Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XIV (1898-1899)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1898 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XXXIV-XXXV) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc14soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  XIV.
(CONTAINING PARTS  XXXIV-XXXV.)

1898-9.


The  responsibility  for  both  the  fads  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  p^ihlished
in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Lim
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.


1899.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc14soci


^  ;'^OQJS:■^X':iI]J^Ja■'S-,  \/

CJ  PAGE

-  PART  XXXIV.

General  Meetings 1

I. Part  of  the  Presidential  Address  delivered  to  the  British  Associa-
tion at  Bristol,  September,  1898. By  Sir  Wm.  Crookes,

^ r.R.s  2

^  II. A  Further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of
.  ji  Trance.  Part  II.  A. — By  Professor  Wji.  Rojiai.ve  Xewbold  6

^IIL Discussion  of  the  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper. I. — By

Fr^kk  Podmore .........  50

IV. A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis  ;  Vjeing
J  Some Experiments on  Two Cases of Hysteria, and  a

A  Physiologico- Anatomical Theory of the Nature  of  these

Neuroses. By  Morton  Prince,  M.D. . . . .  79

Supplement.  •

I. The  British  Medical  Association  and  Hypnotism. . .  -  . -  ■  -

I. — Address  by  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell  ....  98

V, II. — Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.  The  Psychology  of  Hypnotism  100

'^^^ . III. — David Yellowlees, LL;D., M.D. The Uses  and

Dangers  of  Hypnotism ......  109

^f]  IV. — John  F.  Woods,  M.D. Hypnotism  in  Organic  Disease  109

V. — Chas.  a.  Mercier,  M.B.,  F.R.C. S.  Eng.  Suggestion

and  Crime ........  110

"V

,-J^II. Note  on  "  Fisher's  Ghost. " By  H.  Arthur  Siiith  . . .  Ill
Note  on  a  Case  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living ....  114

III. Reviews  : —

^  Some  Cases  Recorded  in  the  Amuoles  des  Sciences  Pmjchic^y.e^.

By  J.  G.  Sbuth  115

_^ Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  "The  Making  of  Religion." By  Frank
J  Podmore  128

Dr.  Otto  George  Wetterstrand's  '■  Hypnotism  and  its  Applica-

Jtion  to  Practical  Medicine."  La  Rivue  de  Psiicholociie.
Dr.  Edgar  BerUlon's  "  L'Hypnotisme  et  I'Orthopedie
Mentale." By  Dr.  Cn.is.  Lloyd  Tuckey . . .  1.39

Mr.  E.  W.  Scripture's  "The  Now  Psychology.'' By  Pro-
fessor James  H.  Hyslop . . . . .  .144

L'Aniiee  Psi/chologicpie. By  F.  W.  H.  Myers . . .  146

Mr.  Henry  Ridgely  Evans's  "Hours  with  the  Ghosts."  By

Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D  147

34098  rp.T.o.


PART  XXXV.
,  , .  . ••••••  •

General  Meetiift<^^  -  :  . .1  I .*'..  I  . .  .151

, ,  ' , .' .* *  *.  *  •••

I.  On  the  Conditions*  of  Ce'rtamty. By  "Professor  Charles  Richet  152

II.  Coincidences, By  Alice  Johnson.

Summary  and  Introduction . . . ■■  . . . .  158

Chapter I. Classification  of  Coincidences  ....  165

Chapter  II. General  Discussion  of  Chance  . . . .  178

Chapter  III. Examples 193

Chapter  lY. Examples, — continued .....  2C1
Appendix 1. (written  jointly  with  W.  E.  Johnson)  On  the

Construction  of  Artificial  Chance  Series  .  293

Appendix II. Examination  of  a  Premonitory  Case . .  309

Appendix  III. Some  Premonitory  Dreams ....  317

Appendix  IV. A  Guessing  Competition.  Was  it  a  "lottery  "  ?  322

Supplement.

I.  The  Forms  of  Apparitions  in  West  Africa. By  Mary  H.  Kingsley  331

II.  A  Few  Notes  on  Occultism  in  West  Africa.  By  J.  ShepleyPakt,  M.D.  343

III.  Psychology  and  Psychical  Research  :  a  Rej)ly  to  Prof essor  Miinster-

berg. By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  348

IV.  Dr.  Morton  Prince's "Experimental  Study  of Visions."  By

F.  W.  H.  Myers  366

V.  Extract  from  J.  E.  de  Mirville's  "DesEsprits  etde  leurs  Manifesta-

tions Fluidiques." With  Introductory  Note  by  Alfred  R.
Wallace,  F.R.S  373

VI.  Reviews  : —

Professor  G.  T.  W.  Patrick's "Some  Peculiarities  of  the

Secondary  Personality."  By  F.  W.  H.  Myers  .  .  382
Dr.  Boris  Sidis'  "  Psychology  of  Suggestion." By  Dr.  E.  W.

Taylor  38(J

Herr  R.  Miiller's  "  Naturwissenschaftliche  Seelenforschung."

By  Professor  Harlow  Gale  ......  389

Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora's "La Telepatia." By  Professor

Harlow  Gale 392

Miss  X.  (A.  Goodrich-Freer)'s  "Essays  in  Psychical  Research."

By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D. .....  393

Judge  Dailey's  "  Mollie  Fancher  ;  the  Brooklyn  Enigma."

By  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newrold  ....  396

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Libraiy . .  399

Officers  and  Council  for  1899 401

List  of  Members  and  Associates . .......  402

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch  . . .  426


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE  •

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXIV.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  91st  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  March  11th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Professor
Henry  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Mr.  Frank  Podmore  gave  an  address  on  "  The  Trance  Phenomena
Manifested  through  Mrs.  Piper."


The  92nd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
April  22nd,  at  4  p.m. ;  Colonel  J.  Hartley  in  the  chair.

Dr.  R.  Hodgson  read  a  paper  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on
"  Coincidences."


The  93  rd  General  Meeting  W8.s  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
May  20th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Mr.  St.  George  Lane  Fox  read  a  paper  by  Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey
on  "  The  Influence  of  Suggestion  on  Health,  with  Special  Reference
to  'Christian  Science.'  "


The  94th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
June  24th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in  the  chair.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  gave  an  address,  "  A  Second  Report  on
the  So-called  Divining  Rod,"  the  paper  being  a  sequel  to  the  Report
published  in  Part  XXXII.,  Proceedings  S.P.R.

B


2


Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.


[part


I-

PART  OF  THE  PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS  DELIVERED  TO
THE  BRITISH  ASSOCIATION  AT  BRISTOL,  SEPT.,  1898,

By  Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.

These,  then,  are  some  of  the  subjects,  weighty  and  far-reaching,  on
which  my  own  attention  has  been  chiefly  concentrated.  Upon  one
other  interest  I  have  not  yet  touched — to  me  the  weightiest  and  the
farthest  reaching  of  all.

No  incident  in  my  scientific  career  is  more  widely  known  than  the
part  I  took  many  years  ago  in  certain  psychic  researches.  Thirty
years  have  passed  since  I  j^ublished  an  account  of  experiments  tending
to  show  that  outside  our  scientific  knowledge  there  exists  a  Force
exercised  by  intelligence  differing  from  the  ordinary  intelligence
common  to  mortals.  This  fact  in  my  life  is,  of  course,  well  understood
by  those  who  honoured  me  with  the  invitation  to  become  your
President.  Perhaps  among  my  audience  some  may  feel  curious  as  to
whether  I  shall  speak  out  or  be  silent.  I  elect  to  speak,  although
briefly.  To  enter  at  length  on  a  still  debatable  subject  would  be
unduly  to  insist  on  a  topic  which — as  Wallace,  Lodge,  and  Barrett
have  already  shown — though  not  unfitted  for  discussion  at  these
meetings,  does  not  yet  enlist  the  interest  of  the  majority  of  my
scientific  brethren.  To  ignore  the  subject  would  be  an  act,  of  cowardice
— an  act  of  cowardice  I  feel  no  temptation  to  commit.

To  stop  short  in  any  research  that  bids  fair  to  widen  the  gates  of
knowledge,  to  recoil  from  fear  of  difficulty  or  adverse  criticism,  is  to
bring  reproach  on  science.  There  is  nothing  for  the  investigator  to  do
but  to  go  straight  on,  "  to  explore  up  and  down,  inch  by  inch,  with  the
taper  his  reason "  ;  to  follow  the  light  wherever  it  may  lead,  even
.should  it  at  times  resemble  a  will-o'-the  wisp.  I  have  nothing  to
retract.  I  adhere  to  my  already  published  statements.  Indeed,  I
might  add  much  thereto.  I  regret  only  a  certain  crudity  in  those
early  expositions  which,  no  doubt  justly,  militated  against  their
acceptance  by  the  scientiflc  world.  My  own  knowledge  at  that  time
scarcely  extended  beyond  the  fact  that  certain  phenomena  new  to
science  had  assuredly  occurred,  and  were  attested  by  my  own  sober
senses,  and,  better  still,  by  automatic  record.  I  was  like  some
two-dimensional  being  who  might  stand  at  the  singular  point  of
a  Riemann's  surface,  and  thus  find  himself  in  infinitesimal  and  in-
explicable contact  with  a  plane  of  existence  not  his  own.


XXXIV.]  Part  of  Presidential  Address  to  British  Association.  3


I  think  I  see  a  little  farther  now.  I  have  glimpses  of  something-
like  coherence  among  the  strange  elusive  phenomena ;  of  something
like  continuity  between  those  unexplained  forces  and  laws  already
known.  This  advance  is  largely  due  to  the  labours  of  another
Association  of  which  I  have  also  this  year  the  honour  to  be  President
— the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  And  were  I  now  introducing
for  the  first  time  these  inquiries  to  the  world  of  science  I  should  choose
a  starting-point  different  from  that  of  old.  It  would  be  well  to  begin
with  telepathy ;  with  the  fundamental  law,  as  I  believe  it  to  be,  that
thoughts  and  images  may  be  transferred  from  one  mind  to  another
without  the  agency  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense — that  knowledge
may  enter  the  human  mind  without  being  communicated  in  any
hitherto  known  or  recognised  ways.

Although  the  inquiry  has  elicited  important  facts  with  reference  to
the  Mind,  it  has  not  yet  reached  the  scientific  stage  of  certainty  which
would  entitle  it  to  be  usefully  brought  before  one  of  our  Sections.  I
will  therefore  confine  myself  to  pointing  out  the  direction  in  which
scientific  investigation  can  legitimately  advance.  If  telepathy  take
place  we  have  two  physical  facts — the  physical  change  in  the  brain  of
A,  the  suggester,  and  the  analogous  physical  change  in  the  brain  of  B,
the  recipient  of  the  suggestion.  Between  these  two  physical  events
there  must  exist  a  train  of  physical  causes.  Whenever  the  connecting
sequence  of  intermediate  causes  begins  to  be  revealed  the  inquiry  will
then  come  within  the  range  of  one  of  the  Sections  of  the  British
Association.  Such  a  sequence  can  only  occur  through  an  intervening
medium.  All  the  phenomena  of  the  universe  are  presumably  in  some
way  continuous,  and  it  is  unscientific  to  call  in  the  aid  of  mysterious
agencies  when  with  every  fresh  advance  in  knowledge  it  is  shown  that
ether  vibrations  have  powers  and  attributes  abundantly  equal  to  any
demand — even  to  the  transmission  of  thought.  It  is  supposed  by  some
physiologists  that  the  essential  cells  of  nerves  do  not  actually  touch,
but  are  separated  by  a  narrow  gap  which  widens  in  sleep  while  it
narrows  almost  to  extinction  during  mental  activity.  This  condition
is  so  singularly  like  that  of  a  Branly  or  Lodge  coherer  as  to  suggest  a
further  analogy.  The  structure  of  brain  and  nerve  being  similar,  it  is
conceivable  there  may  be  present  masses  of  such  nerve  coherers  in  the
brain  whose  special  function  it  may  be  to  receive  impulses  brought  from
without  through  the  connecting  sequence  of  ether  waves  of  appro-
priate order  of  magntiude.  Rontgen  has  familiarised  us  with  an  order
of  vibrations  of  extreme  minuteness  compared  with  the  smallest  waves
with  which  we  have  hitherto  been  acquainted,  and  of  dimensions  com-
parable with  the  distances  between  the  centres  of  the  atoms  of  which
the  material  universe  is  built  up ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  we  have  here  reached  the  limit  of  frequency. It  is  known  that


4


Sir  William  CrooJces,  F.RS.


[part


the  action  of  thought  is  accompanied  by  certain  molecular  movements
in  the  brain,  and  here  we  have  physical  vibrations  capable  from  their
extreme  minuteness  of  acting  dii-ect  on  individual  molecules,  while
their  rapidity  approaches  that  of  the  internal  and  external  movements
of  the  atoms  themselves.

Confirmation  of  telepathic  phenomena  is  afforded  by  many  con-
verging experiments,  and  by  many  spontaneous  occurrences  only  thus
intelligible.  The  most  varied  proof  perhaps,  is  drawn  from  analysis  of
the  subconscious  workings  of  the  mind,  when  these,  whether  by
accident  or  design,  are  brought  into  conscious  survey.  Evidence  of  a
region  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness  has  been  presented,  since
its  first  inception,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  ;  and  its  various  aspects  are  being  interpreted  and  welded
into  a  comprehensive  whole  by  the  pertinacious  genius  of  F.  W.  H.
Myers.  Concurrently,  our  knowledge  of  the  facts  in  this  obscure
region  has  received  valuable  additions  at  tlie  hands  of  labourers  in
other  countries.  To  mention  a  few  names  out  of  many,  the  observations
of  Richet,  Pierre  Janet,  and  Binet  (in  France),  of  Breuer  and  Freud
(in  Austria),  of  William  James  (in  America),  have  strikingly  illustrated
the  extent  to  which  patient  experimentation  can  probe  subliminal
processes,  and  can  thus  learn  the  lessons  of  alternating  personalities,
and  abnormal  states.  Whilst  it  is  clear  that  our  knowledge  of  sub-
conscious mentation  is  still  to  be  developed,  we  must  beware  of  rashly
assuming  that  all  vai'iations  from  the  normal  waking  condition  are
necessarily  morbid.  The  human  race  has  reached  no  fixed  or  change-
less ideal ;  in  every  direction  there  is  evolution  as  well  as  disintegration.
It  would  be  hard  to  find  instances  of  more  rapid  progress,  moral
and  physical,  than  in  certain  important  cases  of  cure  by  suggestion —
again  to  cite  a  few  names  out  of  many — by  Liebeault,  Bernheim,  the
late  Auguste  Voisin,  Berillon  (in  France),  Schrenck-Notzing  (in  Ger-
many), Forel  (in  Switzerland),  van  Eeden  (in  Holland),  Wetterstrand
(in  Sweden),  Milne  Bramwell  and  Lloyd  Tuckey  (in  England).  This
is  not  the  place  for  details,  but  the  vis  medicatrix  thus  evoked,  as  it
were,  from  the  depths  of  the  organism,  is  of  good  omen  for  the  upward
evolution  of  mankind.

A  formidable  range  of  phenomena  must  be  scientifically  sifted
before  we  effectually  gi-asp  a  faculty  so  strange,  so  bewildering,  and  for
ages  so  inscrutaVjle,  as  the  direct  action  of  inind  on  mind.  This  delicate
task  needs  a  rigorous  employment  of  the  method  of  exclusion — a
constant  setting  aside  of  irrelevant  phenomena  that  could  be  explained
by  known  causes,  including  those  far  too  familiar  causes,  conscious  and
unconscious  fraud.  The  inquiry  unites  the  difficulties  inherent  in  all
experimentation  connected  with  mind,  with  tangled  human  tempera-
ments and  with  observations  dependent  less  on  automatic  record  than


XXXIV.]  Part  of  Presidential  Address  to  British  Association.  5


on  personal  testimony.  But  difficulties  are  things  to  be  overcome
even  in  the  elusory  branch  of  research  known  as  Experimental
Psychology.  It  has  been  characteristic  of  the  leaders  among  the  group
of  inquirers  constituting  the  Society  for  Psycliical  Research  to  combine
critical  and  negative  work  with  work  leading  to  positive  discovery.  To
the  penetration  and  scrupulous  fair-mindedness  of  Professor  Heniy
Sidgwick  and  of  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  is  largely  due  the  establish-
ment of  canons  of  evidence  in  psychical  research,  which  strengthen
while  they  narrow  the  path  of  subsequent  explorers.  To  the  detective
genius  of  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson  we  owe  a  convincing  demonstration
of  the  narrow  limits  of  human  continuous  observation.

It  has  been  said  that  "Nothing  worth  the  proving  can  be  proved,
nor  yet  disproved."  True  though  this  may  have  been  in  the  past,  it
is  true  no  longer.  The  science  of  our  century  has  forged  weapons  of
observation  and  analysis  by  which  the  veriest  tyro  may  profit.  Science
has  trained  and  fashioned  the  average  mind  into  habits  of  exactitude
and  disciplined  perception,  and  in  so  doing  has  fortified  itself  for  tasks
higher,  wider,  and  incomparably  more  wonderful  than  even  the  wisest
among  our  ancestors  imagined.  Like  the  souls  in  Plato's  myth  that
follow  the  chariot  of  Zeus,  it  has  ascended  to  a  point  of  vision  far
above  the  earth.  It  is  henceforth  open  to  science  to  transcend  all  we
now  think  we  know  of  matter,  and  to  gain  new  glimpses  of  a
profounder  scheme  of  Cosmic  Law.

An  eminent  predecessor  in  this  chair  declared  that  "by  an  in-
tellectual necessity  he  crossed  the  boundary  of  experimental  evidence,
and  discerned  in  that  matter,  which  we  in  our  ignoi-ance  of  its  latent
powers  and  notwithstanding  our  professed  reverence  for  its  Creator,
have  hitherto  covered  with  opprobrium,  the  potency  and  promise  of  all
terrestrial  life."  I  should  prefer  to  reverse  the  apophthegm,  and  to  say
that  in  life  I  see  the  promise  and  potency  of  all  forms  of  matter.

In  old  Egyptian  days  a  well  known  insci'iption  was  carved  over  the
portal  of  the  temple  of  Isis  :  "I  am  whatever  hath  been,  is,  or  ever
will  be ;  and  my  veil  no  man  hath  yet  lifted."  Not  thus  do  modern
seekers  after  truth  confront  Nature — the  word  that  stands  for  the
baffling  mysteries  of  the  universe.  Steadily,  unflinchingly,  we  strive
to  pierce  the  inmost  heart  of  Nature,  from  what  she  is  to  re-construct
what  she  has  been,  and  to  prophesy  what  she  yet  shall  be.  Veil  after
veil  we  have  lifted,  and  her  face  grows  more  beautiful,  august,  and
wondei'ful,  with  every  barrier  that  is  withdrawn.


6


William  Romaine  Neivhold.


[part


II.

A  FURTHER  RECORD  OF  OBSERVATIONS  OF  CERTAIN
PHENOMENA  OF  TRANCE.


PART  II.

A.— By  Professor  William  Romaine  Newbold.


§  1.  Introductory.

I  have  been  present  at  twenty-six  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  Dr.
Hodgson  kindly  supervised  seven  others  at  which  I  was  not  present,
although  the  communicatoi's  invoked  and  the  topics  introduced  were
suggested  by  me.  Fifteen  sittings,  including  two  of  those  at  which  I
was  not  present,  were  devoted  for  the  most  part  to  getting  evidence  to
prove  the  identity  of  the  alleged  communicators  ;  the  remainder  to
getting  from  them  their  own  theory  of  the  phenomena  and  their
description  of  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  working  and  of
the  life  they  live.  While  it  is  impossible  at  present  to  accept  these
statements  as  true,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  put  them  on
record  as  affording  clues  for  the  guidance  of  experiments  with  other
automatists.  The  material  got  from  this  latter  series  I  shall  leave
entirely  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  I  am  myself  concerned  with  the  evidence
for  identity  only.

Of  the  general  character  of  that  evidence  the  following  pages
will  give  a  sufficient  account.  In  making  my  abstract  I  have  tried  to
include  the  nioi'e  important  passages  which  are  relevant  to  the  question
of  identity.  I  have  been  especially  careful  to  bring  into  prominence
all  distinct  failures  and  any  other  facts  which  would  tend  to  detract
from  the  surprising  character  of  many  of  the  statements  made.  As  a
rule  I  have  not  transcribed  verbatim  pages  of  confusion  from  which  no
coherent  thought  can  be  extracted.  But  in  the  cases  in  which  such
confusion  immediately  precedes  the  appearance  of  some  surprising  bit
of  information,  it  has  been  in  several  cases  given  in  full,  that  the
reader  may  form  his  own  opinion  of  the  methods  by  which  such  results
are  attained.  For  examples  cf.  the  giving  of  the  names  of  Morton,
Murdoch,  and  the  introduction  of  Mr.  Burton  (pp.  15,  27,  32).  When
clearly  intelligible  passages  contained  repetitions  of  the  same  word  due
to  the  inability  of  the  sitter  to  decipher  the  first  attempt,  or  words  and


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  7


phrases  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  general  tenor  of  the
communication,  the  extraneous  material  has  frequently  been  omitted
without  indication  of  the  fact.

Names  of  persons  and  of  places  have  been  in  nearly  all  cases  sup-
pressed. In  the  selection  of  pseudonyms  I  have  taken  great  pains  to
represent  familiar  names  by  names  at  least  as  familiar,  and  unfamiliar
names  by  names  as  unfamiliar.  So  also  in  the  transcription  of
phonetic  approximations  to  the  real  names,  I  have  taken  great  care  to
make  the  representatives  letter  for  letter  analogous  to  their  originals.
A  few  other  changes  have  been  made  in  order  still  further  to  conceal
identity,  but  nothing  which  could  at  all  affect  the  value  of  the  evidence.

With  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  information  given,  I  have  no
theory  to  offer.  I  can  frame  none  to  which  I  cannot  myself  allege
unanswerable  objections.  I  am  satisfied^  however,  as  is  every  one
so  far  as  I  know  who  has  studied  the  case  at  any  length,  that  it
was  not  consciously  got  by  Mrs.  Piper  during  waking  life  and  then
fraudulently  palmed  off  on  the  sitter  as  supernormal.  There  is  every
reason  for  believing  that  there  is  no  memory  bond  between  Mrs.
Piper's  waking  consciousness  and  that  of  her  trance  life.

A  question  more  difficult  to  answer  is  that  which  inquires  into  the
amount  of  information  which  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personalities  get
from  the  sitter.  Even  without  resorting  to  the  assumption  of  a  tele-
pathic relation  between  the  sitter  and  the  "  medium,"  no  one  who  has
seen  how  readily  an  acute  "medium"  will  construct  an  appropriate
"  spirit "  message  upon  the  suggestions  furnished  by  a  sitter's  looks
and  words  will  be  easily  convinced  by  any  such  record  as  I  here  offer.

This  is  a  legitimate  objection,  and  to  some  extent  impairs  the  value
of  the  evidence.  In  dealing  with  personalities  who  had  had  much
experience  in  writing,  and  occasionally  with  those  who  represented
themselves  as  having  been  long  dead,  it  was  usually  possible  to  keep
complete  notes  of  the  sitter's  questions  and  answers.  The  writing  was
relatively  slow,  and  illegible  words  were  readily  rewritten.  But  the
alleged  spirits  of  those  who  had  but  recently  died,  or  who  had  died  a
violent  death,  or  who  had  been  bound  to  the  sitter  by  strong  emotional
ties,  nearly  always  display  great  excitement  and  confusion.  The  time
and  attention  of  one  and  even  two  sitters  is  fully  occupied  in  con-
trolling the  violent  convulsions  which  seize  the  writing  arm,  keeping  a
constant  flow  of  cheering  talk  going  for  the  benefit  of  the  communica-
tor, replacing  broken  pencils  and  at  tlie  same  time  deciphering  the
pages  of  delirious  nonsense  which  the  hand  scribbles  off  as  fast  as  it
can  tear  over  the  sheets,  any  misreading  of  which  greatly  increases  the
excitement  and  confusion.

Under  such  circumstances,  our  notes  necessarily  became  frag-
mentary,  and  when  the  sitting  was  written  up  a  few  hours  later,  many


8


William  Romaine  Neivhold.


[part


of  our  questions  and  answers  had  to  be  supplied  from  memory.  It  is
possible  that  some  suggestions  given  by  sitters  have  escaped  our  notice,
and  the  evidence  is  to  that  extent  untrustworthy.

I  am  myself  satisfied  that  the  percentage  of  error  thus  introduced
is  not  considerable.  Both  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I  have  seen  much  of  pro-
fessional mediums,  and  are  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  methods  of
"fishing"  upon  which  they  generally  rely.  Hence  we  always  had
such  possibilities  in  mind,  and  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  any
large  amount  of  detailed  information  to  have  been  extracted  from
us  in  this  way  without  our  knowledge.  Occasionally  our  vigilance
relaxed,  and  we  made  cai-eful  note  of  the  fact.  For  examples  see  the
quotation  "Fama  tempus  vivat"  (p.  45),  and  Mr.  Bonney's  name
(p.  43).  Probably  it  occasionally  relaxed  without  our  making  any
note  of  it,  but  tliat  could  not  have  happened  very  often.

The  reader  will  observe  that  "  yes  "  and  "no"  are  often  written
when  no  questions  are  recorded.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  the
writing  being  exceedingly  illegible  and  coming  very  rapidly,  the  sitter
reads  aloud  with  a  slight  interrogatory  inflection  at  any  convenient
resting  point,  as  at  the  end  of  a  sheet  or  at  an  apparent  pause  in  the
sense.  To  this  the  writer  responds  with  "yes"  or  "no,"  to  show
whether  he  is  being  correctly  understood.

If  these  utterances  are,  as  I  believe  them  to  be,  entirely  dissevered
from  the  normal  consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper,  they  as  truly  I'eveal  to  us
a  new  world  of  mind  as  the  microscope  reveals  a  new  world  of  matter.
George  Pelham  and  liis  companions  undoubtedly  record  for  us  conscious
experiences  which  are  subjectively  as  real  as  any  that  you  or  I  ever
experienced.  But  when  we  ask  to  what  metaphysical  category  of  Being
they  are  to  be  assigned,  we  find  no  satisfactory  answer.  Are  they
merely  unusually  stable  dream  states,  generated  in  connection  with
Mrs.  Piper's  brain,  interrupted  perhaps  during  her  normal  life,  but
resuming  the  thread  of  their  phantasmal  existence  with  the  recurrence
of  the  convulsions  which  usher  in  her  trance  1  Or  are  they  what  they
profess  to  be,  human  minds,  divested  of  their  mortal  bodies,  and  lead-
ing an  independent  existence  in  a  supersensible  world? — a  world  as  real
as  this  present  world  in  the  only  true  sense  of  real,  being  an  inevitable
portion  of  the  common  experience  of  conscious  beings.

Of  the  existence  of  such  a  world  we  cannot  satisfy  ourselves  by
any  of  our  usual  tests.  We  are  confined  to  the  evidence  for  the  iden-
tity of  the  alleged  communicators.  Of  the  extent  and  value  of  the
evidence  to  be  got  from  my  series  of  sittings  the  reader  can  himself
judge.  Much  of  it  seems  to  me  strong,  and  much  more  I  cannot
reconcile  with  the  theory  of  identity.

The  only  alternative  to  the  "  spirit "  theory  is  the  theory  which
ascribes  the  phenomena  to  secondary  personalities,  derived  from  the


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Troynce.  9


weaving  together  by  Mrs.  Piper's  nervous  mechanism  of  all  the
complex  suggestions  of  the  seance  room,  supplemented  by  telepathic
and  clairvoyant  impressions  got  in  connection  with  the  sitter  and  with
the  articles  which  he  brings.  For  this  we  can  find  some  analogies  on
a  smaller  scale ;  the  greater  part  of  my  own  experiences,  if  taken
severally,  seem  to  me  susceptible  of  such  an  explanation,  and  there
are  a  few  items,  such  as  the  Morse  incident  (p.  24),  which  almost
irresistibly  suggest  it.

Taken  as  a  whole,  however,  I  do  not  think  that  the  phenomona
can  be  satisfactorily  explained  by  reference  to  telepathy  or  clair-
voyance. Indeed  the  phenomena  which  those  words  vaguely  designate
are  themselves  too  little  known  to  provide  principles  for  the  elucidation
of  the  less  known,  and  although,  as  I  have  said,  individual  scraps  of
information  may  be  ascribed  with  some  show  of  plausibility  to  a
telepathic  or  clairvoyant  origin,  the  arrangement  of  these  scraps  into
mosaics  of  thought,  which,  however  defa,ceci,  still  often  irresistibly
suggest  the  habits,  tastes,  and  memories  of  some  friend  deceased — for
this  I  know  of  no  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  analogy.  For  example,
the  demand  made  by  "aunt  Sallie  "  that  I  should  identify  myself  by
expounding  the  significance  of  "two  marriages  in  this  case,  mother  and
aunt  grandma  also,"  admits  of  no  satisfactory  telepathic  explanation.
The  fact  was  known  to  me  and  might  have  been  got  telepathically.
But  why  is  the  dream  personality  of  the  only  communicator  who  died
in  my  childhood  the  only  one  who  seeks  to  identify  me  ?  Why  does
she  allude  in  so  indirect  a  fashion  to  the  mode  of  her  death  (see  p.  34)?
Certainly  no  stratum  of  my  personality  would  have  felt  hesitation  in
alluding  to  so  commonplace  a  matter  as  a  laparotomy,  or  would  have
lacked  suitable  language  in  which  to  express  the  allusion.  Whence
came  the  reference  to  "  Carson  the  Dr.,"  a  circumstance  which  I  had
totally  forgotten,  if  I  ever  knew  it  1  And,  finally,  wliy  was  the  faded
personality,  of  this  almost  forgotten  maiden  aunt  evoked  at  all  ?  I
was  not  ten  years  old  when  she  died,  and  she  had  been  dead  twenty
years.  She  was  a  teacher,  lived  in  Philadelphia,  died  in  a  hospital  in
New  York,  and  was  buried  near  Philadelphia.  I  do  not  know  the
exact  date  of  her  death  or  the  exact  place  of  her  ljurial.  Probably
few  persons  beside  her  immediate  relatives  know  that  such  a  person
ever  existed,  and  even  her  relatives  seldom  think  of  her.  Why  were
these  dim  memories  so  clearly  reflected,  while  others,  far  stronger,
produced  no  efiect  ?  Why  were  my  memories,  in  process  of  reflection,
so  refracted  as  to  come  seemingly  not  from  my  masculine  and  adult
point  of  view  but  from  that  of  a  spinster  aunt  who  could  not  at  first
recognise  me  with  confidence,  and  who,  taking  it  for  granted  that  her
little  nephew  of  ten  had  not  been  informed  as  to  the  precise  cause  of
her  death,  expected  him,  although  grown  to  man's  estate,  to  convey  a


10


William  Romaine  Neivhold.


[part


very  obvious  allusion  to  his  mother  for  interpretation  without  himself
knowing  what  it  meant  1

The  telepathic  interpretation  of  my  other  sittings  might  be  ci'iti-
cised  in  much  the  same  manner.  Evidence  of  this  sort  does  not
suggest  telepathy,  it  suggests  the  actual  presence  of  the  alleged
communicators,  and  if  it  stood  alone  I  should  have  no  hesitation  in
accepting  that  theory.

Unfortunately  it  does  not  stand  alone.  It  is  interwoven  with
obscurity,  confusion,  irrelevancy,  and  error  in  a  most  bewildering
fashion.  I  agree  with  Dr.  Hodgson  that  the  description  given  by  the
writers  themselves  of  the  conditions  under  which  they  are  labouring
would,  if  accepted,  account  for  a  very  large  part  of  this  matter.  But,
even  after  the  most  generous  allowance  on  this  score,  there  remains
much  which  the  wi-iters  cannot  explain.  Easily  first  comes  their
almost  total  inability  to  observe  and  report  the  phenomena  of  the
material  world,  coupled  with  their  reiterated  assertions  that  they  can
and  will  do  so.  Second  should  be  put,  perhaps,  the  unaccountable
ignorance  which  they  often  Vjetray  of  matters  which  upon  any  theory
should  have  been  well  known  to  them.  In  the  third  place,  the  general
intellectual,  as  distinguished  from  the  moral  and  religious,  tone  of  the
more  recent  communications  is  far  lower  than  we  would  expect  of
beings  who  had  long  enjoyed  exceptional  opportunities  for  the  acquisi-
tion of  knowledge.  Concrete  descriptions  of  the  other  world  can  be
had  indeed  ad  infinitum,  but  of  organised,  systematised,  conceptual
knowledge  there  is  little  trace.

From  such  inconsistent  material  one  can  draw  no  fixed  conclusions.
But  there  is  one  result  which  I  think  the  investigation  into  Mrs.
Piper's  and  kindred  cases  should  achieve.  For  any  theory  some
intrinsically  strong  evidence  must  be  adduced,  even  if  there  be  but
little  of  it,  before  the  theory  can  be  given  any  standing  in  court
at  all.  Until  within  very  recent  years  the  scientific  world  has  tacitly
rejected  a  large  number  of  important  philosophical  conceptions  on  the
ground  that  there  is  absolutely  no  evidence  in  their  favour  whatever.
Among  those  popular  conceptions  are  those  of  the  essential  independ-
ence of  the  mind  and  the  body,  of  the  existence  of  a  supersensible
world,  and  of  the  possibility  of  occasional  communication  between
that  world  and  this.  We  have  here,  as  it  seems  to  me,  evidence  that
is  worthy  of  consideration  for  all  these  points.  It  was  well  expressed
by  a  friend  of  mine,  a  scholar  who  has  been  known  for  his  uncom-
promising opposition  to  every  form  of  supernatural  ism.  He  had  had
a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  at  which  very  remarkable  disclosures  were
made,  and  shortly  afterwards  said  to  me,  in  effect,  "  Scientific  men  can-
not say  much  longer  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  a  future  life.  I
have  said  it,  but  I  shall  say  it  no  longer ;  I  know  now  that  there  is


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  11


evidence,  for  I  have  seen  it.  I  do  not  believe  in  a  future  life.  I
regai'd  it  as  one  of  the  most  improbable  of  theories.  The  evidence  is
scanty  and  ambiguous  and  insufficient,  but  it  is  evidence  and  it  must
be  reckoned  with."

If  the  evidence  which  the  Mrs.  Piper  case  affords  proves  sufficient
to  draw  any  considerable  body  of  competent  men  into  these  lines  of
research,  it  will  have  done  as  much  as,  and  more  than,  I  can  venture
to  expect.

Detailed  Cases.
Case  I.

Submission  to  Mrs.  Piper  of  articles  zvith  tvhich  few  living  persows  had
any  associations  and  the  sitter  none  at  all.

In  the  winter  of  1890-1891  my  interest  in  the  problems  commonly
termed  psychical  was  aroused  for  the  first  time  by  reading  the  report  of
sittings  held  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  England.  Soon  afterwards,  February
18th,  1891,  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  with  whom  I  had  at  that  time
no  personal  acquaintance,  saying  that  I  would  be  glad  to  arrange
for  some  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  with  a  view  to  discover  the
source  of  the  information  conveyed  or  suggested  by  articles.  I  told
him  that  I  had  in  my  possession  articles  that  had  belonged  to  persons
long  since  dead,  of  whom  few  living  persons  know  anything.  I
hoped,  in  the  course  of  my  work  as  an  amateur  genealogist,  to  discover
more  about  some  of  these  persons,  and  might  be  able  to  verify  state-
ments now  made  by  Mrs.  Piper,  which  are  absolutely  unknown  to
anyone  living.

Dr.  Hodgson  replied  accepting  my  suggestion,  but  asking  me  care-
fully to  refrain  from  telling  him  anything  whatever  about  the  articles
which  I  would  send.  On  the  9th  of  the  following  May  I  received  a
letter  from  him  asking  for  the  articles,  and  I  at  once  sent  them  on.
Each  was  wrapped  in  paper,  sealed  with  sealing-wax,  and  then
wrapped  in  rubber  cloth.

Dr.  Hodgson  submitted  these  articles  to  Phinuit  at  sittings  held
May  15th,  21st,  25th,  June  4th,  and  June  5th,  1891.  Phinuit  talked
volubly  about  them,  but  said  little  that  was  in  the  least  relevant :  a
large  part  was  distinctly  false,  and  the  balance  either  unverifiable  or
so  vaguely  stated  as  to  be  worthless  for  evidential  purposes.

[The  above  series  of  sittings  were  those  to  which  I  referred,  in
connection  with  the  articles  furnished  by  Mr.  "V.,"  on  p.  132  of  my
previous  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  It
appeared  that  none  of  these  articles  fulfilled  the  condition  of  having
been  much  handled  or  worn  exclusively  by  only  one  or  two  persons


12


William  liomaine  Neivhold.


[PAET


and  these  experiments,  with  others  of  a  like  nature,  incline  me  to  think
that  this  condition  is  practically  necessary  for  any  success.  I  shall
refer  to  this  question  in  Part  II.  of  my  Report. — R.  H.]

Case  II.
Frederick  Atkin  2Iorton.

In  the  spring  of  1893  I  met  a  man  whom  I  shall  call  William
Morton.  He  was  an  intelligent  man,  by  profession  a  dealer  in  real
estate,  loans,  and  mortgages,  of  limited  education  and  of  rather  feeble
health.  In  1894  I  found  that  his  tactile  sensibility  on  one  side  was
defective.  He  told  me  that  he  had  for  some  time  heard  rapping
sounds,  often  saw  apparitions,  and  at  any  time,  by  allowing  himself  to
fall  into  an  abstracted  mood,  could  hear  faint  voices  whispering  to  him.
He  found  it  very  difficult  to  hear  what  the  voices  said.  On  one
occasion,  during  a  stance. in  May  of  1892,  he  had  fallen,  he  told  me,  into
a  trance  and  believed  himself  to  have  passed  into  another  world.  He
described  his  experiences  to  me  in  detail.  His  hand  frequently  wrote
automatically,  and  at  the  inception  of  the  writing  the  arm  was  much
convulsed,  much  as  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case.  The  content  of  the  writing
gave  no  evidence  of  supernormal  powers,  but  in  the  whispered  voices
I  detected  what  seemed  to  me  indubitable  evidence  of  telepathy,
possibly  of  clairvoyance.

On  Mai'ch  24th,  1894,  I  happened  to  meet  Mr.  Morton  unexpect-
edly, and  in  the  course  of  conversation  he  told  me  that  he  had
predicted  a  suicide,  which  was  afterwards  verified.  I  pressed  him  to
give  me  names  and  circumstances,  but  he  refused  on  the  ground  that
tire  person  who  had  committed  suicide  had  borne  the  same  name  that
he  did.  I  then  said  that  a  friend  of  mine,  Frederick  A.  Morton,  had
taken  his  own  life  not  long  before.  Mr.  Morton  replied  that  that  was
odd,  the  person  of  whom  he  had  been  speaking  was  an  uncle  of  his
own,  yet  he  thought  that  a  person  calling  himself  Fred  Morton  had
presented  himself  to  him  at  a  seance  some  time  in  the  preceding
December,  said  that  he  had  committed  suicide  by  shooting  himself
through  the  head  while  standing  before  a  mirror,  and  wished  to
send  a  message  to  someone  whose  name  W.  M.  could  not  remember.
The  death  of  Mr.  Frederick  Atkin  Morton  took  place  under  the
circumstances  above  described,  but  as  full  accounts  appeared  in  the
papers  at  the  time,  and  as  I  had  mentioned  the  name,  W.  M.'s
knowledge  of  it  was  not  surprising.  After  this  I  frequently  had,
through  the  automatic  writing  of  W.  Morton,  what  purported  to  be
messages  from  Frederick  A.  Morton,  but  found  in  them  not  a  sugges-
tion of  the  alleged  writer's  presence.


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  13


On  Api'il  13th,  1894,  I  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  arranged  for
me  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  but  she  was  unable  to  go  into  a  trance  at  all.
W.  M.  knew  on  this  occasion  that  I  went  to  New  York,  but  I  have
every  reason  for  thinking  that  he  did  not  know  my  errand.  On  my
return,  I  procured  from  Dixon  Morton,  a  brother  of  Frederick  A.
Morton's,  a  tie,  a  bunch  of  keys  and  two  small  books,  which  had
belonged  to  F.  A.  M.  I  did  not  tell  D.M.  what  I  wished  them  for.
On  the  evening  of  April  26th  we  had  a  sitting  with  W.  M.,  at  which
alleged  messages  came  from  F.  A.  M.  I  asked  the  writer  whether  he
would  appear  to  me  the  following  day  through  a  medium  I  expected  to
see.  At  lirst  he  refused,  on  the  ground  that  I  did  not  believe  in  his
identity,  but  after  a  little  persuasion  he  agreed  to  do  it.  I  offered  to
tell  him  the  address  to  which  I  was  going,  but  this  he  refused,  saying
that  he  knew  it  already.  He  gave  an  address  in  New  York,  at  which
Mrs.  Piper  had  never  been.  Moreo\"er,  in  the  two  weeks  which  had
elapsed  since  my  first  sitting,  Mrs.  Piper  had  changed  her  address.  I
learned  it  myself  late  on  the  afternoon  of  April  26th  and  immediately
destroyed  the  letter.  I  went  to  New  York  early  on  the  morning  of
April  27th,  taking  with  me  the  articles.  The  first  sitting  was
extremely  confused.

At  this,  as  at  the  former  sitting,  I  passed  under  the  name  of
"  Smith."  Mrs.  Piper  went  into  trance  almost  immediately.  The
articles  were  at  first  grasped  by  Phinuit  and  held  against  the  back  of
the  neck.  Later,  they  were  attached  by  a  rubber  band  to  the  back  of
the  hand.  (N.B.— That  notes  marked  D.  M.  are  by  Morton's  brother,
whom  I  have  termed  Dixon  Morton  ;  others  are  by  myself.)

[Phinuit  began  by  making  some  complimentary  remarks  about  me  and
ventured  a  prophecy  that  I  would  soon  go  abroad.  Then  follow  in  my  type-
written MS.  two  pages  of  confusion,  in  which  several  persons  seem  to  be
talking  at  once.  Tlie  names  Perkins,  Ransom,  Clarance  (sic),  and  Edith  are
mentioned.  Such  scraps  as]  Where  are  my  books  and  how  about  tlie
papers  let  me  .  .  .  isn't  this  strange  to  see  the  keys  where  ...  do
not  worry,  I  shall  be  very  clear  soon  and  then  remember  .  .  .  oh,  do
try  to  remember  me  I  am  .  .  .  my  head  is  troubled  .  .  .  my  head
and  face  hurt  terribly  .  .  .  my  head  was  very  bad  .  .  .  [might
plausibly  be  ascribed  to  the  speaker  who  afterwai'ds  becomes  more  coherent.]

B  i  Hie  B  i  11  i  E.  [Very  few  of  my  friends  call  me  Billie  ;  F.  A.  M.
did,  and  in  a  letter  receis'ed  a  short  time  before  his  death  he  spells  the  name
in  this  way.  I  have  always  spelled  it  Billy.]  [R.  Hodgson  makes  some
remark.]  Don't  worry  about  me  sir  I  want  to  see  my  brother  .  .  .
also  mother  tell  her  I  am  .  .  .  Billie  dear  old  chap  ...  I  see  you
Billie  .  .  .  Billie  speak  ...  I  have  been  .  .  .  yes  and
.  .  .  (Shall  I  tell  you  your  name  ?)  No  don't  please  Billie,  speak  don't
please  tell  me  my  name  because  I'll  tell  it  you  in  a  clear  CLEAR  LIGHT
for  I  am  getting  better  now. [The  following  clause  is  indistinct,  seems  to


14


William  Romxdne  Neiohold.


[part


be]  what  if  wo  will  have  it  yet  [?]  niy  head  is  getting  clear  and  I  shall  soon
prove  to  you  who  I  am  J  [?]  Read  dear  D  U  [?  perliaps  B  O]  B  your  uncle's
BOV.  [I  was  educated  by  an  ujicle  who  had  no  son  of  his  own  and  was
much  attached  to  me.]  Yes  B.  O  yes  b  B.  yes.  Do  you  know  Jack.
(No.)  [For  tlie  moment  I  had  forgotten  our  friend  Jack  McKeiizie  Walker.
He  tells  me  that  F.  A.  M.  seldom  called  him  Jack,  but  usually  John.]  Yes,
don't  you  know  Jack  and  what  became  of  him,  Billie  .  .  .  Sharpless
(Did  you  know  him  '()  Yes,  I  knew  him  Billie  old  chap.  Yes,  he  had  my
book  on  Philosophy  and  never  retunied  it  look  it  up  for  me  .  .  .  (What
book?)  One  of  the  old  ones.  Plato,  yes  I  want  [?]  [F.  A.  M.  was
acquainted  with  Paul  Sharpless.  Theie  is  no  truth  in  the  account  about  the
book.  — D.  M.]  [N.B. — I  do  not  know  anyone  named  Sharpless. — W.  R.  N.
All  that  follows  is  very  illegible.]

W  at  att  at  kennn  k  ke  kenn,  connect  it  together  and  you  will  have
part  of  my  name.  [It  was  not  until  we  were  copying  this  section  that  I
deciphered  this  ;  the  writer  is  clearly  trying  to  write  Atkin.]  Oh  yes,  my
head  Billie  is  muddled  a  little  .  .  .  Billie  what  are  you  doing  here,
[hand  reaches  up  and  feels  my  face,  strokes,  and  grasps  my  beard,  pats  me
appreciatingly,  and  writes]  changed  a  little.  [I  had  seen  F.  A.  M.  only
once  in  about  five  years.  Prior  to  that  I  wore  a  moustache  only.  On  that
one  occasion  we  took  dinner  together  and  I  then  wore  a  beard.  The  hand
throughout  betrayed  a  great  deal  of  emotional  excitement  which,  as  well  as
the  affectionate  expressions,  was  very  unlike  the  F.  A.  M.  whom  I  had
known.  In  its  convulsions  the  hand  at  this  point  came  near  striking  a  finger
which  Mrs.  Piper  had  crushed  not  long  before  and  which  was  very  painful.
Hodgson  warned  the  writer  to  be  careful  of  it.] Fingers  don't  trouble  me.

How  are  you  getting  on  with  your  work,  old  man.  (Very  well.  I
am  still  at  the  University.)  Yes,  I  know  it  and  (You  know  I  have  tried  to
communicate  with  you  before?)  [This  was  a  most  stupid  remark  of  mine,  and
consequently  is  duly  recorded.]  Yes,  but  did  not  succeed.  (Where  was  it  ?)
At  a  ladies'  place.  I  saw  you.  I  tried.  [I  had  seen  a  medium  named  Miss
Gaule  in  Baltimore,  in  March,  1894,  but  no  reference  was  made  to  F.  A.  M.
and  I  Avas  satisfied  that  she  was  fraudulent.]  (You  tried  to  communicate  1)
Yes.  I  am  telling  you  this  .  .  .  Walker  .  .  .  WALKER  .  .  .
don't  you  remember  [v.  suj^.]  (No.)  No  I  gave  you  a  message  for  him.  Yes.
(When  did  you  do  it  1)  long  time  How  long  have  I  been  here  ?  (Nearly  a
year.)  yes  yes  S  [illegible  ;  looks  like]  GUPLI  I  can't  do  it  [H.  talks  to
him.  To  11.]  Can't  you  leave  me  alone  till  I  see  B.  (H.  :  Shall  I  go  out?)
Will  you  sir  you  make  me  confused,  confuse  the  head.  (H.  :  You  mean  I
confuse  you?)  Yes  I  think  so.  [H.  goes  out.  The  hand  writes  more  freely
and  betrays  increasing  excitement.]  I  am  [?]  longer  L  E  W  do  you  know
me  T  0  M  I  am  T  0  M  a  s  .  .  .  now  don't  you  know  .  .  .  where
am  I  .  .  .  what  have  I  in  mind  .  .  .  FRED  .  .  .  [the
emotional  excitement  appeared  to  reach  a  maximum  at  this  point.  The
gestures  indicative  of  friendline.ss  and  affection,  warm  hand.shaking,  caresses
about  cheeks  and  head  which  had  already  often  occurred  became  more
violent  and  frequent.  My  hand  was  wrung  repeatedly.  Taking  up  the
pencil  again,  the  writing  was  resumed.]  I  am  only  teasing  you  Billie  .  .  .
I  am  F  R  E  D  I  wanted  him  [pointing  toward  door]  to  go  out  till  I  could


XXXIV.] Ohsevvdfioif^.  "df.  Varlai'n/  'Phehdinena  of  Trance.  15


tell  you  all  I  feel  ior' yoti.  '  [T  make  dm'jiai.'pf'fltestafclons.]  Well  don't  I
know  that  .  .  I  t3iink;mT(>thei*  an^"  a4li  \  '  \  yes  what  can  I  tell
them.  [D.  M.  :  The  word  mother  was  never  used  in  address  or  reference
by  F.  A.  M.]  (I'll  let  them  know  I  have  heard  from  you.)  Good  Oh
Billie  old  chap  how  are  you  getting  on  do  you  ever  see  any  of  my  folks
(I  have  seen  your  brother  once  or  twice)  I  ...  I  told  you  about  him,
my  brother . . . I . . . too  hard . . . where  is  he . .  .

tell  Cha don't  you  know  him . . . Charles  I  mean,  what  has

become  of  him. [D.  M.  :  Unrecognised.]

(I  don't  know,  but  I  will  try  to  bring  some  of  your  family  to  see  you.)
Good  good  (Shall  I  give  his  name  ?)  No  I'll  tell  you  .  .  .  get  him  .  .  .
yes  .  .  .  Will  are  you  still  there  (Yes,  I'm  here,  go  on,  old  man)  tell
George  (Who  is  he?)  don't  you  know?  to  come  in  and  help  me  .
(You  mean  you  want  George  Pelham  to  help  you  ?)  Yes  too  bad  [I  turned
to  Phinuit — i.e.  addressed  Mrs.  Piper's  ear,  instead  of  her  hand — and  said,
"  Doctor,  this  gentleman  wants  George  Pelham  to  help  him."  "All  right,"
said  Phinuit,  "I'll  go  and  get  him."  After  a  slight  pause,  the  writing
recommenced.]

Billie  where  are  you  .  .  .  tell  me  something  .  .  .  yes  .
liovv  and  who  is  Edith  ...  I  see  her  in  your  life  .  .  .  [Not
significant.]  I  am  not  dead  old  chap,  I  told  you  about  him  D.D.  yes  too
bad  D  I  ck  [I  could  not  at  the  moment  read  this.]  Richard  over  there.
(Do  you  mean  Mr.  Hodgson  ?)  No  J  [?]  ick  (Do  you  mean  your  brother
Dick  ?)  Yes  [much  excitement]  my  brother's  name.  [A  confused  medley  of
capitals  follows,  in  which  D,  I,  and  M  can  be  discerned.]  FRED  [Then
but  not  very  legible,  comes]  Dick  [Some  large  illegible  scrawls.  I  asked
again  whether  he  had  tried  to  communicate  before]  speak  to  .  .  .  Billie
speak  to  you  do  you  mean  did  I  try  to  speak  to  you  .  .  .  yes  I  did  at  a
man's  house  (Who  was  he  ?)  I  don't  know  anything  about  who  he  was  0  I
was  going  about  and  wrote  to  you  .  .  .  Yes  and  let  me  get  clear
and  I  will  do  all  .  .  .  (Did  you  promise  to  talk  to  me  to-day  ?)  I
said  I  will  when  I  saw  my  keys.  I  knew  them  immediately  .  .  .  Read
Read  [?]  also  my  diary  and  you  bet  I  am  not  dead  if  FRED  Morton  ever
lived  I  am  he  and  there  is  no  use  disputing  my  identity  any  longer  (I  am
not  disputing  it,  Fred  ;  don't  suppose  I  doubt  you)  I  don't  I  don't  Billy
[much  excitement  and  illegible  scrawling.]  (You  need  not  prove  your
identity  any  further.)  Yes  I  will  Yes  I  will  now  look  here  Billie  do  you
remember  the  little  scar  .  .  .  [scrawling  and  excitement]  yes  I  will
do  you  remember  I  had  one  [the  hand  here  dropped  the  pencil,
reached  up  and  felt  my  temple  to  show  where  the  scar  was.  At  the  time  of
writing  up  the  sitting  I  thought  it  was  my  right  temple  but  was  not  sure  ;
later  the  hand  said  it  was  the  left.  When  the  scar  was  first  mentioned  I
had  no  recollection  of  it  ;  in  a  moment  or  two  a  faint  recollection  began  to
take  shape  in  my  mind  and  it  has  ever  since  been  quite  distinct.  I  think  it
must  be  an  hallucination  of  memory,  of  which  I  have  had  several,  for  I  have
found  only  two  other  persons  who  had  any  recollection  of  it  at  all  ;  neither
is  sure  of  it,  and  those  who  knew  him  best,  including  all  the  members  of  his
family,  know  nothing  of  it].  This  [?]  I  say  to  prove  my  identity.  [I  express
conviction.] Good  old  chap,  love  to  Dick,  Alice. [D,  M.  :  Unrecognised.]


16


[part


mother  .  .  .  {aiiii'l  sae  fOu  t)g.^in'  .  •>.••  I  jr.iist  fly  away  old  boy
. . . he  good. fVe:ati}  Is  ivop^toi.}/: ^[l  ?  f

I  then  telegraphed  for  the  brother  Dick.  He  came  on  the  evening
of  the  28th.  I  met  him,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  we  went  to
the  house  where  Mrs.  Piper  was  staying.  He  was  introduced  as  Mr.
Jones.  The  first  writing  was  by  George  Pelham  ;  after  alluding  to  some
other  matters  concerning  some  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  earlier  experiments,
he  said,  "There  is  a  young  man  here  who  is  extremely  anxious  to  speak
to  his  brother.  I'll  help  come  in  here  and  speak  to  him."  While
G.  P.  was  writing  Phinuit  was  talking  to  me.  Several  times  he  made
remarks  such  as,  "  Now,  don't  be  in  a  hurry,  you'll  have  plenty  of
time  to  talk  soon,"  wliich  I  could  not  understand.  I  asked  him  what
he  meant,  saying  that  I  was  not  in  a  hurry  and  never  said  I  was.  To
this  Phinuit  replied  that  he  was  talking  to  a  young  man  in  the  spirit
who  was  in  a  great  hurry  to  begin  communicating.

[F.  A.  M.  writesj

Oh  my  clear  Dick  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you  here  my  dearest  brother  for  I
love  you  [D.  M.  :  Not  characteristic]  .  .  .  come  nearer  to  me  .
I  am  no  longer  dead  ...  do  not  shed  tears  for  me  ...  I  am  in
another  life  and  not  far  remote  from  your  own  material  .  .  .  Where  are
oh  speak  to  me  Dick  and  Billie  I  love  you  both  more  and  more
spiritually,  love  to  dear  mother  how  is  she  ?  .  .  .  dear  Dick  speak  that
I  may  hear  your  voice  dear  Dick  Oh  speak  to  me  dear  just  as  you  would  if
you  could  see  me  I  know  you  cannot  yet  trust  me  dear  and  I  shall  always  be
with  you  ...  do  you  know  how  I  left  everything  .  .  .  too  bad
my  head  was  in  a  terrible  state,  dear.  [The  autopsy  revealed
extensive  congestion  of  brain.]  ...  I  did  not  suffer  as  j^ou  may  have
thought,  yet  .  .  .  (Didn't  you  have  pain  ?)  No  dear  .  .  .  no  I  was
unconscious  of  pain  I  assure  you  1  know  and  remember  very  well  .
there  is  .  .  .  too  bad  ...  I  [undec]  not  know  pain  ...  I
could  not  help  it  Dick  .  .  .  no,  my  head  was  in  a  delirious  state
.  I  leave  all  things  to  you,  dear  Dick,  and  I  wish  you  to  think  all  is
for  the  best.  God  is  wise  and  good  and  I  leave  all  in  his  holy  care,  Dick,
and  believe  me  when  I  say  I  am  sorry  for  you  all — yet  I  can  no  longer  worry
with  you. ... I  am  happj'  now.

[In  response  to  leading  questions  from  D.  M.,  the  writer  claims  that  he
had  been  in  a  confused  condition  a  few  days  only,  that  his  mind  was  affected,
that  he  suffered  little,  knew  that  he  was  out  of  his  mind  and  tried  to  save
himself.  None  of  this  is  verifiable,  but  is  not  improbable.  When  questioned
about  the  alleged  attempt  to  communicate  through  the  medium  W.  M.  he
said  that  the  errors  were  due]  to  his  mind  acting  .  .  .  his  own  mind
acted  in  error.

(Where  were  you  on  the  Saturday  and  Sunday  ?)  Where  was  I  at  the
time,  Dick  ?  .  .  .  In  the  room.  (All  the  time  ? )  All  Sunday,  if  I
remember  rightly  .  .  .  Not  Saturday,  but  Sunday.  [D.  M.  :  Not
verified  but  not  improbable.] [When  asked  whom  he  saw  on  Saturday,


xxx[V.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Trance.  17


Mfter  considerable  confusion  he  said  he  saw  a  person  named  Parker  Howard.
He  had  red  or  sandy  hair;  he  was  in  trouble  and  wished  F.  A.  M.  to  help
him.  Said  that  he  [P.  H  ]  was  a  newspaper  man  ;  named  the  paper  upon
which  he  was  employed.  For  further  history  of  this  incident  see  p.  19.
After  much  confused  and  irrelevant  material  occurs  the  remark]

Who  is  taking  my  place  now  ?  [Apparently  referring  to  paper  edited  by
F.  A.  M.]  (You  mean  on  journal  ? )  Yes.  (It  has  been  discontinued.)  Too
bad  ;  I  am  sorry  it  is  dropped.  Could  you  not  keep  on  with  it  ?  It  would
help  you  Dick,  and  be  a  success  I  am  sure.  ...  [I  asked  if  he  promised
to  come  here.]  I  did  promise,  [to]  Now  if  I  could  see  you  I  would.  (The
blunders  were  the  medium's.)  [?]  Yes  .  .  .  Yes.  (You  must  have  been
very  angry.)  I  never  get  angry  noAvadays  ;  you  see  I  cannot  hold  him  in
check,  B.  [Asked  whether  the  medium  cheats.]  I  do  not  think  that  he
does.  .  .  .  I  do  go  there  sir  [to  R.H.]  I  see  a  light.  .  .  .  Do  j'ou
know,  dear  fellows,  you  will  ever  be  rewarded  for  helping  me  to  reach  you
in  this  light  and  trying  to  free  my  poor  imprisoning  mind.  [R.H.  explains
this  remark  to  us. Writer  is  struck  with  his  ready  comprehension.]  Yes.

. Yes,  exactly,  sir,  v.dio  are  you  ? I  cannot  touch  you  sir,  or

reach  you,  sir.  [R.  H.  moves  his  head  forward  ;  hand  feels  his  head.]  Do
not  know  you,  sir. [It  is  explained  who  R.  H.  is  ] . .  .

[D.  M.  :  I  want  to  know  something  more  tharL  anything  else  —will  you
tell  me  ?]

What  !— you  know  I  will  if  in  my  power.

(Were  you  disappointed  about  the  paper  ?) Yes,  a  little.

(Did  you  think  it  wouldn't  prove  a  success  ?)  I  feared  so  .  .  .  not
yes,  1  feared  very  much.  (Were  you  much  dejjressed  by  it  ?)
Certainly  [?]  yes  .  .  .  this  is  what  overpowered  me,  and  led  me  to
take  my  life.

([thought  you  said  you  took  your  life  in  delirium.)  You  don't  under-
stand. Now  listen,  dear.  —  Viz.  I  was  depressed,  and  very  much  so,  but
began  to  recover,  as  I  thought.  When  I  saw  P.  H.  on  Sunday,  Saturday  I
mean,  I  told  him  I  was  feeling  badly,  but  I  truly  did  not  realise  how  badly.
When  on  Sunday  I  began  to  lose  my  mental  equilibrium,  then  suddenly  I
realised  nothing  and  nobody.  This  is  absolutely  true,  Dick.  [F.  A.  M.  was^
found  dead  on  Monday  morning,  but  the  question,  "Where  were  you  oil
Saturday  and  Sunday  ?  "  had  before  been  asked.]

(R.H.  :  And  what  was  your  next  experience  ?)  1  found  I  was  in  this
world.  ...  I  did  not  know  for  the  moment  where  I  was,  only  I  felt
strange  and  freer.  .  .  .  my  head  was  light  in  weight,  also  my  body
.  .  .  my  thoughts  began  to  clear  when  I  observed  I  had  departed  from
my  material  body.  Ever  since  then  I  have  been  trying  to  reach  you,  Dick.
I  saw  a  light  and  many  faces  beckoning  me  on  and  trying  to  comfort  me,,
showing  and  assuring  me  I  should  soon  be  all  right,  and  almost  instantly  I
found  I  was.  Then  I  called  for  you,  and  tried  to  tell  you  all, — where  I  was-
. after  all))  after  all,  sir, — put  this))  after  the  word  all)

[N.  guesses  at  meaning.] Not  at  all . . . after  the)  after  the)

[meaning  understood,  viz,  comma  after  all.']  Yes,  I  never  used  to  write
badly,  what's  the  matter  with  me  now,  Dick,  don't  I  write  well  ?

—  Then  I  called  for  you  and  tried  to  tell  you  all  about  where  and  how  I

C


18


William  Romaine  Newhold.


[part


was,  and  with  one  exception,  this  is  the  only  chance  I  have  had  .
Now  you  see  I  am  making . . . taking  advantage  .

(R.  H.  :  You  are  writing  over  the  other  words. )  VVIiy  did  you  let  me  do  it.

(R.H.  :  We  tried  to  prevent  it — did  all  we  could. ) . .  .

don't  scold  me,  sir,  I  am  doing  my  best.

advantage  of  the  opportunity  .
•  [R.H.  tells  Phinuit  that  it  is  time  to  stop,  etc.]

Yes,  D.,  I  wish  I  could  ...  I  want  ...  I  will  ...  I
wish  .  .  .  and  have  you  know  all  I  feel,  sir  .  .  .  Oh,  Dick,  I  did
not  mean  to  do  anything  wrong  .  .  .  stick  .  .  .  yes,  sir,  I  will  go
in  presently.

(R.H.  :  You  mean  out.)

Out,  sir  .  .  .  Dick  .  .  .  love  to  Ma  .  .  .  Dick,  God  bless
you  and  B.  always  .  .  .  must  I  go  .  .  .  good  bye  .  .  .  not
good  bye . . . not  good  bye.

I'll  see  you  again ... fid  [find  ?]  P  [?]  H.

[Hand  takes  pencil  again  later,  and  writes  Pistol.]

[D.M.  :  Death  resulted  from  a  pistol  shot.]

The  account  here  given  of  F.  A.  Morton's  death  is  correct  as  far  as
can  be  verified.  He  had  been  engaged  in  editing  a  paper  for  a  few
weeks  only.  One  Monday  morning  in  the  summer  of  1893  his  body
was  found  lying  before  his  bureau,  a  bullet  through  the  head  and  a
revolver  lying  on  the  floor  beside  him.  No  reason  could  be  assigned
for  the  act ;  no  one  could  be  found  who  had  seen  him  for  some  days,
but  those  who  had  last  seen  him  thought  him  as  cheerful  as  usual.
The  autopsy  showed  that  the  brain  was  much  inflamed,  and  the
physicians  said  tliat  he  was  probably  in  the  first  stages  of  brain  fever
at  the  time  of  his  death.

In  the  course  of  the  month  of  May  I  had  some  sittings  with  an
educated  young  woman,  not  a  spiritist,  who  had  shown  tendencies
to  automatism.  Her  automatic  writing  was  of  the  most  rudimentary
kind  and  never  became  legible.  She  told  me  she  had  once  seen  a  table
rise  from  the  floor  while  no  one  but  herself  was  touching  it  to  a  height
of  a  couple  of  feet  or  so  above  its  normal  position,  but  I  was  never
able  to  repeat  this  experiment  and  never  myself  saw  anything  which
would  lead  me  to  think  that  she  had  any  supernormal  powers.  On
June  7th,  1894,  Dr.  Hodgson  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  at
Arlington  Heights  at  which  Fred  Morton  presented  himself.  He
■said  he  had  had  great  difiiculty  in  reaching  Billie  although  he,  Billie,
Tiad  been  asking  for  him,  that  the  light  was  not  sufficient  to  enable
him  to  give  clear  and  accurate  messages.  This  light  was  a  woman  but
not  so  much  entranced  as  Mrs.  Piper  : — "  we  see  this  one's  spirit  as
we  see  our  own,  but  not  the  other's  as  clearly,  only  part  of  that  spirit
is  visible  to  us  sir.  We  communicate  through  the  mind  of  the  half-
intelligence ... I  have  seen  him  in  two  distinct  places,  one  a


xxxiY.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  19


lady,  the  other  a  gentleman,  the  last  one  is  a  lady  and  the  first  a  man."
Dr.  Hodgson  saying  something  which  implied  that  he  supposed  this
medium  was  impressed  by  hearing  only,  the  writer  interrupted  "  Look
here  sir,  I  can  make  her  write  as  well."

At  my  request,  R.  H.  had  a  sitting  with  AV.  M.,  at  wliicli  nothing
of  interest  occurred.  Upon  his  return,  R.  H.  was  informed  by  Phinuit
and  G.  P.  that  W.  M.  had  a  little  light,  but  was  not  altogether  honest.

Being  unable  to  discover  Parker  Howard,  Dr.  H.,  at  my  suggestion,
asked  the  writer  whether  he  had  meant  Philip  Hoard,  whose  name  had
been  mentioned  to  me  by  Dr.  ]M.  The  wi-iter  showed  excitement  and
claimed  that  this  was  the  person  whom  he  had  had  in  mind,  reiterated
the  statement  that  he  had  seen  him  just  before  his  death,  and  that
they  had  spoken  of  doing  some  "  journal  work  "  together.

I  found  that  Mr.  Philip  Hoard  was  paying  teller  in  a  bank  ;  he
had  known  F.  A.  M.  very  slightly  and  had  not  seen  or  communicated
with  him  for  three  years  before  his  death.  Nothing  that  was  said  of
Parker  Howard  is  at  all  applicable  to  Mr.  Hoard  save  the  allusion  to
sandy  hair,  Mr.  Hoard's  moustache  being  reddish  brown,  while  his  hair
is  quite  dark. See  the  further  statements  of  June  23rd.

Sitting  of  June  21st,  1894,  Inter  Alia.

[F.  A.  M.  commences.]  How  are  you  B  ?  Philip  Hoard  and  Frank
Bezay.

[I  was  so  surprised  at  seemg  this  name  appear  that  I  interrupted  him.]
(\^^^y,  I  know  him,  did  you  ? )

Good  ;  give  him  my  love  and  ask  him  if  [then  after  some  confusion]  I
remember  the  evening  we  went  up  to  the  office  and  opened  our  window,  sat
in  the  moonlight,  talked  over  the  subscription  for  our  [  ?  ]  paper.

[I  tried  to  get  an  explanation  of  his  statement  about  Mr.  Philip  Hoard
without  success. Writer  insists  that  he  did  see  him.]

Do  you  remember  Jack  ? (Give  me  his  whole  name)  McKenzie. (Is  that

his  whole  name  ?)  two  names  B  at  the  Club  yes  you  have  it  B hut

let  me  tell  you  all.  [I  try  to  read]  keep  still  ...  Sa  ...  do
Sur  [?]  Sa  [at  this  point  there  comes  an  interruption  referring  to
one  of  G.  P's.  relatives.]  Marion  wUl  be  all  right  G.  P.  says— good.  .  .  .
Xow  about  our  Club.  [I  still  fail  to  understand  ;  to  me  "the  Club"  is  the
University  Club,  but  F.  M.  was  not  a  member.]  Why  don't  you  wake  up
B.  and  understand  me.  [Then  it  occurred  to  me  that  he  meant  the
Survivors'  Club  and  I  asked  whether  that  was  right.  JIuch  handshaking,
efforts  to  turn  back  to  portion  not  before  deciphered — writes]  S  U
.  .  .  and  are  new  addition.  .  .  (You  mean  are  any  more  married  ?
We  had  our  dinner  early  m  May).  [Much  handshaking — writes]  I  was  there.
*  *  *  [Statement  here  made  strikingly  relevant  to  a  member  of  the
Club.]  (It  was  at  Bickford's  you  know  I  last  saw  you)  [much  excitement.]
Oh,  I  tried  and  tried  to  think  of  him  but  no,  I  declare  I  could  not  before
where  is  he,  he  is  a  good  fellow. [This  entire  incident  is  curious. In  May


20


William  llomaine  Newhold.


[part


of  1893  nine  of  us  of  whom  John  McKenzie  Walker  and  F.  A.  M.  were  two,
met  at  the  house  of  a  friend,  celebrated  our  escape  from  the  matrimonial
snares  into  which  so  many  of  our  friends  had  fallen,  and  formed  the
"  Survivors' Club."  We  agreed  to  meet  yearly  thereafter  and  drum  out  of
the  club  those  who  had  in  the  interim  engaged  themselves  to  be  married.  As
the  "  Club  "  had  no  existence  save  at  the  annual  dinner  and  its  members
seldom  met  during  the  year,  I  hardly  thought  of  it  as  a  club  at  all.]

The  writer  then  asked  me  how  things  were  going  "at  the  college."  I
gave  him  some  items  of  University  news  which  were  appropriately  received.
He  mentioned  himself  the  surname  of  a  University  officer  ;  when  I  read  it
with  the  name  of  the  office  attached  and  asked  whether  that  was  what  he
meant,  he  replied]  yes  I  do,  the  old  idiot  [which  was  a  rather  emphatic  ex-
pression of  a  sentiment  which  is  quite  widespread.  I  do  not  know  whether
F.  A.  M.  shared  it.  The  writing  then  becomes  very  much  confused,
and  when]  J.  McWalker  .  .  .  Jack  McKenz  .  .  .  and  .
Walker  is  in  my  mind  [was  written,  Phinuit  said  the  light  v/as  bad,  and
I  put  my  hand  over  and  about  a  lialf  inch  away  from  the  writing  hand.]
Yes,  thanks,  I  am  so  delighted  to  free  and  clear  up  my  thoughts  .
How  is  Phi  Phil,  Philo  (Is  that  all  ?)  No  Philoe  oh  you  know  [There
is  a  literary  society  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania, — the  Philomathean
Society,  commonly  known  to  the  students  as  "  Philo,"  and  F.  A.  M.  was  a
member.  Here  follows  a  page  of  confusion,  scarcely  any  of  which  is  in-
telligible. The  writer  asked  again  after  Jiis  book  on  philosophy  and  repeats
that  he  lent  it  to  Sharpless  ;  the  remainder  of  the  sitting  is  of  no  evidential
value.]

The  sitting  of  June  22nd  was  devoted  to  the  F.  A.  M.  case,  Dr.
Hodgson,  Dixon  Mortoa  and  myself  being  present.  I  give  here
merely  the  gist  of  the  statements  which  were  unverifiable  or  untrue,
and  copy  in  detail  those  which  proved  true.

[F.  A.  M.  stated  that  his  mother  was  at  the  time  suffering  from  severe
dizziness  and  headaclie  :  this  cannot  be  verified.  The  location  of  the  scar
was  given  as  on  the  left  temple.  It  was]  quite  conspicuous  ;  I  parted  my
hair  to  cover  it.  Ask  Mother  if  she  does  not  remember  the  fall  I  had  from
the  steps  at  Carter's  years  ago.  She  and  I  were  together  when  I  fell  I
know  and  remember  it  very  well  and  if  you  ask  lier  she  will  know  what  I
mean.  [Mrs.  Morton  remembers  nothing  of  the  kind.  D.  M.  asked  what
the  writer  called  his  mother  during  life.  After  four  or  five  attempts,  during
,  which  D.  M.  was  careful  to  refrain  from  any  sort  of  suggestion,  the  writer
wrote  distinctly]  MAMA'  [with  the  accent  upon  the  last  syllable.  D.  M.
read  it  so,  asking  whether  that  was  right,  and  was  told  it  was.  This  was
correct.  D.  M.  then  asked  about  a  difficulty  which  his  brother  had  had
with  a  certain  man.  The  writer  professed  to  remember  it  well,  hv\t  when
asked  for  the  name  gave  it  incorrectly  as  Henry  Hollis.  D.  M.  then  asked
about  F.  A.  M.'s  plans  for  a  country  house  and  got  a  good  many  confused
statements  involving  this  Hollis  and  a  man  named  Frank  Eliot.  None  of
this  can  be  verified  and  most  of  it  is  known  to  be  untrue.  No  such  persons
as  Eliot  and  Hollis  have  been  found.  I  asked  again  about  the  Frank  Bezay
■\vhom  the  writer  had  mentioned  before.] (What  is  his  2jrofession  ? )  medicn


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Gertain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  21


[very  illegible]  Dr.  Dr. (What  does  he  look  like  ?)  can't  get  it  on  here

B  . (Has  he  any  hair  on  his  face  '? ) [Hand  pulls  rny  beard.] (Ah  !  so

he  had  a  beard  like  mine?) [Assent] (What  is  its  color?) Dark  B

Brown  or  dark  Brown  or  Red . . . Red . . . Dark  Brown  or  Red

we  call  it. . . . Yes,  Dr.  B  Red . . . Why  don't  you  say  yes

when  you  hear  me  ?  (Where  did  you  have  this  talk  witli  Bezay  of  which
you  spoke?)  [In  this  I  was  wrong  for  it  is  not  quite  clear  whether  the
writer  intended  to  ascribe  the  talk  to  Mr.  Hoard  or  Dr.  Bezay]  at  the  .  .  .
in  his  office  when  my  head  was  muddled.  (Do  you  remember  where  it  was  ? )
Yes  I  do.  (Could  you  tell  us  ? )  Yes,  in— Philda.  (What  street  ? )  on  Broad.
[Here  R.  H.  suggests  that  the  first  thought  occurring  to  a  writer  is  often
written.] Yes  I  remember  this  street. (Is  Bezay 's  office  on  Broad  street  '.  )

I  can't  recall  this  B  .

[This  Bezay  incident  is  most  perplexing.  In  the  -winter  of  1890-91  I  met
at  the  house  of  my  brother-in-law  a  friend  of  his  named  Dr.  James  Bezay.  I
saw  Dr.  Bezay  perhaps  two  or  three  times.  In  the  winter  of  1892-93  I  saw
him  once  or  twice.  He  sometimes  wore  a  beard  of  rather  light  tint  but  not
red,  as  I  recollect  it,  and  sometimes  a  moustache  only.  At  the  time  of  the
sitting  I  thought  his  name  was  Frank.  Upon  my  return  home  I  endeavoured
to  find  Dr.  Bezay  and  at  first  without  success. But  I  did  find  that  there

was  another  physician  named  Frank  Bezay  who  had  an  office  on  street

just  off  Broad  and  the  above  description  exactly  fits  him.  He  is  rather  tall
and  heavily  built  and  wears  a  beard  and  moustache  of  a  dark  reddish  brown.
Although  I  had  no  conscious  acquaintance  with  him  it  is  xery  probable  that
I  had  heard  his  name  and  had  jDossibly  seen  him.  Dr.  Bezay's  office  is  about
five  squares  distant  from  F.  A.  M.'s  former  rooms,  but  Dr.  Bezay  tells  me
he  never  knew  Mr.  Morton  and  can  recall  no  such  visit.  I  afterwards  found
Dr.  James  Bezay  and  learned  that  he  also  did  not  know  F.  A.  M.  The
occurrence  of  the  name,  coupled  with  so  accurate  a  description,  is  therefore
very  puzzling.]

[We  enquired  again  about  Philip  Hoard. Were  told  that  Mr.  Hoard  has
a  moustache  and  wears  eyeglasses. The  moustache  is  described  as  light
Mr.  Hoard  is  tall,  slight,  has  dark  hair,  dark  reddish  brown  moustache,  and
wears  eyeglasses. He  was  so  kind  as  to  read  over  my  accounts  of  all  these
sittings,  but  was  entirely  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  allusions  to  him.

The  writer  now  spontaneously  attracts  my  attention  to  what  he  is  about
to  say,  and  after  some  difficulty,  during  which  I  was  very  careful  to  give
him  no  assistance  whatever,  succeeds  in  writing  the  name]

Andie  Le  Grand

[which  was  the  name  of  a  common  friend  of  ours  who  was  much  better
known  to  F.  A .  M.  than  to  me.  He  lives  in  New  Orleans  ;  I  have  not  seen
him  for  more  than  ten  years.  The  writer  proceeded  to  give  us  a  long
account  of  a  prank  in  connection  with  a  bat  and  ball,  which  he  says  that  he,
A.  Le  G.,  and  Jack  Mackenzie  Walker  had  played.  It  was  impossible  to
verify  this  incident.  Mr.  Le  Grand  and  Mr.  Walker  remember  nothing
about  it.]

The  chief  points  given  by  this  communicator  which  would  go  to
show  his  identity  with  the  real  F.  A.  M.  are : — (1)  His  use  of  the  word


22


William  Romaine  Newhold.


[part


Billie.  (2)  The  giving  of  his  own  name  in  full.  (3)  The  mention  of
Jack  McKenzie  Walker,  Andie  Le  Grand,  Sharpless,  and  the  name  of
the  Univei'sity  officer  of  whom  I  have  spoken.  (4)  The  mention  of  his
brother's  name  Dick.  (5)  His  evident  acquaintance  with  the  manner
of  F.  A.  M.'s  death,  especially  iu  the  second  sitting.  (6)  The  allusion  to
the  (Survivors'  Club.  (7)  The  spontaneous  references  to  college  news —
F.  A.  M.  having  been  a  college  friend  of  mine,  and  seldom  seen  else-
where. (8)  The  statement  that  he  called  his  mother  Mamma'.  As
ambiguous  items  are  to  be  mentioned: — (1)  The  statements  about
Mr.  Hoard  and  Dr.  Bezay,  which  show  a  curious  mixture  of  truth  and
error.  (2)  The  reference  to  the  scar,  which  has  neither  been  proved
nor  disproved,  but  is  probably  erroneous.  (3)  The  "prank"  episode,
which  is  possibly  true,  but  probably  not.  (4)  The  statements  as  to
the  circumstances  of  his  death,  which  fit  very  well  with  all  that  is
known,  but  cannot  be  demonstrated.  (5)  The  allusion  to  Philo,  there
being  nothing  in  the  context  to  show  what  is  meant  by  the  word.  (6)
The  fall  from  the  steps.  The  most  important  points  which  are
wholly  false  8.re  the  statements  about  Henry  Hollis  and  Frank  Eliot,
about  seeing  Mr.  Hoard  and  Dr.  Bezay.  The  case  is  further  com-
plicated by  the  statements  made  about  Wm.  Morton.  Phinuit,  George
Pelham,  and  F.  A.  Morton  are  responsible  for  the  statement  that
W.  Morton  "had  light,"  i.e.,  was  a  medium.  I  do  not  think  anyone
could  draw  that  inference  from  Mr.  Morton's  own  performances,
although  it  is  possible  that  he  had  some  supernormal  powers.  On  the
other  hand  there  is  nothing  intrinsically  impossible  in  the  supposition
that  W.  Morton  both  had  supernormal  powers,  and  was  also  an
hysterical  automatist.  A  somewhat  similar  problem  arises  in  the  case
of  Baker  {see  Case  III).

Case  III.

Kittle  Miurdoclb,  involving  that  of  William  Ikiher.

In  the  spring  of  1894  I  had  the  opportunity  of  studying  at  length  an
interesting  case  of  automatic  writing.  I  shall  term  the  subject  William
Baker.  Mr.  Baker  was  a  man  of  education  and  had  been  known  to  me
for  some  years.  He  had  dabbled  more  or  less  in  spiritism,  had  seen  auto-
matic writing,  and  had  once  been  told  by  an  automatist  that  he  could
write  automatically  himself.  He  tried  to  do  so  several  times  without
success.  In  the  spring  of  1894  he  chanced  to  be  at  a  stance  at  which
no  professed  spiritists  were  present,  and  while  sitting  with  his  hands
upon  the  table,  suddenly  felt  a  sharp  contraction  in  his  left  upper  arm.
This  surprised  him,  as  he  had  no  expectation  of  any  "  manifestations  "
occurring  in  connection  with  himself  and  was  interested  in  another
person  present  who  was  supposed  to  be  a  medium. The  contraction


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  23


presently  disappeared.  A  few  moments  later,  after  walking  about  the
room,  he  sat  down  and  took  a  pencil ;  immediately  the  contraction
recurred  in  the  right  arm  ;  and  the  hand  made  desperate  efforts  to
write.  It  produced  nothing  save  scrawls  and  a  few  words  which
happened  to  be  in  his  mind.  That  night  upon  getting  home  he  tried
again  without  success,  the  hand  remaining  motionless.  The  following
evening  he  tried  again,  and  after  waiting  about  forty-five  minutes
attempts  at  writing  were  made.  The  words  "  Yes  "  and  "  No  "  were
written  and  questions  were  answered,  but  the  replies  were  often  incon-
sistent or  untrue.  Finally  the  hand  spelled  out,  letter  by  letter,  the
syllable  m-u-r-d,  or  at  least  Mr.  Baker  so  read  it.  I  examined  the
writing  myself  carefully  and  found  the  letters  by  no  means  clear,
although  they  look  more  like  m-u-r-d  than  anything  else.  It  then
flashed  into  Mr.  Baiter's  mind  that  a  certain  lady  named  Murdoch  had
died  about  three  weeks  before.  He  had  not  known  her  but  knew  her
brother.  As  soon  as  this  occurred  to  him  the  letters  och  were  rapidly
written,  and  when  asked  whether  the  writer  was  Miss  Murdoch  there
followed  a  sei'ies  of  violent  contortions  and  blows,  covering  the  paper
with  huge  scrawls,  and  making  a  "  pool "  of  pencil  lead  in  the  midst  of
the  sheet.  Finally  the  pencil  was  driven  thi"ough  the  paper  and  the
point  broken.  Mr.  Baker  was  sure  that  this  demonstration  did  not
come  from  his  upper  consciousness,  but  in  view  of  the  later  develop-
ments of  his  case  I  do  not  think  his  confidence  is  entitled  to  much
weight.  He  called  my  attention  to  these  phenomena  and  we  got  Miss
Murdoch's  brother,  Mr.  Edward  Murdoch,  to  assist  us  in  trying  to
determine  their  origin.  At  this  time  the  writing  was  produced  slowly
and  with  difficulty,  only  one  letter  being  written  at  a  time  and  that
usually  only  after  many  attempts.  Mr.  Baker  distracted  his  attention
by  reading  aloud.  Nothing  was  written  that  would  at  all  suggest  the
actual  presence  of  Miss  M.  save  one  sentence  : — "The  homefolks  have
forgotten,  Ted,  before  I  v/as  dead,  how  wrong  it  is  to  grieve."  This
struck  Mr.  M.  as  curious,  because  the  name  "  Ted  "  was  never  used
outside  his  home,  and  Mr.  Baker  had  seldom,  if  ever,  heard  it.  Many
other  statements  were  made  by  the  hand  which  were  found  to  be  false.
Before  long  the  writing  became  more  facile  ;  other  alleged  spirits
appeared  and  wrote  messages  which  were  easily  shown  to  emanate
from  no  other  source  than  Mr.  Baker's  own  consciousness.  This
development  was  attended  with  various  unpleasant  symptoms,  chiefly
of  a  choreic  character,  and  in  about  three  weeks  Mr.  Baker  refused  to
allow  his  hand  to  write  automatically  any  more,  being  convinced  that
spirits  had  nothing  to  do  with  it  and  that  it  was  having  a  most
injurious  effect  upon  his  health.

When  I  went  to  Boston  for  my  series  of  sittings  in  June  of  1894
I  secured  the  consent  of  Mr.  Murdoch  and  of  Mi\  Baker  to  attempt


24


William  Romaine  Nevjhold.


[PAKT


getting  into  communication  with  the  alleged  spirit  of  Miss  M.  in  order
to  see  what  explanation,  if  any,  would  be  offered  of  Mr.  Baker's  experi-
ences. I  said  nothing  however  to  Dr.  Hodgson  of  the  Murdoch  case.

At  my  first  sitting  of  this  series,  June  20th,  1894,  [Present  :  R.  H.  and
W.  R.  N.]  Pliinuit  asked  me  whether  I  knew  a  "lady  who  is  a  teacher.
She  is  going  over  her  school  and  college  experiences."  "Yes,"  I  said,  "I
do  ;  ask  her  to  write. ''  [I  did  not  then  know  that  she  had  been  a  teacher,
hut  the  allusion  to  college  led  me  to  reply  in  the  affirmative.]  "  Lady  who
t  iught,"  said  Phinuit,  "  is  going  over  things  that  happened  in  college.  She
wants  to  come  and  thinks  she  knows  yfiu."  [Miss  M.  had  been  a  teacher
for  some  years  and  at  the  time  of  her  death  was  attending  a  welhknown
college.  Phinuit  then  siid  :]  This  young  lady  who  used  to  teach  recognises
you  faintly.  Young  man  {i.e.,  F.  A.  Morton]  is  trying  to  get  her  to  wake
up  and  realise  .she  is  talking  to  you.  (How  long  has  .she  been  there?)
Only  a  few  years,  long  enough  to  get  far  from  eartli  and  we  have  to  get  her
attention. [Miss  M.  had  been  dead  about  seven  weeks.]

The  following  day  a  curious  incident  occurred.  While  experi-
roenting  with  Mr.  Baker  I  had  heard  Mr.  Murdoch  speak  of  a
gentleman  in  such  a  context  as  to  lead  me  to  suppose  that  there  might
have  been  something  in  the  way  of  an  attachment  between  him  and
Miss  M.  I  have  since  learned  that  this  was  not  true  ;  that  the
gentleman  in  question  had  been  dead  for  several  years,  and  that  Miss
M.  had  had  only  the  slightest  acquaintance  with  hira.  I  shall  term
him  Morse — the  real  name  is  much  more  unusual.  Towards  the  end
of  the  sitting  of  June  21.st  [Present  :  R.  H.  and  W.  Pi..  N.]  the
writer,  who  was  the  alleged  F.  A.  Morton,  fell  into  hopeless  confusion
in  the  midst  of  which  comes  the  following  : —

Here  B . . . what  is  M  0  R  D . . . go  [?]  to  [illegible]  with

it . . . E  S . . . M  O  R  T I N . . . N  a . . . M  O  R

yes  she  speaks  and  is  saying  not  right  yet  B

MORESE . . . MORRES . . . Dear  M yes . .  .

[More  confusion] I'll  speak  to  P and  he  will  say  Morres  Morriss.

(N.  :  Very  good,  I  understand.)  How  do  you  speak  it  ...  it  sounds
thus  .  .  .  He  says  this  and  knows  what  he  is  saying.  (N.  :  Try  to
give  her  name.)  [Another  mass  of  confusion  without  relevance  to  tlie
question.]

On  June  22nd  [Present:  R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.]  I  asked  the  F.  A.  M.
writer  to  find  for  me  the  lady  who  said  Morse,  and  he  said  he  would.  On
the  23ixl  [Present  : R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.]  in  the  midst  of  an  alleged
communication  from  an  aunt  of  mine  given  through  G.  P.,  there  came  an
interruption . . . Morr . . . Morrsa . . .  Errsa
[Another  interruption]  Morrs  (N.  :  Does  my  aunt  .say  this  1 ) No  .
how do ycu pronounce it sir  ? (Morse) Yes exactly. [Towards  the
end  of  the  same  sitting  comes  another  mass  of  confusion, in which  I
find]  his  mother . . . Fred's . . . Morrs . . .  Mors
Mortons . . . tell  him  his  sister wishes to say tliis also . .  .


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  25


no  not  at  all  only  she  calls  this  in  connection  with  himself
her  name  .  .  .  Morton's  .  .  .  Morres  .  .  .  (N.  :  Can't  yon
give  me  her  name  or  his  name  ?)  Oh  I  do  not  know  only  slie  keeps  repeating
E  ...  oh  no  ...  it  is  too  bad  .  .  .  could  I  not  give  it  to
you  next  time  sir  ...  I  cannot  tell  [?]  I'll  talk  with  her  and  tell  you
all  she  says  about  .

[While  1  was  in  Boston  I  received  from  Mr.  Murdoch  by  express  an  old
copy  of  Shakesjieare  which  had  belonged  to  his  sister.  It  contained  upon
the  flyleaf  the  name  of  her  father,  but  her  own  name  was  not  in  it.  I  pro-
duced it  at  the  sitting  of  the  25th  of  June  [Present  :  R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.]
and  asked  G.  P.  to  find  the  owner.  The  hand  replied  :]  she  taught  when  in
the  body  and  knows  this  and  says  she  will  try  to  speak  to  you  (Could  you
give  her  name  ?)  I'll  ...  I  don't  believe  it  because  I  can  scarcely  hear
her,  slie  seems  so  far  away.  [Motions  to  book]  let  me  see  this  again  will
you  ?  [After  the  writing  stopped  and  Phinuit  appeared,  I  called  his  atten-
tion to  the  book,  and  he  said  he  would  find  the  owner,  she  taught.  Upon
his  disappearance  the  right  hand  and  arm  were  violently  convulsed,  arm
twisted  backwards,  and  the  hand  pressed  in  the  back  between  the  shoulders,
tlie  fingers  moving  as  if  to  write.  I  was  unable  to  dislodge  the  arm.  I  then
put  pencil  in  the  fingers  and  paper  under  the  hand  against  the  back  ;  a  few
•scrawls  were  made,  then  the  arm  began  to  thresh  violently  about,  grasping
at  papers  and  overturning  the  table.  Becoming  more  quiet  it  began  writing,
.slowly,  and  in  small  characters]  Give  me  my  book  .  .  .  [illegible]
(what  is  your  name  ?)  Adelina  [I  read  it]  No  .  .  .  I  cannot  .  .  .
(Tell  me  your  brother's  name)  Ed  .  .  .  (Would  you  like  to  see  him  ?)
Yes  yes  [The  writing  then  degenerated  into  mere  scrawling.  Hodgson  took
the  pencil  from  the  writer,  saying  that  the  light  was  nearly  gone  and  she
must  wait  until  next  time.  While  coming  out  of  trance  Mrs.  Piper  began
describing  what  she  saw.]  "I  saw  a  pretty  young  lady,  she  had  her  hair
done  up  on  her  head  back  from  her  forehead  .  .  .  She's  leading  a  little
girl  by  the  hand  who  passed  out  with  a  throat  trouble,  she  has  light  curly
hair  .  .  .  the  lady  is  not  very  fair— rather  medium."  [Miss  Murdoch,
I  understand,  was  short,  quite  stout,  and  had  brown  hair,  neither  very  light
nor  very  dark.  This  I  did  not  know  at  the  time.  Her  two  sisters,  whom  I
did  know,  are  fair,  and  I  had  pictured  her  as  fair  also.  She  had  lost  a  little
sister,  but  the  child  did  not  die  of  a  throat  trouble,  nor  had  she  light  curly
hair.  Her  hair  was  light  brown  with  a  ripple  in  it  but  not  noticeably  curly.
I  knew  nothing  of  the  little  sister.]  -  , .  ,

[At  the  opening  of  the  sitting  of  June  26th  [Present  :  R.  H.  and
W.  R.  N.]  Phinuit  said]  Oh,  Hodgson,  if  you  only  knew  what  people  said
of  you  here  !  (What  do  they  say,  doctor  ?)  They  say  you  are  a  brute,
Hodgson.  I  tell  you  that  lady  won't  come  back  for  you  now.  Why  did
you  speak  so  roughly  to  her.  [H.  expresses  his  regret  and  says  it  was
necessary  that  she  should  go  and  she  did  not  do  so  when  asked,  etc.]  You
ought  to  coax  and  not  drive  her  away.  George  and  I  have  been  trying
to  coax  her  to  come  but  her  feelings  are  hurt  and  I  do  not  believe
that  she  will.  [The  book  was  put  on  the  back  of  the  medium's  neck.  G.  P.
begins  writing  on  other  topics ;  finally  I  ask  him  about  the  lady  to  whom
the  book  belongs. He  asks]  "who  is  this  Elver  v/honi  she  continually  calls


26


William  Romaine  Newbold.


[part


for  ?  [and  adds  that]  Elver  is  her  cousin.  [No  such  person  is  known.
In  the  confusion  which  follows  May  and  Alice  are  mentioned.  H.  is  told  to
go  out  and  goes. G.  P.  continues  :]

Here  she  stands  and  is  trying  to  come  close  to  me  .  .  .  Alice  V  (Is
that  N?)  No  .  .  .  (Try  to  give  her  last  name.)  Yes  I  will  Mic
.  .  .  M  i  .  .  .  R  a  .  .  .  strange  name  sir  .  .  .  her  brother's
Christian  name  she  calls  E.  .  .  .  Ned  .  .  .  yes  he  .  .  .  yes  a
queer . . . byren . . . Byron  it  sounds ... [I  read  this]  na

. now  not  this  my  friend . . . sister  Alice  is  hers  also  .
May  a  sister . . . Alice  I . . . and  LI  zzie . . . A.  E.  M.

artha  called  Patty  .  .  .  that  is  your  mother  and  .  .  .  (Just
now,  Mr.  Pelham,  I  wish  to  hear  from  this  other  lady.)  I  understand,  she  is
trying  lier  best  to  tell  me  something  but  why  do  they  keep  calling  Mrse  now

.  yes  I  do  I  think  Mattie  ...  is  slie  one  of  your  fi'iends  .
give  me  the  book  will  you.  [Takes  the  book  and  without  opening  it  more
than  was  necessary  inserts  hand  between  the  leaves  in  various  parts  of  the
book,  allowing  it  to  rest  awhile  in  each.  I  vi'atched  to  see  whether  the  fly-
leaf was  uncovered  ;  it  was  not.]  No  it  is  heard  distinctly  by  yours  [i.e.,
truly]  A.  W.  M.

[Miss  Murdoch  has  a  sister  Alice,  a  brother  Ned,  sometimes  called  Ted  in
the  family,  and  a  sister  Mary  who  was  formerly  usually  called  May  but  for
the  past  four  or  five  years  more  commonly  Mary.  The  allusion  to  Pattie  is
correct  (cf.  case.  .  .  .  Lizzie  is  not  significant  to  E.  W.  M.  The
initials  A.  E.  M.  probably  stand  for  K.  E.  M.  which  are  the  initials  as  later,
although  erroneously,  given  as  those  of  Miss  M.]  (Try  again  to  give  the  last
name.)  Well  it  is  W  I  R  .  .  .  no  .  .  .  M  I  R  R  .  .  .  M I R
.  .  .  M  U  R  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  M  U  R  .  .  .  no  .  .  .  11
yes  ...  I  am  listening  [with  all]  my  ears  but  .  .  .  M  o  r
. oc . . . she  says  this  distinctly . . . (That  is  j^artly  right.)

I  know  it  sir  but  she  is  still  speaking  it  .  .  .  Mur  [scrawl]  .
good,  I  hear . . . Mur  oc  [scrawl]  no  oh  dear . . . Mur  .

II  ...  L  L  ...  A.  W.  M.  ...  (I  read  it.  Is  that  what  you
mean  ? )  I  do,  tliis  is  exactly  what  she  repeats  to  me  A.  W.  M.  [Motions
towards  book.] Give  it  me. [Handles  it  as  before.] This  will  .

she  will  have  it  O.  K.  sir  .  .  .  M  U  R  .  .  .  P  .  .  .  D  .  .  .
[I  read  this  as  P]  yes  only  make  it  this  way  D  .  .  .  E  .  .  .  give
[feels  book]  .  .  .  C  .  .  .  Murd  C  ...  D  C  ...  yes
.  .  .  DC  .  .  .  E  .  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  it  is  i  M  U  R  D  E  C
[strikes  out  E  and  writes]  i  [after  the  C].  I  can't  quite  catch  it  .  .  .
yes  .  .  .  E  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  i  C  .  .  .  [scrawl]  N  .  .  .
h  ...  H  ...  I  just  heard  it  now,  wait  .  .  .  M  rdoch  .
.  yes  .  .  .  she  says  yes  ...  I  am  A.  W.  M  U  doch  .
D  O  C  H  .  .  .  [I  call  to  H.  that  time  is  up.]  I  am  not  going  yet  sir,
no  sir,  I  don't  care  about  Hodgson  .  .  .  no  sir  I  am  struggling  to  bring
this  Ettie  .  .  .  May  .  .  .  look  sir  she  says  she  has  a  sister  May  and
a  brother  Ed  or  .  .  .  (Did  she  know  me  in  life  ? )  Oh  yes  she  knows  you
but  only  since  she  came  out.  She  used  to  teach.  .  .  .  (Did  she  ever
try  to  communicate  with  me  ?  )  Yes,  once  she  succeeded  in  giving  you  this,
viz. ,  "  1  am  with  you  tell  Ed ... do  he;ir . . . tell  Ed  I  am  here,


xxxiv.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  27


don't  worry "  something  to  this  effect  ...  I  will  try  .  .  .  you  see
she  has  a  peculiar  voice  and  it  is  difficult  to  hear  all  she  says  [?]  .  .  .  yes
.  .  .  my  name  sir  is  Miss  Murdoch  .  .  .  [Then  follow  confused
scraps  purporting  to  be  spoken  by  Miss  M.  in  which  she  sends  message  to
May  not  to  worry  because  she  lost  the  brooch  ;  she  will  find  it  again.  This
is  not  intelligible  to  Miss  Mary  M.  She  also  wishes  to  know  what  May  has
done  with  the  rest  of  her  books.  It  seems  that  some  of  the  books  which
she  used  at  college  were  brought  home  and  the  remainder  given  to  her
room-mate.  .  .  .  Then  G. P.  writes  "  adieu  my  good  friend  "  after  which
comes  a  sudden  burst]  K  it . . . Kittie . . . yes  Kittie  W.

Murdoch  K Kittie  W.  Murdocli . . . yes . . . adieu  I  am

perfectly  exhausted  H  want  to  go  to  H  [scrawl]  I  wish  to  go  to  Heav

. . . Heaven . . . yes .  .

[Mrs.  Piper  began  talking  while  coming  out  of  trance.]  I  understand
you  ...  oh  I  do  Kittie  .  .  .  [feels  chest.  Miss  M.  died  of
typhoid  pneumonia.]  The  lady  was  telling  me  about  her  sister  and  I  will
tell  you.  I  hear  the  voice  say  tell  her  she  must  tell  somebody  of  the
name  of  Edward  to  .  .  .  he  works  too  hard  .  .  .  Will  you  let  go
my  brain  .  .  .  he'll  come  out  all  right,  can't  hear  any  more  [Relapses
into  unconsciousness. Considerable  ditficulty  in  getting  her  awake.]

The  name  Kittie  is  correct.  Miss  M.  was  christened  Kate,  was
afterwards  called  Kittie  or  Kit.  For  some  years  before  her  death  she
signed  herself  and  was  usually  called  Katharine,  although  many
persons  still  called  her  Kittie. She  had  no  middle  name  at  all.

I  telegraphed  to  Mr.  Edward  Slurdoch  and  he  came  on  and  was
present  at  the  sitting  on  the  following  day,  June  27th.  [Present :  R.  H.,
W.  R.  N.,  and  E.  M.]  Phinuit  talked  with  him  for  awhile,  making-
sundry  statements  aboiit  his  health,  none  of  which  were  strikingly
correct.  He  also  asked  him  point  blank  where  he  lived.  The  latter
part  of  this  talk  was  interrupted  by  remarks  apparently  addressed  to  a
spirit,  such  as  "  All  right,  dear,  you  may,  be  a  good  girl,"  and  "Don't
be  afraid."  The  writing  now  begins,  at  first  with  difficulty.  The
entire  sitting  is  much  confused  and  I  give  only  an  abstract.

My  dearest  Eddie  [This  name  has  not  been  applied  to  E.  M.  since  his
childhood]  where  is  my  brother  Ned  Murdoch  [?]••• where  am  I

Oh  Ned  tell  me  where  you  are  dear  and  where  is  Bessie  .  .
and  tell  me  are  all  together  .  .  .  Oh  do  help  me  do  ...  I  do  not
remember  all  my  life  but  I  see  hear  think  speak  and  everything  .  .
I  wish  to  know  about  mother  Ned,  I  wish  to  tell  you  that  she  is  long  [ing]  to
be  with  [m.e]  .  .  .  where  is  my  Picture  and  what  is  the  matter  with  my
scarf  I  made  .  .  .  where  is  it  now  and  where  are  the  brushes  who  has
them  .  .  .  [There  is  no  significance  in  the  allusion  to  2)icture  and
brushes. For  the  scarf  see  below.]

(M.  :  Have  you  heard  my  voice  since  you  left  us  ?)  I  went  .  .  .  yes
,  .  .  I  told  you  this  ...  I  heard  you  of  course  I  did  .  .  .  Yes
but  don't  you  think  I  used  to  be  a  little  stubborn  ...  I  did  not  mean
to  be  did  I . . . but  nervous . . . give  me  my . . . where  is.


;28


William  Romaine  Neivhold.


[part


B;iily  [As  I  had  had  alleged  communications  from  an  aunt  of  this  name  I
said,  "That  is  for  me.  Never  mind  about  it."]  Thank  you  I  just  heard  it
[[t  ajjpears  that  Miss  M.'s  trained  nurse  was  named  Miss  Bailey,  and  her
room-mate  says  that  slie  often  called  her  Bailey.  The  words  "Give  me
niy  "  .  .  .  may  be  a  vagrant  reminiscence  of  the  same  sort.]  Where  is
IMay,  Ned  ?  does  her  head  trouble  her  any  .  .  .  what  is  the  matter  with
her  hair  she  looks  different  dear  [Miss  Mary  M.  has  made  no  change  in  the
mode  of  wearing  her  hair.]  Oh  dear  this  is  all  new  to  me  and  I  wish  I
could  tell  you  all  I  remember  and  feel  .  .  .  will  you  send  your  thoughts
to  me  dear  Ned  and  let  me  recall  the  school  ...  I  wish  to  know  who
is  in  my  place  dear  (M.  :  I  don't  know.)  Why  dear  don't  you  remember
the  scarf  .  .  .  it  is  the  last  thing  I  ever  made  dear.  [About  a  half
hour  after  this  question  was  written,  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained,  Miss
M.'s  mother,  while  going  over  her  things,  came  across  a  pink  silk  scarf
which  had  been  sent  her  a  few  months  before  her  death,  and  noticed  how
neatly  it  had  been  hemmed. It  was  not  the  last  thing  she  did  however.]

Ned,  do  you  remember  this  .  .  .  this,  Ned  [touching  E.  M.'s  watch-
pocket  in  which  was  her  watch]  do  you  dear  (Yes.)  Thank  you  dear,  don't
tell  these  people  what  1  am  saying,  I  never  did  like  to  ...  I  must  be
[used  to  be  ?]  a  little  reserved  once  in  a  while,  dear.

[TJie  writer  then  mentioned  "  Kittie  Marston  or  the  young  girl  to  whom
I  gave  the  flowers  " — no  such  person  is  known — and  asked  after  John— the
name  is  not  very  distinct — whether  he  were  well.  Her  sister  was  engaged  to
a  man  of  this  name.  When  asked  whether  she  had  tried  to  communicate
through  Baker  she  said]  yes  but  I  could  not  speak  distinctly  dear  although  I
tried  my  best  [When  the  inquirer  made  it  clear  that  it  was  of  writing  we
asked  she  said]  I  tried,  yes  I  do,  I  took  his  hand  and  wrote  [Here  follow
scrawls  such  as  Baker's  hand  made.]  (How  many  times?)  Not  many  but  I
impressed  my  thoughts  on  his  hand  aud  it  was  truly  I  your  sister  K  .  .  .
I  wrote  this  [something  that  looks  like  S  E  V  E  T  ;  is  probably  meant  for
the  next  word]  S  I  )S  T  E  R  but  my  dear  little  brother  hardly  knows  or
realises  where  I  am  and  how  clearly  I  can  see  him  and  Ned  I  see  all  that  you
do  and  all  you  say  or  think  ;  when  you  sleep  I  am  with  you,  when  you  walk
I  am  with  you,  and  now  that  you  are  going  away  down  to  the  water  I  shall
be  there  with  you.  [M.  notes  that  such  terms  as  "dear  little  brother,"
were  occasionally  but  seldom  used  by  his  sister.  The  "down  to  the  water"
may  have  reference  to  tlie  fact  that  lie  returned  home  that  night  with  me  by
boat,  although  he  had  not  then  decided  to  do  so,  but  the  remark  is  too  vague
to  be  of  value.]

(M.  :  Did  you  give  us  a  message  containing  the  word  Ted  ''.)  Yes  .  .  .
this  is  the  very  first  thing  I  ever  said,  T  E  D,  but  the  rest  was  not  my  own
thought  dear  [We  read  it  :  "  The  home  folks  have  forgotten  Ted,  before  I
was  dead,  how  wrong  it  is  to  grieve."]  Oh  the  words  are  put  backwards
(Is  any  of  it  right  ?)  Yes  .  .  .  Yes  I  said  it  was  wrong  to  grieve  only
the  folks  at  home  do,  and  you  got  it  backwards.  [We  then  went  over  the
message  phrase  by  jjhrase,  and  all  was  accejjted  except  the  "  before  I  was
dead,"  of  which,  when  asked  whether  she  said  it,  the  writer  said]  No  not
at  all.  [Then  followed  a  good  many  confused  allusions,  among  them  one  to
-a  hat  she  did  not  like,  which  is  not  intelligible. M.  asked  her  whether  she


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  29-


remembered  a  certain  concert  to  which  fihe  had  gone  with  him  and  who  went
with  them.  This  was  answered  by  a  series  of  confused  phrases,  the  gist  of
which  was  that  she  had  written  it  already  on  back  sheets.  It  was  not  there.
She  also  alluded  to  the  names  Hayes  and  Adams.  Miss  M.  was  acquainted
with  j)ersons  bearing  these  names,  but  not  very  well.  She  also  said]  How
long  is  it  since  I  came  here  ...  I  mean  when  I  passed  out  [at]  [here
comes  the  name  of  the  college  town  in  which  she  died.  This  name  had  been
mentioned  during  the  sitting,  but  no  reference  had  been  made  to  her  having
died  there.  In  the  conclusion  she  asked]  Where  is  Abbott  (Miss  ?)  Yes
tell  me  Ned  (What  is  her  first  name?)  Kittie  [illegible]  May  .
Oh  do  May  ...  oh  May  will  you  ever  understand  .  .  .  Jessie
I  send  love  [?]  to  Jessie  Abbott.  [M.  remarks  that  a  cousin  named
Bessie  Abbott  (c/.  the  occurrence  of  the  name  Bessie  at  the  beginning  of
the  sitting),  was  staying  at  his  house  at  the  time  of  Miss  M.'s  death,  but  at
this  time  had  left.]

The  main  points  of  evidence  in  favour  of  this  communicator's
identity  with  Miss  Murdoch  are  : — (1)  Phinuit's  point  blanlc  allusion
to  the  lady  who  had  been  a  teacher  and  was  going  over  things  that
happened  at  college.  (2)  The  giving  of  the  names  Ed,  or  Ned,  May
and  Alice — Miss  M.  had  no  other  living  brotliers  or  sisters  than  these;
(3)  The  giving  of  her  own  name  as  Kittie  Murdoch.  (4)  Tlie  aIlu!-ion
to  the  scarf.  (5)  The  reference  to  the  watch.  (6)  The  reference  to
Bessie  Abbott.  (7)  The  allusion  to  her  having  died  at  the  college
town.

Against  the  theory  of  identity  are : — (1)  The  insertion  of  the
initial  W.  in  her  name.  (2)  The  description  of  the  little  sister  as
having  died  of  throat  trouble.  (3)  The  statement  that  "  Elver  "  is
her  cousin.  (4)  The  message  about  the  losing  of  the  brooch.  (5)  The
references  to  Kittie  Marston,  and  to  the  hat  she  did  not  like.  (6)  Her
inability  to  name  the  person  who  went  with  them  to  the  concert.,
(7)  The  Morse  incident.

As  ambiguous  : — (1)  The  claim  that  she  knew  me  only  since  she
came  out,  which  is  true  but  might  obviously  have  been  suggested  by
my  question.  (2)  The  claim  that  she  tried  to  use  Baker's  hand  and  her
asserted  recognition  of  the  message  which  it  wrote.  (3)  The  query
about  the  rest  of  her  books.  (4)  The  message  to  Edward  about
woi'king  too  hard,  which  is  true  but  commonplace.  (5)  The  allusions
to  the  picture  and  brushes.  (6)  The  reference  to  her  own  stubborn-
ness. (7)  The  mention  of  Bailey.  (8)  The  query  about  her  sister's
hair. (9)  The  references  to  Hayes  and  Adams.

The  Morse  incident  calls  for  special  mention.  It  is  the  one  item  in
my  series  of  sittings  which,  although  represented  as  the  remark  of  a
spirit  seen  and  known  to  be  a  spirit  by  the  communicator,  is  indubit-
ably of  telepathic  origin.  I  have  already  told  how  the  name  Morse
came  to  be  associated  in  my  mind  with  Miss  Murdoch. There  is  no.


30


William  Romaine  Neiohold.


[part


conceivable  reason  why  Miss  M.  or  any  other  spirit  should  be  con-
stantly alluding  to  a  man  whom  Miss  M.  had  never  seen  but  once  or
twice,  and  who  had  died  some  years  before  she  did.  If,  however,  we
suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper's  nervous  mechanism  merely  catches  and
reflects  the  sitter's  own  subconscious  memories  and  associations,  the
incident  is  readily  explicable.  It  is  perhaps  worthy  of  note  that
William  Morton  told  me  several  things  which  I  think  he  must  have
got  in  this  way,  telepathically  from  my  mind,  although  they  were
presented  to  him  as  the  whisperings  of  distant  voices.

At  a  later  sitting,  November  7th,  1894  [Present:  Miss  Edmunds]
a  few  messages  were  given  from  the  alleged  Miss  Murdoch,  but  nothing
was  said  that  was  either  clearly  true  or  false.  For  further  develop-
ments in  Mr.  Baker's  case,  see  below.

Case  IV.
William  Baker.

After  getting  these  statements  from  the  alleged  Miss  Murdoch,  Mr.
33aker  was  persuaded  to  allow  some  more  experiments  to  be  made  with
'his  automatic  writing.  He  came  to  Boston  and  had  a  few  sittings
-with  Mrs.  PijDer,  or  rather  was  present  at  a  few.  George  Pelham  and
Thinuit  gave  him  the  fullest  explanation  of  his  past  experiences  and
ininvite  directions  for  future  experimentation.

He  was,  they  said,  a  very  fair  medium  but  "  mixed."  He  had
"  light "  in  the  thumb,  forefinger  and  middle  finger  of  his  right  hand,
and  with  practice  could  be  made  a  very  good  instrument  of  communica-
tion. George  Pelham  especially  was  anxious  to  get  a  chance  to
experiment  with  him.  He  was  told  that  he  could  improve  his  "light"
by  getting  into  better  health  and  by  abstaining  from  animal  food  ;
-when  he  wished  to  try  writing  he  "  should  keep  perfectly  calm,  sit  in
as  quiet  a  place  as  convenient "  and  call  mentally  for  G.  P.  His  past
failures  were  due  to  the  fact  that  his  own  mind  interfered,  so  that  it
was  almost  impossible  for  the  spirit  to  get  his  thoughts  expressed
independently.

We  then  endeavoured,  with  Mr.  Baker's  aid,  to  get  some  objective
verification  of  these  statements.  Mr.  Baker  tried  automatic  writing
both  in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence  and  at  a  distance  from  her.  The  writing
produced  when  at  a  sitting  seemed,  Mr.  B.  said,  dilferent  from  that
-which  he  experienced  at  otlier  times ;  the  movements  were  more
abrupt  and  were  accompanied  by  tingling  sensations  which  he  did  not
feel  at  other  times.  But  such  sensations  cannot  be  regarded  as  of  any
evidential  value,  nor  did  he  so  regard  them.  Our  frequent  attempts
to  get  messages  given  to  the  alleged  writer  by  Mr.  Baker's  hand


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  31

written  by  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  or  vice  versa  proved  absolute  failures,
save  in  one  rather  questionable  case.  Dr.  Hodgson  asked  George
Pelham,  referring  to  Mr.  B.,  "Did  he  make  any  definite  request  of
you?"  The  reply  was,  "Yes,  in  this  line.  Go  to  this  medium  soon.
All  I  think  of  him."  The  last  clause,  as  well  as  the  tenor,  seems  to
show  that  G.  P.  has  misunderstood  the  question  and  supposed  it  to  be,
"  Did  you  make  any  request  of  him " ;  the  last  clause  then  means,
'  This  is  all  I  asked,  I  think,  of  him."  This  happens  to  be  right,  as  the
first  thing  written  by  Mr.  Baker's  liand  on  that  occasion  was,  "  Go  to
Boston  soon."  This  single  success  in  the  midst  of  so  large  a  number
of  failures  does  not  amount  to  much  ;  it  might  well  have  been  chance.
Moreover  it  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  failures.  G.  P.  claimed  that  he
had  often  written  by  Mr.  Baker's  hand,  said  that  he  had  heard  Mr.
Baker  say  this  and  that,  and  that  he  had  himself  said  so  and  so.
None  of  this  was  true.  It  might  be  alleged  that  G.  P.  had  no  means
■of  knowing  how  much  of  what  he  said  was  understood,  and  he  hiniself
once  stated  that  he  thought  he  understood  what  was  said  to  him
better  than  what  he  said  was  understood.  But  in  no  case  did  he
repeat  what  was  said  to  him  or  anything  like  it.  Whence  then  came
the  remarks  which  he  claimed  that  he  had  heard  Mr.  Baker  and  myself
and  others  make?  Furthermore,  he  never  succeeded  in  telling  what
Mr.  Baker  was  doing  at  a  given  time  or  who  was  with  him  when  he,
G.  P.,  attempted  communicating,  yet  he  always  jDrofessed  to  see  it  all
clearly.  What  then  did  he  see,  supposing  him  to  be  a  spirit  ?  These
are  questions  which  the  spiritistic  theory,  as  propounded  by  the
alleged  communicators,  does  not  answer.

Cases  V.  and  VI.

Mrs.  Martin  ayid  John  James  Burton.

Emily  Stevenson,  a  great  aunt  of  mine,  married  Robert  Martin  and
lived  in  a  town  about  thirty  miles  from  my  home.  It  was  rather  an
•out  of  the  way  place  and  in  course  of  time  we  lost  sight  of  her.  I
never  saw  her  myself  until  the  year  1889  when  I  went  to  call  upon
her,  introduced  myself  and  was  received  with  open  arms.  I  saw  her
only  once  or  twice  after  that  ;  last  in  1891. She  died  two  years  later.

[My  connection  with  her  being  so  slight  I  was  much  surprised  when
Phinuit  said  to  me,  June  20th,  1894,  [present  R.  H.  and  W.  R  N.,]]do  you
know  who's  Mrs.  [?]  Miss  [?]  Martini  (I  do.)  She's  an  aunt  of  yours  and
wants  to  speak  to  you.  (I'd  like  to  hear  from  her.)  You  were  smaller  when
she  passed  out.  [She  had  been  dead  about  fifteen  months.  The  writing
then  begins  and  it  would  seem  that  a  large  part  of  it  is  supposed  to  emanate
from  Mrs.  Martin,  but  the  whole  page  is  much  confused  and  apparently
more  persons  than  one  are  talking.]


32


William  Romaine  Neiohold.


[part


[The  writing  contains  allusions  to]  My  will  [which  I  have  been  told
caused  dissatisfaction  in  the  family.]

"Ellen,"  "Emma,"  and  "Eliza,"  [These  are  the  names  of  three  of  Mrs.
Martin's  nieces,  two  of  whom,  Ellen  and  Elizabeth,  known  as  Lizzie,  lived
together  alone  near  her,  were  very  intimate  with  her  and  were  her  chief
legatees.

At  the  sitting  of  June  25th  there  occurs  a  curious  interruption.  G.  P.  is
talking  of  confusion,  etc.,  when  the  word  "James"  is  wi-itten  several  times.
The  left  hand  of  tlie  medium  becomes  much  convulsed  and  grasps  the  right
hand.  The  right  hand  forces  it  away  several  times,  and  finally,  being
almost  reached  by  it,  writes]  Keej^  it  out  of  my  reach,  keep  it  quiet.  [R.  H.
grasps  and  holds  it  by  main  force.  After  some  confused  and  unrecognised
messages  conies]  Here  is  a  relative  of  mine,  sir,  in  the  person  of  Wm.
Newbold. [Confusion]  what  has  become  of  Burton  ? Let  him  and  .

both  him  and  lier  free  tlieir  minds. . . . my  sister  and  aunt  M  will

tell  you  about  your  uncle  also  my  son  [?]  .  .  .  what  and  where  is
Burton  ...  I  am  with  ...  we  are  together  and  .  .  .  [A_
certain  John  James  Burton,  whose  wife  was  a  relative  of  Mrs.  Martin's,  had
died  a  short  time  before.  He  knew  Mrs.  Martin  very  well.  I  was  scarcely
acquainted  with  hint,  having  seen  him  not  more  than  two  or  three  times  in.
my  life,  and  was  much  surprised  to  have  the  name  mentioned  in  this  con-
nection. I  said]  (Is  Mr.  Burton  there  1 )  No,  she  was  calling  to  Burton
and  I  through  mistake  wrote  it  down  as  I  heard  her  say  it . . .  come

here  B  and  speak  to  Will . . . B come  here . . .  B

and  speak  to  Will  .

Cass  .  .  .  Carson,  the  Dr.  took  away  my  medicine  much  against  my
will  yet  it  is  all  right  now.  [This  appears  to  be  an  interruption  ;  c/.  Case-
VIL  (p.  35)].

Who  is  Helen  .  .  .  [Mrs.  Burton's  name  is  Helen]  she  is  always
interrupting  and  this  I  hear  .  .  .  too  bad,  it  is  not  legible  yet  .  .  .
I  will  make  it  clear  soon  .  .  .  [illegible]  .  .  .  D  N  .  .  .  D  N
D  N  .  .  .  [I  am  standing  ;  hand  gently  presses  me  dov/n]  will
you  sit  ?  I  see  your  etherial  in  full  sir  and  I  am  not  specially  anxious  to  see
you  and  I  am  more  so  to  get  these  messages  straight  my  friend.  [The  writer
then  asked  R.  H.  to  go  out  ;  then  to  me]  Burton  wishes  mo  to  say  to  yon
that  if  you  are  New  .  .  .  you  will  recognise  me  by  this.  [Here  follows
a  rude  diagram  wliich  looks  somewhat  like  an  open  book.  It  is  drawn
several  times.  I  said — Why  can't  he  tell  us  in  words  ?]  He  will  do  .  .  .
No  ...  [It  is  drawn  again.]  I  am  not  good  at  this  business,  yet  this-
is  as  he  gives  it  me  D  i  p  1  o  m  a.  [Then  follows  confusion  in  which  occur
tlie  words]  LAW  in  or  der  of  the  LIB  erty  .  .  .  Law  and  (Was  he
a  lawyer  ?)  No,  this  refers  to  somebody  that  is  with  you.  [The  drawing  is
again  given.  R.  H.  guesses  that  it  is  a  book.]  yes  and  it  is  .  .  .  indeed
yes  and  now  he  wishes  to  know  where  it  is.  It  was  a  distinct  part  of  himself
in  a  way  and  he  says  you  should  know  this  .  .  .  what  about  Andrew
.  .  .  (N.  :  I  don't  understand  at  all.)  Oh  my  friend  this  is  a  friend  of  his^
Mr.  Andrews  or  Andrew  by  name  .  .  .  did  you  hear-  your  aunt  who
calls  herself  Mrs.  Martin  is  connected  with  Burton  and  also  you  .  .  .
she  is  an  [?]... her  [?]  husband . . . father . . . no,  your


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  33


grandpa  .  .  .  was  her  father — no  his  .  .  .  wait  I  dislike  any
mistakes  in  this . . . her  brother . . . is . .  .

[Seeing  that  the  communicator  was  getting  confused  I  asked  him  whether
he  remembered  a  call  I  paid  at  his  house.  He  said  that  he  did,  and  that,
after  I  left,  he  had  sent  me  a  box  of  fruit.  I  cannot  learn  that  he  did  any-
thing of  the  kind.  He  sent  his  love  to  his  wife  and  said]  she  must  know  I
live  here  and  if  she  changes  her  place  again  she  will  hear  from  me.  [Mrs.
Burton  had  been  thinking  of  moving.]  (Tell  me  of  your  death.)  I  came
here  quite  suddenly  and  on  account  of  my  head  trouble.  [Mr.  Burton  was
af^jarently  in  his  usual  health  one  morning,  but  after  breakfast  complained
of  feeling  a  little  ill  ;  he  lay  down  on  a  sofa,  soon  became  unconscious  and
died  later  in  the  day.  The  cause  of  death  was  apoplexy.]  (Did  you  suffer
at  all  ? )  No  conscious  pain  at  last  .  .  .  none  although  she  thought  I
did.  [Mrs.  Burton  was  heard  to  ask  the  doctor  whether  Mr.  Burton  had
suffered  any  pain.]

[The  next  day  Pliinuit  called  to  me  and  said :]  I  want  you  Billie.
[Si^eaking  in  the  name  of  a  spirit]  Tell  gentleman  in  the  body  that,  in  my
hazy  communication  to  him  in  expressing  myself  I  made  a  mistake.  It  was
to  Burton's  friend  Mr.  Dycon  or  Deacon,  or — something  like  that  he  says, —
that  the  fruit  was  sent  and  he  mistook  you  for  him.  Ask  Helen  [Phinuit
pronounces  the  word  Hele^n].  At  first  he  recalled  the  circumstances  and
connected  them  with  you.  [When  Phinuit  said  this  I  had  no  notion  whom
he  meant.  One  of  Mr.  Burton's  sons  told  me  that  his  father  was  an
intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Anthony  Deacon — cf.  the  Andrew  above.  I  knew  Mr.
Deacon  myself  very  well  but  did  not  know  that  he  knew  Mr.  Burton.  Mr.
Deacon  died  after  a  long  and  painful  illness  only  three  days  after  Mr.
Burton.  The  sending  him  a  basket  of  fruit  seems  therefore  plausible,  but
no  one  can  be  found  who  knows  anything  about  it.  Mrs.  Deacon  thought
the  words  "Law  and  Order  of  the  liberty"  might  possibly  be  connected
with  the  fact  that  Mr.  Deacon  and  Mr.  Burton  were  both  officers  in  the  late-
Civil  War,  members  of  the  Loyal  Legion  and  spent  much  of  their  time
together  fighting  their  old  battles  over.  The  "diploma  "  may  be  connected
with  ' '  commission. "]

The  evidence  for  the  identity  of  these  two  communicators  taken
singly  is  not  strong.  Mrs.  Martin's  name  and  relation  to  me  is
definitely  given ;  the  other  statements  ascribed  to  her  are  too  ambiguous
to  be  worth  much.  In  Mr.  Burton's  case  the  name  and  caiise  of  death
are  correctly  given.  The  allusion  to  Helen  is  significant,  but  it  is  not
definitely  stated  that  she  is  his  wife.  To  my  mind,  however,  the
collocation  of  these  two  was  one  of  the  most  striking  facts  developed
in  the  course  of  my  sittings.  My  acquaintance  with  both  was  so  slight
that  I  could  scarcely  name  anyone  mention  of  whom  would  have
surprised  me  more ;  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Burton  is  introduced,
his  name  being  first  mentioned  in  what  purports  to  be  Mrs.  Martin's
words  as  she  calls  to  him  to  come  and  speak  to  me  is  very  curious.
The  statement  that  "  your  aunt,  Mrs.  Martin,  is  connected  with.
Burton  "  is  also  noteworthy.

D


34


William  Romaine  Newhold.


[part


Case  VII.
"  Atmt  Sally."

[At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  of  June  24th,  (present  R.  H.  and  W.  R.
N.)  I  am  informed  that  "  Sally"]  wishes  to  be  remembered  to  your  mother
[sends  my  mother  a  message  with  reference  to  something  which  she  says  my
mother  once  did.  My  mother  has  no  recollection  of  this.  I  had  an  aunt
Sally  who  died  early  in  1875.]

This  is  a  dilBcult  matter  to  explain  yet  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  there
were  two  marriages  in  this  case  of  mother  and  aunt  grandma  also.  Conse-
qviently  it  seems  they  will  never  cease  to  taunt  me  until  I  explain  matters  to
you. Sally  is  the  ladj',  elderl}'  lady,  who  says  she  gave  Marie  the  message

.  .  Maria  ...  [I  ask  if  it  is  Maria]  not  quite  Martie  .  .  .
yes  .  .  .  Martha  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  she  says  Martha  [My  mother's
name  is  Martha]  do  you  see  these  people.  (R.  H.  :  No  George,  not  we.)
Why  is  it  possible  when  they  are  so  near,  yet  I  know  you  do  not,  yet  it
seems  as  though  you  must  .  .  .  Yes  .  .  .  she  says  this  distinctly
and  is  still  coming  nearer  and  now  requests  you  to  speak.  (Can  she  hear
me  ?)  I  can  and  I  am  the  telephone  [I  ask  for  something  to  prove  identity]
Yes  yes  .  .  .  Sally  .  .  .  [To  me,  who  am  still  talking]  don't  you
speak  please  unless  you  speak  to  H.  .  .  .  your  mother  had  a  message
from  her  .  .  .  ask  me  the  (juestion  you  asked  before  .  .  .  now  all
is  well,  your  aunt — she  is  your  aunt — at  first  she  could  not  make  you  out
and  it  was  as  difficult  for  her  as  for  you  at  first  yet  she  knows  you  now  very
well  [I  was  ten  years  old  when  she  died]  and  the  instant  I  understood  your
question  she  answered.  [I  send  affectionate  messages]  Yes  and  she  says
Martha  knows  she  did,  ask  lier  if  she  remembers  what  she  says  .  .
[Here  come  confused  statements  in  which  the  word  Morse  frequently  occurs  ;
(c/.  p.  24)  I  ask  whether  my  aunt  says  this  word  and  am  told]  No.  [Finally
the  hand  stops  writing  and  motions  to  me.  After  several  changes  of  jjosition,
which  seem  unsatisfactory  to  G.  P.,  I  get  on  niy  feet  and  the  hand  feels
around  the  lower  edge  of  my  waistcoat,  pausing  to  write]  excuse  this  uncanny
procedure  [finally  presses  firmly  on  median  line  about  the  lowest  button  of
my  waistcoat  and  writes]  ask  mot  [her  ?]  if  she  remembers  this,  Will.  .  .  .
[My  aunt  died  of  the  effects  of  an  operation  for  the  removal  of  an  ovarian
cyst.  When  this  was  written  I  looked  over  to  Dr.  Hodgson  and  said,  "  She
refers  to  the  cause  of  her  death  ;  she  died  of  a  laparotomy."  The  hand  at
once  wrote] Yes,  yes yes  yes yes  sir.

[After  an  interruption.]  There  is  or  was  two  marriages  in  tlie  elderly
lady's  family  ["Sally"  was  grey  when  she  died]  which  they  do  not  seem  to
foe  able  to  unravel  just  now  (I  understand,  Mr.  Pelham.)  O.K.  .  .
just  say  this  for  their  satisfaction  so  they  may  be  quite  sure  you  understand
them  and  that  you  are  you.  [I  explain  that  my  paternal  grandfather  was
twice  married,  that  his  second  wife  had  a  younger  sister  whom  my  father
married  many  years  after  his  father's  death  ;  she  is  my  mother.  The  elder
sister  is  still  living,  and  is  therefore  both  my  aunt  and  my  step-grandmother.]
Yes,  yes,  yes,  O.K.  now  you  know  what  the  aunt  grandma  meant  together
aunt  and  grandma  if  you  recall  were  given  at  the  same  time.  [This  is  a  very
interesting  incident. My  grandfather  died  more  than  forty  years  ago,  only


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  35


eleven  months  after  his  second  marriage.  We  only  recognise  the  tie  of
blood,  and  many  persons  do  not  know  that  my  aunt  is  also  his  widow.  The
supposed  speaker  was  another  sister.]

[At  the  sitting  of  June  26th,  (present  R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.)  occurred
the  interruption  which  I  have  already  given  under  Case  V.,  p.  32]  Cass
Carson,  the  Dr.  took  away  my  medicine  much  against  my  will  yet
it  is  all  right  now.  [I  supposed  at  first  that  this  applied  to  Mr.  Burton,  but
on  inquiry  could  learn  nothing  of  any  doctor  of  the  name  in  connection  with
him.  Then  it  occurred  to  me  that  an  old  doctor  named  Corson  had  lived
not  far  from  our  home  when  I  was  a  child  ;  I  wondered  whether  he  could
have  had  anything  to  do  with  my  aunt  Sally.  I  knew  that  she  had  lived
near  Philadelphia  and  had  died  at  a  hospital  in  New  York.  Upon  inquiry  I
learned  that  she  spent  two  weeks  at  our  house  near  New  York  before  going
to  the  hospital  and  was  attended  by  this  Dr.  Corson.  I  must  have  known
this  at  the  time  but  have  totally  forgotten  it.  The  incident  of  the  medicine
cannot  now  be  verified.  A  little  later  on  in  the  same  sitting  G.  P.  writes.]
Sallie  wishes  to  be  remembered  .  .  .  she  thinks  everything  of  you.  [I
was  a  great  favourite  of  hers  I  believe.  I  asked  whether  she  remembered
her  hymnal  which  I  now  have,  and  the  writer  said  she  was]  delighted  to  hear
this.  [I  then  asked  whether  she  could  tell  me  what  she  did  just  before  her
death.  I  have  heard  that  she  sang  the  hymn  "Nearer,  My  God,  to  Thee"
and  hoped  to  elicit  some  reference  to  it.]  Gave  her  this  for  you  (Gave
whom  ?)  Mattie  ...  (Is  that  Mattie  ?)  No  F  .  .  .  wait  sir
[Apparently  to  the  spirit.]  I  can't  give  it  unless  you  make  it  plainly
.  attie  .  .  .  P  a  1 1  i  e  I  called  her.  [This  is  true.  My  mother
is  always  known  as  Pattie.  I  always  understood  that  the  hymnal  was  sent
me  as  a  parting  gift  by  my  aunt,  but  I  cannot  learn  whether  she  gave  it  to
my  mother  or  not.]

Case  YIII.
Joseiph  White.

[I  have  lost  but  one  relative  within  recent  years  who  was  closely  bound
to  me  by  ties  of  affection.  I  shall  call  him  Joseph  White,  and  I  had  fully
expected  upon  any  theory,  telepathic  or  otherwise,  to  get  some  messages
from  him.  I  was  consequently  very  much  surprised  to  hear  almost
nothing  from  him.  I  did  not  at  first,  however,  make  any  attempt  to  open
communication  with  him.  On  June  23rd,  1894,  G.  P.  says]  who  is  this  uncle  ?
[G.  P.  proceeds  to  say  quite  clearly,  although  with  many  repetitions  and
interruptions,  that  this  uncle  calls  me  Willie  and  his  Will  ;  that  I  am  his
nephew,  and  desires  me  to  give  his  daughter  Edith  his  love  and  to  say  that
Tom  her  husband  will  come  out  all  right  ;  that  the  bronchial  trouble  will
disappear.  That  Tom  had  feared  his  lungs  were  affected,  but  in  fact  it  was
only  his  throat  and  bronchial  tubes.  All  these  names  and  allusions  are
strictly'  pertinent,  save  that  Tom  had  never  supposed  that  his  lungs  were
afiected  by  the  cold  from  which  he  was  then  suffering.

At  the  sittings  of  June  20th,  1895,  and  June  26th,  1895,  I  inquired  after
my  uncle,  and  told  G.  P.  that  I  desired  to  communicate  with  him,  but
without  success. G.  P,  claimed  to  have  seen  my  uncle  but  informed  me]


36


William  Romaine  Neivbold.


[part


as  regards  actual  communication  from  him  I  am  afraid  you  will  not  get  much
conversation  from  him  as  he  has  been  extremely  happy  here  and  his
thoughts  have  been  thus  far  undisturbed,  yet,  of  course,  there  will  always
remain  a  fondness  for  you,  i.e..  in  his  heart.

Case  IX.

TT^.  Stainton  Moses.

[At  the  sitting  of  June  19th,  1895,  (Present  :  W.  R.  N.)  George  Pelham
was  telling  me  how  the  future  state  of  the  soul  is  affected  by  its  earthly  life]
— It  is  only  the  body  tliat  sins  and  not  the  soul  (Does  the  soul  carry  with  it
into  its  new  life  all  its  passions  and  animal  appetites  ?)  Oh  no  indeed,  not  at
all.  Why  mj'  good  friend  and  scholar  you  would  have  this  world  of  ours  a
decidedly  material  one  if  it  were  so.  (Do  you  know  of  Stainton  Moses  ?)  No,
not  very  much.  Why  ?  (Did  you  ever  know  of  him  or  know  what  he  did  ?)
I  only  have  an  idea  from  having  met  him  here.  (Can  you  tell  me  what  he
said  ?)  No,  only  that  he  was  W.  Stainton  Moses.  I  found  him  for  "  E. "  and
Hodgson.  (Did  you  tell  Hodgson  this  ?)  I  do  not  think  so.  (Did  he  say
anything  about  his  mediumship  ?)  No.  (His  writings  claimed  that  the  soul
carried  with  it  all  its  passions  and  appetites  and  was  very  slowly  purified  of
them.)  It  is  all  untrue.  (And  that  the  souls  of  the  bad  hover  over  the  earth
goading  sinners  on  to  their  own  destruction.)  Not  so.  Not  at  [all]  so.  I
claim  to  understand  this  and  it  is  empathically  not  so.  Sinners  are  sinners
only  in  one  life.

[The  next  day,  June  20th,  I  said]  (Can  you  bring  Stainton  Moses
here  ?)  I  will  do  my  best.  (Is  he  far  advanced  ?)  Oh  no,  1  should  say
not.  He  will  have  to  think  for  awhile  yet.  (What  do  you  mean  ?)  Well,
have  you  forgotten  all  I  told  you  before  ?  (You  mean  about  progression  by
repentance  ?)  Certainly  I  do.  (Wasn't  he  good  ?)  Yes,  but  not  perfect  by
any  means.  (Was  he  a  true  medium  ?)  True,  yes,  very  true.  (Had  he
light  ?)  Yes.  (Yet  not  all  true  ?)  Yes,  but  his  light  was  very  true,  yet  he
made  a  great  many  mistakes  and  deceived  himself.  [At  the  close  of  the
sitting  I  said  :]  (I  want  to  see  Stainton  Moses.)  Well,  if  I  do  not  bring  him
do  not  be  disappointed,  because  I  will  if  I  can  find  him.

[On  the  21st,  I  asked  again  about  Stainton  Moses.]  I  cannot  bring
Stainton  Moses  because  he  is  not  in  my  surroundings  yet.  (Can  you  explain
this  further  ?)  Well,  of  course  I  cannot  bring  every  known  person  here  just
when  you  wish.  (How  about  your  surroundings  ?)  This  is  a  large  sphere.  I
have  the  doctor  after  him  now [To  some  forgotten  question]  No,  wait

patiently  and  I  will  wake  him  up  when  he  arrives.  (Is  he  asleep  ?)0h,  B

you  are  stupid  I  fear  at  times,  your  mind  is  like  a  lightening  .  .  .
machine  .  .  .  I  do  not  mean  wake  liim  up  in  a  material  sense.  (Nor
did  I.)  Well  then,  old  man,  don't  be  wasting  light.  (I'm  not  wasting  light
but  I'm  bound  to  find  out  what  you  mean.)  Well,  this  is  what  I  wish  also.
(Stainton  Moses  has  been  nearly  three  years  in  the  spirit— a  long  time.)  Yes.
(Do  you  mean  to  say  that  he  is  not  yet  free  from  confusion  ?)  No.  (Do  you
mean  that  lie  will  be  confused  in  getting  at  the  medium  ?)  Certainly,  a
little,  this  is  why  I  use  the  expression,  wake  him  up.


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  37


[On  the  22nd,  Pliinuit  said],  do  you  know  Billie,  George  is  talking  to
such  a  funny  looking  man  ;  he  has  a  long  double  coat  with  a  large  collar  and
cape, — a  long  beard,  large  eyes  with  drooping  lids,  [fairly  shouts  with
laughter].  George  is  shaking  his  fingers  at  me.  He  sent  me  after  that
gentleman.  I  found  him  in  another  part  of  our  world.  (Far  away  ?)  It
would  be  a  long  way  to  you  Billie  but  not  so  far  to  me.  George  had  difficulty
in  having  him  come  but  they  had  a  long  talk  and  George  made  it  all  right
with  him.  }Ie  didn't  understand  what  we  wished  of  him.  (Who  is  he  ?)  I
don't  know  his  name.  George  called  me  and  sent  me  after  him — you  under-
stand Billie — said,  "You  go  and  find  him  for  me,  doctor."  (How  did  you
know  whom  he  wanted?)  He  said,  "I  want  you  to  find  a  friend  of  mine
who  used  to  be  a  medium  in  the  body,"  used  the  light,  you  know.  Oh  he
has  a  great  deal  of  light,  moi'e  than  anybody.  (Do  spirits  have  light  too  ?)
What  d'you  mean  Billie  ?  Spirits  are  all  light.  (I  mean  does  a  person  who
has  light  in  the  body  have  in  the  spirit  also  more  light  than  others  ?)  Yes
indeed.  (Tell  me  how  George  made  you  know  whom  he  wanted.)  He
described  him.  (And  his  influence  ?)  Of  course.  (You  know  it's  very  hard
for  us  to  believe  in  spirits  at  all.  Do  you  remember  your  life  on  earth,
doctor  ?)  Oh  yes,  but  I've  been  here  a  very  long  time.  (Did  you  believe  in
spirits  while  you  were  on  earth  'i)  [Phinuit  gives  a  short  derisive  laugh.  ]
Not  much.  Not  I.  (Then  you  should  sympathise  with  us.)  Oh,  I  can't  put
myself  in  your  place.  [The  above  description  of  S.  M.  answers  to  the  notion
I  had  of  him  at  the  time,  derived  from  portraits.]

[G.  P.  writing  :]  Here  is  Stainton  Moses,  do  you  wish  to  see  him  ?
(Yes.)  Well,  now  let  me  give  you  a  bit  of  advice.  Speak  slowly  and  dis-
tinctly, making  sure  that  you  articulate  properly,  or  in  other  words  well.
(I  know  my  articulation  is  very  bad. )  Yes,  then  he  will  answer  to  me  all
questions  distinctly.  You  see  he  is  talking  to  me  now.  Fire  away.  (Tell
him  I  liave  read  with  interest  his  book,  /S^jii'/i  Teachuiys,  but  find  in  it  state-
ments apparently  inconsistent  with  what  you  say  and  I  would  like  to  know
his  explanation  of  the  fact.)  Believe  you  in  me  and  my  teachings?  (I  was
much  impressed  with  them,  Mr.  Moses,  esjJecially  as  your  statements  and
Mr.  Pelham's  agree  in  the  main.  But  how  about  the  inconsistencies  ?)
Contradict  the  genuine  statements  made  by  our  friend  Pelham,  whom  I  am
delighted  to  meet.  (I  did  not  say  contradict,  although  it  appears  so.  Can
you  explain  them  ?)  I  do  not  understand  your  question.  (Will  you  explain
these  seeming  contradictions?)  What  are  they,  please  sir?  (You  taught
that  evil  spirits  tempt  sinners  to  their  own  destruction.)  I  have  found  out
differently  since  I  came  over  here.  This  jjarticular  statemeiit  given  me  by
my  friends  as  their  medium  when  I  was  in  the  body  is  nut  true.  (The  second
is  that  the  soul  carries  its  passions  and  appetites  with  it.)  Material  passions.
U  N  true.  It  is  not  so.  I  have  found  out  the  difference.  (Thank  you)
Not  at  all.  (Would  you  like  to  make  any  other  corrections  in  your  book  ?)
Tliere  are  a  few.  One  is  I  believe  that  our  thoughts  were  practically  the
same  here  as  in  the  body,  i.e.,  that  we  had  every  desire  after  reaching  this
life  as  when  it  .  .  .  but  I  find  that  we  leave  all  such  behind,  in  other
words  it  dies  with  the  body.  You  will  understand  I  do  not  mean  thoughts,
but  only  evil  [thoughts]  (Are  you  willing  to  give  me  as  tests  the  names  of
your  "guides.") Guides,  well  I  object  to  the  expression. (Indeed.) I  do


38


William  Romaine  Newhold.


[part


now,  yet  I  did  not  before.  (These  names  have  never  been  made  public
since  your  death.  If  you  are  willing  to  give  them  I  would  be  glad  to  knov/.)
I  will  give  you  one  [I  hand  a  new  pencil.  Hand  turns  and  twists  it  some
moments before writing] Pencil — well, well  —  oh I see. (Who  was

"  Rector  ?  ") Dr. (I  repeat.  Dr.  ?) Yes  sir. Rector  applied  for

convenience  instead  of  Dr. (You  mean  the  true  name  of  the  spirit

Rector  was  Dr.  ?) I  do  mean  just  this,  but  I  had  no  authority  to  speak

of  Rector  as  Dr.  (But  there  was  another  sjjirit  known  as  Doctor.)  I

was  obliged  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other  according  to  their  wish.

(Who  was  the  spirit  "Doctor  j  ") ■  . (Indeed. No  one  will  be  told  of

this  save  Mr.  Myers  and  Dr.  Hodgson.)  Thanks.  (May  I  tell  the  latter?)
Certainly  sir,  if  he  is  reliable. (He  is.) I'll  ask  Mr.  Pelham . .  .

Certainly  sir. •  was  a  very  good  man  sir  and  was  always  with  me.

Have  you  these  ?  Did  you  hear  me?  (Yes.  Now  are  you  willing  to  tell
me  the  name  of  "  Imperator "  also?)  Well,  I  have  never  divulged  this
name  to  anyone.  I'll  think  it  over  and  let  you  know.  (These  names  have
never  been  made  public  and  they  will  afford  excellent  proof  of  your  identity.)
I  vniderstand  sir.  ...  I  know  Albert  ...  I  do — never  mind
this  had  to  do  with  .  .  .  understand  .  .  .  (How  about
the  physical  phenomena  produced  through  you  ?)  It  was  not  done  by  any
effort  of  mine  or  on  my  part.  (Could  such  be  produced  tlirough  this
medium  ?)  Oh  I  do  not  know  sir.  Generally  the  intelligences  have  their
own  phases  sir  and  work  accordingly.  (In  your  book,  Mr.  Moses,  you  made
certain  statements  about  some  historical  personages,  such  as  Abraham,
Moses,  the  Prophets,  and  Jesus  Christ.  Do  you  wish  to  modify  any  of
these  1)  Not  at  all  (All  are  true  ?)  To  the  letter  sir  (You  recollect
nothing  else  in  your  book  that  you  would  desire  to  change  ?)  JS'vt  at  all  sir
(Have  you  any  messages  to  send  to  friends  ?)  I  have  had  a  wonderful
experience  here  sir  and  I  am  extremely  happy  and  I  consider  myself
extremely  fortunate  sir  to  have  been  brought  here  by  this  gentleman  .  .  .
Spear  [I  spell  it,  s  p  e  a  r.  Hand  writes]  e  (Oh  you  mean  s  p  e  e  r  ?)
Certainly  .  .  .  letter  .  .  .  my  thoughts  are  not  quite  clear,  sir,  yet
.  .  .  .  Speer  ...  I  have  a  friend  .  .  .  recollection  of  speer
[Writing  is  growing  dreamy.  I  say]  (You  mean  Charlton  T.  Speer,  the
musician  ?)  [Excitement  and  pounding.]  Yes,  yes,  why  certainly,  give  my
love  to  my  affectionate  brother  worker  in  the  body,  my  dearest  love,  love
.  yes  sir,  I  do  wish  to  give  it  very  much  this  reaches  every  chord  in
my  soul  sir.  (Do  you  remember  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  ?)  Oh  I  think  I  do
sir.  Are  you  he  ?  (No.  I  am  a  stranger  to  you.  He  is  editing  and
publishing  some  of  your  MSS.)  Good,  good,  good.  ...  I  think  I  do
thanks  sir  for  giving  me  this  information  regarding  my  book  (I
wished  those  names  as  proof  of  your  identity.)  [Question  misunderstood]
Certainly  I  am  Stanton  [only  one  stroke  for  n]  Moses.  (Do  you  remember
Richard  Hodgson?)  No,  I  think  not  sir,  are  you  he  ?  (No.  But  he  was  a
member  of  the  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  while  you
were.)  [At  or  about  the  word  "  Society  "  the  hand  displayed  great  excite-
ment.] Of  course  I  remember  him.  (He  went  to  America.)  Yes,  I
remember  he  went  there  some  time  ago.  (You  are  now  in  America,  near
Boston. ) Well,  I  longed  to  go  to  America  and  this  will  open  up  a  great  field


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  39

to  me.  (Good-bye.  "VVill  you  come  again  and  speak  to  Dr.  Hodgson  ?)  I
am  of  course  a  little  strange  here,  yet  nothing  would  give  me  greater
pleasure  than  to  prove  to  the  world  my  identity  I  am  sure.  I  was  a  great
sufferer  physically  and  I  could  not  do  altogether  as  I  wished  in  consequence,
yet  I  am  strong  and  well  here  and  as  I  can  see  through  this  light  clearly
I  should  be  pleased  to  help  you  all.  (You  will  come  again?)  Yes  sir.
(And  then  explain  the  reason  for  your  mistakes  ?)  Certainly  sir.  Oh  I
am  so  pleased  to  return.  [Further  writing,  on  personal  matters,  by  G.  P.
At  the  close  of  the  sitting  Phinuit  returns.  Sjjeaks  with  difficulty]
"George  has  been  teaching  that  man  a  lesson,  showing  him  how  to  use
the  light."

[Sitting  of  June  24th,  1895.  Present  :  R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.  Mrs.  Piper
goes  into  trance  easily,  without  the  usual  striiggles.  R.  H.  remarks  that
this  is  a  new  control.  Her  hands  move  aimlessly  about,  touching  her
eyebrows  and  temples  with  the  linger  tijjs  and  feeling  Hodgson's  face.
Gasps,  peculiar  rattling  in  her  throat,  her  face  is  very  much  contorted.
Ineffectual  attempts  to  speak,  finally  gasps  out]  Moses  [Hodgson  encourages
communicator.  Head  nods]  (H.  :  I'm  Hodgson)  [Head  nods,  she  groans
and  grunts,  hands  move  about.  Right  hand  begins  to  write.  R.  H.  asking
questions  ]  I  am  W.  Stainton  Moses  I  am  he  in  reality.  Oh  my  dear  sir  I
am  so  very  delighted  to  find  this  bright  path  to  earth.  (I'm  very  glad
indeed.)  I  am  here  in  every  organ  of  a  human  body.  (Yes,  you're
occupying  the  medium's  body.)  I  am  a  medium  also.  (Yes,  we  know.)  I
did  see  my  spirits  plainly.  How  strange  you  look.  Are  you  still  in  the  life
on  earth.  (Yes.)  You  must  necessarily  be  I  am  sure.  (Yes.)  Do  you
remember  one  of  our  friends  and  fellow  workers  Dr.  Wallace  ?  (You  mean
Alfred  R.  Wallace  ? )  Certainly,  very  well,  my  friend  Wallace.  (In  the
body?)  Yes,  give  him  my  love.  (I  will  certainly.)  Also  Myers  (Yes
indeed)  whom  I  remember  well  (Yes  I  certainly  will)  all  right. I  had  a

spirit  once  named  W^allace. You  never  knew  did  you  'i (No  I  didn't.)

He  was  one  of  my  guides  when  on  earth. (What  name  did  you  give

him,  i.e., . ) Rector,  and  not  Dr.  as  I  had  explained  to  some  friend

of  yours. Rector  was  — —  (  ?  ) Yes  distinctly,  he  was  Rector.  (Who

was  Doctor  1 ) Not  Wallace,  but  a  Dr.  whom  I  used  to  know  at  college.

[R.  H.  pronounces  and  spells  the  name  over.]  Yes  sir.  It  is  very  singular
how  the  names  of  my  former  friends  and  guides  run  in  my  mind  .
run  through  my  mind  just  now,  at  this  moment.  (Mr.  Moses,  I  wish  to
tell  you  something  that  will  interest  you.  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  whom  you
knew)  quite  (has  been  publishing  a  full  account  of  your  life  experiences
in  the  Froceedings  of  tlie  Society  for  Psychical  Research.) Viz.,  S.P.R.

.  good  ...  oh  glad  I  am  to  meet  you  here  ...  I  will  help
you  in  your  work.  (We  shall  be  glad  indeed.  I  wish  to  ask  you  one
important  question)  let  me  clear  up  all  mj'  thoughts  and  I  will  help  you.
(Do  you  wish  to  write  your  own  thoughts  or  answer  questions  ? )  I  would
like  to  become  acquainted  with  these  conditions.  (Good.)  Myers  what
about  Myers.  (Myers  has  been  publishing  a  record  of  your  experiences  and
has  referred  to  Rector,  Doctor  and  Imperator,  but  explains  that  the  persons
whom  these  names  represented  are  not  to  be  mentioned.)  Pri\'ate.  (But  I
understand  that  Myers  knows.) Yes,  he  mukt. (We  are  not  going  to


40


William  Romaine  Ne-ivhold.


[part


publish  them.) Do  not. (But  you  undei'stand  if  we  tell  Myers  who
Iiuperator  is,  it  will  be  strong  test  of  your  identity.) Yes . . .  Rector
I  know . . . the  name  was  taken  expressly  f(.)r  distinction,

i.e.,  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other,  and  Dr.  was  Dr. whom  I  knew

very  well  at  college.  (Could  you  tell  us,  if  it  will  be  kept  private,  who
Imperator  was  ? )  T  should  hope  so.  Question,  I  did  not  catch  sir.  (Can
you  tell  us  who  Imperator  was  ? )  Certainly,  a  young  lady  friend  of  mine.
(Are  you  sure  ?  1  mean  the  famous  communicator  from  the  spirit  world
whom  you  spoke  of  as  Imperator. )  Oh  no,  but  she  in  my  spirit  teachings
is  mentioned.  (I  mean  the  Imperator  also  mentioned  in  your  Spirit
Teachings.)  Yes.  Yes.  Must  I  tell  you  who  it  was.  (Let  me  explain.
I  wish  you  to  use  your  own  judgment.  Mr.  Myers  knows)  he  does  (and  we
do  not  know.  Nobody  in  the  United  States  knows.  If  you  tell  us  and  we
send  it  to  Myers  privately,  it  will  be  a  very  good  test  of  your  identity,  being
information  to  him  which  nobody  possesses  on  this  side  of  tlie  water.)

 . (  ?) Certainly. (  ?) Yes. Noio  I  hnoio  ivJiereiii  I  speak.

I  never  during  my  illness  when  being  helped  by  him  told  or  divulged  his

name  to  anyone  and  I  only  left  it  written  (  )  in  my  MSS. (Very  good,

Mr.  Moses.  This  will  be  a  splendid  test)  in  or  among  my  private  papers.
(Good.  That's  first  rate.)  No  more  sir.  (You  are  getting  exhausted,  ai-en't
you  ^?)  [Here  the  left  hand  becomes  convulsed  and  rubs  Mrs.  Piper's  right
cheek  in  a  manner  characteristic  of  Phinuit.]  I  wish  to  change  iny  position
sir  if  you  please.  (Yes,  do  so.)  Help  me  to  remain  here  I  wish  very
much  to  continue  my  remembrances.  (Yes,  we  shall  be  very  glad  too. )  I
remember  Mrs.  Speer  veiy  well.  [While  the  last  sentence  was  being  written
Phinuit  remarks  to  Newbold  ;]  "That  gentleman's  a  nice  fellow,  he's  a
clergyman."  Give  my  love  to  all  on  earth.  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  who  can
deny  my  existence  ...  oh  my  existence  I  say,  who  can  deny  that  I
exist?  (We  do  not.)  Stainton  Moses.  (Can  you  write  your  full  name?)
What  Stainton  .  .  .  W.  .  .  .  Moses  always  Stainton  Moses  and
always  will  be.

(Now  we  wish  your  explanation  of  certain  things.  What  was  the  origin
of  this  mistake  about  evil  spirits  taking  possession  of  men  and  leading  them
on  to  do  wrong  ?)  Experience  here  has  taught  me  the  difference.  This  was
more  my  own  theory.  (You  mean  that  when  you  were  in  the  body  you
misunderstood  the  communications  ?)  Yes  often,  especially  when  I  was  not
feeling  well.  (The  thoughts  of  the  communicating  spirit  got  confused  with
yours  V)  I  mean  of  course  to  go  back  to  the  body  i.e.  to  go  back  to  my
earthly  experience  .  .  .  Yes  and  not  so  much  that  altogether  as  that  I
misunderstood.  (You  misunderstood  yourself,  so  to  speak.)  Certainly,
materially.  (You  had  your  own  theory  and  misinterpreted  the  communi-
cator's meaning  ?)  Yes  exactly,  as  I  thought  this  very  strongly  I  felt  sure  of
having  been  told  this.  (Were  all  those  physical  phenomena  that  you  got
due  to  spirits  ?)  No  not  all.  They  were  due  to  material  causes,  etc.  as  well.
(Do  you  mean  persons  in  the  body  produced  them  ?)  Nt)t  at  all,  I  mean  to
say  that  from  the  energy  which  they  took  from  my  own  body,  medium  power
etc.  they  were  moved.  (Were  they  moved  by  the  action  of  spirits  ?)  Action
of  spirits  ?  Oh  yes.  (I'll  state  my  impression.  Certain  spirits  used  the
"electrical" in connection with  your body to produce the  physical


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  41


movements.)  Yes,  this  is  what  they  did.  Objects  etc.  raps  ...  (If
you  have  anytliing  special  to  say  to  us  we  shall  be  glad  to  hear  it,  but
if  not,  we  have  something  especial  which  we  wish  you  to  do  for  us.)
Well  [writing  begins  to  look  dreamy]  I  must  say  that  I  will  have  many
things  special  to  say  to  you,  but  I  am  forced  to  admit  that  this  is  all  new
to  me  now  and  it  seems  very  strange  indeed  ...  I  am  (we  shall  be
grateful  to  you  for  help  in  proving  to  the  world  the  truth  of  spirit  com-
munications.) Yes,  glad  I  will  be  to  be  able.  (Can't  read  that  word)
enabled  to  communicate,  giving  tests  etc.  in  my  own  language.  (Do  you
think  you  could  translate  some  Girreek  into  English  ?)  Do  what  1  Greek
why  I  used  to  be  as  familiar  with  Greek  as  English.  (Better
wait  for  next  time.)  Well,  yes.  (Think  up  your  Greek  and  the  next
time  we  will  give  you  some  to  translate.  Everybody  knows  that  the
medium  does  not  know  Greek  and  if  you  could  translate  some  for  us  it
would  be  good  proof)  what  could  a  medium  have  to  with  rae  and  my
Greek.  [R.  H.  explains  further  that  proofs  must  be  got  that  the  medium's
manifestations  are  not  fraudulent.]  Well  I  suppose  they  said  the  same
of  me.  (Mr.  Moses,  aren't  the  conditions  getting  strange  ?  Don't  you
think  you  had  better  go  now  and  come  to  us  another  time  ?)  Yes  I  do
[scrawls]  auf  wiedersehen  (auf  wiedersehen.)

In  this  case  we  have  the  difficulties  which  attach  to  the  spiritistic
theory  brought  out  in  the  highest  relief.  The  general  tenor  of  the
communications,  the  allusion  to  Mr.  Speer,  the  reception  of  the  names
of  Myers  and  Hodgson,  have  an  air  of  verisimilitude.  The  communi-
cator then  gives  us,  with  the  most  solemn  asseveration  of  their  accuracy
and  with  apparent  consciousness  of  the  importance  of  his  statements  to
a  cause  which  he  had  in  life  much  at  lieart,  three  names  which  the
real  Mr.  Moses  must  have  known  and  which  of  all  possible  things
would  seem  to  be  the  hardest  for  the  spirit  to  forget — the  names
of  the  spirit  friends  who,  as  he  claims,  opened  his  eyes  while  still
on  earth  to  the  realities  of  the  eternal  life.  And  not  one  of  those
liames  is  true  or  has  the  least  semblance  of  truth  !  Furthermore,
of  all  the  points  touched  upon  during  the  sitting  this  was  the  only
one  that  was  unknown  to  both  the  sitters— another  item  in  favour
of  the  telepathic  theory.  To  my  mind  this  failure  on  the  part  of
the  alleged  Moses  is  an  obstacle  to  the  acceptance  of  the  spiritistic
theory  which  has  not  as  yet  been  set  aside  and  which  must  be
satisfactorily  explained  before  that  theory  can  be  regarded  as  meet-
ing the  requirements  of  the  case.

Cases  X.  and  XI.
Aaron  James  and  Albert  Bonney.

[Sitting  of  January  27th,  1896.  Present:  W.  R.  N.  and  Mrs.
Edith  Waldron,  the  latter  for  the  first  time  and  under  assumed
name.]


42


William  Romaine  Neiuhold.


[part


At  the  outset  of  the  sitting  Phinuit  made  the  most  remarkably
correct  diagnosis  that  I  have  ever  seen  him  make.  He  told  Mrs.  W.
that  she  suffered  much  from  flatulent  dyspepsia,  that  she  got  dizzy
sometimes  and  sometimes  fell  or  felt  like  falling,  all  of  which  was  due
to  dyspepsia.  That  she  was  subject  to  severe  attacks  of  despondency.
All  this  is  literally  true,  and  as  Mrs.  W.  is  vivacious  and  seems  in  the
best  of  health,  I  do  not  think  it  could  have  been  got  from  any
superficial  inspection.  Phinuit  then  told  her  that  her  mother  suffered
from  a  cough,  was  very  "positive,"  sometimes  a  little  too  "positive,"
that  her  father  was  a  good  man  but  "  a  little  cranky  from  his
rheumatism"  which  occasionally  made  him  cross.  This  is  also
strictly  true.

[G.  P.  begins  writing.  After  a  warm  welcome  to  me  and  a  few  words  on
sundry  topics  I  asked  for  Mi's.  W. 's  relatives,  to  me  wholly  unknown  save
by  name,  and  even  of  their  names  I  knew  little.]  Oh,  I  see.  Yes.  There
first  of  all  is  a  gentleman  who  is  a  relative  of  hers  [lighter  pressure  in
writing  and  smaller  script.]  Come  nearer,  sir,  do  not  fear.  You  will  be
able  to  clear  your  thoughts.  [To  me.]  Will  you  not  leave  your  jjlace  for
her?  [Mrs.  W.  takes  her  place  by  the  writing  hand.]  Thanks.  He  says
Ask  this  little  lady  if  she  remembers  UNCLE.  [Then  follows  confusion
connected  with  me.  Then  :]  George.  [Following  statement  seems  due  to
G.  P. 's  misunderstanding  speaker;  c/.  below.]  Yes  I  am  he.  Fire  away
old  man.  Tell  Edith  if  she  is  my  sister's  child.  [She  was  the  granddaughter
of  his  wife's  sister.] Charles . . . Charles . . . will  you  hear  me

.  yes  ...  yes  ...  Give  me  one  little  answer  .
[We  ask  who  this  Charles  is.]  Charles  in  the  body.  [Apparently  an  uncle
of  Mrs.  W. 's  and  nephew  of  speaker's  wife.]  And  I  wish  you  to  speak  to
me  and  let  me  get  a  little  clearer  .  .  .  Love  to  Charles  ...  he  is
still  with  you.  [Here  comes  more  confusion  in  which  several  of  my  former
communicators  seem  to  be  trying  to  slip  in  a  word  edgewise  ;  in  the  course
of  it  occur  the  curious  expressions.]  Speak  to  him  for  heaven's  sake.  Let
him  throw  off  his  mantle.  [It  concludes  with.]  Your  father  .  .  .  who
in  thunder  is  George.  [Pointing  to  E.  W.]  He  says  your  father.  (Yes.)
Well  I  thought  all  the  time  he  was  speaking  to  me  .  .  .  calling  me
I  thought  JAMES  .  .  .  yes  I  am  his  brother  .  .  .  Barker
.  .  .  I  know  George  Barker  and  I  am  his  UNCLE  JAMES.  (Is
James  his  surname  or  Christian  name  ?)  [Great  excitement  and  tearing  of
paper.]  James  is  his  surname.  And  I  know  NOW  the  whole  world  is
thought,  developes  with  reason.  What  has  become  of  Mary  Bacon?  [Mrs.
Waldron's  father  is  George  Barker.  His  mother's  sister  married  one  Aarou
Janaes  who  was  always  known  to  his  nephews  as  Uncle  James.  Mary  Bacon
is  not  recognised.]

Don't  you  know  Mary  Bacon  ?  Yes  I  wish  to  give  my  message  distinctly
and  clearly  .  .  .  John  [to  me]  this  is  yours  B.  .  .  .  (Well,  never,
mind,  Mr.  James.) Speak  to  Mary  Bacon  for  me . . . Yes  slie  will

understand,  Mrs. Your  mother  he  says  is  not  quite  well,  is  this  so  ?

(Yes.) Well,  did  you  know  I  thought  I  would  live  somewhere  and  I  am


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  43

really  your  uncle.  If  any  other  person  my  thoughts  would  not  be  clear.  I
was  a  level-headed  man.  [This  is  very  significant.  Mr.  James  was  a
clergyman  ;  he  became  interested  in  spiritism  and  carried  it  to  great  excess,
so  much  so  that  in  the  later  years  of  his  life  he  was  regarded  by  his  relatives
as  not  quite  sane.]

Do  you  remember  me  little  girl.  [She  never  saw  him.  But  immediately
after  this  comes  a  mass  of  confusion  in  which  Mr.  James'  remarks  seem  to
be  mixed  with  those  of  the  communicator  who  next  comes  to  the  front,  and
are  interpeised  with  a  few  of  G.  P.'s  words,  as  "cannot  quite  hear  you,"
"who  in  thunder  is  he  talking  about."  This  other  communicator  knew
Mrs.  W.  very  well.  It  begins  to  get  more  coherent.]  I  wish  to  enquire  for
your  mother  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  also  Mary.  [The  wife  of  the  com-
municator who  next  appears  is  named  Mary  and  is  living.]  Will  you  tell
me  where  she  is  ? I  have  asked,  asked,  asked . . . Mary,  my  Mary

.  tell  me  quick  ...  I  wish  to  know  ...  I  am  living  .
.  .  I  am  .  .  .  gentlemen  I  hope  [A  gentleman,  I  hope  1]  and  I  see
my  niece  but  she  does  not  seem  to  recognise  me.  She  loves  me  still  and
will  do  a  great  deiil  for  you.  You  will  see  her  soon.  (E.  W.  :  Is  she
coming  to  see  me  ?)  Yes.  [Untrue  of  his  wife.]  Very  happy,  as  ha^jpy  as
I  could  be  without  her  .  .  .  [Remark  forgotten.]  Well  I  know  that
well  and  I  wish  my  wife  Mary  to  know  that  I  am  alive.  [We  asked  for
some  proof  of  identity.]  Well,  ask  her  what  I  asked  her  to  do  for  me  just
before  I  left  the  body  in  regai'd  to  seeing  Joseph.  [Unrecognised.]  .
yes  .  .  .  about  the  insurance.  [There  was  no  insurance.]  (Was  there
anything  you  were  very  fond  of  ?)  [This  question  was  asked  with  the  horse
in  mind  ]  I  told  you  about  this  long  ago  viz.  HORSE  and  you  kept  calling
it  house.  [This  was  true  ;  it  occurred  amongst  the  confusion  which  I  have
not  transcribed.  He  had  an  old  horse  of  which  he  was  very  fond.  In  con-
nection with  it  came  the  sentence  ''Go  and  see  Austin,"]  (W.  R.  N.  :  Write
your  name.)  Yes,  of  course  I  will.  I  am  al  Fred  James.  [This  falls  rather
flat.] You  don't  understand. [Repeated  attempts  at  writing  the  nsime

Alfred] Barker and  I  am  .James. Yes  certainly. (N.  :  Is  this  your

name  ?) Yes  this  is  mine  and  I  am  Alfred. Ho . . . No . . .  K

.  I  am  Alfred  .  .  .  Bacon  .  .  .  [Apparently  G.  P.  nov/
speaks  to  communicator.]  You  must  clear  xxy,  clear  up,  clear  up,  clear  up,
clear  up  Bacon  .  .  .  Bacon  .  .  .  Bacon  .  .  .  Bacon  .  .  .
BURNER  .  .  .  [At  some  point  hereabout  Mrs.  W.  said  in  a  low
whisper,  "It  is  Uncle  Bonney."]  ku  .  .  .  ka  .  .  .  rner  .
sounds  .  .  .  [much  excitement]  give  me  [We  produce  an  old  glove  that
had  belonged  to  alleged  communicator  and  hand  it  to  the  writing  hand.  It
feels  it  over.]  Bennett  .  .  .  Alfred  Bonney  .  .  .  [Alfred  Bonney  had
been  the  husband  of  Mrs.  W.  's  paternal  aunt ;  he  had  died  about  eighteen
months  before]  ray  gloves  quick  [We  give  them  back]  hold  it  straight  up
in  his  face  [I  hold  the  glove  in  a  place  over  the  table  to  which  the  hand  has
been  pointing.]  Alfred  Bonney,  yes  .  .  .  and  Uncle  James  both.  Do
let  me  speak,  we  are  both  alive  and  well. Edith,  if  you  remember  Uncle

.  speak  to  me  as  you  used  to  do  when  you  were  a  little  girl.  Where
is  Dick  .  .  .  [Unrecognised.]  Never  mind.  Charles  is  still  in  the
world  with  you,  how  is  he  1 George  too.


4i<  William  Romaine  Neiuhold.  [part

[I  abbreviate  the  remainder  of  the  sitting.]  Do  yoa  remember  N  E  B
Old  Tom  ...  he  is  with  me  this  number  of  years.  [Unrecognised.]
(E.  W.  :  What  did  you  die  of  ? )  What  !  I  am  not  dead.  Don't  think  I  am.
[Feels  about  E.'s  chest  and  mine.]  Heart  trouble  [Points  at  E.'s  heart]
there  .  .  .  Yes  I  lost  my  breath  ...  in  my  bed  ...  I  went
out  ...  I  remember  sitting  in  my  chair  .  .  .  the  last  thing  I
recall  .  .  .  do  you  remember  my  chair — and  I  jjassed  out  there.  (E.W.  :
I  do  not  think  he  did.)  I  did.  I  lost  my  breath  in  my  chair  and  .  .  .
[He  died  of  heart  disease  but  not  in  a  chair  ;  he  had  not  been  out  of  bed  for
some  days.]  .  .  .  (E.  W.  :  What  did  you  and  Papa  and  Uncle  Charles
do  in  the  summers  ? )  Go  trout  fishing.  [True.]  .  .  .  I  was  most  fond
of  .  .  .  [E.  W.  reads  this  aright  ;  I  say  there  is  no  word  "trout."]
Yes,  it  is  trout,  too.  (E.  VV.  :  When  you  j^assed  out  you  left  my  father
some  things  ;  v/hat  were  they  ? )  [This  is  a  mistake.  He  did  not  leave  him
anything.  Mrs.  Bonney  gave  Mrs.  Barker  her  choice  of  some  of  Mr.
Bonney's  things  and  she  chose  a  rod  for  her  little  boy.]  Gave  him  my  tackle
Gave  George  [She  misunderstands  and  says  (That  is  wrong)  ]  my
whole  outfit.  (What  did  you  give  my  brother?)  My  watch.  (No.)  I
cannot  seem  to  keep  this  in  my  mind  but  I  keep  this  pocket  in  my  coat,  oh
no  this  is  not  what  I  wished  to  say  .

[While  coming  out  Mrs.  Piper  says]  Tell  Edith's  mother  I  am  alive  and
well. Alfred  Bonney. I  want  everybody  to  know.

The  striking  points  in  favor  of  the  theory  of  identity  are  :  ( 1 )
The  statement  that  Mrs.  Waldron's  father  is  named  George.  (2)  That
the  speaker  is  his  uncle  James.  (3)  The  emphatic  and  characteristic
statement  asci'ibed  to  "  Uncle  James  "  :  "I  know  now  the  whole
world  is  thought,  develops  with  reason,"  and  the  allusion  to  his  belief
in  spiritism  while  living.  (4)  The  allusion  to  the  horse.  (5)  The
giving  correctly  the  relationship  of  Mrs.  Waldron  to  Albert  Bonney.
(6)  The  mention  of  heart  trouble  as  the  cause  of  Albert  Bonney's
death. (7)  The  allusions  to  trout  fishing.

As  ambiguous  :  (1)  A  statement  that  Edith  is  his  sister's  child,
whereas  she  was  his  wife's  sister's  grandchild.  (2)  The  allusion  to
Charles  in  the  body.  (3)  The  mention  of  the  name  "Barker"  which
had  been  mentioned  in  a  former  sitting  and  might  have  been  guessed.
(4)  The  allusion  to  Joseph.  (5)  The  giving  of  the  name  "  Alfred
Bonney,"  which  was,  unfortunately,  mentioned  during  the  sitting.
(6)  The  allusion  to  "  Old  Tom."

As  untrue  and  pro  taiUo  against  the  theory  of  identity  :  ( I )  The
allusion  to  Mary  Bacon.  (2)  The  allusion  to  what  Albert  Bonney
asked  his  wife  to  do  for  him  before  he  left  the  body.  (3)  The
reference  to  Austin.  (4)  The  reference  to  "Old  Tom."  (5)  The
statement  that  he  passed  out  in  a  chair.  (6)  The  statement  about  his
bequests.


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  45


Case  XII.
J/r.  Parker.

On  jSTovember  7th,  1894,  Miss  Edmunds  submitted  to  Phinuit,  at
my  request,  certain  articles  belonging  to  a  relative  of  mine  who  has
been  living  abroad  for  a  number  of  years,  and  whom  I  shall  term
Mrs.  Parker.  She  has  had  many  experiences  of  an  apparently
supernormal  order,  and  I  had  hoped  that  the  Mrs.  Piper  communi-
cators might  in  some  way  manifest  themselves  to  her.  The  articles
were  incorrectly  ascribed  by  Phinuit,  who  had  been  informed  at
the  outset  that  they  had  been  sent  by  me,  to  Fred  Morton  and
Miss  Murdoch.  On  the  following  day  a  person  unknown  to  me  was
having  a  sitting,  and  in  the  course  of  it  the  following  remark  was
interpolated  : — •

Mr.  Packer  [?]  (Is  that  name  Packer  ?)  No,  Parker  desires  to  send  his
love  to  his  wife  in  the  body.

[Mrs.  Parker's  husband  has  been  dead  some  years.  She  secured  a  divorce
from  him  some  years  before  liis  death.  I  communicated  these  facts  to  her
but  she  made  no  comment  thereupon.]


Case  XIII.

Apparent  Knotoleclge  of  Foreign  languages.

Frequently  in  my  sittings  George  Pelham  used  French  and  Latin
words  and  phrases— ?.^7.,  "inter  nos "  (June  20th,  1895),  "coup  de
main"  (June  21st,  1895),  "  de  die  in  diem"  (June  22nd,  1895).  This
last  phrase  I  could  not  decipher  until  the  writer  added  "  from  day  to
day."  Then  I  read  it  and  added,  "I  never  saw  that  phrase  before."
"  Well,"  the  hand  replied,  "  I  never  saw  it,  it  just  popped  into  my
mind."  This  is  found  in  Webster's  Dictionary  in  the  list  of  foreign
words  and  phrases.

[At  the  sitting  of  June  20th,  at  whicli  I  was  alone,  immediately  after  the
occurrence  of  the  words  "inter  nos  "  I  said  with  reference  to  the  matter  in
hand,  (no  one  knows  but  Hodgson,)]  Hodgson,  what  the  old  chap,  Fama
.  .  .  [I  thought  of  the  well  known  passage  in  Virgil  beginning  with  the
word  and  said,  jokingly,]  (Hello,  you've  not  forgotten  your  Virgil,  George  ?)
[The  liand  pounded  excitedly  and  continued,]  tempos  viat— vivat  G.P.  [With
unpardonable  stupidity,  I  failed  to  look  closely  at  this,  merely  catching  the
general  sense,  and  went  on  with  the  sittmg.]  '

While  deciphering  this  sitting  I  noticed  that  this  sentence  made
no  sense  as  it  stood ;  it  occurred  to  Dr.  Hodgson  to  look  in  the  list  of
quotations  in  a  dictionary,  and  there  we  found  the  original  "Fama
semper  vivat."  At  the  sitting  of  June  22nd,  at  which  I  was  again
alone,  I  asked  G.  P.  about  this  with  very  unsatisfactory  results. G.  P.


46


William  Bomaine  Neivhold.


[part


translated  it,  "  May  his  fame  live  for  ever."  In  spite  of  my  constant
questions,  he  was  unable  to  note  that  "  semper  "  should  be  substituted
for  "terapus."  On  June  21st  [Present:  W.  R.  K  and  H.  W.  O.]  I
tried  to  get  the  motto  of  the  Tavern  Club  (of  Boston),  and  was  given  a
medley  of  almost  illegible  scrawls  in  wliicli  I  thought  I  could  decipher
the  words,  "offere,"  "datum,"  "due,"  and  "  vir."  When  I  asked
whether  this  was  "due  vir,"  the  writer  assented,  and  assented  also  to
my  translation,  "Hero,  go  ahead,"  or,  "Lead  the  way."  This  has  no
resemblance  to  the  motto  of  the  Tavern  Club.

(Will  you  translato  Greek  for  uio  ?)  Certainly  Greek.  (You  remember
it  1)  I  ought  to.  [I  then  said  the  first  scrap  of  Greek  that  liappened  to
come  into  my  head:— Ilarfp  rj^ioiv  6  eV  roZy  ovpavi'a.l  (Did  you  catch  it?)
No,  not  exactly,  slowly. (riurep.) Parter ... I  say . . .  Pae

Pater . . . pater . . . good  {r'j^mv)  hemon
[illegible]  he . . . heiiKJU . . . urano  is . . . and  translation

Good  .  .  .  loVe  [?]  [illegible]  Love  [?]  Love  [?]  .  .  .  father
is  in . . . that  is  right . . . (All  right  but  go  ahead.) I  cannot

quite  catch  that  B . . . yes . . . Patience . . . well  you

have  it  B  . [Throughout,  both  Mr.  O  and  I  frequently  repeated  the

words  and  spelled  them  both  in  Greek  and  English.] Father  is  in . .  .

tois  ou  ou  nois  our . . . B  . Patience  my  boy . . . Father  is

in  Heavens.  (One  word  is  left  out,  George.)  Spell  it  slowly.  (Greek  or
English  ?) Greek  of  course. [We  do  so,  I'jiiwv.] Father  is  in  the  Heaven

I  [do]  not  catch  [it]  .  .  .  slowly  now,  speak  those  letters
separately  my  boy  .  .  .  ae  .  .  .  emon.  (Rough  breathing,  now,
i)fiS)v.) Heaven . . . Yes . . . too  bad  old  chajj ... [I  read

bad  as  "  hard. "] Bad  I  say,  T'll  catch  it. [Hand  points  to  0  .]  Now

you  say  it,  let  me  see  if  it  will  reach  me  any  better. [0  —  says  it.  Hand

gesticulates  and  twists  so  as  to  get  O  's  mouth  close  to  outer  side  of  hand

just  below  the  root  of  little  finger.]  My  ear.  [I  explain  he  means  that  his
spirit  ear  is  located  tliere.]  Certainly,  my  ear  .  .  .  E  M  O  .  .  .
that  is  vfhat  bothers  me  .  .  .  Father  is  .  .  .  was  .  .  .  now
.  no  .  .  .  Father  .  .  .  our.  [Quickly  and  with  excite-
ment.] OUR  O  U.  [Then  slowly  and  reverently,  in  capital  letters.]
OUR  FATHER  IS  IN  HEAVEN.  (Good.)  [We  all  shake
hands  over  it.]  (W.  N.  :  We  generally  put  it,  "  Our  Father  who  art  in
heaven.")  [Excitement.]  Yes,  I  remember  that  too.  Well,  if  you  only
knew  how  difficult  it  is  to  catch  the  sound  of  your  voices  you  would  wonder
how  I  could  speak  at  all  to  you  because  I  have  difficulty  in  making  you
hear  also,  when  a  thing  is  very  clear  to  me.  (Siiall  we  try  another  ?)  One
more  (Shall  it  be  in  Latin  ?)  .  .  .  yes.  (What  jjronunciation  did
you  use,  Roman,  English,  or  Continental  ?)  Roman.  I  asked  for  Greek,
but  never  mind  old  chap . . . wait ... I  am  not  quite  satisfied

But  you  mentioned  the  fact  which  I  wished  to  explain.  (Go
ahead  then  and  explain.)  [Slowly.]  WHO  ART  IN  .  .  .  O.K.
fire  away  .  .  .  [We  have  scarcely  given  the  new  sentence  Tu  ne
cede  malis  sed  contra  andentior  ifo  before  G.  P.  changes  the  subject  by
introducing  two  or  three  Latin  and  French  v;ords  wliicli  he  knows  will


XXXIV.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  47


be  significant  to  me  but  not  to  Mr.  (  )  He  then  asks  that  Mr.  O

should  go  out,  and  begins  writing  upon  a  toj^ic  whicli  he  does  not  wish
him  to  know  of.]

This  case  is  more  significant  than  the  others  because  it  does  seem  that  the
writer  has  some  knowledge  of  Greek,  whereas  the  familiar  phrase  before  used
might  be  picked  up  by  anybody.  It  is  also  difficult  to  explain  this  transla-
tion by  the  telepathic  theory.  The  writer  seems  not  to  recognise  the  familiar
words  but  to  translate  afresh  frona  the  words  he  hears  ;  if  it  were  merely
reflected  from  my  mind  one  would  hardly  expect  it  to  take  this  new  form.

In  order  to  test  G.  P.'s  knowledge  of  Greek  still  further  I  wrote  a  sen-
tence, making  the  first  three  words  give  the  keynote  of  the  whole,  using
very  simple  and  familiar  words,  and  purposely  choosing  the  thought  from  the
group  that  was  uppermost  in  the  minds  of  tlie  writers.  The  sentence  was  : —
OuK  e(TTi  davaros'  at  yap  tcov  dvrjrwv  ^v^a'i  C^qv  ^Sicriv  dddvarov,  diSiov,
^aKapLov.  We  first  gave  this  to  G.  P.  at  the  sitting  of  June  2oth,  1895
[Present  :  R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.].  At  our  suggestion  G.  P.  calls  the  alleged
Mr.  Moses  to  help  translate  it.  The  result  is  confusion  worse  confounded.
Apparently  the  writers  cannot  hear  what  we  say,  Bavaros  is  at  first  written
fruiois.  In  this  confusion  words  and  sentences  occur  which  appear  to
emanate  from  Moses,  such  as  "I  could  in  time  recall  all  the  Greek  I  ever
taught  and  why  should  I  not,"  "It  seems  like  awaking  from  a  dream  to
recall  this  to  mind."  When  the  writer  finally  gets  the  word  ovk  he  translates
it  "light,"  apparently  from  association  with  the  Latin  word  "lux."  On
June  26th  and  27th,  further  unsuccessful  attempts  at  translation  were  made
G.  P.  said  that  he  remembered  his  Greek  well  enough  when  he  was  away
from  the  "light"  but  the  eSbrt  of  communicating  confused  him  and  drove
it  ovit  of  his  head.  On  July  1st,  at  a  sitting  at  which  Dr.  Hodgson  only  was
present,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  communication  from  G.  P.  upon  another
topic,  the  following  interruption  occurs  : —

Who  said  there  was  no  death  ?  [Hand  moves  forward  as  though  ' '  speir-
ing"  into  the  "vacant  space."]  Moses  (Ask  Moses  what  he  means  by  that.)
Well,  you  interrupt  me.  Well,  I  must  say  old  chap  (I  did  not  meaii  to
interrupt  you.)  No  not  you  H  .  .  .  Moses  .  .  .  Ouk  esti  thanatos.
Moses  (that's  first  rate.  Is  this  Mr.  Moses  translating  ?)  Ouk  esti  thanatos.
There's  no  death.  Repeat  it  to  me  in  Greek  Hodgson  for  him.  [R.H.
repeats,  says  it  is  correct  and  suggests  getting  the  rest  of  the  passage
translated.]  Come  H.  Come  here  a  moment.  Hurry  up  H.  [R.  H.
repeats  the  rest  of  the  passage.]

Again  .  .  .  Good  oh  good  may  God  preserve  you  always  H.,  and
keep  you  alive  on  earth  until  you  have  accomplished  a  thorough  work.  I'll
help  you  in  every  way  possible  (Shall  I  repeat  the  Greek  again  ?)  Yes,  some-
thing new  .  .  .  Yes  he's  listening  .  .  .  too  fast  H  .  .  .  wait
ready  he  has  it  very  nearly  .  .  .  not  the  last  H  ...  no
before  .  .  .  3'es  .  .  .  not  quite  .  .  .  got  it.  [R.  H.  had
been  repeating  the  first  five  words  only  several  times.]  I'll  go  now  and
translate  it  and  return  sir.

This  promise  was  never  kept  and  we  heard  no  more  of  the  Greek.  At
later  sittings  other  matters  came  to  the  front  and  Moses  did  not  reappear  to
complete  the  translation.


48


William  Romaine  Newhold.


[part


At  a  sitting  lield  June  27th,  1895,  at  which  I  alone  was  present,
G.  P.  told  me  that  he  had  understood  Romanic  [sic)  and  a  little  Celtic,
and  told  me  to  ask  Mr.  Howard  about  it.  Dr.  Hodgson  asked  about
the  Romanic  and  found  that  Mr.  Howard  knew  nothino-  whatever
about  it.  G.  P.  spent  some  time  in  Ireland  and  wrote  a  book  on  Irish
affairs.

Case  XIV.

Ap2Jarent  Clairvoyance  or  Telepathy.

Several  times  I  got  apparent  evidence  for  the  acquisition  of  know-
ledge in  some  supernormal  way  which  seemed  to  suggest  rather
telepathy  or  clairvoyance  than  extraneous  intelligences.  Thus
(June  20th,  1894,  present  R.  H.  and  W.  R.  N.)  Phinuit  said  to  me  : —

Who  is  this  Edith  in  yonr  surroundings.  (There  are  several.)  Yes,  I
know  it  [Counts  on  hngers]  one,  two,  three.  This  is  the  young  one,  dark
hair,  pretty  complexion,  nice  young  lady.  [This  struck  me  at  the  time  as  a
description  of  a  yoang  cousin  of  mine  as  I  last  sav  her.  She  is  usually
lacking  in  colour,  but  was  then  flushed  with  exertion.]

At  another  time,  on  or  about  June  26th,  1894,  while  in  Dr.
Hodgson's  study,  I  picked  up  a  volume  of  poems  by  G.  P.  with  a
preface  by  Rogers.  I  had  not  known  that  G.  P.  had  written  poems,
and  exchanged  a  few  words  with  Dr.  Hodgson  about  it.  At  the
sitting  of  the  27tli,  Dr.  Hodgson  was  endeavouring  to  get  from  G.  P.
some  evidence  of  having  heard  a  jnessage  which  he  had  tried  to  give
him. The  writer  seemed  to  know  nothing  about  it,  but  wrote  : —

No, — but  I  did  hear  you  tell  about  the  memoriam  Rogers  .  .  .  [We
make  some  remark.]  Yes,  I  caught  it  as  you  were  telling  him  and  it
attracted  me.

Just  a  year  later  a  similar  incident  occurred.  As  the  alleged
Walter  Scott  was  concluding  a  sitting  he  told  me  that  there  were
monkeys  in  the  sun.  That  night  while  writing  up  the  sitting  at  Dr.
Hodgson's  rooms,  ten  miles  from  Mrs.  Pipei',  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I  fell
to  laughing  over  this  preposterous  statement ;  so  loudly  indeed  did  we
laugh  that  I  finally  cautioned  Dr.  H.  that  we  would  be  wakening  the
whole  block.  The  next  morning  the  writer,  without  my  saying  any-
thing about  it,  explained  that  he  did  not  mean  to  say  there  were
monkeys  in  the  sun;  the  light  of  the  medium  was  failing  him  and  gave
rise  to  this  error.  He  meant  to  say  that  we  would  follow  the  light
of  the  sun  as  far  as  the  tropic  of  Capricorn  and  there  we  would  see  the
monkeys  flying  in  and  out  of  sand  caves.  I  do  not  see  that  this
explanation  betters  the  matter  very  much.  A  little  later  on,  as  the
writer  was  professing  to  show  me  the  moon,  the  hand  suddenly
stopped  : —


XXXIV.] Obseimations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  49


Excuse  me  sir,  a  moment.  Who  was  the  gentleman  with  whom  I  saw  you
seemingly  laughing  over  my  journeys  with  you!  Actually  laughing  .  .
yes  sir  .  .  .  and  roaring  enough  to  split  the  canopy  of  space.  [I  con-
fess I  was  much  taken  aback  by  having  my  sins  thus  unexpectedly  brought
to  light ;  I  explained  who  it  was  and  how  absurd  the  statement  about  the
sun  had  seemed  to  us.  I  begged  the  writer's  pardon.]  Not  at  all,  sir,  thank  ■
you  sir  .  .  .  exceedingly  kind  sir.  No  intelligent  spirit  would  convey
for  a  moment  this  impression.

At  a  sitting  held  June  21st,  1895,  at  which  Mr.  H.  W.  O.  was
present  for  the  second  time,  G.  P.  towards  the  close,  when  getting
dreamy,  said  to  him.

Give  my  love  to  Norton  when  you  see  him  again.  [I  ask  O.  whether  he
knows  Norton  ;  he  says  yes.]  Of  course  you  will  and  tell  him  I  do  not
care  about  Jane  Austin,  [sic]  .  .  .  The  old  essays,  read  them  and  you
will  find  out  .  .  .  Norton,  the  dear  old  chap.  Adieu.  [Professor  C.  E.
Norton  is  meant.  Mr.  0.  was  under  a  false  name  at  both  sittings.]  [See
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  333-4.— R.  H.]


E


50


Frank  Podmore.


[part


III.

DISCUSSION  OF  THE  TRANCE-PHENOMENA  OF

MRS.  PIPER.

I. — By  Frank  Podmore.


In  considering  the  phenomena  presented  by  Mrs.  Piper's  trances^  I
do  not  propose  to  follow  Dr.  Hodgson  in  his  speculations  on  the  ultimate
significance  of  the  trance-utterances.  Not  indeed  that  those  specula-
tions can  fairly  be  held  illegitimate,  or  even  premature.  It  is  difficult,
indeed,  to  discuss  the  content  of  these  utterances  at  all  apart  from  the
dramatic  form  in  which  they  are  cast;  and  it  would  be  ridiculous  to
pretend  that  the  invariable  assumption  by  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper  of
an  alien  personality — a  personality  often  realised  with  startling  fidelity
— is  a  fact  wholly  without  evidential  weight.  But  before  entering
upon  the  difficult  problems  suggested  by  these  dramatic  impersonations,
there  is  a  preliminary  question  to  be  asked — a  question  which  Dr.
Hodgson  himself,  and  those  other  members  of  the  Society  whose
acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  has  given  them  the  best  right
to  form  an  opinion — to  wit,  Professor  William  James,  Professor
Oliver  Lodge,  Mr.  Frederic  Myers  and  Dr.  Leaf — have  already
answered  to  their  own  satisfaction.  But  it  is  well,  perhaps,  in  view
•of  the  importance  of  the  issues  now  clearly  seen  to  be  involved,  that
this  preliminary  question  should  once  more  be  definitely  stated,  and
the  answer  already  given,  as  above  indicated,  be  reviewed.  In  brief,
is  it  certain  that  we  have  to  deal  with  supernormal  faculty — say
telepathy,  to  put  it  at  its  lowest — at  all  ?  Is  it  not  conceivable  that
the  whole  of  the  information  given  in  the  trances  may  have  been
acquired  by  normal  means,  either  by  unconscious  elaboration  of  hints
undesignedly  furnished  by  the  sitter,  or  by  a  deliberate  system  of
private  inquiry  ?

Now  the  obvious  preliminary  remark  is  that  Mrs.  Piper  does  nob
.stand  alone.  She  is  a  member  of  a  large  class.  Clairvoyante  mediums
of  one  type  or  another  have  been  numerous,  since,  at  any  rate,  the
days  of  Mesraer.  And,  speaking  generally,  the  claims  put  forward
by  them,  or  on  their  behalf,  have  been  the  same  as  the  claims  now
advanced  for  Mrs.  Piper — the  power  of  diagnosing  and  prescribing  for
the  diseases,  even  of  absent  persons ;  of  seeing  events  and  places  at  a
distance ;  and  of  communicating  with  the  world  of  spirits.


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  51


But  in  attempting  to  compare  the  utterances  of  Mrs.  Piper  with
those  of  previous  mediums,  we  encounter  at  the  outset  a  serious — and
in  most  cases  an  insuperable — difficulty,  the  meagreness,  namely,  of
the  records. Of  some  clairvoyants,  no  doubt,  no  such  deficiency  can  be
asserted ;  he  would  be  an  insatiable  student,  indeed,  who  would  demand
an  ampler  unfoldment  of  the  Arcayia  Ccelestia ;  or  would  desire  to  add
to  the  volumes  of  the  Great  Ilarmonia. But  whatever  the  philosophic  or
theologic  value  of  the  utterances  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg  and  Andrew
Jackson  Davis  —and  in  ranking  the  two  names  together  as  members  of
the  same  class  no  comparison  of  the  two  men,  or  judgment  on  their
respective  systems,  is  intended  to  be  conveyed — it  is  clear  that  their
writings  offer  little  external  evidence  to  support  their  claims  to  inspira-
tion. Some  few  instances,  indeed,  are  alleged  in  which  Swedenborg
clairvoyantly  became  aware  of  events  at  a  distance ;  but  it  would
scarcely  be  profitable  at  the  pi'esent  time  to  inquire  into  the  sufficiency
of  the  evidence. And  I  am  not  aware  that  Davis'  claiais  to  the
possession  of  information supernormally  acquired  have  ever  been
substantiated  in  concrete  cases. Again,  there  were  many  German
ecstatics  in  the  first  few  decades  of  the  present  century,  of  whom  the
Seeress  of  Prevorst  may  be  taken  as  the  type,  whose  delineation  of  the
spiritual  spheres,  journeys  to  the  moon  and  the  interstellar  spaces,  and
the  like,  fill  many  closely  printed  volumes. But  here,  again,  evidence
for  terrestrial  clairvoyance,  though  not  altogether  wanting,  is  hardly
sufficient  to  call  in  itself  for  serious  consideration. With  these  excep-
tions then,  which  are  scarcely  profitable  for  our  present  purpose,  the
records  of  clairvoyance  are  for  the  most  part  both  meagre  and  sporadic;
so  that  we  are  unable  to  judge  how  much  of  the  alleged  success  might
have  been  due  to  information  surreptitiously  obtained  at  the  time  from
the  sitters  themselves ;  nor  what  proportion  of  the  statements  made
on  any  single  occasion  were  correct,  and  what  were  inaccurate  or
irrelevant;  nor  again  have  we  any  data  for  estimating  the  proportion  of
successful  and  unsuccessful  sittings. Naturally,  it  is  "good"  sittings
which  are  recorded  ;  the  rest  are  forgotten. Moreover,  an  additional
element  of  uncertainty  is  introduced  by  the  fact  that  the  accounts
given  are  frequently  undated,  and  were  certainly  in  many  cases  written,
down  months  or  years  after  the  events. In  a  few  cases,  however,
there  seems  to  have  been  a  fairly  full  record  of  the  sittings  of  some
one  medium,  based  upon  contemporary  notes. In  no  case,  indeed,,
with  which  I  am  acquainted,  does  the  record  profess  to  approach,
in  accuracy  or  completeness,  the  practically  verbatim  series  of  reports
edited  by  Dr.  Hodgson. But  in  a  few  cases — of  which  the  best  known
are  Mr.  Stainton  Moses, Alexis  Didier,  and  Adele  Maginot — the
accounts  given  are  sufficiently  full  and  appear  to  have  been  prepared
with  sufficient  care  to  admit  of  some  useful  comparison  being  made.


52


Frank  Podmore.


[part


I  propose  then  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  each  of  these  series  of  trance-
utterances,  in  its  purely  evidential  aspect,  and  to  consider  how  far  the
information  displayed  can  plausibly  be  assigned  to  normal  sources.

Some  account  of  the  alleged  spirit  communications  made  through
the  medium  of  Stainton  Moses — based  almost  exclusively  on  his  own
statements  of  what  took  place — is  given  by  Mr.  Myers  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XI.,  pp.  24-113.  To  the  comments  made  by  Mr.  Myers  I
have  to  add  one  important  detail,  viz.,  that  all  the  information  as
to  the  names,  ages  and  dates  of  death  of  the  three  Jones  children
which  was  given  at  the  seance  of  February  10th,  1874,  had,  it
has  since  been  ascertained,  appeared  in  the  obituary  column  of  the
Times  (London)  on  February  4th,  1874,  six  days  before  the  seance.^
In  the  article  referred  to,  38  spirits  are  enumerated  as  having  com-
municated through  the  medium  of  Stainton  Moses,  either  by  raps
or  by  automatic  writing.  Of  these  38  communicators,  8  or  9  had
been  personages  of  some  historical  importance  ;  13  were  individuals
of  no  special  distinction  ap2:>arent]y  unknown  even  by  name  to  Mr.
Moses  or  any  of  the  circle  ;  the  remainder  had  been  personal  acquaint-
ances of  the  medium  or  of  the  Speer  family,  who  formed  the  usual
sitters.  The  historical  personages  sometimes  signed  their  names  in
handwriting  which  was  reported  to  be  more  or  less  characteristic,  and
sometimes  communicated  facts  in  their  life  history  which  could  have
been  ascertained,  and  were  actually  verified,  by  reference  to  their
biographies  ;  the  unknown  persons  gave  their  names,  the  date  of  their
death,  and  the  disease  of  which  they  died,  in  many  cases  reproducing
verbatim  the  obituary  notice  which  had  appeared  shortly  before  in  the
daily  papers.  Of  the  personal  friends,  one  was  a  friend  of  Mi'S.  Speer,
of  whom  Mr.  Moses  writes  that  he  had  never  previously  heard ;  the
onl)'  facts  given  were  the  initials  and  surname  in  full — A.  P.  Kirkland.
Another  was  a  sister  of  Dr.  Speer,  who  had  died  as  an  infant  before
his  birth  ;  three  Christian  names  and  a  surname  and  particulars  as  to
the  death  were  eventually  given.  Other  relations  of  the  Speers  gave
their  names  and  relationship  correctly ;  the  medium's  grandmother  and
other  friends  conversed  with  him,  and  gave  him  particulars  of  incidents
known  to  him,  or  subsequently  verified.

Finally,  in  one  of  .Mr.  Moses'  notebooks  there  were  discovered,  after
his  death,  communications  from  President  Garfield  and  a  well-known
lady,  called  by  Mr.  Myers  "Blanche  Abercromby,"  which  communica-
tions purported  to  have  been  made  in  each  case  some  hours  before  nev/s
of  the  death  had  reached  Mr.  Moses  through  ordinarj^  channels.

Setting  aside  the  last  two  facts — for  which  we  have  no  other
evidence  than  the  medium's  own  statement — there is nothing  to


1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XI. ,  p]).  75-90.


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  53


forbid  the  supposition  that  the  whole  of  the  information  giv-en  at  these
seances  was  the  reproduction  of  facts  consciously  or  unconsciously
acquired  by  the  medium  from  the  daily  papers,  from  books,  or  from
conversations  with  his  friends.

Nor  do  the  alleged  communications,  it  is  interesting  to  note,  bear
in  most  cases  any  marked  resemblance  to  those  made  through  Mrs.
Piper's  organism.  Apart  from  the  initial  difference  that  Mr.  Moses'
spirits  mostly  communicated  by  raps,  and,  when  they  wrote,  wrote  not
infrequently  in  a  hand  simulating  the  characteristic  handwriting  of
the  alleged  communicator,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  names,  dates
and  other  obituary  particulars,  which  is  practically  all  of  an  evidential
nature  that  the  "  spirits  "  offer,  are  precisely  the  details  which  are
least  conspicuous  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances  ;  whilst  conversely
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  do  not  seem  to  have  been  favoured  with  any  of  the
curiously  subtle  character  sketches,  personal  descriptions,  odd  bits  of
old  family  history,  etc.,  etc.,  which  form  the  staple  of  the  later
medium's  communications.

There  have  been  numerous  exponents  in  England  of  "travelling"
clairvoyance,  especially  in  the  decade  1840-1850.  But  the  records  are
in  most  cases  fragmentary  and  sporadic,  or  contain  too  little  detaib
Of  one  clairvoyant  medium  of  that  period,  however,  we  have  several
tolerably  full  records  by  competent  observers;  and  the  fact  that  the
clairvoyant  was  well  paid  for  his  performances,  and  that  some  of  his
phenomena,  at  any  rate,  were  almost  without  question  to  be  accounted
for  by  the  exercise  of  normal  vision,  render  his  case  a  valuable  one  for
our  present  purposes.

Alexis  Didier  was  a  young  Frenchman  who  was  brought  to  this
country  in  the  summer  of  18-14  and  exhibited  by  one  Marcillet,  whom
EUiotson  and  others  vouched  for  as  a  gentleman  of  high  character  and
undoubted  integrity.  Alexis  was  apparently  in  the  iirst  instance
thrown  into  a  deep  trance ;  his  eyes  were  then  bandaged,  generally  as
follows  : — A  pa,d  of  leather  would  be  placed  over  each  eye,  and  then
two  handkerchiefs  would  be  tied  diagonally  across ;  over  these  a  third
handkerchief  would  be  tied  horizontally,  and  the  interstices  would
be  tilled  up  with  cotton  wool.  In  these  circumstances  he  would  play
ecarte  with  great  skill  and  rapidity ;  would  know  not  only  his  own
cards  but  frequently  those  in  his  adversary's  hand  as  well ;  would
play  correctly  with  his  own  cards  face  downwards  on  the  table ;
would  frequently,  by  request,  pick  out  any  named  card  when  the
whole  pack  was  face  downwards.  Further  he  would — though  generally
with  his  eyes  unbandaged  and  merely  closed — read  words  written
in  sealed  envelopes,  describe  the  contents  of  closed  packets,  and  read
words  and  sentences  several  pages  deep  in  any  book  which  might  be
presented  to  him.


54


Frank  Podmore.


[part


From  the  detailed  descriptions  of  these  performances  given  hy
various  observers  in  the  Zoist  itself  and  in  the  periodical  literature  of
the  time,  we  can  gather  many  indications  that  the  power  exercised
by  Alexis  was  perfectly  normal. ^  In  any  case  bandaging  such  as  that
described  could  not  have  been  accepted  as  satisfactory.  But  a  writer
in  the  Mominy  Chronicle  tells  us  that  he  had  himself  been  bandaged
by  a  friend  in  the  same  way  and  had  managed  to  read  distinctlj^  It
was  noticed,  moreover,  by  several  persons  that  Alexis  contorted  his  face
both  during  and  after  the  process  of  bandaging  ;  that  he  frequently
touched  or  fidgeted  with  the  bandages  ;  that  he  held  the  objects  given
to  him  at  curious  angles,  and  often  changed  their  position  as  if  trying
to  get  a  better  view  ;  envelopes  and  closed  paper  packages  would  be
carried,  for  instance,  to  the  stomach  or  the  top  of  the  head.  Moreover,
the  card-playing  appears  to  have  been  the  only  form  of  experiment
which  was  pretty  uniformly  successful ;  even  here  there  were
many  failures,  but  the  failures  seem  to  have  predominated  over  the
successes  in  other  cases.  He  appears  to  have  selected  the  packages
which  he  was  to  read  from  amongst  a  large  number  presented  to  him  ;
the  contents  of  sealed  envelopes  could  not  be  read  in  the  hands  of  a
sceptic — the  seal  must  be  broken  and  the  contents  shown  to  a
sympathetic  witness.  Marcillet  was  present  in  the  room  throughout
the  performance.  Of  all  the  feats,  that  of  reading  the  words  several
pages  deep  in  a  book  was  the  most  strongly  suggestive  of  trickery.
This  appears  not  to  have  been  attempted,  as  a  rule,  until  Alexis  had
ah'eady  read  some  words  on  the  open  page,  the  book  in  his  hand,  with
the  text  covered  by  a  piece  of  paper  or  a  handkerchief  placed  there  by
himself.  Alexis  would  then  separate  a  number  of  pages,  from  ten  to
150,  holding  them  edgeways  before  him,  and  offer  to  read  some  words
on  a  particular  part  of  the  page  several  pages  further  on.  It  is  not
stated  in  tvny  account  which  I  have  seen  whether  Alexis  or  the
audience  chose  the  particular  spot  on  the  page  ;  but  it  is  certain  that
Alexis  could  not  indicate  with  even  approximate  correctness  the
number  of  pages  deep.  In  one  case  the  words  read  were  found  80
and  150  pages  further  on  respectively.

If  this  were  all  that  Alexis  had  to  show,  we  could  only  woiader  at
the  simplicity  of  the  numerous  witnesses — lawyers,  medical  men,
members  of  Parliament  and  others — cited  in  the  Zoist,  who  vouched
for  his  performances.  But  there  are  two  considerations  which  give  us
pause. In  the  first  place,  though  it  would  have  l^een  difficult  to  prove

1  See  especially  Zoist  II.  pp.  39.3-409,  477-529  ;  the  detailed,  and,  on  the  whole,
impartial  account  by  Dr.  ForVjes,  F.R  S.,  in  the  Lancet,  August  3rd,  1.S44  ;  a  letter  in
the  Morning  Chronicle,  June  28th,  1844,  signed  No  Go  ;  the  Times,  June  25th,  1844  ;
Medical  Times,  July  27th,  1844,  and  subsequent  dates  ;  various  articles  in  the  Critic-.
for  1844  and  1845:  etc.


xxxiv.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  55


this  even  at  the  time,  and  of  course  no  certain  proof  is  now  possible,
there  are  indications  that  his  trance  was  genuine  ;  and  if  genuine,  it  is
permissible  to  suppose,  though  the  knowledge  which  he  displayed  had
clearly  been  acquired  by  the  exercise  of  the  normal  senses,  that  he
himself  was  innocent  of  deception  in  the  matter.  In  the  second  place,
at  every  seance,  together  with  this  display  of  conscious  or  unconscious
jugglery,  there  occurred  instances  of  "  travelling  clairvoyance  "  and
thought-reading,  which,  if  not  genuine,  involved  deception  of  a  more
hazardous  and  complicated  nature.  Of  course,  fraud  is  the  first
explanation  in  a  case  of  this  kind.  Alexis  was  a  professional — he
received  five  guineas  a  seance  ;  there  is  no  strong  improbability  in  the
assumption  that  the  respectable  M.  Marcillet  was  a  confederate ;  and
perhaps  the  most  probable,  though  not  necessarily  the  correct,  ex-
planation of  his  card-playing  performances  is  that  of  deliberate  fraud.
But  in  the  following  instances,  which  are  selected  from  numerous
other  accounts  in  the  literature  of  that  time  as  having  apparently
been  reported  with  due  care,  the  fraud  must  have  been  of  a  different
kind.  The  first  account  is  compiled  from  notes  made  by  Lord  Adare
of  a  sitting  with  Alexis  which  took  place  on  July  2nd,  1844,  at
the  house  of  M.  Dupuis,  in  Welbeck-street.  A  corresponding,  but
rather  fuller  and  more  dramatic  account  of  the  incident  is  given
by  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby,  in  a  letter  to  the  Medical  Tiryies,  dated
July  8th.

Col.  Llewellyn,  who  was,  I  believe,  rather  sceptical,  produced  a
uiorocco  case,  something  like  a  surgical  instrument  case.  Alexis  took  it,
placed  it  to  his  stomach  and  said,  "The  object  is  a  hard  substance,  not
white,  enclosed  in  something  more  white  than  itself  ;  it  is  a  bone  taken  from
a  greater  body  ;  a  human  bone — yours.  It  has  been  separated,  and  cut  so
as  to  leave  a  flat  side."  Alexis  opened  the  case,  took  out  a  piece  of  bone
wrapped  in  silver  paper,  and  said  "  The  ball  struck  here  ;  it  was  an  extra-
ordinary ball  in  effect ;  you  received  three  separate  injuries  at  the  same
moment  ;  the  bone  was  broken  in  three  pieces  ;  you  were  wounded  early  in
the  day  whilst  engaged  in  charging  the  enemy."  He  also  described  the  dress
of  the  soldiers,  and  was  right  in  all  these  particulars.  This  excited  the
astonishment  of  all  the  bystanders,  especially  the  gallant  colonel.  This
account  is  drawn  up,  not  only  from  my  own  notes,  but  from  Colonel
Llewellyn's  statement  made  after  the  seance,  and  from  a  written  account
given  me  by  a  lady  who  was  sitting  close  by. — (Zoist  II.,  pp.  510-11.)

On  the  hypothesis  that  the  information  given  was  normally
obtained,  we  must  suppose  that  Colonel  Llewellyn  was  a  garrulous
old  gentleman,  who  had  betrayed  his  secret  to  someone  in  the  room  at
the  time ;  or  that  Marcillet  or  Alexis  had  by  some  means  acquired
beforehand  knowledge  of  his  history,  and  of  his  intention  to  attend  the
seance.  Neither  supposition  can,  of  course,  be  dismissed  as  altogether
improbable.


50


Frank  Podmore.


[part


The  next  case  is  taken  from  a  letter  by  Dr.  W.  B.  Costello,  which
appeared  in  the  Medical  Times  o£  July  27th,  184:4.  Dr.  Costello  ex-
plains that,  though  personally  unknown  to  Marcillet,  he  had  obtained  an
inti-oduction  to  him  (apparently  through  a  friend),  and  had  accordingly
presented  himself  with  Marcillet's  card  at  a  seance  held  in  a  private
house.  It  may  be  presumed,  therefore,  that  Marcillet  was  aware  of
Dr.  Costello's  intention  to  be  present,  and  had  had  the  opportunity  of
working  up  his  dossier.  After  relating  two  "clairvoyant"  descrip-
tions of  distant  scenes  and  houses  given  to  other  guests,  which  were
apparently  recognised  as  substantially  correct,  Dr.  Costello  proceeds: —

The  sitting  was  now  cU-awing  to  a  close,  and  ...  1  asked  permission
to  put  a  question  as  to  a  fact  in  which  I  was  engaged  early  on  Monday
morning.  I  said  I  was  aware  that  coming  there  under  the  auspices  of  the
mesmeriser,  and,  moreover,  labouring  under  the  disadvantage  of  not  being
known  to  himself,  I  could  well  understand  that  if  the  answer  was  satis-
factory it  could  be  only  to  myself,  but  if  it  were  otherwise  I  should  state
it  to  be  so  without  hesitation.  Permission  having  been  courteously  granted,
I  took  Alexis  by  the  hand  and  asked  him  to  describe  the  persons,  the
room,  and  the  act  in  which  I  was  engaged  on  Monday  morning.  He
answered,  after  brief  musing,  "  You  are  in  a  room  with  a  person,  not  on  a
bed,  but  a  couchette  ;  this  person  has  suffered  a  great  deal  ;  you  have  been
doing  something  to  his  head — there  is  another  person  also— there  are
instruments  with  screws  laid  out  on  the  table  (des  objets  mecaniques  et  a
vis)."  While  speaking  lie  kept  moving  his  hands  over  the  front  of  his
person,  till  he  reached  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  when  he  exclaimed
suddenly,  "Tiens,  vous  I'operez  aussi  au  has  ventre,  vous  operez  pour  la
pierre."  I  was  astonished  at  the  minuteness  and  truthfulness  of  his
description.  I  asked  him  if  the  patient  was  old  or  young.  He  answered
young.  The  truth  was  I  was  performing  the  operation  of  lithotrity  on  a
gentleman,  not  young,  but  eighty  years  of  age,  at  Clifton,  on  the  morning
of  that  day,  and  the  room,  sofa  and  position  of  the  table  on  which  my  instru-
ments lay  were  as  correctly  described  as  if  he  had  been  present.  It  is,  more-
over, not  a  little  singular  that  the  patient  has  an  ulceration  behind  the  ear,
which  his  servant  dresses  for  him.  This  closed  the  sitting.  Of  course  the
correctness  of  Alexis'  answers  to  me  had  no  influence  on  the  mind  of  Mr.

•  . It  might,  however  have  puzzled  him,  as  it  has  me,  had  I  been  known

to  him,  as  I  trust  I  am  to  the  rest  of  the  members  of  my  own  profession.

The  next  accouDt  is  extracted  from  a  long  letter,  dated  Mon  Loisir,
Lausanne,  November  25th,  1851,  written  by  the  Rev.  Chauncey  Hare
Townshend  to  Dr.  EUiotson,  and  containing  a  minute  description  of  a
seance  with  Alexis,  at  which  Marcillet  was  not  present.  Townshend
relates  that  he  had  paid  a  sui'prise  visit  to  Marcillet  in  passing  through
Paris  the  previous  month  ;  he  had  introduced  himself  as  a  friend  of
EUiotson,  and  found  that  both  his  name  and  the  fact  that  he  had
written  a  book  on  mesmerism  were  unknown  to  Marcillet.  The  latter,
at  Townshend's  earnest  request,  had  sent  a  messenger  for  Alexis,  and


xxxiY.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  57


brought  him  round  to  Townshend's  hotel  some  hours  later.  As  soon  as
Alexis  was  in  the  "  mesmeric  "  trance  Marcillet  left  the  room,  and

I  began  to  test  the  clairvoyance  of  Alexis,  in  the  matter  of  seeing  distant
places.  I  asked  liira  if  he  would  visit  my  house  (in  thought).  He  im-
mediately asked,  "  Wliich,  for  you  have  two  ?  You  have  a  liouse  in  London
and  one  m  tlie  country. Which  shall  I  go  to  first  ?  "

I  said,  "  To  the  house  in  the  country."

After  a  pause,  Alexis  said,  "  J'y  sniii "  and  then,  to  my  surprise,  he
opened  wide  both  his  eyes,  and  stared  about  him.  I  saw,  however,  at  <3nce,
that  he  had  the  fixed  rigid  gaze  of  a  sleep  waker.  As  far  as  I  could
perceive,  he  never  once  altered  the  fixed  position  of  the  lids  during  the
whole  time  that  he  was  in  distant  clairvoyance.  The  pupil  looked  dilated
dull,  and  without  any  movement  of  conscious  activity.

"  Well,"  I  asked,  "  what  do  you  see  ?  "

"  Je  vols,"  said  he,  "  une  maisou  d'un  moyen  apparence.  C'est  une  maison,
pas  im  chateau.  II  y  a  un  jardin  aidour.  A  cote  gauche  il  y  a  une  maison,
plus  petite,  sur  la  propriete.''

All  this  was  said  in  breaths,  with  some  effort,  and  with  a  hurried  gasp,
as  it  were,  between  each  sentence.  I  own  I  was  surprised  at  the  accuracy
of  the  description  of  my  house  near  Lausanne,  particularl}'  at  the  mention
of  the  small  house  on  the  left-hand  side,  where,  according  to  Swiss  custom,
dwells  my  landlady.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  marking  feature  of  tlie  place,  not  to
be  guessed  at  by  a  stranger,  and,  as  such,  brought  much  conviction  to  my
mind.  "Now,"  said  I  to  Alexis,  "What  sort  of  view  do  you  see?"
"  Be  Veaii,  de  I'eau,"  said  he  hurriedly,  as  if  he  saw  the  lake  whicli  indeed
spreads  out  before  my  windows.  Then  "  II  y  a  des  arbres  en  face  tous  pres
de  la  maisoii,"  (all  true).  "Well  now,"  I  said,  "we  will  go  into  the
drawing-room"  (salon).  "  What  do  you  see  ?  "  He  looked  about,  and  said
(where  my  memory  fails  as  to  the  exact  words  I  give  the  sense  in  English),
"  You  have  a  good  many  pictures  on  the  walls.  But  now,  this  is  curious —
they  are  all  modern,  except  tivo."

"And  these  two,"  said  I  ;  "  can  you  see  the  subjects  ?  "

"  Oh,  yes  ! One  is  a  sea-piece  ;  the  other  is  un  snjet  religieux."

I  really  felt  something  of  a  shudder  at  this  extreme  precision.  How
then  was  I  astonished  wlien  Alexis  went  on  to  describe  minutely  the  sujet
religieux,  which  was  a  picture  I  had  lately  bought  of  an  Italian  refugee,  and
which  had  many  striking  peculiarities.  He  said  at  once,  "  There  are  three
figures  in  the  jjicture — an  old  man,  a  woman,  and  a  child.  Can  the  woman
be  the  Virgin  ?  (he  asked  of  himself  musingly)  No  !  she  is  too  old  (pro-
ceeded he,  answering  his  own  question,  while  I  remained  perfectly  silent).
The  woman  has  a  book  upon  her  lap,  and  tlie  child  points  with  its  finger  to
something  in  the  book  !  There  is  a  distaff  in  the  corner."  Effectively,  the
picture  represented  St.  Ann  teacliing  the  Vu-gin  to  read,  and  every
particular  respecting  it  was  correct.

I  asked,  "  On  what  is  the  picture  painted  1 "

Alexis  answered,  "It  is  neither  on  canvas  nor  copper  (metal).  It  is  on  a
curious  substance."  After  some  consideration  he  began  to  rap  on  the  table
with  his  knuckles,  as  if  trying  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  substance.
Then  he  called  out  "C'est  sur  pier  re." (The  picture  is  in  fact  on  black


58


Frank  Podmore.


[part


marble.)  "Now,"  said  he,  "  I  ain  looking  at  it  behind.  It  is  of  a  curious
colour  entre  noinUre  et  gris  (the  exact  colour  it  is  behind).  It  is  also  rough
beliivd. El  tiens,"  added  he, c'est  bomhe."

This  last  peculiarity  would  have  convinced  the  most  incredulous.  The
picture,  from  a  warp  or  curve  in  the  stone,  had  been  very  ditticult  to  frame.
{Zoist  IX.,  pp.  405  6.)

Alexis  then  proceeded  to  give  an  equally  detailed  description  of
Townshend's  house  in  Norfolk  Street,  London ;  of  the  maid  servants
there,  the  horse  in  the  stables,  etc.  ;  and  furnished  various  other  proofs
of  clairvoyance.

The  obvious  remark  on  a  case  of  this  kind  is  that  Townshend  was
a  well-known  writer  on  mesmerism  ;  that  it  was  practicall}'  certain
that  he  would  at  some  time  or  another  come  to  see  Ale.x.is ;  and  that
it  would  probably  be  worth  while  for  Alexis  and  his  agents  to  "get
up  "  as  many  facts  as  possible  in  connection  with  him,  in  order  to  afford
a  convincing  proof  of  supernormal  faculty.  That  the  description  of
the  maidservants  in  the  house  in  London,  and  the  grey  horse  in  the
stable  with  sores  on  its  flanks,  applied  accurately  to  the  time  of  the
seance  would  only  prove,  on  this  hypothesis,  that  Alexis'  Intelligence
Department  was  up-to-date.  It  is  true  that  this  explanation  becomes
more  and  more  difficult  as  it  has  to  be  applied  to  a  wider  and  wider
circle.  But  though  successful  clairvoyant  descriptions  of  the  kind
appear  to  have  been  given  at  every  seance,  the  reports  which  we
possess  are  mostly  at  secondhand,  or  insufficiently  detailed,  and  the
names  of  persons  concerned  are  frequently  not  given.  As  a  "  sitting  "
with  Alexis  appears  to  have  been  a  kind  of  levee  attended  by  some
thirty  or  forty  persons,  it  is  clear  that  Alexis  had  considerable  chances
of  utilising  any  information  which  he  might  have  surreptitiously
acquired  ;  and  the  supposition  that  his  display  of  apparent  clairvoyance
was,  in  fact,  to  be  so  explained,  though  it  certainly  implies  the
possession  of  highly-trained  confederates  and  singular  good  fortune  in
the  chance  of  sitters,  is  not  perhaps  to  be  summarily  dismissed.  It
is  interesting  to  remark  that  Alexis  himself  expressly  disclaimed  any
assistance  from  spirits  in  the  matter.

The  revelations  of  the  two  clairvoyants  so  far  considered  bear  little
resemblance  to  those  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Our  next  seer  is  of  a  different
type,  and  presents,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  as  close  a  parallel  as  any  in
later  spiritualistic  literature  to  the  American  clairvoyante.

Alphonse  Cahagnet  describes  himself  as  a  simple  otivrier.  He
was,  in  fact,  as  we  learn  from  an  authoritative  account  of  him  in  the
Journal  dih  Magnetisme,'^  originally  a  journeyman  cabinet-makei',  and
subsequently  took  up  the  trade  of  restoring  old  furniture.  In  January,
1848,  he  published  at  Paris  the  first  volume  of  his  Arcanes  de  la  vie

1  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  340.


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Pi])er.  59


future  devoUcSj'm  which  he  gave  an  account  of  communications  received
through  eight  somnambules,  which  purported  to  proceed  from  thirty-
six  persons  of  various  stations,  who  had  died  at  diiferent  epochs,  some
of  them  more  than  two  centuries  previously.  The  seances  had  extended
over  some  years.  This  first  volume  contained  "  revelations  "  of  the
usual  post-Swedenborgian  kind  about  the  constitution  of  the  spirit
spheres,  the  occupations  of  the  deceased,  the  bliss  of  the  after  life,  and
so  on,  together  with  more  personal  messages  from  deceased  friends  of
those  persons  whom  Cahagnet  admitted  to  witness  the  manifestations.
But  there  is  little  or  nothing  to  show  that  the  so-called  communications
did  not  emanate  exclusively  from  the  imagination  of  the  medium,  and
we  are  dependent  solely  upon  Cahagnet's  good  faith  and  competence
for  the  accuracy  of  the  reports  given.  Cahagnet  appears,  however,
to  have  been  a  man  of  quite  unusual  sincerity  and  teachableness.
The  criticisms  on  his  earlier  woi'k  showed  him  where  the  evidence
was  defective ;  and  in  the  later  seances  described  in  his  second
volume,  which  was  published  in  January,  184:9,  he  appears  to
have  done  his  utmost  to  establish  the  authenticity  of  the  alleged
spirit  communications  by  procuring,  wherever  possible,  the  written
attestations  of  the  other  persons  present.  Tlie  medium  in  all  these
later  sittings  was  a  young  woman  named  Adele  Maginot,  whom  he  had
known  for  many  years.  A  natural  somnambulist  from  her  childhood,
she  had  allowed  Cahagnet  to  "  magnetise "  her,  in  order  that  he
might  put  a  stop  to  the  spontaneous  attacks  which  were  impairing  her
health.  He  soon  found  her  an  excellent  clairvoyante,  especially  for
the  diagnosis  and  cure  of  diseases.

In  the  later  seances,  however,  which  took  place  in  the  spring  and
summer  of  1848,  Adele  was  chiefly  consulted  by  persons  who  wished
for  interviews  with  deceased  friends.  Cahagnet  drew  up  a  statement
of  the  communications  made  at  each  of  these  sittings,  and  asked  the
sitters  to  sign  the  statement,  indicating  how  far  the  particulars  given
were  true  or  false.  These  statements,  with  the  signed  attestations,  are
published.  In  the  few  cases  where  the  names  are  not  given  in  full,
Cahagnet  explains  that  for  sufficient  reasons  the  sitters  had  desired
that  their  names  should  be  withheld  from  the  general  public,  but  that
they  were  at  the  disposal  of  any  private  inquirer  who  might  wish
to  satisfy  himself  of  the  genuineness  of  the  accounts.  Of  course  these
reports,  which  do  not  profess  to  be  verbatim,  do  not  show  what  indica-
tions the  clairvoyante  may  have  received  from  leading  questions  or
undesigned  hints  by  the  sitters.

Cahagnet,  indeed,  seems  to  admit  a  certain  amount  of  editing  on
his  part. His  words  are  : — •

"  Get  ouvrage  est  loin  d'offrir  I'interet  du  reman  par  son  style  forcement
coupe,  accidente. Aussi  conviendrait-il  niieux  aux  amateurs  de  la  science


60


Frank  Fodmore.


[PAKT


qu'aux  lecteurs  passionnes  des  descriptions  poetiques  de  nos  romans  du  jour.
J'ai  cherche  a  rendre  le  style  le  plus  clair  possible  en  le  deponillant  de  cet
entourage  de  questions,  de  scenes  etranqeres  a  ce  genre  de  revelations.  Je  tiens
moins  a  bien  ^crire  qu'k  bien  persuader  .  .  .  Je  suis  reste  dans  les
limites  de  I'austere  verite,  du  role  impartial  de  I'historien,  presentant  a  la
philosophie  du  jour,  des  faits  dans  toute  leur  nudite,  niais  aussi  dans  toute
leur  sinc(^riti5." (Vol.  II.,  p.  233).

But  it  is  evident  from  the  accounts  given  that  many  of  the  sitters,
at  any  rate,  were  sceptical,  and  on  their  guard  against  deception.
And  in  some  cases  it  is  clear  that  no  hints  received  from  the  sitters
could  have  furnished  information,  as  in  the  case  of  Rostan,  quoted
below.  Another  possible  evidential  defect  is  that,  though  Cahagnet
tells  us  that  he  has  recorded  all  the  somnambule's  mistakes  as  well  as
all  her  correct  statements  (Vol.  II.  p.  126),  he  does  not  expressly  say
that  he  has  published  the  records  of  every  seance.  As,  however,  we
have  numbered  records  of  forty-six  seances  in  the  interval  between
going  to  press  with  the  first  volume  in  the  autumn  of  1847,  and  the
end  of  August,  18-1:8,  twenty-eight  of  which  sittings  took  place  between
the  6th  of  March  and  the  latter  date,  it  may,  I  think,  fairly  be
assumed  that  the  sittings  here  recorded  I'epresent  at  least  a  substantial
proportion  of  those  which  actually  took  place.  Lastly,  to  complete  the
enumeration  of  the  more  prominent  evidential  defects,  very  few  dates
are  given.  In  this  respect  also,  however,  the  second  volume  shows  a
marked  improvement  over  the  first.  The  ninety-six  seances  there
recorded  contain  hardly  a  single  date.  But  of  the  later  seances  several
are  dated,  and  the  rest,  from  internal  evidence,  appear  to  be  printed  in
chronological  order.  I  can  pay  M.  Cahagnet  no  higher  compliment
than  to  say  that,  taken  all  together,  he  seems  more  nearly  to  approach
the  evidential  standard  which  the  investigators  of  the  S.P.R.,  after
long  years  of  work,  have  elaborated  for  tlieir  own  guidance,  than  any
previous  worker  in  these  obscure  regions.

The  following  are  a  few  representative  records  : —

No.  129.1 — M.  Petiet  asks  for  M.  Jerome  Petiet.  Adele  sees  a  young
man,  about  tweuty-four  or  twenty-six  years  of  age  (he  was  thirty),  not  so  tall
as  his  brother  now  present ;  auburn  hair,  rather  long  ;  open  forehead,  arched
and  very  pronounced  eyebrows,  brown  and  rather  sunken  eyes,  nose  rather
long,  pretty  well  formed  ;  complexion  fresh,  skin  very  white  and  delicate,
medium  sized  mouth,  round  dimpled  chin.  "  He  was  weak  in  the  chest ;  he
would  have  been  very  strong  had  it  not  been  for  this.  He  wears  a  rough
grey  ves>b,  buttons  with  a  shank  and  eye  such  as  are  no  longer  worn.  1  do
not  think  they  are  brass  ones,  nor  of  the  same  stuif  as  the  vest.  They  don't
look  to  me  very  bright.  His  pantaloons  are  of  a  dark  colour,  and  he  wears
low  (juartered  shoes  without  any  instep.

^  Vol.  II.,  pp.  170-2.  The  sittings  are  numbered  in  one  series  through  the  two
volumes  :  Vol.  II.  begins  with  Seance  No.  US.


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Ql


"This  man  was  of  a  stubborn  disposition,  selfish,  without  any  fine  feelings,
had  a  sinister  look,  was  not  very  communicative,  devoid  of  candour,  and  had
but  little  affection  for  anyone.  He  had  suffered  with  his  heart.  His  death
was  natural,  but  sudden.  He  died  of  suffocation."  Adele  chokes  as  this  man
choked,  and  coughed  as  he  did.  She  says  that  "he  must  have  had  moxas  or
a  plaster  applied  to  his  back,  and  this  accounts  for  the  sore  I  see  there.  He
had  no  disease,  however,  in  that  part.  The  spine  was  sound.  Those  who
applied  this  remedy  did  not  know  the  seat  of  the  disease.  He  holds  himself
badly. His  back  is  round  without  being  humped."

M.  Petiet  finds  nothing  to  alter  in  these  details,  which  are  very  exact,  and
confirm  him  in  his  belief  that  the  application  of  this  plaster,  advised  by  a
man  who  was  not  a  doctor,  brought  on  his  brother's  death,  which  was  almost
sudden .

"  Signed  the  present  report  as  very  exact.

Peiiet,
19,  Rue  Neuve-Coquenard."

Note. — The  buttons  that  Adele  was  unable  to  describe  were  of  metal,  a
dirty  white  ground,  and  surrounded  by  a  blue  circle.  In  this  apparition  there
is  a  remarkable  fact  to  be  noted — viz.,  that  Adele  experienced  the  same
kind  of  illness  as  this  man.  I  was  obliged  to  release  her  by  passes,  she
suffered  terribly.

In  the  sitting  next  to  be  quoted,  M.  du  Potet,  a  well-known  writer
on  Animal  Magnetism,  and  editor  at  that  time  of  the  Journal  du
Magnetisme  in  Paris,  had  bi  ought  with  him  the  Prince  de  Kourakine,
who  is  described  as  being  "Secretary  to  the  Eussian  Ambassador."
The  Prince  had  asked  for  his  sistei'-in-law,  and  a  striking  personal
description  had  been  given  by  Adele,  which  was  acknowledged  by
the  Prince,  in  the  hearing  of  M.  du  Potet  and  two  other  witnesses,
to  be  accurate.  Unfortunately,  the  Prince's  signed  attestation  was
not  procured  on  the  spot ;  he  had  promised  to  come  again,  but — as
Cahagnet  delicately  puts  it — "  les  ev^nements  survenus  en  France
Font  forc^  de  partir,"  and  the  promised  testimony  was  never  obtained.
After  the  apparition  of  the  Russian  Princess,  however,  the  record
continues  : —

No.  117^. — M.  du  Potet  wishes  in  his  tui-n  to  call  up  M.  Dubois,  a  doctor,
a  friend  of  his  who  had  been  dead  about  fifteen  months.

Adele  said:  "  I  see  a  grey-headed  man,  he  has  very  little  hair  on  the
front  of  his  head  ;  his  forehead  is  bare  and  prominent  at  the  temples,  making
his  head  appear  square.  He  may  be  about  sixty  years  of  age.  He  has  two
wrinkles  on  either  side  of  his  cheeks,  a  crease  under  his  chin,  making  it  look
double  ;  he  is  short-necked  and  stumpy  ;  has  small  eyes,  a  thick  nose,  a
rather  large  mouth,  a  flat  chin,  and  small  thin  hands.  He  does  not  look  to
me  quite  so  tall  as  M.  du  Potet  ;  if  he  is  not  stouter  he  is  more  broad-
shouldered. He  wears  a  brown  frock-coat  with  side  pockets. I  see  him


1  Vol.  II.,  pp.  118-120.


62


Frank  Pochnore.


[part


draw  a  snufF-box  out  of  one  of  them  and  take  a  pinch.  He  has  a  very  funny
walk,  he  does  not  carry  himself  well,  and  has  weak  legs  ;  he  must  have
suffered  from  them.  He  has  i-ather  short  trousers.  Ah  !  he  does  not  clean
his  shoes  every  day,  for  they  are  covered  with  mud.  Taking  it  altogether,
he  is  not  well  dressed.  He  has  asthma,  for  he  breathes  with  ditticulty.  I
see,  too,  that  he  has  a  swelling  in  the  abdomen,  he  has  something  to  support
it.  I  have  told  him  that  it  is  M.  du  Potet  who  asked  for  him.  He  talks  to
me  of  magnetism  with  incredible  volubility  ;  he  talks  of  everything  at  once  ;
lie  mixes  everything  up  ;  I  cannot  understand  any  of  it  ;  it  makes  hira
sputter  saliva."

M.  du  Potet  asks  that  the  apparition  may  be  asked  why  he  has  not
appeared  to  him  before  as  he  had  promised^  He  answers:  "  VVait  till  I
find  out  my  whereabouts  ;  I  have  only  just  arrived,  I  am  studying  everything
I  see.  I  want  to  tell  you  all  about  it  when  I  appear,  and  I  shall  have  many
thiijgs  to  tell  you."

"  Which  day  did  you  promise  me  you  would  do  so  V  "  On  a  Wednes-
day." Adele  adds  :  "  This  man  must  be  forgetful  ;  I  am  sure  that  he  was
very  absent-minded."  M.  du  Potet  asks  further  :  "When  will  you  appear
to  meV  "I  cannot  fix  the  time,  I  shall  try  to  do  so  in  six  weeks."
"Ask  him  if  he  was  fond  of  the  Jesuits  ?  "  At  tliis  name  he  gives  such  a
leap  in  the  air,  stretching  out  his  arms  and  crying  "The  Jesuits,"  that
Adele  draws  back  quickly,  and  is  so  startled  that  she  does  not  venture  to
speak  to  him  again.

M.  du  Potet  declares  that  all  these  details  are  very  accurate,  that  he
cannot  alter  a  syllable.  He  says  that  this  man's  powers  of  conversation
were  inexhaustible  ;  he  mixed  up  all  the  sciences  to  which  he  was  devoted,
and  spoke  with  such  volubility  that,  as  the  clairvoyante  says,  he  sputtered  in
consequence.  He  took  little  pains  with  his  appearance  ;  he  was  so  absent-
minded  that  he  sometimes  forgot  to  eat.  When  anyone  mentioned  the
Jesuits  to  him  he  jumped  as  Adele  has  described.  He  was  always  covered
with  mud  like  a  spaniel.  It  is  not  surjsrising  that  the  clairvoyante  should
see  him  with  muddy  shoes.  He  had,  in  fact,  promised  M.  du  Potet  that  he
would  appear  to  him  on  a  Wednesday  or  a  Saturday.  M.  du  Potet  has
acknowledged  the  accuracy  of  this  apparition  in  No.  75  of  the  Juunial  du
Magnetisme.

In  effect,  in  the  Journal  of  August  lObh  of  the  same  year,  in
reviewing  the  first  volume,  Du  Potet  gives  handsome  testimony  to  the
striuing  nature  of  the  impersonation,  "  si  bien  que  je  croyais  le  voir
moi-meaie,  tant  le  tableau  en  etait  saisissant.  Bientot  cette  ombre
s'est  enfuie  en  effrayant  la  somnambule  ;  un  seul  mot  avait  cause  cette
disparition  subite,  et  mon  etonueraent  en  £ut  porte  a  son  corable,  car
■ce  meme  tuot  le  mettait  toujours  en  fureur."  But  Du  Potet,  for  all
that,  is  inclined  to  attribute  the  phenomenon  to  transmission  of
thought  from  his  own  mind ;  ^  and  a  few  months  later,-  in  review-
ing the  second  volume,  he  takes  occasion  to  give  the  result  of  his

1  Journal  du  Magnetisme,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  89.
-  Journal  du  Maon&tUme,  "Vol.  VIII.,  p.  24.


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance- Phenomena  of  il/r.s.  Piper.  63


further  inquiries  on  this  seance.  Generally,  the  minute  description  of
the  personal  appearance  and  other  particulars  which  were  prominent
in  Du  Potet's  own  mind  at  the  time  were  correct  ;  and  other  details
were  correctly  given  which  Du  Potet  might  have  heard,  but  had
certainly  not  remembered  at  the  time.  He  had  ascertained,  however,
from  the  widow  and  children,  that  Dr.  Dubois  took  no  tobacco ;
never  had  a  redingote  of  the  colour  described  ;  had  no  hernia,  and
consequently  wore  no  bandage.  Moreover,  the  apparition  predicted
never  came  off.  Du  Potet,  however,  adds  expressly  that  Dr.  Dubois
was  unknown  in  life  to  Cahagnet  and  his  somnambule.

The  explanation  by  telepathy  becomes  a  little  more  difficult  in
the  seance  next  quoted.  The  sitter  in  this  case,  Dejean  de  la  Bastie,
Delegate  to  the  Government  from  the  Isle  of  Bourbon,  had  come  a
few  days  previously,  and  received  a  personal  description  of  his  father,
which  he  acknowledged  to  be  exact  with  a  few  trilling  exceptions,
together  with  much  excellent  paternal  advice.

No.  141.1 — Dejean  de  la  Bastie,  already  quoted  in  Seance  138,  desires
another  apparition.  He  asks  for  M.  Marie-Joseph-Theodore  de  Guigne.
Adele  sees  a  man  about  forty  years  of  age,  rather  tall,  with  brown  hair.  M.
Dejean  interrupts  Adele  by  saying  that  this  is  not  the  portrait  of  the  person
for  whom  he  asks.  We  see  that  this  gentleman  wishes  for  perfectly  accurate
information.  At  the  words  "  rather  tall,  with  brown  hair,"  he  says,  "He
was  tall  and  not  brown-haired."  Adele  answers  that  the  person  whose
appearance  she  is  describing  must  have  the  same  name  and  belong  to  his
family,  that  she  is  conscious  that  it  is  so  ;  but  he  again  asks  for  this  gentle-
man, and  a  second  person  appears.  The  first  remains.  "  The  newcomer,"
she  .says,  "  is  thirty  years  of  age  and  over;  he  is  tall  and  thin,  has  dark-
flaxen  hair,  a  pale  face,  with  rather  sweet,  dark-blue  eyes  ;  a  long  nose,  a
mouth  that  is  large  rather  than  small,  a  long  chin.  I  see  he  wears  a  sort
of  great  coat,  such  as  is  no  longer  worn.  It  is  not  at  all  becoming  ;  it
resembles  a  dressing-gown,  but  is  not  one  ;  it  is  dark-blue  or  black.
This  garb  proclaims  him  to  be  a  man  in  orders — a  priest  or  something
of  the  kind.  He  looks  stem.  He  must  have  had  chest  complaint.  I  see
that  his  lungs  are  distended  with  blood.  He  has  been  ailing  a  long
time.  He  is  very  weak.  I  think  that  privations  have  caused  this,  and
made  his  chest  so  delicate.  I  do  not  see,  however,  that  he  has  the
germs  of  any  fatal  disease,  and  this  makes  me  believe  that  his  death  was
violent,  accidental,  unexpected.  His  hand  is  large  and  thin.  I  see  a
medal  on  his  breast,  the  size  of  the  palm  of  a  hand.  He  wears  low-cut
shoes,  such  as  are  not  worn  now.  He  will  not  speak  to  me,  so  I  conclude
that  he  did  not  speak  French."

The  following  remarks  precede  the  signature  of  M.  Dejean:  —  "This
person  had  move  of  gentleness  and  kindness  than  severity  in  his  disposition.
He  died  of  a  malignant  fever,  accompanied  by  delirium  lasting  several  days.


1  Vol  II.,  pp.  219-220.


Frank  Podmore.


[part


and  attributed  by  the  doctor  to  the  needs  of  a  vigorous  constitution
thwarted  by  absolute  continence."

"  These  details  acknowledged  to  be  accurate.

(Signed) De.tean  de  la  Bastie,
This  2oth  August,  1848.  18,  Rue  Neuve  de  Luxemboui-g."

In  some  cases,  with  the  express  object  of  excluding  thought-trans-
fei'ence,  the  sitter  came  armed  with  the  name  of  some  dead  person
of  whom  he  knew  nothing — as  in  the  following  case. M.  I'Abbe

A  ,  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  the  record,  had  had  a  successful

experiment  of  the  same  kind  at  a  previous  sitting  (No.  112).

No.  122^ — Pastor  Rostan,  who  is  referred  to  in  the  preceding  seance  in

connection  with  the  conversion  of  M.  I'Abbe  A  ,  desired  in  his  turn  to

obtain  an  apparition.  He  asked  for  a  person  unknown  to  him,  whose  name
had  been  given  to  him  ;  but  there  had  been  a  mistake  made  in  giving  him
this  name  ;  in  consequence  a  person  appeared  whose  description  we  took,
but  who  could  not  be  recognised.  At  least,  such  is  this  gentleman's  version,
and  I  do  not  imagine  that  I  was  imposed  upon.  I  suggested  a  second  seance-
to  him,  especially  as  he  persisted  in  asking  for  a  person  entirely  unknown  to
him,  to  such  an  extent  had  he  been  influenced  by  M.  Hebert's  arguments.
He  then  asked  his  maid -servant  to  give  him  a  name  of  one  of  her  acquaint-^
ances  who  had  been  dead  some  time  ;  he  came  armed  with  this  name,  and
asked  for  Jeannette  Jex.  Adele  replied  :  "1  see  a  woman  who  is  not  tall,
she  may  be  between  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age  ;  if  she  is  not  hump-backed,
she  must  be  crook-backed,  for  she  carries  herself  very  badly.  I  cannot  make
her  turn  round.  Her  hair  is  auburn,  approaching  to  red ;  she  has  small
grey  eyes,  a  thick  nose.  She  is  not  good-looking.  She  has  a  prominent
chin,  a  receding  mouth,  thin  lips  ;  her  dress  is  countritied.  I  see  that  she
has  a  cap  with  two  iiat  bands,  rounded  over  the  ears.  She  must  have
suffered  from  a  flow  of  blood  to  the  head,  she  has  had  indigestion.  I  see
she  has  a  swelling  in  the  abdomen  on  the  left  side  and  in  the  glands  of  one
l)reast. She  has  been  ill  a  long  time."

M.  Rostan  handed  over  the  report  to  his  servant,  and  gave  it  back  to  me
after  adding  his  signature  and  the  following  remarks  : —

"  This  is  correct  as  regards  stature,  age,  dress,  carriage,  the  disease  and
deformed  figure.

(Signed) J.  J.  Rostan."

But  if  M.  Rostan  was  staggered  by  the  result  of  his  test,  his
friends  apparently  still  ascribed  the  results  to  thought-transference,
which  gives  Cahagnet  occasion  for  some  argument  on  the  subject.

There  are,  indeed,  if  a  digression  from  the  main  argument  may  be
permitted,  indications  that  some  at  least  of  the  alleged  apparitions
were  subjective  —  inspired,  that  is,  by  the  imagination  of  the  medium,
supplemented  occasionally  by  telepathic  drafts  from  the  sitter.  We


1  Vol.  II.,  pp.  142-144.


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  65


should  probably  be  justified  in  assuming  —in  default  of  any  corroborative
evidence  as  to  their  reality — that  the  accounts  of  Heaven  and  of  the
occupations  of  the  spirits  therein,  given  in  the  tirst  volume,  had  no  more
remote  origin  than  the  medium's  own  mind,  whose  workings  were  no
doubt  directed,  now  by  memories  of  lessons  learnt  in  childhood,  now  by
hints  of  the  Swedenborgian  philosophy  received  from  Cahagnet
himself.

Here,  for  instance,  is  an  account  of  a  heavenly  vision  vouchsafed  to
Bruno,  Cahagnet's  first  ecstatic,  a  young  man  of  27,  of  mild  dis-
position, and  apparently  limited  education.

No.  10.^ — Bruno  is  in  a  deep  ecstasy  ;  he  enters  heaven  for  the  first  time,
and  there  sees  his  father,  who  is  seated  at  a  small  table  reading.  "  What
is  the  book  which  your  father  is  holding  ?  "  "It  is  like  ours,  but  the  print-
ing is  not  the  same."  "What  is  it  like  ?  "  "It  lias  letters  in  the  shape  of
a  D,  then  others  shaped  like  little  hooks  and  crescents.  I  can  hardly  de-
scribe it  to  you.  My  father  closes  the  book  and  says  that  we  can  understand
nothing  in  this  writing.  Allow  me  to  return  to  heaven  for  a  moment."  After
a  quarter  of  an  liour  he  awakes,  looks  at  his  bed  with  contempt,  and  exclaims  :
"Oh  !  I  understand  why  the  dead  do  not  regret  the  earth.  Who  would
wish  to  vegetate  on  this  mud-heap  after  seeing  what  I  have  just  seen  ?"
"What  have  you  seen,  then?"  "Heaven."  "Yes,  well,  what  is  heaven
like  r'  "Oh  !  I  was  in  a  place  without  any  horizon,  illuminated  by  a
superb  light.  Before  me  was  a  being  who,  I  believe,  was  God,  seated  on  a
throne  ;  his  head  was  covered  with  a  shining  turban,  his  beard  was  grey.
I  think  his  arm  was  resting  on  the  arm  of  his  chair.  He  was  robed  in
crimson  velvet  studded  with  golden  fleurs-de-lis.  His  mien  was  majestic  ;
he  was  speaking  to  his  ministers,  six  or  eight  in  number.  I  did  not  count
them.  They  were  all  seated  on  the  steps  of  the  throne,  and  were  clothed  in
robes  of  the  same  material  and  the  same  colour  as  the  robe  of  God  ;  but  I  do
not  think  there  was  any  gold  embroidery  on  them.  All  round  them  and  m
the  distance  walked  a  multitude  of  beings.  Oh  !  how  ugly  are  the  men  of
the  earth  in  comparison  with  those  beautiful  faces,  those  fair  skins  !  A
gauze-like  scarf  covered  one  shoulder,  and,  besides  that,  they  had  a  little
skirt  of  such  transparent  gauze  that  every  limb  was  easily  distinguishable.
Their  feet  were  shod  with  sandals,  fastened  with  broad  laces  {cothurnes)  ;
but,  oh,  God  !  how  beautiful  it  was  !  I  was  lifted  up  into  the  air,  I  beheld
the  earth  under  my  feet,  and  all  these  little  men,  so  proud,  so  vain-glorious,
how  ill-favoured  and  poor  they  seemed  to  me  by  the  side  of  those  divine
beings  around  me.

At  a  later  sitting,  it  should  be  observed,  it  was  revealed  to  Bruno
that  the  figure  seated  on  the  throne  was  the  angel  Gabriel.

And  here  are  some  extracts  from  Adele's  visions  of  Heaven.
Louise,  her  spirit  niece,  comes  to  the  entranced  Adele  to  announce  the
appearance  of  her  second  brother  [her  first  had  appeared  at  a  previous
sitting.]

1  Vol.  I.,  pp.  18-19.

F


66


Frank  Podmore.


[part


No.  40.1 — "Which  brother  is  this?"  "It  is  Jean-Marie  ;  he,  too,  died
in  Africa  three  years  ago."  Adele  looks  with  joy  on  these  three  members  of
her  family  ;  the  latter  is  also  in  a  dragoon's  uniform  ;  as  in  previous  seances,
she  talks  to  them  for  a  very  long  time  without  informing  me  of  the  subject
of  their  conversation.  "What  are  your  brothers  doing  up  in  heaven?"
"  They  enjoy  themselves,  they  walk  about."  "  Eternity  cannot  be  spent  in
aimlessly  walking  up  and  down  and  enjoying  oneself?"  "Oh!  they  play
music,  study  sciences  ;  they  are  better  and  more  pleasurably  occupied
than  we."

No.  41. — "Here  they  are."  "Do  they  seem  pleased  to  see  you  ?"  "I
should  think  so,  indeed."  "  Is  your  niece  with  them  ?  "  "No."  "  Are  they
glad  that  they  are  dead?"  "Who  would  not  be  glad!  they  are  so  hajjpy.
They  tell  me  I  shall  see  my  mother."

Adfele  waits  a  moment,  then  all  of  a  sudden  she  stretches  out  her  arms,
seems  to  embrace  her  mother  ;  her  heart  beats  violently,  her  face  expresses
emotion,  she  is  very  joyful  and  sheds  tears.  "Does  your  mother  seem  as
glad  to  see  you  a.s  you  are  to  see  her  V  "  Oh  !  yes."  "  What  does  she  do
up  in  heaven  ?  "  "  She  is  with  my  father,  my  brothers,  my  sister,  in  short
with  all  the  family  ;  she  is  very  anxious  about  me,  she  is  very  happy  ;  she
reads,  and  takes  pleasure  in  heai'ing  my  brothers  play."  "  Then  there  are
books  in  heaven?"  "Yes,  certainly,  and  they  are  not  romances  such  as
those  of  earth."  "  What  do  they  tell  of  ?  "  "  They  tell  of  the  mysteries  of
God,  of  science  ;  but  they  are  not  written  as  on  earth,  so  my  mother
tells  me."

******

No.  45^. — "Are  all  your  relations  along  with  you?"  "Four  of  them
are."  "  Do  you  exjjeet  any  others  ?  "  "I  expect  my  sister  who  is  also  dead,
and  whom  I  have  not  seen  as  yet.  Oh,  there  she  is  ;  how  beautiful  she  is  !
Oh,  God!  how  beautiful  one  is  after  death!"  "How  is  she  clothed?"
' '  In  her  betrothal  garments  ;  she  died  on  the  eve  of  the  day  fixed  for  her
marriage  ;  she  is  in  white,  her  hair  is  fastened  back  ;  she,  too,  is  barefoot
like  my  little  niece  ;  how  curious  that  is  !  "  "Ask  them  why  they  have  no
shoes?"  "  My  mother  answers  that  where  they  are  there  are  no  stones."
"  On  what  are  they  standing  now  ?  "  "  On  a  beautiful  green  sward."  "  By
what  are  they  surrounded?"  "By  a  vast  and  beautiful  blue  horizon."
"What  kind  of  light  have  they?"  "A  very  pure  light  which  I  can  only
compare  to  the  light  at  the  close  of  a  fine  summer's  day."

*  *  *  *  *  *

No.  49'^. — Second  apparition  of  Adele's  little  godson.  She  seemed  to
take  the  greatest  interest  in  this  little  creature,  and  when  she  saw  him  go
away  it  seemed  to  her  that  he  was  going  to  fall ;  she  followed  him,  and  then
entered  upon  the  state  of  complete  ecstasy  from  which  I  did  not  find  it  easy  to
rouse  her  ;  she  signified  her  displeasure  by  saying  to  me,  as  she  did  before,
"  Why  compel  me  to  return  to  this  globe  of  mud  and  wretchedness  ?  I  was
so  happy  following  this  little  creature  with  his  pretty  little  white  wings,  as


1  Vol.  I.,  pp.  89,  90,  91.  2  Vol.  I.,  pp.  96,  97.

Vol.  I.,  p.  107.


xxxiv.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  67


M.  Bruno  saw  him.  It  is  I  who  was  wrong  in  this  respect. "How  far
did  you  go?"  "I  ascended  very  high  up;  then  I  went  througli  a  great
archway,  at  the  end  of  which  there  were  very  beautiful  gardens,  and  every-
thing in  them  was  remarkable  for  its  grace  and  freshness.  There  were  many
people  walking  in  the  alleys  ;  some  were  reading,  others  played  music  ;  they
all  seemed  very  happy.  Such  perfect  harmony  seemed  to  exist  among  them
that  one  could  not  but  long  to  be  with  them.  I  saw  there  my  father,  iny
mother,  all  ray  family,  which  is  a  very  large  one.  I  wished  to  remain,  but
my  mother  and  your  will  obliged  me  to  descend."  "  How  were  all  these
people  clothed  '?  "  "  They  all  had  a  kind  of  gauze  robe  in  all  sorts  of  colours  ;
their  physiognomy  was  quite  different,  but  I  easily  recognised  my  relations,
although  if  they  were  to  appear  to  us  thus  dressed  they  would  not  be  easily
recognisable."

But  there  are  other  accounts  which,  wliile  they  point  to  the
action  of  telepathy,  are  extremely  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  theory
of  spirit-intercourse  held  by  the  recorder.

On  two  occasions  Adele  was  asked  to  search  for  a  long-lost  relative
of  the  sitter.  On  each  occasion  she  found  the  man  alive,  and  conversed
with  his  spirit.

■  M.  Lucas,  a  carrier  {^nessager ),  of  Rambouillet,  came  to  inquire  after
the  fate  of  his  brother-in  law,  who  had  disappeared  after  a  quarrel
some  12  years  previously.

Adele  in  the  trance  found  the  man  at  once,  said  that  he  was
alive,  and  that  she  saw  him  in  a  foreign  country,  where  there
were  trees  like  those  in  America,  and  that  he  was  busy  gathering-
seeds  from  small  shrubs,  about  3ft.  high.  He  would  not  answer
her  question,  and  she  asked  to  be  awoke,  as  she  was  afraid  of
wild  beasts. 2  M.  Lucas  returned  a  few  days  afterwards,  bringing
with  him  the  mother  of  the  missing  man.

No.  99'. — Adele,  as  soon  as  she  was  asleep,  said  : — "I  see  him."
"  Where  do  you  see  him  '? "  "  Here."  "  Give  us  a  description  of  him  again
and  also  of  the  place  where  he  is."  "  He  is  a  fair  man,  tanned  by  the  heat
of  the  sun  ;  he  is  very  stout,  his  features  are  fairly  regular  ;  brown  eyes,  large
mouth  ;  he  appears  gloomy  and  meditative.  He  is  dressed  as  a  workman,  in
a  sort  of  short  blouse.  He  is  occupied  at  present,  as  he  was  last  time,  in
gathering  seed,  which  resembles  pepper-corns,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is
pepper  ;  it  is  larger.  This  seed  grows  on  small  shrubs  about  one  metre  high.
There  is  a  little  negro  with  him  occupied  in  the  same  way."  "  Try  to  obtain
some  answer  to-day.  Get  him  to  tell  you  the  name  of  the  country  where
you  see  him."  "  He  will  not  answer."  "Tell  him  that  his  good  mother,
for  whom  he  had  a  great  affection,  is  with  you,  and  asks  for  news  of  him."
"Oh!  at  the  mention  of  his  mother  he  turned  round  and  said  to  me,  'My
mother  ! I  shall  not  die  without  seeing  her  again. Comfort  her,  and  tell

^  Adfele  had  on  a  previoias  occasion  differed  from  Bruno — another  subject  of
Cahagnet's — as  to  the  existence  of  wings  on  the  httle  child.

Vol.  II.,  pp.  32-33.  3  Vol.  II.,  pp.  34-37.


68


Frank  Podmore.


[part


her  that  I  always  think  of  her.  I  am  not  dead  ! '  "  "  Why  does  he  not  write
to  her?"  "He  has  written  to  her,  but  the  vessel  has  no  doubt  been
wrecked- -at  least  he  supposes  this  to  be  so,  since  he  has  received  no  answer.
He  tells  ine  that  he  is  in  Mexico.  He  has  followed  the  emperor,  Don
Pedro  ;  he  has  been  imprisoned  for  five  years,  he  has  suffered  a  great  deal,
and  will  use  every  effort  to  return  to  France;  they  will  see  him  again."
"  Can  he  name  the  place  in  which  he  is  living  ? "  "  No  ;  it  is  very  far  inland,
those  countries  have  no  names."  "  Is  he  living  with  a  European  ?  "  "  No,
with  a  coloured  man."  "Why  does  he  not  write  to  his  mother  ?  "  "Because
no  vessels  come  to  the  place  where  he  is.  He  does  not  know  to  whom  to
turn.  Besides,  he  only  knew  how  to  write  a  very  little,  and  has  almost  for-
gotten. There  is  no  one  with  him  who  can  render  him  this  service  ;  no  one
speaks  his  language  ;  he  makes  himself  understood  with  great  difficulty.
Besides  that,  he  has  never  been  of  a  communicative  disposition  or  a  talker.
He  seems  to  be  rather  a  surly  fellow.  It  is  very  difficult  to  get  these  few
words  out  of  him.  One  would  think  he  were  dumb."  "  In  short,  how  can
one  manage  to  write  to  him  or  hear  news  of  him?"  "He  knov/s  nothing
about  it.  He  can  only  say  these  three  thinis  :  I  am  in  Mexico,  I  am  not
dead,  they  will  see  me  again."  "Why  did  he  leave  his  parents  in  this
manner,  without  saying  anything  to  them,  as  he  was  happy  at  home  ?  "  "  This
man  was  very  reserved  :  he  hardly  ever  spoke.  He  loved  his  mother  very
much,  but  he  had  not  the  same  affection  for  his  father,  who  was  a  passionate,
surly  man,  and  often  treated  him  brutally.  The  cup  had  long  since  been
full.  It  was  not  the  trifling  dispute  that  he  had  had  with  his  father  the  day
before  his  dejjarture  that  made  him  decide  to  go  away  ;  it  had  been  his  fixed
determination  for  some  time  past.  He  told  no  one  of  it.  He  went  away
on  the  sly.  Having  kissed  them  all  the  evening  before,  he  made  good  his
escape  next  day,  without  another  word.  Do  not  be  uneasy,  madam  ;  you
will  see  him  again  1  "  This  good  woman  burst  into  tears,  because  she  recog-
nised the  truth  of  every  detail  given  her  by  Adele.  She  did  not  find
anything  at  fault  in  the  description.  The  disposition,  the  education,  and
the  departure  of  her  son  were  as  Adele  said  ;  but  a  greater  semblance  of
probability  is  given  to  the  clairvoyante's  account  by  the  fact  that  his  rela-
tions had  an  idea  that  he  had  enlisted  in  Don  Pedro's  army,  and  at  one  time
took  some  steps  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  it.  M.  Lucas  told  me  of  this  detail
on  a  journey  which  he  afterwards  made  to  Paris.  No  information  was,  how-
ever, obtainable.  Wliat  no  less  contributed  to  the  astonishment  of  this
good  woman,  of  M.  Lucas,  and  the  other  people  present  at  this  curious
seance,  was  to  see  Adele  put  up  her  hand  to  the  left  side  of  her  face  to  keep
off  the  fiery  rays  of  the  sun  in  those  countries,  and  appear  to  be  suffocated
with  heat ;  but  the  most  extraordinary  part  of  this  scene  was  that  she  had
a  severe  sunstroke  which  turned  the  whole  of  that  side  of  her  face,  from
forehead  to  shoulder,  bluish  red,  whilst  the  other  side  remained  dead
white.  This  dark  colour  did  not  begin  to  disappear  till  twenty-four  hours
later.  At  the  time  the  heat  of  it  was  so  great  that  one  could  not  hold  one's
hand  on  it.

This  simulation,  by  the  subliminal  consciousness,  of  the  effects  of
severe  sunburn  is  no  doubt  not  more  incredible  than  the  production  in
hypnosis  of  mimic  stigmata. Such  physical  effects  of  the  imagination,


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  69

if  rare,  are  well  authenticated.  But  if  Cahagnet's  last  sentence  refers
to  the  heat  of  the  medium's  skin,  I  am  afraid  we  must  admit  that  the
imagination  of  the  recorder  possibly  played  as  prominent  a  part  in  the
marvel  as  that  of  the  patient.

Shortly  after  this  incident,  M.  Mirande,  the  head  of  the  printing-
ofSce  in  which  the  lirst  volume  of  the  Arcaues  had  been  printed,  came
to  Cahagnet,  and  asked  for  a  sitting.  He  was  much  impressed  with
what  he  saw  and  heard,  and  finally

No.  1051. — .  .  .  begged  Adele  to  ask  for  the  apparition  of  his  brother,
who,  he  believed,  had  died  in  the  Russian  campaign.  As  Adele  did  not  see
him  in  the  spirit  world,  she  said  that  he  was  not  dead,  that  she  saw  hiia  on
eai-th  ;  she  described  him  thus  :  "I  see  a  fine  stout  man,  with  brown  hair,
black  eyes,  bright,  beautiful,  and  with  a  gentle  expression ;  a  mediuui-
sized  mouth,  with  good  teeth,  a  well-shaped  nose,  fresh-coloured  cheeks  ;  he
is  courteous  and  lively.  He  looks  to  me  about  thirty  years  of  age,  he  is
somewhat  taller  than  M.  Mirande.  His  uniform  is  that  of  a  non-commis-
sioned officer  (I  think),  for  I  only  see  one  epaulette,  a  blue  coat,  blue  trousers
with  red  braid,  a  shako  with  a  small  peak  ;  taking  him  altogether  he  is  a
fine  man."  "Ask  him  in  what  country  he  is?"  "He  does  not  know,  or
will  not  tell  me.  He  replies  that  he  has  suffered  much.  He  has  been  made
prisoner  and  sent  into  the  interior  of  Russia,  to  the  country  bordering  on
China,  I  think  ;  he  says  that  his  brother  will  see  him  again."  "Why  has  he
not  written  to  him  ?"  "He  has  done  so,  but  the  letters  have  either  been
lost  or  gone  astray."  "  Why  does  he  no  longer  write?"  "  He  does  not
know  whether  his  brother  is  still  alive."  "  Tell  him  that  he  is  alive,  and  is
making  it  his  business  to  discover  the  place  of  his  retreat."  "He  answers
that  he  cannot  tell  me  that,  but  that  he  is  in  hopes  of  surprising  his  brother
some  day."  "  What  is  he  doing  over  there  1  "  "He  is  very  happy,  he  has
some  estates  of  his  own  which  he  farms,  and  employs  many  people.  If  he
liad  found  the  means  of  getting  rid  of  them  by  selling  them  he  would  have
returned  to  France  already,  but  there  purchasers  are  not  to  be  as  easily
found  as  they  ai-e  with  us  :  he  does  not  know  when  he  will  be  able  to  do
this."  "Ask  him  to  write  to  his  brother."  "He  has  no  chance.  You
think  it  is  easy  ;  he  is  far  away  from  the  sea,  and  then  he  is  anxious  to
surprise  his  brother  by  returning  to  him  rich  and  happy.  He  is  not  selfish,
he  is  good-hearted,  but  he  is  not  free  from  ambition,  and  never  was.  The
one  and  only  dream  of  his  life  has  been  to  end  his  days  as  a  rich  man,  and
he  has  reached  the  height  of  his  desires."  "Is  he  married?"  "Yes;  but
he  has  no  children.  Next  time  I  will  ask  him  to  let  me  see  the  country  in
which  he  lives,  and  also  his  house  and  his  wife."  Adele  is  tired,  and  wishes
to  be  awakened.  M.  Mirande  asks  for  some  further  information  concerning
his  brother's  uniform.  Adele  repeats  what  she  has  already  said,  and  adds
that  she  thinks  she  saw  some  lace,  what  we  call  hrandehonnjs,  on  his  breast,
and  also  that  he  had  white  facings  to  his  coat.  M.  Mirande  acknowledged
that  all  the  details  of  the  physique  were  very  accurate,  as  well  as  those  of  the
disposition,  and  his  brother's  ambition  for  a  fortune,  his  good-heartedness.


1  Vol.  II.,  pp.  60-G3.


70


Frank  Podmore.


[PAKT


liveliness,  affection,  etc.,  were  all  quite  true.  He  does  not  so  clearly
recollect  the  details  of  his  dress  ;  however  he  is  satisfied  that  it  is  sub-
stantially correct.  This  gentleman's  brother  had  served  in  the  departmental
guard  before  the  Russian  campaign.  M.  Mirande  believes  that  this  was
the  uniform  belonging  to  it,  only  he  never  knew  him  as  non-commissioned
officer.  He  is  much  surprised  that  his  brother,  who  must  be  fifty-six,  only
looks  thirty.  A  dele  reminds  him  that  she  sees  him  at  the  time  of  his  leaving
France.  "  Then  he  was  only  about  twenty-one,"  replies  M.  Mirande,  "you
see  him  about  thirty  years  of  age  ;  doubtless  the  fatigue  he  has  gone
through  has  aged  him  very  much."  Adele  replies  :  "  Whilst  you  only  knew
him  as  a  soldier  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  he  appears  to  me  as  an  officer  and
older.  Several  years  may  have  gone  by  between  that  time  and  the  time  at
which  I  see  him,  that  is  quite  admissible.  If  I  saw  him  at  the  age  of  twenty-
one,  it  would  be  said  that  I  see  in  your  mind.  If  I,  on  the  contrary,  saw
him  at  his  present  age  of  fifty-six,  his  brother  would  not  recognise  him,
which  M.  Mirande  understands  well  enough.  He  in  no  wise  doubts  that  it
is  his  brother  who  aj^peared. He  cannot  recover  from  his  astonishment."

We  have,  unfortunately,  no  corroboration  of  the  truth  of  the  state-
ments made  about  those  two  persons.  A  third  volume  of  the  A7'canes
were  published  some  years  later,  which  went  into  a  second  edition
in  1860,  and  it  is  perhaps  fair  to  assume  that,  if  news  had  come  that
either  of  the  missing  persons  was  still  alive,  and  had  passed  through
the  experiences  described  by  Adele,  Cahagnet  would  not  have  missed
the  opportunity  of  making  public  such  a  striking  testimony  to  his
subjects'  clairvoyance.  It  follows,  then,  that  in  these  two  seances  all
that  we  ai'e  entitled  to  say  is  that  Adele  was  able  to  divine  with,  it
may  be  admitted,  singular  accuracy,  the  ideas  present  in  the  minds  of
her  interlocutors.  It  was  a  striking  example  of  telepathy ;  but  we
have  no  kind  of  proof  that  it  was  anything  more,  and  from  internal
evidence  it  seems  very  unlikely  that  it  was  anything  more.  In  our
total  ignorance  of  all  conditions  and  limitations,  it  is  perhaps  fair  to
say  that  the  assumption  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  are  ready  to
attend  at  any  moment  the  summons  of  the  living  does  not  in  itself
constitute  an  additional  obstacle  to  accepting  the  accounts  of  Adele's
seances  in  general  as  evidence  of  spirit  intercourse.  But  it  is  quite
another  matter  -when  we  have  to  deal,  as  in  the  two  cases  now  in
question,  with  the  spirits  of  men  still  living.  How  did  Adele  manage
to  discover  the  whereabouts  of  those  two  persons  ?  And,  still  more,
how  did  she  contrive  that  they  should  speak  with  her,  and  that  at
a  time  when  one  of  them,  at  least,  was  wide  awake  and  engaged
in  earning  his  living  by  the  work  of  his  hands  1  And  was  Adele's
power  of  communicating  with  the  spirits  of  the  living  restricted  to
persons  who  had  gone  away  to  distant  climes  in  order  to  escape  from
their  relations  ?  If  Adele,  or  any  other  of  Cahagnet's  clairvoyantes,
really  had  possessed  the  power  of  conversing  with  the  living  at  a


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  71


distance,  I  cannot  doubt  that  Cahagnet,  in  the  course  of  his  many
years'  experiments,  would  have  been  able  to  present  us  with  some
evidence  of  such  a  power  that  was  not  purely  hypothetical.  Nothing
would  be  so  easy  to  prove.  The  fact  that  no  such  evidence  is  forth-
coming affords,  I  submit,  a  strong  presumption  that  Adele  did  not
possess  that  power,  and  that  the  conversations  here  detailed  were  purely
imaginary,  the  authentic  or  plausible  details  which  they  contained
being  filched  telepathically  from  the  minds  of  those  present.  The
curious  similai'ity  of  the  two  accounts  also  points  in  the  same  direc-
tion. Both  men  profess  to  have  written  home^  but  the  letters  must
have  miscarried.  Neither  can  write  now,  because  they  are  far  from
the  sea,  in  the  interior.  Both  have  suffered  much ;  both  have  been
prisoners  ;  both  protest  that  their  relations  will  see  them  before  they
die  ;  neither,  however,  is  in  a  hurry  to  come  back ;  and  neither  is
willing  to  discover  the  name  of  his  present  place  of  abiding.

To  suppose,  as  the  recorder  supposes,  that  these  narratives  are
authentic  revelations  obtained  from  actual  conversations  with  the
spirits  of  men  living  in  unnamed,  and — as  Cahagnet  explains  at  length
— probably  nameless  localities  in  the  interior  of  Mexico  or  Asiatic
Russia,  is  to  strain  credulity  to  the  breaking-point.  But  if  these  two
narratives  are  not  what  they  seem  to  be,  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  other
narratives  in  the  book,  which  are  cast  in  the  same  dramatic  form,  and
contain  similar  details  harmonising  with  the  expectations  or  memories  of
the  interlocutors?  If  those  are  not  authentic  messages  from  the  distant
living,  we  require  some  further  warrant  for  the  assumption  that  these
are  authentic  messages  from  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  Considered  in
conjunction  with  the  almost  certainly  subjective  visions  of  Heaven  and
dead  playmates  which  characterised  the  earlier  trances,  these  later
seances  certainly  point  to  an  exclusively  mundane  origin.

But,  after  all,  to  enquire  too  curiously  whether  the  information  dis-
played by  Adele  reached  her  hidden  consciousness  from  the  minds  of
the  dead  or  the  living,  is  hardly  germane  to  our  present  purpose.

It  is  enough,  here,  to  note  that  all  the  witnesses  cited  by  Cahagnet
seem  to  have  been  satisfied  that  nothing  less  than  thought-transference
would  explain  the  revelations,  and  that  any  candid  reader  now  must
find  it  hard  to  resist  the  same  conviction.

To  turn  now  to  the  consideration  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-utterances.
The  first  point  to  be  brought  out  is  that  the  abundance  of  the  material,
the  fulness  of  the  records,  the  watchful  supervision  exercised  over  the
medium  herself  for  some  years  past,  and  the  extraordinary  and  almost
uniformly  high  level  of  success,  make  these  I'ecox'ds  much  more  note-
worthy than  any  previous  accounts  of  the  kind.  Practically  we  are
justified  by  the  fulness  and  accuracy  of  the  records  in  leaving  altogether
out  of  account  certain  sources  of  error  which  vitiate  to  a  considerable


72


Frank  Podmore.


[PAliT


extent'  any  conclusions  which  might  be  based  even  on  the  sets  of  docu-
ments which  I  have  ah'eady  cited,  and  which  render  ahnost  worthless
in  themselves  the  great  mass  of  similar  narratives  in  the  literature  of
the  past  centui'y.  It  is  tolerably  clear  that  Mrs.  Piper's  success,  at  any
rate,  cannot  be  plausibly  attributed  to  the  unconscious  reproduction
of  knowledge  nonnally  acquired ;  nor  to  the  skilful  manipulation  of
information  extracted  at  the  time  from  the  sitters  themselves ;  nor  to
misrepresentation  and  exaggeration  as  to  what  was  actually  said  at
the  sittings  ;  nor — if  we  may  trust  Dr.  Hodgson's  honesty — to  the  selec-
tion of  the  "  good "  sittings  and  the  suppression  of  the  failures.
"  Fishing  "  for  information,  indeed,  as  Dr.  Leaf  pointed  out  nine  years
ago,  may  reasonably  have  been  supposed  to  operate  to  some  extent  at
the  sittings  then  given  in  this  country  ;  but  it  is  clearly  inadequate
to  explain  even  a  small  fraction  of  the  later  records.  Our  choice  now
seems  clearly  defined  between  deliberate  and  systematic  fraud  on  the
one  hand  and  supernormal  faculty  on  the  other.

Now  as  regards  fraud,  there  is,  of  course,  no  a  priori  improbability
involved  in  such  an  assumption.  The  position  of  the  Society  in  such
investigations  has  always  been  that,  while  no  dishonesty  is  necessarily
imputed  to  the  medium,  every  possible  precaution  should  be  taken
against  dishonesty ;  and  that  no  experiment  can  be  regarded  as  conclu-
sive in  which  the  conditions  allowed  the  honesty  or  dishonesty  of  the
medium  to  be  a  factor  in  the  problem.  The  mere  fact  that  Mrs.  Piper
has  been  paid — at  the  rate  lately  of  10  dollars  a  sitting —  has  in  no
way  affected  the  precautions  taken.  The  motive  to  dishonesty  in  such
matters,  as  we  know  from  long  experience,  is  not  necessarily  the
anticipation  of  pecuniary  reward.  The  precautions  taken  in  Mrs.
Piper's  case  were  not  increased  because  Mrs.  Piper  was  paid,  and
should  not  have  been  relaxed  if  she  had  given  her  services  for
nothing.  But  nevertheless,  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Piper  has  received  pay-
ment at  the  I'ate  of  something  like  £200  a  year  for  about  five  years
past  is  of  some  importance,  because  fraud  of  the  kind  here  supposed, —
the  employment  of  private  inquiry  agents,  —would  have  necessarily-
involved  considerable  expenditure.

If  we  turn  to  the  case  of  the  three  other  mediums  cited,  we  see
that  the  motive  for  fraud  was  priind  facie  stronger  in  the  case  of
Alexis  Didier,  who  received  a  handsome  payment  for  his  performances,
than  in  that  of  Sfcainton  Moses,  whose  reward  was  certainly  not  of
the  substantial  kind,  and  whose  whole  career  is  difficult  to  reconcile
with  the  assumption  of  dishonesty.

Again,  if  we  defer  for  the  present  the  consideration  of  the  internal
evidence  afforded  by  the  trance  utterances,  the  presumption  of  fraud
in  the  case  of  Alexis  Didier,  based  upon  the  extremely  dubious  character
of  his  demonstrations  of  clairvoyance  at  close  quarters  is,  as  has  been


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  73


shown,  overwhelmingly  strong ;  whilst  the  fact  that  Stainton  Moses'
spirit  communications  were  associated  with  physical  phenomena  of  a
kind  which  are  known  in  other  cases  to  have  been  fraudulently  pro-
duced will  afford  to  some  minds  a  presumption  hardly  less  cogent  of
fraud  in  the  trance  utterances  also.  There  is  no  such  presumption  in
the  case  of  Adele  Maginot  or  of  Mrs.  Piper.

There  are,  indeed,  three  preliminary  arguments  against  dishonesty
on  Mrs.  Piper's  part,  to  which  some  weight  should  be  allowed.
(1)  Mis.  Piper  lias  produced  on  nearly  all  those  who  have  come  into
contact  with  her — even  those  who,  (see  e.g.,  Report,  p.  524),  were
predisposed  to  think  her  an  impostor — -the  impression  of  transparent
honesty.  (2)  By  an  almost  universal  consensus  of  opinion  her  trance
is  a  genuine  one,  and  the  association  of  a  genuine  trance  condition
with  preconcerted  fraud  of  the  kind  here  supposed  would  be  unusual,
if  not  altogether  without  precedent.  It  should,  perhaps,  be  added
that,  whilst  we  have  no  independent  evidence  of  any  value  as  to  the
nature  of  Stainton  Moses'  trance,  the  descriptions  given  would  seem  to
indicate  that  in  the  case  of  Alexis  Didier  the  trance  was  genuine,  and
the  contortions  observed  both  on  entering  and  leaving  the  trance  state
seem  to  have  been  not  unlike  those  observed  in  Mrs.  Piper.  There
would  appear  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  the  genuineness  of  the  somnam-
bulic state  in  the  case  of  Adele.  (3)  In  all  these  jears — now  thirteen  or
more — during  which  Mrs.  Piper  has  been  under  the  close  observation,
first  of  Professor  William  James,  and  afterwards  of  Dr.  Hodgson  and
other  competent  persons  —  though  she  has  been  shadowed  by  detectives,
though  her  personal  luggage,  as  Professor  Lodge  has  told  us,  has  been
searched,  her  correspondence  read,  her  goings-out  and  comings-in
closely  watched — during  all  these  years  not  the  smallest  circumstance
has  come  to  light  reflecting  in  any  way  upon  her  honesty.  Certainly
no  other  medium  has  been  exposed  to  so  stringent  an  ordeal.  Plow
much  weight  should  be  attached  to  general  considerations  of  this
kind  it  is  difficult  to  say,  but  in  view  especially  of  the  fact  that  the
researches  of  Dr.  Hodgson  himself,  and  of  many  less  competent
inquirers,  have  succeeded  in  bringing  home  the  charge  of  dishonesty
to  very  many  professional  mediums,  that  this  medium  should  have
passed  through  the  most  searching  and  prolonged  inquiries  without
even  a  rumour  of  an  exposure,  or  the  discovery  of  any  suspicious
circumstances,  is  a  fact  entitled  to  some  weight.

Let  us  now  consider  how  far  we  can  account  for  these  various
ti'ance-utterances  without  having  recourse  to  supposed  supernormal
sources  of  information.  As  regards  Stainton  Moses,  the  case  seems
to  me  quite  clear.  Practically  all  the  particulars  which  his  "  spirits  "
furnished  were  names,  dates,  and  other  concrete  facts,  such  as  could
have  been  culled  from  the  daily  papers,  published  biographies,  and


74


Frank  Podmore.


[PAKT


convei'sations  with  his  friends.  In  fact  there  could  be  no  difficulty  in
accounting  for  the  whole  of  these  communications,  with  two  exceptions,
on  the  hypothesis  that  they  merely  reproduced  facts  already  present
in  his  subconscious  memory.  The  two  exceptions — the  entry  of  com-
munications from  the  spirits  of  President  Garfield  and  "  Blanche
Abercromby,"  at  an  hour  when  their  deaths  could  hardly  have  been
known  by  normal  means — seem  to  preclude  this  simple  explanation,
and  compel  us  to  choose,  for  these  two  cases  at  any  rate,  between
supernormal  faculty  and  deliberate  fraud.  In  the  absence  of  any
cor-roborative  evidence  we  should  not  be  justified  in  pressing  the
former  explanation.

The  problem  presented  by  Alexis  Didier  is  more  difficult.  It  is  true
that  the  kind  of  information  given — description  of  scenes,  the  exterior
and  interior  of  houses,  and  occasionally  the  recent  occupations  of  the
sitters — is  not  beyond  the  competence  of  a  smart  inquiry  agent ;  and
the  circumstances  were  no  doubt  favourable ;  there  were  nearly  always
a  crowd  of  persoiis  present  at  the  seances;  no  doubt  he  and  Marcillet
could  form  a  pretty  shrewd  guess  beforehand  at  some  of  the  sitters  ;
and  probably  Alexis  was  free  to  choose  at  each  seance  from  amongst
the  thirty  or  forty  expectant  recipients  the  two  or  three  about  whom
he  had  the  most  to  tell.  But  his  frequent  and  conspicuous  success
makes  this  explanation  extremely  difficult.  If  fraud  is  really  the
explanation  of  Alexis'  clairvoyance  at  a  distance,  I  think  we  must
regard  it  as  the  high-water  mark  of  achievement  in  this  line.

With  Adele  Maginot  we  are  carried  one  step  further.  We  are  no
longer  concerned  with  names  and  dates  merely  ;  or  merely  with  descrip-
tions of  houses  and  parks ;  nor  is  the  medium  any  longer  free,  within
wide  limits,  to  choose  what  information  she  will  give,  and  to  whom.
Adele,  as  we  have  seen,  had  only  one  or  two  sitters  at  a  time  ;  and
she  had  to  fulfil  the  tests  wliich  were  prescribed  to  her  by  them.  And
the  particulars  given  in  response  to  the  requests  of  her  sitters — minute
descriptions  of  the  personal  appearance,  the  ailments,  the  character,
and  so  on  of  persons  often  dead  many  years  before  —sometimes  of
persons  not  known  even  to  the  sitters  themselves — wei-e  not  such  as
any  inquiry  agent  could  have  ascertained,  one  supposes,  without  grave
risk  of  detection  ;  even  had  the  sittings  been  fixed  some  time  before-
hand, and  all  the  other  circumstances  been  favourable  to  the  under-
taking of  such  inquiries.  On  the  whole,  notwithstanding  the  various
defects  already  enumerated  in  the  I'ecord,  I  find  it  almost  impossible
to  doubt  that  Adele's  success  was  due  to  some  kind  of  supernormal
faculty.

But  now  turn  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  note  that  the  conditions  of  the
experiment  are  in  her  case  incomparably  more  stringent  than  in  any
previous  clairvoyante. She  could  not  pour  out  information  at  her  own


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Fiper.  75


fancy ;  she  could  not,  even  within  the  narrowest  Umits,  select  her
sitters;  and, — if  we  admit  that  the  precautions  taken  were  effectual  to
that  end, — she  did  not  even  know  their  names.  Practically,  of  course,
the  proof  of  her  supernormal  powers  very  largely  depends  upon  the
efifectiveness  of  those  precautions  to  secure  the  anonymity  of  the  sitters
in  the  first  sittings, — and  I  do  not  propose  here  to  consider  any  others.
What  those  precautions  were  are  described  in  general  terms  in  the
Report.  The  arrangements  for  sittings  were  made  by  letter  or  verbally
with  Dr.  Hodgson;  the  correspondence  and  diary  of  engagements  were
kept  in  a  locked  desk  at  Dr.  Hodgson's  oificc.  The  sittings  were  fixed
sometimes  a  fortnight,  sometimes  only  two  or  three  days  beforehand  ;
the  dates  were  sometimes  changed  ;  in  one  case  for  instance  (p,  527,
Dr.  F.  H.  K.,  Illinois)  the  sitting  was  fixed  at  two  or  three  days'  notice
only,  the  sitter  coming  from  a  distant  State,  and  being  a  stranger  even
to  Dr.  Hodgson.  Moreover,  one  series  of  sittings  were  held  in
Cambridge  (U.S.A.),  under  the  direction  of  Professor  James  ;  another
in  New  York,  under  Dr.  Thaw ;  and  similar  precautions  against
revealing  the  sitters'  names  were  taken  in  this  country  ;  at  Liverpool
by  Professor  Lodge,  at  Cambridge  (England)  by  Mr.  Myers,  in  London
by  Dr.  Leaf.  That  in  one  or  other  of  these  instances  the  precautions
taken  may  have  been  insufficient ;  that  letters  may  have  been  left
lying  about;  desks  left  open  ;  false  keys  found  serviceable; — that  by
some  carelessness  or  malign  chance  there  may  have  been  a  loophole  for
fraud,  is,  of  course,  conceivable.  But  it  would  be  very  difficult  to
suppose  that  that  loophole  was  always  left  open,  that  that  malign
chance  favored  Mrs.  Piper  for  nine  years  so  punctually  that  the
sittings  which  have  to  be  written  down  as  failures  now  number  barely
10  per  cent.  The  case  in  that  respect  could  easily  be  made  very  much
stronger ;  in  England,  for  instance,  there  were  several  successful  sitters
who  came  as  chance  callers  and  were  introduced  without  any  previous
notice  at  all.  And  it  is  at  least  worth  remarking  that  the  one  series
of  sittings  where  it  would  have  been  least  difficult  to  anticipate  the
names  of  the  probable  sitters  and  to  provide  for  their  advent — the
well-known  Professors  of  Harvard,  who  came  when  Mrs.  Piper  was
under  Professor  James'  direction, — was  one  of  the  least  successful  here
recorded.

But  let  us  dismiss  the  initial  difficulty  and  assume  that  Mrs.
Piper,  by  skill  of  her  own,  by  fatuity  of  the  investigators,  or  by  some
incredible  chance,  had  kept  herself  through  all  these  years  posted  up
in  the  names  of  the  sitters  and  the  dates  of  their  coming.  She  would
then  be  in  the  same  position  as  Adele  Maginot.  But  if  we  find  it
difficult  to  believe  that  the  information  given  by  Adele  could  have
been  acquired  by  normal  means,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  much  more
detailed  and  intimate  revelations  of  Mrs.  Piper  ? There  are  two  ways


76


Frank  Fodmore.


[part


in  which  details  of  the  kind  given  might  conceivably  have  been
obtained  ;  either  from  other  mediums,  or,  directly,  by  means  of
inquiries  made  for  the  express  purpose.  Now  it  is  no  doubt  permis-
sible to  assume  a  freemasonry  amongst  professional  mediums  leading
to  a  continual  interchange  of  useful  information  about  persons  who
are  in  the  habit  of  resorting  to  clairvoyants.  There  is  evidence  that
some  such  system  does  exist.  And  it  is  the  case  that  several  of  the
sitters  mentioned  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  Report  had  previously  paid  visits  to
other  professional  mediums.  But,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  that  applies
only  to  a  small  portion  of  the  sitters ;  and  in  any  case  this  would  not
be  a  complete  explanation  of  the  matter.  Mrs.  Piper's  unquestioned
superioi-ity  to  all  other  professional  mediums  is  in  itself  sufficient  proof
that  she  is  not  dependent  solely  on  common  sources  of  information.
We  are  driven,  then,  ultimately  to  the  supposition  that  Mrs.  Piper  has
in  her  employment  one  or  more  inquiry  agents  or  private  detectives.

Suppose,  then,  Mrs.  Piper's  agent,  armed  with  the  name  and
address  in  some  distant  State,  to  go  on  the  quest  of  information  about
an  intending  sitter.  He  would  find  no  difficulty  in  ascertaining  such
bare  external  facts  as  the  locality  of  the  hoiise,  nature  of  business,
social  standing,  etc.  The  local  papers,  the  public  registers,  the  family
lot  in  the  cemetery,  the  gossip  of  the  local  tradesmen  would  furnish
him  with  additional  particulars.  In  the  role  of  book-canvasser,  say,
he  would  obtain  entrance  to  the  house,  and  would  thus  be  competent
to  furnish  accurate  descriptions  of  the  living  rooms  and  the  servants'
quarters.  By  chatting  with  a  sympathetic  nursemaid  he  could  learn
more  personal  details — names,  age,  appearance,  disposition,  etc.,  of
children,  near  relatives  or  intimate  friends  of  the  household,  and
recent  accidents,  illness  or  death  amongst  them.  By  the  more
hazardous  process  of  bribing  servants  to  read  letters  and  open  desks,
and  so  on,  he  could  in  some  cases  no  doubt  obtain  more  intimate
details  of  family  troubles,  distant  friends,  relatives  dead  years  ago.
But  it  is  clear  that  the  further  he  pushed  his  inquiries  by  such
methods — even  did  time  permit— the  greater  the  risk  (which  on  the
average  of  so  many  cases  would  amount  to  a  certainty)  of  ultimate
detection.  Moreover,  sucli  proceedings  would  be  costly  and  the  results
very  uncertain.

To  turn  now  to  the  contents  of  the  messages  The  first  salient
point  is  that  Mrs.  Piper  is  weak  precisely  where  Stainton  Moses  was
strong — in  names  and  dates.  Dates  appear  to  be  given  very  rarely.
Names,  of  course,  appear  frequently  ;  but  the  Christian  names  are  given
as  a  rule  first ;  and  both  Christian  and  surnames  emerge  frequently
piecemeal,  and  obviously  with  considerable  eflfort.  This  tentative
exhibition  of  important  information  was  naturally  regarded  at  the
earlier  sittings  as  a  suspicious  circumstance,  pointing  to  "  fishing " ;


XXXIV.]  Discussion  of  Trance- Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  77


and  indeed  I  imagine  that  Phinuit's  evil  reputation  rests  mainly  on
this  characteristic.  But  in  so  far  as  it  is  founded  on  this  circumstance,
that  reputation  is  apparently  undeserved.  For  this  same  tentative
and  piecemeal  emergence  of  proper  names  appears  in  the  most  fully
reported  sittings,  where  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  no  hints  were  given,
and  even  in  those  sittings  where  the  communication  is  made  entirely
by  writing.  So  that  now  it  may  fairly  be  urged  that  the  sparing  use
of  dates  and  the  difficulty  in  eliciting  proper  names  are  arguments  so
far  as  they  go  against  fraud — against  fraud,  that  is,  of  the  only  kind
that  can  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  operated.

There  are  indeed  several  cases  referred  to  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  previous
report  (Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  37-42,  p.  104,  etc.)  in  which  the  information
volunteered  by  the  trance-intelligence  (without  any  reference,  or  only
an  indirect  refei'ence,  to  the  sitter)  was  such  as  might  easily  have  been
got  from  the  newspapers,  inscriptions  on  tombstones,  etc. Such  are

the  cases  of  Porter  Brewster,  William  N  ,  Gracie  X  ■,  and  the

Rev.  Robert  West.  Now  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  these  cases
no  precise  dates  are  given  ;  the  approximate  date  furnished  in  one  case
is  four  years  out ;  the  names  and  other  details  in  the  first  case  are
hopelessly  jumbled  up  and  incorrect ;  whilst  in  the  second  case  the
"  spirit  "  can  only  indicate  the  place  of  his  death  as  "  some  Western
City."  The  obvious  comment  is  that  the  "spirit-guides"  of  Stainton
Moses  did  this  sort  of  thing  much  better.

Again,  in  marked  contrast,  not  only  to  Alexis  Didier,  but  to  the
great  majority  of  clairvoyantes,  Mrs.  Piper  comparatively  seldom  gives
descriptions  of  distant  localities,  houses,  rooms  and  so  on  ;  and  her
success  in  such  delineations,  when  they  have  been  attempted,  seems
not  to  have  been  conspicuous.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  what  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-
utterances  do  include — detailed  personal  descriptions  of  deceased
persons,  their  diseases  and  manner  of  death,  their  moral  and  intel-
lectual characteristics  ;  dramatic  and  lifelike  representations  of  such
persons,  their  mode  of  address,  their  attitude  towards,  and  relation
with,  others  still  living,  references  to  cherished  personal  possessions,
conversations  on  various  intimate  and  private  matters ;  revival  of
forgotten  family  histories  ;  and  so  on,  and  so  on.

And  in  all  this  enormous  mass  of  information  poured  out  by  one
to  whom — on  the  assumption  of  fraud — it  represents  only  indifferent
details  learned  by  rote,  we  find  no  hint  of  self-betrayal.  The  dramatic
impersonations  are  almost  uniformly  consistent ;  the  complex  relation-
ships and  varying  attitudes  are  kept  distinct ;  there  are  indeed
irrelevancies  and  incoherencies  ;  but  they  are  not  such  as  to  suggest
confusion  between  different  family  histories  or  the  attachment  of
dossiers  to  the  wrong  person,  or  any  of  the  innumerable  mistakes  of


78


Frank  Podmore.


[part


omission  and  commission  into  which  an  impostor,  one  cannot  but
suppose,  must  necessarily  fall.

On  the  almost  inconceivable  hypothesis  that  Mrs.  Piper  has  obtained
all  this  information  fraudulently,  we  can  but  view  with  amazement  her
artistic  restraint  in  the  use  of  proper  names ;  her  masterly  reticence
on  dates  and  descriptions  of  houses  and  such  concrete  mattei-s,  which
form  the  stock-in-trade  of  the  common  clairvoyante  ;  the  consum-
mate skill  which  has  enabled  her  to  portray  hundreds  of  different
characters  without  ever  confusing  the  role,  to  utilise  the  stores  of
information  so  laboriously  acquired  without  ever  betraying  the  secret
of  their  origin.  In  a  word,  if  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-utterances  are
entirely  founded  on  knowledge  acquired  by  normal  means,  Mrs.  Piper
must  be  admitted  to  have  inaugurated  a  new  departure  in  fraud.
Nothing  to  approacli  this  has  ever  been  done  before.  On  the  assump-
tion that  all  so-called  clairvoyance  is  fraudulent,  we  have  seen  the
utmost  which  fraud  has  been  able  to  accomplish  in  the  past,  and  at
its  best  it  falls  immeasurably  short  of  Mrs.  Piper's  achievements.
Now,  that  in  itself  requires  explanation.  We  know  somewhat  of  the
conditions  and  the  limits  of  fraud,  and  if  all  clairvoyants  are  simply
tricksters  it  has  to  be  ex^^lained  why  Mrs.  Piper  is  so  incomparably
sujDerior  to  all  her  fellows.  For  whatever  differences  there  may  be
in  the  conditions  and  opportunities,  be  it  noted,  are  differences  which
must  have  operated  to  the  disadvantage  of  Mrs.  Piper.  On  the
assumption  of  fraud  the  tremendous  gulf  between  her  and  them  is  an
almost  insuperable  obstacle.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  conceded
that  Mrs.  Piper  has  genuine  supernormal  powers,  the  concession  is  no
Ijar  to  recognising  similar  powers  in  a  greatly  inferior  degree  in  other
rej^uted  clairvoyants.  For  whilst  we  know  something  of  fraud,  we
know  nothing  at  all  of  the  limits  and  conditions  in  which  such  super-
normal faculties  must  be  supposed  to  operate,
•j^.  .  - .  ■


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  79


lY.

A  CONTRIBUTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  HYSTERIA  AND
HYPNOSIS  ;  BEING  SOME  EXPERIMENTS  ON  TWO
CASES  OF  HYSTERIA,  AND  A  PHYSIOLOGICO-
ANATOMICAL  THEORY  OF  THE  NATURE  OF
THESE  NEUROSES.

By  Morton  Prince,  M.D.

(Instructor  in  Nervous  Diseases,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Physician  for
Nervous  Diseases,  Boston  City  Hospital.)


[Preliminary  Note. — The  following  observations  were  made  some
eight  or  nine  years  ago,  while  the  paper  itself  was  written  seven  years
ago,  and  was  presented  at  that  time  to  the  American  Neurological
Association  at  its  annual  meeting  in  1891.  It  was  then  laid  aside,
with  the  intention  on  the  part  of  the  writer  of  further  carrying  on
the  experiments  with  the  expectation  of  obtaining  more  light  on  the
matter,  and  either  substantiating  the  theory  of  hysteria  propounded
or  controverting  it.  Other  work  has  prevented  this  intention  from
being  carried  out,  and  the  existence  of  the  paper  was  forgotten.  It  is
now  published,  at  the  request  of  Dr.  Hodgson,  in  its  original  form,
excepting  that  certain  parts  have  been  expanded  with  the  view  of
making  the  theory  more  intelligible  to  the  reader  who  is  not  an
expert  in  neurology.  This  much  is  due  in  explanation,  as,  while
the  observations  themselves  have  long  since  lost  their  novelty,  the
phi'aseology  would  imply  the  contrary,  and  would  seem,  perhaps,  not
to  take  cognisance  of  the  work  that  has  been  done  of  late  years  in
this  field.

During  the  last  decade  much  work  has  been  done,  especially  in
France,  in  the  field  of  hysteria,  resulting  in  very  extensive  contribu-
tions to  our  knowledge  of  the  siibject.  The  studies  of  M.  Janet
in  particular  have  given  us  a  new  insight  into  this  neurosis,  and
it  may  be  said  that  as  a  result  of  the  accumulated  facts  we  have
been  obliged  to  recast  our  conceptions  of  the  disease.  This  new  work,
however,  has  been  for  the  most  part  along  psychological  lines.  The
theory  here  offered  is  an  attempt  to  find  a  physiologico-anatomical
basis  for  certain  psychological  phenomena.  It  can  be  regarded  only
as  suggestive  and  tentative,  but  it  seems  to  the  writer  that  the  later


80


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


additions  to  our  knowledge  of  the  subject  tend  to  strengthen  this
theory  rather  than  oppose  it.

One  of  the  greatest  obstacles  to  finding  a  satisfactory  explanation
•of  hysterical  and  hypnotic  phenomena  is  the  tacit  assumption  that  the
psychical  and  physical  condition  must  be  respectively  always  the  same,
and  hence  the  hunt  for  a  universal  law  goA^erning  these  phenomena — -
for  an  explanation  that  will  comprehend  all  the  phenomena  of  hysteria
in  the  one  case,  and  another  that  will  do  likewise  for  all  phenomena  of
hypnosis.  The  phenomena  of  hysteria  are  so  complex,  so  various,  and
involve  so  many  different  functions,  that  in  individual  cases  we  must
invoke  more  than  one  psychical  and  physical  principle.  In  a  given
case,  for  example,  the  phenomena  may  depend  in  part  upon  the  con-
traction of  the  field  of  consciousness  and  conscious  or  subconscious
fixed  ideas  ;  in  part  upon  the  lack  of  cerebral  inhibition,  on  the  law  of
association  of  nervous  processes  and  organic  nervous  memories  (asso-
ciation neuroses)  ;  in  part  upon  the  abnormal  diffusion  of  nervous
stimuli  beyond  their  customary  channels  ;  in  part  upon  auto-  or  external-
suggestion,  and  so  on.

Likewise  in  hypnosis,  in  consequence  of  the  complexity  of  the
human  bi'ain,  we  have  to  deal  with  such  varied  phenomena  that  no
single  law  will  cover  all  cases.  For  instance,  even  in  somnambulism
the  phenomena  in  individual  instances  are  so  fundamentally  dissimilar
that  any  attempt  to  refer  them  all  to  a  single  physiologico-anatomical
basis  must  necessarily  be  unsuccessful.  To  be  more  specific,  there  may
be  a  complete  loss  of  memory,  in  the  somnambulistic  state,  of  the  whole
previous  normal  life,  including  even  a  loss  of  educational  acquirements,
as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  Mary  Reynolds.^  This  young  lady  not
only  had  forgotten  all  her  previous  life  l)ut  had  forgotten  even  how  to
read  and  write,  and  was  obliged  to  learn  these  accomplishments  over
again.  In  either  state,  normal  or  somnambulistic,  she  had  no  know-
ledge of  the  other.  The  cerebral  process  affected  in  such  a  case,  and
the  functioning  centres,  or  association  tracts  remaining,  must  be  very
different  from  tliat  of  a  case  like  the  well-known  Felida,  reported  by
Azam.  Felida  in  her  second  state  not  only  remembers  the  whole  of  her
past  life,  but  has  more  acute  powers  than  in  the  normal  state.  Again
there  are  fundamental  differences  between  these  cases  and  that  of  M.
Mesnet's  sergeant,  who  in  his  normal  state  had  lost  every  sense
excepting  that  of  touch ;  and  all  these  cases  of  so-called  somnambulism
show  marked  differences  from  the  induced  somnambulism  as  ordinarily
observed  in  healthy  subjects.  It  may  be  convenient,  in  view  of  our
deficient  knowledge  of  the  nervous  processes  involved,  to  define  all

1  This  case,  originally  reported  by  Dr.  Mitchell,  of  New  York,  is  the  one  referred
to  by  M.  Binet  in  his  Alterations  of  Personalitii,  p.  4.  The  fullest  account  of  it  will
be  found  in  Harper's  Macjazine  for  May,  1860.


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  81


these  states  as  somnambulism.  A  single  term  emphasises  the  analogies
between  in  other  respects  diiferent  classes  of  facts  ;  but  it  should  not
be  lost  sight  of  when  we  seek  a  physiological  explanation,  that,  in
spite  of  the  general  similarities,  the  physiological  processes  or  cei'ebral
areas  involved  must  be  dissimilar,  and  the  adequacy  of  an  explanation
designed  for  one  set  of  facts  must  not  be  measured  by  its  adequacy  for
another.  It  is  probably  after  all  a  question  of  cerebral  localisation.
Just  as  an  impairment  of  the  functions  of  the  Rolandic  region  will
exhibit  itself  by  loss  of  muscular  power,  slight  or  absolute,  limited  to
the  hand,  or  involving  the  whole  side  of  the  body,  and  an  impairment
of  the  function  of  the  occipital  lobe  by  impairment  of  vision,  according
to  the  extent  of  cortical  territory  involved  and  intensity  of  the  morbid
change,  so  probably  different  varieties  of  somnambulism  and  hysterical
states  may  be  obtained,  according  to  the  extent  of  area  or  number  of
centres  in  the  highest  level  whose  function  is  suppressed.

A  point  which  may  be  parentlietically  raised  here  is  whether  in
some  cases  of  hysteria  with  physical  defects  like  anaesthesia  and
paralysis,  the  so-called  somnambulistic  condition  with  restored  func-
tions is  really  a  somnambulistic  condition  at  all,  but  rather  is  not  the
normal  state,  the  subject  having  been  restored  to  a  normal  state  out  of
a  hystero-hypnotic  state.  It  must  not,  then,  be  assumed  that  the
anatomico-physiological  theory  here  advanced  is  intended  to  cover  all
forms  of  hysteria  or  hypnosis.  The  theory  supposes  a  localised  "  going
to  sleep"  of  certain  portions  of  the  brain  (highest  level  of  Hughlings-
Jackson).  Such  an  explanation  is  applicaVjle  only  to  the  classical  but
probably  most  numerous  class  of  cases,  viz.,  to  that  "  automatic  con-
dition "  to  which  the  ordinary  but  fully  hypnotised  person  is  reduced.
In  those  more  elaborate  states  to  which  so  much  prominence  has  been
given  of  late  years,  and  which  have  been  described  as  spontaneous
somnambulism,  double  personalities,  etc.,  disturbances  of  other  portions
or  localised  areas  of  the  brain  are  probably  involved.

In  this  connection  the  recent  anatomical  investigations  of  Flechsig,
and  the  theory  which  he  has  propounded  are  of  interest.  In  his  late
address  "  Gehirn  und  Seele,"  Flechsig  claims  to  have  demonstrated
the  existence  of  regions  in  the  brain  unconnected  with  the  projection
system  of  fibres  ;  but  in  connection  with  the  various  sensory  centres
by  means  of  association  fibres.  These  regions,  the  so-called  silent
areas  of  the  brain,  Flechsig  looks  upon  as  association  centres,  where
the  various  sensory  impressions  are  associated  together  to  form
memories.  The  frontal  lobe  is  one  of  these  association  centres,  and
here,  perhaps,  in  particular  are  stored  the  memories  which  make  up  a
person's  individuality.  This  is  only  putting  in  different  language  the
same  conception  advocated  by  Hughlings-Jackson,  the  "  association
centres"  taking  the  place  of  the  "highest  level  " It  is  noteworthy  that

G


82


JDr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


Flechsig  by  the  anatomical  method  should  have  arrived  at  conclusions
practically  identical  with  the  inductions  which  Hughlings-Jackson
reached  from  the  clinical  side.  Bianchi^  has  also  offered  a  similar
theory,  viz.,  "  that  the  frontal  lobes  are  the  seat  of  coordination
and  fusion  of  the  incoming  and  outgoing  products  of  the  several
sensory  and  motor  areas  of  the  cortex.  .  .  .  The  frontal  lobes
would  thus  sum  up  into  series  the  products  of  the  sensori-motor  regions
as  well  as  the  motive  states  which  accompany  all  the  perceptions,  the
fusion  of  which  constitutes  what  has  been  called  the  psychical  tone  of
the  individual."

If  Flechsig's  observations  shall  be  conflrraed,  it  may  be  that  many
of  the  phenomena  of  hysteria  and  hypnosis  are  to  be  explained  by  a
suppression  of  function  of  these  association  centres,  the  variations  in
the  phenomena  depending  on  the  extent  to  which  the  centres  are
affected,  or  the  number  of  centres  involved.  In  principle  this  would
be  identical  with  the  theory  advocated  in  niy  original  paper,  to  which
I  now  proceed.]  .  ,  .

The  cases  on  which  the  theory  mentioned  in  the  title  to  this  paper
is  based,  if  not  unique,  nevertheless  are  worth  reporting  because  of
the  light  they  help  to  throw  upon  the  nature  of  certain  forms  of
hysterical  ansesthesia  and  paralysis,  and  if  they  do  not  make  clear  the
exact  cerebral  defect  underlying  this  affection,  they  at  least  indicate
what  it  is  not.

More  than  this,  it  may  be  said  that  the  one  truth  taught  by  cases
of  this  sort  is  that  the  brain  of  such  hysterics  I'eally  does  react  to
external  impressions,  notwithstanding  the  apparent  presence  of
ansesthesia.  In  other  words,  that  an  hysteric  who  has,  to  all  outward
appearances,  lost  the  perception  of  sensation  over  a  part  of  the  body
as  well  as  the  special  senses,  really  does  feel  and  see  and  hear.  We
may  say  that  such  a  person  feels,  but  is  not  conscious  that  he  feels.
The  corresponding  portion  of  the  brain  functions,  but  may  be  said
(for  purposes  of  making  the  clinical  facts  more  comprehensible)  not  to
be  in  physiological  connection  with  other  portions  of  the  brain.
Paradoxical  as  this  may  seem,  a  few  simple  experiments  will  easily
demonstrate  the  fact.  The  cases  I  have  to  relate  present  many  points
of  interest,  but  I  shall  confine  myself  to  such  parts  of  their  histories  as
bear  directly  upon  the  subject  matter  of  this  paper.

The  first  case,  Mrs.  B.,  is  one  of  traumatic  hysteria  and  neuritis.
The  patient  fell  off  a  railway  baggage  truck,  striking  upon  her  left
shoulder.  In  consequence  of  the  accident,  a  number  of  mental
symptoms  developed,  such  as  insomnia,  melancholia  with  mild  suicidal

1  Quoted  by  Thomas,  American  Journal  Medical  Science,  November,  1896.


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  83


tendencies,  inability  to  concentrate  the  attention,  etc. ;  but  besides  the
hysterical  symptoms  there  is  present  a  neuritis  involving  a  portion  of
the  brachial  plexus.  This  neuritis  has  been  of  rather  moderate
intensity  but  irritative  in  character,  affecting  the  sensory  more  than
the  motor  nerves,  so  that  the  patient  has  suffered  almost  continuously
ever  since  the  accident  (a  period  now  of  about  two  years)  from  most
intense  pain  about  the  shoulder  and  down  the  arm.  Almost  any  use
of  the  arm  causes  severe  pain,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine  how
much  of  the  inability  to  use  the  arm  should  be  ascribed  to  the  effects
of  the  pain,  and  how  much  to  real  paralysis.  There  can  be  no  doubt,
however,  that  decided  functional  paresis  of  nearly  the  whole  arm  exists.
The  absence  of  all  trophic  and  electrical  changes  in  the  muscles  shows
that  the  paresis  is  not  due  to  the  neuritis,  but  is  hysterical.  Besides
this,  nearly  the  only  other  objective  symptom  that  was  present  from
the  first  has  been  a  very  slight  anfesthesia,  detected  only  by  very
careful  and  delicate  examination  over  the  whole  inner  side  of  the  arm
and  hand,  corresponding  to  the  distribution  of  the  inner  cord  of  the
brachial  plexus.

After  this  condition  had  existed  for  about  a  year  and  a  half,  it  was
noticed  that  this  anesthesia  suddenly  had  become  profound,  so  that
the  skin  over  the  ulnar  side  of  the  hand  could  be  most  severely  pinched
and  pricked  without  being  felt.  Most  careful  and  accurate  tests  were
made  to  demonstrate  the  actual  presence  of  this  loss  of  sensation.  As
the  patient  was  a  good  hypnotic  subject  it  was  seen  at  once  that  this
was  a  chance  not  to  be  lost.

After  placing  a  screen  between  the  patient's  face  and  her  hand,  I
took  a  pin  and  pricked  the  hand  several  times,  then  laid  gently  upon  it
a  pair  of  small  nippers  with  flat  surfaces  (such  as  are  used  in  micro-
scopical work)  and  pinched  the  skin  with  the  same.  She  did  not  feel
the  pricks  of  the  pin,  nor  did  she  know  that  anything  had  been  done
to  her  hand.  It  should  be  said  that  care  was  taken  not  to  give  the
patient  any  hint  of  the  nature  of  the  experiment,  or  even  that  any
expei'iment  was  being  made.  She  was  then  hypnotised.  While  in  the
trance,  I  asked  her,  "  What  did  I  do  to  your  hand  ? "

"  You  pricked  it."

"  How  many  times  ?  "

"A  good  many  times,  more  than  twelve."
"Where  did  I  prick  it  ? Show  me."

[Patient  indicated  correctly  with  her  finger  the  part  that  was
pricked.]

"  What  else  did  I  do  ?  "
"You  laid  something  on  it."
"What?"

"Something  long  and  flat."

G  2


84


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


"  What  else  did  I  do ?"
"  Pinched  it."
"  With  what  ? "

"  Something  you  had  in  your  hand. I  don't  know  what  it  is."

The  patient  was  then  awakened  and  the  experiment  repeated  with
variations.  After  being  again  hypnotised,  she  was  asked  what  was
done.

"  You  pricked  my  hand."
"  How  many  times  1"
"  Eighteen."
"  All  at  once  ? "

"  No  ;  first  five  times,  then  thirteen."
"  What  else  was  done  1 "
"  You  pinched  it."
"  How  many  times  ? "
"  rive."

"  What  did  I  pinch  it  with  ? "

"  Your  fingers."

These  answers  wei'e  all  correct.

These  experiments  were  afterwards  repeated  publicly  before  the
Boston  Society  for  Medical  Improvement.  Another  fact  of  some
importance,  though  one  that  has  been  noticed  before  in  similar  cases,
should  be  mentioned  here,  namely,  that  during  the  hypnotic  trance,
sensation  completely  returned  in  the  previously  anaesthetic  hand,  so
that  any  manipulation  of  the  skin  was  immediately  noticed  by  the
patient.  It  may  be  said  incidentally,  and  as  further  evidence  of  the
merely  functional  nature  of  the  anaesthesia,  that  normal  sensation  was
restored  later  by  means  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

Before  commenting  on  this  case  I  will  describe  my  second  patient,
who  presented  somewhat  similar  phenomena.  Only  a  few  of  the  more
prominent  featui'es  need  be  referred  to  here.

Case  2.  Mrs.  R.'s  most  prominent  disability  is  hemi-anaesthesia.
The  loss  of  sensation  over  the  right  half  of  the  body  is  only  slight  in
intensity,  but  in  the  arm  it  is  marked.  In  the  hand  there  is  an
absolute  loss  of  tactile,  thermal,  muscular  and  pain  sense.  You  may
pinch,  prick  and  rub  the  skin,  twist  and  bend  her  fingers  without  her
having  any  knowledge  of  the  fact.  The  wrist  may  also  be  bent
vs^ithout  her  knowledge,  unless  the  movement  be  rough.  You  may
place  in  her  hand  objects,  such  as  a  knife,  pencil  and  a  pair  of  scissors
(the  thumb  and  forefinger  being  thrust  through  the  holes),  without
her  being  aware  of  the  fact.  She  fingers  them,  handles  them,  but
does  not  feel  them.  A  bracelet-like  line  limits  the  absolute  anaesthesia
of  the  hand  at  the  wrist  joint.  Right  hemianopsia  is  also  present.
[The  line  of  division  passes  through  the  centre  of  vision.]


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  85


Hearing,  smell  and  taste  are  diminished  on  the  right  side  ;  in  fact
smell  and  taste  are  almost  lost.

There  is  no  paralysis,  although  there  has  been  a  history  of  impaired
muscular  power  on  the  right  side  in  the  past.

There  is  gray  atrophy  of  both  discs.  This  has  been  confirmed  by  Drs.
Wadsworth  and  Williams. The  acuteness  of  vision  is  nearly  normal.^

In  considering  the  nature  of  the  affection  from  which  this  woman
suffers,  I  think  there  are  few  who  would  not  say  at  first  sight  that  we
have  to  do  with  a  lesion  of  the  internal  capsule.  The  hemianopsia
with  optic  atrophy  certainly  means  a  focal  disease  somewhere  between
the  cortex  and  the  optic  chiasm,  and  if  it  be  placed  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Charcot's  sensory  crossway  it  would  cause  the  hemianffisthesia
in  the  classical  way.  But  it  is  very  easy  to  demonstrate  that  the
hemiansesthesia,  at  least,  whatever  be  the  cause  of  defect  of  vision,  is
not  due  to  a  lesion  in  this  situation,  or  at  any  rate  to  one  that  causes
an  interrupcion  to  the  centi'ipetal  fibres  that  pass  upwards  through  this
portion  of  the  capsule  on  the  way  to  the  cortex.  Indeed,  it  is  very  easy
to  demonstrate  that  in  one  sense  of  the  word  there  is  no  loss  of
sensation  in  this  case  at  all,  in  spite  of  all  the  tests  that  have  been
given.  In  one  sense  of  the  word  this  patient  feels  perfectly,  and  if  she
feels,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  by  changing  the  conditions  of  the
experiment  the  patient  is  conscious  of  every  impression  given  to  her
hand  and  has  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  location,  etc.,  of  her  fingers,
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  paths  of  conduction  from  the  periphery
to  the  cortex,  as  well  as  the  cortex  itself,  must  be  intact.  To  show
this,  we  have  only  to  hypnotise  her.  Now  touch  her  hand  or  body  or
foot  ever  so  lightly  and  she  feels  it  perfectly.  You  may  place  objects
in  her  hand,  the  same  that  she  failed  to  recognise  before,  and  she  tells
their  names  immediately,  without  hesitation.  She  says  at  once  knife,
scissors,  rubber  bands,  etc.  The  translation  from  an  insensible  hand
to  one  that  is  perfectly  normal,  is  startling.  The  special  senses  have
I'eturned  as  well.  In  fact  so  far  as  her  physical  powers  are  concerned,
she  is  perfectly  normal.  Wake  her  up  and  the  hand  and  the  whole
right  side  lose  at  once  what  they  recovered.  One  symptom  alone
persists  during  the  hypnotic  state — she  does  not  see  out  of  the  right
half  of  each  eye  ;  a  further  proof  that  the  hemianopsia  is  due  to  an
organic  lesion.

It  is  a  necessai'y  induction  from  these  facts  that  the  centripetal
fibres  to  the  inner  capsule  and  the  sensory  centres  in  the  cortex  must
be  intact,  and  the  ansesthesia  must  be  functional.

It  may  be  suggested  that,  although  there  is  no  organic  lesion
causing  the  hemiansesthesia,  yet  there  may  be  some  change,  dynamic

1  The  macula  apparently  was  not  involved  in  the  atrophy.


86


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


or  vaso-motor,  which  prevents  the  passage  of  impressions  in  the  waking
state  and  disappears  during  hypnosis,  allowing  sensory  stimuli  to  be
felt.  In  other  words,  under  hypnosis  the  cortex  and  sensory  paths
resume  their  activity  but  lose  it  again  when  the  subject  is  awake.  But
it  is  not  difficult  to  show  that  this  is  not  the  condition  of  affairs  we
have  to  deal  with,  for  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  this  patient  feels
with  her  right  hand,  not  only  when  hypnotised,  but  when  awake.

The  following  is  one  of  numbers  of  experiments  made  for  this
purpose  : — While  Mrs.  R.  is  awake  I  squeeze  the  fingers  of  the  right
hand,  prick  the  hand  with  a  pin,  close  and  open  the  fingers,  place  a
pencil,  scissoi's  and  my  knife  in  the  palm, — and  she  has  no  knowledge
of  what  has  been  done.  She  says  she  feels  nothing.  She  is  now
hypnotised.

"  What  did  I  do  to  your  hand  when  you  were  awake  ?  "  I  ask.

"  You  stuck  a  pin  in  it."

"  How  many  times  ?  "

"  One,  two,  three,  four,  five."

"What  else?"

"  You  put  a  pencil,  scissors,  and  your  finger  in  it."
"What  else?"
"  Nothing."

"  What  else  did  I  do  ?  "

"Pinched  it."

"What  else?"

"  Doubled  it  up."

"  Anything  else  1"

"No."

"Sure?"

"Yes."

These  answers  were  correct.i  The  ansesthetic  hand  then  really  did
perceive,  so  to  speak,  the  impressions,  and  that,  too,  as  intelligently  as
a  normal  hand,  although  at  that  time  the  patient  was  not  conscious  of
it.  From  this  it  seems  to  me  that  the  conclusion  is  inevitable  that  the
sensory  conducting  fibres  from  the  periphery  to  the  brain,  as  well  as
the  cortical  sensory  centres,  are  physiologically  normal  in  this  case.
These  cases  seem  to  me  to  show  that  in  hysterical  an;esthesia  of  this
sort  the  sensory  cortical  centres  receive  and  record  external  impressions
in  a  perfectly  healthy  way,  and  whatever  may  be  at  fault  in  such  oases
the  defect  is  not  to  be  found  in  these  regions.

There  is  another  piece  of  evidence  which  goes  to  show  that  the
ansesthetic  hand  of  such  patients  really,  so  to  speak,  feels. It  will  be

1  The  only  answer  about  which  there  may  be  doubt  is  the  number  of  times  the
hand  was  pinched.  .


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Studtj  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  87


remembered  that  Mrs.  R.  was  described  as  deftly  fingering  and  turning
over  in  her  hand  any  object  placed  in  it,  but  was  unconscious  of  the
nature  of  the  object.  Unless  the  hand  "  felt  "  the  object  she  could
not  possibly  use  the  hand  in  this  way.

One  naturally  asks  for  an  explanation  of  such  phenomena  as  these.
Can  we  find  any  physiological  basis  upon  which  they  may  rest  ?

Hughlings-Jackson  has  pointed  out  that  three  different  levels  of
evolution  may  be  distinguished  in  the  central  nervous  system.  These
three  strata  are  both  anatomically  and  physiologically  distinct,  but  are
arranged  as  an  hierarchy.  In  the  lowest  level  are  to  be  found  the  most
organised,  the  most  automatic,  and  the  least  complex  nervous  arrange-
ments. The  highest  level  contains  the  least  organised,  the  least
automatic  (or  most  voluntary)  and  most  complex  arrangements.  The
array  of  evidence  which  Hughlings-Jackson  marshals  in  support  of  this
plan  of  development  is  so  strong  and  convincing  as  almost  to  take  it
out  of  the  field  of  hypothesis.  I  shall  not  be  able  here,  however,  to
refer  to  the  mass  of  facts  physiological  and  pathological  on  which  it  is
based,  but  shall  only  state  briefly  so  much  of  the  general  scheme  as
may  be  necessary  for  my  purposes.

In  the  lowest  level  are  included  the  spinal  cord,  medulla,  and  the
brain-stem  as  high  as  the  nuclei  of  the  cerebral  nerves.  The  middle
level  contains  Ferrier's  motor  region  and  certain  portions  of  the  sensory
region.  The  highest  level  includes  much  of  the  sensory  region  and  all
that  portion  of  the  brain  anterior  to  the  so-called  motor  region,  that  is,
the  greater  part  of  the  frontal  lobes.  Ferrier's  motor  region  (central
convolutions,  etc.)  Hughlings-Jackson  has  named  "middle  motor,"
because  he  believes  all  the  frontal  lobes  anterior  to  Ferrier's  motor
region  to  be  also  motor  in  character.  These  are  the  highest  motor
centres.  The  highest  level  is  concerned  with  the  more  complex  forms
of  ideation.

The  centres  in  the  lowest  level  are  the  most  simple  and  the  most
organised.  They  i-epresent  comparatively  limited  regions  of  the
body.  For  example,  a  nucleus  in  the  lumbar  enlai'gement  represents
only  a  limited  number  of  movements.  These  movements  are  simple
and  they  are  most  automatic,  in  the  sense  that  they  may  go  on  by
themselves  with  greater  or  less  independence  of  all  other  centres.  These
centres  are  also  most  organised.  Comparatively  simple  combinations
of  movement  are  developed  at  an  early  period,  which  persist  with
relatively  little  modification.

In  the  middle  stratum,  Ferrier's  motor  region,  the  movements  are
more  complex,  and  they  represent  wider  regions  of  the  body.  The
same  parts  are  represented  as  below  in  the  lowest  level,  but  in  a  more
complicated  manner.  They  are  less  automatic,  and  the  centres  are
less  organised,  as  development  is  continually  taking  place  in  them,


88


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


allowing  new  combinations  of  movements.  It  is  here,  probably,  that
originate  the  movements  engaged  in  writing,  sewing,  typewriting,  and
the  various  manual  occupations  after  they  have  been  once  acquired.

In  the  highest  level,  in  the  anterior  lobes,  all  parts  of  the  body  are
represented,  but  in  more  complex  combinations  still.  This  level  repre-
sents over  again  what  has  been  represented  in  the  middle  motor  region,
which  re-rejDresented  in  its  turn  what  was  represented  in  the  lowest
level.  In  passing  then  from  the  lowest  level  (the  spinal  cord)  to  the
highest  level  (the  anterior  lobe),  we  meet  with  "increasing  complexity
or  greater  intricacy  of  representation,  so  that  ultimately  the  highest
motor  centres  co-ordinate  movements  of  all  parts  of  the  body  in  the
most  special  and  comflex  combinations."

The  highest  centres,  like  all  other  parts  of  the  brain,  are  sensori-
motor, and  it  is  probable  that  they  supply  the  greater  part  of  the
physical  basis  of  consciousness.

Looked  at  from  a  purely  physical  point  of  view,  all  parts  of
the  brain  must  be  "  sensori-motor."  The  term  sensori-motor  is  not
synonymous  with  sensation  and  volition,  but  refers  to  the  physical
cerebral  process  alone.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  at  some
particular  point,  the  brain  processes  cease  to  be  "sensori-motor,"  and
become  something  else.  It  would  be  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  evolu-
tion. The  highest  centres  can  differ  from  the  lower  centres  only  in
more  intricate  combinations  of  movements  and  impressions.  There  is
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  highest  centres  represent  movements
as  well  as  impressions.  This  conclusion  is  based  on  a  study  of  many
clinical  facts,  and  particularly  those  of  epilepsy.  I  will  not  dwell  on
the  evidence  which  maj'  be  adduced  in  support  of  this  statement,  as
we  are  more  particularly  concerned  with  the  sensory  centres.  It  is
mentioned  here  only  for  the  sake  of  completeness.

The  highest  sensory  centres  likewise  represent  all  parts  of  the  body
in  intricate  combinations.  Sensory  impressions  received  in  the  middle
centres  are  co-ordinated  in  the  highest  centres  with  other  impressions
and  with  movements,  and  there  have  their  psychical  counterparts  as
ideation,  volition,  emotion,  and  other  states  of  consciousness.

Accepting,  then,  this  anatomical  scheme  as  approximately  correct,
let  us  see  if  we  can  build  upon  it  a  psycho-physiological  scheme  which
will  correspond  with  normal  psychological  experience  on  the  one  hand,
and  pathological  facts  on  the  other.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  familiar  fact  that  there  is  a  sort  of  duality
to  consciousness,  which  exhibits  itself  in  two  ways.  One  way  is  that
while  intentlj^  thinking  about  one  thing  we  may  be  doing  another  of
an  entirely  irrelevant  character,  and  the  thing  we  are  doing  may  not
only  involve  movements  of  considerable  complication,  but  these  move-
ments may  be  constantly  corrected  and  guided  by  sensory  impressions


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  89


from  our  environment.  Furthermore,  these  impressions,  although  thus
acting  on  the  organism,  may  not  be  perceived  by  the  individual.
Movements  of  this  kind  are  recognised  as  in  a  greater  or  less  degree
automatic,  according  to  the  vividness  with  which  they  and  the  incom-
ing sensory  impressions  enter  into  consciousness.

The  second  way  in  which  duality  is  exhibited  is  in  compound
movements  which  are  primarily  and  as  a  whole  the  result  of  direct
volition,  yet  are  made  up  of  a  series  of  simpler  and  co-ordinated
movements ;  these  simple  movements  are  not  directly  willed,  but
seem  to  take  place  automatically,  without  our  being  conscious  of  any
effort  in,  or  with  almost  no  knowledge  of,  their  production. In  fact
we  may  have  to  direct  special  attention  to  learn  how  we  make  such
movements,  and  to  analyse  the  successive  steps  in  the  synchronous
occurrences. As  familiar  instances  of  this  may  be  mentioned  the
movements  concerned  in  buttoning  a  coat,  or  those  of  a  well-drilled
soldier  doing  the  manual  at  arms,  or  in  shaving  the  beard. When  we
button  our  coats,  we  may  do  it  while  we  are  thinking  of  something
else,  in  which  case  we  have  an  example  of  the  first  form  of  dual
consciousness;  or  the  act  may  be  initiated  by  volition,  and  thus  be
an  act  represented  in  consciousness,  but  in  most  instances  we  do  not
consciously  move  the  different  fingers  by  successive  efforts  of  volition,
as  I  do  now, — first  the  thumb  and  forefinger,  then  removing  the  fore-
finger, bring  into  play  the  thumb  and  middle  finger,  and  then  removing
the  latter,  complete  the  act  hy  the  tip  of  the  thumb.  The  co-ordination
of  these  different  movements  seems  to  take  place  unconsciously  and
automatically. In  fact  I  did  not  know  how  I  did  it  in  detail  until  I
watched  my  hand  and  observed  the  sensory  impressions  guiding  each
step. My  conscious  mind  wills  the  resultant  act  as  a  whole,  and  the
component  movements  are  made  unconsciously. A  little  observation
will  show  that  a  very  large  number,  if  not  the  majority,  of  our  acts
are  thus  made  up  of  these  two  kinds  of  movements,  the  volitional
and  the  unconscious  (automatic). It  would  seem  as  if  there  were  two
minds,  one  the  self-conscious  mind  which  gave  the  general  order,  and
the  unconscious  mind  which  carried  out  the  details. A  very  pretty
experiment  in  evidence  of  this  was  the  following. Writing  is  an  art
which  is  partly  volitional  and  partly  unconscious. Very  few  of  us
probably  have  any  idea  what  contractions  of  the  fingers  we  make  in
forming  the  letters,  or,  for  that  matter,  are  conscious  of  crossing  our
t's,  dotting  our  i's,  or  forming  our  letters. Now  it  is  very  easy  to
obtain  automatic  writing  with  Mrs.  R. On  one  occasion  the  automatic
and  anesthetic  hand  va-ote  the  verse,  "Mary  had  a  little  lamb,"  etc.,
without  Mrs.  R.  being  conscious  of  it. She  was  then  hypnotised  and
asked  what  the  hand  had  written. She  answered  correctly.  When
asked  if  she  had  made  any  mistakes  she  said  "  Yes,"  and  added  that


90


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


she  had  left  out  such  a  lettei",  failed  to  cross  such  a  t,  and  dot  such  an
i,  which  was  correct.  This  would  indicate  that  such  details  were
directly  controlled  by  one  part  of  the  mind.^

This  duality  of  consciousness  (the  conscious  or  volitional  and  the
unconscious  or  automatic),  exhibits  itself  in  the  greater  part  of  our
daily  acts.

Now  if  Hughlings-Jackson's  anatomical  scheme  is  correct,  it  would
presumably  follow  that  the  conscious  movements  originate  in  the  fore
brain,  or  highest  level,  and  the  greater  part^  of  the  unconscious  }nove-
mcnts,  in  the  middle  level,  or  Rolandic-motor  area.  Otherwise  this
scheme  is  unintelligible.

Let  us  now  go  one  step  further,  and  see  if  we  can  make  out  the
probable  relationship  between  the  middle  motor  and  sensory  regions
and  the  frontal  lobes,  on  the  basis  of  our  present  physiological  and
pathological  knowledge.

In  the  first  place,  we  know  that  sensory  impressions  arriving
simultaneously  from  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  skin,  and  various  parts  of  the
body,  are  primarily  received  and  recorded  as  sensations  in  the  second
level.  Here  we  also  fairly  may  claim  to  know  that  they  are  associated
together  among  themselves  and  to  a  certain  extent  with  the  vestiges
(memories)  of  similar  impressions  of  the  past.  At  this  level  then,  our
daily  experiences  may  be  recorded  and  become  chains  of  memories,  or
associated  impressions  which  may  make  up  a  personality,  but  a
personality  of  limited  attainments.  The  activity  of  such  a  personality
is  comparatively  simple  and  automatic.  That  is  to  say,  the  sensory
impressions  received  at  the  second  level  may  result  at  once  in  outward
expression  or  muscular  action  (through  its  Rolandic-motor  centres) ;
but  such  immediate  response  means  automaticity  and  simplicity.  The
movements  are  a  little  complicated.  It  is  probable,  for  example,  that
the  elementary  movements  concerned  in  wi-iting,  sewing,  speaking,
warding  off  an  expected  blow,  changing  the  postui'e,  altering  tlie
direction  of  our  walk  to  avoid  obstacles,  playing  games,  like  tennis,
etc.,  etc.,  are  all  performed  at  this  level.  But  the  sensory  impressions
received  at  the  middle  level  may  not  result  in  immediate  movement,  or
whether  they  do  or  not  they  (generally)  are  transmitted  to  the  highest
level  (the  frontal  lobes),  where  they  become  associated  with  that  great
network  of  vestiges  (memories)  of  past  impressions  which  constitutes
the  whole  experience  (intellectual  and  physical)  of  the  individual.  The
activity  of  this  level  is  the  dominant  consciousness  for  the  time  being
of  the  individual,  and  so  long  as  it  is  in  activity,  is  the  personality  of

1  The  conditions  were  such  that  Mrs.  R.  could  not  see  the  writing.  Of  course  in
this  experiment  all  the  writing  was  done  avitomatically,  but  in  ordinary  conscious
writing  we  are  not  conscious  of  such  details.

"  Not  all,  for  many  undoubtedly  originate  in  the  third  level.


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  91


the  individual.  Now,  in  so  far  as  a  sensory  impression  at  the  middle
level  is  transmitted,  received,  and  associated  with  the  complicated
processes  of  the  highest  level,  is  it  perceived  (recognised)  by  the
personality,  becomes  a  part  of  the  dominant  state  of  consciousness,
and  the  "  person  "  is  said  to  perceive  this  or  that.  If  the  highest  level
is  in  activity,  even  though  a  sensory  impression  is  received  at  the
middle  level,  and  therefoi'e  "  felt,"  so  to  speak,  by  this  part  of  the
brain,  it  is  not  felt  by  the  individual  unless  it  becomes  associated  with
the  processes  in  the  fore  brain  (highest  level).  If  it  stops  at  the
middle  level,  it  becomes  a  part  of  a  definite  personality  if  the  highest
level  is  not  in  activity  ;  or,  as  associations  are  necessarily  formed  in
the  middle  level,  whenever  the  activity  of  the  frontal  lobes  alone  is
suppressed  the  dominant  consciousness  becomes  that  of  the  middle
brain,  and  all  the  impressions  that  have  been  there  received  and
welded  together  stand  out  as  a  personality  which  has  "  felt  "  all  the
sensory  impressions  composing  it.

Now  it  may  be  that  the  highest  level  a.nd  the  second  level  may  act
more  or  less  independently  and  simultaneously,  like  two  distinct  but
connected  brains.  While  the  highest  level  is  carrying  on  a  complicated
train  of  thought  and  even  expressing  these  thoughts  in  words,  the
second  level  may  be  automatically  doing  something  else,  like  guiding
the  individual  in  his  walk  through  a  crowd,  or  sewing,  knitting,
playing  a  game,  etc.

Although,  for  the  most  part,  the  highest  level  is  so  in  rapport  with
the  second  level  that  it  is  cognisant  of  the  greater  part  of  that  which
the  second  level  feels  and  does,  and  maintains  a  guiding  control  over
its  actions,  this  is  not  wholly  nor  always  so.  Many  sensory  impressions,
— sounds,  sights  and  tactile  feelings, — may  enter  and  be  recorded  at  the
second  level  which  never  reach  the  highest  level,  and  therefore  do  not
enter  the  dominant  consciousness.  This  is  particularly  exemplified  in
absent  mindedness,  i.e.,  where  a  person  is  not  conscious  of  impressions
from  his  environment ;  and  yet  such  impressions  were  recorded  as
sensations,  for  they  afterwards  may  be  remembered  in  dreams  and
hypnosis.  Similarly,  the  union  may  be  so  severed  temporarily  that
the  middle  brain  may  perform  many  acts  of  which  the  frontal  lobes
are  unconscious.  Such  acts  are  typically  automatic.  The  more
unconscious  the  highest  level  is  of  the  middle  level,  or,  to  speak  more
precisely,  the  less  the  activity  of  the  latter  enters  into  association  with
that  of  the  former,  the  less  controlled  and  less  complex  and  the  more
"  unconsciously "  automatic  are  the  actions  of  the  middle  level.
This  dual  activity  of  the  two  levels  may  be  illustrated  on  the  sensory
side  by  the  well-known  observation  of  Dessoir.  A  gentleman  was
absorbed  in  reading  a  book  while  a  conversation  was  going  on  about
him  in  the  same  room. On  being  questioned  it  was  found  that  he  was


92


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


entirely  unconscious  of  what  had  been  said.  He  was  then  hypnotised,
and  while  in  hypnosis  was  able  to  repeat  the  conversation.  Here  we
may  assume  that  the  highest  level  was  entirely  occupied  with  the
thoughts  suggested  by  the  book,  while  the  middle  level  was  receiving
and  recording  the  language  of  the  conversation.  The  association
between  the  two  levels  was  temporarily  suspended.  Dual  activity,  of
which  that  of  the  second  level  is  motor  and  purely  automatic,  probably
has  been  experienced  by  every  one  on  similar  occasions ;  as  when
engaged  in  deep  thought  while  dressing,  the  wrong  clothes  have  been
put  on^  or,  at  other  times,  objects  have  been  taken  up  and  misplaced,
or,  to  use  more  common  illustrations,  sewing,  knitting  and  other
mechanical  work  has  been  done.  This  dual  activity,  when  persisting
with  complete  independence  by  the  middle  level  of  the  highest  level,  is
is  called  absent  mindedness.  A  good  illustration  is  an  observation  of
himself  by  the  writer.  On  a  late  occasion,  being  impatient  to  learn  the
new,?,  he  read  the  newspajjer  while  walking  along  the  street.  After  a
time  he  became  conscious  of  the  fact  that,  although  completely  absorljed
in  the  newspaper  he  maintained  his  direction  and  avoided  obstacles
as  accurately  as  under  ordinary  circumstances,  while  occasionally  his
attention  would  be  awakened  to  exceptional  objects  in  the  sidewalk
(hydrant  covers).  It  required  only  a  moment's  observation  to  discover
that,  although  central  vision  was  upon  the  newspaper,  tlie  pei'ipheral
parts  of  the  retina  saw  the  sidewalk  and  the  houses  on  the  one  side,  and
the  curbing  and  street  on  the  other.  Walking  was  here  probably
directed  automatically  by  the  occipital  lobes  (middle  level).  Similar
experiences  are  well  known  and  have  happened  to  us  all,  as  when
engaged  in  deep  thought  or  animated  conversation  we  have  walked
along  a  crowded  street,  avoided  the  passers  by  and  vehicles,  perhaps
nodded  to  acquaintances,  all  automatically,  without  remembrance  of
the  facts.  These  unconscious  experiences  may,  nevertheless,  come  out
afterwards  in  dreams.  Parenthetically  I  may  remark  that  in  this  wa.y
may  be  explained  many  of  those  so-called  extraordinary  dreams  in
which  a  person  has  dreamed  of  the  arrival  of  a  person,  or  of  some
accident  happening  to  a  person  of  which  he  imagines  he  never  heard,
and  yet,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  "  unconsciously  "  saw  that  person  or
heard  of  the  accident  under  conditions  which  made  no  impression  upon
the  dominant  consciousness ;  that  is,  there  was  a  dual  activity  of  the
two  levels.

Thus  far  I  have  emphasised  the  independent  activity  of  these  levels.
But  of  course,  such  independence  is  not  the  rule.  The  i«<e?--dependence
of  one  level  upon  the  other  is  essential  for  mentation  that  shall  com-
pletely subserve  the  intellectual  wants  of  the  individual.  This
interdependence  and  co-working  of  the  two  is  probably  very  complex,
and  with  our  present  knowledge  cannot  be  understood  in  its  details.


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  93


It  may  be,  and  possibly  justly,  denied  that  the  different  levels  ever
function  absolutely  independently  of  each  other.  I  think  this  is  very
likely  true.  At  one  moment  or  another,  in  a  normal  healthy  individual,
the  sensory  impressions  and  movements  of  the  middle  level  malle
connection  with  the  highest  level,  and  thereby  come  into  consciousness,
and  what  would  have  been  purely  automatic  movements  are  reco-
ordinated  and  adjusted  as  volitional  movements.  And  conversely,
the  conscious  ideation  of  the  individual  is  being>  constantly  corrected
by  sensory  messages  from  below.  Nevertheless,  approximately  or
relatively,  the  middle  level  may  act  as  an  independent  organised
centre.

Ordinarily,  as  I  have  said,  there  is  mutual  interaction  of  which  the
details  can  be  but  imperfectly  understood.  We  cannot  more  than  grasp
the  general  scheme,  but  there  are  three  principles  in  this  relation-
ship which  are  important  and  have  a  practical  bearing  on  the  present
problem.

First,  the  highest  level  requires,  and  is  entirely  dependent  upon,
the  second  level  for  all  intercourse  with  the  outer  world.  That
consciousness  which  we  call  self  sees  and  hears  and  feels  only  through
the  consciousness  of  the  middle  level,  and  also  acts  only  through  this
level ;  that  is,  the  highest  level  has  to  make  use  of  the  so-called  sensory
and  motor  centres  of  the  middle  level  to  feel  on  the  one  hand  and  act
on  the  other.  This  would  seem  to  be  a  necessary  inference  from  the  loss
of  function — of  sensation  and  movement — which  always  follows  injury
to  these  centres.  The  middle  level,  therefore,  would  know  a  good  deal
of  the  conscious  life  of  the  highest  level.

Second.  As  the  second  level  feels  and  acts  directly  without  any
intervention  of  the  highest  level,  when  acting  automatically  it  would
receive  a  great  many  impressions  and  do  a  great  many  things  of  which
the  highest  level  was  unconscious ;  that  is,  this  conscious  life  of  the
second  level  would  not  always  enter  into  that  group  of  mental  states
which  we  call  personal  consciousness.

Third.  The  more  complex  states  of  consciousness  which  make  up
the  conscious  waking  state  of  the  individual  have  their  seat  in  the
highest  level,  and  in  order  that  an  impression  x-eceived  in  the  lower  level
may  be  perceived,  it  must  be  united  in  the  highest  level  with  all  the
other  impressions  which  constitute  consciousness  at  any  given  moment ;
or,  in  other  words,  inasmuch  as  in  the  last  analysis  consciousness  must
consist  of  a  compound  of  feelings  or  sensations  (vivid  or  faint),  any
given  state  of  consciousness  must  depend  upon  the  combination  of
numerous  sensory  [and  motor]  centres.  And  unless  a  given  centre  A
in  the  middle  level  is  physiologically  associated  with  that  group  of
centres  B,  C,  D,  in  the  highest  level  which  for  the  time  being  subserves
consciousness,  the  sensation  corresponding  to  the  given  sensory  centre


94


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


A  cannot  be  brought  into  the  consciousness  of  the  individual  and
cannot  be  perceived  and  recognised  as  belonging  to  the  individual.

If,  further,  all  the  highest  centres  were  removed  or  their  power  to
function  suppressed,  then  consciousness  would  be  limited  to  the  activity
of  the  middle  level,  which  would  constitute  a  second  personality,  and
would  be  of  a  more  or  less  automatic  character.

In  this  psycho-physiological  scheme  which  has  just  been  outlined,
it  may  be  well  at  this  place  to  point  out  tliat  there  is  only  one  assump-
tion that  is  novel.  The  three  automatic  levels  of  evolution  we  owe  to
Hughlings-Jackson.  The  duality  of  consciousness,  that  is,  the  division
of  mental  processes  into  the  higher  complex  processes  of  ideation  and
volitional  movements  on  the  one  hand  and  into  the  automatic  subcon-
scious, or  almost  subconscious,  processes  on  the  othei',  is  well  recognised
as  characteristic  of  every  mind.  This  duality  has  been  more  precisely
worked  out  of  late  as  conceptions  of  personality ; — the  most  complex
associated  states  of  consciousness  and  chains  of  memoi'ies  constituting
the  self  conscious  personality  of  the  ordinary  waking  state, — and  the
more  automatic  subconscious  states  constituting  a  second  personality
which  plays  a  constant,  Imt  more  or  less  hidden,  part  in  the  mental
drama  of  life.  Subliminal  consciousness  is  but  another  term  to  specify
certain  particular  associations  of  this  second  personality.

The  thesis  here  put  forward  is  the  identification,  or  rather,  if  it  is
preferred,  the  correlation  of  the  higher  complex  states  of  self  con-
sciousness (first  personality)  with  the  highest  level  of  Hughlings-
Jackson,  and  the  correlation  of  the  automatic  more  or  less  subconscious
states  with  the  second  level  (the  middle  motor  and  sensory  region).  It
must  be  admitted  that  it  is  Iiardly  possible,  with  our  present  knowledge,
to  offer  any  satisfactory  proof  of  this  correlation,  such  as  we  are
accustomed  to  look  for  in  the  experimental  sciences.  Nor  should  it  be
forgotten  that  the  same  is  true  of  our  conceptions  of  anatomical  levels
and  personalities.  The  best  we  can  do  is  to  offer  a  theory,  provisional
perhaps,  which  shall  harmonise  our  anatomical  conceptions  on  the  one
hand  and  our  psycho-physiological  experiences  on  the  other.  In  so  far
as  it  does  this  and  explains  what  are  otherwise  paradoxical  phenomena
is  it  of  value.  It  seems  to  the  writer  that  the  theory  here  suggested,
so  far  as  it  goes,  fulfils  the  demands  of  the  problem.

Accepting  this  scheme,  then,  the  further  question  arises,  how  does
it  correspond  with  observed  pathological  facts  1  Will  it  render
intelligible  the  phenomena  of  hysterical  anesthesia  as  observed  in
the  two  cases  above  reported  1  It  seems  to  the  writer  that  the
apparently  paradoxical  phenomena  are  just  what  would  be  expected
from  this  scheme ;  in  truth  they  are  the  direct  corollary  of  it.  The
explanation  has  already  been  outlined  above.  It  was  observed  in  the
cases  of  Mrs.  B.  and  Mrs.  R.  that,  notwithstanding  apparent  loss  of


xxxiv.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  95


sensation,  tactile  impressions  were  really  felt  but  not  perceived,  that  is,
did  not  enter  into  the  group  of  conscious  states  which  constituted  the
self-conscious  personality.  How  can  a  person  at  the  same  time  both
feel  and  not  perceive  that  he  feels  1  Now  according  to  this  hypothesis,
ancesthesia  of  hysteria  is  the  inhibition  or  going  to  sleep  of  certain
limited  areas  (or  centres)  of  the  highest  level  [frontal  lobes),  while
hypnosis  is  the  more  or  less  (according  to  the  stage)  comp)lete  inhibition
or  going  to  sleej)  of  the  frontal  lobes  as  a  whole.

In  hysteria  there  is  a  local  suppression  of  function :  in  complete
hypyiosis,  a  total  suppression  of  fimction  of  the  highest  level.

Take  the  case  of  ]Mrs.  R.  I  prick  her  ansesthetic  hand  a  definite
number  of  times  ;  I  place  in  it  a  pair  of  scissors,  which  she  fingers.
Neither  the  pricks  nor  the  touch  of  the  object  does  she  "feel."  What
is  the  matter  ?  Where  is  the  fault  1  We  know  it  is  not  in  the  nerves.
It  cannot  be  in  the  middle  tactile  centre,  for  then  not  only  would  any
given  tactile  impression,  a  prick,  be  not  perceived,  but  it  would  not
be  received  at  all,  and  by  no  device  (like  hypnosis)  could  what  never
had  been  received  be  revived  as  a  memory.  If  on  the  other  hand
we  suppose  that  there  is  a  local  suppression  of  function  in  the  frontal
lobes  (highest  level),  Mrs.  R.  would  not  "feel"  the  pricks  given  her
hand  nor  recognise  the  scissors,  for  although  these  sensory  impressions
were  recorded  in  the  middle  level,  they  stopped  here.  They  did  not
reach  the  frontal  lobes,  and  consequently  become  associated  with
all  the  other  impressions  of  movement  and  sensation  which,  as
normally  associated  together,  constitute  perception.  Her  conscious-
ness is  therefore  minus  any  given  tactile  impression  which  stopped  at
the  middle  level.

Now  we  hypnotise  Mrs.  R.  What  happens  1  We  recognise  at
once  two  phenomena.

First.  Sensation  has  returned  to  her  hand.  That  is,  she  perceives
tactile  impressions,  etc.  Why  ?  Evidently  because  (under  the  terms
of  our  theory)  the  activity  of  the  frontal  lobes  being  suppressed  as  a
whole,  the  states  of  consciousness  which  are  "  awake  "  and  in  rapport
with  the  outer  world  are  those  of  the  middle  level.  The  association
of  these  states  constitutes  a  "second  personality,"  which  feels  all
impressions.

Second.  This  personality  remembers  the  pricks  before  given  the
hand.  Why  1  Evidently  because  they  were  i-eceived  here  (although
they  did  not  reach  the  frontal  lobes),  and  were  associated  with  the
other  conscious  states  of  the  personality  of  this  level,  and  therefore  are
now  re^'ived  as  memories.

Third.  The  hypnotised  subject  is  largely  devoid  of  spontaneity,  and
her  acts  are  more  or  less  automatic.  Why?  Because  these  are  the
characteristics  of  the  middle  level.


96


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


Thus  by  our  theory  we  have  an  intelligible  explanation  of  the
anesthesia  of  hysteria  and  its  relation  to  hypnosis.  It  becomes  com-
prehensible why  a  sensory  impression  is  recorded  but  not  perceived
during  the  waking  state  and  yet  is  remembered  during  the  hypnotic
trance.

Regarding  the  nature  of  the  suppression  of  function  of  hysteria,
T  do  not  think  we  are  in  a  position  to  speak  with  any  positiveness.  I
termed  it  an  "inhibition"  or  "going  to  sleep,!'  for  the  reason  that
the  process  seems  to  have  more  analogy  with  sleep  than  any  other
condition  ;  but  I  do  not  wish  to  be  understood  as  insisting  upon  any
precise  condition  as  the  cause  of  the  suppression  of  function.  Even
if  the  process  were  like  that  of  going  to  sleep  we  have  little  idea  what
it  is,  but  it  v\rould  seem  plausible  that  if  this  process  should  affect
definite  and  limited  areas  of  the  brain  it  would  account  for  the
phenomenon  of  hysteria.

There  are  a  number  of  other  phenomena  allied  to  those  of  hysteria
which  seem  to  harmonise  very  well  with  this  explanation.  Among
them  may  be  mentioned  those  of  double  consciousness  and  automatic
writing.  I  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  automatic  writing  from  both
these  subjects.  I  will  not  describe  these  experiments  at  length,  as
they  have  already  been  published  ^  elsewhere,  but  will  merely  mention
a  few  of  the  more  important  phenomena  elicited.  There  are  several
ways  of  obtaining  writing  of  this  sort,  but  a  simple  method  is  to
hypnotise  a  subject  and  during  the  trance  state  to  tell  her  she  is  to
write  something — a  verse  or  anything  one  pleases — when  awake.
After  being  awakened,  a  pencil  is  put  in  her  hand  and  she  is  given  a
book  to  read  aloud,  or  told  to  count  backwards,  or  do  some  mental
problem.  While  her  attention  is  occupied  with  this,  the  hand  holding
the  pencil,  if  placed  over  a  sheet  of  paper,  will  write  what  was  desired.
The  subject  herself  has  absolutely  no  knowledge  of  what  her  hand
writes.  It  was  found  by  Professor  William  James  that  the  automatic
hand  while  writing  became  jjerfectly  antes thetic.  I  found  the  same
thing  with  my  subject,  Mrs.  B.,  after  her  anaesthesia  was  cured.
Her  hand  could  be  severely  pricked  without  her  being  conscious  of
it.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  phenomenon  may  be  explained  by  the
theory  of  hysterical  anesthesia  just  advanced.  If  there  is  a  local
inhibition  of  the  highest  sensory  and  motor  centres,  the  hand  would
be  moved  automatically  by  the  remaining  middle  centres.  The  pain
following  the  pricks  would  not  be  felt,  because  it  would  nob  be
associated  with  the  conscious  states  induced  by  reading  the  book,  or
whatever  the  mental  problem  was.  The  iuipression  of  pain  would
remain  isolated  on  a  lower  platform.


1  Boston  Medical  and  Snrgicnl  Journal,  May  15th  and  22ud,  1890.


XXXIV.]  Contribution  to  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis.  97


There  are  also  a  number  of  very  remarkable  phenomena  connected
with  hysterical  anfesthesia,  which  have  been  observed  by  Binet.  Binet,
following  an  entirely  different  method,  has  also  shown  that  the
anesthetic  hands  of  hysterics  do  feel,  or  at  least  in  some  way  do  record
the  impressions  given  to  them.  He  has  succeeded  in  obtaining
very  elaborate  movements  from  the  hands  simply  by  means  of
tactile  impressions  given  to  the  anajsthetic  skin.  But  even  more
interesting,  he  has  found  that  many  hysterics  perceive  as  a  visual
sensation  any  tactile  or  muscular  impression.  Such  an  hysteric  sees,
visually,  any  figure  or  letter  written  on  the  skin.  If  the  finger  be  bent
three  times,  the  number  three  is  seen  as  an  indistinct  image.  The
subject  can  also  tell  the  position  given  to  the  hand  by  seeing  it  as  a
visual  image.  But  after  seeing  the  image  of  the  hand  in  this  way  he
cannot  modify  the  image  by  any  mental  effort,  so  long  as  the  operator
does  not  change  the  position  of  the  hand.

All  these  phenomena,  it  seems  to  me,  are  physiologically  intelligible,
if  we  assume  that  in  anaesthesia  of  this  kind  there  is  an  inhibition  of
the  highest  centres,  while  the  middle  centres  still  react.  Although  in
this  case  the  impressions  received  at  the  middle  level  cannot  excite  the
highest  tactile  centres  and  be  perceived,  they  may  still  continue  to
excite  the  highest  visual  centres  which  are  normally  co-ordinated  with
the  tactile  centres  in  the  perception  of  one's  hand.  The  perception  of
one's  own  hand  includes  a  number  of  associated  sensations,  some  vivid
and  some  faint.  Among  them  is  the  visual  sense.  Though  the  tactile
sense  fails,  one  of  the  others  may  be  excited  by  an  impression  in  the
middle  centres.


H


98


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

THE  BRITISH  MEDICAL  ASSOCIATION  AND  HYPNOTISM.
I. — Address  by  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


At  the  annual  meeting  of  the  British  Medical  Association,  held  in
Edinburgh  last  July,  the  subject  of  hypnotism  was  again  brought  before  the
medical  profession.  A  discussion,  as  to  its  phenomena  and  theories,  was
opened  in  the  Psychological  Section,  July  29th,  by  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell
(by  invitation  of  the  Council  of  the  British  Medical  Association),  followed  by
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  (who  was  invited  by  the  Council  to  read  a  paper),  Drs.
Yellowlees,  Benedikt,  Woods,  Mercier,  etc.

Dr.  Bramwell  commenced  his  address  with  a  short  account  of  a  few  of  his
hypnotic  cases,  selected  for  the  following  reasons  : — (1)  The  patients  were
natives  of  our  own  country.  (2)  All  the  observations  had  been  checked  by
independent  witnesses.  (3)  Sufficient  time  had  elapsed  to  enable  the
permanence  of  the  therapeutic  results  to  be  fairly  estimated.

Of  these  the  following  are  examples  : —

Case  2. — Pruritus  and  eczema.  Mrs.  A.,  aged  49.  Suffered  from
pruritus  and  eczema,  which  four  years'  careful  treatment  had  failed  to
relieve.  At  night  the  irritation  was  intolerable,  and  produced  insomnia.
The  disease,  in  the  opinion  of  a  well-known  surgeon,  was  due  to  an  organic
cause  which  interfered  with  the  circulation.  An  operation,  performed  in
order  to  relieve  this,  proved  unsuccessful.  In  August,  1889,  Dr.  Bramwell
tried  to  hypnotise  the  patient,  other  treatment  being  abandoned.  The
attempt  failed,  and  was  repeated  unsuccessfully  on  sixty-six  occasions  during
the  next  four  months,  the  condition  meanwhile  growing  steadily  worse.  At
the  sixty-eighth  seance  somnambulism  was  induced.  All  irritation  vanished
immediately,  and  the  patient  slept  soundly  on  that  and  the  following  nights.
In  a  fortnight  all  trace  of  disease  had  disappeared,  and  treatment  was
abandoned. Three  years  later  there  had  been  no  relapse.

Case  3. — Hyperhidrosis.  Miss  B.,  aged  15,  January,  1890.  On  the  back
of  the  left  arm,  just  above  the  wrist,  a  patch  of  skin,  two  and  a  half  inches
long  by  one  and  a  half  broad,  was  the  seat  of  constant  perspiration.  This  had
existed  from  early  childhood,  was  always  excessive,  and  invariably  rendered
more  so  by  emotion  or  exertion.  The  forearm  was  always  enveloped  in
bandages,  but  these  rapidly  became  saturated,  and  the  perspiration  dripped
npon  the  floor.  On  January  10th,  the  patient  was  hypnotised  for  the  first
time,  and  somnambulism  induced.  By  the  following  day  the  symptoms
had  markedly  diminished  ;  the  patient  was  again  hypnotised,  when  the
perspiration  ceased. Two  years  later  there  had  been  no  relapse.


Part XXXIV.]  British  Medical  Association  and  Hypnotism.  99


Case  5. — Neurasthenia  ;  suicidal  tendencies.  Mr.  D.,  aged  34,  June  2nd,
1890.  Barrister.  Formerly  strong  and  athletic.  His  health  commenced  to
fail  in  1877,  after  typhoid  fever.  He  was  compelled  to  abandon  work  in  1882,
and  had  since  been  a  chronic  invalid.  He  was  constantly  depressed,  and
suffered  from  amemia,  dyspepsia,  insomnia,  etc.  He  had  frequent  suicidal
impulses,  and  once  attempted  suicide.  The  least  exertion  produced  acute
pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  spine,  and  he  was  unable  to  walk  100  yards
without  severe  suffering.  He  had  constant  medical  treatment,  including  six
months'  rest  in  bed,  without  benefit  He  was  hypnotised  from  June  2nd  to
September  20th,  1890.  By  the  end  of  July  all  morbid  symptoms  disappeared,
and  he  amused  himself  by  working  on  a  farm.  He  has  not  relapsed  since,
and  can  walk  forty  miles  a  day  without  undue  fatigue.

Case  6.— Dipsomania.  Mr.  E.,  aged  33,  April  30th,  1890.  He  had  a
family  history  of  intemperance,  and  commenced  to  take  stimulants  in  excess
at  seventeen.  In  1884,  his  friends  induced  him  to  place  himself  under
control.  This  was  repeated  thrice  without  good  results.  In  1887,  he
entered  a  retreat  for  a  year,  but  soon  after  leaving  it  began  to  drink  as  badly
as  ever.  From  this  time  he  does  not  appear  to  have  taken  stimulants  daily,
and,  according  to  his  own  account,  struggled  hard  against  the  temptation  to
do  so.  Any  physical  pain  or  mental  trouble,  liowever,  would  start  a
drinking  bout  and  of  these  he  had  on  an  average  one  a  week.  He  was
hypnotised  from  April  30th,  to  May  17th,  1890,  and  during  this  time  kept
sober.  He  returned  home  and  relapsed  in  less  than  a  month.  He  was
again  hypnotised  daily  for  a  week,  and  from  that  date,  June  1890,  until  the
present  time,  he  has  not  relapsed.

Case  7. — Dipsomania.  A  patient,  aged  47,  with  bad  family  history  of
alcoholism.  He  had  taken  stimulants  to  excess  for  seventeen  years,  had
had  three  attacks  of  delirium  tremens  and  seven  of  epilepsy.  He  was  first
hypnotised  on  April  22nd,  1895,  and  has  not  relapsed  since.

Case  Neuralgia  of  the  leg.  Miss  F.,  aged  28,  July  17th,  1896.  She
complained  of  pain  in  the  leg  of  five  years'  duration,  supposed  to  be  due  to
sciatica.  During  the  first  two  years  of  her  illness  she  never  walked  more  than
a  quarter  of  a  mile,  then  this  was  abandoned,  and  she  took  to  a  bath-chair.
Treatment  : — Rest  on  back  in  bed  for  two  months  ;  careful  drugging  ;  Weir
Mitchell  ;  massage  ;  electricity  ;  baths  at  Droitwich  and  Bath  ;  Paquelin's
cautery  to  leg,  seventy  applications  daily  from  July,  1895,  to  May,  1896,
about  20,000  in  all,  During  this  time  her  condition  steadily  grew  worse  ;  all
treatment  was  then  abandoned,  and  she  was  considered  incurable.  When
Dr.  Bramwell  saw  her  .she  was  emaciated  ;  complained  of  constant  pain  ;  was
unable  to  walk  ;  suffered  from  insomnia  ;  had  lost  all  interest  in  life.  She
was  hypnotised  on  July  17th,  1896  ;  completely  recovered  in  two  days,  and
learned  to  cycle. At  the  present  date  she  is  well,  active,  and  strong.

In  March,  1890,  Mr.  Turner,  of  Leeds,  performed  many  painless  dental
operations  upon  Dr.  Bramwell's  patients,  and  recorded  the  results  in  the
Journal  of  the  British  Dental  Association.  The  most  remarkable  case  was
that  of  a  young  girl,  suflering  from  valvular  disease  of  the  heart,  from
whom  he  extracted  five  teeth.

On  March  25th,  1890,  a  number  of  Dr.  Bramwell's  patients  were
operated  on  at  Leeds,  in  the  presence  of  some  sixty  medical  men,  including

H  2


100


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


such  well-known  surgeons  as  Pridgin  Teale,  Mayo  Robson,  etc.  A  delicate
girl  was  put  to  sleep  by  written  order,  while  Dr.  Bramwell  remained  in
another  room,  and  sixteeen  teeth  were  extracted.  She  showed  no  signs  of
pain,  there  was  no  corneal  reflex,  and  the  pulse  fell  during  the  operation.
A  boy,  aged  8,  suffering  from  exostosis  of  the  great  toe,  had  only  been
hypnotised  on  two  previous  occasions.  Mr.  Mayo  Robson  first  ijerformed
evulsion  of  the  great  toe-nail,  then  removed  the  bony  grownth,  and  part  of
the  first  phalanx.  Some  of  the  patients  were  strong,  healtliy  labouring  men,
others  were  weak,  nervous  women.  None  suffered  from  pain  afterwards,
and  all  returned  home  by  train — a  journey  of  over  an  hour.  In  every
instance  the  healing  process  was  remarkably  rapid.

Dr.  Bramwell  then  gave  a  short  account  of  some  of  his  experimental
researches  in  reference  to  automatic  writing,  the  appreciation  of  time  by
somnambules,  and  more  especially  the  condition  of  the  volition  in  hypnotised
subjects.  Taking  his  personal  observations  as  a  basis,  he  discussed  how  far
the  theories  of  others  were  satisfactory  in  explaining  them.  It  is  unnecessary
to  refer  to  this  portion  of  the  paper  in  detail,  as  the  greater  part  of  it  has
already  appeared  in  the  Froceedings  of  our  Society.  It  is  worthy  of  note,
however,  that  although  two  years  have  elapsed  since  then,  further  experi-
ment has  not  caused  Dr.  Bramwell  to  alter  his  opinions.

He  still  regards  the  theories  of  the  Nancy  school,  es23ecially  in  reference
to  so-called  automatism,  and  the  possibility  of  successfully  suggesting  crime,
as  untenable.  The  further  evidence  he  has  collected  shows,  he  thinks,  more
and  more  clearly,  that  the  phenomena  of  hyjjnotism  are  due  to  the  intelligent
and  voluntary  action  of  a  secondary  consciousness.


II. — Feederic  W.  H.  Myers,
Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.
The  Psychology  of  Hypnotism.

I  must  begin  what  I  have  to  say  by  warmly  thanking  the  officers  of  this
Association  for  allowing  a  layman  in  this  place  to  say  anything  at  all,  and  by
thanking  this  learned  audience  also  for  showing  themselves  thus  willing  to
hear  me.  I  feel  a  quite  special  diffidence  in  undertaking  my  present  task  ;
but  I  can  best  show  my  sense  of  the  honour  done  me  by  speaking  frankly
on,  without  further  preface  or  apology.

I  understand  that  what  is  asked  from  me  is  some  attempt  at  a  coherent
psychological  presentation  of  the  multifarious  and  perplexing  facts  now
commonly  grouped  under  the  name  of  hypnotism.  Purely  physiological
explanations  thereof  have,  by  common  admission,  thus  far  failed  ;  and  little
attempt  has  yet  been  made  by  the  able  practical  hypnotists,  to  whom  the
recent  advance  in  our  knowledge  is  owing,  to  correlate  their  ever-growing
observations  from  a  purely  psychological  point  of  view.  My  late  friends,
Edmund  Gurney  and  Professor  Delbceuf  of  Liege,  did,  indeed,  apply  to
these  problems  minds  of  unusual  acuteness.  They  and  others  have  said
much  of  value  ;  but  much  more  remains  to  be  said  than  any  of  us  in  this
generation  can  hope  to  say.  My  own  attemjat  at  synthesis  will  fall  far  short
both  of  certainty  and  of  completeness  ;  but  its  very  imperfections  may


Part  XXXIV.] The  Psychology  of  Hypnotism.


101


indicate  how  great  the  difficulties  ai'e  which  have  to  be  faced  ;  how  wide  and
jienetrating  a  survey  is  needed  if  these  phenomena,  often  so  superficially
described,  are  to  carry  us,  as  they  ought  some  day  to  do,  deep  into  the
mysteries  of  human  personality.

I  say  then,  as  my  first  and  surest  remark,  that  in  order  to  understand
hypnotism  we  must  bring  into  comparison  a  great  mass  of  cognate  life-
phenomena,  both  spontaneous  and  induced.  From  the  lack  of  wide
comparison,  from  the  confinement  of  attention  to  some  few  of  the  commoner
and  more  obvious  manifestations  of  hypnosis,  liave  sprung  most  of  those
narrow  and  misleading  theories  of  which  Dr.  Bramwell  has  spoken.  But
there  is  now  no  excuse  for  such  narrowness.  Far  more  facts  have  become
matter  of  common  knowledge  than  Despine,  or  Heidenhain,  or  Charcot  knew  ;
and  even  a  cursory  glance  at  the  recent  annals  of  hypnotism  will  show  at
how  many  points  its  problems  touch  on  problems  already  familiar  in  other
fields  of  research.

Let  us  briefly  dwell  on  each  main  group  of  these  problems  in  turn.  In
hypnotic  records  we  find,  to  begin  with,  abundant  instances  of  isolated
losses  and  gains  of  faculty  resembling  the  fantastic  associations  and
dissociations,  dynamogfnies  and  inhibitions,  which  characterise  hysteria.
We  find,  too,  that  uprusli  into  consciousness  of  ideas  or  impulses,  matured
beneath  the  conscious  threshold,  which  forms,  in  my  view,  the  best  definition
of  genius.  We  find  that  interrujjtion  of  external  attention,  along  with  that
profound  organic  recuperation,  which  are  the  marks  of  sleep.  We  find  the
change  of  personality,  the  intercurrence  of  memories,  which  in  their  slighter
forms  are  called  somnamljulisms,  or  sleep-waking  conditions,  and  which  may
exist  quite  apart  from  hysteria.  Finally,  we  observe  in  hypnosis — rarely
indeed,  yet,  as  I  hold,  unmistakeably — certain  forms  of  supernormal
sensibility  which  bring  hypnotism  into  connection  with  all  those  facts  (as  I
must  needs  regard  them)  to  which  I  have  given  the  names  of  "  telepathy  "
and  "  teliesthesia."

Hypnotism  and  Hysteria.

Let  us  begin  with  one  of  the  most  obvious  of  these  analogies, — the
analogy  between  hypnotism  and  hysteria.  How  far  does  this  analogy
extend  ?  \i\  broad  outline  the  answer  is  plain  enough.  Both  in  hypnosis
and  in  hysteria  there  is  a  disaggregation  of  the  personality.  Instead  of  the
continuous  personality  of  common  life,  with  its  one  familiar  alternation  of
sleep  and  waking,  there  are  minor  changes  of  phase,  interruptions  of
memory,  irregularities  of  will,  inhibitions  of  faculty,  something  capricious
and  multilated  in  the  manifestations  of  the  self.  In  the  case  of  hysteria
these  changes  are  plainly  degenerative.  They  indicate  what  Dr.  Pierre
Janet  calls  minire  psycholoijique,  some  weakness  in  the  grasp  which  holds
together  all  our  separate  fragments  of  motor  and  sensory  capacity  under
that  central  dominance  which  makes  the  organism  a  tuiity.  Scraps  of
capacity  drop  out  from  that  dominance  ;  the  muscles,  for  instance,  which  are
innervated  by  soaie  special  centre,  sink  down  beneath  the  threshold  of  con-
scious will.  The  hysteric,  let  us  say,  gets  a  fixed  idea  that  he  cannot  move
his  left  arm.  So  long  as  this  idea  persists, — and  there  is  no  trustworthy
medical  method  of  removing  it, — the  man's  arm  is  in  effect  lost  to  him  ;  it  is
psychically  paralysed,  and  as  useless  as  if  the  governing  brain-centres  were


102


Frederic  W.  U.  Myers.


[Supplement.


actually  destroyed.  And  here  the  thought  at  once  occurs  that  this  is  exactly
the  kind  of  eifect  which  the  platform  hypnotist  produces  by  suggestion.  His
suggestion,  like  the  hysteric's  self-suggestion,  deprives  the  man  of  the  use  of
his  arm  ;  he  induces  a  form,  though  a  brief  and  curable  form,  of  psychical
paralysis.  The  recognition  by  the  Paris  school  of  analogies  of  this  kind
between  hypnotism  and  hysteria  was  originally,  as  I  conceive  it,  a  forward
step — a  result  mainly  of  the  increased  care  and  intelligence  with  which
hysteria  had  been  studied  by  Charcot  and  his  disciples.

But  the  last  word  on  the  matter  has  certainly  not  yet  been  said.  If  we
look  a  little  deeper  into  those  analogies,  we  shall  discover  the  point  at
whicli  they  begin  to  be  misleading — the  point  at  which  hysterical  and
hypnotic  workings,  although  in  fari  materia,  begin  to  be  in  eifect  almost
exactly  opposite  the  one  to  the  other.

Expressed  in  a  sentence,  the  difference  is  this  :  In  hysteria  we  lose  from
supraliminal  control  portions  of  facvilty  which  we  do  not  wish  to  lose,  and
we  cannot  recover  them  at  will.  In  hypnotism  we  lose  from  supraliminal
control  portions  of  faculty  which  we  wish  to  lose,  or  are  indifferent  to  losing,
and  we  can  recover  them  the  moment  that  we  will.

A  good  way,  I  think,  of  presenting  these  two  notions  together  is  to  call
that  stratum  into  which  the  faculties  submerged  in  hysteria  sink  the  hypnotic
stratum,  and  to  describe  hysteria  as  a  disease  of  that  stratum  ;  or  say  an
undue  permeability  of  the  psychical  diaphragni  whicli  separates  ordinary
consciousness  from  the  deeps  below.  This  or  that  group  of  sensory  or  motor
ability  drops  out  of  waking  knowledge  or  out  of  control  of  waking  will.

In  hypnotism,  on  the  other  hand,  we  gain  instead  of  losing  control.
Instead  of  losing  control  over  the  supraliminal  stratum,  we  gain  control  over
the  hypnotic  stratum.  We  j^urposely  increase  the  permeability  of  the
fisychical  diaphragm  in  such  a  way  as  to  push  down  beneath  it  various  forms
of  pain  and  annoyance  which  we  are  anxious  to  get  rid  of  from  our  waking-
consciousness  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  stimulate  in  the  depths  of  our
being  many  sanative  and  recuperative  operations  whose  results  rise  presently
into  the  perception  of  our  waking  life.

An  example  will  make  my  meaning  clear.  One  frequent  symptom  in
hysteria  is  a  retrenchment  or  deformation  of  the  visual  field.  The  liysteric,
with  his  weakened  central  authority,  his  enfeebled  attention,  has  lost  the
use  of  the  outer  margin  of  his  normal  iield  ;  he  cannot  see  a  moving  finger
till  it  is  almost  directly  in  front  of  him.  But  now,  instead  of  the  finger,
bring  within  the  disused  margin  of  the  visual  field  some  object  associated
with  the  jJatient's  hysterical  terrors,  as  a  lighted  match  or  a  stuffed  mouse.
In  that  case,  as  Professor  Janet  has  ingeniously  shown,  the  patieJit  will
scream  and  go  off' into  an  occh  long  before  the  mouse  has  reached  the  point
at  which  the  mere  finger  would  have  been  noticed.  This  means  that  the
power  of  vision  over  the  margin  of  the  field,  although  lost  for  practical  use,
is  retained  in  the  hypnotic  stratum,  and  manifests  itself  again  at  the  bidding
of  a  hurtful  hysterical  caprice.

Now  compare  the  result  if  a  hypnotic  suggestion  is  made  to  the  patient
with  the  diminished  visual  field.  Professor  Janet,  for  instance,  suggests  to
her  that  she  can  really  see  with  the  whole  normal  field.  Apparently  this  is
nothing  more  than  an  empty  remark  from  which  no  results  can  be  expected


Part  XXXIV.] The  Psychology  of  Hypnotism.


103


to  follow.  But  if  the  patient  is  suggestible,  if  a  certain,  appeal  —whose
nature  we  must  discuss  further  on — is  effectively  made  to  the  patient's
subliminal  region  of  personality,  to  the  hypnotic  stratum  in  particular,  then
a  result  does  follow.  The  power  of  vision  begins  to  return  over  the  outer
parts  of  the  field — fitfully,  ^^erhaps,  and  with  relapses  ;  but  if  the  suggestion
is  repeated  the  sight  is  often  permanently  restored.  That  is  to  say,  hypno
tism  has  exactly  repaired  the  mischief  which  hysteria  has  done.  It  has
acted  on  the  same  stratum,  but  with  an  increase  instead  of  a  diminution  of
central  control.  In  just  the  ways  in  which  hysteria  can  destroy  hypnotism
can  fulfil.

Submergence  and  Emergence.

In  describing  that  most  complex  of  known  entities,  the  human  mind,  any
physical  illustration  whatever  seems  even  absurdly  inadequate.  Yet  such
illustrations  we  are  compelled  to  use,  and,  when  not  pressed  too  far,  they
may  be  more  suggestive  than  long  abstract  phrases  could  be.  The
notion  of  upper  level,  middle  level,  and  lower  level  nerve  centres  has  started
many  a  fruitful  thought.  And  somewhat  similarly  this  present  notion — in
which  the  terms  upper  and  lower  are  used  in  a  different  metaphorical  sense,
this  notion  of  a  kind  of  stratification  of  the  personality  above  and  below  the
threshold  of  ordinary  consciousness — will  be  found  to  suggest  new  and
practical  questions  to  which  it  is  possible  to  find  some  beginning  of  answer.

Thus,  it  is  now  natural  to  ask  whether,  if  faculty  which  has  existed  above
the  conscious  threshold  and  has  been  unduly  submerged  may  then  emerge
again  above  that  threshold,  other  faculty  which  has  not  ordinarily  existed
above  the  threshold  may  ever  emerge  from  beneath  it  ?  Does  this  happen  in
the  psychical  storm  of  hysteria  ?  Does  it  happen  in  normal  waking  life  1
Does  it  happen  as  a  result  of  hypnotic  suggestion  ?

Our  answer  must  be.  Yes,  it  happens  in  all  these  cases.  Even  in  hysteria
we  often  observe  great  tactile  hypertesthesia,  as  in  Binet's  experiments,
where  the  hysteric  perceived  the  relieved  surfaces  on  an  unknown  coin
pressed  to  her  skin  with  a  delicacy  immensely — fifty  times,  as  Binet  thought
— beyond  the  range  of  normal  sensibility.

I  do  not  say  that  this  hyperoesthesia  was  of  any  practical  use,  but  it  was
faculty  ;  it  was  faculty  previously  unknown,  bat  borne  upwards  into  the
conscious  stratum  by  that  same  psychical  disturbance  which  carried  down-
wards, and  away  from  conscious  control,  many  more  important  fragments  of
that  patient's  sensory  and  motor  power.  From  the  practical  or  therapeutic
side  the  hysteria  brought  nothing  but  loss  to  the  patient  ;  from  the  psycho-
logical side  it  brought  also  a  certain  gain.  For  the  physician  man's  faculties
exist  for  the  benefit  of  man  ;  if  he  comes  ui:ion  rare  and  useless  capacities,
he  dismisses  them  as  probably  morbid,  and  at  any  rate  uninteresting.  For
the  psychologist,  on  the  other  hand,  man's  faculties  exist  for  the  knowledge
of  man  ;  the  more  rare  and  useless  the  faculty,  the  more  interest  it  has  for
him  as  a  possible  inlet  into  some  human  mystery  yet  unexplored.

Hypnotism  and  Genius.

And  here,  in  this  very  question  of  the  emergence  of  unfamiliar  faculty
from  a  subconscious  stratum,  our  next  step  shows  us  faculty  thus  emerging
which  is  of  real  use  ;  products  of  subliminal  mentation  uprushing  into


104


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


[Su]3plement.


ordinary  consciousness  with  actual  benefit  to  the  waking  life.  This  is  the
reply  to  our  question  asked  a  little  way  back  :  Does  this  emergence  occur  in
normal  life  ?  My  answer  is  that  it  does,  and  that  when  it  does  it  constitutes
genius.

Here  again  the  psychological  view  of  human  faculty  will  differ  from  the
aesthetic  criterion  in  much  the  same  manner  as  we  just  now  saw  that  it
differed  from  the  medical.  The  aasthetic  critic  asks  whether  the  thoughts
and  images  which  surge  up  ready-made  into  the  artist's  or  poet's  mind — his
inspirations,  as  he  calls  them — are  such  as  to  give  delight  to  other  men.
Unless  they  are  such,  the  critic  refuses  to  him  the  name  of  genius.  To  the
psychologist,  on  the  other  hand,  it  matters  little  whether  other  men  find  joy
in  the  artist's  inspirations  or  no.  The  question  which  interests  him  is,  how
those  inspirations  arise  ?  Can  we  prove  that  they  were  matured  by  sub-
liminal mentation,  beyond  the  artist's  conscious  control,  and  then  presented
to  him  as  finished  products  from  his  subterranean  workshops  1  If  so,  I
submit  they  all  share  a  certain  definite  character,  to  which  the  name  of
genius  might  with  real  significance,  although  not  with  practical  convenience,
be  given.  And  this  is  true,  although  the  results  which  can  most  easily  be
proved  to  be  of  subliminal  manufacture  are  not  likely  to  be  results  in  the
highest  order  of  art.  Psychologically  the  best  specimen  of  genius  may
be  the  calculating  boy's  vision  of  the  product  of  two  factors  of  six  figures
each,  seen  in  a  flash  upon  a  mental  blackboard,  with  no  consciousness  of  the
process  by  which  it  was  attained.  The  calculating  boy's  achievement,
indeed,  may  seem  a  mere  curiosity  ;  l)ut  without  the  type  of  faculty  which
that  boy  has  shown,  the  inspirations  of  a  Shakespeare  or  a  Raphael  could
never  have  arisen  to  bring  joy  to  mankind.

Thus  prepared,  let  us  go  on  to  the  next  question,  which  to-day  most
concerns  us,  the  question  whether  hypnotism  succeeds  in  bringing  up  faculty
from  submerged  strata  into  conscious  control  or  enjoyment.  My  answer  is
that  to  do  this  very  thing  is  of  the  essence  of  hypnotism.  We  have  seen
how  hypnotism  brings  up  again  to  the  surface  the  portions  of  faculty  which
hysteria  has  submerged.  We  have  seen  also — it  is  an  obvious  inference
from  Dr.  Bramwell's  cases — how  hypnotism  acts  in  parallel  fashion  to  genius,
by  elaborating  subliminally  certain  intellectual  results  which  are  then  pre-
sented ready-made  to  the  waking  intelligence.  Dr.  Bramwell's  milliner,
computing  subconsciously  the  far-oft'  dates  when  lier  suggestions  fell  due,  is
*a  precise  parallel  to  the  calculating  boy  inspired  with  arithmetical  results
reached  by  no  conscious  working.  Or  again,  when  she  solved  in  the  trance
a  difliculty  in  her  work,  and  that  solution  came  to  her  in  waking  hours  as  an
inspiration,  she  underwent  exactly  the  poet's  experience,  though  the  subject-
matter  may  have  been  only  the  set  of  a  skirt  or  the  trimming  of  a  bonnet.

That  which  the  gift  of  Nature  does  in  certain  limited  directions  for  some
few  delicately  constructed  men,  that  can  hypnotic  suggestion  do  for  the
ordinary  clodhopper,  with  results  of  course  grotesque  in  comparison  to  the
triumphs  of  art,  but  yet  quite  as  striking  in  projjortion  to  the  common
man's  inferior  powers.  That  object  i  vat  ion  de  tijpes,"  for  example,  which
Professor  Richet  has  best  described,  that  assumption  in  speech,  writing,
demeanour,  of  some  suggested  character  which  is  one  of  the  commonest
platform  phenomena,  is  in  fact  an  inspiration  of  genius  as  remarkable  for


Part XXXIV,] The  Psychology  of  Hypnotism.


105


the  rustic  as  the  triumphs  of  a  Duse  or  a  Sarah  Bernhardt  are  for  their
much  higher  organisations.

And  here  I  come  to  one  of  the  connnonest  phenomena  of  hypnotism —
usually  spoken  of  as  a  mere  jest  or  a  mere  indication  of  the  hypnotiser's
power  over  his  patient — but  which  the  psychologist,  I  think,  is  bound  to
regard  as  one  of  the  most  striking  of  all  our  indications  of  latent  faculty.
I  speak  of  the  hallucinations  which  the  hypnotiser  suggests  in  the  entranced,
or  sometimes  even  in  the  waking,  subject.  Such  a  hallucinatory  image  is,
strictly  speaking,  an  inspiration  of  genius,  even  if  it  represents  nothing
better  than  a  black  cat.  The  painter's  highest  joy  consists  in  the  sudden
emergence  into  perceptibility  of  some  fair  form  created  below  the  threshold  :
the  "flash  upon  the  inward  eye  "  of  some  remembered  or  transmuted  image
which  deliberate  efforts  could  neither  shape  nor  recall.  As  the  Sistine
Madonna  was  to  Raphael,  so  tf)  the  hypnotised  girl  is  the  delusive  cat.  The
girl  in  her  ordinary  state  can  no  more  conceive  with  deceptive  distinctness
that  feline  image  than  Raphael  every  day  could  hang  in  heaven  a  form  of
supernal  beauty.  Hypnotised,  the  girl  can  see  the  creature's  very  crouch
and  spring  ;  she  has  evoked  from  her  subterranean  treasure-house  of
imagination  a  picture  incomjDarably  more  vivid  than  waking  imaginative
effort  could  have  afforded  hei-.

Yet  all  this  lies,  so  to  say,  but  on  the  fringe  of  hypnotic  power.  The
main  interest  of  hypnotism  lies  in  a  still  deeper  evocation  of  latent  faculty.
The  fact  which  is  bringing  hynotism  before  the  medical  profession  is  not  its
power  to  imitate  and  in  some  sense  to  outdo  the  achievements  of  genius,  but
its  power  to  imitate,  and  greatly  to  outdo,  the  achievements  of  sleep.

Hypnotism  and  Sleep.

The  relation  of  hypnotism  to  sleep  was  the  next  point  marked  out  for  our
discussion.  Here,  again,  I  must  begin  by  giving  to  sleep  a  psychological
definition.

I  regard  sleep  as  an  alternating  phase  of  our  personality,  distinguished
from  the  waking  i^hase  by  the  shutting  off"  of  the  supraliminal  life  of
relation,  of  external  attention,  and  by  the  concentration  of  subliminal
attention  upon  the  j^rofounder  organic  life.  To  sleep's  concentrated  inward
attention  I  ascribe  its  uniijue  recuperative  power.  Our  entry  into  this
phase  of  our  i^ersonalitj'  is  not  wholly  a  voluntary  thing.  Sometimes  it  is
hindered  by  physical  causes,  as  by  pain  ;  always  (as  some  hold)  it  needs  to
be  helped  on  by  physical  causes,  as  by  the  accumulation  of  waste  products
in  the  brain.  The  first  obvious  effect  of  hypnotism  is  to  bring  sleep  more
fully  under  our  control.  Under  hypnotic  suggestion  people  fall  asleep
without  fatigue  to  help  them,  and  sleep  on  so  that  no  tortures  can  wake
them — sleep  on  in  the  dentist's  chair  or  through  the  great  pain  and  peril  of
childbirth.  They  can  remain  at  will  in  that  regenerative  phase  of  person-
ality which  for  us  needs  so  much  physiological  preparation,  and  is  subject  to
so  many  pathological  checks.

It  is,  of  course,  from  my  point  of  view,  perfectly  natural  that  an
increase  of  power  over  the  personality  should  facilitate  our  transitions  between
its  different  phases.  But  when  a  phase  so  2Jrofoundly  withdrawn  from
outward  stimulus  can  thus  be  produced,  ought  we  to  give  it  the  name  of


106


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement,


sleej),  or  rather  of  trance  ?  Trance  is  the  better  word  ;  for  to  identify
hypnotic  with  ordinary  sleep  is  to  underrate  the  modifiability  of  this  ahiiost
infinite  complex  of  sentient  units  which  we  call  a  man.  I  have  called  the  act
of  falling  asleep  a  passage  into  another  phase  of  personality  ;  but  such
passages  are  like  the  irregular  heatings  and  coolings  of  a  molten  mass  ;  the
gaseous,  the  liquid,  the  solid  state  each  has  certain  stable  laws  of  its  own  ;
but  every  transition  involves  millions  of  molecular  changes  which  can  never
occur  twice  in  just  the  same  way.  There  is  something  in  sleep  that  reminds
one  of  some  increase  of  internal  heat  caused  by  the  collapse  of  a  cooled
surface  ;  for  in  sleep,  along  with  the  decrease  of  responsiveness  to  the
external  world,  certain  inward  movements  become  more  active,  more  pro-
foundly recuperative  ;  fulfil  more  subtly  the  organism's  hidden  need.  In
this  resjDect  hypnotic  trance  is  like  a  further  stage  of  sleep.  Not  that  it  is
necessarily  more  lethargic,  more  comatose  ;  it  has  forms  so  alert  as  to  be
hardly  distinguishable  from  waking.  Trance  is  a  further  stage  of  sleep  in
the  sense  that  it  accomplishes  more  powerfully  sleep's  chai'acteristic  task  ;
the  subliminal  plasticity  is  more  marked,  the  subliminal  control  intenser  ;
until  hypnosis  sometimes  seems  to  be  to  sleep  what  sleep  is  to  waking.

Hypnotism  and  Sleep- Waking  States.

Nay,  more.  In  ordinary  sleep,  neither  hysterical  nor  hypnotic,  certain
phenomena  from  time  to  time  occur  which  the  physician  may  sometimes
wish  to  check  as  inconvenient,  but  which  to  the  psychologist  should  yield
lessons  much  deeper  than  he  has  yet  drawn  from  them.  I  speak  of  somnam-
bulisms or  sleep-waking  states,  which  in  my  view  are  rudiments  of  new
jjhases  of  personality,  useless  for  the  most  part,  and  destined  to  be  abortive
and  to  die  away.  To  these  nascent  rearrangements  of  personality  the
hypnotic  trance  furnishes  abundant  parallels.  Sometimes  it  has  even  hap-
pened that  for  long  periods — in  one  case  at  least  for  a  lifetime — the  new
phase  of  personality,  developed  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  has  been  more
salutary  for  the  patient  than  the  old.  Here  also  hypnotic  artifice  has
improved  upon  the  hints  which  Nature  spontaneously  gave,  and  has  shown
that  there  is  no  real  certainty  that  the  particular  disposition  of  personality
with  which  each  man  is  born  must  be  absolutely  the  best  for  all  his  life  on
earth,  no  proof  that  the  kaleidoscope  of  his  being  may  not  be  sometimes
shaken  into  a  more  satisfactory  pattern.  And  setting  aside  those  extreme
cases  where  one  phase  of  personality  is  marked  off  from  another  by  an  actual
break  in  the  chain  of  memory,  many  of  the  sanative  changes  which  hypno-
tism effects  are  morally  and  physically  so  profound  as  to  deserve  the  name
of  regenerations.  The  suicidal  melancholic,  the  brutalised  morphinomaniac
are  hardly  the  same  persons  as  the  active  hospital  nurse,  the  successful  man
of  business,  into  whom  hypnotic  suggestion  transforms  them.  And  be  it
remembered  that  these  sanative  regenerations  are  both  for  i^hysician  and
for  psychologist  the  leading  facts  of  hypnotism — the  facts  which  call  most
pressingly  both  for  explanation  and  for  development.

I  have  now  briefly  reviewed  the  relation  between  hypnotism  and  certain
comparable,  if  not  strictly  cognate,  conditions — namely,  hysteria,  genius,
sleep,  somnambulism.  I  have  shown  by  each  comparison  that  the  essential
meaning  of  hyijnotism  is  always  the  same — a  fuller  control  over  subliminal
plasticity.


Part  XXXIV.] The  Psychology  of  Hypnotism.


107


Suggestion  and  Self-suggestion.

But  how,  after  all,  is  this  fuller  control  eflected  ?  How  is  this  subliminal
plasticity — this  vis  meclicatrix  Natura — actually  reached  ?  On  this  question
Dr.  Bramwell  has  demonstrated,  with  all  the  advantage  of  actual  ex^jerience,
what  some  of  us  foreshadowed  long  ago—  I  mean  the  absolute  insufficiency  at
present  of  any  pvii'ely  physiological  explanation.  No  such  explanation,  indeed,
now  survives  with  sufficient  vitality  to  be  worth  the  trouble  of  killing  anew.
The  main  consensus  of  living  hypnotists  declares  that  hypnotic  phenomena
are  due  to  suggestion  almost  or  quite  alone.  We  need  not  reject  their
dictum,  but  we  must  make  it  our  task  to  try  and  find  out  what  that  word
suggestion  can  mean.  One  thing  the  word  certainly  cannot  mean,  if  it  is  to
have  any  explanatory  value  at  all  ;  and  that  is — mere  ordinary  persuasive-
ness. Dr.  Bramwell  (to  take  his  own  instance)  is  not  the  first  person  who
has  advised  the  dipsomaniac  not  to  drink.  If  he  succeeds  in  reforming  such
a  patient,  it  is  because  he  has  managed  to  touch  not  his  supraliminal  reason,
but  his  subliminal  plasticity.  He  has  set  going  some  intelligent  organic
faculty  in  the  man  which  has  laid  dormant  till  that  moment,  and  which
proves  more  effectual  for  healing  than  the  man's  conscious  will.  How  then,
has  he  done  this  ?  He  has  either  infused  power,  or  he  has  merely  evoked  it.
Either  he  has  added  power  by  some  influence,  such  as  Cuvier  and  many
competent  men  have  believed  in — some  influence  itself  subliminal,  and  akin
to  what  I  have  called  telepathy  ;  or  else  in  some  empirical  way,  not  as  yet
understood,  he  has  simply  started  a  self-suggestion  :  has  unlocked,  as  1  say,
some  fountain  of  energy  which  was  latent  within  the  man's  own  being.

Now  for  my  part  I  certainly  believe  that  subliminal  relations  between
man  and  man — influences  and  transmissions  as  yet  unknown  to  science — do
play  a  real  part  in  hypnotic  phenomena,  especially  and  manifestly  in  the
rare  cases  of  the  induction  of  trance  from  a  distance.  But  I  shall  not  here
insist  on  these  transmissive  influences  ;  for  I  believe  that  the  great  mass  of
hypnotic  results  can  be,  and  are,  accomplished  without  them,  especially
and  manifestly  in  the  fairly  common  cases  where  the  subject  can  bring  on  the
trance  for  himself,  with  no  external  suggestion  to  help  him.

Whether,  indeed,  those  results  are  accomplished  without  invoking  the
same  agency,  whatever  it  be,  which  manifests  itself  in  telepathy,  is  quite
another  question.  What  we  see  in  hypnotic  recuperation  is  an  apparent
dynamogeny,  or  increase  in  organic  energy  ;  but  whence  that  new  energy
comes  we  can  only  conjecture.  As  to  this,  all  that  our  review  of  hyjjnotism
and  allied  conditions  has  made  plain  is  that  it  is  from  the  subliminal  region
that  any  new  energy  or  new  modification  of  energy  must  needs  proceed.
Beneath  the  threshold  of  waking  consciousness  there  lies,  not  merely  an
unconscious  complex  of  organic  processes,  but  an  intelligent  vital  control.
To  incorporate  that  profound  control  with  our  waking  will  is  the  gi'eat
evolutionary  end  which  hypnotism,  by  its  group  of  empirical  artifices,  is
beginning  to  help  us  to  attain.

In  waking  consciousness  I  am  like  the  proijrietor  of  a  factory  whose
machinery  I  do  not  understand.  My  foreman — my  subliminal  self — weaves
for  me  so  many  yards  of  broadcloth  per  diem  (my  ordinary  vital  processes)
as  a  matter  of  course.  If  I  want  any  pattern  more  complex,  I  have  to
shout  my  orders  in  the  din  of  the  factory,  where  only  two  or  three  inferior


108


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplenient.


workmen  hear  me,  and  shift  their  looms  in  a  small  and  scattered  way.  Such
are  tlie  confined  and  capricious  results  of  the  first,  the  more  familiar  stages
of  hyi^notic  suggestion.

At  certain  intervals,  indeed,  the  foreman  stops  most  of  the  looms,  and
uses  the  freed  power  to  stoke  the  engine  and  to  oil  the  machinery.  This,
in  my  metaphor,  is  sleep,  and  it  will  be  effective  hypnotic  trance  if  I
can  get  the  foreman  to  stop  still  more  of  the  looms,  come  out  of  his  private
room,  and  attend  to  my  orders — my  self-suggestions — for  their  repair  and
rearrangement.

The  question  for  us  proprietors,  then,  is  how  we  can  best  get  at  our
potent  but  secluded  foremen  ;  in  what  way  we  can  make  to  our  subliminal
selves  effective  suggestions.  And  here,  I  think,  we  are  for  the  pi-esent  at
the  end  of  theory.  We  must  look  for  guidance  to  actual  exjaerience  ;  not  to
the  experience  of  the  hypnotic  clinic  alone,  but  to  all  forms  of  self-suggestion
wliich  are  practically  found  to  remove  and  soothe  the  pains  and  weariness  of
large  masses  of  common  men.  Apart  from  recognised  forms  of  hypnotic
suggestion  by  others,  two  popular  forms  of  self-suggestion  may  here  stand,
for  brevity's  sake,  as  types  of  the  rest.  Each  of  these  appeals  to  deep-
seated  faiths  ;  each  is  preached  in  a  crude  extravagant  form  from  which  the
man  of  science  turns  with  repulsion.

The  healing  fountain  of  Lourdes  draws  its  prestige  from  the  ancient
belief  in  beings  higher  than  man  who  concern  themselves  with  even  the
details  of  man's  physical  welfare.  So-called  Christian  Science — or  mind-
cure,  to  use  its  less  presumptuous  name — while  still  relying  on  Christian
revelation,  appeals  most  directly  to  the  optimistic  instinct  in  man,  main-
taining that  jjain  and  evil  are  non-existent  shadows,  and  that  the  only
realities  are  love  and  joy.  The  conception  of  the  miracles  of  Lourdes  is  too
mediajval,  perhaps,  to  maintain  itself  for  long.  The  vaguer  impulse  which
prompts  to  mind-cure  may  prove  more  capable  of  adaptation  to  whatever  may
hereafter  be  learnt  as  to  the  true  relation  between  man's  central  will  and  his
bodily  oi'ganism.

Questions  like  these  as  to  the  relative  efficacy  of  various  self-suggestions
belong  indeed  to  the  inmost  meaning  of  hypnotism  ;  but  they  lie  beyond  the
facts  with  which  the  phj-sician  needs  at  once  to  deal.  What  is  now  to  be
desired  is  that  medical  science  should  recognise  that  a  new  task  has  opened
before  her  ;  that  these  hypnotic  artifices,  empirical  as  they  may  be,  do  yet
lie  in  the  true  path  of  therapeutic  progress  ;  that  hypnotism  is  no  more  a
trick  than  education  is  a  trick  ;  but  that  just  as  education  develops  obser-
vation and  memory,  through  alert  attention,  so  hypnotism  develops  organic
concentration  and  recuperation,  through  their  adjuvant  phase  of  sleep.

Finally,  if  beneath  the  fanaticism  and  the  extravagance  of  men  blindly
seeking  relief  from  pain  some  glimmering  truth  makes  way,  that  truth  also
it  must  be  for  science  to  adopt  and  to  utilise,  to  clarify  and  to  interpret.  By
one  method  or  other — and  her  familiar  method  of  widesjiread  cautious
experiment  should  surely  be  the  best — science  must  subject  to  her  own
deliberate  purposes  that  intelligent  vital  control,  that  reserve  of  energy,
which  lies  beneath  the  conscious  threshold,  and  works  obscurely  for  the
evolution  of  man.


Part  XXXIV.]


Addresses  on  Hypnotism.


109


III. — David  Yellowlees,  LL.D.,  M.D.,

Physician  Superintendent,  Glasgow  Royal  Asylum,  Gartnavel,  Glasgow.
The  Uses  and  Dangers  of  Hypnotism.

I  must  express  the  highest  appreciation  alike  of  the  striking  and  forcible
address  of  Dr.  Bramwell  and  of  the  highly  philosophic  and  admii-able  paper
of  Mr.  Myers.  I  believe  the  popular  impression  that  some  mysterious
power  resides  in  the  operator  is  unfounded,  and  that  the  President,  for
instance,  could  exert  the  same  influence  as  Dr.  Bramwell  over  a  hypnotised
patient.  The  essential  thing  is  the  abnormal  condition  induced  in  a  f)atient.
My  own  experience  enables  me  to  believe  even  in  the  extraordinary  cures
related  by  Dr.  Bramwell.  I  have  obtained  some  i-emarkable  results  from
my  own  endeavours.  On  the  whole,  however,  these  have  been  disappoint-
ing, chiefly  because  I  have  failed  to  hyjDnotise  the  very  patients  whom  I
could  most  have  benefited  thereby.  I  have  not  persisted  in  my  attempts
more  than  six  or  seven  times,  and  the  attempts  have  been  chiefly  among  the
insane,  hence  perhaps  the  very  partial  success.  I  cannot  regard  hypnotism
as  free  from  danger,  nor  think  it  possible  that  we  could  often  reach  and
awaken  "the  subliminal  strata  of  mind"  without  the  risk  of  injury.  I
therefore  utterly  condemn  the  use  of  hypnotism  for  mere  exj^eriment  or
amusement.  As  to  crime  in  relation  to  hypnotism,  it  may  be  true,  as  Dr.
Bramwell  has  said,  that  a  hypnotised  patient  would  revolt  from  any  manifest
or  gross  crime,  but  might  she  not  be  told  to  sign  a  document,  and  very
great  evil  thus  be  wrought  ?


IV.— John  F.  Woods,  M.D.,
Medical  Superintendent,  Hoxton  House  Asylum,  London,  N.
Hypnotism  in  Oeganic  Disease.

Having  now  treated  over  1,000  cases  of  disease  by  so-called  suggestion,
I  have,  like  Dr.  Bramwell,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  a  potent  remedy,
and  that  much  good  may  be  done  by  it  if  rightly  employed.  It  is  conmionly
thought  that  only  functional  nervous  disorders,  such  as  neuralgia,  are
benefited  by  this  treatment.  This  is  not  my  experience,  and  my  chief
object  in  speaking  is  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  is  applicable  to  a
much  wider  field  of  disease.  Let  us  not  forget  that  tlie  nervous  system  is
implicated  in  almost  all  disease,  and  in  so  far  as  we  can  influence  it  for  good
we  can  benefit  tlie  disease.  Take  the  case  of  organic  heart  mischief.  At
first  sight  it  may  appear  irrational — I  liad  almost  said  ridiculous — to  treat  it
by  suggestion.  We  must  remember,  however,  that  in  all  cases  of  serious
organic  disease  of  the  heart  there  is  a  strong  nervous  element  ;  the  patient
is  apt  to  be  agitated,  perhaps  he  sleeps  badly,  or  there  may  be  pain.  Now,
if  we  can  soothe  the  nervous  system,  secure  sleep,  and  remove  pain — we  can
do  all  this — we  are  going  a  long  way  to  improve  the  patient's  condition.
Moreover,  in  addition  to  these  general  effects  we  can  produce  a  direct  and
specific  effect  upon  the  heart  by  placing  one  hand  upon  the  epigastrium  and
suggesting  that  the  heart  shall  quiet  down,  and  beat  more  slowly  and


110


Addresses  on  Hypnotism.


[Supplement.


calmly.  Again,  let  us  take  such  a  disease  as  rheumatic  fever.  It  might,
perhaps,  be  thought  that  this  was  the  very  last  disease  to  be  benefited  by
suggestion,  and  yet,  when  we  come  to  think  of  it,  we  shall  find  that  the
nervous  symptoms  in  it  are  very  pronounced  ;  they  are  evidently  produced
by  the  toxins  of  the  disease.  Now,  although  we  are  powerless  to  touch  the
root  of  the  disease  by  suggestion,  we  may  do  much  to  alleviate  symptoms  ;
by  removing  pain  and  mental  distress,  quieting  restlessness,  and  securing
sleep.  We  may  even  lower  the  temperature.  This  I  have  succeeded  in
doing  not  only  in  rheumatic  fever,  but  in  pleurisy,  pneumonia,  and  typhoid.
Nothing  could  more  eloquently  show  the  value  of  suggestive  treatment  in
diseases  other  than  the  purely  nervous.  I  will  instance  just  one  other
organic  disease  that  can  be  benefited  by  this  treatment — tabes  dorsalis — a
very  unlikely  malady,  one  might  think,  to  be  improved  by  it.  In  a  patient
now  under  observation  I  can  always  remove  the  girdle  and  lightning  pains,
and  improve  his  appetite,  spirits,  and  sleep.  As  the  result  of  this  treat-
ment, he  can  now  walk  much  more  steadily  than  before,  and  considers
himself  a  great  deal  better  than  when  he  first  came  under  observation.  One
word  as  to  the  necessity  of  sending  the  patient  to  sleep.  This  is,  in  my
experience,  by  no  means  essential.  I  have  cured  many  cases  without  it ;  we
may  often  succeed  in  getting  the  patient  into  a  receptive  condition  by
making  him  relax  all  his  muscles  to  the  utmost,  and  composing  himself  to
complete  mental  and  bodily  inactivity.  I  do  not  agree  with  Mr.  Myers  that
hypnotic  phenomena  cannot  be  explained  on  physiological  lines.  Mr.
Myers  would  appear  to  assume  that  the  subliminal  processes  to  which  he
refers  are  purely  psycliic.  I  contend  that  they  must  have  a  physiological
basis.  Time  does  not  permit  me  to  say  more  than  this  concerning  Mr.
Myers's  valuable  and  intei'esting  remarks.


v.— Chas.  a.  Meecier,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.  Eng.,

Lecturer  on  Nenrolofiij  and  Insanity,  Westminster  Hospital  Medical  School.

Suggestion  and  Chime.

I  desire  to  point  out  that  the  cases  of  suggested  crime  instanced  by  Dr.
Braniwell  are  entirely  beside  the  question.  He  has  instanced  cases  in
which  it  was  suggested  to  a  patient  that  the  patient  should  commit  a  crime
as  a  crime  ;  but  this  is  not  the  point.  The  point  is,  and  the  fear  is,  that  a
patient  may  be  made  to  commit  a  crime  whicli  has  been  suggested  to  him  as
a  purely  innocent  act.  The  common  exhibition  of  the  itinerant  mesmerists
is  to  make  a  patient  eat  a  tallow  candle  on  the  suggestion  that  he  is  eating  a
stick  of  celery,  or  to  drink  soap  and  water  under  the  suggestion  that  he  is
drinking  beer.  Why,  then,  might  not  a  butcher  cut  the  throat  of  a  child
under  the  suggestion  that  he  is  cutting  the  throat  of  a  sheep  ?  Why  should
he  not  be  made  to  pole  ixe  a  man  under  the  suggestion  that  he  is  poleaxing  a
bullock  ?  Or,  to  put  a  more  probable  and  more  practical  case,  why  should
not  a  man  be  induced  to  sign  an  important  document  under  the  suggestion
that  he  was  signing  something  of  a  totally  different  character,  and  of  no
iiiiportance  ?


Part  XXXIV.]


Note  on  "Fisher's  Ghost."


Ill


II.

NOTE  ON "FISHER'S  GHOST."
By  H.  Arthur  Smith.


I  think  I  ain  right  in  saying  that  in  the  general  experience  of  psychical
investigators,  the  more  dramatic  and  interesting  a  ghost  story  is,  the  less
likelihood  there  is  of  its  being  well  authenticated. "  Fisher's  Ghost "  is,
however,  certainly  an  excejition  to  this  rule. It  has  been  as  carefully
examined  as  any  event  so  distant  in  time  well  can  be,  and  this  by  enquirers
who  have  brought  to  the  task  special  and  varied  qualifications.  It  is  probably
unique,  in  that  it  in  some  degree,  at  least,  connects  the  question  of  ghostly
phantasms  with  the  severe  principles  of  evidence  which  regulate  the  pro-
ceeduigs  of  a  Court  of  Law.i Many  years  ago  De  Morgan,  though  he  had
probably  never  heard  of  this  case,  conceived  and  considered  the  possibility
of  some  such  association. In  his  introduction  to  "  From  Matter  to  Sj^irit,"
he  vvrote  :  "If  the  ghost  of  a  murdered  man  were  to  make  his  appearance
in  court  in  a  form  which  no  one  could  possibly  attribute  either  to  imposture,
optics,  or  chemistry,  and  were  solemnly  to  declare  that  the  prisoner  was  not
the  murderer,  and  then  to  vanish  through  the  roof,  the  judge  would,  no
doubt,  instruct  the  jury  that  they  must  dismiss  the  respectable  apparition
from  their  minds  altogether  ;  that  even  if  the  spirit  had  offered  to  be  sworn
and  to  stand  cross-examination,  there  would  be  very  grave  doubt  whether
his  evidence  could  be  received,  from  his  probable  want  of  belief  in  a  future
state  ;  but  that  as  matters  stood,  it  was  clearly  their  duty  to  take  the  vision
pro  non  visa. To  which  the  jury  would  reply,  if  they  believed  the  ghost,
by  a  verdict  of  not  guilty." It  is  true  that  in  Fisher's  case  the  ghost
was  considerate  enough  not  to  embarrass  the  court  by  any  such  entry  as  Mr.
De  Morgan  supposes,  but  it  adopted  a  no  less  effective  way  of  working  its
ends,  the  difference  being  that  in  this  case  the  ghost  was  on  the  side  of  the
prosecution.

The  story,  which  was  investigated  a  year  or  two  ago  by  Mr.  Andrew
Lang,  and  fully  related  by  him  in  Blackwood's  Magazine  for  July,  1897,  has
quite  recently  been  minutely  examined  from  a  lawyer's  point  of  view  by  Mr.
G.  B.  Barton,  the  official  historian  of  New  South  Wales,  who  has  of  course
had  special  opportunities  of  testing  it  by  reference  to  the  records  of  the
colony.  The  bare  facts,  as  now  stated  by  Mr.  Barton,  may  be  very  briefly
summarised.

In  1826,  a  ticket-of- leave  holder,  Frederick  Fisher  by  name,  was  farming
a  tract  of  land  at  Campbell-town,  near  Sydney,  with  the  assistance  of  one
George  Worrell,  who  acted  as  overseer,  and  was  thoroughly  conversant  with
all  Fisher's  concerns. On  or  about  the  ]7th  of  .June,  Fisher  suddenly

^  Since  writing  this  sentence  I  fiave  observed  that  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  in  the
paper  referred  to  below,  gives  some  analogous  cases  from  the  English  Courts.


112


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[Supplement.


disappeared,  and  in  answer  to  enquiries  as  to  what  had  become  of  him,
Worrell  gave  it  out  that  he  had  taken  passage  in  the  Lord  St.  Vincent  and
gone  to  England.  Some  of  the  neighbours  were  rather  incredulous  as  to
this,  inasmuch  as  nothing  in  Fisher's  proceedings  had  pointed  to  any  such
sudden  removal,  and  this  incredulity  was  by  no  means  decreased  when  it
was  observed  that  "Worrell  was  taking  steps  to  sell  off  some  of  Fisher's
horses  and  farm  stock.  When  asked  for  his  authority  for  this  j^i'ocedure,
Worrell  produced  a  paper  purporting  to  be  a  receipt  signed  by  Fisher  for
the  purchase  money  of  the  horses  ;  but  the  signature  was,  to  say  the  least,
doubtful,  and  the  sale  was  not  eifected.  Other  features  in  Worrell's  conduct
fomented  the  suspicion  that  there  had  been  some  foul  play  in  the  business,
and  when  three  months  had  passed  by  without  any  news  of  Fisher,  the
police  authorities  were  moved  to  offer  a  reward  of  £20  for  the  discovery  of
his  body,  or  of  £5  for  proof  that  he  had  quitted  the  colony.  This  naturally
drew  attention  again  to  the  case,  and  set  many  men  to  woik,  searching  the
bush  in  every  direction  ;  but  a  month  elapsed  without  any  discovery.  At
last,  however,  a  settler  named  Farley  created  a  sensation  by  alleging  that
when  driving  home  at  night  fnjm  Campbell-town  and  passing  the  corner  of  a
paddock  that  had  belonged  to  Fisher,  he  suddenly  saw  the  figure  of  a  man,
to  all  appearance  Fisher  himself,  seated  on  the  toy  of  the  fence.  Taking
it  at  first  to  be  Fisher,  he  went  up  to  sj^eak  to  him,  but  as  he  approached,  the
figure  slowly  rose  from  the  fence,  raised  its  right  arm  in  the  direction  of  a  small
creek,  and  gradually  disappeared,  apparently  following  the  windings  of  the
channel.  This  was  at  once  reported  to  the  police  and  the  magistrates,  who
eventually  determined  to  have  a  search  made  on  the  spot.  On  the  last  day
of  October  two  constables,  taking  with  them  a  native  tracker  named
Gilbert,  proceeded  to  the  spot.  They  at  once  found  ajjpearances  as  of  blood
stains  on  the  fence  indicated  by  Farley,  and,  with  confidence  increased  by
this  discovery,  proceeded  to  the  creek.  On  coming  to  a  pool  of  water  covered
with  scum,  Gilbert  took  a  corn  stalk  from  the  neighbouring  field,  passed  it
over  the  scum,  put  it  to  his  nose  and  said  "  White  man's  fat."  Then  he  led
them  up  the  creek  about  40  rods  to  some  swampy  ground,  took  the  ramrod
from  his  gun,  drove  it  into  the  ground,  drew  it  out,  smelt  it,  and  again  said
"White  man's  fat,  dig  there."  Spades  were  procured,  and  in  a  few  minutes
the  body  of  a  man  was  discovered.  The  features  were  not  recognisable,  but
on  getting  one  of  the  hands  clear,  constable  Newland^  said  "That's  the  hand
of  Frederick  Fisher;  I  will  swear  to  it."  He  also  recognised  the  body  by
its  general  appearance  and  by  the  clothes.

Of  course  arrangements  were  at  once  made  for  an  inquest.  Medical
evidence  shewed  that  tlie  skull  had  been  fractured  in  several  places.  The
identification  of  the  body  as  Fisher's  was  complete  ;  but  though  the  suspicion
again.st  Worrell  was  keener  than  ever,  the  verdict  was  an  open  one — ' '  wilful
murder  against  some  person  or  persons  unknown."  Worrell  was,  however,
arrested,  and  when  before  the  magistrates  made  a  declaration  in  which  he
accus.ed  four  men  who  were  in  his  kitchen  on  June  17th,  as  the  guilty
persons.  This  story,  inconsistent  as  it  was  with  his  previous  statements,
made  little  impression,  and  he  was  committed  for  trial  at  the  Criminal
Sessions  at  Sydney.

1  Mr.  Lang  gives  this  witness's  name  as  Leonard.


Part  XXXIV.]  Note  011  "  Fishcr's  Ghost."


113


The  trial  took  place  on  February  2nd,  1827,  before  Chief  Justice  Forbes
and  a  military  jury  of  six  officers,  the  prosecution  being  conducted  by
Acting- Attorney-General  Moore,  and  the  defence  by  an  attorney  named
Rowe.  Farley  was  not  called  as  a  witness,  he  having  nothing  to  depose
which  the  rules  of  evidence  could  admit.  Worrell's  conduct,  however,  was
so  unsatisfactorily  explained  that  the  jury  had  no  difficulty  in  convicting.
The  verdict  was  "guilty  "  and  the  death  sentence  pronounced.

The  prisoner  was  attended  by  the  Rev.  W.  Cowper,  to  whom  he  made  a
qualified  confession,  denying  his  declaration  as  to  the  four  men  whom  he
had  accused,  but  representing  that  he  had  accidentally  struck  and  killed
Fisher  while  aiming  a  blow  at  a  horse  which  he  saw  straying  among  the
wheat  crop.  He  was,  however  executed  on  a  scaffold  in  front  of  the  old  gaol
off  Lower  George  Street  in  the  presence  of  an  enormous  crowd.

Such,  in  outline,  are  the  facts  as  narrated  by  Mr.  Barton  after  examina-
tion of  the  court  and  official  records  ;  and  they  agree  in  every  important
point  with  the  story  as  it  was  first  told  in  R.  Montgomery  Martin's  HiMory
of  the  Britiish  Colonies  published  in  London  in  1835  ;  and  a  little  later  in
Tegg's  Magazine  published  in  Sydney,  under  the  title  of  "Fisher's  Ghost,
a  Legend  of  Campbell-Town."  It  appears  also  in  Rusden's  History  of
Australia  (1883)  and  with  more  or  less  intentional  embellishment  in  House-
hold Words  for  1859.

A  friend  of  my  own  who  was  Secretary  of  the  Navigation  and  Pilotage
Boards  in  Sydney  in  1852,  has  recently  given  me  his  recollections  of  the  story
as  it  was  told  him  by  his  father-in-law,  who  was  present  at  the  trial  and  well
conversant  with  the  facts.  His  version  again  is  in  substantial  agreement,
but  there  are  certain  variations  of  detail  which  it  may  not  be  uninteresting
to  indicate.  In  the  first  place  his  impression  was  that  the  locality  of  the
murder  was  near  Parramatta,  on  the  opj)osite  side  of  Sydney  from
Campbell-town.  In  this  he  is  doubtless  wrong.  Again  in  his  version  he
represents  Worrell  as  having  despatched  to  England  a  letter  addressed  to
himself  and  signed  in  Fisher's  name,  in  which  letter  Fisher  is  made  to  say
that,  having  come  into  a  good  fortune  in  England,  he  does  not  intend  to
return  to  Australia,  and  that  for  old  acquaintance  sake  he  makes  Worrell  a
present  of  the  farm  and  stock.  This  letter  was  to  be  posted  in  England
so  as  to  confirm  Worrell's  alleged  title.  There  is  nothing  in  Mr.  Barton's
narrative  to  contradict  this,  but  obviously  such  a  letter,  if  written,  could
have  had  no  eftect  whatever  on  the  case,  inasmuch  as  the  interval  between
the  murder  and  the  trial  was  not  sufficient  for  it  to  have  been  despatched
and  returned.  If  it  happened  at  all  it  could  only  have  come  to  light
afterwards.  My  friend's  recollection  is  quite  distinct  as  to  the  "White
man's  fat''  expression.  In  fact  this  is  a  point  which  would  be  little  likely
to  escape  any  memory.  The  identification  of  the  body  he  ascribes  partly  to
the  peculiar  "basket"  pattern  on  the  buttons,  and  partly  to  the  discovery
in  the  pockets  of  a  large  comprehensive  sort  of  knife  with  corkscrew  and
other  attachments,  which  Fisher  was  known  to  have  recently  received  from
England.  My  friend  is  under  the  impression  that  the  prosecution  was
conducted  by  Mr.  Alfred  Stephen.  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  Mr.
Barton's  story,  as  Mr.  Stephen  must  have  been  a  young  man  at  the  time,
and  may  well  have  held  a  junior  brief  with  the  Attorney-General.


I


114 Note  on  a  Case  in  "Phantasms  of  the  Living."  (Supplement.

The  most  important  deviation,  however,  concerns  the  confession.
According  to  his  account,  a  petition  for  a  rejDrieve  was  got  up  by  some
people  who  were  convinced  of  Worrell's  innocence,  and  presented  to  Governor
Darling ;  and  the  Governor,  strongly  impressed  with  the  peculiar  circumstances
which  led  up  to  the  conviction,  determining  at  the  last  moment  to  stay  the
execution,  despatched  an  orderly  to  the  gaol  for  the  purpose.  Before  his
arrival,  however,  Worrell  had  made  and  signed  not  a  qualified  but  a  complete
confession,  giving  details  of  the  murderous  assault  which  explained  some  of
appearances  on  the  spot.  On  this  confession  being  at  once  reported  to  the
Governor,  the  reprieve  was  withdrawn  and  the  execution  proceeded  with.
One  can  scarcely  hesitate  in  choosing  between  this  and  the  narrative  given
by  Mr.  Barton,  whose  sources  of  information  are  much  more  trustworthy.
It  is  just  one  of  those  dramatic  embellishments  which  are  likely  to  find  their
way  in  course  of  time  into  any  story  which  has  excited  strong  public
interest.

On  the  whole  the  various  accounts  of  the  event  which  have  appeared  are
singularly  free  from  decorative  additions,  and  though  of  course  there  is  room
for  sceptical  criticism  as  to  the  real  origin  of  Farley's  story,  there  is  a
waisemhlance  therein  which  has  been  admitted  by  every  narrator.  One
would  like  to  know  whether  Farley  received  the  £20  reward  offered  by  the
police,  for  one  cannot  help  suspecting  that  he  may  have  known  the  details  of
the  murder  from  the  beginning,  and  that  on  hearing  of  the  reward  he
ingeniously  invented  the  ghost  to  explain  the  four  months'  delay  in  making
the  disclosure.  If  so,  being  on  the  spot,  he  would  have  little  difficulty  in
assisting  the  tracker  to  identify  the  locality  of  the  grave.  Mr.  Lang
considers  tliis  hypothesis,  but  rejects  it  as  an  improbable  explanation  of
Farley's  conduct. But  is  the  apparition  less  improbable  1


NOTE  ON  A  CASE  IN  "PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIVING."


The  Editor  of  these  Proceedings  is  of  course  not  responsible  for  state-
ments appearing  in  any  other  book  ;  but  by  the  wish  of  the  two  surviving
part-autliors  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  considering  the  close  connection
between  that  book  and  the  S.P.R.,  under  the  auspices  of  whose  Council  it
was  published,  we  think  it  right  to  mention  here  that  one  of  the  cases  in  the
"  Additional  Chapter,"  Vol.  XL,  p.  671,  must  now  be  withdrawn.  There  is
no  reason  to  doubt  the  bona  fides  of  Mr.  Sparks,  tlie  princijml  informant  ;
but  Mr.  Cleave,  then  18  years  of  age,  whose  evidence  is  essential  to  the  case,
has  admitted  that  the  alleged  apparition  of  himself,  when  entranced,  to  a
young  lady  in  London,  was  a  hoax.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


115


III.
REVIEWS.

Some  cases  recorded  in  the Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques."

Professor  Grasset  published  in  the  Anncdes  des  Sciences  Psijchiques  for
Nov.-Dec,  1897,  and  in  the  Semaine  Me'dicale  of  Dec.  1st,  1897,  an  account
of  an  experiment  made  by  him  in  Oct.  1897,  with  a  subject  of  Dr.  Ferroul's
of  Narbonne,  in  reading  through  opaque  bodies.  Reports  of  this  experiment
have  appeared  in  most  of  the  chief  English  and  American  newsi^apers,  and
as  these  reports  were  in  the  main  accurate  it  will  be  unnecessary  here  to
enter  into  details.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  subject  read  the  contents  of  a
sealed  envelope  sent  by  Professor  Grasset  to  Dr.  Ferroul  with  substantial
accuracy,  and  Professor  Grasset  was  satisfied  that  the  envelojje  had  not  been
tampered  with  in  any  way.  Suflicient  precautions  had  been  taken  to  render
it  impossible  to  see  the  writing  through  the  envelope,  and  the  words  written
were  known  only  to  Professor  Grasset  and  not  to  Dr.  Ferroul.

I  propose  to  comment  on  two  points  only  in  the  record  of  this  experiment,
and  then  to  give  a  brief  account  of  a  second  experiment  undertaken  by  a
Committee  appointed  by  the  Academie  des  Sciences  et  Lettres  of  Montpellier
at  the  request  of  Professor  Grasset.

(1.)  Dr.  Ferroul  writes  to  Professor  Grasset  as  follows  : —

"  When  your  packet  arrived  here  this  morning  my  subject  was  not  at
hand  .  .  .  Having  to  go  my  rounds  I  decided  to  arrange  for  my  subject
to  come  to  my  house  about  4  o'clock,  and  I  went  to  her  house  to  make  the
appointment.  Having  learnt  what  I  wanted  she  jjroposed  to  read  the
contents  of  the  envelope  immediately."

Now  in  view  of  the  evidence  of  the  committee  of  investigation  which  will
be  given  later,  it  would  be  of  interest  to  know  whether  Dr.  Ferroul  proceeded
directly  to  the  subject's  house  300  metres  distant,  after  leaving  the  envelope
on  his  study  table,  or  whether  any  considerable  interval  of  time  elapsed —
say  20  minutes  or  half-an-hour — before  he  went  there  ;  and  also  whether  the
subject  was  at  home  on  Dr.  Ferroul's  arrival  at  her  house.

(2.)  Professor  Grasset  opened  the  envelope  before  a  meeting  of  the
Academie  des  Sciences  et  Lettres  of  Montpellier,  and  the  members  present
did  not  find  any  trace  of  the  borders  of  the  envelojje  having  been  tampered
with,  after  examining  the  inside  of  it.

Professor  Richet  has  had  the  goodness  to  send  two  photographs  of  the
envelope,  and  another  of  the  sheet  of  note  paper  which  was  enclosed  in  it.

Too  much  importance  must  not  be  attached  to  criticisms  founded  on  a
photograph,  the  opinion  of  the  members  of  the  Academy  who  saw  the
original  being  naturally  entitled  to  more  weight.  But  with  this  proviso,
the  following  observations  may  be  of  some  value.

A  safety  pin  which  had  been  inserted  in  the  envelope,  and  which
Professor  Grasset  himself  states  had  only  caught  some  silver  paper  wrapped

I  2


116


J.  0.  Smith.


[Supplement.


round  the  document,  did  not  pierce  the  document  itself,  so  that  if  the
envelope  had  been  opened,  the  document  could  have  been  removed  without
causing  a  tear.

The  appearance  of  the  inside  of  the  envelope  strongly  suggests  that  the
flap  most  remote  from  the  safety  pin  was  loosened  (by  steaming  or  some
similar  method)  and  withdrawn  from  under  the  seal  and  afterwards  replaced.
There  are  three  separate  indications  of  this  at  least.

(a)  A  torn  hole  in  that  flap  of  the  envelope  through  which  the  greater
part  of  the  safety  pin  ran.

(6) A  considerable  tear  in  the  (supjjosed)  removed  flap.

(c)  A  crumpled  margin  of  one  of  the  side  flaps,  perhaps  caused  by
dragging  on  replacement.

Also  the  margins  of  two  of  the  flaps  have  darkened  aspects,  which  some-
what suggests  that  fresh  gum  may  have  been  used  to  keep  the  removed  flap
in  place.  The  supposed  removed  flap  also  looks  as  if  it  might  be  dirtier,  and
there  appear  to  be  indications  that  fresh  gum  has  diflfused  itself  beyond  the
edges  where  two  of  the  flaps  join.

So  much  for  the  first  experiment.

The  report  of  the  committee  appointed  by  the  Academie  des  Sciences  et
Lettres  of  Montpellier,  appeared  in  the  Semaine  Medicale,  pp.  18-20,  1898,
and  in  the  January-February  number  of  the  Annales  des  Sciences  PsycMques,
1898.  It  is  admirably  written,  and  with  much  detail,  and  is  signed  by  all
the  members  of  the  Committee,  including  Professor  Grasset  himself.  I
attempt  no  more  than  to  give  the  salient  points.  Three  envelopes  were
prepared  by  the  Committee  before  leaving  Montpellier  ;  but  as  two  only  were
used  in  the  experiments  we  may  dismiss  the  third  from  our  minds.  Most
elaborate  precautions  were  adopted  in  the  matter  of  sealing,  gumming  and
wrapping,  and  the  documents  placed  inside  the  envelopes  were  so  selected
from  many  others  that  their  contents  were  unknown  to  any  of  the  Committee
or  in  fact  to  anybody,  a  condition  which  is  strongly  criticised  by  Dr.  Dariex
in  the  Annales  in  his  comments  on  the  report.  But  it  should  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  subject  claimed  not  the  faculty  of  telepathy  but  of  reading
through  opaque  bodies.  Arrived  at  Karbonne,  the  committee  proceeded  to
Dr.  Ferroul's  house.  Contrary  to  their  wish.  Dr.  Ferroul  insisted  that  the
first  experiment  at  least  should  be  made  under  the  conditions  already  familiar
to  the  subject ;  namely,  that  the  envelojDe  should  be  placed  on  the  writing
table  in  his  study,  and  that  no  one  should  be  present  in  the  room,  not  even
if  concealed  ;  as  the  subject  found  the  presence  of  any  body  in  the  room,
where  the  envelope  was,  disconcerting.  Prepared  for  some  such  difficulty,
the  Committee  had  placed  one  of  the  envelopes  in  a  box  filled  with  shavings
and  wrapped  in  stout  paper  ;  and  the  additional  precaution  had  been  taken
of  inserting  a  sensitive  plate  inside  the  envelope,  so  that  if  the  envelope
were  opened  the  plate  would  be  affected  by  the  exjjosure.

The  box  was  placed  on  the  writing  table.  Dr.  Ferroul  then  proposed  to
seal  and  lock  the  door  of  his  study.  The  Committee  saw  no  use  in  sealing
the  door,  as  they  had  no  private  seal  with  them  :  and  on  search  being  made
for  the  key  it  could  not  be  found — a  significant  fact.  A  start  was  then  made
for  the  subject's  house,  which,  although  but  300  metres  distant,  it  took  7  or
8  minutes  to  reach. At  the  moment  of  their  arrival  the  subject  was  out.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


117


She  arrived  about  3  minutes  afterwards  and  was  at  once  hypnotised  by  Dr.
Ferroul.  No  mention  is  made  of  any  means  having  been  taken  to  test  the
genuineness  of  the  trance.

The  trance  began  about  S.5.  The  subject  almost  at  once  stated  that  the
box  contained  shavings.

At  3.15  she  was  awakened.

At  3.25  her  sister,  who,  though  present  on  the  arrival  of  the  Committee
at  2  o'clock,  had  left  the  house  almost  immediately,  re-entered  the  room.

At  3.27  the  subject  was  re-hyjjnotised,  and  at  2. 35  stated  that  the  box
was  made  of  wood.

At  2.40  a  servant  who  had  gone  out  just  as  the  Committee  arrived,
re-entered  the  house.

During  the  next  hour  the  subject,  who  was  awakened  and  re-hypnotised
sevei'al  times,  had  amjile  opportunities  of  conversing  with  her  sister  away
from  the  observation  of  the  Committee.

About  3.30  the  sister  left  the  house  taking  with  her  some  paint  brushes,
saying  that  she  was  going  to  do  some  photo-miniature  work.  A  few  moments
before  she  had  had  in  her  hand  a  small  bottle  containing  a  transparent  liquid
of  a  yellowish  tinge.

At  3.40  the  subject,  when  in  trance,  described  the  contents  of  the  box  in
disconnected  sentences.  She  mentioned  black  sealing-wax  (correct),  a  large
paper — shavings — glass  (i.e.  the  sensitive  plate) — green  paper  .  .  .  "the
letter  'f — I  think — an  'r'  a  'g'  or  an  'f — and  something  else — I'm  not
sure  if  there  aren't  numbers — then  a  '  4  ',  I  thmk."

The  document  inside  the  envelope  really  bore  the  following  inscription.
At  the  top,  the  letters  "  a  d  f  "  on  one  line — on  the  line  below,  the  letters
"g  r." At  the  bottom  are  placed  the  numbers  8,  7,  4,  upside  down.

At  3.50  the  subject  was  awakened  and  wished  to  walk  alone  to  Dr.
Ferroul's  house.  The  Committee  followed  and  entered  the  study  at  the
same  time.

Immediately  on  entering  the  room  two  members  of  the  Committee  in-
dependently noticed  that  the  box  was  not  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  it
had  been  left  in,  and  that  the  seals  on  the  top  were  no  longer  intact.

The  subject  tried  to  tear  the  envelope — presumably  with  the  purpose  of
destroying  all  traces  of  injury  to  the  seals  etc.,  but  the  envelope  was  quickly
recovered,  before  she  had  time  to  do  it  more  than  a  trifling  injury,  which
was  carefully  noted.

At  4-15  an  experiment  was  made  with  the  second  envelojje,  which
was  held  all  the  time  by  one  of  the  Committee.  The  subject  made  three
absolutely  unsuccessful  attempts  to  read  the  contents.  The  third  attempt
was  distinctly  amusing  as  it  opened  with  a  repetition  of  the  words  written  m
Professor  Grasset's  envelope — "  The  deep  heavens  reflect  in  stars  our  tears  :
then  they  said  to  themselves  as  they  wrote  it — What  does  it  matter,  since
she  has  read  it  at  a  distance  once."

The  real  contents  of  the  envelope  were  a  Knave  of  Clubs  with  the  word
"amour"  written  on  one  side  of  it,  and  a  plain  white  card  with  the  number
"24"  in  one  corner,  and  these  words:  "It  is  a  square  courtyard  with
nothing  peculiar  about  it."


118


J.  G.  Smith.


[Supplement.


The  young  lady  then  had  an  attack  of  nerves,  which  brought  the  st5an.ce
to  an  abrupt  conclusion.  Dr.  Ferroul  and  the  subject  explained  the  failure
by  the  sensitive  plate  which  acted  on  the  subject,  who  at  such  moments  is
stored  with  electricity,  as  an  insulator.

The  Committee  conclude  their  report  as  follows  ; —

"  We  made  two  experiments  with  Dr.  Ferroul's  subject.

In  one,  the  envelope  remained  in  the  possession  of  one  of  us  all  the  time,
and  the  subject's  answers  were  completely  wide  of  the  mark.

In  the  other,  if  the  subject  succeeded  in  indicating  more  or  less  correctly,
though  not  fully,  the  contents  of  the  box,  it  is  essential  to  a  proper
appreciation  of  the  value  of  this  experiment,  to  collate  from  the  evidence
given  above  with  regard  to  the  condition  of  the  box  and  its  contents  the
following  facts  : —

(1)  The  box  had  to  be  left  unwatched.

(2)  The  subject  was  absent  from  her  house  at  the  moment  of  our  arriving
here  after  having  relinquished  the  box.

(3)  The  details  relating  to  the  contents  of  the  box  were  furnished  only
after  an  interval  of  1  hour  40  minutes,  and  after  the  subject  had  communi-
cated several  times  with  her  sister,  to  whose  frequent  comings  and  goings  we
have  already  drawn  attention.

This  summary  will  enable  anyone  to  draw  his  own  inferences  and  to  find
an  exjjlanation  both  simple  and  natural  of  the  more  than  surprising  keenness
of  vision  of  the  subject  whom  we  examined  in  deference  to  the  request  of
the  Academy."

I  need  only  add  that  the  seals  on  one  side  of  the  box  were  impaired,  the
paper-cover  of  the  box  was  torn  and  had  holes  in  it,  and  fresh  gum  had
been  used  to  refasten  it,  one  of  the  seals  had  been  bodily  removed  and  stuck
back  again,  and  the  sensitive  plate  showed  unmistakably  signs  of  having
been  exposed  to  the  light.

Dr.  Dariex,  the  editor  of  the  Annales,  pleads  for  a  suspense  of  judgment
on  various  grounds,  chiefly  on  the  ground  that  Professor  Grasset's  first
experiment  remains  unaffected  by  the  evidence  of  the  conunittee.  It  would
be  hard,  however,  to  believe  that  anyone  will  be  found  inclined  to  waste  time
on  further  experiments  with  Dr.  Ferroul's  subject  of  the  "X  rays  eyes,"  as
the  New  York  Herald  called  her,  at  least  on  experiments  of  this  nature,
though  if  the  evidence  of  some  other  experiments  made  with  her  in  1894
can  be  relied  upon,  thei-e  is  reason  to  suppose  that  she  is  not  always
fraudulent,  but  occasionally  clairvoyante.  {v.  Annales,  May- June,  July-
August,  1896.)

I  now  proceed  to  consider  two  articles  on  table-turning  phenomena  by
M.  R(juillon,  Professor  of  German  at  Perigueux  College,  which  ajDpeared  in
the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  Sept. -Oct.,  1897,  and  Jan. -Feb.,  1898,
respectively.  I  give  the  stances  in  their  chronological  order,  thus  slightly
altering  M.  Rouillon's  arrangement,  and  I  discuss  only  those  sittings  at
which  two  gentlemen,  MM.  Etienne  Vidal  and  Loze,  were  present,  either
alone  or  with  others.

Stance  on  the  28th  November,  1893,  in  M.  Loze's  room  at  Limoges
College.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


119


Translation.

' '  Seated  at  the  table,  MM.  Vidal  pere — Etieniie  and  Marcel  Vidal,  his
sons,  Loze  and  Rouillon.  "We  make  a  chain  with  our  hands  on  the  edge  of
the  table.

At  the  end  of  35  minutes  movements  begin.

I  ask  for  the  name  [of  the  Saint]  on  the  almanac  under  the  date  of  the
12th  June.  None  of  us  know  it,  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  all  our
seances.  The  almanac  is  on  a  writing  table  at  three  paces  from  us,  resting
against  the  lamp  (the  only  light  in  the  room)  and  so  serves  us  as  a  screen.
This  almanac  has  six  months  on  each  side.  When  the  question  was  put,  the
side  containing  the  first  six  months  of  the  year  was  turned  towards  the  light
of  the  lamp  ;  none  of  us  can  see  it.  The  answer  is  '  Trinite,'  we  proceed  to
verify,  and  this  is  found  to  be  correct.

I  leave  the  circle.  The  other  four  keep  one  hand  only  on  the  table,
without  forming  a  chain.

Question.  'The  name  under  the  date  of  the  2nd  January.'  Ansiver.
'  Basile.'  Correct.

Question.  The  name  given  for  the  2nd  September? Ansiver.  'Fii'min.'

I  proceed  to  verify  the  answer.  The  month  of  September  is  on  the  side
of  the  almanac  placed  in  the  shade.  The  answer  is  wrong,  but  M.  Loze
observes  that  Firmin  does  come  in  the  month  of  September,  that  the  woi'd
is  written  in  large  characters,  and  that  there  is  a  2  in  the  date  [of  S.  FirminJ,
the  25th.  The  almanac  is  put  back  in  its  place,  with  the  second  six  months
towards  the  light.

M.  Yidal  asks  for  the  name  under  the  date  of  the  5th  December.

Answer.  Sabas.

This  name,  absolutely  unknown  to  any  of  us,  strikes  us  all  with  astonish-
ment, and  we  regard  the  result  as  negative,  as  simply  a  fortuitous  combina-
tion of  letters.  A  verification  is  made,  and  Sabas  is  given  under  the  date
in  question.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  seance,  we  all  signed  a  record  vouching  for  the
reality  of  these  occurrences."


The  presence  of  the  almanac  in  the  room  to  my  mind  deprives  the  results
obtained  of  all  value,  as  it  is  practically  impossible  to  decide  with  certainty
what  is  or  is  not  within  the  range  of  vision  of  five  different  persons,
especially  as  the  35  minutes'  concentration  of  mind  before  the  table  began
to  move  may  well  have  produced  hyperajsthesia  in  the  visual  organs  of  any
or  all  of  the  experimenters.  It  would  have  seemed  the  obvious  precaution
not  to  have  had  an  almanac  at  all  in  the  room.  The  answers  could  have
been  written  dowTi  and  verified  afterwards.  The  remark  that  the  almanac
was  on  a  writing-table  at  "  three  paces  from  us"  is  verj^  loose  evidence,  it
being  clear  that  the  writing-table  could  not  be  equidistant  from  the  five
diS'erent  persons  sitting  at  the  table.  Out  of  the  four  questions  asked,  the
name  of  the  questioner  is  given  in  two  instances,  once  M.  Rouillon,  once

Vidal,  in  the  two  remaining  instances  the  name  of  the  questioner  is  not
given.  This  is  a  point  of  some  importance.  M.  Rouillon  does  not  state
whether  these  four  dates  were  the  only  dates  asked,  and  it  is  i^ossible  that
he  has  recorded  the  successes  or  partial  successes  only.


120


G.  Smith.


[Supplement.


M.  Rouillon  does  not  say  what  position  relatively  to  the  almanac  he  took
up  after  leaving  the  circle  at  the  table  ;  nor  does  he  say,  except  in  one
instance,  who  verified  the  answer  by  referring  to  the  almanac.  The  plirases
employed  are  "nous  verifions, "  "on  verifie, "  once  "je  veritie,"  and  in  one
instance  the  verification  is  not  expressly  mentioned,  but  left  to  be  inferred.
And  even  when  M.  Rouillon  says  "  je  verifie,"  it  does  not  amount  to  much,
for  the  expression  does  not  exclude  the  co-operation  of  the  other  experi-
menters. M.  Rouillon  is  looking  to  see  if  the  almanac  gives  Firmin  as  the
saint  for  September  2nd.  It  does  not ;  whereupon  M.  Loze  draws  attention
to  the  fact  that  S.  Firmin's  day  does  occur  in  the  month  of  September,
but  on  the  25th,  instead  of  on  the  2nd.  Now  we  gatlier  from  M.  Rouillon's
repeated  assertions  that  neither  M.  Loze  nor  any  other  person  knew
the  dates  of  the  various  Saints'  days.  It  follows  then  that  although  M.
Rouillon  is  said  to  have  verified  the  reference,  still  M.  Loze  or  M.  Vidal  may
have  been  examining  the  almanac  as  well  at  tlie  same  time.  He  only  once
mentions  the  act  of  replacing  the  almanac  after  verification,  and  then  uses  a
charmingly  vague  French  expression  "on  replace."  Obviously  the  person
who  handled  the  almanac  would  have  an  02jportunity  of  consulting  it  either
consciously  or  sub-consciously,  and  would  then  perhaps  choose  the  next  or
some  subsequent  date  for  the  table  to  answer.  And  even  in  those  instances
when  one  experimenter  is  stated  to  have  replaced  the  almanac,  and  another
experimenter  to  have  put  the  subsequent  question,  there  is  no  reason  against
supposing,  for  any  evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  the  person  who  replaced
the  almanac  may  not  have  suggested  a  date  to  the  next  or  some  subsequent
questioner.

I  now  pass  on  to  the  second  seance,  held  in  M.  Loze's  room  on  October
30th,  1893,  two  days  later.

Translation.

"  At  the  table,  MM.  Etienne  Vidal,  Loze,  Martin,  licentiate  in  mathe-
matics and  science,  and  tutor  at  Limoges  College,  and  Duris,  tutor.

Same  conditions  as  before,  no  one  either  in  the  room  or  at  the  table
knew  the  names  asked  for.  The  following  questions  were  put  by  M.  Vidal,
who  appears  to  have  the  greatest  influence  on  the  table.

The  name  for  Jan.  14. Answer.  Hilaire.  Correct.
,, ,, Feb.  21. ,, Pepin.  Correct.
,, ,, Jan.  28. ,, Charlemagne.  Correct.
,, ,, Dec.  27. ,, Innocents. (Error  of  one  day,
Innocents'  Days  falling  on  December  28th.)
,, ,, May.  16. Ansxver.  Cyriacjue. (Error  of  one  month,

Cyriaque  being  June  16th.)
,, ,, May.  26. Answer.  Clet. (Efror  of  one  month,  Clec

being  April  2Gth. )

A  more  curious  thing  still.  Abdon  was  given  us  for  July  30th.  This  name
does  not  occur  on  the  almanac  that  we  used,  neither  on  the  date  named,  nor
at  any  other  date.  In  the  evening  being  in  the  bursar's  ofKce  I  consulted  an
almanac  hanging  on  the  wall  and  found  under  the  date  of  July  30th  the  name
'Abdon.'  The  scime  thing  has  happened  several  times  in  the  course  of  my
experiments  with  my  tivo  children  alone. We  have  sometimes  had  to  consult


Part  XXXIV.]  Reviews.


121


a  dictionary  to  find  the  name  indicated  by  the  table  (the  name  '  Cune^onde  '
for  instance)  or  another  ahnanac  (for  the  name  'Rose.')  The  name  dktated
by  the  table  always  corresponded  perfectly  with  the  date  named  by  us  "

My  observations  on  the.  first  seance  apply  equally  to  this  second  seance
The  conditions  we  are  told  were  the  same.  Are  we  to  understand  that  the
almanac  was  still  three  paces  from  the  persons  sitting  at  the  table  ?  If  so  it
follows  that  the  table  was  in  precisely  the  same  position  as  two  days  befo're.
The  errors  of  one  day  and  in  two  instances  of  exactly  one  month  do  not  seem
to  have  struck  M  Rouillon  as  suspicious.  They  can  hardly  fail  to  strike
others  so  The  fact  that  the  name  "Abdon"  had  to  be  sought  for  in
another  almanac  m  the  bur,sary,  and  other  names  in  a  dictionary,  are  also
accepted  by  M.  Roudlon  without  misgiving.

It  will  be  noticed  that  other  persons"  besides  the  actual  experimenters
were  present  m  the  room.

It  is  difficult  to  acceiJt  M.  RouiUon's  assurance  that  the  date,  or  at  least
the  approximate  date,  of  Holy  Innocents'  day  was  unknown  to  any  persou

TXjr t\ "  ^'T"  "'^''^^^^'^  °f  ten  persons

of  edu  ation  would  be  aware  tliat  Innocents'  day  falls  soon  after  Christmas
and  before  the  beginning  of  January.

As  in  the  two  remaining  seances  at  which  MM.  Vidal  and  Loze  assisted

the  fabl! h  ^  ''''""^'^  ^"^'^^^^^^  other  persons  at

Ince  !;  !r  ?  "'Ti  "^te™ittent  and  except  in  the  case  of  one
seance  at  w  iich  he  and  his  tea  year  old  daughter  alone  were  present  the
proportion  of  failures  to  successes  is  not  given. In  this  latter  seance,  out  of

held  on T '  ?f  ""'"^^^ ''''  ^^^'^  ' this  seance  was

held  on  January  3rd,  1894,  and  M.  Rouillon  had  been  engaged  with  his
daughters  and  others  in  these  almanac  experiments  off  and  cm  evei  since

extorts ''f'-T.''^  '"T '^"^  t°  have  becon:::.

befieve  thafr  ^^P^^ readers  to

ab  oTut^t  I  r I  '^--^P-ncbng  to  tlie  dates  that  were  chosen  were

game  had  been  played  so  often.

s^an/°''i^'r  """"'^  remarkable  of  the  series  of  table-turnin.

Timidation.
A  Case  From  Limoges. By  M.  Rouillon

renitlcencef  5  ""^^'^^  circumstantial

Tn^  wl  ch  4 'l^^'^^^f '  considering  the  excellent  conditions

unclei  which  they  took  place,  constitute  a  contribution  of  creat  value  (as  T

;  17^"  T'^^^^  'r^''-  '''^  experimentl:  have  been

of  mind  offe^^^^^^^^^  T  i7""'  ^'''^^  '  "^'"'''y  ^'^^"^  --'ti-l  hal^it

ot  mind  offer  an  unimpeachable  guarantee  of  tlieir  accuracy.

Identification  of  a  name  ■^oith  a  dead  person  unlcnown  to  the  e.perime.aers,

obtained  by  direct  writing

h..^''??^™''f clerk  at  Limo<.es  College
had  invited  his  friend  M.  Etienne  Vidal  to  come  to  his  rooms  to  Se  a  Si


122


J.  G.  Smith.


[Supplement.


of  white  wine.  It  was  about  10  o'clock.  There  was  a  good  wood  fire
burning  in  the  grate,  in  front  of  which  .stood  a  small  round  table  with  a
bottle  and  a  plate  upon  it.  M.  Vidal  had  his  forearm,  and  M.  Loze  his
elbow,  on  the  top  of  the  small  table.  The  conversation  was  in  no  way
connected  with  the  subject  of  psychical  experiments.  All  of  a  sudden  M.
Vidal  felt  the  table  rise  once,  then  twice,  and  so  forcibly  that  there  was
only  just  time  to  clear  the  tray.  "  Hullo,"  said  M.  Vidal,  "one  would  think
the  table  wants  to  talk.  Let's  wait  a  minute."  They  placed  their  hands  on
the  table  and  asked,

"  Who  is  there  ? "  "Demi-Siphon."

' '  Dead  or  alive  ?  " ( "  Mort  ou  vivant  ? ") "  Dead. " ( ' '  Morte. ")

"Ah,  it's  a  woman  then  ! What  were  you  'I  " "  A  dancer."

"  Where  ? " "Moulin  Rouge."

"  What  did  you  die  of  ?  " "  An  accident."

"  What  accident  ? " "  Rupture  of  the  perinseum — in  doing  '  a  split.'  "

"  Will  you  jjrovide  an  interesting  seance  for  our  benefit  ?  "

Thereuijon  followed  some  extremely  curious  phenomena,  but  of  a  nature
which  cannot  be  recorded  here  ;  and  afterwards  the  table  spelt  out  "  Slates."

Some  time  before  this  M.  Loze  had  procured  two  slates  in  thick  wt)oden
frames,  which  he  had  fixed  together  by  means  of  two  brass  screws,  i  The
screws  were  unfastened  and  the  slates  separated.  M.  Loze  washed  them  with
a  wet  sponge  and  put  them  to  dry  by  the  fire  in  a  good  light.  Then  he  went
to  look  in  a  drawer  for  a  piece  of  pencil,  and  placed  it  between  the  two  slates.
M.  Vidal,  after  examining  the  slates  again  on  both  sides,  in  front  of  the
lamp  and  in  the  presence  of  M.  Loze,  who  made  a  simultaneous  and  equally
careful  examination,  laid  them  one  against  the  other  and  screwed  them
together.  They  were  then  placed  flat  on  the  table  away  from  all  contact  with
the  experimenters'  hands.  The  table  seemed  to  rajj  impatiently.  On  being
asked  what  it  wanted,  the  reply  came:  "Remove  the  lamp."  M.  Loze
carried  the  lamp  into  an  alcove  about  two  paces  away,  whence  it  still  threw
some  light,  while  at  the  same  time  the  glow  from  the  fire  was  fairly  bright.
It  would  have  been  quite  easy  to  read  the  time  by  a  watch.  All  this  time
M.  Loze  did  not  lose  the  slates,  which  were  resting  on  the  table,  from  sight,
nor  did  M.  Vidal  touch  them.-

"  Write  something,  and  when  the  writing  is  finished,  rap  once."

The  table  remained  motionless  for  a  moment,  then  gave  two  raps
signifying,  according  to  the  usual  code,  "No."

"  There  is  something  not  quite  right  ■?  " "Yes." •  ,

"What  ?"  "Hands."

"Do  you  want  our  hands  on  the  slates  ?  " "  Yes."

This  was  done,''  and  after  a  moment  the  table  rapped  once.

"  Is  the  writing  finished  ?  "  "Yes."

1  These  were  stout  screws,  at  least  four  centimetres  long.

-  This  mutual  supervision  on  the  part  of  both  experimenters  was  the  method  of
procedure  adopted  throughout.

3  It  must  be  understood  that  during  these  experiments  the  slates  rested  on  the
table,  and  were  held  (rnaintcnucs)  by  both  experimenters  simultaneously  in  an  amply
good  enough  light.  Each  time  that  they  were  opened,  it  was  in  a  strong  light  and
under  the  closest  supervision  of  both  operators. (Note  by  M.  Vidal.)


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


123


The  lamp  was  then  brought  close,  and  on  the  slates  being  unscrewed  by
M.  Vidal,  extremely  distinct  tracings  were  discovered  on  one  of  them
resembling  figures  of  8  interlaced.  Encouraged  by  this  result,  M.  Vidal,
without  rubbing  anything  out,  screwed  up  the  slates  again,  and  put  them
back  on  the  table.

The  lamp  was  again  removed,  and  a  request  was  made  for  something
more  definite.  The  table  remained  stationary,  but  the  movement  of  the
pencil  vvas  heard,  and  one  rap  was  given.  By  the  light  of  the  lamp  M.  Vidal
unscrewed  the  slates  and  on  one  of  them  some  characters  were  seen  which  at
first  sight  seemed  to  have  no  meaning.  On  questioning  the  table  it  replied  :
"reversed."  M.  Vidal  thereupon  made  out  an  L,  and  then  M.  Loze  a
flourish,  which  he  occasionally  uses  as  a  signature.  With  his  eyes  away  from
the  slate  the  latter  took  a  sheet  of  thin  paper,  on  which  he  traced  in  his
ordinary  style  the  flourish  in  question  ;  and  on  placing  it,  with  the  back
side  towards  himself,  against  the  lamp,  he  stated  that  the  strokes  which  he
had  just  made  were  practically  identical  with  those  on  the  slate.

The  slate  was  held  before  a  glass,  and  M.  Loze's  signature  was  perfectly
recognisable.

Without  efiacing  anything  the  slates  were  again  screwed  togetlier  and  the
table  was  requested  to  be  good  enough  to  write  in  the  ordinary  way.  The
noise  of  the  pencil  was  noticed,  and  one  rap  was  made.  The  slates  were
opened  by  M.  Loze,  and  on  one  of  them  was  found  written  in  most  satis-
factorily clear  characters  "Demi-Siphon."  The  slates  were  closed  again  by
M.  Loze.

' '  By  one  single  word,  applicable  strictly  and  solely  to  yourself,  indicate
the  kind  of  life  that  you  led."  The  noise  of  the  pencil  was  once  more  heard,
and  once  more  there  was  a  rap.  The  slates  were  unscrewed,  and  on  one  of
them  was  found  very  legibly  written  the  word  "  Vadrouille."  The  writing
was  remarkably  clear  and  firm.

Some  more  questions  were  put  to  the  table,  which  all  of  a  sudden  came
to  a  standstill,  and  did  not  budge  again.

Neither  M.  Vidal  nor  M.  Loze  had  ever  heard  of  Demi-Siphon,  and  they
were  puzzled  both  by  the  name  and  the  details  connected  with  it,  of  which
they  knew  absolutely  nothing.

The  next  day,  when  talking  of  their  experience  before  several  colleagues,
they  learnt  that  a  few  days  before,  Le  Temps  had  announced  the  death  of  a
dancer  at  the  Moulin  Rouge  who  went  by  the  nickname  of  Demi-Siphon.
M.  Vidal  told  me  at  the  time  that  he  did  not  know  whether  the  cause  of
death  (rupture  of  the  perinseum)  as  indicated  by  the  table  was  correct.  But
I  feel  sure  I  remember  that  this  point  was  corroborated  by  inquiries  made  at
the  time.  During  the  whole  evening  M.  Vidal  and  M.  Loze  were  alone  in
the  room  where  the  seance  took  place,  and  also  at  the  following  sitting.  By
way  of  invitation  to  a  fresh  seance,  the  intelligent  force  was  requested  to  be
so  good  as  to  give  a  palpable  manifestation.

"Cross." An  explanation  was  asked  for.

1  It  will  be  observed  that  in  these  various  experiments  MM.  Vidal  and  Loze  took
it  in  turn  to  open  and  shut  the  slates,  one  opening  and  the  other  shutting,  and  vice
versa  on  the  ne.'ct  occasion,  without  affecting  the  result  in  any  way.  (Note  by
M.  Vidal.)


124


J.  G.  Smith.


[Supplement.


"  Wall," — but  nothing  was  to  be  seen.

Some  clays  later,  about  half-past  seven  in  the  evening,  M.  Vidal  was  alone
in  his  room,  which  no  one  else  could  have  entered. ^  All  of  a  sudden  on
turning  round  he  saw  on  the  glass  a  cross  about  10  centimetres  long,  traced,
as  if  by  a  finger,  in  ink.  The  ink  was  still  wet.  About  three  metres  from
the  glass,  on  a  table,  stood  an  inkpot  containing  ink  identical  with  that
in  the  drawing.  Now  M.  Vidal  had  not  left  his  room  for  half  an  hour,  and
some  ten  minutes  or  so  previously  he  had  just  completed  his  toilet  in  front  of
the  glass,  in  a  strong  light,  before  going  to  the  theatre.  It  can  be  said  then
that  this  cross  was  produced  in  his  presence.

About  the  same  time  M.  Loze  also  had  found  several  crosses  in  chalk  in
his  room,  and  in  various  other  places,  but  in  this  latter  case  the  conditions
were  not  sufficiently  stringent  (le  manque  de  controle)  to  warrant  us  attaching
the  same  importance  to  it.  Still  it  seems  likely,  after  taking  into  considera-
tion all  the  circumstances,  that  these  marks  proceeded  from  the  same  cause
as  the  cross  in  ink.  I  append  the  attestations  of  MM.  Vidal  and  Loze,  and
can  only  add  that  these  incidents  were  related  to  me  by  the  two  witnesses
the  very  day  after  they  took  place  (le  lendemain  meme  de  leur  constatation)
with  all  the  details  as  given  above.

M.  ROUILLON,

Professeur  d'allemand  au  lycee  de  Perigueux.
Perigueux,  January  2nd,  1898.

This  account  is  scrupulously  accurate.  Vidal

This  report  of  the  various  experiences  related  (slates  and  cross)  is  in
strict  conformity  with  the  truth.

  L.  Loze.


In  connection  with  this  case  Professor  Charles  Richet  writes  as  follows
in  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

"  I  draw  your  attention  to  the  paper  by  M.  Rouillon  in  the  Annales  des
Sciences  Psychiqnes.  The  value  of  the  experiences  depends  wholly  on  the
worth  and  honourable  character,  and  above  all  on  the  scientific  abilities  of
the  witnesses.  M.  Vidal,  who  was  one  of  the  witnesses  and  probably  the
medium,  is  a  man  of  great  intelligence.  At  the  time  of  the  experiences  he
was  only  20  years  old.  Since  then  he  has  passed  his  medical  examinations
with  great  brilliancy,  and  is  now  a  Doctor  of  Medicine.  He  worked  for
three  years  in  my  laboratory,  and  I  consider  that  he  possesses  a  scientific
mind  of  an  high  order.  The  strange  thing  is  that  he  should  have  had  these
mediumistic  experiences  during  6  weeks,  and  then  never  again."  M.  Richet
adds  that  he  has  no  personal  acquaintance  with  M.  Loze.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  report  was  not  written  by  M.  Vidal  or
by  M.  Loze,  or  hy  both  in  collaboration,  as  M.  Rouillon's  paper  exhibits  the
usual  deficiences  of  second-hand  evidence. Regrettable  also  is  the  interval

1  The  rooms  of  M.  Vidal's  family  are  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  college  by  a
glass  partition.  Access  is  gained  by  a  door  which,  from  the  outside,  can  be  opened
only  by  a  latchkey.  This  door  leads  into  a  large  lobby  with  rooms  on  either  side.
One  of  these  rooms  is  M.  E.  Vidal's.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


125


of  four  years  between  the  date  of  the  seances  and  the  publication  of  the  report.
This  interval  of  four  years  must  detract  substantially  from  the  value  and
reliability  of  M.  Rouillon's  record.  Mention  is  made  of  contemporaneous
notes,  by  the  aid  of  which  the  report  published  in  the  Anncdes  was  written.
But  although  not  directly  admitted,  it  seems  a  fair  inference  that  the  report
was  not  written  by  M.  Rouillon  until  quite  recently.  Nor  did  M.  Rouillou
depend  entirely  upon  written  notes;  he  speaks  of  "  des  souvenirs  precis."
After  a  lapse  of  three  or  four  years  it  is  quite  true  that  our  memory  of  any
event  may  be  precise,  or  distinct  or  circumstantial,  however  we  prefer  to
translate  the  word  ;  in  fact  it  not  seldom  happens  that  our  recollections
become  more  precise,  even  too  precise,  as  time  goes  on  ;  but  it  does  not
follow  that  because  our  recollections  are  distinct  they  are  necessarily
accurate.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  far  these  contemporaneous
notes  preserve  a  record  of  the  conditions,  and  how  far  the  information  about
the  conditions  given  in  M.  Rouillon's  paper,  incomplete  though  it  is,  has
been  drawn  from  the  memory  of  the  experimenters  3  or  4  years  after  the
occurrences.

M.  Rouillon  makes  a  poitit  of  the  fact  that  prior  to  the  iirst  and  sudden
appearance  of  Demi-Siphon  the  conversation  was  in  no  way  whatever
connected  with  matters  psychical.  But  we  know  that  both  M.  Vidal  and
M.  Loze  had  been  attending  table-turning  seances  (^uite  recently,  and  so  it
is  not  unfair  to  presuppose  a  state  of  mental  expectancy.  An  accidental
movement  of  M.  Vidal's  forearm  or  of  M.  Loze's  elbow,  both  of  which  are
recorded  to  have  been  resting  on  the  table  just  before  it  began  to  move,
may  well  have  supplied  the  necessary  stimulus  to  start  tlie  table  on  its  wild
career.

M.  Loze  had  "  some  time  before  "  procured  two  slates  joined  together  by
brass  screws,  presumably  for  experimenting  at  some  seance  which  he  had  in
view.  Note  the  strange  coincidence.  M.  Loze  has  "some  time  before"
("depuit;  qudqne  temps")~a.  vague  expression  like  many  others  used  by  M.
Rouillon— provided  himself  with  two  slates  and  screwed  them  together  with
brass  screws.  Then  lo  !  and  behold  an  obliging  spirit  named  Demi-Siphon
arrives  in  the  most  opportune  manner  and  performs  upon  them.

It  is  a  [jity  that  M.  Rouillon  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  search  the  issues
of  Le  Temps  about  Christmas  1893  to  make  quite  certain  whether  the  details
there  given  of  Demi-Siphon's  death  were  identical  with  those  given  by  the
slate,  or  whether  the  table  supplied  any  information  which  did  not  appear
in  the  newspaper.

Also  it  would  be  most  desirable  to  know  whether  Le  Temps  alone  anions
French  newspapers  contained  a  reference  to  the  death  of  Demi-Siphon,  and
whether  MM.  Vidal  and  Loze  were  in  the  habit  of  reading  Le  Temps,  as
were  evidently  some  of  their  colleagues.  For  it  is  quite  conceivable  that,
though  the  experimenters  did  not  consciously  acquire  the  information,  it
may  have  been  acquired  subconsciously  by  either  or  both  of  them.

One  would  like  to  know  too  where  exactly  the  screws  were  placed  in  the
slates,  what  was  the  size  of  the  piece  of  pencil,  and  what  was  the  size  of  the
slates  ;  especially  the  latter,  because  unless  they  were  fairly  large,  the
communications  must  have  got  a  little  mixed  before  the  end  of  thelieance,
as  we  are  told  that  nothing  written  on  tliem  was  rubbed  out.


126


J.  G.  Smith.


[Supplement.


Were  the  slates  shown  afterwards  to  any  other  persons,  with  the  writing^
still  on  them  ?  Before  the  slate-writing  began,  the  table,  or  rather  the
influence  that  controlled  it,  impatiently  demanded  the  removal  of  the  lamp,
but  it  is  noticeable  that,  though  the  table  insisted  on  the  removal  of  the
lamp  at  the  first  seance,  yet  one  would  infer  that  the  material  manifestation
of  the  ink  cross,  which,  by  the  way,  could  not  be  produced  then  and  there
at  the  second  seance,  occurred  in  a  strong  light,  for  the  cross  was  on  the
glass  before  which  M.  Vidal  had  been  dressing  "  en  pleine  lumiere."

The  day  after  the  first  seance  MM.  Loze  and  Vidal  spoke  of  their
experiences  before  several  colleagues.  One  may  naturally  suppose  then
that  they  spoke  of  the  unexplained  incident  of  the  "  Cross  "  "  Wall,"  which
occurred  at  the  second  seance,  before  other  persons  also.  If  this  was  the
case,  there  arises  a  formidable  suspicion  of  a  practical  joke.  Neither  the
fact  that  M.  Vidal  did  not  see  the  cross  on  entering  his  room  and  when
occujjied  with  his  toilet,  nor  that  the  ink  was  still  wet,  nor  that  the  ink  on
the  wall  and  the  ink  in  M.  Vidal's  ink-pot  were  identical,  exclude  such  an
explanation  ;  and  no  capable  practical  joker  would  be  baffled  by  so  slight  an
obstacle  as  a  door  which  could  be  opened  from  the  outside  only  by  a
latchkey.

And  be  it  noted  in  this  connection  that  it  was  not  the  door  of  M.  Etienne
Vidal's  room  that  could  only  be  opened  by  a  latchkey,  but  merely  the  front
door  of  the  suite  of  rooms  occupied  by  M.  Vidal  pere  and  his  family.

Again,  to  assume,  as  M.  Rouillon  does,  that,  because  M.  Vidal  only
noticed  the  ink  cross  after  having  been  some  time  in  his  room,  therefore  the
cross  was  actually  inked  on  the  wall  in  his  presence,  is  to  assume  a  very
great  deal  too  much.

Note  also  that  M.  Vidal  did  not  see  the  cross  in  process  of  being  drawn,
only  when  completed.

It  is  difficult  to  understand  whether  the  "  Vadrouille "  incident  was
recorded  simply  because  of  the  production  of  clear  and  distinct  writing  when
the  slates  were  screwed  together,  or  whether  because  tlie  answer  was
considered  particularly  apposite  to  the  question  asked.  If  the  latter,  it  may
be  remarked  that  this  term  might  have  been  applied  to  many  dancers  at  the
Moulin  Rouge  without  much  risk  of  its  proving  inappropriate.

Lastly  Professor  Richet  excites  our  curiosity  by  fixing  on  M.  Vidal  as
"  probably  the  medium,"  but,  like  the  wise  judge,  does  not  give  his  reasons,
which  we  should  very  much  like  to  hear.

I  come  now  to  the  last  seance  of  the  series.  It  is  i-emarkable  for  having
produced  a  communication  very  similar  in  style  to  the  communication  made
by  "Demi-Siphon."  I  translate  the  account  given  in  Annales  des  Sciences
Psychiques,  Sept.-Oct.,  1897,  p.  261.

"The  following  seance  was  held  about  Januai-y  13th,  1894,  in  M.  Loze's
room  at  the  College.  I  give  below  a  passage  from  a  letter  that  I  addressed
to  Professor  Charles  Richet  on  January  21st,  as  it  correctly  records  what
took  place  : —

'  Monsieur  le  Docteur, — Eight  days  ago  we  made  some  new  experi-
ments in  psychic  force.  One  startling  incident  remains  in  my  mind,  which
after  several  days'  consideration  I  have  decided  to  communicate  to  you.

At  the  table  were  MM.  E.  Vidal,  Loze  and  myself.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


127


Without  any  preliminary  question  the  table  dictates  :

Jeanne  Eymery.

Are  you  dead  'i  Yes.

Where  ?  Barnabe.

What  did  you  die  of  ?  Murdered.

By  whom  ?  Husband.

When  ? January  10th,  1894.

Has  your  husband  been  arrested  ?  Yes.

Where  is  he  ?  Perigueux.

We  took  the  whole  thing  as  a  joke,  merely  astonished  at  the  part  played
by  the  unconscious  self  with  its  faculty  of  inventing  elaborate  stories,  and
we  didn't  even  think  of  verifying  these  fantastic  lucubrations.

In  the  evening,  at  supper,  M.  Vidal  pere  said  to  his  son  :  '  Well,  have
you  seen  anything  1 '  M.  Etienne  Vidal  replied  with  a  laugh,  '  Oh  nothing.
We  had  a  visit  from  a  woman  named  Jeanne  Eymery  who  was  murdered  by
her  husband,  etc'

Whereupon  Mme.  Vidal  exclaims,  'Why,  it's  in  to-day's  Petite  Gironcle.'

Amazement  of  M.  E.  Vidal  who,  after  ascertaining  that  this  affair  was
related  at  length  in  the  Petite  Gironde,  runs  off  to  find  M.  Loze  in  order  to
acquaint  him  with  this  strange  discovery.

I  send  you  the  newspaper  in  question.

Your  first  idea,  Monsieur  le  Docteur,  will  certainly  be  that  one  of  us  had
read  or  learned  in  some  way  or  other  the  story  so  strangely  communicated  to
us.  This  IS  not  the  case,  and  we  append  our  three  signatures  at  che  end  of
this  letter  in  support  of  our  unanimous  assertion.'

"From  inquiries  that  I  made  by  letter  of  the  schoolmaster  at  Trelissac,  of
which  Barnabe  is  a  suburb,  and  also  of  the  secretary  of  the  mayoralty  of  the
parish  where  Jeanne  Eymery  was  born,  it  appears  that  her  only  Christian
names  were  Marie  and  Franqoise.  But  it  may  be  observed  that  the  husband's
name  was  Jean  Eymery  and  that  the  wife  is  often  known  by  the  name  and
Christian  name  of  her  husband.  It  is  true  that  'Jeanne' is  not  'Jean,'
but  perhaps  we  may  have  borrowed  the  letter  E  of  the  surname  Eymery  and
tacked  it  on  to  the  Christian  name  '  Jean.'  This  would  give  the  pronuncia-
tion 'Jeanne,'  though  one  letter  would  be  wanting  to  complete  the  jjroper
spelling  of  the  word.  Assuming  tliis  to  have  been  the  case,  there  would  be
no  contradiction  on  any  point  between  the  facts  communicated  by  the  table
and  those  given  in  the  newspaper."

Again  a  most  important  detail  in  the  evidence  is  omitted  by  M.  Rouillon,
for  as  before  he  does  not  state  who  put  the  questions  to  the  table.  No
difficulty  seems  to  have  been  felt  afc  the  time  when  the  table  rapped  out
the  name  "Jeanne."  The  question  "  Are  you  dead  ?"  "  Vous  etes  Morte  ?"
(feminine)  follows  pat.  The  attempted  explanation  of  the  confusion  between
Jean  "  and  "Jeanne  "  strikes  me  as  particularly  feeble.  I  am  afraid  that
the  unsympathetic  sceptic  would  point  out  that  the  substitution  of  the  name
"Jeanne"  for  "Marie  Frangoise  "  was  far  more  probably  caused  by  a  slip
of  the  memory  on  the  part  of  one  of  the  experimenters,  who  liad  read  the
account  of  the  murder  in  the  Petite  Gironde  and  confused  the  names  of  the
husband  and  wife,  or  who  had  read  a  report  in  some  other  newspaper  where
the  murdered  woman's  name  was  incorrectly  given  as  "Jeanne."  For  we  have


128


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  affair  was  reported  only  in  the  Petite  Gironde.
And  surely  a  spirit  who  three  days  after  death  could  make  such  admirably
lucid  communications  would  not  be  likely  to  fail  in  such  a  personal  detail  as
its  own  Christian  name.  Does  not  the  inquiry  "Has  your  liusband  been
arrested?"  look  like  a  "  leading  question  "  ?  It  suggests  the  methods  of  a
counsel  examining  a  well  primed  witness.  Perhaps  the  parts  of  examining
counsel  and  witness  in  this  case  were  played  by  the  same  person.  Strange
too  that  the  experimenters  should  have  regarded  what  M.  Rouillon  seven
days  afterwards  in  his  letter  to  Professor  Richet  calls  "a  striking  incident,"
as  a  joke.  Why,  little  more  than  a  fortnight  before,  they  had  been  treated
to  a  communication  from  Demi-Siphon,  the  details  of  which  had  been  verified
by  means  of  a  paragraph  in  Le  Temps.  These  two  spirits,  Demi-Siphon,  late
of  the  Moulin  Rouge,  and  Jeanne  Eymery,  were  really  most  accommodating.
With  a  thoughtfulness,  which  I  am  sure  Dr.  Hodgson  would  like  to  see
emulated  by  the  spirits  communicating  through  Mrs.  Pij^er,  they  refrain  from
giving  any  information  which  cannot  be  verified  in  a  newspaper  published
the  same  day  or  a  day  or  two  before.  They  evidently  shrink  from  giving  any
reason  for  suspecting  them  of  being  "lying  spirits."  Everything  that  they
rap  out  on  M.  Loze's  table  has  already  appeared  in  print,  with  the  exception
of  the  single  word  Vadrouille,  and  a  conversation  unsuitable  for  publication.
What  more  can  one  say  than  that  !

Yet  there  is  one  little  point  more  in  their  favour.

Jeanne  Eymery  can  communicate  clearly  and  unconfusedly  three  days
after  she  is-murdered,  and  Demi-Siphon  also  a  very  short  time  after  her  life
of  degraded  excess  had  come  to  an  end.  The  promptitude  and  precision  of
these  communications  would  seem  to  show  that  a  table  is  a  more  easily
manipulated  medium  than  a  human  organism.

But  are  we  bound  to  believe  that  these  are  really  messages  from  another
world  1  Well,  M.  Rouillon  can  find  no  otlier  explanation  that  fits  the  facts  ;
for,  says  he,  "  suggestion  or  transmission  of  thouglit  (in  other  words,  tele-
pathy), presupposes  a  knowledge  in  the  mind  of  one  or  of  several  persons
present  of  the  facts  revealed  by  the  subject."  Now  we  are  assured  again
and  again  that  none  of  the  persons  present  at  these  seances  were  cognisant
of  the  facts  revealed  by  Demi-Si])hon  and  Jeanne  Eymery.

Possibly  M.  Loze  could  solve  the  mystery.

J.  G.  Smith.


T/te  Making  of  ReUgiun. By  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.,  LL.D.  (Longmans,
Green  and  Co.,  London,  New  York  and  Bombay,  1898,  pp.  380.)

This  volume  is  full  of  interest  for  students  of  our  evidence.  It  may,  in
fact,  be  defined  as  an  essay  in  applied  Psychical  Research.  Mr.  Lang's  object
throughout  the  first  half  of  the  book  is  to  compare  primitive  and  savage
beliefs  in  various  classes  of  marvels — clairvoyance,  possession,  poltergeists,
the  fire-ordeal,  etc. — with  modern  civilised  testimony  to  the  same  effect,
and  to  suggest  a  modification  of  current  anthropological  theories,  in  so  far  as
they  assume  the  baselessness  of  these  primifive  beliefs.  The  noble  savage,
Mr.  Lang  argues,  is  not  such  a  fool  as  the  anthropologists  make  out :  he  had


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


129


at  least  as  good  ground  for  believing  in  powers  transcending  the  material
universe  as  any  modern  Spiritualist.  The  present  writer  does  not  feel
competent  to  criticise  Mr.  Lang's  views  as  to  the  origin  and  growth  of
religious  ideas,  nor  is  it  necessary  here  to  consider  them.  Special  training  is
no  doubt  required  to  enable  one  to  appreciate  the  value  of  the  evidence
ofFered.  To  the  layman,  indeed,  it  looks  as  if  in  the  vast  field  of  anthropology
each  inquirer  is  free  to  select  whatever  facts  best  fit  his  views,  and  still
leave  enough  for  those  who  come  after  to  confute  him  withal.  But  no  doubt
there  are  rules  of  the  game  to  be  observed.

In  support  of  his  position,  however,  Mr.  Lang  quotes  a  good  deal  of
modern  evidence  for  clairvoyance,  "opening  the  gates  of  distance  "  and  the
like.  The  most  striking  are  the  crystal  visions  of  the  lady  whom  he  names
Miss  Angus,  some  account  of  which  has  already  been  given  in  a  paper  read
before  the  Society  last  year.  Mr.  Lang  met  "Miss  Angus"  early  in  1897,
and  received  from  her  accounts  of  some  curious  hallucinatory  experiences.
Mr.  Lang  then  induced  the  lady  to  look  into  a  glass  ball,  and  she  shortly
developed  an  extraordinary  faculty  of  seeing  visions  of  pei-sons  and  places
unknown  to  her,  but  known  to  or  connected  with  those  in  her  company  at
the  time.  Here  is  one  account  of  the  kind  given  in  Miss  Angus's  own  words
(pp.  97-98).

"  IL — One  afternoon  I  was  sitting  beside  a  young  lady  wliom  I  had  never
seen  or  heard  of  before.  She  asked  if  she  might  look  into  my  crystal,  and
while  she  did  so  I  happened  to  look  over  her  shoulder  and  saw  a  ship  tossing
on  a  very  heavy  choppy  sea,  although  land  was  still  visible  in  the  dim
distance.  That  vanished,  and  as  suddenly  a  little  house  appeared  with  five
or  six  (I  forget  now  the  exact  number  I  then  counted)  steps  leading  up  to
the  door.  On  the  second  step  stood  an  old  man  reading  a  newspaper.  In
front  of  the  house  was  a  field  of  thick  stubbly  grass  where  some  lambs,  I  -was
going  to  say,  but  they  were  more  like  very  small  sheep  .  .  .  were
grazing.

"When  the  scene  vanished  the  young  lady  told  me  I  had  vividly
described  a  spot  in  Shetland  where  she  and  her  mother  were  soon  to  spend  a
few  weeks."

[Mr.  Lang  adds] — "I  heard  this  case  from  Miss  Angus  within  a  day  or
two  of  its  occurrence,  and  it  was  then  confirmed  to  me  verbally  by  the  other
lady.  She  again  confirms  it  (December  21st,  1897).  Both  ladies  had
hitherto  been  perfect  strangers  to  each  other.  The  old  man  was  the  school-
master apparently.  In  her  MS.,  Miss  Angus  writes  'Skye,'  but  at  the
time  both  she  and  the  other  lady  said  Shetland  (which  I  have  restored).  In
Shetland  the  sheep,  like  the  ponies,  are  small."

The  next  case  to  be  quoted  is  more  striking,  as  being  strictly  ex-
perimental. Mr.  Lang  writes  (p.  99)  : —

"The  next  case  is  attested  by  a  civilian,  a  slight  acquaintance  of  Miss
Angus's,  who  now  saw  him  for  the  second  time  only,  but  better  known  to
her  family.

"IV.— On  Thursday,  March  ?  1897,  I  was  lunching  with  my  friends

the  Anguses,  and  during  luncheon  the  conversation  turned  upon  crystal
balls.  The  subject  arose  owing  to  Miss  Angus  having  just  been  presented
with  a  crystal  ball  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang. I  asked  her  to  let  me  see  it,  and

K


130


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


then  to  try  and  see  if  she  could  conjure  up  a  vision  of  any  person  of
whom  I  might  think  ...  I  fixed  my  mind  upon  a  friend,  a  young
trooper  in  the  [regiment  named],  as  I  thought  his  would  be  a  striking  and
peculiar  personality  owing  to  his  uniform  and  also  because  I  felt  sure  that
Miss  Angus  could  not  possibly  know  of  his  existence.  I  fixed  my  mind
steadily  upon  my  friend  and  presently  Miss  Angus,  who  had  already  seen  two
cloudy  visions  of  faces  and  people,  called  out,  '  Now  I  see  a  man  on  a  horse
most  distinctly  ;  he  is  dressed  most  queerly  and  glitters  all  over — why,  it's
a  soldier  !  A  soldier  in  uniform,  but  it's  not  an  officer.'  My  excitement  on
hearing  this  was  so  great  that  I  ceased  to  concentrate  my  attention  upon  the
thought  of  my  friend,  and  the  vision  faded  away  and  could  not  afterwards  be
recalled. — December  2nd,  1897."

"  The  witness  gives  the  name  of  the  trooper  whom  he  had  befriended  in
a  severe  illness.  Miss  Angus's  own  account  follows  :  she  had  told  me  the
story  in  June,  1897.

"  Shortly  after  I  became  the  happy  possessor  of  a  '  crystal'  I  managed
to  convert  several  very  decided  '  sceptics, '  and  I  will  here  give  a  short
account  of  my  experiences  with  two  or  three  of  them.

"  One  was  with  a  Mr. ,  who  was  so  determined  to  bafiie  me,  he  said

he  would  think  of  a  friend  it  would  not  be  jiossihle  for  me  to  describe  1

"  I  had  only  met  Mr. the  day  before,  and  knew  almost  nothing

about  him  or  his  personal  friends.

' '  I  took  up  the  ball,  which  immediately  became  misty,  and  out  of  the
mist  gradually  a  crowd  of  j^eople  apjjeared,  but  too  indistinctly  for  me  to
recognise  anyone,  until  suddenly  a  man  on  horseback  came  galloi^ing  along.
I  remember  saying,  '  I  can't  describe  what  he  is  like,  but  he  is  dressed  in  a
very  queer  way — in  something  so  bright  that  the  sun  shining  on  him  quite
dazzles  me,  and  I  cannot  make  him  out  ! '  As  he  came  nearer,  I  exclaimed,
'Why,  it's  a  soldhr  in  shining  armour,  but  it  is  not  an  officer,  only  a  soldier!'

Two  friends  who  were  in  the  room  said  Mr. 's  excitement  was  intense,

and  my  attention  was  drawn  from  the  ball  by  hearing  him  call  out,  '  It's
wonderful  ! It's  perfectly  true  ! I  was  thinking  of  a  young  boy,  a  son  of  a

crofter,  in  whom  I  am  deejjly  interested,  and  who  is  a  trooper  in  the  in

London,  wliich  would  account  for  the  crowd  of  people  round  him  in  the
street.'  "

One  other  case  may  be  referred  to,  as  illustrating  the  intrusion  on  a
vision  of  the  ordinary  kind  of  an  alien  impression — which,  if  due  to  thought-
transference,  may  have  had  its  origin  in  the  mind  of  a  lady  at  a  considerable
distance,  through  the  mediation,  it  may  be  conjectured,  of  her  mother,  who
was  present  in  the  room  with  Miss  Angus.

Miss  Angus,  on  February  2nd,  1897,  was  looking  in  the  crystal  and
describing  what  she  saw — a  man  with  an  agreeable  smile,  whose  appearance
and  surroundings  were  described  with  some  detail  and  recognised  by  the
persons  who  had  set  the  test.  "The  vision,  which  interested  Miss  Angus,
passed  away,  and  was  interrupted  by  that  of  a  hospital  nurse,  and  of  a  lady
in  a,  peujuoir,  lying  on  a  sofa,  loifh  hare  feet."  The  vision  was  apparently
not  recognised  at  the  time  ;  but  a  few  days  later,  a  Mrs.  Cockbui'n,  who  had
been  present,  struck  by  the  exact  fulfilment  of  a  later  vision,  wrote  to  her
young married daughter,  then  some  fifty  miles  away  and  much  in  her


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


131


thoughts,  "and  asked  whether  on  February  2nd,  she  had  been  lying  on  a
sofa  in  lier  bedroom,  with  bare  feet.  The  young  lady  confessed  that  it  was
indeed  so  ;  and  when  she  heard  how  the  fact  came  to  be  known,  expressed
herself  with  some  warmth  on  the  abuse  of  glass  balls,  which  tend  to  rob
life  of  its  privacy."  The  incident,  however,  occurred  between  4.30  and
7.30  p.m.,  whilst  the  crystal  vision  was  seen  about  10  p.m.

As  an  alternative  to  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transference  from  the
younger  lady's  mind,  it  may  be  suggested  that  the  attitude  was  perhaps  a
not  unfamiliar  one ;  and  that  Mrs.  Cockburn  may  have  subconsciously
pictured  her  daughter  as  so  placed  at  that  time.

It  is  curious  to  note  the  effect  produced  on  Mr.  Lang  by  Mrs.  Piper's
trance-revelations.  This  is  how  he  refers  to  the  most  astonishing  body  of
testimony  which  has  ever  been  published  for  supernormal  faculty  ;  the  only
testimony  of  the  kind,  indeed,  in  which  every  evidential  flaw  has  been,  as
far  as  possible,  eliminated.

"In  this  treatise,  I  may  have  shown  the  'will  to  believe  '  in  an  unusual
degree  ;  but,  for  me,  the  interest  of  Mrs.  Piper  is  purely  anthropological.
She  exhibits  a  survival  or  recrudescence  <jf  sa%'age  phenomena,  real  or
feigned,  of  convulsions  and  of  secondary  personality,  and  entertains  a
survival  of  the  animistic  explanation."  But  this  sentence  was  written,
apparently,  before  the  publication  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  last  Rep  ort.  Mr.
Lang,  after  that  publication,  adds  the  following  :  —  "  The  published  reports
do  not  produce  on  me  any  such  impression  [i.e.,  as  they  have  produced  on
Dr.  Hodgson].  As  a  personal  matter  of  opinion,  I  am  convinced  that  those
whom  I  have  honoured  in  this  life  would  no  more  avail  themselves  of  Mrs.
Piper's  *  entranced  organism '  (if  they  had  the  chance)  than  I  would
voluntarily  find  myself  in  a  sitting  witli  the  lady."  All  which  means,  I  take
it,  that  Mr.  Lang  does  not  like  Mrs.  Piper.

Mrs.  Piper,  no  doubt,  makes — or  used  to  make — ugly  faces  in  going  into
the  trance:  and  her  "spirits"  use  various  Americanisms,  and  say  "Sir"
to  each  other  and  the  sitter  with  irritating  frequency.  But  setting  aside
such  £esthetic  considerations  (which  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  affect  a
critical  estimate  of  the  case)  I  can  suggest  but  one  explanation  for  what
seems  a  curiously  inadequate  appreciation  on  Mr.  Lang's  part  of  evidence
valuable  not  less  for  his  purposes  than  for  ours.  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
utterances  are  presented  in  all  their  original  crudity,  with  repetitions,  in-
coherencies,  loose  tags,  and  irrelevant — or  seemingly  irrelevant — digressions
and  interpolations.  As  such  they  form  a  striking  contrast  to  the  smooth
and  finished  narratives  with  which  Mr.  Lang  has  so  often  delighted  himself
and  us— witness.  The  Book  of  Dreams  ami  Ghosts.

The  difference,  of  course,  is  the  difference  between  the  elaborate
antiquities  which  are  the  produce  of  Birmiugham  or  Soho,  and  the  battered
and  worraeaten  fragments  with  which  the  genuine  amateur  has  often  to  be
content.  Mr.  Lang,  if  the  figure  is  allowable,  likes  his  psychical  bric-a-brac
"  restored  "  and  decorated.

Mr.  Lang  is  very  happy  in  his  treatment  of  Herr  Parish,  one  of  the
most  recent  critics  of  our  evidence.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Parish,
though  more  candid  and  more  painstaking  than  most  persons  who  have
undertaken  to  demolish  the  evidence  for  telepathy, has  made  several

K  2


132


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


blunders,  has  fallen  into  many  singular  misconceptions,  and  has  committed
himself  to  some  untenable  positions.  Mr.  Lang  deftly  criticises  the  critic,
and  illustrates  from  Herr  Parish's  own  argument  the  vai'ious  sources  of
error — want  of  attention,  inaccuracy,  fallacious  memory  and  all  the  rest  of
them — with  which  Parish  charges  our  witnesses.  Here  for  instance  is  an
example  :  —

"  A  lady,  facing  an  old  sideboard,  saw  a  friend  with  no  coat  on,  and  in  a
waistcoat  with  a  back  of  shiny  material.  Within  an  hour  she  was  taken  to
where  her  friend  lay  dying,  without  a  coat,  and  in  a  waistcoat  with  a  shiny
back.  Here  is  the  scientific  explanation  of  Herr  Parish  : — '  The  shimmer
of  a  reflecting  surface  [the  sideboard  ?]  formed  the  occasion  for  the
hfillucinatory  emergence  of  a  subconsciously  perceived  sliiny  black  waistcoat
[quotation  incorrect,  of  course],  and  an  individual  subconsciously  associated
with  that  impression.'  I  ask  any  lady  whether  she  consciously  or  subcon-
sciously associates  the  men  she  knows  with  the  backs  of  their  waistcoats.
Herr  Parish's  would  be  a  brilliantly  satisfactory  explanation  if  it  were  only
true  to  the  printed  words  that  lay  under  his  eyes  when  he  wrote.  There
was  no  '  shiny  black  waistcoat, '  but  a  waistcoat  with  a  shiny  buck.  Gentle-
men, and  especially  old  gentlemen  who  go  about  in  bath-chairs  (like  the  man
ill  this  story),  don't  habitually  take  off  their  coats  and  show  the  backs  of
their  waistcoats  to  ladies  of  nineteen  in  England.  And,  if  Herr  Parish  had
cared  to  read  his  case,  he  would  have  found  it  expressly  stated  that  the  lady
'  had  never  seen  the  man  without  liis  coat '  (and  so  could  not  associate  him
with  an  impression  of  a  shiny  back  to  his  waistcoat)  till  after  the  hallucina-
tion, when  she  saw  him  coatless  on  his  deathbed.  In  this  instance,  Herr
Parish  had  a  hallucinatory  memory,  all  wrong,  of  the  page  under  his  eyes.
The  case  is  got  rid  of  then  by  aid  of  the  'fanciful  addenda  '  to  which  Herr
Pai-ish  justly  objects.  He  first  gives  the  facts  incorrectly,  and  then
explains  an  occurrence  which,  as  reported  by  him,  did  not  occur,  and  was
not  asserted  to  occur.

"I  confess  that,  if  Herr  Parish's  version  were  as  correct  as  it  is
essentially  inaccurate,  his  explanation  would  leave  me  doubtful.  For  the
circumstances  were  that  the  old  gentleman  of  the  story  lunched  daily
with  the  young  lady's  mother.  Suppose  that  she  was  familiar  (which
she  was  not)  with  the  shiny  back  of  his  waistcoat,  still,  she  saw  him
daily  ;  and  daily,  too,  was  in  the  way  of  seeing  the  (hypothetically)  shiny
surface  of  the  sideboard.  That  being  the  case,  she  had,  every  day,  the
materials,  subjective  and  objective,  of  the  hallucination.  Yet  it  only'
occurred  once,  and  then  it  precisely  coincided  with  the  death  agony  of  the
old  gentleman,  and  with  his  coatless  condition.  Why  only  that  once  ?
G'eM  Id  le  miracle  !  '  How  much  for  this  little  veskit  ? '  as  the  man  asked
David  Copperfield."

It  is  delightful  to  have  the  tables  turned  in  this  fashion .  There  is  sjjace
for  but  one  more  quotation.  Parish,  following  Professor  Royce,  argues  that
many  cases  of  so-called  fulfilled  presentiments  are  really  due  to  hallucination
of  memory,  started  by  the  news  of  some  sudden  and  painful  event ;  ignoring,
or  making  light  of,  the  fact  that  many  of  these  "pseudo-presentiments" —
as  he  styles  them — are  attested  by  a  second  witness,  to  whom  the  vision  was
told  before  the  news  came.


Vart  XXXIV.]


Revieivs.


133


This  is  Mr.  Lang's  humorous  ^Dresentation  of  our  critic's  argument  : —
"Jones  tells  me  that  he  has  just  seen  his  aunt,  whom  he  knows  to  be  in
Timbuctoo.  News  comes  that  the  lady  died  when  Jones  beheld  her  in  his
smoking-room.  'Oh,  nonsense,'  Herr  Parish  would  argue,  'you,  Jones,
saw  nothing  of  the  kind,  nor  did  you  tell  Mr.  Lang,  who,  I  am  sorry  to  find,
agrees  with  you.  What  happened  was  this :  When  the  awful  news  came
to-day  of  your  aunt's  death,  you  were  naturally,  and  even  creditably,  excited,
especially  as  the  poor  lady  was  killed  by  being  pegged  down  on  an  ant-heap.
This  excitement,  rather  praiseworthy  than  otherwise,  made  you  believe  you
had  seen  your  aunt,  and  believe  you  had  told  Mr.  Lang.  He  also  is  a  most
excitable  person,  though  I  admit  he  never  saw  your  dear  aunt  in  his  life.
He,  therefore  (by  virtue  of  his  excitement),  now  believes  you  told  him  about
seeing  your  unhappy  kinswoman.  This  kind  of  false  memory  is  very
common.  Two  cases  are  recorded  by  Kraepelin,  among  the  insane.  Sure
you  understand  my  reasoning  ? '

"I  quite  understand  it,  but  I  don't  see  how  it  comes  to  seem  good  logic
to  Herr  Parish.

"The  other  theory  is  funnier  still.  Jones  never  had  a  hallucination
before.  '  The  rarity  and  the  degree  of  interest  compelled  by  it '  made  Jones
*  connect  it  with  some  other  prominent  event,'  .say  the  death  of  his  aunt,
which  really  occurred,  say,  nine  months  afterwards."

Naturally,  Mr.  Lang  appears  to  me  less  convincing  when  he  turns  to
criticise  my  own  views  on  Poltergeists.  T  submit,  indeed,  with  some  diffi-
dence— a  diffidence  not  lessened  by  the  suspicion  that  to  Herr  Parish,
perhaps,  his  own  case  may  present  itself  in  a  similar  light— that  Mr.  Lang
has  not  fairly  represented  my  argument.  Briefly,  that  argument  is  as
follows  :  I  took  all  the  cases  of  mysterious  stone-throwing,  etc.,  which  the
Society  during  its  existence,  i.e.,  from  1882  onwards,  has  investigated  at  or
shortly  after  the  time  of  their  occurrence.  Naturally,  these  eleven  cases,
selected  for  investigation  out  of  a  much  larger  number  reported  in  the  news-
papers during  the  last  fifteen  years,  were  selected  because  they  were  prima
facie  good  cases — that  is,  good  for  the  supernormal  interpretation  which  Mr.
Lang  here  champions.

Now,  until  I  carefully  collated  these  eleven  cases,  I  held  it  not  im-
probable that  there  was  something  inexplicable  in  these  Poltergeist
manifestations.  I  expressed  that  opinion,  indeed,  in  my  report  on  the  first
case  which  I  personally  investigated  m  1883.  Tliat  I  now  hold  the  contrary
opinion  is  not  because  I  find  the  intervention  of  a  new  physical  force  ante-
cedently incredible.  It  is  solely  a  question  of  evidence.  I  cannot  find  any
evidence  that  would  justify  such  a  supposition,  even  as  a  working  hypothesis.
There  are,  broadly,  two  qualities  which  we  demand  in  evidence  for  the
•operation  of  a  new  cause.  It  must  be  good  as  evidence,  that  is,  it  must  be
recent,  and  must  proceed  from  witnesses  of  good  intelligence  and  character  ;
and  it  must  be  demonstrative,  that  is,  the  things  attested  must  be  of  such
a  kind  that  no  other  interpretation  is  possible.  Now,  by  a  careful  analysis
of  these  eleven  selected  cases,  and  of  others  gathered  frcnn  various  sources,
I  endeavoured  to  show  that  these  two  qualities  in  the  evidence  are  never
found  together.  There  is  much  testimony  that  is  credible,  but  inconclusive,
as  where,  to  quote  a  case  investigated  by  Colonel  Taylor,  the  new  servant's


134


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


best  hat  is  reported  by  her  mistress,  a  respectable  householder,  to  have  been
found  in  the  water  jug,  and  a  jjair  of  stockings  were  revealed  in  the  kitchen
boiler.i  And  again,  there  is  much  that  would  be  conclusive,  if  its  remote-
ness, the  defect  of  education  on  the  part  of  the  witness,  or  other  circum-
stances, did  not  lessen  its  credibility  ;  as  where,  to  take  another  illustration
from  a  case  investigated  by  Colonel  Taylor,  a  rustic  is  reported  two  or
three  weeks  after  the  event  to  have  seen  a  shadowy  hand  upset  a  tray  of
potatoes.^

My  argument  then  proceeded  to  infer  that  since  over  so  wide  a  field
the  qualities  of  conclusiveness  and  credibility  were  never  found  combined,
this  characteristic  of  the  evidence  was  probably  not  accidental,  that  the
evidence  which  was  credible  was  for  that  reason  necessarily  inconclusive  ;
and  that,  when  the  evidence  seemed  demonstrative,  its  conclusive  quality
was  due  to  the  cii'cumstances  which  lessened  its  credibility.

This  argument  was  strengthened  by  the  demonstration  of  tr-ickery  in  some
cases,  of  strong  grounds  for  suspecting  trickery  in  others  ;  and,  generally,
of  errors,  discrepancies,  and  sources  of  weakness  in  all  the  testimony
available.  Mr.  Lang  meets  my  argument  by  taking  one  case  and  analysing
it.  The  case  which  he  selects  is  the  case  which  I  rejjorted  upon  in  1883 — the
first  case  investigated  by  any  representative  of  the  Society.  Let  me  at  once
admit  tliat  Mr.  Lang  points  out  one  or  two  flaws — one  of  considerable
importance — in  my  treatment  of  this  case.  The  evidence  of  the  Worksop
disturbances  does  not  altogether,  as  erroneously  stated,  rest  on  reports
..made  several  weeks  after  the  events.  Mr.  Lang  has  done  what  I  ought  to
have  done,  and  has  compared  the  version  of  the  events  given  to  me  by  one
of  the  principal  witnesses  on  April  10th,  with  an  earlier  account  by  the
same  witness,  published  in  the  local  papers  on  March  9th.  These  two
accounts  are  in  almost  complete  agreement.  And  this  disposes  of  my
statement  as  regards  this  witness,  at  any  rate,  that  the  testimony  to  the
marvels  must  be  discounted  in  view  of  the  long  interval  which  elapsed
between  the  events  and  their  record.  Mr.  Lang  is  also  clearly  justified  in
pointing  out  that  in  my  original  report  (of  1883)  I  ought  to  have  quoted  the
evidence  for  certain  statements  made  as  regards  the  servant  girl  concerned
and  her  mother.  In  fact,  they  were  based,  if  I  remember  right,  on  common
— and  possibly  inaccurate — report.

For  the  rest,  Mr.  Lang  devotes  several  pages  to  shewing  tliat  the
descrijjtions  given  by  the  various  witnesses,  and  even  my  own  report  (of
1883)  are  inconsistent  with  the  hypothesis  of  trickery.  In  all  this  he  does
me  the  honour  to  reinforce  my  own  argument.  The  various  witnesses  are
doubtless  honest  and  intelligent ;  and  the  things  which  they  say  they  have
seen  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  trickery.  That  was  the  impression  j^ro-
duced  on  me  by  the  reports  in  1883  ;  it  is  the  impression  produced  on  me
still  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  such  is  also  the  imjaression  produced
on  so  acute  a  critic  as  Mr.  Lang.

But  beyond  this  point  our  views  diverge.  To  charge  Mr.  Lang — the
champion  of  our  English  tongue  against  all  irreverent  assailants — with


1  S.P.R.  Procccdiw/s,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  86.

2  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  71.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


135


misunderstanding  an  English  sentence  savours  of  impertinence,  almost  of
impiety — as  if  a  schoolboy  should  accuse  his  headmaster  of  a  false  quantity.
And  yet :  I  wrote,  of  the  Worksop  case,  ' '  The  phenomena  described  are  quite
inexplicable  by  ordinary  mechanical  means."  Mr.  Lang  quotes  this  sentence
(p.  357)  and  a  few  lines  lower  down,  twice  over,  converts  it  into  "Yet  a
half-witted  girl,  in  Mr.  Podmore's  theory,  can  do  what  is  quite  inexplicable
by  ordinary  mechanical  means."  But  I  did  not  say  the  thin/js  done  were
inexplicable  ;  I  said  the  fhenomena  described  were  inexplicable  ;  and  I  meant
what  I  said  and  no  more.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  the
difference  is  something  more  than  a  mere  verbal  nicety.  It  is  of  the  very
essence  of  the  argument  which  Mr.  Lang  does  me  the  honour  to  criticise.  My
contention  is  that  things  described  are  by  no  means  the  same  as  things  done.
Mr.  Lang's  view  apparently  is  that  they  are.  And  so  a  page  or  two  further  on
he  introduces  a  highly  decorated  piece  of  bric-a-brac — Mr.  Bristow's  account
of  the  Swanland  disturbances.  The  disturbances  took  place  in  1849,  when
Mr.  Bristow  was  a  joiner's  apprentice.  In  1854  he  made  some  rough  notes
of  the  occurrence  ;  in  1891  he  expanded  those  rough  notes  into  the  account
printed  in  our  Proceedings.'^  This  account,  as  already  said,  is  highly
decorated.  Mr.  Lang  introduces  it  as  follows  :  "The  most  curious  modern
case  known  to  me  is  not  of  recent  date,  but  it  occurred  in  full  daylight,  in
the  presence  of  many  witnesses,  and  the  phenomena  continued  for  weeks."
Mr.  Lang  finds  this  case  interesting,  notwithstanding  that  unlucky  interval
of  five  years  ;  to  me  it  seems  probable  that  the  interest  which  the  case
possesses  for  Mr.  Lang  is  due  mainly  to  the  interval.  If  those  "moving
odds  and  ends  of  wood  "  had  been  watched  by  Mr.  Westlake,  say,  instead  of
by  Mr.  Bristow  :  or,  if  the  account  had  been  written  down  in  full  the  next
day,  instead  of  in  brief  five  years  afterwards,  it  may  be  suggested  that  the
narrative  would  hardly  have  possessed  sufficient  interest  to  tempt  Mr.  Lang
to  quote  it.

For  myself,  I  am  grieved  to  think  that  the  Poltergeist  should  go.  He  was
a  more  picturesque  figure  than  the  naughty  little  girl  who  takes  his  place.
There  are  too  many  naughty  little  girls  on  this  planet  already.

Mr.  Lang  next  criticises  my  suggestion — often,  of  course,  made  before —
that  in  certain  cases  the  witnesses  to  alleged  "physical  phenomena"  may
have  been  hallucinated.  In  two  instances,  indeed,  owing  it  is  likely  to  a
want  of  clearness  of  expression  on  my  part,  Mr.  Lang  has  misunderstood  me.
Thus  he  quotes  the  account  given  by  the  Master  of  Lindsay  of  Home's
levitation,  whicli  was  briefly  to  this  efiect :  that  the  witnesses — Lord  Lindsay,
Lord  Adare  and  Captain  Wynne — heard  the  window  in  the  next  room  lifted
up  ;  that  Home  was  carried  out  of  the  window,  and  in  at  the  window  of  the
room  in  which  they  were  sitting  ;  that  Lord  Adare  then  went  into  the  next
room,  to  look  at  the  window,  and  "expressed  his  wonder  how  Mr.  Home
had  been  taken  through  so  narrow  an  aperture.  Home  said,  still  entranced,
'I  will  show  you,'  and  then,  with  his  back  to  the  window,  he  leaned  back,
and  was  shot  out  of  the  aperture,  head  first,  with  the  body  rigid,  and  then
returned  quite  quietly."

In  arguing  for  the  hypothesis  of  collective  hallucination,  built  up  on
a  nucleus  of  physical  fact  supplied  by  the  medium,  I  suggested,  as  an


1  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  384-394.


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


illustration  of  my  meaniag,  that  Home  on  this  occasion,  "  at  least  thrust  his
head  and  shoulders  out  of  the  window."'  Mr.  Lang  quotes  this  sentence
and  rejoins,  "  But  if  he  did,  they  could  not  see  him  do  it,  for  he  was  in
the  next  room.  A  brick  wall  was  between  him  and  them."  But  as  they
didn't  see  him  do  it,  and  only  inferred  it  from  a  noise,  which  again  they
inferred  to  come  from  the  opening  of  tlie  window  in  the  next  room,  it  is
clear  that  the  suggested  explanation,  so  far  as  regards  that  part  of  the
Ijerformance,  is  superfluous.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  of  course,  the  suggested
explanation  was  intended,  not  for  the  first  "  levitation  " — which  as  having
been  led  up  to  and  introduced  by  Home  at  a  time  and  under  conditions  of
his  own  choosing,  can  scarcely,  I  submit,  be  claimed  as  a  strong  case  even  by
those  who  are  convinced  that  such  levitation  does  occur — but  for  the  second,
which  was  of  the  nature  of  a  direct  experiment.

So  again  with  the  fire-test ;  as  performed  by  Home  I  should  suppose — still
on  the  theory  of  hallucination — that  the  manifestation  was  generally  worked
by  the  substitution,  aided  by  a  subdued  light,  of  a  cold  cinder  for  a  hot  one  ;
and  that  he  "  jjossibly  on  some  occasions  (as  when  the  liot  coal  jn-oduced  a
blister  Oil  the  hand  of  Mr.  Lang's  friend)  held  the  live  coal  in  his  hand,
protected  by  some  non-conducting  substance. 2"  Mr.  Lang,  on  the  authority
of  Sir  V/.  Crookes,  tells  me  that  there  is  no  substance  known  which  can
j)rotect  the  skin  from  the  effects  of  great  heat,  and  challenges  me  to  produce
my  non-conducting  substance.  Well,  I  was  thinking  of  nothing  more
recondite  than  a  piece  of  asbestos  cloth.

Mr.  Lang  does  not  find  the  theory  of  collective  hallucination  a  satisfactory
explanation  of  the  alleged  physical  phenomena  commonly  called  Spiritual-
istic. Nor  do  I.  But  I  jjrefer  it,  as  regards  the  cases  just  quoted,  to  any
otiier  hitherto  advanced.  If  I  may  venture,  indeed,  to  intei'pret  Mr.  Lang's
jjosition,  he  is  arguing  not  so  much  in  favour  of  explanation  by  supernormal
forces,  as  against  an  indolent  acquiescence  in  the  explanation  by  hallucina-
tion. Of  those  alleged  physical  phenomena,  the  greater  part,  Mr.  Lang
would  no  doubt  agree,  are  due  to  trickery  pure  and  simple.  But  there  are
some  recorded  cases  in  which  the  explanation  by  trickery  pure  and  simple
would  amount  almost  to  an  outrage  on  common  sense.  Mr.  Lang  and  I
should  possibly  differ  pretty  widely  as  to  the  size  of  this  residuum.  But  we
are  both  agreed  that  some  of  the  manifestations  in  Home's  presence  recorded
by  Sir  W.  Crookes  and  others  fall  within  it.  Now,  on  the  assumption  that
trickery  is  inadequate  in  these  cases,  we  have  the  choice,  broadly  speaking,
of  two  other  explanations  ;  (1)  that  the  things  really  happened — say  that
Home  really  took  a  live  coal  out  of  the  fire  in  his  naked  hand  and  was  not
burnt  ;  (2)  that  Home  did  not  take  up  a  live  coal  in  his  naked  hand,  but
that,  partly  by  exercise  of  the  ordinary  conjurer's  art,  partly  by  the  aid  of
such  verbfil  suggestion  as  is  employed  by  the  hypnotist,  he  succeeded  in
inducing  in  Sir  W.  Crookes'  mind,  at  the  moment  or  subsequently,  the  belief
that  he  had  done  so.  Let  us  admit  that  whilst  neither  explanation  is
impossible,  both  go  beyond  common  experience. But  the  fir.st  is  without


^  Stwlics  in  Psychical  Research,  p.  121.
-  Op  cit.,  p.  121.


Part  XXXIV.)


Reviews.


137


parallel  or  analogy  of  any  kind,  and  involves  the  assumption,  so  far
as  we  can  at  present  see,  of  an  entirely  new  pliysical  law  ;  the  other
involves  merely  the  intrusion  into  a  new  region  uf  tolerably  familiar
mental  processes.  It  is  perfectly  true,  of  course,  that  whilst  we  know  of
sense-deceptions  of  many  kinds,  and  occurring  under  various  conditions
to  various  subjects,  we  know  of  no  other  case  in  which  a  Fellow  of  the
Royal  Society  has  been  hallucinated  in  the  course  of  a  scientific  experi-
ment. But  then  other  Fellows  of  the  Royal  Society — niore's  the  pity —
have  not  had  the  courage  or  the  curiosity  to  place  themselves  under  the
same  conditions.

Mr.  Lang  raises  two  special  objections  to  the  theory  of  collective  hallu-
cination ;  iirst  that  all  the  witnesses,  as  in  the  levitation  case,  are  affected  in
the  same  way  (p.  362).  But  if  the  hallucinations  are  suggested  by  the  word
or  gesture  of  the  performer,  we  should  exjaect  them,  as  at  a  hypnotic  seance,
to  be  uniform.  We  should  marvel  rather  if  like  causes  did  not  produce  like
effects.  And  again,  "contagious  hallucination  cannot  affect  witnesses
ignorant  of  each  other's  existence  in  many  lands  and  ages,  nor  could  they
cook  their  reports  to  suit  reports  of  which  they  had  never  heard  "  (p.  361).
No  doubt  the  uniformity  of  testimony  to  these  occurrences  indicates  a
uniform  cause.  But  a  uniformity  of  mental  constitution  in  the  human
race  predisposing  to  similar  tricks  or  similar  delusions,  will  fit  the  facts  just
as  well  as  a  hypothetical  mode  of  physical  energy.  And  we  have  some
evidence  for  the  one  view,  and  none  for  the  other.  In  brief,  since  we
have  to  make  some  assumption — for  merely  to  admit  that  these  phenomena
are  of  interest  is  to  uphold  a  theory  about  them,  viz.,  that  they  are
not  yet  explained  by  trickery, — it  seems  clear  that,  otlier  things  being
equal,  we  should  make,  as  tentatively  and  undogmatically  as  we  please,
the  assumjDtion  that  involves  the  least  departure  from  the  established
order.

But  other  things  are  by  no  means  equal  ;  there  are  two  special  con-
siderations which  point  very  strongly  towards  hallucination  rather  than
"  ectenic  "  force.  The  first  is  the  extreme  diversity  of  the  effects  reported
— the  levitation  of  the  human  body,  the  handling  of  red  hot  substances,  the
apports  of  flowers  through  closed  doors,  the  "materialisation"  of  objects,
the  production  of  musical  sounds,  the  lengthening  of  the  human  body,  etc.
Each  new  kind  of  manifestation  iiacreases  the  difficulty  of  the  physical
hypothesis.  It  is  apparent,  if  all — or  several — of  tliese  alleged  phenourena
really  occurred,  that  we  have  to  deal  either  with  several  new  forces,  or  with
one  force  altogether  remote  from  familiar  analogies.  An  "ectenic  "  or  psychic
force  Aviekled  by  the  medium's  automatic  consciousness  can  only  appear
an  easier  hypothesis  than  tliat  of  the  Spiritualists  because  some  of  the
phenomena  are  ignored,  and  some  of  the  difficulties  evaded.  Unless,  indeed,
adopting  a  suggestion  made  by  Mr.  Myers,  we  are  willing  to  credit  the
automatic  consciousness  of  the  medium  with  the  power  of  dealing,  like
Clerk  Maxwell's  demon,  with  molecular  forces.  If  Home  could  handle
molecules  with  as  much  ease  as  the  rest  of  us  can  play  at  marbles,  no  doubt
he  could  perform  all  the  marvels  reported  of  him.  But  that  is  a  larger
assumption  than  the  champions  of  "ectenic"  force  have  hitherto  shown
themselves  willing  to  make. The  second  set  of  considerations  is,  to  my


138


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


thinking,  even  more  decisive.  Sir  W.  Crookes,  at  the  beginning  of  his  own
investigation,  indicated  very  clearly  the  rules  to  which  proof  of  the  alleged
new  physical  forces  should  conform.  The  Spiritualists,  he  says,  tell  us  of
flowers  and  fruit  and  Mrs.  Guppy  being  carried  through  closed  doors  and
brick  walls.  "The  scientific  investigator  naturally  asks  that  an  additional
weight  (if  it  be  only  the  1,000th  part  of  a  grain)  be  dei^osited  on  one  pan  of
his  balance  when  the  case  is  locked,  and  the  chemist  asks  for  that  1,000th
of  a  grain  of  arsenic  to  be  carried  through  the  sides  of  a  glass  tube  in  which
pure  water  is  hermetically  sealed."

In  other  words,  the  phenomena  should  be  performed  under  strict  ex-
perimental conditions.  The  proof  of  the  thing  done  should  depend  upon
something  else  than  the  mere  observation  of  the  experimenter,  however
skilled.  There  should  be  a  permanent  automatic  record.  Now  when  Sir
W.  Crookes  wrote  the  words  above  quoted — more  than  25  years  ago — the
absence  of  any  evidence  of  this  kind,  though  a  serious  defect,  was  scarcely
in  itself  suspicious.  These  alleged  phenf)mena  had  for  the  most  part  ujj  to
that  time  been  investigated  by  jjersons  without  any  scientific  training,  who
were  not  aware  of  the  kind  of  proof  required.  The  spirits,  or  the  "ectenic"
force,  could  not  have  failed  to  meet  tests  which  had  never  been  demanded.
But  in  the  25  years  which  have  passed  since  then,  not  only  Sir  W.  Crookes
himself,  but  many  other  trained  and  capable  investigators  have  examined  the
subject,  have  witnessed  the  phenomena,  have,  on  occasion,  propounded  tests
of  the  exact  kind  indicated.  And  yet  the  evidence  stands  now  exactly  where
it  stood  when  the  words  were  written  ;  but  with  a  difference.  There  are
plenty  of  competent  persons  who  have  seen  things  which  neither  they  nor
we  can  explain  ;  but  no  one  can  yet  j^oint  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  simple
test  proposed.  Many  eminent  persons  can  vouch  for  movements  or  altera-
tions in  the  weight  of  heavy  bodies — but  the  balance  in  its  locked  glass  case
remains  unaffected  ;  flowers  and  fruit  and  Parian  statuettes  have  continued
to  make  their  appearance  in  closed  rooms — but  that  small  particle  of  arsenic
has  not  yet  found  its  way  through  the  walls  of  tlie  hermetically  sealed  tube.
Intense  cold  has  been  felt  at  a  seance  ;  but  has  never  been  recorded  by  a
self-registering  thermometer.  Strange  draperies,  delicious  scents,  solid
luminous  bodies,  even  material  human  forms,  have  been  produced  out  of  the
viewless  air ;  and  into  the  viewless  air  have  returned  unweighed,  unanalysed,
and  rarely  photographed.

Now,  whether  these  tests  have  been  applied  and  evaded,  as  we  know  to
have  been  the  case  in  certain  experiments  with  Eglinton  and  Slade  ;  or
whether  the  inquirers  liave  simj^ly  forgotten  to  apply  them,  the  result  for
us  is  much  the  same.  Twenty-five  years  ago  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  plus
hallucination  was  at  least  as  probable  as  the  alternative  hypothesis  of  a  new
physical  force.  It  is  now  so  much  more  to  be  preferred,  because  the  tests
which  alone  could  distinguish  between  fact  and  fantasy  have  been  tried  and
have  failed  ;  or,  in  the  alternative,  those  who  have  examined  the  phenomena
have  proved  themselves  unfitted  for  their  task  by  omitting  to  apjDly  the  tests
at  all.

Frank  Podmoee.


Part  XXXI  v.]


Reviews.


139


Hypnotism  and  Its  Aiyplkation  to  Practical  Medicine,  bij  Dr.  Otto  George
Wetterstkand,  M.D.  Translated  from  the  German  Edition  by  Henrik
G.  Petersen,  M.D.  London  and  New  York.  Putnam's  Sons.  8vo.,
pp.  166.

La  Revile  de  Psychologic.  Paris.

L' Hypnotisme  et  L'Orthope'die  Mentale,  by  De.  Edoar  B:^rillon,  Medical
Inspector  of  Public  Asylums,  and  Editor  of  La  Revne  de  L' Hxjpnotisme.
8vo. pp.  45. Paris,  1898.

Among  tlie  medical  pioneers  of  liypnotism  no  one  fills  a  more  prominent
place  than  Dr.  Otto  George  Wetterstrand,  of  Stockholm,  and  we  welcome  a
book  from  his  pen,  especially  so  as  he  is  a  corresponding  member  of  the
S.P.R.  and  displays  this  title  of  honour  on  the  title  page.

Though  the  English  translation  bears  the  date  1897,  we  find  the  German
edition  was  published  in  1891,  and  we  must  express  regret  that  the  results
have  not  been  brought  up  to  a  later  date,  for  much  has  been  done  in  the
last  six  years  to  systematise  and  develop  the  use  of  hypnotic  suggestion.
However,  we  are  glad  to  have  the  results  of  Dr.  Wetterstrand's  early  years'
experiences,  and  hojae  he  will  soon  supplement  them  by  a  new  edition.  We
would  then  suggest  the  addition  of  an  index.

Dr.  Wetterstrand  is  above  all  things  a  practical  physician,  and  his  book
is  written  for  medical  men.  He  modestly  disclaims  any  pretension  to
scientific  completeness,  and  he  refers  the  reader  who  requires  a  text  book
to  the  works  of  Liebeault,  Bernheim,  Moll,  etc.  But  scattered  throughout
the  book  are  many  practical  observations  and  reflections  which  are  of
great  interest  to  the  student  of  psychology  as  distinct  from  the  physician.
It  is  more  esj^ecially  this  psychological  aspect  which  it  is  proposed  to
notice  here.

Dr.  Wetterstrand  at  once  proclaims  himself  as  a  follower  of  the  Nancy
School,  as  opposed  to  that  of  Charcot  or  the  Salpetriere.  As  is  well
known,  Charcot  investigated  hypnotism  almost  entirely  on  hysterical  women
at  the  Salpetriere,  and  he  regarded  the  hypnotic  state  as  morbid,  and,  in
fact,  as  an  induced  neurosis.  Whereas  Liebeault  and  Bernheim  working
among  ordinary  men  and  women  at  Nancy  came  to  exactly  the  opf)osite
conclusion,  and  consider  hypnosis  closely  allied  to  ordinary  sleep  and  a
physiological  condition  to  which  almost  every  healthy  person  is  susceptible.
The  Nancy  theory  is  that  now  generally  held,  and  no  one  with  practical
experience  can  fail  to  endorse  it.  The  Swedes  are  not  supposed  to  be
neurotic,  or  even  highly  imaginative,  but  they  are  noted  for  their  fine
physique  and  jjractical  common-sense.  It  is  therefore  interesting  to  comi:)are
Dr.  Wetterstrand's  exj)erience  with  that  of  other  observers  in  other  parts  of
the  world.  Some  years  ago  a  German  medical  writer,  after  visiting  Nancy
and  Paris,  expressed  his  thankfulness  that  he  was  not  a  neurotic  Frenchman,
but  belonged  to  a  nation  whose  people  were  insusceptible  to  hypnotic
influence.  The  experience  of  Moll,  Forel,  Schrenck-Notzing  and  other
physicians  in  all  parts  of  Germany,  does  not  bear  out  this  boast,  and  it  is
instructive  to  find  that  the  results  achieved  are  very  similar,  whether
reported  from  France  or  Germany,  England  or  America,  Sweden  or  Italy.


140


JDr.  Charles  Lloyd  Tuchey.


[Supplement.


Dr.  Wetterstrand  finds  temperament  an  important  factor  in  hj'pnotism,
-and  holds  that  fidgety,  querulous  and  contentious  persons  are  tlie  most
difficult  to  influence.  Age  is  a  consideration.  He  says  that  all  children  from
4  to  15  are  hypnotisable,  and  he  admits  no  exceptions  excejat  those  of  weak
intellect.  As  one  gets  older,  susceptibility,  he  says,  seems  to  decrease,  but
he  finds  that  even  in  old  age  tlie  majority  of  people  are  susceptible  to  a
greater  or  less  degree.  ■

He  employs  the  method  of  jjersuasion,  and  in  all  cases  endeavours  to
gain  the  patient's  confidence  before  attempting  to  hypnotise  him.  When
there  is  apparent  insusceptibility  he  often  uses  chloroform  as  a  predisposing
■agent  and  endeavours  to  make  the  chloroform  anaesthesia  pass  into  the
hypnotic  state.  He  has  been  successful  in  several  cases  of  this  kind  after
repeated  attempts  without  chloroform  had  failed,  and  susceptibility  once
induced  the  drug  can  be  dispensed  with. (p.  4.)

On  several  occasions  he  has  obtained  acceleration  and  retardation  of  the
pulse  ratio  by  suggestion,  and  he  has  raised  blisters  on  the  skin  and  caused
local  bleeding  in  several  susceptible  subjects, (pp.  30,  32.)

As  bearing  out  his  idea  that  hypnotism  is  closely  allied  to  ordinary  sleep,
he  relates  (p.  34)  how  sleeping  persons,  especially  cliildren,  can  be  made  to
pass  from  one  condition  to  the  other.  He  places  one  hand  lightly  on  the
forehead,  while  with  the  other  he  makes  some  passes  over  the  body,  at  the
same  time  telling  the  sleeper  not  to  awake  but  to  answer  him.  The  sleeper
soon  becomes  cataleptic  and  replies  to  questions  without  waking.

He  has  endeavoured  to  repeat  the  phenomena  of  transference  of  paralysis
from  one  side  to  the  other  by  jneans  of  magnets  observed  by  Charcot  and
Binet  and  Fere,  but  he  has  not  obtained  their  results,  and  believes  that
suggestion  is  the  cause,  as  he  has  seen  similar  transference  occur  when  a
sham  magnet  made  of  wood  has  been  substituted  for  the  metal  one.

In  the  therapeutic  part  of  his  book.  Dr.  Wetterstrand  classifies  diseases
■and  gives  his  experience  with  hypnotism  in  each  class.  He  finds  it  very
useful  in  the  treatment  of  drunkenness  and  relates  several  striking  cases.
One  is  that  of  an  engineer  who  had  had  delirium  treviens  three  times.
His  wife  was  on  the  point  of  getting  a  divorce  on  the  ground  of  incurable
drunkenness  (this  being  possible  in  Sweden).  He  went  to  Dr.  Wetterstrand
for  treatment  and  was  hypnotised  fourteen  times.  A  comj^lete  cure  resulted
■and  the  couple  went  to  America,  where  they  got  on  well.

Dr.  Wetterstrand  notices,  as  do  many  other  observers,  that  anajmic
persons  are  particularly  good  hypnotic  subjects,  and  he  has  found  that  many
bad  cases  of  anaemia,  especially  those  dependent  on  shock  and  depressing
emotions,  are  cured  by  hypnotic  treatment  after  ordinary  remedies  have
failed.

As  he  has  succeeded  in  inducing  hemorrhage  by  suggestion  it  is  not
surprising  to  learn  that  he  has  seen  it  rapidly  stop  severe  bleeding  from  the
nose  in  a  highly  susceptible  phthisical  patient  (p.  74).

He  remarks  (p.  79)  that  he  knows  no  remedy  which  exerts  so  soothing
an  influence  over  the  dying  person  as  hyjjnotic  suggestion.  His  experience
is  borne  out  by  other  observers.  At  such  times  drugs  often  lose  their  effect,
or  become  inadmissible,  and  the  patient's  last  hours  are  rendered  distressing
by  restlessness,  irritability  and  sleeplessness.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviei'js.


141


The  rapidity  with  which  suggestion  acts,  even  in  removing  such  objective
symptoms  as  the  swelling  of  joints  after  injury  is  shown  by  some  of  the
cases.  For  instance,  a  boy  of  sixteen  went  to  Dr.  Wetterstrand  on  October
13th,  1887.  As  the  result  of  a  blow  about  a  month  before  on  the  knee,  the
joint  was  swollen,  and  he  could  neither  bend  nor  straighten  it,  but  kept  it  in
a  semi-flexed  position.  Strong  fluctuation  could  he  felt  in  it,  and  there  were
two  places  above  the  patella  painful  on  pressure.  After  being  hypnotised  he
was  able  to  walk  without  limping,  all  pain  had  disappeared,  and  he  could
bend  and  extend  the  leg  without  difliculty.  The  next  day  the  effusion  had
almost  entirely  disappeared,  and  he  could  walk  (piite  well  (p.  108).  Such  a
case  reminds  one  of  many  similar  instances  reported  by  Braid  fifty  years  ago,
and  perhaps  throws  some  light  on  the  success  sometimes  attending  the
operations  of  "  bone-setters."  These  are  often  men  of  great  ignorance,  but
of  unbounded  confidence,  and  they  practically  hypnotise  many  of  their
patients.

Dr.  Wetterstrand  says  he  knows  of  hundreds  of  people  in  whom  he  can
produce  anfesthesia  in  any  part  of  the  body  by  a  word,  and  he  finds  this  of
great  advantage  where  he  has  to  examine  a  sensitive  jjart,  e.g.,  the  larynx
with  the  laryngoscope.  The  patient  seems  perfectly  awake  and  yet  the
back  of  tlie  throat  may  be  tickled  with  a  feather  without  producing  any
cough  or  sputter.  Dr.  Wetterstrand  is  extremely  careful  (p.  Ill)  not  to  claim
too  much  for  hypnotism,  and  states  nothing  but  the  results  of  his  own
experience  and  observation.  He  reports  failures  as  well  as  successes,  which
is  not  the  invariable  rule  with  medical  men  !  He  confutes  with  much  indig-
nation some  of  tlie  theoretical  objections  levelled  against  hypnotism,  and
while  acknowledging  that  it  might  be  employed  for  evil  purposes  by  bad
people,  asserts  that  he  has  never  seen  anything  but  good  follow  its  use  in
medical  practice.  He  finds  that  the  cures  are  real  and  permanent,  and  that
there  is  no  reaction  to  combat  as  is  sometimes  the  case  with  other  methods
of  treatment.

In  a  new  edition  perhaps  Dr.  Wetterstrand  will  tell  us  of  the  results  he
has  found  to  follow  prolonged  hypnosis,  especially  in  cases  of  epilepsy.  He
has  in  some  cases — reported  in  the  Revue  de  I'Hypnotisme — kept  jjatients  in
the  somnambulic  state  for  over  five  weeks  at  a  time,  eating,  drinking,  and
the  natural  functions  being  carried  on  in  obedience  to  suggestion.  One  can
well  understand  the  benefit  which  should  follow  such  prolonged  rest  of  the
highest  brain  centres  in  cases  of  "  nerve  strain, "  cerebral  exhaustion  and
recurrent  attacks  of  mania.  We  should  also  like  to  learn  the  result  of  the
experiments  he  stated  his  intention  of  making,  with  Professor  Tigerstedt,
the  physiologist,  concerning  the  raising  of  blisters  and  the  slowing  of  the
heart's  action,  etc.,  by  suggestion  in  somnambulists.

The  last  fifty  pages  of  the  book  are  devoted  to  four  letters  by  the  trans-
lator, Dr.  -Petersen,  in  which  he  gives  a  very  clear  account  of  his  experience
in  Professor  Bernheini's  clinique  at  the  Hopital  Civile,  Nancy,  and  expresses
his  own  views  as  to  the  value  of  hypnotism  in  disease  and  especially  in  the
treatment  of  moral  obli(|uities.

La  Revue  de  Psychologie  is  the  second  medical  journal  devoted  especially
to  hypnotism  and  allied  subjects  published  montlily  in  Paris. It  is  well


142


Dr.  Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey.  [Supplement.


edited  liy  Drs.  Hartenberg  and  Valentin,  and  is  now  in  its  second  year.  In
the  numbers  for  March  and  Apiil  Dr.  Van  Renterghem  contributes  two
articles,  in  which  he  summarises  his  experience  of  hypnotism  during  the
four  years  1893-97.  As  he,  in  collaboration  with  Dr.  Van  Eeden,  has
previously  related  his  exjierience  in  the  two  jDrovious  similar  periods,'  we
now  have  available  the  carefully  prepared  record  of  this  successful  doctor's
hypnotic  practice  for  twelve  years.  During  this  third  period  he  treated  488
patients,  248  women  and  240  men.  Of  this  number  55  persons  proved
insusceptible  to  hypnotic  influence,  about  11  per  cent.  ;  142  persons,  or
about  29  i^er  cent.,  were  only  slightly  hypnotisable  ;  about  56  per  cent.,  or
271  persons,  were  profoundly  hypnotised  ;  and  about  10  per  cent,  of  the
whole,  or  47  persons,  were  hypnotic  somnambulists,  i.e.,  chey  had  no
memory  on  waking  of  what  had  hapf)ened  while  asleep.

These  figures  are  extremely  interesting  and  instructive  and  will  be
found  to  correspond  pretty  closely  with  those  reported  by  other  observers
in  different  parts  of  the  world  when  dealing  with  private  as  compared  with
hospital  patients.  In  hospitals,  as  Bornheim  finds  at  Nancy,  the  patients
are  more  thoroughly  under  the  physician's  influence,  and  the  atmosphere  is
charged  with  suggestion  ;  hence  the  proportion  of  insusceptibles  is  much
smaller  and  that  of  somnambulLsts  is  much  larger.

Cure,  however,  in  psycho-therapeutics  does  not  depend  upon  the  depth  of
the  hypnotic  state  induced,  and  some  of  Dr.  Van  Renterghem's  best  results
have  been  obtained  with  patients  who  were  only  .slightly  hypnotisable.  With
such  a  treatment  as  the  hypnotic  at  present  it  is  found  that  the  physician's
clientele  is  largely  made  up  of  patients  who  have  exhausted  all  other  methods
of  cure,  and  Dr.  Van  Renterghem  is  therefore  justified  in  expressing  .satis-
faction that  he  has  succeeded  in  curing  158  or  33  per  cent,  of  his  patients
and  in  improving  the  health  of  about  36  per  cent.,  or  176  patients.  In  84
cases,  or  17  per  cent.,  there  was  no  effect,  and  in  70  cases,  or  about  15  j)er
cent.,  the  result  of  treatment  was  unknown.

Dr.  Van  Renterghem  follows  his  previous  classification  and  divides  the
diseases  he  has  treated  into  : — 1.  Those  affecting  the  nervous  system.  2.
Those  affecting  other  parts  of  the  body.  The  classification  is  rigorous  and
the  results  are  noted  with  accuracy.  To  the  medical  inquirer,  therefore,
this  record  must  be  of  great  help,  and  much  credit  is  due  to  Dr.  Van
Renterghem  for  the  care  and  thoroughness  he  has  shown  in  the  task.

We  irote  that  he  has  treated  ten  cases  of  real  epilepsy  without  a  single
cure  or  even  any  marked  improvement,  and  this  unfortunate  result  is  the
more  disappointing  since  most  observers  have  claimed  at  least  to  get  some
amelioration  in  the  severity  of  the  cases  they  had  treated.  But  in  hj^stero-
ejjilepsy,  which  is  often  confounded  with  real  epilepsy  even  by  some  medical
men,  he  has  been  very  successful,  and  also  in  tliat  distressing  and  intractable
conditicm  known  as  neurasthenia.

As  one  would  expect,  his  greatest  success  has  been  in  the  treatment  of
neuralgias  of  functional  origin,  headaches,  occupation  neuroses  (writers'  and

' Comptes-rendus,  etc.,  Bruxelles.  A.  Xancereau,  1889.  Psychotherapie,  Paris,
Soc.  d'edit.,  Scient.,  1894.


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


143


telegraphists'  cramp)  nervous  dyspepsia,  insomnia,  and  bad  habits  in  children.
But.  he  has  also  had  considerable  success  in  treating  old  paralyses  of  organic
origin,  locomotor  ataxy,  and  the  painful  sym^jtoms  of  phthisis,  cancel",  and
Bright's  disease.

Among  mental  diseases  he  classifies  chronic  alcoholism,  and  he  has  been
successful  with  the  two  cases  he  has  treated  ;  he  has  also  cured  some  cases  of
melancholia  and  folie  du  donte.

Dr.  Berillon  has  made  a  special  study  of  the  application  of  hypnotism  in
the  education  and  treatment  of  children  for  over  twelve  years,  and  his
official  position  has  given  him  many  facilities  for  experimenting  in  this  field
on  a  large  scale.  The  present  pamphlet  is  the  twenty-third  contribution  he
has  published  on  the  subject.  In  it  he  treats  of  the  method  of  procedure  he
adopts,  the  class  of  cases  in  which  he  applies  hypnotism,  and  the  results  he
obtains.

From  his  personal  experience  of  several  thousands  of  cases,  he  deduces
the  following  conclusions  : —

1.  Eight  children  oat  of  ten  are  hypnotisable  to  a  profound  degree  at  the
first  or  second  sitting.

2.  Normal  children  are  more  easily  influenced  than  abnormal  ones.  The
more  intelligent  the  child  the  more  oi^en  he  is  to  suggestion.

Dr.  Berillon  thinks  children  should  only  be  hypnotised  by  cautious  and
experienced  medical  men  for  a  definite  purpose,  and  with  these  precautions
he  considers  the  treatment  absolutely  free  from  risk,  physical,  moral,  or
mental.

It  is  in  the  treatment  of  degenerate  children  that  he  has  found  hypnotism
most  valuable.  Among  the  characteristic  signs  of  degeneracy  he  places  the
existence  of  certain  habits  which  in  these  children  tend  to  become  automatic.
Holding  a  first  place  among  these  is  nail-biting,  which  is,  however,  generally
associated  with  other  habits.  By  hypnotic  suggestion  he  endeavours  to  raise
these  automatic  actions  into  the  domain  of  consciousness,  and  then  to  arouse
or  create  centres  of  inhibition.  For  instance,  he  tells  the  nail-biting  child
that  in  future  he  will  always  be  conscious  of  the  habit,  and  will  feel  a  weight
and  tension  in  his  hand  which  will  make  it  diflicult  for  him  to  put  it  to  his
mouth,  and  that  this  feeling  will  call  up  a  desire  and  power  to  resist  the
habit.  The  same  idea  applies  to  kleptomania,  of  which  he  has  cured  many
children.  He  observes  that  in  a  real  kleptomaniac  the  impulse  to  steal  is
automatic,  beyond  the  control  of  the  will,  and  the  act  often  is  only  im-
perfectly remembered.

Dr.  Berillon  quotes  some  remarkable  cases  of  extreme  idleness,  inatten-
tion, and  pusillanimity  which  he  has  cured  by  suggestion.  A  medical  man
was  once  heard  to  say  that  he  should  prefer  to  have  his  children  naturally
naughty  than  hypnotically  good.  We  imagine  the  question  turns  upon  the
degree  of  naughtiness  which  may  be  considered  natural.  No  sensible
person  would  advocate  the  indiscriminate  hypnotising  of  young  children,
but  for  cases  where  ordinary  educational  methods  have  failed  hypnotic
suggestion  is  certainly  a  most  valuable  auxilliary  and  may  save  the  child
from  an  adolescence  of  misery  and  crime.

Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.


144


James  IT.  Hydop.


[Supplement.


The  New  Psychology.  By  E.  W.  Scripture,  Ph.  D.,  Director  of  the  Yale
Psychological  Laboratory.  8vo.  pp.  500.  Loudon  :  Walter  Scott.  New
York  :  Charles  Scribuer's  Sons.  1897.

This  work  is  a  revision  of  a  more  popular  treatise  by  the  same  author.
The  popular  features  are  still  retained  to  some  extent,  but  are  supplemented
by  matter  of  more  scientific  interest.  The  animus  of  the  book  is  a  strong
defence  of  experimental  methods  in  Psychology,  especially  the  quantitative
measurement  of  mental  plienomena,  as  opposed  to  the  introspective  policy
of  the  past.  In  the  course  of  the  work,  the  author  meets  psychical  research
in  his  path  and  assumes  the  office  of  fool-killer  in  seven  pages  !  The  main
body  of  the  work  requires  no  discussion  here.  This  belongs  to  the  ordinary
psychologist.  It  would  also  be  as  unnecessary  to  notice  the  author's
animadversions  upon  psychical  research  were  it  not  for  the  persistent
demand  all  through  the  work  for  the  utmost  thoroughness  and  accuracy  in
the  investigation  of  facts.

The  criticism  which  must  be  directed  against  the  author  is  that  he
betrays  absolute  ignorance  of  the  subject  which  he  attacks  and  ridicules.
And  this  after  such  repeated  demands  for  thoroughness.  The  accusation
thus  made  can  be  easily  substantiated  by  an  examination  of  the  author's
remarks, (pp.  62-69.)

Professor  Scripture's  mode  of  attack  consists  in  a  comjjarison  of  what  he
regards  as  the  slipshod  method  of  psychical  research  and  the  more  scientific
23rocedure  of  Hansen  and  Lehmann  in  their  criticism  of  the  Sidgwick
experiments.  How  much  he  knows  about  the  Society's  work  is  shown  by
the  single  fact  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  of  his  ever  having
seen  the  Society's  Reports.  The  first  instance  of  this  negligence  is  found
in  the  reference  to  some  experiments  alleged  to  have  been  made  by  Dr.
Ochorovicz,  and  ridiculed  here  with  a  persiflage  that  is  wholly  unscientific.
The  character  of  the  experiments  I  do  not  defend.  They  may  be  anything
you  please.  But  we  are  entitled  to  know  where  they  were  published  and
how  much  weight  was  given  them  by  Ochorovicz  himself.  Not  a  reference
is  given,  while  it  would  seem  fi'om  the  very  language  that  Ochorovicz
attached  no  value  to  them.  Tlie  record  of  them  is  not  found  iji  any  of  the
publications  of  the  Society,  nor  can  I  find  any  trace  of  them  in  Ochorovicz's
book  on  "Mental  Suggestion."  A  few  of  his  experiments  were  mentioned
in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  (Vol.  II.,  p.  660  ff. ),  but  not  a  word  in  them
refers  to  the  instances  criticised  by  Professor  Scripture.  If  psychical
research  is  to  be  held  responsible  in  this  way  for  matter  to  which  it  has  never
given  its  imprimatur,  what  is  to  be  said  of  the  author's  boasted  scientific
method  ?  I  do  not  say  a  word  in  defence  of  either  the  method  or  the  results
of  the  Society's  work.  Any  man  may  think  what  he  pleases  about  tliis.  I
only  hold  up  the  standard  which  Professor  Scripture  had  set  for  himself.
The  failure  in  this  respect  is  seeir  in  another  incident.

The  examjjle  of  scientific  method  here  recommended  for  imitation  is  that
of  the  two  Danish  students,  Hansen  and  Lehmann.  The  value  and  sugges-
tiveness  of  their  experiments  I  shall  not  question,  but  recognise  with
unstinted  praise.  But  Professor  Scripture  shows  no  knowledge  of  either
Professor  Sidg wick's  original  experiments  or  his  rej)ly  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XII.)  to  Hansen  and  Lehmann.  Moreover,  there  are  distinct  indications


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


145


in  the  author's  statements  that  he  has  relied  altogether  on  the  article  in
Wundt's  Studien  for  both  his  )naterial  and  his  judgment  of  the  subject.  He
says  :  "If  we  look  through  the  hundreds  of  drawings  in  Richet's  work,  and
in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psycliical  Research,  we  readily  see  that
the  resemblance  of  the  two  drawings  [referring  to  the  example  taken  from
Hansen  and  Lehmann's  paper]  is  in  only  extremely  few  cases  more  than  in
the  one  given."  (p.  67.)  This  is  an  exact  translation  from  the  article  in  the
Studien,  and  is  not  included  in  quotation  marks, ^  as  it  should  be,  unless
Professor  Scripture  intends  to  imply  that  he  has  examined  the  ijublications
of  the  S.P.R.  But  if  he  had  done  this  he  would  have  found  no  basis  for
such  a  reckless  statement.  I  may  refer  him  to  the  following  places  for  proof
of  my  allegation  : — Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  39-48  ;  Proceedings,
Vol.  I.,  pp.  83-98,  and  175-216  ;  Vol.  II.,  pp.  33-42,  195-200,  and  208-215  ;
Vol.  III.,  pp.  425-452  ;  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  116-126,  and  324-337;  Vol.  V.,  pp.
58-112,  and  174-191;  Vol.  VI.,  p.  398,  five  pages;  Vol.  VII.,  p.  22,  seven
pages,  and  p.  382,  five  pages.  The  statement  quoted  cannot  be  honestly
made  by  any  man  who  has  examined  the  diagrams  given  in  these  references,
and  it  only  shows  that  the  author  under  review  has  abandoned  his  own
injunction  to  be  thorough  when  he  merely  translates  Hansen  and  Lehmann
without  sufficient  acknowledgment,  and  without  himself  consulting  the  work
of  the  S.P.R.

Further,  Professor  Scripture  says  : — "Hysterical  or  hypnotised  persons
are  the  most  frequent  percipients  in  such  experiments."  (Translation  again
without  quotation  marks.)  But  what  evidence  is  produced  for  this  state-
ment ?  None.  Professor  Scripture  lays  great  emphasis  on  quantitative
measurements,  and  surely  here  is  a  statement  that  is  capable  of  statistical
proof  if  anything  is.  But  not  an  iota  of  proof  is  given.  This  is  scientific
method  !  The  statement,  indeed,  is  a  pure  assumption  entirely  without
foundation.  But  what  if  it  were  true  1  What  difference  would  that  fact
make  in  careful  experiments  of  the  kind  under  review,  viz.,  drawings  1  The
percipients  could  just  as  well  be  insane.  It  matters  not  who  or  what  the
percipient  may  be,  if  the  precautions  are  sufficient  to  prevent  fraud.  If  we
should  prove  telepathy,  and  assume  or  prove  that  the  percipients  were
abnormal,  the  fact  might  require  us  to  abandon  the  materialistic  theory  of
insanity.

Not  only,  however,  is  Professor  Scripture  comj^letely  ignorant  of  the
actual  work  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  but  he  is  also  apparently
completely  ignorant  of  the  simple  doctrines  of  chance  that  need  to  be
applied  for  any  exact  estimate  of  the  probable  results  in  experiments  in
thought-transference.  He  supposes  (p.  65)  that  if  a  counter  be  drawn  by
chance  fi-om  a  total  of  90  counters,  the  probability  that  a  random  record  out
of  the  90  figures  will  agree  with  it  is  only  1  in  8100  !  !  His  words  are  :
"We  might,  like  the  psychical  researchers,  proceed  to  calculations  of
probability,  e.g.,  if  a  counter  be  drawn  by  chance  from  the  total  of  90'
counters,  the  probability  of  drawing  any  particular  one  is  1-90,  and  likewise
the  probability  of  recording  at  random  any  particular  one  of  90  possible

1  The  paragraph  of  which  the  above  e.xtraot  is  part  begins  on  the  previous  page-
(66)  with  the  remark:  "This  case,  continue  the  authors,  .seems  to  be  quite  note-
worthy, "  but  no  marks  of  quotation  are  used.


L


146


F.  W.  H.  M.


[Supplement.


figures  is  1-90.  Now,  the  probability  that  the  two  agree  by  chance  is  equal
to  the  product  of  the  .sepai'ate  probabilities,  or  1-8100.  Only  once  out  of
8100  times  ought  an  experiment  to  succeed."  The  probability  that  Pro-
fessor Scripture  describes  is  the  probability  that  tlie  number  drawn  and  the
number  recorded  will  hoth  agree  loith  a  previously  designttted  number.  But
this  is  not  the  question.  For  example,  to  take  one  of  the  instances  quoted
by  Professor  Scripture,  the  problem  is  not  the  determination  of  the  chance,
prior  to  the  experiment,  that  the  agent  would  draw  the  particular  number
33,  and  the  percipient  also  guess  33.  The  problem  is  the  determination  of
the  chance,  that  after  the  agent  has  drawn  one  of  the  numbers,  no  matter
which,  the  percipient  should  guess  the  same  number.  The  agent  having
drawn  33,  this  number  is  already  settled,  and  is  calculated  as  a  certainty.
It  is  one  of  90  numbers,  any  one  of  which  the  percipient  may  choose,  and
the  chance  that  he  will  guess  right  is  obviously  1  in  90.  I  do  not  blame
Professor  Scripture  merely  for  being  ignorant  of  the  very  simplest  applica-
tion of  the  laws  of  probability,  but  1  do  blame  him  for  being  ignorant  and
at  the  same  time  attempting,  in  a  professedly  scientific  work,  to  deal  with  a
subject  where  some  elementary  knowledge  of  these  laws  is  absolutely
essential  for  even  a  superficial  judgment.

In  ordinary  controversy,  among  persons  not  claiming  to  be  "scientific,"
we  rightly  condemn  any  expositor  who  offers  only  a  gross  misrepresentation
of  the  views  he  attacks,  and  shows  an  ignorance  of  the  fundamental
principles  pertaining  to  the  subject-matter  ;  but  what  shall  we  say  of  the
culpability  of  a  professed  scientific  investigator  who  in  a  professed  scientific
work,  actually  makes  a  charge  of  "  unscientific  methods  of  experimentation"
against  a  body  of  investigators  of  whose  publications  he  shows  absolute
ignorance,  holding  up  to  ridicule  a  gross  travesty  of  the  experiments  upon
which  their  conclusions  are  founded,  and  betraying  at  the  same  time  a
sublime ignorance  of  the quantitative  estimate  to  be  applied  to  their

•  James  H.  Hyslop.


l/Annee Psychologiqne. Publi(^e  par Alfred Binet, quatrieme  ann^e.
Schleicher  Freres,  Paris,  1898.

The  fourth  number  of  the  Anne'e  Psychologiqne  has  recently  appeared
under  M.  Binet's  editorship.  It  is  only  fitting  that  students  of  every  branch
of  Experimental  Psychology  should  express  their  gratitude  to  M.  Binet,  M.
Victor  Henri,  and  their  collaborators  for  this  masterly  annual  summary  of
Tvork  done  over  a  wide  and  various  field.  The  summary  itself  is  invaluable,
— is  practically  indispensable  to  serious  students  ;  and  each  volume  contains
in  addition  a  mass  of  original  work  largely  due  to  MM.  Binet  and  Henri,
and  in  this  last  volume  to  M.  Vascliide.  The  labour,  patience,  and  skill
involved  in  the  production  of  each  successive  volume  is  po.sitively  astonishing.
The  mere  amount  of  accurate  precis-writing  and  reviewing  seems  enough  to
occupy  nearly  the  whole  year,  and  when  all  M.  Binet's  own  experiments  are
added,  one  fancies  that  night  and  day,  without  intermission,  his  hands  must
have  grasped  a  dynamometer,  a  chronograph,  an  ergograph,  a  pneumograph,
a  plethysmograph,  or  a  pen.  I  will  not  venture  to  review  his  work  in  detail,
important  though  it  be  to  students  of  "psychical"  jjhenomena  to  keep


Part  XXXIV.]


Revieivs.


147


themselves  «u  conrant  of  the  labours  and  results  of  this  growmg  multitude
of  workers.  The  relation  of  their  work  to  ours  may  be  compared  without
offence  to  the  relation  of  surface-mining  to  deep-level  mining  among  the
auriferous  reefs  of  the  Witwatersrand.  The  surface-miners  are  certain  of
finding  payable  gold,  scattered  pretty  evenly  through  a  stiff  conglomerate.
Here  and  there  the  reefs  trend  downwards,  but  uncertainly  ;  and  work
at  deep  levels  at  first  ruined  more  companies  than  it  enriched.  I  olfer  here
no  prospectus  of  our  assets  or  profits  ;  and  assuredly  the  modern  machinery,
the  regular  dividends  of  the  surface-miners,  may  well  attract  the  admiration
even  of  those  who  are  themselves  impelled  to  push  on  for  gold  towards  the
unknown  heart  of  the  earth.  ^  „7-  tt  ht


Hours  with  the  Ghods.  By  Henry  Ridgely  Evans.  (Chicago  :  Laird  and
Lee.  Pp.  302.  1897.)
This  book,  which  is  also  otherwise  entitled  by  the  author  as  "Nineteenth
Century  Witchci-aft — Illustrated  Investigations  into  the  Phenomena  of
Spiritualism  and  Theosophy,"  scarcely  pretends  to  add  anything  that  is
new,  of  a  constructive  character,  in  the  way  of  contribution  to  Psychical
Research.

Mr.  Evans  states  in  his  preface  that  he  "  has  had  sittings  with  many
famous  mediums  of  this  country  and  Europe,  but  has  seen  little  to  convince
him  of  the  fact  of  spirit  communication.  The  slate  tests  and  so-called
materialisations  have  invariably  been  frauds.  Some  experiments  along  the
line  of  automatic  writing  and  psychometry,  however,  have  demonstrated  to
the  writer  the  truth  of  telepathy  or  thought-transference.  The  theory  of
telepathy  explains  many  of  the  marvels  ascribed  to  spirit  intervention  in
things  mundane."  The  author  jjrof esses  his  belief  that  "we  bear  within  us
the  undying  spark  of  divinity  and  immortality,"  but  after  giving,  in  the  first
part  of  his  book,  a  description  of  various  "  mediumistic  manifestations,"  con-
cludes that  the  majority  of  these  are  due  to  conjuring,  and  that  telepathy
will  account  for  the  rest  without  "  spirit  intervention."  He  holds,  however,
that  the  supernormal  phenomena  which  he  does  accept  seem  to  indicate  that
the  human  personality  is  a  "  spiritual  entity  "  which  survives  death.

The  second  part  of  the  book  is  devoted  to  an  account  of  "  Madame
Blavatsky  and  the  Theosophists,"  and  includes  references  to  the  chief
exposures  which  have  thrown  light  upon  the  fraudulent  methods  used  by
some  of  the  leaders  of  the  Theosophical  movement.  The  author  finds  it
"difficult  to  place  any  reliance  in  the  accounts  of  Mahatmic  miracles."  He
also  adopts  the  conclusion  justified  by  the  researches  of  Mr.  W.  E.  Coleman,
that  "  '  Isis  Unveiled  '  and  the  'Secret  Doctrine,'  by  Madame  Blavatsky
.  are  full  of  plagiarisms  and  garbled  statements."  Mr.  Evans
draws  attention  to  facts  concerning  the  early  period  of  the  Theosophic  move-
ment which  many  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  followers  to-day  either  are
ignorant  of  or  prefer  to  forget.  One  of  these  facts  is  that  Madame
Blavatsky  first  located  her  Mahatmas  in  the  ruins  of  Thebes  and  not  in
Thibet.  Another  is  that  a  lecture  given  by  a  certain  George  H.  Felt  was
the  circumstance  that  primarily  led  to  the  founding  of  the  Theosophical
Society. Mr.  Evans  should  have  given  further  details  on  this  point,  which


14-8


Richard  Hodgson.


[Supplement.


may  be  found  in  the  Naio  York  Herald  for  November  lOfch,  1895.  The
information  given  in  that  article  was  furnished  by  Mr.  Henry  J.  Newton,  a
well-known  spiritualist  of  New  York,  since  deceased,  who  had  furnished  me
with  a  similar  account  some  years  previously  and  had  shown  me  the
documents  in  his  possession.  It  appeared  that  Mr.  Felt  asserted  that
l^henomena  of  "  materialisation "  could  be  produced  "  by  a  combustion  of
aromatic  gum  and  herbs."  Mr.  Newton  claimed  to  have  taken  the  first  step
in  forming  a  society  for  the  investigation  of  these  particular  phenomena,  and
to  have  himself  proposed  the  name  "  Theosophical  Society."  He  also  stated
to  me  that  the  term  Theosophy  was  chosen  expressly  on  the  basis  of  the  first
meaning  given  to  that  word  in  fVehsters  Dictionary:  "Any  system  of
philosophy  or  mysticism  which  proposes  to  attain  intercourse  with  God  and
superior  spirits,  and  consequent  superhuman  knowledge,  by  physical  pro-
cesses, as  by  the  theurgic  operations  of  some  ancient  Platonists,  or  by  the
chemical  processes  of  the  German  fire  jjhilosoijhers."  And  hence  the  first
.sentence  of  the  original  preamble  of  the  Theosophical  Society  read  :  —

"  The  title  of  the  Theosophical  Society  explains  the  objects  and  desires
of  its  founders  ;  they  seek  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  nature  and
attributes  of  the  Supreme  Power  and  of  the  higher  spirits  by  the  aid  of
physical  processes."

The  date  of  its  organisation  was  October  30th,  1875,  and  not,  as  Mr.
Evans  states,  November  17th.  Even  as  late  as  the  early  part  of  1879  the
first  of  "the  general  plans  of  the  Society"  was  declared  to  be  :  "To  keep
alive  in  man  his  belief  that  he  has  a  soul,  and  the  Universe  a  God,"  which
was  revised,  at  the  end  of  the  same  year,  into  :  "To  keep  alive  in  man  his
spiritual  intuitions."  Indeed,  the  true  inner  history  of  Madame  Blavatsky
and  the  Theosophical  Society  yet  remains  to  be  written,  though  the  sketchy
accfmnt  given  by  Mr.  Evans  may  sufficiently  serve  the  purjjose  of  the
outsider  who  wishes  to  get  a  brief  popular  history  of  the  movement.

In  the  first  part  of  his  book  Mr.  Evans  relates  several  apparently  super-
normal experiences  coming  under  his  own  notice,  but  it  is  to  be  regretted
that  he  gives  no  corroborative  testimony  in  the  cases  where  this  seems  to
have  been  obtainable.  Thus  he  describes  a  railway  accident,  where  an  old
man  was  decapitated  by  a  locomotive  between  Washington  and  Baltimore.
Mr.  Evans  was  on  the  train  and  saw  the  head,  with  white  hair  and  beard,
standing  in  a  pool  of  blood.  Other  details  are  given.  On  reaching
Baltimore,  Mr.  Evans  went  to  a  newspaper  office  and  wrote  out  an  account
of  the  accident,  and  did  other  work  at  the  office  before  going  home.  His
Ijrother,  who  slept  in  an  adjoining  room,  had  then  gone  to  bed,  and  in  the
morning  related  to  the  family  a  dream  which  he  had  during  the  night  and
which  agreed  in  the  main  details  with  his  brother's  actual  experience  in
connection  with  the  accident.  Yet  no  statement  is  ofl'ered  by  the  brother
or  any  other  member  of  the  family,  and  the  date  of  the  incident  is  not  given
any  nearer  than  "the  fall  of  1890."  Corroborative  details  should  have  been
given  either  in  a  footnote  or  an  appendix.

Following  these  telepathic  experiences,  after  a  few  pages  concerning
"muscle-reading,"  Mr.  Evans  describes  some  of  the  trick  methods  used  by
fraudulent  mediums,  — among  them,  Henry  Slade,  The  Davenport  Brothers,
Annie  Eva  Fay,  Charles  Slade,  Pierre  L.  O.  A.  Keeler,  and  F.  W.  Tabor, —


Part  XXXIV.]


Reviews.


149


and  has  a  little  to  say  about  "Spirit-Photography"  and  "Thought-
Photography."  If  Mr.  Evans  had  confined  his  attention  to  this  part  of  his
subject  and  taken  special  pains  to  produce  as  far  as  possible  a  complete
classified  exposition  of  the  various  trick  devices  used  by  mediums,  he  might
have  rendered  much  more  efficient  service.  It  is  a  good  work  to  popularise
the  knowledge  of  the  trick  methods  of  fraudulent  mediums,  and  we  com-
mend Mr.  Evans  for  what  he  has  done  in  this  direction.  He  offers  a  very
meagre  account  of  Eusapia  Paladino,  and  quotes  from  a  statement  in  the  Nerv
York  Herald,  as  though  it  had  been  communicated  to  that  paper  by  myself,
whereas  it  is  a  grossly  inaccurate  account  of  a  reporter's  interview  with  me.

In  describing  the  method  of  writing  on  the  under  surface  of  a  slate  held
against  the  under  surface  of  a  table,  Mr.  Evans  appears  to  think  that  the
"ability  to  write  in  reverse  "  is  involved.  This  is  not  necessarily  the  case.
The  writing  as  "visualised"  from  above  would  appear  in  reverse,  but  the
motor  changes,  which  are  the  most  important,  are  largely  the  same  as  in
ordinary  script. On  p.  156  Mr.  Evans  writes  : —

' '  The  '  spirit  necktie  '  is  one  of  the  best  things  in  the  whole  range  of
mediumistic  marvels,  and  has  never,  to  my  knowledge,  been  exposed.  A
rope  is  tied  about  the  medium's  neck  with  the  knots  at  the  back  and  the
ends  are  thrust  through  two  holes  in  one  side  of  the  cabinet,  and  tied  in  a
bow  on  the  outside."

Manifestations  follow  whicli  indicate  that  "  either  the  medium  gets  loose
the  necktie  and  impersonates  the  spirits  or  the  materialisations  are
genuine."  The  explanation  given  by  Mr.  Evans  is  "substitution."  The
medium  cuts  the  cord  round  his  neck,  thus  releasing  himself,  and  after  pro-
ducing the  manifestations  takes  a  second  cord  from  his  pocket,  ties  it  round
his  neck,  and  calls  for  the  cord  to  be  unfastened  outside  the  cabinet.  He
then  pulls  the  first  cord  into  the  cabinet  and  conceals  it  in  his  pocket.  The
general  method  of  substitution  in  rope-tying  tricks  is  not  new,  nor,  indeed,
is  the  general  method  of  "  taking  up  slack,"  which,  in  this  particular  trick  at
least,  I  think  is  superior  to  the  method  described  by  Mr.  Evans,  and  of
which  an  account  was  published  by  Col.  Bundy  in  the  Religio-Philosophical
Journal  for  May  9th,  1891,  on  information  given  by  myself.  The  medium
was  a  Mrs.  Martin,  who  was  giving  sittings  in  New  York.  She  pulled  in
"  slack  "  after  she  was  in  position  in  the  cabinet,  and  before  the  rope  was
tied  on  the  outside.  She  was  thus  able  to  widen  the  loop  round  her  neck
and  slip  it  off',  replacing  it  in  position  after  producing  tlie  manifestations.
I  suspected  the  method  used,  did  all  the  tying  and  untying  myself,  marked
the  rope  privately  with  a  piece  of  crayon  which  I  had  "palmed"  for  the
purpose,  and  examined  the  rope  at  leisure  afterwards.

Although  Mr.  Evans  devotes  more  than  forty  pages  of  his  book  to
D.  D.  Home,  there  is  clear  indication  that  he  has  not  made  any  careful
examination  of  the  mass  of  testimony  to  Home's  phenomena,  and  in  fact
it  is  difficult  to  understand  that,  if  he  had  ever  even  read  the  bulk  of  this
testimony,  he.  could  have  offered  the  "cheap  and  ready-made"  accounts
of  the  music-box  tricks  and  fire-tricks  as  providing  in  themselves  an
adequate  explanation  of  certain  notable  incidents  described  by  Home's
witnesses.  I  refer  to  two  other  instances  of  the  want  of  care  shown  by
Mr.  Evans. He  quotes  a  statement  from  "  Celia  Logan,  the  journalist,"


150


Richard  Hodgson.


[Supplement.


concerning  "one  of  Home's  seances  at  a  nobleman's  house  in  London,"
in  which  occurs  the  charge  that  the  host  saw  Home  place  a  bottle  on
the  mantelpiece just  before  leaving  the  room  for  the  staircase  where
luminous  hands  were  seen. The  host,  it  is  alleged,  seized  the  bottle  and
found  later  that  it  contained "  phosphorated  olive  oil  or  some  similar
preparation,"  and  "  after  the  discovery  of  the  phosphorus  trick  he  dropped
Home  at  once." Who  is  Celia  Logan  ? Where  and  when  did  this  account
originally  apjjear,  and  who  was  the  host  ? We  protest  against  any  such
vague  and  uncorroborated  charge. At  least  two  such  charges  against  Home
have  come  under  my  own  direct  notice  ;  in  each  case  the  person  making  the
charge  was  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  the  charge  was  completely  un-
founded, and,  oddly  enough,  one  of  the  charges  was  based  upon  a  quotation
■ from  Home  himself,  who  was  describing  the  tricks  of  another  medium.
This  question  as  to  the  proof  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  Home  was  considered
fully  in  the  article  in  the  Jotmial  S.P.R.  for  July,  1889,  by  Professor
Barrett  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  at  that  time  no  proof  of  fraud  was
forthcoming. Later,  in  1897,  Mr.  Podmore  writes  (Studies  in  Psychical
Research,  p.  Ill)  :  "I  am  not  aware  that  clear  proof  of  imposture  was  ever
brought  forward  against  him." Again,  Mr.  Evans  quotes  the  statement
made  by  Dr.  Carpenter  in  the  Contemporary  Review  for  January,  1876,
concerning  Home's  alleged  levitation,  that  "  a  single  honest  sceptic  declares
that  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  in  his  chair  all  the  time." This  was  proved  to  be
a  gross  misstatement,  and  was  so  proved  by  Captain  C.  Wynne,  the  supposed
"  sceptic"  himself,  who  actually  corroborated  the  account  of  the  levitation.
(See  D.  D.  Home:  His  Life  and  Mission,  by  Madame  Dunglas  Home,  p.  307;
also  Journal  S.P.R. ,  July,  1889,  p.  108.) In  dealing  with  Home,  Mr.  Evans
seems  to  have  followed  blindly  the  lead  of  Dr.  W.  A.  Hammond's  inadequate
treatment  in  his  book  Spiritualism  and  Nervons  JJerangement,  published  in
1876. Whether  Home's  phenomena  can  be  explained  away  or  not — and
there  is  a  large  mass  of  testimony  to  be  taken  into  consideration — they  most
assuredly  have  not  been  satisfactorily  accounted  for  as  j'et  by  any  ordinary
explanations  which  I  have  seen  offered,  and  we  cannot  but  condemn  such
ignorant  and  superficial  treatment  as  that  accorded  to  them  by  Mr.  Evans.
I  should,  however,  regret  if  I  did  Mr.  Evans  an  injustice. Possibly  he  may
have  intended  merely  to  present  a  loose  and  popular  view  of  Home  by
quoting  various  opinions  for  and  against  him  ;  but  this  would  be  hardly
consistent  with  his  professed  intention  in  his  preface  "  to  give  an  accurate
account  of  the  lives  and  adventures  of  celebrated  mediums  and  occultists."

Generally  I  may  say  that  much  of  the  book  consists  of  a  compilation  of
extracts  from  various  sources,  many  of  which  appear  to  have  been  selected
without  sufficient  discrimination,  and  after  a  very  partial  and  superficial
survey  of  the  subjects  considered.  I  regret  that  I  cannot  speak  more  favour-
ably of  a  book  which  is  evidently  written  with  sincerity  and  earnestness,  and
which  recognises  so  sympathetically  the  value  of  the  work  performed  by  the
S.P.R.  There  may  be  a  class  of  readers  to  whose  less  substantial  wants
the  book  may  provide  some  temporary  supply,  but  I  should  be  surprised  if
our  members  found  anything  enlightening  in  the  volume,  unless  it  were,  as  I
have  already  indicated,  some  of  the  descriptions  of  trick-devices.

R.  Hodgson.


PROCEEDIN^GS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXV.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  95th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  November  4th,  1898,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;
Dr.  a.  W.  Barrett  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  Podmore  read  a  paper  on  "  A  Predecessor  of  Mrs.  Piper,"
which  was  embodied  in  his  article  published  in  Proceedings,  Part
XXXIV.,  under  the  title  of  "  Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena
of  Mrs.  Piper."

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  gave  a  "Discussion  of  some  Reciprocal  and
other  Cases  recently  received."


The  96  th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
December  9th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  the  President,  Sir  William  Crookes,  irt
the  chair.

Mr.  H.  Arthur  Sjiith  read  "  A  Note  on  '  Fisher's  Ghost.'  "

A  paper  by  Professor  W.  Romaine Newbold,  entitled  "  A

Further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,"

was  read  by  Mr.  Myers.

Both  these  papers  were  included  in  Proceedings,  Part  XXXIV.


The  97th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  Lower  Hall  of  the
same  place  (a  larger  room  than  that  generally  used)  on  Friday,
Januai-y  27th,  1899,  at  4  p.m.  ;  the  Preside>jt  in  the  chair.

Professor  Richet  delivered  an  address  in  French,  "  On  the
Conditions  of  Certainty,"  a  translation  of  which  is  printed  below.


The  98th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  Council  Chamber  of  the
same  place  on  Friday,  March  10th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Dr.  G.  F.  Rogers.
in  the  chair.

Miss  Mary  H.  Kingsley  read  a  paper  on  "  The  Forms  of
Apparitions  in  West  Africa,"  printed  below.


The  99th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
April  28th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  the  President  in  the  chair.

Some  portions  of  the  paper  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  "  Coin-
cidences," printed  below,  were  read  by  Mr.  Myers.

A  paper  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince  entitled,  "  A  Case  of  Triple
Personality  and  Crystal  Vision,"  was  also  read  by  Mr.  Myers,  and
some  extracts  from  it  are  printed  below.

M


152


Professor  Charles  Ricliet.


[part


I.

ON THE CONDITIONS OF  CERTAINTY.

ADDRESS  DELIVERED

By  Professor  Charles  Richet.
{Translated.)


Mr.  Chairman, — Ladies  and  Gentlemen, — I  do  not  propose  to
address  you  upon  the  Conditions  of  Certainty  from  a  philosophical
point  of  view.  That  theme  has  been  often  treated  by  learned  meta-
physicians ;  and  the  present  oceasioa  is  ill-suited  for  metaphysics.
Whatever  my  own  respect  foi"  that  science  (of  which,  by  the  way,  I
am  entirely  ignorant),  I  think  that  here  and  now  we  had  better  take
our  stand  upon  the  more  solid  ground  of  actual  experiment.  That,
indeed,  is  a  view  to  which  you  have  all,  more  or  less  explicitly,  giveii
your  adhesion  ;  and  your  illustrious  President  has  at  different  times
given  to  the  world  examples  of  the  value  of  experiment, — however
daring  and  unforeseen, — too  brilliant  to  leave  me  any  scruple  in
speaking  to  you  of  Experiment  as  the  true  and  rightful  mistress  of
scientific  enquiry.

The  problem  before  us  is  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  facts,
so  numerous  and  often  so  decisive,  which  you  have  accumulated
during  the  last  twenty  years  have  not  carried  with  them  any  general
conviction.  The  problem,  I  say,  lies  in  the  disaccord  which  still
exists  between  the  state  of  public  belief  and  the  existence  of  authentic
facts  whose  cogency  would  under  other  conditions  have  been  by  this
time  admitted  without  dispute.

To  explain  this  persistent  incredulity,  my  siuiplest  plan  will  be  to
give  you  a  sketch  of  my  own  history.  I  know  well  that  le  moi  est
hdissahle  : — "/  is  a  hateful  word," — as  the  great  Pascal  told  us.  But  I
use  myself  only  as  a  concrete  example  ;  and  a  narrative  of  actual
■experience  may  illustrate  more  convincingly  than  any  theoretical
■explanation  could  do,  the  strength  of  the  resistance  which  the  human
spirit  cr.w  sometimes  oppose  to  proofs  which  the  reason  cannot  but
admit  as  complete.

Conviction,  indeed,  cannot  be  achieved  like  a  geometrical  demon-
stration ; — and  it  often  happens  that  even  a  geometrical  demonstration
does  not  carry  conviction  to  all  minds.  M.  Thiers,  it  is  said,  when  no
longer  young,  was  anxious  to  get  some  notion  of  mathematics.  His
excellent  teacher  one  day  proved  to  him, with  all  the  rigidity  of


XXXV.]


On  the  Conditions  of  Certainty.


153


geometrical  reasoning,  that  an  oblique  section  of  a  cone^  in  whatever
direction  it  was  made,  was  a  regular  ellipse.  But  this  M.  Thiers  would
not  admit.  "  It  is  simply  impossible,"  he  said,  "  there  cannot  be  the
same  ellipse  at  the  cone's  base  and  at  its  summit."  To  persuade  him
his  instructor  had  to  send  for  a  sugar  loaf  to  make  the  oblique  section,
and  to  show  him  the  actual  ellipse.  Experiment  convinced  the  learner
whom  theoretical  demonstration  had  left  incredulous.

All  of  us,  indeed,  are  recalcitrant  in  accepting  facts  wliich  do  not
seem  concordant  with  the  facts  of  every  day.  We  are  incredulous  of
the  extraordinary;  and  Aozt;  incredulous  I  could  hardly  illustrate  better
than  by  my  own  prolonged  and  almost  invincible  opposition  to  the  facts
called  occult.

And  now,  to  begin  with,  we  must  get  rid  altogether  of  this  word
occult ; — or  rather  we  must  give  it  the  only  sense  which  it  ought  to
bear.  Occult  means  unknown.  Alchemy,  before  it  became  chemistry,
astrology,  before  it  became  astronomy,  medicine,  before  it  became
bacteriology,  were  nothing  more  than  occult  sciences.  Nor,  indeed,
would  it  be  very  hard  to  show  that  the  classic  sciences,  of  which  we
are  so  proud,  are  not  yet  far  removed  from  the  occult  stage.  We  may
know  certain  phenomena,  and  even  the  laws  which  govern  their
appearance;  but  we  do  not  adequately  understand  a  single  one  of  them.
To  say  of  the  stone  which  falls  to  earth  that  it  obeys  an  attraction
which  varies  directly  as  the  mass  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  the
distance,  is  not  to  understand  the  stone's  fall.  Familiar  though  that
phenomenon  is,  it  is  not  a  phenomenon  which  is  tmderstood  in  all  its
elements.  Not  one  phenomenon,  I  repeat,  is  fully  understood.  All
are  linked  together,  and  if  we  really  understood  one,  we  should  under-
stand all.

When  I  first  began  to  occupy  myself  with  the  sciences  called  occult
it  was  to  make  experiments  in  somnambulism.  At  that  time, — it  was
in  1873,  very  long  ago' — somnambulism  was  still  a  mysterious,  magical
science ;  and  in  the  account  which  I  gave  of  my  experiments  I  began
by  saying,  "  It  needs  a  certain  courage  to  pronounce  the  word
somnambuiisin."  I  was  right,  I  think,  to  have  this  courage  ;  for  a  few
years  later, — and  possibly  my  own  efforts  helped  towards  this  change,
— somnambulism  had  taken  its  place  among  facts  which  no  one  denied.
As  you  know,  the  hypnotic  trance  is  now  matter  of  common  know-
ledge ;  it  forms  a  theme  of  ordinary  medical  instruction,  and  is  no
more  a  subject  of  doubt  than  is  small-pox  or  cholera.  Thus  may  an
occult  science  become  a  classic  science  in  twenty  years.

In  the  course  of  these  studies  I  had  here  and  there  observed
certain  facts  of  lucidity,  of  premonition,  of  telepathy ;  but  since  these
facts  were  denied  and  ridiculed  on  every  side,  I  had  not  pushed  indepen-
dence of  mind  so  far  as  to  believe  them. I  deliberately  shut  my  eyes

M  2


154


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[PAKT


to  phenomena  which  lay  plain  before  me,  and  rather  than  discuss  them
I  chose  the  easier  course  of  denying  them  altogether.  Or,  I  should
rather  say,  instead  of  pondering  on  these  inexplicable  facts  I  simply
put  them  aside,  and  set  them  down  to  some  illusion,  or  some  error  of
observation.

Nay,  in  my  servile  respect  for  the  classic  tradition  I  mocked  at
what  was  called  s}nritism ;  and  after  reading  the  astounding  state-
ments which  Mr.  Crookes  had  published,  I  allowed  myself — and  here
do  I  publicly  beg  his  pardon  for  it  ! — to  laugh  at  them  as  heartily
as  almost  every  one  else  was  doing.  But  now  I  say  just  what  my
friend  Ochorowicz  says  in  the  same  matter  ; — I  beat  my  breast  and  I
cry  Pater,  jy^ccavi/  How  could  I  suppose  that  the  savant  who  has  dis-
covered thallium  and  the  radiometer,  and  foreshadowed  the  Rontgen
rays,  could  commit  gross  and  inexplicable  blunders,  and  allow  himself
to  be  duped  for  years  by  tricks  which  a  child  could  have  exposed  1

A  certain  experiment  in  spiritism  (I  keep  the  word,  although  it
corresponds  to  no  theoretical  idea  at  all)  came  to  shake  my  disbelief.
One  of  my  friends  discovered  that  he  possessed  the  curious  faculty  of
causing  a  table  to  go  through  certain  movements — for  him  involuntary
and  unconscious — but  which  were  nevertheless  intelligent.  That  is  to
say,  one  could  put  questions  and  get  answers  of  which  he  had  no  know-
ledge, although  he  remained  fully  awake,  and  his  own  personal
consciousness  seemed  quite  intact.  Unwilling  to  look  for  any  cause
outside  the  causes  of  familiar  phenomena,  I  invented  as  an  explana-
tion of  these  strange  facts  a  theory  which  has  not  survived,  and  did
not  deserve  to  survive,  —  the  theory  of  heyni-somnambidism.  This  was
in  1883.

Several  years  before  this  date,  one  of  my  relations  had  experienced
in  my  presence  a  telepathic  hallucination,  under  circumstances  of  the
most  striking  kind.  But  of  this  I  had  taken  no  serious  thought.
Little  by  little,  however,  as  you  went  on  accumulating  in  your
Proceedings  facts  of  just  the  same  order,  this  veridical  hallucination
of  which  I  had  been  cognisant  returned  more  strongly  to  my  memory,
and  a  kind  of  suspense  and  floating  uncertainty  took  possession  of
my  spirit.

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  in  my  excuse,  that  as  a  professional
physiologist  I  moved  habitually  along  a  road  quite  other  than
mystical.  I  had  been  taught  a  scrupulous  respect  for  fact,  a  habit  of
exact  and  prosaic  observation,  controlled  by  rigorous  tests  ; — by  the
balance,  the  nayograph,  the  chemical  reaction.  I  began  to  feel  myself
dragged  in  two  directions  by  contrary  currents.

It  would  have  been  something  if  psychical  experiments  had  been
susceptible  of  exact  measurements  !  But  you  know  too  well  that  this
is  not  so. In  the  best  experiments  with  sensitives  there  is  always  a


XXXV.]


On  the  Conditions  of  Certainty.


155


caput  inortuum  which  escapes  analysis, — something  loose  and  approxi-
mate which  fails  to  satisfy  men  who  have  taken  as  their  motto  these
words  of  the  Preacher  which  govern  science:  " Omnia  in  numero  et
pondere."

But  on  the  other  hand  the  history  of  science  showed  me  into  wJiat
strange  mistakes  men  fall  by  ignoring  facts  plain  to  see.  The  wisest
of  our  forerunners  was  blind  to  many  a  conspicuous  phenomenon,
simply  because  it  was  a  phenomenon  which  he  could  not  understand.
"  And  may  it  not  be  thus,"  I  said  to  myself,  "  with  these  psychical
phenomena?  The  unlearned  deny  them  ;  the  learned  exclude  them
from  their  text-books ;  but  they  may  exist  for  all  that."

Then,  as  my  next  step,  I  imagined, — I  ask  your  pardon  for  this
public  confession, — that  certain  psychological  facts  of  lucidity,  of
telepathy,  perhaps  of  pi'emonition,  were  true  ;  but  that  no  occult  facts
actually  affected  the  material  universe.  Our  human  intelligence,  I
said  to  myself,  is  perhaps  endowed  at  certain  moments  with  extra-
ordinary powers,  with  faculties  which  remain  latent  in  the  mass  of
men  ;  but  that  is  all ;  it  cannot  act  directly  upon  matter.

This  novel  power  of  insight — I  thought — will  in  no  wise  alter  our
fundamental  conception  of  the  world  ;  the  only  truth  in  spiritism
is  just  this  lucidity.  Nay,  the  lucidity  itself,  although  it  seems
possible,  even  probable,  is  not  as  yet  establislied  by  vigorous  proof.

I  was  at  this  point  when  M.  Aksakoff  came  to  see  me  in  Paris,
and  reproached  me  for  not  interesting  myself  more  keenly  in  experi-
ments with  mediums.  "Well,"  said  I,  "if  I  were  sure  that  a  single
true  medium  existed,  I  would  willingly  go  to  the  end  of  the  world  to
see  him  !  "

Two  years  later,  M.  Aksakoff  wrote  to  me  :  "You  need  not  come
to  the  end  of  the  world  ;  if  you  come  to  Milan  it  will  do."  Milan !
that  was  not  far  to  go  to  find  the  key  of  the  mystery.

I  took  part,  then,  in  those  celebrated  Milan  seances  with  Eusapia
Paladino;  and  while  those  seances  were  going  on  I  was  fully  convinced
of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  Numerous  precautions  were  taken  ;
the  incessant  repetition  of  tests  and  exjieriments  satisfied  the  most
scrupulous  mind.  When  I  left  Milan  I  was  fully  convinced  that  all  was
true; — as  also  were  the  eminent  savants  who  took  part  in  the  sittings ;
—  Brofferio,  Gerosa,  Finzi,  and  the  great  astronomer  Schiaparelli.

But  at  this  point  a  remarkable  psychological  phenomenon  made
itself  felt, — a  phenomenon  deserving  of  all  your  attention.  Observe
that  we  are  now  dealing  with  observed  facts  which  are  nevertheless
absurd;  which  are  in  contradiction  with  facts  of  daily  observation;
which  are  denied  not  by  science  only,  but  by  the  whole  of  humanity  ;
— facts  which  are  rapid  and  fugitive,  which  take  place  in  semi-
darkness,  and  almost  by  surprise  ;  with  no  proof  except  the  testimony


156


Professor  Charles  Bichef.


[part


of  oui'  senses,  which  we  know  to  be  often  faUible.  After  we  have
witnessed  such  facts,  everything  concurs  to  make  us  doubt  them.

Now,  at  the  moment  when  these  facts  take  place  they  seem  to  us
certain,  and  we  are  wilHng  to  proclaim  them  openly,  but  when  we
return  to  ourselves,  when  we  feel  the  irresistible  influence  of  our
environment,  M'hen  our  friends  all  laugh  at  our  credulity; — then
we  are  almost  disarmed,  and  we  begin  to  doubt.  May  it  not  all  have
been  an  illusion  ?  May  I  not  have  been  grossly  deceived  ?  I  snw,  no
doubt ;  but  did  I  see  aright  1  who  can  prove  to  me  that  I  did  so  ?

And  then,  as  the  moment  of  the  experiment  becomes  more  remote,
that  experiment  which  once  seemed  so  conclusive  gets  to  seem  more
and  more  uncertain,  and  we  end  by  letting  ourselves  be  persuaded
that  we  have  been  the  victims  of  a  trick.

Our  own  conviction, — the  conviction  of  men  who  have  seen, —
ought  properly  to  convince  other  people  ; — but,  by  a  curious  inversion
of  roles,  it  is  their  conviction,  the  negative  conviction  of  people  who
have  not  seen,  and  who  ought  not,  one  would  think,  to  speak  on  the
matter,  which  weakens  and  ultimately  destroys  our  own  conviction.
This  phenomenon  occurred  in  my  case  with  such  intensity  that  scarcely
a  fortnight  after  witnessing  the  experiments  with  Eusapia  Paladino,  at
Milan,  I  had  persuaded  myself  that  thei'e  had  been  nothing  beyond
fraud  and  illusion.

Nevertheless,  I  wished  to  repeat  those  experiments  ;  and  at  Rome,
in  company  with  an  eminent  savant,  Schrenck-Notzing,  and  a
celebrated  painter,  H.  Siemiradzki,  I  again  made  experiments  of  the
most  decisive  kind.  But  a  second  time  I  found  that  doubt  seized  me
after  a  short  interval.  I  was  not  yet  satisfied  ;  and  I  invited  Eusapia
to  my  house  for  three  months.  Alone  with  her  and  my  excellent
friend,  Ochorowicz,  a  man  of  penetrating  perspicacity,  I  renewed
the  experiments  in  the  best  possible  conditions  of  solitude  and  quiet
reflection.  We  thus  acquired  a  positive  proof  of  the  reality  of  the
facts  announced  at  Milan.

Other  friends  belonging  to  your  society,  Messrs.  Myers  and
Lodge  especially,  came  and  shared  our  conviction.  It  has  since
undergone  serious  oscillation, — partly  from  that  psychological  process
of  recurrence  to  habitual  modes  of  thought  already  described,  partly
through  the  fault  of  the  medium  herself  ; — but  my  own  fourth  series  of
experiments  in  Paris,  brought  with  it  for  me,  as  also  for  Mr.  Myeis,
a  conviction  of  reality  even  stronger  than  before.  Nevertheless,
before  discussing  or  publishing  experiments  in  detail,  a  yet  further
series  should  be  held  under  the  most  careful  conditions.

In  the  meantime  it  is  quite  possible  that  my  friends  and  I  may  lose
that  vigour  of  conviction  which  recent  experience  gives.  We  may
return  to  that  curious  state  of  mind  of  which  I  have  already  spoken.


:sxxv.]


On  the  Conditions  of  Certainty.


157


The  real  world  which  surrounds  us,  with  its  prejudices,  well  or  ill-
founded,  its  scheme  of  habitual  opinions,  holds  us  in  so  strong  a
grasp  that  we  can  scarcely  free  ourselves  completely.  Certainty  does
not  follow  on  demonstration,  it  follows  on  hahit.

But  the  duty  of  the  savant  is  precisely  not  to  allow  himself  to
follow  the  routine  of  unreasoning  respect  for  what  Bacon  termed  idols.
Our  mission  is  to  seek  truth,  without  caring  for  the  opinion  of  the
vulgar.  What  should  we  care  for  popularity  1  Sarcasm  or  indiffer-
ence ought  to  leave  us  equally  unmoved.

If  we  have  been  credulous,  our  credulity  has  not  been  spontaneous
and  easy ;  we  have  made,  as  you  have  seen,  an  obstinate  defence.  It
took  me  twenty  years  of  patient  researches  to  arrive  at  my  present
conviction.  Nay, — to  make  one  last  confession, — I  am  not  even  yet
absolutely  and  irremediably  convinced  !  In  spite  of  the  astounding
phenomena  which  I  have  witnessed  during  my  sixty  experiments  with
Eusapia,  I  have  still  a  trace  of  doubt ;  doubt  which  is  weak,  indeed,
to-day,  but  which  may  perchance  be  stronger  to-morrow.  Yet  such
doubts,  if  they  come,  will  not  be  due  so  much  to  any  defect  in  the
actual  experiment,  as  to  the  inexorable  strength  of  prepossession
which  holds  me  back  from  adopting  a  conclusion  which  contravenes
the  habitual  and  almost  unanimous  opinion  of  mankind.


Note.

[To  explain  what  is  here  said  of  "oscillation,"  it  must  be  briefly
stated  that  a  series  of  experiments  with  Eusapia  Paladino  was  made
at  Cambridge  in  the  summer  of  1895  ;  that  the  chief  investigators
arrived  unanimously  at  the  conclusion  that  systematic  fraud  had  been
used  from  first  to  last  in  these  experiments ;  and  that  reference  to  a
description  given  by  Professor  Richet  himself,  in  February,  1893,  of
the  manner  in  which  Eusapia's  hands  were  held  "  en  general,"  showed
that  her  main  method  of  cheating  in  the  Cambridge  experiments  must
have  been  practised  by  her  systematically  for  years.

It  ought  to  be  added,  in  justice  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  who  rendered

much  important  aid  in  the  exposure  of  her  trickery  at  Cambridge,

since  admitted  by  her  own  trance-utterance, — that  his  opinion  of
Eusapia  Paladino's  performances  has  been  in  no  way  modified  by  the
brief  notes  which  were  all  that  it  was  possible  for  Professor  Richet
and  myself  to  make  of  certain  experiments  in  Paris,  on  December  1st
and  3rd,  1898,  which  appeared  to  us  conclusive. — F.  W.  H.  Myees.]


158


Alice  Johnson.


[part


II.

COINCIDENCES.

By  Alice  Johnson.

Associate  of  Neivtilmm  College,  Cambridge.

SUMMARY.

Introduction. — Definition  of  "  Coincidences."  Application  of
subject  to  Psychical  Research ;  work  already  done  by  the  Society  in
this  connection.  159-164

Chapter  T.  —  Division  of  Coincidences  into  three  classes:  (A)
those  suggestive  of  "  Causation  "  ;  (B)  those  suggestive  of  "  Design  "  ;
(C)  those  due  to  "  Chance."  Definition  of  "  Design."  Theoretical
distinction  between  Chance  and  Design.  Representation  of  Chance
■series  by  curves.  Grounds  on  which  we  may  form  an  opinion  whether
artificial  series  or  single  conjunctions  of  events  are  due  to  Chance  or
to  Design.  The  operation  of  Chance  in  Nature.  Distinction  between
Causation  and  Design.  Causation  and  Design  (?)  in  Nature.  Dis-
tinction between  Chance  and  Causation.  Grounds  for  judging
whether  series  or  single  conjunctions  of  events  are  due  to  Chance  or
Causation.  Chance  is  not  the  negation  of  Law,  nor  inconsistent  with
the  hypothesis  of  Universal  Design.  165-177

Chapter  II. — General  Discussion  of  Chance.  Probability  and
Expectation.  Relation  of  Events  in  a  Chance  Series  to  one  another.
Consequences  of  the  absence  of  causal  connection  between  them.
The  Aggregate  Results  of  Chance  Series  ;  order  in  the  mass,  com-
bined with  disorder  in  the  units  of  the  mass.  Methods  of  analysis
of  Chance  Series.  "  Residual  Cycles,"  an  example  of  the  fact  that  a
few  extraordinary  coincidences  are  less  instructive  than  a  large  number
of  trivial  ones,  all  pointing  in  the  same  direction.  Professor  Pearson
on  Monte  Carlo  Roulette.  178-192

Chapter  III. — Examples  :  Section  I. — Coincidences  clearly  due  to
Chance.  Section  II. — Coincidences  with  a  doubtful  claim  to  causal
production.  (A)  Cases  suggestive  of  Design.  (B)  Cases  of  "  physical
phenomena  "  in  which  the  evidence  for  a  supernormal  cause  depends
on  a  coincidence. (C)  Premonitions.  193-260

Chapter  IV. — Examples  of  Coincidences  with  a  stronger  claim  to
causal  production  :  Section  I. — Cases  apparently  due  to  subliminal
mental  action.  Section  II. —  Cases  possibly  or  probably  due  to  Telepathy.

261-292

Appendix  I.  (written  jointly  with  W.  E.  Johnson). — On  the
construction  of  artificial  Chance  Series.  293-308


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


159


Appendix  II. — Examination  of  a  Premoaitory  case, — Mr.  Lane's
dream  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Terriss.  309-316
Appendix  III. — Some  premonitory  dreams  of  races.  317-321
Appendix IV.  —  A guessing competition  case. Discussion  of
whether  it  was  a  "lottei'y"  in  the  legal  sense  of  the  term.  322-330


INTRODUCTION.

By  a  "Coincidence"  is  meant  any  conjunction  of  circumstances
that  would  primarily  be  regarded  as  accidental,  but  in  which  a  special
aspect  is  involved,  suggesting  a  causal  relation.  It  is  always  this
special  aspect  that  attracts  our  attention,  not  the  fact  tliat  the  con-
junction is  in  itself  a  particularly  unlikely  one  to  occur.  It  has  a
certain  antecedent  probability,  which — theoretically — can  always  be
calculated  ;  and  the  calculation  always  shows  it  to  be  no  more  unlikely
than  many  other  possible  conjunctions.  For  instance,  suppose  that
some  one  had  correctly  prophesied  what  a  certain  hand  at  whist  would
be.  We  can  calculate  what  is  the  antecedent  probability  of  getting
this  hand  and  it  will  be  found  to  be  very  small,  but  no  smaller  than
the  probability  of  any  other  specified  hand.  The  only  noteworthy
point  in  the  matter  would  be  the  correspondence  between  the  actual
hand  and  the  prophesied  hand,  and  this  would  suggest  some  cause,
such  as  a  preconcerted  arrangement  of  the  pack.

The  consideration  of  the  special  aspect  that  attracts  our  atten-
tion in  a  coincidence  is  useful,  because  it  may  lead  to  the
discovery  of  a  cause  hitherto  unknown,  or  at  least  unrecognised  by
science.  The  appearance  of  a  causal  relation,  however,  is  often
fallacious  ;  the  circumstances  may  seem  to  come  under  the  operation  of
a  common  cause  when  they  are  really  produced  by  entirely  independent
causes,  and  such  conjunctions  or  coincidences  are  accidental.

In  psychical  research  we  are  constantly  confronted  with  the
question : — are  those  coincidences  which  form  the  main  material  of  our
study, — the  apparitions  seen  at  the  time  of  death  or  of  some  crisis  in
the  life  of  the  person  represented,  the  cases  of  detailed  apparent
foreknowledge  of  events,  the  ma.ss  of  correct  information  to  be  found
among  the  utterances  of  at  least  one  trance  medium,  the  precise
resemblances  between  the  thoughts  of  two  persons  in  successful
experiments  in  thought-transference,  the  movements  of  the  divining-
rod  over  concealed  underground  water, — are  all  these  coincidences  to
be  put  down  to  chance,  or  is  there  something  more  in  them  1

It  may  be  thought  that  we  have  already  discussed  this  question
ad  nauseam  and  decided  it.  But  this  is  at  most  true  only  in  regard  to
some  sections  of  the  above-mentioned  classes  of  facts,  and  there  is  room
for  difference  of  opinion  about  many  of  them.  Thus,  some  persons  may


160


Alice  Johnson.


[part


think  that  tlie  evidence  for  telepathy  is  conclusive,  but  not  that  for
clairvoyance.  Some  may  be  convinced  of  the  possibility  of  telepathy
between  the  living,  but  yet  remain  dubious  as  to  communications  from
the  dead.  In  deciding  on  this  latter  question,  there  are  of  course  other
points  to  be  taken  into  consideration  besides  the  possible  scope  of
chance  coincidence.  But  I  think  the  main  doubt  is  whether — after
excluding  the  cases  that  may  be  explained  by  telepathy  from  living
persons —those  that  remain  are  sufficiently  numerous  to  be  beyond
chance.  I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  this  difficulty  at  all  now, — still
less  to  pronounce  any  opinion  upon  it, — I  merely  wish  to  point  out
that  in  many  lines  of  our  work  the  question  of  chance  coincidence  is
still  to  the  front  and  refuses  to  be  shelved.

The  chief  reason  why  apparently  telepathic  phenomena  may
be  thought  accidental  is  tliat  we  have  no  notion  how  telepathy —
assuming  that  there  is  such  a  thing — causes  the  phenomena.  We  may
some  time  find  traces  of  the  method  by  which  it  works  ;  that  is,  we
may  find  some  of  the  intermediate  links  between  the  cause  and  the
effect.  But,  so  far,  we  not  only  have  no  knowledge  of  any  inter
mediate  links,  but  there  is  nothing  which  even  alfords  any  clue  as  to
the  direction  in  which  they  should  be  looked  for.  Telepathy  is
generally  defined  as  the  action  of  one  mind  on  another  otherwise  than
through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  The  action  may  be  an
exclusively  mental  one.  Of  course,  in  the  case  of  telepathy  between
living  persons,  the  brain  of  each  person  must  be  supposed  to  be
concerned  in  the  action,  but  the  communication  between  the  two
minds  may  be  exclusively  mental,  involving  no  physical  energy  of  any
kind.  This  would  make  it  much  more  difficult — if  not  impossible — to
discover  the  laws  of  the  transmission,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of
direct  observation  of  any  mental  action  outside  our  own  minds.  At
all  events,  the  evidence  for  telepathy  rests  for  the  present  on  two
main  lines  of  argument.  The  first  is  the  fact  that  a  large  mass  of
apparently  miscellaneous  phenomena,  for  the  occurrence  of  which
there  is  strong  evidence,  can  be  reduced  to  order  and  coherence  by  the
hypothesis.  It  does  not  account  for  all  the  phenomena  with  which
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  deals ;  but  if  we  confine  ourselves
to  really  well-authenticated  cases,  we  find  that  it  covers  a  large  pro-
portion, if  not  the  great  majority  of  them,  just  as  the  hypothesis  or
theoi-y  of  gravitation  covers  the  apparently  chaotic  motions  of  the  stars.
It  is  true  that  the  theory  of  gravitation  not  only  covers  a  much  larger
number  of  cases  than  the  theory  of  telepathy,  but  also  involves  all
sorts  of  complicated  consequences,  nothing  clearly  contradictory  of
which  has  ever  been  observed.  Still,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  evidence
for  both  theories  is  practically  the  same  from  a  qualitative  point  of
view,  though  so  obviously  not  the  same  in  quantity.


XXXV.]


Coivcidenceft.


161


The  second  main  argument  for  the  existence  of  telepathy  is  that
the  number  of  cases — which  may  be  spoken  of  here  as  "  coincidences,"
because  it  is  always  some  kind  of  coincidence  in  them  that  indicates
their  supposed  telepathic  nature — are  far  too  numerous  to  be  reason-
ably attributed  to  chance.  The  argument  is  used  for  instance  by  De
Morgan  (see  vl  Budget  of  Paradoxes,  pp.  279-280)  with  regard  to
apparitions  seen  at  the  time  of  death.  He  points  out  that  if  there
was  no  causal  connection  between  the  apparition  and  the  death,  we
should  expect  to  find  a  comparatively  large  proportion  of  cases  of
what  he  calls  "the  wrong  spectre," — that  is,  cases  in  which  it  is  seen
"  at  the  moment  of  the  death  of  one  or  another  of  all  the  cluster
who  are  closely  connected  with  the  original  of  the  spectre,"  instead  of
at  the  time  of  death  of  the  original  himself.  But,  says  De  Morgan,
this  class  of  cases  is  "almost  witiiout  example. '  As  a  matter  of  fact,
among  our  own  more  recent  evidence,  perhaps  as  many  as  half-a-dozen
cases  are  to  be  found  in  which  a  near  relative  of  the  dying  person  was
seen  at  the  time  of  the  death ;  but  this  as  compared  with  hundreds  of
cases  where  the  dying  person  himself  was  seen.

In  the  present  state  of  obscurity  as  to  the  mode  of  action  of
psychical  causes,  the  statistical  argument  is  the  strongest  one  that  we
can  bring  to  bear  in  proof  of  their  reality.  Though  we  find  its
importance  recognised  now  and  again  by  thinkers  like  De  Morgan,  and
even  in  much  earlier  times,  and  hints  thrown  out  as  to  the  necessity  of
statistical  investigations  for  settling  the  question  of  chance  coincidence,
the  first  serious  attempts  to  collect  statistics  on  anything  like  an
adequate  scale  were  made  by  the  founders  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  —  pre-eminently  by  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney, — and  some  of  the
most  important  work  done  by  the  Society  since  has  been  on  these  lines.

I  may  recapitulate  bi'iefly  some  part  of  what  has  been  done  up  to
the  present.  First,  as  to  spontaneous  cases  of  apparitions  at  the  time
of  death  of  the  person  seen.  Apparitions  of  persons  known  to  the
seer  are  not  uncommonly  seen  when  nothing  particular  is  happening  to
the  person  represented  by  the  apparition.  On  the  other  hand,  this
person  sometimes  dies  at  the  time.  Statistics  have  been  collected  by
the  Society  on  an  extensive  scale  to  test  whether  the  well-authenticated
coincidences  of  this  kind  are  more  numerous  in  proportion  to  the  non-
coincidental  apparitions  than  would  be  the  case  by  chance,  and  they
were  found  to  be  very  considerably  more  numerous.

Next,  with  regard  to  experiments  in  thought-transference.  In  the
early  days  of  the  Society,  some  of  the  most  striking  results  obtained
were  in  experiments  in  which  the  percipient  attempted  to  reproduce
drawings  or  diagrams  made  by  the  agent, — care  being  of  course  taken
to  prevent  the  former  from  gaining  knowledge  of  them  through  any  of
the  ordinai-y  channels  of  sense, — and  much  useful  work  might  be  done


162  Alice  Johnson.  [part

now  by  persons  who  have  opportunities  of  repeating  these  experiments.
They  were  criticised  on  the  ground  of  the  famiUar  fact  that  the  minds
of  men  have  a  tendency  to  run  in  certain  grooves, — so  that,  for
instance,  if  one  is  asked  to  think  of  or  to  draw  objects,  or  to  think  of
playing-cards  or  numbers,  each  person,  though  he  may  not  be  aware  of
it,  has  favourites  and  is  more  likely  to  think  of  some  objects,  cards,  or
numbers,  than  others.  These  mental  "liabits,"  as  they  are  sometimes
called,  may  be  alike  in  several  persons ;  and  when  this  is  so  in  the  case
of  two  experimenters,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  diagrams  drawn  l^y
the  pei'cipient  may  resemble  those  drawn  by  the  agent,  and  thus
simuhite  the  phenomenon  of  thought-transference.  Similarly,  if  cards
or  numbers  are  chosen  by  tlie  agent,  his  mental  habits  may  lead  him  to
choose  a  large  proportion  of  those  that  happen  also  to  be  favourites
with  the  percipient,  who  will  therefore  have  a  better  chance  of  guessing
right.  This  is,  of  course,  one  reason  why  it  is  always  best  for  the  agent
in  experiments  with  cards  or  numbers  to  draw  them  at  random  from  a
batch  and  not  to  choose  them.

In  order  to  test  how  far  mental  haljits  might  have  simulated
thought-transference  in  the  experiments  with  diagrams.  Colonel  Taylor
carried  out  a  series  of  dummy  experiments,  made  in  the  same  manner
as  the  experiments  in  thought-transference,  but  with  the  element  of
thought-transfei'ence  eliminated  (see  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,Vol.  VI.,
p.  398).  He  got  eighty  persons  to  draw  twenty -live  diagrams  each,
and  so  obtained  1,000  pairs  of  diagi'ams,  which  could  be  compared
according  to  a  pre-arranged  plan.  The  comparison  showed  how
many  resemblances  were  actually  produced  by  chance,  combined  with
similarity  in  the  mental  habits  of  the  persons  who  drew  the  diagrams  ;
and  the  number  of  resemblances  were  found  to  be  proportionately  far
less  than  those  found  in  the  experiments  in  thought-transference.  ^

In  experiments  with  drawings,  where  the  number  of  possible
drawings  is  unrestricted,  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  calculate  how
many  successes  might  be  obtained  by  chance ;  the  question  can  only  be

1  To  this  it  may  be  objected  that  tlie  persons  who  drew  the  diagrams  being  taken
at  random,  there  was  no  reason  to  expect  similarity  in  their  mental  habits  ;  whereas
— since  some  experiments  in  thought-transference  fail,  while  others  succeed — it  might
be  argued  that  only  those  succeed  where  the  mental  habits  of  agent  and  percipient
happen  to  be  similar.  Similarity  of  mental  habits  could  not,  of  course,  in  any  case
ensure  success,  because  it  would  be  very  unlikely  that  the  percipient  would  think  of
his  favoui  ite  forms  in  the  same  order  as  the  agent  ;  but  it  might  increase  the  chance  of
success.  In  many  of  the  experiments  in  thought-transference,  however,  the  diagrams
were  drawn  or  selected  by  some  person  other  than  the  agent,  and  not  always  the  same
person,  so  that  a  general  similarity  in  mental  habits — as  well  as  a  general  tendency  to
think  of  the  favourites  in  the  same  order — would  have  to  be  assumed,  and  this  seems
to  be  negatived  by  Colonel  Taylor's  experiments.  The  most  crucial  test  of  the  hypo-
thesis would  be  to  see  whether  any  considerable  proiDortion  of  the  diagrams  in
successful  experiments  are  those  which  there  is  reason  to  regard  as  general  favourites,
and  I  do  not  think  it  is  possible  to  maintain  that  this  is  the  case.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


163


tested  empirically,  and  a  very  large  number  of  trials  is  necessary  to
ensure  a  completely  satisfactory  test.

Taking  next  the  thought-transference  of  numbers,  two  Danish
psychologists,  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen,  have  attempted  to  prove
that  unconscious  whispering — a  possible  source  of  error  which,  I  need
hardly  say,  had  been  present  to  the  minds  of  the  experimenters  from
the  tirst — accounted  for  the  successes  obtained.  They  found  that
when  they  tried  similar  experiments  with  one  another  they  had  a
tendency  to  whisper  the  numbers  unconsciously,  and  the  one  who  was
playing  the  part  of  percipient  at  a  little  distance  from  the  agent  heard
indistinctly  what  was  whispered,  and  thus  often  got  the  number  right.
But  the  most  important  part  of  their  criticism  consisted  in  showing
that,  when  the  number  was  guessed  wi'ong,  through  being  heard  too
indistinctly,  the  same  mistakes  were  often  made  as  were  made  in  the
experiments  in  thought-transference.  For  instance,  2 — when  it  was
not  guessed  right — was  guessed  as  3  more  often  than  anything  else  in
both  sets  of  experiments.  This  suggested  that  the  mistake  was  due
to  the  same  cause,  viz.,  indistinct  hearing  of  a  whispered  sound,  in
both  cases.  The  argument  was  founded  on  coincide7ices  in  mistakes,
which  were  certainly  striking  at  first  sight.  Further  investigation,
however  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XII ,  p.  298),  showed  the
inconclusiveness  of  this  reasoning.  There  was  a  certain  series  of
experiments  in  thought-transference  in  which  agent  and  percipient
were  in  different  houses,  so  that  the  hearing  of  unconscious  whispering
was  out  of  the  question.  In  this  series,  the  number  of  successes  was
not  above  what  might  have  been  produced  by  chance  ;  so  that  all  the
results  that  occurred  in  it — both  right  and  wrong — were  to  be  put
down  to  chance  alone.  Now  it  was  found  that  there  were  quite  as  many
correspondences  (as  to  the  mistakes  that  were  made  most  frequently)
between  this  series  and  Messrs.  Hansen  and  Lehmann's  whispered
series  as  between  theirs  and  the  thought-transference  series.  It  follows
that  the  correspondences  or  coincidences  that  seemed  so  remarkable
were  not  beyond  what  chance  could  produce,  so  that  no  argument  as
to  the  cause  of  the  mistakes  made  could  be  founded  on  them.

In  the  present  paper,  no  attempt  is  made  to  carry  on  further  any
statistical  inquiry  of  this  kind,  but  rather  to  compare  on  more
general  grounds  the  curious  coincidences  sometimes  met  with  in
ordinary  life  to  those  met  with  in  psychical  research.  With  regard  to
the  examples  selected,  I  have  tried  to  consider  as  far  as  possible
whether  they  are  due  to  some  cause  which  is  not  immediately  obvious  ;
and  if  not,  whether  there  is  any  reason  to  suppose  that  they  are  not
the  result  of  chance.  For  this  end,  I  endeavour  to  consider  whether
the  probability  of  their  occurrence  is  great  or  small.  In  choosing
cases,  I  have  been  guided  chiefly  b}'  the  apparent  improbability  of


164


Alice  Johnson.


[part


their  occurrence, — the  common  sense  impression  of  their  oddness.  The
degree  of  improbability  is  sometimes  less  than  the  narrators  of  the
incidents  seem  to  think ;  but  in  most  of  my  cases,  no  numerical
calculation  of  it  is  possible ;  ovly  a  very  rough  estimate  can  be  formed,
and  on  general  grounds  alone.  There  is,  however,  a  case  of  two
persons  guessing  independently  the  numbers  drawn  in  a  lottery,  where
the  chances  against  the  double  event  were  calculated  by  a  competent
mathematician  as  about  22  billions  to  1  (see  p.  249).  It  is  very
remarkable  that  a  coincidence  such  as  this  should  occur, — by  which  I
mean  that  it  must  be  so  exceedingly  rare  that  we  are  justified  in
feeling  surprised  when  we  meet  with  it.  But  if  nobody  ever  met
with  such  a  coincidence,  we  should  be  still  more  surprised  ;  as  the
very  reasoning  which  shows  us  that  it  is  not  likely  to  occur  more  than
once  in  a  certain  large  number  of  times,  shows  us  also  that  it  is  not
likely  to  occur  less  titan  once.  Tlie  imiJiobability  in  this  particular
case  is  enormously  in  excess  of  the  improbability  of  any  one  of  the
coincidences  we  meet  with  in  psychical  research, — so  far  as  we  are  able
to  estimate  them  numerically.  But,  as  already  implied,  for  the  proof
that  these  psychical  coincidences  are  beyond  chance,  we  do  not  depend
on  the  degree  of  improbability  of  any  one  coincidence,  but  on  the
accumulation  of  many  coincidences  of  certain  well-defined  types  ;  and
in  deciding  whether  other  coincidences  are  accidental,  we  have  to
consider  whether  they  too  fall  into  natural  classes  too  numerous  to  be
accounted  for  by  chance.

Since  we  are  dealing  with  cases  which — like  apparitions  seen  at
the  time  of  death — obviously  miglit  be  due  to  chance  alone,  the
question  is  complicated  by  an  inevitable  uncerlainty  as  to  which
coincidences,  if  any,  are  due  to  chance  and  which  are  not.  All  that
the  theory  of  probability  can  tell  us  is  that  out  of  a  certain  number  of
events,  the  most  likely  number  of  coincidences  is  so-and-so.  If  we  find
the  actual  number  to  be  largely  in  excess  of  this,  we  are  justified  in
thinking  it  probable  that  something  beyond  chance  has  operated  in  the
whole  group  of  events  taken  togetlier.  But  we  are  not  justified  in
drawing  any  conclusion  about  any  individual  coincidence.  The  very
same  reasoning  that  has  led  to  tlie  conclusion  that  the  whole  group  of
coincidences  taken  together  is  not  due  to  chance  involves  the  assumption
that  some  of  the  coincidences  «re  due  to  chance,  and  affords  no  criterion
by  which  we  can  distinguish  these  coincidences  from  the  others.  In
course  of  time,  however,  we  may  learn  enough  about  all  the  circum-
stances and  processes  concerned  to  enable  us  to  distinguish  between
casual  coincidences  and  those  which  arise  from  a  cause,  and  reasoned
speculation  based  on  psychical  research  has,  in  fact,  already  reached
such  a  stage  that  we  may  often  be  mare  or  less  convinced  on  rational
grounds  as  to  the  nature  of  a  given  coincidence.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


165


CHAPTER  I.

ON  THE  CLASSIFICATION  OF  COINCIDENCES.


"  To  understand  what  a  thing  is,  one  must  generally  give  some  attention
to  appreciating  what  it  is  not.  .  .  .  Ajjplying  this  plan  to  the  term
'  Chance,'  there  will  be  found  to  be  two  sets  of  terms  which  are  very  com-
monly used  to  indicate  an  antithesis.  One  of  these  is  'Causation,'  and  its
synonymes,  and  the  other  'Choice'  or  'Design.'  These  two  sets  of  terms
mark  in  strictness  ...  a  very  different  kind  of  opposition  ;  but  the
controversies  to  which  tliey  give  rise  will  be  found  to  overlap,  and  in  some
instances  to  merge  into  one  another." — J.  Venn.  The  Logic  of  CItance
(2nd  Edition,  p.  224).

The  quotation  just  given  suggests  a  basis  for  the  provisional
classification  of  Coincidences  which  I  propose  to  adopt.  I  divide
them  accordingly  into  three  classes: — (A)  Coincidences  suggestive  of
"Causation";  (B)  Coincidences  suggestive  of  "Design";  (C)  Coin-
cidences due  to  "  Chance."

(A)  Coincidences  suggestive  of  "Causation."  In  this  class  there
seems  to  be  a  definite  causal  connection  between  the  coinciding  events.
Eitlier  one  causes  the  other,  or  both  are  due  to  a  common  cause,  such  as
thunder  and  lightning  resulting  from  a  certain  condition  of  the  atmo-
sphere. The  mere  fact  of  two  events  frequently  happening  together
may  lead  to  the  discovery  of  new  causes.  Many  scientific  discoveries
liave,  indeed,  resulted  from  the  observation  and  study  of  coincidences.

When  the  things  that  coincide  are  due  to  chains  of  causes  that  are
up  to  a  certain  point  independent,  the  coincidence  may  yet  be  by  no
means  accidental.  Examples  of  this  may  be  found  in  the  extra-
ordinarily minute  imitation  of  plants  or  other  objects  by  some  animals,
especially  insects,  the  imitation  being  so  close  as  frequently  to  deceive
both  other  animals  and  human  beings.  For  instance,  the  following-
account  of  an  incident  observed  by  Mr.  Belt  in  Nicaragua  is  given
in  Wallace's  Darvnnism  (2nd  Edition,  p.  203).  Describing  the
armies  of  foraging  ants  in  the  forests  which  devour  every  insect  they
can  catch,  Mr.  Belt  says  : — "  I  was  nmch  surprised  with  the
behaviour  of  a  green  leaf-like  locust.  This  insect  stood  immovably
among  a  host  of  ants,  many  of  which  ran  over  its  legs  without  ever
discovering  there  was  food  within  their  reach.  So  fixed  was  its
instinctive  knowledge  that  its  safety  depended  on  its  immovability,
that  it  allowed  me  to  pick  it  up  and  replace  it  among  the  ants  without
making  a  single  effort  to  escape.  This  species  closely  resembles  a  green
leaf." Now  the  ants  no  doubt  took  the  locust  for  a  green  leaf,  and  if


166


Alice  Johnson.


[part


they  had  been  able  to  consider  how  it  had  been  produced,  they  would
probably  have  argued  that,  like  other  green  leaves,  it  had  grown  on  a
tree.  A  very  little  knowledge  of  natural  history  suffices  to  show  that
the  antecedents  of  a  locust  are  totally  different  from  those  of  a  green
leaf, — that  two  independent  chains  of  antecedent  events  have  in  this
case  produced  two  closely  similar  effects.  But  a  good  deal  of  further
investigation  is  required  to  prove  that  the  similarity  is  not  accidental,
but  was  brought  about  by  a  definite  cause, — the  gradual  selection  in
one  generation  of  locusts  after  another  of  the  individuals  who  escaped
destruction  through  a  constantly  increasing  resemblance  to  their
surroundings.

(B)  Coincidences  suggestive  of  •'  Design."  Design  is,  of  course,
a  cause,  but  from  some  aspects  of  such  a  different  character  from
other  causes  that  it  is  convenient  to  treat  it  separately.  Typical
instances  of  the  class  are  coincidences  or  combinations  of  events  that
make  so  decidedly  for  the  convenience  or  inconvenience  of  particular
individuals  that — to  their  minds,  at  least — the  idea  of  a  special
intervention  on  their  behalf  or  against  them  may  be  forcibly  suggested.
Yet  these  combinations  of  events  may  seem  to  be  of  exactly  the  same
character  as  many  other  combinations  which  affect  nobody,  and  are
therefore  considered  accidental,  their  only  distinguishing  feature  being
their  importance  to  the  individual.  Thus,  supposing  a  man  misses  a
train  through  his  watch  being  slow  and  the  train  meets  with  an
accident  in  which  all  the  passengers  are  killed ;  or  supposing  he
misses  a  train  which  meets  with  an  accident  in  which  no  one  is
injured.  The  two  coincidences  would  be  of  just  the  same  apparently
accidental  character ;  yet  he  would  probably  be  inclined  to  attach
much  more  significance  to  the  first  than  to  the  second.  It  is,  of
course,  easy  to  suppose  that  the  man's  watch  would  have  been  slow
that  day  in  any  case,  quite  irrespective  of  what  was  going  to  happen
to  the  train — that,  in  fact,  it  was  not  specially  contrived  to  make  him
miss  the  train;  just  as  we  assume,  speaking  generally,  that  the  numbers
that  turn  up  in  a  lottery  are  determined  by  chance,  without  reference
to  the  question  whether  any  one  has  a  stake  on  them  or  not.  Still,
coincidences  of  this  kind  may  conveniently  be  treated  as  a  separate
class.

(C)  Coincidences  due  to  "  Chance,"  that  is,  those  in  which  the
coinciding  events  are  due  to  independent  causes.  Mr.  Gurney
makes  the  following  remark  on  casual  coincidences  (see  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  18,  foot-note)  : — "  In  a  general  way,
coincidences  where  previous  experience  affords  some  ground  for
suspecting  (however  faintly)  a  cause  other  than  chance  are  distin-
guished from  coincidences  where  no  such  ground  exists  by  this  fact —


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


167


that  the  latter  sort  of  cases,  if  a  priori  highly  improbable,  are
not  mentioned  or  described  until  after  they  have  happened.  From
the  mere  fact  that  they  do  not  belong  to  any  known  or  surmised  type,
they  do  not  enter  into  any  one's  head  ;  no  one  suggests,  without  any
sort  of  grounds,  that  a  particular  thing  will  happen  to  some  one  at
a  particular  time,  or  predicts  any  particular  highly  improbable  coin-
cidence, and  then  afterwards  finds  this  thing  or  this  coincidence
actually  occurring."  For  instance,  he  says,  "The  odds  are  very  great
against  two  of  the  foremost  men  in  a  century  being  born  on  the  same
day  ;  yet  this  happened  in  the  case  of  Darwin  and  Lincoln,  and  no
one  imagines  that  the  one  birth  depended  on  the  other. "

There  are  two  obvious  difficulties  in  making  use  of  the  provisional
classification  suggested:  (1)  we  often  cannot  tell  to  which  class  a
given  coincidence  belongs  ;  and  (2)  doubts  may  arise  as  to  wliat  dis-
tinctions really  exist  between  the  classes.  The  second  point  needs
discussion  first,  the  words  "Design,"  "Causation,"  and  "Chance"
having  been  used  above  in  their  ordinary  popular  sense,  which  perhaps
requires  definition.

Design  and  the  antithesis  between  it  and  Chance.
The  word  "  Design  "  is  generally  intended  to  convey  the  idea  that
an  intelligent  Will  is  manipulating  circumstances  with  some  pur-
pose-some end  in  view.  When  we  speak  of  the  means  as  being
considered  more  important  than  the  end— if,  e.g.,  a  man  refuses  to
gain  some  advantage  for  himself  by  an  immoral  action— this  is  rather
a  loose  way  of  speaking.  We  do  not  really  mean  that  the  end  is
disregarded  ;  but  that  the  end  ultimately  aimed  at  is  not  the  particular
advantage,  but  morality.  Whatever  the  end  may  be,  and  though  it
may  vary  from  moment  to  moment,  there  is  always  at  any  given
moment  in  the  case  of  intelligent  human  action,  some  end  which  is
aimed  at.  Effort  is  concentrated  and  attention  chiefly  fixed  on  one
circumstance  or  condition,  all  the  others  being  regarded  as  relatively
unimportant.  For  a  finite  inteUigence  with  personal  interests,  it  is
indeed  inevitable  that  certain  things  should  seem  vastly  more  important
than  others.

The  antithesis  between  Chance  and  Design  is  clear,  so  long  as  we
confine  ourselves  to  human  action.  To  say  that  a  series  of  events  is
a  Chance  series,  and  not  produced  by  Design,  means  that  human  voli-
tion determines  that  some  events  of  certain  kinds  shall  occur,  but  does
not  choose  exactly  tvhich  event  it  shall  be  each  time,  leaving  this  to
depend  on  the  external  physical  conditions,  which  are  expressly
arranged  in  such  a  way  as  to  allow  of  several  alternative  events.  For
instance,  in  games  of  pure  chance,  the  player  places  the  object  used  in


N


168


Alice  Johnson.


[part


such  a  position  {e.y.,  up  in  the  air)  that  one  of  several  things  must
happen  (e.cj/.,  if  the  object  has  several  flat  faces,  it  must  fall  on  one  of
them) ;  but  he  expressly  abstains  from  determining  which  of  the  things
shall  happen.  If,  instead  of  behaving  thus,  he  deliberately  aims  at
producing  one  event  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  possible  ones,  the
event  is  said  to  be  due  to  Design.

Another  typical  case  is  that  of  a  marksman,  with  some  degree  of
skill,  tiring  at  a  target,  when  the  particular  arrangement  of  any  large
number  of  shots  on  the  target  will  be  the  result  of  Chance.  Here  the
centre  of  the  target  may  be  compared  with  tlie  particular  event  in  a
game  of  chance  on  which  the  player  stakes  at  any  given  moment.  It
is  true  that  the  two  cases  are  not  altogether  analagous,  because  the
general  distribution  of  the  shots  depends  to  a  considerable  extent  on
the  skill  of  the  marksman.  The  greater  his  skill,  the  more  will  they
cluster  about  the  centre.  Whereas  in  a  game  of  pure  chance,  the
variations  in  the  events  depend  merely  on  the  external  conditions,  and
not  at  all  on  the  actions  of  the  player.  But  the  marksman  also  de-
liberately leaves  something  to  be  determined  by  external  conditions, —
such  as  gravitation  and  the  wind, — which  he  does  not  attempt  to  con-
trol, thougli  he  varies  his  own  action  to  allow  for  them.  If  he  simply
determined  to  touch  the  centre  of  the  target  with  the  bullet,  he  might
carry  it  in  his  hand  up  to  the  target  and  do  so,  just  as  the  player
might  keep  his  dice  in  his  hand  and  turn  them  at  will.  This  would  be
the  work  of  Design  in  both  cases.  But  whenever  Design,  of  its  own
accord,  stops  short  of  deciding  between  several  alternatives,  the  final
result  is  due  to  Chance.

A  Chance  series  such  as  the  distribution  of  shots  on  a  target  is  often
represented  by  a  diagram  like  the  following.^ BAG  is  a  horizontal


BKHGADEFC


straight  line,  whose  central  point  A  represents  the  centre  of  the  target;
other  points,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  K,  in  the  line  to  the  right  and  left  of  A,
represent  areas  in  the  target  at  distances  to  the  right  and  left  of  its

'  The  same  diagram  can  be  used  to  represent  various  features  in  a  series  of  throws
of  dice,  etc.,  but  the  method  of  doing  so  is  a  rather  more  complicated  one,  and  the
explanation  of  it  is  therefore  omitted.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


169


centre,!  proportionate  to  the  distances  of  the  respective  points  from  A.
From  all  these  points  vertical  lines  are  drawn  upwards,  proportionate
in  length  to  the  number  of  shots  that  hit  the  corresponding  areas  in
the  target.  If  the  upper  ends  of  these  lines  be  joined  together,  the  line
joining  them  approaches  to  the  form  of  a  curve,  as  shown  in  the  figure.
The  larger  the  number  of  shots,  the  smaller  is  it  feasible  to  make  the
subdivisions  in  the  target  and  the  corresponding  subdivisions  in  the  line
BAG,  and  the  smoother  and  more  symmetrical  will  the  curve  repre-
senting the  distribution  of  the  shots  become.  The  ideal  chance  distribu-
tion in  such  a  case  is  represented  by  a  perfectly  symmetrical  curve,
and  when  any  curve  representing  a  large  number  of  incidents  or  events
approximates  closely  to  this,  there  is  strong  presumption  that  the  whole
series  was  due  to  Chance  and  not  to  Design  (or  any  other  cause).

It  is,  however,  often  very  difficult  to  find  out  what  has  produced  a
single  event.  For  instance,  if  we  only  saw  the  upshot  of  a  single
event— say,  a  pair  of  dice  lying  on  a  table  with  certain  faces  upper-
most—it would  be  impossible  to  say  whether  this  had  been  produced
by  Chance  or  Design.

In  some  individual  cases,  however,  there  may  be  grounds  for  form-
ing a  judgment  on  this  point.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  in  a  game  of
whist  all  the  tliirteen  trumps  are  found  in  one  hand.  A  hand  of  thirteen
trumps  is  a  highly  improbable  hand,  but  is  just  as  likely  to  occur  by
chance  as  any  other  given  hand.  In  other  words,  among  all  the  millions
of  possible  hands,  there  is  no  one  individual  case  which  is  more  likely
to  occur  than  the  case  of  thirteen  trumps.  It  is,  of  course,  infinitely
more  probable  that  some  other  one  among  the  millions  sliould  turn  up,
but  not  at  all  more  probable  that  any  jJarticidar  one  should  do  so.

It  was,  then,  quite  possible  that  the  thirteen  trumps  came  into  one
hand  by  Chance.  The  reason  why  we  may  doubt  if  they  did  so  has
nothing  to  do  with  our  knowledge  of  the  workings  of  Chance,  which
practically  gives  us  no  help  in  the  case.  It  is  simply  that  some  one
profits  by  the  hand  of  thirteen  trumps  more  than  he  would  by  any
other  hand,  and  there  is  therefore  a  motive  for  him  to  manipulate  the
pack  with  a  view  to  this  result.  Such  a  case  does  not,  of  course,
afford  conclusive  proof  of  Design,  but  it  certainly  affords  evidence  of
It— evidence  more  or  less  strong,  according  to  the  circumstances.

The  Operation  of  Chance  in  Nature.
There  are  many  groups  of  things  in  Nature,  altogether  outside
human  control,  which  it  is  possible  to  represent  by  diagrams  like  the

1  The  particular  method  of  subdivision  of  the  target  into  areas  is  a  matter  of  detail.
1  erhaps  the  best  way  would  be  to  divide  it  into  concentric  ring-shaped  areas  round  the
DUU  s  eye,  and  then  draw  a  vertical  line  through  the  centre  and  take  as  units  the  halves
ot  the  areas  on  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the  vertical  line.

N  2


170


Alice  Johnson.


[PAKT


one  given  above  ;  for  instance,  the  heights  of  a  large  number  of  men, —
if  represented  in  the  same  way  as  the  shots  on  the  target, — will  form  a
similar  curve,  the  number  of  men  of  the  average  height  being  indicated
by  the  central  vertical  line,  and  the  numbers  of  men  of  various
heights  in  excess  or  defect  of  this  by  the  A'ertical  lines  on  either
side  of  the  centre.  These  become  shorter  as  they  recede  from  the
centre,  showing  that  the  more  any  height  differs  from  the  average,
the  fewer  men  of  that  height  ai-e  to  be  found.  The  average  in  this
case  may  be  called  the  ti/pe,  and  the  analogy  is  suggested  of  Nature
aiming  at  the  type,  as  the  marksman  aims  at  the  centre  of  the  target.
This  is,  of  course,  nothing  more  than  an  analogy,  though  in  some
respects  a  very  close  and  instructive  one.  Among  the  two  series,  we
may  find  several  instances  of  (a)  two  men  of  the  same  height,  and  of
(b)  two  shots  hitting  the  same  spot  on  the  target.  All  these  are
accidental  coincidences,  that  is,  similar  effects  produced  by  independent
causes  ; — the  heights  do  not  influence  one  another,  nor  do  the  shots.
The  coincidences  obviously  become  more  numerous  as  we  approach
the  average  height  in  one  case  and  the  centre  of  the  target  in
the  other;  since  in  doing  so,  there  are  a  greater  number  of  heights  or
shots,  as  the  case  may  be,  per  unit  of  area.  This,  however,  does  not
make  the  coincidences  any  the  less  accidental ;  they  are  only  the  more
likely  to  occur.

The  same  remarks  would  apply  to  the  heights  of  a  number  of  hills
as  to  the  heights  of  the  men.  If  any  of  them  coincide,  it  is  not  the
result  of  some  force  directed  towards  making  one  the  same  height  as
anotlier.  Separate  causes  have  acted  in  each  case,  and  it  is  only  by
accident  that  similar  effects  have  been  produced.

Suppose,  however,  we  compare  with  this  the  heights  of  the  tide  in
a  number  of  different  places.  If  the  tide  is  at  the  same  height  at  a
given  moment  in  two  places  a  little  way  off  each  other,  this  coincidence
is  not  accidental,  but  produced  by  a  common  cause, — the  combined
attraction  of  the  sun  and  moon  on  the  two  places.

A  practical  criterion  of  whether  these  three  kinds  of  coincidences
are  accidental  or  not  may  be  afforded  by  asking  the  cjuestion  : —
Does  knowledge  of  the  height  of  one  man,  or  hill,  or  tide,  enable  us  to
infer  what  the  height  of  another  specimen  of  the  same  class  will  be  ?

After  measuring  the  height  of  one  man,  we  should  expect  to  find
that  another  will  be  more  nearly  of  his  height  than  of  the  height,  say,
of  a  giraffe  or  of  an  ant ;  and  the  moie  men  we  measured,  the  greater
would  be  our  confidence  that  any  other  man's  height  would  come
within  certain  limits ;  similarly  with  the  heights  of  hills  (though  here
a  certain  vagueness  would  be  introduced  by  having  to  settle  arbitrarily
what  height  must  be  attained  before  a  rising  of  the  ground  can  be
called  a  hill  at  all). A  similar  method  might  also  be  applied  to  tides ;


XXXV.]


■Covncidences.


171


we  might  satisfy  ourselves  by  a  large  number  of  measurements  that  the
heights  of  all  terrestial  tides  would  be  almost  certain  to  lie  within
certain  limits.

The  distinction  between  the  classes  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  the  cases
of  men  and  hills,  we  should  never  reach  the  point  of  predicting  exactly
what  the  height  of  any  one  specimen  would  be,  because  the  heights
are  produced  in  each  specimen  by  causes  that  are  to  a  large  extent
independent  of  the  causes  that  alfect  the  other  specimens  ;  whereas
exact  measurement  of  the  height  of  one  tide  (combined  with  other
ascertainable  facts)  might  theoretically  give  us  the  heights  of  all  other
individual  tides,  because  of  the  common  cause  producing  all  of  them.
(For  a  full  discussion  of  a  case  illustrating  this  theoretical  distinction,
see  Appendix  IV.)

Distinction  between  Causation  and  Design.
By  "  Causation  "  we  mean  such  a  connection  between  events  that
the  same  consequences  always  follow  from  the  same  antecedents.
Causation  is  a  more  general  term  than  Design —Design  being  merely  a
special  case  of  Causation.  There  is  therefore  no  antithesis  between
the  two  terms,  and  they  are  sometimes  used  to  imply  two  different
aspects  of  the  same  thing.  When  we  speak  of  Design  in  an  action
we  are  thinking  of  the  subjective  aspect,— the  point  of  view  of  the
active  Intelligence  controlling  it.  When  we  speak  of  Causation  we  are
referring  to  the  objective  aspect — the  method  of  action  used  to  produce
the  result.

Causation  and  Design  in  Nature.

Many  of  the  operations  of  Nature— of  inanimate  Nature,  at  least
— carry  with  them  no  suggestion  of  their  existing  for  the  sake  of  any
purpose  or  end.  They  merely  present  the  appearance  of  a  number  of
events  inevitably  following  by  fixed  laws  the  events  that  have  gone
before  them,  and  inevitably  leading  on  in  a  similar  way  to  future
events — that  is,  they  seem  simply  to  exemplify  the  working  of  Causa-
tion. When  we  come  to  sentient  living  organisms,  individual  Wills
and  Designs  begin  to  come  into  existence,  and  there  begins  to  be
scope  for  the  pursuit  on  their  part  of  the  one  most  obvious  and  rational
purpose  of  Happiness.  We  may  next  imagine  a  Universal  Design,
embodying  and  transcending  the  designs  of  all  the  individuals.  But
the  working  of  Causation  is  in  no  way  excluded  or  superseded  by  the
existence  of  Design.  The  conception  of  Causation  seems  to  imply  that
each  separate  item  with  which  it  is  concerned  forms  part  of  one  large
scheme  of  which  every  portion  is  important  as  regards  the  whole, — since
the  character  of  the  whole  would  be  altered  if  it  were  absent,  or  in  any
way  different  from  what  it  is, — but  of  little  or  no  importance  as  regards
itself  taken  alone. Supposing  that  the  whole  of  creation  were  made


172


Alice  Johnson.


[part


up  in  this  way  of  parts,  past,  present  and  future,  all  rigidly  determin-
ing one  another,  it  would  not  even  then  follow  that  Design  was
absent,  for  the  whole  scheme  might  obviously  be  the  work  of  Design.
Further,  this  Design  might — as  a  human  being  would  in  an  analogous
case, — regai'd  some  parts  of  the  scheme  as  more  important  than  others,
and  construct  it  with  some  view  to  the  happiness  of  individual
organisms.

To  illustrate  this  point,  let  us  consider  the  case  of  eclipses  of  the
sun  or  moon.  These  eclipses  can  only  be  of  extremely  slight  im-
portance in  the  solar  system,  involving  nothing  more  than  a  brief
interception  of  the  rays  of  light  falling  on  part  of  the  earth  or  moon,
while  the  effect  of  gravitation  on  the  sun,  earth,  and  moon  at  the
time  is  very  slightly  different  from  its  effects  under  other  circum-
stances. That  is,  on  the  whole  the  condition  of  the  three  bodies  at
the  time  of  an  eclipse  is  imperceptibly  different  from  their  condition
an  hour  before  or  an  hour  after  the  eclipse.  For  the  astronomer,
however,  there  are  few  events  that  can  compare  in  importance  with
these  eclipses,  from  which  a  great  part  of  his  knowledge  has  been
derived.  Yet  we  do  not  suppose  that  the  solar  system  was  arranged
so  that  eclipses  might  occur  with  a  special  view  of  instructing
astronomers  ;  because  we  see  that  it  would  be  difficult, — if  not  im-
possible,— to  construct  a  solar  system  in  which  eclipses  did  not  occur
on  anything  in  the  least  like  its  present  plan.  They  are  clearly  a  sort
of  bye-product  of  the  general  scheme,  and  the  fact  that  their
occurrence  tends  to  facilitate  scientific  discovery  does  not  affect  our
view  of  them.  Still,  it  does  not  seem  altogether  irrational  to  suppose
that  this  incidental  advantage  may  have  been  one  of  the  points  taken
into  consideration  in  constructing  the  whole  plan.

At  the  same  time,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  there  could  be  any  cleai-
proof  that  the  universe  was  the  work  of  Design  and  not  the  result  of
unintelligent  mechanical  forces,  except  through  some  striking  change
in  the  known  and  more  or  less  familiar  course  of  Causation ;  while,
even  if  such  a  change  occurred,  it  would  always  be  possible  to  put  it
down  to  the  action  of  a  cause,  similar  in  kind  to  known  ones,  but
manifest  only  on  rai'e  occasions.

Distinction  between  Chance  and  Causation.

The  distinction  between  Chance  and  Causation  is  theoretically
a  perfectly  sharp  and  clear  one.  Causation  is  an  even  and  inevitable
flow  of  sequences,  unhurried  and  uninterrupted.  If  we  were  able
to  isolate  a  simple  series  of  events  causally  connected  (as  we  can  isolate
a  chance  series  of  events)  it  would  appear  that  each  event  depended
on  the  preceding  ones,  and  contributed  to  the  sum  of  conditions
by  which  all  the  following  ones  were  determined,  so  that  knowledge  of


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


173


what  had  happened  up  to  a  certain  point  would  help  us  to  guess  what
would  happen  next.  There  are  a  great  many  cases  in  which  we  are
practically  certain  about  the  future,  e.g.,  that  the  sun  will  rise
to-morrow  morning,  or  that  if  we  throw  a  stone  up  in  the  air  it  will
fall  down  again.  The  convenience  of  this  practical  certainty  is  too
obvious  for  remark.  There  are  a  great  many  other  cases  in  which  we
are  only  uncertain  of  the  future  for  want  of  knowledge  of  the
circumstances.  An  extension  of  the  same  sort  of  knowledge  we  now
possess  w-ould  add — it  seems  that  it  might  go  on  adding  almost
indefinitely — to  our  power  of  predicting  the  future.  But  this  would
hold  only  on  the  assumption  that  the  same  consequences  would  always
follow  the  same  antecedents  ;  that  is,  it  is  only  true  when  we  are
dealing  with  events  that  are  causally  connected.

Chance  may  be  regarded  either  as  a  constant  interruption  of  a
sequence  of  causally  connected  events,  or — what  is  the  same  thing —
the  breaking  up  of  a  long  sequence  into  a  number  of  little  short
separate  sequences,  to  each  one  of  which  the  term  "  event "  is  applied  ;
for  instance,  in  throwing  a  pair  of  dice  several  times,  the  whole  of
what  happens  from  the  beginning  of  one  throw  to  the  beginning
of  the  next  is  called  an  "event."  In  a  Chance  series  each  "event"
is  determined  independently  of  all  the  others,  so  that  the  events
exercise  no  influence  on  one  another.  The  result  is  that  what  has
already  happened  gives  us  no  indication  whatever  of  what  is  likely
to  happen  next.  We  know  that  it  will  be  one  out  of  several  things,
because  we  arbitrarily  limit  the  conditions  so  that  only  certain  things
can  happen  ;  but  we  cannot  possibly  tell  wliich  of  these  things  will
happen.

As  was  said  above  in  contrasting  Chance  Avith  Design,  it  is  com-
paratively easy  to  determine  whether  a  long  series  of  events  has  been
produced  by  Chance  or  by  some  cause,  but  it  may  often  be  difficult  to
judge  of  the  origin  of  a  single  conjunction  of  events,  or  coincidence.
Even  here,  however,  some  principles  are  available  for  guidance  ;  e.g.,
an  exact  and  detailed  agreement  or  resemblance  between  two  things
will  suggest  a  cause  for  the  resemblance,  and  it  may  be  so  detailed
that  we  are  practically  certain  that  it  is  not  accidental.

Theoretically,  no  degree  of  complexity  and  exactness  would  conclu-
sively prove  this.  Thus,  Dr.  Venn  remarks,  in  his  Logic  of  Chance
(p.  380)  : — "  [Suppose  that  all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  contained
in  a  bag  and  that  one  is  drawn  at  a  time  from  the  bag  and  then
replaced.]  If  the  letters  were  written  down  one  after  another  as  they
occurred,  it  would  commonly  be  expected  that  they  would  be  found  to
make  mere  nonsense,  and  would  never  ari'auge  themselves  into  the
words  of  any  language  knovi^n  to  men.  No  more  they  would  in
general,  but ... if  the  process  were  continued  long  enough,


174


Alice  Johnson.


[part


words  making  sense  would  appear  ;  nay  more,  .  .  .  any  book  we
chose  to  mention, — Milton's  Paradise  Lost  or  the  plays  of  Shakespeare,
for  example, — ^would  be  produced  in  tins  way  at  last.  It  would  take
almost  as  many  days  as  we  have  space  in  this  volume  to  represent  in
figures,  to  make  tolerably  certain  of  obtaining  the  former  of  these
works  by  thus  drawing  letters  out  of  a  bag,  but  the  desired  result
would  be  obtained  at  length."

Practically,  however,  if  we  come  across  a  book  with  the  title,
Paradise  Lost,  we  are  absolutely  certain  that  its  close  agreement  with
other  books  bearing  the  same  title  has  not  been  produced  accidentally  by
putting  together  a  number  of  letters  taken  at  random,  but  is  due  to
their  all  being  copies  of  the  same  original.  And  a  very  much  lower
degree  of  correspondence  in  detail  may  lead  to  the  view  that  a
coincidence  of  this  kind  is  not  accidental.  As  an  illusti'ation,  I
give  the  following  extract  from  an  article  on  "Coincidences"  by
Professor  Max  Miiller  in  The  Fortnigldly  Review  for  July,  1896
(Vol.  IX.,  p.  48).  The  article  relates  to  some  of  the  resemblances
between  Christian  and  Buddhist  writings.  Professor  Max  Muller
tells  us  that  the  Buddhist  Canon  was  reduced  to  writing  between
88  and  76  B.C.,  and  he  gives  several  instances  of  stories  in  it  closely
resembling  some  Bible  stories,  e.g.  ; —

We  read  in  .7«^a/,:rt,  190  (Vol.  II.,  p.  77): — "One  evening,  on  his  way
to  Jetavana,  he,  the  disciple  of  Buddha,  came  to  the  bank  of  tlie
river  Acliiravati,  wlien  the  ferrymen  had  pulled  up  their  boats  on
the  shore  in  order  to  attend  service.  As  no  boat  could  be  seen  at
the  landing-stage  and  our  friend's  mind  was  full  of  delightful  thoughts
of  the  Buddha,  he  walked  into  the  river.  His  feet  did  not  sink  below
the  water.  He  got  as  far  as  mid-river,  walking  as  though  he  were  on
dry  land  ;  but  there  he  noticed  the  waves.  Then  his  ecstasy  subsided  and
his  feet  began  to  sink.  Again  he  strung  himself  up  to  high  tension  and
walked  on  over  tlie  water.  So  he  arrived  at  Jetavana,  greeted  the  Master,
and  took  a  seat  on  one  side.  The  Master  entered  into  conversation  with
him  pleasantly.  '  I  hope,  good  layman,'  said  he,  'you  had  no  mishap  on
your  way.'  '  Oh,  sir,'  he  replied,  'on  my  way  I  was  so  absorbed  in  thoughts
of  the  Buddha  that  I  set  foot  upon  the  river  ;  but  I  walked  over  it  as
though  it  had  been  dry  ground  !  '  'Ah,  friend  layman,'  said  the  Master,
'  you  are  not  the  only  one  who  has  kept  .safe  by  remembering  the  virtues  of
the  Buddha.'"

In  this  case  the  mere  walking  on  the  water  would  not  startle  me  so  much,
for  among  miracles  this  is  not  a  very  uncommon  miracle.  But  walking  on
the  water  by  faith,  and  sinking  from  want  of  faith,  seems  a  coincidence
that  can  be  accounted  for  by  some  historical  contact  and  transference  only,
and  in  this  case  we  must  remember  that  the  date  of  the  Buddhist  parable  is
chronologically  anterior  to  the  date  of  tlie  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.

One  more  coincidence  and  I  have  done.  You  all  know  the  parable  of
Christ  feedmg  the  five  thousand.  .  .  .  Well,  in  the  78th  Jataka,  as
pointed  out  to  me  by  Professor  Estlin  Carpenter,  we  read  of  Buddha  receiving


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


175


one  cake  in  his  alms-bowl,  and  after  he  had  fed  his  five  hundred  brethren  as
"well  as  his  host  and  hostess,  nay,  all  the  people  in  the  monastery,  there  were
still  so  many  cakes  over  tliat  they  had  to  be  thrown  into  a  cave  near  the
gateway.

Here  again,  there  is,  no  doubt,  some  dissimilarity,  but  the  similarity  is
far  stronger,  and  requires  some  kind  of  explanation.  We  should  I'emember
that  the  Greeks  also  did  not  tell  their  ordinary  fables  exactly  as  the  Hindus
■did,  nor  need  the  Jatakas  of  Buddha  be  the  mere  copies  of  the  New
Testament  parables,  or  vice  versa.  Yet  we  could  hardly  deny  that  commu-
nication and  exchange  there  must  have  been.  The  cliapter  of  accidents  may
be  much  lai'ger  than  we  imagine,  but  when  we  have  to  deal  with  fully
elaborated  stories,  with  tales  composed  for  a  moral  purpose,  we  can  hardly
fall  tiack  on  mere  chance.

It  is  not  enough  that  these  coincidences  should  be  pointed  out ;
they  should  be  traced  to  their  real  source.  We  have  to  decide  once  for  all
whether  we  can  honestly  ascribe  them  to  mere  accident,  or  to  our  common
human  nature,  or  whether  we  must  ascribe  them  to  some  real  historical
intercourse  between  Buddism  and  Christianity.  If  they  can  be  accounted
for  by  our  common  human  nature,  let  it  be  done  by  pointing  out  analogous
cases.  If  they  can  be  ascribed  to  mere  accident,  again  I  say  let  us  have
similar  cases  from  the  chapter  of  accidents.

Similar  evidence  of  a  cause  for  such  coincidences  is  afforded  when
the  resemblances,  although  not  very  close,  are  repeated  several  times  ;
for  instance,  when  all  the  main  incidents  of  a  story,  though  with
more  or  less  varying  details,  are  found  among  several  distinct
races,  like  the  "far-travelled  tale"  of  Jason  and  jVledea,  variants
of  which  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  has  pointed  out  in  Zulu,  Gaelic,
Norse,  Malagasy,  Russian,  Italian  and  Japanese  mythology.  He
gives  this  (in  Custom  and  Myth)  as  an  instance  of  a  story  which
"  may  have  been  diffused  by  slow  filtration  from  race  to  race  all  over
the  globe."  Speaking  of  the  resemblances  between  myths  in  general,
he  remarks  {ojj.  cit.,  Preface,  pp.  i.x:.-x.)  : —

"As  a  rule,  the  incidents  in  Marchen  are  common  to  all  races;
an  artistic  combination  of  many  of  these  in  a  plot  must  probably  be
due  to  a  single  imagination,  and  the  plot  must  have  been  diffused  in
the  ways  described  in  Custom  and  Myth.  Independently  evolved
myths  may  closely  resemble  each  other  when  they  account  for  some
natural  phenomenon,  or  are  based  on  some  common  custonj.  Where-
ever  a  sequence  of  such  incidents  is  found  in  a  distinct  and  artistic
plot,  we  may  provisionally  assign  diffusion  from  an  original  centre
as  that  cause.  Singular  as  are  the  coincidences  of  fancy,  it  is  unlikely
that  they  ever  produced  exactly  the  same  tale  in  lands  which  have
never  been  in  communication  with  each  other.  .  .  .  The  suggestion
that  exactly  the  same  plot,  in  exactly  the  same  shape,  and  with
exactly  the  same  incidents,  can  have  been  invented  by  several  persons
independently,  seems  to  me  inconceivable. ... I  believe  in  no


176


Alice  Johnson.


[PAllT


such  exact  coincidences  of  imagination,  though  how  far  precisely
coincidence  may  go  is  a  delicate  question."

It  is,  of  course,  possible  to  attribute  a  great  many  of  the  slighter
coincidences  met  with  in  folk-lore  and  other  forms  of  literature  to  the
fact  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  current  stock  of  ideas  in  religion,
I^oetry,  and  philosophy  are  the  common  property  of  the  human  race.
But  whether  any  given  coincidence  of  this  kind  is  to  be  put  down  to
this  or  some  other  cause,  or  to  chance,  is  obviously  a  question  which
only  scholars  can  settle.

Chance  not  the  Negatio7i  of  Latv.

Many  persons  are  unwilling  to  admit  the  agency  of  Chance  in  any
matter  outside  games  of  chance  and  the  like,  because  they  imagine
that  this  is  tantamount  to  admitting  that  phenomena  may  belong  to  a
realm  of  chaos,  and  not  of  law.  But  more  careful  investigation  shows
that  it  is  merely  a  question  of  whether  they  come  under  the  jurisdic-
tion of  one  set  of  partially  known  laws — the  laws  of  Causation,  or  another
set — the  laws  of  Chance.  The  second  set  is  perhaps  even  less  known,
and  in  a  certain  seiise  more  mysterious,  than  the  first  set.  Yet  there
are  clear  traces  of  some  definite  method  in  its  operation,  and  it  does  not
even  entirely  supersede  the  first.  Chance  is  not  the  destruction  of  Causa-
tion, but  merely  a  peculiar  relationship  of  Causes  to  one  another.  The
principle  governing  it  may  be  described  briefly  as  that  of  order  in  the
mass,  combined  with  disorder  in  the  constituent  units  of  the  mass,
and  some  of  the  various  features  and  developments  of  this  principle
are  discussed  more  fully  in  the  next  chapter.  Meanwhile,  since  we
sometimes  find  the  same  characteristics  occurring  in  nature  as  in  the
chance  series  produced  by  art  and  man's  device,  the  question  arises
whether  to  apply  tlie  same  rules  of  interpretation  to  them,  —  the  same
tests  for  deciding  whether  a  given  coincidence  or  combination  of  events
is  really  produced  by  a  discoverable  natural  cause,  or  by  an  intelligent
extra-liuman  design,  or  by  chance.  When  studying  an  artificial  series
of  events  we  first  try  to  find  out  if  there  is  anything  in  it  different
from  what  generally  occurs  in  a  chance  series.  If  not,  we  regard  it
as  due  to  chance,  and  this  method  is  generally  valid,  because  it  is
very  difficult  to  simulate  a  chance  series  by  design.  Yet  such  an
imitation  may  be  so  skilful  as  to  escape  detection  for  a  long  time  (see
the  account  of  Monte  Carlo  roulette  below,  p,  191).  If  the  operation
of  design  has  been  long  overlooked  at  Monte  Carlo,  a  fortiori  we  may
fail  to  detect  evidence  of  it  in  tlie  universe.

Again,  it  has  been  remarked  above  that  if  we  only  see  a  single
event,  or  group  of  events,  in  an  artificial  series,  we  may  have  reason  to
think  that  it  was  produced  by  Design,  and  not  by  Chance,  if  there  is
some  one  who  profits  greatly  by  it. Is  it  altogether  irrational  to  apply


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


177


the  same  argument  to  things  that  are  beyond  human  control,  and  to
maintain  that  events  making  for  the  special  advantage  of  individuals
afford  some  evidence  of  Design — not  conclusive  proof,  of  course,  but
evidence  ?

The  reply  is  fairly  obvious  that  we  do  not  know  what  is  really  and
ultimately  for  the  best  advantage  of  individuals.  An  optimistic
philosophy  will  hold  that  everything  that  happens  is  for  the  best ;  if
so,  it  follows  that  Design  is  manifested  in  everything,  not  only  or
specially  in  certain  cases.  And  this  indeed  seems  the  only  possible
philosophic  interpretation  of  Chance  itself — that  it  is  produced  by  a
supreme  Design.  In  our  artificial  chance  series,  it  is  human  design
that  brings  the  series  into  existence,  while  cutting  short  its  own
influence  at  a  certain  stage  in  each  event  of  the  series.  In  the
universe,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  Design,  if  it  exists  at  all,  can  stop
short  anywhere ;  rather  we  must  conceive  of  it  both  as  producing  and
using  either  causally  connected  groups  of  events,  or  chance  series  of
events,  at  will.  All  existing  entities  may  be  "  Pieces  of  the  Game,"
which  may  be  in  reality  a  game  of  skill,  and  not  of  chance.


178


Alice  Johnson.


[part


CHAPTER  II.

GENERAL  DISCUSSION  OF  CHANCE.

Though  the  word  "  Chance  "  is  one  in  constant  wse,  there  are
perhaps  few  terms  about  which  so  much  real  obscurity  of  thought
exists ;  it  may  therefore  be  worth  while  to  discuss  it  at  some  length.

The  difficulty  of  defining  Chance  consists  in  its  attributes  being
chiefly  negative  ;  for  this  reason  any  general  assertions  about  it  often
fail  to  convey  any  precise  meaning,  unless  reference  is  made  to  special
cases  in  what  is  called  a  "  Chance  series  of  events,"  such  as  throws
of  a  penny.

In  speaking  of  a  Chance  series,  it  must  be  remembered  that  what
we  are  considering  is  an  ideal  Chance  series ;  that  is,  one  in  which  (1)
the  penny  or  whatever  other  object  is  used  is  so  constructed  as  to  be
without  any  bias  which  would  cause  one  side  to  be  uppermost  oftener
than  the  other  ;  and  (2)  the  person  tossing  it  takes  care  to  avoid  any
procedure  which  would  cause  one  side  to  turn  up  oftener  than  the
other.  This  ideal  may  never  be  perfectly  attained  in  any  actual
series,  but  it  must  be  assumed  in  discussing  the  subject  of  Chance ;
just  as  in  geometiy  the  properties  of  ideal  circles  and  straight  lines
are  considered,  not  such  circles  and  straight  lines  as  are  seen  in
diagrams,  however  accurately  drawn.

Prohahility  and  Bxjjectation.

If  we  say  that  at  any  point  in  a  series  of  throws  of  a  penny,  the
chances  of  heads  or  tails  turning  up  are  equal,  we  mean — for  one
thing — that  our  expectations  of  them  are  equal, — that  we  do  not
expect  one  event  at  all  more  than  the  other.  The  expectation  is  then
expressed  numerically  by  the  fraction  |.

The  first  explanation  that  would  occur  to  us  of  this  state  of  mind
would  perhaps  be  that  it  was  founded  on  our  ignorance,  inasmuch  as
we  know  of  no  reason  why  one  side  should  turn  up  rather  than  the
other.  Further  consideration  shows  that  it  depends  rather  on  our
knowledge,  derived  from  experience,  that  the  two  events  occur  on  the
whole  equally  often.

Expectation  is  equivalent  to  what  may  be  called  the  subjective
probability  of  the  events  ;  the  objective  probability  having  reference
to  what  actually  happens.

The  term  "objective  probability  "  may  be  applied  either  to  a  single
event  or  to  a  series  of  events.  The  objective  probability  of  a  single
event,  say,  a  head,  is  always  the  same,  viz.,  1  or  0,  since  a  head  must


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


179


either  turn  up  or  not.  The  expectation  of  a  single  event  can  never
correspond  to  its  objective  probability,  since  we  cannot  confidently
expect  either  a  head  or  a  tail.  The  expectation  is  therefore  a  fraction,
— in  this  case

When  we  speak  of  objective  probability  with  reference  to  a  series
of  events,  we  mean  the  compcm'ative  frequency  with  which  the  various
events  occur.  Having  found  by  experience  what  this  has  been  in  a
large  number  of  series,  we  draw  the  inference  that  it  is  likely  to  be
the  same  in  future  series  of  the  same  kind.  In  this  case,  subjective
probability  (or  expectation)  may  correspond  more  or  less  closely  with
objective  probability  (or  comparative  frequency)  :  in  throwing  a  coin,
the  expectation  of  a  head  is  ^,  which  is  what  its  comparative
frequency  has  Ijeen  in  a  very  large  number  of  previous  cases.  The
expectation,  therefore, — unlike  the  objective  probability, — is  the  same
in  the  single  event  as  in  the  series,  since  it  is  founded  solely  on
experience  of  the  series.

The  expectation  depends  on  the  assumption  that  the  series  under
consideration  is  essentially  similar  in  all  respects  to  the  series  of
previous  experience.  If  we  know  that  it  is  similar  in  some  respects,
but  not  in  all, — without  knowing  exactly  in  what  the  difference  con-
sists,— we  can  only  found  our  expectation  on  what  we  know, — namely,
the  similarity,  as  far  as  it  goes.  Thus,  supposing  that  the  penny  used
in  our  series  has  a  decided  bias,  from  being  made  unsymmetrically,  or
that  the  person  throwing  it  has  a  decided  tendency  to  throw  in  a  certain
way,  one  side  would  be  likely  to  turn  up  oftezier  than  the  other.  We
might  know  that  there  was  a  decided  bias  from  one  or  other  of  these
causes ;  but,  unless  ive  knew  ivhich  way  the  bias  tended,  we  should
have  no  more  reason  for  expecting  one  side  than  the  other,  so  that  our
expectation  of  heads  or  tails  would  still  be  But  the  objective
probability  (or  comparative  frequency)  would  of  course  be  different.

Now,  in  each  individual  event  of  any  series,  there  ahvays  must
be  Oj  bias,  that  is,  the  forces  tending  to  make  one  side  turn  up  must
be  stronger  than  those  tending  to  make  the  other  side  turn  up,  or  else
neither  side  would  turn  up  ;  that  is,  the  objective  probability  of  the
single  event,  as  already  remarked,  is  1  or  0.  The  ideal  chance  series
may  be  described  as  one  in  which  there  is  a  bias,  but  the  bias  varies
from  moment  to  moment,  and  what  we  expect  is  very  much  the  same  on
the  whole  as  what  happens.

The  same  equality  of  expectation  and  objective  probability  is  found
in  series  where  there  is  a  constant  bias,  provided  we  know  enough  about
it  to  be  able  to  estimate  its  effects  numerically.  Thus,  suppose  we  have
a  bag  containing  75  white  balls  and  25  black  ones,  and  draw  out  a  ball
without  having  seen  it  a  number  of  times  (putting  it  back  after  each
draw). We  should  then  expect  to  draw  a  white  ball  three  times  as


180


Alice  Johnson.


[part


often  as  a  black  one,  and  both  the  expectation  and  the  probability  of
a  white  ball  being  drawn  can  be  expressed  by  the  fraction  ^.  This
is,  of  course,  a  mere  extension  of  exactly  the  same  sort  of  condition  as
that  in  which  the  chances  of  the  two  events  are  equal.

But  if  there  were  a  constant  bias  of  whose  nature,  or  even  of
whose  existence,  we  were  ignorant,  expectation  and  objective  pro-
bability would  no  longer  be  equal,  but  might  diverge  greatly  ;  the
results  expected  might  be  very  different  from  those  that  actually
occurred.  In  trying  to  estimate  -what  those  results  wei'e  likely
to  be,  we  could,  of  coui'se,  only  go  by  what  we  knew ;  our  estimate
would  represent  expectation,  not  probability ;  and  it  would  be  the
divergence  found  between  the  expected  and  the  actual  results  that
would  reveal  the  bias  to  us.

So  far,  I  have  spoken  of  expectation  that  is  founded  on  purely
rational  grounds,  on  inference  from  known  matters  of  fact — not  neces-
sarily what  people  do  expect,  but  what  they  should  expect.  In  the
ordinary  affairs  of  life,  we  are,  of  course,  guided  by  many  other  influ-
ences besides  reason  in  forming  expectations;  emotions,  such  as  desire
and  fear,  play  a  large  part  in  producing  them.  Thus  the  divergence
between  what  we  expect  and  what  happens  is  due  not  only  to  our
ignorance,  but  to  a  varied  complication  of  causes.  For  instance,  if  a
man  himself  or  some  one  in  whom  he  is  greatly  interested  is  in  danger,
— say,  in  a  battle, — his  expectation  of  a  fatal  result  may  be  much
greater  than  would  be  warranted  by  a  calculation  of  the  actual  pro-
portion of  persons  killed  out  of  all  those  who  had  taken  part  in  the
battle  (which  would  give  roughly  the  rational  basis  for  expectation
that  any  particular  person  should  be  killed).  Similarly,  there  is  a
case  in  my  possession  of  a  veridical  dream  about  a  shipwreck  (which  I
have  been  obliged  to  omit  for  want  of  space,  but  which  will,  I  hope,  be
printed  soon  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.)  in  which  the  narrator,  apparently
through  his  emotional  interest  in  the  story,  calculates  the  chance  of
survival  after  shipwreck  as  being  almost  infinitesimal ;  whereas  if  he
had  considered  the  actual  number  of  survivors,  say,  of  all  the  ship-
wrecks that  had  occurred  during  the  present  century,  the  chance
would,  I  think,  have  appeared  very  much  greater.

In  judging  of  the  origin  of  some  kinds  of  coincidences,  however,
expectation  is  the  more  important  consideration,  because  it  may  have
some  causal  efficacy  in  producing  them.  If,  e..(/.,  we  are  discussing
whether  an  apparition  seen  at  the  time  of  death  was  produced  by
telepathy  or  by  anxiety  about  the  person  seen,  it  is  important  to  know,
not  so  much  whether  there  was  reason  for  expectation  that  the  person
would  die,  but  what  degree  of  emotional  interest  the  seer  took  in  him,
and  the  extent  to  which  he  was  likely  to  allow  this  to  influence  his
expectation.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


181


The  Relation  of  Events  in  a  Chance  Series  to  one  another.

If  we  have  two  ideal  chance  series,  produced,  say,  by  two  persons,
A  and  B,  tossing  pennies  simultaneously,  it  is  obvious  that  the  two
series  do  not  affect  one  another  in  any  way,  so  that  if  A's  penny  turns
up  a  head  at  the  same  time  as  B's,  the  coincidence  is  not  due  to  any
influence  of  the  throws  on  one  another,  but  is  accidental, — due  to
Chance.  In  other  words,  it  was  not  caused  by  anything.  In  saying
that  nothing  caused  the  coincidence,  I  do  not,  of  coui'se,  mean  that
nothing  caused  the  coinciding  events.  We  do  not  know  exactly  what
made  the  penny  turn  up  a  head  in  either  case,  but  we  know  it  was
some  definite  cause  in  both  cases.  Given  all  the  conditions, — the
resistance  of  the  air,  the  smoothness  of  the  surface  it  fell  on,  the
particular  way  it  was  thrown,  and  so  on, — the  result  of  the  throw  was
definitely  determined  from  the  instant  the  penny  left  the  thrower's
hand,  or  perhaps  a  little  earlier.  The  point  is  that  the  chain  of
causation  breaks  off  completely  at  the  end  of  each  throw  or  event,
and  begins  entii-ely  afresh  at  the  next  one,  so  that  what  is  true  of  the
relation  of  the  events  in  the  tiuo  series  to  one  another  is  equally  true
of  the  relation  of  the  events  in  each  series  to  one  another.  The  whole
of  each  series  is  like  a  number  of  "  broken  arcs  "  to  which  there  is  no
corresponding  "  perfect  round,"  since  the  breaches  are  absolute.

Since  there  is  no  causal  connection  between  the  events,  it  makes  no
difference  whether  they  occur  simultaneously  or  successively.  Further,
their  order  can  be  changed  in  any  way  we  like — provided  it  is  done  on
some  arbitrary  principle,  irrespective  of  the  nature  of  the  events, —
and  the  nature  of  the  series  will  remain  unaltered.  Thus,  we  might
take  them  in  the  reverse  order,  or  reverse  the  order  of  each  successive
pair  of  events,  or  of  every  alternate  pair ;  we  might  omit  every  other
event,  or  every  third  event,  without  changing  the  nature  of  the  series,
if  it  were  a  sufficiently  long  one.  If,  however,  we  began  to  change  the
series  with  reference  to  the  naticre  of  the  events,  we  should  at  once
introduce  a  fresh  element.  Thus,  if  we  omitted  every  fifth  head,  or
changed  every  tail  coming  after  a  succession  of  three  tails  into  a  head,
the  series  would  no  longer  be  a  Chance  series,  but  one  produced,  or  at
least  affected,  by  Design.  Conversely,  if,  in  a  long  series,  we  find  any
principle  of  arrangement  recurring  much  oftener  than  would  l^e  likely
by  chance  alone  (the  probability  of  such  recurrence  can,  of  course,  be
estimated  precisely)  we  suspect,  with  more  or  less  confidence,  that  the
series  is  not  due  to  Chance  only,  but  to  Design.  A  mere  omission  of
an  improbable  event  may  lead  to  suspicion  if  continued  long  enough.
For  instance,  if  we  went  on  tossing  a  penny  20,000  times  and  never
got  more  than  six  heads  or  six  tails  running,  we  should  know  that
there  was  some  special  cause  at  work,  preventing  a  longer  succession.


182


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Something  very  much  like  this  has  been  discovered  by  Professor  Karl'
Pearson  in  the  case  of  Monte  Carlo  roulette  (see  p.  191).

Another  result  of  the  fact  that  events  in  a  Chance  series  have  na
influence  on  one  another  is  that,  if  all  the  events  are  equally  probable,
any  set  of  events  is  as  likely  to  occur  as  any  other  set  of  the  same
length.  For  instance,  a  hand  of  thirteen  trumps  (as  mentioned
above)  is  as  likely  as  any  other  specified  hand  at  whist.  Or,  again,
in  twelve  throws  of  a  penny  we  are  as  likely  to  get  twelve  heads  as-
to  get  (1)  six  heads  followed  by  six  tails,  or  (2)  heads  and  tails
alternately.  There  is,  I  think,  a  real  practical  difficulty  in  grasping
this  idea,  which  seems  to  me  to  arise  from  failing  to  realise  that  the
whole  twelve  throws  are  being  considered  in  each  case.  We  know
that  six  heads  running  is  more  likely  than  twelve  heads  running,  and
that  one  head  followed  by  one  tail  is  more  probable  still  ;  also  that  in
twelve  throws  we  are  much  more  likely  to  get  some  tails  than  no  tails.
All  these  facts  seem  at  first  sight  inconsistent  with  the  statement  that-
twelve  heads  running  is  as  likely  as  the  other  two  cases  given.  But
the  twelve  heads  are  to  be  compared  not  to  six  heads,  but  to  six  heads-
followed  by  six  tails  ;  and  not  to  one  head  followed  by  one  tail,  but  to
six  such  successive  pairs  of  events.

The  probability  of  any  set  of  events  depends  merely  on  the  numbei-
of  possible  alternatives  (supposing  that  all  are  equally  probable)  and
the  number  of  events  in  the  set,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
nature  of  the  events.  It  is  expressed  by  the  following  formula  :  If  a
be  the  number  of  possible  alternatives,  the  probability  of  occurrence  of
any  events,  n  in  number,  in  any  order  we  choose  to  specify,  is

Since  in  questions  of  pure  probability,  it  does  not,  as  already
remarked,  make  any  difference  whether  we  are  referring  to  events
occurring  simultaneously  or  successively,  or  to  events  past,  pi'esent,  or
future — so  long  as  we  are  equally  ignorant  of  all  of  them — the  formula
can  be  applied  equally  well  in  psychical  research  to  cases  of  prediction,
clairvoyance  or  telepathy,  or  retrocognition.  It  shows  the  degree  to
which  such  cases  become  more  valuable  as  evidence  of  something
beyond  chance  in  proportion  to  (1)  their  comjilexity,  that  is,  the
number  of  simple  events  involved  in  the  perception  ;  and  (2)  themH^y
of  the  events,  that  is,  the  number  of  possible  alternative  events  that
might  have  occurred. ^

So  stated,  the  remark  sounds  sufficiently  obvious.  But  one  fact
in  connection  with  it  is  sometimes  overlooked,  namely,  that  it  applies
only  to  events  that  have  no  causal  connection  with  one  another.  Most
of  the  events  of  ordinary  life  are  causally  connected,  each  event  being

1  Assuming  that  all  the  alternatives  are  equally  probable.  If  not,  a  rather  more
complicated  formula  has  to  be  used.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


183


influenced  by  what  has  gone  before  and  exercising  influence  on  what
follows,  and  it  is  to  such  events  that  spontaneous  cases  of  apparently
supernormal  perception  generally  relate.  For  instance,  crystal  visions
of  facts  unknown  to  the  seer  are  generally  of  this  kind,  and  it  is  im-
possible to  say  in  these  cases  how  large  a  part  is  played  by  inference
in  elaborating  the  details  of  the  perception,  though  of  course  there
must  be  some  basis  of  perception  for  inference  to  work  on.  On  the
other  hand,  in  successful  experiments  dealing  with  the  events  in  a
chance  series  {e.g.,  experiments  in  guessing  cards  or  numbers)  it  is  not
necessary  to  allow  anything  for  the  action  of  inference.  For  this
reason,  such  experiments  afford  more  satisfactory  proof  of  supernormal
power  than  spontaneous  cases.  Incidentally,  they  possess  the  further
advantage  that  the  degree  of  probability  of  success  in  them  is  not  a
matter  that  admits  of  difference  of  opinion,  even  though  it  may  not  be
easy  to  determine  what  degree  of  success  justifies  the  conclusion  that
something  beyond  chance  is  producing  it.

To  the  above  argument  it  may  be  objected  that  we  cannot  exclude
the  action  of  inference  from  any  mental  process  whatever.  In  guess-
ing a  number  of  playing  cards,  say,  drawn  from  a  pack  at  random,  and
not  seen  by  any  one,  the  person  guessing  cannot  affirm  that  each  guess
is  uninfluenced  by  the  previous  ones.  Apart  from  the  "mental  habits"
leading  him  more  or  less  unconsciously  to  prefer  certain  cards  to
others,  he  can  hardly  help  forming  some  expectations  based  on  previous
results,  as  that  a  card  once  drawn  will  not  recur  for  a  little  time.
Inference  probably  guides  him  to  a  certain  extent  in  making  guesses.
But  the  point  is  that  inference  is  just  as  likely  to  guide  him  wrong  as
right,  because — in  a  truly  chance  series — there  are  no  rational  grounds
for  drawing  inferences.  The  action  of  inference  cannot,  therefore,  in
the  long  run  add  to  the  number  of  his  successful  guesses,  which
consequently  need  not  be  discounted  on  this  account.

On  the  other  hand,  in  considering  events  that  are  causally  con-
nected, there  always  are,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  rational  grounds
for  inferring  from  one  event  something  about  another  one,  and  infer-
ence is  then  likely  to  lead  us  right  oftener  than  wrong  on  the  whole.

The  Aggregate  Results  of  Chance  Series.

So  far  we  have  considered  the  relation  between  individual  events  in
a  Chance  series  and  the  consequences  that  follow  from  the  absence  of
all  causal  connection  between  them.  One  of  these  consequences  is  the
impossibility  of  predicting  what  is  going  to  happen  in  the  case  of  any
one  event.  It  would  seem  that  no  extension  of  knowledge  about  the
circumstances  and  conditions  of  the  events  would  give  us  any  help  in
this  ;  an  extension  of  the  ordinary  human  faculties  would  seem  to  be
required  for  it.

0


184


Alice  Johnson.


[part


But  the  most  interesting  and  important  feature  in  a  Chance  series,
— the  point  at  which  the  attributes  of  Chance  cease  to  be  exclusively
negative — is  that  absolute  uncertainty  about  individual  events  is  com-
bined with  practical  certainty  as  to  the  general  characteristics  of  the
series,  if  a  sufficiently  long  one  be  taken.  Experience  shows  that  the
longer  we  make  the  series,  the  nearer  will  the  results  approximate  to
the  theoretically  "  most  probable "  results.  This  fact  is  so  familar
that  one  may  easily  fail  to  see  how  remarkable  it  is  that  out  of  the  not
only  apparent  but  real  disorder  of  the  single  events  arise,  as  if  by  a
sort  of  spontaneous  generation,  the  order  and  regularity  of  the  series
taken  as  a  whole.

The  accompanying  diagrams,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  my
brother,  Mr.  AV.  E.  Johnson,  may  serve  to  illustrate  this  point.
Figure  1  shows  a  short  series  — 100  throws  of  a  penny — recorded  by  a
graphic  method  on  paper  ruled  in  small  squares.

The  throws  are  represented  by  the  thick  zigzag  line  drawn  along
the  sides  of  the  squares,  the  length  of  one  side  of  a  square  representing
one  throw.  At  every  change  in  the  series  to  heads  or  tails  (which,
for  the  remainder  of  this  chapter  I  will  call,  for  brevity,  H  or  T)  the
zigzag  line  turns  respectively  to  the  right  or  left.  It  starts  at  the
point  A,  which  is  one  end  of  a  straight  line,  AB,  drawn  diagonally
through  the  squai'es,  and  the  first  turn  being  to  the  right  of  this
straight  line  indicates  that  the  series  began  with  an  H.

Any  point  where  the  zigzag  touches  the  diagonal  line  indicates  an
epoch  in  the  series  at  which  the  numbers  of  H's  and  T's  are  exactly
equal ;  the  diagonal  representing,  in  fact,  the  most  probable  result
theoretically.  The  zigzag  being  on  the  right  of  the  diagonal  at  any
point  indicates  an  excess  of  H's  at  that  point,  while  its  being  on  the
left  indicates  an  excess  of  T's.  The  exact  difference  in  number  of
H's  and  T's  at  any  point  can  be  measured  by  a  straight  line  drawn
from  the  point  in  question  on  the  zigzag  line  to  the  line  AB,  the
straight  line  being  drawn  either-  in  continuation  of  the  zigzag  line  or
at  right  angles  to  it,  and  the  number  of  squares  along  which  it  passes
showing  the  excess  of  H's  or  T's  over  each  other.  Thus,  at  the  point
C  in  the  series,  the  dotted  line  drawn  from  C  (either  in  continuation
of  or  at  right  angles  to  the  zigzag)  passes  along  four  squares  before  it
reaches  the  dia.gonal  line  AB,  showing  that  at  the  point  C,  four  more
H's  than  T's  had  been  thrown.  Further  on,  at  the  point  D,  the  T's
had  amounted  to  three  more  than  the  H's.

The  diagram  is  like  a  view  of  an  object  seen  under  a  microscope,
the  individual  features  being  brought  into  great  prominence,  so  that
the  more  general  aspects  are  masked.  The  irregularity  and  disorder  of
the  separate  throws  are  strongly  marked,  while  the  general  tendency  to
equality  of  H's  and  T's  is  only  very  faintly  and  dubiously  indicated.


186


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Figure  2  represents  in  a  similar  manner  the  general  results  of
considerably  longer  series,  ignoring  altogether  the  individual  results,
and  the  difference  in  appearance  is  very  striking.  The  diagrams  (a)
and  (b)  record  two  series  of  1,000  and  4,000  throws  respectively.  The
ideal  or  most  probable  result — equality  in  number  of  H's  and  T's — is
represented  in  both  by  the  thick  vertical  straight  line,  while  the  zigzag
shov/s  the  actual  results  reached  at  the  end  of  each  hundred  in  the  first
series,  and  at  the  end  of  each  thousand  in  the  second  series,  these  epochs
being  marked  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  etc.  The  position  of  the  zigzag
to  the  right  of  the  straight  line  shows  excess  of  H's,  and  the  position
to  its  left  shows  excess  of  T's — the  vertical  distances  of  the  various
points,  A,  B,  C,  etc.,  from  the  straight  line  being  roughly  proportional
to  the  excess.  At  the  point  0  in  diagram  (a)  equality  happens  to
have  been  exactly  reached,  so  that  the  point  C  lies  on  the  straight
line.  The  greatest  deviation  from  equality  in  this  series  appears  at
the  point  K  (at  the  end  of  the  ninth  hundred)  when  34  more  T's  than
H's  had  been  thrown.  At  the  end  of  the  thousand  the  excess  of  T's
was  16.

The  longer  the  series,  the  more  chance  there  is  for  large  deviations
from  equality ;  but  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  deviations,  though
absolutely  larger,  become  relatively  sm;iller  as  the  series  grows  in
length.  Thus,  in  Fig.  1,  the  greatest  deviation  occurs  at  the  point  E,
where  there  is  an  excess  of  9  H's,  or  60  per  cent,  of  the  total  number
of  throws  (15).  In  Fig.  2  (a),  at  the  point  D,  the  excess  of  T's  over
H's  is  22,  or  5'5  per  cent,  of  the  total  number  of  throws  (400).  At  K
the  excess  of  T's  is  34,  or  3-8  per  cent,  of  the  total  number  of  throws
(900).  At  C,  in  Fig.  2  (b),  the  excess  of  H's  is  44,  or  rather  less  than
1-5  per  cent,  of  the  total  (3,000).

These  deviations  from  equality  might  be  represented  graphically  by
the  angles  which  lines  drawn  from  the  points  in  question  to  the
starting  point  of  the  series  would  form  with  the  straight  line.  Such
angles  would  obviously  tend  to  become  smaller  as  the  series  proceeds.^
In  other  words,  the  zigzag  line  (representing  the  actual  results  of
experiments)  tends  to  approximate  more  and  more  closely  to  the
straight  line  (representing  the  theoretically  most  probable  results). ^

1  Unless  the  excess  of  H's  or  T's  became  proportionately  larger,  in  which  case  we
should  have  strong  ground  for  suspecting  a  bias — for  thinking  that  the  series  was
not  a  purely  chance  one.

-  This  form  of  diagram  might  be  used  statistically  to  discover  the  comparative
frequency  of  two  alternatives,  by  recording  them  as  they  occurred.  An  oblique  line
joining  the  initial  point  to  each  successive  terminal  point  would  represent  with  con-
tinually increasing  exactness  the  required  ratio  of  frequency.

In  any  case  where  the  cr.  priori  ratio  of  frequency  is  known, — as  in  the  example
given  in  the  text, — the  oblique  line  can  be  drawn  beforehand,  and  the  deviations  from
it  show  the  actual  results.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


187


Methods  of  Analysis  of  Chance  Series.

These  diagrams  illustrate  the  relation  of  actual  to  theoretical
results  in  shorter  or  longer  series  only  with  regai'd  to  the  number  of
times  each  of  the  two  simple  alternative  events,  H  and  T,  occurs.
We  may  further  consider  different  groups  or  runs  of  events  in  the
same  series,  instead  of  the  simple  events.

There  are  many  different  ways  in  which  such  series  can  be
analysed  into  groups  of  events.  The  usual  method  is  to  record  the
number  of  times  different  runs  of  each  alternative  liave  occurred,  for
comparison  with  the  most  probable  number  of  times  that  they  would
have  occurred  by  theory.  Thus  Buffon  (quoted  in  De  Morgan's
Budget  of  Paradoxes,  pp.  169  to  171)  analysed  his  series  into  "sets"
of  one  alternative,  say  H.  Every  time  that  H  is  thrown  it  is  called  a
"set";  if  there  are  several  H's  following  one  another,  each  is  a  "  set  "
of  one  throw  ;  if  the  H  is  preceded  by  one  or  more  T's,  these  form
part  of  the  same  "  set,"  of  two  or  more  throws.  The  "  sets  "  may
thus  consist  of  H,  TH,  TTH,  TTTH,  etc.,  and  may  be  written  briefly
as  H,  TH,  T,  H,  T^  H,  etc.  The  following  (see  Table  I.)  are  the
results  obtained  by  Buffon  in  2,048  "  sets,"  as  given  by  De  Morgan,
compared  with  the  most  probable  results,  and  with  those  of  a  corre-
spondent of  De  Morgan's  whom  he  calls  A.


Table  I.


"Sets."

Most  probable
results.

Buffon's
results.

A.'s  results.

H

1024

1061

1048

TH

512

494

507

T,H

256

232

248

TgH

128

137

99

T^H

64

56

71

T5H

32

29

38

TcH

16

25

17

TjH  ...

8

8

9

TsH

4

6

5

T.,H

2

3

Ti„H

1

1

TnH

Ti.,H

T13H

1

1

T„H


1

Totals

2048

2048

2048

188


Alice  Johnson.


[part


This  method  shows  only  the  runs  of  one  alternative,  T,  but  of
course  the  same  series  could  be  analysed  over  again,  so  as  to  show
the  runs  of  H's.

I  have  adopted  a  rather  more  complicated  analysis,  which  seems
to  me  more  instructive,  showing  in  one  Table:  (1)  the  numbers  of
runs  of  different  lengths  of  both  altei-natives,  and  (2)  in  the  case  of
one  alternative,  H,  the  runs  of  each  length  subdivided  to  show  what
length  of  run  of  the  other  alternative  they  were  followed  by.  This  is
done  by  dividing  my  whole  series  into  consecutive  groups  of  events,
each  group  beginning  with  an  H  (which  has  been  preceded  by  a  T)
and  ending  with  a  T  (which  is  followed  by  an  H).  Thus  HHHTT,
HT,  HHT,  HTTT,  HHT,  are  17  consecutive  throws  divided  into
groups,  sliown  by  the  commas.  These  groups  I  call  "cycles,"  because
they  all  begin  and  end  in  the  same  way.  The  plan  involves  the
necessity  of  regarding  the  series  as  a  circular  one  ;  i.e.,  one  in  which
the  end  is  continuous  with  the  beginnins;.  So  that  if  the  series
actually  ended  with  one  or  more  H's,  these  would  be  brought  round  to
the  beginning  to  form  the  first  part  of  the  first  cycle.  And  if  it
actually  began  with  one  or  more  T's,  they  would  be  carried  round  to
the  end  to  form  the  last  part  of  the  last  cycle.

Table  II.  gives  a  summary  of  all  the  cycles  in  an  actual  series  of
4,096  ( =  21^)  1  throws,  the  number  in  each  square  referring  to  cycles
which  began  with  the  number  of  H's  stated  at  the  beginning  of  the
line  in  which  the  squai'e  is,  and  ended  with  the  number  of  T's  stated
at  the  top  of  the  column  in  which  the  square  is.  Thus,  the  first  line
shows  that  a  single  H  (that  is,  an  H  preceded  and  followed  by  at  least
one  T)  occurred  495  times.  (See  column  headed  "Total  Cycles").
On  257  occasions  it  was  followed  by  a  single  T;  on  121  occasions  by
two  T's;  on  61  occasions  by  three  T's,  and  so  on.  The  second  line
shows  that  the  group  of  two  H's  (preceded  and  followed  by  at  least
one  T)  occurred  262  times,  being  followed  by  one  T  on  137  occasions,
by  two  T's  on  59  occasions,  and  so  on.

The  column  headed  "Total  Cycles"  gives  the  totals  of  the  different
runs  of  H's,  while  the  bottom  line  gives  the  totals  of  the  dififerent
runs  of  T's.  The  column  headed  "Total  Throws"  gives  the  total
numbers  of  throws  corresponding  to  the  total  numbers  of  cycles.
This  is,  of  course,  a  simple  matter  of  calculation.  Thus,  taking,  e.g.,
the  second  line  from  the  top,  the  first  square  gives  a  number  of
cycles  consisting  of  three  throws  each,  the  second  square  a  number  of
cycles  of  four  throws  each,  and  so  on.

^  The  series  was  stopped  when  this  number  was  reached  for  convenience  in  calculat-
ing the  theoretical  or  most  probable  numbers,  some  of  which  would  be  fractional  if
the  total  number  of  events  in  the  series  was  other  than  some  power  of  2.


XXXV.]  Coincidences.  189


Table  II.


Ti

T2

T3

T4

T5

Te

Tr

T

Tio

Tn

T12

Total
Cycles

Total
Throws

Hi

•257

356

121

138

61

64

24

33

15

i6'

8

5

9

4

i

1

495

513

1459

1535

H2

137

138

59

64

29

5^

9

i6

17

8

6

4

2

i

1
1

2

—

—

262

^.56-

1068

1033

H3

63

64

26

33

15

16

8

5

1

2

1

1

2
1

—

—

—

—

121

13S

609

639

H4

33

33

24

iS

13

2

3

2

1

i

1
1

11

64

464

383

H5

12

16

6

4

4

2

?

1

i

3
1

28

33

207

333

He

5

8

6

1

3

1

1

1

13

16

102

137

H-

6

4

2

3

1

2
1

10

88

71

Hs

2

3

1

1

—

—

—

—

1

—

—

—

—

3

4

34

39

Ho

1

1

1

1

12

31

Hio

2
1

2

i

22

11

Hu

—

1

1

13

H12

1

1

34

His

Hi4

Hl5

1

1

1

18

Totals

517

513

245

-?o6

125

7?.<?

48

G4

41

33

19

16

11

8

5
4

2

i

1

1014

70^4

4096

4096

Figures  in  ordinary  type  show  actual  results.

Italic  figures  show  theoretical  or  most  probable  results.

Figures  in  thick  type  show  "residual  cycles,"  see  p.  190.

Total  H 2057

Total  T 2039


Total  number  of  throws ...  4096


190


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  convenience  of  this  method  is  that,  in  a  series  composed  of  only
two  altei-native  simple  events, — the  probability  of  occurrence  of  each
of  which  is  one-half, — we  are  able  to  show  in  a  single  Table  the  occur-
rence of  a  number  of  compound  events  (each  made  up  of  two  or  more
simple  events)  of  varying  degrees  of  probability,  and  to  compare  actual
results  in  regard  to  all  these  events, — both  simple  and  compound, —
with  the  theoretical  or  most  jarobable  results.  The  latter  are  given
in  each  square  of  the  Table  in  italic  figures,  below  the  tigures  in
ordinary  type,  which  give  the  actual  results.  (For  the  method  of
calculation  by  which  the  theoretical  numbers  are  obtained,  see
Appendix  I.,  p.  293.)

This  Table  is  a  further  illustration  of  the  fact  that  the  longer  the
series,  the  smaller  in  proportion  become  the  deviations  from  theory.  In
a  series  of  997  throws,  which  formed  part  of  the  large  total  series  of
4,096  throws,  the  cycles  of  H  T  were  8  per  cent,  in  excess  of  their
most  probable  number,  whereas  in  the  total  series,  as  seen  in  the  Table,
they  are  about  04  per  cent,  in  excess  of  the  same.

But — and  this  is  an  equally  important  point  —  this  closer  corre-
spondence with  theory  is  only  found  in  the  case  of  events  having  a
comparatively  large  probability.  Even  in  the  next  longer  cycles — those
containing  three  events, — viz.,  H.,  T  and  H  T2, — the  deviations  from
the  most  probable  numbers  are  5  per  cent,  and  7  per  cent,  respectively
(in  the  shorter  series  just  referred  to,  they  were  13  per  cent).  In  the
cycles  of  four  events,  the  deviations  range  from  1-6  per  cent,  to  7 '8
per  cent,  and  in  those  of  five  events  from  3  per  cent,  to  25  per  cent.,
and  in  still  longer  cycles,  the  deviations  amount  often  to  100  percent,
or  more.

Another  feature  which  is  rather  surprising  at  first  sight  is  the
exact  correspondence  with  theory  of  some  among  the  very  long  cycles,
e.g.,  H  Tg,  H3  T^,  Hj  Tg,  H-  To.  It  will,  however,  be  seen  on  considei'-
ation  that,  though  the  relative  deviation  from  probability  in  the  case  of
these  vei'y  long  cycles  is  likely  to  be  often  great,  the  absolute  deviation
is  likely  to  be  almost  always  small,  so  that  there  is  really  a  greater
chance  of  such  exact  correspondences  occurring  than  in  the  case  of  the
shorter  cycles.

"  Residual  Cycles."

There  is  one  further  point  to  which  attention  may  be  drawn.  On
Buffon's  method  of  analysis  of  2,01-8  "sets,"  the  longest  "set  "  which
is  likely  to  occur  as  often  as  once  is  Tj,.,  H.  But  if  we  add  up  the
most  probable  numbers  of  this  and  of  all  the  shorter  sets,  the  total
comes  to  one  less  than  2,048.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  for  one  of
the  longer  sets  to  occur  to  make  up  the  total.  Now  the  most  probable
number  of  any  longer  set  is  a  fractional  _  number,  less  than  unity.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


191


But  as  no  case  can  occur  a  fractional  number  of  times,  it  is  assumed
that  one  of  the  longer  sets  will  most  probably  occur  once.  The  choice
in  Table  I.  of  T^ .>  H  as  the  most  probable  one  is  arbitrary,  though
we  should  naturally  expect  one  not  very  much  longer  than  Tj^  H.

If  a  similar  series  of  4,096  throws  be  analysed  into  "  cycles,"  and
we  add  up  all  the  cycles  the  theoretical  number  of  which  amounts
to  one  or  more,  we  find  that  they  fall  short  of  the  theoretical  total  by
1 1  cycles  — corresponding  to  the  single  "  set  "  left  over  on  Buffon's
plan.  These  I  call  "residual  cycles."  We  have,  therefore,  to  fill  up
the  Table  by  putting  in  11  longer  cycles  (see  the  figures  in  thick  type),
the  most  probable  number  of  each  of  which  is  really  a  fraction  less
tlian  unity.  Their  position  in  the  TaVjle  (like  the  position  of  Buffon's
extra  "  set ")  has  to  be  settled  in  an  arbitrary  manner,  and  the
particvilar  position  chosen  in  Table  II.  must  be  understood  to  be
not  more  probable  than  several  others.  But  the  "  residual  cycles "
must  lie  within  certain  definite  and  assignable  limits,  which  are
explained  in  Appendix  I.,  with  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  whole
subject.  It  is  only  necessary  to  remark  here  that  while,  on  Buffon's
method,  there  is  always  one  set  left  over, — whatever  the  length  of
the  whole  series  may  be, — the  number  of  "  residual  cycles  "  varies
with  the  length  of  the  series,  increasing  absolutely,  but  decreasing
relatively  with  it.

By  taking  into  consideration,  therefore,  more  complicated  groups
of  events — "cycles"  instead  of  "sets" — we  find  that  the  theoretical
distribution  involves  the  necessity  of  occurrence  of  a  considerable
number  of  groups,  each  of  which,  taken  alone,  should  theoretically
occur  only  a  fractional  number  of  times.  In  other  words,  these  are
groups  which  in  longer  series  would  be  expected  to  occur  only  once
each.

If,  then,  we  were  trying  to  judge  whether  there  was  evidence  of
any  agency  beyond  chance  in  an  actual  series  of  this  kind,  we  should
have  to  be  very  cautious  in  drawing  conclusions  from  these  apparently
remarkable  occurrences,  unless  they  were  very  numerous.  We  should
be  on  much  safer  ground  in  dealing  only  with  the  deviations  from
the  theoretical  results  shown  by  the  shorter  cycles.  Similarly,  a
few  extraordinary  coincidences,  though  much  more  striking  to  the
imagination,  afford  much  less  reliable  evidence  of  something  beyond
chance  than  a  large  number  of  trivial  ones  all  pointing  in  the  same
direction.

As  an  instructive  illustration  of  this  point,  I  may  refer  to  Professor
Karl  Pearson's  investigation  of  the  published  results  of  two  months'
roulette  playing  at  Monte  Carlo  (Es.say  on  "  The  Scientific  Aspect  of
Monte  Carlo  Roulette,"  in  27ie  Chances  of  Death  and  other  Studies  in
EvohUion,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  51  to  57). The  total  number  of  trials  examined


192


Alice  Johnson.


[part


was  over  32,000,  with  some  very  curious  and  anomalous  results,  which
may  be  briefly  stated  as  follows  :  —

(1)  In  the  32,000  and  odd  trials,  the  total  numbers  of  rouge  and
noir  results  were  about  what  they  should  have  been  by  chance.

(2)  In  a  series  of  4,052  throws,  the  runs  of  odd  and  even  numbers
{i.e.,  among  the  numbers  0  to  36  which  mark  the  37  compartments  of
the  roulette  table)  were  also  "obedient  to  the  laws  of  chance."

(3)  In  a  series  of  16,563  throws  examined  to  find  how  frequently
each  of  the  37  numbers  occurred,  (all  the  37  numbers  should,  of  course,
have  occurred  about  the  same  number  of  times),  the  deviations  from
the  most  pi'obable  results  were  in  some  cases  enormously  greater  than
would  have  been  expected  theoretically.

(4)  Even  greater  divergences  from  the  most  probable  I'esults  were
found  in  the  case  of  runs  of  the  two  colours.  The  omission  of  the
number  zero  (which  is  black)  from  the  calculations  made  the  chances  of
red  or  black  in  the  remaining  36  numbers  equal,  so  that  the  chances  of
runs  of  red  and  black  were  equivalent  to  those  of  runs  of  heads  and  tails
in  tossing  a  coin.  Calling  a  "  set "  the  number  of  throws  of  the
roulette  ball  till  a  change  of  colour  comes,  in  4,274  "sets  "  (resulting
from  8,178  throws  of  the  ball  in  one  fortnight),  the  "sets"  of  one
were  found  to  be  enormously  more  frequent  than  they  should  have
been,  and  the  "  sets  "  of  two,  three,  and  four  enormously  less  so.
The  writer  sums  it  up  Ijy  saying  (p.  57)  ;  "  Short  runs  are  deficient,
and  the  colour  changes  much  more  frequently  than  the  laws  of  chance
prescribe";  and  he  observes  (p.  55)  :  "If  Monte  Carlo  roulette  had
gone  on  since  the  beginning  of  geological  time  on  this  earth,  we
should  not  have  expected  such  an  occurrence  as  this  fortnight's  play
to  have  occurred  once  on  the  supposition  that  the  game  is  one  of
chance."  These  remarkable  results  were  still  further  confirmed  by
independent  investigations  of  the  play  of  two  more  fortnights  taken
separately,  and  Professor  Pearson  remarks,  after  describing  the  last
of  them  (p.  55)  :  "  That  one  such  fortnight  of  runs  should  have
occurred  in  the  year  1892  might  be  looked  upon  as  a  veritable
miracle  ;  that  three  should  have  occurred  is  absolutely  conclusive.
Roulette  as  played  at  Monte  Carlo  is  not  a  scientific  game  of  chance."


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


193


CHAPTER  III.

EXAMPLES.

Section  I.

Coincidences  clearly  due  to  Chance.

An  artificial  Cliance  Series,  such  as  a  number  of  throws  of  a  coin,
is  in  many  respects  so  unlike  the  events  of  our  ordinary  existence  that
it  might  be  supposed  impossible  that  any  analogy  could  exist  between
coincidences  occurring  in  the  former  case  and  those  occurring  in  the
latter.

Yet,  from  a  certain  superficial  point  of  view,  the  whole  existence  of
each  individual  may  be  compared  with  a  single  "  event  "  in  a  Chance
Series,  the  successive  stages  of  the  existence — like  the  successive
positions  of  a  coin  during  a  single  throw— being  causally  connected
together,  while  a  sort  of  definite  break  occurs  at  the  beginning  and  end
of  the  life,  as  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  throw.  Further,  the
various  positions  of  the  coin  are  produced  by  the  interaction  of  several
forces  or  causes,  and  so  are  the  various  stages  in  the  man's  life.  We
may,  if  we  choose,  assume  that  all  these  stages  are  rigidly  determined  by
what  has  gone  before,  and  by  the  conditions  surrounding  the  man  at  the
moment  (all  of  which,  in  their  turn,  may  be  supposed  to  be  determined
by  previous  conditions) ;  just  as  we  assume  that  what  happens  to  the
coin  is  the  inevitable  result  of  the  way  it  is  thrown,  etc.  In  any
case,  whether  we  take  a  strictly  deterministic  view  of  the  individual's
actions  or  not,  there  is  no  question  but  that  they  are  greatly  influenced
by  one  another, — that  causation  plays  a  large  part,  if  not  the  whole
part,  in  producing  them,  as  in  producing  the  successive  positions  of
the  coin  during  a  single  throw.

The  analogy  is  of  course  an  ancient  and  familiar  one,  but  if  we
attempt  to  carry  it  far,  it  soon  breaks  down.  A  human  life  is  not  an
isolated  "event,"  cut  off  from  all  other  such  events  by  the  two  epochs
of  birth  and  death  ;  the  causal  influence  is  continued  into  the  next
generation  and  radiates  out  into  the  whole  of  the  individual's  present
environment,  as  well  as  into  the  future,  so  that  the  relation  between
two  contemporary  lives  is  something  quite  difl'erent  from  the  relation
between  two  simultaneous  chance  series.

This  being  so,  it  might  appear  at  first  sight  that  there  could  be  no
scope  for  chance  coincidences  between  the  events  in  two  human  lives.
There  are,  however,  many  cases  in  which  two  events  having  some  kind
of  agreement  with  or  similarity  to  one  another  are  brought  about  by
entirely  independent  causes— just  as  the  causes  that  make  two  coins


194-


Alice  Johnson.


[part


turn  up  heads  at  the  same  time  are  entirely  independent  of  one
another — and  all  such  coincidences  are  due  to  chance.

Thus,  if  two  acquaintances  meet  in  the  street,  the  meeting  may  be
due  to  chance,  or  it  may  not.  It  is  not  by  chance  if  they  both  have
a  habit,  either  from  choice  or  necessity,  of  going  there  at  that  time  ;
or  if  they  are  drawn  to  the  spot  at  the  same  moment  by  a  common
attraction,  such  as  a  circus  passing  by.  But  if  they  were  accustomed
to  go  out  at  various  times  in  various  directions,  their  meeting  would
be  due  to  chance.  The  probability  of  the  meeting  might,  of  course,
be  fairly  large  ;  the  times  at  which  they  went  out  and  the  directions
they  took  would  be  limited  ;  and  the  more  similar  their  tastes  were,
the  narrower  would  these  limits  become,  and  they  would  consequently
meet  oftener.  In  the  case  of  each  meeting,  we  should  have  to  know
all  the  circumstances  in  order  to  know  whether  it  occurred  by  chance
or  not.  In  any  case,  each  of  the  persons  would  have  had  some
reason  for  being  at  the  place  just  then, — some  cause  would  have
brougiit  him  there, — but  if  there  was  no  reason  why  both  should
choose  the  same  time,  the  meeting  would  be  accidental.

We  should  hardly,  however,  call  such  a  meeting  a  coincidence,
unless  there  was  some  special  feature  in  it  that  attracted  our  attention,
— something  that  made  us  ask  why  it  happened  ;  even  though  con-
sideration of  it  might  show  that  there  was  really  no  cause  for  it,  that
is,  that  it  was  accidental.

My  first  example  is  a  case  of  this  kind,  the  point  of  wliich  consists
in  the  meeting  of  two  persons  of  the  same  name, — both  Christian  and
surname.

Case  1.  .  .

The  account  is  taken  from  Notes  and  Queries,  5th  Series,  Vol.  XII.,
p.  Ill,  August  9th,  1879,  the  writer  being  the  Rev.  C.  W.  Bingham.
Another  coincidence  recorded  by  him  is  given  below  on  p.  261.

Till  within  the  last  few  years,  the  Clergy  List  contained  the  name
of  a  highly  respected  clergyman,  in  no  wise  related  to  me,  but  bearing  and
called  by  the  same  first  Christian  name  as  myself.  We  had  been  introduced
to  each  other,  but  had  had  no  ojjportunity  of  cultivating  each  other's
acquaintance.  It  chanced  that  in  1867  I  was  visiting  the  Paris  Exposition,
and  passing  one  morning  through  the  building,  my  attention  was  arrested
by  the  kind  of  tropliy  of  Bibles  which  was  raised  in  the  centre  of  one  of  the
alleys  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society.  On  the  ojaposite  side
stood  an  English  gentleman,  who  was  engaged  in  a  similar  survey,  and  as
our  eyes  fell  from  the  object  of  our  gaze,  they  met  each  other  and  a  slight
smile  of  recognition  gradually  lighted  up  both  our  countenances.  We  advanced
towards  each  other  and  shook  hands,  but  it  was  obvious  from  his  manner
that  we  were  in  precisely  the  same  case — were  aware  that  we  had  met  else-
where, but  had  no  recollection  whatever  as  to  who  we  respectively  were.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


195


■"I  beg  your  pardon,"  was  onr  common  exclamation,  "  but  I  cannot  at  this
moment  remember  your  name."  I  forget  which  was  the  first  to  reply,  but
the  answer  was  identical  :  "My  name  is  the  Rev.  Charles  Bingham,"  and
"My  name  is  the  Rev.  Charles  Bingham." . .  .

C.  W.  Bingham.

In  this  episode  there  are  several  different  conjunctions  of  events
whose  antecedent  probability  might  be  estimated,  and  I  give  the  story
partly  because  it  illustrates  the  difficulty  of  disentangling  among  a
mass  of  incidents  the  salient  ones  for  the  present  purpose.  For  this,
I  think  the  only  important  point,  as  already  indicated,  is  the  meeting
■of  two  persons  of  the  same  name.  As  in  other  analogous  cases  (e.g.,
the  case  of  thirteen  trumps  in  a  hand  at  whist)  this  conjunction  6f
•events,  as  far  as  its  antecedent  probability  can  be  calculated,  is  no
more  unlikely  than  any  other  similar  conjunction.  It  is  not  more
unlikely  for  two  specified  persons  of  the  same  name  to  meet  than  for
two  specified  persons  of  different  names.  The  only  point  that  could
affect  the  calculation  would  be  the  question  of  how  common  the  name
was.  The  account  implies  that  there  were  only  two  English  clergymen
then  living  of  the  name  of  Charles  Bingham.  Crockford's  Clerical
Directory  for  1898  gives  seven  clergymen  of  the  name  of  Bingham,
among  whom  is  one  Charles  Bingham.  If  the  name  were  a  very
common  one,  it  would,  of  course,  increase  the  probability  of  the
meeting  of  some  two  persons  of  that  name  (though  it  would  not
increase  the  probability  of  the  meeting  of  tivo  particular  individuals
•of  that  name).  Evidently  the  particular  point  in  the  incident  that
struck  the  persons  concerned  was  their  both  giving  the  same  answer
to  the  same  question.  But  the  case  depends,  I  think,  as  to  its  ante-
cedent probability,  on  nothing  else  than  the  rarity  of  tlie  combination
of  the  Christian  and  surnames.

The  next  is  a  case  of  a  remarkable  resemblance  between  a  real
and  a  fictitious  individual.

Case  2.

The  account  is  a  reproduction  of  an  article  called  "  A  Remarkable
Coincidence  ; — Letter  from  Dr.  George  M.  Beard  "  ^  in  The  Popular
Science  Monthly,  Vol.  XV.,  (May-Oct.,  1879),  p.  628.

In  the  April  number  of  your  Jo>mml  for  this  year  (1879)  I  discussed  the
subject  of  coincidences  as  one  of  the  six  sources  of  error  in  experimenting
with  living  human  beings,'-  and  stated  in  substance  that  this  department  of

1  Author  of  "The  Psychology  of  the  Salem  Witchcraft  Excitement  of  1692"
<New  York,  1882),  and  "Trance  and  Muscle-reading  "  (New  York,  1882).

2  In  an  article  called  "Experiments  with  Living  Human  Beings"  (Popular
Science  Monthly,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  611  and  751),  containing  some  useful  discussion  of
the  sources  of  error  to  which  such  a  subject  as  psychical  research  is  liable.


196


Alice  Johnson.


[PAET


logic  had  been  most  imperfectly  studied,  and  that  the  mathematical  doctrine
of  chances  especially  had  V)een  abused  and  misunderstood,  to  the  great
detriment  of  science.  The  following  very  remarkable  correspondence  illus-
trates my  position  so  forcibly  that  I  beg  leave  to  present  it  to  your  readers.

The  tirst  letter  is  a  so-called  "  April-fool  "  letter,  as  the  date  suggests,
and  is  wholly  imaginative.  It  was  written  for  amusement  purely,  and
obtained  a  very  different  reply  from  what  was  expected.

The  autlior  of  the  communication  is  a  well-known  merchant  of  this  city
and  a  friend  of  mine.  The  person  who  replied  is  also  well  known  in  the
region  where  he  resides.

This  coincidence  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  any  recorded
in  the  history  either  of  logic  or  delusions.

"  202,  Columbia  Heights,  Brooklyn,  .4pn7  1st,  1879.

"My  Dear  Sister  Velina, — You  will  no  doubt  be  somewhat  surprised
to  receive  a  letter  from  me,  but  I  have  a  little  matter  of  business,  and  if  you
will  attend  to  it,  you  will  place  me  under  obligations  to  your  good  self.

"  Some  time  ago  a  man  by  the  name  of  John  Nasium  lived  in  New  York.
His  father  was  a  Southerner  and  died  last  summer  of  yellow  fever.  He  had
two  brothers,  James  and  George.  The  former  some  years  ago  went  to
California,  and  the  latter,  I  understand,  resides  somewhere  in  Kansas.

"This  John  Nasium  seems  to  have  been  the  black  sheej)  of  the  family,
and  when  he  left  New  York.,  he  did  not  leave  a  very  good  record  behind  him.
He  went  from  here  to  Toledo,  Ohio,  and  afterwards,  we  hear,  he  went  to
Tecumseh,  Michigan,  no  doubt  thinking  that  in  a  quiet  country  place  he
would  be  more  secluded  than  he  could  be  in  a  city.  I  and  several  of  my
friends  would  like  to  get  track  of  him,  if  it  can  be  done  quietly  and  without
exciting  any  suspicion.  He  may  have  changed  his  name  and  so  I  will
describe  the  man  as  nearly  as  I  can,  which  may  be  some  help  to  you.  John
I  never  knew  very  well,  but  his  brother  Jem,  as  they  called  him  here,  I
knew  very  well  indeed.  John  is  rather  tall,  weighing  about  180  lbs.,  I
should  think.  He  stoops  a  little  and  is  slightly  lame  in  the  left  leg.  You
would  not  observe  his  lameness  unless  you  were  to  pay  particular  attention
to  him  while  walking.  His  liair  is  a  dark  sandy  colour,  in  fact,  almost  a
red,  and  his  side-whiskers  are  almost  the  same  colour,  but  a  little  darker.
He  is  about  38  years  of  age,  but  really  does  not  look  over  30.  His  eyes  are
a  very  dark  brown,  and  the  left  eye  h^oks  a  little  peculiai",  i.e.,  unlike  the
other — looks  as  if,  some  time  or  other,  a  cataract  had  been  removed  by  an
operation.  To  look  at  him  you  would  at  once  see  a  difference  in  his  eyes,
and  yet  I  cannot  describe  the  difference  any  better  than  I  have  done.  While
he  lived  here,  he  usually  wore  his  hair  rather  long  and  carried  himself  in  a
style  peculiar  to  the  Southerner.

"  Now  perhaps  the  best  and  most  prudent  way  for  you  to  do  would  be
for  you  to  go  up  and  read  this  letter  to  Uncle  Hiram  first.  He  is  a  very
careful,  discreet  man,  and  he  can  make  enquiries  and  excite  less  susj^icion
than  you  could.

"  I  am  real  sorry  to  make  you  any  trouble  and  much  less  Uncle  Hiram,
but  this  is  a  matter,  if  it  can  be  properly  done,  which  may  be  of  considerable
importance  to  me  and  several  of  my  friends,  and  perhaps  further  the  ends  of
justice.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


197


"  There  is  one  other  mark  which  may  aid  you,  which  is— this  man  was  in
the  rebel  army,  and  his  forefinger  on  his  left  hand  xms  sJiot  off.  His  nose  is
quite  prominent,  and  he  has  a  very  mild  and  quiet  look,  and  he  is  the  last
man  you  would  pick  out  for  the  scoundrel  that  lie  is. — Yours  very  truly,

R.  T.  Bush.

P. S. — Please  attend  to  it,  and  oblige."

Shortly  after  this  letter  reached  its  destination,  Tecumseh,  Mr  Bush
received  a  telegram  stating  that  the  man  had  been  found,  and  asking  if  they
should  arrest  him.  The  corresjaondent  had  not  observed  the  date  of  the
letter,  nor  suspected  that  he  was  reading  a  novel  ;  and  in  a  few  days  the
following  letter  was  received : —

"Tecumseh,  April  18th,  1879.

"  Mk.  R.  T.  Bush, —Dear  Sir, — Velina  read  to  me  a  letter  Wednesday
evening  from  you,  describing  a  certain  man  that  was  wanted  in  New  York,
who  had  recently  left  Toledo  for  this  village.

"The  next  morning,  after  hearing  the  description,  T  informed  our  marshal
of  the  fact,  and  requested  him  to  keep  a  look-out  for  such  a  man.  In  the
course  of  half-an-hour  he  came  to  me,  saying  that  he  had  just  seen  my  man,
— with  sandy  whiskers,  rather  tall — would  weigh  170  or  180  lbs., — wearing
specs.,  and  the  front  finger  of  the  left  hand  missing  ;  and  was  very  anxious
that  he  should  be  immediately  arrested,  as  he  was  then  at  the  livery  stable,  for
a  saddle-horse  to  ride  away.  I  told  him  we  had  better  wait  and  be  sure  that
he  was  the  one  we  wanted,  and  also  find  out  if  we  could  whether  you  wanted
him  arrested,  shovild  he  prove  to  be  the  right  man.  I  saw  the  man  and  he
answered  the  description  so  well,  even  to  the  firuier,  that  I  thought  it  best  to
telegraph  you  for  instructions.  The  marshal,  in  the  mean  time,  was  to  keep
his  eye  on  him  (as  he  failed  to  get  a  horse).  Seeing  him  walk  down  to
dinner  with  one  of  our  townsmen,  the  first  opportunity  he  made  some
enquiries  of  this  townsman,  and  found  that  he  was  not  the  man— that  he
was  the  cousin  of  this  man  that  took  him  to  dinner,  and  was  brother  to  a
Mrs.  Palmer,  whom  he  was  visiting — that  he  lives  in  South  Cleveland,  Ohio,
and  is  a  lawyer  by  profession.

' '  That  he  answered  the  description,  both  in  size  and  the  loss  of  the  finger,
as  well  as  the  colour  of  his  whiskers,  there  could  be  no  doubt.  Wearing
specs,  we  supposed  was  to  hide  the  defects  of  that  eye  you  mentioned,  and
he  looked  as  though  his  side-whiskers  had  recently  been  cut  or  shaved  ;  but
if,  as  we  are  told,  his  home  is  in  Cleveland  and  his  name  is  Hick,  why  of
course  we  were  deceived  in  tlie  matter.  And,  if  his  friend  has  not  informed
him,  he  is  still  ignorant  of  our  suspicions.

"Now,  as  this  is  my  first  experience  in  the  detective  business,  you  will
pardon  the  blunder.  Hoping  that  it  has  put  you  to  no  inconvenience,  I
remain,  yours,  etc.  ^  Raymond."

The  one  striking  feature  of  this  coincidence  is,  of  course,  the  loss  of  the
forefinger  in  the  left  hand.

Both  the  imagined  and  the  real  case  possessed  this  very  excejjtional
peculiarity.  This  is  a  subject  on  which  statistics  cannot  be  gained  ;  but  it
is  certain  that  in  the  whole  continent  not  a  small  roomful  could  be  found
possessing  precisely  this  deformity  at  the  age  .specified  ;  and  it  may  well  be


198


Alice  JuJmfion.


[part


doubted  whether  in  the  whole  world  there  is  another  person  thus  mutilated
and  at  the  same  time  possessing  all  tlie  general  physical  characteristics  of  the
individual  described  in  the  letter.

More  striking  still  is  the  fact  that  this  individual  did  not  reside  in  the
place  where  the  letter  was  sent  (vvliich  is  not  a  large  place)  and  was  there  by
chance  only  the  day  that  the  letter  reached  there.

Those  who  believe  that  the  matheuiatical  doctrine  of  chances  can  solve
the  complex  problems  of  coincidences  will  find  in  this  case  material  for
consideration.  I  may  here  quote  a  single  sentence  froru  the  second  of  my
series  of  papers  on  "Experiments  with  Living  Human  Beings,"  in  the  April
number  of  the  Monthly:  "In  these  and  all  studies  of  a  like  character  it  is
to  be  recognised  that  coincidences  of  the  most  extraoi'dinary  character  and
astonishing  nature  are  liable  to  occur  at  any  instant,  and  that  they  are  as
likely  to  occur  on  the  first  trial  as  on  the  last  of  a  long  series."

A  second  point  of  great  psychological  interest  in  this  case  is  the  attempt
made  by  the  person  to  whom  the  letter  was  addressed  to  overlook  certain
discrepancies  between  the  imaginary  and  real  individual,  and  to  twist  and
pervert  and  reason  upon  the  facts  of  the  case,  so  as  to  bring  them  into
harmony  with  what  he  was  expecting  to  see.  While  the  man  corresponded  to
the  description  in  size,  in  the  colour  of  his  whiskers  and  especially  in  the  loss
of  his  finger,  he  did  not  correspond  in  the  fact  that  he  wore  spectacles,  and
had  no  side-whiskers.  The  detective  reasoned  that  he  wore  spectacles  to
hide  the  defect  in  his  eye,  which  defect  he  did  not  see  ;  and  he  assumed,  on
thought,  that  the  side  whiskers  had  been  recently  shaved  or  cut.  Nothing
is  said  of  his  stooping,  or  of  his  being  lame  in  the  left  leg,  or  of  the  colour  of
his  hair,  or  of  its  length.

The  bearings  of  this  whole  history  on  the  delusions  of  clairvoyance,
mind-reading,  animal  magnetism  and  spiritism  are  apparent.  A  successful
coincidence  of  this  kind  wo'dd  have  made  fortune  and  favour  for  any
clairvoyant  or  medium  or  mind-reader. — Truly  yours.

George  M.  Bearu.

New  York,  July,  1879.

In  addition  to  the  comments  of  Dr.  Beard  on  this  case,  it  may
be  observed  that  the  greater  part  of  the  general  description  of  the
supposed  individual — apart  from  the  point  of  the  missing  finger — might
have  fitted  very  fairly,  say,  one  out  of  every  thirty  middle-aged  men
in  England  or  in  America.  "  He  is  rather  tall — stoops  a  little — his  hair
is  a  dark  sandy  colour,  almost  a  red,  and  his  side-whiskers  are  almost
the  same  colour,  but  a  little  darker — his  eyes  are  a  very  dark  brown
and  the  left  eye  looks  a  little  unlike  the  other."  Finally,  "  his  nose  is
quite  prominent,  and  he  has  a  very  mild  and  quiet  look  and  is  the
last  man  you  would  pick  out  for  a  scoundrel."  The  village  of
Tecumseh  probably  contained  several  persons  like  this.  But  Mr.
Raymond  no  doubt  knew  all  his  fellow  townsmen,  at  least  by  sight,
and  it  would  never  occur  to  liiui  to  compare  any  of  them  with  the
description  given.  He  naturally  looked  out  for  the  first  stranger  he
could  find,  and  it  is  not  very  surprising  that  the  first  stranger  turned


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


199


out  to  have  a  general  resemblance  to  the  fictitious  scoundrel.  But  it
is  certainly  remarkable  that  in  both  of  them  a  linger  was  missing, —
and  that  the  same  finger, — a  deformity  which,  as  Dr.  Beai-d  says,  is
extremely  rare.

The  next  case — of  similar  incidents  occurring  in  two  contemporary
lives  —  presents  a  curiously  close  analogy  to  the  coincidences  that  may
occur  between  events  in  two  simultaneous  artificial  chance  series.  The
account  was  obtained  by  Dr.  Hodgson.

Case  3.

London,  Jaimary  21st,  1898.

Dr.  M.  and  the  undersigned  H.  W.  B.  are  brothers-in-law.  Dr.  M.  resides
and  practises  in  London  ;  H.  W.  B.  lives  in  a  suburb,  but  is  engaged  in
business  in  the  city.  In  December,  1897,  he  was  temjjorarily  staying  with  his
brother-in-law  Dr.  M.  The  undersigned  J.  T.  H.,  an  Australian  on  a  short
visit  to  London,  was  detained  there  by  illness.  He  had  not  previously
known  Dr.  M.  or  H.  W.  B.,  but  in  November,  1897,  he  made  the  acquaintance
of  Dr.  M.,  who,  on  account  of  the  ill -health  of  J.  T.  H.,  was  kind  enough  to
invite  him  to  stay  at  his  house.  In  December  J.  T.  H.  went  to  stay  with
Dr.  M.,  and  there  for  the  first  time  met  H.  W.  B.

It  transpired  in  conversation  that  H.W.B.  and  J.T.H.

1.  Were  both  born  on  May  13th,  1858.  ■

2.  Their  christening  was  in  each  case  delayed  until  the  completion  of  a
new  church,  one  church  being  in  England,  the  other  in  Australia.

3.  At  that  time  (December,  1897)  they  each  occupied  a  house  (one  in
England,  the  other  in  Australia)  which  house  in  each  case  consisted  of  two
small  cottages  knocked  into  one  by  connecting  doorways.

r-,. ,^  ( Herbert  Wilforu  Brett.
[Signed]  J J  ^  Hackett.

Mr.  Hackett  is  an  Associate  S.P.R.  He  is  an  old  friend  of  mine,  and
gave  me  the  above  account  orally,  and  afterwards  wrote  it  out  at  my
request. — R.  HoDGSo>f.

Case  4.  *

The  following  is  a  series  of  trivial  coincidences  recorded  by  Miss
C.  Shuttle  worth,  of  10,  Cottesmore-gardens,  Kensington,  W  ,  who
writes  that  the  "  coincidences  are  all  strictly  true."

1.  On  one  of  the  coldest  days  of  the  bitter  frost  in  the  beginning  i)f  1895
I  went,  at  about  half-past  six  in  the  evening,  to  jjay  a  visit  to  a  near  neigh-
bour in  London.  Two  ladies  were  sitting  with  her — an  aunt  and  a  niece  —
and  whilst  she  talked  with  the  aunt,.  I  had  to  talk  to  the  niece.  When  the
degrees  of  cold  had  been  disposed  of,  I  could  think  of  nothing  else  to  say
to  this  stranger  than  to  ask  if  she  happened  to  have  read  a  book  which  just
then  had  been  much  interesting  me,  "  A  Colony  of  Mercy,'"  being  an  account
of  the  work  of  Pastor  von  Bodelschwingh  in  Westphalia.  "No,"  she  replied,
"  I  have  not  read  it,  but  I  know  all  about  Von  Bodelschwintth. I  am  gointr

P


200


Alice  Johnson.


[part


there  to-night."  I  thought  I  must  have  misunderstood  her.  '■  Gohuj  to
Bielefeld  to-nlglit  ?  "  I  exclaimed.  "Yes,"  she  said,  and  glancing  at  the  clock
she  added,  "And  I  must  be  off,  for  my  train  leaves  Victoria  at  eight."  It
appeared  she  had  a  friend  living  in  the  "Colony."  The  lady  of  the  house
had  never  heard  of  the  place  or  the  Pastor,  and  I  knew  no  more  of  her
friends  than  if  they  had  dropped  from  the  moon.

******

2.  From  a  country  house,  some  years  ago,  we  drove  over,  a  large  party,
to  some  distant  ironworks.  During  our  walk  round  them  we  had  to  stand
for  a  while  by  a  little  railway  waiting  for  an  engine  to  get  out  of  the  way.
Whilst  we  did  so  I  asked  a  man  of  the  party  who  had  only  arrived  the
evening  before  whether  he  had  ever  been  on  an  engine.  I  forget  what  he
said,  but  I  remember  expatiating  on  the  fun  of  driving  one — an  accomplish-
ment I  had  lately  practised.  He  seemed  confused,  and  some  elderly  ladies
who  were  listening  looked  shocked,  which  I  fear  prompted  me  to  enlarge  on
the  topic.  On  the  way  back  he  confided  to  me  that  this  was  the  anniversary
of  his  wife's  death.  She  had  died  that  day  three  years.  In  the  evening  I
rejjeated  this  to  our  hostess,  who  then  told  me  the  cause  of  her  death.  It
appeared  that  once  indeed  the  poor  man  had  been  on  an  engine  and  it  was
with  his  wife.  It  had  overturned  going  round  a  curve,  and  his  wife  was
crushed  to  death  beneath  it.

3.  Many  years  ago  a  neighbour  was  dining  with  us.  He  told  a  story  of
Mrs.  H.,  a  propos  of  something  that  had  been  said,  and  stated  that  he  had
only  once  met  her,  more  than  thirty  years  before.  I  asked  if  she  was  now
Lady  H.,  as,  if  so,  she  miglit  be  identical  with  a  funny  old  person  whom  an
old  governess  of  ours  used  to  tell  us  about,  but  whom  we  had  never  seen.  She
was  a  neighbour  of  hers  in  a  remote  village  nearly  300  miles  away,  and  we
had  heard  her  speak  of  her  kindness  and  her  eccentricity.  She  had  told  us
tliat  when  walking  home  in  an  evening  she  would  often  accost  a  stranger,
usually  a  labourer,  and  saying,  "I  am  Lady  H.,  I  will  take  your  arm,"
would  i^roceed  to  do  so,  and  thus  walk  home  with  him,  perhaps  a  mile  or
two.  And  with  this  anecdote  I  capped  our  friend's.  But  he  could  not  tell
us  whetlier  she  was  the  same  j^erson  or  not,  as  he  had  never  heard  of  his
Mrs.  H.  again.

The  tie.i-f,  morning,  tcliiid  ■?('«  tvere  at  hreakfast.  Lady  H.  walked  hi.  She
had  already  paid  our  friend  a  visit,  having  arrived  at  hk  house  at  8  o'clock.
She  ims  his  Mrs.  H.,  and  having  been  told  he  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,
had  walked  a  couple  of  miles  over  the  fields  to  breakfast  with  him.  The
temptation  to  tell  her  how  we  had  discussed  her  the  night  before  was  too
strong  for  him,  and,  alas  !  he  could  not  even  resist  the  diabolical  suggestion
to  repeat  my  bit  of  gossip  about  the  labourer.  So  she  came  on  to  inquire
liow  it  had  reached  us.  We  never  told  her,  though  we  spent  the  morning
under  cross-examination.  But  she  was  pacified  with  luncheon,  and  being
afterwards  driven  back  to  the  house  where  she  was  staying.  "  It  was  quite
true,  my  dear,"  she  freely  admitted  ;  "  and  only  last  night,  whilst  you  were
talking  about  me,  I  was  walking  home  from  the  station  arm-in-arm  with  the
ticket  taker."

4.  A  few  years  ago  my  sister  asked  me  as  we  sat  over  the  fire  whether  I
ever  now  heard  anything  of  a  Mr.  M. I  was  surprised  at  the  question,  as


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


201


she  had  known  him  less  than  I  had  done,  and  I  had  only  once  seen  him,  and
had  never  heard  from  him  in  about  ten  years.  I  was  not  aware  that  he
knew  my  address.  But  whilst  I  was  answering  her  question,  he  came  in.
He  was  living  in  Cambridge  and  I  in  London.

5.  "  Is  not  '  Seend '  an  odd  name  for  a  place  ? "  a  friend  once  asked  me,
as  we  sat  writing  letters  in  Tyrol,  she  at  one  end  of  a  long  room,  and  I  at  the
other;  "Yes,"  I  said,  "but  how  in  the  world  did  you  know?"  "Know
■7vhat?  she  inquired.  "Why,  that  I  have  this  instant  directed  an  envelope
there  !  "  It  then  transpired  that  her  uncle  had  just  taken  a  house  in  the
village  in  which  a  friend  of  mine  was  living,  but  neither  of  us  knew  that  the
other  had  ever  heard  of  the  place.  q  g

In  reply  to  a  request  for  corroboration  of  these  incidents,  in  so  far
as  it  could  be  had,  Miss  Shuttleworth  writes  to  me  : —

June  22nd  [1898].
My  sister,  Mrs.  Moore,  says  her  recollection  of  the  No.  4
coincidence  is  so  vague  that  it  would  be  no  use  her  saying  anything  in
■corroboration.  That  is  to  say,  she  remembers  it  now  I  have  reminded  her
of  it,  or  thinks  she  does,  but  at  first  could  not  recall  it  at  all.  I  find  it  must
have  happened  in  1886 — longer  ago  than  I  thought.

No.  3  she  remembers  perfectly.  The  "  friend"  on  whom  Lady  H.  first
called  is  dead,  and  none  of  his  family  were  at  home  at  the  time.  That  was
why  he  dined  with  us  most  evenings.

My  friend  Mrs.  Russell,  of  9,  St.  Albans  Road,  Kensington,  has  sent
me  the  enclosed  letter  from  lier  friend,  the  "  aunt  "  of  No.  1.  As  you  will
see,  she  fully  corroborates  it  so  far  as  she  goes,  though  she  evidently  thinks
I  was  requiring  information  about  Von  Bodelschwingh's  institutions.  Her
niece  is  in  America,  but  I  remember  she  told  me  that  she  was  taking  Biele-
feld on  her  may  to  Leipzig,  and  was  to  stay  there  about  a  fortnight.  I  have
never  seen  her  or  her  aunt  since.  The  ivhole  of  tlie  aunt's  letter  was  not
sent  me,  so  there  is  no  signature.

The  smaller  enclosed  note  concerns  No.  5.  That  is  all  I  can  do. — Yours
faithfully,  t-,

C.  bHUTTLEWORTH.

Miss  Shuttle  worth's  sister,  Mrs.  Moore,  writes  :  —
I  remember  Lady  H.  suddenly  making her aijpearance under  the


circumstances  described  in  No.  3.


Agnes  E.  Moore.


The  letter  referred  to  in  connection  with  coincidence  No.  1  is  as
follows : —

May  ^Ist.

I  see  on  referring  to  my  diary  that  on  January  1st,  1895, 1  and  E.  C.  had
tea  with  you,  and  I  saw  E.  off  for  Leipzig  by  the  8  o'clock  train  from
Victoria.  I  remember  meeting  Miss  Shuttleworth  at  your  house,  but  cannot
speak  as  to  the  date.  E.  is  now  in  America.  .  .  .  E.  C.  has  a  brother
who  has  been  several  years  at  Bielefeld,  and  E.  has  visited  him  there  several
times.  ...  I  have  the  book  "The  Colony  of  Mercy,"  and  would  lend
it  to  any  one  who  wanted  to  see  it. . .  .

p  2


202


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  note  referring  to  coincidence  No.  5  is  as  follows  :  —

' 29,  Cyril  Mansions,  Battersea  Park,  S.W.,  J^lne  IStli.
. Yes,  certainly  I  can  verify  No.  5. I  remember  it  perfectly,  and
you  are  quite  accurate  in  what  you  say.

Ethel  Moffatt.

Case  5.  ' '  ■  ■• ' •  '  ■

A  further  coincidence  in  relation  to  Miss  Shuttleworth's  account
(No.  2)  remains  to  be  mentioned.  A  portion  of  the  present  paper,
including  her  narrative,  was  read  by  Dr.  Hodgson  at  a  general
meeting  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  on  April  22nd,  1898,
and  the  next  day  he  received  the  following  letter  : —

April  22nd  [1898].
Dear  Sir, — Having  been  at  the  meeting  this  afternoon,  at  Westminster
Town  Hall,  I  write  to  tell  you  about  a  further  coincidence  in  connection
with  one  of  the  examples  recorded  by  Miss  Shuttleworth.  The  gentleman
with  whom  Miss  Shuttleworth  spoke  upon  the  subject  of  driving  engines
was,  I  feel  almost  sure,  my  father.  The  lady  who  lost  her  balance  while
rounding  a  corner,  and  who  was  killed  on  the  spot,  was  my  mother  1  It  was
quite  a  chance  my  being  at  the  meeting  this  afternoon,  as  I  am  not  a  member
of  the  Society,  and  it  will  probably  be  the  only  meeting  I  shall  be  able  to
attend  this  year,  as  I  live  altogether  in  Ireland.  On  coming  back  here  this
afternoon  I  said  to  my  father,  "  Did  you  ever  meet  a  Miss  Shuttleworth  ?"
and  on  hearing  he  had  done  so,  I  proceeded  to  tell  him  of  this  afternoon's
meeting.  He  says  he  remembers  having  spoken  to  Miss  S.  about  engines.
It  would  be  a  satisfaction  to  discover  for  certain  whether  the  gentleman  in

question  was  Captain  whose  wife,  Mrs.  ,  was  accidentally  killed

from  a  traction  engine  at  in  1869,  August  31st. — Yours  very  truly,

[Signed] .

Dr.  Hodgson  asked  if  Captain  would  himself  furnish  a  state-
ment of  the  circumstances,  and  Miss  replied  : —

April  25th,  1898.

Dear  Sir, — I  am  very  curious  to  know  if  it  was  my  father  to  whom  Miss
Shuttleworth  alluded  :  Captain  (now  Lord  ).

I  hardly  like  to  ask  h'im  to  write  down  a  statement  ;  first  of  all,  because
he  does  not  like,  even  now,  speaking  of  the  accident,  as  he  is  of  a  highly
nervous  temperament,  and  secondly,  because  his  memory  is  not  as  good  as

it  used  to  be,  but  I  gather  that  it  was  at  the  house  of  Mr. , ,  that

he  met  Miss  S.,  to  whom  he  remembers  speaking  on  the  subject  of  my
mother's  death.

It  wab  either  in  '71  or  '72. My  mother  was  on  a  small  traction  engine

built  by  her  cousins,  the  j^resent  Lord  and  his  brothers,  and  in  turning

a  corner,  she  put  up  her  hand  to  steady  her  hat,  and  in  so  doing,  she  lost
her  balance  and  fell  off  the  engine — being  killed  on  the  spot.

I  thought  it  odd  the  other  day  that  this  should  be  alluded  to  at  the
one  meeting  of  the  year  at  which  I  happened  to  be  j)resent,  and  that  the
subject  of  the  meeting  should  be  "  Coincidences."


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


203


We  wrote  to  Miss  Bhuttleworth  to  enquire  if  it  was  Captain ,

now  Lord  — — ,  to  whom  she  had  referred  in  this  case,  and  she  replied
in  the  affirmative.

Case  6.  .

The  following  case  was  contributed  to  Light  (Vol.  X.,  1890,  p.  371),
by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey. He  says  : —

At  the  Board  meeting  of  the  Brecon  and  Merthyr  Railway  ^  last  month,
a  serious  and  fatal  accident  to  a  train  of  the  Company,  owing  to  a  "wild  run"
down  the  incline  at  Tallybont,  on  December  2nd,  was  reported.  At  the
same  meeting  also  was  reported  the  death,  within  an  hour  and  a  half  of  the

time  of  the  accident,  of  one  Thomas,  who  had  been  in  receipt  of  an

allowance  of  seven  shillings  a  week  from  the  Company  ever  since  1867,  in
consequence  of  injuries  sustained  by  him  in  that  year  from  an  accident  to  a
train  at  the  very  same  spot  and  from  the  very  same  cause.

In  this  case  the  coincidence  of  the  man's  death  at  the  time  of  the
second  accident  was  clearly  due  to  chance  ;  but  it  was  not  by  chance
that  the  two  accidents  occurred  to  the  train  in  the  same  place,  since
they  were  due  to  the  same  cause.

On  the  other  hand,  when  a  somewhat  rare  event  occurs  several
times,  —  either  simultaneously  or  in  rapid  succession, — being  due  to  a
different  cause  each  time,  the  repetition  is  an  accidental  coincidence.
The  following  are  instances  of  this  type.

Case  7.

In  Time,  of  September,  1890,  (New  Series,  Vol.  II.,  p.  978),
occurs  an  article  by  Mr.  A.  W.  Holmes-Forbes  on  "Contemporary
Coincidences,"  containing  a  curious  collection  of  groups  of  similar
events  occurring  at  about  the  same  time  in  various  parts  of  the  world,
— mostly  in  England.  These  are  extracted  from  newspaper  reports,
viz.,  from  the  Times,  Daily  If'etus,  Echo,  Standard,  Daily  Telegraj^h,
Globe,  and  Evening  Standard,  and  are  not  contirmed  in  any  way,  but
one  may  probably  assume  that  reports  of  events  such  as  these  are
accurate  in  the  main.

The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  events  reported,  with  their
dates: — (1)  Fall  of  buildings,  five  cases,  July  22nd  to  21th,  1885  ;
(2)  burning  of  cluirches,  five  cases,  December,  1886,  to  February,  1889,
two  occurring  on  the  same  day  of  February,  1889  ;  (3)  fall  of  bridges,
two  cases,  on  September  16th,  1889  ;  (4)  theatres  burned,  three  cases,
January  lst-5th,  1838;  (-5)  explosions — mostly  serious  ones — seven  cases,
October  6th  to  November  30th,  1888;  (6)  burying  empty  coffins,  three
cases,  December  17th  to  23rd,  1888  ;  (7)  great  finds  of  honey,  two
cases,  September,  1888;  (8)  marriages  interrupted,  two  cases,  February,

1  I  was  then  a  director  of  that  Company  and  was  present.


204


Alice  Johnson.


[part


1886;  (9)  women  in  men's  clothes,  three  cases,  March  and  Ajsril,
1889  ;  (10)  actions  for  libel,  nineteen  cases  in  the  Michaelmas  Sittings
of  1889  —  all  apparently  in  London;  (11)  similar  robbery  of  lawyers,,
two  cases,  on  August  16th,  1886  ;  (12)  death  in  the  legal  ranks,  four
cases,  March,  1883  ;  (13)  constables  in  trouble,  three  cases  on  August
20th,  1887,  and  three  on  November  30th,  1889  ;  (14)  riots,  six  cases,
July  24:th-31st,  1885  ;  (15)  discovery  of  prehistoric  remains,  one  in  the
United  States  and  one  near  Milan,  November,  1889;  (16;  asylums
burned,  two  cases  (in  America),  May  8th,  1890.

The  writer  says  that  these  sixteen  series  are  taken  from  a  list  of
more  than  140  similar  groups,  in  some  instances  more  than  twelve
serious  accidents  of  the  same  kind  (other  than  wrecks)  having  occurred
within  a  few  days  ;  and,  in  conclusion,  he  observes  : — "  Taken  all
together  the  catalogue  seems  to  contain  some  element  beyond  that  of
mere  coincidence."  He  explains  that  his  collection  is  merely  the  result
of  cases  taken  at  random  in  the  course  of  his  ordinary  newspaper
reading,  and  states,  "We  are  not  coincidence-hunters.  Not  one
coincidence  has  been  the  result  of  searching."

There  is  a  certain  analogy  between  incidents  of  this  kind  and
repetitions  of  the  same  event  in  an  artificial  chance  series  ;
suppose,  in  tossing  a  coin,  the  sequence  of  seven  heads  followed  bv
three  tails  occurred  twice  running.  This  sequence  is  likely  to  occur
twice  running  in  a  series  of  1,048,576  throws.  But  it  is,  of  course,
not  more  likely  to  happen  at  one  time  than  another  in  the  series ;
so  that  it  might  happen  during  the  first  hundred  throws  as  well  as  at
any  other  point.  Regarded  as  part  of  a  series  of  100  throws,  it  would
be  highly  improbable  that  it  should  occur  at  all ;  while,  regarded  as
part  of  a  very  long  series,  it  is  not  improbable.

Now,  there  is  always  something  arbitrary  about  the  length  of  a
series  to  which  we  choose  to  assign  a  certain  event  or  sequence  of
events.  Even  if  we  are  considering  an  actual  series  of  a  certain  finite
length,  it  is  always  possible  to  regard  it  as  part  of  an  imaginary  longer
series;  just  as  an  actual  line  may  be  treated  geometrically  as  part  of  an
imaginary  longer  line.  The  whole  conception  of  the  events  as  consti-
tuting a  series  is,  in  fact,  an  arbitrary  one, — which  we  adopt  for  con-
venience, because  this  is  the  only  way  in  which  it  has  been  found  possible
to  formulate  any  principles  with  regard  to  the  events.  One  of  these
principles  is  that,  if  we  wish  to  be  able  to  judge  whether  certain  events
have  actually  occurred  by  chance  or  not,  it  is  necessary  to  take  an
actual  series  so  long  that  tlie  events  in  question  are  likely  to  have
occurred  by  chance  a  good  many  times  in  the  course  of  it.  The
greater  the  probability  of  the  events,  therefore,  the  more  practically
reliable  is  any  evidence  for  a  cause  which  depends  on  the  frequency
of their  occurrence. The  "  residual  cycles " in the  chance  series


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


205


flescribed  in  Chapter  IT.,  p.  190,  afford  an  instructive  illustration  of
this  point.  These  were  sequences  of  events  having  a  very  small
probability,  and  it  was  shown  that  their  occurrence  in  the  series  in
question  proved  nothing.

Still  less  is  it  possible  to  draw  any  conclusion  from  the  repetitions
of  events  described  by  Mr.  Holmes-Forbes  in  the  above  narrative ;
first,  because  it  is  clear  that  their  antecedent  probability  is  com-
paratively small  ;  and,  secondly,  because  there  are  no  grounds  for
judging  what  length  of  series  they  could  reasonably  be  regarded  as
belonging  to.


Section  II.

Coincidences  tvith  a  doubtful  claim  to  caused  prodtiction.
(a)  Cases  suggestive  of  ''''Design."

In  describing  the  classification  of  Coincidences  here  adopted,  I
referred  to  incidents  involving  an  unusual  combination  of  circum-
stances, whose  characteristic  is  that  they  are  specially  convenient  for
some  person  or  persons, — something  that  would  be  called  particularly
"lucky"  for  them.  The  word  "  lucky  "  implies  that  the  conjunction  of
circumstances  is  thought  accidental.  Yet,  if  it  implies  something  of
real  moment  to  the  persons  concerned,  it  can  hardly  fail  to  suggest —
to  them,  at  least — that  it  did  not  come  about  by  chance,  nor  through
the  ordinary  course  of  events  causally  connected  together,  but  was
due  to  a  special  intervention  on  their  behalf, — a  sort  of  slight  bias
given  to  the  circumstances  by  an  overruling  Design.  There  is  no
doubt  that  this  idea  is  distinctly  suggested  by  such  cases  as  the  last
one  I  give  in  this  section,  and  by  other  cases  (not  given  here)  which
are  regarded  as  answers  to  prayer.

I  do  not,  of  course,  put  forward  the  cases  cited,  or  the  comments
made  on  them,  as  any  contribution  towards  settling  the  question
whether  such  a  special  intervention  ever  really  occurs.  They  are
intended  merely  to  illustrate  the  difficulties  met  with  in  considering
the  question.  The  first  of  these  is  that  the  "  lucky  "  incidents  are
sometimes  so  trivial  that  it  seems  absurd  to  attribute  any  importance
to  them  as  evidence  of  anything ;  while  there  is  no  obvious  point  at
which  to  draw  the  line  between  these  and  the  more  momentous  ones.

Again,  very  "lucky"  events  generally  consist  in  the  extrication  of
somebody  from  some  unpleasant  or  dangerous  situation  ;  and  then  the
evidence  for  special  intervention  on  his  behalf  is  certainly  dubious  ;
since  as  much  seems  to  have  done  against  his  interests  in  involving
him  in  trouble,  as  for  him  in  taking  him  out  of  it.


206


Alice  Johnsov.


[part


Both  these  considerations  would  tend  to  show  that  what  had
happened  in  all  the  cases  supposed  was  jjart  of  the  ordinary  course  of
events,  and  that  no  special  intervention  had  taken  place.

We  need  not,  however,  hold  that  Design  operates  by  any  kind  of
interference  at  the  moment,  but  might  rather  hold  that  all  events  in
the  universe  were  pre-arranged  by  it  from  the  beginning.  The  only
essential  feature  in  the  conception  is  that  things  are,  in  one  way  or
another,  arranged  with  some  purpose — some  end  in  view.  We  can
hardly  in  any  case  suppose  that  Design  is  only,  or  chiefly,  concerned
with  "  lucky  "  or  "  unlucky  "  events.  If  we  believe  in  it  at  all,  we  can
hardly  help  believing  that  it  takes  cognisance  of  everything  that
occurs.  But  it  might  easily  happen  that  only  a  certain  number  of  all
the  events  that  occur  were  what  mightbe  called  "  evidential  "  of  Design,
just  as  believers  in  telepathy  generally  hold  that  it  occurs  frequently,
but  only  now  and  then  in  a  manner  susceptible  of  proof.

It  is  these  apparently  "  evidential  "  cases  that  may  be  instructively
compared  with  the  events  that  afford  evidence  of  human  design.
If  some  one  wins  by  cheating  in  a  game  of  chance,  the  fact
of  the  results  being  specially  fortunate  for  him  may,  under  some
circumstances,  lead  us  to  guess  that  he  is  cheating.  Similarly,  when
circumstances  beyond  human  control  concur  in  an  unusual  manner  to
produce  some  great  benefit  to  a  human  being,  this  may  suggest  to  us
that  a  superhuman  Design  is  working  for  the  benefit  of  that  person.

In  the  case  of  the  fraudulent  player,  we  might  find  conclusive
proof  through  detecting  the  agency  at  woi-k, — a  kind  of  evidence  which
we  can  hardly  conceive  of  obtaining  in  the  other  case.  But  we  might
also  find  evidence  of  what  the  fraudulent  player  was  doing  by  observing
that  in  a  very  large  number  of  instances,  the  results  of  the  game
differed  from  what  would  be  expected  to  occur  by  chance.  This  would
only  make  it  moi'e  or  less  ^jro6a6/e  that  some  cause,  not  chance,  was
acting,  and  a  very  large  number  of  instances  would  be  necessary  for
practical  certainty.  Even  then  we  should  have  to  investigate  further
to  discover  what  the  cause  was.

The  consideration  of  games  of  chance  and  the  like  has  no  very
direct  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  existence  of  a  superhuman
Design.  But  without  some  knowledge  of  what  can  be,  and  in  fact
constantly  is,  produced  by  chance  in  such  cases,  we  should  hardly
be  able  to  realise  what  a  multitude  of  incidents, — incidents  either
specially  "lucky"  or  specially  "unlucky"  for  some  individuals  — might
occur  by  chance  alone,  and  this  ought  to  make  us  very  cautious  in
attempting  to  found  arguments  on  any  particular  instances.

There  are  other  kinds  of  Coincidences  which,  on  somewhat  different
grounds,  are  occasionally  regarded  as  indicative  of  Design  in  the


XXXY.]


Coincidences.


207


universe  ; — namely,  coincidences  in  which  events  of  a  certain  order
seem  susceptible  of  a  special  interpretation  having  relation  to  other
events,  apparently  unconnected  with  them  and  of  an  entirely  distinct
order.  It  has  been  a  favourite  idea  of  mystics  in  all  ages  that  most
events  are  symbolic  of  something  else,  which  can  be  discovered
through  the  use  of  a  sort  of  hypothetical  cipher,  —  the  great  object  of
ambition  being  to  find  out  the  universal  cipher  that  will  fit  every-
thing, and  in  the  light  of  which  everything  would  seem,  as  it  were,
to  make  sense.

The  cipher  must  be  supposed  sometimes  to  take  a  very  simple  form,
such  as  the  famous  anagram:  Horatio  j^elson=  Honor  est  a  Xilo.
Here  it  would  have  to  be  supposed  that  J^elson's  parents  were  guided
to  give  him  the  name  in  a  spirit  of  unconscious  prophecy.  But  the
practical  certainty  that  the  coincidence  was  accidental  is  shown  by
the  fact,  which  any  one  can  verify  for  himself,  that  there  is  little
difficulty  in  making  more  or  less  appropriate  anagrams  out  of  almost
any  names,  since  most  of  them  contain  a  fair  proportion  of  vowels  and
the  common  consonants,  while  the  very  large  number  of  incidents  in
any  one  life  afford  unlimited  scope  for  choice  of  words  to  compose
the  anagram.

In  many  instances  some  special  significance  has  been  attached  to
certain  numbers  as  portents,  the  numbers  having  attracted  attention
for  some  reason  ;  for  instance  (as  in  the  case  of  Mr_  Massey  and  the
number  99,  given  below),  on  account  of  their  being  associated  several
times  with  similar  events.  Or  in  some  cases  the  same  number  is
produced  repeatedly  in  several  different  ways,  e.g.,  in  adding  up  the
digits  of  different  dates,  chosen  for  some  reason  irrespective  of  the
numbers.  (See  Case  10,  below.)  The  histories  of  all  religions  are  full
of  this  tendency  to  attach  special  significance  to  all  kinds  of  objects  or
incidents  which  have  been  supposed  to  give  information  or  super-
natural guidance.

Astrology  and  Palmistry  form  some  of  the  best  known  historical
instances  of  this.  The  ancient  astrology  of  course  involved,  and  was
to  a  great  extent  based  on,  the  belief  that  the  earth  was  in  all  respects
the  centre  of  creation,  so  that  there  seemed  to  be  nothing  unreasonable
in  the  idea  that  one  of  the  main  functions  of  the  stars  was  to  record
its  history  or  to  guide  men  in  their  affairs.  Apart  from  this  obsolete
belief,  the  theory  depended  for  its  philosophic  basis  on  the  notion  of  a
pre-existing  (or  co-existing)  coherence  of  all  phenomena, — the  universe
being  regarded  as  a  continuous  structure,  every  part  of  which  depended
on,  or  was  determined  by,  the  rest,  and  might  therefore  be  supposed  to
explain  the  rest.  On  this  assumption,  the  universe  as  a  whole  might  be
empirically  recognisable  in  the  relative  positions  of  stars,  or  the  flights
of  birds,  or  the  lines  in  a  human  hand  or  anything  else;  complete


208


Alice  Johnson.


[PABT


knowledge  of  any  one  portion  of  the  universe  both  requiring  and
involving  complete  knowledge  of  all  the  rest  of  it.

This  main  principle  is  not  only  generally  accepted  in  the  present
d;iy  as  an  axiom  of  science,  but  is  formulated  in  a  much  more  precise
manner  than  formerly.  But  it  is  difficult  to  realise  exactly  what  it
means  when  we  come  to  apply  it  to  specific  sets  of  facts.  We  are
accustomed  to  state  it  confidently  in  complicated  cases  where  we  are
too  ignorant  of  the  circumstances  to  permit  of  a  definite  contradiction
of  the  assumption  {e.g.,  in  the  case  of  the  "  ilower  in  the  crannied
wall.")  But  there  are  many  simple  cases  that  we  know  enough  about
to  see  that  complete  knowledge  of  one  part  does  not  necessarily  involve
complete  knowledge  of  the  whole.  For  instance,  complete  knowledge
of  what  has  happened  in  ten  throws  of  a  coin  will  not  tell  us  what
will  happen  if  we  go  on  throwing.  Again,  the  most  perfect  know-
ledge of  one  side  and  one  angle  of  a  triangle  will  not  suffice  to  tell  us
the  form  of  the  whole  triangle.  The  whole  science  of  Mathematics
rests,  of  course,  on  the  fact  that  certain  things  are  involved  in
certain  others,  so  that  knowledge  of  the  former  is  implied  in  know-
ledge of  the  latter ;  but  the  science  shows  exactly  what  and  how  mucik
is  required  to  be  known  in  order  to  give  certain  further  knowledge.

The  science  of  Mathematics  owes  its  certainty  to  the  fact  that  the
objects  of  which  it  treats  have  no  real  existence.  There  is  thus  no
possibility  of  the  disturbing  influences  that  may  come  in  in  the  case  of
real  events  that  succeed  one  another  in  Time  —  events  that  have  to  one
other  the  relation  of  what  we  call  cause  and  effect.  The  absoluteness
of  Mathematics  depends  on  the  assumption  of  the  absence  of  any
distui-bing  influences  ;  it  treats  merely  of  what  would  happen  if  nothing
interfered  with  whatever  forces  are  taken  into  consideration.  It  is
conceivable  that  all  successions  of  real  events  might  be  predetermined
from  the  beginning,  —  as  they  are  assumed  to  be  in  Mathematical
problems,  —  with  no  disturbing  influences  ever  coming  in;  also  that
each  portion  might  involve  and  be  involved  in  the  rest  with  the  same
inevitableness  that,  say,  the  circumference  of  a  circle  involves  its  radius.
But  we  cannot  prove  the  absence  of  all  disturbing  influences  ;  nor  are
we  justified  in  assuming  that  any  one  portion,  if  sufficiently  known,
would  give  us  knowledge  of  all  others.

In  the  first  case  given  in  this  section,  the  repeated  association  of  a
certain  number  with  trivial  incidents,  occurring  spontaneously,  sug-
gested to  the  person  to  whom  they  occurred  the  action  of  an  external
Intelligence.

Case  8.

The  following  case  was  contributed  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  to  Light
of  November  14th  and  21st,  1885. It  must  be  observed  that  Mr.


XXXV.]


Coincidevccs.


20D


Massey  does  not  represent  the  case  as  valuable  evidentially,  but  merely
as  illustrative  of  a  certain  class  of  experiences.

November  1st

I  am  so  little  of  a  psychic  that  I  know  nothing  of  my  somnambulic  con-
sciousness in  general,  and  tliough  once  or  twice  before  I  have,  while  falling
asleep,  detected  something  like  an  attempt  (quite  inarticulate)  at  a  whisper,
nothing  at  all  similar  to  the  experience  of  a  few  nights  ago  had  ever  occurred
to  me.  .  .  .  Certain  numbers  haunt  me  ;  they  have  very  distinct  assf)cia-
tions  for  me,  but  into  these  I  will  not  enter  here.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  one
of  them  especially  recurs  in  a  certain  month  of  the  year,  now  just  past,  and
even  on  certain  days  of  that  month.  Latterly,  to  narrow  the  jjroblem  of
coincidence  as  far  as  possible,  I  have  refused  to  take  note  of  mere  multiples,
and  have  even  only  given  specinl  heed  to  a  certain  high  number,  [99]
being  the  repetition  of  the  root  number  [9].  This  number  is  presented
to  me  in  various  objective  and  seemingly  accidental  ways,  often  directly,
but  more  usually  by  the  following  mode.  My  attention  will  be  directed  to
some  slight  incident  readily  to  be  characterised  by  one  word  or  two  words.
Now,  though  the  letters  of  the  modern  derivative  alphabets  are  not  natural
numbers,  conventionally,  so  to  speak,  for  this  purpose  they  maybe  treated  as
having  the  numerical  value  of  their  order  ;  thus,  a  =  1,  o  =  15,  z  =  26,  etc.,
in  the  English.  It  frequently  happens,  no  doubt,  that  the  same  incident  may
be  equallj'  well  characterised  in  brief  by  different  words  or  expressions,  and
then,  of  course,  the  exact  summation  of  the  letter  values  of  one  of  them  to
the  required  number  is  less  remarkable,  the  favourable  chances  being
multiplied  by  the  alternatives.  In  every  case,  however,  the  natural  odds
remain  largely  adverse.  But  as,  when  attention  has  once  been  draAvn  to  this
sort  of  sympathy  (or  whatever  it  should  be  called)  others  may  seek  it  in
their  own  experience,  I  sliould  add  that  any  seeking  or  solicitude  is  perfectly
idle.  To  be  always  on  the  look-out  for  such  coincidences  means  spending
half  the  day  in  doing  silly  addition  sums.  Attrition  nmst  be  awake  to  them,
of  course,  for  the  incidents  will  be  mostly  trivial  in  themselves.  But  when
the  method  has  been  discovered  — and  how  it  occurred  to  me  would  take  long
to  tell — it  is  only  necessary  to  remember  that  if  there  is  anything  in  it  at  all,
attention  will  he  arrested  suthciently  often  to  make  it  almost  impossible
to  doubt  a  significance.  The  condition  seems  to  be  some  true  and  deep
feeling  concerned.  To  such,  apjmrently  unconscious  sympathies  respond.
Mere  idle  curiosity,  or  scientific  interest,  will  not  elicit  them.  And  now,
having  premised  an  explanation  which  seemed  necessary,  I  will  come  to  the
occasion  of  my  hearing  the  "  voice."

It  was  at  Eastbourne,  October  23rd.  I  had  been  rather  preoccupied
all  day,  and  late  in  the  evening,  having  finished  some  writing,  I  took  up  a
book  and  lit  a  pipe.  It  then  occurred  to  me  that  the  "number"  had  not
that  day  been  given.  I  felt  rather  disappointed,  when  in  a  few  minutes  one
of  the  little,  commonplace  incidents  with  the  numerical  value  occurred  in
the  room  where  I  was  sitting  with  no  other  companion  than  a  kitten  (who,
by-the-by,  had  nothing  to  do  with  it).  I  made  the  calculation,  and  soon
went  on  with  my  book.  Later  I  went  to  bed,  my  thoughts  occupied  with
certain  abstract  speculations  unconnected  with  these  experiences.  In  bed  I
was  still  drowsily  meditative  on  the  same  ideas,  when  suddenly,  to  some


210


Alice  Johnson.


[part


internal  sense  of  hearing,  pi:rfectly  articulate,  yet  with  a  sort  of  quick,  jerky
intonation,  suggestive  of  a  spasmodic,  but  successful  effort  to  overcome
obstruction  or  difficulty — a  hreakinij  in,  as  it  were  — sounded  two  whispered
words.  Two  more  common  or  simple  words  are  not  to  be  found  in  the
language  (one  was  only  a  preposition),  nor  more  utterly  foreign  to  any
conscious  context  in  my  mind.  For  I  was  not  asleep,  though  drowsy.  They
roused  me  instantly,  and  almost  instantly,  struck  with  the  absence  of  any
intrinsic  sense  for  me  in  them,  I  said  to  myself :  "■  they  will  sum  out  my
number."  The  calculation  was  quickly  made  and  the  result  was  exactly  as
anticipated.

[Mr.  Massey  informs  me  that  the  words  were  "  To  dinner."]
Whatever  the  explanation,  the  case  certainly  has  a  psychological  interest,
for  it  can  hardly  be  ascribed  to  chance  coincidence.  Allowing  that  a  sub-
conscious dream  faculty — the  "  masked  "consciousness — could  start  an  audible
hallucination  of  spoken  words  for  the  waking  consciousness — (tlie  i^roof  that
I  was  not  asleep  is  in  the  fact  that  a  course  of  waking,  though  weak,
thought  was  distinctly  interrvpted  by  the  sound,  and  I  could  clearly  recall
that  course  of  thouglit) — it  is  not  for  a  moment  to  be  supposed  that  the
numerical  coincidence  was  accidental.  It  may  be  suggested  that  I  had  sub-
consciously gone  in  search  of  words  suitable  to  my  purpose  ;  I  can  only  say
that  coHscioudii  the  process  of  search  would  be  long  and  tiresome,  as  I  have
tested  by  actual  trial.  So  that  the  least  the  case  would  prove  would  be
the  instinctive  superiority  of  the  sub-conscious  faculty  of  calculation,  coupled
with  a  power  to  project  the  result  as  a  hallucination  into  a  waking  con-
sciousness not  in  the  least  habituated  already  to  such  hallucinations.

I  record  tliis  case  because  I  can  bring  it  to  book  for  others  better  than
the  other  modes  of  my  numerical  experiences.  For  mj'self,  those  other
modes  are  alone  significant,  on  account  of  the  objective  character  excluding
deceptive  agency.  In  the  case  in  question,  even  su[)posing  that  a  spirit
(perhaps  an  '"elemental")  imjjressed  my  sense  of  internal  hearing  with
words  of  the  numerical  value,  that  value  would  have  little  more  significance
for  me  than  if  some  friend — or  some  one  wishing  to  play  upon  a  weakness —
purposely  suggested  such  words  to  me.  The  marvel  is  when  strangers,
letters,  chance  occurrences,  incidents  wholly  undesigned,  and  which,  in  the
nature  of  things,  must  have  been  determined  by  endless  antecedents,
co-operate  for  a  result  having  a  particular  subjective  relation,  so  that  it  is
the  time  problem  that  here  presents  itself,  but  with  far  greater  complexity
than  in  the  case  of  prevision.  Nor  have  I  anything  to  urge  against  those
who  altogether  decline  to  accept  an  indefinite  statement  of  such  experiences.
They  are  oidy  adverted  to  here  in  order  to  explain  the  principal  incident.

C.  C.  M.

November  14#/i.

Here  is  a  case  in  which  a  numerical  coincidence,  I  think  of  a  very
extraordinary  character,  was  actually  predicted  by  myself,  and  that  not  by
any  occult  prevision  or  impression,  but  simply  by  inference  from  a  lai-ge
experience  of  similar  instances.  Those  who  read  my  communication  in
last  week's  Light  will  remember  the  reference  there  to  a  certain  high  number,
to  which  the  letter  values  (ascertained  })y  ali)habetical  order),  of  words


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


211


suggested  to  me  in  a  particular  relation,  sum  up.  For  better  apjDreciation
of  the  following  case,  I  will  now  mention  that  this  high  number  is  99 — the
repetition  of  the  root  number  9.

Last  night,  I  took  up  niy  new,  uncut  copy  of  Notes  and  Queries,  and
glanced  at  the  contents  page — having  seen  no  other.  One  of  the  topics
indexed  was  "Smoking  in  Church."  This  immediately  recalled  to  my  mind
the  incident,  heard  long  ago,  of  a  young  pedestrian  on  the  Welsh  hills,  being
caught  in  a  storm,  finding  shelter  in  a  little  churcli  or  chapel,  and  solace  in
a  cigar  there.  The  recollection  belonged  to  the  personal  associations  for  me
of  the  aforesaid  number,  and  assuming  that  the  "Note"  in  Notes  and
Queries  would  be  of  some  specific  instance,  I  said  to  myself  (there  was  no
one  else  to  say  it  to),  with  a  confidence  amounting  to  positive  assurance,
that  the  name  of  either  smoker  or  church  would  sum  out  the  number  99.  T
then  turned  to  the  place  referred  to  {N.  and  Q.  6th  S.  XII.  385),  and  found
an  account,  in  a  letter  of  the  last  century,  of  how  a  certain  Arclihisho])
Blackhourn  (so  spelt)  of  York  had  ordered  pipes,  tobacco,  &c.,  into  the
vestry  of  a  Nottingham  church  for  his  refreshment  after  a  confirmation  !
Now,  if  any  reader  will  take  the  trouble  to  make  the  calculation,  he  will  find
that  "  Archbishop  "  sums  to  99,  "  Blackbourn  "  sums  to  99,  and  "  of  York  "
sums  to  90  1  From  experiments  I  have  made  with  books  and  directories,  I
believe  the  odds  against  any  word  or  name  taken  at  random  giving  a
particular  number  to  be  considerably  larger  than  the  odds  against  naming
the  particular  card  to  be  drawn  from  a  jjack  of  52.  Indeed  tliey  are
probably  not  much  under  100  to  1.

The  first  word  of  the  title  of  the  book  cited  for  the  account  in  Notes  and
Queries  is,  "Letters,"  also  =  99.

I  know  well  that  readers  will  be  inclined  to  suspect  that  I  have  overrated
or  overstated  my  expectation  of  this  result.  No  one  but  myself  can  know
how  jealous  I  am  of  self-deception,  or  how  used  I  am  to  in.stant  analysis  of
my  own  feelings  and  beliefs.  But  make  what  abatement  you  will  on  this
account  ;  there  remains  the  fact,  quite  independent  of  the  degree  of  my
expectation,  that  I  was  led  to  seek  and  to  find  a  very  improbable  numerical
result  in  particular  words  of  a  particular  passage  out  of  the  whole  contents  of
the  paper.  ^  ^  ^

I  have  referred  to  the  mimber  of  Notes  and  Queries.  The  "  Con-
tents "  with  the  item  :  "Smoking  in  Church  "  is  on  p.  381,  so  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  see  the  "Note,"  which  occurs  on  p.  385,  while
looking  at  the  "Contents  "  page,  and  Mr  Massey  informs  me  that  the
copy  was  uncut.

In  answer  to  questions,  Mr.  Massey  has  kindly  given  me  the
following  fui'ther  information: —

124,  A^ictoria  Street,  S.W.,  August  lUh,  1898.

I  made  brief  notes  of  many  of  the  incidents  in  question  at  the  time  of
their  occurrence.  But  they  were  of  little  evidential  value,  being  merely
memoranda  of  dates  and  words,  to  enaljle  me  to  recall  the  occasions,  but
giving  no  detail,  usually,  of  the  latter.  And  they  have  long  been  destroyed.
. . . So  I  can  only  repeat  generally  what  I  said  in  that  the  number


212


Alice  Johnson.


[part


was  given  especially  at  the  (for  me)  significant  season  of  the  year,  in  quick
repetition,  by  "strangers,  letters,  chance  occurrences,  incidents  wholly
undesigned."  Sometimes  three  or  four  or  even  more  such  occasions  would
occur  in  the  course  of  a  single  solitary  walk  (usually  across  counti'y  from
Eastbourne).  To  give  particulars  from  memory  at  this  distance  of  time
Would  be  useless,  even  if  I  could  recall  a  number  of  them  (some,  I  certainly
can),  because  you  could  not  "  control  "  my  statements.  At  first  I  took  note
of  9  and  its  multiples  ;  but  not  being  able  to  assign  any  ratio  of  pr(,>bability  to
the  frequent  recurrence,  I  determined  to  confine  my  attention  to  the  less
likely  repetition,  99.  The  sort  of  thing  went  on  day  after  day,  more  or  less,
for  weeks,  and  in  successive  years  at  the  same  season,  for  some  four  or  five
years  ;  now,  hardly  ever. ...  ^  ^  Massey.

Awjnst  IWi,  1898.
The  brief  memoranda — words  I  jotted  down  immediately  after
the  occurrences— were  merely  that  I  might  know  accurately  at  the  end  of
each  day  how  frequent  the  coincidences  had  been.  Otherwise  they  would  not
help  you  now,  even  had  they  been  kept,  as  particulars  would  still  depend  on
my  pi-esent  recollection.  But  I  am  sorry  that  they  are  not  extant,  because
it  was  just  the  frequency  of  the  coincidence  in  a  brief  period  that  in  my  view
excluded  any  merely  subjective  explanation.  Obviously,  the  latter  is  not
available,  if  the  frequency  of  objective  facts  with  the  numerical  signification
is  in  excess  of  any  reasonable  estimate  of  what  might  be  ordinarily  expected
daily  for,  say,  a  few  successive  days.  My  subliminal  self  would  be
dependent  on  external  circumstances  for  the  selection,  and  it  was  the
frequency  of  circumstances  lending  themselves  to  such  selection  tliat  I  say  is
beyond  common  probability.  We  can  test  this  to  some  extent  by  experiment,
and  I  did  so.  (_lften,  moreover,  only  common  attention  by  a  mind  openly  on
the  alert  (as  mine  was)  was  requisite,  the  significant  number  jiresenting
itself  without  any  calculation,  e.y.,  in  ticket  numbers,  numbers  of  railway
carriages  (entered  before  the  number  was  seen),  the  number  given  in  the
course  of  a  letter  from  a  correspondent  wholly  unaware  of  its  significance  for
me,  and  so  on.  In  other  cases,  no  doubt  you  would  have  to  be  satisfied  that
the  key  words,  so  to  speak,  with  the  numerical  value,  were  in  all  cases  the
simple  and  obviously  descriptive  ones,  not  forced  for  the  purpose.

C.  C.  Massey.

The  explanation  of  tliis  case  that  first  suggests  itself  is  obviously
the  one  referred  to  by  Mr.  Massey— that  he  "  had  subconsciously  gone
in  search  of  words  suitable  to  his  purpose."  The  experiences  might
then  be  considered  akin  to  the  anagrams  sometimes  occurring  in
automatic  writing, — a  striking  case  of  which  is  given  in  Mr.  Myers'
paper  "  On  a  Telepathic  Explanation  of  some  so-called  Spiritualistic
Phenomena"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  225-231.  The
particular  interest  of  these  anagrams  is,  as  Mr.  Myers  says,  that  "the
result  of  the  involuntary  movement  of  the  pen  is  altogether  puzzling  to
the  writer, — is  something  which  he  has  to  make  out  with  difficulty  as
if  it  were  the  product  of  another  brain." They  were  "  anagrams,


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


213


indeed,  of  the  crudest  kind,  consisting  of  mere  ti*anspositions  of  letters,
but  still  puzzles  which  the  writer  had  to  set  himself  to  decipher  ab
extra.  The  chances  against  drawing  a  group  of  letters  at  random,
which  will  form  several  definite  words  and  leave  no  letters  over  are,  of
course,  very  great  indeed."  An  instance  was  "Tefi  Hasl  Esble  Lies"
( Life  is  the  less  able).

In  cases  like  this,  we  may  suppose  that  the  real  order  of  the  mental
processes  involved  is  the  reverse  of  the  apparent  order.  In  inventing
a  riddle  in  the  ordinary  way,  we  first  invent  the  answer  and  then
concoct  a  suitable  question  ;  but  in  propounding  it  to  another  person,
we  put  the  question  first.  In  dreams  it  sometimes  occurs  that  we  our-
selves have  a  riddle  propounded  to  us  ;  we  then  seem  to  hear  the
question  first,  with  no  consciousness  of  knowing  the  answer,  which
comes  to  us  later  as  a  surprise,  although  we  must  really  have  known
it  beforehand.  Such  a  di'eam  is  "  dramatised  backwards,"  like  the
example  given  below  (see  p.  263).  The  apparent  mystery  in  these
anagrams  is  of  the  same  kind  ;  it  consists  in  the  writer  seeming  to  put
the  question  to  himself  and  subsequently  finding  out  the  answer,  which
he  must  have  known  subconsciously  all  the  time.

Similarly,  in  Mr.  jVIassey's  case,  his  subliminal  self  may  have
started  with  the  number  99  and  made  up  words,  e.g.,  "To  dinner,"
whose  letters  summed  up  to  it,  presenting  the  finished  result  of  its
labours  to  his  supi'aliminal  self.  To  the  latter,  this  might  appear
like  a  I'iddle  propounded  by  some  external  source,  the  answer  to  which
it  worked  out  and  found  to  be  99.  The  explanation  depends  on  the
assumption  that  mental  processes  can  be  apparently  reversed  as
described,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  large  number  of  cases  that  can
be  thus  explained  justify  the  assumption.

It  is  not  even  necessary  to  assume  the  apparent  reversal  in  all  the
instances  referred  to  by  Mr.  Massey.  In  cases  where  an  incident
occurred  that  could  be  described  briefly  in  several  different  terms  or
expressions,  the  subliminal  self  might  be  supposed  to  select  the  term
suited  for  its  purpose  and  to  reject  altogether  cases  in  which
it  could  find  no  suitable  words.  This  would  merely  imply  that
the  finished  result  alone  would  be  presented  to  the  supraliminal  self,
the  mental  processes  leading  up  to  it  being  performed  unconsciously.
The  cases  where  the  number  was  presented  directly,  as  on  tickets  or
railway  carriages,  might  be  merely  instances  of  selective  attention  to
it.  (The  incident  of  "  smoking  in  church  "  cannot  be  thus  explained,
but  a  single  case  like  this  cannot,  of  course,  be  regarded  as  evidence
of  anything  beyond  chance.)

All  this  implies  no  further  assumption  than  that  Mr.  Massey 's  sub-
liminal self  acquired  a  special  readiness  in  playing  a  sort  of  game, —
rather  more  difiicult  than  the  making  of  anagrams,  but  a  person  who  has


214


Alice  Johnson.


[part


spent  a  little  time  over  puzzles  of  this  kind  soon  acquires  what  seems
to  one  totally  inexperienced  in  them  great  quickness  and  skill.  With
regard  to  the  number  99,  it  will  be  seen  at  once  that  at  least  7  or  8
letters  would  generally  be  required  to  form  it,  since — if  all  the  letters
of  the  alphabet  occurred  equally  often — 13  would  be  the  average  value
of  any  letter  taken  at  random.  But  more  than  8  letters  would  generally
be  wanted,  since  the  letters  in  the  first  half  of  the  alphabet  occur  much
oftener  than  those  in  the  second  half.  That  this  is  so  with  initials  can  be
seen  in  any  dictionary,  e.g.,  I  see  that  the  first  13  letters — A  to  M — take
up  about  of  the  space  in  an  old  edition  of  Johnson's  Dictionary.
This  shows  roughly  the  actual  proportion  of  words  beginning  with
these  letters.  The  greater  frequency  with  which  such  words  occur  may
be  shown  roughly  by  the  fact  that  the  same  initial  letters  take  up  16  out
of  the  24  volumes  of  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica.  (It  is  instructive
to  observe  that  the  letter  M — which  Napoleon  is  said  to  have  regarded
as  having  a  special  significance  in  his  life — takes  up  a  little  more  than
two  out  of  these  sixteen  volumes).  Words  clearly  too  long  or  too  short
for  the  number  would  be  at  once  rejected,  and  it  is  not  very  difficult  to
imagine  that  the  subliminal  self  could  memorise  all  the  letters  of  the
alphabet  so  as  to  substitute  at  once  for  the  letter  its  numerical  equiva-
lent, and  add  up  the  numbers  rapidly  whenever  it  saw  that  they  would
come  to  something  like  99.  The  interest  that  Mr.  Massey  had  come  to
attach  to  the  number  might  furnish  a  fully  sufficient  motive  for  the
exercise,  which  otherwise  would  have  seemed  trivial  and  childish.

In  the  next  case  the  apparently  signiBcant  numbers  were  presented
in  a  simple  and  direct  fashion.

Case  9.

The  account  is  translated  and  slightly  abridged  from  the  Annales
des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  March- April,  1899.

The  narrator,  M.  E.  Desbeaux,  writes  to  Dr.  Dariex  that  these  cases
are  extracted  from  his  private  diary,  under  their  respective  dates  ;  that  he
has  been  to  Monte  Carlo  twenty-three  times,  and  has  never  had  any  other
premonitions.

His  account  is  as  follows  : —

Case  1. — On  Wednesday,  February  6th,  1889,  at  Monte  Carlo,  taking  a
walk  in  the  afternoon,  I  found  a  rusty  horse-shoe.  Being  superstitious,  like
all  gamblers,  I  picked  it  up,  since — as  every  one  knows — a  horse-shoe,
especially  a  rusty  one,  brings  luck  !  On  standing  up  again  my  eye  fell  on  the
number  6,  painted  red  on  a  mile-stone.  I  said  to  myself,  "Tliat  is  the
number  to  bet  on  to-day,"  but  I  had  hardly  finished  making  this  reflection
when  I  found  myself  gazing  at  the  number  28  imprinted  on  the  lamp  of  a
carriage  that  had  stopped  in  front  of  me.  I  thought  at  once  that,  if  I  saw  the
6  turn  up  on  one  of  the  roulette  tables,  I  ought  next  to  stake  on  the  28,


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


215


Two  hours  after  this  little  incident,  which  I  had  almost  forgotten,  I  went
into  the  gambling  salo(jn.  I  went  up  to  a  table,  and  almost  at  once  saw  the
6  turn  up.  Then,  but  only  then,  I  remembered  that  I  ought  to  stake  on
the  28.  As  I  had  been  losing  for  several  days,  and  had  but  a  very  limited
confidence  in  my  prognostic,  I  hesitated,  and  instead  of  staking  a  louis  on
the  28  alone,  T  merely  staked  5  francs  on  the  six  numbers  (transversale)
28—33. The  croupier  threw  the  ball,  and  the  :2S  turned  up.

Case  2.-0x1  Tuesday,  December  26th,  1894  .  .  .  just  as  I  was
comhig  out  of  [a  house]  I  was  obliged  to  start  back  out  of  the  way  of  a
carriage,  with  lighted  lamps,  driving  hurriedly  by.  The  number  of  this
carriage— 22— was  flashed  on  my  eyes.  Then  it  occurred  to  me  that  this  was
the  first  number  I  had  seen  since  [an  incident  which  he  had  amused  himself
by  regarding  as  a  lucky  portent],  T  entered  the  Casino,  but  there  was  no
prior  indication  which  could  serve  as  my  cue  (-point  de  depart)  as  in  the
previous  case  ;  it  was  therefore  with  no  confidence  that  I  jjlaced  five  or  six
coins  on  the  22.  This  number  did  not  turn  up,  and  I  retired.  I  had
dinner  and  then  came  back,  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  having  a  cue,  and
Destiny  not  having  indicated  one  to  me,  I  decided  in  my  own  mind  tliat  this
should  be  the  number  1.  I  then  walked  about  among  the  tables,  waiting  for
the  moment  when  I  should  see  No.  1  turn  up.  At  the  end  of  an  hour,
having  seen  nothing,  I  went  towards  the  door  to  smoke  a  cigarette  in  the
anteroom,  when  passing  by  a  table  I  heard  the  croupier  call  out,  "  1,  red,
odd  number,  manque.'^  "  Here  was  my  cue.  I  put  down  a  loiiis  on  the  22'.
The  croupier  threw  his  ball  again,  and  22  turned  up.

The  next  day  we  lunched  with  our  friends,  the  B.'s,  at  the  Hotel  du
Cap  Martin.  The  first  thing  I  noticed  on  the  table  at  which  we  were  sitting
was  a  white  card,  supported  on  a  copper  stand,  bearing  the  number  222
(a  number  referring  to  the  service  of  the  hotel  and  restaurant).  My
superstitious  mind  was  struck  with  the  oddity  of  finding  again  under  my
eyes  the  22  which  had  favoured  me  the  evening  before.  I  wondered  if  this
was  not  another  gracious  guidance  from  Fate,  and  I  thought  that  the  first
2  probaljly  meant  that  22  would  turn  up  twice  for  me  that  day.  These
reflections  were,  of  course,  made  rapidly  and  internally,  without  conviction.

At  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  went  into  the  rooms,  and  had  hardly
approached  one  of  the  tables  when  1  saw  the  number  1  turn  up.  Then,
thinking  of  nothing  but  the  system  which  had  succeeded  the  evening  before'
I  put  a  louis  on  the  22.  Then  the  22  turned  up.  "  Here  is  one, "  I  thought!
"  and  if  my  prognostic  is  correct,  there  should  be  a  second."  Having  picked
up  my  winnings,  I  left  on  the  22,  as  my  custom  was,  the  louis  which  had
just  won.  The  croupier  threw  the  ball,  and  called  out:  "2,  black,  even
number,  manque."  This  time  my  louis  returned  to  the  bank,  and  I  was  going
to  look  for  another  table  where  I  might  see  the  1  appear,  when  I  suddenly
remembered  for  the  first  time  the  card  numbered  222  at  the  Cap  Martin,
and  I  thought  at  the  same  time  that  I  had  the  initial  indication  which  had
failed  me  the  evening  before  ;  it  was  this  2,  preceding  a  22,  which  should  be
my  cue.  I  hastened  to  throw  a  lonis  on  the  22.  The  ball  twisted  and
turned  and  fell  into  the  22. This  happened  under  the  eyes  of  two  of  my

1  Manque  indicates  any  of  the  numbers  from  1  to  18  inclusive,  being  contrasted
with  passe,  which  indicates  any  of  those  from  19  to  36  inclusive.— A.  J.


216


Alice  Johnson.


[part


friends,  ^  who,  nut  being  aware  of  the  course  of  my  thoughts,  were
astonished  to  see  me  hit  off  the  precise  number  twice  in  three  turns — both
the  winning  numbers  being  22.

Case  3.  —  On  Friday,  February  3rd,  1899,  at  Monte  Carlo,  I  was  walking
about  before  lunch,  thinking  sadly  that  ever  since  my  arrival  in  this  beautiful
country,  namely,  for  three  days,  the  roulette  had  been  treating  me  unkindly.
Suddenly  at  a  street  corner  my  glance  fell  on  the  number  11  painted  on  a
wall.  "  Can  this  be  an  indication  of  Destiny  ?"  I  thought,  half  sceptically,
half  credulously.  But  at  once  I  remembered  my  two  previous  cases,  and  I
recognised  the  necessity  of  having  another  indication  to  act  as  my  cue,  as
before. "Well,"  I  said,  "the  first  figure  that  I  see  shall  be  this." At  once

I  saw  coming  towards  me  an  electric  tram  with  the  figure  4  on  its  front,
large  and  standing  out  clearly. I  took  note  of  it.

At  about  four  o'clock  I  entered  the  Casino.  I  walked  about  among  the
tables,  hoping  to  see  my  4  turn  up.  At  the  end  of  an  hour  I  had  seen
nothing  of  it.  Becoming  bored,  I  began  to  play,  thinking  no  more  of  my
prognostic.  I  played  for  an  hour  with  5  franc  pieces  only,  and  did  not  win
once.  At  last,  at  six  o'clock,  I  went  up  to  a  table  in  the  large  room,  and  saw
the  4  turn  up. There  was  my  cue. I  at  once  put  a  louia  on  the  11,  and  the

II  came  next.

Satisfied.  I  went  towards  the  door,  but,  crossing  the  last  room,  I  glanced
at  the  table  on  the  left,  where  there  were  comparatively  few  people.  At
that  moment  the  4  turned  up  before  me.  At  once  T  put  a  lo\iis  on  the  11,
and — actually — the  11  came  next  ! . .  .

M.  Desbeaux  discusses  with  some  ingenuity  the  metaphysical  diffi-
culties of  any  theory  of  premonition  as  applied  to  these  cases  ;  but,
curiously  enough,  among  the  various  hypotheses  he  suggests  to  explain
them,  that  of  chance  coincidence  is  not  mentioned  !  With  a  view  to
testing  this,  it  is  unfortunate  that  his  diary — like  so  many  other
diaries — recorded  the  number  of  hits  only,  and  not  the  number  of
misses.  Still  it  is  made  clear  that  the  latter  were  very  numerous,  and
the  narrative,  as  a  whole,  is  hardly  calculated  to  increase  one's
confidence  in  portents.

There  is  another  kind  of  numerical  coincidences  in  the  collection
of  which  much  time  and  ingenuity  has  been  expended  by  various
persons  ;  I  mean,  coincidences  relating  to  dates.  I  give  an  instance
which  I  have  seen  quoted  more  than  once  as  an  especially  noteworthy
one,  though,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  estimate  has  ever  been  made  of  tlie
degree  of  its  improbability.

Case  10.

Louis  Philippe  became  King  of  France  in  1830,  and  abdicated
in  1848. Thei-e  are  three  important  dates  connected  with  his  life —

1  M.  H.  M.,  who  has  recently  reminded  me  of  the  incident,  would,  if  necessary,
bear  witness  of  it.  and  M'""  S.,  his  sister.  [The  names  of  these  persons  were  given  in
confidence  to  Dr.  Dariex.]


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


217


the  date  of  his  birth,  of  his  wife's  birth,  and  of  their  marriage— the
four  digits  of  each  of  which,  added  to  tlie  date  of  his  accession,
makes  the  date  of  his  abdication  ;  in  other  words,  the  four  digits
added  together  are  in  each  case  equal  to  the  number  of  years  that  he
reigned,  namely,  18. Thus  : —


Date  of  accession


Date  of
birth


wife's
birth


1848  1848  1848


A  somewhat  similar, — but,  as  will  be  seen,  far  less  remarkable, —
series  of  coincidences  is  to  be  found  in  the  life  history  of  Napoleon  III.,
who  became  Emperor  of  France  in  1852  and  abdicated  in  1870.  The
four  digits  of  the  corresponding  three  dates  in  his  life,  added  to  the
date  of  his  accession,  come  in  each  case  to  a  year  short  of  the  date  of
abdication;  that  is,  they  each  add  up  to  17,  which  is  one  less  than
the  number  of  years  that  he  reigned. Thus  : —

Date  of  accession  .. . 1852  1852  1852

n


j  g Date  of  j  g


Date  of 8  , 8 Date  of

,  .  , , -[r.  wife  s -  •

birth U  1-^1 2  marriage


8


1869  1869  1869


In  the  case  of  Louis  Philippe,  the  coincidences  consist  in  the  digits
of  all  the  three  dates  summing  up  to  a  given  number,  18.  This  number
may  be  said  to  be  "  given,"  because  it  is  obtained  independently  of  the
sum  of  the  digits,  namely,  from  the  length  of  the  reign.  Thus,  three
numbers,  taken  more  or  less  at  random,  are  all  equal  to  a  given
number.

In  the  case  of  Napoleon  III.,  the  three  numbers  are  all  equal  to
one  another,  but  are  not  equal  to  a  given  number ;  the  length  of  reign
is  18  years  and  the  digits  sum  up  to  17.  The  antecedent  improbability
of  their  summing  up  to  17  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  their  summing
up  to  18  (this  would  not  be  the  case  with  all  possible  sums  of  four
digits,  but  may  be  found  to  be  so  in  the  case  of  the  sums  17  and  18,
when  the  first  digit  is  1,  as  in  all  the  dates  now  being  considered).
But  17  only  happens  to  be  the  number  that  they  sum  up  to;  it  is
not  a  number  obtained  independently  of  them,  as  the  18  is  obtained  in
Louis  Philippe's  dates.

Q  2


218


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Taking  Louis  Philippe's  dates  we  may  first  consider  wliat  is  the
probability  that  the  digits  of  the  date  of  his  birth  should  sum  up  to
18.  As  he  came  to  the  throne  in  1830  he  must  have  been  born  either
in  the  18th  or  19th  century,  therefore  the  first  digit  must  be  1  and  the
second  7  or  8.  It  will  be  found  that  a  date  whose  digits  sum  up  to  18
occurs  once  in  every  ten  years  between  the  dates  1719  and  1890,
which  are  respectively  the  earliest  and  the  latest  dates  in  the  two
centuries  fulfilling  the  condition  required,  and  as  it  is  obvious  from  the
circumstances  of  the  case  that  the  birth  must  have  taken  place
between  these  limits,  the  probability  that  the  digits  would  sum  up  to
18  was  -"(J.  The  date  of  his  wife's  birth  and  of  their  marriage  must
also  have  come  within  these  limits,  so  that  the  probability  in  each  case
that  the  digits  would  sum  up  to  1 8  is  j^^,  and  the  probability  that  they
would  do  so  in  all  three  cases  is  y-y^y

Taking  Napoleon  III.'s  dates,  we  have  to  ask  what  is  the  proba-
bility that  the  digits  of  the  three  dates  should  all  add  up  to  the  same
number ;  or,  in  other  words,  what  is  the  probability  that  the  sum  of
the  digits  of  two  of  the  dates  should  both  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the
digits  of  the  third — this  sum  being  17.  A  date  whose  digits  sum  up
to  17  occurs  once  in  every  ten  years  between  1709  and  1880,  and  as,
from  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  both  dates  must  be  within  these
limits,  the  probability  is  in  each  case  and  the  probability  of  its
occurring  in  both  cases  is  y

A  little  consideration  will  show  that  the  particular  dates  involved
are  specially  favourable  ones  for  the  occurrence  of  these  coincidences.
In  each  series,  all  the  dates  must,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  fall
within  100  years  of  one  another.  Practically  then,  it  is  a  question  of
all  the  possible  sums  of  the  last  two  digits.  There  are  nineteen
possible  sums  (from  0  to  18  inclusive)  of  two  digits,  and  a  hundred
ditT'erent  ways  of  obtaining  them  ;  but  while  0  and  18  can  each  be
obtained  in  only  one  way,  so  that  the  probaljility  of  the  occurrence  of
each  of  them  is  y^^,  the  sums  that  can  be  obtained  most  frequently
are  9  (in  ten  different  ways),  and  8  and  10  (each  in  nine  different
ways).  Now  it  is  either  8,  9,  or  10 — the  chance  of  whose  occurrence
is  most  favourable  —that  is  required  as  the  sum  of  the  two  last  digits
in  all  the  dates  (since  the  first  two  digits  are  always  1  and  7  or  8)  to
make  the  four  digits  add  up  to  17  or  18.

If  any  ai'gument  is  needed  to  show  the  utter  iri'ationality  of
attaching  any  significance  to  coincidences  such  as  these,  one  might  be
furnished  by  observing  that  there  are  cases  in  which  they  could  not
possibly  occur.  Thus,  if  a  man  were  born  in  the  first  year  of  any
century,  say,  in  1800,  the  digits  of  the  date  of  his  birth  could  not
sum  up  to  the  same  as  the  digits  of  any  other  date  in  his  life,  but
must  always  fall  below  them;  or  if  he  were  born,  say, in  1799,  a


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


210


coincidence  would  be  almost  impossible,  as  it  could  not  occur  before
1889,  and  so  on.  •

Further  examples  of  a  similar  kind,  to  which  similar  reasoning  is
applicable,  are  to  be  found  in  the  following  passage,  wliich  is  taken
from  a  discussion  of  "fortuitous  coincidences"  in  Jevotis'  Principles
of  Science. (Third  Edition,  p.  263.)

Case  11.

In  historical  and  social  matters,  coincidences  are  frequently  pointed  out
which  are  due  to  chance,  although  there  is  always  a  strong  popular  tendency
to  regard  them  as  the  work  of  design,  or  as  having  some  hidden  meaning.
If  to  1794,  the  number  of  the  year  in  which  Robespierre  fell,  we  add  the
sum  of  its  digits,  the  result  is  1815,  the  year  in  which  Napoleon  fell ;  the
repetition  of  the  process  gives  1830,  the  year  in  which  Charles  the  Tenth
abdicated.  Again,  the  French  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  1830  consisted  of
402  members,  of  whom  221  formed  the  party  called  ''  La  queue  de  Robes-
pierre," while  the  remainder,  181  in  number,  were  named  "  Les  lionuetes
gens."  If  we  give  to  each  letter  a  numerical  value  corresponding  to  its
place  in  the  alphabet,  it  will  be  fi^und  that  the  sum  of  the  values  of  t1ie
letters  in  each  name  exactly  indicates  the  number  of  the  party.

The  remaining  cases  I  give  in  this  section  relate  to  "lucky"  events
of  greater  or  less  importance  to  the  persons  concerned.

Case  12.

The  lirst  is  a  case  of  scientific  discovery  being  hastened  by  a
fortunate  coincidence, — that  of  an  Egyptian  papyrus  and  a  Gi'eek
translation  of  the  same  papyrus  coming  into  the  hands  of  the  investi-
gator, Dr.  Thomas  Young,  through  two  independent  sources,  almost
at  the  same  time.  The  narrative  is  taken  from  Dr.  Young's
Account  of  some  recent  discoveries  in  Hieroglyphical  Literature  and
Ugyptiajt  Antiquities  (London,  1823).  He  was  engaged  in  1814
in  comparing  and  deciphering  the  two  forms  of  Egyptian  inscriptions
on  the  "  Pillar  of  Rosetta  "  (commonly  known  as  the  Rosetta  Stone).
He  had  made  some  progress  with  the  work,  and —

In  1821  he  discovered  "at  Leghorn  among  a  iriultitude  of  Egyptian
antiquities  belonging  to  Mr.  Drovetti,  the  French  Consul  at  Alexandria,  a
stone  containing  an  enchoriaP  and  a  Greek  inscription,  which  was  known  to
have  existed  formerly  at  Menouf,  but  which  had  been  lost  and  almost  forgotten
by  European  travellers  in  Egypt  and  I  believe  by  Mr.  Drovetti  himself."
Drovetti  refused  his  request  to  be  allowed  to  take  a  copy  of  this.  Soon  after
occurred  {op.  cit.,  p.  38)  "  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Casati  at  Paris,  with  a  parcel  of

1  Young  used  the  term  "  enchorial  "  because  this  form  of  writing  is  called  in  the
Oreek  Enchoria  Grammata.  Champollion  preferred  the  word  "demotic,"  or  writing
of  the  people,  and  the  latter  term  is  used  in  the  description  of  the  Rosetta  Stone  in
the  British  Musemn.


220


Alice  Johnson.


[part


manuscripts,  among  which  Mr.  ChampoUion  discovered  one  that  considerably
resembled,  in  its  preamble,  the  enchorial  text  of  the  Pillar  of  Rosetta  ; "
(p.  43)  "Mr.  ChampoUion  had  ascertained  the  analogy  of  one  of  the
manuscripts,  purchased  of  Casati,  to  the  enchorial  inscription  of  Rosetta,
and  he  had  obtained  from  it  without  difficulty,  the  mode  of  writing  the  name
Cleopatra  in  that  character.  He  did  not,  however,  then  mention  to  me  the
important  consequences  which  he  had  derived  from  this  discovery."  .

Later  came  (p.  55)  "  an  event  which  is  the  most  important,  considered  as  a
single  occurrence,  that  has  taken  place  since  the  commencement  of  my  Egyp-
tian researches.  It  was  very  soon  after  my  return  from  France  that  George
Francis  Grey,  Esq.,  of  University  College,  Oxford,  having  been  at  Naples
upon  his  return  from  Egypt,  .  .  .  had  the  kindness,  on  the  22nd  of
November  last,  to  leave  with  me  a  box  containing  several  fine  specimens  of
writing  and  drawing  on  papyrus  ;  they  were  chiefly  in  hieroglyphics,  and  of
a  mythological  nature  ;  but  the  two  which  he  had  before  described  to  me  a.s
particularly  deserving  attention,  and  which  were  brought,  through  his
judicious  precautions,  in  excellent  preservation,  both  contained  some  Greek
characters,  written  apparently  in  a  pretty  legible  hand.  He  had  purchased
them  of  an  Arab  at  Thebes,  in  January,  1820  ;  and  that  which  was  most
intelligible  liad  appeared,  at  first  sight,  to  contain  some  words  relating  to  the
service  of  the  Christian  church.

"  Mr.  ChampoUion  had  done  me  the  favour,  while  I  was  at  Paris,  to  copy
for  me  some  parts  of  the  very  important  papyrus,  which  I  have  before
mentioned  as  having  given  him  the  name  of  Cleopatra ;  and  of  which  the
discovery  was  certainly  a  great  event  in  Egyptian  literature,  since  it  was  the
first  time  that  any  intelligible  characters,  of  the  enchorial  form,  had  been
discovered  among  the  many  manuscripts  and  inscriptions  that  had  been
examined,  and  since  it  furnished  Mr.  ChampoUion  at  the  same  time  with  a
name  which  materially  advanced,  if  I  understood  him  rightly,  the  stejjs
that  have  led  him  to  his  very  important  extension  of  the  hieroglyphical
alphabet.  He  had  mentioned  to  me  in  conversation  the  names  of  ApoUoniitfi,
^Aidioclius,'  und  Ant igonus  as  occurring  among  the  witnesses  ;  and  I  easily
recognised  the  groups  which  he  had  deciphered  ;  although,  instead  of
Antiochus,  I  read  Antimachus,  and  I  did  not  recollect  at  the  time  that  lie
had  omitted  the  m.

"  In  the  evening  of  the  day  that  Mr.  Grey  had  brouglit  me  his  manuscripts
I  proceeded  impatiently  to  examine  that  which  was  in  Greek  only  ;  and  I
could  scarcely  believe  that  I  was  awake  and  in  my  sober  senses,  when  I
observed,  among  the  names  of  the  witnesses,  Antimachus  Antifjenis ;  and  a
few  lines  further  back,  Portis  Apollonii,  although  the  last  word  could  not
have  been  very  easily  deciphered,  without  the  assistance  of  the  conjecture,
which  immediately  occurred  to  me,  that  this  manuscript  might  perhaps  be  a
translation  of  the  enchorial  manuscrijat  of  Casati.  I  found  that  its  beginning
was  '  A  copy  of  an  Egyptian  writing  .  .  .  ; '  and  I  proceeded  to
ascertain  that  there  were  the  same  number  of  names  intervening  between  the
Greek  and  the  Egyptian  signatures  that  I  had  idexititied  and  that  the  .same
number  followed  the  last  of  them  ;  and  the  whole  number  of  witnesses
appeared  to  be  sixteen  in  each.  The  last  paragraph  in  the  Greek  began  with
the  words,  '  Copy  of  the  Registry  ; '  for  such  must  be  the  signification  of


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


221


the  word  n  T  fl  M  A  T  O  2,  employed  in  this  papyrus,  though  it  does  not
appear  to  occur  anywhere  else  in  a  similar  signification.  I  could  not,  there-
fore, but  conclude  that  a  most  extraordinary  chance  had  brought  into  my
possession  a  document  which  was  not  very  likely,  in  the  first  place,  ever  to
have  existed,  still  less  to  have  been  preserved  uninjured,  for  my  information,
through  a  period  of  near  two  thousand  years  ;  but  that  this  very  extra-
ordinary translation  should  have  been  brought  safely  to  Europe,  to  England
anil  to  me,  at  the  very  moment  when  it  was  most  of  all  desirable  to  me  to
possess  it,  as  the  illustration  of  an  original  which  I  was  then  studying,  but
without  any  other  reasonable  hope  of  being  able  fully  to  comprehend  it  ;
this  combination  would,  in  other  times,  have  been  considered  as  affording
ample  evidence  of  my  having  become  an  Egyptian  sorcerer.

"  Mr.  Champollion  had  not  tli(jught  it  worth  while  to  give  me  a  transcript
of  the  original  Greek  endorsement  ;  he  seemed  to  consider  it  as  not  fully
agreeing  with  the  Egyptian  text,  or  at  any  rate  not  materially  assisting  in
its  interpretation  :  .  .  .  [and]  after  an  accidental  delay  of  a  month,  the
answer  that  I  received  from  Paris  was  only  such  as  to  enable  me  to  state
that  my  opinion  of  the  identity  of  the  two  endorsements  is  fully  confirmed.
I  have  lost,  however,  no  time  in  sending  to  the  Conservators  of  the  King's
cabinet  a  copy  of  my  registry  ;  with  a  request  to  be  favoured  with  theirs  in
return  ....  in  order  that  the  duplicates  may  stand  side  by  side  in
the  lithographical  copy.  .  .  .  Bly  application  for  tlie  copy  of  the
Registry  has  been  received  with  the  liberality  which  was  to  be  expected
from  the  directors  of  a  great  institution,  and  I  have  to  return  my  best
thanks  to  Mr.  Raoul  Rochette  for  a  correct  copy  of  tlie  whole  of  this  highly
important  manuscript.

"The  contents  of  Mr.  Grey's  Greek  manuscript  are  of  a  nature  scarcely
less  remarkable  than  its  jjreservation  and  discovery  :  it  relates  to  the  sale,
not  of  a  house,  or  a  field,  but  of  a  portion  of  the  Collections  and  Offerings
made  from  time  to  time  on  account,  or  for  the  benefit,  of  a  certain  number
of  Mummies,  of  persons  described  at  length,  in  very  bad  Greek,  with  their
children  and  all  their  households.  The  price  is  not  very  clearly  expressed  ;
but  as  the  portion  sold  is  only  a  moiety  of  a  third  part  of  the  whole,  and  as
the  testimony  of  sixteen  witnesses  was  thought  necessary  on  the  occasion,
it  is  probable  that  the  revenue,  thus  obtained  by  the  priests,  was  by  no
means  inconsiderable.

"The  result  derived  at  once  from  this  comparison  is  the  identification  of
more  than  thirty  jjroper  names  as  they  were  written  in  the  running  hand  of
the  country.

"A  second  papyrus,  [obtained  by  Mr.  Grey]  of  considerably  greater
magnitude,  contains  three  Egyptian  conveyances  in  the  enchorial  chai-acter,
with  separate  registries  on  the  margin  in  very  legible  Greek.  These
.  .  .  .  afford  us  also  many  additional  examples  of  enchorial  proper  names,
besides  a  general  idea  of  the  subjects  of  the  respective  manuscripts,  all  of
which  relate  to  the  sale  of  lands  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Thebes."

On  pp.  69-75  of  the  book  Dr.  Young  gives  translations  of  "  the  enchorial
papyrus  of  Paris  containing  the  original  deed  relating  to  the  mummies  "  and
Mr.  Grey's  "Greek  Antigraph,"  which  begins, — "Copy  of  an  Egyptian
writing  respecting  the  dead  bodies  in  Thyn. . , ." On  comparing  these


222


A  lice  Johnson.


"[part


two  translations,  it  appears  that  the  Greek  is  a  slightly  abridged  copy  of  the
Egyptian  document,  the  preamble  ("in  the  reign  of  So-and-So  " — giving  a
list  of  kings,  priests,  and  gods)  being  omitted  ;  after  the  name  of  each  of
the  dead  persons,  the  phrase  "with  his  children  and  his  household"  found
in  the  Egyptian  is  mostly  omitted  in  the  Greek,  as  well  as  a  short  passage
which  seems  to  give  a  sort  of  summary  of  the  persons  after  enumerating
them.  The  Egyptian  document,  before  the  names  of  the  witnesses,  ends
thus: — "Executed  and  confirmed:  written  by  Horus  the  son  of  Phabis,
clerk  to  the  chief  priests  of  Amonrasonther  and  the  contemplar?  Gods,  of  the
Beneficent  Gods,  of  the  Father-loving  Gods,  of  the  Paternal  God  and  of  the
Mother-loving  Gods,  Amen  "  ;  while  the  Greek  says  merely — "  Written  by
Horus,  tlie  son  of  Phabis,  the  writer  of  the  Qjriests]  of  Amoiirasonther  and
the  other  gods  of  the  Temple."  The  main  parts  of  the  documents,  however,
judging  from  the  translations,  undoubtedly  correspond  so  closely  that  there
can  be  no  question  that  the  Greek  is  a  translation  of  the  Egyptian.

The  date  uf  the  documents  was  supposed  by  Dr.  Young  to  be  from
146—135  B.C.

The  probability  of  occurrence  of  this  coincidence  may,  I  think,  be
taken  as  equivalent  to  the  probability  that  an  MS.  taken  at  random
out  of  all  the  MSS.  so  far  discovered  in  Egypt  should  turn  out  to  be  a
Greek  translation  of  a  given  demotic  MS.

Greek  being  the  official  language  in  Egypt  at  the  date  when  the
MS.  was  written,  legal  documents  would  often  have  been  written  in  it;
and  if  one  of  the  conti'acting  parties  did  not  understand  the  language
of  the  other,  which  might  often  be  the  case,  the  document  woukl
probably  be  duplicated  in  the  two  languages.  Of  course  only  a  small
proportion  of  these  legal  documents  would  be  preserved  up  to  the
present  century.  But  it  is  practically  certain  that,  when  they  wei'e
duplicated,  the  duplicates  would  have  been  originally  kept  together  in
the  same  archives  (see  Mr.  Griffith's  letter,  below),  so  that,  when  first
unearthed,  they  would  be  unearthed  together,  and  if  one  was  pre-
served, jjrobably  both  would  be.  Therefore  Dr.  Young's  duplicates
were  almost  certainly  included  originally  in  the  same  find  and
separated  later.

Now,  if  the  duplicates  had  been  kept  separate  to  begin  with,  so
that  one  of  them  might  have  been  preserved  and  the  other  not,  the
chance  that  one  document  found  in  Egypt  should  turn  out  to  be  the
duplicate  or  translation  of  a  certain  other  one  would  depend  on  the
total  number  of  documents  of  all  kinds  that  had  ever  existed  in  Egypt,
and  would  thus  be  very  small.  But  since,  as  just  remarked,  it  is  pretty
certain  that  both  duplicates  or  neither  would  be  preserved  and  found,
the  chance  depends  practically  on  the  total  number  of  documents  of  all
kinds  that  had  been  found  in  Egypt  at  that  date  (about  1820),  and  is
thus  comparatively  large.  By  the  word  "found,"  I  mean  merely
unearthed  and  preserved.  'I  do  not  mean  to  imply  necessarily  that


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


223


any  discovery  had  been  made  of  the  nature  of  the  documents,  or  even
of  the  language  in  which  they  were  written,  but  only  that — whether  in
the  hands  of  investigators  or  dealers  —  they  formed  part  of  the  total
material  then  accessible  for  study.  Probably  no  one  knew  at  that
time  that  any  of  the  Greek  MSS.  were  translations.

The  chance  in  question  may,  then,  be  expressed  as  follows  : —
Let  e  be  the  number  of  documents  in  the  Egyptian  language  that
had  been  found,  of  which  i  had  been  translated  into  Greek  and  ex
Aypoihesi  found,  and  g  the  number  of  Greek  documents  —  not  transla-
tions— which  had  been  found. Then  the  chance  that  there  had  ever

been  a  translation  of  a  given  Egyptian  document  is  —  and  the  chance
that  a  particular  document  taken  at  random  out  of  all  the  documents

found  should  be  the  translation  in  question  is  that  is,  it

e{e+g  +  t),

increases  with  the  extent  to  which  translations  were  made,  and
decreases  with  the  extent  to  which  documents  of  all  kinds  had  been

found. It  cannot  possibly  be  greater  than ^  this  being  the

e  +  g  +  t,

value  on  tlie  extreme  supposition  that  all  Egyptian  documents  had
been  translated,  in  which  case  t  =  e,  and  the  chance  then  depends
merely  on  the  total  number  of  documents  found.  Actually,  no  doubt,
t  is  considerably  less  than  e  and  the  chance  is  decreased  accordingly.

In  considering  this  problem,  it  may  appear  at  first  sight  that  the
Greek  MS.  was  not  taken  at  i-andom  at  all,  as  Grey  had  specially
drawn  Young's  attention  to  it.  But  there  was  no  idea  on  the  part  of
either  of  them  that  it  might  turn  out  to  be  a  translation ;  from  the
point  of  view  of  its  being  such,  it  was  quite  at  random  that  Young
examined  it  first  out  of  all  those  that  Grey  had  sent  him.

From  the  same  jioint  of  \'iew,  it  was,  as  it  seems  to  me,  quite  at
random  that  the  MS.  to  which  attention  was  drawn  was  a  Greek  MS.
And  for  this  reason  I  have  treated  it  simply  as  an  MS.  taken  at
random.  But  if  it  be  considered  that  this  view  is  not  legitimate,  we
should  then  have  to  regard  it  as  a  Greek  MS.  taken  at  randoin,  which
of  course  increases  the  probability  of  its  turning  out  a  translation.
Using  the  same  notation  as  before,  the  chance  may  be  expressed  as
follows  : —

The  chance  that  there  had  ever  been  a  translation  of  a  given

Egyptian  document  is,  as  before,  — ^ The  chance  that  a  particular

e.

document  taken  at  random  out  oi  g  +  t  Greek  documents  should  be

the  translation  is ^ If  g  =  0,  that  is,  if  there  are  no  Greek

e{g  +  t).


22i


Alice  Johnmn.


[part


documents  except  translations,  (which,  of  course,  is  infinitely  far  from
fact)  the  chance  is  simply  -3—  that  is,  depends  only  on  the  number  of

Egyptian  documents  and  is  independent  of  the  number  of  translations
that  were  made.  Otherwise,  it  depends  on  t  and  increases  as  t
increases.  On  the  extreme  supposition  that  t  =  e,  that  is,  that  every
Egyptian  document  was  translated  (likewise  utterly  contrary  to  fact),

the  chance  is  simply  — that  is,  depends  merely  on  the  number

of  Greek  documents. These  two  formula,  —  and  — ^ —  give  the

e  y  +  t,

greatest  possible  values  of  the  fraction,  —  being  the  case  in  which  the

e

denominator  is  as  small  as  possible  and  — ^  that  in  which  the

g  +  t

numerator  is  as  large  as  possible.

It  is  important  to  note,  further,  that  the  chance  of  the  duplicates
coming  together  again,  after  having  been  once  separated,  depended
largely  on  the  number  of  places  in  which  any  exploration  had  been
made.  Obviously,  the  fewer  places  had  been  explored,  the  greater  is
the  chance  of  the  reunion  of  the  duplicates.  It  seems  possible  (see
below)  that  only  two  places  had  been  explored  then,  so  that  the
chance  was  much  increased  by  this.

In  whatever  form  the  jiroblem  be  stated,  there  are,  unfortunately,
too  many  unknown  quantities  in  it  to  admit  of  an  exact  solution.
However,  through  the  courtesy  of  Professor  Ernest  Gardner,  I  was  put
into  communication  with  Mr.  F.  L.  Griffith  (Editor  of  the  Archseo-
logical  Survey  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund),  who  is  well-known  as
the  leading  authority  on  Egyptian  manuscripts,  and  who  has  very
kindly  given  me  what  information  is  available  towards  the  solution.
He  writes  : —

Riversvale,  Ashton-under-Lyne,  Auc/vst  21st,  1898.

The  cohicidence  you  treat  of,  wonderful  as  it  seems,  is  by  no  means  so
extraordinary  as  ib  appears  at  first  sight.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  copy  or
"anfcigraph"  in  Greek  would  be  kept  with  the  original  demotic.  The  latter
was  the  real  instrument,  tlie  former  was  only  intended  to  make  it  intelligible
to  the  Greek  officials,  etc.,  and  naturally  they  would  be  kept  together.  The
Greek  antigraphs,  of  which  several  are  known,  are  more  or  less  abbreviated  ;
the  example  in  question  is  singularly  full.  Of  course  these  bilinguals  only
exist  for  a  short  period  under  the  Ptolemies  and  Roman  emperoi-s  and  form
only  a  minute  p<n'tion  of  the  MS.  documents  from  Egypt.

It  was  very  usual  to  endorse  demotic  documents  in  Greek  giving  a  brief
indication  of  tlie  contents ;  the  Greek  documents  themselves  were  likewise
endorsed  in  Greek.

I  am  afraid  I  could  give  no  estimate  of  the  number  of  Greek  translations,
Greek  originals,  or  of  the  total  number  of  MSS.  from  Egypt  discovered  and


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


225


preserved  down  to  1820,  unless  indeed  after  long  research,  which  I  must  not
undertake  now.  The  trade  in  antiquities  and  papyri  was  then  very  active,
and  while  very  few  lists  existed  of  the  collections,  numbers  of  objects  were
being  hawked  about  or  brought  home  by  travellers.

■ F.  LI.  Gkiffith.

P.S. — Unfortunately,  "unearthing"  documents  did  not  always  lead  to
their  preservation.  Except  in  the  few  places  where  their  value  was
understood,  they  were  burnt  or  thrown  away.

There  was  no  systematic  exploration  in  Egyj^t  before  1820,  but  Thebes
was  tlie  hunting  ground  and  next  to  it  Memphis.  I  doubt  whether
documents  were  preserved  from  any  other  sites  at  that  time.

Case  13.

With  the  foregoing  we  may  compare  another  instance  of  quite  a
different  kind  taken  from  the  history  of  Astronomy,  where  two
independent  discoveries,  completed  almost  at  the  same  time,  led  to
results  correlated  to  one  another  in  an  important  way.

The  account  is  taken  from  an  article  on  "  Coincidences  and
Superstitions in  the  Cornhill  Magazine,  Vol.  XXVI.  C.July  to
December,  1872),  pp.  684  et  seq.  The  article  in  the  Cornhill
Magazine  is  unsigned,  but  is  reprinted  under  the  same  title  in
Knowledge,  Vol.  V.  (1884),  the  authorship  being  there  disclosed  as
that  of  R.  A.  Proctor. He  writes  : —

The  history  of  Astronomy  has  in  quite  recent  times  afforded  a  very
remarkable  instance  of  repeated  coincidences.  We  refer  to  the  researches
by  which  the  theory  has  been  established  that  meteors  and  comets  are  so  far
associated  that  meteor  systems  travel  in  the  track  of  comets.  It  will  readily
be  seen  from  the  following  statements  ....  that  the  demonstration
of  this  theory  must  be  regarded  as  partly  due  to  singular  good  fortune  ; —

There  are  two  very  remarkable  meteor  systems — the  system  which
produces  the  November  shooting-stars,  or  Leonides,  and  that  which  produces-
the  August  sliooting-stars,  or  Fersekles.  It  chanced  that  the  year  186G'
was  the  time  when  a  great  display  of  November  meteors  was  expected  l)y
astronomers.  Hence,  in  the  years  18(55  and  18G(3,  considerable  attention
was  directed  to  the  whole  subject  of  shooting-stars.  Moreover,  so  many
astronomers  watched  the  display  of  1866,  that  very  exact  information  was  for
the  first  time  obtained  as  to  the  apparent  track  of  these  meteors.  It  is
necessary  to  mention  that  such  information  was  essential  to  success  in  the
main  inquiry.  Now  it  had  chanced  that  in  1862  a  fine  comet  had  been  seen,
whose  path  approached  the  earth's  path  very  closely  indeed.  This  led  the
Italian  astronomer  Schiaparelli  to  inquire  whether  there  might  not  be  some
connection  between  this  comet  and  the  August  shooting-stars,  which  cross
the  earth's  path  at  the  same  place.  He  was  able,  by  comparing  the  path  of
the  comet  and  the  apparent  jjaths  of  the  meteors,  to  render  this  opinion
highly  probable.  Their  came  inquiries  into  the  real  patlis  of  the  November
meteors,  these  in(;[uiries  being  rendered  just  practicable  by  several  coinci-
dences, as — (1)  the  exact  observations  just  mentioned  ;  (2)  the  existence  of


226


Alice  Johnson.


[part


certain  old  accounts  of  the  meteor  shower  ;  (3)  the  wonderful  mastery
obtained  by  Professor  Adams  over  all  problems  of  perturbation  (for  the
question  depended  on  the  way  in  which  the  November  meteors  had  been
perturbed)  ;  and  (4)  the  existence  of  a  half-forgotten  treatise  by  Gauss,
supplying  formulae  which  reduced  Adams'  labours  by  one-half.  The  path
having  been  determined  by  Adains  ....  the  whole  question  rested  on
the  recognition  of  a  comet  travelling  in  the  same  path.  If  such  a  comet  were
found,  Schiaparelli's  case  was  made  out.  If  not,  then,  though  the  evidence
might  be  convincing  to  mathematicians  well  grounded  in  the  theory  of
probabilities,  yet  it  was  all  but  certain  that  Schiaparelli's  theory  would
presently  sink  into  oblivion.  Now  there  are  j)robably  hundreds  of  comets
which  have  a  period  of  33^  years,  but  very  few  are  known— only  three
certainly — and  one  of  these  had  only  just  been  discovered  when  Adams'  results
were  announced.  The  odds  were  enormous  against  the  required  comet  being
known,  and  yet  greater  against  its  having  been  so  well  watched  that  its  true
path  had  been  ascertained.  Yet  the  comet  which  had  been  discovered  in
that  very  year  1866 — the  comet  called  Tempel's,  or  I.  1866 — was  the  very
comet  required  to  establish  Schiaparelli's  theory.  Their  was  the  path  of  the
meteors  assigned  by  Adams,  and  the  path  of  the  comet  had  been  already
calculated  by  Tempel  before  Adams'  result  had  been  announced  ;  and  these
two  paths  were  found  to  be  to  all  intents  and  purposes  (with  an  accuracy  far
exceeding  indeed  the  requirements  of  the  case)  identical.

Case  14.

The  next  case,  referring  to  a  curiously  lucky  little  incident,  was
contributed  to  Azotes  and  Queries  in  1895  (8th  Series,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.
270),  by  Mr.  C.  J.  Feret,  F.R.G.S.,  F.R.  Hist.  Soc,  author  of  an
exhaustive  history  of  the  parish  of  Fulharn,  which  is  about  to  be
published  under  the  title  of  FuAliam  Old  and  New.

Mr.  Feret  writes  : —

49,  Edith  Road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Christmas,  1892,  I  spent  at  Southsea.  One  day  I  wanted  to  get
some  envelopes  of  a  somewhat  unusual  size.  I  tried  some  dozen  stationers'
shops  in  the  town,  but  not  one  could  supply  me.  I  gave  up  my  quest  in
despair  and  was  returning  home  to  dinner.  I  had  nearly  reached  the  top  of
Palmerston  Road  when  I  saw  a  small  parcel  lying  on  the  pavement.  I
picked  it  up,  and,  as  it  bore  no  printed  address  of  a  shop,  I  took  it  back
with  me  to  my  apartments.  You  may  judge  my  astonishment  when,  on
opening  it,  I  found  it  to  contain  a  packet  of  twenty-live  envelopes  of  the
precise  size  for  which  I  had  fruitlessly  enquired  !  My  sister,  who  was  with
me  at  the  time,  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this  incident.

Chas.  Jas.  Fi;RET.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Feret  asking  for  his  sister's  recollections  of  the
incident,  which  she  has  kindly  sent  me.
8he  writes  : —

49,  Edith  Road,  West  Kensington,  April  mh,  1898.
My  dear  Madam, — I  have  referred  to  the  paragraph  in  Notes  and.
Queries  wliich  my  brother  wrote. It  is  perfectly  accurate  in  every  detail.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


227


My  brother  and  I,  after  having  failed  to  get  the  envelopes  we  wanted
(rather  an  extra  size),  were  returning  home  to  dine.  Just  as  we  were  cross-
ing the  Palmerston  Road  to  go  down  Marmion  Road  I  noticed  a  small
parcel  on  the  pavement.  I  picked  it  up,  but  as  there  was  no  name  on  the
packet  and  no  one  seemed  to  be  looking  out  for  anything  lost  we  took  it
home  and  there  opened  it.  As  we  could  hear  of  no  owner,  and  the  packet
afforded  no  clue,  we  used  them,  as  they  were  precisely  what  we  wanted.
We  have  often  talked  about  it.  A  stranger  coincidence,  escej^t  in  the
realm  of  fiction,  it  would  be  impossible  to  conceive.  I  hope  these  facts  may
be  of  use  to  you. — Yours  faithfully,  q Ad^le  FiiRET

The  next  case  relates  to  the  finding  of  a  lost  object,  much  valued
by  its  owners.

Case  15.

The  account  appeared  in  The  Spectator  of  August  27th,  1898,
among  "Letters  to  the  Editor,"  under  the  title  of  "The  Romance  of
a  Ring."

Waldron  Rectory,  Sussex,  August  22nd.

Many  years  ago,  when  at  Oxford,  my  father  gave  me  as  a
heirloom  a  ring  presented  to  him  by  an  old  friend,  and  bearing  an  inscription
stating  that  it  contained  the  hair  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  This  ring  I
gave  to  my  wife  on  our  marriage  in  1876.  In  October,  1879,  when  we  were  on
a  visit  to  Mr.  W.  Arkwright,  of  Sutton  Scarsdale,  my  wife  felt  the  ring  slip
off  her  finger  at  the  dinner-table,  and  although  careful  search  was  made,
nothing  more  was  seen  or  heard  of  it  for  eigliteen  years,  so  far  as  we  were
concerned.

At  the  commencement  of  this  year,  however,  my  wife  received  a  letter
from  her  half-sister  (Mrs.  Hodge)  in  New  Zealand,  which  stated  incidentally
that  a  church  in  which  she  was  interested  out  there  had  received  unexpected
help  some  years  ago  from  a  curious  source.  Her  sister  (Miss  White)  had
sent  out  from  England  at  her  request  some  gloves  purchased  at  Side's  [a
London  shop],  and  on  trying  on  a  pair  of  these  gloves  she,  to  her  astonish-
ment, found  inside  one  of  them  a  ring  containing  the  hair  of  the  Duke
of  Wellington,  which  had  evidently  been  drawn  off  the  finger  unconsciously
by  some  one  trying  on  the  glove  at  Bide's.  Unable  to  find  the  owner  of  the
ring  and  not  liking  to  keep  it,  Mrs.  Hodge  thought  it  would  be  a  fair  thing
to  sell  it  and  apply  the  proceeds  to  the  church  fund.  She  did  so  and  the
purchaser  was  a  Mr.  Frank  Arkwright,  of  Overton,  Marston,  New  Zealand,
whose  grandmother  had  given  the  ring  to  my  father,  and  who  has  most
kindly  replaced  it  in  my  possession.

Now,  here  are  a  series  of  coincidences  which  are  only  likely  to  happen
once  in  a  life-time.  That  of  all  the  thousands  of  people  who  purchase  gloves
my  wife's  half-sister  should  have  lighted  upon  this  particular  pair  and,
unknown  to  herself  and  to  Bide,  should  have  sent  out  this  ring  in  them  to
her  sister  in  the  Antipodes,  and  that  there  it  should  have  been  recovered  in
the  house  of  a  cousin  of  the  Mr.  Arkwright  in  whose  house  it  had  been  lost
eighteen  years  ago,  surely  goes  to  show  that  sometimes,  at  any  rate,  truth  is


228


Alice  Johnson.


[part


stranger  than  fiction,  As  a  minor  coincidence  I  may  perhaps  mention  that
the  letter  which,  by  the  merest  chance,  happened  to  mention  the  finding  of
the  ring,  was  dated  from  WelHngton,  in  New  Zealand. — I  am,  sir,  etc.,

W.  J.  Humble-Crofts.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Humble-Crofts,  asking  if  any  corroboration  of  this
account  was  obtainable,  and  he  replied  : —

Waldron  Rectory,  Sussex,  September  Wth,  1898.

I  shall  be  glad  to  put  you  in  possession  of  any  information  you  may
require  as  to  the  ring,  and  my  wife  is,  of  course,  quite  willing  to  corroborate
what  I  say  and  to  copy  the  extract  from  Mrs.  Hodge's  letter  which  first
informed  us  of  the  discovery.

But  I  do  not  see  how  this  would  help  you,  as  Mrs.  Hodge  had  no  know-
ledge of  the  fact  that  we  had  lost  any  ring,  and  the  reason  why  she  happened
to  mention  it  (which  she  would  not  have  done  otherwise)  was  that  my  wife
had  sent  out  some  little  help  towards  the  church  in  which  Mrs.  Hodge  was
interested.  In  acknowledging  this,  she  proceeded  to  state  what  a  curious
;iddition  they  had  received  to  their  church  fund.

W.  J.  Humble-Crofts.

Mrs.  Humble-Crofts  wrote  to  me  later  : —

Waldron  Rectory,  Sussex,  October  llth  [1898].
I  beg  to  enclose  copy  of  extract  from  letter  received  by  me  from  my
half-sister  in  New  Zealand,  and  also  extract  from  letter  from  the  other  half-
sister  in  London  about  the  lost  ring.  I  also  corroborate  all  the  statements
made  in  the  account  of  the  loss  and  recovery  of  the  ring,  as  given  in  the
S2}ectator.

B.  Humble-Crofts.

The  copies  enclosed  were  as  follows  : —

Copy  of  letter  written  by  Mrs.  Hodge,  December  19th,  1897.

"  We  are  hoping  to  get  our  church  built  by  the  end  of  February. I  am

now  collecting  for  the  organ,  and  sold  a  ring,  which  I  daresay  D will

remember  came  out  by  a  strange  chance  in  one  of  the  boxes  she  sent  me
long  ago,  and  which  belonged  to  the  Arkwrights,  and  contained  the  Duke  of
Wellington's  hair.

"  Mr.  Arkwright,  who  is  out  here,  was  very  pleased  to  get  it,  and  sent
me  £5  for  it,  which  I  shall  place  to  the  Organ  Fund."

Copy  of  letter  ivritten  by  Miss  White  (sister  of  Mrs.  Hodge,  and  half-sister  of
Mrs.  Hnmble-Grofts),  dated  January  31st,  1898.

"The  history  of  that  ring  I  remember ^'ej/ec^Zy,  and  it  was  this  : —

"  B  and  L  wrote  asking  me  to  send  out  one  dozen  kid  gloves.  I

was  in  London,  and  went  to  Byde's  glove  shop.  North  Audley-street,  chose

a  dozen  of  gloves,  and  sent  them  out  to  New  Zealand. When  L  tried

them  on,  behold  in  one  pair  was  this  ring.  Some  one  buying  gloves  at  Byde's


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


229


must  have  been  trying  them  on,  and  left  the  ring  in  the  gloves.  I  wonder
who  that  could  have  been  ?  "

The  next  case  relates  to  a  matter  of  still  greater  urgency,  and,  as
will  be  seen,  admits  of  being  explained  by  telepathy.

Case  16.

The  account  is  an  extract  from  a  narrative  printed  in  the  Joivrnal
S.P.R.  for  July,  1898,  under  the  title  of  "Three  Generations  of
Psychical  Faculty."  Professor  Lodge,  who  obtained  the  account,
says: — "The  following  narrative  has  beeii  recently  written  by  a
gentleman  well  known  to  me,  an  active  clergyman  of  the  Church  of
England.  Of  his  good  faith  thei'e  can  be  no  doubt,  and  the  narra-
tive may,  I  believe,  be  regarded  as  substantially  accurate."  Several
incidents  are  described,  and  the  writer  continues  : —

.  These  curious  experiences  generally  occur  in  groups,  and  are
simultaneous  with  the  close  of  a  period  of  excessive  mental  activity.  A
very  singular  one  occurred  last  January,  when  I  went  to  D.  with  my  wife
for  a  few  days'  quiet.  While  there,  I  remembered  that  E.  was  in  the
neighbourhood,  where  I  had  a  cousin  residing,  a  brother  of  a  distinguished
artist,  and  that  he  had  written  to  me  some  time  before  about  a  j^icture  of
his  brother's,  which  he  wanted  to  sell.  I  at  once  resolved  to  ride  over  next
morning.  Upon  enquiry  from  the  manager  of  the  hotel,  I  learnt  that  the
road  was  bad,  the  weather  unpromising,  other  directions  more  interesting.
But  I  stuck  to  my  purpose  and  went,  through  the  road  was  atrocious,  and,
within  three  or  four  miles  of  my  goal,  I  was  so  dead  beat  that  I  almost
turned  back.

However,  I  reasoned  with  myself  that  I  might  perhaps  never  have  the
chance  of  seeing  my  cousin  again,  and  that  I  might  even  find  him  in  some
great  need  of  my  help.  I  continued  my  journey,  found  out  his  cottage  and
knocked  at  the  door.  He  opened  it  himself  and  said,  without  showing  any
surprise  at  my  appearance,  "It's  very  good  of  you  to  come  so  promptly,
but  I  didn't  expect  you  to-day."  "  Why  did  you  expect  me  at  all  ? "  I  said.
"Haven't  you  got  my  letter  ?"  he  replied,  "I  wrote  to  you  last  night."
"  To  W.  ? "  I  said.  "Yes,"  he  answered.  "  But  I  am  staying  at  D.,  and
have  had  no  letter,"  I  said.  He  then  took  me  in,  and,  to  make  a  long  story
short,  I  found  him  in  very  great  distress,  and  my  coming  on  the  scene  really
proved  a  sort  of  lifebuoy  to  a  drowning  man.

Through  the  kindness  of  Professor  Lodge,  I  was  put  into  com-
munication with  the  writer,  who  replied  to  my  enquiries  :  —

July  24th,  1898.

.  Fortunately,  I  made  notes  at  the  time  of  all  the  incidents
referred  to.  .  .  .  As  regards  my  cousin,  I  had  certainly  no  idea  that  he
was  in  trouble.  His  letter  was  addressed  to  me  at  [the  writer's  home],  and
he  had  no  knowledge  that  I  was  at  [D]. I  have  his  letter  somewhere,  but

cannot  lay  my  hands  upon  it  at  the  moment. Mrs. was  quite  as  much

jstruck  with  this  coincidence  as  I  was.  ...


230


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mr. was  unable  to  send  me  his  notes,  as  they  were  embedded

in  manuscript  relating  to  other  matters  ;  but  Mrs.  - — —  kindly  sent
the  following  corroborative  statement  : —

July  25th,  1898.

Dear  Madam, — I  have  much  pleasure  in  endorsing  my  husband's
account  of  the  coincidences  recorded  since  our  marriage.

The  call  on  his  cousin  from  [D]  was  made  last  January,  so  is  quite  recent,
and  clearly  in  our  minds.

[Signed  in  full] .

A  case  very  similar  to  this,  but  involving  a  more  strongly  marked
coincidence,  is  related  by  Bt.  Major  Kobbe,  U.S.  Array  (see  Pliantasms
of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  288).  While  at  home  in  New  Yotk  city  he
felt  a  sudden  desire  one  day  to  visit  a  cemetery  some  six  or  seven  miles
distant,  on  Long  Island,  where  his  family  owned  a  vault.  None  of
them  had  ever  been  accustomed  to  go  there  and  there  was  no  reason  at
all  to  suggest  the  idea  to  him  ;  but  on  arriving,  he  found  his  father
standing  at  an  open  grave,  in  which  he  had  just  had  placed  the  remains
of  an  infant  son  who  had  died  before  Major  Kobbe's  birth  ;  the  remains
having  been  removed  from  the  vault  of  the  new  grave.  It  appeared
that  the  father  had  left  a  message  at  home  for  him  to  meet  him  there
just  at  that  time,  but  he  had  not  gone  home  and  consequently  had  not
received  the  message.

Mr.  Gurney  prefixes  this  case  by  the  caution  that  "it  is  scarcely  too
much  to  say  that  cases  of  this  character,  in  whatever  number  accumu-
lated, could  never  decisively  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  accident."

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  following
case,  which  m&j  also  be  explained  as  due  to  telepathy.  But  I  place  it
here  because,  among  all  those  I  have  come  across  in  this  connection,
it  is  the  one  that  seems  to  me  most  strongly  to  suggest  a  special
intervention.

Case  17.  •  .

The  account  was  obtained  by  Professor  Lodge,  who  writes  : —

(Jctober  18th,  1896.

The  enclosed  statement  is  the  record  of  what  was  carefully  and  precisely
told  me  yesterday  by  the  son  of  the  old  lady,  who  calls  himself  C.  B.  in  the
narrative,  a  personal  friend  of  mine.  He  is  a  solicitor  (and  a  recent  M.P. )
and  thoroughly  understands  about  evidence.  He  is  an  ideal  witness,  but  is
doubtful  'vvhether  it  is  worth  recording.  It  may  be  considered  either  a
coincidence,  or  a  teleijathic  leading,  or  an  answer  to  prayer.  ^  s  a  coinci-
dence, the  chances  are  remarkably  heavy  against  it.

C.  B.'s  account  is  as  follows  : —

At  the  beginning  of  the  pi-esent  year,  1896,  after  fifty-two  years  of  ideal
married  life,  A.  B.  lost  her  husband,  n,  clergyman  then  in  his  eighty-first


xxxy.]


Coincidences.


231


year.  For  some  time  before  her  husband's  death,  she  had  shown  signs  of
failing  memory,  but  not  in  any  remarkable  degree.  Immediately  upon  his
death,  her  memory  began  to  show  signs  of  failure,  which  increased  very
rapidly.  Soon  after  the  death,  A.  B.  was  taken  from  the  provincial  town
in  which  she  had  lived  to  live  in  London  (Kensington)  with  her  sister.  By
the  16th  May,  1896,  the  date  which  is  important  for  the  present  purpose,
A.  B.  had  failed  so  much  that  she  was  not  always  aware  that  she  had  left  her
old  home,  often  fancied  she  was  there  or  elsewhere  in  her  old  town.  She  was
quite  incapable  of  finding  her  way  from  one  part  of  London  to  another,  and
unable  to  state  her  own  address  in  London.  On  the  morning  of  16th  May
at  10  a.m.,  she  left  her  house  alone,  carrying  a  parcel  which  she  intended  to
leave  at  a  shop  a  very  short  distance  off.  I  believe  her  sister  was  unaware
of  her  intention,  and  it  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  the  servants  that,
as  the  distance  was  so  short,  there  would  be  any  risk  of  loss  of  way.

At  9.30  p.m.,  C.  B.,  one  of  the  three  sons  of  A.  B.,  arrived  at  his  house
in  London,  having  travelled  up  from  the  country.  He  there  met  his  sister-
in-law,  wife  of  another  son  of  A.  B.  She  informed  him  that  A.  B.  had  left
home  at  10  a.m.  under  the  circumstances  stated  and  had  not  been  heard  of
since  ;  that  in  the  meantime  her  husband  and  liis  brother  had  communicated
with  Scotland  Yard,  and  with  the  district  police  office,  giving  a  description  of
A.  B.  ;  that  the  description  had  been  duly  circulated  throughout  the  Metro-
politan District  ;  that  communications  had  been  sent  to  all  the  London
hospitals  ;  and  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  police  authorities  nothing  further
could  be  done.

C.  B.  (that  is,  the  son  who  had  arrived  in  London)  waited  for  a  few
moments  until  his  wife  came  hi.  When  she  came  in,  the  three  people  (that
is,  C.  B.,  his  wife,  and  his  sister-in-law)  drove  first  to  A.  B.'s  house.  They
saw  there  A.  B.'s  sister  and  the  servants,  but  learnt  nothing  more  than  the
facts  already  stated.

C.  B.  went  to  the  local  police-station  with  his  wife,  and  found  that  all  the
notices  had  been  properly  circulated.  He  asked  the  Chief  Inspector  whether
any  useful  purpose  could  possibly  be  served  by  going  to  Scotland  Yard.
The  Inspector  said  it  would  be  useless,  as  the  system  was  such  that  if  news
of  the  missing  lady  were  known  at  one  police  office,  all  the  other  offices
would  instantly  be  made  aware  of  it.

C.  B.  then  went  with  his  wife  to  the  house  of  his  brother,  quite  close  to
where  A.  B.  lives.  He  found  that  his  brother  was  then  receiving  telegrams
from  various  hospitals  saying  that  they  had  seen  nothing  of  A.  B.

By  this  time  it  was  past  10  p.m.  C.  B.  liad  no  idea  that  anything  further
could  be  done.  He  thought  that  all  that  remained  was  to  await  news,  and
never  expected  to  see  his  mother  alive  again  ;  but  as  under  these  circum-
stances no  rest  is  to  be  had  by  sitting  still,  he  said  to  his  wife  that  he
intended  to  take  the  Underground  Railway  to  Westminster,  and  to  call  at
Scotland  Yard.  He  thought  it  possible  that  he  might  lind  some  official  in
high  authority  who  would  give  him  some  ideas  based  upon  wide  experience.
C.  B.'s  wife  offered  to  accompany  him.  Accordingly  these  two  people  went
to  Westminster  Bridge.

On  leaving  the  station  C.  B.  asked  a  porter  the  way  to  Scotland  Yard,  for
the  purpose  of  making  enquiry  as  to  a  missing  person. The  porter  directed


232


Alice  Johnson.


[part


him  to  go  on  to  the  Embankment,  the  Thames  Embankment,  and  to  take  the
second  street  to  the  left.  C.  B.  and  his  wife  went  along  the  Embankment
and  took  what  they  thought  was  the  second  street  to  the  left.  It  was  in  fact
the  third  turn,  so  that  they  were  in  error.  On  taking  the  turn  they  could
see  nothing  of  Scotland  Yard  and  they  called  at  a  large  block  of  flats  and
asked  the  porter  the  same  question  as  tliat  put  to  the  railway  porter.  He
told  them  to  go  straight  on  into  Parliament  Street  and  then  to  turn  to  one
side,  C.  B.  forgets  wliether  to  the  right  or  left.  They  followed  the  direction
and  found  themselves  in  Parliament  Street,  Westuainster  clock  then  striking
eleven.  C.  B.  saw  a  young  man  passing  along  Parliament  Street  and  turned
after  him  a  few  paces  in  order  to  find  out  whether  he  should  turn  to  the  left
or  the  right.  The  young  man  pointed  in  the  right  direction.  C.  B.  then
turned  round  to  tell  his  wife,  who  was  a  few  paces  behind,  and  saw  her  then
talking  to  A.  B.

A.  B.  was  then  taken  back  to  her  own  home,  a  distance  of  about  four
miles.  She  could  give  no  account  oF  herself.  The  parcel  she  started  with
in  the  morning  was  still  in  her  liands.  She  tliought  she  had  been  twice  in
church.  She  thought  she  had  been  to  the  docks,  evidently  confusing  the
river  at  Westminster  Bridge  with  docks  in  her  old  town.  She  was  not  aware
that  she  was  not  in  her  old  town  until  the  lamps  were  lighted.  She  then
realised  that  she  was  lost,  but  I  believe  she  did  not  know  then  that  she  was
lost  in  London.  Her  purse  contained  no  money,  but  it  did  contain  two
tickets,  showing  that  she  had  been  first  to  Tottenham  Court  Road,  and
afterwards  to  Charing  Cross.  On  meeting  C.  B.,  A.  B.  said  she  had  never
prayed  so  earnestly  in  her  life,  that  "one  of  you,"  meaning  one  of  her  sons,
"  would  come.  '

Neither  C.  B.  nor  his  wife  felt  any  impulse  drawing  them  by  the  way
they  took,  and  which  resulted  in  the  meeting.  On  the  contrary,  they  had
no  ex]3ectation  of  liearing  of  A.  B.  except  from  the  Police.


(b)  Cases  of  "  Physical  Plienometia  "  in  ivhich  the  evidence  for  a  super-
normal cause  depends  on  a  coincidence.

In  cases  of  "physical  phenomena" — effects  on  matter  which  are
by  some  attributed  to  the  action  of  disembodied  spirits — we  have,  of
course,  first  to  consider  whether  the  conditions  sufficiently  exclude  the
agency  of  ordinary  known  causes, — wliether  there  can  have  been  any
deception  or  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses.  Supposing  that
we  have  satisfied  ourselves  on  this  point,  the  next  question  bearing  on
the  spiritistic  interpretation  is  whether  any  intelligence  has  been
manifested  suggesting  the  agency  of  spirits.

Case  18.

In  this  case  the  evidence  on  both  the  points  just  mentioned  is
obviously  very  weak  ;  the  action  of  known  causes  is  certainly  not
excluded,  and  there  is  merely  a  slight  indication  of  intelligence,  which
depends  on  the  incident  happening  just  at  the  time  it  did. That  is,


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


233


it  is  a  rather  curious  coincidence,  but  pretty  clearly  nothing  more.
This  is  the  view  taken  of  it  by  the  witnesses,  who  were  two  members
of  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society,  Mr.  W.  E.  Ward  and  Dr.
Anna  Lukens. Mr.  Ward  writes  : —

(Russell,  Burclsall,  and  Ward,  Manufacturers  of  Bolts  and  Nuts.)

Port  Chester,  N.Y.,  May  13th,  1897.
Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, —  ...  A  queer  thing  happened  in  the  Doctor's
[Dr.  Lukens']  office  last  Sunday  afternoon.  We  had  been  talking  about  our
old  friend  Professor  Cope,  who  died  about  four  weeks  before  we  returned
home  from  our  three  months'  trip  through  Mexico,  California,  and  the
North-West.

I  was  referring  to  Cope's  interest  in  psychical  matters,  and  saying  how
satisfactory  it  would  be  if  we  could  get  some  reliable  report  from  him  of  his
impressions  of  the  real  life  he  has  so  lately  entered  into.  And  immediately
the  Doctor's  large  musical  box  commenced  playing,  and  continued  to  play  for
over  five  minvtes,  to  our  great  and  almost  bewildering  astonishment,  and
ceased  playing  only  when  I  commenced  trying  to  account  for  such  an
unexpected  entertainment  through  ordinary  natural  methods.  Just  as
soon  as  I  remarked  how  it  might  be  accounted  for,  it  stopped  as  abrujatly
as  it  began.

The  instrument  Jtad  not  been  tvonnd  np  in  over  three  months,  and  when
last  used,  if  there  had  remained  unused  any  tension  of  the  spring,  it  might
have  been  released  long  before  by  the  jarring  it  had  been  subject  to  through
the  occasional  shifting  of  the  furniture  in  the  room.

W.  E.  Ward.

Mr.  Ward  writes  later  :  —

Port  Chester,  N.Y.,  May  26th,  1897.
.  The  most  simple  material  cause  I  can  attribute  the  playing  to
is  mainly  surplus  spring  tension,  for  some  unknown  reason  unexpended
during  the  last  use  of  the  instrument  and  held  until  favouring  conditions  of
temperature  would  probably  release  any  frictional  restraint  in  the  working
parts,  together  with  an  imperceptible  vibration  from  unnoticed  jar,  [which]
might  have  aided  in  removing  the  obstruction  to  the  playing.

A  curious  part  of  the  experience,  which  I  perhaps  omitted  to  mention
in  my  last,  was  the  response  I  received  to  a  mental  question  I  asked  some
ten  or  fifteen  minutes  after  the  playing  ceased.  The  question  was  addressed
to  Professor  Cope  in  about  this  form,  "Edward,  are  we  indebted  to  you  for
the  music  we  have  just  heard?"  and  immediately  a  response  of  three  loud
raps  came  on  the  floor  aj^parently  quite  near  me,  but  this  was  after  Dr.  Lukens
had  left  the  room,  so  is  unsuiDported  by  another  witness.

Dr.  Lukens  will  probably  write  and  tell  you  what  her  opinion  is  about
the  experience.  I  don't  think  she  has  any  faith  in  Cope  having  anything  to
do  with  the  playmg.

W.  E.  Ward.

Dr.  Lukens  writes  : —

10C8,  Lexington  Ave.,  Mmj  30th,  1897.
De.a.r  Dr.  Hodgson, — I  have  nothing  to  add  to  Mr.  Ward's  report  of
the  musical  box  experience  except  to  say  that  I  doubt  very  much  that  it  was

K  2


234<


Alice  Johnson.


[part


produced  hy  any  supernormal  cause.  It  was,  indeed,  a  rather  startling
circumstance  that,  as  we  sat  in  my  office  that  Sunday  afternoon  (May  9th)
talking  of  Professor  Cope  and  wishing  we  might  get  some  report  from  him,
the  musical  box  should  at  that  moment  begin  to  play,  and  continue  for
a  few  minutes.  But  I  am  inclined  to  believe  it  was  merely  a  coincidence,
due  probably  to  the  natural  causes  Mr.  Ward  suggested  in  his  last  letter
to  you.

a.nna  lukens  [m.d.].

Case  19.

This  case  was  brought  to  our  notice  as  one  of  supposed  "  spirit
photography,"  the  importance  of  which  seemed  to  be  considerably
enhanced  by  its  involving  a  very  well-authenticated  coincidence.  It
will  be  seen,  however,  that  the  lady  who  took  the  photograph —
Miss  S.  R.  Corbet — was  from  the  first  fully  alive  to  the  inconclusive
nature  of  the  evidence  for  any  supernormal  agency  being  concerned
in  its  production.  We  are  indebted  in  the  first  instance  for  informa-
tion about  the  case  to  Lady  Fitzgerald,  through  whose  kindness
Professor  Barrett  was  put  into  communication  with  the  persons  con-
cerned. From  a  mass  of  correspondence  on  the  subject,  Professor
Barrett  put  together  in  June,  1895,  the  account  printed  below,  which
was  afterwards  corrected  and  signed  by  Miss  Corbet.

Miss  Sybell  Corbet,  when  staying  with  her  sister,  Lady  S.,  at  D.  Hall
[assumed  name],  took  a  photograph  of  the  library  in  the  afternoon  of
December  5th,  1891,  between  2  and  3  o'clock.  The  exposure  was  rather  a
long  one.  No  one  was  present  with  Miss  Corbet  when  the  picture  was
taken,  but  on  developing  tlie  negative,  the  head  and  body  of  an  elderly
gentleman  appeared  seated  on  a  high-backed,  old  oak  chair,  one  arm  resting
on  the  arm  of  the  chair,  the  other  arm  of  the  figure  and  the  legs  being
invisible.  The  figure,  in  fact,  only  went  down  to  the  waist,  and  though  the
face  was  rather  indistinct,  it  appeared  to  have  a  short  beard.  When  the
picture  was  shown  to  one  of  the  nearest  relatives  of  Lord  D.,  the  late  owner
of  D.  Hall,  she  thought  it  exactly  like  him  ;  others,  however,  who  knew
him,  think  it  too  indistinct  to  be  sure  of  any  likeness.  Strangely  enough,  it
turned  out  that  the  funeral  of  Lord  D.  was  taking  place  on  the  very  same
day  and  hour  at  which  the  photograph  was  taken.

Miss  Corbet  is  sure  the  plate  had  not  been  exposed  before,  and  was  one
of  a  parcel  of  dry  Ilford  plates.  Unfortunately,  the  exposure  being  soiiie-
what  long,  she  was  not  in  the  room  the  whole  time,  and  did  not  lock  the
doors  when  she  left  the  room  ;  but  the  only  men  in  the  house  were  her
youngest  brother,  the  butler,  and  two  footmen,  and  all  these  four  were
young  men  and  heardlesa.  In  an.swer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Corbet  states  tliat
the  servants  would  not  be  at  all  likely  to  have  entei'ed  the  room,  and  her
brother  declares  he  did  not.  None  of  them  would,  she  is  certain,  be  likely
to  play  a  practical  joke,  and  even  if  they  did,  the  difficulty  would  be  to
explain  the  production  of  an  older,  bearded  figure,  without  legs,  and  one
considered  by  some  of  his  near  relatives  to  be  very  like  Lord  D.,  and  entirely
unlike  any  men  living  in  the  house.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


235


The  men  were  all  young  and  clean-shaven,  except  Miss  Corbet's  brother,
who  hiid  a  moustache,  and  who  is  not  in  the  least  like  the  figure  indepen-
dently of  this.

I  certify  the  foregoing  account  to  be  correct  in  every  particular.

Sybell  R.  Cokbet.

The  date  is  fixed  by  two  separate  notes  made  by  Miss  Corbet, —
at  a  time,  "vhen,  as  explained  below,  she  had  not  observed  the
coincidence, — as  follows  : —

Entry  in  photographic  note-book. — December  5th,  1891  :  subject,  library,
D.  ;  exposure,  60  minutes  ;  plate,  Ilford  Ordinary  ;  hour,  2  to  3  p.m.
Entry  in  dianj. — December  5th,  1891  :  Lord  D.  buried  at  W.  Church  [two
miles  from  D.]

The  following  extracts  from  letters  written  by  Miss  Corbet  give
further  details.

Kingsland  House,  Shrewsbury,  Miitj  2nd,  1895.
There  are  the  most  contradictory  opinions  about  the  likeness  of  the  figure
in  my  D.  photograph  to  Lord  D.  My  sister  thought  it  so  like  him  that  she
begged  me  to  look  out  the  date  on  which  I  had  taken  it,  when  I  first  noticed
that  it  was  taken  at  the  very  time  of  Lord  D.'s  funeral.  Since  that,  people
who  knew  him  well  have  declared  it  was  not  in  the  least  like  him  ;  others
who  knew  him  ei^ually  well  chat  it  was.  But  to  my  mind  it  is  not  clear
enough  to  form  a  very  definite  opinion  about,  as  the  features  are  hidden  by
a  standard  lamp.

It  is  a  curious  coincidence  ; — an  unaccountable  figure  appearing  in  a
photograph  taken  at  that  particular  date,  and  that  the  figure  should,  in  tlie
opinions  of  some  who  knew  him  most  intimately,  resemble  Lord  D.

June  12th,  1895.

You  ask  if  there  is  any  possibility  of  the  plate  having  being  exposed
before.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  none,  as  I  always  keep  a  very  careful  account
of  every  plate  I  expose  :  or  rather  I  should  say,  no  probability,  as  I  have
never  exposed  a  plate  twice  without  becoming  aware  of  my  mistake  on  taking
out  the  dark  slides  ;  and,  moreover,  I  had  in  those  days  never  taken  a  human
figure — excepting  as  a  minute  object  in  a  landscape — so  the  figure  would  still
be  unaccounted  for.  However,  I  am  told  by  some  photographers  and  others
that  the  pre-exposure  may  happen  during  the  sensitising  of  the  dry  plate.
Of  this,  of  course,  I  know  nothing.  The  fact  remains  a  curious  one,  T
think,  although  some  photographers  declare  there  is  nothing  odd  in  it — mere
accident  and  chance.  But  I  quite  agree  with  you  that,  as  it  is  impossible  to
prove  that  no  one  entered  the  room,  it  cannot  be  regarded  "as  aflbrding
indubitable  evidence  of  a  '  spirit  photograph.'  "

July  22nd,  1895.

I  did  not  develop  the  plate  until  August  of  the  following  year,  when  I  first
became  aware  of  the  presence  of  an  unexpected  figure  ;  but  it  was  not  until  my
eldest  sister,  Mrs.  R.,  suggested  a  likeness  to  the  late  Lord  D.,  and  asked  me
if  it  was  taken  before  or  after  his  death,  that  I  referred  to  my  note-book  and
diary,  and  found  that  it  was  on  the  day  of  the  funeral  (he  died  in  London,


236


Alice  Johnson.


[part


but  was  buried  in  the  Church  near  D.).  On  later  inquiry,  I  also  discovered
that  the  time  corresponded,  the  funeral  being  a  little  late,  in  consequence  of
the  lateness  of  the  special  train  ;  in  fact,  that  during  part  of  the  exposure,
the  service  was  waiting  the  arrival  of  some  of  the  principal  mourners.  My
sister,  Lady  S. ,  was  renting  D.  Hall  at  this  time  ;  and  so  far  as  I  can
remember,  several  of  us  (my  sisters)  were  there  when  I  arranged  the  camera,
after  which  v/.e  all  went  out,  leaving  the  plate  exposed,  and  the  room  quite
empty  !  I  had  no  jjarticular  interest  in  [the]  arm-chair,  and  have  never  been
able  to  discover  that  Lord  D.  was  in  the  habit  of  using  it,  as  he  usually
occupied  a  smaller  room,  on  the  ground  floor,  when  alone.

In  the  photograph,  which  is  here  reproduced,  half  of  the  upper
part  of  the  figure  of  a  man  appears  seated  in  the  large  chair  on  the
left.  The  high  stand,  carrying  a  flower-pot,  in  front  of  the  chair  seems
to  cut  off  the  other  half  of  the  face  and  body  of  the  figure.  The  lower
part  of  the  body  and  tlie  legs  are  entirely  wanting ;  the  head  is  semi-
transparent  and  the  face  very  indistinct.  A  vague  semblance  of  an
eye-brow,  an  eye,  and  a  nose  is  seen  on  careful  examination  to  be
really  the  carving  of  the  back  of  the  chair  showing  through.^  It  is
impossible  to  make  out  with  certainty  whether  the  face  wears  a  beard
or  not,  but  the  head  appears  to  be  quite  bald,  and  there  is  something
like  a  stock  round  the  neck,  which  adds  to  the  appearance  of  age.
These  features  were  perhaps  mainly  instrumental  in  suggesting  the
likeness.

With  regard  to  the  possibility  that  one  of  the  footmen  might  have
got  taken,  either  accidentally  or  as  a  practical  joke,  Miss  Corbet  points
out  that  the  dress  of  the  figure  is  apparently  that  of  a  gentleman,
whereas  her  sister's  footmen  always  wore  livery,  altiiough  at  that  time
they  were  in  mourning.  She  thinks  it  more  possible,  although  very-
improbable,  that  some  stranger  came  in  for  a  few  minutes ;  the  butler
declared  that  no  one  did  so,  but,  unfortunately,  enquiry  was  not  made
until  some  time  after  the  event.

The  incompleteness  of  the  figure,  together  with  the  supposition
that  the  room  was  empty  while  the  photograph  .  was  being  taken,
having  suggested  the  possibility  that  it  was  produced  by  something-
other  than  an  ordinary  man,  the  interest  of  this  suggestion  was  much
heightened  by  the  undoubted  fact  that  Lord  D.'s  funeral  was  actually
occurring  at  the  time.

Professor  Barrett,  however,  with  the  aid  of  Mr.  Gordon  Salt,
experimented  on  the  effects  that  could  be  produced  by  the  transitory
introduction  of  a  figure  during  a  long  exposure  of  a  plate.  The  results
thus  obtained  by  a  person  coming  into  the  room,  sitting  on  a  chair

1  All  these  points,  as  well  as  the  semi-transparency  of  the  figure  as  compared  with
the  solid  objects  surrounding  it,  are  naturally  shown  more  clearly  in  the  photograph
than  in  the  reproduction.


XXXV.]


Coivci<Jevces.


237


and  moving  his  legs,  were  so  very  like  the  reputed  ghost  picture  that
Professor  Barrett  writes  : —

September  5th,  1895.
I  can  see  how  the  "  Ghost "  picture  may  have  occurred,  as  I  have
succeeded  in  reproducing  it  almost  exactly.  I  believe  that  one  of  the
servants  came  into  the  room,  sat  down  in  the  chair,  crossed  his  legs  and  tlien
uncrossed  them,  looked  down  for  a  moment  and  then  at  the  camera,  saw  he
■  was  being  taken,  so  got  up  and  went  away,  having  been  in  the  chair  about
20  to  30  seconds.  This  will  give  tlie  ghost  of  an  apparently  older  man  from
a  young  man,  with  no  legs,  and  a  senu-transparent  face,  &c.

Professor  Bari'ett's  photograph  is  also  reproduced  here,  and  will  be
seen  to  be  very  similar  in  appearance  to  the  other,  only  half  of
the  upper  part  .of  the  figure — the  half  most  strongly  lighted  — being-
shown,  and  this  being  semi-transparent.  There  are  very  faint  indi-
cations of  features  in  the  face,  and  the  chin,  being  abnormally  long
and  with  no  distinct  outline,  looks  as  though  there  were  a  short
white  beard.  A  similar  indetiniteness  of  outline  on  tlie  right  side
of  the  collar  simulates  the  folds  of  a  stock,  and,  as  in  Miss  Corbet's
photograph,  the  legs  are  entirely  absent.

Further  light  was  thrown  on  the  possible  method  of  production
of  Miss  Corbet's  photograph  by  Dr.  H.  D.  R.  Kingston,  of  Stor-
mont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W.,  an  Associate  of  the  Society,  who  has
had  a  long  and  varied  experience  in  the  investigation  of  "spirit
photography."  He  observed  a  point  which,  though  not  at  all  con-
spicuous at  first  sight,  is  very  evident  when  once  attention  has  been
drawn  to  it, — viz.,  that  almost  all  the  white  lines  or  marks  in  the
photograph  are  doubled,  the  brightest  or  best-lighted  lines  being  most
so.  The  doubling  is  clear,  for  instance,  in  some  photographs  and
candles  standing  on  two  tables,  various  parts  of  some  chairs,  some
of  the  handles  of  the  drawers  of  a  cabinet,  and  finally  in  the  books
and  mouldings  of  the  bookshelves  ^  In  each  case  there  is  a  faint
image  to  the  right  side  of  and  slightly  lower  down  than  the  bright
image  of  the  same  object.  This  shows  that  the  camera  must  have
been  moved  slightly  during  tlie  exposure,  as  no  movement  of  the
furniture  could  have  produced  such  complete  uniformity  of  the  double
appearance.  Since  one  set  of  images  is  much  clearer  than  the  other,
the  camera  must  have  been  moved  either  near  the  beginning  or  near
the  end  of  the  exposure.  Miss  Corbet,  however,  informs  us  that  the
camera  was  placed  in  the  open  doorway  and  partly  outside  it,  and
thinks  it  possible  that  she  herself  may  have  shaken  it  in  passing  out  of

1  The  doubling  is  not  shown  very  satisfactorily  in  the  reproduction,  but  is  fairly
clear  in  the  photograph  standing  on  the  small  table  to  the  extreme  right,  also  in
another  photograph  in  a  high  stand  on  the  large  table  and  a  candle  to  tlie  right  of
this,  and  may  be  seen  more  faintly  in  the  books.


238


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  room.  This  also  makes  it  possible  that  another  person  passing  by
may  have  moved  it  slightly  without  coming  into  the  room  at  all.

It  is  important  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  the  "  ghost  " — the
figure  in  the  chair — has  a  double  outline  as  well  as  the  other  objects
in  the  room,  as,  if  so,  it  would  prove  that  the  figure  had  been
in  the  chair  during  the  whole  of  the  exposure,  aijd,  therefore,
could  not  be  that  of  the  person  who  moved  the  camera.  Unfor-
tunately, it  is  altogether  so  faint,  and  its  outline  is  so  much  blurred
that  it  is  impossible  to  make  certain  of  this  j^oint.  So  far,  however,
as  there  can  be  said  to  be  any  double  outline,  it  clearly  does  not
correspond  with  the  double  outline  of  the  other  objects.  It  is  possible
to  trace  more  than  one  outline  in  the  head  and  stock  or  collar,  but
impossible  to  say  that  the  one  on  the  right  is  lower  down  than  the  one
on  the  left ;  if  anything,  it  is  slightly  higher  up.  Further,  there  are
two  distinct  images  of  the  elbow,  but  one  is  resting  on  the  arm  of  the
chair,  while  the  other  projects  some  way  below  it.  This  seems  to
prove  conclusively  that  the  figure — urdike  all  the  other  objects  in  the
room — moved  during  the  exposure,  and  that  the  multiplication  of  its
outlines  was  not  due  to  the  movement  of  the  camera.

Thus  the  camera  may  have  been  moved  by  some  one  who  came  into
the  room  while  the  photograph  was  being  taken,  and  Professor  Barrett's
experiments  prove  that  the  semi-transparency  and  whole  appearance  of
the  figure  may  have  been  caused  by  the  person  in  question  sitting  in
the  chair  for  a  short  time,  and  moving  about  in  it  while  he  did  so.

In  tlie  remaining  four  cases  given  under  this  head  an  apparently
telepathic  impression,  relating  to  the  death  of  a  distant  person,  is
described,  the  "  physical  phenomenon "  being  stated  to  occur  at  the
same  time.  In  two  of  the  cases  the  object  affected  had  some  special
association  with  the  dying  person.  But  the  evidence  for  the  physical
effect  having  been  produced  supernornially  is  generally  very  slight,  and
I  do  not  think  that  the  association  with  an  apparently  telepathic
incident  can  reasonably  be  held  to  add  any  weight  to  this  evidence.

Case  20.

From  the  "  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments"
in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Fsijchical  Research,  p.  433.

[Miss  M.  0.  A.  sends  the  following  account.]

February  8f.li,  1888.
"A  strange  and  curious  dream  came  to  me  one  night  last  autumn,  which,
from  the  events  that  followed,  made  a  deep  impression  upon  me.  I  dreamed
that  my  mother's  brother  died,  and  I  went  to  Brooklyn  to  attend  the  funeral,
but  was  intensely  annoyed  at  arriving  too  late,  as  the  service  was  over,  and
the  body  being  carried  out  of  the  house.  I  saw  my  aunt  and  cousins,  but
could  not  speak  to  them. In  the  midst  of  this  distressing  scene  I  awoke.


EXPERIMENTAL  PHOTOGRAPH  TAKEX BY  PROFESSOR  BARRETT  AND
ME.  GORDON  SALT.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


239


hearing  a  loud  crash,  as  of  something  falling.  This  was  a  decided  reality,
but  I  could  discover  nothing  in  my  room  that  had  been  disturbed.  In  the
morning  I  related  my  dream,  and  felt  as  though  I  should  hear  some  news
that  day.  The  noise  I  heard  was  accounted  for  by  the  falling  of  a  weight  in
a  tall  clock  which  stood  in  the  hall.  Two  days  passed,  and  on  the  morning
of  the  third  day  the  paper  contained  a  notice  of  my  uncle's  death  (my
father's  brother),  stating  that  he  died  on  the  night  I  had  my  dream.  It  was
then  too  late  for  me  to  go  to  the  funeral  ;  for  some  unknown  reason  I  had
not  been  notified  by  the  family,  although  my  dream  had  informed  me,
perhaps,  of  the  very  hour  that  he  died.  q  ^  ,,

[In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  inquiries.  Miss  A.  informed  him  that  the  date
of  the  dream  was  September  2nd,  1887,  and  sent  the  following  statements
from  two  ladies  to  whom  she  had  related  it  in  the  morning  before  the  news
of  the  death  came.]

"Philadelphia,  March  ith,  1888.

' '  My  sister's  dream  of  our  uncle's  death,  as  related  by  her,  occurred  at

the  time  she  mentions. I  was  visiting  her  at  the  time,  and  distinctly

remember  being  told  the  dream,  and  being  asked  if  I  had  heard  a  peculiar

sound  in  the  night. The  sound  I  did  not  hear,  but  was  present  when  it

was  discovered  that  the  weight  of  the  hall  clock  had  fallen  down.  My

uncle's  death  occurred  at  that  time,  and  the  news  of  it  was  so  late  in

reaching  us  that  we  were  unable  to  attend  the  funeral. ,,t  in
^  Isabella  A.

•'March,  1888.

"Miss  A.  related  to  me  the  dream  which  she  had  relative  to  her  uncle's
death  the  morning  afterward,  and  I  also  heard  the  noise  made  by  the  fall  of
the  clock-weight  the  same  night.  "Elizabeth  B H  "

This  case  is  one  of  the  best-evidenced  that  I  have  found  of  this
type.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  object  affected— the  clock-weight —
had  only  a  very  remote  connection,  if  any,  with  the  dying  person,  and
it  is  hardly  possible  to  regard  its  fall  at  the  time  of  his  death  as  any-
thing but  a  mere  coincidence.

The  dream  may  no  doubt  have  been  telepathic — though  its  reference
to  the  wrong  person  is  a  reason  for  doubting  this — but  even  if  it  were,
it  does  not,  I  think,  add  to  the  significance  of  the  clock -incident ;  a
clock-weight  might  as  easily  fall  at  the  moment  that  its  owner  was
having  a  telepathic  impression  as  at  any  other  time.

In  the  next  case  the  great  anxiety  of  the  percipient  about  the
dying  person  is  a  weak  point,  as  this, — rather  than  telepathy, — may
have  caused  the  hallucination  experienced  at  the  time  of  his  death.

Case  21.

[This  case  is  slightly  abridged  from  an  account  given  in  the  "Appendix
to  the  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,"  Proceedings  of  the
American  S.F.B.,  p.  429.]


240


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Our  attention  was  first  drawn  to  this  case  by  the  following  account,  which
appeared  in  the  Oil  City  Derrick  (Oil  City,  Pa.),  December  12th,  1887  :—

"  Dejjot-master  George  Fry,  whose  brother  Gideon  died  at  Big  Rapids,
Mich.,  Sunday  night,  December  4th,  had  a  strange  presentiment  of  his
death.  On  Monday  morning  Mr.  Fry  received  a  telegram,  announcing  the
death  of  his  brother,  but  giving  no  further  information,  and  in  the  afternoon,
in  conversation  with  a  7Je/-)-((;A:  reporter,  said,  'I  wrote  a  letter  to  Gid  last
night,  and  just  as  I  liad  finished  it  I  glanced  up  and  noticed  the  clock  had
stopped.  I  got  up  and  wound  the  clock  and  pulled  out  my  watch  to  set  it
by.  It  was  15  minutes  to  10  ;  I  set  the  clock  and,  just  as  I  started  it,  1
heard  the  words,  "I'm  gone  !  I'm  gone  !  "  It  ivas  Gid's  voice,  and  it  seemed
to  come  out  of  the  clock.  I  heard  it  as  distinctly  as  I  ever  heard  anything
in  my  life.  It  startled  me  and  I  related  the  occurrence  to  my  family.  I  am
no  Spiritualist,  but  I  believe  that  must  have  been  the  time,  and  those  the
last  words  of  brother  Gid.'  Yesterday,  Mr.  Fry  showed  the  Derrick  a
letter  from  Big  Rapids,  giving  an  account  of  his  brother's  last  moments.
The  letter  stated  that  Gideon  died  at  15  minutes  of  10,  Sunday  night,
December  4th,  and  his  last  words  were,  'I'm  gone  !  I'm  gone  !  '  the  identical
time  and  words  as  related  to  the  reporter  Monday  hist. . .  ."

"  In  a  later  account  Mr.  Fry  is  described  as  saying —
"  . . . . I  am  not  a  Spiritualist  and  never  had  any  such  experience
before. The  clock  that  stopped  belonged  to  brother  Gid. . .  ."

"  In  reply  to  our  inquiries  Mr.  Fry  wrote  as  follows  :  —

"  106,  Sycamore-street,  Oil  City,  Pa.,  Juhj  QtJi.,  1888.

"Richard  Hodgson,  Esq., — Dear  Sir, — The  account  of  my  experience
in  regard  to  my  brother's  death  is  true  ;  that  is,  the  way  the  Oil  City  or
Pittsburgh  papers  had  it. . . .  "  G W Fry  "

Later  some  further  evidence  was  received  through  Mr.  R.  W.  Criswell,
Edit(jr  of  the  Oil  City  Derrick,  who  obtained,  in  January,  1889,  the
statements  that  follow  from  various  witnesses  in  the  case.  He  remarks  that
"  George  Fry  lias  been  a  resident  of  Oil  City  for  25  years.  He  is  now  about
39  years  of  age,  a  member  in  good  standing  of  the  Second  Presbyterian
Church  and  a  man  who  is  regarded  as  a  good  citizen  in  every  respect.  At
the  time  of  the  above  occurrence  he  was  depot-master,  employed  by  the
Allegheny  Valley  and  New  York  and  Western  Pennsylvania  Railroads."
Mr.  Fry  states  :  —

"My  brother  Gideon  and  I  had  been  much  together  and  were  more
intimate  in  our  associations  than  other  members  of  the  family.  I  was  much
attaclied  to  him  On  Friday,  December  2nd  [1887]  I  received  a  telegram
from  his  physician  at  Big  Rapids  tliat  he  was  ill  and  could  not  live  over  24
hours.  I  had  known  of  liis  illness,  but  he  had  not  been  regarded  in  a
dangerous  condition.  I  could  not  leave  my  business  to  go  to  him  and  I  was
greatly  trouljJed  on  this  account.  I  was  thinking  of  him  almost  constantly.
In  church,  Sunday,  he  was  the  chief  subject  of  my  prayers.  Sunday  evening,
after  church,  I  sat  down  to  write  him  a  letter  and  while  writing  it,  I  observed
that  the  clock  in  the  room — his  clock,  by  the  way, — had  stopped.  I  got  up  to
start  it,  and  looking  at  my  watch  saw  that  it  had  been  stopped  but  a  few


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


241


minutes.  I  started  to  wind  it  up  and  found  that  it  had  not  run  down.  As  I
moved  the  hands  around,  a  strange  light  flooded  the  face  of  the  clock,  and
the  words  issued  from  it  in  the  voice  of  brother  Gid,  '  I'm  gone,  I'm  gone  ! '
The  words  were  distinctly  uttered.  1  was  so  impressed  that  brother  Gid  had
died  at  that  moment  and  that  these  were  his  last  words,  that  I  hastily  sealed
the  letter,  laid  it  away,  and  did  not  mail  it. I  noted  the  time  as  9.45.

.  Next  morning  early  before  going  to  work,  I  told  my  wife  of  the
incident.  At  about  11.30  that  forenoon  I  was  handed  a  telegram  that  had
been  received  by  my  brother,  Daniel  P.  Fry,  in  these  words  only,  '  Gid  is
dead.  Come  to  Montague.'  This  was  signed  by  my  sister  Lizzie,  who  was
at  Big  Rapids.  That  afternoon  I  told  S.  W.  Turner,  a  newspaper  reporter,
of  the  death  of  my  brother  ;  and  also  told  him  ...  of  the  strange
presentiment  of  the  evening  before.  I  had  received  no  word  of  my  brother's
death,  except  the  message  given  above,  nor  did  I  receive  any  more  intelligence
regarding  it  until  some  days  later,  when  a  letter  came  from  my  sister,  giving
particulars.  This  letter  added  that  Gideon  had  died  at  8.45  Sunday  evening,
December  4th,  and  his  last  words  were  '  I'm  gone,  I'm  gone.'  It  was  at  9.45
that  I  had  heard  the  voice  in  the  clock  ;  but  the  difterence  in  time  between
Big  Rapids  and  O.il  City  is  just  enough  to  cover  this  discrepancy.  My  sister,
who  was  with  Gideon  when  he  died,  is  now  at  home,  in  Oil  City,  and  she  tells
me  that  for  some  time  before  he  died  he  was  unconscious,  and  imagined  that
I  was  with  him.  When  any  one  would  leave  the  bedside,  he  would  say
'  George,  don't  leave  me.'  "

The  following  statement  was  obtained  from  Mrs.  Fry  : —

"  OU  City,  Jaiwar;/ 13i/i,  1889.

"  In  regard  to  the  presentiment  of  Gideon  P.  Fry's  death,  December  4th,
1887,  my  husband  told  me,  early  Monday  mornmg,  December  5th,  1887,  of
the  voice  in  the  clock,  which  he  had  heard  the  preceding  evening.

■  ■  "Mbs.  Kate  J.  Fry."

Mr.  S.  W.  Turner,  the  reporter  above  referred  to,  gives  a  statement,  dated
Januaiy  13th,  1889,  substantially  the  same  as  the  original  newspaper  account
which  he  had  written  at  the  time,  but  somewhat  briefer,  and  omitting  the
incident  of  the  clock  stopping.  On  January  18th,  1889,  Mr.  Turner  wrote  a
more  detailed  account,  in  which  he  mentions  that  Mr.  Fry  told  him  the  clock
had  stopped  while  he  was  writing  a  letter  to  his  brother. He  continues  : —

[Mr.  Fry]  "said  the  exact  time  was  9.45.

"On  the  following  Sunday,  the  11th,  Mr.  Fry  reminded  me  of  our  con-
versation on  the  5th,  and  showed  me  a  letter  from  his  sister,  Lizzie
Thompson,  dated  Big  Rapids,  giving  particulars  of  the  death  of  Gideon.
This  letter,  which  I  read,  said  that  Gideon  had  died  at  8.45  p.m.,  Sunday,
December  4th,  1887,  and  his  last  words  were  '  I'm  gone,  I'm  gone  !  '

"  With  the  permission  of  Mr.  Fry,  I  went  to  the  telegraph  offices  here
Wednesday,  December  14th,  and  .  .  .  searched  their  files  for  copies  of
any  messages  relating  to  the  death  of  Gideon  Fry.  Below  is  a  copy  of  the
only  message  bearing  on  the  case  : —

"  'Big  Rapids,  Mich.,  December  5tk.
"  '  Daniel  P.  Fry,  Oil  City,  Pa. Gid  is  dead  ;  come  to  Montague.

■  '  Lizzie  K.  Thompson.  '


242


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"This  message  was  received  iu  Oil  City  at  9.40  Monday  morning,
December  5th.  No  message  was  received  at  the  postal  telegraph  office. . .  .

"S.  W.  Turner."

With  regard  to  the  clock  stopping,  it  may,  of  course,  be  supposed
that  Mr.  Fry,  in  his  great  anxiety  about  his  brother,  forgot  to
wind  up  the  clock  the  night  before.  Against  this  we  have  to  set  his
statement  that  he  found  on  investigation  that  it  had  not  run  down.
But  this  statement  does  not  occur  in  the  newspaper  account,  presum-
ably given  by  him  at  the  time,  but  only  in  the  narrative  written  rather
more  than  a  year  later.  In  the  agitation  of  the  moment  he  may  easily
have  omitted  to  notice  whether  the  clock  had  really  run  down  or  not,
and  may  have  assumed  afterwards  that  he  must  have  taken  this
elementary  precaution.  On  the  other  hand,  as  a  "  depot-master,"  he
was  probably  more  careful  instinctively  to  keep  his  clocks  in  good
order  than  the  average  man  would  be,  so  that  it  is  comparatively
unlikely  that  he  forgot  to  wind  it  up.  Even  if  he  did,  this  would  not
cause  it  to  stop  at  the  moment  of  liis  brother's  death  ;  it  would  only
give  it  a  better  chance  of  doing  so.

Then,  again,  what  is  the  evidence  that  tlie  clock  really  did  stop  ?
The  detail  is  omitted  from  the  corroboratory  statement  of  Mrs.
Fry,  and  it  is  omitted  from  one  of  the  three  statements  of  the  news-
paper reporter,  being  mentioned  in  the  other  two.  I  do  not  think,
however,  that  much  stress  can  be  laid  on  these  omissions,  as  it  is  very
doubtful  whether  any  of  the  witnesses  realised  that  the  stopping  of  the
clock — supposing  it  to  be  causally  connected  tvith  the  brothers  death —
was  at  all  more  remarkable  than  the  hallucination — telepathic  or
subjective  —  of  the  voice  that  seemed  to  come  out  of  the  clock.

The  connection  of  the  hallucination  with  the  clock  suggests,  no
doubt,  that  the  same  agency  produced  both  the  veridical  impression  on
the  man  and  the  effect  of  stopping  the  clock.  On  the  other  hand,  the
clock  face  may  simply  have  acted  as  a  point  de  repere  for  the  hallucina-
tion because  Mr.  Fry's  attention  was  directed  to  it  at  the  moment,  and
any  other  object  would  perhaps  have  served  this  purpose  equally  well.

The  next  case  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  at  first  hand,  but  depends
on  the  kind  of  evidence  that  was  called,  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
"  second-hand,  as  good  as  first  " — evidence,  namely,  from  a  witness
who  knew  of  the  percipient's  experience  at  the  time  and  before  it  was
ascertained  whether  or  not  it  was  in  any  sense  veridical.

Case  22.

The  account  was  sent  by  Mi".  A.  Glardon,  whose  interesting
experiments  in  thought-transference  at  a  distance  are  well-known.
(See  Joi^rnal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  98,  and  Vol.  VII.,  p.  325).


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


243


The  name  of  the  witness  was  given  us  in  confidence.  Mr.  Glardon
writes  : —

Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Aiigust  31st,  1894.

A  friend  of  mine,  Mrs.  F.,  a  daughter  of  the  well-known  geologist,  ,

has  related  to  me  a  rather  striking  instance  of  telepathy  of  which  she  was  a
witness.

A  few  years  ago,  she  was  sitting  on  the  rocks  above  the  sea,  at  Nervi,
near  Genoa,  where  she  resides  habitually,  with  an  American  young  girl,  who
has  since  become  her  son's  wife.  The  young  lady,  her  gloved  hands  resting
on  her  knees,  was  talking  with  Mrs.  F.,  when  all  at  once  she  gave  a  slight
scream.

"  What  is  the  matter  ? "  asked  Mrs.  F.
"My  finger  has  been  stung."

She  took  off  her  glove,  and  discovered  that  a  ring  of  hers  had  snapped.
She  looked  at  it  with  a  scared  look  and  exclaimed  :

"  Oh,  Mrs.  F.,  a  dear  friend  of  mine  has  just  died."

She  went  on  to  explain  that  the  ring  had  been  given  her  by  a  young  man
at  the  time  of  her  leaving  the  United  States  and  that  he  had  said  :  "  If  I
were  to  die,  this  ring  would  apprize  you  of  the  fact."

Mrs.  F.  pooh-poohed  the  matter,  being  not  herself  a  believer  in  psychical
matters.  But,  a  few  weeks  later,  came  the  news  of  that  young  man's  death.
Mrs.  F.  could  not  tell  me  if  it  was  on  the  very  day  of  the  breaking  of  the
ring  ;  but  she  has  little  doubt  about  it.

I  doubt  if  Mrs.  F.  reads  English,  but  if  you  write  to  her,  she  can,  I  dare
say,  get  your  letter  translated  and  will  doubtless  answer  you,  confirming
my  report.

Her  address  is ,

Aug.  (jlakdon.

We  wrote  to  Mrs.  F.  asking  for  her  recollection  of  the  incident  and
its  date,  and  also  whether  she  could  obtain  for  us  any  statement  from
the  lady  to  whom  it  actually  occurred,  and  she  replied  as  follows  :  —

Nervi,  le  10  Octuhre,  1894.

MoKSiEUR, — En  reponse  a  votre  honoree  lettre,  je  ne  puis  que  confirmer
les  faits  dont  Monsieur  Aug.  Glardon  vous  a  fait  mention.

En  efFet,  au  mois  de  Janvier,  1877,  j'etais  assise  avec  une  jeune  demoiselle
a  Nervi  au  bord  de  la  mer.  Nous  causions,  elle  avait  les  mains  immobiles,
lorsque  tout  a  coup  elle  se  sentit  fortement  piquee  au  doigt.  En  otant  son
gant  elle  vit  c^u'une  bague  qu'elle  portait  toujours,  s'etait  cassee  et  I'avait
ainsi  piquee.

Cette  jeune  personne  qui  avait  habite  auparavant  I'Amerique  requt  au
moment  de  partir  pour  I'Europe,  d'un  monsieur  cet  anneau.  II  lui  dit  que
s'il  devait  lui  arriver  un  malheur,  elle  en  serait  avertie.  Quelques  semaines
aprfes  ce  fait  qui  I'avait  peniblement  emotionnee  elle  refut  la  nouvelle  de  la
mort  de  ce  monsieur  arrivee  a  la  meme  date  et  meme  heure  que  celle  de
la  rupture  de  la  bague.

Je  ne  pense  pas  que  cette  dame  desire  maintenant  que  son  nom  soit
publie,  cause  pour  laquelle  je  ne  puis  vous  en  faire  part.

(Signed  in  full) E.  F.


244


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Further  inquiries  as  to  the  evidence  for  the  closeness  of  the
coincidence  remained  unanswered,  and  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain
any  more  information  about  it.

It  will  be  observed  that  though  this  case,  assuming  the  complete
accuracy  of  the  report,  points  primd  facie  to  telekinetic  agency — an
effect  pi'oduced  by  unknown  means  on  matter  at  a  distance — it  may
easily  be  explained  as  merely  telepathic — an  eifect  produced  super-
normally  on  mind  at  a  distance  (Mr.  Glardon,  in  fact,  calls  it  an
instance  of  telepathy).  It  may  be  supposed  that  a  telepathic  impulse
from  the  dying  man  reached  the  subliminal  consciousness  of  the
percipient  and  produced  a  motor  instead  of  a  sensory  effect,  which
led  to  an  involuntary  muscular  spasm  in  the  fingers,  resulting  in  the
breaking  of  the  ring.  We  should  expect  that  a  motor  impulse
originating  in  this  way  would  attach  itself,  if  possible,  to  some  object
associated  with  the  agent,  just  as  we  should  expect  that  a  sensory
impulse  telepathically  started  would  produce  a  hallucination  represent-
ing the  agent,  either  in  form  or  in  voice.  We  have  many  instances
recorded  of  motor  effects  apparently  due  to  telepathy,  though  they  do
not  seem  to  be  so  frequent  as  sensory  impressions  from  the  same
cause.  But  it  is  obvious  that  as  long  as  any  human  being  is  in
contact  with  the  object  affected,  as  in  this  case  of  ring  breaking,  we
must  put  down  the  eifect  to  the  action,  conscious  or  unconscious,  of
that  human  being,  as  in  all  cases  of  so-called  "  physical  phenomena  "
where  the  objects  moved  are  in  contact  with  the  so-called  "medium."

Case  23.

In  the  following  case,  an  intelligent  message,  apparently  relating
to  a  death  that  had  occurred  a  few  hours  before,  was  received  through
raps.  I  have  ascertained  that  the  death  took  place  in  1887.  The
account,  dated  November  29th,  1890,  was  written  by  Mr.  Myers,
from  details  furnished  to  him  by  the  witnesses,  who,  he  says,  were
"  well-known  to  me  and  entirely  trustworthy."  We  are  not  allowed
to  pinnt  their  names.  There  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  the
name  given  through  the  raps  was  intended  to  be.

A  group  of  persons  in  a  country  house  were  amusing  themselves  by
getting  a  table  to  tilt  out  messages.  The  name  of  a  deceased  friend — of
whom  they  were  not  consciously  thinking — was  given  (as  often  happens  in
such  cases)  as  the  communicating  intelligence.  Suddenly  the  tilts  changed
to  rapti,  which  gave  an  unintelligible  sentence.  (I  am  obliged  to  change  the
name,  but  I  give  what  is  a  fair  parallel.)  "  Spare  us  Maroribnks."  While
they  puzzled  over  this  message,  a  ring  was  lieard  at  the  front  door.  The
host  went  out  to  greet  some  guests  fresh  from  London.  These  guests
brought  with  them  the  news  that  Mr.  Marjoribanks,  a  valued  friend  of  all  the
party,  had  expired  suddenly  a  few  hours  before.  It  should  be  added  that
the  deceased  friend  whose  name  had  been  given  as  "control"  was  also  a


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


245


friend  of  Mr.  Marjoribanks,  and  that  Mr.  Marjoribanks,  whose  life  was  a
very  valuable  one,  had  been  supposed  to  be  in  perfect  health.

With  regard  to  the  raps  here  described,  I  need  hardly  say  that
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  good  faith  of  the  witnesses ;  but  we
require  also  to  exclude  the  possibility  that  any  of  them  might  have
produced  the  raps  automatically  and  unconsciously.  For  my  own
part,  I  believe  it  possible  that  the  most  honest  persons  may  occa-
sionally act  in  this  way,  with  entire  unconsciousness  of  what  they  are
doing.  But  the  interest  and  importance  of  the  incident  lies  in  the
fact  of  the  intelligence  manifested  by  the  raps,  however  they  were
caused.  Even  if  we  adopt  the  supposition  that  one  of  the  party
rapped  automatically,  at  least  information  unknown  to  any  of  them
was  elicited, — as  information  unknown  to  any  one  present  is  some-
times received  through  automatic  writing.

In  connection  with  this  interpretation,  it  may  be  instructive  to
refer  to  an  incident  described  by  Mr.  E.  Gurney  {Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  76  to  78)  to  show  that  apparently  genuine  instances
of  thought-transference  may  sometimes  occur  even  in  connection  with
fraudulent  phenomena.  The  following  is  Mr.  Gurney's  account,  some-
what abridged  : —

On  September  2nd,  1885,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and
the  jjresent  writer  paid  an  impromptu  visit  to  a  professional  ■'medium''
[a  person  who  has  been  detected  in  the  production  of  spurious  phenomena]
in  a  foreign  town.  We  had  decided  beforehand  on  a  name  on  which  to  con-
centrate our  thoughts,  with  a  view  to  getting  it  reproduced.  The  medium,
her  daughter,  and  the  three  visitors  sat  round  a  table  on  which  their  hands
were  placed,  and  the  present  writer  pointed  to  the  successive  letters  of  a
printed  alphabet  ;  at  intervals  the  sound  of  a  rap  was  heard  and  the  letter
thus  indicated  was  written  down.  Now  these  conditions  could  not  have
been  considered  adequate,  had  the  result  been  that  the  name  in  our  minds
was  correctly  given  ;  for  though  our  two  companions  were  not  apparently
looking  at  us  and  not  in  contact  with  us,  it  might  have  been  supposed  that
some  involuntary  and  unconscious  movement  on  our  part  revealed  to  one  of
them  at  what  points  to  make  the  raps.  But  as  the  result  turned  out,  it  will
be  seen,  I  think,  that  this  objection  does  not  apply.  The  name  that  had
been  selected  was  John  Henry  Pratt.  The  result  obtained  in  the  way
described  was  J  O  N  H  N  Y  E  S  R  O  S  A  T.  From  the  N  in  the  fifth
place  to  the  end,  Dr.  Myers  and  myself  regarded  the  letters  that  were  being
given  as  purely  fortuitous  and  as  forming  gibberish  ;  and  though  Mr.
F.  W.  H.  Myers  detected  a  method  in  them,  he  was  as  far  as  we  were  from
expecting  the  successive  letters  before  they  appeared.  On  inspection,  the
method  becomes  apparent.  If  in  three  places  a  contiguous  letter  be  sub-
stituted, the  complete  name  will  be  found  to  be  given  thus  : —

R  PT
JON HNYES  ROSAT,
the  first  word  being  phonetically  spelt  and  the  other  two  being  correct


246


Alice  Johnson.


[part


anagrams.  It  is  highly  improbable  that  such  an  amount  of  resemblance
was  accidental  :  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  it  was  due  to  muscular
indications  unconsciously  given  by  us  in  accordance  with  an  'unconscious
arrangement  of  tlie  letters  in  our  minds  in  phonetic  and  anagrammatic  order.
If  these  supjjositions  be  excluded,  the  only  alternative  will  be  thought-
transference.

But  in  whatever  way  the  knowledge  of  the  letters  or  syllables  reached
the  "  medium's  "  mind,  I  see  no  reason  to  think  that  the  expression  of  it  by
raps  was  other  than  a  conscious  act.  The  sounds  were  such  as  would  be
made  by  gently  tapping  the  foot  against  the  wooden  frame  of  the  table  ;
and  at  a  subsequent  trial  with  one  of  these  so-called  "mediums" — the
daughter — I  managed  by  very  gradually  advancing  my  own  foot  to  receive
on  it  first  a  part  and  ultimately  the  whole  of  the  impact.  The  movement
required  to  make  the  raps  may  have  become  semi-automatic  from  long
habit,  but  can  hardly  have  been  unconscious.


(c)  Preriionitions.

I  include  Premonitions  among  the  class  of  Coincidences  having  a
doubtful  claim  to  causal  production,  partly  because  of  the  difficulty  of
forming  any  satisfactory  theory  of  what  mental  action  or  faculty  can
be  involved  in  a  genuine  premonition, — that  is,  a  real  foreseeing  of  a
future  event  which  could  not  by  any  exercise  of  the  reasoning  powers
be  inferred  from  a  knowledge  of  present  or  past  conditions.  There
are,  of  course,  a  great  many  so-called  premonitions  or  presentiments
which  can  be  explained  by  supposing  some  supernormal  knowledge  of
pi'esent  facts  ;  and  a  large  number  of  predictions  no  doubt  bring
about  their  own  fulfilment  in  various  ways  through  self-suggestion  or
suggestion  acting  on  others.  All  these  explanations  have  been  fully
discussed  in  articles  on  the  subject  that  have  appeai-ed  from  time
to  time  in  our  Proceedings  (see  especially  "On  the  Evidence  for
Premonitions,"  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  Vol.  V.,  p.  288;  and  "The
Subliminal  Self — The  Relation  of  Supernormal  Phenomena  to  Time —
Precognition,"  by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  408).  I  may
refer  also  to  a  more  recent  article  hy  Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora  in  the
Rivista  cli  Studi  Psichici  (of  which  a  translation,  under  the  title,
"  Sur  la  possibilite  des  theories  rationnelles  de  la  premonition,"
appeared  in  the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  Jan. -Feb.,  1899),
showing  how  other  cases  may  be  explained  by  a  supposed  combination
of  tekethesia  and  telepathy,  and  discussing  theories  of  interpretation
of  those  residual  cases  that  may  be  called  genuinely  premonitory.

Apart  from  all  theoretical  difficulties,  however,  the  cases  I  give  under
this  head  aiford  but  very  inadequate  evidence  of  a  real  premonitory
faculty.  Some  of  them  share  the  weakness  so  frequently  found  in
such  cases  in  that  the  prediction  does  not  refer  to  any  stated  time  of
fulfilment, and therefore allows comparatively large scope  for


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


247


accidental  coincidence.  Some,  e.g.,  the  predictions  of  the  results  of
races,  refer  to  events  in  which  only  a  small  number  of  alternatives
was  possible,  which  again,  of  course,  increases  the  chance  of  accidental
fulfilment.

In  the  first  two  cases  given  the  fulfilment  of  the  premonition  seems
clearly  accidental,  although  highly  improbable.

Case  24.

This  case  is  Swift's  prediction — if  prediction  it  can  be  called — of
the  discovery  of  the  then  unknown  satellites  of  Mars.  The  coincidence
is  well-known,  at  least  to  astronomers,  but  as  I  have  not  been  able  to
fiad  any  complete  account  of  the  relation  of  the  prediction  to  the
actual  facts,  it  seems  worth  while  putting  together  all  the  details
relevant  to  it.

The  following  passage  occurs  in  Gulliver''s  Travels  (published  in
1726)  Part  III.,  Chaptei^  III  :—

[The  astronomers  of ,  Laputa]  "have  likewise  discovered  two  lesser  stars,
or  satellites,  which  revolve  about  Mars,  whereof  the  innermost  is  distant
from  the  centre  of  the  primary  planet  exactly  three  of  his  diameters,  and  the
outermost  five  ;  the  former  revolves  in  the  space  of  ten  hours,  and  the  latter
in  twenty-one  and  a  half  ;  so  that  the  squares  of  their  periodical  times  are
very  near  in  the  same  proportion  with  the  cubes  of  their  distance  from  the
centre  of  Mars  :  which  evidently  shows  them  to  be  governed  by  the  same
law  of  gravitation  that  influences  the  other  heavenly  bodies."

In  order  to  judge  how  unlikely  it  was  that  any  one  should  make
this  guess,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  how  much  was  known  about  the
planets  and  their  satellites  at  the  time.  The  two  outermost  planets,
Uranus  and  JSeptune,  had  not  been  discovered  ;  but  the  other  six
principal  ones,  Mercury,  Venus,  the  Earth,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,
had  been  known  for  centuries.  Four  out  of  the  five  satellites  of
Jupiter  had  been  discovered,  and  five  out  of  the  eight  now  known  to
belong  to  Saturn.  As  Mars  comes  between  the  Earth  with  one
satellite  and  Jupiter  with  four,  it  was  not  unnatural,  in  making  a
guess  about  its  satellites,  to  imagine  that  their  number  was  two.
With  regard  to  the  theory  of  gravitation,  this  had  been  established  by
the  publication  of  iSTewton's  Principia  in  1687,  and  the  law  as  to  the
proportion  which  the  periodic  times  of  satellites  bear  to  their  distance
from  their  planet  had  been  shown  to  be  a  consequence  of  it ;  so  that
the  different  facts  imagined  in  Swift's  narrative  were  all  scientifically
consistent  with  one  another.

But  these  facts  involved  a  remarkable  result,  namely,  that,  on
account  of  the  closeness  of  the  satellites  to  Mars,  the  time  they  took
to  revolve  round  it  was  less  than  the  time  taken  by  it  to  rotate  on
its  own  axis, — in  other  words,  that  the  months  were  shorter  than  the

s


248


Alice  Johnson.


[part


days.  This  was  a  state  of  affairs  that  no  scientific  man  would  have
been  likely  to  predict,  because  there  was,  and  still  is,  no  known
parallel  to  it.

However,  the  imaginary  conditions  suggested  in  1726  were  to
an  important  extent  verified  by  the  discovery  of  the  two  satellites
of  Mars  by  Professor  Asaph  Hall  at  tlie  observatory  of  Washington,
in  1877.  The  facts  are  given  in  the  following  quotation  from  Sir  R.
S.  Ball's  Story  of  the  Heavens,  p.  190  (Edition  of  1893).

"The  outer  of  the  satellites  revolves  around  the  planet  in  the  period  of
30  hours,  17  inins.,  54  sees.  ;  it  is  the  inner  satellite  which  has  commanded
the  more  special  attention  of  every  astronomer  in  the  world.  Mars  turns
round  on  his  axis  in  a  martial  day,  which  is  very  nearly  the  same  length  as
our  day  of  24  hours.  The  inner  satellite  of  Mars  moves  round  in  7  hours,
39  mins.,  14  sees.  The  inner  satellite,  in  fact,  revolves  three  times  round
Mars  in  the  same  time  that  Mars  can  turn  round  once.  This  circumstance  is
unparalleled  in  the  solar  system  ;  indeed,  as  far  as  we  know,  it  is  unparalleled
in  the  universe."

The  diameter  of  Mars  is  4,200  miles,  and  the  period  of  his  axial
rotation  is  24  hours,  37  mins.,  22*7  sees.  It  may  be  convenient  to
show  the  exact  degree  of  correspondence  between  Swift's  statement
and  the  actual  facts  in  a  tabular  form,  assuming  that  he  knew  what
the  diameter  of  Mars  was.


According
to  Swift.

As  nmu  known.

Inner  Satellite  (Phobos)

Mean  distance  from  centre

of  Mars

Periodic  time

12,600  miles.
10  hrs.

5,800  miles.

7  hrs.,  39  mins.,  14  sees.

Outer  Satellite  (Deimos)
Mean  distance  from  centre

of  Mars

Periodic  time

21,000  miles.
21  hrs.,  30  mins.

14,500  miles.

30  hrs.  17  mins.,  54  sees.

It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  no  very  close  resemblance  between  the
two  sets  of  figures.  But  the  unique  characteristic  of  the  inner  satellite
— that  its  periodic  time  is  less  than  the  period  of  rotation  of  its
primary — is  brought  out  in  both.  This  would  cause  the  satellite  to
appear  to  a  dweller  on  Mars  to  rise  in  the  west,  instead  of — like  all
other  heavenly  bodies — in  the  east.  Swift's  knowledge  of  astronomy
was  probably  sufficient  to  show  him  this  anomalous  result  of  the  figures
he  gives  for  his  imaginary  moon  ;  but  as  he  does  not  state  it  explicitly,
it  is  not  quite  certain  that  he  realised  it.  It  must  be  observed  also
that,  according  to  him,  the  outer  satellite  would  have  exhibited  the


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


249


same  anomalous  feature;  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  does  not.
The  correspondence  was,  however,  sufficiently  striking  to  produce  a
strong  impression  on  the  mind  of  at  least  one  astronomer,  as  is  shown
in  another  passage  which  1  quote  from  Sir  R.  S.  Ball  [op.  cit.  p.  192).

"  A  curious  circumstance  with  respect  to  the  satellites  of  Mars  will  be
familiar  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with  Gulliver's  Travels.  The
astronomers  on  board  the  flying  Island  of  Laputa  had,  according  to  Gulliver,
keen  vision  and  good  telescopes.  The  traveller  says  that  they  had  found  two
satellites  to  Mars,  one  of  which  revolved  around  him  in  ten  hours.  The  author
has  thus  not  only  made  a  correct  guess  about  the  number  of  the  satellites,
but  he  actually  stated  the  periodic  time  with  considerable  accuracy  !  We
do  not  know  what  can  have  suggested  the  latter  guess.  A  few  years  ago  any
astronomer  reading  the  voyage  to  Laputa  would  have  said  this  was  absurd.
There  might  be  two  satellites  to  Mars,  no  doubt  ;  but  to  say  that  one  of
them  revolves  in  ten  hours  would  be  to  assert  what  no  one  could  believe.
Tet  the  truth  has  been  even  stranger  than  the  fiction."

The  coincidence  would,  of  course,  have  beea  more  complete  if  it
had  not  been  stranger,  but  only  equally  strange  !

Case  25.

The  next  case  is  a  coincidence  whose  improbability  enormously
exceeds  that  of  any  other  treated  of  in  the  present  paper  in  which
a  numerical  calculation  of  chances  is  possible.  I  take  the  account
of  it  from  two  sources,  De  Morgan's  Budget  of  Paradoxes  (p.
168),  and  the  chapter  on  "Lotteries  "  in  R.  A.  Proctor's  Chance  and
Luck  (pp.  1.39-148),  the  facts  having  been  originally  recorded  in  a
book  called  Almanach  Remain  sur  la  Loterie  Roy  ale  de  France,  oxi  les
etrennes  necessaires  aux  Actionnaires  et  Receveurs  de  la,  elite  Loterie,  by
M.  Menut  de  St.  Mesmin  (Paris,  1830),  which  contains  all  the  draw-
ings of  the  French  Lottery  (two  or  three  each  month)  from  1758  to
1830.  It  was  intended  for  those  who  thouglit  they  could  predict  the
future  drawings  from  the  past,  and  various  sets  of  "  sympathetic
numbers "  were  given  to  help  them.  In  the  French  Lottery,  five
numbers  out  of  ninety  were  drawn  at  a  time.  Any  person  in  any
part  of  the  country  might  stake  any  sum  upon  any  event  he  pleased,
viz.,  that  one  or  more  of  the  numbers  drawn  would  be  a  certain
number  or  numbers,  which  was  called  a  simple  drawing ;  or  that  a
•certain  number  or  numbers  would  be  drawn  in  a  certain  order,  which
was  called  a  determinate  drawing.  If  he  won,  he  received  a  certain
multiple — which,  of  course,  increased  with  the  improbability  of
success  — of  the  value  of  his  stake.

De  Morgan  remarks  that  "  the  enormous  number  of  those  who
played  is  proved  to  all  who  have  studied  chances  arithmetically  by
the  number  of  simple  quaternes  [successes  in  four  out  of  the  five

s  2


250


Alice  Johnson.


[part


numbers]  which  were  gained  :  in  1822,  fourteen  ;  in  1823,  six  ;  in
1824,  sixteen  ;  in  1825,  nine,  etc."

The  case  I  refer  to  occurred  in  July,  1821,  when  one  gambler
selected  the  five  numbers,  8,  13,  16,  46,  and  64;  and  for  the  same
drawing  another  had  selected  the  four  numbers,  8,  16,  46,  and  64.
The  numbers  actually  drawn  were,  8,  46,  16,  64,  13,  so  that  both
gamblei's  won.  Their  stakes  were  small,  and  their  actual  winnings  were
only  131,350  francs  and  20,852  francs  respectively.  "The  coincidence,"
observes  Proctor,  "  was  so  remarkable  (the  antecedent  probability
against  two  gamblers  winning  on  a  simple  drawing  [a]  simple
qimie  and  a  simple  quaterne  being  about  22  billions  to  one)  that  one
can  understand  a  suspicion  arising  that  a  hint  had  been  given  from
some  one  employed  at  the  lottery-office.  M.  Menut  insinuates  this,
and  a  recent  occurrence  at  Naples  suggests  at  least  the  possibility  of
collusion  between  gamblers  and  the  drawers  of  lottery  numbers.  But
in  the  case  above  cited,  the  smallness  of  the  stakes  warrants  the  belief
that  the  result  was  purely  accidental.  Certainly  the  gamblers  would
have  staked  more  had  they  known  what  was  to  be  the  actual  result  of
the  drawing.  The  larger  winner  seems  to  have  staked  two  sous  only,
the  prize  being,  I  suppose,  1,313,500  times  the  stake,  instead  of
1,000,000,  as  on  a  similar  venture  in  the  Geneva  lotteiy.  Possibly
the  stake  was  a  foreign  coin,  and  hence  the  actual  value  of  the  prize
was  not  a  round  number  of  francs.  The  smaller  winner  probably
staked  five  sous,  or  thereabouts,  in  foreign  coin."

Since  lotteries  and  all  kinds  of  sports  with  which  betting  is  asso-
ciated are  events  in  which  large  numbers  of  persons  are  interested,  we
should  expect  premonitory  impressions  about  them — other  than  mere
guesses,  like  those  in  the  case  just  given — to  occur  fairly  often  and
to  be  occasionally  fulfilled.  But  I  have  been  surprised  to  find  how
rarely  such  premonitions  seem  to  be  recorded,  even  after  the  event.
One  case,  dating  from  1857,  was  given  in  the  Journal  for  March,  1890
(Vol.  IV.,  p.  226)  and  among  all  the  records,  printed  and  unprinted,
of  the  Society,  I  think  there  are  hardly  a  dozen  of  the  same  kind.
The  following  is  a  recent  premonition  of  this  kind,  experienced  by
Professor  F.  W.  Haslam,  of  Canterbury  College,  Christchurch,  New
Zealand,  an  Honorary  Associate  of  the  Society.

Case  26.

Mrs.  Haslam  writes  to  Mr.  Myers  as  follows  : —

St.  Barbe,  Riccarton,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand,

November  10th,  1897.
Dear  Mr.  Myers, — I  do  not  know  whether  the  following  little  circum-
stance will  be  at  all  interesting  to  you  as,  perhaps,  an  example  of  the  working
of  the  subliminal  self. I  send  it  on  the  chance.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


251


Yesterday,  being  the  Prince  of  Wales'  birthday,  was  a  holiday  in  the
Colony,  and  Frank  meditated  going  to  see  the  racing  for  the  New  Zealand
cup.  He  has  been  so  busy  with  exams,  that  he  has  not  had  a  moment
to  think  about  the  horses,  and  was  ahsolutehj  ignorant  of  their  names,
qualities,  etc.

But  as  he  lay  between  sleeping  and  waking  he  tried  to  imagine  the
winner,  and  a  jockey  with  all  scarlet  cap  and  jacket  passed  before  his  eyes,
pulling  his  horse  in  hard  and  finally  arriving  at  the  winning  post.  He
thought  "scarlet  is  a  common  colour  to  see,  '  but  again  the  same  jockey
passed  before  his  vision.  He  told  Clarke,  our  Riccarton  blacksmith,  that
morning,  and  before  the  race  was  run  he  also  told  Dr.  Nedwill  of  Oxford
Terrace,  and  Dr.  Moorhouse,  in  the  hearing  of  other  jDeople,  also  of  Christ-
church.  He  then  took  me  all  about  the  saddling  paddock  before  the  race  to
see  what  jockey  was  in  all  scarlet,  and  what  sort  of  a  horse  he  rode,  and
finally  he  laid  a  little  money  on  the  race  and  won  it.  The  horse  was
"Waiuku,"  and  was  not  the  favourite,  and  all  round  us  tliey  were  saying
he  had  not  a  chance  ;  but  he  seemed  to  become  more  popular  towards  the
approach  of  the  race,  and  was  about  second  in  the  popular  estimation.  I
will  ask  Frank  to  read  this  and  correct  if  necessary. — Sincerely  yours.

Rose  St.  Barbe  Haslam.
The  above  is  a  coi-rect  statement  of  what  happened.

F.  W.  PIaslam.

Mrs.  Haslam  adds  :  —

P.  S. — Waiuku's  jockey  did  two  or  three  times  during  the  race  sit  back
and  pull  the  horse  in  hard. Just  at  the  end  he  passed  everything  and  won.

In  reply  to  enquiries,  Mrs.  Haslam  writes  : —

St.  Barbe,  Christchurch,  Canterbury,  N.Z.,  March  22nd,  1898.

Dear  Sir, — In  answer  to  yours  of  January  1st,  1898,  I  am  trying  to  get
a  list  of  the  horses  that  ran  for  the  N.Z.  Cup  in  November  last,  also  state-
ments from  Dr.  Nedwill  and  Dr.  Moorhouse.  As  to  newspaper  accounts  of
the  prospects  before  the  race,  I  am  afraid  that  the  points  upon  which
Mr.  Haslam's  word  alone  must  be  taken  are  these.  He  did  not  knoio  before
he  reached  the  course  and  bought  a  card  of  the  races  anytJung  about  the  horses
to  run  for  the  "Gup,"  except  "St.  Paul,"  a  very  well-known  horse,  who
he  believed  would  win.  He  had  no  notion  of  the  colours  the  jockeys  wore,
excepting  those  of  the  local  owner,  Mr.  Stead,  whose  jockeys  always  wear
yellow.  He  did  not  dream  of  a  horse.  He  saw  an  all  scarlet  jockey  riding
to  win,  and  on  obtaining  a  card  at  the  races  his  first  thought  was  to  look
if  there  were  an  all  scarlet  jockey  riding.  As  it  turned  out,  there  was,  and
he  rode  "  Waiuku  "  the  second  favourite — the  first  being  St.  Paul.  Waiuku
was  a  horse  from  the  north  island  utterly  unknown  to  him.  He  is  not  a
race  goer,  and  has  generally  been  busy  at  lectures  during  the  most  im-
portant race  meetings  at  Christchurch.  He  had  never  seen  tlie  jockey
before  to  his  knowledge,  or  the  colours,  or  the  horse,  and  knows  no  jockeys
by  sight.  After  his  vision  of  the  jockey  he  thought  to  himself  that  scarlet
might  be  a  usual  colour  for  people  co  see  with  their  eyes  shut,  so  he  tried
again  to  imagine  the  winner,  and  again  saw  the  all  scarlet  jockey  riding  in


252


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  win,  and  he  immediately  apprised  me  of  the  faot.  He  cannot  remember
any  similar  experience,  and  I  think  that  your  magazine  put  the  idea  of
trying  to  see  the  winner  into  his  head.  ...  I  first  asked  Drs.  Nedwill
and  Moorhouse  to  tell  me  if  they  recollected  anything  about  Mr.  Haslam's
vision.  You  see  that  Dr.  Moorhouse  says  "nw/At,"  whereas  it  really  was
early  morning,  but  I  expect  he  naturally  concluded  that.

Rose  St.  Baebe  Haslam.

Mrs.  Haslam  enclosed  corroborative  notes  addressed  to  herself  by
the  two  gentlemen  mentioned  in  her  letter,  Dr.  Nedwill  and  Dr.
Moorhouse,  as  follows  :  —

Christchurch,  New  Zealand,  February  21st,  1898.

On  meeting  my  friend.  Prof.  Haslam,  at  the  races  at  Riccarton  in

November  last,  he  said  to  me,  "let  us  look  at  the  card  to  see  if  there  is  a

jockey  in  all  scarlet,  as  I  dreamed  a  horse  came  in  a  winner  in  this  race,

with  these  colours."  „  -si-  -r%

Courtney  Nedwill,  M.D.

Christchurch,  March  20th,  1898.
Dear  Mrs.  Haslam, — My  recollection  of  the  N.Z.  Cup  day  and  Professor
Haslam  is  as  follows.  But  I  might  first  mention  that  the  reason  I  have  for
remembering  the  circumstances  especially  well  are  that  for  a  good  many  race
meetings  Professor  Haslam  and  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  discussing  the
horses  and  agreeing  on  the  one  we  elected  to  bet  on,  and  backing  the  horse
together  as  a  sort  of  partnership.  On  the  Cup  day  I  arrived  at  the  course
somewhat  late  and  did  not  at  first  see  Professor  Haslam,  and  had  made  my
bets  on  the  Cup  before  I  found  him  ;  but  shortly  before  the  race  he  came  up
to  me  and  suggested  that  we  should  continue  the  partnership  bets,  at  the  same
time  telling  me  that  he  had  dreamt  the  previous  night  that  he  had  seen  the
race  run  and  that  a  horse  with  scarlet  colours  had  won.  I  turned  up  the  race
card  and  saw  that  the  only  horse  carrying  scarlet  colours  was  "  Waiuku."  I
said  I  was  sorry  that  I  had  made  all  the  bets  I  intended  to  on  the  race,  so  did
not  join  him  in  backing  the  horse.  The  Professor  left  me  with  the  intention
of  backing  "Waiuku,"  but  as  1  did  not  see  him  again  for  some  time  that  day
I  don  t  remember  whether  he  told  me  he  had  backed  him,  and  I  have  had  no
conversation  with  him  since  on  the  subject.  Of  course  you  remember  that
"  Waiuku  "  did  win  the  race.  In  future  if  the  Professor  tells  me  he  has  had
any  more  dreams  about  winners,  I  shall  not  fail  to  back  them.

B M.  Moorhouse.

Mrs.  Haslam  sent  us  also  a  programme  of  the  meeting,  dated
Tuesday,  November  9th,  1897.  From  this  it  appears  that  14  horses
were  entered  for  the  New  Zealand  Cup,  the  third  on  the  list  being
Mr.  S.  McGuinness'  "  Waiuku,"  colours  "  All  scarlet  "  ;  and  that  no
other  horse  in  the  list  had  any  scarlet  in  its  colours.

Some  furtlier  cases  of  dreams  about  races,  narrated  by  an
Australian  member  of  the  S.P.R.,  Mr.  Donald  Murray,  will  be  found
in  Appendix  III.,  p.  .317.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


253


We  have  another  case,  which  I  think  hardly  worth  printing  in  full,
of  two  dreams  about  the  result  of  a  boat  race  between  the  crews  of
Columbia  College,  Cornell  University,  and  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  June,  1895.  (1)  Dr.  L.  O.  Howard,  Entomologist  in  the
U.  S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  dreamt  the  night  before  the  race
that  Columbia  would  win,  which  actually  happened,  and  his  statement,
written  in  1896,  is  confirmed  by  four  persons  to  whom  he  had  told  the
dream  before  its  fulfilment.  Professor  Hyslop  gives  a  careful  analysis
of  the  criticisms  of  the  crews  made  in  the  New  York  papers  beforehand,
which  were  on  the  whole  favourable  to  Columbia,  though  the  betting
was  in  favour  of  the  other  two  boats.  Dr.  Howard,  who  was  living  at
Washington,  expressly  states  that  being,  as  a  Cornell  graduate,  very
much  interested  in  the  I'ace,  he  had  read  all  the  newspaper  accounts  of
the  condition  of  the  crews,  and  on  the  day  before  his  dream  had  been
made  rather  anxious  on  Cornell's  account  by  a  somewhat  unfavourable
review  in  one  of  the  New  York  papers.  (2)  Professor  Hyslop
happened  to  mention  this  dream  to  one  of  his  own  students  at
Columbia  College,  who  informed  him  that  he  also  had  dreamt  on  the
same  occasion  that  Columbia  had  won,  with  other  correct  details  of
the  I'ace.  His  account  is  confirmed  by  a  friend  of  his,  whom  he  had
told  of  the  dream  before  its  fulfilment.  He,  like  Dr.  Howard,  was
keenly  interested  in  the  race.

In  connection  with  these  premonitory  dreams  of  races,  I  may  refer
to  a  small  group  of  much  more  impressive  predictions  of  numbers  to  be
drawn  in  the  conscription  for  the  Belgian  army  ;  the  report  of  which
was  sent  in  1894  by  Professor  G.  Hulin,  of  the  University  of  Ghent,
to  Professor  Sidgwick,  and  is  given  at  length  in  Mr.  Myers'  paper  on
"The  Relation  of  Supernormal  Phenomena  to  Time"  [Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  545).  Five  cases  of  the  right  numbers  being  pre-
dicted, during  the  eight  years,  1886-1894,  are  given  on  good  authority  ;
the  numbers  in  the  first  four  cases  being  respectively  90,  112,  216,  111.
The  first  case  was  an  especially  striking  one  ;  a  clearly  externalised
vision  of  the  number  90  appeared  to  the  percipient,  and  produced  a
strong  impression  on  his  mind,  convincing  him  that  he  would  draw  that
number.  In  the  fifth  case,  the  man  who  was  to  draw  first  announced
that  his  number  would  be  116,  and  on  being  told  that  that  was  already
drawn,  said  it  would  be  115,  which  turned  out  correct.  The  report
only  professes  to  give  correct  predictions,  and  we  have  no  means  of
knowing  how  often  predictions  of  these  numbers  are  made  which
turn  out  wrong.  Neither  are  we  told  how  many  numbers  there  were
to  draw  from,  except  in  one  case,  where  it  appears  that  there  were  at
least  150,  the  lowest,  of  them  being  46  and  the  highest  223.  In  this
case,  the  number  216  was  the  one  rightly  guessed.  We  must  assume,
I  think,  that  these  facts  were  known  to  the  man  who  was  to  draw, —


254


Alice  Joltnson.


[part


the  narrative  certainly  does  not  exclude  this  supposition,  and,  in  fact,
I'ather  suggests  it, — and,  if  so,  the  chance  of  his  making  a  correct
guess  was,  of  course,  about  1  in  150.  The  success  of  the  prediction  is
thus  much  more  noteworthy  than  in  the  dreams  of  the  boat-race
mentioned  above,  wliere  the  chance  of  guessing  correctly  was  at  least
1  in  3.  Still  these  conscription  cases  are  hardly  numerous  enough
to  exclude  the  explanation  of  chance  coincidence.

Dr.  Ermacora  in  the  article  already  referred  to  (see  Annales  des
Sciences  Psychiques,  January-February,  1899,  p.  46)  suggests  that  the
fulfilment  of  premonitions  about  the  results  of  drawing  by  lot — when
the  drawing  is  done  by  the  person  who  experiences  the  premonition —
might  be  explained  by  telfesthesia,  as  we  might  suppose  that  in  such
a  case  the  drawing  of  the  number  is  not  accomplished  blindly,  but  is
guided  by  a  supernormal  perception  which  leads  the  subject  to  select
automatically, — and  probably  unconsciously, — the  particular  number.

Case  27.

The  next  is  a  case  of  a  premonition  which  I  print  because  it  is
well-authenticated,  but  the  fultilment  of  which  hardly  suggests  more
than  a  chance  coincidence,  since  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  on  occasions
so  momentous  presentiments  of  the  kind  might  occur.

The  account  was  obtained  for  the  Society  by  Lord  Bute  from
Lord  Halifax,  and  is  as  follows  : — ■

Powderham,  April  Stli,  1885.

Account  of  the  attempted  execution  of  John  Lee  for  the  murder  of  Miss
Keyse,  at  Babbicombe,  February,  1885,  with  letter  to  Lord  Clinton  enclosing
statement  of  prison  warders  as  to  his  dream  on  the  preceding  night.

Copied  by  me  from  account  lent  me  by  Lord  Clinton,  who  was  staying  at
Powderham  when  he  received  them.

(Signed) Chakles  L.  Wood.

H.M.  Prison,  Exeter,  April  8th,  1885.

My  Loud, — The  following  are  the  jjarticulars  of  the  dream  of  John  Lee,
which  your  lordship  has  requested  me  to  supi:)ly.

After  the  attempted  execution  of  Lee  on  February  23rd,  1885,  I  went  to
his  cell,  and  spoke  to  him  on  the  extraordinary  event  that  had  happened  in
his  case.  He  replied  by  saying  that  he  had  dreamed  last  night  that  it  would
so  happen.

At  my  request  he  then  related  the  nature  of  his  dream.

He  said  lie  saw  in  his  dream  that  he  was  led  from  his  cell  down  through
the  reception  basement  to  the  scaffold,  which  was  just  outside  the  door  of
that  basement.

He  saw  himself  placed  upon  the  scaffold,  and  efforts  made  to  force  the
drop,  but  it  would  not  work.  He  then  saw  himself  led  away  from  the
place  of  execution,  as  it  was  decided  tliat  a  new  scaffold  must  be  built  before
the  sentence  of  the  law  could  be  carried  out.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


255


He  then  told  me  that  he  had  mentioned  the  dream  to  the  two  officers
who  were  in  the  cell  with  hiin,  when  he  awoke  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning.

The  officers  were  not  present  when  he  told  me  this,  nor  had  they  been
with  him  since  the  attempt  was  made.  But  in  the  meantime  the  officers  had
reported  the  dream  to  the  Governor  of  the  prison,  to  whom  also  I  had  gone
to  make  a  similar  statement.

I  ought  to  add,  my  lord,  that  John  Lee  did  not  attach  any  weight  to  the
dream,  but  had  fully  believed  up  to  the  time  of  execution  that  he  would  be
hanged,  nor  did  he  think  of  it  while  the  attempts  were  being  made.  The
force  of  the  dream  came  to  him  after  the  state  of  semi-consciousness,  into
which  he  had  apparently  relapsed  during  the  attempts,  had  passed  away. — I
am,  your  lordship's  obedient  servant,

(Signed) John  Pitkin,  Chaplain.

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Clinton.

(Signed) A  true  copy,  Clinton.

Fehruary  23rd,  1885.
A  true  account  of  a  dream  dreamed  by  John  Lee  on  the  night  before  the
execution.

At  6  a.m.,  when  he  arose  from  his  bed,  he  said,  "Mr.  Bennett,  I  have
dreamed  a  very  singular  and  strange  dream.  I  thought  the  time  was  come,
and  I  was  led  down  through  the  reception  out  to  the  hanging  place  ;  but
when  they  placed  me  on  the  drop  they  could  not  hang  me,  for  there  was
something  wrong  about  the  machinery  attached  to  the  drop,  and  then  they
led  me  off  from  the  drop,  and  took  me  (instead  of  the  way  I  came)  around
the  A  Wing,  and  back  through  the  A  Ward  to  my  cell."

He  told  me  this  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Milford,  who  watched  with  me
through  the  night.

(Signed) Samuel  D.  Bennett,  Assistant  Warder.
James  Milford,  Superior  Officer.
(Signed) A  true  copy.  Clinton.

The  letter  from  the  Rev.  John  Pitkin,  Chaplain  to  the  Prison,  enclosing  a
copy  of  the  statement  of  the  warders,  was  written  to  Lord  Clinton  at  his
request  when  he  was  staying  at  Powderham  in  the  beginning  of  April,  1885,
he  being  in  the  Chair  at  Quarter  Sessions  at  the  time.

The  drop  was  contrived  by  two  doors  secured  underneath  by  a  bolt  ;  the
prisoner  was  made  to  stand  with  a  foot  on  each  door  and  on  the  bolt  being
withdrawn  the  doors  would  naturally  fall  apart.

The  drop  had  been  tried /o?<r  [five. — C]  times  on  the  Saturday  previous
to  the  execution  and  had  answered  jjerfectly  [twice  in  the  presence  of  the
executioner,  who  expressed  himself  satisfied  with  it. — C.].  It  was  again  tried
after  the  attempted  execution,  but  without  any  weight  on  the  scaffold,  when
it  also  succeeded.

On  the  occasion  of  the  execution,  at  each  successive  attempt,  the  bolt
could  not  be  withdrawn  from  the  socket  by  hardly  the  eighth  part  of  an  inch.

Case  28.

The  following  is  a  case  of  retrocognition,  not  precognition, —  an
apparently  supernormal  perception  of  a  past,  not  a  future  event, — but  it


256


Alice  Johnson.


[part


is  convenient  to  class  the  two  kinds  of  cases  together,  as  is  done  in
Mr.  Myers'  article  above  referred  to,  and  this  one  is  accordingly
placed  here.  The  percept  takes  the  form  of  a  communication  from  a
deceased  person  and  there  is,  no  doubt,  some  evidence  for  post-mortem
knowledge  of  and  interest  in  trifling  circumstances  like  the  one
described.  But  it  will  be  seen  that  the  case  may  easily  be  explained
by  telepathy.

The  account  was  sent  to  us  by  Professor  A.  Alexander,  of  RiO'
Janeiro,  who  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Myers,  dated  July  21st,  1896,  writes  : —

Together  with  this  letter,  I  send  you  the  evidence  for  a  veridical  border-
land hallucination.  The  people  who  sign  the  depositions  are  quite  reliable
and  the  facts  no  doubt  occurred  as  they  are  stated.  The  case,  however,  does
not  stand  altogether  outside  the  possibility  of  chance  coincidence.

Professor  Alexander  sent  us  the  original  depositions  signed  by  the
witnesses,  with  translations  kindly  furnished  by  himself.  His  own
statement  is  as  follows  :  —

Constante  Gardonne  Ramos,  the  principal  informant  in  the  following
case,  is  employed  as  a  foreman  in  the  bookbinding  department  of  the
"Benjamin  Constant  Institute  for  the  Blind,"  one  of  the  public  establish-
ments of  Rio  de  -Janeiro.  He  has  himself  been  totally  blind  from  his  first
year,  and  he  is  therefore  entirely  destitute  of  visual  memories.  This  will
account  for  the  fact  that  tlie  experience  related  by  him  was  auditory  and
tactile,  and  not  visual.  From  his  description,  it  would  appear  to  have  been
a  hallucination  of  the  borderland  type  rather  than  a  mere  dream.

I  called  on  him  for  the  first  time  on  May  30th  of  this  year,  and  then
took  the  notes  from  which  his  written  declaration  was  drawn  up.  After  the
coi-rection  of  some  minor  points,  he  agreed  that  the  account  was  a  faithful
statement  of  his  memory  of  the  occurrence,  and  requested  his  wife,  Donna.
Julieta  Ramos,  to  sign  for  him.

17,  Rua  de  Todosos  Santos,  Rio  de  Janeiro,

June  13th,  1896.

On  the  17  th  of  .January  of  this  year  I  went  to  the  house  of  my  mother,
Donna  Emilia  Ramos,  at  No.  55,  Rua  Sao  Joao  Baptista.  She  was  out,  and
while  I  stayed  there,  I  talked  to  a  parrot,  which  belongs  to  me,  and  which
has  a  value  for  us  because  of  family  associations.  My  father,  who  died  on
the  4th  of  February,  1895,  was,  indeed,  very  fond  of  this  bird.

On  the  following  day  in  the  very  early  morning,  while  I  was  yet  lying  in.
bed  in  that  half  conscious  state  of  somnolence  that  precedes  waking,  I  felt
twice  the  pressure  of  a  hand  placed  on  my  body,  and  I  then  heard  the  familiar
tones  of  my  father's  voice  saying,  "  Nenem,  send  for  your  parrot.  I  have
already  given  orders  to  deliver  it  ujj.  It  is  in  the  house  .  .  .  and  street
.  1  with  two  doors  closed  on  the  side  of  the  street."  The  voice  sounded
as  if  it  were  external  and  came  from  a  person  standing  near  me.

1  In  a  later  letter,  Professor  Alexander  explains  that  neither  the  number  of  the
house  nor  the  name  of  the  street  was  given  in  the  message  about  the  parrot  ;  the  dots-
are  intended  to  indicate  their  omission.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


257


Now,  as  above  stated,  I  had  been  with  the  parrot  on  the  precedmg  day
and  had  observed  nothing  which  might  lead  me  to  suppose  that  there  was  a
possibility  of  its  escaping.  A  very  heavy  raia  was  falling,  and  no  one  came
on  the  evening  of  that  day  to  tell  me  what  had  happened.

About  9  o'clock  on  the  same  morning  of  the  18th,  as  I  was  just  finishing
the  narration  of  my  experience  to  my  wife,  the  black  woman  came  from
the  other  house  to  give  us  the  news  that  my  parrot  had  in  fact  escaped.  It
had  got  away  in  the  afternoon,  after  I  had  left  the  house  in  the  Rua  Sao
Joao  Baptista,  and  it  had  been  caught  by  persons  at  the  grocery  store  [venda]
at  No.  100,  Rua  General  Polydoro.

As  the  grocer  refused  at  iirst  to  restore  the  bird  to  us,  we  were  obliged,
in  order  to  regain  possession  of  it,  to  have  recourse  to  the  intervention  of
the  police.

(Signed  at  the  request  of  my  husband,  Constante  Gardonne  Ramos),

JULIETA  FiGUEIREDO  CaRVALHO  RaMOS.

As  the  result  of  my  interrogation,  Donna  Julieta  Ramos  confirms  the
references  to  her  part  in  the  above  incidents  as  follows  : —

17,  Rua  de  Todosos  Santos,  Rio  de  Janeiro,

June  13th,  1896.

I  perfectly  recollect  that  my  husband  related  to  me  his  having  heard
the  voice  of  his  father  telling  him  of  the  escape  of  the  parrot.  The
particulars  of  the  deposition  bearing  his  signature  are  substantially  the  same
as  those  he  gave  me  on  that  occasion.  I  recollect  how  the  black  woman
arrived  with  her  news  just  as  he  was  finishing  the  narration  of  his
experience,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that,  up  to  that  moment,  none  of  the
persons  that  were  in  the  house  knew  of  that  escape  by  any  normal  means
[of  communication].

(Signed) Julieta  Figueiredo  Carvalho  Ramos.

Donna  Emilia  Ramos,  from  whose  house  the  parrot  made  its  escape,
assured  me  that  there  was  nobody  at  home  on  the  occasion,  and  that,  there-
fore, it  was  impossible  that  the  occurrence  should  have  been  communicated
to  her  son  on  that  day.  The  black  woman,  when  questioned  by  me,  seemed
to  confirm  her  mistress's  statements.  The  positiveness  of  the  witnesses
that  no  communication  prior  to  the  hallucination  passed  between  the  two
houses  is  important,  for  it  is  hardly  two  minutes'  walk  from  one  place  to
the  other.

Donna  Emilia  Ramos  declares  : —

55,  Rua  Sao  Joao  Baptista,  Rio  de  Janeiro,

June  Uth,  1896.

The  parrot  escaped  from  my  house  on  the  day  preceding  the  dream  of
my  son  Constante.  It  appears  that  on  the  afternoon  of  that  day  it  broke
the  chain  that  secured  it  and  escaped  out  of  one  of  the  windows.  I  arrived
home  in  the  evening,  and  it  was  only  on  the  following  morning  that  I  sent
the  cook  to  tell  niy  son  what  had  happened.

In  his  lifetime  my  husband  made  a  great  pet  of  this  bird,  and  every  day
on  coming  home  fed  it  with  ears  of  Indian  corn  or  other  things.

(Signed) Emilia  RaiMos.


258


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Senor  Constante  Ramos  has  two  brothers  in  Rio,  one  of  whom  has  a
business  in  Botafogo,  the  other  being  a  public  employe.  It  was  through
their  instrumentality  that  I  first  heai'd  of  the  case,  and  to  their  perusal  I
finally  submitted  their  brother's  deposition.  They  were  quite  sure  that  the
narrative  thus  written  out  was  identical  with  that  which  they  had  heard  from
his  mouth  at  the  very  beginning,  and  at  my  request  they  very  willingly  made
the  following  formal  statement  to  tliat  efi"ect  : —

77,  Rua  da  Passagem,  Botafogo,  Rio  de  Janeiro,

June  16th,  1896.

We  have  just  read  the  account  given  by  our  brother  Constante,  and  we
are  sure  that  it  is  in  every  respect  a  true  one.

It  is  exactly  in  this  manner  that  he  has  told  us,  from  the  very  first,  of
the  dream  in  which  he  was  informed  of  the  escape  of  the  parrot.

(Signed) Carlos  G.  Ramos.

Fernando  Gakdonne  Ramos.

The  grocery  store  in  the  Rua  General  Polydoro  has  three  doors  on  the
side  of  the  street.  The  grocer  assured  me  that  none  of  these  have
remained  closed  in  the  daytime.  The  jjarrot  had  been  caught  in  the  street
and  brought  to  him  by  some  labourers,  and  he  had  been  unwilling  to  give  it
up  without  a  reward.

Case  29,

The  following  is  an  instance  of  a  fulfilled  prediction  of  death  and
probably  belongs  to  the  class  of  premonitions  that  bring  about  their
own  fulfilment  through  self-suggestion.  The  account  of  it  was
obtained  and  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Mr.  Marshall  Wait,  who  writes
that  the  main  facts  of  the  case  were  told  to  him  within  two  days  of
Mrs.  X.'s  death,  and  the  story  in  full  a  week  after.  Her  name  and
the  names  of  the  witnesses  are  withheld  by  their  request.

Mr.  Wait  writes  : —

5,144  Madison  Ave.,  Chicago,  September  25th,  1896.
Dk.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  enclose  you  herewith  a  state-
ment of  Mrs.  X.  's  premonitory  dream  signed  by  several  members  of  her
family.  The  first  account  which  I  received  was  from  Mr.  J.  S.,  a  brother
of  Mr.  A.  S.,  and  was  somewhat  inaccurate,  as  you  will  see.  I  then
called  upon  Mr.  A.  S.  and  after  conversation  with  him  wrote  out  an
account,  at  his  request,  in  the  name  of  his  wife.  When  I  presented  the
letter  to  him  for  signature,  lie  told  me  that  in  talking  over  the  subject  with
his  wife,  he  found  that  his  statement  was  inaccurate  in  one  detail.  Mrs.
X.  was  anxious  to  procure  the  services  of  a  certain  nurse  for  her
confinement  and  heard  in  the  dream  her  father  say  to  her  mother  "  You  had
better  engage  that  German  girl  now,  as  she  is  not  at  work."  He  then  walked
to  the  wall  and  put  his  finger  on  the  calendar.  Mr.  S.  promised  to
rewrite  the  letter  witli  this  correction,  but  he  has  returned  it  to  me  as  I  wrote
it,  saying  that  it  was  otherwise  accurate  and  the  family  preferred  to  sign  it
as  it  was.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


259


I  have  seen  Dr.  T.,  who  attended  Mrs.  X.  He  expressed  great
interest  in  the  case  and  signified  his  willingness  to  give  me  any  information
he  could  about  Mi's.  X.'s  condition.  But  he  is  an  extremely  busy  man
and  lives  at  a  great  distance  from  me,  and  thus  far  I  have  been  unable  to
have  more  than  a  few  minutes'  talk  with  him.  I  will  try  again  to  see
him.-Yours  respectfully,  Marshall  Wait.

The  account  enclosed,  which  is  signed  by  Mrs.  X.'s  mother,  her
three  sisters,  and  Mr.  A.  S.,  her  brother-in-law,  is  as  follows  :  —

Chicago,  September  18th,  1896.

Dr.  R.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — In  March  of  this  year,  my  sister,  Mrs.
X.,  was  expecting  her  confinement.  She  was  very  apprehensive  about
the  result  and  expressed  her  belief  that  she  was  going  to  die.  On
March  5th  she  dreauied  that  she  was  in  the  kitchen  of  her  house,  bub  at  the
same  time  could  see  her  father  (who  has  been  dead  eleven  years)  in  the  room
above,  talking  with  her  mother,  but  did  not  hear  what  he  said.  She  saw
him  hold  in  his  hand  a  large  printed  calendar  and  put  his  finger  on  the
date  of  March  22nd.  She  told  her  dream  the  next  morning  and  inter-
preted it  to  mean  that  the  baby  would  be  born  on  that  date  The
accouchement  occurred,  however,  on  Mai'ch  12th.  Much  fun  was  poked  at
Mrs.  X.  about  the  mistaken  warning  in  her  dream.  Whether  she  put
any  other  interpretation  on  it  we  do  not  know,  as  she  iiever  said  anything
to  indicate  that  she  did  so.  Her  condition  was  in  every  way  satisfactory
to  the  attending  physician  until  the  afternoon  of  March  21st,  when  she
suddenly  became  unconscious  and  died  on  March  22nd,  having  never  entirely
regained  her  consciousness.  The  cause  of  her  death  was  a  throat  trouble,
not  connected  with  her  confinement.

My  husband,  my  sisters,  and  my  mother,  who  were  all  familiar  with
the  facts  and  knew  of  the  dream  before  the  death,  sign  this  with  me
in  confirmation,  but  in  case  of  publication  we  request  you  to  witlihold
names.

No  memoranda  were  made  of  the  dream,  but  the  dates  were  fixed  in  our
minds  by  the  death  occurring  while  our  remembrance  of  them  was  fresh.

(Signed)

Mr.  Wait  writes  further  : —

October  19th,  1896.
I  called  this  morning  upon  Mr.  A.  S.  He  requests  me  to  say  that
Mrs.  X.  told  her  dream  the  next  morning  to  [her  mother  and  two  .sisters],
who  were  all  members  of  one  household.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  heard  of  the
dream  later,  but  before  the  birth  of  the  child.  .  .  .  The  relations
between  the  family  and  Mr.  X.,  the  widower,  are  strained,  and  I  did
not  ask  for  his  signature.  I  enclose  a  certificate  from  the  Health  Office,
which  I  thought  would  be  the  best  independent  evidence  of  the  death  and
its  date.

The  certificate  states  that  the  death  occurred,  on  March  22nd,  1896,
of  Mrs.  X.,  aged  27  years ;  "cause  of  death.  Tubercular  Meningitis  ;
duration  of  disease,  three  days."


260


Alice  Johnson.


[PAKT


Attempts  to  obtain  further  evidence  from  Mr.  X.  failed,  but  Mr.
Wait  succeeded  later  in  obtaining  a  statement  of  the  case  from  the
physician  in  attendance,  Dr.  T.  [assumed  initial]. He  writes  : —

December  4th,  1897.
At  last  I  am  able  to  send  you  a  statement  by  Dr.  T.  in  the  X.  case.  Dr.
T.  did  not  answer  my  appeal  for  a  special  appointment,  so  as  a  last  resort  I
wrote  out  a  statement  from  my  memory  of  our  conversation,  and  last
evening  I  got  him  to  sign  it.  I  would  have  preferred  to  have  him  make  out
his  own  statement,  but  as  that  seemed  impossible,  I  did  the  next  best  thing.
He  said  that  my  statement  was  perfectly  correct,  and  that  I  might  liave
made  it  even  stronger— that  Mrs.  X.'s  condition  throughout  her  pregnancy
and  up  to  the  moment  when  she  complained  of  sudden  severe  pain  in  her
head  was  "  absolutely  normal. "  Marshall  Wait.

Chicago,  December  3rd,  1897-
I  was  the  physician  in  attendance  upon  the  late  Mrs.  X.  at  the  time  of
her  death.  I  was  well  acquainted  with  Mrs.  X.,  having  been  a  friend  of  the
family  as  well  as  their  physician  for  many  years.  She  was  of  the  tubercular
diathesis,  but  had  had  no  trouble  of  the  kind  for  some  years.  Her  condition
after  her  accouchement  was  apparently  satisfactory.  I  called  upon  her  the
morning  of  the  day  before  her  death,  — more  as  a  friendly  matter  than  as  a
pi'ofessional  duty, — and  found  her  apparently  in  so  good  condition  that  I
jokingly  told  her  that  1  would  not  have  wasted  my  time  if  I  had  known  how
well  she  was.  I  believe  that  in  the  processes  of  elimination  and  repair
which  follow  child-birth,  the  glands  in  her  throat  became  overtaxed  and
discharged  tuberculous  matter  into  the  base  of  the  brain,  causing  the
meningitis  which  resulted  in  her  death.  But  at  the  date  of  her  dream  (of
which  I  was  told  before  her  death)  there  was  no  more  reason  why  she  should
have  anticipated  death  than  at  any  time  for  ten  years  before.

In  case  of  publication  I  would  prefer  to  have  my  name  witliheld.

(Signed  in  full) M.D.

It  is  an  obvious  weakness  in  this  case,  as  Mr.  Wait  remarked  in
sending  it,  that  Mrs.  X.'s  condition  at  the  time  of  her  dream  might
have  predisposed  her  to  presentiments  of  the  kind.  This  does  not,
indeed,  account  for  the  exactness  of  the  coincidence — in  the  absence
of  which  the  case  would,  of  course,  be  entirely  worthless  as  evidence
of  anything  supernormal — but  it  adds  considerably  to  the  likelihood
that,  if  not  the  result  of  self-suggestion,  it  was  merely  due  to  chance.

Further  instances  of  premonitions,  the  accounts  of  which  would
have  made  this  section  too  long,  are  to  be  found  in  Appendices  II.,
III.,  and  IV.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


261


CHAPTER  IV.

EXAMPLES  OF  COINCIDENCES  WITH  A  STRONGER  CLAIM  TO
CAUSAL  PRODUCTION.


Section  I.

Coincidences  apparently  due  to  Subliminal  Mental  Action.
Case  30.

The  following  case  was  recoi'ded  by  the  Rev.  C.  W.  Bingham,
apparently  within  three  weeks  after  it  occurred,  in  Notes  and  Queries
(5th  Series,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  256  ;  September  27th,  1879). He  writes  :—

On  Sunday  evening,  Sept.  7th,  as  I  was  reading  the  37fcli  Psalm  in
church,  my  attention  was  suddenly  drawn  away,  and  there  happened  to  me
what  I  never  remember  to  have  happened  to  me  before  in  the  course  of  my
long  ministry,  viz.,  an  utter  inability  to  recover  my  lost  place.  After  an
awful  pause,  the  clerk  proceeded  with  the  next  verse,  and  a  neighbour
kindly  directed  me  where  to  go  on.  On  returning  home,  niy  wife  pointed
out  the  remarkable  coincidence  that  the  clause  I  had  omitted  was  the  latter
part  of  verse  37  :  "  -ff  is  'place  covld  tiowhere  he  found  !  "

C.  W.  Bingham.

I  should  be  inclined  to  apply  to  this  case  a  suggestion  made  by
Mr.  Myers  in  his  discussion  of  what  he  calls  promnesia, — the  feeling,
often  experienced  by  some  persons,  that  what  is  going  on  at  the
moment  is  a  repetition  of  what  has  happened  to  them  before,  so
that  they  feel  able  to  predict  the  next  step.  (See  "  The  Subliminal
Self.  The  Relation  of  Supernormal  Phenomena  to  Time :  Retro-
cognition  and  Precognition,"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XI.,
pp.  341-344.)

Mr.  Myers  imagines  that  the  subliminal  perception  of  what  is
going  on  may  sometimes  be  slightly  in  advance — say,  by  a  small
fraction  of  a  second—  of  the  supraliminal  perception.  Then,  when
the  subliminal  percept  emerges  into  the  supraliminal  or  ordinary
consciousness,  there  may  be  a  sort  of  double  consciousness  of  the
percept — or  a  consciousness,  together  with  an  apparent  memory  of  the
same  consciousness.  The  memory  might  appear  to  relate  to  a  period
some  time  back,  whereas  it  would  really  relate  to  a  past  only  just  past,
The  effect  would  be  that  what  is  happening  appears  to  the  observer  to

1  The  whole  verse  (in  the  Prayer-Book  version)  is: — "I  went  by,  and  lo,  he  was
gone  :  I  sought  him,  but  his  place  could  nowhere  be  found."


262


Alice  Johnson.


[part


be  a  repetition  of  what  has  happened  some  time  ago, — the  repetition
being  really  in  his  own  perception  of  the  incidents,  not  in  the  incidents
themselves.

According  to  this  view,  we  may  suppose  that  Mr.  Bingham's
subliminal  self  was  reading  on  a  little  ahead,  and  that  the  phrase,
"  His  place  could  nowhere  be  found,"  shot  up  into  his  supraliminal
consciousness  a  little  too  soon,  namely,  at  the  moment  when  it  was
occupied  with  the  first  part  of  the  verse.  This  may  have  produced  a
dream-like  confusion,  in  the  midst  of  which,  as  in  a  dream,  the  phrase
was  totally  misapprehended  and  applied  by  the  reader  to  himself,
instead  of  to  "  the  ungodly,"  to  whom  it  really  refers.  Thus,  it  may
actually  have  caused  him  to  lose  his  place,  and  so —possibly  —  the
coincidence  was  produced. ^

In  further  illustration  of  this  view,  I  may  refer  to  three  cases  given
in  Mr.  Myers'  paper  just  referred  to  {op.  cit.  pp.  411-415).  In  the
first,  Mr.  Newnham,  walking  in  a  field,  hears  a  voice  telling  him  that
he  will  find  a  certain  rare  moth  — Chaonia  —  on  a  certain  oak.  Here,
as  Mr.  Myers  suggests,  he  may  subconsciously  have  seen  the  moth
settle  on  the  oak,  and  the  fact  may  have  been  conveyed  to  his  ordinary
consciousness  in  this  hallucinatory  form.  In  the  second  case,  M.
Adrien  Guebhard,  on  a  geological  excursion,  is  suddenly  reminded  of  a
rare  variety  of  fern  with  bifurcated  fronds  (in  which  he  had  once  been
much  interested,  but  had  never  been  able  to  find  a  specimen  of  it),
and  immediately  afterwards  sees  a  plant  of  the  variety  in  question  on
the  ground  close  to  him.  The  same  experience  with  regard  to  this
abnormality  in  ferns  occurred  to  him  twice  more  in  the  course  of  the
same  year.  We  may  suppose  that  on  the  two  latter  occasions  he  was
subconsciously  on  the  look-out  for  further  specimens,  which  might
otherwise  have  escaped  his  notice  altogether.  The  third  case  was  an
experience  that  occurred  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  Walking  in  a  garden  and
engaged  in  a  train  of  thought  that  made  him  oblivious  to  his  surround-
ings, he  "regained  his  consciousness  of  them  suddenly  to  find  himself
brought  to  a  stand,  in  a  stooping  position,  gazing  intently  at  a  five-
leaved  clover."  Several  years  earlier  he  had  been  interested  in  getting
extra-leaved  clovers,  but  had  not  for  years  made  any  active  search
for  them.

The  same  superior  alertness  of  the  subliminal  self  seems  to  be
shown  in  the  familiar  cases  of  dreams  dramatised  backwards,  when
the  dreamer  first  becomes  consciously  aware  on  waking  of  the  noise  or
other  stimulus  which  has  apparently  started  the  dream,  and  which,
therefore,  must  have  been  perceived  earlier  by  his  subliminal  self.

1  Even  if  his  attention  was  drawn  away  by  something  external,  such  as  a  sudden
noise,  it  may  have  been  a  subliminal  perception  of  the  content  of  the  verse  that
prevented  him  from  finding  his  place  again.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


263


The  following  is  an  instance  experienced  by  Dr.  C.  Theodore
■Green,  an  Associate  of  the  Society,  who  writes  : —

Birkenhead,  June  28th,  1896.

While  reading  Mr.  W.  R.  Newbold's  "Sub-conscious  Reasoning,"
Proceedings  S.P.R. ,  Part  XXX.,  p.  19,  I  was  reminded  of  a  dream  I  had
■  last  winter  which  may  have  been  "dramatised  .  .  .  from  its  apparent
■conclusion  to  its  aj^parent  initiation."  I  thought  I  was  invited  by  some
friends  to  an  Elizabethan  mansion  in  the  north  of  England,  as  they  knew
that  I  was  desirous  of  seeing  a  ghost.  I  was  told  that  I  should  be  sure  to
see  some,  as  they  were  as  "common  as  blackberries  "  nearly  every  day  in
that  house,  and  that  even  the  children  and  servants  had  got  used  to  them.
So  I  went  there  in  my  dream,  thinking  that  I  should  at  last  have  something
veridical  for  the  S.P.R.  So  I  wandered  through  the  quaint  galleries  of  the
rambling  old  house,  and  slept  in  it  for  four  nights  without  hearing  or  seeing
anything  in  the  least  supernormal.

But  during  the  fifth  niglit — I  was  to  return  home  next  day — a  ghost  put
its  long  white  cold  arm  slowly  up  from  under  the  bed  and  touched  me  on  the
right  cheek.  I  instantly  sprang  up  and  seized  the  arm,  feeling  sure  that  I
had  caught  a  ghost  this  time.  Alas,  I  awoke,  and  found  myself  sitting  half
•up,  grasping  the  c()ld  iron  arm  of  the  bedstead,  which  had  evidently  touched
my  cheek  as  I  rolled  over  in  bed.

I  have  since  then  been  half  awaked  several  times  by  touching  this
■same  iron  bar  with  hand  or  face,  but  have  not  had  any  dream  connected
with  it.

Assuming  that  dreams  may  be  "dramatised  backwards"  as  well  as
forwards  in  point  of  time,  it  follows  that  the  mental  process  involved  was
extremely  rapid,  for  I  must  have  awaked  to  ordinary  consciousness  within  a
Tery  few  seconds  of  grasping  that  cold  iron  bar  in  midwinter.

(Dr.)  C.  Theodore  Green.

Case  31.

Perhaps  few  experiences  are  more  familiar  than  to  meet  with  a
oiame  or  a  fact  in  reading  or  conversation  almost  immediately  after
hearing  of  it,  as  we  think,  for  the  first  time.  This  familiar  experience
;generally  strikes  us,  even  though  we  ai-e  quite  aware  that  the  coin-
cidence is  due  to  nothing  more  than  selective  attention  to  a  point
which — for  some  reason — interests  us,  and  selective  disregard  of
other  points.  The  same  explanation  obviously  applies  to  such  cases
:as  the  three  following,  the  first  of  which  was  sent  to  me  by  Dr.
Leaf. He  writes  : —

Beechwood,  Pembury  Road,  Tunbridge  Wells,  May  5th,  1898.
[The  following  is]  a  sufficiently  absurd  coincidence  which  hapijened  to
miyself.

When  I  was  an  undergraduate  at  Cambridge  in  1871,  I  had  an  accident
at  a  practice-wicket  at  cricket,  by  which  two  of  my  teeth  were  broken  out.
This  was  on  July  9.  I  had  a  good  deal  of  pain ,  which  gave  me  such  a  rest-
less night  that  I  was  glad,  contrary  to  my  usual  habit,  to  get  up  early  next

T


264


Alice  Johnson.


[part


morning  and  go  to  early  chapel.  Tn  the  Psalms  for  the  morning  (Iviii.,  6)
came  the  verse  :  "Break  their  teeth,  O  G-od,  in  their  mouths."

Walter  Leaf.

Case  32.

The  otlier  two  cases  were  recorded  by  De  Morgan  in  A  Budget  of
Paradoxes  (reprinted  from  the  Athenmim),  1872,  pp.  280-282.  Such
coincidences  must,  of  course,  be  met  with  much  more  frequently  by
omnivorous  readers  like  De  Morgan  than  by  persons  of  more  limited
intellectual  interests.

The  purely  casual  coincidence,  from  which  there  is  no  escape  except  the
actual  doctrine  of  special  providences,  carried  down  to  a  very  low  point  of
special  intention,  requires  a  jvuiction  of  the  things  the  like  of  each  of  which
is  always  happening.  I  will  give  [two]  instances  which  have  occurred  tO'
myself  within  the  last  few  years  ;  I  solemnly  vouch  for  the  literal  truth  of
every  jDart  of  [both].

In  August,  1861,  M.  Senarinont,  of  the  French  Institute,  wrote  to  me  to
the  effect  that  Fresnel  had  sent  to  England,  in  or  shortly  after  1824,  a  paper
for  translation  and  insertion  in  the  European  Rcoieui,  which  shortly  after-
wards expired.  The  question  was,  what  had  become  of  that  paper.
I  examined  the  Revienj  at  the  Museum,  found  no  trace  of  the  paper,  and
wrote  hack  ,  to  that  effect  at  the  Museum,  adding  that  everj'thing  now
depended  on  ascertaining  the  name  of  the  editor,  and  tracing  his  papers  ;  of
this  I  thought  there  was  no  chance.  I  posted  this  letter  on  my  way  home,,
at  a  post  office  in  the  Hampstead-road  at  the  junction  with  Edward  street,
on  the  opposite  side  of  which  is  a  bookstall.  Lounging  for  a  moment  over
the  exposed  books,  sim(,t  mens  est  mos,  I  saw,  within  a  few  minutes  of  the
posting  of  the  letter,  a  little  catchqjenny  book  of  anecdotes  of  Macaulay,
which  I  bought,  and  ran  over  for  a  minute.  My  eye  was  soon  caught  by
this  sentence  :  "One  of  the  young  fellows  immediately  wrote  to  the  editor
(Mr.  Walker)  of  the  European  lieview."  I  thus  got  the  clue  by  which  I
ascertained  that  there  was  no  chance  of  recovering  Fresnel's  paper.  Of  the
mention  of  current  reviews,  not  one  in  a  thousand  names  the  editor.

In  the  summer  of  1865,  I  made  my  first  acquaintance  with  the  tales  of
Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  and  the  first  I  read  was  about  the  siege  of  Boston  in
the  War  of  Independence.  I  could  not  make  it  out  :  everybody  seemed  to-
have  got  into  somebody  else's  place.  I  was  beginning  the  second  tale  when  a
parcel  arrived  ;  it  was  a  lot  of  old  pamphlets  and  other  rubbish,  as  he  called
it,  sent  by  a  friend  who  had  lately  sold  his  books,  had  not  thought  it  worth
while  to  send  these  things  for  sale,  but  thought  I  might  like  to  look  at  them
and  possibly  keep  some.  The  first  thing  I  looked  at  was  a  sheet  which,  being
opened,  displayed  "A  plan  of  Boston  and  its  environs,  showing  the  true
situation  of  his  Majesty's  anny  and  also  that  of  the  rebels,  drawn  by  an
engineer,  at  Boston,  Oct.,  1775."  Such  detailed  plans  of  current  sieges  being
then  uncommon,  it  is  explained  that  "the  principal  part  of  this  plan  was  sur-
veyed by  Richard  Williams,  Lieutenant  at  Boston  ;  and  sent  over  by  the  son
of  a  nobleman  to  his  father  in  town,  by  whose  permission  it  was  published."
I  immediately  saw  that  my  cimfusion  arose  from  my  supposing  that  the
king's  troops  were  besieging  the  rebels,  when  it  was  just  the  other  way.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


265


Another  instance  of  a  coincidence  produced  ia  great  part  by
selective  attention  to  a  subject  in  which  the  narrator  was  specially
interested  is  the  following.

Case  33.

The  account  of  this  case  was  sent  to  Mr.  Myers  on  the  day  of
its  occurrence  by  Mr.  Edward  D.  Blyth,  of  12,  Belgrave  Crescent,
Edinburgh.  The  account  was  written  by  Mrs.  Blyth,  and  corrobora-
tive notes  by  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Henry  Anderson,  and  Mr.  Blyth
are  appended.

12,  Belgrave  Crescent,  Edinburgh,  Jannaru  5th,  1893,  8.55  p.m.

I  am  at  present  engaged  in  tracing  the  pedigree  of  an  old  Irish  family  of

which  I  am  a  scion. I  exjjressed  a  wish  to  my  daughter,  Mrs.  Henry

Anderson,  that  I  could  find  a  book  which  would  give  me  a  full  account  of  the

Irish  Brigade  (time  of  James  II.),  two  members  of  which.  Colonel  Shee

and  Count  D'Alton  Shee,  were  my  kinsmen. I  expressed  this  wish  several

times. Later  in  tlie  day,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  H.  A.,  I  went  for  the  fird

time  to  the  Advocates'  Library  in  the  Parliament  House  in  the  High-street

of  Edinburgh. Not  knowing  the  way,  by  mistake  we  entered  a  room

reserved  for  members  only. Finding  we  were  in  the  wrong  place,  Mrs.  H.  A.

said,  "Wait  here,  mamma,  while  I  go  and  find  out  where  we  ought  to  go,"

and  left  me  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  large  room,  surrounded  by  thousands

of  books. I  crossed  the  room  with  no  particular  end  in  view,  and  stopped

in  front  of  a  division  filled  with  books,  and  the  very  title  my  eyes  fell  uj^on

was  the  Army  List  of  the  Irish  Regiments  of  King  James  II. ,  in  two  volumes,

cavalry  and  infantry,  by  J.  Dalton,  published  in  Dublin,  in  18(j0. I  have

not  yet  recovered  from  the  curious  shock  I  then  received  and  am  immensely

impressed. I  told  my  husband  of  the  curious  incident  when  I  saw  him  after

returning  home.  h/t  -d

"  Kate  M.  Blyth.

Mrs.  Henry  Anderson  writes  : —

Jaimary  5th,  1893,  9.25  p.m.
I  can  testify  to  the  above  occurrence.  In  the  morning  my  mother
repeatedly  expressed  the  wish  to  obtain  a  book  on  the  subject  of  the  Irish
Brigade,  in  order  to  find  some  kinsmen's  names.  I  left  her,  as  stated,  in  the
large  private  room,  and  coming  back  after  an  absence  of  four  or  five
minutes,  met  her  coming  out  through  the  swing  doors  with  such  an  agitated
expression  that  I  thought  she  must  have  had  a  start  f>f  some  kind.  She
said  immediately,  "Kate,  such  a  very  extraordinary  thing  happened  just
now. I  went  towards  one  of  the  divisions  of  books,  and  the  first  title  my

eyes  fell  on  was ,"  and  she  gave  the  name  of  the  book. She  was

quite  startled  and  nervous  all  the  afternoon  and  evening.

Kate  Henry  Anderson.

Mr.  Blyth  adds  :—

Ja7iuary  5th,  1893,  9.40  p.m.
The  above  accounts  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  what  my  wife  and
daughter  related  to  me  some  hours  ago.

Edward  D.  Blyth.


2G6


Alice  Johnson.


[part


This  case  is  clearly  not  an  accidental  coincidence.  Tt  nmst,  indeed,
have  been  merely  by  chance  that  the  particular  part  of  the  book-case
Mrs.  Blyth  first  approached  happened  to  contain  a  book  with  the
information  she  wished  for  ;  that  is,  it  was  not  her  wish  that  caused
the  book  to  be  in  that  part  of  the  room,  or,  indeed,  in  the  room  at  all.
But  given  that  there  was  such  a  book  in  that  part,  it  was  not  chance
that  led  her  at  once  to  pick  it  out,  but  her  interest  in  the  subject,
making  her  on  the  alert  for  anything  relating  to  it.

Case  34.

The  following  case  is  extracted  and  somewhat  abridged  from  an
article  on  "  Psychical  Research  and  Coincidences,"  by  Professor  J.  H.
Hyslop,  in  7'he  Psycholugical  Review  for  July,  1898.  It  relates  to
some  of  the  experiences  of  Mrs.  D.,  a  lady  with  whom  Professor
Hyslop  has  been  long  acquainted  (an  earlier  report  of  her  crystal
visions  was  given  by  him  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  259).
The  central  incident  in  the  present  account  is  a  premonition  of  Mrs.
D.'s  of  the  death  of  one  of  her  children.  The  case  therefore  properly
belongs  to  the  preceding  section,  but  I  place  it  here  on  account  of  the
very  careful  and  comjjlete  analysis  of  all  the  evidence  for  its  possibly
subliminal  causation  given  by  Professor  Hyslop,  which — for  want  of
space — I  do  not  reprint  in  full,  but  for  which  I  may  refer  the  reader
to  his  original  article.

Some  time  in  July,  1897,  Mrs.  D.  had  a  strong  impression  that  some
unusual  "  burden  "  was  going  to  fall  upon  the  family.  She  could  describe
the  feeling  in  no  other  way,  and  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  expression  is  a
common  one  with  religious  minds,  which  often  emj^loy  the  term  to  denote  a
providential  affliction.  This  meaning  Mrs.  D.  gave  to  the  term  herself.
But  the  feeling  was  too  vague  to  identify  witli  any  past  cause  or  any  incident
to  be  forecasted  in  the  future.  Mrs.  D.  was  in  good  liealth  ;  there  was
nothing  in  her  physical  condition  that  would  suggest  a  clear  phj'sical  cause
of  such  a  feeling.  I  am  not  implying  that  there  were  no  such  causes,  for
there  may  have  been  conditions  that  a  skilled  physician  would  detect.  But
to  the  consciousness  of  the  subject  there  was  no  indication  of  indisposition
of  any  kind.  In  fact,  she  has  answered  all  my  inquiries  on  this  point  to  the
efTect  tliat  her  peculiar  experiences  always  occur  most  frequently  when  her
health  is  at  its  best,  so  far  as  her  own  judgment  can  determine.  Throughout
the  whole  period  over  which  the  ijresent  narrative  extends  her  health  was
good.  In  the  month  of  August  this  premonitory  feeling  repeated  itself  very
frequently,  and  became  so  annoying  that  Mrs.  D.  mentioned  it  to  her
husband,  who  confirms  her  statement  in  regard  to  both  facts,  and  hence
.supports  the  supposition  that  the  location  of  the  experience  previous  to  its
real  or  supposed  fulfilment  is  not  due  to  an  illusion  of  memory.  Finally,
the  feeling  became  so  intense  and  persistent  that  Mrs.  D.,  as  is  often  the
case  with  religious  minds  as  deeply  imbued  with  piety  as  is  her  own,
sought  relief  in  prayer. But  though  this  resource  had  in  her  estimation


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


2C7


been  effective  in  other  cases  whei-e  it  had  been  instigated,  as  might  well
be  in  a  mind  so  sensitive  to  automatisms  as  is  her  own,  yet  the  feeling
could  not  be  dismissed.

To  make  the  matter  clearer  it  is  necessary  to  anticipate  the  seij^uel  of  the
story,  to  which  the  incidents  of  the  narrative  are  supposed  to  refer.  This
is  that  the  little  daughter,  whom  I  shall  call  Lefctie,  and  who  was  just  one
year  and  nine  months  old,  died  on  December  2nd,  1897,  from  the  burning  of
its  cradle.

At  odd  times  between  August  and  December  Mrs,  D.,  in  her  thoughts
about  the  child's  future  and  while  planning  some  little  thing  for  her,  would
hear  a  voice  saying,  "She'll  never  need  it."  One  of  these  occasions  was
the  following  :  The  family  live  in  a  house  with  few  accommodations  for  a
clergyman  who  requires  a  study,  and  Mrs.  D.  planned  to  give  Lettie  a
certain  room  for  a  bedroom  when  she  grew  older,  and  was  running  over  how
she  would  furnish  it,  and  this  voice  came  as  described.  It  was  not  exactly
what  one  could  describe  as  an  external  voice,  nor,  again,  a  mere  thought
impression  or  product  of  the  memory  and  imagination,  as  we  usually
characterise  such  things,  but  one  of  those  internal  voices  with  which
psychical  researchers  have  become  familiar  and  which  Mrs.  D.  herself  dis-
tinguishes as  neither,,  a  real  voice  nor  a  memory  rej^roduction,  but  an
impression  with  all  the  characters  of  a  real  voice  except  the  sense  of
external  reality.

There  were  many  repetitions  of  this  voice  in  about  the  same  language.
One  of  them  occurred  about  two  weeks  before  the  cliild's  death.  Mrs.  D.
had  resolved  to  write  a  little  diary  wliich  she  could  give  to  the  child  when
it  became  older.  She  wrote  down  two  separate  accounts  on  different  days
of  certain  events  having  an  interest  to  the  little  girl.  But,  while  writing
them,  this  voice  came  as  before  :  "  She'll  never  need  them."  The  day  before
the  child  died  the  same  voice  appeared,  and  on  the  morning  of  its  death  the
child  was  running  about  the  house  in  a  rather  dilapidated  pair  of  shoes,
when  Mrs.  D.  remarked  to  the  child  that  her  feet  must  be  cold  and  thought
she  must  have  a  new  pair  of  shoes.  In  the  midst  of  her  thoughts  came  the
voice  again,  "  She'll  never  need  them."  It  must  be  added  also  that,  pre-
vious to  the  impression  of  a  coming  "  burden "  above  described,  this  voice
had  been  heard  several  times.

About  a  week  before  the  child's  death  Mrs.  D.  thought  she  smelled  fire
at  night,  and  feeling  afraid  of  it  went  to  the  cellar  to  look  after  the  matches
and  to  see  that  there  was  no  danger.  She  found  no  traces  of  fire  and
nothing  to  explain  her  impression.  But  from  that  time  she  began  to  be
careful  about  matches,  seeing  that  tliey  were  in  safe  places  and  out  of  reach.
She  even  went  so  far  as  to  look  over  the  house  for  the  matches,  and  felt  a
strong  impulse  to  bui-n  all  parlour  matches  which  were  of  that  kind  that  is
easily  lighted.  Once  the  impulse  to  do  this  was  attended  with  something
like  a  voice  warning  her  to  the  same  end,  and  about  the  danger  of  fire.
Nothing  definite  enough  having  been  suggested  by  the  voice  to  guide  her
actions  directly,  Mrs.  D.  could  only  imagine  the  necessary  precautions,  and
finally  thought  to  hang  a  dripping  pan  in  front  of  the  range  fire,  a  thing
Mrs.  D.  had  never  done  before,  to  prevent  coals  from  falling  out  during  the
night.  Nor  had  any  apprehensions  of  tliis  kind  ever  been  felt  before,  within


268


Alice  Johnson.


[PAET


her  recollection,  and  there  were  no  special  reasons  to  suppose  that  any
danger  of  fire  in  this  way  existed.

On  the  morning  of  the  child's  death,  and  during  family  worship,  another
incident  of  some  interest  occurred.  In  tlie  midst  of  the  petition  for
individual  members  of  the  family,  when  she  came  to  the  phrase  with  which
she  besought  divine  care  for  each  one,  and  attempted  to  apply  it  in  behalf
of  Lettie,  though  no  difficulty  was  encountered  in  the  case  of  the  other
children,  in  this  case  something  seemed  to  stop  Mrs.  D.'s  voice,  and  she
could  not  repeat  the  usual  language.  She  recalls  no  similar  previous
experience.

On  the  same  morning,  about  an  hour  before  the  fatal  disaster,  the  pro-
pulsion to  destroy  the  matches  that  were  dangerous  became  stronger  and
stronger,  until  Mrs.  D.  turned  and  reached  for  the  box  to  destroy  it.  But
as  she  picked  it  up  she  thought.  No  ;  L.  (the  elder  boy)  is  gone,  and  she
thought  that  she  might  need  the  matches  to  light  the  gas  stove.  She  then
said  aloud  to  herself,  "  I'll  destroy  it  as  soon  as  he  comes  back."  She  then
went  on  with  her  work  in  the  kitchen.  When  the  time  came,  about  ten
o'clock,  Lettie  was  taken  up  to  her  crib  for  the  morning  sleejj,  and  as  Mrs.
D.  was  putting  her  into  the  cradle  a  voice,  such  as  has  been  described  above,
said:  "  Turn  the  mattress."  This  Mrs.  D.  was  accustomed  to  do,  though
she  had  never  experienced  any  voice  before  in  connection  with  it.  But,
being  in  a  great  hurry,  she  simply  said  in  a  motherly  way  to  the  child  that
she  would  turn  the  mattress  after  the  child  had  taken  her  nap.  She  then
went  downstairs  to  her  work.  After  a  while  she  heard  the  child  cry,  and
hurrying  up  to  the  room,  found  the  crib  and  its  bedding  on  fire,  and  the
child  so  badly  burned  that  it  died  in  three  hours.

The  only  possible  way  to  account  for  the  accident  was  to  suppose  that
the  cliild  had  found  a  match,  possibly  in  the  crib  or  on  the  mantelijiece,
which  she  could  reach,  and,  lighting  it,  had  set  its  bedclothes  on  tire.
The  other  two  cliildren  were  not  present.  L.  had  gone  down  town  on  an
errand  and  E.,  the  younger  boy,  was  at  school.  No  fire  was  on  this  floor
of  the  house,  hut  in  the  kitchen  and  the  dining-room,  both  below.

Now,  another  incident  of  much  interest  had  occurred  many  times
during  the  two  or  three  years'  residence  of  the  family  in  this  house.  Mrs.
D.  had  often  had  a  visual  apparition  of  tliis  vei'y  crib  on  fire,  but,  as
her  apparitions  or  visual  automatisms  are  very  frequent,  she  had  not
thought  to  assign  it  any  meaning  or  possible  coincidental  value  until  after
the  accident.

These  were  the  experiences  of  Mrs.  D.  previous  to  the  event,  but
there  were  two  otiier  incidents  by  other  persons  than  Mrs.  D.,  that  lend
them.selves  to  a  construction  of  coincidence  in  connection  with  the  accident.
The  first  is  exactly  like  the  one  narrated  as  occurring  at  family  devotions.
Mrs.  D.  has  a  sister  living  in  Connecticut,  some  seventy-five  miles  from  B.,
the  home  of  Mrs.  D.  No  correspondence  has  passed  recently  between  them,
and  the  sister  was  not  given  to  as  devotional  a  life  as  Mrs.  D.  It  must  also
be  remembered  that  the  sister  had  ridiculed  Mrs.  D.'s  stories  of  her
experiences,  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  half  jestingly  criticise  Mrs.  D.  for
her  extravagant  piety.  She  discouraged  Mrs.  D.'s  tolerance  of  possible
significance  in  many  of  the  coincidences  which  I  have  recorded  in  the


JSXXV.J


Coincidences.


269


ProceecZinr/s  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  (Vol.  XII.,  p.  259  seq.),
when  they  were  the  subject  of  conversation.  But  on  hearing  of  the  child's
-death  she  came  to  B.  and  narrated  an  experience  of  her  own.  It  was  to  the
effect  that  about  a  week  before  the  death  of  the  child  she  had  had  such  an
experience  as  she  had  never  had  before.  An  overwhelininw  impression  of
some  great  calamity  to  occur  in  the  "  family  "  (the  incidents  show  that  the
term  included  the  whole  family  connections),  and  the  impulse  arose  in  her
to  pray  for  each  one,  which  she  did,  feeling,  as  she  expressed  it  in  her
narrative,  that  this  was  an  unusual  procedure  for  her.  She  u'ent  over  each
person  among  parents  and  relatives,  until  she  came  to  the  child,  Lettie,
when  her  voice  suddenly  stopped  and  she  could  not  pray  for  her  as  for  the
others.  She  finally  managed,  however,  to  utter  with  struggling  voice  a
petition  for  "  our  little  blossom,"  the  name  which  she  was  accustomed  to
apply  to  Lettie  when  speaking  of  her.

The  second  incident  was  an  experience  of  the  next  door  neighbour  to
the  D.'s.  I  shall  call  the  lady  who  had  it  JIi-s.  G.  On  the  afternoon  of  the
child's  death  Mrs.  G.  came  in  about  three  o'clock  and,  a  propos  of  the
accident,  remarked  that  on  the  night  before,  I  believe  it  was,  she  had  been
wakened  by  the  fear  of  tire  and  had  gone  down  to  the  cellar  to  search  for  it,
and  exclaimed  while  making  the  search  :  "  Oh  !  if  our  little  baby  would
burn  up  !  "  Her  own  child  was  about  the  age  of  Lettie.  I  ascertained  the
facts  of  Mrs.  G.'s  experiences  from  her  own  statements,  and  found  that
they  were  exactly  as  told  me  by  Mrs.  D.

The  night  after  the  burial  of  the  child  IMi-s.  D.  could  picture  to  herself
nothing  but  the  little  coffin  and  the  grave.  To  remove  the  unpleasant  feeling
Mrs.  D.  prayed  to  have  a  realising  sense  and  the  power  to  know  that  the
child  was  a  spirit  and  did  not  lie  in  the  grave.  At  this  time  she  was  at  the
home  of  her  sister,  whither  the  family  had  gone  to  seek  a  burial  place.  One
morning,  soon  after  this  prayer,  she  awakened  and  lay  for  an  hour  thinking
over  family  afiairs.  The  sua  was  shining  brightly  in  the  room,  and  while
thinking,  suddenly  she  saw  a  form  by  the  bedside,  and,  turning,  saw  an
apparition  of  little  Lettie  with  her  hands  on  the  bedside  and  smiling  at  Mrs.
D.  By  her  side  was  the  form  of  a  woman,  holding  her  hands  about  the
child,  as  if  to  assist  it.  Mrs.  D.  sprang  up  in  bed  and  unconsciously
exclaimed,  "Good  morning,  Lettie,"  and  both  figures  immediately  vanished.
The  forms  were  transparent  and  objects  could  be  seen  through  them.  The
grown  form  was  not  recognisable  as  any  one  that  Mrs.  D.  knev/.  Mrs.  D.
retained  a  strong  sense  of  satisfaction  from  the  vision.  She  is  disposed  to
interpret  it  as  a  providential  comfort  for  her  sorrow.

At  the  end  of  December  another  incident  took  place  that  will  have  some
interest.  This  time  it  was  the  experience  of  the  little  boy  E.  It  w^as  first
told  me  by  Mr.  D.  The  following  letter  from  Mrs.  D.  narrates  the  details
of  the  occurrence  :  —

''Januarii  ofh,  1898.

"You  requested  a  note  of  E.'s  recent  experience.  It  occurred  on
Thursday  eve,  December  30th  (1897).

"  I  lay  down  on  the  sofa  to  rest  in  the  evening,  and,  as  he  often  does,  he
climbed  back  of  me  to  rest  with  me.  I  do  not  remember  what  my  thoughts
were,  but  feel  quite  confident  I  was  not  thinking  of  my  experience  at


270


Alice  Johnson.


[part


S  ,  Conn.,  when  E.  said  :  'Mamma,  is  little  Lettie  air  now? Is  she

like  smoke  1 '  Why,  darling  1  '  'Cause  I  just  saw  her  and  put  my  arms
around  her  and  she  was  like  air.'  I  will  endeavour  to  keep  account  of  any-
thing further.  -p, p,  „


On  inquiry  about  the  incident  I  could  find  no  trace  of  any  story  to  the
child  that  might  lead  to  a  belief  on  its  part  in  such  a  reality  as  its  experience
miglit  be  taken  to  describe.  The  child  was  only  four  years  old.  The
incident  impressed  both  parents  as  very  striking,  and  they  were  evidently
puzzled  by  it,  having  a  strong  aversion  to  the  apjjarent  meaning  of  such
occurrences.

The  apparition  of  the  burning  cradle  is  one  of  the  most  striking  coin-
cidental features  of  the  whole  narrative.  The  fact  is  that  the  crib  stood
within  a  few  feet  of  a  fire  grate.  But  as  there  had  been  no  fire  in  this
grate  for  a  year  or  more  the  accident  could  not  have  been  caused  by  this.
Mrs.  D.  herself  had  all  along  explained  the  vision  of  the  burning  crib  by
this  very  proximity  to  the  fire  grate.  Almost  every  one  would  have  such
a  possibility  suggested  to  the  mind  by  this  situation  of  the  crib.  But  not
every  one  is  subject  to  automatisms,  and  such  thoughts  are  easily  refei'red
to  their  proper  source  in  association.  Mrs.  D.,  however,  as  w^e  have  found,
is  liable  to  these  occurrences.  Now  it  is  the  unusual  occurrence  and
character  of  automatisms  that  call  special  attention  to  them.  They  are
easily  remembered  as  interesting  and  significant  if  any  coincidence  witli
them  is  remarked.  If  the  accident  of  the  child's  death  had  occurred  only
in  connection  with  an  association  of  a  burning  crib,  every  one  would  have
dismissed  it  as  a  coincidence  not  worth  taking  seriously,  and  no  significance
would  be  given  it.  But  when  an  accident  of  this  sort  occurs  in  coincidence
with  an  apparition  apparently  premonitory  in  character,  we  forget  associa-
tion and  are  tempted  by  the  unusual  nature  of  the  phenomenon  to  ascribe
it  a  value  that  it  may  not  deserve.  We  may  concede  that  such  an
experience  might  have  some  significance  if  not  connected  with  automatisms
as  frequent  or  habitual  occurrences.  But  here  we  have  in  this  very  subject
the  existence  of  automatisms  which  can  be  traced  directly  to  emotional
influences  of  various  sorts.  There  is  a  frequent  connection  between  past
thoughts  and  associations  and  certain  sensory  automatisms,  and  we  have
only  to  suppose  this  case  one  of  them  in  order  to  explain  it  in  a  natural  way.


Section  II.

Coincidences  jwssibly  or  fvohahlij  dv,e  to  Telepathy .

Among  all  those  apparently  supernormal  faculties  which  form  tlie
subject  of  the  investigations  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
Telepathy  is  probably  the  one  whose  existence  most  persons  interested
in  psychical  research  regard  as  the  most  firmly  established.  I  there-
fore place  in  my  last  section  coincidences  suggestive  of  Telepathy.
I  cannot  claim  that  the  cases  given  here  add  in  any  at  all  material


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


271


degi'ee  to  the  evidence  for  telepathy  already  published,  and  several  of
my  most  evidential  ones  have  already  been  printed  in  the  Journal.
No  one  denies  that  merely  accidental  coincidences  between  tlie  thoughts-
and  expressions  of  two  different  persons  often  occur,  and  we  cannot,
of  course,  treat  any  coincidences  as  telepathic  unless  we  have  strong
reason  for  thinking  that  they  are  not  accidental.  But  since,  as
already  observed,  we  have  no  means  at  present  of  discovering  for
certain  whether  telepathy  has  operated  or  not  in  any  individual  case,
because  of  our  ignorance  of  its  method  of  operation,  the  main  object
of  this  section  is  to  illustrate  the  difficulty  of  dravviDg  the  line  between
accidental  and  telepathic  coincidences  For  this  purpose  I  arrange
my  cases  in  a  sort  of  rough  order  of  merit,  beginning  with  those  that
seem  to  me  evidentially  weakest  and  ending  with  the  stronger  ones.

The  weakness  of  the  first  case  consists  in  the  absence  of  any
sort  of  connection  between  the  persons  whose  thoughts  coincided.


Case  35.

This  case,  which  was  recorded  a  few  days  after  it  occurred,
was  sent  to  Mr.  Myers  by  Mr.  L.  C.  Powles,  an  Associate  of  the
Society. He  writes:  —

9,  Queen's  Gate  Place,  London,  S.W.,  March  1st,  1898.
Dear  Sir, — I  hardly  know  whether  the  dream  given  on  the  other  side  of
this  is  worth  sending  you. I  should  be  more  inclined  to  set  it  down  as  a
mere  coincidence  if  it  were  not  that  I  am  somewhat  easily  impressed  by  the'
thoughts  of  others. I  ought  to  add  Mrs.  Wellesley  is  known  to  me. —

L.  C.  Powles.
March Id,  1898.

On  the  night  of  the  26th  ult.  I  had  a  vivid  dream  to  this  effect ;  that  I
had  determined  to  commit  suicide  and  had  made  arrangements  to  do  so,  even
to  the  extent  of  ordering  my  coffin  of  the  village  carpenter  ;  but  I  was-
profoundly  disinclined  to  carry  out  these  arrangements  when  the  time  had
come  and  confided  to  a  friend  tliat  I  should  put  off  the  deed  till  Thursday  next.
My  friend  in  the  dream  replied  grudgingly,  "Well,  I  suppose  it  can  be
managed."  This  dream,  which  I  attributed  to  a  reminiscence  of  a  book  I
had  been  reading  the  day  before.  The  Early  Life  of  Wordsworth,  I  related
to  Lady  Eden  and  Mr.  Wellesley  on  the  27th.

[These  persons  add]

We  certify  thi.s  {

I  Victor  Wellesley.

On  the  28th  came  a  letter  from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Wellesley  to  Mr.
Wellesley,  dated  26th  February,  Wiesbaden,  of  which  I  send  you  jiart.
The  coincidence  is  very  curious.


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  passage  in  the  letter  in  which  the  coincidence  occurs  is  as
follows  : —

Homan's  establishment  is  in  a  great  state  of  excitement  and  scared,
as  a  chap  there  contemplates  committing  suicide  and  goes  about  with  a
revolver. He  lias  now  put  it  off  till  next  Thumday .

Case  36.

The  following  is  a  coincidence  whose  triviality  throws  doubt  on
its  telepathic  character.  It  was  obtained  by  Professor  Harlow  S.  Gale,
of  the  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  from  Mrs.  Charles  T.
Jerome,  who  writes  to  Professor  Gale  : —

MinneapoUs,  February  20th,  1896.
On  the  afternoon  of  October  29th,  1895,  at  ten  minutes  past
four,  I  stepped  upon  a  chest  in  my  closet  to  reach  my  muff  which  was  lying
on  a  high  shelf.  As  I  turned,  my  mufl:'  brushed  across  the  top  of  the  door
casing,  and  a  key  fell  to  the  floor.  I  picked  it  up  and  recognised  it  as  the
key  to  a  cash  box  belonging  to  my  son,  Albert  C.  Jerome,  which  he  had
supposedly  lost  about  a  year  jjrevious.

When  he  returned  home  in  the  evening  I  said,  "  Albert,  I  found  the  key
to  your  cash  box  to-day."  "Did  you  ?  "  he  replied,  "  I  was  thinking  about
that  key  like  evenjth.iny  this  afternoon."  "  Have  you  thought  of  it
frequently?"  Tasked.  "No,"  he  replied,  "I  haven't  thought  of  it  before
in  six  months  that  I  remember. I  had  given  up  finding  it."

I  inquii'ed  at  what  time  he  was  thinking  of  it,  to  which  he  answered,
"  A  little  after  four  o'clock,  about  ten  minutes  after.  I  know  the  time
because  I  was  thinking  about  it  just  as  I  reached  the  Great  Western  freight
depot,  and  looked  at  the  clock  as  I  entered,  not  with  reference  to  that,  but
on  account  of  my  errand  there  I  took  note  of  the  time."  I  had  not  then
mentioned  at  what  time  I  found  the  key.

I  had  also  noted  the  time,  simply  because  I  was  just  then  going  out  to
drive,  and  taking  my  miitf  down  passed  immediately  out.

Incidents  of  a  similar  nature  have  several  times  occurred  between  Albert
and  myself,  but  I  have  never  regarded  them  of  sufficient  importance  to
interest  any  one  but  ourselves.

Mrs.  Chas.  T.  Jerome.

As  far  as  I  am  concerned  this  is  O.K.

Albert  C.  Jerome.

On  the  afternoon  of  October  29th,  1895,  very  shortly  before  ten  minutes
jjast  four,  Mrs.  Charles  T.  Jerome  was  standing  un  a  c]iair-.seat  before  an
open  chamber  door.  To  keep  her  balance  she  put  forth  her  hand,  laying
her  fingers  upon  the  ledge  above  the  doorway,  and  at  the  same  time,  by
merest  accident,  upon  the  key  of  her  son  Albert's  cash  box — the  key  having,
no  doubt,  l)een  laid  there  t  >  hide  it  ;  but  the  place  and  circumstance  of  its
hiding  had  been  quite  foi gotten.  Indeed,  it  had  been  missing  for  about  a
year,  and  its  loss  had  been  nearly  dropped  from  memory.

Upon  her  son's  return  she  told  him  of  her  finding  his  lost  key.  He
asked  when  it  was  found  ;  and  learning  that,  exclaimed  in  surprise  that  at


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


273


just  about  that  time  he  had  been  thinking  very  intensely  of  the  key,  and
said  furthermore  that  he  did  not  remember  having  tliought  of  the  key  before
in  six  months.

I  knew  the  time  when  the  key  was  found,  because  it  was  just  before
going  to  drive  witli  my  mother,  and  at  starting  looked  at  the  clock.

Albert  knew  appi-oximately  the  time  when  he  was  thinking  of  the  key,
because  he  was  on  his  way  from  McMillan  and  Co. 's  warehouse  (cor.  2  St.
and  1  Ave.  N. )  to  the  Chicago  Great  Western  freight  depot  (cor.  10  Aves.
and  Wash.),  and  noted  the  hour  and  minute  of  leaving  for  the  depot.

Charles  W.  Jerom£.

The  next  case,  again,  may  possibly  have  been  telepathic,  though
there  is  no  proof  that  Miss  M.  was  thinking  of  her  friends  just  at  the
time  when  they  began  to  talk  about  her.  The  coincidence  seems  to
relate  to  the  j)lace  ratlier  than  the  time  of  the  conversation.

Case  37. [L.  1099.]

The  account  was  received  from  one  of  our  Associates  who  wishes
that  the  names  and  address  should  not  be  given.

Cheltenham,  December  11th,  1897.
My  wife  was  walking  with  her  married  daughter  in  Cheltenham
to-day,  December  11th,  and  when  they  arrived  at  Montpellier  Walk,  about
tlie  centre  of  the  town,  my  wife  remarked  to  her  daughter  that  she  would
like  to  receive  some  information  about  a  lady  whom  she  had  met  several
years  ago  at  her  daughter's  bungalow  in  Ceylon.  Tliey  continued  talking  of
this  lady  for  some  minutes,  and  were  much  surprised  to  find  on  their  return
home  that  the  lady  in  question  had  called  only  half-an-hour  previously,  and
■expressed  great  regret  at  not  finding  them  at  home,  as  she  had  to  leave
Cheltenham  by  the  next  train.  The  coincidence  is  rendered  the  more
remarkable  by  the  fact  that  my  son-in-law  had  met  the  lady,  at  the  exact
spot  in  the  town  where,  about  half-an-hour  afterwards,  my  wife  had  the
impression  that  she  would  like  to  receive  some  news  about  her.  I  may  add
that  the  lady  does  not  live  at,  or  near,  Cheltenham,  and  beyond  knowing
that  she  had  left  Ceylon,  and  was  residing  in  England,  neither  mj'  wife  nor
■daughter  knew  where  she  was  living,  or  had  the  remotest  idea  that  she  was
in.  Cheltenham,  and  would  call  upon  them.

(Signed; [Mr.  A.]

In  reply  to  inquiries  we  received  the  three  following  letters  : —

Cheltenham,  December  17th,  1897.

Dear  Sir, — On  the  morning  of  the  11th  inst.  I  met  Miss  M.  on  Mont-
pellier Walk.  She  had  been  to  call  on  my  wife,  and,  failing  to  find  her  at
home,  was  walking  down  town  in  hopes  of  meeting  her.  I  turned  and
walked  with  Miss  M.  for  some  time,  looking  for  my  wife  until  it  was  time  to
return  to  where  she  was  staying,  as  she  had  to  catch  the  train  to  Malvern.
At  lunch  my  mother-in-law  remarked  to  my  wife  that  it  was  a  curious
coincidence  they  should  have  been  talking  of  Miss  M.  on  their  way  home.  I


274


Alice  Johnson.


asked  if  they  remembered  whereabouts  they  began  speaking  of  her,  and  it.
turned  out  that  it  was  on  the  exact  spot  to  a  yard  where  I  had  met  Miss  M..
-Yours  faithfully,  ^^.^^^^^ [Mn.  B.]

December  17th,  1897.
Dear  Sir, — I  was  walking  home  from  town,  and  when  at  the  Montpellier

Walk  I  said  to  my  daughter  (Mrs.  "  B.")  that  I  wondered  if  had  arrived.

from  Ceylon  and  where  she  would  pass  the  winter.  We  continued  talking
about  her  almost  the  whole  way  h(jme.  At  the  Christ  Church  crossing  we'
met  my  son-in-law  (Mr.  "B.")  on  his  bike  and  he  called  out  something

about  which  we  did  not  understand. On  reaching  home  we  found  a.

letter  from  this  lady  saying  how  vexed  she  was  to  miss  us,  as  she  was  leaving
by  next  train. At  lunch  my  son-in-law  remarked  how  curious  we  should

have  talked  of during  the  morning,  and  asked  where  we  were  when  the^

conversation  began.  We  said,  "At  the  Montpellier  Walk,"  which  proved
to  be  exactly  where  he  had  met  about  half-an-hour  before  we  returned

"^^y-  (Signed) [Mrs.  A.]

December  17t/<,  1897.
Dear  Sir, — I  was  walking  home  with  my  mother  when  she  asked  me  if
I  had  had  any  news  of  Miss  M.  and  where  she  was,  and  wondered  where  she-
was  going  to  live.  We  began  talking  of  her  on  the  Montpellier  Walk,  and
continued  chatting  about  her  nearly  the  entire  way  home.  At  the  Christ
Cliurch  crossing  we  met  my  husband  on  his  bike,  who  shouted  out  something,
about  Miss  M.,  which  we  failed  to  understand.  But  when  we  arrived  at  the
house  we  found  that  Miss  M.  had  called  and  was  so  sorry  to  miss  us,  as  she
was  leaving  Cheltenham  by  the  next  train.  At  luncheon  we  were  telling  my
father  and  husband  how  curious  it  was  that  we  were  talking  of  Miss  M.  so
much  and  that  she  should  be  in  Cheltenham,  and  my  husband  asked  us  where^
we  began  to  speak  of  her,  and  we  told  him  at  the  Montpellier  Walk,  which
proved  to  be  exactly  where  he  had  met  our  friend  before  we  returned
that  way.

(Signed) [Mrs.  B.]

Case  38.

In  the  following  the  detailed  nature  of  the  agreement  suggests  more-
strongly,  though  still  by  no  means  conclusively,  that  the  coincidence  was-
due  to  telepathy.  I  received  it  from  Mr.  A.  Berry,  Fellow  and  Lecturer
in  Mathematics  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  who  writes  to  me  : —

Fairseat,  Wrotham,  April  3rd,  1898.

Dear  Miss  Johnson,  —The  circumstances  relating  to  the  coincidence  of
which  I  was  speaking  are  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect  as  follows  : —

I  was  taking  part  in  an  Intercollegiate  Examination  in  Mathematics  in
1890.  In  addition  to  papers  on  specific  subjects,  there  is  also  a  paper  of
problems,  which  may  be  chosen  from  any  of  the  subjects  of  examination..
The  other  papers  contain  "  bookwork  "  cj[uestions  and  problems,  or  "  riders,"
connected  with  them.  Shortly  before  the  examination  it  appeared  that  Mr..
A.  Larmor,  of  Clare,  and  I  projjosed  to  set  closely  similar  problems — one  in,
the  "  problem  paper"  and  one  in  the  paper  on  a  specific  subject,  Statics.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


275


I  find  thab  Mr.  Larmor's  version  was  actually  printed  and  set  in  the
Statics  paper.  I  infer  that  I  was  setting  mine  in  the  problem  paper,  but  I
have  no  independent  recollection  of  this.  The  problem  paper  is  made  up  by
■contributions  from  each  of  four  Colleges  which  join  in  the  examination  ;  it  is
•edited  by  one  examiner  and  circulated  in  proof  to  all.  I  imagine  that  Mr.
Larmor  saw  my  question  in  proof  and  then  noticed  that  it  was  substantially
his  own. My  question  was  tlien  withdrawn.

I  was  not  able  to  find  the  question  among  the  old  examination  papers
which  I  possessed,  but  satisfied  myself  by  a  process  of  exclusion  that  the
year  must  have  been  1890,  and  after  leaving  Cambridge  asked  Mr.  Richmond,
giving  him  this  date,  to  send  me  a  copy  of  the  question  (Mr.  Larmor's
version),  which  I  enclose.

I  have  no  copy  of  my  own  version,  but  my  recollection  is  that  the  data
of  the  problem — as  contained  in  the  first  sentence — were  identical,  but  that
I  only  asked  for  a  certain  result  which  expressed  the  stresses  (tensions)  along
the  four  strings,  whereas  Mr.  Larmor  asked  atw  for  the  stresses  along  the
rods,  and  expressed  the  whole  result  in  a  singularly  elegant  form,  which  I  had
missed.  I  do  not  think  that  the  result  asked  for  is  nearly  as  characteristic
of  a  problem  of  this  class  as  the  data,  so  that  the  resemblance  between  our
two  versions  is  greater  than  might  perhaps  at  first  sight  appear.

A  new  text-book  on  Statics  (by  J.  Greaves  of  Christ's)  had  recently  come
out,  and  it  is  possible  that  something  in  that  may  have  suggested  the  problem
to  both  of  us,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  anything  of  the  sort.

I  have  written  to  Mr.  Larmor  for  his  recollection  and  enclose  a  copy  of  the
letter,  so  that  you  may  be  able  to  judge  how  far  his  reply  is  suggested  by  my
letter. When  I  hear  from  him  I  will  send  the  letter  on. — Yours  sincerely,

Arthur  Berry.

The  copy  of  the  question  as  finally  printed,  furnished  by  Mr.
Richmond  to  Mr.  Berry,  was  as  follows  :  —

A  parallelepiped  formed  of  twelve  weightless  rods  freely  jointed  together
at  their  extremities,  is  in  equilibrium  under  the  action  of  four  stretched
elastic  strings,  connecting  the  four  pairs  of  opposite  vertices.  Show  that  the
figure  is  its  own  stress-diagram.

The  following  is  Mr.  Berry's  letter  to  Mr.  Larmor,  asking  for  his
recollection  of  the  incident : —

Aijril  drd,  1898.

Dear  Larmor, — Do  you  happen  to  remember  any  details  of  the  circum-
stances under  which  we  both  set,  or  wanted  to  set,  a  problem  about  a
pai-allelepiped  in  the  Mays,  about  1890  ?  A  friend  of  mine  is  interested  in
coincidences,  and  has  asked  me  to  get,  if  possible,  your  statement  of  the
matter  as  well  as  my  own.  If  you  could  give  me  your  recollections  1  should
be  much  obliged. — Tours  sincerely,

Arthur  Berry.

Mr.  Larmor  replied  :  —

April  6th,  1898.

Dear  Berry, — My  I'ecollection  of  the  curious  coincidence  to  which  you
refer  is  as  follows  : — Clare,  Caius,  King's  and  Trinity  Hall  were  grouped  for


276


Alice  Johnson.


[part


examination  purposes  ;  you  were  one  of  the  examiners  representing  King's,
and  I  one  of  those  representing  Clare.  I  believe  Statics  was  one  of  the
subjects  assigned  to  ine,  and  we  were  each  requested  to  supply  three  or  four
problems  for  the  problem  paper,  i-epresenting  more  or  less  the  subjects
assigned  to  us  for  the  ordinary  papers.  The  procedure  was  as  follows.  Art
editor  was  appointed  who  should  collect  the  problems  from  the  various
examiners,  arrange  them,  and  see  to  the  printing  of  the  problem  paper,  its
circulation  among  the  examiners,  and  the  insertion  of  corrections  suggested
by  them.  This  was,  I  believe,  Stearn  (or  Bell?).  The  problem  was  set  by
me  as  an  example  of  the  principle  of  Virtual  Work.  On  receiving  the  proof
of  the  problem  paper,  I  sav/  that  it  had  been  printed  twice  and  drew  the
editor's  attention  to  it.  It  turned  out,  however,  that  the  explanation  was
that  you  had  also  sent  it  in  among  your  problems.  While  the  problems  were
practically  identical,  I  recollect  that  my  version  was  a  trifle  more  general
than  yours,  inasmuch  as  it  Iiaa  reference  to  the  diagonals  as  well  as  the  edges
of  the  parallelepiped.  [The  italics  are  mine.  A. J.]  This  version  was
retained  in  tlie  paper  and  you  sent  a  substitute  for  the  other.  We  were
both  struck  at  the  time  by  the  curious  coincidence  and  discussed  the  matter,
but  were  unable  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  were  led  to  set  the
problem  by  atiy  train  of  ideas  we  had  in  common.

The  problem  was  quite  new,  I  had  not  discussed  it  with  anybody,  and
the  editor  of  the  problem  paper  was  the  only  person  to  whom  I  had
communicated  it.— Very  sincerely  yours,  Alex.  Larmor

Mr.  Berry  wrote,  enclosing  Mr.  Larmor's  letter :  —

King's  College,  Cambridge,  Aijril  8th,  1898.
Dear  Miss  Johnson, — Here  is  Mr.  Larmor's  "narrative."  The  only
discrepancy  which  I  notice  between  his  account  and  mine  is  in  the  sentence
[italicised].  It  is  quite  irrelevant  to  the  coincidence  and  merely  affects  the  .
question  of  our  "credibility."  I  think  that  my  problem  referred  to  the
diagonals  (strings)  only,  and  he  thinks  that  it  referred  to  the  edges  (rods)
only,  omitting  the  strings,  so  that  virtually  the  results  which  he  thinks  that  I
asked  for  and  those  which  I  think  that  I  asked  for  are  exactly  ccimple-
mentary,  and  together  make  up  practically  what  he  (as  we  both  agree)  asked
for. -Yours  sincerely,  Arthur  Berry.

I  first  heard  of  this  case  orally  from  Mr.  Berry,  when  he  drew
a  diagram  of  a  parallelepiped  with  dotted  lines  connecting  the  four
pairs  of  opposite  vertices,  to  explain  to  me  what  the  problem  was.
This  diagram  shows  that  his  recollection  of  the  general  nature  of
the  problem  at  that  time  was  correct,  as  afterwards  verified  by  refer-
ence to  the  printed  question.

Case  39.

The  next  is  a  series  of  three  coincidences, — all  apparently  purely
accidental  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  first, — taken  from  Over
the  Teac7i2)s,  by  Ofiver  Wendell  Holmes  (3rd  Edition,  1891,  p.  12,  et


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


277


seq.)  We  are  told  in  the  Introduction  that  the  part  of  the  book
containing  these  cases  was  written  in  March,  1888.

(p.  12)  ...  I  relate  a  singular  coincidence  which  very  lately
occurred  in  my  experience.  ...  I  will  first  copy  the  memorandum
made  at  the  time  : —

"  Remarkable  coincidence. On  Monday,  April  18th,  being  at  table  from

G.30  p.m.  to  7.30,  with and [the  two  ladies  of  my  household],  1

told  them  of  the  case  of  'trial  by  battel'  offered  by  Abraham  ThorntdU  in
1817.  I  mentioned  his  throwing  down  his  glove,  which  was  not  taken  up  by
the  brother  of  his  victim,  and  so  he  had  to  be  let  off",  for  the  old  law  was  still
in  force.  I  mentioned  that  Abraham  Thornton  was  said  to  have  come  to  this
country,  '  and  [I  added]  he  may  be  living  near  us  for  aught  that  I  know.'  I
rose  from  the  table  and  found  an  English  letter  waiting  for  me,  left  while
I  sat  at  dinner. I  copy  the  first  jjortion  of  this  letter  : —

'20,  Alfred  Place  West  (near  Museum),  South  Kensington,

London,  S.W.,  April  7th,  1887.
'  Dr.  0.  VV.  Holmes, — Dear  Sir,  —  In  travelling  the  other  day  I  met  with
a  reprint  of  the  very  interesting  case  of  Thornton  for  murder,  1817.  The
prisoner  pleaded  successfully  the  old  Wager  of  Battel. I  thought  you  would
like  to  read  the  account,  and  send  it  with  this . . . — Yours  faithfully,

'Fred.  Rathbonb.' "

Mr.  Rathbone  is  a  well-known  dealer  in  old  Wedgwood  and  eighteenth
century  art.  As  a  friend  of  my  hospitable  entertainer,  Mr.  Willett,  he  had
shown  me  many  attentions  in  England,  but  I  was  not  expecting  any  com-
munication from  him  ;  and  when,  fresh  from  my  conversation,  I  found  this
letter  just  arrived  by  mail  and  left  while  I  was  at  table,  and  on  breaking
the  seal  read  what  I  had  a  few  moments  before  been  telling,  I  was  greatly
surprised,  and  immediately  made  a  note  of  the  occurrence,  as  given  above.

I  had  long  been  familiar  with  all  the  details  of  this  celebrated  case,  but
had  not  referred  to  it,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  for  months  or  years.  I
know  of  no  train  of  thought  which  led  me  to  speak  of  it  on  that  particular
day.  I  had  never  alluded  to  it  before  in  that  company,  nor  had  I  ever
spoken  of  it  with  Mr.  Rathbone.

The  case  I  have  given  is,  I  am  confident,  absolutely  free  from  every
source  of  error.  I  do  not  remember  that  Mr.  Rathbone  had  communicated
with  me  since  he  sent  me  a  plentiful  supply  of  mistletoe  a  year  ago  last
Christmas.  The  account  I  received  from  him  was  cut  out  of  The  Sporting
Times  of  March  nt\\,  1887.  My  own  knowledge  of  the  case  came  from
Kirby'a  Wonderful  Mnsenm,  a  work  presented  to  me  at  least  thirty  years  ago.
I  had  not  looked  at  the  account,  spoken  of  it,  nor  thought  of  it  for  a  long
time,  when  it  came  to  me  by  a  kind  of  spontaneous  generation,  as  it  seemed,
having  no  connection  with  any  previous  train  of  thought  that  I  was  aware  of.
I  consider  the  evidence  of  entire  independence,  apart  from  possible
"telepathic"  causation,  completely  waterproof,  airtight,  incombustible,  and
unassailable,

(p.  18).  I  referred,  when  first  reporting  this  curious  case  of  coincidence,,
with  suggestive  circumstances,  to  two  others,  one  of  which  I  said  was  the


278


Alice  Johnson.


[part


most  picturesque  and  the  other  the  most  unlikely,  as  it  would  seem,  to
happen. This  is  the  first  of  those  two  cases  : —

Grenville  Tudor  Phillips  was  a  younger  brother  of  George  Phillips,  niy
College  classmate,  and  of  Wendell  Phillips,  the  great  orator.  He  lived  in
Europe  a  large  part  of  his  life,  but  at  last  returned,  and,  in  the  year  1863,
died  at  the  house  of  his  brother  George.  I  read  his  death  in  the  paper  ;
but,  having  seen  and  heard  very  little  of  him  during  his  life,  should  not  have
been  much  impressed  by  the  fact  but  for  the  following  occurrence  :  between
tlie  time  of  Grenville  Phillips's  death  and  his  burial  I  was  looking  in  upon
my  brother,  then  living  in  tlie  house  in  which  we  were  both  born.  Some
books  which  had  been  my  father's  were  stored  in  shelves  in  the  room  I  used
to  occupy  when  at  Cambridge.  Passing  my  eye  over  them,  an  old  dark  quarto
a,ttracted  my  attention.  It  must  be  a  Bible,  I  said  to  myself, — perhaps  a  rare
•one, — the  "Breeches"  Bible  or  some  other  interesting  specimen.  I  took  it
from  the  shelves,  and  as  I  did  so,  an  old  slip  of  paper  fell  out  and  fluttered
to  the  floor.  On  lifting  it  I  read  these  words  :  TJie  name  iti  Grenville  Tudor.
What  was  the  meaning  of  this  slip  of  paper  coming  to  light  at  this  time,  after
reposing  undisturbed  so  long  ?  There  was  only  one  way  of  explaining  its
presence  in  my  father's  old  Bible, — a  copy  of  tlie  Scriptures  which  I  did  not
remember  ever  having  handled  or  looked  into  before.  In  christening  a  child
the  minister  is  liable  to  foi'get  the  name  just  at  the  moment  vvlien  he  ought  to
remember  it.  My  father  preached  occasionally  at  tlie  Brattle  Street  Church.
I  take  this  for  granted,  for  I  remember  going  with  him  on  one  occasion  when
he  did  so.  Nothing  was  more  likely  than  that  he  should  be  asked  to  ofliciate
at  the  baptism  of  the  younger  son  of  his  wife's  flrst  cousin,  .Judge  Phillips.
This  slip  was  handed  him  to  remind  him  of  the  name.  He  brought  it  home,
put  it  in  that  old  Bible,  and  there  it  lay  quietly  for  nearly  half  a  century,
when,  as  if  it  had  just  heard  of  Mr.  Phillips's  decease,  it  flew  from  its  hiding
place  and  startled  the  eyes  of  those  who  had  just  read  liis  name  in  the  daily
column  of  deaths.  It  would  be  hard  to  find  anything  more  than  a  mere
coincidence  here  ;  but  it  seems  curious  enough  to  be  worth  telling.

Tlie  second  of  these  two  last  stories  must  be  told  in  prosaic  detail  to  show
its  whole  value  as  a  coincidence.

One  evening  while  I  was  living  in  Charles  Street,  I  received  a  call  from
Dr.  S.,  a  well-known  and  highly  respected  Boston  physician,  a  particular
friend  of  the  late  Alexander  H.  Stephens,  vice-jDresident  of  the  Southern
Confederacy.  It  was  with  reference  to  a  work  which  Mr.  Stephens  was
about  to  publish  that  Dr.  S.  called  ujion  me.  After  talking  that  matter  over
we  got  conversing  on  other  subjects,  among  the  rest  a  family  relationship
existing  between  us, — not  a  very  near  one,  but  one  which  I  think  I  had  seen
mentioned  in  genealogical  accounts.  Mary  S.  (the  last  name  being  the  same
.as  that  of  my  visitant),  it  appeared,  was  the  great-great-grandmother  of  Mrs.
H.  and  myself.  After  cordially  recognising  our  forgotten  relationship,  now
for  the  first  time  called  to  mind,  we  parted,  my  guest  leaving  me  for  his  own
home.  We  had  been  sitting  in  my  library  on  the  lower  floor.  On  going
upstairs  where  Mrs.  H.  was  sitting  alone,  just  as  I  entered  the  room  she
pushed  a  paper  across  the  table  towards  me,  saying  that  perhajjs  it  might
interest  me.  It  was  one  of  a  number  of  old  family  papers  which  she  had
brought  from  the  house  of  her  mother,  recently  deceased.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


279


I  opened  the  paper,  which  was  an  old-looking  document,  and  found  that
it  was  a  copy,  perhaps  made  in  tliis  century,  of  the  will  of  that  same  Mary
S.,  about  whom  we  had  been  talking  downstairs.

If  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  purely  accidental  coincidence,  this  must  be
considered  an  instance  of  it.  All  that  one  can  say  about  it  is  that  it  seems
very  unlikely  that  such  a  coincidence  should  occur,  hut  it  did.

Dreams  about  letters,  coinciding  with  their  actual  arrival  and
correctly  representing  some  part  of  their  contents,  are  comparable  to
Dr.  Holmes'  first  case,  but  belong  to  a  class  which  is  stronger
evidentially,  since  dreams  about  any  subjects  must  be  on  the  whole
less  frequent  than  mere  impulses  to  talk  about  them.  I  give  two
cases  of  such  coincidental  dreams.^

Case  40. [L.  955.]

The  first  comes  from  Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  Bart.- ;  the  account  has
the  advantage  of  having  been  written  on  the  day  of  the  incident.

Ventnor,  March  2Zrd,  1891.
I  was  called  at  eight  this  morning,  and  my  letters  left  outside  the  door.
I  fell  asleep  again,  and  had  what  seemed  a  long  and  troublesome  dream
about  a  cheque  which  I  had  to  fill  up  and  sign.  At  nine  I  awoke,  with  a
vivid  recollection  of  my  dream,  got  up,  opened  a  packet  of  letters  forwarded
from  home,  and  found  among  them  a  registered  letter  containing  a  cheque
for  a  large  sum,  which  I  had  to  sign  as  trustee.  L J  J

N.B.  —I  had  no  reason  to  expect  the  receipt  of  the  cheque.  The  dream
was  not  in  any  way  concerned  with  the  real  cheque,  but  was  rather  my
ineffectual  attempts  to  draw  a  cheque  properly  on  a  blank  sheet  of  paper.
But  the  coincidence  was  very  remarkable.

Lady  Jones  writes  : —

April  Ut,  1893.

I  can  entirely  corroborate  from  my  own  memory  the  story  of  my

husband's  dream  about  the  cheque.  -it,  t>t  t

^  Evelyn  M.  Jones.


'  For  other  instances  of  this  kind,  see  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  103  and'
105,  and  Vol.  VII.,  p.  257.  In  connection  with  these  cases,  I  may  refer  to  a  curious
non-coincidental  case  published  in  the  "Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations"
(Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  p.  91)  of  an  extremely  vivid,  though  apparently  not  fully
externalised,  vision  of  a  number  of  letters  lying  on  a  (real)  table  in  a  room  adjoining
that  in  which  the  percipient  was  lying  in  bed.  The  door  was  shut,  so  that  he  could  not
really  see  the  table  ;  but  along  with  the  vision  came  the  conviction  that  the  letters
contained  news  of  the  death  of  all  his  relations.  On  going  into  the  room,  he  found
no  letters  there  and  nothing  occurred  later  to  confirm  the  presentiment.  The-
percipient  (who  is  personally  known  to  some  members  of  the  Committee  who  drew
up  the  "Report  on  the  Census  ")  declared  that  he  was  certainly  awake  and  with  his  eyes
open  when  the  vision  occurred,  and  he  seems  to  have  had  no  sense  of  awakening-
from  it.

-  For  another  experience  of  Sir  Lawrence  Jones',  see  below,  p.  290.

U


280


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Sir  Lawrence  J  ones  writes  later  : —

Cranraer  Hall,  Fakenham,  April  Ist,  1893.

I  related  my  dream  to  Lady  Jones  immediately  after  opening  my  letter.
This  dream  was  unusually  vivid,  and  the  impression  of  it  remained  with  me
much  longer  than  usual.  I  dream  a  good  deal,  but  rarely  remember  any-
thing except  in  the  case  of  morning  dreams,  when  I  liave  woken  early  and
gone  to  sleep  again.

Case  41. [L.  998.J

The  next  case  rests  on  unusually  good  evidence,  since  it  was  noted
before  verification,  while  the  full  account  of  it  was  written  from  notes
made  immediately  after  by  Professor  A.  Alexander,  of  Rio  Janeiro.
He  says,  in  sending  the  account  : —

February  Uh,  1896.
My  informant,  Senhor  Nascimento,  is  a  life  member  of  the  ' '  Society  of
Arts,"  and  received  his  technical  education  in  London.

Rio,  February  3rcZ,  1896.

A.  recent  case  of  apparent  clairvoyance  has  been  communicated  to  me
by  a  Brazilian  engineer,  called  Jose  Custodio  Fernandes  do  Nascimento,
who  is  liimself  the  percipient.  I  have  been  acquainted  with  this  gentleman
for  several  years  and  know  him  to  be  a  careful  and  trustworthy  witness.  It
will  be  seen  that  he  has  enabled  me  also  to  give  direct  testimony  to  the
care  with  which  he  has  j^rovided  for  projDer  evidence.

Li  thus  proceeding,  he  endeavours  to  atone  for  former  laxness,  inasmuch
as  some  seven  or  eight  years  ago  he  failed  to  take  adequate  note  of  a
probably  veridical  dream,  in  which  he  seemed  to  be  trying  to  escape  with
his  family  from  the  deck  of  a  burning  vessel,  and  to  witness  the  jumping
overboard  f)f  a  man  whose  clotlies  liad  caught  fire.  A  telegram  from  a
northern  Brazilian  port  subsequently  gave  the  news  that  about  that  time
fire  had  broken  out  on  board  a  certain  vessel,  and  that  on  the  occasion  some
individual  had  in  reality  jumped  into  the  sea,  more  or  less  in  tlie  manner
perceived  in  the  dream.

Shortly  after  three  p.m.  on  Saturday,  January  11th,  1896,  I  met  Senhor
Nascimento  in  the  Rua  do  Ouvidor  in  this  city,  and  he  at  once  gave  me
verbal  particulars  of  a  second  experience  of  the  kind,  which  he  had  had  on
that  very  date.

He  stated  that,  as  the  result  of  slackness  in  his  business,  he  had  lately
been  straitened  for  want  of  means,  and  had  felt  this  impecuniosity  all  the
more  that  his  eldest  daughter  is  shortly  to  be  married  to  tlie  son  of  a  Don
J.,  a  merchant  resident  in  Montevideo.

On  the  preceding  evening  of  the  10th,  the  young  man  J.  came  to  visit
his,  fianeee.  at  the  usual  hour,  and  mentioned  that  a  letter  from  his  father  was
waiting  for  Senlior  Nascimento  in  the  Rua  da  Alfandega  at  the  firm  of  Jorge
Dias  Brothers,  the  correspondents  in  Rio  of  Don  J.  He  had  not  brought  it
himself,  as  it  was  to  be  delivered  to  Senhor  Nascimento  personally.

My  informant  awoke  on  the  following  morning  at  an  early  hour,  and  fell
again  into  a  state  of  slumber  between  5  and  6  o'clock. He  then  dreamt


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


281


that  he  had  called  at  Dias  Brothers  and  that  they  handed  him  a  present
from  Don  J.  of  one  conto  of  reis  (about  £40),  which  he  was  so  glad  to
receive  that  he  embraced  the  members  of  that  firm  with  an  efi'usion  of  tears.
In  the  dream  he  seemed  to  count  the  money.

He  rose  with  the  conviction  that  his  vision  would  lie  realised,  although
Tio  ordinary  reasons  concurred  to  make  him  supjjose  that  such  would  be  the
<;ase.  This  belief  led  him  to  write  down  on  a  slip  of  paper  (which  is  here-
with enclosed)  the  following  note  ; —

' '  Sonhei  que  ao  ir  receber  a  carta  dos  Senhores  J orge  Dias  estes  me
■entregaram  a  somma  de  1  :  000$  000  de  reis,  e  que  eu  commovido  abracei-os
chorando."  11-1-96.

("I  dreamt  that  on  going  to  receive  the  letter  fi'om  Senhores  Jorge  Dias,
the  latter  delivered  to  me  the  sum  of  1  :  000  $  000  of  reis,  and  that  I,  being
moved,  embraced  them  with  tears."  11-1-96.)

Senhor  Nascimento  said  nothing  to  his  wife  or  children  about  the  dream.
He  merely  put  the  above  note  under  other  pajiers  in  a  pigeon-hole  of  his
bureau,  which  he  then  locked.  He  went  into  town  ;  called  at  half-past  ten
at  the  house  of  Jorge  Dias  Brothers,  and  received  the  letter,  which  he
afterwards  opened  in  the  street.  This  letter  he  showed  to  me  when  we  met.
In  it  Don  J.  makes  a  present  of  one  conto  of  reis  to  his  future  daughter-in-
law,  and  instructs  Senhor  Nascimento  to  draw  the  money  at  the  house  of
John  Moore  and  Co.  of  this  city.  This  sum  Senhor  Nascimento  had  duly
received  about  1  o'clock  on  that  day,  and  he  invited  me  to  accompany  him
home  to  verify  what  he  had  stated  regarding  the  note  taken  in  the  morning.
The  conto  of  reis  was  shown  to  me  ;  the  bureau  was  opened  in  my  presence,
and  the  slip  of  paper  was  taken  out  of  the  pigeon-hole  and  immediately
■delivered  intt)  my  keeping.

On  Monday  the  13th,  I  returned  for  further  information.  By  direct
■questioning,  Senhor  Nascimento  had  learnt  that  his  friends,  the  Dia,s
Brothers,  were  not  aware  of  the  contents  of  the  letter  at  the  time  of  its
receipt.  A  similar  declaration  was  made  in  my  hearing  by  the  young  man
J.  who  added,  however,  that  he  had  afterwards  (i.e.,  at  an  hour  later  than
that  of  the  dream)  been  informed  by  a  brother  of  his  wliat  their  father
liad  done.

Jolin  Moore  and  Co.  are  not  personally  known  to  my  informant.  J.'s
brother  lias  no  other  connection  with  him  than  that  established  by  the
■coming  union  between  the  families,  and  yet  the  dream  coincided  Avitii  the
arrival  of  the  letter  at  Rio  and  not  with  its  despatch  from  Montevideo.  The
circumstances  of  the  case,  then,  seem  to  render  the  explanation  by  clair-
-\'oyance  more  plausible  than  that  by  telepathy.

Senhor  Nascimento  states  that,  although  he  sometimes  has  waking
presentiments,  the  two  dreams  above  narrated  are  the  only  vivid  ones  of  the
kind  he  recollects  having  had  in  his  experience.  He  does  not  remember
■ever  receiving  similarly  positive  indications  in  a  vision,  -which  have  remained
unfulfilled.

(The  above  is  written  out  from  notes  taken  by  me  on  the  date  of  the
■occurrence.)

A.  Alexander.


282  Alice  Johnson.  [part

Professor  Alexander's  account  is  confirmed  as  follows  by  the
percipient  : —

Rio,  Fehrnary  3rd,  1896.

I  can  testify  to  the  fulness  and  exactness  of  all  the  details  above  given.

I  still  have  a  vivid  remembrance  of  the  dream  of  the  burning  vessel,  the
confirmation  of  which  came  on  the  same  day.  A  man  was  reported  to  have
jumped  overboard  with  his  clothes  on  fire,  just  as  I  saw  him  in  my  dream.

I  reside  at  No.  33,  Travessa  de  Sao  Salvador,  Haddock  Lobo,  half-an-

hour's  journey  from  town  in  the  tramcars,  and  I  never  come  home  during

the  course  of  the  day.  t /-i -c  tvt

Jose  C.  Fernandes  do  Nascimento.

The  original  note,  made  by  Senhor  Nascimento  on  the  morning
after  his  dream  and  before  its  verification,  was  sent  with  the  narrative
by  Professor  Alexander.

Cases  referring  to  the  arrival  of  persons  may  be  compared  with
those  relating  to  the  arrival  of  letters.  Here  is  one  in  which  the
impression  about  the  arrival  seems  to  have  coincided  with  the  sup-
posed agent's  planning  of  his  arrival.  It  is  in  one  respect  somewhat
stronger  evidentially  than  the  cases  just  given^  since  the  impression  was
a  waking  one — though  possibly  an  illusion  rather  than  a  hallucination.
On  the  other  hand,  the  incident  to  which  the  impression  referred  was
of  a  less  unusual  kind.


Case  42. [L.  995.]

This  case  was  received  from  Mrs.  C.  R.  Griffing,  an  Associate
of  the  American  Branch  of  the  S.P.R.,  who  is  well-known  to
Dr.  Hodgson.  She  made  the  following  note  of  what  she  had  heard
from  the  percipient,  her  daughter-in-law,  before  they  knew  that  it  had
any  correspondence  with  the  actual  facts  :  —

Box  14,  White  Plains,  New  York,  Jxme  13th,  1891.

Just  now  I  am  feeling  much  worried  about  my  son  Horace,  who  is-
away.  My  sister,  who  has  many  times  made  correct  predictions,  wrote  me
that  she  saw  Horace  very  ill,  and  last  evening  my  daughter-in-law,  after  she
went  to  her  room,  heard  Horace,  as  she  supposed,  enter  the  basement
kitchen  ;  she  heard  him  rock  in  his  favourite  large  chair  and  move  about.
This  morning,  when  I  went  down  to  breakfast,  she  said,  "Horace  came,
didn't  he  ?"  She  was  so  sure  that  he  came  that  she  had  more  coffee  made
for  him.  Just  now  I  am  tlie  only  one  who  drinks  coftee.  She  thought  she
heard  me  early  this  morning  ask  him  how  he  was  feeling.  All  this  may  not
be  premonitory,  but  it  worries  me.  j^^.^  Griffing.

Her  son  actually  returned  home  the  next  day,  and  Mrs.  Griffing
wrote  shortlv  after  : —

[June  28tK  1891.]

The  morning  of  June  13th,  when  I  went  down  to  breakfast,  my  daughter-
in-law  remarked  carelessly,  "Horace  came  last  night,  didn't  he  ?  "  "No,"


XXXV,]


Cu  incidences.


283


I  said,  "he  did  not  come."  "But  I  heard  him  come,"  she  exclaimed,  in  a
surprised  tone.  "Are  you  sure  he  isn't  here?"  I  answered  that  I  was
sure.  "But,"  she  persisted,  "did  you  look  into  the  room?  I  am  sure  I
heard  him."  It  was  difficult  to  convince  her  that  he  was  not  somewhere
about.  He  had  been  away  only  a  few  days,  was  well,  as  far  as  we  knew,  and
we  had  no  reason  to  be  anxious  about  him.  The  next  day  he  returned  and
told  me  that  he  came  very  near  coming  the  evening  before,  but  after  talking
it  over  with  Charley  he  decided  to  wait  until  the  next  day.  They  both  told
me  of  their  discussing  it  about  eight  o'clock.

Jane  R.  Griffing.

The  precipient  describes  her  impression  as  follows  : —

During  the  evening  of  June  12th,  about  eight  o'clock,  I  went  to  my
room.  Some  time  before  nine,  I  heard  my  brother-in-law,  Horace,  come  to
the  basement-kitchen  door  ;  finding  it  locked  he  went  to  a  window,  raised
it  and  stepped  in.  I  heard  him  strike  a  match,  move  about  the  room,  and
sit  down  in  a  large  rocking  chair.  I  was  so  absolutely  sure  that  it  was
Horace  that  I  did  not  go  down  to  see  who  it  was,  or  speak  to  my  inother-in-
law  about  it.  I  supposed  she  knew  that  Horace  was  there.  The  reason  I
was  so  sure  that  it  was  Horace  instead  of  any  one  else  was  that  my  other
brother-in-law  was  in  the  house,  my  husband  would  not  come  until  the  next
day,  and  all  the  movements  I  heard  were  exactly  like  Horace's  habits  when
he  had  been  out  and  came  in  by  the  basement,  especially  his  sitting  and
rocking  in  that  particular  chair.

Phebe  L.  Geiffing.

Mr.  C.  L.  Griffing  and  his  brother  give  the  following  account  of
what  they  were  doing  at  the  time :  —

The  evening  of  June  12th,  my  brother  Horace  and  I  were  together  for  an
hour  or  so  before  nine  o'clock.  It  must  have  been  about  eight  when  we
were  discussing  the  question  of  his  returning  to  White  Plains  that  night,  or
waiting  until  the  next  day  and  [going]  up  with  me.  He  was  quite  inclined
at  first  to  go  by  a  late  train  that  evening,  but  decided  to  wait  until  the
next  day.

*  Chas.  L.  Griffing.

My  brother's  account  of  the  conversation  between  us  in  regard  to  my
returning  home  during  the  evening  of  June  12th  is  correct.  It  could  not
have  been  far  from  eight  o'clock,  as  we  were  not  together  until  after  seven,
and  separated  before  nine.

H.  M.  Griffing.

In  answer  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  further  enquii'ies,  Mrs.  Griffing
writes  : —

Box  14,  White  Plains,  New  York,  April  1st.  [1892.]
In  reply  to  your  enquiry,  at  the  time  of  the  telepathic  incident  of
June  12th,  it  was  entirely  uncertain  when  Horace  would  return  ;  he  might
come  at  any  time  and  might  not  for  weeks.  He  was  in  the  City  for  a
special  purpose  and  did  not  know  what  the  result  would  be.  I  was  not  ex-
pecting him  at  that  time,  as  it  was  too  soon  for  him  to  know  what  his  plans


284


Alice  Johnson.


[part


would  be,  and  he  returned  only  for  two  or  three  days.  I  was  not  in  the
least  anxious  about  him,  as  he  was  well  and  in  no  trouble  of  any  kind.

Jane  R.  Gbiffing.

Case  43.

The  following  case  comes  from  Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse,  whose  name  will
be  familiar  to  readers  of  the  Proceediyigs  and  Journal.  His  success
as  agent  in  many  experiments  in  thought-transference  adds  consider-
ably to  the  probability  that  the  apparition  was  veridical.  On  the  other
hand,  the  absence  of  anything  at  all  remarkable  or  strikingly  unusual
in  his  condition  at  the  time  is,  of  course,  a  weak  point.  The  per-
cipient. Dr.  Wiltse's  son,  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :  —

Lancing,  Tenn.,  February  lotJi,  1896.
Dear  Sir, — On  the  night  of  the  15th  of  January  last  my  father  was  away
from  home.

As  the  night  was  somewhat  cold  and  there  was  fire  in  his  room,  I  c)ccupied
his  bed.  During  the  night  1  awoke  and  saw,  as  I  supposed,  my  father  lying
in  bed  on  the  front  side.  He  seemed  to  be  sleeping  quietly,  and  his  left
arm  was  lying  at  full  length  on  the  top  of  the  coverlet.

I  got  carefully  out  of  bed,  thinking  not  to  awaken  him,  covered  up  the
fire  to  keep  for  morning,  and  stood  close  to  him  looking  at  him,  and  cogita-
ting whether  to  go  back  to  my  own  bed  ;  but,  preferring  the  warm  room,  I
said  to  myself,  "  He  sneaked  in  with  me,  so  I'll  sneak  in  with  him."  I  got  in
bed,  and  fell  to  sleep,  but  afterwards,  waking  up,  discovered  that  he  was-
gone.  I  supposed  he  had  been  called  away,  but  learned  in  the  morning  that
he  had  not  been  at  home. — Yours  truly,

Jason  Wiltse.

Dr.  Wiltse  adds  : —

Lancing,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.,  Febrnary  lith,  1896.
My  Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — . . . I  send  an  account  of  an  apparition  uf
myself.

My  share  in  the  apparition  is  this  : —

On  the  night  in  question  I  was  .staying  at  the  house  of  Mr.  W.  T.
Howard,  two  miles  from  home.  I  was  tired  out,  and  stopi^ed  because  1  really
could  go  no  farther.

I  had  to  sleep  with  two  boys  who  had  bad  colds,  and  was  so  annoyed  with
them  that  I  laid  awake  wishing  I  was  at  home  in  my  own  room,  and  pictur-
ing to  myself  the  comfortable  fire,  bed,  &c.,  that  I  was  missing,  until  I  was
near  at  one  time  rising  and  going  home,  but  cojicluded  I  was  feeling  too  weak
to  make  the  journey.

On  my  arrival  home  my  son  told  me  of  seeing  me,  as  he  supposed,  in  njy
bed  before  I  had  mentioned  the  matter,  or,  in  fact,  tliought  of  the  possi-
bility of  my  having  ijroduced  any  telepathic  impression. — Yours  truly,

A.  S.  Wiltse.

I  give  next  two  cases  of  apparent  thought-transference  relating  to
animals.  There  is  of  course  no  prima  facie  reason  why  people  should
not  have  veridical  impressions  about  animals  as  much  as  about  any


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


285


other  beings  in  whom  they  ai-e  strongly  interested.  It  has  often  been
pointed  out  that  such  cases  do  not  involve,  of  necessity,  an  animal
"  agent,"  since — at  least  in  all  that  I  have  ever  met  with — there  is
always  a  human  being  concerned  from  whose  mind  the  percipient
might  have  gathered  the  intelligence,  apart  from  the  possibility  of
independent  clairvoyance.  It  is  clear  that  the  idea  of  a  dog  might  be
conveyed  from  one  mind  to  another  as  easily  as  the  idea  of  any  other
object — neither  the  dog  nor  the  object  taking  any  part  in  the  process —
and  a  real  dog  just  as  well  as  the  imaginary  dog,  who  figures  in  one  of
my  cases.

It  is,  however,  altogether  irrelevant  to  the  main  purpose  of  this
paper  to  discuss  how  this  or  that  supernormal  or  apparently  super-
normal incident  may  have  been  caused.  I  am  not  concerned  to  argue
that  the  mind  of  an  animal  cannot  communicate  directly — by  thought-
transference — with  the  mind  of  a  human  being.  I  maintain  only  that,
however  probable  such  a  hypothesis  may  be,  the  evidence  in  our
possession  so  far  hardly  even  suggests  it;  because  the  well-authenticated
cases  of  supposed  telepathy  from  animals  are  so  few  that  they  can
easily  be  put  down  to  chance.  Regarded,  however,  as  cases  of  clair-
voyance, or  of  telepathy  from  one  human  being  to  another,  they  go  to
swell  the  bulk  of  cases  of  these  classes,  and  consequently  to  reduce  the
possibility  of  attributing  them  to  chance.

Case  44. [L.  1075.]

This  case  was  I'eceived  by  Mr.  Myers  in  December,  1890,'  from  Mrs.
Bagot,  writing  from  The  Palace,  Hampton  Court.  Both  Mrs.  Bagot
and  her  daughter,  who  confirms  the  account,  are  known  to  Mr.  Myers.

In  the  year  1883  we  were  staying  at  the  Hotel  des  Anglais,  at  Mentone.
I  had  left  at  home  (in  Norfolk)  in  the  care  of  our  gardener  a  very  favourite
little  dog,  a  black  and  tan  terrier,  named  Judy.  I  was  sitting  at  table  d'hote
and  suddenly  saw  my  dog  run  across  the  room,  and  unthinkingly  exclaimed,
"  Why,  there's  Judy  !  "  There  was  no  dog  in  the  hotel,  and  when  I  went  up-
stairs I  told  my  daughter,  who  was  ill,  what  I  had  seen.  A  few  days  after
I  got  a  letter  saying  that  Judy  had  gone  out  with  the  gardener  as  usual  in
the  morning  quite  well,  but  when  he  returned  at  breakfast  time  she  was
suddenly  taken  ill,  and  died  in  half-an-hour.  At  this  distance  of  time  I
cannot  distinctly  remember  whether  the  dates  agreed,  but  my  impression  is

that  she  had  died  the  day  I  saw  her.  -.^  t>

Mary  Bagot.

Mrs.  Bagot's  daughter,  Mrs.  Wodehouse,  sent  to  Mr.  Myers  on
February  9th, 1896,  the  following  corroboration,  stating  that  the

1  In  February,  18110,  Mrs.  Bagot  wrote  a  second  account  of  the  same  incident,
which  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  April,  1896,  with  her  daughter's  con-
firmation, then  obtained  for  the  first  time.  The  earlier  account,  here  given,  is  practically
identical  with  the  later  one,  so  that  Mrs.  Bagot's  recollection  of  the  circ\imstances
does  not  seem  to  have  varied.


286


Alice  Johnson.


[part


quotations  were  an  exact  copy  of  the  references  to  the  dog  in  her  diary
for  March  24th  and  ■28th,  1883.  It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no
proof  that  the  dog  was  seen  on  the  day  of  its  death,  but  it  is  clear
that  the  death  was  not  heai'd  of  till  afterwards.

56,  Chester  Square,  S.W.

(Cojvj  of  Diary.)  March  2m,  1883.  Eader  Eve  (Mentone).—"  Drove  with
A.  and  picked  anemones.  Lovely  bright  day.  But  my  head  ached  too
much  to  enjoy  it.  Went  to  bed  after  tea  and  read  Hettner's  '  Renaissance.'
Mamma  saw  Judy's  ghost  at  table  d'hote  !

March  2Stli,  Wednesday  (Monte  Carlo).  — "  Mamma  and  A.  came  over  for
the  day. Judy  dead,  poor  old  dear."

Note.  — I  distinctly  remember  my  father  and  mother  and  sister  (Mrs.
Algern(.)n  Law)  and  my  cousin  (Miss  Dawnay)  coming  into  my  bedroom  all
laughing  and  telling  me  how  my  mother  had  seen  Judy  (black  and  tan
terrier)  running  across  the  room  whilst  they  were  at  table  d'hote.  My
mother  was  so  positive  about  it,  that  one  of  the  others  (I  think  my  father)
had  asked  the  waiter  if  there  were  any  dogs  in  the  hotel,  and  he  had  answered
in  the  negative.  I  can  find  no  further  mention  of  the  time  or  day  of  the
dog's  death  in  my  diary.

I  may  also  be  mistaken  in  the  day  on  which  my  mother  saw  Judy,  for
although  I  usually  write  my  diary  every  evening,  I  sometimes  leave  it  for  two
or  three  days  and  then  write  it  in  as  best  I  can  remember.  But  I  distinctly
remember  lying  in  my  bed  at  Mentone  when  they  told  me  the  story,  and
equally  clearly  I  remember  receiving  the  news  of  Judy's  death  at  Monte
Carlo.

AuELA  H.  WODBHOUSE.

Case  45. [L.  1000.]

The  following  case  was  obtained  tlnough  Dr.  Bramwell.  The
percipient,  Mr.  de  SoUa,  is  a  gentleman  well  known  in  the  musical
world. He  writes  to  Dr.  Bramwell  :  —

Febnuiry  5th,  1896.
Deak  Dr.  Bramwell, — As  jjromised  I  now  send  an  account  of  my  little
thought-transference  experience.  'Twas  thus.  I  sat  opposite  my  eldest
daughter,  who  was  reading  a  book  by  the  fireside.  Presently  I  exclaimed,
" Good  gracious  !  "  My  daughter  saying,  "  What  is  it  ?"  I  replied,  "  I  could
have  sworn  I  saw  a  dog  enter  the  room."  I  described  the  dog  minutely.
My  daughter  in  great  surprise  told  me  that  she  had  that  moment  read  a
description  of  just  sucli  a  dog.  I  do  not  even  now  kiKjw  the  title  of  the
book.  We  kept  no  dog  at  the  time,  nor  had  we  conversed  about  one. —
Faithfully  yours,  Lsii.ore  de  Solla.

In  reply  to  our  enquiries,  Mr.  de  Solla  writes  : —

5,  Harrington-square,  London,  N.W.,  March  8th,  1896.

Dear  Sir, — In  rei)ly  to  yours  of  4th  inst. ,  the  incident  re  thought-
transference  'twixt  my  daughter  and  myself  took  place  on  a  Sunday  about  a
year  ago.  My  daughter  would  Vie  willing  to  give  an  account  of  the  matter.
She  does  not  remember  my  giving  a  detailed  description  of  the  dog,  but
simply  that  I  exclaimed,  "I  just  saw  such  a  big  dog  rush  into  the  room."


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


287


My  daughter  tells  me  that  immediately  before  my  exclamation  she  had  read
the  following  words  from  a  book  (Leims  Arundel): — "As  he  spoke,  he
uttered  a  low  peculiar  whistle  ;  in  obedience  to  his  signal  a  magnificent
Livonian  wolf-hound,  etc.,  etc.,  sprang  into  the  room."

It  is  not  a  common  experience  of  mine  to  imagine  I  see  anything
anywliere  which  is  not  tangibly  present,  and  I  am  very  scejjtical  about  other
folks'  reports  re  such  things.

Isidore  de  Solla.

Case  46. [L,  1100.]

This  case,  like  the  one  just  given,  is  an  instance  of  close  corre-
spondence between  two  persons'  unspoken  thoughts.

Sir  William  Crookes  writes  on  December  13th,  1897  :  —
'■I  enclose  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Fisher  (Arabella  Buckley)  which  is  of
interest,  not  so  much  on  account  of  the  instance  of  telepathy,  which  is  slight,
And  possibly  a  coincidence,  but  as  coming  from  a  lady  well  known  for  having
written  good  books  on  science  and  knowing  how  to  observe."

The  account  of  Mrs.  Fisher  (Associate  S.P.R.)  is  as  follows  : —
Elmcroft,  Newton  Abbot,  S.  Devon,  December  9th,  1897.

Dear  Sir  William  Crookes, — .  .  .  An  instance  of  telepathy  has  just
occurred,  which  I  think,  on  account  of  its  triviality,  may  be  worth  j.tutting  on
record  with  names  and  date.

This  evening  my  step-daughter  (Mrs.  Heriot)  and  I  were  sitting  together
in  the  drawing-room,  no  one  else  being  f)resent.  She  was  working  and  I  was
reading  to-day's  Times.  We  had  not  spoken  for  some  time.  I  had  read
through  the  correspondent's  article  on  the  "Engineering  Dispute"  and  the
leading  article  on  the  same  subject.

As  I  finished,  my  eye  fell  on  a  small  print  paragraph  telling  of  a  gas
explosion  caused  by  looking  for  an  escape  with  a  light.  Without  reading  it  I
exclaimed  aloud  "  Oh!  What  idiots  some  people  are!"  Mrs.  Heriot  replied
instantly  "  Yes,  gas."

So  far  the  bare  fact.  Much  astonished  I  said,  "How  on  earth  did  you
know  I  meant  gas  ? "  "I  do  not  know,"  she  rejjlied,  "  but  as  you  said  '  Oh  ! '
I  saw  a  man  looking  for  a  gas  escajDe  with  a  light."

My  step-daughter  and  I  have  been  close  friends  for  more  than  thirty
years,  and  have  often  noticed  how  we  sjDcak  of  tlie  same  things  simul-
taneously. But  nothing  so  striking  as  this  has  occurred  before.

— Yours  very  sincerely,  ,  -o  -n,

Arabella  B.  Fisher.

I  should  perhaps  say  that  Mrs.  Heriot  was  sittmg  on  the  opposite  side  of
the  fire,  that  she  had  not  read  the  paper,  and  had  no  clue  as  to  what  part
was  reading.

In  reply  to  inquiries  Mrs.  Heriot  writes  : —

Elmcroft,  Newton  Abbot,  S.  Devon,  December  17th,  1897.

Dear  Sir, — .  .  .  Mrs.  Fisher  has  asked  me  to  write  to  you  about
what  occurred  the  other  evening.  I  was  sitting  on  one  side  of  the  fireplace,
working,  she  on  the  other,  reading  the  Times.  She  looked  up,  saying,  "Oh  !
what  fools  some  people  are  !  " As  she  spoke,  it  flashed  through  my  mind,


288


Alice  Johnson.


[part


as  if  she  had  read  aloud,  that  some  person  had  taken  a  light  to  look  for  an
escape  of  gas,  and  thereby  caused  an  explosion — so  I  at  once  answered
'•  Yes,  gas." — I  am,  yours  faithfully.

Rose  Mackay  Heriot.

Case  47.

The  next — a  case  in  which  a  dying  mother  liad  an  apparently
telepathic  vision  of  an  absent  son  who  happened  to  be  dying  at  the
same  time — is  one  of  those  cases  which  seem  to  indicate  a  heisrhtenin"
of  certain  faculties  at  the  approach  of  death.

From  Colonel  C.  F.  Hicks.

46,  Valplaisant,  St.  Heliers,  Jersey,  December  23rd,  1889.

Agreeably  to  my  promise  I  now  give  you  a  statement  of  my  late  wife's
last  moments.  Some  days  beforehand  I  was  informed  she  would  not  last-
long  ;  and  it  was  in  the  evening  about  5  or  6  o'clock  p.m.,  on  3rd  October.
1887,  I  went  into  her  bedroom.  There  was  the  nurse,  my  second  and  thii'd
daughters  in  the  room  with  me.  The  door  was  a  little  ajar.  She  was  look-
ing at  it  very  earnestly  when  she  said  to  my  second  daughter,  Flo,  "There
is  some  one  outside,  let  him  in."  Flo  answered  and  said,  "  Oh,  no,  mamma  ;
there  is  no  one — look,"  and  she  ojaened  the  door  wider.  We  then  talked  to
her  gently  for  some  little  time.  After  a  pause  she  said,  "Poor  Eddie  (my
second  son,  who  had  gone  out  to  Australia)  ;  oh,  he  is  looking  very  ill — he
has  had  a  fall — liroken  his  leg — poor  Eddie."  When  we  all  assured  her  such
was  not  the  case — that  the  last  news  we  had  heard  from  him  was  that  he
was  C[uite  well — she  became  more  pacified,  although  restless  and  doubtful,
as  she  continued  to  say  now  and  then,  "  Poor  Eddie  !  "  She  died  at  about
20  minutes  to  2  a.m.,  early  on  the  4th  October.  V/e  little  thought  that  her-
words  would  be  verified,  with  the  exception  of  the  broken  leg.

Some  time  afterwards  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Williams
announcing  my  poor  son's  death.  For  he  left  a  place  called  Wyndham  on
the  Cambridge  Gulf,  N.W.  of  Australia,  on  the  4th  '[evidently  meaning  3rd,
see  below]  October,  1887,  with  a  young  man  of  the  name  of  Russell.  He^
suddenly  felt  ill  and  called  for  some  water.  The  latter  went  off  to  a  spring
to  get  it,  but  coming  back  he  found  that  he  had  fallen  from  his  horse  and
was  lying  quite  dead.  So  his  poor  mother's  vision  turned  out  to  be  quite
true,  exce])ting  his  leg  being  broken.

Now,  the  only  question  is  about  the  time.  Did  tlie  son  die  before  the
mother  or  after  the  mother?  as,  taking  the  longitude  of  Wyndham  N.W.  of
Australia,  so  far  to  the  east  of  us,  there  must  be  a  good  eight  or  ten  hours
difference,  and  a  ship  going  round  the  world  making  east  all  the  way  would
gain  a  day,  and  by  westing  would  lose  one.

I  give  you  a  few  extracts  from  letters  I  have  received.  The  one  from  Mr.
Thomas  Williams,  with  whom  my  son  lefl  a  letter  to  be  sent  on  to  me.  Mr.
T.  VV.'s  letter  is  dated  the  5th  October,  1887  :  "Your  son  left  Wyndham  to  go-
to  Durack  station  on  the  3rd  October,  in  comjjany  with  Louis  Suiith  and  John
Russell.  They  had  to  go  over  a  very  rough  country,  and  your  poor  boy
succumbed  to  the  pangs  of  thirst,  sutt'ering  at  the  same  time  with  fever.  I
am  glad  to  inform  you  that  his  sufferings  were  short,  and  that  the  great  God
was  ]jleased  to  take  him  away  quickly. He  spoke  very  affectionately  of  his


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


289


mother,  and  wliat  he  would  do  if  he  could  only  get  back  to  Jersey,  for  he
was  heartsick  when  he  was  here."

I  give  you  another  extract  from  his  employer,  a  Mr.  Durack,  a  gentle-
man who  dealt  largely  in  horses,  and  had  a  great  number  of  horse  stations
in  Australia  :

"When  I  left  your  son  at  Wyndham  on  27  th  September  last,  1887,  he  was
to  start  back  to  the  station,  as  he  had  a  horse,  bridle,  and  saddle  to  ride."

In  conclusion,  I  have  now  given  you  as  succinctly  as  I  can  the  death  of
the  motlier  and  son,  the  one  having  taken  place  here  and  the  other  at  our
Antipodes,  both  on  the  same  day  and  date,  and  as  far  as  I  know  about  the
same  time. It  is  more  than  a  coiacidence — it  is  very  mysterious.

(Signed) C.  F.  Hicks.

Colonel  Hicks  writes  later  : — -

Fehrvary  22nd,  1890.

.  .  .  The  witnesses  in  my  wife's  late  case  are  none  of  them  jjresent
here.  My  second  daughter,  whom  I  was  expecting  from  Bombay  when  I
received  your  letter,  has  arrived  here.  Her  statement  I  enclose.  My  third
daughter,  another  witness,  is  at  present  at  Brisbane,  in  Australia.  It  will
take  some  time  before  I  can  receive  an  answer  from  her.  As  to  the  nurse
who  was  attending  my  late  wife,  she  is  residing  in  Dublin  ...  I  must
write  to  her,  as  her  address  is  Miss  E.  Fenn,  16,  Adelaide-road,  Dublin,  to
give  her  statement  of  the  case.

Discrepancy  in  dates  :  my  late  wife  died  at  about  40  minutes  to
2  a.m.  on  4th  Oct(jber,  1887 — that  is  taking  the  time  from  12  a.m.  on
the  3rd  to  12  p.m.,  after  which  it  becomes  the  4th.  So  all  the  conversa-
sation  that  took  place  with  the  above-named  witnessses,  viz.,  the  nurse,
Miss  E.  Fenn,  two  daughters  and  self,  took  place  in  the  evening  of  the
3rd,  about  5  or  6  p.m.,  as  she  died  the  same  night,  or  more  con-ectly  speak-
ing, being  after  12  p.m.,  it  was  early  in  the  morning  of  the  4th.

Now  for  my  son's  death.  Mr.  Thomas  Williams'  letter  is  dated  tiie  5th
October,  1887.  He  says  my  son  left  Wyndham,  on  the  Gulf  of  Cambridge,  on
the  4th  [the  date  given  in  Mr.  Williams'  letter  is  3rd,  see  below]  October,
1887,  but  he  does  not  mention  at  what  time.  But  being  within  the  tropics,
where  people  generally  travel  as  early  as  they  can  to  escape  the  heat  of  the
sun,  it  is  presumed  that  he  and  his  friend,  Mr.  Russell,  must  have  started
early,  and  it  is  certain  that  they  could  not  have  gone  far  before  he  met  his
end,  and  most  probably  Mr.  T.  Williams  must  have  heard  of  it  the  same
day,  as  his  letter  is  dated  the  5th  October,  1887. . .  .

(Signed) C.  F.  Hicks.

The  following  letter  from  Miss  Hicks  was  enclosed  :  —

February  27th,  1890.

I  was  in  my  late  mother's  bedroom  between  the  hours  of  5  and  6  in  the
evening,  on  the  3rd  of  October,  1887,  when  she  asked  me  to  open  the  door,
as  some  one  was  outside  and  wanted  to  come  in.  I  answered  and  said,  "  Oh,
mother,  the  door  is  open,  and  there  is  no  one  outside,"  and  then  I  opened
the  door  wider.  Then  I  shut  the  door.  She  then  said,  "  Poor  Eddie,  he
looks  very  ill  ;  he  has  had  a  fall  "  1  said  to  her,  "  Oh,  mother,  how  you  go
on  ;  he  is  all  right  the  last  time  we  heard." She  said,  "  Oh,  he  is  looking


290


Alice  Johnaon.


[PAKT


very  ill."  The  next  morning,  at  about  40  minutes  to  2  a.m.,  she  died.  I
heard  from  letters  received  that  my  poor  brother  Eddie  died  in  Australia  on
the  same  day  and  about  the  same  time.  -p,  jjj^g^g

Colonel  Hicks  also  sent  us  the  letter  from  Mr.  Williams,  giving
an  account  of  his  son's  death.  The  exact  time  is,  as  Colonel  Hicks
says,  not  stated,  but  the  letter  is  dated  October  5th,  1887,  and  states
that  Mr.  E.  Hicks  started  on  his  journey  on  October  3rd.  It  seems
probable  that  the  death  took  place  on  the  same  day.

The  following  case  affords  perhaps  stronger  evidence  for  telepathy
than  any  others  in  this  section,  on  account  of  the  collective  nature  of
the  experience.

Case  48.  [L.  953.]
Mr.  Myers  writes  : —

The  following  case  was  sent  to  me  by  Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  Bart.,  a
member  of  the  S.P.K.  In  conversation  he  described  to  me  the  singular  and
persistent  distress  accompanying  the  nocturnal  alarm. — F.  W.H.M.

Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk,  April  2(Sth,  1893.

On  August  2()th,  1884,  I  was  staying  at  my  father-in-law's  house  at  Bury
St.  Edmunds.  I  had  left  my  father  in  perfectly  good  health  about  a  fort-
night before.  He  was  at  home  at  this  address.  About  August  18th  I  had
had  a  letter  from  my  mother  saying  that  my  father  was  not  quite  well,  and
that  the  doctor  had  seen  him  and  made  very  light  of  the  matter,  attributing
his  indisposition  to  the  extreme  heat  of  the  weather.

I  was  not  in  any  way  anxious  on  my  father's  account,  as  he'  was  rather
subject  to  slight  bilious  attacks.

I  should  add,  though,  that  I  had  been  spending  that  day,  August  20th,
at  Cambridge,  and  sliould  have  stayed  tlie  night  there  had  not  a  sort  of
vague  presentiment  haunted  me  that  possibly  there  would  be  a  letter  from
home  the  next  morning.  My  wife,  too,  had  a  similar  strong  feeling  that  if
I  stayed  the  night  at  Cambridge  I  might  regret  it.  In  consequence  of  this
feeling  I  returned  to  Bury,  and  that  night  woke  up  suddenly  to  find  myself
streaming  with  perspiration  and  calling  out  :  "  Something  dreadful  is
happening  ;  I  don't  know  what."  The  impression  of  horror  remained  some
time,  but  at  last  I  fell  asleep  till  the  morning.

My  father.  Sir  Willoughby  Jones,  died  very  suddenly  of  heart  disease
about  1  a.m.  on  August  21st.  He  was  not  in  his  room  at  the  moment,  but
was  carried  back  to  his  room  and  restoratives  applied,  but  in  vain.

My  Ijrother  Herbert  and  I  were  the  only  two  of  the  family  absent  from
home  at  the  time.  The  thoughts  of  those  present  (my  mother,  brother,  and
three  sisters)  no  doubt  turned  most  anxiously  towards  us,  and  it  is  to  a
telepathic  impression  from  them  in  their  anxiety  and  sorrow  that  I  attribute
the  intimations  we  received.  LaweexVCE  J.  Jones.

Lady  Jones  writes  : —

I  have  a  vivid  remembrance  of  the  occurrence  related  above  by  my
husband. I  was  sound  asleep  when  he  awoke,  and  seizing  me  by  [the]


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


291


wrist  exclaimed  :  "Such  a  dreadful  thing  is  happening,"  and  I  had  much
difficulty  in  persuading  him  that  there  way  nothing  wrong.

He  went  to  sleep  again,  but  was  mucli  relieved  in  the  morning  by  finding
a  long  letter  from  Sir  Willoughby,  posted  the  day  before,  and  written  in
good  spirits.  Having  read  this  and  gone  to  his  dressing-room,  however,  he
soon  returned  with  the  telegram  summoning  him  home  at  once,  and  said  as
he  came  in  :  "  My  impression  in  the  night  was  only  too  true."

Evelyn  M.  Jones.

Mr.  Herbert  Jones,  the  other  percipient,  describes  his  experience
as  follows  : —

Knebworth  Rectory,  Stevenage,  April  4i/i.,  1893.
Eecollections  of  Avgvd  20th,  1884.

I  had  spent  the  day  at  Harpenden,  and  returned  home  about  8  p.m.,  and
went  to  bed  about  10.30.

I  woke  at  12  o'clock,  hearing  my  name  called  twice,  as  I  fancied.  I  lit
my  candle,  and,  seeing  nothing,  concluded  it  was  a  dream — looked  at  my
watch,  and  went  to  sleep  again.

I  woke  again  and  heard  people  carrying  something  downstairs  from  the
upper  storey,  just  outside  my  room.  I  lit  my  candle,  got  out  of  bed,  and
waited  till  the  men  were  outside  my  door.  They  seemed  to  l^e  carrying
something  heavy,  and  came  down  step  by  step.

I  opened  my  door,  and  it  was  pitch  dark.  I  was  puzzled  and  dumb-
founded. I  went  to  my  sitting-room  and  into  the  hall,  but  everything  was
dark  and  quiet.  1  went  back  to  bed  convinced  I  had  been  the  sport  of
another  nightmare.  It  was  about  2  a.m.  by  my  watch.  At  breakfast  next
morning  on  my  plate  was  a  telegram  telling  me  to  come  home.

This  whole  story  may  be  nothing,  but  it  was  odd  that  I  should  have
twice  got  up  in  one  night,  and  that  during  that  night  and  those  hours  my
father  was  dying.

H.  E.  Jones.

Sir  Lawrence  Jones  adds  : —

My  brother  was  then  a  curate  in  London,  living  at  32,  Palace  Street,
Westminster,  where  the  above  experience  took  place. — L.  J.  J.


CONCLUSION.

In  conclusion,  some  justification  may  appear  necessary  for  dis-
cussing at  so  great  a  length  and  with  so  much  detail  the  possible
scope  of  accidental  coincidences  in  various  departments  of  Psychical
Research.

Any  empirical  treatment  of  a  sul)ject  partakes  to  some  extent  of
the  nature  of  statistics,  and  to  persons  who  are  not  actively  engaged
in  collecting  and  studying  them,  statistics  generally  appear  not  only
intolerably  tedious,  but  essentially  unreliable.  Statistics — it  is  com-
monly said — can  be  made  to  prove  anything. And  it  is  quite  true


292


Alice  Johnson.


[part


thab  they  cmi  be  made  to  prove  anything,  so  long  as  arguments  are
drawn — as  is  too  often  done — from  mere  collections  of  percentages,
while  the  possible  agency  of  Chance  in  producing  many  of  the
percentages  is  ignored.

The  general  necessity  of  allowing  for  Chance  in  the  ordinary
empirical  sciences,  indeed,  has  always  been  recognised.  If  a  bac-
teriologist is  trying  to  discover  what  will  destroy  certain  germs,  he
is  aware  that  the  fact  of  their  dying  the  first  time  he  introduces  a
certain  substance  into  their  environment  does  not  prove  that  that
substance  caused  their  death ;  their  death  at  that  time  may  have
been  an  accidental  coincidence.  This  does  not  discourage  him  from
further  search,  as  he  knows  that  something  caused  the  death  and  it  is
his  business  to  find  out  what  the  cause  was.  But  he  will  never  be
able  to  prove  what  it  was  if  he  ignores  the  possible  agency  of
Chance.

Similarly,  we  cannot  substantiate  the  claims  of  telepathy  or  any
other  supposed  supernormal  faculty  by  ignoring  what  Chance  may
bring  about.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  no  necessity  for  concluding
that  if  supernormal  faculties  are  not  at  work  in  all  incidents  that
suggest  them,  they  do  not  exist  at  all.

But  in  dealing  with  the  most  difficult  and  obscure  of  all  sciences
— that  of  Psychical  Research — the  necessary  process  of  eliminating
one  possible  agency  after  another  must  be  even  more  lengthy  and
tedious  than  in  any  other  subject.  The  present  article  is  nothing
more  than  an  attempt  to  clear  some  of  the  ground  in  a  preliminary
fashion,  and  is  intended  to  suggest  problems  rather  than  to  solve
them, — their  solution  being,  as  it  seems  to  me,  impossible  for  the
present.


Some  points  with  regard  to  the  construction  and  characteristics
of  artificial  Chance  Series  are  put  into  Appendix  I.,  so  as  to  avoid  too
much  interruption  of  the  text ;  while  the  later  Appendices  contain
detailed  discussions  of  individual  cases,  too  lengthy  to  be  included
in  the  article  itself.


XXXV.] On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.


293


APPENDIX  I.
On  the  Construction  of  Artificial  Chance  Series.
[Written  jointly  with  W.  E.  Johnson.]

This  section  contains  a  further  discussion  of  the  method  of  analysis
•of  Chance  Series  of  events  into  "  cycles,"  of  which  an  example  was
given  in  Chapter  II.,  Table  II.,  p.  189.  The  series  there  analysed
consisted  of  4096  ( =  2^'^)  throws  of  a  penny,  which  were  divided  into
consecutive  groups  of  events,  to  which  the  name  "  cycles  "  was  given,
each  group  beginning  with  a  head  (which  had  been  preceded  by  a  tail)
and  ending  with  a  tail  (which  was  followed  by  a  head).  Henceforth
throughout  this  section,  we  write  "head  "  and  "tail  "  respectively  as
H  and  T  for  brevity.  Thus,  17  consecutive  throws,  HHHTT,  HT,
HHT,  HTTT,  HHT,  would  be  divided  as  shown  by  the  commas
into  five  groups  or  "  cycles."  The  series  has  to  be  regarded  as  a
circular  one,  that  is,  one  in  which  the  end  is  continuous  with  the
beginning.  So  that  if  the  series  actually  ended  with  one  or  more
H's,  these  would  be  brought  round  to  the  beginning  to  form  the  first
part  of  the  first  cycle;  and  if  it  actually  began  with  one  or  more  T's,
they  would  be  carried  round  to  the  end  to  form  the  last  part  of  the
last  cycle.

The  theoretic  number  of  every  different  cycle,  etc.,  included  in  the
Table  was  given  in  each  department  in  italic  figures,  and  it  must  now
be  explained  how  these  theoretic  numbers,  which  for  the  future  we
will  speak  of  as  "  norm  numbers,"  were  obtained.

Each  cycle  involves  by  definition  the  occurrence  of  a  group  of
events  two  more  in  number  than  itself,  viz.,  a  preceding  T  (l>elonging
to  the  end  of  the  previous  cycle)  and  a  following  H  (belonging  to  the
beginning  of  the  next  cycle)  e.g.,  the  cycle  HT  involves  the  occurrence
of  the  group  of  events  THTH,  and  so  on.  Therefore,  since  there  are
two  alternative  events,  the  probability  of  any  cycle  of  events  r  in

number  is  ^^^^  (that  is,  the  product  of  the  probabilities  of  all  the
single  events) ;  and  the  norm  number  of  such  cycles  in  the  series  of

012

4096  (  =  21-)  events  is  For  instance,  the  norm  number  of  cycles

^ '  2'-+2

212

of  HT  in  that  series  is  -^i  =256.

2*

The  same  method  "jives  the  norm  numbers  of  the  different  runs  of
each  alternative.  Thus,  all  the  single  H's  in  the  top  line  of  the  Table
involve  the  group  THT  ;  all  the  runs  of  two  H's  involve  the  group


294


Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.


[part


THHT,  ;ind  so  on  ;  the  probability  of  the  former  is  .£  and  of  the

latter  ^  ;  and  the  norm  numbers  of  them  in  the  series  are  respectively
4096  4096

and  Similarly  with  the  different  runs  of  T's,  shown  in  the

bottom  line  of  the  Table.

Again,  each  cycle — whatever  its  length  may  be — involves  a  single
occurrence  of  the  group  TH  at  its  beginning  ; — -the  occurrence  of  this
serving,  as  it  were,  to  inaugurate  each  cycle.  For  instance,  taking
seven  throws  as  follows  : —

 T)  H,  T,  (H

one  complete  cycle  is  included  in  the  middle  of  this, — between  the  two
brackets, — preceded  by  a  T,  which  belongs  to  the  previous  cycle,  and
followed  by  an  H,  which  belongs  to  the  next  cycle.  The  remainders
of  these  two  cycles  are  indicated  by  the  dots.  The  seven  throws
include  two  occurrences  of  TH,  but  it  is  clear  that  there  is  only  one
such  occurrence  for  each  cycle  ;  so  that  the  actual  number  of  cycles
must  always  be  the  same  as  the  actual  number  of  times  TH  occurs.

The  norm  number  of  occurrences  of  TH  in  our  series  is  1024.

This  must  therefore  be  the  norm  number  of  cycles  in  the  same  series.

Residual  Cycles.

It  was  shown  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  191,  that  if  we  made  up  the  Table
out  of  all  the  cycles  the  norm  number  of  which  is  one  or  more,  we
get  only  1013  cycles,  instead  of  the  theoretic  total  of  1024.  The
11  remaining  cycles  were  called  "residual  cycles."  In  every  series
analysed  in  this  way,  some  residual  cycles  are  found,  the  number  of
which  increases  absolutely,  but  decreases  relatively,  with  the  length
of  the  series;  this  number  being  (n  — 1)  in  a  series  of  length  2"^.
It  was  remarked  in  Chapter  II.  that  their  exact  position  in  the
Table  had  to  be  settled  in  an  arbitrary  manner,  but  that  there  were
definite  and  assignable  limits  within  which  they  must  lie.  We  now
proceed  to  explain  how  these  limits  are  ascertained.

Norm  S'eries.

To  find  the  limits  of  the  norm  distribution  of  the  residual  cycles  in
any  series,  we  liave  recourse  to  a  second  method  of  analysis  of  the
series.

The  analysis  into  cycles  is  a  division  into  mutually  exclusive  sets
or  "  sequences  "  of  events  ;  every  event  in  the  series  is  included  in  one
sequence,  and  in  one  sequence  only.  These  may,  therefore,  be  called
"  closed  sequences."


XXXV.] On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.


295


Another  method  is  to  divide  the  series  into  overlapping  sequences,
of  any  length  we  choose  to  adopt, — so  that  every  event  belongs  to
several  sequences.  These  may  be  called  "unclosed  sequences"  to
distinguish  them  from  the  cycles,  or  "  closed  sequences."

Sequences  are  successions  of  events,  arranged  in  a  defined  order ;
e.g.,  HHT,  HTfl,  and  THH  are  various  sequences  of  three  events,  or
what  may  be  called  sequences  of  length  3.  A  series  of  events  of  length
m  may  always  be  regarded  as  containing  m  sequences  of  length  r,
where  r  is  any  number  not  greater  than  m.

A  complete  analysis  of  a  brief  series  on  this  plan  is  perhaps
required  for  clearness,  and  we  will  take  as  an  example  5  throws  of  a
penny,  HHTHT.  This  must — like  the  long  series  already  discussed —
be  conceived  of  as  a  circular  series ;  i.e.,  we  may  suppose  it  to  be
repeated,  so  that  its  initial  terms  would  follow  after  its  final  terms.  It
could  be  represented  in  a  circular  diagram  thus  :


H


where  the  final  T  is  followed  by  HH,  etc.,  as  if  the  actual  series  were
repeated.

Now,  this  circular  series  of  length  5  contains  (a)  5  sequences  of
length  5,  viz.,  HHTHT,  HTHTH,  THTHH,  HTHHT,  THHTH ;  (b)
5  sequences  of  length  4,  viz.,  HHTH,  HTHT,  THTH,  HTHH,  THHT;

(c)  5  sequences  of  length  3,  viz.,  HHT,  HTH,  THT,  HTH,  THH,

(d)  5  sequences  of  length  2,  viz.,  HH,  HT,  TH,  HT,  TH  ;  (e)  -5
sequences  of  length  I,  viz.,  H,  H,  T,  H,  T.  In  all  these  cases  the
several  sequences  begin  at  the  several  successive  throws  in  the  series.
Hence  the  number  of  sequences  is  equal  to  the  number  of  throws.

It  will,  of  course,  be  noticed  that  all  the  m  sequences  in  a  series  of
length  m  are  not  nece.ssarily  different  in  formation  from  one  another.
We  count  them  as  m  by  distinguishing,  not  their  kind  or  formation,
but  t\ie\v  position  in  the  series.

We  may  define  an  ideal  or  Norm  Chance  Series  as  follows  : —
Definition  :  If  t  be  the  number  of  alternative  events  in  a  series,  a
Norm  Series  of  length is  a  series  which  contains  all  the  possible
different  sequences  of  length  n  which  can  be  made  with  t  alternatives.

X


296


Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.


[part


It  has  just  been  shown  above  that  a  series  of events  contains
sequences  of  any  length  that  we  may  choose  (up  to  Hence  the

series  of  length  contains,  in  particular,  P^  sequences  of  length  n.
But  with  t  alternatives  we  can  (by  the  rules  of  Permutations)
construct  P^  differently  amstitufed  sequences  of  length  n.  Hence,
according  to  the  definition  of  the  Norm  Series,  each  of  these  differently
constituted  sequences  occurs  once,  and  once  only,  in  it. The  occurrence

of  each  once  corresponds  to  its  probability,  which  is that  is,  in  any

series,  in  length,  the  norm  number  for  each  sequence  of  length  n
is  one.

Definitions.  In  a  series  of  length  any  sequence  of  length  n  may
be  called  a  unit  sequence  ;  sequences  of  lengths  smaller  or  greater  than
n  may  be  called  minor  or  major  sequences  respectively.

It  will  be  obvious  that  in  a  Norm  Series  of  length  every
"  minor  sequence  "  (as  well  as  every  "  unit  sequence  ")  will  occur  as
often  as  its  probability  requires. For  the  pi'obability  of  a  specific

sequence  of  length  r  is it  ought,  therefore,  to  occur  in  P^  events

~ -i-= times. But  P'~''  is  the  number  of  ways  in  which  a
p-

given  sequence  of  length  r  could  be  extended  into  a  sequence  of
length  n. Hence  the  proposition  follows.

But  in  the  Norm  Series  of  length  P^  the  "  major  sequences  "  cannot
occur  according  to  their  jjrobability  number.  For  the  probability
number  of  each  would  be  fractional. Thus  the  probability  of  a  given

sequence  of  length  n  +  1  is  ;  hence,  in events,  this  should  occur

^'^  — ^v+T  ~  ~7  ti™®^!  which  is  impossible.

Hence  no  finite  series  can  be  regarded  as  norm  with  reference  to
its  7nnjor  sequences."  It  will  however,  of  course,  contain  major
sequences,  since  any  sequence  of  length  greater  than  n  is  a  major
sequence. These  have,  thei'efore,  to  be  introduced  arbitrarily.

To  sum  up,  the  conditions  of  the  Norm  Series  may  be  stated  in  the
form  of  the  rule  that  in  a  series  of  length  all  the  "  unit  sequences  "
of  length  n  must  occur  each  once,  so  that  all  the  "minor  sequences"
of  length  r  will  occur  each  times.

For  instance,  out  of  three  alternative  events,  a,  b,  and  c,  3  sequences
of  length  1,  32  sequences  of  length  2,  and  3^  sequences  of  length  3,  can
be  made.  So  that  a  Norm  Series  of  length  3'  would  contain  three  of
each  sequence  of  1  and  one  of  each  sequence  of  2  ;  and  a  Norm  Series
of  length  3'*  would  contain  nine  of  each  sequence  of  1,  three  of  each


XXXV.]


On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.


297


sequence  of  2,  and  one  of  each  sequence  of  3.  The  following  are  such
Norm  Series  : — •

(1)  Series  of  length  32  '  :  '

aahacbbcc.  ' '  '  ■  ■  -  ■

(2)  Series  of  length  3^

aaacacbccabacccbbcbaabbbabc.  ■

The  following  are  examples  of  Norm  Series  with  two  alternative
■events,  viz.,  throws  of  a  penny,  H  and  T.

(1)  Series  of  length  21  :  Hj  T^.

(2)  Series  of  length  2^ : T,.  ; .  ^

(3)  Series  of  length  2^  :  H3  T,  H^^  T^.

(4)  Series  of  length  2^ : T,,  H.,  T^  Hj  T^.

(5)  Series  of  length  2^  :  H,  T^ T^ T^  H.  T- T.  T2.

Hi Hj  T2.

(6)  Series  of  length  2'-' : T,, T^  H3  T^  H„  T3  H3  T.,  T,

T, T.,  H.  T,  T, T,  H,  T, T^ T,  H,  T^  T^.

<7)  Series  of  length  2" : T„  H,  T^ T^ T,  H,  T,  T^
H,  T,  Hj  Tj T3  H„  T,  Hj  T.,  H3  T^  H„  T, T.^  H.,  Tg

T, Hj Tj Hj T, Hj Tj H, T\ Hj Tj Hj T, Hj T3 Hj  T^
H^ Tj" H3 Tj Hj  Hj Tj H; T, Hj T, H, f , H3  T3.

<8)  Series  of  length  2S  :  Hj  .T.,  H^  Tj  H.,  Tj  H3  T.,  H.,  Tj  H„  T3
H,  T,,  Hj  T3  Hj  T,  H.,  T^,  Hg  Tj  H,^  T.,  Hj  Tj  H^  Tj  H,  Tj

h:  t;  Hj  Tj  Hj  t;  h;  t;  Hj  Tj  h;  t;  Hj  Tj  H3  Tj  h;  t,

Hj Tj Hj  Hj T, Hj T., Hj T, Hg T, Hj T^ Hj Tj H,  T,

Hj T, Hj Tj Hj T. H, Tj Hj Tj H, T., H, Tg Hj T3 H.,  Tj

H,  t;  Hj  t,  Hj  t;  h;  T3  Hj  t,  h,:  t:  hJ  t,  h,  Tg  h;  t^

Tj Hj Tj Hj Tj H^ T^ Hj Tj Hg T3 Hj Tj Hg T4 Hj  Tj
Hj T^ Hg Tj Hj Tg Hg  Tj.

The  reader  will  find  that,  as  the  length  of  the  series  is  increased,  it
laecomes  increasingly  difficult  to  solve  the  problem  of  constructing  the
Norm  Series,  although,  of  course,  the  mere  number  of  cycles  of  each
order  is  a  matter  of  simple  arithmetical  calculation.


Residual  Cycles  in  the  Norm  Series.  >

The  constitution  of  the  Norm  Series  shows  us  the  limits  within
which  the  residual  cycles  must  lie.  Table  III.  (A)  and  (B)  gives  an
ideal  series  of  1024  (  =  2i*')  throws  of  a  penny,  analysed  twice  over,
into  cycles  beginning  with  heads  and  tails,  called  respectively  Head-
dycles  and  Tail-Cycles,  to  illustrate  this. From  the  formula  given


298  Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.  [part

Table III.  (A)


To

ni

T5

To

Tt

Ts

To

T

Total
Cycles.

Total
Throws.

Hi

64

32

16

8

4

2

1

1

128

383

H2

32

16

8

4

2

1

1

64

255

i

16

8

4

2

1

1

32

159

8

4

2

1

1

16

95

H.

4

2

1

1

8

55

u

2

1

1

4

31

H7

1

1

2

17

Hg

1

1

9

H,


1

1

20

128

64

32

16

8

4

2

1

1

256

1024

Skkies  of  21*'  EVENTS. — Head-Cycles.
Figures  in  thick  type  show  residual  cycles.

Table  III.  (B)


H2

H3

H4

H5

Ho

Ht

Hs

Ho

Hio

Total
Cycles.

Tot£.l
Throws.

Ti

64

32

16

8

4

2

1

1

128

385

T2

32

16

8

4

2

1

1

64

256

T3

16

8

4

2

1

1

32

160

T4

8

4

2

1

1

16

96

T5

4

2

1

1

8

56

T«

2

1

1

4

32

Tr

1

1

2

18

Ts

1

1

10

To

Tio

1

1

11

128

64

32

16

8

4

2

1

1

256

1024

Series  of  2^"  events. — Tail-Cycles.
Figures  in  thick  type  show  residual  cycles.


XXXV.] On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.


299


above  (p.  293)  of  the  probabilities  of  cycles,  the  probability  of  each

cycle of length  8  is ~- There  will,  therefore,  be  one  of  each  of

the  cycles  of  length  8,  which  are  seen  along  what  may  be  called  the
"  diagonal "  from  H^.  to  T^.  But  these  are  the  longest  cycles  whose
norm  number  amounts  to  one  in  this  series,  and  their  norm  numbers,
together  with  those  of  all  the  shorter  cycles,  amovmt  only  to  247,

whereas  the  total  number  of  cycles  should  be  —  =  256. There  are,

therefore,  9  residual  cycles  to  distribute.

Since  there  are  2^''  different  sequences  of  length  10,  each  of  these
must  occur  once,  and  once  only,  in  a  Norm  Series  of  length  2^^.
Similarly,  since  there  are  2-'  different  sequences  of  length  9,  each  of
them  should  occur  twice ;  and  since  there  are  2*  different  sequences  of
length  8,  each  of  them  should  occur  four  times,  and  so  on.  We  cannot
here  enter  into  a  complete  explanation  of  how  all  these  different
sequences  occur  in  the  series  which  is  summarised  in  Table  III.  ;  but
it  is  obvious  that  certain  sequences  of  8,  9,  and  10,  which  are  absent
from  the  part  of  the  Table  up  to  and  including  the  "  diagonal  "  from
H-  to  T-, — viz.,  Hg,  Tg,  Hg,  Tg,  H^^,  T^,-,, — have  to  be  introduced.  This
can  be  done  by  putting  one  cycle  into  each  square  along  the  next
"  diagonal "  (from  Hg  to  Tg)  and  adding  a  single  cycle,  H^^  T^g  (see
figures  in  thick  type  in  Table  III.  A).  The  cycle  H^g  T^g  contains
(a)  one  each  of  the  sequences  H^g,  T^g  ;i  (b)  two  each  of  the  sequences
Hg,  Tg  (since  the  sequences,  by  definition,  overlap  one  another) ;  and
(c)  three  each  of  the  sequences  Hg,  Tg.  We  require,  then,  one  more  of
the  sequences  Hg  and  Tg,  which  are  to  be  found  respectively  in  the
cycles  Hg  T,  H  Tg.  Similarly,  there  are  2"  different  sequences  of
length  7,  which  should,  therefore,  occur  eight  times  each  in  the  series  ;
hence  H^  and  T-  should  occur  eight  times  each.  Tliey  occur  four  times
each  in  the  cycle  H-jg  T^g,  and  twice  each  in  the  cycles  Hg  T,  H  Tg.
Two  more  occurrences  each  are  required  and  are  to  be  found  in  the
cycles  H.  T,  H-  T,,  H  T^,  H.,  T^.  Similarly  for  all  the  shorter
sequences.

It  must  be  observed  that  the  distribution  shown  in  Table  III.  is
not  the  only  possible  arrangement  satisfying  the  conditions  of  a  Norm
Series  of  this  length.  Any  arrangement  will  do  by  which,  after  first
distributing  all  the  cycles  whose  norm  number  amounts  to  one  or  more,
one  cycle,  and  one  only,  is  added  to  each  line  and  to  each  column  of  the
Table,  with  the  exception  of  the  line  beginning  H^^  and  the  column

1  It  also  contains  one  of  all  the  sequences  of  length  10  which  can  be  made  out  of
combinations  of  single  runs  of  both  alternatives,  viz.,  H()  T,  Hg  To,  H;  T3,  T4,
H  5X5,  H4  Te,  H3  T7,  H2  Tg,  H  Tg.


300


Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.


[part


headed  T,y  (This  exception  has  to  be  made,  because,  as  already
explained,  the  necessary  introduction  of  the  sequences  H^^  and  Tjj^
involves  the  introduction  of  all  the  required  sequences  of  and  Tg.)
It  is  not  diihcult  for  the  reader  to  assure  himself  that  this  is  the  only
distribution  which  would  ensure  an  equal  number  of  H's  and  T's  in
the  whole  series.  As  soon  as  the  position  of  the  cycle  in  each  line  is
fixed,  it  will  be  found  that  there  are  two  alternative  positions  for  the
cycle  in  the  line  below,  until  the  last  line  is  reached,  when  only  one
position  is  possible.  This  gives  in  general  2"--  varieties  of  the  Norm
Series  2"  in  distributing  the  (?t  — 1)  residual  cycles  which  occur.  There
are  two  symmetrical  ways  of  filling  up  the  Table  according  to  this
rule,  which  are  shown  in  Table  III.  (A)  and  (B).

All  these  results  can  be  immediately  genei-alised.

Series  with  more  than  two  Alternative  Events.

A  series  with  any  number  of  alternative  events  may  be  analysed
into  cycles  on  the  same  method  as  that  used  when  there  are  only  two
alternatives,  by  taking  one  of  the  alternatives  as  the  invariable  tirst
term  of  the  cycle  and  beginning  a  new  cycle  whenever  this  alternative
occurs  after  any  one  of  the  other  alternatives.  Thus,  supposing  there
are  three  alternatives,  «,  6,  c,  and  we  choose  to  begin  the  cycles
with  a ;  the  series  a  c,  a  a  b  b,  abbe,  a  c  c  c  b  b,  a  c  c,  a  b  c,  would
be  divided  into  the  cycles  shown  by  the  commas.  These  cycles,  like
those  in  a  series  with  two  alternatives  (or,  for  tliat  matter,  with  any
number  of  alternatives)  may  consist  of  two  events,  or  of  any  number
of  events  more  than  two.  But  the  cycles  composed  of  one  event
following  the  a  or  a's  are  of  two  different  kinds,  as  this  event  may
be  b  or  c ;  those  composed  of  two  events  following  the  a's  are  of
four  different  kinds,  as  the  events  may  be  b.^,  h  c,  c.„  ov  cb  ;  those
composed  of  three  events  following  the  a's  are  of  eight  different  kinds,
and  so  on.

The  probability  of  each  cycle  depends,  of  course,  on  the  num-
ber of  events  in  it,  being  the  same  for  all  cycles  of  the  same
length,  no  matter  what  the  events  are.  As  before,  any  given  cycle
involves  the  occurrence  of  two  more  events  than  are  comprised  in
itself,  viz.,  a  6  or  a  c  preceding  it,  and  an  a  following  it.  Thus
the  cycle  a  b  implies  either  b  a  b  a  or  c  a  b  a.  The  probability
of  the  cycle  a  b  is  therefore  the  sum  of  the  probabilities  of  the
sequences  b  a  b  a  and  c  a  b  a.  Since  there  are  three  alternative
events,  the  probability  of  each  of  these  sequences  of  four  events  is

1  2  •  •

;  therefore  the  probability  of  the  cycle  a  6  is The  probability


XXXV.] On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.  301

of  the  cycle  a  c  is  of  course  the  same.^  Similarly  the  cycle  a  b  c
implies  either  hahc  a  or  c  ab  ca,  the  probability  of  each  of  which  is

~;  therefore  the  probability  of  the  cycle  abc  (or  any  other  cycle  of
2  .  .

three  events)  is  It  is  obvious  that  the  same  method  of  reasoning

applies  to  the  cycles  of  all  the  different  lengths  ;  so  that  the  probability

2

of  a  cycle  of  r  events  (in  a  series  with  three  alternatives)  is  ^jTf^'

a  series  with  t  alternatives,  the  probability  of  a  specific  cycle  of  length

r  is,  then,

Again,  every  cycle,  whatever  its  length  may  be,  involves  at  its
beginning  the  occurrence  of  either  b  a  or  c  a,  the  probability  of  each

of  which  is  so  that  the  norm  number  of  cycles  in  a  series  of  x
events  is  ^,  of  x.


Table  IV.


h

c

he

^2

cb

<>3

&2C

hch

C3

ch..

chc

Total
Cycles.

Total
Events

a

18

18

6

(5

6

6

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

76

208

0-2

6

6

2

2

2

2

20

68

2

2

4

16

100

292

Series  of  729  (  =  3'')  events.

The  Table  shows  only  the  cycles  whose  norm  number  amounts  to  one  or  more,
omitting  the  "  residual  cycles  "  and  corresponding  "  residual  events. "

If  we  take  a  series  of  a  definite  number  of  events  (choosing  some
power  of  3  as  the  numljer,  for  convenience  of  calculation)  and  sum-
marise the  cycles  in  a  Table  (see  Table  IV.),  we  find  as  before  that
there  are  some  "residual  cycles,"  (not  shown  in  this  Table)  the  number
of  which  always  increases  absolutely,  but  decreases  relatively,  with  the
length  of  the  series.  The  formula  for  this  number  is  given  below
(see  p.  307).  These  residual  cycles  can  be  distributed  according  to  the
rules  of  the  iSTorm  Series,  the  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  being  that  the
sequences  of  the  various  lengths  must  occur  in  the  series  according  to


1  These  being  thR  shortest  possible  cycles,  it  follows  that  3''  is  the  shortest  series
in  which  the  norm  number  of  any  cycle  will  amount  to  one.


302  Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.  [part  i


Table


6

c

hi

6c

^2

c6

6^0

6c6

C36

C69

c'5c

C262

C63

bcbc

c6c6

a

6

6

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

1

1

1

1

as

Series  of  243
Showing  a  possible  distribution  of  the


their  respective  probabilities.  In  this  calculation  we  must  remember
that,  as  before,  a  certain  number  of  the  shorter  sequences  are  included
in  the  longer  ones. Thus,  there  are  :

3 different  sequences  of  length  1,

32  different  sequences  of  length  2,

3-^  different  sequences  of  lengtli  3,

3*  different  sequences  of  length  4,

3^  different  sequences  of  length  5,
and  so  on. Therefore  in  a  Norm  Series  of  3-^  (=  243)  events,  there
should  be

1  of  each  "  unit  sequence  "  of  5

3  of  each  "  minor  sequence  "  of  4  (viz.,  1  in  addition  to  those  in  the

longer  sequences)

9  ))  3  (  ,, 4 ,,  )

81 „  „  1  (  „  36 „  „  )

e.gr.,  must  occur  36  times  in  the  series,  12  times,  4  times,
and  so  on.  This  gives  the  total  number  of  cycles  in  each  line  of  a
complete  Table.

In  Table  V.  is  given  a  solution  of  the  series,  fulfilling  these
conditions.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  total  number  of  cycles  (see
column  headed  "  Total  Cycles  ")  correspond  to  the  sequences  (or  runs)
of  a  of  the  different  lengths,  and  inspection  of  the  Table  will  show
that  the  different  runs  of  b  and  c  also  occur  in  the  required  propor-
tions. The  Table  has  to  be  extended  as  far  as  a^,  65,  and  c^,  in  order  to
include  all  the  different  sequences  of  5,  so  that  the  longest  cycle  that


XXXV.]  On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.  303
Y.


O3C2

62C3

boC^h

6isc6

bc-,h

bcbcb

C63C

cbc^

cbcbc

Total
Cycles

Total
Events


1

1

1

1

1

1

36

128

1

1

1

1

12

64


1

1

1

1

4

32

1

9

1

1

10

54

243

(  =  3°  )  EVENTS

"  residual  cycles  "  (figures  in  thick  type).


might  have  to  be  included  would  be  Cy For  simplicity  all  the

columns  containing  no  cycles  are  omitted.

General  Solutions.

The  conditions  vvhicli  have  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  three
alternative  events  may  be  expressed  in  a  more  general  form  (see
Table  VI.,  A  and  B).  These  Tables  give  a  general  solution  of  a  series
of  729  ( =  S'')  events,  the  numbers  and  formulae  given  being  applicable
to  all  the  possible  different  arrangements  of  the  series.  Tliey  show  in
the  case  of  every  cycle,  etc.  :  (1)  the  sequence  of  events  involved;
(2)  the  calculation  used  in  consequence,  and  (3)  the  resultant
number.

Taking  i?  to  represent  any  of  the  alternatives  except  a  (that  is,  in
this  case,  either  b  or  c)  all  the  cycles  involve  at  their  beginning  the
occurrence  of  the  sequence  Ra ;  there  must,  therefore,  be  as  many

cycles  as  there  are  occurrences  of  Ra. The  probability  of  ^  is ,  and

o

1  2

of  a  — ,  so  that  the  probability  of  Ha  is  Therefore,  the  total

2

number  of  cycles  will  be of  the  total  number  of  events. All  the

cycles  in  the  first  line  of  the  Table  (see  "  Total  Cycles  "  in  Table  VT.,  A)

. .  2-

involve  the  sequence  R  a  R,  the  probability  of  which  is  —  .  Similarly,

all  the  cycles  in  the  second  line  involve  Ji  a.^R,  the  probability  of  which
.22

is  —  and  so  on. Again,  all  the  cycles  in  the  first  column  (see  "  Totals  "


304  Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.  [part


Table  VI.  A.


-"1

7?

^4

i?8  .  . .  .

Total

«1

Ra  Ra
2'-

1  of  3''
=  36

93

^of  38

0

=  24

i^of  38
=  16

RaR^.  .  .  .
95

1  of  38  .
=  32

RaR
|of38
=  108

92

f.of  3«
=  12

93

4  of  36
3«

=  8

V

jRa2 •  •  •  •

S  of  38
38

=  16

Rao  R
£of  38

Q4
0

=  36

«3

Ra^Ra
02

4- of  30
3«

=  4

93

-.  of  3«
38

=  8

Ra^  R
^of  36
=  12

04

-<

Rct^  Jt^  ....
^  of  3""'
=  4

Ra^R
38

=  4

^ ■ ^  \
Ra^.  .  .  .

1  of  3«
=  2

Xlttj  ....

1  of  38

38

=  2

jRa
|of38
=  162

Series  of  38  events

Showing  limits  of  distribution  of  residual  cycles  (figures  in  thick  type)

in  lines.


XXXV.]


On  the  Construction  of  Chance  Series.
Table  VI.  B.


305


Ba  Ba
=  36


Ba2  Ba
02

A  of  3"
3"
=  12


B,

Ba  BoU

^  of  3«

35

=  24


Ba.2  B.fv
23


30


of  36


iJttj  Ba,
02

_.  of  36
3»


e  CO

.is  ^

)•  ^  o


8  o
M  CO

^  Ci_l


1^
I  Ico


B.


Ba  B^a


2*


of  3«
=  16


CO
O

c^j  Ico


CO


B.


CO

o


(0


1^
I  Ico


B-^


B,.


CO

o


a  Ba


a  B.^a


Totals


9  22
I3  of  3^ |j  of  36

=  54  =36


a  B^a
of  30
=  24


a  B^a


23


38


of  3«
=  16


2^>


of  3«


r  Series  of events  :

Showing  limits  of  distribution  of  residual  cycles  (figures  in  thick  type)

in  columns.


306


Alice  Johnson  and  W.  E.  Johnson.


[part


in  bottom  line  of  Table  VI.,  B)  involve  the  sequence  a  R  a,  the

2

probability  of  which  is  ~ .  All  the  cycles  in  the  second  column  involve
the  sequence  a  R.^a,  the  probability  of  which  is  ~,  and  so  on.

The  calculation  used  for  the  "  residual  cycles  "  (figures  in  thick  type
in  the  Tables)  differs  in  one  respect  from  that  which  applies  to  the  other
cycles,  because  we  have  solved  it  in  the  general  form,  by  taking  cycles
of  all  the  possible  lengths  that  could  occur  in  a  Norm  Series.  All  the
residual  cycles  that  are  contained  in  the  first  line  (see  Table  VI.,  A)
are  cycles  of  a  followed  by  at  least  4  ^'s  ;  those  in  the  second  line  are
cycles  of  followed  by  at  least  3  R's,  and  so  on.  The  respective
sequences  involved  are  Ra  R^  .  .  .  .  and  Ra^  R„  .  .  .  .

Taking  the  residual  cycles  contained  in  each  column,  (see  Table
VI.,  B)  the  number  of  ffi's  is  similarly  indeterminate  ;  the  residual
cycles  in  the  first  column  involving  at  least  4  rt's,  followed  by  one
R;  those  in  the  second  column  at  least  3  a's,  followed  by  2  ^'s
and  so  on.  The  respective  sequences  involved  are  ....  a^  R  a,
....  do  Re,  a.

The  brackets  indicate  respectively  the  lines  or  columns  in  which
the  numbers  of  cycles  included  under  them  must  occur,  leaving  the
distribution  of  the  cycles  among  the  squares  undetermined.

It  must  be  observed  that  the  limits  in  regard  to  residual  cycles
shown  in  the  two  Tables  VI.  A  and  VI.  B  have  to  he.  jointly  satisfied.

In  attempting  to  make  any  particular  solution  of  such  a  series,  it
has  to  be  remembered  that  the  various  sequences  of  a  and  R  must


Table  VII.


R,

R,

i?3

^4

Total
Cycles

Total
Events

«1

36

24

16

32

108

464

02

12

8

16

36

164

«3

4

8

12

64

«4

4

4

24

"5

1

1

6

1

1

7

Totals

54

36

24

16

32

162

729

Series  of  3"  events.
Residual  cycles  in  thick  type.


XXXV.]


On  the  Construction  of  Chmice  Series.


307


occur  in  their  due  proportions  ;  and  also  that  the  cycles  must  be  of
such  a  length  as  to  include  between  them  all  the  events  of  the  series.
The  latter  condition,  taken  alone,  is  of  course  comparatively  easy  to
fulfil,  and  Table  VII.  gives  an  example  of  it,  which  it  may  be  in-
structive to  compare  with  Table  II. (See  Chapter  II.,  p.  189.)

General  Formidre  for  Series  zvith  any  mimber  of  Alternative  Events.

The  method  of  reasoning  and  calculation  used  with  regard  to  series
with  three  alternative  events  can  without  difficulty  be  extended  to
series  with  any  number  of  alternatives,  a,  b,  c,  d  .  .  .  .  ,  if  we  take
R  to  stand  for  any  of  the  alternatives  except  a,  say,  which  is  chosen
as  the  invariable  first  term  of  the  cycles,  and  calculate  the  fractional
probabilities  of  the  various  cycles  in  the  same  way  as  shown  above.

Thus,  in  a  series  with  t  alternatives,  the  probability  of  the  sequence
Ba  is

t  -  1 X  1  = ^  -  1
t  t  tr

Therefore  in  a  series  of  length the  norm  number  of  cycles  is

X  tn+-i  =  (f-l)in

out  of  which  total  it  will  be  found  that  the  number  of  residual
cycles  is


rry  \  - 1)


All  the  cycles  containing  s  a's  involve  the  sequence
. . .  .  RagR. . .  .
and  the  norm  number  of  these  cycles  in  the  same  series  is

.^^  'Z^^-  X =  (t  ~  ly-  i"-s

This  formula  gives  the  norm  number  of  cycles  in  any  line  of  the
Table.

All  the  cycles  containing  s  i?'s  involve  the  sequence
.  .  . . a  Rg  a  .  .  .  .
and  the  norm  number  of  these  cycles  is

This  formula  gives  the  norm  number  of  cycles  in  any  column  of
the  Table.

Any  cycle  containing  s  «'s  and  m  R's  involves  the  sequence
. . . . R)  ttg  Rm  {a .  . .  .
and  the  norm  number  of  such  cycles  is


308


Alice  Johnso7i  and  W.  E.  Johnson.


[part


Series  in  which  all  the  Alternatives  are  not  equally  probable.

It  may  be  worth  while  to  note  further  that  the  same  method  may
be  used  for  series  in  which  one  alternative  is  more  likely  to  occur  than
the  other  or  others.

One  of  the  simplest  cases  would  be  that  of  a  series  with  two  alter-
natives, a  and  h,  in  which  the  chance  of  i's  occurrence  was  twice  as
great  as  the  chance  of  a's  occurrence.  Table  VII.  just  given  would
show  the  proportionate  numbers  of  the  various  kinds  of  cycles  in  a
series  of  this  kind  of  3"  events,  since  the  fractional  probabilities  are
exactly  the  same  whether  R  is  taken  to  represent  two  out  of  three
equally  probable  alternative  events,  or  an  alternative  whose  occurrence
is  twice  as  likely  as  that  of  the  other  alternative.

Similarly,  if  there  are  two  alternatives  one  of  which  is  three  times
as  likely  to  occur  as  the  other,  this  would  be  equivalent  to  a  sei'ies  in
which  R  represented  three  out  of  four  equally  probable  alternatives.
For  instance,  in  a  series  of  guesses  of  the  suits  of  playing-cards,  when
each  card  to  be  guessed  is  drawn  at  random  from  a  full  pack,  the
results  may  be  treated  as  two  alternatives  :  (a)  right  guesses,  and  (b)
wrong  guesses ;  and  of  these  two,  (b)  is  three  times  as  probable  as  (a).


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


309


APPENDIX  II.
Examination  of  a  Premonitory  Case.
3fr.  Lane's  dream  of  the  death  of  Air.  Terriss.

P.  174.

This  is  a  case  which  has  attained  some  notoriety  on  account  of  its
association  with  the  well-known  actor,  William  Terriss.  Mr.  Frederick
Lane,  his  "  under- study,"  dreamt  the  night  before  the  murder  that  he
saw  Mr.  Terriss  lying  unconscious  in  a  certain  part  of  the  Adelphi
Theatre  where  he  actually  saw  him  the  following  evening.  The
narrative  shows  that  Mr.  Lane  had  apparently  no  reason  for  expect-
ing the  event.  But  it  is  also  clear  that  the  premonition  might  be
explained  as  a  clairvoyant  or  telepathic  perception  of  the  result  of
the  intentions  of  the  unfortunate  man  who  committed  the  murder.

The  preliminary  statements  were  obtained  by  Mr.  Podmore,  who
writes  on  January  4th,  1898  : —

I  enclose  accounts  of  a  dream  of  Terriss'.s  death.
(1.)  By  Mr.  Lane,  the  dreamer.

(2.)  By  Miss  Haygate,  the  first  person  to  whom  the  dream  was  told.

(3.)  By  Mr.  Carter  Bligh,  one  of  several  to  whom  the  dream  was  told  at
the  theatre,  in  the  early  afternoon  of  the  16th  :  Terriss  was  stabbed  at  7.20
on  the  16th.

Mr.  Lane  and  Miss  Haygate  were  understudies  for  Terriss  and  Miss
MiUward  respectively.

Miss  Haygate  is  a  connection  by  marriage  of  a  friend  of  mine,  Mr.

Ronald  Hepburn. Mrs.  Hepburn  was  dining  with  the  D  's  on  the

evening  of  the  16th  when  Miss  Haygate  came  in  and  told  them  of  the
murder  and  of  the  dream  which  she  had  heard  a  few  hours  before.

Mrs.  Hepburn  told  me  this  the  nest  day,  and  arranged  a  meeting  for  me
on  the  18th.

The  accounts  are  as  follow  :

1.  From  Mr.  Frederick  Lane.

Adelphi  Theatre,  December  20th,  1897.
In  the  early  morning  of  the  16th  December,  1897,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  the
late  Mr.  Terriss  lying  in  a  state  of  delirium  or  unconsciousness  on  the  stairs
leading  to  the  dressing  rooms  in  the  Adelphi  Theatre.  He  was  surrounded
by  people  engaged  at  the  theatre,  amongst  whom  were  Miss  Millward  and
one  of  the  footmen  who  attend  the  curtain,  both  of  whom  I  actually  saw  a
few  hours  later  at  the  death  scene.  His  chest  was  bare  and  clothes  torn
aside.  Everybody  who  was  around  him  was  trying  to  do  something  for  his
good. This  dream  was  in  the  shape  of  a  picture. I  saw  it  like  a  tableau  on


310


Alice  Johnson.


[part


which  the  curtain  would  rise  and  fall. I  immediately  after  dreamt  that  we

did  not  open  at  the  Adelphi  Theatre  that  evening. I  was  in  my  dressing

room  in  the  dream,  but  this  latter  part  was  somewhat  incoherent. The  next

morning  on  going  down  to  the  theatre  for  rehearsal,  the  first  member  of  the

Company  I  met  was  Miss  Olive  Haygate,  to  whom  I  mentioned  this  dream.

On  arriving  at  the  theatre  T  also  mentioned  it  to  several  other  members  of

the  Company,  including  Messrs.  Creagh  Henry,  Buxton,  Carter  Bligh,  etc.

This  dream,  though  it  made  such  an  impression  upon  me  as  to  cause  me  to

relate  it  to  my  fellow  artists,  did  not  give  me  the  idea  of  any  coming

disaster. I  may  state  that  I  have  dreamt  formerly  of  deaths  of  relatives,  and

other  matters  which  have  impressed  me,  hut  the  dreams  have  never  impressed

me  sufficiently  to  make  me  repeat  them  the  following  morning,  and  have

never  been  verified. My  dream  of  the  present  occasion  was  the  most  vivid

I  have  ever  experienced  ;  in  fact,  life-like,  and  exactly  rej^resented  the  scene

as  I  saw  it  at  night.  -r-,  t

°  Frederick  Lane.

Mr.  Podmore  appends  the  following  note  : —

January  Ath,  1898.
At  a  meeting  on  the  20th  December  Mr.  Lane  gave  me  first  a  viva  voce
account  of  his  exjaerience,  and  then  wrote  it  down,  as  above.  He  explained
that  he  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  theatre  when  Mr.  Terriss  was
stabbed  on  the  evening  of  Thursday  the  16th  December,  1897,  and  ran  to
the  Charing  Cross  Hospital  for  a  doctor.  On  his  return  he  looked  in  at
the  private  entrance,  and  saw  Mr.  Terriss  lying  on  the  stairs  as  in  the
dream.  jp  p_

2.  From  Miss  Haygate.

Adelphi  Theatre,  December  18th,  1897.
On  Thursday  morning  about  twelve  o'clock  I  went  into  Rule's,  Maiden
Lane,  and  there  found  Mr.  Lane  with  Mr.  Wade.  In  the  course  of
conversation  after  Mr.  Wade  liad  left,  Mr.  Lane  said  that  he  had  had  a
curious  dream  the  night  before,  the  efiects  of  which  he  still  felt.  It  was  to
this  effect  :  he  had  seen  Terriss  on  the  stairs,  inside  the  Maiden  Lane  door
(the  spot  where  Terriss  died),  and  that  lie  was  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of
people,  and  that  he  was  raving,  but  he  (Mr.  Lane)  couldn't  exactly  tell  what
was  the  matter.  I  remember  laughing  about  this,  and  tlien  we  went  to
rehearsal.  Olive  Haygate.

3. From  Mr.  Carter  Bligh.

Adelphi  Theatre,  W.C.,  January  Uh,  1898.
Dear  Sir, —  ...  I  have  much  pleasure  in  being  able  to  state  that
Mr.  Fred  Lane,  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  ult.,  at  rehearsal  at  the  Adelphi
Theatre,  told  me  among  others  in  a  jocular  and  cliaffing  way  {'not  believing  in
it  for  an  instant),  how  he  probably  would  be  called  upon  to  play  Captain
Thomas,  that  night,  as  he  had  dreamt  that  something  serious  had  happened
to  Terriss.  I  forget  now,  and  therefore  do  not  attemjDt  to  repeat,  the  exact
words  Mr.  Lane  used  as  to  the  reason  (in  the  dream)  why  Mr.  Terriss  would
not  appear  that  night,  but  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  him  saying  that  he
(Terriss)  could  not  do  so,  because  of  his  having  dreamt  that  something  had


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


311


happened. It  was  all  passed  over  very  lightly  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  it
was  given,  i.e.,  in  the  spirit  of  unbelieving  banter.

H.  Carter  Bligh.

In  reply  to  further  inquiries,  Mr.  Podmore  received  the  following
letter  from  JNlr.  S.  Creagh  Henry  : —

5,  Milborne  Grove,  The  Boltons,  S.W.,  Jawinnj  20th.
Dear  Sir, — "With  reference  to  your  letter  concerning  Mr.  Lane's  dream,
he  mentioned  it  to  me  at  reheai'sal  during  the  morning  of  the  day  which
proved  fatal  to  poor  Terriss.  The  description  he  gave  me  was  that  he
saw  Mr.  Terriss  on  the  staircase  (upon  the  landing  where  he  died)  sur-
rounded by  several  people  who  were  suj)porting  him  in  what  appeared  to
be  a  fit.

Something  serious  seemed  to  have  happened,  and  no  performance  took
place  that  evening, — another  fact  which  was  verified.  As  far  as  I  recollect
this  was  all  Mr.  Lane  mentioned. — I  remain,  yours  faitlifuUy,

S.  Creagh  Henry.

Mr.  Terriss,  whose  real  name  was  William  Charles  James  Lewin,
was  murdered  by  a  man  named  Richard  Archer  Prince  (Archer  being
apparently  his  family  name  and  Prince  his  professional  name),  an
actor  out  of  employment,  who  was  afterwards  proved  to  be  insane
at  the  time.

The  value  of  this  case  as  evidence  of  supernormal  perception  of  a
future  event  of  course  depends  primarily  on  whether  Mr.  Lane  had  any
reason  for  anxiety  on  Mr.  Terriss's  behalf.  The  account  of  the  murder
given  in  the  Times  of  the  next  day  shows  that  Archer  was  known  by
some  persons  to  have  a  grudge  against  Mr.  Terriss,  but  it  seems  clear
that  very  little  attention  was  paid  to  this  and  that  no  one  had  any
suspicion  of  the  length  to  which  he  was  prepared  to  go.  And  the
evidence  given  later  seems  to  show  that  this  account  exaggerated  the
suspicious  incidents,  in  accordance  with  the  common  and  natural
tendency  to  imagine,  after  an  event,  that  one  has  noticed  some
indications  of  it,  if  one  did  not  actually  expect  the  thing  itself.  The
evidence  further  shows  that,  though  Archer  had  expressed  hostility
to  Terriss,  he  seems  to  have  avoided  doing  so  to  persons  in  any  way
connected  with  the  Adelphi  Theatre ;  also  that  there  were  several
other  persons  besides  Terriss  whom  he  had  a  grudge  against,  on  account
of  their  fancied  ill-usage  of  him.  Mr.  Lane  did  not  know  him,  except
perhaps  by  sight,  and  had  only  heard  of  him  as  previously  connected
with  the  theatre  and  that  he  had  the  night  before  asked  for  Terriss,
To  this  very  common  incident  he  could  hardly  be  supposed  to  attach
any  importance.

I  do  not  think,  therefore,  that  anxiety  about  Terriss  could  have
had  any  share  in  causing  the  dream  ;  but  it  seems  desirable  to  give  the-

Y


312


Alice  Johnson.


[part


evidence  for  and  against  this  view,  and  I  therefore  quote  the  account
in  the  Times  of  Friday,  December  17th,  and  give  an  abstract  of  all  the
evidence  given  in  the  Times  reports  of  the  inquest,  the  examination
before  the  magistrate,  and  the  trial,  which  seems  to  me  to  have
any  bearing  on  the  point.  (iSee  Times  of  December  18th,  20th,  21st,
and  30th,  1897,  and  January  14th,  1898).

The  evidence  shows  further  the  close  correspondence  of  the  events
of  the  death  with  Mr.  Lane's  dream.  .  ■.  •

From  the  Times  of  Friday,  December  17tli,  1897.

Last  evening,  Mr.  William  Terriss,  one  of  the  most  jjopular  actors  on
the  London  stage,  was  assassinated  at  the  ]jrivate  entrance  to  the  Adelphi
Theatre  in  Maiden  Lane,  Covent  Garden.  He  had  spent  the  afternoon  with
some  friends,  and  had  gone  home  to  dinner  at  about  5  o'clock.  Sub-
sequently, he  proceeded  as  usual  to  the  theatre,  where  he  was  taking  the
chief  part  in  Secret  Service,  and  on  reaching  the  private  entrance  he  was
suddenly  attacked  by  a  man  between  30  and  40  years  of  age,  who  stabbed
him  in  the  region  of  the  heart  and  again  in  the  back.  The  weapon  employed
is  described  as  a  long,  thin-bladed  knife.  Mr.  Terriss  at  once  fell  tu  the
ground,  exclaiming  :  "  He  has  stabbed  me,  arrest  him."  The  assassin,  after
a  struggle,  was  captured,  and  straightway  conveyed  to  Bow  Street  Police-
station.  Mr.  Terriss,  meanwhile,  v/as  carried  inside  the  theatre  and  medical
aid  was  at  once  sumtnoned  from  Charing  Oross  Hospital  and  obtained.  It
was  not  possible,  however,  to  convey  him  further  than  the  foot  of  the
stairs  leading  to  his  dressing-room,  and  here,  after  lying  in  a  state  of
semi-consciousness  for  al)out  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  twenty  minutes,  he
died. . .  .

The  assassin  is  known  Ijy  the  name  of  William  Archer,  or  William  Archer
Flint.  Some  years  ago  he  was  employed  as  a  supernumerary  at  the
Adelphi,  one  of  the  pieces  in  which  he  appeared  being  In  the  Banks.  It  is
understood  that  he  had  frequently  applied  to  Mr.  Terriss  and  other  members
of  the  company  for  heljj,  and  a  great  deal  had  been  done  for  him  by  them.
Recently,  however,  he  had  become  so  importunate  in  his  demands  that  Mr.
Terriss  refused  to  do  anything  more  for  him,  but  referred  him  to  the  Actors'
Benevolent  Fund,  from  which  association  he  received  a  grant.  For  several
nights  past,  Archer  had  been  noticed  hanging  about  the  private  entrance  to
the  theatre,  and  on  Wednesday  night,  it  is  reported,  he  made  an  enquiry  of
the  stage-door  keeper  as  to  Mr.  Terriss's  whereabouts.  He  is  said  to  have
been  known  in  the  theatre  as  "  Mad  Archer,"  but  the  stage-door  keeper  and
others  last  night  expressed  a  doubt  as  to  whether  he  is  insane.  ...  In
reply  to  the  charge  of  murder,  he  is  reported  to  have  said  :  "  He  has  done
me  out  of  the  Benevolent  Fund  this  morning,  and  I  am  out  of  it  for  life."

Mr.  Frederick  Lane,  who  "understudies"  Mr.  Terriss  in  the  part  of
Captain  Thome,  had  a  peculiar  story  to  tell. He  said  :  —

"I  dreamt  about  this  very  thing  last  night,  and  when  I  came  to  the
theatre  this  morning  for  the  rehearsal,  I  told  all  the  '  boys  '  about  it.  I
dreamt  I  saw  Mr.  Terriss  lying  in  the  landing,  surrounded  by  a  crowd,  and
that  he  was  raving. I  seemed  to  see  it  all  and  then  it  all  seemed  to  fade


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


313


;iway.  It  was  a  horrible  dream,  and  I  could  not  tell-  what  it  meant.  I  tried
to  forget  it  during  the  day,  but  to-night  again,  when  I  came  to  the  theatre,
I  was  going  down  Bedford  Street,  wlien  something  seemed  to  say,  '  Do  not
go  there.'  I  then  went  round  to  Maiden  Lane,  and  there  I  saw  this  villain.
I  had  heard  of  him  as  being  an  old  su2:)er,  and  I  knew  he  was  asking  for  Mr.
Terriss  last  night.  His  appearance  struck  me  as  peculiar.  He  wore  a  big
cloak  and  a  slouch  hat.  I,  however,  do  not  know  him,  and  he  said  nothing
to  me.  I  walked  on,  and  then  a  few  minutes  afterwards  I  heard  a  great
noise  and  found  that  he  had  stabbed  Mr.  Terriss.  I  rushed  back  and  saw
Mr.  Terriss  taken  indoors.  If  it  had  not  been  for  the  police,  I  believe  the
man  would  have  been  lynched.  He  was  a  fellow  of  average  height,  had  a
dark  moustache  and  a  somewhat  foreign  appearance.  I  can  suggest  no
motive  whatever  for  tlie  crime.  The  man  may  possibly  have  been  refused
money.  I  cannot  tell,  though  ;  and  it  is  at  any  rate  certain  he  had  no
reason  to  go  to  such  an  awful  extreme.  Mr.  Terriss  was  the  kindest  of  men,
and  we  loved  him  both  on  and  off  the  stage.  He  was,  indeed,  '  one  of
the  best.'  "

Another  member  of  the  Adelphi  company  further  corroborated  the
statements  jireviously  made  in  reference  to  the  personality  of  Mr.  Terriss's
assailant,  mentioning  that  at  the  theatre  he  was  generally  known  as  "Mad
Archer.'"  When  seen  by  Mr.  Nicholls  on  the  previous  evening  and  told  that
he  could  not  see  Mr.  Terriss,  he  is  stated  to  have  gone  away  murmuring
"  Not  yet. "  .  .  .  Archer  is  alleged  to  have  nursed  a  grievance  against
]\lr.  Terriss  even  before  he  left  the  employ  of  the  Adelphi,  and  is  reported
to  have  more  than  once  stood  in  the  wings  and  made  sarcastic  remarks  at
the  expense  of  the  deceased  actor.  One  of  his  remarks  is  quoted  as  an
instance  of  this  :  "  Fools  often  succeed  in  life  where  men  of  genius  fail."

Abstract  of  Evidence  Given  in  "Times'"  Reports.

Mr.  J.  H.  Graves  said  that  he  spent  Thursday  afternoon  with  Mr.
Teri'iss  and  at  about  7  o'clock  drove  with  him  to  Adelphi  Theatre — driving  to
corner  of  Maiden  Lane,  Strand,  where  tliey  both  alighted  and  walked  to  the
private  entrance  a  few  yards  up  the  lane.  This  entrance  was  only  used  by
Mr.  Terriss  and  one  or  two  others.  As  he  was  putting  his  key  into  the
lock,  the  prisoner  rushed  forward  from  across  the  lane  and  stabbed  him.
Mr.  Terriss  fell  and  Mr.  Graves  seized  the  prisoner  and  gave  him  in  charge
to  a  constable,  whom  he  accompanied  to  Bow  Street.  He  went  back  to  the
theatre  and  found  Mr.  Terriss  lying  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs  a  few  paces
from  the  door,  attended  by  a  doctor  and  several  others.  He  died  a  few
minutes  later.

The  prisoner  said  to  liim  that  Mr.  Terriss  had  kept  him  out  of  employ-
ment for  ten  years,  and  he  had  either  to  die  in  the  streets  or  take  his
revenge  on  him.  The  truth  was  that  Mr.  Terriss  had  often  helped  him  and
had  recommended  him  to  the  Actors'  Benevolent  Fund,  from  which  he  had
got  help  many  times.  He  had  called  at  the  office  of  the  fund  on  that  day,
and  had  been,  told  that  the  Committee  could  not  meet  then  to  reconsider  his
case. He  had  for  some  time  been  almost  a  weekly  applicant  there.

Sub-Divisional-Inspector  William  French  was  at  Bow  Street  when  the
prisoner  was  brought  in  and  returned  with  Mr.  Graves  to  Adeljjhi  Theatre,

Y  2


314


Alice  Johiison.


[part


entered  private  door  in  Maiden  Lane,  and  found  Mr.  Terriss  lying  in  the
passage.  He  was  unconscious  and  remained  so  until  his  death.  Three
doctors  were  present,  and  Miss  Millwai-d  was  supjiorting  his  head.  She
asked  him  if  he  knew  her.  He  made  no  reply  to  her,  but  shouted  out
several  times  :  "  Get  away,  get  away."

Mr.  Bragg,  Police-Constable,  who  arrested  the  prisoner,  said  the  latter
had  been  asked  by  Graves  on  the  way  to  Bow  Street  why  he  did  it,  and  he
answered:  "In  revenge.  He  has  blackmailed  me  for  ten  years.  I  gave
him  due  warning.  I  should  eitlier  have  had  to  die  in  the  streets  or  have  my
revenge."

Inspector  Wood,  before  whom  he  was  brought  at  Bow  Street,  said  he
gave  same  answer  to  him.  To  Inspector  Croxton  he  said  that  his  sister
was  in  league  with  Terriss  in  blackmailing  him.

At  the  trial,  Mk.  Gill,  the  Counsel  for  the  Crown,  said  there  could  be  no
(juestion  but  that  tlie  prisoner  had  some  years  ago  conceived  a  violent  hatred
for  Mr.  Terriss,  and  would  aj^pear  to  be  under  the  impression  that  Mr.
Terriss  was  in  some  way  preventing  him  from  getting  on  in  his  profession.
That  was  shown  by  .statements  made  at  different  times  to  persons  to  whom
he  complained  that  Mr.  Terriss  was  preventing  him  from  getting  employment
and  was  blackmailing  him.  As  far  as  could  be  ascertained  that  was  a
complete  delusion  on  his  part  ;  Mr.  Terriss  had,  on  the  contrary,  assisted
him  to  obtain  charitable  relief  and  employment.  The  point  at  which  the
evidence  coimnenced  was  in  October  last,  when  the  prisoner  came  into
contact  with  Mr.  Croydon,  a  theatrical  manager  at  Newcastle.  About  the
end  of  October  he  came  to  London  and  purchased  a  knife  (probably  the  one
with  which  the  murder  was  committed).  It  was  during  the  period  between
this  time  and  tlie  murder  that  he  was  getting  assistance  from  the  Actors'
Benevolent  li'und.  ( )]i  JNovember  9th  he  obtained  a  letter  of  recommenda-
tion to  theni  from  Terriss,  on  the  strength  of  which  lie  received  various
small  sums  from  the  fund.

After  being  arrested,  prisoner  said  to  the  Inspector  about  the  knife,
"That  is  what  I  stabbed  him  with.  He  had  due  warning,  and  if  he  is  dead,
lie  knows  what  he  has  to  expect."

It  was  clear  that  he  was  acting  with  the  greatest  deliberation  and  that,
cherishing  a  feeling  of  hatred  against  Mr.  Terriss ,  he  was  uttering  threats  as
to  what  he  proposed  to  do.  During  the  time  he  was  in  London  at  the  end  of
October,  he  was  obviously  contemplating  the  crime,  because  they  found  him
purchasing  the  knife  and  uttering  the  threats  against  Jlr.  Terriss.

Mk.  R.  Croydon,  theatrical  manager,  had  engaged  the  prisoner  in
October  last  to  take  a  part  in  his  company  at  Newcastle.  The  prisoner  told
him  he  had  only  left  the  Adelphi  through  one  man,  and  might  have  starved
but  for  the  Actors'  Benevolent  Fund,  and  that  he  would  be  even  with  this
man  some  day.  He  did  not  learn  his  part  and  behaved  very  strangely,  and
consequejitly  was  discharged  next  day.  He  said  he  had  then  two  enemies,
and  on  being  asked  who  the  other  was,  said  it  was  Terriss.  Mrs.  Croydon
said  "You  are  mad  ;  "  and  he  replied,  "Yes,  and  the  world  will  ring  with  my
madness." He  then  left  and  they  had  not  seen  him  again.

Mr.  Denton,  theatrical  manager,  of  Maiden  Lane,  said  he  had  known
the  prisoner  for  some  time,  and  had  then  lost  sight  of  him  till  October  or


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


315


November  last,  when  he  called  nearly  every  day  at  his  office  for  employ-
ment. He  tried  to  get  him  employment  and  offered  him  a  week's  engage-
ment, which  he  would  not  accept.  On  the  afternoon  of  December  16tli,
prisoner  called  to  ask  if  he  had  got  him  any  employment  and  he  said  he  had
not.  Cross-examined,  said  the  prisoner  did  not  appear  to  have  any  particular
animosity  against  Mr.  Terriss  ;  was  peculiar,  and  could  easily  be  put  into  a
temper  by  chaff — lie  seemed  to  think  he  ought  to  play  more  important  parts
than  were  given  him.

Mr.  CoLSOisr,  Secretary  to  the  Actors'  Benevolent  Fund,  said  that  help
had  been  given  to  the  prisoner  on  the  recommendation  of  Terriss  in  his
letter  of  November  9th.  He  read  seven  letters  from  the  prisoner  to  the
managers  of  the  Fund  asking  for  help,  saying  that  he  was  in  great  trouble,  on
<iccountof  having  lost  an  engagement  "through  no  fault  of  my  own, "  but  not
complaining  of  any  one  otherwise  than  in  that  phrase,  and  expressing  great
gratitude  for  what  they  had  done  for  him.

Mrs.  Darby,  his  landlady,  had  seen  the  knife  in  his  room  upon  more
than  one  occasion  before  the  murder,  but  she  never  saw  him  use  it  for
anything.  She  had  seen  marks  on  it  as  if  it  had  been  used  for  cutting
bread.  She  knew  he  was  in  trouble  for  want  of  money,  as  he  could  not  jjay
his  rent.

G.  LoKBERG,  cutler,  Brompton  Road,  said  in  October  he  had  knives  for
sale  similar  to  one  produced,  price  9d.,  and  one  evening  in  October,  a  tall,
shabbily-dressed  man  bought  one.  (Evidence  at  joolice-court  made  it  almost
certain  that  this  was  the  knife  with  which  the  murder  was  committed.)

Mr.  Thomas  Terriss,  son  of  the  deceased,  said  he  never  knew  him  to
be  threatened  at  all,  did  not  know  he  had  an  enemy  in  the  world.  "He
had  not  to  his  knowledge  ever  seen  the  man  who  was  charged  with  his
murder  until  he  saw  him  at  Bow  Street  on  Friday  morning,  when  he  found
he  was  not  a  man  whom  he  had  previously  known  as  '  Mad  Archie.'  "

Henry  Spratt,  stage  door  k"eeper  to  the  Adelphi,  said  he  first  saw  the
prisoner  about  two  months  ago,  when  he  brought  a  letter  for  Mr.  Terriss  to
the  stage  door  and  waited  for  an  answer.  Half  an  hour  later  a  message  came
down,  "All  right."  A  few  nights  after  this  Mr.  Terriss  sjjoke  to  witness
about  messages.  Witness  saw  the  prisoner  about  half  a  dozen  times  after
this.  He  would  wait  outside  the  door  for  half  an  hour  or  so  and  then
go  away  without  saying  anything,  except  on  December  15th,  which  was
the  last  time  witness  saw  him,  when  he  asked  if  Mr.  Terriss  came  out  that
way,  meaning  by  the  stage  door.  Witness  replied  that  he  did,  which  was  not
the  fact ;  but  he  said  it  in  consequence  of  what  Mr.  Terriss  had  said  to  him,
in  order  to  keep  the  man  away  from  the  private  entrance  in  Maiden  Lane.
Cross-examined,  said  it  v/as  not  an  uncommon  thing  for  persons  who  had
been  employed  at  the  theatre  to  wait  about  the  stage  door,  nor  was  it  an
uncommon  thing  for  persons  to  come  there  and  enquire  in  regard  to  others.

W.  Alger,  dresser  to  Mr.  TerrLss,  said  that  he  did  not  know  the  [irisoner.
On  the  night  of  December  15th  he  saw  the  prisoner  at  about  8.30  watching
the  people  coming  out  of  the  stage  door,  but  did  not  speak  to  him.

The  Defence  was  directed  towards  proving  insanity.  Evidence  was
given  that  the  prisoner  had  Iiad  many  delusions  of  persecution,  thought  liis


31G


Alice  Jo] in  son.


[part


mother  and  others  had  put  poison  into  his  food  ;  that  Mr.  Arthur,  the
"  theatre-master  "  at  Dundee,  "  l^lackraailed  "  him.  He  had  also  worked  as  a
lahfiurer  and  thought  his  fellow  workmen  and  others  had  tried  to  keep  him
out  of  work,  had  violent  fits  of  passion,  thought  his  brother  was  in  league
with  Mr.  Arthur  in  blackmailing  liim  and  had  attacked  his  brother  several
times,  once  with  a  knife  and  poker. Two  of  his  brothers  had  been  insane.

11.  BEVERiixiE,  attendant  at  the  Dundee  Tlieatre,  gave  evidence  of  his
thinking  himself  a  great  actor  and  badly  used  in  general.  Once  he  wanted
to  "  go  for  "  an  actor  named  Stewart,  and  when  Beveridge  turned  him  out,
prisoner  pulled  out  a  revolver  from  his  pocket  and  threatened  him.

A.  Husband,  foreman  at  Wallace  Foundry,  in  Dundee,  said  prisoner
worked  there  in  1896  (in  the  intervals  of  his  being  em2)loyed  as  an  actor),
and  said  Mr.  Terriss  blackmailed  him.  He  showed  him  a  letter  fron^
Terriss  saying  that  he  should  be  glad  to  hear  of  his  getting  an  engagement,
and  that  he  might  give  his  name  as  a  reference.  The  prisoner  had  asked
Mr.  Terriss  for  a  character,  and  he  thought  that  letter  not  sufficient,  and
called  it  blackmailing.  He  said  the  same  thing  about  Mr.  Elliston,  who,  he
said,  was  in  league  with  Mr.  Terriss.

Me.  Elliston,  theatrical  manager,  who  had  employed  prisoner,  said
since  prisoner  had  left  liim,  he  had  received  a  number  of  letters  and  post-
cards from  him  stating  that  he  had  not  given  him  a  reference,  that  he  had
blackmailed  him  and  tried  to  prevent  his  getting  employment,  which  was
not  true.

Dr.  Bahtian  gave  opinion  that  he  was  insane,  and  his  mind  saturated
with  delusions  of  persecution.  He  did  not  attach  any  importance  to
purchase  of  knife  ;  did  not  think  prisoner  contemplated  doing  the  murder  a
month  before  he  did  it.  If  he  had  premeditated  it,  he  might  have  been
insane  all  the  same,  but  he  did  not  believe  he  had.  Did  not  believe  prisoner
went  to  theatre  with  intention  of  committing  the  act,  but  that  he  wanted  to
speak  to  Mr.  Terriss,  and  as  Mr.  Terriss  did  not  speak  to  him,  he  struck
him,  having  the  knife  in  his  hand.

Two  other  medical  experts  gave  very  decided  opinions  as  to  his  insanity,
but  said  nothing  as  to  whether  the  act  was  premeditated  or  not.

The  verdict  given  was  to  the  effect  that  the  prisoner  was  guilty  of  wilful
murder — that  he  knew  what  he  was  doing  and  to  whom  he  was  doing  it,  but,
on  the  medical  evidence,  that  he  was  not  responsible  for  his  acticms.


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


317


APPENDIX  III.
Some  Premonitory  Dreams  of  Races.


The  following  narrative,  which  is  of  interest  in  connection  with
Professor  Haslam's  dream  of  the  winner  of  the  New  Zealand  Cup  (see
above,  p.  250),  was  compiled  by  Mr.  Donald  Murray,  Editor  of  the
Sydney  Morning  Herald,  a  Member  of  the  Society.

Melbour>'e  Guv  Dreams.

The  race  for  the  Melbourne  Giip  has  acquired  such  celebrity  in  Australia
that  it  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  a  national  event.  It  attracts  visitors  from
all  parts  of  Australia,  and  for  weeks  beforehand  the  Melbourne  Oup  is  one
of  the  chief  subjects  of  conversation  over  a  continent  as  large  as  Europe.
Cup  Day  is  the  culminating  point  of  a  saturnalia  of  gambling,  the  results  of
which  penetrate  to  every  corner  of  Australia.  Under  these  circumstances  it
is  not  surprising  that  there  is  always  a  large  crop  of  dreams  of  the  Winner
of  the  Cup.  It  is  also  not  surprising  that,  as  there  are  never  more  than
about  150  entries  and  seldom  more  than  about  20  or  30  starters  for  the
Melbourne  Cup,  and  as  the  dreams  must  be  numbered  by  thousands,  one  or
two  of  the  dreams  occasicmally  come  true.  The  odds  are  heavily  in  favour
of  such  a  contingency.  As  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  racing  dreams  are
fairly  numerous  in  Australia,  I  enclose  an  extract  from  the  Simday  Times  of
November  1st,  1896,  a  Sydney  paper,  in  wliich  mention  is  made  of  half-a-
dozen  Cup  dreams.  The  Cup  was  run  two  days  after  tlie  publication  of  these
dreams,  and  it  is  notable  that  not  in  a  single  instance  was  either  the  first,
second,  or  third  horse  correctly  indicated.  The  extract,  however,  serves  to
show  how  widesjjread  is  the  tendency  amongst  sporting  people  to  dream  of
the  Cujj,  and  consequently  the  extreme  probability  of  one  or  two  of  the
dreams  occasionally  coming  true  by  chance  coincidence.

Another,  and  a  very  droll  aspect  of  the  matter  was  revealed  to  me  by
the  sporting  editor  of  the  Siidneij  Morniny  Herald.  I  a.sked  him  if  he
thought  there  was  much  betting  on  dreams  of  the  Cup.  "Of  course  tliere
is,"  he  replied,  "  why,  some  people  make  a  practice  of  taking  a  heavy  dinner
of  pork  in  order  to  dream  of  the  winning  horse."  The  same  authority
informed  me  that  entries  for  the  Melbourne  Cup  took  place  about  the  second
of  June  each  year,  and  that  the  Cap  is  run  in  November,  or  about  six
months  afterwards.  Bets  used  to  be  made  as  much  as  a  year  beforeliand,
but  long  range  speculation  of  this  kind  is  not  now  practised  to  any  extent.
The  entries  number  from  100  to  150,  and  of  these  usually  not  more  than
from  30  to  40  horses  actually  take  part  in  the  race.  The  odds  against  some
of  the  individual  horses,  rank  outsiders,  may  be  as  long  as  1,000  to  1,  while
the  chances  against  other  horses  may  be  as  short  as  5  to  1.  On  the  average,
however,  the  odds  atjainst  any  horse  selected  at  random  six  months  before-
hand would  not  be  more  than  150  to  1,  and  a  few  days  before  the  race  not


318


Alice  Johnson.


[part


more  than  about  50  to  1.  Tlie  names  of  the  horses  entered  for  the  race  are
published  all  over  Australia  for  months  previously,  and  there  is  consequently
plenty  of  opportunity  for  the  dreamers.  If  there  were  only  1,000  dreams
(possibly  there  are  10,000)  then  the  odds  would  be  about  10  to  1  iu  favour  of
at  least  one  dream  coming  true.  For  this  reason — because  racing  dreams
come  so  completely  within  the  range  of  explanation  by  ordinary  coincidence
— but  little  importance  can  be  attached  to  such  occurrences.

On  at  least  two  occasions,  liowever.  Cup  dreams  have  occurred  of  such  a
remarkable  character  that  they  have  received  notice  in  tlie  public  press.
One  of  these  I  shall  describe  as  the  "  Auraria  dream,"  and  the  other  is  the
so-called  "  Nimblefoot  Mystery."  The  latter  seems  to  have  impressed  the
public  mind  to  such  an  extent  that  twenty  years  afterwards  it  was  remem-
bered and  used  as  a  heading  for  a  Cup  dream  paragraph.  A  passing
acquaintance  in  a  boarding-house  was  also  able  to  tell  me  about  it.  I  will
deal  first  witli  the  "  Auraria  dream."

On  November  6th,  1895,  the  Evening  News,  a  Sydney  evening  paper,
published  [a]  paragraph  [about  it,  which,  however]  gave  no  clue  for  further
enquiries,  but  the  following  paragraph  from  the  AnstraUan  Star,  another
Sydney  evening  paper,  on  November  9th,  1895,  dealing  with  the  same
subject,  mentioned  the  name  of  Mr.  J.  Dalveen,  from  whom  I  obtained
some  corroboration  of  the  story  : —

"  Witli  the  majority  of  sensiljle  folk,  dreams  of  the  Melbourne  Cup
winner  are  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  time-honoured  joke.  One  instance,
however,  has  come  under  our  notice  which  it  is  impossible  to  accept  other-
wise tlian  as  a  truthful  and  remarkable  occurrence.  Some  four  months  ago
a  working  man  resident  in  Redfern  had  a  remarkable  dream  in  wliich  he  saw
Auraria  win  the  Melbourne  Cup  ;  he  also  dreamt  that  before  the  Cup  was
run  he  (the  dreamer)  died.  So  vivid  was  the  impression  that  he  backed
Auraria  to  win  £200 — the  odds  at  that  time  were  vei'y  long.  He  gave  the
tickets  to  his  wife.  At  the  time  of  the  dream  he  was  in  liis  usual  health,
ljut  he  took  ill  and  died  some  weeks  before  the  race  was  run.  One  part  of
the  dream  coming  true,  tlie  story  was  circulated  among  the  neighboui's,
several  of  whom  backed  the  horse.  Our  informant  was  among  tliese.  He
put  £1  on  the  filly,  with  the  result  that  he  won  £50.  He  laid  the  wager
with  Mr.  J.  Dalveen,  who  at  the  time  laughed  at  the  idea.  But  the  laugh
was  on  the  other  side  when  settling  time  came,  and  the  young  man  who
backed  the  dream  fancy  has  now  the  bank  deposit  slip  to  shovv  for  his  faith.
Numbers  of  his  friends  also  chaffed  hinr  about  his  superstitious  fancy —
before  the  race.  Now  he  is  engaged  in  the  pleasant  pastime  of  asking  them
whether  their  opinion  is  shaken.  And  the  widow  of  the  man  who  dreamt
the  winner  is  the  richer  by  £200. Truth  is  still  stranger  than  fiction."

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Dalveen,  a  bookmaker,  asking  him  whether  the  paragraph
was  true,  and  if  so,  whether  he  could  supply  me  with  the  name  of  the  gentle-
man who  laid  the  wager  with  him,  or  better  still  the  address  of  the  widow  of
the  man  who  had  liad  t!ie  dream.  After  some  delay  my  letter  was  returned
with  the  following  note  written  upon  it  by  a  Mr.  J.  W.  M  .

"  Mr.  Dalveen  has  handed  me  this  letter  of  yours,  as  I  took  the  bet  of
£50  to  1  about  Auraria  from  him.  I  spoke  to  the  widow  and  she  does  not
wish  to  have  her  name  published  in  any  paper  about  the  sad  aflair.  The


XXXV.]


Goincidencefi.


819


dream  was,  sad  to  state,  quite  true  iu  every  detail. — Yi)ui-s  faitlifully,  [signed
in  full]  J.  W.  M  . Don't  pul)lisli  my  name."

I  wrote  to  Mr.  M.  explaining  that  I  simply  wanted  more  precise  details.
I  got  no  reply.  Finally  I  called  on  Mr.  Dalveen  and  obtained  Mr.  M.'s
address.  He  was  an  employe  of  a  clothing  company  in  George-street,
Sydnej'.  He  assured  me  that  the  paragraph  was  perfectly  true,  and  he
added  : — "When  I  heard  of  the  deatli,  I  said  to  myself,  'Here's  a  leg  in'  and
I  laid  the  wager."  IMr.  M.  is  a  respectable  young  man,  and  the  details  of
the  dream  may,  I  think,  be  relied  on  as  far  as  they  go.  He  told  me  he  must
decline  to  give  me  the  address  of  the  widow,  as  she  had  been  worried  so  much
by  people  calling  to  see  her  about  the  dream  that  he  did  not  care  to  subject
her  to  any  further  annoyance.  I  made  some  more  attempts  to  iind  out  the
address,  but  without  success,  and  being  very  busy  at  the  time  I  had  to
abandon  the  quest.  It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  certain  features  about
this  dream  whicli  would  have  rendered  more  precise  details  verj'  desirable.
For  instance,  the  odds,  as  already  explained,  against  the  dreaming  of  the
winner  of  the  Cup  were  not  more  than  about  100  to  1 .  In  the  Star  account
the  date  of  the  dream  is  given  as  "  some  four  months  "  before  the  day  of  the
race,  and  the  paragraph  says,  '"At  the  time  of  the  dream  he  was  in  his  usual
liealth,  but  he  became  ill  and  died  some  weeks  before  the  race  was  run."
Much  would  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  illness.  At  the  time  of  the  dream
it  is  quite  possible  he  may  have  known  he  had  not  much  longer  to  live — or
he  may  at  least  have  had  a  sublinunal  consciousness  of  the  fact,  arising  from
unnoticed  inroads  of  the  malady,  whatever  it  was.  In  that  case  the  additional
coincidences  of  dreaming  of  his  death  before  the  Cup  and  of  his  widow
drawing  the  money,  would  not  increase  the  probabilities  against  cliance
coincidence.  These  incidents  would  be  merely  deductions  from  facts  known
to  the  subliminal  mind.  Unfortunately,  as  I  was  unable  to  obtain  the
add  ress  of  the  widow,  I  was  also  unable  to  obtain  the  address  of  the  doctor
who  attended  htr  husband.

The  mention  of  the  "Nimblefoot  Mystery"  in  the  heading  to  the
Evening  News  paragraph  led  me  to  make  eiupiiries  about  this  case  also.  A
boarding-house  acquaintance  told  me  it  was  most  I'eniarkable,  that  it  had
involved  a  "bet  on  a  double''  of  £20,000,  and  that  there  had  been  a  big
lawsuit  about  the  payment  of  the  bet  after  the  death  of  the  owner  of
Nimblefoot.  He  also  mentioned  that  it  had  been  fully  reported  in  the
Andralmian,  a  well-known  Melbourne  weekly  jiaper.  I  wrote  to  the
editor  asking  him  for  the  date,  and  the  reply  under  the  head  of  answers  to
correspondents  was  as  follows  : —

"  S.P.  R.  (Sydney).  We  do  not  remember  any  lawsuit  about  Nimblefoot.
J.  Day,  the  lad  who  rode  him  in  the  Melbourne  Oujj,  and  W.  Lnng  were
parties  in  some  action  in  whicli  the  question  of  Day's  engagement  to  Lang
was  concerned."

The  boarding-house  acquaintance  then  recommended  me  to  write  to  the
proprietor  of  Craig's  Royal  Hotel  at  Ballarat,  and  ask  for  the  date  of  the
Australasian  containing  particulars  of  the  Nimblefoot  dream.  I  did  so,
and  a  reply  came  from  Mr.  W.  L.  Bentley,  giving  the  date  as  October  olst,
1891.  On  enquiry  it  turned  out  tliat  there  were  no  copies  of  the
Australasian of  this  date  for  sale, but  the  following  is  a  coj^y of  a


320


Alice  Johnson.


[part


paragraph  it  contains  referring  to  the  Nimblefoot  clreani.  It  occurs  in  the
Anstralufiian  of  October  31,st,  1891,  page  865,  in  a  sporting  article  by
"Augur,"  entitled  "A  Cup  Chronicle. — Past  and  Present."

"  While  in  1870  Nimblefoot  was  victorious,  and  the  alleged  dream  of  his
dead  owner,  Mr.  Walter  Craig,  was  said  to  have  been  realised.  It  will  be
remembered  that  by  Nimblefoot's  triumph  the  veteran  bookmaker.  Slack,
had  been  struck  for  a  double  which  he  had  laid  to  Mr.  Walter  Craig  ;  but  if  I
mistake  not,  the  bet  was  in  reality  taken  by  Mr.  Stephen  Holgate  in
conjunction  with  Mr.  Craig.  It  was  £1,000  to  several  drinks  and  cigars
against  Croydon  winning  the  A.  J.  C.  Metropolitan  and  Nimblefoot  the
Melbourne  Cup.  The  double  came  off,  aiad  it  was  generally  believed  that
Slack  paid  the  £1,000  to  Mrs.  Craig,  but  he  gave  her  only  half.  It  was  a
splendid  advertisement  for  the  rough  old  penciller,  and  ever  afterwards  he
did  a  roaring  business  as  a  layer  of  double  events."

In  1870  there  were  29  competitors  for  the  Cup. The  Argus  tip
for  the  CujD  on  the  morning  of  Niiveinber  10th  was  ;

1.  Trump  Card,  4  to  1  against.

2.  Croydon,  100  to  14  against.

3.  Nimblefoot  or  Strop,  100  to  7  against.

The  Ar(jit:i  of  Friday,  November  11th,  the  day  after  the  Cup,  has  a
aragraph  as  follows  : —

"A  remarkable  circumstance  in  connection  with  the  victory  of  Nimblefoot
formed  matter  for  a  good  deal  of  comment  and  wonder  yesterday  ;  that  was
the  fact  tliat  prior  to  his  death  Mr.  Walter  Craig  had  dreamed  of  a  horse
carrying  his  colours,  but  with  the  jockey  wearing  crape,  winning  the  Cup
this  year.  Differing  from  the  great  majoiity  of  prophetic  dreams,  this  one
was  on  record  prior  to  the  event,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  week  appeared
in  the  following  form  in  the  Bendujo  Independent  : —

"  '  It  is  said  that  the  late  Mr.  Walter  Craig,  of  Ballarat,  told  some  of  his
friends  a  short  time  before  his  death  that  he  had  dreamed  that  he  saw  a
horse,  ridden  by  a  jockey  w'earing  his  well-known  colours,  but  with  crape  on
his  left  sleeve,  coming  in  first  for  the  Melbourne  Cup.  Now  Nimblefoot,  Mr.
Craig's  horse,  won  the  Hotliam  Stakes  on  Saturday,  and  his  jockey,  who
wore  crape  on  his  sleeve  in  menKjry  of  the  late  Mr.  Walter  Craig,  was  loudly
cheered  on  coming  to  scale.  .  .  .  Whether  Nimblefoot  will  win  the
Melbourne  Cup  is  another  matter,  but  should  that  be  the  case,  it  will  be
somewhat  startling.'  "

It  will  be  noticed  that  nothing  is  said  in  this  paragraph  about  the  double
event  bet,  but  apparently  there  was  such  a  transaction,  and  that  it  was
widely  known  may  be  fairly  inferred  from  the  paragraph  in  the  Audralasiayi
of  1891,  or  11  years  afterwards.  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  after  so  many
years  to  obtain  any  further  corroboration  of  this  case,  beyond  perhaps  looking
up  the  tiles  of  the  Bendigo  Independent  to  verify  the  foregoing  paragraph.
That  could  be  done,  but  it  seems  hardly  necessary,  as  the  Argus  is  recognised
as  a  careful  and  accurate  paper.

Details  such  as  those  about  the  jockey  wearing  crape  on  his  sleeve,  the
death  of  the  owner  of  Nimljlefoot  before  the  Cup,  the  betting  on  the  double


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


321


event  (if  the  accounts  about  the  latter  can  be  relied  upon)  seem  to  me  to
bring  this  case  out  of  the  ordinary  ruck  of  Cup  dreams.

As  a  further  illustration  of  the  likelihood  of  chance  coincidence  being  the
true  exjjlanation  of  ordinary  Cup  dreams,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  a  few-
years  ago,  when  the  last  wave  of  spiritism,  culminating  in  the  exposure  of
Mrs.  Annie  Mellon,  passed  over  Sydney,  several  members  of  the  New  South
Wales  Parliament  lield  a  table-tilting  seance,  and,  taking  a  published  list  of
the  entries  for  the  Cup,  tilted  through  the  list  for  the  winner.  The  table
persistently  bumped  at  one  name,  and  this  horse  was  backed  V)y  about  a.
dozen  prominent  members  of  Parliament.  The  horse  won  the  Cup,  and  as
the  odds  were  fairly  long,  the  members  who  laid  the  bets  won  sums  ranging
from  £10  to  £100.  The  result  was  that  for  a  time  table-tilting  as  an  adjunct
to  horse-racing  became  very  popular  in  Sydney  ;  but  the  method  was  found
to  be  unreliable,  and  racing  speculators  have  been  compelled  to  fall  back  on
pork  suppers  as  a  stimulant  of  supernormal  faculty.

Donald  Murkay.


322


Alice  Johnson.


[part


APPENDIX  IV.
A  Guessing  Competition  Case.


The  following  account  refers  to  a  success  in  a  guessing  competition
of  one  of  the  kinds  now  constantly  being  advertised  in  weekly  papers.
It  happens  that  a  good  deal  of  information  is  available  about  it,  as  it
was  the  subject  of  two  trials,  the  proprietor  of  the  paper  having
refused  to  pay  the  prize  money  to  the  successful  competitoi",  who
therefore  brought  an  action  against  him.  The  jury  gave  a  verdict  for
the  plaintiff,  but  this  was  disallowed  by  the  Judge,  on  the  ground
that  the  competition  was  a  "lottery"  (that  is,  a  distribution  of
prizes  determined  by  lot  or  chance,  and  involving  no  skill)  and  there-
fore illegal.  The  judgment  was  appealed  against,  and  the  Court  of
Appeal  determined  that  the  competition  was  not  a  lottery.  The
<]uestion  is  important  theoretically,  as  well  as  legally,  and  as  my
own  view  is  that  it  was  a  lottery,  I  reprint  all  the  arguments  used
on  both  sides.

The  case  was  first  tried  at  the  West  Riding  Assizes  at  Leeds,  on
March  22ud,  1898,  and  I  give  the  report  published  in  The  Yoi-ksldre
Post  of  the  following  day  in  full,  in  order  to  show  what  evidence  there
is  that  the  correct  guess  was  really  made.

NISI  PRIUS  COURT.
(Before  Mr.  Justice  Laweance  and  a  Special  Jury.)
A  CURIOUS  GUESSING  COMPETITION.
A  SHEFFIELD  BUTCHER  CLAIMS  £1,000.

John  Henry  Hall,  butcher,  near  Sheffield,  brought  an  action  for  breach
of  contract  agahi.st  William  Henry  Bingham  Cox,  printer  and  publislier  of  a
pajjer  called  the  Bucket.  The  claim  was  for  £1,000,  alleged  to  have  been
won  by  the  plaintiff  in  a  guessing  competition  in  December  last.  Mr.
Walter  Beverley  appeared  for  the  plaintiff,  and  the  defendant  was  repre-
sented by  Mr.  Tindal  Atkinson,  Q.C.,  and  INIr.  Longstaffe.

Mr.  Beverley,  in  opening  the  case,  .stated  that  Mr.  Bingham  Co.x,  in
copies  of  the  jjapcr  of  November  last,  had  offered  a  prize  of  £1,000  to  any
one  wlio  should  predict  the  exact  number  of  male  and  female  births,  together
with  tlie  number  of  deaths  in  Loudon  for  the  week  ending  December  11,
1897.  There  was  also  a  number  of  consolation  prizes  offered  for  those  who
miglit  not  predict  the  exact  figures,  but  get  very  near  to  them.  Hoping  to
be  the  £1,000  prize-winner,  the  plaintiff'  bought  252  copies.  From  these
copies  he  cut  out  the  coujions,  filled  them  up  in  the  required  manner,  and
forwarded  them  to  the  offices  of  the  Bucket. In  one  of  these  coupons,


XXXV.]


Coineidei'ices.


325


according  to  counsel,  he  predicLed  that  the  number  oi  male  births  for  the-
week  ending  December  11  in  London  would  be  : — Males,  1,24-4  ;  females,
1,245  ;  and  deatlis,  1,866.  Plaintiff  afterwards  obtained  from  the  Registrar-
General  or  from  the  Queen's  Printers  (Messrs.  Eyre  &  Spottiswoode)  the-
returns  of  the  male  and  female  births  and  of  deaths  for  the  week  in  question,
and  it  was  alleged  that  the  figures  were  precisely  the  same  as  those  that  had
been  forecast  by  the  plaintitf.  Oa  the  16th  December  plaintiff  wrote  to  the
Rocket  office  calling  attention  to  tlie  fact  that  he  had  been  right  in  his
forecast,  and  congratulating  himself  on  his  luck.  To  this  letter  there  was
no  reply.  He  again  wrote  on  the  29th  December  but  got  no  reply.  He
wrote  again  on  the  3rd  January,  and  received  as  reply  that  when  the  result
had  been  arrived  at,  it  would  be  made  known  in  the  Rocket.  The  plaintiff
put  the  matter  into  the  hands  of  his  solicitor.  In  the  course  of  further
correspondence  it  was  contended  on  behalf  of  the  defendant  that  the  com-
petition had  been  declared  to  be  an  illegal  lottery,  that  he  had  been  fined
£20,  and  that  the  coupon  on  which  the  plaintiff  contended  he  had  written
the  e.xact  figures  had  got  gummed  or  fastened  to  another  coupon,  and  had
consequently  been  jjut  to  one  side,  and  not  deciphered.  Even  if  these-
statements  were  true,  the  defendant,  counsel  contended,  had  made  them  too
late  to  allow  him  to  break  away  from  his  contract.  The  plaintiff,  concluded.
Mr.  Beverley,  had  taken  extraordinary  pains  to  win  the  £1,000,  and  having,
as  he  thought,  become  entitled  to  it,  he  ought  to  succeed  in  this  action.

The  plaintiff  gave  evidence  bearing  out  counsel's  statement.  During  his
evidence  a  kettle  was  brought  into  court  with  the  object  of  separating  tw&
coupons,  one  of  which  the  plaintiff  contended  contained  the  figures  entitling
him  to  the  £1,000  prize.

The  Associate  (Mr.  Wade)  held  the  papers  over  the  kettle,  and  whilst  the
process  lasted,  the  business  of  the  Court  was  brought  to  a  standstill.

His  Lordship  :  I  think  this  process  might  be  carried  on  outside  by  two
solicitors.  The  first  who  sees  anything  favourable  to  his  side  can  come
running  back.  (Laughter.)

The  kettle  and  documents  were  here  taken  out  of  court  by  the  solicitors.

After  the  supposed  winning  coupon  was  brought  into  court,  it  was  passed
up  to  the  Judge,  and  the  jury  afterwards  examined  it.

Mr.  Atkinson  contended  that  it  was  impossible  to  make  out  what  figures,
had  been  on  the  coupon,  and  that  in  the  sjjace  for  the  number  of  deaths
there  never  had  been  any  figures  filled  in  at  all.

Plaintiff,  in  cross- examinati(jn  by  Mr.  Atkinson,  said  he  had  been  obliged
to  file  his  petition  through  speculating  on  a  stand  on  the  occasion  of  the
Queen's  visit  to  Sheffield.

Mrs.  Hall,  wife  of  plaintiff,  and  a  letter  carrier  also  gave  evidence  for
the  plaintifl'.

For  the  defence,  Mr.  Atkinson  submitted  that  tlie  coupon  in  question
did  not  contain  the  necessary  figures.  The  question,  however,  was  one
entirely  for  the  jury.  The  defendant  had  carefully  refrained  from  touching
the  coupon  that  was  glued  to  another,  and  which,  according  to  the  plaintiff,
contained  the  exact  numbers.  It  could  not  be  suggested  that  the  defendant
had  caused  the  coupons  to  be  glued  together.  There  was  every  indication
of  these  coupons  and  others  sent  by  the  plaintiff  having  become  glued


Alice  Johnson.


[part


l)efore  tliey  left  plaintiff's  possession.  Again,  was  it  possible  that  any  one
would  be  able  to  guess  the  exact  number  of  male  births,  of  female  births,
and  of  deaths  in  London  in  one  week  ?  With  regard  to  the  letters  of  the
plaintiff  not  being  replied  to,  it  was  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  had
been  thousands  of  coupons  sent  in  for  this  competition,  and  that  much  time
was  required  to  go  through  them.

Mr.  Kennedy,  assistant  manager  to  Mr.  Cox,  gave  evidence  to  show  that
the  coupons  as  jaroduced  in  court  were  the  same  as  had  been  forwarded  to
the  oflBce.  He  had  not  glued  them,  nor  had  any  one  else  in  the  office,  nor
had  any  one  tampered  with  the  coupons  in  question  or  with  any  of  them.

Mr.  A.  Allison,  also  in  the  employment  of  the  defendant,  spoke  to  the
•care  with  which  the  coupons  had  been  examined.

Mr.  Bingham  Cox,  proprietor  of  the  paper,  gave  evidence.  The  coupon
on  which  it  was  alleged  the  correct  figures  had  been  wiitten  was  glued  to
another  when  he  first  saw  it.  It  was  afterwards  placed  in  the  hands  of  his
solicitor,  and  had  not  left  that  gentleman's  liands  since.  It  was  quite
untrue  that  either  himself  or  any  one  in  his  employment  liad  tampered  with
the  coupons  in  any  way  whatever.  There  would  be  from  80,000  to  100,000
coupons.

The  Judge,  in  his  address  to  the  jury,  laid  stress  on  the  fact  that  it  was
for  the  plaintiff  to  make  out  his  case.

The  Jury  retired  to  consider  their  verdict.  On  returning  into  court
after  half-an-hour's  absence  they  gave  a  verdict  for  the  plaintifi'.

Mr.  Beverley  :  I  formally  ask  for  judgment.

Mr.  Atkinson,  Q.C.  :  Before  judgment  is  given,  I  shall  have  to  argue
the  point  as  to  whether  this  competition  was  a  lottery  or  not,  and  whether
the  £1,000  can  be  legally  paid  over.

The  Judge  :  Very  well ;  that  is  clearly  a  point  that  must  be  argued.  It
may  be  argued  at  the  next  sitting  of  the  Court.

Judgment  was  accordingly  deferred  until  to-day  (Wednesday),  in  order
that  this  point  of  law  might  be  discussed.

On  the  following  day  the  point  was  argued  whether  the  competition
was  a  lottery  or  not.  As  this  question  is  important,  not  only  as  a
point  of  law,  but,  as  I  have  said,  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view,
I  again  give  the  report  in  ?'/<.e  Yorkshire  Post  (of  Mai'ch  '2ith,  1898)
in  full.

Mr.  Atkinson,  Q.C,  who  appeared  for  the  defendant,  addressing  the
Judge,  now  contended  that  although  the  jury  had  given  a  verdict  for  the
plaintiff,  judgment  ought  clearly  to  be  given  for  the  defendant,  and  that  the
plaintiff  was  not  in  a  position  to  recover.  That  the  competition  was  a
lottery  had  already  been  decided,  inasmuch  as  Mr.  Cox  had  been  fined  £20
and  costs  in  respect  of  the  competition  on  which  the  present  action  was
based.  A  lottery  had  been  described  to  be  "a  distribution  of  prizes
determined  by  lot  or  chance."  This  had  been  well  illustrated  in  what  had
come  to  1)3  known  as  the  "Missing  Word  Competition" — Barclay  v.
Pearson.  In  that  case  Mr.  Justice  Stirling,  before  wlioui  it  was  tried,  ruled
that  if  the  competition  had  been  one  that  involved  the  skill  of  finding  out


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


325


the  most  appropriate  word  in  a  particular  sentence,  that  would  not  have  been
a  lottery,  because  there  would  have  been  au  element  of  knowledge  or  skill.
The  word  in  question  was  not  necessarily  the  most  appropriate  one,  but
merely  a  word  which  the  publisher  of  the  paper  in  question  had  himself
decided  to  be  the  word  which  was  the  most  appropriate  word.  Mr.  Justice
.Stirling  had  held  that  under  these  circumstances  it  was  necessarily  a  matter
of  chance  that  the  word  could  be  selected,  and  consequently  no  skill  what-
ever entered  into  the  competition.  There  was,  said  Mr.  Atkinson,  just  as
much  of  the  element  of  chance  in  the  present  case  as  in  the  one  known  as
"the  Missing  Word  Competition."  The  competitors  in  the  present  case
were  to  guess  the  number  of  male  and  female  births,  and  the  number  of
deaths  in  a  certain  week.  In  such  a  calculation  there  could  be  no  element
i)f  skill  in  arriving  at  the  particular  results.  There  were  he  did  not  know
how  many  billions  to  one  against  any  one  arriving  at  the  accurate  figures.
In  roulette,  in  spite  of  all  its  elements  of  chance,  there  was  a  certain  margin
of  skill,  although  it  might  be  almost  infinitesimal.  The  case  of  horse-racing
tipping  might  be  drawn  into  the  question  before  the  Court.  That  case,  how-
ever, as  had  been  shown  in  Sagar  v.  Stoddart,  was  entirely  different.  There
was  some  knowledge  on  which  the  first,  second  and  third  horses  in  a  race
might  be  projjhesied.  There  the  matter  was  to  some  extent  a  matter  of
experience  and  knowledge.  There  were  the  performances  of  the  horses  and
other  matters  tending  to  raise  the  prediction  from  the  domain  of  mere
chance.  As  he  had  said,  however,  the  case  of  the  liodcet  was  one  of  pure
chance,  and  therefore  came  under  the  Lotteries  Act.  Being  a  lottery  the
plaintiff  was  not  entitled  to  recover,  and  judgment  should  be  entered  for
the  defendant.

Mr.  Walter  Beverley,  who  was  counsel  for  the  plaintiff,  proceeded  to
argue  in  support  of  the  verdict  of  the  jury,  and  in  refutation  of  the  plea
that  the  competition  was  a  lottery.  In  a  lottery  there  was,  he  .said,  no
opjDortunity  given  for  the  employment  of  any  skill  or  judgment  whatever.
It  depended  purely  on  chance,  and  no  exercise  of  skill  or  knowledge  entered
into  it.  The  present  case  was  entirely  different,  for  the  plaintiff'  had  clearly
shown  that  he  had  taken  a  considerable  amount  of  trouble  to  obtain
information  to  enable  him  to  form  a  correct  judgment.

The  Judge  :  He  could  scarcely  inquire  at  a  house  when  a  baby  was
likely  to  be  born.  (Laughter.)

Mr.  Beverley  repeated  that  he  had  done  much  to  obtain  information  to
form  a  correct  judgment,  and  if  with  the  aid  of  such  knowledge  the  plaintiff
had  guessed  the  correct  figures,  he  was  entitled  to  win  in  the  present
action.

The  Judge  said  the  case  before  the  Court  was  one  full  of  difficulties.
He  had  not  had  an  opportunity  of  looking  into  all  the  cases  bearing  on  the
subject,  but  so  far  as  he  had  formed  an  opinion,  he  was  inclined  to  the  belief
that  there  was  more  of  the  element  of  chance  than  of  skill  in  the  matter.
The  case,  however,  was  a  very  important  one,  and  one  on  which  there  ought
to  be  a  definite  jjronouncement.  He  was  going  to  give  the  judgment  he
intended  in  order  that  there  might  be  another  lotterj',  and  that  the  plaintiff
might  go  to  the  lottery  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  if  he  wished,  and  try  his
luck  there.  (Laughter.)


326


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mr.  Atkinson  :  I  take  it  there  will  be  judgment  for  the  defendant  with
costs,  with  stay  of  execution.

The  Judge  :  That  is  so  ;  and  with  a  further  stay  of  execution  if  necessary
for  the  api^eal.

The  judgment  was  appealed  against,  and  the  case  was  tried  again
before  the  Court  of  Appeal  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Judicature,  Lord
Justices  A.  L.  Smith,  Rigby  and  Collins  on  the  bench,  on  December
2nd,  1898.

The  following  report  of  the  trial  appeared  in  The  Tunes  of
December  3rd.

HALL  V.  COX.

This  was  an  appeal  by  the  plaintiff  from  the  judgment  of  Mr.  Justice
Lawrance  at  the  trial  of  the  action,  with  a  jury,  at  Leeds.  The  defendant
advertised  in  a  paper  called  the  Rocket  that  a  prize  of  £1,000  was  offered  for  a
correct  prediction  of  the  numbers  of  male  and  female  births  and  the  number
of  deaths  in  London  during  the  week  ended  December  11,  1897  ;  the  com-
petitors to  fill  in  and  sign  the  accompanying  voucher,  paste  it  on  a  sheet  of
paper,  and  send  it,  with  a  coupon  cut  from  the  front  page  of  the  Rocket,  in
accordance  v/ith  the  instructions  given.  The  voucher  contained  the  following
words  : — "I  say  that  the  number  of  births  and  the  number  of  deaths  in
London  during  the  week  ending  December  11,  1897,  as  disclosed  by  the

Registrar-Oeneral's  returns,  will  be ." Then  followed  spaces  for  the

number  of  births  (male),  births  (female),  and  deaths.  The  answers  were  to
be  sent  in  by  December  10  ;  and  if  more  than  one  correct  prediction  was
received,  the  £1,000  would  be  divided.  The  advertisement  also  stated  that,
"  according  to  the  Registrar  General's  returns,  the  number  of  births  and  the
number  of  deaths  in  London  during  the  week  ending  December  12,  1896,
were  as  follows  : — Births  (males),  1,342  ;  ditto  (females),  1,213  ;  deaths,
1,539."  The  pl.iintifF,  having  sent  in  a  correct  prediction,  brought  this
action  to  recover  the  £1,000.  The  action  was  ordered  to  be  tried  without
pleadings  under  order  14.  At  the  trial  before  Mr.  Justice  Lawrance,  at
Leeds,  the  defence  was  that  the  answer  had  not  been  received  ;  but  the  jury
found  that  a  correct  answer  had  been  sent  in  by  the  plaintiff,  and  gave  a
verdict  for  him  for  £1,000.  The  learned  Judge  then,  upon  the  application
of  the  defendant,  entered  judgment  for  him  on  the  ground  that  the  competi-
tion was  a  lottery.  The  learned  Judge,  in  giving  judgment,  said  that  the
case  was  full  of  difficulty,  and  he  had  not  an  opportunity  of  looking  at  all
the  cases  bearing  upon  it,  and  he  did  not  think  he  would  be  very  much  wiser
if  he  did  look  at  them.  The  foundation  of  a  lottery  was  chance,  and  he
should  have  thought  the  foundation  of  guessing  how  many  children  would  be
born  next  week  or  next  month  was  a  matter  more  of  chance  than  of  skill.
Of  course,  with  a  verdict  of  £1,000  in  question,  neither  party  would  rest  at
that  Court  ;  and  the  case  seemed  to  be  eminently  one  on  which  the  Court  of
Appeal  should  give  their  opinion.  For  the  purpose  of  sending  it  thei'e  he
would  not  take  time  to  consider  his  judgment,  but  would  hold  that  the
competition  was  a  lottery,  and  that  the  plaintiff  might  once  more  be  put  into
a  lottery  which  might  be  as  much  a  matter  of  chance  as  of  skill — go  to  the
Court  above. He  accordingly  entered  judgment  for  the  defendant.  Since


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


327


the  trial  the  defendant  had  died.  His  personal  representatives  did  not
appear  upon  the  ajjpeal.

Mr.  Brooke  Little,  for  the  plaintiff,  contended  that  this  was  not  a
competition  of  mere  chance,  but  some  skill  came  into  it — namely,  calculating
from  previous  returns  of  the  Registrar-General  how  many  births  and  deaths
would  be  likely  to  take  place  in  London  in  a  particular  week.  It  was  not,
therefore,  a  lottery.  He  referred  to  "Caminada  v.  Hulton  "  (60  L.J.,  M.C.,
116),  "Morris  v.  Blackman "  (2  H.  and  C,  912),  "Taylor  v.  Smetton  "
(11  Q.B.D.,  207),  "Barclay  V.  Pearson"  (1893,  2  Ch.,  154),  "Stoddartv.
Sagar"  (1895,  2  Q.B.,  474).

The  Court  allowed  the  appeal.

Liird  Justice  A.  L.  Smith  said  that,  in  his  opinion,  this  was  not  a  lottery.
The  solution  of  the  question  did  not  dej^end  upon  mere  chance.  It  depended
very  largely  upon  chance,  but  there  was  an  element  of  statistical  inquiry
brought  into  it.  The  advertisement  which  offered  the  jirize  set  out  the
number  of  births  and  deaths  for  the  corresponding  week  of  the  preceding
year.  A  statistical  calculation  was  imported  into  it,  and  it  was  not  all
chance.  In  "Caminada  v.  Hulton,"  a  Divisional  Court,  consisting  of  Mr.
Justice  Day  and  Mr.  Justice  Lawrance,  held  that  an  offer  of  prizes  to  any
purchaser  of  a  book  who  should  fill  up  a  coupon  with  the  names  of  the
winning  horses  in  certain  races  about  to  come  off  was  not  a  lottei-y.  How
the  learned  Judge  reconciled  his  judgment  in  the  present  case  with  his
decision  in  that  case  he  (the  Lord  Justice)  did  not  quite  understand.

Lord  Justice  Rigby  and  Lord  Justice  Collins  concurred.

In  reply  to  an  incjuiry  made  later  in  the  same  month,  I  was
informed  that  "  the  Rocket  and  its  late  proprietor  are  both  dead,"  so
that  it  seems  very  doubtful  whether  the  prize  money  was  ever  paid.

I  have  ascertained  that  the  numbers  of  births  and  deaths  quoted
are  the  same  as  those  given  in  the  Registrar-General's  Annual
Summary  of  Births,  etc.,  in  London,  for  1896  and  1897.

The  question  whether  the  competition  was  one  of  pure  chance  or
whether  any  skill  entered  into  it  is  very  complicated,  and  I  venture
to  think  that  the  arguments  used  by  the  Counsel  and  Judges  betray
some  obscurity  of  mind  on  the  subject.  There  are,  however,  certain
statistics  which  it  might  be  supposed  would  afford  help  in  the  guessing,
and  I  give  a  few  figures  taken  from  the  Annual  Reports  and  Annual
Summaries  of  the  Registrar-General  about  those  facts  which  seem  to
have  the  most  direct  bearing  on  the  question,  and  then  proceed  to
consider  what  inferences  may  be  drawn  from  them.

(1)  The  Marriage  Rate  (i.e.,  number  of  persons  married  per  thousand  of
the  population). — This  has  been  steadily  rising  in  the  whole  of  England  and
Wales  during  the  last  ten  years,  the  rate  of  1896  being  higher  than  it  had
been  any  year  since  1876.  In  1896  it  was  15 '8,  the  average  of  the  ten
previous  years  being  14'9.  In  London  the  same  rise  was  observable  ;  and
the  rate  was  also  higher,  being  18  "0  in  1896,  while  the  average  of  the  ten
previous  years  was  17 '2.

Z


328


Alice  Johnson.


[part


lb  would  nob  of  course  necessarily  follow  bhat  bhe  birbhs  were  more
numerous,  as  bhe  birth  rabe  mighb  be  decreasing  ab  bhe  same  bime,  which  in
facb  has  been  bhe  case.  Sbill,  if  bhe  marriage  rabe  rises  in  any  year,  we
shttuld  rather  expect  b  )  find  the  birth  rate  rising  in  the  following  year.
Investigation  of  the  I'ates  of  eacli  year  from  1847  to  189(5  bears  this
out  to  some  slight  extent  ;  in  24  cases  the  birth  rabe  of  one  year  increases
or  diminishes  according  as  bhe  marriage  rabe  of  bhe  preceding  year  increases
or  diminishes  ;  wliile  in  23  cases  no  such  influence  is  discernible.  Taking
the  rabes,  however,  in  periods  of  5  years,  from  1841  bo  1895,  bliere  are
7  cases  in  which  bhe  birth  rate  increases  or  diminishes  in  accordance  with
the  marriage  rate  of  tlie  preceding  period,  and  only  3  cases  in  which  it
does  not.

There  would  therefore  be  some  slight  presumption  that  the  births  in
1897  would  be  rather  more  numerous  than  they  were  in  1896.  (As  a
matter  of  fact,  they  were  in  London  215  less  in  1897  than  in  1896.)

(2)  Tlie  Birth  Rate  (number  of  births  per  thousand  of  tlie  population). —
The  birth  rate  has  been  steadily  decreasing  since  1876,  the  rate  of  1896
being  29 "7  in  England  and  Wales  and  30 '2  in  London,  while  tlie  average  of
the  ten  preceding  years  was  respectively  31 '0  and  31  "6.  In  1897  the  rate  in
London  was  the  lowest  on  record,  viz.,  30'0.

Tlie  proportion  o'"  rifiale  to  female  birtlis  (counted  as  births  of  males  to
1,000  females)  has  been  decreasing  since  1840  in  the  whole  country.  Taking
periods  of  five  years,  it  was  at  its  highest,  viz.,  1,052,  in  1841-5,  and
decreased  steadily  to  1,036  in  1886-90,  remaining  the  same  in  1891-5.  The
average  of  all  the  periods  recorded  is  1,042.  In  London,  however,  tlie  pro-
portion was  1,048  in  1896,  whereas  tlie  average  of  the  ten  preceding  years
was  the  same  as  that  in  the  whole  country,  viz.,  1,036.  But  the  proportion
in  London  fell  again  in  1897.

(3)  Tlie  Death  Rate  (number  of  deaths  per  1,000  of  the  population). —
The  death  rate  has  also  been  steadily  decreasing  on  the  whole  since  the
period  1846  50,  when  it  was  23"3.  In  1896  it  was  17 '1  in  England  and
Wales  and  18 '2  in  London,  while  during  tlie  preceding  10  years  it  was
respectively  18'8  and  19  9.

There  is  anotlier  general  consideration  with  regard  to  all  three  rates,
viz.,  their  variation  at  different  times  of  tlie  year.  The  Registrar-General's
Table  giving  the  rates  during  the  different  quarters  of  the  year  since  1840
in  periods  of  ten  years  shows  that

(«)  The  Marriage  Rate  was  always  highest  during  the  last  quarter  of  the
year  and  lowest  in  the  first  quarter.

(/<)  The  Birth  Rate  was  nearly  always  highest  during  the  first  quarter,
though  in  1891-6  it  was  slightly  higher  in  the  second  quarter  than  in  the
first. It  was  always  lowest  in  the  last  quarter.

(<:)  The  Death  Rate  was  always  highest  in  the  first  quarter  and  lowest  in
the  third.

Now,  speaking  generally,  all  these  facts  help  to  limit  somewhat  the
ranges  within  which  the  numbers  required  to  be  guessed  will  probably
lie. But  they  are  really  of  very  little  practical  use,  because,  in  such


XXXV.]


Coincidences.


329


short  periods  as  weeks,  the  numbers  vary  very  much  more  in  pro-
portion than  they  do  for  longer  periods.

The  only  practical  plan,  then,  is  to  find  the  actual  range  of  the
variations  that  have  occurred  during  a  large  number  of  weeks,  and
make  enough  guesses  to  cover  all  the  possible  combinations  of  numbers
within  the  range, — or,  better  still,  a  little  beyond  it.


The  folli)wing  Table  gives  under  each  heading  the  highest  and  lowest
numbers  recorded  in  any  week  of  the  two  years  1896  and  1897.


Births.
Total. Male.  Female.

Deaths.

In  1896.  Maximum

Minimum

3041
1829

1563
904

1478
925

2146
1238

Difference

1212

659

553

908

In  1897.  Maximum

Minimum

2928
2106

1519
1059

1427
1027

2360
1158

Difference

822

460

400

1202

It  will  be  seen  that  in  1896  there  is  a  greater  range  of  variation  in  all
the  numbers  of  births,  while  the  range  of  variation  in  deaths  is  greater
in  1897.

With  regard  to  the  proportion  of  male  to  female  births,  the  extreme
limits  in  any  week  were  as  follows  : —

In  1896,  greatest  excess  of  male  over  female  births,  183,  greatest  excess
of  female  over  male,  52  ;  total  range  of  variation,  235.  In  1897,  greatest
excess  of  male  over  female  births,  131,  greatest  excess  of  female  over  male,
65  ;  total  range  of  variation,  196.

During  the  weeks  of  1896,  the  female  births  exceeded  the  male  in  6
cases  ;  during  1897,  in  7  cases.

These  variations,  however,  are  much  more  than  covered  by  the  differ-
ences between  the  maxima  and  minima  in  the  Table.  Supposing  that  the
latter  represent  the  greatest  ranges  that  can  occur,  the  chance  of  getting  all
tlie  three  numbers  (male  and  female  births  and  deaths)  right  in  a  single
guess  is  one  in  438,770,108  (the  product  of  the  three  greatest  diflerences,
659,  553  and  1204).

Since  the  successful  competitor  made  only  252  guesses,  it  was  extremely
unlikely  that  he  should  have  got  one  of  them  right ;  while  the  chance
against  some  one  of  the  total  100,000  cuesses  said  to  have  been  sent  in
being  correct  (assuming  that  the  guesses  were  all  different,  which  tliey
probably  were  not)  was  about  5,000  to  one.

These  considerations  seem  to  me  to  show  that  no  more  real  skill
can  enter  into  such  a  competition  than  into  the  guessing  of  numbers  in
ii  lottery. If  the  ranges  of  the  numbers  in  the  lottery  were  known —

z  2


330


Alice  Johnson.


[part


as  they  probably  are  in  some  cases — it  would  be  easy  to  calculate  how
many  guesses  must  be  made  to  ensure  one  being  right,  and  the  most
ignorant  person  would  know  that  the  more  guesses  he  made,  the
greater  would  be  his  chance  of  getting  one  right.  Similai'ly  the
previous  statistics  of  births  and  deaths  can  only  tell  us  what  the
general  trend  of  things  has  been  so  far  ;  tliat  is,  they  afford  rational
ground  for  expectation  that  the  numbers  will  lie  within  certain  limits,
but  no  rational  ground  for  expecting  any  particular  numbers  within
these  limits.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  cited  by  the  Judge  as  a  parallel
one — that  of  guessing  the  name  of  the  horse  that  will  win  in  a  race
— the  kind  of  knowledge  from  which  some  particular  inference  may
reasonably  be  drawn  is  available,  and  there  is  consequently  scope  for
skill.  It  appears  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  two  cases  are  not  really
analogous.


XXXV.]


Apparitions  in  Wed  Africa.


331


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

THE  FORMS  OF  APPARITIONS  IN  WEST  AFRICA.
By  Mary  H.  Kingsley.


Gentlemen  and  Ladies, — I  have  accepted  with  much  hesitation
the  honour  of  addressing  the  Society  for  P.sychical  Research,  for  I
know  the  object  of  this  society  is  the  determination  of  the  truth
regarding  apparitions  ;  whether  they  liave  a  separate  existence  apart
from  their  human  seers  and  so  on.  With  this  branch  of  the  study  of
apparitions  I  have  no  concern  ; — all  I  am  interested  in  is  the  discovery
of  the  ideas  that  the  natives  of  West  Africa  have  concerning  appari-
tions ;  what  position  they  have  in  West  African  native  religion  ;  and
what  the  West  African  holds  to  be  their  significance  and  their
characteristics.

Briefly,  I  entirely  believe  the  West  African  sees  apparitions,  but  I
do  not  think  this  any  evidence  that  the  apparition  has  a  separate
existence.  I  have  had  an  extensive  and  sad  experience  with  people,
— white  and  black,  strong-minded  and  weak-minded,  educated  and
uneducated, — suffering  from  delirium,  which  has  taught  me  that  men,
under  certain  physical  conditions,  can  and  do  see  things  that  men  in  a
normal  state  cannot  and  do  not  see.  I  also  know  that  the  African,  in
spite  of  all  his  hard-headed  common  sense,  is  endowed  with  a  super-
sensitive nervous  organisation — he  is  always  a  step  nearer  delirium,  in
a  medical  sense,  than  an  Englishman  ;  a  disease  that  will  by  a  rise  of
bodily  temperature  merely  give  an  Englishman  a  headache  will  give
an  African  delirium  and  its  visions.  Whether  this  indicates  a  differ-
ence in  physical  make  between  Africans  and  Englishmen,  I  do  not
know.  It  may  be  that  the  African,  by  his  long  process  of  acclimatisa-
tion to  malarial  districts,  has  a  chronic  state  of  malarial  delirium ;  or,
on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  that  his  undoubtedly  more  sensitive
nervous  system  enables  him  to  see  things  the  duller-nerved  English-
man does  not ;  or,  as  one  might  say,  the  African  mind  may  be  a  more
perfect  photographic  plate  on  which  the  spirit  world  can  print  itself.


332


Mary  H.  Kingsley.


[Supplement.


I  do  not  know  one  way  or  the  other  ;  all  I  am  concerned  in  is  that  I
should  give  you  as  clear  and  unbiassed  an  idea  as  lies  in  my  power  of
the  spirit  world  as  an  African  sees  it.

First,  therefore,  I  would  like  to  state  what  the  spirit  world  is
that  the  Afi-ican  sees  and  believes  in.  All  the  world  is  a  spirit  world
to  him — he  has  not,  as  many  Eui'ppeans  have,  a  feeling  that  there  are
two  distinct  worlds,  a  world  of  spirit  and  a  world  of  matter  ;  neither
has  he  the  idea  that  there  is  certainly  a  world  of  matter,  and  there
may  be,  or  there  may  not  be,  a  world  of  spirit ;  the  thing  is  one  to  him
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  From  the  supreme  Godhead  to  the
pebble  on  the  seashore,  it  is  merely  a  matter  of  grade.

I  beg  you  will  allow  me  to  detain  you  a  few  minutes  with  the
statement  of  what  any  one  man,  woman,  or  child  is  to  an  African
who  has  not  been  influenced  by  a  Semitic  Religion — Christianity  or
Mohammedanism. To  the  pure  pagan  African  what  we  call  a  man  is
not  an  individual  one  soul, — he  is  a  syndicate  of  souls,  usually  four,
details  of  which  I  have  given  elsewhere. Well,  this  syndicate  wear
flesh  and  blood,  and  they  wear  clothes,  i-equire  and  like  ornaments
and  food,  exercise  functions,  and  use  tools,  and  so  on,  presided  over
by  the  soul  syndicate. But  the  soul  syndicate  has  other  business  to
deal  with  besides  that  of  these  things  it  lives  in  and  directly  lives
by  ;  it  also  deals  with  other  soul  .syndicates  called  men,  with  other
non-human  souls  of equal  power  to  its  own,  with  other  souls  of
lower  power  to  its  own,  and  with  other  souls  of  greater  power  than
its  own,  in  grades  of  power  right  away  up  from  dust  to  the  Godhead
who  is  above  all  things  that  are. You  may  notice  I  am  dodging
ci'editing  the  African  with  holding  the  idea  of  this  over-god  being
the  Creator. This  interesting  point  is  not  yet  worked  out. I  my-
self  at  present  regard  creation-myths,  which  abound  in  Africa,  as
being  the  resultants  of  European  and  Mahommedan  teaching.  The
native  African,  as  far  as  I  know,  has  not  the  same  feeling  about
time  that  we  have  ;  he  does  not  see  why  things  should  come  to  an
end,  or  have  a  beginning ;  he  recognises  that  they  change,  but  I  do
not think  he  would  commit  himself  further. I cannot,  however,
detain  you  with  these,  to  me,  interesting  points  in  African  philosophy,
but  return  to  the  position  of  the  human  soul  —  the  syndicate  of  dream
soul,  shadow  soul,  bush  soul,  and  surviving  soul. This  syndicate
deals  most  intimately  with  those  souls  most  neai  ly  connected  witli
its  interests,  but  it  knows  of  the  souls  beyond,  upper  and  lower,  in
ultimate  power. I  do  not  think  I  should  be  going  too  far  if  I  were
to  say  you  will  find  in  West  Afi'ica  no  people  who  have  not  the
conception  of  the  idea  of  the  supreme  Godhead  at  the  apex  of  things,
and  matter,  the  very  lowest  form  of  soul,  at  the  other  end  of  the
scale ;  or  to  put  it  in  other  words,  you  will  find  no  peojjle  who  have


Part  XXXV.]


A'pparition>i  in  West  A  fried.


333


the  European  conception  of  matter  at  all.  There  is  to  them  no
conception  of  the  ditference  between  these  things,  but  an  intinitely
intricate  conception  of  degree,  and  herein  is  the  secret  of  the  terror
of  Africans  for  what  are  to  Europeans  material  objects.  The  thing
ii  perfectly  clear  in  itself,  but  it  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  an
African  can  conceive  a  powerful  spirit  wearing  a  silk  cotton  tree,  a
rock,  a  fierce  river  rapid,  or  the  everlasting,  booming,  man-killing
surf  itself,  as  a  garment.  The  African  sees  the  spirit  inside  that
garment ;  he  no  more  worships,  or  fears  the  gai-ment  than  you  would
fear,  or  worship  a  great  man's  chimney-pot  hat,  or  pocket  handker-
chief, or  pen,  and  when  he  chooses  to  think  the  spirit  that  he  fears
or  worships  has  cast  these  things  oS,  has  done  with  them,  the
African  also  has  done  with  them,  and  if  it  is  necessary  to  him,  tries
to  find  out  the  spirit  he  wants  to  get  on  with  in  its  new  clothes  ;
with  this  difference,  mind  you,  and  it  is  an  important  one, — the
African,  regarding  such  things  as  clothes  as  being  in  a  measure
possessed  of  life  and  responsibility,  is  liable  to  think  that  the  thing
was  cast  otf  because  it  was  bad  and  unsatisfactory  to  the  spirit  who
once  used  it  as  a  garment,  and  this  explains  a  certain  quantity —
!)Ut  not  all, — of  the  cases  in  which  an  African  smashes  and
vilifies  his  idol ;  the  other  cases  in  which  he  does  this  arise  from
his  feeling  the  spirit  itself  has  behaved  unfairly  to  him,  a  fine
instance  of  which  has  been  given  in  Mr.  Dennett's  Folk-Lore  of  the
Fjuvtes,  published  by  the  Folk-Lore  Society — you  will  find  it  in  the
chapter  on  the  Burial  of  the  Fjorte.  The  far  more  common  thing,
however,  is  the  absolute  carelessness  as  to  what  becomes  of  the
garment  of  the  spirit,  the  thing  that  was  the  idol  or  the  charm.
The  spirit  has  thrown  it  off,  it  can  itself  be  thrown  away,  or  left  to
rot,  it  does  not  matter ;  though  it  is  not  matter  as  you  conceive  it,  it
is  in  itself  merely  too  low  a  grade  of  spirit  to  be  worth  troubling
about.  The  African  thinks  no  more  of  it  than  you  think  of  a
harmless  insect,  or  any  other  inferior  living  thing.  I  apologise  for
detaining  you  on  this  point,  but  until  you  have  grasped  this  position
you"  cannot  understand  the  African's  mind,  and  its  attitude  towards
apparitions  ;  it  is  a  position  you  cannot  avoid  grasping  when  you
live  among  Africans  who  are  unadulterated.  The  result  of  this  point
of  view  is  intricate,  complex,  and  so  on,  but  it  is  never  for  one  single
moment  confused.

I  will  now  turn  to  the  forms  of  apparitions  of  the  various  grades
of  spirits,  and  we  will  commence  with  those  of  the  great  over-god  you
find  among  all  the  West  African  peoples  under  varying  names.  This
god  has  no  organised  worship  given  to  him,  he  is  regarded  as  an
unmanageable  beiug,  who  has  no  interest  in  human  affairs  in  detail,
but  who  nuw  and  then  manifests  an  interest  in,  what  one  might  call,


8.34


Mary  H.  Kingsley.


[Supplement.


the  higher  politics  ;  he  can  interfere  and  save,  or  scourge  a  people,  but
it  is  no  use  for  any  gentleninn  or  lady  who  has  lost  property,  or  got  a
disease,  to  appeal  to  him.  As  far  as  I  know  the  Krumen  call  on  this
over-god  of  gods  more  frequently  than  other  VVest  Africans.  When  the
surf  on  the  shore  of  their  country  is  very  bad,  and  the  men  cannot  get
out  fishing,  they  will  go  in  numbers  to  the  beach  and  talk  to  the  great
god  about  it ;  most  carefully  explaining  to  iiim  the  whole  of  the  circum-
stances of  the  case, — how  tlie  women  and  children  want  food,  and  food
depends  on  fishing,  and  so  on,  just  as  if  they  were  addressing  a  great
judge  who  had  no  personal  knowledge  of  human  affairs,  but  who  could
be  depended  on  to  be  just  if  you  could  only  get  him  to  be  interested
and  to  understand.  Sometimes  it  takes  a  week  to  get  the  great  god  to
understand,  but  he  always  does  in  the  end,  and  the  surf  becomes  pass-
able, for  a  time  at  any  rate.  Also  among  the  noble  tribes  of  the  Bight
of  Panavia  you  find  a  regular  talking  to  the  great  god,  and  among  them
you  find  his  apparition  in  some  way  connected  with  the  moon  ;  at  each
new  moon  tlie  chief  of  a  village  goes  out  and  stands  alone  in  the  open
and  talks  to  Anyambie  He  does  not  praise  Anyambie  ;  he  does  not
request  him  to  interfere  in  human  affairs  ;  he,  the  chief,  feels  competent
to  deal  with  them,  but  he  does  want  Anyambie  to  attend  to  those
spirits  which  he,  the  god,  can  control  better  than  a  man,  and  he  always
opens  the  address  to  the  great  god  with  a  catalogue  of  his,  the  chief's,
virtues,  saying  :  "  I  am  the  father  of  my  people  ;  I  am  a  just  man ;  I
deal  well  with  all  men,"  etc.  The  chief's  account  of  his  own  virtues
is  naturally  too  long  to  detain  you  with  here,  and  after  this  he  winds
up  with  a  request  that  all  spirits  may  l)e  kept  away  from  his  village.
At  first  hearing  these  catalogues  of  the  chief's  virtues  used  to  strike
me  as  comic,  and  I  once  said  :  ''  Why  don't  you  get  some  one  else  to
say  that  for  you ;  praising  yourself  in  that  barefaced  way  must  be
very  trying  to  you."  "  Oh,  no,"  said  the  clnef,  "  and,  besides,  no  man
knows  how  good  he  is  except  himself,"  which  is  a  common  W^est  Coast
proverb.  But  by-and  bye — when  I  had  been  the  silent  spectator  of
sevei'al  of  these  talks  witli  the  great  god  —  the  thing  struck  me  as
really  very  grand.  There  was  the  great  man  standing  up  alone,
conscious  of  the  weight  of  responsibility  on  him  of  the  li\'es  and
happiness  of  his  people,  talking  calmly,  proudly,  respectfully  to  the
great  god  who  he  knew  ruled  the  spirit  world.  It  was  like  a  great
diplomat  talking  to  another  great  diplomat  of  a  foreign  power,  saying,
"  Let  us  keep  our  people  from  interfering  with  each  other;"  there
was  no  whining  or  begging  in  it,  and  as  I  have  said,  the  grandeur  of
the  thing  charmed  me.  But  you  must  not  think  I  am  one  of  the
modern  school  who  believe  that  great  over-gods  are  always  moral  gods
in  a  human  sense,  V)ecause  the  African  over-god  is  not.  I  have  often
asked  carefully,  "Is  he  good  ?"  and  I  never  found  an  African  who  had


Part  XXXV.]  Appavitions  in  West  Africa.


335


not  been  in  touch  with  mission  influence  say  Nzambi,  Nyankupong,
or  whatever  other  name  he  was  called  by,  was  good.  He  is  a  tiling
apart  from  the  human  moral  code.  No  !  they  say  firmly,  lio  is  not
what  you  would  call  good ;  he  lets  things  go  too  much,  he  cares  about
himself  only,  and  T  have  heard  him  called  "  lazy  too  much,  bad  person
for  business,"  and  a  dozen  things  of  that  kind,  and  very  rarely  do  you
come  across  any  one  who  speaks  of  an  apparition  of  him.  You  will
find  in  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Fjortes  an  account  of  a  man  who
went  aloft  and  had  a  chat  with  him,  but  this  is  not  a  common
tale,  and,  I  think,  shows  mission  influence.  The  most  frequent  form
of  apparition  spoken  of  as  appertaining  to  this  great  god  is  some
tremendous  elemental  catastrophe  :  he  rides  upon  the  whirlwind  and
the  pestilence.

I  think  I  may  say  all  the  various  names  given  to  the  over-god  can
bear  the  translation  of  the  Awakener,  the  Lord  of  the  sk}'.  I  think
this  great  over-god  is  just  merely  a  realisation  of  the  fact  that  there
is  something  outside  and  beyond  the  earth  we  know  and  the  sky  Ave
see  to  the  African  mind.  It  seems  that  this  thing  can  also  include
terresti'ial  things.  I  mjself,  therefore,  completely  accept  Dr.  Sneider's
statements  that  the  African  is  a  monotheist ;  but  a  dissertation  by
me,  the  diffuse,  on  a  German  philosopher,  also  diffuse,  is  not  a  thing
suited  for  an  evening's  address ;  it  would  be  more  of  the  nature  of
a  Chinese  play  that  takes  a  week  or  so  to  get  acted,  so  I  turn
to  the  apparition  of  the  gods  below  the  over-gcd,  but  above  the
grade  of  power  of  man.

The  apparitions  of  these  gods  are  very  frequent ;  you  will  hardly
find  a  man  or  woman  who  does  not  know  a  man  or  woman  who  has
seen  them,  while  the  priests  belonging  to  their  various  cults  are  always
in  ready  touch  with  them, — on  terms  of  easy  familiarity.  Sometimes
the  god  takes  possession  of  the  priest  or  priestess,  talking  through  him
or  her,  but  always  with  a  strange  voice.  This  occurs  when  the  priest
has  to  arrange  an  affair  between  the  god  and  the  laity  when  the  laity
ai'e  present,  but  at  other  times  the  priest  when  he  is  out  alone  meets
the  god  in  a  visible  form,  and  you  often  hear  a  priest  say,  "  I  met —
whatever  the  name  of  his  god  may  be — this  afternoon,"  in  the  most
casual  way,  and  when  asked  after  the  god's  state  of  temper,  the
important  thing  about  a  deity  to  the  laity,  the  priest  will  say,  "  Oh,
pretty  fair,"  or,  "rather  bad,"  or  "much  as  usual,"  and  will  advise
any  one  who  wants  to  do  business  with  him  to  seize  the  opportunity  of
the  state  of  amiability,  or  to  leave  any  little  affair  until  a  more  hopeful
time.  Down  below  the  Negro  districts  you  very  rarely  And  these
gods  with  a  regular  priesthood  ;  there  they  are  dealt  with  by  the
headmen  of  the  villages,  and  at  Emfetta  when  one  night  there  was  a
row  on,  a  headman,  one  of  the  parties  involved  in  the  discussion,


336


Mary  H.  Kingdey.


[Supp'.emeiil.


roaring  like  a  bull  with  rage,  spun  round  and  charged  at  a  steep  dwaif
cliff  to  make  a  short  cut  to  the  residence  of  his  village  god  above  ;
when  he  was  half  way  up,  the  bit  of  cliff  came  away  with  him,  and
flump  on  his  Ijack  our  friend  landed  on  the  beach  below.  There  was  a
general  grunt,  and  the  man  picked  himself  up  and  returned  to  the
discussion  in  a  more  reasonable  frame  of  mind,  recognising  it  was  no
good  expecting  spiritual  support  that  evening,  and  that  he  had  only
got  himself  to  depend  on.  You  will  tind  in  Ellis's  works  many  de-
scriptions of  the  form  of  these  gods  when  they  appear  ;  you  will  find
their  apparitions  are  almost  all  of  human  shape,  that  their  appearance
is  almost  always  gigantic  and  terrifying,  and  that  some  of  them  are
males,  some  females  ;  frequently  they  are  mariied,  and  strangely
enough,  many  of  the  worse  gods  are  white.

There  is  a  certain  amount  of  reason  in  some  of  them  being  white.
Fohsu  is  monstrous  in  size  and  whitish  in  colour,  but  that  may  be
because  of  her  association  with  salt  making.  That  most  horrible  Aynfwa
who  lives  at  Moree,  whose  name  signifies  ''not  to  be  looked  upon,"
and  whose  priests  say  she  is  covered  with  white  hair  like  a  goat,  being
the  protectress  of  Albinoes,  also  has  a  reason  for  being  white,  though
why  she  should  be  hairy  I  do  not  know.  But  why  Ihturi,  the  god  of
the  rivers,  Sirwi  and  Kakum,  on  the  Gold  Coast,  should  be  white  there
seems  no  reason  ;  any  more  tlian  there  is  for  Bons'ahm,  the  swallower
of  men  and  a  marine  god,  being  exceedingly  black  like  Fuan  Fuan-Fo,
driver  of  men  and  war-god  of  Moree  ;  while  Ampah,  the  good  person,
who  appears  always  with  a  casting  net  in  his  hands,  being  attached  to
the  fishing  industry,  is  brown  in  colour  ;  while  —  to  make  this  question
of  colour  more  difficult — Bobowissi,  blower  of  clouds,  chief  god  of
the  Southern  Tshi,  is  as  black  as  night,  and  Tando,  chief  god  of
the  Northern  Tshi — the  Hater — the  god  to  whom  driver  ants  are
sacred,  is  a  sort  of  golden  brown.  There  is,  I  am  convinced,  some
strange  stuff  involved  in  this  question  of  colour.  I  do  not  believe
whiteness  has  anything  to  do  with  white  men,  for  people  who  have
no  direct  intercourse  or  experience  of  white  men  have  white  gods,
and  if  you  enquire  if  these  white  gods  are  like  white  men,  you  will  be
toldj  no,  they  are  white  like  chalk,  not  like  white  flesh.  You  will  also
find  a  feeling  of  veneration  for  chalk,  it  is  used  in  ceremonial  decora-
tions ;  a  gentleman  engaged  in  some  particularly  important  fetish
affair  paints  a  ring  with  white  chalk  round  one  eye  :  when  you  have
had  a  stroke  of  luck,  people  say,  God  has  thrown  chalk  to  you,  and  so
forth.  I  should  incline  to  the  belief  that  this  whiteness  had  a  connection
with  the  rarity  ot  the  colour  in  West  Africa  as  a  colour  at  large,  and
also  with  its  occurring  in  connection  with  those  two  iinportant  things —
so  valuable  and  so  dangerous  respectively — namely,  salt  and  the  surf
that  unceasingly  breaks  on  West  Africa's  seashore.


Part  XXXV.]


A'pparitums  in  West  Africa.


337


I  will  now  leave  this  class  of  gods,  whom  Ellis  has  so  admirably
described  in  his  works  on  the  Ewe  Tshi  and  Yoruba-speaking  peoples
of  West  Africa,  merely  remarking  that  they  have  a  characteristic  in
common  with  their  rejjresentati ve  forms  further  south  down  the  coast,
and  that  is  that  it  is  a  dreadful  thing  for  any  one  but  a  priest  belonging
to  them  to  see  an  apparition  of  any  one  of  them.  To  the  layman
seeing  one  of  these  gods  means  death  in  the  Bight  of  Benin,  and  in
the  Bight  of  Biafra  it  means  disaster  to  the  tribe  to  which  the  layman
seer  belongs.

I  need  not  detain  you  here  with  details  of  the  apparition  form  of
that  god  and  goddess  to  whom  I  have  given  most  especial  attention,
Sasabonsum  and  his  wife  Srahmantin,  for  I  have  published  observa-
tions on  them  already.  These  two  deities  have  a  great  fascination  for
me,  they  are  so  widely  diffused,  so  powerful,  so  unlike  those  local
deities  I  have  named,  and  they  are  equally  unlike  the  great  over-god
and  the  lower  range  of  spirits  equal  to  and  inferior  to  man.  They  are
the  rulers  of  the  witchcraft  world  ;  hated  by  priests  and  respectable
house  fathers  from  one  end  of  West  Africa  to  the  other,  and  feared
exceedingly'.  No  man  dare  openly  brag  of  having  had  dealings  with
Sasabonsum ;  to  see  him  is  to  die ;  to  be  touched  by  him  is  to  rot ;  but
if  you  are  very  brave  and  bad,  and  want  a  power  from  him,  j^ou  risk
this  and  go  into  the  forest,  try  and  gain  from  him  a  power,  a  sithman  ;
if  he  grants  j'our  I'equest  for  one,  you  do  not  see  him,  nor  feel  him,  you
hear  him.  If  he  refuses,  there  is  a  vacancy  in  your  family  circle,  and
it  may  be  fragments  of  your  remains  are  some  day  come  across  in  the
forest  in  a  very  scattered  state;  or  merely  a  few  rags  of  your  garments
are  found  sticking  to  the  trunk  of  one  of  Sasabonsum's  silk-cotton
trees  ;  and  then  your  family  and  friends  say  that  while  you  were  going
to  see  a  sick  friend,  the  awful  thing  grabbed  hold  of  you  and  took  you
to  his  under-world  home  to  suck  your  blood  at  his  leisure  (Sasabonsum
never  eats  iiesh)  and  your  enemies  say  you  were  in  that  forest  for  no
good,  you  were  making  witch,  and  there  is  a  row,  and  actions  for  libel
and  trials  by  ordeal  break  up  the  peace  of  your  town  for  months  after.

I  fear  I  have  detained  you  too  long  already  in  my  attempt  to  place
before  you  the  thing  that  in  tlie  African  mind  is  behind  the  mere
thing  seen,  this  great,  very-i'eal-to-the- African  spirit  world.  When
people  up  here  see  a  ghost,  I  find  it  is  usually  a  ghost  of  a  departed
human  being,  or  the  vision  of  a  Saint  or  Angel.  Out  there  the
majority  of  ghosts  seen  are  not  human  at  all  ;  a  very  high  percentage
do  not  take  human  forms.  One  of  the  most  important  of  the  Fjorte
gods  is  Nkala  the  Crab,  who  comes  now  and  then  from  his  kingdom
under  the  sea  ;  and  lower  in  power,  but  very  terrible,  are  the  ghosts
that  are  flying  spears,  ghosts  that  are  paths  leading  men  to  destruc-
tion, ghosts  that  are  blood  ;  in  fact,  there  is  nothing  we  know  that


338


Mary  H.  Kingsley.


[Supplement.


cannot  be  to  an  African  an  apparition,  the  cloth  of  a  spirit,  and  just  as
a  learned  African  man  can  put  on  to  his  spirit  the  form  of  a  leopard
or  a  crocodile,  so  can  a  great  spirit  put  on  the  form  of  man,  beast,
storm,  pestilence  or  thing.

Tando  the  Hater  comes  among  pe(jple  he  has  a  grudge  against  in
the  form  of  a  weeping  miserable  orphan  child,  and  woe  to  those  who
take  that  child  in,  for  he  gives  them  a  disease  that  they  give  their
neighbours,  and  all  die  of.  Nzambi,  of  the  Fjorte  country,  comes
among  people  as  a  woman  carrying  a  child,  and  begs  for  food  or  drink
for  it,  and  woe  to  those  who  refuse  her.  The  contradictory  conduct  of
these  two  gods  is  not  isolated — many  gods  do  that  sort  of  thing — and
it  makes  the  human  being  very  careful  how  he  deals  with  strangers.
There  is  an  immense  amount  of  very  curious  stuff  connected  with  what
one  might  call  the  natural  history  of  African  apparitions.  I  should
much  like  to  know  whether  any  other  apparitions  are  divided — like  the
West  African  ones — into  those  whose  disappearances  leave  ash,  or  leave
a  common  object  like  a  fallen  bough,  or  a  pool  of  water,  and  those
who  leave  no  sign  behind  them  at  all.  These  apparitions  that  leave  no
ash  are  the  most  dreaded.

I  fear  I  have  neglected  too  much  to-night  the  legitimate  ghost,  the
human  soul  out  of  a  body,  but  I  have  said  all  I  can  say  on  Ensisa  and
AszaJimanfo  ;  but  tiresome  as  they  are  and  on  occasion  dangerous,
they  are  not  to  be  compared  in  danger  with  tlie  gods — the  Imbuiri  or
local  deities,  or  Sasabonsum.  Human  souls,  if  properly  buried  and
looked  after,  are  manageable  beings,  commonly  called  the  well-disposed
ones,  but  no  one  would  dream  of  regarding  a  local  deity  as  a
person  as  easily  managed  as  an  ancestor  ;  while  a  Sasabonsum  with
his  temper  well  up  is  the  most  awful  and  unmanageable  thing  West
Africa  knows.  But,  besides  apparitions  of  dead  human  beings,  there
are  apparitions  of  live  ones.  You  will  hear  many  stories  of  people  who
have  been  belated  at  night  on  a  journey,  coming  to  a  village,  and  after
dark  tinding  heaps  of  people  in  the  village  merry-making ;  and  seeing
that  none  of  them  wore  clothes,  knew  they  were  witches,  and,  hiding
themselves,  have  spent  an  awful  night,  for  if  the  witches  had  found
them  out,  they  would  have  torn  them  to  shreds.  These  stories  are
very  cheery  when  you  hear  them  at  a  bush  lire  in  the  heart  of  a
forest,  whose  local  geography  ycu  know  little  of  in  detail,  and  they
are  told  in  most  dramatic  convincing  fashion,  and  the  witches  in  the
tale  always  keep  on  leaving  off  dancing  and  saying  "  I  smell  live  flesh,"
and  go  hunting  round  for  that  live  flesh,  which  is  you.  It  recalls  one's
early  terrors  of  Fee-fo-fum  vividly,  and  you  wonder  if  you  may  not
yourself  some  night  stray  into  a  witch  town.  Then  you  will  hear
story  after  story  of  people  who  have  been  alone  on  the  path,  women
and  children  cliieHy,  who  have  been  seized  and  carried  away  by  the


Part  XXXV.]


Apparitions  in  West  Africa.


330


bibendi  and  kept  by  them  in  their  town,  may  be  for  years,  or  until
they  have  had  sense  and  opportunity  to  get  a  handful  of  red  pepper
and  seizing  a  favourable  opportunity,  throw  it  in  the  faces  of  the
guardians  of  the  gate,  and  flee  for  ic  hard  all  back  to  real  life.  I
came  across  a  very  pathetic  affair  connected  with  this  at  Adenolo'ongo:
a  couple  had  lost  a  child,  it  had  strayed  away  and  been  no  more  seen,
but  they  heard  it  sometimes  crying  at  night,  and  they  said  "  the
bibendi  have  got  it,''  and  they  used  to  go  out  and  search  for  it.
calling  it  by  its  pet  names.  There  are,  in  fact,  endless  tales  of
the  bibendi  and  their  ways  and  their  towns  and  their  markets,
whereunto  by  day  live  people  sometimes  unintentionally  go,  and  buy
at  the  market-place  goods  that  vanish  before  tliey  reach  their  own
homes,  or  goods  that  turn  into  horrible  useless  things.  I  may  remark
for  the  benefit  of  any  one  who  is  going  to  the  land  where  such  things
are,  that  if  you  get  among  spirits,  never  touch  the  food  they  offer  you,
or  you  will  have  to  stay  with  them  for  a  long  time,  and  never  give
them  your  clothes  in  exchange  for  finer  raiment,  for  if  you  do  you
will  alarm  your  relations  by  coming  in  without  a  rag  on  you,  and,  as
a  man  said  to  me,  "  One's  wife  never  believes  when  one  says  one's
cloth  has  been  given  to  a  bibendi  man.  She  always  thinks  it  is  living
women  who  have  got  it."  And  if  you  deliberately  go  to  a  spirit  town
to  find  out  something  from  them,  never  drink  water,  or  anything  else,
until  you  get  home ;  if  you  do  you  will  forget  what  the  spirits  told
you.  These  bibendi  are  the  souls  of  dead  human  beings,  and  Mr.
Du  Chaillu  got  himself  more  discredit  up  here  than  he  need  have  by
repeating  the  tales  he  had  heard  about  the  bibendi  and  their  towns,
and  crediting  them  to  gorillas, — I  expect  from  a  confusion  in  the
native  words.

Although  throughout  all  West  Africa  there  is,  as  Merolla  says,
"  an  exceeding  plentie  of  Devils,"  there  are  some  places  where  they
are  so  numerous  as  to  make  the  place  almost  uninhabitable  to  the
human  being,  used  as  he  is  to  their  goings  on  and  manners  and
customs.  Of  course  I,  being  out  there  for  the  purpose  of  studying
Fetish,  have  always  had,  when  I  heard  of  such  a  region  on  good
authority,  to  go  and  potter  quietly  into  it.  I  am  not  a  person  who
would  violate  any  man's  temple  or  sanctuary,  but  miscellaneous  devils
do  not  count  in  that  category ;  the  greatest  difficulty  you  experience
in  getting  into  these  devil  haunts  is  getting  respectable  people  to  go
with  you.  This,  however,  you  can  do  without,  provided  there  is  even
a  small  resident  human  population  therein.  Your  friends  among
the  surrounding  tribes  will,  it  is  true,  tell  you  the  men  who
live  in  such  places  are  little  better  than  the  devils,  but  that  may
be  just  prejudice  ;  at  any  rate  my  personal  experience  among  the
human  residents  in  the  notorious  devil  regions  of the  Sierra  Del


Mary  H.  Kingdey.


[Supplement.


Crystal and tlie Ourounougou swamp has been  exceedingly
pleasant  and  friendly,  and  although  I,  according  to  local  opinion,
have  suffered  grave  inconvenience  from  the  devil  population  upsetting
my  canoe,  making  me  lose  my  way,  and  on  one  awful  occasion  grabbing
a  box  of  most  valuable  fishes,  that  by  natural  laws  ought  to  have
fl(iated  on  the  water  after  an  upset  in  a  swamp  but  did  not, — these  are
not  things  to  discourage  an  enthusiastic  observer  of  the  ways  of
devils,  but  rather  stimulating  than  othei'wise. Well,  the  strange
thing  about  these  particular  devil  haunts  is  that  the  people  who  live
in  them  hold  the  same  opinion  about  their  spirit  co-residents  that  the
outside  world  does,  and  they  simply  glory  in  the  richness  in  horrors  of
their  homes  ;  nothing,  indeed,  pleases  a  Nkama  or  Ourounougou  man
more  than  when  on  one  of  his  visits  to  a  town  on  the  border  of  his
region,  he  succeeds  in  making  the  flesh  crawl  of  every  man  and
woman  iu  it. Round  among  the  villages  by  Lamberenie,  a  little
experience  soon  taught  one  that  a  night  of  excursions,  and  alarms,
and  shrieks,  meant  that  one  of  those  swamp  men  had  been  ujd  telling
tales  and  disorganising  the  nervous  systems  of  the  respectable  Ajumba
and  Igalwa  population,  and  when  I  was  down  in  the  swamp  myself
staying with  the  swamp  men, the  local  conversation  was  just  as
alarming  and  lurid,  but  being  used  to  that  sort  of  thing  it  did  not
upset  people  so  much. I  well  remember,  the  first  night  I  spent  at
one  of  their  little  islands,  asking  why  there  were  no  window  holes  in
their  houses  like  there  were  in  the  Ajumba  and  Igalwa  houses  ;  and
being  told  cjuietly  that  the  fewer  holes  a  house  had  down  there  the
better,  because  things  looked  in  through  them. Then  followed  a
catalogue  of  things  that  had  been  seen  through  holes  :  one  large  eye
occupying  a  hole  all  night,  a  horrid  but  complete  face,  a  red-hot  plate
of  metal  (a  neptune,  as  those  plates  are  called),  a  hand  hanging  out
the  sill  that,  when  you  cut  at  it  with  a  knife,  bled  and  bled  but
did  not  go  away,  and  had  no  body  belonging  to  it,  and  so  on  ;  and  I
gathered  that,  when  my  friends  came  down  to  occupy  these  houses  on
the  islands  in  the  swamp  for  the  fishing  season,  they  had  for  the
first  week,  until  things  were  tidied  up,  a  very  lively  time  of  it,  and  I
am  bound  to  say  that  when  things  were  tidied  up  and  quite  all  right,
from  my  host's  point  of  view,  the  time,  to  one  not  brought  up  to
that  sort  of  thing,  remained  lively. I  do  not  think  I  have  ever  seen  a
weirder  scene  anywhere  than  I  saw  nightly  at  full  moon  from  the  door
of  my  perched  up  little  pigeon-house  on  one  of  those  low  clay  islands
named Njuki  ; tliere  was  clear  water  right  round  it, some  200
yards  across,  and  then  rose  up  the  black  forest  wall  a  hundred
feet  high,  so  dense  that  neither  sun  nor  moon  could  illuminate  it.
The  black  shadow  of  the  forest  wall  would  cloak  the  water  and  be
withdrawn  off  it  as  the  moon  rays  struck  it,  like  drawing  a  velvet


Part  XXXV.]


AppaTitions  in  West  Africa.


341


cloth  off  a  bright  silver  table ;  and  in  moonlight  and  in  darkness
shone  the  light  of  the  fireflies  ;  while  the  beach  below  and  up  under
the  house  was  in  the  possession  of  crocodiles,  squattering  about  as
gracefully  as  swans  upon  a  gravel  walk,  quite  different  things  to  the
sleepy  log-like  things  crocodiles  are  by  day,  save  that  they  stank  just
as  bad.  But  they  were  now  in  their  clumsy  way  active  and  noisy,
giving  their  quaint  bark  that  ends  in  a  moaning  whine,  and  evidently
generally  enjoying  themselves,  and  making  you  understand  why  the
natives  went  to  bed  early,  and  built  their  houses  on  the  tops  of  poles,
but  poles  not  quite  high  enough  or  strong  enough,  to  my  way  of
thinking.  Now  and  again  the  great  black  mass  of  a  hippo  would  raise
itself  out  of  the  water,  and  come  ashore  and  have  a  look  round,  or
just  give  a  great  soughing  grunt  of  satisfaction  and  sink  again,  and
during  the  early  hours  of  the  night  there  would  be  strange  wandering
wefts  of  silver  and  white  mist  that  trod  the  water  solemnly,  gracefully,
and  now  and  then  waltzed  together  into  one  mass  that  would  sink  into
the  lake,  or  stroll  away  and  stand  showing  white  in  the  darkness,  or
glide  away  among  the  tall  columns  of  the  forest  wall  ;  it  was  a  scene
to  make  one  believe  in  ghosts,  and  see  them,  if  you  could  see  a  ghost  at
all.  I  cannot, — never  have, — but  my  African  friends  can  and  do  to
any  extent,  in  tamer  surroundings  than  the  Ourounougou  country,
which  I  have  never  dared  attempt  to  describe,  which  haunts  me  and
calls  me  more  than  any  other  thing  T  have  ever  seen.  Then  there  is
another  region  I  love  well,  but  where  all  spirits  are  not  bad,— though
most  of  them  are, — the  region  of  the  rapids  of  the  river  Ogowe  ;  there
from  Boue  and  Lope  down  to  Otala  Amagonga  are  the  fearful  spirits  of
the  rapids  and  the  Okanda  gorge,  ever  quarrelling  with  each  other,  and
with  the  rocks  and  with  the  whirlpools  in  between  ;  ever  I'eady  to  kill
the  man  who  comes  near  them  ;  but  there  are  other  spirits  there  who
are  kinder  to  him  and  who  call  him  off  from  danger,  and  these  are  the
singing  sands  of  Okanda.  There  are,  as  I  have  elsewhere  described,
beautiful  sand-banks  of  white  sand,  that  owing  to  the  fall  of  tempera-
ture at  night,  emit  a  long  faint  musical  note,  which  you  can  hear
t;hrough  the  noisy  squabble  and  roar  of  the  rapids,  if  you  keep  your
head  bowed  low  near  the  surface  of  the  water  as  you  toil  up  or  flash
down  the  Okanda  in  a  canoe  at  night,  and  you  know  that  there  is
slack  water  where  the  sound  comes  from,  and  keep  into  it.  JSTaturally
the  Adooma  canoe  men  who  work  the  regions  of  the  rapids  feel  a
gratitude  to  these  spirits  and  give  them  things,  and  I  confess  I  got  used
to  giving  them  things  when  with  the  native  canoe  men,  and  use  grows
on  one  there,  and  I  had  to  pull  myself  up  one  night  and  say  to  myself,
"  Look  here,  you  don't  believe  in  these  things,"  for  coming  down  alone
that  night  I  found  myself  flinging  tobacco  to  the  spirits  of  the  singing
sands. This  passive  growing  into  a  belief  in  fetish  is  a  thing  liable  to


312


Mary  H.  Kingsley.


[Supplement.


happen  to  one  when  one  lives  among  such  scenes  and  surrounded  by
people  who  so  simply  and  so  thoroughly  do  believe  in  fetish,  and  you
will  hardly  find  a  white  man  who  has  lived  long  alone  in  West  Africa
wlio  does  not  think  there  may  be  something  in  fetish.  I  fell  more
rapidly  into  the  fetish  line  of  thought  than  a  trader  or  official  would,
because  my  mind  was  carefully  kept  swept  of  preconceived  notions,  and
I  was  profoundly  interested  in  the  thing  and  anxious  to  follow  it
through  all  its  varied  twinings  and  turnings.  A  little  practice,  a
great  deal  of  patience  and  sj'mpathy  with  the  African,  which  he
completely  won  from  me  by  his  kindness  to  nie,  soon  taught  me  to
think  fetish,  and  when  you  once  think  fetish,  it  is  so  easy, — the  outside
world  and  circumstance  are  so  readily  explained  b}^  it, --that  you  find
it  difficult — it  requires  an  effort— to  think  in  any  other  way.  You  all
know  up  here  people  who  have  a  great  knowledge  of  French  1  Well,
they  always,  when  there  is  anything  particular  to  be  said,  use  a  French
phrase. I  use  a  fetish  phrase— that  is  all.

You  will  often  hear  this  religion  of  fetish  called  a  religion  of
terror  and  painted  black  with  crimson  patches.  Well,  facts  are  facts  ;
find  me  a  more  cheerful  set  of  hutnan  beings  in  this  wide  world  than
the  West  Africans  who  believe  in  fetish  ;  find  me  a  region  where
crime  for  private  greed  is  so  rare  as  in  West  Africa,  and  then,  and  not
till  then,  will  I  say  fetish  is  a  liorrible  thing.  I  will  grant  you  there
is  human  sacrifice  under  it  from  Sierra  Leone  to  the  Niger  ;  I  will
grant  you  there  is  a  sending  down  with  the  dead  of  their  wives,
slaves,  and  friends ;  I  will  grant  you  it  kills  witches,  that  it  produces
cannibalism  in  this  region ;  but  before  you  write  down  the  men  who  do
these  things  as  fiends,  I  ask  you  to  read  any  respectable  book  on
European  history,  to  face  the  Inquisition  and  the  fires  of  Smithfield,
and  then  to  go  and  read  your  London  Sunday  newspapers.  West
Africa  could  not  keep  a  Sunday  newspaper  going  in  crimes  between
man  and  man  ;  its  crimes  are  those  arising  from  a  simple  direct
absolute  belief  in  a  religit)n.  From  no  region  that  I  know  can  so  truly
go  up  the  sad  cry  to  God,  Doch,  alles  ivas  dazu  mich  trieb,  Gott,  war  so
gut  !  ach  I  war  so  lieh  !  as  from  West  Africa.  Down  below  the  Niger
you  strike  two  schools  of  fetish  who  do  not  care  so  much  for  religion
in  a  religious  sense.  I  do  not  care  so  much  for  the  Bantu  negro,  and
the  true  Bantu  you  meet  below  Cameroons,  as  for  the  true  Negro.
I  like  them,  but  the  Negro  is  an  infinitely  finer  man,  physically  and
morally,  than  the  Bantu;  so  the  mere  fact  of  the  Bantu  doing  little  or
nothing  in  the  way  of  human  sacrifice  or  sending-down  killing,  does
not  make  me  prefer  him  to  the  Negro.  But  to  both  alike  everything
is  an  apparition,  and  what  matters  about  an  apparition  is  its  grade  of
power.


Part  XXXV.]


Occultism  in  Wed  Africa.


343


II.

A  FEW  NOTES  ON  OCCULTISM  IN  WEST  AFRICA.
By  J.  Shepley  Part,  M.D.

Late  Assistant  Colonial  to  the  Gold  Coast  Colony.

When  I  first  went  to  Africa,  few  men  probably  were  more  sceptical  on
such  subjects  as  clairvoyance,  apparitions  and  the  so-called  supernatural
generally  ;  I  had  of  course  heard  the  popular  smatterings  of  these
things  and  when  I  did,  li^id,  in  the  usual  style,  put  all  down  to  fiction,
over-excited  brain,  suggestion  or  auto-suggestion  and  the  like.  I  hope  to
advance  in  what  follows  some  evidence  that  phenomena  do  at  times  occur
that  are  not  explainable  by  ordinary  scientific  methods  and  that  certain
men  can  avail  themselves  of  forces  which  are  beyond  the  ken  of  the
ordinary  individual.  It  is  certain  that  when  I  was  first  brouglit  into  con-
tact with  these  things  I  was  incredulous,  and,  as  a  consequence,  put  them
on  one  side  for  a  considerable  time  as  not  worth  investigation — much  to  my
subsequent  regret.

I  propose  to  roughly  divide  the  paper  into  divisions,  as  stories  T  have
heard  and  facts  observed,  but  under  the  former  heading  I  only  proi:)ose  to
include  those  stories  which,  unless  otherwise  stated,  I  believe  to  be  worthy
of  credence  from  personal  knowledge  of  the  men  who  told  them.

I  do  not  intend  always  to  mention  ray  authorities  by  name,  as  in  some
cases  I  am  under  obligations  not  to  do  so,  and  in  others  it  would  possibly  be
distasteful  to  them  did  I  do  so,  and,  owing  to  the  short  time  at  my  disposal,
I  am  unable  to  ask  for  their  permission.

There  are  many  tales  told  by  natives  of  the  liaunting  of  roads  by  the
spirits  of  the  deceased,  but  of  these  I  do  not  purpose  to  treat,  not  having
had  means  of  investigating  ;  but  when  travelling  in  the  interior  I  have
repeatedly  been  told  of  what  the  English-speaking  native  of  the  uneducated
classes  calls,  for  want  probably  of  a  better  word,  ghosts,  i.e.,  of  messengers
having  been  seen  on  the  approaches  to  villages  and  so  on,  and  we  are  told
that  these  "  ghosts  "  are  men  who  go  out  to  keep  a  look  out  on  the  road  to
give  timely  warning  of  the  approach  of  strangers.  This  matter  will  be  dealt
with  later  on  in  more  detail.

In  cemeteries  the  presence  of  apparitions  is  looked  upon  by  the  native  as
die  usuaL  thing,  and  these  are  said  to  be  the  spirits  of  the  departed  buried
there.  They  make  their  appearance  as  usual  at  night  and  take  various
forms,  sometimes  appearing  as  replicas  of  their  once  living  selves,  either
material  or  in  ghostly  form — more  often  in  an  undefined  (more  or  less)
ghostly  or  cloudy  condition,  luminous  or  otherwise,  as  the  case  may  be.

These  forms  are  looked  upon  with  fear  by  the  ordinary  people  and  it  is
considered  dangerous  to  come  into  personal  conflict  with  them  at  times —
this  idea  leading  occasionally  to  blackmailing  by  personators  ;  it  is  also

2  A


344


./.  SJiepley  Part.


[Supplement.


thought  to  he  very  wrong  to  grapple  with  a  gemune  ghost,  as  it  may  probably
injure  him  (or  it)  greatly,  though,  as  to  why,  I  have  not  been  able  to  gain
any  enlightenment.  These  stories  of  graveyards  I  have  quoted  in  outline
here  as  showing  the  general  drift  of  ideas  on  the  subject,  and  certainly  I
have  had  luminous  ap[)earances  in  the  form  of  an  apparent  nebulous  mass
of  light  pointed  out  to  me  in  these  situaticjns  as  being  what  are  described  as
ghosts  of  the  dead.

Many  of  the  old  castles  and  ports  teem  with  accounts  of  ghosts  of  old
ofhcials  haunting  them  at  times  ;  of  these  I  propose  to  give  one  or  two  in
outline  as  given  to  me  by  men  whom  I  believe  to  be  absolutely  trustworthy.
Englishmen  holding  administrative  and  judicial  appointments.

At  one  port  is  a  very  fine  old  castle,  built,  I  believe,  by  the  Portuguese
about  the  seventeenth  century,  still  used  as  temporary  quarters  for  officials
travelling  through  or  visiting  the  place.  On  one  occasion  a  district  commis-
sioner went  to  the  place  on  official  business  and  arrived  after  dark.  He
proceeded  to  change  and  during  this  time  his  boys  prepared  the  table  for
dinner  in  the  hall,  and  on  his  going  out  of  his  room  to  have  a  walk  round,
his  boy  met  him  and  said,  "  a  white  man  come  for  chop,  sar,  1  tell  cook  get
chop  for  two."  My  informant  said  this  was  nonsense — where  was  the  white
man?  and  went  into  the  hall,  on  which  the  boys  said  "  he  sit  for  table  "  in
the  commissioner's  place,  and  pointed  to  the  head  of  the  table,  apparently
astonished  that  my  friend  did  not  see  him,  but  they  stuck  to  it  he  was  there,
and,  on  being  asked  what  he  was  like,  described  a  man  with  a  pointed  grey
beard  and  moustache,  dressed  in  Spanish  or  Portuguese  style  of  the  last
century.  My  friend  said  he  could  see  nothing  whatever,  but  he  was  quite
satisfied  that  several  of  his  boys  did  see  the  man  and  they  were  unanimous
in  their  descriptions  of  him.  Furthermore  they  refused  to  stop  in  the  castle
at  night,  and  preferred  to  camjj  out  where  they  could.

The  gentleman  who  told  me  this  I  knew  well,  and  am  aware  that  he  was
a  thoroughly  hard-headed  reliable  man,  who  was  not  given  to  romancing,  and
as  entirely  free  from  superstition  as  any  one  I  ever  met.  Of  the  facts  I  am
satisfied — explanations  I  must  leave  to  others.

While  passing  through  one  of  the  outposts,  I  was  informed  of  an  extra-
ordinary case  of  murder.  The  crime  was  seen  to  be  committed  by  competent
and  credible  witnesses  at  a  place  some  80  miles  from  the  coast — some  five
days'  marching — but  equally  credible  witnesses,  including  white  evidence,
vouched  for  the  man's  presence  on  the  coast  on  the  same  day  and  at  the  time
of  the  murder.  The  interest  in  this  case  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  accused
was  a  known  witch  doctor  (not  fetich  man)  of  no  mean  ability.

With  regard  to  the  transmission  of  intelligence  by  occult  means,  the
matter  is  treated  by  the  better  classes  of  natives  as  everyday  knowledge,  the
medicine  men  occasionally  being  asked  to  obtain  or  transmit  information  for
various  purposes.

I  have  repeatedly  been  told  by  well-educated  and  broad-minded  natives
(and  such  do  exist)  that  it  is  possible  for  certain  trained  individuals  to
"  project  their  consciousness  "  to  a  distance  irrespective  of  time  or  distance,
and  to  do  so  while  retaining  a  continuity  of  consciousness  with  that  in  their
ordinary  condition.  We  also  hear  the  same  fact  stated  in  this  way  :  That
the  individual  has  the  power  to  go  to  any  place  without  regard  to  time  or


Part  XXXV.]


Occultism  in  West  Africa.


345


distance,  etc.,  and  it  is  not  an  uncommon  remark  to  hear  that  so-and-so
had  been  to  such-and-.such  a  place  "during  the  night,"  or"  yesterday
afternoon,"  or  "this  morning,"  such  journey  being  out  of  all  possibility  by
ordinary  means.

In  respect  to  the  transmission  of  articles,  such  as  letters,  from  place  to
place,  the  accounts  are  fewer,  but  more  precise,  if  anything,  than  those  of  the
mere  transmission  of  intelligence  or  the  obtaining  of  information  by  personal
observation  of  the  seer  ;  but  very  few  seem  to  be  possessed  of  this  power,
and  only  a  few  seemed  to  me  to  be  acquainted  with  its  existence,  and  it  was
always  spoken  of  as  being  rare  ;  but  on  one  occasion  a  witch  doctor  under-
took to  do  this  for  me,  but,  owing  to  peremptory  orders  to  change  my
station  at  short  notice,  I  was  unable  to  put  this  to  the  test.

I  feel  that  I  must  de^jart  from  my  general  rule  and  mention  one  name
among  my  informants,  that  of  the  late  Mr.  Ferguson,  who  was  murdered  by
Samory's  (or  Samoli's)  men  at  Wa,  in  Dagati,  whilst  engaged  as  a  member  of
the  expedition  under  Lieut.  Henderson,  R.N.,  in  1897,  to  which  party  I  had
also  the  hoiiour  to  be  attached.  I  do  this  in  consequence  of  Miss  Kiugsley's
having  already  quoted  him  at  the  meeting  of  the  Society  on  the  10th  inst.,
when  I  had  the  pleasure  to  be  a  guest.  Miss  Kingsley  stated  then  that  Mr.
Ferguson  daiined  to  have  the  power  of  projecting  his  intelligence  (I  use  this
as  a  convenient  and  non-committing  phrase)  to  a  distance  and  making
personal  observations.  Now  I  know  that  he  did  make  this  claim,  and  I
propose  to  relate  an  incident  here  which  goes  far  in  my  mind  to  substantiate
it.  When  we  had  "sat  down"  at  Wa  for  some  time,  and  were  anxiously
waiting  for  reinforcements  and  renewed  supplies,  we  were  exercised  much  in
our  mind  as  to  what  had  become  of  the  relief  column,  as  it  was  considerably
overdue,  and  Mr.  Ferguson  undertook  to  try  and  find  out  its  whereabouts.
He  did  so,  and  reported  that  he  had  discovered  an  armed  party  travelling
from  East  to  West  through  a  certain  district  which  had  better  be  nameless.
He  said  that  this  party  had  but  one  white  man  with  it,  whereas  we  knew  that
the  one  we  expected  should  have  had  three.  He  also  said  that  he  did  not  know
them,  although  he  was  acquainted  with  two  of  the  expected  officers,  neither
could  he  recognise  the  uniforms  of  the  men.  Now  the  point  here  is  that  the
place  where  this  party  was  reported  was  many  miles  east  from  the  route  to
be  followed  by  our  relief  party,  and  their  direction  of  march  was  at  right
angles  to  what  our  party  would  have  followed.  Further,  there  was  no  column
of  which  we  had  been  advised  anywhere  near  this  place.  The  sequel  appeared
upwards  of  two  months  after  this,  subsequent  to  the  evacuation  of  Wa,  when
we  had  joined  a  second  British  column  under  Captain  Donald  Stuart,  then  in
command  of  the  Hinterland  forces.  On  our  leaving  him  to  proceed  to  the
coast,  he  gave  instructions  to  us  to  enquire  at  a  certain  town  into  the  truth
of  a  native  rumour  which  had  just  reached  him  of  a  party  belonging  to
another  nationality  having  passed  from  East  to  West  through  that  town
about  two  and  a-half  months  previously.  It  can  easily  be  imagined  how
interested  I  was  thereat.

When  we  reached  the  town  named  in  our  orders  we  found  that
undoubtedly  their  party  had  passed  as  described,  and  answered  in  every
particular  to  Mr.  Ferguson's  description  given  three  months  before,  and  at  a
■distance  of  some  130  rniles.

2  A  2


346


/.  Shepley  Part.


[Supplemeni.


Now  this  incident  occurred  under  circumstances,  as  it  happened,  that
precluded  any  possibility  of  personal  communication  with  Mr.  Ferguson  by
any  one  without  my  knowledge,  as  the  whole  time  the  whole  of  Mr.
Ferguson's  tent  was  in  my  view,  backed  by  a  high  swish  wall.  There  was
no  transmission  by  water,  as  he  had  no  stream  there,  and  drums  are  not
used  by  the  Soudanese  tribes  in  the  West  to  anything  like  the  extent
they  are  by  the  pure  negro  tribes  on  the  coast  belt,  and,  in  addition,
Mr.  Ferguson  was  not  a  drummer  or  a  king's  linguist.  They  are
hereditary  posts,  and  indeed  his  native  rank  was  superior  to  them,  high
as  they  stand.

On  the  way  up  to  the  Hinterland,  shortly  before  leaving  the  forest  country,
we  were  benighted  one  night,  and  our  guide  did  not  know  how  far  we  were
from  the  town  to  which  we  were  bound.  We  had  been  marching  for  some
hours  in  the  dark  along  one  of  the  forest  roads  when  I  and  others  saw  what
we  took  to  be  a  lantern  in  the  thick  bush.  It  was  peculiar,  as  it  moved  as
fast  as  we  did.  It  presently  came  out  on  the  track,  and  an  attempt  was
made  to  capture  the  bearer,  which  failed,  and  Mr.  Ferguson  said  we  had
better  leave  it  alone.  The  impression  that  I  retain  of  it  is  as  a  focus  of
light  throwing  a  circle  of  light  round  it,  much  as  an  ordinary  stable  lantern
would,  but  afterwards  I  could  not  say  that  I  actually  saw  tlie  wires  of  the
lantern,  but  that  was  the  general  impression.

As  we  approached,  the  light  eluded  us,  and  then  followed  the  path  ahead
of  us  for  some  few  miles,  and  then  disajjjjeared,  just  outside  the  town  we
were  approaching  ;  it  moved  exactly  as  if  carried  by  a  man.  The  explana-
tion given  to  me  was  that  this  was  the  "  double  "  (or  "  Ka  "  of  the  ancient
Egyptians)  sent  out  along  the  route  to  act  as  our  guide.

Towards  the  end  of  the  last  Ashantee  expedition  I  happened  to  be
stationed  on  the  coast  at  the  termination  of  the  shortest  route  from  Kumassi
to  the  coast.  A  day  before  the  expected  entry  of  the  expedition  into
Kumassi,  I  was  informed  by  my  boy  that  the  Governor  had  entered  the
town  at  noon  (this  was  about  1.30).  About  an  hour  later  I  was  told  the
same  thing  in  the  town  by  an  old  chief,  an  educated  man,  who,  when  I
laughed  at  it,  remarked  that  native  means  of  communication  were  much
more  rapid  than  ours.

I  may  mention  that  the  upper  portion  of  the  line  was  in  charge  of  the
Eoyal  Engineers,  and  the  coast  Imes  under  reserve  for  Government  wires
only.  The  news  was  confirmed  the  following  evening  by  official  wire.  The
head  of  the  military  wire  was  some  30  to  36  hours'  distance  from  Kumassi,
so  this  excludes  irresponsible  chattering  by  the  operators.  As  to  runners,
we  were  five  days  at  the  shortest  for  special  runners  from  the  front.  The
route  is  entirely  through  forest  country,  and,  in  regard  to  water  transit  of
sound  from  drums,  there  is  no  direct  access  to  tlie  coast  from  Kumassi  by
water.

With  regard  to  the  means  by  which  these  phenomena  are  obtained — these
are  secret,  and  their  professors  are  members  of  a  secret  society  ;  but  I  was
informed  on  good  authority  that  the  process  gone  through  to  obtain  the
power  of  clairvoyance  as  exemplified  above  is  purely  physical,  and  requires —
when  the  means  have  been  taught — but  constant  practice  to  bring  the
several  stages  to  perfection,  l)ut  that  special  means  are  used  in  each  stage.


Part  XXXV.]


Occultism  in  West  Africa.


initiation  being  necessary  to  each  stage  of  develojjinent  and  then  only  on
approval  of  the  chiefs  of  the  order,  which  is  very  stringently  guarded.  Only
a  very  few  are  initiated  into  the  highest  development.
The  stages  may  be  divided  as  under  :

1.  Simple  Clairvoyance.

2.  The  paying  of  "  Astral  visits  "  or  projection  of  the  consciousness

only.

3.  The  same  as  2,  with  power  to  materialise  the  entity  projected  or

(which  I  am  not  certain)  to  transport  the  body  itself  and  to
affect  material  objects.

Mr.  Ferguson's  name  having  been  mentioned  in  public  in  connection
with  this  subject,  I  shoidd  like  in  justice  to  him  to  say  something  as  to  his
character  as  I  knew  it.

I  found  him  to  be  a  most  modest  and  retiring  man  with  regard  to  those
subjects,  and  not  inclined  to  talk  about  even  the  possession  of  the  power  of
clairvoyance,  which  he  treated  as  a  great  honour  to  have,  and  as  a  sacred
trust  not  to  be  reposed  in  any  one  who  came  along.  He  was  a  well  educated
man  and  a  most  competent  surveyor  and  mathematician,  as  can  be  verified  by
the  honours  obtained  for  work  done  in  the  field  from  the  R.G.S.  I  may  add
that  I  have  myself  the  utmost  confidence  in  what  he  said  to  me  on  the  subject
of  this  paper,  and  I  have  not  trespassed  on  any  confidence  shown  me,  as  I
have  confined  myself  to  those  points  which  are  common  knowledge  among
many  on  the  coast,  and  which  Mr.  Ferguson  was  willing  to  confirm.

In  conclusion  I  can  only  reiterate  that,  as  to  ways  and  means  in  detail,  I
am  in  the  dark,  and  should  be  pleased  to  correspond  with  any  one  in  the
position  to  enlighten  me.

As  to  any  criticism  not  dealt  with  in  the  paper,  I  shall  be  glad  to  give  any
further  information  in  my  jjower  to  any  one  addressing  me  through  the
Editor,  who  has  my  address.


34<8


F.  G.  8.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


III.

PSYCHOLOGY  AND  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH:
A  Reply  to  Professor  Munsterheyg.^
By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


Boss  locn.tus  est:  Professor  Hugo  Munsterberg,  of  Harvard  University,  the
lord  of  I  don't  know  how  many  thousand  dollars'  worth  of  psychological
machinery,  lias  planted  the  banner  of  the  '  only  genuine  '  jDsychology  amid
the  pulverised  fragments  of  'Mysticism,'  and  sent  back  'the  Cinderella
of  the  sciences,'  Psychical  Research,  to  supervise  what  alone  she  is  lit  for,
viz.,  the  culinary  operations  of  the  witches'  caldron.  And  yet,  jjei'haps,  in
a  critical  age,  such  ex  cathedra  pronouncements,  even  of  the  greatest
scientific  dignitaries,  are  not  as  safe  nor  as  effective  as  the  lofty  and  scornful
silence  affected  by  most  of  his  confreres  on  the  General  Staff  of  the  Army  of
Science.  The  Goliath  of  Authority  cannot  stalk  fortii  into  the  field  of
debate  without  a  risk  that  a  little  pellet  of  reason  may  pierce  through  the
thickness  of  his  skull  and  put  an  end  to  his  pretensions.  For  too  often  the
eft'ect  of  authority  is  impaired  by  argument,  and  the  impressiveness  of  a
judgment  is  destroyed  by  divulging  the  reasons  on  which  it  was  based.
Professor  Miinsterberg  should  have  remembered  Lord  Mansfield's  advice  to
the  man  who  undertook  the  job  of  judging  what  he  did  not  understand,  or,
as  one  must  say  in  Professor  Miinsterberg's  case,  what  he  would  not  under-
stand. For  Professor  Miinsterberg's  inability  to  grasp  the  nature  of  the
ease  for  Psychical  Research  is  manifestly  of  an  emotional  rather  tlian  of  an
intellectual  character,  and  afi:brds  as  fine  an  example  of  the  effect  on  the
mind  of  a  passionate  '  will  to  disbelieve '  as  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of
meeting.  I  am  accordingly  confident  of  expressing  only  the  sentiment  of
every  psychical  researcher  when  I  thank  Professor  Munsterberg  for  the
interesting  light  he  has  (however  inadvei'tently)  thrown  on  the  psychology
of  psycliologists,  and  the  nature  of  the  fixed  ideas  by  which  they  seem  to  be
obsessed.

And,  personally,  I  owe  Professor  Miinsterberg  a  debt  of  gratitude  also
on  account  of  the  undesigned,  exquisite,  and  almost  ideal  illustration  which
his  remarks  yield  of  the  aptness  of  a  comjjarison  I  ventured  to  institute  in
reviewing  Mr.  Podmore's  book  in  the  pages  of  Miiid,'^  when  I  called
'psychical'  phenomena  "the  Dreyfus  Case  of  Science."  I  then  pointed
out  that  they  had  never  received  a  fair  and  open  trial,  coram  populo,  that

1(7/.  his  article  on  "Psychology  and  Mysticism"  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly,
January,  1899.

■■^  For  January,  1899. No.  29,  N.S.


Part  XXXV.] Psychology  and  I-'aychical  Research.


Bid


the  evidence  on  which  they  had  been  condemned  had  never  been  published,
and  could  not  be  produced,  that  their  banishment  from  the  society  of
scientific  fact  and  their  relegation  to  the  company  of  the  Devil  had  been
effected  by  a  secret  and  nameless  court-martial,  which  made  no  serious
pretence  of  examining  the  evidence,  and  that  for  nearly  two  centuries  the
authorities  who  professed  to  speak  in  the  name  of  kScience  had,  when
questioned,  done  nothing  but  invoke  the  sanctity  of  the  chose  jugee,  and
intimidate  inquirers  with  solemn  prophecies  of  the  absolute  ruin  that  would
overtake  the  whole  scientific  order  if  any  investigation  or  revision  of  the
matter  were  to  be  attempted. ^

I  also  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that,  in  spite  of  all  discouragements
and  threats,  a  demand  for  '  revision  '  had  grown  up,  which  was  suj^ported
by  an  increasing  number  of  'intellectuals,'  who  were  not  afraid  of  being
maligned  as  the  hirelings  of  "a  conspiring  syndicate  of  all  the  super-
stitions." But  I  could  not  anticipate  that  Professor  Miinsterberg  would
simultaneously  have  been  goaded  into  divulging  the  contents  of  the  secret
dossier,  of  which  we  have  heard  so  much  and  seen  so  little,  that  he  would
have  exhibited  to  an  astonished  wbi  et  orbi  the  ridiculous  documents  on
which  he  relies  to  substantiate  his  case.  In  short,  it  was  eux^als  ofj-oiov  that
among  the  Anti-Dreyfusards  of  Science  there  should  so  soon  be  found  a
champion  to  emulate  the  career  of  M.  Cavaignac  !  Once  more,  therefore,
let  me  express  my  gratitude  for  the  service  he  has  done  to  the  cause  of
Psychical  Research.

Nevertheless,  gratitude  must  not  prevent  us  from  exposing  the  extra-
ordinary nature  of  the  misrepresentations  and  misconceptions  to  which  he
has  attempted  to  give  currency,  from  drawing  attention  to  the  weird
character  of  the  arguments  whereby  he  seeks  to  appease  his  intellectual
conscience,  in  his  hurried  return  to  the  shelter  of  the  ancient  prejudices
from  which  he  ought  never  to  have  emerged.

I.

Professor  Miinsterberg  does  well  to  open  his  article  with  a  definition  of
his  subject  :  but,  unfortunately,  this  definition  would  be  scouted  as
ridiculous  by  every  psychical  researcher.  He  defines  '  mysticism  '  ^  as  "  the
belief  in  supernatural  connections  in  the  physical  and  psychical  woiids."
Assuredly  he  did  not  discover  this,  or  anything  like  it,  in  the  Proceedings  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  which  he  professes  to  have  included
among  the  100  volumes  he  claims  to  have  read — (p.  78) — with  more  speed,
apparently,  than  care. In  fact,  if  he  had  paid  the  most  ordinary  attention

1  Pi'ofessor  Miinsterberg-,  of  course,  trots  out  this  old  bugaboo  also.  Courageous
confidence  in  the  ability  cf  science  to  deal  with  every  order  of  fact — with  "the
psychology  of  spirits,  angels,  and  demons,  if  such  things  there  be,  as  well  as  with
that  of  men  and  beasts  "  (as  I  said  in  Mind),  he  declares  to  be  "  wrong  and  dangerous
from  beginning  to  end  "  (p.  76).  Can  it  be  that  he  has  a  lurking  fear  that  if  he
attempted  to  investigate  demons,  they  might  fly  away  with  him?

-  Which  term,  by  the  way,  he  uses  in  a  wholly  poi>ular  and  unphilosophic  fashion,
in  order  to  inchide  under  a  common  name  widely  divergent  attitudes  towards  these
matters.


350


F.  C.  S.  SekiUer.


[Supplement.


to  the  continually  reiterated  '  declared  objects  of  the  Society,'  he  could
not  but  have  observed  that  no  more  grotesquely  inappi-opriate  travesty  of
its  object  and  method  could  possibly  have  been  devised.  The  notion  that
any  phenomenon  in  God's  world  could  be  meant  to  be  supernatural,  i.e.,  put
there  to  jjrovoke  and  to  baffle  inquiry,  is  one  of  the  very  worst  of  the  super-
stititions  which  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  set  out  to  slay.  Its
fundamental  postulate  was  that  no  fact  could  possibly  be  supernatural,  that
however  anomalous  it  might  appear,  it  must  yet  admit  of  investigation  by
the  approjjriate  methods,  and  that  to  declare  it  supernatural  was  simply  an
obscure  and  offensive  way  of  declaring  one's  ununlUngness  to  have  it  inves-
tigated. From  the  psychical  researcher's  point  of  view,  therefore.  Professor
Miinsterberg  is  himself  a  supei-naturalist  of  the  worst  type,  little  better  than
the  advocate  of  the  Satanical  explanation.  The  very  term  "supernatural"
is  eschewed  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  ever  since  its
foundation  it  lias  striven  to  supplant  the  'supernatural'  by  the  'super-
normal,' aiming  at  the  momeutous  consequence  of  substituting  something
which  courts  and  challenges,  for  something  which  discourages  and  defies,
inquiry.  Either,  therefore.  Professor  Miinsterberg  has  wholly  mistaken
the  purpose  cif  the  psychical  researchers  ah  rniMo,  or  he  has  grossly  libelled
them  in  the  rest  of  his  article  by  representing  them  as  '  mystics  '  and
advocates  of  a  'supernatural'  view  of  the  alleged  phenomena.  Among
the  horns  of  this  dilemma  I  must  leave  him  to  choose  the  one  on  which  to
impale  himself,  and  would  ask  him  only  to  look  up  S.P.R.  Proceedinqs,  No.
1,  p.  4.1

It  is  because  of  this  initial  misrepresentation  of  the  aims  of  the  Society
that  he  seems  throughout  incapable  of  conceiving  any  other  motive  for
taking  an  interest  in  anomalous  phenomena  than  a  morbid  love  of  the  mar-
vellous qua  unintelligible,  or,  as  he  would  call  it,  'supernatural.'  That  it
is  possible  to  contemj^late  such  matters  in  the  spirit  of  an  explorer,  of  a
C.O.S.  worker,  or  of  a  deter.tive  (those  who  are  familiar  with  the  practical
working  of  the  Society  and  have  suffered  at  its  hands,  indeed,  have  often
complained  of  the  excess  to  which  it  had  carried  this  last  spirit),  that  it  is
possible  to  he  animated  by  a  desire  to  extend  the  sway  of  scientific  method
over  unconquered  ground,  and  to  rejoice  rather  than  repine  when  the  new
facts  have  been  connected  with  tlie  old  principles  (which,  howevei',  they
often  transform),  that  it  is  possible  to  take  up  the  subject  from  a  keen  sense
of  the  scientific  scandal  and  social  dangers  perpetuated  by  abandoning  it
to  the  vagaries  of  superstition,  in  short,  from  a  self-sacrificing  willingness  to
"take  up  the  white  man's  burden" — all  these  are  alternative  motives  which
Professor  Miinsterberg  is  sedulous  to  ignore. Yet  he  might  have  found  one

1  Perhaps,  however,  in  view  of  the  difficulty  he  seems  to  find  in  grasping  the
point  of  the  literature  he  reads  with  such  rapidity,  I  had  better  quote  for  him  an
extract  from  the  inaugural  circular:  "The  aim  of  the  Society  will  be  to  approach
these  various  problems  without  prejudice  or  prepossession  of  any  kind,  and  in  tlie
same  spirit  of  exact  and  unimpassioned  inquiry  which  has  enabled  Science  to  solve
so  many  problems  once  not  less  obscure  nor  less  hotly  debated.  The  founders  of  the
Society  fully  recognise  the  exceptional  difficulties  which  surround  this  branch  of
research  ;  but  they  nevertheless  hope  that,  by  patient  and  systematic  effort,  some
results  of  permanent  value  may  be  attained."


Part  XXXV.] Psi/chologi/  and  Psychical  Research.


351


or  other  of  them  expressed  on  ahiiost  every  page  of  every  presidential
exhortation  ever  delivered  unto  the  members  of  the  S.P.R.  !

But  not  only  is  Professor  Miinsterberg's  definition  of  mysticism  in-
applicable to  Psychical  Research,  it  is  also  liable  to  grave  exceptio,.  in  itself.
Is  it  possible,  e.ij.,  to  put  an  intelligible  interpretation  on  the  phrase  'super-
natural connection"?  Prima  facie  it  seems  a  contradiction  in  terms  ;  for  to
Professor  Miinsterberg  the  '  supernatural '  is  that  which  is  nat  connected
with  nature.  If  it  is  connected  in  any  stable  and  calculable  fashi(jn,  it  ipnu
/ric/o  becomes  a  fit  subject  for  scientific  investigation,  i.e.,  becomes  natural.
If,  therefore,  Professor  Miinsterbei'g  had  thought  his  definition  sound,  he
might  have  contented  himself  (and  liis  readers)  by  jjointing  out  that  the
conception  of  '  mysticism  '  was  self-contradictory,  by  inferring  '  ergo  cadit
qncustio  '  and  stopping  '  right  there.'

Again,  a  dangerous  ambiguity  seems  to  lurk  in  the  phrase  about  the
connections  being  '  in '  the  physical  and  psychical  worlds.  As  a  philo-
sopher who  ventures  to  soar  to  the  metapliysical  heights  he  reaches  later,
Professor  Miinsterberg  must  of  course  know  quite  well  that  these  worlds
are  not  separate  universes,  but  aspects  of  the  world  (of  experience),  or
rather,  the  results  of  special  methods  of  handling  our  experience.  Hence,  in
one  sense,  any  fact  will  be  'out  of,'  e.g.,  the  physical  world,  when  it  does
not  lend  itself  to  treatment  by  the  established  methods  of  physics,  and  so  is
ignored  by  them.  But  of  course  it  goes  on  existing  just  the  same,  and  may
receive  recognition  in  another  science  or  by  other  methods.  Tliat  is,  it  will
remain  '  in '  the  25hysical  world  in  a  wider  sense,  and  so  long  as  it  coheres
with  other  facts  (or  aspects  of  facts)  it  must  be  capable  of  scientific  explora-
tion, and  the  only  question  will  be  as  to  the  proper  method  of  investigating.
The  only  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  of  Science  or,  less  metaphorically,
against  the  fundamental  assumjation  of  all  science,  which  it  is  possible  to
commit,  is  the  assertion  that  any  fact  can  be  incapable  of  being  connected
with  others.  This  offence  is  far  from  the  thought  of  the  psychical
researcher,  but  by  implication  Professor  Miinsterberg  commits  it  whenever
he  argues  against  the  recognition  of  any  fact  on  tlie  ground  that  it  is
'  supernatural,'  and  allows  his  fears  to  dictate  his  arguments.

Having  started  from  a  vicious  definition.  Professor  Miinsterberg  is  forced
to  justify  it  by  ascribing  to  his  '  mystics  '  an  utterly  anti-scientific  attitude.
A  lay  observer  is  not  allowed  to  use  the  teleological  language  of  ordinary  life
in  expressing  the  connection  of  phenouiena  as  they  ap[)eared  toliim,  without
having  his  words  twisted  into  a  denial  of  the  possibility  of  a  scientific  con-
nection of  events.  Now,  of  course.  Professor  Miinsterberg  may  nourish
whatever  metaphysical  prejudices  he  pleases ^  against  the  teleological
explanation  of  things,  but  there  are  two  things  which  they  do  not  entitle
him  to  do  :  (1)  They  do  not  entitle  him  to  treat  a  teleological  ordering  of
events  as  no  order  at  all — that  is  merely  begging  the  question,  and  brings
him  into  conflict  with  all  the  religions  as  well  as  with  '  mysticisni '  ;  and
(2)  they  do  not  entitle  him  to  overlook  the  fact  that  in  many  sciences  the

1  His  argument  on  p.  83  amounts  to  an  assertion  tliat  a  final  cause  is  no  cause —
a  doctrine  open  to  much  olijection  philosophically,  and  only  apparently  borne  out  by
the  present  practice  of  the  natural  sciences.


852


F.  C.  S.  SchUler.


[Supplement.


teleologieal  explanation  often  yields  the  clue  which  leads  on  to  the  discovery
of  the  iiiechaiiism  whereby  the  effect  is  mediated.  Thus,  in  biology,  the
purpose  of  an  organ  is  often  far  more  easily  apparent  than  the  mechanism
by  wliich  it  functions.  Similarly,  if  departed  spirits  did  communicate,  we
might  detect  why  long  before  we  discovered  how  they  did  so.  To  declare,
then,  one's  belief  that  certain  events  are  purposive  does  not  in  the  least
imply  that  they  are  not  also  mechanical,  according  as  we  contemplate  them
in  one  way  or  in  another.

II.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  true  mystic,  if  such  thei'e  be,  would  resent
Professor  Miinsterberg's  account  of  his  mental  attitude  as  a  distortion,  or,
as  is  more  probable,  would  remain  profoundly  indift'erent  to  anything  that
might  be  urged  by  so  unsympathetic  a  critic.  But  I  do  know  that  Professor
Miinsterberg's  distortions  of  his  opponents'  views  must  not  be  acquiesced  in
when  they  affect  people  who  do  aim  at  precision  in  the  use  of  their  technical
words.  His  caricatures  are  not  even  correctly  drawn,  and  are  hardly  recog-
nisable. Thus  he  does  not  scruple  freely  to  use  the  technical  term  which
the  S.P.R.  has  introduced  in  its  infancy,  and  has  clung  to  ever  since,  viz.,
TelepatJi.it.  But  tliis  is  how  he  detines' it  (p.  68)  :  "To  perceive  in  an  incom-
prehensible way  the  ideas  and  thoughts  of  others."  On  the  other  hand,  the
Society  has  unvaryingly  defined  its  meaning  as  "the  transmis.sion  of
thoughts  and  feelings  from  one  mind  to  another  by  no  recognised  channel  of
sense. "  ^  It  seems  impossible  to  ascribe  to  Professor  Miinsterberg  either
such  linguistic  ignorance  or  such  logical  incapacity  as  would  lead  to  the
substitution,  without  a  suspicion  of  tlie  scope  of  the  change,  of  "incompre-
hensible "  for  "  uncomprehended."  By  what  psychological  processes,  then,
did  he  extract  his  interpretation  from  the  literature  which  he  claims  to  have
examined  1

At  any  rate,  a  candid  critic  could  not  but  have  observed  that  the  official
de6nition  of  telepathy  in  no  wise  excluded  transmission  either  through  as
yet  unrecognised  sensory  channels  or  through  a  supernormal  intensifying  of
the  recognised  channels  ;  i.e.,  tele^jathy  includes  both  hyper;esthesia  and
physical  hypotheses  of  the  '  brain  wave '  type,  and  it  is  simply  one  of
the  many  delusions  with  which  the  subject  teems  to  suj^pose  that  the
recently  alleged  extensions  of  liypenesthesia  constitute  a  refutation  of  the
telejmthic  hypothesis.  They  simply  show  how  completely  right  the  S.P.R.
was  15  years  ago  in  holding  that  the  bounds  of  science  had  to  be  enlarged  to
take  in  the  new  facts.  On  the  other  hand,  the  suggestion  that  telepathic
transmission  is  incomprehen.sible  is  a  request  that  the  S.P.R.  should
gratuitously  commit  suicide.

Not  but  what  a  strong  criticism  might  be  directed  against  the  telepathic
explanation  on  grounds  other  than  those  Professor  Miinsterberg  saw  fit

1  "All  impressions  received  at  a  distance  without  the  normal  operation  of  the
recognised  sense  organs"  are  telepathic.  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  I.,  p.  147,  cf.  11.,
pp.  44,  117,  ct  passim.  Mr.  Podmore,  whom  Professor  Miinsterberg  holds  up  to
scientific  execration,  explicitly  states  that,  "though  there  are  grounds  sufficient  to
justify  telecathy  as  a  ivorkinr/  hypothesis,  the  proof  of  its  transcendental  nature  is  still
wanting." Studies  in  Psycliical  Research,  1897,  p.  8.


Part XXXV.] Psychology  and  Fnychical  Research.


353


to  adopt.  For  telepathy  is,  after  all,  not  a  positive  explanation  but  a
negation,  arrayed  in  the  garb  of  an  affirmation,  and  crying  aloud  to  gods
and  men  for  a  more  positive  definition.  Hence  the  effect  that  it  seems  to
triumph  to  its  own  loss,  that  in  proportion  as  the  facts  for  which  it  obtained
recognition  find  po.sitive  grounds  of  explanation  and  enrich  the  sphere  of
science,  its  own  foundations  seem  to  be  withdrawn.  But  this  would  be
distressing  only  if  the  psychical  researcher  were,  as  Professor  Miinsterberg
insinuates,  interested  in  the  growth,  not  of  knowledge,  but  of  mystery.

And  if  the  S.P.R.  be  accused  of  having  been  somewhat  slow  in  develop-
ing the  positive  content  of  '  telejjathy, '  it  may  fairly  urge  in  defence  that
its  workers  were  few,  and  that  other  needs  were  more  pi'essing.  The  main
use  of  the  conception  of  telepathy  was  to  assist  in  the  analysis  of  the  far
more  anomalous  phenomena  (jf  spiritism  and  ghost-seeing.  Of  the  con-
sequeace  that  the  proof  of  sp)irit-life,  spirit  identity  and  spirit  agency  was
thereby  rendered  indefinitely  more  difficult.  Professor  Miinsterberg  betrays
not  the  least  suspicion.  He  treats  telejmthy  throughout  as  but  the  most
modern  avenue  to  the  Hall  of  Illusion.  And  yet,  if  he  had  only  seen  it,
telepathy  would  have  served  his  purpose  far  better  if  he  had  not  abused
it,  but  used  it,  like,  e.g.,  Mr.  Podmore,  to  arrest  the  premature  flights  of
superstition.  Hence  the  ingeuious  author  of  the  ^'^Krf/^'s  in  F^ijcliical
Research  figures  only  as  "the  most  ardent  believer  in  telejjathy  "  (p.  77),
anxious  to  credit  needless  marvels.  Just  as  if  his  perhaps  somewhat  hyper-
critical studies  did  not  embody  incomjjarably  the  most  successful  attempt  to
take  a  sceptical  view  of  the  phenomena  as  a  whole,  as  if  they  did  not  strike
a  far  more  telling  blow  at  superstition  than  the  collective  eftbrts  of  all  the
a  priori  scoffers  from  the  daj's  of  Hume  onwards  !

It  is  clear,  then,  that  Professor  Miinsterberg  has  grossly  misrepresented
both  the  aims  and  methods  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  the  character  of  the  explana-
tions which  it  has,  quite  provisionally,  suggested.  In  other  woixls,  the
secret  dossier  which  he  reveals  does  not  refer  to  the  S.P.R.  "  G'e  canaille
de  D."  is  not  Dreyfus,  and  whoever  reads  it  thus  reads  it  wrong,  and
knows  it.  Professor  Miinsterberg  owes  the  Society  an  apology,  and  in
view  of  the  extent  of  his  obligaticjns  to  its  critical  work  (from  which  his
explanations  derive  all  the  real  force  they  possess),  poetic  justice  would
seem  to  demand  that  he  should  at  least  contribute  to  its  funds  tlie  ill-
gotten  gains  of  his  Atlantic  Monthly  article!

III.

Strictly  speaking,  I  might  end  here — after  vindicating  the  integrity  of
the  only  approximation  to  a  Cour  de  Cassation  whicli  exists  in  this
analogue  of  the  Dreyfus  Case  against  the  irresponsible  attack  of  a  would-
be  Quesnay  de  Beaurepaire.  But  I  cannot  resist  the  temj^tation  of
commenting  still  further  on  some  of  the  many  delectable  passages  in  Pro-
fessor Miinsterberg's  article.

Professor  Miin.sterberg  has  a  pretty  knack  of  enunciating  sonorous
maxims  which,  upon  examination,  turn  out  either  not  to  be  relevant  or
not  to  be  intelligible.  Let  us  take,  for  instance,  the  impressive  dictum
which  tells  us  (p.  69)  that  "the  psychologist  insists  that  every  perception


354


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


of  occurrencey  outside  of  one's  own  body,  and  every  influence  beyond
one's  own  organism,  must  be  intermediated  by  an  uninterrujjted  chain  of
physical  processes."  Surely  Pi-ofessor  Miinsterberg  need  feel  no  anxiety
lest  this  should  seem  "an  apparently  arbitrary  decision" — for  no  require-
ment can  be  more  easily  complied  with.  Does  not  the  continuity  of
Sjaace  mediate  between  all  processes  that  occur  in  the  perceptual  universe  ?
and  would  not  the  weirdest  miracle  that  a  theological  imagination  ever
concocted  be  accompanied  by  "an  uninterrupted  chain  of  physical  pro-
cesses "  ?  And,  contrariwise,  would  not  the  laxness  of  the  maxim  open
wide  the  door  to  the  wildest  claims  of  hyper<esthesia  that  might  be
advanced  by  any  pseudo-scientific  'cranio'?  Professor  Miinsterberg's
admissions  arouse  the  gravest  apprehensions.  A  blind  man,  he  tells  us,
may  perceive  distant  obstacles  by  touch  (p.  70),  '■  but  that  does  not  con-
flict with  the  propositions  of  psychology,  and  is  not  mystical,"  and  "even
if  a  man  .  .  .  liad  a  sense-oi'gan  for  electric  currents  more  sensitive
than  the  finest  galvanometer,  the  psychologist  would  have  no  reason  for
skejiticism,  so  long  as  the  physical  nature  of  the  transmission  from  the
outer  object  to  the  bi'ain  is  admitted."  Such  portentous  credulity  would
render  him  the  victim  of  any  swindler  who  claimed  to  perform  his  tricks
by  '  phy^dcal '  means,  while  to  the  honest  investigator,  who  observed  the
facts  but  did  not  come  prepared  with  figments  to  '  explain  '  them,  Science
would  say:  "  Avaunt,  vile  mystic,  if  thou  canst  not  sliow  thy  physical
mediation,  tliy  physical  substrata  "  I  Something  must  somehow  have  gone
wrong  with  critical  canons  which  lead  to  such  results  !

The  truth  is,  of  course,  tliat  Professor  Miinsterberg  is  once  more
juggling  with  the  double  meaning  of  '  physical '  mentioned  above  (p.  351),
and  trying  to  infer  'from  the  (assumed)  impossibility  of  treating  an  alleged
fact  by  the  present  methods  of  the  special  science  of  physics  that  it  can
have  no  existence  in  a  world  which  (among  its  many  other  asjjects)  is  also
phy.sical.  But,  to  my  limited  intelligence,  it  appears  almost  inconceivable
to  supjjose  that  any  fact  shoukl  iwt  have  a  physical  aspect,  however  sub-
ordinate, while  it  is  obvious  that  the  principles  of  physics  are  not  rigid  and
immutable,  like  the  famous  '  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.'  Hence  I
cannot  but  think  that  the  attempt  to  proscribe  any  fact  u  priori,  on  the  ground
of  the  Use  majede  it  commits  against  thela\Vsof  physics,  necessarily  fails.  No
independent  jury  would  convict  a  fact  of  the  humblest  and  most  suspicious
character  on  such  grounds — whatever  verdict  miglit  be  extracted  from  a
packed  and  hoodwinked  court-martial  of  Professor  Miinsterberg's  laboratory
assistants .

And  the  same  objection  disposes  also  of  Professor  Miinsterberg's  laboured
contentions  that  (for  some  reason  which  he  never  succeeds  in  making  clear)
'  mystical '  phenomena  are  incompatible  with  the  causal  c(jnnection  and
mechanical  treatment  postulated  by  science.  Professor  Miinsterberg,  I
make  bold  to  say,  is  perfectly  aware  that  this  is  all  moonshine,  that  the
mechanical  explanation,  just  because  it  is  a  method  of  science,  is  universally
applicable  ;  that  the  causal  connection  as  an  '  a  i^riori '  postulate  is  the
same  ;  and  that  if,  for  the  purposes  of  special  sciences  or  for  the  sake  of
excluding  distasteful  facts,  its  scope  has  been  unduly  narrowed,  nothing  is
easier  or  more  imperative  than  to  expand  it  to  any  requisite  degree.  I


Part  XXXV.] Psyckolorpj  and  Psychical  Resea/rch.


355


should  also  like  to  credit  him  with  the  knowledge  ^  that  a  mechanical  and
(in  his  sense)  causal  explanation  of  a  fact  in  no  wise  excludes,  prejudices,
or  dispenses  with,  its  explanation  by  higher  categories,  and  that  all  the
High  Priests  of  all  the  Sciences  in  solemn  conclave  assembled  could  not
effectively  taboo  the  '  romantic '  and  teleological  interpretation  of  the
facts  of  life.

IV.

I  may  pass  next  to  what  is  perhaps  the  cleverest  thing  in  Professor
Miinsterberg's  article,  viz.,  the  splendid  audacity  with  which  he  interprets
away  the  rout  to  wliich  scientific  dogmatism  has  so  often  been  put  by  the
victorious  intrusion  of  new  facts.  "It  is  .absvu-d,"  he  says  (p.  83),  "  for  the
mystics  to  claim  the  backing  of  history,  because  it  shows  that  many  things
are  acknowledged  as  true  to-day  which  were  not  believed  in  earlier  times.
The  teaching  of  history,  on  the  contrary,  annihilates  almost  cruelly  every
claim  of  mysticism,  as,  far  from  a  later  approval  of  mystical  wisdom,  liistory
has  in  every  case  remoulded  tlie  facts  until  chey  have  become  causal  ones.
If  the  scientists  of  earlier  times  disbelieved  in  phenomena  as  products  of
witchcraft,  and  believe  to-day  in  the  same  phenomena  as  products  of
hypnotic  suggestion  and  hysteria,  the  mystics  are  not  victorious  but  defeated.
As  long  as  the  ethical  (s/c)  category  of  Satanic  influence  was  applied  to  the
appearances  they  were  not  true  ;  as  soon  as  they  were  brought  under  the
causal  categories  they  were  accepted  as  true,  but  they  were  tlien  no  longer
mystical — it  was  not  witchcraft  any  more.  This  larocess  of  transformation
goes  on  steadily  ;  millions  of  23ropositions  which  life  suggests  remain  untrue
till  they  are  adjusted."

If  Professor  Miinsterberg  means  what  he  says  by  his  last  remark,  it
would  follow  that  for  lack  of  a  little  'adjustment '  he  was  losing  his  chance
of  becoming  the  greatest  discoverer  of  truth  the  world  has  yet  seen,  a
veritable  millionaire  of  verities,  in  fact  !  If,  again,  he  means  what  he  says
in  his  last  sentence  but  one,  it  would  follow  that  he  should  swallow  any  yarn
so  soon  as  any  one  has  taken  the  trouble  to  coat  it  over  with  an  illusory
varnish  of  '  causal '  phrases.

But  I  am  loth  to  think  that  he  should  really  believe  that  the  truth  or
falsehood  of  reported  facts  can  dejjend  on  the  atmosphere  of  worthless  a
priori  theories  with  which  we  surround  tliem  before  investigation.  If  that
were  all,  it  would  be  contemjitibly  easy  to  make  the  extremest  assertions
look  respectable,  and  to  put  Professor  Miinsterberg  in  a  hole  whence  he
could  extricate  himself  only  by  ctmversion  to  the  principles  of  psychical
research  ;  I  myself  should  not  need  that  provocation  to  undertake  to  show
that,  with  unlimited  license  of  conjectural  extension,  the  orthodox  princi^^les
of  suggestion,  hallucination  and  the  'threshold'  of  consciousness  would  be
quite  capable  of  '  accounting  for '  far  more  marvels  than  have  ever  been

'  He  has  read  his  colleague,  Professor  James',  Will  to  Believe,  though  he  mis-
represents it.  And  though  his  metaphysics,  as  will  be  shown  (p.  357),  result  in  an
impossible  separation  of  the  world  of  phenomena  from  that  of  reality,  they  do  contain
a  sort  of  admission  that  both  the  mechanical  and  the  teleological  explanations  are
(in  different  senses)  triie.


.356


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


alleged,!  whereas  the  real  difficulty  of  the  subject  is  to  authenticate  the  fads,
and  as  soon  as  a  sufficient  supply  of  authentic  facts  has  been  accumulated,  no
difficulty  has  ever  been  encountered  in  fitting  them  on  to  previous  facts.  To
Professor  Miinsterberg  the  important  asj^ect  of  this  process  is  that  the  facts
should  have  fitted  ;  to  the  psychical  researcher,  that  the  facts  should  have
been  admitted — the  one  is  anxious  to  recover  from  the  shock  to  his  prejudices,
the  other  to  obtain  recognition  for  unappreciated  truth.  It  is  obvious
which  of  these  is  the  more  scientific  attitude.  And  the  triumph  of
science  over  '  mysticism '  which  Professor  Miinsterberg  here  discovers
is  a  triumph  only  over  his  own  absurd  conception  of  mysticism,  while  the  new
facts  triumph,  not  over  science,  but  over  the  prepossessions  of  the  scientists
who  arrogated  to  themselves  the  monopoly  of  truth.  If  any  historical  fact
is  certain,  it  is  surely  this,  that  if  those  who  had  faith  in  the  unknown
possibilities  of  existence  had  allowed  themselves  to  be  deterred  by  the  a
priori  denunciations  of  those  who  thought  like  Professor  Miinsterberg,  the
existence  of,  e.r/.,  hypnotism  would  never  have  been  brought  to  light.  And
if  Professor  Miinsterberg  regards  the  hundred  years'  struggle  before  the
facts  were  grudgingly  admitted  a  creditable  chapter  in  the  history  of  science,
I  can  compare  his  audacity  only  to  that  of  a  theologian  who  should  regard
the  history  of  witch-burning  as  a  credit  to  theology,  or  of  a  member  of  a
certain  historic  Sanhedrim  who  should  take  credit  for  his  jjart  in  promotmg
the  establishment  of  the  Christian  religion  by  stinmlating  Pontius  Pilate's
somewhat  torpid  zeal  for  the  discharge  of  his  official  duties  !

V.

At  intervals  in  the  course  of  his  article  Professor  Miinsterberg  betrays
symptoms  of  an  uneasiness  about  the  progress  of  his  crusade  against
'  mysticism.'  Thus,  when  about  half-way  through,  he  confesses  (p.  75)' that
so  far  "we  have  given  decisions,  but  not  arguments."  One  cordially  agrees,
and  after  this  expects  a  revolution  in  the  logical  texture  of  the  article.  But,
alas,  it  goes  on  very  much  as  before.  Then  Professor  Miinsterberg  makes
another  effort  and  invokes  the  suprasensible  truths  of  metaphysics  to  supply
him  with  reasons  for  the  utter  rejection  of  mysticism  a  priori.  The  appeal
is  successful,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  article  the  lay  reader  struggles  gallantly
with  Professor  Miinsterberg's  attempts  to  express  thoughts  that  lie  too  deep
for  words  and  intelligible  statement,  and  to  bring  them  to  bear  on  a  very
simple  dispute  about  facts.  At  first  one  is  inclined  to  hold  that  this  recourse
to  metaphysics  is  merely  due  to  Professor  Miinsterberg's  inability  to  find
any  more  conclusive  reasons,  and  forms  his  version  of  the  old  story :  ' '  No
case — abuse  the  plaintiff's  attorney,"  viz.,  "No  case;  drag  in  metaphysics ! "
But  attentive  reflection  soon  discovers  that  the  real  reason  is  somewhat
different.

Professor  Miinsterberg  is  a  victim  of  the  Germanic  spirit.  So  he  cannot
content  himself  with  simply  telling  the  '  mystics  '  that  their  facts  are  in
point  of  fact  illusory. He  cannot  be  happy  until  he  has  convinced  himself

1  As,  indeed,  I  pointed  out  five  years  ago  in  Philosophical  Bcvicw,  Vol.  III.,
No.  4,  pp.  488-9.


Partxxxv.j Psychology  and  Psychical  Research.


357


that  they  are  a  lyriori  impossible.  Before  he  can  be  got  to  admit  a  fact  as  a
fact,  he  must  be  provided  with  a  proof  that  it  is  possible,  and  see  that  it  has
a  passport  duly  vise  A  and  officially  stamped,  entitling  it  to  find  a  home  in
the  world  of  science.  He  can  no  more  help  doing  this  than  the  British
spirit  can  help  ferreting  out  the  facts  first  of  all  and  postponing  to  sub-
sequent leisure  the  task  of  devising  an  explanation  for  them.

Now  personally  I  have  much  sympathy  with  metaphysical  prejudices,
and  am  reluctant  to  sacrifice  their  brilliance  to  the  laborious  pertinacity  of
the  sounder  British  method.  I  do  not  therefore  propose  to  be  hard  on
Professor  Miinsterberg's  metaphysics.  They  are  a  national  infirmity  rather
than  a  personal  eccentricity  or  an  attempt  to  confuse  the  issue,  and  I  will  be
merciful  to  them  (and  to  my  readers).  Hence  I  shall  say  as  little  as
possible  about  them,  and,  lest  I  should  sjjoil  their  ;esthetic  effect,  shall
confine  myself  to  quotations.

"  Our  real  inner  life  is  a  system  of  attitudes  of  will  which  we  do  not  per-
ceive as  objects  of  consciousness,"  and  the  "causal  view  has  not  the  slightest
meaning  for  this  inner  reality."  "The  real  inner  life  in  its  teleological
reality  is  spaceless  and  timeless"  and  is  "in  short  not  a  psychological  fact  at
all."  " Life  as  seen  from  a  psychological  point  of  view  .  .  .  is  utterly
worthless."  A  future  life,  therefore,  as  understood  hitherto,  is  "a  violation
of  the  ethical  belief  in  immortality  "  which  "  means  that  we  as  subjects  of
will  are  immortal  ;  that  is,  we  are  not  reached  by  death."  Nay,  (in  this
sense)  "  immortality  is  certain  ;  for  him,  the  denial  of  immortality  would  be
even  quite  meaningless."  This,  then,  is  the  real  idealism  and  the  true
immortality,  which  cannot  become  a  vulgar  object  of  desire  to  any  one,  while
with  the  exception  of  a  few  professorial  '  immortals'  '  every  one  escapes  his
own  notice  possessing  it.'  No  wonder  Professor  Miinsterberg  gets  angry
with  those  who  are  trying  to  profane  his  transcendental  ideals  by  dragging
them  down  to  a  world  in  which  they  themselves  live,  and  change,  and
suffer,  and  speak  intelligibly  !

When  such  monsters  of  metaphysical  mountains  labour  to  crush  Mrs.
Piper,  the  unsympathetic  comment  of  bystanders  is  not  wanted.  I  shall
remark,  therefore,  only  that  Professor  Miinsterberg's  metaphysic  is  Schopen-
hauerism,  that  it  has  inherited  Kant's  insoluble  difficulty  of  the  double
causation  of  every  event,  phenomenally  and  really,  and  that  in  any  case  it
is  not  really  relevant  to  the  point  under  dispute. i

The  only  thing  that  really  matters  about  Professor  Miinsterberg's  meta-
physics is  that  they  constitute  him  a  mystic  of  the  most  pronounced  type —
in  his  own  sense  of  the  word.  For  he  denies  all  connections  between  his  two
worlds,  that  of  psychology  and  that  of  reality  :  hence  each  is  '  super-
natural, '  and  neither  is  intelligible,  to  the  other.  Our  experience  as  a  whole
also  becomes  unintelligible,  because  it  is  cleft  in  twain  irremediably  by  the
two  worlds  Miinsterberg  the  Professor  has  set  up.  And  this  is  sad,  but  it  is
so  ;  though  it  need  not  have  caused  any  surprise  to  those  who  have  observed

1  If  I  were  disposed  to  make  trouble  I  might  say  a  good  deal  more.  I  should
urge,  c.r/.,  that  acts  and  purposes  in  a  world  which  is  out  of  time  would  seem  to  be  sheer
nonsense  ;  that  ethical  valuations  are  facts  in  time  as  much  as  any  other,  and  have
nothitig  to  do  with  Professor  Miinsterberg's  "  ethical  belief  in  immortality  "  ;  that  he
is  inconsistent  in  a  variety  of  ways,  etc.,  etc.


358


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


how  often  extremes  meet  and  how  truly  Aristotle  held  that  excellence  lay
in  a  mean.  Once  more  a  prkiri  scepticism  has  played  into  tlie  hands  of
superstition  and  jjuts  obstacles  into  the  intermediate  path  of  Psychical
Research  !

VI.

Minoi-a  canamns.  It  is  a  relief  to  turn  fi-om  such  excursions  into  '  the
vast  inane  '  to  the  pleasant  side-lights  Professor  Miinsterberg  sometimes
throws  on  his  personal  characteristics.  He  is  a  very  Galahad  among
psychology  professors.  He  has  never,  he  assures  us,  "taken  part  in  a
telepathic  experiment  or  in  a  spiritualistic  seance."  But  he  once  had  a
thrilling  adventure  "with  two  famous  telepathists  in  Europe  "  (p.  77),  who
had  discovered  "  a  medium  of  extraordinary  jjowers"  at  a  distance,  unfor-
tunately, wliich  would  have  involved  him  in  "15  hours' travelling" — no  slight
journey  even  for  a  well-girt  man.  For  a  moment  the  professor  wavered  in
his  decision,  and  his  mighty  mind  was  nigh  o'erthrown.  But,  before  he  had
started,  the  telepathists  had  discovered  the  fraud.  A  most  providential
escape,  surely  ;  for  if  the  professor  had  come  and  seen,  he  might  have  been
conquered,  and  then  a  flood  of  superstition  might  have  swept  us  all  back
into  the  Middle  Ages  !  But,  after  all,  his  (and  our)  escape  was  not,  as  he
confesses,  so  much  due  to  his  scientific  caution  as  to  his  dilatoriness  ;  the
virgin  purity  of  his  scientific  character  was  preserved  unsullied  only  by  his
professorial  slowness  in  packing  his  trunks  !  ^  Perhaps  his  readers  would
have  been  more  interested  to  hear  the  reason  why  he  has  never  expended  a
couple  of  hours  and  of  5-cent  car  fares  and,  fortified  only  with,  say,  a
couple  of  bags  and  a  choice  selection  of  psychological  instruments,  tried  his
luck  with  Mrs.  Piper  !  After  such  heroic  readiness  to  pack  his  trunks  for
a  15-hour  journey,  that  seems  a  little  strange.

The  reason,  doubtless,  lies  in  his  sense  of  the  surpassing  innocency  of
his  character.  He  is  in  very  deed  "the  Israelite  in  whom  there  is  no  guile"
we  read  of  in  the  Scriptures.  "  Why  do  I  avoid  these  stances?"  he  asks
pathetically.  "  It  is  not  because  I  am  afraid  that  they  would  shake  my
theoretical  views  and  convince  me  of  my.sticism,  but  because  I  consider  it
■H.ndujnified  to  visit  such  performances  ....  and  because  T  know  I  should
be  the  last  man  to  see  through  the  scheme  and  discover  the  trick  "  (p.  78).

And,  after  an  appeal  to  the  effete  old  ignnm  ratio  that  a  conjuror  and
not  a  scientist  is  the  proper  person  to  detect  trickery,^  he  proceeds  to

1  Note  the  plural.

-  This  seems  a  truism  fi.  priori,  but  is  not  borne  out  by  experience.  Por  such  ex-
perts have  often  most  unreservedly  admitted  the  supernormal  character  of  many  of
the  disputed  facts— even  where  the  scientists  subsequently  discovered  trickery.  The
explanation,  of  course,  is  that  the  expert  is  quite  as  liable  (or  in  some  case.s,  because
of  his  conceit  of  knowledge,  even  more  liable)  to  be  deceived  by  trickery  on  lines
which  are  unfamihar  to  him.  And,  as  Messrs.  Hodgson  and  Davey  have  shown,  the
subtler  sort  of  spiritistic  fraud  really  rests  on  a  higher  plane  than  ordinary  conjuring.
It  rests  not  so  much  on  the  deception  of  the  senses  by  apparatus  and  prestidigitation,
but  on  the  fact  that  the  spectator  is  induced  to  deceive  himself  by  lapses  of  attention
and  errors  of  interpretation.  Hence  his  mental  processes  present  far  subtler,  more
complicated  and  interesting  psychological  problems  than  those  of  the  conjuror's
audience.


Part  XXXV.] PsTjchology  and  Psychical  Research.


359


commend  himself,  ami  his  science,  for  his  lack  of  detective  insight.  As  an
e.Kperimental  psychologist  he  is  by  his  whole  training  "  absolutely  spoilt  for
the  business  of  a  detective."  He  does  not  know  "another  profession  in
which  the  suspicion  of  constant  fraud  becomes  so  systematically  inhibited
as  it  does  in  that  of  the  scientist."  Daily  work  in  a  scientific  laboratory  he
regards  "as  a  continuous  training  of  an  instinctive  confidence  in  the  honesty
of  one's  co-operators."  Hence,  he  implies,  Zollner,  Richet,  Crookes,  etc.,
were  deceived,  and  he  was  saved  from  a  like  fate  only  by  his  resisting  the
temptation  to  investigate — or,  more  precisely  (as  we  saw  above)  by  the
fortunate  delay  in  packing  his  trunks  1

Now,  of  course,  we  must  accept  Professor  Miinsterberg's  description  of
his  own  idiosynci'asy.  I  am  i^uite  ready  to  believe  that  he  is  as  easy  to
deceive  as  he  is  diflicult  to  convince.  But  on  the  other  points  of  this  argu-
ment I  take  leave  to  difier.

I  think  he  exaggerates  the  incompetence  of  other  scientific  men  in
psychical  research  when  he  judges  them  by  himself.  They  are,  of  course,
not  born  experts  in  psychical  research,  but  become  such  by  a  pretty
severe  training,  in  the  course  of  which  they  may  often  fall  into  error.
For  they  are  no  more  infallible  in  their  observations  than  in  their
a  priori  convictions.  An  instinctive  insight  into  the  possibilities  of
fraud  comes  to  them,  as  to  the  detective,  only  as  the  fruit  of  long
experience.  (That  is  just  why  I  am  not  impressed  by  the  authority  of
scientists  whose  qualifications  resemble  Professor  Miinsterberg's.)  But  thej-
can  make  themselves  very  fair  judges  of  trickery,  though  perhaps  they
would  do  well,  both  before  and  after  investigating,  to  consult  writh  a  real
expert  witli  the  long  and  varied  experience  of,  e.g..  Dr.  Hodgson.  And  it  is
just  because  isolated  investigation  is  so  hazardous,  because  experience  and
special  study  are  so  valuable,  that  it  is  so  desirable  that  the  S.P.R.  should
have  the  means  to  employ  dozens  of  trained  investigators,  who  '  know  the
ropes,'  and  are  fully  alive  to  all  the  difficulties  of  the  subject,  instead  of
one.  For  our  science  here  stands  shivering  on  the  shore  of  an  '  unharvested
sea  '  of  unknown  dimensions.

Again,  I  am  a  little  reluctant  to  accept  Professor  Miinsterberg's  account
of  the  experimental  psychologists'  superhuman  guilelessness.  This  may  in
part  be  due  to  the  unfortunate  outcome  of  my  only  attempt  to  enlist  an
experimental  jDsychologist's  co-operation  in  a  '  psychical '  experiment.  He
took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  secure  the  failure  of  the  experiment.
No  doubt  his  scientific  conscience  permitted,  nay,  persuaded,  him  to  protect
'  science  '  against  the  possible  inroads  of  '  supei-stition '  by  such  means,
but  after  this  I  naturally  incline  to  guard  myself  against  the  possibilities  of
deception  on  both  sides.  For  it  is  decidedly  humiliating  to  have  escaped
the  wiles  of  the  professional  mediums  only  to  fall  a  victim  to  the  excessive
zeal  of  a  professorial  psychologist,  whose  good  faith  one  had  taken  for
granted  !

Further,  and  this  is  a  contention  which  has  a  wider  scope,  I  would  main-
tain that,  whatsoever  may  be  the  natural  and  acquired  guilelessness  of
psychologists  de  facto,  they  have  no  business  to  pride  themselves  on  it  and
to  cultivate  it  de  jure,  and  that  if  Professor  Miinsterberg's  account  of  the
mental  attitude  of  himself  and  his  '  experimental '  confreres  is  correct,  it  pr»

2  B


360


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


tanto  uu6ts  him,  and  them,  for  the  prosecution  of  delicate  psychological
inquiries.  For  the  obstacles  which  impede  the  attainment  of  truth  in
Psychical  Research  and  in  '  experimental '  psychology  are  in  many  important
respects  identical.  And  if  the  psychical  researcher  has  to  recognise  the
superior  position  of  experimental  psychology  in  many  respects/  and  may
learn  not  a  little  from  its  ingenious  use  of  mechanical  contrivances  for
recording  and  controlling  observations,  yet  on  the  other  hand  the  psychical
researcher  has  acquired  an  openness  of  mind  and  a  practical  experience  of
the  sources  of  psychologic  error,  whicli  might  be  applied  to  psychological
experiments  in  a  most  fruitful  and  rev(jlutionary  manner.

Very  possibly  such  assertious  will  strike  Professor  Miinsterberg  as  novel
and  preposterous,  and  he  will  feel  inclined  to  retort  that  he  puts  his  trust  in
instruments  which  cannot  lie,  and  apparatus  which  cannot  be  hallucinated.
And  in  a  liuiited  sense  tliis  is  doubtless  true  :  instruments  are  a  mighty
defence  against  fraud,  though,  like  all  fortifications,  they  require  to  be
manned  by  the  right  sort  of  garrison  and  to  be  properly  looked  after,  in  the
absence  of  which  care  it  is,  e.;/. ,  perfectly  easy  to  jaroduce  bogus  'spirit'
photographs  from  the  most  trustworthy  cameras.  So  that  the  use  of  instru-
ments of  the  most  marvellous  exactness  alone  will  not  prevent  deception  if
the  experimenters  cannot  be  trusted.

But  the  charge  is  that  in  psychical  researches  they  cannot  be  trusted,
whereas  in  '  experimental '  psychology  they  can,  and  it  is  here  that  I
find  the  home  of  the  delusion  which  puffs  up  the  psychologist  with  so
overweening  a  conceit  of  his  own  superiority,  with  so  overbearing  a
contempt  for  the  poor  psychical  researcher  struggling  amid  the  pitfalls  of
deception.  But  this  view  of  the  situation  may  be  shown  to  be  utterly
erroneous.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true  that  exposure  to  deliberate  deception  is
the  only  or  the  chief  difficulty  which  besets  psychical  research.  No  one  who
has  had  any  considerable  practical  familiarity  with  the  evidence  and  the
process  of  collecting  it,  believes  that  conscious  deception  is  the  source  of
any  considerable  jjart  of  it,  or  that  an  appreciable  percentage  of  the
narrators  of  marvellous  stories  are  liars,  pure  and  simple.  There  are  such
cases,  and  they  throw  much  valuable  light  on  the  study  of  human  mendacity
(even  though  it  may  not  be  possible  to  determine  by  their  means  the  co-
elEcient  of  human  mendacity  with  mathematical  accuracy),  even  as  one  has
heard  of  bogus  statistics  and  bogus  surveys  in  other  sciences.  Occasionally
a  well-constructed  and  well-sustained  lie  may  impose  even  on  an  expert,
though,  fortunately,  this  danger  is  rapidly  diminishing  as  the  methods  of
criticism  of  '  psychical '  evidence  are  becoming  better  understood,  and  as
the  social  atmosphere  grows  more  favourable  to  the  truthful  reporting  of
such  experiences.  Even  the  possibilities  of  fraudulent  '  mediumship '
have  become  pretty  well  understood,  with  the  result  that  the  area  of  the
phenomena  calling  for  investigation  has  been  correspondingly  restricted.
On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  danger  of  deception  from  deliberate  and  con-
scious fraud  and  uiendacity  is  not  serious,  and  it  would  be  as  absurd  to

1  Especially  as  regards  its  financial  resources  and  its  command  of  the  well-paid
jBervices  of  hundreds  of  workers  with  a  high  academic  status.


Part  XXXV.]


Pt<ycholo[/y  and  Psychical  lieaearch.


361


explain  the  mass  of  phenomena  in  this  way  as  to  hokl  that  the  constancy  of
the  experimental  results  obtained  by  psychologists  was  due  only  to  a  tacit
consjjiracy  to  foist  a  profitable  pseudo-science  upon  the  universities  of  the
world.  The  real  danger  lies  elsewhere.  It  is,  as  Plato  says,  a  '  lie  in  the
soul'  and  not  'in  words.'  It  lies  in  the  as  yet  unexplored  possibilities  of
unconscious  and  self  deception,  of  hallucination  and  suggestion.  Of  the
subtle  sophistications  which  lurk  in  these  agencies  we  know  as  yet  so  little
that  one  sometimes  thinks  that  a  new  era  in  psychology  might  spring  from
nn  attempt  to  answer  the  question — How  are  collective  hallucinations
possible  ?  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  psychical  researcher  is  here  largely
groping  in  the  dark,  sustainel  only  by  the  consciousness  that  every  moment
he  stumbles  upon  something  new  and  unexpected,  and  that  his  best  security
lies  in  his  acute  appreciation  of  the  peril  of  his  position.

But  what  about  the  'experimental'  psychologist?  HU  position  is  pre-
cisely analogous,  only  he  does  not  appear  to  know  it  !

(1)  Like  the  psychical  researcher  with  his  'sensitives,'  he  has  to  confine
most  of  his  experiments  to  a  very  limited  section  of  the  human  race,  viz.,
those  who  are  not  only  educated  up  to  the  point  of  understanding  them,  but
are  also  constitutionally  endowed  with  a  rare  capacity  of  resisting  the  tedium
of  performing  them.

(2)  Like  him,  he  puts  his  subjects  under  abnormal  conditions  and  assumes
that  what  is  found  to  hold  of  mental  processes  under  '  experimental '
conditions  will  apply  also  to  them  under  the  normal  conditions  of  natural
life.  This  he  does,  although  he  knows  ipiite  well  that  the  limen  of  conscious-
ness and  the  capacity  of  attention  vary  most  surprisingly  according  to  the
interest  which  the  subject  inspires.

(3)  Like  the  psychical  researcher  he  is  dealing  witli  conditions  which
give  the  widest  possible  scope  to  »}Uj(iestion.  But  unlike  the  former  he
seems  to  have  been  (at  all  events  until  recently)  blissfully  unconscious  of  the
fact  and  to  have  taken  no  appreciable  precautions  against  the  vitiation
of  his  results  from  this  source.  ^  Yet  the  conditions  of  the  ordinary
psychological  laboratory  are  almost  the  ideal  conditions  for  inducing  a
maximum  of  suggestibility.  First  of  all  the  subject's  mind  is  prepared  by
impressive  and  dogmatic  statements  of  his  professor  to  expect  certain  results.
Then  he  is  steeped  in  a  literature  admirably  calculated  to  lower  his  vitality,
to  stupefy  his  critical  capacity,  to  abase  his  imagination,  until  no  thought  can
enter  it  of  any  but  a  certain  sort  of  result.  Meanwhile  he  is  subjected  to  a
thorough  course  of  '  ward  training  '  in  the  laboratory,  I'eceiving  all  the
time  frequent  '  hints '  from  his  director  and  breathing  an  atmosphere
which  simply  reeks  with  suggestion.  When  finally  he  produces  his  research,
is  it  a  wonder  that  in  99  cases  out  of  100  its  results  should  be  found  faith-
fully to  reflect  the  assumptions  of  '  experimental '  psychology  in  general
and  to  confirm  the  views  of  the  director  of  his  laboratory  in  particular  ?
And  do  not  the  training  and  the  ideas  instilled  in  the  Leipzig  laboratory  still

1  It  will  suffice  to  refer  to  an  exception  which  proves  the  rule,  viz.,  Professor
G.  A.  Tawney  (justissimus  unus  qui  fitit  in  Tcucris),  who,  in  an  article  in  the
Ptycholorjical  Kcvino  (Nov.,  1897),  shows  that  the  '  double-point  illusion '  is  mainly
due  to  auto-suggestion.


362


F.  a  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


play  much  the  same  part  in  'experimental'  psychology  as  the  'three-
stages  '  view  of  the  Salpi^triere  School  once  did  in  the  theory  of  hypnotism  ?
And  is  it  not  generally  admitted  that  the  wonderfully  symmetrical  results
originating  from  the  Salpetriere  were  mainly  the  result  of  suggestion,  though
the  fact  could  not  l^e  proved  until  independent  centres  of  experimentation
imbued  with  different  notions  had  come  into  prominence  ?  We  have  then
positive  proofs  that  the  effects  of  suggestion  can  vitiate  a  whole  science  ;  and
suggestion  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  youthful  minds  that  frequent
psychological  laboratories  with  far  greater  force  than  even  in  the  palmiest
days  of  the  Salpetriere  theory.  Would  it  not  then  border  on  a  miracle  if
such  strong  suggestions  had  failed  to  produce  their  effect,  would  it  not  be
still  more  marvellous  if  such  a  '  failure '  should  ever  be  thought  worth
printing  ?

(4)  Like  the  psychical  researcher,  the  psychological  experimenter  deals
with  mental  processes  whose  delicacy  rsnders  them  peculiarly  liable  to
hallucination.  And  when  we  bear  in  mind  the  powerful  sugg-estions  that
are  operative  throughout  the  process,  it  v/ill  hardly  seem  surprising  that  not
only,  e.;/.,  the  'perception  '  of  infinitesimal  differences  in  sensory  stimuli  and
the  reacbions  of  an  expectant  attention  upon  an  imagined  signal,  but  even  the
readings  of  a  micrometer  or  the  chronoscopic  estimates  in  thousandths  of  a
second  which  are  needed  to  produce  the  required  conformity  in  the  results
should  often  be  explicable  as  sheer  hallucinations  fostered  by  the  peculiar  con-
ditions of  the  experiment.  Indeed,  we  even  find  some  such  results  recorded
by  the  psychologists,  though  without  any  consciousness,  apparently,  of  their
metliodological  significance.  At  all  events  I  feel  that  I  personally  could
match  Pi'ofessor  Miinsterberg's  avowal  of  his  limitless  capacity  to  be  deceived
in  'psychical'  experiments  by  an  equally  frank  avowal  of  my  capacity  tn
deceive  myself  in  psychological  experiments.  If  I  did  not  succeed  in  getting'
myself  turned  out  as  an  unsuitable  subject  by  failing  to  see  anything  at  all,
I  am  sure  I  should  delude  myself  into  fancying  that  I  saw  wlin,^ever  was
expected  of  me.  For  in  such  experiments  one  cannot  trust  oneS'-'if ;  there  is
often  just  the  same  difficulty  about  distinguishing  a  real  from  a  hallucinatory
sense-perception,  as  there  is  in  some  '  borderland '  experiences  about
saying  whether  one  is  asleep  or  awake.

(5)  Like  the  psychical  researcher,  tlie  psychologist  cherishes  a  weakness
for  figures — in  the  one  case  in  the  shape  of  statistics  ;  in  the  other  in  shape
of  'exact  quantitative  measurements.'  And  though,  of  course,  a  method
of  inquiry  which  can  use  figures  is  far  more  provocative  of  confidence
than  one  whicli  cannot,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  in  both  cases  the
Pythagorean  reverence  for  Numlier  is  not  often  carried  to  a  superstitious
intensity.  To  swamp  the  inquirer  with  a  flood  of  figures  is  not  necessarily
to  solve  a  problem,  especially  while  one  of  the  chief  doubts  is  as  to  the
relevance  of  the  figures.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  well  known  that
with  skilful  manipulation,  statistics  and  '  exact  quantitative  determina-
tions '  may  be  made  to  prove  many  things,  while  they  serve  as  opiates  to
the  critical  faculty  and  induce  a  comfortable  glow  of  scientific  rectitude.
Hence  the  pride  which  the  psychologist  takes  in  his  figures  may  often  prove
a  snare,  and  a  prelude  to  his  fall  from  Iiis  fancied  eminence  of  uncontested
truth .


Part  XXXV.]


Psychology  and  Psychical  Research.


363


In  addition  to  the  above  five  points,  in  which  the  problems  of  the  psychical
researcher  and  the  '  experimental '  psychologist  are  analogous,  I  may  briefly
allude  to  two  others  in  which  there  is  a  divergence,  significant  as  bearing  on
the  attitude  which  the  latter  so  often  takes  up  towards  the  former.

(6)  The  psychologist  deals  with  partial  processes  of  human  mentality,
isolated  as  far  as  possible  from  tlieir  context  ;  the  psychical  researcher
generally  experiments  with  the  psychical  organism  as  a  whole.  The  former
procedure  is  more  in  accordance  with  the  analogy  of  the  other  sciences
(though,  to  be  sure,  it  is  here  a  question  how  far  tlie  analogy  holds),  but  it
renders  him  liable  to  the  charge  of  false  abstraction  in  ignoring  the  context
.iind  the  connection  of  the  phenomena  studied  with  the  whole  mental  life.
The  latter  runs  the  risk  of  treating  as  a  simple  fact  what  is  really  the  com-
plex resultant  of  many  factors.  But,  being  more  concrete,  this  method  is
more  interesting  and  more  human,  as  the  psychologist  cannot  but  himself
feel.  And,  being  irritated  both  by  the  popular  preference  for  the  wider
sweep  of  the  more  concrete  method  and  by  his  consciousness  of  the  respon-
sive note  it  strikes  in  his  own  bosom,  he  reacts  upon  the  temjjtation  by
pouring  out  the  vials  of  his  wrath  from  time  to  time  in  indiscriminate  abuse
of  Psychical  Research  and  all  its  works  and  w^ays.  Which,  though  very
human,  is  foolish,  and  not  science.

(7)  The  psychical  researcher  is  aware  tliat  he  has  to  deal  with  what
appears  a  more  aberrant  type  of  fact,  and  to  exercise  the  greatest  care  to
take  nothing  for  granted.  He  must  state  all  the  conditions  ot  his  experi-
ments with  the  utmost  fulness  and  the  greatest  attainable  accuracy,
regarding  nothing  as  too  trivial  for  mention,  and  sedulously  eschewing
anything  like  '  cooking '  of  the  evidence  And  I  think  that  no  candid
reader  can  deny  that  such  has  been  the  aim  of  the  S.P.R. ,  and  that  the
evidence  it  publishes  conforms  to  tlie  highest  standards  in  an  ever-increasing
degree  as  time  goes  on,  and  the  knowledge  of  its  methods  becomes  more
widely  diifused.

The  facts  of  the  'experimental'  psychologist,  on  the  other  hand,  are
'iatrinsically  of  an  entirely  conunonplace  character.  They  are  so  closely
connected  with  tliose  of  tlie  recognised  science  of  physiology,  that  their
<lependence  on  it  has  often  seemed  mere  parasitism.  Hence  the  psychologist
feels  freer  from  the  restrictiims  which  are  imposed  on  psychical  research,
and  his  accounts  show  that  he  enjoys  his  freedom  to  the  full.  He  appears
to  recognise  no  limits  to  the  suppression  of  misuitable  records  and  to  the
selection  of  tlie  'facts'  he  propounds.  And  in  any  case  his  statement  of
the  conditions  is  hardly  ever  full  enough  to  disarm  the  suspicion  that  the
first  four  sources  of  error  I  have  mentioned  have  not  been  adequately
^guarded  against.  Hence  the  reports  of  psychological  experiments  are
hardly  ever  such  as  to  carry  conviction  to  any  one  disposed  to  dispute  their
results  ;  they  are  accepted  because,  as  a  rule,  they  shock  no  antecedent
prejudice.  But  this  uncritical  naivete  can  hardly  be  esteemed  a  recommenda-
tio7i  by  an  impartial  student  of  the  methodology  of  the  sciences,  and  hence
Professor  Miinsterberg's  complacent  delight  in  the  absence  of  suspiciousness
fostered  by  his  psychological  methods  vividly  reminds  me  of  General
Mercier's  innocent  surprise  at  being  informed  of  the  illegality  and  impro-
priety of  his  use  of  the  documents  whereby  the  condemnation  of  Dreyfus


364


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


(Supplement.


was  secured.  It  would  be  far  better  if,  instead  of  propagating  misrepre-
sentations of  the  S.P.  R.,  Professor  Miinsterberg  imitated  its  methods
somewhat  more  closely,  and  got,  e.g.,  his  fellow-townsman.  Dr.  Hodgson,
to  open  his  guileless  eyes  to  some  of  the  sources  of  illusion  which  infect  his
most  favourite  assumptions.

VII.

Now  why,  it  may  be  wondered,  have  I  done  Professor  Miinsterberg's
incoherent  and  ridiculous  reasonings  {''^  Raisonniren''  as  the  Germans  aptly
say)  the  honour  of  so  detailed  a  refutation  ?  Jt  is  not  that  so  elaborate
a  counterblast  is  needed  against  sophistries  which  can  hardly  impose  on
their  author.  It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  gaining  a  dialectical  victory  and
humbling  his  professorial  pride.  It  is  not  in  the  hope  of  effecting
his  conversion.  For  if  any  man  can  remain  deaf  to  the  charming  of
his  colleague.  Professor  James,  no  power  in  heaven  or  earth  can  move
him  in  his  prejudices.  It  is  simply  because  I  would  put  it  to  MM.  Its
Gcneirinx  dc  V Et<d- major  that,  even  from  their  own  point  of  view,  they  arc
making  a  mistake  in  their  conduct  of  this  awkward  little  affair.  Their
methods  of  suppressing  the  'revisionists'  arc  too  crude  and  inefficient.
We  want  something  freslier  tlian  a  re-hash  of  tlie  old  a  priori  prejudices  in
lieu  of  conclusive  documents.  We  wairt  something  more  unlike  the  belated
forgeries  of  Colonel  Henri  than  Professor  Miinsterberg's  perversions  of  the
S.P.R.'s  attitude.  He  is  simply  adding  blunders  to  the  ancient  crimes,
and,  from  the  point  of  view  of  humanity,  adding  crimes  to  the  ancient
blunders.

For,  socially  speaking,  the  policy  pursued  in  this  Dreyfus  Case  of  Science
has  been  criminal  as  well  as  stupid,  criminally  stupid  and  stupidly  criminal.
The  success  of  the  S.P. R.,  to  say  nothing  of  more  fanatically  'Dreyfusard'
associations,  must  make  it  obvious  even  to  the  obtusest  professor  that  the
policy  of  tlie  c/io.se  j^i/jee  has  failed.  It  lias  not  achieved  what  was  expected
of  it — it  has  not  burked  inquiry.  And  it  is  quite  plain  that  it  cannot  do  so
in  the  future,  however  great  becomes  the  growth  of  Science.  For,  as  the
sciences  grow  more  specialised  and  their  language  more  technical,  the  radius
of  their  influence  contracts  rapidly,  their  ideas  affect  the  minds  of  men  less
aiid  less.  Already  in  Professor  Miinsterberg's  article  (unless  its  obscurity  was
intentional)  the  real  ground  of  his  technical  objection  to  '  mysticism '  can
hardly  have  been  intelligible  to  one  out  of  a  thousand  of  educated  readers.
And  experimental  psychi^logy  is  still  in  its  infancy,  crying  aloud  to  every
cdma  mater  to  notice  and  nourish  it.  To  what  depths  of  technicality  and
obscurity  may  we  not  then  expect  it  to  descend  by  the  time  it  is  full
grown  ?

Now  the  impotence  of  science  is  the  opportunity  of  superstition.  It
flourishes  unchecked  all  around  the  scientist,  who  will  not  compromise  his
dignity  by  recognising  its  existence.  He  cannot  check  its  growth  by
arguments  so  technical  that  they  are  understood  only  by  tlie  very  few  who
have  been  able  to  sf)end  the  best  years  of  their  youth  in  his  laboratories.
His  attitude  of  «  priori  disgust  is  too  unsympathetic  to  have  the  slightest
effect  upon  the  convictions  of  liis  adversaiies  wlio,  as  Professor  James  has
well  pointed  out,  "are  indiff'erent  to  Science,  because  Science  is  so  callously


Part  XXXV.] Psychology  and  Psychical  Research.


365


indilfereiit  to  their  experiences."  ^  In  fact,  it  stands  to  reason  that  one
cannot  expect  to  convince  any  adherent  of  mistaken  views  by  either  ignoring
him  or  saying  to  him  :  "Now,  my  good  man,  you  are  either  a  liar  or  a
lunatic."

And  for  the  scientists  to  hold  utterly  aloof  from  the  beliefs  of  the  vulgar
is  just  as  stupid  and  dangerous  a  practice  in  the  end  as  was  that  of  the
Roman  philosophers  to  discourse  about  humanity,  while  leaving  untouched
institutions  like  that  of  the  gladiatorial  games.  Similarly  the  psychologist
consumes  his  energies  in  researches  which,  from  a  social  point  of  view,  can
only  appear  ingenious  modes  of  academic  trifling,  while  leaving  unexplored
subjects  which  prima  facie  raise  the  most  stupendous  issues,  have  the
most  direct  practical  bearing  on  society,  and  most  naturally  fall  into  his
province.

No  wonder,  then,  that  the  policy  of  the  choae  jugee,  as  practised  for  the
last  two  centuries,  has  not  eradicated  superstition  :  it  has  been  a  blunder.
By  the  same  token,  it  has  also  been  a  crime ;  for  a  different  policy
would  have  ei'adicated  superstition.  And  thus  the  real  responsibility
for  the  persistence  of  superstition  lies  not  with  the  ignorant  masses,
who  interpreted  their  experience  according  to  their  lights,  but  with  the
educated  Pharisees,  whose  delicate  nostrils  were  offended  at  the  very
idea  of  associating  with  publicans  and  sinners.  It  is  these  latter  who
are  the  true  obscurantists,  who  by  keeping  aloof  have  kej^t  alive  the  belief
in  witchcraft,  Satanism,  and  the  offensive  aspects  of  supernaturalism
generally,  whose  consciences  ought  to  be  burdened  with  the  unspeakable
evils  these  beliefs  have  brought  upon  mankind.  And  if  they  knew  not  what
would  be  the  effect  of  their  attitude,  they  were  foolish  ;  if  they  knew  it,
they  are,  to  put  it  mildly,  disingenuous.  Does  it  not  behove,  then,  every
good  scientist  and  every  good  citizen  to  work  for  the  '  revision '  of  the
Dreyfus  Case  of  Science  ?


1  Will  to  Believe,  p  323.  Professor  Miinsterberg  has  apparently  read  this  excellent
essay,  and  that  after  doing  so  he  should  write  as  he  does  gives  the  measure  of  what
one  would  be  disposed  to  call  either  his  moral  bias  or  his  mental  obtuseness,  if  one  did
not  know  to  what  lengths  the  pathological  obfuscation  of  the  psychological  intellect
may  be  carried  in  the  discussion  of  these  matters.


366


F.  II'.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


IV.

DR.  MORTON  PRINCE'S  "EXPERIMENTAL  STUDY

OF  VISIONS."

By  E.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  paper  which  Dr.  Morton  Prince  allowed  us  to  read  at  the
last  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  has  now  appeared  in  Brain  under  the  above
title.  It  describes  one  of  the  most  curious  cases  of  split  personality
yet  recorded  ; — a  case,  however,  which  is  somewhat  tantalising,  since
it  seems  plain  that,  had  Dr.  Prince  chosen,  he  might  have  pushed  his
experiments  in  yet  more  interesting  directions.  Let  us  hope  that  he
may  in  fact  have  done  so,  and  may  ultimately  give  his  observations  to
the  world.  Meantime  some  quotations,  with  occasional  comment,  may
be  acceptable  to  our  readers.

I  have  had,  says  Dr.  Prince,  an  opportunity  to  make  some  experiments
of  this  kind  on  a  particularly  favourable  subject.  In  most  of  the  observa-
tions reported  hitherto,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  thoroughly  investigate
the  relation  of  the  vision  to  antecedent  events  in  the  subject's  life,  beyond
the  evidence  of  the  waking  memory  of  that  person.  But  in  this  instance,
the  fact  that  it  was  possible  to  hypnotise  her  and  obtain  tiro  additional  and
distinct  personalities,  three  in  all,  each  with  distinct  memories,  gave  an
opiDortunity  to  search  in  the  hidden  depths  of  consciousness,  and  obtain
information  about  facts  long  forgotten  by  the  normal  personality.  Further,
it  was  possible  to  experimentally  study  the  relation  of  the  sub  conscious
personality  to,  and  the  influence  of  this  upon,  the  production  of  visions.

To  understand  this,  it  is  necessary  to  state  a  few  facts  regarding  the
subject.  Miss  X.i  sutlers  from  what  is  ordinarily  called  neurasthenia,  or
hystero-neurasthenia,  but  what  I  think  is  more  correctly  called  hysterical
neurasthenia.  But  she  has  no  physical  stigmata,  excepting  a  possible  con-
traction of  the  field  of  vision.-  She  is  easily  hypnotised  ;  first  passing  into
a  state  which  resembles  that  of  the  ordinary  classical  deep  stage.  After
waking  there  is  complete  loss  of  memory  of  this  state.  During  hypnosis  she
is  very  susceptible  to  suggestion  ;  but  on  the  whole  there  is  nothing  very
remarkable  about  the  mental  condition,  which  does  not  materially  differ
from  one  of  the  deeper  stages  of  hypnosis  as  ordinarily  observed.  The  only
points  to  which  I  would  call  attention  are  that  Miss  X.  in  tliis  stage  of
hypnosis  knows  all  about  Miss  X.  awake,  and  apparently  remembers  all  that

iDr.  Morton  Prince's  subject,  "Miss  X.,"  is,  of  course,  not  to  be  confused  with
the  former  pseudonym  of  Miss  A.  Goodrich-Freer.

-  At  the  time  these  observations  were  made  this  seemed  to  have  disappeared,  or,
at  least,  could  not  be  recognised  by  the  finger  tesst.


Part  XXXV.] Dr.  Mortoii  Prince  on  Crystal  Visions.


367


Miss  X.  remembers  and  some  other  things  besides,  which  she  has  forgotten
when  awake  ;  but  Miss  X.  when  awake  knows  nothing  of  what  has  occurred
in  this  hypnotic  state.  For  convenience'  sake  I  have  called  Miss  X.,  in  this
stage  of  hypnosis,  X.  2,  as  distinguished  from  Miss  X.  or  X.  1.

Now,  on  commanding  X.  2  to  sleep  more  deeply,  there  appears  a  third
personality,  whom  I  have  called  X.  3.  This  person  knows  all  about  both
Miss  X.  and  X.  2,  everything  they  do  and  think,  but  is  unknown  to  both.
Her  memory,  also,  in  some  respects,  is  much  fuller  than  that  of  either  Miss
X.  or  X.  2,  so  it  comes  about  that  X.  3  can  tell  much  in  the  past  life  of  Miss
.  X.  that  that  person  has  forgotten,  and  can  exjalain  much  that  the  waking
personality  is  at  a  loss  to  account  for.  X.  3  even  knows  all  about  many  of
the  little  absent-minded  and  half-voluntary  doings  of  Miss  X.,  nor  does  she
hesitate  to  voluntarily  tell  of  them,  although  Miss  X.  is  morbidly  and
unnecessarily  reserved  about  her  whole  life.

Thus  far  this  case  seems  quite  in  accordance  with  analogy.  An
unusual  point,  however,  now  follows ; — in  the  relation  of  the  different
characters  of  the  personalities  to  each  other.  In  cases  already
observed  we  have  generally  found  that  the  deepeU  attainable  per-
sonality, besides  possessing  the  completed  memory,  possessed  also,  on
the  whole,  the  most  intelligence.  In  this  case,  on  the  other  hand,
the  deepest  phase  of  personality  at  which  we  seem  to  get  is  the  least
satisfactory  of  all.

It  may  only  be  added  that  the  characters  of  the  three  personalities  were
very  different  and  distinct.  Miss  X.  is  resei'ved,  morbidly  conscientious,
self-contained,  serious,  deferential,  and  dignified.  X.  2  is  sad,  serious,  and
gives  the  impression  of  weariness  and  suffering.  X.  3.  is  flijjpant,  jovial,
free  from  all  physical  infirmities,  full  of  fun,  reckless,  and  contemptuous  of
Miss  X.,  whom  she  stigmatises  as  silly,  stupid,  and  dull,  and  in  an
.apparently  heartless  way  enjoys  every  trouble  that  comes  to  her.  X.  3
always  speaks  of  Miss  X.  as  "  She,"  ^  and  insists  that  they  are  different
persons — that  they  don't  think  the  same  things  or  know  the  same  things.
She  speaks  of  X.  2  as  "  Mi.ss  X.  asleep."

This  tripartite  personage  looked  in  a  crystal, — or  rather  in  "  an
electric-light  globe  or  lamp,"  of  course  not  connected  with  a  circuit,
but  held  free  in  the  hand.  The  mode  of  vision  was  just  such  as  our
readers  are  accustomed  to  hear  of.

The  visions  were  not  seen  like  small  objects  reflected  in  or  on  the  glass
bulb,  but  Miss  X.  stated  that  the  bulb  disappeared,  and  she  saw  before  her
the  scene  she  described,  which  appeared  real,  the  characters  being  life-size
and  like  living  persons.  I  should  infer  that  she  saw  them,  much  as  one
sees  the  characters  on  the  stage  of  a  theatre,  but  she  saw  them,  nevertheless,
where  the  bulb  was.  Perhaps  the  illustration  of  looking  through  an  opera-
glass  at  the  stage  is  apposite,  for  she  several  times  at  first  broke  ofi"  from  her


In  the  following  account,  !She,  with  a  capital  S,  always  refers  to  Miss  X.  (X.  1).


368


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


inspection  and  examined  the  bulb  to  see  if  there  was  any  explanation  of  the
vision  to  be  found  in  the  glass,  much  as  one  who  had  never  seen  an  opera-
glass  or  a  kaleidoscope  might  examine  it  for  this  purpose.  To  me  as  I
observed  her  she  appeared  like  one  who,  at  a  theatre,  was  completely
absorbed  by  the  play,  and  in  that  sense  was  unconscious  of  surroundings,  but
not  at  all  in  a  trance  state.  Her  absorption  and  the  exceeding  mobility  and
expression  of  her  face  when  describing  a  vision  gave  the  impression  that  she
was  entirely  oblivious  of  myself  and  surroundings,  until  sjjoken  to,  but  not
as  one  hypnotised,  but  rather  as  one  who  is  intensely  absorbed  in  the  scene
of  a  theatre  and  has  forgotten  where  she  is.  Every  feeling,  timidity,
surprise,  interest,  seemed  to  be  expressed  by  the  play  of  her  features,  and  at
times,  especially  at  first,  she  seemed  rather  frightened  by  the  uncamiiness  of
what  she  saw.  Most  of  her  descriptions  were  given  in  answer  to  my
questions,  which  were  continuous  but  never  suggestive.  They  were  simply
expressions  like  "  What  else  ?"  "Go  on,"  "  Is  there  anything  more  1"  etc.
It  may  be  noted,  then,  as  psychologically  of  interest,  that  the  visions
appeared  like  ordinary  hallucinatio)is  or  vivid  dreams,  the  scenes  real,
of  life  .size,  but  dissucialed  from  her  surroundings,  and  not  as  part  of  them.

The  substance  of  the  visions  consisted  largely  of  memories  of  past
visual  experiences,  l)ut  partly  also  of  scenes  which  the  percipient  had
at  any  rate  never  discovered  with  ordinary  consciousness.  I  give  first
an  instance  of  a  scene  on  which  Miss  X.'s  eyes  had  no  doubt  looked,
but  without  conscious  attention.

Ejcperiment  4. — X.  3  now  (after  explaining  the  last  vision)  volunteered
the  following  remarkable  story,  telling  it  with  great  gusto  and  as  a  joke  on
Miss  X.,  and  speaking  with  great  rapidity,  so  that  it  was  difficult  to  follow
the  sequence  of  events.  The  language  was  substantially  that  of  X.  3,  but
condensed.  ''She"  yesterday  received  a  letter  from  a  photographer.  She
had  it  in  her  hand  while  walking  down  Washington  Street,  and  then  put  it
into  her  pocket  (side  pocket  of  jacket)  where  She  kept  her  watch  and  money
(bank  notes).  Then  as  She  walked  along,  She  took  out  the  money  and  tore
it  to  pieces,  thinking  it  was  the  letter  from  the  photographer.  She  threw
the  money  into  the  street  As  she  tore  up  the  money  she  said  to  herself  : —
"  I  wish  they  would  not  write  on  this  bank-note  paper."  At  my  request
X.  3  repeated  the  words  of  the  photographer's  note,  which  was  to  say  some
photographs  were  ready.  As  to  the  money,  there  were  twenty  dollars  —
two  ten-dollar  notes  ;  this,  at  my  demand,  X.  3  counted  mentally,  with
some  difficulty  and  concentration  of  thought.  X.  3  manifested  considerable
unwillingness  to  .show  me  the  letter,  which  she  said  was  in  "her"  pocket
still,  and  which  She  still  thought  to  be  money.  Finally,  after  some  insist-
ence, she  did  so.  It  was  folded  up  into  a  small  square,  just  as  one  often
folds  bank  notes.  The  language  of  the  photographer's  note  was  identically
the  same  as  quoted  by  X.  3.  X.  3  said  that  "She  "  was  absent-minded,  and
thinking  of  something  else,  when  "  She"  tore  up  the  money.  I  then  gave
X.  3  the  note  to  put  back  in  her  pocket  preparatory  to  waking  her  up.
This  impish,  liypnotic  personality  remarked  upon  what  a  joke  it  would  be
when  She  found  it  there  instead  of  the  bank-notes. I  will  say  here  the


Part  XXXV.] Dr.  Morton  Prince  on  Crystal  Visions.


heartless,  cold-blooded  deliglit  which  this  almost  lago-like  personality  found
in  the  loss  of  the  money,  which  was  a  very  great  one  to  Miss  X.,  was
appalling. To  X.  3  it  was  a  splendid  practical  joke.

Miss  X.  was  now  awakened.  I  asked  lier  whetlier  she  did  not  have  some
money  and  had  not  received  a  letter  from  a  photographer.  She  said  "  Yes,"'
but  seemed  to  think  it  rather  queer  my  asking  these  questions,  but  by  this
time  she  had  become  accustomed  to  being  astonished.  In  reply  to  a  series,
of  questions  she  said  she  had  not  the  letter  with  lier,  but  had  torn  it  up.
and  thrown  it  into  the  street  (Washington  Street)  The  bank  bills  she  had
in  her  pocket.  They  were  two  ten-dollar  bills.  I  asked  her  to  show  them  to
me.  She  put  her  liand  in  her  pocket  to  take  them  out  and  brought  out  the
photographer's  letter.  She  evidently  received  a  shock,  although  she  tried
not  to  show  it.  I  asked  her  where  the  bills  were,  and  after  searching  hei"-
pocket,  she  insisted  that  she  must  have  left  them  at  home.  1  remarked  that
she  must  have  destroyed  them  by  mistake  instead  of  the  letter  ;  she  refused
to  admit  it.  I  pointed  out  the  circumstantial  evidence  ;  she  recognised  that
it  was  suspicious,  but  could  and  would  not  believe  it.  The  loss  meant  a
great  deal  to  her,  and  she  evidently  encouraged  herself  with  a  forlorn  hope.
I  then  said,  taking  the  glass  globe  :  —  "We  will  see  whether  it  is  not  true.
Look  in  and  you  will  see  what  you  have  done."  At  first  she  saw  only  in-
diiferent  things  ;  then  I  said  : — "Think  of  bank-notes  and  the  feeling  of
tearing  them  up."  Now,  to  her  astonishment,  she  saw  herself  walking  along
Washington  Street  and  putting  the  letter  in  her  pocket,  then  taking  out
what  looked  like  bank-notes,  that  is,  green  pieces  of  paper,  and  tearing
them  into  pieces  and  throwing  them  into  the  street.  The  vision  in  all  its.
details  corresponded  to  the  account  given  by  the  hypnotic  personality.

Tliis  curious  story  shows  us  a  secondary  personality  in  (so  to  say)
its  most  alien  and  even  hostile  form  ; — such  a  form  as  might  well
suggest  actual  possession  by  a  malign  sjDrite.  Yet  the  truer  analogy  is.
probably  the  madman  who  beats  one  side  of  his  own  body  under  tlie-
impression  that  it  is  an  enemy.

I  add  another  quotation  which  shows  the  third  personality  in  a
striking  light; — as  remaining  alert  and  unuonfused  throughout  the-
perilous  delirium  of  the  primary  personality.

(B)  Experiments  in  which  the  hallucination  was  not  a  revival  of  a  jx^i-st
visual  experience,  hut  loas  larrjelij  a  newly-cyeated  visual  representation  of  a
past  experience  other  than  visual.

Experiment  5. — I  will  give  this  in  the  brief  language  of  my  notes  :  Miss
X.  looked  again  into  the  globe  ;  she  saw  a  i-oom  with  a  bed  in  it.  There  was.
a  figure  in  the  bed  ;  the  figure  threw  off  the  bed-clothes  and  got  up.  Miss
X.  exclaimed  : — "  Why,  it  is  I."  (Appeared  rather  frightened  at  what  she
saw,  but  went  on  to  describe  it,  largely  in  answer  to  my  promptings,  such
as,  "Goon,"  "  What  do  you  see  ? "  etc.)  She  saw  herself  walking  to  and
fro,  up  and  down  the  room.  Then  she  climbed  on  to  the  window  sill  which
is  the  deep  embrasure  of  a  mansard  roof. Then  she  climbed  outside  the


370


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


window  and  from  the  sill  looked  down  into  the  street.  It  was  night — the
street  lamps  were  lighted,  there  was  also  the  gas  light  in  the  room.  As  she
looked  down  she  felt  dizzy.  Here  Miss  X.  turned  away  frightened,  saying
she  felt  the  same  dizziness  as  if  she  were  standing  there.  She  soon  con-
tinued. 8he  saw  herself  throw  an  inkstand  into  the  street  below,  which  she
had  .seen  herself  take  before  climbing  on  to  the  window.  Miss  X.  was  again
■obliged  to  stop  looking  because  of  dizziness.  After  a  time  she  returned  to
the  globe.  She  saw  herself  go  back  into  the  room  and  walk  up  and  down  ;
the  door  opened  and  she  jumped  into  bed  and  lay  quiet.  Miss  L.  (a  friend)
■entered,  went  out  and  returned  several  times  ;  brought  a  poultice  which  she
put  on  Miss  X.'s  chest  ;  Miss  X.  herself  remaining  quiet.  Then  Miss  L.
went  out  and  Miss  X.  got  up  and  took  the  poultice,  rolled  it  up  into  a  little
bunch  and  hid  it  in  a  corner,  putting  a  towel  over  it.  Here  the  experi:nent
ended.

Miss  X.  stated,  on  being  questioned,  that  slie  could  not  remember  any
incident  like  the  vision,  excepting  that  she  recognised  the  room  as  the  first
one  she  occupied  when  she  came  to  Boston  four  or  five  years  ago.  It  was  in
the  top  storey  of  a  house  on  Columbus  Avenue  ;  she  was  ill  there,  and  Miss
L.  took  care  of  her.  But  she  did  not  remember  ever  having  climbed  on  to
the  window,  or  having  thrown  an  inkstand,  or  any  of  the  incidents  of  the
vision.  She  could  throw  nn  light  on  the  atiair.  She  was  now  lightly
hypnotised  and  X.  2  was  present.  X.  2  could  add  very  little  to  Miss  X.'s
statement.  (My  notes  of  X.  2's  memory  are  somewhat  confused  ;  it  is  not
plain  from  them  whether  or  not  she  remembered  ever  having  done  any  of
the  things  seen  in  the  vision,  although  it  is  stated  that  she  had  an  imperfect
memory  of  the  incident.  It  is  possible  X.  2's  statement  as  noted  was  mixed
up  with  that  of  X.  3,  but  X.  2  remembered  being  ill  in  the  room  described,
and  that  ink  was  found  in  Miss  X.'s  shoes  ;  X.  2  did  not  know  how  it  came
there,  but  Miss  L.  had  said  that  Miss  X.  had  poured  ink  in  her  shoe.  At
any  rate,  X.  2  could  not  explain  the  incident  as  X.  3  did  later.)

Deep  hypnosis  ;  X.  3  appeared  with  great  vivacity  and  amusement.  X.  3
■explained  the  whole  scone.  (As  was  customary  with  her,  X.  3  s^joke  of  Miss
X.  (X.)  as  "  She,"  as  if  it  were  an  entirely  distinct  person  and  not  herself.)
"  She"  had  pneumonia  and  was  delirious,  and  She  iniagined  She  was  on  the
sea-shore  and  was  walking  uj)  and  down  the  sand.  This  was  why  she  walked
up  and  down  the  room,  and  She  stuck  her  toes  in  the  cai'pet,  thinking  it  v/as
the  sand.  There  were  rocks  there,  and  the  window  sill  was  one  of  them  and
when  She  climbed  out  upon  the  window  sill  She  thought  She  was  climbing
upon  a  rock,  and  she  took  up  a  stone,  as  She  thought,  and  threw  it  into  the
sea.  This  was  the  inkstand  that  she  threw  into  the  street.  Then  when  She
took  the  poultice  and  hid  it  in  the  corner.  She  thought  She  had  buried  it  in
the  .sand.  She  had  not  poured  ink  into  her  shoes,  but  her  hand  shook  and
She  had  spilled  it  into  her  shoes.  Miss  L.,  seeing  the  inkstains,  had
inferred  that  Miss  X.  had  poured  the  ink  into  the  shoes,  and  had  told  Miss
X.  so.  Hence  the  statements  of  X.  and  X.  2.  X.  3  was  highly  amused  at
<ill  the  mistakes  of  Miss  X's.  delirium.

Finally,  one  more  quotation, — tlie  last  which  can  be  here  admitted,
— indicates  the  line  of  inquiry  wliieh  one  must  hope  that  Dr.  Morton


Part  XXXV.] D/'.  Mortoii  Prince  on  Crystal  Visions.  371


Prince  has  followed,  or  will  yet  follow  ; — however  cautious  he  may  be-
as  to  printing  the  results  to  which  it  leads.

Expeviinent  8. — Miss  X.  had  lost  a  scarf  pin  she  valued.  I  suggested
that  she  should  try  to  find  it  hy  looking  in  the  glohe.  After  looking  a  few
minutes,  she  saw  a  bed-room  with  a  brass  bedstead,  and  on  the  dressing-
table  was  a  pin-cushion  (described  in  detail),  and  in  the  pin-cushion  were
several  pins.  Amongst  them  she  recognised  her  own,  and  exclaimed
somewhat  excitedly  "Why,  that  is  my  pin!"  Involuntarily  she  reached
out  to  seize  it.  During  this  her  face  was  very  expressive,  and  showed  great
a.stonishment.  She  did  not  recognise  the  room,  and  was  certain  she  had
never  seen  it  before,  but  thought  it  a  city  room,  and  not  a  country  one,  from
its  general  appearance  and  furnishing.

In  hypnosis  both  personalities  were  also  ignorant  of  this  room;  but  X.  3,
being  asked  to  tell  the  last  time  that  Miss  X.  had  the  scarf  pin,  recollected
perfectlj'.  "She"  (Miss  X.)  came  into  her  room  (in  the  country,  not  in
Boston)  one  day  with  a  very  severe  headache,  took  the  pin  out  of  her  dress
and  stuck  it  into  the  head  of  the  couch,  then  doubled  up  the  pillow  and
placed  it  over  it,  and  lay  down  on  the  couch  with  her  head  on  tlie  pillow  and
rested.  "She"  forgot  all  about  the  pin,  and  had  no  recollection  of  putting
the  pin  where  She  did,  and,  in  fact,  did  it  rather  absent-mindedly.  This
was  several  months  ago,  and  X.  3  presumed  the  pin  was  gone.  On  Miss  X.
being  awakened,  I  told  her  what  she  had  done  with  the  pin,  but  still  she  had
no  recollection  of  the  affair.

Was  that  pin  actually  in  that  pincushion  Perhaps  it  was  ; — and
if  it  was,  that  fact  has  no  iaconsiderable  bearing  upon  the  way  in
which  the  world  is  made.

Meantime  there  is  one  practical  lesson — often  urged  already  in
our  Proceedinr/s, — which  these  experiments  should  plainly  reinforce.
Crystal-vision  should  become  one  of  the  habitual  and  recognised
occupations  of  the  psychological  laboratory.  I  know  of  no  real
reason  whatever  for  supposing  that  the  power  of  seeing  these  visions
is  commoner  in  hysterical  than  in  normal  patients,  or  is  a  token  of
any  kind  of  '■'disaggregation."  This  has,  indeed,  been  assumed  on
a  priori  groiinds  by  some  writers.  And  the  fact  that  a  good  many
hysterical  patients,  being  under  their  doctors'  control,  have  been
induced  to  look  in  the  crystal,  has  inevitably  tended  to  foster  the
assumption.  But  the  relative  proportion  of  normal  to  hysterical  seers
is  as  yet  undetermined  ; — and  cannot  be  determined  until  a  far
greater  number  of  normal  persons  have  seriously  made  the  attempt.
The  instances  of  normal  seers  quoted  in  our  Proceedings  and  in  Mr.
Andrew  Lang's  Making  of  Religion  represent  but  the  very  first  hasty
ingathering  from  a  vast  and  unworked  field.  And  I  believe  that
that  field  will  never  be  adequately  worked  until  the  scientific  world
shall  frankly  adopt  the  view  which  I  have  often  suggested  : — namely,


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


that  these  crystal  -  pictures  are  experiments  in  the  extension  and
■externalisation  of  inward  or  central  vision ;  and  that  the  inward  or
central  vision  which  we  thus  externalise  by  empirical  artifice  may
ultimately  become  for  us  even  fuller  of  instruction  than  that  outward
or  peripheral  vision  on  which  mankind  are  accustomed  exclusively  to
rely.  The  highest  use,  perhaps,  of  this  optical  vision  of  the  material
world  is  to  teach  us  an  alphabet, — a  scheme  of  visual  presentations, —
whereby  we  may  behold,  "as  in  a  mirror,  darkly,"  truths  not  only
material  but  spiritual  which  lie  outside  and  beyond  our  optical  scope
and  horizon.


Part XXXV.] Dc  MlrviUe  on  Houdia  and  Alexis.


373


Y.

EXTRACT  FPtOM  J=-E  DE  MIRVILLE'S
"Des  Esprits  et  de  leurs  Manifestations  Fluidiques."
(Paris,  1854). Third  Edition,  Vol.  I.,  Ch  :  I  :  pp.  18-C2.


Introductory  Note  by  Alfred  R.  Wallace.

In  the  last  Part  of  the  Proceedings  (December,  1898)  Mr.  Podmore,
in  the  preliminary  remarks  to  his  "  Discussion  of  Ti-ance-Phenomena
of  Mrs.  Piper,"  devotes  more  than  five  pages  to  an  examination  of  the
evidence  for  clairvoyance  in  the  case  of  Alexis  Didier,  which  evidence
he  depreciates  throughout,  and  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  Alexis
might  have  been,  and  probably  was,  a  clever  impostor.  He  urges
that  "bandaging  the  eyes,"  as  described,  was  not  "satisfactory;"
that  many  indications  showed  "  that  the  power  exercised  by  Alexis
was  perfectly  normal " ;  that  the  reading  a  book  several  pages  in
advance  of  any  page  opened  at  random  was  "  the  most  strongly
suggestive  of  trickery  "  ;  and  that  the  most  probable  explanation  of
his  card-playing  performances  "  is  that  of  deliberate  fraud."  He
urges  that  his  manager,  Marcillet,  might  have  been  a  confederate,
and  that  the  reports  "  are  mostly  at  second-hand  or  insufficiently
detailed."  He  quotes  lengthy  reports  of  some  of  the  special  instances
of  clairvoyance  which  were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  explained  by
thought-reading,  but  says  nothing  of  those  in  which  facts  were
correctly  given  which  were  not  known  to  any  one  present ;  and,
finally,  he  omits  all  reference  to  the  most  remarkable  and  convincing
evidence  of  Robert  floudin,  whose  testimony  has  been  quoted  by
Dr.  Lee,  by  myself,  and  by  many  other  well-known  writers,  while  a
detailed  report  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  great  work  of  the
Marquis  de  Mirville  to  be  seen  in  the  Society's  library.

When  preparing  my  reply  to  Mr.  Podmore  (which  appeared  in
the  Journal  of  February)  I  borrowed  De  Mirville's  work,  and  for
the  first  time  read  his  detailed  account  of  Houdin's  experiences
certified  as  correct  by  Houdin  himself.  Tiiis  account  seemed  to  me
to  be  so  important,  as  well  as  so  intrinsically  interesting,  that  I
suggested  the  printing  of  a  translation  of  it  in  our  Proceeding-'^:  To
this  the  Editor  has  assented,  and  the  following  very  close  translation
has  been  kindly  made  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Smith.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  it
now  appears  for  the  first  time  in  English,  although  it  has  been  known


374


Alfred  R.  Wallace.


[Supplement.


to  a  few  students  for  nearly  half  a  century  ;  and,  if  it  is  admitted
that  the  question  is  one  of  evidence,  it  must  be  held  to  prove  the
reality  of  the  clairvoyance  of  Alexis,  both  that  kind  due  to  thought-
reading  and  that  termed  "  true  clairvoyance "  in  which  the  object
described  is  not  known  to  any  one  present  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the
cards  dealt  by  Houdin  and  the  book  brought  and  opened  by  himself,
to  any  living  person.

In  his  rejoinder  (in  the  March  Journal)  Mr.  Podmore  admits
that  "  Houdin's  testimony  is,  no  doubt,  very  striking "  ;  but  he
urges  that  it  is  not  conclusive  as  against  the  theory  that  subjects
in  trance  may  possess  "  preternorraal  acuteness  of  vision."  To  this
I  would  reply  that  any  such  preternatural  acuteness  of  vision  as  is
here  required  has  never  been  proved  to  exist,  but  has  been  suggested
as  the  only  means  of  explaining  phenomena  deemed  too  incredible
for  acceptance  on  any  testimony;  and,  further,  that  if  trance  patients
can  see  through  cards,  and  tables,  and  eight  pages  of  a  printed  book,
to  admit  such  "  acuteness  of  vision  "  is  only  to  admit  "  clairvoyance  "
under  another  name.

I  would  here  earnestly  call  the  attention  of  our  members  to  a  very
important  elementary  principle  of  sound  reasoning  too  often  neglected
in  discussions  of  these  questions — that,  as  tersely  stated  by  J.  S.  Mill,
"an  argument  is  not  answered  till  it  is  answered  at  its  best,"  and  that
no  amount  of  negative  or  indirect  evidence  is  of  any  weight  as  against
good,  positive,  and  direct  evidence  on  the  other  side.  I  ask  them  to
compare  carefully  this  evidence  of  De  Mirville  and  Houdin  with  that
adduced  by  Mr.  Podmore,  and  they  will  find  that  while  the  former
consists  of  the  very  best  direct  evidence  of  facts,  the  latter  is  wholly
negative,  consisting  of  doubts,  suspicions,  and  possibilities,  every  one
of  which  is  excluded  in  the  direct  evidence  here  given.

This  fundamental  defect  applies,  in  my  opinion,  to  all  Mr.
Podmore's  writings  on  this  subject.


Translation.

You  all  know  Robert  Hondin-,  and  you  will  deny  to  this  Prince  of
Conjurers  neither  the  jjre  eminence  to  which  his  skill  entitles  him,  nor,
consequently,  his  entire  coiupetency  as  a  judge  of  the  .skill  of  others.

Evidently,  to  put  an  end  to  this  eveiiasting  and  unsound  argument,'  the
only  thing  to  do  was  to  go  and  tind  Robert  Houdin  himself.

No  sooner  said  than  done.  I  am  showia  into  his  drawing-room,  and  our
interview  begins.

1  [i.e.,  that  as  Robert  Houdin  could,  by  trickery,  do  everything  that  clairvoyants
did,  and  even  more,  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  supernormal  power  in  the  case  of
clairvoyants. — Translator's  note.]


Part  XXXV.] Dc  MivviUe  on  Houdin  and  Alexis.


375


I  am  going  now  to  give  a  careful  word-for-word  report,  with  all  the
accuracy  of  the  Moniteiir,  of  everything  that  subsequently  took  place.

M.  Houdin's  signature  will  guarantee  the  truth  of  the  record.

"  Monsieur  Robert  Houdin,  I  am  an  admirer  of  your  second  siglit,  but
will  you  kindly  tell  me  if  you  have  any  knowledge  of  magnetism  ?  Have
you  seen  any  somnambulists  ?  "

"A  slight  knowledge,  Monsieur  ;  I  have  seen  only  two  somnambulists."

"What  did  you  think  of  them  ?  "

"  Their  tricks  were  so  badly  done,  so  contemptible,  that  T  could,  then
and  there,  have  given  them  a  lesson."

"So  you  regard  a  somnambulist  as  a  brother  conjuror,  and  often  as  a
clumsy  one."

"  But  hoiv  else  wo)dd  yov.  rerjard  him  ?  After  all,  as  I  said  before,  I  have
seen  only  these  two  poor  specimens.  All  I  can  say  is  that  in  the  course  of
a  journey  that  I  made  in  Belgium,  to  Brussels,  Lifege,  and  Aix-la-Chapelle,  I
constantly  followed  M.  Laurent  and  M"e-  Prudence,  two  of  your  '  magnetic  '
celebrities,  and  I  can  assure  you  that  the  day  after  their  stances  I  in-
variably dissipated,  as  if  by  enchantment,  their  triumph  of  the  previous
night.  Whereupon,  to  my  great  regret  (for  I  have  always  a  genuine  dislike
t!)  causing  any  one  the  smallest  injury),  the  kind  of  stupor  of  admiration  that
they  had  caused  was  suddenly  turned  into  sarcasm,  insults,  and  even  coarse
abuse,  the  outcome  of  absolute  incredulity.  However,  to  do  them  justice,  I
must  add  that,  a  few  days  later,  and  with  a  courage  that  I  can  only  describe
as  heroic,  they  returned  to  the  charge,  and  succeeded  in  the  very  same  towns
in  reversing  public  opinion,  and  in  conquering  afresh  what  I  had  just
deprived  them  of.  I  have  often  since  reflected  on  this  fact,  and  have  found
no  explanation  of  it."

"  Do  you  want  an  explanation,  and  would  you  be  curious  to  see  a  genuine
magnetic,  or  rather  somnambulic  phenomenon  V

"  That  has  long  been  my  wish."

"Would  you  consent  to  accompany  me  and  spare  me  a  few  moments  of
your  time  1 "

"Although  I  am  very  busy  just  now,  nothing  would  give  me  greater
pleasure."

"Very  well,  I  will  not  ask  you,  in  the  unlikely  event  of  your  being
•convinced,  if  you  would  have  the  honesty  to  acknowledge  it  and  further  to
subscribe  to  your  convictions  ;  I  will  not  ask  you  to  do  so,  for  I  already  read
in  your  face  the  entire  frankness  of  your  reply."

"Rest  assured,  Monsieur;  in  that  case  you  will  have  no  cause  to  be
•dissatisfied  with  me."

"It  will  be  delightful  then  to  show  the  savants,  whom  we  were  speaking
of  just  now,  that  love  of  truth  has  flown  to  you  for  refuge.  But  don't
forget  to  bring  with  you  some  cards  (orthodox  ones,  mind,  not  yours),  a
book,  some  hairs,  etc.,  in  fact  anything  which  could  best  contribute  to  settle
your  convictions."

"Have  no  fear.  I  know  what  I'm  about.  Can  Madame  Houdin  come
with  us?"

"Most  certainly."  '  ' ;

"  All  right,  I  will  come  back  at  one  o'clock  to  fetch  you."

2  C


376


Alfred  R.  Wallace.


[Supplement.


It  was  then  12  o'clock,  and  when  I  got  into  my  carriage,  R.  Houdin
heard  me  give  the  address  of  42,  Rue  de  la  Victoire  for  the  Jirst  time.  I
have  underlined  the  words  "/o)-  the  first  time,"  because  there  are  plenty
of  magnetisers  in  Paris,  and  nothing  having  intimated  beforehand  our  choice
of  one  more  than  another,  there  could  have  been  no  time  to  foresee  or  to
forestall  that  choice.

On  the  way  the  future  neophyte  employed  all  the  resources  of  his
dialectic  (no  difficult  task  in  such  cases)  to  prove  to  me  what  he  con-
sidered as  self-evident,  namely,  that  it  was  all  a  question  of  dodges  more
or  less  elaborate,  and  of  a  repertoire  better  "  staged  "  than  the  average.

At  the  moment  of  our  arrival  the  oracle  is  performing  in  the
adjoining  room  for  the  benefit  of  several  people. Presently  one  of  them

(M.  Prosper  G  1)  comes  out,  greatly  impressed  by  having  just  been

given  a  description  of  his  country  house,  situated  at  the  opposite  e<xtremity
of  France,  down  to  the  series  of  pictures  hanging  in  his  bedroom.  Further
than  tliis,  after  a  description  of  all  the  out-houses,  stables,  and  finally  of  the
dog  kennel,  M.  G  1  had  added  :

"  Could  you  tell  me  the  name  of  the  powerful  animal  that  sleeps  in  the
kennel  1  "

' '  His  name  is  —wait — his  name's  Es  .  .  Esterl — and  it's  the  name  of
the  guide  who  got  him  for  you."

Here  we,  too,  found  ourselves  on  familiar  ground  ;  for  who  does  not
knovi^  Esterl,  the  smartest  and  wiliest  of  all  the  Eaux  Bonnes  guides'?

I  have  often  passed  several  hours  together  in  Marcillet's  salon,  amusing
myself  with  the  kind  of  stupefaction  (there  is  no  other  word  for  it)  stamped
on  the  faces  of  the  sitters,  very  different  from  the  expression  which  they
wore  on  entering.

Evidently,  it  had  required  very  {personal  and  private  revelations  to  upset
them  to  such  a  degree.  But  I  was  forgetting  that  the  persons  who  attended
there  one  after  another,  from  morning  to  night,  were,  one  and  all,  primed
accomplices.

However,  to  return  to  the  investigation  of  M  Houdin,  who  is  now  face
to  face  with  Alexis.

Alexis  exhibits  on  waking  the  drawn  features,  the  peculiar  look,  and
neurotic  stamp  so  characteristic  of  sonniambulists,  which  alone  would  be
amply  convincing  to  a  doctor's  eye.  Then  gradually  the  face  regains  its
composure,  the  colour  returns,  until  on  being  put  to  sleep  again  by  his
magnetiser  by  means  of  a  simple  i:)ressure  of  the  arm,  a  slight  and  barely
perceptible  convulsion  once  more  shakes  his  whole  system,  and  plunges  him
into  a  somnambulic  state.

Robert  Houdin,  who  is  an  adept  in  such  matters,  asks  leave  to  bandage
Alexis'  eyes  himself.  After  a  careful  examination  of  the  wadding  and  the
enormous  silk  handkerchiefs  that  were  handed  to  him,  he  covers  the  whole
of  the  subject's  face  with  the  wadding.  But  after  folding  two  of  the  hand-
kerchiefs over  the  rolls  of  cotton  wool,  which  enveloped  the  face  as  though
it  were  a  most  precious  statuette,  and  which  fi'om  the  top  of  the  forehead  to
below  the  lips  did  not  allow  of  the  very  tiniest  opening,  he  declined  to  use
the  third,  and  did  not  require,  as  certain  doctors  do,  a  complete  mask.  The
reason  being  that  R.  Houdin  knows  his  business  and  the  Prince  of  Conjurors


Part  XXXV.] De  Mirville  on  Houdin  and  Alexis.


377


does  not  bother  about  such  trifles.  These  two  most  suspicious  eyes  once
well  encased  in  wadding  and  covered  with  bandages,  with  all  the  chinks
stopped  up,  so  to  speak,  R.  Houdin  drew  from  his  pocket  two  packs  of  cards
still  in  their  wrappers  with  the  Government  stamp  intact,  opened  them,
shuffled  and  asked  Alexis  to  cut.  He  does  so,  and,  I  must  admit,  does  so
in  some  special  way,  which  I  do  not  remark,  but  which  brings  a  passing
smile  to  the  lips  of  the  expert  observer.  It  is  clear  that  Robert  Houdin
has  noticed  something,  and  thinks  he  recognises  the  trick,  and  any  one
but  myself  would  have  trembled  for  the  success  of  the  experiment.
Nevertheless  he  lays  down  five  cards  before  his  ojjponent,  who  takes  good
care  not  to  touch  them,  gives  himself  five  and  is  just  going  to  pick  them
up,  when  Alexis  stops  him  with  the  words  :  "You  needn't  do  that.  I  take
every  trick,"  and  names  the  ten  cards  which  are  still  lying  on  the  table  face
downwards.

"Let  us  begin  again,"  says  R.  Houdin  coldly,  stunned  though  he  was,  as
if  by  a  heavy  blow.
"With  pleasure."

Ten  fresh  cards  are  substituted  for  the  first  lot,  and  this  time  there  was
no  smiling.

"I  discard,"  says  R.  Houdin.

"  Why  do  you  keep  these  two  cards,  and  this  very  weak  trump  too  1  "
"  Never  mind,  give  me  three  more."
"  Here  they  are."

"  What  are  they  ?  "  says  Houdin,  covering  them  with  both  hands.

"Queen  of  Diamonds,  Queen  of  Clubs,  and  eight  of  Clubs."  ■

"Go  on,  a  third  round."

Same  accuracy  and  infallibility.

It  is  now  my  turn  to  watch,  and  what  do  I  see  ?

R.  Houdin  fixes  Alexis  with  those  remarkable  eyes  of  his  ;  he  changes
colour,  his  face  grows  livid,  and  a  kind  of  nervous  quiver  passes  over  his
features,  and  then,  with  the  passionate  excitement  of  an  artist  who  suddenly
recognises  his  master,  cries,

"  What  is  this  ? What's  happening  ? It  is  splendid."

Then,  as  used  to  happen  in  the  Chamber  after  a  fine  speech,  the  sitting
is  perforce  suspended  for  a  time.  A  fresh  start  is  made,  and  R.  Houdin,
after  taking  oft'  the  somnambulist's  useless  bandages,  draws  a  book  of  his
owH  from  his  pocket,  and  asks  him  to  read  eight  pages  further  on,  starting
from  a  given  place.  Alexis  pricks  the  page  two  thirds  of  the  way  down  with
a  pin,  and  reads,  Apres  cette  triste  ceremonie."

"  Stop,"  says  R.  Houdin,  "  that's  enough. I  will  look."

Nothing  like  it  on  the  eighth  page,  but  on  the  next  page  at  the  same
height  are  these  words,  "Apres  cette  triste  ceremonie."

"That's  enough,"  says  Houdin.  "What  a  marvel!  Can  you  tell  me
who  wrote  me  this  letter  ? "  Alexis  feels  it,  puts  it  on  the  top  of  his  head,,
and  against  his  stomach,  and  describes  the  writer  fairly  accurately,  but  he
makes  what  a  doctor  would  call  mistakes.  Trifling  mistakes,  however  ;  for
instance,  he  is  mistaken  as  to  the  shade  of  the  hair,  and  as  to  his  profession,
calling  him  a  librarian,  because  he  sees  him  surrounded  by  books.  Briefly,
errors  of  detail,  such  as  somnambulists  are  constantly  being  forced  to


378


Alfred  R.  Wallace.


[Supplement.


commit  when  too  closely  pressed. . . . R.  Houdin  does  not  allow  these
errors  of  detail  to  stop  him,  and,  returning  to  the  subject  of  the  letter,
asks  :  "  Where  does  it  come  from  ?  "
"  From  "

"Ah,"  says  R.  Houdin,  "and  the  postmark.  I  never  thought  of  that.
But  since  you  see  this  house,  can  you  tell  me  in  what  street  it  stands  ?  "

"Wait. Give  me  a  pencil." After  five  minutes'  reflection,  he  wrote

rapidly, "Rue  d'A  ,  IN  umber ." "This  is  too  much,  says  R.

Houdin.  '  It's  beyond  me.  I  don't  want  any  more.  One  word  more,
though. What  is  the  writer  of  the  letter  doing  at  this  moment  ?  "

"  What  is  he  doing  1  Take  care.  Be  on  your  guard.  He  is  betraying
your  confidence  at  this  very  moment."

"  Oh  1  tliat  is  an  utter  mistake,"  says  Houdin,"  "  for  the  writer  is  one  of
my  best  and  most  trusted  friends."

"Take  care,"  repeats  Alexis,  this  time  in  an  oracular  tone,  "he  is
deceiving  you  shamefully. "

"  Nonsense,  "  '  replies  Houdin.

Madame  Houdin  now  takes  a  turn  at  asking  questions.

"Could  you  tell  me,  Monsieur,  what  I  am  thinking  of  at  this  moment?"

"Give  me  your  hand.  What  are  you  thinking  of?  Wait.  You  are
thinking  of  a  child,  of  a  very  young  child.  Ah  !  poor  mother,  how  sorry  I
am  for  you  !  "

Madame  Houdin,  who,  so  far, had  endeavoured  to  keep  a  smiling
countenance  in  order  to  mislead  him,  sheds  a  few  tears.
"But,  Monsieur,  you  can  see  him,  then  !  "
"Yes. He  died  on  the  15th  of  last  July."
"  At  what  o'clock  ? "
"Four  o'clock  in  the  morning."
"At  Paris?"

"No. Three  leagues  from  Paris. Wait. Ah! It  was  too  late."
"  What  do  you  mean  ?  "

"  I  mean  that  you  changed  the  wet  nurse  too  late.  You  know  that
well ;  the  child  was  poisoned  by  the  first  nurse's  milk.  The  poor  woman
was  very  ill."

"Oh  !  that's  quite  true,  quite  accurate.  And  could  you  tell  me  what  I
am  thinking  of  now  1  "

"Alas!  You're  thinking  of  a  still  younger  child,  for  it  is  not  yet
alive. "

This  was  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  subject  of  Madame  Houdin's  thoughts,
whose  maternal  hopes  were  anticipating  the  future.  Thereupon  Alexis,
seeing  me  writing  in  a  pocket-book,  snatches  it  from  my  hands,  places  it
quickly  on  his  head  and  reads  from  it  two  or  three  lines  written  in  pencil,
which  we  find  on  the  page  named.

1  We  hasten  to  add  that  last  year,  on  my  paying  another  visit  to  Robert  Houdin,
in  company  with  my  friend,  M.  Lacordaire,  Manager  of  the  GobeUns  Manufactory
his  first  words  were: "You  remember,  Monsieur,  the  famous  letter  of  my  friend,

living  at  ,  and  my  repeated  denials  to  Alexis. " "Yes." "Well,  this  wretched

friend  was  robbing  me  of  10,000  francs  at  the  very  time  of  the  sitting."  It  will  be
admitted  that  this  development  has  given  a  more  serious  turn  to  the  matter.


Part  XXXV.] Dd  MirvUle  on  Houdin  and  Alexis.


379


A  curious  thing  then  occurred,  which  we  submit  to  the  consideration  of
persons  interested  in  this  inexplicable  agency.  In  the  pocket-book  was  a
loose  object.

"  What  is  it,  Alexis  ? "

"A  piece  of  cardboard."

"Yes,  but  what  exactly  is  the  cardboard  ? "

"I  don't  know  ;  it  is  surrounded  by  little  short  engraved  lines,  but  I
don't  know  what  they  are."

"  Try  hard. It  isn't  difficult  ;  a  piece  of  cardboard  in  a  pocket-book."

"  Wait.  It's  a  large  visiting  card — a  card  on  which  steel  pens  are  dis-
played for  sale — a  tradesman's  address."

Nothing  of  the  kind,  and  the  capricious  faculty  of  the  somnambulist
could  not  succeed  in  guessing  an  almanac.  A  certain  doctor  of  my
acquaintance  would  have  been  triumphant  and  have  quickly  closed  the
sitting  as  usual. We  continued.

"And  the  paper  next  to  it  ?  "

"The  one  folded  in  four  ?  "

"Yes."

"Oh,  that's  very  diff'erent  and  not  difficult.  'Receipt  of  MM.  Saquier
and  Bray,  booksellers,  64,  Rue  des  Saints-Peres,  for  15 francs,  20 cents.'''

R.  Houdin  opens  the  paper  and  verifies  the  correctness  of  this  state-
ment. Astonishment  greater  than  ever.  On  second  thoughts,  however,
he  says  :  —

"As  far  as  I'm  concerned  this  is  not  evidence,  Monsieur,  for  I  have  not
the  honour  of  your  acquaintance,  and  though  I  am,  personally,  convinced
that  you  are  not  in  league  with  the  somnambuli.st,  yet  I  must  act  as  though
you  were  so  on  this  occasion.  Allow  me  then  to  confine  myself  to  matters
within  my  own  personal  knowledge,  and  to  make  one  last  experiment.

"  To  whom  does  this  hair  belong  ?  "

"  To  a  young  man."

"  Who  may  that  be  ?"

"  Your  son."

"What  age?"

"  Three  years  less  than  you  allow  him  to  he."
"True. What  is  he  suff"ering  from  '!  He  is  ill."

' '  Yes.  He  suffers  much  pain  in  the  right  side.  But  wait.  You  have
just  touched  these  hairs,  and  I  have  made  a  confusion  in  the  fluids.  It's
you  who  are  suffering  in  the  right  side,  and  at  this  very  moment."

"That's  quite  true  ;  but  how  about  my  son  ?  "

"  Your  son  ? He  has  nothing  the  matter  with  him."

"Yes,  he  has.  Try  again;  there's  something  wrong  with  him.  Don't
you  see  anything  ?  "

Alexis  feels  hiuiself  all  over,  moving  his  hand  over  his  legs,  stomach,
heart,  chest,  and  head,  but  perceives  nothing.

"  Try  again."

"Ah!  I've  got  it.  But  do  you  mean  to  say  you  worry  about  that?
About  this  faint  little  speck  that  I  can  just  see  on  the  right  extremity  of  the
right  eye  ?  You  think  that  it's  the  beginning  of  amaurosis,  and  he  is  miserable
about  it. It's  true  the  doctors . . but  make  your  mind  quite  easy.


Alfred  R,  Wallace.


tSupplement.


Don't  do  anything.  Your  son,  I  tell  you,  is  in  perfect  health.  He's  now
.sixteen  years  and  three  months  old  ;  at  eighteen  it  will  have  disappeared."

"It's  astounding,"  exclaims  R.  Houdin.  "  That's  enough.  Let  us  go
away. Wake  him  up."

Marcillet  breathes  upon  the  somnambulist's  face,  the  nervous  symptoms
which  accompanied  the  entrancement  reappear,  but  in  reversed  order,  the
vital  functions  gradually  resume  their  ordinary  course,  and  finally  the
medium  returns  completely  to  his  ordinary  every-day  existence.

The  two  investigators  withdrew  in  silent  astimishment,  and  on  reaching
the  street,  I  said  : —

"  Well,  what  about  jugglery  ?  "

"  Monsieur,  if  the  world  contained  a  jiiApjler  capable  of  performing  such
miracles,  he  would,  qua  j}i,g(jler,  astound  me  a  thousand  times  more  than  the
mysterious  cujent  ivhom  you  have  just  shoiim  me."

"  If  you  like  I  will  take  you  straight  away  to  see  ten  others,  and  you  will
witness  more  or  less  tlie  same  phenomena."

"  I  assure  you  that  there  is  no  necessity."

"  I  can  rely  then  on  your  keeping  your  promise."

"I  am  a  man  of  my  word,  Monsieur,  and  no  base  promptings  of  self-
interest  or  of  vanity  will  have  any  effect  ou  me."

"  Quite  so,  and  the  moment  I  saw  you  I  never  doubted  your  good  faith.
But  explain  to  me  then  why  you  smiled  wiien  the  cards  ivere  cut  before  the
first  hand  of  ecarte."

"  I  merely  thought  I  noticed  a  coincidence  between  the  cards  cut  and  the
number  of  cards  required."

"  But  I  always  hear  it  said  that  your  games  of  ecarte  and  those  of  Alexis
are  as  like  as  two  peas."

"Ah  !  Monsieur,  that  may  seem  so  to  a  man  of  no  experience  in  these
matters,  to  the  ordinary  person,  (though  even  then  such  a  mistake  is  hardly
admissible),  but  to  the  expert ! — Just  consider.  Monsieur,  that  all  my  cards
are  faked,  marked,  often  of  unequal  sizes,  or  at  least  artistically  arranged.
Again,  I  have  my  signals  and  telegraphs.  But  in  this  case  a  fresh  pack  was
used,  which  I  had  just  taken  out  of  its  wrapper,  and  which  the  somnambu-
list cannot  have  studied.  There  is  another  point,  where  deception  is
impossible,  namely,  in  the  handling  of  the  cards  :  in  the  one  case,  the  entire
artlessness  of  the  performance,  in  the  other,  that  tell-tale  air  of  efl^ort  which
nothing  can  entirely  disguise.  Add  to  that  his  total  blindness,  for  need  I
insist  on  the  impossibility — the  absolute  impossibility — of  his  having  seen.
Besides,  even  supposing  he  cordd  see,  how  can  we  account  for  the  other
phenomena?  With  regard  to  my  own  'second-sight'  performances,  without
being  able  to  divulge  my  secret  to  you  now,  bear  in  mind  what  I  am  careful
to  tell  you  every  evening,  that  I  only  promise  a  second  sight  !  consequently
in  my  case  a  first  sight  is  indispensable."

The  following  day  R.  Houdin  gave  me  the  following  signed  statement : —

"  While  I  am  by  no  means  inclined  to  accept  the  compliments  which

M is  kind  enough  to  pay  me,  and  while  I  am  particularly  anxious

that  my  signature  should  not  be  held  to  prejudice  in  any  way  my  opinion,
either  for  or  against  magnetism,  still  I  cannot  refrain  from  affirming  that  the
incidents  recorded  above  are  ABSOLUTELY  CORRECT,  and  that  the  more


Part  XXXV,] De  Mirville  on  Houdin  and  Alexis.


381


I  think  about  them  the  more  impossible  I  find  it  to  class  them  with  those  which
form  the  subject  of  my  professioti  and  of  my  performances.

"May  4th,  1847."  "  Robert  Houdin."

A  fortnight  later,  I  received  another  letter,  ais  follows  : —
"  Monsieur, — As  I  informed  you,  I  was  anxious  to  have  a  second  sitting.
This  sitting,  which  was  held  at  Marcillet's  house  yesterday,  proved  even
more  extraordinary  than  the  first,  and  has  left  me  without  a  shadow  of  doubt
as  to  the  clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  I  went  to  this  seance  fully  determined  to
keep  a  careful  watch  on  the  game  of  ecarte,  which  had  astounded  me  so
much  before.  This  time  I  took  much  greater  precautions  than  at  the  first
seance  ;  for  distrusting  myself  I  took  with  me  a  friend,  whose  natural
imperturbability  enabled  him  to  form  a  cool  judgment  and  helped  to  steady
mine.  I  append  an  account  of  what  took  place,  and  you  will  see  that
trickery  could  never  have  produced  such  results  as  those  which  I  am  about
to  recount.  I  undo  a  pack  of  cards,  which  I  had  brought  with  me  in  a
marked  wrapper  to  guard  against  another  pack  being  substituted  for  it.  I
■shufBo,  and  it's  my  deal.  I  deal  with  every  precaution  known  to  a  man  well
up  in  all  the  dodges  of  his  profession.  It's  all  of  no  use,  Alexis  stops  me,
and  pointing  to  one  of  the  cards  that  I  had  just  placed  in  front  of  him  on  the
table,  says  :

"  'I've  got  the  king.'

"'But  you  can't  possibly  know  yet;  the  trump  card  has  not  been
turned  up.'

"  'You'll  see,'  he  replies. 'Go  on.'

"As  a  matter  of  fact  I  turn  up  the  eight  of  Diamonds,  and  his  was  the
Xing  of  Diamonds.  The  game  was  continued  in  an  odd  enough  mamier,  for  he
told  me  the  cards  that  I  had  to  play,  though  my  cards  were  hidden  under  the
table  and  held  close  together  in  my  hands.  To  each  lead  of  mine  he  played
one  of  his  own  cards  without  turning  it  up,  and  it  was  always  the  right  card
to  have  played  against  mine.  I  left  this  seance  then  in  the  gi'eatest  possible
state  of  amazenaent,  and  convinced  of  the  utter  impossibility  of  chance  or
conjuring  having  been  responsible  for  such  marvellous  results. — Yours,  etc.,

"(Signed)  Robert  Ho ddin."

"16  May,  1847."


382


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Supplement.


VI.
REVIEWS.

"Some  Pecnliarities  of  the  Secondary  Personality." Professor  G.  T.  W.
PATiiiCK,  University  of  Iowa. {Tlie  Psychuloijical  Revien\  Nov.  1898.)

This  article  by  Professor  Patrick,  which  is  to  some  extent  a
Review  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-phenomena,
(S.P.R.  Pruceediivjs,  Part  XXXIII.),  although  not  throwing  much  new
light  on  the  problems  at  issue,  is,  nevertheless,  a  very  welcome  utterance.
For  wo  have  here,  in  one  of  the  foremost  psychological  journals  of  the
United  States,  a  strong  appeal  to  experimental  psychologists  to  occupy
themselves  with  the  phenomena  of  automatism.  The  fact  is,  as  Professor
Patrick  delicately  hints,  that  there  are  a  great  many  experimental  psycholo-
gists in  America, — solidly  established  in  a  great  many  "  psycho-physical
laboratories," — and  that  they  are  not  all  of  them  precisely  overwhelmed
with  important  jobs  to  do.  "It  has  been  felt,"  says  Professor  Patrick,
"  that  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  exjjerimental  psychology,  this  subject  and
certain  related  ones  must  be  ignored — they  have  been  almost  uniformly
kept  out  of  American  psychological  laboratories,  where  infinite  labour  has
been  spent  upon  other  probably  less  fruitful  problems.  But  experimental
psychology  has  now  long  passed  its  probationary  period,  and  may  quite
freely  choose  its  subjects  for  research  ;  and  at  present  there  is  perhajjs  no
other  subject  promising  to  throw  more  light  upon  certain  dark  chapters  in
mental  science  than  that  of  automatism."  Some  of  my  readers  may
remember  my  often  expressed  hope  that  the  generation  of  young  American
savants,  whom  psychology  attracts,  would  some  day  let  some  of  those
"probably  less  fruitful  problems"  wait  a  little,  and  make  a  methodical
attack  upon  tlie  problems  which  a  very  few  very  busy  persons  have  been
gradually  eliciting  out  of  the  mixedness  of  things  for  organised  Science  to
deal  with  as  best  she  may.  That  is  what  we  pioneers  desire  ;  — the  repetition
of  our  experiments,  the  discussion  of  our  provisional  conclusions,  with
diligence  and  competence  ; — no  matter  how  much  or  how  little  credit  may
be  allowed  to  our  own  work.  What  we  do  not  want,  on  the  other  hand  (to
speak  at  least  for  myself),  is  the  liasty  adherence,  the  facile  eulogy  which,
indolently  assuming  that  all  we  have  even  conjectured  is  positive  truth,  uses
our  Proceedings  as  a  foundation  for  all  kinds  of  whimsical  speculations,
without  a  jjarticle  of  fresh  work  or  fresh  experiment  to  support  them.  For
heaven's  sake,  I  would  say,  do  not  accept  our  conclusions  too  easily  ;  revise
our  methods  and  imj^rove  them  if  you  can  ;  re-travel  again  and  again  the
early  stages  of  our  road  !  All  this  is  needful,  if  a  number  of  able  young  men
(in  whoni  is  our  hope  !)  are  to  feel  that  the  subject  is,  indeed,  their  oxon  ; — a.
subject  whicli  they  have  pursued  from  its  beginning,  and  in  which  they
mean  to  make  their  mark.


Part  XXXV.]


Review.


383


Just  of  the  required  type,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  this  paper  of  Professor
Patrick's.  He  is  not,  of  course,  convinced  of  the  agency  of  spirits  of  the
dead  (and  I  for  one  desire  no  easy  convictions  !)  ;  but  he  puts  the  questions
which  suggest  themselves  to  all  of  us  in  a  clear  way,  and  he  has  himself
made  experiments  of  a  kind  to  us  familiar,  in  automatic  writing.  I  quote
his  concluding  passage,  which  may  serve  as  the  text  for  some  brief
comment  : —

"As  regards  the  various  traits  of  the  secondary  personality,  some  of
which  have  been  referred  to  in  this  paper,  it  has  been  sugge.sted  by  Mr.
Podmore  and  others  that  they  are  instances  of  survival  or  reversion.  One
cannot  indeed  fail  to  be  impressed  by  the  similarity  of  these  traits  to  what
we  know  or  conjecture  about  the  primitive  mind.  The  general  low  moral
and  intellectual  tone  of  the  communications,  the  vulgarity  and  mild  profanity,
the  frequent  imjjersonation  of  the  medicine-man,  Quaker  doctor,  Indian
doctor,  etc.,  the  keen  memory  and  dull  reason,  the  vivid  constructive
imagination,  the  deception  and  prevarication,  the  unwavering  belief  in
spiritism,  and  the  superstitious  devotion  to  amulets,  trinkets,  and  petty
articles  of  ornament  or  apparel,  all  point  to  an  early  stage  in  the  evolution
of  mind.  Even  the  peculiar  intuitive  j^ower  sometimes  exhibited  by  the
secondary  personality  may  be  compared  to  the  superior  intuitiim  of  woman,
whose  mental  peculiarities  are  in  general  representative  of  the  more  stable,
basal  and  abiding  phenomena  of  mind.  Both  may  point  to  some  nearly  extinct
faculty  no  longer  serviceable.  Still  other  peculiarities  suggest  the  same
theory,  such  as  the  extreme  suggestibility  and  motor  force  of  ideas,  marks  of
automatism  and  of  the  hypnotic  state,  and  at  the  same  time  characteristic  of
the  child  and  savage  mind.  In  close  relation  to  this  is  the  peculiar  intimate
connection  between  ideas  and  organic,  nutritive  and  circulatory  processes,
best  shown  in  hypnosis,  and  common  to  this  group  of  phenomena.  In  view
of  such  facts  as  these,  certain  of  the  more  simple  physiological  theories  of
double  personality  gain  considerable  plausibility,  such,  for  instance,  as  the
revival  of  disused  and  outgrowai  brain  tracts,  particularly  perhaps  those  of
the  less  specialised  hemisphere.  The  frequent  apj^earance  in  automatic
writing  of  Spiegehchrift,  which  occurs  also  among  children,  lends  some
support  to  this  view."

I  will  endeavour  to  disentangle  fi'om  this  resume  some  elements,  as  it
seems  to  me,  both  of  truth  and  of  error  : —

(1)  "General  low  moral  and  intellectual  tone."  I  think  that  this  very
frequent  criticism  of  automatic  utterances  depends  largely  on  a  misapprehen-
sion, which  mistakes  batfled  effort  and  incoherence  for  lowntss  or  savagery.
The  so-called  Phinuit,  for  instance,  who  has  been  much  attacked  on  this  line,
did  undoubtedly  fish  for  information  and  pretend  to  possess  information,,
(though  how  far  with  definite  intent  to  deceive,  I  cannot  say),  and  did
undoubtedly  talk  in  the  slangy,  tiresome  style  of  a  man  who  has  a  very
poor  vocabulary  at  his  disposal.  But  so  far  as  I  heard  him,  or  heard  of
him,  he  was  neither  inunoral  nor  stupid.  On  the  contrary,  he  gave  much
advice  on  private  and  delicate  matters  ;  and  that  advice,  so  far  as  I  heard
it,  was  always  both  shrewd  and  kindly.  I  feel  bound  to  say  this  :  since
from  having  often  acted  as  amanuensis  in  Phinuit's  days,  I  have  heard  many
criticisms  and  admonitions  of  his,  which  naturally  did  not  appear  in  printed


384


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


reports.  Professor  W.  James  and  Professor  Lodge,  who  also  heard  much
of  this  intimate  talk  of  Phinuit's,  will,  I  think,  agree  in  this  view.

(2)  The  "mild  profanity"  of  which  Professor  Patrick  speaks  is,
in  my  experience,  so  mild  that  I  confess  that  it  has  never  succeeded  in
shocking  me.  The  pencil,  or  planchette,  will  sometimes,  as  though  in
fatigued  impatience,  write  devil,  devil— ]\x&t  as  it  will  write  no,  no,  or
yes,  yes,  or  Mary,  Mary.  This  means,  I  think,  a  mere  inability  to  use
the  instrument  (whatever  the  real  instrument  may  be  !)  in  any  but  rudi-
mentary fashion.  But  if  the  word  devil  is  received  by  bystanders  as
mysterious  and  interesting,  the  incoherent  intelligence  (whatever  the
real  incoherent  intelligence  may  be  !)  may  even  pluck  w\)  spirit  to  add

the  word  d  h. Ignore the  rubbish  and  it  ceases  to  appear.  But,

indeed,  in  my  view,  the  sources  of  automatic  writings  (confining  ourselves
to  cases  of  genuine  automatism)  are  far  from  being  one.  They  may,  e.g.,
originate  in  the  subliminal  self  of  the  medium,  or  in  the  minds  of  still
embodied  other  human  beings  present  or  absent,  acting  telepathically  on  the
subliminal  self  of  the  medium,  or  from  spirits,  and  there  may  be,  and,
in  my  opinion,  in  most  cases  usually  is,  an  admixture  of  these  various
influences.

(.3)  "The  unwavering  belief  in  spiritism."  Are  we  not  in  some  danger
of  question  begging  if  we  treat  this  belief  as  an  indication  of  reversion  to
sivage  conceptions,  when  the  actual  problem  is  really  whether  that  belief  be
true  or  no  ?

(4)  "Superstitions,  devotion  to  amulets,"  etc.  I  have  nothing  to  say  for
amulets ! — but  I  think  that  what  Professor  Patrick  really  alludes  to  here  is
Phinuit's  custom  of  asking  for  "hair  cut  close  to  the  head,  or  old  hat-linings,"
as  a  way  of  getting  "  into  the  atmosphere"  of  the  former  wearers  of  hat  or
hair.  Now,  one  might  well  wish  to  be  sunnnoned  from  the  realms  of  day  by
some  appeal  more  attractive  tlian  the  posthumous  traces  of  one's  having
worn  a  particular  cricket-cap  on  a  hot  afternoon.  But  if  tlie  immaterial  and
the  material  worlds  are  really  continuous,  it  is  conceivable  that  what  has  been
closest  to  the  living  brain  may  retain  the  most  perceptible  earthly  indication
of  that  special  personality.  We  are  dealing  here  with  an  empirical  suggestion
rather  than  with  a  traditional  superstition.

(5)  "  In  peculiar  intuitive  power,"  etc.  This  sentence  seems  to  be  a
mere  play  on  the  word  intuitive.  A  woman,  say,  with  delicate  half-conscious
observation,  and  without  formal  reasoning,  might  have  discovered  (although
Emma  did  not)  that  Frank  Churchill  was  somehow  secretly  linked  with  Jane
Fairfax.  This  W(juld  be  called  feminine  intuition  ;  but  such  a  guess  is
absolutely  different  from  the  bits  of  knowledge  wliich  really  need  explaining
in  these  trance  utterances  ; — the  uttei'ance,  say,  of  the  names  of  dead
strangers,  to  which  nothing  has  led  up.  A  woman  is  no  better  able  than  a
man  to  tell  you  straight  out  the  Christian  name  of  your  grandfather.  There
is  nothing  "  stable,  basal,  and  abiding  "  about  such  intuitions  as  that.

(6)  And  here  I  may  touch  on  the  general  question  as  to  whether  these
■supernormal  powers, — telepathy  and  tehesthesia, — are  instances  of  "survival
or  reversion  "  ; — reversion  to  primitive  ancestors,  survival  of  "  some  nearly
■extinct  faculty  no  longer  serviceable."  T  cannot  understand  the  view  of
protoplasmic  evolution  here  implied. Protoplasm  (as  the  text-books  tell  us)


Part  XXXV.]


Review.


385


from  its  primary  inexplicable  irritability  gradually  develops  specific  sensibili-
ties, in  response  to  specific  stimuli,  and  by  tlie  survival  of  individuals  best
fitted  to  secure  food  and  to  escape  enemies.  Thus  faculty  rises  from  touch
and  smell,  which  act  near  at  hand,  to  sight,  which  acts  at  great  distances.
At  what  point  would  the  struggle  for  existence  develop,  say,  the  power  of
symbolically  cognising  the  death  of  a  kindred  individual  beyond  the  range
of  sight  ?  Such  a  faculty  would  be  profoundly  indifferent  to  a  hedgehog  or
;i  crab.  How  could  a  savage  acquire  it  ?  and  of  wlrat  use  would  it  be  to
him  I  I  am  not  aware  that,  except  by  a  few  Psychical  Researchers,  the  gift
is  particularly  valued  even  now.

Of  course  this  line  of  argument  takes  us  further  still.  I  frankly  find  it
inconceivable  that  at  any  period  of  man's  history,  this  faculty  of  far-feeling,
this  cognisance  of  distant  minds,  should  have  been  developed  by  the  actual
need  and  stress  of  earthly  existence.  I  can  imagine  no  gift  wliich,  for  the
ordinary  purposes  of  living  and  propagating,  would  be  either  more  unpractical
•or  more  unattainable.  "Conscience,"  says  Huck  Finn,  "takes  up  more
room  than  all  the  rest  of  a  person's  insides,  and  yet  ain't  no  good,  nohow."
If  the  moral  sense  acquired  by  our  race  after  long  and  painful  tribal  training,
thus  often  appears  worse  than  useless  to  its  possessor,  what  should  we  say  of
the  policy  of  acquiring  a  faculty  incomparably  more  elaborate  and  expensive
than  sight  itself,  whose  upshot  is  to  give  its  owner  an  occasional  peep  at
a  ghost  ?  The  case  might  be  changed,  could  we  show  that  savage  races
habitually  acted  with  adoantage  on  messages  given  through  medicine  men.
I  doubt,  however,  whether  those  messages  are  more  often  of  -practical  use  to
them  tlian  trance  utterances  are  to  us.

But,  in  truth,  to  a  deeper  gaze,  the  problem  of  telepathy  shows  itself  as
something  quite  apart  from  questions  of  earthly  use  or  advantage.  Telepathy,
in  my  own  view,  involves  an  opening  out  of  inner  vision,  bearing  a  relation
diflferent  from  that  borne  by  any  human  sense,  certainly  to  space,  and  perhaps
to  time.  It  involves  a  commnnicatio  idiomatum,  —  a  contact  and  converse  of
minds  as  minds,  different  altogether  from  any  known  contact  or  converse  of
organisms.  It  belongs  primarily,— as  I  needs  mu.st  think, — to  an  environ-
ment quite  other  than  that  we  know.  It  may  be  a  vestige,  a  survival  ;  but,
if  so,  it  is  the  vestige  of  prenatal  faculty,  the  survival  of  something  which
existed  in  the  universe  bef<jre  the  individualisation  of  incarnate  man.

(7)  And  now  a  few  concluding  words  as  to  the  possible  preferential  use
of  the  right  cerebral  hemisphere  in  automatic  messages.  This  suggestion
was,  I  believe,  iirst  made  by  our  valued  correspondent,  the  late  Rev.  P.  H.
Newnham,  who  was  struck  with  peculiarities,  very  unlike  his  wife's
character,  in  certain  messages  which  both  he  and  Mrs.  Newnham  believed
to  proceed  ultimately  from  some  stratum  of  her  mind.  I  developed  this
hypothesis  in  a  long  paper  in  Pruceediiujs,  Vol.  III.,  p.  1  (January,  1885),
dwelling  especially  on  the  rather  frequent  occurrence  of  min-or-writiny
(Spiegelschrift)  in  automatic  script,  as  a  clear  indication  of  dextro-cerebral
preponderance  where  it  occurred.  The  suggestion  was  coldly  received  at  the
time,  but  in  some  recent  papers  in  Brain  and  elsewhere  1  observe  that
the  idea  of  an  oscillation  between  the  two  hemispheres,  as  regards  pre-
ponderance in  verbalisation,  is  again  renewed.  And  to  me  it  seems  that
many  automatic  messages  received  since  I  first  wrote — and  those  of  Mrs.


386


E.  W.  Taylor.


[Supplement.


Piper's  especially — do  increasingly  suggest  a  difficult  or  makeslujt  usage  of  a
human  brain.  The  brain  may  conceivably  be  thus  used  in  a  makeshift
way  either  by  a  subliminal  stream  of  consciousness  or  by  an  external
intelligence.  On  the  assumption  that  there  is  an  invading  intelli-
gence, that  intelligence  (as  Dr.  Hodgson  somewhere  says)  is  employing
a  kind  of  imperfect  typewriter  ; — which,  one  may  add,  is  also  an  erratic
calculating  machine — you  drop  your  thoughts  into  it,  and  some  of  them
come  out  somehow.  But  the  machine  has  holes  in  it ; — places  where  the
thoughts  which  the  spirit  puts  in  drop  through  ineflfectively  ; — and  it  has  also
strains  or  cramps  in  it  ; — places  where  it  has  got  set  or  stuck  in  a  way  which
the  spirit  cannot  alter.  This  last  fact  resembles  the  well-known  difficulty  in
the  way  of  making  therapeutic  suggestions  to  a  hysteric.  She  has  already
given  Jierself  such  strong  suggestions  on  certain  points  that  no  counter-
suggestions  of  ours  can  shake  her.

Now,  I  tliink  it  possible  that  our  left  hemispheres,  having  been  more
constantly  used  than  our  right  hemispheres,  may  be  more  crowded  and
blocked  (so  to  say)  with  our  own  already  fixed  ideas.  An  external
intelligence,  wishing  to  use  my  brain,  might  find  it  convenient  to  leave
alone  those  more  educated  but  also  more  preoccupied  tracts,  and  to  use  the
less  elaborated,  but  less  engrossed,  mechanism  of  my  right  hemisphere.

If  this  be  thus,  we  should  have  here  a  striking  instance  of  light  thrown
u[ion  our  own  being  by  the  procedure  of  beings  almost  incredibly  remote.  Bub
this  would  not  surprise  me.  As  I  have  elsewhere  remarked,  such  an  incident
would  resemble  the  light  thrown  upon  the  elements  which  constitute  our
familiar  earth  by  spectroscopic  analysis  of  the  radiance  of  distant  suns.  It
would  be  another  step  in  the  reconstruction  of  what  once  seemed  so
solid  and  self-contained — what  now  seems  so  diffused  and  unseizable — the
personality  of  man.

"  Hampty  Dumpty  " — the  Self,  totus  teres  atipie  rotimdas — "sat  on  the
wall"  of  tlie  old  psychology.  "  Humpty  Dumpty  has  had  a  great  fall."
"Not  all  the  King's  horses  nor  all  the  King's  men" — nay,  not  the  allied
battalions  of  the  Great  Republic — "can  sec  Humpty  Dumpty  up  again."
Yet  they  may  find,  perhaps,  that  only  his  shell  is  broken,  and  that  some-
thing has  somehow  hatched  out  of  him  which,  instead  of  sitting  on  his  wall,
will  lly  over  it.  .  ^_  jj_


The  Psychology  of  Siiggestio'}i,:  A  Research  vnto  tlie  Snbconscious  Nature  of  Maih
and  Society.  By  Boms  Sidi.s,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Associate  in  Psychology
at  the  Pathological  Institute  of  the  New  York  State  Hospitals.  With
an  introduction  by  Pkofessor  William  James,  of  Harvard  University,
pp.  X.  +386. New  York  :  D.  Appleton  and  Co.,  1898.

The  book  before  us  is  a  type  of  work  which  should  be  encouraged.  It  is
an  attempt  to  establish  on  a  basis  of  observation  and  experiment  facts  which
have  too  long  suflered  from  the  failure  to  apply  to  them  exact  methods.
The  general  subject  of  subconsciousness,  with  which  the  author  deals,  is
naturally  elusive,  and  capable  of  varied  interpretations.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  it  demands  our  most  unprejudiced  and  exacting  research,  in  the


Part  XXXV.]


Revieiv.


387


light  of  recent  advances  in  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  nervous
system.  This  is  Sidis's  attitude  tovvards  the  proble.u  he  has  undertaken  to
solve  ;  he  is  critical  throughout  his  discussion,  excepting  wliere  demands  for
explanation  of  psj'chical  facts  lead  him  too  definitely  to  the  assumption
of  underlying  physical  causes,  as,  for  example,  in  his  free  adoption  of  the
retraction  theory.

The  book  is  divided  into  three  parts  :  Suggestibility  ;  the  Self  ;  Society.
Each  of  these  demands  consideration.

After  a  brief  discussion  of  the  careless  way  in  which  the  term  "sug-
gestion "  has  come  to  be  used,  Sidis  commits  himself  to  the  following
•definition  (page  15)  :  "  By  suggestion  is  meant  the  intrusion  into  the  mind
■<jf  an  idea  ;  met  with  more  or  less  opposition  by  the  person  ;  accepted
unci'itically  at  last  ;  and  realised  unretlectively,  almost  automatically."  It
is  evident  that  this  definition  will  not  pass  wholly  unchallenged.  The  fact
of  opposition  is  certainly  not  essential  to  suggestion  ;  not  infrequently  the
most  powerful  suggestion  is  that  which  is  accepted  uncritically  at  first,  and
to  which  not  the  slightest  opposition  is  made.

An  interesting  series  of  experiments  into  the  evidence  of  normal  sug-
gestibility is  given,  from  which  the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  normal
suggestibility  exists  as  an  undoubted  fact,  and  that  "ilfa/t  is  a  suggestible
animal,  par  excellence."  Following  this  is  a  critical  analysis  of  both  normal
and  abnormal  suggestibility,  with  a  discussion  of  the  hypnotic  state,  and
illustrative  cases,  all  of  which  constitutes  an  excellent,  brief  presentation
of  matters  of  vital  concern  both  to  the  neurologist  and  psychologist.  The
result  of  the  analysis  is  that  "suggestibility  is  a  disaggregation  of  con-
sciousness," in  which  the  subconscious  self  enters  into  direct  communication
with  the  external  world,  hence  the  general  law  : — "  Sn.ggestibility  varies  as  the
amount  of  disaggregation,  and  inversely  as  the  unificalion  of  consciousness."

The  next  section  of  the  book  is  concerned  with  the  "Self."  The
argument  already  begun  is  carried  to  its  conclusion,  and  the  "subconscious  "
is  given  a  place  of  dignity  in  the  realm  of  mind  as  a  consciousness  of  relative
independence  ;  "  it  is  a  secondary  consciousness,  a  secondary  self."  This
conception  Sidis  reaches  not  by  d  priori  metliods,  but  by  experiment  with
numerous  subjects  both  in  and  out  of  the  hypnotic  state.  He  places  his  two
personalities,  as  it  were,  side  by  side,  and  studies  their  character,  their
methods  of  inter-communication,  and  their  general  inter-relations.  This  is
extremely  well  d(jne,  and  while  constantly  feeling  that  the  problems  are
being  stated  in  too  diagrammatic  a  way,  the  reader  cannot  fail  to  see  the
force  of  the  argument,  and  the  suggestiveness  of  its  treatment.  "The
Problem  of  Pei'sonality  "  is  the  title  of  a  chapter  which  is  largely  taken  up
with  an  adverse  criticism  of  Professor  James's  theory  of  personality,  and  is  of
interest  to  those  whose  concern  is  with  the  more  metaphysical  side  of  the
question.  We  cannot  pass  over  the  chapter  on  "The  Piiysiology  and
Pathology  of  Sub-conciousness,"  without  a  word  of  comment.  Sidis  here
sketches  very  briefly  the  new  anatomical  theory  of  the  nervous  system,  and
commits  himself  unhesitatingly  to  the  so-called  retraction  theory.  This
chapter  is  superficial  and  dogmatic,  and  brings  no  adequate  evidence  in
support  of  its  position.  A  postulate  so  vague  and  so  incapable  of  demonstra-
tion as  the  retraction  of  neuron  terminations  should  certainly  be  approached


388


E.  W.  Taylor.


[Supplement.


tentatively  and  not  dogmatically.  Such  allegiance  to  an  unproved,  and  to
many  minds  fanciful  theory,  is  not  in  accord  with  the  spirit  of  scientific
exactness,  and  repels  the  unprejudiced  reader.

The  author  is  on  much  safer  ground  when  he  discusses  in  the  following
chapter  the  case  of  a  Rev.  Thomas  C.  Hanna,  in  whom  a  complete  amnesia
followed  an  accident.  The  history  of  this  case  is  worked  out  in  admirable
detail,  though  given  merely  in  outline.  By  means  of  a  method  which  the
writer  calls  "  hypnoidization,"  he  was  able  to  prove  that  the  patient  had  all
his  lost  memories  stored  in  his  subconscious  mind,  which  could  temporarily
be  brought  to  the  surface  of  consciousness.  By  degrees  the  two  personalities,
which  had  developed  since  the  accident,  were  fused  into  one,  and  the  patient
completely  cured.  This  case  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  valuable
contributions  which  tlie  book  contains.  Its  practical  bearing  needs
only  to  be  mentioned  to  be  racognised.  Much  more  regarding  the  sub-
conscious self  is  of  great  interest,  as,  for  example,  its  characteristics,  as
distinguished  from  the  waking  self,  and  its  relations  to  insanity.  These  are,,
however,  matters  for  which  we  must  refer  the  interested  reader  to  the  text
for  furtlier  detail.

The  volume  concludes  with  a  section  on  Society,"  in  reference  par-
ticularly to  social  suggestibility.  This  is  by  all  means  the  most  entertaining
part  of  the  entire  book,  and  is  most  cordially  to  be  recommended  to  the
student  of  social  movements.  The  psychology  of  the  mob  and  the  crowd,
and  mental  epidemics,  are  described  in  a  highly  original  and  graphic
manner.  Some  of  the  author's  statements  are  extreme,  and  must  be  con-
demned by  a  sober  judgment,  as,  for  example,  (page  362):  "American
society  oscillates  between  acute  financial  mania  and  attacks  of  religious
insanity";  or  (page  363),  "Woman  cannot  leave  long  the  routine  of  her
life,  the  beaten  track  of  mediocrity  ;  she  can  rarely  rise  above  the  trite  ;
she  is  a  Philistine  by  nature."  These  and  many  other  statements  are  un-
necessarily sweeping,  but  tlie  faults  of  these  chapters  are  so  inherently  a
part  of  their  excellence  that  we  refrain  from  further  criticism.  Were  Sidis
not  an  extremist  the  chapters  might  better  have  been  left  unwritten.  As  it
is,  they  are  full  of  suggestiveness  and  undoubted  truth,  in  spite  of  the
occasional  extravagance  of  expression.

In  general,  we  have  no  doubt  the  book  will  fill  a  place  and  supply  a
want.  It  has  in  a  rare  degree  tlie  qualities  of  originality  and  forcible
expression,  tempered  by  a  guarded  scientific  spirit,  except  in  a  certain
tendency  toward  a  too  free  acceptance  of  unproved  theories  of  physiological
nervous  action.  The  author  has  done  a  good  service,  however,  in  stating
clearly  a  doctrine  of  consciousness,  and  substantiating  his  claims  by  an
appeal  to  experiment,  which  is  likely  to  throw  liglit  on  various  morbid
mental  states,  notably  hysteria,  and  so  indirectly  on  the  nature  of  mind
itself.

An  introduction  by  Professor  William  James  adds  to  the  interest  of  the
book.  It  is  noticeable  that  James  is  careful  to  avoid  committing  himself  to
Sidis's  views,  while  clearly  recognising  the  intrinsic  merit  of  his  work.

The  typography  and  general  appearance  of  the  book  are  excellent.  It  is
embellished  by  a  few  illustrations  and  charts,  which  tend  to  make  clear  the
text,  and  has  a  good  index.  ^  Taylor


Part  XXXV  ]


Revietv.


Naturioissensclutftlkhe  ScelcitfurncJuirKf.  I.  Das  Verundcrungsgesetz.  Von
Rudolf  Muller. Leipzig. [1897.] pp.  VIII.,  168.

Das  Hypnotische  Ilelheh.  ExjKriment  im  Diensfe  der  Natiirivissenschafflicheii,
SeelenforscJiung.  Band  II.  Das  Nonnale  Beii'usstsein.  Von  Rudolf
MtiLLER. Leipzig. [1898.] pp.  173-322.

In  this  first  instalment  of  his  planned  work  the  author  seeks  to  sketeli
the  foundations  of  a  scientific  method  of  the  investigation  of  mind,  and  of
the  points  of  view  from  which  it  proceeds.  (Vorrede  VII.)  The  small  pro-
gress of  psychology  Ijeyond  description  to  the  real  end  of  a  .science  in
explanation  is  ascribed,  in  spite  of  the  late  great  activity  in  psychological
.•jtudy  and  laboratories,  to  the  want  of  courage  in  breaking  from  old
prejudices  and  speculative  theories.  (V.  and  VI.)  As  against  this  the-
author's  method  needs  no  hypothetical  presuppositions,  and  will  give  to
psychological  phenomena  a  real  explanation  in  liaiiuony  with  the  other
results  of  exact  investigation.  (VII.)

The  special  interest  of  the  book  for  our  Society  lies  in  the  importance
the  author  attaches  to  hypnotism  and  telepathy  as  p.sychological  methods  of
investigation.  "Even  more  than  the  successes  of  objective  science,  the
hypnotic  and  occult  phenomena  have  lately  called  forth  a  mental  movement
embracing  ever  wider  circles,  and  which  seeks  to  solve  the  riddle  of  the-
mind  by  an  experimental  investigation  of  these  phenomena.  Several
learned  societies,  foremost  the  '  Society  for  Psychical  Research  '  in  London
and  the  '  American  Psychical  Research  '  in  Boston,  and  numerous  clubs  of
all  civilised  lands,  are  concerned  with  this  kind  of  experimental  study  of
mind,  which  direction  has  already  found  numerous  zealous  literary
champions.  But  here  again  the  old  fault  has  not  been  avoided,  since  the
temptation  has  been  too  little  resisted  of  seeking  the  goal  on  the  wings  of
uncertain  speculation,  instead  of  trusting  alone  to  the  gradual  and  slow,
but  so  much  the  surer,  progress  of  experimental  study  No  wonder  that
the  official  representatives  of  psychology  do  not  follow  this  flight.  On  the
other  hand,  all  honour  is  due  to  those  few  earnest  psychological  students
who  have  the  courage  to  extend  their  investigations  to  the  hypnotic  and —
even  though  in  the  beginning  with  caution  and  sceptical  predisposition —
also  to  the  occult  phenomena,  and  to  use,  not  speculation,  but  observation
and  verification  of  facts  and  experimental  methods." (VI.  and  VII.)

Three  divisions  of  psychology  are  made  : — (1)  Psychical  physiology  ;  (2)
Psychology  in  the  narrow  sense  ;  (3)  Hypnology.  (pp.  110-118.)  It  is  the
methodology  of  hypnology  with  which  the  author  is  chiefly  concerned,  and
which  he  believes  will  be  of  such  great  service  to  p.sychology  in  the  narrow
sense.  Stimulated,  apparently,  by  the  suggestion  of  Miinsterberg,i  and  by
the  hypnotic  experimental  method  of  Dr.  O.  Vogt,-  the  author  extends  this
introspection  in  hypnotism  to  the  condition  of  clairvoyance  in  hypnotism.

1  Aufgahcn  und  Mcthodcn  der  Psiichologic,  s.  120.

^  Die  directe  Psi/chologifchc  Expcrimcntal-methodc  in  Hypnotischen  Bcivusstscinszu-
ttdnden,  Leipzig,  1897  ;  abstract  in  Proceedings  of  the  Dritter  Internattonolcr  Con-
gress fiir  Psyckologie  in  Miinchen,  s.  250-259.


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


But  under  clairvoyance  seems  to  be  included  also  thought-transference
(|jp.  152-3).  The  knowledge  so  rejiorted  is  not  to  be  taken  with
uncritical  belief,  but  is  to  be  proved  and  verified  by  the  usual  objective
methods  (pp.  156-7)-  Thus  three  methods  of  liypnotic  clairvoyant
introspection  are  made  : — (1)  Introspecting  self-observation  ;  (2)  Intro-
spection of  some  third  person  put  into  rapport  by  the  hypnotiser  ;  (3)
Introspection  of  the  hypnotiser.  These  three  simple  methods  are  also  to  be
used  in  combination  (pp.  158—163.)  The  author  has  used  these  methods
some  years  (p.  154),  and  reserves  for  his  second  volume  of  this  work  a
detailed  account  of  his  clairvoyant  experi)nents  in  hypnotism  and  their
foundation  principles  (pp.  139  and  158).

Yet  from  this  introductory  volume  one  has  some  glimpses  of  the
author's  <nvn  results  and  his  real  methods  as  compared  with  the  above
excellent  plan.  For  "the  fact  of  the  existence  of  a  subject,  which  is
denied  by  pure  psychology,  the  Nahirivissenschaftliche  Seelenfomchmuj  will
undertake  to  prove"  (p.  14). Then  specially,  "  it  is  the  truly  astonishing
tiifects  which  come  to  light  in  the  jjlienomena  of  hypnotism  and  clairvoyance
which  force  us  to  recognise  the  real  and  actual  existence  of  this  something,
called  soul,  within  the  human  organism.  .  .  .  The  psyche  is  nothing
«lse,  and  can  be  nothing  else,  than  a  force"  (p.  102).  "It  must  here  be
expressly  emphasised  that  under  the  idea  of  soul  is  not  meant  any  spiritual
substratum  of  life-  and  thought-force,  but  the  force  itself,  i.e.,  that  effective
activity,  evidencing  itself  pre-eminently  in  the  matter  of  the  nervous
substance,  which  produces  the  process  of  life  and  thought "  (pp.  102
nnd  103).  The  NutarwissenschaftUche  Seelenforschung  has  no  other  problem
than  to  investigate  the  laws  of  the  changes  effected  by  the  soul-force "
(p.  108).

Indeed,  the  discussion  about  this  mental  subject  fills  the  greater  part  of
this  present  introductory  book,  and  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  reconcile  the
author's  different  standpoints  and  reasonings.  For  though  the  study  of  the
brain  mechanism  as  making  possible  and  conditioning  the  mind  is  counted  as
one  of  the  most  important  problems  (p.  132),  and  though  hypnotic  introspec-
tion reports  "  without  brain  function,  no  consciousness  "  (pp.  154  and  156),
yet  the  aim  of  physiological  psychology  in  seeking  to  know  the  causal
connection  of  motions  in  the  nerves,  in  the  hope  of  ultimately  inferring
therefrom  the  causal  connection  of  mental  jjrocesses,  is  considered  a  dream  ;
and  were  it  even  reached,  it  "  would  neither  satisfy  our  demands  of  know-
ledge nor  afford  an  explanatiim  for  psychical  phenomena "  (p.  29  ;  see
-also  pp.  99,  112,  146-7).

The  fact  appears  to  be  that  tiie  author's  "  subject  "  has  been  anticipated
in  tliis  methodology  volume  by  being  carried  back  from  the  subsequent
inetaijhysics  to  which  he  thinks  all  science  leads.  "Force,  and  therewith
*ilso  matter,  is  physical ;  the  substratum  of  force,  the  subject  of  activity,  is
metaphysical.  .  .  .  Since  the  subject  of  activity  is  metaphysical,  so  all
branches  of  science  lead  to  a  natural  metaphysics  as  the  real  basis  of  all
natural  reality  "  (p.  52  ;  see  also  pp.  12,  33,  109,  168).  This  attitude  is
shown  in  his  vehement  protest  that  Du  Bois-Reymond  and  Helmholtz  have

1  For  a  dramatic  figure  of  the  death  of  '' psyohology  without  a  soul,"  see  p.  4.


Part  XXXV.]


Bevietv.


391


poured  out  the  child  (life-force)  with  the  bath,^  as  compared  with  his  highest
admiration  for  the  work  of  Du  Prel  (pp.  106  and  120).  However  diflferent
judgments  may  vary  as  to  the  possibility  or  value  of  real  knowledge  leading
ultimately  to  any  metaphysics,  it  is  at  any  rate  discouraging  to  find  another
author  straying  so  soon  from  his  scientific  method.^

In  the  second  instalment  of  this  work  the  experimental  results  with  a
female  clairvoyant  medium  are  given  ;  yet  only  scattered  direct  quotations
of  the  medium's  descriptions,  and  no  attempt  is  made  at  giving  a  full  record
of  even  one  sitting.  When  asked  to  look  into  her  own  or  the  hypnotiser's
brain,  the  hypnotised  medium,  who  was  ignorant  of  such  matters,  gave  the
following  characteristic  descriptions: — "There  is  so  very  much  together,
and  all  in  movement  and  alive  ;  there  and  there  and  here  something  springs
up,  in  many  places  at  once,  and  then  immediately  again  at  other  places,  and
they  are  interwoven  through  and  over  one  another, — that  is  by  no  means
easy  to  describe  !  .  .  .  .  There  are  many  and  many  little  points  like
poppies,  and  thousands  and  thousands  of  little  threads  in  which  currents  run
forwards,  backwards,  from  within  upwards  and  downwards.  This  looks
like  the  foaming  on  pouring  out  soda-water  or  beer  "  (p.  188).  The  author
wondered  if  by  these  "little  poppy  points"  was  meant  the  pyramid  and
other  nerve  cells  of  the  cortex,  and  considered  these  first  descriptions  so
correct  and  exact,  ia  spite  of  the  primitive  modes  of  expression,  that  his
beginning  doubts  gave  way  to  confidence  in  the  medium  (p.  189).  Asked
what  that  springing  up  at  so  many  places  occasioned,  she  replied  slowly,
"  That  makes  thinking,  speaking,  hearing;  for  when  I  or  you  speak  there
arise  such — how  shall  I  name  them  ?^  little  bits  of  balls  or  knots,  I  might
almost  say  bubbles,  but  very  small,  now  like  the  finest  needle  points,  some
larger,  some  smaller,  variously  formed  "  (pp.  189  and  190).  Such  popularly
vague  and  figurative  descriptions  can  be  translated  into  almost  any  technical
brain  language.

Her  scheme  for  the  optic  tract  and  chiasma  is  considered  much  more
probably  right  from  its  simplicity  and  naturalness  (pp.  209  and  210).
Sensation  is  made  out  to  be  due  to  a  double-sided  fluctuation,  resulting  in  a
tension  of  the  fibrillated  nerve  endings  (p.  234),  and  consciousness  from  the
union  in  the  cortex  of  the  biochemical  hunger  from  the  cerebellum  with  the
positive  fluctuations  from  the  sense  organs  (p.  235).  The  cerebellum  is  the
stomach  of  the  nervous  system,  in  that  it  secretes  the  nutritive  fluid  which
is  taken  into  the  nerves  through  the  fibrillated  endings,  (pp.  212,  195.)
With  her  "accustomed  precision"  (p.  221)  the  heart  is  the  seat  of  the
feelings  (p.  220),  being  dark  blue  in  bitterness  and  light  red  in  joy  (pp.  288
and  291).  Such  fantastic  anatomy  and  physiology  is  to  be  taken  as  true
because  it  is  not  self- contradictory  (p.  186).  But  in  addition  to  this
deductive  logical  test  of  metaphysics,  the  author  awaits  experimental
verification  for  the  clairvoyant  descriptions  which  he  could  not  bring  into
harmony  with  tlie  already  acquired  scientific  knowledge  (p.  286).

1  Cf.  Hermann  :  Lchrbuch  dcr  Physiologic,  Ote  Auf.  S.  4-8,  for  a  historical
sketch  of  the  final  elimination  of  "Lebenskraft  "  as  an  explanation  in  physiology.

2  As,  CO.,  in  Hudson's  Scientific  Demonstration  of  the  Future  Life,  See  Proceedings
a.P.R.,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  330.

2  D


392


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


With  the  difficulty  of  separating  the  medium's  descriptions  from  the
author's  technical  interpretation,  and  with  the  slight  evidence  for  the
existence  of  strict  clairvoyance,  anyway  as  beyond  telepathy,  these  results
can  hardly  be  considered  of  any  value.  The  value  of  the  book  is  in  its
advocacy  of  more  use  of  hypnotism  in  exf)eriniental  psychology,  and  in
many  just  criticisms  of  much  modern  psychology.  Though  the  book
is  difficult  reading  owing  to  its  metaphysical  mixture,  yet  it  is  written
for  the  laity,  and  it  is  hoped  it  will  stimulate — especially  in  the  author's
country — to  more  knowledge  and  results  in  this  important  work.

Harlow  Gale.


La  Telepatia. By  Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora. Padova,  1898,  pp.  150.

This  "summary  exposition  of  real  studies  on  the  transmission  of
thought "  is  a  collection  of  the  author's  articles  which  have  been  appearing
irregularly  in  the  Ehnsta  di  Studi  Psichici,  edited  by  himself  and  Dr.  G.
Finzi.  The  sudden  death^  of  Dr.  Ermacora  a  year  ago  has  left  these
articles  somewliat  incomplete  as  a  review  of  the  subject.  Yet  the  book  as
it  stands  is  a  most  hopeful  and  valuable  work.  It  is  hopeful  as  an  evidence
itself  of  the  progress  of  psychical  research  which  the  author  sketches  in  his
Introduction.  In  this  general  progress  it  may  be  an  encouragement  to  the
workers  in  the  S.P.R.  to  find  that  nearly  60  per  cent,  of  all  the  citations
and  references  are  from  English  sources.

The  work  deals  only  with  the  experimental  evidence  for  telepathy.  An
excellent  introduction  discusses  the  methods  and  the  cautions  against
illusion  and  fraud.  The  evidence  begins  with  the  jaroduction  of  hypnotism
at  a  distance  and  of  telepathic  percejjtion  in  hypnosis.  Before  going  on  to
the  experiments  in  the  normal  condition  there  is  an  interpolation  of  some
theoretical  considerations  on  the  various  effects  in  telej^athy.  These  are
fortunately  not  concerned  with  speculations  as  to  the  means  of  telepathic
transmission,  but  with  the  forms  in  which  the  telepathic  influence  manifests
itself  in  the  percipient.  This  analysis  and  classification  gives  the  basis  for
the  subdivisions  of  the  experimental  evidence  which  follows.  These
remaining  sections  are  : — Alterations  of  function,  percef)tion  of  ideas,
perception  through  internal  sensory  images,  hallucinations  hypnotic  and
post-hypnotic,  dreams,  waking  hallucinations  (with  subdivision  on
hallucinations  in  general),  emotions  and  alterations  of  personality,  and
motor  perceptions.  The  author  left  the  titles  only  of  two  planned  chapters
on  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  and  the  phenomenon  of  so-called  magnetic
attraction.

The  work  then,  as  a  comj)lete  review  of  the  evidence  for  telejmthy,  is
wanting  in  the  spontaneous  cases  of  veridical  hallucinations,  and  in  more
than  a  passing  notice  of  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  Strangely  enough,  too,
there  is  no  reference  to  the  mass  of  evidence  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper.

1  Noticed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  May,  181)8,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  224.  See  also  the
Riviatadi  Studi  Psichici,  Anno  IV.,  pp.  103-108,  for  his  portrait,  and  for  a  most
intercKting  sketch  of  hi.s  specialised  education  in  physics,  with  his  subsequent
attraction  and  complete  devotion  of  his  means  and  leisure  to  psychical  research.


Part  XXXV.]


Review.


393


This  oversight  can  hardly  be  intentional,  because  of  lier  phenomena  being
classed  as  "clairvoyance,"  or  because  of  their  sjjiritistic  form.  For  of  his
own  very  original  and  highly  valuable  study  on  dreams  ^  produced  througli
the  "Elvira"  personality  of  Signorina  Marie  M.,  he  said:  "It  seems
important  to  me  to  remark  once  for  all  that  supposed  spiritistic  intervention
is  certainly  able  to  become  an  important  factor  in  explanations  of  telepathy,
but  one  ought  not  now  to  make  a  distinction  a  priori  (and  founded  on  simple
difference  of  form  in  phenomena)  between  messages  transmitted  by  telepathy
and  messages  transmitted  by  spirit  intervention.  We  ought  to  remain
bound  to  the  definition  adopted,  according  to  which  all  coiumunication
between  mind  and  mind  that  does  not  come  by  known  sensory  means  is
called  telepathy."  {La  Telepatia,  p.  74,  note.)  And  as,  against  these
omissions,  the  book  offers  only  four  cases  which  are  not  included  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living  ov  Mr.  Podmore's  Apparitio}is  and  Thought-Trans-
ference, the  work  cannot  be  regarded  as  so  complete  and  thorough  a  review
of  telepathy  as  Oiwi  Thonght-Transference. The  higli  admiration

for  this  work  which  Dr.  Ermacora  expressed  in  his  thirteen-page  review  of
it  in  the  first  number  of  his  Rivista  -  in  January,  1895,  and  his  desire  for  its
translation,  had  apparently  been  preceded  by  his  beginning  this  series  of
articles  which  made  up  La  Tele2mtia.  And  probably  his  form  of  popularisa-
tion and  critical  education  in  this  difficult  subject  may  be  more  fitted  to  his
own  country  and  readers.

Thus,  in  spite  of  its  more  or  less  necessitated  incompleteness,  La  Telepaiia
is  a  work  of  most  timely  and  even  permanent  value,  a  worthy  monument —
together  with  the  three  volumes  of  his  Rivista — to  its  open-minded,  untiring,
and  scholarly  author.  It  is  surely  to  be  greatly  hoped  that  the  work  in  its
collected  form  may  hasten  the  renewed  formation  of  an  Italian  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  to  which  the  family  of  the  author  carry  out  his  spirit  in
dedicating  the  income  from  this  work.

Harlow  Gale.


Essays  in  Psychical  Research. By  Miss  X.  (A.  Goodrich-Freer) (London  :
George  Red  way. 1899. pp.  XV.,  330.)

Miss  Freer,  who,  under  the  name  of  "Miss  X.",  has  made  several
contributions  to  our  Proceedings,  tells  us  in  the  preface  to  this  volume  of
essays  that  ' '  the  papers  which  are  here  collected  from  various  periodicals
in  which  they  have  appeared,  are  in  every  sense  essays  in  Inquiry,"  and  she
states  that  she  has  "no  claim  to  the  attention  of  others,  but  such  as  they
may  grant  to  a  lifelong  experience  of  the  phenomena  under  consideration."
Miss  Freer  is  indeed  most  at  home  in  describing  her  own  experiences  and
commenting  upon  them,  and  is,  I  think,  seen  at  her  best  in  the  article
entitled  "  How  it  came  into  my  head.  The  Machinery  of  Intuitions "
— which  is  substantially,  as  she  reminds  us,  the  reproduction  of  an  article

1  "Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced."  Proceedings  S.P.K.,  Vol.  XI.,
pp.  235-308.

-  See  Dr.  Leaf's  notice  of  the  Rivista  in  Proceedings  S.  P.R.,  Vol.  XI.,  pp.  171
and  172.


894


Richard  Hodgson.


[Supplement.


published  in  these  Proceediwis  (Part  XXVII.)  under  the  title  of  "  On  the
Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages."  The  other  essays  in  the  book
are  all  reproduced— with  some  slight  changes  by  omission  or  addition  or
re-arrangement,  chiefly  verbal  in  character —from  articles  by  Miss  X.  which
appeared  in  the  magazine  Borderland,  published  quarterly  by  Mr.  W.  T.
Stead,  the  first  number  of  which  appeared  in  July,  1893,  and  the  last,  and
expiring,  number  in  October,  1897.

The  book,  as  a  whole,  is  rather  of  the  literary  than  the  scientific  order,
and  deals  with  the  subjects  under  consideration  in  the  somewhat  popular
manner  suitable  to  Borderland.  This  fact  will  doubtless  make  the  present
volume  more  rather  than  less  interesting  to  many  readers.  Besides  the
article  referred  to  above  as  republished  from  our  Procei>dings,  the  book  con-
tains, in  addition  to  the  Introductory  sketch  of  "  Psychical  Research  in  the
Victorian  Era,"  papers  under  the  following  headings  :  "Haunted  Houses,"
"Another  Theory  of  Hauntings  "  (really  about  "The  Land  of  Faery,"  as
it  was  originally  called  in  Borderland),  "  On  the  Faculty  of  Crystal  Gazing,"
"The  Divining  Rod,  or  the  Faculty  of  Dowsing,"  "Hypnotism,"  "Obses-
sion :  or  the  Imperative  Idea"  (about  /udi-  and  ideea  fixes),  "  Holywell —
Psychic  Healing  :  The  Welsh  Lourdes,"  "  Saint  Columba,  the  Father  of
Second  Sight."

Of  these  articles,  that  on  Crystal  Gazing  has  special  value  owing  to  the
practical  experience  of  Miss  Freer  in  this  subject. On  the  Divining  Rod,
however,  the  reader  will  do  well  to  refer  to  Professor  Barrett's  report
published  in  Part  XXXII.  Proceedings  S.P.R. It  is  odd  that  Miss  Freer
makes  no  reference  to  this  in  her  book,  although  there  are  indications  which
suggest  that  in  revising  her  article  from  its  original  form  in  Borderland,  she
was  indebted  for  some  of  her  new  statements  to  that  report. Of  excellent
reading  is  the  account  of  Saint  Columba,  who,  according  to  Adamnan
(whom  Miss  Freer  summarises),  united  various  kinds  of  psychical  gifts,  from
"thought-transference  and  clairvoyance"  ujj  to  "premonitions"  of  things
both  small  and  great. Many  instances  are  quoted  by  Miss  Freer,  from
which  I  take  the  following

"The  saint  called  two  of  the  brethren,  Lugbe  and  Silnan,  and  gave
them  this  charge:  'Sail  over  now  to  the  Malean  Island,  and  on  the  open
ground,  near  the  seashore,  look  for  Ere,  a  robber,  who  came  alone  last
night  in  secret  from  the  Island  Coloso.  He  strives  to  hide  himself  among
the  sandhills  during  the  daytime  under  his  boat,  which  he  covers  with  hay,
that  he  may  sail  across  at  night  to  tlie  little  island  where  our  young  seals  are
brought  forth  and  nurtured.  When  this  furious  robber  hath  stealthily
killed  as  many  as  he  can,  he  then  fills  his  boat  and  goes  back  to  his  hiding-
place.'  They  proceeded  at  once,  in  compliance  with  their  orders,  and  found
the  robber  lying  hid  in  the  very  spot  that  was  indicated."

"On  another  day  a  shout  was  given  on  the  other  side  of  the  Sound.
The  saint  .  .  .  said :  '  The  man  who  is  shouting  beyond  the  Sound  is
not  of  very  sharp  wits,  for  when  he  is  here  to-day  he  will  upset  my  inkhorn
and  spill  the  ink.'  Diormit,  his  minister,  hearing  this,  stood  a  little  in  front
of  the  door,  and  waited  for  the  arrival  of  this  troublesome  guest,  in  order
to  save  the  inkhorn.  But  for  some  cause  or  other  he  had  soon  to  leave  his
place,  and  after  his  departure  the  unwelcome  guest  arrived. In  his  eager


Part  XXXV.]


Review.


395


haste  to  kiss  the  saint,  he  upset  the  iukhorn  with  the  hem  of  his  garment
and  spilled  the  ink."

"  One  day  S.  Columba  was  sitting  by  a  well  near  the  fortress  of  Cethirn
with  Abbot  Comgell.  Water  was  brought  to  them  to  wash  their  hands,  and
the  saint  said  to  the  abbot :  '  A  day  shall  come,  O  Comgell,  when  the  well
whence  this  water  now  poured  out  for  us  was  drawn  will  be  no  longer  fit  for
man's  use.'  'How  .shall  the  water  of  this  be  defiled?'  said  the  abbot.  'From
this,'  answered  the  saint,  'that  it  shall  be  filled  with  human  blood;  for  thy
relatives  and  mine— that  is,  the  people  of  the  Cruithni  and  the  race  of
Niall — shall  be  at  war  in  the  neighbouring  fortress  of  Cethirn.  At  this  well
an  unhappy  relative  of  mine  shall  be  slain,  and  his  blood,  mingling  with
that  of  many  others,  shall  fill  it  up.'  An  old  man  present  at  the  battle,
many  years  after,  referred  to  this  prophecy,  and  pointed  out  its  literal
fulfilment  in  the  dead  bodies  in  the  well  and  the  death  of  S.  Columba's
kinsman."

With  so  much  that  is  of  interest  in  this  collection  of  Bordeiiand  articles,
it  is  to  be  regretted  that  Miss  Freer  has  repeated  an  important  misrepre-
sentaltion  of  fact  concerning  Mrs.  Piper,  my  correction  of  which  had  been
previously  brought  to  her  attention.  She  gives  her  readers  to  understand
(pp.  X.  and  21)  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  involve  "the  extreme  cost  of
personal  suffering,"  and  she  speaks  of  "the  convulsed  countenance,  the
gnashing  teeth,  the  writhing  body,  the  clenched' hands."  Miss  Freer  gave
uttei'ance  to  .similar  remarks  at  a  meeting  in  London,  reported  in  the
magazine  Light  for  December  17th,  1898.  In  a  comuiunication  to  the  same
magazine  for  February  4th,  1899,  I  pointed  out  that  her  assertions  on  this
matter  were  entirely  baseless.  I  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  "the  con-
vulsive movements  which  usually  in  past  yeai's  marked  Mrs.  Piper's  going
into  and  coming  out  of  trance"  had  ceased  two  years  previously,  and  I
referred  to  the  statements  which  I  had  already  made  to  this  effect  in  the
Journal  S.  P.  R.  for  January,  1898  (p.  167)  and  in  the  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,
PartXXXlII  ,  February,  1898  (p.  409).  I  also  emphasised  the  fact  that
Mrs.  Piper's  trances  did  not  involve  any  personal  suffering  by  quoting  a
statement  from  Mrs.  Piper  herself  that  she  had  never  suffered  any  physical
pain  in  connection  with  her  trances,  and  that  during  the  past  two  years  she
had  experienced  better  health  than  before  since  she  was  thirteen  years  old.
It  is  therefore  surprising  to  find  that  Miss  Freer  in  the  volume  before  us
repeats  her  misrepresentation,  and  to  find  further  that  the  latest  words
which  I  have  quoted  above  (from  the  paper  on  "Psychical  Research  in  the
Victorian  Era,"  p.  21),  do  not  occur  in  the  original  paper  in  Borderland
(July,  1897).  Miss  Freer  is  evidently  labouring  under  an  idee  fixe,  which
perhaps  began  between  two  and  three  years  ago,  and  has  become  more
strongly  established  since.  That  this  is  the  explanation  of  her  curious  mis-
statements may  appear  to  tlie  reader  who  will  compare  what  she  says  about
Mrs.  Piper  in  tlie  book  before  us  (as  well  as  in  her  remarks  reported  in
Light  for  December  17th,  1898)  with  what  she  wrote  in  Borderland  for
January,  1894, — "  Character  Sketch.  Mrs.  Piper" — and  for  July,  1896, —
"  The  Progress  of  Psychical  Research.  Professor  James's  Address."  (Miss
Freer's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  it  should  be  noted,  were  as  long  ago  as
December  7th  to  9th,  1889.) Not  only,  in  these  articles,  is  there  not  the


396


Wm.  Romaine  Newhold.


[Supplement.


slightest  reference  of  any  kind  whatsoever  to  any  personal  suffering  of  Mrs.
Piper,  but  it  will  be  very  plain  to  the  reader  that  no  thought  of  any  such
suffering  had  entered  Miss  Freer's  mind  ;  and  it  seeras  that  as  late  as  July,
1896,  Miss  Freer  wrote  as  follows,  after  quoting  Professor  James's  now
famous  remark  that  his  own  white  crow  was  Mrs.  Piper  :  "  It  is  well  known
that  Mrs.  Piper  is  Professor  James's  own  particular  show,  as  they  say  over
in  his  country.  We  have  learnt  many  things  from  Mrs.  Piper,  and  are  glad
to  feel  that  she  is  in  hands  so  thoroughly  capable  of  making  the  most  of
what  she  has  to  teach,  as  are  those  of  Professor  James  and  Dr.  Hodgson."
(Borderland,  July,  1896,  p.  310.)

That  Miss  Freer's  recent  utterances  concerning  Mrs.  Piper  must  bo
regarded  as  unreliable  may  be  illustrated  by  another  instance.  She  recentlj'
stated  that  the  few  prophecies  upon  which  Mrs.  Piper  had  "  ventured  in
regard  to  her  had  none  of  them  'come  olf '  '  {Liijltf,  December  17th,  1898,
p.  613),  but  several  years  previously  and  when  her  recollections  were
presumably  more  trnstvvortlij',  she  stated  that  "four  important  prophecies"
were  made  to  her,  that  two  of  these  had  been  fulfilled,  and  that  the
remaining  two  "  were  only  prevented  by  my  own  will,  and  both  were
[irominently  brought  before  me  as  suggestions."  (Borderland,  January,  1894,
p.  230.)

Richard  Hodgson.


Mollie  Fancher :  The  Brooklyn  Enigma.  An  Antherdic  Statement  of  Facts  in
the  Life  of  Mary  J.  Fancher,  the  Psychological  Marvel  of  the  NineteentJi,
Centv/ry.  Utdmpeachmhle  Testimony  of  Many  Witnesses.  By  Abram  H.
Dailey,  Brooklyn,  N.Y. pp.  XIII.,  262.

This  })ook  consists  of  a  I'ather  disconnected  narrative  by  Judge  Dailey,
abstracts  of  a  diary  kept  by  Miss  Fancher's  aunt,  a  series  of  signed  state-
ments inade  by  friends,  and  a  number  of  reprints  of  articles  which  had
originally  appeared  in  the  daily  papers.  No  attempt  has  been  made  to
reduce  this  mass  to  a  coherent  whole.  It  abounds  in  repetitions  and  irrele-
vaiicies  to  such  a  degree  that  it  is  far  from  easy  to  extract  from  it  a  clear
history  of  the  very  interesting  case  which  it  is  designed  to  put  on  record.
The  main  facts  may  be  outlined  as  follows  :  —

Miss  Fancher  was  born  August  16th,  ] 848.  As  a  child  her  health  was
good,  but  in  March  of  1864  it  began  to  fail.  She  had  "nervous  indigestion,"
inability  to  retain  food,  "fainting  spells,"  "weakness  in  the  chest,"  and
she  "wasted  away."  May  lOtli,  1864,  she  was  thrown  from  her  horse  and
severely  injured.  In  the  course  of  the  following  summer  the  lower  part  of
her  body  suddenly  became  paralysed.  She  seemed  to  recover  from  the
effects  of  this  accident  during  the  autumn,  but  on  June  8th,  1865,  as  she
was  stepping  from  a  street  car,  the  car  started  too  soon,  she  was  thrown
to  tlie  gruund,  her  skirt  caught  upon  a  projecting  hook,  and  she  was  dragged
some  yards,  again  receiving  serious  injuries.  This  was  followed  by  weakness,
transient  paralyses,  pain,  cough,  and  hfemorrhages  from  the  lungs.  In
February,  1866,  convulsions  ajjpeared.  Soon  afterwards  she  lost,  in  rapid
succession,  sight,  speech,  and  hearing.  From  that  date  to  1894,  when  the
book  was  written,  her  history  was  that  of  a  hysteric  of  the  worst  type—


Part  XXXV.]


Revieiv.


397


anaesthesias,  paralyses,  contractures,  and  convulsions  involving  now  this,
now  that  oi'gan  of  sense  or  group  of  muscles,  and  succeeding  one  another  in
bewildering  variety.  Her  sight,  however,  was  never  restored,  although  in
recent  years  she  seems  to  be  recoverins;  some  portion  of  it.  Throughout
this  period  normal  sleep  seemed  to  be  replaced  by  "trance,"  in  which  tlie
whole  body  became  rigid.

In  1875,  after  a  trance  lasting  a  month,  it  was  found  that  her  memory
of  the  nine  years  immediately  preceding  had  been  totally  obliterated,  the
contractures  which  had  marked  those  years  had  disajjpeared,  and  all  the
skill  in  embroidery,  etc.,  which  she  had  acquired  during  them  was  lost.

From  1875  to  the  date  of  the  book  Miss  Fancher's  memories  were
approximately  continuinis,  tlie  only  exceptions  being  found  in  the  lives  of  her
secondary  selves.  She  also  remembers  the  events  of  her  early  life  up  to
the  beginning  of  the  nine-year  period.  About  1878  a  new  memory-synthesis
appeared,  but  soon  vanished,  and  was  not  again  observed  until  1887.
It  was  then  named  by  her  friends  "Idol."  Others  of  later  date  were  named
"Rosebud,"  "Pearl,"  and  "Ruby."  The  "normal"  Miss  Fancher  was
named  "  Sunbeam,"  to  distinguish  her  from  these.  Each  of  these  memory-
systems  or  personalities  calls  itself  Mollie  Fancher,  possesses  a  portion  of
Miss  Fancher's  memories,  and  remembers  its  own  previous  occurrences.
No  one  has  any  knowledge  of  any  other  save  in  so  far  as  informed  by  other
persons.  "  Rosebud"  seems  to  be  identical  with  Mollie  Fancher  as  she  was
at  six  or  seven  years.  "Idol"  and  "Pearl"  are  young  girls  of  about
sixteen,  but  neither  recalls  the  first  accident,  while  "Ruby,"  who  seems
to  be  about  the  same  age,  recalls  the  first,  but  not  the  second  accident.
"Idol"  and  "Pearl"  are  quiet,  and  not  markedly  unlike  one  another,  while
"Ruby"  is  vivacious,  clieerful,  and  talkative.  None  of  them  possesses
"  Sunbeam's  "  acquired  skill,  and  all  are  extremely  unstable,  appearing  only
during  the  night,  and  lasting  but  a  few  minutes.

During  her  years  of  blindness  Miss  Fancher  has  convinced  her  friends
that  she  possessed  supernormal  powers  of  vision.  It  is  claimed  that  she  has
repeatedly  read  sealed  letters,  described  events  at  a  distance,  and  found  lost
articles.  She  also  believes  that  she  sees  the  world  of  spirits,  but  is  extremely
reticent  upon  that  topic.

One  is  disappointed  to  find  that  Judge  Dailey  adduces  little  evidence  of
value  in  support  of  these  claims.  He  has,  indeed,  recorded  the  narratives
of  many  witnesses  whose  truthfulness  no  one  would  question,  but  in  not  one
of  these  narratives  are  the  facts  given  with  that  attention  to  details  and  that
care  to  avoid  misdescription  which  the  nature  of  the  case  demands.  Many
are  vague  in  the  extreme,  and  very  few  tell  us  how  much  time  elapsed
between  the  event  and  its  committal  to  writing.  To  glance  at  only  the  best
of  these  :  Prof.  Parkhurst  submitted  to  Miss  Fancher  a  sealed  enveloj^e  con-
taining a  slip  of  printed  paper,  the  contents  of  which  he  did  not  himself
know.  She  told  him  it  contained  the  words  "court,"  "jurisdiction,"  and
the  numerals  6,  2,  3,  4.  These  he  wrote  in  his  notebook,  took  tlie  envelope
away  still  sealed,  read  Miss  Fancher's  statement  to  two  friends,  and  in
their  presence  opened  the  envelope.  Miss  Fancher's  statements  were
found  to  be  correct.  But  we  are  not  told  how  large  the  type  was,  how
many thicknesses  of  paper  covered  it,  how  Miss  Fancher handled  the


398


Wm,  Romaive  Newhold.


[Supplement.


envelope,  how  long  she  had  it  in  her  possession,  or  whether  she  had  it  at  any
time  when  Prof.  Parkhurst  was  not  present.

Dr.  Speir  states  that  Miss  Fancher  once  wrote  for  him  upon  a  slate  the
contents  of  a  letter  which  had  just  been  brought  to  her  by  the  postman,  and
was  as  yet  unopened.  We  are  not  given  copies  of  the  two,  nor  are  we  told
how  much  time  elapsed  between  the  event  and  the  record,  nor  who  wrote
the  letter,  nor  whether  Miss  Fancher  could  have  known  that  Dr.  Speir
would  be  present  when  the  postman  came.

Miss  Fancher  once  told  Judge  Dailey  that  she  hud  seen  him  upon  a
given  evening  with  a  gentleman  whom  slie  described.  After  some  difficulty
Judge  Dailey  recollected  that  upon  that  evening  he  had  been  with  a  friend
named  Sisson.  We  are  not  told  how  he  identified  the  evening.  Some
months  later  Judge  Dailey,  Mr.  Sisson,  and  another  person  called  upon  Miss
Fancher.  She  at  first  said  she  had  not  before  seen  either  of  the  two  gentle-
men, but  after  a  moment's  reflection  said  that  one,  pointing  to  Mr.  Sisson,
was  the  man  she  had  seen  with  the  Judge.  This  is  one  of  the  best  cases,  as
it  is  corroborated  by  Mr.  Sisson,  and  it  appears  that  his  account  was  written
only  six  months  or  so  after  the  event.  We  would  like  to  know,  however,
whether  any  further  questions  were  asked  Miss  Fancher  after  she  had  first
stated  that  she  did  not  recognise  Mr.  Sisson.

In  brief,  the  evidence  which  Judge  Dailey  has  collected  will  seem  satis-
factory only  to  those  who  are  already  satisfied  of  the  possibility  of  clair-
voyance. It  will  do  little  towards  establishing  that  possibility.  And  as  Miss
Fancher's  clairvoyant  powers  are  said  to  be  much  less  keen  now  than  they
were  some  years  ago,  it  is  not  probable  that  her  case  will  contribute  much  of
value  to  the  evidence  for  the  supernormal.  One  can  readily  appreciate  the
repugnance  which  Miss  Fancher  felt  to  submitting  herself  to  the  commission
of  experts  suggested  by  the  New  York  Medico-legal  Society,  but  it  is  much
to  be  regretted  that  her  friends  should  have  allowed  the  value  of  her  case  to
be  lost  through  mere  negligence.

Wm.  Romaine  Newbold.

University  of  Pennsylvania.


Edmund  Gurvey  Library.


399


EDMUND GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1898-9.


Additions  since  the  list  iii,  ^''Proceedings,"  Vol.  XIII.


BiNET  (Dr.  Alfred),  The  Pnychology  of  Reasoning. Translated  by

A.  G.  White,  B.Sc  Chicago,  1899

Bkamwell  (J.  Milne,  M.B.), On  the  Evolution  of  the  Hypnotic

Theory  (Brain,  1896.)  London,  189(i

  Hypnotic  Anesthesia {The  Practitioner, 1896)  London,  1896

  Suggestion  : Its  Place  in  Medicine  and  Scientific  Research

London,  18U7

  James  Braid  : His  Work  and  Writings  (S.P.R.  Proceedings,

Vol.  XII.)  London.,  1896

Charcot,  (J.  M.),  The  Faith  Cure  {The  New  Review,  1893). ..London,  1893

CoLQUHOUN  (J.  C),  History  of  Magic, Witchcraft, and  Animal

Magnetism. 2  Vols  London,  1851

Du  PoTET  (de  Sennevoy),  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Animal

Magnetism. From  the  French  London,  1838

Ethnology  (14th  Annual  Report  of  Bureau  of). Parts  I.  and  II.

Part  II. The  Ghost  Dance  Religion  Washington,  U.S.A.,  1896

James  (Prof.  William),  Human  Immortality. Two  Supposed  Objec-
tions to  the  Doctrine  London,  1898

Myers  (F.  W.  H.),  On  Some  Fresh  Facts  Indicating  Man's  Survival

of  Death. {The  National  Review,  October,  1898)  London,  1898

Neilson  (William),  Mesmerism  in  its  Relation  to  Healtli  and  Disease

London,  1855

Nevius  (John L.,  D.D.) Demon  Possession  and  Allied  Themes

London,  1896

SCHOFIBLD  (Alfred  T.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.), The  Unconscious  Mind

London,  1898

Statham  (F. Reginald),  Magnetism  and  Morals  {The  Westminster

Revieic,  November,  1898)  London,  1898

Wetterstranu  (Dr.  0.  G.),  Hypnotism  and  its  Application  to  Practical

Medicine. Translated  by  Dr.  H.  S.  Petersen  London,  1897


AuGUEZ  (Paul),  Spiritualisme  ;  Faits  Curieux  Paris,  1858

Charcot  (Prof.  J.  M.),  La  Foi  qui  guerit Paris,  1897

Chardel  (C),  Essai  de  Psychologie  Physiologique.  2nd  Edition... Parjs,  1838
[Dalloz],  Entretiens  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1823


400


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


Demarquay  (Dr.  et  Dr.  Giraud-Tenlon),  Recherches  sur  I'Hypno-


tisme  Paris,  1860

[De Puys^gur (A. M.  J.  Chastenet)],  Memoires pour servir  a

I'Histoire  du  Magndtisme  Animal. 2nd  Edition  Paris,  1809

  Suite  des  Memoires  Paris,  1809

[Deslon  (Ch.)].  Satire.  Supplement  aux  deux  Rapports  de  la  Faculty

de  M^decine  Amsterdam,  1784

[DiDiER  (Alexis).]  Le  Sommeil  Magnetique,  expliqud  par  le  Somnam-

bule  Alexis Paris,  1856

Fabre  (Dr.),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1838

Frapart  (Dr.)  Lettres  sur  le  Magnetisme Paris,  1840

Gasc-Desfoss^s  (Ed.),  Magnetisme  Vital  Paris,  1897

H[annapier]  (C.  H.),  Teratoscopie  du  Fluide  Vital  Paris,  1822

Janet  (Dr.  Pierre),  Nevroses  et  Idees  Fixes  Paris,  1898

"Journal  du  Magnetisme  Animax"  Paris,  1840-1

Mesmer,  Aphorismes  Paris,  1785

Raymonb  (Prof.  F.  et  Dr.  P.  Janet),  Nevroses  et  Idees  Fixes  II.

Paris,  1898


SErE  (Dr.  G.  Louis  de),  Application  du  Somnambulisme  Magnetique

Paris,  1855


Beitrage  zur  Grenzwissenschaft  Jena,  1899

MitLLER  (Rudolph),  Hypnotismus und Objective  Seelenforschung

Leipdg,  [1897]

  Naturwissenschaftliche  Seelenforschung.

I.  Das  Veriinderungsgesetz  Leipzig,  [1897]

  Das  Hypnotische  Hellseh-Experiment  im  Dienste  der  Natur-

wissenschaftlichen  Seelenforschung.

II.  Das  normale  Bewusstsein  Leipzig,  [1898]


Ermacora  (Dr.  G.  B.),  La  Telepatia  Padua,  1898


A  full  Catalogue  of  the  hooks  in  the  Ed/mund  Gurney  Library  was  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Supplementary  Catcdogues  were
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,  X.,  XI.,  XII.,  and
XIII.  Separate  copies  of  these  Catalogues  are  still  on  hand,  and  can  he
obtained  from  the  Secretary.


OffLcevs  and  Council  for  1899.


401


FORMER  PRESIDENTS.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick ----- -  1882-1884.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S. - - -  1885-1887.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick ------  188S-1892.

Right  Hox.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S. - -  1893.

Professor  William  James  (Harvard,  U.S.A.) -  1894-1895.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.  -----  1896-1898.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1899.


PRESIDENT.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.


The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  F.R.S.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.
Professor  W.jAMES,Harvard,U.  S.  A.


Professor  S.  P.  Laxgley,  Smithson-
ian Institution, Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  R.ayleigh,  F.R.S.
The  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


COUNCIL.


TheRt.  Hon.  U.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.
A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
Montague  Crackanthorpe,  Q.C.
The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal-

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.
Mr.  Registrar  Hood.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  M  ac  alister,  M.  D.  ,  F.  R.  S.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.
Frank  Podmore.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
George  F.  Rogers,  M.D.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
H.  Babington  Smith,  C.S.L
J.  G.  Smith.

Sir  A.  K.  Stephenson,  K.C.B.,  Q.C.
Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
J.  Venn,  D.  Sc.,  F.R.S.
Abraham  Wallace,  M.D.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARY.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Canibridj,'e.

HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.  :
Michael  Petrovo-Solovovo.  38,  Sergievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

SECRETARY  AND  TREASURER  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylstnn  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  LT.S.A.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingbam  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


402


Lint  of  Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

{June,  1899.)


PRESIDENT.
Sir  William Orookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  10,  Downing-street,  S.W.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.ll.S.,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.
Professor  He?^ry  Sidgwick,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S. ,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Prop.  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Josephine,  Route  d'Antibes,  Cannes,  France.

Professor  Bernhelm,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.

Prof.  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  31,  Goltz  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  22,  Rue  de  Bellechasse,  Paris.


Lid  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


403


Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corse  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S. A.

Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophiqiie,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  1.5,  Rue  de  I'llniversite,  Paris.

Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  ScHRENCK-lSroTziNG,  2,  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Dr.  H.  de  Varigny,  18,  Rue  Lalo,  Paris.

Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.

Dr.  Otto  G.  Wetterstrand,  Stockholm.

Dr.  G.  C.  Wittig,  22,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.

MEMBERS,  HONORARY  ASSOCIATES,  AND  ASSOCIATES.

Names  of  Members  are  j^rinted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  by  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  are  printed  in  Small  Capitals.

Abbrnethy,  Mrs.,  10,  St.  Colene-street,  Edinburgh.
Adair,  Desmond,  Bank  of  England,  Plymouth.
Adams,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  Henry,  Heathcote,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Adkins,  Henry,  J.P.,  Leyhill,  Northfield,  near  Birmingham.
AiNSLiE,  Douglas,  St.  James's  Club,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Alb  AN,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Hotel  Bellevue,  Via  Nazionale,  Rome.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.
Allen,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  Picton  House,  Ealing.

Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  8.3,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Allin,  Rev.  Thomas,  Donnington  Rectoiy,  Ledbury.
Amery,  W.  C,  34a,  Corporation-street,  Birniingliam.
Appleyard,  Walter,  Endcliffe-crescent,  Sheffield.
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.
Armstrong,  Miss  C.  M.,  31,  Hereford-square,  London,  S.W.
Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.
Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Astley,  Miss,  3,  Halkin-place,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Presbytery,  Henley-on-Thames.
Bacle,  E.,  57,  Rue  de  Chateaudun,  Paris.
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  23,  Lower  Phillimore-place,  Kensington,  W.
Bagnell,  Mrs.,  22,  Down-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Baines,  Miss  W.,  Karnes  Cottage,  Port  Bannatyne,  Bute,  N.B.


404


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  Keston,  27,  Burnaby-gardens,  Chiswick,  W.

Bakkr,  Edjiuxd  G.,  High  View,  Shooters-bill,  Kent.

Baker,  Miss  Morrant,  Boston  Lodge,  Harvard-rd.,  Gunnersbury,  S.W.

Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,M.P.,F.R.S.,  10,  Downing-st.,S.W.

Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  G.W.,  M.P.,  24,  Addison-road, London, W.

Balfour,  Miss,  10,  Downing-street,  London,  S.W.

Ballard,  Rev.  F.,  M.  A  ,  B.Sc,  Morschach,  Aniaby-road,  Hull.

Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Barclay,  Rev.  Chas.W.,  M.  A.,TheVicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.

Barkly,  Mrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  near  London.

Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.  P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  co.  Dublin.

Barlow,  Colonel  W.  R.,  .56,  Penywern-road,  London,  S.W.

Barrett,  Ashley  W.,  M.B.,  7,  Cavendish-place,  Cavendish-square, W.

Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.

Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  GlengarifF,  co.  Cork.

Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  1,  Connaught-

street,  London,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Baudains,  Miss  M.  G.,  Pai-ade  House,  Jersey.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  The  College,  Eastbourne.
Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Brentwood.
Beatty,  Octavius,  Fairholt,  Merton-hall-road,  AVimbledon,  Surrey.
Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redclilfe-sq.,  S.W.
Bective,  The  Countess  of,  Barnacre  Lodge,  Garstang.
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterlield-gardens,  London,  W.
Beeton,  Miss  Florence,  2,  Adamson-road,  S.  Hampstead,  N.W.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhm-st,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bell,  Major  Wm.  Morrison,  Thor,  Birchington,  Thanet,  Kent.
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  M.A.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.
Benson,  Mrs.,  9,  St.  Thomas-street,  Winchester.
Benson,  Miss  Annette  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay.
BerenS,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  IJarewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.
Bernard,  John,  Major,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "Nelson,"  Portsmouth.
Berry,Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,M.D.,60,Welbeck-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.
Bevan,  Miss  N.  H.,  Chalet  Passiflora,  Cannes,  France.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


405


Bickford-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,  Etidymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W.
BiCKNELL,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Bidder,  Mrs.,  10,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
BiDDULPH,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S  W.
BiELBY,  Horace  C.  V.,  67,  Lord-street,  Liverpool,  W.
Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  40,  Chester-terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
BiRRELL,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Lansdowne-road,  Worthing.
Blackburn,  Ernest  M.,  38,  Egerton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.
Blackwood,  Mrs.,  Norton  Court,  Sittingbourne,  Kent.
Biakelock,  Rev.  R.,  M.A.,  Horbury  Bridge  Vicarage,  Wakefield.
Bois.HenryG.,  c/oH.Bois,  Esq.,  5,  Attwood-rd.,South Kensington,  vS.W.
Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  W.
Boldero,  Lieut.-General  G.  IST.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.
Bolland,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  vSouthampton.
Bolton,  Miss  A.  J.,  B.A.  (ISr.Z.),  Hillside,  Bourton-road,  Buckingham.
BooRNE,  Herbert  H.,  9a,  Sackville  street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Bosanquet,  Mrs.  O.  V.,  Annandale  View,  Simla,  India.
BoscQ  de  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Airel  (Manche),  France.
Boswell-Stone,  Miss  E.  L  ,  Dayrells,  47,  Wickham-road,  Beckenham.
BouLNOis,  H.  Percy',  M.Inst.C.E.,  7,  Devonshire-road,  Liverpool.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  at  Carey's,  Brockenhurst.

BowELL,  Ernest  W.  W.,  Mostyn  House  School,  Park  Gate,  Cheshire.
Bowness,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London,W.
Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
Bramston,  Miss  A.  R.,  Witham-close,  Winchester.
Bramston,  ]Miss  M.,  St.  Grimbald's,  Winchester.

Bramwell,  John  M.,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square, W.
Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholrae,  Weybridge.
Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Bertram,  D'Eresby  House,  Marina,  Bexhill-on-Sea.
Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.
Briggs,  Mrs.,  Welbury  Drive,  Bradford.
Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  126,  Kennington  Park-road,  London,  S.E.
Broderick,  Mrs.  Alan,  31,  Greenheys-road,  Liverpool.
Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  Villa  Raffo  Bogliasco,  near
Genoa.

Brooks,  Col.  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A  ,  M.A.,  1,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne,  Mrs.  W.  P.,  Bidston,  97,  Gipsy  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
BrowninGj  OscaRj  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.


406


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryant,  A.  C,  B.  A.,  2,  Langham-road,  West  Green,  London,  N.

Bryant,  Captain  G.  E.,  K.A.,  c/o  J.  M.  Edwards,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J- P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill-square,  W.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.  A.,  9,  Upper  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

BuLLEY,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Neston,  Cheshire.

Bullock,  Mrs.,  St.  Margaret's,  Mitcliain,  Surrey.

BuNSHAW,  N.F.,  Med.  OIF.,  B.G.J. P.  Rail  way,  Ghadechi,  Kathiawar,  India.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Logner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow  on-the-Hill.

Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.

Butt,  Lady,  c/o  London  Joint  Stock  Bank,  South  Kensington  Branch,

Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.
Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.
Caillard,  Sir  Vincent,  Wingfield  House,  near  Trowbridge,  Wilts.
Calcutta,  The  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Calcutta.
Caldecott,  Rev.  Professor  Alfred,  M.A.,  Lopham  Rectory,  Thetford.
Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  16,  Monpelier  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  N.B.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  B.A.,  22,  Market  Hill,  Cambridge.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Lieut.  IST.  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Colchester.
Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  3,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  London, W.
Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37,  Commercial-road  East,  London,  E.
Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.
Caebery,  William  E.,  21,  Eldon-road,  Kensington,  W.
*Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.
Carmichael,  Rev.  Canon,  D.D.,  LLD.,  Ranelagh,  Dublin.
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Carnegie,  Lady  Helena,  Kinnaird  Castle,  Brechin,  N.B.
Carter,  Mrs.  L.  Brudenell,  Kenilworth,  Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Cathels,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  N.B.
Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  Binsted,  Cambridge.
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.
Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  76,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.
Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  Apollo-street,  Bombay.
Ohattock,  Prof.  Arthur  P.,  1,  Rockleaze-avenue,  Sneyd  Park,  Bristol.
Chichele-Plowden, Trevor, C.S.I., The Residency,  Hyderabad,

Deccan,  India.
Chichester,  Miss  May,  Wotton  Rectory,  Dorking.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


407


Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  261,  King's-road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Chrouschoff,  Michel  de,  Binnbrooke,  Grange  road,  Cambridge.
Clark,  W.  W.,  Denehurst,  Dorking.
Clark,  Miss,  Suffiekl  Park,  Cromer.

Clarke,  Francis,  17,  Hornsey  Rise  Uardens,  London,  N.
Clarke,  J.  F.  Howard,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.,  99,  Siiaftesbury-avenue,  W.
Clarke,  Johx  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-street,  London,  W.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C  S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill.
Clarke,  The  Rev.  Father  R.  F.,  S.J.,  40,  St.  Giles,  Oxford.
Clarke,  Rev.  W.  J.,  186,  Bristol-road,  Birmingham.
Clayton,  Charles  E.,  152,  North-street,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Cleveland,  The  Duchess  of,  18,  Grosvenor-place^  London,  S.W.

Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Fawley  Lodge,  Lansdown-road,  Cheltenham.

Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.

Close,  Miss  Etta,  Lamperri,  Dursley,  Gloucestershire.

Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.

Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Coghill,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Cosheen,  Castle  Townshend,  co.  Cork.

Oolegrane,  Mrs.  E  ,  Bracebridge,  ISToi-wood,  S.E.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Collier,  Mrs.,  St.  Mary's  Entry,  Oxford.

Collingwood,  Miss  A.  M.,  6,  Pcrwis-square,  Bayswater,  W.

Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.

CoLLisoN,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  17b,  Great  Cumberland-place,  London,  W.

CoLTHURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley- square,  London,  W.

CoLQUHOUN,  Daniel,  M.D.  (Lond.),  M.R.C.P.  (Lond.),  High-street,

Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
CoLviLE,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.
CoMPTON,  Lady  Alwyne,  7,  Balfour-place,  London,  W.
CooNEY,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.  A.,  28,  Donegall-passage,  Belfast.
Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  Churchills,  Caterham  Valley,  Surrey.
CoTTERELL,  James,  140,  Earlstield-road,  Waudsworth  Common,  S.W.
CoRT  van  der  Linden,  Dr.  P.  W.  A.,  Ministre  de  Justice,  Surinarae-

street.  The  Hague.
Cousens,  Charles  H.,  Star  Chambers,  30,  Moorgate-st.,  London,  E.C.
Cousens,  John  S.,  Wanstead,  Essex.

Cowan,  William  H.,  11,  Marlborough-road,  Bournemouth.
CowPER,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  Grosvenor  Hotel,  London,  S.W.
Crackanthorpe,  Montague,  Q.C.,  6-5,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Crackanthorpe,  Mrs.,  65,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Caven-
dish-square, London,  W.
Crawford,  F.  Marion,  Villa  Crawford,  Sant'Agnello  di  Sorrento,  Italy.

2  E


408


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockliarton-gardens,  Colinton-road,  Edinburgh.

Crawley,  Mrs.  Chas.,  11,  Little  Stanhope-street,  Mayfair,  London, W.

Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley  square,  London,  W.

Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Casilla,  63d,  Santiago  de  Chili,  South  America.

Crewdson,  Miss  Gwendolen,  The  Barons,  Reigate.

Crooks,  Miss,  Kensington,  South  Australia.

Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  10,  Jeffrey 's-square,  St.  Mary  Axe,  London,  E.C.
Cruise,  Sir  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  W.,  Dublin.
Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,

Cuffe,  Honble.  Otway  F.  S.,  23,  Cambridge-street,  London,  W.

Cunningham,  G., D.M. D.  (Fai'vard,  U.S.  A.),  2,  King's-parade,Cambridge.

Currie,  Andrew  S.,  M.D.,  81,  Queen's  Road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.

Currie,  Mrs.,  Warders,  Park-avenue,  Bedford.

Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  15,  Barton-street,  Westminster,  S.W.

CusHiNG,  Mrs.  F.  AV.,  4,  Rue  Chalgrin,  Paris.

D'Abbadie,  An'j  l'Oine,  120  Rue  de  Bac,  Paris.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.  A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  110,  King  Henry's-rd.,  South  Hampstead,  IST.W.
Damania,  Surgeon-Major  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.
Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.
Dartnell,  George  E  ,  Abbottsfield,  Stratford-road,  Salisbury.
Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.

Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychtield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.
Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  M.B.C.M.  (Aberdeen),  76,  Portland-place,  W.
Davies,  Ben.tamin,  26,  Moscow  Drive,  Liverpool.

Davis,  A.  E.,  F.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.I., 20,  Great  George-square,
Liverpool.

Davis,  Joseph  T.,  Holly  Bush,  Snai-esbrook,  Essex.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Gatefield,  Clarendon-road,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  41,  Roland-gardens,  London,  S.W,
Dawson,  Lieut.-Col.  Henry  P.,  Hartlington,  Burnsall,  Skipton.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Dell,  Rev. Russell  St.  John, A.K.C,  Earnley  Poppleton-road,

Leytonstone,  E.
Delouest,  Edward,  Ocala,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Dun,  John,  Walsingham,  Chislehurst.

'''Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
De  Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid,  13,  Albemarle-street,  London,  W.
Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.
DiCKSEE,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  Greville  House,  3,  Greville-place,  St.  John's
Wood,  N.W.

Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.

Dixon,  Edward  T.,  4,  Cranmer-road,  Cambridge.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  East  Park  Parade,  Northampton.


Lint  of  Members  and  Associates.


Dixon,  Prof.  W.  Macneile,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Litt. D.,  5,  Carpenter-
road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
DoBBiE,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Dodge,  Miss  Mary  M.  H.,  39,  Brompton-square,  London,  S.W.
Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.
Dorchester,  The  Lady,  Greywell  Hill,  Winchlield.
DouGALL,  Miss  Lily,  463,  Elm-avenue,  Westmount,  Montreal,  Canada.
Douglas,  Rev.Dr.  G.  VV., 239, Whitney-avenue,  jSTewhaven, Conn., U.S.A.
Doveton,  F.  B.,  Karsfield,  Torquay.

DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q CP.,  L.R.C.S.L,  91,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Deewry,  Mrs.  George,  Melrose,  Buxton.

Duke,  Thomas,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  33,  Bilton-road,  Rugby.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.

Duncan,  Harold  M.,  Hyde  Park-court,  Albert-gate,  S.W.

Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom-road,  Guildford.

Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Messrs.  Morton,  Chaplin  and  Co.,  6,

Princes-street,  London,  E.G.
DuTT,  R.  C,  CLE.,  Burdwan,  Bengal,  India.

Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  (Retired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  11,  Chepstow-villas,

Bayswater,  London,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Devonia,  St.  Audrew's-road,  Henley-on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  o,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.
Egerton,  Miss  M  ary  L.,  Alma  Lodge,  The  Mount,  York.
Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Gilbert,  Tednambury,  by  Bishops  Stortford,  Herts.
Elliot,  Gilbert,  10,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Miss,  Sandecotes,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  A.,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.D.,  Wi-essil  Lodge,  Wimbledon-
common.

Elliott,  Rev.  W.  A.,  54,  Kirkgate,  Shipley,  Yorkshire.

Ellis,  Mrs.  Robert,  4,  Rylett-road,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  The  Vicarage,  Windsor.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  3,  Palace  Mansions,  Addison  Bridge,  W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Encombe,  Viscount,  Bachelor's  Club,  8,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.

Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermen,  Walter  F.  A.,  14,  Kent-street,  Great  Yarmouth.

Esterhazy',  Count  Michael,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.

Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  xVustralia.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnik,  Alessandria.

Parmer,  W.  M.,  18,  Bina-gardens,  London,  S.W.

2  E  2


410


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Farrer,  The  Lady,  Abinger  Hall,  Dorking.

Faulkner,  Miss  A.  A.,  Inglewood,  Barnt  Green,  Woi'cestershire.
Fawssett  Thomas,  97,  Philbeach-gardens,  Earl's-court,  London,  S.
Feildincj,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Basil,  Ph.D.,  Scot's  College,  Rome.
Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5,  John-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Feilding,  The  Lady  Louisa,  Broome  Park,  Betcliworth,  Surrey.
Ffrench,  Mrs.  Sophy  A.,  Golovino, Kanadeista,  Syzran-Viazma

Railway,  Govt,  of  Simbirsk,  Prussia.
Field,  Allan  B.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Field,  E.  M.,  M.A.,  Cotswold,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N".
Finch,  H.  AVynne,  Junr.,  M.A.,  6,  Oakley-crescent,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*FiNzi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.
Fisher,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  24,  Duke's-avenue,  Chiswick,  London,  W.
Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.
FitzGerald,Desmond G.,M.S.T.E.,94,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton, S.W.
Fletcher,  Mrs.  K.  R.,  The  Orchard,  Buckland, near Betchworth, Surrey.
Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redcliti'e-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  Mandeville-place,  London,  W.
Forrester,  Mrs.,  Gavell  House,  Kilsyth,  N.B.
Foster,  Miss  Lucy  E.,  42,  Lexham  gardens,  London,  W.
Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  19,  St.  John's-road,  WestclifF-on-Sea,  Essex.
Frasek,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Junior  Athenteum  Club,  Piccadilly,  W.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C  ,  Belgrave  Mansions, Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.
Freemann,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent.
Fry,  Lewis  George,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  41,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  11,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.
*Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.
Galloway,  The  Countess  of,  17,  Upper  Grosvenor-street,  W.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Long  Wittenham,  Abingdon.
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-square,  W.
Garet-Charles,  Georges,  The  Nook,  TiLchfield-rd.,  Regent's-pk.,  N.W.
Garner,  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.
Garth,  Henry,  M.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  4,  Harrington-street,  Calcutta.
Gernet,  Miss  Nina,

Ghose,  N.  N.,  the  Indian  Nation  Office,  43,  Bancharam  Unkoor's-lane,
Calcutta.

Ghosh,  Rai  Kali  Prasanna,  Dacca,  Bengal,  India.

Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Russia.

*Glardon,  Rev.  Auguste,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.

Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  C.  W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.

*Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  27,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  W.


Litit  of  Members  and  Associates.


411


Gordon^  George  H.,  1  Clare- road,  Bristol.
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

GovER,  John  M  ,  LL.D.,  5,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

GovETT,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  Gibraltar.

GovETT,  F.  MoLYNEUX,  Veytaux,  Canton  de  Vaud,  Switzerland.

Gow,  William,  184,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.

Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

GRAY,EDWARDW.,SuRGEON-CAPTAiN,c/oMessrs.Holt,17,Whitehall,S.W.

Green,  C.  T.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C  P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.

Green,  Miss  Marian,  Wagner  House,  Bel  size-grove,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Greener,  W.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rector^-,  Cambridge.

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.

Grignon,  Rev.  W.  S.,  M.A.,  30,  Blenheim-gdns.,  Will esd en  Green,  N.W.

Grist,  Rev.  Gordon  C,  B.A.,  Church  Cottage,  Madresfield,  Malvern.

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.

Grove,  Mrs.  Edward,  22,  Dover-st.,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

*Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  5,  22,  Crosby-road,  Birkdale,  Southport.

Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  3.5,  Hazlewood-road,  Northampton.

Grunbaum,  O.  F.  F.,  B.A.,  D.Sc,  Ladbroke-grove,  London,  W.

Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.

Guinness,  Miss,  Tibradden,  Rathfarnham,  Dublin.

GuRNEY,  Rev.F.,  M.  a.,  St.  John's  Cottage,  BoveyTracey,  Newton  Abbot.

Hackett,  James  T.,  B.A  ,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Haggard,  John  G.,  H.B.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria.

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Hales,  Frank  N.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  3,  Pitt-street,  Campden  Hill,  W.

Hall,  Wilfred,  Dilston  Hall,  Corbridge-on-Tyne.

Hall,  Mrs.,  3,  St.  Alban's-road,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  co.  Down,  Ireland.

Hamilton,  J.  J.,  70,  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  jST.

Hannah,  Robert,  S2,  Addison-road,  Kensington,  W.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Harding,  G.  Palmer,  Trouville,  France.

Hargrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Larches,  Heaton  Mersey,  Manchester.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southport.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  Rev.  Chas.,  M.A.,The  Institute,  Mansfield-st.,  Haggerston,  N.E.

Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  37,  Wellington-square,  Oxford.

Harris,  Mrs.  Leverton,  4,  Green-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.

Hartshorn,  Miss  C,  P.O.  Box,  Milton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


412


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Harvey,  Alfred  S.,  Hurstbourne,  Bishops  wood-road,  Highgate,  N.
*Haslam,  Prof.  F.  W.,  M.A.,  Canterbury  College,  Christchurch,  New
Zealand.

Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Croni well-road,  S.W.

Haweis,  Miss,  127,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W

Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Hayward,  Miss  Grace  G.,  25,  St.  George's  Road,  Kilburn,  N.W.

Heard,  George  Henry,  2,  Argyle-street,  Sunderland.

Heard,  IIichard,  37,  York-place,  Portuian-square,  London,  W.

Heath,  Mrs.  Cuthbert,  47,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Hebert,  p.  Z.,  M.D.,  L.R.C.P.,  16a, Old  Cavendish-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.

Heiiner,  Mrs.  Otto,  126,  St.  James'-road,  West  Croydon.

Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll  villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert.  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringvvood,  Hants.
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Herschel,  Colonel  John,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough.
Hewitt,  Mrs.,  Southernhey,  Knighton,  Leicester.
HiGFORD,  Miss  Katharine,  23,  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.
Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.
HiLDYARD,  F.  W.,  Gwyder  Lodge,  Forest,  Snaresbrook.
Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.
HocKEN,  Thoius  M.,  M.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  F.L.S.,  Moray-place,  Dunedin,
New  Zealand.

HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  ^lelbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C,  2,  Busby-place,  Camden-road,  N.W.

Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  M.P,,  B.A.,  58,  Conduit-street,  W.

Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Canipden  Hill,  London,  W.

Hollander,  Bernard,  L.R.C.P.,  61,  Chancery-lane,  London,  W.C.

HoLLiNS,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  77,  Park-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  Wonham,  Dampton,  Devon.

Holmes,  Edmond  G.  A.,  4,  Rawlinson-road,  Oxford.

HoLSTEiN,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.

Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road.  London,  S.W.

Hood,  Mrs.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.

Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,  W.

Hooper,  Mrs.  Pitman,  6,  Morland  Villas,  Boxraoor,  Herts.

HoPKiNSON,  Prof.  Alfred, M.  A.,  B.C. L.,  The  Lodge,  32,  Heme  Hill,  S.E.

Horrack,  Philip  J.  de,  4,  Rue  du  General  Foy,  Paris.

HoRSLEV,  GnoRGE  F.,  26,  Parli<ament  Hill-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.


■Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


413


Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Surgeon-Major,  Hammam  Chambers,

67,  Jermyn-street,  London,  S.W.
Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penrith.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambiek,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.
HuDDLESTON,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hudson,  Norman  W.,  B.A.,  Pebble  Hill,  Limjisfield,  Surrey.
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterham

Valley,  Surrey.

Hughes,  Mrs.,  Gwyunondale,  Lanarthney  R.S.O  ,  Carmarthenshire.

HuME-RoTHERY,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  The  Pines, Worcester  Pk.,Surrey.

HuMFREY,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.

Hunter,  Thomas,  Elmhurst,  Hillmorton-road,  Rugby.

HuNTiNGFORD,  Miss,  North  End  House,  Winchester.

HuTCHiNS,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town.

Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Brooklands  House,  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Hyamson,  Albert  M.,  Secretary's  Office,  General  Post  Office,  E.C.

Hyslop,  Dr.,  Bethlem  Hospital,  London,  S.E.

Tliffe,  Mrs.,  13,  Warnborough-road,  Oxford.

Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingram,  Hon.  Mrs.  Meynell,  Temple  Newsam,  Leeds.

Innes,  Lady,  Winslow,  Darling  Point,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.

Ireland,  Wm.  W.,  M.D.  (Edin.),  Mavisbush,  Polton,  Midlothian,  N.B.

Jackson,  Rev.  F.,  The  Vicarage,  Newton-upon-Ptawcliffe,  Pickering.

Jackson,  William'  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Pen  Wartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,  S.  Hilda's  School,  Clifton-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  M  A.,  Villa  degli  Angoli  Fiesole,  Florence.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springtield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Overton,  Lansdowne-road,  Bournemouth.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyti  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.

*Jenkin!?,  E.  Vaughan,  Energiyn,  38,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.

Jervis,  Mrs.,  30,  Ladbroke-square,  London,  W.

J Essup,  A.  E.  .Villa  St.  Dominique,  Valescure,  St.  Raphael  ( Var),  France.
Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.
Jevons,  F.  B.,  Litt.  D.,  Hatfiekl  Hall,  Durham.
Johnes,  Mrs.,  Dolaucothy,  Llanwrda  R.S.O.,  South  Wales.
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.
Johnson,  Rev.  Waylano,  LL.D.,Fredon,  Sussex  Co.,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  The  Writer's  Club,  Hastings  House,  Norfolk-
street,  Strand,  W.C.
Jones,  E.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  Corpus  Buildings,  Cambridge.


414


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Jones,  Captain  Hknry  Michael,  V.C.,  H.B.M.  Legation,  Lima,  Peru.
Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.
Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.
Jones,  Professor  P.,  64,  Via  St^^-  Lucia,  Naples.

Jones,  Rev.  T.  Lloyd,  B.A.,  B.D.,  Ffynonfair,  Pencader,  Carmarthen.
Jordan-Smith,  Benj.,  A.R.C.S.,  F.C.S.,  Lower  Chaplin-road,  Longton,
Staffs.

Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Kay,  H,  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.

Kearne,  Percy,  37,  Avonmore-gardens,  West  Kensington,  W.
Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  26,  Yanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Kelso,  Commander  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester.
Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.
*Keulemans,  J.  C,  13,  York-terrace,  Brewery-road,  Southend.
King,  Miss,  50,  Gloucester-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
KiNSGBURY,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.
Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Macra,  Eltham,  Kent.
K  NIGHT,  Charles  N.,  M.A.,  31,  Holland-park,  London,  ^Y.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehui-st  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.
Knox,  Nathaniel,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Knutsford,  The  Lady,  7-5,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.
Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27,  Mikealsgatan,  Helsingfors,  Finland.
Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.W.  S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Yicarage,  Ilford.
Lafone,  A.  W.,  M.P.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
Laing,  R.M.,M.  A.,B.Se.,Boys'High  School,  Christchurch,New  Zealand.
Lambert,  Edward  W.,  F.R.G.S.,  13, Great  James-st.,  London, W.C.
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Rokeby  Rectory,  Barnard  Castle.
Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.  B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.
Laurie, Prop.  H.,  LL.D.,  Melbourne,  South  Australia.
Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  1,  The  Cloisters,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Crown  Hill,  Norwood,  S.E.
Leap,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Lee,  Rev.  W.  T.,  4,  Edith-terrace,  Mount  Gold-road,  Plymouth.
Legge,  The  Lady  Frances,  Woodsome,  Hudderstield.
Lehmann,  Miss  B.  Hoyt,  22,  VValpurgis  Strasse,  Dresden.
Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.  A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Leopold,  Dr.  H.  M.,  8,  Yerversdyk,  Delft,  Holland.
Lethbridge,  Alan  B.,  26,  (Jxford-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Levy,  Mrs.,  16,  Campden  House-road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llaneliy,  Carmarthenshire.
Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland-av., W.C.


Lifst  of  Members  and  Associates.


415


Librarian,  Grosvenor  Library,  Buffalo,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.G.
Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial-street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Librarian  op  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.
LiMOND,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.
Linden,  Miss  Olga,  3,  Versailles  Road,  Anerley,  S.E.
Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.
Lindsay,  R.,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  The  Oaks,  Botley,  Hants.
Lloyd,  Major  Francis,  22,  Cadogan-square,  London,  S.W.
Lloyd,  Otho Holland,  6, Place  d'Ai-mes,  Canton Neuchatel,  Switzerland.
Lloyd,  Thos.  Edward,  .T.P.,  Coedmore,  Cardifjan.
Lodg-e,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool.
Lodge,  Robert,  Laurie  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.
Logan,  Miss  Isabel,  6,  Richmond-terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.
LovELL,  Reginald  H.,  449,  Collins-street,  Melbourne.
Lucas,  Henry,  "Thirlmere,"  Anderton  Park-rd.,  Moseley,  Birmingham.
Ludlow,  Col.  William,  Array  Building,  New  York,  U.S.A.
LuNN,  Charles,  24,  Avonmore-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
LuxMOORE,  Miss,  Bryn  Asaph,  St.  Asaph,  North  Wales.
Lyell,  David,  Ard-choille,  The  Ware  Road,  Hoddesdon,  Herts.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  The  Vicarage,  Eccles,  Manchester.
Lyttelton,  Sybella  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.U.,  F.R.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.
MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.
James's,  S.W.

*Macdonald,  Rev.  .1.  A.,  6,  Queen's-avenue,  Freshfield,  Liverpool.
Macintyre,  John,  M.B.,  F.R.S.E.,  179,  Bath-street,  Glasgow.
Mackay,  George  D.,  Inveralmond,  Cramond,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  AV.

Malevsky-Malevitch,  Madame  S.,  23,  Millionnaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  33,  Gloucester-ter.,  Hyde  pk.,  London,  W.
*Mangin,  Marcet,  102,  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.
Mann,  Rev.  Pre  DERic,  M.A.,  Grange  House,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  6,  Slialston  Villas,  Ewell-road,  Surbiton  Hill.
Marsh,  Edward  H.,  B.A.,  30,  Bruton-st.,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.
Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  Dr.  Thomas,  95,  Fortess-road,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
]\[arten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  15,  Thurloe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Martin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.


416


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Martinez,  Mrs.,  16b,  Hyde  Park -mansions,  London,  W.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Jullundur,  Punjab.
Mason,  Miss  M.  II.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.
Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Masterman,  Charles  F.  G.,  M.A.,  17,  Dean's-yard,  London,  S.W.
Mathews,G.B.,B.A.,9,  Menai  View-terrace,Upper Bangor, Nortli  Wales.
Matthews,  Frank  H.,  22,  Wentworth-street,  Bolton,  Lancashire.
Matthews,  Mrs.,  15,  Stanley-gardens,  London,  W.
Maud,  Miss  Constance,  Sanderstead  R.ectory,  near  Croydon.
Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  M.P.,  48,  Belgrave-square,

London,  S.W.
Maxwell,  Joseph,  37,  Rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
Mayo,  Ernest  S.  G.,  5,  Castle-arcade,  Cardiff.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  13,  Charing  Cross-mansions,  Charing  Cross-road,  London,
W.C.

McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Dalnottai',  Kirkpatrick,  Dumbartonshire.
McClure,  Henry,  M.D.,  Cromer,  Norfolk.

McCoNNEL,H.W.,M.A.,M.B.,M.R.C.S.,ManorHouse,Ryburgh,Norfolk.
McHuGH,  P.  A.,  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLachlan,  David  B.,  Grosvenor  House,  Ridgway,  Wimbledon.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  43,  Belgrave-square,  London,  vS.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N".,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McNeily,  a.  J.  W.,  Q.C.,  Supreme  Court,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Meath,  The  Most  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.
Medeiros  e  Albuquerque,  Jose  de,  Rua  S.  Christovam,  36,  Rio
Janeiro,  Brazil.

Mellor,  Miss  Emily,  The  Cottage  Hospital,  Wellington,  Somerset.
Merrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria

Metcalf,  Rev.  Francis  W.  R.,  Wolsey,  Christuhurch-road,  Boscombe.
Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley.
MiDDLEMORE,  Mi4S.,  Melsetter,  (Jrkney,  N.B.

Miers,  Ronald  H.  M.  C,  Lieut.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  and  Co.,  16,  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.
MiLBURN,  Rev.  R.  G.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College  Mission,  Tenby -road,

Stratford,  E.
Miles,  Miss,  Woodhill,  Gerrards  Cross,  Bucks.
Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Miller,  Mrs.  AV.  Piti',  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Mitchell,  Miss,  Ballynure,  Grangecon,  co.  Wicklow,  Ireland.
Mitchiner,  J.  H.,  Acacias,  Barham  Road,  South  Croydon.
Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.


/


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


417


Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.
Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett.Walsingham  House,  Piccadilly, W.
Montagu, The  Lady  Cecil  Scott,  The  Lodge,  Beaulieu,  Southampton.
MoxTEAGLE,  Thk  Lord,  K.P.,  Mouiit  Treticliard,  Foynes,  co.  Limerick.
MoNTEBELLO,  La  Comtesse  de,  44,  Rue  Copertiie,  Paris.
Monteith,  Mrs.  James,  The  Worthys,  Kingsworthy,  Winchester.
Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

MoNTJiORE\CY,.J.E.G.de,B.  A., L.L.B.,20,Old-bldiigs., Lincoln's  Inn,W.C.
Moore,  General  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Norwood,  S.E.
Morell,  Mrs.  Waldo.,  9,  Claremont-terrace,  Francis-st.,  Nottingham.
Morgan,  PtEV.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh.
MoRisoN,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.
Morris,  Charles  A.,  10,  Thrograorton-avenue,  London,  E.G.
MouL,  Mrs.,  12,  Queen's  Mansions,  58,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  c/o  Low's  Agency,  1,123,  Broadway,  New  York,
N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Babbacosube  Cliff,  Torquay.
Moynihan,  B.  G.  a.,  M.B.  (Loud.),  The  General  Intirmary,  Leeds.
Munro,  H.  a.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Lulworth,  Bushey  Green,  Catford.
*MuRRAY,  Donald,  M.A.,  "  Morven,"  Lane  Cove-road,  St.  Leonariis,
Sydney,  N.S.W.

Murray,  Professor  Geo.  G.  Aime,  B.A.,  Barford,  Churt,  Farnhara.
Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
MuRRVY,  Oswald,  Rose  Ci'oix,  Alumhurst-road,  Bournemouth.
Murray,  R.  M.,  M.  A.,  M.B.,  M. R.G.P.  (Edin.),  I  l,Chester-st.,  Edinburgh.
Murray,  T.  Douglas,  29,  Albemarle-street,  London,  W.
Murray,  Hon.  Mrs.,  oO,  Grosvenor-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Mylne,  Mrs.,  83,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  AV.
Neate,  p.  .J.,  F.G.S.,  M.T.M.E.,  Belsize,  Watts-avenue,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D  ,  St.  Michael's  Vicarage,  Bromley,  Poplar,  E.
Nelson,  Mrs.  H.  A.,  Ptedbourne,  East  Molesey  Park,  Surrey.
Newbold,  Miss  A.,  4,  Artillery-ljuildings,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.
Newton,  PtEV.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  U.S  A,  ..
NiCHOLL,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.
Nicholls,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M  A.,  St  Oswald's  College,  Tyneniouth.
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  Tlie  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
Nicholson,  Mrs.  R.  W.,  32,  Cadogan-square,  London,  S.W.
NicoLSON,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I.E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Legation,  Tangier,  Morocco.


418


Lifst  of  Members  and  Associates.


*NiSBET,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.

Noble,  James  B.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  167,  Ken tiiiigton  Park-road,  S.E.
Noel-Cox,  H.  L.  N.,  33,  Sydenham  Park,  »Sydenham,  Kent.
Norman,  Mrs.  Herbert  G.  H. ,5, Southwell  gdns,S.Kensington,S.W.
Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Birchtield,  Aston,
Birmingham.

NoRTHCOTE,  Hon.  Hugh  Oliver,  The  Hyde,  Luton.

Nugent,  Mrs.  Arthur,  83,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotham,  Kent.

'Gates,  F.  Edward,  St.  Peter's  Presbytery,  Gloucester.

""■OcHOROWicz,  Dr.  J.,  23,  Rue  Vladimir,  Warsaw.

O'DoNNELL,  Elliott,  Henley  House  School,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Ogilvy,  Mrs.  N.  Hamilton,  Biel,  Prestonkirk,  East  Lothian,  N.B.

Ogilvie,Mrs.,c/o  Dr.OgilviOjH.M.Chiei:  Inspectorof  Schools, Edinburgh.

Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.

O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,  I\I.B., 291, Elizabeth-st., Sydney, NewSouth  Wales.

Opie,  Edward  A.  D  ,  J. P.,  Pirie-streefc,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Orr,  Mrs.  Sutherland, 11,  Kensington-park-gardens,  London,  W.

Owen,  Miss  Lilian  S.,  5,  Whitehall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Pack-Beresford,  DE^^IS  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlo w.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguardo,  Florence.

Palmer,  Miss,  3,  Carlisle-place,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  Si,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W.
Passingham,  Mrs.,  Fermoyle,  Castle  Gregory,  Co.  Kerry.
Patterson,  C.  B.,  19,  West  31st-street,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Payne,  Ernest,  M.A.,  A.LE.E.,  Hatchlands,  Cuckfield,  Sussex.
Pedley,  Charlks  Herbert,  Winterley  House,  near  Crewe.
Pennington,  Mrs.,  Fairholtn,  Bushey  Grange-road,  Bushey,  Herts.
Percival,  Mrs.,  2,  Southwick  Place,  London,  W.
Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Islands.
Perry,  E.  C,  M.  D.,  M.  A.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.
Pethybridge,  Walter,  3,  Pthodesia-road,  Clapliam  Rise,  S.W.
Petrovo-Solovovo,  Michael,  38,  Sergievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Phillips,  PtEV.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Mon.
Phipps,  Miss,  Knebworth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts.
Pickering,  Harold  J.,  L.D.S.  (Eng.),  10,  Museum-street,  York.
Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I.E.E.,  5,  Carew-road,  Thornton  Heath.
Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.
Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  Traveller's  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Fitter,  PtOBERT  A.,  The  School  of  Medicine,  Middlesex  Hospital,  W.
Playford,  Louis  L.,  P.O.  Box,  377,  Johannesburg,  Transvaal,  S.  Africa.
Plenderleith,  William,  126,  Stroud  Green-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.
Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weyniouth-street,  London,  W.

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-isquare,  S.W.

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Rye  Vale,  Leixlip,  co.  Kilrlare.

PoxTiFEX,  Miss,  72,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Pope,  (jtEORGE  H.,  INLA.,  B.O.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Porter,  Mrs.,  Sydney  House,  Westclift'e-road,  Bournemouth.

*PoRTER,  Miss,  16,  Pvussell-square,  London,  VV.C.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  AVestminster,  S.W.
Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Campden  Hill-square,  London,  W.
Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.
PowLES,  Lewis  Charles.  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.
PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot  square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Prescott,  Miss  Frances  E.,  152,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.
Pribitkof,  v.,  67,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Pullen,  Miss,  Milton  View,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.
Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Derwent-hill,  Ebchester,  co.  Durham.
PuRDiE,  Mrs.,  27,  Palace-court,  London,  W.

PvM,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Luniiani-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  52,  Grosvenor-street,  London,  W.

Rae,  Roderic  H.,  103,  Sotheby-road,  High  bury -park,  N.

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W-

Ramsay,  Lady,  23,  Draycot-place,  Cadogan-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.

Raper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cxford.

Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  New  College,  Oxford.

Raupert,  J.  G.  F.,  30,  Belsize-square,  London,  N.W.

Raworth,  Edwin,  5,  South  Park-road,  Harrogate.

Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  6,  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  Univei'sity  College,  Bangor.

Rensburg,  Miss  Netta  L.,  12,  Ivanhoe-road,  Sefton  Park,  Liverpool.

Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.

Reynolds,  Mrs.  Henry,  Tandill,  Argentina,  S.  America.

Rich,  Miss,  50,  Queen's-gate-terrace,  London,  S  W.

Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  FarclifFe-place,  Bradford.

Riddiford,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Chalfont,  Barnwood,  near  Gloucester.

Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Singapore.

Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.

Ritchie,  Miss  M.,  165,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W.

Robb,  Mrs.,  ■16,  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.

Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  39,  Addison-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  A.sylum,  Morning.side,  Edinburgh.


420


Li'it  of  Memhera  and  Associates.


lloBERTSON,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-cle-la-Zouch.

lioBERTSOiV,  Miss  N.,  c/o  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  19,  Bucking-
ham-street, Adelphi,  London,  W.O.

Robin,  Pebcv  A.,  B.  A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Robinson,  Edward,  G.E.,  F.R.A.S.,  4,  Castelnau-gardens,  Barnes,  S,W,

Robinson,  George  R.,  31,  James-street,  Liverpool.

Robinson,  Lady,  5,  Cromwell  Houses,  London,  S.W.

Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.

RoDEWALD,  Alfred  E.,  The  Albany,  Liverpool.

^Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.

Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Foxley  Lodge,  West  ^V'orthing,  Sussex.

Rogers,  George  F.,  M.A.,  M.D.,  4,  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.

Rogers,  R.  S.,  M.A.,  M.S.,  M.D.,  Flinders-street,  Adelaide,  South
Australia

RooME,  Henry  A.,  J. P.,  Oudenarde,  Victoria-road,  Soutlisea.
RoTCH,  C.  B.,  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge.

Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.
RoxiiURGii,  R.,  M.lx,  F.R.G.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19,  Gladhow-gardens,  S.W.
PtUDOLPHi,  Eduard,  20,  Zabalcansky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg,  Russia.
RusHTON,  C.  H.,  7,  Queen  Elizabeth's-walk,  Stoke  Newington,  N.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  Rev.  T.  H.,  St.  Martin's  Vicarage,  Gospel  Oak,  London, N.W.
Rylands,T.G.,F.L.S.,F.G.S.,Highiields,  The! wall,  nearWan-ington.
Ryves,  JMiss  Miriam  G.  B.,  Bentley  Hall,  Fennj'  Bentley,  Ashbourne,
Derbysliire.

Sa.tous,  Charles  E.  de  M.,  M.D.,  2,043,  Walnut-st.,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.
Samaldas,  Lalubhai, Chief Revenue  Officer, Bhavnager,  Bombay

Preisidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxslialls,  Lindtield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sanders,  Mrs..  33,  Buckingham-palace-mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.
Sanderson,  J.  Murray,  B.A.,  London  Hospital,  London,  E.
Sanger,  Charles  Percy,  Triiiity  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.
Saunders, Mrs.  W. H. Radcliffe, 29, Bramham-gai'dens,  South

Kensington,  London,  S.W.
Schiller,  F^CS.,  M.A.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
ScHRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.
Schreiber,  Ma.jor,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  London,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  22,  Old  Queen-street,  Westminster,  S.W.
Schwabe,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Lieut.-Governor's  House,  Chelsea  Hospital ,  S.W.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRiiTS,  T.  Cecil,  4,  Drapers'-gardens,  London,  E.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


421


Scull,  Mrs.,  The  Pines,  2,  Langland-gardens,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmevsley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N.
Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.
Selous,  Edmund,  Warail  Hall,  Mildeuhall,  Suffolk.
Selous,  Mrs  ,  Leafield,  Gibson's  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sharpe,  J.  W^.,  M.A.,  WoodroiFe,  Portarlington-road,  Bournemouth.
8haw,  Rev.  Charles  J.  M.,  The  Orchard,  Swanley,  Kent.
Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  JST.,  Emmanuel  House,  Cambridge.
Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.

Sheldon,  Mrs.  L.  V.,  52,  Queen's-rd.,  i\Iarlborough-rd.,  London,  N.W.
*Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifford  Rectory,  Essex.

Shove,  Miss  E.,K.Q.C.P.L,M.B.,  25,  St  Mark's  cres.,  Regent'sPk.,  N.W.

*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Takoma  Park,  District  of  Columbia,  U.S.A.

Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.

SiDGWicK,  Mrs.  Edward,  25,  Collingham-road,  S.W.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W,

Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.

Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  ]\I.A.,  LL.D.,  Waterford,  Ireland.

Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  .3-4,  St.  Michael-street,  Oxford.

Sloman,  Samuel  George,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.

Smith,  Mrs.  Apsley,  Flore  House,  Weedon,  Northamptonshire.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

Smith,  D.  R.  Crawfurth,  36,  Chapel-street,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  C.S.I.,  Stokeleigli,  Weybridge.

Smith,  John  George,  87,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  W.

Smith,  Martyn,  Abberton  Hall,  Pershore.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson  Park,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Smith,  Reginald  A.,  B.A.,  48,  Upper  George-street,  Portman-square,

London,  W.
Smith,  Mrs.,  Barnes  Hall,  Sheffield.
Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.
Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Somerset,  The  Lady  Henry,  Eastnor  Castle,  near  Ledbury.
Sowrey,  John,  Tudor  House,  Lower  King's-rd.,  Kingston-on-Thames.
Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Fairholme,  Ventnor,  Isle  of  Wight.
Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.


422


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Spencer,  Miss  Georgiaxa  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Sperling,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.
Spinks,  J UDGE,  Vernon,  British  Columbia.

Squarey,  Andrew  T.,  J. P.,  Gorsey  Hey,  Bebington,  Birkenhead.
St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.
Stafford,  Mrs.,  9,  Fitzwilliam-square,  Dublin.

Stainforth,  Miss  Emily,  15,  Matheson-road,  West  Kensington,  W.

Stange,  Miss  F.  M.,  12,  Holland-park,  London,  W.

Stanley,  Sir  Henry  M.,  M.P.,  G.C.B.,  D  C  L.,  LL.D.,  2,  Rich-
mond-terrace, London,  S.W.

Stansfeld,  J.  B.  Evelyn,  M.A.,  Junior  Carlton  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Stapley,  Richard,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.

Stapley,  Mrs.,  33,  Bloomsburj'-square,  London,  W.C.

Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  House,  Wimbledon,  S.W.

Stearn,  H.  T.,  M  A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stephens,  William  Walker,  Rosehall  Lodge,  Dalkeith-rd.,  Edinburgh.

Stephenson, SirAugUStusK.,K.C.B.,Q.C., 46, Ennismore-gdns,S.AV.

Stepney^,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  Andrew,  M.A.,  16,  Warrender  Park  Crescent,  Edinburgh.

Stewart,  JIrs.  G.  A.,  38, Weymouth-street,  Portland-place,  London,W.

Stewart,  Miss  Susan,  89,  Philbeach-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stirling,  J.  M.  Morries,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Stone,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  5,562,  Clemen.s-a venue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stopp,  Paul,  c/o  Dresdner  Bank,  Di-esden,  Germany.

Storrar,Wm.  M.,  L.R.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  57,  Hoghton-st.,  Southport.

Stout,  George  F.,  M.A,,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Strachey,  JohnSt.  "Loe, Spectator Offi.ce,  l,Wellington-st., Strand, W.C.

Sturges,  Mrs  William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.

*Sugden,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

Sullivan,  W.  R.  Washington,  Purleybury,  Parley,  Surrey.

Summerson,  Samuel  J.,  West  House,  Darlington.

Sutton,  Mrs.,  49,  Lexham-gardens,  London,  W.

Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere  street,  London,  S.W.

SwANVViCK,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Sweeney,  Hubert  J.  P.,  Balliol  House,  Toynbee  Hall,  London,  E.

Sweeting,  Richard,  D.H.,  B.A.,  D.P.H.,  6,  Hereford  Mansions,
Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  W.

Swire,  Commander  H.,  R.X.,  Buxton  Lodge,  Rodwell,  Weymouth.

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W.

Szentirmay  de  Darvastu,  Bela  Maria  Joseph  de,  Austro-Hungarian
Consulate  General,  Beyrout,  Syria.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Castle  View,  Strood,  Rochester.

Talbot,  Captain  Frederick  G.,  Ritle  Brigade,  15,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


423


Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Tanner,  Ernest,  Hazlehurst,  Penarth.

Tanner,  Slingsby,  104:B,  Mount-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall  street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.

Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.,  6,  College-lawn,  Cheltenliam.
Tebb,  a.  E.,  M.D  ,  9,  Laiigland-piace,  Finchley-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Temple,  Reginald  W.,  Ashley  House,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  W.C.
Terrill,  George  Morton,  M.D.,  336,  Post-street,  San  Francisco,

California,  U.S.A.,  (President  of  the  California  Psychical  Society).
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park  road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  J.  W.,  F.LC,  F.C.S.,  2,  Hampstead  Hill  Mansions,  N.W.
Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  53,  Croxteth-road,  LiverpooL
Thompson,  Mrs.  Edmond,  87,  South  Hill-park,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Thomson,  Edward  John,  Glen  Tower,  Great  AVestern-road,  Glasgow.
Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thomson,  VV.  B.,  22,  Wallwood-road,  Leytonstone,  Essex.
Thornton,  W.  M.,  M.Sc.  (Vict.),  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-

on-Tyne.

Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.
Thurstan,  F.  W.,  M.A.,  17,  Buckingham  Gate  Mansions,  James-street,

Buckingham  Gate,  S.W.
Toby,  Ernest  G.,  Denmark  House,  Hatfield,  Herts.
Tooth,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  Woodside,  Croydon.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Ivenmare,  Ii-eland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris.
Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88,  Park  .'5treet,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
Tuker,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Balquholly,  Turriff,  N.B.
Tweedie,  David  M.,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  AVoodleigh,  Prescot.

Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.

Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  251,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.


424


Lint  of  Members  and  Associates.


Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  Sefton  House,  Hardwick-road,  Eastbourne.
Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-o-ai-dens,  Cambridge.
Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.
ViAN-WiLLiAMS,  Rev.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place,  North  Shields.
VicKERS,  Mrs.,  26,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.
ViLLAMARiNA,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.
Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Southfield  Grange,  Wandsworth,  S.W.
Wade,  Rev.  William,  19,  St.  Charles'-square,  North  Kensington,  W.
Walford,  Col.  Neville  L.,  R.A.,  1,  Ashburn  place,  London,  S.W.
Wall,  Miss  :M.  M.,  99,  Chelsea-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39,  Harley-street,  London,  W.
Wallop,  Hon.  &  Rev.  E,  Missionary  Coll.,  Burgh  le  Marsh,  R.S.O.,Linc.
Warburton,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.A.,  St.  James's  Vicarage,  Congleton.
Ward,  Wilfrid,  Molescroft,  Eastbourne.
Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.
Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.
Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  87,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.
Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.  A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa,01d  Swinford, Stourbridge.
Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C,  Colworth,  Bedford.
Way,  William  R.,  Hillside,  Upminster,  Essex.

Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W.
Webb,  Godfrey,  167,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Wedd,  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W.
Wells,  H.  G.,  Arnold  House,  Sandgate.

Westcott,  William  Wynn,  M.B.,  D.P.H  ,  396,  Camden-road,
Loudon,  N.

Western,  Rev.  William  T.,  M.A.,  Bartlow  Rectory,  Linton,  Cam-
bridgeshire.

W^estlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Westlake,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Behnhard,  Heathtteld  Down,  Modbury,  S.  Devon.
Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
White,  Miss  E.  Hilda,  170,  Queen 's-gate,  London,  S.W.
White  Leedham,  D.L.,  F.C.S.,  16,  Wetherby-gdns.,  London,  S.W.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  5,  St.  Andrew's- road,  Enfield.
Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  34,  York-street  Chambers,  Bryanston-

square,  London,  W.
Whiting,  J.  Mahkby,  58,  Ted  worth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone.
Wigglesworth,  Alfred,  157,  Fenchurch-street,  London,  E.G.
Wilberforce,  Rev.  Canon  Basil,  M.  A.,  20,  Dean's  Yard,  London,  S.W.
AViLKiNS,  Silvanus,  15,  Victoria-street,  Westminster,  S.W.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.  425-

WiLLAN,  Miss  F.  M.,  Mayfield  House,  Old  Pord-rd.,  Bethnal  Green,  E.
WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  9,  Upper  Beulah-hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G., M.  A.,  Ketteringham,Wymondliam,  Norfolk.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  Tlie  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  Miss,  7,  Cromwell-terrace,  Scarborough.

Wilson,  Robert,  M.I.C.E.,  7,  St.  Andrew's  Place,  Regent's  Park,N.W.
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.
W^isden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
Wise,  Miss,  Shrubland  Hall,  Leamington.

WiTHERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.  A.,  8,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  S.W.
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.O.
WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  9  Moika,  St.  Petersburg.

WooDD,  Mrs.  Basil,  Leckby,  Hollington  Park,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.
Woodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Woods,  John  F.,  M.D.,  Hoxton  House  Asylum,  London,  N.
Wright,  Mrs.  Almroth  E.,  Iiigleside,  Netley,  Hants.
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  7,  Westbourne-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
Yearsley,  p.  Macleod,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.O.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings-

bury-Neasden,  N.W.
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.
Young,  Prof.  W.  H.,  883,  East  Main-street,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckingham  Street,
Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


2  F  2


426


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OF  THE  AMElilCAN  BRANCH.

(June,  1899.)


Names  of  Members  are  printed  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  by  an  Asterisk.
Names  of  Associates  are  2>rinted  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  when  anuiher  Country  is  named.


Adams,  Gkorge  S.,  M.D.,  Insane  Hospital,  Westboro,  Mass.

Agelasto,  M.,  Box  244,  Norfolk,  Va.

Albery,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.

Albree,  John,  Junr.,  Sv/ampscott,  Mass.

Albbice,  Ralph,  187,  Western-avenue,  Allegheny,  Pa.

Alexander,  Don,  253,  Fourth-aveaue,  Louisville,  Ivy.

*Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Binrjingham,  Mich.

Ames,  Miss  Evelyn,  c/o  Messrs.  Whitby  and  Co.,  Florence,  Italy.

Anderson,  Professor  A.  W.,  Macalester  College,  St.  Paul,  Minn.

Arguelles,  Don  Pedro,  Collector  of  Customs,  N.  Laredo,  Mexico.

Arnold,  Miss  Fannie,  323,  North  17th-street,  Omaha,  Neb.

Atwood,  Dr.  G.  Wilson,  17,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  2,641,  Prairie-Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bancroft,  Miss  M.,  Haddonfield  Training  School,  Haddon  Field,  N.J.

Barber,  Rev.  George  E.,  Marlborough,  N.Y.

Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  EUis-ave.  and  Oakwood-boulevard,  Chicago,  111.
Barrett,  Harrison  D.,  Box  3,  Needham,  Mass.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  Brookline,  Mass.

Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.

Bates,  Charles  F.,  2,642,  Euclid-avenue,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Bates,  Dr.  Mary  C,  Exeter  Chambers,  Exeter-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bayley',  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  s.e.  cor.  15th  &  Poplar-sts.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Beale,  Rev.  Chas.  H.,  The  Warren,  Roxbury,  Mass.

Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda  W  ,  4,722,  Woodlawn-a venue,  Chicago,  111.

Bengler,  Chas.  E.,  Box  2,851,  Boston,  Mass.

Bickford,  R.  G.,  Neivport  News,  Va.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  427

BiGELOW,  A.  E.,  First  National  Bank,  New  Hampton,  Iowa.  •

Bill,  George  E.,  M.D.,  Harriwburgh,  Pa.

Blakesley,  Theodore  S.,  286,  Marshfleld-aveaae,  Chicago,  111.

Block,  Louis,  211,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.

Blodgett,  C,  M  D.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Blodgett,  Mrs.,  2.38,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Boardman,  Hon.  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Booth,  Mrs.  Lucy  C,  Great  Barrington,  Mass.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BowDiTCH,  Professor  H.  P.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Boyd,  Mrs.  Ella  F.,  Hyde  Park,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.  ; .

Brewster,  Edwin  T.,  Andover,  Mass.

Briggs,  Mrs.  N.  R.,  Bismarck,  N.  Dakota.

Brimmer,  Mrs.  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Henrv,  110,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Henry  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Mrs.  H.  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Rev.  Howard  N.,  79,  Moum  Vernon  School,  Boston,  Mass.

Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  16,  E.  37th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Buffet,  Dr.  E.  P.,  -520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.

Bollard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

BuLLEY,  R.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

BuNDY,  Mrs.  John  C,  624,  Sheridan-square,  Evanston,  111.
Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Cabot,  Caroline  A.,  M.D.,  126,  West-48th  St.,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Callender,  Ira  S.,  Galesburg,  111.

Carey,  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carey,  Mrs.  Arthur  A.,  29,  Fairlield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  46,  Exchange-place,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carpenter,  Mrs.  Franklin  R  ,  Deadwood,  Suutli  Dakota.

Carpenter,  W.  O.,  517,  Adams-street,  Chicago,  111.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle  street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Casey, Theodore  B.,The  Empire,333,Commonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10,  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.  ^
Oaulkins,  Silas,  310,  Requena-street,  Lo4  Angeles,  California.
Chard,  Thomas  S.,  534,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111.
Chase,  G.  N.  (Lieut.  U.S.  Army,  Rtd.),  Box  198,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.
Chase,  Harvey  S.,  8,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.


428


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Chatwin,  .James,  926,  Fairraount-avenue,  Phila.,  Pa.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  120,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  W.  T.,  Box  184,  Rome,  Ga.

Chick,  Frank  W.,  Madrid,  Franklin  Co.,  Maine.

Christine, G.  Maxwell,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,043,  N.  12th-st., Philadelphia,  Pa.

Clark,  Miss  F.  Benita,  578,  East  60th-street,  Chicago,  111.

Clarke,  Miss  Rebecca  S.,  Nor  ridge  week,  Maine.

Closson,  Dr.  JaiMES  H.,  53,  West  Chelton-avenue,  Germantown,  Pa.

Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  IST.H.

Clough,  H.  W.,  2,018,  H  St.,  KW.,  Washington,  D.C.

Cockerill,  Mrs.  R.  D.,  Glasgow,  Mo.

CoE,  Mrs.  Andrew  J.,  P.O.  Drawer,  101,  New  Haven,  Conn.
CoE,  Miss  M.  A  ,  55,  Brook  street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Coffin,  Abraham  B.,  Winchester,  Mass.
Coleman,  Miss  Anne  C,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania.
Coleman,  Geo.  E.,  Santa  Barbara,  California.

*Coleman,  William  Emmette,  Chief  Quartermaster's  Office,  Phelan

Building,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Conklin,  Roland  R.,  524,  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
CooKE,  Dr.  Joseph  B.,  269,  West  138th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
CooLiDGE,  Mrs.  J.  T.,  Junr.,  114,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Cope,  Porter  F.,  The  Bertram,  33rd  &  Chestnut-sts ,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
CoRTis,  Miss  Grace  M.,  126,  West  70th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Coryell,  V.  M.,  20,  Lincoln-road,  Flatbush,  N.Y.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Amsterdam,  N.Y.
Crane,  A.  J.,  218,  Walnut-street,  Montclair,  N.J.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Crothers,  Dr.  T.  D.,  Walnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.
Cruft,  George  T.,  433,  Shawmut-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
CuLiN,  William  D.,  M.D.,  Par rish-s tree t,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Curran,  Richard  L.,  114,  W.  34th-street,  New  York.
Curtis,  W.  E.,  14,  W.  20th-street,  Manhattan,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cushing,  Miss  Eleanor  P.,  76,  Elm-street,  Northampton,  Mass.
Davidson,  H.  A.,  179,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Davis,  Dr.  D.  W.,  402,  Land  Title  Building,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Dawson,  Miles  M.,  11,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Delabarre,  Prof.  E.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Denton,  Miss  Jane  A.,  Palo  Alto,  Cal.

Derby,  Captain  George  McC,  3,232,  Prytania-st.,  New  Orleans,  La.
Dewing,  O.  M.,  M.D.,  State  Ho.spital,  King's  Park,  Long  Island,  N.Y.
Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
DiCKERMAN,  Rev.  W.  F.,  276,  Orange  street.  New  Haven,  Conn.
Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Room  22,  94,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  111.
DixoN,  George  E.,  82,  West  Jackson-street,  Chicago,  111.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


429


DoANE,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Dodge,  Joseph  T.,  346,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.
PoBR,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dow,  Alexander,  255,  V\^.  92nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Dow,  Lorenzo,  255,  W.  92nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  Auburndale,  Mass.
Draper,  George  Otis,  Hopedale,  Mass.
Drown,  T.  Pickering,  Framingham,  Mass.
Dyer,  Walter  H.,  Knightsville,  Maine.

Easton,  Prof.  Morton  W.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  224,  South  43rd-st.,  Phila.,  Pa.

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Eldridge,  Prof.  E.  H.,  The  Temple  College,  Broad  &  Berks-streets,

Philadelphia,  Pa.
Elliott,  Miss  Alma  C,  4,916,  Washington-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  480,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Esty,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.
Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  53,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  J.,  Eliot,  Maine.

FiLLEBROWN,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  157,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Finnigan,  John,  (31,  Beekman-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

FiTTS,  William  B.,  Calumet  Club,  267,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Fluhrer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  95,  Main-street,  Albion,  N.Y.

FoRMAN,  G.  A.,  824,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Forman,  Lawrence  C,  25,  Dunster  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.

FoRWOOD.  Peploe,  c/o  California  Fig  Syrup  Co.,  398,  Church-street,

San  Francisco,  Cal.
Frankland,  Fruderick  W.,  346,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Fuller,  S.  C,  M.D.,  Insane  Hospital,  Westborough,  Mass.
FuUerton,  C.  W.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.
Fullerton,  Professor  G.  S.,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  West  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Gage,  Hon.  Lyman  J.,  1,715,  Massachusetts-ave,  Washington,  D.C.
Gale,  Prof.  Harlow  S-,  Univ.  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.
Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.
Gardiner,  J.  Hays,  18,  Grays  Hall,  Harvard  Univ.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Gay,  Walter,  73,  Rue  Ampere,  Paris^  France.
Gehring,  Albert,  109,  Edge  water-street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.
Gibier,  Dr.  Paul,  313,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Goddard,  George  A.,  1,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Goodale,  Henry  Sterling,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
GooDNOW,  H.  R.,  95,  Riverside  Drive,  New  York.


430


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Geay,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Greene,  Bertram,  6,  Louisburg-S(|iiare,  Boston,  Mass.
Gridlky,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Mrs.  J.,  1105,  Davis-street,  Evanston,  111.
Griffinq,  Mrs.  Jane  R.,  1,976,  Lexington  Avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Griffith,  Mrs.  Mary  E.,  Room  603,  Ne^v  England  Building,  Euclid-
avenue,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Gross,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  48,  Lake  Shore  Drive,  Chicago,  111.
Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.
Ha.ll,  James  P.,  6,  Poplar-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Hamilton,  C.  M.,  M.D  ,  Oklahoma  City,  Oklahoma  Territory.
Hapgood,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  Alton,  111.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,922,  Locust-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  1,303,  P. -street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  239,  Washington-street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Hartzell,  F.  S.,  728,  North  Market-street,  Canton,  Ohio.
Harvey,  Anson  B.,  M.A.,  140,  North  16th-streefc,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Haworth,  George  D.,  20,  Groveland-park,  Chicago,  111.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon- street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hayward,  Alvinza,  532,  Market-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Heilner,  Rev.  S.  A.,  D.D.,  2,434,  Marshall-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.

Henshaw,  ]\1ks.  Harriet  A.,  The  Kempton,  Berkeley  and  Newbury-

streets,  Boston,  Mass.
Herrick,  Wilbur  F.,  Haworth,  N.J.

Heysinger,  Dr.  Isaac  W.,  1,521,  Poplar-street,  Phila.,  Pa.

Heywood,  Charles,  Exchange  Court  Buildings,  New  York,  N.Y.

Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen's  Co.,  N.Y.

Higbee,  Col.  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa.

Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  9,  Massachusetts-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Hill,  Rev.  John  J.,  Sewickley,  Allegheny  Co.,  Pa.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Hodgson,  Dr.  Thomas,  Gertiiule -street,  Kitzroy,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Hoffman,  Prof.  F.  S,,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.

HoLBROOK,  Francis  W.,  Haworth,  N.J.

HoLBROOK,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  N.Y.

HoLRROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holladay,  Prof.  Waller,  120,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadlur,  28,  West  120th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Rev.  S.  V.  V.,  724,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holt,  Dr.  L.  E,  15,  East  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Hoskin,  John,  4,100,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Howard,  Rev.  Arthur  B.,  224,  Waverly-place,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


431


HowLAND,  Miss  B.  M.,  cor.  Carver  and  Museum-sts.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.C.
*HuLL,  Miss  P.  C,  134,  West  llGth-street,  New  York,  KY.
Hunter,  Mrs.  M.  L.,  Lewisburg,  Penna.
HusE,  Wm.,  Pouca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska.

Hutchinson,  Miss  Mary  S.,  2,006,  De  Lancey-place,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  University,  New  Y^'ork,  N.Y.
James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,627,  Olive  street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Jamison,  A.  B.,  M.D.,  43,  West  45th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marl  borough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Jeschke,  Harry,  Hackensack,  N.J.

Jessop,  Dr.  Halton  I.,  1,829,  Arch-street,  Phila.,  Pa.

Jewett,  Professor  Franklin  N.,  Fredonia,  N.Y.

Johnson,  Charles  E,.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.

Johnson,  Professor  Roger  B.  C,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.

Johnston,  Rev.  Howard  A.,  Madison-ave.  k  53rd-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.

JoLiNE,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Jones,  Miss  Alice,  Santa  Monica,  Los  Angeles  Co.,  Cal.

Jones,  George  H.,  561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

JuDAH,  Noble  B.,  2,701,  Prairie-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Kempton,  C.  W.,  c/o  Percy  B.  McCoy,  29,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Kennedy,  Harris,  M.D.,  Readville,  Mass.

KiDD,  G.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Kimball,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Rockford,  111.

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Common  weal  th-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Kingsbury,  Hon.  B.  B.,  Defiance,  Ohio.

Kinraide,  T.  B.,  38,  Spring  Park-avenue,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  Pv.,  LL.D.,  Lock  Box  15,  Oxford,  Mass.
Kopta,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podmok  in  Podraok,  Post  Shiitten-

hofen,  Bohemia,  Europe.
Krebs,  G.  W.  G,  26,  East  Baltimore-street,  Baltimore,  Md.
Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Reading,  Pa.

KuHN,  Hamilton,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.

Lawrence,  A.  E.,  1,  West  81-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  116,  West  103rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Lay,  Dr.  Wilfrid,  251,  W.  109-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Layman,  Dr.  Alfred,  1,630,  N.  18th-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  N.  22nd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.

Librarian,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pennsylvania.


432


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Librarian,  Cazenovia  Public  Library,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass.

Librarian,  Lowell  City  Libi-ary,  Lowell,  Mass.

Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminaiy,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

LiNDESLEY,  J.,  No.  200,  Yokohama,  Japan.

LiPPiTT,  General  Francis  J.,  1412,  Hopkins-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Llewellyn,  F.  T.,  B.A.,  C.E.,  1,012,  Hennen-bldg.,  New  Orleans,  La.

Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Lombardi,  C,  265,  14th-street,  Portland,  Oregon.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jei-sey  City,  N.J.

Loughnane,  John,  78,  Duane-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Lounsbery,  Mrs.  Richard  P.,  12,  East  35th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Low,  Clarence  F.,  Common  and  Carondelet-sts.,New  Orleans,  Louisiana.

LuKENS,  Dr.  Anna,  1068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Marchand,  G.  L.,  112,  Clark-street,  Room  516,  Chicago,  111.

Marson,  W.  G.,  311,  Sykes  Block,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Martin,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  409,  North  E.-street,  Tacoma,  Wash.

Martin,  Mrs.  Emma  H.,  71,  Scio-street,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Marvin,  Walter  T.,  6,  West  130th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

McClellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Box  152,  Galena,  111.

McEwEN,  Alfred,  512,  La  Salle-avenue,  Chicago,  III.

McEwen,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

McGee,  W.  J.,  Bureau  of  Amer.  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Institution,

Washington,  D.C.
McHenry,  Miss  J.  Howard,  Garrison,  Balto.  Co.,  Maryland.
McKesson,  J.  E.,  Lebanon,  Mo.

Means,  Miss  Evelyn  B.,  care  of  Miss  Gano,  Asheville,  N.C.
Mendenhall,  Mrs.  E.  R.,  1,804,  Green-sti-eet,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Meyer,  J.,  10,  Chestnut  sti'eet,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Millet,  Josiah  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mills,  Rev.  Benj.  Fay,  22,  Cypress-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Mopfett,  F.  L.,  204,  Flour  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


433


Moody,  Harry  L.,  27,  Crescent-street,  Greenfield,  Mass.
Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  2,909,  CIroveland  avenue,  Chicago,  111.
MosLEY,  Prof.  J.  R.,  Mercer  University,  Macon,  Ga.
Murphy,  Hon.  Franklyn,  1,027,  Broad-street,  Newark,  N.J.
Murphy,  M.  J.,  614,  Center-avenue,  Bay  City,  Mich.
Myers,  W.  H.,  M.D.,  157,  West  Wayne-street,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.
*Newbold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Penna,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Newton,  Mrs.  Mary  B.,  1,722,  Capitol-avenue,  Omaha,  Neb.
Newton,  Rev.  Dk.  R.  Heber,  East  Hampton,  New  York,  N.Y.
Norbury,  Mrs.  J.  F., Plaza  Hotel,  5th -ave.  &  59th-st., New  York,  N.Y.
NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary,  206,  West  71st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Norton,  Mrs.  F.  L.,  30,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119i,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.
Olcott,  Miss  Edith,  4,  East  53rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Oliver,  George  S.  .7.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Osborne,  A.  E.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  Eldridge,  P.O.,  Sonoma  Co.,  Cal.

Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.

Paxson,  W.  L.,  c/o  Messrs.  Baker  and  Hamilton,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Paxton,  Miss  Josephine  E.,  Bethany  College,  Topeka,  Kansas.

Peabody,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  47,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Peckham.  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.

Peebles,  J.  M.,  M.D.,  3,121,  K-street,  San  Diego,  Cal.

Pellew,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Perry,  George  S.,  Binghampton,  N.Y.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  362,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Philpott,  a.  J.,  c/o  Boston  Globe,  Boston,  Mass.
Pitman,  Stephen  M.,  Wayland-a venue.  Providence,  R.I.
Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Post,  C.  W.,  Battle  Creek,  Michigan.
Powers,  Mrs.  Ellen  F.,  Townsend,  Mass.

Pratt,  Fred.  H.,  c/o  W.  B  Cannon,  Harvard  Univ.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Price,  Miss  L.wenia,  815,  W.  13th-street,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  458,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C.  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  i\Iarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  George,  50,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


44,  Sakurada,  Mashi,  Asalu,  Tokio,  Japan.


434


Lint  of  Members  and  Associates.


Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Briclgewater,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  "^2,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Saata  Barbara,  Oal.

Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Bane,  Dr.  C.  S.,  121,  North  lOth-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  176,  West  75th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Reed,  S.  A.,  208,  Century-building,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Rees,  Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  Rosemary  Hall,  Wallingford,  Conn.

Reiff,  Josiah  C,  247,  5th-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y''.

Reininger,  E.  E.,  M.D.,  35.3,  South  Oakley-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Reynolds,  Mrs.  James  B.,  184,  Eldridge-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.

Richardson,  M.  T.,  Ridgewood,  N.J.

Ring,  Dr.  Arthur  H.,  Arlington  Heights,  Mass.

RiNN,  J.  F.,  166,  Reade-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  29,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Rockwell,  A.  E.  P.,  80,  East  Concord  street,  Boston,  Mass.

Rogers,  Dr.  Oscar  H.,  346,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

RoLFE,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.

Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving  street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Russell,  Arthur  J.,  Minn.  Journal,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Russell,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  Haddon  Hall,  Berkeley-st.,  Boston,  Mass.

Savage,  Rev.  Dr.  M.  J.,  Church  of  the  Messiah  Study,  34th-street

and  Park-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Sawyer,  Mrs.  A.  M.,  188,  Institute-road,  Worcester,  Mass.
Sawyer,  Edward  W.,  6,  Chester-street,  Melrose,  Mass.
ScHUBMEHL,  Frank  E.,  M.D.,  87,  Brighfcon-avenue,  AUston,  Mass.
Scott,  Prof.  W.  H.,  131,  Fifteenth-avenue,  Columbus,  Ohio.
Seabury,  Mrs  Clara  E.,  139,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Sears,  Mrs.  J.  M,  12,  Arlington-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Shaw,  Miss  Emma  C,  34,  Linwood-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.
Shaw,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Shed,  Z.,  1,622,  Arapahoe-street,  Denver,  Colorado.
Sheets,  John  C,  College  Hill,  Station  K,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.
*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.W.,  2,508,  University-place,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.O.
Smith,  Bolton,  405,  Washington-street,  Memphis,  Tenn.
Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  John.son  Park,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Winfield,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.
Sparhawk,  Dr.  Samuel,  Burlington,  Vermont.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


435


Sprague,  Mrs.  E.  E.,  Flushing,  IST.Y.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis.  Mo.
Stephenson,  J.  E.,  Ansonia,  Ohio.

Steeling,  Mrs.  E.  C,  22,  Westmoreland-place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stewart,  Joseph,  P.  O.  Departuieiit,  Washington,  D.C.
Stewart,  Mrs.  K.  G.,  Hillsborough,  111.
Stillman,  Mrs.  AV.  O.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.
Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118,  East  22nd-street,  N"ew  York,  N.Y.
Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Cliestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  191,  Prospect-avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Strong,  Charles  A.,  Box  208,  Lakewood,  N".J.
Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  336,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sumner,  Francis  B.,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  N.Y.
*Sutton,  Mrs.  Katharine  P.,  The  Higlilands,  Athol  Centre,  Mass.
Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  410,  West  20th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Tafft,  Henry  S.,  174,  Weybosset-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  44,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Temple,  Rev.  H.  W.,  400,  Locust-st.,  Washington,  Pa.
Tetzel,  Mrs.  F.  G.,  817,  Newhall-street,  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara  Co.,  Cal.
Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara  Co,  Cal.
Thompson,  E.  H.,  10,  Winthrop-streec,  Watertown,  N.Y.
Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Waluut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Thorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  19,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Tighe,  Judge  J.  G.,  350,  Fulton-street,  Brooklyn,  N  Y.
Totten,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street, Washington,  D.C.
Tralles,  William  A.,  1,189,  West-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Tripp,  Dwight  Iv.,  1,317,  Monadnock  Block,  Chicago,  111.
TuRNBULL,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.

TwiTCHELL,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  323,  North  Third-street,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Tyler,  Mrs.  Mosks  Coit,  5,  East-avenue,  Ithaca,  N.Y.

Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmoutli-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Vail,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Woodman-building,  Atlanta,  Ga.

Vaill,  Miss  Annie  E.,  23,  East  48th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Baun,  Du.  Wm.  W.,  1402,  Spruce-street,  Phila.,  Pa.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  1,827,  H-st.,  Sacramento,  Cal.

Vischer,  Carl  V.,  M.D.,  1429,  Poplar-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Wainwright,  Mrs.  W.  P.,  121,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  411,  East  45tli-street,  Chicago,  111.


436


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Walker,  John  A.,  260,  Montgomery-street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Ward,  Professor  Duren  J.  H.,  Ph.D.,  State  Agricultural  College,

Manhattan,  Kansas.
Ward,  Mrs.  L.  A.  Coonley,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.
Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.
Warren,  Lyman  Otis,  Ptockland-street,  Brighton,  Mass.
Waterman,  L.  E  ,  265,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Watson,  Thomas  A.,  Weymouth,  Mass.

Watson,  Professor  AVilliam,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Watts,  H.  M.,  "The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Webb,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  c/o  E.  D.  Ropes,  Esq.,  Salem,  Mass.

Wells,  David  W.,  M.D,,  391,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Wendell,  B.  R.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  272,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

White,  H.  Laurence,  75,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y.

Whiteside,  Miss  H.,  c/o  A.  A.  Carey,  29,  Fairfield-st.,  Boston,  Mass.

Whiting,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Brunswick,  Back  Bay,  Boston,  Mass.

Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon  street,  Boston,  Mass.

Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.  D.,  287,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

AVhittlesey,  Mills,  301,  Chestnut-avenue,  Trenton,  N.J

Wilcox,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  Box  626,  Honolulu,  Hawaiian  Islands.

Williams,  Charles  R.,  Iiuiianapolis  News,  Indianapolis,  Ind.

Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111.

Wilson,  ^Iiss  Martha,  564,  Dearborn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

*WiLTSE,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Lancing,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.

Wing,  Isaac  H.,  Bay  held,  Wisconsin.

Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
WooDBRiDGE,  Profeshor  F.  J.  E.,  Univ.  o£  Minn.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
W^OOdman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Weight,  Miss  Henrietta  C,  Old  Bridge,  New  Jersey.
Wright,  Major-General  H.G.,  1,203,  N.-st.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
Wright,  Colonel  J.  P.,  500,  N.  Commercial-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
ZuG,  C,  P.O.  Box  1,053,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  The  Seokktaby,  5,  Boylston  Plage,  Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOLUME  XIV.

(PARTS  XXXIV -XXXV.)
1898-99.


A.  PAGE

A. ,  Miss  M.  0. ,  Case  recorded  by 238

A.  ,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... 273

Accidental  Coincidences. {See  Chance  and  Chance  Series)

Africa,  West,  Forms  of  Apparitions  in,  by  Mary  H.  Kingsley 331

,, ,, Notes  on  Occultism  in,  by  J.  Shepley  Part,  M.D 343

Alexander,  Professor  A. ,  Cases  comninnieated  by ... .. ...  255,280

Alternative  Events,  Chance  Series  witli  two 184-191,  293-300

,,  ,,  ,,  ,, witli  more  than  two ... ...  300-307

,,  ,, of  Unequal  Probability 308

American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  List  of  Members  426

Anagrams 207,  212

"  Angus,  Miss,"  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision 129-131

"  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques,"  Review  of  some  Cases  recorded  in  ...  115

"  Annee  P.sychologique,  L',"  Review  of ...  146

Artificial  Chance  Series,  On  the  Construction  of,  by  AV.  E.  .lohnson  and

Alice  Johnson  293

Automatic  Phenomena,  Functions  of  the  Brain  in ... 385-6

"  Table-tilting "  Experiments 118-128

"  Aunt  Sally,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 34

B.

B.  ,  Mrs.,  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  Hypnotic  Experiments  with 82

Bagot,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 285

Baker,  William  (and  Mrs.  Piper),  Experiments  in  Automatic  AVriting  22,  23,  30
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  Experiments  in  "  Spirit  Photography"  ..  ...  236
Barton,  G.  B.,  Examination  of  Evidence  in  "Fisher's  tUiost"  Case ...  Ill

Beard,  Dr.  George  M.,  Case  recorded  by 195

Berillon,  Dr.  Edgar, "  L'Hypnotisme  et  I'Orthopedie  Mentale,"  by —

Review  of 139,  143

Berry,  Arthur,  Case  contributed  by .. 274

Binet,  Dr.  A.,  "  L'Annee  Psychologique,"  Edited  by — Review  of 146

Bingham,  Rev.  C.  W.,  Cases  recorded  by 194,  261

Blyth,  Mr.s.  E.  D.,  Case  contributed  by.  265


11


Index  tj  Volume  XIV.


"  Bonney,  Albert,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 41

Braniwell,  Dr.  J.  Milne,  Address  on  Hypnotism  before  the  British

Medical  Association ... ...  98

,,  ,,  ,, Experiments  in  Curative  Hypnotism ...  98-100

Brett,  H.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 199

British  Association,  Presidential  Address  (Part  of),  by  Sir  W.  Crookes  ...  2

Britisli  Medical  Association,  Hypnotism  before  the ... 98-110

Buddhist  Canon,  Coincidences  between  it  and  the  New  Testament ...  174

"Burton,  J.  J.,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 31

Bute,  The  Marquis  of ,  Case  communicated  by  .. . ... ... ... ...  254


C.

Cahagnet,  Alphonse,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 58-71

Causally  Connected  Events  compared  \nt\\  Events  in  a  Chance  Series

170,  172,  182-3,  193

Causation,  Coincidences  Doubtfully  Suggestive  of 205-260

,,  ,,  More  Strongly  Suggestive  of ... ...  261-292

,, Contrasted  with  Chance 172,  176,  183

Design 171

Definitions  of 171,  172

,, Indications  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  173,175

Certainty,  the  Conditions  of,  Professor  Ch.  Richet  on .. .. ..  152

Chance  Resemblances  between  Diagrams,  Colonel  Taylor's  Experiments  on  162

Chance,  Coincidences  Clearly  Due  to ... ...  193-205,322

,, Contrasted  with  Causation ... .. .. 172,  176

,, Design 167,  176

,, Definitions  of 166,167,173,181

,, General  Discussion  of ... ... ...  178-192

Chance  Series,  Artificial,  on  the  Construction  of 293

„  Composed  of  "  Events " 173,181

„  Definition  of 167,  173

Diagrams  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  185

,,  Expectation  of  Events  in ... ... ... ... ...  178

General  Characteristics  of ... 183,  204

„  Methods  of  Analysis  of,  into  "  Sets" 187

„  ,,  ,,  "Cycles" 188,293-308

"Norm" 294

,, Examples  of ... ... ...  297

Probability  of  Events  in... ... ... ... ... ...  178

Relation  of  Events  in,  to  One  Another 181

,,  Represented  by  Curves  ... 168

Summarised  into  Tables  187,  189,  298,  301,  302,  304,  305,  306
Clairvoyance,  Telepathic,  Possible  Cases  of  ...  48,  67-69,  345,  394,  397,  398
Coincidences,  Alice  Johnson  on ... ... ... .. .. ...  158-330

Associated  with  "  Pliysical  Phenomena " '  232-246

Classification  of ... ... ...  165

Definition  of  ... ,. ...  159

„  Due  to  Chance 166,  193-205,  322

„  Examples  of  ... 193-292,309-330

„  Premonitory 214,  246-260,  266,  309,  317,  322

„  Summary  of  Article  on ... ... ... ...  158

„ Sugge.stive  of  Causation  ... ... 165,261-292

„  „ Design 166,  205-232


Index  to  Volume  XIV.


iii


Coincidences,  Suggestive  of  Subliminal  Mental  Action 261-270

Telepathy 270-291

Coluniba,  Saint,  Psychical  Incidents  in  the  Life  of 394,  395

Corbet,  Miss  S.  R.,  Case  contributed  by  234

Costello,  Dr.  W.  B. ,  Case  recorded  bj' ...  56

Crookes,  Sir  Wm.,  F.R.S., Presidential  Address  before  the  British

Association ... 2

Crystal  Vision,  Experiments  in ... 129-131

,,  ,,  Hypnotic  ... 367-371

"  Cycles,"  Analysis  of  Chance  Series  into 188-191,  293-308

D.

D. ,  Mr.s.  ,  Case  contributed  by 266

Dailey,  Judge,  "  Mollie  Faneher,"  by — Review  of 396

De  la  Bastie,  ]M.  Dejean,  Case  recorded  by ...  63

De  Morgan,  A.,  Cases  recorded  by 249,  264

Desbeaux,  M.  E.,  Case  recorded  by 214

Design,  Coincidences  Suggestive  of 205-232

,, Contrasted  with  Causation ... ... ... ... ...  166,171

Chance 167,  176,  181,  206

,, Definition  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  167

,, Indications  of 169,176,206,207

De  Solla,  I. ,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... ... ... ... ...  286

Didier,  Alexis,  Alleged  Clairvoyance  of 51,53-58,74,373

"  Direct  Writing,"  Experiments  in ...  121-126

Du  Potet,  M.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 61-63

E.

Ermacoea,  Dk.  G.  B.,  "  La  Telepatia,"  by— Review  of 392

,,  ,,  On  the  Theory  of  Premonitions 246,  254

Evans,  H.  Ridgely,  "Hours  with  the  Ghosts,"  by — Re\'iew  of 147

Expectation  Compared  with  Probability ... ... ... ... ...  178

,, Of  Events  in  a  Chance  Series ... ... ... .. 178,  183

,, Po.ssible  Causal  Efficacy  of 180

F.

F. ,  Mrs.  ,  Case  contributed  by 242

"  Faneher,  Mollie,  The  Brooklyn  Enigma,"  by  Judge  Dailey — Review  of  396

Feret,  C.  J. ,  Case  recorded  by . . 226

Ferguson,  Mi\,  Clairvoyance  of ... ...  345

Ferroul,  Dr.,  and  Grasset,  Professor,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  of ...  115

Fisher,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 287

"  Fisher's  Ghost,"  Note  on,  by  H.  Artliur  Smith ... ...  Ill

Flechsig,  Professor,  Investigations  into  tiie  Anatomj-  of  the  Brain ...  81

Fry,  G.  W. ,  Case  recorded  by 239

G.

Gale,  Profes.soe  Harlow  S.  ,  Case  communicated  by 272

,,  ,, Reviews  by.  Dr.  Ermacora's  "La  Telepatia"  392

,,-  ,, Herr Miiller's "  Naturmssen-

schaftliche  Seelenforschung  "  389

Glardon,  Rev.  A.,  Case  communicated  by 242

Goodrich-Freer,  A.  ("MissX."),  "Essays  in  Psychical  Research,"  by —

Review  of ... 393


IV


Index  to  Volume  XIV.


Grasset,  Professor,  and  Ferrovil,  Dr.,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance ...  115

Green,  Dr.  C.  Theodore,  On  Dreams  "Dramatised  Backwards" 263

Griffing,  Mrs.  C.  K. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  282

Guessing' Competition,  Case  of  a ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  322

Gurney,  Edmund,  On  a  Case  of  Apparent  Tliought-Transference 245

,, Memorial  Library,  Supplementary  Catalogue  ... ...  399

H.

Hackett,  J.  T.,  Case  contributed  by  199

Hanna,  Rev.  T.  C,  A  Case  of  Secondary  Personality ..- ... ...  388

Hansen  and  Lehmann,  Messrs.,  E.xperiments  in  Unconscious  Whispering  163

Ha.slam,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 250

Hicks,  Colonel  C.  F. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  288

Hodgson,  R. ,  LL.D.,  Reviews  by  : —

"Essays  in  Psychical  Researcli,"  by  "Miss  X."  (A.Goodrich-

Freer) ...  ' '  393

"  Hours  with  the  Ghosts,"  by  H.  R.  Evans  ... ... .. ...  147

Holmes-Forbes,  A.  W.,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... 203

Holmes,  Oliver  Wendell,  Cases  recorded  by ... ... ...  276

Home,  D.  D.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 136-138,  149,  150

Houdiii,  Robert,  Experiments  with  Alexis  Didier ... ... ...  374-381

Howard,  Dr.  L.  O.,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... ... ... ...  253

Hulin,  Prof es.sor  G.,  On  Premonitions  of  Conscription  Numbers ... ...  253

Humble-Crofts,  Rev.  W.  J.,  Case  recorded  by 227

Hypnotism  : —

An.iesthesia,  Hypnotic 96-97,  99,  100

British  Medical  Association  and 98,  100,  109,  110

Clairvoyance,  Hypnotic,  Alleged ... ... 53-71,  115-118,  366-371

Curative 98-100,  109,  110,  140-143

Drugs,  Use  of  in  Inducing ... ... ... ...  140

Hysteria  and  Hypnosis,  Study  of  Cases ... ...  79

Memory,  Conditions  of 80,  92,  388

Miscellaneous  Phenomena 53-71,  79,  98-100,  109,  110,  139,  141,  143,

366,  373,  388,  389

Moral  Aspects  of 99,  100,  109,  110,  143

Organic  Disease  in ... ... ... ... ...  109

Personality,  Hypnotic ... .. .. 101,  366-369

Psychology  of ... ... ... ... ... ... .. .  .  100

Reviews  of  Recent  Works  on 139,  366,  386

Sensation,  Return  of,  Under 83,  84,  85,  86,  87,  94-97

Suggestion  and.  Limits  of ...  100,  107,  108,  110,  140,  141,  386

Time-Sense,  Hypnotic ... ... ... ... .. .. ...  100

I^ses  an<l  Dangers  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ..  109

Hy.slop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Cases  communicated  by ... ... ... 253,  266

.,  ,,  Review  by,  "  The  New  Psychology,"  by  E.  W.

Scripture ... ...  144

Hj'steria  and  Hypnosis,  A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of,  by  Dr.  Morton

Prince ... ... ... ... 79

J.

"  James,  Aaron,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 41

James,  Professor  Wm. ,  Introduction  to  the  "  P.sychology  of  Suggestion,"

by  Boris  Sidis " ...  386


Index  to  Volume  XIV.


V


Jerome,  Mrs.  C.  T.,  Case  contributed  by 272

Jevons,  W.  S.,  Coincidences  recorded  by 219

Johnson,  Alice,  On  Coincidences 158-330

Johnson,  W.  E.,  Diagrams  of  Chance  Series 184-5

,,  and  Alice  Jolmson,  On  tlie  Construction  of  Artificial

Chance  Series 293-308

Jones,  Rev.  H.  E.,  Ca.se  contributed  by . ...  291

K.

KiNGSLEY,  Mary  H. ,  Forms  of  Apparitions  in  West  Africa 331

Kingston,  Dr.  H.  D.  R.,  On  "Spirit  Photography" 237

Kobbe,  Bt.  Major,  Case  recorded  by 230

L.

Lane,  Feedeeick,  Case  contributed  by 309

Lang,  Andrew,  On  Coincidences  between  Mytlis 175

„  ,, On  "  Fi-sher's  Ghost "  Case Ill

"  The  Maldng  of  Religion,"  by— Review  of 128

Leaf,  Dr.  W. ,  Case  contributed  by 263

Lelimann  and  Hansen,  Messrs.,  Experiments  in  Unconscious  Whispering  163

Lodge,.  Professor  O.  J. ,  Cases  communicated  by 229,  230

Lottery,  Definition  of  Legal  Term 322

,, Discussion  of  Theoretical  Meaning  of 324-330

Louis  Philippe,  Coincidences  Regarding  Dates  in  his  Life 210

Loze,  M.,  E.xperiments  in  "Table-Tilting  "  and  "Direct  AVriting  "  118,  121
Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  Case  contributed  by ...  233

M.

Maginot,  Ad^le,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with 59-71,74

Marcillet,  M.,  and  Alexis  Didier 53-58

"  Martin,  Mrs.,"  Communications  (througli  Mrs.  Piper) 31

Massey,  C.  C,  Cases  recorded  by 203,  208

Meetings  of  the  Society ... ...  1,  151

Melbourne  Cup  Dreams 317

Members,  Associates,  and  Hon.  Members  of  the  S.P.R.,  List  of 402

,,  ,,  ,,  American  Brand  1  426

Mercier,  Cli.  A.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  "Suggestion  and  Crime"  (Britisli

Medical  Association) ...  HO

Mirville,  J.  E.  de,  "  Des  Esprits  et  de  leur.s  Manifestations  Fhiidiques,"  '

Extract  from ... ... ...  373

Monte  Carlo  Roulette,  Professor  Karl  Pearson  on 176,  182,  191

"Morton,  F.  A.,"  Communications  (througli  Mrs.  Piper) 12-22,  24

Mo.ses,  W. Staiuton, Alleged Communications  from (through  Mrs.

Piper) "... 36,  47

,,  ,, "  Spirit-Identity,"  Cases  tlirougli ..  51,52,73,74

Miiller, Herr R, "  Naturwissenschaftliehe Seelenforschung," by  —

Re\  iew  of , . 389

Miiller,  Professor  Max,  On  Coincidences ... ... ...  174

Miinsterberg,  Professor,  Psychology  and  Psychical  Research,  A  Reply  to,

by  F.  C.  S.  Schiller ' 348

"  Murdocli,  Kitty,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 22

Murray,  Donahl,  Cases  communicated  by ...  317

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Case  communicated  by  244

,,  ,, On  Subliminal  Perceptions .. . 261


VI


Index  to  Volume  XIV.


Myers,  F.  W.  H. ,  Psycliology  and  Hypnotism  (before  the  British  Medical

Association) 100

Reviews  by —

"  L'Annee  Psychol ogiqne " ... ... ... ...  146

"  Experimental  Study  of  Visions,"  by  Dr.  Morton

Prince  ... .. ... ... ... ... ...  366

"Peculiarities  of  Secondary  Personality,"  by  Pro-
fessor G.  T.  W.  Patrick ?82

N.

Nascimento,  J.  C.  F.,  Case  contributed  by 280

Newbold,  Professor  Wm.  Romaine  : —

A  Further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain

Phenomena  of  Trance ... . . 6

,,  ,,  ,, Detailed  Cases  11-49

,,  ,,  ,,  ,, Discussion  of  Evidence

of  "Spirit-Identity"
8,  9,  10,  21,  22,  29,  30,  33,  41,  44
,,  ,,  Review  of "  MoUie  Fancher, the  Brooklyn


Enigma,"  by  Judge  Dailey 396

"  Norm  Chance  Series  " 294

„ Examples  of 297

"  Norm  Numbers  "  in  Chance  Series 293

0.

Occultism  in  West  Africa,  Notes  on,  by  J.  Shepley  Part,  M.D.  ...  343
Officers  and  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  (1899) 401

P.

Paladino,  Eusapia,  Note  on  the  Alleged  Powers  of,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  157
,,  ,, Prof e.ssor  Ricliet's  Sittings  with ... ... ...  155

'•  Parker,  Mr.,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) ... ... ...  45

Part,  J.  Sliepley,  M.D.,  A  Few  Notes  on  Occultism  in  West  Africa,  by  ...  343
Patrick,  Professor  G.  T.  W. ,  ' '  Some  Peculiarities  of  the  Secondary

Personality,"  by — Review  of... ... ... ... ... .. ...  382

Pearson,  Professor  Karl,  On  Monte  Carlo  Roulette 182,  191

Pelham,  George  ("G.P."),  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 16,  19,  30,

34-42,  45

Personality,  Secondary,  Cases  of  ... ... ... ...  366,397

,,  ,,  Some  Peculiarities  of,  Professor  G.  T.W.Patrick  on  382

Petiet,  M.,  Case  recorded  by 60

"  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Note  on  a  Case  in ... 114

"  Physical  Phenomena "  involving  Coincidences ... ... ...  232-246

„  "Levitation" 135,  136

„  ,,  "Slate-Writing" 119-124

"Table-Tilting" 118-127

Piper,  Mrs.,  The  Trance  Phenomena  of  : —

Lang,  A.,  on  ... 131

Newbold,  Professor  W.  R.,  on  ... 6

Patrick,  Professor  G.  T.  W.,  on 382

Podmore,  F.,  on ... ... ... ... 50

"X.,  Miss,"  on 395-6

Pitkin,  Rev.  John,  Case  contributed  by  . . 254


Index  to  Volume  XIV.


Vll


Podmore,  Frank,  Case  communicated  by 309

,, Discussion  of  tlie  Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Pijier ...  50
,,  ,, Review,  "  The  Making  of  Religion,"  by  Andrew  Lang  128

Powles,  L.  C,  Case  contributed  by 271

Premonitions 214,  246-260,  266,  309,  317,  322

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Hysteria  and

Hypno.sis,  by . ..  79

,,  ,,  "  Experimental  Study  of  Visions,"  Review  of ...  366

Probability  Compared  with  Expectation ...  178

,, Formula  for 182

,, Of  Events  in  Chance  Series 182,  293

„  „  ,, Formulas  for 293-308

Proctor,  R.  A. ,  Cases  recorded  by 225,  249

Psychology  of  Hypnotism,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 100

,,  ,, Hypnotism  and  Genius 103

,,  ,,  ,, and  Hysteria 101

„  ,, and  Sleep 105

„  ,, and  Sleep-Waking  States ...  106

,,  „  ,, Submergence  and  Emergence  103

,,  ,,  ,, Suggestion  and  Self-Suggestion  107

Psychology  and  Psychical  Research,  A  Reply  to  Professor  Miinsterberg,

by  F.  C.  S.  Schiller 348

R.

R.,  Mr.s.,  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  ... 84-86,  94,  95

Ramos,  C.  G.,  Case  contributed  by 255

"Residual  Cycles,"  Occurrence  of,  in  Chance  Series 190,  294,  297-308

,,  Formula  for 294,  300,  307

Retrocognition,  A  Case  of  . . . ... 255

Reviews 115,  128,  139,  144,  146,  147,  382,  389,  392,  393-396

"  Revue  de  Psychologie,  La,"  Review  of ...  141

Richet,  Professor  C. ,  Note  on  MM.  Loze  and  VidaFs  Experiments ...  124
,,  ,,  On  the  Conditions  of  Certainty ... ... ...  152

Rostan,  J.  J.,  Case  recorded  by .. ..  64

Rouillon,  Profe-s-sor,  On  Some  "Table-Tilting"  Experiments  ...  118-128
Roulette  at  Monte  Carlo,  Professor  Karl  Pearson  on... ... 176,  182,  191

S.

S.,  A.,  Case  contributed  by 258

Sandby,  Rev.  G.,  Case  recorded  by ... 55

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  Psychology  and  P.sychical  Research,  A  Rejily  to

Prof essor  Miinsterberg ... ...  348

Scripture,  E.  W.,  "  The  New  Psychology,"  by — Review  of 144

"  Sequences  "  of  Events  in  Chance  Series ...  294-308

Shuttleworth,  Mi.ss  C,  Case  contributed  by .. 199

Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  "  Psychology  of  Suggestion,"  by — Review  of ... .  386

"  Slate-Writing "  Phenomena 119-124

Smith,  H.  Arthur,  Note  on  "  Fisher's  Ghost"  _ Ill

,,  J.  G.,  Review  of  Cases  in  the  "  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychi(juos"  115
Spirit-Identity. (iSce  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.)

"  Spirit-Photography,"  A  Case  of  Supposed ... ... 234

Subliminal  Mental  Action,  Coincidences  Apparently  Due  to ...  261-270

,,  ,,  Possible  Instances  of 213,  244,  245

Swift,  Dean,  Imaginary  Discovery  of  Satellites  of  Mars 247


via


Index  to  Volume  XIV.


T.

Taylor, Colonel, Exijeriments  on Chance  Resemblances  between


Diagrams 162

Taylor,  Dr  E.  W.,  Review  of  the  "Psychology  of  Suggestion,"  by  Dr.

Boris  Sidis 386

Telepatliy,  Coincidences  Suggestive  of  ... ... .. ... ...  270-291

Telepathic  Clairvoyance. (See  Clairvoyance  and  Hypnotism.)

Terriss.  William,  Premonitory  Dream  of  the  Murder  of 309

Townshend,  Rev.  C.  Hare,  Case  recorded  by  ... .. ... ...  56-58

Trance  Phenomena  of  jNIrs.  Piper  :  -  -

Newbold, Professor W. Romaine, A Further Record  of

Observations  of  ... 6

Podmore,  F.,  Discussion  of 50

,, .  Fraud,  Po.ssibilities  of ...  ...71-78


Spirit-Identity,  Examination  of  Facts  Suggestive  of 8-10,  21,  22,  29,

30,  33,  41,  44

Tuckey,  Dr.  Chas.  Lloyd,  Reviews  by : —

"Hypnotism  and  its  Application  to  Practical  Medicine,"  Dr.

O.  G.  Wetterstrand  139

"  L'Hypnotisme  et  I'Orthopedie  Mentale,"  Dr.  E.  Berillon  ...  143
"  Revue  de  Psychologie  " 141 .

u. ^  -/

Unconscious  Whispering, Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen's  Experi-
ments in  ... ... ... 163

V.

Van  Renterghem,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 142

Vidal,  M.,  Experiments  in  "  Table-Tilting  "  and  "  Direct  Writing  "  118-128

W.

Wait,  Marshall,  Case  communicated  by 258

Wallace,  A.  R.,  F.R.S.,  Note  to  Extract  from  J.  E.  de  Mirville's  "  Des

Esprits  et  de  leurs  Manifestations  Fluidiques " .. .. 373

Ward,  W.  E.,  Case  contributed  by 233

West  Africa,  The  Forms  of  Apparitions  in,  by  Mary  H.  Kingsley ...  331

,, Occultism  in,  J.  Sliepley  Part,  M.D.,  on 343

Wetterstrand,  Dr.  0 .  G. ,  "  Hypnotism  and  its  Application  to  Practical

Medicine,"  Review  of 139

"  White,  Joseph,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Pijjer) ... 35

Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S. ,  Case  contributed  by 284

Woods,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Hypnotism  in  Organic  Disease  (before  the  British

Medical  Association) 109

"Worksop"  Case,  The 134,  135

X.

"X.,  Miss"  (A.  Goodrich-Freer),  "Essays  in  P.sychical  Research,"  by-
Review  of ... 393

"  X.,"  Miss,  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  Hypnotic  Experiments  with 366

Y.

Yellowlees,  D.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Uses  and  Dangers  of  Hypnotism

(before  the  British  Medical  Association) 109
