Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXII (1908)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1908 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Part LVII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc22soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXII

(CONTAINING  PART  LVII)
1908


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  iti  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


GLASGOW

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  AND  CO.  LTD.
1908


{The  Rights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  are  reserved)


CONTEXTS


PAET  LVII.

October,  1908.

1.  Presidential  Address.  By  jMrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  - - - 1

II.  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  By  J.  G.  Piddington.

Introduction,  ^9

List  of  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pipei',  - - - - . , - 27

Explanation  of  Abbreviations  and  Teims,  ■ - - - - 29

Cases  of  Cross-Correspondence,

I.  St.  Paul,  31

II.  Erancis  and  Ignatius,  35

III.  Triangle  within  a Circle,  ■ - - - 36

IV.  Steeple,  .>g

V.  Library,  niy  own  Name  and  Mrs.  Sidgvvick’s,  - ■ 43

\ I.  Hope,  Star  and  Browning,  -^9

VII.  Arrow,

VIII.  Giant  and  Dwarf,  --------  81

IX.  Laurel  Wreath,  ~ 94

X.  Celestial  Halcyon  Days,  - - - - . . - 103

XL  Crossing  the  Bar.  The  ai’ro?  oi’paros'  aKV/jLijiv  Incident,  - 107

XII.  Violets,  jy.-)

XIII.  Cup,  ----------  179

XT  \ . Diana,  - 193

XV.  Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  Infancy,  and  Faith,  Hope
and  Chai’ity,

XVI.  Euripides,

XVII.  Spirit  and  Angel,  2-K)


PAGE


iv


.....  C01,l,fentS,  ,c.c<r  r r.c

•..•  ;

, t e * » c » < t « r t < c ( < t

XVIII.  (.)’er  Mon'ut'aih.^,  Seas' .ancl'I^afeesa^irl'IIivei’s,
XIX.  Light  ill  West,  . . . . .

XX.  Azure  and  Horizon,  - - - -

XXL  Thanatos,

XXII.  Laus  Deo,

XXIII.  Music,  - - - - - -


The  Latin  Message,


■230

241

281

295

304

307

312


III.  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  Trance  ; being  an  attempt  to  elicit
from  Myersp  evidence  of  acquaintance  with  a circumstance  in  the
life  of  Fredei'ic  Myers.  By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,


417


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LVII.

October,  1908.


I.


PRKSIDEXTIAL  ADDRESS.


Delivered  on  Maij  l^th,  1908.

BY  MRS.  HENRY  SIDGWICK.

Psychical  Research  has,  both  since  the  Society  was  founded
and  for  several  years  before  that,  occupied  so  large  a place  in
my  life  and  thoughts — the  investigations  the  Society  was
founded  to  promote  have  seemed  to  me  so  important,  and
likely  to  be  so  far  reaching  in  their  effects,  that  the  honour
of  being  invited  to  fill  the  President’s  chair  has  naturally
been  very  gratifying  to  me.  At  the  same  time  when  I look
at  the  list  of  my  predecessors,  and  note  how  many  of  them
have  been  eminent  in  Philosophy,  Psychology  or  Physical
Science,  I feel  it  is  difficult  to  succeed  them  with  credit  ;
and  I have  decided  that  my  best  chance  of  interesting  you
will  be  not  to  attempt  in  this  address  to  make  any  original
contribution  to  the  philosophy  or  science  of  the  subjects  with

A


2


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvicl:.


[part


which  our  Society  is  concerned,  but  rather  to  review  our
position — taking  stock  as  it  were  of  the  progress  made  during
the  26  years  of  the  Society’s  life,  and  considering  what  are

the  most  hopeful  lines  of  advance  at  present.  Such  a general
survey  has  naturally  at  various  times  formed  a subject  of
presidential  addresses,  but  not  I think  very  recently.

I will  refer  first  to  worldly  prosperity.  Of  the  improve-
ment of  our  position  in  this  respect  we  have  three  indications.
The  first  is  increased  membership,  whicli  is  very  important

from  the  pecuniary  point  of  view,  but  yet  more  as  implying
increased  effective  interest  in  our  work.  We  may  congratulate
ourselves  too  on  the  number  of  persons  eminent  in  other

branches  of  scientific  research  whom  we  continue  to  add  to  our
ranks.

A second  indication  of  the  cfreater  estimation  in  which  we

O

are  held  may,  I think,  be  found  in  the  tone  of  presidential
addresses.  I notice  tliat  in  the  early  years  of  the  Society
these  were  largely  occupied  with  apologies  for  its  existence,
and  defence  of  its  aims  and  methods  against  attacks  from
unscientifically  incredidous  scientists  on  the  one  hand  and
unscientifically  credulous  spiritualists  on  the  othei\  Since
about  1889  this  attitude  has  changed — not  that  attacks  from
both  these  points  of  view  do  not  continue,  but  they  affect  us
less.  We  stand  more  firmly  on  our  own  feet  and  our  aims

and  methods  are  better  understood  and  consequently  more
widely  sympathised  with.

A third  indication  of  material  prosperity  is  the  growth  of
our  endowment  fund — a very  necessary  part  of  our  equipment,
and  likely  to  become  more  and  more  necessary  as  the  work
grows.  Bequests  from  late  members  and  gifts  from  present
members  have  already  raised  the  fund  to  an  important  sum,
though  not  yet  sufficient  for  present  and  prospective  needs.
And  I may  remark  that  some  contributions  to  this  fund —
such  as  the  one  lately  announced  in  the  Journal  from  Lord
Eayleigh,  President  of  the  Eoyal  Society  and  from  the  beginning
one  of  our  Vice-Presidents — are  valuable  not  only  as  adding
to  the  fund  but  for  the  moral  support  they  bring.

Tills  is  an  appropriate  place  to  announce  that  lately  we
have  learnt  that  the  Society  will  receive  an  important  addition
to  its  funds — amounting  probably  to  some  £3000  or  £4000,


Presidential  Add.ress.


3


Lvn.]

through  the  bequest  of  Mr.  H.  A.  Kay,  a member  who  died  a
few  months  ago.

Worldly  prosperity,  though  it  furthers  our  work  and  is  even
indispensable  to  its  full  development,  is  no  measure  of  the
work  itself,  and  we  must  now  turn  to  review  the  progress  made
in  this  work,  and  to  consider  the  prospects  before  us  and  the
difficulties  that  beset  our  path.  And  lest  in  what  follows  I
should  seem  to  dwell  more  on  difficulties  than  on  success,  and
should  appear  to  some  unduly  cautious,  let  me  say  at  the  outset
that  no  one  can  feel  more  strongly  than  I do  the  value  and
importance  of  the  work  we  are  engaged  on  or  be  more  confident
that  it  is  worth  all  the  time  and  energy  we  can  spend  on  it.
Kor  can  any  one  more  sincerely  congratulate  our  Society  on  the
work  it  has  already  done  and  is  doing,  or  look  forward  more
hopefully  to  the  progress  that  lies  before  us.

In  the  paper  describing  the  objects  of  the  Society  which  is
sent  to  enquirers,  the  principal  departments  of  work  are
described  under  five  heads,  which  may  be  briefly  stated  as
follows  : — (1)  Telepathy  ; (2)  Hypnotism  and  Clairvoyance  ;

(3)  Spontaneous  veridical  apparitions ; (4)  The  physical  pheno-
mena of  spiritualism;  (5)  The  historical  investigation  of  the
same  subjects.  This  catalogue  is,  of  course,  not  exhaustive.  It
is  difficult,  for  instance,  to  say  under  which  head  we  should
place  Professor  Barrett’s  full  and  interesting  investigation,
experimental  and  historical,  into  dowsing — the  finding  of  water
and  other  things  by  the  so-called  divining  rod — published  in
Volumes  XIII.  and  XV.  of  our  Proceedings.  Possibly,  as  he
suggests  provisionally,^  the  proper  place  may  be  under  the  head
of  Clairvoyance — so  far,  of  course,  as  the  success  of  the  dowser
cannot  be  attributed  to  external  indications.  If  it  is  due  to
clairvoyance  it  affords  almost  the  only  evidence  we  have  of
pure  clairvoyance  or  telaesthesia — the  perception  by  means
other  than  the  senses  of  physical  facts  unknown  to  any  living
human  being  and  therefore  not  explicable  by  any  extension  of
the  faculty  of  telepathy  between  living  minds.  This  distinction
between  clairvoyance  which  may  possibly  be  telepathic  and
that  which  cannot  is  I think  of  great  theoretic  importance.
There  were  in  old  days  alleged  cases  of  pure  clairvoyance —
e.g.  of  the  reading  of  mottoes  enclosed  in  nuts  ; but  we  have
^ Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.  p.  314.


•i  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtviek.  [part

in  this  Society  come  across  exceedingly  little  clear  evidence
of  it,^  unless  it  is  exemplified  in  dowsing.  The  best  recent

case  I know  which  seems  'pririia  facie  to  suggest  clairvoyance
is  one  contributed  by  Professor  William  James  to  the
Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  (Part  II.)  and  briefly
noticed  in  our  Journal  last  October.  In  this  case  the  position
of  a dead  body  for  which  search  had  been  vainly  made  was
correctly  described,  and  afterwards  identified,  by  a spontaneously
entranced  person,  though  neither  she  nor  (so  far  as  can  be
discovered)  any  other  living  person  can  have  known  about  it
normally.

The  paucity  of  evidence  for  pure  clairvoyance  gives  special
interest  to  the  question  whether  successful  dowsing  ever  in-
volves it,  or  whether  on  the  contrary  it  is  to  be  explained  by
some  obscure  and  hitherto  undiscovered  physical  faculty.  In
whatever  way  this  question  is  answered,  however,  there  is  no
doubt  that  dowsing  is  a form  of  motor  automatism.  In  what-
ever way  the  presence  of,  say,  underground  water  reveals  itself
to  the  unconscious  strata  of  the  mind,  the  knowledge  is
expressed  through  the  involuntary  muscular  movement  which
twists  the  forked  twig  used  as  a divining  rod.  The  great  extent
to  which  automatism,  as  an  external  expression  of  subliminal
mentation,  pervades  all  the  departments  of  our  work  is  one
of  the  things  that  we  have  learnt  in  the  last  26  years.
This  fact  and  its  importance  will  be  present  to  the  minds
of  all  who  have  read  Mr.  j\Iyers’s  great  work  on  Human
Personality.

Hypnotism,  chiefly  because  it  enables  the  experimenter  to
communicate  with  the  subconscious  strata  of  the  mind  in  a
definite  way,  is  one  of  the  most  effective  means  we  have  of
experimentally  investigating  automatism  and  the  relation  of
tlie  subconscious  to  the  conscious  mind.  This  alone  makes  its
study  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us,  quite  apart  from  any
supernormal  faculties  that  hypnotised  persons  occasionally  ex-
hibit. The  progress  that  hypnotism  has  made  since  1882  is
amusingly  marked  by  the  fact  that  when  the  Society  was
founded  enquiry  into  the  reality  of  hypnotic  anaesthesia — a

' I have  not  forgotten  Professor  Ricbet’s  experiments  in  “lucidity”  published
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.  pp.  77-116  (1888),  but  they  can  hardly,  I think,  be
regarded  as  altogether  beyond  explanation  by  chance.


LVii.]  Presidential  Address.  5

thing  which  no  well  instructed  person  now  doubts — was  set
down  among  objects  of  investigation.  We  cannot  of  course
claim  that  it  is  our  Society  which  has  brought  about  the  now
general  recognition  of  the  existence  of  hypnotism,  nor  more
than  a part  of  the  great  advance  made  in  our  knowledge  of  it.
We  have  no  doubt  contributed  to  this  advance,  but  the  credit
is  chiefly  due  to  members  of  the  medical  profession  who  have
used  hypnotism  in  their  practice.  Their  investigations  are
closely  related  to  ours  for  the  reason  that  suggestive  therapeutics
and  psychical  research  both  have  much  to  do  with  the  sub-
conscious mind  ; and  we  are  fortunate  in  having  many  of  the
leading  exponents  of  hypnotism  both  in  England  and  abroad
actively  interested  in  the  work  of  the  Society.

It  is,  I think,  inevitable  that  the  study  of  hypnotism  should
be  mainly  in  the  hands  of  medical  men,  and  it  is  probably  also
desirable ; but  it  would  be  disastrous  if  this  were  to  confine
investigation  to  the  therapeutic  aspect  of  the  subject.  The
purely  psychological  knowledge  that  may  be  gained  through
hypnotism  is  obviously  of  the  greatest  scientific  importance ;
and  especially  is  it  so  to  psychical  researchers,  through  the
light  thrown  on  subconscious  mentation,  on  dissociation  of
personality,  and  on  hidden  powers  of  the  human  mind.  In
the  psychology  of  the  subject  our  Society  can  boast  of  valuable
work,  as  evidence  of  which  I may  refer  to  Mr.  Gurney’s
important  papers  in  early  volumes  of  the  Proceedings,  and  to
Dr.  Milne  Bramwell’s,  and  (quite  recently)  Dr.  Mitchell’s  ex-
periments on  the  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.^  Nor
have  we  been  without  confirmation  of  the  manifestation  of
supernormal  faculties  in  the  hypnotic  state,  as,  for  instance,  in
the  case  of  Dr.  Alfred  Backman’s  subjects  in  Sweden  or  Dr.
Wiltse’s  in  the  United  States  of  America.^

In  connection  with  hypnotism  I may  remark  that  it  is  to  the
study  of  this  subject,  and  the  light  it  has  thrown  on  the  power
of  suggestion,  that  we  largely  owe  our  present  knowledge  of  the
quite  special  difficulties  that  attend  experiments  in  psychical
subjects.  In  experimental  work  progress  is  made  by  taking
some  provisional  hypothesis  and  testing  it — or,  to  put  it  other-
wise, by  asking  nature  questions  to  which  phenomena  obtained

^Proceedings,  Vol.  XII.  p.  179;  Vol.  XXI.  p.  2.

- Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.


6


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiuick.


[part


under  suitably  arranged  conditions  give  the  answers.  That,
indeed,  is  what  we  mean  by  experiment.  The  special  difficulties
inherent  in  psychical  experiments  arise  from  the  fact  that  dealing
as  we  do  with  the  human  mind  under  circumstances  where
suggestion  is  powerful,  both  the  question  itself  which  we  address
to  nature  and  the  expectations  as  to  the  answer  become  to  an
unknown  extent  part  of  the  conditions  to  be  dealt  with  and  are
liable  to  be  disturbing  factors  very  difficult  to  eliminate.  For
instance,  it  is,  I think,  now  generally  admitted  that  the  theories
as  to  hypnotic  processes  put  forward  by  Dr.  Charcot  and  the
Salpetriere  school  were  largely  vitiated  by  insufficient  attention
to  the  effect  of  preconceived  ideas  as  to  what  was  expected  to
happen,  with  which  the  observers  themselves  inspired  the
patients.  Suggestion  in  its  widest  sense  too  is  as  likely  to
operate  in  inhibiting  phenomena  as  in  affecting  their  form,  and
it  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  difference  in  the  kind  of  psychical
phenomena  observed  with  hypnotic  patients  by  e.g.  Dr.  Elliotson
in  the  fifties  and  Dr.  Eramwell  now,  may  be  partly  due  to  the
mental  attitude  of  the  experimenters  acting  on  the  patients.
Especially  may  this  be  so  if  telepathy  be  a vera  causa,  since  in
that  case  the  utmost  effort  to  conceal  thoughts  and  feelings
might  fail  to  prevent  unintended  mcoital  suggestion.  To  the
difficulties  arising  from  suggestibility  we  have  to  add  those  due
to  the  operation  of  subliminal  inferences  and  memories  which
are  often  hard  to  detect.  The  extreme  care  and  caution  in
drawing  conclusions  which  all  this  necessitates  may  well  make
progress  slow ; but  every  branch  of  scientific  investigation  has
its  special  difficulties,  and  ours  sliould  not  discourage  us,  but  on
the  contrary  stimulate  us  to  greater  efibrt.

Following  the  order  of  the  list  of  departments  of  the  Society’s
work  already  referred  to  we  come  after  hypnotism  to  the  collec-
tion and  investigation  of  spontaneous  veridical  apparitions  and
analogous  phenomena.  It  would,  I think,  be  generally  admitted,
even  by  those  not  yet  convinced  of  telepathy,  that  the  work  done
under  the  auspices  of  the  Society  has  thrown  a new  light  on
the  subject  of  apparitions.  And  most  of  us  here  present  have
probably  been  convinced  of  the  telepathic  origin  of  many  of
them  by  the  evidence  ably  set  forth  by  Mr.  Gurney,  Mr.  Myers,
and  Mr.  Podmore  in  the  book  Phcmtasms  of  the  Living  in  1886.
This  evidence  has  been  supported  by  further  cases  constantly


LVII.]


Presidential  Address.


7


received  since  then,  and  has  been,  supplemented  in  an  important
way  by  the  so-called  “ Census  of  Hallucinations  ” — the  statistical
investigation  and  classification  of  the  spontaneous  hallucinations
of  persons  in  ordinary  health — published  in  Volume  X.  of  the
Proceedings.  But  there  remains  much  to  be  done  both  in
collecting  more  well-evidenced  cases  and  in  getting  the  import-
ance of  recording  experiences  immediately  to  be  more  generally
understood.  More  cases  are  wanted  not  only  in  order  to
convince  the  scientific  world,  but  in  order  that  a comparative
study  of  the  experiences  may  throw  light  on  their  nature  and
origin.  Each  carefully  observed  case  may  have  features  of  its
own  confirming  or  contradicting  some  previous  hypothesis  or
suggesting  new  considerations.  For  instance,  the  interesting
case-  read  by  Professor  Barrett  at  the  last  meeting  (see  Journcd,
Vol.  XIII.  p.  228)  differs  in  some  important  respects  from  any
that — so  far  as  I remember — we  have  received  before.  What  is
to  be  desired  is  that  the  Society  should  be  widely  understood
to  be  the  repository  to  which  accounts  of  well-evidenced  veridical
hallucinations  should  be  sent  as  soon  after  their  occurrence  as
possible,  and  I think  members  of  the  Society  might  help  more
than  they  do  tq  bring  this  state  of  things  about.  One  of  the
advantages  of  a society  is  that  it  may  bring  us  into  touch  with
a wider  circle,  and  therefore  with  more  persons  having  experi-
ences than  would  be  possible  for  any  one  working  alone.

But  it  may  be  asked — how  many  cases  ought  we  to  expect  to
receive,  and  is  it  reasonable  to  expect  more  than  are  now  sent
to  us  ? It  is  not  of  course  possible  to  answer  this  question
exactly,  but  some  light  is  thrown  on  it  by  the  “ Census  of
Hallucinations.”  It  appears  {Proceedings,  Vol.  X.  p.  242)  that
among  the  17,000  persons  who  answered  the  census  question
apparitions  representing  a dead  or  dying  person  within  12  hours
of  the  death  were  reported  to  have  occurred  to  percipients  over
the  age  of  10  on  eleven  different  occasions  during  the  previous
ten  years.  From  this  we  may  infer  that  from  a circle  of  17,000
persons  such  occurrences  are  likely  to  be  heard  of  at  the  rate
of  about  one  a year.  The  census  enquiry  closed  in  May  1892—
sixteen  years  ago.  I have  looked  through  the  Journal  to  see
how  many  cases  of  the  above  type,  sufficiently  well  evidenced
to  print,  have  been  reported  to  us  during  these  16  years.  I
find  that  there  are  eight,  including  one  in  which  it  is  not  certain


8


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


that  the  person  whose  apparition  was  seen  had  not  been  dead
for  more  than  12  hoursd  Eight  in  16  years  is  about  half  the
census  proportion,  and  what  makes  it  worse  is  that  only  two  of
these  cases  belong  to  the  last  ten  years — the  period  from  1898
to  1908.

Of  course  other  interesting  spontaneous  veridical  cases  have
been  printed  in  the  Journal  since  1892.  I do  not  mean  that
there  are  only  seven  interesting  experiences  in  all.  I select  a
particular  well-defined  class  because  this  facilitates  numerical
comparison ; and  if  we  have  received  fewer  than  we  might
reasonably  expect  of  this  class — a specially  interesting  one — it
is  probable  that  other  classes  are  inadequately  represented  also.

I must,  however,  in  fairness  admit  at  this  point  that  of  the
eleven  “ census  ” cases  just  mentioned  only  seven,  or  about  two-
thirds,  were  judged  sufficiently  well  evidenced  to  print — and
that  probably  to  make  the  statistical  comparison  accurate  some
additions  for  insufficiently  evidenced  cases  ought  to  be  made  to
the  eight  printed  in  the  Journal  since  1892.  At  the  same  time
we  must  remember  that  there  ought  now  to  be  a more  widely
spread  understanding  of  the  importance  of  making  the  evidence
good  than  there  was  in  the  comparatively  dark  ages  before
Phantasms  of  the  lAving  was  published,  and  that  consequently
fewer  cases  should  be  lost  through  carelessness.  However,  we
cannot  expect  perfection,  and  probably  some  cases  have  been
so  lost.

I do  not  wish  to  lay  too  much  stress  on  the  numbers  I have
given.  With  so  rare  a phenomenon  and  such  short  periods  we
cannot  of  course  expect  a constant  proportion.  I think,  however,
that  we  may  infer  that  at  least  as  regards  apparitions  at  the  time
of  death  we  do  not  draw  from  so  large  a circle  as  the  17,000
who  answered  the  census  question.  You  will  perhaps  say  that
it  is  unreasonable  on  my  part  to  expect  that  we  should,  because
when  answers  to  the  census  question  were  collected  a special
effort  was  made,  and  we  are  not  likely  to  be  generally  in  touch
with  anything  like  so  large  a circle.  I cannot  agree  with  this —
at  least  I certainly  think  we  might  spread  our  net  more  widely
than  we  do.  There  are  now  1138  members  and  associates  of

'The  eight  cases  will  be  found  as  follows  : — Journal,  Vol.  VI.  p.  280  ; p.  368  ;
Vol.  VII.  p.  121  ; Vol.  VIII.  p.  41  ; Vol.  IX.  p.  306  ; Vol.  XII.  p.  59  ; Vol.  XIII.
p.  103  ; p.  -234.


LVII.]


Presidential  Address.


9


the  Society,  and  if  they  were  all  sufficiently  interested  to  exert
themselves  as  much  as  some  of  them  do  they  could  surely
effectively  reach  a numher  of  persons  approaching  the  17,000
who  were  asked  the  census  question  by  410  collectors.

I may  take  this  opportunity  of  allaying  a suspicion  which
I think  exists  in  the  minds  of  some  members — the  suspicion,
namely,  that  well-evidenced  cases  are  sent  to  the  Society,  which,
through  the  perversity  of  the  Editor  of  the  Journal,  or  false
economy  on  the  part  of  the  Council,  are  not  printed.  This  is
far  from  being  the  case.  Well-evidenced  cases  are  always  printed,
except  in  the  very  rare  instances  in  which  onr  informants  ask
us  not  to  print.  It  is  true,  however,  that  we  have  somewhat
raised  our  standard,  especially  in  the  matter  of  the  interval
between  experience  and  record ; and  I think  it  is  true  also  that
— the  kind  of  evidence  required  being  better  understood  than
it  used  to  be — fewer  badly-evidenced  cases  are  sent  to  us  now
than  formerly.  Cases  which  cannot  be  brought  up  to  a useful
evidential  standard  ought  not,  of  course,  to  be  printed  by  the
Society ; though  some  of  them  are  worth  storing  in  view  of
possible  evidential  improvement,  or  because  they  belong  to  a
class — such  as  some  haunted  house  cases,  or  some  doubtfully
veridical  experiences  of  living  percipients — which  may  become
important  through  possible  future  experiences  or  developments.
There  would  doubtless  be  differences  of  opinion  as  to  what
standard  a case  should  reach  to  make  it  worth  printing,  but  I
do  not  think  that  any  competent  judge  would  be  likely  either
to  regard  the  evidential  standard  adopted  in  the  Journal  as  too
high,  or  to  think  any  imprinted  cases  clearly  above  it.

Before  I leave  this  subject  let  me  again  express  the  hope  that
members  will  increase  their  efforts  to  get  on  the  track  of
interesting  cases,  and  to  bring  them  up  to  as  complete  an
evidential  standard  as  possible.

There  is  one  department  of  the  Society’s  activities  in  which
hardly  any  real  progress  has  been  made — I mean  the  investiga-
tion of  the  physical  phenomena  of  spiritualism,  or  I may  say
for  shortness,  telekinesis.  So  far  as  I can  judge,  this  subject
stands  almost  exactly  where  it  did  26  years  ago,  when  the
Society  was  founded.  The  first  President  of  the  Society  said  in
his  first  presidential  address  that  it  was  “ a scandal  that  the  dis-
pute as  to  the  reality  of  these  phenomena  should  be  still  going


10


iMrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


on,”  and  that  it  was  a primary  aim  of  the  Society  “ to  make  a
sustained  and  systematic  attempt  to  remove  the  scandal  in  one
way  or  the  other.”  Nevertheless,  the  scandal  remains.  On  the
one  hand  the  phenomena  are  still  swamped  in  fraud,  and  so  har
as  they  are  reported  to  us  still  occur  for  the  most  part  in  the
presence  of  professional  mediums  who  are  sooner  or  later
detected  in  trickery  : and,  on  the  other  hand,  evidence  continues
to  be  offered  from  time  to  time  which  cannot  be  disregarded
owing  either  to  our  confidence  in  the  skill  and  judgment  of  the
persons  offering  it  and  their  experience  in  this  kind  of  investi-
gation, or  in  a few  cases  to  the  moral  trustworthiness  of  all
concerned.

There  are,  of  course,  some  results  from  the  various  investiga-
tions that  have  been  carried  on.  On  the  negative  side,  besides  an
extended  experience  of  trickery  and  credulity,  we  have  acquired —
largely  through  the  work  of  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey  and  Dr.  Hodgson —
a much  more  definite  experimental  knowledge  of  the  possibilities
of  mal-observation  than  we  possessed  when  the  Society  was
founded.  Also  our  greatly  extended  knowledge  of  motor  auto-
matism has  shown  us  that  the  possibility  of  sub-conscious
muscular  action — even  very  complicated  action — has  to  be
reckoned  with  more  than  we  knew  in  1882.  On  the  positive
side  we  have,  as  I have  said,  the  conviction  of  a few  persons
whose  judgment  cannot  be  ignored,  that  they  have  seen  genuine
phenomena  even  with  professional  mediums ; and  a few  cases
like  that  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  (though  his  case,  by  the  way,
occurred  before  the  Society  started),  where  there  is  great
improbability  of  conscious  deception,  and  where  unconscious
automatic  action  has  at  least  not  been  discovered.  I cannot,
however,  myself  feel  confident  that  in  these  cases  the  possi-
bilities of  error  have  been  sufficiently  excluded,  or  that  a
conclusion  either  way  is  at  present  justified.  There  is  still —
to  use  a phrase  with  which  we  were  all  very  familiar  in
the  early  days  of  the  Society — a prima  facie  case  for
investigation.

How  then  can  the  investigation  be  furthered  ? In  the  first
place  I should  like  to  urge  strongly  that  fraud  should  be  more
seriously  discouraged  than  it  is  at  present.  I cannot  help
thinking  that  if  telekinesis  is  a genuine  phenomenon  we  could
not  but  have  known  more  about  it  by  now  than  we  do,  had


LVii.]  Presidenticd  Address.  11

it  not  been  for  the  extent  to  which  it  is  mixed  up  with  fraud.
And  the  reason  there  is  so  much  fraud  is  that  it  pays  so  well.
As  a rule  the  fraudulent  medium  runs  no  serious  risk  even  of
loss  of  credit  through  discovery.  Between  the  credulous  and
the  curious  the  medium  who  has  been  exposed  is  as  much
in  demand  after  exposure  as  before.  If  every  medium  dis-

covered in  systematic  trickery  could  be  at  once  dropped  and
ignored,  the  disgusting  trade  of  fraudulent  mediumship  would
soon  cease  to  be  profitable,  and  the  ground  of  investigation —
assuming  that  there  are  genuine  phenomena  to  investigate —
would  be  considerably  cleared.  Of  course  this  is  a cpiestiou
of  policy,  and  there  are  leading  members  of  the  Society,  as  well
as  many  outside  it,  who  do  not  agree  with  me.  For  myself,
however,  I feel  strongly  that  as  things  are  no  evidence  for
telekinesis  obtained  with  professional  mediums  is  likely  to
produce  any  permanent  impression  on  the  scientific  world.

One  of  the  evils  arising  from  the  trickery  pervading  physical
mediumship,  and  the  bad  name  consequently  attaching  to  it,  is
that  private  persons  who  suspect  in  themselves  telekinetic  powers
are  apt  to  be  deterred  from  pursuing  the  subject.  It  was  one
of  the  hopes  of  the  founders  of  the  Society  that  private
mediums  would  be  encouraged  to  come  forward  and  give  their
assistance  in  investigation.  In  other  branches  of  our  enquiry
this  has  happened,  and  progress  has  been  largely  due  to  the
intelligent  and  energetic  interest  in  the  phenomena  and  their
origin  and  cause  taken  by  persons  who  have  found  themselves
possessed  of  telepathic  or  other  psychical  faculties.  But  in
telekinesis  practically  no  disinterested  person  has  come  forward
in  this  country  apparently  possessing  the  power  and  at  the
same  time  taking  a scientific  interest  in  its  investigation  suffi-
cient to  carry  them  through  the  tedium  of  careful  experiment.
Given  an  investigator  with  telekinetic  power  the  simplest
manifestations  of  it — such  as  movements  of  small  objects
without  contact — would  lend  themselves  best  to  satisfactory
investigation  in  the  first  instance.  Possibly  it  might  be  best
to  approach  them  through  automatic  movements  with  contact,
which  are  by  no  means  uncommon,  and  to  try  to  develop  these
into  movements  without  contact,  but  there  are  of  course  dangers
of  self-deception  in  this  course.  In  any  case  what  is  wanted
is  numerous  experiments  without  contact  under  carefully  planned


12


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


conclitioDS  calculated  first  to  exclude  all  known  physical
explanations  and  all  possibility  of  hallucination,  and  secondly
to  throw  light  on  the  mechanical  nature  of  the  phenomenon,
where  the  reaction  is,  and  so  forth.  I am,  of  course,  saying
nothing  new  in  saying  this ; but  it  is  worth  repeating,  for
evidence  of  this  kind  and  a good  deal  of  it  is  the  minimum
which  is  likely  to  produce  any  permanent  effect.

Another  line  of  investigation  I should  like  to  see  pursued
in  this  connection  is  on  the  negative  side — it  is  investigation
into  the  question  of  the  occurrence  of  sensory  hallucinations
under  conditions  similar  to  those  of  s&nces  for  physical  phenomena.
The  importance  in  scientific  investigations  of  eliminating  the
possibility  of  subjective  illusion  and  hallucination  may  be  illus-
trated from  other  branches  of  research  than  ours.  The  history
of  the  X-rays  is  instructive  in  this  way.  The  supposed  dis-
covery of  these  rays  was  referred  to  by  Professor  Eichet,  in  his
address  as  President  of  this  Society  in  February,  1905,  as  an
example  of  the  difficulty  in  certain  cases  of  arriving  either  at
a positive  or  a negative  conclusion  even  about  facts  alleged
to  be  demonstrable  by  experimental  evidence  which  could  be
repeated  at  will.  Their  history  has  lessons  for  us  in  relation
to  our  own  investigations  in  more  ways  than  one,  and  I will
venture  brielly  to  recall  some  of  the  circumstances  to  your
minds.

It  was  in  1903  that  Professor  Blondlot,  a French  physicist
of  repute,  observed,  while  investigating  Eontgen  rays,  some
effects  which  he  attributed  to  a hitherto  unobserved  kind  of
radiation  having  a vibratory  character  like  light  and  heat,  and
to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  N-rays.  He  even  thought  a
little  later  that  he  could,  by  suitable  arrangements,  measure
their  wave  length  approximately.^  They  emanated,  according
to  his  observation,  from  a variety  of  sources,  among  others
from  certain  metals  and  other  substances  in  a state  of  strain ;
and  presently  a physiological  colleague,  Professor  Charpentier,
reported  that  they  also  emanated  from  the  muscles  (when
contracted)  and  the  active  nerve  centres  of  living  bodies.
IMany  remarkable  properties  of  these  rays  were  reported  one
after  another  almost  every  week  in  the  early  part  of  1904,
and  hopes  were  raised  that  the  discovery  would  prove  a source
^Gomptes  Eenclus,  Vol.  CXXXVIII.  (1st  half  of  1904)  p.  125.


lvil]


Presidential  Address.


13


of  further  knowledge  not  only  of  the  constitution  of  matter,
but  even  of  the  nature  of  vital  processes.

The  IST-rays  were  not  visible,  and  the  way  in  which  their
presence  was  made  apparent  to  the  senses  was  through  the
increase  in  the  brightness  of  a feeble  source  of  light,  such  as
a very  tiny  gas  jet  or  electric  spark  or  a surface  painted  with
luminous  paint,  when  IST-rays  fell  on  it;  or  again,  by  the
increased  power  of  the  eye  to  see  faintly  illuminated

objects  when  N-rays  fell  on  the  retina.  Naturally  physicists
all  over  the  world  tried  to  repeat  the  experiments,  but  though
a few  said  the  effects  to  be  observed  were  marked  and  unmis-
takable, the  majority  of  those  who  tried  could  not  see  the
differences  described  at  all.  It  is  true  that  photographs
exhibiting  differences  in  the  luminosity  of  a small  electric
spark  when  believed  to  be  exposed  to  N-rays  were  offered
by  Professor  Blondlot  as  proof  of  the  objectivity  of  the
phenomenon ; but  others  failed  to  get  similar  photographs
under  satisfactory  conditions,  and  in  any  case  such  photographs
would  not  have  gone  very  far  towards  proving  the  existence
of  rays  with  the  peculiar  properties  claimed  for  N-rays.  The
continued  non-success  of  so  many  skilled  experimenters  in
repeating  the  experiments  could  not  but  suggest  that  in  the
successful  experiments  enough  care  had  not  been  taken  to
exclude  personal  and  subjective  elements — to  make  sure  that
the  observations  were  in  no  way  influenced  by  the  observers’
expectations.  ^

Some  of  those  who  had  unsuccessfully  endeavoured  to  repeat
the  experiments  took  opportunities  of  visiting  laboratories  in
which  the  observations  had  been  made,  and  when  shown  the

^Professor  Salvioni  of  Messina  published  in  July,  1904,  some  experiments
on  himself,  which  led  him  gravely  to  suspect  that  in  his  own  previous
repetition  of  Professor  Blondlot’s  observations  auto-suggestion  and  optical
illusion  played  an  important  part.  [Atti  della  reale  Academia  dei  Lyncei,
July  19,  1904,  xiii.  No.  12  p.  703.)  He  was  unable  to  carry  out  his  experi-
ments as  completely  as  he  would  have  desired,  because  he  found  himself  no
longer  able  to  see  as  clearly  as  before  the  variations  in  apparent  luminosity
which  were  the  subject  of  experiment.  This — if  it  was,  as  seems  probable,  a
result  of  his  critical  attitude — is  perhaps  instructive  for  us  in  our  investigations.

Professor  Pierre  Weiss  of  Zurich,  who  had  also  believed  himself  to  have  verified
some  of  the  recorded  observations,  wrote  to  the  Revue  Scientifique  for  Dec.  3,
1904,  an  account  of  experiments  which  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  psycho-
physiological  causes  had  operated  in  his  case.


14


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


processes  were  confirmed  in  negative  conclusions.  One  of  them —
an  American  physicist,  Professor  E.  W.  Wood — published  an
account  of  his  experiences.^  The  following  are  some  of  them.
Pirst  he  failed  to  see  the  supposed  brightening  of  a stream  of
small  electric  sparks  when  the  N-rays  were  concentrated  on  it
by  an  aluminium  lens.  His  host  thought  this  must  be  due  to
want  of  sensitiveness  in  his  eyes  as  the  difference  was  most
distinct  when  the  X-rays  were  intercepted  by  a hand  interposed
between  their  source  and  the  spark.  Professor  Wood  suggested
that  an  attempt  should  be  made,  by  observing  the  illumination,
to  announce  the  exact  moment  when  his  hand  was  introduced
into  the  path  of  the  rays,  the  observer  not  having  other  means
of  knowing  whether  the  hand  was  there  or  not.  The  attempt
failed  completely ; alternating  brightness  and  dimness  were
announced  while  the  hand  was  held  motionless  in  the  path  of
the  supposed  rays,  and  when  the  hand  was  moved  the
fluctuations  observed  had  no  relation  to  the  movements.

He  was  afterwards  shown  the  deviation  of  the  rays  by  an
aluminium  prism  which  was  alleged  not  only  to  bend  the  rays
thrown  on  it  through  a slit,  but  to  spread  them  out  into  a
spectrum.  The  positions  of  the  deflected  rays  were  detected
by  a thin  strip  of  luminous  paint  moved  across  them  which
became  more  brilliant  at  certain  points.  Professor  Wood  was
again  unable  to  see  any  change  whatever  in  the  brilliancy  of
the  phosphorescent  line  as  it  moved  across,  and  he  presently
found  that  the  secret  removal  of  the  prism  (the  I'oom  was
dark)  did  not  seem  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  observa-
tions of  his  host.

A third  experiment  consisted  in  showing  that  circles  painted
in  luminous  paint  showed  more  distinctly  in  a dark  room  when
a steel  file — steel  being  a source  of  X-rays — was  brought  near
them.  Again  Professor  Wood  could  not  himself  see  any  effect
though  it  was  said  to  be  very  marked,  and  presently  he  found
that  when  he  held  the  file  so  that  his  body — which  should
have  been  an  effective  screen — was  between  it  and  the  phos-
phorescent circles,  while  he  moved  his  arms  towards  and  away
from  them,  his  host  still  observed  the  same  changes.

A fourth  experiment  consisted  in  holding  the  fde  so  that
the  X-rays  from  it  fell  on  the  eye,  whereupon  in  a nearly
^ N'ature,  Sept.  29,  1904,  p.  .'i.SO.


LVii.]  Presidential  Address.  lo

dark  room  a wliite  .dock  face  bccairxje  ^)r9re  distinctly  visible
than  before.  Again  Professor  Wood  saw  no  difference,  but  he
found  that  his  host’s  observation  of  it  was  in  no  way  interfered
with  by  the  secret  substitution  for  the  file  of  a piece  of  wood
of  similar  size  and  shape.

It  is  not  surprising  that  Professor  Wood,  like  others,  left
the  laboratory  with  a firm  conviction  that  the  few  experi-
menters who  had  obtained  positive  results  in  the  observations
of  N-rays  had  been  in  some  way  deluded.  And  while  leaving
the  question  whether  N-rays  have  any  objective  existence  or
not  to  the  physicists,^  we  may  safely  agree  that  thei'e  certainly
was  delusion  on  the  occasion  of  Professor  Wood’s  visit  and
profitably  examine  what  the  nature  of  the  delusion  was.

Slight  variations  in  sensation,  especially  on  the  margin  of
svhat  we  can  perceive,  may  and  do  occur  from  physiological
causes.  Professor  Plondlot  and  others  concerned  were  of  course
well  aware  of  this,  and  the  point  of  their  observations  was  not
that  variations  in  appai’ent  brightness  occurred,  but  that  these
variations  which  they  described  as  marked  coincided  with  an
external  physical  event  so  constantly  as  to  render  the  conclusion
inevitable  that  there  was  a causal  connection.  What  Professor
Wood  showed  was  that  the  variations  coincided  with  the  idea  of
the  event  as  readily  as  with  the  event  itself.  The  difference  of
sensation  was  therefore  nor  purely  pliysiologically  caused,  nor,
on  the  other  hand,  was  it  due  to  the  external  physical  cause.
It  was,  in  fact,  a hallucination  produced  by  expectation,  though
no  doubt  a hallucination  of  a simple  kind.

I have  called  your  attention  to  this  partly  because,  as  I have
said,  I think  it  possible  that  visual  (and  other)  hallucinations  due
to  suggestion  or  self-suggestion  occur  at  seances  for  physical
phenomena  more  than  we  realise.  We  start  with  the  knowledge
that  many  persons  can  induce  hallucinations  by  gazing  into
crystals ; that  such  hallucinations  are  sometimes  collective,  as  for
instance  at  a sAxnce  of  which  an  interesting  account  is  given  in
the  Journal,  Vol.  XII.  p.  17,  when  similar  figures  were  seen
by  the  four  sitters  in  a large  mirror  opposite  to  which  tliey  sat ;
that  at  other  seances  of  which  we  have  records  certain
phenomena  were  clearly  of  a hallucinatory  character  whatever

^ An  excellent  discussion  of  the  question  will  be  found  in  the  Revue.  Scientifique,
second  volume  for  1904.


1(3


[part


2Irs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.

their  cause  that-halluciu,atious  of,  a dehnite.  kiRdlcan  be  induced
by  suggestion  in  good  hypnotic  subjects  even  in  the  waking
state;  and  now,  from  the  N-ray  experiments,  that  expectation  can
produce  hallucinations,  at  least  of  an  elementary  sort,  in  a
darkened  room  in  the  case  of  persons  in  a perfectly  normal  state.
Further  investigation  and,  if  possible,  experiment  is  certainly
called  for  in  .this  direction.  The  bearing  of  the  question  on  the
evidence  for  telekinesis  is  obvious.

There  is  another  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  story  of  the
X-rays.  It  is  not  only  in  the  subjects  cur  Society  exists  to
investigate  that  the  scientific  world  is  cautious,  and  has  need  to
be  cautious,  in  accepting  conclusions  depending  on  observations
which  cannot  be  repeated  by  others  and  checked.  It  is  not  mere
prejudice  but  the  legitimate  caution  that  should  be  exercised  in
all  branches  of  science  that  makes  scientific  men  chary  of
accepting  as  sufficient  the  evidence  so  far  offered  for  telekinesis
or  even  for  telepathy.  Tlie  hesitation  will  be  overcome  if  and
when  the  conditions  under  which  these  things  occur  are  dis-
covered, so  that  they  can  be  brought  more  under  control  and
observations  repeated  at  will  under  definable  conditions  ; but  in
the  meanwhile,  as  I have  said,  much  would  be  done  to  remove
scepticism  by  careful  observation  under  as  many  conditions  as
possible.

I now  turn  from  telekinesis,  which  is  to  me  the  most
depressing  branch  of  our  investigations,  to  speak  briefly  of  the
most  encouraging,  that  which  at  present  promises  the  most
fruitful  harvest,  namely,  telepathy.  The  Society  started  with  its
face  already  set  in  this  direction,  and  as  we  all  know  its  efforts
were  from  the  first  successful,  not  only  in  collecting  the
spontaneous  experiences  apparently  due  to  telepathy  to  which
1 have  already  referred,  but  in  obtaining  opportunities  for
experiment  and  reports  of  experiments  carefully  carried  out.  It
is  true  that  it  cannot  yet  be  said  that  the  scientific  world
generally  has  admitted  telepathy  as  a fact,  but  it  is  not
uncommon  to  hear  educated  persons  offering  it  as  a rational
explanation  of  unusual  experiences  without  apirarently  any  sense
of  invoking  an  unrecognised  cause  and  even  with  the  feeling  that

^ For  some  useful  information  about  this  matter  as  well  as  about  the  history
of  telekinesis  generally,  I should  like  to  refer  my  hearers  to  Mr.  Podmore’s
excellent  book  on  Modern  Spiritualism.


LVli.]  Presidential  Address.  17

that  they  are  stemming  the  tide  of  superstition  in  not  admitting
anything  more  occult.  Indeed,  the  acceptance  of  telepathy  is
wide  enough  to  expose  us  to  a serious  danger  that  persons  who
might  furnish  evidence  may  refrain  from  doing  so  because  they
think  the  telepathic  question  is  settled  and  that  there  is  no
further  need  of  observation  or  experiment.  It  is  fortunate  that
at  least  some  of  our  members  realise  the  contrary,  as  the
interesting  paper  (see  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  243)  read  by  Miss
Miles  at  our  last  meeting  shows.

There  are  two  important  reasons  why  much  more  evidence  is
required.  The  first  is  the  one  already  referred  to,  that  in  default
of  being  able  to  repeat  experiments  at  will  under  given
conditions,  we  can  only  establish  the  truth  of  telepathy — get  it
admitted  by  scientific  men  as  a vera  cai(,sa — by  showing  that  it
occurs  between  so  many  different  and  apparently  trustworthy
persons  under  so  many  different  conditions  that  any  possibility  of
the  results  being  due  to  chance,  or  self-deception,  or  unnoticed
indications,  may  be  excluded  by  sheer  weight  of  evidence.

The  second  reason  for  wide  experimentation  and  observation
is  even  more  important.  It  is  that  we  do  not  yet  know  the
nature  of  telepathy.  There  are  two  opposing  views  as  to  its
probable  nature  among  those  who  accept  it  as  a fact.  Some,  like
Professor  Flournoy,  approaching  the  subject  from  the  physio-
logical side,  believe  on  a priori  grounds  that  the  transmission  is
from  brain  to  brain  through  some  physical  medium — that  it  is,
in  fact,  more  or  less  analogous  to  wireless  telegraphy.  Others,
like  our  late  President,  approaching  the  question  from  the
philosophical  side,  are  inclined  to  regard  telepathy  as  a purely
psychical  phenomenon — a direct  interaction  of  mind  with  mind.
It  is  in  harmony  with  this  second  view,  if  not  absolutely
essential  to  it,  to  hold  that  mind  can  exist  independently  of  the
body,  and  is  therefore  capable  of  surviving  the  dissolution  of  the
latter.  Inve.stigation  into  the  real  nature  of  telepathy  is  thus
intimately  connected  with  the  most  important  and  far  reaching
problems  involved  in  our  enquiry.  If  the  question  is  capable  of
scientific  determination,  however,  much  more  evidence  than  we
at  present  possess  will  be  required,  and  any  evidence  we  can
obtain  of  survival  after  bodily  death  is  likely  to  throw  light  on
the  nature  of  telepathy  and  rice  versa.

The  accumulation  of  evidence  is  and  must  be  a slow  process,

B


18


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part  lvii.]


not  only  because  very  few  of  us  seem  able  to  act  as  agents  or
percipients  in  a manner  which  lends  itself  to  observation  or
experiment,  but  also  because  of  the  experimental  difficulties
inherent  in  psychical  research  of  which  I spoke  earlier  in  this
address.  Notwithstanding  the  immense  difficulties  of  the  subject,
howeve'?',  evidence  is  slowly  accumulating,  and  some  progress  is
being  made.  Lately  we  seem  to  have  made  a distinct  advance
through  the  automatic  writing  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  “ Holland,”
and  others,  and  the  trance  writing  of  Mrs.  Piper,  some  of  which
has  been  put  before  the  Society  at  several  recent  meetings,  and
which  is  likely  to  occupy  a large  place  in  the  Proceedings  for
some  time  to  come.

The  evidence  needs  careful  and  critical  study; 'it  is  not  of  a
sensational  character,  it  is  not  likely  to  make  good  copy  for  the
Daily  Mail,  and  I am  not  sure  how  far  it  will  impress  the
majority  of  readers.  Those,  however,  who  follow  the  work  of  the
Society  carefully  will,  I think,  perceive  that  in  these  scripts  we
have  at  least  material  for  extending  our  knowledge  of  telepathy.
They  will  probably  be  disposed  further  to  admit  that  the  form
and  matter  of  the  cross-correspondences  that  occur  between  the
different  scripts  (produced  at  a distance  from  one  another)  afford
considerable  ground  for  supposing  the  intervention  behind  the
automatists  of  another  mind  independent  of  them.  If  this  be  so
the  question  what  mind  this  is  becomes  of  extreme  interest  and
importance.  Can  it  be  a mind  still  in  the  body  ? or  have  we  got
into  relation  with  minds  which  have  survived  bodily  death  and
are  endeavouring  by  means  of  the  cross- correspondences  to
produce  evidence  of  their  operation  ? If  this  last  hypothesis  be
the  true  one  it  would  mean  that  intelligent  co-operation  between
other  than  embodied  human  minds  and  our  own,  in  experiments
of  a new  kind  intended  to  prove  continued  existence,  has  become
possible,  and  we  should  be  justified  in  feeling  that  we  are
entering  on  a new  and  very  important  stage  of  the  Society’s
work.


II.


A SEEIES  OF  CONCOEDANT  AUTOMATISMS.

BY  J.  G.  PIDDINGTOX.

Introduction.

Mrs  Piper  came  to  England  at  the  invitation  of  the  Council
and  between  November  10,  1906  and  June  2,  1907  gave
74  sittings  in  all.  The  management  of  the  sittings  was
entrusted  by  the  Council  to  a committee  composed  of  the
Et.  Hon.  Gr.  W.  Balfour,  then  President  of  the  Society,  Sir
Oliver  Lodge,  Mr  Podmore,  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  myself.

The  Committee  decided  that  the  main  object  of  the  experi-
ments to  be  conducted  with  Mrs  Piper  should  be  to  encourage
the  development  of  certain  controls  which  had  already  been
manifesting  in  her  trance — namely,  those  giving  themselves  the
names  of  Henry  Sidgwick,  Frederic  Myers,  and  Eichard  Hodgson
— and  also  to  endeavour  to  bring  about  experimentally  the
kind  of  phenomenon  to  which  the  name  of  cross-correspondence
has  been  given.

Of  the  upshot  of  the  first  of  these  two  objects  I will  confine
myself  here  to  saying  that  the  Sidgwick  control  played  but  a
minor  part ; the  Hodgson  control  showed  much  activity  as
a go-between  or  master  of  the  ceremonies,  as  it  were,  but
gave  little  evidence  of  identity  and  did  not,  I think,  fully
maintain  the  lifelike  character  of  its  earlier  manifestations  in
America ; while  the  Myers  control,  which  had  formerly  been
lacking  in  dramatic  vitality,  displayed  a marked  advance,  par-
ticularly in  the  vraisemUance  of  the  personation.

It  is  chiefly  with  the  second  of  our  main  objects,  the  ex-
periments in  cross-correspondence,  that  this  paper  deals.


20


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  first  13  sittings  were  held  at  Liverpool  or  Edgbaston
under  the  direction  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Then  came  58  sittings
in  London,  I being  in  charge  on  35  occasions,  Mrs  Sidgwick
on  19,  and  Miss  Johnson  on  two  towards  the  end  of  the  series;
and  Mr  E.  N.  Bennett,  M.P.  had  two  sittings  to  himself  as  a
sec|uel  to  a successful  first  sitting  which  he  had  had  at  Boston
shortly  before  Mrs  Piper’s  departure  for  England.  The  last
three  sittings  were  given  in  Edgbaston,  whence  Mrs  Piper  went
to  Scotland  for  a few  weeks’  holiday  before  returning  home.

All  the  London  sittings,  with  the  exception  of  five  held  at
Mrs  Piper’s  flat,  took  place  in  the  Smoking-room  of  the  Irish
Literary  Society  at  20  Hanover  Square,  which  we  had  rented
for  this  purpose.  As  regards  the  London  sittings,-  the  person
in  charge  of  the  sitting  was  present  before  the  trance  began
and  remained  until  Mrs  Piper  had  regained  normal  conscious-
ness. In  no  case  did  the  sitter  enter  the  seance-room  or  come
in  contact  with  Mrs  Piper  until  she  was  fully  entranced,  and,
except  where  noted,  the  sitter  left  the  room  before  the  end  of
the  trance,  and  did  not  come  in  contact  again  with  Mrs  Piper
until  the  next  or  some  subsequent  trance  was  already  in  progress.

In  all  about  120  experiments  in  cross-correspondence  were
made.  I cannot  give  the  precise  number  because  the  trance-
personalities,  when  it  fell  to  them  to  announce  the  inception
or  accomplish.ment  of  an  experiment,  did  not  always  state  ex-
plicitly that  a cross-correspondence  had  been  intended,  and  also
because  in  several  instances  they  appear  to  have  combined  two
or  more  messages  into  one  which  had  at  first  been  given
separately.  But  the  exact  total  is  of  little  importance,  for  a
considerable  proportion  of  the  coincidences  ai’e  of  far  too  definite
a character  to  be  accounted  for  by  chance,  whatever  the  pro-
portion of  failures,  and  so  the  application  of  any  rigorous
statistical  metliod  is  uncalled  for.  Besides  Mrs  Piper,  the
automatists  concerned  in  these  experiments  were  Mrs  Verrall,
Miss  Helen  Verrall,  Mrs  Thompson,  and  the  two  ladies  known
to  the  members  of  our  Society  under  the  pseudonyms  of  Mrs
Eorbes  and  Mrs  Holland.

Mrs  Verrall  liad  ten  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper,  Miss  Verrall
five,  and  Mrs  Eorbes  four ; and  exactly  the  same  precautions
were  observed  with  them  as  with  the  other  sitters.  They  did
not  enter  the  seance-room  till  the  trance  had  begun,  and  they


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  21

left  it  before  Mrs  Piper  had  recovered  her  normal  conscious-
ness ; and  they  did  not  hold  any  intercourse  or  communication
with  Mrs  Piper  except  at  these  sittings.

Mrs  Thompson’s  participation  was  unfortunately  very  brief,
being,  I regret  to  say,  abruptly  terminated  in  consequence  of
the  unexpected  death  of  her  husband  after  a few  days’  illness.

Mrs  Forbes  was  informed  of  the  experiments  a few  weeks
after  they  started,  but  she  did  not  set  herself  systematically
and  regularly  to  write  automatically,  and  in  fact  produced  only
a few  pieces  of  script,  and  these  show  no  coincidences  with
the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists.

The  subject  of  cross-correspondence  experiments  was  first
mooted  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  at  the  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper
held  on  Nov.  15,  1906  ; and  Mrs  Piper  gave  her  last  sitting
on  June  2,  1907.

The  experiments  in  cross-correspondence,  then,  extended  over
the  period  Nov.  15,  1906 — June  2,  1907.

During  this  period  Mrs  Verrall  produced  in  all  63  pieces
of  script  on  59  different  days,  the  first  piece  being  written
on  Nov.  16,  1906  and  the  last  on  May  13,  1907.  After

May  13  she  did  not  do  any  more  automatic  writing  for  nearly

5 weeks.

During  the  period  Nov.  15,  1906 — June  2,  1907  Miss
Verrall  produced  17  pieces  of  script  on  17  different  days,
the  first  being  written  on  Nov.  20,  1906  and  the  last  on
May  26,  1907.  After  May  26  she  did  not  write  automati-
cally again  till  July.

Between  Nov.  15,  1906  and  July  10,  1907  Mrs  Holland
produced  38  pieces  of  script  on  38  different  days.  I have

extended  the  period  beyond  June  2,  1907  in  Mrs  Holland’s

case,  not  because  that  portion  of  her  script  which  was  pro-
duced subsequently  to  the  termination  of  the  Piper  sittings
shows  any  coincidences  with  Mrs  Piper’s  script  or  trance-
utterances,  but  simply  because  there  was  no  such  definite  or
prolonged  break  in  her  automatic  output  as  there  was  in  Mrs
and  Miss  Yerrall’s.

For  the  purposes,  then,  of  comparison  between  the  automa-
tisms of  Mrs  Piper,  Mrs  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs
Holland,  I take  the  following  periods:  Nov.  15,  1906 — June  2,
1907  (Mrs  Piper);  Nov.  16,  1906— May  13,  1907  (Mrs


22


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Verrall);  Kov.  20,  1906 — May  26,  1907  (Miss  Verrall);  and
Nov.  21,  1906 — July  10,  1907  (Mrs  Holland).  These  periods
I shall  from  time  to  time  refer  to  in  the  course  of  this  paper
as  “ the  periods  under  review  ”.

Both  Mrs  and  Miss  Verrall  knew  of  the  experiments  with
Mrs  Piper;  but  until  the  middle  of  March  1907  Mrs  Holland
was  entirely  unaware  that  any  such  experiments  were  being
conducted.

Miss  Verrall’s  17  pieces  of  script  were  written  at  irregular
dates  and  hours,  except  on  two  occasions  when  the  hours  were
preconcerted  to  synchronise  with  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.

With  Mrs  Verrall  a more  systematic  plan  was  followed ;
27  pieces  of  her  script  having  been  written,  mostly  by  previous
arrangement,  either  just  before  or  during  Mrs  Piper’s  trances.

The  Piper  sittings  took  place,  as  already  stated,  eitlier  in
London,  Liverpool  or  Edgbaston.  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  was  done
at  Cambridge  or  Matlock  Bath,  with  the  exception  of  3 pieces
written  in  London,  7 in  the  train  between  Cambridge  and
London  and  one  at  Brighton.  Of  Miss  Verrall’s  script  14
pieces  were  clone  at  Cambridge,  2 at  Brighton,  and  one  piece
at  Edgbaston.  Her  visit  to  Edgbaston  did  not  coincide  with
Mrs  Piper’s.  Mrs  Holland  was  throughout  in  India.

The  script  of  Mrs  Verrall  and  that  of  Miss  Verrall  were
sent  to  me  up  to  April  5,  1907,  and  after  that  date  to  Miss
Johnson.  We  in  every  case  noted  either  on  the  envelope  or
on  the  script  itself  the  date  and  hour  at  which  it  reached  us.
Mrs  Holland’s  script  was  sent  to  Miss  Johnson,  who
endorsed  each  script  with  the  date  of  its  arrival.

Mrs  Holland  remained  throughout  the  entire  series  of  experi-
ments in  absolute  ignorance  of  what  was  written  by  the  other
autoniatists.  So  likewise  did  Mrs  Piper,  unless  it  be  that  she
remembers  in  her  normal  state  things  said  to  her  during  her
trances ; and  even  then  the  evidential  value  of  the  results
would  be  unaffected,  for  all  she  could  have  learnt  in  this  way
was  either  that  an  experiment  had  been  successfully  accom-
plished or  that  it  had  failed.  Mrs  Verrall  saw  at  various
dates  certain  portions  of  Mrs  Holland’s  and  of  Miss  Verrall’s
script;  and  Miss  Verrall  read  or  was  informed  of  a few
passages  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.  Careful  note  was  taken  at  the
time  of  the  extent  of  the  knowledge  thus  normally  acquired


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Aiitomatisms.  23

and  of  the  dates  on  which  it  was  acquired  by  Mrs  and  Miss
Verrall.

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  I shall  not  bring  forward  as
evidence  of  supernormal  reciprocation  any  coincidences  which
can  be  explained  by  Mrs  Verrall’s  normal  knowledge  of  parts
of  Mrs  Holland’s  or  of  Miss  Verrall’s  script,  or  by  Miss
Verrall’s  normal  knowledge  of  parts  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.

The  word  or  sentence  given  to  the  Piper  trance-personalities
for  reproduction  by  them  through  one  or  more  of  the  other
automatists  was  selected  in  eighteen  cases  by  those  in  charge
of  the  sittings : five  times  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  eleven  times
by  myself,  and  twice  by  Mrs  Sidgwick.  Piather  over  a
hundred  subjects  for  experiment  were  chosen  by  the  trance-
personalities  : one  by  Imperator,  two  by  Prudens,  three  by

Eector,  61  by  “Myers,”  21  by  “Hodgson,”  6 by  “Sidgwick,”
one  by  “ G.  P.,”  and  in  a few  cases  the  choice  was  not
attributed  to  any  special  control.

Of  the  18  words  or  phrases  selected  by  the  experimenters
only  one  can  be  said  with  certainty  to  have  been  successfully
transferred.  Of  the  success  achieved  in  the  transmission  of
messages  chosen  by  the  trance-personalities  themselves  it  would
be  idle  to  attempt  to  speak  in  general  terms.  Each  case  where
complete  or  partial  or  possible  success  was  attained  must  be
described  and  studied  in  detail.  I shall  deal  with  the  cross-
correspondences in  chronological  order : that  is  to  say,  in  the
order  in  which  they  were  first  referred  to  in  the  Piper  trance.

In  the  extracts  from  the  records  of  Mrs  Piper’s  sittings
printed  in  small  type  I have  reproduced  the  abbreviations,
punctuation  and  other  peculiarities  of  the  trance-script.  When,
however,  quotations  from  the  records  occur  in  passages  printed
in  large  type,  I have  usually  revised  the  punctuation  and
written  out  in  full  the  abbreviated  words.  I have  in  many
cases  omitted  questions  asked  by  the  sitter  about  undeciphered
words  and  the  subsequent  explanations  of  the  trance-person-
alities, and  these  omissions  are  usually,  though  not  invariably,

indicated  thus But  I have  in  no  case  omitted  any

such  passages  unless  they  were  entirely  unimportant  and  had
no  possible  ‘ evidential  ’ bearing.

Previous  reports  on  the  trance-phenomena  of  Mrs  Piper  have
appeared  in  Proc.,  Yol.  VI.,  pp.  436-659  ; Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  1-167;


24


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  284-582;  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  6-78;  and  Vol.  XVI.,
pp.  1-649.  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  1-432,  contains  a report  by
Mrs  Verrall  on  her  own  automatic  writings ; and  Proc.  Vol.
XXI.,  pp.  166-391,  a report  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  Mrs
Holland’s.

Xor  an  explanation  of  the  parts  played  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance
by  “ Imperator  ”,  “ Eector  ” and  “ Prudens  ” the  reader  is  re-
ferred to  Proc.  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  408-9,  and  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  15.

The  external  features  of  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  may  be  briefly
described  as  follows : — Mrs  Piper  sits  at  a table  with  a pile  of

cushions  in  front  of  her,  and  composes  herself  to  go  into

trance.  After  an  interval  varying  I'rom  2 or  3 to  1 0 minutes

her  head  drops  on  the  cushions  with  the  face  turned  to  the
left  and  the  eyes  closed,  her  right  hand  falling  at  the  same
time  on  to  a small  table  placed  on  her  right  side.  A pencil
is  put  between  her  fingers,  and  the  hand  proceeds  to  write.
The  writing  being  done  without  the  aid  of  sight  and  with
the  arm  in  a more  or  less  strained  position  is  often  difficult
to  decipher,  at  least  without  practice  ; but  in  spite  of  its  not
being  easy  to  read,  it  is  remarkably  consistent  in  character,  so
that,  its  peculiarities  once  grasped,  the  correct  interpretation  of
all  but  a very  few  words  is  not  a matter  of  conjecture.  The
coming  out  of  trance  is  a longer  process  than  the  going  into
trance.  After  the  hand  has  ceased  to  write  the  medium

remains  quiescent  for  a few  minutes.  She  tlien  raises  herself
slowly,  and  often  with  difficulty,  from  the  cushions.  When
the  body  is  erect,  she  begins  to  speak.  Her  utterance  at  first
is  usually  indistinct,  but  as  she  gradually  regains  her  normal
condition  it  becomes  clearer.  All  the  sittings  which  Mrs  Piper
gave  in  England  were,  with  one  exception,  “ writing  ” and  not
“ voice  ” sittings  : that  is  to  say,  her  automatism  took  the  form
of  writing  and  not  of  speech,  except  during  the  waking-stage.
The  “ writing  ” sittings  possess  one  great  advantage  over  the
“ voice  ” sittings,  namely,  that  the  automatic  phenomena  which
occur  at  them  by  their  very  nature  record  themselves.

The  remarks  made  by  the  sitters  it  was  our  habit  to  note
down  on  the  sheets  of  paper  on  which  the  entranced  Mrs
Piper  wrote ; and  these  sheets  have  of  course  been  preserved.
As  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  trance  the
experimenter  in  charge  of  the  sitting  made  a full  manuscript


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  25

copy  both  of  what  Mrs  Piper  had  written  and  of  the  notes
of  what  the  sitters  had  said.  This  copy — which  is  spoken  of
as  “ the  record  ” — was  annotated  by  the  experimenter  and
afterwards  typewritten,  and,  in  cases  where  there  had  been
another  person  present  at  the  sitting  besides  the  experimenter,
submitted  to  this  person  for  the  insertion  of  such  comments
and  explanations  as  seemed  necessary.  The  trance-script  was
always  kept  out  of  Mrs  Piper’s  sight  and  taken  away  at  the
end  of  the  sitting,  so  that  she  never  saw  it  or  had  access
to  it  at  any  time.  In  her  normal  condition  she  neither  asked
for  nor  received  any  information  whatever  about  what  had
happened  at  the  sittings,  except  that  she  was  occasionally  told
that  the  results  were  considered  interesting  and  promising,  and
that  they  were  of  a different  nature  from  what  had  previously
been  obtained.  Since  thei’e  is  strong  ground  for  believing  that
in  her  normal  state  she  remembers  absolutely  nothing  of  what
has  occurred  in  the  trance  state,  it  would  seem  impossible  that
in  the  intervals  between  the  sittings  she  could  have  got  up  any
information  bearing  on  them,  even  had  she  wished  to  do  so.

Miss  Newton,  the  assistant  secretary  of  the  Society,  was
present  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  several  sittings.  There  were
two  reasons  for  her  attendance: — (1)  As  the  controls  objected
to  Mrs  Piper’s  being  left  alone  when  in  trance,  and  as  the  sitter
was  not  allowed  to  see  Mrs  Piper  until  ^le  was  entranced,  it
was  necessary  to  have  someone  besides  the  experimenter  in
the  seance-room,  who  could  go  out  and  tell  the  sitter  when
it  was  time  to  come  in.  (2)  Mrs  Piper’s  utterances  during
the  waking-stage  often  cannot  be  heard  unless  one  stands  with
one’s  ear  close  to  her  mouth  (and  often  not  even  then) ; and
when  experience  had  taught  us  that  it  was  difficult  to  do  this
and  to  record  at  the  same  time,  we  thought  it  desirable  to
have  a second  person  present,  who  could  stand  close  to  Mrs
Piper  and  report  her  indistinct  utterances  to  the  recorder.
Beyond  what  she  could  learn  during  these  brief  and  occasional
attendances.  Miss  Newton  knew  nothing  of  the  results  of  the
sittings,  and  knew  nothing  whatsoever  of  the  contents  of  the
scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs  Holland.

Wherever  the  word  “ trance  ” or  “ sitting  ” is  used  without
qualification  in  this  paper,  it  means  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  or  a
sitting  with  Mrs  Piper.  The  word  “ script  ” is  applied  to


26  J.  0.  Piddington.  [part

the  automatic  writings  of  all  the  automatists,  including  Mrs
Piper.

In  the  last  section  of  this  paper  entitled  “ The  Latin
Message  ” I touch  briefly  on  the  rationale  of  these  cross-
correspondence experiments.  The  reader,  however,  is  strongly
advised  to  study  Chapter  VII  of  Miss  Johnson’s  Eeport  On
the  Automatic  tvriting  of  Mrs  Holland  (Proc.  Part  LV.,  pp.
369-391),  as  it  contains  a full  and  lucid  exposition  of  the
theory  of  cross-correspondences,  and  so  forms  an  essential
complement  of  the  Introduction  to  this  paper.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


27


List  of  Sittings  with  Mrs  Piper  between  November  10,  1906

AND  June  2,  1907.


Date.

Sitter.

Experi-
menter in
charge.

Place.

(1)  10  Nov.  1906

Mrs  Isaac  Thompson

0.  J.  L.

Liverpool.

(2)  11  Nov.  „

0.  J.  L.  & E.  Thompson

55

55

(3)  12  Nov.  „

E.  & Miss  T.  Thompson

—

55

(4)  15  Nov.  ,,

0.  J.  L.  & Lady  Lodge

0.  J.  L.

Edgbaston.

(5)  16  Nov.  ,,

55  55

5’

'5

(6)  19  Nov.  ,,

Lady  Lodge

55

5 5

(7)  21  Nov.  „

J.  H.  Muirhead

(8)  23  Nov.  „

0.  J.  L.

55

55

(9)  26  Nov.  ,,

J.  11.  Muirhead

(10)  27  Nov.  ,,

Lady  Lodge  & Miss  Wood-
ward

55

55

(11)  30  Nov.  „

0.  J.  L.  & J.  H.  Muirhead

(12)  iDec.  „

Lady  Lodge

55

(13)  3 Dec.  „

0.  J.  L.

0.  J.  L.

55

(14)  12  Dec.  „

Mrs  Nisbet

J.  G,  P.

London.

(15)  17  Dec.  ,,

Miss  A.  Johnson  & J.  G.  P.

(16)  18  Dec.  ,,

Miss  Helen  Verrall

(17)  19  Dec.  „

55  55  55

55

55

(18)  24  Dec.  „

55  55  55

55

55

(19)  31  Dec.  „

Mrs  Verrall

(20)  1 Jan.  1907

5 5 5 5

55

55

(21)  2 Jan.  „

J.  G.  P.

55

55

(22)  7 Jan.  „

Miss  Helen  Verrall

(23)  10  Jan.  „

55  55  55

55

55

(24)  14  Jan.  „

Mrs  Verrall

(25)  15  Jan.  ,,

5 5 5 5

55

5 5

(26)  16  Jan.  ,,

J.  G.  P.

(27)  21  Jan.  „

Mrs  Verrall

(28)  22  Jan.  „

5 5 5 5

55

55

(29)  23  Jan.  „

J.  G.  P.

(30)  28  Jan.  ,,

Oliver  Lodge,  Jr.,  & J.  G.  P.

(31)  29  Jan.  ,,

Mrs  Verrall

(32)  30  Jan.  ,,

5 5 5 5

55

5 5

(33)  4 Feb.  „

J.  V.  W.  Macalister

(34)  5 Feb.  ,,

5 5 5 5

55

55

(35)  6 Feb.  ,,

J.  G.  P.

(36)  11  Feb.  „

J.  Y.  W.  Macalister

55

55

28


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Date.

.Sitter.

Experi-
menter in
charge.

Place.

(37) 12  Feb.  1907

J.  Y.  W.  Macalister

J.  G.  P.

London.

(38)  13  Feb.

E.  M.  S.  & J.  G.  P.

55

(39)  18  Feb.

J.  Y.  W.  Macalister

55

55

(40)  19  Feb.

J.  G.  P.

55

55

(41)  20  Feb.

E.  M.  S.  & J.  G.  P.

55

55

(42)  25  Feb.

H.  G.  Dakvns

55

55

(43)  26  Feb.

55

55

(44)  27  Feb.

J.  G.  P.

55

55

(4.5)  4 March  ,,

J.  Russell

55

55

(46)  5 March  „

E.  M.  S

55

(47)  6 March  ,,

J.  G.  P.

J.  G.  P.

55

(48)  11  March  „

J.  Russell

55

55

(49)  12  March  „

E.  M.  S.

55

(50)  13  March  ,,

J.  G.  P.

J.  G.  P.

55

(51)  18  March  „

Mrs  J.  Russell

E.  M.  S.

15

(52)  19  March  „

51

55

(53)  20  March  „

E.  M.  S.

51

55

(54)  2 April  „

55

55

(55)  3 April  „

G.  Mh  Balfour

55

55

(56)  4 April  ,,

5)  >1

55

55

(57)  8 April  ,,

E.  M.  S.

55

55

(58)  9 April  ,,

Mrs  “Forbes”

55

55

(59)  10  April  ,,

))

15

55

(60)  15  April  „

55

5 5

(61)  16  April  „

E.  N.  Bennett

—

51

(62)  17  April  „

E.  M.  S.

E.  M.  S.

55

(63)  22  April  „

E.  N.  Bennett

—

55

(64)  23  April  „

Mrs  “ Forbes  ”

E.  M.  S.

55

(65)  24  April  „

E.  M.  S.

15

55

(66)  29  April  „

Mrs  Verrall  & Miss  A.

Miss  A.

55

Johnson

Johnson

(67)  30  April  „

51

55

(68)  1 May  ,,

E.  M.  S.  & Miss  A.  Johnson

E.  M.  S.

55

(69)  6 May  „

11  n

55

55

(70)  7 May

15  11

55

55

(71)  8 May  „

5 5 5 1

51

55

(72)  19  May  „

0.  J.  L.  & Lady  Lodge

0.  J.  L.

Edgbaston

(73)  27  May  „

55  11

55

55

(74)  2 June  ,,

51  55

55

55

lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


29


EXPLANATION  OF  ABBREVIATIONS  AND  TERMS


(a)  Used  in  Mrs  Piper’s  Trance-Script.

U.D.  =Rny  part  of  the  verb  “to  understand”;  and  also  the  noun

“ understanding”.

U.Dg.  =the  noun  “understanding”.

U.Dly.,  or  U.Dgly.  = “ understandingly”.

R.  = Rector.  '1

P.  =Prudens.  -Controls  of  Mrs  Piper’s.

I.  S.  D.  =Imperator  Servus  Dei.  j

+ = Cross,  the  signature  and  symbol  of  Imperator.

Dr.  = Doctor,  the  name  of  one  of  Mrs  Piper’s  controls;  or  the  word

“ doctor”.

The  Friend  = The  Sitter.

Light  =a  medium;  and  also  some  kind  of  luminosity  by  which  a medium
is  surrounded,  and  by  means  of  which  the  spirits  profess  to
effect  their  communications.

Machine  or  Machinery  =the  pencil  used  by  Mrs  Piper  during  trance.

First  after  coming  (Sabbath)  = Monday  next.

Second  ,,  ,,  ,,  = Tuesday  ,,

Third  ,,  ,,  ,,  =Wednesday  ,,


(6)  Used  in  this  PvEport.

O.  J.  L.  =Sir  Oliver  J.  Lodge.

E.  M.  S.  =Mrs  Sidgwick.

J.  G.  P.  =Mr  Piddington.

Scribe  =the  personality  which  purports  to  be  the  author  or  inspirer  of  a
piece  of  automatic  script.

Waking-stage  = the  process  of  coming  out  of  trance  during  which  Mrs  Piper
speaks  but  does  not  write.  Called  by  Dr.  Hodgson  “the
Subliminal”.


Myers  p
Myers  V
Myers  H
Hodgson  p
Hodgson  T


The  personality  that  calls  itself  “Myers”  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.
,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.

,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  Mrs  Holland’s  script.

,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  “Hodgson”  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.

,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.


30


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


“ Aid  fallax  ” ait  “ est  sollertia  nobis,
Aid  fia  sunt  nullumquc  nefas  oracula  suadent.”


The  rcmenaunt  of  the  tale,  if  ye  vjil  here.
Rede  in  Ovid.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


31


I.

“ST.  PAUL.”

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs  Pifcr  held  on  Nov.

15,  1906.

(Present:  0.  J.  L.  and  Lady  Lodge.)

(Hodgson  communicating.)  I am  Hodgson.

0.  J.  L.  Glad  to  see  you  at  last.

Hello  Lodge.  I am  not  dead  as  some  might  suppose.  I am
very  much  alive.

0.  J.  L.  Good,  I expect  so.

Speak  to  me.

0.  J.  L.  Are  you  interested  in  the  cross-correspondence  1 Could  you
send  something  to  other  communicators  1

I am  very,  and  think  it  the  very  best  thing.

0.  J.  L.  Could  you  send  one  now  to  one  of  the  mediums  1

I will  go  to  Mrs  Holland.  [Dr  Hodgson  never  knew  any-
thing about  Mrs  Holland ; but  J.  G.  P.  in  the  spring
of  1906  had  mentioned  her  name  to  Hodgsonp  more
than  once  at  sittings  in  Boston.]

0.  J.  L.  What  will  you  send  ?

St.  Paul.

0.  J.  L.  That  is  a good  idea.

St.  Paul.  I will  give  it  to  her  at  once.


(After  an  interval.)


32  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

O.  J.  L.  Do  j’ou  remember  what  you  were  going  to  say  to  Mrs.
Holland  1

St.  Paul.

O.  J.  L.  Yes,  quite  right.

I will  go  at  once.

“ St.  Paul  ” did  not  appear  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script.  There
are,  however,  in  the  script  of  Miss  Verrall  two  passages  worth
considering  in  this  connection. ^

The  two  passages  in  question  occur  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script
of  Jan.  12  and  Feb.  26,  1907.  The  script  of  Jan.  12  opens
with  a sentence  in  Latin,  and  then  totally  unconnected  with  it
follow  these  words  : —

the  name  is  not  right  robbing  Peter  to  pay  — Paul  1
sanctus  nomine  quod  efficit  nil  continens  petatur  sub-
veniet.

The  script  of  Feb.  26  reads  as  follows: —

A tangle  of  flowers  with  green  grass  between  wall  flowers
pansies  why  such  hurry  did  you  know  that  the  second
wa}^  was  shorter  you  have  not  understood  about  Paul
ask  Lodge,  quibus  eruditis  advocatis  rem  explicabis  non
nisi  ad  unam  normam  refers  hoc  satis  alia  vana
a tower  of  ancient  masonry  with  battlements

(a  scrawl,  perhaps  \

representing  a signature  1 astolat.

“A.^T.”  /

’ I consider  myself  Justified  in  looking  for  a correspondence  in  the  script  of
an  automatist  other  than  the  one  to  whom  the  message  was  directed,  because
the  trance-personalities  were  more  than  once  and  in  the  most  formal  and
definite  terms  asked  to  try  to  give  tliese  corresponding  messages  to  all  or  any
of  the  automatists  concerned  in  these  experiments,  even  though  only  one  was
specifically  named  when  the  experiment  was  arranged.  To  a critical  mind  the
reflection  will  at  once  occur  that  the  chances  of  success  were  hereby  increased.
I agree  ; but  I will  content  myself  with  saying  that  if  any  serious  critic  will
carefully  study  all  the  evidence  presented  in  this  report  I shall  not  be  afraid
of  his  seeking  to  set  down  the  successful  cases  of  correspondence  to  chance  in
spite  of  the  way  in  which  the  chances  of  success  to  the  extent  here  stated
were  widened.


LYii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automudisnis.  33

The  last  sentence  and  tlie  opening  phrases  down  to  “shorter”
seem  to  me  clearly  not  to  belong  to  the  middle  passages,  the
subject  of  which  is  dismissed  with  the  words  “ this  is  enough ;
more  is  useless

The  Latin  words  in  the  script  of  Jan.  12  I interpret
thus : — “ Holy  in  name  (i.e.  with  the  title  of  saint)  what  she
(or,  he)  is  doing  is  of  no  use  (i.e.  by  itself).  Let  the  point
(continens)  be  looked  for;  it  will  help”.

The  Latin  words  of  Feb.  26  I translate; — “By  calling  to
your  aid  what  learned  men  will  you  explain  the  matter  ? ^
(You  will  not  explain  it)  unless  you  refer  it  to  one  standard.
This  is  enough  ; more  is  useless”.

The  only  reference  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Miss  Verrall’s
script  during  the  period  under  review  is  the  one  quoted  above.
The  names  Peter  and  Paul  do  not  occur  elsewhere  in  Miss
Verrall’s  script  during  the  same  period.  It  is  natural,  therefore,
to  put  together  the  two  scripts  containing  the  name  Paul.

If  we  take  these  two  passages  to  refer  to  the  experiment
arranged  on  Xov.  15,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  name  Paul  is
given ; and  that  “ Lodge  ” is  correctly  indicated  as  the  person
to  explain  about  the  name  Paul.  Miss  Verrall  never  did

apply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  as  directed ; and  it  was  not
until  September  1907  that  the  interpretation  given  above
struck  me.

I have  said  that  “St.  Paul”  did  not  appear  in  Mrs.
Holland’s  script,  but  her  script  of  Dec.  31,  1906  suggests  an
approach  to  the  name  of  St.  Paul,  and  also  suggests  an
explanation  of  the  words  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  12,
“ the  name  is  not  right  robbing  Peter  to  pay — Paul”.

I transcribe  the  first  half  only  of  this  script  of  Dec.  31,
1906:  the  second  half  having  no  connection  with  the  first.

II  Peter  L,  15.  [“Moreover  I will  endeavour  that  ye  may
be  able  after  my  decease  to  have  these  things  always  in
remembrance.”]  ^

^ Or,  if  “ quibiis  ” is  treated  as  a relative  instead  of  as  an  interrogative,
the  words  would  mean  : “ when  yon  have  called  these  learned  persons  to  your
aid”.

'Explanatory  comments,  translations,  etc.  are  throughout  enclosed,  as  here,
in  square  brackets.


C


34


J.  G.  P icldington.


[part


“This  witness  is  true” —

It  is  now  time  that  the  shadow  should  be  lifted  from  .your
spirit — “Let  patience  have  her  perfect  work” —

“ This  is  a faithful  saying  ” —

This  wit'iiess  etc.  is  not,  I believe,  a textual  quotation,  but
is  reminiscent  of  several  passages  in  the  writings  of  St.  John.

Let  patience  etc.  is  a quotation  from  the  Epistle  of  St.  James.

This  is  CO  faithful  saying  occurs  at  least  three  times  in  St.
Paul’s  Epistles.

The  only  name  actually  written  is  Peter,  and  this  Peter  is
clearly  Paint  Peter.  If  we  suppose  that  the  scribe  was  aiming
at  getting  “ St.  Paul  ” expressed,  it  looks  as  if  he  felt  his  way
towards  the  name  or  notion  of  St.  Paul  by  quoting  first  from
St.  Peter,  next  from  St.  John,  then  from  St.  Janies  and  finally
from  St.  Paul.  I do  not  mean  that  I think  the  process  was
thus  deliberately  involved,  but  that  the  scribe  (whoever  or
whatever  that  may  be)  did  the  best  he  could.  A long  way
round  may  perhaps  be  the  only  way  there.  I further  suggest
that  the  scribe  having  got  so  far  could  not  proceed  to  get  the
name  “ St.  Paul  ” written,  and  so  had  to  content  himself  with  a
quotation  from  his  writings.

Now,  read  in  the  light  of  this  interpretation,  the  words  in
Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  12,  “the  name  is  not  right

robbing  Peter  to  pay — Paul”,  are  suggestive.

The  words  nisi  ad  tmarn  normetm  refers  in  Miss  A^errall’s
sci'ipt  of  Feb.  26  may,  perhaps,  have  been  intended  to  mean
that  unless  there  was  one  person  in  touch  with  all  the  auto-
matists  concerned  in  these  experiments  the  point  would  be

missed  in  many  instances;  or  in  other  words,  that  a central
exchange  was  necessary.  In  this  case  I was,  so  to  speak,  at
the  central  office,  but  though  I was  receiving  IMiss  A^errall’s
script,  and  though  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  sent  me  a copy  of  his
record  of  the  sitting  of  Nov.  15,  I was  not  receiving  a copy
of  Mrs  Holland’s  script ; and  until  I did  receive  a copy  of
it  the  significance  of  Miss  Verrall’s  scripts  of  Jan.  12  and
Feb.  2 6 naturally  escaped  me.  If  then  the  words  nisi  acl
7inum  iiormam  refers  can  bear  such  an  interpretation  as  I

have  sought  to  place  on  them,  they  were  neither  otiose  nor

mere  padding.


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  ’^o

Most  readers  who  have  had  the  patience  to  follow  rne  so
far  will,  I fear,  at  this  point  form  the  opinion  that  all  this
may  be  more  or  less  ingenious  rubbish,  but  that  it  is  certainly
rubbish.  Had  our  experiments  produced  no  coincidences  less
problematical  than  this  one,  I should  heartily  agree ; but  there
have  been  correspondences  of  the  most  definite  character,  and
not  only  that,  but  in  the  production  of  them  there  is  evidence
both  of  intelligent  direction  and  of  ingenuity.  I care  not  to
whom  that  intelligence  be  attributed ; but  that  intelligence
and  acute  intelligence  lie  behind  the  phenomena  I stoutly
maintain.  And  if  this  be  once  admitted,  no  excuse  need  be
offered  for  trying  to  place  upon  them  interpretations  which
otherwise  would  be  over-subtle.


II.


“FEANCIS  AND  IGNATIUS”.

On  Jan.  2,  1907  at  12.30  p.m.  Calcutta  time  (i.e.  6.30
a.m.  Greenwich  time)  Mrs  Holland  wrote  a script  containing
the  names  Francis  and  Ignatius ; and  neither  of  these  names
occurs  again  in  her  script  during  the  period  under  review.
Some  five  or  six  hours  later,  at  the  sitting  held  with  Mrs
Piper  on  Jan.  2,  I asked  Imperator  if  he  objected  to  my
asking  MyerSp  if  he  remembered  what  was  Imperator’s  real
name  as  given  through  Stainton  Moses ; and  Imperator  replied
that  he  had  no  objection.  I then  asked  Pmctor  to  tell  me
his  real  name,  and  after  a few  minutes  Eector  said  his  name
was  Francis.  The  question  about  Imperator’s  name  was  put
to  MyerSp  on  April  8,  and  MyerSp  replied  that  he  could  not
remember  the  name  of  Imperator  as  given  through  Stainton
Moses,  but  thought  it  was  something  like  St.  Ignatius ; and
he  then  spontaneously  asked  whether  the  name  of  one  of
Mrs  Piper’s  controls  was  not  Francis.


36


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


I am  disposed  to  regard  these  coincidences  as  accidental.
But  whether  they  be  so  or  not,  at  any  rate  before  pro-
nouncing a definite  opinion  it  is  necessary  to  discover  whether
the  names  Ignatius  and  Francis  had  previously  been  assigned
to  Imperator  and  Eector  respectively  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance-
communications.  To  discover  this  involves  an  examination  of
all  the  many  unpublished  records  of  Mrs  Piper’s  sittings  ; and
as  this  examination  will  not  be  completed  for  a long  time,  I
defer  for  the  present  discussing  in  detail  this  possible  instance
of  cross-correspondence.


III.

“TPJANGLE  WITHIN  A CIECLE.”

Ext7’cict  from  record  of  sitting  vntli  Mrs  PiiKr  held  on  Jem.  16,

1907.

(Present : J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Myers  communicating.)

J.  G.  P.  Myers.

Yes  my  friend.

J.  G.  P.  Myers,  when  you  send  a message  to,  say,  Mrs  Verrall,  and
then  a similar  message  to  Mrs  Holland,  could  you  not
mark  each  with  some  simple  but  distinctive  sign  1

I am  not  cpiite  sure  that  I U.D.  you  do  you  mean  when  I
give  a message  to  make  a sign  after  or  before  the  written
message  ?

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  if  you  wrote,  for  instance,  “sunshine”  through  Mrs
Verrall  and  then  afterwards  through  Mrs  Holland,  you
might  put,  say,  a triangle  within  a circle,  or  some  simple
sign  like  that,  to  show  that  there  is  another  message  to
be  looked  for  corresponding  with  the  message  so  marked.


lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


37


I think  I U.D.  you  wish  me  to  make  a sign  when  giving
a word  at  Mrs  Verralls  also  at  Mrs  Hollamls’

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

the  same  sign

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I can  yes  I shall  be  veiy  glad  to  tiy  this.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  thank  you.

It  would  be  evidential.

J.  G.  P.  It  certainly  would  lie.

A circle  with  a triangle  inside  it  appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Jan.  28  at  the  foot  of  a remarkable  conununication
embodying  a successful  cross-correspondence,  which  will  be
dealt  with  in  detail  in  Section  VI.  Mrs  Holland’s  script  does
not  contain  any  drawing  of  a circle  with  a triangle  inside
it ; though  on  May  8 she  has  these  drawings  of  geometrical
figures.

O


Mrs  Verrall’s  drawing  is,  however,  quite  unmistakable ; and
it  was  attached,  as  requested,  to  a script  which  contained  a
cross-correspondence.  The  cross-correspondence  was  between
Mrs  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall  and  YIrs  Piper.  That  Mrs  Holland
was  not  concerned  in  it  in  no  degree  detracts  from  the  success,
for  when  suggesting  the  experiment  to  Myersp  I mentioned
Mrs  Holland  (and  for  that  matter  Mrs  Verrall  also)  only  by
way  of  exemplification.  This  was  the  only  experiment  chosen
by  the  experimenters  which  certainly  succeeded.  It  may  be
that  it  succeeded  because,  unpromising  though  such  a subject
may  seem,  the  circle  and  triangle  may  have  had  a significance


.38


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAKT


of  a poetical  nature  which  appealed  to  the  emotions  of
the  Myers  personality ; and  the  circle  certainly  fitted  in
most  happily  and  appropriately  with  the  communication  to
which  it  was  appended.  In  later  sittings  MyerSp  indicated
with  sufficient  clearness,  if  not  as  explicitly  as  could  have
been  wished,  the  particular  piece  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  which
had  been  marked  with  the  triangle  and  circle.  These  points
will  be  further  explained  and  discussed  under  Section  VI.


IV.


“ STEEPLE.”

On  Jan.  16,  1907  while  I was  haviiio’  a sitting  with  Mrs
Piper  in  the  Irish  Literary  room  at  Hanover  Square,  Miss
Johnson  was  having  a synchronous  sitting  with  Mrs  Thompson
in  the  larger  of  the  S.P.K.  rooms.  I was  told  when  Mrs
Thompson  had  gone  into  trance,  and  we  then  began  to  try  to
get  messages  transferred  from  one  medium  to  the  other.  The
controls  of  either  medimr.  were  also  asked  to  report  what  was
passing  at  the  other  sitting.  No  success  attended  these  experi-
ments. In  the  Piper  sitting  the  communications  went  on  in
the  ordinary  way ; the  controls,  who  had  been  commissioned
to  give  messages  to  Mrs  Thompson’s  control  “ Nelly  ” and  to
describe  what  was  passing  at  her  seance,  breaking  in  from
time  to  time  to  report  progress.  Thus,  immediately  after  the
arrangement  had  been  made  with  MyerSp  about  the  triangle
and  circle  experiment  related  in  the  last  section,  the  following
was  written  : —

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  Jan.
16,  1907.

(Present:  J.  Cl.  P.  alone.)

(Prudens  communicating.)


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


39


ask  Mrs  Thompson  if

Miss  Johnson  I mean  if  the  word  steeple  came  out  theie
[i.e.  at  Mrs  Thompson’s.]

•J.  G.  P.  “ sceptic,”  is  it  ?

S teeple.

S

•J.  G.  P.  “ Steeple  ” 1

(hland  gives  emphatic  assent  as  J.  G.  P.  says  “steeple”.)
Prudens.

J.  G.  P.  Excellent,  Prudens.  Why  did  you  ask  this  1
Because  I thought  I recognised  it.

J.  G.  P.  Thank  you.

I shall  be  glad  to  know  if  the  word  Mourn  or  Mown  came
out.  [This  referred  to  an  experiment  made  some  days
previously.]

•J.  G.  P.  “Mourn  or  Mown.”  No,  Prudens,  there  was  no  trace  of  it.
“ mourn  ”

•J.  G.  P.  “mourn.”  No;  nor  of  that  either,
thank  you  I thought  it  might.

But  as  I said  before  I am  not  so  good  at  receiving.

J.  G.  P.  as  at  transmitting?

(Hand  assents.)

.T.  G.  P.  Will  you  wait  a moment  ?
yes  two  if  you  like.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  Can  I speak  to  Myers  while  you,  Prudens,  listen  ?

Very  good  wait  and  I will  speak  to  him.
he  gave  the  name  Moses  to  Nellie.


40


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


J.  G.  P.  “Moses”'?

(Hand  assents.)

(M3’ers  communicating.)

Myers.  (Agitation  in  hand.)  I lieard.

J.  G.  P.  I want  you  to  hear  what  Prudens  has  just  WTitten.  He
wrote:  “Ask  Miss  Johnson  if  the  Avord  steeple  came
out  ” at  IMrs  Thompson’s.  Does  that  suggest  anything
to  you  ?

Oh  yes  that  is  wl)v  I have  tried  it  again  there.

It  was  m}^  suggestion  entirely.  . . .

1 gave  this  before,  as  I heard  it  repeated  I must  ask  Mrs
Verrall  about  it.  ...  did  she  not  U.D.  it.

J.  G.  P.  You  want  me  to  answer  that  ?

Yes  I do.

J.  G.  P.  I’m  not  quite  certain;  but  it’s  just  because  I’m  not  quite
certain  that  I think  this  rvill  be  such  a splendid  test.

Yes  I U.D.  as  I have  very  persistently^  heard  it  and  so
persistently  tried  to  give  it  here  also  there  at  Mrs  T’s.

J.  G.  P.  \Yhen  you  say  you  have  heard  it,  where  did  you  hear  if?

I thought  you  gave  it  at  Mrs  Yerralls.

J.  G.  P.  (In  a tone  of  surprise)  “I  thought  you  gave  it  at  Mrs
Yerrall’s”!  Is  that  right?

I did  not  mean  you  I mean  to  say  I got  it  there  and  at
IMrs  Thompson’s  also.

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  I understand.

I heard  it  quite  clearly.  but  you  seemed  so  perplexed.

AYhen  I spoke  it  here.  I wondered  if  my  heailng  was

good.

J.  G.  P.  No,  Myers.  The  wuiting  wmsn’t  clear,  and  I was  perhaps  a
little  slow.


Oh.  w'ell  it  is  U.D.  isnt  it  ?
J.  G.  P.  Yes;  quite  understood.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Goncorcla/nt  Automatisms.


41


I now  give  copies  of  various  notes  and  letters  which  relate
to  this  incident  : —


Note  by  J.  G.  P.  made  on  January  16,  1907,  at  3.40  p.m.


With  reference  to  an  incident  that  occurred  in  a sitting  with  Mrs.

Piper  held  on  this  day.


Some  days  ago — a week,  more  or  less — I thought  1
received  a letter  from  Miss  Johnson  in  which  she  said  that  she
had  discovered  a cross-corres}3ondence  between  the  scrijrt  of  Mrs.
Verrall  and  that  of  Mrs.  Holland  : the  coincidence  consisting  in  the
production  of  the  word  “ stee^Je  ” by  both.  She  added  (so  I
thought)  that  she  thought  it  rather  clever  of  her  to  have  made  out
the  coincidence,  as  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  the  reference  to  the
steeple  was  in  Latin.

One  or  two  days  after  1 thought  I had  received  this  letter  I was
going  through  the  scripts  of  klrs  and  Miss  Verrall  which  had  been
sent  to  me  since  the  end  of  November  1906  ; and  in  one  of  Miss
VerralFs  writings  I came  across  a drawing  of  two  birds  looking  at
a thing  like  this  v V.


Underneath  the  drawing  the  word  “doves”  was  written;  and
some  phrase  like  “she  saw  it  over  the  church”.  I made  a note, —
or  so  I believe — (I  will  verify  after  completing  this  note)  pointing-
out  that  this  might  be  a vague  reference  to  the  “steeple”  men-
tioned— as  I thought — both  in  Mrs.  Yerrall’s  and  Mrs.  Holland’s
scripts.  When  making  this  memorandum  I looked  for  the  letter  in
wliich  I thought  Miss  Johnson  had  informed  me  of  the  coincidence.
'When  I failed  to  find  it  a doubt  momentarily  possessed  me  whether
I had  ever  really  had  such  a letter  from  Miss  Johnson ; but  I
dismissed  this  doubt  as  absurd.

Yesterday,  Jan.  15,  1907,  I was  lunching  with  Mrs.  Verrall  after
a Piper  sitting.  I believe  I then  told  Mrs.  Verrall  that  kliss
Johnson  had  discovered  another  coincidence  between  her  script  and
Mrs.  Holland’s,  and  I believe  that  I told  her  that  “steeple”  was
the  common  idea  or  word.

This  morning  the  Myers  control,  or  Prudeus,  asked  me  whether
the  word  “ steeple  ” had  been  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  and,  I think,
added  that  he  had  tried  to  give  it  to  Mrs.  Thompson  also.  (My
recollections  of  what  exactly  was  written  b}^  the  Myers  control  or
Prudens  are  somewhat  hazy;  but  I am  purposely  making  this  note


42


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


before  writing  out  or  reading  through  the  record  of  this  morning’s
sitting.)

When  “ steeple  ” was  mentioned  in  the  Piper  trance  I became
quite  enthusiastic  and  exclaimed  “Excellent”;  as  I thought  that  the
word  had  now  been  produced  by  a third  automatist.  The  control
asked  me  if  Mrs.  Verrall  had  got  the  word  “steeple.”  I replied
that  I was  not  absolutely  certain,  but  believed  she  had.  The  reserve
manifested  in  this  reply  was  almost  entirely,  if  not  altogether,  due
to  my  natural  caution.  Not  having  myself  seen  the  evidence  for  the
coincidence  I did  not  like  unreservedly  to  vouch  for  the  occurrence
of  the  word  “steeple”  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script.  Possibly — though

only  possibly — the  doubt  may  have  recurred  to  me — though  certainly
I did  not  formulate  it,  if  it  did — whether  I had  in  reality  learnt
from  a letter  written  by  Miss  Johnson  of  the  occurrence  of  “steeple”
in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  and  Mrs.  Holland’s  scripts.

After  the  Piper  sitting  was  over  I went  into  Miss  Johnson’s
room,  where  she  had  been  having  a sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson.

Before  examining  Miss  Johnson’s  notes  of  her  sitting  in  order  to
see  whether  there  were  any  coincidences  between  the  trance-utterances
of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  the  script  of  Mrs.  Piper,  I said  to  Miss
Johnson  : “ Well,  anyhow,  there  was  one  good  thing  this  morning,
for  the  controls  said  they  had  given  the  word  “ steeple  ” to  Mrs.
Verrall.  You  remember  you  wrote  and  told  me  that  you  had
discovered  that  both  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  had  been  writing
about  a steeple”.  Miss  Johnson  denied  all  recollection  of  having
written  any  such  letter,  and  denied  the  existence  of  an}^  such  coin-
cidence. I then  dictated  to  Miss  Johnson  a short  note  giving  the
essential  parts  of  this  note.

I am  not  a vivid  dreamer  and  I rarely  remember  my  dreams ;
but  when  I do  dream,  my  dream  not  infrequently  takes  the  form  of
receiving  letters,  and  in  my  dream  the  handwriting  of  my  dream-
correspondent  is  just  like  that  of  the  living  person  from  whom  I
imagine  I am  hearing.  I think  I have  once  or  twice  before  mis-
taken  dream  experiences  for  waking  experiences.

I have  some  kind  of  vague  suspicion  that  I may  perhaps  have
given  “steeple”  as  a cross-correspondence  message  for  the  Piper
controls  to  convey  to  Mrs.  Verrall ; but  this  can  be  verified  by
reference  to  the  records.  [“Steeple”  was  not  chosen  as  a cross-
correspondence message  at  any  time.]

I have  now  looked  up  the  note  relating  to  Miss  Verrall’s  script
and  find  that  my  recollection  recorded  above  is  correct.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


43


The  note  runs  as  follows ; —

“ Notes  re  C.Cs  and  V.  scripts.

H.  V.  Nov.  20,  1906.

drawino;  of  two  birds  ‘ regardant  ’ doves  ”.

O O

“ She  has  seen  it  above  the  church  ”.

? Is  this  a reference  to  (1)  “the  white  dove”  (Holland  &:  Piper)

(2)  “steeple”  (Mrs.  V.  and  Holland.)

On  Jan.  16,  after  having  completed  the  foregoing  note,
I wrote  to  Mrs  Verrall  as  follows. —

“ Did  I tell  you  yesterday  at  lunch  (or  perhaps  the

day  before)  that  Miss  Johnson  had  discovered  another  C.C.  [i.e.  cross-
correspondence]  between  you  and  ]Mrs  Holland  and  did  I tell  you
what  the  common  word  or  idea  was  1 It  may  help  you  to  remember  if
I add  that  to  the  best  of  my  belief  I told  you  that  I fancied  I had
found  in  your  daughter’s  script  a possible,  though  vague,  reference
to  the  same  word  or  idea.  Please  think  this  over  carefully,  for  if
my  memory  isn’t  playing  me  tricks,  and  if  your  memory  corroborates
mine,  the  controls  will  have  brought  off  rather  a pretty  thing

(Written  on  the  back  of  the  envelope)  “ Did  you  tell  H.  V.  [i.e.  Miss
Helen  Verrall]  when  you  returned  home  about  my  thinking  that  her
script  had  a reference  to  a C.C.  obtained  by  you  and  Mrs  H?”

To  this  Mrs  Verrall  replied  on  Jan.  17  ; —

On  Monday  Jan.  14  at  lunch  you  described  to  me  a pair  of
regardant  doves  in  H’s  script  and  asked  if  I had  had  anything
similar.  You  then  said  something  about  Mrs.  Holland  and  myself
having  had  something  about  a church  steeple,  which  was  and  is
quite  unintelligible  to  me.  You  said  that  Miss  Johnson  had  told
you  this  or  you  had  dreamt  it.  I certainly  never  mentioned  the
episode  to  Helen  ; the  first  she  knew  of  it  was  when  I read  aloud
the  pencil  note  outside  your  letter.  (Helen  corroborates)

Note  by  J.  C.  P.  re  above,  dated  Jan.  18,  1907.

“ Fow  said  that  Miss  Johnson  had  told  you  or  you  had  dreamt  it.’’

I think  I first  said  that  Miss  J.  had  told  me ; and  only  added  that
perhaps  I had  dreamt  it  when  Mrs.  Verrall  looked  perplexed  at
my  I'eference  to  a steeple,  and  then  probably  I was  speaking  more
in  joke  than  otherwise.  At  the  sitting  on  Jan.  16  when  the  control


44


J.  G.  Piddimjion.


[part


asked  me  if  Mrs.  Verrall  had  received  the  word  steejsle,  or  rather
when  I understood  it  to  ask  that,  and  when  I answered  that  I
thought  she  had  received  it,  I had  entirely  forgotten  the  ignorance
displayed  and  confessed  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  Jan.  14  of  all  knowledge
of  the  occurrence  of  the  word  in  her  script.

Some  days  or  perhaps  a week  or  two  later,  to  tease  Mrs
Piper,  I told  her  in  fun  that  she  needn’t  think  mediumistic
gifts  so  exceptional,  as  I myself,  for  instance,  was  a medium
too.  I was,  of  course,  thinking  of  the  “ Steeple  ” incident,  but
I did  not  say  anything  about  it,  my  object  being  to  mystify
her.  And  I do  not  see  how  my  remark  could  have  given  any
clue  to  what  came  out  subsequently  in  the  trance ; and  the
surprise  I manifested,  when,  on  Jan.  16,  Myersp  said  he  thought
I had  given  “ Steeple  ” to  Mrs  A^errall,  ought  to  have  thrown
her  trance-consciousness  off  the  scent.  I will  now  relate  the
sequel.

On  Feb.  19,  1907,  the  following  words  were  spoken  during
the  waking-stage,  and  were  certainly  addi’essed  to  me,  as  I alone
was  present  : —

George  Pelham  [who  is  represented  throughout  as  co-operating
with  Hodgsoiip  and  MyerSp]  is  in  there,  shaking  both  hands  at
me  and  muttering  a kind  of  language ; and  they  say  that  they  tell  you
things  in  your  dreams  some  day  some  time.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  until  Mrs  Piper  held  on
March  13,  1907.

(Myers  communicating)  I gave  her  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  the
word  Church  as  did  Hodgson  also.

J G.  P.  Yes.

but  more  than  once  I found  you  and  although  you  did  not
reply  in  words  to  my  message  I repeatedly  said,  and  in
fact  shouted  out  to  you  in  what  you  would  call,  an
undignified  manner  for  a gentleman.  Steeple.

J.  G.  P.  That’s  good ; very  good.

you  did  not  reply  but  your  spirit  seemed  to  grasp  the
idea,  and  that  pleased  me  greatly  as  it  seemed  the  nearest
approach  to  making  j ou  U.D.  clearly  that  I ever  (hesita-
tion) gave,  [or,  “gone.”]


lvil]  a Series  of  Goncordavt  Automatisms.  45

J.  G.  P.  Is  it  “ gave  ” ?
did.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I understand.

The  mention  here  in  close  proximity  of  “ Church  ” and
“ Steeple  ” is  interesting  in  two  ways.  First,  because  I had
noted  a connection  between  the  phrase  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script
of  ISTov.  20,  1906,  “she  has  seen  it  above  the  church,”  and  the
“ Steeple  ” cross-correspondence  which  I had  imagined  had
occurred  in  the  scripts  of  Mrs  Holland  and  Mrs  Verrall ;
and,  secondly,  because  as  long  ago  as  Nov.  16 — six  weeks
at  least  before  my  dream — the  following  had  passed  at  one  of
Sir  Oliver  Lodge’s  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper : —

(Communicator  not  indicated;  perhaps  Myers  or  Rector;  probably
not  Hodgson.)

St.  Paul  has  been  given.

Ask  Piddington  if  he  said  anytliing  about  a church  at  Mrs
Holland’s.  Ask  him  if  he  srave  a message  to  be  recorded

O O

here  about  a church — if  he  said  church  to  Mrs  Holland.
0.  J.  L.  All  right,  I will.

The  matter  was  recalled  at  a sitting  held  on  Dec.  3,  1906  : —

(Hodgson  communicating)  Did  you  ask  Piddington  about  the
Church'?  He  said  something  to  me  through  Mrs  Holland
about  the  Church.

0.  J.  L.  Very  well,  that  is  a C.C.  [i.e.  cross-correspondence]  message.

Yes,  have  you  heard  about  the  others  yet?

0.  J.  L.  No,  but  they  will  all  be  recorded  and  collated  in  due  time.

Had  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  communicated  to  me  either  of  these
passages,  the  genesis  of  my  dream  might  have  been  traced  to
them  ; but  as  a matter  of  fact  he  did  not  do  so,  as  I find  on
reference  to  his  letters.  He  acquainted  me  with  most  of  the
other  cross-correspondence  experiments  in  his  sittings,  but,
curiously  enough,  he  omitted  to  mention  this  one.  Nor  did  I
see  the  type-written  records  of  the  sittings  of  Nov.  16  and
Dec.  3 until  after  “ Steeple  ” had  been  mentioned  in  the  Piper
sitting  of  Jan.  16,  although  I did  see  a few  of  the  other  records
of  the  Edgbaston  sittings  before  this  date.  It  is  a pity  that


46


J.  0.  Picldington.


[part


Myersp  hedged  when  my  tone  of  surprise  showed  that  I did
not  understand  his  original  and  significant,  if  not  entirely
explicit,  statement:  “I  thought  you  gave  it  at  Mrs  A^errall’s  ” ;
but  tliat  is  an  unfortunate  habit  of  trance-personalities.  Still,
he  seemed  to  retract  his  retractation  by  adding  spontaneously  :
“ T heard  it  quite  clearly ; but  you  seemed  so  perplexed  when
I spoke  it  here  I wondered  if  my  hearing  was  good  Anyhow,
whether  he  hedged  or  not,  Myersp  comes  out  of  it,  so  far  as
memory  is  concerned,  much  better  than  I do  ; for  on  Jan.  16  1
had  forgotten  what  Mrs.  Verrall  had  told  me  on  Jan.  14:
namely,  that  she  was  unaware  of  the  appearance  of  “ Steeple  ”
in  her  script.

As  regards  the  references  made  in  the  sittings  of  Nov.  16  and
Dec.  3,  1906,  to  Mrs.  Holland,  myself  and  a church,  it  deserves
noting  that  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  Dec.  4,  1906,  opens  with
the  words  :

“ The  grey  church  tower.”

They  occupy  a line  to  themselves,  and  seem  to  be  quite  dis-
connected from  the  rest  of  the  script.  This  is  the  only  time
during  the  period  under  review  that  the  word  “ Church  ” occurs
in  Mrs  Holland’s  script.


V.


“LIDlfATY,  MY  OWN  NAME,  AND  MRS


SIDGWICK’S.”


\_Tlds  Section  should  he  read  in  connection  with  the  paper  bt/  Mrs  Sidgwick

on  pp.  417-440.]

It  will,  I think,  conduce  to  clearness  if  I begin  in  this  case
with  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.

Fart  of  3Irs  Verrall’s  script  of  Fch.  4,  1907,  begun  at  10.50  n.m.

Have  you  nothing  to  .sa\'  to  me
give  the  message  I gave


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


47


but  was  it  understood  1

On  the  Council  I asked  and  she  said  Yes.  Tell  Mrs  Sidg-
wick  that.  and  something  about  the  Gurney  library
Avhich  I think  she  will  remember  or  a Gurney  memorial,
A\diich  she  was  to  take  over.  I will  give  the  message
elsewhere  too  today  but  this  is  easier  than  the  other
place.

The  signature  might  help

H.  Sidgwick.

^Ye  have  tried  for  that  today,  wait  for  their  answer  F W H M

I must  quote  another  script  of  IMrs.  Verrall’s,  although  it  is
largely  concerned  with  another  cross-correspondence,  as  it  would
be  impossible  to  disentangle  the  two  different  subjects  with
which  it  is  concerned,  and,  besides,  they  are  evidently  meant
not  to  be  dissociated.

Mrs  VerrcdVs  script  of  Feb.  6,  1907,  begun  at  11.7  a.m.

Laura  and  another

There  is  some  great  obstruction  this  morning

help  to  remove  it.

This  must  not  occur  again  tell  him  that.

Put  not  your  light  under  a bushel


The  great  Library  has  already  gone  before
Hugh  Le  Despenser

the  branch  that  should  have  grown  full  straight
Apollo’s  laurel  bough

You  don’t  get  it  right  but  some  of  this  is  true


blue  ribband  and  five  pointed  star


I think  it  is  a jewelled  dagger


three  curved  objects  and  a point


I cant  see  what  all  this  means  but  I am


48


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


told  to  say  it  to  you
APOLLOS  LAUREL  BOUC4H
There  is  also  some  point  in  the  Library
Put  together  the  Librarj'  and  the  bough
Laureatus  a laurel  wreath


perhaps  no  more  than  that


Corona  laureata  has  some  meaning  here
With  laureate  wreath  his  brow  serene  was  crowned.
No  more  today — await  the  better  news
that  brings  assurance  with  a laurel  crown.


It  will  be  noticed  that  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  4 was
signed  “ F.W.PI.M.”,  and  her  script  of  Feb.  6,  though  not  signed
with  these  initials  and  not  purporting  apparently  to  come  from
Myers,  is  clearly,  though  only  incidentally,  connected  with  the
previous  script.  The  form  of  the  script  of  Feb.  6 gives  it  the
appearairce  of  emanating  from  a collaborator  of  the  author  of
the  script  of  Feb.  4,  and  from  a collaborator  acquainted  with
the  general  intentions  of  the  author  of  the  script  of  Feb.  4,
though  not  with  the  particular  significance  of  the  message  which
he  had  been  commissioned  to  convey.

I proceed  now  to  cjuote  extracts  from  Mrs  Piper’s  sittings.


Extract  from  record,  of  sitting  ivitli  Mrs  Pi'per  held  on  Feb.
5,  1907.

(Present  during  this  part  of  the  sitting:  J.  G.  P.  and  Miss
Newton,  the  latter  attending  simply  in  order  to  await  a
signal  from  J.  G.  P.  to  summon  the  sitter,  Mr
Macalister.)

(Rector  communicating)

+ HAIL.


J.  Ct.  P.  Hail,  Imperator  and  Rector.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Atdomatisms.


49


Once  more  we  greet  you  friend  of  earth  peace  be  unto  you

+ (R.)

J.  G.  P.  Thank  you.  Have  you  anything  to  say  before  I bring  the
friend  in  ?

iMyers  is  waiting  to  speak  with  you  and  will  do  so  on  day
after  this  U.D.

J.  G.  P.  I shall  be  glad  to  hear  what  Myers  has  to  say,  and  after  he
has  given  his  message  I have  something  to  say  to  him.

Very  good,  then  we  will  bring  him  here  on  day  after  this.

■J.  G.  P.  I thought  you  meant  he  was  waiting  to  speak  now.

He  came  with  me  just  now,  hoping  we  could  arrange  for
him  to  speak  with  you  if  there  is  an  opportunity  he  will
speak  otherwise  day  after  this.  . . .

J.  G.  P.  If  what  he  has  to  say  is  not  long,  let  him  speak  now.  If

it  is  long,  let  him  wait  till  next  time,  when  he  can

occupy  all  the  time,  if  he  wishes.

I will,  arrange  to  postpone  it  until  next  time.  but  he
thought  you  might  have  some  message  for  him  from  Mrs
V.  as  he  is  going  to  give  her  one.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

today.

-J.  G.  P.  Has  he  given  any  message  to  Mrs  Veri’all  since  he  last  spoke

herel  [i.e.  since  Jan.  30]  And  if  so,  can  he  say  what

it  is  ?

he  first  wished  to  explain  that  his  message  here  was

(repeating  a pass-word  previously  given)

J.  G.  P.  Thank  you.  I note  that.

day  after  he  will  have  more  to  say.  mean  while,  say  to
your  friend  of  last  time  [i.e.  Mr  Macalister]  kindly  that
the  object  presented  was  of  little  use  to  us.


J.  G.  P.  Yes.


D


50


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


We  will  meet  him  any  time  now.

(Myers  communicating)

Rose  garden,

Roses  blossoming

Blossoming  everywhere.

U.D.

good  bye.

J.  G.  P.  Is  that  Myers  1

Yes.

J.  G.  P.  I want  to  say  something  to  you.  You  remember  when  I put
you  a question  in  which  the  words  “ seances  ” and  “ Leck-
hampton  ” occurred  you  did  not  at  first  understand  them.

I did  not  hear  them  very  well.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  I think  it  possible  that  in  the  same  way  you  did  not
catch  a word  in  the  question  put  to  jmu  by  Mrs  Verrall
on  behalf  of  Mrs  Sidgwick.

M^hat  was  it  ? I may  be  better  able  to  U.D.  more  than  at
that  time.

J.  G.  P.  The  word  I think  you  may  not  have  caught  was  “Terling."

(repeating  the  word  distinctly  once  or  twice)  Terling  is
the  home  of  Lord  Rayleigh.

Oh  yes  I jjositively  have  never  heard  i.e.  to  grasp  the
word  before.

you  are  right  in  this.  I U.D.  more  and  will  go  over  that
interview  and  if  you  refer  to  this  I will  an  [obviously
the  beginning  of  “ answer  ”]  give  my  answer  tomorrow.

J.  G.  P.  All  right.  Thanks.  Now  I must  say  good-bye.

There  are  two  points  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  extract  to
which  I wish  to  draw  attention : the  evident  anxiety  of  MyerSp
to  make  some  communication  at  this  sitting,  and  his  evident
expectation  that  I should  have  a message  for  him  from  Mrs
Verrall.  Both  feelings  were  natural  and  dramatically  fitting,  if
we  assume  that  MyerSp  was  aware  (and  as  the  event  showed
he  almost  certainly  was)  of  the  message  written  by  MyerSy  on
Feb.  4 through  Mrs  Verrall.


LVil.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Avdomatisms.  51

As  regards  the  latter  part  of  the  extract  I must  explain  that
at  a sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Jan.  21  Mrs  Verrall  had,
on  behalf  of  Mrs  Sidgwick,  asked  Myersp  whether  he  remem-
bered the  subject  of  a certain  conversation  between  her  and
Frederic  Myers  which  occurred  at  Terling  a few  days  before
Mr  Sidgwick’s  death.  The  whole  of  this  episode  is  fully  dealt
with  by  Mrs  Sidgwick  in  a paper  which  will  be  found  further
on  at  p.  417;  and  I need  only  say  here  that,  though  answers
had  been  attempted,  the  correct  answer  had  not  yet  been  given.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vjitli  Airs  Pigoer  held  on  Feb.
6,  1907.

(Present : Mr  M‘Dougall  and  J.  G-.  P. ; the  former  as  aii
onlooker  only.)

(Myers  communicating)  Good  morning  my  friend.  I am
delighted  to  see  you  again.  I hope  all  is  going  well  on
your  side.

J.  G.  P.  Good  morning,  Myers.  I’m  very  glad  to  see  you.  I believe
everything  is  going  on  very  well.

I remery  [in  error  for  “remember”]  the  name  of  the  place
to  which  you  referred  last  time,  and  I would  say  with
regard  to  it  that  I remember  vaguely  making  a suggestion
to  Mrs  Sidgwick  regarding  a certain  document  which  I
thought  she  would  find  necessary  to  be  attend  to

J.  G.  P.  Is  that  “ be  attended  to  ?

look  into  in  case  our  good  friend  [i.e.  Henry  Sidgwick]  came
over  . . here.

Besides  I referred  to  matter  pertaining  to  the  college.

if  I remember  rightly  also  a library  matter.

J.  G.  P.  I want  to  read  over.  Is  “ pertaining  ” right  ?

Yes.

J.  G.  P.  Is  “ library  ” right  1

Yes.

which  she  will  I'ecall  quickly.

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  I will  tell  her  [i.e.  Mrs  Sidgwick],


52


[part


J.  G.  Fiddington.

I feel  sure  of  the  distinction  of  places,
i.e.  my  talk  with  her  at  T.  and  at  my  own  house.  U.D.
i.e.  between  my

(J.  G.  P.  reads  over  as  above.)

yes.  (assent  to  reading)  say  anything  before  I reply  to
another  enquiry  ?

•J.  G.  P.  No,  Myers,  I have  nothing  more  to  ask.

I had  read  Mr.s  YerraH’s  script  of  Feb.  4 (cited  above)  on
the  morning  of  Feb.  5 ; but  even  as  early  as  Feb.  6 it  must
have  completely  passed  out  of  my  mind  (as  it  certainly  had  by
Feb.  11),  or  1 could  hardly  have  failed  at  the  .sitting  of  Feb.  6
to  have  tried  to  extract  further  information  from  Myersp  after
his  mention  of  a Library.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  tvith  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Feb.
11,  1907.

(Present:  J.  G.  P.  alone  at  this  point.)

.J,  G.  P.  (to  Rector.)  I want  to  ask  Myers  a question  before  the
friend  comes  in.

(Rector  communicating.)

Yes  I will  speak  with  him  now  and  attract  him  to  you.
(Healer’s  influence  given.  Hand  speirs.)

(Myers  communicating.)

Good  morning,  my  friend,  did  you  ask  for  me  1

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  Myers.  Good  morning.  I want  to  ask  you  some-
thing.

I am  pleased  to  see  you  again.

.J.  G.  P.  You  will  remember  that  at  our  last  meeting  you  said  that
one  of  the  subjects  of  the  conversation  between  you  and
Mrs  Sidgwick  was  connected  with  a Library.

Yes  as  I recall.

.J.  G.  P.  AVell,  the  day  after  our  last  meeting  here  [This  was  a
mistake;  I should  have  said  “the  same  day  as”.]  Mrs
Verrall  wrote  a message  and  in  it  there  was  a reference
to  a Libraiy.

(The  hand  moves  downwards  as  if  to  write.)


53


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

J.  G.  P.  (who  was  about  to  go  on  speaking  about  the  Libraiy,  but  on
seeing  the  movement  of  the  hand  desisted)  No,  I won’t
go  on.  Please  say  what  you  were  going  to.

No  better  go  on.

J.G.P.  ' There  was  no  obvious  connection  between  what  Mrs  Verrall
wrote  and  what  you  said  except  for  the  bare  mention  of
a Library.  Still  it  seems  possible  to  me  that  you  tried
to  repeat  through  Mrs  Yerrall  what  you  had  already
said  here.

this  is  quite  true  did  I not  tell  you  that  I would  go  to  Mrs
Verrall  did  I not  refer  to  this  at  that  meeting  ?

yes  (assent  to  reading  as  above)

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  3'ou  did.  [On  Feb.  5,  not  at  the  last  sitting,  Myersp
had  said  he  was  going  to  give  a message  to  Mrs.  Verrall ;
but  he  did  not  say  what  the  message  was  to  be  about.]
But  the  reference  to  a Library  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  writing
is  not  suthciently  definite  and  distinctive  to  make  it  clear
that  the  coincidence  is  not  accidental.

No  but  I think  I can  make  it  so  later.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I think  I can.

J.  G.  P.  But  I want  you  to  tell  me,  if  you  can,  how  your  message
came  out.


yes  I am  aware  of  this  but  just  how  much  she  U.D.  I am
not  sure  but  what  I do  wish  her  to  U.D.  is  that  during
my  conversation  with  Mrs  S.  [i.e.  Mrs.  Sidgwick]  the
library  was  referred  to  as  an  important  transaction,  as
I feel  sure  that  I recall  it  and  I wish  very  much  to
impress  it  upon  Mrs  V.  so  as  to  confirm  my  utterances
here.


J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I see.


54


J.  G.  Piddingtov.  [part

I think  she  wrote  or  got  the  message,  that  (the  hand  hesitates
and  make  dots  on  the  paper)  he  S.  [i.e.  Henry  Sidgwick]
was  glad  or  pleased  about  the  library,  what  I said  to
her  was.  write  for  Mrs  Sidgwick  that  we  talked  about
library.

J.  G.  P.  That  is  exactly  what  I wanted  to  get  at.  But  as  a matter
of  fact  there  is  no  reference  to  Mrs  Sidgwick  in  what
Mrs  Verrall  wrote;  only  a quite  disconnected  reference
to  a library.

What  a pity  but  if  you  leave  this  to  me  I will  impress  her
to  write.

We  talked  about,  etc.

J.  G.  P.  I don’t  understand.

I will  impress  upon  her  to  write.

but  quite  fully

Write  for  Mrs  S.  etc.

etc.  etc.

J.  G.  P.  I see.  I am  sorry  to  have  bothered  you  about  this,  (depre-
cative movement  of  the  hand)  but  I thought  it  would  be
helpful  perhaps  for  you  to  know  how  your  message  came
out  on  this  side,  and  helpful  for  us  to  learn  the  form  in
which  you  intended  to  convey  your  message.

of  course  it  is  a great  help  because  it  helps  us  to  U.D.  the
importance  of  impressing  more  than  one  word  at  a time.

J.  G.  P.  I haven’t  got  with  me  the  exact  words  wliich  Mrs  Verrall
wrote ; but  there  was  something  about  Hugh  Despenser
and  Lord  Spencer’s  Library  ; and  then  a statement  that
this  is  not  quite  right,  but  that  the  Library  has  meaning.
[Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  6 mentions  “Hugh  le
Despenser  ” and  a library,  but  does  not,  as  was  stated
here  by  J.  G.  P.,  explicitly  refer  to  Lord  Spencer,  though
there  may  be  perhaps  an  indirect  allusion  to  him.]

that  is  very  good  as  I persistently  repeated  the  word  [i.e.
library]  to  her  also  my  own  name  and  Mrs  Sidgwick’s.

I will  have  another  try  at  this  hoping  she  will  better  U.D.
the  whole  sentence.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisras.  5o

J.  6.  P.  Yes,  I see.  Thank  you  vei’y  much.

When  she  receives  it  let  me  know  kindly.

I was  struck  with  the  way  in  which  Myersp  stuck  to  his
point ; and  this  led  me  to  look  again,  and  this  time  carefully,
at  the  recent  pieces  of  script  sent  me  by  Mrs  A'errall ; and  I
then  found  to  my  astonishment  that  I had  entirely  forgotten
the  contents  of  her  script  of  Feb.  T ; and  that  consequently
what  I had  said  at  the  sitting  of  Feb.  11  was  wrong,  and
what  MyerSp  had  said  was  right.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Feb.  12,
1907.

(Present  J.  G.  P.  and  Miss  Newton.)

J.  G.  P.  Myers,  I want  to  tell  you  that  the  message  which  you  said
you  gave  to  Mrs  A^errall  about  Browning,  Star  and  Hope
has  come  out  quite  clearly,  [v.  p.  60]

(Myers  communicating)

thanks.

I never  tried  with  greater  patience  than  I did  over  those
words.

J.  6.  P Good.  I have  another  good  piece  of  news  for  you.

you  are  most  kind  to  tell  me  because  it  helps  me  in  U.D.
the  best  methods  of  cooperation.

J.  G.  P.  You  remember  that  last  time  I told  you  that  you  had  not
succeeded  in  transmitting  to  Mrs  Verrall  anything  except
a disconnected  reference  to  a Library.  Y^ou  said  that  in
the  message  you  had  given  her  you  mentioned  Mrs
Sidgwick’s  name  and  your  own  and  a library.  I denied
this.  But  now  I find  that  in  another  message  to  Mrs
Verrall,  written  three  or  four  [really  two]  days  before  the
message  I was  thinking  of  in  which  there  is  a reference
to  a Library  and  Hugh  Le  Despenser,  you  did  write  exactly
what  you  said  here  you  had  written.  You  did  mention
Mrs  Sidgwick’s  name,  you  did  mention  a library,  and
you  did  sign  the  message  with  your  name.

I did  certainly,  and  am  very  pleased  to  hear  that  she  fully
registered  the  thoughts  which  I indubitably  (1)  gave  her.


J.  0.  Piddington.


56


[part


J.  G.  P.  Before  you  go  I want  to  ask  you  a question,  which  I hope  you
can  answer  the  next  time.


Do  not  give  me  too  many  things  to  do  at  one  time  will  you  1

J.  G.  P.  No,  I won’t ; but  this  question  will  not  bother  you,  I think.

In  your  message  to  Mrs  Verrall  you  mentioned  a parti-
cular library.  Will  you  tell  me  next  time,  if  you  can,
what  library  it  was  ?


Yes  I will.  I will  think  it  all  over  carefully.


At  the  next  day’s  sitting,  Feb.  13,  MyerSp  asked  Mrs  Sidg-
wick,  for  the  first  time  present  at  a sitting,  “ did  you  understand
my  reference  to  library  ? ”.  Mrs  Sidgwick,  in  ignorance  of  my
having  asked  the  day  before  for-  the  particular  library  to  be
named,  asked  in  reply  “ To  the  Gurney  library  ? ” ; and  so  this
point  could  not  be  tested.  I should  have  omitted  all  reference
to  this  fnrstrated  experiment  had  it  not  been  that  some  days
later  Hodgsoiip  asked  a question  which  just  possibly  displays
in  a very  allusive  form  one  further  item  of  knowledge  of  what
appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  xoith  Mrs  Pi^er  held  on  Feb.  19,
1907.

(Present  J.  G.  P.  alone)

(Hodgson  communicating)  do  you  know  whether  or  not  she
[i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  wrote  the  E.G.  library  or  the  Edmund
Gurney  library.

J.  G.  P.  (not  seizing  the  point)  Oh  ! yes.  She  did  write  about  that.
I told  Myers  all  about  it.

did  it  come  out

E.G.  or  the  name  in  full  ?

J.  G.  P.  I’m  not  sure,  but  I timik  it  came  out  as  “Gurney”  only,  not
as  “Edmund  Gurney,”  nor  as  “E.G.”  At  least  so  I
believe.

I think  the  initials  have  come  out  since.

Myers  and  I talk  things  over  after.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Atttomatisms.  57

This  is  the  last  reference  to  this  matter  in  the  Piper  script
which  I need  quote ; for  though  there  were  later  developments,
dealt  with  by  Mrs  Sidgwick  (v.  pp.  417-440),  they  do  not
concern  the  question  of  cross-correspondence.

The  coincidences  may  be  briefly  summarised  as  follows : —
On  Feb.  4 Mrs  Yerrall  wrote  a script  containing  Mrs  Sidg-
wick’s  name,  the  word  “ library  ” and  Frederic  Myers’s  initials  ;
and  at  11.7  a.m.  on  Feb.  6 began  to  write  a script  in  which
the  word  “ library  ” appeared  three  times ; and  on  no  other
occasion  during  the  period  under  review  did  the  word  “ library  ”
occur  again  in  her  script.  On  Feb.  6,  between  11.32  and
11.37  a.m.  (as  near  as  I can  calculate),  MyerSp  said  he  had
referred  to  “ a library  matter  ” through  Mrs  Verrall ; and  on
Feb.  1 1 that  he  had  persistently  repeated  the  word  “ library
to  Mrs  Verrall,  also  his  own  name  and  Mrs  Sidgwick’s ; and,
to  the  best  of  iny  recollection  and  belief,  the  word  “ library  ”
was  not  mentioned  on  any  other  occasion  in  Mrs  Piper’s
trance  during  the  whole  period  of  the  English  sittings  except
in  connection  with  this  episode.

It  is  unnecessary,  I think,  to  emphasise  further  the  coin-
cidences between  what  was  written  during  Mrs  Piper’s  trances
of  Feb.  6 and  11  and  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  scripts  of  Feb.  4
and  6,  for  even  to  a careless  reader  they  must  be  apparent.
Kegarded  as  answers  to  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  question  these  concordant
messages  are  not  correct,  which  is  a puzzling  circumstance  if
we  regard  them  as  inspired  by  Frederic  Myers.  Yet  it  is  very
difficult  to  regard  them  as  identical  guesses  independently  made
by  Mrs  Piper  and  Mrs  Verrall.

Nothing  that  passed  at  the  Piper  sittings,  and  nothing  that
Mrs  Sidgwick  had  said  or  written  to  Mrs  Verrall  (v.  Mrs
Sidgwick’s  paper,  pp.  417,  419  and  422)  could,  so  it  seems  to
me,  have  possibly  suggested  that  the  conversation  at  Terling
was  connected  with  the  Gurney  Library  or  any  library ; and
though  neither  Mrs  A^errall  nor  Mrs  Piper  knew  or  had  any
means  of  guessing  the  right  answer  to  the  question,  it  must
have  been  obvious  to  both  of  them,  whether  in  a normal  or
abnormal  state,  that  the  subject  of  the  conversation  at  Terling
must  have  been  one  to  which  memories  of  an  emotional  kind
were  attached.  To  Mrs  Verrall  her  script  of  Feb.  4 seemed
so  pointless  that  in  sending  it  to  me  she  informed  me  that


58


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


she  had  not  communicated  it  to  Mrs  Sidgwick  (as  she  was
instructed  to  do  by  the  scribe)  because  she  could  not  see  that
there  was  anytliing  to  “ tell

In  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  it  is  clearly  indicated  that  “ library  ”
is  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence.  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Feb.  4 in  the  phrases  “ I will  give  the  message  elsewhere
too  today”  and  “We  have  tried  for  that  today.  Wait  for  their
answer  ” conveys  the  same  meaning.  Moreover,  in  her  script
of  Feb.  G is  the  phrase : “ There  is  some  point  in  the
Library.  Put  together  the  Library  and  the  bough”,  “the

bough  ” being  “ Apollo’s  bough  ” and  evidently  standing  for
the  same  thing  as  “ Laurel  wreath  ”.  As  will  be  seen  later
(v.  pp.  94-9),  “Laurel  wreath”  is  a perfectly  certain  cross-
correspondence ; and  the  point  of  “ putting  together  ” “ Library  ”
and  “ Laurel  wreath  ” must  lie  in  the  fact  of  both  being  the
subject  of  cross-correspondences.

I would  particularly  draw  attention  to  the  straightforward
w’ay  in  which  MyerSp  on  Feb.  11  maintained  his  account  of
what  he  had  written  through  Mrs  Verrall  in  the  face  of  my
denial  that  any  such  things  had  been  written  by  her.  There
was  no  hedging  this  time.  (Of.  p.  46.)

Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  6 contains  what  I take  to  be
an  interesting  illustration  of  the  intrusion  of  her  normal  con-
sciousness upon  her  automatic  consciousness.  I conceive  that
the  scribe  was  trying  to  refer  again  to  the  Library  mentioned
in  the  script  of  Feb.  4,  and  possibly  trying  to  get  the  “ E.Gr.
Library”  written.  (The  extract  from  the  sitting  of  Feb.  19,
given  above,  should  be  read  in  this  connection.)  Mrs  Verrall
had,  however,  recently  learnt  that  Lord  Spencer  was  resigning
the  Chancellorship  of  Manchester  University ; and  to  this
piece  of  supraliminal  knowledge  is  to  be  traced  the  intro-
duction of  “ the  Great  Library  has  already  gone  before  ”,  an
obvious  allusion  to  the  Althorp  Library  (now  at  Manchester),
and  of  “ Hugh  Le  Despenser  ” ; and  also  of  the  “ K.G.”,  tliough
perhaps  the  letters  “ Iv.G.”  may  have  been  a mistranslation  of
the  scribe’s  “ E.G.”

In  conclusion,  I think  I ought  to  explain  how  it  could  be
that  I forgot  the  contents  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  4
so  quickly  and  completely,  for  if  these  phenomena  are  due  to
telepathic  action  between  living  persons  it  is  evident  that  in


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Atdomatisms.  5i)

this  case  I was  one  person  besides  Mrs  Verrall  herself  from
whom  information  about  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  could  have  been
extracted  by  Mrs  Piper.

In  the  first  place  I made  a point  throughout  these  experi-
ments of  not  puzzling  over  Mrs  and  Miss  Verrall’s  scripts.  I
read  them  through  as  they  reached  me,  most  often  hurriedly
and  carelessly,  endorsed  on  them  the  day  and  hour  at  which
I received  them,  and  then  put  them  aside.  In  the  second
place  I was  attending  three  sittings  a week  with  Mrs  Piper,
and  writing  out  the  full  record  of  the  three  sittings.  It  was
essential  to  write  these  out  as  soon  as  possible  after  they
were  held,  and  consecpiently  I had  little  spare  time.  And
in  the  third  place  I was  building  a house,  and  that  occupied
most  of  my  spare  time  and  energy,  and  in  itself  was  quite
sufficient  cause  for  driving  other  matters  out  of  my  head.

I have  entered  into  this  personal  explanation,  because  I
want  to  make  it  plain  that  if  Mrs  and  Miss  Verrall  and
Mrs  Piper  drew  their  knowledge  of  each  others’  scripts  from
my  mind,  at  any  rate  it  was  not  because  my  attention  was
concentrated  upon  the  automatic  scripts  of  Mrs  and  Miss
Verrall.


VI.

“HOPE,  STAE  AND  BROWNING.”

Immediately  following  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of  Feb.  11,
1907  quoted  in  the  last  section  (pp.  52-55),  came  these  words: —

(Myers  communicating)  Did  she  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  receive  the
word.

Evangelical.

J.  G.  P.  “ Evangelical  ” ?


yes.


60


[part


J.  G.  Pidclington.

J.  G.  P.  I don’t  know,  but  I will  enquire.

I referred  also  to  Browning  again.  [I  had  chosen  on  Dec.  18,
1906  some  words  from  Browning’s  Flight  of  the  Duchess
for  transmission  to  Mrs  Verrall  by  Myersp,  and  he  had
claimed,  though  wrongly,  to  have  succeeded  in  getting
them  written.  It  is  to  this  that  I think  “ again  ” refers.
./.  G.  P.]

J.  G.  P.  Do  you  remember  what  your  exact  reference  to  Browning  wasi

I referred  to  Hope  and  Browning,
yes.  (assent  to  reading  as  above.)

I also  said  Star.

(Miss  Newton  enters  to  announce  the  arrival  of  the  sitter,
Mr  Macalister.)

J.  G.  P.  Now,  IMyers,  I must  say  goodbye,  as  the  friend  is  here.

Do  I U.D.  that  I am  to  go.

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  I’m  sorry,  but  we  can,  I hope,  have  a good  talk  the
time  after  next.

Mean  while  look  out  for  Hope  Star  and  Browning.

.J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I certainly  will.

thank  you  very  much  good  morning.

M

On  my  return  home  after  the  sitting  I looked  through  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  and  found  in  her  script  of  Jan.  28  what  I
took  to  be  a representation,  though  in  expanded  form,  of  “ Hope,
Star  and  Browning”;  and  the  next  day  (sitting  of  Feb.  12)
I told  Myersp  of  the  success,  as  already  described  in  the  last
section  (p.  55).  The  word  “Evangelical”  had  not  appeared
in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script;  so  on  Feb.  13  I said  to  MyerSp : —
“ Y^ou  said  you  gave  the  word  ‘ Evangelical  ’ to  Mrs  Verrall.
When  did  you  give  it  ? ^Yas  it  lately  since  you  have  talked
with  Mrs  Verrall  at  this  light  ? ” [i.e.  since  Mrs  Verrall  had
had  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper].  To  this  MyerSp  replied : — “ No
I believe  not ; but  recall  it  as  one  of  my  own  words  which  I
tried  to  give  her  ”.

At  the  sitting  of  Feb.  27  “Evangelical”  is  again,  and  this
time  spontaneously,  referred  to  by  MyerSp,  first  as  “ evangelic  ”,


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  61

a second  time  apparently  as  “ evangelical  ”,  a third  time,  in
capital  letters  traced  with  care  and  mnch  apparent  effort,  as
“EVE  E V L ”,  and  finally  as  “ E V E L Y ” ; and  as  these  last
letters  are  written  MyerSp  adds : — “ I am  too  today,  my
thoughts  wander”.  (“Weak”,  or  some  such  word,  should  be
supplied  to  fill  the  gap  between  “ too  ” and  “ today  ”.)

Then  on  March  6 George  Pelham,  who  is  represented  as
an  active  co-operator  with  Myers  and  Hodgson,  says  that  among
other  things  Myers  had  given  “ Evelyn  EvELYN  Hope  ” to
Mrs  Verrall.  Whereupon  the  following  conversation  took  place
between  George  Pelham  and  myself : —

J.  G.  P.  Is  that  the  explanation  of  the  word  which  came  out  here  as
“ Evangelical  ” ?

yes.

J.  G.  P.  I begin  to  see.  Thank  you.

it  was  very  stupid  of  Rector  I must  say  as  Hodgson  and
Myers  both  kept  Repeating  it  over  and  over  again,  to
him.

It  will,  I think,  be  allowed  that  the  modification  of  “ Evan-
gelical ” into  “ Evelyn  Hope  ” was  spontaneous  and  not  trace-
able to  any  suggestion  from  me.  Indeed  I could  not  have
given  such  a suggestion,  as,  beyond  the  fact  that  “ Evelyn
Hope  ” brought  in  the  word  “ hope  ” again,  it  conveyed  at  the
time  no  more  meaning  to  me  than  the  word  “ evangelical  ” ;
and,  moreover,  I did  not  then  know  that  it  was  the  title  of
one  of  Browning’s  poems.

I will  now  quote  the  scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall  which  I take
to  correspond  with  the  words  “Hope,  Star  and  Browning”: —

Script  of  Jem.  23,  1907.

Justice  holds  the  scales.

That  gives  the  words  but  an  anagram  would  be  better
Tell  him  that — rats  star  tars  and  so  on.  Try  this.

It  has  been  tried  before  RTATS  rearrange  these
five  letters  or  again  tears

stare

seam
same
and  so  on


62


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Skeat  takes  Kate’s  Keats  stake  steak.

But  the  letters  you  should  give  tonight  are  not  so  many
— only  three

a s t

ScrijJt  of  Jan.  28,  1907.^

Aster  [star]

repas  [wonder  or  sign]

The  world’s  wonder

And  all  a wonder  and  a wild  desire —

The  very  wings  of  her
A WINGED  DESIRE
vTTOTTTepos  epws  [winged  love]

Then  there  is  Blake

and  mocked  my  loss  of  liljerty.

But  it  is  all  the  same  thing — the  winged  desire
TTodeii'os  [passion]  the  hope  that  leaves
the  earth  for  the  sky — Abt  Vogler  for  earth
too  hard  that  found  itself  or  lost  itself — in  the  sky.

That  is  what  I want

On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds

threads

In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc

The  C major  of  this  life

But  your  recollection  is  at  fault


ADB  is  the  part  that  unseen  completes  the  arc.

1 After  Jan.  ‘23  Mrs  Verrall  did  no  automatic  writing  until  Jan.  28.


LVil.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  63

Mrs  Verrall  had  handed  this  script  to  me  on  Jan.  29,  and
pencilled  on  the  envelope  was  this  note : —

“Jan.  29,  /07.  Is  enclosed  attempt  at  BirdX  ‘winged,’
v'TTOTTTepo'i,  and  ‘ Abt  Yogler  ’ ( Yogel)  suggest  it.  The  later
part  is  all  quotations  from  E.  B.’s  Aht  Voglcr  and  earlier  from
the  Ring  and  the  Book.  ‘ Oh,  Lyric  Love  ’ etc.”

Jlrs  Yerrall  might  have  added  that  “ bird  ” was  also  suggested
by  the  line  which  in  the  original  precedes  “ And  all  a wonder
and  a wild  desire  ”,  namely,

“ 0 lyric  Love,  half  angel  and  half  bird

Now  as  to  the  correspondence  with  the  words  “ Hope,  Star
and  Browning  ” ; —

Ho'pe  is  found  in  the  words  “ the  hope  that  leaves  the  earth
for  the  sky

These  words  are  a misquotation  of
“ The  passion  that  left  the  ground  to  lose  itself  in  the  sky

“ Hope  ” has  been  substituted  for  “ passion  ” ; and  it  seems
to  me  that  by  means  of  this  very  misquotation  or  substitution
emphasis  is  thrown  on  the  word  “hope.”^  Mrs  A'errall  knew

of  the  misquotation.  She  wrote  to  me  on  Feb.  15,  1907  : —

“ I knew  perfectly  when  I read  the  script  that  it  should  have
been  ‘ passion  ’ which  left  the  ground  for  the  sky — and  I was
annoyed  at  the  blunder ! The  epw?  TroOeah?,  which  came

straight  out  of  a passage  that  I had  been  translating  in  the

course  of  my  work,  represents  ‘ passion.’  And  I wondered  why
the  silly  thing  said  ‘ Hope.’  ”


1 “ And  all  a wonder  and  a wild  desire’"  ma}-  have  emerged  because  it  thus
vaguely  suggested  “ bird  ” ; but  at  least  its  emergence  was  probably  facilitated
by  an  association  of  ideas  between  its  context  and  “the  broken  arcs”  and
“a  perfect  round”  in  Aht  Vogter.  Its  context  is  as  follows: —

“ so  I wrought

This  arc,  by  furtherance  of  such  allo}',

And  so,  by  one  spirt,  take  away  its  trace
Till,  justifiably  golden,  rounds  my  ring.

A ring  without  a posy,  and  that  ring  mine  ?

0 lyric  Love,”  etc.

®For  a similarly  significant  misquotation  v.  p.  271.


64  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Broivning  pervades  the  whole  script,  and  is  besides  definitely
mentioned  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  pencilled  noted

Star  is  given  prominently  at  the  head  of  the  script  of  Jan.  28
in  the  form  Aster,  the  Greek  for  star.  It  is  written  in  Eoman

not  Greek  letters ; perhaps  in  order  to  justify  the  anagram
Te^a?  ( = teras),  the  e of  which  is  short,  whereas  the  e of  aster
if  written  in  Greek  would  be  long,  Tepag  usually  means  a
sign  or  wonder,  especially  a sign  in  the  heavens ; and  the
Epic  plural  Telpea  meant  the  heavenly  constellations.  Some
authorities  also  trace  repa?  and  acrWip  to  the  same  root ; so
not  only  do  these  two  words  form  an  anagram,  but  they  are
related  etymologically,  and  in  significance  are  closely  associated.
But  this  is  not  the  only  reference  to  “star”  in  Airs  A^errall’s
script,  for  the  word  occurs  again,  this  time  in  English,  in
the  script  of  Jan.  23,  which  indisputably  forms  a prelude
to  the  script  of  Jan.  28  ; and  here,  too,  it  appears  as  part  of
an  anagram,  “ rats  arts  star  ”.

I suspect  that  the  introduction  of  the  quotation  from  Blake —
“ And  mocked  [for  “ mocks  ”]  my  loss  of  liberty  ” — was  due  to
the  preceding  epw?  which  means  both  ‘ love  ’ and  the  ‘ god  of
love  ’ ; for  in  Blake’s  poem  it  is  the  ‘ Prince  of  Love  ’ who
mocks  at  the  lover’s  loss  of  liberty.

When,  by  reason  of  the  coincidences  involved,  my  mind
began  to  concentrate  itself  on  these  two  pieces  of  script  and
the  words  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ” given  in  the  Piper
trance,  a vague  impression  came  over  me  that  the  string  of
words,  “ rats  arts  star,”  had  somehow  and  somewhere  come
under  my  eyes  before.  At  first  I thought  this  must  be  mere
fancy,  and,  when,  after  a little,  I seemed  to  remember  having
seen  them  written  on  a piece  of  paper  in  iJr  Hodgson’s  hand-
writing when  I went  through  his  private  papers  in  the  early
summer  of  190  6,  at  Boston,  I was  inclined  to  accuse  myself
of  suffering  from  a delusion  of  memory.  Still  the  memory —
real  or  fancied — persisted,  and  to  satisfy  myself  I wrote  to
I)r.  Hodgson’s  executors  in  Boston,  Air  George  Dorr  and  Air
Henry  James,  Jr.,  and  asked  them  to  search  among  the  odds

1 vSome  of  these  comments  which  Mrs.  Verrall  appends  to  her  scripts  bear,
I fancy,  nmch  the  same  relation  to  the  subject-matter  of  her  script,  as  do
the  utterances  of  Mrs  Piper  during  the  later  part  of  the  waking-stage  to  her
trance-script.


/4'i  -e


^ "TA  ^ £
TSAks

A ^E-  ^

. ^MX^

A AB-sr

REsr-  CL


H

1 r -r.n  e a
H-  B-^rC-n.

He  i€&sr

KB-^t  he

Akee.  S’tr.
TUEIl&is


^r^15
/•A  «e-S
IZfitTS

4kts

TRA^


To  face  ]t.  <i5.


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  65

and  ends  which,  with  other  matter  such  as  letters,  I had  handed
over  to  them,  for  a scrap  of  paper  with  the  words  “ rats  arts
star”  upon  it.  On  August  23,  1907  Mr  James  sent  me  the
sheet  of  paper  containing  a rough  draft  of  anagrams  in  the
handwriting  of  Dr  Hodgson  of  which  a copy  is  reproduced  here.

I confess  that  when  this  came  into  my  hands  I felt  as  I
suppose  people  do  who  have  seen  a ghost ; for,  though  not
surprised  to  see  the  “ rats  arts  star  ” anagram,  I was  positively
startled  when  I saw  the  anagram  “ rates  stare  tears  aster  ” etc.,
of  which  I had  no  recollection  whatever.^

^It  maj'  seem  strange  that,  while  the  appearance  of  “rats  star  tars”  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  brought  back  to  my  mind  the  fact  of  my  having  seen
these  words  on  a sheet  of  paper  in  Dr  Hodgson’s,  handwriting,  the  appearance
of  “tears  stare”  and  “aster”  in  the  same  script  should  not  have  provoked
the  smallest  glimmer  of  memory  of  my  having  seen  this  anagram  too  among
Dr  Hodgson’s  papers.  I believe  that  I can  account  for  my  remembering  in
one  case  and  for  my  not  remembering  (I  purposely  do  not  say  “forgetting”)
in  the  other.  When  I was  going  through  Dr  Hodgson’s  papers  I found
scattered  about  all  over  the  place,  in  books,  in  pigeon-holes  of  his  writing-
desk,  among  notes  on  the  Piper  trance,  among  bundles  of  old  letters,  and  so
on,  scores  of  sheets,  or  more  usually  scraps  of  paper  scribbled  over  with
words  and  figures.  I didn’t  at  first  grasp  what  they  were,  and  threw  many
of  them  away  into  the  waste-paper  basket.  Then  after  a time  I realised  that
they  were  notes  of  riddles  and  puzzles,  charades  and  anagrams  and  acrostics  ;
and  thinking  they  might  possibly  come  in  useful  either  to  corroborate
references  which  might  be  made  to  them  in  the  Piper  trance  by  the  Hodgson
control,  or  as  material  on  which  to  base  questions  which  could  be  put  at
some  future  time  to  this  control,  I kept  thein  and  made  a packet  of  them.  I
soon  found,  however,  that  many  of  the  scraps  referred  to  the  same  puzzle  or
anagram,  as  the  case  might  be.  “Star,  rats,  tars,  arts”  appeared  again  and
again  on  separate  scraps  of  paper.  Dr  Hodgson  had  evidently  whiled  away
many  an  idle  quarter  of  an  hour  over  this  anagram.  Thinking  it  would  be
useless  to  keep  duplicates  I destroyed  them,  and  kept  only  one  example  of
each.  These,  as  I have  said,  I handed  over  to  Mr  Dorr  and  Mr  Henry
James  before  I left  Boston,  after  explaining  how  I thought  they  might  come
in  useful.  (They  w^ere  left  with  the  executors,  not  because  they  as  executors
wanted  them,  but  simply  because  it  was  in  Boston  and  not  iii  England  that
they  could  at  that  time  be  utilised.)

Xow  the  sheet  of  paper  w'hich  Mr  Henry  James  sent  over  in  August  1907
in  response  to  my  enquiry  is  not  the  piece  of  paper  which  I remembered  as
having  seen  wdth  the  words  “rats  arts  star”  on  it.  The  one  I seemed  and
still  seem  to  remember  is  not  a whole  sheet  with  writing  in  violet  ink,  as  is
this  one,  but  a small  and  torn  scrap  with  writing  in  black  ink — an  ink  little
used  by  Dr  Hodgson.  So  wdiat  I think  probably  happened  was  this : the
paper  I remember  being  a torn  scrap  and  containing  only  the  “rats  arts  star”
anagram,  I destroyed  it  and  duplicates  of  it  when  I came  across  the  whole

E


66  J.  G.  Picldington.  [part

With  regard  to  the  anagrams  in  her  scripts  of  Jan.  23  and
28,  Mrs  Verrall  writes:

“ Skeat  takes  Kate’s  Keats  ” is  from  an  anagram  that  I remember
among  the  dozens  made  by  Mr  Myers,  my  husband  and  Sir  Richard
Jebb.  It  is  impossible  to  say  that  among  these  was  not  one  on
‘ star  ’ : in  fact  I should  think  it  is  certain  that  that  one  was  made.
I can  only  remember  with  certainty  one  by  B.  Darwin,  and  one  of
which  Helen  reminded  me  (made  by  Mr  Myers)  : ‘ notes  Eton’s
onset;  tones  &c.’”

“ Star  ” would  doubtless  be  a word  very  likely  to  suggest
itself  for  the  purpose  of  an  anagram.  The  anagram  “ Eats,
arts,  star  ”,  for  instance,  has  lately,  so  I am  informed,  been
made  use  of  at  Maskelyne  and  Devant’s  conjuring  entertain-
ment. That  the  anagram  “ Eats  star  tars  ” should  have  appeared
in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  is  in  itself  not,  of  course,  in  the  very
smallest  degree  surprising.  The  significance  of  its  appearance
lies  partly  in  its  coincidence  with  the  “ Star  ” of  Mrs
Piper’s  trance ; partly  in  the  fact  that  the  “ star  ” of  the  trance
and  the  “ star  ” of  the  script  were  both  associated  with  “ Brown-
ing ” ; partly,  as  will  be  seen  presently,  in  its  identity  with
an  anagram  automatically  written  by  Miss  Verrall,  which  was
likewdse  associated  with  Browning ; and  partly  in  the  fact
that  both  it  and  another  anagram,  “ stare  tares  tears  ”,  with
which  it  was  conjoined,  had  been  similarly  conjoined  by  Dr
Hodgson.

But  the  coincidence  does  not  end  here.

We  naturally  were  all  considerably  elated  by  the  “ Hope
Star  and  Browning  ” correspondence  (though  the  full  significance

sheet  which  contains  this  anagram  among  others.  The  words  “star  tars  rats”
would  have  cauglit  my  eye,  I should  then  have  seen  that  there  were  other
words  on  the  same  sheet,  and  that  would  have  been  enough  to  decide  me  to
keep  this  sheet  and  to  destroy  the  other  scraps  on  which  “rats  arts  star”
appeared  alone.  Not  having  the  very  least  interest  in  such  things — in  fact
anagrams  and  acrostics  have  always  seemed  to  me  to  be  a particularly  silly
thing  to  waste  time  and  energy  over — I should  not  have  bothered  to  read  the
other  words  on  the  sheet.  This,  then,  will  explain  how  it  was  that  the
appearance  of  “tears  stare”  and  “aster”  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  awoke  no
recollection  in  my  mind,  as  did  “rats  arts  star”.  I must  apologise  for  this
digression,  but  I do  not  see  how  I could  well  omit  it  if  I am  to  furnish
students  of  these  phenomena  with  the  evidence  requisite  for  forming  an
opinion  as  to  the  possible  sources  of  the  automatic  writings.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


67


of  the  incident  was  not  apparent  till  months  later),  and  by
way  of  encouragement  Mrs  Verrall,  on  Feb.  15,  gave  her
daughter  a general  description  of  the  incident,  being,  however,
careful  to  substitute  imaginary  words  for  the  original  ones.
For  “Star”  “Planet  Mars”  was  substituted,  for  “ Flope  ”
“Virtue,”  and  for  “Browning”  “Keats.”  The  script  of  Jan.
23  was  not  mentioned,  and  a general  description  only  of  the
script  of  Jan.  28  was  given.  One  correct  detail  only  was
Miss  Verrall  told,  and  that  was  that  a five  letter  anagram  had
constituted  a part  of  the  success  on  Jan.  28.

Before,  however.  Miss  Verrall  had  been  told  anything  at  all,
she  had  on  Feb.  3,  written  the  following  script: — ■

Vulliamy  not  to  be  confused  with  the  other.

Williams  more  precious  than  rubies  what  was

the  name  of  the  younger  child  Cecil  Atl  Mundellier

(scribbles)

quam  ob  rem  in  Siciliis  proficiscitur  [wherefore  in  Sicily  he
sets  out.]

a green  jerkin  and  hose  and  doublet  where  the
song  birds  pipe  their  tune  in  the  early  morning
therapeutikos  ek  exotikoii  [a  healer  from  aliens]


a monogram


the  crescent  moon


remember  that


and  the  star


like  a thunder  riven  oak  the  grim  remains
stand  on  the  level  desolation  of  the  plains
a record  of  all  ages  of  the  span
which  nature  gives  to  the  weak  labour  of  a man.


68


•/.  G.  Piddington.  [part

After  she  had  been  told  about  the  coincidence  between  her
mother’s  script  and  that  of  Mrs  Piper,  Miss  Verrall  wrote  the
following  on  Feb.  17,  at  which  time  she  was  away  from  home
and  at  a distance  from  Mrs  Verrall : —

androsace  (?)  Carthusian  candelabrum


many  together


that  was  the  sign  she  will  understand


when  she  sees  it

diapason  Sia  Traa-ojv  pvOjio^  [rhythm  through  all]

No  arts  avail

the  heavenly  harmony  ws  oTrAariov  [as  Plato  says]
the  mystic  three  (?)


and  a star  above  it  all

rats  everywhere  in  Hamelin  town

now  do  you  understand  Henry  (?)

These  two  scripts  seem  to  hang  together,  for  each  contains
a drawing  of  a star  and  the  word  “ star  ” : a combination  not
found  elsewhere  in  Miss  Verrall’s  automatic  writing  during  the
period  under  review.  Possibly  there  exists  another,  though
less  definite,  link  between  them.  The  second  script  unques-
tionably alludes  to  Browning’s  Pied  Piiyer  of  Hamelin  in  the
phrase  “ rats  everywhere  in  Hamelin  town  ”.  This  phrase  is
followed  by  the  words  “ now  do  you  understand  ? ”,  which  seem


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  69

to  imply  that  after  a previous  failure  success  has  now  been
achieved  in  impressing  the  automatist  with  the  idea  of  the
Pied  Piper.  Traces  of  this  previous  failure  may  perhaps  be
found  in  the  first  script  in  the  word  “ pipe  ” ; and  also  in  the
phrase  “ therapeutikos  ek  exotikon  ”,  which  is  applicable  to
the  Pied  Piper,  for  he  cured  Hamelin  of  its  plague  of  rats,
and,  says  the  poem,  “ There  was  no  guessing  his  kith  and
kin”.  Moreover,  the  only  script  which  Miss  Verrall  wrote
between  Feb.  3 and  Feb.  17,  that  of  Feb.  12,  opens  with
the  disconnected  phrase : “ Manheim  she  has  seen  it  ” ; and
Manheim,  the  name  of  one  German  city,  represents,  I suspect,
the  first  attempt  to  express  the  name  of  another  German  city,
Hamelin.

Other  points  to  be  noted  in  connection  with  these  two
scripts  of  Miss  Verrall’s  are  as  follows : —

(1)  The  resemblance  between  Miss  Verrall’s  drawing  of  a
star  followed  by  the  words  “ that  was  the  sign  ”,  “ she  [i.e.
Mrs.  Verrall]  will  understand  when  she  sees  it  ”,  “ and  a star
above  it  all  ” on  the  one  hand,  and  Mrs  Verrall’s  “ Aster
Tepa<s  ” (Star  Sign)  on  the  other.

(2)  The  appearance  of  a four  letter  anagram.  (It  might
have  been  supposed,  after  Miss  Verrall  had  been  informed  of
the  significance  of  a five  letter  anagram  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Jan.  28,  that,  if  she  were  going  to  produce  an  anagram  at
all,  the  number  of  the  letters  in  it  would  have  been  five.)

(3)  That  this  four  letter  anagram  introduces  the  English
word  “ star,”  the  equivalent  of  one  of  the  two  words  of  Mrs
Verrall’s  five  letter  anagram,  aster  repa? ; and  that  it  is  the
same  anagram  as  one  of  the  anagrams  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Jan.  23,  of  which  Miss  Verrall  knew  nothing.

(4)  The  introduction  of  three  words  of  Dr  Hodgson’s  anagram,
namely,  rats,  arts  and  star ; and  of  two  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
anagram,  rats  and  star.

(5)  The  absence  of  “tars”  which  had  appeared  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  23.

(6)  The  appearance  of  “arts”  which  had  not  been  given  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  but  which  is  found  on  the  sheet  of  paper
on  which  Dr.  Hodo;son  had  worked  out  his  anagrams.

(7)  The  fact  that  Dr  Hodgson  had  failed  to  hit  on  one
obvious  rearrangement  of  the  four  letters  a t r s,  namely  “ Tsar,”


70  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

and  that  “Tsar”  does  not  occur  in  either  Mrs  or  Miss  Verrall’s
writing.

(8)  The  ingenious  manner  in  which  two  birds  are  killed  with
one  stone  in  the  phrase  “ rats  everywhere  in  Hainelin  town
By  the  two  birds  I mean  “ Browning  ” and  an  anagram  of
“ Star  ”,  namely  “ rats  ”.

(9)  The  use  of  the  feminine  plural  Traerwr ; which,  though
perhaps  suggested  by  the  origin  of  the  word  ^lairaa-wv  and  by
the  immediately  preceding  “diapason”,  was  nevertheless  appro-
priate if  we  take  “ the  rhythm  through  all  ” to  be  a recondite
allusion  to  the  concordant  results  achieved  by  the  three
automatists,  Mrs  Piper,  Mrs  Verrall  and  Miss  Verrall.^

(10)  For  reasons  explained  above  it  seems  not  improbable
that  the  script  of  Feb.  3 is  to  be  connected  with  that  of  Feb.
17  ; and  if  it  be  so  connected,  a further  coincidence  is  to  be
traced  between  it  and  the  script  of  Mrs  Verrall.  It  will  be
remembered  that  Mrs  Verrall  was  inclined  to  regard  her  script
of  Jan.  28  as  aiming  at  the  expression  of  the  idea  of  a bird
(v.  p.  63).  Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  3 ends  with  a drawing
of  a bird  followed  by  the  word  “bird”.

There  are  other  points  of  great  interest  connected  with
“ Hope  Star  and  Browning  ” and  those  scripts  of  Mrs  and  Miss
Verrall  which  I have  been  discussing;  but  I can  deal  in  detail
here  only  with  three  more:  namely,  (1)  the  tj^uestion  of  how  far
Myersp  succeeded  in  indicating  the  particular  piece  of  script  to
which  the  “triangle  within  a circle”  had  been  attached;  (2)  the
appropriateness  of  the  appending  of  the  triangle  and  circle  to
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28 ; and  (3)  the  conjunction  in
IMiss  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  3 of  a crescent  moon  with  a star.
The  other  points  must  be  left  for  discussion  until  I come  to
deal  with  an  experiment  of  which  the  object  was  to  see  if
MyerSp  could  understand  a message  conveyed  in  Latin  and
reply  intelligently  to  it  (v.  “The  Latin  Message,”  pp.  312-416).

(I)  How  far  did  MyerSp  succeed  in  indicating  the  piece  of
script  to  loliicli  the  triangle  and  circle  had  been  attached.

On  Jan.  16  I had  asked  Myersp  to  mark  corresponding
messages  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs  Holland  with  a triangle


^For  another  point  connected  with  “diapason”  v.  pp.  329-330.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


71


inside  a circle.  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28,  which  con-
tained a cross-corresponding  message,  was  so  marked.

On  Feb.  26  I asked  Hodgsoiip  to  tell  MyerSp  that  Mrs
Verrall  had  drawn  a triangle  within  a circle,  and  he  promised
to  convey  my  message.  Apparently  however  he  failed  to  do
so,  for  on  March  6 the  following  occurred  in  the  course  of  the
sitting  with  Mrs  Piper : —


(Myers  communicating)  I gave  also  [i.e.  to  Mrs  Verrall]  a
(a  circle  was  here  drawn)


(Rector  communicating)
he  holds  up  a circle.


R.


J.  G.  P.  Yes.


But  the


J.  G.  P.  Yes  1


(J.  G.  P.  remains  silent.)
did  not  appear.

I tried  to  draw  it  as  he  made  it  R,


•J.  G.  P.  Rector,  ask  Myers  if  he  can  describe  by  a single  word  the
figure  you  have  just  drawn.

Repeat.  I was  listening  to  him

Pardon.


(J.  G.  P.  repeats  question.)

(Myers  communicating)

T R


72


[part


J.  G.  Pidclivgton.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  that  is  right.  Triangle.

(Hand  assents.)  did  not  appear  while  I was  present
blit  I hope  to  succeed  in  bringing  it  out.
inside  the  circle  as  you  suggested.

.1.  G.  P.  Yes.  Will  you  listen  ?

(Rector  communicating)
certainly.

J.  G.  P.  Ask  Myers  ivhen  he  made  the  attempt  to  draw  the  triangle
inside  a circle.  Can  he  remember  any  other  words  he
did  succeed  in  getting  through  at  the  same  time  1

Do  you  mean  what  day  friend  1

I doubt  if  he  could  tell  you  this.

but  he  may  be  able  to  tell  you  which  word.

what  word  he  made  her  write.

(Then  after  references  to  other  matters  J.  Cf.  P.  returned
to  the  subject.)

J.  G.  P.  Please  tell  Myers  he  did  at  least  once  make  Mrs  Verrall
draw  the  circle  with  a triangle  inside  it.

yes.  I will  he  will  be  very  glad  to  U.D.  that  the  triangle
came  through  as  he  did  see  the  circle  but  could  not  be

sure  absolutely  of  the  whole  triangle

he  also  wrote  something  about  Bird.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  quite.

did  you  U.D.  it.  as  it  came  oiif?  He  wishes  to  know.

J.  G.  P.  He  has  written  about  a bird,  and  I think  I understand  ; but
I want  him  to  explain.

Oh  yes.  He  says  he  did  say  Bird  and  Paradise

(“Paradise”  rewritten  spontaneously,  although  at  once  read.)

and  something  else  I do  not  quite  U.D.

AVait  until  he  rests  and  I will  get  it  clearer.

Mrs  Verrall  had  noted  on  the  envelope  containing  her  script
of  Jan.  28 — the  script,  that  is,  to  which  the  drawing  of  the
triangle  and  circle  had  been  appended — “ Is  enclosed  attempt
at  BirclV’  (v.  p.  63);  and  Miss  AMrrall’s  script  of  Feb.  3^


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


73


which,  by  its  connection  with  her  script  of  Feb.  17,  seems  to
connect  indirectly  both  with  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ” and
with  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28,  ends  with  a drawing  of
a bird  and  the  word  “bird”.

So  far  then  Myersp  connects  the  circle  inside  a triangle  with
a Bird.  On  March  13  it  is,  I think,  with  sufficient  explicitness
connected  with  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ” : the  words,  as  I
take  it,  used  by  MyerSp  to  indicate  l\Irs  Yerrall’s  script  of
Jan.  28.  I append  the  relevant  extracts; —

(Myers  communicating)  I U.D.  your  reference  to  the  poem.

in  your  Latin  message  to  me  which,
led  me  to  refer  to  Browning.

and  the  circle  gave  me  a better  understanding  of  it  as  it

came  throusrh  this  liHit

(a  circle  was  here  drawn)

Circle.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I gave  or  helped  Mrs  V — to  draw  it.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

and  signed  my  name,  to  it.

(Other  matters  were  then  referred  to,  and  afterwards  MyerSp
reverted  to  the  subject  thus  : — )

Now  1 thought  the  circle  would  complete  my  U.D.  of  the
message.  M.

J.  G.  P.  I see  a meaning  in  what  you  say,  but  that  does  not  make
it  quite  clear.

reread  the  part  [i.e.  of  the  Latin  Message]  where  you  refer
to  the  poem.

J.  G.  P.  You  mean  in  my  Latin  Message  ? One  moment.  (Then,
as  hand  starts  to  write)  Well  1

Ring

(a  circle  and  a triangle  were  here  drawn)

J.  G.  P.  Circle  and  triangle  1
yes.


74


[part


J.  G.  Pidclington.

J.  G.  P.  What  does  “ Ring  ” mean

(Hand  points  from  “Ring”  to  the  circle.)

J.  G.  P.  The  Latin  Message  does  not  refer — [I  was  going  to  add
“ to  a poem  ”.]

(interrupting)  not  exactly  to  a poem  I know
but  it  suggested  a poem  to  my  mind
Hence  B

H.

S etc.  [i.e.  “Browning,  Hope,  Star”.]

it  [i.e.  the  Latin  Message]  remind  [in  error  for  “re-
minded ”]  me  of  a passage  very  familiar  to  me.  when  I
was  in  the  body  and  I mentioned  (a  circle  was  here
drawn)  as  being  a connecting  link

J.  G.  P.  I see  what  you  mean.

The  last  extract  will,  I think,  be  clear  if  I explain  that  on
Feb.  27  MyerSp  said  quite  distinctly  that  “Hope,  Star  and
Browning  ” was  his  answer  to  the  Latin  message.  At  this
point  it  does  not  matter  in  the  least  whether  there  was  any
sense  in  this  answer  or  not ; all  that  we  need  consider  now
is  this ; — MyerSp  connects  the  Latin  Message  with  a poem  of
Browning’s ; he  then  connects  this  poem  with  “ Browning-
Hope  Star”;  I had  as  long  ago  as  Feb.  11,  before  there  was
any  suggestion  made  that  “ Browning,  Hope,  Star  ” was  an
answer  to  the  Latin  Message,  recognised  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of
Jan.  28  as  answering  to  these  thi-ee  words;  MyerSp  connects
his  drawing  of  the  circle  with  his  reference  to  the  Browning-
poem  ; and  as  a matter  of  fact,  as  we  know,  a circle  with  a
triangle  inside  it  was  drawn  at  the  end  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Jan  28.  The  process  by  which  MyerSp  indicates
the  particular  piece  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  in  which  the  circle
and  triangle  appeared  is  no  doubt  involved  and  difficult  to  set
forth  in  any  but  a round-about  and  tiresomely  recapitulatory
fashion ; but  I think  that,  notwithstanding  the  complexities,  1
am  justified  in  considering  that  a right  answer  was  conveyed,
and  that  it  was  not  derived  from  any  hints  given  by  myself.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  75

(II)  The  airpropriateness  of  affixing  the  triangle  and  circle  to
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28.

The  script  of  Jan.  28  contains  the  words:

“ On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds

threads

In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc  ”

and  they  are  clearly  misquotations  of  the  last  line  of  the
ninth  stanza  of  Aht  Vogler ;

“ On  the  earth  the  broken  arcs  ; in  the  heaven,  a perfect

round.”

The  “ broken  arcs  ” and  the  “ perfect  round  ” of  the  poem
are,  moreover,  clearly  alluded  to  in  the  drawing  of  the  triangle
within  a circle  which  comes  at  the  end  of  the  script  of

Jan.  28 : the  segment  joined  by  the  chord  AB  representing
the  broken  arcs  ”,  and  the  circle  representing  the  “ perfect
round  ”.

I think  that  the  appropriateness  will  be  admitted,  as  also  the
pertinence  of  the  words  written  by  Myersp  on  March  13:  “It
[i.e.  the  Latin  Message]  suggested  a poem  to  my  mind.  Hence
Browning,  Hope,  Star  etc.  It  reminded  me  of  a passage  very

familiar  to  me  when  I was  in  the  body  and  I mentioned

Circle  as  being  a connecting  link  ”.

I do  not  know  if  AM  Vogler  w’as  “very  familiar”  to  Frederic
IMyers,^  but  certainly  the  whole  poem  expresses  with  singular
fidelity  the  aspirations  of  his  whole  life  and  the  convictions
of  his  last  years.

(III)  The  conjunction  in  Miss  Vcrrall’s  script  of  Feh.  3 of  a
Crescent  moon  and  a Star.

On  April  8 Myersp  again  states  that  the  Latin  Message
suggested  the  poem  of  Browning’s  to  him,  and  he  goes  on :

I made  a circle

E.  M.  S.  Oh  ! a circle.  Yes,  1 remember.


1 Since  this  was  written,  my  attention  has  been  drawn  to  a letter  of  Myers’s
published  in  the  Life  and  Letters  of  Sir  R.  C.  Jebb  (pp.  144-5),  from  which
it  is  clear  that  Myers  was  familiar  with  Abt  Voijler.


76


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

as  it  suggested  it  to  my  mind I then  drew  or

tried  to  draw  a Star.  . . . draw  through  the  other  light.

E.  M.  S.  I see ; you  drew  a star.

and  I did  so  so  you  would  U.D.  that  I U.D.  the  message.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

and  I did  this

(a  star  was  here  drawn)

E.  M.  S.  I see  ; a star.

yes  did  you  see  it.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  there  was  a star  drawn.

I drew  it.  so  you  would  U.D.  that  I did  it  also  a crescent.

Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  3 contains,  as  we  have  seen,
the  following :

the  crescent  moon  remember  that


and  terminates  thus :


It  is  true  that  MyerSp  does  not  say  that  he  gave  the  star
and  crescent  to  Miss  Verrall,  but  “to  the  other  light”.  Mrs
Verrall  may  have  been  intended  by  these  words,  and  on
April  8 many  cross-correspondence  messages  were  mentioned
by  MyerSp  as  having  been  given  to  her ; but  the  expression
“ the  other  light  ” is  unusual ; I believe  it  is  applied  only
once  elsewhere  ^ to  Mrs  Verrall,  who  is  otherwise  referred

^ This  was  on  March  6,  1907  when  George  Pelham  spoke  of  Mrs  Verrall  as
“the  other  light'’,  but  only  after  I myself  had  applied  the  phrase  to  her:  my
reason  for  so  doing  being  that  George  Pelham  is  represented — naturally  and
appropriately — as  being  unfamiliar  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  name.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  77

to,  when  cross-correspondences  are  in  question,  as  “Mrs  Verrall,”
“Mrs  V,”,  or  “Mrs  V — ”,  or  merely  as  “she”  or  “her”.  It
remains,  then,  uncertain  who  is  meant  by  “ the  other  light  ”.
It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  MyerSp  begins  by  saying
that  he  “ made  a circle  ”.  Now  it  had  already  been  clearly
stated  that  the  circle  had  been  drawn  through  Mrs  Verrall.
He  next  adds : “ I then  drew  ...  a star  through  the  other
light  ” ; and  “ then  ” suggests  a different  occasion,  and  “ other  ” a
different  automatist.

The  drawing  over  the  crescent  moon  is  certainly  intended
for  a star,  as  the  words,  “ and  a star  ”,  immediately  follow  the
drawing  of  the  crescent  moon  ; and  anyhow  in  Miss  Verrall’s
script  of  Teb.  17  there  is  an  unmistakable  drawing  of  a
star.  Mrs  Wrrall’s  script  contains  no  drau'ing  of  a star.


VII.


“ AKEOW.”

Not  without  relief  I come  now  to  deal  with  a less  com-
plicated incident.  On  Feb.  12,  as  related  above,  I told
MyerSp  that  Mrs  Verrall  had  reproduced  both  his  message  for
Mrs  Sidgwick  about  a Library  and  “ Hope,  Star  and  Brown-
ing ”.  Whereupon  Myersp^  after  asking  me  not  to  be  in  a
hurry  for  his  answer  to  the  Latin  Message,  said  goodbye.
From  this  point  I quote  the  record ; —

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Pifcr  held  on  Feb.
12,  1907.

arrow

HODGSON.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  Will  you  explain  that  ?

I said  to  Mrs  V


78


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I see.
farewell.

J.  G.  P.  Thank  you,  Hodgson.

The  rest  of  the  sitting  was  concerned  with  communications
for  the  sitter,  Mr  IMacalister.

The  next  reference  to  this  experiment  is  on  Feb.  18,  and
is  very  brief : —

(Rector  communicating)  Hodgson  says  do  not  forget  arrow,
watch  for  it  if  it  comes  out.

.J.  G.  P.  I have  not  forgotten  ; I will  look  out  for  it.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  laitli  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Feb.
19,  1907.

(Hodgson  communicating)  Hello  Piddington  glad  to  see  you.
how  are  you  first  rate  I hope  %

J.  G.  P.  Thanks,  I’m  all  right Yoir  said  you  were  going

to  give  arrow  to  Mrs  Verrall.

I did  certainly  say  so  and  I have  been  there  three  days
trying  to  impress  it  upon  her.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

hard.

S!ie  did  get  a r I think  and  stopped  there.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  I don’t  remember  whether  she  got  “ a r ” —

(interrupting  before  J.  G.  P.  had  completed  what  he  was  going
to  say)

after  that  I saw  w written  I know.

•J.  G.  P.  “ M written  ” ?

(H:md  negatives.)

.J.  G.  P.  Is  it  “ W’”?

(Hand  assents.)

.T.  G.  P.  I don’t  know  about  W,  hut  it  did  seem  to  me  that  she  was
cettino:  near  the  idea  of  arrow.  Do  you  know  what  she
did  get?


79


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

not  exactly,  but  Piercing  swift  and  Piercing  came  into
my  own  mind  while  impressing  her.  and  I tried  in
several  ways  to  (hesitation)  to  make  her  U.D.  my  real
meanins;.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  you’ll  stick  to  it,  won’t  you  ? I think  it  may  come
out  all  right.

you  bet  your  life  I will.

She  is  the  very  best  subject  we  have  to  work  with  and  I
believe  she  can  become  much  more  important  to  us.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vntli  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Feh.

20,  1907.

(Hodgson  communicating)  meanwhile  I should  like  to  know
if  Mrs  Y — U.D.  my  message  ?

J.  G.  P.  I find  she  did  write  “ a r ”.  I can’t  say  anything  about  the
“w”;  it  isn’t  certain.

I am  not  absolutely  sure  myself  about  this  but  she  wrote
what  appeared  to  be  an  M or  a W.  and  as  I U.D.  it

J.  G.  P.  (interrupting)  Is  the  first  letter  an  M ?

yes  but  as  my  point  was  to  bring  out  the  W.

I believe  she  made  it  distinct  enough  to  be  recognized  as  a IV.

J.  G.  P.  The  “ W ” being,  I suppose,  the  last  letter  of  the  word
“ arrow  ” ?

(Hand  assents,  and  also  writes)  Yes.  quite.

J.  G.  P.  I am  going  to  ask  you  a question,  Hodgson ; but  don’t  answer

now,  nor  for  that  matter  at  any  time,  if  you  don’t  like.

No  Pid  I learned  my  lesson  when  you  put  those  confused
and  misunderstood  words  to  me  before.  i.e.  C.M.B.
[i.e.  Callie  Bonney  Marble.  I had  asked  Hodgsoiip  if
these  names,  which  were  those  of  a lady  known  to  Dr
Hodgson,  hail  any  meaning  for  him,  and  he  had  given
several  totallj'  wrong  answers.]

J.  G.  P.  I understand.  IVhat  I —

(interrupting)  Speak  slowly  Pid  kindly.

When  Mrs  Yerrall  got  the  letters  “ a r ” she  wrote  several
words  beginning  with  the  letters  a r.

O O


J.  G.  P.


so


[part


J.  G.  Picldington.

that  makes  no  special  difference  to  me.
my  special  word  to  her  was  arrow
AE

J.  G.  P.  I quite  understand  that,  but  what  I want  to  know  is  this  :
In  your  attempt  to  impress  “ arrow  ” did  you  try  to  get
at  it  by  impressing  the  actual  words  which  she  wrote
beginning  with  a r ; or  are  these  words  the  result  of
Mrs  Verrall’s  own  mind?

that  is  what  it  is.

the  actual  word  or  point  was  to  make  her  write  arrow,
this  is  the  only  obstacle  in  our  way  at  present.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  It  is  certainly  instructive  to  us  to  know  just  what
you  actually  tried  to  impress,  and  it  ought  to  be  instruc-
tive to  you  to  know  just  what  actually  came  out;  so  I’ll
tell  you  the  words  in  “ar”  which  Mrs  Verrall  wrote.
They  were  “arch”,  “architecture”,  “architrave”  and
“ pointed  arch.”

Pointed  was  my  own  word  to  suggest  arrow.

more

J.  G.  P.  It  was  because  of  the  drawing  of  a ])ointed  arch  that  I told
you  yesterday  she  was  getting  near  your  word  “ arrow  ”.

I U.l).  this  veiy  well  I also  impressed  upon  her  mind  that
she  should  write  Swift  (Hand  waves  to  the  right,  and  then
consults  spirit.)  as  an  Arrow.  Well  suppose  I go  over
this.

(to  spirit)  Hello  Myers,  wait  a bit.

go  to  her  again  as  soon  as  I finish  here  and  give  her  the
suggestion  again.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  very  good.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  icitli  Mrs  Pilfer  held  on  Feb.

25,  1907.

(Hodgson  communicating)  Got  arrow  yet?  H.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  Hodgson,  I don’t  think  the  word  “ arrow  ” has  been
written,  but  it  has  certainly  been  drawn.

Amen.

I spent  hours  of  earthly  time  trying  to  make  her  U.D.


LVii.]  ^4  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  81

J.  G.  P.  She  hasn’t  got  the  actual  word  )"et ; and  I should  like  to
make  a suggestion,  which,  of  course,  you  needn’t  pay
any  attention  to  unless  you  like.  How  would  it  be  if
you  tried  to  make  her  think  of  Longfellow’s  line:  “I
shot  an  arrow  into  the  air”l

I gave  her  a similar  line.

Swift  as  an  Arrow.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  but  she  hasn’t  got  that  line ; and  as  you  succeeded  in
making  her  write  about  Browning  you  might  be  able  to
impress  her  with  Longfellow  and  his  poem.

Yes  I will  certainly  Stick  to  it

On  Feb.  12,  then,  Hodgsoup  announced  for  the  first  time
his  experiment  of  impressing  Mrs  Verrall  with  the  word  “arrow  ”.

Coj^y  of  Mrs  Verr all's  script  of  Feh.  11,  1907  : —

There  has  been  nothing  for  you  today  nor  will  be  yet.

We  cannot  make  them  understand  the  importance  of  what
we  do  and  they  must  learn  for  themselves.  But  it  is
all  well  and  later  the  news  will  come.

It  is  all  fragmentary  and  you  must  piece  together —
the  essential  word  is  often  not  grasped  and  the  whole  success
so  spoiled.


44.


tria  convergentia  in  unum
[three  things  converging
to  one  (point).]


you  have  surely  had  that  before


The  remainder  of  the  script,  which  refers  to  Mr  Everard
Feilding’s  return  from  abroad  and  to  “ uncut  sapphires”,  is  not
connected  with  what  precedes.

This  script  was  written  at  10.40  p.m.  on  Feb.  11,  and
the  envelope  containing  it  bore  the  postmark : “ Cambridge,
2.15,  p.m.  Feb.  12.”  I received  it  and  read  it  at  11  a.m.  on
Feb.  13,  24  hours  after  the  Piper  trance  of  Feb.  12  ; so  I at

F


82


J.  G.  Piddivr/ton.


[part


any  rate  cannot  have  played  the  part  of  agent  to  Hodgsoiip  on
Feb.  12.  I do  not  think  that  anyone  will  dispute  that  the
drawing  represents  three  arrows.  Mrs  Verrall  always  took  the
drawing  for  arrows,  and  made  a note  to  that  effect  in  her
script-book  on  Feb.  28  ; and  spoke  of  them  to  me  as  arrows
on  March  13,  a fact  which  I made  a note  of  at  the  time.  It
was  not  till  June  4,  1907  that  Mrs  Verrall  learnt  that  “arrow”
had  been  a cross-correspondence  experiment.

The  phrase  “ tria  convergentia  in  unum  ”,  written  opposite
the  drawing,  suggests  that  the  subject  of  the  drawing  is  con-
nected with  a cross-correspondence.  A similar  phrase  “ tria
ilia  in  unum  convergentia  ” had  occurred  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Jan.  20,  1905,  and  the  words  “you  have  surely  had
that  before  ” showed  that  the  scribe  knew  that.

On  Feb.  18  Eector  had  written:  “Hodgson  .says  do  not
forget  arrow,  watch  for  it  if  it  comes  out  ”.

Mrs  Piper’s  trance  did  not  begin  on  this  day  until  11.20  a.m.;
and  it  must  have  been  quite  11.30  before  these  words  were
written.

Mrs  Verrall  sat  down  to  write  automatically  on  Feb.  18
at  10.55  a.m.  and  would  certainly  have  completed  her  script
by  11.30.  Her  script  of  that  day  was  as  follows: —

do  ew  No  nor  any  other
Cant  you  take  the  messcage  1
A L E M B E P T no  Mont  alban  or  Mont  auban
the  white  hill  and  les  neiges  d’antan

Blanche  de  Lys  or  some  such  name — but  it  is  all  only


symlobic  [sic]


it  seems  to  be  carvings  in  stone


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  83

Church  architecture  or  some  such  thing.

Who  wants  those  drawings?  this  is  quite  fresh.  I keep
trying  to  say  a long  word.

ARCHITECTONIC  ARCHITRAVE


I cant  get  rid  of  the  idea  ARCH  it  obsesses  me
There  has  been  great  confusion  here  and  I do  not  think
anything  has  been  accurately  said
accurate  dicta  adcuranda  sunt  [things  said  accurately  are
to  be  attended  to.]

But  the  white  arch  should  give  a clue.

I received  and  read  this  script  on  Feb.  19  at  10.55  a.ni.;
and  about  25  minutes  later  I reminded  Hodgsoiip  that  he  had
said  that  he  was  going  to  give  arrow  to  Mrs  Verrall.  Without

the  help  of  any  hint  from  me  he  thereupon  replied  : “ She  did

get  a r I think  and  stopped  there  ”.  I said  I didn’t  remember,

and  Hodgson  then  added  “ after  that  I saw  w written  I know  ”.

Now  in  the  light  of  this  let  us  consider  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Feb.  18.

“ do  ew.”  Is  it  possible  that  this  might  represent  a mis-
hearing or  a miswriting  of  “ Do  a ‘ W ’ ” ?

Four  words  soon  follow  in  quick  succession  all  beginning
with  the  letter  A ; three  of  them  consisting  of  the  same  number
of  letters  as  the  word  “ arrow  ”.  Two  of  them,  “ alban”  and

“ auban  ”,  appear  to  suggest  the  idea  of  whiteness  to  the
automatist ; hence  “ the  ivhite  hill  ”,  “ les  neiges  d’antan  ”,
“ Blanche  de  Lys  ”,  the  second  of  these  three  being  a reminis-
cence of  a phrase,  “ Blanche  comme  un  lys,”  which  occurs
in  a poem  of  Villon’s ; and  at  the  end  of  the  script  the


84


./.  G.  Piddvngton.


[part


“ white  arch  Next  come  two  drawings,  one  of  which  certainly
is  like  two  bows  back  to  back.  Then  follows  a series  of

words  all  beginning  in  “ Ar  ” : “ architecture  ”,  “ architectonic  ”,
architrave  ”,  and  “ arch  ” three  times  ^ ; and  the  persistence
of  the  sounds  of  A and  E should  be  noted  in  the  words
“ accurate  ” and  “ adcurauda  ”.

What  was  written  at  the  sitting  on  Feb.  1 9 suggests,  if,

indeed,  it  does  not  almost  explicitly  state,  that  only  partial
success  had  been  achieved ; and  throughout  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Feb.  18  the  tone  of  the  scribe  is  that  of  a person

conscious  of  his  inability  to  achieve  just  what  he  wants.  No

trace  of  “ piercing  ” or  “ swift  ” is  to  be  found  in  what  Mrs
Verrall  wrote.

Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  18  opens  with  the  words:
“ There  was  no  message  for  you  this  morning  but  tonight  I
want  to  say  something  ” ; and  then  come  four  drawings,  of
which  the  last  three  probalTy  represent  a bow  and  arrow,  an
arrow,  and  a target,  respectively.


These  drawings,  so  far  as  I can  see,  have  no  connection  with
the  rest  of  the  script.

The  word  “ arrow  ” does  not  appear  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
at  all ; and  the  only  drawings  which  could  possibly  be  taken
to  represent  an  arrow  or  arrows  are  those  of  Feb.  11  and
March  18,  reproduced  above.

It  will  be  remarked  that  Hodgsoiip  did  not  state  that  Mrs
Verrall  “ did  get  a r I think  and  stopped  there  ” until  I
had  read  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  18.  If  my  mind  is
supposed  to  have  been  the  source  from  which  this  information
was  drawn,  it  must  have  been  from  a subconscious  department
of  it ; for  consciously  I had  not  noticed  that  the  words  beginning


^ In  the  poem  of  Villon’s  that  contains  the  words  "Blanche  comme  un  lys  ”
occurs  the  name  “ Archipiada  ” : a fact  which  may  explain  the  emergence  of
the  words  beginning  in  "arch'’.


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Covcordant  Automatisms.  85

with  “ ar  ” had  the  same  first  two  letters  as  “ arrow  I
think  that  I did  not  notice  this  because  the  “ ar  ” of  arrow
is  short,  while  the  “ ar  ” of  the  other  words  is  long.  All  that
I did  notice  was  the  possible  resemblance  of  tlie  drawing
of  the  pointed  arch  to  an  arrow-head.

If  the  reader  will  now  turn  to  page  68  and  look  at  Miss
Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  17  (which  I saw  for  the  first  time  at
10.55  a.m.  on  Feb.  19),  he  will  find  it  contains  an  un-
mistakable drawin"  of  an  arrow.

O

Miss  Verrall’s  drawiim  of  an  arrow  came  later  than  Mrs
Yerrall’s  and  than  the  first  announcement  of  the  word  in  the
Piper  trance ; and  the  case  thus  falls  into  line  with  the  order
of  emergence  of  the  cross-correspondence  which  is  conveniently
summed  up  in  the  words  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ” ; and
also  one  of  the  conditions  connected  with  Miss  Verrall’s  part
in  that  cross-correspondence  is  reproduced,  in  that  the  drawing
of  the  arrow  is  contained  in  a piece  of  script  written  wlien
l\Iiss  Verrall  was  away  from  her  home  and  at  a distance
from  her  mother  (v.  p.  68).

Against  the  drawing  of  the  arrow  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script
of  Feb.  17  are  set  the  words  “many  together”;  which  imply,
that  “arrows”  rather  than  “arrow”  is  meant,  and  put  one  in
mind  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  three  arrows.

. To  sum  up  then:  Mrs  Verrall  draws  an  arrow  on  Feb.  11,
Hodgsoiip  on  Feb.  12  says  he  has  given  “arrow”  to  Mrs
Verrall,  and  on  Feb.  17  Miss  Verrall  draws  an  arrow.  In
view  of  these  coincidences  the  words  which  follow  the  drawing'

o

of  the  three  arrows  in  Airs  Verrall’s  script — “ tria  convergentia
in  unum  ” — become  possessed  of  a strange  pertinency.

I have  a deep  mistrust  of  tabulated  statements,  especially
when  applied  to  psychological  phenomena ; but  the  facts  dealt
with  in  this  section  lend  themselves  to  tabulation  rather  better
than  most  of  those  dealt  with  in  other  sections  of  this  paper  ;
and  so  for  the  convenience  of  readers  who  are  helped  by
such  arrangements  I append  a chronological  summary.


8(3

J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Feb.  11

Mrs  V.’s  script  has  a drawing  of  3 con-
verging arrows,  followed  by  the
words  : “ tria  convergentia  in  unum  ”.

Feb.  12

Hodgsoiip  says  he  has  given  “Arrow  ” to
Mrs  V.

Feb.  13

J.G.P.  sees  Mrs  V.’s  script  of
Feb.  11.

Feb.  17

Miss  V.’s  script  has  drawing  of  an  arrow,
followed  by  the  words  “ many  to-
gether ”.

Feb.  18

(about  11.15  a.m.)
Feb.  18

(about  1 1.30  a.m.)
Feb.  1 9
(10.55  a.m.)

Mrs  V.’s  script  has  several  words  beginning
with  a and  ar.

Hodgsoiip  reminds  J.G.P.  to  “ watch  for
arrow  ”.

J.G.P.  sees  Mrs  V.’s  script  of
Feb.  18,  and  Miss  V.’s  of
Feb.  17.

Feb.  19
(11.20  a.m.)
Feb.  20

Hodgsoiip  says  Mrs  V.  wrote  ar  and  w.

J.G.P.  tells  Hodgsoiip  that  Mrs  V.  has
written  several  words  beginning  with
ar.

Feb.  25

Hodgson  p asks,  “ Got  arrow  yet  ? ” J.G.P.
says  Mrs  V.  has  not  written  the  word,
but  has  drawn  an  arrow.  Hodgsonp
says  he  will  make  further  attempts  to
make  Mrs  V.  write  “ arrow  ”.

March  1 8

Mrs  V.’s  script  has  drawings  of  a bow  and
arrow,  an  arrow,  and  a target.

J uue  4

Mrs  V.  learns  for  the  first  time
that  “ arrow  ” has  been  the
subject  of  a cross-corre-
spondence experiment.

LVII.]


Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


87


VIII.

GIANT  AND  DWARF.

Extract  from  record  of  sittinrj  loitli  Mrs  Piper  hckl  on  Feh.  19,
1907.

(Present  : J.  G.  P.  alone.)

J.  G.  P.  It  might  be  a good  thing  to  send  a message  to  Mrs  Verrall.
(Rector  communicating.)

We  intended  to  do  so  friend.

J.  G.  P.  May  I choose  a message  1
Yes  certainly.

J.  G.  P.  Is  Prudens  here  to  take  it  ?

(Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

I called  Prudens  before  I (The  hand  points  to  the  words
“ yes  certainly  ”,  meaning  obviously  ; “ before  I wrote  the
words  ‘yes  certainly’”.)

J.  G.  P.  fhe  message  is  “The  Giant  and  the  Dwarf”.

(Hand  talks  with  Spirit.)

What  is  the  last  word  spell  it  ?

J.  G.  P.  Dwarf.  D — fourth  letter  — (Hand  assents)  w - a - r - f.
the  Giant  and  the  dwarf.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  quite  right.  A dwarf  is  the  exact  reverse  of  a giant.

Yes.  is  that  all.

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  that  is  all.
gone.

•J.  G.  P.  Yes.  (meaning  that  the  word  “gone”  was  understood  as  apply-
ing to  Prudens’  departure  on  his  errand.)


88


J.  G.  Piddinyton.


[part


The  conversation  reported  above  took  place  about  11.20
a.in.  About  12.15  p.m.  the  subject  was  referred  to  again  as
follows  : —

(Hodgson  conmuniicating)  Prudens  has  been  to  Mrs  Verrall  but
he  has  not  been  al)le  to  get  tlie  message  through  to  her  but  believes
he  can  do  so.  within  a very  short  time.

I looked  in  vain  for  any  allusion  to  “ Giant  and  Dwarf  ”
in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  and  so,  on  March  11,  I urged  Myersp
to  make  another  attempt  to  get  the  message  through  to  Mrs
Verrall.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  unth  Mrs  Piper  held  on  March
11,  1907.

•J.  G.  P.  Will  you  try  your  very  hardest  to  get  “Giant  and  Dwai’f”
through  to  Mrs  Ven’all.  It  has  not  appeared  there  so  ,
far.

(Myers  communicating)

Could  you  explain  a little  the

J.  G.  P.  Will  you  rewrite  that  ?

Could  you  explain  a little  about  first  word.

I do  not  feel  sure  of  it.

•J.  G.  P.  “Giant”.

Oh  Giant  yes  yes.

J.  G.  P.  Tes;  and  “Dwarf”.

tliank  you.  I U.D.  Wharf  (hand  makes  a negative  gesture.
J.  G.  P.  remains  silent.)

no  D W A R F.

,J.  G.  P.  Yes ; quite  right.

(Rector  communicating.)

Yes  I U.D.  Giant  & Dwarf.

R.

.J.  G.  P.  “Giant  and  Dwarf”.  YAs.

Yes  Giant.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordavt  Automatisms.  89

This  experiment  was  referred  to  again  and  again  by  the
Piper  controls  at  sixteen  different  sittings  between  March  1 2
and  May  27,  1907  ; the  subject  sometimes  being  brought  up
as  many  as  four  times  in  a single  sitting.  It  is  quite
unnecessary  to  quote  any  of  these  references  verbatim ; it  will
be  sufficient  to  summarise  the  more  important.

On  March  12,  13,  and  18  it  was  stated  that  Mrs  Verrall
had  written  D — the  first  letter  of  “Dwarf”;  on  March  19
Hodgsoiip  asked  if  Mrs  Verrall  wrote  “D  W ”,  and  added
that  he  thought  she  had  also  written  a “ G ” : i.e.  the  first

letter  of  “Giant”;  and  on  March  20  he  said  that  D W K
and  F had  been  written.  Statements  continued  to  be  made  to
the  effect  that  one  or  more  letters  of  “ Dwarf”  had  been
written  by  Mrs  Verrall.  But  with  the  one  exception  just
mentioned,  where  Hodgsoiip  said  that  he  thought  the  letter
G had  been  written,  no  claim  was  at  any  time  made
that  Mrs  Verrall  had  written  “ Giant  ” or  any  part  of  the
word.

On  May  1 Myersp  said  that  Mrs  Verrall  did  not  seem
to  understand  “Dwarf”  yet;  but  finally  on  May  27  said:  “I
did  give  Dwarf”.

I had  always  regarded  this  experiment  as  one  of  the  com-
plete failures,  as  I could  find  nothing  in  i\Irs  AVrrall’s  script
which  directly  or  indirectly  seemed  to  allude  either  to  a Dwarf
or  a Giant.

Mrs  Verrall  did  not  know  of  the  attempts  to  make  her
write  “Giant  and  Dwarf”  until  October  1907,  when  I told
her  that  these  words  had  been  the  subject  of  a long-continued
cross-correspondence  experiment,  without,  however,  informing
her  of  the  date  on  which  the  experiment  had  been  started.
Airs  Verrall  then  made  a search  through  her  script  but
failed,  as  I had  done,  to  discover  in  it  any  possible  trace
either  of  the  words  or  of  the  idea  “Giant  and  Dwarf”.

On  Jan.  19,  1908  Mr  Hereward  Carrington  wrote  from
America  to  Airs  Verrall  as  follows : —

I had  two  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper  lately — in  both  of  which  R.  H.
[i.e.  Dr.  Hodgson]  purported  to  communicate.  In  the  second  sitting
the  following  occurred  :

[(Hodgson  communicating)]


90


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Oh  yes,  I took  a message  through  Mrs  Verrall.

[Mr.  Carrington.]  Give  me  anything  you  said  through  Mrs  Verrall
at  any  time.

Yes  certainly  I gave  Callie  Callie  also  Dwarf  also  Horizon
Cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon

Again,  it  will  be  noticed.  Dwarf  and  not  Giant  is  claimed
to  have  been  transmitted.

On  Feb.  20,  1908,  Mrs  Verrall  sent  me  Mr  Carrington’s
letter,  and  with  regard  to  it  wrote  as  follows : — •

Mrs  P.[iper]  has  lately  said  to  H,  Carrington  that  she  gave  me
Dtvarf.  I looked  back  on  hearing  this  claim  repeated,  and  I find
that  on  Feb.  19,  1907,  the  script  suggested  “little  men”.  The
poem  beginning  “ Up  the  airy  mountain  ” and  referring  to  “ owl’s
feather”  is  about  “little  men”.  [It  opens  and  also  ends  with  the
following  lines  :]

Up  the  airy  mountain
Down  the  rushy  glen
AVe  daren’t  go  a hunting
For  fear  of  little  men.

Wee  folk,  good  folk.

Trooping  all  together.

Green  jacket,  red  cap.

And  white  owl’s  feather.^

They  then  carried  off  Bridget, — who  in  the  jirose  fairy  tale-  is
carried  off'  by  Pwarfs.  I do  not  know  how  dates  go,  but,  if  they
fit,  it  is  possible  that  there  was  here  an  approach  in  my  script  to
dwarf.

I append  a copy  of  the  concluding  paragraphs  of  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  19,  1907  referred  to  above.  It  was

^From  a poem  entitled  The  Fairies  by  W.  Allingham.  This  poem  has
been  extremely  familiar  to  Mrs  Verrall  since  1888.

“The  prose  story  of  Brkhjel  and  the  Dwarfs — which  she  has  always  supptosed
Allinghain’s  poem  to  be  founded  on — Mrs  V^errall  has  known  since  her  early
childhood.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


91


begun  at  5.5  p.m.,  posted  the  same  evening,  and  received  by
me  at  11  a.m.  on  Feb.  20.


a long  feather

ask  about  tlie  feather

Up  the  mountain — no  that  is  owl’s  feather;  not  what  I
want.

blue  and  green  peacock’s  feather  fan  screen  and  initials

ATM

There  has  come  a message  for  you  from  him,  but  I do  not
think  Piddington  understood.

O


To  this  script  Mrs  Verrall  at  the  time  appended  these
notes :

Up  the  airy  mountain  is  the  first  line  of  a child’s  poem  in  which
‘owl’s  feather’  occurs.

Peacocks  feather  A.  T.  il/.  Peacock-feather  fans  or  screens  were  A.
T.  Myers’s  wedding  present  to  us.

This  script,  I believe,  primarily  and  chiefly  corresponds  with
a script  written  by  Miss  Verrall  at  Brighton  on  Dec.  31,
1906,  which  Mrs  Verrall  did  not  see  until  Feb.  20,  1907.

Copy  of  2Liss  VerrcdVs  script  of  Dec.  31,  1906.

Miserere  nobis  domine  the  words  were  often  heard

What  about  peacocks  in  a garden  shimmering  green  and
blue  and  orange  blossom  and  a white  colonnade

Desdemona  not  that  is  wrong

have  you  seen  the  peacocks  1 blue  is  better  than  white  but
she  will  not  understand

moneta  ut  in  utrisciue  excitatio  leve  momentum  quod
excutitur  sapienter  de  moribus.

[All  Latin  words,  but  practically  untranslatable.]


92


J.  G.  Fiddington.  [part

(Here  came  a drawing  of  a peacock’s  feather  very  closely
resembling  the  one  reproduced  below.)  . ,

still  on  their  way  the  * plod  though  the  long  road

and  drear

their  patient  feet * shod  were  for

* of  the  only  rvay

Mention  of  the  feathers  was  the  only  waj^  to  call  it  to  mind.


PfiS


'V-'


The  coincidences  between  Mi's  and  Miss  Verrall’s  scripts
are  these  :

( 1 ) Both  draw  a feather  ;

(2)  Both  mention  “peacocks”;

(2)  Both  mention  “blue”  and  “green”;

(d)  Mrs  Verrall  notes  that  peacock-feather  fans  were  A.  T.
Myers’s  wedding  present  to  herself  and  her  husband  ; and
Miss  A^errall’s  script  contains  the  word  “ orange  blossom  ” in
connection  with  peacocks.

The  primary  intention  of  the  scribe  on  Feb.  19  was,  then,
I think,  to  write  about  peacocks’  feathers.  The  parenthetic
mention  of  “ Owl’s  feather  ” was,  I conjecture,  indirectly  due  to
the  experiment  started  a few  hours  earlier  at  the  sitting  with
Ml'S  Piper.

Thus,  on  Feb.  19  about  11.20  a.in.  Prudens  makes  a first

attempt  to  impress  “Giant  and  Dwarf”  on  Mrs  Verrall.  An

hour  later  he  is  reported  to  have  failed  to  get  the  message
through  but  to  believe  that  he  can  succeed  “ within  a very
short  time”.  Twice,  then,  before  the  script  of  Feb.  19  was

begun  at  5.5  p.m.  we  may  suppose  that  an  attempt  was

made  to  make  Mrs  Verrall  write  “Giant  and  Dwarf”.  The
attempts  failed  in  so  far  as  the  words  were  not  written,
but  they  nevertheless  left  their  mark  on  the  automatist’s  con-

■*  Undeciphertd  words.


I.VII.]


^■1  Series  of  Coneoi'dant  Autumatisras.


93


sciousness,  for  later  in  the  day,  when  for  the  first  time  that
day  she  set  herself  to  do  antomatic  writing,  upon  the  ideas
then  received  intruded  the  message  which  Prudens  had  pre-
viously succeeded  in  impressing  on  her  mind,  though  not  in
making  her  write.

The  sole  aim  of  the  scribe  on  Peb.  19,  as  I conceive  it,  was
to  make  the  automatist  write  about  blue  and  green  peacocks’
feathers.  He  managed  to  get  a feather  drawn  and  the  word
“ feather  ” written.  The  word  “ feather  ” suddenly  provoked  in
the  automatist,  whose  subconsciousness  had  some  hours  earlier
telepathically  received  the  “Dwarf”  message,  an  association  of
ideas  between  “Dwarf”  and  a poem  containing  references  to
“ little  men  ” “ wee  folk  ” “ up  the  airy  mountain  ” and  “ owl’s
feather  ’’.  The  scribe  at  once  recognised  that  an  alien  train
of  thought  had  been  aroused  ; “ no,  that  is  owl’s  feather ; not
what  I want”:  and  then  succeeded  in  leading  the  automatist
back  to  the  original  subject.

To  put  it  in  another  way  : I do  not  believe  the  drawing  and
the  writing  of  “feather”  would  under  ordinary  circumstances
have  evoked  recollection  of  “ Up  the  airy  mountain  ” or  “ owl’s
feather  ”,  had  it  not  been  that  the  automatist’s  consciousness  had
previously  been  impressed  with  “Dwarf”.

The  coincidence  may  seem  slight ; but  the  following  points
should  be  taken  into  consideration  : —

(1)  The  script  of  Feb.  19  was  written  within  6 hours  of
the  “Giant  and  Dwarf”  experiment  being  arranged  at  the
sitting  with  Mrs  Piper.

(2)  “Up  the  airy  mountain”  and  “owl’s  feather”  can  be
taken  to  allude  to  “ Dwarf  ” only,  and  not  to  “ Giant  ”.  When
at  the  sitting  of  March  11  the  subject  of  the  “Giant  and
Dwarf”  experiment  was  mentioned  for  the  first  time  since  it
was  arranged  on  Feb.  19,  and  since  Mrs  Verrali’s  script  of
Feb.  19  was  written,  MyerSp  showed  that  he  had  understood
the  word  “Dwarf”,  but  was  uncertain  of  the  word  “Giant”.
Moreover,  except  when  Hodgsoup  once  said  he  thought  Mrs
Verrall  had  written  the  G.  of  “Giant”,  the  trance-personalities
never  claimed  to  have  succeeded  iir  making  her  write  “ Giant  ”
or  any  letters  of  the  word  ; whereas  they  often  claimed  to
have  nrade  her  write  “Dwarf”  or  some  letter  or  letters  of  it;
and  seven  months  later  at  a sitting  in  America  Hodgsoup  still


J.  G.  Piddingtov .


94


[part


claimed  that  “Dwarf”  had  been  written,  but  did  not  mention
“ Giant

(3)  The  only  passage  in  her  automatic  writings  in  which
she  could  trace  any  possible  allusion  to  Dwarf  was  selected  by
Mrs  Verrall  in  ignorance  of  the  date  on  which  the  experiment
was  arranged ; and  this  passage,  as  it  turned  out,  had  been
written  on  the  most  suitable  date  possible.


IX.

“ LAUEEL  WEEATH.”

Extract  from  record  of  u'ords  spoken  during  the  %ocddng-stagc  q/
Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  Feb.  26,  1907.

Fairies.  (?1)

(Hand  points.)  George.  — All  right.  — — —

J.  G.  P.  Say  that  again.

There  is  Georsfe.  Whatever  is  it  i

C*

Morehead.  (?)

J.  G.  P.  “ Morehead  ” ?

Morehead  (?)  (or  some  such  name  or  word)  — laurel  for
laurel.

J.  G.  P.  Say  that  again.

for  laurel.  I say  I gave  her  that  for  laurel.  Good-bye.
(addressed  apparently  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  the  spirit.)

J.  G.  P.  No,  before  you  say  goodbye  ask  him  to  repeat  that.

I gave  her  that  for  laur-el.  [I  noted  at  the  time  that
the  first  syllable  “ laur  ” was  clear,  and  the  second
syllable  indistinct.  J.  G.  P.]


J.  G.  P.  Spell  it.


95


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Laur-el  (oi',  “Laur-ie”;  the  second  syllable  being  again  in-
distinct.)

J.  G.  P.  L — a — u.  Is  that  right  1

Aphasia,  aphasia.

Mr.  Headman.  H is  it  1 Herdnian  . Thurl  . There’s  George.
[i.e.  George  Pelham.]

(Sighs)  I am  glad.  (A  long  pause.)

(Smiles;  then  looks  out  of  the  window.)  Getting  dark,
isn’t  it  1 getting  dark  1

(Looking  at  J.  G.  P.  with  an  expression  of  disgust  and
alarm)  There  are — a nigger.  Oh!  dear.  You  go  out.
I don’t  like  you  at  all.

(Pubs  hands  together)  Dead,  (rubbing  right  hand)

J.  G.  P.  Head  snap  ?

Did  you  hear  it  ?

J.  G.  P.  Well,  I knew  it.

I thought  I heard  someone  say  it  was  George.  That’s  the
window.  Weren’t  you  over  by  the  window?

J.  G.  P.  Do  you  remember  what  George  said  ?

Well,  let  me  think.  You’re  Mr.  Piddington,  aren’t  you  1
Something — I think  he  said  something  about — let  me
see.  M"ell,  I think  it  was  something  about  laurel
wreaths,  lau — rel  [sic]  wreaths  he  tell  her.

J.  G.  P.  (mistaking  the  last  three  -words  for  a proper  name)
“Hetella  ”?

(Irritably)  He  tell  her.  He  would  tell  her.  Oh!  you  make
me  so  cross  . . . Tell  her  about.

The  .sitting  on  the  next  clay  was  an  unusually  prolonged
one.  Towards  the  end  of  it  came  another  reference  to  “ Laurel
wreath  ” : —

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vritli  Mrs.  Eiinr  held  on  Feh.

27,  1907.

(Present ; J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Myers  communicating)  I am  too  [weak]  to  tell  it  to-
day. my  thoughts  wander.


96


J.  G.  Piddinffttm.  [part

J.  ri.  P.  Let  me  say  goodbye.  On  third  after  coming  we  meet
again.

goodbye  God  be  with  you.

•J.  (t.  P.  Goodbye,  and  tlianks  again  — many  thanks,
listen.

.J.  (I.  P.  Yes.

I gave  Mrs.  Verrall
Laurel  wreath

J.  (P  P.  Yes,  quite  right ; she  got  it.

and  I said  Hodgson.

.J.  (4.  P.  “ Hodgson  ” 1

yes  would  give  the  next.

,T.  C4.  P.  I don’t  know  about  that:  I’ll  look.

she  may  not  have  received  it  but

•J.  G.  P.  No;  but  she  got  “laurel  wreath”  cleavhj.

I,  (written  while  J.  G.  P.  was  speaking)

yes  I gave  her  that

and  as  the  spirit  of  the  light

Keturned  to  its  body^  I tried  to  grasp  it,  (Pencil  breaks.)
(Rector  communicating)

You  must  keep  the  machine  [i.e.  the  pencil]  in  order  when
the

I (?)  don’t  like  them  if  they  (scrawl)  (Hand  tries  to  write
bej’ond  the  margin  of  the  paper.)  R.  [i.e.  Rector.]

(Myers  communicating)

Grasp  the  spirit,  so  as  to  give  it  you  last  time.

•J.  G.  P.  I heard  it  quite  well:  “laurel  wreath”.

Yes  all  right  I go  now
I cant  think  more  my  thoughts  wander.

Farewell

Myers.


' That  is,  during  the  waking-stage.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  97

I have  already  for  another  purpose  (v.  pp.  47-8)  quoted  the
script  of  Mrs.  Verrall  which  contains  the  correspondence;  but
I shall  quote  it  here  again  for  convenience  of  reference  and
in  order  that  the  reader  may  the  more  readily,  with  the  script
thus  before  his  eyes,  take  note  of  what  I believe  is  both  a
typical  and  a significant  feature  of  Mrs.  Verrall’s  automatic
writing : I mean  the  reiteration  of  the  important  word  or
idea.

Copy  of  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  of  Feh.  6,  1907  (begun  at
11.7  a.m.).

Laura  and  another

There  is  some  great  obstruction  this  morning

help  to  remove  it.

This  must  not  occur  again  tell  him  that.

Put  not  your  light  under  a bushel


K.g.  blue  riband  and  five  pointed  star


the  great  Library  has  already  gone  before
Hugh  Le  Despenser

The  branch  that  should  have  grown  full  straight
Apollo’s  laurel  bough

You  dont  get  it  right  but  some  of  this  is  true


I think  it  is  a jewelled  dagger


three  curved  objects  and  a point

I cant  see  what  all  this  means  but  I am
told  to  say  it  to  you
APOLLO’S  LAUEEL  BOUGH
There  is  also  some  point  in  the  Library
Put  together  the  Library  and  the  bough

Laureatus  [laurelled]  a laurel  wreath

G


98


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


perhaps  no  more  than  that


Corona  laureata  [laurel  crown]  has  some  meaning  here

AVith  laureate  wreath  his  brow  serene  was  crowned.

No  more  today — await  the  better  news

that  brings  assurance  with  a laurel  crown.

Neither  the  word  “Laurel”  nor  the  word  “Wreath”  occurs
elsewhere  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  during  the  period  under
review.

The  script  opens  with  the  word  “ Laura/’  which,  in  view  of
what  follows,  may  almost  without  hesitation  be  taken  to  be  the
first  emergence  of  “Laurel”.  If  “Laura”  is  the  first  attempt  at
“ Laurel  ”,  “and  another”  may  mean  that  another  word,  “wreath  ”,
is  to  be  added  to  it.  I cannot  trace  any  meaning  in  the  words
“ There  is  some  great  obstruction  ” — “ under  a bushel  ”.  The
reference  to  the  Library  has  been  dealt  with  already  (v.  pp.  57-8).
Then  begins  a series  of  phrases  which  all  (except  “ a jewelled
dagger  three  curved  objects  and  a point  ”,  which  may  possibly  be
the  first  emergence  of  the  three  arrows  drawn  on  Feb.  11,  v.
p.  81)  centre  round  the  idea  of  laurel,  and  lead  up  to  the  final
expression  “ laurel  wreath  ” or  “ laurel  crown  ”.

The  word  “ laurel  ” is  repeated  no  less  than  four  times,  and
once  in  large  letters ; and  further  emphasis  is  thrown  by  the
Latin  words  “ Laureatus  ” “ Corona  laureata  ”,  and  by  the  drawing
of  a laurel  wreath.  The  idea  of  a wreath  of  laurel  is  introduced
under  slightly  different  forms  six  times:  (1)  “Laureatus”,  i.e.
crowned  or  wreathed  with  laurel;  (2)  “a  laurel  wreath”;  (3)  a
drawing  of  a laurel  wreath  ; (4)  “ Corona  laureata  ”,  a crown  or
wreath  of  laurel ; (5)  “ laureate  wreath  ” ; (6)  “ a laurel  crown  ”.

We  shall  meet  with  similar  examples  of  this  harping  on  one
word  or  idea  later  on  (v.  pp.  178,  202,  and  223).

In  view  of  the  frequent  use  of  classical  phraseology  in  Mrs.
Yerrall’s  script,  and  of  its  employment  in  this  particular  script,  it
is  tempting  to  see  in  the  first  word  of  the  script,  “Laura”,  an


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automat  isms.  99

attempt  at  “ laurea  ”,  which  is  good  Latin  for  a laurel  wreath  or
crown,  rather  than  at  “ laurel  ” ; but  the  name  Laura  is  said  to
signify  “ Laurel  ”,  and  this  perhaps  affords  the  simplest  ex-
planation. The  concluding  words  of  the  script  seem  to  suggest
that  success  has  not  yet  been  attained,  but  is  to  be  looked  for  in
the  future  ; which  makes  excellent  sense,  since  the  script  of  Feb.  6,
had  no  significance  until  the  complementary  phrase  was  pro-
nounced at  the  sitting  of  Feb.  26.  I think  it  quite  possible  that
the  word  uttered  by  Mrs.  Piper,  which  in  the  original  record
I represented  by  “ Morehead  (?)  ”,  was  really  “ laureate  ”,  indis-
tinctly pronounced  as  “ Lauread  ”.

An  interesting  parallel  to  the  last  three  lines  of  Mrs.  Verrall’s
script  is  to  be  found  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  March  17,  which
reads  thus : —

Alexander’s  tomb  quinque  et  viginti  aunos  post  urbem  conditam
[five  and  twenty  years  after  the  founding  of  the  city.]
with  fire  and  sword  to  purge  the  altar  not
without  grief  laurel  leaves  are  emblem
laurel  for  the  victor’s  brow
Say  not  the  struggle  nought  availeth
Sesame  and  lilies  arum  lilies
When  the  darkness  on  the  quiet  land
Scarlet  tulips  all  in  a row.

This  is  the  only  occurrence  of  the  word  “ Laurel  ” in  Miss
Verrall’s  script  during  the  period  under  review.

1 suspect  that  this  script  exhibits  some  curious  associations  of
ideas.  I should  attempt  to  trace  its  development  thus :

Alexander  is  the  first  emergence  of  the  idea  of  a victor,  and  of
a victor  who  was  the  recipient  of  many  crowns-  of  victory.  This
is  succeeded  by  a fresh  topic : “ with  fire  and  sword  to  purge
the  altar  not  without  grief”.  These  words  perhaps  show  some
supernormally  acquired  knowledge  of  a paper  just  written  by
Dr.  Verrall  but  not  as  yet  seen  by  Miss  Verrall.  Between
“grief”  and  “laurel”  there  is  a space,  which  usually  indicates
a change  of  subject  not  only  in  Miss  Verrall’s  but  also  in  Mrs.
Verrall’s  and  Mrs.  Holland’s  script.  The  earlier  mention  of
the  victor  Alexander  has  cleared  the  way  for  the  emergence  of
“ laurel  leaves  ” and  “ laurel  for  the  victor’s  brow  ” ; and  between
these  words  and  the  succeeding  cj^uotation  from  Clough  there  is


100


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


a natural  enouoh  association  of  ideas.  Miss  Verrall’s  automatic
writing  is  so  often  characterised  by  odd  and  out-of-the-way
classical  allusions  that  I make  bold  to  suggest  that  there  may
have  been  another  link  between  “ Alexander  ” and  “ laurel
leaves  The  Greek  name  for  laurel  is  Sd<pm},  and  Sd(pvt]

'AXe^uvSpela  means  butcher’s  broom.  That,  as  a matter  of  fact,
this  plant  got  its  name  not  from  Alexander  the  Great  but  from
Alexander  (Paris)  the  son  of  Priam,  makes  the  association  of
ideas  a little  less  straightforward,  but  not,  I think,  more  unlikely.

To  complete  the  account  of  this  correspondence  between  the
scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper  an  interesting  prelude
and  sequel  to  what  has  been  related  above  ought  not  to  be
omitted  ; for,  though  they  do  not  manifest  so  high  a degree  of
ingenuity  as  is  exemplified  in  some  other  instances  and  especi-
ally in  the  auro?  oupavo?  a.KV]awv  incident  (v.  pp.  107-172),  they
at  least  afibrd  a good  illustration  of  the  intelligent  way  in  which,
in  my  opinion,  the  cross-correspondences  were  worked.

Extract  from  record  of  sittinq  loifh  Mrs.  Finer  held  on
Jan.  2,  1907.

(J.  G.  P.  present  alone.)

(Myers  communicating)  I said  Wreath  to  Mrs.  Verrall.
Wreaths.

J.  G.  P.  A wreath — a wreath  of  flowers  ?

Yes  but  plural.

Wreaths  of  roses  in  her  hair  entwined.

(Rector  communicating)  I am  Rector  friend.

I feel  . . . that  the  word  Wreaths  has  been  re-
ceived by  Mrs.  Verrall.

Extract  from  record  of  sittinq  vjith  Mrs.  Finer  held  on
Jan.  21,  1907.

(Present  Mrs.  Verrall  and  J.  G.  P.)

•J.  G.  P.  The  friend  \i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  is  here  and  will  come  and
sit  by  you.


LVii.]  A Series  oj  Concordant  Aiitomatisnis.  101

(Rector  communicating)  thank  you.  We  are  glad  to  see
you  again.

Mes.  V.  Thank  you.

and  hope  you  will  be  able  to  U.D.  our  messages  better
when  you  are  not  present.  [Rector  is  speaking,  and  he
means  he  hopes  that  the  messages  which  he  and  other
members  of  his  group  are  trying  to  transmit  to  Mrs.
Verrall  will  in  future  come  out  more  clearly  in  her
script.]

Mbs.  V.  Yes.

We  can  help  very  much.

did  you  U.D.  about  the  wreath  1

Mbs.  V.  “ the  wreath  ” 1

did  you  U.D.  about  it  ?

Mbs.  V.  I don’t  understand  about  the  wreath.

J.  G.  P.  (to  Mrs.  Verrall)  I understand.

all  right  neither  does  our  friend  present  \i.e.  J.  G.  P.]  U.D.
what  we  mean  now.

We  will  tell  him  later.

Extract  from  record  oJ  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on
Jem.  22,  1907.

(J.  G.  P.  present  alone  at  this  point.)

J.  G.  P.  At  the  last  meeting  you  asked  the  friend  [i.e.  Mrs.

Verrall]  if  she  understood  about  “wreath”;  and,  when
she  said  she  did  not,  I said  I understood.  You  then
said  I did  not  understand,  and  that  you  would  explain
later.  Will  you  explain  now  1

(Rector  communicating.)  I believe  now  that  you  did  not
[“not”  immediately  erased]  did  U.D.  but  at  that  moment
while  listen  [sic]  and  registering  at  the  same  time.  I did
not  think  so.


J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I see.


102  J.  G.  PiddhKjton.  [part

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs.  Piper  held  on
Jan.  23,  1907.

(Present:  J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Rector  communicating)  we  are  rather  sorry  we  mentioned
wreath  before  her  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  but  we  did  so
inadvertently.

.J.  G.  P.  It  doesn’t  matter.  Besides,  when  you  said  I didn’t  under-
stand about  “wreath”  that  put  Mrs.  Verrall  off  the
track,  I fancy.

yes  very  good,  as  it  is  a very  good  thing  to  try.  we  do
not  wish  to  spoil  it.

R.

(Myers  communicating)  Good  bye  friend  Piddington.

•J.  G.  P.  Goodbye.

I shall  see  you  again.

F.W.H.M.

•J.  G.  P.  Yes,  certainly.

Extract  from  record,  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs.  Piper  held  on
March  4,  1907.

(J.  G.  P.  present  alone  at  this  point)

(Myers  communicating)  I wish  to  explain  one  more  thing
i.e.,  when  I gave  Mrs.  V.  the  message  about  Laurel
wreath  I purposely  said  Laurel  so  as  (hesitation)

make  the  message  clear.

•J.  G.  P.  “ so  as  make  ” ?

(Hand  negatives.)

•J.  G.  P.  “ to  make  ” ?

(Hand  assents  and  writes)  to  make  the  message  clear

after  having  mentioned  wreath  here.  I thought  it  wiser
to  add  more  to  it.

.J.  G.  P.  You  mean  that  as  you  had  mentioned  “wreaths”  here  in
Mrs.  Verrall’s  presence  you  purposely  added  a distinctive
word  to  “ wreath  ” in  order  to  strengthen  the  evidence  ?

(Hand  assents.)


103


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I had  already  understood  that.

thank  yon.  Goodbye  if  you  have  nothing  for  me.

The  extracts  given  above  explain  themselves  and  require
no  comment,  except  it  be  to  remark  that  whatever  the  agency
is  that  effects  these  coincident  phenomena  it  is  not  a force
working  blindly  and  mechanically,  but  with  intelligence  and
design.

O


X.i

“CELESTIAL  HALCYON  DAYS.”

On  Jan.  15  and  again  on  Jan.  30,  1907  MyerSp  men-
tioned in  Mrs  VerralTs  presence  several  words  and  phrases
which  he  said  he  had  given  her.  He  did  not  specify  the
time  when  the  messages  had  been  given,  but  the  context
leaves  me  in  no  doubt  that  he  meant  to  refer  them  to  a
period  anterior  to  the  inauguration  of  the  English  sittings
with  Mrs  Piper.

Passages  are  to  be  found  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  which  do
correspond  in  some  degree  with  all  these  messages ; but  none
of  the  coincidences  is  very  definite,  and  considering  how
voluminous  Mrs  Verrall’s  automatic  output  has  been  between
March  1901  and  Nov.  1906,  and  considering  also  that  Mrs
Piper  had  read  a little  of  Proc.  Vol.  XX  and  could  have
derived  therefrom  some  general  notion  of  the  sorts  of  topics  to
be  found  in  Mrs  A^erralTs  script,  I do  not  think  it  worth  while
to  discuss  any  of  these  rather  vague  coincidences  except  one,
and  that  one  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  on  account  of  its  associa-
tion with  the  important  group  of  phenomena — the  auro?
ovpavo?  aKUfj.wv  incident — to  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  section.

'This  section  is  inserted  here  out  of  its  proper  chronological  order  because  the
subject  of  it  is  closely  related  and  forms  a sort  of  prelude  to  the  subject  of
the  next  section.


104  J.  G.  Piddincjton.  [part

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vjitli  Mrs  Pilfer  held  on  Jan.
15,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs.  Verrall  and  J.  G.  P.)

(Myers  communicating)

Do  you  remember  saying  you  thought  it  possible  to  get
messages,  through  your
What  did  we  call  it.

Mes  V.  “ What  did  he  call  it  ” ?

We

It  used  to  move  when  we  put  our  hands  on  it.

Mrs  V.  The  table.  Planchette.

Yes  Yes  quite  so.

I came  and  gave  you  two  messages  . . . one  was  Dewdrops
glistening  with  the  mist  and  sun  . . .
remer  [i.e.  “ remember  ”]  it  1

Mrs  V.  Yes;  I remember  something  about  dewdrops  and  mist  and
sun.  (to  J.  G.  P.)  Pm  almost  sure  I had  that.

J.  G.  P.  (to  Mrs.  V.)  I thought  it  was  Helen  [i.e.  Miss  Verrall]

Mrs  V.  (to  J.  G.  P.)  No;  I had  it  a long  time  ago.

I gave  it  you.

Mrs  V.  Yes.

are  you  listening

Mrs  V.  What  was  the  other  message  1

and  the  other  was  . . .
celestial  halceon  [sic]  days

Mrs  V.  “Halcyon  days”.  That’s  right  [i.e.  “that’s  the  right  read-
ing”]; but  what  is  the  word  before  “halcyon”?

Celestial.

Mrs  V.  “ Celestial  ” ?

Yes.  (Hand  thumps  emphatic  assent.)

Now  have  you  it

Have  you  it  ? and  do  you  recall  it.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  105

Mrs  V.  Yes.  [This  was  an  assent  to  the  question:  “Have  you  it?",
not  to  “ do  you  recall  it  1 ”.]

I am  trying  with  all  the  forces  . . . together  to  prove  that
I am  Myers.

These  messages  have  more  meaning  . . . they  will  be  clear
as  soon  as  you  go  over  them.

The  allusion  to  planchette  is  appropriate.  Before  Myers’s
death  the  only  veridical  messages  obtained  by  Mrs  Verrall
or  at  her  house  had  been  by  means  of  table-tilting.  Mrs
Verrall  writes :

I do  not  think  that  at  this  point  MyerSp  was  thinking  definitely
of  the  means  or  method  [of  communication]  but  onlj'  of  the  fact
that  Mr.  Myers  and  I had  agreed  in  the  belief  that  Planchette  or

Table-tilting  might  convey  verifiable  evidential  matter Mr

Myers  and  I had  discussed  that  very  question  constantly  in  the
last  days  before  he  left  England.

The  statements  of  MyerSp  do  not  necessarily  imply  that
the  “ two  messages  ’’  which  he  claimed  to  have  given  Mrs
Verrall  were  given  through  Planchette.  They  can  bear  a
meaning  consistent  with  the  facts  mentioned  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
letter,  and  might  be  paraphrased  thus : “ You  remember  that
you  believed  in  the  possibility  of  veridical  messages  being
obtained  by  means  of  some  form  or  other  of  motor-automatism.
Well,  I will  now  remind  you  of  two  messages  which  I have
made  you  record  automatically.”

It  is  the  second  message  only — “ Celestial  Halcyon  days  ” —
which  I intend  to  discuss.

At  the  sitting  of  Jan.  15  Mrs  Verrall  did  not  recognise
that  any  such  phrase  as  “ Celestial  Halcyon  days  ” had  occurred
in  her  script ; the  “ yes  ” which  she  spoke  after  the  words
“Have  you  it?  and  do  you  recall  it?”  being  an  assent  to  “Have
you  it?”  and  not  to  the  second  question.  On  Jan.  22,  how-
ever, she  wrote  in  the  train,  while  on  her  way  to  a sitting
with  Mrs  Piper,  a long  piece  of  rimed  script  which  ended
thus : —

Then  in  the  broader  lioht

O

That  floods  the  world  s u p e r n
Clear  to  the  sharpened  sight
Hold  fast  the  One  Eterne  !


10(3


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAliT


It  was  obvious  to  Mrs  Verrall  that  the  whole  point  of

tliese  preposterous  lines  was  the  introduction  of  the  word
supern  ”,  and  this,  as  she  noted  at  the  time  in  the  book  in

which  she  copies  her  script,  she  mentioned  on  Jan.  23  to

her  daughter  and  niece.  Later  on  that  day,  Jan.  23;  she
remembered  that  the  word  “ supernal  ” had  occurred  in  her

script  of  July  3,  1903  (quoted  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  p.  64)
which  ran  as  follows  : —

For  her  a message  of  peace  — contemplation  on  high  summits
— stillness  in  the  air.  -pos  oeSa?  dewi'  [to  the  threshold  of  the
gods]  noctivaga  ilia  £ Eelene  [the  night-wandering  moon  (reading,
Ee/Viyi'/;)]  dp/xttTt  apyvpoeiTL  — eAei  <Tv  S’  ovk  kirivola  y^piupkinj  [on  her
silvery  car  goes.  But  you  not  using  intelligence]  you  have  not  all
the  words  — TTo/YAtt  deAAa  [and  often  a storm]  is  part  kuI  XatkapL

KapTepoojvTl  SeSdiperai  ovpapos  dAAos.  [and  by  the  whirlwind  in  its
might  (?)  the  rest  of  the  heaven  will  be  devoured  (?)]  No  you
confuse — the  storm  and  whirlwind  consume  the  blue  clear  space
between  the  worlds,  but  the  supernal  peace  is  undisturbed.

This  script  had  been  written  on  one  of  the  few  fine  still
days  of  a very  stormy  and  weather-broken  holiday  in  the
Alps.

The  fundamental  idea  of  “ halcyon  days  ” — an  interval  of
calm  between  storms — seems  to  be  represented  in  the  words
“ the  storm  and  whirlwind  consume  the  blue  clear  space
between  the  worlds  ”.  The  main  point  of  the  script,  however,
seems  to  be  that  while  halcyon  days  in  this  world  are  tran-
sitory, in  the  celestial  world  they  are  unending.  The  idea  of,
though  not  the  actual  phrase,  “ celestial  halcyon  days  ” would
appear,  then,  as  MyerSp  claimed,  to  be  found  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script,  and  Mrs  Verrall  acknowledged  this  at  the  sitting  of
Jan.  30.

It  should  be  noted  that  the  discovery  in  the  script  of  a
passage  answering  to  “ celestial  halcyon  days  ” might  not  have
been  made  but  for  the  clue  afforded  by  the  script  of  Jan.  22.

Airs  Piper  had  read  parts  of  Proc.  Vol.  XX,  and  may
therefore  have  read  the  script  of  July  3,  1903,  which  is
quoted  in  it  as  an  example  of  an  attempt  at  the  production
of  Greek  hexameter  verse ; but  even  if  this  was  the  case,  it
is  difficult  to  imagine  that  any  part  of  the  consciousness  of


107


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Mrs  Piper,  who  is  entirely  without  classical  scholarship,  should
have  summarised  it  in  the  words  “ celestial  halcyon  days.”  But
the  importance  of  this  incident  lies  chiefly  in  the  fact  that
the  mention  in  the  trance  by  Myersp  of  “ celestial  halcyon
days  ” was  one  of  the  principal  factors  that  determined  Mrs
A^errall’s  choice  of  the  subject  of  a test-cpiestion  which  she
put  to  MyerSp  on  Jan.  29.  What  this  question  was  and
how  it  was  answered  is  e.xplained  in  the  next  section.


XL

“CEOSSIXG  THE  BAR.”

The  auTO?  ovpavog  aKv/j.^’W  INCIDENT.

With  this  incident  I deal  in  a somewhat  different  manner
from  that  in  which  I have  dealt  with  the  other  cases  of
cross-correspondence.  Instead  of  quoting  the  relevant  extracts
from  the  records  in  the  text  I relegate  them  to  an  appendix,
and  in  the  text  give  summaries  of  them  only.  References  to
the  appendix,  which  is  placed  at  the  end  of  this  section,  will
be  made  by  means  of  Greek  letters.  My  part  in  the  incident
is  so  subordinate  a one  that  instead  of  speaking  of  myself
in  the  first  person,  I shall  speak  of  myself  in  the  third  person,
as  “ J.  G.  P.”,  except  in  some  of  the  footnotes.  The  case
being  a complex  one,  its  ramifications  are  grouped  under  sub-
headings.

These  changes  in  the  method  of  presenting  the  evidence  will,
I hope,  make  this  complicated  incident  easier  to  follow.

I refer  occasionally  in  this  section  to  entries  made  by  Mrs
Verrall  in  her  private  diary.  These  entries  I have  in  each
case  either  summarised  or  quoted  from  the  original  diary,
which  Mrs  Verrall  was  kind  enough  to  place  at  my  disposal.


108


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Choice  of  a Test- Question.

In  the  early  part  of  1907,  after  six  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper
in  which  Mrs  Verrall  had  been  struck  with  the  vraisemUance
of  the  Myers  personality,  and  also  with  the  knowledge  shown
of  unpublished  portions  of  her  script  connected  with  that
personality,  Mrs  Verrall  decided  to  ask  at  her  next  sitting  a
question  which  it  would  be  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Myersp —
if  this  personality  really  had  access  to  the  memories  of  Frederic
Myers — would  be  able  to  answer.  For  this  purpose  certain
conditions  seemed  desirable,  some  arising  from  the  circum-
stances of  the  particular  experiment,  and  others  suggested  by
general  considerations  derived  from  previous  experience.  The
important  conditions  were :

1.  the  question  should  be  unintelligible  to  Mrs  Piper  herself,
in  order  to  prevent  the  medium’s  own  knowledge  from  affecting
the  result ;

2.  the  question  should  be  short,  on  account  of  the  difficulty
and  slowness  of  communication  between  sitter  and  communicator
in  the  present  conditions  of  the  I’iper  trance ;

3.  the  question  should  concern  a subject  which  had  not  only
been  known  to,  but  which  had  been  thoroughly  familiar  to
Frederic  Myers,  so  that,  had  it  been  addressed  to  him  in  his
lifetime,  he  would  have  answered  it  instinctively,  without  a
moment’s  doubt,  hesitation  or  reflection.  It  should  therefore
concern  a matter  not  merely  of  intellectual  acquisition  or  learn-
ing, but  of  knowledge  so  completely  assimilated  as  to  have
been  a stable  part  of  his  personality ;

4.  the  answer  should  be  complex,  though  not  necessarily
lengthy ; and  in  order  to  avoid  the  risk  of  an  accidentally
successful  guess  on  the  part  of  Mrs  Piper,  it  should  not  be
expressible  in  a single  word  or  phrase,  but  should  require  for
completeness  allusions  to  more  than  one  group  of  associations ;

5.  the  answer  should  be  such  as  could  be  proved  to  have
been  known  to  Myers : that  is,  the  verification  should  not
depend  on  Mrs  Verrall’s  personal  knowledge  or  impression
but  on  unmistakable  external  evidence ;

6.  the  question  and  answer  should,  in  fact  though  not  in
appearance,  be  connected  with  a range  of  subjects  already
alluded  to  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  own  script  by  Myersy.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  109

It  was  not  easy  to  find  an  appropriate  question.  Some  of
the  required  conditions  would  be  met  if  Greek  were  the  language
of  the  question  ; and  it  seemed  desirable,  with  a view  to  condi-
tion 5,  to  frame  a question  based  on  a Greek  quotation  to
which  reference  had  actually  been  made  in  some  published
work  of  Myers’s,  though  condition  1 demanded  that  this
reference  should  not  be  obvious  or  easily  discoverable.

It  was  on  January  22,  1907  that  Mrs  Verrall  decided
to  apply  this  test,  if  only  she  could  think  of  a satisfactory
question.  On  the  evening  of  January  23  it  suddenly
occurred  to  her  tliat  the  words  kui  ui/to?  oiiparo?  ukvijlwv  would
serve  the  purpose.  The  words  may  be  translated  “ and  the

very  Heaven  waveless”.  They  come  from  the  5th  book  of
the  Enneades  of  the  Neo-platonic  philosopher  Plotinus,  and
form  part  of  a passage  in  which  he  recites  the  conditions  that
should  precede  and  accompany  the  attainment  of  ecstasy,  or
communion  of  the  individual  soul  with  the  divine : these  con-
ditions being  perfect  calm  of  soul  and  body  and  of  external
nature  as  well.  A translation  of  the  passage  from  Plotinus
will  be  found  in  the  second  volume  of  Human  Personality,
p.  291,  but  the  Greek  words  are  not  given,  and  in  the  trans-
lation no  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  particular  phrase  in  question.
It  is  there  rendered  “ calm  be  the  earth,  the  sea,  the  air,  and
let  Heaven  itself  be  still  ”,  and  this  sentence  is  in  the  middle
of  a paragraph  of  some  eleven  lines.

The  four  words  in  Greek  (followed  by  the  name  of  the  author,
Plotinus,  but  by  no  further  reference)  occur  once  in  Myers’s
published  works,  namely,  as  the  motto  to  a poem  on  Tennyson
published  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  (p.  117).  They
are  not  there  translated.^


' Wishing  to  know  whether  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  was  known  to
Mrs  Piper  I wrote,  about  the  end  of  July  1907,  and  put  her  the  question,
without  explaining  my  reason  for  doing  so.  She  replied  on  August  10  as
follows: — “I  am  sorry  to  say  that  according  to  my  best  knowledge  and  recol-
lection I had  never  even  heard  of  such  a book  as  you  mention  and  did  not
know  that  such  a one  had  ever  been  printed.  Since  receiving  your  letter,
however,  I have  enquired  of  Professor  James,  Miss  Robbins  and  a Miss  Willis,
a friend  of  Miss  Edmunds  [formerly  assistant  secretary  of  the  American  Branch
of  the  S.P.R.]  and  a member  of  the  S.P.  R.  The  latter  had  never  heard  of  the
book.  I enclose  a letter  received  from  Miss  Robbins  [formerly  an  active
member  of  the  American  Branch  of  the  S.P.R.]  in  reply  to  my  question  which


110


./.  G.  Piddington.


[PAKT


Further  the  words  may  be  said  to  have  some  connexion
with  Mrs  Verrall’s  own  script.  On  January  15,  Mrs  Verrall
being  the  sitter,  MyerSp  claimed  to  have  referred  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  to  “Celestial  Halcyon  Days’"  (see  Appendix
a and  Section  X.).  This  claim  Mrs  Verrall  neither  accepted
nor  denied,  though,  at  the  time,  she  felt  sure  that  she
had  written  no  such  phrase.  Her  own  script,  however,  on
January  22  recalled  to  her  mind  a much  earlier  script,  that
of  July  3,  1903,^  which  on  consideration  was  seen  to  reflect
the  ideas,  though  not  the  phraseology  of  “ Celestial  Halcyon
Days”.  The  phrase  of  Plotinus,  therefore,  though  not  occur-
ring in  Mrs  AVrraH’s  script,  belonged  to  a range  of  ideas
claimed  by  MyerSp  as  thex’e  occurring.  To  put  it  briefly,

an  intelligence  acquainted  with  Plotinus  could  see  a connexion
between  the  words  cwto^  ovpapo?  aKVfxwv  and  “ Celestial
Halcyon  Days  ” ; but  there  is  no  similarity  in  the  actual
phraseology  to  suggest  a conne.xion  to  an  intelligence,  however
acute,  not  possessed  of  certain  definite  classical,  philosoirhical,
and  literary  associations.

The  words  then  seemed  to  fulfil  the  desired  conditions.

shows  such  a book  is  not  easy  to  obtain Mr  James  thought  there

were  only  a few  private  copies  in  America,  and  that  it  had  never  been  sold
in  the  shops ”

Miss  Robbins’s  letter  to  Mrs  Piper  states  that  she  had  heard  of  the  book
but  never  seen  it.

On  receipt  of  Mrs  Piper’s  letter  I wrote  for  further  information  to  Professor
William  James,  who  on  Oct.  19  replied  as  follows: — “I  enclose  you  a letter
from  Longmans  about  the  sales  of  Myers’s  Frarpnents  in  Boston.  W.  B.  Clarke,
who  is  more  likely  to  have  handled  the  book  than  any  other  Boston  book-
seller, tells  me,  through  his  foreman,  that  he  should  guess  he  may  have  sold
a dozen  copies.”

The  letter  from  Messrs  Longmans’  New  York  house  was  as  follows  ; — ■“  In
re  “Fragments”.  We  regret  to  say  we  are  unable  to  reply  to  your  question
very  satisfactorily  : we  do  not  keep  any  records  of  individual  sales  to  localities,
and  it  is  difficult  to  say  where  books  go  in  detail  especially  as  we  cannot  trace
sales  through  the  jobbing  houses.  But  a search  through  our  own  books  for
.3  months  after  publication  shower!  direct  sales  to  Boston  booksellers  of  only
25  copies.  We  do  not  recall  any  recent  demands,  and  indeed  the  total  sales
have  been  very  disappointing  in  view  of  the  considerable  den.aud  shown  for
the  large  book  (Human  Personality).”

For  my  own  part  I entirely  and  unhesitatingly  accept  Mrs  Piper's  statement
that  she  had  not  heard  of  the  book.  Note  by  J.  G.  P.

t See  Pr-oc.  Vol.  XX.  p.  64.


LVii.J  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  Ill

They  could  be  shewn  to  have  been  familiar  to  Frederic  Myers,
they  suggested  more  than  one  group  of  associations  and  could
be  connected  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  previous  script,  and  at  the
same  time  they  would  have  no  meaning  for  Mrs  Piper.

On  January  23  Mrs  Verrall  decided  to  apply  this  test,
if  an  opportunity  arose,  and  on  January  24  she  noted  this
intention  and  the  reasons  for  the  choice  of  words  in  her
diary  (see  Appendix  /3).  No  one  was  informed  of  her  intention,
and  no  mention  was  made  of  the  subject  till  she  put  the
question  to  MyerSp,  in  the  presence  of  J.  0.  P.,  during  the
sitting  of  Jan.  29  : that  is  to  say,  at  the  first  sitting  which
she  attended  after  she  had  devised  this  experiment  and  cliosen
the  words  of  Plotinus  as  the  subject  of  it.


The  Test-Question  put.

On  -lanuary  29,  1907  Mrs  Verrall  at  the  end  of  her
sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  suggested  as  an  experiment  to  MyerSp,
that  if  she  spoke  three  Greek  words  he  should  say  of  what
they  reminded  him,  or  translate  them  into  English  ; she  also
said  that  these  words,  or  something  like  them,  had  been
suggested  by  her  script,  and  then  gave  the  three  words  in
Greek,  avrog  oupavog  aK-vfxoop,  omitting  kui  (and),  (see  Ap-
pendix y.)

In  the  event  of  a complete  answer  being  given,  Mrs  Verrall
therefore  expected :

1.  a translation  into  English  of  the  words  avrog  ovpavog
aKVfxoov  ;

2.  a reference  to  Myers’s  poem  on  Tennyson  ;

3.  a reference  to  Plotinus  and  the  latter  ]iart  of  Human
Personality.


Possible  Fiust  Attempts  in  Mrs  Piper’s  Trance  to  Eeply
TO  the  Test- Question.

On  January  30,  the  day  after  the  question  was  put,  Mrs
Verrall  had  another  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper.  There  was  no
direct  reference  to  the  test-question,  but  Mrs  Verrall  thought
that  some  of  the  phrases  used  in  the  trance,  though  only


112


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


disconnectedly  introduced,  showed  that  the  associations  for  which
she  had  asked  were  present  in  the  tlionghts  of  the  com-
municating intelligence ; that  there  was  in  fact  what  might

be  called  “ preliminary  emergence  ” of  them.  Thus  the  phrase
“ haven  of  rest  ” was  mentioned  as  likely  to  recall  to  Mrs
A^errall  a memory  of  Myers ; and  towards  the  end  of  the

sitting  there  was  a disconnected  allusion  to  “ Larches  ” and
“ Laburnum  ” (see  Appendix  S).  Both  these  words  have

Tennysonian  associations  for  Mrs  Verrall;  the  spring  budding
of  the  larch  and  the  first  flowering  of  the  laburnum  always
bringing  to  her  mind  Tennyson’s  descriptive  phrases — both  from
In  Memoriam — “ When  rosy  plumelets  tuft  the  larch  ” and

“ Laburnums,  dropping-wells  of  fire

In  view  of  what  has  been  said  above  about  “ Celestial
Halcyon  Days  ” it  is  perhaps  not  without  significance  that  the
verse  of  which  the  first  line  is  “ where  rosy  plumelets  tuft
the  larch  ” speaks  in  its  fourth  and  last  line  of  “ the  sea-blue
bird  of  March  ”,  i.e.  the  king-fisher  or  halcyon ; and  also  in  view
of  future  developments  to  be  described  later  (v.  pp.  117-122)
that  this  verse  forms  part  of  In  Memoriam,  xci,  wherein  the*
poet  invokes  his  dead  friend  to  appear  to  him  in  visible  form.

Mrs  Verrall  said  nothing  about  these  impressions  of  hers
either  at  the  sitting  or  in  her  written  comments  on  the  record
of  it  which  she  sent  to  J.  G.  P.  They  were,  however,  noted
by  her  in  her  diary  on  February  2.


Allusions  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  Script  to  the  Test-Q,uestion.

We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  definite  references  to
the  subject  of  the  test-question  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  and
in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.  AA^e  begin,  following  chronological  order,
with  those  in  Airs  A^errall’s  script,  and  consider  first  the
statements  of  her  script,  and  next  her  interpretation  of  those
statements.

There  were,  as  might  have  been  expected,  allusions  in  her
script,  during  the  months  of  February  and  Alarch,  to  subjects

1 In  the  same  way  the  first  leafage  of  the  elm  ami  the  first  singing  of  the
thrush  recall  to  her  Browning’s:  “That  the  lowest  boughs  and  the  brushwood
sheaf  Round  the  elm-tree  bole  are  in  tiny  leaf”,  and  his  “wise  thrush”.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


113


associated  more  or  less  definitely  in  her  mind  with  the  three
Greek  words.  Thus,  on  February  12,  the  script  had:

The  voyage  of  Maoldune  faery  lands  forlorn  and  noises  of
the  western  sea  thundering  noises  of  the

western  sea.

It  is  about  Merlin  and  Arthur’s  realm — Merlin’s  prophetic
vision — ‘all  night  long  mid  thundering  noises  of  the
western  sea’  and  how  he  would  not  go — the  passing  of
Arthur.

And  then  the  island  valley  of  Avilion  where  blows  not  any
wind  nor  ever  falls  the  least  light — no  not  that  but
you  have  the  sense — there  falls  no  rain  nor  snow  nor
any  breath  of  wind  shakes  the  least  leaf.

I will  try  to  get  the  idea  elsewhere  conveyed — but  it  is
hard  and  I know  I have  failed  before.  Why  will  you
not  put  the  signature  1 Surely  you  know  now  that  it  is
not  you.  FWHM.

The  allusion  to  Tennyson’s  Mortc  d' Arthur  was  recognised
by  Mrs  Verrall  and  seemed  not  inappropriate.  Indeed,  the
association  in  her  mind  of  the  two  topics,  Plotinus’s  waveless
calm  and  Tennyson’s  poetry,  may  well  have  been  responsible  for
the  appearance  of  the  “ valley  of  Avilion  where  blows  not
any  wind”.^

Again,  on  Feb.  25,  the  script,  which  opened  with  an
indication  that  a cross-correspondence  was  intended  (cf.  p.  270),
went  on  to  refer  to  another  passage  in  Tennyson  suggestive
of  a heavenly  calm : —

I stretch  my  hand  across  the  vapourous  space  the  interlunar
space — twixt  moon  and  earth — where  the  Gods  of  Lucretius
cpmft'  their  nectar.  Do  you  not  understand  1

The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  -world — Well  that  is  bridged
by  the  thought  of  a friend,  bridged  before  for  your  passage,
but  to-day  for  the  passage  of  any  that  will  Avalk  it,  not
in  hope  but  in  faith.

1 “ Faery  lands  forlorn”  is  used  as  the  title  of  a poem  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers
(Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry),  which  contains  the  phrases  : “that  heaven-high
vault  serene”,  and  “unearthly  calms”.  This  may  account  for  the  appearance
of  the  words  “faery  lands  forlorn”  in  the  script.

H


114


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


This  script  claimed  to  come  from  Eector.  The  actual  lines
of  Tennyson,  based  upon  the  famous  passage  in  the  third
book  of  Lucretius,  run  as  follows :

“ The  Gods,  who  liaunt
The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world.

Where  never  creeps  a cloud,  or  moves  a wind,

Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star  of  snow,

Nor  ever  lowest  roll  of  thunder  moans.

Nor  sound  of  human  sorrow  mounts  to  mar
Their  sacred  everlasting  calm  ! And  such,

Not  all  so  fine,  nor  so  divine  a calm,

Not  such  nor  all  unlike  it,  man  may  gain
Lettin"  his  own  life  qo.”

O O

In  the  course  of  an  investigation  quite  unconnected  with
this  experiment,  Mrs  Verrall  on  February  20  had  come
across  a passage  of  Catullus  which  reminded  her  of  some  lines
from  Pii  Memoriam  reminiscent  of  it.  This  led  her  to  re-read
In  MemorianG  on  or  about  February  2 6.  Again,  on  the  morning
of  February  26  IMrs  Verrall  learnt  that  in  her  daughter’s
script’  of  February  25  there  had  been  a quotation  from
Browning’s  Asolando.  These  two  facts  are  mentioned  in  view
of  what  followed  in  Mrs  Yerrall’s  script.

On  February  20  the  script  had  its  first  definite  statement
about  avTo?  ovpaioi  aKv/uLcov  as  follows  : —

avTus  otSpai'os  dKVjiMv.  I think  I have  made  him  [probably
“Rector”]  understand  but  the  best  reference  to  it  will
be  made  elsewhere,  not  Mrs  Piper  at  all.  I think  I
have  got  some  words  from  the  poem  written  down — if
not  stars  and  satellites,  another  phrase  will  do  as  well.
And  may  there  be  no  moaning  at  the  bar — my  Pilot
face  to  face.

The  last  poems  of  Tennyson  and  Browning  should  be  com-
pared. There  are  references  in  her  writing  to  both—
Helen’s  I mean.

^ For  Mrs  VerraU's  knowledge  of  In  Memoriam,  see  below  p.  117.

^ Miss  Verrall  knew  nothing  of  the  test-question  that  liad  been  put  to  Mrs
Piper,  or  of  the  contents  of  INIrs  VerraU’s  script.


115


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

The  fighter  fights  one  last  fight,  but  there  is  peace  for  him
too  in  the  end — and  peace  for  the  seer  who  knew  that
after — after — the  earthquake,  and  the  fire  and  the  wind,
after,  after,  in  the  stillness  conies  the  voice  that  can  be
heard.

Some  points  in  this  script  are  still  obscure,  but  this  much
is  certain : two  lines  were  quoted  from  Tennyson’s  poem

Crossing  the  Bar}  and  it  is  clearly  implied  that  Tennyson,  ‘ the
seer  who  knew’  (as  opposed  to  Browning  ‘the  fighter’),  was
aware  that  communion  with  the  unseen  took  place  under
conditions  of  external  calm.  At  any  rate  so  clear  was  the
implication  to  Mrs  Amrrall  that  it  suggested  to  her  the  idea
that  there  might  be  a definite  passage  in  Tennyson  about
spiritual  communion  under  such  conditions.

At  the  time  the  script  was  produced  Mrs  AMrrall  took  “ the
seer  who  kneiv  ” to  mean  Tennyson ; she  also  interpreted
“ after  the  earthquake  and  the  fire  ” etc.,  as  an  allusion  to  the
communion  of  Moses  with  God  on  Alount  Sinai ; though,  as
a matter  of  fact,  the  allusion  is  certainly  to  the  appearance
of  God  to  Elijah  on  Horeb.  The  significance  of  the  real
allusion  and  the  possible  significance  of  the  automatist’s  mis-
interpretation of  it  will  be  explained  later.  (See  pp.  124-5).

On  March  6 the  script,  written  at  10.45  a.m.,  was  more
explicit : —

I have  tried  to  tell  him  of  the  calm  the  heavenly  and
earthly  calm  but  I do  not  think  it  is  clear.  I think  you
would  understand  if  you  could  see  the  record.  Tell  me
wdien  you  have  understood.

Calm  is  the  sea —

and  in  my  heart  if  calm  at  all,  if  any  calm,  a calm  despair.

That  is  onl}"  part  of  the  answer — just  as  it  is  not  the  final
thought.  The  symphony  does  not  close  upon  despair —
but  on  harmony.  So  does  the  poem.  AVait  for  the  last
word.

This  script,  then,  which  was  signed  “ Tuus  ” — a signature
often  used  in  j\Irs  AMrrall's  script  to  mean  Myers — definitely

^The  actual  lines  are:  “And  may  there  be  no  moaning  at  the  bar,  when  I
put  out  to  sea”  aud  “I  hope  to  see  my  Pilot  face  to  face,  when  I have  crost
the  bar.”


116


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


said  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  tell  “ him  ” ^ of  the
“ heavenly  and  earthly  calm  ”,  and  that  this  would  be  recognised
by  Mrs  Verrall  when  she  saw  “the  record” — the  record,  that  is,
of  a Piper-sitting.  Then  by  means  of  a textual  quotation :
“ And  in  my  heart,  if  calm  at  all,  If  any  calm,  a calm
despair  ” : reference  was  made  to  the  ‘ calm  of  despair  ’ of  an
early  section  of  In  Mcmoriam  (xi),  with  the  comment  that
that  was  not  the  final  thought  of  the  poem.  To  say  that  the
‘ calm  of  despair  ’ of  In  Mcmoriam  was  not  the  final  thought
is  to  imply  that  in  the  poem  is  another  calm,  not  of  despair,
which  is  the  final  thought.

Finally,  on  March  11,  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  combined  allu-
sions to  Plato  and  Tennyson  with  phrases  about  “ unseen  or
lialfseen  companionship  ”,  “ voiceless  communing  and  unseen
Presence  felt  ” in  such  a way  as  to  suggest  that  both  Plato
and  Tennyson  were  aware  of  supersensuoirs  modes  of  com-
munication. The  language  of  this  script  is  reminiscent  of  the
last  stanza  of  F.  W.  H.  Alyers’s  Stanzas  on  Mr  Watts’  Collected
Works.

A copy  of  it  is  given  in  Appendix  e.

'“Him”  or  “lie”  is  used  eleven  times  in  Mrs  Verrall's  script  during  the
period  under  review  without  explicit  indication  of  who  is  meant.  In
five  instances  it  clearly  means  one  of  the  group  of  spirit  collaborators  who  are
engaged  in  influencing  the  automatist’s  writing ; and  in  one  of  these  five
instances  it  seems  to  point  to  Rector  as  the  particular  collaborator.  In  two
instances  it  might  apply  either  to  Rector  or  to  J.  G.  P.  ; once  only  does  it
seem  certainly  to  refer  to  J.  G.  P.,  and  twice  it  refers  to  an  indefinite  person,
who  is  neither  a communicating  spirit  nor  J.  G.  P.

The  words  “I  have  tried  to  tell  him  of  the  calm”  etc.  might  mean:  “I,
Myers,  have  tried  to  tell  J.  G.  P.  through  Mrs  Piper  ” ; but  more  probably
they  are  intended  to  mean:  “I,  Myers,  have  tried  to  tell  Rector  of  the  calm
etc.  in  order  that  he  may  express  my  message  clearly  through  Mrs  Piper  ”.

Thrice  at  least,  if  not  oftener,  it  is  stated  that  Myersp  caught  Rector  between
two  trances  and  gave  him  a word  to  be  repeated  through  Mrs  Piper:  “ Abt
Vogler”  in  one  instance  (sitting  of  April  ‘24),  “Homer’s  Iliad”  (sitting  of
April  .30)  and  “Plotinus”  (sitting  of  May  6).  I imagine  that  attention  was
thus  drawn  to  this  particular  modus  operandi  in  order  to  indicate  that  when
some  specially  important  or  difficult  word  has  to  be  conveyed  to  Rector  for
reproduction  in  Mrs  Piper’s  script  it  is  easier  to  convey  it  at  some  time  other
than  that  during  which  Rector  is  actually  engaged  as  amanuensis.

Note  hy  J.  G.  P.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Axitomatisms.


117


Mrs  Yerrall’s  Interpretation  of  her  Script.

The  continued  references  in  her  script  to  Tennyson,  the
introduction  of  In  Memoriam  and  especially  the  recurrence  (on
March  11)  of  Tennyson’s  name  in  connexion  with  communion
with  the  unseen,  led  Mrs  A^errall  not  only  to  believe  that
there  was  a more  definite  connexion  between  Tennyson’s  In
Memoriam  and  the  passage  from  Plotinus  than  she  had
hitherto  recognised,  but  also  to  read  the  poem  again  in  the
hope  of  tracing  it.  Her  knowledge  of  In  Memormm  dated
back  many  years  to  the  days  of  her  girlhood,  when  she  was
wholly  ignorant  of  Greek.  Though  exceedingly  familiar  with
the  poem  itself  she  had  made  no  detailed  study  of  it,  had
read  no  commentary  on  it,  nor  had  she  ever  read  any  Life  of
Tennyson.^  But  now  on  re-reading  In  Memoriam  in  the  light
of  the  suggestions  thrown  out  by  her  script,  she  was  at  once
struck  with  the  resemblance  in  language  as  well  as  in  thought
between  the  stanzas  (sections  xciv — v)  which  describe  the
poet’s  trance  and  its  antecedent  conditions  and  the  passage  in
the  fifth  book  of  the  Enncadcs  where  Plotinus  lays  down  the
antecedent  conditions  desirable  for  ecstasy — the  passage  namely


^ In  the  Memoir  of  Tennyson  by  his  son  is  a letter  addressed  to  the  author
by  Myers,  which  opens  thus  : — •

“You  have  asked  me,  knowing  well  what  pleasure  the  request  would  give
me,  to  send  you  a few  words,  not  of  formal  criticism,  but  of  expression  of
intimate  feeling  as  to  your  father's  work  ; — your  father,  a greater  man  than
whom  I have  never  looked  and  shall  never  look  upon.  You  tell  me  to
approach  the  subject,  ‘ not  from  the  side  of  Plotinus,  but  from  the  side  of
Virgil.’  I understand  what  you  mean.  On  your  father’s  prophetic  message,
as  I must  deem  it,  I have  already  said  my  say  ; and  the  other  point  at  which
my  sympathy  was  deepest  was  iu  our  common  veneration  for  Virgil.”

Mrs  Verrall  came  across  this  letter,  as  noted  in  her  diary,  on  May  18,
1907,  when  she  for  the  first  time  read  the  Memoir  of  Tennyson  by  Hallam,
Lord  Tennyson.

The  letter  suggests  that  Tennyson  may  have  talked  with  Myers  about  the
influence  of  Plotinus  on  his  thought  and  writings.

Since  writing  the  above  I came  across  a footnote  to  a passage  in  Myers’s
Modern  Poets  and  Cosmic  Law  (p.  168)  which  states  that  the  line  taken  in
his  essay  Tennyson  as  Prophet — in  which  stress  is  laid  on  the  affinity  between
Tennyson  and  Plotinus — was  based  iu  part  upon  Tennyson’s  own  conversation.

Note  by  J.  G.  P.


[part


118  ./.  G.  Piddington.

whicli  contains  the  words  cwto?  ovpavo<i  ukv/j-oov  and  which
is  translated  in  the  second  vohune  of  Hv/nmn  Pcrsoncdity.

Further  investigation  showed  that  though  commentators  on
Tennyson  have  pointed  out  the  analogy  between  his  trance  and
that  of  Plotinus,  it  had  not  hitherto  been  noted  that  the
antecedent  conditions  of  external  calm  are  postulated  by  both,
and  that  the  actual  language  of  Tennyson  closely  resembles
that  of  Plotinus.  Mrs  Yerrall’s  investigations  were  subse-
quently recorded  in  a paper  published  in  The  Modern  Language
PtevicxD  for  July  1907,  which  the  courtesy  of  the  Editor  has
enabled  me  to  reproduce  here.


\Tdeiyeinted  from  die  Modern  Language  Review.  Pol.  II.  No.  4.

July  1907.]

A Possible  Peminiscence  of  Plotinus  in  Tennyson.

i\Iore  than  one  commentator  has  drawn  the  attention  of
readers  of  In  Memoriam,  xcv,  to  the  similarity  between  the
experience  of  the  poet  as  there  described  and  that  of  Plotinus,
as  recorded  by  his  disciple  Porphyry  and  by  himself  in  the
Enncadcs  (Enn.  iv,  viii,  1 ; vi,  ix,  9,  10,  11).  But,  so  far  as
I am  aware,  no  one  has  noticed  the  close  resemblance  between
the  conditions  which  accompany  the  trance  of  the  poet  in  In
Mernoriam  and  those  which  are  prescribed  by  Plotinus  for  the
production  of  trance  or  ecstacy — a resemblance  which  appears
to  be  more  than  accidental.

In  the  fifth  book  of  the  Enneades  (v,  i,  2,  3,  4)  Plotinus
demands  certain  antecedent  conditions  for  the  soul  that  would
find  communion  with  the  Great  Soul.  Before  contemplation
of  the  Great  Soul,  the  individual  soul  must  be  freed  from
deception  and  every  kind  of  beguilement  and  be  in  a state
of  peace.  But  not  only  must  its  own  mental  and  bodily
surroundings  be  peaceful ; the  surrounding  external  world  must
also  be  at  peace.  ‘The  earth  must  be  calm,  the  sea  calm,
and  the  air,  and  the  very  heaven  itself  without  a wave.’  ^

- Reading  with  Kirchhoff  aKij/xiov.  There  is  some  disagreement  as  to  the  exact
text  of  this  passage,  but  none  as  to  its  meaning.


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  119

The  trance  of  In  Mcmoriarn  and  its  preceding  conditions  are
described  in  sections  xc — xcv,  which,  as  Mr  Bradley  ^ points
out,  form  ‘ a group  of  closely  connected  sections  on  the  present
communion  or  contact  of  the  living  and  the  dead.  It  opens
with  the  expression  of  desire  for  such  communion,  and  closes
with  the  description  of  an  experience  in  which  this  desire
seems  to  be  fulfilled.’  The  poet  after  calling  on  his  friend
to  come  back  (xc),  to  come  back  in  visible  form  (xci),  rejects
the  wish  upon  refiexion  (xcii),  but  desires  a direct  contact  of
soul  and  soul  (xciii).  Then  in  the  next  section  (xciv),  he
demands  that  the  spirit  desiring  communion  with  the  dead  be
in  a state  of  internal  calm,  and  in  the  opening  of  section  xcv
he  lays  emphasis  on  the  external  calm  of  the  evening  and
night  as  appropriate  precedent  conditions  of  trance.

Thus,  in  xciv,  he  writes :

In  vain  shalt  thou,  or  any,  call
The  spirits  from  their  golden  day,

Except,  like  them,  thou  too  canst  say,

My  spirit  is  at  peace  with  all.

They  haunt  the  silence  of  the  breast.

Imaginations  calm  and  fair.

The  memory  like  a cloudless  air,

The  conscience  as  a sea  at  rest :

and  again,  in  xcv,  he  speaks  of :

calm  that  let  the  tapers  burn
Unwavering:  not  a cricket  chirr’d:

O

The  brook  alone  far-off  was  heard,

and  in  his  own  note  ^ on  this  passage  Tennyson  says : ‘ It
was  a marvellously  still  night,  and  I asked  my  brother
Charles  to  listen  to  the  brook,  which  we  had  never  heard  so
far-off  before.’  ^

' A Commentary  on  Tennyson’s  In  Memoriam,  by  A.  C.  Bradley,  2nd  Edition,
pp.  184-192.

^ See  In  Memoriam  annotated  by  the  author,  p.  256.

The  whole  of  section  xcv  should  be  read  as  it  contains  other  passages
emphasising  the  external  calm.  Mote  by  J.G.P.~\


120  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Then  follows  the  description  of  the  ecstatic  condition  :

And  all  at  once  it  seem’d  at  last
The  living  soul  was  flash’d  on  mine,

And  mine  in  this  was  wound,  and  whirl’d
About  empyreal  heights  of  thought.

And  came  on  that  which  is,  and  caught
The  deep  pulsations  of  the  world,

jTloniaii  music  measuring  out

The  steps  of  Time — the  shocks  of  Chance —

The  blows  of  death.

Nor  is  this  all ; a similar  correspondence  between  external
and  internal  surroundings  is  suggested  when  he  tells  of  the

o OO

passing  of  the  condition :

At  length  my  trance
Was  cancell’d,  strikeu  thro’  with  doubt;

the  termination,  that  is  to  say,  and  the  doubt  came  with  the
uncertainty  of  the  morning  dusk,  and  with  the  rising  of  the
breeze  of  dawn  ;

Till  now  the  doubtful  dusk  reveal’d

The  knolls  once  more  where,  couch’d  at  ease.

The  white  kine  glimmer’d,  and  the  trees
Laid  their  dark  arms  about  the  field  ;

And  suck’d  from  out  the  distant  gloom
A breeze  began  to  tremble  o’er
The  large  leaves  of  the  sycamore.

And  fluctuate  all  the  still  perfume.

And  gathering  freshlier  overhead.

Rock’d  the  full-foliaged  elms  and  swung
The  heavy-folded  rose,  and  flung
The  lilies  to  and  fro,  and  said

‘ The  dawn,  the  dawn  ’ and  died  away.

Admitting  that  Tennyson,  like  Plotinus,  associated  with  the
trance-condition  familiar  to  him  ^ circumstances  of  external  calm

^ ‘ I have  often  had  that  feeling  of  being  whirled  up  and  rapt  into  the  Great
Soul.’  Annotated  eddtion,  in  257.


LTii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  121

as  well  as  of  iuternal  peace,  it  remains  to  consider  whether
this  is  more  than  ati  independent  agreement  of  sensation.  The
question  hardly  admits  of  a certain  answer  without  evidence,
which  I have  not  found,  as  to  Tennyson’s  reading.  But  the
following  considerations  perhaps  suggest  that  the  resemblance
is  not  accidental  and  that  the  writings  of  Plotinus  were  not
unknown  to  Tennyson  and  were  consciously  or  unconsciously
recalled  to  his  memory  when  he  was  describing  his  own  similar
experience.

1.  There  is  a certain  resemblance  between  the  phraseology

of  the  above  quoted  passages  from  In  Memoriam  and  the
language  of  Plotinus.  The  ‘ Hash  ’ and  the  ‘ spirits’  golden
day  ’ are  paralleled  in  Plotinus  ^ who  speaks  of  ‘ the  illuminating
entry  (eia-iovcrar  kuI  eia-Xd/u—ovcrav)  of  the  soul  ’ bringing  a
‘ golden  vision  ’ (ypucroei^j/  o\L-(r)  and  again  of  the  ‘ effulgence  ’
(7r€plXaiui.\lnp)  surrounding  the  contemplative  soul.  The  word
‘ .(Bonian  ’ ^ recurs  several  times  in  Plotinus ; in  his  trance  he
sees  that  Time  is  an  image  of  Eternity,  ‘ the  real  ^Eon,’  and
that  its  three  divisions  are  one,®  there  being  no  past,  no  future,
only  ‘ that  which  is ’ (d  orrw?  aicor,  ov  fuiueiTaL  yporo?  . . . kui
TO  ecTTLV  ael,  kqi  oi/Safxov  to  jmeXXor  ...  ouSe  to  TrapeX>]XvOo?).
The  calm  of  earth  and  heaven  desired  by  Plotinus  is  directly
expressed  in  section  xcv  of  In  Memoriam  ; the  calm  of  air  and
sea  appears  indirectly  in  the  images  of  section  xciv : ‘ The

memory  like  a cloudless  aAr,  the  conscience  as  the  sea.  at
rest.’

2.  The  passage  of  Plotinus  describing  the  required  ante-
cedent conditions  of  ecstasy  is  unmistakably  paraphrased  by  S.
Augustine  in  a famous  chapter  of  the  Confessions,^  a work  with
which  it  is  believed  that  other  passages  of  In  Memoriam  show
an  acquaintance.^  But  there  are  phrases  in  In  Memoriam  and
not  in  S.  Augustine  which  resemble  the  phraseology  of  Plotinus,
and  which  must  therefore  have  been  derived,  if  derived  at  all,

^ Enn.,  V,  i,  2-6.  -See  In  Mem,,  xcv,  above  quoted.

® See  also  In  Mem.,  xxvi,  stanza  3,  and  Mr  Bradley’s  note  thereon.

* Confess.,  IX,  10:  ‘Si  cui  sileat  tumnltus  carnis,  sileant  pliantasiae  terrae
et  aquarum  et  aeris,  sileant  et  poll,  et  ipsa  sibi  anima  sileat,  ...  attingimus
aeternam  Sapientiam  super  omnia  manentem.’

® See  In  Mem.,  i,  1 ; iv,  1 ; viii,  3;  xxvi,  3;  Ixx.xv,  16;  and  illustrative
quotations  in  Mr  Bradley’s  Commentary  on  those  passages.


122


J.  G.  Piddmgton.


[part


direct  from  the  original.  It  is  therefore  hardly  possible  that
the  allusion  in  S.  Augustine  has  any  direct  connexion  with
these  sections  of  hi  Mcmoriam,  though  it  may  have  helped  to
recall  the  original  passage  of  Plotinus.

3.  It  is  known  that  Arthur  Plallam  was  a student  of
philosophy  and  the  volume  of  his  Eemains  in  Verse  and  Prose
contains  passages  showing  familiarity  with  the  doctrines  not
only  of  Plato  but  of  the  Xeo-Platonists.’-  That  the  account
of  the  ecstasy  of  Plotinus  was  known  to  him  in  the  words  of
the  author  is  proved  by  the  appearance  in  his  Essay  on  Cicero "
of  an  allusion  in  the  original  Greek  to  the  experience  of
Plotinus.  ‘ The  (puya  ,uovov  Trpo?  /aorop  preached  by  the  later
Platonists  was  not  possible  for  him.’  Plotinus  is  the  ‘ later
Platonist  ’ who  preaches  ‘ the  Flight  of  the  One  to  the  One.’
The  Enncadcs  of  Plotinus  ends  with  the  description,  revealed
to  him  in  ecstasy,  of  ‘ the  life  of  gods  and  of  godlike  and
blessed  men,  a release  from  every  earthly  thought,  a life  un-
touched by  earthly  pleasure,  the  Flight  of  the  One  to  the
One.’  ®

But  whether  or  not  we  suppose  a direct  connexion  between
Plotinus  and  Tennyson,  it  seems  probable  from  the  description
in  Pn  Mcmoriam,  sections  xciv  and  xcv,  that  some  importance
was  attached  by  Tennyson  to  calm  as  a condition  of  trance,
and  this  sentiment  is  perhaps  further  reflected  in  the  phrase
of  section  cxxii  ‘ in  placid  awe,’  which  seems  to  refer  to  the
earlier  experience.  This  phrase,  which  has  caused  difficulty  to
.some  critics,  is  certainly  more  appropriate  if  the  adjective  is  no
mere  descriptive  epithet,  and  if  placidity  is  regarded  by
Tennyson,  as  it  was  by  Plotinus,  as  an  essential  condition  of
ecstasy.

Margaret  de  G.  Verrall.


The  discovery  of  this  close  parallelism  between  Pn  Memoriam
and  the  passage  from  Plotinus  seemed  to  Mrs  Verrall  both
intere.sting  in  itself,  and  also  explanatory  of  the  choice  of  the
words  avTos  ovparoi  dKOjo-ow  by  Myers  as  a motto  to  his  poem


’^Remains,  pp.  160,  165,  174.
^Enn.,  VI,  ix,  11.


-Remains,  p.  165.


LVII.]


123


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

ou  Tennyson.  This  poem  alludes  to  Tennyson’s  desire  for
peace  at  death  as  expressed  in  Crossing  the  Bar:

“ Once  more  he  rises ; lulled  and  still,

Hushed  to  his  tune  the  tideways  roll ;

These  waveless  heights  of  evening  thrill
^Vith  voyage  of  the  summoned  Soul.”

{Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  p.  117.)

Hitherto  Mrs  Verrall  had  seen  in  the  motto  from  Plotinus
only  an  allusion  to  Tennyson’s  own  desire  that  there  migdit  be
no  moaning  at  the  bar  when  he  put  out  to  sea,  and  to  its
fulfilment  at  the  time  of  his  death. ^ But  a much  deeper
significance  attaches  to  the  choice  of  the  motto,  when  it  is
recognised  that  Tennyson  himself,  like  Plotinus,  desired  con-
ditions of  external  peace  before  attaining  in  life  the  trance
condition,  in  which  he  felt  as  though  he  had  communion
with  the  unseen  world.

It  thus  appears  that  after  the  test-question  had  been  put  to
Myersp  a series  of  communications  by  Myersy  furnished  a new
and  cogent  explanation  of  Avhy  Frederic  Myers  had  associated
the  words  aurd?  ovparo?  uKujuuor  with  Tennyson.  No  such
explanation  had  ever  before  consciously  occurred  to  Mrs  Verrall.
She  knew,  of  course,  that  the  words  of  Plotinus  had  been
associated  by  Myers  with  Tenny^son  because  they  formed  the
motto  of  his  poem  on  Tennyson  ; and  she  supposed  that  he
had  chosen  them  for  this  purpose  simply  because  the  lines  in
Tennyson’s  Crossing  the  Bar:

“And  may  there  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar.

When  I put  out  to  sea.

But  such  a tide  as  moving  seems  asleep.

Too  strong  for  sound  and  foam.

When  that  which  drew  from  out  the  boundless  deep
Turns  again  home.”

had  reminded  him  of  Plotinus’s  calm  of  earth  and  sea  and  air
and  Heaven  which  favours  communion  with  the  Great  Soul.

^ See  contemporary  accounts  in  newspapers,  which  were  the  source  of  Mrs
Verrall’s  know'ledge  of  the  atmospheric  conditions  at  the  time  of  Tennyson's
death.


124


[part


J.  G,  Picldmgton.

That  such  was  one  reason  for  the  association  is  made
perfectly  clear  by  the  poem  itself.  But  neither  in  the  ])oem
itself  nor  elsewhere  in  his  writings  is  there  a hint  that  Myers
associated  the  passage  of  Plotinus  with  Tennyson  because  of
the  connection  between  it  and  sections  xciv  and  xcv  of  In
Memoriam.

On  March  12  Mrs  Yerrall  made  a detailed  entry  in  her
diary  recording  her  discovery  of  the  ])arallelism  between
sections  xciv  and  xcv  of  In  Memoriam  and  the  passage
from  Plotinus,  and  her  belief  that  this  parallelism  explained
why  Myers  had  associated  kul  avTog  ovpavM  ukvixwv  with
Tennyson  (see  Appendix  On  March  13  she  brought  a

summary  of  this  entry  in  her  diary  with  detailed  explanations
and  references  to  London,  and  on  her  arrival  at  20  Hanover
Square  handed  it  in  a closed  envelope  to  Miss  Johnson  for
transmission  to  J.  G.  P.  before  she  had  any  knowledge  whether
any  attempt,  other  than  that  of  January  30,  had  been  made
by  the  Pi|)er  trance-personalities  to  answer  her  test-question.

One  small  point  remains  which  needs  explanation.  Mrs
Verrall,  it  will  be  remembered,  took  the  last  lines  of  her
script  of  Feb.  26  to  be  an  allusion  to  Moses’  communion  with
God  on  Sinai.  This  inter|)retation  she  arrived  at  before  she
had  begun  to  suspect  that  there  was  any  connexion  between
avTo?  oilpard?  uKvp-wv  and  In  Memoriam.  Alter  she  discovered
the  connexion  she  considered  this  supposed  allusion  to  be  the
first  emergence  in  her  script  of  In  Memoriam,  her  reason  being
that  the  last  lines  of  section  xcvi  of  that  poem  run  thus : —

“ And  Power  was  in  him  in  the  night,

MTiich  makes  the  darkness  and  the  light.

And  dwells  not  in  the  light  alone.

But  in  the  darkness  and  the  cloud.

As  over  Sinai’s  peaks  of  old,

M'hile  Israel  made  their  gods  of  gold,

Altho’  the  trumpet  blew  so  loud.”

Now,  as  already  stated,  the  allusion  in  the  script  must  be
to  Elijah  ^ on  Horeb,  not  to  Moses  on  Sinai,  for  on  Sinai  there

1 It  is,  perhaps,  not  without  significance  that  “ Elijah  ” was  announced  by
the  trance-personalities  during  the  sitting  of  May  7 as  the  subject  of  a
cross-correspondence  experiment  with  Mrs  Holland.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  125

was  neither  wind  nor  stillness  : on  the  contrary,  “ Moses  spake
and  God  answered”  “when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  sounded
long,  and  waxed  louder  and  louder

Strangely  enough  neither  at  the  time  nor  at  any  subsequent
time  did  Mrs  Vei’rall  recognise  that  the  allusion  in  her  script
was  to  Elijah.  Her  failure  to  do  so  is  all  the  more  curious
because  Elijah’s  communing  with  God  is  an  apt  illustration  of
intercourse  with  the  unseen  occurring  when  nature  is  at  peace,
whereas  the  case  of  Moses  is  in  that  respect  inapt ; and,  more-
over, the  Epilogue  of  Human  Personality,  which  she  read
carefully  about  the  end  of  April  1907,  contains  the  c^uotation
(Vol.  II.  p.  276)  “After  the  tempest  a still  small  voice”.

Can  her  misinterpretation  be  accounted  for  ?

Perhaps  it  may  be  in  some  such  fashion  as  this :

The  scribe  on  Feb.  26  was  endeavouring  to  convey  to  the
automatist  two  distinct  though  allied  ideas:  (1)  Elijah’s  com-
munion with  God  in  the  calm  that  followed  upon  the  “great
and  strong  wind”  and  the  earthquake  and  the  fire;  (2)  Moses’
communion  with  God  on  Mount  Sinai ; the  first  as  an  illus-
tration of  communion  with  the  Divine  during  external  calm,
the  second  as  an  illusti’ation  of  communion  with  the  Divine
and  also  as  an  indirect  reference  to  In  Memoriam.  The  first
idea  got  expressed  in  the  script,  the  second  failed  to  gain
written  expression  but  reached  the  automatist’s  consciousness.
Mrs  Verrall  would  not  under  ordinary  circumstances  have  con-
fused the  two  incidents,  but  her  normal  mind  was  influenced
by  her  subconscious  mind  (which  had  received  and  perhaps
grasped  the  importance  of  the  second  impression)  and  so  mis-
took the  recorded  for  the  unrecorded  impression : a mistake
the  more  easily  committed  because  of  the  analogy  between
the  two.


First  Definite  Answers  to  the  Test-Question  in
Mrs  Piper’s  Trance.

We  return  now  to  the  other  side  of  the  matter.

The  references  to  the  subject  of  the  test-C[uestion  in  Mrs
Piper’s  trance  were  as  follows : —

On  Feb.  6 J.  G.  P.  read  to  the  trance-personalities  a letter


126


J.  G.  PidcUvgton.  [part

from  Mrs  Verrall,  in  which,  after  saying  that  it  seemed  to  her
that  on  January  30  there  was  evidence  of  an  understanding  on
the  part  of  Myersp  of  her  question,  she  asked  for  a clearer
statement  of  wliat  the  Greek  words  recalled  to  him.  (See
Appendix  ;/.)

On  March  6 Mj'ersp  in  the  course  of  announcing  various
cross-cori'espondences  which  he  claimed  to  have  transmitted  to
Mrs  Verrall  gave  without  explanation  three  words  :

“ Cloudless
Skv

Horizon  ”

followed  the  phrase:  “a  cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon”.
(See  Appendix  6.)  In  the  waking-stage  Mrs  Piper  uttered  the
words:  “moaning  at  the  bar  when  I put  out  to  sea”.  A little
later  she  pronounced  the  name  “Arthur  Hallam  ” C then  almost
directly  said  it  again:  “ Arthur  Hallam.  Good-bye.  Margaret”,
Margaret  being  Mi's  Verrall’s  Christian  name.  (For  the  use  of
“Margaret”  to  indicate  a cross-cori’espondence  with  Mrs  Verrall
cf.  pp.  218  and  27S,  and  Proc.  Part  LY.  p.  313.)  Finally  she
spoke  this  unfinished  sentence:  “There  was  some  man  Arthur
Hallam.  Myers  says  it  was  he — he  about”.  (See  Appendix  £.)

Though  no  claim  was  made  to  have  given  a translation  of
the  words  of  the  test  question  in  the  phrase  “ cloudless  sky
beyond  the  horizon”  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  suppose  that
chance  had  furnished  so  satisfactory  a para])hrase  as  this  of
acTO?  ovpavo?  aKu/uucp ; but  ])receded  as  the  phrase  was  by
references  to  Mrs  Verrall  and  followed  by  tlie  quotation  trom
Crossing  the  Bar  and  the  name  “Arthur  Hallam”,  it  is  prac-
tically impos-sible  to  attribute  its  appropriateness  to  chance.
Moreover,  this  para])hrase  seems  to  indicate  knowledge  not  only
of  the  meaning  of  the  three  words  of  the  test-question  but  also
of  their  original  context.  The  passage  in  the  original  is :
j/crcyo?  yUei'  yi/,  //Vcyo?  de  OaXacraa  kul  ai]p  kq'i  avTO?  ovpavo^
aKvp-wV-  i.e.  “calm  be  the  earth,  and  calm  the  sea,  and  the  air
{ahp)  and  the  heaven  (oi'pai'Ui)  itself  waveless.”  d')]p  is  the
lower  atmosphere  which  surrounds  the  earth;  oi’pard?  is  the

1 These  words  when  first  uttered  wei'e  heard  not  by  J.  G.  P.  but  by  Miss
Newton  who  knew  nothing  whatever  about  the  test-question.


127


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

sky  that  lies  beyond  the  dhp,  the  vault  of  heaven.  We  often
use  “sky”  in  the  sense  of  dhp,  for  instance  in  such  a phrase
as;  “That’s  a very  storiny-looking  sky”.  It  would  seem,  then,
as  though  by  adding  “ beyond  the  horizon  ” to  “ cloudless  sky  ”
Myersp  sought  to  imply  that  by  “sky”  ovpapo?  not  dijp  was
meant.

On  March  13  Myensp  said:  “I  saw  Mrs  Verrall  and  gave
her  a sitru  like  this  (a  rouo-h  drawino’  was  then  made)  and
said  I have  crossed  it  ”.  J.  G.  P.  then  asked  what  the  drawing
represented,  and  in  reply  the  word  “BAPt”  was  written  in
capital  letters.  Myersp  at  once  added:  “I  thought  she  might
get  a glimpse  of  my  understanding  of  her  Greek  ” : a remark
which  to  J.  G.  P.  in  his  foolishness  seemed  utter  nonsense.
Even  the  explanation  of  the  drawing  as  a “Bar”  failed  to
remind  J.  G.  P.  of  the  quotation  from  Crossing  the  Bar  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  2G  ; so  from  him  the  trance-per-
sonalities received  neither  hint  nor  encouragement  on  this
point.

Later  in  the  sitting  J.  G.  P.  read  aloud  an  extract  from  a
letter  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  written  on  iMarch  12,  in  which  she  .said
that  since  her  last  sitting  Avith  i\lrs  Piper  on  Jan.  3U  she  had
learnt  from  her  own  script  the  reason  why  af-b?  ovparo?  dhcupon'
had  had  certain  associations  for  IMyei's ; that  she  had  before
known  the  associations  but  not  the  reason  for  them;^  and  that
she  understood  the  allusion  to  larches  and  laburnum.  hio
further  indications  as  to  Mrs  Yerrall’s  interpretations  were
given  either  to  the  entranced  Mrs  Piper,  or  to  J.  G.  P.,  who
was  absolutely  in  the  dark  and  received  no  enlightenment
whatever  from  Mrs  Verrall’s  letter.  (See  Appendix  k.)

Up  to  this  time  J.  G.  P.  had  not  seen  Mrs  Terrall’s  script
of  March  11  (Appendix  e)  with  its  combination  of  Plato,
Tennyson  and,  Myers,  or  her  notes  as  to  the  connection
betAveen  the  trance-conditions  of  Plotinus  and  Tennyson.  He
had,  it  is  true,  seen  the  script  of  Feb.  26  (v.  p.  114)  Avith
its  reference  to  Crossing  the  Bar,  and  the  script  of  March  6

1 That  is,  she  knew  the  associations  with  Plotinus  and  that  Myers  had
used  Plotinus’s  words  as  a motto  for  his  poem  on  Tennyson  ; but  she  did  not
know  or  suspect  why  he  had  so  used  them  until  her  script  showed  her  the
connection  between  them  and  In  Memoriain  xciv  and  xcv.


1*28


[part


J.  G.  Piddmgton.

(v.  p.  115)  with  its  quotation  from  Pi  MernGviam,  but  he  had
not  recognised  tliat  it  was  a quotation  from  this  poem,  nor,
indeed,  that  it  was  a quotation  at  alld

Towards  the  end  of  this  sitting  of  March  13  J.  G.  P.,  in
reply  to  a question  asked  by  Myersp,  admitted  that  Mrs  Verrall
had  written  “ may  there  be  no  moaning  at  the  bar  ”,  though
she  had  not  drawn  a bar.  Myersp  then  immediately  reminded

^ Whatever  the  source  of  the  knowledge  displayed  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance
concerning  the  meaning  of  and  the  associations  connected  with  ai’ros  ovpavoi
aKVjxwv  may  have  been,  it  was  certainly  not  my  mind.  I knew,  of  course,
what  Kal  and  avrds  and  oi’pavos  meant  as  individual  words,  but  I did  not  know
what  a.Kvp.wv  meant : a lack  of  knowledge  which  would  not  have  been  surprising
in  the  case  of  a far  better  Greek  scholar  than  myself,  as  the  wmrd  is  a rare
one.  I have  never  read  any  Plotinus  ; I did  not  remember,  though  I must
once  have  know'll,  that  the  second  volume  of  Human  Personality  contained  a
translated  extract  from  the  Enneades  of  Plotinus  ; and  I did  not  know  that
the  Greek  words  of  Mrs  Verrall's  test-question  formed  the  motto  of  Myei’s’s
poem  on  Tennyson.  I possess  no  copy  of  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  and
though  I believe  I may  once  or  twice  have  had  the  S.P. R.  Library  copy  of  the
book  in  my  hands  and  glanced  at  a few  jiages  of  the  prose,  I had  not  read  any
of  the  poems  for  the  good  and  sufficient  reason  that,  though  an  admirer  of
Myers’s  prose-style,  I fail  to  appreciate  him  as  a poet.  I had,  moreover,
piurposely  refrained  from  attempting  to  make  out  or  guess  at  the  meaning  of
the  Greek  words  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  question.  When  the  words  “Cloudless
sky  beyond  the  horizon”  were  written  in  the  Piper  trance,  I guessed  that  they
were  a translation  or  paraphrase  of  auros  ovpavbi  a.Kvp.wu,  and  I surmised  tliat
it  aKup-wr  could  really  bear  the  sense  of  “cloudless”  it  must  be  a metaphorical
sense,  and  that  the  original  significance  must  be  “without  W'aves  ”.  I verified
my  guess  a few  hours  after  the  sitting  by  consulting  a Liddell  and  Scott,
which,  however,  gave  me  no  clue  to  the  author  of  the  words  of  the  test-
question,  as  the  reference  to  Plotinus  was  not  given  in  the  edition  which  I
used,  nor  is  it,  I believe,  in  any  edition.  Neither  the  reference  to  “Larches”
and  “Laburnum”  in  the  trance,  nor  that  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  letter  read  at  the
sitting  of  March  13,  conveyed  any  hint  to  my  mind.  I have  read  In  Memoriam
often,  and  am  familiar  with  the  two  different  passages  in  which  these  words
occur,  but  the  two  words  as  conjoined  in  the  trance  did  not  remind  me  of
either  of  these  passages.  As  stated  above,  I had  seen  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Feb.  '26,  but,  if  I thought  about  it  at  all,  I certainly  never  connected  the
cpiotation  from  Crossing  the  Bar  with  ai)ros  oi'paubs  aKvpoiv.  I had  seen  the  script
of  March  0,  but  it  never  entered  my  head  that  the  latter  half  of  it  had  anything
to  do  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  test-question,  and,  I repeat  once  more,  I did  not
realise  that  it  contained  a quotation  from  In  2Iernoriam.

To  suppose  that  subconsciously  I grasped  the  real  significance  and  connection
of  these  oracular  scripts  and  passed  my  knowledge  on  to  Mrs  Piper  is  too
strained  a hypothesis  for  me  to  have  any  patience  with.  If  the  knowledge
shown  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  was  obtained  from  any  living  person,  it  was  from
Mrs  Verrall.  Note  by  J.  G.  P.


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


120


Lvri.]


J.  G.  P.  that  those  words,  as  also  the  name  “Arthur  Hallam”,
had  been  previously  (i.e.  on  IVlarch  6)  given  by  him  in  the
waking-stage  of  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  ^ ; and  he  now  explained
spontaneously  that  he  had  given  the  cpmtation  and  the  name
in  order  “to  connect  the  words  with  its  author’s  individuality”.^
The  fact  that  Grossing  the  Bar  and  Arthur  Hallam  were
first  mentioned  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  on  March  G is  of  great
importance;  for  on  March  G Mi's  Verrall  had  not  grasped  the
significance  of  the  combination  in  her  script  of  cpiotations
from  In  Memoriam  and  Grossing  the  Bar  in  connection  with
avTo?  ovpavo<i  aKVfxwv,  and  did  not  do  so  until  IMarch  12.  If,
then,  the  references  to  Crossing  the  Bar  and  Arthur  Hallam
in  the  trance  of  March  G are  to  be  attributed  to  telepathy
from  IMrs  Verrall,  one  must  assume  either  that  Mrs  Verrall’s
subconsciousness  had  worked  out  the  connection  between  In
Memoriam  and  calrd?  ovpavog  uKi'pcov  some  five  or  six  days
before  she  normally  grasped  it — a pei'fectly  reasonable  hypo-
thesis; or,  if  she  had  not  subconsciously  grasped  the  connection,
that  by  some  odd  chance  the  allusions  to  Grossing  the  Bar  and
In  Memoriam  in  3Irs  Verrall’s  script  got  telepathically  trans-
ferred to  IMrs  Pipei’,  and  emerged  by  another  happy  accident


‘Note  that  “Arthur  Hallam”  was  first  uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs
Piper’s  trance  within  two  hours  of  the  time  when  the  quotation  from  In
Memoriam  was  written  in  Mrs  VerralPs  script,  and  accordingly  before  there
could  have  been  anything  to  suggest  In  Memoriam  or  Arthur  Hallam  to
J.  G.  P.’s  mind.

Note  also  the  anxiety  of  Myersp  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  he  had  previously
uttered  the  words  “Arthur  Hallam”  through  Mrs  Piper.  Not  vain  repetition
this  ; but  the  vigilance,  real  or  admirably  simulated,  of  a trained  experimenter,
as  anxious  as  Mr  Podmore  himself  to  eliminate  thought-transference  from  the
sitter.

‘‘It  is  uncertain  what  is  meant  by  “the  words”,  but  they  may  refer  to  the
quotation  from  Crossing  the  Bar.  Or,  it  may  be  that  the  phrase  is  .an  attempt
to  explain  the  connection  between  “I  drew  a bar  and  said  I have  crossed  it”
and  “Arthur  Hallam,”  i.e.  between  the  two  poems,  Crossing  the  Bar  and  In
Memoriam.  Or,  again,  by  “the  words”  may  be  meant  the  Greek  words
ai’iTos  oi'pavos  aKvpwv,  which  had  been  quoted  earlier  in  the  sitting  in  the  letter
addressed  b}'  Mrs  Verrall  to  the  trance-personalities  and  read  aloud  to  them
by  .J.  G.  P.  ; if  so,  the  phrase  w'ould  mean  that  the  quotation  from  Crossing
the  Bar  was  made  in  order  to  connect  the  words  avrhs  ovpavbs  a.Kvp.011/  with
Tennyson,  who  w^as  both  the  author  of  Crossing  the  Bar  and  the  subject  of
the  poem  of  Myers’s  which  bore  /cal  avros  ovpavhs  a.Kvp.u}v  as  its  motto.

I


130


[part


J-  G.  Piddington.

at  the  same  sitting  at  which  a paraphiase  of  acTo?  ovpavo<^
aKv/nwv  (“  Cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  ”)  was  first  given
in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance-script.

J.  G.  P.  received  Mrs  Verrall’s  note  on  her  discover}’  of  the
connection  between  Plotinus  and  Tennyson’s  In  Meonoriam
after  the  conclusion  of  the  Piper  sitting  of  March  13.  Mrs
Verrall  did  not  know  that  there  had  been  any  allusion  to  afro?
ovparog  uKvpon>  in  the  trance  until  after  the  sitting  of  March  13,
by  which  time  her  detailed  note  was  in  J.  G.  P.’s  hands.

To  sum  up : — It  appears  that,  in  the  absence  of  all  intercourse
between  Mrs  Pijjer  and  Mrs  Verrall  after  Jan.  30,  on  the  one
hand  the  “Myers”  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  on  Feb.  26  and
March  G,  resj^ectively,  connected  Grossing  the  Bar  and  In
Memormm  with  avrog  ovpavog  aKi'p-on' ; while  on  the  other
hand  the  “Myers”  of  IMrs  Piper’s  trance  on  March  6 alluded
to  Grossing  the  Bar  and  mentioned  the  name  “Arthur  Hal  lam  ”
in  close  conjunction  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  Christian  name  ; claimed
on  March  13  to  have  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  a quotation  from
Grossing  the  13ar,  and  further  explained  that  he  thought  this
reference  would  make  Mrs  Verrall  understand  in  part  what
significance  the  Greek  words  had  for  him.

o

If  strict  chronological  sequence  were  to  be  observed,  at  this
point  should  be  inserted  the  whole  of  the  subject-matter  of
Section  XX,  entitled  “ Azure  and  Horizon  ” ; but  the  develop-
ments tliere  described  are  so  indirectly  related  to  the  central
incident  that  to  introduce  an  account  of  them  here,  though
it  would  preserve  the  chronological  order,  woirld  interrupt  the
exposition  of  the  main  theme  and  have  the  disti-acting  effect
of  an  unwieldy  parenthesis.


The  Test-Question  repeated  and  further  answers  to
IT  given  in  the  tkance.

The  sittino;  of  March  13  was  the  last  of  which  J.  G.  P had
charge ; after  that  date  Mrs  Sidgwick  took  over  the  manage-
ment of  the  sittings,  and  from  that  time  to  April  24  the
trance-personalities  did  not  explicitly  add  anything  by  way  of
answer  to  Mrs  Veri'all’s  question,  though,  as  will  be  seen  on
reference  to  pp.  133-4,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  some  words


131


].vil]  a Series  of  Concordant  AiUomaMsms.

uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  April  8 indicate
a first  attem|.)t  on  tlie  part  of  Myersp  to  connect  airo?  ovparog
dKvfjLwv  with  Plotinus.  So  far,  then,  though  the  Greek  words
had  been  paraphrased  and  knowledge  shown  of  what  may  be
called  the  Tennyson  group  of  associations,  no  explicit  allusion
had  been  made  in  the  trance  to  the  other  g)-oup  of  as.sociations,
namely  those  with  Plotinus  and  the  second  volume  of  Human
Personality .

It  was  therefore  thought  desirable  to  revive  interest  in
the  matter  by  introducing  Mrs  Verrall  again  as  a sitter.
Accordingly  she  attended  a sitting  on  April  29,  and  in  the
course  of  it  she  repeated  to  Myersp  the  question  about  ai’T09
oupai'og  uKup-wv,  and,  after  explaining  that  one  group  of  associa-
tions and  the  meaning  of  the  words  had  been  made  clear,
asked  for  an  allusion  to  the  second  group  of  associations  and
to  the  name  of  the  Greek  authoi'  of  the  words.  In  making
this  suggestion  Mrs  Verrall  took  care  to  mention  no  distinctive
names,  but  to  use  only  the  general  term  “ associations  ”,  so
that,  in  this  repetition  of  the  question,  no  clue  was  given  as
to  which  statements  by  MyerSp  had  led  Mi’s  Verrall  to  the
conclusion  that  her  question  had  been  understood  and  partly
answered.

At  this  sitting  allusion  was  made  to  the  words  “azure”
“ a blue  sea  ”.  The  words  were  mis-read  by  Mrs  Verrall  and
were  unintelligible  to  her  even  when  deciphered  by  Miss  Johnson,
as  she  knew  nothing  of  the  succe.ssful  cross-correspondence  of
April  15  and  17  described  in  Section  XX.

There  was  much  confusion  in  this  sitting,  most  of  it  due
|)robably  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  difficulty  in  deciphering  the  script.
It  seems,  however,  fairly  cleai'  that,  after  the  allusion  to
“azure”  and  “blue  sea”,  for  the  first  time  a connection  was
suggested  by  Myersp  between  the  three  Greek  words  and
“ halcyon  days  ” ; whence  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  trance-
personality  had  grasped  not  only  the  general  meaning  of  the
Greek  words  but  also  their  connection  with  earlier  passages  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  own  scidpt.  But  still  there  was  no  mention  of
Plotinus  or  Humani  Personality,  and  no  light  seemed  to  be
thrown  on  the  subject  by  a sudden  and  at  the  time  inexpli-
cable allusion,  in  the  midst  of  the  discussion,  just  before  the


132


-/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


refereuce  to  “azure”  and  “blue  sea”,  to  “Swedenborg”,  followed
by  a similarly  disconnected  allusion  to  “ St.  Paul  ”,  and  later
to  “Dante”  (see  Appendix  X).

At  the  sitting  held  on  the  next  day,  April  30,  Miss
Johnson  was  pre.sent  at  first  alone,  and  then  later  Mrs.  Verrall
joined  her.  To  Miss  Johnson  when  alone  it  was  plainly  stated
Myersp  that  his  “ reply  to  the  three  Greek  words  ” was
that  tliey  reminded  him  of  “ Homer’s  Illiard  ” (sic).  This
statement  was  repeated  to  Mrs  Verrall  on  her  entering  the
room,  thus  :

(Rector  communicating)  Good  morning,  I am  glad  to  greet
you  again.

Mrs  V.  Thank  j'ou,  good  morning.

I have  seen  Mr  Xlyers  and  he  gave  me  his  reply  to  your
Greek  words  and  I gave  them  to  the  other  lady  before
you  appeared  Tell  her  to  speak  them.  All  right.

HOMER’S  I L L I A R D.

This  seemed  to  Mrs  X^errall  mere  nonsense,  and  suggested
random  gues.sing  on  the  part  of  Mrs  Piper,  but  she  did  not
express  any  criticism.  Later  in  the  sitting  MyerSp  claimed  to
have  completed  the  answer  to  the  Greek  question,  reminding
Mrs  X^errall  that  she  had  asked  for  the  author’s  name  and
saying  that  this  reminded  him  of  “ Socratese  ” (sic)  as  well  as
of  “ Homer’s  Illiard  ” (see  Ap}>endix  ju).

This  again  seemed  mere  nonsense.  No  association  of  ideas
could  be  traced  between  Plotinus  on  the  one  hand,  and
Socrates  or  Homer’s  Iliad  on  the  other.  Certainly  Mrs  Verrall
saw  none  at  the  moment,  nor  was  any  connexion  perceived  or
suspected  by  either  Miss  Johnson,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  or  J.  G.  P.,
when  soon  after  the  sitting  they  discussed  the  record.

But  latei'  in  the  day  a dim  im])ression  came  to  Mrs  Ven'all,
aftei'  thinking  over  what  had  been  said  at  the  sitting,  that
in  the  second  volume  of  Human  Personality,  close  to  the
passage  about  the  vision  of  Plotinus  in  which  occurs  the  trans-
lation of  the  woids  ku\  cn’rof  oiiparb?  aKuniccp  was  an  allusion
to  the  famous  vision  of  Socrates,  in  which  the  woman  of
Phthia  addressed  him  in  a line  from  the  Iliad.  An  unmistak-


LVII.]


133


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

able  allusion  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  own  script  of  the  next  day,
IMay  1,  to  the  “ Eagle  soaring  above  the  tomb  of  Plato  ” —
a phrase  descriptive  of  Plotinus  quoted  in  the  ninth  chapter
of  Human  Personality — led  her  to  investigate  further,  with
the  followino-  results :

o

In  the  last  twm  chapters  of  Humctn  Persoimlity  (pp.
259-292),  twice,  and  twice  only,  is  the  word  Vision  used ;
the  first  time  (pp.  273-4)  of  the  Vision  wliich  came  to
Socrates  in  the  prison-house,  wlien  the  “fair  and  white-
robed  woman  ” had  “ given  to  Achilles’  words  ” — “ On  the
third  day  hence  thou  comest  to  Phthia’s  fertile  shore  ” —
“a  more  sacred  meaning’’;  and  the  second  time  (p.  291)
of  the  Vision  of  Plotinus.  Moreover,  to  the  Epilogue  of  Human
Personcdity,  in  wliich  the  Vision  of  Plotinus  is  described,  is
prefixed  a quotation  in  Greek  from  Plato’s  Krito,  the  passage
quoted  being  that  in  which  the  story  of  Socrates’  Alsion  of
the  “ fair  and  wlrite-robed  tvoman  ” is  told.  The  line  from
the  Iliad  (II.  ix.  3G3)  spoken  by  the  woman  in  the  Ansion
of  Socrates  is  therefore  Cjiioted  in  Greek  (p.  278)  and  trans-
lated (p.  274)  in  the  second  volume  of  Human  Personcdity ,
but  on  neither  occasion  is  there  any  reference  either  to  the
poem  from  \vhich  it  comes — -the  Iliad — or  to  the  author  of
that  poem — Homer.  It  would  not  therefore  have  been  possible
for  anyone  but  a Greek  scholar  familiar  with  Greek  literature
to  discover  from  these  pages  of  Humctn  Personcdity  any
connexion  between  the  A^ision  of  Socrates  and  Homer’s  Iliad,
even  if  he  had  sufficient  familiarity  with  those  pages  to  be
reminded  of  the  Vision  of  Socrates  by  an  allusion  to  the  Alsion
of  Plotinus.

But  the  reference  to  Homer’s  Iliad  on  April  30  was  not
the  first  that  had  been  made  to  it  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.
The  word  “ Iliad  ” had  been  pronounced  in  the  waking-stage
of  the  trance  of  April  8 in  the  following  context : —

“They  said  Elliot.  There’s  Air  Myers  and  Elliot.  Iliad.
Pm  glad.  Try  again.  Discourage  don’t  give  me  up
try  again.  Light  in  West.  I'll  tell  you  more.  If  I
can  reach  over  the  bar  I’ll  repeat  this  letter.  Tout
ensemble.”


1 Tlius  written,  with  a capital  V.


134


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

The  “Elliot”  of  the  record  represents  in  all  probability  a mis-
hearing or  a mispronunciation  of  “Iliad”.  The  name  “Elliot”
had  two  distinct  associations  with  Mr  Myers,  both  familiar  to
the  recorder,  Mrs  Sidgwick.  Consequently  it  would  have  been
very  easy  for  her  to  mistake  an  indistinctly  uttered  “ Iliad  ”
for  “ Elliot  There  had  been  nothing  whatever  in  what  had
taken  place  ju’evioirsly  at  this  sitting  to  suggest  either  “ Elliot  ”
or  “Iliad”.  No  significance  has  been  discovered  for  “Elliot”;
and  none  was  discovered  for  “ Iliad  ” until  cwro?  ovpavo^  aKvfxwv
was  connected  witli  “ Homer’s  Iliad  ” in  the  trance  of  April  30.
It  will  be  noticed  that  this  utterance  of  the  solitary  word
“Iliad”  occurs  in  close  proximity  to  “Mr  Myers”,  “Light  in
West  ” and  “ If  I can  reach  over  the  bar  ”.  The  connection  of
ca’To?  ovpavo<i  ukv/ulow  with  “ Light  in  West  ” is  explained  in
section  XIX ; and  its  connection  with  Grossing  the  Bar,  to
which  the  expression  “ reach  over  the  bar  ” must  allude,  has
already  been  explained.  It  looks  then  as  if  the  “ Iliad  ” uttered
on  April  8 was  a fir.st  attempt  to  give  the  associations  of  the
three  Greek  words  of  Plotinus  with  Human  Personality.  And
if  it  was  so,  it  follows  that  the  Plotinian  associations  began
to  emerge  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  three  weeks  before  i\lrs  Verrall,
who  had  not  come  in  contact  with  Mrs  Piper  since  Jan.  30,
attended  the  sitting  of  April  29  for  the  express  purpose  of
asking  Myers^  to  give  the  name  of  the  author  of  the  Greek
words.

The  discovery,  that  it  was  not  unreasonable  for  a question
as  to  the  authorship  ot  the  words  acTO?  ofpard?  uKupwr  to
recall  “ Socrates  ” and  “ Homer’s  Iliad  ” to  an  intelligence
familiar  with  the  concluding  chapters  of  Human  Personality,
suggested  that  in  the  same  source  might  be  found  an  explana-
tion of  the  ap|)arently  meaningless  introduction  of  the  names
of  Swedenborg,  St.  Paul  and  Dante.

On  the  same  page  that  contains  the  phrase,  “ the  eagle  soaring-
above  the  tomb  of  I’lato  ”,  and  near  the  beginning  of  Myers’s
account  of  Ecstasy  (p.  261),  is  a commemorative  list  of  the  “ strong
sonls  who  have  claimed  to  feel  it”,  and  among  these,  after  Plotinus
and  before  Tennyson,  are  included  Swedenborg,  St.  Paul  and
Dante.  Anyone  who  bears  in  mind  this  paragraph  of  Human
Personcdity,  with  its  special  emphasis  on  the  work  of  the


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  135

“ prosaic  Swede  ” — “ of  all  earth’s  inspired  spirits  ....  the  least


divinised,  the  least  lovable  ....  who  has  opened  the  surest
path  for  men,” — and  also  the  fact  that  Myers  wrote  a poem  on
St.  Paul,  will  understand  why  an  intelligence  endeavouring  to
re-collect  knowledge  once  possessed  by  Frederic  Myers  should
select  from  the  list  in  Human  Personality  the  names  of  two  of
those  three  great  Visionaries.  Again,  Myersp,  who  had  on  March
13  connected  the  words  of  Plotinus  with  Crossing  the  Bar,
connected  them  on  April  29  with  St.  Paul.  The  author  of
Human  Personality  had  in  the  Epilogue  of  that  work  alluded
to  St.  Paul,  Crossing  the  Bar  and  Plotinus,  all  within  a space
of  sis  lines:  “there  needs,”  he  wrote,  “no  heroism,  no  sanctity,
to  inspire  the  apostle’s  e—iOujuia  et^  to  uvaXvaai,  the  desire  to
lift  our  anchor,  and  sail  out  beyond  the  bar  ” ; and  three
lines  later  introduced  a translation  of  a passage  from  the
Enneacles  ^ with  the  words  “ says  Plotinus  ” (p.  290,  section
1013).

Thus,  though  the  name  of  the  author  of  the  Greek  words
had  not  been  given,  the  mention  of  Swedenborg,  St.  Paul  and
Dante,  and  more  markedly  the  mention  of  Socrates  and  Homer’s
Iliad  suggested  that  the  trance-personality  was  on  the  right
tack  ; and  moreover  taking  his  bearings  by  landmarks  singularly
appropriate  for  a personality  who  purports  to  be  the  author
of  Human  Personality.

It  is  conceivable  that  the  words  “ Sa.sia  Saisia  Francis”  given
at  the  sitting  of  April  29,  just  befoi’e  the  mention  of  Swedenborg,
St.  Paul  and  “azure  a blue  sea”  (see  Appendix  X p.  159),  were
an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  write  the  name  of  Francis  d’ Assisi ;
who,  though  not  included  in  the  commemorative  list  given  on
p.  261  of  Human  Personality  Vol.  II.  of  the  “strong  souls
who  have  claimed  to  feel”  ecstasy,  might  well  have  been.

Just  as  “Larches”  and  “Laburnum”  were  given  in  the  trance
within  21  hours  of  the  test-question  being  first  put,  so  here
Homer’s  Iliad,  Socrates,  Swedenborg,  St.  Paul  and  Dante  were
given  directly  after  the  question  was  I’epeated.  In  each  case
there  was  a prompt  though  imperfect  response ; in  each  case,  as
will  be  seen  later,  the  imperfect  response  was  in  the  end  satis-

^ The  passage  iu  question  is  not  the  one  in  which  the  words  auros  ovpauos
aKVfXiov  occur.


13G


J.  G.  Piddington,  [part

factorily  completed ; and  in  each  case  the  pielimiuary  response
was  cast  in  a form  so  remote  from  that  expected  by  the
questioner  that  its  pertinence  was  not  apprehended  at  the
time.

On  May  1 Mrs  Sidgwick  reminded  Myersp  that  he  had
piomised  to  reply  further  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  question  about  the
meaning  and  associations  of  the  Greek  words.  Myei’Sp  said
they  reminded  him  of  a poem,  but  that  there  had  been  some
confusion,  and  that  he  rvould  make  his  answer  clearer.  (See
Appendix  v.)

Completion  of  the  Ansaver  in  IMrs  Piper’s  Trance.

To  Miss  Johnson  on  May  1 and  2,  and  to  Mrs  Sidgwick
on  May  3,  Mrs.  Verrall  communicated  the  suggestion  that  there
M'ere  reminiscences  of  Human  Personality  in  the  Piper  sittings
of  April  29  and  30,  and  emphasised  the  fact  that  the  only
thing  now  wanted  to  complete  the  answer  to  her  question  was
the  name  Plotinus.  At  the  sitting  held  on  May  0 Mrs  Sidg-
wick had  intended  to  rejieat  the  enquiry  for  the  name  of
the  author  of  the  three  Gi'eek  words,  but  was  forestalled  by
jM}' ersp,  who  immediately  after  greeting  her,  said  : “ Will  you
say  to  Mrs  Verrall — Plotinus  ”.  The  last  tvord  was  not  deciphered
by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  Avas  thereupon  repeated  in  large  letters^
PLOTINUS.  Mrs  Sidgwick  then  asked  : “ What  is  that  ? ”,
and  Mj'ersp  replied : '■  My  answer  to  autos  ouranos  okumen”
[sic].  Thus  on  Ma}^  G was  given  the  one  point  required  to
complete  the  answer  to  the  question  asked  by  Mrs  Verrall  on
January  29.  Later  in  the  sitting  MyerSp  claimed  that  two
cross-coiTespondences  had  been  successfully  carried  out  between
i\Irs  Piper  and  IMrs.  Verrall,  one  dealing  with  Tennyson  and
the  other  with  BrowniugA  (See  Appendix  o)


Final  references  to  the  Test-Question  in  the  trance;

AND  Conclusion.

The  answer  was  now  complete,  and  subsequent  references
to  the  test-question  were  apparently  meant  only  to  draw  the


1 For  the  Browiiiug  correspoiidence  see  Section  VI.


137


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

attention  of  a new  sitter  to  two  of  its  points.  On  May  27,
Sir  Oliver  Lodsfe  beinw  the  sitter,  Plotinus  was  said  to  be
the  name  of  the  author  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  Greek  words.  On
June  2 it  was  further  claimed  that  directly  Mrs  Verrall  ha.d
put  her  question  Myersp  had  thougdit  of  Tennyson.  This
remark  would  seem  to  refer  to  the  mention  of  “ larches  ” and
“ laburnum  ” on  Jan.  30.  Hitherto  in  the  trance  these  two
words  had  not  been  connected  either  with  the  test-question
or  with  Tennyson.  If  they  are  supposed  to  be  so  here,  it
must  not  be  forgotten  that  at  this  time  the  trance-personalities
knew  that  Mrs  Verrall  had  understood  their  allusion  to
“larches”  and  “laburnum”  and  to  Crossing  th.e  Bar;  and
from  that  knowledge  they  may  have  inferred  that  “ larches  ”
and  “ laburnum  ” had  something  to  do  both  with  uvTog  ovpavo?
uKviucop  and  with  Tennyson.  Still,  if  it  was  an  inference,  at
any  rate  it  was  a correct  one.  (See  Appendix  tt.)

The  trance-pei’sonalities  referred  with  some  pride  to  the
success  of  this  experiment ; and  well  they  might,  for  in  the
course  of  sixteen  weeks,  from  January  29  to  May  6,  they
succeeded  in  giving  a complete  answer  to  the  test  question
put  by  Mrs  Verrall.  That  question,  connected  b}"  Mrs  Verrall
with  topics  mentioned  in  hei'  own  earlier  script,  required  for
its  complete  answer  three  things :

1.  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  words,

2.  the  associations  with  Tennyson,

3.  the  associations  with  Plotinus  and  Hitman  Personality.

Of  these  the  meaning  was  suggested,  and  the  associations

with  Tennyson — in  particular  with  the  two  poems  In  Memoriam
and  Crossing  the  Bai'— were  given  before  March  13  without
further  communication  with  Mrs  Verrall  ; the  associations  with
Plotinus  and  Human  Personality  were  given  between  April
29  and  May  6,  after  Mrs  Verrall  had  had  two  further  sittings,
and  perhaps  began  to  emerge  as  early  as  April  8 ; and
the  connexion  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  earlier  script  was  recognised
on  April  29.

Again,  while  an  explanation — new  to  Mrs  Verrall — of  the
connexion  between  the  two  groups  of  associations,  Plotinian
and  Tennysonian,  was  given  in  Mi's  Verrall’s  script  on  February
26  and  March  11,  statements  made  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trances


J.  G.  Piddington.


138


[part


of  March  G and  13  suggest  knowledge  of  this  explanation
very  forcibly  indeed.

It  is  specially  to  be  noted  that  the  associations  of  the  words
with  Tennyson,  and  in  particular  with  the  two  poems  In

Memoriam  and  Crossing  the  Bar,  were  mentioned  in  the
trance  to  J.  G.  P.,  who  had  no  knowledge  whatsoever  as  to
the  authorship  or  context  of  those  words,  or  of  their  associa-
tions with  either  Tennyson  or  Plotinus.  Again,  whereas  Mrs
Verrall’s  own  associations  of  the  ydrrase  with  Tennyson

referred  to  Myers’s  poem  on  Tennyson  {Fragments  p.  117),
which  contains  an  allusion  to  Grossing  the  Bar  but  none

to  In  Memoriam,  the  references  in  her  own  script  were  to  In
Memoriarn  as  well  as  to  Grossing  the  Bar,  and  those  in  the
trance  were  to  Arthur  Hallam  as  well  as  to  Grossing  the

Bar.  Thus,  knowledge  was  shown  in  the  Piper  sittings  of  facts
altogether  outside  Mrs  Pijrer’s  own  range  of  interest  or  know-
ledge, and  those  facts  were  all  unknown  to  the  actual  sitter,
J.  G.  P.,  and  had  been  in  part  unknown  to  Mrs  Verrall  when
she  first  put  the  question,  and  were  not,  at  least  consciously,
known  to  her  uutil  March  12.

To  Frederic  Myers  all  the  main  facts  given  in  the  scripts
of  Mrs  Piper  and  Mrs  Verrall  had  been  known;  the  meaning
of  the  words,  the  associations  with  Plotinus  and  Human
Personality,  and  the  associations  with  his  own  poem  on
Tennyson  and  with  Grossing  the  Bar.

Were  the  associations  with  Sections  xciv  and  xcv  of  In
Memoriam  also  knowir  to  him  ?

In  Myers’s  poem  on  Tennyson,  to  which  are  prefixed  the
words  Kcu  uvTO'i  ovpavm  aKVfxo)p,  there  is,  it  is  true,  no  allusion
to  In  Memoriam-,  but  there  are  passages  in  other  writings
of  his  which  establish  the  fact  that  the  trances  of  the  poet,
and  among  them  the  trairce  of  In  Memoriam,  were  a matter
on  which  he  had  deeply  meditated.^  He  was  a great  Tenny-
sonian ; he  was  versed  in  all  mystical  subjects  and  in  Neo-
platonic literature,  and  in  one  of  the  closing  and  culminating
passages  of  his  posthumous  work  he  had  given  special


1 See,  in  the  volume  of  INIyers’s  essaj's  entitled  Science  and  a Future  Life,
Tennyson  as  Prophet  generally,  and  particularly  Modern  Poets  and  Cosmic
Law  p.  197.


LVII.]


Series  of  Concordant  Aidomatisms.


139


prominence  to  the  Vision  of  Plotinus.  Moreover,  in  Tennyson
as  Prophet  he  more  than  once  compared  the  ecstatic  states
of  Tennyson  and  Plotinus ; ^ though,  be  it  noted,  nowhere  either
in  that  essay  or  elsewhere  did  he  compare  what  Plotinus
says  about  the  conditions  of  trance  in  Enneades  v.  2-3  with
the  trance  of  In  Memoriaml  And  lastly,  Tennyson’s  son
evidently  thought  it  likely  that  when  asked  to  treat  of  the
Laureate’s  work  he  might  “ approach  it  from  the  side  of
Plotinus  ”,  though  he  had  once  already  done  so,  rather  even
than  from  that  of  his  beloved  Vergil.

All  this  may  not — does  not  prove  that  Myers  had  associated  in
his  mind  the  trance  of  Plotinus  with  the  trance  of  Tennyson  in  In
Memoriam,  but  it  does  create  a strong  presumption  that  he  did.

To  sum  up  : In  this  concordant  episode  of  Mrs  Piper’s  trance
and  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  the  controlling  influence  in  both  cases
claims  to  be  one  and  the  same  personality,  namely,  Frederic
Myers.  Let  us,  however,  ignore  this  claim,  and  continue  to
use  the  symbols  M^^ersp  and  Myersy.  The  case  will  then  stand
thus : To  MyerSp  a cpiestion  is  put  which  could  have  been
answered  by  Frederic  Myers.  MyerSp  gives  various  answers  to
it — all  intelligent  and  all  but  one  provabl}^  correct.  Before
MyerSp  gives  his  first  answer,  Myersy  shows  knowledge  of
what  the  answer  of  Myersp  will  be.  Besides  this,  MyerSp
shows  that  he  knows  that  Myersy  had  previously  shown  know-
ledge of  his  (Myersp)  answer.  One  of  the  facts  comprised  in
this  first  answer  cannot  be  proved  to  have  been  known  to
Frederic  Myers,  but  there  are  good  grounds  for  thinking  that
it  might  well  have  belonged  to  that  body  of  specialised  and
characteristic  knowledge  with  which  his  mind  was  stocked.
The  facts  involved  in  the  remainder  of  the  answer  given  by
Myersp  were  all  known  to  Frederic  M3-ers ; and  they  emerged
in  a manner  which  indicates  that  the  intelligence  i-esponsible
for  their  emergence  was  as  intimately  conver-sant  with  the
closing  chapters  of  Human  Personality  as  Frederic  M}’ers,  its
author,  must  have  been.

^ It  is,  of  course,  assumed  throughout  this  paper  tliat  iNIrs  Verrall  is  familiar
with  the  published  works  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

-See  especially  Ttnnyson  as  Prophet  pp.  13.5-7.  Had  Myers  wished  to  make
this  comparison  he  could  hardly  have  failed  to  have  introduced  it  at  this  point.


140


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


APPENDIX.


(a)

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vAth  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Jan.
15,  1907.

(Present  : Mrs  Verrall  and  J.  G.  P.)

(M}'ers  communicating.)  I came  and  gave  you  two  messages
one  was  Dewdrops  glistening  with  the  mist  and  sun.
remer  [sic]  if?  [i.e.  “remember  if"?]

Mrs  V.  Yes,  I remember  something  about  dewdrops  and  mist  and
sun.

(to  J.  G.  P. ) I’m  almost  sure  I had  that

I gave  it  to  you.

Mrs  V.  Yes.

are  you  listening.

Mrs  V.  What  was  the  other  message  1

and  the  other  was.

was  ....  celestial  halceon  [sic]  days

Now  have  you  it

Have  you  it  ?

and  do  you  recall  it.


In  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  Jan.  22,  1907  “halcyon  days”
was  uttered  disconnectedly.

ift)

Copy  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  diary  of  January  24,  1907.

Jan.  24.  -/07.  I propose  to  make  the  following  test,  wh.  if
F.  W.  H.  M.  is  really  concerned  in  the  trance  ought  to  come  ofi’.
I will  ask  for  his  associations  with  a short  Greek  sentence  to  be
given  to  me  in  English.  I shall  take  kuI  avTos  oupavo?  aKii/xwv  for


141


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

these  reasons:  (1)  My  sc.[ript]  of  Jan.  22  had  the  word  “Snpern”,
wh.  referred  me  back  yesterday  to  an  earlier  sc.[ript]  wh.  represents
the  celestial  halcyon  days  wh.  the  P.[iper]  trance  F.  W.  H.  M.  [i.e.
Myersp]  said  he  had  given  me.  The  phrase  c.[elestial]  h.[alcyon]
days  seems  to  me  to  refer  to  the  idea  of  Plotinus,  quoted  in
H.[uman]  P.[ersonality]  Vol.  II.  p — [blank  left  unfilled]  and  there
is  a flavour  of  Plot.[inus]  too  in  my  sc.[ript]  (July  3 — /03).

(2)  The  4 Greek  words  are  printed  as  the  motto  to  his  Tennyson
poem  in  Frag\_meTi\ts.

(3)  I think  it  possible  that  the  same  idea  is  at  the  base  of  the
references  in  my  sc.[ript]  to  the  windless  calms.

Therefore  (1)  would  give  a chance  that  the  point  is  familiar
enough  to  be  remembered.  (1)  also  suggests  that  it  has  been
selected  as  a test.  (1)  and  (2)  make  it  evidential,  as  the  words  can
be  proved  to  have  had  associations  for  F.  W.  H.  M.  not  to  be  dis-
covered by  Mrs  P.[iper]’s  normal  powers  from  the  printed  books.

I have  mentioned  these  words  to  no  one.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vMli  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Jan.
29,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Verrall  and  J.  G.  P.)

(Myers  communicating.)  Speak  if  you  like.

Mrs  V.  I want  to  ask  3 0U  something.

Do  not  speak  so  fast  your  words  all  run  in  together  E.

Mrs  V.  I understand.  I want  to  ask  you  to  do  something  if  pos-
sible . . I do  not  want  you  to  write  Greek,  because
the  light  [i.e.  Mrs  Piper]  does  not  know  Greek —

all  right  I shall  be  glad.

Mrs  V.  but  if  I say  three  Greek  words  could  you  say  what  they
remind  you  ofl

I might  grasp  the  Avords.
and  I might  not  but  I could  try.

Yes.  You  could  either  translate  them  into  English,  or  tell
me  of  Avhat  they  make  you  think.


Mrs  V.


142


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


Do  what  ?

Mrs  V.  Tell  me  of  what  they  remind  you.

Oh  yes  of  what  they  remind  me.  but  what  have  they
to  do  with  our  experiments  ?

Mrs  V.  I think  you  have  spoken  of  them  to  me  before,  or  something
like  them.

Yes.

Mrs  V.  If  I speak  them  now,  you  can  tell  me  now  or  later  what
they  remind  you  of.

Very  good.

Mrs  V.  avTu^  ovpcwo^;  aKiyroji'.

Spell  it.

Mrs  V.  a-u-t-o-s.
autos.

Mrs  V.  o-u-r-a-n-o-s.

0 U R A N 0 S.
first  word.

Mrs  V.  The  first  word  is  autos.

R.  yes.

Mrs  V.  And  the  second  is  ouranos.
yes.

Mrs  V.  The  third  is  akumon,  and  is  spelt  a.-k-u-m-o-n.

akuno
Mrs  V.  No,  m.
mon.

Mrs  V.  That’s  right.

1 shall  see  you  when  again  ?


Mrs  V.  Tomorrow.


LVII.]


143


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

I will  certainly  reply  if  I live,
live  and  I can  U.D.


first  word  ?

J.  G.  P.  (to  Mrs  V.)  Give  “autos”  again.

Mbs  V.  autos.

is  it  S.
is  it  S.
second  word

Mbs  V.  onranos.

first,  S.

%

Mbs  V.  It  ends  in  S.

Oh  yes  I U.D.  better  farewell  F W H M
(Agitated  movement  of  the  hand)  Adieu  R H

Mbs  V.  Goodbye.

(S)

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  v:ith  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Jan.  30,

1907.

(Present:  Mrs.  Verrall  and  J.  G.  P.)

(Myers  communicating.)  Do  R.  recall,  [i.e.  “Do  you  re-
call?” It  had  been  suggested  to  Rector  to  use  the
abbreviation  “D.  R.”  for  “Do  you  remember?”,  but  he
seemed  unable  to  get  hold  of  it  properly  and  soon  ceased
trying  to  use  it.]

what  I used  to  say  about
Haven  of  rest.

Mbs  V.  Is  that  “ House  of  Rest  ” ?

No  Haven.


ISIbs  V.  “Haven”?


144


[part


J.  G.  Pidclington.

Yes.  do  you  E.  [i.e.  “remember”]  a large  chair
I used  to  sit  iu  when  I called  to  see  you  ?
it  was  rather  low
lown
L 0 W.

and  I made  such  a statement  upon  several  occasions  when  I
called.

Mrs  V.  You  mean  you  said  the  chair  was  low  1

So  I said  I came  in  to  talk  over  some  matter  with  you
and  I thought  it  would  change  my  thoughts  somewhat
as  it  seemed  a Haven  of  Rest.

Mrs  V.  Yes Do  you  mean  you  have  spoken  of  a Haven

of  Rest  since  you  left  this  life  ^

Yes  quite,  twice  I think.

but  it  is  certain  that  I have  done  so.  . . . and  this  is  one
reason  why  it  came  into  my  mind  now.

Mrs  V.  There  have  been  two  references  to  two  occasions  of  your
sitting  in  my  house:  one  published,  [v.  Proc.  Y^ol.  XX.
pp.  239-240.]  the  other  not.


Mrs  V.  You  said  you  had  spoken  to  me  of  Celestial  Halcyon  days.
I couldn’t  remember  it,  but  I have  found  it  now.

I told  you  my  dear  friend  that  my  memory  was  better  than
yours  on  some  points.

Mrs  V.  Yes,  so  I have  found.


I mentioned  Larches  to  you  before.

.J.  G.  P.  “ Lakes  ” — Xo,  perhaps  it’s  “ larches  ”.

Laburman  [There  is  no  doubt  that  Laburnum  is  meant,  though
the  actual  spelling  is  uncertain.  The  one  given  here  is
the  most  probable.]

Mrs  V.  “ Laburnum  ” 1


Yes.  Y’es.


Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


U5


LVII.]


(^)

Copy  of  Mrs  Ver rail’s  script  of  March  11,  1907.

With  violet  buds  their  heads  were  crowned
violaceae

odores  [violet-coloured  scents]

Violet  and  olive  leaf  purple  and  hoary.

The  cit}'  of  the  violet  and  olive  crown.

News  will  come  of  her.  of  Athens

The  shadow  of  the  Parthenon.  It  is  a message  from  Plato
that  I want  to  send— It  has  been  given  elsewhere  but
should  be  completed  here.  It  is  about  dim  seen  forms,
half-seen  in  the  evenings  grey  by  a boy  and  afterwards
woven  into  words  that  last — I want  to  say  it  again.  I
think  there  is  a verse  in  Tennyson  about  it.  Plato  and
the  shadow  and  the  unseen  or  half  seen  companionship —
shapes  seen  in  the  glimpses  of  the  moonlit  heights.

To  walk  with  Plato  or  some  phrase  like  that,
with  voiceless  communing,  and  unseen  Presence  felt
No  you  don’t  get  it  right
Presences  on  the  eternal  hills
that  is  better

The  Presence  that  is  in  the  lonely  hills
That  is  all  for  now  wmit.


(0

Copy  of  Mrs  VcrralVs  Buiry  of  March  12,  1907.

March  12/07 My  script  seems  to  imjily

that  the  at’.[TosJ  ov.[pavo9]  dk-.  [npcjc]  has  been  explained  in  the
P.  [iper]  trance.  I wonder  if  that  is  so.  I have  seen  nothing
referring  to  it  since  my  own  sittings.  Is  the  reason  why  F.  W.  H.  M.
took  those  words  as  the  motto  to  his  Tennyson,  I wonder,  to  be
found  in  T[ennyson]’s  or  in  F.  W.  H.  M’s  own  associations  with
the  words  1 e.g.  is  In  Mem[oriam\  xciv  a reflexion  of  the  view  of
Plotinus  that  calm  of  nature,  earth  and  heaven  alike  is  wanted  for
communion  with  the  divine  1 It  may  be,  and  it  may  be  too  that
this  was  in  F.  W.  H.  M.’s  mind  when  he  wrote  his  poem  and  chose
his  motto.  Constant  suggestions  of  Tennyson  in  my  sc.[ript]  have
led  to  my  reading  In  Mein.\oriam'\  and  so  I found  this  passage.

K


146


[part


J.  G.  Piddhigton.

[Added  later  in  the  day.]

Mar.  12.  To  the  best  of  1113’  belief  I read  In  Mem.\oriam'\  again
a few  days  after  verifying  the  references  in  [Mrs  Holland’s]  sc.  [ript]
to  Catullus.  I saw  that  [i.e.  Mrs  Holland’s  script]  on  Feb.  20  or
thereabouts,  and  asked  [my  husband]  for  the  ref.[erence]  ; looked  up
Bradley  on  Feb.  22  and  read  In  Mem.\oriain\  probably  on  Tues[day].
Feb.  26 —

This  morning,  after  above  note  in  Diaiy,  I went  to  look  up
Bradle}',  and  find  he  refers  to  Plotinus.  “Tennyson’s  experience
seems  to  have  resembled  that  of  Plotinus”  he  says,  commenting  on
xcv,  l)ut  makes  no  mention  of  the  characteristic  peace.  He  says
that  Hallam  had  read  Neoplatonic  literature. — I have  no  doubt  now
tliat  F.  AY.  H.  M.  chose  his  motto  with  the  knowledge  of  the
Plotinus  “communion  during  calm”  in  his  mind  associated  with  In
Mem.\i)riani\  xciv  and  xcv.  M3"  scrijA  suggested  plaiul3"  that
there  was  some  point  in  In  Mein.[oriaiii\ — it  associated  Tennyson  and
F.  AY.  H.  M.  together  on  Feb.  12,  and  referred  to  Arthur  and
Avilion’s  calm  on  same  day ; referred  to  F.  W.  H.  M’s  poem  on
T.[ennyson]  on  Feb.  20,  and  on  Feb.  26  referred  to  In  Mem.[oriam'\
xciv  and  to  In  Mem.[oriaiii\  again  on  March  6.  On  March  11
it  associated  T.[ennyson]  and  another  jjoem  of  F.  AY.  H.  M’s  about
Plato  and  dcdpi"/;crts  etc.

I have  also  now  no  doubt  that  “ larches  and  laburnum  ” were
approaches  to  Tenn3"son’s  In  l\Iem.[oriaiii\  b3"  the  Piper  trance,  and
intended  to  give  me  one  group  of  associations  with  the  Greek  words
said  b3"  me  the  day  before.  Probabl3"  the  primrofie  in  my  sc.[ript]
of  March  6 is  also  an  attempt  to  get  at  Ixxxv.


V'l)

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held  07i  Feh.  6,
1907.

(Present  : J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Alyers  communicating).)  Now  her  [i.e.  Mrs  A^errall’s]  Greek
also  3"our  latin  message  will  be  replied  to  as  soon  as  I can.

•T.  O.  P.  Y^es,  thank  you.

I am  in  no  wise  forgetting  or  overlooking  them  but  I am
getting  much  off  m3"  mind.

.J.  G.  P.  No,  Myers,  don’t  be  in  a hurr3" ; there’s  plenty  of  time,
which  is  a great  help  to  me.


147


Lvri.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

J.  G.  P.  I want  to  give  you  a message  from  Mrs  Verrall  about  her
Greek  words.

Very  well  I listen.

J.  G.  P.  I will  read  a letter  which  she  has  written  to  me.

Read  slowly  friend  otherwise  I loose,  [sic.]

(J.  G.  P.  then  paraphrases  the  letter,  which  read  as  follows  : —
“ Please  tell  the  trance-personalities  that  I believe  them  to
have  been  very  good  on  Jan.  29  and  30.  Especially
F. W.H.M.-  seems  to  me  to  have  shown  on  Jan.  30  that
he  understood  my  three  Greek  words
I had  not  realised  this  at  the  time,  but  thought  of  it  later,
and  am  confirmed  by  the  report,  [i.e.  of  the  sitting.]  ”)

What  ?

U.D.  all  right.

but  one  word  not  clear.

condemned  does  not  seem  to  apply  well.

J.  G.  P.  You  must  have  misheard  the  word  “confirmed”.  “Con-
firmed ”.

confirmed  ?

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

Oh  yes  thank  you  very  much  I U.D.  cpiite
do  go  on.

(J.  G.  P.  paraphrases  the  rest  of  the  letter,  which  read  as
follows : —

“ Details  later,  but  I should  like  you  to  say  this,  and  ask  for  a
clearer  statement  as  to  what  those  words  remind  him  of.”)

Yes  I quite  U.D.  and  will  explain  fully  when  you  are
alone.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  thank  you.

I grasped  much  of  their  meaning  and  am  pondering  much
over  them.


148


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Piggcr  held  on  March  6,
1907.

(Present:  J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Myers  announces  that  he  had  tried  to  make  Mrs  Verrall
draw  a circle  and  a triangle,  but  was  not  sure  of  com-
plete success.  AVhereupon  J.  G.  P.  addresses  Rector  as
follows  : —

.J.  G.  P.  Ask  Myers  ^olien  he  made  the  attempt  to  draw  the  triangle
inside  a circle.  Can  he  remember  any  other  words  he
did  succeed  in  getting  through  at  the  same  time  1

Do  you  mean  what  day  friend  1

1 doubt  if  he  could  tell  you  this.

but  he  may  be  able  to  tell  you  which  word.

what  word  he  made  her  write.

Cloudless

Sky

Horizon.

don’t  you  U.D.

.J.  G.  P.  Will  you  rewrite  the  last  word"?

Horison.

J.  G.  P.  Is  it  “ Horizon  ” ?

(Hand  assents.)  spell  it.

.J.  G.  P.  H — 0 — r — i — z — 0 — n.

(The  hand  reaches  across  the  table  and  points  with  the  pencil
exactly  to  the  spot  where  “Horizon”  had  been  first  written.
The  sheet  on  which  the  word  had  been  first  written  had
been  torn  off  the  block  and  placed  on  the  top  of  the
heap  of  preceding  sheets.)

Reread  my  first  word.

Horizon


149


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

J.  G.  P.  Quite  right.  I see  now.  [The  word  had  been  written  quite
plainly  the  first  time  : better  in  fact  than  on  the  subsequent
occasions.  I failed  to  read  it  the  first  time  probably
because  “ Sky  ” is  not  a word  which  one  would  expect
to  find  immediately  followed  by  “ Horizon  ”.  My  failure
to  decipher  the  word  at  first  shows  how  little  I was
consciously  looking  out  for  a translation  or  reference  to
auTos  ouparos  aKVjxm'.  Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

It  was  given  like  this

J.  G.  P.  Yes?

A cloudless  sky  beyond  the  Horison.

[It  might  be  supposed  that  “ Cloudless  Sky  Horizon  ” was
given,  in  answer  to  my  question,  as  words  which  came
out  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  at  the  same  time  as  the
triangle  and  circle.  I feel  certain,  however,  that  this
was  not  the  intention.  Had  this  been  Rector’s  meaning
he  would  either  before  or  after  writing  the  words  have
explained  that  they  were  Myers’s  answer  to  my  question.
Also  they  were  written  on  a fresh  sheet  of  paper  and
in  a much  larger  and  bolder  hand  than  the  preceding
script : both  points  suggesting  a change  of  subject.

Moreover  the}"  were  followed  by  the  question  “Don’t
you  understand  1 ” — a phrase  not,  I think,  elsewhere  used
in  the  trance  in  connection  with  the  announcement  of
words  said  to  have  been  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  or  other
automatists.  I believe  the  phrase  conveyed  an  expression
of  surprise  that  I did  not  by  manner  or  speech  show
that  I realised  that  a paraphrase  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  Greek
words  had  been  given.  Lastly — and  this  is  the  strongest
reason  for  thinking  that  the  trance-personalities  did  not
intend  to  connect  “ Cloudless  Sky  Horizon  ” with  the
drawing  of  a circle  and  triangle — a few  minutes  later
Rector  gave  a definite  answer  to  my  question  by  stating
that  when  Mrs  Verrall  drew  a circle  and  triangle  Myers
had  also  made  her  write  “ something  about  Bird  ”,  and
“Paradise”,  and  “something  else”  which  Rector  could
not  catch  (see  p.  72).  Note  by  J.  G.  P.]


150


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


(0

Copy  of  the  record  of  words  spoken  hy  Mrs  Piper  during  the
waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  March  6,  1907.

(Present : J.  G.  P.  and  Miss  Newton,  the  latter  standing
with  her  ear  close  to  Mrs  Piper’s  mouth.)

(Smiles.  Thumb  and  first  finger  of  left  hand  pressed  together
as  if  holding  something.  They  are  brought  slowly  to  the
nose,  and  Mrs  Piper  acts  as  though  smelling  a flower  or
perfume.)

(Many  words  lost)

Has  , . . (Many  more  words  lost)

.J.  G.  P.  Say  it  again  slowly.

(More  w'ords  inaudible)  to  meet.

You  here.  Then,  ah  ! then.

Pm  very  sorry  . . .

....  a friend  of  mine  with  old(?)  life.

Yes,  I will.

Moaning  at  the  bar  when  1 put  out  to  sea.  [These  words
were  heard  by  Miss  Newton  who  was  in  ignorance  of
their  having  previousl}^  appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.
J.  G.  P.  did  not  catch  them  ; but  he  was  not  in  nearly  so
advantageous  a position  for  hearing  as  Miss  Newton.]

I’m  glad  PveC?)  entered.  (Pause.)

Because  I do.  Very  glad.

(Papid  and  excited  breathing.)  What  is  it?  (Points.)

Pioses.  (The  right  hand,  hitherto  resting  on  the  table,  is
brought  up  on  to  the  cushion  with  effort,  and  exactly
the  same  gestures  are  made  with  it  as  before  with  the
left  hand.)

(Sniffing.)  Beautiful.

Sorry  (?)

How  are  you  ? Going,  going.  I’m  sorry.

I>’you  hear  that?  (Nods  head.)  Too  bad,  Arthur  Hallam.
[So  heard  by  Miss  Newton.  Before  she  reported  the
name  to  J.  G.  P.  he  had  put  down  “Hallo”:  doubtless
his  mishearing  of  “ Hallam  ”.]

Arthur  Hallam.  [This  time  clearly  heard  by  J.  G.  P.]

Goodbye.  M.argaret.  I’m  so  glad  I came.


151


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Aidoniatisnis.

(Screws  up  left  eye.)  Getting  dark.

It  closes  all  over.  (Shakes  head.)

I’m  very  sorry.  Spiders.  Oh  ! (Shakes  head  in  disgust.)

Oh ! (moaning)  Ah ! I don’t  like  it.  I don’t  like  it.

Midnight  (?)  Very  dull.  (Looks  out  of  window.  The  sun
was  shining  brightly.)

Well,  that’s  cruel.

So  all — all  gone  awa}^  The}^  left  me  all  alone.

•J.  G.  P.  What  did  they  talk  to  you  about  ?

There  was  some  man  : Arthur  Hallam.  Myers  said  it  was
he — he  about.

He  isn’t  for  living.  Salta  (?).

So  he  says  that  he’ll  give  evidence  ; and  he’s  glad  to  know
that  he  had  a good  definite  idea  in  his  innermost  soul —
much  more  reason  in  it  than — can  know  wait  (or,
“weight”)  to  take.

Oh  ! buzzing.

(Looks  at  J.  G.  P.)  Yes,  a little  dwarf,  and  he’s  a dwarf.

Waiting  to  get  taken  up  there.

J.  G.  P.  What  ?

No,  you  don’t  understand  anything.  They  sa}^  it  isn’t  nice
here,  and  I don’t  like  it  very  well.  Is  that  a head  ?
(Points)  Yes,  it’s  a head.  AVhy  do  you  have  a veil  on?

A snap  in  my  head.  I want  to  tell  you  something,  only  I
can’t.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  tell  me  what  you  can  ?

There’s  a gentleman  up  there  who  is  trying  to  tell  me  some-
thing, but — I don’t  know  what  it  was.

J.  G.  P.  M’ell,  listen.

He  said  it  affected  his  innermost  soul  to  talk  to  you,  and
he  was  so  glad.  I am  so  glad.  (Shuts  eyes)  I don’t  .see
you  at  all.

(Long  pause.)  Did  you  hear  my  head  snap?  It  sent  like  a
sound  of — ■

(Looks  at  Miss  Newton  in  surprise.)  You  didn’t  come  in
through  the  window,  did  you  ?


152


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Miss  N.  No,  I came  in  through  the  door.

How  could  you  come  in  through  the  door's  (pause).  Through
the  door.  (Laughs.)  Of  course  ! How  could  you  come
through  the  window?  It’s  just  come  to  me.  That  was
a fool’s  question.  (Laughs  at  her  own  stupidity.)


(Trance  ends  1.35  p.m.)

(-)

Extract  from  record,  of  sitting  vjith  Mrs  Pilfer  held  on
March  13,  1907.

(Present;  J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Rector  communicating.)

+ Hail.

J.  G.  P.  Hail,  Ini})erator  and  Rector.

Once  more  we  greet  you  friend  of  earth
peace  and  joy  and  all  goodwill  rve  bring.

+ (R.)

J.  G.  P.  Thank  you  ; thank  you  much.

Mr  Myers  wishes  to  speak  with  you  first
after  which  we  desire  to  speak  also.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  I am  listening.

(Hand  consults  Spirit.)

he  is  coming  will  speak  in  a moment.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

(Hodgson  then  mentions  two  words  rvlucli  he  has  been
trying  to  make  Mrs  Yerrall  write;  and  immediately
afterwards  Myers  begins  to  communicate  as  follows  : )
Good  morning  my  friend.

J.  G.  P.  Good  morning,  Myers.

I am  glad  to  see  you  again.


153


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automcdisms.

J.  G.  P.  I am  very  glad  to  see  you.

I referred  to


J.  G.  P.  Well  1

saying  I had  crossed  it.

Yes  did  she  li.D.

J.  G.  P.  You  said  it  to  whom  1

both  lights  ....

J.  G.  P.  I have  not  looked  yet.  I purposely  did  not  look.

Oh  yes.  I U.D.  why.

(Myers  after  referring  to  other  matters  (v.  p.  344)  goes  on
to  describe  how  he  imj^ressed  J.  G.  P.  with  the  word
“Steeple”  (v.  p.  44),  dismisses  the  subject  with  the
remark  : “ Well,  that  is  off  my  mind  ”,  and  then  at  once
proceeds  as  follows  : — )

I saw  Mrs  Verrall  and  gave  her  a sign  like  this.


(Hand  consults  spirit.)
and  said  I have  crossed  it.

Y’’es.  (assent  to  reading)  I thought  she  might  get  a glimpse
of  my  U.L).  [i.e.  “ understanding  ”]  of  her  Greek.

J.  G.  P.  I have  a message  from  her  to  you ; but  before  I give  it
will  you  describe  in  a word  the  thing  which  you  said
you  crossed  1


BAR.


154


[part


J.  G.  Picldington.

J.  G.  P.  I see ; I understand.  Now  I’ll  give  you  Mrs.  Verrall’s
message  ; and  then  when  you  have  got  all  the  messages
that  you  have  prepared  off'  your  mind  I will  look  at
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  and  see  if  they  have  come  through.

Very  good.

(Entirely  diff'erent  subjects  are  then  referred  to.)

I wish  her  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall’s]  message  to  me.

J.  G.  P.  Yes ; I’ll  give  it.

(J.  G.  P.  then  reads  the  following  extract  from  a letter
addressed  to  him  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  March  12,  1907  : —
“ He  [i.e.  the  Myers  control]  has  told  me  why  aiVos
ov'pai'os  (XKVfjLwv  had  certain  associations  for  hwi ; he  has
told  me  this  since  he  spoke  to  me  through  ‘ the  light  ’,
and  I am  sure  I did  not  know  the  reason  for  those
associations — though  of  course  I knew  the  associations —
Avhen  I said  the  words  to  him.

You  may  also  say,  if  you  like,  tliat  I understand  Larches  and
Laburnum.”)

Very  good

(Other  matters  are  then  referred  to,  and  meanwhile  Hodgson
has  taken  the  place  of  Myers  as  communicator.)

J.  G.  P.  If  you  have  anything  special  to  say  will  you  say  it  now  ?

(Hodgson  communicating.)  Yes  did  Mrs  V.  draw  a bar

J.  G.  P.  Shall  I look  ?

yes.

J.  G.  P.  Then  wait,  please.

let  me  call  Myers  first  I want  him  to  hear.  (A  pause.)

(Myers  communicating)  yes.  are  you  here  1 ...  .

did  she  draw  a

(A  figure  intended  to  represent  a bar  was  again  drawn  at  this

point,  but  so  faintly  that  it  cannot  be  reproduced.)


155


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

(Meanwhile  J.  G.  P.  had  opened  for  the  first  time  the
envelopes  containing  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  11
and  12,  1907,  and  read  the  contents.)

J.  G.  P.  I cannot  see  that  she  did.

She  D

J.  G.  P.  (interrupting)  Oh  ! Myers,  one  moment.

yes.

.J.  G.  P.  I forgot.  She  wrote  “ may  there  be  no  moaning  at  the  bar  ”,
but  she  didn’t  draw  a bar.

When  I put  out  to  sea.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

IVhy  didn’t  you  say  so  before.

.1.  G.  P.  It  was  some  days  ago  she  wrote  it,  and  I was  looking  out  for  a

picture.

I am  not  so  sure  that  I gave  her  this  full  impression  but
I did  Cjuote  those  lines  to  her.  I also  cpioted  them  to
this  light.

J.  G.  P.  That  is  so ; I know.

while  Hodgson  held  it  for  me.  [i.e.  during  the  waking-
stage.]

.J.  G.  P.  Yes,  luckily  a lady  present  here  [i.e.  Miss  Newton]  heard
them.

(J.  G.  P.  then  urges  the  trance-personalities  to  speak  very
slowly  and  distinctly  during  the  waking-stage..)

I will  do  my  very  best,  that  is  a help

(Hodgson  communicating)

but  we  ask  if  she  wrote  D —

H.  [i.e.  Hodgson.]

J.  G.  P.  I can’t  see  that  she  did.


156


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


(Myers  communicating)

I for  fear  you  would  not  U.D.  Bar


U.D.  I


it  for  her  [i.e.  “ I drew  it  for  her  ”]  and  said

Hallam

did  you  get  it  ?

J.  G.  P.  I think  not.  I am  nearly  sure  not.

Arthur  Hallam.

J.  G.  P.  I understand.  You  wrote  “ Pilot  face  to  face  ” ; but  not
Arthur  Hallam,  so  far  as  I remember,  [i.e.  the  words
“Pilot  face  to  face”  had  ajjpeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Feb.  26,  but  not  the  name  Arthur  Hallam.
AVhen  I said  I understood  I was  thinking  of  the  state-
ment made  by  some  ridiculous  person  that  by  “ my  Pilot  ”
Tennyson  had  meant  Arthur  Hallam.  Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

yes.  No  I mean  I gave  it  to  the  spirit  of  this  light  while
it  was  returning.

J,  G.  P.  You  did  ; you  did.

I did  that  so  as  to  connect  the  words  with  its  authors
individuality.

[At  the  sitting  “ authors  ” was  read  as  “ central  ”,  but  I have
little  doubt  that  “authors”  is  the  true  reading.  J.G.P.^

J.  G.  P.  I quite  understand.

thank  you.

[I  was  at  one  time  disposed  to  regard  this  statement  as  an  instance
of  the  kind  of  evasiveness  not  uncommon  with  trance-personalities  ;
but  careful  consideration  of  the  context  has  led  me  to  think  that
the  “her”  in  the  phrase  “I  drew  it  for  her  and  said  Hallam”  is


157


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

more  properly  to  be  referred  to  Mrs  Piper  than  to  Mrs  Verrall.
After  MyerSp  had  stated  that  he  gave  the  quotation  from  Crossing
the  Bar  to  Mrs  Piper  he  is  twice  interrupted,  first  by  myself,  and
then  by  Hodgsonp  who  interposed  the  remark  “ but  we  ask  if  she
wrote  D”.  MyerSp  then  goes  on  to  add  to  his  statement  as  if  no
interruption  had  occurred,  and  accordingly  “ her  ” would  naturally
apply  to  “ this  light  ” (i.e.  Mrs  Piper).  I had  evidently  been  dis-
tracted by  Hodgson’s  asking  “ if  she  (i.e.  Mrs  Verrall)  wrote  D ”,
and  so  took  “her”  to  refer  to  Mrs  Verrall  also.

But  it  really  matters  little  which  interpretation  is  accepted.  If
we  suppose  that  MyerSp  meant  that  he  had  given  “Arthur  Hallam  ”
to  Mrs  Verrall,  then  this  experiment  failed  in  so  far  as  her  script
does  not  actually  contain  the  name,  although  it  must  be  admitted
that  those  portions  of  her  script  which  refer  to  avro?  orparos  dKvpajv
inevitably  suggest  the  personality  of  Arthur  Hallam.  If  on  the
other  hand  we  suppose  that  Myersp  meant  that  he  had  given  Crossing
the  Bar  and  “ Arthur  Hallam  ” to  Mrs  Piper,  but  only  Crossing  the
Bar  to  Mrs  Verrall,  then  that  absolutely  accords  wdth  the  facts.
The  really  important  point  was  that  the  poem  and  the  name  should
have  been  unmistakably  combined  by  MyerSp ; and  so  long  as  the
combination  was  made  it  hardly  matters  whether  it  was  made  in
both  places  or  not.  Note  hj  J.  G.  P.]


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Pigocr  held  on  April
29,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Verrall  and  Miss  A.  Johnson.)

(Myers  communicating.)  listen,  listen.

When  I referred  to  the  Greek  words  I referred  to  a picture
also.

Did  you  U.D.  it?

Mrs  V.  Do  you  mean  when  you  spoke  to  me  you  referred  to  a
picture  ?

Yes.  when  you  were  not  here.

I have  had  some  reference  to  a picture,  but  not,  I think,  in
connection  with  those  three  Greek  words.


Mrs  V.


158  J,  G.  Piddington.  [part

No  but  I gave  you  some  reference  to  it  here  and  later  I
referred  to  it  again  when  you  were  not  here.

[The  picture  here  mentioned  by  Myersp  I take  to  refer  to
the  drawing  of  a bar  made  at  the  sitting  of  March  13
(v.  Appendix  k).  I had  myself  at  that  sitting  called  it
a ‘ picture  Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

Mrs  V.  Yes,  wait  a moment.  I think  I must  have  this  clear.  Ma}"
I go  through  itl

Yes  do.

Mrs  V.  When  I was  last  here  I gave  you  three  Greek  words  and  I
asked  for  their  meaning  and  associations.  You  have
given  me  the  meaning  through  this  light,  and  have  given
me  direct  the  explanation  of  the  associations — which  I
did  not  know.  You  have  also,  so  I am  told,  given  one
association  through  this  light.  The  only  thing  now  to
complete  it  would  be  to  say  through  this  light  the  name
of  the  Greek  author  of  those  words.

Yes  I U.D.  all  that  well,  (written  while  Mrs  Verrall  was
speaking.)

I do  not  exactly  catch  your  meaning  about  the  next  to  the
last  word.

[By  “next  to  the  last  word”  “author”  seems  to  be  meant.]

Mrs  V.  (misreading  “next  to  the”)  “Next  step”?  I mean  the
thing  to  finish  the  evidence.

Oh  did  you  say  water

Water  yes  what  word  came  before  your  last  ?

Mrs  V.  Wait  a minute.

What  did  you  say  Arthur?

Mrs  V.  No,  I did  not  say  Arthur.  I said  you  have  done  everything
necessary — but  one  more  point  might  be  added — you
might  give  the  author.

Spell  it.


MrsV.  A— u


159


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Oh  I U.D.  Author

Oh  3^es  I did  not  catch  it.  You  mean  my  reference  to
Horace.  [Mr.s  Verrall  had  asked  Myersp  to  answer  a
question  about  a certain  ode  of  Horace  v.  pi>.  397  et  seg.]

Mks  V.  “ My  reference  to  Horace  ” '?

(Rector  communicating.)

(Hand  shakes.)  Confusion  about  your  question —

he  is  thinking  of  that  question  also.

Mbs  V.  Yes,  yes.

let  him  wait  a minute  and  get  the  word  author  through
his  mind.

(Hand  consults  spirit.)  Author  wait  a minute  and  he’ll
answer

(Myers  addressing  Rector)  You  were  very  clear  about  the
Latin  message  and  I am  quite  pleased.

Mbs  V.  Yes.  (To  Miss  Johnson)  He’s  commending  Rector,  I think.

(Myers  addressing  Rector)  the  other  reply  jmu  must  get  now
so  she  will  U.D.  me.

(Rector  to  Myers.)  Yes  I’ll  try.

(Rector  to  Mrs  V.)  He  wishes  to  U.D.  if  he  can  reply  about
the  Horace  question  on  third  [i.e.  on  \Vednesday].

Yes  (assent  to  reading)  to  Mrs  S.

Mrs  V.  Oh  ! that’s  to  Mrs  Sidgwick,  I suppose.

(Myers  communicating)  Yes  very  good.  I remember  my
reference  to  the  Greek  words  well.

this  was  what  brought  to  my  mind  the  thought  about  Sasia
Saisia.

(Rector  communicating)  too  bad.

Mrs  V.  Print  it.

Francis

Siaa  No  you  do  not  U.D.  + R.

Mrs  V.  No,  I know  I don’t.


1(30


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

I said  the  last  sentence  . . . which  I gave  you.  was  okumen
[i.e.  aKVfMxiv  wrongl}^  transliterated].

Best  to  U.D.  each  word  separately  if  you  can  and  it  will  be
easier  to  U.D.  him  R.

(Myers  communicating.)

I gave  it  here  several  times  and  I thought  you  U.D.  it.

Mrs  V.  Yes.  What  was  it  that  you  gave  me  1 A message  about
Horace  1
Yes.

Mrs  V.  No,  I don’t  think  the  message  has  been  given  to  me  about
Horace.  I have  no  knowledge  of  it.

(Rector  communicating)

Oh  yes.  I think  there  is  still  some  muddling  wait  and  I
will  explain.  I did  not  mean  Horace  at  all  he  Mr  Myers
means.

Del

Del

Mrs  V.  “Del”  or  “Det”?

Borg  Yes  Sw  Borg.

Mrs  V.  Swedenborg  1
yes.

Mrs  V.  You  gave  me  a message  about  Swedenborg.  [At  the  sitting
of  Jan.  29 — but  before  the  test-cjuestion  was  first  put — •
MyerSp  had  correctly  reminded  Mrs  Verrall  of  a con-
versation which  Mr  Myers  had  had  with  her  about
Swedenborg.]

(Myers  communicating)

Yes  I did.

Mrs  V.  Yes,  you  did  ; and  I found  it  true.

thank  you  now  you  U.D.

Yes  one  thing  more  cleared  ujr  at  last.

(encouragingly)  Yes.

now  listen  I referred  to  another  character  both  here  and

when  you  were  alone I wish  to  go  back  to  St

Paul


Mrs  V.


LVII.]


^4  Series  of  Concordant  Antomatisms.  IGl

my  reference  to  azure  a blue  sea

[There  is  much  confusion  throughout  this  sitting  and  especially
just  here;  but  I think  that  the  main  points  at  which  the
trance-personalities  were  driving  can  be  apprehended  fairly
clearly.

Myersp  begins  by  referring  spontaneously  to  the  Greek  words  ;
and  this  gives  Mrs  Verrall  an  opportunity  to  ask  for  the
name  of  the  author  of  them  to  be  given  in  the  trance.
Myersp  has  some  difficulty  in  hearing  the  word  “ author  ”,
and,  when  he  does  catch  it,  it  reminds  him  of  another
question  about  an  ode  of  Horace  which  Mrs  Verrall
had  asked  him  to  answer.  Eector  spontaneously  explains
that  Myers  has  confused  the  two  questions.  Myersp  then
says  to  Rector  “the  other  reply  you  must  get  now  so
she  will  U.D.  me”:  “the  other  reply”  meaning,  as  I
think,  obviously,  the  reply  to  the  question  about  afros
oi'/Dai'os  u.KVfj,(Dv,  and  “you  must  get  now”  meaning  that
the  intention  was  to  give  this  reply  at  this  sitting.
Myersp  then  asks,  in  a parenthesis,  if  he  can  answer
the  question  about  Horace  some  other  da}q  and  then
returns  to  the  subject  of  the  Greek  words.  Mrs  Verrall
got  confused  at  this  point,  probably  owing  to  her  diffi-
culty in  deciphering  the  script,  and  thought  that  he  was
referring  to  the  Horace  question.  She  asked  if  this
was  so,  and  M}mrsp  said  “Yes”;  but  Rector  came  to
the  rescue  and  explained  that  Myers  was  not  talking
about  Horace  at  all ; he  did  not,  it  is  true,  say  that
Myers  was  talking  about  the  Greek  words,  but  I think
it  is  clear  that  by  denying  that  the  subject  of  Myers’s
communications  was  Horace  he  implied  that  it  was  the
only  other  subject  which  had  been  alluded  to  in  this
part  of  the  sitting,  namely  the  Gi’eek  words.  Conse-
quently I am  of  opinion  that  “ Sasia  Saisia  Francis  ”
“ Del  Borg  Sw  Borg  ”,  “ St  Paul  ” and  “ azure  a blue
sea”  are  all  meant  to  be  connected  with  the  Greek
words.  When  Swedenborg  was  mentioned  Mrs  Verrall,
not  seeing  at  this  time  any  connection  between  Sweden-
borg and  the  authorship  of  the  Greek  words,  thought
Myersp  was  alluding  to  a talk  about  Swedenborg  which
in  an  earlier  sitting  he  said  he  had  had  in  his  lifetime
with  her.  Myersp  remarks  parenthetically  that  he  is  glad

L


162


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

that  Mrs  Verrall  found  the  reference  correct,  and  then
returns  to  the  subject  of  the  Greek  words  again.

The  phrase  “ another  character  ” should  be  noted.  One
“character”  is  Swedenborg,  the  other  St  Paul.  Myersp
says  he  gave  “St  Paul”  both  to  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs
Piper.  In  Mrs  Yerrall’s  script  St  Paul  is  not  mentioned,
but  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  March  13  the
name  “ St  Paul  ” was  uttered  disconnectedly ; and  it  was
on  March  13  that  the  Tennysonian  associations  with  afros
ovpavus  aKVfx(Dv  were  given.  The  word  “ character  ” may
have  been  used  to  indicate  that  “Swedenborg”  and  “St
Paul  ” were  not  mere  names  chosen  for  the  purpose  of
a cross-correspondence  experiment,  but  that  the  emphasis
was  on  their  individualities.

After  the  mention  of  St  Paul  Myersp  proceeds  to  recall  his
“reference  to  azure  a blue  sky”,  a subject  clearly  con-
nected with  the  paraphrase  of  arVos  ovpavo^  6.Kvp.m’  given
in  the  trance  on  March  6.  (v.  Section  XX.)

Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]

....  I also  referred  to  the  word  Vaunt
Mrs  V.  “ Vaunt  ” ?

yes.  The  word  vaunt  and  I want  you  to  look  it  up.

Mrs  V.  You  want  me  to  look  up  the  word  “Vaunt”?

Yes  in  your  writing

Mrs  V.  Yes,  I will.  [At  the  sitting  of  April  24  MyerSp  twice  said
to  Mrs  Sidgwick  that  he  had  given  “Vaunt”  to  Mrs
Verrall;  but  on  neither  occasion  did  he  connect  it  in
any  way  with  the  Greek  words.  We  may  accordingly
assume  that  he  is  here  introducing  a fresh  topic.

Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

(Rector  communicating)  When  he  gets  that  off  his  mind  he
will  reply  to  the  rest  ....

(Myers  communicating)  look  out  for  the  words  I am  trying
to  give  you  now  I),  etc.  D.  etc.


Mrs  V.  “ Date  ” ? First  letter  is  D 1


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


163


begins  with  D.

Mrs  V.  I know  the  word.  I told  it  to  my  husband  yesterday.  Shall
I say  it  1

Yes.  What  is  it  1

Mrs  V.  Dante.

Yes.  yes.  Very  good  indeed,  but  not  right  yet.

[Myersp  here  undoubtedly  meant  by  the  word  beginning
with  a D “Dwarf”.  “Dwarf  and  Giant”  was  a cross-
correspondence message  chosen  by  J.  G.  P.  for  transmission
to  Mrs  Verrall.  v.  pp.  87-94.]

(Myersp  then  urges  Mrs  Verrall  to  try  to  get  the  word
beginning  with  a D ; and  explains  that  he  thought  it
had  come  out  wrongly  in  her  script  as  “Dianna”.)

Now  I will  refer  to  your  previous  question.  [Mrs  Verrall’s
question  about  the  authorship  of  the  Greek  words
apparently.]

I remember  repeating  the  name  here  well  and  I gave  it
as  answer  to  your  question.  [What  name  was  meant
does  not  appear.]

It  was  with  reference  to  the  poem  Halceon  Halcon  days  and
it  appeared  again  with  you

Mrs  V.  Yes,  it  did.

as  I worked  very  faithfully  to  get  it  through.

I also  mentioned  one  name.

Mrs  V.  Yes,  what  name  1

(The  name  “Dante”  was  then  spelt  after  great  difficulty.
Mrs  Werrall  certainly  gave  no  help;  nor  indeed  could
she  have  done  so,  for  she  had  no  notion  of  what  word
the  trance-personalities  were  trying  to  write.  “Dant”
was  written  straight  off;  but  to  get  the  final  e occupied
several  minutes.  This  was  all  the  more  curious  because
Mrs  Verrall  had  previously  pronounced  the  name  Dante.)

Mrs  V.  Eight ; now  we’ve  got  the  word — you’ve  now  spelt  the  word
“ Dante  ”.

Yes.  Yes.  that  is  right  also.  yes.  right.


104


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Mrs  V.  I discovered  yesterda}^  in  my  script  two  allusions  to  that
word  which  I had  not  seen  [i.e.  understood].  I men-
tioned them  to  my  husband  and  wrote  them  down  and
said  I should  get  that  word  tomorrow.  Well,  I think
that’s  rather  good.  [Mrs  Verrall  had  previously  stated
that  she  had  got  the  word  in  her  script,  so  there  was
of  course  nothing  evidential  in  the  mere  mention  of  it
in  the  trance;  significance,  however,  attaches  to  “Dante”
having  been  mentioned  just  after  Myers  had  said:  “I
will  refer  to  your  previous  question”,  i.e.  as  to  the
authorship  of  the  Greek  words ; for  in  the  catalogue  of
“ the  strong  souls  who  have  claimed  to  feel  ” ecstacy
[Human  Personality  Vol.  II  p.  261)  Dante  figures  as  well
as  Plotinus,  St  Paul  and  Swedenborg.

Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]

I U.D.  well  all  I tried

(Myers  then  again  urges  Mrs  Verrall  to  try  to  write  the
other  word  beginning  with  a D which  he  has  been
impressing  on  her  for  a long  time.)

Mrs  V.  Rector,  I don’t  think  we  ought  to  keep  this  light  much
longer.

(Rector  communicating)  I am  sorry  we  did  not  get  on  better
today.

perhaps  you  will  read  better  next  time.

Mrs  V.  Yes,  I’ve  been  rather  stupid  to-day.

»

I cant  register  unless  }'ou  U.D.  well.

(Myers  communicating)  I am  going  to  return  next  time  and
give  you  several  answers.

Now  listen

that  was  the  answer  to  the  Greek

Greek  words,

got  it  clearly  %


Mrs  V.  Yes,  I have  clearly.


165


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Amen.  Amen,  at  last.

Anything  more  before  I go.  Myers.

[There  is  nothing  to  which  “that”  in  the  phrase  “that  was
the  answer  to  the  Greek  words  ” directly  refers ; but  I
think  it  is  meant  to  refer  specially  to  “ Dante  ” and
generally  to  most  of  the  subjects  mentioned  in  the
sitting.  However  wanting  in  definiteness  many  of  the
statements  made  in  this  sitting  were,  it  is  important  to
note  that  Mrs  Verrall  at  the  time  took  the  references
to  St  Paul  and  Swedenborg  to  be  connected  with  her
question  about  the  authorship  of  the  Greek  words,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  at  the  time  she  failed  to  see  any
relevance  in  them.  Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

itC

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vjith  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Ajoril  30,
1907.

(Present : Miss  Alice  Johnson,  alone  at  this  point.)

(Rector  communicating)  We  greet  you  as  a new  friend  in  a
way  and  before  the  lady  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  appears  Mr
Myers  would  like  to  speak  with  you.

Miss  J.  I shall  be  very  glad  to  see  Mr  Myers.

(Myers  communicating)  Yes  good  morning,  my  friend,  how
are  you  ? I am  very  glad  to  see  you.  Yes  I promised
to  give  my  reply  to  the  Greek  words  and  as  soon  as  I
saw  the  light  departing  I caught  Rector  and  gave  it
to  him  and  he  will  now  give  it  to  you.

Miss  J.  Yes,  do,  please.

as  I believe  it  will  be  a better  proof  of  identity  than  it
would  be  if  I gave  it  to  Mrs  Y —

Do  you  U.D.

Miss  J.  Yes,  cpiite.

AVell  my  reply  to  the  Greek  words  are  [sic]  this  that  is  this

is  this

They  reminded  me  of  HOMERS

(Miss  J.  tried  in  vain  to  read  the  letters.)

No  you  haven’t


16(3


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


.Miss  J.  H ?

Yes.

Miss  .J.  E ?

No — H (followed  by  a string  of  linked  o’s).

Miss  J.  I can’t  read  that  sign.

OMERS.  ILLIARD.

It  is  the  name  of  the  author.

Miss  J.  Horace?  (hand  signifies  dissent.)

H HOMER’S

Miss  J.  Oh!  “Homer”.

(hand  thumps  assent)  HOMER’S  ILLIARD.

Yes  it  reminded  me  of  Homer’s  illiard.  [sic]

(Miss  J.  endeavours  to  decijdier  the  last  word.)

• • •

I ILLIARD.  (heavy  dots  over  the  i’s.)

Miss  J.  (still  unable  to  read  “Illiard”)  I will  tell  Mrs  Verrall  and
she  will  understand,  as  she  knows  more  about  Homer
than  I do.

Yes  she  will
Listen  to  me

I thought  it  would  be  a better  proof  of  my  own  individuality
if  I gave  you  my  reply  before  she  appeared.

I wish  you  now  to  U.D.  that  her  question  was
was  this — Yes  (assent  to  reading)

Mr  Myers  can  tell  me  can  you  tell  me  what  these  Greek
words

(Miss  J.  asks  for  the  word  before  “ Greek  ” to  be  repeated.)

what  these — these  THESE

Greek  words  remind  you  of.

now  my  answer  is  Homer’s  illiard

(Miss  J.  fails  to  decipher)

Homers.


Miss  J.  Oh  ! “ Iliad  ”.  Ah,  yes.
Do  you  U.D.?


167


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Miss  J.  Yes,  quite,  thank  you.

thank  you  very  much

I promised  to  give  it  to  Mrs  S [i.e.  Mrs  Sidgwick]  but  thought
it  would  do  as  well  to  give  it  you

(Other  matters  are  then  mentioned.)

Miss  J.  Shall  I go  and  ask  Mrs  Verrall  to  come  in  now?

Certainly.  Yes.

(Miss  J.  goes  out,  and  comes  back  at  once  with  Mrs  Verrall,
who  takes  her  place  next  to  Mrs  Piper  and  is  at  once
addressed  by  Rector  as  follows  : — )

Good  morning  friend  of  earth  I am  glad  to  greet  you  again.

MesJV.  Thank  you.  Good  morning.

I have  seen  Mr  Myers,  and  he  gave  me  his  reply  to  your
Greek  words.

and  I gave  them  [i.e.  I,  Rector,  acting  as  amanuensis  for
Myers]  to  the  other  lady  before  you  appeared  Tell  her  to
speak  them.

[Rector  then  clearly  changed  his  mind  and  decided  to  repeat
the  answer  himself.]

all  right.

HOMER’S  ILLIARD.

is  that  all  right  ?

Mbs  V.  Yes,  that  seems  all  right.

anything  more  ? about  it  ?

.Mbs  V.  I have  nothing  more  to  say.

Very  good

(Myersp  then  gives  Mrs  Verrall  encouragement  and  advice
about  her  automatic  writing ; and,  after  one  or  two  other
topics  have  been  touched  upon,  Mrs  Verrall  repeats  a
question  asked  some  weeks  earlier  about  an  Ode  of  Horace.
To  this  MyerSp  replies  as  follows  ; — )

I believe  I can  recall  it  in  time.  I will  certainly  go  over
my  memories  very  carefully  and  do  my  utmost  to  recall.

I believe  I have  completed  my  answer  to  the  Greek.


168


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Mrs  V.  Very  likely.  Yes,  I think  so.

If  I have  not  remind  me.

Mrs  V.  Yes.

You  asked  for  Author’s  name.

Mrs  Y.  Yes,  the  name  of  the  author  of  the  three  Greek  words :
ai’iTOS  ovpavus  dKVpMV.

It  reminded  me  of

Pa  [I  think  it  quite  likel3^  that  “Pa”  was  an  attempt  to
spell  “Plato”.  The  story  of  Socrates’  vision  of  the  white-
robed  woman  is  told  in  Plato’s  Krito.  Note  hy  J.  G.  P.l
SOC

(Mrs  V.  read  “C”  first  as  L and  then  as  E.)

c c Socr

tse.

Mrs  V.  Socrates  ?

Yes.

yes  it  reminded  me  of  Homer  also
I got  Socratese  [sic].

S c in  my  mind.

and  it  came  through  your  question,
anything  more  about  it  1

Mrs  V.  No,  I think  not.  I think  there  is  nothing  more  for  me  to
say.

Just  let  me  bring  it  out  when  I can.

I will  try  and  recall  his  name.

Mrs  Y.  But  do  not  trouble ; you  have  given  me  a very  complete
answer  to  that  question  already.

Yes  this  I thought  you  would  U.D.

I could  of  course  go  over  it  again  but  I hope  it  is  not
necessaiy.

Mrs  Y.  No,  not  at  all,  we  have  it  quite  clear.


Amen.


169


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

C)

Extract  from  sitting  ^vith  Mrs  Pi]per  held  on  May  1,  1907.

(Present  : Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  A.  Johnson.)

(Myers  communicating.)  Now  what  other  c^uestion  did  you
give  me  to  answer.

E.  M.  S.  Well,  you  told  me  you  would  tell  me  about  the  Greek  words
that  Mrs  Verrall  spoke  of.

Oh  yes.  I said  it  reminded  me  of  a poem  But  there  was
some  confusion.  I think  about  the  questions  as  I U.D.
them.

E.  M.  S.  Shall  I tell  you  again  what  Mrs  Verrall  asked  you?

Yes  if  you  will  be  so  kind,  it  is  not  that  I forget  but  it  is
with  difficulty  that  1 U.D.

E.  M.  S.  She  said  aiVds  ovpavos  aKvyuiv  and  asked  you  what  is  the
meaning  and  association  of  these  Greek  words  for  you.

I remembered  and  referred  to  it  some  time  ago.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did.

I thought  it  was  clear  but  if  not  1 shall  go  over  it  again
and  repeat  it  here.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  please  do.  There  has  been  a little  confusion,  1 think.

Yes  1 believe  so  and  I am  very  sorrj^  about  it  but  I will
yet  make  it  clear  so  you  will  U.D.  it  as  I did  the
other.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  thank  you.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  loith  Mrs  Pifcr  held  on  May  G,
1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  A.  Johnson.)

(Rector,  after  some  preliminary  remarks  announces,  “ Mr
Myers”.)

(Myers  communicating.)  Good  morning.


170  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

E.  M.  S.  Good  moruing,  Mr  Myers.

I am  very  pleased  to  meet  you  again.

E.  M.  S.  And  1 to  meet  you.

Will  you  say  to  Mrs  Verrall
Plotinus

(E.  M.  S.  fails  to  decipher.)

P L 0 t i n u s.

E.  M.  S.  I will.  What  is  that  ?

My  answer
E.  M.  S.  Good,
to

autos

ouranos  okumen  [in  error  for  ‘ akumon  ’].

E.  M.  8.  Very  good  indeed.  She  will  be  very  glad.  I believe  that  is
what  she  wanted.

It  is  my  answer.

E.  M.  S.  (with  conviction)  Thank  you,  Mr  Myers,  that  is  excellent.

You  are  welcome  cjuite

E.  M.  S.  That  is  a splendid  test.

It  is  only  to  keep  my  jjromise  to  her.  and  to  you

E.  M.  8.  Thank  you.  I am  so  much  pleased.

I am  also  pleased  as  I caught  Rector  at  our  last  meeting  and
spelled  it  out  to  him  clearly.

E.  M.S.  It  is  very  clever  of  you  both.

give  her  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  my  love,  and  tell  her  my  interest
is  unceasing.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I will.  I am  very  glad  it  is.

I answered  this  particularly  to  keep  my  promise  to  you  all
three.


LVii.J  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  “ All  three  ” is  it  1


171


My  good  friend  Piddington  and  yourself  and  Mrs  Verrall.

E.  M.  S.  Oh  ! yes,  I see.

Now  I believe  this  completes  the  answer  to  the  Greek
Cjuestion.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  it  does.

and  the  Latin  I have  previously  answered.  I believe  through
both  lights  sufficiently  for  you  to  U.D.  that  I have  really
answered  at  last.


I could  not  help  thinking  of  Tennyson  in  one  of  the  inc[uiries
and  Browning  in  the  other.


(^)

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  loith  Mrs  Piper  held  on  May  27,

1907.

(Present : Sir  Oliver  and  Lady  Lodge.)

(Myers  communicating.)  1 did  give  Dwarf
Dwarf.

O.  J.  L.  Oh!  “Dwarf”.

Yes  P.  will  U.D.

O.  J.  L.  “ Piddington  wdll  understand  ” 1
Do  you  U.D.  Plotinus
0.  J.  L.  “ Plotinus  ? ”

Yes.

0.  J.  L.  1 know  something  about  Plotinus,  yes.

This  is  my  answer  to  the  Greek  message.

Mrs.  V’s  Greek  message  to  me  was
Autos  ouranos  okumen.  [sic]

My  reply  was  Plotinus.


[part


T72  J.  G.  Picldington.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  so  I gather.

She  asked  me  the  author.

[This  second  reference  to  the  subject  was  no  mere  padding;
on  the  contrary  it  was  a thoroughly  intelligent  comment
on  a remark  made  hy  0.  J.  L.,  which  is,  however,  pur-
posely suppressed.  Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  June  2,
1907.

(Present  : Sir  Oliver  and  Lady  Lodge.)

0.  J.  L.  (spontaneously  introducing  the  subject)  I understood  about
“Autos  ouranos  ” etc.  It  is  considered  the  best  thing
you  have  done.

(Myers  communicating)  Really  1 I thought  of

Tennyson  directly  she  gave  me  her  words.  Socratese  [sic]
and  the  original  aspect.


XII.


“ VIOLETS.’'

We  have  just  seen  how  two  cross-correspondences — “Moan-
ing at  the  bar”  and  “Arthur  Hallam  ” — were  tirst  given  in
the  waking-stage ; the  first  without  any  indication,  the  second
with  only  the  merest  glimmer  of  a hint  that  a parallel  was  to
be  sought  in  the  script  of  some  other  automatist.  In  the
same  way  the  words  “ laurel  wreath  ” came  out  first  during
the  waking-stage ; though  in  this  instance  the  context  in-
timated, if  it  did  not  directly  indicate,  that  they  constituted  a
cross-correspondence.

We  have  now  to  consider  a case  where  a word  uttered  in


173


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

the  waking-stage,  but  not  accompanied  by  any  statement
which  clearly  marked  it  as  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence
experiment,  had  appeared  an  hour  or  so  previously  in  the
script  of  another  automatist.

Extract  from  record  of  icords  spoken  by  Mrs  Piper  during
the  waking-stage  of  the  tro/nee  of  March  11,  1907.

(Present  Mr  John  Russell  and  J.  G.  P.)

I

Ah  ! (about  eleven  words  inaudible)

Safe  suffer  that  (?)  They’re  safe.  Pm  sure  father  too.  [So
heard  by  Mr  Russell  ]

Fai-ther.

Faith.  I say  we  will  read(?)  to  you.

(smiles)  Ah  ! MTll,  w^ell.  Yes,  very  careful.  (?)

Dr  Hodgson.  I’m  glad.  (A  pause.)

Eh?

Violets.  [So  heard  by  Mr  Russell.]

J.  G.  P.  Is  it  “ violets  ” ?

Dr  Hodgson  violets  and  the  lady  said  Fairer  (exag-

gerated accent  on  the  first  syllable,  which  was  pronounced
much  as  fe  would  be  in  French.)

(Here  followed  many  inaudible  words)

would  be  and  her  husband  (?)  hudband  (?)  and  Herdeman
Herdment  (?)

That  w'as  I’ll  help  him  and  Herdeman  Herdeman

It’s  setting  dark.  I’m  glad.  I’m  sure  I don’t  know  what

o o

to  do.

M^hat  w'ill  I do  ? A1  A1  (Looks  round  as  though  at  a
group  of  people  standing  in  a circle.)

Goodbye.  One  of  them  said  Fair

I w'anted  to  see  if  I could  find  my  son  and  — — — —

Cobwebs.  Pick  them  off.  [or,  “think  I’m  off.]

Cross.

Well  then,  I never.  That’s  Mr  Myers,  and  I want  the
cobwebs  off  my  face.  (Waves  hand  in  farewell.)  Aches.
^Yell,  well,  well.  I never.  Spiders.


174


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


The  space  between  the  words  “ Dr  Hodgson  ” and  “ violets  ”
represents  a similar  space  left  in  ray  original  record.  When  a
word  was  inaudible  it  was  my  habit  to  make  a dash.  Where
I heard  a word  but  had  no  time  to  write  it  down  I left  a
space  as  here  ; and  I would  seize  the  first  opportunity  to  fill
in  the  blank.  Here  I failed  to  do  so ; but  I have  no
reasonable  doubt  that  the  word  which  should  fill  the  blank
is  “ said  ” ; and  that  the  sentence  ran  “ Dr  Hodgson  said  violets
and  the  lady  said  Fairer”.

Attempts  had  been  made,  certainly  once,  and  perhaps  twice
before,  to  pronounce  clearly  in  the  waking-stage  the  word
which  in  this  instance  I put  down  as  “Fairer”.

Thei'e  are  two  secondary  points  which  I want  as  far  as
possible  to  establish  before  dealing  with  the  main  subject  of
this  section;  the  first,  that  “Fairer”  was  the  announcement
of  an  attempted  and  possibly  successful  cross-correspondence ;
the  second,  that  such  phrases  as  “I  said”,  “he  said”,  “they
said  ” and  so  on,  are  employed  in  the  waking-stage  to  indicate
that  the  word  or  words  thus  “said”  were  the  subjects  of
attempted  cross-correspondences.

Extract  from  record  of  the  words  spoken  hy  Mrs  Piper  during
the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  Feb.  12,  1907.

(Head  rises  12.57  p.m.)

(Many  inaudible  words.)

— where  I live.

Ben-shot  01)  (Many  words  lost.)

I didn’t  want  to  go.  At  Fairy.

J.  G.  P.  “At  Ferry”?

Fairy.  (Many  words  or  names  inaudible.)

Fanculie.  (?)

You  must  be  patient  with  me  because  I have  only  learned
how —

What  did  you  say  to  me  about  handing  over — ?

Well,  I go.  I’ll  go  to  Mrs  Verrall.

It  should  be  noted  that  very  soon  after  the  word  “ Fairy  ”
was  twice  pronounced  on  Feb.  12  came  the  phrase  “I  go.  I’ll
go  to  Mrs  Verrall”.  These  words  were  spoken  about  1 p.m.


175


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

On  the  same  claj’,  Feb.  12,  1907,  at  11  a.m.  Mrs  Verrall  had
written  the  script,  quoted  in  full  on  p.  113,  which  begins: —

The  voyage  of  Maeldune  faery  lands  forlorn
and  noises  of  the  western  sea

It  will  be  seen  then  tha,t  within  two  hours  of  the  production
of  this  script,  containing  the  word  “ faery  ”,  a communicator
in  the  Piper  trance  utters  the  word  “ Fairy  ” twice  without
explanation,  or  rather,  I should  say,  without  audible  explana-
tion, and  very  soon  afterwards  adds : “ I’ll  go  to  Mrs

Yerrall  The  word  “ fairy  ” had  no  significance  for  the  sitter
Mr  IMacalister,  nor  can  I connect  it  in  any  way  with  any
subject  mentioned  in  earlier  or  later  sittings.

I did  not  see  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  12  till  8 a.m.  on
Feb.  15,  so  that  my  hearing  of  the  word  as  “Fairy”  cannot
have  been  due  to  suggestion.  The  first  word  spoken  during
the  waking-stage  of  the  sitting  of  Feb.  26  (see  above  p.  94)
was  possibly  “Fairies”.  “Fairies”  on  Feb.  26,  and  “the  lad}’
said  Fairer”  on  March  11,  look  to  me  like  attempts  at
repeating,  perhaps  with  the  intention  of  explaining,  the  utter-
ance of  Feb.  12.  “Fairies”  seems  to  have  been  uttered  by
George  Pelham;  “Fairer”  was  attributed  to  “the  lady”.  Who
is  roeant  by  “ the  lady  ” is  a matter  of  conjecture,  but  she  may
well  be  a lady  again  and  again  spoken  of  in  the  trance  as
co-operating  with  the  group  of  which  Myers,  Hodgson  and
George  Pelham  are  the  most  prominent  members ; and  this
group  is  especially  concerned  with  the  conduct  of  the  ci’oss-
correspondence  experiments.  “Fairy”  occurs  only  twice  in  Mrs
Yerrall’s  script,  once  as  quoted  above,  and  once  on  Jan.  22  in
a script  consisting  of  16  lines  of  verse,  of  which  the  first  eight
run  thus  : —

“A  thousand  years  shall  roll
A thousand  aeons  pass
Ere  the  imprisoned  soul
Shall  see  as  in  a glass
Darkly,  a vision  dim

Flit,  phantomlike  and  fair,

A breath,  a fairies’  whim
Thro’  the  encircling  air


176  ./.  G.  Piddington.  [part

I will  now  illustrate  by  quotations  the  use  of  the  formula
“ I said  ” etc.  in  the  wakino-stao-e.

Jan.  23,  1907:—

Well.  I said  forget-me-iiots  — — — ■ — ^ that’s  a hobby  of
mine.

Ache.s.  (Smiles.)  Well,  I never.  There’s  Mr  Myers  and  Dr
Hodgson,  both  in  the  ring.  You  pull  it  offl  Getting
dark,  isn’t  if?  Oh!  dear.  Oh!  dear.  Spiders  again.

lu  the  earlier  part  of  this  sitting  Hodgsoiip  had  said  that
he  was  going  to  impress  Mrs  Verrall  with  the  words  : “ Basket
full  to  overflowing  of  forget-me-nots”;  and  I haven’t  the
least  doubt  that  the  words  uttered  subsequently  in  the  waking-
.stage  were  intended  as  a reminder  of  his  intention.

March  19,  1907  : —

Mr  Hodgson.  How  did  he  gef?

Where  is  Billy'?  Give  my  love  to  Billy.  Billy.

lYhat  is  it?

They  said  they  were  saying

Mary  say  say  day

Most  dead,

What  does  Mr  H.  want  to

Tell  Mrs  Sidgwick  that  there  is  a roses  and  lilies  and
forget-me-nots.  I said  them  all  to  her.  [By  “her”  Mrs
Verrall  is  probably  meant.]

Hallelujah.  Hallelujah.

If  she  gets  it  she  has  it.

My  hand  is  dead.

I thought  I saw  Dr  Hodgson  in  the  light.

Here  too  the  meaning  is  clear.  Hodgsonp  i,s  represented
as  informing  Mrs  Sidgwick,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  sitting,
that  he  has  given  the  words  “ roses,  lilies  and  forget-me-nots  ”
to  some  automatist  unnamed.  It  will  be  seen  that  the
original  subject  of  the  experiment — “forget-me-nots” — has  been
added  to ; but  this  is  paralleled  by  other  instances ; e.g.
“Church”  was  changed  first  to  “Church  edifice”  and  then  to
“Church,  Chapel,  Monument”;  and  “Shores,  lakes  and  rivers,
or  stream  ” was  subsequently  modified  to  “ O’er  mountains,  seas,
^ The  dashes  indicate  words  not  caught.


177


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Aidoniatisms.

and  lakes  and  rivers  ” and  then  again  to  “ Mountain,  field  and
sky,  also  hills  ” (v.  p.  233).

April  17,  1907:—

Tanatos  [repeated  in  later  sittings  and  then  clearly  recognised
as  “ Thanatos  ”].  I am  saying  it.  Thank  you  Mr — -

Certain  my  faithful  wife.

O’er  mountains  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers  (v,  p.  29-5).

“ Thanatos  ”,  as  will  appear  later,  is  a fairly  certain  cross-
correspondence, and  “ Mountains,  seas  ” etc.  also.

May  7,  1907:—

I hear  you.  Yes  yes  no.

Not  deaf.

I will,  ni  see.

Daffodils.

I want  to  say  — — Thanatos  (v.  p.  297).

On  April  29  Myersp  had  given  “ Daffodils  ” as  a cross-corre-
spondence, and  “Thanatos”  is,  as  I have  just  said,  a fairly  certain
cross-correspondence  experiment  too.^

I think,  then,  that  we  are  justified  in  taking  the  words
“ Violets.  Dr.  Hodgson  [said]  violets  ”,  spoken  during  the
waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  March  11,  to  mean  that  Hodgsoiip
is  announcing  the  word  “ violets  ” as  one  chosen  for  a cross-
correspondence experiment.

I find  what  looks  like  a correspondence  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
sciipt  of  the  same  day,  March  11,  1907,  which  was  begun  at
10.55  a.m. : some  two  hours,  that  is,  before  “ violets  ” was
uttered  by  Mrs  Piper.  The  opening  passages  of  this  script
read  as  follows  : —

With  violet  buds  their  heads  were  crowned

violaceae

odores  [violet-coloured  scents]

Violet  and  olive  leaf  purple  and  hoar}n

The  city  of  the  violet  and  olive  crown.

News  will  come  of  her.  of  Athens

The  shadow  of  the  Parthenon.

^ Cf.  “I  say  Aphrodite”,  p.  269.

M


178


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


Three  times  in  these  few  lines  is  the  woicl  “violet”  repeated,
and  “ violaceae  ”,  of  course,  also  introduces  the  meaning-  of  violet.
This  reiteration  of  the  same  word  or  idea  has  already  been
noticed  in  the  “ Laurel  wreath  ” script,  and  it  will  be  met  with
again  (v.  pp.  98,  202  and  223).

Those  familiar  with  what  takes  place  in  the  waking-stage  of
Mrs  Piper’s  trance  will  remember  that  flowei's  are  oiten  mentioned.
While  the  medium  gradually  passes  out  of  the  state  of  profound
trance,  in  which  the  scrii>t  is  produced  and  of  which  she  retains
no  recollections,  she  enters  into  a lighter  stage  of  trance  in
which  she  is  more  or  less  conscious  of  her  “ spiritual  ” sur-
roundings. She  recognises  and  greets  her  spirit  friends,  who
give  her  messages  for  their  friends  on  the  other  side,  and  bring
her  bunches  of  flowers ; and  these  she  smells  with  keen  delight,
and  will  often  exclaim  at  their  beauty.  In  the  series  of  sittings
which  took  place  in  England  roses  were  the  flowers  most  often
mentioned  in  this  way,  and  roses  and  lilies  the  only  flowers  so
mentioned.  Violets  were  never  thus  referred  to.  And  apart  from
this  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  “ violets  ” mentioned  in  the
wakiug-stage  on  March  11  were  not  flowers  offered  to  the
medium  by  spirits  but  a word  reported  by  her  as  having  been
spoken  by  a spirit.

The  word  “violet”  occurs  twice  only  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
during  the  period  under  review ; for  the  first  time  in  the  script
of  March  11,  cjuoted  above,  for  the  second  in  that  of  April  29  ;
and  the  passage  in  which  it  occurs  on  April  29  explicitly  refers
back  to  the  earlier  script.^

The  envelope  containing  Dlrs  Yerrall’s  script  of  March  11

bears  the  postmark  “ Cambridge  2.15  p.m. Mr.”  The

date  is  not  legible,  but  must  be  March  11,  as  the  envelope
was  found  by  Miss  Johnson  on  her  arrival  at  Hanover  Square
at  10.45  a.m.  on  March  12.  She  forwarded  it  unopened  to  me,
and  I received  it  at  10.50  a.m.  on  March  13.  At  the  time,
then,  when  “violets”  was  uttered  in  the  trance  of  March  11,  no
one  but  Mrs  Verrall  had  seen  her  script  of  March  11.

1 “ I tried  before — I spoke  of  Athens,  but
j'ou  did  not  complete.

Golden  City  of  God.  The  city  of  Cecrops
is  violet  and  hoary — look  back  at  that.”


lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


179


XIII.

“ CUP.”

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Evper  held,  on  March
18,  1907.

(Present  : Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Mrs  John  Eussell.)

(Hodgson  communicating)  You  are  a stupid  lot  if  you  cant
U.D.  when  I am  shouting  at  the  top  of  my  voice  to  make
you  U.D.

Don’t  you  remember  how  I used  to  shout  when  I got  excited
and  interested.

Mrs  Russell.  Yes.

Cup  used  (1)

C C

Mrs  Russell.  Is  it  somebody  else  now  ?
no  not  at  all.

In  the  manuscript  copy  of  the  record  of  the  sitting  made  by
Mrs  Sidgwick  from  which  this  extract  is  taken  the  words  given
above  as  “ Cup  used  C C ” were  not  written  out,  hut  tracings
were  given  of  the  original  script,  as  in  all  cases  where
any  doubt  existed  as  to  the  true  reading.  In  revising  the
type-written  copy  of  her  first  manuscript  copy  of  the  record
Mrs  Sidgwick  erased  the  tracing  of  the  second  word  and  sub-
stituted the  reading  “ used  ”.

When  I first  saw  the  record  I read  the  first  word  as  “ Cup  ”,
and  the  third  as  “C  C”,  and  I accepted  wdthout  question  Mrs
Sidgwick’s  reading  “ used  ” for  the  middle  word.  I couldn’t  see
any  meaning  in  the  words  and  thought  no  more  about  them.
On  August  25,  1907,  in  the  course  of  going  over  the  record
of  the  sitting  of  March  18,  among  others,  for  the  purpose  of
writing  this  paper,  I noticed  these  three  words,  and  again  failed


180  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

to  make  any  sense  of  them ; though  I had  no  doubt  that  “ cup  ”
was  the  first  word  and  “ C C ” the  lastd  Half  an  hour  later
I was  searching  through  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  for  some  reference
or  other  when  I noticed  that  her  script  of  March  19  contained
the  names  “Russell”  and  “John”  and  the  drawing  of  a cup.
I then  thought  that  it  would  be  advisable  to  ask  Mrs  Sidgwick
to  examine  the  words  in  the  original  script  of  March  18  again.
This  I asked  her  to  do  without  giving  her  any  hint  of  how  I
read  the  words,  or  of  why  I wished  her  to  re-examine  the  script.
Her  reply,  made  after  a careful  examination  of  the  original,  was  :
“ I should  be  satisfied  with  the  reading  ‘ Cup  used  CC  if  it
made  any  sense  in  the  context.  The  letter  p seems  plain,  and
the  contraction  Cu  into  what  is  written  [i.e.  the  contracted  form
of  the  letters  Cu  in  the  script]  quite  in  accordance  with  custom.
The  ‘used’  is  almost  exactly  like  the  word  in  other  places:  e.g.
three  lines  above”.  I think  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  independent  corrobo-
ration of  my  reading  of  two  out  of  the  three  words  makes
these  two  words  certain.  Mrs  Sidgwick  deciphers  the  middle
word  as  “ used  ”,  and  I agree  that  the  symbols  could  represent
that  word,  but  I do  not  believe  that  it  is  the  true  reading,  though
I cannot  suggest  a better.  My  objection  to  “ used  ” is  that
to  make  sense  of  the  phrase  it  must  be  supposed  to  be  elliptical
for  “ Cup  has  been  (or,  ‘ is  to  be  ’)  used  as  a cross-correspond-
ence ” ; and  not  only  are  ellipses  of  this  kind  not,  so  far  as
my  knowledge  goes,  in  keeping  with  the  diction  of  Mrs  Piper’s
script,  but,  even  if  they  were,  the  expression  would  still  be
an  awkward  and  unnatural  one ; whereas  the  language  of  the
Piper  script  is  obvious,  simple  and  unforced.  There  are  excep-
tions, real  or  apparent,  but  they  are  very  rare ; and  the  former
occur,  I fancy,  when  there  is  some  temporary  difficulty  in  “ com-
municating” (which  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  on  the
occasion  in  question),  while  the  latter  are  due  to  wrong
decii)hering,  and,  as  I have  found  more  than  once,  disappear
when  the  true  reading  has  been  discovered.  Still,  the  two

1C.  C.  as  an  abbreviation  for  “cross-correspondence”  was  used  in  the  Piper
script  both  previously  and  subsequently  to  its  use  here  : e.g.  a few  minutes
earlier  in  this  same  sitting  Rector,  as  amanuensis  for  Hodgsonp,  had  written  :
“ I want  very  much  to  work  over  the  C.C.  messages  as  I think  Myers  U.D.  very
well  now  the  modus  operand!  ”.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Aictomatisms.  181

important  words  are  certain,  and  must  mean  that  “ Cup”  forms
the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence  experiment.  Two  other
points  seem  clear:  (1)  Hodgsonp  was  communicating  imme-
diately before  the  three  words  were  written,  and  continued  with-
out inten’uption  to  communicate  afterwards.  The  sitter  thinking
the  letters  “ C C ” stood  for  initials  asked  : “ Is  it  somebody
else  now  ? ”,  and  was  met  with  the  rejoinder:  “ No,  not  at  all  ”.
In  spite,  therefore,  of  the  abrupt  and  unexplained  introduction
of  the  words  they  must  be  attributed  to  Hodgsonp.

(2)  The}^  were  addres.sed  apparent^  to  Mrs  John  Russell,
herself  an  old  friend  of  Dr  Hodgson’s,  and  the  wife  of  one  of
his  most  intimate  friends  at  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge  ;
or,  if  not  actually  addressed  to  Mrs  Russell,  they  were  at  any
rate  written  in  the  middle  of  communications  addressed  to  her
by  Hodgsonp.

I now  quote  two  scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  which  certainly  seem
to  correspond  in  part  with  the  incident  just  described.

Copy  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  19,  1907,  begun  ai
10.30  p.m.

(Scribbles)  a knot  of  blue  ribbon.

Finny  not  another

Rendall  or  Russell  was  the  name.  This  is  the  first
time  I have  said  — John  but  that  is  not  his  name.

The  rooms  were  adjoining  and  there  was  a better  outlook
from  his.  There  is  something  red  in  this  connection  a
picture  on  the  wall  I think  of  a hunting  scene  I have
said  something  of  that  before.  Look  back.  Two  hunting
crops  on  the  wall  over  a silver  cup.


Try  for  more  tomorrow

I want  to  give  you  a message  from  Henry  Sidgwick.
Try  tomorrow.  I will  do  what  I can.  Tuus.


1S2


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Copy  of  Mrs  VcrrcdTs  script  of  March  20,  1907.

Coral  and  a fisher’.s  line  Mischabel  not  the  Hornli
that  was  a mistake

Mischabelhorner  he  meant  to  say.  Has  that  no
recollections  for  you  ? The  fire  that  was  so  high  — the
bivouac  fire  — and  the  fires  of  the  solstice  in  the
Rhone  valley.

Beltane  fires.  I want  to  say  the  word  Beltane  Fires
elsewhere.  St  John’s  feast  John  the  Baptist,  but  the
Evangelist  is  our  patron  and  we  keep  his  feast.  Johannes
Evangelista  and  the  Eagle  on  the  Gate.

These  scripts  will  require  a good  deal  of  explanation  and
comment,  but  we  may  simplify  the  first  by  detaching  its  final
paragraph,  which  evidently  introduces  a new  topic  unconnected
with  what  precedes.

The  opening  phrase  “ a knot  of  blue  ribbon  ” I take  to  be
no  more  than  a first  attempt  to  get  the  name  “ John  ” :

“ Oh  ! dear,  what  can  the  matter  be  ?

Johnny's  so  long  at  the  fair;

He  promised  to  buy  me  a bunch  of  blue  ribbon
To  tie  up  my  bonny  brown  hair.”

For  “Finny”  I can  suggest  no  explanation.

No  one  except  the  members  of  the  Committee  in  charge  of
Mrs  Piper’s  sittings  and  Miss  Johnson,  and,  of  course,  the  sitters
themselves,  knew  that  Mr  and  Mrs  John  Russell  were  to  have
sittings  with  Mrs  Piper,  and  no  one  except  the  sitters  them-
selves, Mrs  Sidgwick,,  Miss  Johnson  and  myself  knew  the  dates
on  which  their  sittings  were  to  be  or  were  held.  It  is  therefore
interesting  to  find  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  mentioning  “John”
and  “ Russell  ” on  a day  when  Mrs  John  Russell  had  had  a
sitting.

Mrs  Verrall  told  me  in  September  1907  that  she  did  not
know  the  Ru.ssells,  did  not  know  that  a Mr  John  Russell
bad  been  at  St  John’s  College  with  Dr  Hodgson,  and  did  not
know  that  Dr  Hodgson  had  had  such  a friend,  nor  that  he  and
his  wife  were  to  have  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper.  On  Sept.  10
Mr  Russell  wrote  to  Mrs  Sidgwick : — “ We  do  not  know  Mrs
A^ei'rall,  and  think  it  unlikely  that  she  should  ever  have  heard  of


LVii.]  xi  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  183

ns  01-  our  sitting.  We  had  kept  perfect  faith  with  Mr  Piddington
and  mentioned  the  fact  of  our  sitting  to  no  living  soul

The  first  part  of  the  script  of  March  19  ends  with  the  words
“ Try  for  more  tomorrow  We  should  therefore  expect  to  find
the  script  of  the  following  day  supplementing  that  of  the  day
before.  I believe  that  the  whole  of  the  script  of  March  20  aims
at  giving  expression  to  one  thing,  and  one  thing  only : namely,
a College  dedicated  to  S.  John  the  Evangelist,  e.g.  St  John’s
College,  Cambridge ; and  the  manner  in  which  the  idea  eventu-
ally attains  expression  is  both  curious  and  instructive.

The  real  goal  (St  John  the  Evangelist)  is  not  immediately
attained,  the  scribe  has  first  to  travel  by  devious  bye-paths  to
a half-way  house  on  the  main  road  (St  John  the  Baptist),  and
from  that  point  only  is  his  progress  direct  and  easy.

To  this  script  Mrs  Verrall  appended  two  contemporaneous
notes ; (1)  “ Mischahelhdrner.  I once  saw  a bivouac  fire  high
up  on  these  mountains  before  a ‘ new  ’ ascent.”

(2)  ‘'fires  . . . valley.  I also  once  saw  fires  on  S.  John’s
Eve  in  the  Upper  Pth  one  Valley.”

First,  then,  a fire  on  a Swiss  mountain  seen  by  the  automatist
is  recalled.  (Note,  by  the  way,  the  assonance  between  “fisher”
and  “Mischa”,  as  if  the  former  was  a first  mishearing  of  the
latter.)  This  in  turn  recalls  other  fires  seen  in  Switzerland  on
St  John’s  Eve,  i.e.  June  23;  and  these  again  suggest  the
Beltane  or  solstice  fires.  The  fires  seen  in  the  Upper  Rhone
Valle}^  (June  23),  the  mention  of  the  solstice  (June  21  or  22),
and  of  the  Beltane  or  solstice  fires  have  helped  the  emergence
of  the  Feast  of  St  John  the  Baptist  (June  21);  and  from  the
Baptist  to  the  Evangelist  the  transition  is  easy  and  direct.^

^ Mrs  Verrall  writes  on  August  11,  1908: — “We  twice  saw  fires  high  up  in
the  Alps,  one  on  the  Mischabelhorner,  from  the  village  of  Fee  in  the  year
1885.  At  Fee  we  met  Mr  Gerald  Rendall  (now  Head  Master  of  Charterhouse
School),  and  it  was  the  only  time  (I  think)  we  ever  met  him  in  the  Alps.
We  saw  a good  deal  of  him,  and  in  particular  he  was  interested  in  the  climb
which  produced  the  bivouac  fire.  I think  he  and  our  party  actually  stood
together  and  watched  it ; anyhow  we  discussed  it  together.”  It  was  Dr  Verrall
who  reminded  Mrs  Verrall  of  this  connection  of  Dr  Rendall  with  the  incident
of  the  bivouac  fire.  This  new  information  forcibly  suggests  that  the  name
“Rendall”  in  the  script  of  March  19  was  the  first  emergence  of  the  Swiss
allusions  in  that  of  March  20,  and  furnishes  another  reason  for  regarding  these
two  scripts  as  complementary  of  each  other.


184  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

In  a third  note  appended  contem|)oraneously  to  the  script
Mrs  Verrall  wrote;  ‘'The  Evangelist  etc. — probably  allusion  to
St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.”  The  significance  of  this
allusion,  if,  as  I think  we  must,  we  treat  the  script  of
March  20  as  the  sequel  to  that  of  March  19,  lies  in  the  fact
that  Dr  Hodgson  and  Mr  John  Ru.ssell  were  up  at  St  John’s
College,  Cambridge,  together : “ The  Evangelist  is  our  patron
and  we  keep  his  Feast”.  It  was  clear  enough  that  a John
Russell  or  Rendall  was  connected  with  the  script  of  March
19,  but  there  was  no  indication  of  who  the  scribe  might  be,
for  the  signature  “Tuus”,  which  is  that  of  Myersy,  belongs
apparently  to  the  last  paragraph  onl}".  There  is  in  the
script  of  March  19  a phrase:  “This  is  the  first  time  I have
said — John  but  that  is  not  his  name  ” : which,  if  we  assume,  as
indeed  I think  we  must  assume,  some  supernormal  reciprocation
between  the  phenomena  of  Mrs  Verrall  and  those  of  Mrs  Piper,
fairly  satisfactorily  identifies  Hodgsony  as  the  “ 1 ” of  this
script;  for  at  the  Piper  sitting  held  on  the  morning  of  March  19
Hodgsonp  for  the  first  time  unmistakably  gave  the  name
“John”  as  that  of  some  one  closely  connected  with  the  sitter,
Mrs  Russell.  I take  the  words:  “ — John  ^ but  that  is  not  his
name”:  to  mean  that  “John”  was  not  the  name  by  which  Mr
Russell  was  usually  called.  He  was,  as  a matter  of  fact,  called
Jack  by  his  wife  and  by  Dr  Hodgson.

I will  now  summarise  the  evidence  for  my  statement  that
Hodgsonp  for  the  first  time  at  the  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held
on  March  19  clearly  applied  the  name  John  to  some  one  closely
connected  with  Mrs  Russell.

At  Mr  Russell’s  first  sitting  on  March  4 a lady  communicates
who  in  later  sittings  is  identified  as  the  sitter’s  mother ; the
name  “ J ohn  ” is  not  written  in  the  script,  but  the  first  words
spoken  in  the  waking-stage  were  perhaps  “John  and  Nelly”
(they  are  marked  with  a query  in  the  record).  Hodgsonp
sends  no  message  to  the  sitter,  and  the  only  reference  to  him
after  the  sitter’s  entrance  is  in  the  waking-stage,  when  Mrs
Piper  in  the  course  of  describing  her  experience  in  the  spirit-

^ For  the  manner  in  which  empliasis  is  thrown  on  the  name  John  by  means
of  a preceding  dash  cf.  Miss  VerralFs  script  of  Jan.  12,  1907: — “robbing
Peter  to  pay — Paul,”  jr.  32.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  185

world  states  that  “ that  lady  had  said  that  she  was  glad  that
she  had  found  Dr  Hodgson  The  doubtful  words  pronounced
in  the  waking-stage,  “John  and  Nelly”,  are  in  no  way  con-
nected with  Hodgsonp.

At  Mr  Russell’s  second  sitting  on  March  5 “ the  lady  ” says :
“you  will  understand  when  I say  John  and  Ry  are  both  with
me”.  John  was  the  name  of  the  sitter’s  father,  Ry  the  pet
name  of  his  mother.  Hodgsoiip  did  not  put  in  an  appearance
at  this  sitting.

At  Mr  Russell’s  third  sittino-  on  March  11  the  name  John  is

O

not  mentioned,  and  Hodgsonp  is  not  referred  to  except  in  the
waking-stage  and  then  only  in  general  terms.

At  Mr  Russell’s  fourth  and  last  sitting  on  March  12  Hodgsoop
announces  that  he  is  going  to  help  “ the  lady  ” to  speak  to  her
son.  In  the  course  of  this  sitting,  at  whicli  a good  deal  of
confusion  occurred,  the  sitter  said  to  Rector;  “Ask  Hodgson  to
help  Whereupon  Rector  wrote  : “ He  is  helping  the  old  lady
all  he  can.  He  remembers  you  very  well  After  this  Hodgsonp
addresses  remarks  to  the  sitter,  and,  though  he  tries  to  give  the
nickname  by  which  Mr  Russell  called  Dr  Hodgson,  he  does
not  attempt  to  give  Mr  Russell’s  name.

At  Mrs  Russell’s  first  sitting  on  March  18  she  is  greeted
by  Hodgsonp  immediately  on  her  entrance  with  the  words :
“ Hello  old  chap  are  you  first  rate  ? I am  very  glad  to  see
you  old  M ”.  At  this  point  he  apparently  perceives  his
eiTor  and  corrects  it  spontaneously  and  appropriately  by
adding : “ Tell  your  old  chap  [to]  understand  me.  I do  not
think  he  did  absolutely ; but  if  you  understand  better  than
he  did,  we  shall  get  on  finely — first  rate  together.  You
remember  how  I used  to  walk  up  and  down  your  dining  room
explaining  my  ideas  to  you  and  him  ? ”.  To  this  the  sitter
replies  “ Generally  ” ; and  then  a word  is  written  which  Mrs
Sidgwick  has  left  undeciphered  in  her  record  of  the  sitting.
This  word,  if  there  were  any  dot  observable,  would  certainly
be  read  as  “Jim”,  but  there  is  no  sign  of  a dot,  and  it  may  be
“John”;  and  indeed  I think  it  is,  as  the  i is  very  rarely
undotted  in  the  Piper  script.  Whether  it  be  “John”  or  “Jim”,
it  is  certainly  a name,  and  I have  no  doubt  was  intended  to
refer  to  and  explain  the  immediately  preceding  “ him  ”.  Mrs


186


/.  G.  Picldington.  [part

Sidgwick  asked  what  the  word  was,  but  the  question  was  not
answered.  A little  later  on  followed  some  passages  which  I
will  transcribe  from  the  record  : —

(Hodgson  communicating)  Do  you  remember  Jackson

Mes  Russell.  No.

Yes  Jack

E.  M.  !S.  “Jack”?

Mrs  Russell.  Jack,  of  course.  Is  it  Jack?

well  of  course  it  is.  Jack.

Mrs  Russell.  Of  course  I remember  Jack.

son  was  inadvertently  spoken

Mrs  Russell.  I don’t  know  Jackson.

Yes  it  should  be  Jack  only.

The  name  Jack  is  again  referred  to  at  Mrs  Russell’s  second,

o y

and  last,  sitting  held  the  next  day,  March  19,  1907 : —

(Hodgson  communicating)  and  when  I said  Jack  or  John  you
did  not  U.D.  me  at  all.  I am  not  in  a dream  dear(?)
I am  myself  and  clearly  (?)

Mes  PmssELL.  Who  is  ?

R.H.  [i.e.  Richard  Hodgson.]

Later  the  subject  is  brought  up  again  : —

(Hodgson  communicating)  Do  you  remember  who  you  called
Jack.

let  me  get  this  clear  first.  Jack.

Mes  Russell,  (misreading)  “We  called  Jack?”
we  called  Jack,
whom  you  called  Jack.

Mrs  Russell.  Of  course  I remember.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Autoniatis'ms.  187

Jack  is  right.

Mrs  Russell.  Who  is  Jack  1

I am  Hodgson  speaking  now.

Mrs  Russell.  Yes.  Who  is  Jack?

Jack  is  clear,  isn’t  it.

Mrs  Rus.sell.  Yes,  quite  clear.

Jack.  I ask  you  to  follow  me  carefully  and  I shall  (?)
not  (?)  make  (?)  no  mistake.

Is  Jack  all  right?

Mrs  Russell.  Do  you  mean  is  the  name  right?

Yes.  I remember  it  well.

Mrs  Russell.  Yes.

I cant  forget  everything,
dont  you  remember  our
you  say  Jack.

I know  you  used  to  say  Jack.

I U.D.  perfectly  what  I am  driving  at.  I had  such  good
times  with  you.  You  were  so  kind  always,  am  I getting
dreamy  ?

such  good  times  at  your  house  I’ll  never  forget  oh(?)  don’t
you  remember  what  I said  about  coming  over  here  ?

Mrs  Russell.  Yes.

I said  I hoped  I should  do  better  than  some  of  them  had.
Remember  ask  J

Mrs  Russell.  “Ask  J”?  Yes.
he  will  remember  it


J U.D.


188


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Then  again  later : —

listen  is  J all  right.

give  love  to  him.  you  U.D.  I am  not  mistaken  at  all


And  again : —

I am  not  dreaming  in  the  least,  ask  J he  may  remember
Mrs  Russell.  I will.

Amen

anything  else  I can  do  ? I will  surely.

Jack.

Now,  had  it  not  been  for  the  light  thrown  on  this  sitting
by  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  19,  written  some  ten  hours
later,  one  might  have  said  in  one’s  haste  that  this  wearisome
insistence  on  the  name  Jack  was  mere  “ fishing  ” for  the
purpose  of  getting  the  sitter  to  say  whose  name  it  was.  But  I
think  Hodgsonp  knew  what  he  was  about,  and  was  justified  in
saying;  “I  understand  perfectly  what  I am  driving  at”.  His
object,  so  it  seems  to  me,  was  to  signalise  this  sitting  by
the  reiteration  of  some  simple  topic  so  that  a reference  else-
where to  the  same  topic  should  at  once  recall  its  original
context.

If  “John”  is  the  right  reading  and  not  “Jim”  on  March

18,  then  Hodgsoiip  first  said  “John”  on  that  day;  but  in
any  case  the  name  is  not  explicitly  applied ; whereas  on
March  19  the  name  is  clearly  given,  and  it  is  made  perfectly
plain  that  “John”  or  “Jack”  is  the  name  of  the  sitter  who
preceded  Mrs  Russell  ; and,  though  it  is  not  stated  that
“John”  or  “Jack”  is  her  husband,  yet  it  is  certainly  im-
plied— e.g.  in  the  phrase  “your  old  chap” — that  he  is  very
intimately  connected  with  her.

I interpret,  then,  the  words  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March

19,  “This  is  the  first  time  I have  said — John  but  that  is  not
his  name”,  thus To-day  is  the  first  time  that  I,  Hodgson,
have  said  the  name  John  clearly  through  Mrs  Piper;  John,


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  189

however,  is  not  the  name  by  which  my  triend  was  called  but
Jack.”  If  this  interpretation  is  right,  and  if  we  are  justified
in  taking  the  script  of  March  20  as  supplementing  that  of
March  19,  the  following  coincidences  between  Mrs  Piper’s  and
Mrs  Verrall’s  scripts  result ; —

On  March  18  Mrs  Russell,  the  wife  of  John  Russell  an  old
College  friend  of  Dr  Hodgson’s,  has  her  first  sitting  with
Mrs  Piper.  In  the  course  of  it  and  while  Hodgsonp  is
addressing  communications  to  Mrs  Russell,  the  words  “ Cup
used(?)  C C”  are  written.  These  words  are  abruptly  intro-
duced, and  not  only  are  unrelated  to  their  immediate  context,
but  no  connection  can  be  traced  between  them  and  anything
else  that  was  written  or  uttered  during  the  sittings  attended
either  by  Mr  and  Mrs  Russell  or  by  any  previous  sitter.  Shortly
before  these  three  words  were  written,  a name,  which  is
perhaps  “John”,  was  connected  with  the  sitter  by  Hodgsonp.

On  the  morning  of  March  19  Mrs  Russell  had  her  second
sitting  with  Mrs  Piper;  and  in  the  course  of  it  Hodgsonp,
who  clearly  recognised  that  an  intimate  relationship  existed
between  her  and  the  previous  sitter  (Mr  John  Russell),  re-
marked: “when  I said  Jack  or  John  you  did  not  understand
me  at  all”;  the  name  John  this  time  being  distinctl)^  written
and  mentioned  as  an  alternative  to  “ Jack”.  After  this  great
stress  is  laid  upon  the  name  Jack,  which  is  brought  in  again
and  again  in  an  apparently  meaningless  way.

On  the  evening  of  March  19  Mrs  Verrall,  who  had  no  normal
knowledge  of  any  of  these  facts,  wrote  a piece  of  automatic
script  in  which  appeared  the  name  Russell,  the  phrase ;
“ This  is  the  first  time  I have  said — John  but  that  is  not  his
name”,  and  the  word  “cup”  followed  by  a picture  of  a
cup ; and  after  the  picture  came  the  words  “ Try  for  more
tomorrow  ”.

On  the  morrow  she  wrote  a script  embracing  a series  of
topics,  strung  together  by  association  of  ideas,  which  issues
finally  in  what  is  certainly  an  allusion  to  St  John’s  College,
Cambridge.^

A few  points  in  the  two  scripts  of  March  19  and  20,  which
I have  not  touched  on  so  far,  require  comment.

' One  of  the  gates  of  St  John’s  College  has  an  eagle  over  it.


190


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

The  rooms  were  adjoining  and  there  was  a better  outlook
from  his.  To  be  consistent  with  the  interpretation  offered
above  these  words  ought  to  mean  that  Mr  Russell  and  Dr
Hodgson  when  they  were  up  at  St  John’s  occupied  adjoining-
rooms,  and  that  the  outlook  from  the  former’s  was  the  better
of  the  two.  This  was  not  the  case,  for  Mr  Russell,  writing
to  Mrs  Sidgwick  on  Sep.  10,  1907,  says : “ Our  rooms  were
not  adjoining.  Moreover  his  [i.e.  Hodgson’s]  were  never  in
College  except  once  or  twice  in  a ‘ Long  ’.  He  always  ‘ kept  ’
in  Park  Street  ; with  an  outlook  from  his  sitting-room  over
Midsummer  Common.  (Is  it  so  called?)  My  outlook  was
into  the  second  court.”

There  is  something  red.  in  this  connection  a 'picture  on  the
wall  I think  of  a hunting  scene  I have  said  something  of
that  before.  Look  back.  Two  hunting  crops  on  the  wall  over
a silver  cup.

With  regard  to  this  i\Ir  Russell  writes  in  the  same  letter : —
“ Hunting  scenes  and  crops  were  never  at  all  in  my  line  (or
his)  and  the  only  ‘ silver  cup  ’ I ever  had  in  my  rooms  was
a pewter  I won  on  the  river.”

I have  said  something  of  that  before.  Look  back.

On  Jan.  10,  1907,  Mrs  VeiTall’s  script  had  contained  the
following ; — “ But  the  picture  has  colour  in  it — red  colour  I
see  and  movement.  In  full  cry  the  hounds  are  running  to
the  cover  on  the  lea.”

The  unveridical  reference  to  a hunting  scene  and  hunting-
crops  in  the  script  of  March  19  may  perhaps  be  explained
in  this  way.  The  real  aim  of  the  scribe  was  the  expression
of  the  word  or  idea  “ Cup  ” ; and  to  get  at  it  he  liad  to  lead
up  to  it  by  first  introducing  the  idea  of  sport  and  sporting
trophies.  Hence  the  revival  of  an  eai'lier  reference  in  the
script  to  a hunting  scene.  The  word  “crops”  may  have  got
introduced  partly  by  a natural  association  of  ideas  with  hunting
and  partly  from  the  similarity  in  sound  and  form  between
” crop  ” and  “ cup  ”.  Or,  if  we  suppose  that  the  scribe  was
alluding  to  the  pewter  cup  won  by  Mr  Russell,  the  words
“there  is  something-  red  in  this  connection”  may  have  applied
to  the  colours  of  the  Lady  Margaret  Boat  Club  (i.e.  the  Boat
Club  of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge),  which  are  scarlet —


191


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

the  scarlet,  or  very  nearly  so,  of  a hunting  coat ; and  the
scarlet  colours  (or  scarlet  “ blazer  ”)  may  then  have  provoked
a recollection  of  the  script  of  Jau.  10  with  its  allusion  to  a
h untin o-  scene.

o

The  Evangelist  is  our  2)cctron  and  we  kee'j;)  his  feast.

Mr  Russell  writes : “ I think  I do  remember  once  keeping  the
Feast  of  St  John  at  a great  spi’ead  in  Hall.  But  I fancy
everybody  in  residence  did  so  too.”

But  the  unveridical  references  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  scripts  do
not  of  course  affect  the  main  question  of  the  cross-correspon-
dence, which  to  me  at  least  seems  to  be  well  established.

The  script  of  March  19  is  the  onl}’  script  written  by  Mrs
Verrall  during  the  period  under  review  which  contains  either
the  word  “ cup  ” or  a drawing  of  a cup.  Now  it  is  at  least  a
veiy  curious  coincidence  that  the  only  time  that  the  word
“ cup  ” occurs  in  any  piece  of  script  written  by  Mrs  Holland
during  the  period  under  review  is  also  on  March  19.

I quote  the  concluding  paragraphs  of  this  script  only,  as
the  preceding  paragraphs  refer  to  quite  diflerent  subjects.

Copy  of  p)(^'>’t  of  Mrs  HollamTs  script  of  Mamch  19,  1907
(begun  at  10.4-5  a.-.m.  Calcutta  time).

We  have  been  striving  for  some  time  to  eliminate  some  of
the  rubbish  in  these  message  [sic] — To  send  a possible
speck  or  two  of  gold  without  the  obscuring  mounds  of
rubble  and  gravel — But  the  minds  of  both  percipient
and  receiver  make  this  very  difficult.  To  the  readers
of  this  I would  specially  say  Dismiss  your  preconceived
notions — They  are  liindrauces  not  helps — Be  in  no  hurry
to  identify  Only  have  patience — The  water-drops  have
not  as  yet  begun  to  wear  the  stone — After  the  cup  has
been  worn  in  the  stone  the  falling  drops  can  be  collected —
but  not  before — At  present  there  is  only  a damp  spot — ■
inadequate — for  thirst  quenching
I can’t  form  no  signature.

The  use  of  the  word  “ cup  ” to  describe  the  cavity  made
in  a stone  by  dropping  water  is  not  of  course  parallel  to
the  use  of  the  word  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script:  a fact  which
at  first  sight  might  seem  slightly  to  lessen  the  significance  of
the  coincidence.  But  the  same  word  may  intentionally  have


192


[part


J.  G.  PidcUngton.

been  employed  in  one  sense  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  case,  in  another
sense  in  Mrs  Holland’s,  and  in  an  undefined  sense  in  Mrs
Piper’s,  in  order  to  construct  a less  straightforward  instance
of  cross-correspondence  than  would  have  I’esulted  had  the
word  been  used  in  all  three  cases  in  the  same  sensed
Still,  although  the  word  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  undoubtedly
means  a cavity,  the  phrase  “ inadequate  for  thirst  quenching  ”
introduces  also  the  ordinary  sense  of  “cup”  as  a thing  for
drinking  out  of

The  concluding  paragraphs  of  Mrs  Holland’s  script  from  “ Be
in  no  hurry  to  identify  ” clearly  seem  to  indicate  that  some-
thing is  needed  to  complete  the  message  ; which  would  in  fact
be  true  if  Mrs  Holland’s  “ cup  ” is  one  term  of  a triple  cross-
correspondence.

I would  particularly  impress  on  the  reader  the  very  small
interval  of  time  which  separated  the  appearances  of  the  word
“ Cup  ” in  the  .scripts  of  Mrs  Piper,  Mrs  Holland  and  Mrs
Verrall.  The  dates  and  hours  were  these:

Mrs  Piper:  March  IS,  about  11.40  a.m.

Mrs  Holland  : March  19,  script  begun  at  10.45  a.m.  Calcutta
time  (i.e.  4.45  a.m.  Greenwich  time)  and  ended  10.53  a.m.

Mrs  Verrall : March  19,  script  begun  at  10.30  p.m.

And  I think  that  we  may  even  fairly  reduce  this  period  of
35  hours  to  27,  for  even  if  spirits  “ rest  not  day  and  night  ”
mortal  automatists  must ; so  if  we  allow  Mrs  Verrall  8 hour.s’
.sleep  on  the  night  of  March  18,  it  results  that  within  27
working  hours  a word  given  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  as  a cross-
correspondence was  written  automatically  for  the  first  and
only  time  during  a period  extending  over  six  or  seven  months
by  both  Mrs  Holland  and  Mrs  Verrall.

* See  p.  327  for  a possible  instance  of  the  word  “scale”  having  been  used
in  three  different  senses.


lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


193


XIV.

“ DIANA”.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  March

19,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Newton,  the  latter  merely
waiting  for  a signal  to  summon  the  sitter.)

(Rector  communicating)  Mr  Hodgson  is  here  and  sends  his
greeting.

he  also  wishes  to  ask  if  you  U.D.  that  Mrs  V — has  written
Dianna.

E.  M.  S.  (misreading)  “Has  written  Premier”  is  it?

(Hodgson  communicating)  No  Good  morning  Mrs  Sidgwick
I said  DIANNA

E.  M.  S.  Good  morning,  Mr  Hodgson.

I am  very  well  and  happy  how  are  you  ?

E.  M.  S.  I am  very  well,  thank  you.  Did  you  say  that  Mrs  Verrall
had  written  “Dianna”?

I think.  I tried  to  impress  it  on  her  mind.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I will  enquire.

Wky  dont  you  get  her  to  send

you  what  she  does  get  each  day  so  you  can  compare  it
with  what  I tell  you  here?
lYould  that  not  be  wise.

E.  M.  S.  She  sends  it  every  day  to  Mr  Piddington,  and  I tell  Mr
Piddington  what  you  say.

Oh  yes  very  good.

N


194  J.  G.  Pidclington.  [part

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  unth  Mrs  Filler  held  on  Agrril
2,  1907.

(Present  Mrs  Sidgwick  alone.)

(Myers  communicating.)  I should  be  glad  if  you  could  tell
me  if  she  wrote  about  Diana.

E.  M.  S.  I will  enc|uire.  I think  she  wrote  something  like  it,  but
not  C|uite  Diana.

It  was  that  that  I was  impressing  upon  her  mind  did  it
appear  as  Annie

E.  M.  S.  (misreading)  “It  was  as  Diner”,  is  it?

Dianea

E.  M.  S.  I will  enquire.

Thank  you.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  v.nth  Mrs  Piper  held  on  April
4,  1907.

(Present,  at  this  point,  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Newton.)

(Rector  communicating)  AVili  you  note  friend  our  messages
to  and  about  Mrs  V.  and  reply  to  us  when  we  think  we
have  succeeded  in  getting  messages  through  ?

E.M.  S.  Yes,  I will.

you  do  not  reply  about  Darwin

E.  M.  S.  I have  asked  about  it,  but  I cannot  hear  that  it  got  through.

We  do  not  wish  to  make  the  same  things  when  once  they
have  been  received  U.D.

E.  M.  8.  Yes,  I quite  understand,  and  as  soon  as  I hear  that  Darwin
has  got  through,  I will  tell  you.

I think  she  mistook  it  for  Dwarf.

E.  M.  8.  I see.  I’ll  ask.

It  may  liave  been  Den  Diana  or  a similar  word.  We  are
not  sure  just  which.  l)ut  we  are  impressing  her  with
DWARF  continually.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  195

E.  M.  S.  Quite  right.  It  will  get  through.

Yes  in  time  it  will

but  those  words  similar  really  derive

from  our  repeated  attempts  at  Dwarf  U.D.

[“  Darwin  ” ^ had  been  chosen  by  Myersp  on  March  20,
“Dwarf  and  Giant”  by  J.  G.  P.  on  Feb.  19,  as  subjects
of  cross-correspondence  experiments  with  Mrs  Verrall.]


Ejotract  from  record  of  sitting  vntli  Mrs  Piper  held  on  April
8,  1907.

(Present  Mrs  Sidgwick  alone.)

(Myers  communicating)  also  tell  me  if  she  [Mrs  Verrall]
got  Dianna,  it  was  not  cpute  Dianna  but  Dianys  (1)
[or,  “ Dianp  ”]

E.  M.  S.  What  is  that  1

Dia  (followed  by  some  undecipherable  symbols,  which  look
like  a repetition  of  the  final  letters  of  the  preceding
word.)

E.  M.  S.  “ Dia”  is  thaf?

yes,  [Before  Mrs  Sidgwick  had  time  to  ask  what  the  remain-
ing undeciphered  letters  were  MyerSp  went  on  to  another
subject.]

Extract  from  record,  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs  Piper  held  on  April
29,  1907.'

(Present  Mrs  Verrall  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson.)

(Myers  communicating)  It  [i.e.  a word  beginning  with  the
letter  D which  MyerSp  had  just  told  Mrs  V^errall  he  had
been  trying  to  make  her  write.  This  word  was  “ Dwarf”.]
I thought  came  out  as  Dianna  but  it  was  not  right.  It
I thought  came

^ Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  April  9,  1907  contained  a reference  to  a birthday
party  of  the  late  Mrs  Ellen  Darwin’s.  The  surname  was  not,  however,
mentioned,  only  the  Christian  name,  Ellen.


[part


196  J.  G.  Piddington.

(Rector  communicating)
change  the  machinery

Machine  [i.e.  the  pencil.]

(Mrs  Verrall  gives  her  own  pencil  to  the  hand.)

Yes  thank  you.

(Myers  communicating)

I referred  to  the  word  Dianna.

Mrs  V.  Is  it  “ Dreamer  ” ?

Dianna  but  it  was  not  right.

I thought  you  wrote  it
look  that  up  also.

Mrs  V.  I’ve  written  the  word  Diana,  I’m  quite  sure,
recently

Mrs  V.  Some  time  ago.

Yes  I told  her  [i.e.  Mrs  Sidgwick]  so  but  she  said  no.

Mrs  V.  Then  she  was  wrong ; twice  I had  a reference  to  her —
once  a longish  time  ago  to  her  name  and  another  time
to  a Latin  poem  of  Diana.

Yes  I was  sure  you  had  U.D.  me  and  that  you  had  registered
it.  M^e  must  try  to  do  better  and  she  must  be  sure  of
what  you  do  write,  it  is  so  much  easier  for  me  when
I say  I know  that  you  did  get  a word  for  her  to  U.D.
otherwise  I keep  on  trying  at  the  same  word  again
therefore  you  must  make  it  clear  to  her  and  vice  versa.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  fir.st  part  of  the  script  written
by  Mrs  Verrall  on  Feb.  27,  1907,  which  I give  below,  centres
round  one  idea  and  one  only,  the  goddess  Diana.

nemorum  custos  fluitantia  super  stagna
alarum  sine  lemigio  volitans  nunc
et  semper  preces  ausculta

[guardian  of  the  woods  above  the  flowing  pools
without  oarage  of  wings  flitting,
now  and  always  hear  our  prayers.]


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


197


mother  of  months — and  then  hollows  and  windy  places.

It  is  a poem  to  Spring  but  onlj’  part  is  wanted
lMO^^TIUM  GUSTOS
Dianam  tenerae  dicite  virgines

[guardian  of  the  mountains;  sing  Diana  youthful  maids.]

I cannot  get  the  meaning  clear.  I will  try  again.

nemorum  custos  and  Montiiim  custos  are  reminiscences  of
Hor.  Car.  Ill,  22,  an  ode  to  Diana,  which  opens  with  the
words  ;

“ Montium  custos  nemorumque,  Virgo.”

Dianam  tenerae  dicite  virgines  is  a quotation  of  the  first  line
of  Hor.  Car.  I,  21 : an  ode  to  Diana  and  Apollo.

There  seem  to  be  echoes,  too,  of  Catullus  C.  XXXIV,  where
Diana  is  called

“ Montium  domina  ....

Silvarumque  virentium
Saltuumque  reconditorum
Amniumque  sonantum.”

Mother  of  months  is  from  Swinburne’s  Atalanta.  in  Calydon :

“ When  the  hounds  of  spring  are  on  winter’s  traces.

The  mother  of  months  in  meadow  or  plain
Fills  the  shadows  and  windy  places

With  lisp  of  leaves  and  ripple  of  rain.”

These  lines  are  applied  to  an  unnamed  Nature  goddess,  not
actually  Diana,  but  clearly  possessing  some  of  her  leading-
attributes.  In  Hor.  C.  IV.  6,  38-40  Diana  is  spoken  of  both  as
the  goddess  of  the  moon  and  as  “ she  who  prospers  the  fruits
of  the  earth  and  is  swift  to  roll  the  onward  months  ” :

Noctilucam,

Prosperam  frugum  celeremque  pronos
Volvere  menses,

which  comes  very  near  to  calling  her  “ mother  ol'  months  ”.
And  “mother  of  months” — “parens  mensuni  ” — she  is,  under
her  title  of  Luna,  actually  styled  in  Poet.  Lat.  Min.  (Baehrens)
3;  1G3.  Furthermore,  the  juxtaposition  of  the  ideas  of  hunting
(“  the  hounds  of  spring  ”)  and  of  the  bringing  forth  of  the


[part


lyS  J.  G.  Piddington.

months  makes  it  quite  clear,  although  the  Nature  Goddess  of
Swinburne’s  poem  is  not  specified,  that  Diana,  goddess  of  the
moon  and  of  the  chase,  cannot  have  been  far  from  the  poet’s
mind.  And  Swinburne  must,  one  may  almost  say,  have  had
also  in  mind  Catullus  C.  XXXIV,  where  Diana  is  addressed
not  only  as  “ montium  domina”  but  also  in  the  same  breath
as  Nature  Goddess  and  controller  of  months : “ Tu  cursu,

dea,  menstruo  Metiens  iter  annuum,  Rustica  agricolae  bonis
Tecta  frugibus  exples.”

It  is  a 'poem  to  S'pring.  I take  this  to  refer  to  the  poem
from  Atalanta  in  Calydon  ; and  hut  o'lihg  part  is  tvanted  to
mean  that  only  the  particular  lines  alluding  to  the  “ mother
of  months  ” are  significant,  because  they  alone  suggest  the  god-
dess Diana.

Certain  similarities  to  the  statements  made  in  the  Piper
trance  in  connection  with  the  “ Diana  ” experiment  are  to  be
found  also  in

Mrs  VerralVs  sc'ript  of  March  lo,  1907.

Echo  e Baccante

vofxaSe^  et  agrestes  in  urbanos  irruperunt  magno  cum
clamore  evoe  clamantium  Dina  dos  dvdSos  d a-oi  eSwKa
[nomads  and  country  folk  attacked  the  townsmen  with  a

great  shout  of  people  shouting  “ evoe  ”...

what  I liave  given  you.]
no  he  does  not  understand.

Say  it  again.

Diva  the  goddess  stayed  the  rout  with  green  branches
they  were  coming  when  Bircham  Wood  shall  come  to
Dunsinane  a moving  wood  it  was.  It  is  the  invasion  of
a white  shining  marble  city  by  a green  and  furious  rout
of  revellers  and  the  goddess  stayed  the  slaying  of  her
folk.  But  the  green  revellers  have  the  truth  on  their
side,  the  ultimate  truth,  and  the  arresting  goddess  is
but  a white  sham.  Remember  that  the  story  comes  from
the  victorious,  or  at  least  undefeated  few  — the  swarming
horde  saw  no  vision  of  gods,  and  the  city  they  left  was
empty  as  well  as  clean.

I should  like  to  hear  the  unauthorised  version  of  this
tale — ask  your  husband  if  he  knows  it.  Evoe  is  in  the


199


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

end  triumphant  though  that  too  brings  its  own  loss.

Tell  him  to  look  further  for  the  issue  beyond  what
he  now  sees — not  to  read  further  but  to  think  further, —
above  all  to  hold  to  his  thought.  But  leave  all  that
mythology  out  of  the  question — it  has  no  place  here.

On  March  4 Mrs.  Verrall  had  written  a piece  of  script
referring  to  some  point  in  a passage  of  the  Hercules  Furens
of  Euripides  (v.  p.  213)  which  the  scribe  had  suggested  that
Dr  Verrall  should  think  over.  The  allusion  here  to  another
classical  subject  seems  to  have  led  to  a repetition  of  this  sug-
gestion ; and  the  concluding  phrase : “ But  leave  all  that

mythology  out  of  the  question — it  has  no  place  here”  : seems
distinctly  connected  with  the  phrase  in  the  script  of  March  4,
“ not  to  mind  the  mythology  but  to  .see  another  point”  in  the
earlier  reference  to  the  Hercules  Farens.

Leaving  then  the  last  paragraph  out  of  consideration,  what
can  we  make  of  the  rest  ?

Two  distinct  stories  seem  to  be  confused : one  a story  of
an  attack  on  some  townspeople  by  a crowd  of  Bacchic
revellers ; the  other  a story  of  the  saving  of  a white  shining
marble  city  by  a goddess.  Jumbled  up  with  these  two  tales  are
allusions  to  Macbeth.

Mrs  Verrall  and  my.self  have  taken  a good  deal  of  trouble
to  find  out  if  there  is  any  legend  where  a goddess  intervenes
to  save  her  people  from  an  attack  by  Bacchanalian  revellers ;
and  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  none  such  exists.

If  the  Bacchic  elements  and  the  Macbeth  allusions  are
eliminated,  the  residue  can  be  appropriately  referred  to  the
legend  of  the  miraculous  repulse  of  the  attack  on  Delphi  by
the  Gauls  in  279  B.C.

With  these  eliminations  the  scri])t  would  run  thus  :


Diva  the  goddess  stayed  the  rout It  is  the  invasion

of  a white  shining  marble  city and  the


goddess  stayed  the  slaying  of  her  folk.  But

the  arresting  goddess  is  but  a white  sham.  Remember
that  the  story  comes  from  the  victorious,  or  at  least
undefeated  few — the  swarming  horde  saw  no  vision  of
gods,  and  the  city  they  left  was  empty  as  well  as
clean.


200


[part


J.  0.  Piddington.

I will  now  quote  parts  of  J.  G.  Frazer’s  translation  of  Pau-
sanias,  Bk.  X,  23,  which  contains  the  account  of  the  attack  on
Delphi  by  the  Gauls  under  Brennus : —

“ Brennus  lost  not  a moment,  hut  ...  . marched  on  Delphi.
The  trembling  inhabitants  betook  themselves  to  the  oracle,
and  the  god  bade  them  have  no  fear,  ‘For’,  said  he,

‘ I will  myself  guard  my  own  ’.

Meanwhile  the  Greeks  who  had  mustered  at  Delphi  drew
out  in  order  of  battle  against  the  army  of  Brennus,  and
soon  to  confound  the  barbarians  the  god  sent  signs  and
wonders,  the  plainest  that  ever  were  seen.  For  all  the
ground  occupied  by  the  army  of  the  Gauls  quaked
violently  most  of  the  day,  and  thunder  rolled  and
lightning  dashed  continually,  the  claps  of  thunder  stunning
the  Celts  and  liindering  them  from  hearing  the  words  of
command,  while  the  bolts  from  heaven  set  dre  not  only
to  the  men  upon  whom  they  fell,  but  to  all  who  were

near  them,  men  and  arms  alike Such  were

the  suderings  and  terrors  by  which  the  barbarians
were  beset  all  that  livelong  day ; and  the  fate  that  was
in  store  for  them  in  the  night  was  more  dismal  far.  For
a keen  frost  set  in,  and  with  the  frost  came  snow,  and
great  rocks  slipping  from  Parnassus,  and  crags  break-
ing od‘,  made  straight  for  the  barbarians,  crushing  to
death  not  one  or  two,  but  thirty  or  more  at  a blow.

At  sunrise  the  Greeks  advanced  upon  them  from

Delphi.  All  except  the  Idiocians  came  straight  on  ; but
the  Phocians,  more  familiar  with  the  ground,  descended
the  precipices  of  Parnassus  through  the  snow,  and  getting
in  the  rear  of  the  Celts  unperceived,  showered  their  darts
and  arrows  on  the  barbarians  in  perfect  security.”

Fiazer  comments  on  this:

“ The  oracle  vouchsafed  to  the  Delphians  by  Apollo  on  the
approach  of  the  Gauls  is  said  to  have  been  this  : ‘ I
and  the  white  maidens  will  care  for  these  matters ’.  The
‘white  maidens’  were  generally  supposed  to  be  Artemis
and  Athena,  who  were  said  to  have  appeared  in  person
along  with  Apollo  fighting  on  the  side  of  the  Greeks.
Why  the  goddesses  were  called  ‘ white  ’ is  doubtful  ;
Cicero  seems  to  refer  the  epithet  to  the  snow-storm  which
contributed  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Gauls.”


201


LVli.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

It  is  the  words  “ the  arrestinor  o-oddess  is  but  a white  sharn  ”

O O

which  make  it  certain,  to  my  mind  at  least,  that  the  allusion
in  the  script  is  to  the  legend  described  above.  The  rationalising
Cicero  regarded  the  arresting  goddess  as  a “ white  sham  ”,
interpreting  the  “white  maidens”  as  the  snow-storm.

But,  gi’anted  that  this  identification  is  right,  how  is  the
Bacchic  element  in  the  script  to  be  accounted  for  ?

1 imagine  that  the  scribe  was  from  the  first  trying  to  get
the  automatist  to  describe  the  story  of  the  miraculous  defence
of  Delphi  in  order  to  introduce  a reference  to  Artemis.  Dr
Yerrall  was  about  to  deliver  two  lectures  in  London  on  the
BaccJtae  of  Euripides,  and  this  doubtless  was  occupying  the
automatist’s  normal  consciousness  to  some  degree ; and  so,  when
the  scribe  tried  to  impress  her  with  another  classical  subject,  the
two  subjects  got  commingled  with  the  result  seen  in  the  script.

The  first  attempt  to  express  “Diana”  is  made  in  the  words
“Dina  dos  avdoo?”.

“ Dina  ” is,  of  course,  very  near  “ Diana

The  words  dvdoo<s  [sic]  d a-oi  eSwKu  can  hardly  be  translated,
at  least  so  as  to  make  sense.  If  dvdoos  is  taken  as  the  impera-
tive of  uvaSiSwfxi  the  words  would  mean  “Give  up”,  or,
“ distribute  what  I have  given  you  ” ; and  there  is  not  much
apparent  sen.se  in  that.  But  the  imperative  singular  of  dvuoloco/iu
would  be  accented  on  the  last  syllable  and  not,  as  in  the  sciipt,
on  the  penultimate.

If  we  suppose  that  the  scribe  was  trying  to  make  the  auto-
matist write  “Diana”,  I thirds  we  may  see  a meaning  in  this
curious  and  hybrid  collocation  of  words.  He  succeeds  in  getting
“ Dina  ” written,  but  not  being  satisfied  with  this  appi'oximation
to  the  name  he  drops  into  Greek  and  says  to  a collaborator :
dos  (i.e.  (5o?)  uvd,  i.e.  “give  the  sound  ‘ana’”;  and  then  adds
Soi  <1  <joL  eowKa,  i.e.  “ give  what  I gave  you  He  then  abandons
that  way  of  trying  to  get  the  word  or  idea  “ Diana  ” expressed

no  he  does  not  understand  ”)  and  starts  afresh  and  on  a
slightly  difierent  tack ; “ Sa\^  it  again.  Diva  the  goddess  ” etc.

This  interpretation  will  not  sound  so  far-fetched  to  those
who  are  accptainted  with  the  tortuous  way  in  which  names
and  words  are  often  brought  out  in  the  script  of  Mrs  Piper —
words  or  names,  I mean,  which  have  real  significance  and


202


[PAKT


J.  G.  Piddington.

which  must  have  been  supernormally  acquired — and  with  the
fact,  however  we  may  account  for  it,  that  both  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
and  Mrs  Piper’s  scripts  the  phenomena  claim  to  be  produced,
and  consistent!}'  exhibit  the  appeara.nce  of  being  produced,  by
tlie  collaboration  of  several  people,  whose  remarks  to  one  another
and  asides  get  accidentally  registered  by  the  automatist  among
the  intentionally  recorded  communications.  When,  then,  I sug-
gest, the  scribe  realised  that  he  had  failed  to  get  the  word
“ Diana  ” written  he  started  afresh  and  tried  to  work  in  the
notion  of  a goddess,  and  in  such  a manner  as  to  suggest  the
goddess  Artemis.

Note  the  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  “goddess”  preceded
by  “ Diva,”  the  Latin  for  “ goddess  ”,  all  within  seven  lines.
(Cf  for  similar  reiterations  pp.  98,  178,  and  223.)  The  word
“ diva  ” is,  moreover,  suggestive  because  it  has  three  letters
in  common  with  Diana,  and  because  Diva  and  Diana  are
both  derived  from  the  same  root.  It  may  be  advisable  to
add  tliat  this  interpretation  of  the  script  of  March  13  is  my
own  and  not  Mrs  Verrall’s,  who  never  connected  her  script
of  Feb.  27  with  that  of  March  13.

But  what  are  the  references  to  Dunsinane  and  Bircham  (an
obvious  blunder  for  Birnam)  wood  doing  among  these  classical
allusions?  I think  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they
were  derived  Aom  a script  of  Mrs  Holland’s  containing
allusions  to  Macbetlt  and  Artemis,  which  Mrs  Verrall  had
seen.  This  script  I shall  quote  and  discuss  presently.

I was  curious  to  learn  whether  Mrs  Verrall  had  any  theory
as  to  who  “ Diva  the  goddess  ” was ; so  on  April  3,  1907  I
wrote  her  the  following  postcard  : —

Will  you  let  me  know  who  you  take  “Diva  the  goddess”  to  be
in  your  script  of  March  13?

She  replied  on  April  4 : —

Diva.  I can  give  no  name  to  this.  There  is  no  goddess  in  the

Bacchic  legend,  which  is  what  the  thing  seems  to  refer  to

I take  it  to  be  Diva  = the  goddess  (unnamed).  There  is  a great
myth  about  Apollo  saving  Delphi,  and  I think  that  a goddess  is
joined  in  that  story,  probably  Artemis ; and  I have  a vague
impression  that  Athena  once  personally  intervened.  But  I have  no
knowledge,  and  no  books  here.

O J


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


203


The  date  of  the  first  mention  in  the  trance  of  “Diana”  as
the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence  experiment  suits  the  dates
of  the  two  allusions  to  Diana  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.  Her  first
“Diana”  script,  that  of  Feb.  27,  concluded  with  the  words:
“ I cannot  get  the  meaning  cleai’.  I will  try  again.”  The
result  of  the  scribe’s  second  attempt  is  to  be  seen,  apparently,
in  the  script  of  March  13,  which  was  begun  at  11  a.m.  There
would  have  been  time,  therefore,  for  the  trance-personalities  to
have  announced  during  the  sitting  of  March  13,  which  did
not  end  till  after  1 yrm.,  the  fact  that  “Diana”  had  been
written  by  Mrs  Verrall.  But  this  sitting — one  of  the  best  of
the  series — was  fully  occupied  with  other  matters.  The  next
two  sittings  after  March  13  were  those  of  March  18  and
19;  and  on  March  19  Hodgsoiip  made  the  first  reference  to
“Diana”  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.

The  word  when  first  given  in  the  trance  by  Hodgson p
was  written  “ Dianna  ” ; the  second  reference  to  it  was  made
by  Myersp  and  then  the  word  was  spelt  correctly  ; but  the
next  time  that  Myersp  mentioned  the  subject  the  word  was
spelt  “Dianna”  again,  and  in  his  final  reference  it  was  thrice
spelt  with  two  n’s.  It  would  have  been  tempting  to  attribute
the  double  n to  the  amanuensis,  “ good  old  Rector  ” (to  quote
Myer.Sp)  “ who  does  not  understand  a word  of  Latin”,  were  it
not  that  on  the  only  occasion  on  which  Rector  refers  on  his
own  initiative  to  this  experiment  he  spells  the  word  correctly.
In  one  cross-correspondence  experiment  initiated  by  Hodgsonp
the  word  “tranquility”  [sic]  was  said  to  have  been  given
to  Mrs  Verrall  and  it  was  explained  that  the  word  was  pur-
posely spelt  with  only  one  1.  It  is  therefore  just  possible  that
in  this  case  the  double  n was  intentional,  but  I do  not  think
it  probable,  because  if  the  mistake  had  been  intentional  the
intention  would  have  been  declared  as  in  the  case  of  the
word  tranc|uility.^

The  variants  “Dianea”,  “Den  Diana”  “Annie”  etc.  may
have  been  prompted  by  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  remark:  “I  think  she
wrote  something  like  it,  but  not  quite  Diana”;  .so  I am  not

1 Misspellings  are  not  infrequent  in  the  Piper  script:  e.g.  “ infalibility  ”,
“evesdropping”,  “ colledge  ”,  “loose”  for  “lose”,  “controled”,  “satelite”,
“ Halceon  ”,  “Illiard”  for  “Iliad”  etc.


204


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


inclined  to  regard  them  as  attempts  to  describe  what  I do
consider  to  be  an  attempt  at  the  name  Diana  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  March  13 — I mean  “Dina  dos  drado?”.

What  strikes  me  as  far  more  spontaneous  is  the  [persistence
with  which  MyerSp  ])ursned  his  enquiry  whether  Mrs  Verrall
had  I'eceived  the  word.  From  Mrs  Sidgwick  (who  could  give
only  such  information  as  I supplied  her  with)  he  could  get
no  definite  response  ; but  when  Mrs  Verrall  appears  on  the
scene  he  seizes  the  opportunity  to  get  information  from  the
fountain  head.  I think  this  is  really  rather  I’emarkable,  inas-
much as  it  exhibits  the  trance-pei'sonality  maintaining  an
attitude  of  confidence  and  conviction  in  the  face  of  the  scant
encourao'ement  which  was  all  that  Mrs  Sidgwick  could  oive.^
It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs  Verrall  stated  to  Myersp  that  she

had  twice  had  a reference  in  her  script  to  Diana,  “once  a

longish  time  ago  to  her  name,  and  another  time  to  a Latin
poem  of  Diana  ”.  She  was  referring  in  the  first  instance  to

her  script  of  Jan.  7,  1007,  which  so  far  I have  not  quoted,

and  in  the  second  to  the  script  of  Feb.  27,  of  which  a copy
has  been  given  above.

The  script  of  Jan,  7 runs  as  follows: —

(Scribbles.)  Obsolescit.  [it  is  obsolete.]

Jacob’s  letter  was  wanted


the  last  is  better

then  I see  three  words  written  in  a pretty  woman’s  hand
three  words  the  last  is  the  longest


Diana  is  pleased

Here  conies  a candle  to  light  you  to  bed.

^For  an  example  of  similar  confidence  cf.  ‘•'Library”  p 55.


•205


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

The  long  interval  between  the  date  of  this  script  and  the
first  reference  in  the  Piper  trance  to  “Diana”;  the  probability
that  Diana  would  appear  as  a Christian  name  in  Mrs  A^errall’s
script,  since  it  is  the  Christian  name  of  Mrs  Forbes,  with
whose  automatic  script  Mrs  Verrall’s  has  shown  a good  many
coincidences  ; the  fact  that  the  words  “ Diana  is  pleased  ”
are  naturally  referi'ed  to  a living  human  being  and  not  to  a
Roman  goddess ; and  the  casual  and  cursory  way  in  which
the  words  are  introduced : these  four  considerations,  I say,
make  it  unlikely  that  the  appearance  of  the  name  Diana  in
the  script  of  Jan.  7 had  anything  to  do  with  the  cross-
correspondence experiment  first  announced  at  the  sitting  of
March  19.  And  it  is  particularly  the  last  of  these  four
considerations  which  weighs  with  me.  For  a mere  casual
occurrence  of  the  name  Diana  in  Mrs  Veri-all’s  script  to  have
counted  as  a cross-correspondence  it  was  essential  for  it  to
have  synchronised,  or  nearly  so,  with  the  announcement  of
the  expei’iment  on  Mai'ch  19  ; or  else  to  have  been  accompanied
by  a phrase  which  meant  that  it  was  the  subject  of  a cross-
correspondence experiment,  or  to  have  been  emphasised  by
repetition  or  by  large  letters.  In  the  scripts  of  Feb.  27  and
March  13  such  emphasis  is  thrown  by  the  way  in  which  the
scribe  returns  avain  and  again  to  the  charge  and  circles
round  the  idea  of  Diana.  Yet  I cannot  dismiss  the  script  of
Jan.  7 without  first  discussing  it  in  connection  with  some  words
which  were  written  automatically  by  Mrs  Holland  on  Jan.  16,
1907.  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  this  date  I’eads  as  follows: —

& to-morrow — and  to-morrow  and  to-morrow —

Out  out  brief  candle —

A dull  consciousness  of  a confused  roaring  sound  of  voices —
rather  like  the  voice  of  the  sea — A sound  that  arrives
in  waves  like  the  sound  of  the  sea.

It  was  the  sitting  attitude  that  induced  the  fatal  syncope
irndoubtedly  Henry

No — not  Henry  S.  F (?)•

A long  procession  winding  along  a narrow  street.  Little
skipping  children  showering  flowers — an  anachroni.sm
perhaps  but  a pretty  one —


206


[part


J.  G.  Fiddington.

Artemis — Artemis  hear  us  Ionian  Artemis  !

And  the  arms  rose  as  the  voices  rose  and  sank  again  with
them.

Maud  Carten — Carter  not  a relation — but  an  old  acquain-
tance Dorothy —

cO  to-morrow — and  to-morroiv  and  to-morrow — is,  but  for
the  superfluous  and  the  punctuation,  a textual  quotation

from  Macbeth,  as  is  also  Out  out  brief  candle ; and  both
quotations  come  from  the  short  speech  uttered  by  Macbeth
immediately  before  the  Messenger  enters  and  says  to  him  : “ I
look’d  toward  Birnam,  and  anon,  methought,  The  wood  began
to  move

Artemis,  Artemis,  hear  us  Ionian  Artemis ! is  clearly  a
I’eminiscence  of  a line  in  Tennyson’s  ])lay  Tlw  Cap — “ArtemiS)
Artemis,  hear  him,  Ionian  Artemis” — which  is  chanted  by  the
chorus  of  priestesses,  children,  populace  and  soldiers  after
Synorix  has  besought  the  blessing  of  Artemis  upon  his  marriage
with  Gamma.

From  the  same  play,  too,  evidently  comes  the  allusion  to
the  procession  of  children  showering  flowers,  and  the  descrip-
tion of  the  anns  risino-  as  the  voices  rose  ; though  the  narrow
street  and  the  skipping  of  the  children  are  apparently  accretions
for  which  the  automatist  or  the  scribe  must  be  held  responsible.
I quote  the  relevant  stage-directions  from  Act  II : —

Caunma  aaid  all  th.e  Priestesses  kneel,  raise  their  hands  to
the  Goddess  and  boiv  dovm."

“ Enter  a p)rocession  of  Priestesses  and  Children  bringing
garlands  and  goblets,  and  strewing  flowers.”

The  conjunction  of  allusions  to  MacbetJi,  The  Gup,  and  a
“ Henry  ” was,  perhaps,  due  to  an  association  of  ideas  with
Henry  Irving,  who  produced,  and  acted  in,  these  two  plays.

Between  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  Jan.  16 — written  on  a day
of  the  week,  Wednesday,  on  which  Mrs  Holland  regularly
aimed  at  getting  en  rapp>ort  with  Mrs  Verrall — and  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  7,  we  And,  then,  two  verbal,  or
pi'actically  verbal,  coincidences:  “Artemis”  ( = Diana)  and

“candle”  on  the  one  hand,  “Diana”  and  “candle”  on  the
other.

But  these  are  not  the  only  points  contained  in  Mrs  Holland’s


207


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

script  of  Jail.  16  which  suggest  a connection — -vague,  but  still
not  to  be  disregarded — not,  it  is  true,  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,
but  with  things  said  to  her  and  her  daughter  at  sittings  with
Mrs  Piper.

'When  Miss  Verrall  sat  with  Mrs  Piper  on  Dec.  24,  1906,
Hodgsonp  asked  her  if  “Marion  Carver  was  all  right”,  and  just
befoi’e  this  remarked  incidentally  that  some  one  named  Dorothy
who  “has  been  here  a long  time”  was  interrupting  him  and
trying  to  have  a peep  at  the  sitter.  Miss  Verrall  under.stood
the  reference  to  Marion  Carver,  but  not  that  to  “Dorothy”.
On  Jan.  14  Hodgsonp  explained  to  Mrs  Verrall  that  Dorothy
was  a friend  of  Miss  Verrall’s  “ who  passed  out  years  ago  ”,  and
added  that  she  had  a sister  Marion  still  living,  and  there  is
little  doubt  that  this  Marion  is  intended  for  the  same  person  as
Marion  Carver.  It  is  true  (though  the  fact  may  perhayis  have  been
known  to  Mrs  Piper)  that  a Miss  Marion  Carver  was  a friend
both  of  the  Verrall  and  of  the  Myers  families,  and  was  also
known  to  Dr  Hodgson.  It  appears  that  the  statement  about
“ Dorothy  ” is  incorrect.  The  point,  however,  which  I want
to  bring  out  is  that  these  two  names  were  connected  with
Miss  Verrall  in  the  Piper  trance,  and  that  the  most  definite
statements  about  them  were  made  on  Jan.  14.  A few  hours
after  her  sitting  on  this  date  Mrs  Verrall  wrote  automatically  : —
“ Leave  Dorothy  for  remembrance  Dolly  a child’s  picture  book
and  a child  in  it”;  and  tliough  this  throws  no  light  on  the
meaning  of  “Dorothy”  it  clearly  is  related  to  the  Dorothy
mentioned  by  Hodgsonp.  Now  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of
Jan.  16,  written,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  on  a day  on
which  by  ])revious  arrangement  Mrs  Holland  was  to  try  for
communications  which  would  have  relevance  for  Mrs  Verrall,
occur  the  words  ; —

“ Maud  Carten — Cartel'  not  a relation — but  an  old  accpiain-
tance  Dorothy.”

Maud  Carter  is  not  unlike  Marion  Carver;  and  “not  a
relation — but  an  old  acquaintance  ” accurately  describes  the
relation  in  which  Miss  Carver  and  Miss  Verrall  stood  to  each
other.  I admit  that  the  coincidence  is  slight,  but  it  is  some-
what enhanced  by  the  close  association  of  “ Maud  Carter  ”
with  “ Dorothy  ”.


208


[PAKT


./.  G.  Piddington.

Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  Jan.  10  was  shown  to  Mrs  Verrall
on  Feb.  23.  This  fact  may,  I think,  fully  account  for  Diana’s
having  formed  the  subject  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  27  ;
and  while  it  hardly  explains  satisfactorily  her  scribe’s  revived
interest  in  the  subject  two  weeks  later,  it  does  explain  why,
when  the  subject  was  revived,  allusions  to  Macbeth  were  con-
joined with  allusions  to  Artemis.  But  though  Mrs  Verrall’s
normal  acquaintance  with  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  Jan.  16
explains  this  much,  it  in  no  way  accounts  for  the  knowledge
manifested  in  I\Irs  Piper’s  trance  of  the  fact  that  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  had  referred  to  Diana;  nor  does  it  account  for  the  other
coincidences  between  Mrs  Piper,  Mrs  Holland  and  Mrs  Verrall.
In  fact  I think  we  have  here  two  distinct  groups  of  cross-
correspondences : (1)  consisting  of  “candle”,  “Diana”  (Mrs
Verrall,  Jan.  7),  “candle”,  “Artemis”,  “Maud  Carter”,
“Dorothy”  (Mrs  Holland,  Jan.  16)  and  “Marion  Carver”,
“Ilorothy”  (Mrs  Piper,  Dec.  24);  (2)  consisting  of  “Diana”,
“Artemis”  (Mrs  Veri'all,  Feb.  26  and  March  13)  and  “Diana”
(Ml'S  Piper,  March  19).

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  Mrs  Verrall  never  consciously
saw  any  connection  between  her  script  of  March  13  and  Mrs
Holland’s  of  Jan.  16.  M^hen  she  read  the  latter  she  recognised
“ To-moirow  and  to-morrow  and  to-morrow  ” and  “ Out,  out,
brief  candle”  as  quotations  from  Macbeth,  and  took  the  com-
bination of  the  two  to  be  an  allusion  to  Mr  Myers’s  death,  on
or  near  the  anniversary  of  which,  Jan.  17,  similar  allusions
have  regularl}'  occurred  each  year  in  Airs  Holland’s  script ;
but  she  did  not  notice  that  the  “Artemis”  and  “candle”  of
Airs  Holland’s  script  of  Jan.  16  corresponded  with  the  “Diana”
and  “ candle”  of  her  own  script  of  Jan.  7.


lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


209


XV.

“HEAA^EX  LIES  ABOUT  US  IX  OUR  IXEAXCY  ” AXD
“EAITH,  HOPE  AXD  CHAEmA”

Extract  from  record  of  words  spolcen  in  the  ivahinrj -stage  of
Mrs  Piper's  trance  of  April  10,  1907,

(Preceding  utterances  connected  solely  with  the  sitter,  Mrs.
Forbes.)

Oh ! well.

I’ll  go  fetch  him.

Don’t  hurry  so.  Don’t  worry  so.  Don’t  hurry — don’t  worry

and  I’ll  write  out  those  lines  for  you

Past — (a  line  of  verse  not  caught)

Farewell.  Addio.

I did  the  best  I could  for  him.  R.H.

Heaven  lies  about  us  plain  to  see  and  infinite  (?)

Oh  ! (expression  of  pleased  surprise.)

Well,  well,  where  do  you  come  from  ?

Mr.  Myers  (?)

Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy.

And  all  across.  The  cross.

Oh  ! Why  do  you  all  run  away  ?

Who  are  . . . ?

a lady  and  Myers  and  Hodgson.

Airs  Verrall’s  sci’ipt  of  Dec.  5,  1901  had  contained  the
following : —

Then  there  is  a line  of  verse  to  be  remembered  Heaven
lies  about  us  in  our  infancy — that  has  a special  quite  a
special  association,
repeat  the  line  again

It  has  been  written  down,  go  on  to  the  next  trial

O

This  passage  had,  however,  been  published  in  Proceedings,

Vol.  XX.  p.  73,  which  contains  a report  by  Airs  A^errall  on

o


210


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

her  automatic  writing;  and  this  report  had  been  seen  by  Mrs
Piper.  For  this  reason  no  value  attaches  either  to  this  or  to
the  next  case.

In  the  course  of  the  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  March  20
IMyerSp  said  that  “Mr  Sidgwick  gave  her”  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]
“ a Greek  woi'd  which  translated  meant  no  man ; and  he  also
said  Faith  hope  charity”.

For  the  appearance  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  “ Faith,  Hope
and  Charity”  in  connection  with  Di-  Sidgwick  see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XX.  p.  297.

Had  these  two  references  not  occurred,  it  would  have  looked
as  though  the  trance-personalities  had  deliberately  refrained
from  alluding  to  published  passages  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.
To  have  so  refrained  would  have  implied  that  the}^  possessed
far  greater  familiarity  with  the  publications  of  the  S.P.R.  than
it  would  be  reasonable  to  impute  to  them,  if  they  are  really
intelligences  discrete  from  Mrs  Piper’s  normal  personality.


XVI.


“ EUPJPIDES.”

Ix  the  course  of  the  sitting  of  April  8,  which  was  attended  by
l\lrs  Sidgwick  only,  Myersp  said  that  he  had  drawn  a star  and
also  a crescent  “through  the  other  light”  (v.  p.  362).  Mrs
Sidgwick  then  asked  him  if  he  could  name  the  poem  of
Browning’s  connected  with  the  “Hope,  Star  and  Browning”
message,  and  M}^ersp  gave  a confused  reply.  From  this  point
I quote  the  record  ; —

(Myei’s  communicating)  Did  you  U.D.  about  the  + and  star
E.  M.  S.  The  cross  and  star  1


Yes.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  I don’t  know  that  I did.


211


I told  you  I gave  + + [i.e.  two  crosses]

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did.

to  her  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  did  you  see  them.

E.  M.  S.  Xo,  I have  not  seen  them.

Do  you  remember  euripides  (?)

E.  M.  S.  What  is  that  ? “ Euripides  ” 1

I meant  to  say  Harold
E.  M.  S.  “ Harold  ” ?
yes  well.

E.  M.  S.  To  whom  did  you  say  “ Harold  ” ?
to  Mrs.  V.

After  this  Myersp  says  that  he  tried  to  give  other  words
and  phrases  to  Mrs  Verrall ; in  fact  he  took  up  a good  part
of  this  sitting  with  announcing  words  and  messages  which
he  had  tried  to  give  through  Mrs  Verrall.

It  will  be  noticed  that  against  the  word  “ Euripides  ” a query
was  placed  in  the  record.

With  regard  to  the  reading  “Euripides”  Mrs  Sidgwick  wrote
on  October  10,  1907 : “ I read  it  at  the  time  as  Euripides  at
once,  and  I believe  that  I only  queried  it  afterwards  because
of  its  ridiculous  irrelevance  and  because  it  had  not  been
formally  accepted  when  I read  it  out.  I feel  sure  I knew
nothing  about  the  name  having  occurred  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script.  I should  have  been  interested  in  its  appearance  if
I had.”

Mrs  Sidgwick  sent  me  a tracing  of  the  original,  and  T have
no  doubt  that  Euripides  is  the  true  reading.

The  phrase  “ Do  you  remember  ”,  which  is  not  an  obvious
one  with  which  to  introduce  an  enquiry  about  a cross-
correspondence, is,  however,  used  in  this  same  sitting  for  that
very  purpose : viz.  “ Do  you  remember  Spirit  and  Angel.  I


212


[part


J.  G.  Picldington.

gave  both  ” (v.  p.  220).  In  its  context  this  can  only  mean
that  Myersp  said  that  he  had  given  “ Spirit  and  Angel  ”
to  Mrs  Verrall;  and,  if  further  proof  is  needed,  a few  lines
later  Myersp  added : “ Nearly  all  the  words  I have  written
today  are  with  reference  to  messages  I am  trying  to  give
through  Mrs  V.”

o


In  view  of  the  fact  that  Mrs  Verrall  got  two  clear  references
to  Euripides  and  that  Mrs  Holland  also  got  a reference  to
Euripides  which  corresponded  closely  with  Mrs  Verrall’s,  I am
inclined  to  think  that  the  mention  of  Euripides  at  this  sitting,
occurring  as  it  did  at  a point  where  MyerSp  was  explicitly
announcing  and  making  enquiries  about  several  experiments
which  he  had  recently  been  trying  with  i^lrs  Verrall,  should
be  attributed  to  supernormal  activity  and  not  to  chance.  It
was  given  in  a context  that  had  nothing  in  it,  so  far  as  I
can  see,  to  suggest  Euripides  or  the  sound  of  his  name,  or  to
suggest  the  idea  of  any  classical  author  or  of  a classical  allusion.
Besides  Euripides  only  two  classical  authors,  Homer  and
Plotinus,  were  spontaneously  referred  to  by  the  trance-per-
sonalities during  the  sittings  given  by  Mi’s  Piper  in  England,
and  both  of  these  allusions  were  veridical  (v.  pp.  132  and  136).
The  word  “ Harold  ”,  which  was  substituted spontaneously  for
“Euripides”,  does  not  resemble  the  latter  either  in  form  or
sound.  If,  however,  we  assume  some  community  of  consciousness
to  exist  between  Myersp  Myersy  and  Myersn,  it  is  not  difficult
to  discover  a plausible  explanation  of  why  this  misplaced  refer-
ence to  Euripides  emerged  in  the  sitting  of  April  8.  Assuming
the  identity  in  some  sort  of  these  three  personalities,  I suggest
that  MyerSp  was  on  April  8 aware  that  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  there  had  already  appeared  refei’ences  to  Euripides ; and
that  while  he  was  mentioning  at  this  sitting  other  words  or
phrases  which  he  had  impressed  on  Mrs  Verrall’s  mind  he  was
involuntarily  reminded  of  “Euripides”.  Moreover,  just  before

'I  understand  the  words  “I  meant  to  say  Harold,”  which  immediately
followed  the  phrase  “Do  you  remember  Euripides?”,  to  mean  that  Euripides
had  been  written  in  error  for  “Harold”.  That  is  the  most  natural  interpre-
tation; but  the  words  “I  meant  to  say  Harold”  may  introduce  an  entirely
new  subject  distinct  from  the  preceding  allusion  to  Euripides.


213


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

the  mention  of  Euripides  was  made  on  A]>ril  S,  Myersp  had
been  connecting  the  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ” message  which
he  had  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  with  an  unspecified  poem  of
Browning’s.  Now  Mrs  Holland’s  reference  to  Euripides  is
closely  connected,  as  will  appear,  with  one  of  Browning’s
poems,  and  if  the  “Myers”  who  mentioned  “Euripides”
through  Mrs  Piper  also  inspired  Mrs  Holland’s  reference  to
Euripides,  we  can  see  how  an  allusion  to  one  of  Browning’s
poems  might  have  suggested  “ Euripides  ” to  him.

The  scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall  which  refer  to  Euripides  were
written  on  March  4 and  March  25,  1907,  and  read  as
follows : —

March  4,  1907.

IxaLi'ojievos  6 'HpaKA?;g  [Heracles  is  mad]

Hercules  Furens  [The  mad  Hercules.]  Tell  your  husband
from  me.  there  is  a passage  in  the  Heracles  not  under-
stood, about  the  pillar  and  the  tying  to  it.  An  old  story
lies  behind  that  but  it  means  something  in  Euripides
that  A W V [i.e.  Dr.  A.  \Y.  Verrall]  has  not  yet  seen.
Tell  him  to  look  at  it  again — it  is  the  passage  about  the
pillar  and  the  thong — the  pillar  at  the  foot  of  \vh.  lay
the  dead  children.  Tell  your  husband  to  read  that  again —
not  to  mind  the  mj^hology  but  to  see  another  point  wh.
will  please  him.

I have  long  wanted  to  say  this  but  the  words  were  never
there — now  all  the  words  are  there  and  I think  1 have
made  the  meaning  clear  ask  elsewhere  for  the  BOUND
HERCULES.

'HpttK-Aj;?  Avo/xerog  [Unbound  Heracles]  is  the  secprel.

Binding  and  loosing  Secrp,oto-t  Aurotg  [with  loosed  fetters]

not  adamantine  fetters  but  fetters  that  link  and  loose.  Some-
thing about  snapping  his  bonds  in  sunder.  Tell  AWV  he
will  understand.

juaiuojuepog  6 'UpaicXij^.  The  Greek  title  of  the  play  usually
known  by  its  Latin  title  of  Hercides  Farens  is  'Ilpa/cX);?
uaipo/aepoi-


214


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Part  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  scri2)t  of  March  25,  1907.

Claviger  the  bearer  of  the  Key  and  Club  clavem
gerens  trans  Pontem


trans  Hellespontem  et  insuper  mare

ad  urbem  antea  Byzaiitineam  postea  de  ipsius  nomine
nominatam.

[bearing  the  key  beyond  the  Bridge  beyond  Helle’s  bridge
and  over  the  sea  to  the  city  formerly  Byzantine  after-
wards called  from  his  own  name.]

The  Club  and  Key — East  and  West,  look  for  the  Eastern
sign  of  the  Club  ex  pede  Herculem  The  Hercules  story
comes  in  there  and  the  clue  is  in  the  Euripides  play  if  you
could  only  see  it.

Bound  to  the  pillar — I told  you  before  of  Sebastian,  it  is
the  same  story  of  the  archer  and  the  binding  to  the
pillar.

Claviger  in  the  sense  of  “club-bearer”  is  an  epithet  applied
to  Hercules;  in  the  sense  of  “key-bearer”  it  is  not  applied  to
Hercules,  but  to  Janus.  The  remainder  of  the  script,  quoted
on  p.  222,  corresponds,  as  I believe,  to  a cross-corresponding
message,  “Spirit”,  .said  by  Myersp  on  April  8,  a short  time
after  the  mention  of  Euripides,  to  have  been  given  to  Mrs
Verrall.  If  \ve  suppose  that  the  personality  who  mentioned
“Euripides”  and  “Spirit”  in  close  succession  in  Mrs  Piper’s
trance  of  April  8 was  the  inspirer  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of
March  25,  which  certainly  refers  to  Euripides  and  probably
to  “Spirit”,  we  can  see  bow  it  may  have  come  about  that  the
allusion  to  Euri[)ides  on  April  8 led  this  personality  to  allude
shortl}^  afterwards  to  “ S|)irit  ”.

Although,  for  the  purpose  of  dealing  with  the  two  cross-
correspondences  “Euripides”  and  “Angel”,  I thus  divide  into
two  parts  the  script  of  March  25,  both  parts  were,  I believe


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


215


really  connected.  What  the  connection  was  is  discussed  in
Section  XIX.  pp.  259-60.

There  is  no  other  reference  in  Mrs  VeiTall’s  automatic  writing
during  the  period  under  review  either  to  Euripides  or  to  the
Hercules  Fnrens ; the  two  scripts  evidently  belong  together,
and  there  can  be  no  question  that  they  both  relate  to  some
passage  in  the  Hercules  Fnrens  of  Euripides.

It  is  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  April  16,  1907  that  I tind
a passage  which  corresponds  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  scripts  of  March
4 and  25.  As  it  embraces  a variety  of  disconnected  topics,
it  is  unnecessary  to  quote  it  in  full,  and  the  concluding  para-
graphs will  suffice.

A very  commonplace  room— like  lodgings  in  a quiet  neigh-
bourhood

Bayswater — no  Bloomsbury — Horsehair  furniture  under  the
chintz  covers — Is  she  asleep  ? No  she’s  talking — That
chimney  smokes.

Henry — not  the  elder  one — the  other.

Leopold  Lucus.  [<]

(In  mirror  writing)  Margaret
To  hy  to  find  Euripides  Philemon —

I want  you  to  understand  me  but  I have  so  few  chances
to  speak  — it’s  like  waiting  to  take  a ticket  and  I am
always  pushed  away  from  the  pigeonhole  before  I can  infiuence
her  mind — No  the  scribe’s — ^

A peck  of  pickled  pepper — -

E.  M.  must  be  careful  this  spring — E.  N.

A faint  far  arlimmer —

O

a flickerin"  lisrht —

O O

Five  different  influences
have  tried  to  write —

This  is  the  only  time  that  Euripides  or  any  Greek  or  Latin
classical  writer  is  mentioned  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  during  the
period  under  review.

^In  Mrs  Holland’s  script  “the  scribe”  apparently  means  the  automatist.
Mrs  Verrall  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  and  I in  this  paper  mean  by  “the  scribe”
the  “I”  who  purports  to  be  the  author  of  the  script.

-Miss  Johnson  tells  me  she  has  no  doubt  that  this  phrase  is  a punning
allusion  to  Mrs  Piper,  to  whom  other  references  occur  in  Mrs  Holland's
script  about  this  time.


216


[part


J.  G.  Pidclington.

It  is  certain  that  the  words  from  “ Lucus  ” down  to  “ Phile-
mon” hang  together.  I have  little  doubt  that  “Leopold”
belongs  also.  Just  as  “Harold”  is  closely  conjoined  in  the
trance  of  April  8 with  “ Euripides  ”,  so  here  “ Leopold  ” is  con-
joiued  with  “Euripides”.  The  significance  of  these  conjunctions
lies  in  the  fact  that  “Leopold”  and  “ Harold”  are  the  names  of
Frederic  Myers’s  two  sous.  The  name  of  his  only  daughter,  Silvia,
was  appended  to  a ])hrase  in  anothei'  script  of  Mrs  Holland’s
which,  though  not  obviously,  is  indirectly  connected  with
“ Euripides”  (v.  Section  XIX.  p.  261);  and  the  intention  of  this
conjunction  of  the  names  of  Myers’s  children  with  these  three
different  passages— between  two  of  which  there  was  no  super-
ficial connection — was,  as  I understand  it,  to  give  a clue  to
their  interdependence.  The  matter  is  further  explained  in
Section  XIX.  p.  278.

Against  “ Lucus  ” I have  placed  a quei  y,  though  four  letters
out  of  the  five  are  certain.  The  penultimate  alone  is  doubtful,
being  in  the  original  smudged  with  ink.  In  order  to  obtain
an  independent  opinion  I asked  Mr  Bickford-Smith  to  examine
Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  April  16,  and  to  say  how  he  read  the
word  after  “ Leopold  ”,  I of  course  not  giving  any  hint  of  how
I read  it  and  Mr  Bickford-Smith  knowing  nothing  of  my
reason  for  asking.  At  the  first  glance  he  said  “ the  word  is
Lucas  ”.  He  then  at  my  suggestion  examined  the  word  under
a magnifying  glass  with  the  result  that  he  read  the  fourth
letter  as  “ u ” instead  of  “ a He  observed  that  the  glass
brought  out  the  distinction  between  the  strokes  made  by  the
pen  and  the  smudge  made  by  the  ink.  This  exactly  agreed
with  the  opinion  I had  previously  formed  after  looking  at  the
word  with  the  aid  of  a magnifying  glass.

One  of  the  characters  in  the  Hercules  Fiirens  is  AJ/co?,  a
name  which  would  usually  be  transliterated  as  “Lj'cus”  or
“ Lycos  ”,  the  y representing  the  Greek  ^i.  Robert  Browning,
however,  had  a habit  of  representing  the  Greek  u by  the  English
u ; thus  in  his  transcript  of  Euri[)ides’  Hercules  Furens  he  writes
“ Luk  os  ” for  Lycus,  “ Amphitruon  ” for  Amphitryon,  “ Lutta  ”
foi-  Lytta,  “ Bnux  ” for  Pnyx,  and  so  on.  The  “ Lucus  ” of  Mrs
Holland’s  script  is  a sort  of  comj)romise  between  Browning’s
“ Lukos  ” and  the  usual  L}'cus  or  Lycos.  But,  it  may  be


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


217


thought,  this  dragging  in  of  Browning  is  entirely  gratuitous.
Not  at  all ; for  tlie  reference  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  is  clearly
not  to  the  original  play  but  to  Browning’s  version  of  it,  as  is
shown  by  the  introduction  of  the  name  “ Philemon  Philemon
is  not  a character  in  the  oi’iginal  play,  nor  is  he  for  that  matter
in  Browning’s  translation  of  the  play  ; but  “ Philemon  ” is
closely  associated  with  Browning’s  AristoiAianes  Ajyology , which
contains  the  transcript  of  the  Hermdes  Furens  of  Eurijiides,
in  this  way : — In  Aristophanes  Apology  Balaustion  tells  to
Philemon  the  story  of  how,  on  the  night  on  which  news
of  the  death  of  Euri])ides  reached  Athens,  Aristophanes,  flushed
with  wine  and  with  the  success  of  his  Thesmoplioriazousae,
came  to  her  house  and  there  justified  his  attacks  on  the  dead
poet;  and  of  how,  the  apology  ended,  Balaustion  read  to
Aristophanes  and  the  assembled  company  the  Hercides  Furens,
the  original  tablets  of  which  Euripides  had  presented  to  her
as  a parting  gift.  The  poem  ends  by  Balaustion  telling
Philemon  that  she  sent  the  original  tablets  to  Dionysius
tyrant  of  Sicily,  who  placed  them  in  a teni])le  of  Apollo  with
this  inscription :

“ I also  loved

The  poet.  Free  Athenai  chea|jly  prized —

King  Dionusios, — Archelaos-like  ”.

Balaustion  then  asks  Philemon

“ If  he  too  have  not  made  a votive  verse  ! ”,
and  Philemon  replies :

“ Grant,  in  good  sooth,  our  great  dead,  all  the  same.
Retain  their  sense,  as  certain  wise  men  say.

I’d  hang  myself — to  see  Euripides  ! ”.

The  association  then  of  Philemon  with  Browning’s  verse-
translation  of  the  Hercides  Furens  of  Euripides  is  definite
enough;  and  the  conjunction  of  “ Lucus  ”,  “Euripides”  and
“ Philemon  ” makes  it  certain  that  Mrs  Holland’s  script  is
I’eferrino’  to  Brownino-’s  translation  of  the  Hercules  Furens.

O O

(Note,  too,  how  the  phrase  “to  fly  to  find  Euripides”  has  a
flavour  of  Philemon’s  “ I’d  hang  myself — to  see  Euripides  ! ”.)


218


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

The  “ Margaret  ”,  written  in  mirror-writing,  no  doubt  means
Mrs  Venal], ^ who  is  elsewhere  referred  to  in  Mrs  Holland’s
script  by  her  Christian  name.  There  is  an  instance  in  the
Piper  trance  where  “Margaret”  was  used,  as  I believe  it  was
here,  to  indicate  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  convey
the  words  to  which  it  was  attached  to  Mrs  Verrall  (v.  p.  126;
and  cf.  p.  285,  “ May  Verrall).”

In  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  4 there  is  an  even  plainer
indication  that  Euripides’  Hercules  Fuvens  was  to  be  the
subject  of  a cross-corresjjondence  experiment:  “ask  elsewhere
for  the  BOUND  HERCULES.”  (The  binding  of  Hercules  is
one  of  the  episodes  of  the  Hercules  Fiirens.)

In  the  light  of  these  facts  the  coincidence  between  the  scripts
of  Mrs  Verrall  and  MVs  Holland  cannot  be  held  to  be  accidental  ;
and  it  has  the  air  of  a premeditated  achievement.  In  neither
script  is  the  communicator  indicated;  but  I have  no  hesitation
in  assigning  the  two  scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall  to  Myersy,  as  they
are  analogous  in  style  to  the  signed  communications  of  this
personality.  All  that  can  be  said  in  the  case  of  Mrs  Holland’s
script  is  that  a classical  allusion  of  the  kind  is  far  more
appropriate  as  coming  from  the  grou]i  of  personalities  of
whom  “ Myers  ” is  the  most  prominent  tlgure,  than  from  any
other  of  the  personalities  who  play  a part  in  her  automatic
writing.

Of  the  premeditation  which  I see  displayed  in  the  working-
out  of  the  correspondence  between  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs
Holland  there  is  no  sign  in  the  words : “ Do  you  remember
Euripides?”  written  by  Mrs  Piper  in  trance  on  A])ril  8.  But
if,  for  the  moment,  we  make  the  assumption  that  the  person-
ality which  calls  itself  “Myers”  in  all  three  scripts  is  one  and
the  same  personality,  a reason  will  suggest  itself  why  Euripides
was  mentioned  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  and  why  this  mention
was  made  in  so  casual,  disconnected  and  undecided  a manner.

On  March  4,  and  again  on  March  25,  Myer.Sy  had  written
about  Euripides’  play,  the  Hercules  Furens,  through  Mrs  Verrall,
and  on  the  earlier  date  had  told  the  automatist  to  “ask  else-
where for  the  Bound  Hercules”:  in  other  words  had  told  her
that  he  is  going  to  refer  to  the  subject  through  another

1 Cf.  Pi'oc.  Fart  LV.  p.  313.


219


LVii.]  ^4  Series  of  Concordant  Aidomatisms.

automatist.  His  scheme  at  this  date  was  not  to  impress  the  other
automatist  with  the  idea  in  precisely  the  same  way  in  which
he  had  impressed  Mx’s  Verrall,  but,  while  retaining  the  central
idea,  to  present  it  in  a slightly  modified  aspect,  as  was  done
in  other  instances  (cf.  “Cup”  pp.  191-2,  “Thanatos”  p.  298,  and
“Spirit”  pp.  220-7).  He  had  already  in  his  mind  the  design
to  work  the  corresponding  message  through  Mrs  Holland  by
making  her  allude  not  to  the  Hercules  Farens  of  Euripides
but  to  Browning’s  verse-translation  of  Euripides’  play.  On
April  8 Myers  in  the  course  of  communicating  through  Mrs
Piper  has  occasion  to  mention  an  unspecified  poem  of  Browning’s
in  connection  with  a message  which  he  had  previously  given
to  Mrs  Verrall;  and  then  shortly  afterwards  proceeds  to
mention  other  messages  which  he  had  been  trying  to  give  to
her.  By  a natural  association  of  ideas  the  references,  made  in
close  succession,  to  Browning’s  poem  and  to  cross-correspondence
experiments  with  ^Irs  Verrall  remind  him  of  the  scheme  he
has  in  hand  for  completing  his  Hercules  Farens  messsage  (of
which  the  first  half  had  already  been  given  to  Mrs  Verrall)
by  making  Mrs  Holland  allude  to  Browning’s  HeraJdes;  and
hence  his  abrupt  and  spasmodic  allusion  to  Euripides.

This  way  of  putting  it  will,  I fear,  appear  exce.ssively  crude,
especially  to  the  p.sychologist  who  loves  long  words ; but  I
do  not  see  how  eLse  to  express  my  meaning  -without  resorting
to  roundabout  and  tiresome  phraseology,  which,  if  not  too
obscure  to  convey  any  meaning  at  all,  would  only  mean  the
same  thing.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  simplest  form  of  the  common
idea  appears  in  Mrs  Piper’s  script : the  mere  name  Euripides.

In  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  the  allusion  to  Euripides  is  accom-
panied by  a variety  of  classical  or  mythological  allusions.

In  Mrs  Holland’s  script  Euripides  is  expressed  by  means  of
references  to  an  English  poet.

The  differences  in  the  normal  contents  of  the  minds  of  the
three  automatists  might,  at  first  sight,  seem  to  account  very
easily  for  the  different  developments  of  the  central  idea  bj'
Mrs  Holland  and  Mrs  Verrall  and  for  its  non-development  by
Mrs.  Piper.  But  in  Section  XIX.  I shall  show  that  the  matter
is  not  quite  so  simple  as  that ; and  in  any  case  we  should.


220


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


I think,  be  well  advised  not  to  assume  too  hastily  that  this
variation  in  the  presentment  of  the  common  subject  depended
solely  on  the  differences  in  the  mental  equipment  of  the  three
automatists.

If  these  scripts  were  inspired  by  an  external  intelligence
able  to  realise  the  ca[iacities  and  the  limitations  of  the
several  automatists  through  whom  he  had  to  work,  he  may
have  purposely  refrained  from  pouring  a quart  measure  into
a pint  pot ; for  though  part  might  have  been  held  the  essential
ingredient  might  have  escaped  with  the  overffow.  If  one
entrusts  a message  to  a child  one  couches  it  in  language  suited
to  his  capacity.  One  might,  of  course,  for  the  purpose  of  an
experiment  deliberately  give  a child  a string  of  difficult  words
to  see  how  far  he  could  succeed  in  repeating  it ; but  if  one’s
sole  or  main  aim  were  to  have  the  message  correctly  delivered
one  would  give  him  only  such  words  as  he  could  easily  retain
and  pronounce.


XVII.

“SPIRIT  AND  ANGEL.”

As  already  described  (v.  p.  211),  Myersp  took  up  a good
part  of  the  sitting  of  April  8 with  announcing  various  words
which  he  had  been  trvino-  to  oive  to  Mrs  Verrall.  In  the

»/  O O

course  of  this  sitting,  at  which  Mrs  Sidgwick  alone  was
present,  the  following  occurred  : — ■

(Myers  communicating)  Do  you  remember.  Spirit  and
Angel.

I gave  both

E.  M.  S.  You  gave  that^


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Aidomatisvis.  221

Both,  and
them

To  (?)  the  stars.

(Eector  communicating)

I got  it  quite  clear  E.

(A  few  lines  later  this  is  added  :)

(Myers  communicating)

Nearly  all  the  words  I have  written  today

are  with  reference  to  messages  I am

trying  to  give  through  Mrs.  V.

M.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I quite  understand.

Mrs  Sidgwick  did  not  ask  to  whom  “ Spirit  and  Angel  ”
had  been  given,  nor  was  there  any  need  to  do  so,  for  the
preceding  context  had  made  it  perfectly  clear  that  Mrs.  Yerrall
was  meant.

What  is  not  clear  is  whether  “ I gave  both  ” means  that
“Spirit”  and  “Angel”  were  given  separately  or  were  com-
bined in  one  experiment.  The  phrase  used  is  susceptible  of
either  meaning,  but  I think  that  perhaps  the  more  natural
interpretation  is  that  they  wei’e  given  on  separate  occasions.

The  words  “ Both,  and  them  To  the  stars  ” are  not
easy  to  understand.  I think  the  “them”  was  interpola.ted
to  explain  “ both  ”,  so  that  the  phrase  “ I gave  both  ” might
not  be  taken  to  mean  that  Myersp  gave  the  vjord  “ Both  ”.
Explanatory  words  are  often  inserted  out  of  order  in  this
fashion  by  Rector  to  remove  possible  misunderstandings.

If  this  is  the  right  explanation  then  the  passage  would
run  thus :

“ Do  you  remember  Spirit  and  Angel  ? I gave  them  both,
and  To  the  Stars  ” ; the  last  being  another  cross-correspondence
message.  Once  later,  at  the  sitting  of  April  17,  the  words
“To  the  Stars”  are  mentioned  by  Myersp  among  several  other
words  which  he  said  he  had  been  trying  to  give  to  i\lrs  Yerrall.


222


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

“Spirit  and  Angel”  did  not  appear  together  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
automatic  writing  ; but  two  separate  pieces  of  her  script,  those
of  March  25  and  April  3,  seem  to  express  these  two  ideas.
I have  already  quoted  the  opening  paragraphs  of  the  script
of  March  25  (v.  Section  XVI.  p.  214),  and  so  need  give  the
remainder  only  here.  Immediately  after  the  words  “and  the
binding  to  the  pillar  ” comes  this :

I want  a special  message  to  get  to  you.  I have  tried  several
times,  but  you  have  not  understood.  I don’t  know  where
it  went  wrong.  But  let  Piddington  know  when  you  get
a message  about  shadow, — remember  the  Yirgilian  line
indignantis  sub  umbras.  To  you  they  are  shadows —
like  the  shadows  in  Plato’s  cave  but  they  are  shadows  of
the  real.

quae  cum  vides  bene  comprenendere  possis  quae  tibi  nunc
fusco  colore  obdita  paene  obscurata  videntur,  et  tamen  in
somniis  aliquando  U M B R A R U M volitantia  corpora
percipis — immo  pro  corporibus  animas  dicere  melius —
quae  tibi  per  somnum  mentem  immortalia  tangunt

haec  cape,  quis  captis  non  desine
no  not  that

summum  ad  tingere  comes  in

[which  when  you  see  you  will  well  understand  what  now
hidden  wdth  dark  colour  seems  to  you  almost  obscured
and  yet  in  dreams  sometimes  you  see  the  flitting  bodies
of  SHADE  S — rather  for  bodies  it  were  better  to  saj'
souls — the  immortal  things  that  touch  your  mind  in
sleep

seize  them  and  when  they  are  seized  do  not  cease  (no  not
that)  “ to  attain  to  the  highest  ” (reading  “ attingere  ”
for  “ad  tingere”)  comes  in.]

It  means  that  there  and  thus  does  this  mortal  put  on  im-
mortality, by  keeping  hold  of  the  things,  the  true  things
seen  in  sleep.  Why  could  he  not  say  that  ?

It  seems  simple  enough  to  me.

et  nos  attingimus  caelum  [we  too  attain  heaven.]

But  when  so  many  things  Hit  through  the  mind  it  is  hard
to  seize  and  hold  what  is  true.  I think  I have  this  time.
Ask  if  he  understands.


223


LVir.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

The  sliadow  of  a shade.

that  is  better  umbrarum  umbras  o-/ctas  eiocoAor  was
what  I wanted  to  get  written,  goodbj'e.

Indignantis  sub  umbras  is  a wanton  misquotation  of  the
last  line  of  the  Aeneid,  which  must  have  sorely  vexed  the
automatist’s  supraliminal  scholarship.  In  the  original  the  line
runs  thus  :

“ Vitaque  cum  gemitu  fugit  indignata  sub  umbras.”

[And  the  disembodied  spirit  (vita)  with  a groan  flees  angry
to  the  shades.]

Let  Piddington  know  when  you  get  a message  about
shadow  is  a clear  intimation  that  this  script  purports  to
embody  a cross-correspondence.

Note  the  reiteration  of  the  same  idea  involved  in  the
words  “ shadow  ”,  five  times  repeated  ; “ umbrae  ”,  four  times
repeated;  “shade”;  “animas”;  o-Kidg;  elSoAop ; and,  one  may
add,  “vita”,  which  must  be  supplied  as  the  subject  of  indig-
nata  (misquoted  indignantis)-,  and  for  similar  repetitions  of
the  important  word  cf.  pp.  98,  178,  and  202.

Umbrae  is  constantl}^  used  by  the  Augustan  poets  and  by
post-Augustan  prose-writers  for  the  shade,  ghost,  or  spirit  of
a dead  person ; and  the  plural  form  is,  moreover,  used  both
by  Vergil  and  Ovid  of  the  ghost  of  a single  dead  person,
and,  indeed,  I believe  that  the  plural  is  as  often  employed  in
this  sense  as  the  singular.

(T/fiaf  eiSooXov.  This  phrase,  which  means  “ shadow  of  a shade  ”,
is  found  in  a fragment  of  Sophocles,  where  it  is  applied  to  the
refiection  of  herself  seen  by  a mare  in  smooth  water ; but  its
occurrence  in  the  script  is  perhaps  more  likely,  in  spite  of  the
inverted  order  of  the  words,  to  be  a reminiscence  of  a passage
in  the  Agamemnon  of  Aeschylus  O

€v  yap  e^eTrlaTapai
opiX'iws  KUTOiTTpoi',  e’lSwXov  cr/c(d?,

SoKovPTWs  eivui  Kapra  irpeopevel^  epoi
translated  thus  by  Morshead :

“ There  be,  who  vaunt  an  utter  loyalty,
d'hat  is  but  as  the  ghost  of  friendship  dead.”

^ See,  however,  p.  260.


224


[part


J.  G.  Fiddington.

Although  I do  not  at  all  wish  to  press  this  point,  it  should
not  escape  observation  that  whereas  the  script  gives  the  plural
form  of  “umbrae”,  which  is  used  to  mean  a single  dead
person,  it  gives  a singular  case  of  a-Kia,  the  plural  of  which
could  not  be  used  to  signify  a single  ghost.  I do  not  press
this  point,  because  I do  not  think  that  it  much  matters
whether  l\Irs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  25  be  interpreted  as
“shades,  ghosts  or  spirits”  or  as  “shade,  ghost  or  spirit.”  The
coincidence  with  the  “ Spirit  ” of  the  Piper  trance  is  close
enough  either  way.

Umbrarum  volitantia  corpora  may  be  reminiscent  of
Aeneid  VI,  292-4 :

“ Et,  ni  docta  conies  tenuis  sine  corpore  vitas
Admoneat  volitare  cava  sub  imaOTue  formae,

Inruat,  et  frustra  ferro  diverberet  umbras”;

and  this  passage  might  well  have  been  suggested  by  the
preceding  “ indignantis  sub  umbras”,  a misquotation  of  Aeneid
XII,  952,  where  “vita”  is  used  in  much  the  same  sense  (and
that  a very  rare  one)  as  “ vitas  ” here.

Quae  tihi  ....  tavgunt  forms  an  hexameter  line,  and  mentem
immortalia  tangnnt  is  a parody  of  the  Vergilian  “mentem
mortalia  tano-unt”.

O

If  we  treat  all  the  words  from  “non  desine”  down  to  “simple
enough  to  me”  as  parenthetical,  a second  hexameter  line  in
the  style  of  Lucretius  is  formed  by  the  addition  of  “ et  nos
attingimus  caelum”  to  “ haec  cape,  quis  captis  ”.

a/iiimas.  “ Animae  ” is  used  by  the  Augustan  poets  for  the
Souls  of  the  dead  which  inhabit  the  Lower  World.

I have  assumed  throughout  that  by  “Spirit”  MyerSp  had
in  mind  a disembodied  spirit,  and  not  one  of  the  other  signi-
fications of  the  word ; and  I think  I am  justified  in  making
this  a.ssumption,  for  had  MyerSp  wished  to  attach  an  impersonal
meaning  to  the  word  he  would  hardly  have  conjoined  with
it  the  word  “ Angel  ”,  which  connotes  a personal  being.

Mrs  Verrall’s  .script  during  the  period  under  review  does
not  contain  the  word  “Spirit”  or  “Spirits”;  but  obviously
it  would  not  have  been  surprising  if  it  had  ; and  had  either
of  these  words  a.ppeared  in  her  .script,  even  near  the  date  on


225


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Aibtomatisnis.

which  Myei’Sp  said  he  had  given  “ Spirit  ”,  it  would  have  been
difficult  to  treat  it  as  more  than  accidental,  unless  special
prominence  had  in  some  way  been  given  to  the  writing  of  it.
Whether  we  regard  some  part  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  consciousness
or  an  external  intelligence  as  responsible  for  the  script  of
March  25,  the  author  of  it,  I think  we  may  fairly  assume,
would  have  recognised  the  necessity  of  meeting  this  obvious
criticism.  How  better  could  it  have  been  met  than  by  harping
on  the  idea,  while  avoiding  the  use  of  the  English  word,  and
by  reiterating  various  Greek  and  Latin  words  equivalent  to
“ Spirit  ” or  “ Spirits  ” ? ^

A trace  of  “To  the  Stars”  may  just  possibly  be  found  in
the  words  “ et  nos  attingimus  caelum”.^

A portion  of  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  March  27,  which  fell
on  a Wednesday  (v.  pp.  206-7,  and  291),  presents  some  coin-
cidences with  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  25.  I quote  only
a part,  because  the  rest  is  clearly  quite  disconnected.

Talem  (1)  uttorque  (or,  ‘ utorque  ’ or  ‘ utroque  ’)  surgit
absidem  (or,  ‘ exsulem  ’)  lux  toto  dum  (1)
sine  ab  horos  (?)  tenebrae.  Via  obscura  vita  lucet  [So  far
written  with  the  left  hand]

And  o’er  the  flats  the  singing  of  the  sea —

Ebbed  like  the  thought  of  long  forgiven  wrong —

The  abiding  horror  to  me  was  that  of  darkness — Let
sorrow  take  any  other  shape  it  will — Love  and  Sorrow —
Sorrow  and  Love — as  inevitably  as  Light  and  Shadow —
Shadow  and  Light

The  sundial  at  Broadmeadows  what  was  the  motto  ?

Except  the  last  four,  the  words  written  with  the  left  hand  are
very  difficult  indeed  to  decipher,  and  I feel  absolutely  certain
of  two  only,  “surgit”  and  “lux”;  but  they  are  certainly  Latin
or  attempts  at  Latin.

The  reading  ab  horos  is  Miss  Johnson’s.  There  is  no  such
word  as  “ hoi’os  ”,  wdiich  may  be  an  error  for  horis,  ablative

^This  avoidance  of  the  English  word  “spirit”  should  be  compared  with  the
avoidance  of  the  English  word  “death”  in  another  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall’s.
V.  p.  302.

-The  possible  significance  of  “To  the  Stars”  is  explained  in  a footnote
to  p.  269.


P


226


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


plural  of  liora,  hour,  though  this  would  not  make  any  sense.
I think  the  symbols  may  represent  “obscuros”.  It  is  not  possible
to  make  any  sense  out  of  the  words  as  they  stand,  nor  can  I
suggest  any  emendations  which  would  make  them  intelligible.

Lux  means  “light”;  surgit  means  “he  (.she,  or  it)  rises”;
tenehrae  means  “darkness”,  especially  the  darkness  of  night,
or,  as  we  might  say,  “ the  shades  of  night  ” ; and  in  this
meaning  is  nearly  synonymous  with  “ umbrae  ” ; but  it  cannot
mean,  as  does  “umbrae”,  the  shades  or  ghosts  of  the  dead,
though  it  is  applied  to  the  “Shades”  which  the  shades  of
the  dead  inhabit.

In  estimating  the  probability  of  chance  having  produced  the
coincidences  which  are  to  be  found  between  some  of  the  words
in  this  script  of  Mrs  Holland’s  and  some  of  those  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  of  two  da3^s  earlier,  it  is  essential  to  discover
how  often,  and  what  sort  of  Latin  occurs  in  Mrs  Holland’s
automatic  writing.  During  the  period  under  review  the  follow-
ing is  an  exhaustive  list ; —


Dec.  12

“ Fides  ”.

Dec.  19

“ Pace.  Pax.”

Dec.  23

“ Tacet.”  “Nomen.”

Jan.  2

“ Missa  est  ”.

Jan.  9

“ Ave  atque  vale  frater  non  in  perpetu
“ And  ave  ave  ave  said.”

Jan.  23

“Nox”.

Feb.  20

“ Confiteor  ”.

March  27

(as  quoted  above)

April  16

“ Mors  ”.

June  19

“ Vera  causa  ”.

“ perdere  vult”.

“Mors”  I regal'd  as  a cross-correspondence  (v.  |ip.  297-8);  of
the  phrases  written  on  Jan.  9,  the  first  is  a perversion  of
Catullus  CL  10,  and  the  second  is  a quotation  from  Tennyson’s
In  Memoriam,  and  both  perhaps  show  points  of  contact  with
Mrs  Verrall’s  script.  The  rest,  with  the  exception  of  “ confiteor”
and  perhaps  “facet”,  are  the  sort  of  Latin  words  or  tags  that
any  educated  ]ierson  knows.  Of  the  words  written  on  Maich  27,
“ tenehrae  ” recalls  the  “ umbrae  ” ; “ obscura  ” the  “ obscurata  ” ;


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


227


and  “vita”  the  “ indignantis  sub  umbras”  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  March  25.

But  it  is  not  to  these  slight  resemblances  that  I attach
importance.  The  more  .striking  coincidence  lies  in  the  fact
that  two  days  after  I\Irs  Verrall  had  written  a script  which
centres  round  the  wmrds  “.shadow”  and  “umbrae”,  and  in  which
occur  the  words : “ let  Piddington  know  when  }mu  get  a
message  about  shadow  ” : Mrs.  Holland  wrote  a script  in  which
“tenebrae”  occurs  once  and  “Shadow”  twice,  and  in  which,
perhaps,  the  idea  of  “ shadows  ” is  conveyed  implicitly  in  the
reference  to  a sundial.


“ ANGEL  ”.


Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  April  3,  I take  to  represent  the  second
of  the  two  words  named  by  Myersp  on  April  8.

It  reads  as  follows  : — •

M^rite  three  words — something  about  their  serried  ranks, —
the  avenging  flame — the  troop  triumphant —
no  not  quite  that,
flaming  swords — no

flammantia  moenia  mundi  [flaming  walls  of  the  world]
But  wings  or  feathered  wings  come  in  somewhere
“ And  with  twain  he  covered  his  i'ace  ”

Try  pinions  of  desire
The  wings  of  Icarus


long  pointed  rainbow  wings.  But  you  keep  going  round


228


J.  G.  Piddington.

the  ideas  instead  of  giving  three  plain  words


[part


Lost  Paradise  Regained


Of  man’s  first  Disobedience  no  that  is  something  else
a fluttering  faint  desire.  Triumphant  hosts  in  long
array  the  wings  point  upwards  behind  the  marshalled
hosts.

It  is  a picture  can  you  not  see  itl  with  sweeping
stationary  wings,  not  used  in  flight,  but  making  a
great  aureole  behind  the  central  group.  The  hosts  of
heaven  (Scribbles.)  No  I cant  get  it  at  all

Leave  it  today
his  flame  clad  messengers


that  is  better

F W H M has  sent  the  message  through — at  last !


The  intention  of  this  script  is  too  patent  to  need  much
comment.

Flavimantia  moenia  mimdi  is  a tpiotation  of  Lucretius,
I.  73,  and  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  similarity  in  sense
and  sound  of  the  preceding  “flaming”.  JBut  I think  it  more
likely,  in  spite  of  the  reverse  order  in  which  they  emerged,  that
“flammantia  moenia  mundi”  suggested  “flaming  swords”  than
vice  versa.  The  Cjuotation  from  Lucretius  had  already  appeared
once  before  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  on  March  19,  1902  (v.  Froc.
Vol.  XX.  pp.  348  and  359).  It  aroused  no  conscious  associa-
tion in  Mrs  Verrall’s  mind  other  than  with  Lucretius.  It  was


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  229

only  on  Sept.  9,  1907  that  she  discovered  that  the  last  lines
of  F.  W.  H.  Myers’  Passing  of  Youth : ^

“Far,  far  aloof  can  sail  with  wings  unfurled
Beyond  the  flaming  rampire  of  the  world.”

are  a paraphrase  of  Lucretius  I.  72-4  :

“ Ergo  vivida  vis  aniini  pervicit,  et  extra
Processit  longe  flainmantia  moenia  mundi
Atque  omne  immensum  peragravit  mente  animoque.”

Now  at  the  point  where  the  Lucretian  phrase  is  introduced
into  the  script  of  April  3,  1907,  the  scribe  is  trying  to  work
in  the  idea  of  %vings.  But  wings  do  not  enter  into  the  original
lines  of  Lucretius ; “ with  wings  unfurled  ” is  Myers’s  own
addition.  Hence  it  is  more  probable  that  “ flaming  swords  ”,
though  emerging  first,  was  provoked  by  the  latent  idea  of  wings
suggested  by  Myei’s’s.  paraphrase  of  Lucretius,  than  that  “flaming-
swords  ” suggested  “ flaming  walls  ”.  That  this  association  of
ideas  should  appear  as  though  latent  in  the  mind  of  the  scribe
rather  than  in  that  of  the  automatist  is,  at  the  least,  appro-
priate when  the  scribe  purports  to  be  the  same  person  as  the
author  of  the  Passing  of  Youth.

The  source  of  And  with  twain  he  covered  his  face  is  Isaiah
VI.  2. : “ Above  it  stood  the  seraphims : each  one  had  six  wings ;
with  twain  he  covered  his  face,  and  with  twain  he  covered
his  feet,  and  with  twain  he  did  fly.”

Serried  ranks,  avenging  flame,  troop  triumphant,  flaming
swords,  rainhoiv  ^uings,  triumphant  hosts  are  reminiscences,
not,  I think,  quotations,  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  books  of
Paradise  Lost.  There  are  also  probably  reminiscences
of  the  following  lines  from  Milton’s  Ode  on  the  Morning  of
Christ’s  Nativity:

“ The  helmed  Cherubim
And  sworded  Seraphim

Are  seen  in  glittering  ranks  with  wings  display’d.”

One  of  the  most  interesting  points  in  this  script  is  the
evidence  it  affords  of  the  existence  of  two  psychical  activities

^MrsVerrall  states  that  she  probably  must  have  read  the  Passing  of  Youth
at  some  time  before  1907,  but  that  she  has  no  recollection  of  it.


230


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


simultaneously  at  work,  each  a factor  in  the  script ; one
apparently  aware  throughout  of  what  it  was  driving  at  and
able  to  check  the  other  from  wandering  too  far  from  the
point,  yet  almost  in  despair  of  making  its  fellow  grasp  the
exact  point;  and  hardly  less  interesting  is  the  exclamation  of
relief  and  satisfaction  with  which  the  writing  closes.

Neither  the  imagery  of  Milton,  nor  the  variations  on  the
“ wing's  ” theme  seem  to  have  given  the  automatist  so  effective
a clue  to  what  was  wanted  as  the  etymological  hint  afforded
by  the  word  “messengers”,  which  is  no  sooner  written  than
the  drawing  of  an  angel  is  made.

It  should  be  noted  that  though  the  script  throughout  implies
or  points  to  “angels”  in  the  plural,  only  a single  angel  was
drawn ; though  I do  not  wish  to  press  this  point  any  more
than  the  permissibility  of  taking  “ umbrae  ” to  mean  a single
spirit.

This  script,  unlike  that  of  Mai'ch  25,  is  definitely  signed
“F.  W.  H.  M.”

Mrs  Sidgwick,  who  was  present  at  the  sitting  of  April  8
when  for  the  first  and  only  time  “Angel”  was  said  to  be
the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence,  had  Tjot  seen  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  April  3.  The  scrij>t  was  sent  to  me,  and  I I'eceived
and  read  it  at  8.15  p.m.  on  April  4.  The  envelope  containing
it  bore  the  postmark  “ Matlock  Bath.  8.15  p.m.  Ap.  3,  1907  ”.


XVIII.

“O’ER  MOUNTAINS,  SEAS  AND  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.”

At  the  sitting  with  Mrs  Pij^er  held  on  Jan.  22,  1907,  after
a certain  amount  of  pi'eliminary  conversatinn  had  passed  be-
tween Rector  and  myself,  Rector  wrote:  “ vh'v  well  we  will


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  231

now  see  our  friend  [i.e.  the  sitter]  if  you  have  nothing  further  ”,
The  record  then  continues  thus: —

J.  6.  P.  No,  there  is  nothing  further.

(J.  G.  P.  signals  to  Miss  Newton  to  go  out  and  fetch  the
sitter.)

Myers  is  especially  interested  in  taking  messages.

(Sitter  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  enters  11.23  a.m.)

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I’m  glad  to  hear  that.  The  friend  is  here  now,  and
will  sit  beside  jmu.

(Myers  communicating)

Yes,  but  I got  Shores  Lakes  and  Rivers  or  stream.

(Hand  waves  towards  sitter.)

Mrs  V.  I am  here.

Did  it  come  out  there  also  ?

Mrs  V.  \Yhere  is  “there”?

Did  Nellie  say  it  ?

J.  G.  P.  I haven’t  yet  seen  the  record.  I will  let  you  know  as  soon
as  I can.

I hope  }mu  will  as  I wish  to  U.D.  if  I hear  correctly.

“Nellie”  is  the  control  of  Mrs  Thompson;  and  the  question
“Did  Nellie  say  it?”  meant  “Were  the  words  ‘Shores,  Lakes’
etc.  spoken  by  the  Nellie  control  through  Mrs  Thompson  ? ”.
They  were  not.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  question  was
asked  in  the  presence  of  Mrs  Verrall.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs  Pi'per  held  on
March  20,  1907.

(Present : Mrs  Sidgwick  alone.)

(Myers  communicating.)  Now  if  you  can  tell  me  of  any
other  word  you  wish  me  to  convey  to  her  [i.e.  Mrs
Verrall]  I will  do  so


E.  M.  S.  Cloud.


232


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Oh  she  has  already  written  it  ....
the  clouds  dispersed  and  forth  came  sunshine.

think  of  something  else.

(After  a few  references  to  other  matters  the  matter  crops
up  again  in  the  following  way : — )

(Rector  communicating)  She  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  has  already
written  clouds.

E.  M.  S.  I understand  that.

and  the  other  word  church.

E.  M.  S.  (misreading  “ word  ” as  “ and  ”)  “ and  church  ”,

Yes  Chapel  Monument

Hodgson  gave  her  Church

Myers  gave  her  Monument  and  Chapel.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

(Myers  communicating)

Now  there  were  several  other  words  which  she  wrote
one  sounded  like  ^ I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud
that  floats
Sounds  like  Hi2:h
Hill

E.  M.  S.  “ that  floats  on  yonder  hill  ” ?

on  high  (Some  symbols  are  then  written  which

0 E E N . might  be  “ o’er  ” but  which  are  more
like  “ 0 r e r ”)

E.  M.  S.  “OEEN”  is  itl

(Rector  communicating)

Repeat  for  him.  R.

(E.M.  S.  repeats.)

Oer

' Probably  “one  sounded  like  ” is  an  interjection  of  Rector’s,  who  often  repre-
sents himself  as  unable  to  hear  distinctly  words  spoken  by  the  spirit  for  whom
he  is  acting  as  amanuensis.


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  233

E.  M.  S.  Oh  ! “ O’er  ”,  yes.  “ I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud  that
floats  o’er”

Yes.  Dale  and  hill

Yes  I heard  distinctly  several  words.  . . . several  of
those  words

At  the  sitting  of  April  1.5  Rector  included  among  cross-
corresponding  messages  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  by  Myersp  or
Hodgsonp  the  phrase  ; “ Besides  the  word  M something  like
Mountain.”

During  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  April  17,  after
the  words  “Sanatos”  and  “Tanatos”  (v.  p.  295)  had  been
pronounced,  came  the  following ; —

O’er  mountains  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers.

Mr  Myers  has  got  Rector  by  the  ear.  ^Yhispers  into  it.

IVhat’s  last  . . . 1 Oh  ! he  is  writing  it.

L-a-u-s-t-e-o.

Laburnum  (?)  Daftbdils.  I smell  them.

All  the  utterances  made  during  the  waking-stage  of  the
trance  of  April  17  I have  no  doubt  emanated  from  Hodgsoiip
and  MyerSp ; and  I have  little  doubt  that  they  were  almost
entirely  concerned  with  the  announcement  of  various  cross-
coi’respondence  messages,  six  in  number ; namely,  “ Thanatos  ”,
“ O’er  mountains  ” etc.,  “ Laus  Deo  ” (as  “ Lausteo  ” was  eventu-
ally pronounced),  “Semper  Tyrannus  ”,  “Laburnum”  and
“ Daffodils  ”.  Of  these  I shall  presently  discuss  the  first  and
third  (v.  pp.  295  and  304) ; with  the  second  and  the  last  I am
dealing  now;  and  of  the  rest  I find  no  trace  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
or  Mrs  Holland’s  scripts  during  the  periods  under  review.  It
may  seem  surprising  that  I should  regard  “Laburnum”  and
“ Daffodils  ” as  cross-correspondences,  in  view  of  the  words  with
which  their  utterance  is  accompanied : “ I smell  them  ” ; and  I
should  indeed  have  looked  on  them  simply  as  a reference  to
flowers  which  Mrs  Piper  imagines  she  receives  from  her  spirit
friends,  were  it  not  that  “Daffodils”  are  the  subject  of  the
poem  of  which  “ I wandered  lonely  as  a Cloud  ” (given  as  a
cross-correspondence  on  March  20  by  Myersp)  is  the  first  line ;
and  that  Myersp  distinctly  stated  on  April  29  that  he  had


234


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


given  “Daffodils”,  and  on  June  2 “Laburnum”  to  Mrs
Verrall.  If  these  isolated  words  do  not  refer  to  cross-
correspondence experiments  then  they  have  no  sense,  as  they
do  not  connect  in  any  way  with  the  affairs  of  the  sitters  or
with  other  matters  mentioned  in  the  same  sitting  or  in  previous
or  subsequent  sittings ; and  it  is  very  seldom  that  what  Mrs
Piper  writes  or  says  in  trance  lias  no  sense.  It  may  be  in-
coi'rect  or  muddled,  but  it  has  a meaning.

Extract  from  siftivg  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  April  23,
1907.

(Present : Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  ISlewton.)

(Hodgson  communicating)  Did  you  receive  mj^  word  Church
also  Chapel  and  Mountain.

E.  M.  S.  I will  ask  about  this  also.

I believe  Mountain  and  Church  got  partly  through.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ^oith  Mrs  Piper  held  on
April  24,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  alone.)

(Rector  communicating)  They  [i.e.  Myers  and  Hodgson]  feel
that  some  of  their  last  words  have  not  appeared  through
Mrs  Verrall,  but  feel  sure  that  in  due  time  most  of
them  will

E.  M.  S.  Yes.  We  will  wait  for  them.

Did  you  find  that  Mountain  came  out  ?

E.  M.  S.  No,  not  mountain.


(Myers  communicating)

I gave  her  a few  words  in  which  were

cloud  lonely

did  you  get  it  cleat  ly  ?

E.  M.  S.  I think  “ lonely  ” came  through.

Yes  I said  lonely.


E.  M.  S.  Good.


LVII,]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  235

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vAth  Mrs  Piper  held  on
April  29,  1907.

(Present ; Mrs  Verrall  and  Miss  Johnson.)

(Myers  communicating)  Did  you  get  Helen’s  message  about
the  Brook.

Mrs  V.  I haven’t  seen  Helen  for  more  than  six  weeks,  and  don’t
know  what  messages  she  has  had.

I wrote  lonel}'  Wandering  Cloud
Daffodils  Yes.  I did.

Mrs  V.  I will  ask  her.  [i.e.  Miss  Helen  Verrall.]

I gave  it  quite  clearly  to  you  also.

but  you  seemed  to  U.D.  only  the  word  wandering.


(Spoken  during  the  waking-stage.)  I wandered  lonely  as  a
cloud — Myers.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ivith  3frs  Piper  held  on
May  1,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson.)

(Myers  communicating)  I told  Mrs  V.  to  write.

Mountain  field  and  sky.
did  she  receive  it?

E.  M.  S.  “ Sky  ” she  did,  but  not  “ mountain  ” and  “ field  ” I think.

Mountain  may  appear  any  time.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  we’ll  look  out  for  it.
also  hills

if  it  appear  as  hills  we  mean  practically  the  same  thing,
as  when  I can’t  make  [her]  U.D.  one  word  I give  her
another  similar


E.  M.  S.  I see.

Similar

She  did  U.D.  my  reference  to  lakes


236


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  “lakes”?
yes.

E.  M.  S.  I will  see  if  she  got  lakes,
yes  quite.

I think  she  U.D.  it  as  lake
L

E.  M.  S.  “as  lake”?

Yes.

On  May  7,  1907  Myersp  asked  Mrs  Sidgwick  if  Mrs  Verrall
got  the  words : “ Mountain  Lake  and  Lonely  ”,  and  added  :
“Did  Cloud  appear?”.  Mrs  Sidgwick  replied  that  she  thought
“ cloud  ” had  not  appeared,  but  that  “ lonely  ” had,  though  she
could  not  remember  in  what  connection.

On  J\Iay  19,  1907  Myersp  said  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge:  “I  will
tell  you  that  I have  sent  and  succeeded  (?)  in  making  Mrs  V.

understand  Expectancy  trancpiility  [sic]  and  cloud Give

her  my  love  and  tell  her  this  being  my  first  opportunity  to
acknowledge  the  fact  that  the  wortl  did  appear.”

On  June  2,  1907  Myersp  said  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge:  “I  have
succeeded  in  getting  another  word  through  Mrs  V.  It  is
Montin  [sic],  one  of  my  test  words.  I also  note  Lake  LAKE.
Laburnam  [sic]  and  Rose  leaf.  All  this  has  much  meaning
as  you  will  understand  later.”

It  will  be  seen  that  this  experiment,  or  rather  amalgam  of
experiments,  was  pursued  with  great  perseverance.  It  will
first  be  desirable  to  epitomise,  and  if  ymssible  digest,  the  fore-
going medley  of  extracts.

If  we  leave  out  of  consideration  “ shores  ”,  which  was
mentioned  once  only  and  then  not  in  connection  with  Mrs
Verrall,  there  appear  to  be  three  distinct  groups  of  ideas :
(1)  Seas,  lakes,  rivers  or  stream;  (2)  Lonely  wandering  cloud;
and  (3)  field  and  sky.  With  all  three  of  these  groups  is
united  at  one  time  or  another  a fourth  idea  : mountain  or  hill.

If  all  four  are  combined  we  get  12  different  leading  words  ;
lakes,  rivers,  stream,  seas,  cloud,  dale,  hill,  mountain,  lonely
wandering,  field,  and  sky.

Out  of  these  twelve  seven — dale,  stream,  hill,  sea,  river,  mount


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Atdomatisms.  237

and  lake — appear  in  one  piece  of  script  written  by  Mrs  Verrall
on  April  6,  1907,  of  which  the  following  is  a copy: —

For  the  first  time — let  me  say  it  plainly

Ask  for  the  painted  feather,  no  not  feather — sounds  like
feather  fev  feth — Fetherbridge  no  it  is  some  word  like
that  the  painted  Severn  bridge — the  painting  of  Tever
bridge — that  is  what  it  sounds  like  listen  again.  The
painting  of  Letherbridge

But  it  is  not  easy  to  write  today — put  it  letter  by  letter
Le  th  er  bridge

By  holm  and  kill
and  thorp  and  dale
By  stream  and  rill
by  hill  and  vale
In  gloom  or  shine
by  day  and  night
By  larch  and  pine
to  left  to  right

The  water  faintly  trickling  from  its  fount,
gains  volume  as  it  rushes  to  the  sea
A broadening  river  b}^  the  storied  mount
an  o^jen  lake  beside  the  lawns  of

LEA

That  ought  to  give  you  the  clue.

Wait  and  listen.

E W G

Appended  was  the  following  note : —

Matlock  Bath.  April  7.

There  is  a village  near  here  called  Lea.  We  had  spent  all  day
yesterday  in  an  expedition  to  Dovedale,  but  Lea  is  not  near  that,
nor  do  I know  of  any  “ storied  mount  ” in  this  neighbourhood.  The
Dove  does  not,  I think,  flow  into  the  sea  but  into  some  other
river.  I know  of  no  Letherbridge  or  Fetherbridge  &c.

M.  de  G.  V.

Later  Mrs  Verrall  added  this  note: —

“ Kill  ” is  a local  name.

On  April  27  I saw  that  the  river  may  represent  the  river  of  Lethe ;
note  “ Letherbridge  ” corrected  to  “ Lether  bridge  ”,  and  the  final
emphasis  on  Lea.  The  “ storied  mount  ” can  only  be  the  Mount
of  Purgatory,  past  which  flows  the  river  of  Lethe.


238


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


To  give  the  word  “Lethe”  may  well  have  been  one  intention
of  the  scribe ; but  the  sci'ibe  may  have  had  a double  intention,
namely,  to  work  in  the  words  “ dale,  stream,  hill,  lake  ” etc.  as
well  as  the  word  “Lethe”.

No  trace  of  “lonely  wandering  cloud”  appears  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  automatic  writing  at  all.  The  word  “lonely”  occurs
in  her  script  of  March  11  (v.  p.  145)  in  the  ])hrase:  “Presences
on  the  eternal  hills  ....  The  Presence  that  is  in  the  lonely
hills”.  “Lonely”,  it  will  be  noted,  occurs  in  close  connexion
both  with  the  word  “ hills  ” and  with  the  Wordsworthian
phrase,  “ the  eternal  hills  ”.

There  is  not  in  Mrs  Veriall’s  script  any  combination  of  the
ideas  of  “ Mountain,  field  and  sky  ”.

As  regards  the  words  given  in  the  trance  which  do  appear
in  Mrs  Verrall’s  scri])t,  the  points  which,  to  my  mind,  tell
strongly  against  their  appeai’auce  being  due  to  chance  are
these  :

(1)  On  April  15  Rector  says  “something  like  Mountain”
has  been  given  to  Mrs  Verrall;  and  this,  as  I understand  it,
is  expanded  in  the  waking-stage  of  April  17  to  “O’er  mountains
seas  and  lakes  and  rivers”.  On  Apill  6 Mrs  Verrall  had
written  a dowerel  of  twelve  lines,  in  the  last  four  of  which
occur  the  words  “sea”,  “lake”,  “river”  and  “mount”;
(2)  The  persistency  with  which  the  trance-personalities  enquire
whether  “ mountain ” has  got  through;  and  the  confident  state-
ment  by  Myersp  on  June  2 that  Mrs  Verrall  has  written  both
“mountain”  and  “lake”;  (3)  The  spontaneous  expression  of
opinion  by  MyerSp  on  May  1 that  Mrs  Verrall  had  understood
the  word  as  “ lake  ” instead  of  “ lakes  ” ; and  the  appearance  of
“mount”  in  the  script,  which  does  not  correspond  badly  with
Rector’s  “something  like  mountain,”  and  with  the  statement
of  Hodgsonp : “I  believe  mountain  got  paifly  through”;  (4)
The  appearance  in  the  script  of  April  6,  in  addition  to  the
words  mentioned  in  (1),  of  (a)  the  word  “hill”,  which  Myersp
said  on  May  1 might  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  “ mountain  ”,
and  of  (b)  the  words  “dale  and  hill”,  which,  though  not
directly  connected  by  Myersp  with  “ seas  lakes  and  rivers  ”,
are  connected  with  “lonely”  and  “cloud”,  with  which  “moun-
tain” “lonely”  and  “cloud”  were  in  turn  connected  on  May  7;


lvil]


229


A Series  of  Concordant  Aiitomatisms.

and  (5)  the  conjunction  of  “lonely”  and  “hills”  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  in  close  connection  with  a ^Yordsworthian  phrase.

Tt  seems  likely  that  the  surroundings  in  which  Mrs  Verrall
was  staying  on  April  6 both  helped  the  ideas  to  emerge  and
influenced  the  mode  of  their  expression.  “Dale — stream —
rill — vale”  were  all  words  which  the  scenery  of  IMatlock  might
suggest;  and  “kill”  it  must  have  suggested.  l\Iyersp,  let  me
conjecture,  was  making  a second  attempt  to  impress  the  auto-
matist  with  “ I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud  that  floats  o’er
dale  and  hill  ” ; the  attempt  was  but  partially  successful,
only  “hill”  and  “dale”  getting  written;  so  abandoning  this
experiment  and  taking  advantage  of  a momentary  ascendancy
in  the  automatist’s  mind  of  thoughts  connected  with  physical
scenery,  he  started  a new  experiment,  namely,  to  get  a I’eference
to  the  Mountain  of  Purgatory.  Aware  both  of  the  setting
and  of  the  form  in  which  the  main  idea  had  emerged  into
partial  expression  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  Myersp  afterwards
conveyed  the  main  idea — mountain — through  Mrs  Piper  on
April  15,  and  then  two  days  later  I’epeated  it  with  three  of
the  leading  words  which  went  to  make  up  the  setting  or
context  in  which  the  main  idea  came  out.

Some  people  may  feel  that  the  force  of  the  coincidence  is
considerably  weakened  by  the  fact  that  three  out  of  the  seven
coincidental  words  were  known  bj’  iMrs  A^errall  to  have  been
used  for  the  purpose  of  a cross-correspondence  with  another
automatist,  Mrs  Thompson.  That  is  far  from  nw  own  opinion.
On  the  contrary,  I believe  that  this  very  knowledge  woidd
have  been  far  more  likely  to  liave  inhibited  the  reproduction
of  these  words  in  her  automatic  script.  Mrs  Verrall’s  normal
consciousness,  there  are  good  grounds  for  thinking,  often  holds
her  subconscious  impulses  in  check  ; and  in  this  case  she  would
think  it  unlikely  that  the  ti-ance-personalities  would  be  going
on  with  an  experiment  nearly  identical  with  one  tried  more
than  ten  wmeks  earlier  and  one  which,  as  they  knew,  was
within  her  knowledge.

The  initials  E.  G.  appended  to  the  script  of  April  6,
have  not  appeared  before  or  since  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  automatic
writing.  She  did  not  recognise  in  them  the  initials  of  any  dead
or  living  friend  of  hers;  but  she  told  me  in  September  1907


240


./.  G.  Piddington.  [part

that  she  always  had  taken  them  to  be  a bad  shot  at  those  of
a friend  (known  also  to  Mr  Mjmrs),  whose  initials  before  her
marriage  were  E.  W.  C.,  the  W.  standing  for  ‘Wordsworth’;
and  ^she  had  thought  that  they  suggested  that  the  foregoing
script  referred  to  the  Wordsworth  country.  Long  before  I
received  this  information  from  Mrs  Verrall  I had  noticed  a
certain  resemblance  between  “ O’er  mountains  seas  and  lakes
and  rivers  ” etc.  and  the  first  verse  of  a poem  by  F.  W.  H.
Myers,  published  after  his  death  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and
Poetry :

“ O Rock  and  torrent,  lake  and  hill,

Halls  of  a home  austerely  still.

Remote  and  solemn  view  !

O valley,  where  the  wanderer  sees
Beyond  that  towering  arch  of  trees
Hedvellyn  and  the  blue!”^

The  scenery  of  the  poem  is,  of  course,  that  of  the  Wordsworth
country.  The  “ Torrent  ”,  “ lake  ”,  “ hill  ”,  “ valley”,  “ Helvellyn  ”,
“ the  blue  ”,  “ remote  ” and  “ wanderer  ” of  the  poem  correspond
respectively  to  the  “Stream”,  “lake”,  “hill”,  “dale”,  “moun-
tain”, “sky”,  “lonely”  and  “wandered”  of  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.

I had  noticed  the  resemblance  between  the  cross-correspond-
ence messages  dealt  with  in  this  section  and  Myers’s  poem
“O  Rock  and  torrent”  not  only  before  Mrs  Verrall  had  told
me  that  she  thought  her  script  of  Apiil  6 might  refer  to  the
Wordsworth  Country,  but  also  before  I learnt  that  “I  wandered
lonely  as  a Cloud”  is  a quotation  from  a poem  of  Wordsworth’s,
and  consequently  before  I knew  that  the  scene  of  the  incident
described  in  this  poem  is  laid  in  the  Lake  district.^  Since

1 This  verse  of  this  then  unpublisliecl  poem  had  been  recited  by  Dr  Hodgson
at  Mr  Myers's  request  during  a sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  Feb.  17,  1897.
It  was  therefore  known  to  some  part  of  Mrs  Piper’s  mind.

- The  opening  verse  of  Wordsworth’s  poem  is  as  follows  : —

“ I wandered  lonely  as  a Cloud
That  floats  on  high  o’er  Vales  and  Hills,

When  all  at  once  I saw  a crowd,

A host  of  golden  Daffodils  ;

Beside  the  Lake,  beneath  the  trees.

Fluttering  and  dancing  in  the  breeze.”

This  poem  is  referred  to  no  less  than  six  times  in  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  241

“ I wandered  lonely  as  a Cloud  ” is,  I am  told,  one  of  those
poems  which  everybody  is  supposed  to  know,  I’m  afraid  I shall
hardly  be  believed  when  I confess  that  neither  Mrs  Sidgwick
nor  myself  recognised  it ; but  such  was  the  case.  I did  not
learn  the  source  of  “I  wandered  lonely”  until  Feb.  1908,  and
it  was  only  when  I had  learnt  it  that  I obtained  the  clue  to
the  sequence  of  thought  manifested  in  the  ci’oss-correspondences
which  form  the  subject  of  the  next  section.


XIX.

“LIGHT  IN  WEST”.

The  phenomena  which  form  the  subject  matter  of  this  section
are  extremely  complex,  and  to  follow  them  propei’ly  the  reader
must  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  Section  XI  (The  ai’ro?
ovpavo?  uKv/j-wp  incident).  Section  XVI  (“  Euripides  ”),  Section
XVII  (“  Spirit  and  Angel  ”),  and  especially  Section  XVIII
(“O’er  mountains,  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers”).

In  the  course  of  this  report  we  have  met  with  various
instances  of  cross-correspondence  between  Mrs  Piper’s,  Mrs
Verrall’s,  Miss  Verrall’s  and  Mrs  Holland’s  automatic  pheno-
mena. These  cross-correspondences  have  been  treated  as  isolated
coincidences,  complete  in  themselves  and  not  knit  together  or
related  to  each  other  by  any  common  bond  of  thought.

Between  the  subjects  of  most  of  them  there  really  was,  I
believe,  no  connection  ; but  some  of  them,  which  in  preceding
sections  I have  treated  as  disconnected,  really,  as  I discovered
only  after  those  sections  were  written,  belong  together,  and

Wordsworth.  It  may  be  well  to  add  that  I never  read,  nor  to  the  best  of
my  belief  ever  had  in  my  hands,  this  book  until  Feb.  190S.

The  first  line  of  the  poem  was  correctly  quoted  in  the  trance,  but  the  second
line  was  misquoted  thus:  “that  floats  on  high  o’er  Dale  and  hill”.

Q


242


J.  0.  Piddington.  [part

were,  so  to  speak,  links  in  a concatenation,  or  cubes  in  a
mosaic  of  ideas  which  had  been  distributed  among  several
automatists.

Of  the  cross-correspondences  thus  inter-related  one  has  not
hitherto  been  mentioned,  namely,  that  which  was  represented
in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  by  the  words  “Light  in  West”.  “Light
in  West” — or  rather  the  idea  which  a comparative  study  of
Mrs  Verrall’s  and  Mrs  Holland’s  scripts  showed  to  be  under-
lying these  words — proved  (if  I may  vary  the  metaphor  once
more)  to  be  the  leading  theme  of  an  elaborate  concerted
movement.  Yet,  though  I quickly  discovered  in  the  scripts  of
the  other  two  automatists  the  counter-parts  to  Mrs  Piper’s
“ Light  in  West  ”,  and  recognised  the  common  idea  which  under
different  guises  ran  through  all  three,  I did  not  realise  that
this  common  idea  was  also  the  common  starting-point  of  three
trains  of  ideas  which  developed  at  first  in  divergent  directions
but  which  came  together  ao;ain  at  other  common  meeting-
points.

This  synthesis  revealed  itself  to  me  only  when  I learnt  the
literary  source  of  that  script  of  Mrs  Holland’s  which  I take,
and  had  independently  of  this  knowledge  taken,  to  be  the
counterpart  of  Mrs  Piper's  “ Light  in  West

Instead  of  pursuing  the  course  adopted  in  the  other  sections  of
this  report,  I shall  here,  before  citing  the  relevant  extracts  from
the  I’ecords  of  sittings  and  the  scripts,  first  roughly  outline  the
chain  of  ideas  which  I believe  them  to  contain  ; and  I hope,
by  means  of  this  preliminaiy  sketch  to  make  the  reader’s
task  easier  than  it  would  be  if  he  did  not  know  what  to
look  for  until  after  the  evidence  had  been  presented.

The  concatenation  or  mosaic  of  ideas  which  I am  about  to
desci’ibe  I i-egard  not  as  tlie  result  of  telepathic  cross-firing
casually  exchanged  between  the  automatists,  but  as  the  work
of  a single  directing  intelligence,  or  of  a group  of  intelligences
acting  in  concert ; and  I consider  that  this  directing  intelligence
manifested  itself  chiefly  in  the  communications  of  Myersp,
Myersy  and  Myers^.  On  the  problem  of  the  real  identity  of
this  directing  mind — whether  it  was  a spirit  or  group  of  co-
operating spirits,  or  the  subconsciousness  of  one  of  the  auto-
matists, or  the  consciousness  or  subconsciousness  of  some  other


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  243

living  person — the  only  opinion  which  I hold  with  confidence
is  this : that  if  it  was  not  the  mind  of  Frederic  Myers  it  was
one  which  deliberately  and  artistically  imitated  his  mental
characteristics.

My  theory  of  the  interconnections  is  as  follows  ; —

The  parent  idea  from  which  all  the  other  ideas  were  developed
was  suggested  to  the  directing  mind  by  an  idea  associated  with
afro?  ovpafo?  uKufxwv.  It  will  be  remembered  how  certain
passages  in  her  script  had  led  Mrs  Verrall  to  connect  Section
xcv  of  Tennyson’s  In  Memoriam  with  these  words  of  Plotinus.
It  was  from  the  last  three  lines  of  this  Section —

“ And  East  and  West,  without  a breath,

Mixt  their  dim  lights,  like  life  and  death.

To  broaden  into  boundless  day  ” —

that  was  derived  the  parent  idea — the  Union  of  East  and
West — from  which  all  the  other  inter-related  topics  were
developed.  The  developments  took  place  in  three  directions :
A,  B,  and  C.

In  Direction  A.  From  the  parent  idea  there  was  developed

(1)  the  Identification  of  Opposites;  which  in  turn  suggested

(2)  Martha  and  Mary,  and  Leah  and  Rachael,  who  are  cited
by  Dante  in  the  Gonvito  and  in  (3)  Canto  XXVII  of  the
Purgatorio  as  examples  of  opposed  temperaments.  This  Canto,
with  its  sequel  Canto  XXVIII,  suggested  various  other  topics
mentioned  therein : namely,  (4)  Geryon,  the  monster  on  whose
back  Vergil  and  Dante  were  borne  from  the  seventh  to  the
eighth  circle  of  the  Inferno ; (5)  the  goddess  Cytherea  (Venus)
and  the  planet  Cytherea  (Venus);  and  (6)  the  mountain  of
Purgatory,  the  River  of  Lethe,  and  the  crossing  of  the  Helles-
pont by  Xerxes ; with  the  first  two  topics  of  (6)  were  combined
allusions  to  (7)  the  mountains  and  rivers  and  to  the  scenery
generally  of  the  Lake  District;  which  suggested  (S)  the
Daffbdils  .seen  by  Wordsworth  on  the  shores  of  Ullswater
Lake,  and  celebrated  bj^  him  in  the  poem  “ I wandered  lonely
as  a Cloud  ”.

In  Direction  B.  The  union  of  East  and  West  in  In
Memoriam  xcv  suggested  (9)  the  identification  of  East  and
West  in  Tennyson’s  Maud]  and  Maud  suggested  (10a)  “the


244


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

planet  of  Love”  (Venus)  “beginning  to  faint  ...  on  a daffodil
sky”;  and  (10b)  “the  shining  daffodil  dead”  and  “Orion’s  grave
low  down  in  the  West”.

In  Direction  G.  The  union  of  East  and  West  suggested  (11)
Hercules  as  a type  of  the  union  of  East  and  West ; and  this
suggested  (12)  the  Hercides  Furens  of  Euripides,  and  (13)
Geryon,  a three-headed  monster  slain  by  Hercules  in  Erytheia,
an  island  in  the  extreme  West.

It  will  be  seen  that  topics  (4)  and  (13),  (5)  and  (10a),  (8)
and  (10b)  respectively  are  expressible  in  identical  words.

The  above  resume  only  aims  at  setting  forth  the  inter-
connections in  the  very  baldest  and  most  succinct  fashion  ; and
it  does  not  pretend  to  indicate  the  distribution  of  the  various
topics  among  the  automatists,  nor  the  order  in  which,  nor  the
degree  of  explicitness  with  which  they  emerged.  It  is  only
intended  to  help  the  reader  to  form  some  notion  in  advance
of  the  line  I am  going  to  take  in  my  interpretation  of  the
phenomena.

For  reasons  indicated  in  Section  XI  I assume  that  on  March  6
both  M^mrsp  and  Myersy  displayed  knowledge  of  the  associations
between  auro?  oupavo?  uKvpwv  and  In  Memoriam,  sections  xciv
and  xcv.  I shall  further  assume  that,  although  he  did  not
display  it,  MyerSy  possessed  this  knowledge  two  days  earlier,
i.e.  on  March  4.

I now  proceed  to  describe  and  discuss  in  chronological  order
the  automatic  writings  or  utterances  which,  according  to  my
theoiy,  went  to  form  a complex  whole.  Homan  numerals  are
used  to  mark  the  emergence  of  the  several  constituent  elements.


I.

The  first  topic  emerged  on  March  4,  on  which  date  Mrs
Vei'rall  wrote  the  following  script : —

jia.Lvope.vo'i  6 ‘HpaKA)^?

Hercules  Furens  Tell  your  husband  from  me.  there  is  a
passage  in  the  Heracles  not  understood,  about  the  pillar
and  the  tying  to  it.

An  old  story  lies  behind  that  but  it  means  something  in
Euripides  that  A AV  V has  not  yet  seen.  Tell  him  to
look  at  it  again — it  is  the  passage  about  the  pillar  and


LVii.]  A Series  of  Conc&txlant  Automatisms.  245

the  thong — the  pillar  at  the  foot  of  wh.  lay  the  dead
children.  Tell  your  husband  to  read  that  again — not  to
mind  the  mythology  but  to  see  another  point  wh.  will
please  him.

I have  long  wanted  to  say  this  but  the  words  were  never
there — now  all  the  words  are  there  and  I think  I have
made  the  meaning  clear  ask  elsewhere  for  the  BOUND
HERCULES.

'Hpa/<A?;s  Auo/xeros  is  the  sequel.

Binding  and  loosing  5eo-/xotcrt  Avtois  not  adamantine  fetters
but  fetters  that  link  and  loose.  Something  about  snap-
ping his  bonds  in  sundei’.  Tell  A W V he  will  under-
stand.

It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  here  some  explanatory  comments
on  this  script  which  have  already  been  given  (v.  p.  213).

The  script  refers  throughout  to  the  Herctdes  Furens  of
Euripides,  and  to  two  incidents  of  that  yday,  namely,  the
binding  of  Heracles  to,  and  his  unbinding  from  a pillar.  In
a note  appended  to  this  script  a short  time  after  it  was  pro-
duced Mrs  Verrall  wrote  :

The  scene  of  the  binding  to  the  pillar  is  well  known,  but  the
script  has  thrown  no  light  on  it.  See,  however,  Human  Personality,
Vol.  II.,  p.  290  for  an  allusion  to  the  “real  Herakles”  of  Plotinus,
who  might  appropriately  be  called  a “Hercules  Unbound”.

The  passage  in  Himnan  Personality  of  which  Mrs  Verrall
was  reminded  by  the  allusion  in  her  scidpt  to  the  unbinding
of  Heracles  runs  as  follows  : —

“ I believe  that  some  of  those  who  once  were  near  us  are  already
mounting  swiftly  upon  this  heavenly  way.  And  when  from  that
cloud  encompassing  of  unforgetful  souls  some  voice  is  heard, — as
long  ago, — there  needs  no  heroism,  no  sanctity,  to  inspire  the  apostle’s
(TridvfjLLa  €t’s  TO  dcaAvcrai,  the  desire  to  lift  our  anchor,  and  to  sail  out
beyond  the  bar.  What  fitter  summons  for  man  than  the  wish  to
live  in  the  memory  of  the  highest  soul  that  he  has  known,  now
risen  higher ; — to  lift  into  an  immortal  security  the  yearning  passion
of  his  love?  “As  the  soul  hasteneth”,  says  Plotinus h “to  the
things  that  are  above,  she  will  ever  forget  the  more ; unless  all  her


^ Enn.  lY,  3,  27.


246


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

life  on  earth  leave  a memory  of  things  done  well.  For  even  here
may  man  do  well,  if  he  stand  clear  of  the  cares  of  earth.  And  he
must  stand  clear  of  their  memories  too  ; so  that  one  may  rightly
speak  of  a noble  soul  forgetting  those  things  that  are  behind.  And
the  shade  of  Herakles,  indeed,  may  talk  of  his  own  valour  to  the
shades,  but  the  true  Herakles  in  the  true  world  will  deem  all  that
of  little  worth ; being  transported  into  a more  sacred  place,  and
strenuously  engaging,  even  above  his  strength,  in  those  battles  in
which  the  wise  engage.”

I have  already  pointed  out  that  Myersp  associated  with
aurd?  oupavo9  aKvjxoov  three  of  the  subjects — St  Paul,  Grossing  the
Bar  and  Plotinus — referred  to  in  this  passage  of  Human  Per-
sonality (v.  p.  1.35).  Now  here  we  find  Mrs  Verrall  associating
a script  of  hers  referring  to  the  unbinding  of  Heracles  with
a quotation  from  Plotinus  which  is  embodied  in  this  same
jmssage.

In  an  indirect  way,  then,  the  script  of  March  4 may  be
said  to  be  connected  with  auTo?  ovpavo^  aKvp.wv.  And  equally
it  may  be  said  to  be  connected  with  a passage  from  Plotinus
w'hich  emphasises  the  distinction  between  the  shade  of  Heracles
in  the  shadowy  underworld,  and  the  real  Heracles  who  exists
in  “ a moi'e  sacred  place  ” ; and  there  cannot  be  the  least  doubt
that  Plotinus  in  this  passage  was  alluding  to  Odyssey  XI,
601-3,  where  a distinction — though  not  the  same  distinction —
is  likewise  drawn  between  the  shade  {el8w\ov)  of  Heracles  in
Hades  and  Heracles  himself  (ailrb?)  in  Heaven.^

Tov  Se  fj-er'  eicremtjrru  f3hjv  Hpa/cXi;e/>/r,
e’lScoXov  avTOi  Se  per  aQavaroKn  6eoi(Tip
TepireTui  ev  Oahajii.

“ And  after  him  [i.e.  Sisyphus]  I descried  the  mighty  Heracles,
his  phantom,  I say ; but  as  for  himself  he  hath  joy  at  the
banquet  among  the  deathless  gods.”

(Butcher  and  Lang’s  Translation.)

Now  the  distinction  drawn  by  Plotinus  between  the  eiSwXov,
or  visible  shade,  and  the  Spirit  itself  brings  us  back  again  to

^ Mrs  Verrall’s  note  on  dduXov  published  in  Proc.  Part  LV.  p.  216,  was
not  written  till  March  1908,  and  much  of  the  information  contained  in  it  was
not  acquired  by  her  till  that  date.


LVII.]


247


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

In  Memoriam  and  to  a section  of  it  (xciii)  intimately  related
to  Section  xcv  : —

“ I shall  not  see  thee.  Dare  I say
No  spirit  ever  bi’ake  the  hand
That  stays  him  from  his  native  land,

Where  first  he  walked  when  clasp’d  in  clay  ?

No  visual  shade  of  some  one  lost,

But  he,  the  Spirit  himself,  may  come
Where  all  the  nerve  of  sense  is  numb.

Spirit  to  Spirit,  Ghost  to  Ghost.

0,  therefoi'e  from  thy  sightless  range
With  gods  in  unconjectured  bliss


Descend  and  touch  and  enter ; ”

It  seems  impossible  to  suppose  that  the  “ visual  shade  ” “ the
Sph’it  himself”  and  “ with  gods  in  unconjectured  bliss”  were  not
suggested  to  Tennyson  by  the  elSwXop,  avTo?  and  /xer’  dOavaToiai
Oeolaiv  Tep7T6TaL  ev  OaXlg^  of  Odyssey,  XI,  601-3 : lines  to  which
Plotinus  was,  as  we  have  seen,  i-eferring  in  the  passage  from
the  Enneades  quoted  in  Human  Personcdity  Vol.  II.  p.  290.

The  Greek  title  of  the  Hercules  Furens  is  'Hpa/cX>7?  gaipoiuei/o?,
and  the  first  words  of  the  script  clearly  refer  to  this  title.
The  subsequent  phra.se  'Hpa/cAJ??  Xvojuei^og — i.e.  Hercules  Un-
bound— is  not  the  title  of  any  extant  play.  There  is,  however,
a play  of  Aeschylus’  entitled  Upojuojdev^  06crp.wT>]g  (i.e.  Prome-
theus Bound  or  Prometheiis  Vinctus)]  and  a few  fragments  of
a sequel  to  it,  entitled  Yipop.t]0eh  Xvopevo^  (i.e.  Prometheus
Unbound  or  Prometheus  Solutus),  are  extant.

The  reference  to  “ adamantine  fetters  ” — a phrase  applied  by
Aeschylus  in  the  Prometheus  Vinctus  to  the  bonds  of  Pro-
metheus— taken  in  connection  with  the  words  'Hpa/cXi/f  Xvapei/og
is  sufficient  evidence  that  the  scribe  had  in  mind  the  two
Prometheus  plays  of  Aeschylus,  and  also  the  fact  that  it  was
Heracles  who  delivered  Prometheus  from  his  bondage.^

1 lu  one  of  the  very  few  extant  fragments  of  the  Prometheus  Solutus  the
river  Phasis,  the  scene  of  Prometheus’  captivity,  is  called  the  boundary  of
Europe  and  Asia  : in  other  words  the  meeting-point  of  East  and  West.


248  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

I ask  the  reader  to  bear  these  facts  in  mind  and  to  await
an  explanation  of  their  relevancy.

II.

The  next  move  was  made  on  March  10,  on  which  date
Miss  Verrall  and  her  aunt,  Miss  Mex’rifield,  did  some  table-
tiltinjT.  Mrs  Verrall  was  present  and  acted  as  note-taker,
but  sat  apart  from  the  automatists  and  did  not  touch  the
table.

The  account  that  follows  is  based  on  Mrs  Verrall’s  contem-
poi'aneous  notes  : —

The  table  first  spelt  out :

“geryoneshefollostlalemo

lending  colour  to  his  hypothesis  therefore  in  substance  the  two
propositions  are  identical.”

Upon  Mrs  Verrall  saying  that  the  words  before  “lending”
were  nonsense,  the  table  gave  this  amended  version  of  them ;

“ g e r y o n t e s m e f i s t o 1 e s p r o b e m i u m.”
After  reading  this  aloud  as :

“ geryontes  mefistoles  problem  ”

Mrs  Verrall  asked  the  table  to  make  a statement  which
would  clear  up  the  preceding  confusion  ; and  the  response
was  as  follows :

“ mefistofiles  and  geryon  double  aspect  of  one  problem.”

The  table-tilting  was  then  stopped.

The  sentences  spelt  out  b}"  the  table  were  then  discussed,
and  at  Dr  Verrall’s  suggestion  Mrs  Verrall  looked  up  the
reference  to  Geryon  in  Dante’s  Inferno.  Geryon,  who  is  only
thrice  mentioned  by  Dante  in  the  Divina  Conimedia,  twice  in
the  Inferno  (Cantos  XVII  and  XVIII)  and  once  in  the  Pur-
gatorio  (Canto  XXVII), ^ typifies  fraud;  and  this  seemed  both
to  explain  his  conjunction  with  Mephistopheles,  and  to  imply
that  Dante’s  Geryon  and  not  the  Geryon  slain  by  Heracles
was  meant.

But  three  different  spellings  of  the  name  of  Geiyon  were
tilted  out:  Geryones — Geryontes — and  Geryon.  The  name  of

1 Mrs  Verrall  did  not  trace  the  reference  to  Geryon  in  Purgatorio  XXVII.


LVil.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  249'

Dante’s  monster  is  always  spelt  in  English  “ Geryon  ”,  and  in
Dante  only  the  forms  “ Gerione  ” and  “ Gerion  ” appear
whereas  the  name  of  Heracles’  monster,  both  in  Greek  and
Latin,  was  either  Geryon  (r>/pc(or)  or  Geryones  (r>;pt/or>/?)-

The  first  form  of  the  name  tilted  out  by  the  table,  as  also
the  second,  if  the  superfluous  t be  omitted,  would  naturall}^
apply  only  to  the  classical  monster ; the  third  form  might
apply  to  either  monster.

The  conjunction  of  Geryon  with  Mephistopheles,  especially
as  Mephistopheles  is  spelt,  in  the  Italian  way,  with  f for
points  to  Dante’s  monster;  one  spelling  of  the  name  may  also
point  to  him,  but  two  of  the  spellings  ])oint  to  Heracles’
monster.

I draw  the  inference  that  the  intelligence  behind  the  motor
automatism  had  both  monsters  in  mind.

The  only  other  comment  which  I have  to  make  at  this
point  on  the  reference  made  to  Geryon  in  the  table-tilting
experiment  is  that  the  slaying  of  Geryon  in  Erytheia  is
alluded  to  in  the  Hercules  Furens  of  Euripides:

“And  Lerna’s  murderous  hound  ...  he  [i.e.  Heracles]  seared;
and  with  its  poison  tipped  his  darts,  wherewith  he  slew
Erytheia’s  three-bodied  herdsman  ” [i.e.  Geryon].  (Blakeney’s
translation.)

III.

What  may  perhaps  represent  the  first  emergence  of  another
element  of  the  mosaic  of  associated  ideas  occurs  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  of  March  11.  The  first  part  of  this  script
has  already  been  cited  in  Section  XII.  (p.  177)  as  part  of
the  evidence  for  the  cross-correspondence  “ Violet  ”,  and  the
whole  of  it  in  Appendix  e of  Section  XI.  (p.  145)  because
it  was  this  script  which  led  Mrs  Verrall  to  examine  In
Memoriam  to  see  if  it  contained  any  allusion  to  avTO<;  oiiparo?
duviJ-wv.  The  script  concludes  in  this  way :

No  you  dont  get  it  right
Presences  on  the  eternal  hills
that  is  better

The  Presence  that  is  in  the  lonely  hills
That  is  all  for  now  wait.


250


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


For  the  reasons  given  on  p.  238,  this  is  just  possibly  the
first  emergence  of  the  “Wordsworth  Country”  topic.  If  it  is,
tlien  this  topic  was  introduced  for  the  first  time  in  a script
which  belongs  to  the  afro?  ovpavoi  olkv/ulwp  episode.


IV.

We  must  turn  now  to  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  March  13,
which  contains  a verse  in  which  the  East  and  West  are,
not  identified,  but  contrasted.  Mrs  Holland’s  script  is
far  more  broken  up,  and  far  less  homogeneous  than  Mrs
Verrall’s ; so  that,  whereas  it  is  usually  necessary  to  quote
the  whole  or  a large  part  of  a script  of  Mrs  Verrall’s,  in
Mrs  Holland’s  case  it  is  usually  sufficient  to  give  short
extracts  only.  Her  script  of  March  13  was  an  unusually
long  one,  and  embraced  a variety  of  topics.  Towards  the
end  of  it  and  disconnected  with  what  preceded  came  these
lines ; —

One  star  in  the  crimson  West

And  the  East  is  cold  and  grey
And  the  weary  earth  shall  turn  to  her  rest
At  the  end  of  the  winter’s  Day.

These  lines — which,  so  far  as  I can  discover,  are  not  a
quotation  but  original — were  immediately  followed  by  a
quotation  from  Woidd  God  it  were  morning,  a poem  by
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  published  in  The  Renewal  of  Youth  and
other  Poems : —

[My  God,]  How  many  times  ere  I be  dead
Must  I the  bitterness  of  dying  know?

After  this  came  two  disconnected  sentences,  and  then  these
concluding  words  :

Let  the  pen  go  as  it  were  in  a large
planchette  script.  No  it  is  not  returning  to  the
old  scribbles  it  is  a new  attempt — F.  W.  H.  M.

The  quotation  from  Would  God  it  were  morning  and  the
initials  F.  W.  H.  M.  seem  to  connect  Myersn  with  this  part
of  the  script.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  251

V.

It  is  now  Mrs  Piper’s  turn  to  furnish  one  of  the  component
topics.  As  described  in  Section  XVIII.  (p.  232),  at  the  sitting  of
i\larch  20  the  words  “ I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud  that  floats
on  high  o’er  dale  and  hill  ” were  said  to  have  been  given  to
Mrs  Verrall.  It  is  not  categorically  stated  that  MyerSp  was  the
transmitter  of  them,  but  that  is  obviously  meant,  and  anyhow
on  April  29  (v.  p.  235)  Myersp  explicitly  claims  to  have  been.
For  reasons  already  explained  (v.  pp.  233  et  seq.)  this  quotation
introduces  by  implication  two  of  the  component  topics : namely,
“ Dafibdils  ” and  “Wordsworth  Country”.  As  subsequent  de-
velopments will  explain,  it  was  perhaps  not  without  significance
that  at  this  same  sitting,  while  mentioning  other  words  or
phrases  which  he  had  given  to  Mrs  Verrall,  Myersp  said; — “I
referred  also  to  a quotation  of  my  own  in  which  I said  . . .
where  did  he  come  from  whither  is  he  goino-  ”,

Weeks  before  I learnt  that  “ Harold  ” had  on  April  8 been
said  to  have  been  given  by  MyerSp  to  Mrs  Verrall,  and  months
before  I realised  that  there  might  be  a special  point  in  this
choice  of  “ Harold  ” as  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence,
I had  identified  ‘ where  did  he  come  from  whither  is  he
going  ” as  a paraphrase  of  the  8th  verse  of  a poem  entitled
Harold  at  two  years  old  published  in  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s  Frag-
ments of  Prose  and  Poetry.

The  subject  of  this  poem  is  the  childhood  of  Frederic  Myers’s
second  son,  Harold ; and  the  eighth  verse  of  it  runs :

“ Borne  to  us  hitherward.

Ah  ! from  what  shore  ?

Voyaging  whitherward.

Child,  evermore?”


VI.

Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  March  25  contributed  the  next  link
of  the  chain.

The  first  half  of  this  script  has  been  already  cited  in
Section  XVI  as  part  of  the  evidence  for  the  cross-correspon-
dence “Euripides”;  and  the  second  half  in  Section  XVII.  as
part  of  the  evidence  for  the  cross-correspondence  “Angel”.


252


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


But  though  superficially  this  script  seems  to  embrace  two
independent  subjects,  in  reality  the  two  subjects  are  related,
and  so  here  the  whole  script  is  quoted  in  full : —

Claviger  the  bearer  of  the  Key  and  Club
clavem  gerens  trans  Pontem


trans  Hellespontem  et  insuper
mare  ad  urbem  antea  Byzantineam  postea  de  ipsius
nomine  nominatam.

The  Club  and  Key — East  and  West,  look  for  the  Eastex’n
sign  of  the  Club  ex  pede  Herculem

The  Hercules  stoiy  comes  in  there  and  the  clue  is  in  the
Euripides  play  if  you  could  only  see  it.

Bound  to  the  pillar — I told  you  before  of  Sebastian,  it  is
the  same  story  of  the  archer  and  the  binding  to  the
pillar.

I want  a special  message  to  get  to  you.  I have  tried  several
times,  but  you  have  not  understood.  I dont  know  where
it  went  wrong.  But  let  Piddington  know  when  you  get
a message  about  shadow, — remember  the  Virgilian  line
indignantis  sub  umbras.  To  you  they  are  shadows — like
the  shadows  in  Plato’s  cave  but  they  are  shadows  of  the
real.

quae  cum  vides  bene  comprehendere  possis  quae  tibi  nunc
fusco  colore  obdita  paene  obscurata  videntur,  et  tamen  in
somniis  aliquando  UMBRAKUM  volitantia  corpora
percipis — immo  pro  corporibus  animas  dicere  melius —
quae  tibi  per  somnum  mentem  immortalia  tangunt

haec  cape,  quis  captis  non  desine
no  not  that

summum  ad  tingere  comes  in

It  means  that  there  and  thus  does  this  mortal  put  on


253


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

immortality,  by  keeping  hold  of  the  things,  the  true
things  seen  in  sleep.  Why  could  he  not  say  that  ?
et  nos  attingimus  caelum

But  when  so  many  things  flit  through  the  mind  it  is  hard
to  seize  and  hold  what  is  true.  I think  I have  this  time.
Ask  if  he  understands.

The  shadow  of  a shade.

that  is  better  umbrarum  umbras  o-Ktas  ei'SwAov  was  what
I wanted  to  get  written,  goodbye.

For  translations  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  phrases  and  for  other
explanations  the  reader  is  referred  to  p.  214  and  pp.  223-4.

The  first  part  of  this  script  obviously  forms  a sequel  to  that
of  March  4 ; for  both  refer  to  (a)  Heracles ; (b)  the  Hercules
Fttrens  of  Euripides ; and  (c)  some  obscure  point  connected
with  an  incident  in  the  Hercides  Furens,  namely,  the  binding
of  Heracles  to  a pillar.

But  a fresh  point  is  introduced  into  the  script  of  March  25
by  the  word  “ claviger  ” : which  has  the  double  meaning  of
“bearing  a club”  and  of  “bearing  a key”.  The  Club  is  said  to
typify  the  East,  and  the  Key  to  typify  the  West.

“ Claviger  ” in  the  sense  of  “ club-bearer  ” is  an  epithet  applied
to  Hercules  by  Latin  poets  ; but  in  the  sense  of  “ key-bearer  ” is
never  applied  to  him.

In  the  earliest  Greek  representations  of  Heracles  his  emble-
matic weapon  is  a bow  and  arrows.  It  is  only  at  a later  period
that  he  is  represented  with  a Club  (clava)  and  a Lion’s  skin,
and  these  emblems  are  of  Oriental  origin.  (v.  Preller,  Gr.
Myth.  II,  113.)  Consequently  Heracles’  Club  may  legitimately
serve  as  a svmbol  of  the  East.

“Claviger”  in  the  sense  of  “key-bearer”  seems  to  occur  only
in  Ovid  Fasti  1,  where  it  is  applied  to  Janus.  I have  not
the  least  doubt  that  the  scribe  on  March  25  was  alluding  to  Ovid
Fasti  I,  where  the  attributes  and  functions  of  the  god  Janus  are
described,  and  that  in  this  passage  of  Ovid  is  to  be  found  the
clue  to  the  explanation  of  the  opening  paragraphs  of  the  script.

I will  accordingly  summarise  what  Ovid  says  in  Fasti  I
about  Janus : —

Janus  is  the  origin  of  the  year;  he  has  two  heads  ; he  is  an  essentially
Latin  deity  with  no  Greek  counterpart ; he  alone  of  the  gods  sees  what


254


J.  G.  Pidclington.  [part

is  behind  and  what  before;  he  holds  in  his  right  hand  a staff  (baculum)
and  in  his  left  a key  (clavis);  he  had  first  been  known  as  Chaos,  and  had
accordingly  been  a deity  of  formless  bulk ; but  when  Cosmos  had  been
evolved  from  Chaos  he  took  upon  him  a form  and  limbs  such  as  befit  a
god,  though  traces  of  his  original  formlessness  still  remain  in  the  same-
ness of  his  fore  and  hinder  parts  ; he  is  the  Opener  and  the  Shutter  of
all  natural  processes ; he  it  is  who  turns  the  pivot  on  which  the
four  quarters  of  the  heavens  revolve;  who  locks  up  War  and  sends
forth  Peace;  he  is  the  door-keeper  of  the  courts  of  heaven,  and,  just
as  a door-keeper  sees  who  enters  and  who  leaves  a house,  so  he  with
his  double  face  looks  upon  both  the  East  and  the  West  at  the  same
moment  of  time  (Sic  ego  perspicio  caelestis  janitor  aulae  Eoas  partes
liesperiasque  sim.ul.) ; he  is  the  god  both  of  beginnings  and  of  endings;
before  the  time  of  Saturn’s  expulsion  from  Olympus,  he  abode  in
Latium  alongside  the  Tiber,  and  his  dwelling-place  was  the  hill,
now  called  in  his  honour  the  Janiculum,  on  which  the  temple  of
Janus  stands;  as  war  did  not  then  exist  on  the  earth,  he  was  at
this  time  god  of  Peace  and  of  Door-posts  only,  and  as  such  bore  for
emblem  a key.  {Et  clavem  ostenclens  ‘ Haec  ait,  ‘ arma  gero.’)

It  will  be  seen  from  this  summary  that  Janus  in  diverse
ways  represented  the  union  in  one  person  of  opposite  qualities
or  functions  : that  he  was,  so  to  speak,  an  identifier  of  opposites ;
and  it  should  especially  he  observed  that  he  alone  of  all  the
gods  could  look  upon  East  and  West  simultaneously.

In  the  same  Fasti  of  Ovid  (11.  543  et  seq)  is  told  the
story  of  how  the  other  “claviger”,  Hercules,  on  his  way  from
Erytheia  arrives  in  Italy  driving  the  oxen  of  Geryon  :

Ecce  hoves  illuc  Erytheidas  agoqolicat  heros
Emensus  longi  claviger  orbis  iter.

The  oxen  were  stolen  by  Cacus,  but  recovered  by  Hercules
who  fells  the  thief  with  his  “ trebly-knotted  club  ”,  and  in
gratitude  for  his  victory  sacrifices  one  of  the  herd  of  oxen  to
Jupiter,  and  invites  Evander  to  be  present  at  the  sacrifice.
The  episode  concludes  with  the  statement  that  Evander’s
mother,  Carmentis,  who  foretold  that  Hercules  would  soon
become  a god,  herself  became  a goddess  and  has  her  festival
on  the  11th  day  of  the  month  of  Janus  {Possidet  hunc  Jani
sic  dea  mense  diem).


255


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

It  may  be  that  Ovid  in  applying  the  epithet  “claviger”
to  two  of  the  principal  figures  in  the  first  book  of  his  Fasti
meant  thereby  to  hint  at  some  kind  of  mythological  relation
between  the  two.  Anyhow  the  fact  remains  that  Ovid  seems
to  be  the  only  Latin  writer  who  uses  the  word  “ claviger  ” in
the  sense  of  “ key-bearer  ”,  that  he  applies  it  to  Janus,  that  he
applies  it  to  him  in  the  same  book  of  the  Fasti  in  which
he  calls  Hercules  “claviger”  “the  club-bearer”,  and  in  which
he  mentions  the  slaying  of  Geryon  in  Erytheia  and  that  one
only  of  the  labours  of  Hercules.

Once  again  {Fasti  V.  621  et  seq)  Ovid  refers  to  Hercules’
arrival  in  Italy  with  the  oxen  of  Geryon ; and  then  in  con-
nection with  the  story  of  how  Hercules  was  the  first  to  throw
dummy  figures  instead  of  live  human  victims  from  the  Sublician
Bridge  as  sacrifices  to  Vulcan.  Janus  and  the  Janiculum,  though
not  actually  mentioned  in  this  passage,  must  almost  inevitably
be  brought  to  the  mind  of  the  classical  reader  of  it  by  Ovid’s
allusion  (1.  621)  to  the  Sublician  Bridge.  This  was  the  oldest
bridge  across  the  Tiber,  and  for  long  formed  the  only  and
always  the  most  direct  means  of  access  to  the  Janiculum,  which
was  in  fact  the  tete  de  qmnt  of  the  Pons  Sublicius.

Honoured  on  this  same  Janiculum — the  site,  according  to
one  tradition,  of  his  crucifixion  ^ — is  another  “ claviger  ”,  he  to
whom  were  given  the  keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.-  To
St.  Peter  as  to  Janus  the  words  of  Ovid  may  be  applied :

Ille  tenens  hacidum  dextra  clavemque  sinistra,

for  besides  the  key  both  bear  as  an  emblem  the  shepherd’s
statf ; and,  moreover,  to  both  belongs  the  title  of  “janitor  caeli  ”,
“ doorkeeper  of  heaven  ”.

With  these  explanatory  comments  before  him,  the  reader
will  be  able  to  follow  the  interpretation  I am  now  about  to

1 According  to  one  tradition  St.  Peter  was  crucified  on  the  Janiculan  near
the  spot  where  now  stands  the  Church  of  S.  Pietro  in  Montorio.  Another,  and
far  better  authenticated,  tradition  places  his  martyrdom  on  the  Vatican  Hill
which  adjoins  the  Janiculan.  Which  of  the  two  traditions  has  the  better
foundation,  or  whether  indeed  either  is  deserving  of  belief,  are,  of  course,
questions  absolutely  irrelevant  to  the  point  at  issue.

- For  an  earlier  reference  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  to  “ claviger”,  with  apparently
a double  reference  to  St.  Peter  and  Hercules,  see  Proc.  Part  LV.  pp.  298-.301.


256


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

offer  of  the  thought  which  I believe  lies  behind  the  opening
paragraphs  of  the  script  of  March  25  : —

“ The  epithet  ‘ claviger  ’ recalls  three  different  characters :
Heracles,  Janus  and  St.  Peter.  Heracles  is  partly  Eastern,  partly
Western,  and  his  Club  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  Oriental
elements  in  his  mythology.  Janus  is  a purely  Western  deity,
and  the  key  is  the  symbol  of  his  power  of  Opening  and
Shutting — one  of  various  antithetical  powers  attributed  to
him,  of  which  another  instance  is  his  power  of  seeing  the  East
and  the  West  simultaneously.  To  St.  Peter,  an  Oriental
and  first  bishop  of  the  Church  that  was  to  rule  the
Western  world,  belongs  the  Power  of  the  Keys,  the  power
of  binding  and  loosino-J  of  excludinof  from  or  admitting  into
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven;  and  St.  Peter’s  Ke}^s  may  symbolise
the  Western,  as  Heracles’  Club  the  Eastern  world.  All  three,
then,  in  one  way  or  another  represent  the  union  of  East  and
West.

All  three,  moreover,  are  connected  with  the  Pons  Sublicius,
and  two  of  them  with  the  Janiculum.  Heracles  on  his  return
from  Erytheia  stood  on  the  Pons  Sublicius  and  thence  threw
straw-stuffed  figures  into  the  Tiber  as  sacrifices  to  Vulcan.
Janus  crossed  the  Pons  Sublicius  to  go  to  his  arx ; St.  Peter
to  go  to  his  martyrdom  on  the  Janiculum.”

Purthermore,  the  script  contains  an  implicit  allusion  to  the
bridging  of  the  Hellespont  by  Xerxes ; for  though  it  is  the
“claviger”  (in  the  sense,  apparently,  of  key-bearer,  not  of  club-
bearer)  who  bears  “ the  key  across  the  bridge  and  over  the
sea  ”,  the  words  “ trans  pontem  trans  Hellespoutem  et  insuper
mare”  involve  a play  on  pontem  and  {Helles)pontum  which
can  allude  only  to  Xerxes : the  pontem  being  the  bridge
which  Xerxes  had  built  between  Abydos  and  Sestos,  and  by
means  of  which  he  and  his  army  crossed  Helles  pontum  (i.e.
the  Sea  of  Helle,  or  the  Hellespont).  This  allusion  to  Xerxes
may  have  been  suggested  b}^  an  idea  manifestly  present  in  the
scribe’s  mind : the  idea,  that  is,  of  the  union  of  East  and
West  as  typified  by  Heracles.  Heracles  and  Xerxes  repi’esent
this  union  in  different  ways  : the  one  united  East  and  West
only  in  a metaphorical  sense,  the  other  did  so  in  a literal
^Cf.  the  script  of  March  4:  “Binding  and  loosing.”


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


257


sense  by  means  of  the  bridge  which  reached  from  the  shores
of  Asia  to  the  shores  of  Europe.

But  the  emblem  of  the  Club  is  by  no  means  the  only  reason
for  connectingr  Heracles  with  the  East.  That  the  Greek  legend
of  Heracles  was  largely  influenced  by  and  in  part  derived  from
Eastern  mythology  is  universally  recognised.  Thus  Mr.  E.  H.
Blakeney,  the  most  recent  editor  of  the  Hercules  Furens,  after
comparing  the  story  of  Heracles  with  that  of  the  Babylonian
hero  Gilgames,  writes:  “In  fact,  the  parallelisms  are  too  close
to  admit  of  any  other  explanation  than  that  the  Heracles-myth
owed  its  inception  to  Babylonia,  whence  it  made  its  way  to
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  in  the  dawn  of  history.  Traces
of  its  progress  are  to  be  found  in  the  myths  and  legends
attributed  to  Melkarth,  the  Phoenician  Heracles;  and,  doubt-
le.ss,  the  Hebrew  Samson^  story  presents  many  curious  similarities

to  the  Epic  of  Gilgames The  sacrifice  of  quails  by  the

Phoenicians  was  said  to  commemorate  the  I’esurrection  of
Heracles,  restored  to  life  by  the  god  Eshmun-Iolaos,  who  gave

him  a quail  to  smell A Phoenician  bas-relief  has  been

discovered  (in  Cyprus)  repi'esenting  Heracles  carrying  off  the
oxen  of  Geryon, — a fact  which  bears  out  the  contention  as  to
the  importation  of  the  legend  of  Heracles  into  Greece  at  some
early  epoch.  Herodotus  describes  the  temple  of  Heracles  at
Tyre,  attributing  to  it  an  antiquity  of  2300  years  before  his
own  time.”

The  allusion  in  the  script  of  March  25  to  Heracles  as  a
type  of  the  union  of  East  and  West  is  therefore  fully  justified.

But  what  is  to  be  made  of  the  stress  laid  in  both  the
scripts  in  question  upon  the  tying  of  Heracles  to  a pillar?

I can  only  suggest  that  the  .scribe,  wishing  to  intimate  yet
another  reason  why  Heracles  may  typify  the  union  of  East
and  West,  hinted  that  Heracles  was  a “pillar-god”,  and  a
pillar’-god  who  was  in  a way  a connecting  link  between  two
other  pillar-gods,  one  of  whom,  Prometheus,  was  the  pillar-god
of  the  East,  and  the  other,  Atlas,  the  pillar-god  of  the  West.
This  conjectural  explanation,  far-fetched  though  it  may  seem

^ In  view  of  what  is  said  below  the  binding  of  Samson  and  his  connection
with  pillars  should  be  noted.

R


J.  G.  Piddington.


258


[part


to  be,  is  not  without  some  grounds  of  support,  which  I will
brietly  indicate.

For  the  statement  that  Prometheus  and  Atlas  were  pillar-
gods,  and  pillar -gods  respectively  of  East  and  West,  I refer  the
reader  to  a paper  by  Miss  Jane  E.  Harrison  entitled  The  Pillar
and  the  MoAden  {Proceedings  of  the  Classical  Associatio^i  for
1907,  Vol.  V.).  The  pillar-gods  Prometheus  and  Atlas  were
brothers;  Prometheus  accoi'ding  to  Hesiod  {Theog.  517-522)
was  bound,  like  Heracles  in  the  play,  to  a pillar ; Atlas,
according  to  Homer  {Odyssey,  I,  52),  upheld  the  pillars  which
keep  earth  and  sky  a])art.  It  was  Heracles  who  released
Pi'ometheus  from  his  bondage,  and  Heracles  who  for  a time
relieved  Atlas  from  the  labour  of  upholdinof  his  pillars.  Perhaps,
too,  the  myth  about  the  two  pillars  (the  Pillars  of  Hercules),
which  he  set  up  on  his  way  to  Erytheia  at  the  frontiers  of
Europe  and  Libya,  points  to  the  existence  of  a primitive  pillar-
cult  of  Heracles.

None  of  the  ingenious  people  who  mythologise  mythology
has,  so  far  as  I know,  claimed  Heracles  as  a |)illar-god ; but  he
seems  to  possess  as  good  a title  to  the  dignity  as  plenty  of
other  deities;  and  the  scribe  may,  I suggest,  have  been  putting
in  a claim  for  him.

But,  it  may  be  objected,  though  Prometheus  is  alluded  to
in  the  script  of  March  4,  there  is  no  allusion  in  either  script
to  Atlas.  That  is  true,  but  in  the  Phercules  Parens  (11.  403-7),
to  which  play  both  scripts  plainly  refer,  the  Chorus,  just  after
mentioning  the  slaying  of  Geryon,  speaks  of  Heracles’  exploit
“ when  he  came  to  the  home  of  Atlas,  and,  for  valour’s  sake,
held  up  the  god’s  star-visaged  mansions  ”.

In  Ijoth  scripts  it  is  clear  that  the  scribe  means  that  there
is  some  point  in  the  Hercales  Parens  that  the  commentators
have  missed;  and  that  this  point  has  to  do  with  the  incident
of  the  binding  to  the  pillar,  and  is  also  in  some  way  mixed
up  with  the  East  and  West:  “The  Club  and  Ke}' — East  and

West  look  for  the  Eastern  sign  of  the  Club  ex  pede  Herculem.
The  Hercules  story  comes  in  there  and  the  clue  is  in  the

1 Since  writing  the  above  I hnd  that  Raoul  Rochette  suggested  that  Heracles
was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a pillar  ; hut  his  suggestion  seems  to  have
been  ignored  by  archaeologists  of  the  present  daj'.


259


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Euripides  play  if  you  could  only  see  it.  Bound  to  the  pillar —
I told  you  before  of  Sebastian,  it  is  the  same  story  of  the
archer  and  the  binding  to  the  pillar.”

But  the  question  now  arises : why  is  Sebastian  introduced  ?

St.  Sebastian  is  represented  in  mediaeval  art  as  bound  either
to  a pillar,  a column  or  a tree.  Mantegna’s  picture  of  his
martyrdom  in  the  Vienna  Gallery  portrays  him  bound  to  a
pillar  near  a ruined  triumphal  arch  ; and  in  other  pictures
(e.g.  Pinturicchio’s  S.  Sehastiano  in  the  Vatican)  ruined
arches  oi‘  temples  appear  also ; and  it  has  been  suggested  that
the  ruined  arches  symbolise  the  destruction  of  the  heathen
I lowers.  (See  Mrs  Jamieson’s  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art,
p.  416.)  He  is  almost,  though  not  quite,  invariably  represented
as  pierced  by  arrows.

The  piillar,  which  Heracles  in  his  madness  fell  against  and  broke
and  to  which  he  was  bound,  and  his  arrows,  might  readily
enough  suggest  the  pillar  the  broken  arches  and  the  arrows
associated  with  St.  Sebastian ; and  the  pillar-god  the  pillar-saint.

But  if  “claviger”  was  meant  as  an  allusion  to  St.  Peter  as
well  as  to  Heracles  and  Janus,  there  may  well  have  been
another  reason  for  the  mention  of  St.  Sebastian  and  of  his
being  bound  to  a pillar  ; for  tradition  says  that  St.  Peter  was
chained  for  nine  months  to  a pillar  in  the  Mamertine  prison.
And  another  reason  why  the  thought  of  one  saint  might  suggest
the  other  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  body  of  St.  Peter  was  on
two  separate  occasions  removed  from  its  original  tomb  on  the
Vatican  to  the  catacombs  of  St.  Sebastian.

I turn  now  to  the  remaining  paragraphs  of  the  script  of
March  25.

They  contain,  as  has  already  been  pointed  out  (v.  pp.  223-5),
various  words  or  expressions- — shadow,  shadows,  umbrae,  animae,
shadow  of  a shade,  umbrarum  umbras,  (TKtd^  e’lSwXop — which
all  more  or  less  suggest  the  idea  of  ghosts  or  spirits  ; and  also
a clear  intimation  that  “shadow”  is  the  subject  of  a cross-
correspondence  experiment.  The  writing  of  “shadow”  and
“tenebrae”  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  March  27,  and  of  “spirit”
in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  of  April  8,  I regard  as  constituting  the
successful  accomplishment  of  this  experiment.  But  the  scribe


260


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


meant  to  do  something  more  than  provide  the  first  term  of  a
triple  cross-correspoudei]ce ; namely,  to  connect  the  preceding
references  to  Heracles  with  the  distinctive  word  e’/dcoXor,  and
thereby  to  connect  the  whole  script,  as  well  its  prelude,  the
script  of  March  4,  primarily  with  the  passage  from  Plotinus’
Enneades  quoted  in  Human  Personality  (Vol.  II  p.  290)  and
with  In  Memoriam  xciii,  and  secondarily  with  aurd?  ovpavog

f /

aKVfJiicv.

The  scribe,  it  should  be  observed,  is  not  satisfied  until  e'lSwXov
has  been  written  : “ irvm?  e’/dwXor  was  what  I wanted  to  get
written.  Good  bye”.  He  is  satisfied  neither  with  umbrae,
which  is  the  word  used  to  describe  in  a general  way  the  dwellers
in  the  underworld  ; nor  Avith  animae,  which  is  applied  sometimes
to  the  dwellers  in  the  underworld,  sometimes  to  the  souls  of  the
Blest,  and  sometimes  to  souls  about  to  be  reincarnated ; but  only
with  ei'dfoXor^  which  is  used  by  Plotinus  to  distinguish  the
phantasmal  reflection  of  a spirit  from  the  real  and  imper-
ceptible spirit  itself.  The  allusion  to  the  shadows  in  Plato’s
cave  enforces  the  view  that  the  scribe  was  throughout  aiming
to  get  e’lSwXov  written  in  order  to  recall  both  the  passage  in
Plotinus  and  the  y»assage  in  the  Odyssey  where  the  elSwXov  of
Heracles  is  contrasted  with  Heracles  himself  (auT09);  for  in
Plato’s  allegory  of  the  prisoners  in  the  cave  (Plato  Rep.  516)
the  same  distinction  is  drawn  between  e'lOwXov  and  auTo? :


TrpwTOv  p.€P  rd?  (T/c/u?  dV  pnaTa  KaQopcp,  kcu  p.6Ta  tovto  ev  Toi?

uSa(Ti  TCI  T€  TOW  ui'9po}~oop  KCU  Tu  TOW  c'lWwp  e’/ocoXu,  VfTTepOP  Se
’ / 0
avTa. "


[A  |)i'isoner  released  from  the  cave  and  dragged  into  the
sunlight]  “will  first  see  the  shadows  best,  next  the  reflections
(elSwXa)  of  men  and  other  objects  in  the  water,  and  then  the
objects  themselves  (cxvtc'i).”  (Jowett’s  translation.)


1 For  a reference  to  dSwXov  by  Myersn  on  .Jan.  7,  1904  v.  Proc.  Part  LV.
p.  215.  In  a paper  entitled  On  recognised  apparitions  occurring  more  than  a
year  after  death  (Proc.  Vol.  VI  p.  64)  Frederic  Myers  had  contrasted  Homer’s
and  Plotinus’  uses  of  ddwXov.

2 If  the  scribe  had  this  passage  of  Plato  in  mind  it  would  suggest  that  the
words  (TKiaj  dSwXov  were  a correctly  (juoted  reminiscence  of  Soph.  Fr.  587,
where  they  are  used  of  the  reflection  of  herself  in  the  water  seen  by  a mare,
rather  than,  as  suggested  on  p.  22.3,  an  inversion  of  the  dooAov  aKias  in
Aeschylus’  Agamemnon.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  261

The  emergence  of  the  phrase  et  nos  attingimus  caelum  was
probably  due  to  the  scribe’s  preoccupation  with  Heracles  and
his  deification.  Ovid  {Met.  IX  239  et  seq)  lays  great  stress
on  the  fact  that  Heracles’  body  was  not  translated  to  heaven,
but  burnt,  and  that  it  was  only  the  eternal  part  of  him
which  “ the  omnipotent  father  bore  aloft  amid  the  glittering
stars  ” and  received  into  “ the  heavenly  shores


VII.


The  next  contribution  to  the  chain  of  ideas  was  made  by
Mrs.  Holland,  whose  script  of  Wednesday,  March  27  read  as
follows :


Birds  in  the  high  Hall  Garden —

Not  Maud  Sylvia —

The  poor  right  hand  is  so  dreadfully  tired
At  the  wrist  not  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb —
rTake  the  left  hand  only  it  is  not  the  right
I hand  that  is  tired,
j Peter  is  the  second  one
iBut  look  at  it  right  way  up
Hold  it  to  the  mirror.  The  shinins;  world  of

O

looking  glass.

I sprained  my  wrist  once

B.


g .S  [Talem  uttorque  surgit  absidem  (or,  exsulem)
^ ■ lux  toto  dum  Sine  ab  horos  (?)  tenebrae.

C>  ‘S  Via  obscura  vita  lucet.


And  o’er  the  flats  the  singing  of  the  sea —

Ebbed  like  the  thought  of  long  forgiven  wrong —


The  abiding  horror  to  me  was  that  of  darkness — Let  sorrow
take  any  other  shape  it  will — Love  and  Sorrow — Sorrow
and  Love — as  inevitably  as  Light  and  Shadow —
Shadow  and  Li»ht.

O

The  sundial  at  Broadmeadows  what  was  the  motto  ?

Not  Jane’s  husband — the  other  one —

Alexander — Moors  head — Antres  vast  and  deserts  idle —

One  not  easily  jealous.  Benissima  cara —

(Drawing  of  a mast)  The  tall  mast,  but  this  one  is  not  at


sea.


2G2


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

With  the  concluding  paragraphs  from  “Not  Jane’s  husband”
to  the  end  we  have  no  concern.  For  comments  on  the  Latin
words  the  I’eader  is  referred  to  pp.  225-6.

Mrs  Verrali’s  script  of  March  25  had  contained  the  words:
“ let  Piddington  know  when  you  get  a message  about
shadow  ”,  a clear  indication  that  “ shadow  ” was  the  subject
of  a cross-coi’respondence.  This  script  of  Mrs  Holland’s,
written  two  days  later,  contained  the  word  “ shadow  ”
twice,  and  also  tenehrae.  The  cross-correspondence  involved  in
these  coincidences  I have  dealt  with  in  Section  XVII  pp.  225-7.
The  “shadow”  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  I have  connected  for
reasons  given  above  with  the  etSwXop  or  shade  of  Heracles  in
the  underworld.

Now  here  in  this  script  of  Mi’s  Holland’s,  which  contains  a
ci’oss-correspondence  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  “ sliadow,”  occurs  a
reference  to  Tenny.son’s  Matul:  “Birds  in  the  high  Hall

Garden”:  followed  by  the  curious  phrase:  “Not  Maud  Sylvia”.
The  name  Sylvia,  as  will  appear  later  (v.  pp.  275  and  278),
links  this  script  of  Mrs  Holland’s  on  to  another  script  of  hers
containing  an  unmistakable  reference  to  Browning’s  HeraMes- —
i.e.  his  verse-ti-anslation  of  the  Hercules  Furens.  Hence  both
Mrs  Holland’s  and  Mrs  Verrah’s  “ shadow  ” scripts  are  connected
with  Heracles.

VIII.

The  next  link  in  the  chain  is  formed  by  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  April  3 (v.  p.  227-8).

The  whole  script  I take  to  be  expressive  of  the  idea  “Angel”
or  “ Angels  ”,  and  to  constitute  a cross-correspondence  with  the
word  “ Angel  ” given  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  of  April  8.

But  it  corresponds  also  with  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  April  8
(quoted  on  p.  265),  and  corresponds  in  more  than  one  respect.
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  contains  the  word  “ Paradise  ” written  in
prominent  characters ; and  Mrs  Holland’s  the  word  “ Paradise  ”.
This  was  the  only  occurrence  of  the  word  “Paradise”  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  between  November  16,  1906  and  May  13,  1907  ;
and  the  only  occurrence  of  the  word  “ Paradiso  ” in  Mrs
Holland’s  between  November  21,  1906  and  July  10,  1907.
But  the  coincidence  was  not  merely  a verbal  one,  for  Mrs


•263


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Verrall,  who  knew  nothing  of  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of
April  8,  on  April  28,  1907  noted  in  her  diaiy  (v.  p.  264)
that  her  script  of  April  3 was  probably  “ a preliminary
attempt  at  Dante’s  Paradiso  This  script  might  at  first  sight
appear  to  suggest  Milton’s  Paradise  Lost  or  Paradise
Regained  or  both  rather  than  Dante’s  Paradiso.  But  if  the
reader  will  refer  to  the  script  he  will  see  that  the  scribe
tlu’oughout  expresses  dissatisfaction  at  what  has  been  written
until  the  figure  of  an  angel  is  drawn  : “ No,  not  quite

that” — “flaming  swords” — “no” — “you  keep  going  round  the
ideas  instead  of  giving  three  plain  words” — “Of  man’s  first
Disobedience.  No,  that  is  something  else” — “No,  I can’t  get
it  at  all.  Leave  it  today — ”.

“Of  man’s  first  disobedience”  is  the  first  line  of  Milton’s
Paradise  Lost,  and  the  scribe  says  plaiidy  that  that  is  not
the  idea  which  he  is  trying  to  express.  Mrs  Verrall,  there-
fore, was  fully  justified  in  not  regarding  Paraxlise  Lost  as
the  subject  of  her  script  of  April  3.  While  Mrs  Verrall,
then,  interprets  the  script  of  April  3 as  a probable  first
attempt  at  Dante’s  Paradiso,  Mrs  Holland’s  script  contains
the  word  “ Paradiso  ”.  But  the  coincidence  extends  somewhat
further,  for  Mrs  Holland’s  script  contains  besides  the  word
“Paradiso”  a latent  allusion  to  Canto  XSVII  of  the  Purgatorio;
and  in  this  Canto  an  Angel  bids  Dante  go  forward  through
the  fire  which  leads  to  the  terrestrial  Paradise  (v.  p.  267).

IX.

Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  April  6,  1907  contributes  the  next
topic  or  rather  two  topics.  In  Section  XVIII  this  script  of  April
6 was  treated  as  constituting  a cross-coi'respondence  with  the
words  “ O’er  mountains,  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers  ”,  uttered  in
Mrs  Piper’s  trance.  These  words  were  seemingly  connected
in  the  trance  with  Wordsworth’s  poem  “ I wandered  lonely  as
a Cloud”,  and  they  also  seemed  to  be  reminiscent  of  a poem
by  F.  W.  H.  Myei’S,  the  scenery  of  which  is  the  Lake  District
or  W^ordsworth  Country  ; and  for  this  reason  I took  i\Irs
Verrall’s  script  of  April  6,  “I  wandered  lonely  as  a Cloud”
and  “ O’er  mountains,  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers”  to  be  all  three


264  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

various  ways  of  expressing  one  idea,  namely,  the  Wordsworth
Country.

Mrs  Verrall,  however,  had  placed  another  interpretation  on
her  script  of  April  6,  as  the  following  copy  of  an  entry  made
in  her  diary  on  April  28  shows  :

Final  verifying  of  references  shows  me  that  mysc.[ript]  of  Ap.  6 was
an  attempt  to  say  Lethe,  with  a distinct  reference  [i.e.  “ the  storied
mount  ”]  to  Dante’s  Purgatorio,  which  I have  read  and  must  be  taken
to  know.  Probabl}"  the  sc.[ript]  of  Ap.  3 [v.  pp.  227-8]  is  a
preliminary  attempt  at  Dante’s  Paradiso,  but  at  the  time  I did
not  see  it.  I wonder  if  there  has  been  any  Dante  in  the  P.[iper]
trance,  or  if  I shall  get  it  tomorrow.

With  this  interpretation  I agree ; but  because  I now  hold
that  the  script  of  April  6 may  allude  to  the  Mount  of  Purgatory
and  the  River  of  Lethe,  I do  not  the  less  hold  that,  as  suggested
above  (p.  238),  it  also  corresponds  to  “ O’er  mountains,  seas
and  lakes  and  rivers”  and  “I  wandered  lonely  as  a Cloud  that
boats  on  high  o’er  hill  and  dale”.  That  two  diberent  ideas
should  be  implicit  in  a single  scri|)t  of  an  apparently  homo-
geneous character — that,  in  other  words,  a script  sliould  ])ossess
a double  reference  will  not,  I hope,  seem  to  be  an  improbable
hypothesis;  and  in  any  case  the  fact  must  not  be  over-
looked that,  when  Mrs  Verrall  arrived  at  her  interjjretation
and  I at  mine,  neither  of  us  had  the  faintest  conception  of
the  existence  of  a complicated  series  of  inter-related  subjects
latent  in  the  automatic  writings  or  speech  of  Mrs  Holland,
Mrs  Piper  and  Mrs  Verrall,  into  which  both  Wordsworth’s
Country  and  the  Mountain  of  Purgatory  and  River  of  Lethe
would  bt.

X.


On  April  8,  within  an  interval  of  9 hours,  three  concordant
contributions  to  the  concatenation  of  ideas  were  made,  one  in
Mrs  Holland’s  script,  one  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance,  and  one  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  script.  These  scri[)ts  are  quoted  below  in  chrono-
logical order,  and  are  numbered  respectively  X**,  X'^  and  X“ ; and
to  each  are  aj^pended  explanatory  comments.


lvil]

X^.


A Series  of  Concordant  Automcdisnis.


265


Copy  of  part  of  Mrs  Holland’s  scrip>t  of  April  8,  1907,  begun
at  1 p.m.  Calmtta  time  (i.e.  7 a.m.  Greemvich  time).

Is  the  Paradiso  mental  relaxation'?  I should  recommend
prose — English  prose — fiction —

The  constellation  of  Orion.

The  tall  spire  shows  above  the  mellow  redness  of  the  wall —
Do  you  remember  that  excpiisite  sky  when  the  afterglow
made  the  East  as  beautiful  and  as  richly  coloured  as
the  West — Martha  became  as  Mar)' — and  Leah  as
Rachel—

“ With  such  a purple  and  sea  blue  grace
Love  settling  unawares  ” —

Omitting  for  the  moment  the  first  two  paragraphs,  I will
explain  by  means  of  a paraphrase  the  train  of  thought  that,
in  my  view,  runs  through  the  remainder  of  the  extract ; —

“ When  the  aftergdow  of  a sunset  makes  the  sombre  East
as  bright  as  the  West,  these  two  diametrically  opposed  quarters
of  the  heaven  become,  as  it  were,  one  ; a unification  of  opposites
as  strange  as  though  the  restless  Martha  were  to  grow  as
tranquil  as  Mary,  or  the  blear-eyed  Leah  as  beautiful  as  Rachel.”

The  combination  of  metaj^hors  here  gives  rise  to  a fresh  idea
and  one  divergent  from  the  central  thought; —

“ Even  as  the  afterglow  may^  convert  the  dim  Eastei'n  sky
into  a blaze  of  light,  so  ‘Love  settling  unawares’  invests  with
grace  and  beauty  the  characters  of  drab,  commonplace  men
and  women.”

With  such  a 'purple  and  sea  blue  grace  Love  settling  un-
aivares  is  a misquotation  of  two  lines  in  R.  Browning’s  James
Lees  Wife :

“ With  such  a blue  and  red  grace,  not  theirs, —

Love  settling  unawares  ! ”

The  significance  attaching  to  The  constellation  of  Orion  will
be  explained  later.

Is  the  Paradiso  nientcd  relaxation  ? . . . Martha  became  as
Mary — and  Leah  as  Pachel.  In  the  Purgatorio  Dante  has


266


J.  0.  Piddington.  [part

three  visions,  all  prophetic,  namely  the  Eagle  (Canto  IX.  19-33),
the  Siren  (Canto  XIX.  7-33)  and  Leah  and  Rachel  (Canto
XXVII.  97-108j.  This  la.st  is  his  final  vision  before  entering
Paradise,  and  is  introduced  as  follows  : —

‘ In  the  hour,  methink.s,  wlien  Cytherea,  who  seeraeth  ever  burning
with  fire  of  love,  first  beamed  from  the  east  on  the  mount,  meseemed
to  behold  in  a dream,  a lady,  young  and  fair  going  along  a plain
gathering  flowers,  and  singing  she  said  :

“ Know,  whoso  asketh  my  name,  that  I am  Leah,  and  go  moving
my  fair  hands  around  to  make  me  a garland.  To  please  me  at  the
glass  here  I deck  me ; but  Rachel  my  sister  ne’er  stirs  from  her
mirror,  and  sitteth  all  day ; she  is  fain  to  behold  her  fair  eyes,  as  I
to  deck  me  with  my  hands  : her,  contemplation ; me,  action,  doth
satisfy.”

v^nd  now  at  the  brightness  e’er  dayspring  born, the

shades  of  night  were  fleeing  on  every  side,  and  my  sleep  with  them  ’.
{Temple  Classics  Edition.)

The  note  on  this  passage  in  the  Temple  Classics  Edition  is
as  follows  : —

“ This  third  and  last  vision  of  Dante’s,  in  wliich  Leah  and  Rachel,
the  Old  Testament  types  of  the  Active  and  Contemplative  Life
{Cen.  xxix.  sqq.),  appear  to  him,  is  a forecast  of  the  positions

Matilda  and  Beatrice  will  occupy  in  the  earthly  Paradise

In  the  New  Testament  the  types  are  represented  by  Martha  and
Mary;  see  [Dante’s]  Convito  IV,  17:  85-111:  “Verily,  it  is  to  be
known  that  we  can  have  in  this  life  two  happinesses  by  following
two  different  roads,  both  good  and  excellent,  which  lead  to  them  ;
the  one  is  the  Active  Life,  and  the  other  is  the  Contemplative  Life,
which  (although  by  the  Active  Life  one  may  attain,  as  has  been
said,  to  a good  state  of  happiness)  leads  us  to  supreme  happiness,
even  as  the  philosopher  proves  it  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  Ethics  ;
and  Christ  affirms  it  with  his  own  lips  in  the  gospel  of  Luke,  speaking
to  Martha,  when  replying  to  her : “ Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  anxious
and  troubled  about  many  things  : verily  one  thing  alone  is  needful,”
meaning,  that  which  thou  hast  in  hand;  and  He  adds:  “Mary  has
chosen  the  better  part,  which  shall  not  be  taken  from  her.”  And
Mary,  according  to  that  which  is  previously  written  in  the  gospel,
sitting  at  the  feet  of  Christ  showed  no  care  for  the  service  of  the
house,  but  listened  only  to  the  words  of  the  Saviour.  For  if  we


LVII.]


A Seines  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


267


will  explain  this  in  the  moral  sense,  Our  Lord  wished  to  show  thereby
that  the  Contemplative  Life  was  supremely  good,  although  the  Active
Life  might  be  good  ; this  is  evident  to  him  who  will  give  his  mind
to  the  words  of  the  gospel.”

It  appears,  then,  that  in  Dante  as  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script
Leah  and  Rachel  and  .Martha  and  Mary  are  instanced  as
alternative  types  of  opposite  temperaments.  Had  no  further
indication  of  their  source  been  given,  one  might  have  con-
jectured, but  could  hardly  have  felt  reasonably  certain,  that  the
illustrations  given  in  the  script  were  derived  from  Dante  ; but
just  before  the  mention  of  the  two  pairs  of  Biblical  characters
the  script  has  a reference  to  Dante’s  Pavadiso ; and  that
being  the  case  the  conclusion  seems  to  me  to  be  inevitable
that  the  scribe  was  reproducing  ideas  contained  in  the  Pur-
gatorio,  Canto  XXVII,  and  in  the  Gonvito.  With  the  Gonvito
we  have  no  further  concern,  but  a closer  acquaintance  with
the  subject-matter  of  Canto  XXVII  of  the  Piirgatorio  and  of
part  of  its  sequel.  Canto  XXVIII,  is  essential,  as  it  will
reveal  the  source  of  .several  of  the  subjects  which  the  directing
intelligence  fitted  into  the  concatenation  of  ideas  distributed
among  the  various  automatists.'


Summary  of  Cantos  XXVII  and  XXVIII  of  Dante’s

PURGATOEIO.

As  the  sun  is  setting  an  Angel  of  God  appears  before  Vergil
and  Dante  and  bids  them  pass  through  the  fire  to  the  last
stage  of  the  ascent  of  the  Mountain  of  Purgatory,  on  the  sumtnit
of  which  is  situated  the  Terrestrial  Paradise.  Dante  is  terrified
at  the  prospect  of  having  to  pass  through  the  fire  but  is
encouraged  by  Vergil,  who  reminds  him  of  a previous  and  a
greater  danger  through  which  he  had  brought  him  in  safety  :

“ Remember  thee,  remember  thee,  if  I
Safe  e’en  on  Geryon  brought  thee ; now  I come
More  near  to  God,  wilt  thou  not  trust  me  now  ? ”

1 Mrs  Holland,  who  frequently  recognises  and  points  out  the  source  of
literary  allusions  and  quotations  contained  in  her  script,  did  not  know  the
source  of  the  allusions  to  Martha  and  Mary  and  Leah  and  Rachel.


268


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


They  begin  the  ascent,  but  have  not  gone  far  before  the
fall  of  night  hinders  further  progress.  They  lie  down  to  rest,
and  Dante  falls  asleep.  In  the  early  morning,  “ in  the  hour
when  Cytherea  (i.e.  the  planet  Venus)  first  beamed  from  the  East
on  the  Mount”  of  Purgatory,  he  has  a vision  of  Leah  and  Rachel,
who  typify  respectively  the  active  and  the  contemplative  life.
Ilante  then  awakes,  the  ascent  is  continued  and  the  summit
cjuickly  reached.

(Canto  XXVIII  11.  1-75).  Dante  enters  the  Terrestrial
Paradise,  and  reaches  the  River  of  Lethe.  On  the  opposite  bank
of  the  river  he  sees  Matilda,  whose  eyes  “ shot  such  splendour
on  him,  as”  he  weens  “ne’er  glanced  from  Cytherea’s”  (i.e.  from
the  eyes  of  the  goddess  Venus,  or  Aphrodite).  The  stream
sejiarates  them  by  only  three  paces : “ Yet,”  says  Dante,

“ The  Hellespont,  where  Xerxes  pass’d  it  o’ei’,

(A  curb  for  ever  to  the  pride  of  man,)

Was  by  Leander  not  more  hateful  held
For  floating,  with  inhospitable  wave,

’Twixt  Sestus  and  Abydos,  than  by  me

That  flood,  because  it  gave  no  passage  thence.”^


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  vAth  Mrs  Piper  held  on  April
8,  1907  hctvxen  11.30  cun.  and  1.10  p.m.

(Present : E.  M.  S.  alone)

(Myers  communicating)

Do  you  remember  euripide.s.

E.  M.  S.  IVhat  is  that  ? “ Euripides  ” 1

I meant  to  say  Harold.

1 In  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s  Essays  Classical  (p.  92)  references  to  “ Xerxes”,  “East
and  West  ” and  “ Dante”  are  to  be  found  all  within  the  space  of  a few  lines  : —
“Christ,  like  Xerxes,  came  against  the  Greek  spirit  Ivpirjyeves  apya  Scuikcov,
driving  a Syrian  car ; the  tide  of  conquest  was  rolling  back  again,  and  the
East  was  claindng  an  empire  such  as  the  West  had  never  won.

We,  indeed,  knowing  all  the  flower  of  European  Christianity  in  Dante’s
age,  all  its  ripening  fruit  in  our  own,  may  see  that  this  time  from  the  East
light  came.”


269


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  “ Harold  ” ?

Yes.  Well

E.  M.  S.  To  whom  did  )'ou  say  “Harold”'?
to  Mrs  V.  [Mrs  Verrall.]

Ho  you  remember.  Spirit  and  Angel.

I gave  both  [i.e.  to  Mrs  Verrall]

E.  M.  S.  You  gave  that?

Both  and
them

To  (?)  the  stars.i

In  the  wakino'-stage  the  following  words  were  uttered  :

I say  Aphrodite.  I’m  standing  with  them.  Henry.

They  say  . . . see  about  Roland.  Les  Val.  Goodbye,
^lalli  (?)

Corrie.  Corrie  Alarshall

They  said  Elliot.  There’s  Mr  Myers  and  Elliot.

Iliad.  I’m  glad.  Try  again.  Discourage.

Don’t  give  me  up ; try  again.

Light  in  West.

I’ll  tell  you  more.  If  I can  reach  over  the  bar  I’ll  repeat
this  letter.

Tout  ensemble.

The  references  to  Rolands  and  Les  Val  are  unexplained.
Corrie  Alarsliall  was  the  name  of  an  aunt  of  Frederic  Myers’s
(v.  Proc.  Vol.  VI,  p.  439).  The  brief  omitted  passage  relates  to
two  American  sittei’s,  and  has  no  connection  with  what  pre-
cedes or  follows  it.

I'll  repeat  this  letter  makes  no  sense,  and  was  probably  a
mi.shearing  or  mispronunciation  of  “I’ll  repeat  this  later”.

'I  think  it  not  improbable  that  “To  the  Stars”  was  an  allusion  to  the
last  two  words  of  the  last  line  of  Dante’s  P urgatorio.  The  last  word  of  all
three  divisions  of  the  Divina  Gommedia  is  “stelle”,  the  Purgatorio  ending
with  the  words  “ alle  stelle”,  i.e.  “to  the  stars”.  The  last  Canto  (XXXIII)
of  the  Purgatorio  describes  how  Dante  arrives  at  the  fountain  which  is  the
common  source  of  the  two  streams,  Lethe  and  Eunoe  ; and  how,  having  drunk
before  of  the  waters  of  Lethe,  he  now  drinks  of  the  waters  of  Eunoe,  and
returns  “from  the  most  holy  wave,  regenerate,  . . . pure  and  made  apt  for
mounting  to  the  stars  ”.


270  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Tout  ensemble  may  possibly  be  a mishearing  or  mispro-
nunciation of  “ Toutes  ensemble

It  should  be  observed  that  “Euripides”,  “Harold”,  “Spirit
and  Angel”,  “Aphrodite”,  “Iliad”,  “Light  in  West”,  and
“If  I can  reach  over  the  bar”  all  emerged — and  all  emero'ed

O

for  the  first  time — at  the  same  sitting-.

Aphrodite  is  the  name  of  the  Greek  deity  whom  the  Romans
called  Venus.  One  of  the  titles  most  frequently  given  her
both  in  Greek  and  Latin  is  Cytherea.

Elliot  and  Iliad.  On  April  30  Myersp  said  that  “ Homer’s
Illiard  ” was  one  of  the  things  of  which  acrd?  od/oard?  ukv/ucov
had  reminded  him ; and  I have  already  pointed  out  (v.
pp.  133-4)  that  the  utterance  of  “Iliad”  during  the  waking-
stage  of  the  trance  of  April  8 was  probably  the  first  emei'gence
of  the  more  definite  statement  made  on  April  30 and  that
“Elliot”  is  very  likely  indeed  a defective  pronunciation  or  a
mishearing  of  “ Iliad

If  I can  reach  over  the  bar,  etc.  I take  as  indicating  an
attempt  to  give  a cross-cori-esponding  message  on  account  of
its  resemblance  to  such  phrases  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  as:  “I
stretch  my  hands  across  the  vaporous  space,  the  interlunar
space — -twixt  moon  and  earth  ”,  “ I stretch  my  hand  acro.ss  the
gulf  of  time — the  intervening  space  twixt  world  and  world  ”,
which  I believe  have  the  same  significance ; though  the
utilisation  for  this  purpose  here  of  a phrase  reminiscent  of
Grossing  the  Bar  was  probably  suggested  by  the  previous
mention  of  the  Iliad,  with  which  Myersp  subsequently  associ-
ated avT09  oupum?  uKup-cov,  after  having  previously  associated
these  Greek  words  with  Grossing  the  Bar.

That  the  phrase  does  refer  to  a cross-correspondence  ex-
periment is  rendered  all  the  more  likely  by  its  immediate
context,  which  if  read  as  “ Tout  ensemble  ” must  apply  to
the  putting  together  of  two  or  more  things  to  form  a whole,
or,  if  read  as  “ toutes  ensemble,”  ^ to  the  confederate  action  of
two  or  more  persons  (feminine).

Ligltt  in  West  will  be  discussed  later.

MVith  the  suggested  reading  “toutes  ensemble’’  cf.  dia  waaCov  pvdixb's  in  Miss
Verrall’s  script  of  Febr.  17,  1907,  p.  70.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


271


X".

Copy  of  part  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Aiyril  8,  1907,
ended  at  3.10  p.m.

The  words  were  from  Maud  but  you  did  not  understand.
Eosy  is  the  east  and  so  on.

You  will  find  that  you  have  written  a message  for  Mr
Piddington  which  you  did  not  understand  but  he  did.
Tell  him  that.

No  more  now — write  again  this  evening.

The  whole  script  is  reproduced  above  except  the  first  sentence
consisting  of  13  words.  This  sentence  merely  contained  the
statement  that  “Talbot  Forbes”^  would  give  a message  to  Mrs
Verrall  in  the  evening,  and  has  no  connection  with  the  rest  of
the  script.

The  ivords  ivere  from  Maud  . . . Rosy  is  tite  east  and  so  on
obviously  refers  to  Tenu}'son’s  Maud,  which,  however,  is  mis-
quoted, as  Mrs  Yerrall  knew  and  heiself  pointed  out.'^  The
quotation  should  be  “ Eosy  is  the  West  ”,  not  “ East  ”.

The  words  and  so  on  imply  that  signiticance  attaches  not
only  to  “Rosy  is  the  East”  but  to  its  context  as  well.

“ Ros3"  is  the  West”  is  the  fifth  and  also  the  twent3^-fifth
line  of  the  poem  in  Maud  that  opens

“ Go  not,  happy  daj^

From  the  shining  fields.”

The,  second  occurrence  of  the  line  is  immediately  preceded
by  this  verse  :

“ Blush  from  West  to  East,

Blush  from  East  to  West,

Till  the  West  is  East,

Blush  it  thro’  the  West.”

You  xvill  find  that  you  have  written  a message  for  Air
Piddington  %chich  you,  did,  not  lunderstand  hat  he  did.

iFor  “Talbot  Forbes”  v.  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  et  ieq.

“For  a significant  misquotation  similarly  recognised  by  the  automatist  herself
V.  p.  6.3.


272


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


It  is  not  clear  whether  this  sentence  refers  to  the  message
“ Ptosy  is  the  east”  just  written,  or  to  some  other  iinspecitied
message  written  on  a previous  occasion.  If  to  the  latter,  it  is
true  that  more  than  once  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  contained  things
which  were  intelligible  to  me  but  not  to  Mrs  Verrall.  If  to
the  former,  it  may  be  taken  as  an  indication  that  “ Rosy  is
tlie  east”  is  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence,  as  otherwise
there  would  be  no  object  in  mentioning  my  name.  Mrs
Verrall  saw  no  meaning  in  this  script,  and  no  more  did  I
until  5 or  6 months  after  it  was  written,  when  for  the  first
time  I compared  it  with  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  April  8.  To
fit  the  facts,  then,  a change  of  tenses  would  be  recpiii'ed.
For  “you  did  not  undei'stand  ” “you  do  not  understand”,
would  have  to  be  substituted,  and  for  “he  did”  “he  will”.

Let  us  now  consider  the  significance  of  the  phrase:  “The
words  were  from  Maud  but  you  did  not  understand  Rosy  is
the  east  and  so  on  ”.

First,  it  forms  an  antithetical  cross-correspondence  with
“ Light  in  West”  uttered  about  two  hours  earlier  in  Mrs  Pi])er’s
trance.  The  antitliesis  is  brought  about  by  means  of  a mis-
quotation : an  ingenious  way  of  throwing  emphasis  on  the
important  word  met  with  once  before  (v.  p.  (13).  The  East
and  the  West  w'hich  form  the  subject  of  this  antithesis  have,
as  we  have  seen,  prominently  figured  in  one  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
and  in  two  of  Mi'S  Holland’s  previous  scripts,  united  in  the
fonner  and  in  the  latter  first  contrasted  and  then  identified.

In  the  second  place,  “Light  in  West”  occurs  in  a context —
i.e.  “ Iliad  ” and  “ If  I can  reach  over  the  bar  ” — which  recalls
the  associations — i.e.  Homer’s  Iliad  and  Grossing  the  Bar —
which  Myersp  said  aurb?  oupaih?  nKUfuov  ha<l  for  him ; and
between  “Rosy  is  the  east”  and  acrb?  ocpurb?  aKufJnov  likewise
a connection  may  be  traced.  “ Rosy  is  the  East  ” is,  as  we  have
seen,  a misquotation  from  a poem  in  Maud  where  the  East
and  West  are  identified  :

“ Bhish  from  West  to  East,

Bhrsh  from  East  to  West,

Till  the  West  is  East,

Blush  it  thro’  the  West.

Rosy  is  the  West,”.


LVir.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  *273

The  connection  between  avrog  oupavog  ukvij-wv  and  Sections
xciv  and  xcv  of  Tennyson’s  In  Memoriam  has  already  been
explained  (v.  pp.  118-122).  In  the  last  lines  of  Section  xcv
East  and  West  unite  tosfether :

“ And  East  and  West,  without  a breath,

Mixt  their  dim  lights,  like  life  and  death,

To  broaden  into  boundless  day.”

The  union  of  East  and  West  in  In  Memormm  and  the
identification  of  them  in  Maud  are  probably  to  be  traced  to
Tennyson’s  familiarity  and  .sympathy  with  the  Neoplatonic,  and
e.specially  Plotinian,  mystic  doctrine  of  the  identification  of
opposites.  The  realisation  of  this  identification  was  attainable
only  in  that  state  of  ecstasy  in  which  the  individual  soul
entered  into  communion  with  the  Divine;  and  for  the  attain-
ment of  this  state  of  ecstasy  “ a cloudless  sky  ” was  one  of
the  desirable  conditions.

The  context  of  Mrs  Holland  s script  shows  a connection,  as
does  the  context  of  “Light  in  West”,  between  the  identification
of  East  and  West  and  one  of  the  associations  which  IMyersp  said
auTOf  ovpavog  (XKvpwv  had  for  him  ; for  “ Do  you  remember  that
exquisite  sky  when  the  afterglow  made  the  East  as  beautiful
and  as  richly  coloured  as  the  West”  is  preceded  by  a reference
to  Dante’s  Paradiso,  and  Myersp  associated  Dante  with  avrog
ovpavog  uKvp-wv  (v.  p.  131-G).

Pteference  to  p.  261  will  show  that  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of
March  27,  like  Mrs  Verrall’s  of  April  8,  alludes  to  Tennyson’s
Maud.  The  former  has : “ Birds  in  the  high  Hall  Garden  ”,
and  the  latter ; “ The  words  w^ere  from  Maud  ”.  This  is  a
plain  enough  cross-correspondence.  But  I believe  that  Mrs
Holland’s  script  of  April  8 also  contains  an  allusion  to  Tennyson’s
Maiul  in  the  words  “ The  constellation  of  Orion  ”.  Twice  and
twice  only  is  Orion  mentioned  in  Maud,  and  each  time  in
connection  with  his  setting  in  the  We.st,  and  also  (though
this  does  not  concern  us  for  the  moment)  with  daffodils:  —

“ till  I could  bear  it  no  more.

But  arose,  and  all  by  myself  in  my  own  dark  garden  ground.


s


274


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Walked  in  a wintry  wind  by  a ghastly  glimmer,  and  found

The  shining  daffodil  dead,  and  Orion  low  in  his  grave.”

And

“ My  wood  is  changed,  for  it  fell  at  a time  of  the  year
When  the  face  of  night  is  fair  on  the  dewy  downs.

And  the  shining  daffodil  dies,  and  the  Charioteer
And  starry  Gemini  hang  like  glorious  crowns
Over  Orion’s  grave  low  down  in  the  West,

That  like  a silent  lightning  under  the  stars

She  seemed  to  divide  in  a dream  from  a band  of  the  blest.”

“The  constellation  of  Orion”  would  thus  answer  to  Mrs
Verrall’s : “The  words  were  from  Maud”;  and  Orion  in
the  West  would  form  an  antithesis  to  her  “ Rosy  is  the
East  ”.

At  first  sight  it  will,  I am  sure,  appear  to  most  of  my
readers  that  I am  overstepping  the  limits  of  fair  and  reasonable
interpretation  when  I put  forward  the  occurrence  in  one  script
of  the  bald  and  disconnected  phrase  “ the  constellation  of
Orion  ” as  an  instance  of  supernonnal  connection  with  a quota-
tion from  Maud  occurring  in  another  script.

But  before  pronouncing  an  unfavourable  verdict  let  the
reader  take  account  of  the  followino-  considerations ; —

O

On  March  27  Mrs  Holland’s  script  contained  a quotation
from  Matid',  and  on  April  8 Mrs  Verrall’s  script  likewise
contained  a quotation  from  Maud.  One  of  the  topics  of  Mrs
Holland’s  script  of  April  8 is  beyond  question  the  identification
of  East  and  West;  and  on  the  same  day  a few  hours  later
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  misquotes  a line  belonging  to  a context
in  Maud  where  the  East  and  West  are  identified.  Con-
sequently Mrs  Verrall’s  and  Mrs  Holland’s  minds  were  (no
matter  how  or  why)  each  impressed  at  this  period  with  the
same  two  ideas : the  identification  of  East  and  West  and
Tennyson’s  Maud.  Both  these  ideas  emerged  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
case  in  the  form  of  a quotation  from  Maud  and  in  that
form  only.  !Mrs  Holland’s  quotation  from  Maud  had  nothing
to  do  with  the  identification  of  East  and  West,  but  the
passage  in  her  script  which  did  give  expression  to  this


275


LVH.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

idea  was  immediately  preceded  by  the  name  of  a constellation
which  is  twice  mentioned  in  Maud  in  connection  with  the
West.

Once  more.  An  idea  closely  allied  to  that  of  the  identification
of  East  and  West  had  been  expressed  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of
March  2.5  in  the  form  of  a reference  to  Heracles  as  a type  of
the  union  of  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  worlds ; and  this
script  contains  a direct  allusion  to  the  Hercides  Furens  of
Euripides  and  to  the  e’/dcoAor,  or  shade  of  Heracles.  Mrs
Holland’s  script  of  March  27  opened  with  a quotation  from
Maud  followed  by  the  words  “Not  Maud  Sylvia”;  and  then
went  on  to  refer  to  “ shadow  ”.  This  reference  to  “ shadow  ”
I take,  for  reasons  already  explained,  to  be  the  counterpart  of
'\Irs  Verrall’s  “shadow”  and  “shade”,  which  I connect  with
the  €lSwKov  of  Heracles.  Mrs  Verrall,  then,  in  one  scidpt  com-
bines references  to  Heracles  as  symbolising  the  union  of  East
and  West,  to  “ shadow  ” and  to  the  Hercides  Furens,  and
in  another  script  to  Maud  and  the  idetitification  of  East  and
West ; while  Mrs  Holland  in  one  script  combines  allusions  to
Maud  and  “shadow”,  and,  if  my  interpretation  of  “ the  con-
stellation of  Orion  ” be  admitted,  in  another  script  to  the
identification  of  East  and  West  and  to  Maud.  Moreover,  for
reasons  to  be  explained  later  (p.  278),  the  phrase  “ not  Maud
Sylvia”  pi'obably  indicates  that  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  March  27
is  to  be  combined  with  her  script  of  April  16,  which  contains
an  unmistakable  reference  to  Browning’s  translation  of  the
Nereides  Furens.

“ But  still  ”,  a critic  might  sa}^  “ if  you  hadn’t  got  into  your
head  this  theory  about  the  subjects  of  cross-correspondences
forming  a connected  chain  of  ideas,  you  never  would  have
thought  of  seeing  in  “ the  constellation  of  Orion  ” an  allusion
to  Tennyson’s  Maud  ”.  To  this  imaginary  but  probable  criticism
I can  reply  that  before  I entertained  the  very  faintest  suspicion
uf  the  existence  of  any  such  concatenation  of  ideas  I had
taken  “ the  constellation  of  Orion  ” to  be  an  allusion  to  Maud.
I began  by  putting  together  the  two  scripts  of  April  8 and
Mrs  Piper’s  “Light  in  West”,  and  regarded  them  as  all  allud-
ing specially  to  the  union  of  East  and  West,  and  generally
to  the  identification  of  opposites ; and  I treated  them  in  the


27(3


[part


./.  0.  Picldington.

original  draft  of  this  section  as  constituting  a triple  cross-
correspondence, of  a complex  type  indeed,  but  complete  in
itself  and  unconnected  witli  any  other  cross-correspondence.
This  original  draft  was  read  by  Mrs  Verrall,  Miss  Johnson  and
Mr  G.  W.  Balfour,  who,  I do  not  doubt,  would,  if  necessary,
verify  my  statement  that  in  it  I interpreted  “ the  constellation
of  Orion  ” as  an  allusion  to  Maud.

It  is  important  to  establish  the  point  that  my  interpretation
of  “ the  constellation  of  Orion  ” as  an  allusion  to  the  two
“ Orion  ” passages  in  Maud  quoted  above  was  derived  solely
from  a collation  of  the  two  scripts  of  April  8,  and  was  made
and  committed  to  wilting  before  I originated  the  theory  as
to  the  inter-relation  of  several  of  the  cross-correspondences,
because  in  view  of  the  use  I am  going  to  make  of  these
two  “ Orion  ” passages  it  might  look  as  if  I had  dragged  in
this  interpretation  simply  in  order  to  supply  two  links  in
the  concatenation  of  ideas  which  would  otherwise  have  been
missino-.

O

What,  then,  are  these  missing  links  supplied  by  the  two
“(Jrion”  passages  in  Maud'l  Before  answering  this  question,
I will  first  remind  the  reader  of  two  of  the  subjects  which,
according  to  my  theory,  must  have  been  occupying  the  mind
of  the  directing  intelligence  who  was  distributing  among
the  various  automatists  a series  of  ideas  capable  of  being  con-
solidated into  a coherent  body.

These  two  subjects  were  the  Daffodils  celebrated  by  Wordsworth
in  the  poem  “ I wandered  lonel}^  as  a Cloud”  (quoted  in  the  trance
by  Myersp  on  March  20),  and  Cytherea,  the  planet  of  love,  “who
seemeth  ever  burning  with  fire  of  love”,  and  “who  was  first
beaming  from  the  east  on  the  mount  ” of  Purgatory,  when  Dante
had  his  vision  of  Leah  and  Rachel.  Now  this  same  dii'ecting
intelligence  whose  thoughts  were,  ex  hy-pothesi,  occupied  with
these  two  subjects  had  made  refei'ences  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script
to  Maud  in  her  garden  (March  27)  and  to  Orion,  whose  setting
in  the  West  at  the  time  of  the  year  when  the  daffodAl  dies
is  twice  mentioned  in  Maud.  Now  we  find  these  three  subjects
in  some  sense  united  in  that  famous  passage  in  Maud  where
the  lover,  waiting  for  Maud  in  the  high  Hall-garden,  sees  just
before  the  dawn  (as  did  the  lover  Dante  waiting  on  the  Mount


277


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

of  Purgatory  to  begiu  the  ascent  that  is  to  bring  him  finally
to  Beatrice)  the  planet  of  Love  :

“ For  a breeze  of  morning  moves,

And  the  planet  of  Love  is  on  high
Beginning  to  faint  in  the  light  that  she  loves
On  a bed  of  daffodil  sky.”

This  passage  in  Maud  by  means  of  the  “ planet  of  Love  ”
links  up  the  subjects  connected  with  Purgatorio,  Cantos  XXVII
and  XXVIII,  with  the  subjects  connected  with  Tennyson’s  Maud  ;
and  by  means  of  the  word  “daffodil”  the  subjects  connected
with  Maud  with  the  subjects  connected  with  Wordsworth.

But  how  is  it  that  so  important  a link  did  not  appear  in
the  scripts  or  in  the  trance  ?

Obviously  the  directing  intelligence  may  have  tried  to  insert
this  link,  and  have  failed  to  do  so ; or, — and  this  is  the
explanation  which  recommends  itself  to  me — a gap  may  have
purposely  been  left  for  someone  not  concerned  in  the  produc-
tion of  the  phenomena  to  fill  in,  so  as  to  make  the  case  as
difficult  a one  as  possible  to  account  for  by  telepathy  between
the  automatists.

XI.

If  the  reader  will  consult  the  extracts  from  the  sittings  of
April  15,  April  17,  April  23,  April  24,  April  29,  May  1,  May  7,
May  19,  and  June  2,  given  in  Section  XVIII,  he  will  see,  fii’st,
that  on  April  15  “Mountain”  was  first  mentioned  as  the  subject
of  a cross-corresponding  message  intended  for  Mrs  Verrall ;
secondly,  that  on  April  17  the  words  “O’er  mountains,  seas
and  lakes  and  rivers  ” were  uttered  in  the  wakino'-stao-e  amono-

O & O

other  cross-corresponding  messages  ; and  thirdly,  that  on
subsecjuent  dates  “ Mountain  ” was  mentioned  in  close  connec-
tion with  “ lake  ” “ cloud  ” and  “ lonely  I consider  that  these
facts  indicate  that  though  “ Mountain  ” was  the  subject  of  a
separate  cross-correspondence  experiment,  it  was  connected  in
the  mind  of  the  trance-personality  both  with  “ O’er  mountains,
seas  and  lakes  and  rivei's  ” and  with  “ I wandered  lonely  as  a
Cloud  ”.


278


G.  Piddington.


[part


XII.

On  April  16  Mrs  Holland’s  script  contained  tlie  following: —

Leopold  — Lucus  i1)

Mcirgaret

To  fly  to  find  Euripides  Philemon  —

I have  already  explained  in  Section  XVI  (pp.  216-218)
{a)  that  allusion  is  made  in  this  extract  from  Mrs  Holland’s
script  to  Browning’s  verse-translation  of  the  Hercules  Ftirens
of  Euripides;  (b)  that  “Margai'et”,  Mrs  Verrall’s  Christian
name,  indicates  that  a similar  allusion  is  to  be  looked  for  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  scrijrt;  and  (c)  that  “Leopold”,  the  name  of
Frederic  Myers’s  eldest  son,  is  conjoined  with  this  allusion  to
Browning’s  HeraJdes  in  the  same  way  that  Harold,  the  name
of  his  second  son,  is  conjoined  with  the  reference  to  Euripides
in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  of  April  8,  and  as  Silvia  (spelt  “Sylvia”
in  the  script),  the  name  of  his  only  daughter,  is  conjoined  with
the  quotation  from  Tennyson’s  Maud  in  Mrs  Holland’s  scri])t
of  March  27.  Once  and  once  only  was  the  name  Harold
written  in  Mrs  Piper’s  script,  and  once  and  once  only  were
the  names  Leopold  and  Sylvia  written  in  Mrs  Holland’s
script  during  the  period  under  review.  This  apparently
irrelevant  affixing  of  the  names  of  Frederic  Myers’s  three
children  to  three  different  pieces  of  script  was,  I consider,
done  in  order  to  show  that  the  subjects  of  the  three  scripts
formed  part  of  one  family  of  ideas,  and  were  meant  to  be
pieced  together ; a clue  that  was  badly  needed  since  between
the  quotation  from  Maud  and  the  two  allusions  to  Euripides
there  most  certainly  did  not  exist  any  obvious  connection.

XIII.

The  sitting  of  April  29  was  attended  by  Mrs  Verrall.  In
the  course  of  it  Myersp  said  to  Mrs  Verrall:  “I  am  trying  to
give  you  two  special  words,  and  you  did  get  the  first  letter
of  one  of  them  ” ; and  added  that  this  first  letter  was  D.
These  “special  words”  were  undoubtedly  “Dwarf”  and
“Giant”  (v.  Section  VlII.  pp.  87-94).


279


lvil]  a Series  of  ConcordoMt  Automatisms.

Later  in  the  sitting  Mrs  Verrall,  who,  of  course,  knew  nothing
of  the  “Giant  and  Dwarf”  experiment,  and  who  had  the  day
before  noted  in  her  diary  (v.  p.  264)  that  her  scripts  of
April  3 and  6 probably  alluded  to  Dante’s  Paradiso  and
P'Urgatorio  respectively,  said  that  she  knew  that  the  word
beginning  with  D was  “ Dante  Myersp  said  that  this  was
not  the  word  of  which  he  was  thinking ; and  then  later  on
added  that,  though  “ Dante  ” was  not  the  word  beginning  wdth
a D of  which  he  was  thinking-,  he  had  given  the  name

Dante  ” to  Mrs  Verrall,  and  had  given  it  in  connection  with
his  answer  to  auTO?  oupavo?  aKvp-wv.^  Almost  immediately
afterwards  he  said : “ I wrote  Lonely  Wandering  Cloud.

Daffodils

The  utterances  in  the  waking-stage  of  this  same  sitting
opened  as  follows  : —

All  right ; I’m  glad.  Inferno  (the  next  words  were  not
caught,  but  sounded  like)  Smiles  and  verso.  Myers.

Oh  ! beautiful  [A  Christian  name]  The  unknown

deity.  Passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone — passed
out  of  their  bodies  and  gone — passed  out  of  their
bodies  and  gone — every  peak  and  point — star — Abt —
I can’t  hear.  Dante’s  Inferno.  What  else  matters  1
What  else  matters'?  Subliminal.  Nearer  mansions.
She’ll  get  it ; I’m  not  worried.  (Touches  right  wrist)
Aches.  Hallo,  Mr  Hodgson,  how  did  you  get
here?  Lost  your  hat?  I don’t  know.  I’m  glad.
I’m  glad  you  are — (Rubs  wrist)  Aches,  ailrbs  I
have  answered.  There’s  no  Inferno  here.  I want  to
say  more.  I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud.  Myers.
Hallam — Arthur  Hallam.

Passed  out  of  tlieir  bodies — Abt  belongs  to  the  Horace  Ode
Episode  (v.  pp.  402-7).

The  ttnknoivn  deity  suggests  “ The  Unknown  God  ” whose
altar  St.  Paul  saw  in  Athens,  (Acts  xvii,  2.3).  St.  Paul  had
been  mentioned  in  the  course  of  the  sitting  and  apparently
connected  with  the  answer  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  Greek  words.

^At  least  that  is  how  1 interpret  the  statements  of  Myersp.  But  as  they
are  not  free  from  ambiguity  the  reader  should  refer  to  pp.  157-165,  where
they  are  discussed  in  detail.


280  J.  G.  Piddhigton.  [part

avTo?  evidently  means  avT09  ovpcwog  uku/xcoi'.  Arthur  Hcdlaon
was  one  of  the  associations  with  cu’to?  ovpapog  aKuncov  given
by  Myersp  on  March  6 and  13.

The  intention  of  these  utterances  was,  I take  it,  to  show
that  what  may  be  called  the  ‘ Dante,’  the  ‘ Wordsworth  ’ and
the  avTog  ovpapo?  arupon  topics  were  all  to  be  linked
together;  the  Inferno  being  singled  out  for  s])ecial  mention
in  order  to  make  a link  with  Geryon.


I am  only  too  acutely  conscious  of  the  prolixity  and  want
of  lucidity  which  dishgure  the  foregoing  account  of  this  com-
plicated group  of  phenomena.  The  fault,  I do  not  doubt,  is
largely  mine,  but  some  of  the  circumlocution  is  due  to  the
involved  nature  of  the  facts  themselves,  and  some  to  the  lack
of  expedients,  such  as  a recognised  technical  phraseology  and
formulae  for  avoiding  tedious  and  awkward  periphrases — a
lack  which  will  have  to  be  remedied  if  we  continue  to  meet
with  similar  phenomena.  I hope,  however,  that  the  accom-
panying diagram  and  tables  will  help  to  make  clear  points
which  the  text  may  have  left  obscure.  But  a cautious  use
must  be  made  of  them,  for  no  tabular  statement  can  contain
those  nuances  and  qualifications,  without  which  accounts  of
psychological  phenomena  must  be  misleading.  Thus,  the
various  inter-connected  subjects  are  arranged  in  the  diagram
in  a purely  arbitrary  order,  and  might  be  re-arranged  in  half
a dozen  different  wa}’s;  and  in  Tables  I and  III  it  has
been  specially  difficult  to  decide  which  subjects  to  class  as
‘ implicit  ’ and  which  as  ‘ explicit  ’.

The  scheme  of  the  diagram  is  as  follows : —

The  headings  of  the  circles,  printed  in  red  ink,  indicate  the
parent  topics  from  which  subordinate  topics,  printed  in  black
ink,  have  been  derived.  One  of  these  subordinate  topics  in
its  turn  becomes,  as  represented  in  the  next  circle,  the  parent
of  a new  topic,  and  so  on.  At  certain  points,  shown  by  the
connective  arrow-heads,  the  same  topic  has  been  derived
through  two  different  parents:  e.g.  Geryon  through  the

Inferno  and  Purgatorio  in  the  one  case,  and  through  Hercules
in  the  other.


"O'er  iiioumains.
lakes  A-  riv.-rs  ■

Wordsworth  Country


i


■ -^Cv


Table  I. — showing  how  and  on  what  Dates  the  vakious  Topics  were  distributed  among  the  Automatists.


Exp.  = Explicit  in  the  Script  or  Trance-Speech  of;  Dip.  = Implicit  in  the  Script  or  Trance-Speech  of.


Mrs.

Piter.

Mbs.  Verrace.

Mrs.  Holland.

Miss  Merrikield
and  Miss  Verrall.

Exp.

Imp.

Exp.

Imp.

Exp.

1 Imp.

Exp.

Imp.

Hercules  Fiirens  of  Euripides.

Mch.  4 & 25

Apiil  16

Euripides.

April  8

Mch.  4 & 25

April  16

Browning’s  Herakles.

Apiil  16

Umbrae — shadow— shades — ci'SwAor.

Mch.  25

Shadow — Tenebrae.

Maich  27

Spirit.

April  8

Mch.  25

Geryon  (monster  slai

n by  Heracles  : referred  to  in

March  10

Hercfides  Furens).

Geryon  (monster  referred  to  in  Dante’s  Infer7io  xvii

April  8

Mch.  10

and  xviii  and  Purgatorio  xxvii).

Hercules  as  type  of  the  union  of  East  and  West.

March  25

Crossing  of  the  Hellespont.

March  25

A]iril  8

East.

April  8

W est.

April  8

April  8

East  and  West.

March  25

April  8

Mch.  13  & Apr.  8

Identification  of  East  and  West.

April  8

April  8

Identification  of  Opposites.

April  8

Maud.

April  8

March  27

Orion.

April  8

Aphrodite.

April  8

Cytherea  (Goddess)  and  Cytherea  (Planet).

April  8

April  8

River  of  Lethe  and  Mount  of  Purgatory.

April  6

Apiil  8

Paradiso.

April  .3

April  8

Purgatorio.

April  8

Inferno.

April  29

Mch.  10

Daffodils  (Tennyson).

Daffodils  (Wordsworth).  April  17

Mch.  20

1

Wordsworth  Country.

Mch.  20

April  6

Silvia  (conjoined  with  Maud).

March  27

Leopold  (conjoined  with  Browning’s  Herakles).

April  16

Harold  (conjoined  with  Euripides).  April  8

/'Crossing  the  Bar.

April  8

Arthur  Hallam.  April  29

avTOs  oi'pavos  a.KV/Jui>v  •

Iliad — Myers.  April  8

Dante’s  Inferno.  April  29

TABLE  II. — Showing  the  Chronological  Order  in  which  the  various  Interconnected  Topics  emerged.


March  4,  1901

March  10,  .,

March  11,  „

March  13,  ,,

March  20,  ,,

March  25,  ,,


March  27,  ,,

April  3,  „

April  6,  „

April  8,  „


April  15,  ,,

April  16,  ,,

April  17,  „

April  29,  „


Hercules  f urens  of  Euripides.  Heracles  bound  to  the  pillar.  Ask  elsewhere  for  the  ]
Bound  Hercules.  I

Geryon.  {Table  I'iHing).

Presences  on  the  eternal  hills.  The  Presence  that  is  in  the  lonelp  hills.

“One  star  in  the  crimson  West  And  tlie  East  is  cold  and  grey  \

And  the  weary  Earth  shall  turn  to  her  rest  At  the  end  of  the  winter’s  Day.”  I

“I  wandered  lonely  as  a Cloud  That  floats  on  high  o’er  dale  and  hill.”  (Wordsworth),  \
and  quotation  from  Myers’s  Harold  at  two  years  old.  J

Claviger — the  bearer  of  the  Club  and  Key.  Clavem  gerens  trans  Pontem  trans  Helles-
pontem — East  and  West.  The  Eastern  sign  of  the  Club.  The  Hercules  story
comes  in  there  and  the  clue  is  in  the  Euripides  play.  Bound  to  the  pillar.
Sebastian.  It  is  the  same  stoiy  of  the  archer  and  the  binding  to  the  pillar.  Let
Piddington  know  when  you  get  a message  about  shadow.  Umbrae.  The  shadow
of  a shade.  a-Kids  eiSwAor.

“Birds  in  the  high  hall-garden.”  Not  Maud.  Sylvia.  Tenebrae.  Via  obscura  vita  \
lucet.  Light  and  Shadow.  Shadow  and  Light.  I

“ Lost  Paradise  Regained,”  and  a drawing  of  an  Angel.

Script  interpreted  by  Mrs  Verrall  as  representing  River  of  Lethe  and  Mount  of  Purgatory.  \
,,  J.  G.  P.  „ ,,  “O’er  mountains,  seas  and  lakes  & rivers.”  I

Is  the  Paradiso  mental  relaxation  1 . . . The  Constellation  of  Orion.  East  as  beautiful  as  f
West.  Martha  and  Mary.  Leah  and  Rachel.  I


Spirit  and  Angel.  To  the  Stars.  Euripides.  I meant  to  say  Harold.  Aphrodite.
Mr  Myers  and  . . . Iliad.  Light  in  West.  If  I can  reach  over  the  bar  I’ll
repeat  this  later  (f).  Tout  ensemble.

The  words  were  from  Maud.  Rosy  is  the  East  and  so  on.

Mountain.

Leopold.  Lucas.  Margaret.  To  fly  to  find  Euripides.  Philemon,  (i.e.  Browning’s
Heraldes.)

O’er  mountains,  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers.  Daffodils.

auTos  (ouparos  aKVjMDv),  Dante’s  Inferno,  I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud,  Myers  and  Arthur
Hallam,  all  mentioned  in  Waking-Stage.


}


Mrs  Verrall.

Miss  Verrall  and  Miss  Merri field.
Mrs  Verrall.

Mrs  Holland.

Mrs  Piper.


Mrs  Verrall.


Mrs  Holland.
Mrs  Verrall.
Mrs  Verrall.

Mrs  Holland.

Mrs  Piper.

Mrs  Verrall.
Mrs  Piper.

Mrs  Holland.

Mrs  Piper.

Mrs  Piper.


TABLE  Iir. — Showing  which  of  the  vaihous  'I'opics  were


EITHER  EXPLICITLY  OR


IMPLICITLY  CONTAINED,  AND  WHICH


CONTAINED  IN  THE  SCRIPT  OR  TrANCE  SpEECH  OF


THE  SEVERAL  AuTOMATISTS.


WERE  NOT


I Explicit  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance-script  or  trance-speech.

\ Implicit

' Explicit  in  Mrs  VerraH’s  script.

Implicit  in  ,,  ,,

Explicit  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script.

Implicit  ,,  ,,  ,,

V

j Explicit  in  Table-tilting  of  Miss  Merrifield  and  Miss  H.  Verrall.
I Implicit  „ „ „ „ „


Euripides,  Spirit,  Angel,  West,  Ai)hrodite,  Inferno,  Daffodils,  Harold.
Wordsworth  Country;  Cytherea.

Hercules  Fureus]  Euripides;  Umbrae,  Shadows,  Shades,  etSwAoe ;
Angel;  Hercules  as  type  of  East  and  \Test ; Crossing  of  the
Hellespont;  East;  East  and  West;  j\Imd.

East  and  West;  Identification  of  East  and  West;  River  of  Lethe
and  Mount  of  Purgatory;  Paradiso ; Wordsworth  Country.

Euripides ; Shadow,  Tenebrae  ; East  and  West ; Identification  of
East  and  West;  Identification  of  Opposites;  Maud;  Orion;
Paradiso  ] Silvia;  Leopold.

Hercules  Furens ; Browning’s  Herakles ; Cytherea;  River  of  Lethe  and
Mount  of  Purgatory;  Purgatorio  ■,  Crossing  of  the  Hellespont;
Angel.

Geryon  (Dante’s).

Geryon  (Heracles’).


Topics  unexpressed  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance-script  or  trance-speech.


Mrs  Verrall’s  script.


Mrs  Holland’s  script.


Miss  Merrifield  A Miss  Verrall’s  Table-tilting.


Hercules  Furens  ■,  Browning’s  //eruUes ; Umbrae  &c ; Shadow;  Geryon;
Hercules  as  type  of  East  and  West;  East;  East  and  West;
Identification  of  East  and  West ; Identification  of  Opposites ;
Maud-,  Orion;  River  of  Lethe  and  Mount  of  Purgatory;  Paradiso-,
Silvia,  Leopold ; Crossing  of  Hellespont.

Browning’s  Herakles  ; Tenebrae  ; Geryon  ; Identification  of  Opposites;
Orion  ; Aphrodite  ; Cytlieiea  ; Purgatorio,  Inferno ; Daffodils  ;
Silvia,  Leopold,  Harold.

etSwAor,  Spirit ; Hercules  as  type  of  East  and  MTst ; Aphrodite  ;
Inferno-,  Daffodils;  Wordsworth  Country;  Harold.

All  except  Geryon.


‘ • 'ffr-

-f\'  ’ ''■'<.


.^T/i'i^.i’,:  - •


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisras.


281


On  the  top  left  hand  side  of  the  diagrani,  and  enclosed
within  a circle  larger  than  the  rest,  is  the  progenitor  of  the
whole  family  of  topics,  auTo?  ovpavo<s  aKUfj.u>v,  of  which  the
immediate  offspring  are  Plotinus,  Tennyson,  C'rossing  the  Bar,
Arthur  Hallam,  In  Memoriam  xcv  aTul  Dante.  Of  these
offspring,  In  Memoriam  xcv  becomes  the  head  of  the  nest
family  circle,  and  produces  the  Union  of  East  and  West;
which,  in  direction  A,  becomes  the  parent  of  the  Identification
of  Opposites.  Two  derivatives,  or  specific  instances,  of  the
Identification  of  Opposites  are  Martha  and  Mary,  and  Leah
and  Ptachel ; and  the  latter  pair  leads  on  to  Dante’s  Purgatorio,
and  so  on.

Meanwhile,  in  directions  B and  C,  two  other  to[)ics  have
arisen  from  the  Union  of  East  and  West,  viz.  : —

(B)  Maud,  leading  on  to  the  Planet  of  Love;  and

(C)  Hercules  leading  on  to  (1)  the  crossing  of  the  Hellespont,
which,  as  shown  in  another  circle,  has  also  been  derived  through
the  Purgatorio-,  and  (2)  to  various  other  topics  associated
with  Hercules  as  shown  in  contiguous  circles.


XX.

“AZURE”  AND  “HORIZON”.

The  reader  should  study  this  section  in  connection  with
the  uvTO<i  ovpai'o?  ukv/ulow  incident  (pp.  107-172);  and  he
will  obtain  a clearer  compreliension  of  it  if  as  well  he  first
acquaint  himself  with  the  section  entitled  “ The  Latin  Message  ”
(pp.  312-41G).

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  ivith  Mrs  Piper  held  on
Ap)ril  10,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Newton,  the  latter  merely
awaiting  a signal  to  summon  tlie  sitter.)


•282


[part


J.  G.  Piddingtoii.

(Rector  communicating)  Hodgson  wishes  to  know  if  those
messages  have  got  through  yet  Forget  me  not

E.  .M  8.  I will  enquire.  When  did  he  send  “forget-me-not”?

Long  ago.  [“  Forget-me-nots”  was  first  announced  as  a cross-
correspondence message  to  be  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  on
Jan.  23,  1907.]
has  horizon  appeared  1

Myers  said  a cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon

E.  M.  8.  Oh  yes,  that  has  appeared ; that  is  good.

Myers  gave  that

E.  M.  8.  Quite  right.

and  was  anxious  to  know  if  you  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  we  understand  quite  well.  Has  he  any  more  to  say
about  it?

That  will  come  out  here  later  when

ho  has  a better  opportunity

but  he  simply  told  me  to  tell  you.

(Pause)

E.  M.  8.  Yes,  I understand.

that  he  gave  it  and  when  he  clears
the  message  he  will  exidain  it.


Extract  from  I'ccord  of  sitting  -with  Mrs  Fipcr  held  on
Aprd  15,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Newton)

E.  AE  8.  (referring  to  the  statements  contained  in  the  foregoing
extract)  Will  you  ask  Mr  Myers  why  he  chose  that
sentence  about  horizon  ?

(Rector  communicating)  Yes  I will  and  give  answer  as  soon
as  possible.


E.  M.  S.  Thank  you,


•283


LVii.]  ^-1  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Mr  Myers  sends  love  and  says  that  message  [i.e.  “ the  Latin
Message  ”]  conveyed  a several  good  things  to  his  mind
and  that  was  one  of  them.

E.  M.  S.  What  is  the  word  after  “ that  message  ” ?

(Myers  communicating)  Gooil  morning  Mrs  Sidgwick  I am
glad  to  see  you  once  more.

E.  M.  S.  Good  morning,  Mr  Myers.

Piddington’s  message  conveyeil  much  to  my  mind  which
I considered  good  material  to  work  on.  . . .

therefore  all  this  came  to  mind  in  consequence.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

I believe  you  U.D.  nearly  as  well  as  I do

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  I do.

therefore  I will  just  say  it  was  because  of  this  message  that
it  was  brought  to  my  mind  and  which  I tried  to  bring
out  there  with  other  lines  (1)

Is  it  clear.

E.  M.  S.  It  is  clear,  but  I should  like  to  know  why  “horizon”  came
as  distinct  from  “hope  and  star”.

Because  it  was  that  special  passage  which  was  suggested
from  his  message  to  my  mind.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

and  I gave  it  there  last  time  [i.e.  April  10]  as  as  in  part
answer  to  Mr  P’s  enquiry.

E.  M.  S,  “ Mr.  P’s  enquiry  ” 1

Yes  about  the  part  which  impressed  me  most


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  luith  Mrs  Piper  held  on
April  17,  1907.

(Present;  Mrs  Sidgwick  alone.)

(Myers  communicating)  Good  morning  Mrs  Sidgwick  I am
very  glad  to  meet  you  again  I am  Myers.


284


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

E.  M.  S.  Good  morning,  Mr  Myers.

I thought  you  would  U.D.  if  I said
Azure

and  follow  if  that  had  appeared  through  Mrs  Y.

(E.  M.  S.  fails  to  read  “ Azure  ”)

Auzure  [sic]

E.  M.  S.  “ Augur  ” 1

a it  means  Blue

E,  xM.  S.  Oh  ! “ Azure  ”,

and  I also  said  not  precisely  these  words  but  very  nearly
beyond

a cloudless  sky  beyond  the  hoi'izon.

(E.  M.  S.  reads  over)  yes.
regarding  the  message.

it  came  out  I believe  with  a star  being  drawn  also  horizon
horizon  yes  which  comes  from  the  poem

E.  M.  S.  Browning’s  poem  you  mean  ?

Yes  I wrote  m}''self  a similar  line
which  I gave  her  also,
did  it  not  all  appear.

E.  M.  S.  I have  not  seen  it,  but  I will  look  carefully  again.

Do  because  this  I think  is  important.

A little  later  on  Myensp  tried  to  give  some  words  of  the
Latin  Message  (v.  pp.  367-8),  but  they  were  incorrectly  spelt,
and  were  not  in  consequence  recognised  by  Mrs  Sidgwick  at
the  time.  He  then  apparentl}"  alluded  to  Browning’s  poem
La  Saisiaz.  From  this  point  the  record  runs  as  follows: —

E.  M.  S.  I think  he  means  La  Saisiaz.  ^Vhy  is  he  telling  me  about
La  Saisiaz  ?

Yes  and  dont  you  remember  what  I said  about  it


E.  M.  S.  Through  this  light  ?

Yes.  I said  Hope  Star


LVII.]


285


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  I see.  I did  not  know  which  poem  that  was.  [E.  M.  S.

notes  : “I  don’t  quite  know  what  I meant  by  this  remark,
but  I intended  to  draw  something  about  the  ‘ hope  and
star  ’ poem  ”.  See,  however,  note  by  E.  M.  S.  on  p.  368.]

Which  poem  that  was  ?

the  passage  I wished  (?)  concerned  (?)

these  words

three  words  horizon  was  one  of  them  ami  Horizon  was  the
most  important

K.  M.  S.  I see.  I will  look  at  the  poem  and  then  I shall  under-
stand.

Yes  please  do.  then  I shall  feel  that  it  has  in  part  reached
you.

Extract  from  record  of  tvords  spoken  dAiring  the  ivaking-
stape  of  the  trance  of  April  23,  1907.

Ylay  (?)  Verrall.

Mary  . . .

Mars  (?)  . .

I am  glad  I heard  you.

Better  now.  — — — —

Hullo

On  the  horizon  (?)

I’m  right  about  it.


Extract  from  record  of  sittiiuj  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on  April
24,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  alone.)

(Hodgson  communicating)  Do  you  remember  my  statement
about  Horizon

E.  M.  S.  She  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  has  written  something  about  Horizon.

Did  that  not  come  out  later  after  we  wrote  a few  lines  of
Brownings  poem,
in  which  we  mentioned  stars.


28G


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

p].  M.  S.  I do  not  think  the  lines  of  Browning’s  poem  came.

I figured

Xo  I say  did  she  not  mention  Horizon,  as  Myers  gave  it
her  to  her  in  reply  to  the  message
a long  line  seemed  to  appear  seemed  on  her  paper

E.  M.  S.  I don’t  think  there  was  a long  line,  but  I will  look  again.

listen

E.  M.  S.  Oh  ! that  kind  of  line.

Yes  and  then  Myers  made  her  drawer  [sic]  a star.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  she  drew  a star.  [I  thought  so  at  the  moment,  but  am
not  sure  it  was  not  Miss  Helen  Verrall.  Note  hy  E.  M.  S.
Miss  Verrall  twice  drew  a star;  Mrs  Verrall  never  did.
E'ote  hy  J.  G.  P.]

and  the  word  Horizon  was  repeatedly  given  her  until  it  came
out  on  her  pajier.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  “horizon”  came  certainly  clearly.


Later  on  Myei'Sp,  responding  to  a request  made  at  a former
sitting  by  Mrs  Sidgwick,  tries  to  say  to  what  poem  of  Browning’s
the  scri[)t  of  Mrs  Verrall  described  in  the  Piper  trance  as  “ Hope
Star  and  Browning  ” was  intended  to  refer.

E.  M S.  What  was  the  poem  about  ?

Yol  is  right.

E.  M.  S.  You  have  got  something  like  the  name  of  a poem.  It  is
not  quite  right,  but  if  you  tell  me  what  is  in  the  poem  I
think  I shall  understand.

Hope  Star  Horizon
Horizon  comes  elsewhere.

Yes  do  not  get  confused  dear  Mrs  Sidgwick.


p].  M.  S I will  not  get  confused.


287


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Arid  then  at  the  close  of  tlie  sitting  comes  this  further
reference  to  “ Azure  ” ; —


(Myers  communicating)  We  are  not  going  to  remain  today
but  I have  a few  words  for  you  to  look  up  and  a few  for
you  to  watch  out  for.
one  is  Vaunt  one  is  transcendentalism,
and  another  is  Azure  yes.

E.  M.  S.  There  was  something  in  Mrs  Yerrall’s  writing  about  blue
sea.


Yes  it  Is  preciseW  what  I had  in  my  mind.

E.  M.  S.  I am  glad  of  that.

I said  Azure  and  explained  to  you  that  it  meant  Blue.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did.

yes.  and  the  word  Sky  ought  to  have  come  out  at  the
same  time,
yes  will  you  look
look  out  for  it  ?

E.  M,  S.  I will.

Sea  and  Sk_y  Blue

E.  M.  S.  I think  there  was  somethino'  about  skv.

O *.

Yes  I repeated  it  over  and  over  so  she  could  not  mistake
it.

please  look  out  for  itl

E.  iSJ.S.  I will.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  until  Mrs  Piiicr  held  on  Aimil
29,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Verrall  and  Miss  Johnson.)

(Myers  communicating.)  I wish  to  go  back  to  St.  Paul.
[For  an  explanation  of  “St  Paul”  v.  pp.  161-2.]
my  reference  to  azure  a blue  sea
azure  a z z Z Z z


288


./.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Mrs  V.  I can’t  read  this.  “ a ” and  then  “ g ” is  it  ] “ My  reference

to” — I can’t  make  out  that  sign:  capital  L?

( I in  pe  rator  com m un  i cati n g)

help  her  + ask  the  lady  present  to  help.

(Miss  Johnson  comes  to  the  table  and  reads  “azure”)

azure  +

(Miss  Johnson  reads  “blue  sea”.)
a blue  sea

(Mrs  V.  reads  as  above;  and  the  hands  then  thumps  vigorously
as  a sign  of  assent.)

It  is  now  U.D.

The  subjects  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  extracts  are  full
of  obscurities  and  ambiguities,  but  certain  points  are  clear  and
definite:  viz.  (1)  that  on  April  10  Rector  asked  “Has  Horizon
appeared  ? ”,  the  context,  however,  leaving  it  doubtful  whether
the  word  was  supposed  to  have  ajipeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  or
in  Mrs  Piper’s  scrijit;  (2)  that  on  April  15  Myersp  stated  that
he  had  given  “Azure”,  meaning  “blue”,  to  Mrs  Verrall,  and
that  he  had  also  given  her  some  words  very  nearly  resembling
“ a cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  ” ; (3)  that  on  April  24
Myersij  added  that  “ sky  ” ought  to  have  appeared  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  at  the  same  time  as  “Azure”;  and  (4)  that  after
Ml'S  Sid  gwick  had  said  that  something  about  blue  sea  had  been
written  by  Mrs  Verrall  she  was  told  to  look  out  for  “ Sea  and
Sky  blue  ”.

Let  us  now  compare  with  these  statements  made  in  Mrs
Piper’s  trance  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  April  15,  1907 : —

Xiemand  als  ich  ich  selber  hab
es  g es  a g t [no  one  but  me,  I myself  have  said  it.]
Cunctando  restituit  rem.  [by  delaying  he  restoi’ed  fortune.]
go  slowly  leniter  gradu  [with  slow  step]
something  about  “ His  grave  is  in  the  rolling  deep — not  quite
that — but  a wanderer  over  seas  is  the  idea.

Gulfs  in  the  sunny  south.

I see  so  plainly  the  rolling  of  a southern  sea,
blue  and  sparkling,  as  the  ship  goes  onward  to  the


lvil]


•289


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

south,  ever  to  the  soutli.  That  is  all  no
land  in  sight,  onl}^  the  blue  sea  sparkling  in  the
sun  to  the  horizon’s  edge — no  ship  in  sight.

We  will  try  to  give  the  message  to  them.  It  has  come
first  to  you.  a rolling  southern  sea — a southern  sunny  sea.
The  message  is  for  Mrs  F.  |i.e.  Mrs  Forbes]  but  she  is  not
to  be  told  it  for  some  days.  I will  give  it  elsewhere.
Do  not  let  her  know,  you  must  wait  and  have  patience.
She  is  not  to  hear  of  this.  I want  to  get  it  repeated.
Be  careful  about  this

I will  try  again  this  week — it  is  easier  now


and  now  write  2


It  will  be  seen  that  the  word  “horizon”  occurs  here  and  in
close  connection  with  “ blue  ”.  It  is  true  that  the  emphasis  is
on  the  bluene.ss  of  the  sea,  but  the  language  inevitably  suggests
a blue  sky  as  well.

This  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  the  word  “ horizon  ”
appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  during  the  period  under
review.

The  first  .signature  is  intended  for  “Myers”,  the  second,  S,
for  “ Sidgwick  ”.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  scribe  says  (1)
that  the  message  has  come  first  to  Mrs  Yerrall ; (2)  that  it
is  for  Mrs  Forbes;  (3)  that  he  will  give  it  elsewhere;  and
(d)  that  he  will  try  to  give  it  to  “ them  ”.

I have  little  doubt  that  by  “them”  is  meant  the  people
in  charge  of  Mrs  Piper’s  sittings.  I think  that  “ elsewhere  ”
is  not  equivalent  either  to  “them”  or  to  Mrs  Forbes;  and  that
the  scribe  meant  that  he  would  give  the  same  message  to
Mrs  Piper,  to  Mrs  Forbes  and  to  one  other  unnamed  automatist.
If  this  interpretation  is  right  “elsewhei'e”  could  practically
only  mean  either  Miss  Helen  Verrall  or  Mrs  Holland.  There
is  no  trace  of  the  message  in  Mrs  Forbes’s  script;  and  at  this

T


290


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

time  Miss  Verrall  was  not  doiiio’  auv  automatic  writiuo-.  But
in  Ml'S  Holland’s  script  of  Api'il  24,  1907  one  phrase  contains
the  word  “ horizon  ”,  and  two  other  phi-ases  introduce  the  word
“ sky  I shall  quote  these  three  phrases  only,  as  the}"  are
quite  unconnected  with  tlie  other  subjects  mentioned  in  the
same  piece  of  writing.

The  opening  phrase  of  the  script  is:

One  single  line  of  white  flame  far  on  the  horizon —

In  the  middle  comes  :

Clear  darkness  in  spite  of  a luminous  sky.

And  the  last  paragraiih  but  one  is :

Mellow  moons  and  tropic  skies —
a reminiscence  apparently  of  Tennyson’s  :

“ Mellow  moons  and  happy  skies,

Breadths  of  trojiic  shade.”

This  script  was  written  at  10.20  ]).m.  Calcutta  time

(i.e.  4.20  p.m.  Greenwich  time),  about  four  hours  after
Hodgsonp  had  said  “did  she  [Mi's  Verrall]  not  mention
Horizon,  as  Myers  gave  it  to  her  in  rejd}^  to  the  message  a
long  line  seemed  to  appear  seemed  on  her  paper  ” ; and  after
Myersp  had  said  “and  the  word  sky  ought  to  have  come  out
at  the  same  time  ” ; one  day'  after  “ on  the  horizon  ” was
uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  April  23 ; and
nine  day's  after  Mrs  Verrall  had  written  her  script  of
April  15,  which  contained  the  words:  “I  w-ill  give  it  else-
w here  ”.

I am  not  inclined  to  attach  much  weight  to  the  appearance
in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  of  “luminous  sky”  or  “tropic  skies”.
Still  I must  admit  that  the  word  “sky”  is  of  rare  occurrence
in  Mrs  Holland’s  script  during  the  period  covered  by-  the
experiments  with  Mrs  Pij)er  in  England.  It  is  found  on  three
other  occasions  only';  on  March  18,  in  the  phrase:  “The
m emory  of  it  is  like  a great  black  shadow  that  blots  out
half  the  sky'”;  and  on  Apiril  1,  in  a phrase  which  I will
quote  and  discuss  prresently" ; and  on  April  8,  in  a context
a 1 ready  quoted  (v.  p.  265).


291


Lvii.]  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

The  only  time  that  the  word  is  written  twice  in  the  same
sciipt  is  on  April  24.

“ Horizon  ” occurs  here  and  here  only  in  Mrs  Holland’s
script  dining’  the  period  under  review,  that  is  on  Wednesday f
April  24  ; nine  days  after  the  only  occurrence  of  the  word  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  which  contained  the  ]ihrase  “ I will  give
it  elsewhere

The  opening  words  of  the  following  paragraph  of  Mrs
Holland’s  script  of  April  1 do  correspond  very  closely  indeed
with  “a  cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon”  and  “azure — it
means  blue  ” : —

The  sk}’  is  fiercely  blue  with  not  a single  cloud  in
sight — The  birds  are  sheltering  from  the  noonday  heat.
In  England  this  will  be  a comparatively  mild  month —
but  May  will  be  cruelly  cold  with  frequent  snow  flurries
and  the  effect  on  the  fruit  trees  will  be  disastrous —

If  this  is  taken  to  represent  “azure”  and  “a  cloudless  sky
beyond  the  horizon  ” then  “the  message  did  not  come  first”  to
Mrs  Verrall ; and  the  forecast  of  what  the  weather  was  to  be
in  England  during  April  and  l\Iay  must  be  regarded  as  a mere
excrescence.  \Yeather  forecasts  of  the  kind  and  references  to
weather  conditions  are  not  infrequent  in  Mrs  Holland’s  script;
but  whether  they  are  inspired  by  the  scribe  or  owe  their
emergence  to  interest  in  things  meteorological  felt  by  Mrs
Holland  it  is  impossible  to  decide ; but  with  some  of  them  at
least  Myersn  is  connected,  (v.  Proc.  Part  LY.  pp.  291-2,  295.)

It  is  possible  that  the  phrase  “the  sk}^  is  fiercely  blue  with
not  a single  cloud  in  sight”  may  be  a reflection  not  of  the
cross-correspondence  message  announced  in  the  trance  of
April  17,  but  of  the  paraphrase  of  the  words  auro?  ovpuvo^
uKviJ-oDv,  “cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon”,  given  in  the  trance
of  March  6 by  Myersp ; but  the  occurrence  of  the  \vord  “ blue  ”
in  it  suggests  rather  that  it  I’epresents  not  the  original
paraphrase  of  anrb?  ovpavo^  aKvpwv,  but  the  first  emergence  of
the  cross-correspondence  message  which  was  formed  out  of  it
bv  tacking  on  the  words  “azure”  and  “blue”.

^ For  the  significance  of  this  day  of  the  week  see  pp.  ‘206  and  2‘25,  and
Proc.  Part  LV.  pp.  ‘251  et  seq.


•292


•/.  G.  Piddvngton.


[part


Now  as  regards  the  ambiguities.  I cannot  make  up  my
mind  whether  to  regard  “ has  Horizon  appeared  ? Myers  said
a cloud]e.ss  .sky  beyond  the  horizon”  as  the  first  announce-
ment of  “Horizon”  as  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence
experiment,  or  as  a way  of  ascertaining  whether  the  ]mra-
phrase  of  avrog  ovpupo?  ukv/uloop  given  in  the  trance  of  March  6
had  been  correctly  registered  through  Mrs  Pipei',  and  whether
the  point  of  it  had  been  grasped  by  the  experimenters.

Mrs  Sidgwick  naturally  took  the  words  in  the  second
sense ; and  one  would  not  have  thought  of  looking  for  any
other  significance  in  them  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that
the  extracts  from  the  sittings  of  A]nil  17,  24  and  29  quoted
above  make  it  pei  fectly  clear  that  the  word  “ Horizon  ” formed
part  of  a cross-correspondence  message.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  choice  of  “Horizon”  and  “azure”  as  subjects
for  a cross-corresponding  message  was  suggested  by  atlrb?
oupavog  aKupow  and  by  the  paraphrase  of  these  words  given
in  the  trance  of  March  6.  The  choice  may  seem  an  unwise
one,  but  1 may  remark  that  I had  myself  long  before  chosen
“Pearls  before  swine”  as  a message  for  transmission  by  the
Piper  controls  to  Mrs  Verrall,  although  these  words  had  been
twice  previously  given  or  alluded  to  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script ;
and  I did  this  purposely,  as  I thought  it  would  be  interesting
if  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  should  lepeat  the  words  a third  time
after  her  normal  consciousness  had  been  on  two  previous
occasions  preoccupied  with  them.  I am  sufficiently  convinced
of  the  intellio’ence,  if  not  of  the  identities,  of  the  trance-
personalities  who  call  themselves  Myers  and  Hodgson,  to
believe  that  some  such  idea  may  have  prompted  their  choice
of  “ Horizon  ” for  the  purpose  of  a similar  experiment.

On  April  17  Myersp  said  he  believed  that  “ Azure  ”,  meaning
blue,  “came  out  with  a star  being  di-awn  also  horizon  which
comes  from  the  poem  ”.  No  star  a|)|)eared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
scrii)t  of  April  15  ; but  if  the  reader  will  turn  to  p.  114  he
will  see  that  in  her  script  of  February  26,  the  only  script
of  Mrs  Verrall’s  which  contains  the  words  aero?  oeparo?
uKvp.wi>,  occurs  also  the  phrase : “ I think  I have  got  some
words  from  the  poem  written  down — if  not  stars  and  satellites
another  phrase  will  do  as  well  ”.  When  MyerSp  spoke  ol  a


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


293


star  being  drawn  and  of  “horizon”  coming  from  the  poem,
Mrs  Sidgwick  thinking  he  was  referring  to  the  star  of
“Hope,  Star  and  Browning”  asked  if  by  the  poem  lie  meant
Bi  ■owning’s  poem.  Myersp  acquiesced,  but  I cannot  help
thinking  that  the  acquiescence  was  of  a kind  commonly
displajmd  by  trance-|)ersonalities,  who  unfortunately  are  often
only  too  ready  to  accept  any  suggestion  that  mav  be
offered.  I believe  that  the  trance-personalities,  though  they
did  intend  to  connect  “ Hope,  Star  and  Bi'owning  ” with
“ Horizon  ” in  a general  wajq  did  not  mean  that  “ Horizon  ”
formed  part  of  the  particular  message  given  to  Mrs  Verrall
which  they  always  de.scribed  as  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ” ;
and  that  in  spite  of  some  confusion  and  ambiguit}^  they  finally
succeeded  more  or  less  clearly  in  retracting  the  statement
here  made.  I will  later  on  explain  how  I arrive  at  this

conclusion;  but  meanwhile  let  us  accept  the  statement  that
there  was  some  connection  between  “star”,  “horizon”  and  a
poem  of  Browning’s;  and  see  if  there  is  anything  which  can
he  said  to  represent  this  combination  of  ideas  in  Mrs  Verrall’, s
sci'ipt.

In  her  script  of  February  26,  in  addition  to  cu/to?  oupo.vo<i
aKufxwv,  “ stars  and  satellites  ” and  a quotation  from  Grossimj
the  Bar,  come  the  words  : “ The  last  poems  of  Tennyson  and
Browning  should  be  compared”.  There  are,  therefore,  combined
in  this  script  references  to  aaro?  oaparo?  dKVfxm>,  which  answers
to  “ Horizon  ” “ a cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  ” ; to
“ stars  and  satellites  ”,  which  answers  to  “ star  ” ; and  a
mention  of  the  last  poems  of  Browning,  which  answers  to
“ Browning’s  poem  ”.  The  coincidences  are  there  ; and  though
I do  not  claim  them  as  supernormally  produced,  still  thev
should  not  be  overlooked.

Immediately  after  Myersp  on  April  17  had  said  that  by
“the  poem”  he  meant  Browning’s  poem  he  added  spon-
taneously: “I  wrote  myself  a similar  line  which  I gave  her
[i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  also”.  This  may  be  intended  for  an  allusion
to  Myers’s  poem  on  Tennyson,  the  motto  of  which  is  aura?
ovpav'o's  uKupoov,  and  which  contains  a phrase,  “ These  wavele.ss
heights  of  evening”,  obviously  reminiscent  of  the  words  of
Plotinus.  It  also  contains  the  words  “0  star  and  planet”.


[part


29-i  G.  Piddington.

Now  “stars  and  satellites”  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  February
26  was  a phi-ase  which  she  knew  norinally  had  been  men-
tioned in  a Piper  sitting,  that  of  January  30,  and  she  had
noted  in  her  diary  on  February  2,  1907  that  it  had  reminded
her  of  “0  star  and  ])lanet”  in  Myers’s  poem  on  Tennyson.
This  interpretation  would  make  another  coincidence  of  a sort
between  what  was  s;dd  by  MyerSp  at  the  sitting  of  April  17
and  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  February  26.  Uf  course  this  is
all  exceedingly  confused  and  ambiguous  and  hypothetical ; yet
I feel  that  it  is  rather  difficult  to  set  down  this  stidngf  of
coincidences  to  chance  alone.  Some  may  think  it  altogether
too  fanciful  even  tentatively  to  interpret  “ I wrote  myself
a similar  line  ” as  a reference  to  Myers’s  poem  on  Tennyson.
The  interpretation  is  certainly  unverihable,  but  I think  one
may  justifiably  conjecture  that  a trance-personality,  who  showed
he  knew  as  much  about  uvto?  ovpuvog  aKufjLwu  as  MyeiSp  did,
possessed  a little  more  knowledge  on  the  subject  than  he
succeeded  in  explicitly  displaying.

I said  above  that  my  view  is  that  the  trance-personalities
did  not  intend  to  state  that  “ Horizon  ” formed  part  of  the
message  written  by  Mrs  Verrall  on  January  28  which  is
always  described  by  the  Piper  trance-personalities  as  “ Hope,
Star  and  Browning  ”.

M^hat  I do  think  that  they  may  have  meant  to  say  was  that
when  they  gave  Mrs  Verrall  “Horizon”  and  “Azure”  they
gave  at  the  same  time  a star.  It  was  the  question  asked
by  Mrs  Sidgwick  on  April  17 — “ Browning’s  poem  you

mean?” — which,  in  my  view,  introduced  the  subsequent
confusion  with  “ Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ”.  The  statements

made  by  Myersp  on  April  15  in  reply  to  Mrs  Sidg wick’s

question  “ why  he  chose  that  sentence  about  horizon,”  I take
to  mean  one  or  both  of  two  things : (1)  that  the  Latin

Message  (v.  pp.  312-14)  had  suggested  to  him  the  plan  of
answering  the  question  about  uvto?  ovpavo^  aKupwv  by  means
of  concordant  messages  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs  Piper;
(2)  that  the  Latin  Message  had  suggested  to  him  the  plan
of  using  the  phrase  “ Cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  ” not
only  as  a paraphrase  of  avTO?  ovpavo<;  uKup-wv  but  also  as  a
cross-correspondence  message.


lvil]


295


^•1  Sei'ies  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

I regal’d  the  phrase  in  the  sitting  of  April  24;  “Horizon
comes  elsewhere.  Do  not  get  confused,  dear  Mrs  Sidgwick  ” :
as  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  trance-personalities  to
explain  that  a mistake  had  been  made  in  conveying  the
impression  that  “ Horizon  ” formed  a part  of  the  “ Hope,  Star
and  Browning”  cross-correspondence.  They  made  Mrs  Sidgwick
wholly  responsible  for  the  confusion  ; apparently  unmindful  of
the  fact  that,  even  if  Mrs  Sidgwick  may  have  inadvertently
started  it,  they  themselves  not  only  had  hitherto  done
nothing  to  remove  it,  but  had  on  the  contrary  accentuated  it.

In  conclusion,  I would  advise  the  reader  who  has  no  taste
for  these  subtleties  and  entanglements  to  dismiss  them  from
his  mind,  and  to  pay  attention  only  to  the  comparatively
straightforward  case  of  cross-correspondence  exemplified  in  the
quotations  from  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  of  April  17,  from  Mrs
Verrall’s  script  of  April  15,  and  fi'om  Mrs  Holland’s  script
of  April  24.


XXL


“ THANATOS.”

Extract  from  rccordj  of  icords  spoken  in  the  waking-stage  of
Mrs  Pipers  trance  of  April  17,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Newton)

Very  sorry  right  (?)  — Eector.

Pake  very  slow,  [“speak  very  slow”  was  meant.]

Hallo.  I’m  glad  to  see  you.  What  is  it  ?

— — — passes  — — —

Hallo.  Starch  (?)

I do  not  know.  Sanatos.  Look  — S.  T.

Tanatos(?)  I am  saying  it  thank  you  Mr  —

Certain  — My  faithful  wife  — — —

O’er  mountains  seas  and  lakes  and  rivers.

Means  nothing.

O


296


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


To  these My  faithful  wife.

God  be  with  you.

S — — — — [inaudible,  but  afterwards  realised  to  be  the


same  sentence  as  Mrs  Piper  several  times  repeated  later
with  “Tyrannus”  in  it.]

(Points,  smiling  happily.)

Rector,  Myers,  what  are  they  talking  about?

What’s  six  ....  Tyrannus.

Mr  Hodgson  says  there  are  no  tyrants  over  here.

For  the  use  of  such  phrases  as  “I  am  saying”  to  indicate
the  announcement  of  a cross-corres|)Oudence  message  v.  pp.  176-7
and  the  extract  from  the  record  of  May  7,  quoted  below.

Against  the  word  “ Tanatos  ” Mrs  Sidgwick  inserted  a
note  in  the  type- written  cop}^  of  the  record  to  this  effect:
“ Thanatos  is  meant  ])robably.”

Extract  from  record  of  vjords  spolc.en  in  the  vxdcing -stage  of
Mrs  Pipers  trance  of  April  23,  1907.

(Present:  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  “Mrs  Forbes”.)

That’s  Mr  Hodgson  — —

Yes,  I’ll  give  it  — —

Addio

Davis  (?)  — — — is  all  right
May  I — —

Oh  ! Mr  Myers.

May  — — — I’ll  be  back  again.  — — —

Addio

Book

Thanatos  —

Getting  dark.  I don’t  like  it.  I don’t  want  to  come  here.

Extract  from  record  of  voords  spoken  in  the  vxddwj -stage  of
Mrs  Pipers  trance  of  April  30,  1907  : —

(Present:  Miss  Alice  Johnson  and  Mrs  Verrall.)

Glad  there’s  someone.  Thanatos.  Thanatos.  [I  wrote  down
the  word  “ Thanatos  ”,  recognising  it  as  a Greek  word
but  not  knowing  its  meaning,  before  Mrs  Verrall  made
any  remark.  After  I had  written  it  Mrs  Verrall  repeated
it.  Note  hy  Miss  Johnson.']

Glad  I’m  — Thanatos.


A Series  of  Concordant  Automat isras,


297


LVII.]


Ill  the  waking-stage  of  the  sitting  of  May  7,  1907,  at  which
Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson  were  present,  the  words:  I

want  to  say  ■ — ■ — Thanatos  ” were  spoken.  They  occurred
in  t’ne  middle  of  a series  of  sentences  not  explicitly  a,ttributed
to  Myersp,  but  indubitably  to  be  attributed  to  him.  In  the
record  a cpiery  was  put  against  “Thanatos”  as  the  word
w'as  not  quite  certain.

“Thanatos”  is  a Greek  word  meaning  “Death”.

The  word,  or  an  approximation  to  it,  was  given  four  times
in  all,  each  time  in  a disconnected  way,  and  each  time  in  the
middle  of  words  or  phrases  which  without  any  hesitation  may
be  attributed  to  Myersp  or  Hodgsoup.

It  was  twice  given  quite  clearly,  namely  on  April  23  and  30,
the  recorder  being  in  one  instance  Mrs  feidgwick  and  in  the
other  Miss  Johnson,  neither  of  whom  had  any  reason  for
supposing  that  there  was  any  particular  significance  in  the
word.

In  view  of  the  subsequent  emergence  of  “ riianatos  it  is
practically  certain  that  the  words  in  the  waking-stage  of
April  17  recorded  as  “ Sanatos  ” and  “ Tanatos  ” represent
mishearing's  or  mispronunciations  of  “ Ihanatos  . “Sanatos
and  “Tanatos”,  it  should  be  observed,  were  closely  followed
on  April  17  by  the  words : “ O’er  mountains  seas  and  lakes
and  rivers”:  which,  as  we  have  already  seen  (v.  p.  277),
were  a variant  of  a cross-correspondence  message  which  Myersp
said  he  had  given  to  Mrs  Vei-rall.

On  the  assumption  that  “ Sanatos  ” and  “ Tanatos  ” repi'e-
sent  the  first  emergence  of  “ Thanatos  ” and  that  “ Thanatos
was  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence  experiment,  it  now^
remains  to  find  the  tally.  A first  tally  I find  in  Mrs  Holland’s
script  of  April  16,  of  which  part  has  already  been  cited
(v.  p.  278),  and  of  which  I will  now  give  a copy  of  the  ojiening
paragraphs  : —


Maurice.  Morris.  Mors.

And  with  that  the  shadow  of  death  fell  upon  him  and  liis
soul  departed  out  of  his  limbs.

The  most  agreeable  sensation  of  which  I was  at  first  conscious
was  that  I was  no  longer  deaf.


298


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  third  paragraph  appeal's  to  describe  the  hrst  sensation
of  someone  after  death.  It  is  signed  with  the  initials  of  a
dead  man,  known  by  reputation  to  Mrs  Holland.  I imagine
that  the  immediately  ]ireceding  reference  to  death  provoked
a recollection  in  her  mind  of  this  particular  man’s  death.

Awl  with  that  the  sJutdoiv  of  death  etc.  sounds  like  a
quotation,  but  I cannot  place  it.  In  any  case  it  appears  to  be
reminiscent  of  the  Homeric

coKci  Se  9u/UO?

’T^2y6r’  aTTO  jueXewp  crTwyepo?  S'  dpa  piv  (tk('>to‘s  elXev.

il/or.s,  the  Latin  woi'd  for  Death,  tallies  with  “ Thanatos  ”,
the  Greek  word  for  Death,  uttered  the  next  da_v  in  the
waking-stage  of  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.  Both  words  are  given
separately ; and  both  seem  to  emerge  in  such  a way  as  to
suo-o-est  that  in  each  case  tlie  automatist  orot  an  auditorv

■T'O  O »/

perception  of  a spoken  word,  not  a mental  perception  of  a
general  idea:  “Maurice — Mori-is — Mors”  in  one  case;  “ Sanatos
— Tanatos — Thanatos”  in  the  other.

Here  as  elsewhere  (v.  p.  219),  though  exactly  the  same  idea
is  expressed  by  both  automatists,  this  is  done,  not  by  both
writing  exactly  the  same  word  or  words,  but  by  one  producing
a word  01'  yihrase  or  reference  difierent  from,  yet  equivalent
to  the  word  or  phrase  or  reference  made  by  the  other.

In  Mrs  Holland’s  case  the  word  “death”  as  well  as  the
Latin  “Mors”  is  given.  The  object  of  this  introduction  of
the  Eno'lish  word  “death”  seems  to  me  to  have  been  not  so
much  to  supply  a translation  as  to  indicate  that  “Mors”  was
the  only  significant  word  of  the  three  words  written  on  the
fii'St  line.

The  word  “ Thanatos  ” was  cleaily  pronounced  on  two
occasions  by  Mrs  Piper  during  the  waking-stage,  first  on
April  23,  and  again  on  April  30.  One  may  suppose  that  on
April  23  the  word  was  uttered  to  explain  the  misheard  or
mispronounced  ■*  Sanatos  ” and  “ Tanatos  ” of  April  17  ; the
second  and  double  repetition  of  the  word  on  April  30  would
liave  seemed  superfluous  had  it  not  been  that  Mrs  Verrall,
who  attended  a sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  on  that  day,  had
written  on  April  29  a piece  of  script  containing  four  quota-


299


LVii.]  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

tions  all  involving  the  notion  of  Death.  This  script,  written
at  10.40  p.ni.,  reads  as  follows : —

Warmed  both  hands  before  the  Fire  of  Lite.

It  fails  and  I am  ready  to  depart.


Manibus  date  lilia  plenis  [give  lilies  with  full  hands]


The  river  Nile.  /\

I — 5.

Daisy

Come  away  Come  away

Pallida  mors  aecpm  pede  panperum
tabernas  regumque  turres
put  in  pulsat
Tu  beate  Sesti

[Pale  death  with  equal  foot  the  huts  of  the  poor  and  the
towers  of  the  rich.  (Put  in)  “strikes”.  Thou,  happy
Sestius.]

Another  time  will  help
Goodbye,

But  you  have  got  the  word  plainly  written
all  along  in  your  own  writing.  Look  back.

This  script  Mrs  Venall  handed  to  Miss  Johnson  at  12  noon
when  she  entered  the  room  in  which  the  sitting  of  April  30
was  being  held  ; and  she  handed  to  Miss  Johnson  at  the  same
time  a written  note  stating  that  she  interpreted  the  script  as
alluding  to  Death.  Neither  the  script  nor  the  note  could
have  been  seen  by  Mrs  Piper.

The  first  two  lines  are  quoted  from  a motto  ])refixed  by
W.  S.  Landor  to  The  last  fruit  off  an  old  tree :

“I  strove  with  none,  for  none  was  worth  my  strife;
Nature  I loved,  and,  next  to  nature,  art;

I warmed  both  hands  before  the  fire  of  life  ;

It  sinks,  and  I am  ready  to  depart.”


300


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

The  symbol  A,  as  is  made  clear  by  its  repetition  later
preceded  by  “the  river  Nile”,  is  the  Greek  letter  Delta.  In
Mrs  Verrall’s  contemporaneous  note  “Delta”  is  put  down  as
one  of  the  points  suggestive  of  Death.  Mrs  Verrall  subse-
quently explained  to  me  how  it  came  about  that  Delta
suggested  Death  to  her.  She  wrote  ;

“I  had  at  the  time  [i.e.  when  the  script  was  produced]  a strong
impression  that,  long  before  I knew  any  classics,  someone  had  told
me  that  a Greek  capital  A was  engraved  on  the  voting  tablets  used  to
condemn.  I believe  this  to  be  a mistake  due  to  a confusion  between
(a)  the  Roman  use  of  D in  such  a case,  and  (b)  the  Greek  word
for  a tablet,  SeAros  [so  called  from  the  original  Delta-like  shape].

But  I do  not  think  the  confusion  is  mine, Anyhow  on

April  30  I took  A to  mean  Death,  and  Nile  to  be  an  explanation
of  the  first  A.”

Manibus  date  lilia  'plenis  is  a quotation  from  the  famous
passage  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid  where  Anchises
foretells  the  early  death  of  Marcellus,  the  nephew  of  Augustus,
and  in  dramatic  anticipation  calls  for  lilies  and  bright  flowers
to  strew  on  the  corpse.

Mrs  Verrall  traced  no  significance  in  “Daisy”.  Two  possible
interpretations,  of  which  I think  the  second  the  more  likel,y,
have  occurred  to  me  :

(1)  “There  is  a popular  superstition  that  if  you  omit  to
put  your  foot  on  the  first  Daisy  you  see  in  Spring,  Daisies
will  grow  over  you  or  some  one  dear  to  you  ere  the  year
be  out.”  Richard  Folkard,  Plant  Lore,  p.  308.

(2)  The  Vergiliau  quotation  and  its  context:

“ Tu  Marcellus  eris.  Manibus  date  lilia  plenis,
Purpureos  spargam  flores,”

might  have  evoked  recollections  of  Shakespeare’s  Hamlet.
Thus  the  Marcellus  of  the  Aeneid  might  have  I’ecalled  the
Marcellus  of  Hamlet ; and  the  strewing  of  a corpse  with
flowers  and  especially  'with  “ purpureos  flores  ” might  have
recalled  the  Queen’s  description  of  Ophelia’s  death  :

“ There  is  a willow  grows  aslant  a brook,

That  shows  his  hoar  leaves  in  the  glassy  stream;


i.vn.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisins.  301

There  with  fantastic  garlands  did  she  come
Of  crow-flowers,  nettles,  daisies,  and  long  'purples
That  liberal  shepherds  give  a grosser  name,

But  our  cold  maids  do  dead  men’s  fingers  call  them.”

It  should  be  remarked  that  “Daisy”  is  immediately  followed
by  a Shakespearian  quotation ; “ Come  awa}',  come  away,

[Death].”  And  this  quotation  may  in  turn  have  been  suggested
by  “ manibus  date  lilia  plenis,”  for  the  second  verse  of  the
poem  beginning  “ Come  away,  come  away,  Death  ” alludes  like-
wise to  the  strewing  of  flowers  on  the  dead: — “Not  a flower,
not  a flower  sweet.  On  my  black  coffin  let  there  be  strown.”

Pallida  mors  etc.  is  a correct  quotation  of  Horace  I,  4,  13
and  14,  except  that  “ Tu  ” is  sub.stituted  for  “ O

For  the  small  drawing  followed  by  the  word  “sign”  Mrs
Verrall  did  not  put  forward  any  explanation  at  the  time  when
the  script  was  written.  Afterwards  she  suggested  that  it
might  be  an  ace  of  clubs,  which  she  vaguely  recollected  was
associated  with  ill  luck  in  some  story  she  had  read.  Miss
Johnson  reminded  me  of  the  significance  attached  to  the  ace
of  clubs  in  E-.  L.  Stevenson’s  The  Suicide  Club :

‘“It  is  a pack  of  fifty-two,”  whispered  Mr  Malthas.  “Watch  for
the  ace  of  spades,  which  is  the  sign  of  deatli,  and  the  ace  of  clubs,
which  designates  the  official  of  the  night.”’

The  man  who  drew  the  ace  of  spades  had  to  be  killed  by
the  man  who  drew  the  ace  of  clubs.  It  will  be  noticed  that
the  novelist  calls  the  ace  of  spades  ‘ the  sign  of  deatli  ’,  and
if  the  drawing  in  the  script  was  intended  to  represent  the
ace  of  clubs,  one  may  suppose  that  the  word  “sign”  which
followed  the  drawing  was  due  to  a confused  recollection  of
the  title  given  to  the  ace  of  spades  in  the  story.

I cannot  inqirove  on  this  explanation,  but  it  would  be  more
convincing  if  the  drawing  was  not  more  like  a flower  of  some
kind  than  an  ace  of  clubs.

On  April  28,  the  day  before  the  script  was  written,  Mrs
Verrall  had  come  across  Dante’s  translation  of  “ manibus  date
lilia  jilenis”  in  Pu'rgatorio,  Canto  XXX.  This  quotation  and
the  association  of  A with  the  idea  of  Death  must  both  ha,ve  been


302


J.  G.  Piddrngtov.


[part


derived  from  uo  other  source  than  tlie  automatist’s  own  mind.
So  if  the  subject  of  Death  was  ins|)ired  from  outside,  whether
by  Mrs  Piper,  who  had  uttered  “Thanatos”,  or  by  Mrs  Sidgwick
or  Miss  Johnson  wlio  had  heard  it  uttered,  or  by  Mrs  Holland,
or  b}"  a spirit,  we  must  conclude  that  the  form  in  which  it
obtained  expression  was,  in  part  at  least,  determined  by  the
automatist’s  own  mind.

It  looks  almost  as  if  the  scribe  deliberately  avoided  writing
the  word  “ Death  ” on  Ai  >ril  29.  Thus  the  first  four  woi'ds  of
the  familiar  quotation,  “Come  away,  come  away  Death”,  are
written,  but  not  the  fifth  and  most  essential ; and  the  nearest
a])proach  made  is  when  the  Latin  for  death  is  written.

On  the  morning  of  April  29  Mi’s  Verrall  had  had  a sitting
with  Mrs  Piper,  and  in  the  course  of  it  Myersp  told  her  to
look  out  for  a word  beginning  with  a D which  he  was  trying
to  impress  her  with.  Mrs  Verrall  replied  that  she  thought
she  had  got  the  word,  and  told  MyerSp  what  it  was.  He
.said  it  was  not  right,  and  that  she  must  go  on  trying  to  get
the  word  he  wanted.

The  word  beginning  with  a D to  which  Myersp  was  alluding
was  not  the  word  “Death”,  but  the  word  “Dwarf”  which
weeks  before  I had  asked  Myersp  to  make  Mi's  Verrall  write
(v.  ]).  87).  The  reference  to  it  made  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  presence
on  April  29  was  one  out  of  thirty  se])arate  references  made
between  Feb.  19  and  May  27.  There  are  too  many  words
in  the  English  language,  not  to  speak  of  Latin  and  Greek
(from  either  of  which  lang-uages  a word  might  well  have
been  chosen  for  the  purpose  of  an  experiment),  to  permit  of
the  sup})Osition  that  Myersp  by  telling  Mrs  Verrall  he  was
trying  to  make  her  write  a word  beginning  with  a D gave
clue  enough  to  account  for  Mrs  Verrall’s  producing  a script
which,  though  it  does  not  contain  the  word  “Death”,  yet  is
pervaded  with  the  idea  of  it.

The  word  “Death”  occurs  only  once  iu  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
during  the  period  under  review  ; and  that  is  iu  a piece  ot
script  wi’itten  on  May  1,  1907,  the  day  after  she  heard  the
word  “ Thanatos  ” pronounced  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.

If  anyone  is  ready  to  admit  that  the  coincidences  between
the  automatic  wiltings  of  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs  Holland  and


LVIl.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


303


the  trance-speech  of  Mrs  Piper  set  forth  above  are  not
accidental  and  are  due  to  some  supernormal  cause,  then  I
think  he  must  go  a step  further  and  acknowledge  that  the
order  in  which  the  uttei-ances  of  “ Thanatos  ” in  the  waking-
stage  of  Mrs  Pijjer’s  trances  are  distributed  is  strongly  suggestive
of  method  and  intelligence.

Mrs  Holland’s  scii|it  of  April  16  was  written  at  7.30  p.m.
Calcutta  time,  i.e.  1.30  p.m.  Greenwich  time.  On  Apihl  17,
the  first  occasion,  that  is,  that  Mrs  Piper  went  into  trance
after  Mrs  Holland’s  script  was  written,  “ Sanatos  ” and
“Tanatos”  were  uttered  in  the  waking-stage.  Then  on  A]>ril  23
the  faulty  pronunciations  of  April  17  are  amended,  and
“Thanatos”  is  successfully  articulated.  The  word  is  not
again  spoken  until  Apiil  30,  the  first  occasion,  that  is,  on
which  Mrs  Piper  was  entranced  after  Mrs  Verrall  had  written
on  the  night  of  April  29  a script  which  in  vaiious  ways
refers  to  death.  The  last  utterance  of  the  word  was  at  the
sitting  on  May  7,  which  Miss  Johnson  attended,  and  may
perhaps  have  been  then  made  in  order  to  draw  Miss  Johnson’s
attention  to  it,  she  having  just  three  days  before  received  Mrs
Holland’s  script  of  April  16.

It  may  be  thought  that  the  word  “ Death  ” was  one  very
likely  indeed  to  occur  in  the  trance-script  or  trance-speech  of
Mrs  Piper  and  in  the  scripts  of  Mis  Holland  and  Mrs  Ven-all.
No  doubt  the  woi-d  does  occur  in  the  case  of  Mrs  Piper
occasionally,  though  the  trance-personalities  have  a strong  and,
as  I think,  silly  objection  to  its  use;  but  during  the  sittings
held  in  England  it  certainly  did  not  occur  as  a single  dis-
connected word  or  in  such  a context  as  to  suggest  that  it  w’as
the  important  word  of  the  sentence,  except  on  the  occasion
under  discussion,  and  then  only  in  a Greek  form.

I have  already  said  that  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  the  word
appears  only  once.

Mrs  Holland’s  script  is  voluminous,  but  I believe  I am
accurate  in  asserting  that  the  word  “death”  occurred  in  it
during  the  period  under  review  four  times  only:  once  on
Dec.  31,  1906  in  a quotation,  ‘“Bodily  death  ensues  when
the  soul’s  attention  is  totally  withdrawn  from  the  organism
etc.”’;  once,  on  Jan.  2,  1907,  in  the  phrase:  “The  gold  of  the


304


[part


G.  Piddington.

earthly  service  The  myrrh  of  death — the  frankincense  of  the
life  eternal — once  on  March  13  in  the  following  context;

No  conscious  recollection,  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that
immediately.

“ She  knew  she  had  waded  bosom  deep
Along  Death’s  bank  in  the  sedge  of  sleep” —

But  a wild  sjleam  on  a shaken  shoal.

and  once,  as  cited  above,  on  Apill  16,  when  it  is  preceded  by
“ Mors,”  the  Latin  word  for  death.


XXII.

“LAUS  DEO”.

I have  already  referred  (v.  )).  233)  to  the  disconnected
phrases  uttered  during  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of
April  17,  1907 ; and  have  expressed  the  opinion  that  the
phrases  then  and  thus  pronounced  were  cross-correspondence
messages  given  b}^  Hodgsoiip  and  Myersp.

Among  them  were  the  words,  “ Laus  Deo”,  first  pro-
nounced as  one  word  “ Lausteo  ”.

I quote  part  of  the  record  :

What’s  Rector  doing  over  there  1

Why  I heard  such  jablmring.

Are  you  going  i

— — — — — — — — Tyrannus

■Semper  — — — — — Tyrannus.

What’s  Mr  Hodgson  saying  ?

I want  to  see  the  pretty  things.

What’s  that  man  with  a long  beard  i

M'hat’s  that  light  anyway  ?


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


305


lvil]


What’s  Mr  Myers  keeps  saying  (a  Christian  name  four  times
repeated.)

Mr  Myers  has  got  Rector  by  the  ear.  Whispers  into  it.
What’s  last  — — — — 1 Oh  ! he  is  writing  it.

Lausteo.

Laburnum  (?),  Daffodils,  I smell  them.

That’s  funny  ....  I never  saw  anything  — — before.
What  is  it  1

There  was  a man  and  a ....

What’s  the  difference  between  this  world  and  another  one,
and  that’s  a rainbow  . . a rainbow  — — colours.
Lausteo.

Laus  Deo.  That’s  right.

This  is  horrible  I must  say.  (followed  by  the  usual  kind  of
talk  that  accompanies  the  coming  out  of  trance.)

Probably  an  attempt  was  made  in  the  waking-stage  of  the
trance  of  May  8,  1907  to  pronounce  the  words  again.  The
words  uttered  were  the.se : —


Hail ! udeo  - — all  right  1-a-u-d-e-o

banner  ab(?)  loving  (?)  love  is  strong  — — I must  go

Hullo  — Hullo  ! I’m  glad  — eternal  ( ?)

Although  I knew  that  the  words  “ Laus  Deo  ” had  appeai’ed
in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  I rvas  for  a long  time  disinclined  to  attach
any  importance  to  the  coincidence,  because  I w^as  under  the  im-
pression that  “Laus  Deo”,  like  “Pas  Yobiscum”,  rvas  one  of  the
regular  tags  associated  with  Imperator  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance,
and  would  consecpiently  be  known  to  Mrs  Verrall.  But  I
believe  that  I was  mistaken,  for  I have  not  been  able  to  trace
■either  in  the  published  or  in  the  unpublished  records  any
other  instance  of  these  words  having  been  written  or  spoken
in  the  Piper  trance.  (Mrs  Yerrall’s  acquaintance  with  the
records  is  with  a few  exceptions  confined  to  the  records
published  in  Proceedings.)  Of  course  I cannot  assert  that
there  is  no  such  instance;  the  records  are  far  too  voluminous
to  allows  such  an  exhaustive  search  as  would  be  needed  to
establish  the  point  definitely  being  made  without  an  un-
justihable  waste  of  time  and  labour.  But  anyhow  the  words
occur  once  only  in  the  series  of  sittings  which  took  place  in


J.  Ct.  Piddi'agton.


O

O


06


[part


Engiaiid,  and  cannot  appear  frequently  in  other  sittings  or  I
must  have  come  across  them.

Appended  is  a copy  of  Mrs  Yerrall’s  script  of  Nov.  16,  1906,
in  which  the  words  “ Laus  Deo  ” occur ; —


Did  Hodgson  see  the  source
Diastole  and  systole  in  alternate
rhythms  beating.

Laus  in  aeternum  Aeterno

Deo.  Laus  et  Gratia  [Praise  for  ever  to  tlie  Everlasting
God.  Praise  and  thanks.]

Now  begin

o/aoto/j.epvy  ra.  crrotyeta — rouoSe  toj  ytrerat  ciA/V’  oi’

—avTo.yij^  [sic]  cl/xota  d/zoiot?  (TVjxfiaXXcTai'  Sia  ravra  — o/\-
kuKis  ippei  rd  (TvpfiaXX6jie.va.  ov  tolvvv  ecrri,  tl.

§e  Kut  aXXoL  rw£i  p.uTO.[(D<i

[The  elements  are  of  like  parts ; in  that  way  combination
takes  place.  But  like  things  are  not  everywhere  placed
with  likes;  so  often  the  things  that  are  being  placed
together  fail.  Then  there  is  not  a something,  (i.e.  then
nothing  comes  of  it.)

And  you  and  certain  other  people  seek  in  vain.]

The  rest  of  the  script  refers  to  an  experiment  which  Mrs
Yerrall  was  to  try  with  a friend  in  a few  days’  time,  and
does  not  belong  to  the  preceding.

The  Gi’eek,  I have  no  doubt,  refers  to  the  subject  of  cross-
correspondences; and  is  analogous  to  a phrase  in  the  script  of
Feb.  11:  “It  is  all  fragmentary  and  you  must  piece  together —
the  essential  word  is  often  not  grasped  and  the  whole  success
so  spoiled”  (v.  p.  81).

It  will  be  seen  that  neither  in  the  trance  of  April  17  nor  in
the  script  of  Nov.  16  is  “Laus  Deo”  in  any  way  a.ssociated
with  Imperator.  In  the  latter  Hodgson  is  mentioned  by  name  ;
but  he  clearly  is  not  the  scribe,  as  the  scribe  speaks  cjf  him  in
the  third  person.  I should  have  no  hesitation  in  identifying
the  scribe  as  Myersy,  the  Greek  sentences  being  entirely  in
keeping  with  the  style  of  the  signed  communications  of  this
personality.  In  the  trance  “Laus  Deo”  seems  to  be  attributed
to  Myersp.

As  I have  already  said,  the  words  “ Laus  Deo  ” occur  once


307


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

only  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  between  November  1906  and  June
1907;  and  the  only  appearance  of  the  words,  either  singly
or  together,  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  during  the  same  period  is
in  the  script  of  Nov.  16,  1906.  The  “in  aeterimm  Aeterno ’’
of  the  script  should  be  compared  with  the  “ Laudeo  ’’  and
“ eternal  ”(?)  uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  on
May  8.  The  strongest  reason  for  regarding  the  coincidence  as
accidental  is  the  long  interval  of  time,  just  five  months,  which
elapsed  before  the  words  written  by  Mrs  Verrall  were  repro-
duced in  the  trance.  On  the  other  hand  it  must  not  be
forgotten  that  the  coincidence  is  one  of  a series.


XXIII.

“ MUSIC

This  case  can  be  properly  understood  only  if  read  in
connection  with  the  “ Latin  Message  ” (v.  pp.  312-416),  which  I
should  accordingly  advise  the  reader  to  study  first.  Here  it
will  be  sufficient  to  explain  that  at  the  sitting  with  Mrs  Piper
held  on  IMay  6,  1907  Myersp  remarked  to  Mrs  Sidgwick  that
he  had  completed  his  answer  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  question  about
aJro?  ovpavo?  uKiijmcov,  and  that  he  believed  that  he  had  answered
the  question  put  to  him  in  the  Latin  Message  “ through  both
lights  sufficiently  for  jmu  to  understand  that  I have  really
answered  at  last  ’’ : “ both  lights  ” meaning  Mrs  Piper  and  Mrs
Verrall.  To  this  Mrs  Sidgwick  replied: — “Through  Mrs  Verrall
you  answered  very  clearly,  and  through  this  light  you  have
said  a good  deal  about  Aht  Vogler.  But  in  Abt  Vogler  there
is  a particular  line  which  specially  answers  the  Latin  message.
The  Latin  message,  as  you  know,  refers  to  cross-correspondences,


308


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


but  also  to  something  more,  and  there  is  a line  in  Aht  Vogler
which  we  think  you  had  in  mind  as  describing  that  some-
thing more.  It  would  be  very  good  if  you  would  give  it
here.”

At  a later  stage  of  the  same  sitting  the  subject  is  brought
up  again : —

(Myers  communicating)  Now  one  word  more.  Mrs  S.  my
reply  was.  about  the  poem,  and  long  ago  I gave  the
word  Music,  which  came  to  me  as  appropriate,  to  my
answer,  and  U.D.  [i.e.  understanding]  of  the  message.

E.  M.  8.  Yes,  quite  right.

You  must  patch  things  together  as  best  you  can.  Remember
we  do  not  give  odd  or  singular  words  without  (Hand
grasps  the  “healer’s  influence”:  i.e.  a piece  of  material
belonging  to  a mental  healer,  which  Rector  says  j^rovides

him  with  “light”.)  a deep  and  hidden  meaning

in  all  our  messages  through  both  lights  there  is  always
more  or  less  of  the  human  element  in  them,  which  cannot
be  avoided,  for  your  U.D.

E.  M.  >S.  I see.

but  you  must  discriminate  and  disect  [sic]  . . . the  spiritual
from  the  material  and  you  will  see  and  U.D.  much.

Now  we  need  not  trouble  our, selves  at  this  point  to  enquire
whether  “ Music  ” was  an  appropriate  answer  or  not  to  the
Latin  Message;  that  will  be  discussed  elsewhere  (v.  p.  317).
What  we  have  now  to  determine  is  whether  the  word  “Music”
appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  and,  if  so,  in  what  context.
I say  in  Mrs  A^errall’s  script,  for  there  cannot  be  the  least
doubt  that  Myersp  meant  that  he  had  long  ago  given  the  word
“ Mu.sic  ” to  Mrs  Verrall.  She  is  not,  it  is  true,  explicitly
mentioned,  but  whenever  MyerSp  is  dealing  with  the  Latin
Message  he  has  only  one  other  automatist  in  mind  besides
Mrs  Piper,  and  that  is  Mrs  Verrall.^  He  claimed  on  various
occasions  to  have  answered  the  Latin  IMessage  through  Mrs
Verrall,  who  is,  moreover,  the  only  automatist  other  than  Mrs

^ Except  for  a probable  reference  to  Miss  Verrall  on  April  8 in  the  phrase
“I  drew  a Star  through  the  other  light — also  a crescent”.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


309


Piper  mentioned  at  the  sitting  of  May  6 ; and  “ long  ago  I
gave  the  word  ‘ Music  ’ ” can  hardly  mean  that  “ the  word
‘ Music  ’ ” was  long  ago  given  to  Mrs  Piper,  because  such  was
not  the  case.

The  expression  “ long  ago  ” cannot  refer  to  a time  previous
to  the  inauguration  of  the  series  of  sittino\s  held  in  London,
because  it  was  not  until  Mrs  Piper  came  to  London  that  the
question  contained  in  the  Latin  Message  was  put  to  Myersp.

The  first  nine  words  of  the  Latin  message,  Diversis  inter-
nuntiis  quod  invicem  inter  se  resqyondentia  jamdyudum
committis,  which  may  be  rendered  literally  into  English  : “ As
to  the  fact  that  for  some  time  past  you  have  been  entrusting
to  different  intermediaries  things  which  correspond  mutually
between  themselves  (i.e.  cross-correspondences)  ” ; was  spelt  out
to  Hector  on  Dec.  17,  1906  between  11.40  a.m.  and  12  noon.
The  last  word  “ committis  ” was  spelt  out  and  pronounced  as
the  clock  struck  twelve.

At  the  beginuing  of  the  sitting  the  trance-personalities  had
been  told  that  Mrs  Yerrall  would  be  sitting  for  automatic
writing  at  twelve  o’clock,  and  after  this  hour  had  struck
Prudens  announced  that  he  would  give  the  words  “ The  leaves
have  fallen,  and  are  crumbling  with  the  dust”  to  her.  No
trace  of  this  message  is  to  be  found  in  any  part  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
script,  but  read  in  connection  with  the  statement  made  by
Myersp  on  May  6,  “ long  ago  I gave  the  word  music  ”,  and
with  the  context  in  which  these  words  appeared,  the  automatic
writing  produced  by  Mrs  Yerrall  on  Dec.  17,  1900  is  certainly
suggestive.

This  script  was  begun  at  12  noon,  that  is,  immediately
after  the  words  Diversis  internimtUs  quod^  invicem  inter  se
respondentia  jamdudum  committis  had  been  given  to  Rector
for  transmission  to  Myersp ; and  it  read  as  follows : —

Revolving  axes

Revolving  spheres  the  mystic  music  make
Revolving  spheres  the  harmony  began
Harmonious  sound  scarce  audible  to  man
Then  from  every  several  unit  of  the  whole
Joined  the  majestic  music  of  the  Soul


no  no


.310


J.  Ct.  P iddivgton.


[part


Majestic  music

No — you  dont  see  what  I want — begin  again.

Eevolving  spheres  the  harmony  began —

A diapason  manifest  to  man —

Eacli  single  unit  played  its  several  part
Discoursing  symphony  with  godsent  art
Till  the  majestic  music  of  the  whole
Throbbed  in  pulsation  : — and  the  throbbing  Soul
Saw  through  the  sound  the  burning  of  the  flame
Felt  the  lost  Presence — to  the  Presence  came.

The  word  “ music  ” occuns  four  times  ; besides  this  “ harmony  ”
occurs  twice,  and  “harmonious”  “ symphony”  and  “diapason”
once  : in  fact,  terms  of  musical  significance  predominate.

The  script,  as  the  following  cpiotations  will  show,  owes
much  of  its  phraseology  to  two  literary  sources:  Drydeii’s
Hymn  for  S.  Cecilia's  Day,  and  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s  transla-
tion of  two  Greek  Oracles,  published  in  Essays  Classical
pp.  97-100  : —

From  Harmony,  from  heavenly  Harmony
This  universal  frame  began  :

O

Fiom  harmony,  from  heavenly  harmony
This  universal  frame  began  :

From  harmony  to  harmony
Through  all  the  compass  of  the  notes  it  ran.

The  diapason  closing  full  in  Man.


As  from  the  power  of  sacred  lays
The  spheres  began  to  move,


J.  Dpyden.


()  God  ineffable,  eternal  Sire,

Throned  on  the  whirling  spheres,  the  astral  fire,
Hid  in  Avhose  heart  thy  whole  creation  lies, —

Thee  the  first  Number  and  harmonious  whole.
Form  in  all  forms,  and  of  all  souls  the  Soul.


311


LviT,]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Once  by  God’s  grace  was  from  thine  eyes  unfurled
This  veil  that  screens  the  immense  and  whirling  world,
Once,  while  the  spheres  around  thee  in  music  ran.

Was  very  Beauty  manifest  to  man  ; —

F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Mrs  Verrall  knew  all  about  the  Latin  Message  experiment,
and  although  she  did  not  know  when  I was  going  to  start
the  experiment,  it  may  be  assumed  that  she  thought  I should
take  an  early  opportunity  of  doing  so.  Accordingly  the
script  of  Dec.  17  might  be  attributed  to  her  own  subconscious
expectation.

The  appropriateness  of  the  script  of  Dec.  17,  and  particularly
of  the  lines

“ Each  single  unit  played  its  several  part
Discoursing  symphony  with  god-sent  art
Till  the  majestic  music  of  the  whole
Throbbed  in  pulsation”

as  an  answer  to  the  cpiestion  put  in  Latin  to  Myersp  will  be
-evident  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the  Latin  Message.

In  spite  of  the  absence  of  signature  I have  no  hesitation  in
attributing  the  script  of  Dec.  17  to  Myersy,  for  not  only  is  it
in  the  same  style  as  many  of  the  signed  communications  of
this  personality,  but,  as  Mrs  A^errall  herself  pointed  out  and
as  has  been  just  explained,  some  of  its  phraseology  is  certainly
-borrowed  from  a verse-translation  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s.

Mrs  Veriall’s  knowledge  of  the  experiment  described  in  the
Latin  Message  may  serve  to  explain  the  contents  of  her  script
-of  Dec.  17  ; but  Mrs  Piper  did  not  shai'e  Mrs  Verrall’s  know-
ledge; and  even  if  she  had,  it  would  not  account  for  her,  in
common  with  Mrs  Verrall,  hitting  on  “ Music  ” as  an  appropriate
answer  to  the  Latin  Message,  nor  for  the  knowledge  displayed
in  her  trance  of  May  6 of  the  fact  that  “ long  ago  ” the  word

Music”  had  appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.


THE  LATIN  MESSAGE.


Between  the  scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs  Holland,  as
readers  of  Miss  Johnson’s  paper  ]jublished  in  Proc.  Part  LV.
will  know,  a good  number  of  coincidences  has  been  traced
befoi’e  the  English  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper  began.  Much  of
both  these  two  scri|)ts  purports  to  be  inspired  by  a group
of  spirits,  of  whom  “ Myers  ” is  the  most  prominent.  In  the
communications  which  purported  to  be  made  through  Mrs
Verrall  and  Mrs  Holland  by  this  group  Miss  Johnson  thought
she  could  detect  evidence  of  an  attempt  to  carry  out  a form
of  cross-correspondence  more  complex  than  that  which  consists
in  the  production  of  the  same  word  or  phrase  through  two
automatists.  This  simple  type  of  coincidence  it  is  easy  enough
to  explain  as  the  result  of  telepathic  interchange  between  the
automatists ; but  this  theory  seemed  inadequate  to  cover  some
of  the  more  complex  forms  of  cross-correspondence  inherent  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  and  Mrs  Holland’s  scripts,  which  appeared  to
point  to  the  action  of  some  third  mind.^

And  as  we  turned  the  problem  over  in  our  minds  we
came  to  realise  how  cross-cori’espondences  might  be  so
elaborated  as  to  aftbrd  almost  conclusive  proof  of  the  inter-
vention of  a third  mind,  and  strong  evidence  of  the  identity
of  this  third  mind.

These  considerations  suggested  that  when  Mrs  Piper,  in
whose  trance  the  same  group  of  personalities  tigures  as  in
Mrs  Verrall’s  and  Mrs  Holland’s  scripts,  came  to  England,
the  development  of  elaborate  and  complex  cross-correspondences
should  be  encouraged.  With  this  end  in  view  we  drew  up  a
short  message  to  be  addressed  to  Myersp.  1’he  message  was

^ See  especially  Chapter  VII.  of  Miss  Johnson’s  paper.


313


PART  lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

first  written  in  Euolish,  and  then  translated  into  Latin.  Dr
Yerrall  kindly  undertook  the  translation,  and  made  a special
})oint  of  avoiding  the  use  of  any  words  or  phrases  which
might  aftbrd  clues  to  a person  ignorant  of  Latin  but  clever
at  guessiim.

For  the  benefit  of  readers  who  do  not  know  Latin  I may
add  that  the  Latin  of  the  message  is  by  no  means  simple
to  translate ; and  its  meaning  could  hardly  be  discovered,
even  with  the  help  of  a dictionary,  by  a person  possessed
of  only  a small  knowledge  of  Latin.  The  object  of  putting
the  message  into  Latin  was  partl}^  to  prevent  the  normal
consciousness  of  Mrs  Piper,  who  knows  no  Latin,  from  atfecting
the  result;  and  partly  to  test  whether  Myersp  could  display
any  of  the  knowledge  of  Latin  that  Frederic  Myers  had
possessed.

Appended  are  (a)  the  original  draft  in  English — which  was
never,  of  course,  seen  by  Mis  Piper — (b)  Dr  Verrall’s  trans-
lation, and  (c)  a literal  re-translation  into  English  of  Dr
Verrall’s  Latin.

(a)  \\  & are  aware  of  the  scheme  of  cross-correspondences
which  you  are  transmitting  through  various  mediums ;
and  we  hope  that  you  will  go  on  with  them.

Try  also  to  give  to  A and  B two  different  messages,
between  which  no  connexion  is  discernible.  Then  as
soon  as  possible  give  to  C a third  message  which  will
reveal  the  hidden  connexion.

(b)  Diversis  internuntiis  cpiod  invicem  inter  se  respondentia
jamdudum  committis,  id  nec  fallit  nos  consilium,  et
vehementer  probamus.

L"num  accesserit  gratissimum  nobis,  si,  cum  duobus
quibusdam  ea  tradideris,  inter  quae  nullus  appareat
nexus,  postea  quam  primum  rem  per  tertium  aliquem
ita  perficias,  ut  latens  illud  in  prioribus  explicetur.

(c)  As  to  the  fact  that  [quod]  for  some  long  time  past
you  have  been  entrusting  [committis]  to  different  inter-
mediaries (or,  messengers)  things  which  correspond
mutually  between  themselves,  we  have  observed  your
design,  and  we  cordially  approve  it.

One  thing  besides  this  most  agreeable  to  us  will  have


314


G.  Piddi'ngton.


[part


happened,  [i.e.  You  will  even  add  to  our  pleasure]  if,
when  you  shall  have  delivered  to  two  particular  persons
things  between  which  no  connexion  is  apparent,  after-
wards as  soon  as  possible  through  some  third  person
you  so  complete  the  matter  (or,  business)  that  that
which  was  latent  in  the  first  two  (messages)  may  be
revealed.

There  i.s  in  this  ca.se  a great  mass  of  evidence  to  be  con-
sidered. Much  of  it  I have  been  bound  to  cite  in  full,  as
summaries  would  have  been  misleading.  Though  I fear  that
the  reader  -will  at  times  hud  himself  rather  bewildei'ed,  I hope
that  the  comments  and  the  synopses  of  the  evidence  to  be  found
on  pp.  323-330,  347-357,  397-407  and  408-416,  will  explain
the  obscurities  sufficiently  to  enable  him  to  form  his  own
judgment  of  the  case.

The  experiment  extended  over  a period  of  five  mouths  and
a half:  from  Dec.  17,  190G  to  June  2,  1907.

The  subject  was  first  mooted  at  the  sitting  of  Dec.  17,  1906,
when  I alone  was  present,  in  the  following  way : —

J.  G.  P.  I want  you  [i.e.  Hector]  to  transmit  to  Myers  a message
in  a foreign  language,  understood  by  Myers  when  on
this  earth.

(Rector  communicating)

Greek.

.1.  G.  P.  No.

Latin.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  Rector,  you  don’t  understand  Latin,  I think.

Yes  it  is  so.

J.  G.  P.  Can  I transmit  the  message  letter  by  letter  ?
of  course.

.1.  G.  P.  I attach  great  importance  to  this  message  and  to  its  being
correctly  transmitted.  One  object  in  sending  this  message
in  Latin  is  to  see  whether  Myers  can  understand  it.
To  show  that  he  must  send  an  intelligent  reply  to  it ;
not  merely  such  a reply  as  “I  understand”,  or  “Yes”


315


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

or  “ Xo  ”,  but  a reply  which  will  show  that  he  has
grasped  the  purport  of  it.

We  U.D.

Also  we  want  to  convey  information  to  you  and  flyers
and  the  group  associated  with  him  without  its  reaching
any  part  of  the  consciousness  of  the  light. ^

Quite  U.Dd.

Shall  I send  the  message  now  or  another  day  ?

Do  I U.D.  that  you  wish  me  to  give  the  message  to  Myers
and  receive  his  reply  to-day  or  take  the  message  to  him
some  other  day  and  bring  the  reply  at  that  time  1

If,  Eector,  you  have  any  means  of  registering  permanently
the  words  I shall  give  you,  please  take  the  message  now
and  gi\'e  it  afterwards  to  Myers,  who  can  send  his  reply
later.

We  must  not  confuse  messages;  therefore  you  would  [sic]
better  irive  it  now  before  we  begin  with  our  messages
to  Mrs  Verall  [sic]  and  others.  U.D.  [It  had  been
arranged  just  previousl}’  that  the  controls  should  choose
a word  or  phrase  and  try  to  transmit  it  to  Mrs  Yerrall
and  Mrs  Thompson]

J.G.  P.  I shall  first  pronounce  the  whole  word  and  then  spell  it
letter  by  letter.

I then  pronounced  syllable  by"  syllable,  and  spelt  out  letter
by  letter,  the  words : Diversis  internuntiis  quod  invicem
inter  se  respondentia  jamdudum  committis.

On  this  occasion  and  on  subsequent  occasions  Ptector  wrote
down  as  I gave  it  each  word  and  mark  of  punctuation,  though
several  words  had  to  be  repeated  more  than  once  before  they
were  correctly  written  out.

As  the  last  word  committis  was  written  down  the  clock,
as  I noted  at  the  time,  struck  twelve.  At  twelve  o’clock  on
this  same  morning  Mrs  Verrall  at  Cambridge  sat  down  to  write

1 Here,  as  in  a good  many  other  instances,  it  must  be  understood  that  the
experimenter,  in  order  to  convey  his  meaning  acceptably  to  the  trance-
personalities,  is  expressing  himself  in  terms  to  which  under  ordinary  circum-
stances he  might  not  subscribe.


LVII.]


J.  G.  P.


J.  G.  P.


J.  G.  P.


316


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


automatically ; and  the  script  then  ])roduced  would  form  a
most  appropriate  answer  to  this  first  clause  of  the  first  sentence
of  the  Latin  Messao-e.

At  the  sitting  of  Dec.  19,  at  which  Miss  Helen  Verrall  and  I
were  present,  after  repeating  at  Rector’s  request  the  word
internuntiis,  I spelt  out  id  nec  fallit  nos  consilium.

On  Dec.  24,  when  I alone  was  present,  et  veliementer  p7’o-
hamus.  Unum  accesserit  gratissimum  nobis,  si  cum  duobus
quibusdam  ea  tradideris  was  given.

On  Dec.  31  Rector  immediatelv  after  the  usual  Rreetinos
wrote:  “We  have  in  part  U.D.  and  conveyed  your  me.ssage
to  your  friend  Myers  and  he  is  delighted  to  receive  it  so  far
as  he  has  been  able  to  receive  it  ”.

Shortly  afterwards  I spelt  out  inte7'  quae  nullus  appareat
nexus,  postea  quam  primum  rem.

On  Jan.  2,  1907  Rector  said;  “Hodgson  is  helping  Myers  with
his  translation”;  and  a little  later  Mj’ersp  said;  “your  message
has  impressed  me  veiy  much  and  I shall  gladly  translate  it
into  English  for  you  I remarked  that  I didn’t  want  the
Latin  to  be  translated,  but  a message  to  be  sent  which  would
show  that  the  Latin  had  been  understood.

Myersp  replied : “ I quite  understand  and  I will  certainly  do
so  ”,  and  then  asked  for  the  rest  of  the  message  to  be  dictated.
per  terti'um  uliquem  ita  pyerjicias,  ut  latens  ilhul  in  priori-
bus  explicetur  was  accordingly  spelt  out.  Whereupon  Myersp
said  ; “ I may  ask  you  before  I reply  to  repeat  one  or  more
words  that  I may  be  quite  sure  that  I have  understood  it
properly

In  the  waking-stage,  immediately  after  the  utterance  of  a sen-
tence which  can  be  attributed  to  MyerSp  only,  came  the  words ;

“United  (?)  we  (?)  stand  (?)  divided  we  fall.  Stick  to  it
and  spite  of  awful  United — You  know.”

The  second  utterance  of  “ united  ” was  quite  clear,  and  as
“ divided  we  fall  ” had  been  also  quite  clearly  pronounced,
there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  quotation  “United
we  stand,  divided  we  fall  ” was  intended.’^  The  phrase  was
never  stated  to  be  the  subject  of  a cross-correspondence,  and

' I leave  the  queries  against  the  first  three  words  only  because  they  were
inserted  in  the  original  record.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  S17

has  no  relevance  to  anything  said  at  the  sitting,  unless  it  be
to  the  second  sentence  of  the  Latin  Message,  the  concluding
words  of  which  were  dictated  for  the  first  time  in  the  course
of  this  sitting  of  Jan.  2.

“United  we  stand,  divided  we  fall”  would  be  a most
apposite  comment  on  the  second  sentence;  so  apposite,  indeed,
that  had  it  been  definitely  connected  in  the  trance  with  the
Latin  Message  I should  without  hesitation  have  considered

O

that  the  trance-personalities  had  thereby  given  proof  of  having
grasped  the  general  meaning  of  it.  Just  as  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Dec.  17,  written  a few  minutes  after  the  first  clause  of
the  first  sentence  had  for  the  first  time  been  dictated  to  the
trance-personalities,  fonns  an  appropriate  answer  to  this  clause,
so  here  the  words  spoken  in  the  waking-stage — “United  we
stand,  divided  we  fall  ” — form  an  equally  appropriate  answer
to  the  second  paragraph  of  the  Latin  Message,  the  dictation
of  which  has  been  for  the  first  time  completed  some  55  minutes
previously.  The  portion  of  the  Latin  Message  first  dictated  on
Dec.  17  refers  to  the  transmission  to  ditferent  intermediaries
of  things  which  correspond  (answer  mutually)  between  them-
selves : i.e.  to  cross-correspondences.  The  expression  “ things
which  correspond  mutually  between  themselves  ” could  be  inter-
preted so  as  to  appl}^  either  to  complex  cross-correspondences,
or — as  it  was  really  intended — to  the  simpler  forms  of  cross-
correspondence, which  consist  in  the  reproduction  through  two
or  more  automatists  of  the  same  word  or  words  or  of  the  same
idea  expressed  in  different  phraseology.  The  leading  thought
expressed  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Dec.  17,  namely,  that  of
harmony  or  of  a symphony  resulting  from  the  combination  of
single  sounds  would  correspond  to  either  interpretation  of  the
first  sentence  of  the  Message  J and  this  script  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
for  reasons  already  explained  (v.  pp.  310-11)  is  undoubtedly
in  the  style  of  Myersy.

1 That  an  answer  should  have  been  given  to  the  second  half  of  the  Latin
Message  by  Myersv  before  the  words  of  it  had  been  dictated  to  Myersp  is  not
necessarily  inconsistent  with  the  hyijothesis  that  the  knowledge  of  what  passes
at  the  Piper  sittings  manifested  by  Myersv  is  acquired  by  this  personality
from  Myersp  ; because  Myersp  may  on  Dec.  17  (or,  as  the  gist  of  the  Latin
Message  was  known  to  myself  and  others  before  that  date,  even  earlier)  have
acquired  telepathicaUy  knowledge  of  the  whole  Message.


318


J.  G.  Fiddington.


\


[part


In  the  second  sentence  of  the  Message,  the  dictation  of
which  was  for  the  first  time  completed  on  Jan.  2,  the
suggestion  is  made  that  Myersp  should  carry  out  a more  com-
plicated form  of  cross-correspondence  by  first  giving  two
apparently  disconnected  messages  to  two  different  automatists
and  then  revealing  by  means  of  a third  message  given  through
a third  automatist  a hidden  connection  between  the  first  two
messages.  Obviously  if  the  first  part  only  of  such  an  experi-
ment were  carried  out,  the  two  disconnected  messages  would
in  their  unsupported  isolation  fall  to  the  ground,  so  to  speak;
whereas  if  the  first  two  messages  were  united  by  means  of
the  third  messao-e  all  three  would  stand.

On  Jan.  14  Myersp  told  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  was  present  at
the  sitting,  that  lie  was  preparing  a long  message  for  me,  and
expressed  the  hope  that  when  he  had  finished  it  I should
believe  he  had  sent  it.

On  Jan,  15  I asked  if  Myer.sp  could  give  his  answer  to  the
Latin  Message  on  the  following  day,  and  Rector  advised  me
not  to  press  for  an  answer.

On  Jan.  16  Myersp,  through  Rector,  asked  me  not  to  be
impatient  for  his  answer.

At  Rector’s  request  I again  spelt  out  and  pronounced  the
words  javuludiim  committis,  once  at  the  beginning  and  once
at  the  close  of  the  sitting.

As  described  in  Section  III,  I had  asked  Myersp  at  this  sitting
to  mark  cross-corresponding  messages  given  to  Mrs  Verrall
and  Mrs  Holland  with  a triangle  within  a circle.  A little  later,
I impressed  on  M}mrsp  the  importance  we  attached  to  obtaining
cross-corresponding  messages,  and  expressed  the  opinion  that
it  was  “ more  important  to  get  them  than  for  you  spirits  to
give  facts  about  your  past  lives”.  To  this  Myerisp  made  a
most  intelligent  rejoinder: — -Why,  he  asked,  did  we  attach  so
much  importance  to  them  ; for,  said  he,  “ if  you  establish
telepathic  messages,  you  will  doubtless  attribute  all  such  to
thoughts  from  those  living  in  the  mortal  bod}^  ; while  as  a
matter  of  fact  we  are  the  living  intelligences  who  actively
transmit  and  receive  the  messages”.  I contented  myself  by
making  the  following,  a]')parently  unintelligent,  reply  : — “When
you  say  we  should  doubtless  attribute  these  me.ssages  to  tele-


lvil]


319


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

pathy  between  living  minds,  I don’t  agree.  It  doesn’t  look
like  telepathy  at  all.  It  looks  to  us  jinst  like  the  independent
and  intelligent  action  of  external  intelligences  ”.  This  did  not,
and  was  not  intended  to,  meet  the  criticism  ot  Myersp.
Throughout  the  whole  series  of  sittings  the  ex|:)erinienters,  Mrs
Sidgwick,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  myself,  gave  no  indication
or  hint  of  any  kind  that  what  we  wanted  was  cross-corre-
spondences of  a complex  type ; we  alwa3's  spoke  as  if  the
only  object  in  view  were  to  obtain  the  I'eproduction  through
another  automatist  of  the  same  word  or  words  as  those
chosen  either  by  ourselves  or  b\'  the  trance-personalities  for
the  purpose.

MyerSp,  re-echoing  an  opinion  just  before  expressed  by  myself,
then  continued  as  follows : “ Both  Hodgson  and  mj-’self  are
extremely  anxious  to  give  jmu  proof  of  our  real  existence ;
and  I am  more  or  less  convinced  that  neither  he  or  [.sic]  I
can  do  so  b}^  narrating  our  past  experiences  or  those  which
we  have  succeeded  to  retain  ”.

I replied : “ I think  a combination  of  the  two — I mean
narrating  past  experiences  and  sending  concordant  messages
through  dift'erent  lights — is  a telling  method  of  proof.”  Here
again  I was,  of  course,  masking  my  real  meaning  under  the
cover  of  the  indefinite  term  “ concordant  me.ssages

On  Jan.  23  I for  the  first  time  put,  at  Mrs  Verrall’s  request,
the  following  c[uestion  to  Myersp : “ Which  Ode  of  Horace
entered  deepl^^  into  your  inner  life  ? ” Immediatel}'"  after  this
had  been  done,  M^-ersp  said  : “ I should  like  to  go  over  the
first  and  second  sentences  of  our  Latin  message  ...  I believe
I can  send  you  a message  which  will  please  j’ou  if  I understand
it  clearl}"  ”.  The  juxta-position  of  these  two  subjects,  for  which
I was  in  no  way  responsible,  should  be  borne  in  mind  in
view  of  future  developments.  After  an  interval,  during  which
other  matters  were  referred  to,  I repeated  Diversis  mdlus
appareat  nexus.

After  Jan.  23  and  up  to  Feb.  6 there  was  no  fresh  reference
made  in  the  trance  to  the  Latin  Message.  On  the  morning
of  Jan.  23  Myersp  for  the  first  time  had  said  that  he  “believed

1 The  connection  between  this  question  about  an  Ode  of  Horace  and  the
Latin  Message  is  explained  on  pp.  397-407.


320


./.  G.  Piddington.


[part


he  could  send  me  a message”  (i.e.  a message  in  reply  to  my
Latin  Message).  On  the  night  of  Jan.  23  Mrs  Veri-all  wrote
a script,  and  on  Jan.  28  another  script,  clearly  a sequel  to
the  former,  the  leading  points  of  which  Myersp  reproduced  on
Feb.  11,  and,  on  repeating  them  on  Feb.  27,  said  that  they
formed  his  answer  to  the  Latin  Message.  Also,  on  Feb.  3,
Miss  Vei’rall  wrote  a script  which  connects  with  a .script  written
by  her  on  Feb.  17 ; and  both  these  scripts  correspond  with
Mrs  Verrall’s  scripts  of  Jan.  23  and  Jan.  28,  and  in  part  with
the  description  of  them  given  by  Myersp  on  Feb.  11  and  27.

On  Feb.  6 Myersp  said  that  he  would  reply  to  Mrs  Verrall’s
Greek  question  (i.e.  cu’to?  ovgavog  ukvij^wv)  and  my  Latin  Alessage
as  soon  as  he  could.

On  Feb.  11,  immediately  after  the  references  to  the  Library
quoted  in  Section  V (pp,  52-55),  came  the  following : —

(Pre.sent : J.  G.  P.  alone  at  this  point)

(Myers  communicating.)

Did  she  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  receive  the  word.

Evangelical.

J.  G.  P.  “Evangelical”?

Yes.

,T.  G.  P.  I don’t  know,  but  I will  encjuire.

I referred  also  to  Browning  again.  [For  an  explanation  of
“ again  ” v.  p.  60.]

J .(;.  P.  Do  you  remember  what  your  exact  reference  to  Browning
was  ?

Yes.  I referred  to  Plope  and  Browning.

Yes.  (assent  to  reading)

I also  said  Star.

(Miss  Newton  enters  to  announce  the  arrival  of  the  sitter,
Mr  Macalister.)

Now,  Myers,  I must  say  goodbye,  as  the  friend  is  here.

Do  I U.D.  that  I am  to  go.


J.  G.  P.


lvil]


321


Series  of  Concordant  AutomcUisras.

J.  G.  P.  Yes ; I’m  sorry,  but  we  can,  I hope,  have  a good  talk  the
time  after  next.

Mean  while  look  out  for  Hope  Star  and  Browning.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I certainly  will,

thank  you  very  much  good  morning.

M.

J.  G.  P.  Will  you  be  ready  with  your  answer  to  the  Latin  message
on  the  third!  [i.e.  ^Vednesday,  Feb.  13.]

I will  let  you  know  at  our  next  meeting  how  far  I have
L".D.  and  replied.  Yes.  (assent  to  reading)

J.  G.  P.  Thank  you.

I will  reply  in  part  if  not  wholely.

Goodmorning.  M.

Since  at  this  point  I had  absolutely  no  grounds  for  suspecting
the  existence  of  any  connection  between  “ Hope  Star  and
Browning”  and  the  Latin  Message,  it  was  a mere  accident
that  I happened  to  ask  for  an  answer  to  the  latter  immediately
after  Myersp  had  mentioned  the  former.

Thi’ee  points  should  be  noted  : —

(1)  The  past  tense  of  “replied,”  which  must  imply  that  on
February  11  iMyersp  claims  either  that  he  has  cdrectdy  replied,
or  that  by  next  time  he  will  have  replied  to  the  Latin  Message.

(2)  that  “how  far”  cpialifies  not  only  “I  have  understood”
but  also  “ replied  ” ; and  accordingly  suggests  that  the  re|»ly
may  be  wanting  in  completeness.

(3)  that  MyerSp  is  not  certain  on  Feb.  11  whether  he
can  give  a complete  reply.  If  Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.
17  constitutes,  as  I think  it  may,  one  part  of  a complex
reply  to  the  Latin  Message  given  jiartly  through  Mrs
Verrall,  partly  through  Miss  Verrall  and  partly  through  Mi’S
Piper ; and  if  one  may  assume  that  Myersp  was  aware  that
that  part  of  this  complex  answer  w^hich  was  ultimately
given  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script  had  not  yet  been  given,  and
knew  that  until  it  was  given  the  answer  would  be  incomplete;
then,  the  doubt  which  MyerSp  expressed  on  Feb  11  as

X


322  J.  G.  Piddivf/ton.  [part

to  his  ability  to  give  a complete  reply  by  Feb.  13  is  cpiite
appropriate.

On  Feb.  12  I told  Myersp  that  “ Browning,  Hope  and  Star  ”
had  appeared  in  Mrs  A^’erralFs  script : —

J.  Ct.  P.  Myers,  I want  to  tell  you  that  the  message  which  you
said  you  gave  to  Airs  A'errall  about  Browning,  Star
and  Hope  has  come  out  quite  clearly.

(Alyers  communicating)

thanks.  I never  tried  with  greater  jiatience  than  I
did  over  those  words.

I then  went  on  to  say  that  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  name,  the  name
“Myers”  and  “Library”  had,  notwithstanding  my  previous
denial  (v.  p.  55),  also  appeared  in  Mrs  A^errall’s  script.
Just  before  saying  farewell  Myersp  again  begged  me  not  to
“ hurry  or  worry  ” about  his  repl}^  to  the  Latin  Message  as
he  would  bring  it  out  clearly.

Sitting  of  Feb.  13.  On  Feb.  11,  just  before  the  mention  of
“Hope,  Browning  and  Star”,  Myersp  had  asked  whether  Mrs
Verrall  had  received  the  word  “Evangelical”.  As  I had  found
no  trace  of  this  word  in  Mrs  A^errall’s  script,  I asked  Myersp

on  Feb.  13  when  he  had  given  “Evangelical”  to  Mrs  Verrall:

“ Was  it  lately  since  you  have  talked  with  Mrs  A^errall  at
this  light?”  [i.e.  since  Jan.  30,  1907].  To  this  Myensp  replied:
“No,  I believe  not,  but  recall  it  as  one  of  my  own  words

which  I tried  to  give  her  ”.  At  a later  sitting  it  rvas  explained

that  Rector,  who  acts  as  intermediary  and  amanuensis  for  all
the  trance-personalities,  had  misheard  the  word  which  he
transmitted  erroneously  as  “ Evangelical  ” and  that  wdiat
MyerSp  had  really  wdshed  to  have  conveyed  was  “ Evelyn
Hoj)e”.  Consequently,  if  Myersp  was  unaware  of  Rector’s
error  in  transmission,  he  naturally  must  have  been  puzzled
by  my  question,  and  especially  by  my  saying  that  he  himself
had  said  that  he  had  given  “Evangelical”  to  Mrs  AVr rail,  and
under  these  cii'cumstanees  may  have  been  led  to  fancy  tliat
he  liad  really  given  the  word  at  some  anterior  period.  That
one  trance-personality  should  appear  to  be  ignorant  of  what  has
been  said  or  written  by  another  trance-personality,  and  even  that


323


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

the  personality  communicating  through  Rector  should  seem  to
be  ionorant  of  what  Rector  has  said  or  written  on  his  behalf,
is  a phenomenon  frequently  exhibited  in  the  Piper  trance ;
and,  moreover,  this  discontinuity  of  consciousness  is  not  only
explicitly  asserted  but  is  also  often  indirectly  conveyed  by  the
most  subtle  touches ; and  though,  doubtless,  it  may  sometimes
serve  as  a convenient  explanation  of  error,  I believe  it  to  be
often  a real  cleavage  and  not  one  simulated  for  dramatic  purposes.

After  answering  the  question  about  “ Evangelical  ” Myersp
went  on  as  follows:  “If  you  will  meet  me  on  third  after
coming  [i.e.  Wednesday,  Feb.  20]  I wdll  give  you  my  reply  to
your  message  Latin”.  I then  said  to  Myersp : “I  want  to  tell
you  about  “Browning,  Hope  and  Star”.  Mrs  Verrall  has  got
the  references  to  all  three  quite  precise  and  definite  ”.

1 propose  to  interrupt  at  this  point  my  account  of  the
references  made  to  the  Latin  Message  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance
in  order  to  quote  and  discuss  two  scripts  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  and
two  of  Miss  Verrall’s.  These  scripts,  which  are  given  below
in  their  chronological  order,  had  all  been  written  before  the
next  reference  to  the  Message  was  made  in  the  trance  on
Feb.  19;  and  before  that  date  I had  not  only  read  them  but
had  read  into  them  a meaning  which  aftected  the  whole
subsequent  handling  of  the  experiment.

Mrs  Vcrrall's  scrft  of  Jan.  23,  1907  (begun  at  10.50  p.m.).
Justice  holds  the  scales.

Tliat  gives  the  words  but  an  anagram  would  be  better.

Tell  him  that — rats  star  tars  and  so  on.  Try  this.

It  has  been  tried  before  RTATS  rearrange  these
five  letters  or  again  tears

stare

seam

same

and  so  on

Skeat  takes  Kate’s  Keats  stake  steak.

But  the  letters  you  should  give  tonight
are  not  so  many — only  three

a s t


324.


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Mrs  Verrall’s  scri'pt  of  Jan.  28,  1907.
Aster  [star]

Te|oa5  [a  sign  or  \voncler]

The  world’s  wonder

And  all  a wonder  and  a wild  desire —

The  very  wings  of  her.


Then  there  is  Blake

And  mocked  my  loss  of  liberty.

But  it  is  all  the  same  thing — the  winged  desire

epojs  TToQ(.iv6<i  [passion]  the  hope  that  leaves

the  earth  for  the  sky — Abt  Vogler  for  earth

too  hard  that  found  itself  or  lost  itself — in  the  sky.

That  is  what  I want

On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds


A WINGED  DESIRE


vTTo-Tepos  epios  [winged  love]


threads


In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc
The  C major  of  this  life
But  your  recollection  is  at  fault


A D B is  the  part  that  unseen  completes
the  arc.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


325


Part  of  Miss  Verr all’s  script  of  Feh.  3,  1907.

the  crescent  moon


remember  that


and  the  star


like  a thunder  riven  oak  the  grim  remains
stand  on  the  level  desolation  of  the  plains
a record  for  all  ages  of  the  span
which  nature  gives  to  the  weak  labour  of  a man


Miss  Ycrrcdl’s  script  of  Feb.  17,  1907.
androsace  (?)  Carthusian  candelabrum


man}’  together


that  was  the  sign  she  will


understand  when  she  sees  it

diapason  Sta  -ao-wv  pv6[xo‘i  [rhythm  through  all]

no  arts  avail

the  heavenly  harmony  ws  eqfu;  oTrAarwv  [sic]

[as  Plato  says]

the  mystic  three  (?)


X,


326


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


and  a star  above  it  all

rats  everywhere  in  Hamelin  town

now  do  you  understand  Henry

These  four  scrijits  have  been  already  discussed  in  Section  VI,
and  with  that  section  I shall  assume  that  the  reader  is
familiar.

In  Mrs  Verrall’s  two  scripts  I naturally  saw  no  meaning
when  I first  read  them.  After  the  sitting  of  Feb.  11,  however,
in  the  course  of  which  Myersp  stated  that  he  had  referred  to
“Hope  and  Browning”  through  Mrs  Yerrall  and  had  also  said
“Star”,  I took  these  two  scripts,  for  reasons  already  explained
(p|>.  63-4),  to  represent  “Hope,  Star  and  Browning”.  I then
read  Browning’s  Abt  Vogler,  with  which  I had  had  no  previous
accpiaintance,  and  was  immediately  struck  by  the  extraordinarily
apt  answer  to  the  second  sentence  of  the  Latin  Message  which
could  be  extracted  from  one  of  the  only  two  [)assages  in  the
poem  in  which  the  word  “ star  ” occurs.

This  passage  runs  ; —

But  here  is  the  finger  of  God,  a flash  of  the
will  that  can.

Existent  behind  all  laws,  that  made  them
and,  lo,  they  are  !

And  I know  not  if,  save  in  this,  such  gift  be
allowed  to  man.

That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a
fourth  sound,  but  a star.

Consider  it  well : each  tone  of  our  scale  in
itself  is  nought ;

It  is  everywhere  in  the  world — loud,  soft,
and  all  is  said :

Give  it  to  me  to  use  ! I mix  it  with  two  in
my  thought :

And  there  I Ye  have  heard  and  seen:
consider  and  bow  the  head  !

Were  one  to  search  English  literature  for  a quotation  per-
tinent to  the  experiment  suggested  in  the  Latin  Message  it
would  be  difficult  to  find  one  more  felicitous  than  these  lines
from  stanza  VII  of  Aht  Vogler.


LVII.]


^•1  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


327


These  particular  lines,  it  is  true,  were  not  quoted  in  Mrs
Verrall’s  script;  but  the  emphasis  thrown  by  both  her  scripts
on  “Star”;  the  predominance  of  quotations  from  Abt  Vogler
in  the  second  script,  the  opening  words  of  which — “ aster
Tepa?  ’ — also  seemed  applicable  to  the  star  in  Abt  Vogler
which  was  both  a sign  and  a wonder;  and  the  reference  to
“ the  broken  sounds  ” ^ seemed  to  me  to  suggest  that  the  scribe
was  alluding  specially  to  the  seventh  stanza  of  this  poem.

I have  since  found  further  reasons  which  support  my  view
that  the  script  of  Jan.  28  was  alluding  specially  to  Stanza  VII
of  Abt  Vogler.  Thus  : Tepag,  which  is  explained  by  Liddell
andj  Scott  as  “ any  appeai’ance  or  event,  in  which  men  believed
thev  could  see  the  huger  of  God  ” suggests  “ But  here  is  the
hnger  of  God  And  the  word  “ scales  ” in  the  phrase  Justice
holds  the  scales  (which  heads  the  script)  may  he  compared
with  “each  tone  of  our  scale”.  On  May  7 (v.  pp.  388-391)
M}’ersp  persisted  in  S}iite  of  several  failures  until  he  hnally
succeeded  in  giving  the  word  “scale”  to  complete  the  quota-
tion “ in  my  passion  to  sccde  the  sky  To  play  in  this
way  on  three  different  meanings  of  the  word  “ scale  ” would  be
quite  in  keeping  with  the  style  of  the  whole  incident  in  which
anagrams  play  so  prominent  a part.

^loreover,  the  Sid  Truuuv  pvOfj.6^  of  Miss  Veriall’s  script  of
Feb.  17,  which  is  closely  connected  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  script
of  Jan.  28,  recalls  the  “ each  tone  of  our  scale  in  itself  is  nought ;
It  is  everytvhere  in  the  world”  of  Stanza VII.  And  “the  mystic
three  ”,  which  follows  the  phrase  “ the  heavenly  harmony  ” in
^liss  Verrall’s  script,  recalls  the  “three  sounds”  of  the  same
stanza.

Myersp  had  apparently  by  using  the  phrase  “ Hope  Star  and
Browning”  shown  knowledge  of  the  script  of  Jan.  28;  but
that  fact  in  itself  could  be  no  more  than  a suggestive  one,
unless  he  should  subsequently  connect  “ Hope,  Star  and

^The  word  “sounds'’  occurs  only  twice  in  Abt  Vogler,  first  in  the  sixth  and
then  in  the  seventh  stanza.  The  phrase  in  the  script  “the  broken  sounds” —
which  does  not  exist  in  the  poem  but  is  clearly  reminiscent  of  “the  broken
arcs  ” of  stanza  IX — suggests  the  three  ideal  sounds  of  Stanza  VII,  each  of
which  “in  itself  is  nought”  and  which  have  to  be  combined  before  they
become  significant,  rather  than  the  “sounds”  of  Stanza  VI  which  were  the
sounds  made  by  Abt  Vogler's  organ.


328


./.  G.  Piddivgton.


[PAKT


Browning”  with  the  Latin  Message.  Moreover,  it  might  be
ai'gued  that  the  greater  part  of  the  script  of  Jan  28  should
be  ascribed  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  having  subliminally  concocted  an
answer  to  the  Latin  Message.

Oi)  the  other  hand  it  is  impossible  to  regard  the  appearance
of  the  triangle  within  a circle  as  due  to  mere  subliminal
invention;  for  that  part  of  the  script  at  least  must  have  been
due  to  supernormally  acquired  knowledge  of  the  circle  and
triangle  exi)eriment  arranged  at  the  sitting  of  Jan.  16
(v.  p.  36).  Again,  the  use  of  the  letters  A,  B,  C in  the
drawing  of  the  circle  and  triangle  seemed  to  form  a link
with  the  Latin  Message.  In  the  original  draft  in  English  the
letters  A,  B and  C had  been  used  to  represent  the  three
automatists  who  were  to  coopei'ate  in  the  complex  experiment.
Mrs  Verrall,  as  I have  said,  had  seen  the  original  draft  and
consequently  knew  of  this  use  of  the  letters  A,  B and  C.  But
nevertheless,  and  in  spite  also  of  its  being  a very  natural  thing
to  use  the  letters  A,  B,  C in  a geometrical  illustration  of  this  sort,
the  I'act  remains  that  she  did  introduce  them  into  a script  wliich
she  did  not  connect  in  any  way  with  the  Latin  Message.^
Besides,  the  connection  between  the  circle  and  triangle  and  the
preceding  part  of  the  script  is  so  close  that  it  would  be
difficult  to  regard  what  precedes  the  geometrical  figure  as  mere
subliminal  romancing  uninfluenced  by  any  other  mind  than
the  automatists  own,  while  regarding  (as  1 think  we  must)  the
geometrical  drawing  as  the  result  of  some  supernormal  influence.

No  doubt  the  reasons  which  I had  at  the  time  for  inter-
preting Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28  as  an  answer  to  the
Latin  Message  were  slender,  but  they  were  even  more  slender
than  they  need  have  been  because  at  this  time  I had  not
realised  the  connection  between  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Dec.  17,
1906, — witli  its  line  ;

“ and  the  throbbing  Soul

Saw  through  the  sound  the  burning  of  the  flame  ” :

1 Under  the  date  of  Feb.  12,  19U7  Mrs  Verrall  wrote  in  her  diary  as
follows; — “A  card  from  J.  G.  P.  this  morning  says  that  ....  there  is  a

splendid  success  in  my  script  of  Jan.  28 What  was  good

on  Jan.  28,  I have  no  idea.  The  script  was  full  of  Browning — and  wings —
and  oddly  capjsed  a wrong  quotation  from  Abt  Vogler  by  an  explanatory
drawing,  which  showed  that  the  idea  was  there  but  not  the  words.’’


329


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

so  strongly  suggestive  of  the  star  that  is  framed  out  of
sounds — and  Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  17 ; nor  had  I then
realised,  nor  did  I till  April  1908  realise,  that  there  existed
between  Mrs  Verrall’s  scri[)t  of  Dec.  17  and  her  script  of
Jan.  28  another  subtle  link.

As  already  mentioned  (v.  p.  310),  the  script  of  Dec.  17  con-
tains several  reminiscences  of  Myers’s  verse-translation  of  two
Greek  Oracles  (Essays.  Class,  pp.  97-100).  In  the  first  of
these  occur  the  lines :

“Throned  on  the  whirling  sphere,  the  astral  fire.

Hid  in  whose  heart  thy  whole  creation  lies, —

The  whole  tvorld’s  ivonder  mirrored  in  thine  eyes, —

In  the  script  of  Jan.  28  the  words : “ the  workl’s  luonder  ” :
immediately  precede  and  lead  up  to  a quotation  from  The
Ring  and.,  the  Book —

“ And  all  a wonder  and  a wild  desire  ” —

as  if  for  the  purpose  of  hitching  on  the  script  of  Jan.  28  to  that
of  Dec.  17.

The  coincidences  between  Mrs  Verrall’s  two  scripts  and  Mi.ss
Verrall’s  two  scripts  of  Feb.  3 and  Feb.  17  have  been  already
discussed  in  detail,  so  1 need  not  reiterate  them  here.  In  view  of
the  fact  that  before  Feb.  17  Mrs  Verrall  knew  the  interpretation
which  I had  put  upon  her  script  of  Jan.  28,  and  in  view  also  of
some  very  general  information  given  to  Miss  Verrall  on  Feb.  15
about  the  script  of  Jan.  28,^  two  of  these  coincidences,  viz.
the  references  in  Miss  Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  17  to  the  “Star”
and  to  Browning — might  easily  be  attributed  to  thought-
transference  between  Mi.ss  Verrall  and  her  mother.  But  Miss
Verrall’s  script  contains  also  coincidences  with  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Dec.  17,  to  which  Mrs  Verrall  attached  no  significance
and  of  which  Miss  Verrall  knew  nothing.  The  latter  script  is
reminiscent  not  only  of  Myers’s  translation  of  two  Greek
ox’acles  but  also  of  Dry  den’s  Hymn  for  St.  Cecilia’s  Day.  Now
the  “ heavenly  harmony  ” of  Miss  Verrall’s  script  is  an  actual
quotation  from  that  poem  of  Dryden’s ; and  the  script  of
Dec.  17  contains  the  word  “harmony”  twice,  and,  though  it

'For  full  particulars  v.  p.  67.


330


./.  G.  Ficldington.


[PAKT


does  not  contain  the  word  “ heavenly  ”,  the  harmony  which
is  the  subject  of  it  is  clearly  a “heavenly  harmony”.  Common
to  both  scripts  also  are  the  words  “ diapason  ” (which  likewise
occurs  in  Dryden’s  poem)  and  “Mystic”;  and  neither  word
occurs  elsewhere  in  either  script  dining  the  period  under
review.

Before,  then,  the  next  reference  to  the  Latin  Message  was
made  in  the  trance,  on  February  19,  I had  become  impressed,  I
may  even  say,  obsessed,  with  the  idea  that  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Jan.  28^ — which  had  on  Feb.  11  been  described  in  the
trance  by  Myersp  as  “ FLope,  Star  and  Browniug” — was  an
attempt  by  Mjmrsy  to  give  by  means  of  indirect  allusions  to
Stanza  VII  of  Aht  Voghr  an  intelligent  answer  to  the  Latin
Message ; and  I was  naturally  anxious  to  see  whether  Myersp
would  say  anything  in  support  of  this  interpretation.

On  Feb.  19  Hodgsoiip  asked  me  to  repeat  some  of  the  Latin
to  him  and  also  to  his  “ old  friend  George  ”,  i.e.  Geoi'ge  Pelham,
who  henceforth  cooperates  with  Hodgsonp  and  Myersp  in  their
effort  to  understand  and  reply  to  the  Message.  I repeated
Diversis — committis;  and  afterwards  Hodgsoiip  asked  for  “the
next  to  the  last  word  ” i.e.  jamducliim  to  be  repeated.  I told
him  that  the  first  syllable  is  “spelt  like  the  English  word
‘jam’ — preserves”,  and  he  replied:  “Oh  yes,  I understand.
Marmalade.  . . . That  has  been  the  most  difficult  word  for
him  [i.e.  Myersp]  to  understand  ”.  I then  repeated  id  nec  fallit
— 'prohamus.

On  Feb.  20  the  first  attempt  to  reidy  was  made,  as  Myersp
had  promised  on  Feb.  13.

(Present:  E.  M.  S.  and  J.  G.  P. )

(Myers  communicating.)

The  idea  1 got  was  that  I should  be  a Messenger  and  pass
on  to  you  the  same  intelligent  U.D.  now  in  my

present  life It  is  wdth  reference  to  my — [illegible

word,  perhaps  “ interest  ”]  my  being  a messenger

and  my  handing  through  to  you  on  your  side  coherent
and  — — [two  illegible  words  i]  messages


^Undecipherable  words  are  rare  in  the  script;  but  an  unusual  proportion
unfortunately  occurred  in  the  more  important  references  to  the  Latin  Message.


LVII.]


^■1  Series  of  Concordant  Aidomatisms.


331


J.  C4.  P.  “Coherent  and”  something?

as  I am  the  Messenger.

I will  go  over  my  utterances  again

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

and  repeat  them  here  to  you.  ...  I wish  I might  go  over
the  whole  subject  with  you  again.  ...  I do  not  leave
simply  because  I

Is  the  light  not  clear  or  the  machine  working  well  ?

J.  G.  P.  The  machine  is  all  right ; but  the  light  is  perhaps  not  good ;

so  perhaps  you  had  better  defer  your  answer  to  the
Latin  Message  until  the  third  after  coming  [i.e.  "Wednes-
day, Feb.  27.]  ...  .

But  it  would  ...  be  wiser  not  to  refer  to  C.C.  [i.e.  cross-
corresponding]  messages  the  time  before  . . . Because
v,-e  get  these  on  our  minds  and  cant  easily  avoid  making
references  to  them.

Soon  after  this  I advised  that  the  sitting  should  be  brought
to  a close  earlier  than  usual,  as  Mrs  Piper,  who  had  been
suflering  from  indigestion  and  sleeplessness,  was  not  well.

In  this  first  attempt  to  reply  there  are  only  three  points
needing  comment:  (1)  Myersp  seems  to  have  applied  ihe>  inter -
nuntiis  (dative  plural  of  internuntiiis,  a mediator,  messenger
or  go-between)  of  the  Latin  Message,  which  there  is  used  to
mean  mediums  or  automatists,  to  himself;

(2)  “Coherent”  may  possibly  represent  invicem  inter  se
respondentia : but  the  word  is  so  often  used  in  English  to
mean  “ intelligible  ” without  any  strict  notion  of  interrelation
that  no  stress  can  be  laid  ou  its  use  by  Myersp.

(3)  “ Handing  through  ” would  accurately  enough  translate
committis.

On  Feb.  25  Rector  said  that  next  time  he  would  bring  George
Pelham  with  Myers  in  order  to  hear  the  Latin  repeated;  and
asked  me  to  repeat  for  Myers  “ the  words  after  quod  in  first
sentence”  (i.e.  invicem):  which  I proceeded  to  do.  Later,  at
the  request  of  Hodgsoup,  I repeated  inter  se — consilium  id.

On  Feb.  26  I first  asked  Hodgson p to  tell  Mjmrs  that  Mrs
Verrall  had  drawn  a triangle  within  a circle;  and  then,  in


332


[part


J.  G.  Picldington.

accordance  with  the  arrangement  made  on  Feb.  25,  I repeated
Diversis — prohamus.  Quod  was  greeted  with  the  remark,

“Yes.  I know  what?”,  and  jamdudmn  with  “I  understand
that”.  Diversis — prohamtis  was  towards  the  close  of  the  sitting
again  repeated.

On  Feb.  27  Myersp  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  sitting  made
his  second  attempt  to  reply : —

(Present:  J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Myers  communicating)

Goodmorning  my  good  fellow  ....  I am  M3'ers.  we
were  to  meet  and  repl}'  to  each  other  this  day  1

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  . . .

I felt  a little  perturbed  over  your  message  to  me  when  you
said  I — [illegible  word.  From  subsequent  versions  of
the  reply  it  is  clear  that  the  word  “ failed  ”,  or  an
equivalent  word,  was  intended]  in  replying  sufficiently
to  convince  you  etc.  although  I as  intermediary  had  long
since  united  my  ideas  etc.

J.  G.  P.  Is  the  word  after  “ replying  ” “ sufficiently  ” ?

not  or  so  as  to  convince  you  etc.

.J.  G.  P.  What  comes  after  “ etc  ” 1

I as  intermediary  had  long  since  united  ideas  etc.

J.  G.  P.  “I  as  intermediary”  is  it?

Yes  or  Messenger.

J.  G.  P.  “had  by”  what?  (misreading  “long”  as  “by”)
assimilated

.J.  G.  P.  I am  sorry.  I can’t  read.

united  or  assimilated  ....

Now  I believe  that  since  j'ou  sent  this  message  to  me  I
have  sufficiently  replied  to  your  various  questions  to  con-
vince the  ordinary  scientific  mind  that  I am  at  least  a
fragment  of  the  once  incarnate  individual  whom  jmu  called
Myers.  Is  it  not  so  ?


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  A utomatisms.  333

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  Myers.  (Spoken  in  a tone  not  implying  assent  to  the
question,  but  merely  a non-committal  encouragement  to
the  communicator  to  go  on  with  his  remarks.)

Do  you  U.D.  from  my  first  utterances  that  I at  all  U.D.
your  messages  1

J.  G.  P.  I believe  I understand  perfectly ; but  I have  to  play  the
part  of  a stupid  person  who  has  to  have  everything  ex-
plained to  him.

Oh  I see  your  point.  Well  as  far  as  I could  U.D.  and  I
may  have  to  think  it  over  again.  What  you  said  [‘  was
this  ’ must  be  supplied]

Although  you  as  intermediary  have  long  since  united  mutu-
ally ideas.  You  have  or  do  not  reply  or  respond
sufficiently  to  our  questions  as  to  convince  us  of  your
existence  etc.  Is  it  not  U.D.?  . . .

J.  G.  P.  “ united  mutual  ideas  ” 1

mutually  our  ideas.  . . .

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  “ mutually  ”.  Is  it  “ our  ideas  ” ?

ideas  is  correct.

J.  G.  P.  Not  “ our  ” 1

(Hand  makes  a gesture  which  clearly  meant  “ No,  not
‘our’.”)

You  must  take  into  consideration  the  second  intermediary.
Rector.  Viz  Rector.^

J.  G.  P.  I want  to  go  on  reading  over.  “You  have  or  do  not  reply” —

So  as  to  convince  us  . . Is  it  not  U.D.

1 The  words  “viz  Rector”  were  certainly  inserted  in  order  to  avoid  a risk
of  confusion.  As  a general  rule  to  remarks  made  by  Rector  on  his  own
initiative  “R”  or  “Rector”  is  appended;  and  this  plan  was  adopted  so  that
Rector’s  remarks  might  not  get  confused  with  those  of  the  communicating
spirit.  In  this  case,  had  the  explanation  “viz  Rector”  not  been  added,  it
would  hav^e  remained  doubtful  whether  the  words  “you  must  take  into  con-
sideration the  second  intermediary  ” were  to  be  attributed  to  Myersp  or  to
Rector.  Its  addition  makes  it  clear  that  the  speaker  of  the  words  was  Myersp,
and  that  by  “the  second  intermediary”  Rector  was  meant.


334


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


J.  G.  P.  I see.  Will  you  wait  a moment  1 (After  a pause)  You  say
you  have  replied.  I’m  quite  prepared  to  believe  it ;
but  tell  me  in  what  messages  your  reply  is  given.

In  my  messages  reported  here  and  through  Mrs  Verrall.

•J.  G.  P.  That  agrees  with  what  I thought.  But  give,  not  necessarily
all  the  message  or  messages,  but  some  ijiiportant  point  from
them.

One  was.  when  I referred  to  the  poems  the  others  1st  to
the  Halceon  days  and  evangelic  etc  etc  ....

J.  G.  P.  (reading  over)  “ The  others  first  to  the  Halceon  days  ” —
Evangical  [no  trace  of  ‘ el  ’]

J.  G.  P.  And  “ Evangelical  ”.
etc  etc.  I said.

J.  G.  P.  “Evangelical”  is  right  1

It  is  it  helps  to  combine  the  ideas.

.J.  G.  P.  And  “ Halcyon  days  ” comes  in  also  1
Yes.

J.  G.  P.  Anything  else  ?

Let  me  remind  you  of  my  reference  to  the  shrub.

J.  G.  P.  “ Shrub  ” ?

Yes  and  this  all  helps  to  combine  the  ideas  as  conjointly
given  through  Mrs  Verrall  . . . and  this  light.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  Myers,  I understand  you ; but  I don’t  understand  the
reference  to  a shrub.

syringa  syr

J.  G.  P.  “Syringa”.  Oh!  yes.  I want  you  to  go  on  recalling  any
other  relevant  messages.

One  I recall,  clearly  and  that  one  was  with  reference  to
the  Poems  and  cross  corresponding  messages

J.  G.  P.  Yesl

as  given  by  myself  through  Mrs  Verrall


lyil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


335


J.  G.  P.  Tell  me — remember  I have  to  plaj"  the  part  of  the  stupid
person — tell  me  what  poems.

B

my  own

B rowning

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  Well  1

I wish  to  get  this  clear.

J.  G.  P.  Y"es,  take  as  much  time  as  you  like.

Horace.

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ?

got  my  last  utterance  1 if  so  repeat  it.

J.  G.  P.  The  last  things  written  are  “ B mj^  own  Browning.  I wish
this  clear.  Horace.”

Yes  chiefly  Browning.

J.  G.  P.  (interrupting,  thinking  that  the  sentence  was  completed)
Y"^es.  Well,  tell  me  more.

s lines  (Hand  points  first  to  “s”  and  then  to  “Browning”)

J.  G.  P.  “ Browning’s  lines  ”.

yes.

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ?

as  given  through  Mrs  Verrall  and  another  which  I referred
to  before.  I think  I will  not  give  that  to  day.

J.  G.  P.  Y^es ; thank  you  very  much.  I think  you  are  making  it
clear ; but  I want  you  to  make  it  completely  clear.

I wish  this  more  than  you  do

J.  G.  P.  I think  if  you  can  get  through  a clear  and  complete  answer
to  my  Latin  Message  you  will  have  forged  a new  and
strong  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  for  survival  of
bodily  death

I U.D.  that  you  asked  me  to  reply  referring  to  ni}^
utterances  through  Mrs  Verrall


336


J.  G.  Piddington.  [pakt

J.  G.  P.  Now  I think  you’ve  done  enough  for  to-day  in  the
matter  of  replying  to  the  Latin  Message.  But  I want
you  to  make  your  reply  so  clear  and  precise  that  the
sceptic  will  not  be  able  to  say  the  coincidence  which
undoul)tedly  exists  between  the  Latin  Message  and  your
reply  to  it  is  due  to  chance.

MyeiSp  then  said  he  would  like  to  go  over  the  last  sentence
of  the  Latin  again  while  George  Pelham  is  present  to  help  ;
and  that  he  wished  to  continue  his  reply  on  the  following
Wednesday,  March  6.  I then  repeated  Unum  — explicetur
twice.

I now  quote  the  record  again : —

J.  G.  P.  I want  to  say  that  you  have,  I believe,  given  an  answer
worthy  of  your  intelligence — not  today,  I mean,  but
some  time  back — but  the  interpretation  must  not  be
mine.  You  must  explain  your  answer  at  this  light.

Yes.

J.  G.  P.  You  could  do  it  in  two  words. ^

Yes.  I U.D.

J.  G.  P.  AYell  ?

Hope  Star
J.  G.  P.  Well  1 Y"es  ?

^Did  I by  using  the  exijression  “in  two  words”  give  a clue?  If  so,  I did  it
quite  unwittingly.  I used  “in  two  words”  not  strictly  but  in  the  conventional
sense  of  “in  a few  words”.  I never  did,  and  never  should  have  thought  of
“Browning,  Hope  and  Star”  as  two  words  but  as  three.  Myersp  had  already
before  this  said  that  his  reply  had  been  given  in  part  through  Mrs  Verrall ;
and  to  this  I was  alluding  when  I said  ; “ you  have  given  an  answer  ....
some  time  back — but  . . . you  must  explain  your  answer  at  this  light  ”.  Even
if  we  suppose  that  Myersp  could  guess  from  this  remark  that  the  answer  was
contained  in  one  of  the  successful  cross-correspondences  between  Mrs  Piper
and  Mrs  Verrall,  why  should  he  have  pitched  on  a cross-correspondence  con-
sisting of  three  words  when  by  this  time  the  trance-personalities  had  been
informed  of  the  success  of  another  cross-correspondence  which,  unlike  “Browning
Hope  and  Star”,  could  be  naturally  summed  up  in  two  words,  namely,  “triangle
circle  ” ?

When  I said  the  answer  could  be  given  “in  two  words”,  i.e.  in  a few  words,
I had  in  my  mind  some  such  answer  as  this;  “The  poem  I gave  to  Mrs
Verrall  contains  a verse  applicable  to  the  Latin  Message”.


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  337

Browning.

J.  G.  P.  Exactly.  It  couldn’t  be  better.

That  is  my  answer.

J.  G.  P.  Now,  Myers,  I can’t  thank  you  enough.  That  is  what  I
have  been  waiting  for.

Well  what  I wished  was  to  translate  the  whole  message
for  you  into  English.  But  from  (?)  your  kindness  in
replying  to  my  request  in  repeating  the  whole  of  the
last  sentence  so  that  each  word  reached  my  U.D.
[understanding]  clearly  and  concisely  I am  able  with
Pelhams  help  to  reply  today

J.  G.  P.  Translate  into  English  certainly,  if  you  like.  But  now  I
want  to  say  two  things,  and  then  we  ought  to  stop.
First,  I want  to  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  the  trouble
you’ve  taken.

let  me  in  return  thanks  [sic]  to  you  for  your  kindness  and
Patience  in  Repeating  again  and  again  to  good  old
Rector  who  does  not  U.D.  a word  of  Latin.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  ...  In  telling  me  that  “ Browning,  Hope  and  a
Star  ” contains  your  answer  to  the  Latin  Message  you
have  given  an  answer  which  to  me  is  both  intelligible
and  clear;  but  still  I should  like  you  to  bring  out  one
more  point  still,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  in  anyone’s
mind  of  your  meaning.

My  STAR.

EV

E

J.  G.  P.  “ E-v-e  ” ?

E V L

J.  G.  P.  “E-Y-L”?

E V E L

y

J.  G.  P.  “y  ” or  “G”?

Y


838


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


I am  too  [weak]  to  tell  it  today.

My  thoug'hts  wander goodbye

God  be  with  you  . . . listen  ...

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I gave  Mrs  Verrall  Laurel  wreath.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  quite  right ; she  got  it.

(For  the  sequel  v.  p.  96.)

On  March  4 Myer.Sp,  who  spontaneously  introduced  the
subject,  alluded  to  Mrs  YeiTall’s  question  about  an  Ode  of
Horace  as  follows  : —

(Present  : J.  G.  P.  and  Miss  Newton)

(Myers  communicating)

I tried  my  good  fellow  to  make  my  thoughts  clear  to  you
about  my  difficulty  in  replying  to  Mrs  V’s  question  about
Horace  did  you  U.D.

J.  G.  P.  (who  has  misread  “I  tried”  as  “I  told”)  No.  What  “good
fellow  ” do  you  mean  1 Hodgson  1

No  I am  talking  to  you
I told  P.  [i.e.  Rector]  to  say  for  me

J.  G.  P.  (interrupting)  No ; I did  not  understand.

that  I could  not  reply  for  some  time  about  Horace.

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ; all  right.

did  he  [i.e.  Rector]  refer  to  it  at  all  ?

J.  G.  P.  Not  so  far  as  I remember.  Horace  was  said  to  be  con-
nected with  your  answer  to  the  Latin  Message.

that  is  not  so.  it  came  to  my  mind  while  speaking  that

I had  not  replied  to  it but  in  my  desire  to

reply  to  your  message  doubtless  there  was  some  confusion.

J.  G.  P.  I quite  understand  now.

this  may  make  it  clear.

J.  G.  P.  I quite  understand  the  confusion  about  Horace  [i.e.  “ your
explanation  of  the  confusion  ”.]


lyil]


339


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

The  connection  of  Horace  with  the  reply  to  the  Latin  Message
made  on  Feb.  27  is  here  clearly  and  spontaneously  stated  to
have  been  made  in  error.  It  will  appear  later  how  extremely
significant  was  this  mixing  up  of  Horace  wdth  the  reply  to
the  Latin  Message.

On  March  6 Myersp  said  that  he  had  tried  to  give  a triangle
within  a circle  to  Mrs  Verrall;  Hodgsonp  having  apparently
forgotten  to  inform  him,  as  on  Feb.  26  I had  requested  him
to  do,  of  its  appearance  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.  I thereupon
asked  Myersp  if  he  could  remember  when  he  tried  to  give
the  circle  and  triaogle  to  Mrs  Verrall  or  what  other  words,
if  any,  he  had  made  Mrs  Verrall  write  at  the  same  time.
No  immediate  reply  was  made  to  this  question,  and  MyerSp
went  on  to  mention  other  things  with  which  he  had  tried
to  impress  Mrs  Verrall,  and  among  them  “Del  Sarto”.  I
then  asked  Rector  to  tell  Myersp  that  he  had  been  successful
in  making  Mrs  A^errall  draw  a triangle  within  a circle.  From
this  point  I quote  the  record  : —

(Present : J.  G.  P.  alone)

(Rector  communicating)

he  [i.e.  Myers]  will  be  very  glad  to  U.D.  that  the  triangle
came  through  as  he  did  see  the  circle  but  could  not  be
sure  absolutely  of  the  whole  triangle.

...  he  also  wrote  something  about  Bird.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  quite.  [This  merely  meant  that  I understood  what
was  written.]

did  you  U.D.  it.  as  it  came  outl  He  wishes  to  know.

J.  G.  P.  He  has  written  about  a bird,  and  I think  I understand ;
but  I want  him  to  explain.

Oh  yes.  He  says  he  did  say  Bird  and  Paradise  . . and
something  else  I dont  quite  U.D.  ATait  until  he  rests
and  I will  get  it  clearer'

J.  G.  P.  I am  in  no  hurry.

(George  Pelham  communicating)

Good  morning  are  you  the  gentleman  whom  Hodgson  calls
Piddington  ?


340


./.  G.  Piddingion.


[part


J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I am  Pelham.

J.  G.  P.  I’m  very  glad  to  see  you.

did  you  get  what  you  wanted  ^

J.  G.  P.  What  about  1
that  message.

J.  G.  P.  The  Latin  1
yes  quite.

J.  G.  P.  I think  the  answer  is  clear,  but  I want —

Did  he  [i.e.  Myers]  tell  you  about  My  Star.

J.  G.  P.  He  did.  Can  you  explain  about  “My  Star’”?

Yes  it  was  a poem  he  had  on  his  mind  of  Brownings.

J.  G.  P.  And  why  had  he  this  poem  on  his  mind '?

he  said  Because  it  was  one  of  his  test  experiments  with  a
lady  in  the  body  to  whom  he  refers  as  V.

J.  G.  P.  I understand.  Thank  you.

and  he  also  had  another
Evelyn

E V E L Y N Hope.

J.  G.  P.  Is  that  the  explanation  of  the  word  which  came  out  here —
Yes

J.  G.  P.  as  “Evangelical”?

Y^s

J.  G.  P.  I begin  to  see.  Thank  you.

it  was  very  stupid  of  Rector  I must  say  as  Hodgson  and
Myers  both  kept  Repeating  it  over  and  over  again  to  him.
I U.D.  your  latin  message  very  well


J.  G.  P.  Well,  will  you  show  me  that  you  understand  it  ?


lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


341


Yes  certainly  you  said  in  order  to  convince  you  he  should
repeat  a message  not  only  through  this  lady  Mrs  V but
it  should  be  reproduced  here

the  message  began  like  this.

although  you  have  for  some  time  been  uniting  different
ideas

J.  G.  P.  What  is  the  word  after  ‘ for  some  time  been  ’ ?

Uniting  or  assimilating  ideas.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.  Will  you  go  on!

. . . you  fail  to  convince  the  world  or  me  of  your  individual
or  independent
(Hand  hesitates)

J.  G.  P.  “existence,”  you  mean?

(Hand  assents)

J.  G.  P.  Well,  please  go  on.

Now  if  you  can  give  a clear  message  through  Mrs  V.  and
reproduce  it  here  it  will  do  more  to  convince  or  it
will  . . . greatly  help  to  convince  the  world  of  your
continued  existence,  this  was  the  idea  as  I received  it.
you  must  give  [i.e.  make]  allowances  on  (hand  hesitates)
for  its  being  made  comprehensible  liere  ...  to  you.

J.  G.  P.  That  answer  is  nearly  right ; but  I did  not  say  that  Myers
had  failed  to  convince  me  or  the  world  of  his  continued
existence.

No  not  exactly  that,  but  the  idea  was  that  if  he  trans-
lated the  message  it  would  convince.

J.  G.  P.  It  was  certainly  in  my  mind  that  if  he  could  do  something
suggested  in  my  message  that  it  would  add  support  to
the  evidence  of  survival  of  bodily  death.

Yes  I U.D.  perfectly And  the  answer  was  that

he  had  given  a message.  Viz  Browning  Star  hope,

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

and  reproduced  it  here  ....  Now  if  this  answer  does
not  establish  to  your  mind  a proof  that  I U.D.  your
message  give  me  Straightforth  your  reason.  . . .


342


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


J.  G.  P.  You  have  very  nearly  answered  it  correctly.  You  show,  that
is,  a general  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  the  Message ;
but  one  special  point  you  have  not  brought  out

isnt  it  in  reference  to  a special  utterance.

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ? What  is  in  reference  ?

the  point  I fail  to  bring,  [out]  . . .

J.  G.  P.  Well,  will  you  go  on  1

Of  course.  It  referse  [sic]  to  a special  point  which  I had
failed  to  bring  out  here  and  which  had  been  given  there,
[i.e.  through  Mrs  VerralL]  ....

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  Mr  Pelham,  let  me  tell  you  what  I thiidc.  I do  believe
that  Myers  has  answered  the  message  clearly  ^ and
intelligently  through  the  other  light ; but  he  has  not
shown  through  this  light  that  he  has  done  so.

let  me  see  if  I get  jmur  point  clearly.  You  mean  you  wish
him  to  reply  to  one  point  here  as  clearly  as  he  did  at
the  other  light.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

was  the  same  message  given  to  her  1 do  I U.D.  and  he

O O

replied  to  it  there  as  he  did  not  here  is  that  what  I
am  to  U.D.

J.  G.  P.  Not  quite.  Let  me  explain  again.  Myers,  so  I think,  gave
an  answer  to  the  Latin  Message  to  the  lady — to  the
other  light —

Mrs  V.

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  to  Mrs  Verrall.  The  answer  he  gave  to  Mrs  Verrall
was  clever,  ingenious  and  characteristic ; but  though
Myers  has  referred  to  that  here,  he  has  not  made  it
clear  here  why  this  answer  which  he  gave  to  Mrs
Verrall  was  so  appropriate.

Oh  I now  U.D.  . . .

should  not  have  said  “clearly”;  “allusively”  would  have  expressed  my

real  meaning.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  343

George  Pelham  then  said  he  would  explain  the  position  to
Myers,  and  asked  me  to  “ repeat  once  again  the  lines  in  Latin  ”
which  referred  to  the  special  point.  I accordingly  repeated
Umim  accesserit — explicetur.  The  record  then  continues  as
follows : —

J.  G.  P.  One  ■word  before  you  go.  As  I said  before,  I believe  Myers
has  given  a reply  to  Mrs  Verrall  which  shows  he  has
grasped  all  the  points  of  my  Latin  Message  j but  I
want  him  to  show  here  why  this  message  which  he  gave
to  Mrs  Verrall  furnishes  so  good  an  answer.

(Myers  communicating)

I am  again  with  you  my  friend  and  you  will  U.D.  that,
as  I U.D.  you.  I will  reply  as  Mr  Pelham  suggests  to
the  best  of  my  knowledge.

(Rector  communicating)

I U.D.  it  was  a cross  correspondence  message,  and  to  her
[i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  I gave  the  same  words

J.  G.P.  WelH

that  I brought  out  here.^

J.  G.  P.  Weill

as  the  poem  was  one  I knew  him  [i.e  Myers]  to  give  me.
J.  G.  P.  “As  the”  whatl

(Myers  communicating)

Poem  of  my  friend’s.  [Browning  was  a friend  of  Frederic
Myers’s.]

J.  G.  P.  (reading  over)  “ I knew  him  to  give  me  ” 1

(Rector  communicating)  he  gave  me.  R.

J.  G.  P.  I don’t  quite  follow ; but  let’s  go  on.  I can  read  the
words.

Oh  but  you  do  not  U.D.  his  meaning!  R.

^ Rector  is  here  represented  as  playing  the  same  part  of  amanuensis  or
intermediary  for  the  ‘Myers’  personality  in  his  communications  through  Mrs
Verrall  as  he  plays  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance.  In  other  instances  Prudens  is
represented  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance  as  assisting  the  ‘Myers’  personality  to
communicate  through  Mrs  Verrall.  In  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  likewise  Rector
and  Prudens  are  represented  as  assisting  Myersy  to  communicate.


344


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


J.  G.  P.  No,  perhaps  I don’t.  Will  he  rewrite  1

(Myers  communicating)

I told  Rector  to  tell  you.  that  I U.I).  and  replied  saying  it
was  the  poem  in  which  Hope  and  S ar  [sic]  came  out.

J.  G P.  “ Hope  and  Star  ” ?

(Hand  assents)

Yes  I told  Rector.

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ?

about  this  but  I shall  go  over  it  again  very  carefully  and
tell  how  I happened  to  think  specially  of  that  poem

J.  G.  P.  That  is  just  what  I want,  Myers.

Yes  I know  it.

J.  G.  P.  Don’t  trouble  about  it  now.  On  the  third  after  coming
[i.e.  Wednesday,  March  13]  I’ll  talk  with  you  alone.
Now  we  ought  to  be  stopping.

On  March  11  Rector,  immediately  after  the  usual  greeting,
wrote ; “ Myers  said  my  love  always  and  with  it  I send  ” —
here  followed  a drawing  which  was  doubtless  meant  for  a
circle  and  a trianp'le,  though  the  second  figure  is  more  like
a sc|uare.  I then  asked  Myersp  what  he  meant  by  this
drawing,  and  he  said  he  would  explain  “ on  the  third  ” : i.e.
on  Wednesday,  March  13.  I also  asked  if  be  would  explain
“ Del  Sarto  ” which  had  been  given  on  March  G without  any
explanation  of  what  it  meant.  This  also  Myersp  promised  to
do  on  March  13.

On  March  13,  after  the  first  drawing  of  a bar  (v.  p.  153),
Myersp  spontaneously  returned  to  the  subject  of  the  Latin
Message  as  follows  : —

(Present:  J.  G.  P.  alone)

(Myers  communicating)

1 U.D.  your  reference  to  the  poem,  in  your  latin  message
to  me  which,  led  me  to  refer  to  Browning,  and  the
circle  gave  me  a better  U.D.  [i.e.  ‘understanding’]  of  it
as  it  came  to  me  through  this  light.  ...  (A  circle
was  then  drawn.)


lvil]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


345


J.  G.  P.  Yes.

Circle

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I gave  or  helped  Mrs  Y—  to  draw  it  . . . and  signed  my
name  to  it.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

After  allusions  to  Crossing  the  Bar,  “ Steeple  ” and  other
matters,  Myersp  again  spontaneously  returned  to  the  subject
of  the  Latin  Message : —

Now  I thought  the  circle  would  complete  my  U.D.  of  the
message.  M.

J.  G.  P.  I see  a meaning  in  what  you  say,  but  that  does  not  make
it  quite  clear.

reread  the  part  where  you  refer  to  the  poem.

J.  G.  P.  You  mean  in  my  Latin  Message?  One  moment.  (Then  as
hand  starts  to  write)  'Well  ?

Ring  (followed  by  a drawing  of  a circle  and  a triangle)

J.  G.  P.  Circle  and  triangle  ?

Yes.

J.  G.  P.  What  does  “ Ring  ” mean  1

(Hand  points  from  the  word  “Ring”  to  the  circle)

J.  G.  P.  The  Latin  Message  does  not  refer —

(interrupting)  not  exactly  to  a poem  I know  but  it  sug-
gested a poem  to  my  mind
Hence  B H.  S.  etc.  [i.e.  Browning,  Hope,  Star,  etc]

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  very  good,  very  good.  But  make  that  clearer.  What
exact  passage  did  it  suggest  ? Don’t  answer  now  unless
you  like.

It  suggested  it  so  strongly  I rushed  oft’  to  Mrs  V.  gave  it
her  rushed  back  here  and  although  you  did  not  U.D.
it.  at  the  time  you  did  later

J.  G.  P.  Yes;  that’s  quite  right.

if  I remember  rightly.


346  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

The  subject  was  then  dropped  until  I reopened  it  in  the

following  way ; —

J.  G.  F.  Myers,  don’t  thiidv  me  very  persistent —

I am  glad  to  [in  error  for  “you”]  are  it  keeps  me  interested
therefore  helps  me  greatly.

J.  G.  P.  about  getting  an  answer  to  the  Latin  Message ; but  you
have  got  so  many  very  good  things  through  that  I believe
you  are  capable  of  making  your  answer  clearer  than  you
have  made  it  so  far.

Yes.  I think  I can  get  your  idea  and  when  it  is  quite
clear  to  me  I shall  give  my  answer  you  may  be  sure.
I believe  I get  a glimmer  of  what  you  wish  ...  it  remind
[in  eiTor  for  “ reminded  ”]  me  of  a passage  very  familiar,
when  I was  in  the  body  and  I mentioned  (a  circle  was
then  drawn)  as  being  a connecting  link

J.  G.  P.  I see  what  you  mean.

yes  all  right

•J.  G.  P.  Directly  I realised  what  message  given  by  you  to  Mrs  Verrall
was  meant  by  the  words  “Browning — Hope — Star”,
I saw  what  an  excellent  answer  you  had  given  to  the
Latin  Message.  But  though  the  words  “ Browning — -Hope
— Star  ” clearly  enough  describe  the  message  in  question
which  you  gave  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  you  have  never  so  far
made  it  dear  through  this  light  why  the  passage  given  to
Mrs  Verrall  and  described  here  as  “ Browning,  Hope
and  Star  ” furnishes  an  excellent  answer  to  the  Latin
IMessage.

Poem  1

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I U.D.  she  got  it  in  my  answer  but  I did  not  give  it  here  1
Is  that  it  is  that  what  you  say  ?

J.  G.  P.  What  I mean  is  this : — When  you  gave  it  through  Mrs
Verrall  you  made  a detailed  reference  to  a particular
passage.  You  have  not  made  such  a detailed  reference
here.  Will  you  give  it  here  also  1

Oh  yes  I U.D.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  AiUomatisms.  3-1-7

J.  6.  P.  I want  you  to  give  more  details  through  this  light.

I see  and  U.D.  now  what  you  wish  me  to  repeat  or
J.  G.  P.  Not  necessarily  to  repeat.

give  more  words  perhaps.

I U.D.  and  will  go  over  it  and  do  so.

J.  G.  P.  All  right.  Thank  you  very  much.

I for  the  first  time  clearly  U.D.  your  special  point,  you
have  at  last  me  me  U.D.  [in  error  for  “made  me
U.D.”]  I am  glad  to  say.

J.  G.  P.  Will  you  give  your  answer  to  Mrs  Sidgwick,  as  I shan’t

meet  you  for  a good  many  Sabbaths  [i.e.  weeks].

The  .sitting  of  March  13  was  the  last  at  which  I was

present.  Mrs  Sidgwick  took  over  the  management  of  the
subsequent  sittings,  and  the  conduct  of  the  Latin  Message
experiment  passed  into  her  hand,s.  This  accordingly  seems
to  be  a convenient  point  at  which  to  interrupt  the  account  of
the  progress  of  the  experiment  in  order  to  discuss  the  extracts
quoted  above  from  the  sittings  held  between  Feb.  19  and

March  13.

I will  deal  first  with  the  question  of  how  far  the  ti’ance-
])ersonalities  gave  proof  of  understanding  any  of  the  ])hrases,
or  individual  words  of  the  Latin  Message.

The  general  meaning  of  the  word  intermmtiis^  was,  I

think,  unmistakably  known  to  Myersp,  though  its  special

application  in  the  Latin  Message  was  not,  for  he  wrongly
applied  it  to  him.self,  mistaking  apparently  the  dative  plural
internuntiis  for  the  nominative  singular  internuntius.  In  his
first  and  second  reply  accordingly  he  represents  himself  as  the
“intermediary”,  whereas  in  the  Message  the  mediums  are  the
“ intermediaries  ”.

Equally  unmistakable  is  the  comprehension  shown  both  by
Myersp  and  George  Pelham  of  the  word  jamdudum,  wdiich
they  respectively  translated  “ long  since  ” and  “ for  some
time  ”.

^ Lewis  and  Short  define  it  as  one  who  ‘ serves  as  a messenger  or  mediator
between  two  parties  or  persons  ; a mediator,  messenger,  go-between  ’.


348


J.  G.  Plddington.


[part


The  meaning  of  invicem  is  likewise  con-ectly  expressed  by
the  word  “mutually”.  It  is  noticeable  that  siiecial  trouble
seems  to  have  been  taken  with  these  two  words,  jamdudum
and  invicem.  On  Feb.  19  Hodgsotip  asked  for  jamdudum  to
be  repeated  and  then  explained  that  it  had  been  the  hardest
word  to  understand.  This  repetition  of  the  word  on  Feb.  19
seems  to  have  been  effectual,  for  when  it  was  repeated  on
Feb.  26  it  was  met  with  the  remark  “1  understand  rhat”.
Similarly  invicem  was  singled  out  for  repetition  by  itself  on
Feb.  25  ; and  on  the  following  day  when  Myersp  made  his
second  attempt  to  reply  he  used  the  word  “ mutually  ” :
whereas  in  his  first  reply  he  had  not  done  so.

My  pronunciation  of  the  word  quod  on  Feb.  26  was  greeted
with  the  remark  “Yes,  I know.  ‘What?’”  Quod  has  this
interrogative  sense,  but  in  the  Latin  Message  it  is  used  as  a
relative.  The  phrases  used  on  Feb.  27  and  March  6,  “Although
I as  intermediary”  and  “Although  you  have  been  for  some
time  uniting  different  ideas  ”,  suggest,  however,  very  forcibly
that  the  trance-personalities  understood  quod  to  mean
“ although  ”.

Peiliaps  the  phrase  used  on  March  6,  “ you  fail  to  convince
the  world  ” etc.,  represents  a bad  shot  at  the  meaning  of
f(dlit.

As  already  suggested,  the  phrase  “ handing  through  ” used
on  Feb.  20  may  represent  committis,  which  was  used  in  the
Latin  Message  to  mean  “ entrust  ” or  “ deliver  ”.  But  the  phrases
subsequently  employed — “ united  ” or  “ assimilated  ideas  ”,  “ been
uniting  different  ideas”,  “combine  the  ideas  conjointly  given”
— have  every  appearance  of  representing  another  ti’ansla-
tion  of  the  word.  Committere  is  used  by  Latin  authors —
both  prose-writers  and  poets — to  mean  “ to  join  together  ”,
“ to  combine  ”,  “ to  connect  ” or  “ to  unite  ” ; though  this  sense
of  the  word  is  not  found  in  Cicero,  and  the  style  of  the
Latin  Message  is  Ciceronian.  Still,  the  trance-personalities
were  not  informed  that  the  Latin  was  Ciceronian,  and  if
they  gave  committis  an  un-Ciceronian  sense  they  were  not  to
blame.  If,  as  I have  suggested,  internuntiis  was  understood
as  internuntius  and  if  committis  was  taken  to  mean  “ unite  ”,
it  explains  the  translation  given  in  the  trance : “ you  as


LVII.]


349


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

intermediary  {intermmtius)  have  long  since  {jamdudum)
united  (eomniittis)  mutually  ideas  {invicem  inter  se  respon-
dentia) ”d

But,  if  it  is  admitted,  as  I think  it  will  be,  that  the
trance-personalities  realised  that  the  Message  concerned  cross-
con’espondences,  the  translations  which  they  gave  are  susceptible
of  the  following  alternative  explanations: — Unaware,  as  I have
said,  that  the  style  of  the  Latin  Message  was  severely  classical,
they  may  have  thought  that  we  had  by  conjoining  inter
(“  between  ”)  and  nuntium  (“  a message  ”)  concocted  a word  to
represent  “ cross-correspondences  Diversis  internuntiis  would,
on  this  supposition,  mean  “ by  means  of  various  cross-corre-
sponding messages”,  and  the  first  sentence,  if  quod  be  omitted,
might  then  be  translated  thus : “ By  means  of  various  cross-
corresponding  messages  you  have  long  since  united  mutually
ideas”;  and  this  translation  except  for  the  first  four  words
resembles  that  given  in  the  trance,  and  the  first  four  words
are  closely  represented  by  the  phrase  used  by  Myersp  on
Feb.  27:  “this  all  helps  to  combine  the  ideas  as  conjointly
given  through  Mrs  Verrall  and  this  light

If  the  translations  given  in  the  trance  are  to  be  explained
in  this  way,  then  we  must  suppose  either  that  the  phrase
“ I as  messenger  or  intermediary  ” was  a first  and  incorrect
translation,  perhaps,  as  will  appear  directly,  afterwards  recti-
fied; or  that  in  using  this  phrase  MyerSp  was  merely
paraphrasing  instead  of  translating,  and  bringing  out  the
point  that  he  was  the  messenger  or  intermediary  to  whose
agency  the  combination  of  ideas  in  the  various  cross-corre-
sponding messages  was  due.

In  order  to  complete  this  discussion  of  how  far  individual
Latin  words  or  phrases  were  understood  by  the  trance-person-
alities I quote  here  out  of  their  chronological  order  two  extracts
from  the  final  versions  of  the  Latin  Message  given  at  the  sitting
of  June  2: — “You  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate
ideas  one  with  another”  ; and  “ For  a long  time  you  have  been
assimilating  ideas  one  with  another  through  different  lights”.

^At  the  time  the  sittings  were  in  progress  I did  not  know  that  committere
could  have  the  sense  of  “to  unite”  or  “combine”;  so  it  was  not  from  my
consciousness  that  this  information  was  acquired.


350


[part


J.  G.  Pidclington.

Both  versions  seem  to  give  in  the  words  “ ideas  one  with
another”  an  adequate  translation  of  “ invicem  inter  se  respon-
dentia”; and  in  the  final  version  “through  different  lights”
may  represent  “ diversis  internuntiis

The  only  words,  then,  of  the  Latin  Message  of  wliich  a
translation  appeared  in  the  communications  were  Diversis  inter-
mintiis  quod  invicem  inter  se  respondentia  jamdudum  com-
mittis ; as  for  the  remainder  of  the  Latin  I find  no  trace  in
the  trance-script  or  trance-speech  of  Mrs  Piper  of  a translation
or  paraphrase  of  it.

But  it  must  be  remembered — thouo’h  once  or  twice  during
the  progress  of  the  ex|)eriment  I myself  lost  sight  of  the  fact
— that  Myersp  was  asked  not  to  furnish  a translation  but  to
give  such  an  answer  as  would  show  that  he  had  grasped  the
purport  of  the  Message.

The  next  points  to  consider  are  these: — Did  Myersp  in
his  replies  display  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  (a)  the
first  sentence,  (b)  of  the  second  senteiice,  of  the  Latin
Message.

As  regards  (a).  the  replies  made  by  MyerSp  on  Feb.  27,  and
by  George  Pelham  on  March  6,  place  it  beyond  any  reasonable
doubt  that  they  understood  that  the  subject  of  the  Latin
Message  was  cross-con-espondences,  that  it  contained  a refer-
ence to  cross-corres])ondences  which  had  in  the  past  been
engineered  by  Myers,  and  that  something  further  remained  to
1)6  done.

But,  a critic  might  urge,  even  if  this  be  admitted,  it  does
not  follow  that  the  discovery  of  the  subject  with  which  the
Message  was  generally  concerned  was  due  to  supernormal
acquisition  of  knowledge ; the  experimenters  by  frequently
speaking  in  the  most  open  manner  of  cross-corres])ondences
and  impressing  on  the  trance-personalities  the  importance  which
they  attached  to  them  gave  away  the  secret  which  the}^
inefiecti vely  sought  to  veil  in  the  obscurity  of  a language
unknown  to  Mrs  Piper.  This  may  be  true,  but  at  any  rate
the  procedure  adopted  by  the  experimenters  was  deliberate
and  in  part  designed  to  throw  the  trance-personalities  off  the
scent.  The  conduct  of  a seiies  of  cross-correspondence  experi-
ments was  the  chief  object  for  which  we  had  invited  Mrs


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  351

Piper  to  England^;  and  of  this  object  it  was  accordingly  neces-
sary to  inform  the  trance-personalities.  To  speak  quite  openly
and  unrestrainedly  on  the  subject  of  cross-correspondences  on
the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  to  show  both  by  our  action
and  our  words  that  we  were  anxious  to  render  the  subject  of
the  Latin  Message  unascertainable  in  any  normal  manner,
seemed  to  be  the  best  method  of  concealing  the  fact  that  the
two  subjects  were  in  any  way  allied.

The  reply  of  Myersp  on  Feb.  ‘17,  in  my  opinion,  shows
acquaintance  not  only  with  the  thoughts  actually  expi’essed
in  the  Latin  Message,  but  with  the  line  of  thought  by  which
Miss  Johnson  and  myself  had  been  actuated  when  we  planned
the  experiment.  This  line  of  thought  may  be  briefly  expressed
as  follows  : —

The  phenomena  of  several  automatists  known  to  us — but
especially  those  of  Mrs  Verrall  and  Mrs  Holland— exhibit
simple  instances  of  cross-correspondence,  and  also  cross-corre-
spondences of  a more  complex  and  less  direct  type.  These
latter  grow  more  elaborate  as  time  goes  on,  and  exhibit  the
appearance  of  being  due  to  the  action  of  a third  mind.  But
though  they  do  furnish  fairly  strong  fa.cie  evidence  of

the  intervention  of  a third  mind,  we  are  of  opinion  that  to
exclude  the  theory  of  telepathy  between  the  minds  of  the
automatists,  we  ought  to  obtain  a series  of  cross-corresponding
messages  so  obscurely  and  remotely  connected  that  the  con-
nection between  them  shall  not  be  apparent  to  us  until  it
has  been  revealed  by  means  of  a third  message  given  through
a third  automatist.

I think  that  a certain  amount  of  agreement  can  be  traced
between  what  Miss  Johnson  and  I had  been  thinking-  and
what  Myersp  said  on  Feb.  27:  “I  felt  a little  perturbed  over
your  message  to  me  when  you  said  I failed  (?)  in  replying
sufficiently  to  convince  you  etc.  although  I as  intermediary
had  long  since  united  my  ideas.  Now  I believe  that  since
you  sent  this  message  to  me  I have  sufficiently  replied  to
your  various  questions  to  convince  the  ordinary  scientific
mind  that  I am  at  least  a fragment  of  the  once  incarnate

^ Mrs  Piper  iu  her  normal  state  was  given  no  hint  of  what  our  chief
object  w'as.


352


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


individual  whom  you  called  Myers.”  Now  we  had  in  reality
tliought,  though  we  did  not  say  so  in  the  Latin  Message,
that  the  concordant  communications  from  ‘ Myers  ’ in  Mrs
Verrall’s  and  Mrs  Holland’s  scripts,  though  extremely  sug-
gestive, were,  owing  to  the  lack  of  the  qualities  explained
above,  insufficient  to  establish  the  operation  of  a third  mind.

Like  Oliver  Twist  we  wanted  more,  but  we  also  wanted
something  better  as  well.  Tliat  was  the  thought  behind  the
Latin  Message,  and  the  words  of  Myersp  just  quoted,  though
they  may  only  represent  a misunderstanding  of  id  nec  fallit
nos  consilium,  perhaps  suggest  that  he  was  vaguely  aware
of  it.

(b)  But  though  Myersp  may  have  apprehended  this  much,
is  there  any  evidence  to  show  that  he  understood  the  nature
of  the  “something  better”,  namely,  of  the  complex  type  of
cross-correspondence  described  in  the  second  sentence  of  the
Latin  Message  ?

O

There  is  certainly  no  direct  evidence  to  this  effect.  Indeed,
so  far  as  the  actual  language  of  the  trance- personalities  goes,
the  evidence  points  the  other  way.  Thus  on  March  6 George
Pelham  said ; “ You  .said  in  order  to  convince  you  he  [i.e.  Myers]
should  repeat  a message  not  only  through  Mrs  V.  but  it  should
be  reproduced  here”  [i.e.  through  Mrs  Piper];  and,  “if  you
can  give  a clear  message  through  Mrs  V.  and  reproduce  it  here  ”
etc.;  and  MyerSp  on  May  7 (v.  p.  392)  said:  “give  it  [i.e.  ‘out  of
three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a fourth  sound,  but  a star’]  to
my  friend  [i.e.  J.G.P.]  and  tell  him  this  is  my  final  answer
to  his  request  for  a definite  C C message”;  and  again  on
May  27  : “ He  [i.e.  J.G.P.]  wished  me  to  give  a message  through
Mrs  Verrall  and  this  light  [i.e.  Mrs  Piper]  concerning  the
S(xme  subject;  and  this  was  his  me.ssage  to  me  in  Latin  ^

^ There  are,  however,  two  passages  where  the  language  suggests  that
Myersr  was  aware  that  “Browning  Hope  and  Star”  was  a cryptic  summary
rather  than  a straightforward  verbal  reproduction  of  what  Mrs  Verrall  had
written.  The  first  occurs  in  the  sitting  of  March  6: — Rector  said:  “I  under-
stood it  was  a cross-correspondence  message,  and  to  her  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  I
gave  the  same  words  that  I brought  out  here  ; as  the  poem  was  one  I knew
him  [i.e.  Myers]  to  give  me”.  Not  realising  at  the  time  that  Myersp  and
Rector  were  at  this  point  communicating  in  rapid  alternation,  and  failing  in
consequence  to  apply  the  various  pronouns  correctly,  I did  not  grasp  the  sense


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  353

The  expressions  “ repeat  ”,  “ reproduce  ”,  “ a clear  message  ”,
“a  definite  C.C.  message”  and  “a  message  . . . concerning  the
the  same  subject”  apply  to  simple  forms  of  cross-correspondence
but  not  to  the  complex  form  of  them  described  in  the  Latin
Message.  Neither  mere  repetition  nor  reproduction,  nor  clear-
ness nor  definiteness  was  what  we  asked  for.

But  if  the  trance-personalities  really  thought  that  what  we
asked  for  was  the  simple  reproduction  of  the  same  word  or
phrase  or  idea  through  two  or  more  automatists  why  did  they
throughout  consistently  give  “Browning,  Hope  and  Star”,  and
that  only,  as  embodying  the  successful  execution  of  the  experi-
ment which  we  had  asked  them  to  pei’form  ?

It  was  on  Feb.  27  that  Myersp  first  stated  that  “ Browning
Hope  and  Star  ” constituted  his  reply  to  the  Latin  Message.’-
Befoi’e  this  statement  was  made  the  trance-personalities  had
been  informed  of  the  success  of  four  cross-correspondence  experi-
ments : viz.  of  “ Library,  my  own  name  and  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  ”
and  of  “Browning,  Hope  and  Star”  on  Feb.  12;  of  “Arrow”
on  Feb.  25;  and  of  “a  triangle  within  a circle”  on  Feb.  26.
If  they  thought  that  all  they  had  to  do  in  order  to  make  a
successful  reply  to  the  Latin  Message  was  to  bring  off  a simple
cross-correspondence,  why  did  they  pitch  on  “ Browning  Hope
and  Star  ” rather  than  on  one  of  the  other  successes  ? Again
why  did  they  mention  “ Browning  Hope  and  Star”  only,  instead
of  giving  all  four  as  examples  of  their  execution  of  the  test
asked  for  in  the  Message  ? And  why,  again,  when  later  on
they  were  informed  of  other  successful  cross-correspondences,
did  they  still  confine  themselves  to  citing  “ Browning  Hope  and
Star  ” as  their  sole  answer  ?

of  the  above  passage.  So  Myersp,  partly  in  order  to  put  me  on  the  right
track,  and  partly,  I think,  in  order  to  modify  Rector’s  statement  that  he
had  given  the  same  -words  to  Mrs  Verrall  as  he  had  brought  out  through
Mrs  Piper,  intervened  with  the  remark:  “I  told  Rector  to  tell  you  that  I
understood  and  replied  saying  it  loas  the  poem  in  which  Hope  and
came  out”.

The  second  passage  occurs  in  the  sitting  of  April  8 (v.  p.  364,  in  the  course
of  which  MyerSp  said  : “ I at  once  went  to  Mrs  V.  and  wrote  out  these  lines,
and  I returned  here  and  cpioted  a few  fragments  of  the  poem  ”.

1 It  should  be  noted  that  lie  did  this  immediately  after  having  requested  me  to
repeat  the  second  sentence  of  the  Latin  Message.

Z


354


[part


J.  G.  Fiddington.

If,  howevei’,  in  spite  of  their  inability  to  make  plain  in  words
their  comprehension  of  the  request  contained  in  the  Message,
the  trance-personalities  did  I'eally  understand  it,  then  their
choice  of  “ Browning,  Hope  and  Star  ” becomes  at  once  intelli-
gible ; for  it  was  the  first  cross-correspondence  of  a complex
type  which  occury^ed  in  the  seiies  of  expyeriments  carried  on
between  Mrs  Piper  and.  the  other  automatists.  Previous  to
its  occurrence  the  other  coincidences  had  been  of  a simple,
straightforward  kind ; and  though  subsequently  to  its  occurrence,
we  find  other  instances  of  simple  cross-correspondence,  still  we
also  find  cross-correspondences  of  a complex  type  : e.g.  “ Light
in  West”,  “O’er  mountain  lakes  rivers  and  stream”,  and
“ Thanatos

It  is  in  these  cross-correspondences  and  not  in  the  formulated
replies  made  by  the  trance-personalities  that  I am  disposed  to
find  that  intelligent  response  to  the  Latin  Message  which
Myersp  was  asked  to  make.

But  did  “ Browning  Hope  and  Star  ” really  reproduce  all  the
essential  features  of  the  experiment  described  in  the  Latin
Message  ? In  my  opinion  it  did  not,  and  I regard  it  rather
as  a first  and  only  partially  successful  attempt  to  carry  out
an  experiment  on  the  lines  laid  down  in  the  Message.  Section
XIX  of  this  paper,  however,  contains  an  account  of  a batch
of  phenomena  which  I think  may  be  fixirly  claimed  as  ful-
filling with  essential,  if  not  with  absolutely  formal,  exactness
the  conditions  stipulated  in  the  Latin  Message.

At  this  point  it  would  be  well  to  enquire  what  type  of
complex  coincidence,  if  not  the  exact  typ>e  demanded  in  the
]\lessage,  does  result  from  a collation  of  Mrs  Veri'aH’s  scripts
of  Jan.  23  and  28,  Miss  Verrall’s  scripts  of  Feb.  3 and  Feb.  17
and  the  various  references  made  in  the  trance  to  “ Browning
Hope  and  Star”.

I take  “Browning  Hope  and  Star”  to  be  the  simplest
expression  of  three  leading  and  allied  ideas ; the  skeleton
framework,  as  it  were,  on  which  a more  complicated  structure
was  to  be  built.  In  the  script  of  Jan.  23  “star”  emerges  in
an  English,  in  the  script  of  Jan.  28  in  a Greek  anagram ; and
in  this  latter  script  “hope”  is  worked  in  by  means  of  a mis-
quotation, and  “Browning”  by  means  of  quotations  from  two


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  355

of  his  poems,  his  name  not  actually  appearing.  “Hope”  is  not
expressed  in  Miss  Verrall’s  scripts  at  all;  but  in  both  her
scripts  great  emphasis  is  thrown  on  “star”,  in  the  first  by  a
drawino;  of  it,  in  the  second  hv  an  airagram  followed  bv  the
words  “ and  a star  above  it  all  In  this  second  script
“Browning”  is  worked  in  by  means  of  an  allusion  to  the  Pied
Piper  of  Hamelin  and  his  rats,  and  “Browning”  is  also
combined  with  “Star”  by  making  the  “rats”  of  Hamelin  town
form  one  of  the  variants  of  the  anagram  of  which  “star”  is
another  variant.  But  complex  though  the  scheme  is,  it  does
not  meet  the  recpiirements  of  the  Latin  Message,  for  the
connection  between  Mrs  Verra,irs  “ Star  ” and  “ Browning  ” and
Miss  Verrall’s  “Star”  and  “Browning”  would  have  always  been
apparent  had  the  reference  to  “ Browning  Hope  and  Star  ”
never  been  made  in  Mrs  Piper’s  trance ; all  that  this  reference
did  was  to  reveal  the  point  of  the  misquotation  of  “hope”  for
“passion”  in  the  script  of  Jan.  28.  Part  of  the  scheme  mis-
carried, for,  as  the  extracts  quoted  above  from  the  sittings  of
Feb.  11,  Feb.  27  and  March  6 show,  an  effort  had  been  made
to  refer  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  to  two  of  Browning’s  poems,
“My  Star”  and  “Evelyn  Hope”;  with  the  intention  apparently
of  thereby  introducing  another  variation  on  the  simple  theme
“ Browning,  Hope  and  Star  ”.

At  the  sitting  of  March  6 “ Del  Sarto  ” was  mentioned  among
words  given  to  Mrs  Verrall,  but  it  was  not  explicitly  stated
that  “Del  Sarto”  was  a cross-coi’respondence  word  intended  for
Mrs  Verrall.  So  on  March  11  I said  to  Myersp  : “At  our  last
meeting  the  words  “Del  Sarto”  appeared  without  any  e.vplaua-
tion.  Will  you  explain  them  either  now  or  at  our  next
meeting?”  Myensp  replied:  “I  have  tried  this  wdth  Mrs  V.
several  times  ”.  “ Have  you  any  special  reason — ” I began

to  ask,  when  Myersp  interrupted  me  with  the  remark : “ Oh  !
yes,  I am  reserving  that  until  the  third”,  i.e.  till  March  13.
On  March  13,  however,  no  reference  at  all  was  made  to  “Del
Sarto  ”.  So  on  April  8 Mrs  Sidgwick,  at  my  request,  again  asked
why  “ Del  Sarto  ” had  been  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  as  a cross-
correspondence. Myersp  replied  : “ Because  it  was  a good  test
and  was  also  brought  to  my  mind  by  my  attempt  at  the
poem  ”.  The  context  shews  that  by  “ the  poem  ” the  poem  of


356


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Bi’owning’s  connected  with  “ Hope  and  Star  ” was  meant.  I
had  asked  for  an  explanation  of  the  choice  of  “ Del  Sarto  ”
as  a cross-corresponding  message  because  in  view  of  (1)  the
appeax’ance  of  anagrams  on  the  word  “star”  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
scripts  of  Jan.  23  and  28  and  in  Miss  Verrall’s  sci’ipt  of
Feb.  17,  of  which  knowledge  had  been  shewn  by  Myers?;
and  (2)  the  previous  introduction  of  the  titles  of  two  of
Browning’s  poems,  Evelyn  Ho]je  and  My  Star,  for  the
appai’ent  purpose  of  increasing  the  number  and  complexity  of
the  variations  on  the  “ Browning  Hope  and  Star  ” theme,  it
struck  me  as  a by  no  means  extravagant  conjecture  that  “Del
Sarto  ” had  been  selected  for  the  followino;  reasons ; —

It  is  part  of  the  title  of  a poem  of  Browning’s,  Andrea  d.el
Sarto,  and  from  it  can  be  formed  the  anagram  “ Lode  star
Hence  in  a sense  there  would  be  im[)licit  in  it  allusions  to
two  out  of  the  three  leading  ideas  “Browning,  Hope  and
Star”.

I believe  that  an  attempt  was  made  on  Feb.  27  to  compli-
cate the  cross-correspondences  based  on  “ Bi'owning  Hope  and
Star”  .still  further.  This  attempt  I find  in  the  allusions  to
“ Halcyon  days  ”,  “ evangelic  ” (afterwards  explained  as  given  in
error  for  “Evelyn  Hope”),  “the  shrub  Syringa”,  “my  own  and
Browning’s  ]ioems  ”,  and  “ My  Star  ” : all  of  which,  except  the
last, — and  that  was  twice  conjoined  later  on  with  “Evelyn
Hope” — Mjmrsp  said  “helped  to  combine  the  ideas  as  con-
jointly given  through  Mrs  Verrall  and  this  light  ”.  To  deal
with  these  allusions  properly  I should  have  to  discuss  some
matters  of  a rather  private  nature,  and  as  I believe  I could
not  reach  any  definite  conclusion  and  could  at  most  bring
out  only  some  interesting  and  suggestive  points,  I prefer  to
leave  this  problem  untouched.  At  the  same  time  I should
like  to  record  my  opinion  that,  in  spite  of  vagueness  and  con-
fusion, there  was  sense  behind  these  particular  communication, s.

The  references  to  the  Ode  of  Horace  I postpone  for  later
discussion ; and  there  remains  only  one  small  point  to  touch
on  before  I resume  the  account  of  the  pi’ogress  of  the
experiment.

It  will  be  remembered  that  as  early  as  Feb.  11  I had  seen
in  the  indirect  allusions  to  Stanza  VII  of  Aht  Vogler  (which


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Aiitomatisms.  357

I thought  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28  to  contain)  an  implicit
reply  to  the  Latin  Message.  As  time  went  on  I evidently
forgot  at  moments  that  the  allusions  to  this  stanza  were
implicit  only  and  not  explicit,  and  unfortunately  I embodied
this  mistake  in  some  of  the  remarks  which  I addressed  to
Myersp  and  George  Pelham  on  the  subject  of  the  Latin
Message.  Thus  on  March  6 I said : “ I do  believe  that  Myers
has  answered  the  Latin  Message  clearly  and  intelligently
through  the  otlier  light  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall] ; but  he  has  not  shown
through  this  light  that  he  has  done  so  ” ; and  on  March  13  ;
“When  you  [i.e.  Myers]  gave  it  [i.e.  ‘your  answer’]  through
Mrs  Verrall  you  made  a detailed  reference  to  a particular
pa.ssage.  You  have  not  made  such  a detailed  reference  here.
AVill  you  give  it  here  also  ? ”.

Fortunately  this  silly  mistake  of  mine^  did  not,  so  far  as
I can  see,  confuse  the  trance-personalities;  and  it  may  even
perhaps  have  had  a good  result,  for  it  seems  possible  that  it
may  have  led  Myersp  to  display  still  further  acquaintance  with
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28  and  with  Miss  Verrall’s  of
Feb.  17,  by  reproducing  points  explicitly  expressed  therein  to
which  he  had  previously  made  no  allusion  (v.  pp.  411-13).


^ I have  only  one  excuse  to  offer  for  my  mistake,  and  that  is  the  difficulty
experienced  by  the  experimenter  in  preventing  his  mind  from  being  distracted
by  the  multifarious  duties  which  are  entailed  in  the  charge  and  conduct  of
Mrs  Piper’s  sittings.  He  has  to  decipher  the  script — no  easy  matter ; he  has
to  seize  the  sense  of  what  is  written  ; he  has  to  reply  to  questions,  and  often
to  puzzle  his  brains  to  concoct  an  answer  which  will  not  diverge  too  widely
from  what  he  really  thinks  on  the  one  hand  and  from  what  he  guesses  may
prove  palatable  to  the  trance-personalities  on  the  other ; he  has  to  watch
Mrs  Piper’s  hand  to  see  that  it  does  not  overrun  the  margin  of  the  paper  ;
he  has  to  tear  off  each  sheet  as  it  is  finished  from  the  writing-block  ; he  has
to  see  that  the  pencil  in  use  is  in  good  order  ; he  has  to  watch  the  state  of
Mrs  Piper’s  breathing  and  to  see  if  her  left  nostril  is  clear  of  the  pillow
on  which  her  head  rests  ; he  has  to  open  or  shut  the  windows  in  order  to
keep  the  temperature  at  a point  which  meets  with  the  approval  of  Rector ;
he  has  to  look  after  the  fire  when  there  is  one  ; he  has  to  make  a record  of
whatever  he  himself  or  the  sitter  says ; and  amid  these  preoccupations  he
has  to  try  to  conduct  complicated  experiments.  If  under  these  circum-
stances— and  especially  when  Rector,  as  sometimes  happens,  insists  on  the
windows  being  kept  wide  open  in  bitter  wintry  weather — he  sometimes  fails
to  keep  his  thoughts  clear,  he  may,  I hope,  be  excused.


358


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Account  of  the  Progress  of  the  Experiment  between
March  20  and  June  2,  1907.

Pxtract  from  records  of  sitting  icith  Mrs  Piper  held  on

March  20,  1907.

(Present : E.  M.  S.  alone)

(Myers  communicating)

I told  Mrs  V — about  Browning  hope

of  Bodily  death  ....

No  not  quite  U.D.

I said  I told  her  of  the  passage  where  in  B.’s  poems
which  . — • [probably  a badly  written  “where”]  in  w (?)
Stars  and  — [undecipherable  word]  and  life  meet
[I  have  little  doubt  that  the  confusion  in  the  script  was
due  to  the  first  “where”  being  by  mistake  put  before
instead  of  after  “in  B’s  poem”;  and  that  the  sentence
was  intended  to  run  thus ; “ I told  her  of  the  passage
in  B’s  poems  where  (or,  “ in  which  ”)  Stars  and  — and
life  meet  ”.  On  April  8 “ the  poem  ” was  said  to  be
“with  reference  to  this  life  and  the  stars”.  JVote  hy
J.  G.  P.]

You  remember  Browning’s  poem  I was  fond  of  and  to  which
I referred

E.  M.  S.  Yes;  you  referred  through  Mrs.  Verrall  to  hope  and  stars.

Yes  1 got  that  as  1 was  reminded  of  it  in  Mrs  [in  error  for
“Mr”)  P’s  [i.e,  Piddington’s]  message  ....

E.  M.  8.  I see ; you  got  it  very  well.

Is  there  anything  more  I have  not  said  ?

(E.  M.  S.  reads  over.)

about  it  that  you  would  ask  me  to  say.  . . .

he  [i.e.  J.  G.  P.]  said  that  you  would  ask  me  to  say

E.  M.  S.  I don’t  know  of  anything  more ; but  what  have  you  been
saying  to  Mrs  Verrall  lately.

Yes  that  is  what  I am  going  to  tell  you  if  I can  do  nothing
about  the  other  message.  You  remember  the  poem  I
referred  to  do  you  not  ?


359


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  S.  Yes,  you  referred  to  poems  of  Browning.

but  you  do  U.D.  which  one  1

E.  :m.  S.  Yes,  I understand  which  one.  About  stars.

Yes  and  it  was  the  message  which  led  me  to  write  it

Extract  from  record  of  sittinq  with  Mrs  Piper  held  on

April  2,  1907.

(Present : E.  M.  S.  alone)

E.  M.  S.  Mr  Myers,  Mr  Piddington  says  you  promised  to  try  to  tell
us  what  particular  poem  of  Browning’s  you  meant  to
refer  to  by  the  words  “ Browning  Hope  and  Star  ”.  [This
question  had  been  written  out  before  the  sitting,  and
was  read  out  from  the  written  note.]

(Myers  communicating)  Oh  yes.  I am  glad  to  [in  error
for  “ you  ”]  remind  me  of  this  so  clearly  I will  answer
this  at  our  next  meeting

E.  M.  S.  Good.

meanwhile  1 will  think  it  over.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  do.

I mean  when  I meet  jmu  alone,  not  in  the  presence  of
anyone  else,  as  there  are  so  many  interruptions  on  our
side.


lYasn’t  that  message  of  Mr  Piddington’s  good  I was  so
pleased  when  the  words  came  out  to  me  clearly.  Mr  P —
was  very  patient  with  me.

E.  M.  S.  You  quite  understood  the  Latin  Message,  did  you  not  ?

I did  otherwise  I could  not  have  replied  as  I did.  I will
go  over  the  last  sentence  again  and  reply  when  I see
you  alone.

E.  M.  S.  Perhaps  you  might  reply  to-morrow  before  the  other  friend
[i.e.  the  sitter]  comes.

I do  not  know  that  I can  but  will  do  so  if  possible.


360


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  Thank  you.

I wish  to  say  a few  words  more  and  then  I am  through
for  today.

(E.  M.  S.  here  suggested  that  she  should  give  two  messages
from  Mr.  Piddington.)

Oh  yes  do  while  I can  hear  you  clearly.

E.  M.  S.  Shall  I give  them  now  or  later  ?

Now.

E.  M.  S.  (again  reading  from  a written  note.)  Mr  Piddington  says
you  promised  to  try  to  tell  us  what  particular  poem  of
Browning’s  you  meant  to  refer  to  hy  the  words  “ Browning
Hope  and  Star”;  and  what  particular  passage  in  that
poem  was  suggested  to  you  the  Latin  Message.

Yes  very  good  I will  reply  surely.  Bright  star  of  hope
shed  your  beams  on  me  and  send  a loving  message  from
far  accross  [sic]  the  sea.  I only  say  this  as  it  suggested
itself  to  me  but  it  has  no  relevance  to  my  future  reply

E.  M.  S.  I understand.

The  next  sitting  at  which  Mrs  Sidgwick  was  present  alone
was  that  of  April  8,  from  which  the  following  extracts  are
taken  : —

E.  M.  S.  I want  to  ask  Mr  Myers  about  the  poem.

(Rector  communicating)  he  is  coming  presentl}^  with  Mr
Hodgson  and  Pelham  who  will  render  all  the  help  pos-
sible.

(Myers  communicating)  Good  morning  Mrs  Sidgwick

I am  Myers  ....  Do  you  remember  the  Latin  message
I thought  I could  tell  you  that  I specially  thought  of
the  poem  about  the  stars  which  read  (?)  like  this  do  you
remember,  the  walk  tln’ough  the  lonely

^ For  a similar  introduction  of  a poetical  quotation  cf.  ‘As  star  follows  star.’
pp.  370  and  373.


361


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  I can’t  read.  Is  it  “ read  like  this  ” ?

It  yes  it  was  of  Browning’s  Poem  it  was  one  of  Brown-
ing's poems,  which  he  wrote  to  a friend  . . . and  which

read  (?)  as  I recall  (?)  [or,  “had  as  I read”]  about

[4  or  5 undecipherable  words]  Star  & [or,  “ I ”]

hope.  I

(E.  M.  S.  tries  to  read.)

lonely  wandering  Star,
which  read  like  this.

I am  glad  to  get  even  a few  words  through.

Dont  you  recall  the  Poem  of  Browning’s  to  the  Stars.  Yes.
I wander  (?)  lonely  (?)  my  Star

E.  M.  S.  “ I make  lovely  my  star  ” ?

which  had  also  hope
got  it

the  passage  which  I referred  to  was
in  the  lonely

E.  M.  S.  “lonely”?

Yes.  Star  yes  a passage  in  Piddington’s  message  made
me  think  of  it.

E.  M.  S.  Do  you  remember  why  ?

Yes  because  it  reminded  me [2  undecipherable  words]

give  some  of  my  own  (?)  which  pleased  me  very  much.
Do  you  remember  my  interest  in  light  [“  light  ” here,  I
believe,  means  the  process,  agency  or  faculty  by  which
communication  with  the  spiritual  world  is  aflected.  Note
hj  J.  G.  P.]

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

and  my  desire  to  give  some  definite  proof  of.
survival  of  Bodily  death.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I remember  well.

this  reminded  me  of  it.

E.  M.  S.  This  poem  reminded  you  of  it?


362


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Yes.  and  my  own  love  for  it.  when  I was  in  the  body.  I
said  Pi

E.  M.  S.  “ Pi  ” ?

Yes  right.  It  begins  with  P and  Sai

(Rector  communicating)  I made  a mistake

E.

(Myers  communicating)  Eve  confession  (?)

Do  you  remember  it  ?

E.  M.  S.  Do  you  mean  the  poem  1

No  my  confession  of  the  light  and  sending  the  message
through  it  (a  circle  was  then  drawn)

E.  M.  S.  “ through  it  0 ” ?

I made  a circle

E.  M.  S.  Oh  ! a circle.  Yes,  I remember.

as  it  suggested  it  to  my  mind.  ...  I then  drew  or  tried  to
draw  a Star  Medium  yes  draw  through  the  other
light.

E.  M.  S.  I see ; you  drew  a star.

and  I did  so  so  you  would  U.D.
that  I U.D.  the  message.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

and  I did  this  (a  star  was  then  drawn)

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  thei’e  was  a star  drawn.

I drew  it.  so  you  would  U.D.  that  I did  it  also  a crescent.
E.  M.  S.  Do  you  remember  the  name  of  that  poem  1

That  is  what  I am  trying  to  get  through  here.

E.  M.  S.  I see  ; yes.

I said  P is  right.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


363


E.  M.  S.  “ P ” ? I don’t  think  that  is  right.

(Rector  communicating)  it  is  not  P.

R.

(Myers  communicating)  R e 1 Right.

E.  M.  S.  R-e-1  is  right,  you  think  1

Yes.  I am  telling  R.  [i.e.  “ I am  telling  Rector  ”.]

E.  M.  S.  (misreading  “telling”  as  “talking”)  Rector  is  talking?

Yes  I am  trying  to  spell  it  out  to  him.

E.  M.  S.  You  said  you  tried  to  get  “Del  Sarto”  through.

Yes  did  she  not  get  it.

E.  M.  iS.  No,  she  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  did  not  get  it.  Why  did  you  try
“ Del  Sarto  ” ?

because  it  was  in  my  memory  as  a good  test  and  was  also
brought  to  my  mind  by  my  attempt  at  the  jjoem.

Don’t  you  remember  the  word  Sky  coming  out  also
E.  M.  S.  Yes.

in  the  poem

lonely  hope  and  star,  is  that  clear  ?

(Rector  communicating)  he  repeats  it  again  and  again,  but
I cant  seem  to  U.D.  the  word

E.  M.  S.  Never  mind.  Perhaps  another  day.

It  is  S’  tars  [sic.]

E.  M.  S.  “Stars”?
yes

(Myers  communicating)  I wish  you  could  hear  what  I am
saying.

E.  M.  S.  I wish  I could.

I was  very  much  afraid  my  message  would  not  be  U.D.
therefore  I drew  the  Star  to  make  sure


364


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  I see

that  I did  U.D.  and  I try  (1)  to  reproduce  it  here  I will  try
and  give  the  name  again


I am  most  anxious  to  make  Rector  U.D.  about  the  name  of
that  poem.

E.  M.  S.  I quite  understand.

Do  you  remember  the  j^assage  in  which  he  referred  to  the
survival  of  Bodily  death,  and  giving  the  message  clearlj^
through  both  lights  as  a proof  of  my  independent  existence
I at  once  went  to  Mrs  V.  and  wrote  out  those  lines  ....
of  Brownings  poem  and  fearing  there  might  be  some
mistake  I made  her  draw  a star  to  be  sure


E.  M.  S.  I quite  see.

and  I endeavoured  (?)  to  return  here  and  quote  a few  fragments
of  the  poem  the  poem  was  with  reference  to  this  life  and
the  stars.  ...  I am  very  sorry  Rector  does  not  seem
to  grasp  the  word  as  I spell  it.

E.  M.  S.  Never  mind.  It  is  difficult.

Yes  and  a difficult  word  to  get  through  . . . but  I shall  try
until  he  U.D.  it.

At  the  sitting  held  on  April  10  Rector  asked  if  “ Hoi’izon  ” “a
cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  ” had  appeared,  and  explained
that  “ Myers  gave  it  ”.  Mrs  Sidgwick  took  this  to  mean  “ has
‘Horizon’  etc.  appeared  in  Mrs  Piper’s  script”,  and  replied  that
it  had  ; but  Rector  may  have  meant  to  ask  if  “ Horizon  ” etc.  had
appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,  for  just  immediately  before  he
had  asked  whether  a cross-correspondence  message  intended
for  Mrs  Verrall  had  “got  through  ” ; and  also  I know  of  no  other
instance  where  Rector  displayed  uncertainty  as  to  what  had
appeared  in  Mrs  Piper’s  script.

At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  of  April  15  Rector  asked
whether  Mrs  Verrall  had  written  D W,  the  first  two  letters  of


365


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

a cross-correspondence  “Dwarf”,  and  something  like  “Mountain”.

From  this  point  the  record  proceeds  as  follows: —

E.  M.  S.  Will  you  ask  Mr  Myers  why  he  chose  that  sentence  about
Horizon  ?

(Rector  communicating)  ....  Mr  M}mrs  sends  love  and
says  that  message  [i.e.  the  Latin  Message]  conveyed  a
several  good  things  to  his  mind  and  that  w'as  one  of
them  ....

(Myers  communicating)  Good  morning  Mrs  Sidgwick  . . . .
Piddington’s  message  conve}'ed  much  to  my  mind  which
I considered  good  material  to  work  on  . . . therefore  all
this  came  to  my  mind  in  consequence.  [“  all  this  ”,  as
also  Rector’s  “ that  was  one  of  them  ”,  must  apparently
refer  to  “that  sentence  about  Horizon”.  A’ote  hij  J.  G.  P.]

E.  M.  S.  I see.

I believe  you  U.D.  nearly  as  wmll  as  I do

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  I do.

therefore  I will  just  say  it  was  because  of  this  message  that
it  was  brought  to  my  mind  and  which  I tried  to  bring
out  there  [i.e.  through  Mrs  Verrall]  with  other  lines  (?)
Is  it  clear  1

E M.  S.  It  is  clear ; but  I should  like  to  know  why  “ horizon  ” came  as
distinct  from  “ hope  and  star  ”.

Because  it  was  that  special  passage  which  was  suggested  from
his  message  to  my  mind.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

and  I gave  it  there  last  time  as  as  in  part  answer  to  Mr  P’s
[i.e.  Piddington’s]  enquiry.

E.  M.  S.  “ Mr  P’s  enquiry  ” 1

Yes  about  the  part  which  impressed  me  most.

The  grammai',  the  phraseology  and  the  thought  in  these

passages  from  the  sitting  of  April  15  are  alike  confused.

It  may  be  that  what  Myersp  was  trying  to  say  was  that  the


366


J.  G.  Picldivgton.  [part

Latin  Message  had  suggested  to  him  the  plan  of  conveying
his  answer  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  question  about  auTog  ovpavog
aKvfxwv  (of  which  auswer  “Cloudless  Sky  beyond  the  Horizon”
lormed  a part)  not  in  a simple  straightforward  manner
through  one  automatist  but  by  means  of  com])lex  cross-
correspondences, and  also  of  using  both  the  phrase  “ Cloudless
sky  beyond  the  horizon  ” and  the  words  “ Azure  ” and  “ Blue  ”
suggested  by  it  as  the  subject  of  a cross-corresponding  messaged
Mrs  Sidgwick  by  asking  “why  ‘horizon’  came  as  distinct
from  ‘hope  and  star’”  introduced,  I believe,  another  element
of  confusion.  She  does  not  now  remember  what  she  meant
by  this  question.  I imagine  that  a momentary  confusion  was
])i’oduced  in  her  mind  by  the  obscurity  of  the  communications
at  this  point.  “ Mr  P.’s  enquiry  ” doubtless  means  the  request
made  in  the  Latin  Message,  as  the  following  remark  made  by
Myersp  on  May  6 shows : — “ I could  not  help  thinking  of
Tennyson  in  one  of  the  enquiries  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall’s  question
about  the  Greek  words]  and  Browning  in  the  other.”

Early  in  the  sitting  of  April  17  MyerSp  announces  that  he
has  given  “ Azure,  meaning  Blue  ” and  “ a cloudless  sky
beyond  the  horizon  ” to  Mrs  Verrall  (v.  Section  XX  p.  284).
From  this  point  1 quote  the  record: —

(Myers  communicating)  regarding  the  message  [i.e.  the
cross-corresponding  message  “Cloudless  sky”  etc.]  it
came  out  I believe  with  a star  being  dr-awn  also  horizon
horizoir  yes  which  comes  from  the  poem.

E.  M.  S.  Browning’s  poem,  you  mean  ?

Yes  I wrote  myself  a similar  line  which  I gave  her  also,
did  it  not  all  appear.-

E.  M.  S.  I have  not  seen  it,  but  I will  look  carefully  again.®

Do  because  this  I think  is  important.

^ For  a detailed  discussion  of  these  obscure  passages  the  reader  is  referred
to  Section  XX,  pp.  292-5.

For  a conjectural  explanation  of  this  statement  v.  pip-  293-4.

•^Mrs  Sidgwick  had  no  direct  access  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  script.  When  she
said  “I  will  look”  she  meant  that  she  would  make  enquiries  of  Miss  Johnson
or  of  J.  G.  P.


867


Lvil.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Do  you  remember  a poem  not  finished  quite  in  which
the  words  lonely  came  out  ? I tried  to  quote  it  here
but  did  not  get  it  all  clear,  you  remember  it.  [The
expression  “ a poem  not  finished  quite  ” is  explained  b}’
“ I tried  to  quote  it  here  but  did  not  get  it  all  clear  ”.
The  reference  is  clearly  to  “ lonel}^  wandering  Star  ” given
on  April  8.  Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]

E.  M.  S.  I remember  your  writing  about  lonely,  yes.

Yes  did  you  find  it  there  [i.e.  in  Mrs  VerraU’s  script]  also  ?

E.  M.  S.  I don’t  think  so,  but  I will  look  again.

wandering  lonely  and  D W
I tried  this  several  times  recently  . . .

I remember  saying  Confession  also
Chapel  and  Siazies

E.  M.  S.  I can’t  read  that  word.

Siaz

E.  M.  S.  “ Siaz  ” %


Yes.  got  it  clearly

E.  M.  S.  “ Siaz  ”,  is  that  it  ?

Not  quite  Rector  did  not  quite  U.D.

To  the  Stars  Siacriez.

(Rector  communicating)  I can’t  cprite  get  it  friend  Siaraz
E.  M.  S.  La  Saisiaz  is  it  1
Yes

E.  M.  S.  All  right

(Myers  communicating

Yes  I cant  quite  get  it  through

E.  M.  S.  I see.

but  it  is  not  that  which  I am  trying  to  give  you
Is  Pe

(Rector  communicating)  I never  can  seem  to  U.D.  that
word  Pi


368


J.  G.  Pidclington.  [part

(Myers  communicating)  Poem  I have  in  my  mind  Do  you
remember  Pie  . . . Pie  el  bus  (?)  sgnus  Nullus  Pri
erbus  Dont  you  U.D.  what  I am  trying  to  give  you.

E.  M.  >S.  No,  Pm  very  stupid.  I don’t  quite.

I am  trying

do  you  remember  Avarar  a vanaret

E.  M.  S.  “ Avaneret  ” ?

Yes  nearly.  . . .

[“  Pi,  Pe,  Pie,  Pierbus,  sgnus  nullus  Avarar  ” and  “ a
vanaret”  are  all  obviously  attempts  at  the  nullus
appareat  nexus  and  prioribus  of  the  Latin  Message.]

Do  you  remember  the  poem  in  which  he  was  left  alone  and
later  it  all  came  to  him

(Rector  communicating)  he  is  trying  to  explain  the  word  to
me.

E.  M.  S.  I understand.

but  you  do  not  seem  to  place  it.

E.  M.  S.  I think  he  means  La  Saisiaz.  Why  is  he  telling  me  about
La  Saisiazi

(Myers  communicating)

Yes  and  dont  you  remember  what  I said  about  it

E.  M.  S.  Through  this  light  ?

Yes.  I said  Hope  Star

E.  M.  S.  I see.  I did  not  know  which  poem  that  was.  [I  don’t
quite  know  what  I meant  by  this  remark,  but  I intended
to  draw  something  about  the  “ Hope  and  Star  ” poem.
Contemporaneous  note  by  E.  M.  S'.]  [In  August  1908  E.  M.  S.
wrote  : “ It  now  seems  to  me  obvious  that  I meant  I did
not  know  that  ‘ Hope  and  Star  ’ referred  to  La  Saisiaz.”']

Which  poem  that  was.

the  passage  I wished  (?)  concerned  (?)  these  words  three
words  horizon  was  one  of  them  and  Horizon  was  the
most  important.


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  369

E.  M.  S.  I see.  I will  look  at  the  poem  and  then  I shall  understand.

Yes  please  do.  then  I shall  feel  that  it  has  in  part  reached
you

E.  M.  S.  Mrs  Verrall  asked  you  once  what  Ode  of  Horace  entered
deeply  into  your  inner  life,  and  you  said  you  would
answer  the  question.  [This  question  was  read  by  me
from  a letter  received  the  day  before  from  Mr  Piddington.
Note  hj  E.  M.  5'.]

Oh  yes  Mrs  Sidgwick  I recall  the  question  and  I had  Ode
to  Nature  on  my  mind  but  as  I thought  I loved  another
ode  better  I did  not  reply  until  I could  say^  (?)  it  more
clear]y^  Do  you  remember  immortality  ....  I thought
I could  answer.

(Other  subjects  are  then  discussed)


E.  M.  S.  Did  you  when  you  spoke  a little  while  ago  mean  to  say
you  had  given  me  the  name  of  the  poem  in  which
“ Hope  and  Star  ” come  ? [I  think,  but  am  not
sure,  that  I said  “ when  you  spoke  of  La  Saisiaz.”  Con-
temporaneous note  hj  E.  M.  5'.]

No  I have  not  been  able  to  get  it  through  but  I do  hope
to  do  so,

E.  M.  S.  And  what  particular  passage  you  meant  to  refer  to  in  it.

Yes  I certainly  will  do  so  ....

I wish  you  to  repeat  to  me  if  you  will  after  nullus

(E.  M.  S.  reads  over  the  Latin  Message ’from  nullus  to  the
end.)

thank  you  I will  go  over  this  once  more  and  then  I
believe  I can  get  it  through  to  you

(At  the  very  end  of  the  sitting  Myersp  made  another  refer-
ence to  the  same  subject,  as  follows : — )

Mrs  S I shall  see  you  again  and  as  soon  as  Piector  leaves
the  light  I will  catch  him  and  spell  out  letter  by  letter
the  poem  to  him.  and  give  it  to  you  at  once  when  I
see  you  again.  Pll  wait  for  him  today.  M.

2 A


J.  G.  Pidclington.


370


[part


E,  ^iJ.  S.  I shall  see  j’ou  on  the  third  after  coming  alone,  [i.e.  on
Wednesday,  April  24.]

I’ll  surely  give  it  then  if  not  before.

The  sitting  of  April  22  was  attended  V)y  Mr  E.  N.  Bennett
alone  ; and  the  communications  referred  exclusively  to  his  own
personal  affairs,  with  the  exception  of  an  utterance  in  the
waking-stao-e  which  w^as  recorded  as  follows  : —

Mr  Myei’s  says  I must  keep  my  promise.  A star  follows
star  a star  follows  star.  That’s  all.

“ A star  follows  star  ” was,  as  appears  from  what  was  sub-
quently  written  during  the  trance  of  April  24,  a mis-hearing
or  mis-pronunciation  of  “ As  star  follows  star  ” : which  is  a
quotation  from  Browning’s  Saul.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  of  April  23: —

(Present : E.  M.  S.  and  Miss  Newton)

(Rector  communicating)

There  was  some  misunderstanding  in  his  [i.e.  Myers’s]  last
messages  to  you  rvhich  he  will  correct  and  explain
later.  . . .

E.  M.  S.  There  will  be  an  opportunity  tomorrow  as  I shall  be  here
alone.


At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  of  April  24  Hodgsoup  first
asked  whether  variou.s  cross-corresponding  messages,  five  in  all,
had  been  received  by  Mrs  VerralL  He  next  asked  whether
"Horizon”  had  come  out  in  Mrs  A^en-aU’s  script  followed  by
a long  line  and  the  drawing  of  a star.  (v.  Section  XX,
p.  28G.) ; and  finally  asked  if  Airs  A'errall  had  got  the
words  “ Alars,  Jove  and  Egla”.  Alyersp  then  takes  the  place
of  Hodgsoiip,  and  asks  if  “Ezra”  “ wdiat  vaunts  life”  “trans-
cends” “the  star  spark  flame”  have  appeared  in  Airs  A^errall’s
script.  “Alars,”  “Jove,”  “ Ezra,”  “A^aunts,”  “transcends,”  “star,”
“spark”  and  “flame”  are  clearly  reminiscences  of  the  opening
stanzas  of  Browning’s  Rahhi  ben  Ezra?  It  is  not  stated  that


1 In  Mrs  Holland's  script  of  Jan.  7,  1904  (v.  Pi'oc.  Part  LV.  p.  215)  a
quotation  from  Rahhi  hen  Ezra  is  made  by  IMyersn-  This  fact  could  not  have
been  knovn  to  Mrs  Piper,  and  was  not  known  to  Mrs  Sidgwick.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


371


these  words  have  any  connection  with  the  Latin  Message ;
and  from  the  fact  that,  after  Aht  Vogler  had  been  given  and
accepted  as  the  correct  answer  to  the  question  “ What  poem  was
meant  by  Brownings  Hope  and  Star  ? ”,  “ Vaunt  ” and  “ trans-
cends” were  several  times  mentioned  as  the  subject  of  an
ordinary  cross-correspondence  experiment,  one  might  naturally
infer  that  they  were  not  meant  to  he  so  connected.  Nevertheless,
for  reasons  which  will  be  explained  later  (v.  pp.  413-11'),  I think
that  in  giving  these  words  from  JRahbi  ben  Ezra  Myersp  was  here
making  a first  attempt  to  quote  the  particular  passage  in  the
poem  of  Browning’s  meant  by  “Browning,  Hope  and  Star”  which
he  had  said  had  been  suggested  to  him  by  the  Latin  Message-
From  this  point  I quote  the  record: —

(Myers  communicating)  I now  recall  the  transcends.  . . .
and  Vaunt  did  they  not  appear  1

E.  M.  S.  I do  not  remember  them,  but  I have  not  the  writing  [i.e.
Mrs  Verrall’s  script]  here.

look  it  up  and  reread

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I will.

Yes  it  will  assist  us  here.

E.  M.  S.  Good.

(a  star  is  here  roughly  drawn)

E.  AI.  S.  A star.  Good.

Yes

I remem. [her]  V^ol

V o 1 as  it  came  to  m}’  memory.

E.  M.  S.  Is  that  a poem  ?

Yes  Yes

E.  M.  S.  I don’t  quite  understand.

Vol  gar

E.  M.  S.  I think  I see.  Why  are  you  telling  me  about  it  ?
because  I promised  you  I would.


372


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  were  going  to  think  over  the  name  of  a poem.

Yes  and  that  is  it.

E.  M.  S.  What  was  the  poem  about  1
Vol  is  right.

E.  M.  S.  You  have  got  something  like  the  name  of  a poem.  It  is
not  quite  right,  but  if  you  tell  me  what  is  in  the  poem
I think  I shall  understand.

Hope  Star  Horizon.

Horizon  comes  elsewhere

Yes  do  not  get  confused  dear  Mrs  Sidgwick.^

E.  M,  S.  I will  not  get  confused.

V :\i

V M

(Rector  communicating)

Almost  right  he  says

(Myers  apparently  encouraging  Rector  to  try  again)  Yes
I do  wish  it  very  much  just  to  keep  my  promise  and
complete  my  U.D.  of  the  message.

(to  E.  M.  S.)  Y^ou  know  my  interest
E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I know  well.

and  my  desire  to  prove  the  survival  of  bodily  death
E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I know  well.

AB

Volugevar

E.  M.  S.  You’ve  really  very  nearly  got  it.

(Rector  communicating)

I cant  quite  repeat  the  last  two  letters
but  he  caught  me  after  I left  the  light
and  told  me  what  it  was  R.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  Rector,  it’s  very  difficult  and  you’ve  nearly  got  it.  Quite
near  enough,

V 0 1 u g u r

AB  t

1 For  a suggested  explanation  of  this  passage  v.  p.  295.


i-vir.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  373

E.M.  S.  Yes,  Eector,  you  have  got  it  very  nearly  right.  I am  quite
satisfied.

Thank  you.

E.  M.  S.  Do  you  remember  what  the  poem  is  chiefly  about  ?

(Myers  communicating)

I just  gave  you

E.  M.  S.  Hope  and  Star

Yes  as  Star  follows  star  so  I follow  that  message. i
I gave  Eector  one  more  letter
how  do  you  pronounce
ABt

E.  M.  S.  Abt.

V O (hand  enquires  of  E.  M.  S.)

E.  M.  S.  Yogler.

Correct

[The  hand  is  tremendously  pleased  and  excited  and  thumps
and  gesticulates.  The  impression  given  is  like  that  of  a
person  dancing  round  the  room  in  delight  at  having
accomplished  something.  Contemporaneous  note  hy  E.  M.  6^.]

(Eector  communicating)

he  pronounced  it  for  me  again  and  again  just  as  you  did.
and  he  said  Eector  get  her  to  pronounce  it  for  you  and  you
will  U.D.  he  whispered  it  in  my  ear

E.  M.  S.  J ust  as  you  Avere  coming  out  ?

just  as  I left  the  light.

Voglor

yes.

E.  M.  S.  Good.

(Myers  communicating)

Now  dear  Mrs  Sidgwick

in  future  have  no  doubt  or  fear  of  so  called  death  as  there  is
none

as  there  is  certainly  intelligent  life  beyond  it.

^ Cf.  “Bright  star  of  hope  shed  your  beams  on  me”,  p.  ,360.


374


./.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  Yes,  it’s  a great  comfort.  - .

yes  and  I have  helped  to  proclaim  it  for  you  all.

E.  M.  S.  You  have  indeed.

I wish  to  continue  from  time  to  time  to  help  you  by  given
[sic]  some  sign  to  assure  you  I am  with  you.

E.  M.  S.  I hope  you  will.

(I  will)  [There  were  marks  meant  for  brackets  enclosing
“I  will”,  I think.  Note  by  E.  M.  <S’.]
and  that  my  interest  is  still  keen  and
that  I hold  (1)  the  deepest  affection  for  you  at  all
times,  also  that  I look  forward
to  meeting  you  on  this  side.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I look  forward  to  meeting  you  and  all  friends,
one  word  more.

I gave  Mrs  Yerrall  Vaunt  and  transcendentalism.^

E.  M.  S.  “ Transcendentalism  ” %
yes.

the  thing  which  impressed  me  most  was  the  lines  (?)  be3’ond
the  grave

and  do  you  remember  his  cpiestioning

and  the  answer  through  his  seeing  the  (a  star  was  then
drawn)

I will  catch  Rector  again  and  whisper  all  to  him.
and  let  me  first  remind  you  how  deeply  I was  affected  by
the  message  and  how  the  uncertainty  of
of  abt  gave  (?)  me  the  words  I wrote,
and  the  faith

(E.  M.  S.  attempts  to  read  over  the  last  few  lines.)

how  the  uncertainty  of  Abt  and  the  faith  which  he  held  gave
me  my

brought  to  my  memory

'This  had  earlier  in  the  sitting  been  given  as  “transcends”.  E.  M.  S.  had
niis-read  it  as  “transcendental”.  “Transcends”  occurs  in  Eabhi  hen  Ezra,  hwt
“ transcendentalism”  does  not.  This  is  a good  instance  of  the  readiness  of  the
trance-personalities,  who  accepted  tlie  mis-reading  “transcendental”,  to  modify
even  their  correct  statements  in  obedience  to  suggestion ; though  here  the
suggestion  may  have  been  specially  enticing  because  it  recalled  the  title  of  one
of  Browning’s  poems  : Transcendentalism.  Note  by  ./.  G.  P.


lvil]


375


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

the  experience  I have  had  myself  sufficiently  clear  for  me  to
cjuote  it  for  you.
yes

(Eector  communicating)

I left  out  some  words  I am  sorry  R.

(Myers  communicating)

Listen  Mrs  S.  are  you  still  listening.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

I refreshed  my  memory  and  C[Uoted.  those  words  as  I gave
them  to  Rector

go  over  it  again  and  it  will  I think  seem  clearer  to  you.

E.  M.  S.  Shall  I read  it  now  ? [I  thought  he  was  telling  me  to  go
over  the  script,  but  probably  he  meant  the  poem.  E.M.S.']

Do  you  remember  the  passage  where  his  faith  is

E.  M.  S.  In  the  poem  ?

yes.

E.  M.  S.  Not  Cjuite,  but  I will  look  again.

Yes  do  ....

I remember  it  fairly  well  but  I am  trying  to  explain  to  you
his  doubts.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I see.

and  fears  then  his  acceptance  of  God  yes  and  faith  in  Him
Do  you  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  I do.

(Rector  communicating)

he  is  trying  to  explain  a little  about  the  poem.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I quite  see.

So  that  you  can  be  sure  he  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I quite  see.  Thank  you,  Mr  Myers.

(Myers  communicating)

Now  can  I do  more  to  help  you  than  (1)
give  other  messages  1


376


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

E.  M.  S.  I should  like  you,  Mr  Myers,  to  say’’  exactly  why  that  poem
was  so  appropriate  as  an  answer  to  the  Latin  message.

I chose  that  because  of  the  appropriate  conditions'  mentioned
in  it  which  applied  to  my  own  life.

U.D.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

and  nothing  I could  think  of  so
completely  answered  it  to  my  mind
as  those  special  words.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I see.  I will  tell  Mr.  Piddington.

I send  my  love  to  him.  I wish
you  to  ask  him  if  I can  be
even  more  explicit.

E.  M.  S.  I will  ask  him.

(At  the  end  of  the  sitting  E.  M.  S.  asked  Myersp  to  give
her  at  the  next  opportunit}'  answers  to  Mrs  Verrall’s
questions  about  the  Greek  words  and  about  the  Ode  of
Horace.)

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  29.

(Present : Mrs  Verrall  and  Miss  A.  Johnson)

(Rector  communicating)

He  [i.e.  Myers]  wishes  to  U.D.  if  he  can  reply  about  the
Horace  question  on  third  [i.e.  Wednesday,  May  1].  Yes
to  Mrs  S.  [i.e.  Mrs  Sidgwick.]

Mrs  V.  Oh  ! that’s  to  Mrs  Sidgwick,  I suppose  ?

(Myers  communicating)  Yes  very  good.  I remember  my
reference,  to  the  Greek  words  well,  this  was  what
brought  to  my  mind  the  thought  about  Sasia  S a i s i a .

MrsW.  Print  it.

F rancis
Si  a a .

(Rector  communicating)  No  you  do  not  U.D.  me  R.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


377


Mrs  V.  No,  I know  I don’t.

(Myers  communicating)

I said  the  last  sentence

Mrs  V.  “What  brought  to  my  mind  the  sentence”.

which  I gave  you  was  o k u m e n [i.e.  d/cu/^wr  wrongly
transliterated]

(Rector  communicating)

Best  to  U.D.  each  word
separately  if  you  can  and  it  will  be
easier  to  U.D.  him  R.

(Myers  communicating)

I gave  it  here  several

Several  times  and  I thought  you  U.D.  it.

Mrs  V.  Yes.  What  was  it,  Rector,  that  you  gave  me  ? A message
about  Horace

(Rector  communicating)

Yes.

Mrs  V.  No.  I dont  think  the  message  has  been  given  me  about
Horace.  I have  no  knowledge  of  it.

Oh  yes.  I think  there  is  still  some
muddling  wait  and  I will  explain.

I did  not  mean  Horace  at  all  he  Mr  Myers  means.

Del

Del

MrsV.  “Del”  or  “Det”?

Borg  Yes  S w Borg.

Mrs  V.  Swedenborg  ?

Yes.

Myersp  then  said  he  had  “ referred  to  another  character.  I
wish  to  go  back  to  St  Paul.  My  reference  to  azure  a blue  sea”.  ^
In  the  waking-stage  the  words  “ the  unknown  deity — passed
out  of  their  bodies  and  gone — passed  out  of  their  bodies  and
gone — passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone — every  peak  and


ly.  pp.  287-8.


378


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


point  ....  star  — Abt  ” were  uttered  immediately  after  the
name  “Myers”  had  been  pronounced.  These  words  were  heard
by  Miss  Newton  and  recorded  by  Mrs  Verrall.

On  April  30  Mrs  Verrall,  who  was  present  at  the  sitting,
repeated  to  Myersp  a question  which  I had  first  put  on  her
behalf  some  weeks  earlier,  and  which  hitherto  had  not  been
answered.  From  this  point  the  record  proceeds  a,s  follows: —

(Myers  communicating)  Did  Piddington  say  more?  [i.e.  “did
he  ask  any  other  cpiestions  on  your  behalf?”]

Mrs.  V.  Yes,  he  asked  about  a poem  of  Horace  which  I did  not
remember  yesterday.  Shall  I repeat  the  question  ? [Mrs
Verrall  had  forgotten  that  she  had  asked  J.  G.  P.  to  put
the  C|uestion  about  the  Ode  of  Horace.]

If  you  will.

Mrs  V.  I asked  if  you  could  remember  which  of  Horace’s  Odes —

his  what  ?

Mrs  V.  Odes.

ODES  he  wrote  many  ODES.

Mrs  V.  If  you  could  remember  which  of  these  Odes  you  once  told  my
husband  had  specially  entered  into  your  inner  life.

did  you  entered  into  my  what  life?

Mrs  V.  Inner  life.

Oh  inner  life.  I U.D.  now.

Mrs  V.  You  wrote  it  to  my  husband  after  he  sent  you  a book  he  had
written  about  Horace.

I believe  I can  recall  it  in  time.  I will  certainly  go  over
my  memories  very  carefully  and  do  my  utmost  to  recall.


Extract  from  sitting  of  May  1.

(Present:  E.  M.  S.  and  Miss  A.  Johnson)

(Myers  communicating)

Good  morning  Mrs  Sidgwick  jmu  are  Mrs  Sidgwick  are
you  not  ?


379


LVli.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  Mr.  Myers.  Good  morning.  I am  very  glad  to  see  you.

I am  anxious  today  to  clear  one  or  two  things
also  to  tell  you  some  points.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  thank  you.  I shall  be  very  glad  to  hear  them.

Do  you  remember  Avhat  I said  about  disappointments.

E.  M.  S.  “Disappointments”?
yes.

I wished  to  recall,  and  complete,  anything  that  has  been
asked  of  me  so  far  as  possible.

E.  M.  S.  Thank  you.

Do  you  remember  my  reference  to  the  Poem
E.  M.  S.  Yes,  very  well.

Did  you  wish  to  ask  anything  more.

Do  you  remember  when  I said  I had  passed  through  my
body  and  returned.

I tried  to  give  it.  & clearly
but  w'as  not  sure  that  you  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  Do  you  mean  you  gave  the  name  of  the  poem  ?

Oh  yes.  I mean  I tried  to  give  another  part  also,
which  referred  to  completed,  happiness  in  this  life,
and  the  possibility  of  returning  to  the  old  world,  again,
to  prove  the  truth  of  survival  of  Bodily  death,
those  words  were  lingering  in  my  memory  and  I gave  it  as
peak  followed  Star.

(Rector  communicating)

It  is  not  all  through  yet  R.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

I only  get  a few  of  his  words  at  a time  friend.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

If  they  do  not  make  sense  I am  sorry  and
you  must  patch  them  together  as  best  you  can.


380


J.  G.  Picldi'ngton.


[part


E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  they  are  quite  good  sense.

[This  I said  prompted  by  Miss  Johnson  who  saw  the
reference  to  Aht  Vogler,  in  the  words  “ passed  through  my  body
and  returned  ”,  which  escaped  me.  Contem])oraneous  note  by
E.  M.  8.]

he  says  other  words  about  disappointment  and  how  he
hoped.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

joy  and  sublime  truth  and  delight  because  of  his  achievement,
do  you  U.D.  what  he  is  talking  about.

E.  M.  S.  Not  quite,  but  I will  piece  it  together.

A.  J.  (to  E.  M.  S.)  I know  what  he’s  talking  about.

Will  you  try  1

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  certainly.  I think  I quite  understand.

Oh  I do  not.  R.

But  I will  register  what  he  says.

Peace  Heaven  made  whole  sky  and  Heaven  meet.

(Myers  communicating)

Mrs  Sidgwick  dear  old  friend  do  you  hear  me  at  all  1

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I hear.  I have  not  cpiite  understood,  but  I am  putting
it  together  and  I think  I shall  understand.

I believe  you  will,  when  I tell  you  I have  returned  to
breath  [sic]  in  the  old  world  which,
which  is  not  however  better  than  our  new.

(E.  M.  S.  has  difficulty  in  reading.)

(Rector  communicating)
returned  to
he  said  breathe

E.  M.  S.  It  is  about  Abt  Yogler  he  is  telling  me,  is  it  not  1

he  is  telling  you  about  his  writing  through  Mrs  Verrall
Abt  Volger
Y 0

E.  M.  S.  V 0 G,  yes,  quite  right,
g 1 a r.

and  that  is  all  I can  ET.D  myself  R.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  381

E.  M.  S.  Let  him  go  on  and  say  all  he  wishes  to  say.

he  will  he  speaks  very  beautiful  words  to  me  E.

(Myers  communicating)

Mrs  Sidgwick  my  most  earnest  wish  is
to  complete  rny  undertaking  while  the
opportunity  presents  itself.

Hodgson  is  present  and  wishes  me
to  express  his  love  and  best  wishes
He  is  helping  me  now.

I remember  vaguely  my  earliest  impression  of  those  words.

What  is  to  be  shall  be.

and  what  should  (1)  be  (?)  shall  be  soon.

(Towards  the  end  of  the  sitting  Myersp  spontaneously  intro-
duced the  following  reference  to  Horace’s  Odes  :)

I went  over  those  Odes  very  carefully
and  remembered  one  in  particular
which  I loved  ver}'  much
Odes  yes  it  was.

(Rector  communicating)
sounds  like  Odessus

E.  M.  S.  “Odessis”?
yes.

Odesesis

Odesia

E.  M.  S.  “Odesia”?
yes  like  it

(Myers  communicating)

I do  not  think  I ever  told  you.  before.

Odesu

Odesie

E.  M.S.  “Odyssey”?
yes

Better  not  it  quite.

E.  :m.  S.  Let  us  leave  it  for  next  time.

Good


382  J,  Q_  Piddincjton.  [part

In  the  waking-stage  the  following  words  were  spoken  : —

hat  do  they  say  to  me  1 Got  Rector  b}'  the  ear.  Aches
(rubbing  the  right  liand).  I want  to  sa}^

What’s  the  super  ceiling  (1)  ? I’m  sure  too  sure.  I’m  passed
through  the  body  and  gone.  Heaven.  Well,  I never
had  such  a good  time.  Mr  Hodgson  says  you’ve  got
to  do  some  thinking  and  then  you’ll  see  what  he  is
drivins:  at.

On  May  6 Mrs  Sidgwick  asked  Rector  “ to  bring  out  ” the
word  “Vaunt”,  which  had  been  before  mentioned  as  the  suViject
of  a cross-corresponding  message,  “ with  the  other  lights  ” (i.e.
other  automatists  besides  Mrs  Verrall)  “according  to  the  Latin
Message”.  Rector  replied:  “Yes,  we  will.  You  can  rely  upon
our  doing  so  under  just  the  right  conditions”.  I now  quote
from  the  record  : — •

(Myers  communicating)  Now  I believe  this  [i.e.  the  name
Plotinus]  completes  the  answer  to  the  Greek  question.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  it  does.

and  the  Latin  I have  previously  answered.

E.  M.  S.  I see.  Yes.

I believe  through  both  lights  sufficiently  for  you  to  U.D.
that  I have  really  answered  at  last.

E.  M.  S.  Through  Mrs.  Yerrall  you  answered  very  clearljq  and
through  this  “light”  you  have  said  a good  deal  about
Alt  VorjJer.  But  in  Abt  Vogler  there  is  a particular
line  which  specially  answers  the  Latin  Message.  The
Latin  Message,  as  you  know,  refers  to  cross-correspond-
ences, but  also  to  something  more,  and  there  is  a line
in  Alt  Vogler  which  we  think  you  had  in  mind  as
describing  that  something  more.  It  would  be  very  good
if  you  could  give  it  here.

[The  aljove  was  noted  l^y  Miss  Johnson,  but  not  fully.  I
have  written  out  from  her  notes  what  I intended  to  say
and  believe  I,  in  effect,  did  say.  Contemgooraneous  note  by
E.  M.  Y]


LVII.l


883


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Yes  certainly.  I shall  have  to  give  it  to  Rector  as  I did
the  Greek.

E.  M.  vS.  That  would  be  a good  plan.

then  I can  get  it  through  clearly,
did  you  say  Line.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  it  is  a line  of  the  poem.

Poem  ?

E.  M.  S.  Yes.  Abt  Fogler.

Abt  ABT.  Yolg

(hand  expresses  dissatisfaction  with  this.)

Yogler.

(Rector  communicating)

You  see  I do  not  always  catch  the
letters  as  he  repeats  them.  R.

E.  M.  S.  No,  I see.

Therefore  when  I am  registering  I am  apt  to  misspell.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

but  if  you  ask  me  to  correct  it  of  course  I can.  R.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

(Myers  communicating.)

I remember  the  message  as  referring  to  my  giving,  proofs
of  survival  of  Bodily  death  by,  or  through  C C.  [i.e.
“ cross-correspondence  ”]  messages.

E.  M.  S.  YYs  in  a particular  way.

quite  I U.D.  absolutely

very(?)  it  is  very  clear  to  me  my  only  difficulty  is  in
making  it  quite  clear  to  R.  [i.e.  Rector]

E.  M.  S.  I see.

I could  not  help  thinking  of  Tennyson  in  one  of  the
inquiries  and  Browning  in  the  other.


384


G.  Pidclington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  Quite  right.

You  may  be  quite  sure  I will  go  over  this  carefully  and
tell  R.


(After  making  a few  references  to  other  subjects  Myersp
continues  as  follows  :)

now  one  word  more.

Mrs  S.  my  reply  was.  about  the  poem,  and  long  ago  I gave
the  word  Music,  which  came  to  me  as  appropriate  to
my  answer,  and  U.D.  of  the  message.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  quite  right.

You  must  patch  things  together  as  best  you  can.  Remember
we  do  not  give  odd

or  singular  words,  without

(Healer’s  influence  grasped  here.)

a deep  and  hidden  meaning.

E.  M.  S.  That  is  why  we  thought  you  had  a hidden  meaning  in
“ Vaunt  ”.

Yes  so  I have

listen,  in  all  our  messages  through  both  lights  there  is
always  more  or  less  of  the  human  element  in  them,
which  cannot  be  avoided,  for  your  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  I see,

but  you  must  discriminate  and  disect  [sic]

E.  M.  S.  “direct”?

disect.

E.  M.  S.  “dissect”.

the  spiritual  from  the  material  and  you  will  see  and  U.D.
much,  there  was  great  joy  yet  much  hope  in  the  lines
which  I wish  to  give  you.


E.  M.  S.  I see.  Yes,  there  is.


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  385

would  it  be  clearer  to  you  if  I saitl  hoped  ?
yes

hoped  separate  word
hoped  yes.

does  it  convey  my  meaning  any  clearer  ?

E.  AI.  S.  Not  quite,  I think.

Do  you  remember,  the  delight  and  joy  of  ABt  and  then
the  longing  and  final  hope.

E.  M.  S.  Yes  quite.

Yes

well  now  do  you  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  I do.

I shall  make  it  clearer  after  talking  it  over  with  E.  [i.e.
Eector.]

E.  AI.  S.  Yes.

but  I am  only  giving  you  additional  proofs  of  my  U.Dg.

E.  AI.  S.  Yes,  you  are,  I think.

Mrs  Sidgwick  I am  trying  now  dear  friend  to  give  you
additional  evidence  do  you  remember  the  point  where
Poem  suggested  itself  to  me  'I

E.  AI.  S.  Yes.

and  I selected  from  it  my  reply.

(MyerSp  after  addressing  some  remarks  to  Miss  Johnson;
then  continues  as  follows  :— )

I remember.

Those  who  passed  beyond  do  return
Those  beyond  mortal  vision

(Eector  communicating)

I am  sorry  I left  that  out  E.


(Myers  communicating)

1 will  now  refer  a little  more  to  my  expressions  as  I wish
them  to  appear.


386


J.  G.  Plddington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  Do.  Shall  I tell  yon  something  ? About  the  Ode —
Horace’s  Ode — we  believe  you  have  got  something
about  it,  but  it  was  not  clear  to  us.  [I  had  read
to  Mrs  Verrall  the  part  of  the  record  of  the  sitting  of
May  1 containing  the  words  “I  had  passed  through  my
body  and  returned  She  said  this  was  appropriate  to
and  might  be  an  attempt  to  describe  the  Horace  Ode,
which  was  about  reincarnation.  I do  not  think  we  either
of  us  connected  it  at  the  moment  with  Aht  Foglev,  certainly
I did  not.  Contemporaneous  note  hy  E.  M.  fS.]  If  you  can
get  it  clear,  it  will  be  very  good.

You  I think  connected  it  today.

(E.  M.  S.  has  difficulty  in  reading.)

You  have  (1)  I think  connected  it  today.

E.  M.  S.  It  was  last  time  I was  here,  and  I connected  it  afterwards.

Yes.  I mean  you  U.D.  what  I was

trying  to  express.

you  remember.

Passed  through  body  and  gone.

(E.  M.  S.  whispers  to  A.  J.,  “that’s  right”.)

breathe

E.  M.  S.  “ breathe  ” ?

Yes.

again  in  old  world.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  quite  right ; that  is  what  I meant.

that  was  the  part  I specially  referred  to  and  tried  to
convey.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  and  I did  not  understand  till  afterwards.

Sorry  but  glad  you  U.D.  now.

I tried  with  all  my  power  to  answer  it  while  the  light  was
burning

breathe  again  in  the  old  world.

as  if  it  were  here  (?)  [or,  “ new  ”]  I said.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.  I think  that  was  what  you  said.


387


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

but  the  words  were  a little  eonfused  perhaps,
but  those  words  I specially  remembered  as  being  (?)  [or
“having”]  referred  to  in  my  message  to  Mr  Verrall.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  that  is  quite  right,  but  I will  ask  Mr  Verrall.

If  you  do  you  will  find  it  is  the  only  part  which  most
impressed  on  my  memory,
in  my  memory.

If  I could  make  it  clearer.  I would  certainly  try.

There  were  one  or  two  other  words  concerned  with  Horace
did  you  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  No;  I did  not  understand;  I will  look  again.

Breathe  was  one  Old  another
World  another

E.  M.  S.  I will  look  for  them  in  the  record
Breath

Passed  through  body  and  gone
all  goes  together
and  that  is  Horace.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

Now  I do  not  believe  I can  do  more  today.

Extract  from  sitting  of  May  7,

(Present : E.  M.  S.  and  Miss  A.  Johnson)

(Myers  communicating)

I wish  very  much  to  make  things  as  clear  as  I can.

E.  M.  S.  Is  that  Mr.  Myers  ?

Yes.

I heard  you  speak  to  me
Good  morning  my  friend.

E.  M.  S.  Good  morning,  Mr.  Myers.

I am  very  glad  to  greet  you  again.

E.  M.  S.  And  I to  greet  you.


3<S8  G.  Pidclington.  [part

If  the  fourth  is  a Star  what  would  C?)  [or,  “should”]  the
third  be.
do  you  U.D.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I understand  I think.

Out  of  the  first  came  a star.

E.  M.  S.  (misreading)  “but  if  the  first  came  a star”.

(Rector  communicating)

I do  not  think  I get  it  just  right.  R.

E.  M.  S.  Never  mind,  we  will  get  it  right  directly.

fourth

Star  and  then  he  draws  it.  and  says  fourth
E.  M.  S.  Yes,  good

if  instead  of  a fourth  came  a star.

E.  xM.  S.  Yes  ?

(Here  an  incomplete  drawing  of  a star  was  made)

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  he  draws  a star.

(Myers  communicating.)
framed

E.  M.S.  “framed”?  “fumed”?

Yes.

I say  Passion.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

to  sky.

do  you  hear  me  at  all

E.  M.S.  Yes,  I hear  you.  I think  you  are  trying  to  tell  me  the
line  I asked  for.

I am  giving  it  to  Rector.

E.  M.  S.  I .see.

in  my  passion  to

got  it.


389


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  AtUomatisms.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  I have  got  it  enough,
in  my  passion  to  s sc
(E.  M.  S.  reads  “ s e ”)  (Hand  shaken  to  indicate  negative.)
no.

in  my  passion
is  right.

E.  M.  S.  I think  you  have  given  it  quite  enough.  I quite  see  what
line  you  are  referring  to.  [I  meant  the  line  about  the
star.  E.  M.  >?.]

Sky

the  the  Sky

I gave  it  to  Rector  when  I left.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I see.

in  my  passion  to
the  sky.

E.  M.  S.  If  you  are  trying  to  give  me  the  line  in  AM  Vogler  which
I asked  for,  }mu  need  not  trouble  further.

[The  line  I wanted  was :

“ That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a fourth
sound,  hut  a star  ”,

but  I had  not  got  the  exact  words  in  my  mind.  This  line
had,  of  course,  been  clearly  indicated,  but  an  attempt
was  now  being  made  to  give

“As  the  earth  had  done  her  best,  in  my  passion,
to  scale  the  sJcy”,

which  was  not  in  my  mind  at  all  and  which  I did  not
remember.  Contemporaneous  note  by  E.  M.  S'.]

that  is  it

I promised  to  complete  it  this  day.

E.  M.S.  Yes,  it  is  all  right.  I wanted  to  know  if  you  were  thinking
of  that  line  when  you  quoted  Abt  Vogler,  as  an  answer
[“to  the  Latin  message”,  I ought  to  have  said,  but  it
is  very  doubtful  whether  I did.  Note  by  E.  M.  S.]


390


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Oh  yes.  this  is  all  I am  thinking  about
about  at  the  moment  is  to  give  you  the
line  I promised,
have  you  U.D.  it  sufficiently

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  I understand  it  quite  sufficiently.

Passion  is  the  chief  word  yes

U.D.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

to  sc  the  sky
reach

I

E.  M.  S.  reach  1

it  should  not  be  reach  but  scale
in  my  passion  is  right.

(A.  J.,  who,  though  sitting  apart,  knew  what  was  passing
because  E.  M.  S.  read  the  writing  out  as  it  came,  wrote
on  a slip  of  paper  “This  is  another  line  in  AM  Vogler.”,
and  handed  this  to  E.  M.  S.)

E.  M.  S.  But  the  line  I wanted  was  the  one  about  the  star.

Yes  I know  but  I am  only  explaining-
in  my  passion  to  to  reach  you
as  clear  as  the  sky
I quote
If  out  of
If  instead  of

The  forth  [sic]  framed  a star

E.  M.  S.  “ formed  a star  1 ” “ found  a star  ” ? [I  now  think  “ framed  ”
was  what  was  intended.  Noie  hy  E.  M.  »?.]

Yes.

fourth  Star.

E.  M.  S.  I see.

came  a Star,  is  right,
and  to  make  it  clearer.

I drew  a Star.


E.  M.  S.  I see ; very  good.


LVII.]

E.  M.  S.
E.  M.  S.
E.  M.  S.

E.  M.  S.

E.  M,  S.

E.  M.  S.
E.  M.  S.

E.  M.  S.


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  391

This  completes  my  answer  to  the  Latin  message.

If  you  have  received  all  my  words

(E.  M.  S.  cannot  read  “received”.)

received  all  my  words  clearly,
in  my  Passion  to  reach  you  clearly.

I have  made  Eector  try  to  — draw  a star  for  me  so  there
can  be  no  mistake.

No,  there  can  be  no  mistake.

now  are  you  satisfied?

Yes,  cjuite.

Thank  you.

Thank  you  very  much.

You  U.D.  the  difficulties  in  quoting  to  Rector  who  must
repeat  for  me.

Yes,  I U.D.

When  I quoted  to  Mrs  Y.  I drew  the  Star  so  as  to  make
it  clearer  and  I wished  R to  reproduce  it  in  connection
with  the  words  in  the  line.

Yes.

this  is  all  unless  you  wish  me  to  recall  more  words  of  it
No,  thank  you.  You  have  recalled  cjuite  enough.

So  long  as  you  U.D.  it.  I am  happy.

And  I am  very  happy  too,  because  you  have  understood  us.

I U.D.  from  the  first.  but  we  labored  [sic]  under  great
difficulties

in  trying  to  complete  it.  through  both  lights.

I see.

(Rector  communicating)

he  asked  me  to  make  the  message  C C.  [i.e.  “cross-corre-
spondence ”]  unmistakeably  clear


392


J.  G.  Fidclington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  Yes,  thank  you.

and  do  it  in  such  a way  as  to  make  it  conclusive.
E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  you  have.

I believe  you  are  fair  enough  to  realise  it


(Myers  communicating)

If  instead  of  out  of  the  fourth  came  a Star  there  is  something
I cant  get  through  yet.

E.  M.  S.  I think  you  have  got  through  enough

all  right.

give  it  to  my  friend  [i.e.  J.  G.  P.]  and  tell  him  this  is  my
final  answer  to  his  request  for  a definite  C C message.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I will.

(Waking-Stage.)

Hallo

Pm  glad  — • — yes.

Sound  star

instead  of  a fourth  sound

sound

yes  Sound

I hear  you

Mr  Myers  says  Out  of  — — framed  the  Star ; and  they
would  not  let  me  go  till  I said  it.

Extract  from  sitting  of  May  8.

(Present  : E.  M.  S.  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson)

(Myers  communicating)

One  word  did  she  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]  U.D.  my  answers.

E.  M.  S.  I think  she  did.  She  understood  about  the  Greek — that  was
quite  complete,  but  she  asked  me  to  tell  her  if  you  said
anything  more  about  Hornce.

I said  Breathed  in  several  dift'erent  communications  or  tried
to  get  it  through.


393


LVJi.]  ^4  iSeries  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did  get  that  through.

This  was  the  one  particular  part  whicli  I recalled

E.  M.  S.  I see:  that’s  quite  gooh.

I do  not  attempt  to  get  the  whole  passage  through  this  day
but  I do  wish  to  niake  it  as  clear  as  I can  for  your  U.Dg
that  I do  remember  the  Ode  in  a sense.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I think  you  do.

I certainly  do.

Breathed  and  life  wonderfully  impressed  me  always,
breathed  life  & more

(Rector  communicating)

I can’t  U.I).  that  word  sounds  like  World
Right

E.  M.  S.  Yes  ; I see  ; that’s  right.

with  something  else  and  world
E.  M.  S.  I see.

Yes.

right  R.

E.  M.  S.  Good.

(Myers  communicating)

Is  that  sufficient.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  that’s  quite  sufficient.

(After  further  subjects  have  been  mentioned,  Hodgson  com-
municates as  follows  : — )
instead  of  a fourth  sound

E.  M.  S.  Fourth  sounds  Yes'?

(Hand  raised  in  air  as  though  listening)
he  framed  a fourth  sound

E.  M.  S.  (reading)  “ He  framed  a fourth  sound  ” 1

named  a fourth  a star,
yes.


394


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


E.  M.  S.  I see.

I do  not  know  exactly  whether
you  realise  how  I U.D.  that  message.

E,  M.  S.  I think  I do.

I am  Hodgson.


Extract  from  sitting  of  May  27.

(Present : 0.  J.  L.  and  Lady  Lodge)

(Myers  communicating)

0.  .J.  L.  Do  you  wish  to  translate  to  me  Piddington’s  Latin
Message  ?

Yes,  you  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  ideas.

O.  J.  L.  Cannot  read  all  that.

You  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  ideas.

but  (?)  I wish  you  to  give  through  Mrs  Verrall  proof  such
proof  of  the  survival  of  Bodily  death

in  such  a way  as  to  make  in  such  a

prove  conclusively  conclusively  the  survival  of  Bodily  death.

0.  J.  L.  Yes  I quite  understand.  [But  I did  not  know  that  this
purported  to  be  an  attempt  at  translation.  I thought  it
was  padding.  Note  hy  0.  J.  L.\

This  is  the  idea.

After  the  light  rests  and  I return  I will  through  R [i.e.
Rector]  give  you  a concise  and  clear  interpretation  of  it.

O.  .J.  L.  Very  well,  you  will  translate  it  later?

Yes.  I understand  the  message  absolutely  but  it  took  a
long  time  to  get  it  through

He  mentioned  my  own  words  in  it  viz.  the  Survival  of
Bodily  death.

Did  you  understand  it.

O.  J.  L.  No,  I did  not;  I knew  about  the  Latin,  but  I do  not  know
what  it  was.


395


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automcdisms.

It  was  this

You  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  adies  [in  error
for  “ideas”]

But  what  we  now  is  for  you  to  give  such  proof  through

C C.

0.  J.  L.  (not  realising  that  he  was  already  trying  to  do  so.)  ^^'ould
you  tell  me  the  Latin  again  ?

Yes  assimilate  ideas  one  with  another

But  what  I ask  is  for  you  to  give  such  proof  of  the  survival
of  bodily  death  and  in  such  a way  as  to  make  it  conclusive
He  wished  me  to  give  a message  through  Mrs  Verrall
& this  light  concerning  the  same  subject.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I know,  cross-correspondence.

Yes,  and  this  was  his  message  to  me  in  Latin.

0.  J.  L.  Very  well,  thank  you.

You  will  find  it  is  correct  in  the  main,
he  suggested  Browning  to  me.

0.  J.  L.  Yes.

In  the  passage  Preflssias  [i.e.  perficiasf

0.  J.  L.  “ Perfissias  ” ?

Yes  yes.  Appreciate  [so  read]

Apparirat  Appariat  [i.e.  appareat\.

O.  J.  L.  Oh,  I see,  “ Appariat  ” ; very  well,
illud  etc.

from  the  last  sentence  I got

instead  of  a fourth  sound  came  a star,  Sound

0.  .1.  L.  Yes,  I know.

It  was  the  last  sentence  in  Latin  which  suggesteil  it  to  my
mind.

Jam  dudam  commitis  [sic].


396


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

Extract  from  sitting  of  June  2

(Present : 0.  J.  L.  and  Lady  Lodge)

(Myers  communicating)

O.  J.  L.  Do  you  want  to  tell  me  more  about  Piddington’s  Latin  1

Oh  yes  he  said  also  if  you  will  give  me  a message  not  a
message  really

but  a sign  of  some  kind  through  the  lights
corresponding  message  which  I cannot  mistake  I shall
consider  it  the  greatest  proof  of  your  survival  of  bodily
death.

Hence  my  reason  for  drawing  a star.

I believe  I have  given  you  a comparatively  full  or  complete
reply.

The  message  in  Latin  was  this

For  a long  [read  as  “life”]  time  you  have  been  assimilating
ideas  one  with  another  through  different  lights,
but  what

is  (1)  most  (!)  important  (?)  of(?)  all
if  to  [misread  as  “ this  ”]  prove  the  survival  of
bodily  death  is  for  you  to  give  in  — a a
certain  way  a sign

long  [apparently  a correction  of  the  misreading  “ life  ”.]

But  what  I want  but  what  we  want

if  [in  error  for  “is”]  for  you  to  give  us  proof  iu  such  a
wa}'  as  to  make  your  proof  conclusive.

I wish  you  would  follow  me  now  for  a moment.

0.  J.  L.  Quite  right.

Remember  when  Piddington  gave  me  his  message  the  special
point  in  it  was  for  me  to  give  definite  proof  through
both  lights.

The  first  thought  I had  was  to  repeat  a few  words  or  lines
of  Browning’s  poem,  but  in  order  to  make  it  still  more
definite  I registered  a star  and  the  lines  which  I quoted
to  you  before.  . . . were  the  most  appropriate  I could
find.

I believe  you  will  understand  this  to  be  conclusive  that  I
fully  understand  and  have
fairly  well  translated  his  message.


LVII.]


A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.


397


The  Answers  given  in  the  Trance  to  the  Horace  Ode

Question.

The  discussion  of  the  central  problem  will  be  simplified  if
we  first  disentangle  the  references  to  the  side  issue  involved
in  the  question  about  an  Ode  of  Horace.  In  order  to  follow
this  subordinate  incident  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  throughout
that  on  April  2-t  Myersp  successfully  identified  the  poem  of
Browning’s  which  he  claimed  to  have  alluded  to  in  the  phrase
“ Hope  Star  and  Browning  ” as  Abt  Vogler.

The  question  about  the  Ode  of  Horace  was  put  to  Myersp  for
the  first  time  on  Jan.  23,  1907  in  the  following  way  : —

J.  G.  P.  I have  two  questions  from  Mrs  Verrall  to  put  to  3'ou  ....

Do  not,  of  course,  answer  them  to  day  unless  jmu  like  ;
but  do  not  in  any  case  answer  them  when  Mrs  Verrall
is  here.  (J.  G.  P.  then  put  the  first  question.)  Now  I
will  give  you  the  second  question  : “ Which  Ode  of
Horace  entered  deeply  into  your  inner  lifei”  (J.  G.  P.
repeated  the  question  three  times,  each  time  reading  it
from  a written  note.  On  the  third  occasion  he  added
“Horace,  the  Latin  poet”.)

Mjmrsp,  after  the  question  had  been  put,  said:  “this  I
shall  have  to  recall  and  dwell  upon  at  some  length  after  I
cease  to  communicate  today  before  I can  bring  out  an  intelligent
reply  ”.

I myself  had  no  knowledge  or  means  of  guessing  what  the
answer  should  be.

No  further  reference  was  made  to  the  subject  until  Feb.  27.
At  the  sitting  held  on  that  day  Myersp  made  his  second  attempt
to  answer  the  Latin  Message  ; and  in  the  course  of  it  stated
that  he  had  I’eplied  to  it  already  in  messages  given  partly
through  Mrs  Piper  and  partly  through  Mi's  Verrall;  and  that
one  of  these  messages  was  “ with  reference  to  the  Poems  and
cross-corresponding  messages  as  given  . . . through  Mrs  Verrall”.
I asked  what  poems  were  meant  by  “ the  Poems  ”,  and  Myer.sp
replied  that  he  meant  his  own  poems  and  Browning’s  ; and
added  that  he  was  thinking  chiefly  of  “ Browning’s  lines  as
given  through  Mrs  Verrall”.  But  before  this  last  statement


398


[part


J.  G.  Piddington.

was  added  the  word  “Horace”  was  disconnectedly  written,
tliough  in  a context  which  must  be  held  to  have  meant  that
Horace’s  poems  were  to  be  joined  with  “ Browning’s  and  my
own  ” (v.  p.  335).

The  next  reference  to  the  subject  was  made  on  March  4,
when  Myersp  spontaneously  alluded  to  the  question  about  the
Horace  Ode  as  follows : “ I tried  to  make  my  thoughts  clear
to  you  about  my  difficulty  in  replying  to  Mrs  V.’s  question
about  Horace.  Did  you  understand  . . . that  I could  not  reply
for  some  time  about  Horace.  Did  he  [Rector]  refer  to  it  at
all  ? ” I said  I thought  not ; but  that  Horace  had  been  con-
nected with  his  own  answer  to  the  Latin  Message.  Myersp  at
once  said  this  was  a mistake : “ it  came  to  my  mind  while
speaking  that  I had  not  replied  to  it;  but  in  my  desire  to
reply  to  your  message  doubtless  there  was  some  confusion  ”.

Confusion  there  doubtless  was,  but  I believe  it  was  confusion
of  an  intelligible  and  extremely  suggestive  kind,  for,  as  I
shall  presentl}^  show,  MyerSp  answered  the  question  about  the
Ode  of  Horace  by  means  of  allusions  to  two  poems  of  Frederic
Myers’s  and  to  Browning’s  Aht  Vogler.

The  next  reference  to  the  subject  was  on  April  17,  when
Mrs  Sidgwick  reminded  Myersp  of  his  ])romise  to  answer  the
question.  Myersp  said:  “I  recall  the  question,  and  I had  Ode
to  Nature  on  my  mind;  but  as  I thought  I loved  another  ode
better  I did  not  reply  until  I could  say  it  more  clearly.  Do
you  remember  immortality?  . . I thought  I could  answer”.
Mrs  Sidgwick  saw  no  sense  in  this,  nor  did  I when  I read
the  record.  I understood  Myersp  to  mean  that  there  was  an
Ode  of  Horace  known  as  the  “Ode  to  Nature”,  and  that  he
had  first  thous;ht  of  this  Ode  as  being  the  one  which  had
entered  deeply  into  his  inner  life,  but  had  subsequently  remem-
bered another  Ode  which  he  had  loved  better,  but  that  so  far
he  had  not  succeeded  in  mentioning  it  through  Mrs  Piper.  The
question  “do  you  i-ememher  immortality?”  I dismissed  as
rubbish.

Months  later  I noticed  that  Ode  to  Nature  and  Immortality
are  the  titles  of  two  poems  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  published  in
Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry : a book  unknown  to  Mrs  Piper
(v.  pp.  109-110).  Between  Hoi'.  C.  I.  28 — the  Ode  of  Horace


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  A^itomatisms.  399

to  which  Mrs  Verrall’s  question  referred — and  Immo7'tality
it  seems  to  me  that  there  may  be  a considerable  resemblance
in  thought,  and  there  are  some  resemblances  in  language.  The
central  thought  of  Myers’s  Immoi'tcdity — of  which  I quote
part  of  the  first  and  the  whole  of  the  second  and  last  stanza
■ — T take  to  be  this : “ The  prospect  of  annihilation  is  painful ;
but  the  prospect  of  an  aimless,  inert  and  monotonous  im-
mortality is  as  bad,  or  even  worse

Lo  all  that  age  is  as  a speck  of  sand
Lost  on  the  long  beach  when  the  tides  are  free.

And  no  man  metes  it  in  his  hollow  hand
Nor  cai’es  to  ponder  it,  how  small  it  be;

At  ebb  it  lies  forgotten  on  the  land
And  at  full  tide  forgotten  in  the  sea.

II

Yet  in  my  hid  soul  must  a voice  I’eply

Which  knows  not  which  may  seem  the  viler  gain,

To  sleep  for  ever  or  be  born  again.

The  blank  repose  or  drear  eternity.

A solitary  thing  it  were  to  die

So  late  begotten  and  so  early  slain.

With  sweet  life  withered  to  a passing  pain,

Till  nothing  anywhere  should  still  be  I.

Yet  if  for  evermore  I must  convey
These  weary  senses  thro’  an  endless  day
And  gaze  on  God  with  these  exhausted  eyes,

I fear  that  howso’er  the  seraphs  play
My  life  shall  not  be  theirs  nor  I as  they.

But  homeless  in  the  heart  of  Paradise.

Of  the  “ Archytas  ” Ode  (i.e.  Hor.  C.  I.  28)  the  view  taken  by
most  commentators  is  this:  “All  men,  even  philosophers  and
other  great  men,  and  even  men  who  have  been  reincarnated,
must  die  But  this  Ode  has  been  generally  recognised  to  be
a perplexing  one ; and  the  clue  to  the  right  interpretation  of
it  lias  perhaps  been  lost.  So  obscure,  indeed,  is  its  purpose
that  Wickham  says  “it  would  be  hard  to  find  two  editors  who
agree”  about  it.  An  individual  scholar,  such  as  Frederic  Myers,


400


•/.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


for  instance,  might  naturally  then  put  his  own  individual  con-
struction upon  it.  I am  going  to  suggest  a view  of  the  Ode
which  I myself  do  not  believe  is  the  true  one  (11.  16-20  seem
to  me  to  be  almost  conclusive  against  it),  but  which  I believe
Frederic  Myers — reading,  a little  wilfully,  perhaps,  his  own
my.sticisin  into  it — may  well  have  held.  It  may  be  expressed
thus : “ Archytas  spent  a life  actively  engaged  in  the  study  of
science  and  philosophy;  Tantalus  and  Minos  in  kingly  duties  ;
Tithonus  in  the  delights  of  love;  and  Pythagoras  passed  not  one
but  two  active  and  varied  lives  on  this  earth,  first  as  Euphorbus,
a warrior  in  the  Trojan  war,  and  afterwards  as  Pythagoras,  a
philosopher  and  man  of  science.  Yet  what  availed  all  their
earthly  activities  ? All  are  now  condemned  to  joyless,  inert,
aimless,  shadowy,  monotonous  existence  in  the  Underworld.
Might  they  not  say  as  Achilles  to  Odysseus : ‘ Nay,  speak  not
comfortably  to  me  of  death.  Rather  would  I live  above  ground
as  the  hireling  of  another  . . . than  bear  sway  among  all  the
dead  that  be  departed  ’ ? For  death  is  not  the  end  of  all ; it
destroys  only  the  sinews  and  the  flesh  (‘niliil  ultra  Nervos
atque  cutem  morti  concesserat  atrae’).  So  neither  death  nor
annihilation  is  what  men  have  to  dread,  but  rather  the  prospect
‘ that  evermore  I must  convey  These  weary  senses  thro’  an
endless  day’  in  ‘The  blank  repose  or  drear  eternity’  of  the
Underworld.”

The  vei'bal  resemblances  between  Imviortcdity  and  Hor.  C.  I.
28  are  these  : —

“No  man  metes  it”  (i.e.  that  age,  which  is  as  a speck  of  sand)
and  arenae  mensorem\  “on  the  long  beach”  and  'prope  litiis
Matinum,  and  the  variant  lyrope  latum  Matinum;  “speck  of
sand  ” and  indveris  exigui  munera.

These  resemblances  in  language  are  slight  enough,  particularly
the  last ; but  in  estimating  what  they  may  be  worth,  the  fact
must  not  be  lost  sight  of  that  the  two  poems  which  present
them  presented,  according  to  my  theory  at  least,  to  the  mind
of  the  author  of  one  of  them  a resemblance  in  thought  as
well.

1 am  now  inclined  to  inter[)ret  the  answer  given  on  April
17  by  Myersp — “I  had  Ode  to  Nature  on  my  mind,  but  as  I
thought  I loved  another  ode  better  I did  not  reply  until  I


401


lvil]  Series  of  Concordant  A utomatisms.

could  say  it  more  clearly.  Do  you  remember  immortality  ? ” —
thus : —

“ I first  thought  of  an  Ode  of  Horace  to  which  I had  made
allusions  in  my  poem  Ode  to  Nature ; hut  afterwards  I re-
membered another  Ode  of  Horace  which  was  a greater  favourite
of  mine  and  which  was  in  my  mind  when  I wrote  my  poem
Immortality

I cannot  assert  that  Myers’s  Ode  to  Nature  contains  any
very  direct  reference  to  an  Ode  of  Horace,  but  I do  see  in  it
an  echo  of  Hor.  C.  III.  4.  Horace  in  this  Ode  tells  the  story
of  how  once  in  his  early  boyhood  the  “ storied  doves  ” of  the
Goddess  of  Love  had  covered  him,  as  he  lay  asleep  on  the
hills,  with  a garland  of  fresh  laurel  and  myrtle  leaves  as  a
foretoken  of  his  I'uture  fame  as  a poet.  In  the  Ode  to  Nature
the  poet  is  speaking  of  the  hopes  and  dreams  which  “lured
fi  om  child  to  man  the  vision-haunted  boy  ” ; and  as  he  recalls
hovv  in  his  youth  he  had  at  times  felt  that  poetry  was  his
true  vocation,  he  is  reminded,  so  it  seems  to  me,  of  Horace’s
allegorical  avowal  of  the  same  youthful  sense  of  innate  poetic
gifts

Sometimes  the  flying  flame
Was  Fortune  and  was  Fame;

Thro’  cloudy  rifts  a wildering  clarion  rang; —

Ofteuer  an  Orphic  crown.

From  deep  heaven  fluttering  down.

Lit  on  a poet’s  head,  and  sweet  the  poet  sang.

But  first  and  last  and  best.

Most  longed-for,  least  contest.

One  form  unknown  descended  as  a dove ;

Low  in  my  soul  I heard
One  new  melodious  word.

And  all  the  boy’s  frame  trembled  at  the  touch  of  Love.

It  is  true  that  in  Horace’s  Ode  it  is  the  doves  of  the
Goddess  of  Love  that  placed  the  crown  of  laurel  on  the
future  poet’s  head ; whereas  in  Ode  to  Nature  the  Orphic
crown  was  not  brought  by  doves  but  fluttered  down  from
heaven,  and  it  is  “ One  form  unknown  ” which  “ descended  as


402


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


a dove  ” and  made  the  boy’s  frame  tremble  at  the  touch  of
Love,  But  not  to  reproduce  pedantically  a classical  original
is  quite  in  keeping  with  Myers’s  style.  A reader  of  his  verse
or  prose  writings  can  hardl}^  fail  to  observe  how  fond  he  was
of  giving  a fresh  and  modern  turn  to  the  many  classical
allusions  which  occur  in  them.  And  that  is  what  I believe
he  did  in  this  instance.

The  next  reference  to  the  Horace  question  was  made  on
April  24,  when,  at  the  close  of  the  sitting  held  on  this  date,
Mrs  Sidgwick  asked  Myersp  to  give  her  “at  the  next
opportunity  ” his  answers  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  questions  about
the  Greek  words  and  about  the  Ode  of  Horace.  Mrs

Sidgwick  did  not  attend  another  sitting  till  May  1.

Meanwhile  at  the  sitting  of  April  29,  at  wdiich  Mrs  Verrall
and  Miss  Johnson  were  present,  Rector  asked  if  Myers  could
rejdy  about  the  Horace  question  to  Mrs  Sidgwick  on  May  1.
In  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  April  29  were  thi’ice
uttered  the  words : “ passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone  ’’ —
a misquotation  of  “ passed  through  the  body  and  gone  ’’  from
Stanza  V Abt  Vogler — and  they  were  followed  by  the  words
“ every  peak  and  point  ....  star  Abt  ’’ — a misquotation  of
“ not  a point  nor  peak  but  found  and  fixed  its  wandering
star’’  from  Stanza  lY  of  the  same  ]ioem.  Mrs  Yen-all  heard
and  recorded  these  words,  but  did  not  connect  them  with

her  question  about  the  Ode  of  Horace ; and  she  did  not
recognise  “ passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone  ’’  as  a mis-
quotation from  Abt  Vogler.

Mrs  Yerrall  harl  in  January,  1907  asked  me  to  put  the
question  about  Horace  to  Myersp,  but  T had  not  told  her,  nor
had  she  learnt  from  any  other  quarter,  that  the  question  had
actually  been  put,  and  she  had  forgotten  about  it.  But  she

was  reminded  of  it  by  Rector’s  reference  to  it  on  April  29 ;

and  at  the  sitting  of  April  30,  at  which  she  was  present,  she
took  the  opportunity  of  putting  the  question  again  to  Myersp
in  this  form  : “ I asked  if  you  could  rememljer  which  of

Horace’s  Odes  }mu  once  told  my  husband  had  specially  entered
into  your  inner  life.  You  wiote  it  to  my  husband  after  he
sent  you  a book  he  had  written  about  Horace”.  Myersp
promised  in  reply  to  think  the  matter  over  and  said  he


403


lvil]  a Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

thought  he  would  be  able  to  remember,  but  he  gave  no  hint
that  an  answer  had  already  been  given.

As  stated  above,  on  Apxil  24  Mrs  Sibgwick  had  asked
Myersp  to  give  his  answer  to  the  Horace  question  on  the
“next  opportunity”.  On  May  1 she  had  her  first  sitting
since  April  24,  and  on  May  1 — -which  was  also  the  day  fixed
by  himself,  on  April  29,  for  replying  to  the  Horace  question —
Myersp  asked  if  she  remembered  his  “ reference  to  the  Poem  ”,
i.e.  Browning’s  Poem  Aht  Vogler\  and  then  added  “Do  you
remember  when  1 said  I had  passed  through  my  body  and
returned  ? ”.  Mrs  Sidgwick,  not  realising  that  these  words

were  reminiscent  of  Aht  Vogler,  asked  “Do  you  mean  you
gave  the  name  of  the  poem  ? ”.  To  this  MyerSp  at  once
replied ; “ Oh  yes.  I mean  I tried  to  give  another  part  also,
which  referred  to  completed  happiness  in  this  life  and  the

possibility  of  returning  to  the  old  world  again  to  prove  the
truth  of  survival  of  Bodily  death.  Those  words  were

lingering  in  my  memory  and  I gave  it  as  peak  followed
Star  Miss  Johnson  then  told  Mrs  Sidgwick  that  Myersp
was  quoting  from  Aht  Vogler,  and  both  then  naturally
assumed  that  M}mrsp  in  making  these  further  quotations  was
merely  emphasising  the  point  that  Aht  Vogler  was  connected
with  his  reply  to  the  Latin  Message,  and  they  consequently
missed  the  true  significance  of  the  phrase : “ I tried  to  give
another  part  also  ”.  Kector  equally  failed  to  realise  what

Myersp  was  driving  at,  for  he  said  that  Myersp  was  speaking
about  his  writing  Aht  Vogler  through  Mrs  Verrall.  Myersp
seemed  to  be  aware  that  his  meaning  had  not  been  grasped,
for  he  preluded  another  misquotation  from  Aht  Vogler —
“ What  is  to  be  shall  be,  and  what  should  be  shall  be  soon  ”
for  “ What  was,  shall  live  as  before ; . . . What  was  good  shall
be  good  ” — by  the  remai’k : “ my  most  earnest  wish  is  to
complete  my  undertaking  while  the  opportunity  presents
itself”;  and  then,  after  making  a few  passing  references  to
other  subjects,  added : “ I went  over  those  Odes  very  care-
fully and  remembered  one  in  particular  which  I loved  very

^ In  Abt  Vogler  the  Star  comes  down  from  Heaven  to  meet  the  Peak,  which
has  risen  up  from  Earth.  When  they  meet  Earth  and  Heaven  are  in  touch
with  each  other.


404


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


much  After  writing  “ Odes  ” without  difficulty  Rector
appeared  to  be  doubtful  about  the  word,  and  wrote
“ Odessus  ” “ Odesesis  ” etc.  and  finally  half  accepted  Mrs

Sidgvvick’s  suggestion  “ Odyssey  ” — a good  instance  of  how
ready  Rector  is  to  accept  a misleading  suggestion,  even
when  what  he  has  independently  written  is  right,  and  also
of  discontinuity  of  consciousness  between  Rector  and  the
communicating  spirit,  who  in  this  case  was  obviously  trying
to  talk  about  the  Odes  of  Horace  in  order  to  connect  them
with  the  quotations  from  Aht  Vogler  just  previously  made.

The  remark  attributed  to  Hodgsoop  in  the  waking-stage  of
this  sitting  just  after  “ I’m  passed  through  the  body  and
gone  ” had  been  uttered  is  peculiarly  apt : “ Mr  Hodgson  .says
you’ve  got  to  do  some  thinking  and  then  you’ll  see  what
he  [i.e.  Myer.s]  is  driving  at  ”.

Before  the  next  sitting — that  of  May  6 — took  place,  Mrs
Sidgwick  had  read  to  Mrs  Verrall  the  portion  of  the  record
of  the  sitting  of  May  1 in  which  the  words  “ passed  through
the  body”  etc.  occur;  and,  while  they  did  not  recognise  these
words  as  derived  from  Aht  Vogler,  they  thought  that  they
might  have  been  used  to  identity  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  which  contains
an  incidental  thouffii  strikins;  allusion  to  reiticarnation.^  But
Myersp  on  May  6 clinched  the  matter  by  making  it  clear —
and  this  without  help  from  Mi's  Sidgwick — that  he  had  all
along  intended  the  Aht  Vogler  quotations  to  be  connected
with  the  question  about  the  Ode  of  Horace ; though  he  did
not  explain  the  connection.

In  quoting  from  the  lines  which  tell  how  Abt  Vogler’s
music  attracted  back  to  earth  for  a brief  spell

“ the  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through
the  body  and  gone,

But  were  back  once  more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world
worth  their  new;”

MyerSp  may  perhaps  have  meant  to  allude  incidentally  to  the
passage  about  the  reincarnation  of  Pythagoras  in  Hor.  C.  I.  28;

^ Most  of  the  commentators  regard  the  allusion  to  the  reincarnation  of
Pythagoras  as  incidental,  but  Newman  regards  it  as  the  clue  to  the  whole
poem.


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  405

in  spite  of  the  fact  that  to  the  return  to  the  old  world  of
“the  wonderful  Dead”  in  Browning’s  poem  the  term  “reincarna-
tion” could  only  be  applied  in  a metaphorical  sense  and  not
at  all  in  the  sti’ict  sense  in  which  it  applies  to  the  case  of
Pythagorasd

But  I think  that  the  main  point  of  the  quotations  was  not
to  refer  to  reincarnation,  but  to  explain  the  earlier  allusion
to  Immortality.  On  May  1,  after  giving  the  words  “ I had
passed  through  my  body  and  returned  ”,  Myei’Sp  had  gone  on
to  say  : “ I tried  to  give  another  ])art  also  which  referred  to
completed  happiness  in  this  life  and  the  possibility  of  re-
turning to  the  old  world  again  to  prove  the  truth  of  survival  '
of  bodily  death  Mrs  Sidgwick  had  then  said  that  she
did  not  quite  understand  the  meaning  of  this  passage,  but
hoped  to  do  so  later ; and  Myersp  had  replied : “ I believe
you  will  when  I tell  you  I have  returned  to  breathe  in
the  old  world,  which  is  not  however  better  than  our  new”.

It  is  in  these  last  words  that  I find  the  clue  to  the  meaning
of  the  quotations  from  Abt  Vogler.  What  Myersp  meant  I
take  to  have  been  this : “In  the  Archytas  Ode  existence  after
the  death  of  the  body  is  regarded  as  a worthless  thing ; in
Immortality  a fear  is  expressed  lest  it  prove  to  be  but  a
state  of  endless  monotony ; even  in  Aht  Vogler,  a poem  full
of  hope  and  joy,  the  discarnate  dead  who  return  to  earth  find
the  old  world,  at  least  for  a moment,  worth  their  new;  but
I — who  know  the  reality,  and  who,  like  the  wonderful  Dead,
have  been  able  to  return  to  breathe  again  in  the  old  world —

I tell  you  that  the  view  expressed  in  the  “ Archytas  ” Ode
and  the  gloomy  anticipations  expressed  in  Immortality  are

' Allusion  is  made  in  Hor.  C.  I.  28  to  the  alleged  reincarnation  of  Pythagoras
ill  the  following  lines  : —

‘ ‘ habentque

Tartara  Panthoiden  iterum  Oreo
Demissum,  quainvis  clipeo  Trojana  refixo
Tempora  testatus  nihil  ultra
Nervos  atque  cutein  morti  concesserat  atrae.”

Pythagoras  asserted  that  in  a former  existence  he  had  been  Euphorbus,  a
hero  of  the  Trojan  wars  ; and  to  prove  his  assertion  he  took  down  at  first
sight  and  claimed  as  his  own  a shield  hung  up  in  the  temple  of  Hera  at
Argos,  which  on  examination  was  found  to  have  the  name  of  Euphorbus
engraved  on  it.


J.  G.  Piddington.


40(j


[part


wrong ; for  never  and  under  no  circumstances  is  the  old  world
worth  the  new

If  my  view  of  the  meaning  of  the  references  to  “ Ode  to
Nature”  and  “do  you  I’emember  immortality?”  and  of  the
quotations  from  Aht  Vogler  be  accepted,  the  answer  given  by
Myersp  to  Mrs  Verrall’s  question  did  not  take  the  form  which
Mrs  Ven-all  consciously  expected.  She  had  no  idea  that  either
Ode  to  Nature  or  Immortality  contained  Horatian  echoes,  and
at  the  time  of  the  sittings  and  till  as  late  as  April  10,  1908
she  was  under  the  impression  that  it  was  the  allusion  to
reincarnation  which  had  interested  Myers  in  Hor.  C.  I.  28 ;
and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  letter  of  Myers’s  on
which  she  had  based  her  question  made  no  allusion  to  it.
This  letter  she  had  first  read  in  1885,  when  she  was  only
slightly  acquainted  with  the  writer  and  was  not  specially
interested  in  his  “ inner  history  She  had  not  read  it  again
until  about  Christmas  1906,  when  she  had  come  across  it
while  going  through  a collection  of  old  correspondence.  The
letter  was  one  of  thanks  which  had  been  addressed  by  Fi’ederic
Myers  to  Dr  Verrall  for  tlie  gift  of  his  Studies  in  the  Odes
of  Horace.

The  relevant  passages  in  it  were  as  follows :

Dec  31/84

I waited  to  thank  you  till  I got  back  to  day  to  Cambridge  and
found  your  book.  I have  instantly  read  the  first  essa}', — with  great
pleasure,  and,  as  far  as  I can  tell,  with  adhesion.  Then  I glanced
through  the  book;  resolving  to  keep  the  j^erusal  for  some  journey
when  I could  ponder  over  it  at  leisure.  On  pp.  1 36-7  I came  on
something  that  made  me  get  my  Horace  down  and  rub  my  eyes  to
see  if  your  references  were  right.  Od.  I 28  & III  20  ‘ positively
bad’!  The  first  6 lines  of  Archytas  [i.e.  Hor.  C.  I.  28]  have
entered  as  deeply  as  almost  any  Horatian  passage  into  my  own
inner  history  : and  I can’t  help  thinking  there  is  a real  (and  not  a
merely  subjective)  grandeur  in  Aerias  tentasse  domos,  animoque  rotun-
dum  Percurrisse  polum  morituro

1 The  first  6 lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28  are  as  follows

Te  marls  et  terrae  numeroque  carentis  arenae
Mensorem  cohibent,  Archyta,

Pulveris  exiqui  prope  litus  parva  Matinum
Munera,  nee  quidquam  tibi  prodest


Lvii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  407

The  letter  makes  it  clear  that  it  was  the  first  six  lines  of
the  Ode — the  lines,  that  is,  which  may,  perhaps,  give  ex-
pression to  the  belief  that  life  in  the  next  world  is  but  a poor-
exchange  for  life  in  this  world  with  its  many  interests  and
pleasures — and  not  the  allusion  to  the  reincarnation  of
Pythagoras  which  had  impressed  Frederic  Myers.

Mrs  Verrall,  however,  must  have  read  the  letter  hastily  ; as
the  following  extract  from  a letter  which  she  wrote  to  me  on
April  3,  190S,  shows  ; —

The  letter  to  my  husband  exists : I will  send  it  to  you  when
I get  home.  . . . Mr  Myers  does  not  say  [in  the  letter]  why  the
Ode  had  entered  into  his  inner  life  (I  think  that  is  the  phrase) ; no
doubt  it  is  the  reincarnation  theory  advanced  in  it  that  appealed  to
him.

On  April  10,  1908,  Mrs  Verrall  sent  me  the  original  letter
with  this  comment : —

I don’t  think  on  looking  at  it  that  it  is  the  reincarnation  that
specially  appeals  to  Mr  Myers  j though  of  course  the  reincarnation
would  well  serve  to  describe  the  Ode ; it  is,  e.g.,  the  first  thing
that  occurs  to  me  in  connexion  with  it.  But  with  him  it  seems  to

be  the  opening  lines that  ‘ entered  into  his  inner  life

I have  not  read  his  letter  since  1885,  when  I knew  him  very
slightly  and  was  [not]  specially  interested  in  his  inner  life.

If  my  view  of  the  significance  of  the  quotations  from  Aht
Vogler  is  not  accepted,  and  they  are  regarded  as  allusions  to
“ reincarnation  ”,  then  to  this  extent  the  answer  given  by
Myersp  corresponded  to  Mrs  Yerrall’s  anticipations ; but  her
anticipations  will  not  account  for  the  reference  made  by
Myersp  to  Immortality  and  Ode  to  Nature.

Aerias  teutasse  donios  animoque  rotuiiclum
Percurrisse  polum  morituro.

They  are  thus  rendered  by  Conington  : —

The  sea,  the  earth,  the  innumeralde  sand,

Archytas,  thou  coulds’t  measure  ; now,  alas  !

A little  dust  on  Matine  shore  has  spann’d
That  soaring  spirit ; vain  it  was  to  pass

The  gates  of  heaven,  and  send  thy  soul  in  quest
O'er  air’s  wide  realms;  for  thou  hadst  yet  to  die.”


408


J.  G.  Fiddingtov.


[part


Discussion  of  the  References  to  the  Latin  Message  made

IN  THE  Trance  between  March  20  and  June  20,  1907.

Duiing  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  conduct  of  the  Latin  Message  experi-
ment the  object  aimed  at  was  to  obtain  answers  to  two
questions;  (a)  What  was  the  name  of  the  poem  of  Browning’s
which  had  been  described  by  Myersp  as  “ Browning,  Hope  and
Star”;  and  (b)  What  line  in  that  poem  would  serve  as  an
intelligent  reply  to  the  Latin  Message.  The  answers  wanted
were,  as  Mrs  Sidgwick  knew,  to  (a)  Aht  Vogler ; to  (b)  “ That
out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a fourth  sound,  but  a star  ”.

Both  answers  were  in  the  end  correctly  given  by  Myersp ;
the  first  after  some  confusion  and,  perhaps,  after  one  or  two
false  starts,  the  second  without  any  beating  about  the  bu.sh.

I will  first  discu.ss  how  the  answer  to  (a)  emerged.

The  passages  quoted  from  the  sitting  of  March  20  I take
to  be  a first  vague  attempt  to  describe  Aht  Vogler.  Those
quoted  from  the  sitting  of  April  8 are  full  of  confusion.
The  poem  of  Browning’s,  which  had  hitherto  always  been
referred  to  as  “ Browning,  Hope  and  Star  ”,  was  said  to  con-
tain the  words  “ I lonely  wandering  Star  ”,  “ I wander  lonely
my  Star  ”.  I cannot  doubt  that  we  have  here  an  illustration
of  the  confusion  which  on  Feb.  20  M}^ersp  had  said  was  likel}^
to  arise  between  his  answer  to  the  Latin  Message  and  cross-
corresponding  messages  (v.  p.  331).  On  March  20  “ I wandered
lonely  as  a Cloud  ”,  and  on  March  G “ Mj^  Star  ” had  been
mentioned  as  cross-correspondences.  On  April  8,  Myersp,  I
conjecture,  had  in  his  mind  the  line  in  Aht  Vogler  “ Not  a
point  nor  peak  but  found  and  fixed  its  wandering  star  ” ;
(a  quotation  afterwards  applied  to  the  question  about  the
Ode  of  Horace)  but  he  confused  it  with  “ I wandered  lonely
as  a Cloud  ” and  “ My  star  ” ; and  hence  resulted  the  absurd
jumble  “ lonely  wandering  Star  ” and  “ I wander  lonely  my
Star

But  there  was,  I believe,  further  confusion  still  with  La
Saisiaz.  On  April  8 Myersp  said  : “ I specially  thought  of  the
poem  about  the  stars,  which  read  like  this,  ‘ the  walk  through
the  lonely  ’ . . . It  was  one  of  Browning’s  poems  which  he
wrote  to  a friend  and  which  read(?)  about Star


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.  409

and  hope  I lonely  wandering  Star”;  and  on  April  17:  “Do
you  remember  a poem  ...  in  which  the  words  ‘ lonely  ’ came
out  t “ wandering  lonely  ” and  “ D W ” [i.e.  the  tirst  two
letters  of  “Dwarf”  v.  p.  89]  ...  I remember  saying  Confes-
sion also  Chapel  [part  of  a cross-correspondence  “ Church,  Chapel,
Monument”]  and  Siazies”;  and,  after  accepting  Mrs  Sidgwick’s
suggestion  “La  Saisiaz”,  went  on  “Do  you  remember  the
poem  in  which  he  was  left  alone  and  later  it  all  came  to  him  ”.

Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  17,  1904  had  contained  the  words
“Hope.  Hope’s  vision”  and  “Shine  at  the  Wanderer  on  the  Way”.
This  script  had  been  published  in  Froc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  297-8,
where  Mrs  Verrall  had  expressed  the  view  that  the  allusion  was
to  Browning’s  La  Saisiaz  ; and  in  the  course  of  her  comments
had  written  as  follows  : “ Readers  of  the  poem  will  remember
the  circumstances  of  its  production : after  the  sudden  death
of  a friend,  the  poet  takes  alone  the  walk  which  they  had
planned  to  take  together,  and  debating  with  himself  the  ques-
tion of  Immortality  concludes  as  above  described”.  It  is
difficult  to  believe  that  the  confused  references  made  on  April
8 and  17  b\^  Myersp  to  “ Star  and  hope  ...  I lonely  wandering
Star  . . . the  walk  through  the  lonely  . . . Siazies  ” were  not  due
to  reminiscences  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  17,  1904  and
of  her  comments  on  it.  Now  in  view  of  the  evidence  presented
in  this  paper  it  would  not  have  been  unreasonable  to  suggest
that  Myersp  might  have  possessed  acquaintance  with  the  script
of  Jan.  17,  1904;  but  to  suggest  that  MyerSp,  regarded  as  a
personality  distinct  from  Mrs  Piper’s  normal  personality,  was
acquainted  with  Mrs  Verrall’s  published  comments  on  that
script  would  be  extravagant,  and  all  the  more  so  since  Mrs
Piper  had  read  parts  of  Froc.  Vol.  XX.,  and  consequently  may
have  read  these  comments.  Hence  I feel  bound  to  conclude
that  at  least  some  of  the  confusion  displayed  in  the  Hance  on
April  8 and  17  was  due  to  the  intrusion  of  vague  recollections
of  things  with  which  Mrs  Piper  was  normally  acquainted.

On  April  8 and  17  Myersp  must  be  held  to  have  indicated
La  Saisiaz  as  the  ])oern  of  Browning’s  meant  by  “ Browning,
Hope  and  Star”,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  when  Mrs  Sidgwick
asked  him  point-blank  whether  this  was  his  meaning  he  said  no,
and  that  so  far  he  had  not  been  able  to  get  the  name  of  the


410


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


poem  through.  But  this  denial  was  not  worth  much,  for  the
mere  fact  that  it  was  necessary  to  ask  this  question,  and
doubtless  also  the  absence  of  enthusiasm  on  Mrs  Sidgwick’s
part  when  La  Saisiaz  was  given,  were  sufficient  hints  that
La  Saisiaz  was  not  the  right  answer.  It  is  all  the  more  curious
that  La  Saisiaz  should  have  been  named,  because  previously
the  connection  of  the  poem  of  Browning’s  with  the  circle  and
with  “wandering  star”,  and  the  phrase  “Don’t  you  remember
the  word  Sky  coming  out  also  in  the  poem  ” suggest  that
Myersp  had  previously  been  on  the  right  scent.

On  April  17  MyerSp  promised  to  give  the  name  of  the  poem
on  April  24,  and  on  April  24  he  did  give  it  by  naming  Aht
Vogler.  Wlien,  however,  Mrs  Sidgwick  asked  why  Abt  Vogler
constituted  an  appropriate  answer  to  the  Latin  Message  Myersp
said  it  was  “ because  of  the  appropriate  conditions  mentioned
in  it  which  applied  to  my  own  life  ”.  The  answer  Mrs  Sidgwick
wanted  was  that  Aht  Vogler  had  been  chosen  because  it
contained  the  words  “ out  of  three  sounds  he  framed,  not  a
fourth  sound,  but  a star  ”.  The  answer  given  by  MyerSp  was
nevertheless  an  intelligent  one.  It  meant,  as  I understand  it,
that  he  had  chosen  as  subjects  of  cross-correspondence  messages
not  mere  verbal  counters,  such  as  single  words  or  ])hrases  which
could  possess  only  dry  intellectual  associations  and  associations
common  to  countless  other  minds,  but  subjects  so  stamped  and
penetrated  with  his  own  individual  emotions  that  they  should
serve  as  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  chooser.  (Cf.  p.  75.)

On  April  17  Mrs  Sidgwick  had  asked  M3’erSp  to  say  what
particular  passage  in  the  poem  of  Browning’s  he  had  meant  to
refer  to.  Myersp  said  he  would  do  so,  but  though  he  promised
to  give  the  name  of  the  poem  on  April  24  he  did  not  tix  any
|)articular  day  on  which  to  give  the  passage  in  question.  On
April  24  he  did  give  the  name  of  the  poem,  Aht  Vogler  \ but
did  not  make  any  attempt  to  give  the  passage.  So,  when  on
May  6 Myersp  expressed  his  belief  that  he  had  given  a sufficient
answer  to  the  Latin  Message,  Mrs  Sidgwick  said:  “ \vl  Aht  Vogler
there  is  a [larticular  line  which  specially  answers  the  Latin
Message.  The  Latin  Message,  as  you  know,  refers  to  cross-
correspondences, but  also  to  something  more,  and  thei’e  is  a
line  in  Aht  Vogler  which  we  think  you  had  in  mind  as


LVii.]  A Series  of  Goncordcmt  A^domatisms.  -til

describing  that  something  more.  It  would  be  very  good  if
you  could  give  it  here”.  MyerSp  promised  to  think  the  matter
over,  and  to  give  the  line  to  Rector  in  the  same  way  that  he
had  given  the  words  “ Plotinus  ” and  “ Homer’s  Iliad  ”,  and,  as
he  might  have  added,  “ Abt  Vogler”.

The  very  next  day,  May  7,  MyerSp,  immediately  after  greet-
ing Mrs  Sidgwick,  said  : “ If  the  foui'th  is  a Star  what  would
the  third  be  ”.  Various  attempts  were  made  to  give  the
exact  quotation,  but  without  complete  succes.s.  Still  more
than  sufiicient  success  was  achieved  to  place  it  beyond  dispute
that  “ out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a fourth  sound,  but  a
star”  was  meant.

Knowledge,  then,  was  shown  by  Myersp  of  the  general
sense  of  the  Latin  Message,  of  the  meaning  of  some  of  the
individual  words  of  it,  of  the  name  of  the  poem  Aht  Vogler,
and  of  the  line  “out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a fourth
sound,  but  a star”.  Three  at  least  out  of  these  four  answers
were  known  to  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson,  and  all  four
answers  to  Mrs  Verrall  and  myself ; and  we  had  all  had
sittings  with  Mrs  Piper.  Consequently  telepathy  between  the
living  may  easily  explain  this  much  of  the  case ; though  it
may  be  advisable  to  add  that  though  telepathy  may  cover
these  facts  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  it  is  the  true
explanation  of  them.

If  we  suppose  that  the  result  was  due  to  telepathy  between
Mrs  Piper  and  the  sitters,  the  long  time  it  took  for  two
points  of  the  answer — the  name  of  the  poem  and  the  line
about  the  star  framed  out  of  three  sounds — to  emerge  is  ratlmr
curious,  for  ever  since  Feb.  11  both  had  seized  upon  my
imagination  and  been  often  in  my  thoughts,  and  both  were
known  to  three  other  sitters,  Mrs  Sidgwick,  Mrs  Verrall
and  Miss  Johnson.

Besides  giving  these  answers,  MyerSp  between  March  20  and
May  7 also  displayed  increased  knowledge  of  Mrs  Verrall’s
script  of  Jan.  28.  Thus,  on  April  8,  with  reference  to  the
poem  of  Browning’s  summarised  in  the  words  “ Browning,  Hope
and  Star  ”,  he  said : “ Don’t  you  remember  the  word  Sky

coming  out  also  in  the  poem  ? ” ; and  this  mention  of  the
word  “ Sky  ” — which  occurs  twice  in  the  script  of  Jan.  28


412


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


and  twice  in  Abt  Vogler — was  made  before  the  poem  was
identified  as  Aht  Vogler.  Again,  after  the  poem  had  been
identified,  Myei’Sp  on  May  6 said:  “Would  it  he  clearer  to
you  if  I said  ‘ hoped  ’ ? ‘ hoped  ’ separate  word.  Does  it

convey  my  meaning  any  clearer  ? Do  you  remember  the
delight  and  joy  of  Abt  and  then  the  longing  and  final  hope  ?
These  sentences  seem  to  display  a most  astonishingly  accurate
knowledge  of  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  Jan.  28,  for  that  script
had  contained  the  word  “ hope  ” in  the  phrase  “ the  hope  that
leaves  the  earth  for  the  sky  ”,  an  obvious  misquotation  of
“The  passion  that  left  the  ground  to  lose  itself  in  the  sky”.
Myersp,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  had  first  connected  the
words  “Browning,  Hope  and  Star”  which  he  claimed  to  have
given  to  Mrs  Verrall,  with  an  unspecified  poem  of  Browning’s,
and  then  afterwards  had  identified  this  poem  as  Aht  Vogler.
But  though  hope  pervades  Aht  Vogler  the  word  “hope”  does
not  occur  in  it;  only  the  word  “hoped”.  What  then  Myersp
meant  on  May  6,  so  it  seems  to  me,  was  this : — “ I summarised
Aht  Vogler  in  the  phrase  ‘Browning,  Hope  and  Star’,  and
I also  made  Mrs  Verrall  write  the  word  ‘hope’  when  I was
making  her  quote  passages  from  Aht  Vogler.  I did  this  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  word  ‘hope’  does  not  occur  in  Aht
Vogler  but  only  the  word  ‘hoped’.”

Just  before  this  MyerSp  had  said:  “my  reply  was  about  the
poem,  and  long  ago  I gave  the  word  Music  ” : a remark  which,
though  it  does  not  show  increased  knowledge  of  the  script
of  Jan.  28,  1907,  does,  I think,  show  acquaintance  with  Mrs
Veirall’s  script  of  Dec.  17,  1906;  and  this  latter  I regard,  for
reasons  explained  elsewhere  (see  pp.  329-330),  as  closely  con-
nected with  the  former.

Once  more,  after  indicating  the  line  “ out  of  three  sounds
he  frame,  not  a fourth  sound,  but  a star”,  Myersp  on  May  7
quoted : “ in  my  passion  to  scale  the  sky  ” ; and  remarked
“Passion  is  the  chief  word”.  Now  in  the  script  of  Jan.  28
the  line  in  Aht  Vogler  “ The  passion  that  left  the  ground
to  lose  itself  in  the  sky  ” is  misquoted  as  “ the  hope  that
leaves  the  Earth  for  the  sky”,  and  the  word  “passion”  is
represented  only  by  the  Greek  words  epw?  TroOeivoi-  If  the
extensive  acquaintance  with  the  script  of  Jan.  28  previously


418


LVii.]  ^1  Series  of  Concordant  Aidomatisms.

shown  in  the  trance  be  taken  into  consideration,  I do  not
think  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  regal’d  what  was  said  by  Myersp
on  May  7 as  indicating  a knowledge  both  of  the  substitution
of  the  word  “ Hope  ” for  the  word  “ Passion  ” in  the  misquota-
tion contained  in  that  script,  and  of  the  signiticance  of  the
substitution.  Lastly,  when  on  June  2 Myersp  was  essaying  his
final  translation  of  the  Latin  Message,  he  perhaps  manifested  in
the  words : “ he  [i.e.  J.  G.  P.]  said  also,  if  you  will  give  me  a
message — not  a message  really  but  a sign  of  some  kind  through
the  lights — corresponding  message  ” etc. : a knowledge  of  the
repag  (sign)  of  the  script  of  Jan.  28,  and  of  the  words  “ that
was  the  sicrn  ” which  followed  the  drawing  of  the  star  in  Miss
Verrall’s  script  of  Feb.  17.

On  May  27  Myersp  in  his  translation  of  the  Latin  Message
used  the  words:  “I  wish  you  to  give  through  Mrs  Verrall
. . . such  proof  of  the  survival  of  bodily  death  in  such  a way
as  to  . . . prove  conclusively  the  survival  of  bodily  death  ” ;
and  “ But  what  I ask  is  for  you  to  give  such  jiroof  of  the
survival  of  bodily  death,  and  in  such  a way  as  to  make  it
conclusive.”  The  use  of  the  phrase  “ in  such  a way  ” might
be  thought  to  suggest  that  Myersp  was  here  endeavouring
vaguely  to  describe  the  plan  for  the  working  of  complex
cross-correspondences  set  forth  in  the  Latin  Message.  But  I
think  the  phrase  “ in  such  a way  ” was  simply  an  echo  or
paraphrase  of  a sentence  spoken  Vw  Mrs  Sidgwick.  On  May  6,
when  Myersp  said  that  the  Latin  Message  referred  to  his
giving  proofs  of  survival  “ by  or  through  C.  C.  messages  ”,
she  had  replied  : “ Yes,  in  a particidar  %vay

On  April  24  Hodgsonp  asked  if  “Mars  the  planet”,  “Jove”
and  “Egla”  [sic]  had  appeared  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script;  and
then  Myersp  said  that  he  had  given  Mrs  Verrall  the  words
“Ezra”,  “what  vaunts  life”,  “Vaunt”,  “transcends”,  “the
star  spark  flame  ”,  and  added : “ whereas  it  is  diflicult  to  get
through  the  words  one  after  the  other  I believe  I can  make
you  [i.e.  Mrs  Sidgwick]  understand  that  I know  what  I gave
her  [i.e.  Mrs  Verrall]”.  The  words  “Mars”,  “Jove”,  “stars”,
“ flame  ”,  and  “ transcends  ” all  occur  in  the  second  stanza,
“vaunt  of  life”  occurs  in  the  fourth  stanza,  and  “spark”  in
the  third  and  fifth  stanzas  of  Browning’s  Rabbi  ben  Ezra.  If


414


J.  0.  Piddington.  [part

we  exclude  “Ezra”,  which  is  part  of  the  title  of  the  poem,
eight  words  in  all  wei’e  mentioned,  and  five  out  of  these
eight  occur  in  the  second  stanza.  It  would  seem,  then,  that
Hodgsoup  and  Myersp  meant  that  they  had  tried  to  make
Ml’S  Verrall  write  some  lines  from  the  first  four  or  five  stanzas
ot  Rabbi  ben  Ezra,  a poem  containing  32  stanzas  in  all;  and,
since  five  out  of  the  eight  words  mentioned  occur  in  the  last
three  lines  of  the  second  stanza,  that  it  was  these  lines
which  they  specially  wished  to  indicate.  The  last  three  lines
ot  this  second  stanza,  which  consists  of  six  lines  in  all,  are  as
follows :

‘Not  that,  admiring  stars.

It  yearned  “Nor  Jove,  nor  Mars;

Mine  be  some  figured  flame  which  blends  transcends  them  all.”  ’

Although  directly  after  these  words  taken  from  the  early
stanzas  of  Rabbi  ben  Ezra  had  been  given  MyerSp  went  on  to
give  Abt  Vogler  as  the  name  of  the  poem  meant  by  “Browning,
Hope  and  Star”,  it  was  not  till  13  days  later  (May  7)  that
he  succeeded  in  indicating  the  particular  line  in  Abt  Vogler —
“ That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a fourth  sound,  but
a star” — that  answered  the  Latin  Message.  Still  it  looks  as
if  on  April  24  Myersp  was  hot  on  the  scent,  for  the  “ figured
flame  ” in  Rabbi  ben  Ezra  is  closely  analogous  to  the  star
in  Abt  Vogler,  which  blends  and  transcends  the  three  sounds
out  of  which  it  is  framed.  It  looks,  too,  as  if  Myersp  on
April  24,  though  unable  at  the  moment  to  recall  the  actual
words  of  it,  knew  the  gist  of  the  line  in  Abt  Vogler;  and
was  familiar  enough  with  Browning’s  poems  to  be  able  to
indicate,  by  quoting  prominent  words  contained  in  them,  other
lines  of  Browning’s  which  embod}^  an  idea  closely  resembling
the  idea  expressed  in  the  Abt  Vogler  line.

The  discovery  of  these  two  analogous  ])assages  demands,  in
my  opinion,  a greater  familiarity  with  Browning’s  poems  than
Mrs  Piper  normally  possesses.  But  that  the  reader  may  be
in  a position  to  form  his  own  opinion  on  this  point,  I append
some  notes  written  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  and  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  which  will  furnish  him  with  the  necessary  data.


415


LVii.]  A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.

Notes  re  Mrs  Piper’s  Knowledge  of  Browning’s  Poems.

Note  ivritten  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  May  1907.

After  the  sitting  of  Tuesday,  May  7th,  Mrs  Sidg-wick  asked
Mrs  Piper  what  poets  she  had  chietl}^  read,  saying  that
various  quotations  had  come  in  the  script  and  she  wondered
wliether  they  were  from  poems  that  slie  had  I'ead  or  not.  Mrs
Piper  said  that  she  used  to  read  Longfellow,  Whittier  and
some  one  else  (I  forget  who,  but  I think  an  American),  and
that  this  was  about  all.  Mrs  Sidgwick  asked  whether  she
had  read  much  of  Tennyson,  Shakespeare,  Browning  or  Milton.
She  said,  “ pi’actically  nothing.”  She  seemed  to  regard  Shakes-
peare and  Browning  as  about  equally  remote  and  obscure.

'I'he  next  day  she  said  that  she  and  Alta  [her  elder  daughter]
had  been  thinking  over  what  she  could  have  read,  and  she
remembered  that  Mr  Stead  had  sent  her  several  of  his  little
books  of  select  poems,  among  which  was  Browning’s  Flight  of
the  Duchess.  This,  as  far  as  1 remember,  was  the  only  one  of
Browning’s.  Minerva  [her  younger  daughter],  however,  had
some  volumes  of  Browning’s  which  she  was  fond  of,  being
more  interested  in  literature  than  her  mother  and  sister.  Mrs.
Piper  thought  she  might  also  have  read  The  Princess  or  part  of
it,  and  said  that  Mr  Hodgson  had  given  her  Coleridge’s  poems.


Note  written  hy  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  May  'lith,  1907.

At  the  Council  Dinner  on  May  26th,  I asked  Mi.ss  Reed
[i.e.  Miss  E.  M.  Reed,  M.D.,  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.,  who
resided  with  Mrs  Piper  during  her  stay  in  London]  if  she
knew  what  books  Mrs  Piper  had  been  reading  while  she  was
at  42  Morpeth  Mansions,  and  especially  whether  she  had  read
any  of  Browning.  Miss  Reid  said  that  she  believed  Mis  Piper
read  extremely  little  altogether,  but  that  she  remembered  her
looking  one  evening  at  a small  volume  of  Browning,  belonging
to  Minerva.  She  thought  this  had  ha|ipened  three  or  four
weeks  before.  I imagine  this  was  a volume  of  selections,
probably  the  one  mentioned  to  us  by  Mrs  Piper  and  Alta  [on
May  8].  I gathered  from  Miss  Reid  that  Mrs  Piper  had  spent
some  time  turning  over  the  leaves  of  the  volume.


410


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Note  hy  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  written  on  May  'M)tli,  1907.

Last  night  I read  to  the  Pipers  and  some  of  my  family  a
poem  which  had  come  from  America;  and  then  Abt  Vogler.
She  wanted  to  know  who  was  the  author.  I asked  the  girls
[i.e.  Mrs  Piper’s  daughters]  if  they  knew  it;  they  said  they
learned  some  of  it  at  school,  and  they  seemed  to  remember
the  last  verse  fairly.  I told  them  that  it  was  Browning.

Mrs  Piper  then  said  she  knew  Evelyn  Hojye  and  had  heard
of  The  Flight  of  the  Duchess ; she  did  not  know  the  one  I
had  I'ead  at  all,  and  asked  its  name.  I told  her,  but  the
name  seemed  to  suo;o-est  nothino-.

I then  asked  Minerva  if  she  had  any  volume  of  Browning,
and  she  said  she  had  a scliool  book,  but  not  here.  Mrs  Piper
then  said  she  herself  had  had  a gorgeous  one  given  her,  bound
in  calf  with  gilt  edges,  .some  years  ago  ; it  was  kept  locked
up,  and  had  hardly  been  out  of  its  box ; she  did  not  remember
having  opened  it ; it  was  too  nice  to  handle.  Her  father-in-
law  gave  it  to  her,  he  being  in  the  book  business.  It  was
now  locked  up  in  her  store-room  in  America.

Later,  when  my  sons  had  gone  out  of  the  room,  she  asked,
a little  resentfully,  why  I had  catechised  her  and  the  girls  on
the  subject ; was  it  to  show  up  their  ignorance  ? I then  told
her  that  it  was  for  evidential  reasons,  and  this  made  her
happier.  She  said  she  supposed  everybody  knew  Browning
nowada}^s  ; I told  her  that  it  was  by  no  means  the  case,  and
that  I had  not  expected  her  to  know — perhaps  not  even  as
much  as  she  did.

I then  asked  if  she  had  noticed  the  verse  about  combining
three  sounds.  She  did  not  specially  remember  that,  and  I
doubt  if  she  caught  the  sense;  it  evidently  had  made  no
impression  on  lier.


LVII.]


An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.


417


III.

AN  INCIDENT  IN  MES  PIPER’S  TRANCE:

Being  an  attcmi^t  to  elicit  from  MycrSp  evidence  of  acquaintance
with  a circuntstance  in  the  life  of  Frederic  Myers.

By  Mrs  Henry  Sidgwick.

[T/iis  paper  should  be  read  in  connection  toith  Section  V.  of
Mr  Piddington’s  pagocr.]

After  Mrs  Verrall  had  had  two  or  three  sittings  with  Mrs
Piper  she  asked  me  if  I could  give  her  any  good  question  to
pj^t  to  MyerSp , the  trance  personality  calling  itself  Myers.
She  wished  if  possible  to  exclude  explanation  by  thought

transference  by  asking  some  question  the  answer  to  which
would  have  been  known  to  Mr  Myers,  but  not  to  any  of  us
here  now,  and  which  would  yet  be  verifiable.  Such  questions
are  not  easy  to  find  and  I failed  to  think  of  one ; but  as  a
second  best  experiment  it  seemed  worth  asking  a question  of
which  the  answer  would  certainly  be  unknown  to  any  one
present  at  the  sitting.  I accordingly  wrote  to  Mrs  Verrall

as  follows  on  January  19,  1907  :

I have  not  succeeded  in  thinking  of  any  question  which  could
be  asked  the  Myers  control,  of  which  the  answer  is  verifiable
but  unknown  to  any  one ; but  1 have  thought  of  a cqiestion  of
which  the  answer  is  known  to  me  ^ and  almost  certainly  unknown
to  you.  When  Mr  Myers  paid  his  farewell  visit  to  [my  husband]
at  Terling  he  and  I had  a conversation.  It  was  out  of  doors  in

the  porch  of  the  house.  I am  not  sure  whether  Mr  Myers  had

1 At  this  time  all  I had  seen  of  Mrs  Piper  since  her  previous  visit  to  England,
IS  years  ago,  was  a friendly  call  I had  paid  her  at  the  end  of  December  1906,
or  beginning  of  January  1907,  so  that  we  could  hardly  be  regarded  as
likely  to  be  in  any  special  rapport  with  each  other.

2 D


418  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

already  seen  [Mr  Sidgwick]  for  the  last  time,  but  in  any  case
we  knew  that  death  must  come  before  many  days.  Mr  Myers
sought  that  conversation  in  order  to  talk  about  a specific  concrete
subject,  and  he  also  spoke  of  another  specific  concrete  subject  in
the  course  of  the  conversation.  Can  he  remember  anything  about
either  subject  and  what  he  said  ? I could  give  further  clues  if
you  think  it  advisable,  but  anything  I say  had  better  be  said  in
writing,  so  that  we  may  know  exactly  what  it  is.  He  should  be
pressed  for  details  of  what  he  said — more  than  a mere  general
reference  to  the  subject.  If  you  approve  of  the  question  and
would  like  to  have  it  in  reserve  in  case  the  occasion  comes  for
asking  it,  I will  write  an  account  of  the  conversation,  put  it
in  a sealed  envelope  and  send  it  with  a covering  letter  to
Mr  Piddington.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  memorandum  thus
sent  to  Mr  Piddington  on  January  22,  1907,  and  not  opened
till  September  17,  1907  ;

In  August  1900,  when  Mr  Myers  was  at  Terling  Place  for  the
purpose  of  taking  leave  of  [Mr  Sidgwick],  he  sought  a conver-
sation with  me  which  took  place  out  of  doors  in  the  porch  of
the  house.  IVhat  he  wished  to  talk  about  was  a Memoir  of  [Mr

Sidgwick].  He  was  determined  that  one  should  be  written,  had

persuaded  [him]  to  write  some  reminiscences  with  a view  to  it,
had  at  one  time — since  the  knowledge  of  [Mr  Sidgwick’s]  illness — ■
intended  to  write  it  himself,  but  had  withdrawn  from  this  on
account  of  his  own  book  and  the  sliort  time  remaining  before  his
own  expected  death.  He  had  then  talked  to  [him]  about  its

being  written  b}^  Arthur  Sidgwick.  He  wanted  in  this  conver-
sation to  charge  me  with  the  task  of  inducing  [Mr  Arthur  Sidgwick]
to  undertake  it.  He  was  to  be  told  that  H.  [S.]  approved,  that

F.  W.  H.  M.  desired  it,  and  leisure  was  to  be  secured  by  . . .

[inducing]  him  to  resign  some  of  his  work  ....

I omit  the  rest  of  the  memorandum,  as  no  reference  was
made  in  the  trance  to  the  points  mentioned  in  it.  It

contained,  however,  further  particulars  about  the  main  subject,
which  would  have  added  to  tlie  evidence  had  they  been
referred  to  by  MyerSp , and  it  then  continued  with  the
secondary  subject  of  the  conversation,  which  so  far  as  I
remember  arose  without  previous  intention,  and  which  related


LVii.]  An  Incidevt  in  J\Irs.  Pij^ers  Trance.  419

to  the  mode  of  burial  that  should  be  adopted — a subject  ou
which  Mr  Myers  had  views.

At  Mrs  Verrall’s  next  sitting,  on  January  21,  1907,  she
told  MyerSp  that  I had  a message  for  him.  The  record  of  the
sitting  proceeds :

Mrs  V.  Do  you  remember  going  to  see  her  at  Terling  just  before
what*  we  call  the  death  of  Mr  Sidgwick  ?

(Myers  communicating)

I remember  going  to  see  her  just  before  he  came  to  this
life.  I tried  to  console  her,  and  was  deeply  grieved
because  he  had  not  improved  though  I felt  it  quite
impossible.

Mrs  V.  Do  you  remember  speaking  with  her  alone,  without  him  ?
Yes  I refer  to  this.

Mrs  V.  Do  you  remember  where  you  talked  with  her  ?

AVhere  ? 1 will  think  it  out  and  tell  you  tomorrow.  I

will  think  it  out  and  refresh  my  memory.

Mrs  V.  She  wants  you  to  remember  where  you  spoke  to  her  and
what  you  said  to  her.

Yes  I will  certainly  think  it  over  and  tell  you  to  morrow.

It  had  been  my  intention  that  i\Irs  Yerrall  should  give
]\Iyersp  all  the  information  I had  given  her,  so  that  his
memory,  if  memory  there  were,  should  be  clearly  directed  to
a particular  conversation.  I regretted,  therefore,  that  instead
of  reminding  him  of  the  place  where  the  conversation

occurred,  she  asked  him  what  the  place  was.  The  effect  was
necessarily  to  make  it  less  certain  which  of  the  different

conversations  was  referred  to  (for  there  must  have  been  more

than  one  at  Terling  and  more  than  one  out  of  doors),  and
also  to  divert  effort  on  to  an  attempt  to  recall  independently
a detail  which  w’as  of  no  value  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  experiment,  since  it  was  known  to  Mrs  Yerrall.  Whether
any  difference  in  the  result  would  have  been  produced  by

proceeding  otherwise  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  say  ; at


420  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

any  ’rate,  what  was  said  at  the  following  sitting  on  January

22  was  not  to  the  point:

(Myers  communicating)  ^

Good  morning.  I come  again  to  day  to  greet  yon  and
to  keep  my  promise.

Mrs  V.  Yes : thank  you.

I can’t  be  absolutely  sure  just  now  how  much  I may  give
out  here  of  my  own  feelings  and  thoughts  at  the  time
or  how  much  I may  be  able  to  recall  of  my  past  life
and  experiences.  However  I will  try  and  be  as  explicit
as  possible.  I believe  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  I took  a walk
out  of  doors  near  some  shrubbery  where  we  sat  down
for  a

Mrs  V.  What’s  the  word  after  “ near  some  ” ?

Green

J.  G.  P.  Is  it  “shrubbery”?

Yes.  I think  where  we  had  a talk  about  the  possibility  of
our  friend’s  coming  here.  Remember  I am  not  sure  how
much  of  m}^  own  feelings  I am  expressing  and  [how

much]  our  actual  talk.  I remember  my  grief  and  ex-
pressing it  to  her.  I recall  saying  my  own  loss  would
be  greater  if  possible  than  hers.  Yet  I would  not  mind
changing  places  with  him  in  the  least.  I hoped  he

would  pass  out  without  pain  and  that  she  would  feel
as  I did  about  it.

I express  to  you  more  precisely  what  I think  I said  to
her,  but  my  own  feelings  were  exactly  what  I now

express  to  you.  I believe  I asked  her  if  I could  do
anything  to  help  her.  I recall  in  a general  way  our
conversation.

J.  G.  P.  (to  Mrs  V.)  It  would  be  interesting  to  get  him  to  give

Mrs  Sidgwick’s  side  of  the  conversation.

Mrs  V.  (to  J.  G.  P.)  She  is  writing  that  down.  [This  was  a
mistake.]

^ In  transcribing  this  and  other  passages  from  the  record  I have  omitted

repetitions,  and  all  remarks  simply  concerning  the  reading  of  the  script  which

add  nothing  to  the  sense.  I have  also  supplied  the  punctuation  where  required.


LVII.]


421


An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Fiiyers  Trcmce.

J.  G.  P.  (to  Mrs  V.)  Yes,  but  it  would  be  a good  thing  for  him  to
give  it.

Mrs  V.  (to  MyerSp)  Mrs  Sidgwick  asks  me  to  ask  you  if  you  can
recall  the  particular  point  on  account  of  which  you
asked  to  see  her  alone.

I believe  I referred  to  her  asking  him  to  write  something
and  seal  it  if  she  felt  it  would  not  disturb  him.  I
believe  I remember  this  well.

Mrs  V.  One  more  thing  I want  to  ask.  May  I ask  again  1

Ask  it.

Mrs  V.  One  other  point  besides  the  first  arose  in  the  course  of
the  conversation.  Mrs  Sidgwick  asks  if  you  remember
that.  You  understand  that  I don’t  know  the  answers.
Mrs  Sidgwick  thinks  it  better  that  I should  not  know
them  in  order  not  to  confuse  the  issue.

I quite  understand,  but  I did  not  understand  fully  all  you
said.  Kindly  repeat  very  clearly  if  you  will  be  so  kind.

(Mrs  V.  begins  to  repeat  her  last  remark.)

First  what  1

Mrs  V.  Point.

Oh  point ! I understand  quite ; another  point  came  up  in  our
conversation.

Mrs  V.  Yes,  that’s  right.

Now  let  me  see  if  I can  recall  what  that  point  was.  I
remember  referring  to  one  or  more  things  but  whether
they  were  mentioned  on  that  day  I can’t  be  absolutely
certain.  However,  I do  recall  asking  her  what  I have
previously  referred  to.

Mrs  V.  Yes ; quite  so.

And  I believe  I referred  to  some  work  of  his  which  I should
like  to  have  to  bring  out  to  live.  I believe  I understand
and  have  answered.

I will  tell  Mrs  Sidgwick.

I find  my  memory  rather  fragmentary  on  some  points.


Mrs  V.


422


Mrs.  Henry  SidgiuicL


[part


Myersp  had  not  so  far  referred  to  the  points  about  which  I
had  asked,  and  except  that  the  conversation  took  place  out  of
doors  (which  Mrs  Verrall  knew),  I could  not  confirm  anything
he  had  said.  Of  course  a good  deal  of  the  sentiment  corre-
sponded with  what  Mr  Myers  felt  and  may  have  expressed,
though  on  the  other  hand  there  is  no  particular  reason  to
suppose  that  he  did  put  into  words  what  he  must  have  known
I should  know  he  was  feeling  without  his  giving  utterance  to
it.  He  may  have  spoken  about  leaving  a sealed  envelope,
but  I think  it  very  unlikely  that  he  did  so  on  that  occasion.
It  was  too  late,  and,  moreover,  I had  probably  told  him  weeks
before  that  there  was  one.  It  is  not  improbable  that  he  may
have  referred  to  unfinished  work  and  the  possibility  of  publishing
it,  but  I cannot  definitely  recall  his  doing  so.  I wrote  to
Mrs  Verrall  on  January  28:

I doubt  whether  the  experiment  is  worth  pressing,  but  if  the
control  returns  to  the  subject  you  might  say  that  I cannot  remember
whether  he  talked  of  those  things  in  that  conversation,  but  they  are
things  he  would  be  feeling.  The  things  I asked  him  to  remember
were  specific  things,  both  involving  action  on  my  part.  Perhaps  it
would  be  a prit}^  to  give  more  clue  than  this  at  prresent,  but  I will
if  you  like.  Should  you  like  me  to  fix  my  mind  on  the  things
to-morrow  morning  so  far  as  I can,  on  the  chance  of  the  cpiestion
coming  up  at  the  sitting  1

If  my  thinking  of  the  questions  had  had  any  effect  it  would
of  course  have  reduced  the  experiment  to  one  in  telepathy;  but
as  a matter  of  fact,  though  the  question  was  referred  to  at  the
sitting  of  January  29,  no  progress  was  made.  The  following
is  the  record  of  what  was  said ; —

(Myers  communicating)

Now  tell  me  about  my  talk  with  her.  I must  understand
whether  I talked  this  over  with  her  on  that  day  or  at
some  other  time.

Mrs  V.  I will  tell  you.  Mrs  Sidgwick  thinks  that  on  that  day  i
you  and  she  said  such  things ; but  that  was  not  what
she  wanted  you  specially  to  remember.


1 This  was  a mistake.  I am  inclined  to  think  the  contrary.


lvil]


423


An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.

Well  if  I am  alive  at  all  I do  certainly  recall  mentioning
this  to  her.

Mrs  V.  Yes:  she  says  she  is  sure  that  you  spoke  on  that  subject;

but  she  wants  you  to  recall  two  specific  things  in  your
conversation  with  her  at  Terlin"  which  led  to  action  on

O

her  part.

Let  me  think  this  over  more  carefully  and  I can  be  trusted
I believe  to  reproduce  it  here  as  soon  as  I sufSciently  recall.

The  next  reference  to  the  subject  was  on  February  5,  when
Mr  Piddington  introduced  it.  He  was  at  the  moment  the  only
sitter.

J.  G.  P.  Is  that  M}’ers  ?

(Myers  communicating)

Yes.

J.  G.  P.  You  remember  when  I put  you  a question  in  which  the  words
“seances”  and  “ Leckhampton  ” occurred  you  did  not  at
first  understand  them.

I did  not  hear  them  very  well.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  I think  it  possible  that  in  the  same  way  you  did  not
catch  a word  that  occurred  in  the  question  put  to  you  by
Mrs  Yerrall  on  behalf  of  Mrs  Sidgwick.

\Yhat  was  it  1 I may  be  better  able  to  understand  more
than  at  that  time.

J.  G.  P.  The  word  I think  you  may  not  have  caught  was  “ Terling  ”
(repeating  the  word  distinctly  once  or  twice).  Terling
is  the  home  of  Lord  Eayleigh.

Oh  yes.  I positivel}’  never  heard,  i.e.  to  grasp  the  word
before.  You  are  right  in  this.  I understand  now  and
will  go  over  that  interview  and  if  you  refer  to  this  I will
give  my  answer  tomorrcnc?-

^ Though  Myersp  accepts  the  suggestion  that  his  not  catching  the  word  Terling
was  a cause  of  difficulty,  I do  not  think  it  really  was.  The  important  point  w'as
that  the  conversation  took  place  very  shortly  before  my  husband’s  death.  This
Myersp  understood,  as  is  shown  by  his  answers  to  ^Irs  Yerrall,  and  no  such  con-
versation could  have  taken  place  except  at  Terling.


424


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


MyerSp  accordingly  recurred  again  to  the  subject  the  next
day  (Feb.  6)  when  Mr  Piddington  was  having  a sitting  alone
with  Mrs  Piper. ^

(Myers  communicating)

I [I’emember]  “ the  name  of  the  place  to  which  you  referred
last  time  and  I should  say  with  regard  to  it  that  I remem-
ber vaguely  making  a suggestion  to  Mrs  Sidgwick  regarding
a certain  document  which  I thought  she  would  find  neces-
sary to  be  attend  to.

J.  G.  P.  Is  that  “be  attended  to”?

Look  into  in  case  our  good  friend  came  over  here.  Besides
I referred  to  matter  pertaining  to  the  College  if  I remember
rightly;  also  a library  matter  which  slie  will  recall  Cjuickly.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I will  tell  her.

I feel  sure  of  the  distinction  between  the  places,  i.e.  my  talk
with  her  at  T.  and  my  own  house.

Eegarded  as  guesses  at  the  answers  to  my  question  these  are
neither  true  nor  plausible,  but  perhaps  they  were  not  all  meant
to  be  referred  to  that  conversation.  MyerSp  clearly  had  two
conversations  in  view^  Unfortunately,  however,  I cannot  recall
any  conversation  on  these  subjects  between  Mr  Myers  and  myself.

The  question  whether  “ library  ” was  simply  a bad  guess  at  the
subject  of  the  Terling  conversation  or  not  cannot  be  thus  briefly
dismissed  because  of  the  cross-correspondence  concerning  it  which
Mr  Piddington  has  fully  discussed  (v.  pp.  46-59).  I will
briefly  recall  the  facts  here.  On  February  4,  1907,  Myersy  said
in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script :

Give  the  message  I gave  but  was  it  understood  ? On  the
Council  I asked  and  she  said  Yes.  Tell  Mrs  Sidgwick
that  and  something  about  the  Gurney  Library  which  I
think  she  will  remember  or  a Gurney  memorial,  which
she  was  to  take  over.  I will  give  the  message  elsewhere
too  to  day  but  this  is  easier  than  the  other  place.  The
signature  might  help  H.  Sidgwick.

We  have  tried  for  that  to  day.  Wait  for  their  answer
F.  W.  H.  M.

'Mr  M'Dougall  was  present,  but  only  as  an  oiilooker.

^“Remery’’  was  written,  but  “ remember  ” must  have  been  meant.


LVII.]


An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper  s Trance.


425


On  February  5 and  6 Myersp  wrote  as  above  quoted  in
Mrs  Piper’s  script.  On  February  11 — the  sitting  with  Mrs
Piper  following  that  of  February  6 — Mr  Piddington  said  to
MyerSp :

J.  G.  P.  You  will  remember  that  at  our  last  meeting  you  said  that
one  of  the  subjects  of  the  conversation  between  you  and
Mrs  Sidgwick  was  connected  with  a library.

(Myers  communicating)

Yes,  I recall.

Mr  Piddington  then  went  on  to  refer  to  a message  from

0 O

IMyerSy  about  a library  having  come  through  Mrs  Verrall’s  script,
and  to  ask  MyerSp  to  say  what  had  appeared  there ;

J.  G.  P.  I want  you  to  tell  me,  if  you  can,  how  your  message  came  out.

(Myers  communicating)

Yes  I am  aware  of  this  but  just  how  much  she  understood

1 am  not  sure.  But  what  I do  wish  her  to  understand
is  that  during  my  conversation  with  Mrs  S.  the  library
was  referred  to  as  an  important  transaction,  as  I feel  sure
I recall  it  and  wish  very  much  to  impress  it  upon  Mrs  V.
so  as  to  confirm  my  utterances  here.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I see.

I think  she  wrote  or  got  the  message  that  he  S.  was  glad  or
pleased  about  the  library.  What  I said  to  her  was.  Write
for  Mrs  Sidgwick  that  we  talked  about  library.

A little  later  on  in  the  sitting,  and  in  spite  of  Mr  Piddington’s
denial  that  my  name  had  occurred  in  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  (he
was  thinking  of  another  piece  of  Mrs  A^errall’s  script  concerning
library,  viz.  that  of  February  6),  MyerSp  maintained  that  he
“ persistently  repeated  the  word  \i.e.  library]  to  her ; also  my
own  name  and  Mrs  Sidgwick’s.”

The  correspondence  between  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  and  Mrs
Piper’s  in  the  matter  can  hardly  be  accidental,  and  on  February
11 — whatever  we  think  of  February  6 — MyerSp  undoubtedly
seems  to  be  under  the  impression  that  “ library  ” was  a subject
of  the  conversation  with  me  which  he  had  been  asked  to  recall.
We  have  therefore  this  difficulty  : If  “ library  ” was  a pure  guess


426


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  the  Piper  trance-personality,  how  did  it  come  to  coincide  with
Mrs  Verrall’s  script  ? If,  on  the  other  hand,  both  scripts  were,
as  they  alleged,  inspired  by  Myers,  how  did  they  come  to  make
a guess  so  much  off  the  spot  ?

I wish  to  suggest  another  alternative,  namely,  that  neither
IMyerSy  nor  i\IyerSp  originally  intended  to  connect  “ library  ”
with  the  Terling  conversation  at  all,  and  that  MyerSp  did
connect  it  on  February  11,  owing  to  a confusion  introduced
by  Mr  Piddington’s  definitely  so  connecting  it  in  his  first
question.  It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no  prima  facie

reason  for  supposing  Mrs  Verrall’s  script  of  February  4,  taken
by  itself,  to  refer  to  the  Terling  conversation.^  As  already

remarked,  the  Piper  script  of  February  6 refers  to  two

conversations,  and  does  not  say  in  which  of  them  “ library  ” was
a topic.  Mr  Piddington,  however,  took  it  at  the  time  to  mean
that  it  was  a subject  of  the  Terling  conversation,  and  framed
his  first  question  on  February  11  accordingly.  Mrs  Piper’s

trance-personalities,  in  whatever  way  we  interpret  them,  are
suggestible,  and  are  feeling  after  information  often  very  dimly
and  fragmentarily  perceived ; they  welcome  any  information
that  comes  to  them  without  apparently  caring,  or  even  always
knowing,  whence  it  comes.  MyerSp  might  therefore  readily
follow  Mr  Piddington’s  lead  and  speak  of  “ library  ” as  a
subject  of  the  conversation.

In  any  case,  we  are  left  with  the  choice  of  regarding  “ library”
as  a bad  guess  at  the  subject  of  the  Terling  conversation  super-
normally  connected  with  a similar  bad  guess  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
script,  or  of  regarding  it  as  altogether  unconnected  with  the
episode  at  present  under  discussion.  I shall  quote  all  further
references  to  supposed  conversations  about  libraries  between
Mr  Myers  and  myself,  so  that  the  reader  may  have  everything
before  him  ; but  the  subject  is  never  again  definitely  connected
with  the  Terlin"  conversation.

O


^ I do  not  know  that  Mrs  Verrall  did  connect  the  two  at  first.  If  she  did,
she  thought  the  guess  so  had  that  she  did  not  send  it  to  me.  But  when  she
saw  the  record  of  Mrs  Piper’s  script  of  February  6,  she,  like  Mr  Piddington,
took  it  to  mean  that  “library”  was  mentioned  as  a subject  of  the  conversation,
and  she  annotated  it  thus: — “Note  that  my  script,  which  seems  to  have
been  guessing  on  its  own  account  about  Mrs  Sidgwick’s  conversation,  suggests
‘Gurney  Library’  as  a topic.”


LVii.]  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.  427

Both  the  “library”  and  the  “document”  reappear  at  the
sitting  of  February  13,  the  first  sitting  at  which  I was  myself
present.  As  the  object  of  my  presence  was  to  learn  how  to
manage  the  sittings,  in  order  to  be  able  to  take  Mr  Piddington  s
place  later,  I had  been  introduced  to  the  trance-personalities  in
my  own  name.  After  some  other  talk,  MyerSp  wrote  :

Mrs  S.  my  dear  good  friend  did  you  understand  my  reference
to  library  1

E.  M.  S.  To  the  Gurney  Library  ? ^

Yes.

E.  M.  S.  I did  not  understand  it  well.

I wdll  explain  as  we  understand  each  other  better.  My
reference  to  another  light  explains  my  understanding  hex-
message.

Further  conversation  follows  and  he  then  continues  :

Do  you  remember  my  reference  to  my  old  friend,  which
was- — I long  to  meet  him  again.  It  would  be  joy.
Whose  warm  sympathetic  encouragement  kept  my  pen
in  motion  so  to  speak — from  being  idle.

I see  you  a little  clearer  now.

Do  you  recall  my  saying  I would  rather  it  be  myself  than
him  ? I said  this  to  you  just  before  he  came.

Can  you  recall  my  reference  to  your — to  a document
which  concerned  you  after  our  good  friend  left  1

And  you  said  it  did  not  matter  so  long  as  you  gave  the
library.  I thought  it  a good  suggestion,  as  it  would
serve  as  a memoriam  [sic].

(Eector  communicating)

He  wishes  to  know  if  you  understand  (E.)

^This  was  said  in  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  J.  G.  P.  had  asked  MyerSp  to
state  what  particular  library  had  been  referred  to  by  Myersv-  I believe,  too,
that  while  I knew  that  “library”  had  been  referred  to  in  both  scripts,  I had
not  realised  that  the  Gurney  library  had  been  mentioned  in  Mrs  Verrall’s
only.


428  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiuiclc.  [part

E.  M.  S.  I do  not  understand  very  well.  I do  not  remember  about
the  library.

(Myers  communicating)

Dont  you  remember  a letter  I wrote  to  you  about  it  before
I went  away  and  you  replied  that  you  thought  my
suggestion  a good  one  ?

The  “ Library  ” and  the  “ document  ” seem  here  to  be  dis-
sociated from  the  conversation  at  Terling.  I can  make  nothing
of  them  and  have  no  letters  throwing  light  on  them.  At
the  next  sitting  at  which  I was  present — February  20 —
the  library  was  again  referred  to.  Myersj^,  urged  me  to  look
again  for  a letter  referring  to  it  and  said : “ I distinctly
remember  writing  you  or  talking  with  you  and  I believe  I
wrote  about  adding  some  of  your  own  books  to  the  College
Library.”  I do  not  think  it  likely  that  Mr  Myers  and  I
either  talked  or  corresponded  on  this  subject ; and  certainly
if  it  had  been  mentioned  between  us,  it  would  not  have  been
in  a way  to  make  any  particular  impression  on  either  of  us.
The  only  reference  to  the  Terling  conversation  at  this  sitting
was  the  following  remark  by  MyerSp : — “ I am  most  anxious  to
get  my  answer  to  you  with  deep  sincere  and  coherent
meaning.”

The  next  time  it  was  referred  to  was  on  March  20,  when
I was  for  the  first  time  having  a sitting  with  Mrs  Piper  with
no  one  else  present.  I had,  since  February  20,  taken  charge
of  several  sittings,  but  there  had  always  been  another  sitter
with  whom  it  was  intended  that  the  trance-personalities  should
converse.  On  March  20  Myersp  appeared  almost  immediately
and  wished  to  know  if  I remembered  his  making  a suggestion
to  me  once  about  a will.  This  I suppose  is  a development
of  the  document  idea  of  previous  sittings.  I thought  I remem-
bered something  vaguely  about  his  own  intentions  as  to  some
of  his  property  and  said : “ I think  I remember  something
about  it.”  He  continued  :

I recall  very  clearly  speaking  with  you  about  a will  and  as
I recall  it  it  had  to  do  with  our  good  friend  Sidgwick.

E.  M.  S.  I think  we  talked  about  his  will.

I think  I was  rather  interested  and  pleased.


lvil]


An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  Trance.


429


It  is  likely  enough  that  we  spoke  of  the  will  on  some
occasion  between  the  death  of  my  husband  and  that  of  Mr.
Myers ; but  it  was  a will  of  no  general  interest,  as  it  simply
left  everything  to  me.  The  subject  then  dropped  and  a little
later  in  the  sitting  MyerSp  said :

Let  me  ask  you  if  you  recall  my  affectionate  conversation  ^
when  I visited  you  at  Tarling  [sic],-  which  I had  forgotten
about.

E.  M.  S.  Yes  I remember.

Yes  and  my  advising  you  to  see  about — see  [illegible
scrawl  here]  about  his  life.

E.  M.  S.  “My  advising  you  to  see”?

(Eector,  communicating)

I can’t  tell  you  just  what  that  word  is.  It  sounds  like
R e V n u a ® of  his  life  R.

E.  M.  S.  R,  e,  u,  n,  u,  a ; is  that  it  ?

(Myers  communicating)

Yes.  It  was  to  write  it.

E.  M.  S.  “To  write  it”?  Yes  I remember.

Yes,  I mean  where  I saw  you  and  called  you  out.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  quite  right.

It  gave  me  the  greatest  pain  of  my  whole  life,'^  yet  in
another  sense  the  greatest  joy.  Do  you  understand  my
meaning  ? I was  grieved  to  lose  my  friend ; I felt  it
would  be  a loss  ; but  felt  that  his  loss  would  be  his  gain.

^This  word  is  not  clear.  I read  ifc  “conversation”  at  the  time  I believe,
bnt  if  it  is  “ conversation”  it  is  very  much  abbreviated.  It  may  be  “ emotion.”
®This  is  the  first  time  the  name  appears  in  the  script,  and  it  is  spelt
as  a person  might  spell  it  who  had  only  heard  it — not  seen  it  written.

^Perhaps  a cross  between  Eeview  and  Memoir;  compare  “remery”  (p.  424,
footnote),  which  may  have  been  a cross  between  remember  and  memory.  Mrs
Piper  had,  I believe,  had  in  her  hands  the  number  of  the  Proceedings  published
in  February,  1907,  containing  Mr  Podmore’s  review  of  the  Memoir.

^This,  of  course,  is  not  true  of  Mr  Myers,  and,  moreover,  he  regarded  the
separation  as  likely  to  be  brief  ; but  it  is  fair  perhaps  to  take  it  as  merely  a
rhetorical  exaggeration.


430


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiuick.  [part

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I quite  understand.  Can  you  remember  what  you
said  about  writing  his  life  ?

I do  veiy  clearly.  I remember  referring  to  some  letters  and
collecting  them.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I daresay  you  did  say  that.

But  it  was  to  my  mind  the  most  valuable  and  interesting
thing  either  you  or  I could  do.  Do  you  remember  this  1

E.  M.  S.  I remember.!

And  you  said  you  would  give  it  your  best  thought.

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

Did  it  ever  seem  to  you  that  I should  not  survive  to  help
you  with  it  1

E.  M.  S.  I remember  that  you  said  that."

I have  survived  and  so  has  he.

Some  remarks  about  my  husband  follow  here,  and  a message
from  him.  Then  I said  :

E.  M.  S.  May  I ask  another  question,  Mr  Myers  1

Do  talk  with  me  dear  Mrs  Sidgwick.  I long  to  have  you
speak  with  me,  it  is  my  hope  and  my  joy.

E.  M.  S.  You  have  remembered  very  well  about  that  conversation,
but  you  said  something  else  about  the  writing  of  that
Life.  Will  3'ou  think  it  over  and  tell  me  if  jmu  can
what  it  was  1

Did  you  say  think  it  overl
E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I said  think  it  over.

Yes  I will  gladly  go  over  it  in  my  thoughts,  and  finish  my
recollections  when  I meet  jmu  again.

During  the  waking  stage  after  this  sitting  Mrs  Piper
referred  several  times  to  “ Arthur  ” and  an  “ Eleanor,”  who

do  not  really  i-emember  his  saying  anything  e.xactly  like  that,  hut  he  did
think  it  very  important  that  the  Life  should  he  written.

-Here,  again,  my  answer  is  not  exactly  true.  He  hoped  to  help  with  the
Life  more  or  less,  though  he  did  not  expect  to  live  long  enough  to  write  it
himself,  in  addition  to  finishing  his  own  hook.


LVii.]  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Pij>ers  Trance.  431

worked  or  talked  too  hard,  to  whom  he  was  to  give  a rest.
“ What  is  that  man  with  a long  beard  ? Arthur  must  give
Eleanor  a rest ; she  talked  too  hard ; I was  afraid  that  she
would  suffer.”  At  one  point  the  name  “ Henry  ” wms  apparently
associated  with  the  others.  This  collocation  of  names — my
brother-in-law’s,  my  own,  and  my  husband’s — and  the  implica-
tion of  some  kind  of  co-operation  between  Arthur  and  Eleanor
suggests  that  Arthur  Sidgwick  was  the  Arthur  referred  to,’-
and  that  we  have  here  a first  emergence  of  the  idea  of  his
helping  with  the  biography.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was
no  appropriateness  in  speaking  of  a need  of  rest  in  connection
with  me ; and  the  remark,  “ she’s  a bright  girl  ”,  which  was
associated  with  the  overworked  person,  obviously  cannot  apply
to  me.  As  will  be  seen  presently,  however,  Arthur  Sidgwick’s
daughter  is  said  at  the  next  sitting  to  be  “ a very  bright
girl.”  This  suggests  some  confusion  of  ideas.  Is  it  possible

there  is  a further  confusion  between  the  ideas  of  Arthur
Sidgwick  having  little  leisure  for  w'riting  (see  p.  418)  and  my
being  overworked  ? It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  I had
Mr  Arthur  Sidgwick  in  my  mind  on  March  20,  not  only
in  connection  with  the  Terling  conversation,  but  because  I had
just  arranged  for  him  to  sit  with  Mrs  Piper  in  the  following
week.  These  sittings  did  not  come  off,  because  Mrs  Piper  was
ill,  and  he  was  unable  to  avail  himself  of  a later  opportunity.

On  April  2 I again  sat  alone  with  Mrs  Piper.  Her
illness  had  prevented  any  sittings  taking  place  in  the  interval.
Myersp  soon  appeared,  and,  after  a few  remarks  about  another
topic,  said  :

Do  you  remember  my  reference  to  you  at  Tarling  [sic]  about
my  -writing  of  the  life  of  our  blessed  friend  ?

E.  M.  S.  Yes.

I recall  cpiite  distinctly  my  own  impressions  of  what  should
be  done  and  was  cjuite  willing  to  undertake  the  task
myself,  but  you  will  remember  at  that  time  I was
overcrowded  with  work  and  made  the  suggestion  that
you  should  collect  certain  letters  etc.  for  this  purpose.
Do  you  recall  it  yourself  1

’A  man  with  a long  beard  wouhl  describe  either  Henry  or  Arthur  Sidgwick,
but  I do  not  know  of  any  instance  of  Mrs  Pqjer  seeing,  during  tiie  waking-
stage,  absent  living  persons.


432


[part


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

E.  M.  fS.  Yes,  I recall  it4

I should  be  glad  if  you  could  recall  the  act  (1)  of  our
walking  out  in  the  garden  ; and  I said  it  would  be  to
my  mind  the  most  valuable  tribute  we  could  pay  to  him
and  his  memor}'.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I know  you  thought  so,  Mr  Myers,

Besides  I believe  I offered  to  give  you  any  help  I could.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  jmu  did.

I also  had  in  mind  and  I believe  I gave  utterance  to  it  that
after  such  (?)  work  (?)  should  have  been  accomplished  the
receipts  should  go  to  further  a cause  in  which  we  were  both
interested.

E.  M.  S.  I do  not  remember  your  saying  that.

I am  not  sure  that  I did  not  apply  this  to  my  own
work  instead.  My  memory  is  fairly  clear  regarding  the
actual  facts  and  my  feelings.  I also  referred  to  a
photograph  at  one  time,  or  photographs  appropriate  for
reproduction.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did.

Which  seemed  to  meet  with  your  approval  at  once.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  we  agreed  at  once.

[This  choice  of  a photograph  was  for  his  own  obituary
notice  of  my  husband  in  the  S.P.E.  Proceedings.  The
photograph  b}^  Mrs  Myers  which  is  there  reproduced
was  agreed  on  by  Mr  and  Mrs  Myers  and  myself  at
their  house.]

I also  remember  making  reference  to  his  simplicity  and
earnestness  in  his  life’s  work  which  should  be  brought
out.  And  do  you  remember  my  deep  and  tender  emotion
when  I referred  to  the  help  he  had  given  me  ?

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I do  well.

I live  with  him  to  appreciate  and  enjoy  his  kindness  devotion
and  encouragement  as  I did  when  visible  to  you.

Do  you  remember  my  suggesting  also  that  this  should  be
done  as  soon  as  possible  ?

‘ I do  not  really  recall,  however,  his  making  any  suggestion  about  letters.


433


LVii.]  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.

E.  M.  S Yes.i

To  which  3'ou  acquiesced.  And  now  let  me  collect  my
thoughts  and  continue.

IMyerSp  then  retired  to  reappear  after  an  interval  during  which
Hodgsoup  had  been  conversing.  On  returning  he  first  attempted
to  “ go  back  to  old  memories  ” — some  of  which  agree  more  or  less
with  my  recollections,  but  are  not  evidential — and  then  said :

Now  dear  friend  let  us  refer  again  to  the  book.

E.  M.  S.  Yes  I want  you  to  refer  to  the  book.

I remember  I asked  you  to  try,  and  do  you  remember  copy
right,  and  bring  out  the  work  that  it  should  not  fall  into
other  hands.  I felt  it  was  your  work  [or,  book(?)]  alone
and  the  exact  words  I pointed  were  I believe  like  this —
I hade?)  unless  you  take  certain  (?)  on  this  point  they  would
lose  their  value.  Am  I not  correct  ?

E.  M.  S.  I do  not  think  jmu  referred  to  cop}wight.-

I do  not  intend  to  say  copy  right,  only  copies.  Rector  does
not  understand  my  point ; I will  explain.

Do  jmu  remember  my  suggesting  to  jmu  about  views  (?)
photographs  which  I thought  would  be  necessary  ? And
I think  I suggested  Arthur.  Do  you  remember  about
Arthur  and  what  I said  about  his  giving  anything  (?)  to
assist  assisting  j'ou.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  cpiite  well.

And  if  you  gave  it  your  attention  it  would  be  splendid  and
just  what  I should  so  much  like.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did  want  Arthur  to  help.

Yes,  1 did  ask  you  to  get  him  to  help  you.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  you  did.

I remember  it  well.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  that  was  one  thing  you  talked  about  at  Terling.

Yes  it  was  the  chief  thing.

E.  M.  S.  It  was.

And  as  you  asked  me  the  question  I felt  it  my  bounden

1 Again  not  a specific  recollection  on  my  part,  but  it  doubtless  was  what  he
desired.

There  may,  again,  be  some  confusion  with  his  own  book  here.


434


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiviclc.


[part


dut}'  to  reply  in  such  a way  as  to  convince  you  that  I
had  not  forgotten  our  meeting  and  our  talk  [walk  (?)]  in
the  garden  where  I suggested  it.

E.  M.  S.  I am  very  glad  you  have  remembered.

I said  I knew  of  no  one  more  capable  than  he  was  to  carry
out  my  suggestion.  Now  did  you  ever  do  it?

K M.  S.  Yes,  I did  do  it.

Oh  I am  glad  to  hear  it.

I remember  Arthur  had  a daughter,^  but  I can’t  tell  her  name
at  the  moment.  Is  he  [or  she(?)]  all  right?

py  M.  S.  Yes,  he  is  veiy  well.

Very  bright  girl,  and  capable,  I remember.  Well  have  I
answered  all  about  that  ? I think  I have  answered  all
about  our  talk ; I believe  I have  covered  everything  of
importance.

PI  M .S.  Yes,  much  the  most  important  things.

Yes.  If  not  please  remind  me  of  something  I am  to  think
over.

On  the  next  occasion  when  I was  at  a sitting  alone — April
8 — there  was  a good  deal  of  scrappy  reference  to  things  said
on  previous  occasions,  an  indication  probably  that  communication
was  not  going  easily.  Among  other  matters  Myersp  referred
to  the  Terling  conversation  as  follows :

Did  you  understand  what  I said  about  Arthur  ?

And  my  suggestion  about  the  photograi>hs  ?

p].  M.  8.  About  the  photographs  ?

Of  my  good  friend. ^

^ Arthur  Sidgwick  lias  three  daughters,  but  I think  Mr  Myers  liad  a more
vivid  acquaintance  with  one  than  with  the  others.

2 There  was  at  this  sitting  a similar  brief  recurrence  to  the  “library,”  Init  in  a
new  form.  Thus  :

(Myers  communicating)

Do  you  remember  what  I said  about  the  College  library.

E.M.S.  No,  there  was  a cross-correspondence  about  it  though.

Yes,  but  I believe  I wrote  you  about  my  intention  of  giving  some  of  lay
books  to  our  Society.

E.M.S.  Perhaps  you  did.

You  seemed  pleased.  I remember.

E.M.S.  I have  forgotten.


LVii.]  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piim^'s  Trance.  435

It  is  difficult  to  know  whether  we  ouoht  to  infer  from  this
that  MyerSp  conceived  Arthur  Sidgwick’s  assistance  to  be  required
chiehy  for  the  purpose  of  choosing  photographs.  His  name  came
in  close  connection  with  the  selection  of  photographs  at  the
sitting  of  April  2,  but  the  part  MyerSp  assigned  to  him  then
certainly  seemed  more  important.  It  is  possible  here  to  regard
“ what  I said  about  Arthur,”  and  “ my  suggestion  about  photo-
graphs ” as  references  to  two  separate  points,  especially  as  they
do  not  run  on  in  the  script ; the  second  has  a paragraph  to
itself.  This  does  not,  however,  always  imply  an  independent
sentence  in  the  script ; and  at  the  sitting  I certainly  supposed
that  Arthur  and  the  photographs  were  connected.  I believe  that
there  was  in  consequence  a surprised  intonation  in  my  question
— “ About  the  photographs  ” ? — which  I indicated  in  the  record
by  underlining  the  last  word ; but  if  so,  it  led  to  no  attempt
to  remove  my  surprise.

The  last  reference  at  the  London  sittings  to  the  Terling
conversation  was  on  April  30 — when  I was  not  present.
Mrs  Verrall  was  the  sitter,  and  had  been  explaining  another
question  she  wished  MyerSp  to  answer.  He  said  in  reply  to  her
explanation  :

Oh  yes  I think  I understand  now.  It  was  a long  time  before
I understood  about  Terling  [sic]  the  home  of  Lady  Lay-
leigh.  Tailing  [.sic]  where  Mrs  Sidgwick  and  I talked.

This  concludes  the  narrative  of  what  occurred.  It  remains
to  examine  whether  the  episode  affords  evidence  either  of  memory
continuous  with  that  of  Mr  Myers,  or  of  any  other  kind  of
supernormally  acquired  knowledge.  As  an  experiment  in
obtaining  from  MyerSp  evidence  that  he  knew  something
unknown  to  the  sitter,  it  was,  of  course,  a complete  failure,  but
knowledge  of  which  I believe  myself  to  have  been  the  sole
living  repository  was  shown.  Was  it  extracted  from  me  by
guessing  and  fishing  ? Was  it  obtained  from  me  telepathically  ?
These  are  the  questions  to  be  considered  and  answered  as  far
as  possible.  But  first  we  must  examine  what  the  knowledge  to
be  accounted  for  amounts  to.  It  must,  of  course,  be  assumed
that  Mrs  Piper  was  aware  that  my  brother-in-law  Arthur
Sidgwick  and  I had  together  produced  a Memoir  of  my  husband  ;
and  the  apparent  ignorance  of  this  shown  by  MyerSp  (see  p.  434),


436


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


though  curious  and  perhaps  instructive,  cannot  be  regarded  as
evidence  one  way  or  the  other  for  our  present  purpose.  The
further  facts — that  a conversation  between  Mr  Myers  and
myself  took  place  at  Terling,  the  home  of  Lord  Eayleigh,  very
shortly  before  my  husband’s  death,  and  that  in  that  conversa-
tion Mr  Myers  spoke  to  me  on  two  specific  subjects,  both  of
which  involved  action  on  my  part — were  the  data  the  trance
personality  had  to  work  upon.  What  Myersp  contributed  was
{a)  that  our  conversation  took  place  out  of  doors,  (b)  that  it
concerned  the  writing  of  a biography  of  my  husband,  (c)  that
Mr  Myers  being  very  anxious  that  it  should  be  written,  but  (d)
not  feeling  able  to  lurdertake  to  write  it  himself  on  account  of
pressure  of  other  work,  (c)  asked  me  to  get  Arthur  Sidgwick
to  help  with  it.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  what  Mr
Myers  really  proposed  was  that  I should  ask  Arthur  Sidgwick
to  vjritc  it.  That  he  should  co-operate  with  me  in  writing  it
was  my  own  desire.

This  information  came  out  piecemeal — not  all  at  once.  Fact
(a)  was  given  to  Mrs  Verrall  (to  whom  it  was,  as  we  have  seen,
known)  on  January  22  (see  p.  417).  It  might  have  been  a
guess,  as  the  place  out  of  doors  was  not  clearly  specified  and  the
number  of  probable  alternative  answers  to  the  questions  put  by
Mrs  Verrall  was  not  large.  At  the  same  time  it  was  a first
shot,  and  as  such  hits  the  mark  more  nearly  than  a guess  by  a
person  unacquainted  with  the  circumstances  would  have  been
likely  to  do.  Any  conversation  I had  alone  with  Mr  Myers
while  he  was  at  Terling — in  other  words,  any  conversation  with
him  alone  within  a few  weeks  of  my  husband’s  death — probably
took  place  out  of  doors.  The  weather  was  very  fine,  there
were  lots  of  places  in  the  garden  and  shrubberies  to  sit  and
stroll  in,  and  it  was  very  easy  to  step  out  of  the  house  into  the
garden.  One  was  naturally  out  of  doors  when  not  specially
occrrpied  indoors.

Fact  (b)  (that  the  conversation  concerned  the  writing  of  a
Memoir)  was  the  first  definite  statement  about  the  Terling
conversation  made  to  myself  The  previous  guesses — a sealed
envelope,  a work  to  be  brought  out  (p.  421)\  a document,

' It  has  been  pointed  out  to  me  that  it  is  conceivable  that  this  was  a first
approach  to  the  real  subject  of  the  conversation  rather  than  a mere  guess — as  it
might  refer  to  the  autobiographical  fragment  written  at  Mr  Myers’s  suggestion


LVii.]  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  Trance.  437

H college  matter  (p.  424),  library  (if  we  are  to  count  this
as  a guess) — were  given  to  IMrs  Yerrall  or  i\Ir  Piddington ;
and  before  fact  (b)  was  mentioned  MyerSp  had  had  sufficient
means  of  learninQ  that  none  of  them  was  right.  Indeed
“ library  ” and  “ document  ” had  been  referred  to  by  him  in  my
presence  (pp.  427-8),  not,  it  is  true,  as  connected  with  the
conversation,  but  in  a way  which  would  have  given  me  an  oppor-
tunity of  accepting  them  as  so  connected,  had  they  been  the
subjects  in  question.  Fact  {h)  itself  came  out  with  the  provok-
ing want  of  perfect  clearness  so  general  in  the  communications.
Piector’s  inability  to  catch  a word  which  should  havo  been
“ memoir,”  or  an  equivalent,  gave  MyerSp  an  opportunity,  had  he
needed  it,  of  developing  the  idea  in  some  different  way  and  of
denying  that  it  was  a biography  that  was  to  be  written.  If  I
had  not  a little  later  somewhat  unguardedly  accepted  the
interpretation  in  an  unequivocal  manner,  he  might  have  found
it  necessary  to  put  out  further  feelers.  Such  a cautious
procedure  is  characteristic  of  automatism  generally,  as  well  as
of  Mrs  Piper’s  in  particular,  and  seems  to  arise  from  a dislike  of
being  found  in  the  wrong  which  also  leads  to  bad  excuses  and
elaborate  false  explanations  of  erroneous  statements.  So

definite  a statement  so  inartistically  backed  out  of  as  that  about
copy-right  on  p.  433  is,  I think,  unusual.  This  kind  of  cautious
approach  to  a statement  is  no  doubt  often  useful  for  “ fishing  ” —
i.e.  extracting  from  the  sitter  himself  the  information  desired —
but  it  is  equally  liable  to  occur  when  • an  automatist  is  alone
and  fishing  is  out  of  the  question.  There  is  therefore  no  need
to  assume  that  fishing  was  intended  on  the  occasion  under
discussion,  nor  indeed  that  the  inability  to  bring  out  the  word
“ memoir  ” was  feigned.  I have  no  doubt  that  Eector  does
sometimes  feign  inability  to  catch  what  the  spirit  alleged  to

be  using  him  as  amanuensis  is  saying.^  But  though  this  habit
makes  one  suspicious,  I do  not  think  the  present  case  really  looks

like  either  such  feigned  inability,  or  fishing,  or  even  like  a

(see  p.  418).  But  from  an  evidential  point  of  view  this  possibility  seems  hardly
worth  considering.

' When,  for  instance.  Rector  says  he  cannot  catch  the  letters  of  the  alphabet
forming  a name  which  a deceased  friend  of  the  sitter  is  spelling  out  to  him,  it
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  what  is  going  on  is  an  attempt,  whether  deliberate  or
not,  to  get  the  information  from  the  sitter.


438


Mrs.  Henry  Sidy  wick.


[part


cautious  approach  to  the  subject.  The  idea  of  the  Memoir,
even  without  the  word,  is  I think  more  clearly  expressed
than  it  would  have  been  if  ambiguity  had  been  intended.
It  seems  more  likely  that  the  automatic  personality  really  had
for  the  moment  forgotten  the  word,  as  we  are  all  liable  to
do  occasionally,  and  as  apparently  happened  in  the  present
series  of  sittings  not  only  with  difficult  words  like  “ La
Saisiaz  ” and  “ Vogler  ” (see  pp.  367-8,  and  373),  but  with
the  word  “scale”  (pp.  388-391).

I therefore  think  that  MyerSp  did  specify  the  writing  of  a
Memoir  of  my  husband  as  the  subject  of  the  conversation  without
assistance,  unless  it  was  telepathic  a.ssistance,  from  me.  Moreover
it  does  not  seem  to  me  likely  that  a person  knowing  no  more
about  it  than  Mrs  Piper,  would  think  this  a probable  subject  of
conversation  under  the  given  circumstances ; so  that  regarded
as  a mere  guess  it  would  be  a remarkably  fortunate  one,  even
allowing  for  the  deduction  that  must  be  made  on  account  of
the  previous  attempts.

The  successful  statement  of  facts  (c)  (that  Mr  Myers  was
anxious  that  the  biography  should  be  written,  pp,  430  and  432)
and  (d)  (that  he  did  not  himself  feel  able  to  undertake  it  owing
to  pressure  of  other  work,  p.  431)  must,  1 think,  be  held  to  add  to
the  improbability  of  the  whole  being  mere  guess  work,  notwith-
standing the  admixture  of  irrelevant  remarks  about  photographs
(pp.  432,  433,  and  434),  copyright  (p.  433),  and  the  assignment
of  profits  to  a special  object  (p.  432).  At  the  same  time  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  (c)  is  a natural  inference  from
the  already  admitted  fact  that  Mr  Myers  talked  about  the
Memoir  at  such  a moment ; and  as  to  (d)  that  it  is  not
improbable  that  Dr  Hodgson  had  talked  with  the  trance-
personalities  about  Mr  Myers’s  desire  to  finish  his  own  book
before  he  died.

Fact  (e)  that  Mr  Myers  asked  me  in  that  conversation  to  get
Arthur  Sidgwick  to  help  is,  I think,  more  improbable  as  a guess
or  inference.  It  must,  as  I have  said,  be  assumed  that  Mrs
Piper  was  aware  that  he  did  co-operate,  but  I do  not  think  it  at
all  naturally  follows  from  this  that  Mr  Myers  was  likely  to  have
been  concerned  in  the  matter  in  any  way.  MyerSp  must  be
credited,  too,  for  what  it  is  worth,  both  with  the  naturalness
and  the  unambiguity  of  the  Christian  name  Arthur  used  by


lvil]  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  Trance.  439

itself.’-  Mr  Myers,  who  was  an  old  College  friend  of  Arthur
Sidgwick’s,  called  him  simply  “Arthur”  in  speaking  to  him,
or  to  me  of  him ; and  after  his  own  brother  Arthur  died  there
was  no  living  Arthur  of  whom  he  would  have  been  likely
to  speak  to  me  without  further  description.  “ Arthur  ” when
used  by  Mr  Myers  by  itself  in  speaking  to  me  meant  Arthur
Sidgwick.  The  statement  that  “ Arthur  had  a daughter  ”
(p.  434)  is  a further  true  and  distinctive  statement  so  far  as
it  goes.

In  conclusion,  then,  I think  that,  after  making  full  allowance
for  erroneous  guesses  and  for  piecemeal  emergence  of  the  state-
ments made,  the  amount  of  apparent  knowledge  shown  was
decidedly  beyond  what  could  be  expected  to  occur  by  chance,
and  in  forming  a judgement  it  must  of  course  be  remembered  that
the  statements  were  made  in  answer  to  a C[uestion  selected  by
me,  not  by  the  trance-personalities.  Xo  one  incident — even  a
more  striking  one  than  thi.s — can  by  itself  prove  supernormal
access  to  information,  but  this  incident  does  in  my  opinion  add
to  the  weight  in  that  scale.

As  regards  the  source  from  which  MyerSp  obtained  the  know-
ledge— whether  it  was  from  my  mind  or  the  memory  of  Mr
Myers — there  is  no  conclusive  indication  in  the  incident.
Thought-transference  from  me  is  obviously  not  excluded,  and
therefore  unless  and  until  communication  from  the  dead  is
established  as  a vera  causa,  thoimht- transference  must  hold  the
ground.  But  supposing  that  thought-transference  from  the  dead
and  from  the  living  were  known  to  be  equally  probable  in
themselves,  which  should  we  suppose  to  have  operated  in  the
present  case  ? I think  it  is  difficult  to  say.  The  main  con-
siderations are  on  the  one  side  that  the  trance-personality  itself
assumes  that  the  information  came  from  the  dead,  and  on  the
other  that  it  did  not  come  at  all  except  in  the  presence  of  a
living  person  who  possessed  it,  and  then  more  in  accordance
with  that  person’s  views  than  Mr  Myers’s  (see  p.  436).  It
may  perhaps  be  urged  that  I,  the  living  person,  had  not
previously  shown  any  power  as  a telepathic  agent.  But  this
cannot  count  for  much,  for  I had  not  previously  succeeded  in

^ It  is  the  more  important  to  mention  this  because  Mrs  Piper  in  trance,
and  other  automatists,  are  apt  to  bring  out  Christian  names  alone  in  a way
that  is  ambiguous  and  not  natural.


440  3Irs.  He'tiry  Sidgivick.  [part  lvil]

any  way  as  a sitter  with  Mrs  Piper.  My  sittings  with  her  when
she  was  in  England  before  were  a complete  failure.  Some  new
condition  must  therefore  have  been  introduced  in  tlie  present
case,  and  there  is  no  more  difficulty  in  supposing  this  to  be  the
breaking  down  of  some  barrier  between  my  mind  and  j\Irs  Piper’s
which  makes  telepathy  now  possible,  than  in  supposing  any  other-
change  in  the  psychical  relations  between  us.


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XXII

(PART  LVII)

1908.

A.

Abt  Vogler.  See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.

Anagram,  R.  Hodgson’s  : Rats,  Arts,  Star - 64-70

Arrow,  Cross-correspondence  77-86

anros  ovpavoi  d/cv/rwr  Incident  - 103,  107-73,  279-81,  291-4,  366,  376-7,  392

Azure  and  Horizon,  Cross-correspondence,  - - 161-2,  281-95,  366,  377

See  also  Horizon.

B.

Balfour,  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  on  Committee  for  Investigation  of  Mrs.

Piper  - - - - 10

Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  Investigation  of  Dowsing,  Reference  to  - 3

Bennett,  E.  N.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -----  28,  370

Blondlot,  Professor,  Experiments  on  A-rays  - - . - 12-3,  15

Browning.  See  Hope  and  Star.

C.

Celestial  Halcton  Days,  Cross-correspondence  103-7,  112,  131,

140-1,  144,  163,  334

Census  of  Hallucinations,  Proportion  of  Apparitions  at  the  Time  of

Death  in  the  ----------  7

Charpentier,  Professor,  Exj)eriments  on  iV-rays  -----  12


Index  to  Vol.  XXII.


[part


U2


Cross-correspondence,  Experiments  in  - _ _ . . 19-416

Crossing  the  bar,  Cross-correspondence  . _ _ _ 107-72,  281

Cup,  Cross-correspondence  --------  179-92


Daffodils,  Cross-corresjDondence
Dante,  References  to  -
Diana,  Cross-correspondence
Dwarf,  Cross-correspondence

See  also  Giant  and  Dwarf.


D.


- 233-5,  276,  279
132,  134-5,  163,  248-9,  263-8,  273,  279-81

193-208


- 171,  194-5,  365


E.

East  and  West,  Cross-correspondence  214,  250,  252-61,  265,  271-7,  281
Endowment  Fund  for  Psychical  Research,  Contributions  to  - - 2

Euripides,  Ci’oss-correspondence  - - - - 199,  210-20,  244-5,  268,  278


F.

Fairy,  Cross-correspondence  -------  173,  174

Faith,  Hope  and  Charity,  Cross-correspondence  - - - - 209-10

“ Forbes,  Mrs.,”  Automatic  Writing  in  Connection  with  Mrs.  Piper  - 20-1

„ Sittings  with  Mi’s.  Piper  - - - - 20,  28,  209,  296

Francis  and  Ignatius,  Cross-correspondence  -----  35-6


G.


Geryon,  References  to  ------  248-9,  254-8,  267

Giant  and  Dwarf,  Cross-correspondence  - - - _ . 87-94,  163

See  also  Dwarf.

H.

H-ILCYON.  See  Celestial.

Hallam,  Arthur,  References  to  122,  126,  129-30,  138-9,  146,  150-1,

156-7,  279,  281

See  also  In  Memoriam.

Hallucination,  Collective,  Seen  in  a Mirror,  Reference  to  Case  of  - 15

Hallucinations,  Possible  Occurrence  of,  at  Sittings  for  Rhj^sical

Phenomena 12,  15-6

„ In  connection  with  Experiments  on  A-rays  - - 12-6

“ Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy,”  Cross-correspondence,  - - 209

Hercules,  References  to  - - - - - 213-9,  244-9,  252-62,  275,  281

Hodgson,  R.,  Anagram  : Rats,  Arts,  Star 64-70

“ Hodgson”  Control,  of  Mrs.  Piper  19,  23,  31,  45,  56,  77-85,  89,  152,

154-5,  179,  185-9,  193,  234,  285,  330,  331,  370,  393,  413
“ Holland,  Mrs.,”  Automatic  Writing  in  Connection  with  Mrs.  Piper,
etc.  20-2,  33,  35,  37,  46,  191,  205,  215,  225,  250,  261,  265,  278,

290,  291,  297,  303-4
- 132-5,  165-8,  411


Homer,  References  to


443


LVii.]  Index  to  Vul.  XXII.

Hope,  Star  and  Bi'owning,  Cross-correspondence

55,  59-77,  279,  284-6,  292-5,  320-97

Horace,  An  Ode  of.  References  to  159,  lGO-1,  167,  279,  319,  335,  338,

369,  376-8,  381,  386-7,  392-3,  397-407
Horizon,  Cross-correspondence  - - - 126,  148-9,  364-6,  368,  370,  372

See  also  Azure.

1.

Imperator,  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  - 23-4,  35,  48,  152,  288

In  Jlemoriam,  References  to  112,  114,  115,  117-30,  137-9,  145-6,  247,  281
See  also  Hallani.

“ I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud,”  Cross-correspondence  - 232-41,  251,  279

J.

Jambs,  Professor  William,  Case  of  Clairvoyance,  Reference  to  - 4

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Recipient  of  Scripts  ------  22

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  20,  27-8,  131,  132,  157,

165-71,  195-6,  235-6,  287-8,  296-7,  376-94,  402-3
,,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson  . - - . 38-43

,,  (9n  the  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences  - 26,  312,  351

,,  Note  on  Mrs.  Piper’s  Knowledge  of  Browning  - 415

L.

L.4T1N  Message,  The  - - - - 70,73-5,146,159,307-11,312-416

Laurel  Wreath,  Cross-correspondence  - - - 47-8,  58,  94-103,  338


Pans  Deo,  Cross-correspondence  --------  304-7

Library,  Cross-correspondence  ------  46-59,  322,  424-8

Light  in  West,  Cross-correspondence  -------  241-81

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  Committee  for  Investigation  of  Mrs.  Pijjer  - 19

,,  Note  on  Mrs.  Piper’s  Knowledge  of  Browning  - 416

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper


20,  23,  27-8,  31,  45,  137,  171-2,  236,  394-6

M.

Maud,  Tennyson’s,  References  to  . - - - 243,  261,  271-8,  281

Mountains,  Seas,  Lakes  and  Rivers,  Cross-correspondence  - - 177,  230-41

Music,  Ci'oss-correspondence  ------  307-11,  384,  412

“ Myers”  Control,  of  Mrs.  Piper  19,  23,  35,  36,  39-46,  50-6,  59,  71-4,

75,  88,  89,  95-6,  100,  102,  104,  126-139,  140-4,  146-7,  152-72,  194,

195-6,  210-11,  220-1,  231-3,  234-6,  251,  268-9,  278,  283-7,  308,

316-23,  330-9,  343-414,  419-35

N.

Newton,  M iss.  Assistance  at  Piper  Sittings

25,  48,  55,  60,  150-2,  193,  194,  231,  234,  281,  282,  295,  320,  338,  370
A-rays,  Experiments  on  --------  - 12-16


444


radex  to  Vol.  XXII.


[part


P.

“Pelham,  George”  Control,  of  Mrs.  Piper  23,  44,  61,  94,  339-43,  350,  352


Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  See  Telekinesis.

Piddiiigtoii,  J.  G.,  on  Committee  for  Investigation  of  Mrs.  Piper  - 19

„ A Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms,  by  - -19-416

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  - - - 20,  27-8,  passim

Piper,  Mrs.,  Investigation  of  Trance-phenomena  of  - - - -19-440

„ Conditions  of  the  Experiments  with  - . . . oq-G

„ List  of  Sittings  with  - - - - - - - 27-8


Plato,  References  to - - 116,  133,  145,  260

Plotinus,  References  to  - 109,  117-125,  127,  128,  130-9,  145-6,  170,

171,  245-7,  260,  281,  382,  411
Podmore,  F.,  on  Committee  for  Investigation  of  Mrs.  Piper  - - 19

Prudens,  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  - - - 23-4,  38-9,  87,  92

Psychical  Research,  Objects  of  the  Society  for  -----  3


R.

Rector,  Trance  Pei’sonality  of  Mrs.  Piper

23-4,  35,  48,  52,  61,  71-2,  78,  87-8,  96,  100,  101,  102,  132,  148-9,

152,  159-65,  167,  193-4,  196,  221,  230-4,  282,  314-5,  331,  339,  343-4,

360,  362-5,  367-70,  372-7,  379-85,  388,  391,  393,  427-9
Russell,  J.,  References  to,  in  Script  ------  lyi,  189-91

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 173,  184-5

Russell,  Mrs.  J.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -----  179,  185-9


31-5,  45

- 132,  134-5,  160-2,  287,  377
- 32-4,  255-6,  259
13,  footnote
222-7,  252,  259-62


S.

St.  Paul,  Cross-correspondence  -
,,  References  to  -
St.  Peter,  References  to  - - - .

Salvioni,  Professor,  Experiments  on  iV-rays
Shadow,  Cross-corresj:)ondence

See  also  Spirit  and  Angel.

Sidgwick,  Arthur,  Joint  Authorship  of  Memoir  of  Henry  Sidgwick,

References  to  -----  - 418,  430-1,  433-6,  438-9

Sidgwick,  Henry,  An  Attempt  to  Elicit  a Recollection  of  the  “ Myers  ”

Control  concerning  --------  417.40

“ Sidgwick  ” Control,  of  Mrs.  Piper  - - - - - - -19,23

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  on  Committee  for  Investigation  of  Mrs.  Piper  19
,,  An  Incident  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  Trance,  by  - - 417-40

•„  Presidential  Address  by  - - - - - - 1-18

,,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  20,  23,  27-8,  56,  75,  130,

136,  169-171,  179,  185-8,  193-5,  210-11,  220-21,

231-6,  268-9,  281-7,  295-6,  297,  307-8,  330,  347,

355,  358-76,  378-94,  398,  402-5,  408-14,  427-35

- 132-5,  168,  172


Socrates,  Refei’ences  to


445


LVii.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXII.

Spirit  and  Angel,  Cross-correspondence  - . . . 220-30,  259,  261

See  also  Shadow.  _

Star.  See  Hope,  Star  and  Browning.

Steeple,  Cross-correspondence  ------  38-46,  153,  318

Suggestion,  Influence  of,  in  the  Production  of  Hallucinations  - - 12-6

Swedenborg,  Eeferences  to  - - - - - 132,  134-5,  160-2,  377


T.

Teleki>’^esis,  Unsatisfactory  Nature  of  the  Evidence  for  - - - 9-16

Telepathy,  Need  of  more  Evidence  for 6-9,  16-8

„ Bearing  of,  on  Question  of  Survival  after  Death  - - 17-8

Tennyson,  Influence  of  Plotinus  on,  Eeferences  to

108-130,  136-9,  14.5-6,  171,  172,  247,  281
See  also  In  Heinoriain  and  Maud.

Test  Questions  put  to  “Myers”  Control  - - 108-111,140-3,397,417-8

See  also  avrbs  ovpavus  aKipeiv,  Latin  Message,  The,  and  Horace.
Thanatos,  Cross-correspondence  ------  177,  295-304

Thompson,  Mrs.,  Automatic  Writing  in  Connection  with  Mrs.  Piper  20-21,  38
Trance  Pei'sonalities  of  Mrs.  Piper.  See  Imperator,  Prudens,  and  Eector.
Triangle  within  a Circle,  Cross-correspondence

36-8,  70-5,  148-9,  318,  324,  328,  339,  344-6


V.

Verr.\ll,  Miss  Helen,  Automatic  Writing  in  Connection  with  Mrs.

Piper,  etc.  20-2,  32,  41-3,  67-8,  85,  91-2,  99,  325-6
„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  - - 20,  27,  207,  316

,,  Table-tilting  Experiments  - - - - 248-9

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Automatic  Writing  in  Connection  with  Mrs.  Piper,  etc.

20-2,  37,  46-8,  61-2,  81-4,  91,  97-8,  105,  106,  113-6,

145,  175,  177,  181,  182,  196-9,  204,  209,  213-4,

222-3,  227-8,  237,  244,  249,  252,  271,  288-9,  299,

306,  309-10,  323-4

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  20,  27-8,  100,  104-5,  111,

131,  140-4,  157-165,  167-8,  195-6,  207,  231,  23.5,

278-9,  287-8,  296,  302,  376-8,  402,  419-23
Violets,  Cross-correspondence  145^  172-8


Wh

Weiss,  Professor  Pierre,  Experiments  on  A-rays
Wood,  Professor  E.  W^.,  Experiments  on  A- rays  - - -

Wordsworth  Country,  Eeferences  to  -

See  also  Daffodils  and  “ I wandered  lonely  as  a cloud.”


13,  footnote
- 14-5

249,  263
