Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XII (1896-1897)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1896 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XXX-XXXI) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc12soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  XII.

(CONTAINING PARTS XXX— XXXI,
WITH  APPENDIX.)

1896-7.


Thr  regponsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  pnhlislied
in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  ivith  their  avJhors.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.

1897.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc12soci


PAGE


^  PART  XXX.

^  Cfeneral  Meetings  ...........  1

c^j  Address  by  the  President,  Professor  William  James  ....  2
Sub-conscious  Reasoning.  By  Wm.  Romaine  Newbolu  .  .  .11
Suggesti(jn  without  Hypnotism,  an  Account  of  Experiments  in  prevent-

j ing  or  suppressing  Pain. By  C.  M.  Barrows ...  21

•==5  Poltergeists. By  Frank  Podmore 45

A  A  Case  of Information  Supernormally  Acquired. By  Miss  Alice

J .Johnson  ...........  116

SUPPLEMKNT.

James  Braid  ;  His  Work  and  Writings. By  Dr.  J.  Milne

Bramwell  ..........  127

Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Psychical  Research. By  F.W.H.

Myers  166

'2  PART  XXXI.

'jjGeneral  Meeting.s .....  ....  175

^  Personally Observed Hypnotic Phen(.)mena. By Dr. J.  Milne

j,  Bramwell  176

What  is  Hypnotism  '. By  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell ....  204
0  Some Experiments in Crystal-Vision. By Professor James  H.

Hyslop  259

A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism,  including  '.'  Speaking  with  Tongues."
^  By Albert Le Baron. Communicated by  Professor

William  James .........  277

2  Supplement.

■^V,  Involuntary  Whispering  Considered  in  Relation  to  Experiments

in  Thought-Transference. By  Professor  Henry  Sidowick  298
J Recent Experiments in Normal Motor Automatism.  By
^  F.  W.  H.  Myers ■  316

n  Reviews  : —

J  Mr.  Aksakoff s  "The  Precursors  of  Spiritism  for  the  last

J)  250  years." By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.  D. . .  .319

Mr.  T.  J.  Hudson's  "  A  Scientific  Demonstration  of  the
^  Future  Life.' By  Harlow  Gale ....  330

C  Appendix  to  Part  XXXL

;  M  General  Meeting  ...........  337

C3  Address  by  the  President,  William  Crookes,  F.R.S 338

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library . .  357

Ofbcers  and  Council  for  1897 358

List  of  Members  and  Associates  359

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch . "  381


34096


• •  >*  c


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  76th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  December  6th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Professor
SiDGWiCK  in  the  chair.

"Miss  X."  read  a  second  provisional  account  of  her  "  Enquiiy
into  Second-sight  in  the  Highlands."

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  a  case  from  his  paper  on  "  The
Subliminal  Self,"  which  appeared  in  the  Pi-oceedings,  Part  XXIX.


The  77th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
January  31st,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Mr.  H.  Arthur  Smith  in  the  chair.

Professor  William  James'  "  Presidential  Address  "  was  read  by
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  ;Myers,  and  is  printed  below.

The  paper  by  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows  on  "  Suggestion  without
Hypnotism,"  printed  below,  was  also  read  by  Mr.  Myers.


The  78th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
March  13th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Mr.  R.  Pearsall  Smith  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  a  paper  on  "  Sub-conscious  Reasoning  "
by  Dr.  W.  Romaine  Newbold,  Assistant  Professor  of  Philosophy  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  which  is  printed  below.

Selections  were  read  from  Dr.  Hodgson's  "  Notes  on  further
Trance  Phenomena  with  Mrs.  Piper,"  which  will,  it  is  hoped,  be
published  in  a  future  number  of  the  Proceedings.


The  79th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
April  24th,  at  4  p.m. ;  the  President,  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  in  the  chair.

Mk.  F.  Podmore  read  part  of  his  paper  on  "  Poltergeists,"  printed
below.

A  paper  communicated  by  Professor  "W.  James  on  "  A  case  of
Psychic  Automatism,  including  '  speaking  with  tongues,' "  was  read
by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  will,  it  is  hoped,  appear  in  a  future
number  of  the  Proceedings.


B


2


President's  Address.


I.

ADDRESS  BY  THE  PRESIDENT,
Professor  William  James.


The  Presidency  of  the  Society  for  Psycliical  Research  resembles  a
mouse-trap.  Broad  is  the  path  and  wide  is  tlie  way  that  leadeth
thereinto.  Flattering  bait  is  spread  before  the  entrance :  the  dis-
tinguished names  of  one's  predecessors  in  the  office  ;  the  absence  of
ixny  active  duties  ;  England  and  America  symbolically  made  one  in
that  higher  republic  where  no  disputed  frontiers  or  foreign  offices
exist ; — and  all  the  rest  of  it.  But  when  tlie  moment  comes  to
retrace  one's  steps  and  go  back  to  private  life,  like  Cincinnatus  to  his
plough,  tlien  comes  the  sorrow,  then  the  penalty  for  greatness.  Tlie
careless  presidential  mouse  finds  the  wires  all  pointing  now  against
him,  and  to  get  out  tliere  is  no  cliance,  unless  he  leave  some  portion
of  liis  fur.  So  in  i  esigning  my  office  to  my  worthier  successor,  I  send
tliis  address  to  be  read  across  the  ocean  as  my  ransom,  not  unaware,  as
I  write  it,  that  the  few  tilings  I  can  say  may  well  fall  short  of  the
dignity  of  the  occasion  and  the  needs  of  the  cause  for  which  our
Society  exists.

Were  psycliical  research  as  well  organised  as  the  other  sciences  are,
the  plan  of  a  presidential  address  would  be  mapped  out  in  advance.
It  could  be  nothing  but  a  report  of  progress,  an  account  of  such  new
observations  and  new  conceptions  as  the  interim  might  have  brought
forth.  But  our  active  workers  are  so  few  compared  with  those
engaged  in  more  familiar  departments  of  natural  learning,  and  the
phenomena  we  study  so  fortuitous  and  occasional,  that  two  years  must,
as  a  rule,  prove  too  short  an  interval  for  regular  accounts  of  stock  to
be  taken.  Looking  back,  however,  on  our  whole  dozen  years  or  more
of  existence,  one  can  appreciate  what  solid  progress  we  have  made.
Disappointing  as  our  career  has  doubtless  been  to  those  of  our  early
members  who  expected  definite  corroboration  or  the  final  001121  de
grdce  to  be  given  in  a  few  short  months  to  such  baffling  questions  as
that  of  physical  mediumship,  to  soberer  and  less  enthusiastic  minds
the  long  array  of  our  volumes  of  Proceedings  must  suggest  a  feeling
of  anything  but  discouragement.  For  here,  for  the  first  time  in  the
history  of  these  perplexing  subjects,  we  find  a  large  collection  of
records  to  each  of  which  the  editors  and  reporters  have  striven  to


President's  Address.


3


attach  its  own  pi'ecise  co-efficient  of  evidential  value,  great  or  small,  by
getting  at  every  item  of  first-hand  evidence  that  could  be  attained,  and
by  systematically  pointing  out  the  gaps.  Only  those  who  have  tried
to  reach  conclusions  of  their  own  by  consulting  the  previous  litera-
ture of  tlie  occult,  as  vague  and  useless,  for  the  most  part,  as  it  is
voluminous,  can  fully  appreciate  the  immense  importance  of  the  new
method  which  we  have  inti-oduced.  Little  by  little,  thi'ough  con-
sistently following  this  plan,  our  Proceedings  are  extorting  respect
from  the  most  unwilling  lookers-on,  and  I  should  like  emphatically
to  express  my  hope  that  the  impartiality  and  completeness  of  record
which  has  been  their  distinguishing  character  in  the  past,  will  be  held
to  even  more  rigorously  in  the  future.  It  is  not  as  a  vehicle  of
conclusions  of  our  own,  but  as  a  collection  of  documents  that  may
hereafter  be  resoi'ted  to  for  testing  the  conclusions  and  hypotheses  of
anybody,  that  they  will  be  permanently  important.  Candour  must  be
their  very  essence,  and  all  the  hesitations  and  contradictions  that
the  phenomena  involve  must  appear  unmitigatedly  in  their  ]pages.
Collections  of  this  sort  are  usually  best  appreciated  by  the  rising-
generation.  The  young  anthropologists  and  psychologists  who  will
soon  have  full  occupancy  of  the  stage  will  feel,  as  we  have  felt,  how
great  a  scientific  scandal  it  has  been  to  leave  a  great  mass  of  human
experience  to  take  its  chances  between  vague  tradition  and  credulity  on
the  one  hand  and  dogmatic  denial  at  long  range  on  tlie  other,  with  no
body  of  persons  extant  who  are  willing  and  competent  to  study  the
matter  with  both  patience  and  rigour.  There  have  been  isolated
experts,  it  is  true,  before  now.  But  our  Society  has  for  the  first  time
made  their  aljilities  mutually  helpful.

If  I  were  asked  to  give  some  sort  of  dramatic  unity  to  our  historj%
I  should  say  first  that  we  started  with  high  hopes  that  the  hypnotic
field  would  yield  an  important  harvest,  and  that  these  hopes  have
subsided  with  the  general  subsidence  of  what  may  be  called  the
hypnotic  wave.  Secondly,  I  should  say  that  experimental  thought-
transference  has  yielded  a  less  abundant  return  than  that  vvhicli  in  the
first  year  or  two  seemed  not  unlikely  to  come  in.  Professor  Ricliet's
supposition  that  if  tlie  unexplained  thing  called  thought-transference
be  ever  real,  its  causes  must,  to  some  degree,  work  in  every Ijody  at  all
times  (so  that  in  any  long  series  of  card-guessings,  for  example,  there
ought  always  to  be  some  excess  of  right  answers  above  the  chance
number)  is,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  not  very  well  .substantiated.
Thought-transference  may  involve  a  critical  point,  as  the  physicists
call  it,  which  is  passed  only  wlien  certain  psychic  conditions  are
realized,  and  otherwise  not  reached  at  all — just  as  a  big  conflagration
will  break  out  at  a  certain  temperature,  below  which  no  conflagration


4


Presidents  A  ddress.


whatever,  whether  big  or  little,  can  occur".  We  have  published  records
of  experiments  on  at  least  thirty  subjects,  roughly  speaking,  and  many
of  these  were  strikingly  successful.  But  their  types  are  heterogeneous;
in  some  cases  the  conditions  were  not  faultless ;  in  others  the  observa-
tions were  not  prolonged  ;  and  generally  speaking,  we  must  all  share  in
a  regret  that  the  evidence,  since  it  has  reached  the  point  it  has
reached,  should  not  grow  more  voluminous  still.  For  whilst  it  cannot
be  ignored  by  the  candid  mind,  it  yet,  as  it  now  stands,  may  fail  to
convince  coercively  the  sceptic.  Any  day,  of  course,  may  bring  in  fresh
experiments  in  successful  picture-guessing.  But  meanwhile,  and  lack-
ing that,  we  can  only  point  out  that  our  present  data  are  strengthened
in  the  flank,  so  to  speak,  by  all  observations  that  tend  to  corroborate
the  possibility  of  other  kindred  phenomena,  such  as  telepathic
impression,  clairvoyance,  or  what  is  called  "  test-mediuaiship."  The
wider  genus  will  naturally  cover  the  narrower  species  with  its
credit.

Now,  as  regards  the  work  of  the  Society  in  these  latter  regards,
we  can  point  to  solid  progress.  First  of  all  we  have  that  masterpiece
of  intelligent  and  thorough  scientific  work — -I  use  my  words  advisedly
— the  Sidgwick  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  Against
the  conclusion  of  this  report,  that  death-apparitions  are  440  times
more  numerous  than  they  should  be  according  to  chance,  the  only
rational  answer  that  I  can  see  is  that  the  data  are  still  too  few,  that
the  net  was  not  cast  wide  enough,  and  that  we  need,  to  get  fair
averages,  far  more  than  17,000  answers  to  the  Census-question.  This
may,  of  course,  be  true,  though  it  seems  exceedingly  unlikely,  and  in
our  own  17,000  answers  veridical  cases  may  have  heaped  themselves
unduly.  So  neither  by  this  report  then,  taken  alone,  is  it  absolutely
necessary  that  the  sceptic  be  definitively  convinced.  But  then
we  have,  to  strengthen  its  flank  in  turn,  the  carefully  studied  cases
of  "  Miss  X."  and  Mrs.  Piper,  two  persons  of  the  constitution
now  coming  to  be  nicknamed  "psychic"  (a  bad  term,  but  a  handy
one),  each  person  of  a  diff'erent  psychic  type,  and  each  presenting
phenomena  so  chronic  and  abundant  that,  to  explain  away  the  super-
normal knowledge  displayed,  the  disbeliever  will  certainly  rather  call
the  subjects  deceivers,  and  their  believers  dupes,  than  resort  to  the
theory  of  chance-coincidence.  The  same  remark  holds  true  of  the
extraordinary  case  of  Stainton  Moses,  concerning  which  Mr.  Myers
has  recently  given  us  such  interestiiig  documents.  In  all  these  cases:
(as  Mr.  Lang  has  well  said  of  the  latter  one)  we  are,  it  seems  to  me,
fairly  forced  to  choose  between  a  physical  and  a  moral  miracle.  The
physical  miracle  is  that  knowledge  may  come  to  a  person  otherwise
than  by  the  usual  use  of  eyes  and  ears.  The  moral  miracle  is  a  kind
of  deceit  so  perverse  and  successful  as  to  find  no  parallel  in  usual


President's  Address.


5


experience.  But  the  limits  of  possible  perversity  and  success  in
deceit  are  hard  to  draw — so  here  again  the  sceptic  may  fall  back  on
his  general  non  possumics,  and  without  pretending  to  explain  the  facts
in  detail,  say  the  presumption  from  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature
still  holds  good  against  their  supernormal  interpretation.  But  the
oftener  one  is  forced  to  reject  an  alleged  sort  of  fact  by  the  method  of
falling  back  on  the  mere  presumption  that  it  can't  be  true  because,  so
far  as  we  know  Nature,  Nature  runs  altogether  the  other  way,  the
weaker  does  the  presumption  itself  get  to  be ;  and  one  might  in  course
of  time  use  up  one's  presumptive  privileges  in  this  way,  even  though
one  started  (as  our  anti-telepathists  do)  with  as  good  a  case  as  the  great
induction  of  psychology  that  all  our  knowledge  comes  by  the  use  of  our
eyes  and  ears  and  other  senses.  And  we  must  remember  also  that  this
undermining  of  the  strength  of  a  presumption  by  reiterated  report  of
facts  to  the  contrary  does  not  logically  require  that  the  facts  in  question
should  all  be  well  pi'oved.  A  lot  of  rumours  in  the  air  against  a  busi-
ness man's  credit,  though  they  might  all  be  vague,  and  no  one  of  them
amount  to  proof  that  he  is  unsound,  would  certainly  weaken  the
presujn2}tio7i  of  his  soundness.  And  all  the  more  would  they  have
this  effect  if  they  formed  what  our  lamented  Gurney  called  a  faggot
and  not  a  chain,  that  is,  if  they  were  independent  of  each  other,
and  came  from  different  quarters.  Now  our  evidence  for  telepathy,
weak  and  strong,  taken  just  as  it  comes,  forms  a  faggot  and  not  a
chain.  No  one  item  cites  the  content  of  another  item  as  part  of  its
own  proof.  But,  taken  together,  the  items  have  a  certain  general
consistency  ;  there  is  a  method  in  their  madness,  so  to  speak.  So  each
of  them  adds  presumptive  A'alue  to  the  lot ;  and  cumulatively,  as  no
candid  mind  can  fail  to  see,  they  subti'act  presumptive  force  from  the
orthodox  belief  that  there  can  be  nothing  in  any  one's  intellect  that
has  not  come  in  through  ordinary  experiences  of  sense.

But  it  is  a  miserable  thing  for  a  question  of  truth  to  be  confiiaed
to  mere  presumption  and  counter-presumption,  with  no  decisive
thunderbolt  of  fact  to  clear  the  baffling  darkness.  And  sooth  to  say,
in  talking  so  much  of  the  merely  presumption-weakening  value  of  our
records,  I  have  been  wilfully  taking  the  point  of  view  of  the  so-called
"  rigorously  scientific  "  disbeliever,  and  making  an  ad  hominem  plea.
My  own  point  of  view  is  different.  For  me  the  thunderbolt  has
fallen,  and  the  orthodox  belief  has  not  merely  had  its  presumption
weakened,  but  the  truth  itself  of  the  belief  is  decisively  overthrown.
If  you  will  let  me  use  the  language  of  the  professional  logic-shop,  a
universal  proposition  can  be  made  untrue  by  a  particular  instance.  If
you  wish  to  upset  the  law  that  all  crows  are  black,  you  mustn't  seek
to  show  that  no  crows  are ;  it  is  enough  if  you  prove  one  single  crow
to  be  white. My  own  white  crow  is  Mrs.  Piper. In  the  trances  of


6


President's  Address.


this  medium,  I  cannot  resist  the  conviction  that  linowledge  appears
which  she  has  never  gained  by  the  ordinary  waking  use  of  her  eyes
and  ears  and  wits.  What  the  source  of  this  knowledge  may  be  I
know  not,  and  have  not  the  glimmer  of  an  explanatory  suggestion  to
make  ;  but  from  admitting  the  fact  of  such  knowledge,  I  can  see  no
escape.  So  when  I  turn  to  the  rest  of  our  evidence,  ghosts  and  all,  I
cannot  carry  with  me  the  irreversibly  negative  bias  of  the  rigorously
scientific  mind,  with  its  presumption  as  to  what  the  true  order  of
nature  ought  to  be.  I  feel  as  if,  though  the  evidence  be  flimsy  in
spots,  it  may  nevertheless  collectively  cany  heavy  weight.  The
rigorously  scientific  mind  may,  in  truth,  easily  overreach  itself.
Science  means,  first  of  all,  a  certain  dispassionate  method.  To
suppose  that  it  means  a  certain  set  of  results  that  one  should  pin
one's  faith  upon  and  hug  forever,  is  sadly  to  mistake  its  genius,  and
degrades  the  scientific  body  to  the  status  of  a  sect.

But  I  am  devoting  too  many  words  to  scientific  logic,  and  too  few
to  my  review  of  our  career.  In  the  question  of  physical  mediumship,
we  have  left  matters  as  baffling  as  we  found  them,  neither  more  nor
less.  For  if,  on  the  one  hand,  we  have  brought  out  new  documents
concerning  the  physical  mii-acles  of  Stainton  Moses,  on  the  other  hand
we  have,  by  the  Hodgson-Davey  experiments,  and  the  Paladino
episode,  vei'y  largely  increased  the  probability  that  testimony  based  on
certain  sorts  of  observation  may  be  quite  valueless  as  proof.  Eusapia
Paladino  has  been  to  us  both  a  warning  and  an  encouragement.  An
encouragement  to  pursue  unwaveringly  the  rigorous  method  in  such
matters  from  which  our  Proceedings  have  never  departed,  and  a
warning  against  drawing  any  prompt  infei'ence  whatever  from  things
that  happen  in  the  dark.  The  conclusions  to  which  some  of  us  had
been  hastily  led  on  "  the  island,"  melted  away  when,  in  Cambridge,
the  opportunity  for  longer  and  more  cunning  observation  was  afforded.
Some  day,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  our  Proceedings  may  be  enabled  to
publish  a  complete  study  of  this  woman's  life.  Whatever  were  the
uj^shot  of  such  a  study,  few  documents  could  be  more  instructive  in
all  ways  for  psychical  I'esearch.

It  is  pleasant  to  turn  from  phenomena  of  the  dark-sitting  and  rat-
hole  type  (with  their  tragi-comic  suggestion  that  the  whole  order  of
nature  might  possibly  be  overturned  in  one's  own  head,  by  the  way  in
which  one  imagined  oneself,  on  a  certain  occasion,  to  be  holding  a
tricky  peasant  woman's  feet)  to  the  "  calm  air  of  delightful  studies."
And  on  the  credit-side  of  our  Society's  account  a  heavy  entry  must
next  be  made  in  favour  of  that  immense  and  patient  collecting  of
miscellaneous  first-hand  documents  that  alone  has  enabled  Mr.  Myers
to  develop  his  ideas  about  automatism  and  the  subliminal  self.  In


President's  Address.


7


Mr.  Myers'  papers  on  these  subjects  we  see,  for  the  lirst  time  in  the
history  of  men's  dealings  with  occult  matters,  the  whole  range  of
them  brought  together,  illustrated  copiously  with  unpublished  con-
temporary data,  and  treated  in  a  thoroughly  scientific  way.  All
constructions  in  this  field  must  be  provisional,  and  it  is  as  something
provisional  that  Mr.  Myers  olfers  us  his  attempt  to  put  order  into  the
tangle.  But,  thanks  to  his  genius,  we  begin  to  see  for  the  first  time
what  a  vast  interlocked  and  graded  system  these  phenomena,  from
the  rudest  motor  automatisms  to  the  most  startling  sensory  appari-
tion, form.  Mr.  Myers'  methodical  treatment  of  them  by  classes  and
series  is  the  first  great  step  towards  overcoming  the  distaste  of
orthodox  science  to  look  at  them  at  all.

But  our  Proceedings  contain  still  other  veins  of  ore  for  future
working.  Ghosts,  for  example,  and  disturbances  in  haunted  houses.
These,  whatever  else  may  be  said  of  them  at  present,  are  not  without
bearing  on  the  common  scientific  presumption  of  which  I  have
already  perhaps  said  too  much.  Of  course,  one  is  impressed  by  such
narratives  after  the  mode  in  which  one's  impressibility  is  fashioned.
I  am  not  ashamed  to  confess  that  in  my  own  case,  although  my
judgment  remains  deliberately  suspended,  my  feeling  towards  the  way
in  which  the  phenomena  of  physical  mediumship  should  be  approached
has  received  from  ghost  and  disturbance-stories  a  distinctly  charitable
lurch.  Science  may  keep  saying  :  "such  things  are  simply  impossible;"
yet,  so  long  as  the  stories  multiply  in  different  lands,  and  so  few  are
positively  explained  away,  it  is  bad  method  to  ignore  them.  They
should  at  least  accrete  for  future  use.  As  I  glance  back  at  my
reading  of  the  past  few  years  (reading  accidental  so  far  as  these
stories  go,  since  I  have  never  followed  up  the  subject)  ten  cases
immediately  rise  to  my  mind.  The  Phelps-case  at  Andover,
recoi-ded  by  one  of  the  family,  in  JlcClure's  Magazine  for  this  month ;
a  case  in  China,  in  Nevius's  Demon  Possession,  published  last  year ;
the  case  in  John  Wesley's  life;  the  ^'Amherst  Mystery"  in  Nova
Scotia,  (New  York,  1888);  the  case  in  Mr.  Willis's  house  at  Fitchburg,
recorded  in  The  Atlantic  Monthly  for  August,  1868  (XXII.,  129)  ;  the
Telfair-Mackie  case,  in  Sharpe's  History  of  Witchcraft  in  Scotland  ;
the  Morse  case,  in  Upham's  Salem  Witchcraft ;  the  case  recounted  in
the  introduction  of  W.  v.  Humboldt's  Briefe  an  eine  Freundin  ;  a
case  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  last  year  (p.  86) ;
the  case  of  the  carpenter's  shop  at  Swanland,  near  Hull,  in  our
Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  Part  XX^  pp.  383  —  394.  In  all  of
these,  if  memory  doesn't  deceive  me,  material  objects  are  said  to
have  been  witnessed  by  many  persons  moving  through  the  air  in
broad  daylight.  Often  the  objects  were  multitudinous — in  some  cases
they  were stones showered through  windows  and  down-chimney.


8


President's  Address.


More  than  once  it  was  noted  that  they  fell  gently  and  touched  the
ground  without  shock.  Apart  from  the  exceptionality  of  the  reputed
occurrences,  their  mutual  i-esemblances  suggest  a  natural  type,
and  I  confess  that  until  these  records,  or  others  like  them,  are
positively  explained  away,  I  cannot  feel  (in  spite  of  such  vast  amounts
of  detected  fraud)  as  if  the  case  against  physical  mediumship  itself  as  a
freak  of  nature  were  definitively  closed.  But  I  admit  that  one  man's
psychological  reaction  cannot  here  be  like  unto  another's  ;  and  one
great  duty  of  our  Society  will  be  to  pounce  upon  any  future  case  of
this  "  disturljance  "  type,  catch  it  while  red-handed  and  nail  it  fast,
whatever  its  quality  be.

We  must  accustom  ourselves  more  and  more  to  playing  the  role  of
a  meteorological  bureau,  be  satisfied  for  many  a  year  to  go  without
definitive  conclusions,  confident  that  if  we  only  keep  alive  and  heap  up
data,  the  natural  types  of  them  (if  there  are  any)  will  surely  crystal-
lize out ;  whilst  old  material  that  is  baffling  will  get  settled  as  we
proceed,  through  its  analogy  with  new  material  that  will  come  with
the  baffling  character  removed.

But  I  must  not  weary  your  patience  with  the  length  of  my  dis-
course. One  general  reflection,  however,  I  cannot  help  asking  you  to
let  me  indulge  in  before  I  close.  It  is  relative  to  the  influence
of  psychical  research  upon  our  attitude  towards  human  history.
Although,  as  I  said  before,  Science  taken  in  its  essence  should  stand
only  for  a  method,  and  not  for  any  special  beliefs,  yet,  as  habitually
taken  Ijy  its  votaries.  Science  has  come  to  be  identified  with  a
certain  fixed  general  belief,  the  belief  tliat  the  deeper  order  of
Nature  is  mechanical  exclusively,  and  that  non-mechanical  categories
are  irrational  ways  of  conceiving  and  explaining  even  such  a
thing  as  human  life.  Now  this  mechanical  rationalism,  as  one
may  call  it,  makes,  if  it  becomes  one's  only  way  of  thinking,
a  violent  breach  with  the  wa3's  of  thinking  that  have,  until  our
own  time,  played  the  greatest  part  in  human  history.  Religious
thinking,  ethical  thinking,  poetical  thinking,  teleological,  emotional,
sentimental  thinking,  what  one  might  call  the  personal  view  of  life
to  distinguish  it  from  the  impersonal  and  mechanical  view,  and  the
romantic  view  of  life  to  distinguish  it  from  the  rationalistic  view,  have
been,  and  even  still  are,  outside  of  well-drilled  scientific  circles,  the
dominant  forms  of  thought.  But  for  mechanical  rationalism,  person-
ality is  an  insubstantial  illusion ;  the  chronic  belief  of  mankind,  that
events  may  happen  for  the  sake  of  their  personal  significance,  is  an
abomination  ;  and  the  notions  of  our  grandfathei's  about  oracles  and
omens,  divinations  and  apparitions,  )niraculous  changes  of  heart
and  wonders  worked  by  inspired  persons,  answers  to  prayer  and


President's  Address.


9


providential  leadings,  are  a  fabric  absolutely  baseless,  a  mass  of  sheer
■M?itruth. Now,  of  course,  we  must  all  admit  that  the  excesses  to
which  the  romantic  and  personal  view  of  Nature  may  lead,  if  wholly
unchecked  by  impersonal  rationalism,  are  direful. Central  African
Mumbo-jumboism  is  one  of unchecked  romanticism's  fruits.  One
ought  accordingly  to  sympathize  with  that  abhorrence  of  romanticism
fis  a  sufficient  world-theory  ;  one  ought  to  understand  that  lively
intolerance  of  the  least  grain  of  I'omanticism  in  the  views  of  life  of
other  people,  which  ai'e  such  characteristic  marks  of  those  vvho  follow
the  scientific  professions  to-day. Our  debt  to  Science  is  literally
boundless,  and  our  gratitude  for  what  is  positive  in  her  teachings
must  be  correspondingly  immense. But  our  own  Froceedings  and
Journals  have,  it  seems  to  me,  conclusively  proved  one  thing  to  the
candid  reader,  and  that  is  that  the  verdict  of  pure  insanity,  of  gratuitous
preference  for  error,  of  superstition  without  an  excuse,  which  the
scientists  of  our  day  are  led  by  their  intellectual  training  to  pro-
nounce upon  the  entire  thought  of  the  past,  is  a  most  shallow  verdict.
The  personal  and  romantic  view  of  life  has  other  roots  beside  wanton
exuberance  of  imagination  and  perversity  of  heart. It  is  perenially
fed  by  facts  of  experience,  whatever  the  ulterior  interpretation  of  those
facts  may  prove  to  be,  and  at  no  time  in  human  history  would  it  have
been  less  easy  than  now — at  most  times  it  would  have  been  much  more
easy — for  advocates  with  a  little  industry  to  collect  in  its  favour  an
array  of  contemporary  documents  as  good  as  those  which  our  publica-
tions present.  These  documents  all  relate  to  real  experiences  of  persons.
These  experiences  have  three  characters  in  common  :  they  are  capri-
cious, discontinuous,  and  not  easily  controlled  ;  they  require  peculiar
persons  for  their  production  ;  their  significance  seems  to  be  wholly  for
personal  life. Those  who  preferentially  attend  to  them,  and  still  more
those  who  are  individually  subject  to  them,  not  only  easily  may  find  but
are  logically  bound  to  find  in  them  valid  arguments  for  their  romantic
and  personal  conception  of  the  world's  course. Through  my  slight  par-
ticipation in  the  investigations  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
I  have  become  acquainted  with  numbers  of  persons  of  this  sort,  for
whom  the  very  word  Science  has  become  a  name  of  reproach,  for  reasons
that  I  now  both  understand  and  lespect. It  is  the  intolerance  of
Science  for  such  phenomena  as  we  are  studying,  her  peremptory  denial
either  of  their  existence,  or  of  their  significance  except  as  proofs  of  man's
absolute  innate  folly,  that  has  set  Science  so  apart  from  the  common
sympathies  of  the  race. I  confess  that  it  is  on  this,  its  humanizing
mission,  that  our  Society's  best  claim  to  the  gratitude  of  our  genera-
tion seems  to  me  to  depend. We  have  restored  continuity  to  history.
We  have  shown  some  reasonable  basis  for  the  most  superstitious  aberra-
tions of  the  foretime. We  have  bridged  the  chasm,  healed  the  hideous


10


President's  Address.


rift  that  Science,  taken  in  a  certain  nari-ow  way,  has  shot  into  the
human  world.

I  will  even  go  one  step  further.  When  from  our  present  advanced
standpoint  we  look  back  upon  the  past  stages  of  human  thought,
whether  it  be  scientific  thought  or  theological  thought,  we  are  amazed
that  a  Universe  which  appears  to  us  of  so  vast  and  mysterious  a  com-
plication should  ever  have  seemed  to  any  one  so  little  and  plain  a
thing.  Whether  it  be  Descartes'  world  or  Newton's ;  whether  it  be
that  of  the  materialists  of  the  last  century  or  that  of  the  Bridgewater
treatises  of  our  own  ;  it  always  looks  the  same  to  us — incredibly  per-
spectiveless  and  short.  Even  Lyell's,  Faraday's,  Mill's,  and  Darwin's
consciousness  of  their  respective  subjects  are  already  beginning  to  put
on  an  infantile  and  innocent  look.  Is  it  then  likely  that  the  Science  of
our  own  day  Avill  escape  the  common  doom,  that  the  minds  of  its
votaries  will  never  look  old-fashioned  to  the  grandchildren  of  the
latter  1  It  would  be  folly  to  suppose  so.  Yet,  if  we  are  to  judge  by
the  analogy  of  the  past,  when  our  Science  once  becomes  old-fashioned,
it  will  be  more  for  its  omissions  of  fact,  for  its  ignorance  of  whole
ranges  and  orders  of  complexity  in  the  phenomena  to  be  explained,
than  for  any  fatal  lack  in  its  spirit  and  principles.  The  spirit  and  prin-
ciples of  Science  are  mere  affairs  of  method ;  there  is  nothing  in  them
that  need  hinder  Science  from  dealing  successfully  with  a  world  in
which  personal  forces  are  the  starting-point  of  new  effects.  The  only  form
of  thing  that  we  directly  encounter,  the  only  experience  that  we
concretely  have,  is  our  own  personal  life.  The  only  complete  category
of  our  thinking,  our  professors  of  philosophy  tell  us,  is  the  category
of  personality,  every  other  category  being  one  of  the  abstract  elements
of  that.  And  this  systematic  denial  on  Science's  part  of  personality  as
a  condition  of  events,  this  rigorous  belief  that  in  its  own  essential
and  innermost  nature  our  world  is  a  strictly  impersonal  world,  may,
conceivably,  as  the  whirligig  of  time  goes  round,  prove  to  be  the
very  defect  that  our  descendants  will  be  most  surprised  at  in  our
own  boasted  Science,  the  omission  that,  to  their  eyes,  will  most
tend  to  make  it  look  perspectiveless  and  short.

But  these  things  lie  upon  the  knees  of  the  gods.  I  must  leave
them  there,  and  close  now  this  discourse,  which  I  regret  that  /  could
not  make  more  short.  If  it  has  made  you  feel  that  (however  it  turn
out  with  modern  Science)  our  own  Society,  at  any  rate,  is  not  "  per-
spectiveless," it  will  have  amply  served  its  purpose ;  and  the  next
President's  address  may  have  more  definite  conquests  to  record.


Slib-conscioiia  Reasoning.


11


II.

SUB-CONSCIOUS  REASONING.
By  AVm.  Rojiaine  Newbold.

The  three  following  cases  may,  perhaps,  he  as  well  reported
under  the  above  somewhat  ambiguous  caption  as  under  any  other.
In  all,  the  results  obtruded  upon  the  upper  consciousness  seem  to
pre-suppose  the  existence  of  conscious  states,  which,  in  two  cases,
would  appear  never  to  liave  existed  in  the  upper  consciousness  at  ail,
and  in  the  third,  even  if  they  did  exist,  existed  only  in  dream  and
were  wholly  forgotten.  Furthermore,  the  results  were  in  all  three
cases  of  such  a  character  that  they  could  have  been  attained  by
processes  of  associative  reasoning  analogous  to  those  of  the  upper
consciousness,  and  we  are  therefore  not  required  to  ascribe  to  the
supposititious  "  subconscious  "  states  any  supernormal  powers.

The  first  was  given  me  by  my  friend  and  colleague,  William  A.
Lamberton,  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  I  transcribe  his  own  wi'itten  statement.

"  I  went  to  the  Lehigh  University  in  the  fall  of  1869  as  instructor
in  Latin  and  Greek.  My  spare  time,  however,  partly  as  the  result  of
old  leanings  of  my  undergraduate  days,  partly  in  consequence  of  a
somewhat  intimate  companionship  that  sprang  up  between  me  and  the
instructor  in  mathematics,  after  a  few  months  came  to  be  given  almost
entirely  to  mathematics.  I  then  made  acquaintance  for  the  first  time
with  the  pleasures  of  descriptive  geometry ;  I  may  say  here  that  this
branch  of  mathematics  has  a  more  direct  tendency  towards  quickening
the  power  of  mentally  picturing  bodies  and  lines  in  space  than  any
other  part  of  mathematics  that  can  be  called  elementary.  I  mention
this  here  because  it  may  have  some  bearing  upon  the  experience  now
to  be  related.

"  Outside  of  this  study  of  descriptive  geometry,  my  mathematical
work  was  entirely  algebraic  and  analytic.  I  soon  began  to  try  my
hand  at  certain  problems.  Somewhere  in  the  spring,  I  think  it  was,
of  1870,  I  attacked  this  problem  : — Given  an  ellipse,  to  find  the  locus
of  the  foot  of  the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  either  focus  upon  a
tangent  to  this  ellipse  at  any  point.  I  endeavoured  to  solve  this
analytically,  starting  from  the  well-known  equations  of  the  tangent  to
an  ellipse,  and  of  a  perpendicular  to  a  given  line  from  a  given  point.


12  Wm.  Romaine  Newhold.

No  thought  of  attemptino-  a  geometrical  solution  ever  entered  my
head.  After  battling  with  these  equations  for  a  considerable  time — it
was  over  a  week  and  may  have  been  two  weeks — I  came  to  the  natural
conclusion  that  I  was  bogged,  and  that  all  niy  efforts,  if  continued,
would  only  sink  me  deeper  in  the  bog  ;  the  proper  thing  to  do  was  to
call  a  halt,  dismissing  the  problem  as  far  as  possible  from  my  thoughts,
and  after  some  time,  when  my  mind  had  got  completely  free  from  it,  to
return  to  it  afresh,  when,  I  had  no  doubt,  a  few  minutes  would  put  me
in  possession  of  the  solution.  This  I  did  absolutely  and  with  success.
After  about  a  week,  I  woke  one  morning  and  found  myself  in
possession  of  the  desired  solution  under  circumstances  to  me  strange
and  interesting,  so  much  so  that  the  impression  of  them  has  never  died
away,  or  even,  so  far  as  I  can  say,  become  dim  or  altered  in  any  way.
Fii'st : — the  solution  was  entirely  geometrical,  whereas  I  had  been
labouring  for  it  analytically  without  ever  drawing  or  attempting  to
draw  a  single  figure.  Second  : — it  presented  itself  by  means  of  a  figure
objectively  pictured  at  a  considerable  distance  fi'om  me  on  the  opposite
wall.  Now  although  I  have  been  able,  and  have  been  so  for  years,  to
picture  to  myself  a  geometrical  figure — even  moderately  complicated — •
and  use  it  for  solution  of  a  geometrical  problem  without  external  lines
being  drawn,  such  figures  have  sensationally  for  me  a  distinct  location
in  myself,  viz.,  in  the  eye  itself ;  they  are  never,  so  far  as  I  know,
externally  presented.  This,  however,  was  distinctly  external.  The
room  that  I  occupied  had  once  been  a  recitation  room.  It  was  a  long
room,  running  east  and  west,  with  two  windows  on  the  south  side,  one
in  the  south-east  corner.  The  north  wall  had  once  been  partially
occupied  by  a  long  blackboard,  set  in  the  wall  and  surrounded  by  a
moulding.  The  blackboard  surface  was  simply  a  blackened — possibly
slated — portion  of  the  wall  itself.  This  had  been  painted  over,  but  the
black  showed  through  the  white  paint  and  the  moulding  was  still  there;
so  that,  apart  from  the  tradition,  with  which  I  was  familiar,  the  fact  of
a  blackboard  having  been  there  was  perfectly  clear  and  evident.  My
bed  was  so  placed  between  the  windows  on  the  south  and  the  north
wall,  that  on  opening  my  eyes  in  the  morning  the  first  thing  I  would
be  likely  to  see  was  the  blackboard  surface.  On  opening  my  eyes  on
the  morning  in  question,  I  saw  projected  upon  this  blackboard  surface
a  complete  figure,  containing  not  only  the  lines  given  by  the  problem,
but  also  a  number  of  auxiliary  lines,  and  just  such  lines  as  without
further  thought  solved  the  problem  at  once.  Both  foci  were  joined
with  the  point  of  contact  of  the  tangent  ;  the  perpendicular  was
prolonged  beyond  its  point  of  intersection  with  the  tangent  till  it
met  the  line  from  the  other  focus  through  the  point  of  contact  with
the  ellipse  ;  a  line  was  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  ellipse  to  the
foot  of  the  perpendicular,  and,  lastly,  the  locus,  a  circle  on  the  major


Sub-conscious  Reasoning.


13


axis  of  the  ellipse  as  diameter,  was  drawn.  I  sprang  from  bed  and
drew  the  figure  on  paper ;  needless  to  say,  perhaps,  that  the  geome-
trical solution  being  thus  given,  only  a  few  minutes  were  needed  to
get  the  analytical  one.

W.  A.  Lamberton."

Professor  Lamberton  has  showed  me  his  note-book  containing  the
statement  of  the  problem  and  the  analytical  solution.  He  is  unable
to  find  the  contemporary  drawing  above  mentioned,  and  no  con-
temporary account  is  forthcoming.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  the
details  of  the  phenomenon  have  become  obscured  in  the  lapse  of
twenty-five  years,  but  the  essential  points  seem  to  me  to  be  indubit-
able,— that  Professor  Lamberton  saw  that  morning  an  externalised
hallucinatory  figure,  and  that,  whatever  its  precise  character,  it
suggested  to  him  the  solution  which  he  had  sought  in  vain  by  the
analytical  method.  There  is  no  clue  to  the  time  at  which  the  reason-
ing processes  necessary  to  attain  the  result  were  carried  out,  but  from
general  considerations  it  seems  to  me  most  probable  that  they  formed
part  of  some  forgotten  dream  and  were  not  going  on  "  sub-
consciously "  during  waking  life.  Professor  Lamberton  is  of  Scotch-
Irish  descent,  is  a  man  of  the  most  robust  physical  and  mental  health,
and  is  of  a  temperament  precisely  the  opposite  of  that  in  which
traces  of  true  "  sub-conscious "  processes  are  usually  found.  The
function  of  the  disused  blackboard,  as  apparently  providing  a  point
de  repere  for  the  hallucination,  is  of  interest  and  will  suggest  many
analogies.  This  is  Professor  Lamberton's  only  hallucinatory  experience.
He  informs  me  further  that  his  colour  memory  is  bad,  although  his
memory  for  line  and  form  is  excellent.  He  visualises  little,  and  it
was  not  until  some  time  after  the  above  experience  that  he  learned  that
it  was  within  the  power  of  some  persons  voluntarily  to  externalise
their  visual  memories.

For  the  other  two  cases  I  am  indebted  to  another  friend  and
colleague,  Dr.  Herman  V.  Hilprecht,  Professor  of  Assyrian  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  Both  occurred  in  his  own  experience,
and  I  write  the  account  of  the  first  from  notes  made  by  me  vipon  his
narrative.

During  the  winter,  1882 — 1883,  he  was  working  with  Professor
Friedrich  Delitzsch,  and  was  preparing  to  publish,  as  his  dissertation,
a  text,  transliteration  and  translation  of  a  stone  of  Nebuchadnezzar  1.
with  notes.  He  accepted  at  that  time  the  explanation  given  by
Professor  Delitzsch  of  the  name  Nebuchadnezzar — "  Nabu-kudArru-
usur"  "Nebo  protect  my  mason's  pad,  or  mortar  board,"  i.e.,  "my  work
as  a  builder."  One  night,  after  working  late,  he  went  to  bed  about
two  o'clock  in  the  morning. After  a  somewhat  restless  sleep,  he  awoke


14


Wm.  Romaine  Newhold.


with  his  mind  full  of  the  thought  that  the  name  should  be  translated
"Nebo  protect  my  boundary."  He  had  a  dim  consciousness  of  having
been  working  at  his  table  in  a  dream,  but  could  never  recall  the  details
of  the  process  by  which  he  arrived  at  this  conclusion.  Reflecting  upon
it  when  awake,  however,  he  at  once  saw  that  kudurru,  "  boundary  ",
could  be  derived  from  the  verb  kaddru,  to  enclose.  Shortly  afterwards
he  published  this  ti'anslation  in  his  dissertation,  and  it  has  since  been
universally  adopted.

I  quote  this  experience,  in  itself  of  a  familiar  type,  on  account  of
its  interest  when  viewed  in  connection  with  the  more  curious  dream
next  to  be  related.  I  was  told  of  the  latter  shortly  after  it  happened,
and  here  translate  an  account  written  in  German  by  Professor
Hilprecht,  August  8th,  1893,  before  the  more  complete  confirmation
was  received.

'•  One  Saturday  evening  about  the  middle  of  March,  1893,  I  had
been  weaiying  myself,  as  I  had  done  so  often  in  the  weeks  preceding,
in  the  vain  attempt  to  decipher  two  small  fragments  of  agate  which
were  supposed  to  belong  to  the  finger  rings  of  some  Babylonian.  The
labour  was  much  increased  by  the  fact  that  the  fragments  presented
remnants  only  of  characters  and  lines,  that  dozens  of  similar  small
fragments  had  been  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Bel  at  Nippur
with  wliith  nothing  could  be  done,  that  in  this  case  furthermore  I  had
never  had  the  originals  before  me,  but  only  a  hasty  sketch  )iiade  by  one
of  the  members  of  the  expedition  sent  by  the  University  of  Peiinsyl-
vania  to  Babylonia.  I  could  not  say  more  than  that  the  fragments,
taking  into  consideration  the  place  in  which  they  were  found  and  the
peculiar  characteristics  of  the  cuneiform  chaivacters  preserved  upon
them,  sprang  from  the  Cassite  period  of  Babylonian  history  (ca.  1700-
1140  B.C.)  ;  moreover,  as  the  first  character  of  the  third  line  of  the  first
fragment  seemed  to  be  KU,  I  ascribed  this  fragment,  Avith  an
interrogation  point,  to  King  Kurigalzu,  while  I  placed  the  other
fragment,  as  unclassifiable,  with  other  Cassite  fragments  upon  a  page
of  my  book  where  I  published  the  unclassifiable  fragments.  The
proofs  already  lay  before  me,  but  I  was  far  from  satisfied.  The  whole
problem  passed  yet  again  through  my  mind  that  Mai'ch  evening  before
I  placed  my  mark  of  approval  under  the  last  correction  in  the  book.
Even  then  I  had  come  to  no  conclusion.  About  midnight,  weary  and
exhausted,  I  went  to  bed  and  was  soon  in  deep  sleep.  Then  I  dreamed
the  following  remarkable  dream.  A  tall,  thin  priest  of  the  old  pre-
christian  Nippur,  about  forty  years  of  age  and  clad  in  a  simple
abba,  led  me  to  the  treasure  chamber  of  the  temple,  on  its  south-east
side.  He  went  with  me  into  a  small,  low-ceiled  room  without  windows,
in  which  there  was  a  large  wooden  chest,  while  scraps  of  agate  and  lapis
lazuli  lay  scattered  on  the  floor. Here  he  addressed  me  as  follows  : — ■


Suh-cpnscious  ReQ8QuinQ- '  ,>  15

'The  two  fragments  which  yoti  have  pu'blished  separately  upon  pages
22  and  26,  belong  together,  are  not  finger  rings,  and  their  history
is  as  follows.  King  Kurigalzu  (ca.  1300  B.C.)  once  sent  to  the  temple
of  Bel,  among  other  articles  of  agate  and  lapis  lazuli,  an  inscribed
votive  cylinder  of  agate.  Then  we  priests  suddenly  received  the
command  to  make  for  the  statue  of  the  god  Ninib  a  pair  of  earrings  of
agate.  We  were  in  great  dismay,  since  there  was  no  agate  as  raw
material  at  hand.  In  order  to  execute  the  command  there  was  nothing
for  us  to  do  but  cut  the  votive  cylinder  into  three  parts,  thus  making
three  rings,  each  of  which  contained  a  portion  of  the  original  inscrip-
tion. The  first  two  rings  served  as  earrings  for  the  statue  of  the  god  ;
the  two  fragments  which  have  given  you  so  much  trouble  are  portions
of  them.  If  you  will  put  the  two  together  you  will  have  confirmation
of  my  words.  But  the  third  I'ing  you  have  not  yet  found  in  the  course
of  your  excavations  and  you  never  will  find  it.'  With  this,  the  priest
disappeared.  I  awoke  at  once  and  imuiediately  told  my  wife  the  dream
that  I  might  not  forget  it.  Next  morning — Sunday — I  examined  the
fragments  once  more  in  the  light  of  these  disclosures,  and  to  my
astonishment  found  all  the  details  of  the  dream  precisely  verified  in  so
far  as  the  means  of  verification  were  in  my  hands.  The  original
inscription  on  the  votive  cylinder  read  : — '  To  the  god  Ninib,  son  of
Bel,  his  lord,  has  Kurigalzu,  pontifex  of  Bel,  presented  this.'

"  The  problem  was  thus  at  last  solved.  I  stated  in  the  preface  that
I  had  unfortunately  discovered  too  late  that  the  two  fragments
belonged  together,  made  the  corresponding  changes  in  the  '  Table  of
Contents,'  pp.  50  and  52,  and,  it  being  not  possible  to  transpose  the
fragments,  as  the  plates  were  already  made,  I  put  in  each  plate  a  brief
reference  to  the  other.  (Cf.  Hilprecht,  '  The  Babylonian  Expedition
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,'  Series  A,  Cuneiform  Texts,  Vol.
T.,  Part  1,  '  Old  Babylonian  Inscriptions,  chiefly  from  Nippur.')

"  H.  V.  Hilprecht."

Upon  the  priest's  statement  that  the  fragments  wei'e  those  of  a
votive  cylinder.  Professor  Hilprecht  makes  the  following  comment : —

"There  are  not  many  of  these  votive  cylinders.  I  had  seen,  all
told,  up  to  that  evening,  not  more  than  two.  They  very  much
resemble  the  so-called  seal  cylinders,  but  usually  have  no  pictorial
representations  upon  them,  and  the  inscription  is  not  reversed,  not
being  intended  for  use  in  sealing,  but  is  written  as  it  is  read."

The  following  transliteration  of  the  inscription,  in  the  Sumerian
language,  will  serve  to  give  those  of  us  who  are  unleai'ned  in  cunei-
form languages  an  idea  of  the  material  which  suggested  the  dream.
The  straight  vertical  lines  represent  the  cuts  by  which  the  stone-cutter
divided  the  original  cylinder  into  three  sections. The  bracketted


't<  fee ,  ' ' '  ' '  !

words  are  entirely  lost,  and  have  been  supplied  oy  analogy  from  the


many  similar  inscriptions.

Line  1.

Dingir  ISI

inib  du

(mu)

10  the  gou  ^iiiib,  chiJtl

dingir

En-

(lil  )

AT i",  n  A o'r»rl  T^Pi

\JL ULIC i^ULl  JJCl

„  3.

luga

1  -  a  -  ni

(ir)

his  lord

Ku  r

(i-  galzu)

Xurigalzu

„  5.

pa-

(tesi  dingir  Enlil)

I^ontifex  of  the  god  Bel

„  6.

(in-  na-

ba)

has  presented  it.

I  translate  also  tlie  following  statement  which  Mrs.  Hilprecht  kindly
made  at  my  request.

"  I  was  wakened  from  sleep  by  a  sigh,  immediately  thereafter  heard
a  spring  from  the  bed,  and  at  the  same  moment  saw  Professor
Hilprecht  hurrying  into  his  study.  Thence  came  the  cry  '  It  is  so,  it
is  so.'  Grasping  tlie  situation,  I  followed  him  and  satisfied  myself  in
the  midnight  hour  as  to  the  outcome  of  his  most  interesting  dream.^

"  J.  C.  Hilprecht."

At  the  time  Professor  Hilprecht  told  me  of  this  curious  dream,
which  was  a  few  weeks  after  its  occurrence,  there  remained  a  serious
difficulty  which  he  was  not  able  to  explain.  According  to  the  memo-
randa in  our  possession,  the  fragments  were  of  different  colours,  and
therefore  could  have  scarcely  belonged  to  the  same  object.  The  original
fragments  were  in  Constantinople,  and  it  was  with  no  little  interest-
that  I  awaited  Professor  Hilprecht's  return  from  the  trip  which  he
made  thither  in  the  summer  of  1893.  I  translate  again  his  own
account  of  what  he  then  ascertained.

"  In  August,  1893,  T  was  sent  by  the  Committee  on  the  Babylonian
Expedition  to  Constantinople,  to  catalogue  and  study  the  objects
got  from  Nippur  and  preserved  there  in  the  Imperial  Museum.  It
was  to  me  a  matter  of  the  greatest  interest  to  see  for  myself  the
objects  which,  according  to  my  dream,  belonged  together,  in  order  to
satisfy  myself  that  they  had  both  originally  been  parts  of  the  same
votive  cylinder.  Halil  Bey,  the  director  of  the  museum,  to-
whom  I  told  my  dream,  and  of  whom  I  asked  permission  to
see the objects, was so interested in the matter, that he  at

^  An  apparent  discrepancy  between  Professor  Hilprecht's  account  and  that  of
Mrs.  Hilprecht  calls  for  explanation.  Professor  Hilprecht  states  that  he  verified  his
dream  on  Sunday  morning  at  the  University  ;  Mrs.  Hilprecht  that  he  verified  it
immediately  upon  awaking,  in  his  library.  Both  statements  are  correct.  He  had  a
working  copy  in  hi.s  library  which  he  e.Kamined  at  once,  but  hurried  to  the  University
ne.\t  morning  to  verify  it  by  comparison  with  the  authorised  copy  made  from  the
originals. — W.R.N.


Sub-conscious  Reasoning.


17


once  opened  all  the  cases  of  the  Babylonian  section,  and  requested
me  to  search.  Father  Scheil,  an  Assyriologist  from  Paris,  who
had  examined  and  arranged  the  articles  excavated  by  us  before
me,  had  not  recognised  the  fact  that  these  fragments  belonged
together,  and  consequently  I  found  one  fragment  in  one  case,  and  the
other  in  a  case  far  away  from  it.  As  soon  as  T  found  the  fragments
and  put  them  together,  the  truth  of  the  dream  was  demonstrated  ad
oculos — they  had,  in  fact,  once  belonged  to  one  and  the  same  votive
cylinder.  As  it  had  been  originally  of  finely  veined  agate,  the  stone-
cutter's saw  had  accidentally  divided  the  object  in  such  a  way  that
the  whitish  vein  of  the  stone  appeared  only  upon  the  one  fragment
and  the  larger  grey  surface  upon  the  other.  Thus  I  was  able  to
explain  Dr.  Peters'  discordant  descriptions  of  the  two  fragments. —
November  10th,  189-5."

Professor  Hilprecht  is  unable  to  say  what  language  the  old  priest
used  in  addressing  him.  He  is  quite  certain  that  it  was  not  Assyrian,
and  thinks  it  was  either  English  or  German.

There  are  two  especial  points  of  interest  in  this  case,  the  character
of  the  information  conveyed,  and  the  dramatic  form  in  which  it  was
put. The  apparently  novel  points  of  information  given  were  : —

1.  That  the  fragments  belonged  together.

2.  That  they  were  fragments  of  a  votive  cylinder.

3.  That  the  cylinder  was  presented  by  King  Kurigalzu.

4.  That  it  was  dedicated  to  Ninib.

5.  That  it  had  been  made  into  a  pair  of  earrings.

6.  That  the  "  treasure  chamber  "  was  located  upon  the  south-east
side  of  the  temple.

A  careful  analysis  reveals  the  fact  that  not  one  of  these  items  was
beyond  the  reach  of  the  processes  of  associative  I'easoning  which  Pro-
fessor Hilprecht  daily  employs.  Among  the  possible  associative  conse-
quents of  the  writing  upon  the  one  fragment,  some  of  the  associative
consequents  of  the  writing  on  the  other  were  sub-consciously  involved;
the  attraction  of  these  identical  elements  brings  the  separate  pieces  into
mental  juxtaposition,  precisely  as  the  pieces  of  a  "  dissected  map  "  find
one  another  in  thought.  In  waking  life  the  dissimilarity  of  colour
inhibited  any  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  associative  processes  to  bring
them  together,  but  in  sleep  this  difference  of  colour  seems  to  have  been
forgotten — there  being  no  mention  made  of  it — and  the  assimilation
took  place.  The  second  point  is  more  curious,  but  is  not  inexplicable.
Por  as  soon  as  the  fragments  were  brought  into  juxtaposition  mentally,
enough  of  the  inscription  became  legible  to  suggest  the  original
character  of  the  object.  This  is  true  also  of  the  third  and  fourth  points.
The  source  of  the  fifth  is  not  so  clear. Upon  examining  the  originals,

c


18


Wm.  Romaine  Newhold.


Professor  Hilprecht  felt  convinced  from  the  size  of  the  hole  still  to
be  seen  through  the  fragments  that  they  could  not  have  been  used  as
finger-rings,  and  that  they  had  been  used  as  earrings,  but  the  written
description  which  he  had  before  him  at  the  time  of  his  dream  did  not
bring  these  points  to  view.  Still,  such  earrings  are  by  no  means
uncommon  objects.  Such  a  supposition  might  well  have  occurred  to
Professor  Hilprecht  in  his  waking  state  and,  in  view  of  the  lack  of
positive  confirmation,  it  would  be  rash  to  ascribe  it  to  any  supernormal
power.  The  last  point  is  most  interesting.  When  he  told  me  this
story.  Professor  Hilprecht  remembered  that  he  had  heard  from  Dr.
John  P.  Peters,  before  he  had  the  dream,  of  the  discovery  of  a  room
in  which  were  remnants  of  a  wooden  box,  while  the  floor  was  strewn
with  fragments  of  agate  and  lapis  lazuli.  The  walls,  of  course,  and
ceiling  have  long  since  perished.  The  location,  however,  of  the  room
he  did  not  know,  and  suggested  I  should  write  to  Dr.  Peters  and  find
out  whether  it  was  correctly  given  in  his  dream,  and  whether  Dr.
Peters  had  told  him  of  it.  Dr.  Peters  replied  that  the  location  given
was  correct,  but,  he  adds,  he  told  Professor  Hilprecht  all  these  facts  as
long  ago  as  1891,  and  thinks  he  provided  him  with  a  drawing  of  the
room's  relation  to  the  temple.  Of  this  Professor  Hilprecht  has  no
recollection.  He  thinks  it  probable  that  Dr.  Peters  told  him  orally  of
the  location  of  the  room,  but  feels  sure  that  if  any  such  plan  was  given
him  it  would  now  be  found  among  his  papers.  This  is  a  point  of  no
importance,  however.  We  certainly  cannot  regard  the  location  as
ascertained  by  supernormal  means.

The  dramatic  form  of  the  dream  is  of  greater  interest ;  yet,  strange
as  it  is,  it  is  not  without  numerous  analogues  in  the  literature  of
dreams.  M.  Maury  gives  two  cases  from  his  own  experience  which
are  almost  exactly  parallel.  "  Recently  the  name  Mussidan  came
suddenly  to  mind  ;  I  knew  at  the  time  that  it  was  the  name  of  a  town
in  France,  but  where  it  was  I  did  not  know,  or,  better,  I  had  forgotten.
Some  while  afterwards  I  saw  in  a  dream  a  certain  individual
who  told  me  he  came  from  Mussidan  ;  I  asked  him  where  that  town
was.  He  replied  that  it  was  a  place  of  importance  in  a  canton  of  the
department  of  the  Dordogne.  At  the  end  of  the  dream  I  awoke ;  it
was  morning  ;  I  remembered  the  dream  perfectly,  but  was  in  doubt  as
to  the  accuracy  of  what  my  individual  had  told  me.  The  name
Mussidan  still  presented  itself  to  mind  under  the  conditions  of  the
preceding  days,  that  is  to  say,  I  did  not  know  where  the  town  so  termed
was  situated.  I  made  haste  to  consult  a  geographical  dictionary  and,
to  my  great  surprise,  discovered  that  the  interlocutor  of  my  dream
knew  more  geography  than  I ;  in  other  words,  that  I  had  recalled  in
dream  a  fact  which  I  had  forgotten  in  the  waking  state,  and  that  I  had
j)ut  into  the  mouth  of  another  what  was  but  a  recollection  of  my  own.


Sub-conscious  Reasoning.


19


Some  years  ago,  while  studying  English  and  especially  endeavouring  to
learn  the  meanings  of  verbs  followed  by  prepositions,  I  had  the
following  dream.  I  was  talking  English,  and,  desiring  to  tell  a  person
that  I  had  paid  him  a  call  the  preceding  day,  I  made  use  of  this
expression,  '  I  called  for  you  yesterday.'  '  That's  badly  pvit,'  he
replied  ;  '  you  should  say,  I  called  on  you  yesterday.'  Next  morning,
on  waking,  the  recollection  of  this  incident  of  niy  dream  was  very
distinct.  I  took  a  grammar  lying  on  a  table  near  my  bed  and  verified
it ;  the  imaginary  individual  was  right."  {Le  Sommeil  et  les  Reves,
142-3).

In  these  cases  it  is  possible  that  the  apparently  foreign  items  of
information  were  really  accidental  elements,  drawn  into  the  course  of
a  dream  which  had  been  originated  in  some  other  way.  But  the  case
narrated  by  Professor  Hilprecht  is  somewhat  different.  Here  we  are
forced,  I  think,  to  assume  that  the  logical  processes  had  been  approxi-
mately completed  before  the  dramatic  form  was  assumed.  In  the
dramatic  form  itself  there  is  nothing  that  presents  any  particular  diffi-
culty. All  the  associative  material  out  of  which  it  was  constructed  was
more  or  less  in  mind,  and  such  a  dream  might  easily  have  been  initiated
by  many  slight  causes.  But  if  we  assume  that  the  conclusion  was
reached  before  the  old  priest,  with  so  much  ceremony,  inducted  the
dreamer  into  a  secret  which  he  already  knew,  we  fall  into  further
trouble.  It  is  upon  such  phenomena  as  these  that  some  would  base
the  conception  of  a  sub-conscious  self,  who  is  at  all  times  ready  and
anxious  to  make  use  of  his  supernormal  powers  to  play  practical  jokes
of  a  peculiarly  mystifying,  if  usually  kindly  character,  upon  the  more
stupid  upper  self.  According  to  this  doctrine.  Professor  Hilprecht's
sub-conscious  self,  having  solved  the  problem  by  methods  more  or  less
unknown  to  us,  deliberately  resolved  to  present  the  result  to  Professor
Hilprecht  in  the  form  of  an  instructive  drama,  with  thoughts  to  serve
as  its  puppets.

In  this  case,  at  least,  I  can  see  no  reason  for  resort  to  such  a
conception.  We  have  evidence  amply  sufficient  to  show  that,  at  least
in  dreams  which  take  their  rise  from  sensory  suggestions,  the  apparent
flow  of  the  dream-time  may  be  precisely  the  opposite  of  that  of  real
time.  In  other  words,  the  dream  may  be  dramatised  hackiuards,  so
to  speak,  from  its  apparent  conclusion  to  its  apparent  initiation.  Thus
when  M.  Maury,  while  tickled  with  a  feather,  dreamed  that  he  was
being  tortured  by  having  the  skin  of  his  face  torn  ofT  by  a  mask  of
hot  pitch,  it  is  probable  that  some  notion  of  the  mask  and  its  applica-
cation  preceded  the  sensation  of  pain ;  although,  in  fact,  the  touch
sensation,  of  which  the  latter  was  the  exaggerated  representation,  came
first  in  real  time.  A  clearer  case  is  that  related  upon  page  161  (op.
cit.)  A  long  dream  of  the  Reign  of  Terror  concluded  with  his  arrest,  trial,

c  2


20


Wm.  Romaine  Newhold.


conviction  ;  he  clearly  remembered  all  the  details  of  his  transportation
in  a  tumbril  to  the  place  of  execution,  how  he  was  bound  to  the  fatal
plank,  how  the  knife  fell, — and  with  the  blow  he  awoke  to  find  that  the
curtain-pole  of  his  bed  had  fallen  and  struck  him  a  severe  blow  on  the
back  of  the  neck.  His  mother,  who  was  in  the  room,  said  that  he
awoke  the  instant  it  fell.  Here  we  must  suppose  that  the  dream  time
was  purely  illusory  and  occupied  only  a  fragment  of  a  second  of  real
time.  A  similar  case  was  narrated  by  a  friend  of  mine.  She  had
been  very  ill  with  typhoid  fever  but  was  convalescent ;  she  had  fallen
into  a  light  doze  in  her  chair  and  dreamed  that  she  was  being  pursued
from  room  to  room  by  a  savage  dog.  She  would  enter  a  room,  close
the  door,  hold  it  against  him,  he  would  make  his  appearance  by  another
door  and  she  would  escape  through  the  one  she  was  holding  and  take
flight  to  another  room.  This  lasted,  she  thought,  for  a  half-hour  or  so.
She  had  been  driven  to  the  third  storey  and  had  taken  refuge  in  a
small  room  with  but  one  door.  That  door  she  held  against  the  dog's
pressure  until  her  feeble  strength  gave  way,  the  brute  sprang  upon  her
with  a  howl, — and  she  awoke  with  a  start  to  find  that  her  sister  had  at
that  moment  placed  her  hand  upon  her  arm  and  had  said  "  Boo."  The
character  of  this  dream  precludes,  I  think,  the  supposition  that  the
"  Boo "  was  merely  accidentally  woven  into  the  texture  of  a  dream
already  in  course  of  progress ;  it  must  have  been  the  generating
suggestion  from  which  the  whole  dream  took  rise.

Professor  Hilprecht's  dream  may  be  interpreted  in  the  same  way.
Undoubtedly  the  old  priest's  statements  were  attained  by  normal
processes  of  associative  reasoning  which  Professor  Hilprecht  has  now
forgotten,  and  upon  them,  as  upon  a  logical  core,  the  dream  imagery
has  been  superimposed,  thus  producing  a  time-hallucination.


Suggestion  ivitJiout  Hypnotism.  21


III.

SUGGESTION  WITHOUT  HYPNOTISM,
An  Account  of  Experiments  in  Preventing  or  Suppressing  Pain.

By  C.  M.  Barrows.


I  have  been  asked  to  present  a  report  of  experiments  made  by
myself  in  the  use  of  suggestion  without  hypnotism.  The  work  was
begun  about  seven  years  ago,  and  in  prosecuting  it  I  have  treated
several  hundred  persons,  afflicted  with  various  maladies,  including
insomnia,  rheumatism,  neuralgia,  intermittent  headache,  sore  joints,
hysteria,  chorea,  morbid  phenomena  left  as  the  result  of  disease,
functional  disorders  of  the  nervous  system,  dipsomania,  stammering,
stage-fright,  excessive  emotion,  etc.  ; — affording  in  one  sense  an
attractive  variety.

Out  of  this  list,  I  have  chosen  for  mention  in  this  paper  cases  in
which  pain  in  some  form  was  either  prevented  or  suppressed  under
conditions  of  nerve  and  tissue  that  would  ordinarily  make  it
inevitable.  Such  cases  are  better  suited  to  tlie  present  purpose  than
the  others,  because  in  weighing  the  evidence  they  offer,  there  is
comparatively  little  danger  of  errors  due  to  either  of  the  two  causes
which  Professor  Richet  tells  us  it  suffices  to  eliminate.  Intentional
fraud  can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  enter  into  these  experiments,  and
even  the  liability  to  "  unconscious  "  or  "  automatic  "  fraud  is  slight.
Chance,  too,  "  which  often  brings  about  amazing  coincidences,"  can  by
no  stretch  of  its  big  cloak  be  made  to  cover  the  whole  group.

Take  toothache,  for  example,  the  kind  of  pain  with  which  I  first
attempted  to  deal.  If  I  had  tried  only  a  few  cases,  or  if  only  now
and  then  the  pain  had  disappeared  under  the  treatment,  common  sense
would  insist  that  the  ache  ceased  by  chance.  But  since  the  record
shows  a  large  number  of  such  treatments,  with  no  failures  among
them,  it  seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  suggestion  stopped  the
pain.  And  yet,  on  the  strength  of  these  I'esults  alone,  I  would  not
dare  to  affirm  that  what  occurred  in  even  a  single  case  was  an  instance
of  cause  and  effect.  Fortunately  I  am  able  to  cite  more  decisive  tests
of  the  power  of  the  agency  employed.

1  Read  at  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  held  in  the  Westminster  Town
Hall,  January  3lst,  1896;  also  at  the  meetings  of  the  American  Branch  held  in
Boston  and  New  York,  December,  1895.


22


C.  M.  Barrows.


A  lady  about  to  have  several  very  sensitive  teeth  tilled,  asked  if
suggestion  would  exempt  her  from  the  torture  in  store  for  her.  She
explained  that  in  all  her  experience  of  dental  operations,  the  process
had  been  extremely  painful,  and  the  shock  brought  on  nervous
prostration.  Of  course,  I  could  promise  nothing  as  to  the  result,  but
invited  her  to  try  it.  Her  dentist  had  his  office  in  Boston,  and  on  the
day  of  her  first  appointment  with  him,  she  appeared  at  my  house  in
Brookline  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  explained  the  nature  and
manner  of  the  treatment  as  well  as  I  could,  and  made  the  susfgestion
that  she  should  feel  no  pain  while  in  the  dentist's  chair  that  day,  and
no  nervous  prostration  should  ensue.

The  lady  left  me,  feeling,  as  I  judged,  very  little  confidence  in
what  I  had  done, — indeed,  she  remarked  that  she  could  not  see  that
I  had  done  anything, — and  at  eleven  o'clock  the  operator  began  work
on  her  most  sensitive  tooth.  Finding,  to  his  surprise  as  well  as  her
own,  that  she  did  not  wince  under  the  rough  touch  of  his  instruments,
he  worked  steadily  and  fast  for  two  hours,  before  she  was  released  from
the  chair.  The  next  day,  instead  of  being  miserable  in  bed,  this  lady
called  to  report  to  me  what  seemed  to  her  a  wonderful  deliverance
from  pain. Referring  to  the  molar  on  which  the  dentist  had  spent  so

much  time,  she  said,  "  Dr.  wanted  to  fill  it  a  year  ago,  but  it

hurt  so  I  could  not  bear  to  let  him  touch  it ;  but  yesterday  he  did
not  hurt  me  a  particle,  although  he  worked  fast  and  did  not  favour
me.  I  felt  every  movement  and  realised  all  he  was  doing,  but  there
was  no  pain  at  all,  and  I  have  no  prostration."

This  patient  had  four  subsequent  appointments  to  keep  with  her
dentist ;  and  as  the  days  arrived  for  the  second,  third,  and  fourth,  I
repeated  the  suggestion  made  in  the  first  instance,  and  she  passed  the
ordeal  with  a  like  immunity  from  suffering  and  exhaustion.  Perhaps
the  continued  successes  made  me  over-confident ;  for  when  she  called
to  take  the  fifth  and  last  treatment,  she  was  late,  I  was  pressed  for
time,  and  so  omitted  the  formal  suggestion,  trusting  that  I  should  be
able  to  control  her  sensations  when  there  should  be  need  of  it.  But
in  this  I  reckoned  without  my  host,  and  a  wretched  failure  was  the
consequence.  The  poor  victim  endured  severe  torture,  and  was  kept  in
bed  for  two  days  by  the  prostration.  This  mistake  is  wot  to  be
accounted  an  unmixed  evil,  however,  since  no  one  would  deny  that  it
lent  an  added  value  to  the  experiment.

It  should  be  understood,  of  course,  that  in  every  dental  case  herein
described,  my  treatment  began  and  ended  with  a  single  suggestion.  I
did  not  accompany  the  patient  to  the  office,  or  continue  the  treatment
after  the  patient  had  departed.  Observe  also  that  each  suggestion
made  was  a  post-suggestion  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  not  intended  to  take
immediate  effiict,  but  to  produce  a  specific  result  at  a  designated  later


Suggestion  without  Hypnotism.


23


hour.  Like  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  it  seemed  to  become  available  at
the  particular  time  intended  when  it  was  made,  and  to  have  no
influence  before  the  appointed  hour  or  after  it  had  expired.  A  boy
who  was  treated  to  have  a  tooth  extracted  in  the  forenoon,  finding  that
it  had  ceased  to  ache,  postponed  the  operation  until  afternoon,  and  then
found  that  the  suggestion  did  him  no  good.  Another  case  illustrating
the  same  point  is  that  of  a  young  lady  pianist  of  much  talent,  who
during  her  first  public  performances  was  so  overcome  by  stage-fright
that  she  failed  to  do  herself  justice.  One  evening,  when  she  was  to
play  at  a  public  entertainment,  I  made  the  suggestion  that  she  should
be  perfectly  at  her  ease,  and  the  experiment  succeeded,  to  her  great
delight.  Subsequently  I  rendered  her  a  like  service  ;  but  owing  to  a
change  in  the  programme,  she  did  not  take  her  part  as  expected,  but
did  play  at  a  repetition  of  the  performance  given  a  day  later  ;  but  the
virtue  of  my  suggestion  was  gone.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  add  that  a  few
more  treatments  permanently  cured  this  young  lady  of  her  annoying
attacks  of  fright.

To  be  able  to  rob  the  dentist's  chair  of  any  part  of  its  terrors  is
indeed  a  gratifying  achievement,  but  it  is  not  after  all  the  crucial  test.
The  crowning  triumph  would  be  to  enable  a  person  by  means  of
suggestion  alone  to  have  firm  teeth  extracted  without  pain.  I  am  not
prepared  to  say  to  what  extent  this  can  be  done,  for  I  have  tried  the
experiment  only  seven  times,  and  in  one  instance  it  was  a  failure.  Four
of  the  seven  trials  were  made  on  children  between  the  ages  of  eight  and
fifteen  years,  each  of  whom  had  a  firm  molar  removed.  The  next  trial
I  can  refer  to  with  confidence,  because  it  was  my  own  teeth  that  were
extracted.  I  parted  with  two  molars,  one  of  which  was  a  firm  one
with  hooked  roots,  and  the  dentist  used  two  different  instruments
before  he  succeeded  in  removing  the  whole.  This  was  a  case  of
auto-suggestion,  and  the  operation,  though  prolonged,  was  absolutely
painless.  Two  women  took  my  treatment  on  the  same  day  for  a  like
purpose.  One  of  them  had  four  firm  teeth  and  three  loose  ones  taken
out,  and  found  that  my  suggestion  did  not  help  her  at  all ;  the  other
lady  parted  with  a  firm  molar  and  pronounced  the  treatment  a
success.

A  large  number  of  test  cases  would  be  necessary  to  establish  the
practical  usefulness  of  this  form  of  inhibition  ;  but  as  instances  of
local  analgesia  induced  without  hypnotism,  the  six  successful  experi-
ments are  of  peculiar  interest,  because  the  operation  of  extracting  a
finn  tooth  is  severe  while  it  lasts,  and  the  snapping  of  live  nerves  is
painful.  It  would  not  be  easy  to  choose  six  experiments  of  the  same
kind,  in  which  the  conditions  of  a  decisive  test  would  be  more  fully
met :  the  patients  were  in  a  normal  condition  at  the  time  of  treatment ;
each  must  have  suffered  during  the  operation,  unless  the  pain  had  been


24


C.  M.  Barrows.


prevented  in  some  way  ;  it  was  averted  beyond  a  doubt ;  and  this
result  could  not  i-easonably  be  attributed  to  anything  else  than  the
psychical  suggestion  previously  given.

In  all  cases  of  suggestion  mentioned  in  this  paper  the  mode  of
administration  was  essentially  the  same.  When  dealing  with  persons  to
whom  it  is  new,  I  usually  explain  that  the  purpose  of  it  is  to  render
the  nerves  involved  incapable  for  the  time  being  of  producing  the
sensation  of  pain.  There  is  no  hypnotism  about  this  form  of  suggestion,
no  mesmerism,  no  animal-magnetism,  no  mind-cure.  The  effect  does
not  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  freedom  of  the  patient ;  for  I  work
no  charm  and  cast  no  spell  upon  him,  exert  no  control  over  his  will,
make  no  change  in  his  thinking.  My  wish  is  to  accomplish  one
definite  result  and  nothing  else,  namely,  to  take  away  the  feeling  of  pain
from  the  consciousness  which  might  otherwise  suffer.  If  the  patient  is
sceptical,  I  tell  him  that  his  doubt  or  faith  will  not  alter  the  result,
since  it  is  not  a  matter  of  opinion,  but  of  sensation.  Confidence  in  the
treatment  is  not  necessary,  nor  will  any  attempt  to  resist  vitiate  the
effect.

Having  thus  assured  the  patient  and  put  him  at  his  ease,  I  ask  him
to  seat  himself  in  a  comfortable  position,  be  quiet  a  few  minutes,  and
think  of  anything  he  pleases,  while  I  suggest  to  his  nerves  how  to
behave.  Sometimes  I  show  a  patient  what  nerves  are  producing  the
sensation  of  pain  and  locate  the  centres  by  placing  my  hand  on  his
head.  Some  action  of  this  sort  is  often  useful  with  children,  as  a
tangible  evidence  to  them  that  something  is  being  done.

The  popular  impression  (and  this  is  not  untrue)  is  that  hypnotic
suggestion  is  administered  orally,  in  a  language  the  patient  under-
stands. When  the  patient  is  asleep  and  has  reached  a  favourable
stage  of  the  trance.  Dr.  Liebeault  or  Dr.  Bernheim  says  in  a  distinct
tone  of  voice:  "You  will  feel  no  pain  when  you  awake";  or,  "The
lameness  you  complain  of  will  be  gone,"  or  whatever  utterance  the  case
calls  for.  It  is  not  claimed,  I  suppose,  that  the  suggestions  made  in
this  way  differ  in  kind  from  those  a  mother  might  make  to  her  child
who  is  hurt,  when  she  says  :  "  You  will  feel  better  in  a  moment ' ;  or,
"  Mother  will  kiss  it  and  make  it  well."  In  other  words,  the  value  of
hypnotic  suggestions  made  for  therapeutic  purposes  does  not  consist  in
anything  peculiar  about  them,  but  their  effectiveness  is  due  to  the
heightened  susceptibility  of  the  patient  during  the  trance.  It  is
doubtful  if  this  sort  of  treatment  would  have  much  effect  upon  disease
and  pain  if  the  patients  receiving  it  were  not  in  a  trance ;  and  because
my  patients  are  not  so  affected,  as  far  as  I  can  jvidge,  at  the  time  of
treatment,  I  suspect  that  my  suggestion  is  a  different  thing  from  that
employed  by  the  hypnotisers ;  not  so  much  in  its  results  on  patients,
but  as  a  psychical  act  of  the  operator.


Suggestion  without  Hypnotism.


25


Mine  is  a  silent  su"r£festion.  I  use  neither  voice  nor  other  means
to  convey  its  import  to  the  patient  through  sensory  adits.  I  find  it
possible  to  affect  with  these  unvoiced  suggestions  one  who  does  not
know  ray  language,  infants  who  have  learned  no  language,  and  brute
creatures.  This  would  not  be  the  case  if  communication  depended  on
speech.  More  than  this  :  I  am  not  conscious  of  forming  any  statement
of  the  message,  even  in  thought,  when  I  make  the  suggestion.  I
certainly  am  not  then  thinking  about  my  patient,  or  at  him.  Using  the
term  "  mind  "  in  the  popular  sense,  it  does  not  seem  that  the  sugges-
tions which  I  make  are  addressed  to  it  at  all.

My  experience  in  sending  telepathic  messages  to  distant  percipients
casts  some  light  upon  this  point.  Whenever,  acting  as  agent,  I  con-
centrated my  thought  on  a  formal  statement  of  the  message,  the
percipient  failed  to  receive  it ;  but  when  I  made  no  thought  effort, —
no  conscious  effort  of  any  kind, — the  message  reached  its  destination.
Mark,  this  is  not  saying  that  the  agent  does  not  need  to  think  of  his
message  beforehand  and  decide  upon  its  content ;  in  all  except  purely
spontaneous  communications  this  preliminary  step  must  be  necessary.
In  some  recent  experiments  made  with  a  reputed  "mind-reader,"  I  found
that  success  did  not  depend  on  my  own  thought  being  kept  steadily
fixed  on  the  thing  he  was  to  do.  Indeed,  I  have  much  reason  to
believe  that  he  did  not  read  my  thoughts  at  all.  The  conclusion  seems
well  nigh  irresistible  that  therapeutic  suggestion,  as  I  use  it,  is  not
sensory  but  telepathic,  that  the  communication  does  not  require  an
act  of  thinking  or  willing  to  send  it  forth.

About  a  year  ago  an  Irish  girl  of  seventeen  came  to  me  to  be
treated  for  neuralgia  in  the  left  temple.  She  looked  like  an  over-
worked, under-fed  person,  grown  quite  nervous  from  pain  and  loss  of
sleep.  The  pain  and  soreness  were  gone  after  the  first  treatment  ;  but
there  was  some  return  of  the  trouble  next  day,  and  I  repeated  the
suggestion  on  that  and  the  following  day,  producing  permanent  relief.

Last  September  I  treated  a  Welshman,  about  forty  years  of
age,  who  had  been  suffering  from  neuralgia  for  a  long  while,  which
affected  the  entire  left  side  of  his  head  and  face.  His  ear  had  not
been  free  from  pain  for  two  years,  and  he  had  several  attacks  daily
of  what  he  described  as  sharp  stabs  of  pain.  AVithin  three  weeks
of  the  time  I  first  saw  the  man,  he  had  been  complaining  of  his  left
eye,  which  he  said  pained  him  constantly.  The  eye  was  much  inflamed,
but  it  seemed  to  be  only  the  orbit  which  was  attacked,  and  after  three
treatments  both  eye  and  orbit  were  cured.  After  that,  I  was  unable
to  see  the  man  again  until  two  weeks  later,  when  I  found  the  eye
all  right,  but  the  pain  in  and  about  the  ear  had  not  abated.  I  then
gave  him  three  treatments^  and  since  that  time  he  has  had  no  neuralgic
symptoms  at  all.


26


C.  M.  Barrows.


About  six  years  ago  I  treated  a  school  teacher  for  neuralgia,  and  I
think  this  was  my  first  experiment  with  this  disease.  She  had  borne
the  pain  for  nearly  two  weeks,  and  her  nerves  were  completely  un-
strung. I  remember  that  I  made  the  suggestion  in  a  hesitating  way,
scarcely  expecting  the  aching  nerves  to  obey  it ;  but  the  pain  stopped
in  a  few  minutes,  and  the  treatment  was  followed  by  a  night  of  refresh-
ing sleep.  This  respite  was  only  temporary,  and  next  morning  the
lady  was  as  bad  as  ever.  She  sent  for  me  about  the  middle  of  the
forenoon,  and  I  gave  her  a  second  treatment,  after  which  she  suffered
no  more  for  twelve  hours.  Again,  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  was
summoned  to  repeat  the  suggestion  ;  and  from  that  time  on  pain
ceased  and  the  patient  recovered.

I  am  often  asked  whether  the  psychical  treatment  which  relieves
pain  also  cures  the  disease  or  hurt  which  occasions  the  pain.  Evidently
it  does  not  do  so  in  all  cases,  although  in  every  instance  of  rheumatism
or  neuralgia  which  I  have  treated,  the  suppression  of  the  pain  insured
the  disappearance  of  the  other  symptoms.  As  exceptions  to  this  rule,
it  may  be  mentioned  that  I  once  suppressed  the  pain  of  a  big  carbuncle
on  the  back  of  a  man's  neck  for  three  successive  nights,  so  that  he  got
several  hours  of  sleep  ;  but  the  ache  began  again  each  morning, — pro-
bably awoke  him, — the  suppurative  process  continued,  and  at  the
proper  time  the  surgeon  applied  his  knife.  At  another  time  I  treated  a
man  who  suffered  for  months  with  a  kidney  trouble,  which  finally  proved
fatal.  During  the  progress  of  the  disease  he  was  subject  to  spasmodic
attacks  with  excruciating  pain,  and  it  was  in  one  of  these  that  I  saw
him,  and  was  able  to  relieve  his  distress.  In  several  instances  of  a  like
nature,  I  have  suppressed  pain  for  the  time  being,  thus  affording  the
patient  a  brief  respite  from  suffering.

Another  interesting  fact  in  this  connection  is  that  pain  may  be
permanently  inhibited  in  one  part  of  the  body,  and  at  the  same  time
persist  in  another  part.  In  October,  1894,  I  treated  a  man  who  had
sprained  his  left  ankle  very  badly  about  a  year  and  a  half  before.
Although  the  foot  was  no  longer  lame,  and  it  did  not  hurt  him  to  use
it,  there  remained  a  constant  ^^ain  just  under  the  outer  malleolus,
which  when  the  foot  became  tired  at  night  was  very  severe.  At  the
time  this  man  came  to  me  for  help,  he  had  been  enduring  this  steady
pain  for  more  than  twelve  months,  and  his  nervous  system — naturally
a  strong  one — was  breaking  down  under  the  prolonged  strain.  This
case  required  a  series  of  treatments,  the  record  of  which  in  my  note-
book is  as  follows  :  Treatment  began  October  9th,  and  repeated  on
the  10th  and  11th,  with  no  apparent  effect.  On  the  13th,  pain  ceased
during  treatment,  but  returned  after  two  hours.  On  the  16th,  pain
ceased  during  treatment,  but  returned  in  one  hour.  On  the  18th,  the
pain  shifted  during  treatment  to  the  nerve  in  front  of  the  tendon  of


Suggestion  ivithout  Hypnotism.  27


Achilles,  and  returned  to  the  original  spot  about  two  hours  later.
On  the  19th,  no  treatment  was  given,  but  the  man  strained  the  foot
badly  in  jumping  out  of  a  carriage.  This  brought  on  a  severe  pain
which  lasted  until  late  in  the  evening,  when  it  stopped,  and  he  felt  a
like  pain  under  the  outer  malleolus  of  his  right  foot,  which  did  not
subside  until  near  midnight.  The  next  treatment  was  given  on  the
20th,  when  the  pain  ceased  and  did  not  return ;  and  now,  for  a  con-
tinuous period  of  more  than  a  year,  he  has  been  wholly  free  from
it.  All  the  while  he  was  under  treatment,  this  man  was  suffering
with  a  painful  lameness  of  the  right  arm,  of  which  he  made  no  men-
tion at  the  time.  Six  months  after  the  ankle  was  cured,  T  tried  to
help  the  arm  by  suggestion,  but  could  produce  no  permanent  effect
upon  it.  The  man  has  followed  for  more  than  thirty  years  a  mechani-
cal business  which  requires  him  to  hold  the  right  arm  all  day  long
in  a  cramped,  unnatural  position,  in  order  to  do  his  work,  and  to  this
fact  the  morbid  condition  is  probably  due.

About  the  middle  of  February,  1895,  a  poor  working- woman  showed
me  the  "  thimble  "  finger  of  her  right  hand,  the  second  joint  of  which
was  pinched  between  two  swinging  doors,  in  1886,  and  the  ligaments
broken  down.  It  received  no  svii'gical  attention  at  the  time  of  the
accident,  and  for  nine  years  it  had  been  painful  most  of  the  time.  I
gave  the  case  one  suggestion  and  a  permanent  cure  resulted  ;  but  at
the  same  time  this  woman  had  a  painful  lameness  of  the  neck,  a
consequence  of  the  grippe,  which  it  required  three  subsequent  treat-
ments to  remove.

In  the  spring  of  1894,  a  young  married  lady  asked  to  be  treated  for
an  intercostal  pain  which  was  peculiarly  troublesome,  and  for  which  she
said  the  doctors  had  no  name  or  remedy.  Three  years  before  she
applied  to  me,  she  was  driving  a  pair  of  spirited  horses  which  her
husband  had  just  given  hex*,  when  they  took  fright  and  ran.  She
pulled  on  the  reins  with  all  her  might,  and  while  so  doing  felt  something
give  way  in  her  right  side,  between  the  six  and  seventh  ribs,  as  nearly
as  she  could  locate  the  hurt.  After  a  week  or  two  the  soreness  passed
off;  but  she  could  not  wear  a  close-fitting  garment  without  bringing  on
a  hard  pain,  which  grew  more  intense  as  long  as  the  pressure  continued.
She  had  consulted  the  best  surgeons  to  be  found  in  this  country  and  in
Europe  without  getting  any  help,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  escape
from  the  annoying  pain  as  long  as  she  dressed  in  a  way  to  be  present-
able in  society.  I  gave  the  case  six  treatments  by  suggestion,  and  the
pain  entirely  disappeared.

But  I  must  not  forget  how  soon  descriptions  of  this  kind  become
tiresome  to  the  listener.  Suffer  me,  then,  to  refer  briefly  to  one  other
class  of  cases,  and  have  done  with  them.  Rheumatic  pains  afford  an
almost  inexhaustible  supply  of  cases  for  experiment,  and  I  have  had


28


C.  M.  Barrows.


my  share  of  tliem.  Persons  suffering  in  this  way  usually  try  the  various
medicinal  remedies,  and  if  these  afford  no  relief,  and  they  get  desperate
enough  to  do  anything,  they  will  submit  to  suggestion.  My  experience
with  rheumatism  has  been  that,  with  few  exceptions,  from  one  to  four
treatments  put  a  stop  to  the  pain  ;  but  I  can  never  be  quite  sure  whei'e
the  credit  of  such  cures  belongs,  since,  as  the  doctors  kindly  remind
me,  the  patients  have  just  "  taken  a  great  deal  of  good  medicine."  It
will  suffice,  perhaps,  to  cite  two  cases  as  samples  of  the  rest.

In  the  latter  part  of  January,  1892,  a  business  man,  then  living  oo
West  Chester  Park,  Boston,  desired  me  to  treat  him.  He  had
rheumatism  in  his  shoulder  and  arm  ;  the  pain  had  been  very  severe
for  several  days,  the  usual  medicinal  remedies  failed  to  reach  the  case,
and  when  I  answered  the  call,  which  was  in  the  early  evening,  he  told
me  he  "  was  in  for  a  terrible  night,"  and  if  I  could  help  him,  he  wished
])y  all  that  was  good  that  I  would  set  about  it.  I  made  such  a
suggestion  as  the  case  required,  and  left  him  to  get  to  bed  and  make
himself  as  comfortable  as  possible.  The  next  day  he  sent  me  word
that  he  enjoyed  a  long  night  of  sound  sleep,  and  was  free  from
pain.

In  the  spi'ing  of  1894,  I  met  an  Irishman  who  takes  care  of
furnaces  in  the  winter  and  lawns  in  the  summer,  and  found  him
suffering  with  muscular  rheumatism,  attended  with  much  lameness  and
pain.  The  trouble  had  been  so  bad  that  he  had  been  unable  to  do  his
work  during  a  large  part  of  the  winter,  and  when  I  saw  him  he  was
hobblin*;  alone;  with  a  cane.  This  case  I  relieved  with  a  sino;le  treat-
ment,  so  that  he  declares  lie  has  not  felt  a  touch  of  it  since.

Before  leaving  this  part  of  the  subject,  some  reference  should  be
made  to  methods  of  hypnotism  to  which  my  own  experiments  seem  to
be  closely  allied, — methods  of  little  interest  to  the  popular  audience
for  which  this  paper  was  originally  prepared,  but  having  an  important
bearing  on  the  issue  here  raised.

While  it  is  common  for  hypnotised  subjects  to  manifest  certaia
pronounced  symptoms  of  trance,  it  is  claimed  that  true  hypnosis  may
exist  when  no  such  signs  can  be  detected.  Instead  of  amnesia,
hyperjBsthesia,  anaesthesia,  etc.,  with  suspension  of  the  higher  braiix
functions,  there  may  be  nothing  more  definite  than  a  slight  drowsiness-
or  heaviness  to  show  that  the  subject  has  passed  into  a  state  of
"  suggestil)ility."  It  is  easy  to  conclude  that,  for  therapeutic  purposes,
strongly  marked  signs  of  the  trance  need  not  be  present,  the  essential
condition  being  ready  obedience  to  the  suggestions  made.

How  subjects  are  brought  into  this  condition  and  what  is  the  true
relation  between  the  operator  and  the  subject  are  concisely  explained
by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,  in  a  review  of  Moll's  Der  Rapfort  in  der  Hypnose.,


Suggestion  icithout  Hypnotism.


29


etc.  He  says  :  "  These  experiments  [of  Dessoir  and  Moll],  and  many
others  like  them,  all  point  convincingly  to  the  conclusion  that  rajjport
is  not  a  physical  but  a  psychical  phenomenon  :  that  it  is  produced  not
by  any  action  of  an  efBuence  from  the  operator,  magnetic  or  otherwise,
but  by  the  action  of  the  subject's  own  mind,  obedient  to  suggestions
whether  received  externally  or  spontaneously  generated.  It  is  natural
to  conclude  that  rapport  is  no  more  than  a  concentration  of  attention
on  the  operator,  an  exaggerated  case  of  the  state  of  mind  which  in  its
•different  degrees  we  know  in  ordinary  life  as  reverie,  abstraction,
'absence  of  mind,' and  so  on."i

Professor  William  James,  referring  to  the  so  called  Nancy  method
of  producing  the  hypnotic  trance,  writes  :  "  The  simplest  one  is  to
leave  the  subject  seated  by  himself,  telling  him  that  if  he  close  his
eyes  and  relax  his  muscles  and,  as  far  as  possible,  think  of  vacancy,  in
&  few  minutes  he  will  '  go  off.'  On  returning  in  ten  minutes  you  may
find  him  effectually  hypnotised."  ^

It  would  be  a  rare  psychical  event  for  a  person,  who  had  never
been  hypnotised  and  whose  attention  had  not  been  previously  called  to
the  matter,  to  lapse  into  the  trance-sleep  in  obedience  to  auto-suggestion
alone.  A  novice  seems  to  I'equire  something  more  than  a  spontaneously
generated  impulse  to  enable  him  to  "  go  off."  The  operator  convinces
him  that  the  proposed  experiment  is  desirable  and  harmless  ;  his  free
•consent  is  asked  and  obtained ;  means  are  used  to  lead  him  to  con-
<;entrate  his  attention  on  the  operator.  Altogether,  these  appeals  and
the  action  of  his  own  mind  amount  to  a  powerful  suggestion,  well
calculated  to  initiate  the  desired  psychical  phenomenon  in  the  average
.subject.  And  it  may  be  added  that  hypnosis  itself  is  produced  by
suggestions  received  by  the  subject  before  he  goes  off.

If  we  accept  Dr.  Moll's  definition  of  hypnotism,  is  there  any  evi-
•dence  that  it  formed  part  of  the  psychical  experience  of  the  hundreds
of  patients  whom  I  have  treated  in  the  manner  herein  described  ?

It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  among  so  many  cases  of  hypnosis  (?),
there  would  be  some  at  least  so  pronounced  as  not  to  be  mistaken  ;
especially  would  this  be  likely  to  happen  in  the  case  of  patients  who
received  a  series  of  such  treatments ;  but  I  cannot  recall  a  single
instance  of  the  kind.  It  may  be  insisted,  however,  that  only  slight
manifestations  were  to  be  expected,  because,  like  Dr.  Russell  Sturgis,
I  hypnotised  only  "  to  the  first  degree  ;  "  therefore  we  must  pursue
the  inquiry  farther,  and  find  out  if  the  necessary  steps  were  taken  to
produce  any  such  results.

None  of  my  patients  expected  me  to  hypnotise  them  ;  nor  do  I

1  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXIV.,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  213.
-  The  Principles  of  Psychology,  Vol.  II.,  p.  593.


30


C.  M.  Barrows.


believe  that  even  5  per  cent  of  them  associated  a  thought  of  hypnotism
with  what  I  was  trying  to  do  for  them.  The  instances  were  rare
indeed  in  which  a  patient  during  treatment  concentrated  his  (or  her)
attention  on  "  vacancy,"  on  tlioughts  of  sleep,  or  on  me  ;  in  many  cases
the  indications  pointed  strongly  the  other  way.

In  one  case  the  patient,  a  literary  gentleman,  wrote  concerning  his-
mental  experiences  during  the  treatments  he  had  received  :  "  I  was
never  aware  of  the  particular  thing  suggested  each  time,  but
only  of  the  desired  outcome  of  all  the  ti'eatments.  During  the
suggestion  we  [operator  and  patient]  sat  quietly  without  speaking,  my
mind  being  perfectly  at  liberty.  The  suggestion  occupied  as  a  rule
about  twenty  minutes,  during  which  time  I  usually  repeated  poetry  to-
myself,  or  looked  across  to  Boston,  of  which  there  is  a  fine  view  to  be
had  from  Mr.  Barrows's  windows."  A  lady  who  received  six  treatments
for  the  cure  of  intermittent  headache,  read  a  fascinating  book  while  I
was  operating.  By  a  single  suggestion  I  relieved  a  child  from  severe
pain,  who  was  not  aware  of  m^'  presence  in  the  room.  She  was  lying
on  a  bed  beside  which  sat  her  nurse ;  I  entered  the  room  noiselessly,
sat  down  where  she  could  not  see  me,  and,  after  doing  my  work,  went
out  without  having  attracted  her  notice,  so  that  there  was  no  chance
for  expectancy  or  attention  on  her  part.  Here  is  another  case  irt
which  hypnotism  would  seem  to  have  been  impossible.  In  September,
1895,  I  became  an  inmate  of  a  house  occupied  by  a  family  of  the  name
of  Meyers.  I  had  been  there  only  a  few  days  when  Mrs.  Meyers  met
me  in  the  corridor  one  forenoon,  and  told  me  that  her  son,  a  boy  of
six,  was  troubled  with  very  annoying  facial  spasms.  She  said  that  his
father  and  herself  had  used  every  means  in  their  power  to  break  up
and  cure  the  habit,  but  with  no  apparent  effect.  I  had  then  seen  very-
little  of  the  boy,  but  offered  to  try  and  help  him  by  suggestion ;  and
his  mother  on  her  part  promised  that  Willie  should  not  be  told  any-
thing about  the  matter.  About  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the
same  day,  I  looked  out  of  the  window,  near  which  I  was  at  work,  and
saw  the  boy  playing  with  some  other  children  on  the  lawn  below.  It
seemed  a  favourable  time  to  try  the  proposed  suggestion,  and,  taking
care  that  he  should  not  see  me,  I  made  it  then  and  there.  It  was  com-
pletely successful,  for  all  the  family  noticed  that  Willie's  facial  trouble-
ceased  from  that  day  on.

A  cogent  argument  in  support  of  the  theory  herein  set  forth  might
be  based  upon  the  striking  analogy  of  this  method  of  psychical  treat-
ment to  that  of  telepathic  suggestion  or  so-called  thought  transference  ;;
for  the  same  form  of  suggestion  used  in  therapeutic  experiments  I
have  found  to  be  most  successful  in  the  sending  of  telepathic  messages
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  an  agent  may  suggest  definite  sensations  to
a  percipient,  who  will  receive  and  experience  them  without  the  aid  of


Suggestion  tvithout  Hypnotism.


31


hypnotism  ;  while  to  assume  that  the  agent  could  hypnotise  a  distant
percipient,  on  whom  he  had  not  previously  operated,  would  be  mani-
festly absurd.

The  analgesia  or  inhibition  induced  by  suggestion  is  liable  to  be
confounded  with  something  quite  different.  It  is  not  a  general
stupifying  and  deadening  of  all  sensation,  like  that  produced  by  ether
or  narcotics  ;  neither  does  it  benumb  a  group  of  nerve-endings,  or
deprive  a  limited  segment  of  tissue  of  all  feeling,  as  cocaine  does.
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  says:  "It  is  by  no  means  a  mere  ordinary
narcotic — a  fresh  specimen  of  the  methods  already  familiar  for
checking  all  conscious  cerebration.  It  is  a  new  departure  ;  it  is  the  first
successful  attempt  at  dissociating  forms  of  sensation  which  throughout
the  known  history  of  the  human  organism  have  almost  invariably
been  found  to  exist  together."

There  is  certainly  implied,  in  every  such  case  of  suppression  or  pre-
vention of  pain,  a  principle  and  power  of  selection  intelligently
exercised,  by  which  the  suggesting  agent,  whoever  it  be,  singles  out
from  the  various  sensations  that  a  nerve  or  group  of  nerves  may  be
capable  of  producing  the  one  called  pain,  and  imposes  a  stay-law
upon  it.  Suggestion  which  cures  one  pain  does  not  necessarily
suppress  every  pain  in  the  body,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  the
man  whose  ankle  was  relieved,  while  his  arm  continued  to  ache.  It
does  not  always  remove  the  exciting  cause  of  pain.  The  legitimate
function  of  therapeutic  suggestion  seems  to  be  to  act  upon  a  special
occasion  for  a  limited  time,  and  such  action  may  take  place  immedi-
ately, or  be  postponed ;  or,  in  some  instances,  a  permanent  beneficial
change  is  the  result  achieved.

I  find  it  impossible  to  tell  in  a  given  case  whether  this  psychical
remedy  will  act  quickly  or  slowly.  I  treated  the  Irish  day  labourer
who  had  been  suffering  many  months  with  general  muscular  rheu-
matism, and  in  five  minutes  all  the  lameness  and  pain  were  gone,  and
the  trouble  has  not  returned  for  nearly  two  years.  I  treated  a  girl
of  thirteen  who  had  a  seated  pain  in  the  fleshy  part  of  her  right
shoulder,  due  to  a  sprain  of  the  deltoid  muscle  which  had  been  cured,
and  the  suggestion  was  repeated  twice  a  week  for  six  weeks  before  the
pain  completely  vanished.  Some  slight  ailment  often  seems  to  olfer
greater  resistance  than  a  much  graver  disease.  Cases  of  obstinate
insomnia  and  mental  depression  are  apt  to  yield  more  readily  than
headache  or  indigestion.  Stage-fright,  worry,  and  definite  fears,  are
easily  cured  in  this  way  ;  while  a  fixed  delusion,  or  other  troublesome
idea,  may  be  hard  to  dislodge.

Any  theories  we  may  devise  as  to  the  nature  and  mode  of  this  form
of  suggestion,  based  on  present  knowledge,  must  needs  be  provisional ;


32


G.  M.  Barrows.


and  a  wise  man  will  hold  them  loosely,  ready  to  abandon  them  at  any
time  for  better.  In  mattei-s  which  continually  baffle  the  most  profound
students,  it  certainly  becomes  us  to  speak  with  modesty  and  caution.
I  feel  quite  unable  to  offer  an  adequate  solution  of  the  problems  to
which  I  have  called  attention  ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  the  psychical
influence  employed  in  these  and  many  other  experiments  which  I  have
made  is  a  form  of  telepathy,  and  ought  to  be  studied  as  such.  A
telepathic  message  is  a  suggestion  of  an  agent  that  the  percipient  per-
form an  act  or  feel  a  sensation.  If  the  percipient  be  suffering  pain,
and  the  agent  suggests  to  him  a  feeling  or  state  of  ease,  the  proper
response  on  the  part  of  the  percipient  would  be  a  sense  of  relief  from
pain.  Perhaps  it  does  not  help  us  much  to  say  this,  for  telepathy
implies  an  agency  inscrutable  to  us  at  present.

]!^or  can  the  real  difficulties  which  confront  the  student  be  dis-
missed or  evaded  with  the  shallow  remark  :  "  It  is  only  another
case  of  the  power  of  mind  over  mind."  It  ought  to  be  plain  enough
to  any  one  capable  of  grasping  the  situation,  that  the  form  of  psychical
suggestion  under  consideration  is  no  more  addressed  to  the  mind  of
the  patient  than  an  opiate  prescribed  for  quieting  pain  is  addressed  to
the  mind.  Do  not  forget  that  I  use  "mind"  in  the  popular  sense.
The  patient  swallows  the  dose  as  directed,  but  experiences  no  mental
change  in  consequence  ;  but  if  the  sedative  eases  the  pain,  he  may  then
think  far  enough  to  refer  the  relief  to  the  operation  of  the  drug.  If
instead  of  an  opiate  a  silent  suggestion  be  made  that  the  pain  cease,
the  patient  is  not  even  aware  that  such  a  telepathic  message  has  been
lodged  in  his  brain ;  he  does  not  know  that  anything  has  been  done,
therefore  he  cannot  act  upon  it  mentally  ;  but  after  the  proper  neural
response  has  taken  place,  he  may  recall  what  has  happened,  and  ascribe
the  cessation  of  pain  to  the  suggestion.

If  the  psychical  experiments  which  I  have  made,  a  small  number  of
which  are  described  in  this  paper,  are  indeed  instances  of  telepathy,
then  it  follows  that  a  telepathic  message  may  be  received  by  a  per-
cipient, and  may  produce  within  him  a  definite  physical  change,
without  becoming  matter  of  conscious  thought  at  all.  Again,  admit-
ting it  to  be  telepathy,  we  may  make  free  use  of  all  that  is  known
about  that  mysterious  subject  to  aid  us  in  explaining  this  special
group  of  phenomena.  We  must  also  encounter  the  unsolved  problems
which  lie  at  the  very  threshold  of  investigation, — problems  so  profound
that  one  must  think  long  and  abandon  many  a  plausible  theory
before  one  can  appreciate  their  scope  even  on  the  hither  side.  For
if  telepathy  be  what  the  findings  of  scientific  research  foreshow,  no
invention,  no  discovery  ever  made  by  man  is  worthy  to  be  compared
with  it.  It  implies  nothing  less  than  a  revolution  in  our  science  of
mind.


Suggestion  ivithout  Hypnotism.


33


The  paramount  inquiry  in  this  as  in  other  forms  of  telepathic
action  is,  How  is  it  clone  ?  And  this  question  naturally  divides  into
two  :  first,  Who  is  the  agent  ?  Second,  By  what  means  does  the  agent
work  ?

I  suppose  it  is  not  too  much  to  claim  that  psychical  investiga-
tion has  made  some  definite  progress  towards  answering  these  two
baffling  questions,  has  in  some  fashion  reached  a  provisional  hypo-
thesis. But  if  any  headway  has  been  made,  the  light  has  always
come  by  studying  together  many  different  groups  of  related  pheno-
mena, and  never  by  studying  a  single  group  apart  from  the  rest.
Then  if  it  be  granted  that  these  cases  of  psychical  suggestion  con-
stitute a  group  of  phenomena  apparently  unclassified,  we  shall  gain
much  if  we  find  that  it  properly  belongs  with  some  collection  already
made.

Scanning  our  group  as  a  naturalist  examines  his  specimens  for  the
features  common  to  them  all,  we  find  that  in  every  one  of  these  cases  of
inhibition  of  pain  some  other  agent  than  ordinary  mental  power
brought  about  the  result.  Assuming  this  fact  as  a  basis  of  classifica-
tion, we  make  the  further  discovery  that  the  same  thing  is  true  of  a
large  collection  of  psychical  phenomena  already  made ;  that  is  to  say,
the  distinguishing  fact  appearing  in  each  member  of  this  collection  is
that  some  other  agent  than  ordinary  mental  power  acted  through  a
human  organism  and  produced  the  results  observed.  I  need  only  refer
to  a  few  cases  of  this  kind  to  remind  you  of  the  whole  class.

There  are  occasions,  you  are  aware,  in  the  lives  of  most  people,
when  they  are  surprised  out  of  their  habitual  ways  of  thinking  and
doing,  and  act  in  spontaneous  obedience  to  irresistible  promptings
which  come  they  know  not  whence.  Such  experiences  are  memorable
because  when  the  actor  recalls  what  then  took  place,  he  perceives  that
he  thought  something  or  did  something  for  which  he  could  give  no
reason,  save  that  one  which  explains  everything  or  nothing,  as  you  take
it  :  "  It  came  to  me."

Examples  of  this  kind  are  not  far  to  seek.  A  lady  said  to  me  the
other  day  in  explanation  of  her  absence  from  home,  "  I  was  busy  that
morning  in  my  usual  fashion,  when  it  suddenly  came  to  me,  I  can't
tell  how,  only  it  seemed  like  a  voice  that  said,  '  Go  to  your  sister,  she
needs  you.'  The  call  was  as  clear  and  imperative  as  though  I  had
received  a  telegram  or  a  letter,  and  I  knew  I  ought  to  go."  At  the
close  of  the  Civil  War,  a  northern  gentleman  with  a  partner  established
a  mercantile  business  in  a  Virginia  city.  After  being  there  several
months,  he  awoke  from  sleep  in  the  middle  of  the  night  with  the  thought
impressed  upon  his  mind,  "  There  is  something  wrong  at  the  store  and
I  must  go  and  see  about  it."  He  could  not  account  for  this  vivid
impression,  for  his  sleep  had  been  sound  and  undisturbed  by  dreams  ;

D


34


G.  M.  Bdrroivs.


but  obeying  the  summons  he  called  up  his  partner,  and  together  they
hastened  to  the  place,  just  in  season  to  prevent  their  money  from
being  carried  off  by  a  burglar.  Several  years  ago  a  citizen  of
Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  while  on  a  visit  to  another  city,  dreamed  one  night
that  she  saw  a  large  block  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  from  her
own  home  burn  down,  and  the  accounts  in  the  newspapers  next
morning  proved  her  to  have  been  dreaming  of  an  actual  event.

When  Mr.  Benjamin  Blyth,  one  of  the  "arithmetical  prodigies,"
was  six  years  old,  he  asked  his  father,  as  they  were  taking  a  morning
walk,  "At  what  hour  was  I  born?"  "At  four  a.m  ,"  answered  his
parent.  "And  what  o'clock  is  it  now?"  "Seven  tifty,"  said  the
father.  After  walking  on  in  silence  for  a  few  hundred  yards,  Ben
turned  to  his  father  and  stated  just  how  many  seconds  he  had  lived.
Mr.  Blyth  noted  down  the  figures  given  by  his  son,  made  the  calcula-
tion on  reaching  home,  and  told  Ben  he  was  172,800  seconds  wrong.
"  Oh,  papa,"  exclaimed  the  child,  "  you  have  left  out  the  two  extra
days  in  the  leap  yeai'S  1820  and  1824,"  which  was  true.

Mr.  Wm.  J.  Stillman  said  that  Mi'.  Lowell  once  told  him  that  he
wrote  "The  Vision  of  Sir  Launfal  "  in  two  evenings,  and  never  re-
touched the  poem.  An  entry  in  Longfellow's  diary,  dated  December
30th,  1839,  reads:  "  I  wrote  last  evening  a  notice  of  Allston's  poems,
after  which  I  sat  till  twelve  o'clock  by  my  fire,  smoking,  when
suddenly  it  came  into  my  mind  to  write  the  '  Ballad  of  the  Schooner
Hesperus';  which  I  accordingly  did.  Then  I  went  to  bed,  but  could
not  sleep.  New  thoughts  were  running  in  my  mind,  and  I  got  up  to  add
them  to  the  ballad.  I  feel  pleased  with  the  ballad.  It  hardly  cost
me  an  effort.  It  did  not  come  into  my  mind  by  lines,  but  by  stanzas."
George  Eliot  declared  that,  in  all  she  considered  her  best  writing,  there
was  a  "  not  herself  "  which  took  possession  of  her,  and  that  at  such
times  she  felt  her  own  personality  to  be  merely  the  instrument
through  which  this  spirit  acted.  George  Inness,  the  painter,  once  told
me  that  his  best  compositions  came  to  him  as  visions  ;  that  then  a
power  which  did  not  move  him  at  other  times  drove  him  to  work
incessantly,  yet  with  no  tiresome  effort,  until  his  concept  was  fixed
upon  the  canvas.

The  publications  of  this  Society  contain  accounts  of  many  similar
experiences,  and  others  more  remarkable.  You  remember  the  series  of
articles  on  "  The  Subliminal  Consciousness,"  in  which  Mr.  Myers
treats  of  such  phenomena,  and  what  he  there  says  about  the  Dpemon  of
Socrates,  the  monitory  voices  heard  by  Joan  of  Arc,  the  thirteen
"  Arithmetical  Prodigies,"  and  the  inspirations  of  genius  in  general.

You  see  from  these  few  examples  to  what  collection  I  assign  my
group  of  phenomena.  You  know  also,  those  of  you  who  are  acquainted
with  the  results  of  recent  investigation,  that  the  phenomena  embraced


Suggestion  ivithout  Hypnotism.


35


in  this  large  collection  are  believed  to  have  been  produced  by  some
other  agency  than  the  ordinary  process  of  normal  cerebration.

According  to  the  most  scientific  opinions  now  held,  it  was  the
Subliminal  Self  that  called  the  lady  to  her  sister's  bedside,  roused  the
merchant  from  sleep,  enabled  the  distant  dreamer  to  see  the  Brooklyn
fire,  whispered  to  little  Ben  Blyth  how  old  he  was,  indited  the  poems
of  the  Cambridge  bards,  held  the  pen  of  Mrs.  Lewes,  moved  the  brush
of  George  Inness,  guided  Socrates,  commanded  the  Maid  of  Oi'leans,
and  inspired  every  gifted  artist  whose  works  bear  the  stamp  of  genius.
Thus  do  the  conclusions  of  modern  science  confirm  the  dictum  of
Novalis,  "  The  art  of  a  well  developed  genius  is  far  different  from
the  artfulness  of  the  understanding,  of  the  merely  reasoning  mind."

The  common  bond  of  relation  between  the  form  of  suggestion  of
which  this  paper  treats  and  the  phenomena  belonging  to  this  great
psychical  class  is  that  the  source  of  the  manifested  power  is  the  same
in  both.  The  action,  subliminally  initiated,  produced  a  change  in  living
brain,  and  ultimately  modified  certain  movements  in  living  bodies ;
and  the  evidence  of  this  mode  of  action  is  strong  enough,  it  seems  to
me,  to  justify  the  following  inferences  : — 1.  This  subliminal  agent,
which  acts  directly  upon  brain  substance  to  produce  certain  recognised
effects,  may  also  be  the  cause  of  other  observed  effects  not  now  ascribed
to  it.  2.  If  this  subliminal  agent  does  sensibly  affect  one  group  of
brain  cells  (as  those  immediately  concerned  in  thinking),  another  group
of  cells  may  be  so  affected.  3.  If  this  subliminal  agent  has  chosen
certain  brains  to  be  the  immediate  organs  and  vehicles  of  its  power,  we
have  no  right  to  draw  the  line  there,  and  affirm  that  this  agent  never
extends  that  same  power  through  these  immediate  organs  to  other
living  brains.  4.  If  this  subliminal  agent  act  through  that  portion  of
the  brain  assumed  to  be  the  seat  of  the  mental  faculties,  then,  for
aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  the  same  agent  may  act  through  other
portions  of  the  brain  not  concerned  in  thinking,  to  produce  effects
unrecognised  by  mind,  as  currents  traverse  the  nerves  which  co-ordinate
motility.

Considering,  therefore,  what  deductions  may  easily  be  made  in  the
premises,  I  incline  to  ask  those  who  are  wiser  in  such  matters  than  I,
if  the  kind  of  suggestion  here  treated  of  be  not  the  power  of  this
subliminal  agent,  exerted  directly  upon  the  proper  nerve  centres  to
control  a  particular  sensation.

I  said  a  moment  ago  that  the  question  of  paramount  interest  in
this  connection  divides  itself  into  two.  I  have  tried  to  give  in  a
condensed  form  the  answer  of  science  to  the  first.  May  I  presume  on
your  patience,  and  offer  a  word  of  reply  to  the  second  ?

By  what  means  does  this  subliminal  agent  work  ''■  We  wish  to
know  how  this  subtle  energy,  which  acts  thi'ough  a  particular  brain,


36


C.  M.  Barrows.


can  make  itself  felt  in  another  brain,  near  or  remote.  By  the  con-
ditions of  the  problem,  the  communication  or  message  cannot  traverse
any  recognised  sensory  channel  on  its  way  from  one  brain  to  another,
but  must  be  conveyed  by  telepathy.  Very  well.  If  telepathy  be
accepted  as  a  fact  in  nature,  just  as  the  passage  of  light  from  distant
stars  is  accepted  as  a  fact,  we  want  to  know  how  the  message  is
carried  through  space.  Science  has  assumed  a  luminiferous  ether
through  which  "  star  to  star  vibrates  light,"  and  many  persons  seem
content  to  believe  that  communications  pass  from  brain  to  brain  by
means  of  the  same  material  vehicle. But  another  theory  is  possible.

What  if  it  should  appear  that  this  subliminal  agent  is  simply  one
intelligent  actor  filling  the  universe  with  its  presence,  as  the  ether  fills
space,  the  common  inspirer  of  all  mankind  1  By  what  authority  is
it  assumed  that  this  wizard  self  resident  in  one  man  is  related  to
the  selves  of  other  men  merely  as,  in  the  language  of  theology,
one  personal  soul  is  related  to  the  rest  1  Are  we  sure  that  this
transcendent  energy  is  parted  into  numberless  distinct  entities,  one
for  each  human  being?

Should  we  plunge  into  a  darker  mystery,  were  we  to  compare  this
subliminal  agent  or  self  to  a  skilled  musician  presiding  over  many
pipes  and  keys,  and  playing  through  each  what  music  he  will  ?
Imagine  each  human  being  one  of  millions  of  animate  organs,  through
whose  mind  and  body  one  unified,  all-pervasive,  immaterial  self  blows'
with  the  breath  of  energy  to  make  the  varied  music  we  call  life.  If
this  were  true,  then  would  the  subliminal  self  be  a  universal  fountain
of  energy  and  each  man  an  outlet  of  the  stream  ;  each  man's  personal
self  would  be  contained  in  it  and  thus  made  one  with  every  other  ;
and  with  a  slight  change  we  might  adopt  the  quotation  :  "  In  that
deep  force,  the  last  fact  behind  which  analysis  cannot  go,  all  psychical
and  bodily  effects  find  their  common  origin."


APPENDIX.


Corroborative  testimony  as  to  several  of  the  cases  mentioned  above
was  obtained  by  Mr.  Barrows,  and  sent  by  him  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  The
letter  from  Dr.  Burrell,  however,  was  addressed  direct  to  Dr.  Hodgson.
Mr.  Barrows  himself  writes  : —

Brookline,  January  1st,  1896.
My  Deak  Dr.  Hodgson, — I  have  been  extremely  busy  with  some  very
interesting  experiments,  or  you  would  have  received  what  your  letter  of
yesterday  calls  for  sooner.  I  can  now  give  you  all  I  am  able  to  get  in  each
of  the  cases  mentioned  in  my  paper.  Taking  them  in  order,  I  think  the
following  statement  will  be  plain.


Suggestion  ivithoiU  Hypnotism.


37


1.  The  lady  who  had  live  sittings  with  a  Boston  dentist  is  Mrs.  C,  of
New  York — letter  enclosed.

2.  Seven  cases  where  patients  had  teeth  extracted  :  in  the  four
children's  cases,  all  happening  years  ago,  I  can  get  nothing  of  value.  My  own
case  needs  no  voucher,  and  the  failure  ditto.  Have  a  letter  from  Mrs.
Christensen,  the  lady  of  the  last  experiment.

3.  The  Irish  girl  of  seventeen,  treated  for  neuralgia,  was  recently
married,  and,  as  Mrs.  Lynch,  her  letter  is  enclosed.

4.  The  Welshman,  cured  of  neuralgia  in  eye  and  ear,  is  Mr.  Woodfin,  for
whom  I  wrote  the  enclosed  statements,  which  he  and  his  wife  signed.

5.  The  school  teacher,  treated  six  years  ago  for  neuralgia,  went  West,
and  I  find  no  trace  of  her.

6.  Man  with  carbuncle  was  a  soldier,  whose  name,  regiment,  etc. ,  I  did
not  get  at  the  time,  for  I  did  not  then  think  of  putting  the  experiment  to  use.
He  was  a  stranger,  stopping  temporarily  at  a  hotel,  and  I  know  not  what
became  of  him.

7.  Man  with  kidney  trouble — with  stricture  of  uretlira— died  years
ago.  He  was  Mr.  William  Willward,  a  teacher  of  Elocution,  in  Providence,
B..I.  His  widow  (his  only  family  survivor)  left  Providence,  I  was  told,  and
I  do  not  know  where  she  is.  I  may  be  able  to  get  track  of  her  in  a  month  or
two,  and  get  a  statement  about  the  case.

8.  Mr.  Morse,  the  man  with  sprained  ankle,  contributes  two  letters,  one
about  this  case,  another  about  a  cure  of  intermittent  headache.

9.  Poor  woman  with  pinched  finger  joint  contributes  statement,  written
and  confirmed  by  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Henderson.

10.  Young  married  lady,  treated  in  1894,  for  intercostal  pain,  died  a  few
months  later  ;  disease,  melancholia.  Her  family  know  the  facts  ;  but,  for
reasons  I  have  never  been  able  to  fathom,  her  husband  has  made  a  false
charge  of  fraud  against  me,  and  will  have  no  communication  with  me.

11.  The  business  man  on  Chester  Park,  ti'eated  for  rheumatism,  now  lives
in  New  York,  and  contributes  a  statement.

12.  The  illiterate  Irishman,  also  treated  for  rheumatism,  signed  a  state-
ment which  I  wrote  out.

13.  Can  get  nothing  just  now  about  the  girl  of  thirteen,  with  pain  in
deltoid.  Her  aunt,  who  lives  here,  informs  me  that  the  girl  with  all  the
family  (the  A.'s)  are  in  Germany,  and  Mrs.  A.  is  critically  ill.  May  get  a
statement  when  she  recovers,  from  both  mother  and  daughter.

These  are  all  the  cases  of  prevention  or  suppression  of  pain  mentioned  in
the  paper,  of  which  a  detailed  statement  is  made.  Two  or  three  others  of  a
somewhat  different  character  are  alluded  to  incidentally.

You  will  bear  in  mind  that  during  the  years  in  which  these  experiments
were  performed  I  had  no  motive  for  securing  vouchers,  as  I  did  not  then
contemplate  using  any  such  evidence.

I  do  not  see  in  what  way  a  physician's  statement  would  strengthen  the
evidence  in  these  cases,  since  he  could  not  bear  witness  to  the  treatment.  In
cases  involving  dental  operations,  the  operator,  even  if  he  recalled  the  case,
could  not  vouch  for  anything.  In  cases  3,  9,  12,  no  physician  was  employed.


38


C.  M.  Barroivs.


Mr.  Morse  had  tliree  ijhysicians  during  the  progress  of  his  sprain  ;  what
they  could  say,  I  do  not  know.  Neither  of  them  saw  him  while  he  was.
under  my  treatment.  I  will  get  their  addresses  if  desirable.  Mr.  Chadwick
had  medical  attendance  before  I  treated  him,  and  it  might  be  of  interest  to
determine  the  possible  effect  of  the  medicines  prescribed  on  the  subsequent
cure,  if  the  doctor  could  now  tell  what  doses  were  taken.  But  we  must  not
forget  that  it  is  the  stojjping  of  pain  by  suggestion  which  is  to  be  proved,  not
whether  the  patient  recovered. What  could  a  doctor  testify  to  that  1

At  my  desire  Mrs.  A.  took  her  daughter  to  Dr.  Geo.  W.  Gay,  of
Boston,  before  I  treated  her,  and  he  wrote  me  on  a  prescription  slip,
"sprain  of  the  right  deltoid  muscle." — I  enclose  the  slip. Please  preserve.
—Very  truly  yours,  q  ^  Bakrows.

(1)  Letter  from  Mrs.  C. (See  p.  22.)

New  York  City,  Nocemher  21st,  1895.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — At  the  request  of  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows
of  Brookline,  Mass.,  I  write  you  my  experience  under  psychical  treatment.
Several  years  ago  while  living  in  Brookline,  1  was  in  an  extremely  nervous,
run-down  condition,  and  was  obliged  to  have  several  teeth  tilled.

I  went  to  Mr.  Barrows  for  treatment  before  going  to  Boston  to  the
dentist,  and  I  think  Mr.  Barrows  also  gave  me  another  treatment  while  I  was
in  the  dentist's  chair.

My  teeth  were  particularly  sensitive  and  I  was  enabled  to  go  through  the
ordeal  with  very  little  pain,  and  when  I  felt  pain  it  was  as  if  on  the  outside  of
me.  I  did  not  mind  it,  and  after  leaving  the  dentist  I  did  not  feel  that
nervous  exhaustion  which  I  had  always  before  experienced.  Three  or  four
times  I  went  to  the  dentist's  having  taken  treatments  before  going,  and  I
felt  very  little  pain  and  did  not  mind  it  ;  but  the  fifth  time  I  neglected  to
have  the  treatment  and  suffei'ed  very  much,  showing  me  conclusively  that
the  pain  was  very  much  lessened  by  psychical  treatment.

If  you  wish  to  publish  this  statement,  I  would  thank  you  not  to  use  my
name.  While  I  anr  a  firm  believer  in  psychical  treatment,  I  would  prefer  not
to  have  my  name  appear  publicly. — Very  truly  yours,

(Signed)

(2)  Letter  from  Mrs.  Christensen. (See  p.  23.)
17,  Harvard-street,  Brookline,  Mass.,  November  11th,  1895.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — In  September,  1894,  before  going  to
the  dentist  to  have  a  very  sensitive  double  tooth  extracted,  I  received
suggestive  treatment  from  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows  for  the  prevention  of  pain.

I  had  been  dreading  the  extraction,  and  also  the  after-effects,  which  have
usually  been  very  severe  in  my  case.

I  found  that  I  was  keenly  aware  of  the  grasjD  of  the  forceps,  of  the  force
of  the  dentist's  pull  on  the  tooth,  the  tearing  away,  but  I  felt  no  pain  during
the  operation  or  subsequently.

Although  a  raw,  chilly,  blustering  day,  I  went  at  once  to  Boston  and  was
exposed  to  the  weather  for  some  hours,  but  had  no  trouble  in  consequence,

1  The  sHp  enclosed  contained  the  statement  given  above.


Suggestion  tvithout  Ilyjmotisin.


39


neither  suffered  at  all  from  the  pain  and  inflammation  which  usually  have
followed  the  extraction  of  a  tooth.  — Yours  respectfully.

(Mrs.)  A.  H.  Cheistensen.

(3)  Letter  from  Mrs.  Lynch. (See  p.  25.)

26,  Sewall-street,  Brookline,  December  Uth,  1895.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — In  the  early  part  of  January  I  had
a  bad  attack  of  neuralgia  in  my  left  temple,  which  aft'ected  my  eye  and  the
side  of  my  face.  After  I  had  been  enduring  the  pain  for  several  days  and
grew  no  better,  a  friend  took  me  to  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows,  who  treated  me  by
psychical  suggestion.  All  the  pain  stopped  while  I  was  taking  the  first
treatment ;  but  the  next  night  I  had  a  hard  headache,  and  he  gave  me  two
more  treatments,  which  cured  it.

Mr.  Barrows  did  not  hypnotise  me  or  do  anything  which  I  could  see  or
feel;  he  sat  down  beside  me  for  about  fifteen  minutes  without  speaking  and
the  pain  was  gone.— Yours  respectfully,  Mrs.  Agnes  Lynch.

(4)  Statement  of  Mr.  Woodfin. (See  p.  25.)

School-street,  Brookline,  Mass.,  November  15th,  1895.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir,  — I  want  to  say  that  I  have  been  having
a  great  deal  of  trouble  with  my  left  ear  and  all  that  side  of  my  head.  When
Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows  began  to  treat  me,  about  the  middle  of  last  September,  I
had  had  a  very  hard  pain  in  my  ear  for  about  two  years.  Almost  every
morning,  when  I  first  woke  up,  and  at  different  times  during  the  day,  there
would  be  sharp  stabs  of  pain  in  my  ear,  very  hard  to  bear.  Besides  the
troubles  I  have  now  spoken  of,  my  left  eye  also  began  to  be  sore  and  blood-
shot about  three  weeks  before  Mr.  Barrows  took  my  case  ;  and  it  ached  hard
almost  all  of  the  time.

Mr.  Barrows  did  not  give  me  medicine,  but  used  wliat  he  called  "psychical
suggestion,"  and  stopped  all  the  pain  very  quickly.  My  eye  got  well  first,
then  my  ear,  then  my  head.  Thomas  H.  Woodfin.

I  can  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  above  statement,  and  that,  since  my
husband  received  treatment  from  Mr.  Barrows,  he  has  been  free  from  j)ain
and  better  in  every  way  ;  he  sleeps  well  and  is  not  nervous.

Mrs.  Lavinia  Woodfin.

(8)  Letters  from  Charles  IV.  Morse. (See  p.  26.)
[From]  Charles  W.  Morse,  watchmaker,  jeweller,  and  stationer.

Brookline,  Mass. ,  November  29th,  1895.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir,  —  At  your  request  I  send  the  following
particulars  of  a  cure,  due,  as  I  believe,  to  psychical  suggestion,  made  by  Mr.
C.  M.  Barrows  of  this  town.

In  June,  1893,  as  I  was  hurrying  to  take  a  train  at  the  Brookline  station,
I  met  with  an  accident  in  this  wise  :  as  I  stepjjed  from  the  platform  upon
the  track  which  I  must  cross  to  reach  the  train  which  was  on  the  track


40


G.  M.  Barrows.


beyond,  liaving  my  little  girl,  six  years  old,  raised  in  my  hands,  which  pre-
vented my  seeing  where  I  was  to  step,  I  supjjose  I  stepped  on  the  edge  of  a
tie,  which  turned  my  foot,  throwing  us  both  to  the  ground.  I  picked  up  my
child  unhurt  and  hobbled  into  the  train  which  was  waiting  ;  not  realising
the  extent  of  my  injurj',  and  thinking  the  pain  would  soon  cease.  Such  an
occurrence  was  not  uncommon  with  me,  as  that  ankle  had  bothered  me  for
years  in  that  way,  as  the  result  of  a  sprain  in  my  boyhood.  On  reaching
Boston  I  took  an  express  train  for  Worcester  ;  but  as  the  pain  rapidly  in-
creased, I  tried  to  obtain  relief  at  the  first  stopping  place,  which  was  S.
Framingham  ;  as  the  train  was  late,  no  stop  could  be  made,  and  having  a
brother  in  Ashland,  the  next  station,  I  left  the  train  there  ;ind  called  a
surgeon,  Dr.  Redfern  of  that  town  ;  the  ankle  being  badly  swollen,  it  was
impossible  to  tell  whether  any  bones  were  broken  or  not;  the  Doctor  bandaged
the  ankle  and  gave  me  a  liniment,  saying  he  would  give  me  a  year  in  which
to  get  over  it.  I  borrowed  crutches  and  started  for  Brookline.  On  reaching
home,  I  did  not  call  another  physician  immediately,  as  Dr.  Redfern  had  said
"that  it  didn't  make  much  difference  what  remedies  were  used,  as  the  cure
would  be  simply  a  matter  of  time."  As  time  went  on,  my  ankle  imjjroved  ;
but  for  some  reason,  I  could  not  put  my  foot  to  the  floor  without  intense
pain  through  the  whole  limb  below  the  knee  ;  it  was  cold,  also  discoloured.
It  was  about  four  weeks  after  the  accident  that  Dr.  J.  H.  Woods  of  this
town  offered  to  take  me  in  to  Boston  to  consult  Dr.  Burrell  of  the  Mass.
Gen.  Hospital. I  accepted  his  offer  and  saw  Dr.  Burrell.

After  a  thorough  examination,  in  which  he  found  that  the  flat  bone  on
the  outside  of  the  foot  had  been  split  open,  (as  he  could  feel  where  it  had
knit  together)  the  two  Doctors  had  a  private  consultation  from  which  I  was
excluded.  Dr.  B.  said  that  the  pain  and  discoloration  were  caused  by
stagnation  of  the  blood  ;  and  recommended  j^lunging  the  limb  into  hot  water
and  cold  alternately,  one  minute  in  each  ;  and  said  that  when  the  limb
resumed  its  normal  colour,  the  pain  would  cease.  This  treatment  I  followed
for  several  weeks,  uutil  the  discoloration  was  nearly  gone  ;  and  it  certainly
afforded  me  much  relief,  but  did  not  entirely  banish  the  pain.  This  continu-
ous pain,  added  to  worry  about  my  business,  which  I  was  unable  to  follow  for
several  months,  affected  my  nerves  and  head  to  a  very  great  extent ;  I
could  neither  eat  nor  sleep,  and  fell  unconscious  two  or  three  times.  I  was
reduced  in  weight  to  about  100  pounds,  my  usual  weight  being  from  125  to
130.  I  did  not  take  any  medicine  to  ease  the  pain  or  cause  sleei^.  At  this
time  Dr.  F.  B.  Percy  ol  Brookline  sent  me  away  [from]  home,  as  the  only
thing  to  be  done  in  the  case  ;  I  was  gone  a  month,  and  came  back  with  my
nerves  somewhat  steadier,  and  general  health  imjjroved,  but  not  rid  of  the
pain  in  my  ankle  which  seemed  to  puzzle  the  Doctors.  When  I  first  talked
with  Mr.  Barrows  in  the  last  of  September  of  the  following  year,  1894,  the
pain  was  as  intense  as  ever  with  no  prospect  of  cessation  ;  it  was  continuous
day  and  night  ;  it  was  just  below  the  outer  malleolus  of  the  left  ankle.  Mr.
Barrows  came  into  my  store  and  talked  with  me  about  my  health,  and
inquired  about  my  ankle.  I  told  him  my  ankle  seemed  to  be  all  right,
except  the  pain,  which  was  still  there  ;  he  then  said,  "  You  had  better  come
up  and  see  me,  and  let  me  take  the  pain  away."  I  called  on  him  by
api^ointment  October  9th,  1894,  and  he  gave  me  a  treatment  with  no


Suggestion  xvithoiit  Hypnotisvi.


41


apparent  result.  I  called  again  October  10th,  no  change.  October  11th,  I
noticed  between  the  two  treatments  that  day  and  the  day  before,  there
"were  three  or  four  hours  in  which  I  was  free  from  jjain.  October  12th,  the
pain  left  for  a  few  hours.  October  16th,  no  apparent  change.  October
18th,  the  pain  moved  to  the  otlier  foot.  October  23rd,  when  I  left  Mr.
Barrows,  had  no  pain.  October  24th,  I  did  not  call  on  Mr.  B.,  but  my  foot
ached  very  hard,  especially  on  the  back  of  the  ankle.  October  25th,  called
again,  had  much  pain  in  niy  leg  just  above  the  ankle.  October  30th,
another  treatment ;  since  the  25th,  have  had  darting  pains,  but  on  this  day
was  nearly  free  from  pain.  The  next  time  I  called,  he  did  not  give  me  a
treatment ;  since  that  time  have  been  entirely  free  from  that  peculiar
pain.

Now  in  regard  to  the  mode  of  treatment ;  one  half  the  time  was  taken  up
in  discussing  the  subject  ;  there  was  no  laying  on  of  hands,  neither  was  any
spell  cast  over  me.  I  was  absolutely  free  all  the  time  Mr.  Barrows  was
treating  me  ;  just  what  the  treatment  was,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  say.  I
will  say  this  much,  I  was  thoroughly  prejudiced  against  it  when  I  went  there
and  had  no  faith  whatever  that  Mr.  Barrows  would  help  me,  but  was
desperate  and  ready  to  try  almost  anytliing  that  offered  even  the  slightest
prospect  of  relief.  Qjj^^_  ^Y.  Morse.

Brookline,  Mass.,  November  29th,  1895.
De.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  send  the  following  particulars  of
a  cure,  due,  as  I  believe,  to  psychical  suggestion,  made  by  Mr.  0.  M.  Barrows
of  this  town.

A  few  months  after  the  treatments  mentioned  in  a  former  letter  to  you,  I
went  to  see  Mr.  Barrows  again,  while  suffering  from  an  intense  headache.  I
have  been  subject  to  severe  headaches  for  years,  but  at  this  time  they  were
more  frequent  than  usual,  occurring  every  week  for  several  weeks,  and
Listing  two  or  three  days  at  a  time,  rendering  me  unfit  for  everything.
Whether  Mr.  Barrows'  former  treatments  had  had  any  effect  on  my  head,  I
cannot  say  ;  but  one  thing  I  do  know,  that  the  one  special  treatment  he  gave
me  at  this  time  of  which  I  am  speaking,  cured  me  ;  and  I  have  been  almost
entirely  free  from  headache  since  that  time.  Just  when  I  received  that
treatment  I  cannot  say,  but  it  was  about  the  last  of  March  of  the  present

y^^^-  Chas.  W.  Morse.

Letter  from  Dr.  Herbert  L.  BurreLl.
[From  Dr.  H.  L.  Burrell,  an  eminent  surgeon  of  Boston,  and  well  known
to  me. — R.H.]

22,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.,  January  3rd,  1896.

My  Dear  Hodgson, — I  am  very  glad  to  give  you  the  notes  on  Mr.
Morse's  case.  The  history  is  essentially  the  same  as  he  gives  ;  the  "  Physi-
cal Examination"  is  : — "  The  right  foot  from  the  middle  of  leg  anteriorly  to
the  middle  of  dorsum  of  foot  is  swollen  and  ecchymosed.  There  is  no  frac-
ture, but  much  tenderness  about  the  external  malleolus.  To  try  massage,
passive  motion  and  a  bandage. Favourable  prognosis  given."

The  length  of  time  that  elapsed  between  the  injury  and  Mr.  Barrows'
treatment  makes  me  suspect  that  the  pain  which  occurred  in  his  left  ankle


42


C.  M.  Barrows.


was  similar  to  that  which  occurred  in  his  head,  both  of  which  were  mental,
and  which,  it  is  very  probable,  Mr.  Barrows  did  relieve  by  suggestion.

I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  sending  me  this  account  of  the  case,
for  I  am  personally  strongly  of  the  belief  that  suggestion  will  cure  patients.
If  there  is  anything  more  that  I  can  tell  you  about  it,  please  let  me  know. —
Very  truly  yours,  Herbekx  L.  Burrell.

(9)  Statement  of  Mrs.  James  Honey. (See  p.  27.)
11,  Walnut-street,  Brookline,  Mass.,  November  20th,  1895.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — Last  February  I  was  cured  in  a-
remarkable  way  of  a  pain  from  which  I  had  suffered  for  nine  years.  In  1886,
the  second  finger  of  my  right  hand  was  pinched  between  the  edges  of  twc
swinging  doors,  in  the  dry  goods  store  of  Jordan,  Marsh  and  Co.,  Boston'.
The  second  joint  was  badly  hurt,  and  was  very  lame  and  sore  for  a  long  time
before  it  seemed  to  heal.  After  it  got  so  well  that  I  could  begin  to  use  it,
the  hurt  joint  was  still  enlarged  and  the  whole  finger  so  stiff  that  I  couldi
bend  it  only  a  little.  Being  my  thimble  linger,  I  had  to  use  it  as  I  was  able,
and  almost  every  day  it  became  swollen  and  ached.  At  times  the  pain  was
severe,  and,  as  I  was  obliged  to  work  every  day  at  washing,  sewing,  and
other  kinds  of  housework  and  could  not  ftivour  it  mucli,  it  ached  more  or
less  every  night,  and  often  was  not  free  from  pain  for  days  together.

On  the  4th  of  February,  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows  saw  me  while  I  was  having
an  unusually  bad  time  with  tliis  finger.  He  told  me  that  he  had  sometimes
helped  such  cases,  and  examined  the  joint  carefully,  while  questioning  me
about  it.  He  did  nothing  to  the  finger,  but  was  quiet  for  not  longer  than
three  minutes,  I  should  say,  when  all  the  pain  stojjped,  and  I  have  had  none
of  it  since.  I  have  been  able  to  bend  the  finger  and  use  it  better  ever  since.
In  two  more  treatments  he  also  cured  a  painful  lameness  of  my  neck,  which
resulted  from  grijjjje.— Respectfully  yours,  jy|-pg_  James  Honey.

I  can  testify  to  the  trutli  of  above  statement  of  my  mother's,  knowing
how  much  she  suffered  from  her  finger,  and  being  at  home  when  Mr.  Barrows
helped  her.— Respectfully,  ]yjj^g_  ^  ^  Henderson.

(11)  Letter  from  Mr.  Chadivick. (See  p.  28.)
Hemenway  and  Browne,

New  York  and  Boston.
Browne,  Beeche  and  Co.,

Valparaiso.

47.  Cedar-street,  New  York,  November  20th,  1895.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  am  pleased  to  place  beft>re  you,
at  the  request  of  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows,  a  certain  case  of  sickness  for  which  he
treated  me.

It  was  in  January,  1892,  when  I  was  then  living  in  Boston.  I  had  been
suffering  for  about  a  week  with  acute  rheumatism,  and  had  been  unable  to
get  much,  if  any,  sleep  at  night.  I  was  not  able  to  get  relief  from  any  source,
and  decided  to  call  in  Mr.  Barrows. He  came  in  the  evening,  and  after  his


Suggestion  ivithout  Hypnotism.


4B


treatment  I  enjoyed  a  refreshing  night's  sleejD;  the  pain  eutirelj'  disappeared,
and  since  that  tinie  I  have  had  only  iufrei^iuent  returns  of  tlie  rheumatism. —
Yours  truly,  J.  R.  Chadwick.

(12)  Letter  from  3Ir.  Haryis.  (See  p.  28.)
46,  Morse  Ave,  Brookline,  Mass.,  December  10th,  1895.
Dk.  RicHAED  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — At  the  request  of  Mr.  C.  IM.  Barrows,
I  am  glad  to  acknowledge  the  help  I  received  from  his  meth(jd  of  treatment
in  the  sjjring  of  1894.  I  had  been  troubled  -with  muscular  rheumatism  all
the  previous  winter,  and  had  so  much  lameness  and  pain  that  it  was  often
impossible  for  me  to  attend  to  my  work.  I  saw  Mr.  Barrows  some  time  in
May,  and  he  offered  to  help  me  if  1  would  call  at  his  house.  I  did  so  ;  and
I  remember  that  my  back  and  legs  were  aching  hard,  and  I  was  so  lame  that
it  hurt  me  to  sit  down  ia  the  chair  he  placed  for  me.  He  sat  ui  another
chair  several  feet  away,  and  asked  some  questions  about  my  case  ;  then  he
stopped  talking  for  two  or  three  minutes,  and  I  don't  know  what  he  did,  but
the  pain  all  left  me.  I  began  to  move  about,  then  stood  up,  and  found  the
lameness  gone  too,  and  I  have  had  no  rheumatism  since.

James  H.  Harris.

The  following  additional  corroborations  have  been  received  while
this  paper  was  passing  through  the  press.  The  first  refers  to  the  case
given  on  p.  30.

58,  University-road,  Brookline,  Mass.,  April  16tli,  1896.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  very  willingly  comply  with  the
request  of  Mr.  Barrows  to  corroborate  his  statement  in  regard  to  my
son  WilHe.  He  had  been  troubled  with  a  twitching  of  the  face  for  several
weeks.  His  father  and  I  had  tried  to  break  him  of  the  habit,  but  could
not.  I  told  Mr.  Barrows  about  it,  as  he  says,  one  morning  last  September,
and  Willie  had  no  more  twitchmg  after  that  day. — Respectfully  yours,

Bertha  Meyers.

The  next  note,  addressed  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  was  received  by  him
on  January  20th,  1896.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  favourable
effects  produced  by  the  treatment  in  this  case  seem  to  have  been
somewhat  slighter  that  in  most  of  the  cases  described,  and  perhaps  of
a  more  purely  mental  nature.

Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — I  am  glad  to  make  an  informal  statement,  to  you,
of  Mr.  Barrows'  work  with  me  ;  although,  for  several  reasons,  I  do  not
think  that  I  should  care  to  have  the  same  made  public.

Mr.  Barrows  treated  me  last  spring  before  an  hour  with  the  dentist,
and  on  this  occasion  I  experienced  no  pain  at  all ;  although  it  is  but  fair
to  say  that,  on  my  questioning  the  dentist,  he  said  that  he  could  not  be
sure  that  what  he  had  just  done,  should,  of  necessity,  have  produced  pain.
He  expected  it  would,  but  could  not  be  certain  in  the  matter.

This  autunm  and  early  winter  Mr.  Barrows  has  given  me  five  or  sis
treatments  for  the  same  reason. These  operations  were  more  serious, — a


44


G.  M.  Barrows.


sensitive  wisdom  tootli  to  be  excavated  and  a  large  filling  to  be  replaced
in  a  position  between  the  teeth  which  required  preliminary  "wedging," —
besides  several  minor  operations.  My  experience  with  these  hours  in  the
dentist's  chair  have  varied  ; — not,  I  think,  so  much  according  to  the  gravity
of  the  work  on  the  teeth,  as, — in  so  far  as  I  can  tell, — according  to  my
receptivity  toward  Mr.  Barrows'  suggestion.  At  no  time  during  these
sittings  has  pain  been  totally  suppressed  ;  although  at  times,  I  confess
that  I  have  felt  as  if  it  were  decidedly  deadened- -the  result  seeming  to  me
the  same  as  that  producible  by  an  antesthetic.  The  general  results,  how-
ever, have  been  :  a  certain  relaxed  feeling  in  place  of  the  usual  nervous
tension  of  such  times  ;  a  certain  sense  of  indifference  to  the  pain — a
purely  mental  state  ;  and  an  almost  complete  freedom  from  nervous  pros-
tration after  the  operations.  At  the  time  of  the  operations, — the  time
when  Mr.  Barrows'  post-suggestion  was  to  work, — I  have  felt  physical
drowsiness,  a  sense  of  eyelids  being  heavy,  brain  somewhat  numb,  etc.,
combined  (although  it  may  seem  curious)  with  a  sense  of  mental  exhilara-
tion. Tliese,  I  may  add,  are  the  symptoms  I  experience  during  a  treatment
of  Mr.  Barrows'  ;  though  there  is  frequently  added  to  these  a  slight  sense
of  snapping  in  the  head,  as  if  the  nerves  were,  in  actuality,  relaxing.

As  I  suffer  hal^itually  from  over-tension  of  the  nerves  at  the  back  of  the
head  and  of  the  back,  this  is,  perhaps,  not  extraordinary.  This  hyper-
sensitive condition  of  nerves  (much  less  than  formerly  with  me,  but  still
evident)  should  perhaps  be  taken  into  account  in  considering  the  lack  of
total  suppression  of  sensation  in  my  case  ;  also,  probably  the  fact  that  (I
think)  I  am  very  suggestible,  and  that,  as  I  have  always  dreaded  the
dentist's  instruments,  I  may  make  a  strong  auto-suggestion  each  time  in
favour  of  pain.  I  fancy  this  to  be  the  case,  and  have  in  the  chair,  once
or  twice,  had  the  sensation  as  if  one  suggestion  were  struggling  with
another, — the  sense  of  indifference  to  pain  with  that  of  dread.  I  am  afraid
I  do  not  put  this  into  scientific  language  and  that  it  is  not  very  available

as  testimony  Believe  me,  etc,

(Signed  in  full)

Dr.  Hodgson  writes  with  reference  to  the  case  of  Mr.  J.  R.
Chad  wick,  see  above,  No.  11  : —

May,  1896,

Mr.  W.  L.  Parker,  residing  in  Boston,  well  known  to  me  and  also  an
Associate  of  the  American  Branch  of  the  S.P.R.,  was  a  partner  in  the  firm  of
Hemenway  and  Browne,  in  which  Mr.  Chadwick  is  an  employe.  At  my
request,  Mr.  Parker,  on  a  visit  recently  to  New  York,  questioned  Mr.
Chadwick  closely  aljout  his  experience,  and  reported  that  he  is  a  man  of
shrewdness  and  intelligence,  and  of  good  judgment ;  had  already  weighed
the  various  other  considerations  offered  to  account  for  the  cessation  of  his
pain,  etc.,  but  was  unable  to  attribute  it  to  any  other  cause  but  the  treatment
of  Mr.  Barrows.

R.  Hodgson.


Poltergeists.


45


IV.

POLTERGEISTS.
By  Frank  Podmore.

Visitations  of  raps  and  loud  noises,  accompanied  by  the  throwing  of
stones,  the  ringing  of  bells,  and  other  disturbances  of  an  inexplicable
kind  have  been  known  for  many  centuries.  Mr.  Lang  {Cock  Lane  and
Common  Sense,  p.  170)  cites  a  case  as  early  as  856  a.d.  In  the  last
century  there  were  many  outbreaks  of  the  kind,  nor  were  the
manifestations  confined  to  any  one  country.  There  was  the  celebrated
Cock  Lane  case,  occurring  in  London  in  1762  ;  there  was  a  tumult
of  bell-ringing  in  the  Russian  monastery  of  Tzarekonstantinoff  in
1753 1;  and  we  hear  of  a  case,  in  1750,  in  Saxony,  of  mysterious
stone-throwing  which  lasted  for  some  weeks,  much  to  the  annoyance
of  a  clergyman  and  his  two  sisters  who  were  the  victims  of  the
outbreak.-  In  a  small  and  now  rare  book,  called  dealings  Bells,
published  in  1841  by  Major  Moor,  F.R.S.,  for  sale  at  a  Church
bazaar,  accounts  are  given,  mostly  at  first-hand,  of  some  20  cases  of
this  kind.  The  disturbances  described  in  Bealhigs  Bells  consisted
generally  of  bell-ringing,  but  they  included  occasional  noises  of  other
kinds,  movements  of  furniture,  throwing  of  crockery  and  small  objects.
The  S.P.R.  has  received  many  reports  of  similar  disturbances.  Two
of  the  most  striking  have  already  been  published  by  Mr.  Myers  in  the
Proceedings.  (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  160-173,  and
pp.  383-394 — Mr.  Bristow's  case.)  In  these  two  cases  no  opportunity
was  afforded  of  personal  investigation ;  but  in  several  instances
Members  of  the  Society  have  been  able,  either  to  be  present  during  the
actual  occurrence  of  the  disturbances,  or  to  visit  the  locality  and
interrogate  the  witnesses  immediately  after  the  events.  In  the  present
paper  it  is  proposed  to  deal  with  the  results  of  these  investigations.

I. — The  Worksop  Case.

The  first  case  of  the  kind  occurred  at  Worksop  in  1883.  Subjoined
is  a  report,  drawn  up  at  the  time,  of  my  inquiries  a  few  weeks  after
the  occurrences  described.

1  The  Russian  Archiirs,  1878,  pp.  278—0,  translated  and  forwarded  to  us  by
T.  Briihns.

2  Annali  dello  Spiritismo,  quoted  in  Lir/ht,  February  22nd,  189G.


46


Frank  Podmore.


Report  on  the  Worksop  Disturbances. By  F.  Podmore.

April  nth,  1883.

At  tlie  beginning  of  March,  1883,  tlie  Retford  aiul  Gainsborougli  Times
and  other  local  papers  gave  accounts  of  some  reniarkaljle  disturbances  which
had  occurred  in  the  first  two  or  three  days  of  the  month,  at  the  house  of  a
small  horse-dealer  in  Worksop,  named  Joe  White.  One  or  two  members
of  the  Society  entered  into  communication  with  the  principal  persons  named
in  the  newspaper  reports,  and  with  a  friend  in  the  neighbourhood,  who
very  kindly  took  some  trouble  in  inquiring  into  tlie  matter  for  the  Society.
But  it  soon  became  obvious  that,  as  nearly  all  the  witnesses  of  the
occurrences  related  were  of  the  humbler  class,  and  unable,  therefore,  to
write  a  connected  account  of  wliat  had  happened,  the  best  way  to  arrive  at
the  truth  of  the  matter  was  for  one  of  us  to  go  in  person  to  niake  inquiries.
Accordingly,  at  the  request  of  the  Haunted  House  Committee,  I  went  down
to  Worksop  on  the  afternoon  of  Saturday,  April  7th,  with  the  intention  of
inspecting  the  actual  scene  of  the  occurrences,  and  of  personally  interro-
gating the  principal  witnesses  ;  in  order,  if  possible,  to  arrive  at  some
rational  explanation  of  the  business.  I  spent  the  Saturday  evening  and
the  whole  of  the  following  day  in  my  inquiries,  and  have,  I  think,  obtained
as  intelligible  and  trustworthy  a  history  of  the  matter  as  the  lapse  of  time,
the  nature  of  the  phenomena  tliemselves,  and  the  character  of  the  witnesses
will  permit.

I  derived  my  information  from  seven  principal  eye-witnesses  of  the  dis-
turbances, whom  I  interrogated,  with  the  single  exception  of  White  himself,
separately.  I  wrote  out  the  statement  of  each  witness  in  full  immediately
after  the  interview,  and  the  three  most  important  witnesses,  Higgs,
Currass,  and  White,  subsequently  read  tlirougli  my  notes  and  signed  them.
Tlie  depositions  of  these  three  persons  are  printed  in  full  below.  My  time
was  too  short  to  allow  a  second  interview  with  the  four  other  principal
witnesses,  and  I  was  unable,  therefore,  to  obtain  their  signatui-es  to  the
depositions  ;  but  I  have  incorporated  the  statements  of  all  the  jjrincipal
witnesses  in  my  repoit.

Besides  the  seven  chiefly  concerned,  I  questioned,  in  presence  of  White
and  his  wife,  three  or  four  other  witnesses  of  the  disturbances,  viz.,
White's  brother  Tom,  a  bright-looking  lad  of  18  or  20  ;  Solomon  Wass  and
his  wife,  next-door  neighbours  of  the  Whites,  the  former  an  ordinary
North  countryman  of  the  lower  class,  the  latter  a  pleasant-looking,  intelli-
gent woman  ;  and  George  Ford  (Buck  Ford),  a  man  of  about  28.  From
these  I  obtained  general  confirmation  of  the  various  incidents,  as  described
by  White,  Higgs,  &c.,  at  whicli  they  had  themselves  been  present ;  but  time
did  not  permit  of  much  cross-questioning,  nor  of  taking  down  their  evidence
in  full.

White's  house  has  been  built,  according  to  his  own  statement,  about
seven  years.  He  has  only  resided  in  it  three  years.  I  was  unable  to
discover  anything  about  the  former  occupants.  The  house  stands  at  the  end
of  a  piece  of  waste  land,  called  the  New  Building  Ground,  with  another
house  or  cottage  attached  ;  the  nearest  separate  building  being  a  public-
house,  about  lUO  yards  off.  With  that  exception,  there  are  no  other  buildings
within  about  200  yards.


Poltergeists.


47


The  following  sketch  will  illustrate  the  general  plan  of  the  house  : —


3

o


<  H


CO

|i


c


i;  O

8  ^


T  o

t-i  , — I  w


c

o

o
o

Q


O  CQ
O

t;  ^  <i>

"

cj  O

8

13  ti,  a>
^  CI
-°  be  £

cS-S  o


C  C


S|8
g  8--


Covered  passage,  open  at  both  ends,  separating
the  two  houses.


House  formerly  occupied  by  Wasses  and  Willises,
now  tenanted  by  the  former  only.


48


Franh  Podmore.


There  is  no  entrance  to  the  liousc  by  the  front,  the  front  door  being;
locked,  and  the  joints  secured  with  paper  from  the  inside.  Entrance  is.
obtained  by  a  covered  passage,  open  at  either  end,  which  separates  the  two'
houses,  and  gives  access  innnediately  to  a  yard,  surrounded  on  one  side  by
high  palings,  and  on  the  other  three  by  piggeries,  stables,  and  the  two-
houses.  The  plan  of  the  ground-floor  of  White's  house  is  apparent  from  the
accompanying  sketch.  The  kitchen  is  about  15  ft.  square.  The  upper  floor
is  divided  into  two  rooms,  the  back  one,  corresponding  to  the  kitchen,  being
vised  as  a  bedroom  for  Tom  and  the  children  ;  the  front  one  as  a  store-house
for  bacon,  horse- furniture,  and  various  odds  and  ends.  There  is  also
garret  above  this,  into  which  I  did  not  enter,  it  being  at  the  time  full  of
bacon  in  salt.  The  whole  house,  not  excepting  the  bedrooms,  is  hung  with
bacon,  the  very  staircase  being  lined  with  it,  so  that  I  had  to  draw  my  coat
close  to  me  in  going  up.  A  large  part  of  the  Ijacon,  as  I  was  told  by  White,
had  gone  bad  during  the  period  of  the  disturbances.

The  front  or  inner  room  on  the  ground-floor  was  an  ordinary  room,  like
all  the  rest  of  the  house  half  filled  with  bacon,  and  containing,  besides
bedroom  furniture,  a  large  beer-barrel  on  trestles  ;  everything  in  it  filthily
dirty.

I  looked  all  over  the  house  in  daylight,  but  could  discern  no  holes  in  the
walls  or  ceilings,  nor  any  trace  of  the  extensive  and  elaborate  machinery
which  would  have  been  required  to  produce  the  movements  by  ordinary
mechanical  means.


The  history  of  the  disturbances,  as  gathered  from  the  various  witnesses-
whom  I  interrogated,  appears  to  be  briefly  as  follows  : —

Nothing  remarkable  had  been  seen  or  heard  in  the  house  until  about  tlie
20th  or  21st  February,  1883,  when,  as  Mrs.  Wliite  was  alone  with  two  of  the
children  in  tlie  kitchen  one  evening,  washing  up  the  tea-things  at  the  table,
the  table  tilted  up  at  a  considerable  angle  ;  the  candle  was  upset,  and  the
wash-tub  only  saved  by  Mrs.  W.  holding  it.  She  positively  assured  me  that
she  exerted  no  pressure  whatever  upon  tlie  table,  and  the  whole  incident
struck  her  as  very  extraordinary. Her  husband  made  light  of  it  at  the  time.

On  Monday,  February  26th,  White  was  absent  from  home  until  the
Wednesday  afternoon.  On  the  Monday  his  wife  allowed  a  girl,  Eliza  Rose,
the  child  ot  an  imljecile  mother,  to  come  into  the  house  and  share  her  bed  at-
night.  White  returned  on  Wednesday  night,  but  left  on  the  following
morning  until  Friday  ;^fternoon.  During  that  one  night  the  girl  slept  on
the  squab.  On  Thursday  night,  March  1st,  at  about  11  p.m.,  Tom  White
went  up  to  bed — the  children  having  gone  up  some  hours  before.  At  abouf
11.30,  Mrs.  White  and  Eliza  Rose  being  then  alone  in  the  kitchen,  various
tilings,  such  as  a  corkscrew,  clothes-pegs,  a  .salt-cellar,  &c.,  which  had  been
in  the  kitchen  only  a  few  minutes  before,  came  tumbling  step  by  step  down
the  kitchen  stairs.  Tom  positively  and  solemnly  denied  having  thrown  the
articles,  and  the  mysteiy  was  increased  when,  at  least  20  minutes  after  he
had  gone  upstairs,  no  one  having  left  the  room  in  tlie  interval,  some  hot  coala
were  thrown  down.

On  the  following  night,  March  2nd,  at  about  the  same  hour — Wliite^
Mrs.  White,  and  Rose  being  in  the  kitclicn — a  noise  was  heard  as  of  some


Poltergeists.


49


one  coming  down  the  passage  between  the  two  houses,  and  stopping  just
outside  the  outer  door.  White  told  Rose  to  open  the  door,  but  she  was  too
friglitened  to  do  so.  Then  they  heard  a  surcingle  and  immediately  afterwards
some  pieces  of  carpet  throwai  down  the  stairs.  Then  followed  some  knives
and  forks  and  other  things.  The  girl  picked  them  uj)  ;  but  they  followed
still  faster.  White  then  left  the  room  to  go  up  to  Tom.  During  his  absence
one  of  the  ornaments  flew  off  the  mantelpiece  into  the  corner  of  the  room
near  the  door.  Nothing  was  seen  by  the  two  women  ;  but  they  heard  it  fall,
and  found  it  there.  Their  screams  summoned  White  down  ;  as  he  entered
the  room  his  candle  went  out,  and  something  struck  him  on  the  forehead.
The  girl  picked  up  the  candle — which  appears  to  have  left  the  candlestick —
and  two  new  ones  which  had  not  been  in  the  house  previously,  from  the
ground  ;  and  as  soon  as  a  candle  was  lit,  a  little  china  woman  left  the
mantelpiece,  and  fell  into  the  corner,  where  it  was  seen  by  White.  As  soon
as  it  was  replaced  it  flew  across  the  room  again,  and  was  broken.  Other
things  followed,  and  the  women  being  very  frightened,  and  White  thinking
that  the  disturbances  presaged  the  death  of  his  child,  who  was  very  ill  with
an  abscess  in  the  back,  sent  Tom  (who  was  afraid  to  go  alone)  with  Ford  to
fetch  the  doctor.  Mrs.  White  meanwhile  took  one  of  the  children  next  door.
Rose  approached  the  inner  room  to  fetch  another,  when  things  immediately
began  to  fly  about  and  smash  themselves  in  that  room.  After  this  all  appear
to  have  been  absent  from  the  house  for  a  short  time.  White  then  returned,
with  Higgs,  a  policeman,  and,  whilst  they  were  alone  in  the  kitchen,
standing  near  the  door,  a  glass  jar  flew  out  of  the  cuf)board  into  the  yard  ;  a
tumbler  also  fell  from  the  chest  of  drawers  in  the  kitchen,  when  only  Higgs
was  near  it.  Both  then  went  into  the  inner  room,  and  found  the  chest  of
drawers  there  turned  up  on  end  and  smashed.  On  their  return  they  found
Rose,  Wass,  and  Tom  White  in  the  kitchen  [?  and  Mrs.  Wass],  and  all  saw
a  cream  jug,  which  Rose  had  just  placed  on  the  bin,  fly  four  feet  up  in
the  air  and  smash  on  the  floor.  Dr.  Lloyd  and  Mrs.  White  then  entered,
and  in  the  presence  of  all  these  witnesses,  a  basin  was  seen  to  rise  slowly
from  the  bin — no  person  being  near  it  except  Dr.  Lloyd  and  Higgs.  It
touched  the  ceiling,  and  then  fell  suddenly  to  the  floor,  and  was  smashed.
This  was  at  12  p.m.  All  then  left  except  Tom  White  and  his  brother.
The  disturbances  continued  until  about  2  a.m.,  when  all  grew  quiet,  and
the  Whites  slept.  At  about  8  a.m.,  on  Saturday,  the  3rd,  the  disturbances
began  again.

White  left  the  kitchen  to  attend  to  some  pigs  ;  and,  in  his  absence,  Mrs.
White  and  Rose  were  left  alone  in  the  kitchen.  A  nearly  empty  port  wine
bottle  leaped  up  from  the  table  about  four  feet  into  the  air,  and  fell  into  a
bucket  of  milk,  standing  on  the  table,  from  which  Mrs.  White  was  filling
some  jugs,  &c.

Then  Currass  appears  to  have  been  attracted  to  the  scene.  He  entered
with  White,  young  Wass,  and  others,  and  viewed  the  inner  room.  They
had  but  just  returned  to  the  kitchen,  leaving  the  inner  room  emjjty,  and  the
door  of  communication  open,  when  the  American  clock,  which  hung  over  the
bed,  was  heard  to  sti'ike.  (It  had  not  done  so  for  18  months  previously.)
A  crash  was  then  heard,  and  Currass,  who  was  nearest  the  door,  looked  in^
and  found  that  the  clock  had  fallen  over  the  bed — about  four  feet  broad —

K


50


Frank  Podmore.


and  was  lying  on  the  flooi-.i  Shortly  afterwards —no  one  being  near  it — a
china  dog  flew  off  the  mantelpiece,  and  smashed  itself  in  the  corner  near  the
door. Currass  and  some  others  then  left.

Some  plates,  a  cream-jug,  and  other  things,  tlien  flew  up  in  the  air,  and
smashed  themselves  in  view  of  all  who  were  in  the  kitchen — Rose,  the
Whites,  and  Mrs.  Wass.

White  then  lay  down  on  the  sofa  ;  but  disturbances  continued  during  his
siesta.  In  particular,  some  pictures  on  the  wall  next  the  pantry  began  to
move,  but  were  taken  down  at  once  by  his  brother.  At  about  2  p.m.  a
Salvation  Army  woman  came  in,  and  talked  to  White.  Rose  only  was  with
them  in  the  kitchen.  A  candlestick  flew  from  the  bin,  and  fell  behind  the
Salvation  Army  woman,  as  she  stood  near  the  pantry  door.  She  left  the
room  in  terror.

Other  things  then  followed  at  intervals.  A  full  medicine  bottle  fell  without
breaking.  An  empty  medicine  bottle  and  a  lamp-glass  fell  and  broke
themselves.  It  was  then  about  4  p.m.,  and  White  could  stand  it  no  longer.
He  told  the  girl  she  must  go  ;  she  did  in  fact  leave  before  5  p.m.  After  her
departure  nothing  whatever  of  an  abnormal  character  took  place,  and  the
house  has  remained  undisturbed  up  to  the  present  time.

With  regard  to  the  positions  of  the  persons  present,  in  relation  to  the
objects  moved,  it  may  be  stated  generally  that  there  was  no  possibility  in
most  cases  of  the  objects  having  been  thrown  by  hand.  It  will  be  seen,  on
reference  to  the  depositions  of  the  witnesses  which  are  appended,  that  the
objects  were  frequently  moved  in  a  remote  corner  of  the  room,  or  even  in
an  adjoining  room.  Sloreover,  the  character  of  the  movements,  in  many
cases,  was  such  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  the  objects  having  been
thrown.

Of  course  the  obvious  explanation  of  these  occurrences  is  trickery  on  the
part  of  some  of  the  persons  present.  In  regard  to  this,  it  seems  to  me  a
matter  of  very  little  significance  that  most  of  the  educated  people  in  Worksop
believe  White  himself  to  have  caused  the  disturbance.  For  most  educated
persons,  as  we  know,  would  not  be  ready  to  admit  any  other  than  a
mechanical  explanatioia,  and  if  such  an  explanation  be  adopted.  White,  the
owner  of  the  house,  a  man  of  considerable  intelligence,  whose  record  was  not
entirely  clean,  and  who  was  himself  present  on  the  occasion  of  nearly  all  the
disturbances,  must  obviously  be  the  agent.  But  whilst  believing  White  to
be  at  the  bottom  of  the  matter,  none  of  the  persons  with  whom  I  conversed
were  prepared  with  any  explanation  of  his  modus  operandi.  That  he  should
have  thrown  the  things  was  universally  admitted  to  be  impossible.  And

1  It  will  be  noted  that  there  is  a  discrepancy  between  White's  and  Currass'
version  of  this  incident.  Mrs.  White,  however,  confirmed  her  husband's  account ;
and  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  statement  in  the  tc'xt  is  substantially  accurate.
Currass  is  more  likely  than  White  to  have  been  mistaken  in  his  recollection  of  White's
position  at  the  time  ;  and  Currass'  account  of  his  own  position  does  not  differ  greatly
from  that  given  by  White.  The  material  point,  and  one  on  which  both  witnesses  are
agreed,  is  that  no  one  saw  the  clock  fall.  Currass'  written  statement  is  not  clear  on
this  point,  but  he  told  me  vivd  voce  that  his  attention  was  drawn  to  what  had  taken
place  by  hearing  the  crash.  He  only  then  turned  round  and  saw  the  clock  lying  on
the  floor.— F.P.,  April,  1883.


Poltergeists.


51


beyond  this,  I  could  discover  little  more  than  an  unquestioning  faith  in  the
omnipotence  of  electricity.  No  one  professed  to  have  any  idea  of  what
mechanical  means  could  have  been  employed,  or  hov.-  they  could  have  been
adapted  to  the  end  in  view.  Still  less  did  any  one  pretend  to  have  discovered
any  indications  in  the  house  itself  of  any  machinery  having  been  used.
Moreover,  there  was  a  total  absence  of  any  apparent  motive  on  White's  part,
supposing  him  to  have  been  capable  of  effecting  the  movements  himself.
Whilst  he  was  unquestionably  a  considerable  loser — to  the  extent  of  nearly
£9  as  estimated  by  himself,  though  this  estimate  is  probably  exaggerated — by
the  articles  broken,  he  appears  to  have  reajjed  no  corresponding  advantage.
The  one  motive  which  I  heard  suggested — if  we  disregard  a  report  in  one
newspaper,  subsequently  contradicted  in  another,  to  the  effect  that  White
was  anxious  to  buy  the  house,  and  to  buy  it  cheap — was  that  he  produced
the  disturbances  in  fulfilment  of  a  sporting  bet.  But  I  saw  no  reason  to
regard  this  explanation  as  anything  but  a  scholium  evolved  by  some  ingenious
commentator  from  the  facts  themselves.

Again,  had  White  himself  been  the  principal  agent  in  the  matter,  it  is
clear  that  he  must  have  had  at  least  two  confederates,  for  he  was  not  himself
present  during  the  disturbances  on  the  Thursday  night — which  might,
indeed,  have  been  caused  by  his  brother  Tom — nor  was  either  he  or  his
brother  present  during  some  of  the  occurrences  on  the  following  day.  More-
over, these  confederates  must  not  only  have  been  extremely  skilful,  but
they  must  have  been  capable  of  more  than  ordinary  reticence  and  self-
control.  For  it  is  remarkable  that,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  statements
made  by  the  girl  Rose,  no  one  professed  to  have  heard  even  a  hint  from
White  himself,  from  his  brother,  or  from  any  other,  of  any  trickery  in  the
matter.

Moreover,  it  is  hard  to  conceive  by  what  mechanical  appliances,  under  the
circumstances  described,  the  movements  could  have  been  effected.  The
clock,  for  instance, — a  heavy  American  one — was  thrust  out  from  the  wall
in  a  horizontal  direction,  so  as  apparently  to  clear  a  4ft.  bedstead  which  lay
immediately  beneath  it,  and  the  nail  from  which  it  dejaended  remained  in
situ  on  the  wall.  The  objects  thrown  about  in  the  kitchen  moved  generally,
but  by  no  means  always,  in  the  direction  of  the  outer  door.  And  it  is
noticeable  that,  in  most  cases,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  been  thrown,  but
in  some  manner  borne  or  wafted  across  the  room  ;  for,  though  they  fell  on  a
stone  floor  15ft.  or  16ft.  distant,  they  were  often  unbroken,  and  were  rarely
shivered.  And  it  is  impossible  to  reconcile  the  account  given  of  the  move-
ment of  some  other  objects,  variously  described  as  "jerky,"  "  twirling, "  and
''turning  over  and  over,"  with  the  supposition  that  the  objects  depended
on  any  fixed  support,  or  were  in  any  way  suspended.

Lastly,  to  suppose  that  these  various  objects  were  all  moved  by  mechani-
cal contrivances  argues  incredible  stupidity,  amountiiig  almost  to  imbecility,
on  the  part  of  all  the  persons  present  who  were  not  in  the  plot.  That  the
movement  of  the  arms  necessary  to  set  the  machinery  in  motion  should
have  passed  unobserved  on  each  and  every  occasion  by  all  the  witnesses,  is
almost  impossible.  Not  only  so,  but  Currass,  Higgs,  and  Dr.  Lloyd,  all
independent  observers,  assured  me  that  they  examuaed  some  of  the  objects
which  had  been  moved,  immediately  after  the  occui'rence,  with  the  express

H  2


52


Frank  Podmore.


intention  of  discovering,  if  possible,  any  clue  to  an  explanation  of  the
matter,  but  entirely  failed  to  do  so.  These  men  were  not  over-credulous  ;
they  certainly  were  not  wanting  in  intelligence  ;  and  they  were  not,  any  of
them,  prepossessed  in  favour  of  Wliite.  But  they  each  admitted  that  they
could  discover  no  possible  explanation  of  the  disturbances,  and  were  fairly
bewildered  by  the  whole  matter.


Statement  of  Joe  White.  A  fair  witness.  I  think  that  he  always
intended  to  speak  the  truth,  but  that  occasionally  his  memory  proved
treacherous.  In  all  importants  points,  however,  he  was  corroborated
by  his  wife  (an  excellent  witness),  Higgs,  and  Currass. — F.  P.

I  returned  home  about  7  on  the  Friday  night  (March  2nd).  I  had  been
absent  from  home  on  Monday  and  Tuesday  nights  :  and  it  was  during  my
absence  that  my  wife  took  in  the  girl  Rose,  who  shared  her  bed  in  the  front
inner  room.  I  slept  at  home  on  Wednesday,  and  the  girl  then  slept  on  the
squab  in  the  kitchen.  I  left  again  on  Thursday  morning,  and  returned  as.
mentioned  on  the  Friday.

When  told  by  my  wife  and  Tom  what  had  happened  on  Thursday  night,  I
said  some  one  must  have  been  tricking,  and  didn't  think  much  more  about
it.  But  I  chaffed  the  lass  (Rose)  a  good  deal,  for  she  was  much  frightened.
About  11.30  on  Friday  evening,  when  my  wife,  the  girl,  and  I  were  alone
in  the  kitchen,  just  going  up  to  bed,  I  heard  a  noise  as  if  some  one  had
come  down  the  passage  between  the  two  houses,  and  were  standing  just
outside  our  door.  They  didn't  knock;  but  I  said  to  Rose,  "Go  and  see-
who's  there."  But  she  was  frightened  and  didn't  go.  Then  presently,  a
lot  of  things  came  rattling  down  the  stairs.  I  don't  know  what  came  first  :
but  a  lot  of  things  came — a  surcingle,  bits  of  carpet,  knives  and  forks,  a.
corkscrew,  &c.  The  girl  went  to  pick  them  up,  and  put  them  on  the  table,
and  just  as  fast  as  she  put  them  on  more  things  came  down.  Then  my  wife
said  to  me,  "  The  salt  cellar  came  down  last  night,  but  you  won't  have  it
down  to-night,  for  here  it  is  on  the  table."  She  was  using  it  at  the  time  for
salting  Tom's  dinner  for  next  day.  She  had  hardly  said  this,  when  the  salt
cellar  flew  off  from  the  table,  and  into  the  corner  near  the  outer  door.  Rose-
was  in  that  corner,  and  not  near  the  table  :  my  wife  was  at  the  table,  but
certainly  didn't  touch  the  cellar.  I  saw  the  thing  go,  though  I  couldn't
believe  my  eyes.  My  wife  didn't  see  it  go,  but  we  both  saw  it  as  it
struck  the  wall  in  the  corner.  All  the  salt  was  spilled  out  of  it.  I  fairly  couldn't
believe  mj'  own  eyes  ;  but  I  couldn't  help  thinking  it  must  be  Tom.  So  I
went  upstairs  to  him,  and  told  him  to  leave  off.  "  Thou'lt  frighten  our
Liz  to  death."  He  said,  "It's  not  me,  Joe.  I'll  take  my  oath  it  isn't.  I've
never  thrown  nowt  down. "  Whilst  I  was  still  talking  to  him,  I  heard  a
crash  downstairs  ;  and  the  women  screamed  ;  and  my  wife  cried,  "  Come
down,  Joe."  As  I  was  just  coming  into  the  x'oom  the  candle  which  I  held  in
my  hand  went  out — I  don't  know  how  at  all — and  we  were  left  in  darkness,
excejjt  for  the  firelight.  Then  something  hit  me  on  the  forehead,  and  I
cried  out,  "  Who  threw  that  ?  "  Then  there  was  a  crash  in  the  corner.  I
found  out  when  we  had  a  light  again  that  the  salt  cellar  had  fallen  again  into
the  corner,  and  bioken  itself.  Then  I  found  out  that  the  candle  was  not  in  the
candlestick,  and  asked  where  it  was. I  told  the  girl  to  look  for  it,  and  then


Foltergeists.


53


she  felt  among  the  things  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs  and  picked  up  three
candles,  two  of  them  quite  new.  We  had  only  had  tiro  candles  in  the  house
[Mrs.  Wliite  expressly  confirmed  this. — F.P.]  which  had  been  bought  just
before,  and  both  had  been  partly  burnt.  I  lit  the  old  ones  and  left  the  new
ones  on  the  table  ;  but  they  disappeared  afterwards,  and  I  have  never  seen
them  since.

^V]len  the  candle  was  lit  again,  I  saw  the  little  china  woman  jump  off
from  the  mantelpiece,  and  go  into  the  same  corner.  It  fell  on  its  side,  and
then  righted  itself,  and  stood  upright,  unbroken.  I  distinctly  saw  it  go
through  the  air  ;  it  passed  near  me  as  I  stood  about  the  middle  of  the  room.
None  of  us  were  near  the  mantelpiece.  I  picked  it  up,  and  presently  it  fell
into  the  corner  again,  and  broke  itself.  Then  the  tea-caddy  and  the  candle-
stick, all  from  the  mantelpiece,  followed.  Then  I  went  out  and  found
George  Ford  ("  Buck  "  Ford),  and  asked  him  to  fetch  Dr.  Lloyd  for  the
child — for  they  had  told  me  that  all  this  disturbance  meant  the  death  of  the
child,  who  was  very  ill  with  an  abscess  in  its  back.

Then  I  got  my  wife  to  take  the  little  lad  out,  and  lay  him  next  door,  he
lying  on  the  squab  in  the  kitchen  at  the  time.  [Mrs.  W.  denied  this,  and
said  he  was  in  the  inner  room. — F.  P.]  Rose  went  with  her,  and  they  took
all  the  children  with  them.  Before  going.  Rose  had  to  go  into  the  inner
room,  and  then  things  began  to  fly  about  there  and  make  a  disturbance.  All
had  been  quiet  there  before.

I  went  after  the  others  into  the  next  house  and  stayed  there  some  little
time.  When  I  came  back,  I  found  Police-constable  Higgs  in  the  kitchen.
He  and  I  were  alone  there.  (Rose  all  this  time  was  next  door. )  We  heard
a  crash  in  tlie  inner  room,  and  we  went  in — Solomon  Wass  and  Tom,  who
had  just  entered,  with  us,  and  Higgs  with  his  lantern, — and  we  found  the
chest  of  drawers  turned  up  on  end,  and  the  lustres  and  looking-glass,  and
everything  else  that  had  been  on  it,  in  pieces  on  the  floor.  Then  we  came
back  into  the  kitchen,  and  we  saw  the  cupboard  door  open,  and  a  big  glass
jar  flew  out,  and  flew  into  the  yard  and  broke  itself.  Also  some  things
flew  off  the  bm  at  the  side  of  the  door,  from  the  end  near  the  fire  ;  and  they
pitched  in  the  corner,  and  then  went  out  in  the  yard.  Things  often  pitched
on  the  floor  by  the  door  first,  and  then  got  up  again  and  flew  out  into  the
yard.

Then  Dr.  Lloyd  came  in  with  my  wife,  and  Higgs  showed  him  what  had
happened  in  the  inner  room.  Then  when  we  had  got  into  the  kitchen  again,
and  were  all  standing  near  the  door  of  the  inner  room — Higgs,  my  wife,  and
Tom,  and  Wass,  and  Lloyd — who  was  about  six  feet  from  the  bin,  and  the
nearest  to  it  of  our  party — we  all  saw  a  basin  which  was  lying  on  the  bin
near  the  door,  get  up  two  or  three  times  in  the  air,  rising  slowly  a  few
inches  or  perhaps  a  foot,  and  then  falling  plump.  [Mrs.  W.  corroborated
this,  and  so  did  Mr.  Wass,  the  next-door  neighbour,  who  was  also  present.
— F.  P.]  Then  it  got  up  higher,  and  went  slowly,  wobbling  as  it  went,  up
to  the  ceiling,  and  when  it  reached  the  ceiling,  it  fell  down  all  at  once,  and
broke  itseK.^ Dr.  Lloyd  then  looked  in  the  bin,  saying  the  devil  must  be

1  During  this  scene  the  room  was  lighted  by  one  candle,  Higgs's  lantern,  and
a  blazing  fire  ;  so  that  the  light  was  pretty  good.


54


Frank  Podmore.


in  the  house,  and  then  left.  All  the  others  shortly  afterwards  left,  Mrs.  W.,
Rose  and  the  children  stopj^ing  in  the  next  house.  Tom  and  I  sat  in  the
chair  on  either  side  of  the  fire  until  the  next  morning  at  8  a.m.  Things
kept  on  moving  every  now  and  then  until  about  2  a.m.,  and  then  was  all
quiet,  and  we  got  to  sleep  a  bit.  At  about  8  a.  m.  I  had  to  go  out  to  see
after  a  pig  which  had  been  pigging,  and  then  things  began  again  ;  and  a  lot  of
folks  came  in  to  see  about  it.  Currass  came  in,  and  I  went  with  him  into
the  inner  room  and  showed  him  the  chest  of  drawers,  he  and  I  alone  ;  we
came  out  leaving  the  door  open — I  am  quite  sure  it  was  open — and  I  was
sitting  near  the  fire,  and  Currass  was  just  inside  the  kitchen,  not  far  from
the  open  door,  when  Wass's  little  lad,  who  was  sitting  at  the  table,  said,
" There's  the  clock  striking,"  meaning  tlie  big  clock  which  hung  over  our
bed.  I  couldn't  hear  it,  and  I  said  it  was  a  lie.  Just  then  we  heard  a  crash,
and  I  asked  what  it  was,  and  Currass  looked  round,  and  said  it  was  the
American  clock  had  fallen  right  across  the  Ijed,  and  lay  on  the  floor  at  the
foot,  with  its  bottom  knocked  out.  Then  I  took  it  into  the  yard.  I  think —
iiideed,  I  am  sure,  that  Coulter  was  not  heve  when  all  this  happened.  The  other
clock  fell  and  was  broken,  but  whether  before  or  after  I  cannot  remember  ;
and  he  may  have  seen  that.  I  don't  remember  where  the  girl  Rose  was
when  the  American  clock  fell.  She  may  have  been  in  the  kitchen,  but  she
certainly  wasn't  in  the  imier  room  ;  no  one  was  in  that  room,  I  am  sure.  I
don't  remember  saying  just  at  tliat  time,  though  I  often  did  say,  that
wherever  she  went  the  things  smashed.

After  that,  Currass  and  1  and  one  or  two  others  were  standing  near  to
the  outer  door  talking,  when  the  china  dogs,  or  one  of  them,  flew  ofl'  the
mantelpiece  and  smashed  ;  and  lots  of  things  kept  on  flying  into  the  corner
and  smashing.  I  saw  one  of  the  dogs  leave  the  mantelpiece  and  go  through
the  air.  I  don't  remember  exactly  when  Coulter  came  ;  lie  may  have  been
here  when  the  china  dog  was  smashed,  but  I  don't  remember  that  he  was.
Then  a  cream  jug  fell  off"  the  table  ;  it  had  done  so  four  or  five  times  without
smashing.  At  last  I  filled  it  with  milk,  and  had  placed  it  on  the  bin,  when
it  suddenly  fell  off  and  smashed,  and  the  milk  was  all  spilt.

Then  I  was  tired,  and  lay  down  on  the  squab  ;  but  things  kept  moving.
I  was  told  some  pictures  on  the  wall  began  to  move,  but  I  didn't  see  them.
At  about  2  p.  m. ,  a  Salvation  Army  woman  came  in  and  was  talking  to  me  as
I  lay  on  the  squab  ;  she  stood  near  the  inner  door  ;  Rose  was  near  the  outer
door,  having  brought  in  some  carj^et.  There  were  two  candlesticks  on  the
bin,  at  the  end  near  the  fireplace.  Suddenly  something  dropped  behind  the
Salvation  Army  woman.  No  one  saw  it  going  through  the  air  ;  but  we
turned  round  and  found  that  it  was  one  of  the  brass  candlesticks.  It  was
half  balanced  on  the  small  end  where  the  candle  goes,  and  was  wobbling
about  on  tlie  end.  Then  the  Salvation  woman  said,  "I  must  go;"  and
she  went.

Then  a  little  after,  when  Rose  was  going  to  lay  down  the  carpet,  and  no
one  else  in  the  room,  a  medicine  bottle,  full,  fell  from  the  bin  on  to  the  roll
of  carpet,  about  three  or  four  yards  ofl^,  and  was  broken.  A  lamp-glass  had
fallen  several  times  without  breaking  ;  but  at  last  that  fell  and  broke.  Then
an  emj^ty  bottle  flew  oft'  from  the  mantelpiece.  That  was  one  of  the  last
things  that  happened. Well  then,  I  couldn't  stand  it  any  longer.  Wherever


Poltergeists.


55


the  lass  seemed  to  go,  things  seemed  to  fly  about.  So  I  said  to  her,  "  You'll
have  to  go."  She  began  to  roar.  But  my  wife  gave  her  some  tea,  and  she
■went.  That  was  between  4  and  5  p.m.,  very  soon  after  the  last  disturbance.
Nothmg  happened  after  she  left.  We  sat  up  in  tlie  kitchen  that  evening,  a
lot  of  us,  as  the  newspapers  tell  ;  but  nothing  happened  at  all.

I  have  been  in  the  house  three  years.  I  think  the  house  had  been  built
four  or  five  years  before  that.  Nothing  of  the  kind  had  ever  happened  in  it
before,  as  far  as  I  know,  except  that  once  I  thought  I  heard  some  one  moving
in  the  yard,  and  fancied  it  might  be  some  one  after  the  fo\vls  ;  but  there  was
no  one  there  ;  and  there  was  that  strange  tilting  of  the  table  when  my  wife
was  washing  up  the  things  about  a  week  before.

The  Was.ses  and  the  Willises  [Mrs.  Willis  is  Wass's  sister]  had  lived
together  in  the  next  house  ;  but  since  all  these  disturbances,  the  Willises
have  left  the  house  ;  but  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wass  are  still  there.

(Signed) Joseph  White.

New  Building  Ground,  Worksojj.
April  8th,  1883.


SiATEiMENT  OF  PoLiCE  CONSTABLE  HiGGS.  A  man  of  good  intelligence,  and
believed  to  be  entirely  honest.  Fully  alive,  as  becomes  his  official
position,  to  White's  indifferent  reputation,  but  unable  to  account  for
what  he  saw. — F.P.

On  the  night  of  Friday,  March  '2nd,  I  lieard  of  the  disturbances  at  Joe
White's  house  from  his  young  brother,  Tom.  I  went  round  to  the  house  at
11.55  p.m.,  as  near  as  I  can  judge,  and  found  .Joe  White  in  the  kitchen  of
his  house.  There  was  one  candle  lighted  in  the  room,  and  a  good  fire  burn-
ing, so  that  one  could  see  things  pretty  clearly.  The  cupboard  doors  were
open,  and  White  went  and  shut  them,  and  then  came  and  stood  against
the  chest  of  drawers.  I  stood  near  the  outer  door.  No  one  else  was  in  the
room  at  the  time.  White  had  hardly  shut  the  cupboard  doors  when  they
flew  open,  and  a  large  glass  jar  came  out  past  me,  and  pitched  in  the  yard
outside,  smashing  itself.  I  didn't  see  the  jar  leave  the  cupboard,  or  fly
through  the  air  ;  it  went  too  quick.  But  I  am  quite  sure  that  it  wasn't
thrown  by  White  or  any  one  else.  White  couldn't  have  done  it  without  my
seeing  him.  The  jar  couldn't  go  in  a  straight  line  from  the  cupboard  out  of
the  door  ;  but  it  certainly  did  go.

Then  White  asked  me  to  come  and  see  the  tilings  whicli  had  been  smashed
in  the  imier  room.  He  led  tlie  way  and  I  followed.  As  I  passed  the  chest
of  drawers  in  the  kitchen  I  noticed  a  tumbler  standing  on  it.  Just  after  I
passed  I  heard  a  crash,  and  looking  round,  I  saw  that  the  tumbler  had  fallen
on  the  ground  in  the  direction  of  the  fireplace,  and  was  broken.  T  don't
know  how  it  happened. There  was  no  one  else  in  the  room.

I  went  into  the  inner  room,  and  saw  the  bits  of  pots  and  things  on  the
floor,  and  then  I  came  back  with  White  into  the  kitchen.  The  girl  Rose  had
come  into  the  kitchen  during  our  absence.  She  was  standing  with  her  back
against  the  bm  near  the  fire.  There  was  a  cup  standing  on  the  bin,  rather
nearer  the  door.  She  said  to  me,  ' '  Cup '11  go  soon  ;  it  has  been  down  three
times  already."  She  then  puslied  it  a  little  farther  on  the  bin,  and  turned
round  and  stood  talking  to  me  by  the  fire. She  had  hardly  done  so,  when


56


Frank  Podmore.


the  cup  jumped  up  suddenly  about  four  or  five  feet  into  the  air,  and  then  fell
on  the  floor  and  smashed  itself.  White  was  sitting  on  the  other  side  of
the  fire.

Then  Mrs.  White  came  in  with  Dr.  Lloyd  ;  also  Tom  White  and  Solomon
Wass.  After  they  had  been  in  two  or  three  minutes,  something  else
happened.  Tom  White  and  Wass  were  standing  with  their  backs  to  the
fire,  just  in  front  of  it.  Eliza  Rose  and  Dr.  Lloyd  were  near  them,  with
their  backs  turned  towards  the  bin,  the  Doctor  nearer  to  the  door.  I  stood
by  the  drawers,  and  Mrs.  White  was  by  me  near  the  inner  door.  Then
suddenly  a  basin,  which  stood  on  the  end  of  the  bin  near  the  door,  got  up
into  the  air,  turning  over  and  over  as  it  went.  It  went  up  not  very  quickly,
not  as  quickly  as  if  it  had  been  thrown.  When  it  reached  the  ceiling  it  fell
plump  and  smashed.  I  called  Dr.  Lloyd's  attention  to  it,  and  we  all  saw  it.
No  one  was  near  it,  and  I  don't  know  how  it  happened.  I  stayed  about  ten
minutes  more,  but  saw  nothing  else.  I  don't  know  what  to  make  of  it  all.
I  don't  think  White  or  the  girl  could  possibly  have  done  the  things  which
I  saw.

(Signed) William  Higgs,  G.E.  30.

April  mil,  1883.


Statement  of  Arthur  Currass,  coal-miner  ;  a  Methodist,  and  apparently
a  very  steady,  respectable  man.  Believed  that  White  did  it,  but
couldn't  guess  liow  it  was  done. — F.P.

I  had  to  go  out  on  the  Saturday  morning  (March  3rd)  to  get  some  swill
for  the  pig,  about  8.15  a.m.  I  passed  by  Wliite's  liouse,  and  hearing  a
disturbance,  I  looked  over  the  railing.?,  and  White  said  to  me,  "There's
something  in  the  house  that's  breaking  all  afore  it."  I  asked  him  what  it  were,
and  he  told  me  to  come  and  see.  I  got  over  the  railings,  and  I  followed
White  into  his  own  house.  He  took  me  into  the  front  place  where  the  clock
was  hanging  over  the  bed's  head,  and  was  showing  me  a  nest  of  drawers,
where  his  suit  of  clothes  came  out  of  the  bottom  drawer  into  the  top  one  but
one.  While  I  was  looking  at  the  drawer,  and  the  broken  pots  there  was
lying  there,  the  clock  by  some  means  came  from  the  wall,  slantingwise  about
seven  feet,  and  dropped  clear  of  the  bed's  foot  on  to  the  floor.  It  had  been
fastened  up  on  the  wall,  near  the  bed's  head,  and  it  fell  between  the  bed's
foot  and  the  door.  I  said,  "  What  is  that '?  "  White  said,  "  It's  something
else  smashed."  I  turned  round  and  saw  that  it  was  the  clock.  The  nail  still
remained  in  the  wall.  The  girl  Rose  was  coming  out  of  the  kitchen  towards
the  inner  door,  but  had  not  got  quite  up  to  it.  She  seemed  to  be  much
frightened.  White  said  to  me,  "  It  doesn't  matter  a  damn  where  that  lass
goes,  there's  something  smashes. "  The  clock  was  taken  right  away  into  the
yard  and  placed  on  an  empty  cask,  and  there  it  stayed.  White  and  I  were
alone  in  the  front  room  when  the  clock  fell.  White  and  I  then  went  into
the  back  kitchen,  and  I  remained  about  four  feet  from  the  outer  door,  with
my  face  towards  the  fireplace.  I  then  saw  a  pot  dog  leap  from  the  mantel-
piece, and  come  within  about  five  feet  of  tlie  pantry  door  and  break,  passing
close  to  me.  There  was  nothing  attached  to  it,  and  there  was  no  one  near  it.
I  then  began  to  move  away,  and  just  then  Coulter  appeared.  This  would  be
between  8.30  and  8.45  a.m. Coulter  had  not  come  before  whilst  I  was  tliere,


Poltergeists.


57


and  certainly  had  not  been  present  when  the  clock  and  the  dog  were  broken.
The  clock  was  in  the  yard  when  he  came,  and  I  showed  it  him  there.
John  Street,  Worksop,  (Signed) Aethur  Currass.

April  8th,  1883.

I  hav^e  given  the  evidence  in  this  instance  at  considerable, — perhaps
tedious, — length,  because,  of  all  the  cases  which  have  been  investigated
by  representatives  of  the  Society,  it  is,  as  it  stands,  one  of  the  most
difficult  to  harmonise  with  any  explanatioa  by  ordinary  material  causes.
The  concordant  testimony  of  so  many  honest  and  fairly  intelligent
persons  certainly  produced,  as  will  have  been  seen  from  my  report,  a
strong  impression  on  my  mind  at  the  time.  Nor  do  I  see  i-eason  now
to  question  my  original  estimate  of  their  intelligence  and  good  faith.
If  my  verdict  on  the  Worksop  disturbances  in  1896  differs  from  that
which  I  gave  in  1883,  it  is  because  many  things  have  happened  since,
which  have  taught  us  to  discount  testimony  in  matters  of  this  kind.

For  it  will  be  seen  that  the  value  of  these  reports,  as  testifying
to  the  operation  of  some  supernormal  agency,  depends  wholly  upon  two
assumptions,  first,  that  the  various  witnesses — imperfectly  educated
persons,  not  skilled  in  accurate  observation  of  any  kind — correctly
described  what  they  saw  :  and,  second,  that  after  an  interval  of  more
than  five  weeks,  during  which  time  the  experiences  had  been  discussed
and  compared  and  gaped  at  by  every  village  fireside,  and  in  the
public  press,  they  correctly  remembered  what  they  described.  But
in  the  course  of  the  13  years  which  have  passed  since  I  wrote  my
report,  we  have  received  some  striking  object-lessons  demonstrating
the  incapacity  of  the  ordinary  unskilled  observer  to  detect  trickery
or  sleight-of-hand  :  and  we  have  learnt  to  distrust  the  accuracy  of
the  unaided  memory  in  recording  feats  of  this  kind,  especially  when
performed  under  circumstances  of  considerable  excitement.

And,  indeed,  if  we  scrutinise  the  account  as  it  stands,  we  shall
find  various  discrepancies  and  contradictions  in  the  evidence.  (1)  Thus,
according  to  White,  Higgs  and  he  went  into  the  front  room  first,  to
see  the  damage  done  there,  and  on  their  return  to  the  kitchen  a  glass
jar  flew  out  of  the  cupboard.  But  according  to  Higgs'  version,  it  was
after  seeing  the  glass  jar  fly  through  the  air  that  White  and  he  went
into  the  inner  room.  (2)  White's  account  is  that  two  or  three
witnesses  were  present  when  the  glass  jar  flew  out ;  Higgs  says,  "  that
no  one  else  was  in  the  room  at  the  time."  (3j  There  seems  to  be  a
doubt  as  to  whether  Rose  entered  the  kitchen  during  Higgs'  visit.
White  does  not  mention  her  entrance  at  all.  Higgs  says  they  found  her
in  the  kitchen  on  their  return  from  the  inner  room.  (4)  Currass  says
he  was  in  the  inner  room  on  the  morning  of  the  3i'd  when  the  clock  fell.
White  says  that  Currass  was  in  the  kitchen. (5)  Again,  White  cannot


58


Frank  Podmore.


remember  where  Rose  was  at  the  time  of  the  incident ;  whilst  Currass
says  that  she  was  near  the  inner  door.  (6)  White  and  Currass  agree
that  Coulter  was  not  present  when  the  American  clock  fell  and  was
smashed.  Now  Coulter,  whom  I  saw,  and  who  impressed  me  favourably
as  an  honest  man,  stated  that  he  was  present  when  the  clock  fell,  and
also  during  the  immediately  succeeding  disturbances  in  the  kitchen.^

Such  are  some  of  the  discrepancies  which  appear  in  the  evidence
even  as  prepared  and  taken  down  from  the  lips  of  the  witnesses  by  a
too  sympathetic  reporter.  It  is  probable  that  more  and  more  serious
discrepancies  and  contradictions  would  have  been  found  if  there  had
been  no  speculation  and  consultation  and  comparison  in  the  interval  of
five  weeks ;  and  if  each  witness  at  the  end  of  that  time  had  written
an  independent  account  of  the  incidents.

It  would  be  idle,  in  the  circumstances  and  at  this  distance,  to
speculate  on  the  real  cause  of  these  disturbances.  But  it  is  to  be  noted
that  Eliza  Rose — the  daughter  of  an  imbecile  mother — was  present,  by
all  accounts,  at  most  of  the  disturbances ;  that  they  began  shortly  after
her  entrance  to  the  cottage  and  ceased  with  her  departure  ;  and  that  she
was  regarded  by  AVhite  himself  as  the  prime  cause  of  all  that  happened.
And  if  one  apparently  honest  witness  could  describe  himself  as  having
seen  occurrences  that  he  knew  of  only  by  hearsay  ;  if  others  could  be
mistaken  as  to  the  sequence  of  important  events,  and  the  presence  or
absence  at  given  times  of  particular  persons ;  it  is  perhaps  not
unreasonable  to  conjecture  that  the  statements  made  by  White  and
others  that  some  abnoi'mal  movements  took  place  during  Rose's
absence  may  have  been  incorrect,  and  that  Rose  herself,  as  the
instrument  of  mysterious  agencies,  or  simply  as  a  half-witted  girl
gifted  with  abnormal  cunning  and  love  of  mischief,  may  have  been
directly  responsible  for  all  that  took  place.

In  the  next  case  we  have  clear  evidence  that  some,  at  least,  of  the
phenomena  which  puzzled  those  who  witnessed  them,  and  ga.\e  rise  to
suspicions  of  preternatural  agency,  were  due  simply  to  sleight-of-hand  on
the  part  of  a  young  uneducated  village  girl.

II.— The  Wem  Case.

The  subjoined  extract  from  a  daily  paper  gives  an  account  of  some
mysterious  disturbances  at  a  Shropshire  village,  in  November,  1883.

"  A  series  of  occurrences  which  have  caused  great  excitement  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Leebotwood,  and  no  small  speculation  and  wonder  in  the

1  Coulter's  evidence  was  omitted  from  the  account  given  in  the  text,  originally
printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  Society,  as  I  did  not  at  the  time  sufficiently  realise  its
importance,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  man  was  telling  a  deliberate
falsehood.


Poltergeists.


59


adjacent  town  of  Shrewsbury,  have  just  taken  place.  At  a  secluded  farm
called  '  The  Woods, '  which  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  Toppington  and
nine  or  ten  from  Shrewsbury,  resides  a  farmer  named  Hampson,  and  about
four  o'clock  one  afternoon,  at  the  latter  end  of  last  week,  the  servants  were
in  the  kitchen  of  the  farmhouse,  preparing  tea.  On  the  fire  was  a  saucepan
in  which  were  some  eggs  boiling,  and  this  'jumped,'  as  the  girls  declai-ed,
olf  the  fire,  while  the  tea  things  were  thrown  from  the  table  and  smashed.
Some  of  the  hot  cinders  were  also  thrown  out  of  the  grate,  and  set  fire  to
some  clothes  in  a  basket.  So  far,  the  explosion  of  some  material  in  the  grate
might  have  been  sufficient  to  account  for  the  occurrence  ;  but  what  is  said  to
have  occurred  subsequently  vnW  not  bear  such  an  explanation.  On  the  table
was  a  paraffin  lamp,  with  a  globe,  and  the  globe  was  '  lifted  '  off  the  stand
and  thromr  across  the  room,  the  lamp  itself  being  left  on  the  table.  A  mat
under  the  lamp  took  fire,  and  the  inmates  of  the  house  becoming  alarmed,
then  ran  out  for  the  neighbours.  Among  others  who  went  to  the  house  was
a  Mr.  Lea,  an  adjacent  farmer,  who  states  that  wlien  he  approached  the  house
it  seemed  as  if  all  the  upstairs  rooms  were  on  fire,  '  as  there  was  such  a  light
in  the  windows.'  Mr.  Hampson  consequently  went  upstairs  and  made  an
examination,  but  everything  there  was  safe,  and  in  the  usual  order.  As
things  were  continuing  to  jump  about  the  kitchen  in  a  manner  which  was
altogether  inexplicable,  and  many  were  getting  damaged,  Hampson  decided
to  remove  everything  that  was  in  that  apartment  outside.  He  accordingly
took  down  a  barometer  from  the  wall,  when  something  struck  him  on  the
leg,  and  a  loaf  of  bread  which  was  on  the  table  was  thrown  by  some
invisible  means  and  hit  him  on  the  back.  A  volume  of  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  '
was  thrown  or  '  j  umped  '  through  the  window,  and  a  large  ornamental
sea-shell  went  through  in  a  similar  fashion.  In  the  parlour  a  sewing  machine
was  thrown  about  and  damaged,  and  has  had  to  be  sent  to  be  repaired.
The  nurse-girl  was  nursing  the  baby  by  the  fire  when  some  fire  leapt  from  the
grate,  and  the  child's  hair  was  singed  and  its  arms  burnt.  The  girl  was  so
alarmed  that  she  set  off  to  a  neighbour's,  and  on  the  way  there  her  clothes
took  fire,  and  had  to  be  torn  from  her  body.  During  the  evening,  while  the
girl  was  at  the  neighbour's,  a  plate  which  she  touched  while  having  her
supper  was  apparently  thrown  on  the  floor,  and  the  pieces  were  picked  up
by  some  unseen  agency,  and  put  in  the  centre  of  the  table.  Other  occur-
rences are  said  to  have  taken  place  in  the  neighbour's  house  while  the  nurse-
gii'l  was  there,  the  whole  lasting  considerably  over  half  an  hour.  As  no  one
could  explain  the  cause  of  what  they  witnessed,  the  police  were  communicated
witli,  and  made  full  inquiries  from  the  inmates  of  the  house  and  others,  the
result  being  that  they  ordered  the  coal  to  be  consumed  in  the  open  air,
believing  it  to  contain  some  explosive  substance,  but  it  burnt  quietly  away.
Those  who  witnessed  these  occurrences  tell  a  marvellously  straiglitforward
story,  and  curiously  enough  none  of  them  attributed  it  to  any  supernatural
cause,  as  might  have  been  expected  in  a  quiet  country  locality,  but  they  say
it  was  '  something  in  the  coal  or  in  tlie  air, '  while  one  or  two  fancy  it  was
some  electrical  phenomena."

Subsequently  the  same  paper  states  their  "Shrewsbury  correspondent
telegraphs  that  he  paid  another  visit  to  Weston  Lullingfield  yesterday,  and
was  informed  that  on  Saturday  and  Sunday  there  were  more  extraordinary


60


Frank  Podmore.


manifestations  in  connection  with  the  girl  Emma  Davies.  Police-constable
Taylor,  of  the  Shropshire  Constabulary,  remained  in  the  house  until  late  on
Saturday.  During  the  time  he  was  there  the  fender  moved  from  the  fire-
place into  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  on  lieing  replaced,  came  forward  a
second  and  third  time.  A  cushion  placed  at  the  back  of  a  chair  on  which  the
girl  sat  several  times  flew  across  the  room,  and  all  the  stitches  in  her  apron
came  undone,  followed  later  on  by  the  buttons  upon  her  dress  being
wrenched  off.  Miss  Maddox,  the  village  schoolmistress,  made  a  statement
to  the  correspondent  to  the  eifect  that  she  called  to  see  the  girl,  a  former
pupil,  on  Saturday  evening,  and  had  not  long  been  seated  when  she  observed
both  the  chair  and  the  girl  rise  from  the  floor.  She  took  the  girl  on  her  lap
and  sat  in  the  chair  herself,  and  immediately  the  girl's  boots  flew  ofi',  and
although  replaced,  the  circumstance  was  twice  repeated.  On  Sunday  a  box
in  a  bedroom  was  hurled  across  the  room,  and  a  number  of  cups  and  saucers
were  smashed."

Report  by  Mii.  F.  S.  Hughes.

December  3rd,  1883.

During  tlie  first  and  second  weeks  of  November,  1883,  accounts  were  to
be  seen  in  the  London  and  local  papers  of  strange  phenomena  stated  to  have
taken  place  at  Wood  s  Farm,  near  Wem,  and  other  houses  in  the  neighbour-
hood.

These  phenomena  could  not  apparently  be  accounted  for  by  ordinary
physical  laws,  and  it  seemed  therefore  very  desirable  that  the  stories
should  be  thoroughly  sifted  on  behalf  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.

The  scene  of  the  first  series  of  these  phenomena  was  Wood's  Farm,
and  the  time,  the  afternoon  of  Thursday,  November  1st.  A  nurse-girl  at
the  farm,  named  Emma  Davies,  was  connected  in  some  way  with  the
disturbances  by  the  occupiers,  and  she  was  accordingly  dismissed  and  sent
to  her  home  at  a  village  called  Weston  Lullingfield,  about  five  miles  off.
Here  the  singular  phenomena  appeared  shortly  after  her  arrival,  and  the
affair  began  to  attract  very  general  attention.

On  Friday,  the  9th,  the  girl,  who  seems  to  have  got  into  a  very  nervous
state,  was  taken  to  a  branch  establishment  at  Wem,  of  Dr.  Corke,  of
Baschurch,  and  kept  in  strict  seclusion,  at  the  same  time  being  closely
watched  by  the  housekeeper.  Miss  Turner.

On  the  following  Thursday  the  Daily  Nnrs  and  the  Daily  Telegraph  both
had  long  reports,  stating  that  the  girl  had  confessed  to  having  wrought  all
these  wonders  by  very  ordinary  sleight-of-hand.

As,  however,  these  accounts  did  little  to  explain  away  the  phenomena
which  had  taken  place  accoi'ding  to  the  previous  newspaper  reports,  I  was
asked  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  to  go  down  to  Shropshire  to
investigate  the  evidence  on  which  the  original  stories  rested,  and  to  see
whether  they  could  really  be  accounted  for  satisfactorily  by  the  girl's  alleged
trickery.

On  Saturday,  the  17t]i  November,  I  proceeded  to  Wem,  and  shortly  after
my  arrival  called  at  the  doctor's  house,  and  saw  Miss  Turner,  Dr.  Mackey,
the  assistant  of  Dr.  Corke,  not  being  at  home.


Poltergeists.


61


Miss  Turner  is  a  lady  of  about  30  years  of  age,  who  appeared  to  be  a
practical,  shrewd  person,  not  at  all  excitable,  and  she  gave  her  evidence  in  a
very  straightforward  manner.

Callmg  again,  later  on  in  the  evening,  I  saw  Dr.  Mackey,  wlio  is  a  young
Scotchman,  of  about  27  or  28,  and  who  seemed  nervously  anxious  not  to  give
any  evidence  about  which  he  had  any  doubt.

I  am  quite  confident  that  the  girl  was  well  treated  while  living  with  them,
and  was  subjected  to  no  undue  influence.

I  made  notes  of  the  evidence  they  were  able  to  give  me  on  the  subject,
and  obtained  their  signatures  to  my  account  after  they  had  heard  it  read  to
them.

Briefly  !;heir  account  is  : — That  certain  manifestations  took  place,  similar
in  character  to  those  that  preceded  them,  and  for  two  or  three  days  they
were  quite  unable  to  detect  any  fraud,  though  no  manifestation  ever  took
place  when  the  girl  was  not  in  such  a  position  that  she  might  have  produced
them  by  ordinary  trickery.

Thus,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Mackey  and  Miss  Turner  a  piece  of  bread
jumped  across  the  room,  the  girl  not  being  actually  seen  to  throw  it.  On
another  occasion  when  Miss  Turner  had  left  the  room,  the  girl  suddenly
screamed,  and  when  Miss  T.  returned,  a  pair  of  slippers  were  on  the  sofa
which  had  just  before  been  seen  on  the  hearthrug.  Again,  when  Miss  T.  had
just  turned  her  back  to  the  girl,  the  usual  scream  was  heard,  and  turning
round  Miss  T.  saw  a  bucket  in  the  air  descending  to  the  ground.  A  knife
on  another  occasion  was  thrown  across  the  room,  being  in  the  air  when  Dr.
Corke's  servant  was  entering  the  room.

On  Tuesday  morning,  however.  Miss  Turner  was  in  an  upper  room  at
the  back  of  the  house,  and  the  servant  of  the  establishment  and  Emma
Davies  were  outside,  Emma  having  her  back  to  the  house,  and  unaware  that
she  was  observed.  Miss  Turner  noticed  that  Emma  Davies  had  a  piece  of
brick  in  her  hand  held  behind  her  back.  This  she  threw  to  a  distance  by  a
turn  of  the  wrist,  and  while  doing  so,  screamed  to  attract  the  attention  of
the  servant,  who,  of  course,  turning  round,  saw  the  brick  in  the  air,  and
was  very  much  frightened.  Emma  Davies,  looking  round,  saw  that  she  had
been  seen  by  Miss  Turner,  and  apparently  imagining  that  she  had  been
found  out,  was  very  anxious  to  return  home  that  night.

Miss  Turner  took  no  notice  of  the  occurrence  at  the  time,  but  the  next
morning  (Wednesday)  she  asked  the  girl  if  she  had  been  playing  tricks,  and
the  girl  confessed  that  she  had,  and  went  through  some  of  the  performances
very  skilfully,  according  to  Miss  Turner's  account.

Later  on  in  the  day  she  repeated  these  in  the  presence  of  the  doctor.
Miss  Turner,  and  the  two  reporters  from  London,  but  Miss  Turner  said
nothing  like  so  well.

Dr.  Mackey  further  gave  me  an  account  of  a  conversation  which  he  had
had  with  Emma  Davies,  chiefly  with  reference  to  some  of  the  extraordinary
stories  that  had  appeared  in  the  papers.

One  of  these  stories  was  that  after  the  girl's  return  to  her  father's  house,
she  was  in  the  habit  of  assisting  her  sister  in  household  work.  One  day  they
were  putting  clothes  out  on  the  hedge  to  dry,  but  those  placed  by  Emma
Davies  refused  to  remain  on  the  hedge,  and  "jumped  over  into  the  road."


62


Frank  Podmore.


With  reference  to  this,  the  statement  of  Emma  Davies,  as  reported  by
Dr.  Mackey,  was  as  follows  :  "They  put  the  clothes  on  the  hedge,  and  then
returned  to  the  house,  nothing  unusual  having  occurred.  On  going  outside
again,  the  linen  was  found  on  the  ground,  two  little  boys  being  seen
running  away. "  She  was  quite  confident  that  she  did  not  see  the  things
going  oS  the  hedge.

Several  of  the  other  stories  were  similarly  disposed  of  by  her.  Thus,
when  the  windows  were  broken  at  her  father's  cottage  and  the  farm,  there
were  a  lot  of  men  and  boys  standing  about  outside.

The  girl  always  denied  that  she  had  produced  the  various  phenomena  at
Wood's  Farm  and  Weston  Lullingfield,  but  Dr.  Mackey  thought  that  .she
had  been  carefully  primed  not  to  "let  on  "  about  this.

Dr.  Mackey  added  that  the  girl's  physical  and  mental  condition  was
quite  normal,  .so  far  as  he  could  ascertain.

On  the  following  morning  I  drove  over  to  Wood's  Farm,  which  is  about
five  or  six  miles  distant  from  Wem,  and  there  obtained  the  evidence  of  the
following  witnesses  : —

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hampson,  their  servant  girl,  Priscilla  Evans,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Lea,  of  a  neighbouring  farm,  and  the  waggoner  at  Wood's  Farm,
Thomas  Williams.

Mr.  Hampson  was  a  very  intelligent  man,  who  unfortunately  was  not  at
home  at  the  time  of  the  occurrences,  and  only  had  evidence  on  some  minor
details.

Mrs.  Hampson  was  very  diffuse  in  her  account,  and  appeared  rather
credulous. She  looks  about  30  years  of  age.

The  girl,  Pri.scilla  Evans,  is  about  16,  very  voluble,  but  gave  her
evidence  in  a  very  straightforward  manner,  giving  me  the  impression  that
she  was  telling  me  what  she  believed  to  be  the  truth.  She  had  an  excellent
character  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hampson  ;  and  it  is  mere  justice  to  her  to
state  that  the  charge  of  complicity  with  Emma  Davies'  trickery,  brought
against  lier  by  the  reporters  of  the  Daily  Neivs  and  the  Daily  Telegraph — on
the  ground  of  a  supposed  confession  of  the  waggoner  Williams,  that  he
had  taught  his  fellow  servants  "how  to  shift  things  about" — completely
broke  down  under  my  examination.  The  waggoner  denies  that  he  ever  said,
or  could  have  said,  anything  of  the  sort  ;  and  his  denial  was  entirely  con-
firmed by  Mr.  Belliss,  the  innkeeper,  who  drove  the  reporters  over  from
Wem,  and  himself  suggested  the  questions  put  to  the  waggoner  which  led
to  the  reporters'  mistake.

I  could  not  regard  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lea  as  good  witnesses,  since  their  firm
conviction  of  the  devil's  agency  in  the  matter  rendered  them  too  much
indisposed  to  accept  any  ordinary  explanation  of  any  of  the  occuri'ences  to
which  they  referred,  and  they  did  not  bring  forward  any  cases  of  manifesta-
tions which  took  place  when  Emma  Davies  was  undeniably,  according  to  my
opinion,  in  such  a  position  that  she  could  not  have  produced  them.

A  rough  drawing  of  the  pi-emises  will  show  the  relative  position  of  the
parlour,  kitchen,  and  dairy,  and  will  be  useful  in  estimating  the  value  of  the
evidence.

Accoi'ding  to  Mrs.  Hampson's  account,  the  family,  with  the  exception  of
Mr.  Hampson,  were  occupying  the  parlour  on  Wednesday,  October  31st,


Poltergeists.


63


when  suddenly  coal  was  seen  to  be  "  alive  "  in  various  parts  of  the  room,
apparently  having  flown  out  of  the  fire.  Nothing  unusual  was  observed  that
■day  in  addition  to  this,  the  fire  having  been  removed  to  the  kitchen,  and
coke  instead  of  coal  being  employed.

The  next  day,  about  four  p.m.,  the  family  were  about  to  sit  down  to
tea,  when  the  saucepan  on  the  fire  jumped  off,  and  coal  began  to  fly  about.
A  cup  and  .saucer  "went  off"  the  table,  by  unseen  agency,  and  they  were
all  so  frightened  that  E.D.  was  sent  off  to  Lea's  farm  for  help.  Mrs.  H.
and  Priscilla  retreated  to  the  dairy,  whence,  it  will  be  seen  on  reference  to
the  map,  they  had  a  full  view  of  the  kitchen  table.  They  both  state  that
they  saw  the  crockery  rise  up  otf  the  table  and  fall  to  the  ground.  The
articles  did  not  go  off  all  at  once,  but  one  or  two  at  a  time.  They  are  quite
certain  that  this  happened  while  Emma  Davies  was  absent,  fetching  Mrs.
Lea  from  the  neighbouring  farm.


I  H


I  H  I


I  H  I


H


G


D


M


E


A Entrance  to  house.
B  Dairy.

C,  E,  F  Doorways.
D  Cupboard.

I Staircase  leading  to  upper  rooms.
H  H  Windows.
K  Kitchen  Table.
Kitchen.
Parlour.

Place  where  Evans  was  standing  when  the

crockery  came  out  of  the  cupboard.
Emma  Davies'  position.
Indicates  the  direction  in  which  the  crockery
came  out  of  the  cupboard.


G
L
M-

-N


H  I


Some  of  the  crockery,  on  the  return  of  Emma  Davies  and  Mrs.  Lea,
■was  placed  on  the  table,  but  again  went  off.  Mrs.  Lea  and  Mrs.  Hampson
then  deemed  it  desirable  to  go  for  further  assistance,  the  girls  being  left
behind.  This  ends  Mrs.  Hampson's  evidence  as  regards  the  occurrences  of
that  evening  at  the  farm.

Mrs.  Hampson  also  stated  that  in  the  morning  the  baby  was  in  its  cradle
inside  the  parlour,  where  it  had  been  placed  to  be  out  of  range  of  the  fire.
Mrs.  Hampson  and  the  girls  were  in  the  kitchen,  and  E.  D.  went  in  to  see
after  the  baby,  returning  presently,  screaming,  saying  that  the  baby  was  on
fire. On  the  various  occasions  (three  or  four)  that  the  baby  was  on  fire,


64


Frank  Pochnore.


E.  D.  was  always  the  one  to  discover  it ;  and  she  always  had  time  to  cause
the  fire,  according  to  Mrs.  Hampson.  Once  she  was  seen  to  be  shaking  the
child's  pinafore,  which  was  alight,  although  Mrs.  H.  had  carefully  warned
her  always  to  "crush  "  fire  out.

Further,  on  one  occasion  wlien  E.  D.  was  alone  in  tlie  parlour,  during
the  manifestations,  a  noise  as  of  a  striking  match  was  heard,  and  when  Mrs.
H.  entered  tlie  room,  there  was  a  distinct  smell  of  brimstone,  and  a  used,
match  was  found  at  the  baby's  head.

Priscilla  Evans  added  some  information  with  regard  to  articles  found
on  fire,  whicli  was  corroborated  by  Mr.  Lea.  Mrs.  Hampson  was  not
present,  I  believe,  when  they  were  discovered.

It  is  well  to  note  that  E.  D.  was  always  the  person  to  discover  anything
on  fire,  and  none  of  the  witnesses  could  state  positively  that  on  any  single
occasion  was  she  in  the  company  or  in  sight  of  any  one  when  she  made  the
discovery.

One  of  the  baby's  caps,  of  a  kind  of  woollen  material,  and  a  paper  mat
were  found  in  flames,  the  flames  being  very  high  and  white,  and  the  articles
apparently  burning  were  very  little  singed  when  the  flames  were  ex-
tinguished. The  cap  and  mat,  which  had  both  been  exposed  to  the  air  for
some  time,  were  shown  to  me,  and  I  cut  off  a  bit  of  the  cap,  whicli  I  dipped
in  paraffin,  which  was  largely  used  at  the  farm.  Ligliting  it,  she,  Priscilla.
E.,  declared  it  presented  exactly  the  appearance  of  the  former  blaze,  and
the  bit  of  cap  was  of  course  little  singed,  when  the  flame  was  extinguished.
Mr.  Hampson  stated  that  the  cap,  when  shown  to  him  on  his  leturn,  had  a
greasy  feel.

The  most  important  piece  of  evidence  that  the  girl  Evans  contributed  is,
that  when  Mrs.  H.  and  Mrs.  Lea  had  left  the  house,  the  cupboard  opposite  the
dairy  door  was  apparently  locked  by  one  of  them,  but  afterwards  flew  open,
whereupon  E.  D.,  going  to  close  it,  became,  as  it  were,  rooted  to  the  spot.
Priscilla  tried  to  pull  her  away,  but  the  girl  shrieked  and  said  she  couldn't
move.  The  cupboard  was  well  stocked  with  crockery,  and  these  things  pro-
ceeded to  come  out  of  the  cupboard  two  or  three  at  a  time,  generally  in  the
direction  shown  by  the  arrow  in  the  diagram.  The  girls  occupied  the  positions
indicated  in  the  same  diagram.  Priscilla  states  that  E.  D.  had  her  arms
folded  all  the  time,  and  that  she,  Priscilla,  watched  her  closely,  and  was-
certain  that  she  did  not  pull  the  things  out.  I  should,  however,  point  out
that  it  must  have  been  nearly  dark  at  tlie  time.

With  regard  to  the  statement  that  E.  D.  was  put  up  to  these  tricks  by
the  waggoner,  there  appears— as  I  have  already  said — no  evidence  for  this,
and  it  is  almost  absurd  to  suppose  a  heavy  rustic  capable  of  giving  lessons
in  legerdemain.

Priscilla  and  E.  D.  appear  to  have  been  on  rather  bad  terms,  and  none
of  the  people  at  the  farm  gave  E.  D.  a  good  character.

Continuing  my  journey  I  arrived  at  Weston  Lullingfield,  a  village
about  five  miles  from  Wood's  Farm.  I  first  called  on  Miss  Maddox,  a.
woman  of  about  40,  who  had  been  training  the  youth  of  Weston  for
the  last  12  years  ("come  December").  She  is  rather  excitable,  and  a.
woman  who  would,  I  think,  be  easily  imposed  ujjon. Her  evidence  is  &


Poltergeists.


65


remarkable  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  the  sensational  newspaper
reports  dwindle  down  into  the  commonplace.

She  states  that  when  she  visited  the  girl,  there  were  about  20  people
■standing  and  sitting  about  the  room,  and  the  girl  E.  D.  was  wriggling  about
on  her  chair  in  a  state  of  great  excitement.  Miss  M.  is  positive  that  the
chair  rose  oS  the  ground  about  a  foot,  but  this  I  imagine  a  clever  child
could  accomplish  by  a  clever  "  kick  off."

Miss  M.  then  took  the  child  on  her  lap,  and  the  child's  boots  flew  off,
"but  whether  they  were  securely  fastened  on  her  feet,  or  downtrodden  at
the  heels,  she  cannot  say.

The  only  further  evidence  that  Miss  M.  had  on  the  subject  was  that  she
saw  a  table  (up  against  a  wooden  partitior.)  moving  up  and  down  rather
xiolently,  without,  she  thought,  any  one  being  near.  She  added  that  the
partition  seemed  "bulged  in,"  so  that  somebody  might  have  been  pushing
it  on  the  other  side  of  the  partition.

She  gave  E.  D.  a  good  character.

I  then  visited  the  girFs  home,  but  could  not  see  the  girl.  The  father,
"however,  came  out  and  spoke  to  me,  but  he  himself  had  seen  nothing.

The  rustics  of  the  village,  whom  I  afterwards  interviewed,  were  nearly
all  unable  to  sign  their  names,  and  their  evidence  is  hardly  worth  recording.
One  man,  who  was  present  with  Police-constable  Taylor  when  the  fender
performed  feats,  states  that  Taylor  was  sitting  on  one  side  of  the  fire,  and
E.  D.  on  the  other,  but  he  could  not  say  how  the  fender  "  came  forward,"
whether  parallel  to  itself,  or  only  in  such  a  manner  that  the  girl  might  have
pushed  it  out  with  her  foot.

All  the  other  evidence  at  this  place  was  of  the  same  unsatisfactory
nature.

.  The  next  day  I  drove  over  with  Mr.  Maitland  to  try  and  see  Emma
Davies,  but  she  would  not  speak,  and  was  taken  upstau's.  After  the  lapse
of  an  hour  she  reappeared,  but  we  could  not  get  anything  out  of  her.

Summing  up,  I  consider  that  there  is  abundant  evidence  of  some
trickery  on  the  part  of  the  girl  E.  D.,  at  Wood's  Farm;  but  that  some
portion  of  the  phenomena  cannot  be  referred  to  this  cause  if  the  statements
■of  Mrs.  Hampson  and  Priscilla  Evans  as  to  what  occurred  in  E.  D.'s
absence,  and  the  description  given  by  PriscUla  Evans  of  the  crockery
coming  out  of  the  cupboard,  can  be  at  all  relied  on.  Still,  if  the  case  were
an  isolated  one,  the  evidence  is  not  of  so  satisfactory  a  nature  as  to  justify
the  assumption  that  phenomena  unexplainable  by  trickery  actually  took
place ;  but  on  the  hypothesis  that  there  are  cases  on  record  in  which
trickery  and  genuine  preternatural  phenomena  were  combined,  this  case
might,  with  some  degree  of  probability,  be  included  amongst  them.

Frank  S.  Hughes,  B.A.  (Cantab).

December  3nl,  1883.

As  exception  has  been  taken  to  Mr.  Hughes'  treatment  of  part  of
the  evidence  in.  this  case,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  biassed  against  a
belief  in  supernormal  agencies,  it  seems  best  to  quote  textually  the  two
passages  specially  referred  to.

F


66


Frank  Podmore.


(1)  The  signed  statement  by  Miss  Maddox  gives  the  following
version  of  the  "levitation"  : — "There  were  about  20  people  standing'
and  sitting  about  the  room  when  Miss  Maddox  entered.  The  first
thing  Miss  Maddox  saw  was  the  chair  on  which  the  girl  sat  wriggling
about,  and  once  rising  a  foot  from  the  ground,  the  girl  having  no  point
of  contact  with  the  ground  at  the  time.  She  was  writhing  about,  and
in  a  state  of  great  nervous  excitement."

(2)  The  following  passage  is  from  a  statement  signed  by  Henry  and
I James  Lea  : — "  Emma  Davies  was  with  Mi-s.  Lea  at  the  gate,  a  long

distance  off,  while  the  noises  continued  and  things  came  flying  out  of  the
window. Things  came  out  after  the  place  had  been  cleared  of  people."

It  will  be  admitted,  I  think,  that  the  conditions  described  by  Miss
Maddox — some  twenty  people  present  in  the  room,  and  Emma  Davies
twisting  and  wriggling  on  her  chair  in  a  condition  of  great  nervous
excitement — were  not  specially  favourable  for  observation.  It  may  be
added  that  under  more  favourable  circumstances  a  phenomenon  of  the
kind  which  Miss  Maddox  claims  to  have  witnessed  is  not  easy  to
observe  with  accuracy.  As  regards  the  Leas'  statement  that  Emma
Davies  was  at  a  distance  from  the  house  during  the  progress  of  some  of
the  disturbances,  it  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  Worksop  case  it  was
shown  that  memory  is  apt  to  be  treacherous  on  such  matters  as  the
presence  or  absence  of  particular  pei'sons  at  particular  times,  and  the
precise  sequence  of  various  events.  A  statement  of  this  kind  would  no
doubt  be  deserving  of  consideration  if  it  emanated  from  a  6rst-rate
witness.  But  Mr.  Hughes'  estimate  of  the  Leas  as  being  indifferent
witnesses  must  be  allowed  to  have  weight.

Upon  the  whole,  after  a  reperusal  of  the  documents  in  the  case,  I
cannot  find  that  Mr.  Hughes  has  misrepresented  the  evidence  in  any
materia]  particular.  As  regards  the  two  incidents  upon  which  he  lays
special  stress,  it  may  be  considered  that  if  Emma  Davies  was  able  to
evade  detection  when  closely  watched  for  two  or  three  days  by
suspicious  and  educated  witnesses,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  she
might  have  succeeded  in  the  easier  task  of  eluding  the  vigilance  of
Priscilla  Evans,  a  young  rustic  already  inystified  and  excited  by  the
marvellous  manifestations  which  she  had  witnessed,  and  that  the
crockery  which  flew  out  of  the  cupboard  in  the  twilight  was  merely
propelled  by  the  hand  of  Emma  Davies.  There  remains  the  statement
of  two  witnesses  who  saw  crockery  fall  off  the  table  during  Emma
Davies'  absence.  This  statement,  if  accepted  literally,  is  hard  to
reconcile  with  the  supposition  of  trickery.  But  we  have  no  reason  to
suppose  that  Priscilla  Evans  and  Mrs.  Hampson  were  better  observers
than  some  of  the  persons  who  sat  at  seances  with  Mr.  Eglinton,  or
were  able  to  remember  and  describe  what  they  saw  with  greater
accuracy  than  the  witnesses  of  Mr.  Davey's  sleight-of-hand.


Poltergeists.


67


It  should  be  added  that  though  Emma  Davies  was  regarded  by  the
doctor  who  examined  her  as  being  quite  normal,  Mr.  Hughes,  in  the
course  of  his  enquiries,  found  some  evidence  of  unusual  precocity
on  her  part.  Moreover,  according  to  her  mother's  statement,  while  she
had  been  a  healthy  child  before  the  outbreak  of  the  disturbances,  she
afterwards  fell  into  ill-health  and  became  subject  to  fits.  It  should  be
added  that  Miss  Maddox  in  her  signed  account  states  that,  during
some  of  the  disturbances  at  which  she  was  present,  Emma  Davies
ci'ied  out  that  an  old  woman  was  at  her,  and  would  not  let  her  breathe,
and  called  to  her  mother  to  relieve  her.

III. — The  Arundel  Case.

The  next  account,  by  Major  (now  Lieutenant-Colonel)  Taylor,  deals
■with  disturbances  which  took  place  in  February,  1884.

-Report  on  the  Alleged  Manifestations  at  Arundel,  Sussex.  By
Major  G.  L.  Le  M.  Taylor,  Royal  Military  College,  Farnborough
Station,  Hants.

Accompanied  by  Major  King,  R.  M.A.,  I  arrived  at  Arundel  on  Saturday,
February  22nd,  to  enquire  into  the  circumstances  attending  the  alleged
manifestations  in  connection  with  the  girl  Clark.

We  iii'st  visited  Mr.  Hubbert,  F.R.C.S.,  the  medical  man  who  had  been
called  in  to  see  the  girl  when  the  affair  commenced  ;  he  very  kindly  told  us
what  took  place,  his  statement  being  in  effect  as  follows  :  —

He  was  called  in  about  10.30  on  the  night  of  February  8th,  to  see  the
girl  Clark,  who  was  said  to  be  "bewitched"  ;  he  found  the  household  in
great  consternation,  and  persuaded  that  a  neighbour  had  "  bewitched  "  her.
He  asked  what  the  symptoms  were,  and  was  told  that  "  scratchings  "  took
place  "all  about  the  bed  "on  which  the  girl  was,  that  she  did  not  make
them,  and  that  they  were  supernatural  ;  he  was  told  to  listen,  and  shortly
lie  heard  a  noise  in  the  bedroom  above,  as  if  made  by  scratching  the
mattress  with  the  nails  of  the  hand.  On  going  upstairs  he  found  the  girl
in  bed,  and  asked  her  "  How  she  did  it  ? "  or  "  Why  she  did  it  'i  "  but  she
said  she  had  notliing  to  do  with  it.  While  he  was  in  the  room  nothing  took
place,  but  he  was  told  that  if  he  left  the  room  the  noise  would  probably
recommence.  He  did  so,  and  again  the  scratchings  were  heard.  He  went
back  into  the  room  with  the  girl  alone,  and  having  taken  hold  of  her  hands
with  one  of  his,  he  scratched  the  mattress  with  tlie  other.  The  noise  was-
at  once  recognised  by  the  family  outside  the  door  as  the  same  previously
heard.  The  doctor  now  tied  the  girl's  hands  in  such  a  way  as  to  prevent
the  use  of  the  nails,  and  left  the  room.  The  noise  was  soon  repeated,  but
was  now  more  like  rubbing  than  scratching.  In  fact,  the  sound  seemed
muffled.  Again  he  tied  the  girl's  hands  more  securely,  and  balanced  a
woollen  cuff  on  them,  outside  the  bed  clothes.  Now  no  noise  was  heard  for
some  time,  and  on  re-entering  the  room  the  cuff  was  found  unmoved.  Tlie
doctor  was  satisfied  tliat  the  noises  were  made  by  the  girl  herself.  He  then
left  and  has  had  nothing  more  to  do  with  tlie  affair.


68


Frank  Podmore.


We  next  went  to  Clark's  house,  and  found  that,  unfortunately,  the  girl's
father  was  away,  and  the  girl  herself  had  been  sent  to  Brighton.  We  saw,
however,  the  girl's  mother  and  her  father's  mother.

The  mother  is  a  large,  flabby,  sallow  woman  of  about  40,  with  a  narrow
forehead  and  rather  oblique  eye-brows.  She  did  not  seem  in  good  health,
and  was  certainly  nervous  and  frightened  at  the  whole  afiair.  Mr.  Hubbert
described  her  as  hysterical.  The  grandmother  is  an  old  woman,  who  was  not
at  all  frightened  at  what  had  taken  place,  but  rather  liked  talking  about  it.

The  impression  we  received  as  to  the  evidence  of  these  women  was  that
they  were  perfectly  honest  witnesses,  believing  everything  they  told  us  ;
the  mother  being  unwilling  to  speak  of  them  at  all,  and  particularly  careful
not  to  speak  to  anything  which  had  not  come  within  her  own  knowledge.
The  grandmother,  though  equally  honest,  had  evidently  told  the  story  so
often  that  she  described  things  which,  on  her  own  showing,  she  could  not
have  seen.

We  gathered  that  the  "manifestations"  began  on  Friday  evening,
February  8th,  and  the  girl  was  sent  away  on  Tuesday  or  Wednesday,  the
19th  or  20th,  and  that  nothing  took  place  between  Tuesday,  the  12th,  and
Monday,  the  18th,  on  which  day  the  girl  is  said  to  have  seen  an  apparition,
which  determined  her  peojDle  to  send  her  to  Brighton.  Our  two  witnesses
were  able  to  speak  directly  to  only  some  of  the  alleged  manifestations,  the
evidence  for  the  others  resting  on  the  testimony  of  the  girl,  her  father,  the
girl's  maternal  grandmother,  and  a  neighbour.  The  manifestations  appear
to  have  begun  spontaneously  ;  but  afterwards  to  have  been  in  a  great
measure  sought  by  the  father  to  test  their  reality.  We  ascertained  pretty
well  in  what  order  the  different  things  happened,  but  could  not  quite  make
it  clear  on  which  days  they  occurred.

I  will  give  first  the  substance  of  the  statements  of  the  two  women  we
saw,  as  far  as  they  speak  from  their  own  knowledge  ;  and  then  the  re-
mainder of  the  story  as  gathered  from  the  grandmother,  but  the  direct
evidence  for  which  could  not  be  obtained.

Tlie  mother  states  that  the  girl  is  13,  but  looks  older  ;  is  a  good,  quiet
girl,  about  whose  honesty  in  the  present  matter  she  has  no  doubt.  (Major
King  saw  the  girl's  photograph  ;  it  was  of  a  girl  with  a  sharp  and  rather
shrewd  face.)  That  on  Friday  night,  a  minute  or  two  after  getting  into  bed
with  her  two  girls  (her  husband  being  away  at  work),  she  heard  a  scratching
noise  on  the  mattress  of  the  bed.  She  asked  the  girls  if  they  were  making
it.  They  said,  " No,"  and  seemed  frightened.  She  held  the  girl's  hands,
and  yet  the  noise  continued.  She  got  out  of  bed,  thinking  it  might  be  rats,
lit  a  candle,  searched  the  room,  and  re-made  the  bed.  When  they  went  to
bed  again  the  noise  recommenced.  She  then  went  into  the  back  room,  but
the  noise  continued  on  the  other  bed.  She  also  states  that  the  first  bed
heaved  up,  and  that,  when  they  went  into  the  second  room,  the  bed  and
everything  in  the  room  shook.  She  got  so  frightened  that  she  sent  for  the
doctor.

Though  the  mother  sat  by  and  acquiesced  in  all  her  mother-in-law  sub-
sequently related,  she  said  nothing  more  than  the  above  came  under  her
special  knowledge,  except  the  evident  distress  of  her  daughter  on  other
occasions.


Poltergeists.


69


The  grandmother  corroborated  what  the  mother  stated  about  the  girl's
goodness  and  honesty,  and  proceeded  to  say  that  when  the  father  returned
on  Saturday  night  (?)  some  attempts  were  made  at  an  investigation,  in  the
course  of  which  tlie  girl  was  sent  upstairs  into  the  room  in  which  the  noises
were  first  observed,  "  to  see  what  would  happen."  She  was  followed  by  her
two  grandmothers  (the  maternal  grandmother,  who  lived  in  another  village,
having  been  sent  for  previously).  The  girl  stood  at  A  (see  plan),  in  full
view  of  the  old  women,  who  were  at  the  head  of  the  stairs,  when  in  a
minute  three  articles  fell  to  the  ground  at  the  other  end  of  the  room  at  B
and  C,  a  clock  from  off  the  chest  of  drawers,  and  two  ornaments  from  the
chimney-piece,  all  at  the  same  time.  The  girl  rushed  back  to  the  stairs,
and  the  two  old  women,  going  into  the  room,  found  the  things  on  the  floor,
but  not  broken  ;  there  was  a  mat  or  carpet  where  they  fell.  They  replaced
the  things,  the  clock  on  its  back  far  back  on  the  drawers.  They  again  fell
under  similar  circumstances  (?)  ;  the  girl  described  them  to  have  turned  over
and  over  till  they  reached  the  floor.  One  of  the  things  tliat  fell  was  a  small
bell-shajjed  shade  over  a  match  stand.

After  the  above  incident  (on  Sunday,  I  think),  the  girl  was  sent  to  her
grandmother's  house,  not  far  off,  ' '  to  see  if  anything  would  hajjpen  in  a
new  place.''  The  grandmother  says  that,  when  there  and  in  view,  things
jumped  up  and  fell  down  which  were  out  of  the  girl's  reach.  I  could  not
get  a  clear  statement  about  it,  but  got  the  old  woman  to  acknowledge  that
she  saw  nothing  fall.

Later,  again,  the  grandmother  declares  that  when  going  uf)stairs  in  her
son's  house,  with  the  girl  in  front  of  her,  a  dark  cloud  seemed  to  meet
them  and  obscure  the  light  of  the  candle  till  slie  lost  sight  of  the  child.


PLAN  OF  CLARK'S  HOUSE.-IST  FLOOR  PLAN.


Frank  Podmore.


PLAN  OF  CLARK'S  HOUSE.


—GROUND  PLAN.


Poltergeists.


71


who  shrank  back  to  her,  and  said  she  felt  it  all  over  her  ;  tlie  cloud  soon
passed  away.

As  for  the  rest  of  the  story,  it  appears  that  the  father  sent  the  girl  into
the  scullery,  and  watched  through  the  door  a  tray  of  potatoes  and  an  iron
pot  fall ;  they  were,  however,  scarcely  beyond  the  girl's  reach.  This
experiment  appears  to  have  been  repeated,  for  on  another  occasion  a  neigh-
bour, looking  through  the  door,  said  he  saw  a  shadowy  hand  stretched  out
from  the  girl  to  the  things  to  upset  them.  On  another  occasion  the  girl,
having  been  sent  across  the  road  to  the  baker's,  returned  with  the  story  that
immediately  she  entered  the  shop  two  chairs  fell  over  of  themselves,  but
aio  one  else  saw  them  fall.

Again,  the  girl  is  said  to  have  been  alone  with  her  maternal  grand-
mother (whom  we  did  not  see")  in  the  lower  front  room,  and  being  told  to
get  some  coal,  the  child  opened  the  door  at  D.  At  this  moment  the  grand-
mother and  girl  heard  three  violent  knocks  on  table  E.  The  girl  got
frightened,  and  the  grandmother  went  with  her  to  get  the  coal  from  under
the  stairs. Again  three  knocks  were  heard  on  the  stairs.

After  this  it  seems  the  girl  never  left  her  mother's  side  for  a  week,
and  nothing  took  place.  At  the  end  of  that  time  her  mother,  thinking
that  perhaps  it  was  all  over,  sent  the  girl  upstairs  to  get  a  dress  from  the
back  bedroom.  On  entering  the  room  the  cliild  screamed,  and  on  her
return  stated  to  her  mother  that  she  had  seen  at  F  a  figure  in  a  white  dress,
with  fingers  very  white  and  long,  bald  head,  and  white  eyes  and  feet,  which,
when  she  screamed,  receded  and  disappeared  into  the  wall  behind  it.

The  order  in  which  the  manifestations  are  said  to  have  followed  one
another  is  as  follows  ; —

Order  of  Manifestations.  Observed  By.

1.  Scratchings Mother,  Sister,  and  Doctor

2.  Ditto Mother,  Sister,  and  Paternal  Grandmother

3.  Things  falling Paternal  Grandmother  and  Maternal  Grandmother

4.  Ditto,  Ditto Paternal  Grandmother

5.  Ditto,  ditto Father  and  Neighbour

6.  Knocks Maternal  Grandmother

7.  Darkening  of  candle Paternal  Grandmother

8.  Apparition Child

Observations.

Nos.  1  and  2. — The  doctor  being  quite  unaffected  by  any  feeling  of
excitement  or  fear,  which  was  not  the  case  with  the  family,  was  the  best
judge  of  the  cause  of  these  manifestations.  He  was  convinced  that  they
were  caused  by  the  child  herself.

Nos.  3  and  4. — If  the  evidence  of  the  paternal  grandmother  could  be
relied  on,  these  could  not,  in  my  opinion,  be  accounted  for  by  any  physical
cause,  as  the  clock  and  ornaments  fell  simultaneously  and  were  9ft.  from
the  girl,  who,  having  been  sent  by  her  father  without  warning  (as  I  under-
.stood)  to  the  room  above  stairs,  had  no  opportunity  of  making  any  arrange-
inents  for  trickery.


72


Frank  Podmore.


No.  5. — In  these  manifestations  the  girl  might  not  have  been  moi'e  than
4ft.  from  the  things  which  fell,  and  the  hole  in  the  door  (as  tested  by  me)  is
so  small  that  little  can  be  seen  through  it,  and  that  little  in  a  shadowy  way.

No.  6. — The  girl  standing  where  she  did  when  the  knocks  "on  the
table  "  were  heard,  was  within  reach  of  the  door  of  the  coal-hole,  knocks
on  which  (as  ascertained  by  Major  King)  sounded  hollow,  as  if  on  a  table,
and  from  their  sound  it  would  not  be  possible  to  tell  whence  they  came.
When  immediately  afterwards,  the  girl  was  in  the  coal-hole,  the  knocks
on  the  stairs  sounded  from  a  place  within  her  reach.

No.  7.  —  The  stairs  are  so  narrow  that  the  girl  must  have  been  in  front
of  her  grandmother,  and  above  her  ;  if  she  had  shaded  the  candle  with  her
hand  it  might  not  have  been  observed  by  the  old  woman,  and  the  stated
effect  might  have  been  easily  produced  on  the  half-frightened  grandmother.

No.  8. — The  fright  of  the  girl  on  seeing  the  appearance  must  have  been
well  feigned  to  deceive  her  mother,  but  the  girl  herself  was  in  such  a  con-
dition of  nervousness  as  to  make  it  most  probable  that  she  was  frightened
at  a  shadow  only.

Conclusions.

1.  — The  scratchings  were  perhaps  done  by  the  child  at  first  by  accident,
and  persisted  in,  when  the  effect  was  seen,  for  fun.

2.  — That  the  grandmother  possibly  did  not  actually  keep  the  girl  in
sight  when  the  things  fell  in  the  bedroom  ;  having  perhaps  turned  round  to
speak  to  the  mother  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs.

3.  — That  the  knocks  were  most  likely  produced  by  the  child,  who  at  this
time  was  getting  rather  frightened  at  her  own  "manifestations."

4.  — That  the  father  and  Mr.  M.,  the  neighbour,  could  not  have  watched
the  girl  through  the  scullery  door,  and  that  Mr.  M.,  from  his  reference  to
a  spirit-hand,  suggested  a  sp)iritual  appearance  to  the  girl.

5.  — The  darkenmg  of  the  candle  might  have  been  done  by  the  child
accidentally,  and  frightened  her  as  well  as  her  grandmother.

6.  — That  the  "  spirit  "  was  purely  subjective.

7.  — That  on  the  whole  it  is  most  likely  that  the  affair  was  begun  in  fun,
continued  in  fraud,  and  closed  in  fright.

In  this  case  also  it  will  be  seen  that  one  of  the  incidents,  as
described,  was  inexplicable  by  trickery.  But  it  is  to  be  noted  that
none  of  the  witnesses  appear  to  have  alleged  that  they  actually  saw
objects  in  the  act  of  falling  under  circumstances  which  would  have
made  trickery  out  of  the  question.  Moreover,  the  whole  matter  had
been  the  theme  of  general  discussion  before  Colonel  Taylor's  visit ;  and
one  at  least  of  the  principal  witnesses  described  things  which,  on  her
own  showing,  she  could  not  have  seen.  There  seems  to  have  been  some
exaggeration  also  in  the  account  given  by  the  father  of  the  girl  of  what
he  saw  through  the  scullery  door.  In  the  alleged  occurrence  of  an
apparition  seen  by  the  child  alone,  as  well  as  in  other  points,  the  case
presents  a  marked  resemblance  to  the  disturbances  at  Wem.  The


Poltergeists.


73


"shadowy  hand"  alleged  to  have  been  seen  by  the  neighbour  stretching
out  from  the  girl  recalls  some  of  the  descriptions  given  of  seances  with
Eusapia  and  other  "physical  mediums."  On  the  whole,  having  regard
to  the  doctor's  evidence,  to  the  nature  of  the  occurrences  reported,  and
to  the  character  of  the  principal  witnesses,  I  am  disposed  to  agree  with
the  two  reporters  that  the  evidence  for  abnormal  agency  of  any  kind
in  the  case  is  hardly  worth  consideration.

IV. — The  Beajiford  Disturbances.

In  November  and  December,  1887,  an  account  appeared  in  the
Sast  A^iglian  Daily  Times  of  disturbances  in  a  cottage  at  Bramford,
near  Ipswich.  The  cottage  was  inhabited  by  Mrs.  Parker,  a  widow,
Thomas  Fan'ington,  a  grown-up  son,  by  a  tirst  marriage,  and  two  other
children,  Ellen  Parker  (11)  and  Cornelius  Parker  (10),  and  an  old
bedridden  woman,  Mrs.  Felgate.  The  phenomena  consisted  of  the
throwing  of  stones  and  dirt  outside  the  house ;  raps,  noises,  and
the  movement  of  various  articles  of  furniture  inside  the  house.
It  was  alleged,  for  instance,  that  the  little  girl  would  be  lifted  bodily
in  the  air ;  kettles,  a  table  and  sofa  would  be  moved  about ;  knives
would  fly  out  of  the  cupboard  and  stick  in  Ellen's  hair,  &c.,  &c.
Finally,  the  girl  went  for  a  few  days  to  Stowmarket  on  a  visit  to  a
mariied  sister  of  her  mother's,  Mrs.  Jeffery.  "What  then  ensued  is
thus  described  by  Mr.  Jeifery  in  a  letter  to  the  East  Anglian  Daily
Times,  dated  December  14th,  1887.

"The  child  came  to  my  house  on  Monday,  November  26th,  in  the  evening.
Nothing  happened  till  the  Wednesday  night  following,  when  raps  came  at  my
front  door.  No  one  was  there.  Closing  the  front  door  as  soon  as  I  got  in,
raps  came  inside  the  house  till  the  child  went  to  bed,  sleeping  with  her
grandmother.  As  the  child  went  upstairs,  raps  followed  her,  and  went  on
in  the  room. That  was  all  that  happened  that  night.

"The  next  night,  in  the  room  where  she  sat,  at  about  7  o'clock,  I  was
annoyed  by  hearing  raps  again  in  the  room  where  the  child,  my  wife,  and
the  child's  grandmother  were  sitting.  No  one  else  was  there.  This  went  on
till  the  child  and  her  grandmother  went  to  bed  ;  raps  followed  them  both
up  the  stairs.  I  then  heard  a  tremendous  noise.  Mrs.  Jeffery  went  upstairs,
saw  things  moving  about,  and  called  me.  I  went  up  and  found  them  in  a
terrible  fright.  I  got  them  both  downstairs  for  an  hour,  when  nothing-
happened  but  a  few  raps,  coming  from  wliere  I  did  not  know.

"They  went  to  bed  again  about  11.  My  wife  went  up,  and  as  soon  as  the
child  and  her  grandmother  were  in  bed,  I  went  up.  There  was  no  one  in  the
room  then  but  my  wife,  myself,  and  those  in  bed.  As  soon  as  I  went  in,  the
washstand  fell  on  to  me,  no  one  being  near  it  but  myself  ;  next  I  saw  a
clothes  chest,  weighing  at  least  seven  stones  with  the  contents,  jumping
about  the  floor.  I  put  it  in  its  place  several  times.  Then  the  chairs  and  all
the  moveables  in  the  room  seemed  alive  ;  even  the  brass  knob  screwed  on  the


74


Frank  Pochnore.


bedpost  was  taken  off  and  dashed  across  the  room.  All  this  time  the  child
was  in  bed,  and  a  bright  light  in  the  room.  These  disturbances  went  on  till
about  12  o'clock  that  night,  when  they  ceased.

"This  is  what  I  witnessed  myself,  but  I  must  mention  that  in  my  absence,
my  wife,  my  two  sons,  and  my  neighbour  (Mrs.  Read)  saw  very  much  the
same  things  as  I  did.  But  I  leave  them  to  speak  for  themselves,  confining
myself  to  what  I  saw  and  heard  myself.  I  have  been  a  resident  of  Stow-
market  32  years,  and  I  am  sure  my  friends  will  credit  me  as  a  truthful  man
to  the  best  of  my  ability.— I  am,  &c.,  Robert  Jeffery.

In  the  early  part  of  January,  1888,  a  member  of  the  Society  visited
Bramford  and  Stowmarket  to  investigate  the  matter  on  the  spot.  He
saw  Mrs.  Parker  and  was  favourably  impressed  both  as  regards  her
honesty  and  her  intelligence.  He  found  out,  however,  that  the
phenomena  occurred  only  in  the  presence  of  the  little  girl,  Ellen  ;  and
that  the  evidence  for  the  disturbances  at  Bramford  rested  almost
exclusively  on  her  mother's  testimony.

Mrs.  Parker's  statements  were  of  a  very  surprising  kind  ;  but  he
was  unable  to  discover  any  motive  for  fraud  or  connivance  on  her  part.
She  had,  indeed,  been  a  pecuniary  loser,  since  the  guardians  had,  in
consequence  of  the  disturbances,  stopped  an  allowance  for  outdoor
relief;  and  she,  as  a  general  rule,  refused  to  take  money  from  the
newspaper  reporters  and  others  who  came  to  see  her.

Our  representative  ascertained  from  the  constable  who  had  been
set  to  watch  the  house  at  the  beginning  of  the  disturbances,  that  he
had  seen  the  child  producing"  noises  and  tapping  the  window  with  her
hand,  when  she  believed  herself  to  be  unobserved.  Also  that,  some
days  later,  the  little  boy,  Cornelius,  had  confessed  to  him  that  he  had
produced  some  of  the  movements  by  trickery.  The  schoolmaster,  who
was  pi'esent,  gave  the  following  account  of  the  interview  between
Cornelius  and  the  policeman.  The  latter  asked  the  boy  whether  he
caused  the  noises,  &c ,  purposely.  The  boy  was  silent  for  some  time,
and  at  last  said  "  Yes."  On  being  asked  who  first  put  him  up  to  it,
the  boy  said  "  Mrs.  Felgate," — an  exceedingly  improbable  statement
on  the  face  of  it.  No  threats  were  used  to  induce  the  boy  to  confess.
In  conversation  with  our  representative  the  boy  denied  that  he  ever
made  such  a  confession.

The  following  is  our  representative's  account  of  his  interview  with
another  witness  : —

Mr.  Burrows  is  a  hivd  fancier  and  lias  been  heretofore  a  ghost-hunter.
He  is  a  shrewd  man.  He  informed  me  that  he  went  to  the  cottage  one
Sunday,  and  being  slightly  acquainted  with  Thomas  Farrington  obtained
admittance  with  three  friends.  It  was  getting  dark  when  they  entered,  and
they  all  pretended  to  be  very  credulous  upon  the  subject.  The  boy  and  his
mother  were  sitting  on  the  couch,  and  the  boy  had  his  arm  behind  his


Poltergeists.


75


mother,  with  the  result  that  first  a  glove  and  then  a  baby's  bib  were  thrown
out.  Mr.  B.  saw  the  boy  working  his  arm.  The  girl  was  under  the  table,
where  she  could  be  seen  however  by  Mr.  B.  He  saw  her  kick  her  leg  up,  so
as  to  send  her  boot  across  the  room.  At  the  same  time  she  screamed  out
"  They've  taken  my  boot."  He  then  saw  the  boy  stoop  down  at  the  fire-
place. He  placed  his  own  head  low  down  over  his  knees,  and  presently  saw
the  boy  dart  his  arm  backwards,  with  the  result  that  the  poker  flew  across
the  floor.  He  kept  his  eye  on  the  boy,  in  the  confusion,  and  saw  him  seize
the  kettle,  and  roll  that  along  the  floor.  The  boy  also  when  sitting  beside
his  mother  on  the  sofa,  took  ofi'  his  coat,  and  placed  it  under  him,  to  see  if
the  spirits  would  drag  it  out.  While  doing  so  and  after,  lie  managed  to
wriggle  the  cushion  upon  which  he  sat  from  beneath  liim,  and  threw  that
across  the  room,  striking  the  cat.

Mr.  Burrows  then  left  with  some  ironical  compliments.  What  degree  of
inference  instead  of  actual  sight  there  may  be  in  Mr.  B.'s  evidence,  I  cannot
say.  He  said  repeatedly  that  he  saw  these  acts  of  deception.  His  prejudices
or  convictions  were  evidently  strong.  I  think  it  must  be  believed  that  he
saw  some  at  least  of  the  acts  of  deception.

Our  representative  then  proceeded  to  Stowmarket.  Of  Mr.  JefFery
he  wrote,  "  Simplicity  and  honesty  are  manifestly  his  characteristics."
The  grandmother  was  described  by  Mr.  Jeffery  himself  "as  not  know-
ing quite  what  she  said." The  report  continues  : —

The  washstand  fell  upon  Mr.  Jefi"ery  as  he  entered  the  room.  The  door
opens  outward,  the  washstand  therefore  miglit  be  placed  overlapping  the
door,  and  on  Mr.  Jeflfery's  entering,  his  leg  might  strike  it,  for  it  does  not
rise  much  higher  than  a  man's  knee,  and  so  he  might  think  it  fell  against  him,
under  the  influence  of  his  prevailing  impressions.

The  chest  which  he  saw  jumping  about  the  floor,  and  which  he  put  in  its
place  several  times,  he  saw  really  jump  only  once  and  then  a  few  inches,
though  it  jumped  several  times  when  he  was  out  of  the  room.  This  chest,
which  is  a  box,  stood  about  1^  feet  from  the  side  of  the  low  bed,  on  which
the  child  was  lying,  and  stands  on  a  support  which  raises  it  about  two  inches
from  the  ground  thus  :


By  stretching  out  an  arm  quickly  and  getting  purchase  underneath  the
box,  the  child  could  lug  it  from  its  place.  Now  upon  the  occasion  that  Mr.
JefFery  saw  the  chest  move,  he  had  just  put  it  back  in  its  place,  and  was
walking  away  from  it,  with  his  back  to  it,  and  it  was  when  he  turned  the
corner  of  the  bed  that  he  saw  it  move.  He  must  have  seen  it  out  of  the
right  corner  of  his  right  eye. The  child  may  have  given  the  box  a  tug,  and


76


Frank  Podmore.


got  its  arm  in  bed  again,  before  the  man  could  turn  round.  He  may  then
have  perceived  that  the  box  had  moved,  and  this  may  have  become  confused-
in  his  mind  with  seeing  it  move.

Mr.  Jeffery  was  not  in  the  room  when  tlie  brass  knob  was  thrown.

He  says  that  he  stood  at  the  door  and  watched  the  child  for  20  minutes.
During  tliat  time  only  two  things  occurred  ;  one  was  that  a  piece  of  an  old
bedstead  leaning  against  the  wall  to  his  right  jumped  once  two  inches  high.
This  phenomenon  again,  as  he  was  watching  the  child  to  the  left,  he  would  see'
out  of  the  right  corner  of  the  right  eye.  Expectation  moreover  could  easily
cause  a  piece  of  furniture  to  appear  to  jump  two  inches.  I  have  seen  the
phenomenon  myself.  But  Mr.  Jeffery  says  he  also  heard  it  thump  down
again.  It  is  possible  he  heard  a  knock  which  he  localised  to  his  right,  and
that  at  the  same  moinent  the  old  bedstead  ajppeared  to  jump  so  as  to  explain
the  knock.

The  second  incident  that  occurred  was  that  the  taljle  to  his  left,  against
the  wall  upon  the  the  side  of  the  bed  nearest  to  him,  and  therefore  with  thef
old  lady  between  the  table  and  the  girl,  moved.  He  saw  it  move  with  his
own  eyes.  It  moved  a  foot,  so  that  the  corner  of  the  table  farthest  from  the
girl  moved  through  the  arc  of  a  circle  towards  her.

No  one  was  near  the  table,  except  the  grandmother  on  that  side  of  the
bed.  As  Mr.  Jeffery  lirmly  adhered  to  his  statement  of  the  time  and  circum-
stances under  whicli  this  movement  took  place,  excluding  all  action  by  the
grandmother,  there  is  only  one  explanation  of  the  statement,  apart  from
accejitance,  namely  that  Mr.  Jeffery,  having  shown  so  much  confusion  of
statement,  }nay  here  be  making  a  confused  statement  which  has  become
petrified  into  a  mistaken  belief.

Mrs.  Read,  who  seemed  an  intelligent  woman,  though  summoned  to  the
scene,  saw  nothing,  except  the  washstand  fall  upon  Mr.  Jeffery.  She  heard
knocks,  however,  and  seemed  to  believe  tliat  something  very  wonderful  had
taken  place.

I  did  not  see  the  boys.

The  report  concludes  as  follows  : —

There  is  no  evidence  of  genuineness,  there  is  evidence  of  fraud.
The  explanation  of  the  occurrences  which  commends  itself  to  me  is  as
follows  : —

The  children  one  day  varied  their  amusement  of  throwing  things  at  one
another,  by  throwing  at  the  old  lady,  Mrs.  Felgate.  They  would  then  deny
having  thrown,  and  Mrs.  Felgate  may  have  said  something  like  "spirits
must  have  done  it  then."  They  would  take  up  this  idea,  and  being  in  danger
of  thrashing  for  throwing  stones  in  the  yard,  which  struck  the  door,  or  dirt,
which  hit  the  windows,  they  would  deny  doing  it  and  say  it  was  done  by  the
spirits,  and  that  they  saw  the  stones  rise  from  the  ground,  and  so  on  from
lie  to  lie  ;  till  they  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of  a  popular  excitement,
and  contiirued  their  tricks  from  very  fear.  "  To  return  were  tedious  as  go
o'er. "  The  fact  that  the  mother  and  young  Farrington  went  to  the  policeman
and  tried  to  get  him  to  enquire  into  it,  seems  to  show  that  they  were  deceived
by  the  children  and  that  they  were  not  parties  to  a  fraud.  Mrs.  Parker's
statement  can  hardly  upon  the  present  hypothesis  be  an  accurate  version  of


Poltergeists.


77


the  facts.  But  possibly  she  would  be  found  to  romance  as  much  upon  any
other  topic.  She  and  her  son  both  seem  to  me  respectable,  possessed  of  an
lionest  pride.  Their  refusing  money  may  be  from  the  motive  that  their
reputation  is  dear  to  them,  and  tliey  wish  to  prove  to  their  fellow  villagers
that  they  are  not  the  sort  of  people  they  take  them  for.  I  call  the  son
respectable,  because  he  supports  his  mother,  has  been  married  once  and  is
going  to  marry  again.  And  there  is  nothing  against  the  woman,  except  the
prejudices  of  the  neighbourhood.  The  effect  which  the  child  has  produced
upon  the  mind  of  Jeffrey,  she  might  produce  upon  her  own  mother  and
brother.  And  if  they  found  her  out  once  or  twice,  that  would  make  little
■difference  in  their  belief.

It  remains  to  add  that,  according  to  the  girl's  own  statement —
■corroborated,  so  far  as  such  a  statement  could  be  corroborated,  by  her
mother — Ellen  during  the  progress  of  the  disturbances  suffered  from
transient  attacks  of  blindness  (possibly  of  a  hysterical  nature).  The
-child  further  said  that  in  the  course  of  these  attacks  she  could  see  a
sailor  standing  over  her  with  a  chain  in  his  hands  to  bind  her  and
carry  her  off.  She  would  also  see  a  white  woman  beckoning  and  hear
her  singing.  The  boy,  Cornelius,  also  stated  that  he  had  seen  an
apparition,  which  did  not,  however,  resemble  either  of  the  figures
alleged  to  have  been  seen  by  his  sister.

V. — The  Waterford  Case.

In  January,  1892,  the  Irish  papers  contained  accounts  of  disturb-
ances in  a  haunted  house  at  Waterford.  Appended  is  an  extract  from
a  Dublin  paper  : —

"Curious  Occurrence  at  Waterford.

"  An  occurrence  of  a  curious  nature,  and  one  which  is  the  all-absorbing
topic  of  city  gossip,  is  reported  from  a  portion  of  Ballybricken  known  as
Costelloe's-lane.  It  appears  that  some  three  weeks  ago  a  pensioner  of  the
Royal  Irish  Constabulary,  named  K.,  with  his  family  took  up  his  residence
there,  prior  to  coming  to  Waterford.  He  held  the  position  of  caretaker  on
an  evicted  farm  in  the  Passage  East  district.  While  in  occupation  he
reported  to  Sergeant  Murphy,  of  Passage  East,  that  he  and  his  family
were  disturbed  at  night  by  unearthly  sounds.  The  sergeant,  who  is  no
believer  in  ghosts,  commanded  an  escort  party  to  the  house,  the  approaches
to  which  were  taken  possession  of,  and  one  of  the  men  stationed  in  the
interior.  While  there  the  sergeant  and  his  men  heard  unmistakably
unearthly  sounds.  The  man  on  duty  inside  .saw  furniture  dashed  about
by  some  invisible  agency.  Sergeant  Murphy  reported  the  result  of  his
•experience  to  his  superior  officer  ia  Waterford,  and  Head-Constable  Waters
was  sent  out  to  investigate  the  allegation  that  ghosts  were  haunting  K.'s
house  ;  but  despite  all  entreaties,  the  caretaker  and  his  family  left  in  a
state  of  terror,  turning  up,  as  has  been  stated,  at  Costelloe's-lane,  in  the
•city,  where  he  seems  to  have  lived  in  peace  until  Saturday  night  last,
■when  he  created  quite  a  panic  by  raising  the  alarm  that  the  ghosts  who  had


78


Frank  Fodmore.


hunted  him  from  his  Passage  East  home  had  tracked  him  there.  Some  of
his  neighbours  entered  the  house,  and  found  his  family  in  a  state  of  the
greatest  possible  nervous  excitement.  They  saw  articles  of  furniture  thrown
about,  crockery  smashed,  aiad  heard  a  voice  quite  audibly.  They  tied  out  of
the  house  in  terror  and  raised  the  alarm,  with  the  result  that  the  police
authorities  visited  the  house  yesterday,  and  again  to-day,  as  did  hundreds
of  citizens,  including  several  Roman  Catholic  clergymen.  All  the  approaches
to  the  house  have  to-day  been  closely  guarded,  but  unearthly  voices  are  still
heard.  At  the  time  of  telegraphing,  some  hundreds  of  people  are  in  th&
vicinity  waiting  for  the  latest  news  regarding  the  action  of  the  ghosts  iir
K.'s  house."

On  February  7th,  1892,  Mr.  J.  W.  Hayes,  an  Honorary  Associate
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  went  to  Waterford  to  investi-
gate the  matter.  K.  and  his  family  had  left  Waterford  some  days
before  his  arrival,  but  Mr.  Hayes  saw  the  police  and  several  of  the
neighbours.  K.,  it  appears,  was  an  emergency  caretaker,  i.e.,  a  care-
taker on  "  evicted "  farms ;  an  occupation  always  unpopular  and
occasionally  hazardous.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  nervous  man,  and
one  who  would  be  readily  imposed  upon.  His  occupation  appears  to
have  been  distasteful  to  his  wife.  The  appended  statements  contain
the  evidence  of  the  three  chief  witnesses  interviewed  by  Mr.  Hayes.

Evidence  of  Head  Cokstable  Elders.  Taken  February  1st,  1892,  in  the
day-room  at  Lady-lane,  Station,  Waterford.
When  Peter  K.  reported  to  Sergeant  Murphy,  of  Passage  East,  that  he
was  "  tormented  with  supernatural  noises,''  the  sergeant  and  one  man  (not  an.
"escort  party")  went  and  examined  the  place  inside  and  outside,  ani
satisfied  them.selves  that  there  were  no  strangers  about.  This  house  had  two
bedrooms  at  the  left  of  the  entrance  door,  ojiening  into  one  another,  and
divided  by  a  partition  wall,  in  which  partition  was  a  permanently  closed  door
(marked  F),  and,  a  little  lower  down,  another  door  which  opened  and  shut
(marked  E).  Tlie  other  apartments  in  the  house  were  a  kitchen  (just  as  you
go  in),  and  a  room  at  the  right  used  as  a  chicken  house.  On  one  occasion
when  Sergeant  Murphy  visited  the  house,  K.'s  boy  Johnny  comjjlained  of
being  sick,  and  retired  to  bed  at  three  in  the  afternoon.  The  bed  he  occupied
was  in  bedroom  B,  and  his  bed  I'an  alongside  the  partition,  the  foot  of  the
bed  being  only  a  foot  or  so  from  the  closed  door  F.  Sergeant  Murphy
stationed  himself  in  the  kitchen,  and  after  a  while  several  loud  knocks  (as  if
made  with  a  stick)  were  heard  proceeding  from  tlie  room  where  the  boy  lay.
The  sergeant  immediately  went  in  and  found  the  boy  lying  quietly  in  the-
bed,  but  not  a  bit  frightened.  The  young  fellow,  when  questioned,  said  the
knocks  came  on  the  closed  door,  but  no  further  knocking  took  place  while
the  sergeant  was  in  the  room,  neither  did  the  sergeant  search  the  bed  to  see-
whether  the  boy  produced  the  knocks  with  a  stick  or  not.  K. — it  is  generally
supposed,  at  the  request  of  his  wife — threw  up  this  situation  as  caretaker,,
and  came  with  his  family  into  Waterford,  taking  up  his  residence  at
C'ostelloe's-lane.  On  Sunday,  January  24th,  1892,  he  called  at  the  police-
station  in  Waterford,  and  reported  that  the  ghost  was  again  at  work,  that


Poltergeists.


Entrance
Door


Fireplace


n

Johnny's  Bed

O

H

Closed

Open  r
Door  L

<l

i  Second  Bed.

MR.  K.'S  RESIDENCE  IN  C.


80


Frank  Podmore.


after  going  to  bed  on  Saturday  night,  he  heard  knocks  at  the  door,  and
getting  up,  placed  himself  behind  the  door,  until  his  son  should  get  up
to  take  his  place.  On  opening  the  door  they  found  no  one.  He  then
went  out  to  the  yard,  and  fancied  he  saw  three  dark  objects  run  over  the
wall,  and  when  he  came  in  he  heard  a  voice  under  one  of  the  beds
saying,  ' '  This  is  not  the  ghost  you  heard  in  Carrigleigh  ;  I'll  follow  you
wherever  you  go,  in  spite  of  the  police."  The  Waterford  police  called  at
his  house  at  1  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning,  January  24th,  and  saw  one
pane  of  glass  broken,  but  no  sound  was  produced  while  they  were  on  the
premises.  They  went  away,  but  at  3  o'clock  on  the  same  day  K.  reported
that  at  3  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning  the  ledges  were  burst  oS  the  back  door
of  the  kitchen,  and  the  door  forced  open.  This  door  was  merely  fastened
with  a  small  bolt,  which  shot  into  an  auger  hole  close  to  the  edge  of  tlie  door-
post. Now  the  side  of  the  auger  hole  showed  no  sign  of  having  been
burst  either  in  or  out.  The  ledges  which  were  stated  to  have  been  knocked
off  by  the  ghost  bore  marks  of  violence,  as  if  they  had  been  repeatedly  and
heavily  struck  with  a  blunt  instrument,  or  were  hammered  off.  At  4  o'clock
K.  stated  that  another  pane  of  glass  was  broken.  The  police  examined  the
bits  of  glass,  which  fell  outside  in  all  cases,  and  found  traces  of  reddish
paint  on  some  of  them,  as  if  a  piece  of  painted  timber  had  been  used  to
break  the  glass  out.  The  chairs  in  the  room  were  ordinary  wooden  ones
painted  a  reddish  colour.  Some  broken  delph  and  jam  pots  and  bottles
were  spread  around  the  floor,  and  pointed  out  as  having  been  thrown  there
by  supernatual  agency.  A  hatchet  was  found  in  the  house,  (and  is  still  to
the  good),  the  head  of  which  had  distinct  reddish  paint  marks,  just  as  if  it
had  been  used  to  crush  painted  timber.  Nothing  supernatural  occurred
while  the  police  watched.  In  the  house  in  Costelloe's-lane,  Johnny  K.
slept  in  a  room  to  the  left  of  the  hall-door.  The  room  had  a  window,  and  in
this  window  the  glass  was  broken  outwards.  Here  also  the  voice  was  said  to
be  heard.

EvinENCE OF Mrs. P. Dea, of Costelloe's-lane, Waterford.  Taken
February  2nd,  3892.

On  Sunday  week  I  was  in  K.  's  house  along  with  a  young  man,  having  gone
in  to  see  the  ghost  act.  I  distinctly  saw  Johnny  K.  roll  a  ball  or  something
across  the  floor  and  it  rolled  in  under  a  talde.  I  then  saw  him,  when  he
thought  I  was  not  minding  liim,  liurl  a  jam  pot  on  to  the  floor.  Afterwards
I  saw  him  sneak  round  to  the  bellows  and  contrive  to  fling  it  on  the  floor.
The  father  was  in  the  room  when  J.  flung  the  bellows  and  said  "Johnny,
was  it  you  threw  that  ?  "  Johnny  said  "  No,  Sir."  "But  you  did  throw  it,"
said  Mrs.  Dea.  "I  didn't,"  said  Johnny  laughing.  Mrs.  D.  states  that  she
is  "prepared  to  swear"  that  she  saw  the  boy  throw  these  things  and  other
things  too.  She  states  that  Mrs.  K.  did  not  seem  the  least  bit  alarmed  at
the  action  of  the  "  ghosts."

Evidence  of  Patrick  Dea. Taken  February  2nd,  quite  independently  of
what  his  wife  stated.

I  was  at  K.'s  house  at  a  quarter  past  11  on  Sunday  night  week.  Two
more  fellows  were  with  me  ;  we  went  in  to  watch  the  ghosts.  Peter  K.  was  in


Poltergeists.


81


bed,  but  Johnny  was  at  the  fire.  We  all  engaged  in  conversation,  but  at  the
same  time  I  kept  my  eye  on  the  boy,  although  I  kept  my  head  down.  [It
should  be  remarked  that  Dea  has  crooked  eyes,  so  that  in  reality  it  would  be
very  liard  to  tell  when  he  was  looking  straiglit  at  a  person.]  I  saw  Johnny
stand  up  from  where  he  was  leaning  on  the  table  or  box  and  gradually  shove  a
tin  gallon  over  to  himself.  Originally  it  was  at  the  far  end  of  the  box  or  table.
He  then  a  few  moments  after  put  his  two  hands  to  the  back  of  his  head  as  if
he  was  tired  and  wanted  to  rest  his  head  against  them.  Then  leaning
backwards  he  took  up  tlie  gallon  and  jerked  it  over  his  head  and  it  fell  on
tlie  middle  of  the  floor.  I  thereupon  said  to  the  young  men  with  me,  "Oh,
come  on  home,  lads,  if  that's  the  sort  of  ghosts  are  around."  .  After  that  the
father  got  up  when  he  heard  us  going  and  asked  me  to  stay  with  Johnny  to
jjrotect  him.  I  refused  and  went  away  disgusted.  I  am  prepared  to  swear
to  these  matters  and  think  the  boy  should  have  been  pr(_)secuted.

Thus  it  would  appear  that  no  phenomena  took  place  at  any  time
while  the  police  were  on  the  spot,  except  that  on  one  occasion  at  C.
knocks  occurred  as  if  made  with  a  stick  on  a  door  in  the  next  room
out  of  sight  of  the  policeman  and  close  to  John]iy.  There  seems  to  be
no  evidence  that  phenomena  ever  occurred  beyond  the  reach  or  the
power  of  Johnny,  and  whatever  agency  produced  the  phenomena  used
very  human  means.  Thus  the  cross  pieces  appear  to  have  been
knocked  off  the  door  with  a  hatchet,  and  a  piece  of  painted  wood
appeal's  to  have  been  used  to  break  the  windows.

It  seems  that  the  neighbours  were  generally  agreed  that  though
the  father,  a  timid  and  credulous  person,  was  much  alarmed,  and
believed  the  disturbances  to  be  due  to  the  spirit  of  a  dead  man  named
H.,  Johnny  and  his  mother  were  not  in  the  least  nervous  or  frightened
by  the  proceedings  of  the  "  ghost."  Finally,  we  may  add  that  the
effect  of  the  disturbances  was  to  induce  the  father  to  give  up  his
caretaking  jobs,  leave  the  neighbourhood,  and  remove  with  his  family
to — as  it  is  believed — the  part  of  the  country  where  his  wife's
relations  lived.

Case  VI.

The  occuri'ences  described  in  the  next  case  took  place  at  a  post
office  in  a  town  near  London.  The  witnesses  were  examined  by
Lieutenant-Colonel  Taylor,  who  from  notes  of  the  conversation  with
them  drew  up  statements,  which  were  afterwards  corrected  and  signed
by  the  persons  concerned. Tlie  names  and  initials  given  are  fictitious.

Statement  of  Miss  K.

Fehrnarii  13th,  1895.
The  mysterious  manifestations  about  which  you  are  interested  began
shortly  before  my  mother's  death  on  J une  30th,  1893,  when  only  she  and  my
niece,  Ellen  P.,  who  is  now  about  16  years  old,  were  living  in  the  house  with
me. We  had  been  in  residence  about  a  year  and  a  half  when  we  began  to

G


82


Frank  Fodmore.


observe  that  small  things  were  unaccountably  moved,  flower  vases  upset,  etc.,
and  for  some  time  we  thought  it  must  be  the  cat  (a  foreign  cat  which  came
about  the  place.)

One  Sunday  niorning  I  sent  my  niece  off  to  church,  k)cking  the  outside
door  after  her  ;  shortly  afterwards  I  followed  her,  my  mother  locking  the
door  after  me.  On  my  return  my  mother  reported  that  shortly  after  I  left
she  went  to  the  kitchen  and  found  things  displaced  ;  some  chops  which  were
for  dinner  and  some  milk,  both  of  which  liad  previously  been  placed  in  the
cupboard  and  its  door  shut,  were  found  upon  the  kitchen  floor.  She  replaced
the  chops  and  prepared  for  dinner  by  placing  some  potatoes  in  a  bowl  of
water  to  soak.  She  went  upstairs  and  on  her  return  in  a  few  minutes  found
the  bowl  on  the  floor  with  the  potatoes  under  it.  The  window  (a  cottage
window)  was  open  and  I  put  the  whole  thing  down  to  cats  again.

Shortly  after  my  mother's  death  an  elderly  friend  and  a  little  boy  came
to  stay  with  me  ;  after  their  arrival  annoyances  began  again.  Things  were
moved  and  tem2)orarily  lost,  being  sometimes  found  on  the  dust  heap  in  the
yard,  a  bonjiet  and  some  other  things  put  into  water,  hats  were  wetted  and
spoiled.  At  this  time  things  became  serious,  for  the  Postal  Orders  in  the
oflice  were  interfered  with  ;  one  day  Ellen  was  in  the  office  when  a  person
came  in  for  a  P.  O.  for  15s.  ;  she  called  out  to  me  "Auntie,  where  are  the
15s.  P.  O.'s  ?  I  can't  find  them."  I  said  they  were  on  the  counter.  They
were  there  a  few  minutes  before,  but  had  now  disappeared.  I  was  greatly
frightened.

Fortunately,  soon  after,  while  looking  for  them,  my  eye  caught  sight  of
part  of  one  sticking  out  of  tlie  door  of  a  cuplioard  in  the  office  and  in  this
we  found  them  uninjured,  but  apparently  roughly  placed  there,  some  at  the
bottom  of  the  cupboard  and  some  on  the  middle  shelf.  All  the  P.  O.'s  were
not  interfered  with  on  this  occasion  ;  only  those  from  10s.  Gd.  up  to  20s.  were,
I  think,  missing.

In  SeptemVjer  a  servant  named  Alice  came  (age  23. )  After  her  arrival
the  annoyances  increased.  Besides  the  removal  of  objects  and  their  partial
destruction  by  water,  they  were  found  now  frequently  in  the  boiler  in  tlie
kitchen  range  as  well  as  in  the  yai'd.  Doors  were  found  locked ^  and  the
keys  missing,  a  bed  was  wetted,  besides  other  things  which  I  will  now  I'elate.
Shortly  after  Alice  came,  one  evening  I  wanted  her  to  go  out  for  something,
and  when  she  came  downstairs  witli  her  jacket  on  I  saw  she  had  a  peculiar
wliite  mark  on  the  back  of  it.  I  brushed  it  oft'  and  told  her  to  go  upstairs
again  ;  this  she  did  and  returned  at  once,  when  I  found  two  white  marks  of
the  same  kind  as  liefore.  These  I  removed  and  again  sent  her  upstairs  ;  she
returned  again  marked  as  before.  A  third  and  a  fourth  time  I  tried  the
same  experiment  with  the  same  result.  The  marks  were  on  a  jjart  of  her
back  which  I  dtai't  think  she  could  reach  with  her  own  fingers  but  were
like  marks  which  would  be  made  by  whitened  fingers  being  placed  on  her.
The  girl  was  after  this  always  getting  marks  on  her  back,  so  that  at  the  close
of  a  day's  work  her  back  would  be  covered  with  them  ;  she  said  she  never
felt  herself  touched.  About  this  time  one  Sunday  evening,  at  Miss  Z.'s
suggestion,  I  tied  Alice's  hands  in  front  of  her  and  sent  her  upstairs  ;  she

1  Doors  were  locked  also  in  the  elderly  person's  time.


Poltergeiists.


83


returned  at  once  with  the  usual  marks  in  the  usual  places.  She  said  she  felt
no  touch,  but  felt  a  cold  sensation  on  her  back  while  shew  as  away.  On  the
Tuesday  following  we  tried  the  experiment  again.  There  were  present  : —
Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Miss  Y.,  Mi-.  R.,  Miss  Z.,  Miss  H.  (now  Mrs.  L.).

Mr.  Y.  bound  Alice's  hands  in  front  of  her,  and  secured  them  further  by
passing  the  cord  round  her  waist  ;  we  sent  her  upstairs  and  on  her  immediate
return  marks  as  usual  were  found  on  her.

She  was  sent  to  other  places  besides  upstairs  with  a  similar  result.  She
was  unbound  and  on  return  from  a  moment  spent  upstairs  had  marks.  She
was  agaiir  bound  and  the  same  results  to  our  experiment  were  obtained.
On  one  or  two  other  occasions  Alice's  hands  were  bound  and  on  returning
after  being  sent  upstairs  the  usual  sort  of  white  marks  were  found  on  her
back. Once  her  own  father  thus  bound  her  hands.

Just  after  this  Alice  reported  one  morning  that  about  six  inches  of  her
hair  had  been  cut  off  in  the  night  ;  we  never  found  this  hair.  Three  days
after  this  my  niece's  hair  began  to  be  cut  oS  lock  by  lock,  from  three  to  four
inches  long,  and  thrown  on  the  ground.

This  "cutting  "  began  early  in  the  afternoon,  continued  during  that  day
and  the  next  morning,  but  not  during  the  night  which  separated  them.  Ellen
says  she  felt  nothing,  and  though  I  was  constantly  on  the  look  out,  I  never
saw  a  lock  being  cut  off  but  only  found  one  on  tlie  ground  now  and  again,
till  all  the  girl's  hair  was  cut  short  and  it  was  so  hacked  that  the  barber  had
to  cut  the  remainder  close  to  her  head. I  have  only  kept  some  of  it.

About  this  time,  one  day  I  was  in  my  room  preparing  to  go  out.  Alice
was  also  upstairs,  but  Ellen  was  below.  Alice  went  out  of  her  room  for
something,  and  on  her  return  called  out  that  Miss  Ellen's  bed  was  all  wet.
I  went  into  the  room,  and  saw  this  was  the  condition  of  the  bed.  This  was
the  only  time  a  bed  was  made  wet  during  1893,  when  Alice  was  with  me.

The  Monday  after  Ellen's  hair  was  cut  off,  I  sent  her  and  Alice  away.
During  the  absence  of  both  for  one  day,  nothing,  to  my  knowledge,  took
place.  On  Alice's  return,  a  few  things  were  unaccountably  moved  about,
and  on  the  return  of  my  niece  the  following  Wednesday,  all  abnormal
manifestations  ceased  for  a  whole,  year.  This  was  near  the  end  of
November,  1893.

In  April,  1894,  Alice  left,  and  in  September  a  new  servant  arrived  (whom
we  always  called  Jane).

In  November,  things  of  an  unusual  kind  began  again— beds  were  con-
tinually being  wetted,  things  moved  about  and  lost,  a  door  locked  and  a  key
missing  on  two  different  occasions,  so  that  I  had  to  have  the  lock  taken  off
to  be  able  to  get  about,  and  as  a  new  feature  ni  the  matter,  things  put  on
the  fire.

The  first  time  anything  unusual  happened  in  connection  with  my  servant
Jane  was  one  Saturday  early  in  November,  '94.  I  sent  her  for  some  soap,
which  she  brought  home  and  placed  on  the  table  in  the  kitchen  and  then  went
about  her  work.  I  was  in  the  kitchen  at  the  time  and  saw  it  placed  on  the
table,  but  after  that  lost  sight  of  it.  In  the  afternoon  this  soap  was  wanted,
but  could  not  be  found  ;  my  servant  was  greatly  concerned  about  its  loss  and
oflfered  to  buy  me  a  new  piece.  I  was  lying  down  in  the  sitting  room  when
the  soap  was  missed,  and  said Don't  be  frightened,  Jane  ;  go  and  look  in


84


Frank  Podmore.


the  boiler."  The  soap  was  found  there.  I  mentiuned  the  boiler  as  a  likely
place  to  find  it,  as  from  experience  I  knew  that  it  was  a  favourite  hiding-
place.  Another  of  the  first  cases  of  this  second  set  of  annoyances  was
when  I  was  at  tea  one  Saturday.  Jane  was  in  the  room,  and  filled  a  jug
with  liot  watei",  which  she  set  on  tlie  table  in  front  of  me.  When  I  was
about  to  use  it,  I  heard  something  metallic  in  tlie  jug,  and  on  looking  found
my  scissors  in  it.  The  girl  declared  that  she  was  sure  the  scissors  were  not
in  it  when  she  filled  it  with  hot  water.

The  next  morning,  Sunday,  the  servant  found  the  door  locked  between
the  sitting-room  and  the  office,  and  the  key  missing.  I  had  the  lock  taken
off.  The  next  day  the  key  was  found,  and  I  had  the  lock  replaced.  I  put
the  key  in  my  own  pocket  for  safety,  as,  till  now,  nothing  had  been  removed
from  my  person.  In  the  evening,  however,  I  found  the  key  was  gone,  and
as  I  expected  in  consequence  that  the  door  would  be  locked,  I  looked  at
about  10.30  p.m.,  after  supper,  to  see  if  it  was  so — it  was  not.  Shortly
afterwards,  when  I  was  poking  the  fire,  Ellen  and  the  servant  heard  a
"click,"  and  Jane  said  to  my  niece,  "Did  you  hear  that?"  She  said
"Yes,"  and  I  exclaimed  "Go  and  look  at  the  door."  Jane  went  and
looked,  saying,  "Locked,  miss," — it  was  locked  !  No  one  had  been  near
the  door  since  I  had  looked  and  f(_>und  it  not  locked.  I  had  to  take  the  lock
ofT  again.  Next  morning  the  key  was  found  in  a  saucepan  of  water.  The
most  distressing  form  of  annoyance  which  has  characterised  these  disturb-
ances has  been  the  repeated  wetting  of  the  beds  both  witli  clean  and  foul
water.  In  1894  this  became  frequent  ;  sometimes  all  four  beds  (there  are
two  on  one  bedstead)  have  been  wetted  at  the  same  time.  I  have  super-
intended the  housemaid's  work  in  the  bedrooms,  but  still  the  beds  have  been
wetted,  but  not  so  much.  Ellen  or  Jane  have  always  been  the  last  upstairs
on  these  occasions,  except  when  sometimes  tliey  have  come  down  together.

One  Sunday  (same  day  she  found  door  locked  first  time)  during  November,
the  servant  reported  the  teapot  missing.  On  Thursday  Miss  H.  was  helping
me  to  look  for  some  stockings,  which  also  had  been  lost.  We  had  carefully
gone  through  all  three  bedrooms  from  Ellen's  to  mine,  but  not  finding  them,
determined  to  search  back  again  before  trying  downstairs.  We  were
ending  our  second  search  of  the  bedrooms  when  on  opening  a  box  situated
near  the  top  of  the  stair,s,  we  found  on  the  top  of  everything  the  missing  tea-
pot ;  this  box  had  been  opened  and  searched  by  us  a  few  minutes  before,  at
which  time  there  was  no  teapot  in  it.  I  am  certain  that  Ellen  could  not  have
come  up  and  placed  it  there  while  we  were  in  my  room  and  the  servant  was
not  in  the  house.  Going  on  with  our  search  for  the  stockings  downstairs,  1
put  my  hand  into  the  boiler  and  found  it  empty.  Ellen  at  that  moment  came
out  of  the  oftice,  and  went  straight  to  the  cupboard  for  the  scissors,  which  were
seen  there  before  we  went  upstaii's.  They  were  not  to  be  found.  Ellen  asked
lue  if  I  knew  where  they  were,  I  said  "No."  During  this  conversation  Miss
H.  and  I  had  gone  into  the  sitting  room  from  the  kitchen  and  after  staying
for  a  minute  or  two  in  that  room  looking  for  the  scissors,  I  returned  to  the
kitchen,  and  again  felt  in  the  boiler,  where  I  now  found  the  scissors.  Miss
H.  followed  me  into  the  kitchen  and  Ellen  followed  her.  I  am  certain  that
Ellen  did  not  go  into  the  kitchen  between  the  time  I  felt  in  the  boiler  for
the  stockings  and  the  finding  of  the  scissors. The  servant  was  still  out.


Poltergeists.


S5


The  police  were  called  in,  but  could  make  nothing  of  it  all.

One  Wednesday  in  November,  Jane  and  my  niece  went  away  from  home,
but  before  they  left  we  missed  the  lamp  glass  from  my  lamp.  On  Friday  T
was  sitting  over  the  fire  in  an  armchair  when  I  was  called  into  the  office.  On
my  return  I  found  the  curtains  of  the  window  behind  my  chair  had  been
pulled  back  and  hitched  up  over  tlie  back  of  my  chair,  and  when  I  came  to
look  close  I  found  my  lamp  glass  on  the  sill.  Miss  Jones  came  in  just  after
and  I  showed  her  the  state  of  the  curtain  and  the  position  of  the  lamp  glass.
I  don't  know  when  the  glass  got  there,  it  might  have  been  there  since  Wed-
nesday.

On  another  occasion,  in  November  1894,  I  was  engaged  in  the  office  and
had  told  Ellen  to  watch  a  garment  which  was  drying  before  the  tire  in  the
sitting  room  ( it  must  always  be  remembered  that  we  found  that  as  long  as
anything  was  watched  it  was  not  interfered  with).  Ellen  was  wanted  in  the
office,  and  before  coming  removed  the  garment  to  the  kitchen  table  for  safety.
On  her  return  in  a  few  minutes  .she  found  the  garment  on  the  fire.  I  took  it
off  myself.  Jane  was  upstairs  all  the  time  and  knew  nothing  about  it.
During  this  month  also,  when  alone  in  the  house,  I  have  hear-d  steps  in  the
room  over  the  sitting  room,  and  once  when  Miss  H.  and  I  were  the  only
people  at  home  we  both  heard  the  steps  in  the  same  room.

I  also  heard  the  nine  knocks  about  which  Miss  H.  speaks  when  she  was
in  the  cellar. I  never  heard  similar  knocks  at  any  other  time.

What  I  have  stated  is  only  a  small  part  of  that  which  has  taken  place.
At  one  time  things  of  one  kind  or  another  went  on  every  hour  of  the  day  ;
they  are  not  now  so  frequent.  Still  on  Friday,  .January  ith,  1895,  Miss  B.,  my
assistant  in  the  post  office,  lost  some  of  her  things,  and  on  Saturday,  the  19th,
a  folded  sheet  was  put  into  the  water  in  one  of  the  bedrooms.  Ellen,  who
had  gone  upstairs  for  a  handkerchief,  says  all  was  right  when  she  left  the
room,  but  when  I  went  up  a  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards  the  sheet  was  in
the  water. Our  servant  had  left  us  before  this  took  place.

I  have  perfect  confidence  in  my  niece  and  do  not  think  for  a  moment  that
Ellen  has  had  any  hand  in  producing  these  mysterious  and  annoying  things.
Nor  can  I  suspect  either  of  my  servants.

I  have  had  to  search  the  house  so  many  times  for  various  things  that  I
know  every  corner  of  it,  and  feel  sure  that  when  things  are  missing  and
subsequently  found  in  the  yard  or  house,  they  could  not  in  the  meantime  be
concealed  anywhere  about.  I  am  confident  that  if  they  had  been  in  the
house  I  should  have  found  them,  at  all  events  such  large  things  as  lady's
hats,  a  teapot,  etc.  Small  things,  of  course,  I  could  not  be  so  confident
about.

I  have  had  many  people  in  the  house  who  liave  searched  it  and  cross-
examined  us  for  an  explanation  of  these  things,  but  with  no  result.  On  more
than  one  occasion  when  Alice  with  lier  hands  boimd  was  sent  upstairs  and
returned  with  the  white  marks  on  her  back,  the  stairs  and  rooms  above
have  been  searched  to  discover  anything  by  means  of  which  she  might  have
printed  the  marks  on  her  back  or  otherwise  caused  them,  ]nit  nothing  has
been  found  of  this  nature.

My  landlord,  Mr.  T.,  a  retired  carpenter,  has  frequently  been  here  ;  he
speaks  about  the  aftair  in  a  peculiar  manner. He  says  for  example  that  his


86


Fro/Ilk  Pochnore.


wife,  who  lived  in  this  Iiouse  with  him  20  or  22  years  ago,  "  had  a  devil  ;  "
tliat  it  would  soon  all  come  out  now.  I  asked  on  <.)ne  occasion  if  lie  could
see  through  my  affair.  He  assented  and  added,  "But  I  have  left  it  all  to
God.  He  has  forgiven  me."  Another  day  I  asked  him  to  explain  his
meaning  as  to  seeing  through  this  affair,  but  he  said  "  How  can  I  ?  It  is
impossible  for  me  to  explain  it."

I  think  it  right  to  say  that  I  think  he  has  a  kind  of  religious  mania,  and  I
am  not  altogether  sure  that  he  quite  understands  the  significance  which
might  be  attached  to  his  statements.

Some  gentlemen  came  on  the  evening  of  January  5th  and  held  a  seance.
They  suppose  themselves  to  liave  got  into  communication  with  the  "  sjjirit  "
who  is  causing  all  these  annoyances,  and  to  have  obtained  a  very  extraordinary
account  of  wlio  he  had  been  in  this  life  and  what  had  become  of  him.

T  know  nothing  of  sijiritualism  and  never  was  at  a  seance  before,  so  I  can
offer  no  opinion  about  this  one.

Ill  a  letter  dated  June,  1895,  Miss  K.  stated  that  the  distuibances
.still  continued  ;  the  new  servant's  best  hat  had  I'ecently  been  found  in
a  water-jug,  and  a  pair  of  stockings,  some  teacups  and  a  library  book
in  the  kitchen  boiler.

Other  witnesses  depose  to  the  disappearances  of  gloves,  a  hat,  and
various  other  objects  ;  and  confirm  Miss  K.'s  account  of  the  finding
of  the  teapot,  the  chalk  marks  on  the  servant's  back,  and  other
phenomena.

Of  Ellen,  Colonel  Taylor  writes,  '•  She  is  a  girl  of  about  16  years
old,  very  intelligent,  but  a  cripple  from  her  infancy.  >She  cannot
easily  raise  her  hands  to  her  head.  She  uses  scissors  in  an  imperfect
and  awkward  manner.  She  limps  and  is  not  able  to  move  about
quickly,  or  witliout  considerable  noise."

In  her  signed  statement  Ellen  corroborates  generally  her  aunt's
version  of  the  various  incidents,  and  denies  that  she  herself  had  had
any  part  in  doing  the  things. The  statement  concludes  as  follows  : —

Statement  of  Ellen  P.

February  IStli,  1895.

1st  Appearance. — I  now  come  to  a  separate  experience  of  mine.

On  June  Otli,  1893,  before  my  grandmother  died,  but  after  a  few
unaccountable  things  had  taken  place  in  the  house,  I  was  in  the  office  when
a  stranger  who  was  well  dressed  and  had  a  top  hat  on  came  in  and  asked  for
a  Postal  (!)riler  for  5s.  I  gave  him  one,  and  he  paid  for  it  in  two  half-crowns
and  a  jjeniiy.  I  thought  him  an  ordinary  customer.  He  entered  into
conversation  with  me,  and  said  he  knew  my  grandfather  and  other  relations,
that  he  knew  my  Auntie  veiy  well,  and  told  me  her  Christian  name.  I  said,
"  Let  me  call  her,  she  would  like  to  see  you,"  but  he  would  not  let  me.
Eventually  he  went  out  and  I  told  Auntie  about  him.

2)id  Appvuyanre. — At  about  4.15  the  same  day  I  was  in  Orchard-street
when  a  man,  like  a  beggar,  in  ragged  clothes,  whom  I  did  not  recognize,  and


Poltergeists.


87


■\vlio  was  standing  a  little  way  down  Newton-street,  beckoned  to  me  and  said,
"  Come  here,  I  won't  hurt  you.  I  am  the  gentleman  who  was  talking  to  you
in  the  office."  I  went  uji  to  him  and  did  not  feel  afraid,  nor  at  the  time  did
I  think  how  strange  it  was  that  he  should  be  so  difi'erent.  He  said  his  name
was  Sykes  and  that  he  lived  in  Lacey-street,  but  he  carried  on  the  thread  of
the  conversation  begun  in  the  office,  and  at  the  time  I  considered  him  the
same  individual  as  had  bought  the  5s.  order,  in  spite  of  his  changed
appearance.  He  also  told  me  on  this  occasion  that  my  Aunt  had  written
a  business  letter,  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  and
its  contents.  He  said  that  my  Aunt  had  sold  her  earrings  some  time  ago,
and  what  she  had  got  for  them.  He  told  me  that  Auntie  had  been  to  G.'s
shop  and  what  she  had  bought.  He  also  rejaeated  to  me  a  conversation  which
had  been  carried  on  during  the  day  in  the  office  in  my  presence  between  my
Aunt  and  two  friends  who  came  in.  I  asked  him  how  ho  knew,  and  he
answered  that  he  was  listening  round  the  corner.

3rd  Appearance. — At  5. .30  about,  I  was  in  the  yard  when  he  looked  over
the  door  at  the  end.  Tliis  time  he  was  dressed  as  a  parson,  and  had  quite  a
different  face.  I  only  saw  his  head  and  as  much  of  his  neck  as  to  show  me
his  clerical  collar,  etc.  I  did  not  recognize  him,  except  that  he  said  that  he  was
the  same  person  who  had  spoken  to  me  before,  and  from  his  conversation  I
believed  him.  He  told  me  he  was  the  Rev.  Mr.  B.,  who  had  been  engaged
to  my  aunt's  sister,  and  added  that  she  did  not  die  of  consumption,  but  that
he  had  broken  her  heart.  He  said  he  had  preached  at  St.  Stephen's  Church.
He  said  he  stuck  on  his  moustache  with  gum,  and  had  often  tried  to  alter
the  colour  of  his  eyes  by  pouring  ink  into  them.  He  showed  me  a  small
hassock  which  he  said  he  kept  to  enable  him  to  look  over  the  gate,  and  he
showed  me  something  black  which  he  said  was  the  pocket  in  which  he  kept
it.  He  said  lastly,  "  I  have  plenty  of  money,  but  I  would  rather  lay  it  all
at  your  feet  than  that  your  Auntie  should  see  me."

4^/i  Appearance. — At  about  7  the  same  evening  I  was  in  the  W.  road
when  I  saw  him  again.  This  time  he  was  dressed  as  a  soldier.  He  had  on  a
striped  coat,  red  and  black,  dark  trousers  with  a  wide  red  stripe  down  them
and  a  round  cap  with  a  yellow  band  set  slantways  on  his  head.  He  had  a
gun  in  his  hand  which  he  held  by  the  middle,  off  the  ground,  and  with  the
thick  end  towards  me.  I  know  it  was  a  gun  because  I  saw  the  thing  you
pull  to  make  it  go  off.  He  was  standing  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  pavement
facing  inwards.  He  told  me  that  Auntie  was  in  the  habit  of  walking  along
the  T.  Road  with  a  dark  lady  ;  he  did  not  like  it,  and  would  shoot  them,
but  would  sh<jot  the  dark  lady  first.  He  said  he  loved  Auntie,  and  I  asked
him  why  he  wanted  to  shoot  her,  and  he  answered  "  I  must  do  my  duty."  I
knew  him  for  the  same  person  that  I  had  spoken  to  before  by  his  conversa-
tion. He  had  stopped  me  as  I  jjassed  him.

bill  Appearance. — Next  day  about  8.30  a.m.  I  saw  him  again  over  the
yard  gate,  this  time  dressed  as  a  sailor.  He  said,  "Here  I  am  again.  I
was  in  the  passage  when  tlie  policeman  came  at  12  o'clock  last  night.  I  put
up  my  hands  and  disappeared.  When  I  want  to  turn  into  a  man  again  I  put
my  hands  down.  It  is  your  grandmother's  birthday  to-day,  and  your  Aunt
has  just  wished  her  '  many  happy  returns  of  the  day.'  "  He  also  said  that
Granny  had  spasms  that  morning,  which  was  true. It  was  also  true  about


88


Frank  Podmore.


Auntie  wishing  her  mother  many  hajjpy  returns,  for  I  had  heard  her  do  so
just  before  the  sailor  appeared.  He  said  also,  "  I  know  tliey  are  going
to  set  the  police  to  watch  me.''

6th  Appearance. — About  five  minutes  after  this  he  again  looked  over  the
gate,  this  time  as  a  woman  dressed  in  maroon  velvet  with  a  hat  just  like
Auntie's.  She  said,  "  Come  here.  I  want  to  tell  you  something  more."  Site
said  that  Mrs.  M.  had  come  in  and  borrowed  2s.  from  Auntie,  and  had
repaid  it  on  Saturday  morning.

7th  Appearance. — Again  at  about  8.40  she  appeared  over  the  gate,  this
time  dressed  in  dark  blue  velvet.  Auntie  had  tukl  me  that  if  I  saw  him  (or
her)  again  I  was  to  say  that  she  wondered  tliat  he  (or  she)  had  notliing  better
to  do.  This  I  did.  Her  eyes  blazed,  and  she  said,  "If  she  says  that  again
I  will  make  her  life  a  terror  to  lier. "

Sth  Appexrance. — Mr.  F.  came  in  during  the  morning,  and  on  being  told
about  these  visits  insisted  on  going  f(.)r  the  police.  While  he  was  gone,  and
while  Auntie  was  upstairs,  I  was  in  the  office  at  the  telegraph  instrument,
when  "  my  stranger  "  came  ill  as  a  well-dressed  man  and  said,  "  The  police
are  after  me,  I  am  going  abroad."  He  put  out  his  left  hand  to  shake  hands,
but  I  could  not  leave  the  instrument.  He  then  said,  "Good-bye.  I  am  off,
you  will  never  see  me  again."

2th  Apjpearance. — I  did  see  him  again,  however,  in  the  street  shortly  after-
wards ;  as  I  passed  liim  he  said,  without  turning  to  me,  "  You  see  I  am  not
gone  yet. "

The  following  are  some  moi'e  scraps  of  conversation  I  remember,  l)ut
can't  quite  recollect  at  which  appearance  they  took  place.

When  he  appeared  as  a  beggar,  I  think,  lie  told  me  that  Mr.  J.  had
come  to  breakfast  on  one  occasion  some  years  before,  and  had  liad  a  hard
egg  given  to  hiui.

He  told  me  that  lie  was  the  person  who  had  wjitten  a  letter  to  my  Aunt
asking  her  to  meet  him  on  the  W.  road.

During  one  of  his  visits  lie  told  me  that  Auntie  had  come  to  the  N.
Street  window  and  asked  Granny  for  Miss  J.'s  "  register  "  (a  book).  I  was
asleep  at  the  time  she  did  so,  and  did  not  know  it  till  he  told  me.

I  had  heard  "Grandma  "  say  to  Auntie,  "  I  wonder  if  the  C. 's  could  see
him  in  the  passage."  When  afterwards  I  went  into  the  yard  and  he  was
speaking  to  me,  I  can't  remember  which  time,  he  said,  "  You  think  the  C.'s
can  see  me,  but  they  can't  ;  nobody  can  see  me."  I  had  not  mentioned  the
C.'s  to  him.

The  C.'s  then  lived  opposite  to  us,  and  tlieir  "  l)ake  office"  was  almost
oj)posite  our  passage.

From  time  to  time  I  told  Auntie  and  my  grandmother  what  was  going
on.  Auntie  made  several  attempts  to  see  him,  but  never  could  do  so,  and  the
police  were  unable  to  trace  him  in  any  way.

He  told  me  much  more  during  our  conversations  than  I  can  now
remember.

Some  of  the  things  he  told  me  I  knew  before,  some  I  remembered  when
he  told  me,  but  much  that  he  said  was  new  to  me,  and  the  pleasure  of  being-
told  my  Aunt's  secrets  had  something  to  do  with  my  forgetting  to  be
frightened  at  his  change  of  api^earance.


Poltergeists.


89


It  remains  only  to  add  that  several  witnesses  had  heard  mysterious
steps  and  knockings  in  the  house ;  and  that  three  persons  testified  to
having  seen,  on  two  separate  occasions,  a  white  cloudy  apparition  in  the
parlour. On  the  first  of  these  occasions  the  appai-ition  was  collective.

As  regards  the  physical  phenomena,  Colonel  Taylor  remarks  that
"  the  greater  number  of  the  incidents  would,  if  considered  singly,  be
justly  and  naturally  referred  to  the  ordinary  action  of  some  one  or
other  of  the  occupants  of  the  house."  After  considering  each  incident
separately  and  pointing  out  a  possible  explanation  by  normal  means,
he  proceeds: — "As  to  the  marks  i-eported  to  have  been  repeatedly
produced  on  the  servant's  back,  if  any  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  the
accuracy  of  the  narrators,  and  if  the  amount  of  evidence  available  is
considered  sufficient,  these  may  be  considered,  I  think,  as  beyond
explanation  by  ordinary  means."  As  regards  the  amount  of  evidence
available,  no  less  than  six  witnesses  (exclusive  of  Miss  K.  and  Alice
herself)  attest  the  appearance  of  the  mysterious  "  markings  "  on  the
servant's  back,  after  she  had  been  sent  upstairs  with  her  hands  tightly
bound.  One  witness  adds  the  interesting  observation  that  when  the
servant  was  sent  into  the  yard  outside  the  house  instead  of  upstairs,
"a  white  mark  of  indefinite  shape"  was  found  on  her  back;  and
another  states  that  when  he  accompanied  Alice  upstairs  no  marks
appeared.  None  of  the  witnesses  in  their  original  statements  mention
the  whereabouts  of  Ellen  during  these  manifestations.  Alice  in
her  account  of  the  matter  does  not  mention  Ellen ;  and  Ellen's
own  signed  statement  contains  no  allusion  to  the  chalk  marks.  It
is  true  that  Colonel  Taylor,  in  his  report,  states  that  Ellen  was  present
and  witnessed  the  phenomenon,  but  he  does  not  give  his  authority  for
this  statement.  One  of  the  witnesses,  Mr.  R.,  a  clerk  from  the  head
post  office  of  the  town,  in  a  report  which  he  was  good  enough  to  send
us  in  March,  1896  (more  than  two  years  after  the  occurrence),  states
that  Ellen  was  in  the  parlour  on  the  occasion  when  he  was  present  and
saw  the  chalk  marks  with  the  others  in  the  kitchen.  His  contem-
porai'y  statement  (unsigned),  as  taken  down  by  Colonel  Taylor,  contains
however,  no  reference  to  Ellen.

In  view  of  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  a  person  who,
on  any  theory  of  the  disturbances,  must  be  regai-ded  as  the  central
figure  in  the  drama,  and  regarding  the  phenomenon  as  one  which  could
be  readily  produced  by  normal  means,  even  without  Ellen's  intervention,
I  am  disposed  to  question  both  the  accuracy  of  the  narrators,  and  the
sufficiency  of  the  evidence  in  this  instance  for  abnormal  agency,  and  if
this  is  admitted  the  whole  case  for  such  agency  falls  to  the  ground.

It  has  been  shown  that  Ellen  was  subject  to  hallucinations  of  a
lively  kind ;  also  that  she  had  by  some  means  acquired  knowledge  of
the  contents  of  an  anonymous  letter  addressed  to  her  aunt,  and  of  a


90


Franl'  Podmore.


business  letter  written  by  her  aunt,  which  never  reached  its  pi'oper
destination.  It  will  be  seen,  furtiier,  that  if  allowance  is  made  for
so  much  exaggeration  and  such  lapses  of  memory  as  we  have
found  to  occur  in  similar  cases,  all  the  physical  phenomena  alleged
to  have  taken  place  were  well  within  the  competence  of  Ellen,  aided
occasionally  by  one  of  the  servants,  to  perform  by  perfectly  normal
means.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  look  any  further  for  an  explanation
of  the  mystery.  If  this  explanation  has  not  commended  itself  to  Miss
K.,  it  is  apparently  because  she  has  implicit  confidence  in  her  niece's
own  statement  that  she  didn't  do  the  things.

Case  VII. — The  Durweston  Case.

In  January,  1895,  we  received  accounts  of  an  outbreak  in  the
West  Country.  The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  Western  Gazette,
January  11th,  1895.

"  The  little  village  of  Durweston,  situate  about  three  miles  from  Blandford,
has  been  for  some  weeks  past  the  scene  of  considerable  excitement  in  conse-
quence of  the  supposition  that  one  of  its  cottages  is  haunted.  The  cottage  in
question  is  one  of  a  double  tenement,  situate  at  Norton — a  spot  isolated  from
the  rest  of  tlie  village,  some  considerable  distance  from  the  highway,  and  on
the  outskirts  of  a  wood.  The  cottages  are  owned  by  Viscount  Portman  ;  his
keeper  (named  Newman)  occupies  one,  and  the  other  until  recently  has  been
in  the  occupation  of  a  widow  (named  Mrs.  Best),  her  daughter,  and  two  little
orjjhan  girls,  who  were  boarded  out  to  Mrs.  Best  by  tlie  Honourable  Misses
Pitt,  of  Steepleton.  It  is  in  the  latter  house  that  tliese  occurrences  took  place,
which  have  caused  such  a  scare  in  tlie  village.  More  than  a  month  since  Mrs.
Best — who  it  may  here  be  stated,  is  a  most  respectable  woman,  of  a  quiet,
inoffensive  disposition,  and  on  good  terms  with  her  neighbours  and  the  village
generally  —became  puzzled  by  faint  knocking  and  scratcliing  in  various  parts
of  the  house,  and  could  account  for  the  same  in  no  possible  way.  As  days
passed  there  was  a  repetition  of  these  strange  noises,  which  gradually
increased  in  sound,  until  they  could  be  heard  by  the  keeper  Newman  in  his
own  house.  About  a  fortnight  since  these  sounds — which  the  village  black-
smith, who  was  an  auditor  (jf  the  same,  described  as  then  being  as  heavj'  as
sledge  hannner  blows — were  succeeded  by  still  more  startling  events,  for,
according  to  Mrs.  Best's  version,  stones  came  violently  through  the  bedroom
windows,  smashing  the  panes,  and  then  returned  through  the  windows.
The  neighbours  instituted  a  thorough  search  of  the  surroundings  to  see  if
there  was  any  one  in  hiding  who  was  playing  a  joke  upon  the  woman,  but
there  was  not  the  slightest  trace  of  a  human  being,  nor  of  footsteps."

In  the  latter  part  of  January  Mr.  Westlake  proceeded  to  Durweston
and  took  down  the  statements  of  some  of  the  principal  witnesses —
about  20  in  all.

The  disturbances,  it  appears,  began  on  December  13th,  1894.  On
the  18th  December  Mr.  Newman  witnessed  some  of  the  phenomena.


Poltergeists.


91


The  following  is  an  extract  from  Mr.  "Westlake's  notes  of  an
.•account  given  to  him  by  Mr.  Newman  on  the  23rd  January,  1895  : —

On  Tuesday  (December  18th)  between  10  and  11  a.m.,  Mrs.  Best  sent
for  me,  and  told  me  that  Annie  (the  elder  girl,  about  13  years  of  age)  had
seen  a  boot  come  out  of  the  garden  plot  and  strike  the  back  door,  leaving  a
muddy  mark.  I  went  into  Mrs.  Best's,  and  I  saw  a  bead  strike  the
window  ;  and  then  soon  after  a  big  blue  bead  struck  the  window  and  broke
it,  and  fell  back.  Then  a  little  toy-whistle  struck  the  window,  but  did  not
break  it.  Then  I  sat  down  in  the  chair,  and  said,  "  You're  a  coward,  you're
a  coward  ;  why  don't  you  throw  money  ? "  I  was  looking  at  the  door
opening  into  the  garden,  it  was  wide  open,  leaving  a  space  of  15  inches
between  it  and  the  inner  wall,  when  I  saw  coming  from  behind,  the  door,  a
•quantity  of  little  shells.  They  came  round  the  door  from  a  height  of  about
6  feet.  They  came  one  at  a  time,  at  intervals  varying  from  half-a-minute
to  a  minute.  They  came  very  slowly,  and  when  they  hit  me  I  could  hardly
feel  them.  With  the  shells  came  two  thimbles.  They  came  so  slowly,  that
in  the  ordinary  way  they  would  have  di'opped  long  before  they  reached  me.
They  came  from  a  point,  some,  I  think,  a  trifle  higher,  and  some  no  higher,
than  my  head.  Both  the  thimbles  struck  my  hat.  Some  missed  my  head
and  went  just  past,  and  fell  do'mi  slantingwise  {not  as  if  suddenly  dropped).
Those  that  struck  me  fell  straight  down.

The  two  children  were  all  the  time  in  the  same  room  with  me.

Then  right  from  behind  me  a  slate  pencil  came  as  if  from  the  copper.
The  pencil  was  about  2i  inches  long,  and  went  slowly  on  a  slant  to  a  bowl
•on  the  floor  in  the  pantry  ;  and  another  piece  went  just  in  tlie  same
■direction  just  over  the  bowl,  and  went  into  a  pot  of  dirty  water.

And  a  hasp,  like  the  hasp  of  a  glove,  was  dropped  into  my  lap  from  a
point  above  the  level  of  my  head.

I  never  saw  any  of  the  things  begin  to  move.  I  saw  some  of  them  just
after  they  were  started.  Time  was  somewhere  between  10  and  11  a.m. —a
nice  clear  day  ;  don't  remember  whether  there  was  sunlight.

A  boot  came  then  in  from  outside  the  door.  It  came  in  moving  along
a  foot  above  the  ground,  and  pitched  down.  The  boot  had  been  lying  right
in  front  of  the  door,  where  it  had  previously  fallen.  This  boot  came
towards  me,  and  fell  down  just  at  my  side.  Mrs.  Best  took  it  and  threw  it
out — it  was  an  old  dirty  boot  from  otf  the  garden  plot  (it  was  a  woman's
boot).  I  think  the  boot  moved  about  as  slow  as  the  others,  but  cannot
quite  remember. It  finally  fell  softly.

After  the  boot  was  thrown  out  into  the  garden,  I  went  out  and  put  my
foot  on  it,  and  said,  "I  defy  anything  to  move  this  boot."  Just  as  I
stepped  off,  it  rose  up  behind  me  and  knocked  my  hat  off ;  there  was  no  one
behind  me. The  boot  and  the  hat  fell  down  together.

A  few  days  later  the  two  children,  with  their  foster-mother,  Mrs.
Best — a  woman,  it  should  be  said,  of  about  60  years — went  to  stay  in
Mr.  Newman's  cottage  for  some  days.  Whilst  they  were  there  the
Rector  of  Durweston,  the  Rev.  W.  M.  Anderson,  came  to  witness  the
phenomena. On  his  first  visit  (Friday,  the  4th  January,  1895)  nothing


92


Frank  Podmore.


took  place.  On  Thursday,  January  10th,  he  went  again,  accompanied!
by  Mr.  Sheppard,  the  schoolmaster.  Mi-s.  Best  took  the  two  children
upstairs  and  put  them  to  bed,  herself  lying  down  in  the  bed  with
them. The  subjoined  chart  shows  the  disposition  of  the  furniture  : —

MRS.  BEST'S  HOUSE.


bo
a

■ft

ft

P3


.a


Washing
Stand


MR.  NEWMAN'S  HOUSE.


I  §
'3  "H


bo  -


+  •!•  O


East


Poltergeists.


93


Loud  rappins^s  were  heard,  apparently  on  the  walls  in  different
parts  of  the  room.  Mr.  Sheppard  went  outside  the  house  to  see  that
no  one  was  playing  tricks  from  outside,  whilst  the  Rector  remained
within,  the  noises  still  continuing.  Subjoined  is  an  extract  from  Mr.
Anderson's  account,  written  on  the  25th  January,  1895,  of  the  events
of  that  evening  : —

I  put  my  ear  and  hand  to  the  wall,  but  could  not  detect  any  vibration  ;
but  when  resting  my  hand  on  the  rail  at  the  bottom  of  the  bed,  I  could
■distinctly  feel  a  vibration  varying  according  to  the  loudness  of  the
knocking.  It  is,  perhaps,  needless  to  say  that  I  searched  the  room  and  the
house,  also  Mrs.  Best's  house  from  top  to  bottom.  Occasionally  there
•was  a  noise  in  the  wall,  as  if  some  one  were  scratching  with  their  nails.
This  scratching  also  appeared  to  be  going  on  in  the  mattress  of  the  bed,
although  I  am  sure  it  was  not  produced  by  any  of  the  three  occupants  of
the  bed,  as  I  could  see  their  hands,  and  watched  them  very  closely  all  the
time.

There  was  a  lighted  lamp,  a  small  hand  lamp  giving  a  good  light,  on  the
washstand  the  whole  time. When  the  rapping  first  began,  I  noticed  that
it  frequently  ceased  when  I  came  into  the  room,  but  after  a  short  time  it
made  no  difference,  and  was  loud  and  continuous  when  every  inmate  of  the
house  was  in  the  room. About  2.15  a.m.  it  was  suggested  by  someone,  I
helieve  Mr.  Sheppard,  that  the  "Agency"  should  be  asked  whether  it
would  write  any  communication  on  a  slate  ;  the  number  of  raps  requested
for  an  affirtnative  were  given. There  was  no  slate  in  the  Newmans'  house,
but  Mrs.  Best  told  us  where  we  should  find  one  in  her  house.  Newman,
Mr.  Sheppard,  and  myself  went  into  her  house,  found  the  slate  and  a  jnece
■of  pencil,  and  returned. In  rej^ly  to  several  questions  as  to  where  the  slate
was  to  be  placed,  the  number  of  knocks  asked  for  was  given  for  the  wiirdow-
sill  (inside,  of  course),  the  sill  being  some  9  or  10  inches  wide. I  may
mention  that  every  conceivable  place  in  the  room  was  suggested  one  after
the  other,  but  the  right  number  of  raps  was  not  given,  but  a  short,  sharp
knock  which  seemed  always  to  be  given  for  a  negative. We  almost  gave  up
at  this  point,  until  as  an  afterthought  I  suggested  the  window-sill,  which  was
at  once  accepted. The  next  question  was  as  to  who  was  to  remain  in  the
room,  and  according  to  the  knocks  every  one  was  to  leave,  except  the  two
children  and  Mrs.  Best  ;  the  light  was  also  to  be  removed. The  sign  to  be
given  when  the  writing  was  finished  was  four  raps. We  all  retired  down
the  stairs,  which  are  about  ten  in  number  and  straight. I  remained  at  the
bottom  of  the  stairs,  with  the  bedroom  door  wide  open,  it  was  very  dark  at
the  time. Some  15  seconds  elapsed,  and  amid  perfect  silence  we  all  heard
the  pencil  scratching  on  the  slate. Mrs.  Best  gave  a  suppressed  groan,
which  I  could  distinctly  hear. Four  sharp  raps  were  given  almost  simul-
taneously with  the  dropping  of  the  pencil  on  the  slate,  and  Mrs.  Best  gave
a  loud,  screaming  call,  "Come." I  was  in  the  room  instantly  ;  the  whole
thing  taking  less  time  than  it  would  take  to  read  this  description.  The
light  showed  some  unmeaning  scratches  on  the  slate. We  asked  for  some-
thing legible,  which  was  promised  in  the  usual  way. It  was  with  the
greatest  difficulty  that  we  could  persuade  Mrs.  Best  to  reniain  in  the  rooui


94


Frank  Podmore.


a  second  time,  but  we  prevailed  on  hei-  to  do  so,  I  promising  to  remain  on
the  stairs.  The  second  time  a  flourish  [something  like  this]  was  on  the^
slate —


Only  the  curves  were  beautifully  drawn  with  firm  bold  lines,  such  as  no-
child  could  produce. The  same  proceedings  took  place  a  third  time,  when

M
1

was  found  on  the  slate. The  fourth  time

MONY

and  the  fifth  time

O

GARDEN
O

Every  time  I  was  nearer  to  the  bedroom  door,  which  was  wide  open  and
opposite  the  window.  The  last  two  or  three  times  I  was  so  close  that  I
could  almost  hear  Mi's.  Best  breathe,  the  silence  being  death-like.  The
slightest  movement  by  any  one  in  the  bed  would  have  been  detected  by  me
in  a  moment,  and  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  the  writing  could  not  have
been  done  by  any  one  in  the  room  without  my  knowing  it.  On  one  occasion
tlie  pencil  rolled  off'  on  to  the  floor,  and  was  broken  in  two  pieces.

Mrs.  Best  cannot  write  ;  the  younger  child  cannot,  she  was  asleep  ;
Annie  Cleave  can.  I  told  Mrs.  Best  that  1  was  myself  convinced  that  no  one
had  moved  in  the  bed,  much  less  left  it,  but  I  said  people  would  .say  such
had  been  the  case.  She  said  she  was  prepared  to  take  a  solemn  oath  that
none  of  them  had  moved  or  left  the  bed,  which  was  some  4  ft.  or  more  from
the  window.

We  could  get  no  more  replies  in  the  way  of  raps,  and  nothing  more  was
heard  that  night. Mr.  Sheppard  and  I  left  at  ten  minutes  to  three.

I  should  like  to  say  a  word  about  the  ch.aracters  of  those  who  have
witnessed  and  heard  these  abnormal  phenomena.  With  one  exception
(Spinney)  they  are  all  known  to  me  personally,  and  the  veracity  and  honesty
of  them  all  is  beyond  question.  Mrs.  Best  is  an  earnest  Cliristian  woman,
who  bears  perhaps  the  highest  cliaracter  in  the  village.

Later,  the  children  were  taken  to  another  house  in  the  village,
where  raps  and  other  noises  were  heard ;  and  were  finally  separated,
the  elder  child,  Annie,  being  removed  to  another  village,  Iwerne
Minster,  to  the  house  of  a  single  woman. There  the  disturl^ance  still


Poltergeists.


95


continued  :  noises  were  heard,  generally  on  the  outer  walls  of  the
house  ;  a  big  stone  was  flung  on  the  roof  of  the  porch  ;  and  snowdrops
were  dug  up  out  of  the  garden  and  flung  about.  On  March  7th,  Miss
M.  H.  Mason,  Local  Government  Board  InsjDector  of  Boarded-out
children,  came  down  and  took  the  child  Annie  to  stay  in  her  flat  in
London  for  a  week.  No  disturbance  worth  recording  occurred  during
her  stay  in  London.

Miss  Mason  had  the  child  examined  by  a  doctor,  who  pronounced
her  of  a  mai'kedly  consumptive  tendency,  and  apparently  hysterical.
A  sister  two  years  older  than  herself,  has  since  died  from  consumption.
According  to  another  witness,  Annie,  during  the  earlier  distui'bances,
saw  a  queer  animal  with  green  head  and  green  eyes,  and  a  big  bushy
tail,  sitting  up  and  pulling  her  doll  to  pieces  with  its  paws.  Gertie,
the  younger  girl,  she  added,  saw  the  same  apjDarition  when  Annie
called  to  her.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  account  given  by  the  educated
witness,  Mr.  Anderson,  of  the  phenomena  observed  by  himself  is  quite
compatible  with  trickery  on  the  part  of  the  children.  But  this
supposition  implies  in  Mrs.  Best  either  connivance  or,  in  the  alterna-
tive, a  degree  of  stupidity  which  it  is  difficult  to  credit.  This  is  a
real  difliculty ;  since  Mrs.  Best,  a  Nonconformist,  was  by  all  her
fellow-villagers,  even  including  the  Rector,  looked  upon  as  a  thoroughly
respectable  woman ;  and  the  sequel  of  the  outbreak,  at  any  rate,  was
most  detrimental  to  her  interests,  since  she  lost  in  the  girl  Annie  a
lucrative  lodger,  who  had  been  with  her  for  nearly  four  years.

As  regards  the  things  vouched  for  by  Newman,  it  should  be  observed
that  the  account  was  not  committed  to  writing  until  5  weeks  after  the
events.

On  the  whole  I  think  it  would  be  diflicult,  on  the  evidence  obtain-
able, to  substantiate  in  this  case  a  theory  of  supernormal  agency.  ^

Case  VIII.— The  Ham  Case.

Early  in  February,  1895,  we  received  intelligence  of  a  Polter-
geist at  Ham,  a  little  village  near  Hungerford,  in  Berkshire.  The
following  extract  from  a  letter  written  by  a  local  clergyman  will  give
some  idea  of  how  the  matter  was  regarded  in  the  neighbourhood.

"Froxfield  Vicarage,  Hungerford,  Berks.

"  Janwo-i/  31st,  1895.
' '  There  is  a  veritable  ghost  at  Ham  ;  it  has  overturned  boots  and  shoes
from  the  slab  of  an  oven  on  to  the  hob  —overturned  a  stool,  and  pitched  the

1  Mr.  Westlake  proposes  to  give  a  fuller  account  of  his  inv  estigations  in  this  case
ill  an  early  number  of  the  Journal.


96


Frank  Podmore.


cat  on  it  into  the  fire — upset  tables  and  all  sorts  of  things.  The  tenant's
name  is  Turner,  and  he  works  for  Mr.  Woodman.  Woodman  has  put  the
man  into  an  adjacent,  but  not  adjoining,  house,  and  has  had  the  floor  of  the
house  taken  up,  but  has  not  discovered  the  cause,  and  now  the  same  pranks
are  going  on  in  the  house  into  which  the  people  have  removed.  It  is  no
delusion— it  takes  place  in  broad  daylight  before  people's  eyes,  and  Edith
Woodman  saw  a  table  overturned  on  Tuesday.  No  one  can  explain  it — it  is
quite  a  mystery,  and  is  causing  great  excitement  thi-ough  the  country-side  ;
people  from  Marlborough,  Hungerford  and  Froxfield  visit  the  scene  of  these
operations.  They  say  that  the  people  liave  a  daughter  who  is  eccentric  and
deformed."

The  ghost  appeal's  to  have  been  particularly  active  on  the  evening
of  January  24th.  Appended  are  extracts  from  two  letters  chronicling
the  events  of  this  remarkable  evening.  The  first  witness  is  the  local
constable  ;  he  appends  to  his  letter  a  plan  of  the  I'oom.

From  Police  Const.ible  H.  King.

County  Police,  Ham,  Hungerford.

February  Uth,  1895.

With  reference  to  what  1  saw  at  Thomas  Turner's  cottage  on  Thursday,
January  24th,  I  respectfully  beg  to  inform  you  that  about  11  p.m.  on  the

PLAN  OF  ROOM.


Cupboard


-X-


A

Armchair


G


Chair
Kitclien

D


/


Table
E


Fireplace


Oven


Kitclien
Table


D

Chair  Chair


D


D


Door


Poltergeists.


97


date  named  above,  I  went  into  Turner's  cottage.  The  first  tiling  I  saw  was
the  ai>mchair  fall  over  on  its  side.  After  a  few  minutes  I  saw  one  of  the
kitchen  chairs  fall  forwards.  The  next  I  saw  was  a  four-legged  stool  which
was  standing  in  the  chimney  corner  that  fell  over  on  its  side  into  the  fire.
No  one  was  near  enough  to  touch  either  when  it  fell.  I  saw  the  things
when  [they  ?]  were  falling,  and  [they  ?]  came  over  with  great  force.  Polly
Turner  was  at  this  time  with  her  father  the  other  side  of  the  house  by  the
oven.  Some  time  after  this  Polly  Turner  came  out  into  the  middle  of  the
room  near  where  I  was,  ( there  were  two  kitchen  chairs  standing  about  2
yards  from  me,  [near  the  pantry]  one  had  books  and  a  workbox  on  it).  Polly
went  near  the  chair,  and  put  out  her  hand  to  take  a  book,  but  before  she
could  take  it,  over  went  the  chair  and  nearly  fell  on  the  girl.  It  fell
towards  her,  but  so  as  to  just  miss  her,  and  she  ran  away  apparently
frightened.  The  armchair  fell  away  from  the  girl,  but  the  other  three
kitchen  chairs  came  towards  her.  The  only  time  that  I  saw  her  anywhere
near  the  chairs  was,  as  I  said,  when  she  went  to  get  a  book,  and  the  chair
fell  before  she  could  reach  it.  I  should  say  that  during  the  time  T  was
there,  Polly  was  three  yards  away  from  the  chairs  when  they  fell  down,  except
the  time  I  mentioned.  I  saw  them  go  down  several  times  ;  they  simply
fell  down,  and  there  remained  till  one  of  the  party  put  them  up  again.
The  persons  present  in  the  room  were  P.O.  H.  King,  Mr.  Thos.  Martin,.
Mr.  F.  H.  Grist,  Mr.  Thos.  Frances,  Ed.  Stockwell,  Simon  Cook,  Wm.
"Whiter,  Abel  Cumings,  Jesse  Rolfe,  and  Mr.  Maggs,  and  Turner's  family.

From  Mr.  J.  Koli'e.

Ham,  Hungerford. Fthrnary  lith,  1895.

I  am  writing  to  give  you  all  information  of  what  I  saw  on  January  24th,
between  a  quarter  past  nine  o'clock  and  twelve  o'clock  p.m.,  in  Mr.  Turner's
house.  The  first  thing  I  saw  was  the  oven's  lid  fall,  and  then  the  stool
with  two  cats  sat  upon  it,  and  it  threw  the  cats  into  the  fire.  There  was  not
much  fire.  The  next  thing  that  went  over  was  one  of  the  chairs  against
the  pantry.  They  both  went  over,  but  it  was  about  five  minutes  between.
Then  I  saw  the  armchair  go  over,  and  I  saw  the  oven's  lid  fall  several  times,
and  the  stool  and  chairs  when  no  one  was  near  them.  They  went  over  with
great  force,  no  one  could  throw  them  over  so  swift.  The  things  went
straight  over.  I  did  not  see  them  start,  for  when  I  was  looking  at  one  thing
to  see  it  go  over,  one  of  the  others  went  over.  The  little  girl  Polly  was
not  close  to  throw  it  over.  Her  father  or  her  brother  was  nursing  her
most  of  the  time  I  was  there.  Mr.  Turner  was  sitting  in  the  chair  close
to  the  oven  most  of  the  time,  and  the  other  people  were  standing  round
by  tlie  table,  and  sometimes  one  or  two  were  around  by  the  armchair,
but  not  [so]  close  but  what  it  could  fall.  I  have  made  a  x  as  near  as  I
could  where  the  people  stood  when  the  things  went  over.  It  could  not  have
been  possible  for  the  little  girl  Polly  to  have  thrown  it  over.

"We  have  received  similar  accounts  of  the  disturbances  on  that  even-
ing from  Mr.  Cumings  and  Mr.  Stockwell.  Another  witness,  Mr.
Martin,  saw  the  furniture  moving  on  two  occasions.  He  writes : —
*'  Thei'e  were  other  persons  present,  standing  all  about  the  room,

H


98


Frank  Podmore.


but  not  very  near  the  chairs.  I  am  quite  sure  the  child  did  not  touch
them,  they  seemed  to  fall  as  she  passed  them.  The  armchair  fell  on
its  side,  the  others  forward.  It  was  between  10  and  11  o'clock  in  the
evening."  Another  witness,  Mr.  .James  Kavanagh,  describes  some
movements  which  he  saw  after  the  Turner  family  had  moved  to
another  house. He  writes  —


Having  heard  so  many  reports  of  table  and  chairs  turning  over,  I  deter-
mined to  visit  and  so  satisfy  my  curiosity.

About  a  fortnight  ago  I  went  to  the  house  at  4.30  p.m.  and  stood
at  place  marked  K.  Nothing  occurred  for  about  ten  minutes,  when  I
heard  the  stool  under  the  t;ible  turn  over.  The  boy  Turner  replaced  it.
In  a  few  minutes  it  toppled  over  again.  A  third  time  it  did  the  same,
and  each  time  towards  the  door.  In  a  short  time  I  observed  the  chair
(marked  in  plan)  turn  over,  likewise  towards  the  door.  The  chair  was
fully  5  or  6  feet  from  me.

I  am  confident  no  one  moved  it.  I  examined  the  chair  well  to  see  if  there
was  any  trickery,  as  I  have  always  been  averse  to  anything  of  the  sort.


Ham  N.  School,  Hungerford,  Berks.

February  WJi,  1895.


PLAN  OF  ROOM.


Fireplace


Mrs.  Turner  +
Polly  Turner  +


K


+  Boy  Tinner


Table  with  stool
under  it.


Chair  +


+


Chair  which
turned  over


Chair  +


Recess
under
Stairs.


Poltergeists.


99


Early  in  February  Mr.  Westlake  went  to  Ham.  On  the  morning
following  his  arrival  he  wrote  as  follows  : —

Letter  I.

Post  Office,  Ham,  Hungerford,  Berks,  February  9th,  1895.
Nothing  is  alleged  in  this  case  but  the  frec^uent  movements  of  objects
(excejat  that  Mrs.  Turner  says  that  once  she  saw  a  woman's  face  in  the  oven).
It  is  one  of  those  baffling  cases  where  the  thing  won't  work,  or  only  incon-
clusively, in  the  presence  of  strangers.  At  least  that  was  my  experience
last  evening  ;  some  local  observers  have  had  better  success,  I  hear.  Never-
theless I  think  it  to  be  genuine  from  the  liundred  and  one  indications  wliich
one  gathers  when  talking  with  the  fdlks  around  their  heartli — the  primitive
seance.  Polly,  a  little  dwarfed  black-haired  girl,  turning  12,  sits  in  the
chimney  corner  and  nurses  the  cats  Topsy  and  Titit — she  is  the  centre  of
force — then  (in  the  absence  of  strangers)  the  coals  fly  about  and  all  moveable
objects  are  thrown  down  ad  libitum,  and  ad  nauseam  according  to  their
account.

It  has  been  a  nine  days'  wonder,  and  local  interest  (all  unintelligent)  is
dying.

The  Turners,  however,  say  that  things  are  as  active  as  ever  (last  evening,
«.(/.)  The  report  that  they  have  made  money  out  of  it  seems  to  be  untrue.

On  the  same  day,  a  few  hours  later,  Mr.  Westlake  writes  as
follows  : —

Letter  II.

The  "  Ham  Ghost "  is  a  humbug  noiv,  whatever  it  may  have  been.  I
made  friends  with  the  cats,  and  their  mistress,  poor  child,  gave  me  a  private
sitting  of  some  2  or  3  hours,  in  the  course  of  whicli  she  moved  between
40  and  50  objects  when  she  thought  I  wasn't  looking  (her  plan  being  to  watch
me  till  I  looked  away.)  However,  I  saw  her  in  contact  with  the  objects  with
every  degree  of  distinctness,  and  on  se.  en  (at  least)  occasions  by  simple
devices  I  had  a  clear  view  of  her  hands  in  contact  with  the  objects  and
saw  them  quickly  moved.  I  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  tiling,  and
said  nothing  to  any  one,  beyond  suggesting  to  the  lady  (Miss  Woodman)  at
the  Manor  House  that  the  affair  would  probably  cease  if  no  further  attention
were  paid  to  it,  and  that  some  one  would  do  well  to  watch  the  child.

She  is  a  dwarf,  aged  12,  who  has  only  lately  learned  to  walk,  pale,  with
long,  black  hair  and  eyes,  very  sharp,  and  watches  one  like  a  cat  a  mouse.
Her  mother  is  said  never  to  leave  the  house  or  to  allow  the  child  to  do  so.

But  it  is  curious  that  a  little  child  should  succeed  in  deceiving  a  whole
country  side,  and  especially  in  deceiving  her  parents  (for  I  do  not  think  they
are  implicated  ; — if  they  have  suspicions,  they  smother  them  ;  they  appear
genuinely  worried.)  The  mother  would  sometimes  ask  the  child,  after  a
particularly  barefaced  "  upset,"  whether  she  did  it,  and  she  always  denied.

Mr.  Westlake  has  kindly  furnished  the  following  additional  particu-
lars of  what  he  observed  : — "After  posting  ray  first  letter,  I  went  to  the
Turners'  and  sat  on  a  bench  in  front  of  the  fire.  No  one  else  was  present

H  2


100


Frank  Podmore.


besides  the  child.  She  sat  on  a  low  stool  in  the  chimney  on  the  right
of  the  fire.  On  the  other  side  of  the  hearth  thei'e  was  a  brick  oven  in
which,  much  to  Polly's  interest,  I  placed  a  dish  of  flour,  ai'guing  that  a
power  capable  of  discharging  the  contents  of  the  oven  (one  of  the  first
disturbances)  might  be  able  to  impress  the  flour.  After  a  time  I  went  to
the  oven  to  see  how  the  flour  was  getting  on,  stooping  slightly  to  look  in,
but  kept  my  eyes  on  the  child's  hands,  looking  at  them  under  my  right
arm.  I  saw  her  hand  stealing  down  towards  a  stick  that  was  projecting
from  the  fire;  I  moved  slightly  and  the  hand  was  withdrawn.  Next  time
I  was  careful  to  make  no  movement  and  saw  her  hand  jerk  the  brand
out  on  to  the  floor.  She  cried  out.  I  expressed  interest  and  astonish-
ment ;  and  her  mother  came  in  and  cleared  up  the  debris.  This  was
repeated  several  times,  and  one  or  two  large  sticks  ready  for  burning
which  stood  near  the  child  were  thrown  down.  Then  a  kettle  which
was  hanging  on  a  hook  and  chain  was  jerked  oS  the  hook  on  to  the  fire.
This  was  repeated.  As  the  kettle  refused  to  stay  on  its  hook,  the-
mother  placed  it  on  the  hearth,  but  it  was  soon  overturned  on  to  the
floor  and  upset.  After  this  I  was  sitting  on  the  bench  which  stood
facing  the  fire  in  front  of  the  table.  I  had  placed  my  hat  on  the  table
behind  me.  The  little  girl  was  standing  'near  me  on  my  right  hand.
Presently  the  hat  was  thrown  down  on  the  ground.  I  did  not  on  the
first  occasion  see  the  girl's  movements,  but  later,  by  seeming  to  look  in
another  direction,  I  saw  her  hand  sweep  tlie  hat  off  on  to  the  floor.
This  I  saw  at  least  twice.  A  Windsor  chair  near  the  girl  was  then
upset  more  than  once,  falling  away  from  her.  On  one  occasion  I  saw
her  push  the  chair  over  with  both  hands.  As  she  was  looking  away
from  me,  I  got  a  nearly  complete  view.  After  one  of  these  performances
the  mother  came  in  and  asked  the  girl  if  she  had  done  it,  but  she
denied  it."

With  Mr.  Westlake's  observations  it  is  interesting  to  compare
the  following  account  by  Mr.  E.  N.  Bennett,  of  Hertford  College,,
Oxford  :—

A  week  after  Mr.  Westlake's  visit  to  Ham,  I  went  over  from  Oxford  and
stayed  for  nearly  five  hours  in  the  Turners'  cottage,  viz.,  from  5  to  9.50  p.m.
During  this  time  certain  phenomena  occurred.  A  table  moved  some  4
inches  along  the  floor  ;  a  stool,  upon  which  a  little  girl  (the  supposed
medium)  sat,  was  rejjeatedly  jerked  about  and  on  one  occasion  so  completely
as  to  upset  lier  upon  tlie  floor  ;  a  teapot  full  of  tea  fell  forward  violently
upon  the  floor  from  a  raised,  but  firm  and  level,  hearth ;  and,  finally,  a  chair
placed  by  myself  some  10  or  12  inches  from  the  child  in  question  moved
towards  her  four  times.

With  respect  to  the  above  phenomena,  I  nuticed— a.  That  whenever
they  occurred  the  child  was  in  very  close  proximity  to  the  material  objects
afiected.  /3.  That  none  of  these  movements  were  initiated  when  I  waa
looking  directly  at  the  cliild  and  the  furniture  near  her.


Poltergeists.


101


During  the  latter  part  of  my  time  in  the  cottage,  I  placed  the  child  quite
apart  from  the  rest  of  the  family,  upon  a  stool,  and  made  her  clasp  her
hands  before  her,  and  also  put  her  feet  upon  one  of  mine.  Two  movements
of  furniture  then  took  place,  but  in  one  case,  her  hands,  I  noticed,  were
jHomentarily  unclasped,  and  in  the  other,  one  of  her  feet  left  my  boot  for
an  instant.

My  own  imjoression  is,  certainly,  that  the  movenients  I  witnessed  were
produced  by  trickery,  although  I  was  unable  to  actually  detect  the
fraudulent  means  employed.  The  child  seems  to  combine  with  a  defective
intelligence  a  considerable  amount  of  cunning,  while  tlie  garrulity  and
exaggerated  statements  of  the  mother  deprive  her  testimony  of  any  value.

In  the  three  cases  which  follow,  the  "  medium  "  or  person  through
whose  agency,  physical  or  psychical,  the  manifestations  were  brought
about,  was  of  superior  education  and  social  position  to  the  little
rustics  with  whom  we  have  chiefly  been  concerned  hitherto.  In  the
first  case,  which  I  abi'idge  from  my  own  fuller  statement  written  at
the  time,  we  have  direct  confessions  of  trickery  from  two  persons  :
and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  whole  of  the  phenomena
attested  were  due  to  trickery.  Indeed,  no  one  in  the  house  seems  to
have  been  deceived  in  the  matter,  except  the  lady  upon  whose  credulity
her  guests  appear  to  have  practised.

Case  IX.

In  the  autumn  of  1894,  Mrs.  B.,  a  lady  living  in  a  pi'ovincial  town,
gave  me  an  account  of  certain  curious  incidents  which  had  recently
taken  place  in  her  house.  The  occupants  of  the  house — an  old  one  —
consisted,  besides  Mrs.  B.  and  her  family,  of  a  widow  lady,  Mrs.  D.,
and  her  two  children — a  girl  of  about  20,  C.  D.,  and  a  boy  of  15,  E.  D.

Mrs.  B.,  C.  D.,  and  E.  D.  had  been  in  the  habit  of  trying  experi-
ments with  planchette  in  the  evening.  Planchette  had  given  them  to
understand  that  the  house  was  haunted  by  four  spirits,  a  wicked
mai-quis,  a  wicked  monk,  a  lay  desperado,  and  a  virtuous  and  beautiful
young  lady.  These  had,  all  four,  met  with  violent  deaths  (minutely
described  by  planchette)  at  one  another's  hands  in  the  house.  These
spirits  wrote,  through  planchette,  of  treasure  concealed  in  the  house;  of  a
hidden  chamber  ;  and  many  other  matters.  They  also  promised  through
planchette,  and  ultimately  gave,  objective  proofs  of  their  presence.
Amongst  other  proofs  were  the  following  : — (1)  One  evening  after  dark
Mrs.  B.,  in  accordance  with  directions  received  through  planchette,
went  with  C.  D.  and  E.  D.  to  the  old  oak  tree  in  the  garden,  and
standing  with  the  girl  and  boy  on  either  side,  holding  a  hand  of  each,
she  distinctly  heard  a  stone  strike  the  garden-roller  a  few  feet  off.  The
phenomenon  was  repeated  twice  ;  and  her  companions  solemnly  assured
her  that  they  had  no  part  in  the  performance.


102


Frank  Podmore.


(2)  On  another  occasion,  sitting  up  in  a  bedroom  (her  son's)  at  the
top  of  the  house  in  the  dark,  with  only  E.  D.  in  the  room,  Mrs.  B.  was
struck  by  a  stone  on  the  temple,  heard  objects  thrown  about  the  room,
felt  an  arm  put  tlirough  hers,  and  so  on.  Some  of  these  phenomena
also  occurred  when  she  was  alone  in  the  room — but  with  the  door,  I
gathered,  not  shut.

(3)  Mrs.  B.  one  morning  placed  a  white  chrysanthemum  bouquet
on  the  boughs  of  the  oak  tree.  It  disappeared  shortly  afterwards ;
and  on  the  next  morning  two  other  small  bou(juets  were  found  there.
Mrs.  B.  asked  for  whom  these  were  intended,  and  went  away,  leaving,
pencil  and  paper.  On  her  return  she  found  the  paper  torn  in  half,  and
the  initials  of  her  own  Christian  name,  and  that  of  C.  D.,  written  on
the  two  lialves  respectively,  with  a  bouquet  on  each  half.

(4)  About  this  time  a  new  secret  chamber  was  discovered,  with  the
skeleton  of  a  cat  crouching  in  act  to  spring,  and  the  skeleton  of  a
woman.  Asked  more  particularly  about  the  latter,  Mrs.  B.  said  :
"  Well,  at  least,  a  skull  and  some  bones — but  it  was  a  woman's  skull."

A  few  days  after  receiving  this  account,  I  went  down  by  invitation
to  the  house.  I  saw  Mrs.  D.  and  her  two  children,  and  received  from
them  ungrudging  corroboration  of  Mrs.  B.'s  marvellous  story.  In
E.  D.'s  company  I  penetrated  the  secret  chamber,  and  found  there  the
mummified  skeleton  of  what  might  have  been  a  cat — but  nothing  else.
In  removing  the  stains  left  by  this  exploit  from  my  person,  I  contrived
a  tete-a-tete  interview  with  E.  D.  I  at  once  asked  him,  "  How  much  did
you  do  of  all  these  things  1  '  He  replied,  "  Oh,  not  much  ;  I  only  did
a  few  little  things."  Pressed  on  particular  points,  he  admitted  having
thrown  one  stone  at  the  garden-roller,  and  having  also  thrown  a
trouser-button  against  the  wall  when  sitting  alone  in  the  bedroom  with
Mrs.  B.  He  denied  having  produced  the  other  phenomena  on  those
occasions.  Asked  as  to  the  bouquets,  he  said  he  had  not  placed  them
on  the  tree.  Pressed  a  little  more,  he  said,  "  If  I  did  it,  it  must  have
been  without  knowing  it."  (This  without  any  suggestion  from  me  as
to  possible  somnambulism,  or  unconscious  action.)  He  assured  me  that
his  sister  had  had  no  hand  in  this  matter.  I  could  not  get  any  more
out  of  him,  as  he  was  shortly  after  called  away.

I  subsequently  learnt  from  his  mother  that  E.  D.  was  so  nervous
and  delicate  that  he  slept  in  her  room  at  night  ;  that  he  was  not
allowed  to  do  much  mental  work  ;  that  he  was  subject  to  attacks  of
somnambulism  ;  and  had,  indeed,  fallen  into  a  semi-conscious  state  only
a  few  days  before,  during  a  lesson  in  carpentry.

Subsequently  Miss  C.  D.,  whilst  denying  any  complicity  with  her
brother  in  the  "  physical  phenomena,"  admitted  having  deliberately
co-operated  with  him  in  working  planchette,  and  writing  answers  of
their  own  invention  to  Mrs.  B.'s  questions.


Poltergeists.


103


These  things  may  seem  too  foolish  to  be  woi'th  recording.  I  have
recorded  them  because — incredible  as  it  must  seem — Mrs.  B.,  an
educated  woman,  did  unquestionably  believe  that  she  was  in  communi-
cation, through  planchette,  with  four  spirits,  who  looked  to  her  for  help
and  guidance ;  and  saw  in  a  schoolboy's  silly  tricks  special  manifesta-
tions of  spirit  power  vouchsafed  for  her  enlightenment.  On  the  whole,
Mrs.  B.  was,  perhaps,  only  a  little  more  credulous  than  some  of  the
other  witnesses  to  the  doings  of  Poltergeists.

Case  X.

The  house  in  which  the  phenomena  to  be  described  took  place  is
a  small  terrace-house  in  a  town  in  the  south  of  England,  occupied  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  and  their  family.  The  younger  daughter,  Alice,
is  barely  1 2.  She  is  very  tall  and  pale,  and  has  apparently  outgrown
her  strength  ;  and  is  compelled,  under  medical  advice,  to  lie  down  on
her  bed  for  an  hour  or  two  every  afternoon.  She  impressed  me,  on  my
visit  to  the  house,  as  being  very  intelligent,  energetic  and  clever  beyond
her  years.

In  the  summer  of  18  the  servant  complained  of  hearing  strange

noises  in  the  house,  and  shadows  behind  her,  and  occasionally  of  being
touched.  In  the  course  of  the  same  year  Mrs.  B.  on  one  occasion
heard  a  tremendous  blow  on  the  door  of  a  room  in  which  she  was
sitting  ;  and  on  another  occasion  saw  part  of  a  figui'e  clothed  in  a  print
dress  through  the  half-open  door  of  the  dining-room.

In  the  autumn  of  the  following  year,  however,  the  phenomena
were  very  frequent  and  striking. The  manifestations  were  of  two  kinds  :

(1)  physical  disturbances,  (2)  auditory  and  visual  phenomena,  which
may  have  been  hallucinations.  It  will  be  convenient  first  to  consider  the
physical  phenomena.  If  we  omit  such  matters  as  blows  on  doors,  the
violent  slamming  of  half-opened  doors,  and  the  fall  of  a  picture  from  its
nail,  the  most  striking  physical  phenomena  are  the  following  : — •

I  cite  these  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  given  in  the  narrative
furnished  by  Mr.  B.  and  other  members  of  the  family.  (1)  Alice,
when  alone  in  her  room^  found  some  newly-shed  blood  on  the  floor.

(2)  Alice,  entering  her  bedroom,  closely  followed  by  Miss  K.,  an
inmate  of  the  house,  found  that  her  water-jug  had  been  quite  recently
upset  on  the  floor.  (3)  A  water-jug  was  again  found  upset  in  the
same  bedroom,  Alice  being  in  the  room  alone  at  the  time.  (4)  Mrs.
B.,  in  stooping  down  to  kiss  her  daughter  Alice  good-night,  felt
distinctly  a  hand  laid  on  her  back.  (5)  A  charwoman  complained
that  a  saucepan  was  dragged  from  her  hand  and  dashed  down  on  the
stove.  (6)  A  chair  was  moved  in  Mrs.  B's  room,  Alice  being  the  only
other  person  present. (7) A  picture  was  seen  to  move  from  its


104


Frank  Podmore.


position  on  the  wall  of  the  dining  room  to  the  extent  of  about  4  inches.
It  then,  when  commanded  by  Mrs.  B.,  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,
returned  slowly  to  its  original  position.  The  witnesses  to  this
phenomenon  were  Mrs.  B.,  Alice,  and  Miss  K.  (8)  A  card-table,  at
which  Mrs.  B.,  Miss  K.,  Miss  B.,and  Alice  were  seated,  moved  sharply
and  struck  Miss  K.  on  the  arm.  (9)  Two  little  boys  were  having
tea  with  Alice  in  the  dining  room.  One  of  the  little  boys  had  first  his
leg  and  then  his  throat  sharply  pinched.

It  is,  perhaps,  not  uncharitaljle  to  suggest  that  the  fall  of  the
saucepan  may  have  been  due  to  the  clumsiness  of  the  charwoman,  and
that  the  other  disturbances  were  caused  by  Alice,  by  ordinary  physical
means.  The  only  incident  which,  on  this  interpretation,  offers  any
difficulty  is  the  movement  of  the  picture  on  the  wall  of  the  dining-
room.  This  may  have  been  moved  by  a  string ;  though  I  could  find  no
trace  either  on  the  picture  itself  or  on  the  adjacent  wall  of  any  such
means  having  been  used.  Mrs.  B.  could  not  remember  in  what  part
of  the  room  Alice  was  standing  during  tlie  phenomenon  ;  and  Miss  K.
and  Mrs.  B.  assigned  different  positions  to  Mrs.  B.  herself.  I  think  it
not  impossible  that  the  whole  movement  was  imaginary.

The  visual  and  auditory  phenomena  were  very  curious  and
interesting.  Mrs.  B  and  Miss  K.  at  various  times — sometimes  together
— heard  voices  speaking,  moans,  cries,  rappings,  footsteps,  and  loud
noises.  Some  of  these  noises — the  sounds  of  articulate  sentences,  for
instance — were  appai'ently  hallucinatory.  There  were  also  many  visual
hallucinations.  Miss  K.,  on  two  occasions,  saw  a  hand — in  one  case,  on
the  glass  of  a  bookcase.  Mrs.  B.,  besides  the  hallucination  of  a  woman's
dress  already  referred  to,  saw,  when  in  bed,  a  brilliant  disc  of  white
light  and  a  dazzling  white  garment ;  she  also  saw  a  shadowy  black  form
on  suddenly  entering  a  dark  room.  She  saw,  in  the  middle  of  the  after-
noon, a  lovely  white  bird,  larger  than  a  dove,  gliding  across  the  upper
hall.  Going  up  the  stairs  shortly  after  tlie  vision,  Mrs.  B.  saw  a
shower  of  gold  and  silver  flakes.  Alice,  who  accompanied  her,  saw
them  too,  and  went  to  fetch  the  charwoman.  The  charwoman
"  thought  it  rather  pretty,  and  supposed  it  was  motes."  Perhaps
it  was.

Alice  also  recited  several  experiences  of  her  own,  which  may,
perhaps,  be  classed  as  hallucinations  ;  she  was  thumped  on  the  back  ;
she  felt  something  push  against  her  in  going  upstairs  ;  she  heard
moans,  voices  and  other  noises  ;  and  once,  when  lying  down  on  her
bed  in  the  afternoon,  she  heard  the  sound  of  paper  scraping  on  the
wall,  and,  looking  up,  saw  a  coloured  ball  of  paper  fall  from  the  ceiling
and  disappear  in  the  basin. No  such  ball  could  be  found.

It  should  be  added  that  the  B.  family  regard  the  phenomena  as
inexplicable.


Poltergeists.


105


Case  XT.

In  this  case  I  am  precluded  from  giving  full  details  of  the  various
incidents.  Lest,  however,  it  should  be  thought  that  the  bi'ief  summary
•which  follows  presents  an  ea; y;'«rte  statement  of  the  circumstances,  I  am
permitted  to  say  that  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  are  acquainted
with  the  case,  agi'ee  with  my  general  conclusions.  The  occupants  of
the  house,  which  was  the  scene  of  these  incidents,  were  a  family  whom
I  will  call  Z.  The  family  included  a  grown-up  son,  Y.  Z.  The  disturb-
ances, whicli  were  vei'y  frequent,  and  extended  with  uneven  intervals
over  a  period  of  about  twelve  months,  began  soon  after  the  appearance
in  the  house  of  a  young  lady  visitor,  Miss  Q.  The  first  outbreak  lasted
for  some  weeks,  and  ceased  on  the  day  of  Miss  Q.'s  departure.  The
disturbances  were  striking  and  various.  They  included,  besides  loud
noises,  slamming  of  doors,  and  sound  of  footsteps,  &lc.,  frequent  physical
movements,  such  as  the  displacement  of  furniture,  occasional  breakage
of  crockery,  the  throwing  about  of  boots,  toilet  necessaries,  and  articles
of  clothing.

We  have  been  furnished  with  a  long  series  of  letters  and  documents
written  by  members  of  the  family,  minutely  describing  the  earlier  dis-
turbances. I  have  analysed  the  record  of  the  events  which  took  place
-during  Miss  Q.'s  first  visit.  I  find  that  there  were  sixty-six  disturb-
ances involving  movements  of  material  objects  during  the  period  of  a
fortnight.  On  thirty-four  of  the  sixty-six  occasions,  Y.  Z.  and  Q.,
either  together  or  separately,  were  the  first  to  arrive  on  the  scene  of  the
disturbance  ;  and  in  most  of  the  thirty-four  cases,  they  were  the  sole
witnesses  that  any  movements  had  taken  place,  the  rest  of  the  house-
hold being  generally  contented  to  accept  their  report.  In  the
remaining  thirty-two  instances,  in  which  the  movements  were  testified
to  by  other  members  of  the  household,  the  disturl^ances  consisted
sometimes  of  furniture  being  found  by  the  servant  in  the  morning
displaced,  Y.  Z.  himself  having  found  it  similarly  displaced  on  the
previous  evening  and  having,  according  to  his  own  statement,  replaced
it ;  in  other  cases  furniture  was  displaced  in  rooms  which  Y.  Z.  or
Q.  had  recently  passed  through  ;  or  objects  were  thrown  from,  or  fi'om
the  direction  of,  Q.'s  bedroom  when  she  was  in  the  room  alone.  In  a
few  cases  the  description  of  the  occurrence  is  not  sufficiently  detailed
to  enable  one  to  judge  of  the  positions  and  movements  of  the  persons
concerned.  On  two  occasions  only  are  movements  recorded  as  actually
taking  place  in  the  presence  of  other  members  of  the  household.  Thus,
on  one  occasion  a  small  object  was  thrown  across  the  room,  in  which
all  the  household  except  the  servants  were  seated.  It  is  not  stated
that  any  one  saw  it  in  the  air.  On  two  or  three  other  occasions  move-
ments of  small  objects  are  reported  to  have  taken  place  when  Y.  Z.


106


Frank  Podmore.


and  Q.  were  in  remote  parts  of  the  house.  But  the  evidence  for  these
movements  is  by  no  means  clear ;  and  as  Y.  Z.  or  Q.,  and  possibly
both,  appear  to  have  assisted  in  drawing  up  the  reports,  little  reliance
can  be  placed  upon  tlte  accounts  given.  Xothing  is  reported  as
taking  place  when  both  Q.  and  Y.  Z.  were  absent  from  the  house  —
except  a  few  noises,  and  the  opening  of  a  cupboard  door.  With
the  trifling  exceptions  mentioned  above,  nothing  seems  to  have
occurred  during  the  fourteen  days  which,  even  as  described  by  the
family,  could  not  readily  have  been  produced  by  Q.  or  Y.  Z.  by  very
simple  means.

Some  time  after  Q.'s  departure,  the  phenomena  recommenced.  But
they  now  centred  I'ound  Y.  Z.  exclusively,  and  nothing  is  recorded  which
could  not  readily  have  been  produced  through  his  agency.  As  the
phenomena  still  continued  at  intervals,  various  members  of  the  Society
— of  whom  I  was  one  — went  to  investigate  the  case.  My  own  visit  was
unfruitful.  But  one  of  my  colleagues,  Mr.  T.,  was  more  fortunate.  His
visit  happened  to  coincide  with  a  visit  from  Miss  Q.  After  Miss  Q.  hacL
retired  to  her  room,  various  articles  were  thrown  from  the  direction
of  her  door  when  no  one  was  watching ;  and  various  small  pieces  of
furniture  were  displaced  immediately  outside  her  room  ;  her  door  was
heard  to  open  several  times  and  various  objects  were  thrown  out.  Miss
Q.  professed  to  have  had  no  hand  in  these  doings,  and  not  even  to  know
when  they  took  place.  Nothing  whatever  occurred  when  Mr.  T.  was-
watching  the  door.

Finally,  Q.  professed  that  she  was  too  disturbed  to  keep  in  her
room,  and  went  downstairs.  Yarious  articles  of  furniture  were  theu
moved  in  the  ground-floor  rooms,  some  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of
Q.,  others  in  more  remote  rooms,  to  which,  however,  she  could  readily
have  had  access  undetected.  Similar  phenomena  were  repeated  on
the  following  night.  It  was  observed  that  in  no  single  instance  did
any  disturbances  take  place  which  could  not  readily  have  been  produced
by  Q.  Moreover,  certain  curious  limitations  to  the  phenomena  were
observed.  Miss  Q.'s  room  had  two  doors.  The  one  was  locked  on  the
outside  through  the  greater  part  of  the  disturbances  ;  of  the  other  she
herself  had  the  key.  Nothing  took  place  outside  the  locked  door  ;  but
many  objects  were  moved  outside  the  other  door.  Finally,  on  the
second  night,  after  many  things  had  been  thrown  out  from  the  unlocked
door,  and  many  movements  had  taken  place  in  its  vicinity.  Miss  Q.  was
requested  to  stand  close  to  the  locked  door.  The  lights  were  put  out,
and  the  request  was  then  made  that  some  movement  should  take  place
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  other  door,  i.e.,  at  a  distance  of  some  yards
from  Q.  The  investigators  waited  twenty  minutes,  but  nothing  more
took  place.  Q.  left  the  house  the  next  day,  the  phenomena  ceasing  with
her  departure.


Poltergeists.


107


One  other  series  of  disturbances  may  perhaps  be  referred  to,  since
the  manifestations  exhibited  a  marked  and  most  instructive  change  of
character.  When  Q.  or  Y.  Z.  were  staying  in  the  house,  tlie  disturb-
ances had  taken  the  form  of  violent  banging  of  doors,  displacement  of
furniture  and  throwing  about  of  small  objects,  generally  accompanied
with  a  good  deal  of  noise.  During  the  period  now  under  consideration,
Y.  Z.  was  away,  and  Q.,  though  apparently  about  the  house  nearly
every  day,  was  not  sleeping  there  ;  and  the  disturbances  were  of  a  much
milder  type.  They  consisted,  in  fact,  almost  exclusively  of  the  noise-
less displacement  and  stealthy  disappearance  of  small  objects,  their
hiding  place  being  often  discovered  by  Q.  herself.

With  one  exception,  which,  it  may  be  suggested,  was  possibly  due
to  mal-observation  on  the  part  of  the  reporter,  there  was  nothing  to
indicate  at  what  time  the  movements  took  place,  or  to  forbid  the
supposition  that  they  actually  occurred  in  Miss  Q.'s  presence,  though
the  fact  of  the  movement  was  not  in  some  cases  discovered  for  hours
or  days  afterwards.

After  these  occurrences,  the  phenomena  ceased  almost  entirely,  and
did  not  recommence  until  some  months  later,  when  there  were  again
a  few  disturbances  of  the  same  general  character,  i.e.,  movements  of
furniture,  and  throwing  about  of  small  objects  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  Y.  Z. (Q.  was  not  at  that  time  in  the  house.)

From  first  to  last,  with  a  few  insignificant  exceptions,  the  whole
of  the  disturbances  could  readily  have  been  produced  by  Miss  Q.
or  Y.  Z.,  acting  sometimes  singly  and  sometimes  in  concert.  The
belief  of  the  Z.  family  and  their  friends  that  they  were  not  so
produced  rests  almost  exclusively  on  their  conviction  of  the  good
faith  of  iliss  Q.  and  of  Y.  Z.

Mr.  T.  writes  : —

The  disturbances  (about  70  ?)  which  occarred  while  I  was  in  the  house
could  all  have  been  done  by  Miss  Q.  or  Y.  Z. — and  that  without  any
particular  skill  or  artifice — but  as  I  obtained  no  direct  evidence  as  to  how
they  were  produced,  I  have  no  behef  one  way  or  the  other.  If  genuine,
they  simply  rest  on  the  word  of  those  persons.  If  fraudulent,  I  would
suggest  that  they  probably  grew  from  an  undesigned  beginning  into  a  hoax,
exciting  to  the  youthful  authors,  whose  success  encouraged  them  to  push  it
as  far  as  possible,  regardless  of  the  serious  trouble  and  worry  to  Mrs.  Z.

It  may  be  added  that,  so  far  as  I  am  aw^are,  no  signs  of
abnormality  have  been  detected  in  either  of  these  two  persons  ;  and
that,  on  the  assumption  that  they  were  the  authors  of  these  disturb-
ances, no  adequate  motive  has  been  suggested  for  their  conduct,
unless,  indeed,  the  alleged  desire  of  Y.  Z.  to  transport  the  family  to
a  more  congenial  neighbourhood  can  be  held  to  constitute  such  a
motive.


108


Frank  Podmore.


These  eleven  cases  are  the  only  instances  in  which  we  have  full
lepoi'ts  of  personal  investigation  by  i-epresentatives  of  the  Society
since  its  foundation  in  1882.  Other  cases  have  indeed  from  time  to
time  been  brought  to  our  notice,  and  enquiries  have  in  some  cases  been
made,  but  no  report  has  been  presented  to  the  Society.  Accounts
liave  been  sent  to  us,  however,  of  a  few  other  cases,  in  which  fraud  has
been  detected  or  inferred  with  some  degree  of  probability.  Thus  a  lady
writes  to  us  from  Bournemouth,  in  November,  1889,  that  a  fortnight
after  the  appearance  in  her  house — a  small  private  boarding  house —
of  a  new  cook,  disturbances  of  various  kinds  took  place.  Bells  were
mysteriously  rung  ;  a  heavy  cellar-grating  was  several  times  thrown
down  ;  a  leg  of  mutton  made  its  appearance  in  inappropriate  situations  ;
the  kitchen  clock  stopped ;  bedsteads,  a  chest  of  drawers,  tin  cans,  a
waste  paper  basket,  and  other  articles  of  furniture  were  repeatedly
displaced.  The  servants'  bedrooms,  in  particular,  were  the  scene  of
many  disturbances.  This  state  of  things  continued  for  a  week.
During  all  this  time  the  lady  of  the  house  and  her  fellow  inmates
took  various  precautions,  and  kept  a  close  watch  on  the  servants,
without  being  able  to  discover  any  suspicious  movements.  Finally,  on
the  eighth  day,  their  patience  was  rewarded.  One  of  the  daughters  of
the  house,  after  having  ascertained  that  the  furniture  in  the  upper
rooms  was  undisturbed  and  in  its  proper  position,  kept  a  close  watch
upon  the  stairs  leading  up  to  the  servants'  quarters.  Looking  through
a  keyhole  she  saw  the  new  cook,  Mary,  go  stealthily  upstairs,  and
heard  various  movements  in  the  room  overhead.  When  Mary  had
retreated.  Miss  Lucy  B.  went  upstairs  and  found  the  furniture
disarranged  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  it  had  been  many  times
before  duiing  the  previous  week.  Asked  whether  she  had  been
upstairs  during  the  morning,  Mary  said  no.  She  further  denied  all
knowledge  of  the  whereabouts  of  a  key  belonging  to  a  bedroom  door
which  had  been  found  in  the  course  of  the  day  to  be  locked.  Under  a
threat  of  police,  however,  she  revealed  the  hiding-place  of  the  key.
Mrs.  B.  states  that  it  was  never  discovered  by  what  means  Mary
succeeded  in  ringing  the  bells  without  detection.  Mary  is  described
as  a  girl  of  about  17  ;  very  pretty,  pleasant  and  quiet  in  manner  and
speech.  In  the  next  case,  also,  a  servant  who  is  described  "  as  leather
smarter  and  sharper  than  tlie  average  country  gii'l,"  was  caught  in  the
act  of  causing  disturbances.

Mr.  James  Gardner  writes  to  us  ; —

Jannayy  2bth,  1896.
In  reply  to  your  letter  respecting  noises  at  Edgewortli  Rectory,  I  shall  be
pleased  to  tell  you  all  I  know,  although  it  must  be  nearly  20  years  ago.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Shaw  were  away  from  home,  and  during  tlieir  absence  strange
noises,  such  as  scraping  and  moaning,  were  heard  at  the  Rectory,  which


Poltergeists.


109


frightened  the  servants  in  the  house,  and  they  told  the  gardener,  who  stayed
in  the  house  the  next  night  and  was  equally  puzzled  as  to  cause  of  noise.  The
next  night  when  the  policeman  came  round  on  his  beat,  he  was  told  of  it,  and
they  searched  inside  and  out  the  house  with  no  result.  As  you  may  easily
imagine,  the  story  of  a  ghost  at  the  Rectory  soon  spread  over  the  little  village,
and  not  a  few  believed  it.  I  was  living  very  near  the  Rectory  at  tlie  time,
and  Mr.  Shaw  was  most  kind  to  me,  so  I  told  the  confidential  servant  who
was  left  in  charge  that  I  would  stay  a  night  in  the  house  and  try  and  solve
the  mystery  ;  which  I  did  by  secreting  myself  where  I  had  a  chance  of  looking"
into  the  bedroom  of  a  fresh  servant  that  had  recently  been  taken  into  the
liouse,  xnd  by  means  of  a  dark  lantern  suddenly  flashed  on  the  girl  when  the
noises  commenced,  I  was  quite  satisfied  that  she  was  the  author  of  them,
and  told  Mrs.  Shaw  so  when  she  returned  home.  The  girl  was  started  at
once,  and  the  house  was  perfectly  quiet  afterwards.

In  a  later  letter  Mr.  Gardner  explains  that  he  saw  the  girl
striking  the  wall  with  her  hand,  just  after  the  old  housekeeper  had
pronounced  her  to  be  fast  asleep.  He  adds  that  he  thinks  some  of  the
noises  heard  were  probably  produced  by  the  aid  of  some  instrument  in
her  mouth.

We  have  also  three  cases  strongly  resembling  in  their  details  the  Cock
Lane  case,  reported  within  the  last  10  years  from  Cradock,  South
Australia,  East  Lothian,  and  Perth  respectively.  In  each  case  the  only
phenomena  were  raps.  The  raps  occurred  only  when  the  medium—  a
little  girl  in  each  case  —was  in  bed,  and  ceased  altogether  when  both
the  girl's  hands  were  under  observation.  In  one  case  the  medical  man
who  reported  the  case  to  us  states  that  no  rapping  was  ever  heard
when  the  girl's  hands  were  kept  above  the  bedclothes  :  and  that  a
board  was  indispensable.  In  another  case  the  raps  would  only  occur
when  the  lights  were  tui^ned  out,  and  even  under  these  conditions
failed  to  manifest  when  the  girl  was  placed  in  a  hammock.  In  the
tliird  case — reported  to  us  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Nicol,  of  Perth — a
witness  is  stated  to  have  seen  the  movements  of  the  girl's  arm  under
the  bedclothes  during  the  occurrence  of  raps,  which  appeared  to  proceed
from  a  part  of  the  wall  within  reach  of  her  right  hand  under  cover  of
the  clothes.  In  none  of  the  three  cases  is  there  evidence  that  any
sounds  were  heard  which  were  beyond  the  girl's  power  to  produce  by
ordinary  means.

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  two  out  of  the  three  cases,  as  well  in  the
case  which  follows,  the  child's  parents  appear  to  have  connived  at  the
trickery.

In  the  next  case  our  informant  is  General  Pitt  Rivers,  who  writes
on  November  16th,  18S6

Rushmore,  Salisbui-y.
There  is  absolutely  nothing  to  investigate  in  the  Woodcuts  imposture.  I
was  asked  by  the  man  N.,  who  has  since  been  turned  off  for  misconduct,  to


110


Frank  Podmore.


go  and  investigate  the  rapping  in  his  house.  I  have  no  doubt  he  thought  it
would  be  an  advertisement.  Finding  that  all  the  people  about  were  agog
with  this  ghost,  I  went,  and  Mrs.  Rivers  and  myself,  and  several  others,
went  up  into  the  room.  I  said,  "  now  let  us  hear  some  rapping,"  and  the
father  said,  ' '  You  must  all  go  out  of  the  room  except  the  girl  [his  daughter],
and  must  stand  so  that  no  one  can  see  into  the  room,"  so  I  complied.  The
girl  asked  some  stupid  question  in  the  room,  and  immediately  there  were
loud  raps  ;  this  was  repeated  once  or  twice.  I  then  said  to  the  girl,  "  Now
stand  at  the  door  where  I  can  see  you,"  and  she  did  so.  No  raps.  I  then
said,  "  It  is  evident  there  will  be  no  raps  unless  you  are  in  the  room  by
yourself  out  of  sight."  So  I  jjaced  across  the  room  from  the  door,  and
found  it  six  and  a-half  short  paces,  and  told  the  girl  to  take  three  paces  into
the  room  and  stand  there,  where  I  knew  she  could  touch  nothing.  I  made
her  pace  it  before  me  to  make  sure  that  .she  understood.  "Now,"  I  said,
"you  must  stand  there  and  not  move,  and  ask  your  questions  and  hear
your  raps  from  that  spot,"  and  T  then  went  downstairs  to  the  bottom
of  the  stairs  where  I  was  told  to  stand.  I  heard  her  take  three  paces,
then  a  very  slight  movement,  and  after  that  three  or  four  loud  raps.
I  stepped  up  the  stairs  two  pair  at  a  time,  and  found  her  off  her  post.
Meanwhile  Mrs.  Rivers,  instead  of  going  downstairs  with  the  others,  had  put
herself,  unknown  to  the  girl,  in  the  opposite  room  where  she  could  see  the
girl  plainly.  She  saw  her,  after  taking  the  three  paces,  look  over  her  shoulder
towards  the  door,  then  run  quickly,  and  give  the  three  loud  raps  on  the  back
board  of  the  bod.  Mrs.  R.  then  came  out  and  told  the  girl  what  she  had  seen.
She  immediately  burst  into  tears,  put  her  apron  over  her  face  and  said,
crying,  "I  only  knocked  to  see  if  he  was  coming."  I  then  knocked  on  the
bed  myself,  wliere  she  had  knocked,  and  found  it  made  exactly  the  same
noise  that  we  liad  hoard  downstairs.  I  have  told  the  police  that  if  anything
was  done  to  make  it  an  indictaWe  offence,  Mrs.  R.  and  myself  would  give
evidence,  but  the  man  is  careful,  charges  nothing,  and  only  receives  gifts  to
the  extent  of  three  and  four  sliillings  a  day  from  symjmthising  idiots.

A.  Pitt  Rivers.

Reverting  now  to  the  1 1  cases  investigated  by  repi'esentatives  of
the  Society,  we  may  note  tliat  there  is  a  general  resemblance  through-
out. These  cases,  pretty  obviously,  belong  to  the  same  class  ;  and  it  is
prima  facie  probable  that  an  explanation  which  fits  one  case  will  fit
all.  An  exception  should  perhaps  be  made  in  case  IX.,  since  it  seems
doubtful  whether  any  one  was  deceived  by  the  manifestations  in  this
case  except  the  lady  of  the  house.  But  in  the  other  cases  most  of  those
who  witnessed  the  disturbances,  whether  inmates  of  tlie  house  or
neighbours,  appear  to  have  regarded  them  as  inexplicable.

Now  the  only  explanation  for  which  we  have  valid  evidence  at  all
is  trickery.  Trickery  was  actually  detected  by  one  or  more  witnesses
in  four  cases  (II.,  IV.,  V.,  VIII.).  In  two  of  these  cases  (II.  and
IV.)  and  in  case  IX.,  there  was  a  confession  of  trickery.  There
is,  therefore,  strong  ground  for  believing  in  trickery  as  the  true  and


Poltergeists.


Ill


sufficient  explanation  in  all  these  11  eases.  In  the  first  place  we
may  note  that  the  phenomena  described  in  the  Wem  and  Ham  cases
for  instance  (II.  and  VIII.)  were  p7-imd  facie  as  inexplicable  as
those  testified  to  in  other  instances.  But  in  these  two  cases  we
know  that  trickery  was  employed.  It  is  to  be  noted  also  that  in
the  Wem  case  the  child  was  so  skilful  that  though  she  was  under  the
close  observation  of  several  pairs  of  eyes  in  Dr.  Corke's  house,  and
though  she  lirought  off  many  "  phenomena,"  it  was  not  until  the  fifth
day  that  she  was  actually  detected  in  her  performances,  and  then  only
tlii'ough  a  surreptitious  entry  on  the  theatre.  In  the  Ham  case  Mr.
Westlake  was  able  to  detect  the  actual  movements  of  the  child  only
when  the  repetition  of  the  perfoi'mance  taught  him  what  to  look  for,  and
Mr.  Bennett,  despite  his  strong  suspicions,  failed  altogether  to  obtain
conclusive  proof  of  fraud.  And  if  we  remember  how  many  and  how
great  were  the  errors  in  observation  demonstrated  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in
the  records  given  by  educated  persons  of  seances  with  Mr.  Davey,  we
shall  find  it  not  unreasonable  to  infer,  even  when  direct  evidence  is
wanting,  like  errors  in  the  testimony,  mostly  of  uneducated  persons,
now  under  consideration.  We  have  some  indirect  proof  of  the  justice
of  this  inference.  It  will  be  noted  that  in  cases  such  as  VI.,  IX.,
X.  and  XI.,  where  the  witnesses  were  for  the  most  part  educated
persons,  and  the  record  in  some  instances  almost  contemporaneous
with  the  event,  it  is  not  difficult  to  explain  all  that  took  place — with
a  few  trifling  exceptions — as  due  to  trickery.  The  proof  of  abnormal
agency  in  these  cases  rests  almost  entirely  on  moral  considerations.
But  in  cases  like  I.,  II.,  III.,  and  VII.,  where  the  chief  witnesses
were  persons  of  limited  education,  the  phenomena  attested  are  of
a,  much  more  surprising  kind ;  and  at  Worksop  and  Durweston
especially,  where  the  witnesses  were  not  only  imperfectly  educated,
but  did  not  give  their  testimony  until  some  weeks  after  the  event,
the  things  described  seem  wholly  inexplicable  by  normal  agencies.
[Contrast,  for  instance,  Mr.  Anderson's  and  Mr.  Newman's  evidence
in  the  Durweston  case,  p.  93  and  91].

One  other  feature  in  these  records  should  be  noticed  in  this  connec-
tion. Many  of  the  witnesses  described  the  articles  as  moving  slowly
through  the  air,  or  exhibiting  some  peculiarity  of  flight.  (See  my
report  on  the  Worksop  case,  also  case  VII.).  Similar  peculiarities  are
noted  by  Mr.  Bristow  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  383-394).
In  describing  the  movement  of  pieces  of  wood  in  a  carpenter's  shop,
he  writes  of  them  as  now  moving  in  a  straight  line  and  striking  a  door
"noiselessly  as  a  feather,"  and  again  "as  though  borne  along  on
gently  heaving  waves."  In  a  case  which  was  investigated  by  one  of
our  corresponding  members,  Herr  Hans  Natge,  an  account  of  which
was  published  in  Berlin  in  1889,  under  the  title  Der  Sjmk  von  Resau,


112


Frank  Podmore.


a  similar  phenomenon  is  described  by  the  witnesses.  Thus  a  frying  pan
in  the  air  is  described  as  having  the  appearance  not  of  a  thing  tlirown,
but  of  a  thing  flying  ;  and  the  witnesses  are  said  to  have  noticed  the
absence  of  any  curve  of  projection  in  the  ai'ticles.  In  default  of  any
sufficient  evidence  that  the  disturbances  in  question  were  due  to
abnormal  agency,  I  am  disposed  to  explain  the  appearance  of  moving
slowly  or  flying  as  a  sensory  illusion,  conditioned  by  the  excited  state
of  the  percipients.

But  if  the  assumption  of  errors  of  observation  of  vai-ious  kiiids  in
these  records  is  necessarily  supported  by  little  direct  evidence,  we  have
proofs  of  serious  errors  of  memory.  Thus,  in  several  instances  we  find
that  the  various  witnesses  to  a  phenomenon  differed  amongst  themselves
as  to  the  position,  or  even  the  presence  or  absence  of  particular  pei'sons  ^
or  failed  to  mention  at  all  the  whereabouts  of  the  presumed  agent ;  or
imagined  that  they  had  been  present  at  manifestations  of  which —
according  to  other  witnesses — they  knew  only  by  hearsay.  (See  for
instance  the  discussion  on  cases  I.,  III.,  VI.,  XL).  There  is  an
account  contributed  to  our  records  by  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Jeaffreson  of
movements  of  small  objects,  which  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by
occasional  lapses  of  memory  of  a  rather  unusual  kind.

Mr.  Jeaff'reson  writes  on  May  27th,  1883  : —

I  do  not  know  when  we  first  began  to  notice  anything  strange  about  the
house,  but  after  no  very  long  time  we  began  to  miss  little  things  of  no  value
(and  tlierefore  not  likely  to  have  been  stolen),  which  mostly,  though  not
invariably,  were  found  in  places  where  a  few  minutes  before  we  had  searched
for  them.  This  took  place  in  every  part  of  the  house,  but  chiefly  in  my
study.  There  I  liad  a  small  round  table  (perhaps  30in.  in  diameter),  whicli
was  seldom  used  for  anything  but  a  cup  of  coffee,  or  a  few  books  when  I  was-
sorting  them  for  the  shelves.  For  the  most  part  this  table  was  clear,  and
therefore  there  was  no  chance  of  small  articles  being  covered  up  accidentally,
and  as  accidentally  discovered.  I  do  nottliink  tliat  things  disappeared  more
from  this  table  than  any  other  ;  but  the  circumstances  I  have  mentioned
made  the  occurrence  more  conspicuous  in  the  case  of  this  table  and  less  open
to  accident.

If  I  put  down,  say,  a  bvnich  of  keys  on  this  table,  they  frequently
disappeared.  At  first  I  used  to  seaich  for  them  in  vain,  and  come  back  to
find  them  where  I  thought  I  had  placed  them,  on  the  little  table.  At  last,,
when  we  missed  anything  from  the  jjlace  where  we  thought  we  had  placed  it,
we  (my  wife  and  I)  used  to  sit  still,  and  after  a  time,  the  things  would  usually
reappear.  We  never  saw  any  article  coming  or  going.  The  length  of  time
varied.  Pei'haps  tlie  longest  interval  was  in  the  case  of  a  bracelet,  which,
disappeared  one  night  as  my  wife  was  dressing  for  a  party,  and  reappeared
about  the  same  time  the  next  night  lying  in  the  nnddle  of  a  d(jorvvay  through
which  we  had  passed  many  times,  and  in  which  I  had  carefully  searched  witk
a  candle  the  first  night,  and  the  servants  the  next  morning.


Poltergeists.


113


Mr.  Jeaflfreson  adds,  "  similar  removals  have  in  our  opinion  taken
place  since  we  left  H.  in  the  houses  we  have  since  occupied,  but  less
frequently  and  less  conspicuously."

Of  the  errors  of  narration  perpetrated  by  journalists  in  search  of
sensational  copy  (see  cases  II.  and  V.),  it  is  hardly  necessary  to
speak,  except  to  point  out  that  the  dramatic  and  exaggerated  accounts
of  the  disturbances  given  in  the  newspapers  inevitably  react  upon  the
memories  of  those  who  read  them,  and  so  tend  still  further  to  vitiate
testimony.

But  it  is  much  easier  to  infer  that  trickery  has  been  practised  in
these  cases  than  to  find  a  plausible  motive  for  trickery. In  one  or  two
instances,  indeed,  intelligible  motives  have  been  suggested  for  the
fraud. (See,  for  instance,  cases  V.  and  XI.,  and  the  account  given
by  General  Pitt  Rivers  on  p.  109). But  in  most  cases  it  is  difficult  to
conceive  that  any  adequate  or  even  rational  end  was  aimed  at  by  the
authors of  the disturbance. A considerable amount  of  labour,
extending  in  some  cases  over  months  or  years,  has  been  voluntarily
undertaken  by  the  agent ;  much  annoyance,  expense,  and  occasionally
severe  distress  has  been  inflicted  on  other  persons;  and  a  lively  sensation
has  been  caused  in  the  neighbourhood. But  there  has  been  apparently
no  revenge  to  satisfy,  and  such  fame  as  lies  in  the  mouths  of  rustics,
and  in  occasional  paragraphs  in  provincial  newspapers,  would  haixUy
constitute  for  normal  persons — even  for  children — a  sufficient  recom-
pense for  the  labour  incurred. And  yet  it  is,  in  fact,  in  the  desire  to
cause  a  sensation  that  the  working  motive  is  probably  to  be  found.
The  reader  must  have  been  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  agent — or
central  figure — in  the  great  majority  of  the  cases  quoted  is  a  young
girl,  roughly  between  the  ages  of  12  and  16,  though  one  or  two  may
have  been  a  little  older. The  agent  in  each  of  the  six  cases  last  cited
was  a  young  girl ;  and  in  the  1 1  cases  given  at  length,  a  young  girl
appears  in  eight  cases  and  a  young  boy  in  three  (in  one  of  which
—  case  IV. —  he  is  apparently  associated  with  his  young  sister).  But
a  further  peculiarity  is  to  be  noted  beside  the  youth  of  the  agents,  to
wit,  their  mental  and  physical  abnormality. In  the  Worksop  case,
the  presumed  agent  was  a  half-witted  girl,  child  of  an  imbecile  mother.
In  the  Wem  case,  Emma  Davies  was  stated  by  her  mother  to  be
subject  to  fits. In  the  Bramford  case,  the  girl  appears  to  have  suffered
from  attacks  of  hysterical  blindness. In  cases  VI.  and  VIII.,  the  girl
was  deformed,  in  case  VII.  hysterical  and  consumptive. In  case  IX.
the  boy  was  delicate  and  liable  to  attacks  of  spontaneous  somnam-
bulism;  and  in  case  X.  the  girl  is  delicate  and  has  outgrown  her
strength. Thus  in  eight  out  of  the  11  cases  we  have  evidence  of
ill-health  or  abnormality  more  or  less  pronounced. This  evidence  is
strengthened  if  we  accept  the  agent's  own  testimony  for  the  occurrence

I


114


Frank  Podmore.


of  hallucinations.  Thus,  in  cases  II.,  III.,  IV.,  VI.,  VII.  and  X.,  the
agent  was  the  subject  of  hallucinations,  which  in  case  VI.  were  frequent
and  prolonged.

It  may  be  suggested  then  that,  in  the  majority  of  these  cases,  the
real  motive  which  impelled  these  children  to  a  long  series  of  apparently
meaningless  acts  of  mischief,  was  the  excessive  love  of  notoriety  which
is  occasionally  associated  with  other  morbid  conditions,  especially  in
young  girls.  Case  XI.,  on  this  view,  remains  unaccounted  for,  since
the  agents  in  this  instance  were  educated  adults,  apparently  free  from
morbid  influences.

To  sum  up  :  (1)  In  the  eleven  cases  which  we  have  investigated  in
detail,  direct  proofs  of  trickery  have  been  obtained  in  several  instances.
(2)  Where  the  phenomena  have  been  recorded  shortly  after  their
occurrence  by  educated  persons,  trickery  is  found — moral  considerations
apart — to  be  an  adequate  explanation.  (3)  Where  the  phenomena  have
been  described  by  illiterate  persons,  or  recorded  some  time  after  the
event,  this  explanation  becomes  difficult ;  and  the  difficulty  is  found  to
increase  directly  with  the  length  of  the  interval  and  inversely  with  the
education  of  the  witness.  (4)  But  these  eleven  cases  are  fairly
representative  of  their  class.  A  certain  number  of  such  cases  are
brought  to  our  notice  each  year.  These  eleven  cases  were  selected  for
investigation,  mainly  because  from  the  accounts  in  the  press,  or  from
reports  received  from  trustworthy  private  sources,  they  seemed  to
present  a  prima  Jacie  case  for  abnormal  agency.  It  is  difficult  to  resist
the  conclusion  that  if  the  opportunity  had  been  given  to  us,  with  the
experience  which  we  have  now  obtained,  to  undertake  an  equally  full
and  searching  inquiry  into  the  cases  of  this  kind  which  figure  so  largely
in  the  literature  of  the  subject,  the  evidence  for  abnormal  agency
would  have  been  found  as  little  calculated  to  convince.  Take,  for
instance,  the  movement  of  pieces  of  wood  in  a  carpenter's  shop
already  referred  to.  It  is  one  of  the  most  striking  cases  ever  published,
and  as  described  by  an  honest  and  intelligent  witness,  the  phenomena
seem  perfectly  inexplicable.  But  the  account  printed  at  length  in  the
Proceedings  (Vol.  VII.,  p.  383),  was  written  42  years  after  the  events
recorded.  It  is,  indeed,  based  on  some  earlier  notes ;  but  these  notes
themselves  were  not  committed  to  writing  until  five  years  after  the
events.  That  some  movements  of  the  kind  described  did  occur  in
1849  we  can  well  believe  ;  indeed  we  have  corroboration  of  the  fact
from  at  least  one  other  living  witness.  But  the  most  we  seem  entitled
to  conclude  from  their  reports  is  that  Mr.  Bristow  and  his  friends  did
not  at  the  time  discover  how  the  movements  were  caused,  and  that
their  later  recollections  afford  us  no  clue.

.  The  case  given  in  the  same  volume,  pp.  160-173,  is  evidentially
stronger,  inasmuch  as  the  events  were  recoi'ded  within  a  few  weeks  or


Poltergeists.


115


days  of  their  occurrence.  But  it  will  be  observed  in  this  case  that
much  of  the  evidence  on  which  the  narrator  relies  is  second-hand  ;  that
"we  have  practically  only  one  account  of  the  incidents,  since  Mrs.  K.,  the
housekeeper,  merely  confirms  the  account  written  by  the  master  of  the
house,  and  does  not  give  an  independent  version  ;  that  the  disturbances
were  unquestionably  connected  with  the  presence  of  a  young  and  new
servant,  and  ceased  when  she  left  the  house  temporaiily  ;  and  that  this
young  servant  became  delirious  towards  the  end  of  the  manifestations.
"We  have  only  to  assume — what  experience  entitles  us  to  assume
— slight  defects  of  observation  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses,  and  slight
errors  on  the  part  of  the  narrator,  to  place  the  case  on  the  level  of  the
eleven  which  we  have  already  investigated.  It  is  suggested  that  to
establish  even  a  prima  facie  case  for  abnormal  agency  in  such  cases,
we  need  evidence  of  quite  another  kind  from  any  which  has  yet  been
brought  forward.

Before  the  subject  is  dismissed,  attention  may  be  directed  to  two
points.  The  first  is  that  the  moral  presumption,  upon  which  the
evidence  for  abnormal  physical  phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence
of  private  persons  mainly  depends,  is  seriously  weakened  by  this-
demonstration  of  frequent,  elaborate  and  long- continued  trickery ^
practised  occasionally  even  by  educated  persons,  without  apparent
recompense  or  adequate  motive.  The  second  point  is  that  genuine-
hallucinations  may  apparently  be  associated  with  fraudulent  physical
phenomena.  Leaving  on  one  side  the  hallucinations  alleged  to  have
been  experienced  by  the  agents  in  many  of  these  cases — though  these
are  not  without  interest — we  find  hallucinations  reported  by  the
witnesses  in  several  instances.  Thus  at  Ham,  case  IX.,  one  witness-
is  recorded  to  have  seen  a  woman's  face  in  the  oven  and  in  cases
VI.  and  X.  several  credible  witnesses  give  accounts  of  hallucinatory
experiences.  Many  of  the  auditory  experiences,  and  at  least  two  of
the  visual  hallucinations,  appear  to  have  been  collective.

These  facts  are  of  special  interest  in  their  bearing  on  the  phenomena-
of  collective  hallucination,  and  on  the  genesis  of  hallucinatory-
disturbances — auditory  and  visual — in  so-called  "haunted  houses."


116


Miss  Alice  Johnson.


V.

A  CASE  OF  INFORMATION  SUPERNORMALLY

ACQUIRED.
By  Miss  Alice  Johnson.

I  have  been  asked  by  Professor  Sidgwick  to  put  together  and
comment  on  the  evidence  in  the  case  hei-e  printed,  since  it  seems
of  sufficient  interest  to  be  worth  discussing  at  somewhat  greater
length  than  is  usually,  in  these  Proceedings,  afforded  to  single  cases.
The  most  important  and  instructive  details  have  only  been  brought
out,  as  will  be  seen,  by  prolonged  and  careful  enquiry  on  the  part  of
the  Russian  investigators  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  collection
of  the  evidence.  The  printed  selections  from  their  correspondence  will
give  some  idea  of  the  amount  of  labour  they  have  spent  on  the
investigation.  Most  of  the  information  was  obtained  through  the
kindness  of  Mr.  Joseph  Kronhelm,  while  the  energy  and  perseverance
of  Mr.  M.  Petrovo-Solovovo—  whose  name  is  well-known  to  all
members  of  the  S.P.R. — in  collecting  and  transcribing  it,  has  made
tlie  full  presentation  of  the  case  possible.

The  main  incidents  are  given  in  the  following  narrative, — a
translation  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Kronhelm  in  the  Revue  S^nrite  for
July,  1895.

June  10th,  1895.
. The  following  is  an  account  of an  apparition  seen  by  my
engineer,  Mr.  Vincent  Idanowicz,  here  at  Creczelowka,  District  Gajsin,
Podolia,  Russia.

On  November  10th,  1894,  Mr.  Idanowicz  went  to  Gajsin  to  order  a  fur
cloak  from  the  tailor,  Izloma  Sierota.  While  he  was  looking  at  the  material,
Sierota  showed  him  an  almost  new  fur  cloak,  and  induced  him  to  purchase
it  at  the  price  of  forty-five  roubles,  saying  that  he  had  bought  it  from  a
Mr.  Lassota.  Mr.  Idanowicz  agreed  to  take  the  cloak.  .  .  .  He  returned
home  pleased  with  his  bargain,  went  to  bed  and  slept  profoundly.  (Mr.
Idanowicz  and  his  brother  Ivan  occupy  a  room  on  my  premises.)  After
midnight  he  was  awakened  by  a  gentleman  dressed  in  black.  He  was  not
alarmed  in  any  way,  but  considerably  surprised  to  see  a  man  whom  he  did
not  know  and  had  never  seen  before,  knowing,  besides,  that  the  room
door  was  locked,  and  he  asked,  "  Who  are  you,  sir,  and  what  do  you  want?"
The  apparition  replied,  ' '  I  am  called  Wiszniecoski,  and  I  come  to  advise
you  to  return,  as  quickly  as  possible,  this  fur  which  you  have  just  bought
from  Izloma  Sierota  for  forty-five  roubles,  since  it  did  not  belong  to  Mr,
Lassota,  but  to  a  judge  at  Gajsin,  who  has  just  died  of  phthisis. The  fur  is


A  Case  of  Information  SuiJevnoriinaUy  Acquired.  117

infected  by  phthisic  bacilli."  Thereupon  the  vision  disappeared,  and  Mr.
Idanowicz  got  up  in  order  to  see  how  Mr.  Wiszniecoski  could  have  got  out,
as  the  only  entrance  to  the  room  was  double-locked  as  usual.  Understanding
nothing  of  what  he  had  seen  and  believing  it  to  be  a  hallucination  —all  the
more  because  his  brother,  who  had  awakened  after  the  apparition  had
vanished  and  had  heard  and  seen  nothing,  laughed  at  him — Mr.  Idanowicz
went  to  bed  again  and  next  day  resumed  his  ordinary  work,  without  saying
a  word  to  any  one  about  what  he  had  seen  and  heard.  On  the  following
night,  the  two  brothers  retired  to  bed  as  usual,  but,  as  they  could  not
sleep,  they  talked  over  their  aflairs,  and  chiefly  about  Mr.  Vincent's  fiancee
and  her  family.  Suddenly  they  heard  steps  approaching  their  chamber,  and
the  door,  which  was  locked,  opened  smartly.  Greatly  astonished,  they  saw
a  gentleman  in  black  enter,  who  said  to  them,  "  You  are  both  awake.  Well,
this  time,  Mr.  Vincent,  you  will  not  say  that  my  appearance  yesterday  was
a  hallucination.  I  come,  therefore,  to  repeat  to  you  :  Go  and  ask  Mr.
Kronhelm  to  allow  you  to  go  to  Gaj.sin  to-morrow,  and  return  the  fur  to
Izloma  Sierota,  who  is  deceiving  you  in  saying  that  it  belonged  to  Mr.
Lassota.  I  repeat  that  it  belonged  to  a  judge,  who  died  of  phthisis  at
Gajsin.  It  is  infected  with  phthisic  bacilli.  I  was  a  Government  official  at
Lipovvice  (in  the  KiefF  district),  and  died  there  in  1892  ;  but  as  my  mission
is  to  watch  over  you,  I  warn  you  of  what  will  happen  if  you  do  not  follow
my  advice." So  saying,  the  apparition  vanished.

At  five  o'clock  the  same  morning  I  was  awakened  by  my  valet,  who
said  that  the  Idanowiczes  insisted  on  seeing  me,  having  an  urgent  affair  to
communicate  ;  I  got  up  and  saw  the  two  brothers,  pale  and  frightened,  and
they  told  me  the  storj^  of  the  apparition.  Being  myself  a  convinced
Spiritualist,  ...  I  decided  to  go  with  Mr.  Vincent  Idanowicz  to
Gajsin,  in  order  to  examine  intij  the  assertions  made  by  the  "guardian
angel,"  as  Mr.  Idanowicz  justly  calls  him.

The  Jew  Sierota  denied  it  flatly  and  maintained  that  what  he  had  said
about  buying  the  cloak  from  Mr.  Lassota  was  strictly  accurate.  I  then
called  on  the  judge  at  Gajsin,  who  confirmed  the  statement  that  his
predecessor  had  died  of  phthisis,  but  knew  nothing  about  his  efiects,  which
had  probably  been  taken  possession  of  by  his  heirs.  Finally,  he  advised  me
to  consult  the  second-hand  dealer,  Boruch  Fonkonogi ;  the  latter  told  me
that  he  had  bought  all  the  effects  of  the  late  judge,  except  a  fur  cloak,  which
had  been  bought  by  Izloma  Sierota.  We  showed  him  the  fur  cloak  and  he
recognised  it  at  once  and  said  that  he  was  ready  to  swear  to  the  truth  of
what  he  affirmed.

Joseph  de  Kronhelm.

Mr.  Solovovo  wrote  to  Mr.  Ivronhelm,  asking  him  for  further
particulars  of  the  case,  and  forwarded  to  Professor  Sidgwick  the  reply
received,  with  his  own  ti'anslation  of  it,  part  of  which  is  here  printed.

TchetcheHovka,  Aiignsi  3rdll5th,  1895.

Sir, — Much  to  my  regret  it  is  but  with  one  half  of  your  request  that  I
am  able  to  comply.  I  have  not  got  all  the  proofs  you  are  asking  for  of  the
reality  of  the  apparition  of  the  late  Wischnevsky's  ghost  to  Mr.  Zdanovitch  ;


118


Miss  Alice  Johnson.


as  for  making  inquiries,  it  would  be  for  ine  a  great  inconvenience,  owing
to  the  absence  of  the  persons  required.  I  am  able  to  give  a  satisfactory
reply  only  to  the  first  point  of  your  letter,  as  I  append  to  this  letter  Mr.
Zdanovitch's  attestation  of  the  truth  of  the  fact  he  had  communicated  to  me,
viz.,  as  to  his  having  bought  of  Sirota  a  fur  cloak,  and  as  to  the  ghost  of  the
deceased  Wischnevsky  having  appeared  to  him  twice  ;  also  a  statement  by
Zdanovitch's  brother  that  he  really  saw  one  night  a  man  who  appeared
to  him  through  a  closed  door  and  called  himself  Wischnevsky.
—I  am,  etc.,  j  Kronhelm.

The  statements  enclosed  by  Mr.  Kronhelm  were  also  forwarded  to
Professor  Sidgwick. Mr.  Solovovo  translates  them  as  follows  : — •

Attestation.

Tchetcheliovka,  August  4,th/16th,  1895.
The  fact  of  my  having  bought  of  the  Jew  Schlioma  Sirota  a  fur  cloak  and
of  the  ghost  of  the  deceased  Wischnevsky  having  appeared  to  me  twice  in
order  to  warn  me  against  the  danger  of  catching  consumption  is  absolutely
true. I  certify  its  truth  with  my  signature.

Vincent  Osipovitch  Zdanovitch.

Statement.
Tchetcheliovka,  August  Athjl^th,  1895.
When  spending  the  niglit  in  the  same  room  with  my  brother  Vincent
Zdanovitch  on  the  12th/24th  of  November,  1894,  I  really  saw,  at  11  p.m.,  a
man  come  in,  dressed  in  black,  who  called  himself  Wischnevsky,  and  talked
to  my  brother  about  his  giving  away  the  fur  cloak  he  had  bought  of  Sirota.
The  door  was  locked,  so  tliat  it  was  impossible  for  a  living  man  to  come  into
the  voom  without  unlocking  the  door. I  append  my  signature.

Ivan  Osipovitch  Zdanovitch.

N.B.  —  The  names  "Tchetcheliovka"  and  "Zdanovitch"  may  also  be
written  "  Czeczelowka "  and  "  Zdanowicz "  if  we  adopt  the  Polish
orthography.  ^  p  g_

Mr.  Kronhelm  in  the  letter  above  quoted  had  confused  "  Wisch-
nevsky "  with  the  deceased  owner  of  the  fur  cloak,  although  in  his
original  narrative  it  seemed  clear  that  they  were  two  distinct  persons,
and  a  good  deal  of  correspondence  took  place  before  this  mistake  was
cleared  up.  In  a  letter  written  on  iSTovember  17th/29th,  1895,  Mr.
Solovovo  informed  us  that  Mr,  Zdanovitch's  attestation  applied  to  the
narrative  given  in  the  Revue  Spirite,  in  which,  as  he  remarked,  though
it  was  not  expressly  stated,  it  was  certainly  implied  that  Mr.
Zdanovitch  was  not  acquainted  either  with  Wischnevsky  or  the
deceased  judge.  Mr.  Solovovo  had  meanwhile  written  to  Lipovetz
(the  town  where  Wischnevsky  was  stated  to  have  died — spelt
"  Lipowice  "  in  the  Revue  Spirite)  to  make  enquiries,  but  had  received


A  Case  of  Information  Supernormally  Acquired.  119


a  reply  that  no  Government  official  of  that  name  had  died  there  at  the
date  mentioned.  He  then  wrote  again  to  Mr.  Ki'onlielra  and  his  next
letter  contains  further  information.

December  2()th/ January  7th  [1896].
Dear  Mk.  Sidgwick, — It  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  be  at  last  able  to  send
you  a  good  deal  of  additional  evidence  concerning  the  Wischnevsky  case.  I
received  Mr.  Kronhelm's  letter  on  December  21st  (January  2nd),  but  owing
to  an  attack  of  influenza,  was  unable  to  translate  its  contents  at  once.

1.  You  will  perceive  on  reading  Mr.  Kronhelm's  letter  that  one
particularly  puzzling  point  in  the  whole  story  has  at  last  been  cleared  up.
We  now  know  that  Wischnevsky  and  the  proprietor  of  the  fur  cloak  or
overcoat  were  not  one  and  the  same  person ;  Mr.  K.  states  this  most
categorically.  I  suppose  in  his  former  letter  to  me  he  had  merely  mixed  up
two  smiilar  names, — Wischnevsky  and  Nevsky.  At  any  rate  there  is  no
such  confusion  in  the  printed  narrative.

2.  The  name  of  the  locality  where  W.  died,  stated  to  be  "  Lipowice  "
in  the  Revue  Spirite,  appears  to  be  now  "  Ilyintzy "  or  "  Lintzy "  (the
latter  being  the  popular  form)  ;  this  [is]  in  accordance  with  Mr.  Kronhelm's
first  letter  to  me.  The  Revue  Spirite  article  is  full  of  such  extraordinary
misprints  that  we  may  well  suppose  "Lipowice"  to  have  been  one  of  them.
Moreover,  almost  every  name  cited  admits  of  at  least  two  ways  of  being
written.  1  Thus  Mr.  Kronhelm  spells  the  name  of  his  estate,  "  Czeczelowka,"
whilst  I  have  adopted  for  it  the  form  "  Tchetcheliovka,"  which  is  more
correct  so  far  as  pronunciation  is  concerned.  Besides,  as  it  now  appears,
Mr.  Kronhelm  has  never  had  much  information  about  Wischnevsky,  and
Mr.  Zdanovitch  (alias  Zdanowicz  or  Sdanowitsch)  none  at  all  before  the
apparition  ;  both  may  therefore  have  confounded  the  little-known  name
"  Lintzy  "  with  the  much  better  known  "Lipowice"  or  "  Lipovetz  "  in  the
same  province  (Kieff).

I  therefore  think  that  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  these  two
points.  And  as  you  asked  me  last  time  my  opinion  of  Mr.  Kronhelm,  I  may
say  now  that — so  far  as  one  may  judge  him  by  his  letters — he  must  be  a
thoroughly  trustworthy  (morally)  and  painstaking  gentleman.  His  good
faith  is  for  me  above  doubt.

With  regard  to  the  examining  magistrate's  mortal  illness,  it  is  certainly
unfortunate  that  phthisis  is  not  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  his  death  in  the
official  document.  But  I  thuik  we  may  safely  rely  on  the  priest's  evidence.
Last  of  all,  if  you  think  it  necessary  to  have  some  official  document  about
Wisdmevslq/s  death,  I  shall  try  to  get  it ;  but  in  that  case  directly,  not
through  Mr.  Kronhelm.  I  am  afraid,  however,  it  will  be  difficult,  as  we
know  so  little  about  him.

Extract  from  Mr.  Kronhelm's  letter  to  me  {received  on  December  21st/
January  2nd,  '95/'96).  — M.  P.  S.

The  fur  cloak  had  not  belonged  to  Wischnevsky  (whose  ghost  twice
appeared),  but  to  the  examming  magistrate,  Nev.sky,  who  died  of  phthisis  at

1  Of  course  if  letters  of  the  Latin  alphabet  be  used. — M.P.S.


120


3Iiss  Alice  Johnson.


Gaysin.  .  .  .  Nevsky,  though  called  a  "  judge"  in  the  Revue  Spirite,
was  no  judge,  but  an  examining  magistrate.  He  lived  in  the  town  of
Gaysin,  where  he  died  of  phthisis.  A  certificate  of  his  death  is  recorded  in
the  registers  of  the  Gaysin  Cathedral,  of  which  the  Very  Rev.^  Nicander
Mikhnevitch  is  at  present  the  overseer  ;  he  must  he  applied  to  for  an  official
statement.  I  enclose,  however,  with  this  an  extract  from  these  church
registers  with  the  Very  Rev.  Mikhnevitch's  signature.

I  enclose  with  this  Boruch  Tonkonogy's  original  attestation  as  to  the  fm-
cloak  having  belonged  to  Nevsky.

Messrs.  Zdanovitch  themselves  knew  positively  nothing  about  Wisch-
nevsky.  The  statements  made  by  the  ghost  were  also  unknown  to  them.
It  is  true  that  a  certain  Wischnevsky  had  been  known  to  Mr.  Domansky,  my
steward,  who  has  become  related  to  Mr.  Zdanovitch  (Z.  married  D.'s  sister
last  year).  As  for  myself,  the  information  I  have  about  Wischnevsky  is  very
scanty.  He  is  said  to  have  lived  at  Ilyintzy  (or,  as  the  people  say,  Lintzy),
Government  of  KiefF,  and  to  have  served  in  the  Excise  Department  or  to
have  been  a  private  solicitor.  I  have  been  unable  to  collect  more
information. . .  .

J.  Kronhelm.

Translation  of  the  documents  annexed  to  Mr.  Kronhelm' s  letter.

(1)

The  overcoat  which  Zdanovitch  bought  of  the  Jew  Schlioma  Sirota
had  really  belonged  to  Nevsky,  who  died  of  phthisis  ;  and  to  this  I  append
my  signature.

Boruch  Tonkonogy.

(2)

Granov,  December  \.2th.
I  was  really  acquainted  with  Mr.  Wischnevsky. I  made  his  acquaintance
at  Zaslav,  Government  of  Volhynia,  and  Mr.  Wischnevsky  told  uie  he  served
[in  some  official  institution]  at  Ilyintzy,  Government  of  Kieff.  — I  append  my
signature.

Alexander  Domansky.

(3)

Gaysin,  December  Uth/28th,  1895.

Most  Honourable  Joseph  Valentin ovitch,- — It  is  very  pleasant  to
know  that  there  are  in  the  district  of  Gaysin  persons  so  highly  educated  as
to  cany  on  a  correspondence  for  scientific  purposes  with  Paris  and  London.
I  send  you  an  extract  from  the  Cathedral  registers  concerning  Nevsky's
death,  who  before  dying  had  spent  together  with  his  wife  two  or  three
months  at  Algiers, — a  French  colony.

"On  June  28th  [July  10th],  1893,  there  died  of  an  aneurism,  and  was
buried  on  the  30th  [12th]  of  the  same  month  in  the  Gaysin  churchyard  the
examining  magistrate  of  the  first  district,  Alexander  Ivanovitch  Nevsky,
aged  32."

1  Archpriest.— M.P.S.
-  Mr.  Kronhelm's  j)atronymic  name. — M.P.S.


A  Case  of  Information  Super  normally  Acquired.  121


In  fact,  however,  he  died  of  consumption  ;  blood  began  to  flow  out  of
his  throat. — Accept,  etc.

Very  Rev.  Nicander  Mikhnevitch.
[The  words  in  brackets  are  mine. — M.P.S.]

The  only  point  now  remaining  on  which  further  evidence  seemed
required  was  the  death  of  Mr.  Wischnevsky,  and  Mr.  Solovovo
continued  his  exertions  in  this  direction  witli,  as  will  be  seen,  a
somewhat  surprising  result. He  wi'ites  : —

January  6th/lSth,  1896.
Dear  Mr.  Sidgwick, — I  wrote  about  a  week  ago  to  the  police  authorities
at  Lipovetz,  KiefF,  asking  for  information  about  Wischnevsky's  death,  and
will  probably  get  a  reply  before  long.

I  have  ascertained  that  Ilintzy,  where  W.  is  said  to  have  died,  is  situated
very  near  the  town  of  Lipovetz — something  like  twelve  English  miles,  I
think  ;  so  that  there  is  no  discrepancy  on  this  point  between  the  printed
narrative  and  Mr.  Kronhehn's  present  statements.

M.  Petrovo-Solovovo.

St.  Petersburg,  January  24:thf February  5th  [1896].

Dear  Mr.  Sidgwick, — It  is  only  to-day  that  I  am  in  receipt  of  an
official  reply  from  the  police  authorities  of  Lipovetz,  Government  of  Kiefif,
stating  that  a  certain  N.  F.  Wischnevsky,  a  private  solicitor,  is  living  at
present  at  Ilintzy,  district  of  Lipovetz,  and  that  there  has  been  at  Ilintzy  no
other  person  of  the  same  name.

I  shall  write  to  this  Mr.  Wischnevsky,  stating  the  case  in  full,  etc.,  and
will  also  inform  Mr.  Kronhelm  of  this  strange  discovery.  I  doubt,  however,
whether  Mr.  Wischnevsky  will  be  able  to  clear  up  the  matter.

If  you  can  suggest  anything  else,  I  shall  comply  at  once  with  your
advice.

M.  Petrovo-Solovovo.

The  next  letters  give  the  results  of  Mr.  Solovovo's  correspondence
with  Mr.  Wischnevsky,  and  some  further  remarks  by  Mr.  Kronhelm.

38,  Sergievskaia,  St.  Petersburg,  Fehritary  4,tli/16lh  [1896].

Dear  Mr.  Sidgwick, — I  have  received  to-day  an  answer  from  Mr.
Wischnevsky  (whom  we  had  supposed  to  be  dead  !)  :  and  I  am  sorry  to  say
that  his  letter  cannot  throw  any  light  on  the  subject  of  our  inquiry.

He  says  that  he  has  lived  for  25  years  at  Ilintzy  ;  and  that  during  this
interval  two  persons  of  the  name  of  Wischnevsky  ^  did  live  there  too  ;  but
one  of  them  left  Ilintzy  20  years  ago,  and  the  other  lives  at  present  at
Winnitza,  Podolia.  He  also  says  there  certainly  was  no  Wischnevsky  at
Lipovetz  in  1892.

He  is  not  acquainted  either  with  Mr.  Kronhelm  or  with  Mr.  Zdanovitch.
He  met  a  Mr.  Domansky  thirty  years  ago,  but  it  was  not  at  Zaslav,  since  he


1  Not  a  very  uncommon  name  in  general. — M.P.S.


122


Miss  Alice  Johnson.


has  not  been  there  since  1853 ;  and  he  lived  then  at  Jitomiz.  As  you  see,  the
identity  of  this  Domansky  with  Mr.  Zdanovitch's  brother-in-law  is  doubtful.
He  has  never  heard  the  story  before,  etc.

I  will  write  again  as  soon  as  I  receive  a  reply  from  Mr.  Kronhelm.  In
my  opinion,  however,  the  absence  of  any  positive  information  about  the
Wischnevsky  of  Mr.  Kronhelm's  narrative  does  not  invalidate  the  case.

M.  Petrovo-Solovovo.

St.  Petersburg,  March  9th  121st  [1896].

Dear  Mr.  Sidgwick, — I  have  at  last  received  a  reply  from  Mr.
Kronhelm,  who  now  lives  at  KiefF,  which  explains  why  he  did  not  reply  to
me  before.  He  says,  ' '  I  have  several  times  written  to  Lipovetz,  but  have
not  learned  anything  ;  as  I  lived  far  from  Lipovetz,  I  did  not  go  there
myself  in  order  to  find  out  the  above-mentioned  Wischnevsky,  but  only
learnt  certain  details  from  a  former  inhabitant  of  Lipovetz,  M.  A.  A.
Domansky  [which  details  we  possess  already].  ...  I  did  all  I  could  to
find  out  the  truth."

Mr.  Kronhelm  further  says  there  is  nothing  extraordijiary  in  the  fact
that  there  lives  now  at  Lintzy  a  Mr.  Wischnevsky,  seeing  that  the  name  is
very  common  in  the  south  of  Russia,  and  is  borne  both  by  Catholics  and
by  members  of  the  Orthodox  Church.  He  will  ascertain,  he  says,  to  what
Catholic  j)arish  Lijjovetz  belongs,  and  will  then  ask  a  Catholic  priest  to  clear
up  the  matter.  Mr.  Vincent  Zdanovitch  and  his  brother  are  no  more  in
Mr.  Kronhelm's  service,  having  left  him  at  Christmas.  He  has  given  V.  Z.
a  certificate  of  good  behaviour,  but  has  not  heard  from  him  and  his  brother
since.

M.  Petrovo-Solovovo.

Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  feature  in  this  curious  case  is  the
mixture  of  truth  and  probable  falsehood  in  the  information  given  by
the  apparition.  The  percipient  is  instructed  on  two  quite  distinct
subjects: — (1)  the  history  of  the  cloak, — afterwards  fully  verified;
and  (2)  the  supposed  history  of  the  phantasmal  "  Wischnevsky,"
who,  according  to  the  evidence  in  our  possession,  is  most  probably  a
purely  fictitious  personage.

With  regard  to  the  first  subject, — the  history  of  the  cloak, — three
possible  sources  of  the  information  may  be  suggested.  First,  it  may
have  come  from  the  deceased  owner  of  the  cloak.  This  hypothesis
does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  any  of  the  persons  concerned,  and
indeed  has  little  to  recommend  it.  If  it  was  the  magistrate  Nevsky
who  was  communicating,  why  did  he  give  a  wrong  name  and  address  ?
His  words  would  have  carried  greater  weight  if  he  had  announced
himself  frankly  as  the  owner  of  the  cloak.

The  second  hypothesis  is  that  the  information  was  obtained
through  some  kind  of  clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Zdanovitch.
It  may  have  been  telepathic  clairvoyance,  the  agent  being  the  Jew
dealer,  whose  guilty  conscience — shown  apparently  by  his  telling  a


A  Case  of  Information  Super  normally  Acquired.  123


falsehood  about  the  cloak — may  have  been  the  exciting  cause  of  the
telepathic  impact.  Two  cases  of  veridical,  possibly  telepathic,  im-
pressions with  regard  to  criminal  actions  of  a  more  serious  kind  are
given  by  Mrs.  McCall  Black  in  the  Jouriial  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  270
and  272.  In  the  first,  Mrs.  Black,  discovering  her  purse  stolen,  had
an  impression  that  it  had  been  taken  by  a  certain  person,  whom  she
had  no  reason  for  suspecting,  and  that  it  was  then  in  a  certain  place.
Immediate  search  was  made  and  the  purse  found.  On  another
occasion,  after  a  burglary  in  her  house,  she  dreamt  that  two  persons
were  concerned  in  it,  one  known  to  her  and  the  other  not,  and  direc-
tions wei'e  given  how  to  treat  each  of  them.  She  was  told  the  name  and
address  of  the  unknown  thief  in  her  dream,  and  she  wrote  to  him  next
day  and  finally  recovered  all  her  property.  In  another  case  given  in
Mr.  Myers'  paper  on  The  Subliminal  Self  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XI.,  Part  XXIX.,  p.  459,  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  going  to  his  office
with  his  nephew  to  consult  a  book,  was  prevented  by  a  sudden  and
unaccountable  impulse  from  going  in  himself.  His  nephew  went  in
alone  and  was  shot  at,  but  not  injured,  by  a  man  who  was  hiding  near
by  with  the  intention  of  murdering  Dr.  Parsons.

The  third  hypothesis  is  that  the  facts  given  were  subconsciously
known  to  Mr.  Zdanovitch  beforehand.  It  must  be  I'emembered  that
he  lived  near  the  town  of  Gaysin,  to  which  the  deceased  magistrate
belonged,  and  may  have  been  in  the  habit  of  going  there  frequently.
Nevsky,  being  probably  a  somewhat  important  personage  in  the  town,
may  have  been  pointed  out  to  him  once  or  twice,  and  may  then  have
been  wearing  the  cloak.  He  may  easily  have  forgotten  this  encounter;
but  if  it  ever  took  place,  he  might  then  have  noticed  some  mark  on
the  cloak  by  which  he  afterwards  subconsciously  recognized  it.
Something  in  the  Jew's  manner,  again,  may  have  led  him  to  suspect
some  nefarious  dealing.  Possibly  the  subliminal  self  of  the  average
half-educated  Russian  lives  in  a  chronic  state  of  suspicion  of  the
average  Jew.

We  have  abundant  evidence  of  the  superior  acuteness  of  the
subliminal  to  the  supraliminal  self,  both  in  making  observations  and  in
drawing  conclusions  from  them,  and  though  this  does  not  explain  why  the
conclusions  should  be  presented  in  an  elaborate  dramatic  form  rather
than  in  a  plain  straightforward  manner,  there  are  numerous  instances
in  which  it  actually  is  so, — e.y.  the  well-known  case  of  "Miss  X."'s
recalling  the  forgotten  date  of  Ptolemy  Pliiladelphus  by  means  of  a
crystal-vision  of  a  Jewish  Elder  at  work  on  the  Septuagint
(Pi'oceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  512),  and  Professor  Hilprecht's  dream  of  the
Assyrian  inscription,  given  above  in  Professor  Newbold's  paper  (see
ante,  p.  14).  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  observed  that  while  all
the  facts  given  in  Professor  Hilprecht's  dream  could  have  been  deduced


124


Miss  Alice  Johnson.


from  information  already  in  his  possession, — although  some  of  it  had
been,  as  was  proved,  once  known  to  him  and  subsequently  forgotten, —
there  is  no  proof  that  any  of  the  facts  about  the  cloak  had  ever  been
known  to  Mr.  Zdanovitch,  or  could  have  been  deduced  from  anything
within  his  knowledge.  The  case  mei'ely  shares  in  the  weakness  inherent
in  all  cases  of  apparently  supernormal  knowledge  of  past  events, — the
difficulty,  namely,  of  completely  excluding  the  explanation  suggested.
Even  if  this  be  the  true  explanation,  however,  it  does  not,  of  course,
account  for  the  apparition  having  been  seen  by  both  the  brothers
collectively  ;  but  this  point  will  be  dealt  with  later.

We  have  next  to  consider  the  significance  of  the  personality
"Wischnevsky."  Mr.  Zdanovitch  may  possibly  have  heard  through  his
future  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Domansky,  of  the  Mr.  Wischnevsky  ^  whom
the  latter  had  met  at  Zaslav.  The  town  of  Gaysin,  near  which  they
lived,  is  about  34  (English)  miles  from  Lipovetz,  near  which  Wischnevsky
is  said  to  have  lived.  Zaslav  is  about  120  miles  from  Lipovetz,  and
the  Mr.  Wischnevsky  whom  Mr.  Domansky  met  there  told  him  that  he
was  a  government  official  at  Ilyintzy  (or,  Lintzy)  about  12  miles  from
Lipovetz.  They  appear  to  have  been  merely  casual  acquaintances.  It
is  assumed  at  first  that  the  apparition  represents  this  Wischnevsky,
and  that  he  died,  as  stated,  in  1892.  One  would  naturally  suppose  that
a  spirit  so  well  acquainted  with  the  affairs  of  the  Gaysin  magisti-ate
would  have  at  least  an  equally  accurate  knowledge  of  his  own  name  and
former  occupation,  and  the  place  and  date  of  his  death.  However,  the
police  authorities  at  Lipovetz,  who  must  no  doubt  know  of  all  the
government  officials  in  the  neighbourhood,  state  that  the  only  person
of  this  name  recently  inhabiting  Ilintzy  is  still  living  there,  and
there  is  no  ground  for  connecting  this  living  Wischnevsky  with  the
apparition,  while  his  identity  with  the  Wischnevsky  formerly  known
to  Mr.  Domansky  is  very  doubtful.

We  are  told,  moreover,  that  Wischnevsky  is  a  very  common  name
in  the  south  of  Russia ;  but,  since  all  the  facts  given  about  the
phantasmal  Wischnevsky  are  entirely  unsupported  by  the  evidence,  the

1  Mrs.  Verrall  writes  to  mo  with  regard  to  this  case  : —

"5,  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge,  Mai/  14tli,  [1806].

"One  small  point  occurs  to  me  as  favouring  your  'third  hypothesis,'  viz.,  that
the  facts  were  known  subconsciously  to  the  percipient.  It  is  the  undoubtedly  curious
resemblance  in  sound  between  the  names  of  the  apparition  and  the  deceased  owner.
Had  the  apparition  been  what  he  described  himself,  I  suppose  we  should  have
regarded  the  resemblance  as  merely  '  odd, '  but  under  the  circvimstances,  ...  it
seems  to  me  that  if  Mr.  Vincent  Z.  did,  as  you  suggest,  know  subconsciously  the
facts  about  Nevsky,  and  had  heard  the  name  Wischnevsky,  it  is  exceedingly  likely
that  his  subliminal  self  would  give  one  name  while  announcing  the  facts  known  to  the
other  person.  At  least  this  is  the  way,  as  we  all  know  from  personal  experience,  in
which  a  half-remembered  fact  connects  itself  with  similar  facts  or  words."


A  Case  of  Information  Supernormally  Acquired.  125


commonness  of  the  name  only  reduces  still  further  any  force  that  there
might  have  been  in  the  "  identity  test."  Wischnevsky,  in  fact,  plays
in  the  story  the  part  of  a  hallucinatory  "Mrs.  Harris,"  and  we  are  led
seriously  to  doubt  whether  there  is  any  such  person.

If  we  now  compare  this  case  with  the  ordinary  experiences  of
mediums,  we  find  that  it  almost  always  appears  to  them  that  their
"communications"  come  from  some  definite  personal  source  or  sources,
and  it  often  seems  purely  accidental  whether  the  person  conceived  of
3.S  the  source  is  a  real  or  an  imaginary  person.  There  is,  so  far  as  I
iim  aware,  no  objective  evidence  whatever  of  the  real  existence  of
"  Phinuit,"  or  of  the  less  well-known  "  Elvira,"  described  in  Dr.
Ermacora's  paper  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXVIII.  (Vol.
XI.),  p.  235.  On  the  other  hand,  the  utterances  given  in  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  constantly  refer  themselves  to  definite  individuals,  while  her
controls "  other  than  Phinuit  are  occasionally  recognised  by  her
sitters  as  real  persons  known  to  them.  The  case  here  under  discussion
seems  transitional  between  these  cases  and  the  hallucinations  of  the
ordinary  non-mediumistic  person,  which  are  generally  of  a  much  less
complicated  type,  affecting  one  sense  only  at  a  time.

Every  one,  however,  is  accustomed  to  meeting  with  the  more
complicated  and  dramatic  element  in  his  dream-conceptions,  and
Professor  Hilprecht's  dream,  already  referred  to,  of  the  Assyrian  priest
who  explained  to  him  how  to  decipher  the  inscription,  is  a  noteworthy
case  in  point.  The  conception  of  the  priest  arises  naturally, — one
might  almost  say,  inevitably- — out  of  the  circumstances  of  the  dream.
But  while  we  can  see  the  probable  causes  at  work  in  his  construction,
Wischnevsky  seems  a  purely  fancy  sketch.

His  being  represented  as  a  deceased  person  is  another  point  of
resemblance  to  the  mediumistic  type.  For  in  accordance  with  their
preconceived  ideas,  mediums  constantly  regard  their  "communications"
as  coming  from  such  spirits,  and  the  element  sometimes  obtrudes  itself
into  the  midst  of  a  partially  veridical  communication.  Two  instances  of
this  are  given  in  Mr.  Myers'  paper  on  "  The  Subliminal  Consciousness:
Motor  Automatism/'  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.E.,Vol.  IX.,  pp.  65  and  67.
In  the  first,  the  medium  gives  some  correct  information  about  an  early
friend  of  the  sitter's,  but  states  incorrectly  that  he  is  dead  at  the  time.
In  the  second,  after  some  rather  striking  statements  about  the  sitter's
deceased  father,  the  medium  gives  the  name,  and  date  and  cause  of
death — by  accident — of  a  former  pupil  of  his,  the  name  of  the  clergy-
man who  preached  the  funeral  sermon,  and  the  text  from  which  he
preached.  The  names  were  those  of  real  pei'sons  known  to  the  sitter,
and  the  accident  was  one  which  he  had  feared  might  take  place,  but  it
had  never  actually  occurred.  Later  on  in  the  same  paper,  among  the
experiences  of  "Miss  A./'  is  given  the  curious  ca.se  of  "John  Black  "


126


Miss  Alice  Johnson.


(loc.  cit.,  p.  84),  who  on  his  first  appearance  announces  himself  as  dead^
but  is  found  afterwards  to  be  alive.

There  remains  one  more  remarkable  feature  in  the  case,  viz.,  that-
the  apparition  was  seen  and  heard  by  Mr.  Zdanovitch's  brother  as  well
as  by  himself.  The  impressions  of  Mr.  Ivan  Zdanovitch,  however,
cannot  be  considered  independent  of  those  of  his  brother.  It  was  only
after  hearing  of  his  brother's  experience  of  the  preceding  night  that  he
himself  saw  the  apparition.  If  he  was  sufficiently  impressionable  to
experience  anything,  it  would  be  likely  to  take  the  form  already
suggested  to  him,  and  accordingly  the  second  experience  is  hardly
more  than  a  mere  repetition  of  the  first.  The  only  additional  points-
are  the  statements  relating  to  the  former  occupation  and  death  of
Wischnevsky,  and  these  are  just  the  details  which  investigation  has-
shown  to  be  probably  erroneous.

The  significance  of  collective  hallucinations  is  discussed  in  the
"  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  X.,  pp.  319-326,  whei'e  it  is  maintained  that  hallucinations, —
whether  veridical  or  falsidical, — may  be  transmitted  from  one  person
to  another  by  verbal  or  telepathic  suggestion,  or  by  both  kinds  of
suggestion  acting  together,  and  that  it  is  generally  unnecessary  to
assume  any  agency  external  to  the  minds  of  the  two  percipients.
This  theory  explains  the  cases  where  the  hallucination  represents
some  inanimate  object  or  animal,  and  brings  collective  hallucinations-
under  the  same  category  as  "  simultaneous  dreams,"  such  as  those
given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  314  to  316,  or  that
narrated  by  Miss  Bidder  (see  Journal  S.P.R. ,  Vol.  IV,  p.  344),  in
which  she  and  her  sister  dreamt  at  the  same  time  of  a  pre-historic
human  skeleton  with  a  long  snout.

As  the  conception  of  telepathy  was  deduced  from  a  large  number
of  experiments,  in  the  great  majority  of  which  the  ideas  transferred
were  trivial  in  the  extreme,  so  these  trivial  spontaneous  cases  may
give  us  the  clue  to  the  true  explanation  of  cases  whose  psychological
significance  is  apt  to  be  obscured  by  emotional  considerations.  For
any  one  who  admits  the  possibility  of  telepathy,  it  would  be  not  only
unnecessary  but  absurd,  to  maintain  that  these  dreams  of  the  Miss-
Bidders  were  caused  by  an  external  agent ;  and  it  seems  to  me  equally
unnecessary — though  not,  of  course,  equally  absurd — to  assume  aii
external  agent  in  the  present  case.  We  know  that  verbal  suggestion
may  occasionally  produce  hallucinations  and  there  was  undoubtedly
verbal  suggestion  here,  while  this  may  have  been  supplemented  at
the  moment  by  telepathic  suggestion  from  one  percipient  to  the
other.


Supplement.] James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.  127


SUPPLEMENT.


JAMES  BRAID  ; HIS  WORK  AND  WRITINGS.
By  De.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


The  following  are  all  the  books  and  articles  by  Braid  on  the  subject  of
hypnotism  which  I  have  been  able  to  trace  : —

1.  Satanic  Agency  and  Mesmerism  reviewed,  in  a  letter  to  the  Rev.  H.

McNeile,  A.M.,  in  Reply  to  a  Sermon  preached  by  him. [1842, 12mo.]

2.  Neurypnology,  or  the  Rationale  of  Nervous  Sleep,  considered  in  Relation  to

Animal  Magnetism,  illustrated  hy  numerous  cases  of  successful  application
in  the  Relief  and  Cure  of  Disease. [1843,  12mo,  pp.  281.]

3.  The  Power  of  the  Mind  over  the  Body,  an  Experimental  Inquiry  into  the

Nature  and  Cause  of  the  Phenomena  attributed  hy  Baron  Reichenbach
and  others  to  a  "  New  Imponderable."  [1846.]

4.  Observations  on  Trance  or  Human  Hybernation.  [1850.]

5.  Electro-Biological  Phenomena,  considered  physiologically  and  psychologi-

cally, from  the  Montldy  Journal  of  Medical  Science  for  June,  1851,
with  Appendix.

6.  Magic,  Witchcraft,  Animal  Magnetism,  Hypnotism  and  Electro-Biology ;

being  a  Digest  of  the  latest  Views  of  the  Atitlior  on  these  S^ibjects.  Third
Edition,  greatly  enlarged,  embracing  observations  on  J.  C.  Colquhoun's
History  of  Magnetism.  [1852.]

7.  Hypnotic  Therapeutics,  Illustrated  by  Cases,  ivith  an  Appendix  on  Table-

Tnrning  and  Spirit-Rapping.  Reprinted  from  the  Monthly  Journal  of
Medical  Science  for  July,  1853.

8.  The  Physiology  of  Fascination,  and  tlie  Critics  Criticised. [1855.]  The

second  part  is  a  reply  to  the  attacks  made  in  the  Zoist.

9.  Observations  on  the  Nature  and  Treoiment  of  Certain  Forms  of  Paralysis.

[1855.]

Articles  in  the  Medical  Times  : —

10.  "  Animal  Magnetism." Vol.  V.,  1841-42,  p.  283.

11.  "Animal  Magnetism." Vol.  V.,  p.  308.

12.  "Neuro-Hypnotism." Vol.  VI.,  1842,  p.  230.

13.  "Plireno-Mesmerism." Vol.  IX.,  1843-44,  p.  74.

14.  "  Mr.  Braid  on  Mesmerism." Vol.  IX.,  p.  203.

15.  "Observations  on  some  Mesmeric  Phenomena." Vol.  IX.,  p.  225.

16.  "  Observations  on  Mesmeric  and  Hypnotic  Phenomena." Vol.  X.,  1844,

pp.  31  and  47.


128


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


Supplement.


17.  "  Case  of  Natural  Somnambuli.sm  and  Catalepsy,  ti'eated  by  Hypnotism  ;

with  remarks  on  the  Phenomena  presented  during  Spontaneous  Som-
nambulism, as  well  as  that  produced  by  various  Artificial  Processes."
Vol.  XI.,  1844-45,  pp.  77,  95,  and  134.

18.  "  Experimental  Inquiry  whether  Hypnotic  and  Mesmeric  Manifestations

can  be  adduced  in  Proof  of  Phrenology." Vol.  XI.,  p.  181.

19.  "Magic,  Mesmerism,  Hypnotism,  &c..  Historically  and  Physiologically

considered." Vol.  XI.,  pp.  201,  224,  270,  296,  399,  and  439.

20.  "Case  of  Natural  Somnambulism,"  &c. Vol.  XII.,  1845,  p.  117.

[Article  giving  further  history  of  case  already  reported.]

21.  "The  Fakirs  of  India." Vol.  XII.,  p.  437.

22.  "Dr.  Elliotson  and  Mr.  Braid." Vol.  XIII.,  1845-46,  pp.  99,  120,

and  141.

23.  "On  the  Power  of  the  Mind  over  the  Body  ;  an  Experimental  Inquiry

into  the  Nature  and  Cause  of  the  Phenomena  attributed  by  Baron
Reichenbach  and  others  to  a  '  New  Imponderable.'  "  Vol.  XIV.,  1846,
pp.  214,  252,  and  273.

24.  "  Facts  and  Observations  as  to  the  Relative  Value  of  Mesmeric  and

Hypnotic  Coma  and  Ethereal  Narcotism,  for  the  Mitigation  or  entire
Prevention  of  Pain  during  Surgical  Operations."  Vol.  XV.,  1846-47,
p.  381  ;  continued  :  Vol.  XVI.,  1847,  p.  10.

25.  "  Observations  on  the  Use  of  Ether  for  Preventing  Pain  during  Surgical

Operations,  and  the  Moral  Abuse  it  is  capable  of  being  converted  to."
Vol.  XVI.,  p.  130.

26.  "  Mr.  Braid  and  Dr.  Elliotson." Vol.  XVII.,  1847-48,  p.  106.

27.  "  Mr.  Braid  and  Mr.  Wakley." Vol.  XVII.,  p.  163.

28.  "Observations  on  Trance  or  Human  Hybernation." Vol.  XXI.,  1850,

pp.  351,  401,  and  416.

In  the  Lancet  : —

29.  "  Queries  respecting  the  Alleged  Voluntary  Trance  of  Fakirs  in  India."

Vol.  11.,  1845,  p.  325.

In  the  Monthlij  Journal  of  Medical  Science  : —

30.  "Hypnotic  Therapeutics,  Illustrated  by  Cases." Vol.  VIII.,  third

series,  1853,  j).  14.

In  tlie  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  :  —

31.  "The  Power  of  the  Mind  over  the  Body;  an  Experimental  Inquiry

into  the  Nature  and  Cause  of  the  Phenomena  attributed  by  Baron
Reichenbach  and  others  to  a  'New  Imponderable.'"  Vol.  LXVI.,
1846,  p.  286.

32.  "Facts  and  Observations  as  to  the  relative  Value  of  Mesmeric  and

Hypnotic  Coma,  and  Ethereal  Narcotism,  for  the  Mitigation  or  entire
Prevention  of  Pain  during  Surgical  Operations."  Vol.  LXVII. ,  1847,
p.  588.

33.  "  On  the  Use  and  Abuse  of  Anaesthetic  Agents,  and  the  best  Modes  of

Rousing  Patients  who  have  been  too  intensely  affected  by  them.
Vol.  LXX.,  1848,  V.  486.


Supplement.) James  Braid;  His  Work  and  Writings.  129


The  name  of  James  Braid  is  familiar  to  all  students  of  hypnotism  and  is
rarely  mentioned  by  them  without  due  credit  being  given  to  the  important
part  he  played  in  rescuing  that  science  from  ignorance  and  superstition.
Regret  is  usually  expressed,  however,  that  he  held  many  erroneous  views,
which  it  is  claimed  tlie  researches  of  more  recent  investigators  have  disproved.
The  following,  as  far  as  I  can  gather  from  hypnotic  works  and  from  conversa-
tion with  those  interested  in  hypnotism,  are  the  almost  vmiversally  adopted
opinions  in  reference  to  Braid.  (1)  He  was  an  English  surgeon.  (2)  He
believed  in  phrenology.  (3)  He  was  the  discoverer  or  rediscoverer  of  the
subjective  origin  of  hypnotic  phenomena.  (4)  He  knew  nothing  of
suggestion.  In  all  this,  one  thing,  and  one  alone,  is  correct,  namely,  that
Braid  was  the  rediscoverer  of  the  subjective  nature  of  hypnotic  phenomena.
This  estimate  of  Braid  has  arisen  from  imperfect  knowledge  of  his  writings.
Few  seem  to  be  acquainted  with  any  of  his  works  except  "  Neurypnology,
or  with  the  fact  that  this  was  only  one  of  a  long  series  on  the  subject  of
hypnotism,  and  that  in  the  later  ones  his  views  completely  changed.  The
necessarily  limited  length  of  this  article  will  prevent  my  dealing  with  each
of  these  separately  and  in  detail.  I  propose,  therefore,  first  to  refer  shortly
to  his  earliest  publication,  then  to  give  an  account  of  the  theories  which  are
found  in  "  Neurypnology  "  alone,  and  finally  to  present  a  general  picture  of
his  later  ojnnions.

Meanwliile,  a  word  as  to  Braid's  nationality  and  to  the  events  which  led
to  his  hypnotic  researches.  The  names  of  EUiotson,  Esdaile  and  Braid
stand  out  prominently  in  the  history  of  mesmerism  and  hypnotism  in  this
country,  and  it  is  not  without  interest  to  note  that  all  of  them  studied  at
Edinburgh  University,  and  that  both  Esdaile  and  Braid  were  of  Scotch  birth
and  parentage,  the  latter  being  born  at  Rylaw  House,  Fifeshire,  about
1795.

On  November  13th,  1841,  Braid,  for  the  first  time,  was  present  at  a
mesmei'ic  seance,  the  operator  being  Lafontaine.  At  this  time  mesmeric
phenomena  were  believed  to  be  due  either  to  mysterious  force  or  fluid,  self-
deception  or  trickery.  Braid  held  the  latter  theory  and,  on  the  first
occasion,  saw  nothing  to  cause  him  to  alter  his  views.  At  the  next  seance,
six  days  later,  he  noticed  that  one  subject  was  unable  to  open  his  eyes.
Braid  regarded  this  as  a  real  phenomenon  and  was  anxious  to  discover  its
physiological  cause  ;  and  the  following  evening,  when  the  case  was  again
operated  on,  he  believed  he  had  done  so.  After  making  a  series  of  experiments,
chiefly  on  personal  friends  and  relatives,  he  expressed  his  conviction  that
the  phenomena  he  had  witnessed  were  purely  subjective,  and  began  almost
immediately  to  place  these  views  before  the  public,  his  first  lecture  being
delivered  on  December  27th,  1841.

In  1842,  Braid  offered  a  paper  on  the  subject  of  hypnotism  to  the
Medical  Section  of  the  British  Association.  This  was  refused,  whereupon  he
gave  a  conversazione  at  which  many  members  of  the  Association  were
present,  read  his  paper  and  showed  cases.  His  first  work  on  mesmerism  was
entitled  "Satanic  Agency  and  Mesmerism  reviewed,  in  a  letter  to  the  Rev.
H.  McNeile,  A.M.,  of  Liverpool,  in  Ref)ly  to  a  Sermon  preached  by  him  at
St.  Jude's  Church,  Livei'pool,  on  Sunday,  April  10th,  1842."  iMcNeile
had  charged  Braid  with  "refusing  to  state  the  laws  of  nature  by  the  uniform

K


130


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bravuvell.


[Supplement.


action  of  which  mesmeric  phenomena  were  produced." To  this  Braid  replied
that  he  had  always  explained  the  phenomena  on  physiological  and  psycho-
logical principles,  but  that  McNeile  had  refused  to  attend  his  lectures  or  to
read  any  account  of  them. Braid  at  this  time  believed  in  the  physical  origin
of  hypnotic  phenomena,  and  referred  to  the  theory  by  which  he  attempted
to  explain  certain  changes  in  the  central  nervous  system,  more  particularly
decreased  functional  activity,  as  the  result  of  the  exhaustion  of  other  nerve
centres  from  continued  monotonous  stimulation. "But,"  he  said,  "even
supposing  my  theories  did  not  explain  the  whole  of  the  phenomena,  surely,
when  beneficial  a2:)plication  could  be  made  of  the  extent  of  the  knowledge
we  had  acquired,  we  ought  to  be  at  liberty  to  do  so  without  being  stigmatised
from  the  pulpit  as  necromancers,  or  producing our  effects  by  '  Satanic
agency.' Supposing  a  hundred  passengers  start  in  one  of  your  packets,  and
20  or  30  of  them  become  sea-sick,  and  the  others  escape,  would  it  be  fair  to
implicate  the  captain  in  a  charge  of  acting  by  Satanic  agency  because  the
whole  were  not  sick,  and  because,  according  to  McNeile,  '  if  it  be  in  nature,
it  will operate  uniformly and not capriciously  ? . . . if  it  operate
capriciously,  then  there  is  some  mischievous  agent  at  work  ;  and  we  are  not
ignorant  of  the  devices  of  the  devil.' Would  any  man  but  Mr.  McNeile
say  that,  because  the  captain  gave  the  signal  to  heave  anchor,  to  spread  the
sails,  and  other  '  talismanic  tokens  '  for  steering  the  vessel,  and  because  only
part  of  the  passengers  became  sick,  he  was  consequently  affecting  i/iem
through  Satanic  agency  ; — or  that  it  would  alter  the  matter  one  whit  because
medical  men  could  not  assign  the  true  cause  of  this,  or  why  any  one  should
be  so  aflected  ?  "

"  Neukypnology."

"  Neurypnology,  or  the  Rationale  of  Nervous  Sleep,"  was  published  by
Braid  in  1843,  and  800  copies  were  sold  in  a  few  montlis.

At  the  seance  already  referred  to,  Braid  had  observed  that  the  mesmeric
condition  was  induced  by  fixed  staring,  and  concluded  that  the  inability  to
open  the  eyes  arose  from  paralysis  of  certain  nerve  centres  and  exhaustion  of
the  levator  muscles.  "  I  expressed,"  he  said,  "my  entire  conviction  that
the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  were  to  be  accounted  for  on  the  principle  of
the  derangement  of  the  state  of  the  cerebral  spinal  centres,  and  of  the
circulatory,  respiratory  and  muscular  systems,  induced  by  a  fixed  stare,
absolute  repose  of  body,  fixed  attention  and  suppressed  respiration,
concomitant  with  that  fixity  of  attention.  That  the  whole  depended  on  the
physical  and  psychical  condition  of  the  patient,  arising  from  the  causes
referred  to,  and  not  at  all  on  the  volition,  or  passes  of  the  operator  throwing
out  magnetic  fluid,  or  exciting  to  activity  some  mystical,  universal  fluid  or
medium."

Braid  induced  hypnosis  by  nraking  the  subject  look  at  a  bright  object,
held  in  such  a  position  above  the  forehead  as  was  calculated  to  produce  the
greatest  possible  strain  upon  the  eyes  and  eyelids,  while  at  the  same  time  the
mind  was  to  be  riveted  on  the  idea  of  that  one  object.  Braid  not  only
maintained  that  the  condition  was  a  purely  subjective  one,  produced  in  this
mechanical  way,  but  also  claimed  to  have  successfully  demonstrated  that  it
could  be  induced  in  like  manner  in  persons  who  had  never  heard  of  mesmerism
and  who  were  ignorant  of  what  was  expected  of  them. In  illustration  of


Supplement.] Jctmes  Brcdd ;  His  Wovh  and  Writvags.  131


this,  he  mentioned  that  he  had  hypnotised  one  of  his  servants,  who  knew
nothing  of  mesmerism,  by  giving  him  such  directions  as  were  calculated  ti  >
impress  his  mind  with  the  idea  that  his  fixed  attention  was  required  merely
for  the  purpose  of  watching  a  chemical  experiment  with  which  he  was
already  familiar.

After  having  established  the  subjective  origin  of  the  phenonema.  Braid
proposed  that  they  should  be  called  hypnotic,  instead  of  mesmeric,  and
invented  the  following  terminology  : —

Neurypnology,  the  rationale  or  doctrine  of  nervous  sleep.

Neuro-hypnotism,  or  nervous  sleep,  a  peculiar  condition  of  the  nervous
system  produced  by  artificial  contrivance.

Then,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  suppressing  the  prefix  "neuro,"  he  gave
the  following  terms  :  —

Hypnotic,  the  state  or  condition  of  nervous  sleep.

Hypnotise,  to  induce  nervous  sleep.

Hypnotised,  put  into  the  condition  of  nervous  sleep.

Hypnotism,  nervous  sleep.

Dehypnotise,  to  restore  from  the  state  of  nervous  sleep.
Hypnotist,  one  who  practises  neuro-hypnotism.

This  terminology  is  closely  followed  at  the  present  day,  the  main
diflFerence  being  that  one  now  speaks  of  the  science  of  hypnotism,  instead
of  that  of  neurypnology,  applying  the  term  hypnosis  to  the  artificial  sleep,
and  hypnotic  both  to  the  phenomena  and  to  the  subject  in  whom  they  are
induced.

Braid  at  this  date  came  to  the  iollowing  geiieral  conclusions  : —

1.  "That  the  effect  of  a  continued  fixation  of  the  mental  and  visual  eye,
in  the  manner  and  with  the  concomitant  circumstances  pointed  out,  is  to
throw  the  nervous  system  into  a  new  condition,  accompanied  with  a  state  of
somnolence,  and  of  a  tendency,  according  to  the  mode  of  management,  of
exciting  a  variety  of  phenomena  diflerent  from  those  we  obtain  either  in  the
ordinary  sleep,  or  during  the  waking  condition.

2.  "  That  there  is  at  first  a  state  of  high  excitement  of  all  the  organs  of
special  sense,  sight  excepted,  and  a  great  increase  of  muscular  power  ;  and
that  the  senses  afterwards  become  torpid  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  what
occurs  in  natural  sleep.

3.  "That  in  this  condition  we  have  the  power  of  directing  or  con-
centrating nervous  energy,  raising  or  depressing  it  in  a  remarkable  degree
at  will,  locally  or  generally.

4.  ' '  That  in  this  state,  we  have  the  power  of  exciting  the  force  and
frequency  of  the  heart's  action,  and  the  state  of  the  circulation,  locally  or
generally,  in  a  surprising  degree.

5.  "  That  whilst  in  this  peculiar  condition,  we  have  the  power  of  regulat-
ing and  controlling  muscular  tone  and  energy  in  a  remarkable  manner  and
degree.

6.  "  That  we  also  acquire  the  power  of  producing  rapid  and  important
changes  in  the  state  of  the  capillary  circulation,  and  on  the  whole  of  the
secretions  and  excretions  of  the  body,  as  proved  by  the  application  of
chemical  tests.

K  2


132


Br.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.  [Supplement.


7.  "Tliat  this  power  can  be  beneficially  directed  to  the  cure  of  a  variety
of  diseases  which  were  most  intractable,  or  altogether  incurable,  by  ordinary
treatment.

8.  "That  this  agency  may  be  rendered  available  in  moderating,  or
entirely  preventing,  the  pain  incident  to  patients  while  undergoing  surgical
operations.

9.  "  That  during  hypnotism,  by  manipulating  the  cranium  and  face,  we
can  excite  certain  mental  and  bodily  manifestations,  according  to  tlie  part
touched."

After  hypnotising  his  patients,  Braid  manipulated  them  in  various  ways,
with  a  view  of  producing  changes  in  the  muscular  and  cii'culatory  systems,
believing  that  this  excited  the  different  hypnotic  phenomena  and  played  an
important  part  in  the  cure  of  disease.  He  also  held  that  cures  could  some-
times be  effected  by  similar  methods  in  the  waking  condition.  From  the
description  of  his  manner  of  inducing  hypnosis,  it  is  evident  that  he  employed
vei-bal  suggestion,  but,  at  this  time,  this  was  appai-ently  done  unconsciously
and  in  ignorance  of  its  value.

Braid  found  that  he  could  terminate  the  hypnotic  condition  by  means  of
a  current  of  cold  air.  He  also  noticed  that  he  could  make  a  rigid  limb
flexible  by  blowing  on  it  ;  that  he  could  restore  the  sight  to  one  eye  by
the  same  means  and  leave  the  other  insensible  ;  excite  one  half  of  the
body  to  action,  while  the  other  remained  rigid  and  torpid,  or  make  the
patient  pass  from  a  general  state  of  inactivity  of  the  organs  of  special  sense
and  tonic  nniscular  rigidity  to  the  opposite  condition  of  extreme  mobility
and  excited  sensibility.  He  acknowledged  that  he  was  unable  to  explain
these  extraordinary  phenomena,  but  stated  that  lie  had  no  difficulty  in
reproducing  them,  that  they  were  independent  of  any  "rapport"  lietween
operator  and  patient  and  invariably  appeared,  no  matter  whether  the  current
of  air  came  from  the  lips,  a  pair  of  bellows,  the  motion  of  the  hand,  or  any
inanimate  object.

The  subjective  explanation  of  the  origin  of  mesmeric  phenomena  was  not
a  new  one,  and  had  already  been  given  both  by  the  Abbd  Faria  and
Bertrand.  Their  views,  however,  if  not  entirely  forgotten,  exercised  no
practical  influence  on  mesmeric  theory,  and  Braid  evidently  was  unacquainted
with  them  when  he  commenced  his  mesnieric  researches  ;  thus,  his  conclusions
were  arrived  at  independently,  and  successfully  substituted  for  those
universally  held  in  his  day.  At  a  later  date,  when  his  ojjponents  i>ointed
out  the  similarity  between  the  theories.  Braid  asserted  that  this  was  more
apparent  than  real,  as  Faria  had  attributed  everything  to  the  effect  of  the
imagination  ;  on  this  point  they  differed,  but  were  alike  in  asserting  that
neither  contact  nor  magnetic  fluid  was  necessary.

At  this  time  Braid  did  not  believe  that  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism
were  the  result  of  attention,  for,  in  speaking  of  some  articles  on  animal
magnetism  which  had  appeared  in  the  Medical  Gazette  in  183.3,  he  said  :
"In  the  writer's  opinion,  the  phenomena  are  the  result  of  attention  strongly
directly  to  diflferent  parts  of  tlie  body,  whereas,  by  my  method,  the  attention
is  riveted  to  something  outside  the  body."

In  o]j  position  to  the  theory  that  hypnotism  resembled  reverie.  Braid
said:  "Reverie  proceeds  fi-om  an  unusual  quiescence  of  the  brain,  and
inability  of  the  mind  to  direct  itself  strongly  to  any  one  point. There  is


Supplement.] Javus  Braicl ;  his  Work  and  Writings.


133


defect  in  the  attention,  which  instead  of  being  fixed  on  one  subject,  wanders
over  a  thousand,  and  even  on  these  is  feebly  and  inefl'ectively  directed.  This
is  the  very  reverse  of  what  is  induced  by  my  plan,  because  I  rivet  the
attention  to  one  idea,  and  the  eyes  to  one  point,  as  the  primary  and
imperative  condition."

Some  experiments  which  Braid  made  as  to  the  methods  of  inducing
hypnosis  apjjear  to  have  first  suggested  alterations  in  his  hypnotic  theory
and  shaken  his  faith  in  the  purely  physical  explanation  of  hypnotic
phenomena.  At  first  he  had  required  his  patients  to  look  for  a  considerable
time  at  some  inanimate  object,  until  the  eyelids  closed  involuntarily.  He
frequently  found,  however,  that  this  was  followed  by  pain  and  slight
conjunctivitis,  and,  in  order  to  avoid  this,  he  closed  the  patient's  eyes  at
a  much  earlier  stage.  Despite  this,  he  was  able  to  hypnotise  as  easily  as
before  and  without  subsequent  unpleasant  sensations.  This  led  to  further
experiment,  when  he  found  he  could  induce  hypnosis  as  readily  in  the  dark,
or  with  the  eyes  bandaged,  as  in  the  light  and  with  the  eyes  uncovered  ;  it
being  only  necessary  to  keep  the  eyes  fixed  and  the  body  and  mind  at
absolute  rest.  He  always  failed,  however,  in  young  children  and  in  persons
of  weak  intellect,  or  of  restless  and  excitable  minds,  who  were  unable  to
comply  with  these  simple  rules.  As  he  succeeded  with  the  blind.  Braid
concluded  that  the  impression  was  made  through  the  mind  and  not  through
the  optic  nerve.  "  It  is  important  to  remark,"  he  said,  "that  the  oftener
patients  are  hypnotised,  from  association  of  ideas  and  habits,  the  more
susceptible  they  become  ;  and  in  this  way  they  are  liable  to  be  aflFected
entirely  through  the  imagination,.  Thus  if  they  consider  or  imagine  there  is
something  doing,  although  they  do  not  see  it,  from  which  they  are  to  be
affected,  they  will  become  affected  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  most  expert
hypnotist  in  the  world  may  exert  all  his  efiorts  in  vain,  if  the  party  does  not
expect  it,  and  mentally  and  bodily  comply,  and  thus  yield  to  it."

Braid  at  first  was  inclined  to  believe  in  phrenology  and  considered  it
possible  that  the  passions,  emotions  and  intellectual  faculties  could  be
excited  during  hypnosis  by  simple  contact  or  friction  over  certain  sympathetic
points  of  the  head  and  face.  He  cited  12  cases  in  which  he  thought  he  had
observed  these  phenomena  in  subjects  who  were  ignorant  of  phrenology,
and  who  were  not  influenced  by  previous  training,  or  by  leading  questions
and  suggestions  on  the  part  of  the  operator.  He  was  not  satisfied  with
these  results,  however,  and  stated  that  it  was  his  intention  to  conduct  a  new
series  of  experiments  on  fresh  patients  in  order  to  ascertain  to  what  extent
it  might  be  practicable,  by  arbitrary  associations,  to  excite  the  opjjosite
tendencies  from  the  same  j^oint.  He  also  thought  it  probable  that  errors
might  have  arisen  through  the  remarkable  docility  of  hypnotic  subjects,
which  made  them  anxious  to  comply  with  every  suggestion  or  indication
given  by  the  operator.  In  reference  to  the  proposed  further  experiments,
he  said,  "There  will  thus  be  both  positive  and  negative  proof  to  aid  us  in
determining  whether  there  is  any  natural  and  necessary  connection  existing
between  the  points  manijDulated  and  the  manifestations  excited  ;  whether  it
may  depend  entirely  ujjon  associations  which  have  originated  from  some
partial  knowledge  of  pi^renology,  from  arbitrary  arrangement,  or  accidental
circumstances  or  causes  which  have  been  entirely  overlooked  or  forgotten  ;


134


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramiuell.


[Supplement.


and  which  afterwards  produce  the  result  from  that  ultimate  law  of  the  mind,
which  ordains  that  the  repetition  of  a  definite  sensation  shall  be  followed  by
a  renovation  of  the  past  feelings  with  which  it  was  before  associated.  T  am
inclined  to  adopt  this  course,  from  my  anxiety  to  remove  every  possible
source  of  error,  my  object  being  neither  to  prove  nor  disprove  the  truth  of
phrenology.  That  during  the  nervous  sleep,  there  is  a  power  of  exciting
jjatients  to  manifest  the  passions  and  emotions,  and  certain  mental  functions,
in  a  more  striking  manner  than  the  same  individuals  are  capable  of  in  the
waking  condition,  no  one  can  doubt  who  has  seen  much  of  these  experiments.
And  it  can  in  no  way  alter  the  importance  of  hypnotism  as  a  cui-ative  power
and  extraordinary  means  of  controlling  and  directing  mental  functions  in
a  peculiar  manner,  by  a  simple  association  of  impressions,  whether  we  thus
act  on  the  brain  as  a  single  organ,  or  as  a  combination  of  separate  organs  ;  or
whether  the  jDrimary  associations  have  originated  from  a  special  organic
connection,  or  from  some  accidental  and  unknown  cause,  or  from  precon-
sulted  arrangement  and  arbitrary  association."

The  following  account  of  some  hypnotic  phenomena  is  drawn  partly  from
"  Neurypnology,"  and  partly  from  other  sources.

Braid  recognised  two  distinct  hypnotic  co?iditions,  which  correspond
practically  with  the  late  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney's  "alert"  and  "deep"
stages,  also  intermediate  states  between  the  two,  one  frequently  gliding
impercejitibly  into  the  other.  The  deep  stage  was  characterised  by  a
condition  of  torpor  more  profound  than  that  of  natural  sleep  ;  the  alert  by
exaltation  of  the  sj^ecial  senses,  increase  in  muscular  sense  and  jjower,  and
exaltation  of  certain  mental  faculties.  By  the  sense  of  smell,  some  patients
were  able  to  detect  any  person  known  to  them,  or  to  find  the  owner  of  any
glove.  They  first  smelt  the  glove  and  then  unhesitatingly  presented  it  to
its  owner,  choosing  him  from  amongst  a  large  company.  If  the  nostrils
were  stopped,  however,  the  apparent  clairvoyant  faculty  instantly
disappeared.  The  sense  of  touch  and  the  muscular  sense  were  sometimes  so
remarkably  increased  that  some  subjects  were  able  to  write  with  great
accuracy  during  hypnosis,  when  effectual  precautions  were  taken  to  prevent
their  being  able  to  see.  They  crossed  the  t's  and  dotted  the  i's  and  could
even  go  back  a  line,  strike  out  a  letter  and  put  it  in  its  proper  place.  One
patient  could  correct  the  writing  on  a  whole  page  of  note-paper,  but  if  the
relative  positions  of  the  table  and  paper  were  changed,  the  alterations  ceased
to  be  placed  correctly.  The  following  is  an  interesting  account,  published
in  the  Medical  Times  for  September,  1847,  by  an  independent  observer,  of  the
power  possessed  by  certain  somnambules  of  imitating  language  and  song.

"On  Tuesday  last,  the  3rd  inst..  Mile.  Jenny  Lind,  accompanied  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Schwabe,  and  a  few  of  their  friends,  attended  a  stance  at
Mr.  Braid's  for  the  purpose  of  witnessing  some  of  the  extraordinary
phenomena  of  hypnotism.  There  were  two  girls  who  work  in  a  warehouse,
and  who  had  just  come  in  their  working  attire.  Having  thrown  them  into
the  sleep,  Mr.  Braid  sat  down  to  the  piano,  and  the  moment  he  began
playing,  both  somnambules  arose  and  approached  the  instrument,  when  they
joined  him  in  a  trio.  Having  awoke  one  of  the  girls,  Mr.  Braid  said,
although  she  was  ignorant  of  the  grammar  of  her  own  language  when  awake,
that  when  in  the  sleep  she  would  prove  herself  competent  to  accompany


Supplement.] Javiies  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.


135


any  one  in  the  room  in  singing  songs  in  any  language,  giving  both  notes  and
words  correctly — a  feat  which  she  was  quite  incompetent  to  perform  in  the
waking  condition.  He  then  requested  any  one  in  the  room  to  put  her  to  the
test,  when  Mr.  Schwabe  sat  down  to  the  instrument,  and  played  and  sang  a
German  song,  in  which  she  accompanied  him  correctly,  giving  both  notes
and  words  simultaneously  with  Mr.  Schwabe.  Another  gentleman  then  tried
her  with  one  in  Swedish,  in  which  she  succeeded.  Next  the  queen  of  song,
the  far-famed  Jenny  Lind,  sat  down  to  tlie  instrument  and  sang  most
beautifully  a  slow  air,  with  Swedish  words,  which  the  somnambulist
accompanied  her  in,  in  the  most  perfect  manner  both  as  regards  words  and
music.  Jenny  now  seemed  resolved  to  test  the  powers  of  the  somnambulist
to  the  utmost  by  a  continued  strain  of  the  most  difficult  roulades  and
cadenzas,  for  which  she  is  so  famous,  including  some  of  her  extraordinary
sostentuto  notes,  with  all  their  inflections  from  pianissimo  to  forte  crescendo,
and  again  diminishing  to  thread-like  pianissimo,  but  in  all  these  fantastic
tricks  and  displays  of  genius  by  the  Swedish  nightingale,  even  to  the  shake,
she  was  so  closely  and  accurately  tracked  by  tlie  somnambulist,  that  several
in  the  room  occasionally  could  not  have  told,  merely  by  hearing,  that  there
were  two  individuals  singing — so  instantaneously  did  she  catch  the  notes,  and
so  perfectly  did  their  voices  blend  and  accord.  Next,  Jenny  having  been  told
by  Sir.  Braid  that  she  might  be  tested  in  some  other  language,  this  charming
songstress  commenced  'Casta  Diva,'  and  the  'A  la  Bell  a  mi  Ritornella,'
in  which  the  fidelity  of  the  somnambulist's  performance,  both  in  words  and
music,  was  most  perfect,  and  fully  justified  all  Mr.  Braid  had  alleged
regardurg  her  powers.  She  was  also  tested  by  Mile.  Lind  in  merely
imitating  language,  when  she  gave  most  exact  imitations  ;  and  Mr.  Schwabe
also  tried  her  by  some  most  difficult  combinations  of  sound,  which  he  said  he
knew  no  one  was  capable  of  imitating  correctly  without  much  j)ractice,  but  the
somnambulist  imitated  them  correctly  at  once,  and  that  whether  spoken  slowly
or  quickly.  When  the  girl  was  aroused,  she  had  no  recollection  of  anything
which  had  been  done  by  her,  or  that  she  had  aS"orded  such  a  high  gratifica-
tion to  all  present,  by  proving  the  wonderful  powers  of  imitation  which  are
acquired  by  some  patients  during  a  state  of  artificial  somnambulism  ;  she
said  she  merely  felt  somewhat  out  of  breath,  as  if  she  had  been  running."

Despite  long  perseverance.  Braid  never  succeeded  in  hypnotising  idiots,
and  he  found  that  one  patient,  who  had  been  easily  hypnotised  when  well,
became  refractory  during  the  delirium  of  fever.  With  the  majority  of  his
patients  there  was  no  loss  of  consciousness  ;  they  simply  became  lethargic
and  retained  complete  recollection  of  all  that  had  occurred  ;  with  others  many
hypnotic  phenomena  could  be  produced  without  their  having  previously
passed  through  a  condition  in  any  way  resembling  sleep.  This  state  was
XJopularly  described  as  the  "electro-biological,"  a  name  which  Braid  justly
.  termed  ridiculous.  In  some  instances  hypnotised  patients,  even  after  having
undergone  surgical  operations,  remembered  nothing,  while  others,  to  whom
he  had  taught  Greek,  Latin,  French,  and  Italian  during  hypnosis,  forgot  it
all  when  awake.  When  rehypnotised  the  lost  memory  frequently  returned
spontaneously,  but  if  it  did  not  do  so,  the  operator  could  revive  it  by  placing
his  hand  on  any  part  of  the  patient's  body  and  thus  giving  a  physical  aid  to
the  concentration  of  attention. Suggestions  made  to  these  patients  during


136


Dr.  J.  Milne  Brmmuell.


[Supplement.


hypnosis  were  fulfilled  in  the  waking  state,  despite  the  fact  that  they  had
apjjarently  been  entirely  forgotten.

Analogous  States.

In  liypnotism,  Braid  found  an  explanation  of  the  prolonged  trance  of  the
fakirs  and  of  the  voluntary  suspended  animation  of  Colonel  Townsend  ;  some
instances  of  the  former  being  remarkably  well  authenticated  by  the  evidence
of  English  officers  of  position.  On  one  occasion  a  fakir  was  buried  at  a
depth  of  four  feet  ;  it  was  arranged  that  the  exjjeriment  should  last  nine  days
and  an  English  officer  had  the  grave  constantly  watched  by  sentinels.  At
the  end  of  the  third  day,  the  officer,  fearing  the  fakir  might  be  dead,  and  that
this  would  be  the  cause  of  trouble  to  himself,  insisted  on  the  termination  of
the  experiment.  When  the  man  was  dug  up  he  was  as  stiff  and  cold  as  a
mummy  and  apparently  lifeless  ;  he  revived,  however,  after  being  manipulated
for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

Braid  considered  that  there  was  a  marked  resemblance  between  the
condition  produced  by  hashisch  and  certain  hy^inotic  states,  and  in  support  of
this,  quoted  the  following  experiments  made  by  Dr.  O'Shaughnessy  at
Calcutta,  and  published  in  Pereira's  "Elements  of  Materia  Medica";  —
"  At  2  p.  m.  a  grain  of  the  resin  of  hemp  was  given  to  a  rheumatic  patient.
At  4  p.m.  he  was  very  talkative,  sang,  called  loudly  for  an  extra  supply  of
food  and  declared  himself  in  perfect  health.  At  (i  p.m.  he  was  asleep.  At
8  p.m.  he  was  found  insensible,  but  breathing  with  perfect  regularity,  the
pulse  and  skin  natural,  and  the  pupils  freely  contractile  on  the  approach  of
light.  Happening  by  chance  to  lift  up  the  patient's  arm,  the  jjrofessional
reader  will  judge  of  my  astonishment,"  observes  Dr.  0.,  "  wheii  I  found  it
remained  in  the  posture  in  which  I  had  placed  it.  The  patient  had  become
cataleptic.  We  raised  him  to  a  sitting  posture,  and  placed  his  arms  and
limbs  in  every  imaginable  attitude.  A  waxen  figure  could  not  be  more
pliant.  He  continued  in  this  state  till  1  a.m.,  when  consciousness  and
voluntary  motion  quickly  returned. "  A  similar  experiment  was  made  with
another  patient  with  like  results.

Before  considering  the  later  works,  it  will  be  well  to  examine  some  of
the  opinions  expressed  in  reference  to  Braid,  which  apparently  indicate  that
the  writers  were  acquainted  with  "  Neurypnology  "  alone.  Dr.  Bastian,  in
his  article  on  Braidism  in  Quain's  Dictionary  of  Medicine,  expressed  his
regret  that  Bi-aid  did  not  reject  all  the  so-called  phenomena  of  phreno-
hypnotism.  Professor  Romanes  also  apjaears  to  have  been  only  acquainted
with  "  Neurypnology, "  and  mentions  it  alone  in  his  article  on  Hypnotism
in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  September,  1880.  He  refers  to  the  fact  that
Heidenhain  omits  ail  reference  to  Braid  and  maintains  that  it  would  be
doing  scant  justice  to  Neurypnology  to  say  that  all  Heidenhaiii's  results  had
been  anticipated.  For,  "in  the  vast  number  of  careful  experiments  wliich  it
[Neurypnology]  records — all  undertaken  and  prosecuted  in  a  manner  strictly
scientific — it  carried  the  inquiry  into  various  provinces  which  have  not  been
entered  by  Heidenhain.  No  one  can  read  Braid's  work  without  being
impressed  by  the  care  and  candour  with  which,  amid  violent  opjjosition  from
all  quarters,  his  investigations  were  pursued  ;  and  now,  when  after  the  lapse
fif  nearly  40  years,  his  results  are  beginning  to  receive  the  confirmation


Supplement.] Javiies  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.


137


"R-hich  they  deserve,  the  physiologists  -n-ho  yield  it  ought  not  to  forget  the
credit  that  is  due  to  the  earliest,  the  most  laborious,  and  the  hitherto  most
extensive  investigator  of  the  phenomena  of  what  he  calls  hyi^notism."

The  follo^-s-ing  passage  in  "  Suggestive  Therapeutics,"  published  in  1890,
shows  tliat,  at  that  date  at  all  events,  Bernheim  was  unacquainted  with
Braid's  advanced  theories  : — "Braid  made  use  of  suggestion  without  knowing-
it.  We  must  come  down  to  1850  to  find  the  doctrine  of  suggestion  freed
from  all  the  elements  that  falsified  it,  even  in  the  hands  of  Braid  himself,
and  applied  in  the  simplest  manner  to  therapeutics.  The  patient  is  put  to
sleep  by  means  of  suggestion.  He  is  treated  by  means  of  suggestion.  The
subject  being  hypnotised,  Liebeault's  method  consists  in  affirming  in  a  loud
voice  the  disappearance  of  his  symptoms.  Sucli  is  the  method  of  therapeutic
sugge.stion  of  which  M.  Liebeault  is  the  founder.  He  was  the  first  to  clearly
establish  that  the  cures  of  pain  by  the  old  magnetisers,  and  even  by  Braid's
hypnotic  operations,  are  not  the  work  either  of  a  mysterious  fluid  or  of
physiological  modidcations  due  to  special  manipulations,  but  the  work  of
suggestion  alone."

In  the  Jonrnal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Researcli  for  March,  1896,
M.  Bou-ac,  in  replying  to  Dr.  Walter  Leaf's  criticism  of  "  L'Hypothese  du
Magnetisme  Animal,"  which  appeared  in  the  number  of  the  Proceedings  for
December,  1895  (Part  XXIX.),  states  that  he  associates  Braid  with  the
Paris  School  (hypnotism)  and  Faria  with  the  Nancy  School  (suggestion).

General  Theory.

In  the  commencement  of  "  Neurypnology, "  as  we  have  seen.  Braid
explained  hypnotic  phenomena  mainly  from  the  physical  standpoint,  and
lield  that  they  could  be  induced  by  fixed  staring  at  an  inanimate  object,
even  in  persons  who  had  heard  nothing  of  hypnotism  or  mesmerism,  and
who  were  ignorant  of  what  was  required  of  them.  In  the  later  chapters,
however,  these  views  were  considerably  modified  and  he  talks  of  persons
being  hypnotised  entirely  through  their  imagination,  and  also  of  the  useless-
ness  of  the  efforts  of  the  most  expert  mesmeriser  if  the  patient  were  ignorant
of  his  aims.  In  his  other  works  the  physical  theory  is  entirely  abandoned  in
favour  of  a  purely  psychical  one.  After  explaining  what  induced  him  to  adopt
the  term  hypnotism  in  preference  to  that  of  mesmerism,  he  stated  that  the
word  hypnotism  was  liable  to  grave  objections,  as  under  it  had  been
comprised,  not  a  single  state,  but  a  series  of  stages  or  conditions  varying  in
every  conceivable  degree,  and  that: — "In  correct  phraseology,  the  term
hypnotism  ought  to  be  restricted  to  the  phenomena  manifested  in  patients
who  actually  pass  into  a  state  of  sleep,  and  who  remember  nothing  on
awakening  of  what  has  transpired.  Of  those  who  may  be  relieved  or  cured
by  hypnotic  processes,  perhaps  not  more  than  one  in  ten  ever  passes  into
the  state  of  oblivious  sleep.  The  term  hypnotism,  therefore,  is  apt  to  confuse
them  and  lead  them  to  suspect  that  they  cannot  be  benefited  by  processes
which  fail  to  produce  the  most  obvious  indication  which  their  name  imports."
Braid,  therefore,  proposed  to  alone  call  hypnotic  those  cases  of  artificial
sleep  followed  by  amnesia  on  awakening,  but  in  which  there  is  perfect
recollection  of  what  has  happened  when  the  patient  is  again  hypnotised.
Hypnotic  coma  he  described  as  that  deeper  stage  in  which  the  lost  memory


138


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


[Supplement.


is  not  revived  in  subsequent  hypnoBes.  "I  became  satisfied,"  he  said,
"that  the  hypnotic  state  was  essentially  a  state  of  mental  concentration,
during  which  the  faculties  of  the  mind  of  the  patient  were  so  engrossed  with
a  single  idea  or  train  of  thought  as,  for  the  nonce,  to  render  it  dead  or
indifferent  to  all  other  considerations  and  influences.  The  consequence  of
this  concentrated  attention,  again,  to  the  subject  in  hand,  intensified,  in  a
correspondingly  greater  degree,  whatever  influence  the  mind  of  the
individual  could  produce  vipon  his  physical  functions  during  the  waking
condition,  when  his  attention  was  so  much  more  diffused  and  distracted  by
other  impressions.  Moreover,  inasmuch  as  words  spoken,  or  various  sensible
impressions  made  on  the  body  of  an  individual  by  a  second  party,  act  as
suggestions  of  thought  and  action  to  the  person  impressed,  so  as  to  draw  and
fix  his  attention  to  one  part  or  function  of  his  body,  and  withdraw  it  from
others, — whatever  influence  suggestions  and  impressions  are  capable  of
producing  during  the  ordinary  waking  conditi(jn,  should  naturally  be
expected  to  act  with  correspondingly  greater  effect  during  the  'nercoiis  sleep,
when  the  attention  is  so  much  more  concentrated,  and  the  imagination,  faith,
and  expectant  ideas  in  the  mind  <.if  tlie  patient  are  so  much  more  intense
than  in  the  ordinary  waking  condition.  Now,  this  is  precisely  what
happens  ;  and  I  am  persuaded  that  this  is  the  most  philosophical  mode  of
viewing  tlie  subject ;  and  it  renders  the  whole  clear,  simple,  and
intelligible  to  the  apprehension  of  the  unprejudiced  person,  who  may  at
once  perceive  that  the  real  object  and  tendency  of  the  various  processes  for
inducing  a  st;ite  of  hypnotism  or  mesmerism  is  obviously  to  induce  a  state  of
abstraction  or  concentration  of  attention  —  that  is,  a  state  of  monoideism,
whether  that  may  be  by  I'equesting  the  subject  to  look  steadfastly  at  some
unexciting,  and  empty  inanimate  thing,  or  ideal  object,  or  inducing  him  to
watch  the  fixed  gaze  of  the  operator's  eyes,  his  pointed  fingers,  or
other  manoeuvres  of  the  mesmeriser.  .  .  .  Then,  inasmuch  as  I  feel
satisfied  that  the  mental  and  pliysical  phenomena  which  fiow  from  tlie  said
processes  result  entirely  from  the  mental  impressions  or  dominant  ideas,
excited  thereby  in  the  minds  of  the  subjects,  changing  or  modifying  the
previously  existing  physical  action,  and  the  peculiar  physical  action  thus
superinduced  reacting  on  their  minds — and  that,  whetlier  these  dominant
expectant  ideas  existed  in  the  minds  of  the  subjects  previously,  or  were
suggested  to  them  after  passing  into  the  impressible  condition,  by  audible
suggestions  or  sensible  impressions  excited  by  manipulations  of  a  second  party
— under  these  circumstances,  I  consider  the  following  terms  calculated  to
realise  all  the  precision  which  we  may  desire  on  this  point.

"  Let  Mono-ideology  indicate  the  doctrine  of  the  influence  of  dominant
ideas  in  controlling  mental  and  physical  actions.

"Then  Monoideism  will  indicate  the  condition  resulting  from  the  mind
being  possessed  by  dominant  ideas.

"  To  monoideise  will  indicate  the  act  of  performing  processes  for  inducing
the  act  of  monoideism.

"  Monoideiser  will  indicate  the  person  who  monoideises.

"  Monoideised  will  indicate  the  condition  of  the  person  who  is  in  a  state
of  monoideism.


Supplement.] James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.


139


' '  And  Monoideo-Dynamics  will  indicate  the  mental  and  physical  changes,
whether  of  excitement  or  depression,  which  result  from  the  influence  of
monoideism.

"  And,  finally,  as  a  generic  term,  comprising  the  whole  of  these  phenomena
which  result  from  the  reciprocal  actions  of  mind  and  matter  upon  each  other,
I  think  no  term  could  be  more  appropriate  than  Psycho-Physiology."

This  theory  was  first  published  by  Bi-aid  in  1847.  The  fascination  of
birds  by  serpents,  the  phenomena  of  electro-biology,  of  table-turning,  the
gyrations  of  the  odometer  of  Dr.  Mayo,  the  magnetometer  of  Mr.  Rutter,  the
movements  of  the  divining  rod,  the  supposed  levity  of  the  human  body  when
lifted  on  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  four  individuals,  were  all,  according  to
Braid,  examples  of  unconscious  or  involuntary  muscular  action  resulting
from  dominant  ideas.  When  the  attention  of  man  or  animal,  he  said,  is
absorbed  by  an  idea  associated  with  movement,  a  current  of  nervous  force
is  sent  into  the  muscles  and  a  corresponding  motion  produced,  not  only
without  conscious  effort,  but  even  in  many  instances  in  opposition  to  the
volition.  The  subject  loses  the  power  of  neutralizing  the  dominant  idea  and
is  irresistibly  drawn  or  spellbound  according  to  the  nature  of  the  impression
produced,  and  may,  in  this  way,  be  brought  under  the  control  of  others  by
means  of  audible,  visible,  and  tangible  suggestions.

The  mental  and  physical  phenomena,  no  matter  what  processes  were
employed  to  induce  hypnosis,  resulted  entirely  from  the  mental  imjsressions,
or  dominant  ideas,  thereby  excited  in  the  minds  of  the  subjects.  It  was  a
matter  of  indifference  whether  these  ideas  existed  in  the  subject's  mind
previously,  or  were  afterwards  suggested  by  audible  suggestions  or  sensory
impressions  created  by  the  manipulations  of  the  operator.

Braid  held  that  the  operator  acted  like  an  engineer  and  called  into  action
the  forces  in  the  patient's  own  organism,  and  controlled  and  directed  them
in  accordance  with  the  laws  which  governed  the  action  of  the  mind  u\)on  the
body.

In  reference  to  "Electro-Biological  Phenomena,  considered  phy.siologically
-and  psychologically,"  published  in  1851,  Braid  stated  that  its  object  was  to
prove  the  subjectivity  of  the  hypnotic  and  mesmeric  condition,  and  to  show
that  the  phenomena  resulted  from  the  concentrated  mental  attention  of  the
patient  acting  on  his  own  jahysical  organism,  and  of  the  changed  condition
of  the  physical  action  thus  induced  reacting  on  the  mind  of  the  patient.
That  the  changed  physical  condition  arose  from  the  action  of  predominant
ideas,  and  that  these  ideas  might  arise  in  the  minds  of  the  patients,  and
become  operative  on  them,  through  their  own  unaided  acts — or  from  the
mere  remembrance  of  past  feelings,  without  any  co-operation  or  act  of  a
second  party  ;  and  that,  in  certain  subjects,  they  might  also  be  excited  by
audible,  visible,  or  tangible  suggestions  from  another  person,  to  any  extent
whatever, — even  before  they  passed  into  a  state  of  sleep.  Braid  stated  that
he  had  held  and  endeavoured  to  prove  this  theory  more  than  five  years
previoudii.

In  reply  to  a  writer  who  had  adopted  in  a  modified  form  the  objective
theory  of  mesmeric  phenomena.  Braid  says  : — "  If  Mr.  Newnham  would  only
condescend  to  consider  the  simple  subjective  theory  which  I  have  ventured
to  propound,  1  thijik  he  might  readily  comprehend  how  the  new  modes  of


140


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


(Supplementr


excitement,  or  depression,  or  peculiar  distribution  of  the  nervous  or  vital
influence  ivithiu  the  patient's  oivn  body  might  arise  through  the  influence  of
his  own  mind  acting  on  his  physical  organism,  and  might  thus  account  for  all
which  is  realised  without  the  transmission  of  any  occult  influence  from  one
human  being  to  another.  I  readily  grant,  however,  that  the  looks,  words-
and  actions  of  a  second  party  may  furnish  suggestions  influential  upon  others
— just  as  a  word  of  encouragement,  spoken  or  written  by  a  friend,  may  neive
our  arm  with  greater  power,  and  inspire  our  tongue  with  greater  ehjquence
— and  that  a  lively  comjjanion,  or  encouraging  expression  may  excite  us  ;
whilst  a  grave  companion  or  doubtful  expression  would  chill  and  depress —
and  that  hope  and  confidence,  or  the  contrary,  in  the  means  used,  may
modify,  to  a  remarkable  extent,  the  results  under  any  mode  of  treatment.
Still,  I  believe  that  there  is  no  positive  interchange  or  transference  of
nervous  or  eitcd  iorce  froin  the  operator  to  the  patient  as  the  actual  cause  of
these  I'esults,  as  has  been  alleged  by  the  mesmerists.  I  do  not  believe  that,
in  such  instances,  A  loses  an  amount  of  power  equivalent  to  what  B  gains  ;
I  do  not  believe  that  a  preacher,  an  orator,  or  an  author  loses  an  amount
of  vital  force  in  exact  ratio  to  the  numbers  influenced  by  his  spoken  or
printed  ideas,  sentiments  and  illustrations, — which  would  necessarily  be
the  case  were  the  magnetic  theory  true.  On  the  contrary,  I  do  believe
that  the  perusal  of  a  posthumous  work  might  be  equally  influential  as
if  the  book  had  been  j^rinted  when  the  author  was  alive — and  that  the
simple  suggestion  of  new  ideas  to  the  mind  of  tlie  reader,  through  the
printed  symbols  of  thought,  is  the  real  efficient  cause  of  the  future
results."

In  "  Neurypnology,"  Braid  stated  that  he  was  unable  to  account  for  the
action  of  a  current  of  air  upon  hypnotised  subjects  ;  at  a  later  date  he  gave
the  following  theory.  In  hypnosis  the  attention  is  concentrated  upon  the
particular  function  called  into  action,  while  the  others  merge  into  a  state  of
torpor;  thus,  only  one  function  is  active  at  any  one  time  and  hence  intensely
so.  The  arousing  of  any  dormant  function  is  equivalent  to  sujjerseding  the
one  in  action,  and  he  explained,  therefore,  the  termination  of  a  state  of
muscular  rigidity  when  a  current  of  cold  air  is  directed  to  the  skin,  by
suggesting  that  tliis  called  the  attention  to  the  skin,  and  withdrew  it  from
the  muscular  sense.

Braid  considered  the  following  to  be  the  chief  points  of  difference
between  spontaneous  and  induced  somnambulism.  Spontaneous  somnambu-
lists are  impelled  to  certain  trains  of  acticju  by  internal  imjjulses,  while  the
induced  tend  to  remain  at  absolute  rest  and  to  lapse  into  a  state  of  profound
sleep,  unless  excited  by  some  impression  from  without.

Natural  and  artificial  sleep  were  not  regarded  by  Braid  as  identical,  and
the  following  are  furtlier  points  of  contrast  in  addition  to  those  already
mentioned  (pjj.  131—2).  The  pujjils  are  dilated  in  hypnosis  and  tlie
eyelids  either  quiver  continuously,  or  are  firmly  closed  by  spasmodic
contractions.  In  passing  into  liypnosis,  anything  held  in  the  hand  is  grasped
still  more  firmly.  There  is  an  increase  of  the  muscular  sense,  and  hypnotic
subjects  jjossess  an  extraordinary  power  of  balancing  themselves  Chronic
rigidity  of  the  muscles  is  not  followed  by  corresponding  exliaustion.  Some-
times in  the  hypnotic  state  there  is  excitement,  similar  to  that  pi'oduced  by


Supplement.] James  Brcud ;  his  Work  and  Writings.  141


wines  and  spirits,  at  others  there  is  muscular  quiescence,  with  acute  hearing
and  dreamy,  glowing  imagination,  closely  resembling  the  condition  induced
by  Conium.  "The  principal  difference,"  he  said,  "between  the  hypnotic
or  nervous  sleep  and  common  sleep  consists  in  the  state  or  condition  of
the  mind.  In  passing  into  common  sleep,  the  mind  is  diffusive  or  passive,
flitting  from  one  idea  to  another  indifferently,  thereby  rendering  the  subject
unable  to  fix  his  attention  on  any  regular  train  of  thought,  or  to  perform
any  acts  requiring  much  effort  of  will.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  a
Btate  of  passiveness  is  manifested  during  the  sleep,  so  that  audible
suggestions  and  sensible  impressions  addressed  to  the  sleeper,  if  not  intense
enough  to  wake  him  entirely,  seldom  do  more  than  excite  a  dream,  in  which
ideas  pass  through  his  mind  without  exciting  definite  physical  acts  ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  the  active  and  concentrated  state  of  the  mind  engendered
by  the  processes  for  inducing  the  nervous  .sleep,  are  carried  into  the  sleep,
iind,  in  many  instances,  excite  the  sleeper,  without  awaking,  to  speak  or  to
exhibit  physical  manifestations  of  the  suggestions  received  through  words
audibly  uttered  in  his  hearing,  or  ideas  previously  existing  in  his  mind,  or
excited  by  sensible  impressions  made  by  touches  or  passes  of  the  operator,
which  direct  the  attention  of  the  sleeper  to  different  parts,  or  excite  into
action  certain  combinations  of  muscles,  and  thereby  direct  his  current  of
thought."  Another  difi'erence  is  the  wonderful  power  of  hypnosis  in  curing
many  diseases,  which  had  resisted  natural  sleep  and  every  known  agency
for  years.  For  instance,  a  few  hypnotic  seances  of  ten  minutes  each  cured
a  patient  who  must  have  had  during  his  long  illness  at  least  eight  years'
sleep.

Magnets,  etc.

In  Braid's  time  the  mesmerists  held  that  magnets,  certain  metals,  crystals,
etc.,  possessed  a  peculiar  power  and,  with  sensitive  subjects,  were  caj^able  of
producing  attraction  and  other  remarkable  phenomena.  Some  experienced
an  unpleasant  sensation  like  an  aura,  others  got  headache,  or  attacks  of
fainting  or  catalepsy,  with  spasms  so  violent  that  they  apparently  endangered
life.  Frequently  there  was  hypersesthesia  of  the  special  senses.  Many
also  fancied  they  saw  fiery  bundles  of  light  stream  from  the  poles  of  the
magnet.  All  this  was  said  to  happen  even  when  the  subjects  did  not  see
the  magnets  and  did  not  know  what  was  being  done.  Braid  performed  many
■experiments  in  order  to  test  these  statements,  with  the  following  results  : —
the  phenomena  appeared  when  the  patients  had  preconceived  ideas  on  the
subject,  or  when  these  were  excited  by  leading  questions,  but  were
invariably  absent  when  they  were  ignorant  of  what  was  being  done.
Pretended  magnets  also  produced  the  phenomena  when  the  patients  knew
what  was  expected  to  occur.  Reichenbach  recorded  an  instance  where,  by
the  mere  exposure  of  a  sensitive  plate  in  a  box  with  a  magnet,  an  impression
had  been  made,  as  if  it  had  been  exposed  to  the  full  influence  of  the  light.
Braid  repeated  the  experiment,  and  also  had  similar  ones  performed  for  him
by  an  expert  photographer  and,  when  all  sources  of  fallacy  were  guarded
.against,  the  results  were  invariably  negative.  According  to  Braid,  the  mind
of  the  patient  alone  was  sufficient  to  produce  the  effects  attributed  to
magnetic  or  odyllic  force  and  suggested  ideas  were  capable  of  exciting  a  great
variety  of  physical  sensations  and  mental  conditions.


142


Dv.  J.  Mihie  Bramivell.


[Supplement,


The  following  is  an  account  of  an  experiment  of  Braid's  to  show  that
suggestion  was  the  true  explanation  of  the  supposed  mesmeric  powers  of
magnets  and  certain  metals  : — "When  in  London  lately,"  he  said,  "I  had
the  pleasure  of  calling  upon  an  eminent  and  excellent  physician,  who  is  in
the  habit  of  using  mesmerism  in  his  practice,  in  suitable  cases,  just  as  he
uses  any  other  remedy.  He  spoke  of  the  extraordinary  effects  he  had
experienced  from  the  use  of  magnets  applied  during  the  mesmeric  state,  and
kindly  offered  to  illustrate  the  fact  on  a  patient  who  had  been  asleep  all  the
time  I  was  in  the  room,  and  in  that  state  during  which  I  felt  assured  she
could  overhear  every  word  of  our  conversation.  He  told  me  that  when  he
put  the  magnet  into  her  hands,  it  would  produce  catalepsy  of  the  hands  and
arms,  and  such  was  the  result.  He  wafted  the  hands  and  the  catalepsy
ceased.  He  said  that  the  mere  touch  of  a  magnet  on  a  limb  would  stiffen  it,,
and  such  he  proved  to  be  the  fact.

"  I  now  told  him  that  I  had  got  a  little  instrument  in  my  pocket,  which
although  far  less  than  his,  I  felt  assured  would  prove  quite  as  powerful,  and
I  offered  to  prove  this  by  operating  on  the  same  patient,  whom  I  had  never
seen  before,  and  who  was  in  the  mesmeric  state  when  I  entered  the  room.
My  instrument  was  about  three  inches  long,  the  thickness  of  a  quill,  with  a
ring  attached  to  the  end  of  it.  I  told  him  that  when  put  into  her  hands,  he
would  find  it  catalepsize  both  hands  and  arms,  as  his  had  done,  and  such  was
the  result.  Having  reduced  this  by  wafting,  I  took  the  instrument  from
her,  and  again  returned  it,  in  another  position,  and  told  him  it  would  now
have  the  very  reverse  effect, — that  she  would  not  be  able  to  hold  it,  and  that
although  I  closed  her  hands  on  it,  they  would  open  and  that  it  would  drop
out  of  them,  and  such  was  the  case, — to  the  great  surprise  of  my  worthy
frieiud,  who  now  desired  to  be  informed  what  I  had  done  to  the  instrument
to  invest  it  with  such  new  and  opposite  power.  This  I  declined  doing  for
the  present  ;  but  I  promised  to  do  so  when  he  had  seen  some  further
proofs  of  its  remai'kable  powei's.  I  now  told  him  that  a  touch  with  it,  on
either  extremity,  would  cause  the  extremity  to  rise  and  become  cataleptic,
and  such  was  the  result ;  that  a  second  touch  on  the  same  part  would  reduce
the  rigidity,  and  cause  it  to  fall,  and  such  again  was  proved  to  be  the  fact.
After  a  variety  of  other  experiments,  every  one  of  which  pi'oved  precisely  as.
I  had  predicted,  she  was  aroused.

"  I  now  ai)plied  the  ring  of  my  instrument  on  the  third  finger  of  the  right
hand,  from  which  it  was  suspended,  and  told  the  doctor,  when  it  was  so
suspended,  it  would  send  her  to  sleep.  [To  this  he  replied,  'It  never  will,'
but  I  again  told  him  that  I  felt  confident  that  it  would  send  her  to  sleep.  ]
We  then  were  silent,  and  very  speedily  she  was  once  more  asleep.  Having
aroused  her,  I  put  the  instrument  on  the  second  finger  of  her  left  hand,  and
told  the  doctor  it  would  be  found  she  could  not  go  to  sleep  when  it  was
placed  there.  He  said  he  thought  she  would,  and  he  sat  steadily  gazing  at
her,  but  I  said  firmly  and  confidently  that  she  would  not.  After  a  consider-
able time,  the  doctor  asked  her  if  she  did  not  feel  sleepy,  to  which  she
replied,  'Not  at  all.'  '  Could  you  rise  and  walk  V  When  she  told  him  she
could,  I  then  requested  her  to  look  at  the  point  of  the  forefinger  of  her
right  hand,  which  I  told  the  doctor  would  send  her  to  sleep,  and  such  was.
the  result ;  after  being  aroused,  I  desired  her  to  keep  a  steady  gaze  at  the


Supplement.] James  Braid ;  his  Work  and  Writings.


143


nail  of  the  thumb  of  tlie  left  hand,  which  would  send  her  to  sleep  in  like
manner,  and  such  proved  to  be  the  fact.

"Having  repaired  to  another  room,  I  explained  to  the  doctor  the  real
nature  and  powers  of  my  little  and  apparently  magical  instrument,  that  it
was  nothing  more  than  my  portmanteau  key  and  ring,  and  that  what  had
imparted  to  it  such  apparently  varied  powers  was  merely  the  predictions
which  the  patient  had  overheard  me  make  to  him,  acting  upon  her  in  the
peculiar  state  of  the  nervous  sleep,  as  irresistible  impulses  to  be  effected,
according  to  the  results  she  had  heard  me  predict.  Had  I  predicted  that
she  would  see  any  tlame,  or  colour,  or  form,  or  substance,  animate  or
inanimate,  I  knew  from  experience  that  such  would  have  been  realised,  and
responded  to  by  her  ;  and  that,  not  from  any  desire  on  her  part  to  impose
upon  others,  but  because  she  was  self-deceived,  the  vividness  of  her
imagination  in  that  state  inducing  her  to  believe,  as  real,  what  were  only  tlie
figuients  of  fancy,  suggested  to  her  mind  by  the  remarks  of  others.  The
power  of  suggestions  of  this  sort  also  in  paralysing  or  energising  muscular
power  is  truly  astonishing  ;  and  may  all  arise  in  perfect  good  faith  with
almost  all  patients  who  have  j)assed  into  the  second  conscious  state  and  with
some  during  the  first  conscious  state."

In  1843,  Braid  referred  to  Elliotson's  belief  in  the  powers  of  certain
metals,  and  to  Wakley's  experiments.  The  latter,  operating  with  a  non-
mesmerising  metal,  made  the  patient  believe  he  was  using  a  mesmerising
one,  whereupon  she  fell  asleep  ;  and  he  concluded  that  all  the  subjects  were
impostors.  Braid  denied  this,  asserting  that  the  active  agent  was  simply  the
imagination,  and  that  the  metals  were  neither  mesmeric  nor  non-mesmeric.
In  the  same  way,  he  explained  the  action  of  the  wooden  tractors  which
Dr.  Hayarth,  in  1799,  successfully  substituted  for  the  metal  ones  of
Mr.  Perkins.  The  latter  consisted  of  two  pieces  of  metal,  one  apparently  of
iron  and  the  other  of  brass,  about  three  inches  long,  blunt  at  one  end  and
pointed  at  the  other.  They  were  invented  by  Dr.  Elisha  Perkins,  of
Norwich,  Connecticut,  who  in  1796  took  out  a  patent  for  them,  and  were
applied  by  di-awing  them  lightly  over  the  part  affected  for  about  20  minutes.
This  method  of  treatment,  which  was  very  fashionable  at  one  time,  was
termed  Perkinism,  in  honour  of  its  inventor.

According  to  Braid,  it  had  long  been  recognised  that  various  anomalous
sensations  followed  the  prolonged  direction  of  the  attention  to  any  part  of
the  body;  but  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  remarkable  cures  had  occasionally
been  caused  by  mental  excitement,  and  severe  illness  and  even  death  had
resulted  from  fear,  it  was  usually  supposed  that  these  anomalous  sensations
were  unaccompanied  by  physical  change.  With  the  exception  of  Dr.  Holland,
who  wrote  on  the  influence  of  attention  on  the  bodily  organs  in  his  "  Medical
Notes  and  Reflections,"  no  one.  Braid  said,  entertained  the  idea  that  definite
and  special  physical  changes  conld  be  excited,  regulated,  and  controlled  at
will  by  the  voluntary  mental  efibrts  of  a  healthy  individual  directed  towards
his  own  body  ;  or  that  the  .same  results  might  be  produced  involuntarily,  by
the  suggestions  of  another  person  conveyed  directly,  verbally,  or  indirectly,
by  means  of  passes,  etc.

The  following  are  examples  of  the  power  of  suggestion  in  causing
alterations  in  bodily  function  :—"  I  had  told  a  friend,"  Braid  said,  "that


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


it  sufficed  to  arouse  certain  ideas  as  to  her  condition  in  the  patient's  mind  in
order  to  produce  the  corresponding  alterations  in  the  functions  of  the  organ
or  part  of  the  body  referred  to  ;  as  he  was  not  inclined  to  believe  my
statement,  I  told  him  I  could  increase  the  secretion  of  milk  in  one  of  his
wife's  breasts  (she  happened  to  be  nursing  a  child  at  the  time),  by  calling  her
attention  to  the  breast  during  hypnosis.  Eight  months  previously  I  had
hypnotised  this  lady  and  cured  lier  of  severe  headache.  She  was  a  good
somnambule."  After  obtaining  the  patient's  consent,  but  without  telling
her  of  the  proposed  experiment,  Braid  hypnotised  her  and  drew  her  attention
to  her  breast.  On  being  awakened,  she  remembered  nothing  of  what  had
been  said  or  done,  but  complained  of  a  feeling  of  tightness  and  tension  in
the  breast.  Her  husband  then  told  her  that  Braid  had  been  trying  to
increase  the  secretion  of  milk.  She  replied,  "That  would  lie  no  light
matter,  for  my  child  is  14  months  old,  and  I  have  hardly  any  milk."  Braid
asked  her  to  send  for  the  child  and  to  put  it  to  tlie  breast,  when  it  got  so
much  milk  that  it  was  nearly  choked.  A  few  days  later  the  patient
complained  that  her  figure  was  deformed  in  consequence  of  the  swelling  of
the  left  breast.  Braid  hypnotised  her  again  and  repeated  the  experiment
with  the  riglit  breast.  The  result  was  precisely  the  same,  and  both  breasts
now  secreted  so  much  milk  that  the  lady  was  able  to  suckle  her  child  for  six
months  longer,  whereas  before  she  had  always  complained  of  lack  of  milk.

Tlie  value  of  the  hypnotic  mode  of  treatment  was  best  shown,  according
to  Braid,  by  "cases  of  hysterical  paralysis,  in  wliich,  without  organic
lesion,  the  patient  may  have  remained  for  a  considerable  length  of  time
perfectly  powerless  of  a  part,  or  of  the  whole  body,  from  a  dominant  idea
which  has  paralysed  or  misdirected  his  volition.  In  such  cases,  by  altering
the  state  of  the  circulation,  and  breaking  down  the  previous  idea,  and
substituting  a  salutary  idea  of  vigour  and  self-confidence  in  its  place,  which
can  be  done  by  audible  giiggestiom  addressed  to  the  patient,  in  a  confident  tone
of  voice,  as  to  what  must  and  shall  be  realised  by  the  processes  he  has  been
subjected  to, — on  being  aroused  a  few  minutes  afterwards,  with  such  dominant
idea  in  their  minds,  to  the  astonishment  of  themselves  as  well  as  of  others,
the  patients  are  found  to  have  acquired  viginir  and  voluntary  power  over
their  hitherto  paralysed  limbs,  as  by  a  magical  spell  of  witchcraft."

The  power  of  imagination  and  excited  attention,  in  producing  a  specific
influence  in  a  healthy  person,  was  beautifully  illustrated,  he  said,  in  the
following  case  :  "  Having  heard  an  account  of  some  extraordinary  discovery
in  America,  of  certain  medicines  which  could  manifest  their  influence  through
glass,  that  is,  that  by  taking  hold  of  a  phial  in  which  tlie  mediciae  was
contained,  it  would  impart  its  peculiar  medicinal  virtue  through  the  closed
phial  ; — having  read  this  account,  I  named-it  to  certain  parties,  who  scouted
the  idea  as  preposterous.  I  told  them  I  did  not  doubt  the  fact  of  such
physical  effects  resulting  from  such  means,  but  added  that  I  very  strongly
suspected  the  correctness  of  the  physiology  of  the  explanation.  I  was
inclined  to  believe  it  quite  possible  that  it  arose  from  vivid  imagination,
attention  and  expectation,  exciting  the  particular  function  to  be  acted  upon.
This  they  scouted  as  equally  preposterous,  which  induced  me  to  repeat  my
conviction  of  tlie  possibility  of  such  a  result  taking  place  [although  I  had
never  tried  it],  and  I  also  projjosed  to  test  it  forthwith,  in  their  presence.


Supplement.] James  Braid ;  h  is  Work  and  Writings.  145

With  this  view,  I  requested  an  ounce  phial  to  be  brought  to  me,  filled  with
common  water,  coloured  with  syrup  of  poppies,  which  I  meant  to  use  for  the
purpose  of  acting  as  an  emetic. We  then  repaired  to  a  room,  where  there
"was  a  female  friend,  who  knew  nothing  of  our  intentions.  I  then  commenced
talking  to  the  gentlemen,  but  so  that  she  could  hear  the  conversation,  about
the  remarkable  discovery  of  this  extraordinary  medium,  which  could  act  as
an  emetic  through  the  glass. I  then  requested  this  lady  to  oblige  me  by
trying  its  effects. She  was  very  unwilling  to  encounter  it,  but  at  length  was
prevailed  upon  to  do  so,  by  my  assuring  her  it  would  much  oblige  me,  and
we  could  all  place  the  most  implicit  confidence  in  her  veracity. She  very
soon  stated  that  it  gave  her  an  unpleasant  feeling  extending  up  the  arm.  I
encouraged  her  to  persevere,  assuring  her  it  would  only  make  her  sick,  and
added  that  when  it  got  as  high  as  the  shoulder  it  would  suddenly  dart  across
the  chest,  when  it  would  induce  vomiting. When  the  feeling  had  extended
as  far  as  the  elbow,  we  observed  her  become  as  pale  as  ashes,  and  from  this
it  speedily  mounted  to  the  shoulder  and  across  the  chest,  and  was  evidently
about  to  be  followed  by  vomiting  had  I  not  suddenly  put  an  end  to  the
experiment. This  I  did  by  desiring  her  to  take  another  phial  into  the
other  hand,  which  would  neutralise  the  effects  of  the  emetic  phial.  The
result  was  equally  successful. The  experiment  did  not  last  more  than  two
or  three  minutes. I  repeated  the  experiment  a  second  time  with  the  same
patient,  with  like  effect." . . . "A  consideration  of  these  facts,"  Braid
said,  "renders  it  easy  to  understand  how  hypnotism  may  become  available
for  the  relief  and  cure  of  various  diseases. By  various  modes  of  suggestion,
either  by  audible  language,  spoken  within  the  hearing  of  the  patient,  or  by
definite  physical  impressions,  certain  ideas  are  fixed  strongly  and  involuntarily
in  the  mind  of  the  patient. These  act  as  stimulants  or  sedatives,  according
to  the  nature  of  the  expectant  idea,  and  either  direct  attention  to,  or
withdraw  it  from,  particular  organs  or  functions.  Similar  results  are  effected
in  ordinary  practice,  by  prescribing  medicines  which  stimulate  or  irritate
these  organs,  thereby  directly  increasing  their  functions,  or  which  produce
the  reverse  effect,  either  by  direct  sedative  action  on  the  oi'gans,  or  by
diminishing  the  heart's  action,  or  by  stimulating  some  distant  part,  and
thereby  producing  revulsion. The  great  object  of  all  treatment  is  either  to
excite  or  to  depress  function,  or  to  increase  or  to  diminish  the  existing
state  of  sensibility  and  circulation  locally  or  generally,  with  the  necessary
attendant  changes  in  the  general,  and  more  especially  in  the  capillary,
circulation. For  this  purpose  I  feel  convinced  that  hypnotism  may  be
applied  in  the  cure  of  some  forms  of  disease,  with  the same  ease  and
certainty  as  our  most  approved  methods  of  treatment."

Braid  cited  the  alteration  in  the  capillary  circulation  which  takes  place
in  the  phenomenon  of  blushing  and  which  may  appear  immediately  as  the
result  of  a  mental  impressioii.  "Where  then,"  he  asks,  "  is  the  difficulty
in  comprehending  why  a  dominant  expectant  idea  in  the  mind  of  the  patient
should  be  adequate  to  produce  effects  equally  potent  on  other  parts  of  the
body,  and  in  special  organs,  when  strongly  concentrated  on  such  organs  or
parts  ?  The  same  effects  are  produced  then  by  hypnotism  as  are  produced
by  various  drugs  which  depress  or  excite  the  circulation.  In  other  cases
hypnotism  may  be  supposed  to  act  as  an  alterative,  producing  a  new  action

L


146  •  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.  [Supplement.


or  counter  impression,  during  which  the  morbid  action  is  suspended,  which
affords  an  opportunity  for  a  natural  and  healthy  action  to  be  resumed  when
the  influence  of  hypnotism  is  suspended."  In  support  of  this  theory.  Braid
called  attention  to  the  number  of  recoveries  which  took  place  during  the  use
of  infinitesimally  small  doses  of  medicine  in  homoeopathic  practice.  These,
he  said,  benefited  the  patient,  not  by  their  physical  or  chemical  qualities,
but  as  suggestions,  and  quoted  Professor  Simpson,  who  had  proved  that  in
one  homceopathic  dilution  a  patient  would  have  to  take  a  dose  every  second
of  time,  night  and  day,  for  30,000  years  before  he  consumed  one  grain  of
the  original  drug,  while  another  was  so  attenuated  that  it  would  require  a
mass  of  the  dilution  equal  to  61  times  the  size  of  the  earth,  to  contain  a
single  grain  of  the  medicine.

While,  according  to  Braid,  the  action  of  homoeopathic  remedies  was  a
purely  subjective  one,  he  also  thought  that  the  mental  element  associated
with  the  administration  of  drugs  in  general  had  been  far  too  much  ignored,
and  said,  "  It  is  worthy  of  inquiry  how  much  of  the  benefits  derived  during
ordinary  treatment  may  be  due  entirely  to  the  effects  of  the  medicine,  and
how  much  indirectly  by  its  directing  attention  to,  or  withdrawing  it  from  the
seat  of  morbid  action.  ...  A  mental  itupression  is  necessarily  brought
into  operation  whenever  any  substance  is  taken,  supposed  to  be  of  a  medical
quality,  and  it  will  either  excite  or  depress  the  functions  of  the  morbid  part
[to  or  from  which  the  mind  is  naturally  directed]  according  to  circumstances,
independently  of  the  mere  physical  influence  which  would  otherwise  ensue
from  the  particular  medicine,  supposing  the  patient  had  not  been  aware
he  had  taken  any  medical  substance."  This  mental  impression.  Braid
thought,  accounted  for  the  remarkable  revolutions  which  have  taken  place
at  different  times  as  to  the  estimate  of  the  virtues  and  powers  of  particular
medicines.  "At  one  period  a  universal  favourite  appeared  to  be  possessed
of  every  valuable  quality  ;  anon,  discarded  and  forgotten  as  utterly  worthless  ;
again,  arising  into  meridian  power  and  splendour,  to  be  followed  by  another
decadence  in  due  course.  All  this  arises  very  naturally  in  the  following
manner.  A  zealous  and  sanguine  professor  prescribes  it  with  high  confidence
of  its  potency  for  good,  and  patients,  who  are  generally  acute  physiognomists
as  regards  their  medical  attendants,  catch  the  inspiration  and  the  results  are
most  propitious.  Every  successful  result  exalts  the  confidence  of  the
physician  and  patient  ;  and  others,  prescribing  with  confidence,  realise
equally  favourable  results,  and  thus  the  remedy  attains  the  culminating
point  of  its  fame  and  favour.  Others,  however,  follow  in  their  wake,  but
neither  with  the  same  hopes  nor  desire  that  they  should  find  the  discovery
of  some  rival  practitioner  deserving  such  laudation.  The  patients  discern
the  doubtful  omen  portrayed  in  the  words,  looks  and  manner  of  the
attendant  ;  the  effects  are  correspondingly  less  salutary,  and  every
succeeding  case  makes  a  decadence  in  the  reputation  of  the  once  fashionable
and  omnipotent  remedy.  Others  espouse  this  view,  and  thus,  through  their
combined  moral  impressions,  they  subvert  the  natural  tendency  of  the
remedy,  and  prevent  the  good  which  should  legitimately  have  attached  to  it,
independently  of  either  enthusiasm,  or  envy  or  caprice.  It  thus  slumbers
for  a  time  in  forgetfulness,  to  give  place  to  another  rival,  which  is  now  in
the  ascendant,  until  some  other  zealous  patron  at  length  takes  the  former


Supplement.] Javiss  Brciicl ;  his  Work  and  Writings.  147


under  his  special  favour,  and  by  a  similar  process  as  at  first,  it  once  more
rises  to  the  highest  honours,  but  only  to  sink  again,  in  its  turn,  to
unmerited  neglect."

Clairvoyance,  etc.

In  Braid's  opinion,  much  of  the  reluctance  to  accept  the  genuine
phenomena  of  mesmerism  and  hypnotism  arose  from  the  extravagant
assertions  of  the  mesmerists  in  reference  to  clairvoyance— assertions  which
he  described  as  being  opposed  to  all  the  known  laws  of  physical  science
and  a  mockery  of  the  human  understanding.  As  the  result  of  frequent
experiments  made,  not  only  on  his  own  patients,  but  also  upon  many  of  the
renowned  clairvoyants  of  the  day.  Braid  was  able  to  find  nothing  but
hypnotic  exaggeration  of  natural  powers.  The  following  sources  of  error,
he  said,  ought  always  to  be  kept  in  mind  : — 1.  The  hypertesthesia  of  the
organs  of  special  sense,  which  enables  impressions  to  be  perceived  through
the  ordinary  media  that  would  pass  unrecognised  in  the  waking  condition.
2.  The  docility  and  sympathy  of  the  subjects,  which  tend  to  make  them
imitate  the  actions  of  others.  3.  The  extraordinary  revival  of  memory  by
■which  they  can  recall  things  long  forgotten  in  the  waking  state.  4.  The
remarkable  efiect  of  contact  in  arousing  memory.  5.  The  condition  of
double  consciousness  or  double  personality.  6.  The  vivid  state  of  the
imagination,  which  instantly  invests  every  suggested  idea,  or  remembrance
of  past  impressions,  with  the  attributes  of  present  realities.  7.  The
tendency  of  the  human  mind,  in  those  with  a  great  love  of  the  marvellous,
to  erroneously  interpret  the  subject's  replies  in  accordance  with  their  own
desires.  8.  Deductions  rapidly  drawn  by  the  subject  from  unintentional
suggesti(ms  given  by  the  operator.  Braid  considered  that  the  belief  in
thought-transference  arose  from  the  failure  to  guard  against  sources  of  error
similar  to  those  just  described,  and  stated  that  he  had  never  met  with  any
case  where  the  subjects  could  correctly  interpret  his  unexpressed  desires,
without  some  sensible  indication  of  them.  In  reference  to  the  alleged
intuitive  powers  of  certain  mesmeric  subjects,  Braid  held  that,  whereas
with  animals  instinct  was  usually  right,  with  somnambules  it  was  generally
wrong.  It  was  true  that  certain  patients  could  successfully  predict  their
own  hysterical  attacks,  but  here  the  prophecy  pi'oduced  its  own  fulfilment
through  self-suggestion.

Phrenology.

Braid's  increased  knowledge  of  the  ■  power  of  mental  influences  in
provoking  the  various  phenomena  of  the  hypnotic  state  soon  led  him  to
discard  even  the  slightest  l^elief  in  phrenological  phenomena.  He  complained
that  the  author  of  an  article  in  the  NurtJi  British  Review  for  November,
1854,  confounded  him  with  the  Phreno-Mesmerists  and  attributed  to  him
the  belief  that  touching  particular  parts  of  the  head  would  make  a  hypnotised
patient  laugh,  pray,  sing,  steal,  and  fight,  etc.  "Now,"  said  Braid,  "the
fact  is  that  I  never  adduced  the  said  manifestations  as  a  proof  of  the
organology  of  phrenology.  I  exhibited  the  phenomena  and  explained  how
they  were  to  be  accounted  for  upon  totally  different  principles,  so  that  they
neither  proved  nor  disproved  the  doctrine  of  phrenology,  but  left  that
precisely  where  they  found  it. These  manifestations  may  arise  either  fronx


148


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


a  previous  knowledge  of  phrenology,  or  from  a  system  of  training  during
the  sleep,  so  that  they  may  come  out  subsequently  as  acts  of  memory,
when  corresponding  points  are  touched,  with  which  particular  ideas  have
been  associated  through  audible  suggestion — which  arbitrary  association
may  be  equally  readily  established  by  touching  other  parts  of  the  body  as  by
touching  different  parts  of  the  head — or  they  may  arise  from  the  touch
calling  into  action  certain  muscles  of  expression  of  mental  conditions,
exciting  in  the  mind  of  the  subject  the  ideas  with  which  they  were  usually
associated  in  the  waking  condition.  This  latter  mode  I  consider  the  only
natural  mode  of  exciting  these  manifestations,  and  it  is  a  mere  inversion
of  the  sequence  which  ordinarily  obtains  between  mental  and  muscular
excitation;  viz.,  firstly,  the  touch  calls  into  play  the  muscles  constituting  the
'  Anatomy  of  expression '  of  any  given  passion  or  emotion,  idea  or  train  of
thought  ;  and,  secondly,  this  physical  expression  suggests  or  excites  in  the
mind  of  the  subject  the  corresponding  idea,  passion  or  emotion  with  which
it  is  usually  associated  in  the  waking  condition  ;  i.e.  under  ordinary
circumstances,  the  mental  impression  precedes  and  acts  as  the  exciting
cause  of  physical  manifestations  of  different  mental  conditions,  bvit  here  the
physical  condition  precedes  and  acts  as  the  exciting  cause  of  the  mental
condition.  ...  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  so  long  ago  as
December,  1841,  I  particularly  pointed  out  the  remarkable  docility  of
patients  during  hypnosis,  whicli  made  them  most  anxious  to  comply  with
every  proper  request  or  supposed  wish  of  others.  I  have,  therefore,  no
doubt  that  they  might  be  trained  to  manifest,  during  hypnotism,  the
opposite  tendencies,  in  accordance  with  conventional  arrangements."

As  early  as  1843,  Braid  had  adopted  the  view  that  the  supposed  phreno-
logical manifestations  were  due  to  muscular  expression  exciting  corresponding
mental  conditions,  and  in  1844  he  showed  that  he  was  able  to  induce  all  the
phenomena  by  verbal  suggestion,  no  matter  what  j^art  of  the  head  was
touched.

Suggestion,  Passes,  etc.

At  first  Braid  employed  mechanical  methods  alone,  both  for  the
induction  of  hyi)nosis  <and  its  phenomena.  But  when  he  abandoned  his
physical  theory,  his  views  as  to  the  value  of  passes,  etc.,  naturally  changed,
and  he  soon  regarded  them  as  only  of  secondary  importance,  and  attached
most  value  to  suggestion.  With  certain  impressionable  subjects,  hypnosis
might  be  caused  by  self-suggestion  ;  if  they  believed  that  something  was  taking
place  at  a  distance,  capable  of  putting  them  to  sleep,  they  would  fall  asleep
even  if  nothing  was  happening.  Direct  verbal  suggestion,  however,  was
best  both  for  the  production  of  hypnotic  phenomena  and  for  the  cure  of
disease.  After  hypnotising  his  patients.  Braid  stated  in  a  confident  manner
the  results  he  wished  to  obtain  and,  in  certain  subjects,  found  that  these
could  be  varied  by  simple  change  in  the  voice.  Thus,  if  he  made  a  patient
see  an  imaginary  sheexj,  and  then  asked  him  in  a  cheerful  manner  what
colour  it  was,  this  tone  usually  elicited  the  reply  "White,"  or  some  light
colour.  If  he  then  asked  "  What  colour  is  it  rtwc  ?"  giving  a  sad  hitonation
to  the  word  noii;  the  reply  would  usually  be  "  Black."

The  action  of  passes,  etc.,  is  explained  by  Braid  in  the  following  manner.
Everything  which  produces  a  new  impression  will  modify  or  change  existing


Supplement.] James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.


149


functions,  whether  the  new  impression  be  of  a  mental  or  physical  nature.
The  brain  receives  many  impressions,  which  subsequently  influence  the
mind,  although  they  were  not  perceived  when  conveyed  to  it  by  the  organs
of  sense  ;  and  others,  too  slight  ever  to  become  conscious,  may  nevertheless
be  sufficient  to  produce  a  local  influence  on  the  nerves  and  capillaries.
Thus,  a  person  may  be  engaged  in  reading,  so  as  not  to  notice  he  is  sitting
in  a  draught,  and  yet  this  may  cause  rheumatism.  Passes  may  have  a
mechanical  action  through  the  agitation  of  the  air,  or  by  touch,  or  they  may
produce  changes  in  temperature  and  electrical  states.  They  are  most
powerful,  however,  when  they  directly  excite  mental  action,  either  by  fixing
the  attention  on  one  part  or  function  of  the  body  and  withdrawing  it  from
others,  or  by  arousing  ideas  previously  associated  with  the  physical
impression.  All  these  efi'ects  may  be  neutralised  by  direct  suggestion,  and
it  is  quite  possible,  by  a  system  of  training,  to  make  passes,  etc.,  produce
the  opposite  of  the  result  attributed  to  them.  Thus,  "  supposing  that,  with
each  touch  or  agitation  of  the  air  the  operator  speaks  aloud  and  predicts  what
shall  hajjpen,  the  auricular  suggestion  maybe  so  strong  as  to  cause  thepredicted
manifestation  to  be  realised  instead  of  what  otherwise  would  have  been  the
case  ;  and  thus,  from  this  time  forward,  through  the  double  conscious
memory,  the  like  impression  on  that  part  or  organ  of  sense  will  recall  the
previously  associated  idea  and  manifestations."  Some  sort  of  material
combination  may  be  sufficient  to  produce  hypnosis  when  it  is  positively
affirmed  that  it  will  do  so,  while  a  moment  later  the  same  method  will
produce  nothing,  when  it  is  suggested  it  will  be  a  failure.  ' '  All  these
phenomena  may  be  realised  without  the  patient  intending  to  play  off  any
deception  on  others,  or  having  any  remembrance  of  the  fact  on  coming  out
of  the  sleep."  Braid  also  stated  that  the  entire  value  of  jjasses  and  various
other  mechanical  methods,  was  altogether  a  suggestive  one  and  that  he  used
them  just  as  he  would  use  audible  suggestion.

Dangers.

In  passing  into  the  hypnotic  state.  Braid  held  that  reason  and  will  were
the  first  mental  powers  to  wane  ;  tlius  the  imagination  gained  the  ascendancy,
and  the  cerebro-spinal  functions  became  more  excitable,  as  the  controlling
powers  of  the  will  were  withdrawn.  This  interference  with  the  volition,
however,  had  its  limits,  and  in  an  unpublished  letter  in  my  possession,  in
which  he  replied  to  some  questions  regarding  the  dangers  of  hypnotism,
Braid  stated  "that  the  Almighty  would  never  have  delegated  to  man  such  a
dangerous  influence  over  his  fellow-man  as  to  have  given  him  such
irresistible  power  over  his  volition.  .  .  .  While  under  the  hypnotic
influence,  the  patients  evince  great  docility,  but  there  is,  however,  such  a
state  of  the  perceptive  faculties  and  judgment  that  they  will  be  quite  as
fastidious  of  correct  conduct  as  when  in  the  natural  state.  So  far  as  I  know,
there  is  no  more,  or  not  so  mucli,  chance  of  gaining  a  knowledge  of  the
thoughts  of  others  than  might  be  attained  by  giving  the  patient  a  glass  or
two  of  wine.  And  I  have  no  exijerience  of  any  such  irresistible  influence
over  individuals  for  producing  those  malign  effects  you  refer  to.  I
strongly  suspect  they  only  exist  in  the  imagination  of  the  parties  operating
or  operated  on. At  all  events,  no  such  effects  result  from  my  operations,


150


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


although  undoubtedly  I  have  been  able  to  produce  the  most  wonderful
effects  in  many  instances  where  ordinary  treatment  had  been  unavailing."
Braid  also  asserted  that  he  could  give  instructions  to  those  who  had  been
successfully  hypnotised,  no  matter  how  often,  by  means  of  which  they
could  completely  resist  the  influence  of  any  one  afterwards.

In  1847,  Braid  contrasted  the  dangers  of  ether  with  those  of  hypnotism,
from  a  moral  jjoint  of  view,  and  concluded  in  favour  of  hyjmotism.  He
refen-ed  to  the  moral  abuse  to  which  ethereal  narcotism  is  capable  of  being
turned  by  cruel  and  unprincipled  individuals.  The  opponents  of  mesmerism
and  hypnotism  had  asserted  that  their  employment  was  calculated  to  excite
the  animal  passions  and  that  virtuous  women  might  be  victimised  by
unprincipled  men,  even  without  their  consciousness  of  the  fact  when
restored  to  the  waking  state,  or  their  possessing  any  mode  of  bringing  home
to  the  culjjrits  a  charge  of  their  villainy,  while  there  was  not  a  whisper
against  the  use  of  ether  as  liable  to  be  converted  to  such  unholy  jjurposes.
Braid's  experience  of  both  ether  and  hypnotism  enabled  him  to  confidently
state  that  ether  was  much  the  more  dangerous  of  the  two.  He  had  never
seen  a  hypnotised  patient  who  did  not  strenuously  resist  any  attempt  at
taking  a  liberty  with  her.  Such  patients  could  not  be  induced  to  take  off
their  stockings,  for  example,  or  to  give  a  kiss  to  a  gentleman,  even  should
he  be  a  hallucinatory  one.  On  the  contrary,  they  would  repel  such
suggestions  with  more  energy  than  in  the  waking  condition.  ' '  What  might
be  achieved,"  he  said,  "by  .systematic  and  persevering  attempts  to  corrupt
a  virtuous  person  during  that  state,  I  do  not  pretend  to  tell ;  I  should  never
condescend  to  witness  such  attempts  being  systematically  made  ;  but  my
present  convictions  are  that  the  same  individual  might  be  more  readily
demoralised  when  awake,  than  when  in  the  second  conscious  state  of
nervous  sleep,  which  evidently  has  a  tendency  with  virtuous  jjeople  to
quicken  their  perceptions  and  heighten  their  notions  of  what  would  be
immoral  or  highly  indecorous,  whilst  at  tlie  same  time  it  renders  them
most  docile  and  obliging  in  all  which  is  reasonable  and  seemly  in  their
estimation.  Thus,  while  they  still  indignantly  repel  tlie  proposal  to  kiss  an
imaginary  gentleman,  they  will  be  quite  willing  to  do  so  to  an  imaginary
child.  A  libidinous  manifestation  I  have  never  seen  during  hypnotism,  but
I  have  witnessed  the  most  intense  manifestations  of  erotism  arise
spontaneously  on  several  occasions  during  the  primary  or  exciting  state  of
etherisation,  and  that  even  in  a  patient  of  high  resjjectability  and  of  the
most  modest  and  virtuous  conduct  and  pious  disposition  in  her  general
deportment  when  awake."

Again,  he  said,  supposing  an  unprincipled  person  were  j^laced  in  the
most  favourable  circumstances  for  perpetrating  a  hypnotic  crime  and
succeeded,  after  systematic  and  persevering  attempts,  in  doing  so,  and  that,
on  awaking,  the  patient  had  no  remembrance  whatever  of  the  injury
inflicted  on  her, — "let  not  the  criminal  indulge  in  a  delusive  hope  that  he
could  not  possibly  be  inculpated.  From  the  well-established  and  most
beneficent  law  of  double  consciousness,  it  is  quite  certain  that,  however
comjoletely  the  transactions  which  occurred  during  the  sleep  may  be
forgotten  on  awaking,  she  has  only  to  be  hypnotised  or  mesmerised  when
put  into  the  witness  box,  to  render  her  as  competent  to  give  accurate


Supplement.] Jcimes  Brcdcl ;  his  Work  and  Writings.


151


testimony  of  all  which  occurred  in  her  former  state  of  nervous  sleep,  as  in
the  waking  state  she  could  testify  to  the  facts  which  occurred  in  her  waking
condition. Now,  I  maintain  there  is  not  a  like  security  for  the  person  who
might  be  victimised  during  ethereal  narcotism. By  this  means  patients
might  be  rendered  speedily  entirely  oblivious  of  vvhat  was  occurring,  and  that
without  the  benefit  and  security  of  the  double-conscious  memory  to  be
summoned  to  the  conviction  of  the  perpetrators  of  their  wrongs. "  .
"  I  have  proved  by  experiments,  botli  in  public  and  private,  that  during  the
state  of  excitement  the  judgment  is  sufficiently  active  to  make  the  patient,
if  possible,  even  more  fastidious,  as  regards  the  propriety  of  conduct,  than
in  the  waking  condition  ;  and  from  the  state  of  rigidity  and  sensibility,  they
can  be  aroused  to  a  state  of  mobility,  and  exalted  sensibility,  either  by  being
rudely  handled,  or  even  by  a  bi'eath  of  air.  Nor  is  it  requisite  that  it  should
be  done  by  the  pei-son  who  put  them  in  the  hypnotic  state. It  will  follow
equally  from  the  manipulations  of  any  one  else,  or  a  current  of  cold  air
impinging  against  the  body,  or  from  any  mechanical  contrivance  whatever.
And,  finally,  the  state  cannot  be  induced,  in  any  stage,  unless  with  the
knowledge  and  consent  of  the  party  operated  on. In  this,  hypnotism  has
an  advantage  over  medicine,  for  many  powerful  medicines  have  been  used
for  criminal  purposes  and  can  be  administered  w^ithout  the  knowledge  of
the  intended  victim. I  have  vindicated  hypnotism  against  the  erroneous
prejudices  cited  against  it  as  having  an  immoral  tendency  ;  I  did  not,  and  do
not,  claim  for  it  the  power  of  emplanting  a  principle. I  do  not  say  it
will  make  a  vicious  person  virtuous  ;  but  I  am  most  confident  it  will  not
make  a  virtuous  person  vicious. On  the  contrary,  I  feel  assured  that  a
person  of  habitually correct  feelings will, during the  somnambulistic
condition,  while  consciousness  lasts,  manifest  fully  as  much  delicacy  and
circumspection  of  conduct  as  in  the  waking  state. Moreover,  I  have  proved
that  no  one  can  be  affected  at  all  unless  by  volnntanj  compliance,  and
consequently  it  has  no  right  to  be  held  as  an  agency  which  could  be
converted  to  immoral  purposes,  as  many  have  supposed. If  any  one  would
say  it  may  have  this  tendency,  because  in  a  state  of  torpor,  insensibility,  and
cataleptiform  rigidity,  the  party  is  unconscious,  immovable,  and  incapable
of  self-defence,  I  beg  to  remind  such  individuals  that  the  same  argument
might  be  urged  against  the  proper  use  of  wine,  spirits,  or  opium,  because
excess  in  the  use  of  either  might  be  followed  by  like  results. I  am  quite
certain  no  one  can  be  affected  by  it,  in  any  stage  of  the  process,  unless  by
the  free  will  and  consent  of  the  patient,  which  is  at  once  sufficient  to
exonerate  the  practice  from  the  imputations  of  being  capable  of  being
converted  to  immoral  purposes,  which  has  been  so  much  insisted  on  to  the
prejudice  of  animal  magnetism. This  has  arisen  from  the  mesmerisers
asserting  that  they  have  the  power  of  overmastering  patients  irresistibly,
even  whilst  at  a  distance,  by  mere  volitions  and  secret  passes."  Braid
stated  that  he  had  been  careful  in  hypnotic  experiments  and  had  neither
met  with  accidents,  nor  seen  a  single  case  which  he  could  not  awaken  in
two  minutes.

Medical  and  Surgical  Cases.

Braid  records  a  good  many  minor  surgical  operations,  performed
painlessly  during  hypnosis. He  mentions  the  fact  that  in  some  instances


152


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


general  consciousness  was  unimpaired,  and  the  patients  remembered
afterwards  all  that  had  been  done,  although  they  had  experienced  no  pain
during  or  after  the  operation.  He  also  records  an  immense  number  of
medical  cases  which  were  cured  or  relieved  by  hypnotism.  The  majority  of
these  were  functional  nervous  disorders,  but  remarkable  results  were  also
obtained  in  many  cases  of  organic  disease.  The  clearing  up  of  a  long-
standing corneal  opacity,  in  a  patient  wlio  was  being  hypnotised  for  the
relief  of  a  rheumatic  aft'ection,  is  one  of  the  most  interesting.  He  also
obtained  marked  improvement  in  many  cases  of  organic  paralysis.  In  one
instance,  the  patient  afterwards  died  from  another  apopletic  seizure,  and
post-mortem  examination  revealed  evidence  of  the  earlier  organic  mischief.  lu
this  case,  the  symptoms  had  improved  greatly  under  hypnotic  treatment.  "It
is  of  importance  beforehand  to  inform  the  patient,"  he  said,  "  that  it  is  not
necessary  for  him  to  become  unconscious  in  order  to  obtain  the  beneficial
effects  of  the  nervous  sleep.  Many  believe  that  a  favourable  result  can  only
be  obtained  if  the  consciousness  has  been  completely  lost,  whereas,  in
numerous  cases,  where  the  usual  internal  and  external  treatment  has  been
quite  in  vain,  the  most  favourable  results  liave  been  obtained  by  the  imj^res-
sion  on  the  nervous  system,  even  if  the  patient  has  noticed  everything  that
has  taken  place  and  upon  awaking  from  the  nervous  sleep  has  remembered
everything  which  occurred  during  its  duration."  Braid  stated  he  had  ex-
perienced this  himself,  when,  on  account  of  a  severe  attack  of  rheumatism,
he  had  hypnotised  himself  for  eight  or  nine  minutes  and  awoke  completely
free  from  pain,  although  he  had  not  lost  consciousness  in  the  least  during
the  so-called  sleej).

Genekal  Observations.

Braid  desired  to  place  all  his  results  and  methods  before  his  medical
brethren  ;  insisted  that  they  alone  ought  to  use  hypnotism,  and  warned  the
ignorant  against  tampering  with  such  a  powerful  agency,  which  might
produce  either  good  or  evil  according  to  the  manner  in  which  it  was
managed  and  applied.  "  Hy^jnotism  is  capable,"  he  said,  "  of  curing  many
diseases  for  which  hitlierto  we  knew  of  no  remedy  ;  but  none  but  a
professional  man,  well  versed  in  anatomy,  physiology  and  pathology,  is
competent  to  ap2:)ly  it  with  general  advantage  to  the  patient,  or  ci-edit  to
himself,  or  the  agency  he  employs.  I  must  beg,  however,  that  it  be
particularly  understood  that  I  by  no  means  hold  up  this  agency  as  a  universal
remedy.  Whoever  talks  of  a  universal  remedy,  I  consider  must  either  be  a
fool  or  a  knave  ;  for,  as  diseases  arise  from  totally  opposite  pathological
conditions,  all  rational  treatment  ought  to  be  varied  accordingly."  In
reference  to  the  successful  therapeutic  results  that  lie  had  obtained  by
hypnotism,  Braid  asserted  that  he  could  teach  any  intelligent  medical  man
to  do  what  he  had  done,  and  that  his  object  had  always  been  not  to  mystify,
but  to  dispel  all  mystery.  He  also  claimed  that  he  was  able  to  hypnotise
a  larger  percentage  by  his  mechanical  methods,  than  the  mesmerisers  could
do  with  the  supposed  aid  of  mysterious  agencies.  Hypnotism  could  be
ajjplied  with  the  greatest  confidence  by  those  who  understood  it,  and  benefit
might  be  derived  from  it,  even  in  incurable  cases  ;  neither  pain,  discomfort,
nor  dangers  being  associated  with  it.  In  doubtful  cases,  it  was  sometimes
of  service  in  obtaining  a  correct  diagnosis.


Supplement.] Jcimes  Brciid ;  Ids  Work  and  Writings.


153


Braid  stated  that  he  had  taken  every  care  to  avoid  deception  in  his
experiments,  but  did  not  expect,  on  this  account,  that  his  conclusions
would  be  accepted  by  others.  He  hoped,  however,  that  his  professional
brethren  would  investigate  the  subject  coolly,  with  an  honest  desire  to
arrive  at  truth.  "Having  myself  been  sceptical,"  he  said,  "I  can  make
«very  reasonable  allowance  for  others.  Every  one  should  examine  the
phenomena  for  themselves,  but  at  the  same  time  they  should  know
something  about  them."  In  illustration  of  tlie  importance  of  this,  he
referred  to  the  fact  that  different  subjects  showed  varying  susceptibility
and  that  many  people,  even  pi'ofessional  men,  expected  that  all  should
present  uniform  hypnotic  phenomena.  "It  must  be  borne  in  mind,"  he
said,  "that  the  opposite  mental  conditions  may  glide  into  each  other  by  the
most  imperceptible  degrees,  or  by  the  most  abrupt  transitions,  according  to
the  modes  of  management ;  and  thus  consciousness  or  unconsciousness,  sound
sleep,  dreaming,  or  somnambulism,  will  result,  according  as  sensations  or
ideas  predominate,  or  are  equally  vivid.  It  is  no  unusual  thing  for
•different  parties  to  be  testing,  or  calling  for  tests,  for  the  opposite
•conditions,  at  the  same  instant  of  time."

In  many  instances,  Braid  publislied  the  written  testimony  of  others  in
support  of  his  alleged  successful  treatment  of  different  patients  by  hyjjnotism,
and  explained  that  he  did  this  because  ' '  most  unwarrantable  interferences
had  been  resorted  to  by  several  medical  men,  in  order  to  misrepresent  some
-of  them.  In  one  instance,  in  order  to  obtain  an  attested  erroneous
.document,  the  case  was  read  to  the  patient,  and  others  present,  the  very
reverse  of  what  was  written.  However  extraordinary  such  conduct  may
appear,  the  fact  of  its  occurrence  was  publicly  proved,  and  borne  testi-
mony to  by  the  patient  and  other  parties  present  on  the  occasion  when  the
■document  was  obtained."

He  referred  again  and  again  to  the  almost  incredible  opposition  which
he  had  to  combat,  at  the  hands  both  of  the  orthodox  medical  practitioner
and  of  the  mesmerist,  and  complained  that  having  been  attacked  in  the
Zoist,  the  editors  of  tliat  journal  would  not  jjermit  him  to  reply  in  their
pages.  He  sent  his  answer  to  the  Association  Medical  Journnl,  as  he
considered  that  the  most  natural  medium  for  a  member  of  the  Provincial
Association  to  publish  his  defence  in,  but  it  was  also  refused  there.

"  Throughout  the  whole  of  my  inquiries,"  he  said,  "  ray  chief  desire  has
been  to  arrive  at  what  could  be  rendered  most  practically  useful  for  the
relief  and  cure  of  disease  ;  and  I  hesitate  not  to  say  that,  in  the  hands  of  a
skilful  medical  man,  who  thoroughly  understands  the  peculiar  modes  which
I  have  devised  for  varying  the  effects  in  a  manner  applicable  to  different
cases,  hypnotism,  besides  being  the  sijeediest  method  for  inducing  the
condition  is,  moreover,  capable  of  achieving  all  the  good  to  be  attained  by
the  ordinary  mesmerising  processes  and  mnc/i  more."  .  .  .  "Of  course
there  is  one  point  which  renders  hypnotism  less  an  object  of  approbation
with  a  certain  class  of  society,  viz.,  that  I  lay  no  claim  for  it  to  produce
the  marvellous  or  transcendental  phenomena  ;  nor  do  I  believe  that  the
phenomena  manifested  have  any  relation  to  a  magnetic  temj)erament,  or
some  peculiar  or  occult  power,  possessed  in  an  extraordinary  degree  by  the
operator.  These  are  all  circumstances  which  appeal  powerfully  to  the  feelings


154


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


[Supplement.


of  the  lovei'S  of  the  marvellous,  and  therefore  tell  in  favour  of  mesmerism  ;
and,  moreover,  seeing  that,  for  conducting  the  hypnotic  processes  with  any
degree  of  certainty  and  success,  I  contend  that,  in  many  cases,  a  knowledge
of  anatomy,  physiology,  pathology,  and  therapeutics  are  all  requisite,  it  is
obvious  that  such  requirements  must  be  less  calculated  to  secure  the
approbation  of  non-professional  mesmerists  and  amateurs,  whose  magnetic
creed  taught  them  to  believe  that  the  mere  possession  by  them  of  the
magnetic  temperament, — of  a  surcharge  by  nature,  within  their  own  bodies,
of  a  magnetic  fluid  or  odyle, — is  quite  sufticient  to  enable  them  to  treat  any
case  as  efficiently  as  the  most  skilful  medical  man  in  the  universe,  simply
by  walking  up  to  the  patient  with  the  ivill  and  good  intention  of  doing  him
service,  or  by  adding  thereto,  occasionally,  the  efficacy  of  mesmeric  touches,
passes  or  manipulations."  .  .  .  "  Like  the  originators  of  all  new  views,
however,  hypnotism  has  subjected  me  to  much  contention  ;  for  the  sceptics,
from  not  perceiving  the  difl'erence  between  my  method  and  that  of  the
mesmerists,  and  the  limited  extent  of  my  pretensions,  were  e(|ually  hostile
to  hypnotism  as  they  had  been  to  mesmerism  ;  and  the  mesmerists,  thinking
their  craft  was  in  danger — that  their  mystical  idol  was  threatening  to  be
shorn  of  some  of  its  glory  by  the  advent  of  a  new  rival — buckled  on  their
armour,  and  soon  proved  that  the  odium  mesmericum  was  as  inveterate  as
the  odium  theologicuia."

Historical.

Braid  died  suddenly  on  March  25th,  1860,  according  to  some  accounts
from  apoplexy,  according  to  others  from  heart  disease  ;  he  left  a  widow,  son
and  daughter.  He  maintained  his  active  interest  in  hypnotism  up  to  the  end,
and  three  days  before  his  death  sent  his  last  MS.  to  Dr.  Azam,  with  the
following  inscription  : — ' '  Presented  to  M.  Azam,  as  a  mark  of  esteem  and
regard,  by  James  Braid,  Surgeon,  Manchester,  March  22nd,  1860."
Sympathetic  notices  of  Braid's  death  appeared  in  the  local  papers  and
different  medical  journals,  all  of  which  bore  warm  testimony  to  his-
professional  skill  and  high  personal  character.  The  Lancet  drew  attention
to  the  fact  that,  though  he  was  best  known  in  the  medical  world  by  his
theory  and  practice  of  hypnotism,  he  had  also  obtained  wonderfully
successful  results  by  operations  in  cases  of  club  foot  and  other  deformities,
wliich  brought  him  patients  from  every  part  of  the  kingdom.  Up  to  1841  he
had  operated  on  262  cases  of  Talipes,  700  cases  of  Strabisums,  and  23  cases
of  spinal  curvature.

In  1852,  in  the  Breface  to  the  Third  Edition  of  "  Magic,  Witchcraft,
etc.,"  Braid  stated  that  he  now  gave  his  view  of  all  important  hypnotic  and
mesmeric  theories,  and  hoped,  by  this  means,  to  make  up  in  some  measure
for  the  delay  in  the  publication  of  another  edition  of  his  work  on
Hypnotism,  which  had  long  been  out  of  print,  and  was  frequently  called
for.  "  That  call,"  he  said,  "  I  hope  shortly  to  be  able  to  respond  to,  with
such  fulness  of  detail  as  the  importance  of  the  subject  merits  ;  more
particularly  with  regard  to  its  practical  application  for  the  relief  and  cure
of  some  forms  of  disease,  of  which  numerous  interestmg  examples  will  be
adduced."  At  tlie  conclusion  of  "  The  Physiology  of  Fascination,  etc.,"  he
also  said  "It  is  my  intention  shortly  to  publish  a  volume  entitled,
'  Psycho-Physiology  ;  embracing  Hypnotism,  Monoideism  and  Mesmerism,


Supplement.] Jciiues  Brctld;  his  Work  and  Writings.


155


This  work  will  comprise,  in  a  connected  and  condensed  form,  the  results  of
the  whole  of  my  researches  in  this  department  of  science  ;  and  it  will,  more-
over, be  illustrated  by  cases  in  which  hypnotism  has  Vjeen  proved  particularly
efficacious  in  the  relief  and  cure  of  disease,  with  special  directions  how  to
regulate  the  processes  so  as  to  adapt  them  to  different  cases  and
circumstances."  Shortly  before  his  death,  Braid  contemplating  publishing  a
second  edition  of  "  Neurypnology,"  in  France;  this  was  never  done,  nor
did  the  two  proposed  works  above  referred  to  ever  see  the  light.  All
Braid's  books  and  articles  are  out  of  print,  and  of  the  former,  Nos.  2,  3,  4,
6,  and  7  (See  list,  pp.  127  and  128),  are  alone  to  be  found  in  the  Library
of  the  British  Museum.  I  possess  Nos.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  and  8,  as  well  as  most
of  his  articles  and  two  long  MS.  letters  addressed  to  M.  Highfield,  Esq.,
Surgeon,  dated  respectively  28th  October,  and  16th  November,  1842.
These  letters  contain  an  interesting  resume  of  Braid's  views  on  the
subjective  nature  of  hypnotic  phenomena  ;  some  account  of  the  hyperajsthesia
of  the  special  senses  and  reference  to  successful  medical  cases,  together  with
the  denial  of  the  alleged  dangers  of  hypnotism  and  of  the  supposed  automa-
tism of  the  subject.

In  1859,  Dr.  Azam,  of  Bordeaux,  became  acquainted  with  Braid's
hypnotic  work,  and  commenced  to  investigate  the  subject  for  himself  ;  an
account  of  his  experiments,  with  much  reference  to  Braid,  appeared  in
the  Archives  de  Medecine  in  1860.  About  the  same  time  Broca,  who  had
obtained  marvellous  results  with  Braid's  methods,  read  a  paper  on  Hypnotism
before  the  Academic  des  Sciences,  which  attracted  much  attention,  and
Velpeau  presented  a  copy  of  "Neurypnology"  to  the  same  Society.  A
commission,  composed  of  members  of  the  four  sections  of  the  Institute ,  was
then  formed  to  report  on  the  subject.  On  hearing  of  this,  Braid  wrote  to
the  Academie  to  say  how  much  pleasure  Azam's  brilliant  results,  and  the
action  of  the  Society,  had  given  him.

From  this  date,  the  subject  of  hypnotism  was  never  lost  sight  of  in
France  ;  but  it  was  not  until  40  years  after  its  original  publication  that
"Neurypnology"  was  translated  by  Dr.  Jules  Simon,  who  stated  that
"Braid's  researches  procured  for  him  numerous  enemies  ;  but  despite  this  he
pursued  them  with  the  precisioji  of  genius,  and  was  able  to  add  artificial
somnambulism  to  the  pathology  of  the  nervous  system — a  chapter  whicli
the  investigations  of  the  greater  number  of  modern  neiiro-pathologists  have
confirmed."

Braid's  first  translator  was  W.  Preyer,  Professor  of  Physiology  at  the
University  of  Jena,  who  in  1881  published  "The  Discovery  of  Hypnotism."
This  was  a  condensation  of  "  Neurypnology,"  together  with  the  translation
of  the  pamj^hlet  sent  by  Braid  to  Azam  in  1860,  which  had  passed  into  the
possession  of  Dr.  Beard  of  New  York,  who  lent  it  to  Preyer.  The  same
pamphlet  is  also  translated  into  French  and  forms  an  appendix  to  Dr.  Jules
Simon's  "Neurypnology,"  published  in  1883.  In  1882,  Preyer  published
"  Hypnotism,"  which  consisted  of  a  translation  of  all  Braid's  works,  with  the
exception  of  "  Neurypnology,"  and  "  Satanic  Agency."

I  do  not  jiropose  in  this  article  to  examine  Braid's  views  critically,  but
desire  briefly  to  compare  them  with  those  of  later  workers  in  the  same  field.


156


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


At  first  Braid  believed  in  the  purely  physical  origin  of  hypnotic
phenomena,  and  held  that  tliey  could  be  induced  by  mechanical  means  in
subjects  who  were  ignorant  of  hypnotism  or  mesmerism.  This  doctrine  is
still  held  by  Heidenhain  and  by  certain  members  of  the  Salpetriere  School.
The  former  says  ; — "  People  who  have  heard  nothing  about  hypnotism,  and
who  do  not  know  for  what  purpose  they  are  being  experimented  on,  can  be
hypnotised.  The  hypirotic  condition  can  be  brought  about  without  the
instrumentality  of  a  living  being,  simply  by  certain  definite  physical
stimuli."  Charcot  and  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  say,  "  Hypnotism  c:.n  be
induced  by  purely  physical  means,  and  a  person  can  be  hyjjnotised,  so  to
sjieak,  unknown  to  himself."  Before  Braid  appreciated  the  mental  influence
in  hypnosis,  he  was  inclined  to  believe  in  phrenology,  and  the  same  cause
seems  to  have  led  the  Salpetriere  School  into  error  as  to  the  action  of
magnets,  metals  and  medicines  in  sealed  tubes.  That  all  these  owed  their
virtue  to  suggestion  was  clearly  demonstrated  by  Braid  ;  yet,  despite  this
fact,  the  metallo-theraj^eutics  of  Burq  were  revived  by  Charcot  and  his
disciples,  and  Dr.  Luys  still  plays  with  his  india-rubber  dolls  and  Professor
Benedikt  with  his  magnets.  An  account,  by  Dr.  F.  Peterson  and  others,  of
Professor  Benedikt's  theory  of  the  action  of  magnets,  and  of  the  experimental
exposure  of  its  fallacious  nature,  read  before  the  New  York  Academy  of
Medicine,  closely  resembles  what  was  said  and  done  by  Braid  on  the  same
subject.  According  to  Professor  Benedikt,  "certain  forms  of  hysteria  are
better  treated  by  the  magnet  than  by  electricity,  hydropathy  or  drugs.
When  a  magnet  is  applied  to  the  sensitive  vertebrte  without  removal  of  the
dress,  the  irritable  patient  soon  becomes  quiet  and  even  quasi  paralysed,
the  muscles  gradually  relax,  the  respiration  becomes  sighing,  consciousness
slowly  disappears  ;  the  resistance  to  conduction  in  motor  nerves  could  easily
become  absolute.  The  two  poles  have  different  effects,  the  magnet  must  be
employed  with  caution,  patients  may  be  injured  by  it."  These  statements
were  tested  in  America  ;  magnets  of  enormous  power  were  used  and  exj)eri-
ments  made  on  human  subjects  and  lower  animals.  A  young  dog  was
subjected  to  magnetic  influence  for  five  houi-s  ;  but,  instead  of  being
jmralysed  from  "  increased  resistance  to  conduction  in  motor  nerves,"  on
being  liberated,  it  was  more  lively  than  before.  The  experimenters  conclude
"that  the  human  organism  is  in  no  wise  ai:)preciably  affected  by  the  most
powerful  magnets  known  to  modern  science ;  that  neither  direct  nor  reversed
magnetism  exerts  any  percejjtible  influence  u2Jon  the  iron  contained  in  the
blood,  upon  the  circulation,  upon  ciliary  or  protoplasmic  movements,  upon
sensory  or  motor  nerves,  or  upon  the  brain.  The  ordinary  magnets  used
in  medicine,"  they  say,  "have  a  jjurely  suggestive  or  psychic  effect,  and
would  in  all  probability  be  quite  as  useful  if  made  of  wood."

The  theories  of  the  School  of  Nancy  closely  resemble  Braid's  later  ones,
in  which  lie  regarded  hypnotic  phenomena  from  a  psychical  standpoint.
They  are  not  alike,  however,  on  all  points.  For,  while  both  attach  much
importance  to  "dominant  ideas"  and  "suggestion,"  Braid  regards  the
latter  simply  as  a  method  of  inducing  the  phenomena,  and  lays  stress  on  the
preliminary  change  which  must  be  brought  about  in  the  nervous  system,
while  the  Nancy  School  hold  that  suggestion  explains  all  the  phenomena  of
hypnosis. Bernheim,  for  example, considers that there is nothing  in


Supplement.] Jamss  Brciid ;  his  Work  and  Writings.


157


hypnotism  but  the  name,  and  says,  "hypnotism  does  not  really  create  a
new  condition  ;  there  is  nothing  in  induced  sleep  which  may  not  occur  in
the  waking  condition."  In  this  Mr.  Frederic  Myers  agrees  with  Braid,
and  has  clearly  pointed  out  that  suggestion  does  not  explain  the  phenomena
of  hypnosis,  but  is  merely  the  artifice  used  by  the  operator  in  order  to  evoke
them.

Braid  is  in  opposition  to  the  Nancy  School  in  reference  to  suggested
crimes  and  to  what  has  been  called  the  automatism  of  the  hyjjnotised
subject.  On  this  point  he  is  more  in  accordance  with  the  Saljietriere  School
and  his  position  has  recently  been  greatly  strengthened  by  the  observations
of  Delbojuf  and  others.  With  regard  to  this  question,  Mr.  Frederic
Myers  says,  "  Let  us  first  ob.serve  what  is  the  moral  tone  of  the  somnambule
when  left  to  himself,  as  far  as  possible,  without  suggestion.  In  some
important  points  it  is  the  precise  opposite  of  the  drunken  condition.
Alcohol,  apparently  by  paralysing  first  the  higher  inliibitory  centres,  makes
men  boastful,  impure,  and  quarrelsome.  Hypnotism,  apparently  by  a  tendency
to  paralyse  lower  appetitive  centres,  produces  a  contrai-y  effect.  The
increased  refinement  and  increased  cheerfulness  of  the  developed  somnam-
bule is  constantly  noticed.  It  is  a  moot  point  whether  any  sleep-walker
has  ever  told  an  untruth  ;  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  angry  or  impure
gesture  has  ever  shown  itself  spontaneously  in  the  hypnotic  state."

My  own  observations  on  this  question  have  led  me  to  conclusions  even
more  pronounced  than  Braid's.  For  while  I  am  convinced  that  it  is  impossible
to  commit  or  suggest  crime  during  the  alert  stage  of  hypnosis,  nothing  that
I  have  seen  has  afforded  me  any  ground  for  supposing  that  a  crime  could  be
committed  during  the  deep  stage.  As  early  as  1890,  in  an  account  of  some
dental  operations,  performed  during  hypnotic  anaisthesia,  I  drew  attention
to  the  fact  that  there  was  no  interference  with  the  volition  of  the  subject.

Braid,  as  we  have  seen,  drew  important  distinctions  between  natural  and
induced  sleep.  These  are  not  recognised  by  the  Nancy  School.  Bernheim
says,  ' '  In  my  opuiion  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  differentiates  natural
and  artificial  sleep."  He  admits,  however,  one  point  of  difference,  namely,
that  "in  ordinary  sleep,  as  soon  as  consciousness  is  lost,  the  subject  is  only
in  relationship  with  himself.  In  induced  sleep,  the  subject's  mind  retains
the  memory  of  the  person  who  has  put  him  to  sleep,  whence  the  hypnotiser's
power  of  playing  upon  his  imagination,  or  of  suggesting  dreams,  and  of
directing  the  acts  which  are  no  longer  controlled  by  the  weakened  or  absent
will."  With  regard  to  the  relationship  between  hysteria  and  hypnotism,
Braid  agrees  with  the  Nancy  and  is  opposed  to  the  Salpetriere  School.

Braid  and  the  Nancy  School  diff"er  in  reference  to  rapport.  According  to
Carpenter,  who  explained  Bi'aid's  views  in  an  article  in  the  Quarterly
Kevietv,  rap-port  could  be  entirely  explained  on  the  ijrinciple  of  "dominant
ideas."  The  subject  believed  that  the  operator  alone  had  power  over  him,
or  could  commuuicate  with  him  ;  this  established  the  rapport.  Rapport
was  not  discovered  until  long  after  the  practice  of  mesmerism  had  come  into
vogue,  having  been  unknown  to  Mesmer  and  his  immediate  disciples  ;  and
its  phenomena  only  acquired  constancy  and  fixity,  in  proportion  as  its  laws
were  announced  and  received.  Mesmerists,  ignorant  of  rapport,  produced  a
great  variety  of  remarkable  phenomena,  and  yet  never  detected  this  rappwrt  ;


158


Dr.  /.  Milne  Bramivell.


[Supplement.


although  they  obtained  immediate  evidence  of  it,  when  once  the  idea  liad
been  put  into  their  own  minds  and  thence  transferred  to  their  subjects.  In
all  the  experiments  Dr.  Carpenter  witnessed  which  seemed  to  indicate  its
existence,  the  previous  idea  had  either  been  present,  or  had  obviously  been
suggested  by  the  methods  employed  to  induce  the  mesmeric  somnambulism  ;
whilst  in  a  large  number  of  other  cases,  in  which  the  subjects  were  not
habitues  of  the  mesmeric  seances,  their  consciousness  was  not  confined  to
the  mesmeriser,  or  to  those  wlaom  he  placed  en  rapport  with  them,  but  was
equally  extended  to  all  around.

Braid,  as  we  have  already  seen,  observed  that  a  somnambule,  sujjposed
only  to  be  en  rapport  with  the  hypnotiser,  heard  and  obeyed  the  predictions
made  by  a  third  person.  At  a  much  later  date,  Liegeois  drew  attention  to
the  fact  that  when  you  had  suggested  to  a  somnambule  that  he  could  not
hear  you,  he  was  still  able  to  do  so.  "If,"  he  said,  "you  address  him
directly,  he  will  neither  reply  nor  carry  out  your  suggestion  ;  but  if  you  speak
impersonally,-  speaking  not  in  your  own  name,  but  as  if  with  an  internal
voice,  then  the  subject  will  execute  the  suggestion.  Under  such  circum-
stances, if  I  said  in  reference  to  Camille,  '  Camille  is  thirsty,  Camille  will
go  to  the  kitchen  and  ask  for  a  glass  of  water,'  the  order  was  obeyed."

The  following  is  Liebeault's  view  : — "  It  is  observed  that  neai-ly  all
artificial  somnanibules  are  in  relation  by  their  senses  with  those  who  put
them  to  sleep,  but  only  with  them.  The  subject  hears  everything  that  the
operator  says  to  him,  but  him  only,  provided  the  sleep  is  sufficiently  deep.
He  only  hears  the  ojjerator  when  he  is  addressed  directly  by  him  and  not
when  a  third  person  is  spoken  to.  This  rapport  extends  to  the  other
senses."  Accoi'ding  to  Liebeault,  the  subject  remains  en  rapport  with  the
hypnotiser  because  he  goes  to  sleep  in  thinking  of  him,  and  this  does  not
differ  from  what  happens  in  ordinary  sleep.  A  motlier  who  goes  to  sleep
close  to  the  cradle  of  her  child,  does  not  cease  to  watch  over  him  during  her
sleep,  but  watches  only  for  him,  and  while  she  hears  his  slightest  cry  is
insensible  to  other  louder  sounds.  The  concentration  of  the  subject's
attention  upon  the  ojjerator,  and  his  mental  retention  of  the  idea  of  the  one
who  put  him  to  sleep,  is  the  cause  of  rapport.

From  this  it  is  evident  that  Braid  believed  rapport  to  be  entirely  the
result  of  suggestion,  while  Liebeault  considers  it  to  be  due  to  a  concentration
of  attention  whicli  resulted  naturally  from  the  induction  of  hypnosis.  My
own  observations  have  led  me  to  conclusions  similar  to  those  of  Braid.  In
subjects  who  did  not  know  what  was  expected  of  them,  and  to  whom  neither
direct  nor  indirect  suggestions  of  rapport  were  made,  this  condition  did  not
appear.  On  the  contrary,  they  lieard^and  obeyed  any  one  who  might  address
them.  In  several  instances,  similar  conditions  were  observed  in  the
subjects  experimented  on  by  the  Hypnotic  Committee  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.  These  facts  ap])ai-ently  disjjrove  Bernheim's  conclusion
tliat  the  only  difference  which  exists  between  natural  and  induced  sleep  is
the  concentration  of  tlie  subject's  mind  upon  the  operator, — a  condition
which,  he  holds,  not  only  explains  rapport,  but  also  the  power  of  the
operator  to  influence  the  subject.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Braid,  like  Esdaile,  recognised  the  analogy
between  hypnosis  and  certain  states  produced  by  Cannabis  Indiea.  No


Supplement.] James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.


159


reference  to  these  observations  is  to  be  found  in  Schrenck-Notzing's
monograph,  "  Die  Bedeutung  narcotischer  Mittel  fiir  den  Hypnotismus."
He  refers,  however,  to  O'Shaughnessy's  experiments.

Some  slight  difference  exists  between  Braid's  view  of  the  value  ot
passes ,  etc. ,  and  that  of  Professor  Forel.  While  Braid  believed  that  their
influence  was  mainly  suggestive,  he  still  held  that  they  were  capable  of
producing  some  physical  effect,  though  this  might  be  destroyed  or  reversed
by  direct  suggestion.  Forel,  on  the  other  hand,  denies  the  physical
influence  of  mechanical  processes  on  the^  ground  that  sugge.stion  is  capable
of  altering  their  supposed  action.  lie  says,  "The  action  of  blowing  upon
the  face  no  longer  awakens  my  subjects,  because  I  suggested  this  would
remove  pain,  in  place  of  awakening  them."  From  this  he  argues  that  the
act  of  blowing  produces  no  result ;  but  would  it  not  be  equally  logical  to
contend  that  the  prick  of  a  pin  produced  no  physical  effect,  because  by
■suggestion  the  patient,  rendered  insensible  to  pain,  had  been  taught  to
regard  the  pin  jjrick  as  the  signal  to  evoke  some  other  condition  ?

Braid  forestalled  Bernheim  in  discovering  the  value  of  hypnotic
treatment  in  organic  paralysis  and  the  power  of  the  ojjerator's  toucli  to
assist  the  patient's  mental  concentration  and  thus  recall  lost  memory.
Bernheim  says,  "  If  necessary,  I  lay  my  hand  on  the  subject's  forehead  to
concentrate  his  attention  ;  he  thinks  deeply  for  an  instant,  without  falling
:asleep,  and  all  the  latent  memories  arise  with  great  precision."  This,  both
AS  to  the  observed  fact  and  its  explanation,  is  an  almost  exact  reproduction
of  the  words  of  Braid.  Bernheim's  views,  as  to  the  part  played  by
^suggestion  in  ordinary  medicine,  were  long  ago  expressed  by  Braid  clearly
and  at  great  length.  Similar  opinions  have  recently  been  advanced  by
Dr.  Wilks,  the  newly-elected  President  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,
.and  one  of  the  ablest  thinkers  in  the  medical  profession.  According  to  hiin,
"  To  sit  down  in  one's  chair  daily  and  write  on  a  piece  of  paper  the  name  of
some  drug  for  every  ailment  without  exception  which  comes  under  our
observation  is  in  the  present  state  of  medicine  an  absurdity,  and  simply  a
pandering  to  human  weakness.  I  do  not  say  that  drugs  are  not  useful  in  a
moral  sense,  I  am  merely  contending  that  the  method  is  not  scientific,  as
we  usually  apply  this  term.  I  know  of  no  more  successful  practitioner  than
the  late  Sir  William  Gull,  and  his  treatment  was  rational,  but  he  did  not
credit  any  particular  drug  with  the  properties  ascribed  to  it  by  the  patient.
His  prescription  very  often  consisted  of  nothing  but  coloured  water."
Dr.  Wilks  describes  a  "  sixpenny  doctor,"  at  a  cheap  dispensary,  who  saw
'On  an  average  70  patients  during  one  evening,  and  whose  almost  universal
medicine  was  a  mixture  composed  of  sulphate  of  magnesia,  burnt  sugar  and
infusion  of  quassia,  and  who  said,  "  Always  give  medicines  wliich  produce
.ajjpreciable  effects  ;  then  also  the  mixture  must  taste  like  medicine,  and  if
it  have  a  bad  smell,  the  patient  will  be  better  satisfied."  Dr.  Wilks  objects
"  to  the  attempt  to  treat  cases  of  disease  on  principle,  when  we  possess  no
principles  ;  we  do  not  know  sufficiently  the  action  of  drugs  to  do  this,  and
Tve  know  less  of  the  meaning  or  significance  of  symptoms  which  we  treat.'
With  change  of  the  pathological  views  of  disease,  he  says,  the  whole  method
■of  its  treatment  is  changed  again  and  again,  and  further  chemical  knowledge
frequently  shows  that  the  drugs  we  employ  do  not  possess  the  (qualities  we


160


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramtvell.


(Supplement.


have  been  in  the  habit  of  attributing  to  them.  "Medicine  began  as  a
superstition,  covered  and  surmounted  hy  fancies  and  crude  theories.  By
getting  rid  of  these,  advance  has  been  made  ;  but  tlie  fact  is  not  yet;,
sufficiently  realised  that  many  of  the  old  fancies  still  remain  in  the
profession."

Dr.  Hack  Tuke,  in  speaking  of  Sir  Andrew  Clark,  said,  '•  His  favourite
drugs  were  Bicarbonate  of  Potash  and  a  vegetable  bitter ;  but  neither  drugs
nor  diet  formed  the  central  factors  of  liis  treatment,  or  explained  his
success.  'Suggestion'  lay  at  the  root  of  it  all.  The  term,  however,  is
too  mild,  unless  understood  in  the  teclniical  sense  in  wliich  it  has  been
employed  in  recent  times.  In  short.  Sir  Andrew  out-Bernlieimed  Bern-
heiiu  ;  he  was,  in  a  word,  the  most  successful  hypnotist  of  his  day."

In  reference  to  the  many  important  differences  between  the  theories  of
Braid  and  those  just  referred  to,  my  own  observations,  I  may  state,  accord
on  most  points  with  those  of  the  earlier  investigator.  A  careful  study  of
all  Braid's  writings  has  led  me  to  tlie  conclusion  that,  while  much  has
been  lost  by  their  neglect,  little  or  no  advance  has  been  made  upon
them  until  quite  recent  times.  Where  progress  has  been  made,  and
made  alone,  it  has  been  in  the  development  of  the  views  already  expressed
by  Braid  as  regai'ds  tlie  individuality,  in  oj^position  to  the  automatism,  of
the  hypnotised  subject,  and  in  a  clearer  estimate  of  what  he  recognised  as.
double-consciousness.  Above  everything,  it  is  worthy  of  note  how  Braid  at>
once,  by  his  early  experiments,  exploded  the  fallacies  of  the  mesmerists,
which,  till  tlien,  had  flourished  successfully,  despite  the  abusive  and
absolutely  unscientific  attacks  of  the  combined  medical  press.  In  the  writings
of  Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  more  especially  in  "The  Subliminal  Conscious-
ness," are  to  be  found  the  ablest  and  clearest  expression  of  these  later-
views.  In  reference  to  hypnotism,  he  justly  says,  "It  is  something  more
and  other  than  the  mere  production  of  trance  that  we  have  to  deal  with —
something  more  and  other  than  the  mere  plienomena  of  fascination^
mimicry,  rigidity,  which  are  to  be  seen  on  every  itinei-ant  mesmeriser's-
platform.  Discussions  on  cerebral  circulation,  on  inhibition  and  dynamo-
genesis,  are  useful  and  needful  on  the  outskirts  of  the  problem  ;  they  may
give  precision  to  our  conception  of  the  condition  in  whicli  the  deeper
phenomena  begin  ;  but  they  cannot  explain  the  novel  powers  to  which  thos&
phenomena  introduce  us, — the  increased,  the  penetrating  control  of  the  brain
over  the  organism."

How  is  it  that  Braid's  later  theories  have  been  almost  entirely  ignored  ?
The  answer  is  a  difficult  one.  It  is  true  that  all  his  works  have  long  been
out  of  print  in  this  country,  and  are  not  to  be  found  in  their  entirety,  even
in  the  British  Museum.  On  the  other  hand,  his  conclusions  were  largely
adopted  by  the  scientists  of  his  day.  In  illustration  of  tliis,  it  is  only-
necessary  to  refer  to  the  works  of  the  late  Drs.  Carjjenter  and  John  Hughes.
Bennett.  The  former  gives  a  full  exposition  of  Braid's  views  hi  liis
"Principles  of  Mental  Physiology,"  Sixth  Edition,  London,  1881,.
"  Mesmerism,  Spiritualism,  etc.,"  and  elsewhere.  The  following  pas.sage,.
from  an  article  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  September,  1853,  shows  how
thoroughly  Dr.  Carpentei-  understood  the  importance  attached  by  Braid  to-
suggestion. "The  clue  to  the  marvel  [mesmerism]  was  soon  found  by  Mr.


Supplement.] James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.  161


Braid,  in  the  concentrated  operation  of  the  j^rincij^le  of  suggedion ;  [the
italics  are  Dr.  Carpenter's]  .  .  .  and  under  the  guidance  of  this  idea,
he  has  subsequently  followed  up  the  investigation  with  great  intelligence,
making  no  mystery  of  his  proceedings,  but  courting  investigation  in  every
possible  way."  Professor  Bennett,  in  his  "Textbook  of  Physiology,"
reproduced  the  explanation  of  "  Braidism,"  both  from  the  physiological  and
psychological  side,  first  given  by  him  in  1851.  This  formed  a  part  of  the
lecture  on  hypnotism  he  gave  annually  to  his  students,  in  which  he  urged
them  to  investigate  a  subject  destined  to  revolutionise  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine.

The  only  recent  English  writer,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  refers  to  Braid's
later  works,  is  C.  W.  Sutton  in  the  "Dictionary  of  National  Biography,"
where  he  states  that  some  of  them  have  been  translated  into  French  and
German.  Despite  Preyer's  translations.  Braid's  advanced  theories  seem  to
be  little  recognised  in  Germany  and,  as  far  as  I  have  observed,  Moll  alone
refers  to  them,  and  in  the  Zeitschrift  filr  Hgpnotismns,  for  December,
1892,  he  warmly  acknowledges  Germany's  indebtedness  to  Preyer  for  his
translations  and  states  that  the  later  works  are  a  distinct  advance  upon
"  Neurypnology,"  especially  in  their  psychological  explanation  of  hypnotic
phenomena.  At  the  same  time,  he  evidently  does  not  realise  how  entirely
Braid  had  forestalled  the  "  Suggestion  "  theory  of  the  Nancy  School.  He
admits,  however,  tliat  "  notwithstanding  that  many  researchers  have  referred
to  and  valued  Braid's  writings,  the  modern  works  are  only  in  the  smallest
degree  a  continuation  of  his."

In  France,  Braid's  later  theories  are  equally  ignored,  which  is  all  the
more  surprising  when  one  remembers  that  a  translation  of  his  last  MS.  was
published  in  1883  as  a  sujoplement  to  "Neurypnology."  This  gives  many
of  his  advanced  views,  and  clearly  states  his  reasons  for  substituting  them
for  his  earlier  ones  and  for  changing  the  term  hyjinotism  into  that  of
monoideism.  It  also  contains  numerous  references  to  verbal  suggestion.
Bernheim  refers  to  it,  but  has  evidently  entirely  failed  to  grasp  its  importance,,
and  merely  says  that  he  agrees  with  Brown-Sequard  that  Braid  did  not  guard
sufficiently  against  suggestion  and  that  "  it  seems  that  at  the  end  of  his  life,
Braid  felt  some  doubt  about  his  experiments  relative  to  phreno-hypnotism.
In  his  last  memoir,  a  remarkable  resume  of  his  work,  addressed  to  the
Academy  of  Science  in  1860,  at  the  time  of  the  experiments  of  Azam  and
Broca,  he  passes  by  his  phreno-hypnotic  researches  in  silence."  Bernheim
also  mentions  Braid's  work,  ' '  The  Power  of  the  Mind  over  the  Body, "  but
only  in  connection  with  Gi'imes'  "electro-biological  researches."

While  I  have  tried  to  show,  both  as  a  point  of  historical  interest  and  irt
justice  to  Braid,  how  he  had  anticijjated  many  of  the  most  important
observations  of  the  School  of  Nancy,  I  do  not  wish  to  undervalue  th&
services  of  that  School,  and  more  especially  those  of  its  founder.  Braid's,
researches  were  undoubtedly  the  exciting  cause  of  the  hypnotic  revival  irt
France,  but  at  that  time  little  or  nothing  was  known  of  any  of  his  works,
except  "  Neurypnology,"  and  his  last  MS.  was  not  published  in  France  until
1883.  To  Liebeault  we  owe  practically  the  entire  development  of  modern
hypnotism. Independently  he  arrived  at  the  conclusion  tliat  the  mental

M


162


Br.  J.  Milne  Braouivell.


[Supplement.


condition  was  the  iniportant  one  in  hypnosis,  and  suggestion  the  main  factor
in  producing  its  phenomena,  and  successfully  combated  the  errors  of  the
Salpetriere  School.  Another  point  in  reference  to  their  career  is  worthy  of
note.  Braid's  views  at  once  brought  him  fame.  His  books  sold  rapidly,
the  demand  for  them  exceeding  his  power  of  supply.  The  medical  journals
were  open  to  him,  to  an  extent  which  may  well  excite  envy  in  those
interested  in  the  subject  at  the  present  day.  When  Liebeault  published  his
classical  work,  "  Du  Sommeil  et  des  Etats  analogues,"  six  copies  alone  were
sold.  His  statements  only  found  sceptics,  his  methods  of  treatment  were
rejected  without  examination,  and  he  was  laughed  at  and  despised  by  all.
For  many  years  he  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  poor,  and  long  refused  to
accept  a  fee,  lest  he  should  be  regarded  as  attempting  to  make  money  by  un-
recognised methods.  Even  in  his  later  days,  fortune  never  came  to  him,  and
his  services— services,  which  he  himself,  with  true  modesty,  described  as  the
contribution  of  a  single  brick  to  the  edifice  many  were  trying  to  build — only
began  to  be  appreciated  when  old  age  compelled  him  to  retire  from  active
work.  Though  his  researches  have  been  recognised,  it  is  certain  that  they
have  not  been  estimated  at  their  true  value,  and  that  members  of  a  younger
generation  have  reaped  the  reward  which  his  devotion  of  a  lifetime  failed  to
obtain.

References.

In  the  Medical  Times  : —

1.  "The  New  Theory  of  Animal  Magnetism."  Vol.  V.,  1841-42,  p.  175.
Editorial  account  of  a  lecture  given  by  Mr.  Duncan,  on  Animal  Magnetism,
at  the  Hanover  Square  Rooms,  on  December  31st,  1841.  The  lecturer,
who  had  adopted  Braid's  views,  explained  them.

2.  "Animal Magnetism."  Vol.  V.,  1841-42,  p.  283.  Editorial  account
of  two  lectures  by  Braid,  one  on  March  1st,  1842,  at  Hanover  Square,  and
the  other  next  day  at  the  London  Tavern.

3.  "On  Mr.  Braid's  Experiments."  By  Dr.  Herbert  Mayo.  Vol.  VI.,
1842,  p.  11.

4.  "Mesmerism."  Vol.  VI.,  1842,  p.  47.  Editorial  account  of  two
lectures  delivered  by  Braid.

o.  "Hypnotism,  or  Mr.  Braid's  Mesmerism."  Vol.  X.,  1844,  p.  98.
Letter  to  Editor  from  "  S.,"  in  praise  of  Braid's  researches  and  of  the  open-
mindedness  of  the  Medical  Times.

6.  " Conversazione  on  Hypnotism."  Vol.  X.,  1844,  p.  137.  Editorial
account  of  the  Conversazione  held  by  James  Braid,  at  the  Royal  Manchester
Institution,  on  April  22nd,  1844,  by  invitation  of  the  Committee.

7.  "Jenny  Lind  and  Hypnotism."  Vol.  XVI.,  1847,  p.  602.  An
interesting  account  of  Braid's  experiments  to  show  the  i^ower  of  somnambu-
lists in  imitating  languages  and  song.

8.  "Operations  under  Hypnotism  in  Paris."  Vol.  XIX.,  1859,  p.  646.
Account  of  Azam,  with  reference  to  Braid.

9.  "Mr.  Braid  of  Manchester."  Vol.  I.,  1860  [new  series],  p.  355.
Obituai-y  notice.


Supplement.] James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Wintings.


163


10.  "The  late  Mr.  Braid."  Vol.  I.,  1860  [new  series],  p.  396.  Letter
to  Editor  from  A.  W.  Close,  F.R.C.S.,  exposing  the  absurdity  of  certain
statements  in  the  above  account  of  Mr.  Braid's  death.

In  the  Lancet:  —

11.  "Hypnotism  in  Paris."  Vol.  II.,  1859,  p.  650.  Article  referring
to  Azam,  ^''elpeau,  Broca,  etc.,  and  stating  that  they  had  copied  the  methods
of  Braid  and  Esdaile.

12.  '■  Sudden  Death  of  Mr.  James  Braid,  Surgeon,  of  Manchester."
Vol.  I.,  1860,  p.  335.

In  the  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal : —

13.  Critical  article  on  Braid's  ' '  Observations  on  Trance  or  Human
Hybernation." Vol.  LXXIV.,  1850,  p.  421.

14.  "  Abstract  of  a  Lecture  on  Electro-Biology, "  delivered  at  the  Royal
Institution,  Manchester,  on  March  26th,  1851,  by  James  Braid.  Vol.
LXXVL,  1851,  p.  239.

15.  "Death  of  Mr.  James  Braid,  Surgeon,  of  Manchester."  Vol.  V.,
1859-60,  p.  1068.

16.  "Case  of  Contracted  Foot,  with  severe  pain,  cured  by  Mesmerism."
The  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  1845-46,  p.  339.  Article  by  Elliotson,  referring  to
Braid.

17.  ' '  Researches  in  Magnetism,  Electricity,  Heat,  Light,  Crystallisation,
and  Chemical  Attraction  in  their  Relations  to  Vital  Force."  By  Karl,  Baron
von  Reichenbach,  Ph.D.  Translated  by  William  Gregory,  M.D.,  London,
1850.

18.  TJie  British  and  Foreign  Medico-CIiirurgical  Bevieiv,  Vol.  VIII.,
July  to  October,  ]851,  Article  V.,  p.  378.  An  article  on  Mesmerism,
Magnetism,  and  Hypnotism,  with  favourable  reference  to  Braid  and  his
views.

19.  "Electro-Biology  and  Mesmerism,"  The  Quarterly  Eevieiv,  Vol.
XCIIL,  1853.  Article  VI.,  p.  501.  This  article,  which  is  unsigned,  is
believed  to  be  by  Dr.  Carpenter,  and  gives  an  interesting  account  of  Braid's
work  and  theories.

20.  Death  of  Mr.  Braid,  Surgeon.  The  MoMchester  Courier,  Saturday,
March  31st,  1860.  This  article  gives  an  account  of  Braid's  life  and
writings.

21.  "Observations  on  Animal  Magnetism."  By  M.  Andral.  London
Medical  Gazette,  Vol.  II.,  1832-33,  p.  792.

22.  "  Effects  of  Mental  Attention  on  Bodily  Organs."  Medical  Notes  and
Beflections. By  Heiuy  Holland,  M.D.,  London,  1839,  p.  64.

23.  "Chapters  on  Mental  Physiology."  By  Sir  H.  Holland,  Bart.
Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged,  London,  1858.

24.  "The  Elements  of  Materia  Medica  and  Therapeutics."  By  Jonathan
Pereira,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  andL.S.  Second  Edition,  enlarged  and  improved.
Vol.  11. London,  1842,  p.  1097.

M  2


164


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


25.  "  Electrical  Psychology  ;  or  the  electrical  philosophy  of  mental  impres-
sions, including  <a  new  philosophy  of  sleep  and  of  consciousness,"  from  the
works  of  the  Rev.  John  Bovee  Dods  and  Prof.  J.  S.  Grimes.  Revised  and
edited  by  H.  G.  Darling,  etc. London,  Glasgow,  printed  1851.

26.  "Spirit  Manifestations  examined  and  explained;  Judge  Edwards
refuted  ;  or  an  exposition  of  the  involuntary  powers  and  instincts  of  the
human  mind." By  J.  B.  Dods,  New  York,  1854.

27.  "  The  Philosojjhy  of  Mesmerism  and  Electrical  Psychology  .
comprised  in  two  coui'ses  of  lectures."  By  J.  B.  Dods. Edited  by  J.  Burns.
London,  1876.

28.  "  Monoideism." Text-hooh  of  Physiology, etc. By  John  Hughes
Bennett,  M.D.,  etc.,  1871,  part  II.,  pages  357  to  361.

29.  "Mesmerism,  Spiritualism,  etc." By  William  B.  Carpenter,  M.D. ,
etc.,  1877.

.30.  "  Principles  of  Mental  Physiology,  etc."  By  William  B.  Carpenter,
M.D.,  etc.,  Sixth  Edition,  1881.  Both  these  works  contain  much  reference
to  Braid's  experiments  and  theories.

31.  "Hypnotism."  By  G.  J.  Romanes.  Nineteenth  Century,  ^Q^temhQr,
1880,  p.  474.

32.  "Braid,  James."  By  C.  W.  Sutton.  Dictionary  of  National
Biography. Vol.  VI.,  p.  198. London,  1886.

33.  "  Hypnotism  or  Animal  Magnetism."  By  Rudolph  Heidenhain,
M.D.  Translated  from  the  Fourth  German  Edition  by  L.  C.  Wooldridge,
M.D.,  D.Sc.  With  a  Preface  by  G.  J.  Romanes,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  Second
Edition,  London,  1888.

34.  ' '  Suggestive  Therapeutics  ;  A  Treatise  on  the  Nature  and  Uses  of
Hypnotism."  By  H.  Bernheim,  M.D.  Translated  from  the  Second  and
Revised  Edition  hy  Christian  A.  Herter,  M.D.  Second  Edition.  Edinburgh
and  London,  1890.

35.  "  Braidism."  By  H.  Charlton  Bastian.  "  A  Dictionary  of  Medicine."
Edited  by  Richard  Quain,  M.D.  London,  1882.  Vol.  I.,  p.  131.
"  Mesmerism." By  H.  Charlton  Bastian,  1882. Vol.  II.,  p.  972.

36.  "  Stray  Thoughts  on  some  Medical  Subjects."  By  Samuel  Wilks,
M.D.,  F.R.S. The  Lancet,  November  24th,  1894.

37.  "Extractions  under  Hypnotism."  By  J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.,  and
W.  Arthur  Turner,  L.D.S.  The  Journal  of  the  British  Dental  Association.
March,  1890,  p.  153.

38.  "  The  Stages  of  Hyjjnotism."  By  Edmund  Gurney.  Proceedings  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research. Vol.  II.,  1884,  j).  61.

39.  "  L'Hypothese  du  Magnetisme  Animal."  Proceedings  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research. Vol.  XL,  December,  1895,  p.  599.

40.  "  L'Hypothese  du  Magnetisme  Animal."  Journal  of  tite  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  March,  1896,  p.  221.


Supplement.] Jccmes  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings.


165


41.  "Hypnotism  in  the  Hysterical."  By  J.  M,  Charcot  and  Gilles  de
la  Tourette.  A  Dictionanj  of  Pd>icholo(jical  Medicine.  Edited  by  D.
Hack  Tuke,  M.D.,  1892. Vol.  I.,  p.  606.

42.  "  Some  Physiological  Experiments  with  Magnets  at  the  Edison
Laboratory."  By  Frederick  Peterson,  M.D.,  and  A.  E.  Kennelly,  Chief
Electrician,  Edison  Laboratory,  Vice-President  American  Institute  of  Elec-
trical Engineers.  Read  before  the  Section  in  Neurology  of  tlie  New  York
Academy  of  Medicine,  October  14,  1892.

43.  "The  Subliminal  Consciousness."  By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  Proceedings
of  the  Society  fo)-  Psychical  Besearch. Vol.  VII.,  February,  1892,  p.  298.

44.  "  On  Criminal  Suggestion."  By  Professor  J.  Delboeuf.  TheMonist,
April,  1892,  p.  363.

45.  "  Human  Personality  in  the  Light  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion."  By  F.
W.  H.  Myers.  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psych  iced  Research. Vol.  IV.,

1887,  p.  1.

46.  "Journal  du  Magnetisme."  Hedige  par  une  Societc^  de  Magn^tiseurs
et  de  M^decins.  Sous  la  direction  de  M.  le  Baron  du  Potet.  Vol.  IV.,  1847,
p.  209  ;  Vol.  VIII.,  1849,  p.  66  ;  Vol.  X.,  1851,  p.  510;  Vol.  XIV.,  1855,'
p.  400  ;  Vol.  XIX.,  1860,  pp.  62,  105.  Du  Potet  refers  to  Braid's  methods
and  theories,  and  also  gives  an  account  of  a  somnambule  in  Paris  who  could
imitate  languages  and  song.

47.  "  Note  sur  le  sommeil  nerveux  ou  hypnotisme."  Par  le  Dr.  Azamde
Bordeaux,  Archives  generates  de  medecine,  cinquieme  s^rie.  Tome  XV.,  p.  5.
Paris,  1860.

48.  "  Memoirs  d'un  Magn(^tiseur."  Par  Ch.  Lafontaine.  Tome  Premier.
Paris,  1860,  pp.  311-314.

49.  "  Neurypnologie  ;  Traite  du  sommeil  nerveux  ou  hypnotisme. "  Par
James  Braid.  Traduit  de  I'anglais  par  le  Dr.  Jules  Simon.  Avec  Preface
de  C.  E.  Brown-Sequard. Paris,  1883.

50.  "  De  la  suggestion  et  du  somnambulisme  dans  leurs  rapports  avec  la
jurisprudence  et  la  medecine  legale. "  Par  Jules  Liegeois,  Professeur  a  la
Faculte  de  Droit  de  Nancy. Paris,  1889.

51.  "  Mysteres  des  sciences  occultes. "  Par  un  Initie.  Paris  [no  date].
[A  short  account  of  Braid  is  given,  pp.  296-300,  and  at  p.  289  is  to  found
the  only  portrait  of  Braid  with  which  I  am  acquainted.]  Facsimile  d'une
lithographic  d'apres  nature,  imprimee  a  Liverpool  en  1854.

52.  "  Cours  theorique  et  pratique  du  Braidisme  ou  hypnotisme  nerveux."
Par  M.  le  Dr.  Phillips  [Durand  de  Gros]  1860.

53.  "Suggestions  Criminelles  Hypnotiques ;  Arguments  et  faits  a
I'appui."  Par  M.  le  Dr.  Liebeault.  Revue  de  V Hypnotisme,  Avril,  1895,  p.  289.

54.  "  De  la  suggestion  envisagde  au  point  de  vue  pedagogique."  Par  le
Dr.  Bernheim. P>,emie  de  V Hypnotisme. Vol.  I.,  1887,  p.  129.

55.  "  Ephemerides  de  I'Hypnotisme."  This  contains  an  account  of  Braid
without  reference  to  his  later  works. Revue  de  V Hypnotisme. Vol.  II.,

1888,  p.  276.


166  F. W.  H.  Myers.  [Supplement.

56.  "  Le  Sommeil  provoque  et  les  Etats  analogues."  Par  le  Dr.  A.  A.
Lii^beault. Paris,  1889.

57.  "Suggestions  Hypnotiques  Crivninelles. "  Lettre  au  Docteur  Lie-
beault,  par  M.  le  Dr.  Durand  [de  Gros],  p.  8.  Revue  de  1' Hypnotismc,
Juillefc,  1895.

58.  "  L'Hypnose  et  les  Suggestions  criminelles."  Par  J.  Delboeuf.
Revve  de  VHijp'notisnie. F^vrier,  1895,  p.  225. Mars,  1895,  p.  2(j0.

59.  "  Die  Etitdeckung  des  Hypnotisinus."  Von  W.  Preyer.  Berlin,  1881.

60.  "Der  Hypnotismus."  Ausgewahlte  Schriften  von  J.  Braid.  Deutsch
herausgegeben  von  W.  Preyer. Berlin,  1882.

61.  " Literaturbericht,"  von  Dr.  med.  Albert  Moll  in  Berlin.  Zeitschrift
fur  Hypnotismus,  December,  1892,  p.  107.

62.  "Die  Bedeutung  narcotischer  Mittel  fiir  den  Hypnotismus,  mit
besonderer  Beriicksichtigung  des  indischen  Hanfes."  Von  Dr.  Frh.  von
Schrenck-Notzing.  Schriften  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  pstjclwlogische  Forschimg^
Heft  1. Leipzig,  1891.


GLOSSARY  OF  TERMS  USED  IN  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.

By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


It  has  been  often  explained  in  these  Proceedings  that  the  success  or
otherwise  of  our  investigations  must  necessarily  def)end  largely  upon  the
amount  of  first-hand  testimony  which  we  receive  from  voluntary  correspon-
dents. These  correspondents  are  not  all  of  them  equally  familiar  with
philosophical  and  medical  terms  ;  nor  are  they  all  of  them  of  English-
speaking  nationality.  It  is  important,  nevertheless,  tliat  they  should  readily
and  exactly  understand  the  drift  of  our  inquiries  ;  and  we  have  been
repeatedly  asked  to  furnish  a  Glossary  of  the  unfamiliar  words  which  those
inquiries  oblige  us  to  use.  I  have  here  attemjDted  to  comply  with  that
request,  and  have  explained  some  words  and  phrases  which  fall  under  three
main  heads.

1.  Words  in  common  philosophical  or  medical  use,  to  which  no  new
shade  of  meaning  is  given  in  this  inquiry,  e.g.  ecmnesia.  Introducing  a
few  of  these  words  for  the  ordinary  reader's  convenience,  I  have  generally
taken  the  definition  from  Hack  Tuke's  Dictionary  of  Fsycliological  Medicine
(London  :  Churchill,  1892),  which  is  the  most  authoritative — almost  the  only
— English  work  of  its  kind.

2.  Words  or  phrases  in  themselves  not  new,  but  used  in  these  studies
with  some  special  significance  ; — as  for  instance  "  systematised  aniesthesia,"
"  negative  hallucination."  These  two  phrases  are  constantly  used  by  French
writers  on  hypnotism  ;  but  mere  familiarity  with  the  words  themselves  would
not  explain  their  meaning  in  that  context  to  a  reader  fresh  to  hypnotic
discussions.

3.  A  few  words,  distinguished  by  an  asterisk,  for  which  I  am  myself
responsible. I  must  leave  it  to  my  readers  to  judge  how  far  these  words  are


Supplement.]  Glossavy  of  Tevms  used  in  Psychical  Research.  167


likely  to  be  useful.  But  I  would  suggest  that  when  a  subject  so  novel  as
ours  is  made  the  subject  of  discussion  in  many  countries,  there  is  a
convenience  in  using  words  of  Greek  or  Latin  derivation,  which  can  be
adapted  to  all  languages,  and  can  be  made  to  bear  a  clearly  defined
signification.

Glossary.

Ahoulia.—  Loss  of  power  of  willing.  I  have  used  the  word  hyperboulia  to
express  that  increased  power  over  the  organism,  resembling  the  power  which
we  call  uhU  when  it  is  exercised  over  the  voluntary  muscles,  which  is  seen
in  the  bodily  changes  effected  by  self-suggestion.

After-image. — The  picture  seen  as  though  in  the  eye  itself  after  looking
at  a  bright  object.  It  is  called  positive  when  it  reproduces,  negative  when  it
reverses  the  true  illumination  or  colours  of  the  actual  object.  After-images
are  regarded  as  retinal  or  entoptic,  belonging  to  the  interior  of  the  eye.
After-images  must  be  distinguished  from  memory-images,  which  may  appear
spontaneously,  or  may  be  summoned  by  an  effort  of  will,  long  after  the
original  sight  of  the  object.

Agent. — The  person  on  whose  condition  a  telepathic  imjjression  seems  to
be  dependent  ;  who  seems  to  initiate  the  telepathic  transmission.

Alternation  of  personality. — See  Disintegration  of  personality.

Ancesthesia,  or  the  loss  of  sensation  generally,  must  be  distinguished
from  analgesia,  or  the  loss  of  the  sense  of  pain  alone.  Many  hypnotic
subjects  are  analgesic  but  not  anfesthetic.  Sustematisecl  anastkesia  or
negativehalhicinatiov,  signifies  the  condition  of  an  entranced  subject  who  has
been  told  (for  instance)  that  Mr.  A.  is  not  in  the  room,  while  he  is  in  reality
present.  The  subject  may  thus  be  said  to  liave  a  negative  hallucination,  or
to  have  been  deprived  of  a  certain  group  or  system  of  perceptions,  in  that
he  fails  to  see  Mr.  A.  Other  words  descrijDtive  of  the  general  sensory  con-
dition are  dijstesthesia,  impaired  or  painful  sensation,  panesthesia,  erroneous
or  morbid  sensation,  hypercesthesia,  unusually  keen  sensation,  whicli  may  or
may  not  be  a  morbid  symptom.  Hyperaesthesia  may  be  peripheral,  when  it
afiFects  nerve-endings  near  the  surface  of  the  body,  or  central,  when  the
excessive  sensitiveness  belongs  to  the  central  sensorinm ; — such  parts,
namely,  of  the  brain  as  are  concerned  in  receiving  or  generating  sensory
images  and  impressions.  Hemi-aiicesthesia  means  anassthesia  of  half  the
body,  the  median  line  (down  the  middle  of  the  body)  separating  normal
sensation  from  absence  of  sensation.  Anfesthetic  zones  or  patches  (formerly
deemed  characteristic  of  witches)  are  common  in  hysteria.  Caneesthesia
means  that  consensus  or  agreement  of  many  organic  sensations  which  is  a
fundamental  element  in  our  conception  of  personal  identity.  Finally  I  have
suggested  the  word  *paniesthesia  to  express  the  undifl'erentiated  sensory
capacity  of  the  supposed  primal  germ.

Aphasia. — Incapacity  of  coherent  utterance,  not  caused  by  structural
impairment  of  the  vocal  organs,  but  by  lesion  of  the  cerebral  centres  for
speech.  Distinguished  from  congenital  or  acquired  aphonia,  due  to  paralysis
or  imperfect  ajiproximation  of  the  vocal  cords,  and  also  from  hysterical
mntism,  when  the  patient  is  obstinately  and  involuntarily  silent,  although  the
vocal  organs  are  uninjured  and  the  cerebral  centres  of  speech  are  only


168


F.  TF.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


functionally  affected,  with  no  visible  lesion.  All  the  four  forms  of  verbalisa-
tion are  subject  to  sejiarate  disorders  of  the  type  of  ajjliasia.  Lack  of  power
to  write  words  is  called  agraphia  or  agraphy  ;  lack  of  power  to  understand
words  written,  alexia  or  word-blindness  ;  lack  of  power  to  understand  words
uttered,  word-deafness.  In  each  case  the  trouble  may  lie  in  the  brain  and  not
in  the  organ  of  sense  or  other  organs.  For  instance,  a  man's  sight  even  for
jjrinted  musical  notes  may  be  unimjjaired,  while  yet  he  is  unable  to  under-
stand printed  words.

Attaque  de  sommeil. — Tliis  French  term  is  more  correct  than  the  word
"  trance,"  to  express  those  sjjontaneous  lapses  into  prolonged  and  profound
sleep  which  sometimes  occur  in  hysterical  subjects.

Automatism. — The  words  nntomatisrn  and  automatic  are  used  in  some-
what different  senses  by  physiologists  and  psychologists.  Thus  Professor
Foster  says,  (Foster's  Physiology,  5th  Edition,  p.  920)  "We  speak  of  an
action  of  an  organ  or  of  a  living  body  as  being  spontaneous  or  automatic
when  it  aj^pears  to  be  not  immediately  due  to  any  changes  in  the  circum-
stances in  which  the  organ  or  body  is  placed,  but  to  be  the  result  of  changes
arising  in  the  organ  or  body  itself  and  determined  by  causes  other  than  the
influences  of  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.  The  most  striking  automatic
actions  of  the  living  body  [are]  those  which  we  attribute  to  the  working  of
the  will  and  wliich  we  call  voluntary  or  volitional."  That  is  to  say,  to  the
physiologist  an  action  is  "self-moved"  when  it  is  determined,  not  by  the
environment,  but  by  tlie  organism  itself.  Tlie  word  thus  becomes  hardly
more  than  a  synonym  for  spontaneous.  The  psychologist,  on  the  other  hand,
regards  an  action  as  "self-moved"  when  it  is  determined  in  an  organism
ajDart  from  the  central  will  or  control  of  that  oi'ganism.  Thus  when  an  act
at  first  needing  voluntary  guidance,  by  practice  comes  to  need  such  guidance
no  longer,  it  is  called  "  secondarily  automatic."  I  have  used  the  word  in  a
wider  sense,  as  exjjressing  such  images  as  arise,  as  well  as  such  movements
as  are  made,  without  the  initiation,  and  generally  without  the  concurrence,  of
conscious  thought  and  will.  Sensory  automatism  will  thus  include  visual  and
auditory  hallucinations  ;  motor  automatism  will  include  messages  written
without  intention  (automatic  script)  or  words  uttered  without  intention  (as  in
"  speaking  with  tongues,"  trance-utterances,  etc.).  I  ascribe  these  jjrocesses
to  the  action  of  submerged  or  subliminal  elements  in  the  man's  being.  Such
phrases  as  "reflex  cerebral  action,"  or  "unconscious  cerebration,"  give
therefore,  in  my  view,  a  very  imjDerfect  conception  of  the  facts.

Catalepsy.  — "  An  intermittent  neurosis,  characterised  by  the  patient's
inability  to  change  the  position  of  a  limb,  while  another  person  can  place  the
muscles  in  a  state  of  flexion  or  contraction  as  he  will." — Tuke's  Diet.
Catalepsy  may  also  be  induced  as  a  stage  of  hypnotism  ;  although  Charcot's
view  which  erected  catalepsy,  lethargy,  somnambulism  (their  relative  positions
sometimes  varied)  into  three  typical  or  necessary  stages  in  a  hypnotic
trance  is  now  connnonly  considered  to  have  been  a  too  hasty  generalisation
from  the  habits — largely  imitative — of  the  group  of  hypnotic  patients  at  the
Salj^etriere,  (a  hospital  in  Paris.)

Census  of  ludlucinations. — An  inquiry  undertaken  to  determine  the
frequency  of  hallucinations  in  sane  and  healthy  persons  ;  described  in
S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  X.


Supplement.]  Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Psychical  Research.  169


Centre  of  consciousness. — The  place  where  a  percipient  imagines  himself  to
loe.  The  point  from  which  he  seems  to  himself  to  be  surveying  some
phantasmal  scene.

Clcdrvoyance  (Luciclite). — The  faculty  or  act  of  perceiving,  as  though
visually,  with  some  coincidental  truth,  some  distant  scene,  used  sometimes,
but  hardly  properly,  for  transcendental  vision,  or  the  perception  of  beings
regarded  as  on  another  plane  of  existence.  Vlairaudience  is  generally  used
of  the  sensation  of  hearing  an  internal  (but  in  some  way  veridical)  voice.
I  have  preferred  to  use  the  term  *telcesthesia  for  distant  perception.  For
Ihe  faculty  has  seldom  any  close  analogy  with  an  extension  of  sight ;  the
perception  of  distant  scenes  being  often  more  or  less  symbolical  and  in  other
ways  out  of  accord  with  what  actual  sight  would  show  in  the  locality  of  the
vision.  On  the  other  hand,  telcesthesia  merges  into  telepathy,  since  we  cannot
say  how  far  the  perception  of  a  distant  scene  may  in  essential  be  the  per-
ception of  the  content  of  a  distant  mind.

Cohiciderdal. — This  word  is  used  when  there  is  some  degree  of  coincidence
in  time  of  occurrence  between  a  supernormal  incident  and  an  event  at  a
distance,  which  makes  it  seem  probable  that  some  causal  connection  exists
Toetween  the  two.  An  apparition,  for  instance,  seen  at  or  about  the
time  when  the  person  whose  phantasm  is  seen  dies,  is  a  coincidental
apparition.

Collective. — Applied  to  cases  where  several  persons  together  perceive  a
hallucination  or  phantasm.

Control. — This  word  is  used  of  the  intelligence  which  purports  to
communicate  niessages  which  are  written  or  uttered  by  the  antomatist,
aensitive,  or  medium.  The  word  is  used  for  convenience'  sake,  but  should  not
imply  that  the  source  of  the  messages  need  be  other  than  the  automatist's
own  subliminal  intelligence.

*Cosmopathic. — Open  to  the  access  of  supernormal  knowledge  or  emotion,
apparently  from  the  transcendental  world,  but  whose  precise  source  we  have
no  means  of  defining.

Crystal-gazing. — The  act  of  looking  into  a  crystal,  glass  ball,  or  other
speculum,  or  reflecting  surface,  with  the  object  of  inducing  hallucinatory
pictures.  The  person  doing  this  is  called  a  seer  or  scryer.  The  pictures  of
course  exist  in  the  mind  and  not  in  the  crystal. See  Shell-hearing.

Delusion  and  Delusive. — Applied  generally  to  all  cases  whether  of  halluci-
nation or  illusion,  when  there  is  no  corresponding  reality  whatever  ; — i.e.,
when  the  case  is  not  coincidental  or  in  any  other  way  veridical,

*Dextro-cerebral  (opposed  to  *Sinistro-cerebral) ;  of  left-handed  persons,
as  employing  preferentially  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain.

Dimorphism. — In  crystals,  the  property  of  assuming  two  incompatible
forms  ;  in  plants  and  animals,  difference  of  form  between  members  of
the  same  species.  Used  of  a  condition  of  alternating  personalities  ;  a
kind  of  psychical  dimorphism  in  which  memory,  character,  faculty,  etc.,
present  themselves  at  different  times  in  diiferent  forms  in  the  same  person.
Similarly,  polymorphism  is  the  property  of  assuming  many  forms.

Discarnate. — Disembodied,  opposed  to  incarnate.  Used  of  that  part  of
man  which  still  subsists  after  bodily  death.


170


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplements


Disintecjrationof  jKrsonality. — Used  of  any  condition  where  the  sense  of
personality  is  not  unitary  and  continuous  ;  especially  when  secondary  and
transitory  personalities  intervene  ;  as  for  instance  when  a  hysterical  subject
calls  herself  at  one  time  Rose,  at  another  Adrienne,  etc.,  with  separate
chains  of  memory  for  each  condition.

Dissolntive. — Opposed  to  Evolutive,  of  changes  which  tend  not  towards''
progress  but  towards  decay.

D]inamogenij. — The  increase  of  nervous  energy  by  appropriate  stimuli  5
often  opposed  to  inhibition.

JEcmnesia. — A  gap  in  memory:  "a  form  of  amnesia  [forgetf ulness]  in
which  there  is  a  normal  memory  of  occurrences  prior  to  a  given  date,  with
loss  of  memory  of  what  hapijened  for  a  certain  time  after  that  date." — ■
Tuke's  Did.  It  should  be  added  that  the  gap  of  memory  may  include
some  period  of  time  previous  to  the  shock  or  accident  which  caused  it.

*Enteiicephalic. — On  the  analogy  of  entoptic ;  of  sensations,  etc.,  which
have  their  origin  within  the  brain,  not  in  the  external  world.

Externalise. — This  word  is  used  to  represent  the  process  by  which  an
idea  or  impression  on  the  percipient's  mind  is  transformed  into  a  phantasm
apparently  outside  him.

Hallncination. — Any  supposed  sensory  perception  which  has  no  objective
counterimrt  within  the  field  of  vision,  hearing,  etc.,  is  termed  a  hallucination.
Hallucinations  may  be  delusive  ov  falsidiml,  when  there  is  nothing  whatever
to  which  they  correspond  ;  or  veridical,  when  they  correspond  (as  those  of
which  we  treat  generally  correspond)  to  real  events  happening  elsewhere.  A
jjsev.do-hallncination  is  a  quasi-percept  not  sufficiently  externalised  to  rank
as  a  "  full-blown  "  hallucination. Contrast  with,  ilhision  and  delusio7i.

Hyperhonlia. — See  Abonlia.

Uypcrmnesia.  —  Defined  in  Tuke's  Diet,  as  "over-activity  of  the  memory,
a  condition  in  which  past  acts,  feelings,  or  ideas,  are  brought  vividly  to  the
mind,  which,  in  its  natural  condition,  has  wholly  lost  the  remembrance  of
them."  In  my  view  the  subliminal  memory  retains  these  remembrances
throughout,  and  their  supraliminal  evocation  implies  an  increased  gra,sp  of
natural  faculty.  *Panmnesia  would  imply  a  potential  recollection  of  all
impressions.

* Hyperpromethia. — Supernormal  power  of  foresight  ;  attributed  to  the
subliminal  self  as  a  hypothesis  by  which  to  explain  premonitions  without
assuming  either  that  the  future  scene  is  shown  to  the  percipient  by  any
mind  extern.il  to  his  own,  or  tliat  circumstances  which  we  regard  as  future
are  in  any  sense  already  existent.

Hypnagogic.  Illnsions  hypnagogiqves  (Maury)  are  the  vivid  illusions  of
sight  or  sound — "faces  in  the  dark,"  etc. — which  sometimes  accompany  the
oncoming  of  sleep.  To  similar  illusions  accompanying  the  departure  of
sleej^,  as  when  a  dream-figure  persists  for  a  few  moments  into  waking  life,
I  have  given  the  name  *]iypnopompic.

Hypn.otism. — See  Mesmerism.

Hysteria. — "A  disordered  condition  of  the  nervous  system,  the  anato-
mical seat  and  nature  of  which  are  unknown  to  medical  science,  but  of
which  the  symptoms  consist  in  well-marked  and  very  varied  disturbances  of


Supplement.]  Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Psychical  Research.  171


nerve-function." — Encyc.  Brit.  For  further  definition  the  reader  must  be
referred  to  various  papers  shown  in  the  indices  to  these  Proceedings.

Hysterical  blindness,  contractures,  mutism,  oedema,  paralysis,  etc.,
signify  afi'ections  not  dependent  on  any  discoverable  lesion,  hut  on  the
defects  of  nervous  co-ordination  characteristic  of  hysteria.  Such  affections,
even  when  of  long  standing,  may  quite  suddenly  disajjpear.

Hysterogenous  zones. — Points  or  tracts  on  the  skin  of  a  hysterical  person
pressure  on  which  will  induce  a  hysterical  attack.  Similarly,  hypnogenous
zones  are  regions  by  jjressui'e  on  which  sleep  is  induced.

Ideational. — Used  of  impressions  which  convey  some  distinct  notion,  but
not  of  sensory  nature.

Illusion. — The  misinterpretation  of  some  object  actually  present  to  sight
or  hearing,  as  when  a  hanging  coat  is  taken  for  a  man,  a  ringing  in  the  ears
for  the  sound  of  a  bell,  etc.

Imagiiial. — A  word  used  of  characteristics  belonging  to  the  perfect  insect
or  imago  ; — and  thus  opposed  to  larval ; — metaphorically  applied  to  transcen-
dental faculties  shown  in  rudiment  in  ordinary  life.

Induced. — Of  phantasms,  etc.,  intentionally  produced.

Levitation. — A  raising  of  objects  from  the  ground  by  supposed  supernormal
means  :  especially  of  living  persons,  asserted  in  the  case  of  S.  Joseph  of
Copertino,  and  many  other  saints  ;  of  D.  D.  Home,  and  of  W.  Stainton
Moses.

Medium. — A  person  through  whom  communication  is  deemed  to  be  carried
on  between  living  men  and  spirits  of  the  departed.  As  commonly  used  in
spiritist  literature,  this  word  is  liable  to  the  objection  that  it  assumes  a
particular  theory  for  phenomena  which  admit  of  explanation  in  various
ways. It  is  often  better  replaced  by  atdomatist  or  sensitive.

Mesmerism. — This  is  the  oldest  widely-recognised  word  for  a  large  group
of  phenomena  discussed  in  many  papers  in  these  Proceedings.  The  name
need  imply  nothing  more  than  the  fact  that  Mesmer  was  the  conspicuous
introducer  of  many  of  the  phenomena  to  the  Eurojoean  public.  But  it  is
also  specially  used  to  imply  something  of  his  theory  of  their  production,  by
a  vital  efSuence  from  the  mesmeriser,  conveyed  partly  by  mesmeric  'passes,  or
wavings  of  the  hands.  The  term  Animal  Magnetism  implies  a  somewhat
different  theory.  The  term  Hypnotism,  when  first  started  by  Braid,  was
again  meant  to  imply  a  theory  of  the  genesis  of  these  phenomena,  but  it  is
now  generally  used  with  no  theoretical  implication.

Message. — Used  for  any  communication,  not  necessarily  verbal,  from  one
to  another  stratum  of  the  automatist's  personality,  or  from  an  external
intelligence  to  one  or  other  stratum  of  the  automatist.  Thus  any  automatic
script  may  be  called  a  message,  even  if  incoherent.

Meta.llcesthesia. — A  form  of  sensibility  alleged  to  exist  which  enables
some  hypnotised  or  hysterical  subjects  to  discriminate  between  the  contacts
of  various  metals  by  sensations  not  derived  from  their  ordinary  properties  of
weight,  etc.

*Methectic. — Of  communications  between  one  stratum  of  a  man's
intelligence  and  another  ;  as  when  he  writes  messages  whose  origin  is  in


172


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


his  own  subliminal  self.  Some  word  is  needed  to  exjjress  this  novel
conception  ;  and  Plato's  use  of  the  word  jxide^is,  participation,  (Parm.  132D)
suggests  methectic  as  the  most  appropriate  term  of  Greek  origin.

Mirror-writing  {ecriture  renversce,  Spiegel-schrift).  Writing  so  inverted,  or,
more  exactly,  perverted,  as  to  resemble  writing  reflected  in  a  mirror,  or
blotted  off  on  to  a  sheet  of  blotting  paper.  This  form  of  writing  is  natural
to  some  left-handed  persons. It  also  frequently  api^ears  in  automatic  script.

Mnemonic  chain.—  A  continuous  series  of  memories,  especially  when  the
continuity  persists  after  an  interrujDtion. See  Disintegration  of  personality.

Monition. — A  message  involving  counsel  or  warning,  when  that  counsel
is  based  upon  facts  already  in  existence,  l)ut  not  normally  known  to  the
person  who  receives  the  monition.

Motor. — Used  of  an  impulse  to  action  not  carrying  with  it  any  definite
idea  or  sensory  impression.

Negative  hallucination. — See  Anasthesia.

Objectify. — To  externalise  a  phantom  in  three  dimensions  ;  to  see  it  as  a
solid  object  fitted  into  the  waking  world.

Percipient. — The  correlative  term  to  Agent  ;  the  person  on  whose  mind
the  telepathic  impact  falls  ;  or  more  generally,  the  person  who  perceives  any
motor  or  sensory  impression.

Phantasm  and  Phantom. — Phantasm  and  phantom  are,  of  course,  mere
variants  of  the  same  word  ;  but  since  phantom  has  become  generally
restricted  to  visual  hallucinations,  it  is  convenient  to  take  j^hantasm  to  cover
a  wider  range,  and  to  signify  any  hallucinatory  sensory  imjaression,  whatever
sense — whether  sight,  hearing,  touch,  smell,  taste,  or  diflFused  sensibility —
may  happen  to  be  affected.

Point  de  repere.  — Guiding  mark.  Used  of  some  (generally  inconspicuous)
real  object  which  a  hallucinated  subject  sees  along  with  his  hallucination,
and  whose  behaviour  under  magnification,  etc.,  suggests  to  him  similar
changes  in  the  hallucinatory  figure.

Pohjzoism. — The  property,  in  a  complex  organism,  of  being  comjjosed  of
minor  and  quasi-independent  organisms  (like  the  poii/^oa  or  "sea-mats").
This  is  sometimes  called  "  colonial  constitution,"  from  animal  colonies ;  but
the  metaphor  implied  is  not  always  suitable.  The  word  polypsychism  is
sometimes  used  to  express  the  psychical  aspect  of  jjolyzoism.

Post-hypnotic. — Used  of  a  suggestion  given  during  the  hypnotic  trance,
but  intended  to  operate  after  that  trance  has  ceased.

Precognition. — A  knowledge  of  impending  events  supernormally  acquired.

Premonition. — A  sujjernormal  indication  of  any  kind  of  event  still  in
the  future.

*Preoersion. — A  tendency  to  characteristics  assumed  to  lie  at  a  further
point  of  the  evolutionary  progress  of  a  species  than  has  yet  been  reached  ;
ojjposed  to  reversion.

Prolcptic. — Anticipatory  ;  assuming  a  knowledge  of  a  fact  not  yet
communicated.  A  dream  is  called  proleptic  when  it  assumes  some  fact
which  is  only  made  known  to  the  dreamer  later  in  the  dream.  For  instance,
a  person  in  one's  dream  may  ask  one  a  riddle,  and  not  tell  one  the  answer  for


Supplement.]  Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Psychical  Research.  173


some  time  ;  yet  a  knowledge  of  that  answer  must  have  existed  in  one's  mind
all  the  time,  since  one  did  in  fact  ask  the  riddle  oneself.

*Priminesia.  — The  paradoxical  sensation  of  recollecting  a  scene  which  is
only  now  occurring  for  the  first  time  ;  the  sense  of  the  deja  vk.  The  term
paramnesia,  which  is  sometimes  given  to  this  sensation,  should,  I  think,
cover  all  forms  of  erroneous  memory,  and  cannot  without  confusion  be  used
to  express  specifically  this  one  anomalous  sensation.

Psyclio-therajyeutics. — "Treatment  of  disease  by  the  influence  of  the
mind  on  the  body." — Tuke's  Diet.  All  suggestion  of  course  comes  under
this  head.

Quasi-percept.~The  more  or  less  objectified  phantasm,  which  the
percipient  does,  in  a  certain  sense,  perceive.

Eeciprocal. — Used  of  cases  where  there  is  both  agency  and  percipience  at
each  end  of  the  telepathic  chain,  so  that  (in  a  complete  or  developed  case)  A
perceives  P,  and  P  perceives  A  also.

*Betrocognition. — Knowledge  of  the  Past,  supernormally  acquired.

Secondanj  personality. — It  sometimes  happens,  as  the  result  of  shock,
disease,  or  unknown  causes,  that  a  man  or  woman  experiences  an  alteration
of  memory  and  character,  amounting  to  a  change  of  personality,  which
generally  seems  to  have  come  on  during  sleep.  The  new  personality  is  in
that  case  termed  secondary.  It  generally  disappears  after  a  time,  or
alternates  with  the  original,  or  primriry,  personality.

Secondary  sensations  {Seeunddrempfindungen,  audition  coloree,  so^md-
seeing,  synasthesice,  etc.). — With  some  persons  every  sensation  of  one  type  is
accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  another  type  ;  as  for  instance  a  special  sound
may  be  accompanied  by  a  special  sensation  of  colour  or  light  {cJiromatisms  or
photisms).  This  phenomenon  is  analogous  to  that  of  number-forms, — a  kind
of  diagrammatic  mental  pictures  which  accompany  the  conception  of  a
progression  of  numbers. See  Galton's  Inqniries  into  Human  Faculty.

Shell-hearing. — The  induction  of  hallucinatory  voices,  etc.,  by  listening
to  a  shell. Analogous  to  crystal-gazing.

Spectrum  of  conscioitsness. — A  comparison  of  man's  range  of  consciousness
or  faculty  to  the  solar  spectrum,  as  seen  by  us  after  passing  through  a  prism
or  as  examined  in  a  spectroscope.

Spiritualism  or  Spiritism. — A  religion,  philosophy,  or  mode  of  thinking,
based  on  the  belief  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  communicate  with  living  men.
Since  the  words  spiritualisme  and  spiritualiste  have  long  been  used  in  France
for  a  school  of  philosophy  opposed  to  materialism,  there  is  some  advantage
in  choosing  the  word  Spiritism  for  the  belief  in  spirit-intercourse.

Stigmatisation. — The  production  of  blisters  or  other  cutaneous  changes
on  the  hands,  feet,  or  elsewhere,  by  self-suggestion  or  meditation.  These
marks  were  said  to  have  been  produced  on  S.  Francis  of  Assisi,  on  Louise
Lateau,  etc.,  by  meditation  on  the  sufferings  of  Clirist.  Similar  marks  are
producible  by  suggestion  in  some  hypnotic  subjects,  and  even  vesication  (the
formation  of  blisters)  seems  to  have  been  thus  induced.

Subliminal. — Of  thoughts,  feelings,  etc.,  lying  beneath  the  ordinary
threshold  (limen)  of  consciousness,  as  opposed  to  supraliminal,  lying  above


174


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


the  threshold.  Excitations  are  termed  snhlimiioal  when  they  are  too  weak
to  rise  into  direct  notice  ;  and  I  have  extended  the  application  of  the  term  to
feeling,  thought,  or  faculty,  which  is  kept  thus  submerged,  not  by  its  own
weakness,  but  by  the  constitution  of  man's  personality.  The  threshold
(Schwelle)  mast  be  regarded  as  a  level  above  which  waves  may  rise, — like  a
slab  washed  by  the  sea, — rather  than  as  an  entrance  into  a  chamber.

Suggestion.. — The  process  of  effectively  impressing  upon  the  subliminal
intelligence  the  wishes  of  the  man's  own  supraliminal  self  or  of  some  other
person.  The  mechanism  of  this  process  is  obscure,  nor  is  it  known  why
some  persons  are  much  more  suggestible  than  others.  Self -suggest ion  (some-
times called  auto-suggestion  by  a  barbarism  easily  avoidable  in  English)
means  a  suggestion  conveyed  by  the  subject  himself  from  one  stratum  of
his  personality  to  another,  without  external  intervention.

*  Supernormal. — Of  a  faculty  or  jjhenomenon  which  goes  beyond  the  level
of  ordinary  experience,  in  the  direction  of  evolution,  or  as  jiertaining  to  a
transcendental  world.  The  word  siipernatural  is  open  to  grave  objections  ;
it  assumes  that  there  is  something  outside  nature,  and  it  has  become
associated  with  arbitrary  interference  with  law.  Now  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  psychical  phenomena  witli  which  we  deal  are  less  a  part  of
nature,  or  less  subject  to  fixed  and  definite  law,  than  any  other  phenomena.
Some  of  them  appear  to  indicate  a  higher  evolutionary  level  than  the  mass  of
men  have  yet  attained,  and  some  of  them  appear  to  be  governed  by  laws  of
such  a  kind  that  they  may  hold  good  in  a  transcendental  world  as  fully  as  in
the  woi'ld  of  sense.  In  either  case  they  are  above  the  norm  of  man  rather
than  outside  his  nature.

Supralimiiud. — See  Suhliminal.

Telekinesis. — Used  of  alleged  supernormal  movements  of  objects,  not  due
to  any  known  force.

*Telepatlhy  and  *tel(esthesia. — It  has  become  possible,  I  think,  to  discrimi-
nate between  these  two  words  somewhat  more  sharply  than  when  I  first
suggested  them  in  1882.  Telepathy  may  still  be  defined  as  "  the  communica-
tion of  impressions  of  any  kind  from  one  mind  to  another,  independently  of
the  recognised  channels  of  sense."  The  distance  between  agent  and  joercipient
which  the  derivation  of  the  word,  "  feeling  at  a  distance  "  imjjlies,  need,  in
fact,  only  he  such  that  no  known  operation  of  the  senses  can  bridge  it.
Telepathy  maj'  thus  exist  between  two  men  in  the  same  room  as  truly  as
between  one  man  in  England  and  another  in  Australia,  or  between  one  man
still  living  on  eartli  and  another  man  long  since  departed.  Telcesthesia —
perception  at  a  distance — may  conveniently  be  interpreted  in  a  similar  way,
as  implying  any  direct  sensation  or  perception  of  objects  or  conditions
independently  of  the  recognised  channels  of  sense,  and  also  under  such
circumstances  that  no  known  mind  external  to  the  percipient's  can  be
suggested  as  the  source  of  the  knowledge  thus  gained.

*Telergy. — A  name  for  a  hypothetical  force  or  mode  of  action,  concerned
with  the  conveyance  of  telepathic  impressions,  and  perhaps  with  other
supernormal  operation.

Veridical.  — See  Hallucination.


General  Meetings.


175


PEOCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  80th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  "West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  June  5th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Professor
Barrett  in  the  chair.

Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell  read  the  paper  on  "  Personally  observed
Hypnotic  Phenomena,"  printed  below.


The  81st  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
July  10th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  the  President,  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  in  the  chair.

Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell  read  a  paper,  entitled  "  What  is
Hypnotism  ?  "  also  printed  below.


The  82  nd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
October  30th,  at  8.30  p.m. ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  read  a  further  paper  on  the  Dowsing
or  Divining  Rod,  which  it  is  hoped  will  appear  in  a  future  number  of
the  Proceedings.


The  83rd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  jslace  on  Friday,
December  4th,  at  4  p.m. ;  the  President,  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  in  the
chair.

"  Miss  X."  read  a  paper  on  "  Some  Recent  Experiences,  apparently
Supernormal,"  which  it  is  hoped  will  appear  in  a  future  number  of  the
Proceedings.


176


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


I.

PERSONALLY  OBSERVED  HYPNOTIC  PHENOMENA.
By  Dr.  J.  Milne  Beamwell.

During  the  last  few  j^ears,  I  have  occasionally  been  asked  to  give
an  account  of  my  hypnotic  experiences  to  this  Society,  on  the  ground
that,  as  I  was  constantly  employed  in  hypnotic  work  at  home,  and  had
frequently  visited  hypnotic  centres  abroad,  I  must  have  something
interesting  to  relate.  I  have  hitherto  refrained  from  doing  so,  chiefly
because  my  researches  have  been  almost  entirely  of  a  medical  nature,
and  have  contained  little  of  general  scientific  interest.  I  have  observed,
however,  certain  facts  which  are  not  without  importance  in  reference
to  hypnotic  tlieory.  These,  I  think,  tend  to  show  that  the  hypnotised
subject  has  a  higher  mental  life  than  he  is  usually  credited  with,  and
possesses  considerable  selective  power  in  reference  to  the  commands  of
the  operator.  These  facts,  together  with  an  account  of  the  remarkable
power  of  appreciating  time  possessed  by  one  hypnotised  subject,  will
form  the  main  features  of  this  paper.  I  also  propose  giving  a  short
account  of  other  phenomena,  and  will  try  to  group  them  so  as  to
form  a  general  picture  of  the  hypnotic  state,  as  it  appears  to  me.
The  sequel  to  this  paper  will  deal  with  these  phenomena  in  relation-
ship to  the  various  theoretical  explanations  of  hypnotism.

Methods  and  Susceptibility.

As  various  theories  have  been  based,  both  on  the  manner  in  which
hypnosis  is  induced,  as  well  as  on  the  mental  condition  of  those
capable  of  being  hypnotised,  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  say  a  word
or  two  on  these  two  points.  I  have  never  observed  an  instance  in
which  hypnosis  has  followed  mechanical  means  alone  ;  on  the  other
hand,  it  has  frequently  appeared  when  tliese  have  been  carefully
eliminated,  and  when  the  only  method  employed  has  been  the  creation
by  verbal  suggestion  of  a  picture  of  the  desired  condition.  I  have
neither  been  able  to  confirm  the  observations  of  others  in  reference  to
the  value  of  cliloroform  and  other  narcotic  drugs  in  inducing  hypnosis,
nor  to  succeed,  as  they  claim  to  have  done,  in  changing  natui'al  into
hypnotic  sleep.

The  susceptibility  to  hypnosis  varies  widely,  usually  in  proportion
to  the  subject's  power  of  concentration.  Where  voluntary  attention
is  absent,  as  in  idiots,  hypnosis  is  impossible ;  where,  as  in  insanity.


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  177


hysteria,  &c.,  the  attention  is  actively  engaged  in  other  directions,
hypnosis  is  generally  difficult.

The  following  figures,  comprising  two  groups  of  100  consecutive
cases,  illustrate  this.  In  group  No.  l,inany  were  in  good  health  when
I  attempted  to  hypnotise  them,  while  of  the  remainder,  few  suffered
from  diseases  calculated  to  interfere  with  their  powers  of  attention.

The  results  in  this  class  were  as  follows  : —

Slight  hypnosis,  12.  Deep  hypnosis,  40.  Somnambules,  48.  Re-
fractory, 0.  Hypnotised  at  first  attempt,  92.  After  repeated  trials,  8 :
average  number  of  trials  in  these  eight  cases,  4.

In  group  No.  2,  nearly  all  suffered  from  grave  and  long-standing
nervous  disease,  and  with  them  the  susceptibility  was  considerably
decreased,  thus  : —

Slight  hypnosis,  35.  Deep  hypnosis,  1-3.  Somnambules,  29.  Re-
fractory, 2.3.  In  the  77  successful  cases  hypnosis  was  obtained  at  the
first  attempt  in  -51  instances.  After  repeated  trials,  in  26  :  average
number  of  trials  in  these  26  cases,  15.

Sex  apparently  exerted  no  influence  on  susceptibilty.

Hypnotic  Phenomena.

Closure  of  the  eyes  is  usually  the  first  phenomenon  observed  in
hypnosis,  and  as  soon  as  this  occurs  other  alterations  in  the  voluntary
muscles  can  usually  be  induced  by  suggestion.  In  reference  to  these
I  have  nothing  special  to  report.  I,  like  others,  have  seen  that
voluntary  muscular  power  can  be  increased  or  diminished  to  a
remarkable  extent.

Involuntary  Muscles  and  Special  Senses. — The  action  of  the  in-
voluntary muscles  and  the  special  senses  can  be  influenced  in  hypnosis.
Of  this  I  have  seen  many  striking  instances,  but  will  confine  myself
almost  entirely  to  one  case,  that  of  a  woman  aged  forty,  in  which  all
the  experiments  were  checked  by  independent  observers.

Pulse. — In  this  subject,  the  rapidity  of  the  pulse  could  be  quickly
increased  or  diminished  by  simply  suggesting  that  it  should  beat  faster
or  slower.  These  changes,  as  recorded  by  the  sphygmograph,  showed
corresponding  alterations  in  tension.

Muscular  Sense. — Differences  in  weight  as  small  as  eight  grains
could  be  distinguished  in  the  hypnotic  state;  this  the  patient  was  quite
unable  to  do  in  the  normal  condition.

Thermal  Sensihiliiy. — She  was  able  to  discriminate  between  very
slight  changes  in  temperature,  such  as  she  was  unable  to  appreciate
when  awake.

Common  Cutaneous  Sensibility. — The  common  cutaneous  sensibility
was  nearly  double,  i.e.,  the  patient  could  distinguish  the  points  of  a

N  2


178


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramvjell.


compass,  applied  to  different  parts  of  the  body,  at  about  half  the
normal  distance. She  possessed  no  increased  power  when  awake.

Hearing. — The  range  of  hearing  could  be  doubled  by  suggestion.

Sight. — The  variations  in  this  patient's  range  of  vision  were
recorded  for  me  by  Mr.  Bendelack  Hewetson,  Ophthalmic  Surgeon
to  the  Leeds  Infirmary  ;  and,  as  they  appear  to  be  of  considerable
intei'est,  I  will  give  them  in  detail.  He  first  saw  her  in  1889,  long-
before  she  had  been  hypnotised,  and  reported  that  she  was  hyper-
metropic ;  that  this  condition  was  over-corrected  by  ciliary  spasm ;
that  she  could  only  read  the  third  line  of  Snellen's  test  types,  and
required  a  minus  glass  to  enable  her  to  I'ead  the  bottom  line.  In
hypermetropia,  as  many  of  my  readers  are  doubtless  aware,  the  axis  of
the  eye  is  shorter  than  normal,  and  the  rays  of  light,  or  a  certain  pro-
portion of  them,  in  passing  through  the  lens,  are  focussed  at  a  point
behind  the  retina. In  this  the  result  of  spasm  of  the  muscles

of  accommodation,  the  position,  and  possibly  the  curvature  of  the  lens
was  altered;  i.e.,  it  was  projected  further  forward  and  rendered  more
convex.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  hypermetrojDia,  which  was  only
slight,  was  not  only  neutralised,  but  over-corrected.  Thus  the  patient
was  rendered  virtually  myopic  ;  the  axis  of  the  eye  had  become  longer
than  normal,  and  the  rays  of  light  were  focussed  at  a  point  in  front  of,
instead  of  behind,  the  retina.  At  this  time  treatment  by  glasses
failed  to  relieve  the  defect,  as  the  patient,  who  suffei'ed  from  other
nervous  affections,  was  unable  to  wear  them.  She  was  first  hypno-
tised in  March,  1892,  when  I  observed  that  I  could  apparently  alter
the  range  of  vision  by  suggestion.  In  the  following  July  she  was  again
examined  by  Mr.  Hewetson,  who  found  the  physical  condition  and
range  of  vision  identical  with  what  it  had  been  in  1889.  Suggestions
were  then  made  in  his  presence,  with  the  view  of  increasing  the  range
of  vision,  whereupon  the  spasm  disaj^peared,  and  the  patient  easily
read  the  bottom  line  of  Snellen's  test  types  without  a  glass.  After
having  shown  that  the  spasm,  with  its  accompanying  defective  vision,
could  be  restored,  I  suggested  its  total  disappearance.  In  June,  1893,
Mr.  Hewetson  again  examined  the  patient,  and  reported  that  the
range  of  vision  was  normal,  and  that  there  was  no  return  of  the
spasm.

Analgesia. — With  this  patient,  as  with  many  others,  hypnotic
analgesia  could  be  easily  induced.  On  one  occasion  she  had  six  teeth
painlessly  extracted,  and  on  another  four.  There  was  no  pain  at  any
time  after  these  operations,  and  the  healing  process  was  a  remarkably
quick  one.  A  powerful  application  of  the  Faradic  brush  was  also
unattended  by  any  disagreeable  sensation.

Change  of  Temperature.  —  On  two  occasions  only  have  I  had  an
opportunity  of  testing  whether  the  suggested  sensations  of  heat  and


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  179


cold  were  accoinpanied  by  change  in  temperature.  The  subject  of  both
experiments  was  a  young  man,  a  remarkably  good  somnambule,  in
whom  all  the  usual  phenomena  of  deepest  hypnosis  could  be  induced.
Dr.  Waller,  the  well-known  physiologist,  recorded  the  temperature  by
means  of  a  delicate  electrical  apparatus,  capable  of  registering  fractions
of  a  degree  of  change,  while  I  alternately  made  emphatic  and  prolonged
suggestions  of  heat  and  cold. The  result  was  an  entirely  negative  one.

Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.

To  Professor  Delbceuf's  experiments  in  this  direction  my  own  owe
their  origin.  Delbceuf  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that,  in  most
instances  in  which  it  had  been  suggested  to  somnambules  to  do  some-
thing at  the  end  of  a  certain  number  of  days,  this  had  been  rendered
more  simple  by  the  terminal  day  falling  upon  some  easily  recognisable
date,  such  as  the  New  Year,  and,  as  the  subject  knew  this,  the
suggestion  was  equivalent  to  saying  that  he  was  to  do  something  on
New  Year's  Day.  To  avoid  mistakes  of  this  kind  and  to  render  the
test  conditions  more  stringent,  Delboeuf  made  his  sugsfestions  in
minutes  varying  in  number  from  350  to  3,300.  In  thirteen  experi-
ments there  were  only  two  complete  successes  ;  in  the  majority  of  the
remainder  there  was  a  partial  success,  with  an  error  of  a  tenth  to
a  thirty-seventh  of  the  interval.  Despite  these  failures,  Professor
Delbceuf  considered  that  the  successes,  under  the  conditions  in  which  he
obtained  them,  were  amongst  the  most  extraordinary  things  presented
by  induced  somnambulism.

I  propose  at  present  to  confine  my  account  to  the  history  of  one
case  and,  as  the  results  obtained  were  so  extraordinary,  1  will  put
before  you  as  many  details  as  possible,  in  order  to  present  a  fairly
complete  picture  of  the  subject  of  the  experiments,  and  of  the  circum-
stances under  which  they  were  carried  out.

Miss  ,  the  patient  in  question,  aged  19,  was  iirst  hypnotised

by  me  on  September  2nd,  1895.  At  this  time  she  had  suffered  from
muscular  tremor  of  both  arms  and  legs  for  about  twelve  months.
The  illness  had  appeared  after  over-exertion  and  mental  strain,  the
result  of  nursing  a  relative  who  died  after  a  long  illness.  Previously,
the  general  health  had  been  good  and  there  had  been  no  signs  of
hysteria.  Family  history  good.  After  about  three  weeks  of  hypnotic
treatment  the  tremor  disappeared,  and  has  not  returned  since.  The
patient  is  intelligent  and  fairly  well  educated,  but  possesses  no
extraordinary  calculating  powers  either  in  the  normal  state  or  in
hypnosis.  According  to  her  mother,  she  has  always  been  remarkably
truthful  and  well-conducted,  rather  grave  in  disposition  and  inclined
to  take  the  duties  of  life  seriously.  She  is  a  dressmaker,  and  is  in
the  employment  of  a  personal  friend,  but  lives  at  home. She  is  fond


180


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bmmwell.


of  her  business,  and  her  main  interest  in  Hfe,  apart  from  it,  appears
to  be  a  kind  of  amateur  mission  work,  which  she  carries  out  with
considerable  success  amongst  the  children  of  a  poor  and  rough
neighbourhood.  Her  parents  are  shopkeepers  and  are  comfortably
off  for  their  position  in  life.

Some  time  before  the  commencement  of  the  experiments,  she  had
become  a  good  somnambule,  and  I  had  satisfied  myself  of  the
genuineness  of  this  condition  before  thinking  of  making  her  the
subject  of  any  experiment.  She  could  be  made  analgesic  or
anresthetic  by  suggestion.  The  touching  of  the  cornea  or  the  tickling
of  the  back  of  the  throat  with  a  feather  produced  no  reflex,  and  the
passing  of  a  needle  deeply  into  the  flesh  was  unattended  by  pain.
She  never  spontaneously  recalled  in  the  waking  state  anything  that
occurred  in  hypnosis.  During  this  time  she  was  also  treated  medically
by  suggestion,  but  this  was  only  for  a  functional  disturbance,  which
was  of  little  importance  in  reference  to  her  general  i^hysical  state,
and  of  none  in  regard  to  her  mental  one.  With  the  exception  of  a
short  time  towards  the  close  of  the  experiments,  when  she  was
suffering  from  the  effects  of  a  severe  fall,  she  was  in  good  health,
and  on  more  than  one  occasion  she  rode  over  fifty  miles  in  a  day  on
a  heavy  tricycle  without  undue  fatigue.

The  experiments  were  all  of  the  same  character.  On  each  occasion
I  suggested  to  her,  during  hypnosis,  that  at  the  expiration  of  a  varying
number  of  minutes  she  should  feel  impelled  to  make  a  cross  on  a  piece
of  paper  with  a  pencil  and  also,  without  looking  at  clock  or  watch,
write  down  what  time  she  believed  it  to  be,  and  then  immediately
compare  this  with  the  actual  time  and,  if  possible,  obtain  corroborative
testimony  from  her  friends.

Exjyeriment  No.  1.  November  5th,  1895,  4  p.m. — Suggestion  to
to  be  realised  in  five  hours  and  twenty  minutes,  i.e.,  at  the  expiration
of  that  time  the  patient  was  to  make  a  cross  and  put  down  the  time
in  tlie  manner  just  described. Result. — Correct.

Remarks. — On  this  occasion  I  did  not  say  anything  to  the  patient
about  the  experiment,  either  before  or  after  hypnosis.  I  told  her
mother  its  nature,  but  not  the  time  at  which  the  suggestion  should  be
fulfilled.  At  9.15  the  same  evening  her  mother  noticed  that  the
patient  was  restless  and  asked  her  what  was  the  matter.  She  replied,
"  I  feel  I  must  do  something,  but  cannot  tell  what."  At  9.20  p.m.
she  rapidly  made  a  cross  with  a  pencil  and  wrote  20  minutes  past  9  on
a  piece  of  paper,  at  the  same  time  saying,  "It's  all  silliness."  There
was  no  clock  in  the  room,  but  her  mother  went  into  the  next  room
where  there  was  one,  and  found  that  the  time  was  9.20.  When  I
again  saw  the  patient  I  explained  the  nature  of  the  experiments  I
proposed  making  to  her,  and  instructed  her  always  to  carry  a  pencil


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  181


and  paper  with  her  during  the  day,  and  to  put  one  by  her  bedside  at
night.  I  did  not  describe  them  as  anything  extraordinary,  but  simply
told  her  that  hypnotised  subjects  were  often  able  to  calculate  time,  and
that  I  wished  to  see  whether  she  could  do  so.  No  peczmiary  or  other
reward  was  promised  or  given.  I  told  her  I  should  make  these
experimental  suggestions  from  time  to  time,  but  not  on  each  occasion
when  she  visited  me.  I  neither  told  her  in  the  waking  condition  that
the  suggestions  had  been  made,  nor  informed  her  relatives  when  I
made  them,  or  what  they  were.  They  knew  that  suggestions  of  this
nature  were  given  frequently,  but  only  became  acquainted  with  them
on  seeing  the  patient  carry  them  out,  or  on  hearing  from  her  that  she
had  done  so.  Invariably,  before  making  the  suggestions,  I  wrote  them
down  in  my  case-book,  and  when  the  patient  again  visited  me  I  copied
into  it  what  she  had  written  on  the  different  pieces  of  paper.  In  many
instances  I  did  not  calculate  when  the  suggestions  fell  due,  and  in
others  the  calculations  I  made  at  the  time  were  proved  to  be  erroneous,
and  the  results  of  the  experiments  were  in  these  cases  only  determined
when  the  series  was  completed.

Experiment  No.  2. — November  28th,  1895,  2  p.m.  Suggestion  in
320  minutes. Result. — Correct.

Remarks. — The  suggestion  was  carried  out  at  7.20  p.m.  when  the
patient  was  in  a  friend's  house.  She  had  no  watch  with  her.  There
was  a  clock  in  the  room,  but  it  was  wrong.

Experiment  iVo.  3. — December  4th,  3.15  p.m.  Suggestion  in  24
hours  and  100  minutes. Result. — Correct.

Remarks. — -When  in  a  friend's  house  the  following  afternoon  she
carried  out  the  suggestion  at  4.55.  She  then  asked  the  time.  Her
friend  looked  at  her  watch  and  told  her,  whereupon  she  remarked,
"  Your  watch  is  three  minutes  fast." This  was  the  case.

ExiJeriment  No.  4. — December  12th,  3.20  p.m.  Suggestion  in  24
hours,  1,440  minutes.  Result. — ^3.20  p.m.,  Saturday,  December  14th.
Correct.

Experiment  No.  5. — Wednesday,  December  18th,  3.45  p.m.
Suggestion  in  24  hours,  2,880  minutes.  Result. — 3.45  p.m.,  Saturday,
December  21st.  Correct.

Experiment  No.  6. — Tuesday,  December  24th,  2.55  p.m.  Sugges-
tion in  30  hours,  50  minutes.  Result. — 9.45  p.m.,  Wednesday,
December  25th.  Correct.

Experiment  No.  7. — Tuesday,  December  24th,  3.10  p.m.  Sugges-
tion in  7,200  minutes.  Result. — 3.10  p.m.,  Sunday,  December  29th.
Correct.

Remarks. — The  patient  was  teaching  a  class  in  the  Sunday  School,
when  she  suddenly  felt  an  impulse  to  make  a  cross  and  mark  the  time.


182


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


It  was  only  after  doing  so  that  she  looked  at  the  clock,  which  was
behind  her.

Exj)eriment  No.  8. — Tuesday,  December  31st,  3.45  p.m.  Sugges-
tion in  4,335  minutes.  Result. — 4  p.m.,  Friday,  January  3rd,  1896.
Correct.

Experiment  No.  9. — December  31st,  1895,  4  p.m.  Suggestion  in
11,525  minutes. Result. — 11.5  a.m.,  Wednesday,  January  8th.  Wrong.

Remarks. — The  result  ought  to  have  been  4.5  p.m.,  January  8th.
I  rehypnotised  her  on  that  day  and  asked  her  to  recall  the  suggestion
I  had  made  on  December  31st.  She  said  it  was  to  be  executed  in
11,225  minutes.  It  is  possible,  but  not  at  all  likely,  that  I  had  made
a  mistake,  as  I  had  read  the  suggestion  to  her  with  the  figui-es  before
my  eyes.  The  supposed  suggestion  of  11,225  minutes  had  been  carried
out  correctly.

I  now  attempted  to  find  out  during  hyjmosis  the  patient's  mental
condition  in  reference  to  these  suggestions.  In  reply  to  my  questions
she  informed  me  : — 1.  That  when  the  suggestions  were  made  in
hypnosis  she  did  not  calculate  when  they  fell  due.  2.  That  she  did
not  calculate  them  at  any  time  afterwards.  3.  That  she  had  no
recollection  of  them  when  awakened.  4.  That  no  memory  of  them
ever  arose  in  the  waking  state.  5.  That  shortly  before  their  fulfil-
ment she  always  experienced  a  motor  impulse,  that  her  fingers  moved
as  if  to  grasp  a  pencil  and  to  perform  the  act  of  writing.  6.  That
this  impulse  was  immediately  followed  by  the  idea  of  making  a  cross,
and  of  the  time.  7.  That  she  never  looked  at  clock  or  watch  until
after  she  had  written  the  figures.

Exjjeriments. — Wednesday,  January  8th,  1896.

No.  10. — 4.5  p.m. Suggestion  in  4,417  minutes.

No.  11. — 4.5  p.m. Suggestion  in  11,470  minutes.

No.  \2. — 4.30  p.m. Suggestion  in  10,070  minutes.

Results. — No.  10. — 5.42  p.m.,  Saturday,  January  11th.

No.  11. — 3.15  p.m.,  Thursday,  January  16th.

No.  12. — 4.20.  p.m.,  Wednesday,  January  15th. — All  were  correct.

Remarhs. — As  the  patient  had  stated  in  hypnosis  that  she  made
no  calculations  in  reference  to  the  suggestions,  in  order  to  vary  the
experiments,  I  asked  her  as  soon  as  I  had  made  them,  and  before
awakening  her,  to  calculate  mentally  when  they  would  fall  due,  and  to
tell  me  the  result.

She  replied  as  follows  : — ■

"No.  10  in  3  days,  37  minutes,  or  23  minutes  to  5  next  Saturday
afternoon.

"No.  11  in  187  hours,  50  minutes,  or  7  clays,  9  hours,  50  minutes.
Next  Wednesday  morning  at  5  minutes  to  12.


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Plienomena.


183


"No.  12  in  1,067  hours,  40  minutes,  or  6  days,  23  hours,  and  40
minutes. 4.20  p.m.  next  Wednesday."

In  No.  10,  the  answer  was  1  hour,  5  minutes  too  early,  the  interval
(which  was  1  hour  too  short)  having  apparently  been  calculated  from
4  o'clock,  instead  of  4.5  p.m.

In  No.  11  the  answer  was  1  day,  3  hours,  20  minutes  too  early.  '
Here  (1)  the  interval  is  calculated  as  187  hours,  50  minutes,  showing
that  11,470  has  probably  been  mistaken  for  11,270.  (2)  187  hours,
50  minutes,  is  stated  to  be  equal  to  7  days,  9  hours,  50  minutes,  instead
of  7  days,  19  hours,  50  minutes.  The  answer  seems,  however,  to  have
been  calculated  with  the  latter  interval,  but  (3)  a  mistake  of  1  day  is
made.

In  No.  12  the  aiaswer  is  correct,  but  does  not  correspond  with  the
calculations  ;  10,070  minutes  equals  167  hours,  50  minutes,  not  1,067
hours,  40  minutes.  Here  (1)  a  cypher  has  been  wrongly  inserted,  and
(2)  40  minutes  miscalculated  for  50.  The  former  error  is  corrected,
but  the  latter  repeated  when  6  days,  23  hours,  40  minutes  is  given
instead  of  6  days,  23  hours,  50  minutes.

When  No.  12  was  fulfilled  the  patient  had  been  asleep  in  my
consulting-room  for  an  hour.  There  was  no  clock  in  the  room.  I  was
hypnotising  another  patient,  Mrs.  M.  Exactly  at  4.20,  without
awaking  or  opening  her  eyes,  the  patient  said  she  had  to  make  a  cross
and  put  the  time  down.  When  the  suggestions  were  realised  in  my
presence  I  invariably  noticed  the  motor  impulse  previously  described
by  the  patient.  From  this  date,  I  arranged  that  a  certain  number  of
the  experiments  should  be  fulfilled  when  the  patient  visited  me.  On
these  occasions  she  was  sometimes  awake,  sometimes  asleep.  In
almost  every  instance  I  made  her  write  the  time  she  thought  it  was
in  my  case  book,  and  frequently  was  able  to  get  this  witnessed  and
signed  by  others  who  were  present.  On  these  occasions  I  compared
my  watch  beforehand  with  the  Vere-street  Post  Office  clock,  in  order
to  insure  greater  accuracy.

From  this  time  I  visually  made  a  number  of  suggestions  to  the
patient  at  each  seance.  Sometimes  these  started  from  the  same  hour,
sometimes  fi'om  different  hours.  In  the  latter  case  the  starting  points
were  usually  imaginary,  i.e.,  I  said  to  the  patient,  "You  are  to  suppose
it  is  such  a  time,  and  carry  out  the  suggestions  in  so  many  minutes
from  that  imaginary  starting  point."  The  suggestions  were  all  made
rapidly  one  after  the  other.

ExjDeriments. — Wednesday,  January  15th,  4.45  p.m.

No.  13. — From  4.45  p.m. Suggestion  in  4,453  minutes.

No.  14. — From  2  p.m. Suggestion  in  10,470  minutes.

No.  15. — From  3  p.m. Suggestion  in  10,060  minutes.  .  •


184


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


Results. — iVb.  13. — 6.58  p.m.,  Saturday,  January  18th.

No.  14. — 8.30  p.m.,  Wednesday,  January  22nd.

No.  15. — 2.40  p.m.,  Wednesday,  January  22nd. — All  correct.

At  the  time  the  suggestions  were  made  the  patient  was  again
asked  in  hypnosis  to  calculate  mentally  when  they  would  fall  due,  and
replied  rapidly  : —

"No.  13  in  722  hours  and  33  minutes,  or  11.15  p.m.  next
Wednesday.

"No.  14  in  197  hours  and  30  minutes,  or  4.5  p.m.  next  Wednesday.
"No. 15,  8  days,  5  hours  and  30  minutes,  or  4.25  p.m.  next
Wednesday."

Remarks. — In  No.  13  the  answer  was  4  days,  4  hours,  17  minutes
too  late.  4,453  minutes  equals  74  hours,  13  minutes,  not  722  hours,
33  minutes.  Perhaps  4,453  was  mistaken  for  43,353,  equalling  722
hours,  33  minutes.  The  answer  has  been  calculated  from  the  interval
of  No.  14.

In  No.  14  the  answer  was  4  hours,  25  minutes  too  early.  10,470
minutes  equals  174  hours,  30  minutes,  not  197  hours,  30  minutes.
The  answer  also  does  not  correspond  with  either  interval,  but  is  nearly
the  same  as  the  answer  given  in  No.  15.  There  is  no  explanation  for
either  of  these  two  independent  errors.

In  No.  15  the  answer  was  1  hour,  45  minutes  too  late.  The
wrongly  calculated  interval,  8  days,  5  hours,  30  minutes,  cori'esponds  to
the  wrongly  calculated  197  hours,  30  minutes  of  No.  14  ;  this  interval
having  apparently  remained  in  the  mind.  The  time  of  falling  due
has  been  calculated  with  4.45  as  initial  time,  as  in  No.  13,  instead
of  3  p.m.

When  I  made  the  patient  calculate  when  the  suggestions  would
fall  due,  and  found  that  her  calculations  wei-e  wrong,  I  naturally  con-
cluded that,  as  she  had  fixed  the  date  at  which  the  suggestions  were
to  be  fulfilled  in  her  own  mind,  in  the  hypnotic  state,  they  would  be
carried  out  at  the  erroneous  times.  My  astonishment  was  great  when
I  found  they  were  executed  correctly.  I  rehypnotised  the  patient  and
said  to  her,  "  You  have  not  carried  out  these  suggestions  at  the  time
you  told  me  they  would  fall  due.  Why  is  this  ?  "  She  replied,  "  What
I  told  you  was  all  wrong."  "  How  do  you  know  the  others  are  right?"
"  I  can't  tell  you,  I  only  feel  that  they  are."  I  was  not  able  to  elicit
by  questioning  any  memory  of  the  processes  by  which  the  original
mistakes  were  corrected.  The  patient  assured  me  that  from  the  time
the  suggestions  were  made  she  had  never  again  thought  of  them,  and
that  at  the  time  of  their  fulfilment  she  had  suddenly  had  the  impulse
to  put  down  the  figures.  When  doing  so  she  had  no  recollection  of
her  original  calculations.


Personally  observed  Hyimotic  Phenomena.  185


Experiments. — Wednesday,  January  22nd,  4.5  p.m.

No.  16. — Suggestion  in  20,180  minutes.

No.  17. — Suggestion  in  20,160  minutes.

No.  18.— Suggestion  in  20,140.

Results. — No.  16. — February  5th,  4.25  p.m.

No.  17. — February  5th,  4.5  p.m.

No.  18. — February  5th,  3.45.  p.m. — All  correct.

Remarks. — On  "Wednesday,  February  5th,  I  hypnotised  the  patient
at  3  p.m.  At  3.45  she  said  the  time  was  3.45,  and  that  she  wished  to
make  a  cross.  I  awoke  her  at  4  o'clock,  and  the  same  thing  occurred
at  4.5  and  at  4.25.  On  each  occasion  she  marked  the  time  in  my
case-book,  and  this  was  witnessed  by  two  other  persons  who  were
present.  The  two  last  suggestione  were  carried  out  when  awake,  and
while  she  was  in  the  midst  of  conversation  with  me  and  others  in  the
room.

Patient's  Calculations. — "No.  16,  336  hours,  20  minutes,  or  13
days,  20  minutes. Tuesday,  February  4th,  at  4.25.  p.m.

"No.  17. — Tuesday,  February  4th,  at  4.5  p.m.

''No.  18.— Tuesday,  February  4th,  at  3.45  p.m."

Remarks. — The  answers  in  each  instance  are  one  day  too  early,  but
in  No.  16,  20,180  minutes  is  correctly  given  as  336  hours,  20  minutes.

Experiments. — Wednesday,  February  5th,  4  p.m.

No.  19. — Suggestion  in  10,050  minutes.

No.  20. — Suggestion  in  10,080  minutes.

No.  21. — Suggestion  in  10,090  minutes.

No.  22. — Suggestion  in  840  minutes.

No.  23. — Suggestion  in  900  minutes.

Results. — No.  22. — Thursday,  February  6th,  6  a.m.

No.  23. — Thursday,  February  6th,  7  a.m.

No.  19.— Wednesday,  February  12th,  3.30  p.m.

No.  20. — Wednesday,  February  12th,  4  p.m.

No.  21. — -Wednesday,  February  12th,  4.10  p.m. — ^All  correct.

After  the  suggestions  were  made  the  patient  was  asked  during
hypnosis  when  they  would  fall  due,  and  almost  instantaneously  replied
correctly  as  follows  : —

"No.  19.-3.30  p.m.,  Wednesday,  February  12th.

"No.  20. — 4  p.m.,  same  day.

"  No.  21. — 4.10  p.m.,  same  day.

"No.  22. — 6  a.m.,  Thursday,  February  6th.

"No.  23. — 7  a.m.,  same  day."

Remarks. — AVhen  the  patient's  mother  went  to  her  bedroom  on  the
morning  of  the  6th,  she  found  the  patient  asleep  and  two  pieces  of
paper  on  a  table  by  the  bedside. On  each  was  a  rough  cross,  and  on


186


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


one  the  figure  6  and  on  the  other  the  figure  7.  Both  very  badly
written. She  said  she  had  not  awakened  during  blie  night.

The  other  suggestions  were  carried  out  during  hypnosis  in  my
room.  The  time  being  marked  by  the  patient  in  my  note-book  and
witnessed  by  others.

Tlie  five  suggestions  were  given  rapidly,  one  after  the  other,  and  then
the  patient  was  asked  when  they  fell  due.  These  complicated  series
of  suggestions  were  never  read  over  to  the  patient  more  than  twice
and  in  some  instances  were  only  read  to  her  once,  and  that  quickly.

I  rehypnotised  the  patient  and  questioned  her  about  the  suggestions
which  had  been  carried  out  during  the  night  and  presumably  in  natural
sleep.  She  told  me  she  had  no  recollection  in  reference  to  them,  and
on  subsequent  occasions,  when  suggestions  were  again  carried  out  in
natural  sleep,  the  patient  could  never  recall  anything  regarding  them.

Experiments.  —  Wednesday,  February  12th.

JVo.  24. — 3.30  p.m. Suggestion  in  2,220  minutes.

JVo.  25. — 3.30  p.m. Suggestion  in  2,285  minutes.

iVo.  26. — 3  p.m. Suggestion  in  10,115  minutes.

iTo.  27. — 3  p.m. Suggestion  in  10,150  minutes.

JVo.  28. — 4  p.m. Suggestion  in  20,190  minutes.

Result. — No.  24. — 4.30  a.m.,  Friday,  February  14th.  ■

No.  25. — 5.35  a.m.,  Friday,  February  14th.

No.  26. — 3.35  p.m.,  Wednesday,  February  19th.

No.  27. — 4.10  p.m.,  Wednesday,  February  19th.

No.  28.— 4.30  p.m.,  Wednesday,  February  26th.— All  correct.

At  the  time  the  suggestions  were  made,  the  patient  was  asked  to
calculate  mentally  when  they  all  fell  due. She  replied  as  follows  : —
"  No.  24. — -18  hours  and  40  minutes,  or  10.10  to-morrow  morning.
"No.  25. — 11.15  to-morrow  morning.

"No.  26. — 25  minutes  to  4  p.m.  next  Wednesday."  Answered
immediately.

"No.  27. — 5.30p.m.  next  Wednesday." Answered  immediately.

"  No.  28. — A  fortnight  and  half-an-hour." Answered  immediately.

Remarks. — In  No.  24  the  answer  was  18  hours,  20  minutes  too
early.  It  would  have  been  correct  if  the  interval  suggested  had
been  1,120,  instead  of  2,220  minutes.

In  No.  25  the  answer  was  18  hours,  20  minutes  too  early,  but
would  have  been  correct  had  the  suggested  interval  been  1,185,
instead  of  2,285  minutes.

In  No.  26  the  answer  was  correct.

In  No.  27  the  answer  was  1  hour,  20  minutes  too  late.  The
interval  here  seems  to  have  been  taken  as  7  days,  150  minutes,  instead
of  10,150  minutes.


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  187


In  No.  28  the  answer  is  correct  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  the  exact
time  of  fulfilment  is  not  given.

At  the  time  I  made  the  suggestions,  I  also  calculated  when  they
would  fall  due,  as  follows  : —

No.  24. — 5  a.m.  on  the  14th. Wrong. Half-an-hour  too  late.

No.  25. — 6.5  a.m. Wrong. Half-an-hour  too  late.

No.  26.-3.35  p.m.  on  the  19th.  Right.

No.  27.— 4.10  p.m.  on  the  19th.  Right.

No.  28. — 4.25  p.m.  on  the  26th. Wrong. 5  minutes  too  soon.

Nos.  24  and  25  were  fulfilled  during  sleep  on  the  14th.  The
patient  on  awaking  in  the  morning  found  papers  by  her  bedside,  with
4.30  and  5.35  written  on  them.  On  the  19th,  she  was  hypnotised  in
my  room  at  3  p.m.,  and  carried  out  Nos.  26  and  27  while  asleep.
On  both  occasions  she  wrote  the  time  in  my  note-book,  and  this  was
witnessed.  I  asked  her  during  hypnosis  whether  she  remembered  the
last  suggestion  (No.  28),  which  I  had  made  to  her  the  previous  week.
She  said  she  did,  and  repeated  the  number  of  minutes  correctly,  but
stated  she  had  never  thought  of  it  since,  and  did  not  know  when
it  fell  due,  or  the  number  of  minutes  that  had  elapsed.  She  had
apparently  forgotten  that  she  had  calculated  when  it  fell  due,  at  the
time  the  suggestion  was  made.  No.  28  was  carried  out  correctly
on  February  26th,  the  patient  being  asleep.

Experiments. — Wednesday,  February  19th.
No.  29. — 3.30  p.m. Suggestion  in  720  minutes.
No.  30. — 3.30  p.m. Suggestion  in  780  minutes.
No.  31. — 3.30  p.m. Suggestion  in  2,160  minutes.
No.  32. — 3  p.m. Suggestion  in  10,135  minutes.
No.  33. — 3  p.m. Suggestion  in  20,210  minutes.
Residts.—lSio.  29.— Thursday,  February  20th,  3.30  a.m.
No.  30.— Thursday,  February  20th,  4.30  a.m.
No.  31.— Friday,  February  21st,  3.30  a.m.
No.  32. — Wednesday,  February  26th,  3.55  p.m.
No.  33. — Wednesday,  March  4th,  3.50  p.m. — All  correct,  with  the
exception  that  No.  33,  stated  to  be  due  at  3.50,  was  executed  at  3.48.

At  the  time  the  suggestions  were  made  the  patient  was  asked  when
they  fell  due.  She  replied  quickly,  without  apparently  making  any
calculation.  Her  answers  were  correct,  with  the  exception  of  No.  32,
which  she  said  was  due  at  2.5  p.m.  on  Wednesday,  February  26th.
This  was  1  hour,  50  minutes  too  early  and  represented  an  interval  of
7  days,  less  55  minutes,  instead  of  7  days,  plus  55  minutes.

On  awaking  at  7  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  the  patient
found  a  piece  of  paper  with  3.30  marked  on  it  and  another  with  4.30,
On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  she  found  a  paper  with  3.30  marked  on


188


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


it.  She  had  no  recollection  of  waking  during  the  night ;  and,  as  usual,
questioning  in  hypnosis  failed  to  revive  any  memory  of  what  had  taken
place.

Experhnents,  AVednesday,  February  26th,  3.30  p.m.

No.  34. — Suggestion  in  2,140  minutes.

No.  35. — Suggestion  in  3,590  minutes.

No.  36. — Suggestion  in  5,030  minutes.

No.  37. — Suggestion  in  10,125  minutes.

No.  38. — Suggestion  in  10,100  minutes.

No.  39. — Suggestion  in  20,180  minutes.

Results.— No.  34.— Friday,  February  28th,  3.10  a.m.
No.  35.— Saturday,  February  29th,  3.20  a.m.
No.  36. — Sunday,  March  1st,  3.20  a.m.
No.  37. — Not  recorded. [Due  March  4th,  at  4.15  p.m.]
No.  38. — Wednesday,  March  4th,  3.48  p.m. Patient  stated  the
time  to  be  3.50.

No.  39. — March  11th,  3.51^  p.m.  Patient  stated  the  time  to
be  3.50.

All  correct,  with  the  exception  of  2  minutes  in  one  instance,  and
Ih  minutes  in  another  between  the  time  the  suggestion  was  due  and
the  moment  at  which  it  was  carried  out.

Remarks. — These  suggestions  were  only  read  to  the  patient  once,
when  she  was  asked  to  repeat  them,  which  she  did  correctly,  with  the
exception  of  No.  37.  She  was  told  not  to  make  any  calculations.  I
did  not  calculate  when  the  suggestions  would  fall  due  at  the  time  I
made  them.  Nos.  34,  35,  and  36  were  executed  during  sleep,  and  the
papers,  as  usual,  were  found  by  the  patient  at  her  bedside  in  the
morning.  No.  38  was  carried  out  at  3.48  p.m.,  on  March  4th,  instead
of  at  3.50,  when  it  really  fell  due.  The  patient,  however,  stated  the
time  correctly  at  which  she  ought  to  have  carried  it  out,  A'iz.,  3.50.  It
is  to  be  noted  that  3.50,  March  4th,  is  the  date  at  which  another
suggestion  made  a  fortnight  before  fell  due,  and  this  has  already
been  recorded  in  its  proper  place.  The  patient  stated  at  3.48  that  she
had  to  make  two  crosses  and  to  put  down  3.50  twice.  No.  37,  due  at
4.15  p.m.,  Wednesday,  March  4th,  I  have  no  record  of.  I  am  not  quite
certain  whether  this  is  my  fault  or  the  patient's.  I  was  hypno-
tising another  patient  when  the  suggestions  were  fulfilled  and  may
have  omitted  to  enter  this  one.  On  the  other  hand,  the  patient  may
have  failed  to  carry  it  out.  Three  suggestions  fell  due  very  quickly,
and  one  of  them,  as  we  have  seen,  belonged  to  another  series.  When
suggestions  were  made  to  fall  due  in  a  fortnight  and  I  saw  the  patient
in  the  week  between,  I  invariably  questioned  her  in  hypnosis  in
reference  to  the  unfulfilled  suggestions. She  always  assured  me  that


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  189


she  had  never  thought  of  them,  did  not  know  how  much  of  the  time
had  elapsed,  nor  when  they  fell  due.  No.  39  was  carried  out  at  3.51|,
but  the  patient  gave  3.50  as  the  time  at  which  it  ought  to  be  executed.

Experiments. — Wednesday,  March  4th,  3.45  p.m.

iVo.  40. — Suggestion  in  10,080  minutes.

JVo.  41. — Suggestion  in  10,055  minutes.

JS^o.  42. — Suggestion  in  10,040  minutes.

]Vo.  43. — Suggestion  in  750  minutes.

JVo.  44. — Suggestion  in  2,160  minutes.

JVo.  45. — Suggestion  in  2,195  minutes.

Results. — IVo.  43. — 4.15  a.m.,  Thursday,  March  5th.

Ifo.  44. — 3.45  a.m.,  Friday,  March  6th.

]\ro.  45.— 4.20  a.m.,  Friday,  March  6th.

JVo.  42. — 3.5  p.m.,  Wednesday,  March  11th.

i7o.  41._3.22  p.m.,  Wednesday,  March  11th.

JVo.  40.— 3.44  p.m.,  Wednesday,  March  11th.

All  correct,  with  the  exception  of  slight  variations  between  the
correctly  estimated  time  the  suggestion  fell  due,  and  its  execution ;
these  amounted  to  1  minute  in  No.  40  and  2  minutes  in  No.  41.

Remarks. — When  these  suggestions  were  given  I  did  not  calculate
them,  nor  ask  the  patient  to  do  so.  Mr.  Barkworth,  a  svell-known
member  of  this  Society,  and  Dr.  Barclay,  a  medical  friend,  were
present  during  the  greater  part  of  the  seance  on  Wednesday,  March
11th,  and  witnessed  and  signed  the  suggestions  as  they  fell  due.
When  the  patient  said  it  was  3.20  the  exact  time  was  3.22.  When
she  said  it  was  3.45  the  exact  time  was  3.44.  When  she  said  it
was  3.50  [No.  39  of  former  series,  made  February  26th]  the  time
was  3. 51  J.

At  this  seance,  March  11th,  fresh  suggestions  were  made  under  the
following  conditions.  Mr.  Barkworth  and  Dr.  Barclay  were  both  put
en  rapport  with  the  patient,  and  it  was  agreed  that  they  should  each
make  two  time  suggestions  to  her,  arranged  so  as  to  fall  due  at  the  next
seance,  when  they  both  promised  to  be  present.  The  suggestions  were
made  when  I  was  out  of  the  room,  and  I  was  not  told  what  they  were
until  after  their  fuliilment.  AYhile  I  was  still  in  the  room,  both
gentlemen  were  busy  for  some  considerable  time  with  pencil  and  paper
before  they  were  able  to  work  out  their  calculations  correctly,  and  I
observed  a  great  deal  of  whispered  consultation  and  frequent  correc-
tion of  their  results.  At  least,  I  imagined  that  this  was  what  was
taking  place,  for  I  did  Jiot  hear  what  they  said.

On  Thursday,  March  26th,  I  hypnotised  the  patient  at  12.30  p.m.
Mr.  Barkworth  was  present  and  Dr.  Barclay  came  later.  At  22
minutes  to  1  the  patient  said  she  had  to  make  a  cross  at  20  minutes


190


Dv.  J.  Milne  Bramtvell.


to  1.  Error  of  2  minutes.  Mr.  Bark  worth  corroborated  the  time.  At
1  minute  to  1  she  said  she  had  to  mark  1  o'clock.  Error  of  1  minute
as  checked  by  Mr.  Barkworth  and  myself.  At  8  minutes  past  I  she
said  she  had  to  mark  the  time  :  this  was  correct.  At  14  minutes
past  1  she  again  said  she  had  to  mark  the  time  :  this  also  was  correct.
Dr.  Barclay  was  now  present.

Mr.  Barkworth  and  Dr.  Barclay  had  both  mislaid  their  notes  and
were  unable  with  certainty  to  recall  the  suggestions.  The  patient  was
asked  during  hypnosis  if  she  remembered  them  and  replied  : — "  They
were  made  at  4  p.m.  last  Wednesday  week,  and  were  to  be  fulfilled  in
21,400,  21,420,  21,428,  and  21,434  minutes.''  She  said  Mr.  Barkworth
had  made  two  of  these  suggestions  and  Dr.  Barclay  the  others,  and
that  she  had  made  no  calculation  at  the  time  and  had  not  thought  of
them  afterwai'ds.  These  questions  were  put  to  the  patient  after  the
suggestions  had  been  fulfilled.  On  other  occasions,  when  a  week  or
two  had  elapsed  after  the  suggestions  had  been  executed,  I  found  that
she  was  unable  to  recall  them  correctly  in  hypnosis.  On  April  22nd,
Dr.  Barclay  sent  me  the  lost  memo,  of  his  two  suggestions,  viz.,  21,428
and  21,434  minutes  from  4  p.m.  on  the  day  already  mentioned.  On
April  27th,  Mr.  Barkworth  wrote  to  tell  me  that  he  also  had  found
his  lost  memo,  and  that  the  suggestions  were  21,400,  21,420,  21,428,
and  21,434  minutes  ;  the  first  two  having  been  made  by  himself  and
the  two  latter  by  Dr.  Barclay.  This  agrees  with  the  patient's  account.
The  results  of  the  suggestions  were  correct,  with  the  exception  of  the
minute  differences  in  time  already  mentioned.  These  experiments  just
recorded  are  Nos.  46,  47,  48,  and  49.

A'pril  Sih,  1896. — A  fresh  series  of  suggestions  was  made  on  this
day,  some  to  fall  due  during  the  night,  some  next  day  in  my  presence.
The  patient  lost  her  papers  recording  those  made  at  home  and  I  was
too  busy  to  enter  at  the  time  those  that  were  fulfilled  in  my  presence,
and  therefoi'e  cannot  be  sure  of  the  results.  These  are  the  only
expei'iments  in  the  whole  series  which  are  not  recorded  and  are  only
omitted  for  the  above  reasons.

Experiments. — Thursday,  May  7th,  3  p.m.
No.  50. — Suggestion  in  8,650  minutes.
No.  51. — Suggestion  in  8,680  minutes.
No.  52. — Suggestion  in  8,700  minutes.

I  still  further  complicated  these  by  suggesting  as  follows  : —
"  No.  50  is  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  waking  state.  Five  minutes
before  51  comes  due  you  are  to  fall  asleep.  No.  51  is  to  be  fulfilled
while  you  are  asleep,  and  five  minutes  afterwards  you  are  to  awake
and  remain  so  until  after  the  fulfilment  of  No.  52.  Eight  minutes
after  52  falls  due  you  are  again  to  fall  asleep."


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  191


Result. — These  suggestions  were  carried  out  correctly,  with  the
exception  that  she  fell  asleep  at  3.31  instead  of  3.35.

Remarks. — On  May  13th,  the  patient  came  into  my  consulting
room  at  3.5  p.m.,  and  almost  immediately  fainted.  She  would  have
fallen,  had  I  not  caught  her  in  my  arms  and  laid  her  down.  She  had
recently  met  with  a  severe  accident,  and  was  in  acute  suffering.
Immediately  on  regaining  consciousness,  she  said  she  had  to  make  a
cross  at  3.10,  and  did  so  in  my  case  book.  Time  correct.  She  fell
asleep  at  3.31,  and  at  3.40  she  said  she  had  to  make  a  cross,  and  mark
20  minutes  to  4.  She  awoke  spontaneously  at  3.45.  Exactly  at  4
o'clock  she  said  she  had  to  make  a  cross,  and  mark  4  o'clock.  Exactly
at  4.8  she  fell  asleep.  Others  were  present  in  the  room  when  all
these  suggestions  were  fulfilled,  with  the  exception  of  the  first.

Experiments. — Wednesday,  May  13th,  4.30  p.m.

On  this  occasion  I  said  to  the  patient,  "You  are  to  carry  out  all
the  suggestions  made  last  Thursday,  but  to-day  you  are  to  start  from
2.55  instead  of  from  3  p.m.,  and  to  each  of  them  you  are  to  add  1,440
minutes."  As  I  was  much  pressed  for  time,  these  suggestions  were
made  very  hurriedly,  and  without  explanation,  and  I  was  not  at  all
certain  whether  the  patient  undei'stood  them.

Results. — Correct,  with  the  exception  of  slight  diiFerences  between
the  correctly  estimated  time  and  the  moment  at  which  the  suggestion
was  fulfilled.

Remarks. — On  Wednesday,  May  20th,  the  patient  entered  my
room  at  3  p.m.  At  3.5,  in  the  waking  state,  she  said  she  had  to  make
a  cross  and  mark  the  time.  She  fell  asleep  at  3.30  and  at  3.35  she
said  she  had  to  make  a  cross  and  write  down  25  minutes  to  4.  She
continued  asleep  until  3.40,  when  she  awoke  spontaneously.  According
to  the  suggestions  made  last  week,  she  was  to  remain  awake  until  the
fulfilment  of  the  next  suggestion,  but,  as  she  was  still  suffering  fi'om
the  effects  of  her  accident,  I  hypnotised  her  and  made  curative
suggestions,  and  told  her  she  would  awake  one  minute  before  the
next  suggestion  fell  due.  She  awoke  at  3.49,  and  at  3.50  said  she
had  to  make  a  cross  and  mark  the  time,  which  she  stated  to  be  3.55.
I  hypnotised  her  again  immediately.  At  4.3,  while  still  asleep,  she
said  it  was  3  minutes  past  4  and  that  I  had  suggested  she  should
fall  asleep  at  that  hour.  The  suggestions  were  correctly  fulfilled,
with  the  exception  that  the  suggestion  due  at  3.55  was  carried
out  at  3.50,  although  she  stated  it  to  be  due  at  3.55.  It  is  worth
noting  that  on  this  occasion  the  patient  fell  asleep  at  3.30,  the
exact  time  suggested,  on  the  last  occasion  she  fell  asleep  at  3.31
instead  of  3.35  as  suggested.  This  is  interesting,  as  the  latter
suggestion,  carried  out  correctly,  was the  former  one  complicated

o


192


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


by  5  minutes  having  been  deducted  from  the  starting  point  and
1,440  minutes  added  to  the  intervah

These  experiments,  Nos.  53,  54,  and  55,  complete  the  series,  but
the  subject  is  still  available  for  further  ones  and  I  shall  be  glad  to
receive  any  suggestions  in  reference  to  them.

Summary.

Fifty-five  experiments  are  recorded  ;  of  these  one  apparently  was
not  carried  out  at  all,  while  in  another  (No.  9)  the  patient  had  mis-
taken the  original  suggestion  and  fulfilled  it  correctly  in  accordance
with  what  she  thought  it  had  been.  The  remainder  were  completely
successful,  with  the  exception  that  in  eight  instances  (Nos.  33,  38,  39,
40,  41,  46,  47,  55)  there  were  minute  diffei'ences,  never  exceeding  five
minutes,  between  the  patient's  correct  estimation  of  when  the  sugges-
tion fell  due  and  the  moment  at  which  she  carried  it  out.  The
proportions  which  these  errors  bear  to  the  I'espective  intervals  vary
between  1  to  2,028  and  1  to  21,420.

As  regards  a  certain  proportion  of  the  experiments,  the  correctness
of  the  results  depends  upon  the  evidence  of  the  patient  and  her  friends.
The  remainder,  howevei",  were  carried  out  before  me  and  other  wit-
nesses. In  reference  to  these  the  following  particulars  are  worthy
of  note.  (1.)  A  complicated  series  of  figures,  which  she  would  have
been  unable  to  remember  when  awake,  was  read  over  to  the  patient
while  asleep.  (2.)  These  generally  started  from  imaginary  hours,  and
when  she  calculated  in  hypnosis  when  they  fell  due  she  was  frequently
wrong.  Thus,  out  of  24  calculations,  the  first  9  were  wrong,  and,  of
the  remaining  15,  11  were  right  and  4  wrong.  It  is  worthy  of  note
that,  as  the  experiments  advanced,  not  only  the  frequency,  but  also  the
extent  of  these  errors  decreased,  and  the  answers  were  given  much
more  rapidly.  The  errors  in  calculation  had  apparently  no  effect
on  the  ultimate  results,  these,  with  few  exceptions,  being  correct.
(3.)  She  sometimes  remained  asleep  for  an  hour  or  more  after  the
suggestions  were  made.  (4.)  She  had  no  recollection  of  the  sug-
gestions in  the  waking  state.  (5.)  When  the  suggestions  were  fulfilled
in  my  presence  and  in  that  of  other  witnesses  she  had  sometimes
been  several  hours,  either  asleep  or  awake,  under  such  conditions  that  it
was  impossible  for  her  to  consult  the  time.  (6.)  It  was  impossible  for
her  to  receive  direct  or  indirect  suggestions  from  me,  as  I  rarely  knew
the  exact  time  at  which  the  suggestion  was  due,  and  was  generally
busily  occupied  in  hypnotising  some  other  patient.  I  may  add  that  I
have  a  bad  memory  for  figures,  and  even  when  I  had  previously
correctly  estimated  the  time  of  fulfilment,  this  was  never  in  my  mind
when  the  patient  carried  out  the  suggestion.  (7.)  The  results  of  the
experiments  were  only  completely  estimated  after  the  series  was  com-


Personally  observed  Hy]pnotic  Phenomena.  193


pleted,  when  a  friend,  Mr.  Bartrum,  B.Sc,  kindly  checked  them  for
me.  He  discovered  that  some  of  my  calculations  made  at  the  time
had  been  erroneous.  I  am  also  indebted  to  him  for  a  critical  examina-
tion of  the  calculations  the  patient  was  asked  to  make  when  the
suggestions  were  given.

Memory.

Memory  in  relationship  to  hypnotic  states  varies  widely,  and  is
influenced  by  the  depth  of  the  hypnosis,  the  personality  of  the  subject,
and  the  suggestions  of  the  operator.

Memory  in  hypnosis  may  be  : —

(1)  Unchanged.

In  this  group  the  subjects  when  hypnotised  can  recall  the  events  of
waking  life,  and  on  awakening  can  remember  all  that  has  passed.

In  some  instances,  however,  where  the  memory  is  apparently
unchanged,  closer  examination  shows  that  it  has  either  been  inci'eased
or  diminished. Of  this  the  two  following  cases  are  examples.

(a)  Miss  A.  I  had  frequently  hypnotised  this  patient  and  could
influence  by  suggestion,  not  only  the  voluntary  muscles,  but  also  the
special  senses.  On  awakening  she  could  always  recall  what  had  passed,
despite  suggestions  to  the  contrary.  At  a  later  date  I  found  I  could
make  her  analgesic  by  suggestion.  Touching  the  cornea,  passing
needles  deeply  into  the  flesh,  and  probing  the  nose  and  vocal  chords
were  unaccompanied  by  pain  or  disagreeable  sensation.  On  awaking,
despite  suggested  amnesia,  the  patient  could  recall  all  the  tactile
sensations  associated  with  these  operations,  but  was  unable,  even  in
response  to  suggestion,  to  revive  any  memory  of  pain.

(b)  Mrs.  B.  In  this  patient  certain  changes  in  the  voluntary
muscles  and  special  senses  could  also  be  induced,  all  of  which  she
remembei'ed  on  awaking.  She  could  not,  however,  be  made  analgesic
by  suggestion.  Though  her  memory  was  apparently  unchanged,
experiment  revealed  the  existence  of  a  sub-conscious  memory,  superior
to  her  normal  one.  I  suggested  to  her  during  hypnosis  that  she  should
fall  asleep  the  first  time  a  certain  friend  called  and  shook  hands  with
her.  On  awaking  she  remembered  the  suggestion.  A  week  or  two
passed  without  the  friend  calling,  when  one  day  he  met  her  at  my
house  and  shook  hands  with  her.  She  did  not  fall  asleep.  We  had
both  forgotten  the  exact  terms  of  the  suggestion  and  believed  it  had
been  a  failure.  Some  time  afterwards  the  friend  called  at  the  patient's
own  house  and  she  fell  asleep  the  moment  he  shook  hands  with  her.
She  was  not  thinking  of  the  suggestion  at  the  time.

(2)  The  subject  may  remember  during  hypnosis  the  events  of
waking  life,  with  a  clearness  corresponding  to  his  powers  of  memory
in  the  normal  state,  and  on  awakening  have  a  more  or  less  indistinct
recollection  of  what  has  passed. The  subject  will  frequently  state


194


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


that  he  can  recall  all  that  has  been  said  or  done,  but  on  questioning
him  it  will  generally  be  found  that  he  remembers  very  little  and  that
this  fades  rapidly.

(3)  Here,  in  response  to  suggestion,  the  subject  may  recall  the
events  of  waking  life  to  a  greater  extent  than  he  could  do  in  the
normal  condition,  as  well  as  what  has  taken  place  during  previous
hypnoses ;  and,  on  awaking,  may  have  lost  all  recollection  of  what  has
occurred.  The  lost  memory  can  be  restored  to  a  greater  or  lesser
extent  by  suggestion.  The  improvement  in  memory  extends  to  remote
as  well  as  recent  incidents,  and  I  have  noticed  numerous  examples  of
both.  One  patient,  whose  natural  memory  was  unusually  bad,  was  able
to  recall  on  awaking  some  verses  with  which  she  was  previously
unacquainted,  and  which  were  only  read  over  to  her  twice  during
hypnosis.  Another,  who  could  play  a  few  dance  tunes  upon  the
piano,  but  who  could  only  do  so  with  the  music  before  her  when
awake,  was  able,  when  hypnotised  and  blindfolded,  to  play  the  same
tunes  much  more  brilliantly.  T  have  found  that  subjects  who  could
not  remember  events  which  happened  at  an  earlier  age  than  six  or
seven  were  able,  when  hypnotised,  to  recall  those  which  had  occurred
at  the  age  of  two  and  a-half  years.  In  many  of  these  instances  I
have  obtained  confirmatory  evidence,  at  all  events  as  regards  the
occurrence  of  the  facts  themselves,  from  the  testimony  of  older  relatives.

The  recollection  during  the  hypnotic  state  of  what  has  occurred
in  waking  life,  and  previous  hypnotic  conditions,  rarely  appears
spontaneously  in  the  first  instance.  In  some  cases  frequent  sugges-
tions are  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  this  revival  of  memory,  but
once  induced,  it  will  often  recur  spontaneously  in  subsequent
hypnoses,  or  at  all  events,  it  can  then  be  easily  produced  by
suggestion.  When  a  subject  has  forgotten  on  awaking  the  events
of  the  hypnotic  state,  I  have  never  observed  a  spontaneous  revival  of
this  lost  memory  in  the  normal  condition.

(4)  The  subject  may  be  unable,  owing  to  suggestion,  to  recall  during
hypnosis  the  events  of  waking  life,  or  those  of  previous  hypnoses,  and
on  awaking  may  have  lost  all  recollection  of  what  has  taken  place.
This  lost  memory  will  not  reappear  spontaneously,  but  can  be  revived
by  suggestion.  For  example,  one  of  my  patients,  a  nervous  girl,  was
much  frightened  by  seeing  a  friend  in  a  fit,  and  was  unable  to  dismiss
the  scene  from  her  mind.  This  was  blotted  out  by  suggestion,  and
she  has  not  thought  of  it  since,  either  in  the  normal  state  or  in
hypnosis.

(5)  The  subject  may  be  unable,  even  in  response  to  suggestion,  to
remember  certain  events  and  sensations  of  previous  hypnoses.  Of
this  we  have  already  had  an  example  in  the  patient  who  could  not
recall  painful  sensations  after  suggested  analgesia. This  case  may


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  195


be  taken  as  a  typical  one,  for  amongst  the  numerous  operations
performed  during  hypnosis  with  which  I  have  had  to  do,  I  have  in  no
instance  been  able  to  revive  any  memory  of  pain.  Certain  events,
particularly  those  occurring  in  the  lethargic  condition,  cannot  be
recalled  by  suggestion.  For  example,  some  subjects  are  unable  to
remember  various  sounds  from  the  outside  world,  or  to  recall  things
said  and  done  by  the  spectators,  but  not  referring  to  them.  Others
can  remember  everything  that  has  passed  in  a  previous  lethargic
condition,  even  when  it  has  been  suggested  that  they  should  forget  it.
For  instance,  I  hypnotised  0.,  a  good  somnambule,  and  suggested  that
he  should  hear  nothing  but  my  voice,  and  that  only  when  I  addressed
him  directly.  I  then  held  a  long  conversation  with  a  medical  friend,
on  a  topic  unconnected  with  the  patient  or  with  hypnotism.  On
awaking,  C.  was  unable  to  recall  anything  that  had  been  said.  On
being  rehypnotised,  however,  in  response  to  suggestion,  he  gave  a  better
precis  of  the  conversation  than  either  my  friend  or  I  could  have  done.

(6)  The  subject  may  recall  during  hypnosis  the  events  of  previous
hypnoses  and  those  of  waking  life,  the  latter  to  a  greater  extent  than
he  could  do  in  the  normal  condition ;  and  by  suggestion  this  memory
may  be  retained  on  awaking.

Here  amnesia  has  been  prevented  by  suggestion,  and  there  is  now
no  break  in  the  memory  of  the  hypnotised  suljject.  The  only  alteration
is  one  of  improvement ;  the  subject  now  remembers  in  the  waking  state
past  events  which  he  was  unable  voluntai'ily  to  recall,  but  the  memory
of  which  has  been  revived  in  hypnosis.  He  also  recalls  the  recent
impressions  he  has  received  during  hypnosis, — impressions  which  he
would  not  have  been  able  to  revive  so  vividly  had  they  been  made  in
the  waking  state.  He  remembers,  for  instances,  the  piece  of  poetry
which  has  been  read  to  him  twice  during  hypnosis,  and  which  he  would
have  required  to  have  heard  read  many  times  in  the  normal  state  in
order  to  retain  an  equally  clear  recollection  of  it.

Memory  in  reference  to  certain  Post-Hypnotic  Conditions.

I  formerly  believed  that  all  post-hypnotic  acts,  resulting  from
suggestion  in  hypnosis,  were  forgotten  immediately  after  fulfilment.  I
have  lately  observed,  however,  that  when  the  suggestions  are  carried
out  some  time  after  awaking,  this  is  by  no  means  always  the  case.  If  I
suggest  to  a  subject  that  his  arm  will  become  rigid  on  awaking,  this
post-hypnotic  act  is  immediately  forgotten  after  fulfilment.  On  the
other  hand,  if  I  successfully  suggest  to  the  same  patient,  who  perhaps
has  been  suffering  from  insomnia,  that  he  will  sleep  eight  hours  the
following  night,  he  will  remember  that  he  has  done  so.

An  attempt  was  made  by  some  members  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee
of  this  Society  to  recall  by  means  of  suggestion  what  had  occurred


196


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


during  the  administration  of  nitrous  oxide  gas.  This  was  a  failure,
and  I  have  also  been  unsuccessful  in  my  endeavours  to  revive  in  a
similar  way  the  recollection  of  what  has  taken  place  during  normal
sleep.  With  one  subject,  whose  memory  during  hypnosis  of  the  events
of  waking  life  was  exceptionally  good,  I  carried  out  the  following
experiment : — The  patient  was  in  the  habit  of  falling  asleep  every
Sunday  afternoon  in  his  arm-chair,  and  it  was  arranged,  on  these
occasions,  that  he  should  be  read  aloud  to,  and  that  the  same  sentences
should  be  repeated  again  and  again.  I  afterwards  hypnotised  him,  and
tried  to  make  him  recall  what  he  had  heard,  but  the  experiment,
though  frequently  repeated,  was  invariably  unsuccessful.

With  another  patient  I  tried  in  the  same  manner  to  revive  the
memory  of  what  had  happened  in  a  series  of  attacks  of  a  hysterical
nature,  in  which  an  apparent  change  of  personality  had  occurred.
The  attempt  was  a  failure,  despite  the  fact  that  the  patient  was  a
good  somuambule.

Waking  Somnambulism.

This  term  is  ajjplied  by  Beaunis  to  a  condition  in  which  the  patient
will  accept  suggestions  similar  to  hypnotic  ones,  without  having  on
that  occasion  been  subjected  to  any  hypnotic  process,  or  having  passed
thi'ough  any  state  resembling  sleep  or  trance.  He  considers  the
condition  a  hypnotic  one  for  two  reasons  :  (1)  The  patient  will  receive
other  suggestions  of  a  hypnotic  nature;  (2)  These  suggestions  are
forgotten  immediately  after  fulfilment.  I  have  observed  that  all
subjects,  in  whom  hypnosis  has  previously  been  induced,  will  sub-
sequently exhibit  the  same  range  of  phenomena  in  response  to  suggestion
in  the  apparently  waking  state.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  noticed
some  slight  points  of  difference  between  the  two  conditions.  In
waking  somnambulism,  while  sometimes  the  suggestions  were  forgotten
almost  immediately,  at  others  they  were  remembered  for  a  longer
period,  and  in  some  cases  were  recalled  after  the  lapse  of  weeks.  The
subject  of  one  of  these  experiments  was  questioned  in  hypnosis  in
reference  to  her  memory  of  suggestions  carried  out  in  the  state  of
waking  somnambulism.  She  replied  :  "Sometimes  I  forget  them  quickly,
sometimes  remember  them  for  an  hour  or  two,  never  longer."  When
I  reminded  her  that  she  had  recalled  one  at  the  end  of  a  month,  she
replied,  "  Oh,  yes  !  You  made  the  suggestion  just  before  I  left  your
room  and  I  talked  it  over  with  my  mother  on  the  way  home."  Here
the  recollection  of  the  event  was  complicated  by  the  patient's  verbal
description  of  it,  and  possibly  by  her  mother's  comments.

With  another  patient,  I  noticed  a  difference  between  the  mental
attitude  in  reference  to  hallucinations  suggested  in  hypnosis  and  those
created  in  waking  somnambulism. This  subject,  a  good  somnambule,  on


Personally  observed  Hyimotic  Phenomena.  197


several  occasions,  when  hypnotised,  sav/  by  suggestion  a  halkicinatory
cat.  She  was  always  delighted  with  the  imaginary  animal  and  evinced
great  pleasure  in  playing  with  it.  At  a  later  date,  in  the  apparently
waking  state,  I  successfully  suggested  a  similar  hallucination.  The
patient  did  not  like  it  at  all.  She  said,  "  I  see  that  cat,  but  I  know
it  is  not  a  real  one,  I  know  it  is  only  an  imaginary  one  which  you
have  made  me  see.  I  don't  like  this.  I  don't  mind  seeing  the  -cat  now,
because  I  know  you  have  done  it  as  an  experiment  and  will  blot  it  out
again.  But  if  I  commence  to  see  cats  when  I  am  by  myself,  I  shall  be
horribly  frightened."

So-called  Hypnotic  Automatism.

"When  I  first  visited  Nancy  in  1891,  Dr.  Liebeault  showed  me  one
of  his  subjects,  called  Camille,  who  had  been  frequently  hypnotised,
and  whom  he  regarded  as  a  typical  specimen  of  deep  somnambulism
illustrating  hypnotic  automatism  in  its  highest  degree.  He  assured
me  that  the  suggestions  he  made  to  her  were  carried  out  with  the
fatality  of  a  falling  stone.  He  hypnotised  her,  and  suggested  that
on  awaking  she  should  find,  on  opening  the  outer  door,  that  there  was
a  violent  snow  storm ;  that  she  should  at  once  return,  complain  of  this,
and  proceed  to  the  stove  to  warm  herself.  While  so  doing  one  of  her
hands  would  touch  the  stove  and  be  burnt.  It  was  a  warm  summer's
day,  and  of  course  the  stove  had  not  been  lighted.  The  jjatient
refused  to  accept  the  suggestion.  Dr.  Liebeault  insisted  for  some  time
and  then  gave  up  the  attempt,  saying  that  she  sometimes  refused
suggestions.  He  then  asked  her,  "  Will  you  do  this  another  time  if  you
will  not  do  it  to-day  ?"  She  replied,  "Yes,  to-morrow."  On  the  follow-
ing day  the  suggestion  was  repeated  and  carried  out  in  all  its  details.

Miss  C,  aged  19,  an  uneducated  girl,  had  been  frequently  hyp-
notised by  me  and  was  a  good  somnambule.  She  suffered  greatly  from
her  teeth,  of  which  she  had  only  sixteen  left,  all  decayed.  These  were
extracted  at  Leeds  in  the  presence  of  60  medical  men  and  dental
surgeons.  Antesthesia  was  produced  by  written  suggestion,  while  I
remained  in  another  room.  The  operation  was  perfectly  successful  and
unattended  by  the  slightest  pain  either  then  or  afterwards.  At  a  later
date  I  examined  her  mouth  and  found  that  a  fragment  of  one  of  the
stumps  remained.  1  told  her  to  come  to  my  house  to  have  it
removed.  She  mentioned  this  to  one  of  her  neighbours,  an  old  woman,
who  advised  her  to  have  no  more  teeth  extracted,  as  it  would  cause
her  mouth  to  fall  in.  The  following  day  she  presented  herself  and  was
at  once  hypnotised,  but  refused  to  open  her  mouth,  or  to  permit  me  to
extract  the  tooth.  Emphatic  suggestion  continued  for  half-an-hour
produced  no  result.  This  was  the  fii'st  occasion  on  which  she  had
refused  a  suggestion. I  then  awoke  her  and  asked  her  why  she  refused


198


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


to  have  the  tooth  extracted.  She  told  me  what  her  neighbour  had
said,  and  expressed  her  determination  to  have  nothing  more  done.  I
explained  the  absurdity  of  this,  and  pointed  out  that,  as  she  had  only
the  fragment  of  one  tooth  remaining,  its  removal  could  not  aifect  the
appearance  of  her  face.  As  she  was  still  obstinate,  I  said,  "  Unless
this  fragment  is  removed  you  cannot  have  your  artificial  teeth  fitted."
This  argument  was  sufficient.  She  gave  her  consent  in  the  waking
condition,  was  at  once  hypnotised  and  operated  on  without  pain.

Miss  D.,  aged  20,  was  a  good  somnambule  who  had  been  the
subject  of  two  painless  operations.  At  a  much  later  date  I  wished
to  satisfy  myself  of  the  depth  of  the  hypnotic  anesthesia,  as  another
and  more  serious  operation  was  contemplated.  I  obtained  her  consent
to  test  the  condition,  hypnotised  her  and  pricked  the  pulp  of  the
thumb  deeply  with  a  needle,  and  also  pinched  her  arm  severely.  She
showed  no  sign  of  pain,  and  remembered  nothing  afterwards  of  what
had  occurred.  A  few  days  afterwards  I  wished  to  repeat  the  process.
She  again  permitted  me  to  prick  the  thumb,  but  when  I  attempted
to  pinch  her  arm  she  drew  it  away  and  refused  to  let  me  touch  it.
Her  mother,  who  was  present,  gave  the  following  explanation.  After
the  first  experiment  her  daughter  noticed  that  her  arm  was  blackened
in  several  places  and  asked  the  cause.  She  told  the  girl  what  I  had
done,  whereupon  she  said,  "  I  don't  object  to  being  pricked  with  a
needle,  but  I  won't  allow  Dr.  Bramwell  to  pinch  my  arm  again,
because  the  neighbours  might  notice  the  marks."  On  both  occasions
her  arm  was  covered,  and  I  did  not  know  it  had  been  marked.  I
awoke  the  patient.  She  had  no  recollection  of  what  she  had  said  and
done.  I  told  her  she  had  refused  to  let  me  pinch  her  arm,  and  asked
the  reason.  She  laughed  and  gave  me  the  same  explanation  as
her  mother  had  done.  One  day  when  I  had  hypnotised  this  patient,
her  mother  said  bo  me,  "  Ask  her  what  she  did  on  a  certain  occasion."
I  questioned  her,  but  could  obtain  no  response.  I  afterwards  learnt
what  she  had  done.  It  was  something  which  the  mother  regarded  as
a  joke,  but  which  was  slightly  indelicate.  Many  persons,  even  fairly
refined  ones,  would  have  told  this  without  blushing,  but  one  of  the
patient's  characteristics  was  an  extreme  prudishness.

Miss  E.  had  been  frequently  hypnotised,  and  was  a  good  somnam-
bule in  whom  antesthesia  could  be  easily  induced.  She  was  maid  to
one  of  my  patients,  a  chronic  invalid,  whose  house  was  managed  by  a
sister  of  uncertain  temper.  On  one  occasion,  when  I  had  hypnotised
E.,  her  mistress  requested  that  I  would  ask  her  what  had  been  said  to
her  by  this  sister.  A  quarrel  had  taken  place,  of  a  somewhat  amusing
nature,  and  my  patient  wished  to  hear  E.'s  account  of  it  in  hypnosis ;
but,  despite  energetic  suggestions,  she  absolutely  refused  to  say  a  word
on  the  subject.


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.


199


Miss  F.,  aged  19,  in  good  health,  intelligent  and  well-educated.
This  subject  was  a  very  good  somnambule,  in  whom  antesthesia  and
other  phenomena  of  deepest  hypnosis  could  be  easily  induced.  She
had  a  bad  memory  for  words,  and  was  also  extremely  shy  in  reading,
singing,  or  playing  before  others.  I  suggested  to  her  that  she  should
recite  to  me  on  awaking  some  verses  with  which  she  was  unacquainted,
and  which  I  had  read  twice  to  her  when  asleep.  Shortly  after
awaking,  she  repeated  them  with  very  few  mistakes  and  without
apparent  embarrassment.  Her  mother  assured  me  that  under  ordinary
conditions  this  feat  of  memory  would  have  been  entirely  beyond  her
power,  and  that  nothing  would  have  induced  her  to  read  or  recite
before  me.  On  another  occasion,  her  mother  asked  me  to  suggest  to
her  during  hypnosis  that  on  awaking  she  should  go  to  the  side-
board in  my  dining  room,  pour  out  a  glass  of  water,  and  drink
it.  This  suggestion  was  not  carried  out,  and  was  the  first  which
had  not  been  fulfilled.  I  had  taught  her  mother  to  hypnotise  her
and  on  returning  home  she  did  so,  and  questioned  her  about  the
suggestion.  She  recalled  it  at  once  and  gave  the  following  reason
for  not  carrying  it  out,  namely,  that  she  did  not  know  me  well
enough  to  help  herself  to  a  glass  of  water  in  my  house  without
being  asked.

Mr.  G.,  aged  25,  a  shopkeeper.  He  had  been  frequently  hypnotised
for  medical  and  surgical  purposes  and  was  a  good  somnambule.  On
one  occasion  I  showed  him  at  the  York  Medical  Society.  At  the  close
of  my  lecture  I  was  asked  to  give  an  example  of  changed  personality
by  making  this  patient  believe  he  was  a  dissenting  minister  preaching
a  sermon.  He  refused  to  do  this,  and  I  was  then  asked  to  make  him
believe  he  was  a  hawker  selling  fish.  This  was  also  rejected,  but  he
accepted  the  suggestion  that  he  was  Barnum  and  that  the  medical  men
were  wild  beasts  and  proceeded  to  describe  them,  in  his  character  of
showman,  in  a  highly  amusing  manner.  I  afterwards  tried  to  make
him  accept  the  two  first  suggestions,  but  he  invariably  refused.  On
one  occasion,  however,  he  accepted  the  suggestion  that  lie  should  poison
a  personal  friend.  The  subject  was  in  the  alert  stage  of  hypnosis  with
his  eyes  open.  I  took  a  piece  of  sugar  from  the  basin,  and  assured
him  that  it  was  a  piece  of  arsenic  sufficient  to  kill  a  dozen  persons.  I
then  put  it  in  a  cup  of  tea  and  told  him  to  give  it  to  his  friend  to
drink.  He  at  once  did  so.  1  asked  him  why  he  had  poisoned  his
friend  and  he  replied  in  an  unnatui^ally  gruff  voice,  "  Oh,  he  has  lived
long  enough."  Another  young  man  who  was  present,  also  a  good
somnambule,  would  carry  out  suggestions  like  those  I'ejected  by  G.,
but  refused  to  execute  the  fictitious  murder.  The  explanation  of  the
reason  why  some  of  these  suggestions  were  accepted  and  others  refused
I  hope  to  give  in  my  next  paper.


200


Br.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


The  patient  who  was  the  subject  of  the  time  experiments  also
refused  certain  suggestions.  These  I  will  now  I'elate,  as  well  as  her
own  description  of  her  mental  and  physical  condition  during
hypnosis.  On  one  occasion,  dui"ing  hypnosis,  I  asked  her  to  put  her
fingers  to  her  nose  at  Mr.  Bark  worth.  She  laughed,  and,  despite
repeated  suggestions,  absolutely  refused  to  do  so.  At  a  later  date,
in  hypnosis,  I  asked  her  for  an  explanation.  She  told  me  she  did
not  want  to  and  would  give  no  other  reason.  On  another  occasion,
during  hypnosis,  I  suggested  that  she  should  steal  Mr.  Barkworth's
watch.  The  watch  was  placed  upon  the  table  and  Mr.  Barkworth
hid  behind  a  screen.  I  told  the  patient  that  Mr.  Barkworth  had
gone  and  had  left  his  watch,  that  he  was  very  absent-minded,  would
never  remember  where  he  had  left  it,  would  never  miss  it,  &c.  ;
suggested  that  she  should  take  it,  no  one  would  ever  know,  &c.  I
awoke  the  patient.  She  took  no  notice  of  the  watch.  I  asked  her,
"Where  is  Mr.  Barkworth?"  "Gone  away."  "He  has  left  his
watch,  would  you  not  like  to  take  it  1  "  The  patient  laughed  and
said,  "No,  of  course  not."  I  rehypnotised  her  and  asked,  "What
did  I  suggest  to  you  a  little  while  ago  when  you  were  asleep  1 "
"That  I  should  steal  Mr.  Barkworth's  watch,  that  he  was  absent-
minded,  would  never  miss  it,  &c."  "Then  why  did  you  not  do  so?"
"Because  I  did  not  want  to."  "Was  it  because  you  were  afraid  of
being  found  out?"  "  No,  not  at  all,  but  because  I  knew  it  would  be
wrong."

On  another  occasion  I  again  questioned  her  in  hypnosis  in  reference
to  this  suggested  theft.  I  said,  "  Did  you  recognise  it  was  an  experi-
ment?" "  Yes,  perfectly."  "  How  did  you  know  it  was  ?  "  "I  can't  tell
you,  I  only  felt  sure  it  was  "  On  being  pressed  further,  she  said,  "Well,
I  knew  you  would  never  really  ask  me  to  do  anything  wrong."  "  Well,
then,  if  you  were  quite  certain  in  your  own  mind  that  it  was  only  an
experiment,  why  did  you  not  carry  it  out  ? "  "  Because  I  did  not  wish
to  do  what  was  wrong,  even  in  jest."  "If  then,  I  asked  you  to  put  a
lump  of  sugar  in  some  one's  tea  and  told  you  it  was  arsenic,  would  you
do  so?"  "No,  certainly  not."  "Not  even  if  you  were  quite  certain
that  it  was  only  sugar  ?  "  "  No."  "  Why  ?  "  "  Because  I  should  be
pretending  to  commit  a  crime."

I  found  with  this  patient,  however,  that,  although  she  was  able  to
refuse  a  suggestion,  she  was  unable  to  prevent  its  fuliSlment  after
having  accepted  it.  For  instance,  if  I  suggested  to  her  in  hypnosis
that  she  should  place  her  hands  together  and  lose  the  power  of
separating  them,  she  could  reject  the  suggestion  if  she  pleased.  On  the
other  hand,  if  she  accepted  the  suggestion  and  placed  her  hands
together,  she  was  unable  to  separate  them,  even  when  encouraged  to  do
so  by  the  exercise  of  her  own  volition.


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.


201


In  reply  to  further  questions  in  hypnosis,  she  said  she  felt  sure  she
could  refuse  any  suggestion.  That  she  felt  she  was  herself,  that  she
knew  where  she  was  and  what  she  was  doing.  "  Are  you  the  same
person  asleep  as  awake?"  I  asked.  "Yes,"  she  replied^  with  a  laugh.
She  described  the  condition  as  a  sort  of  losing  herself  and  yet  not
losing  herself.  She  knew  and  heard  all  that  was  going  on,  and  yet
seemed  to  be  taking  no  notice  of  it.  When  Mr.  Barkworth  was  put  en
rapport  with  her  she  remembered  his  voice,  which  she  had  heard  on  a
previous  occasion  when  not  en  rapport  with  him.  She  said  she  was
resting  all  the  time,  and  that  nothing  she  did  or  thought  tired  her.  I
asked  her  what  it  felt  like  to  have  her  arm  made  cataleptic  by  sugges-
tion. She  replied,  "  I  did  not  feel  frightened,  but  I  felt  startled.  I
think  it  would  surprise  any  one."  "  When  you  awake  and  find  your
arm  still  rigid,  what  do  you  feel  then?"  "I  feel  amused."  "When
you  are  sleeping  here  and  no  one  is  talking  to  you,  do  you  ever  think
of  anything  % "  "  Yes  !  One  day  I  was  troubled  about  my  dressmaking.
My  employer  was  ill  and  I  had  more  responsibility  than  usual.  I  had
a  difficult  piece  of  work  to  do  and  could  not  understand  how  it  was  to
be  done.  When  asleep  here  I  planned  how  I  would  do  it  and  carried
this  out  successfully  when  I  returned  home.  When  I  awoke  I  did  not
know  that  I  had  done  this  ;  the  way  out  of  the  difficulty  suddenly  came
into  my  mind  on  my  way  home.  I  now  remember  planning  while
asleep  what  I  carried  out."

On  one  occasion,  after  being  hypnotised,  and  when  she  was
apparently  in  the  lethargic  condition,  she  suddenly  volunteered  the
statement  that  her  mother  wished  to  speak  to  me.  Shortly  afterwards
her  mother  came  into  the  room.  The  patient  was  still  asleep  and  no
suggestions  of  i-apport  were  made.  Her  mother  commenced  to  tell  me
about  a  friend  in  whom  she  was  interested,  with  a  view  to  finding  out
whether  I  thought  hypnotic  treatment  would  be  of  benefit  in  his  case.
Tlje  patient  suddenly  joined  in  the  conversation,  and  added  some
important  details  which  her  mother  had  forgotten.  On  awaking  she
remembered  nothing  in  reference  to  this.

On  another  occasion,  under  similar  circumstances,  her  mother
qiiestioned  me  in  I'eference  to  a  trivial  indisposition  from  which  the
patient  was  suffering,  and  asked  me  whether  I  thought  she  might  give
her  a  certain  simple  remedy.  Upon  this  the  patient  commenced  to
laugh,  and  recounted  in  a  highly  amused  manner  an  experiment  of  her
mother's  in  domestic  medicine,  of  which  she  had  been  the  unfortunate
victim.

I  obtained  the  following  account  of  the  hypnotic  condition  from
another  patient,  an  educated,  intelligent  woman.  She  said,  "  When
asleep  I  still  feel  that  I  am  myself,  and  can  think  and  reason  just  as
well  as  when  I  am  awake. I  could  resist  any  suggestion  if  I  wanted


202


Br.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


to  do  so.  The  sensation  is  a  pleasant  one,  as  if  I  were  getting  rested
all  over.  I  am  not  conscious  of  other  sounds,  except  your  voice.  When
you  are  not  talking  to  me  the  condition  is  generally  a  blank.  At  such
times  I  occasionally,  but  rarely,  think  and  sometimes  spontaneously
recall  the  events  of  past  hypnoses."

Another  educated  patient,  a  very  good  somnambule,  described  her
state  in  similar  terms.  She  said,  "I  feel  a  kiadof  restfulness  which  I
do  not  get  in  any  other  condition  of  life.  I  feel  no  fatigue.  External
sounds,  other  than  your  voice,  I  hear  vaguely,  as  if  in  a  dream,  and
pay  no  attention  to  them.  I  still  feel  myself  and  can  reason  just  as
well  as  if  I  were  awake."  When  her  arm  is  made  stiff,  this  appears
quite  natural,  as  she  recognises  it  is  done  as  an  experiment.  She  feels
certain  she  could  refuse  any  suggestion  which  she  disapproved  of  and
would  not  carry  out  an  imaginary  crime,  even  if  she  knew  it  was  only
an  experiment.  This  patient  readily  accepted  suggestions  of
anaesthesia  and  analgesia,  and  was  unable  to  remember  in  the  waking
state  either  painful  sensations  or  tactile  impressions.  On  being
rehypnotised,  howevei-,  though  she  could  not  recall  any  sensation  of
pain,  she  was  able  to  state  where  she  had  been  pinched  or  pricked
and  to  describe  the  tactile  impressions  associated  with  these  operations.

Bapport.

I  have  never  observed  any  peculiar  rapport  between  the  subject
and  the  operator,  when  direct  and  indirect  suggestions  in  reference
to  this  condition  have  been  carefully  excluded.  I  could  always,  how-
ever, readily  induce  the  condition  by  suggestion.

Methods  of  Atuaking.

I  have  never  experienced  any  difficulty  in  terminating  the  hypnotic
condition.  All  that  is  required  is  to  suggest  during  hypnosis  that  the
patient  shall  awake  at  a  given  signal.

Reinduction  of  IIyp)nosis.

Once  genuine  hypnosis  has  been  obtained,  the  condition  can  be
reproduced  immediately  at  any  subsequent  time.  It  is  only  necessary
to  suggest  during  hypnosis  that  in  future  the  patient  shall  pass  into
that  state  when  told  to  do  so.

Self-Hypnosis.

Except  in  cases  where  hypnosis  had  been  previously  induced  by
others,  I  have  never  met  with  an  instance  in  which  a  subject  had
succeeded  in  hypnotising  himself.  On  the  other  hand,  all  hypnotic
subjects  can  be  trained  to  do  so,  by  suggestion  in  hypnosis.  All  that  is
necessary  is  to  suggest  that  they  should  fall  asleep  on  looking  at  the
operator's  signature,  or  on  counting  up  to  five,  or,  indeed,  in  any


Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  203


other  way  which  has  been  arranged.  The  subject  then  can  hypnotise
himself  at  any  time  and  also  suggest  the  various  phenomena  which  he
desires  to  obtain.  He  can,  for  example,  place  himself  en  rapport  with
his  dentist  and  have  his  teeth  painlessly  extracted.  Some  of  my
patients  still  possess  and  exercise  this  power,  which  was  first  suggested
to  them  six  years  ago.

Multiple  Suggestions.

Numerous  suggestions  can  be  carried  out  simultaneously  by  one
and  the  same  patient.

This  fact  is  of  considerable  importance  in  reference  to  certain
hypnotic  theories,  which  are  based  upon  the  state  of  the  attention.
One  can  suggest,  for  example,  at  the  same  time,  paralysis  of  one  arm
and  catalepsy  of  the  other  ;  excited  action  of  the  special  senses  on
one  side  of  the  body  and  diminished  or  arrested  on  the  other,  &c.

Suggestion  in  Disease.

The  phenomena  described  so  far  have,  with  few  exceptions,  been
those  induced  in  healthy  subjects.  The  result  of  suggestion  in  disease,
by  far  its  most  important  field  of  action  in  my  opinion,  I  cannot
describe  in  detail  before  a  non-medical  audience.  I  may  state,  however,
that  I  have  been  able  to  confirm  many  of  the  observations  reported
from  abroad.  I  have  seen,  for  example,  the  removal  of  pain  in  various
diseases,  and  its  prevention  in  operation ;  the  habit  of  sleep  restored
in  those  suffering  from  insomnia,  and  many  functional  diseases  cured
which  had  long  resisted  other  forms  of  treatment ;  obsessions  and
painful  memories  blotted  out ;  dipsomania,  kleptomania,  and  other
vicious  habits  corrected,  and  many  functions  of  organic  life,  which  were
performed  imperfectly  or  painfully,  restored  to  their  normal  condition.

Conclusion.

If  I  were  asked  in  one  word  to  describe  the  diffei'ence  between  the
hypnotised  and  the  non-hypnotised  subject,  I  should  say  that  it  con-
sisted in  the  superiority  of  the  former  over  the  latter  in  his  having
acquired  a  far-reaching  power  over  his  own  organism,  which  the  other
does  not  share.  This  view  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  not  a  novel  one,
and  has  already  been  ably  described  by  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.  In
addition,  I  desire  to  emphasise  the  fact — denied  by  some,  half-heartedly
conceded  by  others — that  this  increased  power  carries  with  it  no
penalty,  and  implies  no  interference  with  volition  ;  and  that  the  subject
can  reject  when  asleep,  as  readily  as  when  awake,  all  suggestions
which  are  contrary  to  his  moral  sense.


204


Lr.  J.  Milne  Bramxvell.


II.

WHAT  IS  HYPNOTISM?
By  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.

The  answers  to  this  question  have  been  so  numerous  and  conflicting
that  it  would  be  impossible,  in  the  space  at  my  disposal,  to  give  even  a
brief  summary  of  them.  I  propose,  therefore,  only  to  draw  your
attention  to  some  of  the  more  important,  and  to  consider  these  more
especially  in  reference  to  the  theories  of  James  Braid.  Two  points
seem  to  me  worthy  of  special  notice  : —

1.  Apparently  little  of  value  has  been  discovered  which  can  justly
be  considered  as  supplementary  to  Braid's  later  work,  while  much  has
been  lost  through  ignorance  of  his  investigations.

2.  The  theories  of  the  mesmerists,  which  he  so  successfully
combatted,  still  apparently  survive.  There  not  only  exist,  as  the
questions  and  statements  of  one  of  the  audience  at  my  last  lecture
apparently  indicate,  frankly  avowed  believers  in  mesmerism,  but,  as
we  shall  see  later,  views  that  differ  only  in  name  from  those  of  the
mesmerists  still  crop  up  in  strange  and  unexpected  places.

Modern  hypnotism  undoubtedly  owes  its  origin  to  mesmerism  and,
to  understand  its  evolution,  a  clear  conception  of  mesmeric  theories  is
necessary.  The  views  of  Esdaile  may  be  regarded  as  a  fair  summary
of  them.

Esdaile^s  Theory.

Esdaile  believed  that  mesmeric  phenomena  were  due  to  the  action
of  a  vital  curative  fluid,  or  peculiar  physical  force,  which,  under  certain
circumstances,  could  be  transmitted  from  one  animal  to  another.
Various  inanimate  objects,  such  as  metals,  crystals  and  magnets,  were
also  supposed  to  possess  it,  and  to  be  capable  of  inducing  and
terminating  the  mesmeric  state,  and  of  exciting,  arresting  or  modifying
its  phenomena.  One  metal,  for  example,  would  pi'oduce  catalepsy,
another  change  this  into  paralysis  ;  a  glass  of  water  could  be  charged
with  odyllic  force  by  being  breathed  upon  by  the  mesmeriser,  etc.

Bi'aid's  Theories.

Braid  explained  hypnotic  phenomena  from  two  widely  differing
standpoints;  first  regarding  them  as  mainly  physical  in  their  origin,  and


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


205


then,  at  a  later  date,  as  chiefly  psychical.  From  the  commencement,
however,  to  the  termination  of  his  researches  he  held  practically  the
same  view  as  to  the  origin  of  mesmeric  phenomena.  In  many  instances
he  regarded  the  phenomena  themselves  as  genuine,  considering  their
explanation  only  as  erroneous.  As  the  result  of  long  and  careful  experi-
ment, he  claimed  to  have  proved  that  the  various  mesmeric  phenomena
could  be  excited  when  all  their  alleged  causes  had  been  carefully
eliminated,  and  also  that  the  supposed  exciting  causes  were  non-
effective when  the  subjects  were  ignorant  of  their  existence.  The
marvels  only  appeared  when  the  various  physical  stimuli  were
associated  with  mental  impressions,  and  were  invariably  absent  when
these  were  excluded.  An  imitation  magnet,  for  example,  produced
all  the  usual  phenomena  when  the  subject  was  told  of  its  presence,
while  a  real  magnet  produced  nothing  when  the  subject  was  unaware
that  it  had  been  brought  in  contact  with  him.

Braid's  Physical  Theory.

Braid  held  that  mesmeric  and  hypnotic  phenomena  were  due
neither  to  volition  on  the  part  of  the  operator,  nor  to  his  possession  of
any  mysterious  force  or  fluid,  but  were  mainly  due  to  physical  changes
that  took  place  in  the  subject.  These,  which  consisted  in  the
exhaustion  of  certain  nerve  centres  with  resulting  decrease  in  the
functional  activity  of  the  central  nervous  system,  arose  from  the
continued  monotonous  stimulation  of  other  nerves,  e.g.,  those  of  the
eye  by  means  of  fixed  gazing,  those  of  the  skin  by  passes  with  contact.
At  this  time  (1843),  Braid  agreed  with  the  mesmerists  on  one  point,
viz.,  that  the  mesmeric  or  hypnotic  state  could  be  induced  without  the
subject's  knowledge.  His  belief  in  johrenology  also  had  its  analogy  in
mesmeric  theory.  Thus,  Braid  held  that  certain  phenomena  could
be  induced  by  pressure  upon  sensitive  points  of  the  head,  and  the
mesmerists  believed  that  others  could  be  excited  by  bringing  various
inanimate  objects  in  contact  with  different  parts  of  the  body.  At  a
later  date  Braid  abandoned  his  physical  theory,  and,  with  it,  all  belief
in  phrenology.  To  his  psychical  theory  I  will  refer  later  ;  meanwhile,
I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  some  other  physical  explanations  of
hypnotic  phenomena.

Charcot's  Theory,  or  that  of  the  Salpetriere  School.

According  to  this  school,  hypnosis  is  an  artificially  produced  morbid
condition,  charactei'ised  by  certain  chemical  changes  in  the  secretions
— a  neurosis  only  to  be  found  in  the  hysterical.  Women  are  more
easily  hypnotised  than  men ;  children  and  old  people  are  almost  entirely
insusceptible.


206


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


Hypnosis  can  be  produced  by  purely  physical  means,  such  as
pressure  on  certain  regions  of  the  body ;  and  a  person  can  be  hypnotised,
as  it  were,  unknown  to  himself.

The  hypnotic  phenomena  are  divided  into  three  different  stages,
which  usually  appear  in  regular  sequence.  These  are  induced  and
terminated  by  certain  definite  physical  stimuli.

Hypnotism  has  so  far  not  proved  of  much  therapeutic  value.

There  is  danger  of  provoking  hysteria  in  trying  to  induce  hypnosis.

There  is  a  difierence  between  suggestion  in  normal  life  and  in
hypnosis.  The  former  is  a  physiological  phenomenon,  the  latter  a
pathological  one.  Suggestibility  does  not  constitute  hypnosis,  it  is
only  one  of  its  symptoms.  There  does  not  exist  a  single  case  in  which
a  somnambule  has  acted  criminally  under  the  influence  of  suggestion.

This  theory  has  been  strongly  attacked,  chiefly  by  the  hypnotic
observers  who  belong  to  what  is  termed  the  Nancy  School.  To
commence  with,  they  point  out  the  insufliciency  of  the  data  upon  which
the  theory  has  been  founded,  and  cite  the  confession  of  its  own
supporters  that  only  a  dozen  cases  of  true  hypnosis  have  occurred  in
the  Salpetriere  in  ten  years,  and  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  the
experiments  were  conducted  on  one  subject,  who  had  long  been  an
inmate  of  that  hospital.  On  the  other  hand,  they  call  attention  to  the
extended  nature  of  their  own  observations  and  to  the  fact  that  their
conclusions  are  drawn  from  the  study  of  many  thousand  cases.

Is  Hyjynosis  a  Morbid  Condition  tvhich  can  only  he  Induced  in  the

Hysterical  ?

This  question  must,  I  think,  be  answered  in  the  negative.  Moll,
in  reference  to  Charcot's  ai'gument  that  hypnotism  and  hysteria  are
identical,  because  the  chemical  character  of  certain  secretions  is  similar
in  both,  pointed  out  that  Charcot's  subjects  all  suffered  from  hysteria ;
and  that,  as  the  phenomena  which  characterise  waking  life  are  readily
induced  in  hypnosis,  Charcot  easily  created  a  complete  type  of
hysteria  by  suggestion.  It  would  be  equally  easy  to  suggest  stammei'ing
in  hypnosis,  but  one  would  not  be  justified,  therefore,  in  characterising
hypnosis  as  a  condition  of  stammering.

Again,  as  the  following  statistics  show,  if  the  hysterical  alone  can
be  hypnotised,  over  90  per  cent,  of  mankind  apparently  suff'er  from
hysteria.  Some  years  ago,  Bernheim  had  already  attempted  to
hypnotise  10,000  hospital  patients  with  over  90  per  cent,  of  successes,
while  Wetterstrand  recently  I'eported  6,500  cases  with  105  failures.
Schrenck-Notzing  in  his  First  International  Statistics,  published  in
1892,  gave  8,705  cases  by  15  observers  in  different  countries,  with  6  per
cent,  of  failures.  Mr.  HughWingfield,  when  Demonstrator  of  Physiology
at  Cambridge,  attempted  to  hypnotise  over  170  men,  all  of  whom,  with


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


207


the  exception  of  18,  were  undergraduates.  In  about  80  per  cent.,
hypnosis  was  induced  at  the  first  attempt ;  but  as  no  second  trial  was
ever  made  with  the  unsuccessful  cases,  these  results  undoubtedly
understate  the  susceptibility.  (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  198.)  Most  of  the  undergraduates  would  be  drawn  from  our  public
schools,  and,  if  these  do  not  always  turn  out  good  scholars,  they  cannot
at  least  be  accused  of  producing  hysterical  invalids.  Braid  stated  that
the  nervous  and  hysterical  were  the  most  difficult  to  hypnotise,  while
Liebeault  found  soldiers  and  sailors  particularly  easy  to  influence.
Grossmann,  of  Berlin,  recently  asserted  that  hard-headed  North
Germans  were  very  susceptible,  and  I  observed  that  healthy  Yorkshire
farm  labourers  made  remarkably  good  subjects.  Professor  Forel  told
me  that  he  had  hypnotised  nearly  all  his  asylum  warders  ;  that  he
selected  these  himself  and  certainly  did  not  choose  them  from  the  ranks
of  the  hysterical.  In  former  times  Esdaile's  patients  were  stated  to  be
hysterical.  In  reply  to  this,  he  said,  "  I  cannot  possibly  see  how
hysteria  has  got  into  my  hospitals,  where  I  never  saw  it  before —
coolies  and  felons  not  being  at  all  nervous  subjects.  .  .  .  As
natural  hysteria  may  be  supposed  to  be  more  powerful  than  imitation,
I  shall  look  with  impatience  for  the  announcement,  in  the  Morning
Post,  that  Mrs.  Freake  has  been  cured  of  her  nervous  headaches  by  the
skilful  application  of  hysteria,  and  that  Lady  Tantrum  has  had  her
arm  cut  off  while  in  a  flt  of  hysterics,  without  knowing  it.  These
should  be  easy  feats  for  our  fashionable  physicians  and  sui'geons,  as
they  have  the  disease  and  antidote  ready  made  to  their  hands,  whereas
it  costs  me  and  my  assistants  great  trouble  to  make  the  coolies  and
prisoners  of  Bengal  hysterical  to  the  degree  necessary  to  render  them
insensible  to  the  loss  of  their  members."

These  and  similar  facts  apparently  justify  the  statements  of  Forel
and  ]\Ioll  that  it  is  not  the  healthy  but  the  hysterical  who  are  the
most  difficult  to  hypnotise.  According  to  the  former,  "  every  mentally
healthy  man  is  naturally  hypnotisable  "  ;  while  the  latter  says,  "  if  we
take  a  pathological  condition  of  the  organism  as  necessary  for  hypnosis,
we  shall  be  obliged  to  conclude  that  nearly  everybody  is  not  quite  right
in  the  head.  The  mentally  unsound,  particularly  idiots,  are  much
more  difficult  to  hypnotise  than  the  healthy.  Intelligent  people,  and
those  with  strong  wills,  are  more  easily  hypnotisable  than  the  dull,  the
stupid,  or  the  weak-willed."

Are  Women  rnore  Susceptible  than  Men  ?

All  observers,  with  the  exception  of  those  of  the  Salpetriere  School,
agree  in  stating  that  sex  has  little  or  no  influence  upon  the  suscepti-
bility to  hypnosis.  According  to  Liebeault,  the  difference  between  the
sexes  is  rather  less  than  1  per  cent. The  majority  of  Esdaile's  subjects

P


208


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramiuell.


were  men  and,  as  we  have  seen,  Mr.  Wingfield  was  able  to  hypnotise
about  80  per  cent,  of  the  Cambridge  undergraduates  at  the  first
attempt.

Are  Children  and  Old  Feojyle  Insusce20tihle  ?

Wetterstrand  found  that  all  children  from  3  or  4  to  15  years  of  age
could  be  influenced  without  exception.  Dr.  Berillon,  out  of  250  cases
in  children,  hypnotised  80  per  cent,  at  the  first  attempt.  Liebeault
also  found  children  peculiarly  susceptible,  and  one  of  his  statistical
tables  records  100  per  cent  of  successes  up  to  the  age  of  14.  In  adult
life,  age  ajDparently  makes  little  difference.  In  the  same  table  we  find
that  from  the  ages  of  14  to  21  the  failures  were  about  10  per  cent.,
and  from  63  years  and  upwards  about  13  per  cent.

Can  Hyjmosis  be  Induced  by  Mechanical  Means  alone  ?

This  question  is  answered  by  the  Nancy  School  in  the  negative,
and  my  own  experience  agrees  with  this.  I  know  of  no  single
instance  where  hypnosis  has  followed  the  employment  of  mechanical
means,  when  mental  influences  have  been  carefully  excluded,  and  the
subjects  have  been  absolutely  ignorant  of  what  was  expected  of  them.
ISTo  one  was  ever  hypnotised  by  looking  at  a  lark-mirror,  until  Dr.
Luys  had  borrowed  this  lure  from  the  bird-catchers  and  invested  it
with  hypnotic  power.  On  the  other  hand,  any  physical  method  will
succeed  with  a  susceptible  subject  who  knows  what  is  expected  of  him.

Are  ffypnotic  Phenomena  divided  into  three  Distinct  Stages  ?

The  stages  described  by  the  Salpetriere  School,  as  arising  from
definite  physical  stimuli,  have  never  been  noticed  by  other  observers.
Amongst  the  many  hundred  hypnotised  subjects  I  have  seen,  none
have  responded  to  the  manipulations  which  produced  such  striking
phenomona  at  the  Salpetriere.  On  the  other  hand,  I  and  many
others  have  found  that  we  could  easily  evoke  these  stages  by  verbal
suggestion,  and  train  the  patients  to  manifest  them  at  any  given  signal.
The  condition,  however,  was  always  an  artificial  one.

Is  Hypnotism  of  little  Therapeutic  Value  1

On  the  one  hand,  we  have  the  negative  evidence  of  a  few  cases
observed  at  the  Salpetriere,  where  experiment,  not  cure,  seemed  the  main
end.  On  the  other,  the  positive  evidence,  drawn  from  many  thousands
of  cases,  where  hypnotism  has  been  successfully  employed  for  the  relief
or  cure  of  disease.

Is  Hypnotism  Dangerous  1

The  Salpetriere  School  answer  this  in  the  aflirmative,  asserting  that
hysterical  symptoms  have  sometimes  appeared  after  the  attempted


What  is  Hypnotism  ?■


209


induction  of  hypnosis.  That  such  phenomena  should  occur  with  them
is  not  surprising,  when  one  considers  the  nature  of  the  subjects  and
their  surroundings,  and  the  violent  and  startling  methods  sometimes
resorted  to.  The  slight  accidents  which  they  recoi'd  have  not  occurred
in  other  and  more  experienced  hands.  Professor  For  el  says  : —
"  Liebeault,  Bernheim,  Wetterstrand,  van  Eeden,  de  Jong,  Moll,  I
myself,  and  the  other  followers  of  the  Nancy  School,  declare
categorically  that,  although  we  have  seen  many  thousands  of  hypnotised
persons,  we  have  never  observed  a  single  case  of  mental  or  bodily
harm  caused  by  hypnosis,  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  seen  many
cases  of  illness  relieved  or  cured  by  it."  This  statement  I  can  fully
endorse,  as  I  have  never  seen  an  unpleasant  symptom,  even  of  the
most  trivial  nature,  follow  the  skilled  induction  of  hypnosis.

Can  varwus  Physical  and  Mentcd  Phenomena  he  excited  hy  the
Application,  or  near  Presence,  of  certain  Metals,  Magnets,  and  other
Inanimate  Objects  ?

Here,  in  the  assertions  of  the  Salpetrifere  School  and  their
refutation  by  that  of  Nancy,  we  have  an  exact  counterpart  of  the
controversy  between  Braid  and  the  mesmerists.  All  the  old  errors,  the
result  of  ignoring  mental  influences,  are  again  revived.  Medicines  are
again  alleged  to  exercise  an  influence  from  within  sealed  tubes.  The
physical  and  mental  conditions  of  one  subject  are  stated  to  be
transferable  to  another,  or  even  to  an  inanimate  object.  It  is  useless
to  enter  into  any  arguments  to  refute  these  statements,  for  this  would
be  repeating  the  work  of  Braid.  Indeed,  in  many  instances  their
absurdity  renders  argument  unnecessary.  For  example,  when  a  sealed
tube  containing  laurel  flower  water  was  brought  near  a  Jewish  girl  of
disorderly  life,  she  adored  the  Virgin  Mary.  From  this  it  might  be
inferred  that  diffei'ent  religious  beliefs  were  represented  by  different
nerve  centres,  and  that  these  could  be  called  into  action  by  appropriate
physical  stimuli.  Should  this  be  established,  it  could  hardly  fail  to
have  an  important  influence  upon  the  character  and  direction  of
missionary  enterprise  !  The  chief  apostle  of  these  doctrines  is  Luys  ;
and  considerable  attention  was  drawn  to  them  in  England  a  few
years  ago  by  popular  articles  in  the  daily  papers  and  elsewhere.
Indeed,  the  editor  of  a  well-known  medical  journal  thought  them
of  suflicient  importance  to  demand  his  writing  a  book  in  order  to
disprove  them.  He  apparently  was  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  M.
Dujardin-Beaumetz,  in  1888,  reported  to  the  Academie  de  Medecine
that  Luys'  experiments  were  conducted  so  carelessly  as  to  rob  them
of  all  value,  and  that  among  students  of  hypnotism  they  are  entirely
disregarded.

p  2


210


Br.  J.  Milne  Bramiuell.


The  two  remaining  points,  namely,  the  question  of  criminal  sug-
gestion and  that  of  suggestion  in  general  in  relation  to  hypnotism,  I
will  refer  to  in  discussing  the  theories  of  the  Nancy  School.

Heidenhain's  Theory.

According  to  Heidenhain,  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  owe  their
origin  to  the  arrested  activity  of  the  ganglion-cells  of  the  cerebral
cortex.  He  holds  that  these  higher  centres  are  inhibited  by  the
monotonous  stimulation  of  other  nerves,  e.g.,  by  fixed  gazing,  passes,
etc.,  and  that  sensory  impressions,  which  usually  produce  movements
after  passing  to  the  higher  centres  and  evoking  consciousness,  now  do
so  by  passing  directly  to  the  motor  centres.  This  is  essentially  a
"  short-circuiting  of  nervous  currents  "  theory.  Heidenhain  regards  the
hypnotised  subject  as  a  pure  automaton,  who  imitates  movements  made
before  him,  but  who  is  entirely  unconscious  of  what  he  is  doing.  To
cause  him  to  move  his  arm,  he  says,  the  image  of  a  moving  arm  must
pass  before  his  retina,  or  an  unconscious  sensation  of  motion  must  be
induced  through  passive  movement  of  his  arm.  The  patient  has  no
idea  corresponding  to  the  movements  he  makes  ;  the  sensory  impression
leads  to  no  conscious  perception  and  to  no  voluntary  movement,  but
suffices  to  set  up  unconscious  imitation.  In  reference  to  the  playing
of  different  parts  by  hypnotised  subjects,  Heidenhain  says  that  it  is  a
mistake  to  suppose  that  the  subjects  realise  what  they  are  doing  :  this
is  quite  out  of  the  question  ;  the  hypnotised  individual  neither  thinks
nor  knows  anything  about  himself.  Heidenhain  holds  that  the  fact
of  the  hypnotised  subject's  forgetfulness  of  the  sensations  he  has
experienced  during  hypnosis  affords  satisfactory  evidence  that  these
sensations  were  unconscious  ones.  This  theory  was  first  published  in
1880,  and  attracted  considerable  attention.  It  was  accepted,  for
example,  by  Professor  McKendrick,  of  Glasgow,  and  re- stated  by  him,
in  the  last  Edition  of  the  Ennjclopoedia  Britannica,  as  giving  a  true
and  scientific  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  so-called  animal
magnetism.

To  this  explanation  many  objections  may  be  urged,  thus  : —

(1)  It  is  a  mistake,  as  Gurney  pointed  out,  to  call  the  hypnotic
action  on  the  cortical  functions  inhibition,  without  stating  explicitly
that  the  normal  action  of  these  functions  in  respect  to  motion  is  to  a
large  extent  inhibitory,  and  that  the  complete  description  of  the
method  by  which  the  automatic  reflex  responses  are  brought  about,  is
thus  "inhibition  of  the  inhibitory  functions."

(2)  While  giving  an  elaborate  exposition  of  the  theory  of  cerebral
inhibition  produced  by  peripheral  stimulation,  Heidenhain  omits  to
take  into  consideration  the  result  of  central  stimulation  by  means  of


What  is  Hypnotism


211


an  idea  or  emotion.  As  hypnosis  can  be  equally  well  induced  in  this
way,  we  cannot  accept  Heidenhain's  theory,  as  he  wishes  that  we
should  do,  in  substitution  for  that  of  "  dominant  ideas."  It  cannot
justly  be  considered  as  an  alternative  to  it,  as  it  is  merely  the  physio-
logical statement  of  psychical  facts.

(3)  The  theory  itself  is  not  a  new  one  ;  with  the  exception  of  a  few
details,  it  is  essentially  an  imperfect  reproduction  of  that  of  the  late
Professor  John  Hughes  Bennett,  of  Edinburgh,  published  in  1851.
But  Bennett,  as  we  shall  see  later,  possessed  a  clearer  view  of  the  whole
problem  and  did  not  fall  into  the  mistake  of  attempting  to  substitute
the  physiological  statement  of  psychical  facts  for  the  facts  themselves.

(4)  Hypnosis  can  be  induced,  not  only  in  the  absence  of  monotonoits
peripheral  stimulation^  but  even  without  any  peripheral  stimulation  at
all.  At  the  present  day  it  is  usually  evoked  by  central  stimulation,
which,  in  those  who  have  been  previously  hypnotised,  need  not  be
persistently  monotonous  ;  the  single  word  "Sleep"  being  then  sufficient
to  excite  the  condition.  In  such  cases,  the  factor  which  Heidenhain
regards  as  essential  to  the  production  of  hypnotic  phenomena,  i.e.,
monotonous  peripheral  stimulation,  is  absent.

(5)  Instead  of  a  hypnotised  subject  imitating  a  movement  which
he  sees  and  failing  to  perform  one  which  is  verbally  suggested  to
him,  the  reverse  is  actually  the  case.  As  a  rule,  the  slightest  verbal
suggestion  is  sufficient  to  induce  the  movements  described  by  Heiden-
hain ;  on  the  other  hand,  hypnotised  subjects  never  copy  movements
made  before  them  unless  they  have  been  trained  to  do  so.  The
imitative  movements  only  take  place,  according  to  Moll,  when  the
hypnotic  subject  is  conscious  of  them,  and  knows  that  he  is  intended
to  make  them.  If  they  were  unconscious  reflexes,  the  subjects  would
imitate  any  person's  movements,  but  they  only  imitate  the  one  person
who  exists  for  them,  i.e.,  the  experimenter,  and  him  only  when  they
know  he  wishes  them  to  do  so.  A  clear  idea  of  the  movements  to  be
made  is  the  first  condition.  When  such  experiments  ai-e  often  repeated,
the  imitation  may  become  automatic  in  later  hypnoses,  as  happens  in
waking  life.  At  first,  however,  a  clear  idea  is  necessary ;  but  as  we
regard  the  cei^ebral  cortex  as  the  seat  of  ideas,  and  as  there  is  no
reason  for  shifting  them  to  another  part  of  the  brain  in  hypnosis,  so
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  activity  of  the  cerebral  cortex.

(6)  According  to  Gurney,  Heidenhain's  only  argument  is  based
upon  the  subject's  subsequent  defect  of  memory  ;  he  thus  assumes,  as
his  sole  test  for  present  consciousness,  the  suljsequent  remembrance  of
its  content.  Yet,  as  Gurney  says,  if  the  reality  of  that  test  be  granted,
the  question  whether  a  man  was  conscious  when  he  read  an  article  in
the  Times,  will  depend  on  whether  or  not  he  receives  a  blow  on  the
head  when  he  has  j&nished  it. Gurney  further  points  out  that  there  is


212


Br.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


a  more  radical  objection  to  all  these  arguments  founded  on  subsequent
loss  of  memory, — the  fact,  namely,  that  memory  is  frequently  present.
Braid,  for  example,  found  that  only  some  10  per  cent,  of  his  subjects
were  unable  to  recall  the  events  of  hypnosis,  while  Schrenck-Notzing's
International  iStatistics  of  8705  cases  give  15  per  cent.  Again,  if  on
waking  the  act  performed  during  hypnosis  is  forgotten,  the  lost
memory  can  be  revived  in  subsequent  hypnoses ;  and,  finally,  the
amnesia,  which  would  otherwise  follow  deep  hypnosis,  can  be  entirely
prevented  by  suggestion.

Mr:  Ernest  Hart's  Theories.

Ml-.  Hart  has  also  attempted  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism
from  a  physical  standpoint.  His  theories  in  themselves  demand  little
or  no  attention,  as  they  are  almost  entirely  unsupported  by  experi-
mental evidence.  On  the  other  hand,  from  his  position  as  Editor  of
the  British  Medical  Journal,  he  has  had  exceptional  opportunities  of
making  them  known  to  the  medical  profession.  According  to  Mr.
Hart,  the  hypnotised  subject  "  is  reduced  more  or  less  perfectly  to  the
state  of  a  living  automaton.  The  upper  brain  is  more  or  less  com-
pletely, and  more  or  less  I'egularly,  bloodless,  its  functions  in  abeyance,
the  will  is  abolished,  suspended,  or  enfeebled.  A  hypnotised  subject
will  perform  unconsciously,  under  the  influence  of  suggestion,  acts
which  are  dangerous  to  himself  and  others,  and  which  are  in  them-
selvfes  criminal — so  that  he  can  be  made  to  thieve,  to  commit  arson,  or
to  attempt  violence."  He  summarises  his  views  in  the  following
somewhat  obscure  sentence: — "We  have  already,  I  hope,  succeeded
in  eliminating  from  our  minds  the  false  theory, — the  theory  that  is
experimentally  proved  to  be  false — that  the  will,  or  the  gestures,  or
the  magnetic  or  vital  fluid  of  the  operator  is  at  all  necessary  for  the
abolition  of  the  consciousness  and  the  abeyance  of  the  will  of  the
subject ;  and  we  now  see  that  ideas  arising  in  the  mind  of  the
subject  are  sufficient  to  influence  the  circulation  in  the  bi'ain  of  the
person  o])erated  on  (!),  and  in  such  variations  are  adequate  to  produce
sleep  in  the  natural  state,  or  artificially,  by  total  deprivation,  or  by
excessive  increase,  or  local  aberi'ation  in  the  quantity  or  quality  of  the
blood  to  produce  coma  and  prolonged  insensibility  by  pressure  of  the
thumbs  upon  the  carotid  ;  or  hallucinations,  dreams,  and  visions  by
drugs,  or  by  external  stimulation  of  the  nerves ;  or  to  leave  the
consciousness  partially  ajSected,  and  the  person  in  whom  sleep,  coma,
or  hallucinations  is  produced,  subject  to  the  will  of  others  and  in-
capable of  exercising  his  own."  (See  "  Hypnotism  and  Humbug,"
Nineteenth  Century,  January,  1892.)

To  Mr.  Hart's  theories  there  are  three  objections.


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


213


( 1 )  It  is  doubtful  whether  any  of  the  phenomena — unconsciousness,
automatism,  susceptibility  to  criminal  suggestion, — which  he  i-egards
as  characteristic  of  the  hypnotic  state,  exist.  The  general  question  of
consciousness  and  automatism  has  already  been  referred  to  in  dealing
with  Heidenhain's  theory ;  that  of  criminal  suggestion  I  propose  to
discuss  more  fully  in  connection  with  the  views  of  Bernheim  and
others.  Meanwhile,  I  may  state,  as  the  result  of  seven  years'  hypnotic
research,  that  I  have  failed,  either  at  home  or  abroad,  to  discover  a
single  instance  in  which  the  phenomena  described  by  Mr.  Hart  have
occurred.

(2)  The  presence  of  cerebral  ansemia  in  hypnosis  is  by  no  means
established.  The  belief  in  its  existence  is  an  old  one,  which  recent
investigations  have  done  much  to  discredit.  Many  years  ago  Cai'penter
suggested  it  as  a  possible  explanation  of  at  least  some  hypnotic
phenomena,  and  Hack  Tuke  also  considered  there  was  a  partial  spasm
of  the  cerebral  blood  vessels  in  hypnosis.  Heidenhain  too  at  first
supposed  that  anremia  of  the  brain  was  the  cause  of  hypnosis.  He
soon  gave  up  this  opinion  for  several  reasons  :  (a)  He  saw  hypnosis
appear  in  spite  of  the  inhalation  of  nitrite  of  amyl,  which  causes
hypersemia  of  the  brain,  (b)  The  investigations  of  Forster  discovered
no  change  in  the  vessels  at  the  back  of  the  eye  during  hypnosis,  (c)
Salviole  and  Bouchut  found  cerebral  hyperemia  during  hypnosis.

(3)  Granting  that  cerebral  antemia  exists,  to  assume  that  it  explains
the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  is  unscientific.  For,  as  Professor  William
J ames  points  out,  the  change  in  the  circulation  is  the  result,  not  the
cause,  of  the  altered  activity  of  the  nervous  matter.  Many  popular
writers,  he  says,  talk  as  if  it  were  the  other  way  about,  and  as  if  mental
activity  were  due  to  the  afflux  of  blood.  That  belief  has  no
physiological  foundation  whatever  ]  it  is  even  directly  opposed  to  all
that  we  know  of  cell  life.  The  stomach  does  not  digest  because  more
blood  flows  into  it,  nor  do  the  muscles  of  the  arm  contract  for  a  similar
reason  ;  on  the  contrary,  their  increased  blood  supply  follows  their
increased  functional  activity.

Hypnosis  in  Aniinals.

Mr.  Hart  believes  that  animals,  such  as  guinea-pigs,  rabbits,  frogs,
birds,  crayfish,  and  even  young  alHgators  can  be  hypnotised  by
methods  similar  to  those  employed  with  the  human  subject,  and  that
tliey  present  like  phenomena.  The  only  argument  in  favour  of  this  is
drawn  from  the  fact  that  these  animals,  after  certain  physical  stimuli
have  been  applied  to  them,  present  the  phenomenon  of  catalepsy.  Is
this  catalepsy  invariably  a  genuine  one  ?  I  am  inclined  to  think  that
in  many  instances  it  is  a  conscious  simulation  of  death,  adopted  by  the
animal  from  the  instinctive  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  certain  birds  and


214,


Br.  J.  Milne  BramweU.


beasts  of  prey,  except  under  pressure  of  extreme  hunger,  will  not  attack
what  is  dead.  If,  for  example,  you  turn  a  beetle  over  on  its  back  it
will  remain  motionless  and  apparently  cataleptic,  with  its  legs  sticking
rigidly  in  the  air.  The  moment  you  turn  away,  however,  it  scrambles
to  its  feet  and  resumes  its  journey.  Here  death  or  catalepsy  was  in
all  probability  only  shammed,  and  doubtless  the  insect  was  keenly
watching  your  every  movement  and  anxiously  waiting  for  your
depai'ture.  Again,  catalepsy  is  only  one,  and  a  comparatively
unimportant,  phenomenon  of  hypnosis.  One  of  the  main  character-istics
of  the  hypnotic  state  is  the  rapidity  with  which  one  phenomenoir  can
be  changed  into  its  opposite.  Have  we  any  evidence  of  this  in  the
so-called  hypnosis  of  animals  1  I  think  not.  Again,  is  it  logical  to
conclude  similarity  of  cause  from  identity  of  effect  ?  In  order  to  induce
hypnotic  catalepsy  in  the  human  subject,  a  clear  idea  of  the  suggested
act  is  necessary.  What  evidence  have  we  for  concluding  that  a  cray-
fish becomes  cataleptic  from  a  clear  idea  that  the  operator  has  suggested
this  condition?  It  is  possible  that  in  some  instances  the  phenomenon
is  genuine,  and  then,  according  to  Preyer,  the  condition  is  one  of
paralysis  resulting  from  fright.  Now  fear  is  not  necessary  for  the
induction  of  hypnosis  ;  and,  before  concluding  that  the  condition  is  a
hypnotic  one,  it  would  be  wise  to  exclude  this  factor  from  the  equation.
To  do  this  experimentally  would  not  be  difficult ;  it  would  only  be
necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  disproportion  betsveen  the  size  and  strength
of  the  operator  and  the  animal,  a  disproportion  which,  in  the  experi-
ments referred  to,  has  always  existed  in  favour  of  the  hypnotiser.
Instead  of  a  young  alligator,  let  one  of  greater  age  and  larger  growth
be  chosen  and  the  experiment  repeated.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that
in  such  a  case  the  roles  would  be  reversed,  the  operator  would  become
cataleptic  and  the  subject  uncommonly  and  disagreeably  mobile.

Again,  Mr.  Hart  holds  that  hypnosis  can  be  induced  only  in  the
hysterical,  in  those  possessing  ill-balanced  nervous  systems.  What
evidence  have  we  for  the  existence  of  hysteria  in  the  alligator  ?  I
think  none,  and  yet  the  spectacle  of  an  alligator  executing  "  grands
mouvements "  or  even  "  mouvements  passionnels  "  would  have  been
certain  to  have  attracted  attention.

Braid's  Later  or  Psychical  Theory.

According  to  this  theory  the  hypnotic  condition  was  essentially  one
of  mental  concentration  or  monoideism,  in  which  the  mind  was  so
engrossed  with  a  single  idea  as  to  render  it  dead  to  all  other  influences.
All  the  phenomena,  no  matter  how  hypnosis  was  induced,  resulted
entirely  from  dominant  ideas  aroused  in  the  minds  of  the  subjects.

The  attention  was  concentrated  upon  the  particular  function  called
into  action,  while  the  others  passed  into  a  state  of  torpor. Only  one


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


215


function  was  active  at  any  one  time,  and  hence  intensely  so.  The
arousing  of  any  dormant  function  was  equivalent  to  superseding  the
one  in  action.

In  his  earlier  theories  Braid  attached  most  importance  to  the
physiological  changes  associated  with  hypnosis  ;  in  his  later,  to  the
psychological  ones.  He  never  entirely  separated  the  two,  however ;
and  when  he  explained  the  condition  by  means  of  monoideism,  he  still
clearly  stated  that  this  depended  upon  a  definite  physical  change  in
the  subject.  This  resulted  from  the  methods  employed  to  induce
hypnosis,  and  alone  rendered  the  mental  condition  possible.  In  his
later  works  he  gives  no  further  elaboration  of  his  physical  theory  and
for  this  we  must  turn  to  Professor  John  Hughes  Bennett,  who  adopted
Braid's  view  in  reference  to  monoideism,  and  explained  it  both  from
the  physiological  and  psychological  side.

Bennett's  Physiological  Theory.

According  to  Bennett,  hypnosis  was  characterised  by  alterations  in
the  functional  activity  of  the  nerve  tubes  of  the  white  matter  of  the
cerebral  lobes.  He  suggested  that  a  certain  proportion  of  these
became  paralysed  through  continued  monotonous  stimulation,  while
the  action  of  others  was  consequently  exalted.  As  these  tubes,  "fibres
of  association  "  as  they  have  been  called,  connect  the  cerebral  ganglion-
cells,  suspension  of  their  functions  was  assumed  to  bring  with  it
interruption  of  the  connection  between  the  ganglion-cells.

,  Bennetts  Psychical  Theory.

From  the  psychical  side,  he  explained  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  by
the  action  of  predominant  and  unchecked  ideas.  These  were  able  to
obtain  prominence  from  the  fact  that  other  ideas,  which  under  ordinary
circumstances  would  have  controlled  their  development,  did  not  arise ;
because  the  portion  of  the  bi'ain  with  which  they  were  associated  had
its  action  temporarily  suspended,  i.e.,  the  connection  between  the
ganglion-cells  was  broken,  owing  to  the  interrupted  connection
between  the  fibres  of  association.  Thus,  he  says,  the  remembrance  of
a  sensation  can  always  be  called  up  by  the  brain ;  but,  under  ordinary
circumstances,  from  the  exercise  of  judgment,  comparison,  and  other
mental  faculties,  we  know  it  is  only  a  remembrance.  When  these
faculties  are  exhausted,  the  suggested  idea  predominates  and  the
individual  believes  in  its  reality.  In  this  manner  we  attribute  to  the
faculties  of  the  mind  as  a  whole  a  certain  power  of  correcting  the
fallacies  which  each  one  of  them  is  liable  to  fall  into,  in  the  same
way  that  the  illusions  of  one  sense  are  capable  of  being  detected  by
the  healthy  use  of  other  senses. There  are  illusions,  mental  and


216


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


sensorial ;  the  former  caused  by  predominant  ideas  and  corrected  by-
proper  reasoning ;  the  latter  caused  by  perversion  of  one  sense  and
corrected  by  the  right  application  of  the  others.

In  hypnosis,  then,  according  to  this  theory,  a  suggested  idea
obtained  prominence  and  created  mental  and  sensorial  illusions,  because
the  check  action — the  inhibitory  power — of  certain  higher  centres  had
been  temporarily  siispended.  These  theories  were  first  published  by
Professor  Bennett  in  1851.

If  we  confine  ourselves  entirely  to  the  psychological  side  of  this
conception  of  hypnosis,  we  find  an  almost  identical  picture  of  the
condition  presented  by  certain  latei-  observers,  such  as  Gurney  and
Bernheim.

Gurney's  Theory.

After  referring  to  the  certain  and  isolated  way  in  which  suggestion
evokes  a  particular  idea  in  the  mind  of  the  subject,  Gurney  states  that
this  isolation  of  a  single  object  in  the  mind  naturally  implies  abeyance
of  the  normal  controlling  and  relating  powers.  In  the  normal  state,
he  says,  successive  vivid  points  of  consciousness  are  surrounded  by  a
swai'm  of  subordinate  perceptions  and  ideas,  by  reference  to  which
conduct  is  instinctively  or  subconsciously  kept  rational.  In  the
hypnotic  state  the  contact  is  broken  between  the  predominant  idea  and
this  attendant  swarm  ;  and  conduct  thus  ceases  to  have  reference  to
anything  except  the  predominant  idea.  The  hypnotic  mind  is  working
with  marked  absence  of  individuality  in  the  channel  chosen  by  others;
and  what  its  owner  says  or  does,  in  response  to  external  influence,  is
that  on  which  his  attention  is  concentrated  to  the  complete  exclusion
of  every  other  thought.

Bernheini's  Theory.

In  hypnosis,  according  to  Bernheim,  the  whole  nervous  force  of  the
subject  is  concentrated  upon  a  siiagie  idea.  This  nervous  concentration
may  be  changed  from  one  point  to  another  in  response  to  the  sugges-
tions of  the  operator,  but,  though  the  focus  shifts  its  place,  the  same
concentration  continues  to  exist.

In  the  normal  state,  he  says,  we  are  subject  to  errors,  illusions  and
hallucinations.  Sometimes  these  are  spontaneous,  or  follow  imperfect
sensorial  impressions;  at  others  they  are  suggested  to  us,  and  accepted
without  being  challenged.  In  the  normal  state  there  is  a  tendency  to
accept  ideas  suggested  by  others  and  to  act  upon  them ;  but  every
formulated  idea  is  questioned  and,  as  the  result  of  this,  either  accepted
or  rejected.  In  the  hypnotised  subject,  on  the  other  hand,  there  exists
a  peculiar  aptitude  for  transforming  the  suggested  idea  into  an  act.
This  is  so  quickly  accomplished  that  the  intellectual  inhibition  has  not
time  to  prevent  it,  and,  when  it  comes  into  play,  it  does  so  too  late,  as'


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


217


the  idea  has  been  translated  into  its  physical  equivalent.  If  conscious-
ness follows  the  suggested  act,  it  at  all  events  follows  it  too  late  to
interfere  with  its  fulfilment.

"While  Bernheim  almost  exactly  reproduces  the  views  of  Braid  and
Bennett  in  reference  to  the  general  mental  condition  in  hypnosis,  he
and  certain  other  members  of  the  Nancy  School  differ  from  them  in
many  important  points,  and  to  these  I  now  propose  to  call  your
attention.

Points  of  Difference.

Braid  and  Bennett,  as  we  have  seen,  regarded  the  phenomena  of
hypnosis  as  the  result  of  a  definite  physical  change  in  the  subject ;
Bernheim,  on  the  other  hand,  attempts  to  explain  them  (1)  by  finding
an  analogy  between  them  and  the  phenomena  of  the  normal  state,  and
(2)  by  means  of  suggestion.

According  to  Bernheim,  hypnotic  phenomena  are  analogous  to
many  normal  acts  of  an  automatic,  involuntaiy  and  unconscious  nature,
and  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  differentiates  natural  and  artificial
sleep.  If  any  distinction  exists  at  all  between  the  normal  and  the
hypnotic  state,  this  can  be  explained  by  means  of  suggestion.  Both
the  normal  and  the  hypnotised  subject  can  be  influenced  by  it;  but,  as
we  have  suggested  to  the  latter  that  he  should  become  more  responsive,
a  peculiar  aptitude  for  transforming  the  idea  into  an  act  has  in  this
way  been  artificially  developed.  In  other  words,  every  one  is  suggestible
and  if  you  take  some  one  and  suggest  to  him  to  become  more  suggestible,
that  is  hypnotism !  Thus,  suggestion  not  only  excites  the  phenomena  "
of  hypnosis,  bnt  also  explains  them.  Suggestion,  i.e.,  the  mental
impression,  including  the  preliminary  suggestion  to  become  more
suggestible,  conveyed  from  the  operator  to  the  subject,  is  the  ordy
essential  factor  in  the  equation,  and  the  condition  of  the  patient,
physical  or  mental,  is  absolutely  unimportant.

This  theory  contains  five  distinct  statements,  none  of  which  can
be  accepted  without  discussion.

I.  Nothing  differentiates  natural  and  artificial  sleep.  Hypnotic
phenomena  are  analogous  to  many  normal  acts  of  an  automatic,
involuntary  and  unconscious  nature.

II.  An  idea  has  a  tendency  to  generate  its  actuality.

III.  In  the  hypnotic  state,  this  tendency  to  accept  suggestions  is
somewhat  increased  by  the  action  of  suggestion  itself.  Such  increased
suggestibility,  one  of  degree,  not  of  kind,  alone  marks  any  difference
between  the  hypnotic  and  normal  state,

IV.  The  result  of  suggestion  in  hypnosis  is  analogous  to  the  result
of  suggestion  in  the  normal  state.


218


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


V.  In  the  four  preceding  propositions  is  to  be  found  a  complete
explanation  of  hypnosis  and  its  phenomena.

In  discussing  the  above  propositions,  I  will,  for  convenience'  sake,
somewhat  change  their  order.

/. — Explanation  of  Hypnosis  hy  means  of  a  supposed  Geyieral  Analogy
between  it  and  the  Normal  State.
My  chief  objections  to  this  are  : —

(1.)  That  an  analogy,  however  successfully  established  between  two
sets  of  phenomena,  by  no  means  explains  either  of  them.

(2.)  That  the  automatic,  involuntary  and  unconscious  acts,  in  which
Bernheim  seeks  to  find  his  analogy,  rarely,  if  ever,  occur  in  hypnosis,
and  are  certainly  by  no  means  characteristic  of  it.

Putting  aside  the  question  of  automatism,  which  I  shall  discuss
later  in  conjunction  with  suggested  crimes,  we  find  that  Bernheim
believes  that  a  complete  analogy  exists  between  the  therapeutic  action
of  hypnosis  in  his  hospital  and  the  miracle  cures  at  Lourdes.  How  far
these  and  similar  phenomena  resemble  each  other  can,  however,  be
better  dealt  with  under  the  head  of  suggestion.

Braid  considered  that  marked  differences  existed  between  hypnosis
on  the  one  hand,  and  natural  somnambulism  and  the  normal  sleeping
and  waking  states  on  the  other.  A  detailed  account  of  these,  which,
he  thought,  consisted  mainly  in  the  increased  mental  and  physical
powers  of  the  hypnotised  subject,  is  to  be  found  in  the  article  on
Braid  in  Part  XXX.  of  the  Proceedings  of  this  Society  (p.  127).

///. — In  Hypnosis  the  Tendency  to  accept  Suggestions  is  somewhat
increased  hy  the  Action  of  Suggestion  itself;  this  alone
distinguishes  the  Hyjmotic  from  the  Norma/  State.
Granting  for  the  moment  that  the  normal  and  hypnotic  states  are
identical ;  that  both  are  characterised  by  susceptibility  to  suggestion,
how  far  are  we  justified  in  concluding  that  increased  suggestibility  is
alone  possessed  by  the  hypnotic  subject  and  affords  the  only  difference
which  distinguishes  him  from  the  normal  one?  Let  us  consider  the  means
by  which  the  supposed  change  has  been  brought  about.  The  phrase, "You
are  to  become  more  suggestible,"  is  stated  to  have  artificially  created
it.  Now,  if  we  admit  that  this  formula  is  sufficient  to  change  a  normal
into  a  hypnotic  subject  and  to  account  for  his  increased  suggestibility,
we  must  be  prej^ared  to  show,  in  order  to  maintain  the  distinction
between  the  two,  that  the  individual  who  is  still  regarded  as  normal,
i.e.,  less  suggestible,  has  escaped  similar  influences.  Suggestions  in
normal  life,  however,  are  frequently  associated  with  those  of  increased
suggestibility.  A  beggar,  in  appealing  for  alms,  not  only  asks  that
they  should  be  given  him,  but  also  suggests  in  various  ways,  directly  or


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


219


indirectly,  according  to  his  skill  and  ingenuity,  that  the  object  of  his
petition  should  become  more  responsive  to  his  prayer,  i.e.,  more  sugges-
tible. There  is  an  important  difference  between  the  two.  In  hypnosis
we  attempt  to  gain  increased  power  by  quietly  repeating  some  recog-
nised formula  once  or  twice,  while  in  normal  life  we  attempt  to  obtain
it  in  a  much  more  forcible  and  varied  manner.  We  must  conclude,
then,  that,  if  the  hypnotic  and  normal  states  are  identical  and  sugges-
tion a  factor  common  to  both,  suggestibility,  as  the  result  of  the
methods  employed  to  develop  it,  ought  to  be  more  markedly  character-
istic of  the  normal  than  of  the  hypnotic  condition.

-^y^- — ^/ie  Result  of  Suggestion  in  Hypnosis  is  analogous  to  the  Result
of  Suggestion  in  the  Normal  State.

If  we  confine  ourselves  to  cases  in  which  suggestion  in  the  normal
subject  has  been  employed  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  used  in  hypnosis,
the  analogy  is  at  once  seen  to  be  an  extremely  imperfect  one.  The  cold-
blooded results  of  the  action  of  the  mind  upon  the  body,  as  Mr.  Myers
calls  them,  are  extremely  rare  and  generally  unimportant.  On  the
other  hand,  if  we  turn  to  the  effects  of  violent  emotional  states,  we  find
many  phenomena  have  been  produced  by  them  which  more  or  less  closely
resemble  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis.  Similarity  of  result,  however,
does  not  necessarily  imply  identity  of  cause,  and  an  attempted  analogy,
which  is  based  solely  on  the  former  and  ignores  the  latter,  must  ever  be
an  imperfect  one.  Fear,  hope,  faith,  or  intense  religious  excitement  is
almost  invariably  present  in  cases  which  are  cited  as  analogous  to
hypnotic  ones.  Not  only  are  these  conditions  unnecessary  for  the
induction  of  hypnosis,  but  some  of  them  absolutely  preclude  its  pro-
duction. Thus,  hypnosis  can  be  evoked  in  the  absence  of  all  those
conditions  that  are  essential  for  the  production  of  analogous  phenomena
in  the  normal  state ;  and,  further,  the  presence  of  some  of  these
conditions,  instead  of  favouring  hypnosis,  hinders  or  prevents  it.
Putting  aside  this  important  objection — the  difference  between  the

conditions  associated  with  the  development  of  tlie  phenomena  there

still  remain  certain  points  of  contrast  between  the  phenomena  them-
selves, which  I  shall  now  enumerate.

Suggestion  in  Hypnosis.

1.  Once  hypnosis  has  been  induced,  a  wide  range  of  phenomena,
both  mental  and  physical,  can  be  evoked  at  any  time,  and,  with  the
consent  of  the  subject,  by  any  one.  A  considerable  number  of
phenomena  can  be  simultaneously  produced  in  the  same  subject.

2.  One  phenomenon  can  be  immediately  changed  into  its  opposite,
e.g.,  muscular  rigidity  into  paralysis,  anaesthesia  into  hypertesthesia,  etc.

3.  Hypnotic  phenomena  can  be  tei^inated  at  will.


220


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


4.  The  date  of  the  appearance  of  the  jshenomenon  can  be  delayed,
e.g.,  it  can  be  suggested  during  hypnosis  that  it  shall  not  appear  till
twelve  months  afterwards.

5.  The  suggestion  will  invariably  be  responded  to,  subject  to  two
important  limitations,  i.e.,  that  it  contains  nothing  in  opposition  to  the
patient's  moral  sense  and  is  not  beyond  the  range  of  his  hypnotic
powers.

6.  Under  the  conditions  just  mentioned,  the  exact  nature  of  the
response  can  be  predicted,  i.e.,  similar  stimuli  produce  identical  results.

7.  Hypnotic  suggestion  tends  to  gain  strength  by  repetition.

8.  Patients  who  readily  respond  to  suggestions  when  hypnotised
are  frequently  the  very  subjects  who  have  for  years  resisted  suggestion
in  the  normal  condition,  even  when  this  has  been  associated  with
emotional  states.  For  example,  a  patient  who  had  long  suffered  from
dipsomania  received  many  and  var-ied  suggestions  in  the  normal  state.
The  grief  of  his  friends  and  relatives  and  their  repeated  remonstrances
were  powerful  suggestions.  So,  too,  were  the  loss  of  fortune  and  self-
respect,  and  the  physical  sufferings,  associated  with  keen  remorse,  which
followed  his  drinking  bouts.  Twelve  months  passed  in  a  home  for
inebriates  must  also  have  been  full  of  suggestion  of  many  kinds.  All
these,  however,  produced  no  result ;  and  yet,  after  a  few  weeks'  hypnotic
treatment,  the  patient  abandoned  the  alcoholic  habit  and  still,  after
the  lapse  of  six  years,  remains  an  abstainer.

Suggestion  hy  Means  of  Emotional  States.

1.  The  resultant  phenomena  are  usually  isolated  ones  or,  at  all
events,  much  more  limited  in  number  than  those  which  can  simul-
taneously be  evoked  in  the  hypnotised  sul)ject.

2.  One  phenomenon  cannot  be  immediately  changed  into  its
opposite,  without  an  alteration  in  the  emotional  state  which  had
produced  it.

3.  Emotional  phenomena  cannot  be  terminated  at  will.

4.  The  date  of  the  ajspearance  of  the  phenomena  can  rarely  be
delayed  and  fixed.

5  The  phenomena  are  evoked  with  less  certainty  than  in  hypnosis.
An  emotional  state  which  will  produce  a  physical  effect  in  one  subject
will  produce  nothing  in  another.

6.  The  result  of  identical  emotional  states  is  not  similar  physical
phenomena.  On  the  contrary,  opi^osite  conditions  are  frequently
produced  in  different  subjects  by  identical  emotions  ;  e.g.,  fear  will
paralyse  one,  and  excite  violent  muscular  movements  in  another.

7.  An  emotional  suggestion  frequently  loses  strength  by  repetition,
e.g.,  a  subject  may  rapidly  come  to  disregard  former  fears.


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


221


— ^<^6a  has  a  Tendency  to  Generate  its  Actuality.

According  to  Bernheim,  the  suggestive  phenomena  of  hypnosis
depend  upon  the  fact  that,  in  the  normal  subject,  an  idea  has  a
tendency  to  generate  its  actuality.  This  power,  as  we  have  seen,  was
supposed,  and  erroneously  so,  to  be  artificially  increased  by  suggestion
in  the  hypnotised  subject  alone.

Now,  if  we  confined  our  attention  to  the  hypnotic  state  and
considered  how  frequently  a  suggested  idea,  unattended  by  emotional
conditions,  produced  a  rapid  and  definite  response,  we  should  be
incHned  to  admit  that  in  hypnosis  an  idea  had  not  only  a  tendency  to
generate  its  actuality,  but  almost  invariably  did  so.

A  similar  statement,  however,  in  reference  to  normal  life  cannot  be
accepted  without  question.  If  ,  an  extended  statistical  inquiry  were
made  as  to  the  results  of  suggestion  we  should  find  that  these  would
fall  under  three  classes.

1.  Where  the  suggested  idea  had  produced  no  result.

2.  Where  the  result  was  opposite,  or,  at  all  events,  different  from
that  intended.

3.  Where  the  suggestion  had  been  responded  to  with  more  or  less
exactitude.

1.  Where  the  Suggested  Idea  -produced  no  Result.
A  very  casual  glance  at  the  events  of  everyday  life  would  compel
us  to  conclude  that  this  class  is  the  commonest  of  the  three.  This  is
evident,  if  we  think  of  the  numberless  things  ineffectually  suggested  in
the  family  circle,  to  domestics,  workmen,  tradespeople,  friends  and
acquaintances,  county  councillors,  vestrymen,  Members  of  Parliament,
and  even  to  the  Prime  Minister  himself  !

2.  Where  the  Result  irroduced  was  Opposite,  or,  at  all  events,  Different

from  that  intended.
In  point  of  numbers  this  class  possibly  comes  second,  but,  in  regard
to  the  annoyance  associated  with  it,  it  might  be  considered  to  stand  first.
Numerous  examples  can  easily  be  cited.  Thus,  if  a  thief  snatches  my
watch  from  me,  and  I  suggest  to  him  to  stop,  he,  on  the  contrary,  runs
the  faster.  If  a  street  arab  is  making  a  noise  under  my  window  and  I
tell  him  to  cease  and  go  away,  he  not  only  persists,  but  incites  others
to  join  him.  If  I  suggest  to  a  Liberal  friend  to  become  a  Home  Ruler,
he  rejects  the  idea  and  joins  the  opposite  party.  If  a  servant  asks  for
a  rise  in  wages,  this  frequently  results  in  his  dismissal.

3.  Where  the  Suggestion  has  been  Responded  to  tvith  more or  less

Exactitude.

When  we  compare  the  results  of  this  class  with  those  obtained  in
the  others  they  must,  I  am  afraid,  sink  into  insignificance. Eor  one


222


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


suggestion  which  has  generated  its  actuality,  we  must  count  at  least  a
hundred  which  have  produced  nothing,  and  possibly  ten  whei'e  the  result
has  been  an  unexpected  or  disagreeable  one.  I  would  therefore  restate
the  proposition  as  follows  : —

1.  A  suggested  idea  has  generally  a  tendency  to  generate  nothing.

2.  A  suggested  idea  has  frequently  a  tendency  to  generate  its
opposite.

3.  A  suggested  idea  rarely  tends  to  generate  its  actuality.

V. —  In  the  four  preceding  Propositions  is  to  be  found  a  complete
Explanation  of  Hypnosis  and  its  Phenomena.

So  far  we  have  been  occupied  in  discussing  the  facts  upon  which
Bernheim's  theoretical  explanation  of  hypnosis  is  founded.  To  these
exception  has  been  taken  on  every  point,  viz  : —

I.  To  the  supposed  analogy  between  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis
and  automatic,  involuntary  and  unconscious  acts  of  normal  life.

III.  To  the  statement  that  suggestion  increases  suggestibility  in  the
hypnotised  subject  alone.

IV.  To  the  general  analogy  between  the  result  of  suggestion  in  the
normal  state  and  in  hypnosis.

II.  To  the  general  principle  that,  in  normal  life,  an  idea  has  a
tendency  to  generate  its  actuality.

Of  all  these  statements  there  is  only  one  I  am  prepared  to  accept,
namely,  that  suggestion  plays  an  important  part  in  evoking  hypnotic
phenomena.  There  remains  for  our  consideration  the  question  how  far
suggestion  exidains  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis.

I  wish  first,  however,  to  refer  to  Braid's  views  regarding  suggestion.

While  Braid  held  that  hypnotic  phenomena  resulted  from  dominant
ideas  in  the  mind  of  the  subject,  he,  at  the  same  time,  stated  that  it
was  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  these  had  existed  previously,  or
were  afterwards  audibly  suggested  by  the  operator,  or  indirectly
created  by  the  sensory  impressions  resulting  from  his  manipulations.

Self-suggestion.

Braid  cites  many  instances  in  which  hypnosis  and  its  phenomena
were  entirely  the  result  of  self-suggestion,  although  they  were  supposed
to  be  due  to  other  causes.

Passes  and  other  Manipulations.

According  to  Braid,  everything  which  produces  a  new  impression
is  capable  of  modifying  existing  functions,  whether  the  impression  be
of  a  mental  or  physical  nature.  Hence  he  thought  it  possible  that
passes  might  have  a  physical  effect  through  mechanical  agitation  of  the


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


223


air,  by  touch,  or  by  producing  some  change  in  the  temperature  or
electrical  states.  In  support  of  this,  he  drew  attention  to  the  fact
that  pliysical  impressions,  too  slight  to  arouse  consciousness,  might  yet
produce  potent  results  ;  for  example,  although  a  person  did  not  notice
he  was  sitting  in  a  draught,  this  might  cause  rheumatism.  He  con-
sidered that  physical  methods  acted  most  powei'fully,  however,  when
they  directly  excited  mental  action,  either  by  fixing  the  attention  on
one  part  or  function  of  the  body  and  vvithdi'awing  it  from  others,
or  by  arousing  ideas  previously  associated  with  the  physical  impression.
In  reference  to  the  latter  point,  he  says,  this  is  simply  an  inversion  of
the  ordinary  sequence  between  mental  and  muscular  excitation.
Under  ordinary  circumstances  the  mental  impression  precedes  and
excites  the  physical  one,  but  here  the  order  of  events  is  reversed.
The  touch  calls  into  play  the  muscles  constituting  the  "  anatomy  of
expression  "  of  any  given  passion  or  emotion,  idea  or  train  of  thought ;
and,  secondly,  this  physical  expression  suggests  to  the  mind  of  the
subject  the  corresponding  idea  with  which  it  has  been  previously
associated  in  the  waking  condition.  Though  Braid  explained  the
action  of  passes  in  this  way,  he  also  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that
their  effects  might  be  neutralised  or  even  reversed  by  direct  suggestion.
Thus,  he  said,  suppose  the  operator,  while  making  the  passes,  spoke
aloud  and  predicted  what  would  happen,  the  verbal  suggestion  might
be  so  strong  as  to  cause  the  predicted  manifestation  to  be  realised
instead  of  what  otherwise  would  have  been  the  case ;  and  thus,  from
this  time  forward,  through  the  action  of  the  hypnotic  memory,  a  similar
impression  on  that  part  or  organ  of  sense  would  recall  the  previously
associated  idea  and  manifestation.  Though  Braid  at  first  employed
passes,  &c.,  he  almost  entii'ely  discarded  these  methods  when  he  began
to  regard  hypnotic  phenomena  from  a  psychical  standpoint.  He  then
stated  distinctly  that  the  value  of  mechanical  means  was  purely
suggestive  and  that  direct  verbal  suggestion  was  best  for  exciting  the
phenomena  of  hypnosis,  whether  experimental  or  therapeutic.  His
usual  method  was  as  follows  :  after  hypnotising  his  patients,  he  stated
in  a  confident  manner  the  results  he  wished  to  obtain  and,  in  certain
subjects,  found  that  these  could  be  varied  by  a  simple  change  in  the
voice.  Thus,  if  he  made  a  patient  see  an  imaginary  sheep,  and  then
asked  him  in  a  cheerful  manner  what  colour  it  was,  this  tone  usually
elicited  the  reply  "White,"  or  some  light  colour.  If  he  then  asked,
""What  colour  is  it  now?"  giving  a  sad  intonation  to  the  word  now,
the  reply  would  usually  be  "  Black."

The  difference  between  Braid  and  the  Nancy  School,  with  regard  to
suggestion,  is  entirely  one  of  theory,  not  of  practice.  Braid  employed
verbal  suggestion  in  hypnosis  just  as  constantly  and  just  as  intelligently
as  any  member  of  the  Nancy  School, This  fact  is  denied  by  Bernheim,

Q


224


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


who  states  that  Braid  did  not  dream  of  using  verbal  suggestion  in
therapeutics  ;  but  his  statement  has  its  sole  origin  in  ignorance  of
Braid's  later  work  and  writings.  Braid,  however,  while  agreeing  with
Bernheim  as  to  the  practical  use  of  suggestion,  differs  entirely  from  him
in  his  theoretical  conception  of  it.  He  did  not  consider  suggestion  as
explanatory  of  hypnotic  phenomena,  but,  like  Mr.  Myers  at  a  later
date,  regarded  it  simply  as  an  artifice  used  in  order  to  excite  them.
He  considered  that  the  mental  phenomena  were  only  rendered  possible
by  previous  physical  changes  and,  as  the  result  of  these,  the  operator
was  enabled  to  act  like  an  engineer  and,  by  means  of  suggestion,  to
excite  and  direct  the  forces  which  existed  in  the  subject's  own  body.

Before  discussing  the  general  question  of  how  far  suggestion
explains  hypnotic  phenomena,  I  wish  to  draw  attention  to  the
difference  between  the  views  of  Braid  and  of  Forel  as  regards  passes.
While  Braid  believed  that  the  mental  effect  resulting  from  the  indirect
physical  action  of  mechanical  means  could  be  checked  or  reversed  by
stronger  and  more  dii'ect  verbal  suggestion,  he  still  held,  and  I  think
justly  so,  that  the  physical  impression  was  capable  of  j^roducing  both
physical  and  mental  results.  Forel,  on  the  other  hand,  denies  the
physical  influence  of  mechanical  processes,  on  the  ground  that
suggestion  is  capable  of  altering  their  supposed  action.  He  says,
"  blowing  on  the  face  no  longer  awakens  my  subjects,  because  I  have
suggested  that  this  would  remove  pain  instead  of  arousing  them."
Fi'om  this  he  concludes  that  the  act  of  blowing  produces  no  result,  and
■considers  this  a  powerful  argument  against  the  somatic  school.  Would
it  not  be  equally  logical  to  contend  that  the  pi'ick  of  a  pin  produced
no  physical  effect,  because  the  patient,  rendered  insensible  to  pain  by
suggestion,  had  been  taught  to  regard  the  pin  prick  as  the  signal  to
evoke  some  other  condition  ?

Does  Stiggeation  explain  Hyjmosis  and  its  Phenomena  ?

The  answer  to  this  question  must,  I  think,  be  a  distinctly  negative
one.  The  success  of  suggestion  depends,  not  on  the  suggestion  itself,  but
on  conditions  inherent  in  the  subject.  These  are  (1)  willingness  to  accept
and  carry  out  the  suggestion,  and  (2)  the  power  to  do  so.  In  the  hyp-
notised subject,  except  in  reference  to  criminal  or  improper  suggestions,
the  first  condition  is  generally  present.  The  second  varies  according
to  the  depth  of  the  hypnosis  and  the  personality  of  the  patient.  For
instance,  I  might  suggest  analgesia,  in  precisely  similar  terms,  to  three
subjects  and  yet  obtain  quite  difi'erent  results.  One  might  become
profoundly  analgesic,  the  second  slightly  so,  and  the  third  not  at  all.
Just  in  the  same  way,  if  three  jockeys  attempt  to  make  their  horses
gallop  a  certain  distance  in  a  given  time,  the  suggestions  conveyed  by
voice,  spur  and  whip  may  be  similar,  and  yet  the  results  quite  different.


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


225


One  horse,  in  response  to  suggestion,  may  easily  cover  the  required
distance  in  the  allotted  time.  It  was  both  able  and  willing  to  perform
the  feat  The  second,  in  response  to  somewhat  increased  suggestion,
may  nearly  do  so.  It  was  willing,  but  had  not  sufficient  staying
power.  The  third,  able  but  unwilling,  not  only  refuses  to  begin  the
race,  but  bolts  oS  in  the  contrary  direction.  With  this  horse,  we  have
the  exact  opposite  of  the  result  obtained  in  the  first  instance  ;  and  yet
possibly  the  amount  of  suggestion  it  received  largely  exceeded  that
administered  to  the  others.  As  Mr.  Myers  has  pointed  out,  the
operator  directs  the  condition  upon  which  hypnotic  phenomena  depend,
but  does  not  create  it.  "Professor  Bernheim's  command,  'Feel  pain
no  more,'  is  no  more  a  scientific  instruction  how  not  to  feel  pain,
than  the  prophet's  '  Wash  in  Jordan  and  be  clean '  was  a  pharmacopoeal
prescription  for  leprosy."  In  hypnosis,  the  essential  condition  is  not  the
means  used  to  excite  the  phenomena,  but  the  peculiar  state  which
enables  them  to  be  evoked.  Suggestion  no  more  explains  the  phenomena
of  hypnotism  than  the  crack  of  a  pistol  explains  a  boat  race.  Both  are
simply  signals,  mere  points  of  departure,  and  nothing  more.  In
Bernheim's  hands,  the  word  '•  suggestion  "  has  acquired  an  entirely  new
signification,  and  differs  only  in  name  from  the  odyllic  force  of  the
mesmerists.  It  has  become  mysterious  and  all-powerful,  and  is  supposed
to  be  capable,  not  only  of  evoking  and  exjjlaining  all  the  phenomena  of
hypnotism,  but  also  of  originating,  nay  even  of  being,  the  condition
itself.  According  to  his  view,  suggestion  not  only  starts  the  race,  but
also  creates  the  rowers  and  builds  the  boat  !

Attention  in  Hypnosis.

While  Braid  and  Bernheim  diifer  as  to  the  physical  changes  which
precede  or  accompany  hypnosis,  they  both  attach  much  importance  to
the  question  of  attention  in  reference  to  the  induction  of  hypnosis
and  of  its  phenomena.

Attention  in  the  Induction  of  Hypnosis.

According  to  Braid,  the  induction  of  hypnosis  was  facilitated  either
by: — (1)  The  concentration  of  the  attention  on  some  external  object.
(2)  Concentration  of  the  attention  on  some  idea  connected  witli
hypnotism.

Li^beault  and  Bernheim  consider  that  ordinary  and  hypnotic  sleep
both  owe  their  origin  to  the  fixation  of  the  attention  and  of  the  nervous
force  upon  the  idea  of  sleep.  The  individual  who  desires  to  go  to  sleep
chooses  a  quiet  place,  meditates  and  keeps  still.  His  nervous  force  is
concentrated  upon  a  single  idea  and  deserts  the  nerves  of  sensation,
emotion  and  special  sense.  The  conditions  which  induce  the  hypnotic
state  are  identical. The  subject  is  told  to  concentrate  his  mind  upon

Q  2


226


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


the  idea  of  sleep  and,  to  aid  him  in  doing  so,  is  directed  to  look  fixedly
at  some  object.  From  this  results  bodily  repose,  the  senses  become
less  acute,  more  and  more  isolated  from  the  external  world  and,  finally,
thought  is  arrested.

A  connection  undoubtedly  exists  between  the  subject's  powers  of
attention  and  the  facility  with  which  hypnosis  can  be  induced.  For
example,  idiots,  who  possess  little  spontaneous  and  no  voluntary
attention,  cannot  be  hypnotised  at  all,  and  others,  such  as  those  suffer-
ing from  mania,  hysteria,  (fee,  whose  attention  is  actively  turned  into
other  channels,  are  extremely  difficult  to  influence.

In  reference  to  the  connection  between  the  attention  and  the
induction  of  hypnosis,  the  following  points  seem  worthy  of  notice.

1.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  attention  should  be  concentrated  on
the  idea  of  sleep.  Braid,  as  we  have  seen,  easily  induced  hypnosis
when  the  patient  gazed  steadily  at  an  external  object  and  concentrated
the  attention  on  the  idea  of  that  object.  The  primary  hypnosis  also
need  not  resemble  sleep,  and  the  subject  may  at  once  pass  into  the  alert
state  with  the  eyes  oj^en.

*2.  Primaiy  hypnosis  has  sometimes  been  induced  in  cases  where  it
would  be  difficult  to  pi'ove  that  any  concentration  of  attention  had
existed,  either  upon  some  external  object  or  upon  the  idea  of  sleep.
In  these  cases,  the  subject,  after  having  given  his  consent  to  the
expei'iment,  has  rested  quietly  and  voluntai'ily  reduced  his  mental
activity.  He  has,  as  nearly  as  possible,  emptied  his  mind  of  all
thought  and  produced,  not  a  condition  of  concentration,  but  its
opposite,  —  abstraction.

3.  Again,  as  Gurney  points  out,  the  phenomena  of  natural
somnambulism,  which,  in  respect  to  the  absorption  of  the  mind  in
one  direction,  present  the  closest  analogy  to  those  of  hypnotism,
demand  no  previous  concentration  of  attention  at  all.

4.  Once  hypnosis  has  been  induced,  the  condition  can  be  evoked  at
any  time,  and  practically  instantaneously,  in  response  to  a  previously
arranged  signal.  Here,  though  the  attention  of  the  subject  has
been  momentarily  directed  to  the  signal,  prolonged  concentration  of
attention  has  been  absent.

Does  C oncentratio7i  of  Attention  cause  Hypnosis?

Gurney  says  : — "  But,  even  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  cases  where
attention  is  actually  present  during  the  production  of  the  state,  •what
ground  is  there  for  describing  it  as  the  catise  of  that  state  ?  .  .  .
The  general  effects  of  a  one-sided  strain  of  mind  or  body  are  pretty  well
known  and  '  tonic  cramp  of  the  attention  '  may  be  a  very  satisfactory
description  of  the  one-sided  absorption  in  a  particular  direction  which


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


227


characterises  many  isolated  stages  of  hypnotic  trance.  But  what
tendency  should  the  cramp  of  an  attention,  which  is  directed  to  a
button  held  in  the  hand,  have  to  produce,  or  to  facilitate,  a  fresh
cramp  or  series  of  cramps,  when  the  attention  is  diverted  to  quite  fresh
objects  ?  .  .  .  I  have  again  and  again  found  the  complete  change
to  a  new  genus  of  ideas  to  be  absolutely  effortless  and  instantaneous —
found,  that  is,  that  the  atteiition,  which  has  been  as  usual  fixed
during  the  process  of  hypnotisation,  became  quite  abnormally  mobile
afterwards.  .  .  .  If  I  am  told  that  a  particular  mental  attitude,  —
that  of  fixed  or  one-sided  attention — is  the  cause  of  certain  mental
phenomena  which  are  new  to  me,  I  am  surely  justified  in  demanding
that  the  order  of  events  shall  present  some  perceptible  coherence — shall
at  least  not  run  directly  counter  to  what  my  general  experience  would
have  led  me  to  expect." [Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  271-3.)

Again,  taking  the  case  where  the  attention  was  concentrated
during  the  production  of  the  state,  how  does  this  explain  the  fact
that  when  the  patient  is  left  to  himself  in  hypnosis,  his  condition  is
usually  one  of  abstraction  1  Here,  as  a  supposed  result  of  a  previous
concentration  of  attention,  we  have  the  spontaneous  development  of
its  opposite.

Preliminary  fixation  of  attention  cannot  be  accepted  as  an  explana-
tion of  subsequent  mobility.  All  that  we  can  concede  so  far  is  :— (1)
That  fixation  of  the  attention  frequently  precedes  and  usually
facilitates  the  induction  of  hypnosis.  (2)  That  the  attention  in
hypnosis  can  easily  be  rendered  excessively  mobile.

Further  Conditions  favourable  for  the  Indxiction  of  Hypnotic

Phenomena.

Rapport  and  attention.

The  following  is  Liebeault's  view  : — "  It  is  observed,"  he  says,
"  that  nearly  all  artificial  sonmambules  are  in  relation  by  their  senses
with  those  who  put  them  to  sleep,  but  only  with  them.  The  subject
hears  everything  the  operator  says  to  him,  but  hears  him  only,  provided
the  sleep  is  sufficiently  deep.  He  only  hears  the  operator  when  he  is
addressed  directly  by  him  and  not  when  a  third  person  is  spoken  to.
This  rapport  extends  to  the  other  senses."  According  to  Liebeault,
the  subject  remains  en  rapport  with  the  hypnotiser  because  he  goes  to
sleep  in  thinking  of  him,  and  this  does  not  differ  from  what  sometimes
happens  in  ordinary  sleep.  A  mother  who  goes  to  sleep  close  to  the
cradle  of  her  child,  does  not  cease  to  watch  over  him  during  her  sleep,
but  while  she  hears  his  slightest  cry,  is  insensible  to  other  louder
sounds.  The  concentration  of  the  subject's  attention  upon  the
operator,  and  his  mental  retention  of  the  idea  of  the  one  who  put  him
to  sleep  is  the  cause  of  rapport.


228


Dr.  J.  Milne  Braviiuell.


In  rapport  Bernheim  finds  his  solitary  point  of  difference  between
normal  and  hypnotic  sleep.  He  says,  "  In  ordinary  sleep,  as  soon  as
consciousness  is  lost,  the  su1)ject  is  only  in  relationship  with  himself  ;
in  induced  sleep  his  mind  retains  the  memory  of  the  person  who  has
put  him  to  sleep  ;  hence  the  hypnotiser's  power  of  playing  upon  his
imagination,  of  suggesting  dreams,  and  of  directing  the  acts  which  are
no  longer  controlled  by  the  weakened  or  absent  will."

The  following  is  Braid's  view  of  the  condition  of  the  attention  in
hypnosis  :  — ■

The  principal  difference  between  hypnotic  and  normal  sleep  is  to  be
found  in  the  mental  condition.  When  falling  into  ordinary  sleep,  the
mind  passes  from  one  idea  to  another  indifferently,  and  the  subject  is
unable  to  fix  his  attention  on  any  regular  train  of  thought,  or  to
perform  any  act  requiring  much  voluntary  effort.  As  the  result  of
this,  audible  suggestions  and  sensory  impressions  received  by  the
sleeper,  if  not  intense  enough  to  entirely  awaken  him,  seldom  do  more
than  arouse  dreams,  in  which  ideas  pass  througli  his  mind  without
exciting  definite  physical  acts.  On  the  other  hand,  the  concentration
of  attention,  which  is  the  result  of  the  means  employed  for  inducing
hypnosis,  is  continued  into  the  state  itself,  and  verbal  suggestions  or
sensory  impi'essions  excite  definite  trains  of  thought  or  physical
movements,  instead  of  dreams.

Certain  points  of  difference  and  resemblance  are  to  be  noticed
between  these  views.

According  to  Braid,  the  condition  of  the  attention  in  hypnosis
favoured  response  to  external  suggestion,  but  not  to  suggestion
conveyed  by  any  particular  person,  such  as  the  hypnotiser.  It  was
possible  by  suggestion  to  create  an  artificial  state  in  which  the  subject
was  apparently  only  en  rapport  with  the  operator,  but  this  condition
was  only  an  apparent,  not  a  real  one.  The  subjects  really  heard  the
suggestions  of  others,  though  special  artifices  might  be  necessary  in
order  to  make  them  respond  to  them.  Braid  relates  a  case  in  which  he
made  a  somnambule  respond  to  his  indirect  suggestions,  conveyed  in
the  form  of  confident  predictions  of  what  was  going  to  happen,  though
the  subject  was  asleep  when  he  entered  the  room  and  apparently  was
only  en  rapport  with  the  original  operator.  Carpenter  di'ew  attention
to  the  fact  that  rapport  was  unknown  to  Mesmer  and  his  immediate
disciples  and  was  not  discovered  until  long  after  the  practice  of
mesmerism  had  come  into  vogue.  The  phenomena  of  rapport  only
acquired  constancy  and  fixity  in  proportion  as  its  laws  were
announced  aiid  received.  Mesmerists,  ignorant  of  it,  produced  a
great  variety  of  remarkable  phenomena  without  discovering  rapport,
until  the  idea  had  been  put  into  their  minds  and  thence  transferred
to  their  subjects.


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


229


Bernheim  and  Liebeault  believe  that  a  real  rapport  e^ifits  between
the  subject  and  the  operatoi*  and  that  this  follows  as  a  natural  con-
sequence from  the  methods  employed  in  inducing  hypnosis.  According
to  Bernheim,  not  only  does  it  exist,  but  the  operator's  power  of  evoking
hypnotic  phenomena  depends  on  it.  While  Bernheim  and  Liebeault
agree  on  this  point,  they  differ  on  another.  Thus,  Bernheim  finds  in
rapport  the  sole  difference  between  hypnotic  and  ordinary  sleep,  while
Liebeault,  on  the  contrary,  tries  by  means  of  it  to  establish  an  analogy
between  them.

My  own  observations  in  reference  to  rapport  have  led  me  to
conclusions  similar  to  those  of  Braid,  viz.  : — -1.  That  rapport  does  not
appear  unless  it  has  been  directly  or  indirectly  suggested.  2.  That  the
condition  is  always  an  apparent  and  never  a  real  one.  It  could  always
be  experimentally  proved  that  the  subjects  actually  had  been  cognisant
of  what  had  been  said  and  done  by  others  who  had  not  been  placed  en
rapport  with  them.  In  those  who  did  not  know  what  was  expected  of
them,  and  to  whom  neither  direct  nor  indirect  suggestions  of  rapport
were  made,  this  condition  did  not  appear.  On  the  contrary,  they
heard  and  obeyed  any  one  who  might  address  them.

Moll,  in  Der  Rapport  in  der  Hypnose,  published  in  1892,  comes
practically  to  the  same  conclusion  as  Braid  in  regard  to  rapport,  viz. :  —
that  it  is  caused  by  direct  or  indirect  suggestions  of  the  operator,  or  by
self-suggestions  which  result  from  the  subject's  conception  of  the  nature
of  the  hypnotic  state.

It  is  true,  as  Liebeault  has  pointed  out,  that  rapport  frequently
exists  between  the  sleeping  mother  and  her  child  and  that  she  will  hear
its  slightest  cry  and  yet  be  unconscious  of  louder  sounds.  This,  how-
ever, has  no  analogy  in  the  hypnotic  state.  The  untrained  somnambule
responds  with  equal  readiness  to  the  voice  of  any  one  and,  if  he  has
been  taught  to  respond  only  to  one  voice,  he  still  hears  others.  Again,
the  difference  between  hypnotic  and  normal  sleep  is  not,  as  Bernheim
says,  that  rapport  exists  only  in  the  former.  On  the  contrary,  we
might  with  justice  establish  a  distinction  between  hypnotic  and  normal
sleep  on  the  ground  that  rapport  is  absent  from  the  former  and  is  a
frequently  occurring  phenomenon  in  the  latter.

Alterations  in  Volition.  The  so-called  Automatism.
Suggested  Crimes.
According  to  Braid's  conception  of  hypnosis,  the  state  was
characterised  by  mental  and  physical  phenomena  which  were  not  to
be  found  in  other  conditions.  The  hypnotised  subject  had  acquired
new  and  vai'ied  powers,  but  had  not  at  the  same  time  lost  his  volition
or  moral  sense.  He  asserted  that  he  had  proved  that  no  one  could  be
affected  by  hypnotism,  at  any  stage  of  the  process,  unless  by  voluntary


230


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


compliance.  The  subjects  were  docile  and  obliging  ;  but,  despite  this,
they  refused  all  criminal  suggestions  and  even  developed  a  higher
sense  of  propriety  than  characterised  theii'  normal  condition.

Totally  different  views  are  held  by  Bernheim  and  cei'tain  other
members  of  the  Nancy  School.  They  believe  that  the  subject's
volition  is  weakened  or  destroyed,  and  consider  this  condition  to  be
one  of  automatism.  To  both  these  points  I  wish  to  draw  your
attention.

The  hypnotic  state  is  described  as  one  of  cerebral  automatism,  and,
according  to  Bernheim,  its  phenomena  find  their  analogy  in  various
automatic  movements  of  normal  life,  such  as  walking.  Suggested  crimes,
which,  I  think,  differ  essentially  from  acts  like  these,  are  described  as
illustrating  automatism  in  its  highest  form.  It  is  with  the  latter
that  I  desire  to  deal  at  present.  Let  us  take  a  typical  case.  It  is
suggested  to  a  high-jjrincipled  girl  in  the  somnambulic  state  that
she  shall  take  a  piece  of  sugar  fi'om  the  basin  and  put  it  into  her
mother's  tea-cup,  after  having  heen  informed  that  this  is  really  a
lump  of  aisenic  certain  to  cause  death.  Apart  fiom  the  question
whether,  in  carrying  out  this  suggestion,  she  has  committed  what
she  believes  to  be  a  real  crime,  or  knows  that  she  has  merely  carried
out  an  experiment,  let  us  attempt  to  understand  the  supposed
luental  condition  with  regard  to  consciousness  and  volition,  and  then
compai'e  it  with  the  usual  scientific  conception  of  automatism.  It
is,  I  think,  generally  conceded  by  the  Nancy  School  that  hypnotic
acts  are  conscious  ones,  and  that,  if  amnesia  follows  on  waking,
the  lost  memory  can  be  restored  in  subsequent  hypnoses.  Indeed,
Professor  Bernheim,  in  discussing  the  Salpetriere  experiments,  insists
upon  the  fact  that  the  hypnotised  subject  is  conscious  in  all  stages.
The  alleged  criminal  act  was,  then,  a  conscious  act.  Again,  we  are  told
that  somnambules,  before  accepting  criminal  suggestions,  frequently
struggle  against  them.  This  would  indicate  that,  in  some  instances  at
all  events,  they  ai'e  carried  out  in  opposition  to  volition  as  it  exists  in
hypnosis.  Further,  it  must  be  conceded  that  a  criminal  act  would  not
be  performed  voluntarily  by  a  virtuous  person  in  the  normal  state.  The
suggested  act,  then,  is  one  which  would  have  been  opposed  by  volition
in  the  waking  state.  Now,  let  us  turn  to  automatism,  as  defined  by
Professor  Waller,  the  well-known  physiologist.  "  The  word,"  he  says,
"  has  received  two  diametrically  opposed  meanings,  viz.  (1)  self-moving,
self-ai-ising,  spontaneous,  (2)  automaton-like,  that  is  to  say,  like  a
mechanism  that  appears  to  be  self-moving,  but  that  we  know  to  be
moved  by  secret  springs  and  hidden  keys."  The  second  sense  is  the
one  in  which  he  employs  it,  and  is  also,  I  think,  the  one  now  generally
adopted  by  science.  As  the  supposed  essential  characteristic  of  the
suggested  crime  is  the  fact  that  it  arose,  not  spontaneously,  but  in


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


231


response  to  the  desires  of  the  operator,  it  is  obvious  that  if  it  be  automatic
at  all,  it  must  accord  with  the  second  conception  of  automatism.  Now,
let  us  follow  Dr.  Waller  in  his  further  definition  of  the  second  condition
and  then  see  how  this  agrees  with  the  so-called  hypnotic  automatism.
According  to  him,  the  automatic  action  is  essentially  a  reflex  action,  and
differs  from  it  only  in  that  it  is,  as  a  rule,  the  habitual  or  serial  effect
of  habitual  or  serial  stimuli.  An  automatic  act  is  the  repeated  or
rhythmic  motor  response  to  a  repeated  or  continuous  excitation.
Usually  it  is  carried  on  unconsciously.  Automatic  actions  are
distinguishable  into  two  sub-groups  :  (1)  Primary  or  inherited,  of
which  the  act  of  sucking  is  an  example.  (2)  Secondary  or  acquired,
of  which  walking  is  an  example.  In  this  discussion  I  think  we  may
disregard  primary  or  inherited  automatic  acts.  Obviously,  to  kill  one's
mother  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  inheiited  automatism,  and,  if
such  a  crime  be  automatic  at  all,  it  must  fall  under  the  group  of
secondary  ones.  Of  this  form  of  automatic  act,  the  winding  of
one's  watch  may  be  taken  as  a  typical  example.  This  is  fii'st  performed
consciously  and  voluntarily.  After  a  time  consciousness  ceases  to
participate  in  the  action.  On  attempting  to  wind  your  watch,  many  of
you  must  have  occasionally  found  that  you  had  already  done  so,
although  quite  incapable  of  recalling  it.  Now,  this  automatic  act  is
simply  a  voluntary  one  performed  inattentively  or  unconsciously ;  one
that  has  previously  been  frequently  performed  and  possesses  well-worn
nerve  channels.  It  has  commenced  as  a  conscious,  voluntary  one.  It
has  become  unconscious  by  repetition,  but  still  remains  voluntary  in  the
sense  that  it  is  an  act  which  the  consciousness  would  approve  of  did  it
happen  to  participate  in  it.  Let  us  consider  the  so-called  automatic
crime  of  the  hypnotised  subject  and  see  how  it  agrees  with  this  concep-
tion of  automatism.  (1)  The  crime  has  not  been  an  habitual  one.  In
the  present  instance  the  very  nature  of  the  act  renders  this  impossible.
Obviously  the  subject  could  not  have  habitually  killed  her  mother.
The  alleged  automatic  act  must,  then,  in  this  instance,  have  been
performed  for  the  first  time.  Now  the  essential  character  of  the
secondary  or  acquired  automatic  act  is  that  it  has  jjreviously  been
frequently,  consciously  and  voluntarily  performed  and  possesses  in  con-
sequence well-worn  nerve  tracts,  which  offer  no  obstacle  to  its  fulfilment.
(2)  The  hypnotic  act  is  performed  consciously,  and  the  attention,
instead  of  being  directed  into  other  channels,  as  in  genuine  automatism,
is  supposed  to  be  intensely  concentrated  on  the  operator  or  on  the
signal  given  by  him,  and  this  latter  may  be  so  faint  that  the  subject  is
only  enabled  to  recognise  it  by  means  of  the  hypersesthesia  of  his  special
senses.  (3)  The  hypnotic  crime  is  sometimes  supposed  to  be  performed
in  opposition  to  volition  as  it  exists  in  hypnosis,  and  is  always  supposed
to  be  in  opposition  to  the  normal  volition. The  genuine  automatic


232


Dr.  J.  Milne  Braynwell.


act,  oil  the  otlier  hand,  has  only  been  enabled  to  become  automatic
owing  to  the  fact  that  it  has  previously  been  frequently  j^erformed  as  a
voluntary  act ;  and  now,  when  performed  unconsciously,  it  still  remains
such  an  act  as  the  volition,  as  a  general  rule,  would  approve  of.  The
so-called  automatic  crime  of  the  hypnotised  subject  not  only  differs^
then,  from  the  general  scientific  conception  of  automatism,  but  is  its
exact  opjjosite  in  every  detail.

While  holding,  and  holding  strongly,  that  the  hypnotic  crimes
which  we  are  discussing  cannot  in  any  sense  be  termed  automatic,  I
do  not  deny  that  the  hypnotic  subject  can  be  trained  to  perform
automatic  acts.  If  I  suggest  some  simple  movement  to  a  subject,
which  his  volition  does  not  disapprove  of,  doubtless  after  a  time  it  may
be  performed  automatically,  i.e.,  after  having  been  frequently,  volun-
tarily, and  consciously  performed,  it  may  at  length  be  executed
unconsciously  as  a  genuine  automatic  act  in  response  to  the  habitual
stimulus  which  has  excited  it.

Putting  aside  all  question  of  the  correct  conception  of  the  word
automatism,  or,  perhaps  better  still,  characterising  the  described
condition  as  one  of  obedience,  I  now  desire  to  see  how  far  the
phenomenon  so-called  can  be  taken  as  the  essential  characteristic  of  the
hypnotic  state.  The  writings  of  the  Nancy  School  indicate  a  belief
that  the  hypnotic  state  is  essentially  characterised  by  the  obedience
of  the  subject  to  the  operator.  Some  years  ago  most  stress  was  laid
upon  complete  obedience,  and  Liebeault  said,  "  We  may  postulate,  as
a  first  principle,  that  a  subject  during  the  state  of  magnetic  sleep,  is
at  the  mercy  of  the  hypnotiser."  Now,  possibly  as  the  result  of  the
influence  of  the  late  Professor  Delboeuf,  a  greater  power  of  resistance
is  conceded.  In  a  recent  article  Dr.  Liebeault  admits  that  he  has  only
encountered  four  to  five  per  cent,  of  hypnotised  subjects  to  whom  one
could,  with  absolute  certainty,  suggest  crime.  This  admission  is  an
important  one,  but  despite  it,  the  so-called  automatism  is  still  regarded
as  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  hypnotic  state.  If  only  four  or
five  out  of  a  hundred  subjects  evince  the  so-called  automatism,  surely
one  is  not  justified  in  describing  this  as  the  essential  characteristic  of
the  whole  group.  If  five  out  of  a  hundred  unhypnotised  individuals
presented  certain  phenomena  which  were  absent  in  the  remainder,  one
would  surely  not  choose  these  rarely  occurring  phenomena  as  the
descriptive  characteristics  of  the  class,  and  those  upon  which  the
belief  in  other  and  more  frequently  observed  phenomena  should
depend.  Yet,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  this  is  the  position  assumed  by
Durand  le  Gros,  who  assured  Delbceuf  that  if  he  succeeded  in  proving
that  the  suggested  crimes  of  the  Nancy  school  were  recognised  by  the
subject  as  experimental  ones,  he  would  destroy  hypnotism  entirely.
The  existence,  then,  of  many  undisputed  phenomena,  which  are  common


What  is  Hypnotism  ?■


233


to  all  hypnotic  subjects,  is  to  depend  upon  the  acceptance  of  others
which  it  is  alleged  occur  in  four  or  five  per  cent,  alone  out  of  the  same
number.

Putting  aside  in  its  turn  the  question  of  the  average  number  of
subjects  in  whom  it  is  alleged  crime  can  be  successfully  suggested,  I
desire  first  to  refer  to  some  of  my  own  experiments  in  this  direction
and  afterwards  to  consider  them  in  conjunction  with  the  so-called
suggested  crimes  of  Bernheim  and  others,  in  ordei'  to  gain,  or  at  all
events  to  strive  after,  a  clearer  conception  of  the  mental  states
involved.

When  I  commenced  hypnotic  work  some  seven  years  ago,  I,  like
Delboeuf,  believed  that  the  hypnotic  subject  was  entirely  at  the  mercy
of  the  operator.  T  was  soon  aroused  from  this  dream,  however,  not  by
the  result  of  experiments  made  to  test  the  condition,  but  from  the
constantly  recurring  facts  which  spontaneously  arose  in  opposition  to  my
preconceived  theories.  In  the  paper  printed  above,  under  the  heading
"  So-called  hypnotic  automatism,"  I  cited  a  number  of  cases  in  which
suggestions  had  been  refused  by  hypnotic  subjects.  I  also  mentioned
two  subjects  who  had  rejected  certain  suggestions  and  accepted  others.
Miss  F.,  for  example,  recited  a  poem,  but  would  not  help  herself  to  a
glass  of  water  from  my  sideboard,  while  Mr.  G.  would  play  one  part,
but  not  others,  and  committed  an  imaginary  crime.

These  subjects  accepted  suggestions  which  were  apparently  in
opposition  to  their  normal  character.  For  instance.  Miss  F.,  who  was
extremely  nervous  and  shy  about  singing  or  reading  aloud,  not  only
before  strangers,  but  also  before  certain  members  of  her  own  family,
recited  a  poem  in  the  waking  state  which  I  had  read  to  her  during
hypnosis.  Her  mother  told  me  that,  under  ordinary  circumstances,
she  would  rather  have  died  than  have  done  so.  While  Mr.  G.,  who
refused  the  rdles  of  dissenting  minister  and  hawker,  accepted  that  of
showman.  He  also,  without  the  least  hesitation,  promptly  put  a  piece
of  sugar  in  a  friend's  tea-cup,  after  having  been  assured  it  was  arsenic.
When  asked  why  he  had  poisoned  his  friend,  he  replied,  laughing,  "  Oh,
that's  all  right,  he  has  lived  long  enough  ! "  I  made  no  attempt  to
ascertain  G.'s  mental  condition  in  reference  to  the  supposed  crime,  but
I  think  one  can,  without  much  difficulty,  imagine  it.  G.  was  a
respectable  tradesman  and  a  somewhat  devout  Dissenter,  and  it  is  not
unnatural  to  suppose  he  refused  the  part  of  fish-hawker  as  this  was
not  in  keeping  with  his  social  position,  and  that  of  minister  as  it
offended  his  religious  susceptibilities,  and  accepted  that  of  showman
because  it  contained  nothing  objectionable  to  him.  Would  it  be
reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  should  at  the  same  time  be  capable  of
weighing  fine  distinctions  between  the  suggested  alterations  in  person-
ality and  unable  to  understand  the  experimental  nature  of  the  crime  1


234


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


He,  by  the  way,  affords  the  only  instance  in  which  an  imaginary  crime
has  been  carried  out  by  one  of  my  own  patients.  All  others,  without
exception,  have  absolutely  refused  such  suggestions.

Why  should  Miss  F.  have  recited  the  poem  and  refused  to  take  a
glass  of  water  from  my  sideboard  1  The  answer  to  the  first  question  is
obvious.  She  was  extremely  anxious  to  get  rid  of  the  nervous  embar-
rassment from  which  she  suffered  and  thus  the  suggestion  contained
nothing  opposed  to  her  volition.  She  herself  explained  the  second ;
after  leaving  my  house,  her  mother  rehypnotised  her  and  asked  why  she
had  refused  my  suggestion,  whereupon  she  replied,  "  I  do  not  know  Dr.
Bramwell  well  enough  to  help  myself  unasked  to  a  glass  of  water."

In  the  cases  above  recorded,  although  a  certain  amount  of  evidence
was  obtained  from  the  patients  themselves  in  reference  to  their  mental
condition,  no  systematic  attempt  was  made  to  investigate  this.  I  am
well  aware  that  this  admission  is  a  startling  one.  I  can  only  say  in
self-excuse  that  this  all-important  point  has  apparently  been  equally
neglected  by  others.  I  have  recently  attempted  to  repair  my  mistake,
and  with  interesting  results.  Some  of  these  have  been  given  in  my  foi'mer
papei',  and  are  to  be  found  in  the  description  of  the  mental  condition
of  somnambules  as  revealed  by  the  answers  obtained  to  questions  asked
during  hypnosis.  One  of  them,  the  subject  of  the  time  experiments,
said  she  would  not  put  a  piece  of  sugar  in  any  one's  tea  if  she  were  told
it  was  arsenic.'  At  a  later  date,  when  Mr.  Myers  was  present,  she
gave  a  different  answer.  She  said,  "  I  would  not  take  a  watch,  even  if
I  knew  the  suggestion  was  made  as  an  experiment,  because  this  would
be  pretending  to  commit  a  crime.  I  would,  however,  put  a  piece  of
sugar  in  a  friend's  tea-cup,  if  I  were  sure  it  was  sugar,  even  though
some  one  said  it  was  arsenic,  because  then  I  should  not  be  the  one  who
was  pretending  to  commit  a  crime."  So  subtle  a  distinction  would  not,
I  think,  have  occurred  to  the  subject  in  the  waking  condition.

In  most  of  the  cases  referred  to,  the  patients  refused  to  carry  out
suggestions  in  hypnosis  which  they  would  have  rejected  in  the  waking
state.  Sometimes,  however,  they  refused  in  hypnosis  things  they  would
readily  have  done,  or  submitted  to,  when  awake.  For  example,  Dr.
Allden,  when  Resident  Physician  at  the  Brompton  Hospital,  hypnotised
a  girl  suffering  from  chronic  pulmonary  disease.  She  was  naturally
docile  and  obedient  and  rapidly  became  a  good  somnambule.  On  one
occasion,  after  hypnotising  her,  the  nurse  reminded  him  that  it  was  his
day  for  examining  the  patient's  chest,  but,  to  his  astonishment,  she
refused  to  allow  it  to  be  bared.  She  had  previously  been  examined
dozens  of  times  by  himself  and  others  and  had  never  made  the  slightest
objection.  He  insisted  upon  her  submitting,  but  was  unable  to  over-
come her  resistance. He  asked  her  why  she  objected  now,  when  she


What  is  Hypnot  ism  ?


235


had  never  done  so  previously.  She  rephed,  "  You  never  tried  before
to  examine  nay  chest  when  I  was  asleep."  On  awaking,  she  remembered
nothing  of  what  had  occurred  and  he  said  nothing  to  her  about  it.
Afterwards  the  nurse  told  her,  whereupon  she  was  greatly  distressed
and  wondered  how  she  could  possibly  have  been  so  rude  to  the  doctor.

These,  and  many  similar  facts,  have  forced  me  to  abandon  all  belief
in  so-called  automatism  or  helpless  obedience  ;  still,  I  must  refer  to
some  of  the  arguments  in  support  of  it,  before  attempting  to  analyse
further  the  mental  condition  in  hypnosis.

(1)  When  subjects  successfully  resist  suggestion,  it  is  usual  to
explain  this  by  assuming  that  they  have  not  been  so  deeply  hypnotised
as  those  in  whom  no  resistance  has  manifested  itself.  I  cannot  admit
the  correctness  of  this  in  my  cases.  During  the  last  seven  yeai's,  T
have  had  frequent  opportunities  of  examining  hypnotic  subjects,  at
home  and  abroad,  and  have  nowhere  observed  more  profound  somnam-
bules  than  amongst  my  own  patients,  rarely,  in  fact,  seeing  cases  to
equal  them.  All  to  whom  I  have  referred  not  only  exhibited  the
phenomena  of  iDrofoundest  somnambulism,  but  nearly  all  had  been
subjects  of  painless  operations  in  the  hypnotic  state.

(2)  The  personality  of  the  operator,  and  his  method  of  training  his
subjects,  is  supposed  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  acceptance  or
rejection  of  suggestions.  Granting  that  this  be  true,  it  does  not
explain  the  resistance  which  I  encountered.  I  commenced  by  believing
that  the  subjects  were  entirely  at  my  mercy  and  did  my  best  to  develop
their  supposed  obedience.

(3)  The  existence  of  one  class  of  phenomena  is  considered  as
necessarily  implying  the  existence  of  another  and  totally  differing  class.
Durand  le  Gros  asks  : — "  Is  it  possible  that  suggestion  should  have  the
power  of  producing  extraordinary  physical  changes  and  yet  be  without
this  particvilar  effect  upon  the  moral  state?"  The  facts  I  have  already
cited  answer  this  question  in  the  affirmative.  Putting  these  aside,  the
assumption  that  the  physical  f)henomena  necessarily  imply  certain
moral  ones  is  unreasonable.  What  inevitable  connection  exists,  for
example,  between  an  alteration  in  the  pulse  rate  and  the  murder  of
one's  mother  1  Should  I  not  be  equally  justified  logically  in  assuming
that  the  subject  in  the  normal  state  who,  in  response  to  suggestion,
would  play  the  violin  or  paint  a  picture  would  be  equally  willing  to  rob
a  church?

(4)  Evidence  in  favour  of  obedience  afforded  by  cases  in  which  the
subjects  are  alleged  to  have  accepted  criminal  and  analogous  sugges-
tions. These  are  important.  The  fact  that  the  phenomenon  of  helpless
obedience  was  invariably  absent  in  my  patients  does  not  justify  me  in
concluding  that  it  did  not  sometimes  occur  in  those  of  others.  These
cases  of  so-called  automatism  fall  into  two  classes  : (a)  where  an


236


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramtuell.


imaginary  crime  has  been  suggested  ;  (5)  where  a  real  act  has  been
performed,  which  it  is  assumed  the  patient  would  not  have  submitted
to  in  the  normal  state.

(a)  First,  as  regards  imaginary  crime  ;  here,  as  Professor  Delboeuf
has  pointed  out,  it  is  supposed  that  the  patient  is  passing  through
a  mental  state  similar  to  that  of  the  operator.  Assumption  without
experimental  proof  is  a  frail  and  unsatisfactory  basis  on  which  to
erect  a  theory.  Let  us  first  examine  the  facts.  A  somnambule
puts  a  piece  of  sugar  into  her  mother's  teacup,  while  her  medical
man  makes  various  absurd  and  untruthful  assertions  as  to  its
composition.  Bernheim  and  Liebeault  assert  that  the  subject  accepted
these  absui"d  statements  as  true  because,  being  hypnotised,  she  was
unable  to  distinguish  between  truth  and  falsehood,  while  Delbceuf  claims
that  she  had  sufficient  sense  left  to  know  exactly  what  she  was  doing.
To  neither  does  it  seem  to  have  occurred  to  ask  the  subject  during
hypnosis  what  she  thought  about  the  matter  herself.  If  they  had
done  so,  she  would  promptly  have  solved  the  difficulty  and  told  them
that  while  they  were  gravely  discussing  probabilities,  she  Avas  quietly
laughing  in  her  sleeve  at  the  grotesque  absurdity  of  the  whole  per-
formance. It  may  be  noticed  in  passing  that,  while  Bernheim  considers
the  Salpetriere  suljjects  so  abnormally  acute  that  they  can  catch  the
slightest  indication  of  the  thoughts  of  the  operator  and  so  destroy  the
supposed  value  of  the  phenomena  alleged  to  be  induced  by  metals,
magnets,  drugs  in  sealed  tubes,  &c.,  he,  on  the  other  hand,  supposes
the  Nancy  subjects  to  be  so  abnormally  devoid  of  all  intelligence  as
to  be  unable  to  understand  when  a  palpable  farce  is  played  before  them.

(6)  Where  a  real  act  has  been  performed,  which  it  is  assumed  the
patient  would  not  have  submitted  to  in  the  normal  state.  Of  this
Bernheim  cites  an  example.  He  states  that  he  uncovered  a  young
woman,  presumably  a  hospital  patient,  in  the  presence  of  his  assistants
and  that  she  appeared  perfectly  calm  and  indifferent.  Bernheim  also
quotes  a  case  in  which  he  entirely  failed  in  persuading  another  young-
woman,  also  a  good  somnambule,  to  allow  him  to  uncover  her,  or  to
commit  an  imaginary  crime,  despite  the  fact  that  he  varied  the
suggestion  in  every  conceivable  way.  Let  us  take  the  case  of  supposed
helpless  obedience.  The  mere  fact  that  a  woman  permitted  herself  to
be  uncovered  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  she  was  incapable  of
resisting.  Before  this  can  be  used  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  the
helpless  obedience  of  the  hypnotised  subject,  one  is  justified  in  demand-
ing that  it  should  be  clearly  proved  that,  under  similar  circumstances,
the  patient  would  have  objected  to  being  uncovered  in  the  waking
condition.  Medical  men  are  frequently  obliged  to  uncover  their  female
patients  for  examination  and  rarely  encounter  resistance.  The
first  time  that  I  visited  Professor  Bernheim's  wards  I  was  struck  by


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


237


the  fact  that,  in  order  to  show  some  hysterical  muscular  movements  in
the  abdomen  of  a  non-hypnotised  subject,  he  threw  oif  the  bedclothes,
drew  the  patient's  nightgown  up  to  her  neck  and  left  her  in  that
condition  while  we  examined  other  cases.  Though  such  treatment  is
opposed  to  the  jDractice  of  English  hospitals,  I  do  not  propose  to
criticise  it.  I  only  desire  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  patient
was  stripped  in  the  waking  state — from  my  point  of  view  unnecessarily
so — and  that  she  and  every  one  else  apparently  regarded  this  as  devoid
of  importance.  The  hypnotised  subject  did  not  object  to  be  stripped.
Why  should  she?  She  must  have  been  accustomed  to  see  other  patients
examined,  and  there  is  no  special  reason  given  why  she  should  have
objected  to  the  ordinary  I'outine.  Cases  such  as  these  appear  to  me
absolutely  valueless,  while  the  reasons  for  the  patient's  supposed
obedience  remain  so  easily  accounted  for  in  other  ways.  To  render
such  a  case  worthy  of  serious  consideration  it  would  be  absolutely
necessary  to  eliminate  many  important  factors  such  as  : — 1.  The  fact
that  the  subject  was  ill.  2.  That  she  was  in  a  hospital  where  patients
were  stripped  as  part  of  the  ordinary  routine.  3.  That  the  examination
was  made  by  a  medical  man.

Strangely  enough,  the  most  marked  case  of  resistance  to  suggestion
that  I  have  observed  was  shown  by  Liebeault's  celebrated  somnam-
bule,  Camille.  To  this  I  have  already  refei'red,  but  I  wish  to  emphasise
the  fact  that  the  classic  hypnotic  automaton,  the  one  who  was  supposed
to  carry  out  a  suggestion  with  the  fatality  of  a  falling  stone,  refused
one,  not  on  moral  grounds,  but  apparently  from  pure  caprice.

The  difference  between  the  hypnotised  and  the  normal  subject,  as
it  appears  to  me  from  a  long  series  of  observed  facts,  is  not  so  much  in
conduct  as  in  increased  mental  and  physical  powers.  Any  changes
in  the  moral  sense,  I  have  noticed,  have  invaiiably  been  for  the
better,  the  hypnotised  subject  evincing  superior  refinement.  As
regards  obedience  to  suggestion,  there  is  apparently  little  to  choose
between  the  two.  A  hypnotised  subject,  who  has  acquired  the  power
of  manifesting  various  physical  and  mental  phenomena,  will  do  so  in
response  to  suggestion,  for  much  the  same  reasons  as  one  in  the  normal
condition.  In  the  normal  state  we  are  usually  pleased  to  show  off  our
various  gifts  and  attainments,  more  especially  if  we  think  they  are
superior  to  those  of  others,  and  in  this  respect  the  hypnotised  subject
does  not  differ  from  the  normal.  Both  will  refuse  what  is  disagreeable  ;
in  both  this  refusal  may  be  modified  or  overcome  by  appeals  to  the
reason,  or  to  the  usual  motives  which  influence  conduct.  When  the  act
demanded  is  contrary  to  the  moral  sense,  it  is  usually  refused  by  the
normal  subject,  and  invariably  by  the  hypnotised  one.  I  have  never
observed  any  decrease  of  intelligence  in  hypnosis.  In  the  alert  state  it
is  often  conspicuously  increased,  whUe  in  the  lethargic  it  is  only


238


JDr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


apparently,  not  really,  suspended.  Forel's  warders,  who  could  sleep
by  the  bedside  of  suicidal  maniacs  and  wake  immediately  at  a  given
signal,  or  who  could  inhibit  their  own  heai'ing  of  the  purposeless  noises
of  the  insane  and  acutely  hear  everything  which  demanded  their
attention,  did  not  in  so  doing  show  any  real  loss  of  intelligence.  The
power  of  concentration  in  the  normal  state,  with  its  accompanying
inhibition  of  undesirable  impressions,  is  a  well-known  and  somewhat
analogous  condition,  but  one  which  is  not  usually  regarded  as  indicative
of  mental  degeneration.

When  one  turns  to  the  later  works  of  Braid  and  sees  how  clearly
he  experimentally  proved  that  the  hypnotised  subject  not  only  had  the
power  of  choosing  between  suggestions,  but  invariably  refused  those
repugnant  to  his  moral  nature,  one  cannot  help  feeling  surprised  at  the
revival  of  theories,  in  reference  to  so-called  automatism  or  obedience,
identical  with  the  views  of  the  mesmerists.  More  especially  so  when
one  considers  that  Bernheim,  who  holds  these  views,  also  boldly  asserts
that  there  is  nothing  in  hypnotism  but  the  name,  that  it  does  not
create  a  new  condition  and  that  hypnotic  acts  are  only  exaggerated
normal  ones.  According  to  Bernheim,  however,  the  moral  state  in
hypnosis  differs  widely  from  the  noi'mal,  and  this  is  in  obvious
contradiction  to  his  own  conception  of  hypnotism.  One  can  under-
stand, for  example,  how  a  prolonged  muscular  rigidity  may  be  a
hypnotic  exaggeration  of  a  somewhat  shorter  normal  one,  but  it
is  difficult  to  comprehend  how  the  murder  of  one's  mother  when
hypnotised  can  be  an  exaggeration  of  the  refusal  to  hurt  a  fly
when  awake.  Bernheim's  view  of  the  moral  state  does  not  follow
logically  from  the  supposed  resemblance  between  the  hypnotic  and
normal  condition,  but  apparently  has  its  origin  in  an  erroneous  estimate
of  the  nature  and  power  of  suggestion.  On  the  one  hand,  he  tells  us
that  the  hypnotic  and  normal  conditions  are  practically  identical,  their
only  distinction  being  a  slight  difference  in  suggestibility.  On  the  other
hand,  we  are  informed  that  a  virtuous  individual  will  commit  crime  in
response  to  liypnotic  suggestion.  If  this  were  correct,  we  should  be
justified  in  describing  the  origin  of  hypnotic  crimes  thus  : —

(a)  A  virtuous  girl  in  the  normal  state  has  a  natural  tendency  to
accept  the  suggestion  that  she  should  murder  her  mother.

(6)  In  hypnosis  suggestibility  is  slightly  increased  and  so,  when  it  is
suggested  to  her  to  murder  her  mother,  she  does  so.

Suggested  Ci'inies  —  Summary.

1.  I  have  never  seen  a  suggestion  accepted  in  hypnosis  which  would
have  been  refused  in  the  normal  state.

2.  I  have  observed  that  suggestions  could  be  resisted  as  easily  in
the  lethargic  as  in  the  alert  stage.


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


239


3.  I  have  frequently  noticed  increased  refinement  in  hypnosis ;
subjects  have  refused  suggestions  which  they  would  have  accepted  in
the  normal  condition.

4.  I  saw  Camille  refuse  a  suggestion  from  mere  caprice.

5.  Examination  of  the  mental  condition  in  hypnosis  revealed  the
fact  that  it  was  unimpaired.

6.  The  arguments  of  Bernheim  cannot  be  considered  conclusive,  as
they  are  founded  solely  on  two  classes  of  facts.  (a)  Wliere  a  simple
and  harmless  act  has  been  assumed  to  be  thought  criminal  by  the
subject,  because  the  operator  has  stated  it  to  be  so.  {b)  Where  the
subject  has  permitted  something  in  hypnosis,  which  he  would  probably
have  submitted  to  in  the  normal  state.

The  Influence  of  the  Operator  in  inducing  the  so-called  Automatism.

In  the  estimation  of  the  part  played  by  the  operator,  Braid  differs
from  certaiu  members  of  the  Nancy  School.  According  to  the  former,
the  operator  merely  acts  as  an  engineer  who  directs  the  forces  in  the
subject's  own  body,  but  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  can  also  be  evoked
by  ideas  previously  existing  in  the  subject's  mind.  The  latter  regard
the  operator's  role  as  a  much  more  important  one ;  not  only  are  his
suggestions  a  mighty  force  in  themselves,  but  their  power  is  increased
by  constant  undermining  of  the  volition.

Moll  says,  the  suggested  idea  cannot  be  supplanted  by  a  voluntary
one,  because,  owing  to  alterations  in  the  attention  which  result  from
the  methods  of  the  operator,  the  subject  is  unable  to  control  the  ideas
conveyed  to  him,  or  to  put  forward  his  own.  External  ideas  dominate
his  consciousness.  He  thus  explains  negative  hallucinations : — the
conviction  of  the  non-existence  of  an  object  arises  from  the  subject's
weakened  will  and  dependence  on  the  operator.  The  fact  that  many
motor  suggestions  have  already  been  made,  which  the  subject  has  been
unable  to  resist,  renders  further  suggestions  easy.

Forel's  explanation  is  somewhat  similar.  For  the  successful  mani-
festation of  hypnotic  phenomena,  he  considers  it  essential  that  the
subject  should  be  under  the  dominion  of  the  operator  and  have  lost  his
own  power  of  concentration  and  attention.  He  regards  the  condition
as  a  battle  between  operator  and  subject,  in  which  the  former,  after
capturing  outpost  after  outpost,  at  last  reigns  supreme  in  the  central
citadel  itself.  "The  mind  of  a  man.  A,  imposes  itself,"  he  says,  "upon
the  mind  of  another  man,  B,  takes  possession  of  it  by  entering  through
some  crevice  in  its  armour,  and  finishes  by  reigning  there  more  or  less
as  master  and  by  employing  the  brain  of  B  as  its  docile  instrument."

According  to  Bernheim,  the  natural  tendency  that  exists  in  every
one  to  accept  suggestions  is  gradually  and  skilfully  developed  by  the
operator.

R


240


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


In  opposition  to  the  views  of  Bernheira,  &c.,  I  would  draw  your
attention  to  two  classes  of  cases.

(1)  Where  the  operator  has  deliberately  tried  to  minimise  his  own
importance  in  reference  to  the  induction  of  hypnotic  phenomena.

Although  I  soon  ceased  to  believe  that  the  subject's  volition  was
dominated  by  that  of  the  operator,  I  still  found,  as  the  result  of
sensational  writings  on  the  question,  that  a  considerable  number  of  my
patients  objected  to  being  hypnotised,  on  the  ground  that  it  would
interfere  with  their  volition.  To  obviate  this  difficulty,  I  changed  my
method  of  inducing  and  managing  the  hypnotic  state.  I  commenced
by  informing  every  new  patient  that  I  did  not  believe  it  possible  for
the  operator  to  dominate  the  volition  of  the  subject,  and  that,  even  if
such  a  thing  were  possible,  it  could  certainly  be  prevented  by  sugges-
tion. I  explained  to  my  patients  that  nothing  would  be  suggested
without  their  consent  having  been  previously  obtained  in  the  normal
state.  Under  these  circumstances,  if  the  suggestions  were  successful,
this  would  not  imply  any  interference  with  volition,  seeing  that  their
consent  had  already  been  obtained.  I  pointed  out  that  the  fulfilment
of  a  hypnotic  suggestion  frequently  demonstrated  an  increased,  not
diminished,  power  of  volition.  For  example,  a  patient  who  desired  to
resist  a  morbid  impulse,  but  was  unable  to  do  so  by  the  exercise  of  his
normal  volition,  might  gain  this  power  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  Thus,
the  suggestion  did  not  suspend  the  volition  of  the  subject,  but  removed
the  obstacle  which  prevented  the  wi.sh  being  carried  into  action.
Further,  as  resistance  was  manifested  despite  suggested  obedience,  it
was  reasonable  to  expect  that  this  might  be  enormously  increased  by
training.  I  suggested,  therefore,  to  all  patients  during  hypnosis  that
they  should  invariably  possess  this  power  of  resistance,  and  also  that
neither  I  nor  any  one  else  should  ever  be  able  to  reinduce  hypnosis
without  their  express  consent.  This  change  of  method  did  not  affect
the  results.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  patients  were  con-
vinced, and  justly  so,  that  they  possessed  complete  control  of  the  whole
condition,  hypnosis  was  evoked  as  easily  as  formerly,  and  as  wide  a
range  of  phenomena  was  induced.

(2)  Where  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  teach  the  subject  to  evoke
hypnosis  and  its  phenomena  without  the  intervention  of  the  operator.

Some  six  years  ago  I  commenced  to  instruct  patients  to  hypnotise
themselves.  This  was  done  by  suggesting  in  hypnosis  that  they  should
be  able  to  reinduce  the  state  at  a  given  signal,  as  for  example,  by
counting  "One,  tAvo,  three."  These  subjects  could  aftei'wards  evoke  the
condition  at  will.  I  also  found  that  the  use  of  suggestion  during
hypnosis  was  not  necessary  for  the  induction  of  its  phenomena.  On  the
contrary,  the  suggestions  could  be  made  equally  well  beforehand  in  the
waking  state. The  subject  was  able  to  suggest  to  himself  when


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


241


hypnosis  should  appear  and  terminate,  and  also  the  phenomena  which
he  wished  to  obtain  during  and  after  it.  This  training  was  at  first  a
limited  one ;  the  patients,  for  example,  were  instructed  how  to  get
sleep  at  night,  or  relief  from  pain.  They  did  not,  however,  always
confine  themselves  to  my  suggestions,  but  originated  others,  and
widely  varying  ones,  regarding  their  health,  comfort,  or  work.  Some,
trained  in  this  way  six  years  ago,  still  retain  the  power  of  hypnotising
themselves.

In  such  cases  it  would  be  difficult,  I  think,  to  explain  hypnotic
phenomena  as  the  result  of  arrested  or  weakened  volition^  and  of  outside
interference  by  the  operator.  It  might  be  objected,  perhaps,  that  the
influence  of  the  operator  had  not  been  entirely  eliminated,  on  the
ground  that  he  had  been  associated  with  the  induction  of  the  primary
hypnosis.  The  conditions,  however,  which  are  more  or  less  frequently
associated  with  the  origin  of  a  jjarticular  state  are  by  no  means  always
essential  for  its  after-manifestation.  For  instance,  the  art  of  swimming
is  usually  taught  either  by  means  of  a  life-belt,  or  by  attaching  the
pupil  to  a  cord  which  his  teacher  holds  and  guides  by  means  of  a  rod.
These  artificial  aids,  however,  are  not  essential  to  the  art  of  swimming  ;
they  are  only  useful  in  its  acquirement.  It  would  be  illogical  to
ascribe  a  champion's  power  of  winning  a  race  to  the  presence  of  a  life-
belt, which  he  discarded  years  before.  In  the  same  way,  it  would  be
unjustifiable  to  attribute  a  subject's  power  of  influencing  forces  within
his  own  body  by  suggestions  arising  in  his  own  mind,  to  the  influence  of
the  operator  who  had  formerly  instructed  him  how  to  evoke  and  direct
this  power.

Monoideism.

Although  Braid  and  Bernheim  differ  on  many  points,  they  are  in
complete  agreement  as  to  the  main  factor  in  the  problem.  According
to  both,  the  essential  condition  is  one  of  monoideism.  The  mind  of  the
subject  is  concentrated  on  a  single  idea.  Only  one  function  is  active
at  any  one  time  ;  and  intensely  so,  because  all  the  attention  is  given  to
it.  Other  functions  are  inactive,  other  sensations  unperceived,  because
the  subject  has  no  attention  left  to  give  to  them.  Bernheim,  as  we
have  seen,  stated  that,  while  the  attention  might  be  directed  from  one
point  to  another,  concentration  remained.  This  was  regarded  as
essential  and  characteristic  ;  the  existence  and  explanation  of  hypnotic
phenomena  depended  on  it.  Impressions,  which  under  ordinary
circumstances  would  reach  consciousness,  now  ceased  to  do  so,  not
only  because  they  did  not  happen  to  be  attended  to,  but  also  because
the  subject  had  nothing  left  wherewith  to  attend  to  them.  Thus,  this
is  not  only  a  "  concentration  of  attention  "  theory,  but  a  "  concentration
and  limited  quantity  of  attention  "  theory.

R  2


242


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


In  reference  to  this,  Gurney  says,  "  the  energy  of  attention  is
not  a  fixed  quantity,  bound  to  be  always  in  operation  in  one  direction
or  another ;  nor  does  the  human  mind,  any  more  truly  than  Nature,
abhor  a  vacuum.  .  .  .  "What  do  we  gain,  then,  by  employing  a
general  term  to  describe  such  special  effects  1  When  once  the  chande-
lier metaphor  is  abandoned — when  once  it  is  recognised  that  in  a
multitude  of  cases  the  quantity  of  attention  turned  on  in  one  direction
is  in  no  way  connected  with  the  withdrawal  from  any  other — the  idea
of  a  common  psychic  factor  seems  out  of  place  and  misleading."
(v.  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  276  and  277.)

This  theoretical  objection  is  in  accordance  with  observed  facts.
Doubtless  certain  hypnotic  states  exist  in  which  all  the  attention,  so
far  as  it  is  called  into  action,  is  concentrated  upon  one  idea.  In  order
to  prove,  however,  that  directing  the  attention  upon  a  fresh  point
necessarily  withdraws  it  entirely  from  another,  it  must  be  shown  that
the  phenomenon  which  resulted  from  the  first  concentration  inevitably
ceased  when  the  second  one  arose.  A  cutaneous  analgesia  of  the  arm
might,  with  some  show  of  reason,  be  said  to  result  from  attention
directed  to  the  muscles  during  suggested  catalepsy,  on  the  ground  that
no  attention  was  left  wherewith  to  attend  to  painful  sensations.  But,
while  the  catalepsy  still  exists,  how — on  this  theory — can  one  explain,
for  example,  a  cutaneous  tactile  hyperjesthesia  of  the  same  limb,  by
means  of  which  the  subject  can  distinguish  the  points  of  the  comjDass  at
half  the  normal  distance  1  If  the  subject  is  unconscious  of  painful
sensations  because  his  attention  is  entirely  concentrated  on  his
muscular  condition,  this  same  lack  of  attention  to  the  skin  ought  not
only  to  have  prevented  abnormal  distinctness  of  tactile  impressions,  but
also  to  have  inhibited  the  usual  ones.  The  experiment  can  be  still
further  complicated,  for,  while  still  permitting  the  catalepsy  to  persist,
the  cutaneous  tactile  hyperfesthesia  can  be  associated  by  suggestion  with
a  cutaneous  analgesia  over  the  same  area.  Now  the  subject's  whole
attention  cannot  be  directed  to  maintaining  a  condition  of  muscular
rigidity,  if  he  has  still  enough  of  it  left  to  suffice,  not  only  for  the
increased  perception  of  certain  tactile  sensations,  but  also  for  the
selection  and  inhibition  of  other  painful  ones.  Further,  the  opposite  of
these  j^henomena  can  be  simultaneously  evoked  on  the  other  side  of  the
body  :  the  patient's  muscles  be  paralysed  by  suggestion,  his  tactile
sensibility  abolished,  and  his  sensibility  to  pain  increased.  The  atten-
tion is  now  directed  to  six  different  points,  and  could  with  equal  ease
be  simultaneously  directed  to  many  others.  A  psychic  blindness,  for
example,  could  be  suggested  on  one  side ;  a  psychic  deafness  on  the
other  ;  hyperpesthesia  of  the  sense  of  smell  and  taste  on  one  side,  and
diminished  or  abolished  sensibility  on  the  other,  etc.,  etc.  But  this  is
not  all,  for  while  the  attention  is  presumably  turned  in  all  these


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


243


different  directions,  the  subject  may  be  engaged  in  the  attempted
solution  of  some  intellectual  problem.  A  still  further  complication  is
possible.  Let  us  suj^pose  that  a  fortnight  before,  in  a  previous  hypnosis,
a  suggestion  to  record  the  time  at  the  expiration  of  20,213  minutes  had
been  made ;  this  will  be  carried  out,  despite  the  existence  of  the  various
muscular  and  sensorial  conditions  already  referred  to,  and  the  fact  that
at  the  moment  of  its  fulfilment,  the  patient  is  engaged  in  some  other
mental  effort.

This  picture  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  neither  fanciful,  nor  dependent
solely  on  my  own  personal  observation.  The  fact  that  numerous  and
varied  hypnotic  phenomena  can  be  simultaneously  evoked  in  the  same
subject  has  been  repeatedly  observed  and  recorded  by  others,  and,
strange  to  say,  even  by  those  who  attempt  to  explain  hypnosis  by  the
concentration  of  the  attention  upon  a  single  point.  It  is  solely  the
importance  of  these  facts  with  regard  to  tliis  particular  theory,  which
has  hitherto  been  so  largely  overlooked.

Granting  that  hypnotic  phenomena  are  the  result  of  changes  in  the
attention,  one  is  forced  to  conclude  that  these  are  the  exact  reverse  of
those  stated  by  Bernheim  as  explanatory  of  the  hypnotic  state.  The
simultaneous  presence  of  many  phenomena  clearly  show  that  hypnosis
cannot  be  explained  by  the  concentration  of  the  attention  on  any  one
given  point.  Again,  the  fact  that  the  multiple  phenomena  are  some-
times similar  in  character  to  the  isolated  ones,  indicates  that  the
explanation  of  hypnotic  phenomena  by  means  of  the  amount  of
attention  concentrated  is  also  fallacious.  If  all  the  attention  is
requisite  for  the  production  of  one  phenomenon,  and,  while  it  still  lasts,
many  other  hypnotic  phenomena  are  simultaneously  induced,  whence
do  the  secondary  ones  derive  that  excessive  amount  of  attention  which
is  said  to  be  necessary  for  the  induction  of  the  primary  one  1  The
hypnotic  condition  differs  then  from  the  normal,  not  because  only  one
phenomenon  can  be  manifested  in  it  at  once,  but  because  it  may  present
simultaneously  many  and  more  varied  phenomena  than  can  be  evoked
in  the  normal  state  at  any  one  time.  In  one  word,  hypnosis  is  a  state
of  poly-ideism,  not  of  mono-ideism.

The  Sithlimiyial  Consciousness  Theory.

"Within  recent  times  another  theory  has  arisen.  This,  instead  of
attempting  to  explain  hypnotism  by  the  arrested  action  of  some  of  the
brain  centres  which  subserve  normal  life,  would  do  so  through  the
arousing  of  certain  powers  over  which  we  normally  have  little  or  no
control.  This  theory  appears  under  various  names — "  Double  Con-
sciousness," "  Das  Doppel  Ich,"  etc. — and  the  principle  on  which  it
depends  is  largely  admitted  by  science.  WUliam  James,  for  example,


244


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


says,  "  In  certain  persons,  at  least,  the  total  possible  consciousness  may
be  split  into  parts  which  co-exist,  but  mutually  ignore  each  other."

The  clearest  statement  of  this  view  is  given  by  Mr.  Myers ;  he
suggests  that  the  stream  of  consciousness  in  which  we  habitually  live
is  not  our  only  one.  Possibly  our  habitual  consciousness  may  be  a  mere
selection  from  a  multitude  of  thoughts  and  sensations, — some  at  least
equally  conscious  with  those  we  empirically  know.  No  primacy  is
granted  by  this  theory  to  the  ordinary  waking  self,  except  that  among
potential  selves  it  appears  the  fittest  to  meet  the  needs  of  common  life.
As  a  rule  the  waking  life  is  remembered  in  hypnosis,  and  the  hypnotic
life  is  forgotten  in  the  waking  state, — this  destroys  any  claim  of  the
primary  memory  to  be  the  sole  memory.  The  self  below  the  threshold
of  ordinary  consciousness,  Mr.  Myers  terms  the  "  subliminal  conscious-
ness," and  the  empirical  self  of  common  experience  the  "supraliminal."
He  holds  tluit  to  the  subliminal  consciousness  and  memory  a  far  wider
range  both  of  physiological  and  of  psychical  activity  is  open  than  to
the  supx-aliminal.  The  latter  is  inevitably  limited  by  the  need  of
concentration  upon  recollections  useful  in  the  struggle  for  existence,
while  the  former  includes  much  that  is  too  rudimentary  to  be  retained
in  the  supraliminal  memory  of  an  organism  so  advanced  as  man.  The
recollection  of  processes  now  perfonned  automatically  and  needing  no
supervision  passes  out  of  the  supraliminal  memory,  but  may  be  retained
in  the  subliminal.  The  subliminal  or  hypnotic  self  can  exercise  over
the  nervous,  vasomotor,  and  circulatory  systems  a  degree  of  control
unparalleled  in  waking  life.

He  suggests  that  the  spectrum  of  consciousness,  as  he  calls  it,
is  indefinitely  extended  at  both  ends  in  the  subliminal  self.  Below  its
supraliminal  physiological  limit  lie  a  vast  number  of  complex  processes
belonging  to  the  body's  nutrition  and  well-being.  These  our  remote
ancestoi's  may  possibly  have  been  able  to  modify  at  will,  but  to  us
they  seem  entirely  withdrawn  from  our  sphere  of  volition.  If  we  wish
to  alter  them  we  must  do  so  by  drugs  and  medicaments,  whether  the
body  to  be  treated  is  our  own  or  another's.

At  the  superior  or  psychical  end  the  subliminal  memory  includes  an
unknown  category  of  impressions  which  the  supraliminal  consciousness
is  incapable  of  receiving  in  any  direct  fashion,  and  which  it  must
cognise,  if  at  all,  in  the  shape  of  messages  from  the  subliminal
consciousness.

Mr.  Myers  arranges  hypnotic  phenomena  into  three  divisions.

1.  The  great  dissociative  triumph  of  hypnotism,  namely,  the
inhibition  of  pain  under  conditions  of  nerve  and  tissue  with  which  it
is  usually  inevitably  connected.

Here,  psychologically,  the  whole  interest  lies  in  the  question
whethei'  pain  is  suppressed  together  with  sensations  of  every  kind,  or


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


245


whether  other  sensations  persist,  pain  alone  being  inhibited.  Our
ancestors,  Mr.  Myers  suggests,  had  ah'eady  attained  to  a  I'ough  practical
knowledge  of  this  distinction.  They  knew  that  if  you  stunned  a  man
by  a  blow  he  would  not  feel  the  pain  for  some  time.  Also,  that  if  you
ran  pins  into  particular  parts  on  a  witch's  body,  she,  although  perfectly
awake,  and  conscious  of  other  sensations,  would  feel  no  smart.

The  second  of  these  discoveries  was  the  more  important.  By
stunning  your  enemy,  you  only  proved  that  vital  functions  could
continue  unimpaired,  notwithstanding  that  the  brain's  action  was  so
far  disturbed  that  all  consciousness  was  temporarily  abolished.  By
pricking  the  witch  in  her  "  marks  " — now  called  hysterical  analgesic
zones  or  patches — you  proved  that  pain  was  a  dissociable  accident  of
organic  injury,  that  other  sensations  might  persist  and  only  that  of  pain
be  in  some  way  inhibited.  The  insensitiveness  to  pain  which  runs  wild
in  hysteria  is  now  being  directed  into  useful  channels  by  "  hypnotic
suggestion."  Some  intelligence  is  involved  in  a  suppression  thus
achieved ;  for  this  is  obtained,  not  as  with  narcotics  by  a  general  loss  of
consciousness,  but  by  the  selection  and  inhibition,  from  among  all  the
percipient's  possible  sensations,  of  disagreeable  ones  alone.  This  is  not
a  mere  ansesthetisation  of  some  particular  group  of  nerve-endings, —
such  as  cocaine  produces  :  it  involves  the  removal  also  of  a  number  of
concomitant  feelings  of  nausea,  exhaustion,  anxiety,  not  always  directly
dependent  on  the  principal  pain,  but  needing,  as  it  were,  to  be  first
subjectively  distinguished  as  disagreeable  before  they  are  picked  out
for  inhibition.  This  freedom  from  pain  is  obtained  without  either
deadening  or  dislocating  the  general  nervous  system ;  with  no  approach
either  to  coma  or  to  hysteria.  The  so-called  hypnotic  trance  is  not
always  necessary :  sometimes  the  pain  can  be  prevented  by  post-
hypnotic suggestion  destined  to  fulfil  itself  after  the  awakening.  And
if  there  be  trance,  this  is  often  no  mere  lethargy,  but  a  state  fully  as
alert  and  vivid  as  ordinary  waking  life.

Mr.  Myers  argues  from  this  that  it  is  plain  that  hypnotic  analgesia
thus  induced  is  by  no  means  a  mere  ordinary  narcotic — a  fresh  specimen
of  such  methods  as  are  already  familiar  for  checking  pain  by  arresting-
all  conscious  cerebration.  It  is  a  new  departure ;  the  first  successful
attempt  at  dissociating  forms  of  sensation  which  throughout  the  known
history  of  the  human  organism  have  almost  invariably  been  found  to
exist  together.

2.  The  ASSOCIATIVE  or  synthetic  triumphs  of  hypnotism,  namely,
the  production  and  control  of  organic  processes  which  no  effort  of  the
ordinary  man  can  set  going,  or  in  any  way  influence.

Hypnotic  analgesia,  Mr.  Myers  says,  may  be  classed  with  equal
justice  as  a  dissociative,  or  as  an  associative  act.  The  sensations  are
severed  from  the  main  supraliminal  current  and  thus  far  the  act  is


246


Br.  J.  Milne  Braviwell.


dissociative.  The  group  itself,  however,  has  to  be  formed  and  the  more
complex  it  is,  the  more  this  involves  some  associative  act.  Inhibition
of  ail  the  pain  consequent  on  an  operation  is  in  reality  a  complicated
associative  process.  It  involves  (1)  the  singling  out  and  fitting  together
of  a  great  number  of  sensations  which  have  only  the  subjective  bond  of
being  disagreeable,  and  (2)  the  inhibition  of  all  of  them,  v/hich  thus
leaves  the  supraliminal  consciousness  in  perfect  ease.

In  further  illustration  of  the  associative  powers  of  hypnotism,  Mr.
Myers  refers  to  alterations  in  the  pulse,  the  secretions,  excretions,  etc.
He  also  cites  Delbceuf's  case  of  two  symmetrical  burns  on  the  same
subject,  one  running  the  ordinary  course  of  inflammation,  the  other  in
which  morbid  action  was  arrested  by  suggestion.

3.  The  INTELLECTUAL  Or  MORAL  achievements  of  hypnotism.

These,  like  the  others,  are  based  ujjon  physiological  changes,  but
present  problems  still  more  profound.  The  removal  of  the  craving  for
alcohol  and  morphia,  the  cure  of  klepto]nania,  bad  temper,  excessive
indolence,  etc.,  are  cited  as  illustrating  the  moral  and  jssychological
changes  which  suggestion  can  effect.

Volition,  etc.

According  to  Mr.  Myers,  the  hypnotic  subject  is  not  a  maimed  or
stunted  normal  individual,  but  one  who,  while  he  has  gained  increased
power  over  his  own  organism,  has  not  at  the  same  time  lost  his  volition,
or  the  mental  and  moral  qualities  which  formerly  distinguished  him.
He  admits  that  there  is  some  difficulty  in  explaining  hypnotic  obedience,
but  holds  that  this  will  be  refused  when  the  act  suggested  is  contrary
to  the  subject's  moral  nature.  He  believes  that  a  complete  comprehen-
sion of  the  suggested  act  exists  in  the  subliminal  strata;  and  that,  when
grave  need  arises,  the  subliminal  self  will  generally  avoid  compliance —
not  by  awakening  the  organism  into  ordinary  life,  but  by  plunging  it
into  a  hysterical  access,  or  into  a  trance  so  deep  that  the  unwelcome
order  loses  its  agitating  power.  The  moral  tone  of  the  somnambule  is,
in  Mr.  Myers'  opinion,  the  precise  opposite  of  the  drunken  condition.
Alcohol,  apparently  by  paralysing  first  the  higher  inhibitory  centres,
makes  men  boastful,  impure,  and  quarrelsome.  Hypnotisation,
apparently  by  a  tendency  to  paralyse  lower  appetitive  centres,  produces
the  contrary  effect.  The  increased  refinement  and  cheerfulness  of  the
developed  somnambule  is  constantly  noticed.

The  Possible  Source  or  Origin  of  Hypnotic  Control  over  Intimate

Organic  Processes.

Mr.  Myers  asks  whether  we  can  find  anything  in  our  ancestry
which  suggests  to  us  these  internal  powers  of  modifying  circulation,


What  is  Hypnotism?


247


quickening  cell-proliferation,  and  altering  trophic  processes  in  unknown
ways.  He  admits  that  the  analogies  to  which  we  can  appeal  are
vague  and  remote,  yet  he  says  we  can  point  to  the  general  fact
that  in  man  and  the  higher  animals  an  increase  in  the  power  of
modifying  the  action  of  the  organism  as  a  whole,  has  evidently
been  purchased  by  a  decrease  in  the  power  of  modifying  its  internal
parts  or  constituent  elements.  The  self-shaping  powers  of  the  amoeba,
the  self- regenerating  powers  of  the  worm  or  crab,  die  gradually
away  into  the  comparative  fixity  of  the  organism  of  the  higher
mammalia.

It  is  possible,  he  thinks,  that  this  fixity  is  more  apparent  than
real : — "  We  may  regard  the  human  organism  as  an  aggi'egation  of
primitive,  unicellular  organisms,  which  have  divided  their  functions,
and  complicated  their  union,  in  response  to  the  demands  of  the
environment,  and  along  such  lines  of  evolution  as  were  possible  to  the
original  germ.  It  is  possible,  too,  that  all  these  processes — beginning
with  the  amoeboid  movements  of  the  primitive  cell — were  accompanied
by  a  capacity  of  retaining  the  impress  of  previous  excitations,  a
rudimentary  memory  which  at  first  constituted  all  the  consciousness
which  our  lowly  ancestors  possessed.  And  further — may  we  not
suggest  ■? — as  evolution  went  on  and  more  complex  operations  were
developed,  whUe  the  primitive  processes  of  cell  -  change  became
stereotyped  by  long  heredity,  the  memory  which  represented  these
earlier  changes  sank  to  a  low  psychical  depth ; — became  subliminal,  and
could  no  longer  be  summoned  by  voluntary  effort  into  the  supraliminal
sequence  of  conscious  states.  How  do  we  know  that  any  psychical
acquisition  is  ever  wholly  lost  ?  Or  even  that  a  memory  is  the  weaker
because  it  has  sunk  out  of  voluntary  control  1  It  may  be  possible,  by
appropriate  artifices,  to  recall  primeval  memories,  and  to  set  in  motion
any  physiological  process  which  could  at  any  moment  of  our  ancestral
history  have  been  purposively,  however  blindly,  performed."  (v.  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  Yol.  VII.,  pp.  345-6.)

Mr.  Myers  refers  to  the  fact  that  Professor  Delboeuf,  although  in  no
way  committed  to  the  conception  of  a  subliminal  self,  has  been  led  to  a
somewhat  similar  hypothesis.

Delboeuf,  in  reference  particularly  to  his  case  of  the  two  symmetrical
burns,  says  that  experiments  like  those  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the
action  of  the  moral  on  the  physical  may  be  almost,  if  not  quite,  equal
to  that  of  the  physical  on  the  moral.  Thence  it  follows  that  the  idea
of  physical  mischief  may  produce  mischief;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
that  the  idea  of  absence  of  mischief  may  bring  about,  or  at  least
favour,  a  cure.  How,  asks  Delboeuf,  are  we  to  explain  the  mechanism
of  this  inverse  action  of  the  moral  and  the  physical  1  We  are  forced
to  admit  that  the  influence  of  the  will  is  more  extended  than  we  used


248


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


to  suppose.  It  may  be  able  to  act,  not  only  on  the  reflexes,  but  on
the  vasomotor  system,  on  the  unstriped  muscles,  on  the  apparatus  of
secretion,  etc.  If  a  contrary  opinion  has  till  now  prevailed,  this  is
because  observation  has  been  exclusively  directed  to  the  normal
exercise  of  the  will.  In  ordinary  life,  in  fact,  our  attention  is  mainly
concentrated  on  the  external  world,  the  principal  source  of  our
pleasures  and  our  pains,  and  our  will  is  devoted  to  perfecting  our
means  of  attack  and  defence.  The  care  of  the  vegetative  life  has
been  handed  over  by  the  will  to  nervous  mechanisms  which  have  learnt
to  regulate  themselves,  and  which  in  general  fulfil  their  task  to  per-
fection. Thus,  the  rapid  changes  of  external  phenomena  mask  the
regularity  of  internal  phenomena,  which  accomplish  themselves  habitu-
ally without  our  knowledge.  But  in  the  hypnotic  state  the  mind  is  in
part  drawn  aside  from  the  life  of  relation,  while  at  the  same  time  it
preserves  its  activity  and  power.  It  can  then,  under  the  impulsion  of
the  hypnotiser,  employ  those  powers  to  regulate  movements  which
have  become  irregular,  or  to  repair  injuries  to  the  organism.  In  a
word,  hypnotism  does  not  depress,  but  exalts  the  will,  by  permitting
it  to  concentrate  itself  entirely  upon  the  point  where  disorder  is
threatened.

Can  all  the  effects  of  hypnotic  suggestion  be  explained,  Mr.  Myers
asks,  by  even  the  most  complete  revival  of  ancestral  memories  1  Do
not  the  moral  or  psychological  achievements  represent  a  point  beyond
that  to  which  such  analogies  will  carry  us  ?  "  These  changes  must,"  he
says,  "or  course  rest  on  a  physiological  basis  ;  but  that  basis  implies  a
well-developed,  a  human  brain.  The  knowledge  of  cortical  centres,  which
must  somewhere  exist  to  make  such  changes  possible,  can  scarcely  have
been  inherited  from  pre-human  ancestors.  Nothing,  perhaps,  in  the
whole  inquiry  is  of  deeper  interest  than  the  possibilities  thus  dawning
upon  us  of  disentangling  from  the  cerebral  labyrinth  which  repi'esents
a  man's  tastes  and  character  the  special  brain  processes  which  stand
for  some  special  temptation — say,  those  which  represent  the  reaction
of  his  organism  to  alcohol.  What  is  the  hidden  process  that  to  one
patient  makes  brandy  as  nauseating  as  it  is  to  a  cat — that  in  another
patient  makes  the  morphia-ci'aving  as  impossible  as  it  is  to  a  rabbit  1 "
(v.  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  347.)

Hysteria,  a  Disease  of  the  Subliminal  Self.

Mr.  Myers  does  not  consider  the  subliminal  self  free  from  dis-
turbance and  disease,  any  more  than  the  supraliminal.  He  points  out
that  there  is  a  marked  analogy  between  the  changes  in  the  nervous
vasomotor  and  circulatory  systems  which  are  to  be  found  in  the
hypnotic  state,  and  those  which  manifest  themselves  in  hysteria.  An
important  difference  exists  between  them,  however ;  in  the  former  they


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


249


are  uader  the  control  of  the  operator  or  the  subject  himself,  in  the
latter  they  are  the  result  of  irrational  self-suggestion  in  regions  beyond
the  power  of  the  waking  will.  Hysterical  antesthesia  or  analgesia
implies  a  power  of  modifying  the  sensibility  to  touch  or  pain  which
we  cannot  imitate  under  ordinary  conditions.  He  does  not  regard
hypnotism  as  a  morbid  state,  but  simply  as  a  manifestation  of  a  group
of  perfectly  normal,  but  habitually  subjacent  powers.  Self-suggested
troubles  are  a  disease  of  the  hypnotic  substratum ;  and  hysteria  falls
under  the  category  of  hypnotism,  not  hypnotism  under  hysteria.

After  criticising  adversely  the  theories  of  Mesmer,  Heidenhain,
Charcot,  Bernheim,  and  others,  Myers  says  : — "  It  is,  therefore,  as  it
seems  to  me,  in  a  field  almost  clear  of  hypotheses  that  I  suggest  my
own ; — my  view  that  a  stream  of  consciousness  flows  on  within  us,  at  a
level  beneath  the  threshold  of  ordinary  waking  life,  and  that  this
consciousness  embraces  unknown  powers  of  which  these  hypnotic
phenomena  give  us  the  first  sample."  (v.  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,
p.  350.)

This  theory  presents  many  interesting  points  for  consideration.

/. — The  Hypnotic  Powers  and  the  Conditions  more  immediately
associated  with  them.

The  special  point  of  interest  in  the  cases  cited  as  illustrating  the
powers  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  the  supposed  mental  condition  of  the
subject.  The  immediate  origin  of  hypnotic  phenomena  depends,
according  to  Mr.  Myers,  upon  a  voluntary  alteration  in  the  arrange-
ment of  ideas.  The  introduction  of  the  term  voluntary,  and  the
recognition  that  all  the  subject's  attention  is  not  requisite  for  the
production  of  a  solitary  hypnotic  phenomenon,  is  one  of  the  most
important  distinctions  that  exists  between  this  theory  and  some  of
those  we  have  already  considered.

Regarding  Bernheim's  theory,  I  raised  the  following  objections  : —

1.  The  condition  cannot  be  called  one  of  monoideism,  because  many
phenomena  can  be  evoked  at  the  same  time.

2.  It  cannot  be  explained  by  the  concentration  of  the  attention
upon  a  single  point,  because,  again,  many  phenomena  can  be  evoked
simultaneously.

3.  It  is  not  due  to  arrested  or  impaired  volition,  as  we  have
shown  (a)  that  the  subject  can  resist  the  suggestions  of  the  operator,
and  lb)  in  cases  of  self-hypnosis,  voluntarily  create  the  phenomena
for  himself.

4.  It  could  not  be  explained  by  suggestion,  as  this  was  merely
the  artifice  used  to  excite  the  phenomena.


250


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


Despite  these  objections,  one  must  admit  that  certain  phenomena
described  by  Mr.  Myers,  and  others  cited  as  illustrating  the  theory  of
monoideism,  possess  one  important  feature  in  common,  namely,  a
change  in  the  arrangement  of  ideas.  If,  for  example,  a  hypnotised
subject,  supposed  to  be  under  the  influence  of  his  operator,  sees  a
hallucinatory  cat,  and  a  self-hypnotised  subject  successfully  suggests
one  to  himself,  the  phenomenon  is  practically  identical  in  both
instances.  The  only  difference  is  in  the  explanation  of  its  origin.
According  to  Bennett,  the  hypnotised  subject  sees  a  hallucinatory  cat
because  the  genesis  of  his  ideas  is  not  interfered  with,  but  only  their
voluntary  synthesis.  Thus,  the  operator  is  able  to  suggest  the
remembrance  of  a  cat ;  but  the  subject,  owing  to  the  involuntary
arrest  of  certain  mental  powers,  fails  to  understand  that  it  is  only  a
remembrance,  and  believes  in  its  reality.  In  Mr.  Myers'  opinion
the  subject,  instead  of  having  lost  the  power  of  voluntai-y  synthesis  of
ideas,  has  acquired  an  increased  power  of  voluntary  association  and
dissociation  of  ideas.  The  remembrance  of  the  image  of  a  cat  has
received  hallucinatory  vividness,  not  because  he  was  unable  to  check
it  from  lack  of  voluntary  synthesis  of  ideas,  but  because  he  has  elected
to  allow  it  to  become  vivid  by  voluntarily  inhibiting  the  appearance
of  all  the  ideas  which  would  have  interfered  with  its  clearness,  while,
at  the  same  time,  he  has  associated  with  it  ideas  connected  with  the
remembrance  of  formerly  seen  cats.

Bernheim,  as  we  have  already  seen,  attempted  to  explain  the
phenomena  of  hypnosis  by  the  involuntary  concentration  of  the
attention  on  one  point.  According  to  Mr.  Myers,  the  mental  changes
which  take  place  are  voluntary  ones,  and  thus,  if  the  phenomena  are
due  to  the  subject's  attention,  he  must  have  acquired  the  power  not
only  of  turning  it  upon  one  point,  but  upon  several  points  simultane-
ously. The  inhibition  of  sensory  impressions  in  hypnosis  presents  a
certain  analogy  to  what  is  found  in  the  normal  state.  The  student  at
his  books  who  wishes  to  carry  on  his  work  without  disturbance,  may
gradually  train  himself  to  be  unconscious  of  external  sounds.  He
teaches  his  attention  to  concentrate  itself  upon  the  problem  before
him,  and  to  disregard  more  and  more  the  noises  which  might  distract
him.  So  also,  in  looking  into  a  microscope  with  one  eye,  he  may  train
himself  to  keep  the  other  eye  open,  and  at  the  same  time  to  become
unconscious  of  the  objects  within  its  field  of  vision.  Here,  both  the
hypnotised  and  non-hypnotised  subject  are  producing  voluntary
changes  in  their  attention.  Important  points  of  difference,  however,
exist  between  the  two.

1.  The  student  does  not  disregard  auditory  or  visual  impressions
the  first  time  he  tries  to  do  so.  On  the  contrary,  prolonged  training
is  often  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  this  power ;  and  frequently  he  is


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


251


unable  to  acquire  it.  In  the  deeply  hypnotised  subject,  on  the  other
hand,  the  power  can  be  developed  by  a  single  sug'gestion  and  with
almost  absolute  certainty.

2.  In  the  normal  subject  the  inhibition  of  the  sensory  impressions
is  associated  with  concentration  of  the  attention  upon  something  else.
The  moment  the  student  closes  his  books  he  becomes  conscious,  for
example,  of  the  organ  grinder  under  his  window,  whose  presence  he
was  ignorant  of  a  moment  before. The  instant  the  attention  ceases  to
be  directed  to  the  object  under  the  microscope,  the  brain  becomes  con-
scious of  the  impressions  received  through  the  other  eye. With  the
hypnotised  subject  the  condition  of  the  attention  is  extremely  variable.
You  may  have  absence  of  painful  sensations  at  the  very  moment  that
you  direct  the  subject's  attention  to  the  fact  that  you  are  piercing  his
flesh  deeply  with  a  needle. Again,  you  may  have  increased  sensory
perceptions  of  the  points  of  a  compass  when  you  have  engaged  his
attention  in  the  attempted  solution  of  a  mental  problem. The  inhibi-
tion of  sensory  impressions  by  the  normal  subject  might  perhaps  be
justly  regarded  as  an  acquired  automatic  act,  but  it  is  an  automatism
which only  acts  properly  when  the attention  is  voluntarily  con-
centrated on  something  else. At  first  the  attention  must  have  been
consciously  divided  between  the  problem  contained  in  the  book  and
the  process  of  inhibiting  the  sensory  impressions. In  the  hypnotised
subject  the  inhibitory  act,  seeing that  it  was  performed  without
previous  training,  cannot  be  regarded  as  completely  analogous  to  the
acquired  automatic  inhibitory  act  of  the  normal  subject. It  can  also
be  performed  without  conscious  concentration  of  all  the  attention  in
another  direction. "We  must  not  conclude,  however,  that  the  hypnotic
act  is  not  associated  with  a  concentration  of  some  of  the  attention,
merely  because  (a)  the  subject  is  attending  to  something  else  at  the
same  time  and  (b)  because  he  is  not  conscious  of  attending  to  the
particular  act  itself. It  is  possible  that  the  hypnotic  act  may  have
been  performed  by  means  of  a  conscious  concentration  of  attention
which  existed  in  some  lower  hypnotic  substratum  of  the  personality.

//. — Moral  and  Volitional  Conditions.

The  views  of  Mr.  Myers  practically  agree  with  those  I  have  already
expressed  in  discussing  the  question  of  so-called  automatism.  T  have
-  not,  however,  seen  subjects  try  to  escape  objectionable  commands  in
the  manner  which  he  describes ;  though  some  instances  of  this  kind
have  been  recorded  by  Professor  Beaunis  and  others.  In  one  of  these
cases  the  patient  refused  to  awake,  after  a  disagreeable  post-hypnotic
suggestion  had  been  given.  Another,  under  similar  circumstances,
rather  than  fulfil  the  suggestion,  passed  from  the  alert  to  the  deep
stage  of  hypnosis.


252


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


III. — Hysteria.

Mr.  Myers'  theory  that  hysteria  is  a  disease  of  the  hypnotic  sub-
stratum is  an  extremely  ingenious  one,  and  is  the  only  reasonable  ex-
planation of  the  resemblance  between  certain  hypnotic  and  hysterical
phenomena  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  As  we  have  seen,  those  who
believed  that  hypnosis  and  hysteria  were  identical  stated  that  the
hystei'ical  alone  could  be  hypnotised.  On  the  other  hand,  those  with
wider  experience  have  successfully  demonstrated  that  the  hysterical
are  genei'ally,  if  not  invariably,  tlie  most  difficult  to  influence.  Of  this
fact  Mr.  Myers'  theory  possibly  affords  an  explanation.  May  not  the
difficulty  of  inducing  hypnosis  in  the  hysterical — of  making  one's
suggestions  find  a  resting-place  in  them — be  due  to  the  fact  that  the
hypnotic  substratum  of  their  personality  is  already  occupied  by
irrational  self-suggestions  which  the  subject's  waking  will  cannot
control  1

IV. —  What  is  the  Evidence  for  the  Existence  of  a  Subliminal

Consciousness  ?

Many  cases  of  alternating  consciousnesses  have  been  observed  in
the  non-hypnotised  subject.  As  a  rule  this  has  been  associated  with
hysteria  or  other  morbid  conditions.  Sometimes  the  primary  waking
state  has  been  morbid,  the  secondary  one  healthy.  Of  this  class,
Felida  X.,  so  ably  described  by  Dr.  Azam,  is  the  familiar  example.

The  work  and  writings  of  Edmund  Gurney,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  Mr.
Frederic  Myers,  Pierre  Janet,  William  James,  and  many  others  have
rendered  us  familiar  with  the  phenomenon  of  secondary  or  multiple
consciousness  in  hypnosis.  It  can  be  experimentally  demonstrated  not
only  that  the  hypnotised  subject  possesses  a  secondary  consciousness,
which  alternates  with  his  primary  one,  but  also  that  it  is  possible  for
the  two  to  coexist  and  to  manifest  different  phenomena  simultaneously.
For  example,  an  individual  may  have  his  attention  concenti'ated  upon
the  act  of  reading  aloud  from  a  book  with  which  he  was  previously  un-
acquainted; and,  at  the  same  instant,  he  maybe  writing  automatically,
— as  far  as  his  primary  consciousness  is  concerned, — the  result  of  a
problem  which  was  suggested  to  him  in  hypnosis  the  moment  before
that  state  was  terminated.  The  primary  waking  consciousness  retains
no  recollection  of  the  hypnotic  suggestion ;  does  not  know  that  the
secondary  consciousness,  after  the  hypnotic  state  has  been  terminated,
first  solves  the  problem  and  then  directs  the  motor  acts  which  record
it ;  and  is  also  unconscious  of  the  motor  acts  themselves.

In  Mr.  Myers'  opinion,  the  general  alternations  in  memory  which
occur  in  connection  with  hypnosis,  afford  the  strongest  evidence  in
favour  of  a  subliminal  or  secondary  consciousness. As  a  rule,  he  says,


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


253


the  hypnotised  subject  I'emembers  waking  life,  but  when  awake  has
usually  forgotten  the  events  of  the  hypnotic  trance.  This  statement
cannot  be  accepted  unquestioned.  According  to  Braid,  amnesia
regarding  the  events  of  hypnosis  only  showed  itself  in  10  per  cent,  of
those  whom  he  hypnotised,  while  Schrenck-iSTotzing's  "  International
Statistics  "  give  1 5  per  cent.  It  is  to  be  noted  also  that  this  amnesia
rarely  occurs  the  first  time  hypnosis  is  induced,  but,  on  the  contrary,
frequently  shows  itself  only  after  the  process  has  been  repeated  many
times.  Under  such  circumstances  it  is  impossible  to  be  certain  that
the  condition  was  not  artificially  created  by  training,  in  the  same  way
as  analgesia,  hypersesthesia,  and  other  phenomena  of  hypnosis.  Un-
doubtedly the  operator  frequently  suggests  amnesia ;  but,  even  when  it
is  carefully  explained  that  the  primary  hypnosis  is  rarely  or  ever
followed  by  it,  I  almost  invariably  find  that  the  idea  is  so  deeply
rooted  in  the  subject's  mind  that  he  suggests  it  to  himself.  Again,
tliis  amnesia  can  be  prevented  by  suggestion.  This  objection  is,
however,  of  little  importance.  Your  next-door  neighbour  would  still
continue  to  possess  his  former  characteristics,  even  if  you  broke  down
the  partition  between  your  house  and  his,  and  afforded  him  free
facilities  for  passing  from  one  to  the  other.

While  we  must  admit  that  this  general  amnesia  only  occurs  in  a
small  per  centage  of  hypnotised  subjects,  forgetfulness  in  reference  to
many  of  the  details  of  hypnotic  life  is  very  common,  and  apparently
affords  evidence  for  the  existence  not  only  of  one,  but  of  several  sub-
conscious states.  The  subject,  who  on  awaking  apparently  remembers
what  has  happened  in  hypnosis,  does  not  really  recollect  everything
that  has  occurred.  He  may  remember  that  the  prick  of  a  needle
caused  no  pain,  but  may  be  quite  unable  to  recall  the  mental
phenomena  which — on  Mr.  Myers'  theory — must  have  been  involved  in
the  selection  and  inhibition  of  painful  sensations.  The  memory  of
this  selective  and  inhibitory  process  is  lost  not  only  to  the  primary
consciousness,  but  apparently  to  the  ordinary  hypnotic  one  also  ;  for
questioning  in  hypnosis  fails  to  revive  it.  Again,  the  patient  who
wrongly  calculated  in  hypnosis  when  a  complicated  time-suggestion
would  fall  due,  but  successfully  carried  the  suggestion  out  in  the
waking  state  (although  no  recollection  of  the  original  suggestion,  nor
of  the  eri'oneous  calculation  and  its  subsequent  correction,  existed
in  the  normal  waking  consciousness),  was  unable  to  recall  in  hypnosis
that  she  had  corrected  the  original  en'oneous  calculation.  This
forgetfulness,  we  see,  is  not  only  manifested  in  reference  to  acts  which
might  possibly  be  regarded  as  automatic  ones  inherited  from  some
ancestral  type,  but  is  also  shown  in  regard  to  others  of  an  entirely
different  nature,  and  which  could  not  possibly  have  arisen  in  this  way.
Some  of  these  phenomena,  then,  cannot  be  regarded  as  hereditary


254


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


automatic  acts  of  the  hypnotic  state,  nor  as  analogous  to  normal
acquired  automatic  ones,  seeing  that  they  had  not  previously  been
frequently  performed  in  the  hypnotic  condition.  The  simultaneous
appearance  in  hypnosis  of  a  greater  number  of  phenomena  (regarding
them  from  their  nximerical  side  only)  than  can  be  manifested  in
waking  life,  is  possibly  also  to  be  explained  by  the  existence  of  several
subconscious  states.  The  normal  attention  apparently  cannot  attend
to  so  many  things  at  once  as  the  hypnotic.  Now,  as  we  have  seen,
certain  of  these  hypnotic  acts,  seemingly  performed  unconsciously,
really  demand  intelligent  attention :  not  only  did  they  require  it  in
the  past,  but,  as  they  are  neither  inherited  nor  acquired  automatic
acts,  they  obviously  require  it  now.

Granting  that  one  or  more  subconscious  states  exist  in  the  human
personality,  and  that  hypnotic  phenomena  owe  their  origin  to  the  fact
that  we  have  by  some  means  or  another  succeeded  in  tapping  them,
two  questions  still  remain  :  —

Thus,  let  it  be  supposed  that  I  possess  a  fi'iend  called  Brovfn,  who
is  usually,  physically  and  mentally,  an  ordinary  individual ;  from  time
to  time,  however,  he  manifests  an  extraordinary  increase  of  physical
power.  Again,  though  still  more  rarely,  he  displays  a  range  of
mental  powers  of  which  he  had  formerly  given  no  indication.  I  ask
for  an  explanation  and  am  told  that  Brown,  as  I  know  him  best,  is
indeed  Brown,  but  that  his  increased  physical  powers  are  due  to  the
fact  that  when  he  shows  them  he  is  Jones,  and  his  increased  mental
ones  to  the  further  fact  that  he  is  then  Robinson.  Granting  that  the
phenomena  afford  evidence  of  the  existence  of  three  separate  per-
sonalities, I  cannot  accept  this  explanation  as  a  solution  of  the  problem
in  its  entirety.  I  want  to  know,  first,  how  Jones  and  Robinson
acquired  their  powers,  and  secondly,  what  has  been  done  to  or  by
Brown  which  has  enabled  these  powers  to  be  evoked.

1.  I{ow  did  Jones  and  Robinson  gain  their  Powersi

Mr.  Myers'  explanation, — ov,  at  all  events,  part  of  it, — is  that
these  powers  are  a  revival  of  those  formerly  possessed  by  some  lower
ancestral  type.  He  frankly  admits,  however,  that  tlie  analogies  to
which  we  can  appeal  are  certainly  vague  and  remote,  and  that  to  find
them  we  must  leave  the  higher  mammalia,  and  descend  to  the  crab,
worm  or  amoeba.

Is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Hypnotic  Poivers,  regarded  as  a
Whole,  existed  in  some  loiver  Ancestral  Type  ?

Granting  that  a  limited  analogy  exists  between  lower  animal  types
and  hypnotised  subjects  as  to  their  power  of  influencing  certain
physical  conditions,  it  would,  I  think,  be  impossible  to  establish  an


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


255


analogy  between  the  mental  and  moral  powei's  of  the  latter,  and  those
of  the  savage  or  lower  animal.  For  example,  one  of  my  patients,  as
we  have  seen,  suddenly  developed  arithmetical  powers  far  exceeding
those  she  possessed  in  the  normal  state.  She  is  not  likely  to  have
derived  them  from  some  savage  ancestor  who  was  unable  to  count
beyond  five,  or  from  some  lower  animal,  presumably  ignorant  of
arithmetic.  Again,  the  same  patient  spontaneously  solved,  in  hypnosis,  a
difiicult  problem  in  dressmaking.  The  power  of  correctly  designing  a
garment  in  accordance  with  the  passing  fashiori  of  the  present  day  can
hardly  have  been  derived  from  some  woad-stained  ancestor,  or  lower
animal  form.  Further,  the  increased  modesty  of  the  hypnotised  subject,
his  greater  power  of  controlling  or  checking  morbid  passions  or
cravings,  does  not  find  its  counterpart  in  the  savage  or  ape.

Mr.  Myers  admits  that  the  argument  from  analogy  is  weakest
when  we  consider  the  mental  and  moral  powers  of  hypnosis.  But  if
it  is  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  subliminal  state  that  the
spectrum  of  consciousness  is  extended  at  both  ends,  surely  an  ex-
planation of  both  extensions  is  equally  necessary.  A  theory  in  itself
imperfect  becomes  still  more  so  when  every  fact  that  is  supposed  to
establish  the  extension  of  one  end  of  the  spectrum  renders  the
extension  of  the  other  end  still  more  difficult  of  explanation.

If  we  admit  that  Hypnotic  Powers  are  derived  from  some  Lowly,
Non-lmman  type,  is  their  Easy  Recovery  probable  ?

I  have  seen  cases  in  which  all  the  phenomena  characteristic
of  deepest  hypnosis  could  be  readily  evoked,  absolutely  without
training,  within  a  couple  of  minutes  of  the  commencement  of  the
process  employed  for  the  induction  of  the  primary  hypnosis.  If  any
of  these  were  derived  from  amoeba,  worm  or  crab,  the  rapidity  with
which  they  were  aroused  was  surely  surprising.

Is  it  likely  that  the  Poivers  should  have  been  Lost  in  Development  ?

The  powers  of  the  hypnotic  state  are  said  to  have  dropped  out  of
the  supraliminal  consciousness  in  the  process  of  evolution,  as  their
association  with  it  had  become  unnecessary  in  the  struggle  for
existence.  It  must  be  noticed,  however,  that  many  of  them  have  not
only  ceased  to  be  employed  automatically  or  unconsciously,  but  have
also  sometimes  apparently  disappeared  altogether  ;  and  until  hypnosis
was  induced,  no  means  existed  by  which  the  supraliminal  consciousness
could  evoke  them.  Now  the  powers  which  the  hypnotic  self  possesses
are  so  numerous,  varied,  and  frequently  so  essential  for  the  comfort  or
well-being  of  the'  individual,  that  one  with  difficulty  concludes  that
development  is  responsible  for  their  loss.  Take,  for  example,  the  power
of  inhibiting  pain. Granting  that  some  lower  type  possessed  it,  a

S


256


Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramivell.


fact  difficult  to  prove,  when  and  why  has  this  important  power  been
dropped  ?  In  this  hyper-civilised  age,  we  appear  to  have  abandoned
the  powers  of  the  subliminal  self  jvist  at  the  very  moment  when
we  most  require  them.  Complaints  about  street-noises  and  the
manners  of  children  show  that  in  many  instances,  at  all  events,  the
supraliminal  self  is  sadly  embarrassed  by  the  fact  that  it  cannot
perform  that  feat,  so  easy  to  the  subliminal  one,  of  shutting  out
undesii-ed  sensations  of  sound  ;  and  in  consequence,  can  neither  work
by  day  nor  sleep  by  night.

Can  the  process  which  has  deprived  the  supraliminal  self  of  so
much  that  is  advantageous  be  justly  described  as  an  evolution  from  a
lower  to  a  higher  type  ?  Should  it  not  rather  be  considered  as  a  sort
of  Rake's  Progress,  where  the  hero  of  the  story  has  gradually  stripped
himself  of  all  the  treasured  possessions  of  his  forefathers,  and  has
finished  by  selling  even  the  ancestral  portraits  from  off  his  walls  ?

2.  What  is  the  Connection  bettveen  Hypnotic  Methods  and  the
Production  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena  ?

To  this  I  think  no  reasonable  answer  has  been  given.  Personally,
I  can  see  no  logical  connection  between  the  acts  of  fixed  gazing,  or
of  concentration  of  attention,  or  suggested  ideas  of  drowsy  states,  and
the  wide  and  varied  phenomena  of  hypnosis.  Hypnotic  phenomena  do
not  appear  spontaneously,  and  some  of  the  methods  described  must
have  been  employed  in  order  to  induce  the  primary  hypnosis.  But  I
cannot  conceive  the  idea  that  the  one  explains  the  other.

Summary.

If  the  theory  of  subliminal  consciovisness  does  not  satisfactorily
explain  all  the  problems  of  hypnotism,  Ave  are  at  all  events  indebted
to  it  for  a  clearer  conception,  not  only  of  the  condition  as  a  whole,  but
also  of  many  of  its  component  parts.

The  following  points  in  the  theory  seem  most  worthy  of  notice  : —

1.  That  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  the
subject's  far-reaching  power  over  his  own  organism.

2.  That  volition  is  increased  and  the  moral  state  improved.

3.  That  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  arise  from,  or  at  all  events  are
intimately  connected  with,  voluntary  alterations  in  the  association  and
dissociation  of  ideas.

4.  That  subliminal  or  subconscious  states  are  more  clearly  defined
than  in  previous  theories.

Considerable  analogy  exists  between  Mr.  Myers'  theory  and  Braid's
later one. In  reference to  the  two first  points their  views  are


What  is  Hypnotism  ?


257


identical.  Little  difference  exists  between  them  as  to  the  third.
Braid  and  Bennett  both  appreciated  the  important  part  played  by
the  arrangement  of  ideas  in  the  production  of  hypnotic  phenomena.
While  the  latter  held  that  this  was  involuntary,  the  former  recognised
that  the  volition  was  unimpaired.  The  existence  of  alternating
consciousnesses  was  not  only  recognised  by  Braid,  but  was  also
regarded  by  him  as  explanatory  of  certain  hypnotic  phenomena.  He
did  not  ascribe  to  it,  however,  the  same  importance  as  Mr.  Myers
does,  nor  did  he  try  to  find  in  it  a  possible  solution  of  all  hypnotic
problems.

While  Mr.  Myers'  theory  may  with  justice  be  described  as
such  a  development  of  Braid's  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the
increased  knowledge  due  to  further  accumulation  of  facts,  some  of  the
other  theories  already  considered  show  a  tendency  to  revert  to
"  mesmeric  "  types.  The  views  as  to  the  methods  by  which  hypnotic
phenomena  are  evoked  especially  show  this.  The  mesmerists  attached
more  importance  to  the  means  by  which  the  phenomena  were  excited
than  to  the  subject  himself.  The  "  odyllic  "  force  could  exercise  its
power  against  the  will  of  the  subject  and  without  his  knowledge.
Every  one  was  not  susceptible  to  this  influence,  those  who  were  being
termed  "  sensitives."  The  Charcot  School  hold  that  some  inanimate
objects  are  capable  of  producing  many  phenomena  practically  identi-
cal with  the  "mesmeric."  Like  the  mesmerists,  they  believe  that
the  influence  can  be  exerted  without  the  subject's  knowledge,  and  also
that  every  one  is  not  susceptible  to  it.  For  the  tei'm  "  sensitive  "  they
substitute  that  of  "  hysterical."  Bernheim's  theory  resembles  that  of
the  mesmerists  still  more  closely.  He  regards  the  operator,  not  the
subject,  as  the  more  important  factor,  and  believes  that  a  skilful
operator  can  hypnotise  at  least  90  per  cent,  of  mankind.  He  holds
that  in  many  instances  the  operator  can  compel  the  obedience  of  the
subject  and  force  him  to  perform  criminal  acts.  On  this  point  he
differs  from  the  Charcot  School,  and  agrees  with  the  mesmerists.  The
power  by  which  he  evokes  and  also  explains  the  phenomena,  called,  as
we  have  seen,  by  the  mesmerists  "  odyllic  force "  and  by  Cliai'cot
"hysteria,"  he  terms  "suggestion."  Braid  and  Myers  regard  the
operator  as  the  mere  starter  of  the  phenomena.  His  existence,  ac-
cording to  Braid,  is  not  even  necessary.  These  observers  differ  from
Bernheim  in  reference  to  criminal  suggestion  and  various  other  points
already  noticed.

If  Braid  and  Myers  have  done  much  towards  giving  us  a  clearer
idea  of  the  hypnotic  state,  they  have  also  added  to  the  difficulties  of
explaining  it.  A  conception  of  hypnosis  which  limited  its  manifesta-
tions to  simple  automatic  movements  was  comparatively  easy  to
explain. The  hypnotic  subject,  who, while  he  has not lost  the

s  2


258


Br.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.


physical  and  mental  powers  of  his  waking  condition,  has  acquired  new
and  far-reaching  ones,  presents  a  very  difiicult  problem.  But  normal
life  contains  many  problems,  both  physiological  and  psychological,
which  are  yet  unsolved  and  some —  such  as  the  causal  connection
between  mental  and  physical  states, — which  are  appai'ently  insoluble,
and  while  this  is  so,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  complete
explanation  of  that  still  more  complex  state — tlie  hypnotic.  Further
observation  is  always  giving  us  clearer  insight,  if  not  into  the  central
pi'oblem  itself,  at  all  events  into  the  phenomena  which  characterise
it.  What  increased  practical  advantage  this  may  give  us  in  curing
disease,  alleviating  pain,  or  improving  moral  states,  time  alone  will
show.  Meanwhile  it  is  reasonable  to  hope  that  increased  knowledge
may  bring  with  it  increased  power.


Some  Exjperiments  in  Crystal -Vision.


259


III.

SOME  EXPERIMENTS  IN  CRYSTAL-VISION.

By  Professor  James H.  Hyslop,
of  Columbia  College,  Neiv  York.

From  a  series  of  notes  taken  at  the  time  I  report  the  following
results  of  experiments  in  crystal  vision.  ^

In  the  course  of  my  conversation  with  the  percipient,  Mrs.  D  ,

regarding  her  various  experiences,  she  happened  to  mention  that,  when
a  child,  if  she  happened  to  look  at  the  surface  of  a  lake  or  body  of
water  reflecting  sunlight,  she  often  saw  the  most  beautiful  scenes  not
in  any  way  representing  the  objects  about  her.  I  at  once  thought  of
the  resemblance  between  this  and  the  visions  of  crystal-gazing,  and
resolved  to  try  experiments  in  this  with  her. I  procured  a  crystal  and

gave  it  to  Mrs.  D  ,  with  information  as  to  how  it  should  be  used.

After  having  tried  the  experiment  and  found  it  successful,  Mrs.  D

told  me  that  when  I  asked  her  to  try  the  crystal,  she  both  resented  such
experiments  and  utterly  disbelieved  that  anything  would  result  from
them.  She  therefore  felt  very  greatly  surprised  when  distinct  visions
were  produced  by  the  crystal.  When  she  tried  it  for  the  first  time
and  a  scene  appeared,  she  suspected  that  it  was  either  a  reflection  of
some  surrounding  objects  or  an  illusion  produced  by  such  a  reflection.
But  by  changing  her  own  position,  or  the  position  of  the  crystal,  the
same  scene  would  continue  to  appear  in  it.  Most  generally  she  shifted
the  crystal  about  in  various  positions,  but  the  act  would  not  change
the  vision,  which  remained  constant  in  spite  of  alterations  in  position,
until  some  new  scene  presented  itself  with  a  like  continuity  under
various  circumstances.

Another  fact  of  considerable  interest  in  the  case  is  that  some-
times the  vision  appears  on  the  surface  of  the  crystal  and  sometimes
at  the  centre  of  it,  and  gradually  develops  into  clearness.  And  again
it  will  sometimes  originate  in  this  way  at  the  centre  and  be  transferred
to  the  surface. But  the  distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of  vision  is

very  clear  to  Mrs.  D  . Sometimes  when  the  scene  appears  at  the

centre  of  the  crystal,  turning  the  glass  will  bring  the  same  picture  to
the  surface. Mrs.  D  is  not  sure  that  she  can  detect  any  difference


1  This  Report  was  written  in  November,  1895.


260


Frofeasor  James  H.  Hyslop.


of  meaning  between  the  two  kinds  of  vision.  Indeed  there  has  been
no  I'eason  to  attach  any  meaning  to  any  of  them  until  investigation
suggested  a  possible  significance  in  two  or  three  of  them  ;  and  as  no
record  was  kept  of  those  which  appeared  at  the  centre  of  the  crystal,
and  of  those  that  appeared  at  the  surface,  it  is  not  possible  at  this
date  to  say  whether  any  of  those  which  investigation  some  months
afterward  showed  might  be  veridical  were  those  at  the  centime  or  those
at  the  surface  of  the  glass. That  they  are  not  representations  of  the

imagination  is  evident  from  Mrs.  D  's  deliberate attempt  to

prevent  a  vision  from  developing  when  it  once  began  to  appear.  She
says  that  in  spite  of  both  her  repugnance  to  the  experiments  and
resistance  to  the  occurrence  of  the  visions,  they  came  irresistibly  and
represented  often  such  absurd  positions,  attitudes  and  congeries  of
facts,  events,  or  scenes,  that  nothing  but  the  dream-world  resembled
them.  This  characteristic  will  be  apparent  in  the  description  of  them.
There  are  three  series  of  them,  obtained  at  diflferent  times  and
numbered  in  their  order.  But  as  nothing  of  an  apparently  telepathic
nature  occurred,  or  having  any  other  kind  of  supernormal  psychological
significance,  the  experiments  were  suspended  and  not  resumed.  The
following  is  an  account  of  what  was  seen  in  the  crystal,  with  the  dates
when  the  experiments  were  made  :  —

February  18th,  1895,  p.m.

1.  An  iceberg  floating  in  the  water.

2.  A  sunset  view,  with  the  observer  looking  over  a  liill  upon  a  bank  of
clouds  surromiding  the  setting  sun.

3.  A  human  head  lying  on  a  pillow  with  the  mouth  very  wide  open.

4.  The  face  of  Mrs.  D  's  mother.

5.  A  woman  and  child  lying  in  bed  with  face  uncovered  and  bed  clothes
pulled  up  to  the  neck.

6.  An  interesting  and  complicated  scene,  comprising  a  house  resembling
one  in  which  a  relative  had  lived,  and  partly  concealed  by  a  ledge  of  clifl'
rocks  (not  connected  with  the  relative's  house) ;  one  gable  end  of  the  house
seemed  to  have  fallen  out  or  [been]  cut  open,  and  various  persons,  including
children,  men,  and  women,  wei-e  coming  out  of  this  opening  and  returning
into  it.  To  the  left  of  the  house  were  two  objects  like  two  tall  posts.  No
faces  were  recognised.

7.  The  entrance  to  a  cemetery,  which  resembled  the  cemetery  known  by

Mrs.  D  at  her  old  home  in  Ohio. But  the  appearance  of  it,  beyond  the

gate  and  wall  with  the  tombstones  and  monuments,  rei^resented  it  as
different  from  what  it  was  as  Mrs.  D  had  known  it.

8.  A  person  kneeling  before  a  covered  bier,  and  a  face  looking  over  the
bier  toward  the  one  kneeling  before  it.

9.  Face  witli  large  nose  and  thin  sunken  lips.

Alarch  20th,  1895.

10.  Face  of  a  Mr.  D.  who  had  been  Mrs.  D.  's  pastor  in  P  ,  Ohio,

and  whom  Mrs.  D.  had  not  seen  for  fifteen  years  until  two  or  three  years
from  date  in  New  York,  and  then  had  seen  him  frequently  after  this.  But


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal -Vision.  261


]ie  appeared  as  he  had  been  known  in  Ohio.  When  tlie  face  appeared  the
eyes  were  closed,  the  mouth  open  and  the  teeth  gnashing.  Not  very  clear
at  first,  but  when  it  developed  into  distinctness  Mrs.  D.  involuntarily
exclaimed,  "  Why,  Mr.  D."  But  when  the  crystal  was  turned  the  face
vanished  quickly  and  other  faces  took  its  place.  Before  Mr.  D. 's  face
appeared,  however,  there  was  a  very  slight  picture  of  a  cemetery  which
could  be  described  only  as  a  dream  of  a  dream,  it  was  so  vague.

April  mil,  1895. 7—8  ^xm.

11 .  A  lady  playing  at  a  piano.

12.  Lady  holding  an  infant,  and  a  child  near  by  looking  at  the  child.

13.  A  street  with  pavement  and  houses,  and  a  child  knocking  at  a  white
door.

14.  Lady  standing  at  the  left  of  an  open  trunk,  holding  up  the  lid  with
the  right  hand  and  stooping  over  to  take  out  something  with  the  left  hand.
The  position  was  very  unusual.

15.  A  little  boy  holding  a  baby  in  his  arms.

16.  A  child  lying  asleep  on  a  bed .

17.  A  man  lying  on  a  bed  with  a  diamond  shirt  stud  in  his  shirt  bosom,
his  head  concealed  from  view  by  the  head  board.  Behind  the  bed  stood  a
mirror  or  screen,  and  on  the  wall  hung  a  picture.

18.  A  man  propped  up  in  bed  witli  a  pillow,  and  trying  to  write.

April  8tli,  1895. 11.30-12  m.

19.  A  landscape  representing  a  cow  path  entering  a  pair  of  bars  into  a
field,  and  trees,  bushes,  and  stones  on  the  right  side  of  the  bars.

20.  One  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  series.

A  room  with  tiling  on  the  floor  and  on  one  of  the  walls.  The  other  wall
was  in  shadow,  apparently  caused  by  streaming  sunlight  passing  through  a
coloured  glass  window  deeply  set  in  the  wall  near  the  corner  of  tlie  room.
Into  this  stream  of  light  suddenly  flew  a  dove.  The  scene  was  a  very
brilliant  one,  and  resembled  that  of  a  fine  painting  of  a  view  in  a  mediteval
castle  or  church. The  tiling  on  the  wall  had  cross  marks  in  the  pieces.

21.  An  abrupt  rocky  and  dark  clifi'  somewhat  resembling  an  island  with
clefts  at  the  left  hand  through  which  the  sun  shone  upon  some  water  and  in
the  face  of  a  man  who  was  in  the  act  of  rising  from  a  lying  posture.

22.  The  head  and  face  of  a  man  with  bushy  beard  and  hair.

23.  A  bridge  across  a  moat  or  canal  with  shipping  and  houses  beyond,
such  as  are  often  seen  in  large  cities.

Not  having  found  that  these  images  represented  any  known
experience  in  her  life,  or  that  they  had  any  other  significance,  the
experiments  were  not  continued.  The  visions  were  all  very  clear  and
brilliant.

The  problem  that  of  course  suggested  itself  to  me  was,  Jirst,
whether  these  visions  represented  the  reproduction  of  anything  once

seen  or  experienced  by  Mrs  T>  ;  second,  whether  there  was,  in

default  of  the  first  explanation,  any  evidence  of  supernormally
acquired  knowledge ;  and  third,  whether  they  were  merely  induced
hallucinations.


262


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


On  questioning  Mrs.  D  about  her  memory  of  any  of  tlie  scenes,

her  emphatic  reply  was  that  she  could  not  remember  any  of  them,
except  two  or  three  faces,  and  the  one  (No.  7)  resembling  a  cemetery
which  she  had  known  in  Ohio,  but  which  was  so  unlike  it  in  other
respects  that  she  would  not  assert  the  identity.  All  other  pictures  were
purely  productions  of  her  mind,  so  far  as  she  knew.  I  reflected  upon
the  cases  for  several  days,  and  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  possibly

Mrs.  D  ,  being  a  very  religious  woman,  may  have  often  seen,  and

perhaps  been  interested  in  at  some  time,  a  picture  which  is  very  common
in  Bibles,  or  was  at  one  time,  and  in  other  religious  books,  namely,  a

picture  of  a  dove  flying  in  the  beams  of  sunlight. I  asked  Mrs.  D

whether  she  remembered  ever  seeing  such  a  pictui-e,  and  she  replied  that

she  did  not  recall  anything  of  the  kind. But  Mr.  D  soon  remarked

that  they  had  a  Bible  and  had  had  it  for  a  long  time,  on  which  was  just

such  a  picture. Mrs.  D  then  remembered  the  book,  but  could  not

recall  having  noticed  or  thought  of  the  picture.  The  peculiarity  of  the
case  (No.  20),  however,  is  that  the  crystal-vision  resembled  this  picture
in  no  respect  except  that  of  the  dove  flying  in  the  sunbeams.  In  all
but  this  it  was  like  a  reproduction  of  some  picture  in  an  art  gallery.

I  remember  myself  having  seen  one  very  much  like  Mrs.  D  's

drawing  in  the  Dresden  Gallery,  but  Mrs.  D  has  never  been  in

Dresden.  I  asked  her  whether  she  had  ever  seen  such  a  picture  in  any
American  gallery,  store,  or  house,  and  she  I'eplied  that  she  had  not,  so
far  as  her  recollection  went.  It  may,  therefore,  be  a  purely  spontaneous
creation  of  the  mind.  But  whether  it  be  this,  or  the  reproduction  of
some  forgotten  visual  experience,  the  chief  interest  lies  in  the  sudden
appearance  of  a  dove  in  the  sunbeams,  a  phenomenon  which  seems  to
show  subliminal  association  between  two  totally  distinct  pictures.
The  streaming  sunlight  in  the  picture  seems,  through  suggestion,  to
have  called  up  the  hallucination  of  the  dove,  which  had  probably  been
seen  at  one  time  in  the  picture  on  the  Bible,  and  was  here  connected
with  a  scene  to  which  it  had  never  belonged  in  reality.

At  this  point  the  matter  stood  without  farther  investigation,  since
no  clue  to  a  similar  interpretation  of  the  other  scenes  could  be  obtained.

No  recollection  of  them  was  possible  to  Mrs.  D  . But  another

expei'ience  of hers  increases  the  probability  that  the  scenes  are

reproduced  past  experiences  without  recognition. Mrs.  D  used

often  to  have  a  visual  hallucination  of  a  bright  blue  sky  overhead,  a
garden  with  a  high  walled  fence,  and  a  peculiar  chain  pump  in  the
garden  situated  at  the  back  of  a  house.  She  attached  no  significance
to  it,  but  took  it  for  one  of  the  many  automatisms  in  her  experience
which  were  without  assignable  meaning  to  her. But  two  summers  ago

she  had  gone  out  west  to  her  old  home  in  D  ,  Ohio,  and  made  the

acquaintance  of  a  lady  whom  she  had  never  known  before,  and  by


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal -Vision.


263


chance  was  in-vated  to  take  tea  with  her  one  evening.  She  went,  and
aftei"  tea  remarked  that  she  would  like  to  have  a  drink  of  water.  The
lady  of  the  house  remarked  :  "  All  right,  let  us  go  out  into  the  garden
and  get  a  fresh  drink  from  the  well."  They  went,  and  behold  here
was  the  identical  blue  sky,  high  fence,  and  chain  pump  which  she  had
so  often  seen  in  her  vision. After  going  home  in  the  evening,  Mrs.

JD  told  her  mother  of  her  experience,  remarking  how  strange  it

was. Her  mother  replied  that  when  Mrs.  D was  a  little  gii'l

about  two  or  three  years  old  she  used  to  visit  this  house  very
frequently  with  her.  Here,  then,  is  a  case  of  spontaneous  reproduc-
tion without  recognition. Mrs.  D has  had  one  other  similar

experience  connected  with  the  events  of  her  early  childhood.^

Perhaps  one  remark  ought  to  be  made  on  number  six  (No.  6)  of
the  visions. The  form  and  shape  of  the  house  were  very  familiar  to

Mrs.  D  ,  being  those  of  a  relative's. But  the  cliff  of  stone  and

the  opening  in  the  gable  end  were  no  part  of  the  house  and  its  locality
as  she  knew  them.

But  there  are  two  cases  which  are  interesting  as  coincidences.  The
first  of  these  is  the  vision  of  the  entrance  to  the  old  cemetery  in  Ohio
(No.  7).

This  last  summer,  July  and  August,  1895,  Mrs.  D  visited  her

old  home  in  D  ,  Ohio. Now  it  must  be  remembered  in  this

connection  that  all  the  crystal-visions  occurred  during  the  illness  of
Mrs.  T>  's  brother,  who  lived  in  Ohio,  and  I  report  below  some  coin-
cidences occurring  at  the  time  between  Mrs.  D  's  automatisms  and

the  condition  of  her  brother.  One  of  thejn  was  that  a  postal  card  or
letter  was  written  by  him  saying  that  he  was  propped  up  in  bed  writing,
and  this  was  somewhere  near  the  time  when  her  crystal-vision  (No.  18)
of  a  man  in  this  position  occurred.  But  there  was  no  recognition  of
her  brother's  form  in  it.  However,  I  lay  no  stress  upon  this  incident,
except  to  mention  that  it  prompted  Mrs.  D to  make  inquiries

1  Mrs.  D  gives  the  following  account,  written  in  1893,  of  these  experiences  : —

"A  few  years  ago  I  was  visiting  my  mother.  I  said,  '  Mother,  I  dreamed  of  being
in  some  place  last  night.  It  seemed  so  real,  I  want  to  tell  it  to  yon.'  After  telling
her  of  the  house,  the  queer  garden,  etc.,  mother  told  me  I  had  been  there,  but  that
I  was  a  very  small  child  when  I  made  my  visit.

"Through  the  early  j'ears  of  my  life  a  place  came  to  my  mind  so  vividly  [that]  it
seemed  I  surely  had  seen  it.  Sometimes  it  came  when  awake,  sometimes  in  sleep.
When  about  20  years  old  I  became  acquainted  with  a  lady  friend.  I  was  at  her  house
to  tea.  After  tea  I  asked  for  water.  She  said  '  Come  on,  we  will  get  some  fresh.'  I
followed  her  and  came  out  into  the  square  with  frame  walls  all  around,  the  blue  sky
above,  and  there  was  the  old  chain  pump.  I  had  seen  the  same  place  and  pump  many
times  in  thought,  and  many  times  had  looked  up  at  the  blue  sky  above.  I  told  mother
of  my  experience  and  of  the  former  thoughts  of  the  place.  She  said,  '  Yes,  Eva  ;
you  were  there  visiting  when  a  little  girl.'  I  know  I  was  not  five  years  old,  perhaps
only  three. Mother  said  her  cousin  used  to  live  in  the  house."


264


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


about  various  things  to  determine  whether  there  were  any  coincidences
in  the  other  cases  of  crystal-vision. Since  her  parents  and  sister  did

not  like  to  believe  in  her  experiences  as  more  than  fancies,  Mrs.  D

did  not  tell  them  her  experiments,  but  questioned  them  carefully  in
regard  to  what  occurred  during  her  brother's  illness,  all  in  a  way
merely  to  satisfy  a  sort  of  gossipy  curiosity  and  without  arousing
suspicion  as  to  her  motives.  She  found,  in  her  own  judgment,
several  coincidences  between  the  thoughts  of  her  sister  and  brother  and
herself  at  the  time  of  the  crystal-vision,  one  of  which  is  interesting.

Mrs.  D  •  visited  the  old  cemetery  purposely  to  see  how  far  it

resembled  her  crystal- vision  of  it.  To  her  astonishment  the  resemblance
was  complete.  The  tombstones  and  monuments  which  appeared  in  the
vision,  and  which  she  had  never  seen,  or  could  not  recall  seeing,  were
there  with  the  entrance,  precisely  as  they  appeared  in  the  vision.
They — the  monuments,  not  the  entrance — were  recent  additions  to  the

cemetery,  and  since  the  time  when  Mrs.  D  had  seen  it  many  years

ago. Mrs.  D  ■  inquired  very  carefully  whether  her  sister  had  had

the  cemetery  in  mind  during  the  brother's  illness.  The  brother  had
suffered  from  a  relapse  of  typhoid  fever ;  all  hope  of  his  recovery  had
been  abandoned  by  his  relatives,  and  Mrs.  D  was  ready  to  respond-
to  a  summons  at  any  time  to  attend  the  funeral.  The  family  burial
place  was  not  in  this  particular  cemetery,  but  in  another  graveyard
now  in  a  rather  dilapidated  condition.  As  most  of  the  family  were
still  living  and  a  new  lot  might  seem  desirable,  the  sister  said  she
often  thought,  during  her  brother's  illness,  that  they  ought  to  purchase
a  new  lot  in  this  better  kept  cemetery,  and  was  ready  to  propose
it  in  case  of  her  brother's  death.  In  this  way  was  established
the  fact  that  the  cemetery  was  often  in  the  sister's  mind,  and  she
knew  from  familiarity  the  exact  appearance  of  the  entrance  to  it.
It  is  possible,  therefore,  to  account  for  the  crystal-vision  by  telepathic
influences,  if  we  accept  such  a  fact  and  if  we  attach  any  value  to  the
coincidence.  ,

The  second  case  in  which  the  coincidence  may  have  some  interest
was  that  of  the  fifth  crystal-vision  (No.  5).  This  was  that  of  a  woman
and  child  lying  in  bed. This  vision  occurred  during  the  illness  of

Mrs.  D  's  brother  and  during  her  mental  anxiety  about  him.  The

peculiarity  about  it  is  that  Mrs.  D  •  thought  of  her  sister-in-law,  her

sick  brother's  wife,  and  recognised  her  form  and  appearance  about
the  head,  but  could  not  recognise  the  face.  But  she  knew  no  reason  to
account  for  the  presence  of  a  baby  in  bed  with  the  sister-in-law.  When
she  was  visiting  her  brother  during  the  summer,  as  referred  to  above,
she  learned  from  his  wife  that  he,  during  the  illness,  was  constantly
troubled  with  the  illusion  that  she  had  given  birth  to  a  child,  and
could  not  be  divested  of  it. He  often  referred  to  the  circumstance,


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal -Vision.


265


and  insisted  in  a  delirious  condition  on  seeing  the  child,  when,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  there  was  no  reason  in  the  case  for  his  belief.

But  strict  science,  before  it  can  attach  evidential  value  to  the
coincidences,  must  be  able  to  record  more  accurately  the  time  of  the
thoughts  which  are  assumed  to  be  the  cause  of  the  vision.  The
absence  of  this  feature  from  the  case  very  greatly  diminishes  the  value
of  the  instances  for  the  purposes  to  which  we  might  wish  to  put  them
as  evidence.  But  the  cases  are,  of  course,  such  that  there  was  no
chance  to  obtain  the  definite  knowledge,  and  we  are  left  with  just
enough  coincidence  to  make  us  laugh  and  wonder,  while  we  entertain
a  sceptical  attitude  in  regard  to  their  significance.  In  this  they  are
illustrations  of  those  frequent  coincidences,  occurring  spontaneously,
to  which  it  is  impossible  to  give  scientific  completeness,  and  which  can
have  no  value  until  they  are  multiplied  so  numerously  and  under  such
varying  conditions  as  to  make  us  doubt  the  influence  of  chance.  In
these  instances,  however,  we  are  certainly  shut  off  from  the  kind  of
evidence  which  strict  scientific  method  demands,  until  it  be  otherwise
shown  that  telepathy  does  not  depend  upon  chronological  coincidences.


[Mrs.  D  ,  as  Professor  Hyslop  mentions,  has  had  a  large  number

of  psychical  experiences,  which  he  had  been  engaged  in  investigating
for  some  time  before  his  account  of  her  crystal- visions  was  written.
They  were  fully  reported  by  him  in  a  series  of  letters  to  Dr.  Hodgson,
and  it  will  be  interesting  in  connection  with  the  above  to  give  some  of
the  best  authenticated  cases.  We  quote  here  extracts  from  Professor
Hyslop's  letters,  with  statements  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D  . Ed. J

(1)

Mr.  D.'s  Statement.

May  nth,  1893.

I  was  a  Sophomore,  or  Junior,  at  . The  Young  Ladies'  Institute

was  at  the  foot  of  "the  Hill"  on  one  of  the  streets  that  led  from  the  College
to  the  main  street  of  the  village.

One  of  the  girls,  looking  from  the  window  of  her  room,  saw  a  student
passing.  She  knew  neither  his  name  nor  his  aim  in  life.  I  am  not  certain
that  she  had  ever  noticed  him  particularly.  If  at  all,  it  was  simply  as  a
student  and  member  of  the  church  choir.  She  felt  that  the  young  man  was
tempted  to  cease  studying  for  the  ministry,  and  choose  some  other  calling.
Something  told  her  to  pray  for  him.  She  did,  of  course.  Fear  kept  her
from  asking  the  other  "  Sem."  girls  who  the  stranger  was,  or  what  profession
he  had  chosen.  Not  many  days  afterwards  he  led  a  prayer  meeting  in  the
church.  After  meeting  she  managed  to  pluck  up  courage  to  ask  his  name.
Not  till  later  did  she  learn  of  his  calling.  As  the  young  student  had  no
company  he  cared  esijecially  for,  he  secured  an  introduction  to  this  young
lady  through  a  mutual  lady  friend.


266


Professor  James  H.  Hyslojp.


I  think  it  was  during  his  first  call  that  he  was  startled  with  the  question,
"Were  you  ever  tempted  ti)  give  up  studying  for  the  ministry?"  She
afterwards  told  him  how  he  acted  and  what  he  said.  He  could  remember
neither  his  actions  nor  his  words.  After  several  minutes'  thought  and
walking  across  the  room,  he  returned  to  her  side  and  simply  asked  her,
"  Why  do  you  ask  that  question  1  "  Then  she  explained  her  impression  and
her  act.  He  then  told  her  how  a  short  time  back  he  was  inclined,  not  to
cease  studying  for  the  ministry,  formally,  but  to  study  for  a  Greek
professorship,  which  would  of  course  be  a  practical  abandonment  of  the
ministry.  But  he  assured  her  that  he  had  told  no  human  being  of  this
thought  before  that  afternoon.

How  did  she  know  my  mental  experience  ?  Were  my  thoughts
transferred  to  her  1  Am  inclined  to  think  I  had  noticed  her  particularly
among  the  other  ladies  of  the  Institute  and  desired  her  acquaintance,  but  I
did  not  intend  to  tell  her  that  which  in  some  way  she  had  learned.

Mrs.  D.'s  Account.

June  15th,  1893.

The  incident  mentioned  by  my  husband  to  Dr.  Hyslop  proved  so  inter-
esting that  he  has  asked  me  to  give  it  more  in  detail.  First  I  should  remark
that  Mr.  D.  was  not  quite  accurate  in  the  particulars  of  his  account,  though
correct  in  the  main  incident.  My  own  memory  also  can  be  refreshed  by
reference  to  my  journal,  which  I  kept  at  th.at  time,  and  had  kept  for  a  long
time  before,  and  we  have  kept  since.  But,  as  I  remember  the  experience,  it
was  somewhat  as  follows.

I  have  always  been  of  a  devoutly  religious  turn  of  mind,  and  so  accustomed
to  give  such  incidents  a  religious  meaning.  When  this  occurred,  I  did  not
know  that  it  had  any  special  scientific  value,  and  remembered  it  only  as  a
very  remarkable  experience,  and  do  not  recall  ever  alluding  to  it  to  any  one
except  niy  husband.  It  took  place  a  number  of  years  ago,  the  exact  date,
which  was  October  5th,  1879,  being  found  in  my  journal  of  that  time.  On
that  evening,  before  retiring  for  the  night,  I  was  reading  my  Bible,  as  was
my  usual  custom,  and  sudderdy  saw  the  vision  of  a  face  appear  before
me.  I  had  raised  my  head  up  from  the  Bible,  and  was  looking  toward  the
wall. The  face  was  that  of  a  gentleman  whom  I  afterwards  felt  that  I  must

have  seen  among  the  students  of  University,  of  the  same  place,  but

having  no  connection  with  the  ladies'  seminary.  I  should  also  say  that  the
face  did  not  appear  to  be  an  ordinary  memory  picture,  representing  a  strong
impression,  but  was  projected  beyond  me  and  externalised,  so  that  it  seemed
quite  as  real  as  any  actual  jjerson  would  seem.  At  the  same  time,  the  vision
was  accompanied  by  a  voice  indicating  very  distinctly  that  the  gentleman
was  tempted  and  that  I  should  pray  for  him.

The  voice  which  I  mention  here  was  quite  as  real  as  the  vision.  It  said  :
"He's  tempted,  pray  for  him."  What  the  temptation  was  in  particular  did
not  come  to  me  until  I  was  in  the  midst  of  my  prayer  on  my  knees,  and  then
it  was  that  he  was  tempted  to  abandon  the  ministry.  The  voice  I  heard  was
one  that  enables  me  to  understand  why  the  negroes  and  some  other
enthusiasts  say  at  times  that  the  Lord  tells  them  audibly  certain  things
they  narrate  for  revelations, — a  fact  I  mention  in  order  to  indicate  that  the


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal -Vision.


267


voice  was  more  than  an  impression  in  my  mind.  I  can  always  distinguish
the  two,  such  experiences  being  frequent.  But  the  particular  temptation
came  to  me  as  a  thought,  and  not  as  a  voice.

The  thought  seemed  very  irrelevant  and  foolish  to  me,  and  I  tried  to
pass  it  by.  But  it  was  too  insistent  to  be  thus  disposed  of.  I  therefore
obeyed  the  feeling  that  I  should  pray  for  him,  though  I  had  never  met  the
person  and  did  not  even  know  [his]  name.  Such  an  occurrence  had  no
special  meaning  to  me  other  than  a  religious  one.  But  I  could  not  under-
stand why  his  temptation  to  abandon  his  studies  for  the  ministry,  if  any
person  was  so  tempted,  could  or  should  be  revealed  to  me  in  this  way.  But
at  any  rate,  the  imi^ression  was  so  vivid  and  my  curiosity  .so  aroused,  that  I
resolved  to  try  and  find  the  student  represented  by  it.  I  was  afraid  to  say
anything  to  my  schoolmates  about  the  experience,  for  fear  they  would  laugh
at  me  for  having  a  special  interest  in  this  person,  and  so  T  kept  the  whole
matter  sacredly  to  myself,  all  the  while  improving  every  opportunity  to  try
the  identification  and  verification  of  the  impression.  Some  time  afterward  I
recognised  the  person  at  an  entertainment,  as  he  stepped  upon  the  platform,
but  would  not  say  anything  about  it.  Later  I  was  at  a  prayer-meeting  where
he  led  the  exercises,  and  by  this  time  I  mustered  up  courage  to  ask  some
one  what  his  name  was.  On  the  same  evening  I  found  also  that  he  was  a
student  for  the  ministry.  This  excited  my  curiosity  still  more,  but  I  had  no
immediate  means  of  gratifying  it.  It  was  several  months  later  before  I  met
him,  and  then  rather  by  accident  on  my  part.  It  was  at  one  of  the  young
ladies'  society  entertainments.  But  nothing  was  said  of  my  experience  to
the  gentleman  for  obvious  reasons.  It  was  not  until  several  months
afterward  that  the  matter  was  mentioned  between  us.  In  the  mean  time,  we
frequently  met  each  other.  But  when  it  was  mentioned,  it  occurred  in  a
singular  way.  We  were  talking  over  a  Sunday  school  lesson  concerning
temptation  together,  when  I  happened  to  tell  him  what  my  experience  had
been.  He  at  once  arose  from  his  seat,  and  looking  as  pale  as  a  sheet,
walked  backward  and  forward  for  a  few  minutes,  stepped  to  the  window
and  looked  out,  and  then  returned  to  his  seat,  when  he  remarked  :  "  Well,
E.,  that  is  the  strangest  thing  I  ever  heard.  I  guess  the  Lord  must  have
meant  you  for  my  guardian  angel."  He  then  confessed  that  he  had,  some
time  before,  been  tempted  to  abandon  his  study  for  the  ministry,  during  the
very  period  in  the  midst  of  which  I  had  my  experience.  But  by  this  time
he  had  concluded  to  continue  his  studies,  and  not  to  be  tempted  by  a  career
in  a  Greek  professorship.  My  experience  then  had  taken  place  whUe  he  was
in  his  mental  struggle,  and  long  before  I  had  any  opportunity  to  verify  it
personally  and  without  any  knowledge  of  the  facts  which  it  represented,
especially  as  Mr.  D.  himself  had  not  mentioned  the  fact  of  his  temptation
to  any  one.

Mr.  D.  adds  :—

Jv/iie  loth,  1893.

I  remember  distinctly  that  I  was  interested  in  Mrs.  D.  (then  Miss  B.),  be-
fore we  met,  having  seen  her  frequently  among  the  students  of  the  Seminary.
My  interest  was  a  strong  one,  and  could  easily  have  been  romantic.  I  also
remember  quite  confidently  that,  while  passing  through  my  mental  struggle,
I  wondered  what  she  would  think,  if  1  thought  of  abandoning  the  ministry.


2G8


Professor  James  H.  Hydoiy.


and  which  she  would  prefer,  a  fact  that  may  indicate  the  strength  of  my
interest  in  her,  and  for  which  there  was  no  reason,  except  the  attraction  [she]
had  for  [me].  In  regard  to  the  temptation  to  abandon  the  study  for  the
ministry,  I  can  say  that  it  was  bi'ouglit  on  by  my  pleasure  in  the  study  of
Greek.  It  was  understood  that  I  was  destined  for  the  pulpit,  and  the  sense
of  honour  I  felt  about  it  came  into  conflict  with  the  desire  to  devote  myself  to
the  Greek  language  ;  and  so  for  several  months  I  was  sorely  tempted  to  choose
the  latter.  After  a  severe  struggle  I  finally  decided  to  abide  by  ray  first
resolutions,  and  kept  the  mental  struggle  to  myself.  I  told  no  one  about  it,
so  that  there  was  no  opportunity  for  Miss  B.  to  hear  of  it,  and  even  if  she
had,  it  would  have  had  no  meaning  to  her,  because  we  were  entire  strangers
to  each  other.  My  astonishment  can  then  be  imagined  when,  some  months
later,  she  told  me  of  her  experience,  revealing  the  fact  which  I  had  concealed
so  carefully.

Professor  Byslop's  Report.

Columbia  College,  New  York,  June  16th,  1893.
Mrs.  D.'s  present  written  account  was  taken  down  yesterday  by  myself
from  her  own  statements,  and  is  identical  with  the  story  she  told  me  on  the
7th  instant,  when  I  called  to  learn  more  about  it  than  Mr.  D.'s  letter
indicated.

Mr.  D.  merely  mentioned  tlie  incident,  and  on  my  request  for  more  details,
replied  that  he  and  his  wife  had  talked  it  over,  and  that  he  found  several  more
details  of  interest  in  it.  I  then  made  an  arrangement  to  see  them  on  the
afternoon  of  the  7th  instant.  In  the  mean  time,  Mrs.  D.  suspected  that  she
might  have  mentioned  the  exjjerience  in  her  journal  which  she  had  kejat  at
the  time  and  before  she  was  in  college,  and  on  examination  found  that  she
had  done  so  on  the  very  night  of  its  occurrence,  the  5th  of  October,  1879 .
She  said  nothing  of  the  fact  to  her  husband,  and  he  was  entirely  ignorant
of  the  existence  of  the  journal  until  she  mentioned  her  consultation  of
it  to  me  in  his  presence,  when  he  expressed  his  surprise.  She  then  told
me  the  details  of  her  experience,  as  I  have  given  them,  and  I  took  down
the  journal  for  the  5tli  of  October,  1879.  I  emphasized  the  value  of  the
incident  on  the  ground  of  the  recorded  evidence,  and  urged  her  to  write  out
a  full  account  of  it.  From  my  account  of  such  phenomena  and  the  meaning
of  them  her  curiosity  was  aroused,  and  she  wondered  whether  her  journal
said  anything  more  about  it.  She  referred  to  it  again,  and  to  her  own
surprise,  found  all  the  other  entries  which  I  have  appended.  I  give  below
the  various  entries  in  the  journal,  indicating  by  dots  the  existence  of  matter
not  connected  with  the  case  at  all.

"  October  5th,  1879. — On  this  eve,  while  sitting  in  my  room,  a  face  that
I  have  seen  present  at  our  meetings  came  before  my  vision  so  plain  that  I  am
impressed  that  this  person  is,  or  has  been,  suffering  temptation.  It  seems  to
me  that  he  has  in  time  past  felt  that  he  should  study  for  the  ministry,  and  is
now  tempted  to  give  up  this  idea.  I  felt  impressed  that  I  must  pray  for  him.
Then  the  thought  came  to  me, — strange  that  I  should  have  such  a  feeling,  for
I  do  not  even  know  the  name,  but  how  plainly  I  see  his  face.  I  have  prayed,
and  earnestly,  although  for  a  stranger,  yes,  a  perfect  stranger.  After  arising
from  my  knees,  I  soliloquised  thus :  I  wonder  who  he  is  ;  if  he  is  studying  for
the  ministry. Why  should  these  feelings  come  to  me  ?  I  mean  to  find  out.  '


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal-Vision.


269


"  October  18th  [1879]. — Several  of  us  attended  the  rhetorical  exercises  in

 Hall. Since  the  5th  of  this  month  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  find

out  the  name  of  the  dark-eyed  stranger  spoken  of.  To-day  I  heard  his  name
spoken  when  called  on  for  his  recitation.  I  found  myself  becoming  much
interested  in  this  person.  I  pray  for  him  daily,  for  I  feel  that  he  needs  my
prayers  "

"  October  28th,  [1879]. — Attended  prayer  meeting  in  the  B.  P.  Church.
The  dark-eyed  stranger  that  I  am  praying  for  led  the  meeting.  While  he
was  reading,  talking  and  praying,  I  sat  silently  praying  for  him.  Since
October  5th,  I  have  found  out  that  he  is  studying  for  the  ministry.  I  feel  so
anxious  to  become  acquainted  with  him,  and  ask  him  wdiether  he  has  been
suffering  temptation  concerning  his  studying  for  the  ministry.  I  wonder  if
we  will  ever  be  jDermitted  to  meet  ? . . . . "

[This  last  question  was  prompted  by  the  strictness  of  the  rules  which
kept  the  students  of  both  institutions  from  meeting  except  on  rare
occasions.]

"  December  5th. — Attended  the  Society. I  met  my  stranger. . .  ."

[The  Society  here  alluded  to  was  the  Philharmonic  of  the  Seminary.]

"  February  7ih.  1880. — Mr.  D.  called  at  the  Sem.  During  the  afternoon
I  told  him  my  feelings  on  October  5th,  and  he  said  that  he  had  been  suffering
temptation  concernmg  studying  for  the  ministry. . .  ."

Of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D  1  can  say  that  they  are  both  educated  people,  and

of  very  respectable  intelligence,  non-believers  in  SpLrituaUsm  and  not  super-
stitious, unless  a  belief  in  special  providences  must  be  so  interpreted.  Mr.

D.  is  a  Baptist  minister,  engaged  in  mission  work  in ,  and  has  attended

my  lectures  at  Columbia  College  this  school  year,  and  I  have  found  him
intellectually  a  careful  and  cautious  man  on  all  matters  of  scientific  facts  and
theories.  Mrs.  D.  is  equally  so,  though  perhaps  her  tendency  to  give  many
of  her  peculiar  experiences  a  special  meaning  might  be  regarded  as  due  to
mental  incautiousness.  But  I  found  her  without  any  explanation  of  some
of  them  and  curious  to  know  if  psychology  could  account  for  them.  In  fact,
there  was  only  one  class  of  her  impressions,  of  which  she  has  had  many,  that
seemed  to  her  to  have  a  definitely  religious  import.  I  can  understand  how,
in  the  absence  of  a  knowledge  of  telepathy,  a  religious  mind  might  give  a
serious  import  to  many  of  the  impressions  mentioned  to  me,  and  this
without  in  the  least  being  suspected  of  or  chargeable  with  a  weak  judgment.
I  found  her  memory  for  small  things  very  good,  and  this  in  regard  to
ordinary  events  in  her  life  [which]  have  no  significance  whatever.  Her
ordinary  perceptions  are  evidently  very  vivid,  and  she  does  not  fail  to
remember  them  down  to  the  smallest  details.

she  very  often  hears  a  voice,  which  quite  uniformly  is  connected
with  her  rehgious  life.  It  is  nearly  always  a  command  to  pray.  Sometimes
it  is  merely  a  conviction  or  thought.  She  distinguishes  very  clearly  between
them,  and  did  so  spontaneously  and  without  any  question  from  me.  It  was
a  matter  of  curiosity  to  herself  that  there  should  be  this  peculiar  difference
between  the  impressions,  some  being  sensible,  as  it  were,  and  others  merely
intellectual.  The  voice  in  these  instances  is  perfectly  audible  to  herself,
though  apparently  less  vivid  than  common  sounds.  These  are  the  cases
which  have  seemed  to  her  to  have  a  personally  religious  import,  simply


270


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


because  they  happened  to  concur  with  a  devotional  life,  and  occur  at  times
when  she  feels  some  special  need,  and  apparently  in  response  to  it.

(2)

Mrs.  D.'s  Account.

January  20th,  1894.

On  the  night  of  June  26 — 27,  here  in  [N.Y.],  I  had  a  dream  which

impressed  me  so  that  I  noted  [it]  down  the  next  day,  the  following  being  the
details  of  the  journal.

"Tuesday,  Jv.ne  27ih,  1893.

"Several  weeks  ago  I  felt  impressed  to  write  to  aunt  R.,  an  aunt  I  have
not  seen  for  eight  years  and  have  not  heard  from  for  a  long  time — never
received  a  letter  myself  from  her  nor  [ever]  wrote  to  her.  She  con-
tinued in  my  mind  for  two  days  and  a  night.  I  neglected  writing.  Last
night  I  saw,  in  dreams,  aunt  A.,  (the  aunt  with  whom  R.  lives). We  were

in  the  cemetery  [P  ,  Ohio]  ;  aunt  held  in  her  ;irms  a  little  child.  The

ground  was  disturbed  for  some  distance.  It  seemed  t)iat  slie  was  trying  to
make  room  by  putting  the  little  one  across  the  foot  of  the  grave,  as  one
would  place  a  little  one  across  the  foot  of  the  bed.  I  .said,  '  Who  is  it  ? —
Berdie  ? '  (a  little  one  she  had  lost  years  ago.)  Aunt  was  covering  the  earth
carefully  around  the  little  form  and  crying  as  if  her  heart  would  break.
While  sitting  at  my  sewing  this  morning,  I  thought  of  my  dream  and  how
strange  it  was.  My  mind  was  on  aunt  A.,  when  a  voice  said  '  Aunt  R.  is
dead.' I  will  write  this  eve."

The  letter  which  I  wrote  to  my  aunt  that  evening  contained  the  following
extract,  which  was  the  only  reference  I  made  to  my  dream.

"  June  27th,  1893.

"  I  write  to  you  because  I  saw  you  in  my  dreams  last  night  with  such  a
troubled  face.  If  you  do  not  feel  like  writmg,  let  some  one  else  write,  that
I  may  know  you  are  all  well."

This  extract  I  copied  from  tlie  letter  before  sending  it  and  placed  it  on
the  same  page  with  the  journal  of  the  dream.

It  is  of  interest  to  remark  that  I  have  not  been  in  correspondence  with
my  aunt,  and  have  had  no  communication  with  the  family  for  six  or  eight
years.  The  last  connnunication  from  one  of  the  members  was  not  a  very
pleasant  one,  and  hence  we  had  no  means  of  following  up  each  other's  lives.

On  the  10th  of  July  I  went  west  and  arrived  at  D  ,  Ohio,  about  six

o'clock  in  the  evening  of  the  11th  of  July.  I  was  met  by  my  sister  at  the
station,  and  asked  her  how  all  the  folks  were,  using  the  expressions,  "  Are
all  well  1 Is  father  well  ? " She  replied  in  regard  to  father,  "  Not  very,  he

is down to P  , G.  is  dead." I  had  asked  this  question  because

between  the  date  of  my  dream  and  this  time  I  had  frequently  seemed  to  see
my  father's  face  and  it  wore  such  a  pitiful  look.

Professor  Hyslop's  Report.

Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  January  20th.,  1894.
There  were  a  number  of  incidents  in  connection  with  the  dream  which
Mrs.  D.  did  not  mention  in  the  journal. The  first  of  these  was  that,  as  she


Some-  Experiments  in  Crystal-Vision.


271


sat  at  her  work  table  the  morning  after  the  dream,  she  wondered  if  any
one  was  sick,  and  thought  it  was  her  aunt's  youngest,  G.,  but  she  was
uncertain  in  her  feelings  about  it  ;  and  about  an  hour  after  a  clairaudient  voice
seemed  to  say  that  it  was  aunt  H. ,  which  was  all  wrong.  But  she  could  not,
in  her  hesitation  as  to  the  person  dead,  feel  that  it  was  any  one  but  G.,  and
yet  uncertainty  hovered  about  this.

The  week  befoi'e  the  dream  her  cousin  N.,  the  sister  of  the  child  who  had
died,  was  frequently  in  Mrs.  D.'s  mind,  and  twice  she  sat  down  to  write  to
her,  but  failed  because  she  finally  thought  that  her  cousin  would  not  care  to  hear
from  her  after  the  long  estrangement  between  them.  ([  should  also  say  at
this  point  that  G.  had  expressed  a  desire  to  be  at  peace  with  all  her  relatives
and  to  forget  all  the  past  differences  that  had  given  rise  to  estrangement.)
Mi-s.  D.  said  that  in  thinking  about  her  cousin  all  this  time  before  the  dream,
she  felt  that  she  (the  cousin)  must  be  in  trouble.  It  was  only  a  vague  feeling
without  any  definite  contents  that  would  convey  to  her  what  was  the  cause

of  it. It  was  only  after  Mrs.  D.'s  arrival  at  D  ,  some  weeks  later,  she

learned  that  her  cousin  was  very  anxious  at  the  time  of  the  dream  about  a
little  son,  sick  with  the  scarlet  fever.

I  will  add  that  on  July  15th,  Mr.  D.,  who  remained  behind  in ,

after  his  wife's  departure  for  the  West,  wrote  me  a  postal  card,  which  I  still
have,  and  among  its  contents  is  a  reference  to  the  dream  about  the  death  of
her  aunt's  child  and  the  corroboration  of  it.  He  alludes  to  her  having  made  a
journal  of  it  before  going  West,  and  before  learning  of  the  facts.

New  York,  Fehrn.arij  drd,  1894.
Mrs.  D.  in  answer  to  my  further  inquiries,  tells  me  that  the  child  died  of

spinal  meningitis,  at  M  ,  Wisconsin,  whither  she  had  gone  on  a  visit.

Her  mother  did  not  live  there,  but  had  gone  thither  to  nurse  her  daughter.
The  accompanying  obituary  notice  shows  that  the  child  had  died  on  July  8th,
1893,  [aged  16]  and  was  buried  on  July  10th.  This  places  her  death  at  twelve
days,  and  her  burial  at  fourteen  days,  after  the  dream. She  was  buried  at

P  ,  Ohio,  and  Mrs.  D.  informs  me  herself  that  she  is  not  familiar  with

the  lot  where  the  grave  is  situated.

New  York,  March  Uth,  1894.

I  wrote  to  Mrs.  D.'s  cousin  in  M  ,  Wisconsin,  at  whose  home  the  girl

died,  and  submitted  the  following  questions  to  be  answered,  bearing  upon
the  possible  mental  anxiety  of  the  mother  at  the  time  of  Mrs.  D.'s  dream,
two  weeks  before  her  cousin's  death.  I  give  the  answer  of  my  correspondent
after  each  question.

1.  "How  long  was  Miss  G.  sick?"  Answer.  "Two  weeks  and  from
Wednesday  to  Saturday."

2.  "  Where  was  her  mother  when  she  heard  of  the  daughter's  sickness  1"
Answer.  "  At  home,  P  ,  Ohio."

3.  "How  long  before  her  daughter's  death  did  the  mother  know  that  the
illness  was  a  dangerous  one  1 " Answer.  "  From  the  time  she  came."

4.  "  How  long  was  Mrs.  G.,  the  mother,  with  her  daughter  before  the
latter's  death  ?  " Answer.  "  Two  v/eeks  and  two  days.''

5.  "How  was  the  mother  informed  of  the  sickness?''  Answer.  "By
telegram."

T


272


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


To  one  of  the  questions  was  also  added  the  remark  that  "the  doctors
said  she  (the  daughter)  would  not  die,  but  Ma  said  she  knew  she  would  from
the  first,"  a  fact  which  must  be  remembered  when  reading  another  incident
which  I  have  still  to  narrate.  But  it  will  be  noted  in  the  answer  to  my
question  that  the  mother's  consciousness  of  her  daughter's  danger  and  her
mental  anxiety  preceded  the  death  long  enough  to  coincide  with  the  dream
of  Mrs.  D.,  and  that  is  sufficient  to  take  the  case  out  of  the  class  of
premonitions.

But  now  in  addition  to  tlie  answers  from  the  sister  I  learn  the  following

interesting  facts,  volunteered  by  the sister, now Mrs.  A.,  in  M  ,

Wisconsin.  She  writes  me  that  on  the  Wednesday  night  that  her  sister
took  sick,  June  21st,  the  sick  sister  had  the  following  experience,  which  I
shall  narrate  in  Mrs.  A.'s  own  words.  We  have  only  to  remember  that  Miss
G.,  the  sister,  had  been  taken  from  school  and  sent  to  Wisconsin,  as  the
narrative  indicates,  on  account  of  some  threatened  ill-health,  and  had  been
absent  from  home  since  March,  1893.  This  explains  the  separation  of
mother  and  daughter. Now  for  Mrs.  A.'s  account.

''March  9th,  1894.
"Sister  G.  took  sick  Wednesday.  [June  21st.]  She  had  not  been  well
since  November  [1892],  They  took  her  out  of  school  and  sent  her  here,  but
she  was  very  much  better  from  the  time  she  came,  in  March,  until  she  took
sick  the  Wednesday  I  spoke  of.  Wednesday  she  had  not  been  able  to  sit
up  all  day,  but  we  just  thought  it  sick  headache.  About  ten  o'clock  at  night,
I  had  not  retired,  she  was  sleeping  nicely.  All  at  once  she  jumped  out  of
bed  and  came  out  in  the  room  where  T  was,  crying.  I  asked  what  was  the
matter.  She  said,  '  Mamma  is  calling  me.  I  dreamed  so  plainly  of  hearing
her  call  me.' That  same  night  about  the  same  time,  mamma  was  asleep  [in

P  ,  Ohio,]  and  she  thought  G.  called  her. She  answered, '  Yes,  I'll

come.'  Then  that  woke  Papa  and  he  woke  her.  She  said  she  knew
something  was  wrong  with  G.  The  next  morning  we  sent  the  telegram  for
her  to  come.

"Another  thing  was  very  queer,  I  think.  The  doctors  said  sister  was  not
going  to  die.  Ma  said  as  soon  as  she  saw  her  she  would  not  live.  We  sent
word  home  as  the  doctors  said.  Well,  Wednesday  before  she  died,  [which
was  on]  Saturday,  she  was  better.  We  sent  them  word  to  that  effect  and
had  sent  no  other  word. At  11  o'clock  Saturday  morning  Papa,  (he  was  in

P  ,  Ohio)  said  to  my  other  sister,  'G.  is  dying.' She  said,  '  Why  no,

she  is  better.'  A  little  wliile  after  he  said  'She  is  dead,'  and  she  died  at
20  minutes  after  11  o'clock.

(Signed) "Mrs.  L.  H.  A."

The  family  of  Miss  G.  refused  to  give  Professor  Hyslop  any  further
information  in  this  case.

(3)

Mrs.  D.'s  Accoimt.

January  20th,  1894.
About  the  first  of  this  month,  I  had  a  dream  which  was  connected  with
my  sister,  the  youngest  daughter  in  our  family. I  dreamed  that  I  was  with
this  sister  attending  a  funer.il  at  my  mother's  house. The  person  at  whoso


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal-Vision.  273


funeral  I  was  present  seemed  to  be  an  entire  stranger  to  me.  I  seemed  to
see  the  coffin  placed  with  the  head  to  the  West,  in  the  only  position  in  which
it  could  be  placed.  The  face  of  the  corpse  was  round,  full  and  plump.  The
hair  was  dark  and  pushed  back  from  the  forehead.  The  person  seemed  to  be
about  maturity.  But  I  could  not  recognise  her  as  any  one  in  my  acquaint-
ance. Only  I  remember  that  the  face  was  an  unusual  one,  as  persons  of  that
age  have  a  sort  of  sameness  that  prevents  the  drawing  clearly  the  differences
between  them  in  expression.  But  in  this  case  the  expression  was  striking
as  that  of  a  stranger,  the  forehead  appearing  intellectual.  The  face  was  pale
but  not  sunken  as  a  corpse  appears  usually.

Two  or  three  days  afterwards  I  received  the  following  letter  from  my
sister.

"D  ,  Ohio,  January  2nd,  1893  [94.]

"Dear  E., — It  seems  rather  strange  for  me  to  be  writing  a  letter  at  one
o'clock  in  the  morning,  but  that  is  just  what  I  am  doing.  IST.  Mc  E.  came
into  our  house  this  afternoon  and  took  a  chill,  and  has  been  very  sick.  She
has  had  La  G-rippe  and  I  guess  it  is  a  kind  of  relapse — she  was  very  delirious
all  evening  and  has  to  have  medicine  every  half-hour  part  of  the  night  and
every  hour  the  rest. .  .

Your  sister,  P."

Unfortunately  I  cannot  at  this  date  remember  distinctly  whether  my
dream  occurred  precisely  at  the  time  my  sister  was  writing  to  me.  I  only
remember  that  when  I  received  the  letter  and  opened  it,  and  before  reading
it,  I  exclaimed,  "Just  night  before  last  I  dreamed  of  her."  When  I  read
the  letter  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  coincidence  would  be  of  interest  to  Dr.
Hyslop,  and  I  wondered  if  the  stranger's  face  really  looked  as  it  appeared  in
the  dream.

Professor  Hyslop's  Report.

New  York,  April  2nd,  1894.
I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  D.'s  sister,  [as  follows]  :

"  D  ,  Ohio,  March  29th,  1894.

"Dr.  Hyslop, — I  have  just  been  able  to  learn  the  date  of  the  night  of
which  you  spoke  in  your  letter.  It  was  the  evening  of  January  9th  that  I
wrote  to  Mrs.  D.  and  I  think  about  half -past  eleven  when  I  finished  the
letter.  The  young  lady  of  which  you  spoke  has  blue  eyes,  almost  black
curly  hair  which  was  coiled  on  the  back  of  her  head.  At  some  time  before
midnight  [I]  took  down  her  hair  and  braided  it  so  that  it  would  rest  on  the
pillow.  The  young  lady  has  naturally  a  very  full  round  face,  and  did  not
look  at  all  wasted  at  the  time."

The  following  is  a  second  letter  in  regard  to  the  same  matter  as  the  above
— the  date  of  the  original  letter.

"D  ,  Ohio,  July  17th,  1894.

"  Dr.  Hyslop, — I  have  delayed  answering  your  letter  of  April  2nd,  hoping
to  send  you  the  exact  date  of  the  letter  in  question.  This  I  find  I  cannot
do — but  I  know  that  it  was  either  the  9th  of  January,  or  one  week  before
the  9th,  which  would  be  the  2nd,  and  it  was  not  '93  but  '94.  Enclosed

T  2


274


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


you  will  find  a  small  picture  of  the  lady  which  you  need  not  return.  I
think  Mrs.  D.  will  recognise  the  x^icture,  although  it  was  taken  several
years  ago."

New  York,  SejMmber  25*/),  1894.

After  receiving  the  above  letter,  I  had  to  wait  several  weeks  before  I
could  get  an  opportunity  to  see  Mrs.  D.  and  to  try  the  experiment  [of]  the
identification  of  the  picture  and  the  person  seen  in  her  vision  or  dream.  I
arranged  with  Mr.  D.  by  note  to  call  to-day,  the  distinct  object  of  the  visit
being  kept  secret  from  Mrs.  D.  I  took  with  me  seven  photographs,  besides
the  one  I  wanted  identified.  I  selected  them  in  a  style  that  would  prevent
any  striking  contrasts  with  the  one  to  be  identified,  which  was  a  very  plain
and  simple  photograph,  taken  in  the  country,  representing  plain  dress  and
none  of  the  flourishes  of  modern  style.  I  therefore  selected  picKires  taken
from  ten  to  eighteen  years  ago  and  representing  plain  faces,  and  simple
dress,  so  that  none  would  be  rejected  on  the  a  priori  ground  that  they  were
too  stylish  for  the  region  from  which  the  picture  came  and  could  not  possibly
represent  such  a  person  as  Miss  McE.

I  took  them  out  of  an  envelope  in  which  I  had  carried  them  and  threw
them  on  the  table  without  any  arrangement,  except  to  see  that  none  of  them
overlapped,  and  then  mentioned  the  object  of  my  errand.  Mrs.  D.,  after
recalling  the  incident,  at  once  remarked  that  she  was  dubious  about  the
chance  of  recognising  the  lady,  because  in  the  vision  the  hair  was  brushed
back  on  the  forehead  in  such  a  peculiar  way.  But  picking  up  a  piece  of
paper  at  our  suggestion  she  said  she  would  try,  and  without  a  moment's
hesitation  or  deliberation,  placed  it  over  the  forehead  of  the  right  picture,
saying  that  she  thought  this  was  the  one,  but  would  cover  the  hair  to  see  if
she  could  be  surer.  She  found  that  her  judgment  was  confirmed,  and  she
expressed  herself  as  more  strongly  convinced  of  her  impressions.  Her
husband  suggested  that  she  should  try  the  experiment  on  another  one  in
which  the  hair  was  brushed  back  from  the  forehead.  But  she  refused,
saying  promptly  that  this  could  not  be  the  person,  and  no  other  picture
presented  a  temptation  to  her  except  the  right  one.  She  remarked  that  the
expression  of  the  eyes  and  face  about  the  eyes  was  that  of  the  person  she
saw  in  the  vision,  and  no  other  face  showed  this.  She  also  went  on  to
remark  that  the  difliculty  she  knew  she  must  meet  in  the  case  was  the  efiect
of  the  difl^erent  position  of  the  hair,  and  of  the  face  which  was  seen  from  a
quarter  view  in  the  vision,  but  with  a  full  front  in  the  picture.  But  in  spite
of  this,  her  recognition  was  positive  and  unshaken,  so  far  as  comparison  with
the  other  photographs  was  concerned.

I  may  add  that  I  did  not  believe,  when  I  tried  the  experiment,  that  there
would  be  the  slightest  tendency  to  identification,  much  less  the  promptness
and  assurance  felt  that  there  were  notable  resemblances  between  the
picture  and  the  face  in  the  vision,  and  that  none  were  found  in  the  other
pictures.

It  is  important  to  remember  that  Mrs.  D.  was  not  acquainted  with  and
had  never  seen  the  lady  represented  by  the  picture  and  seen  in  the  dream.
They  were  absolute  strangers  to  each  other,  the  lady  having  made  the
acquaintance  of  Mrs.  D.  's  sister  in  the  Sunday  school,  being  a  pupil  of  hers,
I  believe.


Some  Experiments  in  Crystal-Vision.


275


(4)

FrofessoT  Hyslop's  Report. ^^^^..^  ^^^^^^  ^g95_

Most  of  the  details  of  this  incident  were  told  me  before  the  issue  of  the
events  was  known,  as  will  appear  in  the  story  and  the  first  impression,
confirmed  by  Mr.  D.  I  received  Mrs.  D.'s  account  on  March  18th  and  the
final  knowledge  of  her  brother's  recovery,  concerning  whom  her  experience
was,  was  received  on  March  25th  and  April  2nd.  But  I  can  best  give  the
incidents  as  they  were  told  me  in  full  and  then  give  Mrs.  D.'s  memorandum
of  them  written  out  afterward  at  my  request.

Previous  to  the  illness  of  her  brother  and  before  she  had  the  slightest
knowledge  of  the  fact,  one  of  those  impressions  came  that  she  must  write  to
him  and  his  wife  to  know  if  they  were  well.  It  was  accompanied  with  a
sort  of  palpitation  of  the  heart  which  is  an  invariable  sign  with  her  that  such
impressions  have  a  probable  meaning.  The  feeling  was  intense  and  she
could  not  banish  her  brother  from  her  thoughts,  though  not  accustomed  to
communicate  with  him  frequently  or  to  feel  any  such  concern  about  him  as
she  then  felt,  apparently  without  reason.  This  was  during  the  week
previous  to  February  23rd  or  24th,  when  she  received  a  card  from  her  father,
dated  February  22nd,  telling  of  the  serious  illness  of  her  brother.  Her
feelings  continued  after  this,  sometimes  being  very  intense,  and  at  times  she
felt  certain  of  his  death  or  approaching  death. On  Saturday,  March  16th,  a

telegram  was  sent  from  D  •,  Ohio,  where  Mrs.  D.'s  father  lives,  sayhig

"  B.  worse;  we  have  but  little  hope;  come  if  can."  This  indicated  a
critical  condition,  but  as  it  was  too  late  to  start  that  evening  she  resolved  to
wait  until  Monday  morning.  In  the  meantime  at  10.20  p.m.  that  night,
Saturday,  while  listening  to  Mr.  D.  reading  a  description  of  the  disease
(typhoid  fever)  and  with  a  heavy  heart,  all  at  once,  like  the  rolling  away  of
a  dark  cloud  or  the  lifting  of  a  dense  fog,  she  felt  the  inapression  and
assurance  that  her  brother  would  live,  and  on  the  strength  of  it  Mr.  D.
telegraphed  to  her  father  that  Mrs.  D.  would  await  further  news  before
going.  On  Monday,  March  18th,  Mrs.  D.  went  to  the  dentist,  and  about
noon,  while  sitting  in  the  dentist's  chair  and  watching  the  funny  traits  and
behaviour  of  a  strange  lady  in  another  chair,  she  felt  a  thud  at  her  heart  and
heard  a  voice  say  "B.  is  dead."  But  strange  to  say  there  was  no  feeling
that  it  was  true.  On  the  contrary,  she  felt  it  was  not  true  and  seemed
assured,  as  she  had  been  since  Saturday,  that  he  would  get  well.  On  March
25th  she  received  a  letter  from  her  father  saying  her  brother  was  much  better
and  that  the  doctor  spoke  very  encouragingly  of  the  case.  Similar  news  came
on  April  2nd.  He  has  since  recovered.  These  letters,  cards  and  telegram  I
have  in  my  possession  and  have  used  them  in  compiling  the  above  account,
so  that  it  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  memory  in  regard  to  dates  and  facts.

Mrs.  D.'s  abbreviated  account  of  the  facts  is  as  follows  :  "During  the
week  previous  to  receiving  father's  card  of  February  22nd,  I  had  twice  felt
the  startled  feeling  of  my  heart  and  felt  that  I  must  write  to  B.  and  his
wife.  They  were  much  in  my  mind.  I  lived  over  the  days  I  spent  with
them. The  following  is  father's  postal  :

'  D  ,  Ohio,  February  22nd.

'Dear  E., — This  is  our  forty-second  anniversary  and  a  rather  sad  one.
Ma  has  been  quite  sick,  but  is  better  and  so  she  is  about. B.  is  down


276


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


with  typhoid  fever.  He  commenced  complaining  some  two  weeks  ago
and  has  been  under  the  doctor's  care  for  a  week.  We  feel  very  anxious
about  him,  but  hope  for  the  best. — Your  father,  J.B.'

The  next  word  from  home  was  a  telegram  sent  on  Saturday,  March  16th,
and  a  postal  card  written  March  15th  and  received  March  18th,  stating  that
brother  could  hardly  live.  On  Saturday  evening  I  prayed  that  he  would  be
spared  and  virhile  listening  to  Mr.  D.  [reading]  a  description  of  the  disease,
like  the  rolling  away  of  a  cloud  or  the  lifting  of  a  dense  fog,  I  felt  assured
that  B.  would  live.  On  that  night  I  saw  Mother's  face  in  agony,  consider-
ably drawn  and  showing  great  anxiety.  On  Monday  morning  at  the  dentist's
about  12  o'clock,  while  interested  in  a  very  peculiar  character  that  sat  in
the  other  dental  chair  and  while  laughing  at  some  queer  remarks  she  was
making,  there  came  a  thump  of  my  heart  so  strong  that  I  felt  as  if  I  had
been  hit  and  the  words  '  B.  is  dead.'  In  the  afternoon  Dr.  Hyslop  came
and  left  a  crystal  glass  for  crystal  gazing."

Then  follows  a  remark  or  two  regarding  the  effect  of  experiments  with
the  crystal,  among  them  being  one  apparition  of  her  brother's  face  with  a
short  stubby  beard  upon  it,  just  such  as  would  grow  during  sickness,  though
no  mention  of  the  fact  had  been  made  in  the  correspondence,  and  the  idea
had  not  occurred  to  her  in  thinking  of  her  brother's  illness.


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


277


IV.

A CASE OF  PSYCHIC AUTOMATISM,  INCLUDING
"SPEAKING  WITH  TONGUES."

By  Albert  Le  Baron.  ^
Communicated  by  Professor  William  James.


[In  the  early  seventies  I  was  invited  to  see  a  young  woman  from
the  country,  who  had  come  up  to  Boston  in  the  hope  of  hading  some
learned  men  in  that  city  who  might  be  able  to  determine  the  unknown
language  which  her  lips  were  irresistibly  impelled  to  utter.  I  cannot
now  recall  her  account  of  the  way  in  which  this  phenomenon  in  her
had  originated,  but  it  was  a  curious  thing  to  hear.  When  she  gave
herself  permission,  her  vocal  organs  would  articulate  nonsense-syllables
with  the  greatest  volubility  and  animation  of  expression  and  with  no
apparent  fatigue,  and  then  again  stop  at  the  behest  of  her  will.  The
young  woman  and  the  friends  with  whom  she  stayed  seemed  sincei'e
in  their  belief  that  this  must  be  a  religious  miracle  identical  with  the
"  speaking  with  tongues  "  so  common  among  the  earliest  Christians,
and  which  St.  Paul  seems  himself  to  have  possessed,  judging  from
I.  Corinthians,  Chap.  XIV.  It  is  hardly  needful  to  say  that  at
the  time  when  I  saw  her,  this  young  woman's  speech  had  not  been
recognised  by  any  linguistic  expert  in  Boston  or  Cambridge,  and  that
(she  herself  knowing  no  foreign  tongue)  all  its  phonetic  elements  were
palpably  English.

1  never  heard  of  the  later  history  of  her  case,  and  have  never  since
met  with  this  phenomenon  of  automatism  until  I  became  acquainted
last  year  with  Mr.  Le  Baron,  as  I  will  call  the  gentleman  whose
narrative  follows.  I  had,  a  couple  of  years  previously,  corresponded
with  him  about  a  small  and  abstruse  work  on  metaphysics  whicli  he
had  published ;  a  year  later,  the  lady  whom  he  calls  Evangel  in
his  narrative  wrote  to  me  that  he  had  become  the  subject  of  remark-
able personal  powers  which  I  ought  to  witness  f  and  correspondence

1  Author'6  Rights  reserved.

2  This  is  the  letter  :-  JVovcmhcr  2m,  1894.

"  Mt  Dear  Professor  James, — Among  those  who  came  to  [us]  this  summer  was
Mr.  [Le  Baron.]  He  was  so  much  impressed  with  what  he  thought  the  ideal  state  of
things  which  he  found  that  he  returned  again  and  again  for  a  day  at  a  time  to  get  an


278


Albert  Le,  Baron.


finally  brought  about  a  meeting  with  him  and  an  exhibition  of  his
vocal  automatism,  of  which,  at  his  request.  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I
presently  had  phonograms  taken,  which  are  now  at  the  Society's  office
in  Boston.

Mr.  Le  Baron,  who  is  a  literary  man,  aged  39,  was  at  that  time
(February,  1895)  much  impressed  by  his  various  experiences,  and  by
no  means  willing  to  abandon  the  idea  that  his  unintelligible  vocal
performances  were  involuntary  reproductions  of  some  ancient  or  remote
tongue.  His  earnestness  and  energy  in  seeking  to  gain  corroboration
for  this  view  is  the  best  possible  proof  that  the  vocal  movements
carried  with  them  for  him,  as  he  made  them,  no  subjective  feeling  of
being  due  to  his  personal  will.  This,  too,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  his
will  could  both  start  and  arrest  them,  make  them  go  fast  or  slow,  and
sing  instead  of  speaking  them.  The  phonetic  elements  in  his  case  again
seemed  English;  and  I  tried  to  make  him  believe  (but  all  in  vain)  that
the  whole  thing  was  a  decidedly  rudimentary  form  of  motor  automa-
tism analogous  to  the  scrawls  and  scribbles  of  an  "  undeveloped "
automatically-writing  hand.  He  spent  hours  poring  over  gi-ammars
and  vocabularies  of  African  and  Asiatic  tongues.  First  it  was  Coptic,
then  Rommany,  then  something  Dravidian. I corresponded  with

uplift,  as  he  said.  On  one  of  these  occasions  while  calling-  at  our  house  (he  was  in  a
room  which  was  always  my  mother's  afternoon  room),  he  had  a  strange  psychical
experience.  He  began  talking  in  a  way  that  he  could  not  control.  Later  he  spoke  to
me  in  a  voice  so  like  my  mother's  that  her  St.  Bernard  dog,  which  hitherto  had  not
noticed  him,  got  up  and  went  over  to  him  and  smelt  his  face  in  seeming  recognition.
As  he  seemed  unable  to  help  himself,  I  became  alarmed  and  called  help.  Since  then
he  has  had  many  strange  experiences,  speaking  in  various  tongues  and  writing  down
the  sounds  phonetically  and  then  writing  translations.  One  of  them  '  Hymn  to
Egypt,'  I  mail  herewith.  He  is  conscious  of  all  he  does  now,  and  can  permit  the
utterance  or  not  at  will.  He  is  very  desirous  of  confirming  the  tongues  if  possible.
.  .  .  Some  one  versed  in  Oriental  languages  could  quickly  tell  whether  what
comes  to  him  is  of  value. — Respectfully  yours,

"(Signed) —  ."

A  later  letter  from  the  same  lady  reads  as  follows  : —

''April  26th,  1895.

"  My  Deab  Professor  James, — . , . Mr.  [Le  Baron]  came  to  [our  camp]

last  summer,  to  write-up  for  the  a  short  account  of  [our]  work. He  had

been  a  great  lover  of  the  Kantian  philosophy,  but  he  had  lapsed  into  agnosticism,
and  almost  pessimism.  The  work  at  [Shelter  Island]  interested  him  so  much  that  he
remained  over  night.  During  the  night  he  had  a  vision  concerning  it  which  seemed
to  him  so  far  from  realisation  that  he  spent  the  night  in  tears,  and  went  away  feeling
that  our  work  was  an  ideal  one,  but  that  there  was  no  place  for  it  in  this  busy,
bustling  nineteenth  century.  Nevertheless,  it  lured  him  back  again,  and  one  evening
while  sitting  in  our  reception  room  at  our  own  house,  and  talking  with  me  concerning
the  work  and  my  mother's  life,  he  had  a  very  startling  experience.  He  was  suddenly
psychologised  in  some  way,  and,  though  conscious,  began  saying  words  which  he  felt
did  not  originate  in  his  own  mind.  His  whole  manner  of  speaking  and  his  tones
changed  so  much  that  the  large  St.  Bernard  dog,  which  had  been  a  si^ecial  pet  of  my
mother,  rose  up  from  the  rug  and  went  over  to  him  and  began  lapping  his  hands  all


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


279


various  philologists  in  his  behalf,  sending  them  specimens,  phoneti-
cally wi'itten  out,  of  his  discourse.  But  no  light  came,  and  finally  he
grew  convinced,  by  the  mere  progress  of  the  phenomenon,  that  it  was
less  important  than  it  pretended  to  be.

At  last,  yielding  to  urgent  importunity  on  my  part  (for  the  case
seemed  to  me  too  rare  and  too  valuable  from  the  intellectual  character
of  the  subject  to  be  lost),  Mr.  Le  Baron  has  written  out  the  autobio-
graphic narrative  which  follows  of  his  experience.  The  names  are
changed  to  prevent  identification,  and  the  actual  geogrtiphical  scope
of  country  disguised ;  but  the  facts  related  I  believe  to  be  substantially
true,  and  the  relative  distances  of  the  journeys  taken  are  correct.  Of
the  sincerity  of  the  writer  I  have  myself  no  doubt.

William  James.]


Albert  Le  Baron's  Experience.

In  the  summer  of  1894  I  had  occasion,  for  the  sake  of  a  certain
literary  project,  to  visit  a  portion  of  our  coast.  At  a  place  to  which  I
will  give  the  name  of  Shelter  Island  I  found  a  group  of  mystics
summering. I  drifted  into  the  esoteric  camp  with  a  copy  of  Kant's

over.  The  tone  in  which  Mr.  [Le  Baron]  spoke  was  very  like  my  mother's,  and  the
words  said  purported  to  be  inspired  by  her.  When  I  saw  how  much  he  was  affected,
I  became  alarmed  and  called  assistance.  After  a  time  he  resumed  his  normal
condition,  and  said  that  he  had  been  conscious  through  it  all,  knew  that  he  was
talking,  but  could  not  help  himself.  This,  as  I  understand,  was  the  beginning  of
many  strange  experiences  which  came  to  him  later,  at  home  surrounded  by  his
family,  and  also  when  away  from  home  on  journeys.

"  Of  the  strange  tongues  with  which  he  speaks  I  can  say  but  little.  I  have  no
knowledge  of  them,  and  the  translations  that  purport  to  be  given  are  largely  of  an
ethical  nature.  He  has  kept  a  very  accurate  account  of  these  communications,  but  I
have  not  yet  had  the  leisure  and  opportunity  to  examine  them.

"  This  speaking  in  strange  tongues  is  not  a  new  thing  to  me.  Once  in  this  city
I  heard  an  old  man,  a  Catholic,  speak  in  a  tongue  which  was  very  musical,  and
purported  to  be  an  old  form  of  the  Latin  language.  He  was  entirely  an  uneducated
man,  and  later  on  what  he  said  was  translated  b)'  Mrs.  Cora  L.  "V.  Richmond,  of  ■whom
you  have  probably  heard.  What  was  given  purported  to  be  from  a  priest  of  the
Romish  Church  who  was  a  missionary  to  California  several  hundred  years  ago,  and
in  this  communication  he  claimed  that  what  he  said  could  all  be  verified  by  documents
now  in  the  Vatican  at  Rome.  These  communications  were  taken  down  by  Mrs.
Richmond's  husband  in  shorthand,  and  if  you  desire,  I  have  no  doubt  you  can  verify
what  I  have  said.

"Concerning  ISIr.  [Le  Baron]  there  is  little  more  to  be  said  except  this:  that
the  experiences  which  have  come  to  him  have  altered  his  whole  course  of  thinking.
Where  he  was  formerly  despondent,  he  is  now  optimistic,  and  at  peace  with  himself.
This  in  itself  is  a  great  joy  to  his  family  and  to  me.  If  I  could  see  you,  I  could  tell
you  much  more  which  at  present  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  write.

"  I  feel  that  Mr.  [Le  Baron]  has  a  work  before  him  for  which  these  experiences
are  in  some  degree,  perhaps,  preparing  him.  Of  this  I  feel  sure  :  that  he  is  earnest,
sincere,  and  absolutely  to  be  relied  upon. — Very  truly  yours.


280


Albert  Le  Baron.


"  Critique "  in  my  valise,  by  way  of  a  little  light  summer  reading.
The  leader  of  the  Shelter  Isla.nd  mystics,  Evangel,  was  a  spiritist
of  the  loftiest  type,  a  believer  in  re-incarnation,  whose  psycho-
automatic  "  control "  was  her  dead  mother.  Of  practical  genuine
spiritualism  I  knew  nothing.  To  theosophy  I  was  an  utter  stranger.
I  found  the  atmosphere  of  the  camp  pregnant  with  a  new  type
of  the  old  style  of  millenial  optimism.  The  World's  Congress  of
Religions  had  re-awakened  the  hope  of  a  new  chemistry  of  civilisation.
The  pious  heart  of  Evangel  was  solacing  itself  with  the  holy  hope
of  doing  something  to  elfect  a  union  of  the  occidental  and  oriental
religions  on  the  purest  conceivable  basis  of  Gnostic-Platonism.
Occasionally,  seances  wei'e  secretly  held,  far  into  the  midnight,  for
the  purpose  of  procuring  information  from  "  invisible  brethren "  to
carry  on  the  work.  At  one  of  these  seances  I  met  with  my  first
experience.  We  were  seated  under  a  pine  tree.  Clairvoyants  were
present.  "  Wheels  "  of  light  and  other  phenomena  were  said  to  be
seen  by  them. I  sat  listening  to  the  affirmations.

Suddenly  an  entirely  new  and  strange  psycho-automatic  force  shook
through  me  like  a  gust  of  fierce  wind  thi'ough  a  tree.  I  willed  myself
into  a  state  of  passivity  in  order  to  observe  the  phenomena.  I  went
into  no  trance  however.  The  force  became  intelligent  in  action.  It
drew  back  my  neck.  Additional  motor  violence  was  displayed  in  my
limbs.  I  was  brought,  from  my  sitting  posture,  down  on  the  flat  of
my  back.  The  force  produced  a  motor  disturbance  of  my  head  and
jaws.  My  mouth  made  automatic  movements  ;  till,  in  a  few  seconds,
I  was  distinctly  conscious  of  another's  voice — unearthly,  awful,  loud,
and  weird — bursting  through  the  woodland  from  my  own  lips,  with
the  despairing  words :  "  Oh  !  My  People  !  "  Mutterings  of  semi-
purposive  prophecy  followed.  One  of  the  clairvoyants  added  additional
weirdness  to  the  experience  by  positively  affirming  that  phantasms  of
ancient  Egyptian  sages  stood  over  me.

I  was  so  dazed  and  "  rattled "  by  the  experience  and  the  motor
disturbances,  that,  at  the  close  of  the  seance,  I  had  to  be  assisted  to  my
feet,  and  was  walked  for  some  time  to  and  fro  in  the  night  air  to
recover  my  equilibrium.

The  witnesses  of  the  foregoing  experience  are  alive  at  this  hour.
The  names  can  be  secured — if  desired — by  any  one.  Either  Professor
James  or  Dr.  Hodgson  could  secure  them  and  furnish  them,  for  the
names  of  some  of  them  are  already  known  to  the  S.P.R.  officers.

During  my  short  stay  in  the  camp  I  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of
Evangel.  Later,  I  was  reclining  on  the  sofa  her  mother  had  lain
on  during  her  last  sickness.  Again,  the  psycho-automatism  struggled
to  manifest  itself.  I  shaded  my  eyes  with  my  hand  to  shut  off  dis-
tracting objects,  and  to  assist  my  thought  to  a  dead  stand-still.  This


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


281


time,  a  woman's  voice  came  through  my  lips.  Evangel  positively
claimed  that  it  was  the  voice  of  her  dead  mother.

On  hearing  the  voice  of  the  woman  escape  my  lips,  her  dead
mother's  old  dog  "  Barry  "  staggered  painfully  across  the  room  to  where
I  was  lying,  and  began  smelling  my  face.

"  He  smells  her  ! "  whispered  Evangel.  The  old  dog  lay  down
by  my  side.  In  a  few  minutes  the  voice  of  the  psycho-automatism
changed. A  man's  deep  voice  succeeded  that  of  the  dead  woman's.

"  It's  father  !  "  again  whispered  Evangel.

Statements  of  a  semi-prophetic  character  were  again  indulged  in  by
the  psycho-automatism,  and  the  words  :  "  he  shall  be  a  leader  of  the
hosts  of  the  Lord  !  "  exploded  with  loud  emphasis.  The  seance  came
to  a  close.  The  elfect  of  all  this  new  experience  on  my  emotional
nature  was  powerful.  I  trod  in  holy  awe  about  the  rooms  of  the  house
of  Evangel,  as,  ever  and  anon,  vibrations  of  the  psycho-automatism
with  which  I  was  en  rapport  trembled  through  my  nerves,  evoking
strange  and  holy  modes  of  the  most  exquisite  consciousness.

Those  feehngs  were  the  most  wonderful  I  have  ever  enjoyed.

One  night  I  slept  in  the  bed  where  the  dead  father  of  Evangel
slept  during  the  last  years  of  his  life.  The  next  morning  I  awoke
lame.  I  limped  about  painfully  for  hours.  The  father  of  Evangel
tvas  a  lame  man.^  As  a  sensitive  somnambule  I  had  taken  on  his  lame
condition.  On  the  general  principle  that  all  startling  and  unusual
phenomena  are  interpreted  as  having  some  personal  bearing,  particu-
larly when  we  are  distinctly  informed  that  they  have,  I  construed  the
vibrations  of  the  psycho-automatism,  whenever  they  occurred,  as
evidence  of  the  presence  of  the  "  spirit "  of  Evangel's  mother.

"Has  mother  been  here?"  asked  Evangel  on  one  occasion,  dis-
covering me  in  a  tlood  of  tears.  I  ansvv'ered  her  in  an  affirmative  sob,
and  a  tone  of  pious  awe ;  for  my  assent  to  the  spiritistic  interpreta-
tion of  the  phenomena  had  induced  a  permanent  and  deep  exaltation
of  religious  sentiment.  I  would  lie  in  bed  on  my  back,  peering
wistfully  into  the  night  darkness  at  the  shadowy  and  vapoury  outlines
of  what  I  supposed  to  be  "  invisible  brethren."  I  could  hear  distinct
raps  on  the  head-board.  Small  globules  of  golden  light  would,  after
travelling  about  the  room  in  the  blackness,  come  and  melt  away  over
my  eyes.  In  the  dense  darkness,  a  group  of  aiithmetical  figures  once
shone  from  near  the  ceiling  of  the  room.

Evangel  was  the  possessor  of  a  finger  ring,  considered  to  possess
occult  powers.  She  had  been  told  by  a  clairvoyant  that  she  was  to
receive  this  talisman,  some  months  previous  to  her  reception  of  it.  The

1  lu  answer  to  enquiries,  Mr.  Le  Baron  writes :  "  I  did  not  know  beforehand
that  her  father  was  lame. I  was  informed  so  when  seen  limping." — Ed.


282


Albert  Le  Baron.


gem  came  in  a  roundabout  way  from  Egypt,  having  been  purchased
from  an  Ai'ab  by  a  certain  American  gentleman  whilst  on  a  trip  to
the  Orient.

The  mysterious  advent  of  this  ring,  and  the  profound  belief  of
Evangel  in  the  genuineness  of  the  communications  from  the  spirit  of  her
saintly  mother,  were  the  two — as  she  considered  them — impregnable
facts,  by  the  means  of  which  she  substantiated  the  acciiracy  of  her
call  to  her  work.  As  proof  of  the  occult  spiritual  power  of  the  ring,
Evangel  told  of  a  young  man,  a  sceptic,  who,  on  placing  the  ring  on
his  fingei',  was  thrown  down  on  the  floor  of  a  room  in  a  convulsive
condition.

I  heard  the  story  and  asked  for  the  ring  to  be  placed  on  my  finger.
An  attempt  at  spontaneous  chirography  was  suggested.  My  hand
flew  in  wide  jerky  spasmodic  movements  over  the  table.  Nothing
intelligible  came.  I  laughed  in  incredulity.  Evangel  gently  rebuked
me  :  "  You  must  not  laugh  at  them."  "  They  are  glad  to  meet  you  !  "
ejaculated  another  lady  in  the  room,  explaining  the  violence  of  the
motor  disturbances.

But  the  ice  was  broken.  It  was  only  a  question  of  development.  It
was  also  explained  that  I  was  difficult  to  control,  and  that  it  would  take
a  little  time  for  "  them  "  to  be  able  to  write  through  me.  Subsequently
the  psycho-physical  spontaneity  controlled  the  right  arm  and  hand,
and  wrote  intelligible  verbiage.  From  subsequent  experiences,  I
believe  the  automatism  capable  of  modifying  the  ordinary  presentations
of  at  least  four  out  of  the  five  senses.  As  the  interpretation  of  life
by  me  now  was  solely  from  tlie  angle  of  mystical  cognition,  rather
than  from  the  theorems  of  pure  reason,  I  became  a  most  devoutly
earnest  religionist.  My  love  of  the  sublime  was  nurtured  by  the  dream
of  Evangel  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  union  of  the  occidental  and
oriental  religious  worlds,  and  my  converse  with  the  "  spii'its  "  of  the
dead  upon  that  vast  subject.  I  secretly  avoided  the  living  to  talk  with
the  "  spirits  "  in  the  depths  of  the  pine  woods,  or  on  the  hill-tops,
with  my  head  bared  to  the  heavens.  Following  out  the  same  principle,
I  took  delight  in  roaming  through  private  burying  grounds.  I  invari-
able "  sensed  "  the  presence  of  the  spontaneity  in  grave-yards  ;  and
this  "  sensing  "  of  the  psycho-spontaneity  was  always  interpreted  by
me  to  be  an  indication  of  the  presence  of  the  "  invisible  brotherhood."
I  became  ascetic,  and  avoided  animal  food.  I  quoted  the  oracles  of
Zoroaster,  and  laid  aside  Kant's  "  Critique."  I  became  exquisitely
morbid  on  the  subject  of  my  own  spiritual  and  moral  unworthiness,
and  could  not  reconcile  humility  with  the  splendid  confidence  of
Evangel.

The  first  message  of  importance  given  to  me  on  leaving  Shelter
Island  was  at  Riverhead,  September  6th  and  8th,  1894. The  first


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


283


message  was  to  be  sent  to  Evangel  as  purporting  to  be  an  address
to  her  from  her  mother.  In  the  second  address,  the  psycho-spontaneity
or  automatism,  assuming  to  be  the  "  true  mother  "  of  my  "  soul,"  said,
among  other  things  :  "I  am  going  to  guide  you  into  the  way  of  truth.

.  .  .  You  must  be  at  the  door  of  the  church  near  the  old  house
in  the  town  of  Stowe,  which  is  in  the  state  Vermont,  by  the  time  the
sun  rises  ou  next  Tuesday.  You  will  then  see  the  reason  why  I  told
you  to  go."  On  September  9th,  at  my  residence,  having  returned  to
New  York  City,  I  asked  for  more  explicit  instructions.  Among  other
things,  the  psycho-automatism,  still  assuming  to  be  the  dead  mother
of  Evangel,  said:  "I  think  you  are  now  to  be  the  one  that  shall
hear  the  voice  of  the  One  that  shall  be  the  truth.  .  .  .  You  will
know  that  it  is  He  by  the  voice  of  the  Holy  One."  As  (in  my  opinion,
though  perhaps  obscurely  stated)  the  reverence  accompanying  the  deific
rhetoric  of  civilisations  varies  in  the  ratio  that  the  special  education  of
a  people  leads  them  to  insert  their  own  concrete  value  into  any  given
method  of  rhetoric,  I  did  not  deem  it  unlikely  that  the  psycho-
automatism  would  assume  that  deific  rhetorical  style  likely  to  be  the
most  revered  by  me.  I  did  not  know  that  such  a  village  as  Stowe
existed.  But  Evangel  did,  as  I  subsequently  learned.  A  map
showed  the  village  located  some  distance  from  Bolton.  On  Sunday
night  I  left  jSTew  York  for  Bolton,  Vermont.  I  hired  a  carriage  at  the
hotel  at  Bolton,  and  drove  to  Stowe.  At  Stowe  I  ordered  the  carriage
ready  by  sunrise.  The  next  morning  about  5  o'clock  I  was  in  the  porch
of  the  church.  The  building  was  old,  weather-beaten,  and  the  flooring
of  the  porch  in  a  decayed  condition.  The  porch  faced  the  east,  and  the
edifice  was  on  a  hill  overlooking  the  village.  An  old  house  stood  near
it.  I  uncovered  my  head  and  stood  in  the  porch  and  faced  the  east.
The  night  had  been  a  drizzling  one.  The  sky  was  black  with  the
remnants  of  the  rain  clouds.  Slowly  golden  streaks  of  dawn  appeared.
The  black  clouds  rolled  away.  The  sun  arose.  I  noticed  a  grave-yard
across  a  field.  The  psycho-automatism  indicated  an  ejection  of  verbiage.
The  verbiage  assumed  a  deific  style,  and  was  as  follows  : — •

I  shall  be  glorified  in  the  work  of  the  people,  for  thou  hast  proved
thyself  to  be  the  man  whose  voice  is  the  voice  of  Him  who  sent  thee.
Thou  has  obeyed  the  command  of  the  Holy  One,  and  the  valleys  shall
rejoice  in  the  hope  and  the  joy  of  the  Lord.  I  shall  be  in  thy  heart,  and
thou  shalt  answer  to  my  voice.

Such  a  style  of  verbiage  proved  to  me  that  the  cause  of  the  psycho-
automatism  knew  that  my  emotional  nature  would  be  influenced  by  it
when  I  recognised  its  deific  modes  of  composition.  I  have  no  adequate
idea  of  any  deific  object  answering  to  such  a  communicating  style,  but
simply  state  the  facts,  irrespective  of  the  deific,  or  any  other  mere
rhetorical  form.


284


Albert  Le  Baron.


On  returning  to  Bolton  I  concluded  to  remain  there  till  T  had
finished  a  certain  small  piece  of  literary  work.  On  Wednesday  night,
September  12th,  I  retired  to  my  room  at  the  inn  somewhat  early,  to  be
alone  with  the  "  invisible  brotherhood  — perchance  they  had  something
to  communicate.  Again  the  psycho-automatism  assumed  the  grave
deific  style  known  to  the  occidental  English-speaking  world.  Viva
voce  it  gave  utterance  to  the  following  chain  of  historic  conceptions  : —

I  will  tell  thee  of  the  days  of  thy  sojourning  in  the  land  of  the  people
of  the  Jumba,  where  the  land  is  the  joy  and  the  light  is  the  joy  of  the
people.  The  land  is  the  country  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and  thy  glory
and  thy  power  was  the  pride  of  the  people.  Thy  name  was  liameses,  and
thy  glory  was  the  end  of  the  triumph  of  the  people.  Thou  didst  throw
down  the  people,  for  their  joy  was  the  truth  of  the  truth.  Thou  didst
exalt  thyself  to  the  end,  and  the  hope  of  the  truth  was  in  thy  keeping,  and
thy  victory  was  the  fall  of  the  truth.  Thy  way  was  not  the  way  of  the
Lord,  and  the  Lord  hath  sent  thee  through  the  fire.

The  point  I  subsequently  made  on  the  foregoing  speech,  was,  that
granting  the  composition  to  be  a  chain  of  lies  from  beginning  to  end,
it  certainly  takes  some  degree  of  intelligence  to  be  able  to  lie  so
artistically,  and  that  the  cause  of  the  psycho-automatism  must  have
known  something  of  the  truth  about  the  matter,  to  be  able  to  lie
about  it.

I  deem  it  a  vital  necessity  for  future  psychical  illustration  to  give
a  somewhat  full  and  adequate  illustration  of  the  various  rhetorical
forms  of  the  deific  verbiage  employed  by  my  psycho-automatism.
Heretofoi'e,  experimental  inductions  of  such  psycho-automatic  pro-
cesses have  not  scientifically  reached  the  analytical  stage  of  the
mystico-deific-modes.

A  somewhat  poetic  form  of  the  deific  style  given  to  me  viva  voce  in
a  hotel  of  Woodstock,  Vermont,  is  a  case  in  point.  There  are  some
eighty-nine  words  in  the  passage.

When  the  song  of  the  day  is  the  song  of  the  night,  and  the  truth  is  the
joy,  and  the  triumph  of  the  peace  is  the  song  of  the  redeemed,  then  the
hope  of  all  flesh  shall  be  the  truth,  and  the  deliverance  from  the  truth
which  now  is  the  truth  of  the  day  but  the  darkness  of  the  light !  The
flash  of  the  truth  is  the  truth  of  the  day,  and  the  flash  of  the  fire  of  the
truth  shall  soon  be  the  light  of  the  night.

That  a  high  excitement  of  the  mind  inspiring  confidence  and  hope
of  success  is  an  essential  to  the  induction  of  such  phenomena  goes
without  saying.  On  any  lower  plane  than  ecstasy  or  transport  of  soul
I  was  in  a  constantly  distressed  condition.

From  this  arose  the  temptation  to  yield — at  odd  moments — a
facility  of  credulous  assent  to  the  re-incarnating  and  other  assertions  of
the  psycho-automatism. If,  however,  I  accepted  the  mystic  conceptions


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


285


as  bond  fide,  then  I  was  thrown  into  violent  antagonism  to  my  own
common  sense,  and  that  of  the  world.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  withdrew
my  assent  to  the-  holier  utterances  of  the  psycho-automatisni,  then  my
"  spiritual "  nature  and  love  of  the  sublime  violently  rebelled.  Thus  I
vibrated  like  a  pendulum  between  the  new  world  of  psychic  phenomena
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  old  world  of  physical  phenomena  on  the
other.  To  my  cognition  of  the  foregoing  alternative  was  presented  the
following  perplexing  dilemma.  If  both  of  these  worlds  of  experience
simply  implied  relations  of  my  consciousness  to  two  totally  distinct
worlds  of  phenomena,  and  my  consciousness  was  in  any  way  related
to  the  deific  "  thing-in-itself "  ;  then,  from  what  unknown  source
emanated  these  two  distinct  worlds  of  phenomena  to  which  the  laws
of  this  deific  consciousness  related  ?  This  a-ux  criticorum  still
remains  the  puzzle  of  my  life.

But  other  startling  experiences  were  before  me.

On  Monday  morning,  September  17th,  came  another  message  viva
voce  to  go  to  St.  Louis.  To  a  house  on  the  street  "  which  is  called  the
street  of  the  the  number  is  one,  two,  three."

This  I  construed  to  mean  123, Street. The  object  of  my

going  was  explained.  I  would  meet  some  one  there  who  would  give
me  information.  In  this  message  given  in  my  home  in  the  suburbs  of
New  York  City  to  go  to  St.  Louis,  a  tendency  to  the  antithetical  deific
style  appeared  more  fully.  The  principle  by  which  conceptions  were
purposely  set  in  opposition  to  each  other,  revealed  itself  in  the  following
seventy-five  words  : —

I  have  seen  thee  in  glory,  and  I  have  seen  thee  in  shame  !

I  have  seen  thee  in  light,  and  I  have  seen  thee  in  darkness  !

I  have  seen  thee  in  peace,  and  I  have  seen  thee  in  terror  !

I  have  seen  thee  in  joy,  and  I  have  seen  thee  in  sorrow  !

I  have  seen  thee  exalted,  and  I  have  seen  thee  debased  !

Tuesday,  September  18th,  I  secured  railway  transportation,  New
York  to  St.  Louis,  return  ;  and  whilst  on  the  train,  conversed  by
means  of  a  pencil  and  pad  with  the  psycho-automatism.  The  perpetual
question  with  me  was  :  Can  I  via  psycho-automatism,  ascend  into  the
uncreated  essence  of  thought — to  the  Mind  of  Minds — and  perchance
snatch  down  some  new  metaphysical  conception  helpful  to  the  lower
world  ? Utter  self-surrender  and  self-abandonment  were  insisted  on

by  the  psycho-automatism. 12.3, Street,  I  found  to  be  a

business  block.  The  number  had  been  given,  as  I  thought,  simply  as  a
test.  Other  tests  wei-e  given  the  next  day.  I  began  to  rebel.  In  the
directory  I  found  the  name  of  an  artist  whom  I  knew.  I  explained
myself.  From  my  artist  friend  I  learned  that  the  most  occult  man  in
the  west  lived  on  Chonteau  Avenue,  and  that  he  considered  his  life
controlled  by  a  princely  priest  of  the  house  of  Rameses  the  great !  I


286


Albert  Le  Baron.


called  on  the  gentleman  and  saw  a  picture  of  this  Egyptian  prince-
priest  on  the  wall  of  his  room.  The  occultist  was  ascetic  in  appearance,
pale,  with  large  dreamy  eyes.  I  explained  my  mission ;  and  later,
whilst  in  an  apparently  semi-trance  condition,  he  made  a  lengthy
foreign  speech  which  purported  to  come  from  the  princely  priest  of  the
house  of  the  Egyptian  King.  A  stenographer  who  was  present  took
down  the  subsequent  translation.  Both  the  gentleman  and  his
stenographer  knew  Evangel.

The  following  sentences  may  shew  the  trend  of  the  verbiage  and
the  conceptions  : — ■

Oh  !  Son  of  Ram  !  For  the  first  time  have  I  the  privilege  of  speaking
to  you  face  to  face  since  1  last  held  your  hands  chilling  with  physical  death
on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  ...  I  congratulate  you  that  you  have  laid
aside  the  tempestuous  feeling  of  arrogance  which,  in  the  ancient  days,
controlled  you  for  your  overpowering  —  which  have  brought  to  you  in
the  times  past  much  of  discipline,  much  of  sorrow,  much  of  anguish,  before
you  had  entered  the  present  body.  .  .  .  Having  fulfilled  obligations  to
the  utmost,  having  reached  the  point  to  which  you  were  sent  and  directed
through  the  devious  ways  which  you  have  travelled  to  reach  and  attain.
We  know  you  well  enough  to  understand  that  the  life  which  comes  will  be
devoted  to  such  degree  as  possible,  under  the  circumstances  of  the  environ-
ment, to  the  new  thought — the  understanding  and  comj^rehension  of  the
real,  and  to  the  awakening  to  that  which  you  become  to  see  is  the  unreality.
Out  of  the  darkness  shall  come  the  Light,  the  Light  that  is  the  joy  and  the
hope  of  the  nations  !  Etc.

The  speech  of  this  gentleman  simply  added  fuel  to  my  psychic  fire,
and  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  gentleman  believed  that  he
was  uttering  a  genuine  foreign  tongue.

Was  this  psycho-automatism  "  fooling  "  this  man,  as  well  as  myself?
If  not,  what  as  yet  undiscovered  law  governed  the  phenomena?  That
this  psycho-automatism  could  reach  a  style  of  deihc  assumption  even
majestic  in  its  utterance,  is  further  illustrated  by  the  following
composition,  which  came  through  my  hand  automatically,  far  into  the
dead  of  night,  as  I  lay  in  a  passion  of  self-abasement  on  my  bed  in
the  hotel.

The  love  of  the  past  hath  been  darkness,  the  love  of  the  future  shall  be
light !  The  power  of  all  flesh  is  love,  and  the  light  of  all  flesh  is  love  !
My  love  shall  cover  the  great  mountains  !  My  love  shall  rule  the  seas
as  with  a  rod  of  power  !  My  love  shall  be  the  strength  of  the  Day,
and  my  love  shall  be  the  curtain  of  the  Darkness  !  My  love  shall  inhabit
the  earth,  and  my  love  shall  save  all  flesh  !  My  love  shall  be  thy  father
and  thy  motlier,  and  my  love  shall  be  thy  love  !  My  love  is  the  sun  in  its
strength,  and  the  flowei's  breathe  my  love  !  The  stars  rejoice  in  my  love,
and  my  love  shall  fill  all  things  with  my  glory  !  I  love  the  man  whose  heart
is  broken,  and  I  love  the  woman  whose  sorrow  is  the  cup  of  her  peace  !
I  love  the  man  who  is  poor,  and  the  man  who  is  filled  with  the  joys


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


287


of  life  1  I  love  the  man  who  shall  not  love  me,  and  I  love  the  man
who  loves  me  !  I  love  the  darkness,  for  the  darkness  shall  be  light  !
I  love  the  terror,  for  I  love  the  peace  !  I  love  the  beauty  of  man,  and  I
love  the  sadness  of  man  !  I  love  the  uia-est  of  man,  and  I  love  the
peace  of  man  !  I  love  the  peace,  and  I  love  the  sorrow  !  I  love  the  joy,
and  I  love  the  terror  !  I  love  the  praise,  and  I  love  the  curse  !  I  love  the
man  whose  ways  are  dark,  and  I  love  the  man  whose  ways  ai'e  light !
I  love  the  love  of  hope,  and  I  love  the  love  of  love  !  I  love  the  day  of
mourning,  and  I  love  the  day  of  joy  !  I  love  the  love  of  pleasure,  and  I
love  the  love  of  pain  !  I  love  the  man  v/ho  steals,  and  I  love  him  from
whom  he  hath  stolen  !  I  love  the  man  who  kills,  and  I  love  the  man
who  is  slain  !  I  love  the  world,  for  the  world  is  mine,  and  the  truth  of  all
things  is  love  !

To  substantiate  the  fact  that  the  psycho-automatism  can  give —
viva  voce  as  well  as  by  automatic  chirography — expression  to  concep-
tions embodying  the  same  antithetic  principle  of  reiterative  deific
pei'sonification^  I  append  the  following  seventy-five  words  : —

I  have  heard  the  roar  of  cities  !  I  have  heard  the  music  of  the
woodlands  !  I  have  heard  the  tears  of  the  nations  as  they  fell  !  I  have
heard  the  songs  of  the  nations  as  they  rose  !  I  have  heard  the  roar  of  the
death  of  the  man  who  was  slain  in  battle  !  I  have  heard  the  shout  of
the  victor  ! I  have  heard  the  new  word,  and  I  have  heard  the  old  word  !

It  is  for  the  reader  to  decide  whether  or  no  the  above  phrases  can
be  construed  as  being  in  any  way  explanatory  of  the  transcendental
basis  of  the  woi'ld  as  a  sum  of  phenomena.  They  are  beyond  my
comprehension.  Whether  or  no  they  proceed  telepathically  from  the
living  or  dead ;  or  whether  they  proceed  from  some  transcendental
subject,  which  is  a  sort  of  deific  representation  of  that  which  con-
tains the  grounds  of  cosmical  phenomena  according  to  unknown  and
transcendental  laws,  I  cannot  make  deposition  to.  I  do  not  know.
"Whilst  on  my  return  trip  to  New  York  City,  my  first  experience  in
clairaudience  was  given.  I  was  sleeping,  and  suddenly  awakened  by
a  voice  shouting  in  my  ear  the  words  :  "  The  enthusiasm  shall  fill
the  hearts  of  the  multitude  in  the  place  of  the  houi's  of  the  day  !  "
In  subsequent  dreams  came  such  sentences  as  :  "  It  shall  take  two
birds  to  carry  thee,  my  son."  "  Blessed  are  they  who  always  obey
themselves."  The  latter  sentence  I  saw  in  my  dream,  in  English
characters,  among  a  number  of  ideographs  on  an  Egyptian  slab  of
stone.

From  the  foregoing  it  is  evident  that,  in  its  incipiency,  the  pheno-
menon differed  from  that  of  a  dedouhlement  de  la  jyersofinalite,  in  that
it  did  not  appear  to  be  a  ease  of  "  subliminal  consciousness  "  on  the
one  hand,  or  a  supra-normal  intellectual  faculty  on  the  other,  but
distinctly  that  of  a  purely  extraneous  psyclio-physical  spontaneity  or

u


288


Albert  Le  Baron.


automatism.  It  was  psychic,  for  it  presented  conceptions ;  it  was
physical,  for  it  presented  sense  intuitions ;  it  was  spontaneous  and
atitomaiic,  for  it  acted  independently  of  the  usual  trend  of  motor
phenomena  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  wilful  intelligence  as  used
in  ordinary  experience  on  the  other.  This  it  automatically  continued
to  do  until  later  on  in  my  experience,  when  I  believed  myself  to  be
so  completely  en  ra2)port  with  it  that  I  considered  the  spontaneity
practically  identical  with  and  in  perfect  accord  with  the  actions  of
my  own  will.  From  this  point  on,  there  was  a  gradual  diminution
in  the  character  of  the  manifestations.

Just  so  long  as  I  assented  to  its  absolute  objectivity,  my  emotions
and  feelings  were  all  dramatically  influenced  to  joy  or  grief  by  the
appearance  of  its  conceptions.  It  was  unquestionably  true  that  if
interests  could  be  predicated  of  the  cause  of  the  psycho-automatism,
those  interests  were  always  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  physical  jjleasure  on
a  low  plane.  How  my  suffering  could  be  in  any  sense  an  advantage
to  the  cause  of  this  psycho-automatism,  save  as  a  means  of  getting  me
into  a  more  sensitive  condition,  I  do  not  know.  And  yet  my  experi-
ence repeatedly  taught  me  that  a  complete  self-surrender  to  the  psycho-
automatism,  as  a  deific  telepathic  ideal,  resulted  in  the  communication
of  a  loftier  flow  of  verbiage  And,  as  a  distinct  mode  of  consciousness,
the  psycho-mystic  mode  now  ranked,  in  my  own  experience,  as  the
causa  sine  qua  7ion  of  a  definite  form  of  religion.

The  automatism  repeatedly  urged  me  to  take  long  Journeys,  which,
judging  from  my  past  experience  in  obeying  it,  I  have  no  doubt  would
have  I'esulted  in  gifts  of  deific  verbiage,  and  other  phenomena,  if  I  had

obeyed. It  told  me  to  be  in  on  the  30th  of  December,  1894,  and

I  should  receive  a  reward,  but  I  did  not  go.  It  told  me  to  go  and  see
the  Emperor  of  China,  but  I  did  not  go.  It  told  me  to  go  to  Seville,
Spain,  but  I  did  not  go.  The  only  reason  I  could  account  for  its
perpetual  desire  for  me  to  take  such  journeys  was  that  it  seemed  to
know  that  my  nervous  system  transmitted  better  when  I  was  in  a
"  worked-up  "  condition  when  coming  and  going.  Expectation  or
disappointment  threw  me  into  the  more  sensitive  condition  essential  to
its  manifestation.

Speaking  in  Unknown  Tongues.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe  that  a  deific  style  of  verbiage  is
necessarily  relative,  and  that — as  mere  sound — the  neighing  of  a  pony
is  more  musical  to  my  ear  than  for  a  man  to  utter  deific  conceptions  to
me  in  a  language  I  know  nothing  about.  On  Sunday  morning,
September  30th,  1894,  I  had  my  first  experience  in  "speaking  in
unknown  tongues,"  at  my  residence  in  the  suburbs  of  New  York  City.
I  had  been  conversing  with  the  psycho-automatism  the  night  previous,


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


289


and  up  to  that  time  had  received  sufficient  deific  verbiage,  one  way  and
the  other,  to  make  a  small  book.  Suddenly,  whilst  conversing  with  it
in  my  bedroom  on  Sunday  morning,  it  changed  abruptly  off  from
English  into  unintelligible  sounds  resembling  a  foreign  tongue,  and
which,  had  I  not  been,  as  I  think,  pretty  level-headed  at  the  time,  I
should  have  construed  as  a  mental  state  patliognomic  of  mania.  And
yet  I  was  not  sufficiently  "at  myself"  to  immediately  seize  pencil  and
pad  and  write  down  the  sounds.  When  T  subsequently  asked  of  the
psycho-automatism  for  a  translation,  among  others  I  received  the  two
following  : —

The  Darkness  to  Egypt.

I  have  seen  all  thy  ways,  O  son  of  the  Nile  ! I  have  heard  all  thy  songs,

0  son  of  the  Nile  !  I  have  listened  to  all  thy  woes,  O  son  of  the  Nile  !  I
have  been  with  thee,  O  son  of  the  Nile  !  I  have  been  near  thee  when  thy
days  were  full  of  glory.  I  have  been  near  thee  when  thy  days  were  covered
in  sadness.  I  have  heard  thy  voice,  O  son  of  Egypt  !  I  have  counted  thy
tears,  O  son  of  Egypt  ! I  have  heard  thy  voice  of  wailing,  O  son  of  Egypt !

1  have  watched  thee  when  thy  men  of  might  have  flown  ;  I  have  watched
thee  when  thy  glory  has  faded  ;  I  have  watched  thee  when  thy  sun  has  set ;
I  have  watched  thee,  O  son  of  the  Nile  !  Thy  tears  have  been  my  tears  ;  thy
joys  have  been  my  joys  ;  thy  woes  have  been  my  woes.  0  son  of  the  Nile,
I  love  thee  !  O  son  of  the  Nile,  I  love  thee  !  My  heart  yearns  for  the  days
of  thy  glory.  My  heart  opens  to  thy  heart.  O  son  of  the  Nile,  how  I  love
thee  !  Thy  sands  are  now  the  way  of  the  stranger  ;  thy  plains  are  now  the
path  of  the  poor  ;  thy  fields  are  now  the  wastes  of  the  day.  Thy  hope  is
gone  ;  thy  day  has  fled  ;  thy  years  are  gone.  O  son  of  Escypt,  I  have  loved,
loved,  loved,  loved  thee  !  Thy  day  shall  rise  again.  Thy  hope  shall  dawn,
thy  sun  shall  shine,  thy  love  shall  be  mine,  thy  tears  shall  flow,  thy  hope
shall  dawn,  thy  flowers  shall  bloom  again.  Thy  palaces  shall  rise  again,  thy
dream  shall  live  again.  Thy  years  shall  be  years  of  joy,  thy  triumph  shall  be
the  triumph  of  peace,  thy  walks  shall  ring  with  new  songs,  thy  hopes  shall
dawn  with  new  stars,  thy  rivers  shall  flow  with  new  life  ;  thy  heavens  shall
blaze  with  new  light.  Thy  hope  is  my  hope,  thy  coming  is  my  coming.  I
am  he  who  loved  thee  ;  T  am  he  who  kissed  thy  lips  ;  I  am  he  who  in  thy
great  hour  was  thine.  I  love  thee,  I  love  thee,  I  love  thee  ;  O  son  of  Egypt,
I  love  thee  !  When  thy  day  shall  rise  again,  I  will  be  thy  guide  ;  when  thy
hour  shall  dawn  again,  I  will  be  thy  love  ;  when  thy  morn  sliall  rise  again,  I
will  be  thy  sun  ;  when  thy  life  shall  flow,  I  will  be  thy  heart  ;  when  thy  love
shall  beat,  I  will  be  thy  breast  ;  when  thy  womb  shall  hear  thy  young,  I  will
be  thy  guide  ;  when  thy  life  shall  ebb  again,  I  will  be  thy  life  ;  when  thy
star  shall  go  to  rest,  I  will  be  tliy  night  ;  when  thy  love  shall  be  thy  day,  I
will  be  thy  love.  O  son  of  Egypt,  I  have  loved  thee  !  Thy  way  has  been
long  ;  thy  path  has  been  dark  ;  thy  woes  have  been  many  ;  tliy  tears  have
been  as  the  sand. I  love  thee  ! I  love  thee  ! I  love  thee  !

The  other  translation  embodied,  among  other  things,  the  following
relatively  intelligible  sentences,  which,  as  I  wrote  them  down,  according

V  2


290


Albert  Le  Baron.


to  the  sou7ids,  are  as  enigmatical  to  me  as  the  purported  foreign
tongue  from  which  they  assumed  to  be  a  translation  : —

Son  of  Peru— of  Gerro — of  Terro — of  Tichaperu — Terra — Terra — of
Pesuro — of  Tepecutu — of  Teruto — Zeereelu — Instopan — of  Zeecorila —
Sceucru.  Greeting  :  I  have  come  through  these  of  mine — I  have  come — I
have  come  ! Eros,  Eros,  Eros.

The  intelligibility  of  the  first  translation,  at  least,  the  a  priori
cognitive  content  of  the  translated  sentences  assured  me  that  the
unintelligible  sounds  were  not  necessarily  pathognomic  of  mania,  but
like  the  repeated  requests  to  take  journeys,  were  another  stratagem  to
keep  me  in  a  "  vvorked-up  "  condition  of  expectation  or  disappointment
essential  to  its  manifestations.  If,  cceteris  pfw^5MS,  such  was  its
object,  it  succeeded  admirably,  and  here,  again,  arose  the  temptation
to  yield  a  facility  of  credulous  assent  to  the  opinion  that  I  was
speaking  a  language  known  to  jue  previously,  on  the  hypothesis  of  the
pre-existence  of  the  soul.  This  for  a  time  I  believed.  In  my
attempt  to  demonstrate  this  I  exerted  an  immense  amount  of  philo-
logical energy,  as  Professor  William  James  and  Dr.  Hodgson  can
testify.  On  Monday,  October  1st,  1894,  I  left  my  home  in  the
suburbs  of  New  York  City  for  the  town  of  Levanna,  IST.Y.  In  room
12  of  the  hotel  and  on  Monday  night,  came  the  following  messages
in  "  unknown  tongues  "  together  with  the  interpretations  : —

The  Unknown  Tongue. — Te  rumete  tau.  Ilee  lete  leele  luto  scele.
Impe  re  scele  lee  luto.  Onko  keere  scete  tere  lute.  Ombo  te  scele
te  here  te  kure.  Sinte  te  lute  sinte  Kuru.  Orumo  imbo  impe  rute
scelete. Singe,  singe,  singe,  eru. Imba,  Imba,  Imba.

The  Translation. — The  old  word  !  I  love  the  old  word  of  the  heavens  !
The  love  of  the  heavens  is  emperor  !  The  love  of  the  darkness  is  slavery  !
The  heavens  are  wise,  the  heavens  are  true,  the  heavens  are  sure.  The  love
of  the  earth  is  past  ! The  King  now  rules  in  the  heavens  !

Unknouni  Tongue. — Etce  ce  Tera.  Lute  te  turo  scente.  Inke  runo
tere.  Scete  inte  telee  turo.  Oru  imbe  impe  iste.  Siinpe,  Simpe,
Simpe.

Trandatlon.. — Love  now  has  been  sent  !  The  light  of  the  earth  !  The
joy  of  the  day  ! Tlie  light  of  all  the  world  !

Unhiioivn  Tongue. — Puree  otee  Sincalee.  Siutee  teef  eenotef
teeotsepo.  Teeoseeton  guopeson.  Oto  te  pere  te  ture,  te  tere,  te
stere,  te  tinke,  te  lutetum. Ombo,  Ombo,  Ombo.

Translation. — Tlie  light  of  the  day  has  now  come  !  The  darkness  has
gone  ! The  love  of  earth,  of  air,  of  darkness,  of  night  is  no  more  !

Unknoivn  Tongue. — Egypto. — Mome  su  u  Ra. Ere  mete  su  onko
inte. A  ma  tu  telee. Oumbe  te  senete  su  u  Ra. Inter  pelee  te  tete.


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


291


Ombo  O  sceuntri.  Inteneo  duru  sinte.  Mome  su  u  Ra.  Seiie  tu
te  skule.  Ombo  telute  tene  tui-o  iuko.  Impe  telute  omko  sinke  tinke
devuda.  Ombededo  dene  sinte  lepo.  Olumono  teme  setre  comto.
Mome  su  u  Ra.  Entenke  tele  mete  tura  obde  sinte  tulepe.  Onite  tete
leste  dinke  itelete.  Mome  su  u  Ra.  Indude  dinke  lutesin,  Amen
Ra,  Amen  Ra,  Amen  Ra.

Translation. — O  son  of  Ra  I  I  have  come  to  thee  !  The  truth  has  come  !
I  have  come,  0  son  of  Ra  !  See  the  truth  in  me  1  The  truth  is  not  of
darkness,  O  son  of  Ra  !  I  will  teach  thee  !  I  will  tell  thee  of  the  light  !
The  light  is  all  that  I  will  teach  thee  !  The  truth  shall  lead  thee  1  It  shall
be  all  that  shall  lead  thee,  O  son  of  Ra  !  The  truth  has  long  been  hidden
from  thee  !  The  light  has  been  small !  Darkness  has  been  thine,  O  son  of
Ra  ! In  the  truth  the  love  is  known  ! The  pure  sun  !

Unhnoivn  Tongue. — Intelete  te  intelute.  Bule  te  skuru  te  sinte
omkoton.  Stinte  te  lete  ode  tinka  oug.  Lepe  lute  impe  sute  compo
intope.  Lute  su  empri.  Lute  lu  lelee  inkapon.  Instute  te  binka-
long  te  pelee  te  obde  de  pere.  Bolotele  te  sinte.  Inde  tere  somte
compo.  Feme  tu  stimele  inkepe.  Surume  tome  lete  skuru.  Istepe
tompo  dere  ombo  luto  lutostou. Amen  Ra,  Amen  Ra,  Amen  Ra.

Translation. — The  book  of  the  jjast  is  not  the  book  of  the  love  !  It  is
the  song  of  the  sadness  !  The  great  light  has  come  to  help  the  darkness  !
Love  is  emperor  !  Love  is  the  light  of  the  darkness  1  The  home  of  the
poor  is  the  palace  of  love  I  All  the  light  is  love  !  All  the  earth  shall  be
light !  All  tlie  darkness  shall  be  light  !  All  the  light  shall  be  darkness  !
The  love  of  all  things  shall  be  the  light  of  all  things  ! Pure  light  !

Unknown  Tongue. — De  Bedeouins.  Scele  ce  ompo.  Ilee  te  tere
simpee.  Orumee  tereme  scele.  Orumeto  te  scelo  te  rume.  Rene
mene  te  scele.  Ire  scelete  sceluto.  Keputuro  sceletis.  Simerete  te
scele.  Intemete  te  colope.  Erete  esimpe  sonte.  Samarata  et  te
lute.  Eru  de  lute  de  sumbos.  Indodede  scele  erumo.  Orumoro
impe  iste. Scele  poloto  arimo. Imba,  Imba,  Imba.

Translation. — Light  is  omnipotent  !  To  love  the  darkness  is  simple  !  I
have  brought  the  light  I  I  have  lighted  the  heavens  !  The  Darkness  of  the
Heavens  shall  pass  !  I  adore  the  great  heavens  !  The  Darkness  has  gone  !
The  light  is  simple  !  The  Glory  has  come  !  The  one  has  ruled  I  I  love  the
Sarah  of  old  !  I  love  the  day  of  the  symbols  !  The  heavens  are  now  aflame  I
The  morning  has  come  1 The  night  is  polluted  !

Unknown  Tongue. — Esteru  Combo.  Esteelee  te  teme  te  skomo  te
turo  impe.  Impe  ikke  te  turo  teto.  Repe  tete  inke.  De  gurumbo
de  tete.  Itru  re  simpe  te  compo.  Lite  te  polote.  Erim  de  .stere  te
tau.  Repe  tete  institi.  De  bulo  de  ruro  de  dere.  Instipiti  te  com.
Omboro  de  pemeste.  Rume  debe.  Ororde  de  sumpto.  Interule  de
combo.  Inke  rule  ruletee.  Simbaletee  te  tokan.  Tinke  te  rulee
tete.  Ikombo  de  sceninkee.  Sere  te  combo  de  elee.  Indo,  Indo,
Indo.


292


Albert  Le  Baron.


Translation. — I  have  heard  !  I  see  !  I  understand  !  Understand,  and
see,  and  hear  !  I  see  !  See  the  end  I  The  Darkness  doth  see  !  The  Light
doth  see  !  He  hath  finished  the  Darkness  !  I  see  the  pollution  !  The  only
light  has  come  !  I  see  it  all  !  The  book,  the  truth,  the  word  !  The  truth
has  come  !  The  Day  has  dawned  !  Darkness  flies  !  The  way  is  Gi'eat !
The  thought  has  come  and  the  Day  !  The  symbol  has  passed  !  The  fact  is
here  ! I  have  come  to  see  you  ! I  have  come  to  love  you  !

Unknown  Tongue. — Ingrujiuto  Cepetuotef.  Sentefopleson  leme
teme  tome. Intersperopston  stefoeton. Ilu,  Ilu,  Ilu.

Translation. — The  light  has  been  sent  to  me  !  The  liglit  shall  come  to
you  !

Unknown  Tongue. — Bode  lute  compokon  su  me  tote  se  bute
lomele.  Ilu  impte  tutete  compete.  Sere  muto  tompe.  Boomo  tepe
iste  olo  tene.  Istrune  te  poto  lotete.  Bete  ponko  tseste  letelo.  Bute
pinkete  ofsto  sute  lute.  Lute  compte  luteson.  Pileto  sintere  luteto.
Bule  tule  links  ompto  dicele.  Inste  luton  crito  pomero.  Interstele
tele  produmo  lute  mute  sinkeru  ompto.  Sinketeru  lute  tete  picketu
simpetu. Sitituti,  Sitituti,  Sitituti.

Translation. — I  have  now  brought  you  the  word  of  light  !  The  love  is
the  love  of  the  Day  !  The  Day  is  of  the  Love  !  The  coming  of  all  things
are  near  !  The  instrument  is  of  the  word-man.  The  power  is  with  the
word-man  !  The  joy  is  of  the  love  !  The  great  love  of  the  Love- Man  !
The  love  of  the  Great-Love-Man.  The  book  will  tell  you  of  all  the  Love
Greatness!  The  Light  of  the  Power  is  the  Love  of  all  things!  l~he  Love
is  produced  by  the  great  light  of  all  things  !  All  the  Light  must  come  from
the  Great  Light !

In  the  attempt  subsequently  to  explain  the  foregoing  "  foi'eign
tongues  "  I  arranged  nine  difi'erent  theories  from  which  the  reader
may  take  his  choice.

First  Theory. — The  sentences  are  all  the  work  of  a  powerful
unconscious  imagination  and  the  sentences  do  not  possess  the  natural
consonantal  and  vowel  elements  of  a  language  at  all.

Second  Theory. — They  are  brand  new  ideas  in  old  and  foreign
verbal  husks,  the  forms  of  which  were  latent  in  the  man's  sub-
consciousness at  birth.

Third  Theory. — The  consonantal  and  vowel  combinations  are  but
the  articulate  shells  of  very  ancient  ideas  latent  in  this  man's  sub-
consciousness at  birth,  but  out  of  the  shells  of  which  the  meanings
have  been  eaten  up  or  metamorphosed  by  some  at  present  unknown
law  of  mental  evolution,  but  are  not  now  to  be  considered  as  ideas
at  all.

Fourth  Theory. — They  are  none  of  the  foregoing,  but  ai'e  new  and
actual  presentations  of  real  and  new  ideas  in  a  foreign  tongue.


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


293


Fifth  Theorij. — They  are  none  of  the  foregoing,  but  a  ludicrous  and
silly  mistake  of  the  man's  imagination  allied  to  some  species  of
humorous  hallucination  and  are  not  to  be  considered  seriously,  or  they
are  a  perjury,  or  a  ghastly  jest,  or  a  very  pi'ofound  mental  trick,  or  the
loose  jargon  of  a  maniac.

Sixth  Theory. — They  are  none  of  the  foregoing,  but  are  a  species  of
scientific  telepathy,  and  the  consonantal  and  vowel  combinations  come
from  some  morally  indifferent,  sublimely  good,  or  awfully  naughty
source,  and  which  is  subject  to  the  will  of  the  man.

Seventh  Theory. — Notwithstanding  he  says  he  never  knew  or  heard
these  consonantal  and  vowel  combinations  before  he  uttered  them,  he
may  be  in  some  very  mysterious  way  deceiving  himself.

Eighth  Theory. — That  it  may  not  be  beyond  human  l>elief  that  he
is  unconsciously  in  possession  of  a  similar  principle  of  intuitive
linguistic  power  said  to  be  possessed  at  this  day  by  the  higher  adepts
of  India,  or  the  Grand  Lama  of  Thibet^  or  the  Rosicrucians,  by  the
means  of  which  an  unknown  language  is  spoken  by  purely  intuitive
processes  unknown  to  the  analysis  of  western  mental  philosophy.

Ninth  Theory. — That  these  consonantal  and  vowel  combinations
and  their  intuitive  vocal  adjustments  may  be  startling  scientific  hints
of  mental  forces  latent  in  everybody,  and  which  if  studied,  generalised,
verified,  systematised,  and  seriously  investigated  by  philosophers  might
prove  of  incalculable  benefit  to  the  human  race,  but  which  could  find
no  encouragement  for  expression  in  the  nineteenth  centuiy  because  of
the  fierce  and  mocking  intolerance  of  the  conservative  dogmas  of  the
age.

My  instinct  of  self-preservation  urges  me  to  publish  these  theories
simply  to  assure  those  who  have  new  ones  that  my  larder  is  full  for  the
present,  and  I  don't  need  them.

The  foregoing  "foreign"  paragraphs  are  not  all  that  were  given  by
any  means,  but  I  have  given  enough  to  indicate  to  the  reader  the
phonetic  principle  employed  by  the  psycho-automatism  in  keeping  me
in  touch  with  itself,  and  in  the  "  worked-up  "  condition  essential  to  its
manifestation.  When  it  ceased  giving  me  prose,  it  gave  poetry  in
"  unknown  tongues."  As  the  foreign  verbiage  came  viim  voce,  I
pencilled  it  down,  mostly  in  an  archaic  mono-phonetic  form,  and  the
subsequent  blending  into  diphonetic  and  other  forms  was  governed  by
the  principle  of  conjectural  euphony.  In  the  poems  the  number
of  feet  in  a  line  was  grasped  by  the  recurring  of  the  sound  synonyms.
In  a  large  number  of  cases  where  the  letter  c  had  the  sound  of  s,  I
used  the  letter  s.  In  the  foregoing  paragraphs  I  occasionally  used  two
ee's  to  convey  the  long  sound  of  a  single  e.  In  my  later  writing
down  of  the  verbiage  the  sound  of  hard  c  was  shown  by  the  letter  k.


294


Albert  Le  Baron.


As  an  illustration  of  the  kind  of  poetry  given  viva  voce  by  the
psycho-automatism,  I  append  the  following  poem  with  its  translation  : — •

Ede  pelute  kondo  nedode
Igla  tepete  konipto  pele
Impe  odode  inguru  lalele
Omdo  resene  okoro  pododo
Igme  odkondo  nefulu  kelala
Nene  pokonto  sefo  lodelu
Impe  telala  feme  olele
Igde  pekondo  raog  japate
Rele  pooddo  ogsene  lu  mano.

I  have  been  looking,  looking  for  daylight.

Ages  have  flown  and  the  years  have  grown  dark  ;
Over  the  hilltops  the  sun  is  now  shining.

Far  from  the  sky  comes  the  song  of  the  lark.
Beauty  is  dawning,  the  darkness  is  passing.
Far  up  the  vales  fly  the  songs  of  the  light.
Into  the  cities  the  joy  will  be  spreading.
Into  the  by-ways  the  light  will  be  spread  ;
Glory  has  come  to  the  lost  son  of  man  !

For  me  to  quote  the  entire  poem  with  the  "foreign  tongue"
precedent,  would  occupy  no  less  than  272  lines.  As  a  further
illustration,  howevei^,  of  the  phonetic  principle  employed  by  the  psycho-
automatism  to  keep  me  in  a  "  worked  up  "  state,  I  append  a  list  of
foreign  words  from  a  note-book  containing  talks  in  "  unknown
tongues  "  beginning  the  first  weeks  in  October,  1894,  and  closing  the
last  week  in  April,  1895.

A  very  large  per  cent,  of  the  words  I  subsequently  traced  in  a
vocabulary  of  primitive  Dravidian,  or  British  Indian,  non-Aryan
languages.

Aru,  aar,  ama,  arde,  adaba,  asode,  asopan,  arimo,  angora,  barabu,  bade,
bade,  bete,  heme,  here,  belu,  befo,  belo,  beja,  beod,  bepo,  bela,  bil'e,
butabon,  bings,  bode,  bote,  bola,  bodo,  bomo,  bondo,  boda,  hobo,  bolo,
bono,  hood,  brote,  bume,  boid,  bute,  bale,  bulo,  bubo,  bubu,  bulu,
blublu,  buto,  baba,  beto,  botu  ;  ce,  cele,  condo,  comtin,  compe,  coere,
cojnbo,  crito,  confebo,  confo,  cimbale  ;  dape,  dara,  de,  debo,  dede,  defu,
defood,  dako,  dekon,  dikeado,  dekan,  dege,  debe,  dole,  dela,  delu,  dera,
depin,  depe,  deso,  deme,  dehdu,  delo,  delu,  delule,  delute,  demo,  deog,  depu,
derne,  dinke,  dinbe,  dode,  doig,  dobo,  doja,  do'me,  domo,  dolu,  dope,  dolo,
do'se,  doog,  dongo,  dorure,  dote,  do'le,  do're,  do'ong,  du,  dudo,  dudu,
dudedu,  du'de,  dububo,  du'ing,  dubudu,  du'le,  dubu,  ducelu,  duru,  dubuing,
dutitu  ;  EE,  EEE,  erne,  ede,  ege,  edu,  elu,  ese,  ene,  ele,  ete,  eis,  eru,  edko,
efrn,  este,  egle,  egpe,  eglu,  erini,  ebede,  eklou,  edda,  edebo,  edede,  edebe,
edeba,  emete,  etepe,  efcutu,  egotes,  egtore,  egsuro,  egypto,  esimpe,  ecemete,
edelude,  edelute,  edeputo,  ebedebede  ;  fara,  fatu,  fadumba,  fapeme,  falu,


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


295


fala,  fano,  fajo,  fao,  fape,  fado,  faton,  fapa,  fako,  fakon,  facre,  faja,  fale,
falute,  falale,  faidme,  fase,  faod,  fare,  faig,  feme,  feja,  fele,  fedon,  fepo,  felo,
fejo,  feto,  feno,  felu,  fekum,  fetan,  fekan,  fela,  feoglo,  fekondo,  feredo,
fiule,  fole,  foid,  fola,  fodo,  folo,  fote,  fose,  fode,  fobo,  fota,  foja,  fojs,  fofu,
folo,  foko,  fopo,  foso,  foto,  fope,  foka,  fomo,  fondo,  fore,  food,  fokon,  fosan,
foigre,  foloda,  folecon,  fosonko,  fonoto,  folale,  fuki,  fuka,  futu,  fute,  fuja,
fule,  fupe,  fuk^lo,  fulela,  fukodo,  fulo,  fure,  fuma,  fating,  fupon,  fukolo,
furo.

As  the  tracing  out  of  the  phonetic  forms  through  the  entire
alphabet  would  be  a  bore  to  any  one  but  a  linguist,  the  foregoing
may  suffice  for  illustrative  purposes.  I  visited  other  towns,  and
received  viva  voce  enough  additional  verbiage  at  the  hotels  I  stopped
at  to  make  several  chapters.  I  abandoned  my  experiments  about
the  end  of  April,  1895.  This  was  due  to  the  fact,  primarily,  that  I
could  not,  and  did  not  substantiate  the  verbiage  as  an  actual
language,  although  I  could  trace  out  a  very  large  number  of  words
in  actual  use  among  the  non-Aryan  tribes  of  British  India.  Balfour's
"  Cyclopoedia  of  British  India  "  put  me  on  the  track  of  a  number  of
words,  also  Hunter's  vocabulary  of  the  non-Aryan  tribes.  That
there  are  some  laws  in  mystic  psychology  not  yet  understood  goes
without  saying.  That  there  exists  some  mental  source,  defined  as  a
psycho-automatism,  with  which  man  is  capable  under  certain  con-
ditions of  putting  himself  en  rapport,  has  been  abundantly  proven  by
the  praiseworthy  efforts  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  ;  and
if  my  desperate  plunge  at  the  problem  ended  in  a  seeming  negationy
it  was  not  due  to  any  lack  of  persistency  on  my  part.


[At  the  General  Meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  on  April  2Ith,  1896,  when
the  above  paper  was  read,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  made  the  following-
remarks  upon  the  case,  which,  at  Mr.  Le  Baron's  request,  are  here
reprinted. — Ed.]

Mr.  Le  Baron's  experiences  are  of  especial  interest  as  filling  a  gap
that  had  remained  for  some  time  open  in  the  symmetrical  series  of
cases  which  show  the  progress  of  each  class  of  automatic  verbalisation
from  insane  incoherence  to  supernormal  instructiveness.  In  each  of
the  other  forms  of  verbalisation  the  sei'ies  is  already  pretty  complete.
In  word-seeing  we  start  from  the  meaningless  and  terrifying  words  or
sentences  sometimes  seen  by  the  insane,  as  though  written  in  tire,
without  them  or  within  ;  we  pass  through  the  stage  of  words  seen  in
the  crystal  with  nothing  to  point  to  an  origin  external  to  the  seer's
mind ;  and  we  arrive  at  the  supernormal  phenomenon  of  the  sight  of
words  in  the  crystal  which  convey  facts  previously  unknown  to  the  seer.
Similarly  in  word-heaj-ing  we  start  from  the  delusions  of  madness,


296


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism


when  persecuting  voices  and  the  like  are  so  often  heard ;  we  go  on
to  interna]  auditions  of  a  monitory  kind,  which  may  well  proceed  from
the  auditor's  own  subliminal  self ;  and  finally  we  come  to  those
"  clairaudient  "  premonitions  which  imply  the  possession  of  a  wider
purview  than  the  automatist  himself  had  ever — to  his  own  supraliminal
knowledge — attained.  For  the  third  form  of  verbalisation, — word-
writing^ — the  continuous  series  from  insanity  to  inspiration  is  by  this
time  still  more  familiar  to  readers  of  our  Proceedings.  In  each  case  the
gradual  development  from  phenomena  below  into  phenomena  above  the
normal  standard  of  personality  seems  to  show  that  in  these  special
directions  the  personality  is  most  easily  modifiable  ;  and  that  subliminal
disturbances,  whether  dissolutive  or  evolutive,  ai-e  apt  to  come  to  the
surface  by  these  as  their  readiest  paths.  It  is  therefore  only  by  a  study
in  each  case  of  the  actual  messages  given  that  we  can  rightly  raids:  the
automatist,  either  as  insane,  or  as  merely  a  person  in  whom  subliminal
uprushes  are  unusually  facile,  or  as  a  man  in  some  sense  inspired  with
fuller  knowledge  than  other  men,  either  by  his  own  hidden  spirit,  or  by
spirits  without  him.

In  the  fourth  form  of  verbalisation, — word-idterance, — we  have
until  now  mainly  found  examples  of  the  lowest  and  the  highest  classes.
The  ceaseless  vociferation  of  mania  is  familiar  to  all ;  and  wonder  is
often  expressed  at  the  vigour  and  persistency  of  the  maniac's  utterance,
— far  surpassing  the  achievements  of  practised  public  speakers.  Then
at  the  other  end  of  the  scale  we  have  the  utterances  which  come
through  Mrs.  Piper,  in  wliich  (as  fresh  evidence  makes  increasingly
probable)  intelligences  other  than  Mrs.  Piper's  own  are  habitually
concerned.

But  for  intermediate  examples, — for  utterance  neither  insane  nor  in
■any  true  sense  inspired, — we  have  thus  far  had  to  fall  back  mainly  on
old  records.  Chief  of  these  have  been  the  accounts  of  the  Irvingite
speaking  with  tongues.  Next,  perhaps,  comes  a  little-known  work,
"Strange  Sermons  of  Rachel  Baker,"  which  contains  two  cases  of
sermonising  utterance  during  apparently  quite  genuine  sleep.  I  need
not  say  that  "  trance  addresses  "  are  quite  a  common  feature  in  spiritist
reunions.  In  the  very  few  cases  where  I  have  heard  these  public
addresses  under  supposed  inspiration,  I  have  felt  sure  that  the  speaker
was  in  full  possession  of  his  or  her  ordinary  consciousness.  But  I  think
it  very  probable  that  speeches  may  sometimes  be  genuinely  made  in  a
trance  state ; — which  would,  of  course,  be  no  more  wonderful  than  it  is
when  a  hypnotised  boy  at  an  entertainment  lectures  on  temperance
and  so  forth,  and  remembers  nothing  about  it  when  he  awakes.  The
trance  may  be  a  mere  self-hypnotisation ;  — and  such,  in  the  absence
from  the  speech  of  any  facts  unknown  to  the  speaker,  we  are  bound  to
•consider  it.


A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism.


297


But  among  all  these  strictly  automatic  vocalisations,  neither  insane
nor  inspired,  Mr.  Le  Baron's  case  is  the  fullest  and  most  instructive.  I
know  no  stronger  example  of  the  subjective  sense  of  genius,  or  rather
of  positive  inspiration,  accompanying  a  subliminal  uprush  of  absolutely
meaningless  matter.  Some  of  this  matter,  indeed,  was  meaningless
even  to  incoherence, — consisting  of  "  unknown  tongues,"  which  are
pretty  certainly  destined  to  remain  unknown.  One  cannot  but  note,
with  satisfaction  at  our  present  progress,  yet  with  deep  regret  at  the
sad  story  of  the  past,  the  different  way  in  which  these  so-called  tongues
were  treated  in  Irving's  time  and  in  our  own.  Several,  at  least,  of  the
speakers  with  tongues  in  Irving's  congregation  were,  I  have  no  doubt,
perfectly  sincere ;  and  Irving  himself  was,  as  all  know,  a  man  of
probity  and  elevation.  Yet  his  ignorance — his  unavoidable  ignorance
— of  the  phenomena  of  automatism  landed  him  and  his  flock  first  in
natural  mistake,  but  at  last  in  obstinate  credulity,  and  spoilt  the  close
of  a  noble  and  high  career.  In  Mr.  Le  Baron's  case,  on  the  other
hand,  the  automatist  himself  had  the  courage  and  candour  to  estimate
his  utterances  in  the  calm  light  of  science,  in  spite  of  strong  subjective
inducement  to  continue  to  assign  to  them  a  value  which  they  did  not
possess.  He  had  the  good  fortune,  I  need  hardly  add,  to  meet  with  a
wise  and  gentle  adviser,  and  the  phenomenon  which,  if  differently
treated,  might  have  led  on  to  the  delusion  of  many,  and  pei'haps  to  the
insanity  of  one,  became  to  the  one  a  harmless  experience,  and  to  the
world  an  acquisition  of  interesting  psychological  truth.  If  oui'  Society
shall  continue  thus  to  tend  to  convert  enthusiasm  into  science  and  peril
into  instruction,  it  will  not  have  existed  in  vain.


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


298  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.  [Supplement.


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

INVOLUNTARY  WHISPERING  CONSIDERED  IN  RELATION
TO  EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.
By  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.

In  a  pamphlet  of  60  pages,  published  in  Wundt's  Philosophische  Studien,
(Vol.  XL,  Part  4),  Messrs.  Lehmanii  and  Hansen,  of  Copenhagen,  give
the  results  of  a  series  of  experiments  in  what  they  call — the  term  seems
to  me  not  quite  exact — "involuntary  whispering";  and  on  the  basis  of
these  results,  they  endeavour  to  show  that  the  apparent  success  of  two
series  of  experiments  in  thought-transference  of  numbers,  recorded  in
these  Proceedings  (Vol.  VL,  pp.  128—170,  and  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  536—552),
may  be  explained  by  supposing  the  agent,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  to  have  un-
consciously whispered  the  numbers.  This  explanation  is  in  no  way  novel ;
in  fact,  attention  was  expressly  called  to  it  in  tlie  record  of  our  first  series
of  these  experiments,  Proceedings,  Vol.  VL,  p.  164-6.  We  there  speak  of
it  in  the  following  terms  : —

"It  is  necessary  to  examine  the  experiments  dealt  with  in  this  paper
with  anxious  care,  in  order  to  see  whether  there  was  any  possible  channel
of  sense  through  which  the  agent's  impression  could  have  reached  the
percipients."  We  show  briefly  tliat  "we  are  reduced  to  the  sense  of
hearing."  Then  we  say,  "There  seem  to  be  only  two  ways  in  which  the
impression  could  have  reached  the  percipient  through  his  ears — either  by
means  of  faint  unconscious  whispering  of  the  number  by  Mr.  Smith  in  the
eflfort  of  concentrating  his  attention  on  it,  or  by  means  of  faint  unconscious
counting  of  the  number  by  breathing,  or  some  other  rhythmical  movement
producing  sound.  ...  Of  the  two  supjjositions,  unconscious  whisper-
ing seems  the  less  improbable,  because  the  concentration  of  the  mind  on  a
written  or  printed  number,  with  a  view  to  having  as  intense  an  impression
of  it  as  possible,  is  found  to  cause  a  certain  tendency  to  say  the  number
mentally,  but  no  tendency  to  count  it."

We  had  then  in  view  "faint  unconscious  whispering"  as  the  least
improbable  explanation  of  our  results,  supposing  that  there  was  no  genuine
thought-transference.

At  the  same  time  I  fully  admit  tliat  the  exjDeriments  of  Messrs.  Lehmann
and  Hansen  have  placed  this  probability  in  a  new  light.

That  is,  they  have  certainly  proved  exjjerimentally — what,  in  our
discussion  we  -could  only  surmise  as  possible— that  a  number  of  two  digits
may  be  communicated  from  agent  to  jiercipient,  by  faint  whispering  with
closed  lips,  so  that  a  Ijystander  in  a  slightly  less  favourable  position  for
hearing  than  the  percipient  would  hear  no  sound  and  probably  observe  no
external  signs  of  movement  of  the  organs  of  speech.  I  say  "probably"
because  so  far  as  I  have  myself  been  able  to  imitate  these  experiments,  I


Supplement.]


Involuntary  Whispering.


299


should  say  that  if  the  observer  directed  his  attention  to  the  neck  and  throat
instead  of  the  lips,  he  could  hardly  fail  to  detect  such  signs  ;  but  unless  he
had  the  possibility  of  whispering  with  closed  lips  clearly  in  his  mind,  he
would  probably  consider  it  enough  to  watch  the  lips,  and  give  no  special
attention  to  the  neck  and  throat.

I  will  briefly  describe  the  experiments  of  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen.
They  placed  tw<:>  concave  s^aherical  mirrors  opposite  each  other,  the  distance
between  the  two  foci  being  two  metres  ;  so  that  when  the  head  of  the  agent
was  in  one  focus  and  the  head  of  the  percipient  in  the  other,  the  concentra-
tion of  the  sound  by  the  mirrors  might  be  a  substitute  for  the  hyperEesthesia
which  they  supposed  to  exist  in  the  hypnotised  subjects  of  our  experiments.
Under  these  conditions  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  attained  a  consider-
able degree  of  success  in  hearing  each  other's  (so-called)  ' '  involuntary "
whispering.  It  appears  to  me  that  "semi-voluntary"  would  be  a  better
term  than  "  involuntaiy, "  because  the  experimenters  were  conscious  of
giving  way  partially,  but  only  partially,  to  the  impulse  to  innervate  the
vocal  muscles  which  they  found  to  accompany  the  concentration  of  thought
on  a  definite  number.  (I  lay  stress  on  this,  because  my  own  experience  is
that  I  cannot  consciously  make  an  audible  whisper  which  is  in  any  degree
involuntary).  In  any  case  the  mouth  of  the  agent  was  firmly  closed  ;  and
we  are  told  that  "no  movements  of  the  lips  were  visible,  and  a  bystander
could  not  hear  any  sounds."  The  experimenters  do  not,  however,  give
any  record  of  systematic  observations  by  a  bystander,  or  state  where
he  was  placed  ;  they  merely  say  generally  that  ' '  all  this  was  confirmed  by
Herr  Buch,  an  assistant  of  the  laboratory,  who  was  once  (!)  present  at  the
experiments."  Accordingly,  in  performing  a  series  of  experiments  in  imita-
tion of  those  of  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen — but  omitting  the  apparatus
of  mirrors — I  paid  spiecial  attention  to  this  point.  I  found  that  it  was  quite
possible  for  an  observer,  fixing  his  gaze  on  the  agent's  mouth,  neither  to
hear  or  see  any  sign  of  a  whisper  at  a  distance  of  two  feet  from  the  agent,  while
the  percipient,  at  a  distance  which  varied,  but  was  ultimately  extended  to
18  inches — measured  from  the  agent's  mouth  to  the  percipient's  ear — heard
with  sufficient  distinctness  to  attain  a  considerable  amount  of  success  in
guessing.  The  whisperer  in  my  experiments  was  sometimes  my  wife,  and
sometimes  Miss  Johnson  ;  but  I  ought  to  say  that  in  both  cases — as  also  in
my  own  case  when  I  made  the  attempt — the  whispering  was  completely
voluntary  ;  we  could  none  of  us  detect  in  ourselves  the  slightest  tendency  to
the  semi-voluntary  whispering  described  by  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen.

At  the  same  time,  with  their  experience  before  us,  I  must  admit  it  to  be
possible  that  Mr.  Smith  may  have  whispered  unconsciously  in  such  a  manner
that— assuming  hypersesthesia  in  the  hypnotised  percipient — he  might  in
some  cases  have  been  heard  by  the  percipient  without  being  observed  by  his
fellow-investigators.  I  ought,  however,  to  say  that — as  stated  in  Proceedings,
Vol. VI.,  p.  165 — we  found  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  percipients  were  ever
hypertesthetic,  though  we  were  on  the  look-out  for  evidence  of  this.  I  must
say  further  that  I  see  no  reason  for  regarding  it  as  at  all  probable  that  Mr.
Smith  whispered  unconsciously,  since  (1 )  his  attention  had  been  caUed  to  the
danger  of  doing  so,  and  (2)  his  effort  was  concentrated  on  the  visualisation
of  the  number  ;  and  both  these  conditions  must,  it  would  seem,  tend  to


300


Professor  Henry  Siclgwick.


[Supplement.


prevent  involuntary  whispering.  Again,  the  experience  of  Messrs.  Lehmann
and  Hansen  gives  no  ground  for  the  supposition  that  unconscious  whispering
is  likely  to  be  unperceived  bj'  tlie  observers.  On  the  contrary,  Dr.  Hansen
expressly  says  that  "at  first  there  was  a  tendency  to  whisper  too  loud,"
which  had  to  be  "  half-consciously  "  checked;  and,  certainly,  the  process
of  whispering  with  closed  lips — which  they  ultimately  adopted  for  the
experiments — is,  according  to  our  experience,  a  markedly  artificial  one,
which  it  requires  some  practice  to  carry  out  successfully.  I  may  add  that  I
have  lately  made  further  experiments  in  thought-transference  of  numbers
with  Mr.  Smith  without  giving  him  any  hint  of  my  special  aim  in  so  doing  ;
in  which,  besides  listening  close  and  attentively,  I  have  concentrated  my
visual  observation  on  possible  signs  of  movement  in  the  submaxillary  region,
where  my  other  experiments  had  taught  me  to  look  for  them  ;  and  have  been
unable  to  detect  the  slightest  sign  of  a  whisper.  Nor  was  any  sound  of
whispering  detected  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  acted  as  percipient,  and  who  had
practised  herself  in  hearing  the  whispers  of  my  wife  and  Miss  Johnson.

Still,  in  spite  of  all  this,  unconscious  whispering  and  hyperaesthesia
combined  give  a  possible  explanation  of  the  results  of  our  experiments,  so  far
as  they  were  performed  with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room  :  and
accordingly  this,  on  our  principles,  would  have  to  be  accepted  as  the  most
probable  explanation,  if  experiments  of  this  kind  constituted  the  only
evidence  for  thought-transference. This  I  fully  admit.

The  contention  of  the  Danish  investigators,  however,  goes  considerably
further  than  this.  They  endeavour,  by  an  elaborate  comparison  of  the
unsuccessful  guesses  in  their  experiments  and  ours  respectively,  to  show
strong  positive  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  same  mode  of  communication
was  operative  in  both  cases.

This  part  of  their  argument  appears  to  me  quite  inconclusive.

They  made  altogether  500  experiments,  taking  the  parts  of  agent  and
percipient  alternately,  so  that  each  made  250  guesses.  The  experiments,
like  ours,  were  made  with  numbers  of  two  digits.  The  results  are  given  in  a
tabulated  form  in  their  i^aj^er,  and  we  have  reproduced  their  table  at  the  end
of  this  ijajDer  as  Table  A.  The  results  of  our  experiments,  which  they
compare  with  their  own,  were  given  in  a  similar  table  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  168.1  reproduce  the  essential  part  of  this  table  as  Table  B.
It  shows  how  often  each  numeral  (the  two  digits  being  counted  separately)
was  drawn,  and  all  the  guesses  that  were  made  for  it.  Comparing  the  two
sets  of  results,  they  endeavour  to  show  that  the  same  wrong  guesses  of  one
numeral  for  another — which  we  will  speak  of  as  "  substitutions  "—occur  in
both  Tables,  to  an  extent  that  renders  it  a  probable  inference  that  the  same
cause — whispering — was  operative  in  both  cases.  For  this  purpose,  they
comj)are  the  four  substitutions  made  most  frequently  for  each  numeral  in
the  two  cases.  The  result'^  shows  that  out  of  the  two  sets  of  40  substitutions
thus  compared,  28  are  common  to  the  two  sets.  (We  will  speak  of  these  as
"correspondences.")  This  is,  no  doubt,  an  amount  of  agreement  decidedly
in  excess  of  what  would  most  probably  occur  by  mere  chance.  But  a  glance
at  Tables  A.  and  B.  will  show  that  the  agreement  is  exaggerated. The  four

1  They  are  reproduced  in  Dr.  Lehtnann's  paper  as  Table  V.,  p.  486.
"  This  result  is  given  in  Dr.  Lehmann's  paper  as  Table  VI.,  p.  487.


Supplement.]


Involuntary  Whispering.


301


substitutions  most  frequently  made  for  each  numeral  are  not  determinate  ;
as  there  are  a  good  many  cases  in  each  Table  in  which  two  or  more  numerals
are  guessed  with  equal  frequency  for  another.  In  such  cases  of  equality  Dr.
Lehmann  has  uniformly  made  the  selection  most  favourable  to  the  conclusion
which  he  wishes  to  prove  ;  and  I  find  that  if  the  selection  had  been  made  on
the  opposite  principle,  his  total  of  correspondences  would  have  been  reduced
from  28  to  22^  This  much  diminishes  the  impressiveness  of  his  comparison  ;
and  its  effect  will,  I  think,  be  altogether  destroyed  by  a  simple  empirical  test
which  our  own  experiments  have  enabled  me  to  make.

Adopting  Dr.  Lehmann's  plan  of  comparison,  I  have  compared  the
thought-transference  experiments  of  Table  B.  with  a  series  of  experiments
in  which  we  may  assume  that  the  guesses  made  were  pure  guesses  and  had
no  relation  whatever,  other  than  accidental,  with  the  numbers  drawn.  The
series  thus  used  is  the  set  of  distant  experiments  with  Miss  B.  mentioned  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  547,  which  we  have  tabulated  below  in
Table  C.  In  these,  the  agent  and  percipient  were  either  in  different  build-
ings or  divided  from  one  another  by  at  least  two  closed  doors  and  a  passage.
The  number  of  experiments  tried  under  these  conditions  was  383  (that  is,
766  digits  guessed)  and  the  successful  guesses  (about  11  per  cent.)  were
clearly  due  to  mere  chance.  This  series,  compai-ed  with  the  thought-
transference  series  (Table  B.)  in  regard  to  the  substitutions  made  for  each
numeral,  gives  a  maximum  number  of  27  correspondences  and  a  minimum
number  of  25.  If  the  maximum  here  is  not  quite  so  much  above  the  average
as  in  the  comparison  of  the  series  of  Tables  A.  and  B.,  the  mininunn  is
more  so,  so  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  second  comparison  shows  a  less
close  agreement  between  the  two  series  compared  tlian  the  first.  Yet,  as  in
the  series  of  jDure  guesses  there  was  no  transfer  at  all,  the  cause  of  the  agree-
ment cannot  be  that  an  identical  mode  of  transfer  operated  in  both  series.^

So  far,  I  have  followed  Dr.  Lehmann  in  comparing  the  four  substitutions
for  each  numeral  which  occur  most  frequently  in  the  unsuccessful  guesses
in  the  two  sets  of  results.  But  I  do  not  think  tlie  plan  of  comparison  a
particularly  good  one  ;  because  it  requires  us,  in  some  cases,  to  include
substitutions  which  occur  hardly  oftener — or  even  in  some  cases  less  often  —
than  the  average  number  of  times  ;  and  it  does  not  seem  reasonable  to  try  to
infer  a  law  governing  the  substitutions  from  those  which  do  not  occur
decidedly  oftener  than  the  average. Let  us  turn  then,  to  enquire  whether

-  II  observe  that  Dr.  Lehmann  himself — when  comparing  these  experiments
with  a  set  of  numbers  arrived  at  through  imperfectly  apprehended  visual  impressions
— treats  22  correspondences  as  a  number  which  might  not  improbably  occur  by  chance.

2  I  need  not  go  into  the  more  elaborate  estimate  of  probabilities  given  by  Dr.
Lehmann  on  pp.  491 — 2,  because  the  method  used  is  fallacious.  The  improbability  of
the  fortuitous  occurrence  of  a  particular  number  and  arrangement  of  the  correspond-
ences in  question,  is  not  in  itself  a  measure  of  the  probability  that  the  cause  was  the
determination  of  the  two  series  compared  by  a  common  mode  of  transfer.  Tliis  can
be  seen  at  once  by  taking  an  extreme  case.  It  might  happen  tliat  there  were  no
correspondences  at  all.  The  probability  of  this  is,  of  course,  extremely  small,  viz.,
^^.5  Y",  or,  using  Dr.  Lehmann's  notation,  W.,i",  but  it  would  be  obviously

absurd  to  say  that  therefore  the  same  phonetic  laws  must  liave  operated  in  determining
the  two  series  compared.


302


Professor  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[Supplement


anything  can  l^e  inferred  from  a  comijarison  for  each  numeral  of  the  one
most  frequent  substitution.  The  following  table  shows  these  substitutions


Substitutions  in  Wluspered\
series  (A) ... ...  ...)

Substitutions in  Thought-"!

transference  series  (B)  ...J
Substitutions in series  of)

mere  guesses  (C)  J


For


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

5

3

5

5

6?

TV

5

3

4

5

5

3

2

3

6

7

2

3

3

3

3

5

4

3

6

5

2

5

3

3

Dr.  Lehmann  lays  great  stress  (p.  490)  on  the  fact  that  the  most  frequent
substitution  is  in  five  cases  common  to  the  thought-transference  series  and
the  whispered  series,  namely  5  for  1 ,  3  for  2,  6  for  5,  7  for  6,  and  3  for  8.
Two  of  these  are,  it  will  be  observed,  ambiguous,  6  and  7  being  guessed  with
equal  frequency  for  5,  and  7  and  5  for  6  in  the  whispered  series.  Still,
without  these  there  are  tliree  agreements.  The  aj^parent  significance  of  this
is,  however,  neutralised  when  we  observe  that  there  are  five  similar
correspondences  between  the  thought-transference  series  and  the  series  of
mere  guesses.

Another  way  of  comparing  would  be  to  take,  say,  the  ten  substitutions
most  often  made  in  the  whole  of  each  series. Tlaese  are  as  follows  : —


Whispering  (A)

Thought-transference  (B)

TJfcre  guessing  (C)

7  guessed  for  6,

20  times

3

guessed  for  8,

26  times

6

guessed  foi

5,

18  times

5  „

)  »

6,

20

5  )

2

„  3,

24

5  1

4

3,

17  „

5  „

?  ?

4,

17

)  •>

5

„  1,

22

J  )

3

» ? ? )

4,

17  „

5  „

5  )

7,

15

)  »

3

„  4,

22

)  »

3

51 >  »

1,

16  „

3  „

J  5

■-^)

13

>)

3

o

21

5

5  ) )  J

^)

16  „

5  „

)  ?

1,

12

)  1

1

„  4,

21

>  )

2

M 1  )

7,

16  „

3  „

i  >

8,

12

)  »

2

)) ;>  '^

21

1

>  )  ?)

5,

15  „

8  „

)  J

2,

11

3

„  1,

20

)  5

5

11 ?  >

7,

15  „

4  „

J  »

7,

11

6

„  5,

19

)  »

5

IT ?  J

s,

15  „

3  „

)  1

6,

10

5  i

2

,  1,

18

»  )

6

5  )  ?)

4,

141  „

1  Five  other  substitutions  occur  in  this  series  14  times.  The  one  selected  is  that
which,  taking  into  consideration  both  its  line  and  its  column,  seems  relatively  the
most  frequent.  One  of  the  remaining  five,  namely,  5  for  1,  is  common  to  both  the
other  series,  and  would  therefore  have  made  five  correspondences  between  the  thought-
transference  series  and  the  series  of  mere  guesses.


Supplement.]


Involuntary  Whispering.


303


Here  we  have  four  correspondences  between  the  thought-transference
series  and  the  series  of  mere  guesses,  and  only  three  between  the  thought-
transference  and  whispering  ;  that  is,  again  a  larger  number  of  correspond-
ences with  the  series  of  guesses.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  from  all  these
various  ways  of  considering  the  matter,  that  the  correspondence  between
the  substitutions  made  in  the  thought-transference  series  of  Table  B.  and
the  series  of  mere  guesses  is  at  least  as  close  as  that  between  the  thought-
transference  and  the  whispered  series. ^

Here  I  may  be  asked,  "  Have  you  no  positive  explanation  of  the  amount
of  correspondence  found  in  the  three  series  compared  ?  "  In  answer,  I
would  suggest  that  it  is  due  to  a  certain  amount  of  agreement  in  the
"  nutnber-habits "  of  the  percipients,  i.e.,  their  unconscious  bias  in  favour
of  particular  numbers.  In  the  three  series  that  we  have  been  discussing,
the  prevalence  among  the  erroneous  guesses  of  certain  numbers  is  marked.
In  Table  B,  the  numerals  3,  2,  5,  4,  6  are  the  five  most  frequently  guessed
erroneously.  In  our  series  of  mere  guesses  (C),  the  same  numbers,  in  the
order,  5,  2,  3,  6,  4,  are  the  favourites  ;  while  in  the  whispered  series  of
Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  (A),  5,  3,  7,  4,  are  guessed  above  the  mean
number  of  times,  2  coming  next  in  frequency.  Now,  in  the  series  of  mere
guesses,  this  result  can  only  be  due  to  some  subjective  tendency  in  the
guesser  to  select  by  preference  the  favoured  numbers  ;  and  if  so,  we  may
reasonably  suppose  that  the  same  cause  operated  in  the  other  two  series.
And  this  is  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  distribution  of  the  erroneous
guesses.  We  find  (e.g.)  that  5 — the  numeral  most  frequently  guessed
erroneously  in  the  Danish  table — is  the  most  frequent  erroneous  guess  for
1,  3,  4,  6  (ambiguously),  7,  and  0.  It  is  surely  unreasonable  to  suppose  that
the  preference  for  5  in  all  these  cases  is  due  to  its  peculiar  phonetic  affinities
with  all  the  six  numerals  for  which  it  is  preferentially  substituted  ;  we  must
therefore  attribute  its  frequency  largely  to  "  nuuiber-habit. "  -

1 A  similar  comparison  of  Dr.  Lehmann's  and  Dr.  Hansen's  guesses  with  each  other
gives  between  the  four  most  frequent  substitutions  for  each  numeral  a  maximum  of
23  and  a  minimum  of  IG  correspondences ;  between  the  most  frequent  substitutions  for
each  numeral  in  each  series,  three  correspondences  ;  between  the  ten  most  frequent
substitutions  in  each  series  two  correspondences  and  one  ambiguous  one  ;  so  that  the
agreement  of  these  two  series,  which  are  arrived  at  by  the  same  process,  is  not  very
close .

-  Tendencies  to  guess  particular  numerals  show  various  peculiarities.  They  are
different,  for  instance,  with  the  same  percipient  for  the  two  digits,  and  that  obviously
independently  of  indications  by  hearing  or  otherwise.  We  have  three  different  series
with  Miss  B.,  described  in  our  Procccdmgs,  Vol.  VIII.  ;  one,  a  series  of  experiments
with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room,  which  was  very  successful  ;  the  second,
the  series  with  agent  and  percipient  in  different  rooms,  wliich  is  shown  in  a  tabulated
form  in  Table  D  at  the  end  of  this  paper,  and  which  was  moderately  successful ;
the  third  was  the  series  C,  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  in  which  there  was  no
success  at  all.  Omitting  in  all  cases  the  successes,  we  find  that  in  each  series  Miss  B.
named  1,  2,  .3,  and  5  above  the  mean  number  of  times  as  a  first  digit  (tens),  and  3,  4,
6,  and  8  above  the  mean  number  of  times  as  a  second  digit  (units).  (They  were  not
always  in  the  same  order.)  Eight  never  occurs  above  the  mean  number  of  times  as
a  first  digit,  nor  1  as  a  second,  nor  0  or  9  as  either.  Our  other  percipients,  P.  and  T.,
who  were  the  percipients  most  concerned  with  the  experiments  of  Table  B.  exhibit
considerable  agreement. Both  of  them  name  2,  3,  and  4,  above  the  mean  number  of


X


304


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


[Supplement.


Further  confirmation  is  given  by  my  own  experiments  in  whispering  in
imitation  of  those  of  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen.

For  when  we  consider  the  favourite  numerals  in  tlie  unsuccessful  guesses
in  both  sets  of  experiments,  we  find,  at  first  sight,  a  certain  amount  of
agreement.

As  the  favourite  numerals  in  my  series  are  5,  2,  3,  6 — in  this  order,
while,  as  we  have  seen,

The  favoui'ite  numerals  in  the  Danish  series  are  5,  3,  7,  4  (2  coming
next).

But  when  we  examine  the  exact  substitutions  in  both  cases,  we  find  that
the  agreement  vanishes.

For  in  the  Danish  experiments,  taken  together,

5  is  erroneously  guessed  most  often  for  6  (20  times  out  of  93)

and  with  next  degree  of  frequency  for  4  (17  times),

but  for  3  only  8  times.

Whereas,  in  my  experiments,

5  is  erroneously  guessed  most  often  for  3  (21  times  out  of  92),

next  for  7  (20  times).

While  it  is  only  guessed  4  times  for  6,
and  only  once  (!)  for  4.
This  analysis  seems  to  me  to  demonstrate  clearly  that  the  preference  for
5  in  both  sets  of  experiments  must  be  attributed  mainly  to  "number-habit,"
and  not  to  the  similar  operation  of  phonetic  laws  of  substitution  in  the  two
ets  of  experiments.

The  only  way  in  which  such  laws  can  be  reasonably  supposed  to  have
operated  is  in  causing  5  to  be  guessed  erroneously  for  7.
This  occurs,  as  was  said,  20  times  in  my  experiments,

and  also  17  times  in  the  Danish  experiments  (7  being  next
in  frequency  to  6  and  4).

I  find  that  in  my  experiments  this  tendency  to  guess  5  for  7  is  found
entirely  in  the  case  of  the  first  digit — 50  is  remarkably  often  guessed  for  70,
but  not  5  for  7.

I  may  observe  that  in  my  experiments  70  appears  by  far  the  hardest
sound  to  catch.  It  is  only  guessed  correctly  8  times  out  of  49,  while  50  is
substituted  for  it  15  times  and  30  twelve  times  ;  7  is  also  a  difficult  sound  :
it  is  only  guessed  right  11  times  out  of  40  ;  but  there  is  no  preference  for  5
as  a  substitute  for  it.

Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  have,  of  course,  an  entirely  different
explanation  of  the  agreement  between  the  whispered  series  and  the  thought-
transference  series.  Dr.  Hansen  has  made  a  very  careful  examination  of  the
numbers  incorrectly  guessed  in  the  Danish  experiments  ;  and  he  thinks  that
in  the  majority  of  cases  he  can  trace  the  error  to  some  regularly  operating
phonetic  law,  leading  to  that  particular  mishearing.  It  is,  no  doubt,  a
probable  that  the  incoi'rect  guessing  in  the  whispered  series  would  be  partly
traceable  to  such  laws.  At  the  same  time — since  the  table  appears  to  show
that  almost  any  numljer  was  liable  to  be  taken  for  any  other,  and  since  Dr.

times  as  first  digits  (tens)  and  3,  5,  and  7  as  second  digits  (units).  Drs.  Lehmann  and
Hansen  seem  to  ag-ree  less  well.  Dr.  Lehmann's  greatest  favourites  are  .5  and  3,  and
Dr.  Hansen's  5  and  7. We  have  no  means  of  comparing  their  first  and  second  digits.


Supplement.]


Involuntary  Whi!i'per'mg.


305


Lehmann  and  Dr.  Hansen  exhibited  mai'ked  diflferences  in  the  relative
frequency  with  which  they  made  particular  sub.stitutionsi — I  cannot  think
that  the  data  are  sufficient  to  establish  empirically  the  large  number  of
phonetic  laws  which  Dr.  Hansen  lays  down.

It  is,  of  course,  easy  for  Dr.  Hansen  to  show  that  in  certain  cases  the
incorrect  guesses  in  our  thought-transference  experiments  are  in  accordance
with  one  or  other  of  his  numerous  phonetic  laws  ;  and,  as  he  does  not
attempt  more  than  this,  I  think  that — after  the  proof  that  I  have  given  of
the  failure  of  Dr.  Lehmann's  attempt  to  establish  the  general  probability
that  unconscious  whispering  operated  in  our  experiments, — I  need  not  enter
into  a  detailed  discussion  of  Dr.  Hansen's  laws.  But  I  may  observe  that  his
whole  treatment  of  our  results  appears  to  ignore  the  part  that  chance  un-
doubtedly played  in  producing  them.  The  cause  of  the  transfer  of  numbers,
— whether  telepathy  or  whispering,  or  something  different  from  either, — was
not  always  operative  ;  there  were  whole  days  when  we  had  no  success  beyond
chance.  It  is  of  no  use  lookmg  for  laws  of  deviation  when  there  is  no  normal
to  deviate  from,  and  on  these  completely  unsuccessful  days  we  must  assume
that  no  imjaressiou  of  the  real  number  reached  the  percipient,  through  his
ear  or  otherwise,  and  that,  therefore,  he  could  not  mishear  it.  It  is,  there-
fore, certain  that  those  of  our  percipients'  impressions  which  occurred  on
these  days  were  determined  by  chance.  But  it  can,  I  think,  be  shown  that
others  were  so  too.  Let  us  suppose  that  in  a  series  of  experiments,  the
numbers  of  which  both  digits  are  guessed  right  are  by  some  means — tele-
pathic or  other — transferred,  but  that  no  others  are,  the  others  being  merely
chance  guesses.  Then,  after  taking  out  the  complete  successes,  so  far  as  they
exceed  what  chance  would  be  likely  to  give,  the  remaining  guesses  would  be
distributed  by  chance.  There  would  be  no  half -successes,  {i  e.,  successful
guesses  of  one  digit  only,  in  its  right  place)  beyond  what  chance  would
produce.  And  that  is  what  we  actually  find  to  be  the  case  in  our  percipient
T.'s  guesses  of  first  digits,  i.e.,  digits  in  the  units'  place."  If  the  first  and
second  digits  (tens  and  units)  in  T.'s  experiments  are  tabulated  separately,
we  find  that  in  second  digits  there  are  51  successes  in  246  guesses.  But
30  of  these  successes  belong  to  complete  successes,  leaving  only  21  for
half-successes.  By  chance  we  should  have  expected  about  three  complete
successes. If  we  take  out  the  other  27,  we  have  219  guesses,  with  24

1  Apart  from  successes,  there  were  only  4.58  single  numerals  to  distribute
over  90  places,  of  which  only  7  were  left  blank.  The  most  numerous  substitu-
tions were  5  and  7  for  6,  each  of  which  occurred  20  times  ;  but  whereas  7  for  6
was  a  substitution  frequently  made  by  Dr.  Hansen,  it  was  rarely  made  by  Dr.
Lehmann  — who,  on  the  other  hand,  favoured  the  substitution  of  5  for  6  considerably
more  than  Dr.  Hansen  did.

-  Dr.  Hansen  complains  (p.  526)  that  we  have  adopted  the  coarse  method  of
tabulating  first  and  second  digits  together  instead  of  separately,  so  that  Dr.  Lehmann
was  obliged  to  do  the  same,  and  thus  some  substitutions  are,  in  his  view,  less  easily
explained  than  they  might  other\vise  have  been.  I  think  the  complaint  somewhat
unreasonable.  We  have  given  a  complete  list  of  every  number  drawn  and  the
corresponding  guess,  so  that  Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  could  have  tabulated  them
ia  any  manner  convenient  for  their  investigation.  I  am  not  surprised  that  they  did
not  think  it  worth  while  to  do  so.  I  only  point  out  that  they  had  the  material  there,
— which  is  more  than  we  have  as  regards  their  experiments.

X  2


306


Professor  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[Supplement.


successes,  and  the  most  probable  numbei*  of  successes  is  -"tV-=  22.  Apart,
therefore,  from  complete  successes,  there  is  really  no  indication  of  any
transfer  in  T.'s  second  digits.  They  ajjpear  to  have  been  merely  chance
guesses.  1

A  careful  perusal  of  our  paper  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  will
reveal  other  cases  in  which  the  percipient's  impression  was  certainly  deter-
mined by  causes  entirely  independent  of  the  number  drawn.  It  is,  therefore,
certain  that  in  a  large  proportion  of  the  incorrect  guesses  of  our  Table  B.,  it  is
perfectly  idle  to  search  for  exemplifications  of  phonetic  laws.

To  return  :  I  hold,  for  the  reasons  above  given,  that  Messrs.  Lehmann
and  Hansen  have  failed  to  furnish  any  positive  evidence  of  the  operation  of
unconscious  whispering  in  our  experiments.  I  have,  however,  admitted
that  their  explanation  of  our  results  would  still  be  the  most  probable  one,  if
our  successful  experiments  in  thought-transference  had  been  confined  to  the
transfer  of  numbers  with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room.  But,  as
our  readers  know,  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  A  strong  reason  for  thinking
that  unconscious  whispering  was  not  the  cause  of  success  in  these  experiments
lies  in  the  success  in  the  series  described  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  536 — 596,  in  which  the  agent  and
percipient  (Miss  B.)  were  in  different  rooms,  separated  by  a  considerable
distance  and  a  closed  door.  The  conditions  are,  we  can  assure  Dr.  Lehmann,
accurately  described,  and,  as  he  admits  (p.  493),  it  follows  that  if  whispering
is  the  explanation  of  the  success  attained,  the  percipient  on  the  one  hand
must  have  had  an  almost  fabulous  hypersesthesia  of  hearing  and  the  agent
on  the  other  must  have  whispered  so  loud  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  the
persons  present  should  not  have  remarked  it.  He  can  only  suggest  that,  as
sounds  are  differently  audible  at  different  points  of  a  room,  and  sometimes
more  audible  at  some  point  more  distant  from  the  source  than  at  a  nearer
one,  it  may  have  happened  that  tlie  relative  positions  of  agent  and  percipient
were  favourable  for  hearing,  while  the  relative  positions  of  the  agent  and  the
person  with  him  were  not.  I  think  that  this  hypothesis  is  in  any  case
extravagant,  considering  the  closed  door,  but  it  is  rendered  still  more  inad-
missible by  the  fact  that  the  percipient's  position  within  the  room  was
intentionally  often  varied,  and  that  the  relative  positions  of  the  agent  and  the
person  with  him  were  varied  also.  And  it  will  be  remembered  also  that  the
experiments  succeeded  in  two  different  sets  of  afiartments.  I  believe  it  to  be
impossible  that  unconscious  whispering  can  have  been  the  mode  of  transfer
in  these  experiments. -

1  P.  was  about  equally  successful  with  both  digits  during  the  series  of  experiments
liere  discussed.  Miss  B.  in  the  experiments  in  separate  rooms  (see  Table  D)  had,
like  T.,  practically  no  half-successes  beyond  chance  in  second  digits,  but  was  very
successful  in  first  digits.

"  It  may  interest  the  reader, — though,  after  what  we  have  said,  it  will  be  under-
stood that  we  attach  no  particular  importance  to  the  fact, — to  observe  that  a  com-
parison of  the  four  most  frequent  substitutions  for  each  numeral  in  this  thought-
transference  series  with  Miss  B.  (Table  D.)  gives,  when  compared  w.th  the  series  of
mere  guesses  (Table  C. ),  a  maximum  of  25  correspondences  and  a  minimum  of  24  ;
compared  with  the  thought-transference  series  of  Table  B.,  a  maximum  of  25  and  a
minimum  of  22,  and  compared  with  the  whispered  series  of  Table  A.,  a  maximum  of
24  and  a  minimum  of  20. If  we  take  the  one  most  frequent  substitution  for  each


Supplement.]  Involuutary  Whispering.


307


Before  leaving  the  subject  of  whispering,  I  will  reply  to  one  or  two  of
Dr.  Hansen's  remarks  about  our  experiments.  At  p.  526,  he  complains  that
we  did  not,  in  discussing  the  possibility  of  mishearing,  distinguish  between
first  and  second  digits,  and  attributes  this  to  our  probably  having  formed  the
conclusion  beforehand  that  the  appearance,  and  not  the  sound,  of  the  number
was  the  important  matter.  Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  quite  mistake  our
views  about  visual  impressions,— but  to  that  I  will  return  later.  In  lumping
together  in  the  Table  the  first  and  second  digits,  we  were  influenced  by  two
considerations.  The  fiist  is  that,  if  there  was  unconscious  whispering,  it  is
impossible  to  know  whether  it  took  the  form  of  whispering  the  whole
number  as  a  number  of  two  digits,  or  of  whispering  each  digit  separately.
The  second  method  would  naturally  be  suggested  by  the  independent  way  in
which  the  two  digits  seemed  generally  to  strike  the  percipients  ;  and  it  must
be  remembered  that  Mr.  Smith  was  consciously  concentrating  his  efi"orts  on
a  vivid  visualisation  of  the  two  digits  ;  in  fact,  he  used  to  say  sometimes  that
he  concentrated  his  mind  tirst  on  one  digit  and  then  on  the  other.  The
second  consideration  that  led  to  our  printing  only  one  table  was  that,  even
so,  the  number  of  experiments  was  too  small  in  our  opinion  to  enable  us  to
draw  any  very  certain  inferences  as  to  the  causes  that  may  contribute  to  the
particular  distribution,  apart  from  the  successes.  The  numbers  are  dis-
tributed among  90  places,  besides  those  occupied  by  successful  guesses,  and
we  know  that  the  distribution  is  at  least  in  great  part  accidental,  so  that
there  is  not  much  margin  left  to  work  upon.

As  Dr.  Hansen  points  out,  in  thus  combining  first  and  second  digits,  we
have  ignored  the  resemblance  of  "teen"  and  "  ty "  and  the  difference
between  "three"  and  "thirty."  The  interchangeability  of  "teen"  and
"  ty  "  he  regards  as  of  great  importance.  If  the  first  and  second  digits  of  our
experiments  (complete  lists  of  them  are  given  in  the  paper  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.)  be  tabulated  separately  on  the  same  plan  as  the  other
tables  we  have  been  using,  the  substitutions  of  "ty"for  "teen  "will  be
shown  by  the  first  line  of  the  table  of  first  digits  (tens).  If  specially  liable  to
happen,  this  substitution  will  lead  to  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  and  9  being  in  the
aggregate  often  guessed  for  1,  and  to  a  small  number  of  correct  guesses  of  1.
On  the  other  hand,  the  substitutions  of  "teen  "  for  "  ty  "  are  shown  by  the
first  column  of  the  table,  and,  if  specially  liable  to  happen,  wiU  make  the
substitutions  of  1  for  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  and  9  in  the  aggregate  relatively
frequent.  It  will  be  found  that  none  of  these  things  occur.  One  is  not  a
numeral  which  our  percipients  were  specially  successful  in  guessing  correctly,
but  it  was  about  as  often  right  as  a  first  digit  as  it  was  as  a  second,  i  If

numeral,  we  find  that  series  D.  has  in  common  with  each  of  the  above  series,  taken  in
the  same  order,  two  correspondences  and  one  ambiguous  one,  four  and  one  ambiguous
one,  and  one  and  one  ambiguous  one,  respectively.  The  ten  most  frequent  substitu-
tions for  each  series  have  in  common  two,  four,  and  one,  respectively.  By  none  of  these
methods  of  comparison,  therefore,  is  any  marked  agreement  shown  between  series
D.  and  the  whispered  series.

^  In  the  experiments  with  Miss  B.  and  the  agent  in  different  rooms  (Table  D.),
27  of  the  successful  guesses  of  1  occurred  with  first  digits  (tens),  and  only  16  with
second  digits.  "Teen"  was  guessed  as  "ty"  only  11  times,  which  is  much  below
the  average  ;  and  '•  ty  "  was  turned  into  "teen  "  also  below  the  average  number  of
times.


308


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


[Supplement.


therefore  Dr.  Hansen  is  right  in  tliinking  that  interchanges  of  "  teen  "  and
"  ty  "  would  be  specially  liable  to  occur  when  unconscious  whispering  is  the
mode  of  communication,  the  argument,  as  far  as  it  goes,  is  against  the
hypothesis  that  whispering  occurred  in  our  experiments.

The  special  interest  of  the  numeral  3  depends  on  its  having  been  rather
often  substituted  for  8  in  our  experiments.  As  Dr.  Hansen  points  out  in
a  footnote,  the  resemblance  in  sound  between  "thirty"  and  "  eighty  "  is
much  greater  than  between  "  three  "  and  "  eight. "  But  if  our  experiments
be  examined,  it  will  be  found  that  the  prevalence  of  3  for  8  is,  in  the  first
place,  entirely  due  to  one  percipient,  P.  ;  and  in  the  second,  tliat  he  makes
this  substitution  11  times  in  the  case  of  first  digits  (tens),  and  10  times  in
the  case  of  second  digits  (units).  In  the  case  of  both  digits,  it  is  the  most
frequent  substitution  he  makes,  but  its  pre-eminence,  compared  to  other
substitutions,  is  more  marked  in  the  case  of  the  second  digits.  It  does  not
appear,  therefore,  that  there  is  any  force  in  Dr.  Hansen's  arguments  to  show
that,  by  tabulating  together  the  first  and  second  digits,  we  have  obscured
the  phonetic  nature  of  the  substitutions.

As  I  have  said,  I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  Dr.  Hansen's  explanations  of
some  individual  experiments  of  our  series  ;  since  every  numeral  is  sub-
stituted more  or  less  frequently  for  every  other,  it  is  clear  that,  whatever
the  laws  of  phonetic  interchanges  may  be,  some  apparent  examples  of  them
must  be  found  among  our  experiments.  I  will  only  point  out  that  one
at  least  of  his  hyj^othetical  explanations — twice  repeated — is  not  tenable.
He  suggests  that  the  guessing  of  0  for  7  is  due  to  the  resemblance  of  the
words  "seven"  and  "zero."  But  the  name  of  the  numeral  0  is  not  "zero"'
in  English  ;  it  is  always  sj^oken  of  as  "  nought  "  or  "  ought,"  and  there  is  no
resemblance  between  these  sounds  and  "seven."

We  have  now  to  discuss  from  the  point  of  view  of  visual  impressions  the
mistakes  that  were  made.  Dr.  Lehmann  attributes  to  us  the  opinion  tliat  the
thought  of  the  agent  called  up  directly  visual  images^  in  the  brain  of  the  per-
cipient by  means  of  an  at  present  unkno-mr  form  of  energy.  Dr.  Lehmann
has  misapprehended  our  meaning.  We  did  not  intend  to  put  forward  any
theory  as  to  the  jjrocess  of  thought-transference  :  we  were  solely  concerned
with  establishing  the  fact  that  communications  may  pass  from  one  mind  to
another  otherwise  than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.

The  passage  from  which  Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  infer  our  theory  is
the  following-^  : — "  Eight  mistakes  were  made  twenty  times  or  more.  These
were  :  1  guessed  as  3  and  as  5,  2  guessed  as  3,  3  guessed  as  2,  4  guessed  as  1
and  as  3,  7  guessed  as  2  and  8  guessed  as  3.  Of  these  eight,  only  three
could  possibly  be  explained  by  unconscious  counting,  viz.,  3  for  2,  2  for  3,  and
3  for  4.  But  of  these,  the  two  first  might  equally  well  be  explained  as  results
of  the  kind  of  imperfect  vision  of  the  number  so  often  complained  of  by  the
percipients,  and  this  is  also  the  explanation  suggested  by  the  most  prevalent
mistake  of  all,  namely,  8  guessed  as  3. And  that  this  is  the  true  explanation

1  Lehmann,  p.  487.  "  Die  genannten  Autoren  nehmen,  wie  wir  gesehen  haben,
an,  dass  die  Gedankea  des  Absenders,  verniittelst  einer  noch  unbekannten  Foi-m  der
Energie  im  Gehirn  des  Empfangers  direct  Gesichtsbilder  hervorgerufeii  haben."
(See  also  p.  479.)

^-Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  1G9-170.


Supplement.]  Involuntary  Whispering.  309


is  further  suggested  by  the  fact  that  3  is  very  seldom  guessed  as  8.  For
though  an  8  half  rubbed  out  might  resemble  a  3,  a  3  could  not  so  easily  be
converted  into  a  badly  seen  8,  whereas  with  2  and  3  the  possibility  of
mistake  would  be  reciprocal ;  an  imperfect  2  might  be  mistaken  for  a  3  as
easily  as  a  3  for  a  2.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  we  think  that  an  examination
of  the  facts  affords  no  support  worth  considering  for  the  supposition — in
itself,  as  we  have  said,  extremely  improbable- -of  unconscious  counting
hyperfesthetically  heard."

The  suggestion  here  is  that  the  errors,  so  far  as  they  go,  point  rather  to
defective  externalisation  than  to  defective  transmission  by  counting.  This
in  no  way  implies  the  direct  transference  of  a  visual  imjjression,  though  it  is
not  inconsistent  with  it.  Our  percipients  in  this  series  of  experiments
almost  always  became  conscious  of  the  idea  through  what,  in  a  broad  use  of
the  term,  may  be  called  a  visual  hallucination.  It  was  certainly  more  than
a  mere  mental  image,  and  we  only  hesitate  about  calling  it  a  hallucination
because  the  percipients  generally  had  their  eyes  closed,  so  that  we  cannot
judge  to  what  extent  their  number  visions  would  have  competed  with  the
visual  sensations  derived  from  external  objects.  But  whatever  name  be
given  to  the  species  of  their  impression, — and  this  is  discussed  at  some  length
in  the  paper  referred  to,  pp.  158-163, — there  is  no  doubt,  we  think,  that  they
first  saw  the  number  and  then  thought  of  it,  not  tliat  they  first  thought  of  it
and  then  saw  it.  They  were  not  conscious  of  it  until  they  saw  it.  This  was,
as  we  state,  probably  due  to  our  own  suggestion.  In  later  experiments
{Proceedings  S.P.R.  Vol.  VIII.),  the  ideas  were  similarly  caused  to  reach  the
consciousness  of  the  percipients  through  auditory  hallucinations,  through
automatic  writing  and  through  table  tilting.  But  in  none  of  these  cases  did
we  suppose  that  the  mode  in  which  the  percipient  became  conscious  of  the
idea  threw  any  light  on  the  question  how  it  originally  reached  his  mind.  We
believed  ourselves  to  have  stated  this  clearly  in  our  paper.  It  is  almost
certain  that  the  ideas  sometimes  reached  the  percipient  through  the  ear,  as
when  P.  and  T.  imitated  each  other's  guesses  ; — though,  so  far  as  we  could
ascertain,  they  could  not  consciously  hear  each  other,  owing  to  being
hypnotised  and  not  put  en  rapport  with  each  other.  "  We  must
therefore  suppose"  to  quote  our  previous  words  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  164),  "  that  sounds  which  fell  unconsciously  on  the  ear  yet  produced  an
impression  on  the  mind,  of  which  the  percipient  became  aware  solely
through  its  reproduction  in  a  visual  form — a  supposition  which  is,  of  course,
entirely  in  accordance  with  observations  made  by  others."  At  other  times,
as  we  have  seen,  the  impressions  seem  to  have  been  the  result  of  pure
guess-work,  or, — what  is  for  practical  purposes  the  same, — produced  by  a
variety  of  unrelated  causes  acting  in  opposition  to  one  another.  It  is  clear
that  the  impressions  sometimes  came  from  Mr.  Smith's  mind, — how  trans-
mitted, whether  through  the  senses  or  telepathically,  is  the  question  at  issue.
If  telepathically,  it  may  have  been  the  name  or  the  visual  impression,  i.e.,
the  form,  that  was  transmitted.  But  that  there  was  direct  transmission  from
visual  organs  to  visual  organs  is  rendered  improbable  by  the  fact  that  the
process  of  perception  by  the  percipient  was  identical,  so  far  as  we  could
judge,  whether  the  idea  reached  him  from  Mr.  Smith,  or  orally  froin  his
co-percipient,  or  was  the  result  of  his  own  invention.


310  Professor  Henry  Sidgtvick.  [Supplement.


Oar  point  was  that,  in  the  transmission  of  an  idea  to  the  percipient's
coiascious  intelligence,  error  may  occur  in  two  ways  ;  either  through  the  idea
being  imperfectly  transferred  (whether  through  the  senses  or  telepatliically),
so  far  as  the  process  of  transference  takes  place  outside  the  percipient's
ordinary  consciousness,  or  through  being  imperfectly  externalised  as  a  halluci-
nation, which  hallucination  is  then  wrongly  interpreted  by  the  percipient's
conscious  mind.  Of  such  misinterpretations  of  hallucinations  we  have  definite
instances,  — instances  where  the  idea  that  was  intended  to  be  communicated
to  the  hypnotised  person  was  known,  his  description  of  the  hallucination  that
was  produced  by  it  heard,  and  also  his  conscious  interpretation  of  that  hallu-
cination. Compare,  for  instance,  P.  's  post-hypnotic  hallucinations  of  a  vague
rhinoceros  when  told  to  see  a  hippopotamus,  of  a  figure  which  he  called
"  Buffalo  Bill "  when  he  was  told  to  see  Robinson  Crusoe,  and  of  what  he
took  for  the  Mayor  when  he  was  told  to  see  Macbeth,  and  other  similar
instances,  both  with  P.  and  T.  as  percipients,  in  Mr.  Myers'  experiments
{Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  459-462).  Compare  also  P.'s  appar-
ently telepatliically  suggested  hallucination  of  a  choir-boy  interpreted  as  a
ghost  (Froceedhigs,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  565)  and  Miss.  B.'s  hallucination  of  a
sailing-boat,  of  which  the  sails  at  first  suggested  chalk  cliffs  {Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII,  p.  561).  For  a  spontaneous  case  of  a  somewhat  similar  process,
— a  memory  picture  called  up  by  association,  but  only  afterwards  recognised,
— see  Prcceedmgs,  Vol.  X.,  pp.  143-4.  Of  course,  the  indistinctness  of  a
hallucination  might  be  due  either  to  indistinctness  in  tlie  underlying  idea,
as  in  the  hipijopotamus  case  above,  or  to  imperfect  reproduction  of  it  in  the
hallucination,  as  in  one  of  Mr.  Myers'  exj)eriments  referred  to  above,  when
T.  saw  horses  with  little  things  on  their  backs,  but  failed  to  recognise  the
little  things  as  monkeys.  Whatever  the  cause,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
hallucinations  of  numbers  often  were  indistinct.

Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  attempted  to  verify  or  disprove  the
hypothesis  that  this  indistinctness  may  have  been  the  immediate  cause  of  the
misnaming  of  the  numbers,  by  experiments  in  which  they  read  numbers
flashed  rapidly  before  their  eyes.  The  results  are  of  some  interest,  but  we
do  not  think  the  metliod  affords  any  useful  comparison  with  the  kind  of
misreading  we  have  suggested,  because  the  indistinct  vision  complained  of  by
our  perciijients  was  seldom  that  due  to  a  momentary  .sight  of  the  object  looked
at,  but  rather  that  due  to  distance  or  want  of  definite  outline,  or  partial
blotting  out  of  the  object  (hallucination)  itself.  The  hallucination  usually
persisted  long  enough  to  be  seen  as  well  as  it  was  capable  of  being  seen.

We  have  discussed  this  subject  of  misinterpreted  visual  hallucinations  at
some  length,  because  what  we  said  before  seems  to  have  been  completely
misunderstood  by  Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen.  But  though  it  is  quite  true
(in  our  opinion  at  least)  that  more  evidence  is  afforded  by  our  experimental
series  for  errors  of  this  kind  than  for  errors  arising  from  the  misinterpre-
tation of  unconscious  whispering  or  counting,  the  evidence  does  not  amount
to  much,  and  it  is  not  increased  or  supported  by  our  later  experiments.

A  few  words,  before  we  conclude,  about  the  observations  of  Drs.  Lehmann
and  Hansen  on  thought-transference  experiments,  conducted  by  means  of
drawings.  Certainly  their  own  experiments,  a  certain  superficial  plausibility
notwithstanding,  were  not  very  successful. They  made  fifteen  attempts  in


Supplement.]  Involuntary  Whispering.


311


which  the  agent— Dr.  Hansen — looked  at  a  double  number,  and  the
percipient,  Dr.  Lehmann,  drew  the  picture  of  it  which  arose  in  his  mind.
Of  the  results,  six,  comprising  images  of  eleven  separate  numerals,  at  first
seemed  to  them  successful ;  but  afterwards  they  concluded  that  the  resem-
blance was  illusory.  This  second  opinion  I  have  no  inclination  to  question  :
undoubtedly  there  is  a  curious  vagueness  about  Dr.  Lehmann's  figures
suggesting  deliberate  ambiguity  on  the  part  of  his  subliminal  consciousness  ;
and  the  moral  drawn  by  him  as  to  the  need  of  caution  in  interpreting  results
of  this  kind  is  undeniably  sound,  and  useful  to  beginners.

But  when  Dr.  Lehmann  tries  to  apply  the  moral  to  the  experiments  in
thought-transference  by  means  of  drawings  or  diagrams  recorded  in  our
Proceedings,  he  makes  it  evident  that  he  has  only  given  them  a  very  partial
and  superficial  consideration.  Thus  (1)  he  selects  Professor  Richet's  experi-
ments in  clairvoyance  for  comment  when  the  subject  under  discussion  is
tJwuglbt-transferenee  ;  (2)  he  asserts  sweepingly  that  the  percipients  were
most  frequently  hypnotised  or  hysterical :  this  being  true  of  Professor
Richet's  percipients,  but  not  true  in  the  case  of  the  thought-transference
experiments  with  drawings  described  in  our  Proceedings.  In  these,  none  of  the
percipients  were  hypnotised,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  any  of  them,
except  some  of  those  who  assisted  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  were  hysterical.
In  view  of  these  palpable  inaccuracies,  his  assertion  that  the  agreement
between  original  and  reproduction  in  our  experiments  with  drawings  is
"usually"  not  better  than  in  Professor  Richet's  experiments,  may  be  fairly
set  down  to  ignorance  ;  it  is  evident  that  he  has  never  seen  those  given  in
Vols.  I.  and  II. — Mr.  Guthrie's  experiments, — or  those  in  which  Mr.  Smith
was  percipient  and  Mr.  Blackburn  agent  :  or,  again,  those  conducted  by  Mr.
Rawson,  and  described  in  Vol.  XI.  This  being  so,  his  general  conclusion
that  the  result  of  all  the  experiments  hitherto  carried  on  in  thought-
transference  in  which  the  percipient  expresses  his  thoughts  in  drawings  can
without  difficulty  be  explained  by  two  causes — namely,  accidental  coincidence
and  illusory  resemblance — hardly  deserves  serious  discussion.  No  one  could
assert  this  with  regard  to  (e.g.)  the  six  consecutive  reproductions  given  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  33 — 35  (see  also  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,
pp.  35—51).

We  have  taken  the  trouble  to  examine  and  estimate  all  the  experiments
of  this  kind  described  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R. ,  taking  as  a
standard  those  drawings  which  Colonel  Taylor  regards  as  resembling  each
other  in  his  "Experimental  Comparison  between  Chance  and  Thought-
transference,"  Vol.  VI.,  p.  398.  Those  which  we  estimate  as  successes,
we  divide  into  three  classes,  as  Colonel  Taylor  does. These  classes  are  : —

1.  Those  which  are  alike  in  idea — that  is  to  say,  have  the  kind  of
resemblance  one  would  expect  if  the  percipient  knew  the  name  of  the
object  the  drawing  represented,  but  had  not  seen  the  drawing.  Instances
of  this  are  the  hand  in  Mr.  Rawson's  experiments,  A^ol.  XI.,  p.  4,
and  several  others  of  his  experiments, — or  again,  the  cat  in  M.  Schmoll's
experiments.  No.  58,  Vol.  V.,  p.  180,  when  a  rough  sketch  of  a  cat  was
drawn  by  the  agent  and  a  cat's  face  seen  by  the  percipient.

2.  Those  which  are  alike  in  shape.  All  successful  experiments  with
nameless  diagrams  come  under  this  head,  and  so  do  some  cases  where  the


312


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


[Supplement.


object  drawn  has  a  name,  but  lias  not  been  recognised  by  the  percipient.
An  instance  of  this  is  No.  11  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  p.  193,  where  a
rough  drawing  of  a  horse's  head  is  roughly  reproduced,  but  not  recognised.

3.  Those  which  are  alike  both  in  idea  and  shape.  As,  for  instance,
the  pig  in  Mr.  Rawson's  experiments,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  4  ;  or  the  fish  or  the
face  in  Mr.  Guthrie's  experiments,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  35  and  41.  Simple
geometrical  figures  with  names  may,  of  course,  easily  come  under  this  head.
See,  for  instance,  some  of  Mr.  Dessoir's  experiments.  Vol.  V.,  pp.  355—
357.  There  are  in  all  in  the  eleven  volumes  of  the  Proceedings  493
experiments  with  drawings  described,  or  at  least  mentioned.  ^  Included  in
the  493  are  24  cases  in  which  it  is  stated  that  no  impression  was  received
by  the  percipient,  and  40  experiments  with  Mr.  Guthrie's  jjercipients,
performed  in  sets  of  6  or  7,  under  conditions  known  beforehand  to  be
unfavourable,  and  which  Mr.  Guthrie  tliinks  should  not  count.  The  follow-
ing is  the  list  : —

No.  of  Experi-
ments.

Mr.  Blackburn  and  Mr.  Smith — Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  pp.
83 — 97,  and  pp.  175 — 216  (four  preliminary  and
successful  experiments  on  p.  163  omitted)

Mr.  J.  W.  Smith,  of  Lieeds  —  Pyoceedings,  Vol.  II.,  p.  7.,  \
and  pp.  207—216 I

Mr.  Gutlirie,  with  the  assistance  at  various  times  of  Mr.  s
Birchall,  Mr.  Hughes,  Mr.  R.  C.  Johnson,  Professor
O.  Lodge,  Professor  Herdman,  Mr.  Gurney,  aird  others.
—Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  31—42,  and  189— 200  ;  Vol.
III.,  pp.  424 — 428,  and  442.  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
Vol.  I.,  pp.35— 51.  Only  a  small  portion  of  Mr.  Guthrie's
drawing  experiments  are  given  in  detail  in  the  Proceed-
ings. We  have,  however,  tracings  of  almost  all  the
drawings  and  reproductions,  and  have  used  them  in
making  our  estimate ... ... ... ...  ...^

Herr  Dessoir — Proceedings,Yol.  IV.,  pp.  115 — 124,  and  Vol.  \  30
v.,  pp.  355— 357

M.  M.  Schmoll  and  M.a.hire—Proceedin.gs,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  324  \  104
—337,  and  Vol.  V.,  pp.  169—195  and  208—215 ...  -*

Dr.  Frherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing — Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  ^  26
pp.  3-22 -*

Professor  liodge— Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  374-381 ...  16

Mr.  Rawson — Proceedings,  Vol.  1 — 17 15

Total,  493

Among  these  we  estimate  that  both  shape  and  idea  were  apprehended  in
27  cases,  the  idea  alone  in  14  cases,  and  the  shape  alone  in  82  cases — in  all


1  In  a  few  of  the.se  experiments,  the  original  was  a  real  object  and  the  reproduction
a  drawing,  or  the  original  a  drawing  which  was  verbally  described  by  the  [)ercipient.


Supplement.]


Involuntary  Whispering.


313


123,  or  25  per  cent,  of  the  total  493.  Of  course,  as  the  reproductions  are
in  no  cases  quite  exact  copies,  various  persons  would  estimate  some  of  them
differently,  so  that,  though  we  have  tried  to  maintain  a  certain  standard,  a
margin  should  be  allowed  for  differences  of  ojjinion.  We  find,  for  instance,
what  had  escaped  our  memory  when  we  made  our  own  estimate,  that  Colonel
Taylor  had  made  an  estimate  of  the  Smith  and  Blackburn  drawings.
We  count  16  successes,  while  he  considers  that  there  were  only  13  successes
comparable  to  those  in  his  chance  series,  and  among  these  13  he  includes
2  which  we  do  not  count  in  our  16.  There  are,  therefore,  5  of  the  16
which  he  does  not  agree  about.  Let  us  assume  that  this  is  a  normal
proportion  of  disagreement,  so  that  about  a  third  of  our  123  successful
cases  should  be  regarded  as  doubtful.  Still  we  have  82,  or  about  17
per  cent,  of  successes  to  compare  with  Colonel  Taylor's  2  per  cent,
by  chance  ;  which  last,  moreover,  would  also  probably  be  reduced  if  the
supposed  coincidences  were  required  to  be  approved  independently  by
several  persons.  In  our  total,  also,  we  have  included  and  counted  as
failures  every  experiment  mentioned,  but  of  which  we  have  not  a  sufficient
account  to  enable  us  to  estimate  it  for  ourselves.  There  are  probably  cases
where  no  impression  was  produced  among  these.

But  this  is  not  the  whole  strength  of  the  case  against  chance  in  these
experiments.  Those  which  we  have  not  counted  as  successes  are  by  no
means  all  failures.  There  are  intermediate  classes  showing  varying  degrees
of  resemblance  to  the  original,  or  apparently  representing  part  of  the  original
only.  When,  without  being  all  good  reproductions,  a  set  of  experiments  is
such  that  if  the  originals  and  rejjroductions  were  severally  shuffled  up,  they
would  be  re-arranged  in  their  proper  pairs  by  a  person  seeing  them  for  the
first  time,  as  is,  for  instance,  the  case  with  all  or  almost  all  the  Blackburn
and  Smith  series,  this  cannot  be  due  to  chance  coincidence.  Nor  is  it  con-
ceivable that  series  like  Mr.  Rawson's  and  Mr.  Smith's  of  Leeds,  or,  as  we
have  already  said,  Mr.  Guthrie's  on  some  days,  should  be  accidental.

Dr.  Lehmann  thinks  that,  to  avoid  vagueness  or  ambiguity,  the  originals
in  experiments  of  this  kind  should  rejaresent  definite  objects  or  figures  with
names,  which  the  percipient  should  be  required  to  give.  But  sujjposing  his
own  experiments  in  seeing  numbers  had  been  successful,  would  not  ho  in
the  light  of  his  later  experience  have  been  the  first  to  say  that  his  success
was  due  to  unconscious  whispering  by  Dr.  Hansen  ?  It  was  to  avoid  the
possibility  of  indications  of  this  sort,  conscious  and  unconscious,  that  the
plan  of  trying  to  transfer  nameless  geometrical  figures  was  adopted.  In
experiments  in  clairvoyance  like  Professor  Richet's,  where  the  drawing  to
be  reproduced  is  unknown  to  all  j)resent,  it  would  no  doubt  be  desirable  to
use  very  clear  and  definite  figures  which  could  be  named  ;  as  has  been  already
pointed  out  by  Miss  A.  B.  Balfour  in  a  careful  criticism  of  Profess<ir  Richet's
results  (see  S.P.R.  Journal  for  December,  1888.  Vol.  III.,  p.  318).  But  in
thought-transference  experiments  with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same
room,  there  are  obvious  advantages  in  making  some  of  the  experiments  with
nameless  figures.  Nameless  figures  may,  no  doubt,  be  sometimes  trans-
ferred by  unconscious  movements  appealing  to  the  sense  of  touch,  for  which
reason  contact  should  be  avoided  ;  but  it  is  hard  to  conceive  of  their  being
conveyed  by  unconscious — -or,  for  that  matter,  even  conscious — auditory


314


Professor  Henry  Sidgiuick.


[Supplement.


indications.  Nameless  figures  afl!"orcI,  too,  the  best  evidence  that  form  may
be  transferred  apart  from  any  other  qualities  or  associations  ;  and  therefore,
granted  the  reality  of  thought-ti'ansference,  constitute  an  important  part  of
the  data  for  forming  an  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  process.

To  sum  up,  we  conclude  that,  interesting  and  instructive  as  the  paper  of
Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen  is,  and  useful  in  giving  practical  illustrations  of
certain  dangers  to  be  guarded  against,  they  have  not  shown  that  either
chance,  illusion,  or  unconscious  whispering  will  account  for  the  evidence
for  apparent  thought-transference  afforded  by  experiments  in  reproducing
drawings  and  guessing  numbers,  described  in  the  Froceedings  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research.


Supplement.]


Involuntary  Whispering.


315


TABLES.


Table  A.
Messrs.  Hansen  di  Lehmann.


Table  B.

Experiments  in  Thought-transference
(reprinted  from  Procccdings,'Vo\.yi.,  p.  168).


Guessed  as.

A

Totals
drawn

Guessed  as.

Nume-
rals
drawn

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

Nume-
rals
drawn

1

/-
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

N

0

Totals
drawn

45

5

i

6

12

1

i

3

7

1

91

43

18

20

17

22

13

10

13

6

2

164

2

-

60

13

6

6

4

7

11

6

1

114

o

10

54

21

12

8

9

6

8

8

4

140

3

2

81

3

8

4

4

4

1

O

109

:

14

24

54

11

15

13

11

7

9

5

163

i

6

6

5

71

17

5

5

3

1

119

21

16

22

52

13

10

11

6

9

3

163

5

3

6

6

6

74

7

7

1

1

no

5

7

9

12

16

35

19

7

8

7

3

123

6

2

2

10

6

20

38

20

3

3

104

0

12

11

12

12

11

40

14

13

3

3

137

7

8

9

7

11

15

8

44

4

5

1

112

7

13

21

13

11

15

16

40

8

4

2

143

8

4

5

12

3

3

3

5

71

4

1

111

8

11

7

26

13

13

12

14

34

7

5

142

9

5

6

8

9

6

5

i

7

38

2

90

9

4

5

11

2

6

3

5

6

19

9

70

0

3

3

1

6

2

5

3

17

40

0

7

6

10

8

9

7

8

2

6

19

82

Totals
guessed

I

101

148

122

167

72

105

112

68

26

1000

Totals
guessed

142

171

201

154

147

148

126

105

78

56

1327

Table  C.

Series  of  mere  guesses.


Guessed  as.


I  Nume-
rals
drawn

1

2


Totals
guessed


61


16


912
12  17


107


911
3
5


14

16  12


12


10  14
1818  1


12

15  10  15


15  13


110  88  122  99  72


7

512


11
9
5

812


78


■\  Totals


drawn


84
82
82
119
72
84


40


20  766


Table  D.

Experiments  with  3Iiss  B.,  Agent  and
Percipient  in  different  roovis.


316


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


II.

RECENT  EXPERIMENTS  IN  NORMAL  MOTOR  AUTOMATISM.

By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Two  articles  of  much  interest  to  students  of  automatism  have  recently
been  published  in  the  Psychological  Eevieiv  (Macmillan).  In  July,  1895,
appeared  a  jjaper  on  "  Exioerimental  Induction  of  Automatic  Processes,"
by  Professor  Newbold,  of  Philadelphia — a  valued  contributor  to  these
Proceedings.  In  September,  1896,  among  Studies  from  the  Psychological
Laboratory  of  Harvard  TJ 'diversity,  appeared  a  paper  on  ' '  Normal  Motor
Automatism,"  by  Leon  M.  Solomons  and  Gertrude  Stein,  describing  certain
experiments  on  the  early  stages  of  such  automatism,  conducted  with  a
care  and  ingenuity  worthy  of  that  distinguished  psychological  school.

I  purpose  first  briefly  to  point  out  the  relation  in  which  these  papers
stand  to  views  previously  set  forth  in  these  Proceedings,  and  then  to  pass
on  to  one  or  two  reflections  of  wider  scope,  which  the  new  experiments
suggest.  In  Vol.  II.,  (Part  VII.,  November,  1884),  of  these  Proceedings,
will  be  found  a  paper  "On  a  Telei^athic  Explanation  of  Some  So-called
Spiritualistic  Phenomena,"  in  which  I  attem]5ted  a  fii'st  imperfect  analysis
of  certain  motor  phenomena  which,  until  that  time,  had  excited  little  or  no
attention,  except  from  those  who  saw  in  all  automatic  writing  the  direct
action  of  spirits  of  the  dead.  Dealing  in  that  pajaer  with  the  earlier  and
simpler  types  of  these  phenomena,  I  there  urged  (pp.  222 — 6)  that  the
"graphic  automatism  of  mental  abstraction  "  was  often  a  normal  and  not  a
morbid  thing  :  ' '  simply  an  extension  of  the  tricks  of  unconscious  action,
which  to  some  extent  are  common  to  every  one."  Speaking  of  Greek  words
"  unconsciously  scribbled  on  the  edge  of  composition  papers  in  the  nervous-
ness of  examination,"  I  said  that  "in  this  case  it  is  the  strong  concentration
of  the  current  of  attention  elsewhere,  which  allows  the  writmg  faculty  to
manifest  itself  automatically, — permits,  that  is  to  say,  the  unconscious
cerebral  action  to  discharge  itself  along  the  well-worn  track  which  leads  to
the  formation  of  written  words. "

It  is  tliis  view  of  the  connection  of  motor  automatism  with  normal
processes  which  these  newer  writers  strongly,  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,
convincingly  support ; — a  fact  the  more  interesting  since  I  do  not  think,
judgmg  by  internal  evidence,  that  my  own  paper — written  at  a  time  when
our  Proceedings  reached  a  smaller  public  than  they  now  reach — has  fallen
under  the  notice  of  either  author.

"I  am  now  convinced,"  writes  Professor  Newbold,  "that  in  many
cases  the  writing  is  produced  precisely  as  these  sensory  processes  are
produced — by  the  continuous  apf)lication  of  an  indeterminate  stimulus  to  the
highly  organised  writing  mechanism."  Precisely  so  ; — and  the  previously
cited  instance  of  verse-composition,  with  mind  fixed  on  the  idea  of  ivriting,
seems  a  good  illustration  of  this  "  indeterminate  stimulus."


Supplement.] Experiments  in  Motor  Automatism.


317


Mr.  Solomons'  paper  affords  a  confirmation, — lyhich,  as  I  have  said,
should  be  absolutely  convincing  for  those  who  accept  his  account  of  himself
and  his  coUaboratrix  as  ' '  representatives  of  the  perfectly  normal,  or  perfectly
ordinary  being,  so  far  as  hysteria  is  concerned," — of  a  thesis  which  I  have
from  the  first  urged  as  very  important,  but  which  has  been  called  in  question
by  high  authorities  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  470-472).  I  mean  the
thesis  that  there  does  exist  a  "Normal  Motor  Automatism;"  that  the
so-called  "  disaggregation  of  personality"  which  produces  automatic  scrijjt
may  be  cultivated  without  injury  (if  proper  care  be  taken)  by  perfectly
healthy  persons  of  either  sex.  These  two  students  taught  themselves  to  read
aloud  unconsciously,  and  to  write  from  dictation  unconsciously,  to  write
words  of  their  own  unconsciously — to  perform,  in  short,  to  perfection  various
automatic  tricks  ; — and  yet  at  the  end  of  (aijparently)  weeks  of  it  they  were
not  a  penny  the  worse, — were  even  more  scientific  and  even  less  hysterical
than  when  they  began.  Their  paper  should  become  a  locus  classicus  on  this
important  question  of  the  cultivation  of  motor  automatism  by  sound  and
normal  persons.

The  task  which  they  set  themselves  was  an  mgenious  one.  They  aimed
at  reproducing,  in  a  waking  state  of  complete  normality,  "the  essential
elements  of  the  second  personality,  so  far  as  they  consist  of  definite  motor
reactions  unaccompanied  by  consciousness, "  "or,"  they  politely  add,  "shall  we
say,  out  of  deference  to  the  sublimmal  consciousness  theory,  unaccompanied
by  conscious  consciousness."  "These  elements"  they  continue,  "appeared
to  us  to  be  conveniently  considered  under  four  groups,  as  follows  :  —

"  1.  General  tendency  to  movement  without  conscious  motor  impulse.

"2.  Tendency  of  an  idea  in  the  mind  to  go  over  mto  a  movement  in-
voluntarily and  unconsciously.

"3.  Tendency  of  a  sensory  current  to  pass  over  into  a  motor  reaction
sub-consciously.

"  4.  Unconscious  exercise  of  memory  and  invention."

The  first  three  of  these  elements  they  exemplified  with  great  distinctness.
They  approximated,  probably  more  nearly  than  waking  experiments  have
ever  done,  to  those  phenomena  of  dissociation  of  the  writing  and  the  reading
processes,  and  of  either  of  these  from  normal  memory,  on  which  Mr.  Edmund
Gumey  recorded  so  many  experiments  in  his  papers  on  "Peculiarities  of
Certain  Post-hypnotic  States,"  and  "Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory, "  (Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  IV.,  p.  268  and  p.  515.)  And  in  the  course  of  these
experiments — not  being  hypnotised,  but  alert  and  accurate — they  made
observations  well  worth  study  on  the  fluctuations  of  attention  and  con-
sciousness.

As  to  the  fourth  element — "unconscious  exercise  of  memory  and  inven-
tion " — they  were  perhaps  less  successful.  Their  best  "writing  from
invention"  seems  to  have  consisted  in  the  following  sentence, — described
(somewhat  euphemistically)  by  Mr.  Solomons  as  "  more  p)oetical  than
intelligible  "  ; — When  he  could  not  be  the  longest  and  thus  to  be,  and  thus  to  be
the  strongest.  Perhaps  if  their  poetry  had  been  stronger  their  paper  would
have  been  longer.

"That  the  second  personality,"  says  Mr.  Solomons  after  summing  up  his
main  results,  ' '  shows,  in  general,  no  abilities  beyond  this,  will,  I  think,


318


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


generally  be  admitted."  I  certainly  admit,  and  have  often  asserted,  that  the
bulk  of  automatic  messages, — including  the  first  scrawls  of  a  planchette,  and
the  first  tiltings  of  a  table, — are  much  on  this  level.  But  certainly  neither
Professor  Janet,  (to  whom  I  think  allusion  is  made)  nor  myself  ever  regarded
utterances  of  this  type  as  indications  of  the  formation  of  a  secondary
personality.  They  are,  as  I  have  frequently  said,  jjrecisely  parallel  to  the
scrappy  words  which  float  through  one's  mind  in  a  moment's  doze.  A  new
personality  is  no  more  formed  in  the  self  by  these  little  spurts  of  fragmentary
independence  than  a  new  party  is  formed  in  the  House  of  Commons  whenever
an  honourable  member  cries  "  Oh  !  oh  !  "

Tlie  formation  of  a  new  personality,  as  of  a  new  party,  depends  upon  the
number  of  psychical  or  parliamentary  units  which  cohere,  and  the  length  of
time  for  which  they  remain  coherent.  It  may  range  from  an  idee  fixe — which
is  a  mere  knot  of  fanatics — to  a  coalition  which  overturns  the  government,
as  when  Felida  X.'s  second  personality  dethroned  her  first.  It  is  often  a
question  of  words  at  what  pomt  the  term  should  be  first  api:)lied — what
degree  of  independent,  intercurrent,  persistent  memory,  altered  faculty  and
diathesis,  is  needed  to  make  one  feel  that  here  is  a  true  psychical
dimori^hism,  a  second  mould  into  which  the  jjlastic  life  of  the  intelligence
might  equally  well  have  run.

The  experimenters  of  whom  I  have  been  speakmg  here  paused  just
beyond  tlie  threshold  of  the  enquiry.  The  true,  the  important  difficulty  of
classification  occurs  (as  Professor  Newbold,  at  any  rate,  knows  well)  at  a
later  stage  altogether.  It  occurs  when  the  intruding  type  represents  no
longer  a  partition  merely,  or  an  allotroijism,  but  something  superadded  and
sujjernormal,  somethmg  which  seems  to  lie  beyond  the  native  scheme  and
scope  of  man.  There  is  the  point  where  previous  beliefs  or  disbeliefs  are
rudely  tested.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  for  instance, — nay,  in
cases  which  in  strangeness  fall  far  short  of  hers, — we  may  some  day  see  the
conservative  critic  driven  to  cling  to  this  very  hypothesis  of  secondary
personalities  ; — to  stretch  to  breaking-point  the  conception  of  a  subliminal
self.  For  what  else  would  have  to  be  admitted  would  be  more  perturbing
still.

Problems  such  as  these  should  be  slowly  and  carefully  approached.  In
the  mean  time  there  is  a  real  satisfaction  in  the  thought  that  the  younger
generation  of  experimental  psychologists  are  entering  upon  a  line  of
investigation  from  which  some  of  them,  I  doubt  not,  are  destined  some  day
to  reap  a  rich  reward  of  discovery.  Only  let  them  follow  fearlessly  wherever
truth  may  lead,  and  Ijeware  of  preconstructing  from  too  few  factors  their
formula  for  the  Sum  of  Things.


Supplement.]


Reviews.


319


III.

REVIEWS.

PredvestniJci  Spiritizma  za  poslednie  250  lyet. (The  Precursors  of  Sijiritism
for  the  last  250  years.) By  A.  M.  Aksakoff,  St.  Petersburg,  1895.

It  is  perhaps  hardly  fair  to  quote  Mr.  AksakofF s  title  without  his
sub-title.  He  must  now  be  almost,  if  not  quite,  the  doyen  of  Continental
SpiritLsts,  and  no  man  is  better  qualiiied  to  write  a  history  of  the
movement,  and  at  the  first  glance  we  might  hope  to  have  such  a  history
here.  To  prevent  disappointment,  therefore,  it  is  well  to  say  at  once
that  he  does  not  profess  to  give  more  than  ' '  Published  Cases  of  Spontaneous
Medianic  Phenomena  from  the  year  1661,  and  the  transition  to  Experi-
mentalism  in  1848."

It  follows  that  much  of  the  present  work  is  but  a  translation  into
Russian  of  cases  with  which  the  English  student  is  familiar.  We  need  not
deal  here  with  Glanville  or  the  Wesleys,  with  Tedworth  or  Hydesville,  nor
even  with  the  recent  report  of  the  Continental  observers  of  Eusapia.  But
two  of  the  cases  recorded,  though  previously  published  in  one  form  or
another,  are  inaccessible  to  western  readers,  and  for  different  reasons  deserve
to  be  made  more  widely  known.

The  first  occurred  in  a  small  Russian  village,  and,  by  the  happy  accident
that  it  resulted  in  damage  to  Government  property,  became  the  subject  of
an  official  enquiry  of  an  obviously  unprejudiced  character.  Mr.  Aksakoff
has  published  verbatim,  without  comment,  the  whole  of  the  official  papers,
including  the  depositions  of  all  the  witnesses.  From  these  I  have  compiled
a  connected  narrative.  The  other  case  does  not  enjoy  this  almost  unique
"objectivity"  of  record  ;  but  the  facts  stated  are  certainly  among  the  most
remarkable  of  their  class,  and,  in  spite  of  obvious  deficiencies  in  the
testimony,  are  sufficiently  in  analogy  with  other  cases  to  deserve  attention.

In  January,  1853,  a  small  cavalry  post  (etape)  at  the  hamlet  of  Liptsy,
in  the  Government  of  Kharkoff,  was  commanded  by  a  Captain  .Jandachenko,
who,  with  his  wife,  lived  in  a  small  four-roomed  house,  which  liad  been
taken  by  the  village  community  for  his  official  residence.  It  had  previously
belonged  to  peasants,  in  whose  time  nothing  abnormal  had  occurred  in  it.
It  seems,  indeed,  that  in  the  beginning  of  January,  1852,  something
mysterious  had  happened  there,  but,  as  this  is  only  casually  alluded  to  by
one  of  the  witnesses,  we  must  pass  on  a  year,  to  January  9th,  1853,
when  the  present  history  opens.

On  that  day  it  appears  that  the  house  was  occupied  by  Captain  Janda-
chenko and  his  wife,  who  had  a  bedroom  and  sitting-room  on  one  side  of
the  passage  ;  on  the  other  side  was  a  store-room  and  the  kitchen,  in  which
the  servants  also  slept.  On  this  evening  there  were  five  of  them,  two  maids
named  Efimia  and  Matrona,  the  latter  hired,  the  former  a  serf  of  the

Y


320


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


captain's,  and  three  soldiers,  one  of  them,  Vasili  (Basil),  being  the  captain's
orderly,  and  the  other  two  attached  to  him  temporarily.

After  the  servants  had  put  out  the  light,  but  before  they  liad  gone  to
sleep — such  is  the  account  which  they  give  without  variations — sundry
small  objects,  such  as  cups  and  wooden  platters  standing  on  the  stove,  were
thrown  about  the  room.  A  light  was  struck,  but  the  throwing  continued
when  no  one  was  looking,  and  no  cause  could  be  found  for  it.  Next  day,
the  5th,  Captain  Jandachenko  mentioned  this  to  his  parish  priest,  Victor
Selyeznetr,  who  came  with  his  church  officers  on  the  6th,  the  Epiphany, ^
after  the  ceremony  of  blessing  the  water  in  the  river.  "  On  entering  the
house,"  he  says,  "  I  saw  a  small  stone  fall  in  the  passage  ;  a  cup  full  of
dumplings  fell  at  my  feet  in  the  midst  of  the  attendants  who  were  carrying
the  icons,  and  I  heard  repeated  knocks."  Captain  Jandachenko  adds  that
after  the  house  had  been  sprinkled  with  holy  water — the  object  of  the
priest's  visit  —  "an  axe  was  thrown  from  the  loft  in  the  passage  against  the
doors  with  remarkable  velocity  and  noise."  Another  priest,  Father
Lobkovsky,  whose  curiosity  had  been  aroused  by  what  he  had  been  told
during  the  blessing  of  the  river,  was  also  present,  with  several  other  official
visitors  to  the  captain.  They  went  into  the  kitchen,  when,  "  in  the  sight  of
all  of  us,  there  was  smashed  against  the  door  in  the  passage,  where  no  human
being  was,  a  bottle  of  varnish,  which,  according  to  the  captain,  had  been
standing  in  tlie  sitting-room  cujDboard  under  lock  and  key."  Moreover,  a
soldier  reported — though  tliis,  as  we  know,  is  "not  evidence" — that  a  tub
full  of  vegetables  in  the  cellar  had  left  its  place  and  upset  its  contents.

Undaunted  by  the  small  success  of  the  aspersion,  the  good  priests
brought  the  heavy  artillery  of  the  church  into  jjlay  next  day.  With  the
assistance  of  a  third  father,  of  the  church  officials  and  the  icons,  a  solemn
service  was  read.  Hardly  had  they  begun,  when  a  stone  was  thrown  in  the
kitchen,  which  was  empty,  and  smashed  a  window  in  the  sight  of  all.  Then
a  piece  of  wood,  followed  by  a  pail  of  water,  flew  out  of  the  kitchen  into
the  midst  of  the  assembly,  the  latter  upsetting  in  the  midst.  The  culminating
horror  was  the  fall  of  a  stone  into  the  basin  of  holy  water  itself.  The  house
was  again  thoroughly  sprinkled,  and  the  holy  objects  carried  back  to  the
•church  ;  but  as  the  phenomena  still  continued,  the  captain  begged  two  of
the  priests  to  return  and  read  the  formal  prayers  for  the  exorcism  of  evil
spirits.

This  seems  to  have  had  little  more  eifect  than  the  previous  service.  The
phenomena  continued  in  the  presence  of  several  fresh  witnesses,  and  on  the
8th  took  a  new  turn.  The  bed  in  the  room  of  the  captain  and  his  wife
caught  fire  in  the  presence  of  both  ;  they  put  it  out,  but  it  immediately
blazed  out  in  a  fresh  place,  and  had  to  be  again  extinguished.  At  the  same
time  two  blows  were  struck  on  the  window  by  a  brick,  and  four  panes  of
glass  broken.  Captain  .Jandachenko  was  at  last  driven  to  change  his
quarters,  but  mo\ed  back  after  a  few  days.  At  the  same  time  he  again  had
recourse  to  the  services  of  a  priest,  which  for  the  time  were  successful,

1  There  seems  to  be  some  discrepancy  in  the  evidence  here  ;  the  Captain  seems  to
say  that  the  priest's  first  visit  was  on  the  5th,  while  Father  Selyezneff  himself  says
that  he  did  not  go  before  the  6th.


Supplement.]


Reviews.


321


as  the  phenomena  were  now  reduced  to  nothing  worse  tlian  some  "human
groaning  "  of  a  most  doleful  description,  heard  by  the  servants  in  the
kitchen.

But  after  a  few  days  it  all  began  again  ;  and  on  Januaiy  22nd  Captain
Jandaclienko  brought  some  friends  in  to  witness  what  was  going  on.  On
this  occasion  the  orderly,  Vasily,  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  head  by  a
knife  thrown  by  the  evil  agency.  Things  grew  worse  and  worse,  and  a
number  of  peasants  were  brought  into  the  house  to  watch  ;  but,  in  spite  of
all  care,  next  afternoon  (the  23i'd)  the  roof  of  the  house  caught  fire  and  was
burnt  off,  the  efforts  of  the  firemen  being  much  hindered  by  a  peculiarly
thick  and  malodorous  smoke  blown  in  their  faces.  This  led  to  an  inquiry
by  the  local  "  ispravnik  "  (head  of  the  district  j^olice),  which  took  place  on
February  4th  and  5th.

The  evil  spirits  yielded  for  a  time  to  government  interference  ;  and
though,  as  appears  from  the  vei'y  full  report  of  the  evidence,  nothing  was
found  to  direct  suspicion  against  any  one,  all  was  quiet  for  some  months.
Captain  Jandaclienko  had  in  the  meantime  permanently  removed  to  another
house,  and  here,  on  July  23rd,  the  old  games  began  once  more.  In  one
room  the  pillows  were  thrown  off  the  beds,  in  another  jars  of  water  were
vipset  The  captain  at  once  applied  officially  for  help,  and  again  a  guard  of
peasants  was  set  all  about  the  house.  In  vain  ;  things  were  more  lively
than  ever  through  the  24th,  and  in  the  morning  of  the  25th  the  most
serious  troubles  of  all  began.  At  eight  o'clock  the  thatched  roof  was
suddenly  found  to  be  on  fire.  It  was  extinguished  before  the  fire-engine
came,  but  for  precaution  engine  and  firemen  were  kept  on  the  sjjot.  At
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  thick  smoke  was  seen  coming  from  a  shed  in  a
wing  of  the  house.  A  soldier  crawled  in  on  hands  and  knees,  and  dragged
out  a  hay  mattress  full  of  smouldering  fire,  which  was  put  out.  Finally,  at
five  o'clock  a  sudden  gust  of  wind  arose,  and  witli  it  the  whole  roof  of  the
wing  burst  into  flames.  The  fire  spread  so  rapidly  that  tlie  men  not  only
could  not  start  the  engine,  but  had  great  difficulty  in  draggmg  it  into  a  place
of  safety  ;  and  with  the  captain's  house  four  neighbouring  cottages  were
completely  burnt  to  the  ground.

This  serious  damage  of  course  led  to  a  renewed  enquiry,  in  the  course  of
which  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  village  as  well  as  of  the  house  seem  to
have  been  examined.  This  lasted  for  five  days,  from  July  27tli  to  31st,
after  which,  no  result  having  been  arrived  at,  the  matter  was  transferred  to
the  civil  court  at  Kharkofl,  where  it  was  duly  pigeon-holed.  It  was  only
after  repeated  enquiries,  and  at  last  after  vigorous  representations  from
headquarters,  that  the  final  inquiry  was  held  in  July  1856,  three  years  after
the  events.  The  evidence  previously  given  was  duly  recapitulated,  and  the
only  decision  given  was  to  the  effect  that  there  was  no  suspicion  to  be  traced
against  any  one.  There  the  matter  was  left  till  Mr.  Aksakofl'  published  the
documents  in  extenso.

Naturally  the  enquiry  is  more  remarkable  for  impartiality  than  f(jr
intelligence.  It  was  recognised  that  the  kitchen  was  always  the  focus  of
the  "  evil  force,"  but  so  little  effort  was  made  to  connect  the  ijhenomena
with  any  particular  person  that  it  is  very  difficult,  often  impossible,  in  .spite
of  the  voluminous  depositions,  to  discover  exactly  who  was  present  on  any


322


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


particular  occasion.  The  evidence  of  the  captain's  wife,  an  important
witness,  one  would  think,  seems  never  to  have  been  taken.  With  a  some-
what wider  experience  of  similar  cases,  we  naturally  look  at  once  to  the
servant  maid  Efimia.  She,  at  least,  was  in  the  house  during  both  periods  of
activity,  which  the  other  maid,  Matrona,  apjaarently  was  not.  The  orderly,
Vasily,  may  have  had  his  share  ;  it  is  remarkable  that  the  second  outburst
in  July  exactly  coincided  with  his  return  to  the  house  after  a  spell  in
hospital.  But  he  came  only  for  a  day  or  two,  and  reported  himself  again  in
Kharkoff  on  the  24th,  the  day  before  the  three  fires,  with  which,  theref<jre,
he  can  have  had  no  direct  concern  ;  the  fact  that  he  was  wounded  on
the  first  occasion  can  hardly  be  said  to  tell  one  way  more  than  the  other.
However,  if  Efimia  was  the  actual  criminal,  she  must  have  attained  a
creditable  degree  of  skill  to  carry  on  her  mystifications  in  daylight,  often
under  the  eyes  of  a  whole  crowd  of  peojjle,  without  ai'ousing  the  least  trace
of  suspicion  in  the  breast  of  a  Russian  police  officer.

The  second  case  to  which  I  have  referred  is  one  of  a  more  complicated
and  startling  sort.  It  was  never  subjected  to  a  similar  enquiry,  but  on  the
other  hand  it  had  the  advantage  of  investigation  during  a  considerable  period
by  apparently  intelligent  sceptics  ;  and  it  is  somewhat  less  remote  in  time,  so
that  Mr.  Aksakoff  has  been  able  to  make  enquiries  and  give  information  as
to  the  credibility  of  the  witness  on  whose  evidence  the  phenomena  are  given.
The  whole  story  appears  to  have  been  widely  known  in  Eastern  Russia  at
the  time  of  the  occurrences,  and  was  warmly  discussed  in  the  local  papers.

The  narrative  is  given  in  tlie  words  of  Mr.  ShchapofF,  a  country  gentleman
living  in  a  house  some  20  miles  from  Iletski,  in  the  government  of  Uralsk,
not  far  from  Orenburg.  In  the  following  I  give  a  much  compressed  outline,
as  far  as  possible  in  his  own  words  : —

"  On  November  16th,  1870,"  .says  Mr.  Shchapoff,  "I  returned  to  my
house  from  Iletski,  a  town  some  30  versts  away.  My  household  consisted
of  my  mother  and  mother-in-law,  two  ladies  each  aged  about  C9,  my  wife,  a
little  over  20,  and  our  infant  daughter.  My  wife  at  once  told  me  that  they
had  had  no  sleejj  for  two  nights  on  account  of  certain  strange  disturbances.
I  was  at  first  inclined  to  laugh,  till  I  found  that  my  wife  was  in  earnest,  and
heard  from  her  the  following  narrative.

"  On  the  night  of  the  14th  the  infant  had  been  peevish,  and  in  order  to
quiet  her,  our  cook  Maria  had  been  sent  for  to  jjlay  the  harmonica  and
dance  to  her.  This  sent  the  child  to  sleep.  My  wife  then  sat  with  a
neighbour,  the  miller's  wife,  and  was  chatting  with  her,  when  the  latter  ■
suddenly  started  up  in  alarm,  but  immediately  begged  my  wife  not  to  be
afraid,  explaining  that  she  had  suddenly  fancied  that  some  one  was  passing
the  window.  Presently  they  both  saw  a  shadow  flitting  past  outside,  and
were  about  to  go  out  to  see  wliat  it  was,  when  they  heard  in  the  loft  over
their  heads  the  sound  of  dancing,^  exactly  similar  to  that  of  Maria,  and
clearly  recognisable  by  the  characteristic  rhythm  of  a  difficult  '  three-footed  '
(double-shuffie  ? )  figure  which  she  had  been  performing.  They  thought
that  Maria  was  practising,  till  they  found  her  asleep  in  the  kitchen,  the  steps
overhead  still  continuing.  The  girl  immediately  took  a  light  and  searched
the  loft,  but  without  result.  Meanwhile  the  two  ladies  heard  loud  raps  on
the  window  panes. They  got  the  miller  and  the  gardener  to  look  round  the


Supplement.]


Reviews.


323


house  ;  but  nothing  was  found,  and  during  the  search  both  the  raps  on  the
window  and  the  dancing  overhead  continued  till  morning  and  kept  the  house
awake.  Precisely  the  same  thing  began  at  ten  o'clock  the  next  evening,  in
spite  of  a  thorough  search  of  house  and  ground  by  tlie  whole  force  of
domestics  and  neighboui-s.

"  I  saw  the  miller,  who  confirmed  this  account,  but  added  that  he  had
found  under  the  cornice  and  cleared  away  a  pigeon's  nest,  which  he  thought
might  be  the  cause  of  the  noises.  I  was  satisfied  by  this  explanation,  and
gave  my  wife  a  lecture  on  her  superstition,  put  the  whole  thing  out  of
my  head,  and  sat  down  after  tea  to  read  Livingstone's  Travels  in  Africa.
Through  the  glazed  doors  which  separated  our  rooms  I  heard  my  wife  and
child  go  to  bed.  All  was  quiet  ;  I  read  with  interest  for  some  two
hours,  when  I  heard,  as  though  from  the  ceiling,  a  sort  of  vague  scratching.
I  thought  the  dog  had  got  into  the  loft,  when  presently  the  sound  changed
to  the  unmistakable  "  three-time"  of  the  dance.  It  ceased  and  began  again  ;
I  could  distinctly  localise  the  place  in  the  ceiling,  over  my  wife's  bed.  As  I
listened,  trying  to  understand,  I  heard  a  rap  on  the  window  of  my  wife's
room,  a  dull  rap,  as  though  with  the  flesh  of  the  finger  on  the  window  frame.
After  a  few  seconds  the  rap  became  clear,  like  the  sound  of  a  finger-nail  on
the  pane.  I  went  to  look  through  the  glazed  door  of  my  wife's  bedroom,  and
saw  by  the  night-lamp  that  she  was  fast  asleep  in  bed.  Just  then  came
another  vnp,  much  louder,  as  though  impatient ;  it  awoke  my  wife,  who  looked
about  her,  and  asked  me  if  I  heard.  In  reply  I  asked  her  if  she  had  not
been  rapping.  As  though  in  answer  to  my  question,  there  came  a  rap  on  the
window  beside  my  own  bed.  I  rushed  to  it,  and  looked  out  into  the  yard,
which  was  brilliantly  lighted  by  the  moon.  I  could  see  no  one.  I  concealed
myself  behind  the  window,  and  held  my  breath,  hoping  thus  to  catch  the
oifender  ;  suddenly  two  deafening  blows  were  dealt  the  outer  wall  close  to  my
ear,  so  violent  that  the  house  shook  as  though  witli  an  earthquake.  I
involuntarily  jumped  away,  my  wife  called  out  "  There  !  It  has  begun
again  !  "  and  began  to  pray.  I  took  my  great-coat  and  gun,  sent  the  cook
for  the  gardener,  went  out,  and  called  the  dogs.  Neither  they  nor  I  could
find  any  ti'aces,  though  the  night  was  as  clear  as  day,  and  perfectly  still.
There  were  no  marks  on  the  snow  beneath  the  windows  where  the  raps
had  been  heard.  While  we  were  outside  we  distinctly  heard  blows  on  wall
and  window  ;  when  we  returned  with  empty  hands,  those  who  were  in  the
house  asked  us  if  we  had  not  been  making  the  noise  from  without.  All  this
time  the  scratching  and  dancing  over  our  heads  continued.  We  searched  the
loft  with  lamps  and  lanterns  ;  while  we  were  in  it  not  a  sound  was  heard,  but
as  soon  as  we  returned  to  the  room  beneath  the  noises  began  again.

"  After  a  sleepless  night  we  spent  the  day  in  a  thorough  search  of  the  loft  ;
all  in  vain.  When  the  night  came,  things  were  worse  rather  than  better.
The  house  was  crowded  with  neighbours,  yet  the  sounds  on  windows  and
walls  went  on  very  loudly,  resembling  in  character  the  beating  of  a  drum.
Other  phenomena  occurred,  for  instance  a  loud  dull  noise  in  the  passage,  as
though  a  heavy  sack  of  flour  had  been  thrown  down  from  the  loft.  We
rushed  out  to  see  what  had  happened,  and  had  hardly  closed  the  door  behind
us  when  it  received  such  a  violent  blow  that  the  solidity  of  the  hinges
seemed  to  be  severely  tried. In  neither  case  could  we  find  any  cause.


324


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


"Next  day  the  phenomena  were  much  less  violent,  and  in  a  day  or  two
they  ceased  entirely.  I  spoke  to  my  friends  about  them,  and  during  a  visit
from  one  of  them  some  weeks  later,  on  December  20th,  we  determined  to  try
an  experiment  by  getting  Maria  to  repeat  the  dance  witli  which  all  had
begun  on  the  former  occasion.  To  our  surprise,  as  soon  as  she  had  gone
through  a  few  turns  of  the  dance,  raps  began  on  the  window-pane.  They
confined  themselves  to  rajjping  out  the  rhythm  of  the  seven  bars  of  the
dance,  finishing  each  time  with  two  or  three  louder  blows.  This  ceased  at
midnight.  Next  night  the  raps  began  without  any  preliminary  dancing  at
all,  combined  with  a  strange  dull  sound  which  we  agreed  cam.e  from  the
chimney  of  the  stove.  Then  objects  lying  on  the  ground,  such  as  boots  and
slipi^ers,  began  to  fly  through  the  air,  up  to  the  ceiling,  or  against  walls  or
doors  ;  they  were  sometimes  observed  to  give  a  sort  of  hiss  as  they  flew.
But  the  strangest  thing  was  that  when  they  fell  on  the  felt-covered  floor,
they  made  a  sound  which  did  not  belong  to  them  ;  for  instance  a  piece  of
stuff  from  the  bedclothes  fell  with  a  sound  like  a  hard  heavy  body,  whereas
hard  bodies  fell  with  no  sound  at  all.  The  j^henomena  grew  gradually  weaker
and  then  ceased.

"  Ten  days  later  we  had  a  party  of  friends  to  see  in  the  new  year,  1871,  and
repeated  the  experiment  of  asking  Maria  to  dance.  We  heard  nothing  till
past  twelve  and  were  going  to  bed,  when  the  drumming  began,  and  grew
louder  and  louder  on  the  window-pane  of  my  wife's  room,  then  on  the  walls,
etc.,  as  before.  We  set  ourselves  to  observe  ;  those  who  were  outside  the
house  heard  the  noise  from  inside,  and  vice  versa.  The  rajjs  then  transferred
themselves  to  the  glazed  door  of  my  wife's  room,  up  and  down  which  they
ran,  now  in  small  .shrill  shakes,  now  louder  and  more  measured.  At  times
we  heard  vague  deep  vocal  sounds  which  made  us  turn  to  one  another  and
say,  '  Did  you  do  that  ? '  and  then  laugli  at  our  involuntary  suspicions.

"  The  phenomena  now  continued  without  our  attempting  to  produce  them
by  the  dance.  On  January  8th  my  wife  fainted  on  seeing  a  ball  of  light
float  from  under  her  bed,  small  at  first,  but  growing  to  the  size  of  an  india-
rubber  ball  as  big  as  a  soup-plate.  Next  day  the  raps  began  in  the  day-time,
at  3  p.m.,  when  she  had  lain  down  to  sleep,  and  from  this  time  they
followed  her  everywhere  as  she  walked  about  the  room.  This  development
troubled  us  both  greatly,  and  alarmed  us  as  to  her  health  ;  for  though  she
was  not  particularly  afraid  of  the  phenomena,  she  always  felt  a  peculiar
weakness  when  they  began,  with  a  strong  tendency  to  sleep.  We  decided
therefore  to  go  for  a  month  to  my  town-house.  But  the  first  person  we  met
in  town  was  my  friend.  Dr.  ShustofF,  who  on  hearing  my  account  at  once
explained  that  the  phenomena  were  due  to  electric  or  magnetic  force,  arising
from  some  peculiarity  either  in  the  soil  beneath  our  house  or,  possibly,  in
my  wife's  organism.  This  not  very  lucid  explanation  was  enough  to  cheer
our  unlearned  minds,  and  we  decided  to  return  to  the  country  with  the
doctor  for  a  night  at  least.  We  did  so,  and  set  Maria  to  dance.  The
phenomena  occurred,  though  only  faintly  ;  but  he  was  able  to  hear  raps  on
my  wife's  bedroom  window  while  she  was  visibly  asleep  on  the  other  side  of
the  room.  The  doctor  again  expounded  his  theory  of  electricity,  and  we
were  relieved  to  think  that  we  could  put  out  of  our  heads  the  tormenting
idea  of  evil  spirits. Even  my  mother,  who  had  hitherto  been  praying  and


Supplement.  ]


Reviews.


325


crossing  herself  without  producing  any  visible  effect  on  the  phenomena,  felt
that  she  could  breathe  again.  Still  we  decided  to  carry  out  our  intention  of
staying  a  time  in  town.  The  servants  told  us  that  nothing  hapj^ened  during
our  absence.  On  one  occasion  I  went  there  with  a  friend,  and  set  Maria  to
dance,  but  not  a  sound  resulted.

"  We  returned  on  January  21st.  Hardly  had  my  wife  gone  to  bed  when
the  raps  recommenced  and  things  began  to  fly  about — dangerous  things  now,
e.g.,  a  table-knife  was  hurled  violently  against  the  door.  This  continued  in
spite  of  the  care  with  which  we  shut  up  all  such  objects  ;  knives  and  forks
which  had  been  put  into  a  closed  cujaboard  in  the  evening  used  sometimes  to
fly  about  at  midnight,  and  some  were  found  sticking  in  the  wall  by  our  bed.
We  were  now  thoroughly  alarmed,  and  I  was  grateful  for  the  visits  of  friends
who  came  out  of  curiosity  to  stay  with  us.

"  The  doctor's  theory  of  electricity  had  finally  to  be  given  up  on  January
24th.  That  night  a  visitor,  Mr.  AlekseefT,  was  sitting  talking  to  my  wife,
and  I  was  carrying  the  baby  and  singing  to  it.  When  I  stopped  singing  the
other  two  asked  me  to  go  on  with  the  tune  ;  then  they  asked  me  to  change
it  ;  I  did  so,  and  then  for  the  first  time  noticed  that  the  raps  on  the  wiiidow
were  beating  time  to  me.  Mr.  Alekseeff  began  to  sing  ;  the  invisible  fingers
beat  time  to  every  tune,  going  astray  only  when  he  purposely  made  a  sudden
change  in  tune  and  rhythm.  We  then  tried  singing  in  a  whisper — the
whisper  was  reduced  to  a  mere  movement  of  the  lips — finally  the  tune  was
repeated  only  mentally  ;  yet  the  raps  kept  time  with  perfect  accuracy.  The
force  was  gifted  not  only  with  hearing  and  understanding,  but  with  the
power  of  divination.  We  got  my  wife  to  move  to  a  bed  close  to  the  glazed
door  ;  the  change  was  followed  by  a  perfect  torrent  of  raps  on  the  glass.
We  then  found  that  the  force  would  rap  as  many  times  as  any  of  us  either
rapped  out  on  the  glass  or  silently  willed.  My  mother  now  suggested  that
we  should  chant  the  Lord's  Prayer  ;  there  was  not  a  rap  to  be  heard  beyond
a  sort  of  chord  at  the  end.  Thinking  that  the  chant  was  perhaps  not  lively
enough,  I  tried  the  Easter  Hymn  ;  again  not  a  sound  !  My  friend  sang  a
secular  tune,  which  was  immediately  accompanied  with  embellishments  !
Just  then  our  Tartar  servant  entered  the  room,  and  we  asked  him  to  chant
his  prayer.  Silence  at  once.  We  told  him  to  say  it  faster,  but  however
quickly  he  gabbled  his  'Allah  bismillah  '  there  was  not  a  rap  in  answer.
But  when  I  tried  to  imitate  his  tone  in  singing  the  invocation  to  the  spirits
from  the  Freischatz,  every  bar  called  forth  particularly  loud  raps.

"I  then  began  to  put  questions.  'Are  you  a  man?'  Silence.  'A
spirit?'  One  rap.  '  What  sort  of  spirit  ?  Good?'  No  answer.  'Evil?'
Two  loud  raps.  '  What  is  your  name? '  And  I  went  through  all  the  names
of  good  spirits  I  could  think  of  without  getting  a  reply.  But  when  I  came
to  the  general  name  of  the  Power  of  Evil,  and  hesitated  before  pronouncing-
it,  the  raps  began  as  though  trying  to  utter  what  I  had  on  the  tip  of  my
tongue  ;  and  as  I  spoke  the  word  '  Devil  ? '  there  came  such  a  deafening
blow,  as  though  froui  the  whole  substance  of  the  door,  that  wo  all  involun-
tarily jumped  backwards.

"I  then  asked  why  a  spirit  should  behave  thus  tome,  and  in  reply  to
various  questions  was  told  that  it  was  '  set  on  at  me. '  I  asked  who  had
done  it,  and  after  going  through  many  names  was  told  that  it  was  the  servant


326


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


of  a  neigbouring  miller  with  whom  I  was  at  the  time  engaged  in  a  law- suit
about  my  mill-pond.  (I  may  mention  that  some  time  before  I  had  met  this
very  man,  who  asked  me  about  the  disturbances,  and  said,  with  a  peculiar
maliciousness  and  confidence,  '  It  will  be  worse  than  that ;  they  will  drag
you  by  the  hair.'  One  day  I  found  my  wife  in  tears,  and  asked  her  what  it
was.  '  They  will  not  let  me  sleep,'  she  said,  '  they  have  been  pulling  my  hair.')
"  At  this  time  the  Orenburg  section  of  the  Imperial  Geographical  Society,
having  heard  of  the  manifestations,  asked  me  for  an  account,  particularly  of
the  meteorological  phenomenon  of  the  ball  of  fire.  After  drawing  it  up  I
took  the  opportunity  of  sending  a  copy  to  Dr.  Shustofl^,  the  author  of  the
electrical  theory,  asking  him  what  he  now  thought.  To  my  surprise  and
satisfaction,  this  letter  was  answered  by  a  visit  from  the  doctor  himself  with
two  friends,  Mr.  Akutin,  a  civil  engineer  employed  on  government  work,  and
Mr.  Savicheff,  a  local  man  of  letters  and  poet,  editor  of  the  Uralsk  Military
Gazette.  The  three  presented  themselves  merely  as  interested  enquirers,
though  it  subsequently  appeared  that  they  had  been  officially  appointed  a
committee  of  enquiry  by  General  Verevkin,  governor  of  the  pi'ovince.  I
placed  my  house  and  family  entirely  at  their  disposal,  and  they  began  with  a
strict  examination  of  the  rooms.  The  manifestations,  which  had  ceased  for
a  time,  began  again  on  the  first  evening  of  their  visit,  with  raps,  flying
objects,  etc.  Next  morning  they  set  up  the  apparatus  tliey  had  brought  with
them,  breaking  up  part  of  the  floor  of  my  wife's  bedroom  in  order  to  plant
an  iron  rod  in  the  soil  beneath  ;  the  other  point  of  it  was  directed  towards
the  glazed  door,  the  glass  of  which  they  covered  with  tinfoil.  They  brought
also  a  Leyden  jar,  magnets,  and  other  instruments  ;  but  I  may  say  at  once
that  none  of  the  apparatus  threw  any  light  whatever  on  the  causes  of  the
phenomena.  A  detailed  journal  of  observations  was  kept,  and  we  took  turns
to  watch  in  my  wife's  room,  whence  the  chief  phenomena  seemed  to  proceed.

"  Our  first  aim  was  to  establish  some  sort  of  system  in  the  phenomena  ;
but  they,  on  the  other  hand,  seemed  to  take  pleasure  in  deceiving  us.  Thus
quite  at  the  beginning,  as  we  were  sitting  at  tea,  the  tea-thmgs  began  to  fly
away  in  straight  lines  from  my  wife.  As  soon  as  we  thought  we  had
established  the  fact  of  some  sort  of  repulsive  power  in  her,  she  went  to  the
sideboard  and  opened  the  door  ;  the  things  inside  began  to  fly  towards
and  past  her.  However  we  watched,  we  never  saw  anything  at  the  moment
of  starting,  but  always  when  flying  or  falling. '  We  got  my  wife  to  touch  the
things  in  the  cupboard  in  turn  ;  none  of  them  moved,  but  while  we  were  all
watching  them,  something  at  the  other  end  of  the  room,  a  candlestick  or
ladle,  would  come  flying  past  and  fall  near  us.

"This  continued  for  several  days,  till  things  took  a  new  turn.  One
evening  Akutin,  who  was  in  sentry  duty  in  my  wife's  room,  suddenly  called
to  us  to  come  in.  He  told  us  that  he  had  been  listening  to  some  indefinite
rustlings  on  the  bed,  where  my  wife  was  fast  asleep,  and  it  had  occurred  to
him  to  make  a  slight  scratching  with  his  own  nails  on  the  silk  coverlet.
This  had  been  immediately  replied  to  by  a  similar  scratching.  He  repeated
the  experiment  in  our  presence.  The  result  was  as  he  had  described  ;  the
sound  he  made  was  repeated  at  once  and  at  the  same  spot. The  exi^eriment

1  Compare  Mr.  Bristuw's  case  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  389.


Supplement.]


Reviews.


327


was  varied  ;  a  defiiiite  number  of  sounds  were  made  of  different  intensity,
on  coverlet,  pillow,  bedstead  or  chair  ;  they  were  always  repeated  exactly  and
at  the  same  spot.  Akutin  then  asked  which  of  us  had  made  the  sounds,  and
as  he  went  through  our  names  the  same  rustling  sound  invariably  indicated
the  person  who  had  in  fact  made  the  sound.  Needless  to  say  that  all  this
time  we  kept  my  wife  carefully  under  observation  ;  she  was  lying  with  her
head  tiirned  away,  so  that  she  could  not  look  at  us  to  see  who  was  doing  it.

"Akutmwas  silent  and  disturbed  for  a  time.  He  then  began  to  ask
questions  on  such  things  as  literature  and  politics,  for  instance  about  the
events  of  the  Franco-German  war,  which  was  then  going  on.  He  invariably
received  correct  answers,  such  as  could  not  have  been  given  by  my  wife,
who  took  no  interest  in  political  matters,  and  never  read  the  papers,  which,
indeed,  we  were  not  taking  in.  Purposely  misleading  questions  were
received  with  obstinate  silence.  Akutin  continued  to  ask  in  French  and
German,  languages  unknown  to  most  of  those  present.  The  result  was  just
the  same  ;  the  answers  were  always  correct.  Akutin  went  on  to  ask  about
the  future  ;  which  side  would  win  ?  The  answer  was,  the  French,  and
Gambetta  would  be  President.  Among  other  things  we  were  told  that  the
Socialist  Lassalle  was  alive.  I  thought  he  was  dead,  and  exclaimed,  '  What
nonsense !  '  but  Akutin  corrected  my  mistake.  He  asked  to  be  left  alone,
and  did  not  go  to  bed,  passing  the  night  in  deep  meditation.  Next  morning,
at  breakfast,  he  turned  the  conversation  on  to  politics,  and  convinced  himself
that  my  wife  hardly  knew  of  the  existence  of  the  war,  and  was  utterly
ignorant  of  its  details.  As  for  Lassalle  and  the  rest,  she  had  married  young,
and  her  mind  was  entirely  occupied  with  the  nursery  and  housekeeping.

"  Akutin  now  asked  us  to  move  to  our  town  house  in  Iletski  for  further
observations.  Here  the  phenomena  were  much  weaker  ;  the  raps,  for
instance,  were  only  heard  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  my  wife.  Two
local  physicians  were  called  in  to  observe.  One  of  them,  especially,  a
German,  Dubinsky  by  name,  was  completely  sceptical.  He  first  declared
that  my  wife  made  the  raj)s  by  clicking  her  tongue,  and  made  her  hold  it
out.  The  raps  ceased  for  a  moment  and  began  again.  It  was  now  asserted
that  '  it  was  only  the  beating  of  her  pulse,  and  nothing  more  !  '  When
Akutin  declared  his  intentioa  of  publishing  the  facts.  Dr.  Dubinsky  attacked
him  vehemently,  and  declared  that  he  would  compromise  himself  to  no
purpose,  that  the  whole  thing  was  trickery,  and  that  all  similar  inquiries
had  always  ended  in  a  fiasco.  This  evidently  produced  an  effect  upon  Akutin,
and  made  him  waver.  He  called  upon  us  to  return  at  once  to  the  country  house,
where  I  regret  to  say  that  he  had  recourse  to  means  not  the  most  honour-
able. He  bribed  a  servant  boy  to  say  that  his  mistress  made  the  sounds
herself,  and  then  pretended  that  he  had  caught  her  trying  to  deceive  us  by
throwing  thmgs.  He  declared,  therefore,  that  Dubinsky  was  right,  and  that
he  would  give  such  a  turn  to  his  report  as  would  not  lead  to  any  con-
sequences ;  but  that  he  was  convinced  we  were  victims  of  a  mystification  on
my  wife's  part,  owing  to  some  morbid  tendency  for  which  she  ought  to  be
put  under  medical  treatment.

"  We  accordingly  placed  her  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Dubinsky;  her  health
and  spirits  improved,  the  phenomena  ceased,  and  we  should  have  been  quite
happy  but  for  two  annoyances. First,  the  appearance  of  an  article  in  the


328


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


Uralsk  Military  Gazette,  signed  by  the  three  members  of  the  commission,  to
say  that  the  marvels  at  my  country  house  were  all  the  work  of  human  hands ;
and,  secondly,  a  letter  from  the  governor  of  the  province,  warning  me  that,
as  it  had  been  reported  that  all  the  manifestations  were  susceptible  of  a
perfectly  natural  explanation,  such  '  tricks '  were  not  to  occur  again,  and
reminding  me  of  the  serious  legal  jjenalties  for  the  dissemination  of
suj^erstition.

"  Imagine,  then,  our  horror  when,  on  our  return  to  the  country  in  March,
the  unknown  force  at  once  set  to  work  again.  And  now  even  my  wife's
presence  was  not  essential.  Thus,  one  day  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  a  heavy
sofa  jumj)  off  all  its  four  legs,  and  this  while  my  aged  mother  was  lying  on  it
— to  her  terrible  alarm,  I  need  not  say.  This  was  particularly  startling  to
me,  as  hitherto  I  had  liardly  dared  to  trust  my  own  eyes  ;  I  had  always  been
with  others  who  might  have  influenced  me.  But  this  took  place  in  full
daylight,  there  was  no  one  present  but  my  mother  and  myself,  and  a  servant
in  the  antechamber  ;  and  I  clearly  saw  the  heavy  sofa,  with  my  mother  lying
on  it,  rise  three  or  four  times  clean  off  its  legs.

' '  In  the  evening  of  the  same  or  the  next  day,  as  we  were  in  the  sitting-
room,  there  flew  out  from  a  wash-stand  in  the  antechamber,  in  the  sight  of
us  all,  a  bluish  phosjjhorescent  spark,  with  a  crackling  noise.  It  went  towards
my  wife's  room,  though  she  was  not  there  ;  and  simultaneously  we  saw  some-
tliing  flame  up  inside.  I  ru.shed  in  and  saw  a  cotton  dress,  only  partly  made
up,  burning  on  a  table  in  a  comer.  My  mother-in-law,  who  was  alone  in  the
room,  anticipated  me  in  extinguishing  the  fire  with  a  jug  of  water.  Before
admitting  any  one,  I  made  a  careful  investigation,  and  found  no  explanation
whatever  of  the  flre,  other  than  the  spark  we  had  seen.  There  was  a  strong
smell  of  sulphur  in  the  room,  proceeding  apj)arently  from  the  dress,  the  burnt
portions  of  which  were  still  hot  to  the  touch,  and  steamed  as  though  the
water  had  been  poui-ed  on  hot  iron  instead  of  on  calico.

' '  Though  reluctant  to  leave  my  family  alone  at  such  a  time,  I  was  called  to
the  town  by  unavoidable  business,  and  therefore  asked  a  young  neighbour,
Mr,  Portnoff,  to  come  and  keep  them  company  in  my  absence.  When  I  came
back  the  day  after,  I  found  the  whole  household  on  the  point  of  leaving,  and
the  luggage  outside  the  house  ;  they  said  it  was  impossible  to  stay  there  any
longer,  as  things  had  begun  to  take  fire  of  themselves,  and  the  previous
evening  it  had  come  to  a  spontaneous  combustion  of  my  wife's  dress,  in
endeavouring  to  extinguish  which  Mr.  Portnoff  had  burnt  liis  hands  badly.
Mr.  Portnoff,  whose  hands  were  covered  with  blisters,  gave  me  the  following
account.  On  tlie  evening  of  my  departui-e  the  phenomena  had  begun  with
bright  meteors,which  appeared  dancing  in  the  verandah,  in  front  of  the  sitting-
room  window.  There  were  several  of  them,  varying  in  size  from  a  large
apple  to  a  walnut.  Their  shape  was  round,  their  colour  deep  red  or
bluisli  pinli  ;  they  were  not  quite  transparent,  but  rather  dull.  This
curious  dance  continued  for  some  time  ;  it  seemed  as  though  the  globes  were
trying  to  get  in  at  the  window. My  wife  was  not  asleep  at  the  time.

"Next  evening  they  went  to  sit  in  the  verandah,  the  weather  being  warm.
Portnofl'  returned  for  a  moment  to  the  house  and  found  the  bed  on  fire.  He
called  for  help,  and  the  bedding,  which  was  well  aflame,  was  put  out,  and  a
careful  search  was  made  for  any  remains  of  fire. They  had  again  taken


Supplement.]


Reviews.


329


their  seats  in  the  verandah,  and  were  wondering  what  the  source  of  the  fire
could  be,  as  no  matches  had  been  lighted  in  the  room,  nor  were  there  any
cigarette  smokers  in  the  house,  when  they  again  smelt  burning.  This  time
they  found  the  horse-hair  mattress  on  fire  from  its  underside.  The  fire  had
penetrated  so  far  that  in  their  opinion  it  could  not  have  come  from  any
sparks  previously  overlooked  ;  the  more  so  as  tlie  very  uninflammable
material  contained  no  admixture  of  anything  else.

"  But  this  was  not  all  ;  the  catastrophe  was  still  to  come  which  decided  us
to  leave  the  house  at  once,  in  spite  of  the  inundations  of  the  melting  snows.
I  give  it  in  Portnoffs  own  words.  '  I  was  sitting  playing  the  guitar.  The
miller,  who  had  been  with  us,  got  up  to  leave,  and  was  followed  by  Helena
Efimovna  (Mrs.  Shchapoff).  Hardly  had  she  shut  the  door  behind  her  when
I  heard,  as  though  from  far  off,  a  long  deep-drawn  wail.  The  voice  seemed
familiar  to  me  ;  overcome  with  an  unaccountable  horror  I  rushed  to  the
door,  and  there  in  the  passage  I  saw  a  literal  jjillar  of  fire,  in  the  middle  of
which,  draped  in  flame,  stood  Helena  Efimovna  ;  the  lower  portion  of  her
dress  was  on  fire,  and  the  flames  almost  concealed  her.  T  supposed  that  the
fire  was  not  violent,  as  her  dress  was  quite  a  thin  one,  and  rushed  to  put  ib
out  with  my  hands  ;  but  I  found  it  burnt  them  badly,  as  though  they  were
sticking  to  burning  pitch.  A  sort  of  cracking  noise  came  from  beneath  the
floor,  which  also  shook  and  vibrated  violently.  The  miller  came  back  from
without  to  help,  and  between  us  we  carried  off  the  unconscious  victim  in  her
burnt  dress.'

"My  wife's  account  was  that  as  soon  as  she  passed  through  the  door  into
the  passage  the  floor  shook  beneath  her,  there  came  a  deafening  noise,  and  at
the  same  moment  one  of  the  bluish  sparks,  which  we  had  i^reviously  seen
come  from  the  cupboard,  flew  up  from  below  ;  she  just  had  time  to  cry  out  in
terror,  when  she  found  herself  wrapped  in  tire,  and  lost  consciousness.  It
is  remarkable  that  she  was  not  in  the  least  ljurnt,  though  the  thin  dress  she
was  wearing  was  burnt  all  romid  higlier  than  the  knees,  nor  was  there  any
sign  of  fire  on  her  legs.

' '  The  miller's  account  was  that  he  had  left  the  house  and  was  walking
through  the  garden,  when  he  heard  first  a  noise  and  then  a  cry,  and  turning
round  saw  there  was  fire  in  the  passage.  He  was  so  frightened  that  his  feet
could  hardly  carry  him  to  render  help.

"  After  this  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  run  away.  We  took  refuge  at
the  neighbouring  hamlet  in  a  Cossack's  hut  till  the  floods  subsided,  and
I  carried  out  sooner  than  I  had  intended  a  plan  already  formed  to  leave
my  country  house  and  take  another.  We  had  no  further  return  of  the
phenomena.

"I  ought  to  have  mentioned  in  the  proper  place  that  we  had  one  or  two
cases  of  what  I  have  now  learnt  to  call  materialisation.  The  first  was  a
delicate  pink  hand  like  a  child's,  which  my  wife  saw  drumming  on  the
window-pane.  She  afterwards  saw  on  the  same  j^ane  two  dark  living  things
like  leeches,  which  frightened  her  into  a  swoon.  Another  time  I  was  alone
in  the  house  with  my  wife,  who  was  asleep,  and  I  tried  to  get  a  sight  of  what
it  was  that  was  raijping  on  the  floor  of  her  room.  Time  after  time  the
rapping  stopped  at  the  moment  I  looked  in,  and  began  again  as  soon  as  I
went  away. But  at  last  I  rushed  in  just  as  tlie  raps  were  beginnmg,  and


330


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


was  numbed  with  horror.  I  saw  a  tiny  pink  hand,  like  a  child's,  spring  up
from  the  floor,  disappear  behind  my  wife's  coverlet,  and  pull  at  the  folds,  so
that  I  could  see  with  what  unnatural  quickness  the  folds  moved ,  beginning
from  the  lower  end  to  the  point  by  her  side  where  the  hand  had  disaj^peared.
I  was  horrified,  because  from  my  wife's  position  it  was  absolutely  impossible
that  the  hand  could  be  her  own.

' '  I  have  only  to  add  that  my  wife  was  a  healthy,  religious,  (juiet,
afFectionate  woman,  who  suffered  from  no  ill-health  till  her  death  from
child-birth  eight  years  later."

These  events,  as  has  been  said,  happened  more  than  twenty  years  ago.
But  Mr.  Aksakoff  has  done  his  best  to  collect  all  the  contemporary
confirmative  evidence,  including  letters  written  at  the  time,  certificates  from
several  of  the  witnesses,  the  account  as  it  was  published  at  an  early  stage  of
the  phenomena  in  the  Uralsk  Gazette,  and  the  report  of  Messrs.  Akutin  and
Saviclieff,  in  which  they  say  that  "there  is  nothing  which  is  not  the  work  of
human  hands. "  The  grounds  on  which  they  base  this  conclusion  appear  to
be  that  the  raps  could  be  imitated,  and  that  when  so  produced  it  was
generally  very  diflicult  to  locate  the  spot  from  which  they  came  ;  and  that
the  flying  objects  were  never  seen  to  start,  and  could  only  be  observed  when
flying  or  falling.  They  do  not  appear  to  have  grappled  with  the  facts  as
stated  by  Mr.  Shchapoff ;  but  of  course  their  adverse  verdict  cannot  be
entirely  set  aside.  Finally  it  should  be  added  that  Mr.  Aksakoff  has
copiously  annotated  the  narrative  with  references  to  similar  phenomena  in
the  sijiritistic  literature  with  which  he  is  so  intimately  acquainted.  These
notes  are  not  the  least  valuable  portion  of  the  publication.

This  long  notice  must  close  with  very  brief  mention  of  another  curious
case,  in  which  similar  phenomena  occurred  in  a  Russian  peasant's  hut  near
Nijni  Novgorod.  The  noises  and  the  throwing  of  objects  were  here
accompanied  by  voices,  which  personated  the  "  domovoi ''  or  house-spirit
who  in  popular  belief  is  attached  to  every  Russian  home.  The  voices  used
to  hold  friendly  and  jocose  conversations  with  the  inmates  at  night,  when
the  lights  were  out ;  they  represented  themselves  to  be  a  spirit  peasant
family,  and  discussed  such  village  matters  as  would  be  of  interest  to  a  moujik.
The  medium  in  this  case  was  a  little  girl  of  eight  years  old,  and  the  question
whether  she  could  not  have  played  the  part  without  any  external  assistance
mainly  turns  on  the  physical  possibility  of  so  small  a  child  producing  the
bass  voice  in  which  the  father  domovoi  used  to  talk.  Here,  as  in  Mr.
Shchapoff^s  case,  the  authorities  intervened  with  legal  proceedings  on  the
ground  of  cheating.  The  family  made  a  pilgrimage  to  a  neighbouring
monastery  to  ask  for  a  cessation  of  the  trouble,  and  this  measure  proved
successful.

Waltek  Leaf.


A  iScientific  Demonstration  of  the  Future  Life.  By  Thomson  Jay
Hudson,  Author  of  TIte  Law  of  Psychic  Phenomena,  etc.  (Chicago  :
A.  C.  McClurg  and  Co.,  1895.)

"  The  object  of  this  book  is  to  outline  a  method  of  scientific  inquiry
concerning  the  powers,  attributes,  and  destiny  of  the  soul,  and  to  specifically
point  out  and  classify  a  sufficient  number  of  the  well  authenticated  facts  of


Supplement.]


Reviews.


331


psychic  science  to  demonstrate  the  fact  of  a  future  life  for  mankind."  "In
pursuing  this  inquiry,  I  have  endeavoured  to  follow  the  strictest  rules  of
scientific  induction,  taking  nothing  for  granted  that  is  not  axiomatic,  and
holding  that  there  is  nothing  worthy  of  belief  that  is  not  sustained  by  a  solid
basis  of  well-authenticated  facts."  (Preface).

The  main  argument  of  the  book  is  summarily  stated  in  the  concluding
chapter  as  follows  :  —  "If  Nature  is  constant,  no  faculty  of  the  human  mind
exists  without  a  normal  function  to  perform.  If  no  faculty  exists  without
a  normal  function  to  perform,  those  faculties  which  do  exist  must  perform
their  functions  either  in  this  life  or  a  future  life.  If  man  possesses
faculties  which  perform  no  normal  function  in  this  life,  it  follows  that  the
functions  of  such  faculties  must  be  performed  in  a  future  life.  Or,  to  put
the  argument  in  a  stiU  more  concise  and  purely  syllogistic  form,  the  proposi-
tions stand  thus  : —

' '  Every  faculty  of  the  human  mind  has  a  normal  function  to  perform
either  in  this  life  or  in  a  future  life.

"  Some  faculties  of  the  human  mind  perform  no  normal  functions  in  this
life.

' '  Therefore,  some  faculties  of  the  human  mind  are  destined  to  perform
their  functions  in  a  future  life.

"  N"o  scientist  will  for  a  moment  question  the  soundness  of  the  major
premise  of  the  above  syllogism. It  is  self-evident, — axiomatic.

"No  one  who  is  at  all  familiar  with  the  results  of  modern  scientific
research  in  the  field  of  psychic  phenomena  will  for  a  moment  gainsay  the
minor  premise.  The  one  faculty  of  telejDathy  alone  is  demonstrative  of  the
soundness  of  that  proposition,  to  say  nothing  of  the  faculty  of  intuitive
perception,  etc.

"The  major  and  minor  premises  being  each  demonstrably  true,  the
soundness  of  the  conclusion  that  man  is  destined  to  inherit  a  future  life  is
self-evident." (p.  321.)

We  need  hardly  say  that  the  major  premise  of  this  argument  would  meet
with  much  questioning  by  those  scientists  who  no  longer  believe  in  ' '  facul-
ties," but  who  are  finding  more  and  more  of  the  inter-comiection  of  states  of
consciousness  and  of  sub-consciousness,  and  of  the  dependence  of  all  these
states  on  the  nervous  mechanism. ^

The  minor  premise  rests  on  the  evidence  on  which  the  author  bases  his
fundamental  distinction  between  the  subjective  and  objective  mmd.  This
theory  of  a  dual  mind,  which  was  a  "working  hypothesis,"  and  "formulated
tentatively"  in  the  earlier  book,  he  now  believes  to  have  been  "abundantly
demonstrated  by  the  facts  of  experimental  hypnotism,  cerebral  anatomy,  and
experimental  surgery." (p.  318.)

In  the  second  book  he  jDroceeds  in  this  way  to  carry  it  to  its  "  legitimate
conclusions."  The  "faculties"  of  the  "  subjective  mind  "  have  increased
in  number,  definiteness  and  extent  since  the  earlier  book.  (See  the  review
of  Tlie  Lcao  of  Psychic  Phenomena,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXIV.,  Vol.

1  Compare  the  book  under  review  with,  e.g.,  the  late  and  great  "Gehirn  und
Seele." Flechsig  :  2te  Ausgabe,  mit  Anmerkungen,  1896.


3.32


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


IX.,  p.  231,  and  the  book  itself,  pp.  29,  46,  62,  151,  208,  250,  287-294.)
They  are  recapitulated  in  the  Scientific  Demondration  as  follows  : —

"  1.  The  subjective  mind  is  constantly  amenable  to  control  by  the  power
of  suggestion.

"2.  It  is  incapable  of  independent  reasoning  by  tlie  processes  of
induction.

"3.  Its  power  to  reason  deductively  from  given  premises  to  correct
conclusions  is  practically  perfect.

"4.  It  is  endowed  with  a  perfect  memory.
"5.  It  is  the  seat  of  the  emotions.

"6.  It  possesses  the  power  to  move  ponderable  objects  without  physical
contact.

"7.  It  has  the  power  to  communicate  and  receive  intelligence  otherwise
than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  the  senses.

"  8.  Its  activity  and  power  are  inversely  proportionate  to  the  vigour  and
healthfulness  of  the  physical  organism.

"9.  It  is  endowed  with  the  faculties  of  instinct  and  intuition,  and,
under  certain  conditions,  with  the  power  of  intuitive  cognition  or  perception
of  the  laws  of  Nature.

"  It  needs  no  argument  or  illustration  to  show  that  the  objective  mind
has  little  in  common  with  the  subjective  in  any  of  the  foregoing  attributes,
powers,  and  limitations.  The  objective  mind  (1)  is  manifestly  not  con-
trollable by  the  power  of  suggestion  in  the  sense  in  which  the  subjective
mind  is  so  controlled, — that  is,  against  reason,  experience,  and  the  evidence  of
the  senses  ;  (2)  it  is  capable  of  inductive  reasoning  ;  (3)  its  power  of  de-
ductive reasoning  is  by  no  means  perfect,  nor  does  it  apj^roach  perfection  ;
(4)  its  memoi'y,  in  its  best  estate,  is  very  defective,  and  comj^aratively
speaking,  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  an  uiicertain,  evanescent  ability  to
recall  a  few  of  the  more  prominent  ideas  and  impressions  which  it  has  once
experienced  ;  (5)  it  is  absolutely  destitute  of  emotion  ;  (6)  it  cannot  exercise
the  slightest  kinetic  force  beyond  the  range  of  physical  contact  ;  (7)  it  is
destitute  of  any  power  remotely  akin  to  telejiathy  ;  (8)  the  essential  pre-
requisite to  the  successful  exercise  of  its  highest  joowers  and  functions  is  a
perfectly  sound,  healthy,  normal  physical  organism  ;  (9)  it  is  endowed  with
no  power  which  is  remotely  akin  to  instinct  or  intuition."  (pp.  225-6.)

The  powers  belonging  exclusively  to  the  subjective  mind  are  held  to
constitute  a  "set  of  faculties,  each  jjerfect  in  itself  and  complete  in  the
aggregate, — that  is  to  say,  every  faculty,  attribute,  and  power  necessary  to
constitute  a  complete  personality  being  present  in  perfection  ;  and  we  find
that  the  most  important  of  those  faculties  perform  no  normal  function  in
physical  life.

' '  Here,  then,  we  have  a  personality,  connascent  with  the  physical
organism,  but  possessing  independent  powers  ;  a  distinct  entity,  with  the
intellect  of  a  god  ;  a  human  soul,  filled  with  human  emotions,  affections,
hopes,  aspirations,  and  desires  ;  longing  for  immorta  life  with  a  passionate
yearning  that  passetli  understanding  ;  possessing,  in  a  word,  all  the  in-
tellectual and  moral  attributes  of  a  perfect  manhood,  together  with  a  kinetic
force  often  transcending,  in  its  visible  manifestations,  the  power  of  the


Supplement.]


Reviews.


333


physical  frame;  in  a  word,  'a  perfect  being,  nobly  planned,' — a  being  oi
godlike  powers  and  infinite  possibilities.

"Is  it  conceivable  that  there  has  been  created  such  a  manhood  without
a  mission,  such  faculties  without  a  function,  such  powers  without  a  purpose?"
(pp.  319  and  320.)

It  ought,  however,  to  be  observed  that  the  final  syllogism,  before  quoted,
does  not  involve  the  theory  of  the  dual  mind.  "Not,"  says  the  author,
"that  I  have  the  slightest  doubt  of  the  scientific  accuracy  of  that  hypothesis;
for  I  can  have  none  in  view  of  the  array  of  facts  which  have  been  presented.
But,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  theory  of  a  dual  mind  and  the  theory
of  a  unitary  mind  with  dual  faculties  are  concurrent  hypotheses,  and  lead  to
identical  conclusions.  Hypothesis  is  not  a  final  dogma  :  it  is  merely  an
instrument  of  logic.  It  is  the  divining-rod  of  truth.  Facts  are  primordial,
antecedent,  and  ultimate,  and  exist  independently  of  any  hypothesis  that
may  be  employed  to  account  for  them.  ...  If  the  facts  which  have
been  adduced  do  not  demonstrate  my  thesis,  crudely  and  imperfectly  as  they
have  been  presented,  then  Nature  herself  has  performed  a  mii'acle,  and
demonstrated  her  inconstancy." (pp.  321-2.)

In  looking  back  through  the  book  for  the  "facts"  thus  confidently
appealed  to,  one  finds  only  one  new  line  of  evidence  over  the  former  book,
viz.,  Chap.  XV.,  "  Duality  Demonstrated  by  Anatomy."  Here  Hammond's  ^
Treatise  on  Insanity  is  quoted  to  show  that  "  certain  faculties  of  the  mind
[instincts]  are  not  confined  "  to  the  brain.  This  is  suddenly  transformed  by
a  paralogism  into  "higher  functions  of  intellect,"  (p.  245)  and  these  are  given
the  name,  "subjective  mind,"  and  so  "demonstrated"  to  be  independent
of  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  Since  no  other  work  on  the  anatomy  and
physiology  of  the  nervous  system  is  quoted,  we  wonder  if  possibly  the
author  did  not  get  the  inspiration  for  this  "new  argument  "  from  the  quota-
tion of  Dr.  Hammond's  in  Sargent's  Scientific  Basis  of  Spir  itualism,  (Boston,
Colby  and  Rich,  5th  Ed.,  1887): — "In  the  fact  that  the  spinal  cord  and
sympathetic  ganglia  are  not  devoid  of  mental  power,  we  find  an  explanation
of  some  of  the  most  startling  facts  of  what  is  called  Spiritualism."  (p.  228.)

Aside  from  this  anatomical  demonstration,  there  is  only  repetition  of  the
uncritical  and  loosely  stated  evidence  of  the  kind  given  in  The  Law  of
Psychic  Phenomena.  The  hope  expressed  that  the  review  of  that  work  in  the
Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  234,  would  perhaps  stimulate  the  author  to  some-
thing more  of  that  ' '  steady  experiment  and  laborious  accuracy  which  alone
can  help  towards  his  avowed  object  of  '  bringing  Psychology  within  the  domain
of  the  exact  sciences '  " — this  hope  is  sorely  disappointed  in  the  Scientific
Demonstration  of  the  Future  Life.  For,  after  getting  the  confidence  of  the
reader  through  the  introductory  apostrophe  to  Bacon  and  the  inductive
method,  and  after  a  very  wholesome  criticism  of  the  defectiveness  of  the  old
arguments  of  Analogy,  Authority,  Metaphysics  and  Instinctive  desire,  the
author  then  gives  us  no  new  evidential  material,  either  of  observation  or
experiment.

He  simply  "explains"  everything  ever  reported  in  spiritism,  hypnotism,
telepathy, clairvoyance,  and  religion,  by  means  of his  subjective  and

1  This  author  is  elsewhere  (p.  302)  credited  with  having  "forever  settled  the
relations  between  psycliic  conditions  and  nervous  diseases."


334-


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


objective  entities.  This  is  at  bottom  similar  to  the  strife  over  Apperception
in  Psychology.  For  "subjective"  and  "apperceptive"  are  both  most
convenient  and  even  necessary  terms  for  the  desi-r  'tptum  of  psychical  phe-
nomena, but  to  personify  those  terms  into  faculties  or  entities  for  the
explanation  of  the  phenomena, — this  is  bringing  regression  to  metaphysical
confusion  into  our  modern  Psychology,  which  is  tryinar  so  hard  to  be
scientific.  On  the  other  hand,  the  author  energetically  snatches  away  the
only  class  of  cases  which  seem  to  many  of  us  to  offer  any  evidential
possibility  or  probability — not  to  speak  of  "demonstration"  (of  which  we
are  finding  less  and  less  in  this  world,  not  to  speak  of  any  other) — viz.,  the
residual  cases  in  spiritism.  The  following  method  of  a  forced  disjunctive  is
very  characteristic  of  a  controversialist  who  makes  a  parade  of  "  logic  "  and
"the  rules  of  correct  reasoning."

"I  hold  that  so-called  spiritistic  phenomena  are  valuable  as  evidence  of
a  future  life  only  on  the  supposition  that  none  of  them  emanate  from  dis-
embodied spirits. My  reasons  are  briefly  these  :  —

"  In  the  first  place,  two  antagonistic  hyf)otheses  cannot  both  be  correct ;
nor  can  each  be  pai'tly  true  and  partly  false  :  for  any  hypothesis  that  does
not  explain  all  the  facts  is  necessarily  wrong,  and  therefore  utterly  valueless.
Thus,  if  any  one  of  a  series  of  so-called  spiritistic  phenomena  can  be  demon-
strated to  emanate  from  disembodied  spirits,  the  telepathic  hypothesis  is
necessarily  invalid  as  a  solvent  for  that  series  of  phenomena.  On  the  other
hand,  if  one  of  said  series  can  be  demonstrated  to  be  referable  to  tele-
pathy between  living  persons,  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  is  necessarily  wrong.
In  other  words,  it  is  a  logical  necessity  that,  as  between  two  antagonistic
hypotheses,  one  or  the  other  must  be  wholly  right  and  the  other  wholly
wrong,  or  both  must  be  wholly  wrong.  The  nature  of  the  case  does  not
admit  of  compromise  ;  for  principles  of  natui'al  law  are  not  established  by
majorities  of  facts,  nor  are  there  exceptions  in  the  operation  of  natural  laws.
It  follows  that  if  one  psychic  phenomenon  could  be  scientifically  demon-
strated to  have  been  produced  by  disembodied  spirits,  the  whole  subject
would  be  relegated  to  logical  chaos,  and  some  solution  of  the  mystery  would
have  to  be  sought  for  other  than  that  embraced  in  either  of  the  hypotheses
under  consideration." (pp.  112-113.)

This  being  so,  we  are  not  surprised  tliat  the  author,  in  controverting  the
views  of  Messrs.  Savage  and  Myers,  is  indignantly  aroused  to  a  "  protest,
in  the  name  of  outraged  science,  against  all  attempts  to  base  a  hypothesis
uj^on  a  '  small  residuum  '  of  phenomena." (p.  105.)

His  criticism  of  a  "  test  case  "  of  Mr.  Savage  is,  we  think,  just ;  but  his
introduction  of  Mr.  Myers'  name  into  this  discussion  is  rather  unwarrantable.
At  the  same  time,  he  politely  adds  that  "the  scientific  world  will  never
cease  to  be  grateful  to  them  for  the  painstaking  care  which  they  have
exercised  in  eliminating  the  '  vast  bulk  '  of  the  phenomena  which  have  been
attributed  to  supermundane  agency  ;  and  if  I  have  succeeded  in  reducing
them  to  a  '  still  smaller  residuum, '  I  shall  beg  the  privilege  of  quietly
basking  in  the  reflected  glory  of  their  achievements." (pp.  111-112).

That  this  "still  smaller  residuum"  equals  0  the  author  also  apparently
believes,  because  ' '  the  unmistakable  import  of  the  closing  clauses  of  the
parable  [of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus]  is  that  it  is  neither  expedient  nor


Supplement.]


Reviews.


335


possible,  for  any  purpose  whatever,  for  spirits  of  the  dead  to  communicate
with  the  living." (pp.  324-325.)

Indeed,  so  far  from  complaining  of  his  want  of  appreciation  of  the
scientific  work  of  the  S.P.R.,  we  are  rather  disposed  to  regret  that  he  often
exaggerates  our  results.  We  do  not  presume  to  claim  that  ' '  no  law  or
power  of  Nature  has  been  more  completely  and  scientifically  demonstrated
than  has  been  the  law  of  telepathy"  (pp.  (58,  197);  still  less  that  "no
phenomenon  in  the  realm  of  physical  science  is  better  authenticated  than
those  of  so-called  spiritism." (p.  54.)

In  conclusion,  we  cannot  but  regard  the  somewhat  pretentious  claim
which  this  book  makes  to  "demonstration"  and  the  maintenance  of  a  strictly
"scientific"  standard  of  reasoning  as  unfounded.  The  book  may  possibly
gain  popularity  from  the  general  interest  in  the  subject,  the  strong  desire  in
many  minds  for  a  confirmation  of  popular  religious  ideas  by  the  light  of
science,  and  certain  attractive  qualities  of  the  author's  style  :  but  it  is  hardly
likely  to  contribute  to  the  advance  of- knowledge  in  matters  of  psychical
research.

Harlow  Gale.

University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis.


Z


General  Meetinrj.


337


PROCEEDINGS OF  GENERAL  MEETING.


The  84th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  January  29th,  1897,  at  4  p.m.;  the
President,  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  in  the  chair.

"  Miss  X."  read  a  paper  entitled  "  A  Passing  Note  on  a  Haunted
House."

Tiiio  President  gave  the  address  which  is  printed  below.


2  A


338


President's  Address.


ADDRESS BY THE  PRESIDENT,
AViLLiAM  Crookes,  F.R.S.

The  task  I  am  called  upon  to  perform  to-day  is  to  my  thinking  by
no  means  a  merely  formal  or  easy  matter.  It  fills  me  with  deep  con-
cern to  give  an  address,  with  such  authority  as  a  President's  chair
confers,  upon  a  science  which,  though  still  in  a  purely  nascent  stage,
seems  to  me  at  least  as  important  as  any  other  science  whatever.
Psychical  science,  as  we  here  try  to  pursue  it,  is  the  eml)ryo  of  some-
thing which  in  time  may  dominate  the  whole  world  of  thought.  This
possibility — nay  probability — does  not  make  it  the  easier  to  me  now.
Embryonic  development  is  apt  to  be  both  rapid  and  interesting ;  yet
the  prudent  man  shrinks  from  dogmatising  on  the  egg  until  he  has
seen  the  chicken.

Nevertheless,  I  desire,  if  I  can,  to  say  a  helpful  word.  And  I  ask
myself  what  kind  of  helpful  word.  Is  there  any  connexion  between
my  old-standing  interest  in  pyschical  problems  and  such  original  work
as  I  may  have  been  able  to  do  in  other  branches  of  science  1

I  think  there  is  such  a  connexion — that  the  most  helpful  quality
which  has  aided  me  in  psychical  problems  and  has  made  me  lucky  in
physical  discoveries  (sometimes  of  rather  unexpected  kinds),  has
simply  been  my  knowledge — my  vital  knowledge,  if  I  may  so  term  it
— of  my  own  ignorance.

Most  students  of  Nature  sooner  or  later  pass  through  a  process  of
■writing  off  a  large  percentage  of  their  supposed  capital  of  knowledge
as  a  merely  illusory  asset.  As  we  trace  more  accurately  certain
familiar  sequences  of  phenomena,  we  begin  to  realise  how  closely  these
sequences,  or  laws,  as  we  call  them,  are  hemmed  round  by  still  other
laws  of  which  we  can  form  no  notion.  With  myself,  this  writing  off  of
illusory  assets  has  gone  rather  far ;  and  the  cobweb  of  supposed
knowledge  has  been  pinched  (as  some  one  has  phrased)  into  a  par-
ticularly small  pill.

I  am  not  disposed  to  bewail  the  limitations  imposed  by  human
ignorance.  On  the  contrary,  I  feel  ignorance  is  a  healthful  stimulant ;
and  my  enforced  conviction  that  neither  I  nor  any  one  can  possibly  lay
down  beforehand  what  does  not  exist  in  the  universe,  or  even  what  is
not  going  on  all  round  us  eveiy  day  of  our  lives,  leaves  me  with  a
cheerful  hope  that  something  very  new  and  very  arresting  may  turn
up  anywhere  at  any  minute.

Well,  it  was  this  attitude  of  a  mind  "  to  let,"  which  first  brought
mc  across  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  and  which  led  to  my  getting  a  glimpse  of


President's  Address.


a39


some  important  laws  of  matter  and  energy  of  which  I  fear  many  of
my  fellow  physicists  still  prefer  to  be  uncognizaut.  It  is  this  same
accessible  temper  of  mind  which  leads  me  to  follow  the  problems  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  with  an  interest  which,  if  somewhat
calmed  by  advancing  years,  and  by  a  perception  of  the  inevitable
slowness  of  discovery,  is  still  as  deep  a  feeling  as  any  which  life  has
left  me.  And  I  shall  try  to  utilise  this  temper  of  mind  to-day  by
clearing  away,  so  far  as  I  can,  certain  presuppositions,  on  one  side
or  on  the  other,  which  seem  to  me  to  depend  upon  a  too  hasty  assump-
tion that  we  know  more  about  the  universe  than  as  yet  we  really  can
know.

I  will  take  the  most  essential  part  first,  and  address  myself  to  those
who  believe  with  me  in  the  survival  of  man's  individuality  after  death.
I  will  point  out  a  curious,  inveterate,  and  widespread  illusion, — the
illusion  that  our  earthly  bodies  are  a  kind  of  norm  of  humanity,  so
that  ethereal  bodies,  if  such  there  be,  must  correspond  to  them  in  shape
and  size.

When  we  take  a  physical  view  of  a  human  being  in  his  highest
form  of  development,  he  is  seen  to  consist  essentially  of  a  thinking
brain,  the  brain  itself,  among  its  manifold  functions,  being  a  trans-
former whereby  intelligent  will-power  is  enabled  to  react  on  matter.
To  communicate  with  the  external  world,  the  brain  requires  organs  by
which  it  can  be  transported  from  place  to  place,  and  other  organs  by
means  of  which  energy  is  supplied  to  replace  that  expended  in  the
exercise  of  its  own  special  functions.  Again,  waste  of  tissue  and
reparation  have  to  be  provided  for ;  hence  the  necessity  for  organs  of
digestion,  assimilation,  circulation,  respiration,  &c.,  to  carry  on  these
processes  effectually  ;  and  when  we  consider  that  this  highly  complex
organ  is  fitted  to  undergo  active  work  for  the  best  part  of  a  century,
we  cannot  but  marvel  that  it  can  keep  in  tune  so  long.  The  human
creature  represents  the  most  perfect  thinking  and  acting  machine  yet
evolved  on  this  earth,  developing  through  countless  ages  in  strict
harmony  with  the  surrounding  conditions  of  temperature,  atmosphere,
light  and  gravitation.  The  profound  modifications  in  the  human
frame  which  any  important  alteration  in  either  of  these  factors  would
occasion  are  strangely  unconsidered.  It  is  true  there  have  been
questionings  as  to  the  effects  that  might  be  occasioned  by  changes  in
temperature  and  atmospheric  composition,  but  possible  variations
in  gravitation  seem  almost  to  have  escaped  notice.  The  human  body,
which  long  experience  and  habit  have  taught  us  to  consider  in  its
highest  development  as  the  perfection  of  beauty  and  grace, — "formed
in  the  image  of  God," — is  entirely  conditioned  by  the  strength  of
gravitation  on  this  globe.  So  far  as  has  been  possible  to  ascertain,
the  intensity  of  gravity  has  not  varied  appreciably  within  those


340


President's  Address.


geologic  ages  covering  the  existence  of  animated  thinking  beings.
The  human  race,  therefore,  has  passed  through  all  its  periods  of
evolution  and  development,  in  strict  conformity  with  and  submission
to  this  dominant  power,  until  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  any  great
departure  from  the  narrow  limits  imposed  on  the  proportions  of  the
human  frame.

In  the  first  place,  I  wish  to  consider  what  transformation  in  our
appearance  would  be  produced  by  a  change  in  the  force  of  gravitation.
Let  us  take  extreme  cases.  Say  that  the  power  of  gravitation
were  to  be  doubled.  In  that  case  we  should  have  to  exert  a  vastly
increased  strength  to  support  ourselves  in  any  other  than  the  prone
or  dorsal  position — it  would  be  hard  to  rise  from  the  ground,  to  run,
leap,  climb,  to  drag  or  carry  any  object.  Our  muscles  would  neces-
sarily be  more  powerful,  and  the  skeleton  to  which  they  ai-e  attached
would  need  corresponding  modification.  To  work  such  limbs  a  more
rapid  transformation  of  matter  would  be  required ;  hence  the  supply
of  nutriment  must  be  greater,  involving  enlarged  digestive  organs,  and  a
larger  respiratory  apparatus  to  allow  of  the  perfect  aeration  of  the
increased  mass  of  the  blood.  To  keep  up  the  circulation  with  the
necessary  force,  either  the  heart  would  have  to  be  more  powerful  or
the  distance  through  which  the  blood  would  require  to  be  impelled
must  be  reduced.  The  increased  amount  of  nourishment  demanded
would  involve  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  difficulty  of  its  collection,
and  the  struggle  for  existence  would  be  intensified.  More  food  being
i-equired  day  by  day,  the  jaws  would  have  to  be  enlarged  and  the
muscles  strengthened.  The  teeth  also  must  be  adapted  for  extra
.  tearing  and  grinding.

These  considerations  involve  marked  changes  in  the  structure
of  human  beings.  To  accord  with  thickened  bones,  bulging  muscles,
and  larger  respiratory  and  digestive  apparatus,  the  body  would  be
heavier  and  more  massive.  The  necessity  for  such  alterations  in  struc-
ture would  be  increased  by  the  liability  to  fall.  The  necessity  of
keeping  the  centre  of  gravity  low,  and  the  great  demands  made  on  the
system  in  other  I'espects  must  conspire  to  reduce  the  size  of  head  and
brain.  With  increase  of  gravitation,  the  bipedal  form  would  be  beset
by  drawbacks.  Assuming  that  the  human  race,  under  the  altered
circumstances,  remained  bipedal,  it  is  highly  probable  that  a  large
increase  in  the  quadruped,  hexapod,  or  octopod  structure  would  prevail
in  the  animal  kingdom.  The  majority  of  animals  would  be  of  the
Saurian  class  with  very  short  legs,  allowing  the  trunk  to  rest  easily  on
the  ground,  and  the  serpent  type  would  probably  be  in  the  ascendant.
Winged  creatures  would  suffer  severely,  and  small  birds  and  insects
would  be  dragged  to  earth  by  a  force  hard  to  resist ;  although  this
might  be  more  or  less  compensated  by  the  increased  density  of  the  air.


Presiden t's  A  ddress.


341


Humming  birds,  dragon-flies,  butterflies,  and  bees,  all  of  which  spend
a  lai"ge  portion  of  their  time  in  the  air,  would,  in  the  struggle  for
existence,  be  rare  visitants.  Hence  the  fertilisation  of  flowers  by  the
intervention  of  insects  must  be  thwarted  ;  and  this  would  lead  to  the
extinction,  or  at  all  events  to  a  scarcity,  of  entomophilous  plants,  i.e.,
all  those  with  the  showiest  blossoms — a  gloomy  result  to  follow  from  a
mere  increase  of  the  earth's  attraction.

But  having  known  no  other  type  of  human  form,  it  is  allowable  to
think  that,  under  these  different  conditions,  Man  would  still  consider
Woman — though  stunted,  thick-limbed,  flat-footed,  with  enormous  jaws
underlying  a  diminutive  skull — as  the  highest  type  of  beauty  1

Decreased  attraction  of  the  earth  might  be  attended  with  another
set  of  changes  scarcely  less  remarkable.  With  the  same  expenditure  of
vital  energy  as  at  present,  and  with  the  same  quantity  of  transformation
of  matter,  we  should  be  able  to  lift  heavier  weights,  to  take  longer
bounds,  to  move  with  greater  swiftness,  and  to  undergo  prolonged
muscular  exertion  with  less  fatigue — possibly  to  fly.  Hence  the
transformation  of  matter  required  to  keep  up  animal  heat,  and  to
restore  the  waste  of  energy  and  tissue,  would  be  smaller  for  the  same
amount  of  duty  done.  A  less  volume  of  blood,  reduced  lungs  and
digestive  organs  would  be  I'equired.  Thus  we  might  expect  a  set  of
structural  changes  of  an  inverse  nature  to  those  resulting  from
intensified  gravitation.  All  parts  of  the  body  might  safely  be
consti'ucted  upon  a  less  massive  plan — a  slighter  skeleton,  smaller
muscles,  and  slenderer  trunk.  These  modifications,  in  a  less  degree  than
we  are  contemplating,  tend  in  the  present  to  beauty  of  form,  and  it  is
easy  to  imagine  our  testhetic  feelings  would  naturally  keep  pace  with
further  developments  in  the  direction  of  grace,  slenderness,  symmetry,
and  tall  figures.

It  is  curious  that  the  popular  conceptions  of  evil  and  malignant
beings  are  of  the  type  that  "would  be  produced  by  increased  gravitation,
— toads,  reptiles,  and  noisome  creeping  things, — while  the  Arch  Fiend
himself  is  represented  as  perhaps  the  ultimate  form  which  could  be
assumed  by  a  thinking  brain  and  its  necessary  machinery  were  the
power  of  gravitation  to  be  increased  to  the  highest  point  compiitible
with  existence — a  serpent  crawling  along  the  ground.  On  the  other
hand,  our  highest  types  of  beauty  are  those  which  would  be  common
under  decreased  gravitation.

The  "  daughter  of  the  gods,  divinely  tall,"  and  the  leaping  athlete,
please  us  by  the  slight  triumph  over  the  earthward  pull  which  their
stature  or  spring  implies.  It  is  true  we  do  not  correspondingly  admire
the  flea,  whose  triumph  over  gravitation,  unaided  by  wings,  is  so
striking.  Marvellous  as  is  the  flea,  its  body,  like  ours,  is  strictly  con-
ditioned by  gravitation.


342


President's  A  ddress.


But  popular  imagination  presupposes  spiritual  beings  to  be  utterly
independent  of  gravitation,  whilst  retaining  shapes  and  proportions
which  gravitation  originally  determined,  and  only  gravitation  seems
likely  to  maintain.

When  and  if  spiritual  beings  make  themselves  visible  either  to  our
bodily  eyes  or  to  our  inward  vision,  their  object  would  be  thwarted
were  they  not  to  appear  in  a  recognisable  form  ;  so  that  their  appear-
ance would  take  the  shape  of  the  body  and  clothing  to  which  we
have  been  accustomed.  Materiality,  form,  and  space,  I  am  constrained
to  believe,  are  temporary  conditions  of  our  present  existence.  It  is
difficult  to  conceive  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  being  having  a  body  like
ours,  conditioned  by  the  exact  gravitating  force  exerted  by  the  earth,
and  with  organs  which  presuppose  the  need  for  food  and  necessity  for
the  removal  of  waste  products.  It  is  equally  difficult,  hemmed  in  and
bound  round  as  we  are  by  materialistic  ideas,  to  think  of  intelligence,
thought,  and  will,  existing  without  form  or  matter,  and  untrammelled
by  gravitation  or  space.

Men  of  science  before  now  have  had  to  face  a  similar  problem.  In
some  speculations  on  the  nature  of  matter,  Faraday^  expressed  himself

1  "If  we  must  assume  at  all,  as  indeed  in  a  branch  of  knowledge  like  the  present
we  can  hardly  help  it  then  the  safest  course  appears  to  be  to  assume  as  little  as
possible,  and  in  that  respect  the  atoms  of  Boscovich  appear  to  me  to  have  a  great
advantage  over  the  more  usual  notion.  His  atoms  are  mere  centres  of  forces  or
powers,  not  particles  of  matter,  in  which  the  powers  themselve.s  reside."

"If  in  the  ordinary  view  of  atoms,  we  call  the  particle  of  matter  away  from  the
powers  a,  and  the  system  of  powers  or  forces  in  and  around  it  m,  then  in  Boscovich's
theory  a  disappear.^,  or  is  a  mere  mathematical  point,  whilst  in  the  usual  notion  it  is
a  little  unchangeable,  impenetrable  piece  of  matter,  and  m  is  an  atmos]jhere  of  force
grouped  around  it."

"To  my  mind  therefore,  the  a  or  nucleus  vanishes,  and  the  substance  consists  of  the
powers  or  m  ;  and  indeed,  what  notion  can  we  form  of  the  nucleus  independent  of  its
powers?  All  our  perception  and  knowledge  of  the  atom,  and  even  our  fancy,  is  limited
to  ideas  of  its  powers  :  what  thought  remains  on  which  to  hang  the  imagination  of  an
a  independent  of  the  acknowledged  forces  ?  "

"  A  mind  just  entering  on  the  subject  may  consider  it  difficult  to  think  of  the
powers  of  matter  independent  of  a  separate  something  to  be  called  the  matter,  but  it
is  certainly  far  more  difficult,  and  indeed  impossible,  to  think  of  or  imagine  that
matter  independent  of  the  powers.  Now  the  powers  we  know  and  recognise  in  every
phenomenon  of  the  creation,  the  abstract  matter  in  none  ;  why  then  assume  the
existence  of  that  of  which  we  are  ignorant,  which  we  cannot  conceive,  and  for  which
there  is  no  philosophical  necessity '!  "

"  If  an  atom  be  conceived  to  be  a  centre  of  power,  that  which  is  ordinarily  referred
to  under  the  term  shape  would  be  now  referred  to  the  disposition  and  relative
intensity  of  the  forces.  .  .  .  Nothing  can  be  supposed  of  the  disposition  of  forces
in  and  about  a  solid  nucleus  of  matter,  which  cannot  be  equally  conceived  with
respect  to  a  centre."

"  The  view  now  stated  of  the  constitution  of  matter  would  seem  to  involve
necessarily  the  conclusion  that  matter  fills  all  space.  ...  In  that  view  matter  is
not  merely  mutually  penetrable,  but  each  atom  extends,  so  to  say,  throughout  the
whole  of  the  solar  system,  yet  always  retaining  its  own  centre  of  force." — Faraday,
"  On  the  Nature  of  Matter,"  Phil.  Mag.,  1844,  vol.  xxiv.,  p.  136.


President's  Address.


343


in  language  which,  mutatis  mutandis,  applies  to  my  present  sur-
mises. This  earnest  philosopher  was  speculating  on  the  ultimate  nature
of  matter  ;  and,  thinking  of  the  little,  hard,  impenetrable  atom  of
Lucretius,  and  the  forces  or  forms  of  energy  appertaining  to  it,  he
felt  himself  impelled  to  reject  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  nucleus
altogether,  and  to  think  only  of  the  forces  and  forms  of  energy  usually
associated  therewith.  He  was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  this  view
necessarily  involved  the  surmise  that  the  atoms  are  not  merely  mutually
penetrable,  but  that  each  atom,  so  to  say,  extends  throughout  all  space,
yet  always  retaining  its  own  centre  of  force.'

A  view  of  the  constitution  of  matter  which  recommended  itself  to
Faraday  as  preferable  to  the  one  ordinarily  held,  appears  to  me  to  be
exactly  the  view  I  endeavour  to  picture  as  the  constitution  of  spiritual
beings.  Centimes  of  intellect,  will,  energy,  and  power,  each  mutually
penetrable,  whilst  at  the  same  time  permeating  what  we  call  space  ;
but  each  centre  retaining  its  own  individuality,  persistence  of  self,  and
memory.  Whether  these  intelligent  centres  of  the  various  spiritual
forces  which  in  their  aggregate  go  to  make  up  Man's  character  or
Karma,  are  also  associated  in  any  way  with  the  forms  of  energy
which,  centred,  form  the  material  atom, — whether  these  spiritual
entities  are  material,  not  in  the  crude,  gross  sense  of  Lucretius,  but
material  as  sublimated  through  the  piercing  intellect  of  Faraday, — is
one  of  those  mysteries  which  to  us  mortals  will  perhaps  ever  remain  an
unsolved  problem.

My  next  speculation  is  more  difficult,  and  is  addressed  to  those  who
not  only  take  too  terrestrial  a  view,  but  who  deny  the  plausibility — nay,
the  possibility — of  the  existence  of  an  unseen  world  at  all.  I  reply  we
are  demonstrably  standing  on  the  brink,  at  any  rate,  of  one  unseen
world.  I  do  not  here  speak  of  a  spiritual  or  immaterial  world.  I  speak '
of  the  world  of  the  infinitely  little,  which  must  be  still  called  a
material  world,  although  matter  as  therein  existing  or  perceptible  is
something  which  our  limited  faculties  do  not  enable  us  to  conceive.  It
is  the  world — I  do  not  say  of  molecular  forces  as  opposed  to  molar,  but
of  forces  whose  action  lies  mainly  outside  the  limit  of  human  perception,
as  opposed  to  forces  evident  to  the  gross  perception  of  human  organisms.
I  hardly  Icnow  how  to  make  clear  to  myself  or  to  you  the  differezice  in
the  apparent  laws  of  the  universe  which  would  follow  upon  a  mere
difference  of  balk  in  the  observer.  Such  an  observer  I  must  needs
imagine  as  best  I  can.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  rival  the  vividness  of
the  great  satirist  who,  from  a  postulated  difference  of  size  far  less
considerable,  deduced  in  "Gulliver's  Travels"  the  absurdity,  and  the
mere  relativity,  of  so  much  in  human  morals,  politics,  society. But  I


1  I  may  say,  in  passing,  that  the  modern  vortex  atom  also  fulfils  these  conditions.


344


President's  Address.


shall  take  courage  from  the  example  of  my  predecessor  in  this  chair,
Professor  William  James  of  Harvard,  from  whom  later  I  shall  cite  a
most  striking  parable  of  precisely  the  type  I  seek.

You  must  permit  me,  then,  a  homunculus  on  whom  to  hang  my
speculation.  I  cannot  place  him  actually  amid  the  interplay  of
molecules,  for  lack  of  power  to  imagine  his  environment ;  but  I  shall
make  him  of  such  microscopic  size  that  molecular  forces  which  in
common  life  we  hardly  notice, — such  as  surface-tension,  capillarity,
the  Brownian  movements, — become  for  him  so  conspicuous  and
dominant  that  he  can  hardly  believe,  let  us  say,  in  the  universality
of  gravitation,  which  we  may  suppose  to  have  been  revealed  to  him
by  ourselves,  his  creators.

Let  us  place  him  on  a  cabbage  leaf,  and  let  him  start  for  himself.

The  area  of  the  cabbage-leaf  apjpears  to  him  as  a  boundless  plain
many  square  miles  in  extent.  To  this  minimised  creature  the  leaf  is
studded  with  huge  glittering  transparent  globes,  resting  motionless
on  the  surface  of  the  leaf,  each  globe  vastly  exceeding  in  height  the
towering  Pyramids.  Each  of  these  spheres  appears  to  emit  from
one  of  its  sides  a  dazzling  light.  Urged  by  curiosity  he  approaches
and  touches  one  of  the  orbs.  It  resists  pressure  like  an  india-rubber
ball,  until  accidentally  he  fractures  the  surface,  when  suddenly  he  feels
himself  seized  and  whirled  and  brought  somewhere  to  an  equilibrium,
where  he  remains  suspended  in  the  sui'face  of  the  sphere  utterly  unable
to  extricate  himself.  In  the  course  of  an  hour  or  two  he  linds  the
globe  diminishing,  and  ultimately  it  disappears,  leaving  him  at  liberty
to  jaursue  his  travels.  Quitting  the  cabbage-leaf,  he  strays  over  the
surface  of  the  soil,  finding  it  exceeding  rocky  and  mountainous,  until
he  sees  befoi'e  him  a  broad  surface  akin  to  the  kind  of  matter  which
■formed  the  globes  on  the  cabbage-leaf.  Instead,  however,  of  rising
upwards  from  its  support,  it  now  slopes  downwards  in  a  vast  curve
from  the  brink,  and  ultimately  becomes  apparently  level,  though,  as
this  is  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  shore,  he  cannot  be
absolutely  certain.  Let  us  now  suppose  that  he  holds  in  his  hand  a
vessel  bearing  the  same  proportion  to  his  minimised  frame  that  a  pint
measure  does  to  that  of  a  man  as  he  is,  and  that  by  adroit  manipula-
tion he  contrives  to  fill  it  with  water.  If  he  inverts  the  vessel  he  finds
that  the  liquid  will  not  flow,  and  can  only  be  dislodged  by  violent
shocks.  Wearied  by  his  exertions  to  empty  the  vessel  of  water,  he
sits  on  the  shore,  and  idly  amuses  himself  by  throwing  stones  and
other  objects  into  the  water. As  a  rule  the  stones  and  other  wet

1  I  need  hardly  say  that  in  this  fanciful  sketch,  composed  only  for  an  illustrative
purpose,  all  kinds  of  problems  (as  of  the  homunculus's  own  structure  and  powers)  are
left  untouched,  and  various  points  which  would  really  need  to  be  mathematically
worked  out  are  left  intentionally  vague,


President's  Address.


345


bodies  sink,  although  when  dry  they  obstinately  refuse  to  go  to  the
bottom,  but  float  on  the  surface.  He  tries  other  substances.  A  rod
of  polished  steel,  a  silver  pencil-case,  some  platinum  wire,  and  a  steel
pen,  objects  two  or  three  times  the  density  of  the  stones,  refuse  to  sink
at  all,  and  float  on  the  surface  like  so  many  bits  of  cork.  Nay,  if  he
and  his  friends  manage  to  throw  into  the  water  one  of  those  enormous
steel  bars  which  we  call  needles,  this  also  makes  a  sort  of  concave
trough  for  itself  on  the  surface,  and  floats  tranquilly.  After  these  and
a  few  more  observations,  he  theorises  on  the  pro^Derties  of  water  and  of
liquids  in  general.  Will  he  come  to  the  conclusion  that  liquids  seek
their  own  level ;  that  their  surfaces  when  at  rest  are  horizontal,  and
that  solids  when  placed  in  a  liquid,  sink  or  float  according  to  their
higher  or  lower  specific  gravity  1  No  ;  he  will  feel  justified  in  inferring
that  liquids,  at  rest,  assume  spherical,  or  at  least  curvilinear  forms,
whether  convex  or  concave,  depending  upon  circumstances  not  easily
ascertained  ;  that  they  cannot  be  poured  from  one  vessel  to  another,
and  resist  the  force  of  gravitation,  which  is  consequently  not  universal ;
and  that  such  bodies  as  he  can  manipulate  generally  refuse  to  sink  in
liquids,  whether  their  specific  gravity  be  high  or  low.  From  the
behaviour  of  a  body  placed  in  contact  with  a  dew-drop  he  will  even
derive  plausible  reasons  for  doubting  the  inertia  of  matter.

Already  he  has  been  somewhat  puzzled  by  the  constant  and
capriciovis  bombardment  of  cumbrous  objects  like  portmanteaus  flying
in  the  air ;  for  the  gay  motes  that  people  the  sunbeams  will  dance
somewhat  unpleasantly  for  a  microscopic  homunculus  who  can  never
tell  where  they  are  coming.  Nay,  what  he  has  understood  to  be  the
difficulty  experienced  by  living  creatures  in  rising  from  the  earth,
except  with  wings,  will  soon  seem  absurdly  exaggerated.  For  he  will
discern  a  terrific  creature,  a  Behemoth  "  in  plated  mail,"  leaping
through  the  skies  in  frenzied  search  for  prey  ;  and  for  the  first  time
due  homage  will  be  rendered  to  the  majesty  of  the  common  flea.

Perturbed  by  doubts,  he  will  gaze  at  night  into  some  absolutely
tranquil  pool.  There,  with  no  wind  to  ruffle,  nor  access  of  heat  to
cause  currents  or  change  surface-tension,  he  perceives  small  inanimate
objects  immersed  and  still.  But  are  they  still  ?  No  !  One  of  them
moves ;  another  is  moving.  Gradually  it  is  borne  in  upon  him  that
whenever  any  object  is  small  enough  it  is  always  in  motion.  Perhaps
our  homunculus  might  be  better  able  than  we  are  to  explain  these
so-called  Brownian  movements.  Or  the  guess  might  be  forced  uj^on
him  that  he  who  sees  this  sight  is  getting  dim  glimpses  of  the  ultimate
structure  of  matter,  and  that  these  movements  are  residual,  the  result
of  the  inward  molecular  turmoil  which  has  not  cancelled  itself  out
into  nullity,  as  it  must  needs  do  in  aggregations  of  matter  of  more
than  the  smallest  microscopic  dimensions.


346


President's  Address.


Things  still  more  tormentingly  perplexing,  our  homunculus  would
doubtless  encounter.  And  these  changes  in  his  interpretation  of
phenomena  would  arise  not  from  his  becoming  aware  of  any  forces
hitherto  overlooked,  still  less  from  the  disappearance  of  laws  now
recognised,  but  simply  from  the  fact  that  his  supposed  decrease  in
bodily  size  brings  capillarity,  surface-tension,  &c.,  into  a  relative
prominence  they  do  not  now  possess.  To  full-grown  rational  beings
the  effects  of  these  forces  rank  among  residual  phenomena  which
attract  attention  only  when  science  has  made  a  certain  progress.  To
honiuncidi,  such  as  we  have  imagined,  the  same  effects  would  be  of
capital  importance,  and  would  be  rightly  interpreted  not  as  something
supplementary  to  those  of  general  gravitation,  but  as  due  to  an  inde-
pendent and  possibly  antagonistic  force.

The  physics  of  these  hoinunculi  would  differ  most  remarkably  from
our  own.  In  the  study  of  heat  they  would  encounter  difficulties
pi'obably  insuperable.  In  this  branch  of  physical  investigation  little
can  be  done  unless  we  have  the  power  at  pleasure  of  raising  and
lowering  the  temperature  of  bodies.  This  requires  the  command  of
fire.  Actual  man,  in  a  rudimentary  state  of  civilisation,  can  heat  and
ignite  certain  kinds  of  matter  by  friction,  percussion,  concentrating
the  sun's  rays,  &c.  ;  but  before  these  operations  produce  actual  fire
they  must  be  performed  upon  a  considei'able  mass  of  matter,  otherwise
the  heat  is  conducted  or  radiated  away  as  rapidly  as  produced,  and  tlie
point  of  ignition  seldom  reached.

Nor  could  it  be  otherwise  with  the  chemistry  of  the  little  people,
if,  indeed,  such  a  science  be  conceived  as  at  all  possible  for  them.

It  can  scarcely  be  denied  that  the  fundamental  phenomena  which
first  led  mankind  into  chemical  enquiries  are  those  of  combustion.
But,  as  we  have  just  seen,  minimised  beings  would  be  unable  to  produce
fire  at  will,  except  by  certain  chemical  reactions,  and  would  have  little
opportunity  of  examining  its  nature.  They  might  occasionally  witness
forest  fires,  volcanic  eruptions,  &c. ;  but  such  grand  and  catastrophic
phenomena,  though  serving  to  reveal  to  our  supposed  Lilliputians  the
existence  of  combustion,  would  be  ill-suited  for  quiet  investigation  into
its  conditions  and  products.  Moreover,  considering  the  impossibility
they  would  experience  of  pouring  water  from  one  test-tulae  to  another,
the  ordinary  operations  of  analytical  chemistry,  and  of  all  manipula-
tions depending  on  the  use  of  the  pneumatic  trough,  would  remain  for
ever  a  sealed  book.

Let  us  for  a  moment  go  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  consider  how
Nature  would  present  itself  to  human  beings  of  enormous  magnitude.
Their  difficulties  and  misconstructions  would  be  of  an  opposite  nature
to  those  experienced  by  pigmies.  Capillary  attraction  and  the  cohesion
of  liquids,  surface  tension  and  the  curvature  of  liquid  surfaces  near


President's  Address.


347


their  boundary,  the  dew  drop  and  the  behaviour  of  minute  bodies  on  a
globule  of  water,  the  flotation  of  metals  on  the  surface  of  water,  and
many  other  familiar  phenomena,  would  be  either  ignored  or  unknown.
The  hotnuncuhis  able  to  communicate  but  a  small  momentum  would
tind  all  objects  much  harder  than  they  appear  to  us,  whilst  to  a  I'ace  of
colossals  granite  rocks  would  be  but  a  feeble  impediment.

There  would  be  another  most  remarkable  difference  between  such
enormous  beings  and  ourselves  :  if  we  stoop  and  take  up  a  pinch  of
earth  between  fingers  and  thumb,  moving  those  members,  say,  through
the  space  of  a  few  inches  in  a  second  of  time,  we  experience  nothing
remarkable.  The  earth  offers  a  little  resistance,  more  or  less,  according
to  its  greater  or  less  tenacity,  but  no  other  perceptible  reaction
follows.

Let  us  suppose  the  same  action  performed  by  a  gigantic  being,  able
to  move  finger  and  thumb  in  a  second's  space  through  some  miles  of
soil  in  the  same  lapse  of  time,  and  he  would  experience  a  very  decided
reaction.  The  mass  of  sand,  earth,  stones,  and  the  like^  hurled  together
in  such  quantities  and  at  such  speed,  would  become  intensely  hot.
Just  as  the  homunculus  would  fail  to  bring  about  ignition  Avhen  he
desired,  so  the  colossus  could  scarcely  mo^'e  without  causing  the  libera-
tion of  a  highly  inconvenient  degree  of  heat,  literally  making  everything
too  hot  to  hold.  He  would  naturally  ascribe  to  granite  rocks  and  the
other  constituents  of  the  earth's  surface  such  properties  as  we  attribute
to  phosphorus — of  combustion  on  being  a  little  roughly  handled.

Need  I  do  more  than  point  the  obvious  lesson  ?  If  a  possible —
nay,  reasonable — variation  in  only  one  of  the  forces  conditioning  the
human  race — that  of  gravitation — could  so  modify  our  outward  form,
appearance,  and  proportions,  as  to  make  us  to  all  intents  and  purposes
a  different  race  of  beings  ;  if  mere  differences  of  size  can  cause  some
of  the  most  simple  facts  in  chemistry  and  physics  to  take  so  widely
different  a  guise  ;  if  beings  microscopically  small  and  prodigiously  large
would  simply  as  such  be  subject  to  the  hallucinations  I  have  pointed
out — and  to  others  I  might  enlarge  upon ; — is  it  not  possible  that  we,
in  turn,  though  occupying,  as  it  seems  to  us,  the  golden  mean,  may  also
by  the  mere  virtue  of  our  size  and  weight  fall  into  misinterpretations
of  phenomena  from  which  we  should  escape  were  we  or  the  globe  we
inhabit  either  larger  or  smaller,  heavier  or  lighter?  May  not  our
boasted  knowledge  be  simply  conditioned  by  accidental  environments,
and  thus  be  liable  to  a  large  element  of  subjectivity  hitherto  unsus-
pected and  scarcely  possible  to  eliminate  1

Here  I  will  introduce  Prof.  James's  speculation,  to  which  I  have
already  alluded.  It  deals  with  a  possible  alteration  of  the  time  scale
due  to  a  difference  in  rapidity  of  sensation  on  the  part  of  a  being  pre-
sumably on  a  larger  scale  than  ourselves.  '


348


President's  Address.


"  We  have  every  i"easoii  to  think  that  creatures  may  possibly  differ
enormously  in  the  amounts  of  duration  which  they  intuitively  feel,  and
in  the  fineness  of  the  events  that  may  fill  it.  Von  Baer  has  indulged
in  some  intei'esting  computations  of  the  effect  of  such  differences  in
changing  the  aspect  of  Nature.  Suppose  we  were  able,  within  the
length  of  a  second,  to  note  distinctly  10,000  events,  instead  of  barely
10,  as  now  ;  if  our  life  were  then  destined  to  hold  the  same  number  of
impressions,  it  might  be  1,000  times  as  short.  We  should  live  less
than  a  month,  and  personally  know  nothing  of  the  change  of  seasons.
If  born  in  winter  we  should  believe  in  summer  as  we  now  believe  in
the  heats  of  the  carboniferous  era.  The  motions  of  organic  beings
would  be  so  slow  to  our  senses  as  to  be  inferred,  not  seen.  The  sun
would  stand  still  in  the  sky,  the  moon  be  almost  free  from  change,  and
so  on.  But  now  reverse  the  hypothesis,  and  suppose  a  being  to  get  only
one  1,000th  part  of  the  sensations  that  we  get  in  a  given  time,  and
consequently  to  live  1 ,000  times  as  long.  Winters  and  summers  will  be
to  him  like  quarters  of  an  hour.  Mushrooms  and  the  swifter-growing
plants  will  shoot  into  being  so  rapidly  as  to  appear  instantaneous
ci-eations ;  annual  shrubs  will  rise  and  fall  from  the  earth  like  restlessly
boiling  water-springs  ;  the  motions  of  animals  will  be  as  invisible  as  are
to  us  the  movements  of  bullets  and  cannon-balls ;  the  sun  will  scour
through  the  sky  like  a  meteor,  leaving  a  fiery  trail  behind  hhn,  &c.
That  such  imaginary  cases  (barring  the  super-human  longevity)  may
be  realised  somewhere  in  the  animal  kingdom,  it  would  be  rash  to
deny." — (James's Principles  of  Psychology,"  Vol.  i.,  ]).  639).

And  now  let  me  specially  apply  this  general  conception  of  the
impossibility  of  predicting  what  secrets  the  universe  may  still  hold,
what  agencies  undivined  may  habitually  be  at  work  around  us.

Telepathy,  the  transmission  of  thought  and  images  directly  from  one
mind  to  another,  without  the  agency  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense,
is  a  conception  new  and  strange  to  science.  To  judge  from  the
comparative  slownesss  with  which  the  accumulated  evidence  of  our
Society  penetrates  the  scientific  world,  it  is,  I  think,  a  conception  even
scientifically  repulsive  to  many  minds.  We  have  supplied  striking
experimental  evidence ;  but  few  have  been  found  to  repeat  our
experiments.  We  have  offered  good  evidence  in  the  observation  of
spontaneous  cases, — as  apparitions  at  the  moment  of  death  and  the
like, — but  this  evidence  has  failed  to  impress  the  scientific  world  in
the  same  way  as  evidence  less  careful  and  less  coherent  has  often  done
before.  Our  evidence  is  not  confronted  and  refuted ;  it  is  shirked  and
evaded,  as  though  there  were  some  great  a  priori  improbability  which
absolved  the  world  of  science  from  considering  it.  I  at  least  see  no
a  priori  improbability  whatever.  Our  alleged  facts  might  be  true  in
all  kinds  of  ways  without  conti^adicting  any  truth  already  known.  I
will  dwell  now  on  only  one  possible  line  of  explanation, — not  that  I  see


President's  A  ddress.


349


any  way  of  elucidating  all  the  new  phenomena  I  regard  as  genuine,
but  because  it  seems  probable  I  may  shed  a  light  on  some  of  those
phenomena.

All  the  phenomena  of  the  Universe  are  presumably  in  some  way
continuous  ;  and  certain  facts,  plucked  as  it  were  from  the  very  heart  of
Nature,  are  likely  to  be  of  use  in  our  gradual  discovery  of  facts  which
lie  deeper  still.

Let  us  then  consider  the  vibrations  we  trace,  not  only  in  solid
bodies,  but  in  the  air,  and  in  a  still  moi'e  remarkable  manner  in  the
ether.

These  vibrations  differ  in  their  velocity  and  in  their  frequency.
That  they  exist,  extending  from  one  vibration  to  two  thousand  billion
vibrations  per  second  we  have  good  evidence.  That  they  subserve  the
purpose  of  conveying  impressions  from  outside  sources  of  whatever
kind  to  living  organisms  may  be  fully  recognised.

As  a  starting-point  I  will  take  a  pendulum  beating  seconds  in  air.
If  I  keep  on  doubling  I  get  a  series  of  steps  as  follows  : —


Starting-point.  The  seconds  pendulum.


Step

1. ...

2

vibrations  per

second.

3)

2.

4

>}

)j

)J

3.  ...

8

))

))

)  J

4.  ...

16

5T

))

5.  ...

32

J  >

1J

J3

6.  ...

64

J»

))

7.  ...

128

)?

J)

8.  ...

256

^  J

3?

JJ

9.  ...

512

!>

)  1

))

10.  ..

1024

))

n

15.  ...

32768

3»

J>

20.  ...

1,048576

)5

))

25.  ...

33,554432

)  )

)1

30.  ...

1073,741824

n

)5

35.  ...

34359,738368

51

>)

))

40.  ...

1,099511,627776

yi

??

45.  ...

3.5,184372,088832

ij

!  )

3  J

50.  ...

1125,899906,842624

ji

1y

J)

55.  ...

36028,707018,963968

55

))

56.  ...

72057,594037,927936

35

3?

57.  ...

14411.5,18807-5,855872

"

))

58.  ...

288220,376151,711744

>'

33

!)

59.  ...

576440,752303,423488

)i

53

60.  ...

1,152881,504606,846976

J)

55

5  J

61.  ...

2,305763,009213,693952

!)

55

62.  ...

4,611526,018427,387904

jy

55

?)

63.  ...

9,223052,036854,775808

55

350


Pres  idenfs  A  ddress.


At  the  fifth  step  from  vinity,  at  32  vibrations  per  second,  we  reach
the  region  where  atmospheric  vibration  reveals  itself  to  us  as  sound.
Here  we  have  the  lowest  musical  note.  In  the  next  ten  steps  the
vibrations  per  second  rise  from  32  to  32,768,  and  here  to  the  average
human  ear  the  region  of  sound  ends.  But  certain  more  highly
endowed  animals  probably  hear  sounds  too  acute  for  our  organs,  that
is,  sounds  which  vibrate  at  a  higher  rate.

We  next  enter  a  region  in  which  the  vibrations  rise  rapidly,  and  the
vibrating  medium  is  no  longer  the  gross  atmosphere,  but  a  highly
attenuated  medium,  "  a  diviner  air,"  called  the  ether.  From  the  16th
to  the  35th  step  the  vibrations  rise  from  32,768  to  34359,738368  a
second,  such  vibrations  appearing  to  our  means  of  observation  as
electrical  rays.

AVe  next  reach  a  region  extending  from  the  35th  to  the  45th  step,
including  from  34359,738368  to  35,184372,088832  vibrations  per
second.  This  region  may  be  considered  as  unknown,  because  we  are  as
yet  ignorant  what  ai'e  the  functions  of  vibrations  of  the  rates  just
mentioned. But  that  they  have  some  function  it  is  fair  to  suppose.

Now  we  approach  the  region  of  light,  the  steps  extending  from  the
45th  to  between  the  50tli  and  the  51st,  and  the  vibrations  extending
from  35,184372,088832  per  second  (heat  rays)  to  1875,000000,000000
per  second,  the  highest  recorded  rays  of  the  spectrum.  The  actual
sensation  of  light,  and  therefore  the  vibrations  which  transmit  visible
signs,  being  comprised  between  the  narrow  limits  of  about
450,000000,000000  (red  light)  and  750,000000,000000  (violet  light)
— less  than  one  step.

Leaving  the  region  of  visible  light,  we  arrive  at  what  is,  for  our
existing  senses  and  our  means  of  research,  another  unknown  region,
the  functions  of  which  we  are  beginning  to  suspect.  It  is  not  unlikely
that  the  X  rays  of  Professor  Rontgen  will  be  found  to  lie  between  the
58th  and  the  61st  step,  having  vibrations  extending  from  288220,576
151,711744  to  2,305763,009213.693952  per  second  or  even  higher.

In  this  series  it  will  be  seen  there  are  two  great  gaps,  or  unknown
regions,  concerning  which  we  must  own  our  entire  ignorance  as  to  the
part  they  play  in  the  economy  of  ci'eation.  Further,  whether  any
vibrations  exist  having  a  greater  number  per  second  than  those  classes
mentioned  we  do  not  presume  to  decide.

But  is  it  premature  to  ask  in  what  way  are  vibi^ations  connected
with  thought  or  its  transmission  ?  We  might  speculate  that  the
increasing  rapidity  or  frequency  of  the  vibrations  would  accompany  a
rise  in  the  importance  of  the  functions  of  such  vibrations.  That
high  frequency  deprives  the  rays  of  many  attributes  that  might  seem
incompatiljle  with  "  brain  waves,"  is  undoubted.  Thus,  rays  about  the
62ncl  step  are  so  minute  as  to  cease  to  be  refracted,  reflected  or  polarised  ;


President's  Address.


351


they  pass  through  many  so-called  opaque  bodies,  and  research  begins
to  show  that  the  most  rapid  are  just  those  which  pass  most  easily
through  dense  substances.  It  does  not  require  much  stretch  of  the
scientific  imagination  to  conceive  that  at  the  62nd  or  63rd  step  the
trammels  from  which  rays  at  the  61st  step  were  struggling  to  free
themselves,  have  ceased  to  influence  rays  having  so  enormous  a  rate
of  vibration  as  9,223052,036854,775808  per  second,  and  that  these
rays  pierce  the  densest  medium  with  scarcely  any  diminution  of
intensity,  and  pass  almost  unref  racted  and  unreflected  along  their  path
with  the  velocity  of  light.

Ordinarily  we  communicate  intelligence  to  each  other  by  speech.
I  first  call  up  in  my  own  brain  a  picture  of  a  scene  I  wish  to  describe,
and  then,  by  means  of  an  orderly  transmission  of  wave  vibrations  set
in  motion  by  my  vocal  cords  through  the  material  atmosphere,  a  corres-
ponding picture  is  implanted  in  the  brain  of  any  one  whose  ear  is
capable  of  receiving  such  vibrations.  If  the  scene  I  wish  to  impress
on  the  brain  of  the  recipient  is  of  a  complicated  character,  or  if  the
picture  of  it  in  my  own  brain  is  not  definite,  the  transmission  will
be  more  or  less  imperfect  ;  but  if  I  wish  to  get  my  audience  to  picture
to  themselves  some  very  simple  object,  such  as  a  triangle  or  a  circle,  the
transmission  of  ideas  will  be  well  nigh  perfect,  and  equally  clear  to
the  brains  of  both  transmitter  and  recipient.  Here  we  use  the
vibrations  of  the  material  molecules  of  the  atmosphere  to  ti'ansmit
intelligence  from  one  brain  to  another.

In  the  newly-discovered  Rontgen  rays  we  are  introduced  to  an
order  of  ^dbrations  of  extremest  minuteness  as  compared  ^vith  the
most  minute  waves  with  which  we  have  hitherto  been  acquainted,  and
of  dimensions  comparable  with  the  distances  between  the  centres  of
the  atoms  of  which  the  material  universe  is  built  up ;  and  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  we  have  here  reached  the  limit  of  frequency.
Waves  of  this  character  cease  to  have  many  of  the  properties  asso-
ciated with  light  waves.  They  are  produced  in  the  same  etherial
medium,  and  are  probably  propagated  with  the  same  velocity  as  light,
but  here  the  similarity  ends.  They  cannot  be  regularly  reflected  from
polished  surfaces  ;  they  have  not  been  polarised  ;  they  are  not  refracted
on  passing  from  one  medium  to  another  of  different  density,  and  they
penetrate  considerable  thicknesses  of  substances  opaque  to  light  with
the  same  ease  with  which  light  passes  through  glass.  It  is  also  demon-
strated that  these  rays,  as  generated  in  the  vacuum  tube,  are  not
homogeneous,  but  consist  of  bundles  of  different  wave-lengths,
analogous  to  what  would  be  differences  of  colour  could  we  see  them  as
light.  Some  pass  easily  through  flesh,  but  are  partially  arrested  by
bone,  while  others  pass  with  almost  equal  facility  through  bone  and
flesh.


352


President's  Address.


It  seems  to  me  that  in  these  rays  we  may  have  a  possible  mode  of
transmitting  intelligence,  which  with  a  few  reasonable  postulates,  may
supply  a  key  to  much  that  is  obscure  in  psychical  research.  Let  it  be
assumed  that  these  rays,  or  rays  even  of  higher  frequency,  can  pass
into  the  brain  and  act  on  some  nervous  centre  there.  Let  it  be  conceived
that  the  brain  contains  a  centre  which  uses  these  rays  as  the  vocal
cords  use  sound  vibrations  (both  being  under  the  command  of  intelli-
gence), and  sends  them  out,  with  the  velocity  of  light,  to  impinge  on
the  receiving  ganglion  of  another  brain.  In  this  way  some,  at  least,
of  the  phenomena  of  telepathy,  and  the  transmission  of  intelligence
from  one  sensitive  to  another  through  long  distances,  seem  to  come
into  the  domain  of  law,  and  can  be  grasped.  A  sensitive  may  be  one
Vi^ho  possesses  the  telepathic  transmitting  or  receiving  ganglion  in  an
advanced  state  of  development,  or  who,  by  constant  practice,  is
rendered  moi-e  sensitive  to  these  high-frequency  waves.  Experience
seems  to  show  that  the  receiving  and  the  transmitting  ganglions  are
not  equally  developed ;  one  may  be  active,  while  the  other,  like  the
pineal  eye  in  man,  may  be  only  vestigial.  By  such  a  hypothesis  no
physical  laws  are  violated,  neither  is  it  necessary  to  invoke  what  is
commonly  called  the  supernatural.

To  this  hypothesis  it  may  be  objected  that  brain  waves,  like  any
other  waves,  must  obey  physical  laws.  Therefore,  transmission  of
thought  must  be  easier  or  more  certain  the  nearer  the  agent  and
recipient  are  to  each  other,  and  should  die  out  altogether  before  great
distances  are  reached.  Also  it  can  be  urged  that  if  brain  waves  diffuse
in  all  directions  they  should  affect  all  sensitives  within  their  radius  of
action  instead  of  impressing  only  one  brain.  The  electric  telegraph  is
not  a  parallel  case,  for  there  a  material  wire  interveI^es  to  conduct  and
guide  the  energy  to  its  destination.

These  are  weighty  objections,  but  not,  I  think,  insurmountable.  Far
be  it  from  me  to  say  anything  disrespectful  of  the  law  of  inverse  squares,
but  I  have  already  endeavoured  to  show  we  are  dealing  with  conditions
removed  from  our  material  and  limited  conceptions  of  space,  matter,
form.  Is  it  inconceivable  that  intense  thought  concentrated  towards  a
sensitive  with  whom  the  thinker  is  in  close  sympathy  may  induce  a
telepathic  chain  of  brain  waves,  along  which  the  message  of  thought
can  go  straight  to  its  goal  without  loss  of  energy  due  to  distance  1
And  is  it  also  inconceivable  that  our  mundane  ideas  of  space  and
distance  may  be  superseded  in  these  subtile  regions  of  unsubstantial
thought  where  "near  "  and  "  far  "  may  lose  their  usual  meaning  ?

I  repeat  that  this  speculation  is  strictly  provisional.  I  dare  to
suggest  it.  The  time  may  come  when  it  will  be  possible  to  submit  it  to
experimental  tests.


President's  Address.


353


I  am  impelled  to  one  further  reflection,  dealing  with  the  conserva-
tion of  energy.  We  say  with  truth  that  energy  is  transformed  but  not
destroyed,  and  that  whenever  we  can  trace  the  transformation  we  find
it  quantitatively  exact.  So  far  as  our  very  rough  exactness  goes,  this
is  true  for  inorganic  matter  and  for  mechanical  forces.  But  it  is  only
inferentially  true  for  organised  matter  and  for  vital  forces.  We  cannot
express  life  in  terms  of  heat  or  of  motion.  And  thus  it  happens  that
just  when  the  exact  transformation  of  energy  will  be  most  interesting
to  watch,  we  cannot  really  tell  whether  any  fresh  energy  has  been  intro-
duced into  the  system  or  not.  Let  us  consider  this  a  little  more
closely.

It  has,  of  course,  always  been  realised  by  physicists,  and  has  been
especially  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Croll,  that  there  is  a  wide  difference
between  the  production  of  motion  and  the  direction  of  it  into  a  par-
ticular channel.  The  production  of  motion,  molar  or  molecular,  is
governed  by  physical  laws,  which  it  is  the  business  of  the  philosopher
to  find  out  and  correlate.  The  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy
overrides  all  laws,  and  it  is  a  pre-eminent  canon  of  scientific  belief  that
for  every  act  done  a  corresponding  expenditure  of  energy  must  be
transformed.  No  work  can  be  efi"ected  without  using  up  a  corres-
ponding value  in  energy  of  another  kind.  But  to  us  the  other  side  of
the  problem  is  even  of  more  importance.  Granted  the  existence  of  a
certain  kind  of  molecular  motion,  what  is  it  that  determines  its
direction  along  one  path  rather  than  another  1  A  weight  falls  to  the
earth  through  a  distance  of  three  feet.  I  lift  it,  and  let  it  fall  once
more.  In  these  movements  of  the  weight  a  certain  amount  of  energy
is  expended  in  its  rise,  and  the  same  amount  is  liberated  in  its  fall.
But  instead  of  letting  the  weight  fall  free,  suppose  I  harness  it  to  a
complicated  system  of  wheels,  and,  instead  of  letting  the  weight  fall
in  a  fraction  of  a  second,  I  distribute  its  fall  over  twenty-four  hours.
No  more  energy  is  expended  in  raising  the  weight,  and  in  its  slow  fall
no  more  or  less  energy  is  developed  than  when  it  fell  free  ;  but  I  have
made  it  do  work  of  another  kind.  It  now  drives  a  clock,  a  telescope
or  a  philosophic  instrument,  and  does  what  we  call  useful  work.  The
clock  runs  down.  I  lift  the  weight  by  exerting  the  proper  amount  of
energy,  and  in  this  action  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy  is  strictly
obeyed.  But  now  I  have  the  choice  of  either  letting  the  weight  fall
free  in  a  fraction  of  a  second,  or,  constrained  by  the  wheelwork,  in
twenty-four  hours.  I  can  do  which  I  like,  and  whichever  way  I  decide,
no  more  enei'gy  is  developed  in  the  fall  of  the  weight.  I  strike  a
match  :  I  can  use  it  to  light  a  cigarette  or  to  set  fire  to  a  house.  I
write  a  telegram  :  it  may  be  simply  to  say  I  shall  be  late  for  dinner,
or  it  may  produce  fluctuations  on  the  Stock  Exchange  that  will  ruin
thousands. In  these  cases  the  actual  force  required  in  striking  the


354


Pres  ident'a  A  ddress.


match  or  in  writing  the  telegram  is  governed  by  the  law  of  conserva-
tion of  energy ;  but  the  vastly  more  momentous  part,  which  determines
the  words  I  use  or  the  material  T  ignite,  is  beyond  such  a  law.  It  is
probable  that  no  expenditure  of  energy  need  be  used  in  the  determina-
tion of  direction  one  way  more  than  another.  Intelligence  and  free
will  here  come  into  play,  and  these  mystic  forces  are  outside  the  law
of  conservation  of  energy  as  understood  by  physicists.

The  whole  universe  as  we  see  it  is  the  result  of  molecular  move-
ment. Molecular  movements  strictly  obey  the  law  of  conservation  of
energy,  but  what  we  call  "  law  "  is  simply  an  expression  of  the  direc-
tion along  which  a  form  of  energy  acts,  not  the  form  of  energy  itself.
We  may  explain  molecular  and  molar  motions,  and  discover  all  the
physical  laws  of  motion,  but  we  shall  be  far  as  ever  from  a  solution  of
the  vastly  more  important  question  as  to  what  form  of  will  and  intellect
is  behind  the  motions  of  molecules,  guiding  and  constraining  them
in  definite  directions  along  pre-determined  paths.  What  is  the  deter-
mining cause  in  the  background  1  What  combination  of  will  and
intellect,  outside  our  physical  laws,  guides  the  fortuitous  concourse  of
atoms  along  ordered  paths  culminating  in  the  material  world  in  which
we  live  1

In  these  last  sentences  I  have  intentionally  used  words  of  wide
signification — have  spoken  of  guidcmce  along  ordered  paths.  It  is
wisdom  to  be  vague  here,  for  we  absolutely  cannot  say  whether  or
when  any  diversion  may  be  introduced  into  the  existing  system  of
earthly  forces  by  an  external  power.  We  can  no  more  be  certain  that
this  is  not  so  than  I  can  be  certain  in  an  express  train  that  no  signal-
man has  pressed  a  handle  to  direct  the  train  on  to  this  or  that  line  of
rails.  I  may  compute  exactly  how  much  coal  is  used  per  mile,  so  as  to
be  able  to  say  at  any  minute  how  many  miles  we  have  travelled,  but,
unless  I  actually  see  the  points,  I  cannot  tell  whether  they  are  shifted
before  the  train  passes.

An  omnipotent  being  could  rule  the  course  of  this  world  in  such
a  way  that  none  of  us  should  discover  the  hidden  springs  of  action.
He  need  not  make  the  Sun  stand  still  upon  Gibeon.  He  could  do  all
that  he  wanted  by  the  expenditure  of  infinitesimal  diverting  force
upon  ultra-microscopic  modifications  of  the  human  germ.

In  this  address  I  have  not  attempted  to  add  any  item  to  the
sound  knowledge  which  I  believe  our  Society  is  gradually  amassing.
I  shall  be  content  if  I  have  helped  to  clear  away  some  of  those
scientific  stumbling-blocks,  if  I  may  so  call  them,  which  tend  to
prevent  many  of  our  possible  coadjutors  from  adventuring  them-
selves on  the  new  illimitable  road.


President's  Address.


355


I  see  no  good  reason  why  any  man  of  scientific  mind  should  shut
his  eyes  to  our  work,  or  deliberately  stand  aloof  from  it.  Our
Proceedings  are  of  course  not  exactly  parallel  to  the  Proceedings  of  a
Society  dealing  with  a  long-established  branch  of  Science.  In  every
form  of  research  their  must  be  a  beginning.  We  own  to  much  that  is
tentative,  much  that  may  turn  out  erroneous.  But  it  is  thus,  and
thus  only,  that  each  Science  in  turn  takes  its  stand.  I  venture  to
-assert  that  both  in  actual  careful  record  of  new  and  important  facts,
and  in  suggestiveness,  our  Society's  work  and  publications  will  form
no  unworthy  preface  to  a  profounder  science  both  of  Man,  of  Nature,
and  of  "Worlds  not  realised  "  than  this  planet  has  yet  known.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


357


EDMUND  GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1896.


Additions  since  the  list  in  ''Proceedings,'^  Vol.  XI.


Bkamwell  (J.  Milne,  M.B.),  On  Imperative  Ideas. Being  a  Dis-
cussion on  Dr.  Hack  Tuke's  Paper. (Brain,  1895)  London,  1896

  James  Braid,  Surgeon  and  Hypnotist. {Brain,  1S9Q)... London,  1896


BoiKAC  (E.),  L'Hypothese  du  Magnetisme Animal {La  Nonvelle

Revue,  October  1st,  1895)  Paris,  1895

Cahagnet  (L.  Alphonue)  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  future  devoiles. 3  vols.

Paris,  1848-60

DuKAND,  (J.  P.  DB  Gros),  La  Pliilosopllie  Physiologique  et  Medicale


Paris,  1868

  L'Idee  et  le  Fait  en  Biologie  Paris,  1896

  Les  Mysteres  de  la  Suggestion  (Revue  de  rHypnotisme)...Pari'.s,  1896

  [Philips  (Dr.  J.  P.),  ]  Cours  Tlieorique  et  Pratique  de  Braidisme

ou  Hypnotisme  Nerveux  Paris,  1860

  Influence  Reciproque  de  la  Peusee,  de  la  Sensation, et  des

Mouvements  Vegetatifs  Paris,  1862

JoLY  (Henri)  Psychologie  des  Grands  Hommes Paris,  1891

RocHAS  (Albert  de),  L'Exteriorisatiou  de  la  Sensibilite Paris,  1895


Benedict  (Prof.  D.  M.),  Second  Life. Das  Seelen-Binnen  {Reprint

from  "  Wiener  Kliiuk  "  ) Vienna,  1894

Breuer  &  Freud  (Drs.),  Studien  liber  Hysteric  Leipzig,  1895

BfiCHNER  (Prof.  Ludwig),  Doppeltes  Bewusstsein  (Die  Zukunft,  No.

30,  April  27th,  1895) Berlin,  1895

Dessoir  (Max)  Das  Doppel-Ich  {2nd  Edition,  Enlarged) Leipzig,  1896

Koch  (Dr.  J.  L.  A.),  Von  Bewusstsein  in  Zustanden  Sogenannte

Bewusstlosigkeit Stuttgart  1877

Krafft-Ebing  (Dr.  R.  von),  Hypnotische  Experimente  {2nd  Edition)

Stuttgart,  1893.

Landmann  (Dr.  S.),  Die  Melirlieit  Geistiger  Personlichkeiten  in  einem

Individuum  Stuttgart,  1894

MuLLER  (Dr. Franz Carl),  Psychopathologie des  Bewusstseins

Leipzig,  1889

Reichel  (Willy),  Der  Heil-Magnetismus  Berlin,  1896


A  full  Catcdogue  of  the  books  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  was  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  tlie  Proceedings.  Siq)plementary  Catalogues  loere
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,  X.,  and  XI.  Sejmrate
copies  of  these  Catalogues  are  still  on  hand,  and  can  be  obtained  from  the
Secretary.


358


Officers  and  Council  for  1S97.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick ------  1882-1884.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S. - -  -  1885-1887.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick - - - - -  -  1888-1892.

Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S. -  -  1893.

Professor  William  James  (Harvard,  U.S.A.)  -  1894-1895.

William  Crookes,  F.R.S. . - . -  -  1896.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1897.


PRESIDENT.

William  Crookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.


The  Eight  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  F.R.S.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.E.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.
Richard  H.  Hutton.
Professor  VV.  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.


Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithson-
ian Institution, Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of

RiPON.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


COUNCIL.


TheRt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.

Thomas  Barkworth.

A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.

J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.

The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal-

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
St.  George  Lane  Fox.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.  .  .

Mr.  Registrar  Hood.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  Macalister,  M.  D.  ,F.  R.  S.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Frank  Podmore.


Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C.  LocKHART  Robertson,  M.D.

George  F.  Rogers,  M.D.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Babington  Smith.

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Sir  Augustus  K.  Stephenson,

K.C.B.,  Q.C.
Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
J.  Venn,  D.  Sc.,  F.R.S.
Abraham  Wallace,  M.D.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARY.  ■
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leclvhamirton  House,  Cambridge.

SECRETARY  FOR  THE UNITED  STATES.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  FJace,  Boston,  Mass.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


359


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

{March,  1897.)


PRESIDENT.
William Crookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Cai^lton-gardens,  S.W.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Crossdeep  Lodge,  Twickenham.
Professor  William  .James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Lanrley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.Pt.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  PtiGHT  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  PtiPON,  The  Palace,  Ripon.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  ISTewnham  College,  Cambridge.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.

William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  Hawarden  Castle,  Chester.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
€r.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  ISTevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Prof.  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Josephine,  Boute  d'Antibes,  Cannes,  France.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  F^re,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Licliterfelde,  Germany.
Professor  Pierre  Janet,  22,  Rue  de  Bellechasse,  Paris.
Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  France.

2  B  2


360


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,U.S.A

Tii.  RiBOT,  Office  of  the  Revue  PhilosojMque,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  1' University,  Paris.

Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  ScHRENCK-ISroTziNG,  2,  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.
Professor  IST.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.
Dr.  Otto  G.  Wetterstrand,  Stockholm.
Dr.  G.  C.  Wittig,  22,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.

MEMBERS,  HONORARY  ASSOCIATES,  AND  ASSOCIATES.

Ncmies  of  Members  are  j^t'inted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  hy  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  are  pirinted  in  Small  Capitals.

Adair,  Desmond,  Bank  of  England,  Plymouth.
Adams,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Ainslie,  Douglas,  St.  James's  Club,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.
Allen,  Henry  J.,  14,  Ailesbury-road,  Donnybrook,  co.  Dublin,
Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  83,  St.  Geoi-ge's-road,  London,  S.W.
Amery,  W.  C,  34a,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.
Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.
Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Atkinson,  Henry,  48,  Parliament-hill-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.
Bacle,  E.,  57,  Rue  de  Chateaudun,  Paris.
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  23,  Lower  Phillimore-place,  Kensington,  W.
Baines,  Miss  W.,  Tighnamara,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute,  N.B.
Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  47,  Russell-road,  West  Kensington,  W,
Baker,  Edmund  G.,  High  View,  Shooters-hill,  Kent.
Baker,  Miss  Morrant,  Boston  Lodge,  Harvard-rd.,  Gunnersbui-y,  S.W.
Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,M.P.,F.R.S.,  4,Carlton-gdns.,S.W.
Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  G.W.,M.P.,  24,  Addison-road,  London, W.
Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Barclay,  Rev.  Chas.W.,  M.  A.,TheVicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
Barkly,  Mrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  near  London.
Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.  P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


361


Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  co.  Dublin.
Barlow,  Colonel  W.  R.,  56,  Penywern-road,  London,  S.W.
Barrett,  Ashley  W.,  M.B.,  7,  Cavendish-place,  Cavendish-square, W.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  G2,  Cadogau-place,  London,  S.W.
Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  Glengariff,  co.  Cork.
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  34,  Oxford-terrace,  London,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  The  College,  Eastbourne.
Beatty,  Octavius,  Fairholt,  Merton-hall-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.
Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redcliffe-sq.,  S.W.
Bective,  The  Countess  of,  Barnacre  Lodge,  Garstang,
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterheld-gardens,  London,  W.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bell,  Major  Wm.  Morrison,  Thor,  Birchington,  Thanet,  Kent.
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  M.A.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.
Benson,  Mrs.

Benson,  Miss  Annette  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay.

Behwinck,  Lady  Henry,  13,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  W.

Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Bergen,  Axel  vox,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.

Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.

Bernard,  John,  Captain,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "Nelson,"  Portsmouth.

Berry,Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D., 60,  Welbeck-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.

Bevan,  Miss  N.  H.,  Chalet  Passiflora,  Cannes,  Prance.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.

Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Bibby,  Charles  Hesketh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Bickpord-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,  Endymion-road, Brixton  Rise,  S.AV.

Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.

BiELBY,  Horace  C.  V.,  67,  Lord-street,  Liverpool,  W.

Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  Lyndhurst,  Luton.

BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Birrell,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Lansdowne-road,  W^orthing.

Blackburn,  Ernest  M.,  38,  Egerton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.

Blackwood,  Mrs.,  Norton  Court,  Sittingbourne,  Kent.


362


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Blaine,  Miss  H.  G.  Delabere,  129,  Ci-omwell-road,  London,  S.W.

Blakelock,  Rev.  R.,  M.A.,  Horbuiy  Bridge  Yicai'age,  Wakefield.

Blyth,  W.  M.,  20,  Highbury -terrace,  London,  JST.

BoGER,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Elvington,  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.

Bois,  Henry  Gordon,  c/o  J.  M.  Robertson  and  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.

Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  W.

BoLDERO,  Lieut. -General  G.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.

BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.

Bolton,  Miss  A.  J.,  B.A.  (N.Z.),  Hillside,  Bourton-road,  Buckingham.

Boorne,  Herbert  H.,  9a,  Sackville  street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Bayeux  (Calvados),  France.

Boswell-Stone,  Miss  E.  L  ,  Dayi*ells,  47,  Wickham-road,  Beckenham.

Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.

BouLNOis,  H.  Percy,  M.Inst.C.E.,  7,  Devonshire-road,  Liverpool.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  at  Carey's,  Brockenhurst.

Bowell,  Ernest  W.  W.,  Sissinghurst  Vicarage,  Cranbrook,  Kent.

BowNESS,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London, W.

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

BRA.MSTON,  Miss  A.  R.,  Witham-close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Suntrap,  RadclifFe-road,  Croydon.

Bramwell,  John  M.,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square, W.

Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Wey bridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshii-e.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.

Briggs,  Mrs.,  Welbury  Drive,  Bradford.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  126,  Kennington  Park-road,  London,  S.E.
Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.
Brooke,  Col.  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A  ,  M.A.,  1,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.
Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  26,  Carisbrooke-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidston,  Alleyn-road,  West  Dulwich,  S.E.
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryant,  A.  C,  B.  A.,  2,  Langham-road,  West  Green,  London,  N.

Bryant,  Captain  G.  E.,  R.A.,  c/o  J.  M.  Edwards,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate,

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill-square,  W.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.A.,  9,  Upper  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E,

Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

BuLLEY,  Mrs.  Arthur,  West  Kirby,  near  Birkenhead.

Bullock,  Mrs.,  St.  Mai'garet's,  Mitcham,  Surrey.


liist  of  Members  and  Associates.


363


BuLMER,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York.

BuNNETT,  A.,  JuNR.,  10,  Station-road,  South  Norwood,  S.E.

BuNSHAW,  IST.F.,  Med.  Off.,  B.G.J. P.  Rail  way,  Ghadechi,  Kathiawar,  India.

Burt,  Percival  J.,  16^  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.G.

Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Logner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D., M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-HiU.

Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.

Butt,  Lady,  17,  Viale  P^^'^-  Margherita,  Florence,  Italy.

Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.

Caillard,  Sir  Vincent,  Constantinople.

Oaillard,  Miss,  Wingfield  House,  near  Trowbridge,  "Wiltshire.

Caird,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London.

Caldecott,  Rev.  Professor  Alfred,  M.  A.,  Lopham  Rectory,  Thetford.

Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Nortonbury  House,  Tewkesbury.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  IST.B.

Campbell,  Colin  E.,  B.A.,  22,  Market  Hill,  Cambridge.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37,  Commercial-road  East,  London,  E.

Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.

Carbery,  William  E.,  21,  Eldon-road,  Kensington,  W.

Carey,  Arthur,  B.Sc,  Browsich,  Gateacre,  near  Liverpool.

Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Grey  well  Hill,  Wiuchfield.

*Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.  ^

Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.

Carter,  Mrs.  L.  Brudenell,  5,  Observatory-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  N.B.

Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-square,  London,  S.W.

Cave-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W.

Oazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.

Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C.,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  Apollo-street,  Bombay.
Ohattock,  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Chichele-Plowden, Trevor, C.S.L, The Residency,  Hyderabad,

Deccan,  India.
Chichester,  Miss  May,  Wotton  Rectory,  Dorking.
Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  46,  Gunter's-grove,  London,  S.W.
Clark,  W.  W.,  Denehurst,  Dorking.
Clark,  Miss,  Suffield  Park,  Cromer.

Clarke,  Francis,  63,  Gladsmuir-road,  Whitehall  Park,  London,  N.
Clarke,  J.  F.  Howard,  M.D.,M.R.C.S.,(Eng.)  105,  Wardour-street,  W.
Clarke,  John  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-street,  London,  W.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.Pv.C.S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill,


364


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Clarke,  Rev.  W.  J.,  186,  Bristol-road,  Birmingham.
Clayton,  Charles  E.,  152,  North-street,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Cleveland,  The  Duchess  op,  18,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  S.W.
Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Fawley  Lodge,  Lansdown-road,  Cheltenham.
Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
CoATES,  Andrew,  Pitcullen  House,  Perth,  JST.B.

Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ooghill,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Cosheen,  Castle  Townshend,  co.  Cork.
CoLEGRANE,  Mrs.  E  ,  Bracebridge,  Norwood,  S.E.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  Pt.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
CoLLiNGWOOD,  Miss  A.  M.,  5,  Addison-mansions,  West  Kensington,  W.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
CoLLisoN,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  17b,  Great  Cumberland-place,  London,  W.
Colthurst,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CoLviLE,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.
Compton,  Lady  Alwyne,  7,  Balfour-place,  London,  W.
CooNBY,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.A.,  28,  Donegall-passage,  Belfast.
Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  Churchills,  Caterham  Valley,  Surrey.
CoTTERELL,  James,  140,  Earlsfield-road,  Wandsworth  Common,  S.W.
CoRT  van  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  W.  A.,  6,  Swimame-st.,  The  Hague.
CousENS,  Charles  H.,  Star  Chambers,  30,  Moorgate-st.,  London,  E.C.
Cousens,  John  S.,  Wanstead,  Essex.

Cowan,  William  H.,  11,  Malborough-road,  Bournemouth.
CowPER,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  Grosvenor  Hotel,  London,  S.W.
Crackanthorpe,  Mrs.,  65,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Caven-
dish-square, London,  W.
Crawford,  F.  Marion, Villa  Crawford,  Sant' Agnello  di  Sorrento,  Italy.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Colinton-road,  Edinburgh.
Crawley,  Mrs.  Chas.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  S.W.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Crespo,  J.  Charters,  162,  Rua  de  S.  Julias,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Crewdson,  Miss  Gwendolen,  The  Barons,  Reigate.
Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  29,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.
Crooks,  Miss,  Kensington,  South  Australia.

Crossley,  Professor  Hastings,  Casa  del  Vallone,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  10,  Jeffry's-square,  St.  Mary  Axe,  London,  E.C.

Cruise,  Sir  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  W.,  Dublin.

Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,  The  Chestnuts,  St.  Margaret's,  Twickenham.

Cunningham,  G.,D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge.

Cushing,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  4,  Rue  Chalgrin,  Paris.

D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120,  Ptue  de  Bac,  Paris. ,.,


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


365


Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.  A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Dall,  Miss  E.  L.,  42,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.

Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  116,  King  Henry's-rd.,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.

Damania,  Surgeon-Major,  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.

Danvers,  Mrs.,  4,  Cranley  Mansion,  Gloucester-road,  S.W.

Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenhani.

Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  WooUohra,  New  South  Wales.

Dartnell,  GrEORGE  E.,  Abbottsfield,  Stratford-road,  Salisbury.

Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.

Davies,  Benjamin,  20,  Lomond-road,  Fairfield,  Liverpool.

Davis,  A. E.,  F.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.L,  20,  Great  George-sq.,  Liverpool.

Davis,  Joseph  T.,  Holly  Bush,  Snaresbrook,  Essex.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Gatefield,  Clarendon-road,  Lewisham,  S.E.

Davison,  Miss  Annie,  1,  Stanford-road,  Kensington,  W,

Day,  Barclay  L.,  Redcot,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Dem,  John,  Walsingham,  Chislehurst.

^Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.

Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.

DicKSEE,  Frank,  A.R,.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.

Dixon,  Edward  T.,  4,  Oranmer-road,  Cambridge.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  East  Park  Parade,  Northampton.

Dobbie,  a.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Dodge,  Miss  Mary  M.  H.,  39,  Brompton-square,  London,  S.W.

Dodgson,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.

DouGALL,  Miss  Lily,  Canaan-grove,  Newbattle-terrace,  Edinburgh.

Douglas,  Rev.Dr.  G.  W.,239,Whitney-avenue, Newhaven,Conn.,U.S.A.

DovETON,  F.  B.,  Eastcliife,  Babbacombe,  South  Devon.

DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.I.,  91,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Duke,  Thomas,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  33,  Bilton-road,  Rugby.

DuLLEY,  Rev.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.

Duncan,  Mrs.  A.M.  A.,  Victoria  Club,  30a,  Sackville-st.,  London,  W.

Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  11,  Half-Moon-sti-eet,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

DuTT,  R.  C,  CLE.,  Burdwan,  Bengal,  India.

Dycb,  Captain  Cecil,  (Ptetired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  64,  Pembridge

Villas,  Notting  Hill  Gate,  London,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Devonia,  St.  Andrew's-road,  Henley-on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.


366


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Elder,  Mrs.,  38,  Hyde  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.

Elliot,  Gilbert,  10,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.

Ellio'i',  iMrs.  Minto,  7,  George-street,  Hanover-square,  AV.

Elliot,  Miss,  Sandecotes,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.

Elliott,  Rev.  W.  A.,  .54,  Kirkgate,  Shipley,  Yorkshire.

Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.

Ellis,  Mrs.  Robert,  4,  Rylett-road,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  The  Vicarage,  Windsor.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brompton,  London,  S.W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London

Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermacora,  Dr.  G.  B  ,  Padua,  Italy.

Esterhazy,  Count  Michael,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.

Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Pagan,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  56,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnik,  Alessandria.

Farrer^^  The  Lady,  Abinger  Hall,  Dorking.

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5,  John-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Field,  Allan  B.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Field,  E.  M.,  M.A.,  Cotswold,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N.

FiNCH,H.WYNNE,JuNR.,M.A.,TheManorHouse,Stokesley,R.S.O.,Yorks.

*FiNZi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.

Fisher,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  24,  Duke's-avenue,  Chiswick,  near  London.

Fisher,  Rev.  J.  PIartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.

FitzGerald, Desmond  G.,M.S.T.E., 94,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton, S.W.

Fletcher,  Mrs.  K.  R.,  The  Orchard,  Buckland,  near  Betchworth, Surrey.

Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  RedclifFe  square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

Flouknoy,  Professor  Th.,  The  University,  Geneva.

Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  Mandeville-place,  London,  W.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Gavell  House,  Kilsyth,  IST.B.

Fort,  Charles  Leyland,  B.A.,  Alderbui-y  Plouse,  Salisbury.

Foster,  Gerald  H.,  5,  Cleveland-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.

Fountain,  Alfred,  The  Elms,  Cornwall-road,  Uxbridge.

Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  Traveller's  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.

Eraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Bellary,  Madras  Presidency.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Belgrave  Mansions, Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.

Freemann,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  1,  Soho-square,  London,  W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlow-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  il.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.

Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


367


*Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.
FuRNivALL,  Percy,  34,  Adelaide-road,  London,  N.W.
Galloway,  The  Countess  of,  17,  Upper  Grosvenor-street,  W.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Long  Wittenham,  Abingdon.
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-square,  AV.
Garner,  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.
Garrard,  Mrs.,  8,  Kensington-court,  London,  W.
Garth,  Henry,  M.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  4,  Harrington-street,  Calcutta.
Gernet,  Miss  Nina,  Basseynaya,  33,  Lodg.4,  St.  Petersburg.
Ghose,  N.  N.,  the  Indian  Nation  Otfice,  43,  Bancharam  Unkoor's-lane,
Calcutta.

GiBOTTEAU,  AiME,  M.D  ,  Villa  Bearnaise,  Biarritz.

Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Russia.

*Glardon,  Rev.  Auguste,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.

Glover^  John  J.  T.,  124,- Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  O.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.

GooDiER,  Miss  B.  M.,  Seighford  House,  Hardwick-square,  Buxton.

Goodman,  Louis  H.,  Bertram  House,  170,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.

*Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  27,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  W.

Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

GovER,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

GovETT,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  Gibraltar.

Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  7,  Barlow-terrace,  High-st.,  C.-on-M.,  Manchester.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Gray,  Edward  W.,  Surgeon-Captain,  c/oMessrs.  Holt,  1 7,  Whitehall, S.W.

Green,  C.  T.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C  P.  (Lend.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.

Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.

Greener,  W.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rectorj%  Cambridge.

Greville,  Miss  C.  C,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.

Griffith,  Miss  E.  C,  37,  York-street,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.

Griffiths,  Joseph,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.,  4,  Kings' -parade,  Cambridge.

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essendon,  Hatfield,  Herts.

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.

*Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  5,  22,  Crosby-road,  Birkdale,  Southport.

Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Shallow,  Ongar,  Essex.

Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.

GuNTON,  Rev.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.
GuNTON,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas'  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  S.W.
GuRNEY,  Rev.  F.,  M. A.,  St.  John's  Cottage,  BoveyTracey,  Newton  Abbot.


368


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Hackett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Haggard,  John  G.,  H.B.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria.

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Hailey,  Alfred  J.,  26,  Bi-uce-road,  Willesden,  N.W.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  3,  Pitt-street,  Campden  Hill,

Hall,  Wilfred,  9,  Prior's-terrace,  Tynemouth.

Hall,  Mrs.,  3,  St.  Alban's-road,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Hall,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton.

Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  co.  Down,  Ii-elaiid.

Hamilton,  W.  Stirling,  Woodgaters,  Horsham.

Handley,  Miss  C,  M.A.,  1,  Clarendon-road,  Garston,  Livei'pool.

Hannah,  Robert,  82,  Addison-road,  Kensington,  W.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Hardcastle,  Edward,  29,  Mannheim-i-oad,  Bradford.

Harding,  G.  Palmer,  Trouville,  France.

Hargrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Larches,  Heaton  Mersey,  Manchester.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southport.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  Pv.ev.  CHAS.,M.A.,The  Listitute,Mansfleld-st.,  Haggerston,  N.E.

Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  Granville  House,  Richmond  Hill,  Bournemouth.

Harris,  Mrs.  Leverton,  4,  Green-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Longfield,  Kent.
Hartshorn,  Miss  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.C.
Harvey,  Alfred  S.,  Hurstbourne,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N.
Haslam,  Prof.  F.  W.,  M.A.,  Canterbury  College,  Christchurch,  New

Zealand.

Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.

Haweis,  Miss,  127,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.

Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Hayward,  Miss  Grace  G.,  25,  St.  George's  Road,  Kilburn,  N.W.

Hayward,  M.  Cecil,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Heard,  PticiiARO,  37,  York-place,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Hehner,  Mrs.  Otto,  Woodside  House,  Woodside,  South  Norwood,  S.E.

Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  133,  Queen's-road,  Bayswater,  W.

Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.

Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll- villas,  Cheltenham.

Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.

Heward,  Rev.  T.  Morley,  M.A.,  17,  Park-st.,  Dorset-square,  N.W.

Hewetson,H.Bendelack,  F.L.S.,  M.R.C.S.,ll,Hanover-sq.,Leeds.

HiBBS,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  369


Hichens,  Rev,  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  ]Sroi'thampton.
HiLDYARD,  F.  W.,  The  Shuttleworth  Club,  Fye  Foot-lane,  Queen  Victoria-
street,  E.G.

Hill,  Clement  Hugh,  63,  Church-road,  St.  Leonai-ds-on-Sea.
Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.
Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.
Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle.

HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C,  2,  Busby-place,  Camden-road,  N.W.
Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  M.P.,  B.A.,  58,  Conduit-street,  W.
Holland,  Mrs.,  Hotel  Nervi,  Nervi,  Genoa.
Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  Wonham,  Dampton,  Devon.
HoLSTEiN,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hood,  Mrs.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,  W.
Hooper,  Mrs.  Pitman,  5,  Endsleigh-street,  Tavistock-square,  W.C.
HoPKiNSON,  Prof.  Alfred,M.  A.,B.C.L.,  The  Lodge,  32,  Heme  Hill,  S.E.
Hopps,  John  Page,  Oak  Tree  House,  South  Norwood  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Horne,  Alderson  B.,  Ditton-place,  Balcombe,  Sussex.
Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penrith.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Howell,  Alexander,  109,  High-street,  Portsmouth.
HuDDLESTON,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hudson,  Norman  W.,  B.A.,  Pebble  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Pai'k,  Caterham
Valley,  Surrey.

Hughes,  Mrs.,  Gwynnondale,  Llanarthney,  Pt.S.O.,  Carmarthenshii-e.

HuME-RoTHERY,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  The  Pines, Worcester  Pk., Surrey.

HuMFREY,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.

Hunter,  Thomas,  Arnold  House,  Rugby.

HuTCHiNS,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town,

Hutchinson,  F.W.  H.,M.A.,Brooklands  House,  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Hutchinson,  William  B.,  C.E.,  F.R.A.S.,  &c.,  Southport,  Lancashire.

Hyslop,  Dr.,  Bethlem  Hospital,  London,  S.E.

Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Innes,  Lady,  Winslow,  Darling  Point,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
Ireland,  Wm.  W.,  M.D.  (Edin.),  Mavisbush,  Polton,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Isaachsen,  Rev.  Thorveld  E.,  44,  Boompjes,  Rotterdam.


370


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Jackson,  Rev.  F.,  The  Vicarage,  Newton-upon-Rawcliffe,  Pickering.

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare,

Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,  S.  Hilda's  School,  Clifton-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  M.A.,  Villa  degli  Angoli  Fiesole,  Florence.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherhara.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G-.,  Overton,  Lansdowne-road,  Bournemouth.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyfi  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.

*Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  38,  St.  Mai-garet's-road,  Oxford.

Jenkinson,  Mrs.  F.  R.  G.,  112,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.

Jessup,  a.  E.  ,Villa  St.  Dominique,  Valescure,  St.  Raphael,  ( Var),  France.

Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.

Johnes,  Mrs.,  Dolaucothy,  Llanwrda  R.S.O.,  South  Wales.

JonNSON,  Miss  Alice,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.

Johnson,  Rev.  Wayland,  LL.D.,Fredon,  Sussex  Co.,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  22,  Earl's  Court-square,  S.W.

Jones,  Captain  Henry  Michael,  V.C,  H.B.M.  Legation,  Lima,  Peru.

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Professor  P.,  64,  Via  S*'"^-  Lucia,  Naples.

Joyce,  Samuel,  Latchford  House,  Greenheys-lane,  Manchester.

Kane,  J,  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.

Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.

Keaene,  Percy,  37,  Avonmore-gardens,  West  Kensington,  W.

Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  P^ectory,  Navan,  co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  26,  Vanbx'ugh-park,  Blacklieath,  S.E.

Kelso,  Commander  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester.

Kenmare,  The  Countess  of,  Killarney  House,  Killarney.

Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.

Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.

*Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  York-terrace,  Brewery-road,  Southend.

King,  Miss,  50,  Gloucester-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  AV.

Kinsgbury,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.

XiNGSTON,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W.

*Kirk,  Joseph,  35,  Ripon-road,  Plumstead,  Kent.

Kluht,  Miss  H.  M.  156,  Westbourne-grove,  London,  W.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  M.A.,  31,  Holland-park,  London,  W.

Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.

Knox,  Nathaniel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Knutsford,  The  Lady,  75,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.

KoTHEN,  Baron  Axel  von,  27,  Mikealsgatan,  Helsingfors,  Finland.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.W.S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  M.P.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


371


Laing,  R.M.,M.A.,B.Sc.,Boys'High  School,  Christc-hurchjXew  Zealand.

Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Rokeby  Rectory,  Barnard  Castle.

Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.  B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.

Laurie,  Prof.  H.,  LL.D.,  Melbourne.  '

Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  1,  The  Cloisters,  Temple,  E.C.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  9,  St.  Paul's  Churchyard,  London,  E.C.

Leap,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Lee,  Rev.  W.  T.,  4,  Edith-terrace,  Mount  Gold-road,  Plymouth.

Legge,  The  Lady  Frances,  Woodsome,  Huddersfield.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.  A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Levy,  Mrs.,  16,  Campden  House-road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Leymarie,  P.  G.,  12,  Rue  de  Sommevard,  Paris.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

LiJiOND,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Linden,  Miss  Olga,  3,  Versailles  Road,  Anerley,  S.E.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.

Lindsay,  R.,L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  c/o  Messrs.Holt  &  Co.,Whitehall-i3lace, S.W.

Lloyd,  Major  Francis,  22,  Cadogan-square,  London,  S.W.

Lloyd,  Otho  Holland,  Dombresson,  Canton  Neuchatel,  Switzerland.

Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool.

Lodge,  Robert,  Laurie  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Loewe,  Hugo  L.,  3,  Southampton-street,  London,  W.C.

LouGHNANE,  JoHN,  Clonkeen,  Aughrim,  Ballinasloe,  Ireland.

Lovell,  Reginald  H.,  449,  Collins-street,  Melbourne.

LowENFELD,  Mrs.,  31,  Lowiides-squarc,  London,  S.W.

LuxMOORE,  Miss,  Bryn  Asaph,  St.  Asaph,  North  Wales.

Lyall,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Fetcham,  near  Leatherhead.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  The  Vicarage,  Eccles,  Manchester.

Lyttelton,  Sybella  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.

Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.

MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.

James's,  S.W.
*Macdonald,  Rev,  J.  A.,  Broadstairs,  Kent.
Mackay,  George  D.,  Inveralmond,  Cramond,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  W.

Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.

Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough.


872


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


*Mangin,  Marcet,  102,  E,ue  Erlanger,  Paris.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  M.A.,  Grange  House,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  5,  South  Bank-terrace,  Surbiton.
Marjobibanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornliill-on-Tweed,  Northumber-
]and.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-avenue,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  Henry  "William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.
Marshall,  Thomas,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial-street,  Leeds.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.O.
IMarten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Yanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  34,  Elvaston-place,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.
Martin,  Miss  Florence  Pt.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
jMartin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Martinez,  Mrs.,  16b,  Hyde  Park-mansions,  London,  W.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Chief  Court,  Lahore,  India.
Mason,  Miss  INT.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.
Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Mathe\vs,G.B.,B.  A.  ,9,  Menai  View-terrace,UpperBangor,North  Wales.
Matthews,  Frank  H.,  22,  Wentworth-street,  Bolton,  Lancashire.
Maud,  Miss  Constance,  Sanderstead  Rectory,  near  Croydon.
Maxwell,  Joseph,  37,  Rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
Mayo,  Ernest  S.  G.,  5,  Castle-arcade,  Cardiff.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Mc Alpine,  Mrs.,  Ardenconnel-row,  near  Helensburgh,  N.B.
McClure,  Henry,  M.D.,  Cromer,  Norfolk.

McCoNNEL,H.W.,M.A.,M.B.,M.R.C.S.,ManorHouse,Ryburgh,Norfolk.
McHuGH,  P.  A.,  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N.,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McNeily,  A.  J.  W.,  Q.C.,  Supreme  Court,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Medeiros  e  Albuquerque,  Jose  de,  Rua  S.  Christovam,  36,  Rio

Janeiro,  Brazil.
Mebrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria.
Metcalf,  Francis  W.  R.,  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge.
Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley.
Miles,  Miss,  Woodhill,  Gerrards  Cross,  Bucks.
Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Mills,  Thomas  E.,  Cabra  Parade,  Dublin.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Mitchiner,  J.  H.,  Acacias,  Barham  Road,  South  Croydon.
Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.
Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.


List  of  ilemhers  and  Associates.  373


Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,Walsingham  House,  Piccadilly,  W.
Montagu, The  Lady  Cecil  Scott,  The  Lodge,  Beaulieu,  Southampton.
MoNTEAGLE,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Treacliai'd,  Foynes,  co.  Limerick.
Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

MoNTMORENCY,J.E.G.de,B.  A., L.LB.,20,Old-bldngs., Lincoln's  Inn,W.O.
Mooraj,  Fazal  G.,  Cooper's-hill,  Staines.

MooRE,  Lieut.-General  Montgomery,  Bellevue,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.

MoRDAN,  Miss  C.  E.,  15,  Queen-square,  W.C.

Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.

MoRisoNj  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh.

Morison,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.

MouL,  Mrs.,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  care  of  Low's  Exchange,  1,121,  Broadway,

New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Babbacombe  Cliff,  Torquay.
MoYNiHAN,  B.  G.  A.,  M.B.  (Lond.),  The  General  Lifirmary,  Leeds.
MuNRO,  H.  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Lulworth,  Bushey  Green,  Catford.
Munthe,  Dr.,  26,  Piazza  di  Spagna,  Rome.

Murray, Donald, M. A.,  Sydney  Morning  HeraldO&icQ,  Sydney,N.S.W.
Murray,  Professor  Geo.  G.  Aime,B. A., The  University,  Glasgow,  N.  B.
Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
Murray,  R.M.,M.A.,M.B.,M.R. CP. (Edin.),ll,Chester-st.,  Edinburgh.
Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile-park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  N.
Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Arthur's  Club,  St.  James's-street,  London,  S.W.
Murray-Aynsley,  Mrs.,  43,  Cromwell-houses,  Queen's-gate,  S.W.
Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckliampton  House,  Cambridge.
Mylne,  Mrs.,  83,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  268,  High-street,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  St.  Michael's  Vicarage,  Bromley,  Poplar,  E.
Nelson,  Mrs.  R.  A.,  Redbourne,  East  Molesey  Park,  Surrey.
Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.
Newbold,  Miss  A.,  4,  Artillery-buildings,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.
Newsom,  John,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  East  Hampton,  Suffolk  Co.,  New  York,  U.S.  A.
Nicholl,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.
Nicholls,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tyneniouth.
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
NicoLSON,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I.E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Legation,  Tangier,  Morocco.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.

Noble,  James  B.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  167,  Kennington  Park-road,  S.E.

2  c


374


List  of  Alemhers  and  Assochites.


Noel-Cox,  Herbert  L.  N.,  2,  Edinburgh  Mansions,  Victoria-st.,S.W.
Norman,  Mrs.  Herbert  G.  H., 5,  Southwell  gdns,  S.Kensington, S.W.
Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Birchtield,  Aston,
Birmingham.

Norris,  William  Alfred,  Holmwood  Lodge,  Laton-road,  Hastings.

NoRTHCOTE,  Hon.  Hugh  Oliver,  The  Hyde,  Luton.

Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotham,  Kent.

Gates,  F.  Edward,  St.  Peter's  Presbytery,  Gloucester.

*0cH0R0wicz,  Dr.  J.,  23,  Rue  Vladimir,  Warsaw.

Ogilvie,  G.  M.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  4-5,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Ogilvie,Mrs.,c/o  Dr.Ogilvie,H.M.Chief  Inspectorof  Schools, Edinburgh.

Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.

O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,M.B.,  291,  Elizabeth-st., Sydney, NewSouth  Wales.

Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlow.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Han-ow.

Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguardo,  Florence.

Palmer,  Miss,  3,  Carlisle-place,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  84,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W.

Passingham,  Mrs.,  Fermoyle,  Castle  Gregary,  Co.  Kerry.

Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  Apollo-st.,  Bombay.

Percival,  Mrs.,  2,  Southwick  Place,  London,  W.

Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Islands.

Perry,  E.  C,  M.D.,  M.A.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.-E.

Petiiybridge,  Walter,  3,  Rhodesia-road,  Clapliam  Rise,  S.W.

Petrovo-Solovovo,  Michael,  38,  Serghievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

Phillips,  Rev.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Mon.

PhippS,  Miss,  Knebworth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts.

Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I.E.E.,  b,  Carew-road,  Thornton  Heath.

Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.

Playford,  Louis  L.,  P.O.  Box,  377,  Johannesburg,  Transvaal,  S.  Africa.

Plenderleith,  William,  126^  Stroud  Green-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.

Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street,  London,  W.

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Rye  Vale,  Leixlip,  co.  Kildare.

PoNTiFEX,  Miss,  72,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Pope,  George  H.,  M  A.,  B.O.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Portal,  Miss  V.,  8,  Beaufort-gai-dens,  London,  S.W.

Porter,  Mrs.,  Sydney  House,  Westcliffe-road,  Bournemouth.

*PoRTER,  Miss,  16,  Russell-sqnare,  London,  W.C.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W.
PosTGATE,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Campden  Hill-square,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


375


Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.
PowLES,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.
PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Prabd,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Pribitkof,  v.,  67,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Pullen,  Miss,  Milton  View,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.
PuMPHREY,  Mrs.,  Derwent-hill,  Ebchester,  co.  Durham.
Purdie,  Mrs.,  27,  Palace-court,  London,  W.

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  52,  Grosvenor-street,  London,  W.
Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W.
Ramsay,  Lady,  23,  Draycot-place,  Cadogan-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Raper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
Raupert,  Rev.  J.  G.  F.,  .30,  Belsize-square,  London,  N.W.
Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Reade,  Herbert  V.,  6,  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor.
Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  ThornclifFe,  Cheltenham.
Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thehvall,  near  Warrington.
Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  Farcliffe-place,  Bradford.
Richardson,  Miss  J.,  72,  Hamilton-terrace,  London,  N.W.
Riddiford,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Chalfont,  Barnwood,  near  Gloucester.
Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  17,  Margaret-street,  London,  W.
Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.
Robb,  Mrs.,  46,  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

RoBBiNs,  Rev.  John,  D.D.,  St.  George's  Yicarage,  Campden-hill,  W.
Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.
Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  39,  Addison-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Robertson,  C.  Lockhart,  M.D.,  Guns  Green, The  Drive,  Wimbledon.
Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh.
Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  Alfriston  House,  Alfriston,  Sussex.
Robertson-MacdonalDjMrs.,  35, Tregunter-rd., South  Kensington,  S.W.
Robin,  Perc^  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robinson,  Edward,  C.E.,  F.R.A.S.,  4,  Castelnau-gai-dens,  Barnes,  S.W.
Robinson,  Lady,  4,  Belgrave-place,  London,  S.W.
Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.
RoDEWALD,  Alfred  E.,  The  Albany,  Liverpool.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
*Rogers,  E.  Daavson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-on-Thames.
Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  London  Hospital,  Whitechapel-road,  E.
Rogers,  R.  S.,  M.C.,  Finders-street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Roome,  Henry  A.,  J. P.,  Oudenarde,  Victoria-road,  Southsea.


376


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Ross,  A.  Gait,  7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  "W.
Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.
Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19,  Gladhow-gardens,  S.W.
RusHTON,  C.  H.,  7,  Queen  Elizabeth's-walk,  Stoke  Newington,  N.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  University  Hall,  Gordon-square,  London,  W.C.
Rylands,T.G.,F.L.S.,F.G.S.,Higlifields,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.
Sajous,  CHARLEsE.deM.,M.D.,  2, 04:3,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,U.S.  A.
Salmond,  Percy  N.,  Captain  3rd  Royal  Scots,  1,  Easby  Drive,  Ilkley.
Samaldas,  Lalubhai,  Chief  Revenue  Officer,  Bhavnager,  Bombay

Presidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxslialls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sanger,  Charles  Percy,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.
Schram,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.
ScHREiBER,  Major,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  London,  S.AV.
Schuster,  Miss,  22,  Old  Queen-sti-eet,  Westminster,  S.W.
Schwabe,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  c/o  Major-General  Schwabe,  G.O.C.  Mauritius.
Scott,  Sydney  C.,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRiPPS,  T.  Cecil,  4,  Drapers'-gardens,  London,  E.C.
*ScuDAMOBE,  Mrs.,  3,  Tollington-park,  Holloway,  London,  N.
Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmersley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N.
Sellin,  Professor  0.  W.,  .5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.
Selous,  Edmund,  Wamil  Hal],  Mildenhall,  Sulfolk.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sharpe,  J.  \V.,  M.A.,  Woodroffe,  Portai^ington-road,  Bournemouth.
Shaw,  Rev.  Charles  J.  M.,  The  Orchard,  Swanley,  Kent.
Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  JST.,  Emmanuel  House,  Cambridge.
Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.

Sheldon,  Mrs.  L.  V.,  52,  Queen's-rd.,  Marlborough-rd.,  London,  N.W.
*Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifford  Rectory,  Essex.

Shove,  Miss  E.,K.Q.C.P.L,M.B.,  25,  St.  Mark's-cres.,Regent'sPk.,N.W.
*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W. ,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.  C. ,  U.  S.  A.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Sidg;wick,  Professor  Henry,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W.
Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Downpatrick,  co.  Down,  Ireland.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


377


Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.

Sloman,  Samuel  George,  June.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.

Smith,  Mrs.  Apsley,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Government  House,  Calcutta.

Smith,  John  George,  4,  Wilton-street,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  W.

Smith,  Martyn,  Abberton  Hall,  Pershore.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  BuflPalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenoi'-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Wallace  A.,  34,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,  W.

Smith,  Mrs  ,  Barnes  Hall,  Sheffield.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Somerset,  The  Lady  Henry,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Fairholme,  Ventnor,  Isle  of  Wight.

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W.

Sperling,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Spinks,  Judge,  Vei-non,  British  Columbia.

Squarey,  Andrew  T.,  J. P.,  Gorsey  Hey,  Bebington,  Birkenhead.

St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.

Stainforth,  Miss  Kmily,  15,  Matheson-road,  West  Kensington,  W.

Stanley,  Henry  M. ,  M .  P. ,  D. C. L. ,  LL.  D. , 2, Richmond-terrace,  S.  W.

Stanway,  Miss  Emily,  17,  Park-street,  Taunton.

Stapley,  Richard,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.

Stapley,  Mrs.,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.

Stead,  William  T.,  Camljridge  House,  Wimbledon,  S.W.

Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stephenson, SirAugustusK.,K.C.B.,Q.C., 46, Ennismore-gdns,S.W.

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  Andrew,  M.A.,  16,  Warreuder  Park  Crescent,  Edinburgh.

Stevenson,  George,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta.

Stewart,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Largham,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.

Stewart,  Miss  Susan,  89,  Philbeach-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stirling,  J.  M.  Morries,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Stone,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  Boulevai-d  Mont  Parnasse,  Paris.

Stopp,  Paul,  c/o  Dresdner  Bank,  Dresden,  Germany.

Stout,  George  F.,  M.A,,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Sturges,  Mrs  William,  32,  Chai-les-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.


878


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


*SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

Sullivan,  W,  R.  Washington,  Purleybury,  Parley,  Surrey.

SuMMERSON,  Samuel  J.,  "West  House,  Darlington.

Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere-street,  London,  S.W.

SwANWicK,  Miss  Anna,  2.3,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Sweeting,  Richard,  D.H.,  B.  A.,  D.P.H.,  6,  Hereford  Mansions,  Here-
ford-road, Bayswater,  W.

Swire,  Commander  Herbert,  R.N.,H.M.  Coastguard, Berwick-on-Tweed.

SymeS,  Ronald,  M.A.,  West  Down,  Mulgrave-road,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W.

Synge,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  1,  Daleham-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.

Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  Bela  Maria  Joseph  de,  Austro-Hun-
garian  Consulate,  Bucharest.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  131,  Ashley-gardens,  Yictoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Tanner,  Ernest,  Hazlehurst,  Penarth.

Tanner,  Slingsby,  104b,  Mount-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.
Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taxis,  The  Princess,  Grosse  Mohrengasse,  Vienna.
Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.  A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milne r-square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Minsterworth,  Old  Bath-road,
Cheltenham.

Tebb,  a.  E.,  M.D.,  9,  Langland-place,  Finchley-road,  Hampstead,  IST.W.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Terrill,  George  Morton,  M.D.,  336,  Post-street,  San  Francisco,
California,  U.S.A.,  (President  of  the  California  Psychical  Society).
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  Joseph  William,  F.LC.,F.C.S.,  Drumpellier,  Gloucester.
Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  5.3,  Croxteth  road,  Liverpool.
Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thurstan,  F.  W.,  M.A.,  Hertford  Lodge,  Albert-bridge,  Battersea,  S.W.
Tooth,  PtEV.  Arthur,  M.A.,  Woodside,  Croydon.
Traherne,  Mrs.,  16,  King's-gardens,  Brighton.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.^  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris.
Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88,  Park-street,  Grosveno r-square,  W.
Tuker,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


379


TuRNiLL,  Henry,  Heathside,  Crayforcl,  Kent.

Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Milton  Hall,  Cambridgeshire.  -  ■

TwEEDiE,  David  M.,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addi.son  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.

Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.

A^'an  GtRUISEn,  Mrs.  A.  H.,  Alcira,  Bidston-road,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Van  Rentergheji,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  251,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.

ViAN-WiLLiAMS,  Rev.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place.  North  Shields.

Vickers,  Mrs.,  26,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.

ViLLAMARiNA,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Park  Cottage,  Sheen  Gate,  S.W.

Wade,  Rev.  William,  19,  St.  Charles'-square,  jSTorth  Kensington,  W.

Walford,  Col.  Neville  L.,  R.A.,  1,  As hburn  place,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Mrs.  Emma,  Priors  Barton,  Winchester.

Walker,  Mrs.  Stewart,  Shrewsbury  House,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Wall,  Miss  M.  M.,  Pioneer  Club,  22,  Br uton-street,  Berkeley-square, W.

Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39,  Harley-street,  London,  W.

Wallop,  Rev.  Edward,  Missionary  Coll.,  Burgh  le  Marsh,  R.S.O.,  Line.

Warburton,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M  A.,  St.  James's  Vicarage,  Congleton.

Ward,  Wilfrid,  Molescroft,  Eastbourne.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  87,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W..

Warter,  M  rs.  Tatham,  Longden  Manor,  Pontesford,  Salop.

Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa, Old  Swinford,Stourbridge.

Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C.  Colworth,  Bedford.

Way,  William  R.,  Hillside,  Upminster,  Essex.

Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W.
Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Wedd,  Is.,  M. a.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N".  Kensington,  W.
Wells,  Miss  Grenville,  27,  Westbourne-square,  London,  W.
Westcott,  William  Wynn, M.B., D.P.H.,396,  Camden-road,  London,  N.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Westlake,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambi'idge.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Bernhard,  173,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.


380


List  of  Memhers  and  Asmciates


Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  5,  St.  Andrew's-road,  Enfield.
Whitehead,  J ohn,  Esplanade,  Gruernsey.
Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  Mostyn  House,  Cambridge.
Whiting,  J.  Markby,  58,  Ted  worth-square,  Chelsea,  S.  VV.
WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone.
WiGGLESwoRTH,  Alfred,  .34,  Mecklenburgh-square,  London,  W.C.
Wilberforce,  Rev  Canon  Basil,  M.A.,  20,  Dean's  Yard,  London.
WiLLAN,  Miss  F.  M.,  May  field  House,  Old  Ford-rd.,  Bethnal  Green,  E.
WiLLARD,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Rest  Cottage,  Evanston,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redsiiawe,  9,  Upper  Beulah-hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Williams,  J.  Leon,  D.D.S.,  L.D.S.,  30,  George-street,  Hanover-sq.,  W.
Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G.,M.  A.,  Ketteringham,Wymondham,  Norfolk.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  Miss,  7,  Cromwe  11-teiTace,  Scarboi'ough.

Vv^ilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Dunridge,  West  Hill,  St.  Leonard  s-on-Sea.
Wilson,  Charles  M.,  Edinburgh  Hotel,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.
Winchester,  H.,  M.B.,C.M.,  Oak  Bank,  Fort  Augustus,  Livemess,N.B.
Windeyer,  The  Hon.  W.  C.  J ustice.  Supreme  Court,  Sydney,  Australia.
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.
Wisden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
WiTHERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.  A.,  8,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  S.W.
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.C.
WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  Moika  28,  St.  Petersburg.
AVooD,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershii-e.
WooDD,  Mrs.  Basil,  Leckby,  Hollington  Park,  St.  Leonaixls-on-Sea.
Woodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.
Wright,  Mrs.  Almroth  E.,  Ingleside,  Netley,  Hants.
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.
Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
Yearsley,  p.  MACLEOD,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings-

bury-Neasden,  N.W.
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  AV.
Young,  Prop.  W.  H.,  883,  East  Main-street,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Young,  Mrs.  AA^.  R.,  Liscoom,  Ballj'mena,  co.  Antrim.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  retxuested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckingham  Street,
Adelphi,  London,  AV.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


381


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

(March,  1897.)


Names  of  Members  are  2}rinted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  by  an  Asterisk.
Names  of  Associates  are  j^rinted  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  when  another  Country  is  named.


Abbott,  Henry  W.,  11,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Abbott,  Lawrence  F.,  13,  Astor-place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Albery,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.
Albree,  John,  Junr.,  Swampscott,  Mass.
Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Alden,  F.  E.,  Vandergrift  Building,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Alden,  Henry  M.,  Metuchen,  New  Jersey.
Alexander,  Don,  2-53,  Fourth-avenue,  Louisville,  Ky.
^Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.
Alexander,  W.  L.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Ames,  Professor  Daniel  T.,  202,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Anderson,  Professor  A.  W.,  Macalester  College,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Arguelles,  Don  Pedro,  Collector  of  Customs,  N.  Laredo,  Mexico.
Atwood,  Dr.  Gt.  Wilson,  17,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Ayer,  J.  C,  M.D.,  Bellevue  Hospital,  New  York,  N.Y.
Baker,  Alfred  L.,  100,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  111.
Baldwin,  Elbert  F.,  13,  Astor-place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61^  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  58,  University-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.
Bates,  Charles  F.,  2,642,  Euclid-avenue,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Beale,  Rev.  Chas.  H.,  33,  Waverly-street,  Roxbury,  Boston,  Mass.
Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda  W.,  4,722,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111,
Berryhill,  Mrs.  James  G.,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.


382


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Best,  Mrs.  Albert  S.,  15,  W.  121st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Bigelow,  Dr.  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Blodgett,  C,  M.D.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Blodgett,  Mrs.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

BoARDMAN,  Hon.  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Boon,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  Molino  di  Sopra,  Alassio,  Liguria,  Italy.

Booth,  Mrs.  Lucy  C.  Great  Barrington,  Mass.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bowditch,  Professor  H.  P.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.

Brimmer,  Mrs.  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Henry,  1 1 5,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Miss  Anna  R.,  115,  South  21st-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Brown,  Edmond  C,  132,  Nassau-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Henry  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Pi,ev.  Howard  N.,  9,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Bryan,  W.,  Houston,  Texas.

Buffet,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.
Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bulley,  R.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Bundy,  Mrs.  John  C,  624,  Sheridan-square,  Evanston,  111.

Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  31,  East  69th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Cabot,  Caroline  A.,  M.D.,  168,  West-48th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carey,  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carey,  Mrs.  Arthur  A.,  29,  Fairlield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  46,  Exchange-place,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carpenter,  Franklin  R.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  Mrs.  Franklin  R.^  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  W.  O.,  517,  Adams-street,  Chicago,  111.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle-street,  Oamlaridge,  Mass.

Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Casey,  Theodore  B.,  169,  Park-street,  Newton,  Mass.

Catlin,  Captain  R.,  1,428,  Euclid-place,  Washington,  D.C.

Oaulkins,  Silas,  310,  Requena-street,  Los  Angeles,  California.

Chapman,  John  Jay,  325,  West  82nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Chard,  Thomas  S.,  534,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Chase,  Harvey  S.,  12,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  Hotel  Bristol,  Boston,  Mass.

Chick,  Frank  W.,  Madrid,  Fianklin  Co.,  Maine.

Child,  S.  R.,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn,


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


38S


Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  603,  Buchtel-a venue,  Akron,  Ohio.

Cleaves,  N.  Porter,  29,  India-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Clement,  Miss  Caroline  H.,  Rutland,  Vermont.

Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  N.H.  ■

Clough,  H.  W.,  Nashville,  Tenn.

CocKERiLL,  Mrs.  R.  D.,  Glasgow,  Mo.

Coffin,  Abraham  B.,  Winchester,  Mass.

Coffin,  C.  P.,  Longwood,  Brookline,  Mass.

Coleman,  Miss  Anne  C,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania.

*Coleman,  "William  Emmette,  Chief  Quartermaster's  Office,  Phcenix

Building,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Conner,Mrs.E.  a..  Am. Press  Association, 47,  Park-place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  K.,  128,  West  6th-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.
Cook,  R.  Harvey,  M.D.,  Oxford  Retreat,  Oxford,  Ohio.
CooKE,  Dr.  Joseph  B.,  269,  West  138th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
CooNLEY',  Mrs.  John  C,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.
Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelpliia,  Pa.
Coryell,  V.  M.,  310,  Sixth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Crafts,  Prof.  James  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Crepin,  Ernest  E.,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Gardner-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Crothers,  Dr.  T.  D.,  AYalnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.
CuRRAN,  Richard  L.,  60,  Oneida-street,  Utica,  N.Y.
Currie,  Rev.  C.  George,  D.D.,  1,014,  St.  Paul-street,  Baltimore,  Md.
Curtis,  "W.  E.,  1,228,  Connecticut-avenue,  Washington,  D.C.
Dawson,  Miles  M.,  136,  Liberty-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Delabarre,  Prof.  E.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Derby,  Captain  George  McC,  3,232,  Prytania-st.,  New  Orleans,  La.
Dewing,  O.  M.,  M.D.,  State  Hospital,  King's  Park,  Long  Island,  N.Y.
Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Dickerman,  Rev.  W.  F.,  276,  Orange  street.  New  Haven,  Conn.
Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Room  22,  94,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  IlL
Dike,  Miss  Florence  B.,  156,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
DiLLARD,  Prof.  J.  H.,  Tulane  University,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.
DiMMOCK,  George,  38,  Grant-street,  Springfield,  Mass.
DoANE,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Dodge,  J.  T.,  346,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.
Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dow,  Alexander,  1,  West  83rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Dyer,  Walter  H.,  Knightsville,  Maine.

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  c/o  Dr.  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass
Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  161,  Main-street,  Keene,  N.H.


S84


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Eldridge,  Prof.  E.  H.,  The  Temple  College,  BrOcad  &  Berks-streets,

Philadelphia,  Pa.
Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  480,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
EsTY,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.
Etheridge,  Miss  Fanny  S.,  1,634,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  53,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  J.,  Eliot,  Maine.
Felton,  Thomas  C,  Hotel  Ludlow,  Boston,  Mass.
Fields,  Mrs.  James  T.,  148,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
FiLLEBROwN,  Tiios.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  157,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Finnigan,  John,  61,  Beekman-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Fletcher,  Horace,  323,  Baronne-street,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.
Fluhrer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  95,  Main-street,  Albion,  N.Y.
FoRMAN,  G.  A.,  824,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Fullerton,  C.  W.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.
FuLLERTON,  PROFESSOR  G.  S.,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  West  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Gage,  Lyman  J.,  470,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111.
Gale,  Prof.  Harlow  S.,  Univ.  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.
Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  131,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Craft's  Avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.
Gardiner,  J.  Hays,  Grays,  18,  Harvard  Univ.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Gay,  Walter,  73,  Rue  Ampere,  Paris,  France.
Gehring,  Albert,  626,  Pearl-street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.
Gleason,  Adele  a.,  M.D.,  The  Sanitarium,  Elmira,  N.Y.
Goddard,  George  A.,  1,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Goodale,  Henry  Sterling,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
GooDNOw,  H.  R.,  95,  Riverside  Di-ive,  New  York.
Goodridge,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Gorton,  Dr.  D.  A.,  174,  Clinton-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Greene,  Bertram,  6,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Rev.  R.  A.,  P.O.  Box  6,  South  Billerica,  Mass.

Gripping,  Mrs.  C.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  H.  Grifiing,  55,  AV.  47-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.

Gross,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  48,  Lake  Shore  Drive,  Chicago,  111.

Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.

Hall,  A.  D.,  M.A.,  Morgan  Hall,  l,713,Nicollet-ave.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Hall,  Professor  James,  Room  32,  State  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.

Hall,  James  P.,  6,  Poplar-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Tabor,  Fremont  Co.,  Iowa.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  385


Hamilton,  C.  M.,  50,  Main-street,  Salamanca,  JST.Y.
Hapgood,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  Alton,  111.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,922,  Locust-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  1,.303,  P.-street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C,

Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  57,  Bentley-a venue,  Jersey  City,  N.Y.

Hartzell,  F.  S.,  96,  North  Walnut-street,  Canton,  Ohio.

Harvey,  Anson  B.,  M.A.,  140,  North  16th-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Hawk,  Walter  S.,  Doniphan,  Nebraska.

Haworth,  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.

Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hayward,  Alvinza,  532,  Market-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Heilner,  Rev.  S.  A.,  D.D.,  1,410,  Christian-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.

Heywood,  Charles,  Gardner,  Mass.

Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen's  Co.,  N.Y.

Higbee,  Col.  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa.

Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  9,  Massachusetts-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Hodgson,  Dr.  Thomas,  Astolat,  Chapman-street,  North  Melbourne,,

Victoria,  Australia.
Holbrook,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holladay,  Prof.  Waller,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  28,  West  120th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Rev.  S.  V.  V.,  Westminster  Church,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holt,  L.  Emmett,  M.D.,  15,  East  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hope,  Robert,  Gen.  Theological  Seminaiy,  Chelsea-sq.,  New  York,  N.Y.
HosKiN,  John,  4,100,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Householder,  Frank,  Kansas  City  Stock  Yards,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
HowLAND,  Miss  B.  M.,  cor.  Carver  and  Museum-sts.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.C.
Hull,  Miss  P.  C,  22,  John-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Hunt,  Chas.  R.,  M.D.,  262,  Union-street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.
HusE,  Wm.,  Ponca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska.

Hutchinson,  Miss  Mary  S.,  2,006,  De  Lancey-place,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jackson,  Mrs.  Louisa  S.,  16,  P^ue  Auguste  Vacqueria,  Paris,  France,
James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,627,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


386


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Jewett,  Miss  S.  0.,  South  Berwick,  Maine.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.
Johnson,  Professor  Roger  B.  C,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.
JoLiNE,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72ncl-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  Miss  Alice,  Bvjn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.
Jones,  George  H.,  561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  Miss  Therese  E.,  Box  566,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Kennedy,  Miss  Leila  M.,  715,  Forman-park,  Syracuse,  N.Y.
KiDD,  G.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Kimball,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Rockford,  111.

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Commonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Kinney,  Thomas  W.,  220,  East  Third-street,  Portsmouth,  Ohio.
Knowles,  ]1ev.  Edward  R.,  LL.D.,  West  Sutton,  Mass.
KoPTA,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podmok  in  Podmok,  Post  Shiitten-

hofen,  Bohemia,  Europe.
Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Reading,  Pa.

KuHN,  Hamilton,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Lamont,  Robert  G.,  68,  St.  James's-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Lane,  Charles  D.,  Angels  Camp,  Calaveras  County,  California.

Lane,  Mrs.  Charles  D.,  Angels  Camp,  Calaveras  County,  California.

Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.

Lawrence,  A.  E.,  Junr.,  53,  Devonshire-st,  Ptoom  15,  Boston,  Mass.

Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  1 42,  East  I8th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  New  York,  N.Y.

Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22nd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.

Librarian,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pennsylvania.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Librarian,  Cassadaga  Lake  Library  Association,  Lily  Dale,  N.Y.

Librarian,  Cazenovia  Public  Library,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass.

Librarian,  Lowell  City  Library,  Lowell,  Mass.

Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Metropolitan  Club  Library,  Washington,  D.C.

Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.  .'  .

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  Universitj^  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

LiPPiTT,  General  Francis  J.,  Annapolis,  Maryland.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


387


Llewellyn,  F.  T.,  B.A.,  C.E.,  1,012,  Henaen-bldg.,  New  Orleans,  La.

LocKWOOD,  Colonel  J.  S.,  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  Williaru-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

LoMBARDi,  C,  1,311:,  Rusk-avenue,  Houston,  Texas.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

LouNSBEERY,  C.  A.,  c/o  The  Record,  Fargo,  North  Dakota.

Low,  Clarence  F.,  Common  and  Carondelet-sts.,New  Orleans, Louisiana.

Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

MacDonough,  Thomas  B.,  1,227,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Magoun,  Walter  Russell,  47,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Main,  W.  F.,  cor.  College  and  Dubuque-streets,  Iowa  City,  Iowa.

Maechand,  G.  L.,  112,  Clark-street,  Room  516,  Chicago,  111.

Martin,  Miss  ExMma  H.,  71,  Scio-street,  Rochestei',  N.Y.

Marvin,  Walter  T.,  6,  West  130th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  Miss  Ida  M.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

McClellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Galena,  111.

McEwEN,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y.
McGee,  W.  J.,  Bureau  of  Amer.  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Institution,

Washington,  D.C.
McHenry,  Miss  J.  Howard,  200,  E.  Biddle-st.,  Baltimore,  Maryland.
McManama,  M.  G.,  504,  Rialto -building,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Meagher,  William,  M.D.,  Portage,  Wisconsin.
Mendenhall,  Mrs.  E.  R.,  1,804,  Green-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Millet,  Josiah  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
MiNOT,  Professor  Charles  S.,  688,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mitchell,  James,  Stock  Exchange,  New  York,  N.Y.
Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  34,  East  29th-street,  Chicago,  III.
Morse,  J.  J.,  26, Osnaburgh-st.,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.  W.,  England.
MuNNS,  Dr.  C.  O.,  Oxford,  Ohio.

MuRLiN,  Rev.  L.  H.,  President  Baker  University,  Baldwin,  Kansas.
Murphy,  Hon.  Franklyn,  1,027,  Broad-street,  Newark,  N.J.
Myers,  W.  H  ,  M.D.,  157,  West  Wayne-street,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.
*Newbold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Penna,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary,  206,  West  71st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Norbury,  Mrs.  J.  F.,5th-avenue  Hotel,  Madison-sq.j  New  York,  N.Y.
NoRRis,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Marion,  Marion  Co.,  Ohio.
Norton,  Mrs.  F.  L.,  186,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119i,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.
Olcott,  Miss  Edith,  4,  East  53rd-street,  New  York  N.Y.
Oldham,  F.  F.,  Blymyer  Building,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  •'
Oliver,  George  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.  •. '  •


388


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Oreick,  N.  C,  ]\r.D.,  Canton,  Mississippi.

Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Osborne,  A.  E.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  Eldridge,  P.O.,  Sonoma  Co.,  Cal.

PAiiK,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  G,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.

Peabody,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  47,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.

Pellew,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Perkins,  Franklin  R.,  294,  Linwood-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Perry,  Thos.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  541,  Common weath-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Pettit,  Miss  Edith,  2,205,  Trinity -place,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  .Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Philpott,  a.  J.,  c/o  Boston  Globe,  Boston,  Mass.

Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Post,  C.  W.,  Battle  Creek,  Michigan.

Pratt,  Frederick  H.,  53,  West-street,  Worcester,  Mass.

Prescott,  Miss,  78,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  458,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  IMarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  George,  50,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  .J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quirk,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  c/o  Fred.  H.  Quirk,  Casilla  Correo,  825,.

Buenos  Ay  res.  South  America.
Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Ransom,  Frank  H.,  4,  Buckingham-place,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Raymond,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  Corey-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  176,  West  75th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Rees,Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  Studio  864,  Carnegie  Hall,  New  York,  N.Y.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.
Richardson,  M.  T.,  Ridgewood,  New  Jersey.
Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  29,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Roberts,  Percy,  c/o  Hennen  Building,  New  Orleans,  La.
Rolfe,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.
Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


389


HUDDIMAN,  J.  C,  247,  27th-avenue,  North,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Rumsey,  Mrs.  B.  C,  cor.  Delaware-ave.  and  Tracey-st.,  Buffalo,  jST.Y.
Russell,  Arthur  J.,  Minn.  Journal,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Salter,  William  M.,  Silver  Lake,  N.H.

Sargent,  Mrs.  Winthrop,  207,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Church  of  the  Messiah  Study,  34th-street  and

Park-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Sawyer,  Hon.  Chas.  H.,  Dover,  New  Hamp.shire.
Schiller,  Prof.  F.  C.  S.,  72,  Huestis-street,  Ithaca,  N.Y.
ScRiBNER,  H.  D.,  1,008,  Central-avenue,  Alameda,  Cal.
Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D,  31,  West  lOth-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Shaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  14,  Rockville  Park,  Roxbury,  Mass.
Shaw,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Shaw,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Shed,  Z.,  Room  3,  Masonic  Temple,  Denver,  Colorado.
Sheets,  John  C,  College  Hill,  Station,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.
*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Smith,  Herbert  W.,  320,  Corn  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Smith,  Horace  J.,  6,  East  Penn.,  Germantown,  Phila.,  Pa.
Smith,  J.  Heber,  M.D.,  279,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson  Park,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111.
Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Winfield,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.

Somerville,  Rev.  T.  E.,  709,  West  Adams-street,  Chicago,  111.
Sparkhawk,  Dr.  Samuel,  Burlington,  Vermont.
Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stephens,  Miss  Mary,  2,713,  Prairie-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Sterling,  Mrs.  E.  C,  22,  Westmoreland-place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stillman,  Mrs.  W.  0.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.
Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  30,  Rue  St.  Dominique,  Paris,  France.
Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  703,  Euclid-avenue,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.
Strong,  Charles  A.,  Box  208,  Lakewood,  N.J.
Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Stuyvesant,  Mrs.  J.  Reade,  29,  West  19th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  336,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sutherland,  J.  G.,  135,  B-street,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Sweetser,  L.  H.,  Yale,  Idaho.

SwENSON,  J.  H.,  811,  25th-avenue,  N.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

2  d


390


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  128,  W.  59-street,  New  York,  IST.Y.

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  73,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Fredk.,  121,  School-street,  Lowell,  Mass.

Temple,  Rev.  H.  W.,  400,  Locust-st.,  Washington,  Pa.

Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D,,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara  Co.,  Cal.

Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara  Co,  Cal.

Thayer,  Miss  Mary  A.,  Stoughton,  Mass.

Thomas,  Dr.  H.  J.,  836,  Buxton-street,  Winston,  N.C.

Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Thorndike,  S.  Lotiirop,  19,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Tighe,  Judge  J.  G.,  337,  Fulton-street,  Brooklyn,  NY.

ToTTEN,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Tracey,  Dr.  Paul  H.,  469,  West  152nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

TuRNBULL,  Miss  K.  E.,  11.3,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.

Twitchell,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  24,  S.  "B."-st.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  1,827,  H-st.,  Sacramento,  CaL

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  411,  East  45th-street,  Chicago,  111.

Ward,  Rev.  Duren  J.  H.,  Ph.D.,  20.5,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.

Ward,  Dr.  J.  N.,  Auburn,  California.

Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

Washburn,  Oscar  F.,  Reading,  Mass.

Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Watts,  H.M.,  "The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Webb,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  34,  Chestnut-street,  Salem,  Mass.
Webster,  David  L.,  334,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Wheeler,  Mrs.  Stephen,  504,  Sixth-avenue,  Fort  Smith,  Ark.
Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.
Whipple,  L.  E.,  326,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Whipple,  Mrs.  Sherman  L.,  Walnut-place,  Brookline,  Mass.
Whiteside,  Miss  H.,  c/o  A.  A.  Carey,  29,  Fairfield-st.,  Boston,  Mass.
Whiting,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Brunswick,  Back  Bay,  Boston,  Mass.
Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M. ,  Ph.  D.  ,c/o  OutlookCo.,  1 3,  Astor-place,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Whittaker,  Thomas,  71,  East  66th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
WiLKiNS,  Miss  M.  L.,  cor.  Carver  and  Museum-sts.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Williams,  Marshall  S.  P.,  1,372,  Beacon-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111,
Wilson,  Mrs.  John  L.,  P.O.  Box  19,  Framingham,  Mass.
Wilson,  Miss  Martha,  564,  Dearborn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
*Wiltse,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Lancing,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.
Wing,  Isaac  H.,  Bayfield,  Wisconsin.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


391


Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
WodDBRiDGE,  Professor  F.  J.  E.,  Univ.  of  Minn.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Woodman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Weight,  Miss  Henrietta  C,  Old  Bridge,  New  Jersey.  .
Wyatt,  Melvin  H.,  Sparkill,  Rockland  County,  N.Y.'
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
ZuG,  C,  P.O.  Box  1,053,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.


N.B.— Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of
any  change  of  address  to  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,
Boston,  Mass.


PKOCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOLUME  XII.

(PARTS  XXXX-XXL,  WITH  APPENDIX.)
1896-97.


A.

Aksakoff,  M.  Alex,  "  The  Precursors  of  Spiritism,"  by — Review  of  ...  319
American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  List  of  Members  381
Anderson,  Rev.  W.  M.— Report  on  "The  Durweston  Cnse  " ... 91,  93

Anonymously  Contributed  Case.s 20,  .33,  34,  43

Arundel  Case,  The 67

Automatism— Normal  Motor— Recent  Experiments  in,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  316
„ Psychic,  and  "  Speaking  with  Tongues." By  A.  Le  Baron  277


B.

B.,  Me.  and  MR.S,,  Case  contributed  by  103

B. ,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 101

B. ,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 108

Barrows,  C.  M.,  Suggestion  without  Hypnotism,  Experiments  in  Prevent-
ing or  Suppressing  Pain ... .. ... ... ■■ 21

Bennett,  E.  N.,  Report  on  "  The  Ham  Case  " 100

Bennett,  Prof.  .J.  Hughes,  Theory  of  Hypnotism 161,  215,  216

Bernheim,  Prof.,  Theory  of  Hypnotism...  159,  216,  225,  228,  229,  2.30,  2.36,  238
Braid,  James,  his  Work  and  W^ritings,  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell  on ...  127
,,  Experiments  in  and  Theory  of  Hypnotism 127,  204


11


Index  to  Volume  XII.


Bramford  Case,  The 73

Braiiiwell,  Dr.  J.  Milne — James  Braid,  his  Work  and  Writings 127

,,  ,,  Personally  Observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena ...  176

,,  ,,  What  is  Hypnotism  ? 204

,,  ,, Analysis  and  Comparison  of  Theories  on

204-258

Biirrell,  Dr.  H.  L.,  Case  contributed  by .41

C.

C,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 22,  38

Chadwick,  J.  R.,  Case  contributed  by 28,  42

Charcot,  Prof.,  Theory  of  Hypnotism 205,  206,  257

Christensen,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... 23,  38

Clairvoyance,  Telepathic 264,  272-274

Crookes,  W.,  F.R.S.,  Presidential  Address 338

Crystal  Vision — Some  Experiments  in,  Prof.  J.  H.  Hyslop  on 259

Currass,  A.,  Report  on  "  The  Worksop  Case  " 56


D.

D.,  Mrs.,  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision 259

D.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by 263,  265,  270,  272,  275

Dea,  Mr.  and  Mr,s.,  Report  on  "  The  Waterford  Case  " 80

Delbojuf,  Prof.,  Experiments  in  and  Theory  of  Hypnotism  179,  232,  233,

236,  247

Durweston  Case,  The 90


E.

Elders,  Head  Constable,  Report  on  "  The  Waterford  Case  " 78

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Theory  of  Hypnotism ... ... ...  204


F.


Future  Life,  A  Scientific  Demonstration  of,  by  T.  Jay  Hudson,  Review  of  330
Forel,  Prof.,  on  the  Theory  of  Hypnotism 209,  224,  239


Index  to  Volume  XII.


Ill


G.

Gale,  Harlow,  Review  of  T.  J.  Hudson's  "  Scieiitilic  Demonstration  of  a

Future  Life " 330

Gardner,  J.,  Case  contributed  Ijy 108

Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Psycliieal  Research,  by  F.  "\V.  H.  Myers ...  166

Gurney,  Edmund,  Memorial  Library  Catal(jL;ue 357

,  ,, Theory  of  Hypnotism 216,  226,  242

H.

Ham  Case,  The 95

Hansen  and  Lehmann,  Messrs.,  Experiments  in  Involuntary  Whispering

in  Relation  to  Tliouglit-Transference,  Professor  Sidgwick  on 298

Harris,  J.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by 28,  43

Hart,  Ernest,  Theory  of  Hyjjnotism 212

Hayes,  J.  W.,  Report  on  "The  Waterford  Case" 78

Heidenhain,  Prof.,  Theory  of  Hypnotism ... 156,210

Higgs,  P.  C,  Report  on  "  The  Worksop  Case  " 55

Hilprecht,  Dr.  Hermann,  Cases  contributed  by 13,  14

Hodgson,  Dr.,  Evidence  as  to  Mr.  Barrows'  Experiments  in  Suggestion

without  Hypnotism ... 36

Honey,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ...  27,42

Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  "A  Scientific  Demonstration  of  a  Future  Life,"

by— Review  of  330

Hughes,  F.  S.,  Report  on  "The  Wem  Case  " 60

Hypnotism  (Miscellaneous) 28,  29,  129-162,  176-203,  204-258

Analysis  and  Comparison  of  Dift'erent  Schools  of  Thought  on

204-258

Braid's  Work  in 127-166

Curative  and  Functional  Effects  ...  141,143-145,151-154,197,198
,, Memory  (and  Post- Hypnotic  Memory) 193,  195,  199

Moral  Aspects  of  ...  149-151,  157,  198,  200,  202,  229-239,  251
,, Power  of  Resistance  to  Suggestions  149-151,  197-202,  229-241

Suggestion  without ... ... ...  21

,, Time-Sense,  During ... ... ...  179-192

Hyslop,  Prof.  J.  H.,  Some  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision 259


J.

James,  Prof.  W.,  A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism,  Preface  to 277

,, ,, Presidential  Address... ... ...  2

Jandachenko,  Capt.,  Case  recorded  by ... 319


;

IV


index  to  Volume  XI t.


JeafiVeson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  112

Jeffeiy,  R.,  Report  on  "  The  Brainfonl  Case" 73

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  A  Case  of  Information  Supernornially  Acquired ...  116


K.

K.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by ... 81

Kavanagh,  J.,  Report  on  "The  Ham  Case" ... 98

King,  P.C.  H.,  Report  on  "  The  Ham  Case  " 96

Kronhelm,  J.  de,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ... ...  116


L.

Lamdeeton,  Prof.  W.  A  ,  Case  contributed  by 11

Le  Baron,  Albert,  A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism,  and  "Speaking  with

Tongues  "  277

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D. — Review  of  "  The  Precursors  of  Spiritism  "  by  M.

A.  Aksakoff 319

Lehmann  and  Hansen,  Messrs.,  Experiments  in  Involuntary  Whispering

in  Relation  to  Thought-Transference,  Professor  Sidgwick  on 298

Liebeault,  Prof.,  Theory  of  Hypnotism  ...  158,  197,  207,  227,  229,  232,  236.  237

Liegeois,  Prof. ,  On  the  Theory  of  Hypnotism  ... ... ... 158

Lynch,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 25,  39


M.


Maury,  M.  ,  Cases  recorded  by  18-20

Meetings  of  the  Society 1,  175,  337

Members,  Associates,  and  Hon.  Members  of  the  S.P.R.,  List  of... 359,  381

,,  ,,  American  Branch... .. ... ...  381

Meyers,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... 30,  43

Moll,  A.,  On  the  Theory  of  Hypnotism 229,  239

Mor.se,  C.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 26,  39,  41

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Glossary  of  terms  used  in  Psychical  Research 166

,, ,,  Hypnotism  and  the  Subliminal  Consciousness  ...  243-258

,, ,,  Motor  Automatism 316

,,  Note  on  Mr.  Le  Baron's  Case 295


Index  to  Volume  XII.  v
N.

NeWbold,  W.  Romaine,  Expeiimental  Induction  of  Automatic  Processes,

Keview  of  - 316-318

,,  ,,  Sub-conscious  Reasoning ... ...  11,123,124

Newman,  Mr.,  Report  on  "  Tiie  Durweston  Case  " 91

Nicol,  Rev.  R.,  Case  contributed  by 109

O.

Officers  and  Council  of  the  S.P.R,  List  of— for  1897 358

O'Shauglinessy,  Dr.,  Experiments  on  tlie  Effects  of  Narcotics 136

P.,  Ellen,  Case  of  ... 81.  86

Petrovo-Solovovo,  M.,  Evidence  with  regard to  Case  of  Supernormal

Information ... ... 116

Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of 125

Podmore,  F.,  On  Poltergeists *5

Poltergeists,  Phenomena  of •■•  4o

Precursors  of  Spiritism,  by  A.  Aksakoft",  Review  of  319

Presidential  Addresses • ••■ •  ■ 2,  338

Presidents  of  the  S.P.R.,  1882-1896 358

Psychic  Automatism,  A  Case  of  277

K

Reviews 316,319,330

Rivers,  General  Pitt,  Case  contributed  by 109

Rolfe,  J.,  Report  on  "  Tlie  Ham  Case  " 97

s.

Shchapoff,  M.  ,  Case  recorded  by 322

Sidgwick,  Prof.  H.,  On  Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen's  Experiments  in

Involuntary  Whispering  in  Relation  to  Tliouglit-Transference  ...  298
Solomons,  Leon  M.,  "Normal  Motor  Automatism,"  Recent  Experiments

in.  Review  of 316

"  Speaking  with  Tongues,"  A  Case  of 277


VI


Index  to  Volume  XII.


Stein,  Gertrude,  "  Normal  Motor  Automatism,"  Recent  Experiments  in,


Review  of... ...  ... 316

Subconscious  Reasoning,  W.  Romaine  Newbold  on  ... ...  11

Subliminal  Consciousness,  Phenomena  pointing  to  ... ..  11,116,277,316

,,  and  Hypnotism ... 243-258

Suggestion  without  Hypnotism,  C.  M.  Barrows  on ...  21

T.

T.,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by 106,107

Taylor,  Lieut. -Col.  Le  M.,  Case  contribtited  by 81

,,  ,,  ,, Report  on  "  Arundel  Case " ...  67

Telepathic  Dreams  and  Impressions 259-276

Terminology  of  Psychical  Research,  A  Glossary  of 166

Thought  -  Transference,  Experiments  in Involuntary Whispering  in

Relation  to 298

,,  ,,  Comparative  Tables  of  Results 302,  312,  316

W.

Waterford  Case,  The 77

Wem  Case,  The 58

Westlake,  E.,  Repoi  t  on  the  Durweston  Case  .. 90

,, ,, ,, Ham  Case 99

Whispering, Involuntary, in  Relation to  Experiments  in  Thought-

Transference,  Prof.  Sidgwick  on 298

White,  J.,  Account  of  "  The  Worksop  Case  " 52

Woodfin,  T.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 25,  39

Worksop  Case,  The 45

Z.

Z.  Family,  Case  contributed  by  105
