Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XIII (1897-1898)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1897 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XXXII-XXXIII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc13soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  XIII.
(CONTAINING- PARTS  XXXII-XXXIII.)

1897-8.


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  pvhlished
in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.

Agents  for  America  :  SUBSCRIPTION  NEWS  CO.  (CHICAGO).

1898.


PAGE


'v,  ? 1>ART  ^xXi^.^' r,'  .

General  Meetings  . "  .  ^ . T ^  ^  ' ^  1 ' ^  ^  ' . .  1
J  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod,  or  Vivgnla  Divina. By  Pkofessor
W.  F.  Barrett.

Book  I.

1^ Part I. Introductory. . . . ... . .  2

Part  II.  Modern  Literature  on  this  Subject  ...  12
Part  III. Examination  of  Evidence '  . . . .  .24

J Part  IV. Geological  Opinion 220

^  Part V. Brief  Survey  of  the  Evidence . . .  .237

^  ^ Part  VI. Theoretical  Conclusions .....  243

^8 Appendix  A. The  Words  "Dowse"  and  "Dowser". .  256

■H Appendix  B. Geological  Opinion  upon  Underground  Water  262

■4 Appendix  C. How  the  Rod  is  Held 266

^ Aj^pendix  D. The  Sensations  Alleged  to  Occur  in  Dowsing  272

Appendix  E. Note  on.  the  Horsham  Experiments . .  278

Table  of  Contents 281

•  J  PART  xxxin.  .

'^General  Meetings . . . . . . . . . .  283

^  Further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.
4  By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.

I'  A Part  I.

'  (t- §  1. Introductory  284

i§  2.  Development  of  Automatic  Writing  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  291
§  3.  History  of  the  G.  P.  Communications  ....  295
§  4. Brief  Accounts  of  Other  Communicators .  .  335

?  §  5- The "  Spirit  " Hypothesis and the Hypothesis  of

Telepathy  from  the  Living .....  357
§6. Indications  that  the  "SjDirit"  Hypothesis  is  True .  370
§  7. Recent  Changes  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance . . .  407
.  Detailed  Reports  of  Sittings. Appendices  I-IV. . . .  413

I. Psycliical  Research  in  American  LTniversities. By  Professor

Harlow  Gale  of  the  University  of  Minnesota . .  583
d II. Reviews  : —

^  Herr  Edmund  Parish's  "ZurKritik  des  Telepathischen

J  Bevveis  MaLeriels." By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  . .  589

Dr.  John  L.  Nevius's  "Demon  Possession  and  Allied

Themes." By  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold  .  602
-J  Mr.  F.  Podmore's "Studies  in  Psychical  Research."

§  By  A:!JDREw  Lang  604

Dr.  R.  Osgood  Mason's  "  Telepathy  and  the  Subliminal

Self." By  Profes.sor  James  11.  Hyslop . .  610
I  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead's  "Letters  from  Julia  :  or.  Light  from

'  the  Borderland." By  F.  W.  H.  Myers . .  612

Dr.  Louis  Waldstein's  "The  Subconscious  Self  and  its

Relation  to  Education  and  Health." By  F.  Poomore  614
Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  "  The  Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts."

By  J.  G.  S.mith

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  "Edmund  Gurney  Library

Officers  and  Council  for  1898

List  of  Members  and  Associates  ......

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch


J


616
619
621

622
644


34097


PKOCEEDI^^GS

OV  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXII.


PROCEEDINGS OF GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  85th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  March  12th,  1897,  at  8..30  p.m.  ;  Bit.
A.  Wallace  in  the  chair.

Me.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "Hysteria  and  Genius."


The  86th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,.
April  23rd,  1897,  at  4  p.m. ;  the  President,  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.'
in  the  chair.

A  paper  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince,  entitled  "  A  Contribution  to  the
Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis,"  was  read  by  Professor  Sidgwick.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  concluded  his  address  on  "  Hystei'ia  and
Genius."


B


2


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


ON  THE  SO-CALLED  DIVINING  ROD,
OR  VIRGULA  DIVINA:

a  scientific  and  historical  research  as  to  the  existence  and  practical
value  of  a  peculiar  human  faculty,  unrecognised  by
science,  locally  known  as  dowsing  ;

By  W.  F.  Barrett,

Professor  of  Experimental  Physics  in  the  Rnijal  College  of  Science  for  Ireland.


"There  are  two  ways  of  investigating  the  facts  or  fancies  about  the
divining  rod.  One  is  to  examine  it  in  its  actual  operation — a  tasl-:  of  consider-
able labour,  which  will  doubtless  be  undertaken  by  the  Society  for  Psychical
"Research  ;  the  other,  and  easier  way,  is  to  study  the  appearances  of  the
divining  wand  in  history." — A.  Lang,  Custom  and  Mijth,  p.  181.


Part  I.
INTRODUCTORY.

At  first  sight  few  subjects  appear  to  be  so  unwoi'thy  of  serious
notice  and  so  utterly  beneath  scientific  investigation  as  that  of  the
divining  rod.  To  most  men  of  science  the  reported  achievements
of  the  "  diviner  "  are  on  a  par  with  the  rogueries  of  Sir  Walter
Scott's  DoHstersivivel.  That  any  one  with  the  smallest  scientific
training  should  think  it  worth  his  while  to  devote  a  considerable
amount  of  time  and  labour  to  an  enquiry  into  the  alleged  evidence  on
behalf  of  the  rod,  will  appear  to  my  scientific  friends  about  as  sensible
as  if  he  spent  his  time  investigating  fortune-telling  or  any  other  relic
of  superstitious  folly.  Nor  was  my  own  prejudice  against  this  subject
any  less  than  that  of  others.  For  I  confess  that  it  was  with  great
reluctance,  and  even  repugnance,  that,  some  six  years  ago,  j'ielding
to  the  earnest  request  of  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.,  I  began  an
investigation  of  the  matter ;  hoping,  however,  in  my  ignorance,  that
a  few  weeks'  work  would  enable  me  to  relegate  it

"  Into  a  limbo  large  and  broad,  since  called
The  Paradise  of  fools."

Moreover,  geologists  might  well  make  an  objection  in  limvae  to


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


3


any  such  investigation.^  For  it  is  a  matter  of  common  geological
knowledge  that  the  mode  of  distribution  of  underground  water  is
very  different  from  that  imagined  by  the  professional  "  diviner "  or
"dowser".-  The  latter  with  the  utmost  assurance  locates  a  spring
on  a  particular  spot,  and  gives  its  exact  depth  from  a  foot  to  100  feet,
and  its  yield  of  water,  and  then  probably  will  tell  you  there  is  another
spring  a  few  feet  further  off,  pei'haps  at  a  very  different  depth,  but
that  between  no  water  will  be  foiind.  Or,  putting  his  interpreta-
tion on  other  indications  of  the  rod,  he  will  confidently  assert  that
under  his  feet  an  underground  river  exists,  yielding  so  many  gallons
per  hour.  By  the  same  means  he  will  profess  to  ascertain  the
direction  in  which  the  imaginary  river  is  running,  and  give  you  its
depth  below  the  surface.  Hard  by  he  will  trace  other  invisible
streams,  and  follow  them  to  their  source,  maintaining  that  a  perfectly
dry  rock  or  sub-soil  sepai'ates  underground  watei'S.  Most  of  this  is
ridiculous  to  the  practical  geologist.^  Here,  for  example,  is  an  extract
from  a  letter  I  lately  receiv^ed  from  the  Rev.  Osmond  Fisher,  M.A.,
(author  of  Pliysia  of  the  Earth's  Crust),  which  gives  the  geological
statement  of  the  case  with  admirable  clearness  and  brevity  : —

Harlton  Rectory,  Cambridge,  February  Hit,  1896.
It  appears  to  nie  that  the  assumption  which  underlies  the  belief  in  the
divining  rod  is  erroneous.  It  is  only  under  exceptional  circumstances,
as  among  crystalline  rocks,  or  where  the  strata  are  much  disturbed,
that  underground  water  runs  in  channels  hke  water  in  a  pipe,  so  that  a
person  can  say,  "  I  am  now  standing  over  a  spring,"  whereas  a  few  paces  off
he  was  not  over  one.  What  is  called  a  spring,  such  as  is  reached  in  a  well,
is  usually  a  widely  extended  water-saturated  stratum.  Ordinarily  where
water  can  be  reached  by  a  well,  there  are  few  spots  [in  the  neighbourhood]
where  a  well  would  not  find  it.

1  Here  is  an  extract  from  a  recent  letter  from  a  weIl-kuo\m  geologist : —
"  It  is  sad  to  find  you  troubling:  about  that  wretched  divining  rod  !  .  .  .  Why
is  it  that  of  late  years  this  '  pestilent  heresy '  has  cropped  up  so  ?  And  why  are
educated  people  bitten  by  it?  Squires,  M.P.'s,  doctors,  and  alas,  parsons  !  "  As  an
instance  of  the  general  treatment  of  the  subject  by  scientific  men,  I  may  refer  to  a
recent  letter  from  Mr.  C.  Tomliuson,  F.R.S.,  in  Notes  and  Queries  for  April  2othi
1896;  p.  336.  The  writer  quotes  as  fact  a  series  of  statements  about  the  ■'  rod,"  which
a  very  brief  investigation  of  the  subject  would  have  shown  him  to  be  entirely  un-
founded. Nevertheless,  he  says  to  those  who  g^ive  credit  to  the  water-finders,  and
who  point  out  that  facts  are  stubborn  thmgs  ;  '-  My  answer  is,  verification  of  facts
is  stUl  more  stubborn,"  a  sentiment  which  we  all  agree  with,  and  \vish  all  who  write
on  this  subject  would  attend  to.

-  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  obscure  ;  the  subject  is  discussed  in  Appendix  A.
I  have  ventured  to  give  in  Apjjcndix  B  a  brief  outline — based  on  the  authority  of
eminent  geologists — of  the  chief  points  at  present  known  concerning  the  production
and  circulation  of  underground  waters.  The  unscientific  reader  may  thus  be  better
able  to  appreciate,  or  to  question,  the  orthodox  geological  view  regarding  the
divining  rod.  Refereacjs  are  there  given  to  some  standard  works  on  underground
water.

B  2


4


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  question  which  is  really  worthy  of  investigation  in  this  and
similar  cases  seems  to  be  how  such  an  idea  ever  originated,  and  to  what
it  owes  its  vitality.  ■  '■ ■  .,

Furthermore,  if  instances  of  the  successful  use  of  the  divining  rod
be  quoted,  the  geologist  would  doubtless  reply  that  these  are  either
shrewd  guesses  of  the  "diviner,"  or  else  purely  cases  of  chance
coincidence  ;  the  few  successes  being  recoi'ded,  whilst  the  numerous
failures  are  overlooked.  This,  indeed,  is  a  common  fallacy,  for
"  the  mind  is  arrested  by  the  affirmative  instances,  whereas  the
numberless  instances  in  which  there  is  no  correspondence  between  the
one  set  of  facts  and  the  other,  altogether  escaped  our  notice."  ^

Hence,  from  the  geologist's  point  of  view,  the  rod  of  the  diviner
is  no  more  a  mystery  than  the  wand  of  a  conjurer.  So  far  as  its  use
in  finding  water  or  mineral  veins  is  concerned,  the  geologist  argues
that  precisely  the  same  degree  of  success  would  be  obtained  by  tossing
a  coin,  or  throwing  dice,  and  then  sinking  wells  on  the  spots  indicated
by  one's  greatest  luck  in  guessing.

Nevertheless  it  is  impossible  to  read  the  voluminous  evidence,
collected  with  such  painstaking  care  by  Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins  of
Oxford,  which  is  given  in  Mr.  Pease's  S.P.R.  report  of  thirteen  years
ago,  without  coming  to  the  same  conclusion  as  that  arrived  at  by  Mr.
Pease,  namely  that : — "  The  evidence  for  the  success  of  '  dowsing  '  as
a  practical  art  is  very  strong — and  there  seems  to  be  an  unexplained
residuum  when  all  possible  deductions  have  been  made."-  Forty  years
ago.  Dr.  Mayo,  F.R.S.,  arrived  at  a  similar  conclusion  after  experi
mental  trials  made  with  the  rod  both  in  England  and  abroad,  and  he
published  a  paper  on  this  subject  in  his  entertaining  little  book  On  the
Truths  contained  in  Popular  S^iperstitions .  Prior  to  this,  in  1814,
Dr.  C.  Hutton,  F.R.S.,  after  examining  the  then  accessible  evidence  on
behalf  of  the  divining  rod  and  witnessing  Lady  Milbanke's  success
with  the  rod,  published  a  statem.ent  of  his  own  belief  in  the  jaractical
value  of  the  divining  rod,  though  unable  to  explain  its  behaviour.^

'  Fowler's  Inductive  Logic,  p.  239.

-  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II,,  p.  89.  An  abstract  of  the  evidence  collected  by
Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins  up  to  the  date  of  Mr.  Pease's  report  (.January,  1884),  is  given  in
the  Procecdinf/s  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  90-107.

^  See  Montucla's  edition  of  Ozanani's  Mathematical  Recreations,  translated  and
enlarged  by  C.  Hutton,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Vol.  4,  2nd  edition,  Longmans,  1814.  In
the  first  edition  of  this  translation,  belief  in  the  use  of  the  "  rod"  is  treated  as
absurd.  When  this  view  was  challenged,  Hutton  made  enquiries  for  himself,  with
the  result  stated  above.  He  had  the  courage  to  publish  his  conviction  in  later
editions  of  the  book,  pp.  21G — 231.  See  also  on  this  Dr.  Ashburner's  edition  of
Reichenbach's  researches,  p.  91,  and  the  Quarterl;/  Review  for  1822,  p.  373,  et  serj.
The  writer  in  the  Quarterly  says,  "  The  fact  of  the  discovery  of  water  being  effected


XXXII.]


U7i  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


5


And  recently,  in  1883,  Dr.  R,.  Raymond  read  a  paper  before  the
American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers  in  which,  after  considerable
investigation,  the  conclusion  is  arrived  at : — "That  there  is  a  residuum
of  scientific  value,  after  making  all  necessary  deductions  for  exaggera-
tion, self-deception,  and  fraud,"  in  the  use  of  the  divining  rod  for
finding  springs  and  deposits  of  ore.i  This  testimony  gains  additional
weight  from  the  fact  that  Dr.  Raymond  is  the  distinguished  secretary
of  that  important  Institute.

In  like  manner,  it  is  impossible  to  study  this  subject  Instoricalhj
without  being  impressed  by  the  number  of  those  Avho  have  accepted  as
indisputable  the  practical  value  of  the  rod,  during  the  four  centuries  it
has  been  in  use.  And  these  believers  in  its  efficacy  were  not  a  set  of
silly,  superstitious  men,  easily  duped  by  cunning  rogues, — credulous
fools,  capable  of  believing  any  nonsense  ; — on  the  contrar'y,  among
them  were  some  of  the  most  learned  writers  and  the  most  painstaking
investigators  of  their  day,  together  with  an  array  of  practical  miners
and  well-sinkers ;  men  who  ought  to  have  known  what  they  were
talking  about.  The  popular  off-hand  view  about  the  rod — that  it  is
merely  another  instance  of  the  jDerennial  superstition,  or  roguery,  of
mankind — seems  therefore  somewhat  inadequate.  For  the  curious
problem  that  meets  one  in  the  examination  of  the  subject  is,  not  only
the  long  survival  and  wide  extent  of  the  belief  in  the  rod,  but  the
singular  and  unselfish  enthusiasm  of  its  advocates,  together  with  the
general  probity  and  intelligence  of  the  "dowsers"  themselves.  Quakers,
farmers,  ladies,  children,  poor-law  guardians,  clergymen,  magistrates,
etc.,  are  among  the  English  dowsers  of  to-day,  and  these  are  not  the
class  of  people  one  would  expect  to  find  hoodwinking  a  gullible  public.
They  may,  of  course,  be  the  victims  of  self-deception  ;  if  so,  does  this
also  apply  to  the  professional  dowsers  (in  England  alone  I  know  of
nearly  twenty  who  make  a  living  by  their  practice),  whom  numerous
agents  of  estates  and  owners  of  land  find  it  to  their  interest  repeatedly
to  employ  ?

by  the  divining  rod,  when  held  in  the  hands  of  certain  persons,  seems  indubitable.
.  .  .  The  faculty,  so  inherent  in  certain  persons,  is  evidently  the  same  with  that
of  the  Spanish  Zahories,  though  the  latter  do  not  employ  the  hazel  twig. "  This  is
much  the  same  view  as  that  taken  by  the  editor  of  the  SpicUitor  in  an  article  in  that
journal  for  October  14th,  1882.  The  Zahories,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel,  I  have
traced  back  to  a  writer  in  the  16th  century.

1  Mr.  Pease  in  his  S.P.R.  report  refers  to  Raymond's  paper,  which  I  find  was
read  a  second  time  at  the  U.S.  International  Electrical  Exhibition  in  1881,  and
is  again  published  in  the  Jour  rial  of  the  Franklin  Institute  for  1885  I  shall  return
to  this  paper  later  on.

- 1  am  glad  to  be  able  to  bear  testimony  to  the  fact  that  several  of  these
professional  dowsers,  notably  those  who  have  been  most  successful,  are  simple
unassuming  men,  who  do  not  disguise  their  ignorance,  nor  occasional  failures,  and
are  ready  to  impart  all  they  know. On  the  other  hand,  as  might  naturally  be


6


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Furthermore,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  at  the  present  day,  as  in
the  past,  those  who  have  had  the  opportunity  of  examining  most
closely  the  practical  use  of  the  "  dowser's  art  "  are  not  to  be  found
among  the  scoffers.  The  opinion  expressed  to  me  by  many  Avell-
informed  and  critical  observers  who  live  in  that  region  of  the  South
West  of  England  where  the  "  rod  "  has  been  longest  in  use,  and  is  still
extensively  employed,  is  by  no  means  contemptuous  or  even  unfavour-
able. Here,  for  example,  is  an  extract  from  the  West  Somerset  Word
Book,  by  Mr.  F.  T.  Elwortliy  (author  of  The  Evil  Eye  and  Kindred
Superstitions),  an  able  and  impartial  authority.

DOWSE  [aaew'z],  r.  To  use  the  divining-rod  for  the  2>urpose  of  finding
springs  of  water.

The  faculty  possessed  by  some  individuals  is  truly  marvellous,  and  is  not
to  be  explained  by  the  ordinary  method,  of  ascribing  the  action  to  chicanery,
as  the  evidence  to  unbia.ssed  minds  is  beyond  cavil.  Moreover,  the  power  is
not  hereditary  nor  communicable.  Nascitiir  non  fit.  The  povrer  of  the
Dowser  to  discover  water  is  not  merely  a  surviving  superstition,  but  is
believed  in  by  hard -headed,  practical  men  of  the  world,  who  still  habitually
pay  their  money  for  the  advice  of  these  men,  and  who  have  proved  by
repeated  trials  that  it  is  always  correct,  and  worth  paying  for.

Quite  recently  a  Sanatorium  was  to  be  built  upon  a  high  and  apparently
very  dry  spot,  where  of  course  the  first  necessity  was  water.  Three  pro-
fessional Dowsers  were  sent  for  separately,  and  unknown  to  each  other.
Each  came  on  a  different  day  from  the  others,  and  under  the  imjiression  that
he  alone  was  being  employed,  with  the  result  that  all  three  pointed  to  the
same  spot,  wliere  a  well  was  dug  and  abundant  water  found.

Inasmuch  as  one  of  my  own  daughters  has  the  power  to  some  extent,  I
am  able  to  testify  that  trickery  plays  no  part  in  the  performance,  and  she
herself  is  quite  unconscious  of  anything  by  which  the  rod  is  acted  on.

The  rod  or  twig  I  have  seen  used  is  a  fork  of  about  a  foot  long,  cut  off
just  below  the  Ijifurcation,  and  in  size  each  limb  is  about  as  large  as  a  thick
straw.  The  wood,  it  is  said,  must  be  either  "  halse  "  or  white  thorn,  and
may  be  used  either  green  or  dry.  The  ojjerator  holds  an  end  of  the  twig
firmly  between  the  fingers  and  tliumb  of  each  hand,  and  with  the  elbows
pressed  rigidly  against  the  sides  ;  consecjuently  the  two  ends  of  the  twig  are

expected,  the  possession  of  any  peculiar  "faculty  "  tends  to  inordinate  self-conceit
and  vanity,  esi^ecially  among  tlie  illiterate  class  from  whom  the  jjrofessional  dowser
is  usually  drawn.  This  is  traceable  from  the  17th  century  dowser  down  to  the
present  day.  Among  such  men  a  great  mystery  is  made  of  their  "art";  an
apprenticeship  must  be  served,  and  initiation  to  its  mysteries  could,  in  former  times,
only  be  gained  by  a  knowledge  of  the  magic  rites  and  ceremonies  with  which  the
practice  was  surrounded.  At  the  present  day  these  magic  rites  are  swallowed  up  liy
the  more  magic  dollar.  For  example,  the  son  of  an  English  rector  having  accidentally
found  he  had  the  faculty  of  dowsing,  the  father  tells  me  he  applied  for  information  to
a  young  professional  dowser — who  cei-tainly  understands  the  art  of  self-advertise-
ment,— and  received  the  reply  that "Mr. declines  to take  less  than  one

liundred  guineas  for  giving  the  youth  three  months'  training  "  !  I  hope  the  present
])aper  may  make  such  premiums  a  little  more  difficult  to  catch.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


7


pulled  asunder,  with  the  centre,  or  juncture  of  the  fork  pointing  downwards.
He  then  moves  very  slowly  forw.-ird,  and  when  over  a  spring  the  twig  turns
outwards,  and  twists  upon  itself  into  an  upright  position.  This  movement
may  be  repeated  any  number  of  times — the  rod  twisting  over  and  over  again
upon  reaching  the  same  spot,  and  with  equal  freedom  when  both  rod  and
lingers  are  held  by  sceptical  witnesses.  The  position  in  which  the  twig  is
held  seems  to  make  it  impossible  that  it  can  be  turned  by  any  conscious
muscular  action.  Indeed  both  my  daughter  and  the  professional  Dowser  I
have  seen,  assert  that  they  cannot  twist  the  rod  by  any  conscious  effort.

In  some  parts  of  the  county  the  operation  is  called  dowsing  and  the
operator  a  jowser.

Even  the  President  of  the  Royal  Greological  Society  of  Cornwall,
Mr, -J.  D.  Eiiys,  F.G.S.,  is  not  a  scoffer;  on  the  contrary  he  himself  is
an  amateur  dowser,  and  in  a  recent  letter,  writing  from  Penryn,
Cornwall,  Mr.  Enys  states,  "I  have  tried  it  [dowsing  for  water]  often.

On  one  occasion  I  cut  a  small  slight  rod  and  held  it  till  I
came  to  the  place  [where  underground  water  e.xiisted],  when  it  always
acted  by  turning.  On  this  occasion  I  was  able  to  hold  the  rod,  but
it  broke  short  oS  in  front  of  my  hands,  and  did  so  a  second  time  in
the  same  place.  ...  I  always  feel  the  effects  aftersvards  if  I  go
on  too  long  using  the  rod."  This  is  another  instance  of  the  testimony
afforded  by  a  scientific  man  living  in  a  locality  where  the  rod  has  been
in  use  for  centuries.  It  is  always  ignorance,  and  not  knowledge,  that
blindly  denies  what  is  unfamiliar.

Here  then  we  find  a  widespread  belief  existing  at  the  present  day,
and  extending  backwards  for  centuries  ;  though  it  seem  contemptible,
how  ai-e  we  to  account  for  the  origin  and  survival  of  this  belief,  and  for
its  appearance  and  persistence  in  regions  remote  fi-om  each  other  1  As
Dr.  Lauder  Brunton,  F.R.S.,  has  remarked  a  propos  of  this  very  subject
— when  we  find  certain  things  implicitly  believed  in  by  some  people,
whilst  they  are  laughed  at  as  ridiculous  and  absurd  by  others,  it  is
worth  while  to  enquire  whether  there  may  not  be  an  element  of  truth
as  well  as  of  falsehood  in  both  belief  and  ridicule.  Ignorance  is  the
parent  both  of  blind  belief  and  of  scoffing  scepticism,  and  leads  not
only  to  implicit  belief  in  untruth,  but  also  to  a  rash  denial  of  what  is
true."  One  main  object  of  our  Society  is  to  endeavour  to  dispel  such
ignorance  by  carefully  examining,  in  the  clearer  light  of  the  present
day,  the  evidence  that  exists  on  behalf  of  phenomena  rejected  as
trivial  or  valueless  by  orthodox  science.

The  Rod  Merely  an  Indicator  of  Subconscious  Impressions.

It  may,  however,  be  asked  in  what  way  does  the  subject  of  the
divining rod  come  within  the scope  of  a  Society foi-  Psychical


•8


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Research?  This  I  think  will  be  evident  in  the  sequel  uf  this  paper;
here  it  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  rod,  or  forked  twig,  is
not  a  chemical  or  physical  re-agent  indicating  the  object  sought  by
some  specific  action  of  that  object  on  the  material  of  the  rod.  The
rod  must  be  I'egarded  simply  as  the  indicator  of  some  action  taking
place  upon  or  within  the  living  mechanism  of  the  individual  who  holds
the  rod;  just  as  "planchette"  or  a  tilting  table  is  used  to  indicate
muscular  impressions  made  by,  or  through,  the  so-called  "medium."  In
fact,  the  rod  is  not  always  used  by  tlie  "dowser"  ;  a  piece  of  wire  or
watch-spring,  or  merely  tlie  out-stretched  hands,  are  used  by  some  of
the  most  successful  "  diviners."  Hence  there  can,  T  think,  be  little
•doubt  that  the  subject  we  are  discussing  is  a  special  case  of  tho.t  large
group  of  phenomena  belonging  to  our  subliminal  consciousness  which
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  has  done  so  much  to  elucidate  :  the  movement  of
the  rod  Ijeiiig  due  to  involuntary  reflex  action.

Some  such  view,  I  And,  has  been  held  by  nearly  all  who  ha\'e  in
recent  years  carefully  considered  the  subject.  Thus  Dr.  Lauder
Brunton,  F.Ii.S.,  says  : —

"I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  success  of  the  divining  rod,  in  some
hands,  for  finding  water  or  even  for  tracing  criminals,  is  due  to  its  causing
involuntary  muscular  action,  and  thus  enabling  the  person  using  it  to
consciously  recognise  that  impressions  have  been  made  upon  him  which
would  otherwise  never  have  arisen  above  the  state  of  sub-consciousness."

Dr.  Brunton  goes  on  to  say  :  "  When  we  liear  tliat  a  man  is  able  to
discover  water  at  a  considerable  distance  below  the  ground  on  which  he
stands,  we  are  at  first  apt  to  scout  the  idea  as  ridiculous,  while  if  we  were
told  that  a  caravan  was  crossing  a  desert,  and  tliat  all  at  once  the  thirsty
camels  started  off  ipiickly,  and  at  a  distance  of  a  mile  or  more  water  was
found,  we  look  upon  the  occurrence  as  natural.  In  the  same  way  we  regard
as  very  remarkable  the  story  of  a  man  tracing  criminals  with  a  divining  rod,
but  it  becomes  quite  ordinary  if  we  put  a  bloodhound  in  the  man's  place."
In  conclusion.  Dr.  Brunton  reinai-ks  concerning  the  divining  rod  and  the
allied  popular  beliefs:  "The  whole  subject  is  a  deejjly  interesting  one,  and
its  thorough  investigation  is  much  to  be  desired."  ^

The  discovery  of  water  or  a  mineral  lode  by  a  hazel  twig,  there-
fore, no  longer  becomes  so  absurdly  improbable  if  it  is  the  individual
who  is  in  some  way  the  discoverer,  and  the  rod  merely  the  indicator
of  some  impression  made  ujjon  him,  an  impression  t(jo  slight  and  too
subtle  to  rise  to  the  level  of  consciousness.  After  all,  it  is  not  the
improbability  of  the  quest  that  should  deter  us,  it  is  simply  a  question

1  Dr.  Lauder  Brunton  on  "Truth  and  Delusion,"  in  the  Univcnal  Review,
.January,  1889.  The  QifirtcrZ// iJcjJiCiu  for  .July,  1«95,  p.  20G,  says  "  Dowsing  .  .  .
is  either  conscious  imposture,  or  it  is  an  act  prompted  by  the  sub-conscious  element  in
the  personality  of  the  'dowser.'  .  .  .  It  is  only  a  question  of  steady  scientific
examination,  as  in  the  study  of  any  other  condition  of  human  faculty."


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


9


■of  what  amount  of  trustwoi'thy  evidence  exists  upon  the  subject  to
make  the  quest  worth  pursuing.

Nomenclature.

The  term  divining  rod  is  unfortunate,  and  has  probably  led  to  a
good  deal  of  the  opprobrium  under  which  the  subject  rests,  as  it  is
frequently  confounded  with  the  ancient  superstitious  practice  of
divination  by  a  rod,  or  Rhabdoraancy,  one  of  the  oldest  methods  of
augury  (Hosea  iv.,  12,  or  by  arrows  as  in  Ezekiel  xxi.,  21).  The
considerable  literature  of  Rhabdomancy  is  a  distinct  question,  and  it
need  hardly  be  said,  of  no  value  to  physical  science.  ^

A  rod  or  wand  was  not  only  used  for  divination,  it  was  and  is,  the
symbol  of  power  ;  as  in  Exodus  iv.,  17,  20  ;  Psalm  xxiii,  4,  etc.,  as  in
the  lituus  of  the  Roman  augur,  in  the  pastoral  staff  of  a  bishop,  in
a  monarch's  sceptre  or  in  the  special  constable's  staff  of  to-day.-  The
Arch-Druid's  wand  is  another  instance  of  this,  and  the  conjurer's
wand  is  a  survival  of  the  same  thing  ;  even  the  native  Irish  name
for  the  latter  is  Slaitin  Draoidlieaclda,  Druid's  wand,  or  virgula
divinationis.  On  this  subject  Mr.  Lang  has  given  us  the  benefit  of
his  scholarship  in  a  passage  I  have  quoted  in  the  foot-note  below.  ^

1  The  most  learned  and  exhaustive  work  on  ancient  divination  is  that  by
M.  Bouche-Leclercq,  entitled  Histoirc  dc  la  Divination  dans  I'Antiquite,  4  vols.,
Paris,  1880.  Lenormant  in  his  C/ialdean  Magic  refers  to  the  use  of  rhabdomancy
among  the  Chaldeans.  (Eng.  trans.,  p.  237).  See  also  article  Divination  in  Smith's
Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  and  Mr.  ^Nlyers'  brilliant  essay  on  Greek  Oraeles.  Brand's
Popular  Antiquities  contains  a  lengthy  and  erudite  article  on  rhabdomancy,  in
which  referi- nee  is  made  to  the  divining  rod  (Vol.  II.,  p.  022.)  The  most  concise
and  excellent  article  on  Divination  which  I  have  met  with  is  that  in  Chamhc'rs'
Enciiclcjpaidia.

Even  among  the  Mongol  tribes,  inhabiting  the  eastern  portion  of  the  plateau  of
central  Asia,  divination  is  rife,  as  that  able  and  devoted  missionary,  the  Rev.
J.  Gilmour,  M.  A.,  shows  in  his  remarkable  work  Among  the  Momjols.  Mr.  Gilmour
says  (p.  188  )  that  the  Mongols  expected  him  to  divine  for  them  where  to  sink
their  wells  so  as  to  get  a  good  water  supply,  or  where  to  find  any  lost  cattle,  etc.,  and
when  he  confessed  his  inability  to  do  so,  their  amatement  and  incredulity  were
profound.

-There  are,  I  find,  some  1.30  references  to  a  "rod"  or  "staff"  as  a  symbol  of
authority  or  power  in  the  Old  Testament  alone.  There  has  recently  been  added  to  the
South  Kensington  Museum  "a  sceptre  of  blue  glazed  ware  made  for  Amenhotop  II..
of  the  18th  Dynasty,  from  the  temple  of  Nubt."  This  sceptre  is  some  7  feet  high,
thicker  than  the  girth  of  one's  arm  and  shaped  like  a  huge  shepherd's  crook  or
pastoral  staff.  The  symbolical,  sacred,  or  magical  power  of  a  rod  or  crook  is  therefore
as  ancient  as  it  is  widely  diffused. What  gave  rise  to  this  is  an  interesting  question.

^  "  In  all  countries  rods  or  wands,  the  Latin  virya,  have  a  magical  power.
'Virgil  obtained  his  mediseval  repute  as  a  wizard  because  his  name  was  erroneously
connected  with  viryida,  the  magic  wand.  But  we  do  not  actually  know  that  the
ancient  wand  of  the  enchantress  Circe,  in  Homer,  or  the  wand  of  Hermes,  was
used,  like  the  divining  rod,  to  indicate  the  whereabouts  of  hidden  wealth  or  water.
In  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Hermes  (line  529),  Apollo  thus  describes  the  eaduceus,


10


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Instead,  therefore,  of  the  word  "  divining  rod,"  I  would  suggest  the
use  of  the  provincial  word  dowsing-rod,  or  of  the  term  winchel-rod  :  the
former  is  common  enough  and  the  latter  has  been,  and  still  is,  used  in
certain  parts  ;  it  was,  I  believe,  first  employed  by  a  writer  in  a  book
translated  from  the  German,  called  the  Laboratory,  published  in  1740.
The  word  probably  arose  from  the  German  name  for  divining  rod,
Wiinschel-ruthe,  the  pi'onunciation  being  similar.  One  writer,  however,
attributes  the  word,  less  probably,  to  the  English  rvinch,  as  the  rod
turns  over  hidden  springs. ^

AUTOSCOPES.

As  the  divining  rod  is  only  one  of  many  instrumental  means,,
whereby  imperceptible,  involuntary,  and  unconscious  muscular  move-
ments are  revealed  by  the  visible  motion  of  an  external  object,  it  is
desirable  to  group  these  various  appliances  under  a  generic  name.  I
would  suggest  for  this  purpose  the  term  Autoscope.'-  Other  autoscopes
besides  (1)  the  divining  or  dowsing  rod,  are,  (2)  a  little  ring  or  ball  sus-
pended by  a  thread,  the  jjendide  explorateur  of  French  writers,  the  use

or  wand  of  Hermes:  'Thereafter  will  I  give  thee  a  lovely  wand  of  wealth  and
riches,  a  golden  wand  with  three  leaves,  which  shall  keep  thee  ever  unharmed. '
In  later  art,  this  wand  or  cadiiceus,  is  usually  entwined  with  serpents ;  but  on  one
vase,  at  least,  the  wand  of  Hermes  is  simply  the  forked  twig  of  our  rustic  miners
and  water-finders. The  same  form  is  found  on  an  engraved  Etruscan  mirror.

"Now, was  a  wand  of  this  form  used  in  classical  times  to  discover  hidden  objects
of  value  ?  That  wands  were  used  by  Scj-thians  and  Germans  in  various  metliods
of  casting  lots  is  certain;  but  that  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  working  of  the
twig.  Cicero  speaks  of  a  fabled  wand  by  which  wealth  can  be  procured  ;  but  he
says  nothing  of  the  method  of  its  use,  and  possibly  was  only  thinking  of  the  rod
of  Hermes,  as  described  in  the  Homeric  liymn  already  quoted.  Tiiere  was  a  satura,
written  byVarro,  called  l^iryida  Divina;  fragments  remain,  but  throw  no  light  on
the  subject.  A  passage  usually  quoted  from  Seneca  has  no  more  to  do  with  the
divining  rod  than  with  the  telephone.  Pliny  is  a  writer  extremely  fond  of
marvels  ;  yet  when  he  describes  the  various  modes  of  finding  wells  of  water,  lie
says  nothing  about  the  divining  wand.  The  isolated  texts  from  Scripture  which
are  usually  referred  to  clearly  indicate  wands  of  a  different  sort." — Custom  and
Jfyth,  p.  182.

1  Other  terms  used  in  old  time  for  the  divining  rod  were  Aaron's  rod,  Moses'
rod,  and  Jacob'.s  rod.  A  work  on  the  divining  rod  was  pubhshed  ni  Lyons  in  l(i!)3,
and  an  English  translation  called  Jacob's  Hud  has  been  made  by  a  Mr.  Welton.
The  fact  that  the  divining  rod  was  in  old  times  often  called  "  Moses'  rod  "
doubtless  arose  from  the  description  given  in  the  book  of  Exodus  of  Moses  obtaining
water  in  the  wilderness  by  means  of  his  rod,  in-everent  persons  concluding  he  had
learnt  the  use  of  the  divining  rod  whilst  in  Egypt.

•  -In  physical  science  the  termination  "scope"  (Gr.  a-Koiriiv  to  view)  is  restricted

tD  instruments  which  reveal  or  detect  a  hidden  object  or  force,  and  do  not  measure  the
amount  of  the  force,  e.g.,  magnetoscope,  electroscope,  etc.  The  word  (JryptosMpc —
instrument  for  showing  liidden  thing.?, — is  for  .some  reasons  preferable  to  autoscope,
but  it  has  already  been  adopted  by  some  French  writers  for  the  fluorescent  screen
used  with  the  X-rays.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  II


of  which  goes  back  at  least  to  the  foui'th  century;^  similar  to  this  is
(3)  a  poised  index,  or  a  simple  pointer,  traversing  the  letters  of  the
alpliabet,  (4)  a  pencil  lightly  and  passively  held  so  that  it  can  write
on  note-paper,  (5)  planchette,  (6)  a  small  table,  or  other  object  such
as  a  chair,2  easily  tilted  or  rotated  (table-turning,  etc.),  (7)  a  passive
living  person  lightly  touched  by  another,  as  in  the  "willing  game,"
where  a  hidden  object  is  found,  or  a  secret  command  obeyed  by  the
quasi  thought-reader,  or  living  autoscope.

Doubtless  other  autoscopes  exist,  or  will  be  invented,  but,  however
different  in  detail,  there  are,  broadly  speaking,  only  two  distinct  kinds,
(a)  those  wherein  the  indicator  is  in  stable  or  neutral  equilibrium,  as
the  pendule  or  planchette,  and  where  a  succession  of  ideas  may  be
conveyed  by  a  series  of  uninterrupted  movements,  (,3)  those  wherein
the  indicator,  or  the  muscular  system  of  the  person  using  the  indicator,
is  in  a  "  sensitive "  state,  i.e,.,  one  of  balanced  strain  or  unstable
equilibrium. 3  Here  a  slight  impulse,  or  nervous  stimulus,  may  pro-
duce a  profound  effect,  the  displacement  not  being  in  the  least
proportional  to  the  foi'ce  that  initiated  it.  Autoscopes  of  this
class,  which  convey  only  a  single  idea,  requii'e  to  be  restored  to
their  initial  condition  by  an  independent  operation,  before  a  second
displacement  can  occur  or  a  second  idea  be  conveyed.  I  shall  show
later  on  that,  if  rightly  held,  the  forked  dowsing  or  divining  rod
belongs  to  this  class.  It  is  in  this  class  we  should  expect  to  find
that  any  sense  perceptions,  which  are  too  faint  to  excite  con-
sciousness, would  probably  reveal  themselves.

Here  permit  a  brief  digression.  Our  conscious  personality  speaks
through  various  voluntary  muscular  movements,  ideas  chiefly  express-
ing themselves  in  articulate  language.  The  large  unconscious  back-
ground of  our  personality  always  speaks  through  involuntary  twx's.q.vXky
movements,  to  which  ordinarily  we  give  no  heed,  though  these
movements  are  ever  going  on  within  us,  and  if  external  are  generally
imperceptible.  Now  if  reasoning,  as  we  know  it,  cannot  exist  without
language,  which  need  not  be  speech  but  some  form  of  expression,  then
autoscopes  furnish  a  means  whereby  the  hidden  part  of  our  personality,
the  dumb  partner  of  our  life,  can  reason  and  outwardly  express  itself  ;

For  a  modern  illustration  of  the  use  of  the  pendule,  see  the  Reminiscences  of  the
late  Mrs.  De  Morgan,  p.  214.

-  Juanita  was  the  name  given  to  a  chair  in  Guadaloupe  in  1853,  which  composed
prose  and  poetry  after  the  manner  of  planchette.  "  Les  oeuvres  litteraires  de  la
chaise,"  are  set  forth  in  a  brochure  published  at  the  Government  printing  office  in
Guadaloupe,  in  1853.

In  the  region  of  physics,  an  inverted  cone,  a  Rupert's  drop  or  a  sensitive
Hame  are  familiar  examples  of  bodies  either  in  unstable  or  poised  equilibrium .


12


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[fart


a  means  whereby  an  intelligence  not  under  our  conscious  control  can
reveal  itself  by  some  physical  manifestation.

It  is  just  because  these  manifestations  appear  to  be  so  novel,  and
detached  from  ourselves,  that  they  are  apt  to  be  so  misleading  to  some
and  so  mischievous  to  others.  Interpreted  on  the  one  hand  as  the  play
of  a  wonderful  occult  force,  science  has  refused  to  have  anything  to  do
with  phenomena  which  seem  to  obey  no  physical  laws,  but  are  capricious
and  self-determined.  Interpreted  on  the  other,  truly  enough,  as  the
exhibition  of  a  free  and  intelligent  agent,  some  infernal  or  discarnate
.spirit  has  been  fixed  upon  as  the  cause,  and  a  fictitious  authority
for  which  there  is  no  warrant  has  been  given  to  their  indications.
Whether  in  any  case  these  intelligent  automatic  movements  exhibit
information  outside  the  memory,  either  active  or  latent,  of  the
indi\  idual  who  uses  the  autoscope ;  or  a  knowledge  beyond  that
which  may  have  been  unconsciously  derived  from  those  present  by
sign-reading  or  thought-transference,  is  a  problem  which  can  only  be
solved  so  as  to  gain  general  acceptance  by  long  and  patient  enquiry,  of
which  our  Proceedings  are  an  earnest,  and  to  which  this  monograph  may
afford  a  small  contribution.


Part  II.

The  liteiature  of  the  divining  rod  is  extensive,  and  several  modern
writers  have  given  historical  outlines  of  this  subject.  But  upon
comparing  these  accounts  it  soon  became  evident  that  they  were  all,
more  or  less,  drawn  from  some  earlier  historian.  I  therefore  devoted
part  of  two  suanner  vacations  to  a  thorough  historical  examination  of
this  subject,  and  thanks  to  the  valual)le  libraries  to  which  I  have  had
access  in  London,  Liverpool,  and  Dublin,  I  venture  to  hope  that  the
historical  survey  appended  to  this  paper  is  somewhat  more  complete
and  exact  than  its  jDredecessors.  In  connection  with  this  part  of  my
task,  most  grateful  acknowledgements  are  due  to  my  friends,  the  Rev.
Maxwell  Close,  M.A.,  and  Mr.  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  for  their  kind  and
valuable  co-operation ;  tlie  latter  devoting  many  weeks  to  this  work
at  the  British  Museum  Library.^

The  historical  evidence  adduced  in  the  sequel — some  of  which  has

1  My  lieai'ty  thaaks  are  also  due  to  the  various  able  and  courteous  Librarians,
more  especially  to  those  in  Dublin.  The  library  in  Trinity  College,  and  Archbishop
Marsh's  library',  Dublin,  are  particularly  rich  in  16t.h  and  17th  century  literature;
the  latter  has  some  works  which  apparently  are  not  in  the  British  Museum  library.
I  am  also  indebted  to  the  National  Librar3'  of  Ireland  and  to  the  scientific  libraries
at  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  the  Royal  Dublin  Society,  and  the  Roj'al  College  of
Science  for  Ireland,  and  to  the  valuable  Picton  Library  in  Liverpool,  etc.


xxxii].  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  13


hitherto  escaped  observation — I'enrlers  the  following  facts,  in  my
opinion,  practically  certain  :  ( 1 )  The  birthplace  of  the  modern  divining
or  dowsing  I'od  is  the  mining  districts  of  G-ermany,  probably  the  Harz
mountains.  Germany  is  the  home  of  mining,  and  the  most  approved
processes  were  in  use  there  prior  to  elsewhere.  (2)  The  first  record  of
the  use  of  the  dowsing  rod  was  for  mining  purposes  and  dates  from
late  in  the  15th  or  eai'ly  in  the  IGtli  century,  though  it  must  have  been
in  use  for  at  least  a  generation  before  this.  Its  introduction  was
coincident  with,  and  jaerhaps  a  symptom  of,  that  great  movement
of  thought  in  Germany  when  tradition  began  to  give  way  to  treason,
and  superstition  to  the  observation  of  nature.  (3)  The  use  of  the
dowsing  rod  for  finding  minei'al  veins  was  introduced  into  England,
by  German  miners,  at  the  latter  part  of  the  16th  century,  and  early
in  the  17th  century  its  use  in  Cornwall  for  mining  is  noticed  by
some  English  writers.  (4)  The  employment  of  a  rod  for  finding
underground  water  possibly  began  in  Germany,  but  at  least  a  century
later  than  its  use  in  raining!  At  the  present  time  the  dowsing  rod
is  far  more  in  use  for  the  former  purpose  (water-finding)  than  for  the;
latter.  (5)  The  use  of  the  rod  in  the  "  moral  world,"  for  detecting-
criminals,  etc.,  was  a  phase  which  arose  towai-ds  the  end  of  the
17th  century  and  quickly  passed  away  ;  its  use  for  this  purpose  (but
this  07ily)  being  condemned  by  a  decree  of  the  Inquisition  in  1701.
(6)  To  A.  Kircher  and  G.  Schott,  about  1660,  we  owe  the  theory  of
unconscious  muscular  action  as  the  explanation  of  the  ^je^ic^M^e
explorateiir,  which  they  connect  (but  obscurely)  with  the  motion  of  the
divining  I'od.  By  Malebranche  and  Lebrun  in  1G92  the  importance  of
the  prior  intention  of  the  diviner  as  to  tlie  object  of  search  was  first
pointed  out.

Postponing  to  the  conclusion  a  detailed  account  of  the  early  history  of
this  subject,  it  will  be  convenient,  before  entering  upon  an  examina-
tion of  the  evidence  on  behalf  of  a  dowsing  faculty  and  how  far  it  is  of
practical  value,  to  give  an  outline  of  what  has  been  written  on  the
subject  in  comparatively  modern  times,  that  is,  since  the  first  scientific
investigation  of  the  question  by  Dr.  Thouvenel  a  centuiy  ago.

Modern  Literature  on  this  Sub.tect.

The  standard  treatise  on  the  subject  is  usually  considered  to  be  a
work  by  M.  Chevreul,  entitled  La  Baguette  Divinatoire,  Paris,  1854.1
The  immediate  cause  of  Chevreul's  treatise  was  a  paper  presented  to
the  French  Academy  of  Sciences,  in  March,  1853,  by  a  M.  Riondet^

1  Chevreul,  as  is  well  known,  was  a  distinguished  French  chemist,  tlie  author
of  numerous  scientific  papers  on  colour  and  the  artistic  and  industrial  applications
of  chemistry.  He  died  in  1889  at  the  age  of  103  years,  retaining  his  faculties  and
industry  almost  to  the  last.


14


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


entitled  Sii,r  la  hajuetle  divinatoire  employee  a  la  recherche  des  eaux
soiUerraines.  As  usual  in  such  cases,  the  Academy  ordered  a  report
on  this  paper  to  be  made,  and  nominated  for  this  purpose  three
eminent  scientific  members  of  its  body,  MM.  Chevreul,  Boussingault,
and  Babinet.  M.  Chevreul  was  requested  by  his  colleagues  to  draw  up
the  report,  which  led  to  the  publication  of  his  book  on  the  subject.
The  author  states  he  found  it  impossible  to  dissociate  the  movement  of
the  baguette  from  that  of  the  pendule  explorateur  and  table-turning  ;
these  subjects  therefore  occupy  a  considerable  part  of  his  work.
(Meanwhile  M.  Riondet's  parser  seems  to  have  been  forgotten,  for  it  is
not  discussed  by  Chevreul  and  no  publication  nor  summary  of  it, — nor
of  a  subsequent  paper  which  M.  liiondet  sent  in, — was  made  in  the
Comptes  Rendus  of  the  Academy).  Chevreul's  book  was  certainly
useful  in  drawing  attention  to,  and  examining,  a  wide-spread  belief
which  hitherto  had  not  been  seriously  discussed  by  any  writer  of
recognised  scientific  position.  But  its  importance  has,  I  think,  been
largely  over-rated ;  it  was  believed  to  be  the  first  attempt  to  give
a-  rational  explanation  of  the  movement  of  the  rod  ;  but  this  is  an
erroneous  belief  ;  as  Kircher,  I  find,  anticipated  Chevreul  by  two
centuries.  Chevreul  is  content  with  the  popular  view  that  the  indica-
tions afforded  by  the  rod  are  always  fallacious ;  hence  he  gives  no
modern  evidence  of  its  success  or  failure,  and  makes  no  experimental
examination  for  himself.  The  historical  portion  of  his  book  up  to  the
year  1700  is  also  largely  derived  from  a  remarkably  learned  but  little
known  work  by  Father  Pierre  Lebrun,  S.J.,  entitled  Histoire  Critique
des  Pratiques  Snperstitieuses,  etc.,  Paris,  1702,  a  work  I  shall  have
■occasion  to  refer  to  later  on.  Lebrun  was  evidently  a  man  of  great
intellectual  power  and  wide  reading,  and  I  do  not  wonder  at  Chevreul
dedicating  his  treatise  to  the  memory  of  this  erudite  Jesuit.^

Subsequent  writers  (with  one  or  two  rare  excejitions,  such  as
Mr.  A.  Lang),  have  heexi  content  with  copying  Chevreul,  often  at
second  or  third  hand.  The  Rev.  S.  Baring-Gould,  for  example —
whose  interesting  and  lengthy  article  on  the  divining  rod  in
Curio'ns  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  London,  1868,  is  probably  the
best  known  essay  on  the  subject  to  English  readers, — appears
entirely  indebted  to  a  recent  popular  and  excellent  Fi'ench  author,
M. Louis  Figuier,-  though  he  does  not  acknowledge  the  source  of

^  Some  ten  years  prior  to  the  publication  of  Lebrun's  Histoire,  etc.,  the  Abbe  de
Valleniont  published  a  work  called  La  Physique  Occidtc,  on  traite  de  la  Baguette
Divinatoire ;  the  latter  jaart  of  this  work  contains  an  even  fuller  historical  review  of
the  subject  than  that  given  by  Lebrun,  who,  in  his  turn,  had  doubtless  borrowed
largely  from  De  Vallemont.  I  shall  return  to  De  Vallemont's  work  in  the  historical
review  at  the  end  of  this  paper.

-  Not  primarily  to  Clievreul,  as  Mr.  Lang  suggests  in  his  Custom  and  Myth,
page  188. Why  does  Mr.  Lang  always  write  "  Chevreuil  "  ?


XXXII.]  On' tUe  So-called  l)ivining  Hod.  15

his  information.  M..  'Fi;»uie;"'s  work  is' ca?ied'  Hzstoi^e  du  Merveilleux
dans  les  temps  moclerhes,  Pans,  1860,  and  half  of  the  second  volume
is  devoted  to  the  divining  rod.  Though  Figuier  relies  on  De
Vallemont  for  most  of  his  historical  data  and  on  Chevreul  for  his
theory  of  the  rod,  yet  his  work  is  hy  far  the  best  memoir  on  our
subject  that  has  yet  appeared  ;  he  makes,  however,  no  attempt  to
collect  or  discuss  evidence  of  the  practical  value,  or  otherwise,  of
the  rod.

Perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  medley  eN'er  put  together  on  the
divining  rod  is  an  article  by  Professor  Fiske,  of  Harvard,  called  the
"  Descent  of  Fire,"  in  his  interesting  volume,  Jlyfhs  and  Myth-makers,
the  18th  edition  of  which  is  dated  1893.  Having  once  met  a  "water
finder"  whom  he  promptly  proved  to  be  a  rogue  by  showing  that  the
rod  would  not  move  when  he  (Professor  Fiske)  used  it,  and  having
read  that  "  learned  author,"  Mr.  Baring-Gould,  Professor  Fiske  feels
himself  qualified  to  clear  up  the  subject.  Accordingly  he  tells  us
that  as  the  divining  rod  "  has  been  used  iu  Europe  from  time
immemorial,"  and  as  "  the  one  thing  essential  about  it  is  that  it  shall
be  forked,''  it  is  obvious  that  its  oi'igin,  "  hopeless  as  the  problem
may  at  first  sight  seem,"  is  "nevertheless  solved:" — it  is,  he  says,
unquestionably  the  wooden  incarnation  of  forked  lightning !  There
was,  however,  he  finds  subsequently,  "one  exception  to  this  rule  of  a
forked  rod,  and  if  any  further  evidence  be  needed  to  convince  the
most  sceptical  that  the  divining  rod  is  nothing  but  a  symbol  of  the
lightning,  that  exception  will  furnish  such  evidence."  ^  !  So  much  for
"  myths  and  myth-makers."

Mr.  A.  Lang  has  a  capital  though  brief  essay  on  the  rod  in  his
Custom  and  Myth,  London,  2nd  edition,  1885  (a  reprint  of  an  article
which  appeared  in  the  Cornhill  Magazine  for  Januaiy,  188.3).  I  am
glad  to  find  that  the  view  ah'eady  expressed  as  to  the  irrele^'ancy  of
discussing  rhabdomancy  in  connection  with  our  present  subject  has  the
support  of  Mr.  Lang  ;  every  other  writer  follows  the  lead  given  by
Father  Lebrun,  and  mixes  up  these  two  entirely  distinct  questions.  I
have  already  quoted  from  Dr.  Mayo's  excellent  essay  on  the  rod
containesl  in  his  book  on  Popidar  Superstitions;  this  essay  originally
appeared  in  Blackwood] s  Mayazine  for  February,  184:7,  under  the  nom
de  plume  ot  "Mac  Davies,"  and  was  copied  into  JAUqIVs  Living  Aye
of  April  the  same  year.

One  of  the  latest  scientific  essays  on  our  subject  is  the  paper  by
Dr.  Rossiter  Raymond  of  New  York,  read  before  the  American
Institute  of  Mining  Engineers,  and  already  mentioned  on  p.  5.  This

1  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  Professor  Fiske's  alleged  facts  are  as  mythical  as
the  origin  he  claims  for  the  rod,  which  is  based  on  Dr.  Kulin's  work,  Die  Herah-
kuiist  des  Feuers.


16  ' ' 'Professor  IV/ I^/'BaM^ek'' '  [part

is  a  serious  and  tKou^ihSftdV'.lttfel'rJpt  :,to  'i|iye&^tgaite/,ct^^  subject;  con-
temporary evidence,  tliough  not  adduced,  has  been' considered  by  the
author,  and  his  conclusion  has  already  been  stated.  The  bulk  of  his
paper  is  historical,  and  this  part,  as  Dr.  Raymond  frankly  says,  is
derived  from  Clievreul  and  Figuier.  The  same  parentage  is  traceable
in  other  writers,  to  whom  I  need  not  refer.  An  exception  to  this  rule
is  tlie  excellent,  though  brief,  article  on  the  divining  rod  in  the
Penny,  now  the  English,  Cyclopradia  ;  the  only  English  encyclopaedia.
I  can  find  that  contains  anything  of  value  on  this  subject.  One  or
two  historical  references  to  the  rod  occur  at  the  end  of  the  article
Hazel  in  the  Encyclopa'dia  Britamiica.

De  Quincey  has  several  references  to  dowsei's  and  dowsing,  or
jowsing,  as  he  terms  it,  in  his  writings.  Thus,  in  Modern  Superstitions,
he  writes  : —

Tliero  are  in  England  (especially  in  Somersetshire)  a  class  of  men  who
Iii'actise  the  Pagan  I'habdomancy  in  a  limited  sense.  They  carry  a  rod  or
i-habdos  (pd/3Soy)  of  willow  :  this  they  hold  horizontally  ;  and  by  the
bending  of  the  rod  towards  the  ground,  they  discover  the  favourable  places
for  sinking  wells  ;  a  matter  of  considerable  importance  in  a  province  so  ill-
\\'atered  as  tlie  northern  district  of  Somersetshire.  These  peoi^le  are  called
jowsers  [dowsers^.  The  exijerimental  evidences  of  a  real  iDractical  skill  in
these  men,  and  the  enlarged  compass  of  speculation  in  these  days,  have  led
many  enlightened  people  to  a  stoic  cttoxv,  or  susj^ension  of  judgment,  on
tlie  reality  of  this  somewhat  mysterious  art.

Tn  a  foot-note  to  this  passage  De  Quincey  says  :  —

For  twenty  miles  round  Wrington,  in  Somersetshire,  the  birth-place  of
Locke,  nobody  sinks  for  wells  without  their  [the  dowsers']  advice.  I  myself
knew  an  amiable  Scottish  family,  who,  at  an  estate  called  Belmaduthie,  in
memory  of  a  similar  property  in  Ross-shire,  built  a  house  in  Somersetshire,
and  resolved  to  find  water  without  the  help  of  tiie  "jowser. "  But  after
sinking  to  a  gi'eater  depth  than  ever  had  been  known  before,  and  spending  a
large  sum  of  money,  they  were  finally  obliged  to  consult  the  jowser,  who
,  found  water  at  once.

Again,  in  his  Confessions  of  an  Opiuyn  Eater,  page  84,  De  Quincey
speaks  of  the  value  of  "jowsing  "  to  the  inhabitants  of  Somersetshire,
and  remarks  : — •

I  have  myself  not  only  seen  the  pi'ocess  tried  with  success,  but  have
witnessed  the  enormous  trouble,  delay,  and  expense  accruing  to  those  of  the
opposite  faction  who  refused  to  benefit  by  this  art.  To  jjursue  the  tentative
plan  {i.e.,  the  plan  of  boring  for  water  at  haphazard)  ended,  so  far  as  I  was
aware,  in  multiplied  vexation.  In  reality,  these  poor  men  are,  after  all,
more  philosojjhic  than  those  who  scornfully  reject  their  services.  For  the
artists  obey  unconsciously  the  logic  of  Lord  Bacon  :  they  build  upon  a  long
chain  of  induction,  upon  the  uniform  results  of  their  life-long  experience.
But  the  counter-facti(.)n  do  not  deny  tliis  experience  ;  all  they  have  to  allege
is  that,  agreeably  to  any  laws  known  to  themselves,  d  priori,  there  ought  not


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  17


to  be  any  such  experience.  Now,  a  sufficient  course  of  facts  overthrows  all
antecedent  plausibilities.  Whatever  science  or  scepticism  may  say,  most  of
the  tea-kettles  in  the  Vale  of  Wrington  are  filled  by  rhabdomancy.

Among  English  scientific  works  the  only  one  I  can  find  that  gives
an  account  of  the  dowsing  rod  is  the  great  treatise  on  British  Mining,
published  in  1884,  by  the  late  Robert  Hunt,  F.E..S.,  keeper  of  the
Mining  Records.  The  author  treats  the  indications  of  the  rod  as
illusory,  but  devotes  considerable  space  to  quotations  showing  the
use  of  the  rod,  taken  from  Agricola's  work  on  mining  of  the  16th
centuiy,  and  Pryce's  well-known  folio  on  Cornish  mining  of  the  18th
century  ]  these  works  are  fully  noticed  in  the  Historical  Survey
appended  to  this  research.

The  English  scientific  societies  have  as  a  rule  given  the  subject  a
wide  berth.i  Nevertheless,  a  few  stray  papers  on  the  divining  rod  are
to  be  found  in  their  Proceedings.  Thus,  to  go  back  to  1814,  the
Transactions  of  the  Geological  Society,  Yol.  II.,  contain  illustrations
of  the  practical  use  of  the  rod  in  a  paper  by  Mr.  W.  Phillips,  who  had
also  previously  contributed  an  interesting  article  on  the  subject  to
TillocNs  Philosophical  Magazine  for  1801,  Vol.  XIII.  The  Quarterly
Mining  Revieiu  for  1830  has  also  a  lengthy  article  on  the  dowsing  rod,
several  instances  being  given  of  its  successful  use  in  the  discovery  of
mineral  lodes,  the  same  spot  being  indicated  even  when  the  dowser  was
blindfolded.  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  British  Association  for  1875,
Miss  A.  "VV.  Buckland  alludes  to  the  divining  rod  in  a  paper  on
Rhabdomancy,  but  is  evidently  mistaken  in  the  origin  to  which  she
traces  the  rod  ;  in  a  letter  Miss  Buckland  contributes  to  the
Standard  newspaper  for  January  3rd,  1889,  she  gives  a  striking
instance  of  the  practical  value  of  the  rod  in  finding  water,  the  spot
indicated  by  the  dowsing  rod  yielding  a  good  water  supply  on  a  well
being  sunk,  whereas  close  by  a  well  sunk  to  a  greater  depth  was  C]uite
dry.  The  numerous  other  similar  cases  I  shall  be  able  to  cite  render
it  less  probable  that  this  is  a  case  of  mere  chance  coincidence.  In  the
Proceedings  of  the  Bristol  Naturalist's  Society  for  1874,  Messrs.  Tawney
and  Pass  relate  experiments  with  a  dowser  finding  hidden  coins,  and
they  attempt  to  explain  away  the  considerable  degree  of  success
attained,  but  the  result  was  probably  due  to  unconscious  indications
given  by  the  spectators,  or  to  true  thought-transference  ;  when  both
of  these  are  excluded  the  failure  of  such  experiments  is  invariable
and  complete,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  course  of  this  paper.  Experi-
ments of  this  kind  are  misleading,  as  they  have  really  nothing  to  do

1  In  the  Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  for  1GC6  (Vol.  I.,  p.  333)
will  be  found  a  question  by  the  Hon.  Robert  Boyle  as  to  whether  the  virgula  divina
is  of  use  in  finding  mineral  veins.  This  famous  philosopher  devotes  some  space  to  the.
divining  rod  in  his  Philosophical  Essays,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  concluding  part.

G


18


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


with  whatever  peculiar  faculty  the  dowser  may  possess  for  detecting
underground  springs  or  veins  of  ore.  In  the  Froceedings  of  the  same
Society  for  1884  is  a  paper  by  a  distinguished  geologist,  Prof.
Sollas,  F.R.S.,  on  the  result  of  the  experiments  he  made  at  the
request  of  the  S.P.R.  to  test  a  dowser  at  Locking,  Somerset.  The
substance  of  this  paper  appeared  in  Vol.  II.  of  our  own  Proceediyigs.
Prof.  Sollas  arrives  at  a  conclusion  adverse  to  the  dowser,  but,  with
all  deference,  I  venture  to  submit  that  a  more  inconclusive  paper  has
rarely  been  published  by  a  scientiKc  authority.  In  the  Proceedings
of  the  Bath  Natural  History  Society  and  Field  Club  for  1889,  Vol.  VI.,
is  a  lengthy  paper  on  the  dowsing  rod  by  Mr.  Forder  Plowman  ;
several  cases  of  more  or  less  evidential  value  are  quoted  by  the
author,  who  is  a  warm  believer  in  the  indications  afforded  by  the  rod.
At  the  Folk  Lore  Congress  in  1891,  Miss  M.  R.  Cox  read  a  paper  on
dowsing,  which  is  published  in  their  Proceedings,  and  in  the  Wiltshire
Notes  and  Queries  for  1893.  The  paper  deals  with  a  dowser,  W.  Stokes,
and  relates  some  remarkable  successes  which  had  attended  his  practice.
A  good  picture  is  given  showing  the  method  of  holding  the  rod
employed  by  Stokes  in  dowsing.

In  1853  a  Mr.  F.  Phippen  published  a  brochure  entitled.  Narrative
of  practical  exi^eriments  jiroving  to  deinonstration  the  discovery  of  water,
coal,  and  mine^xds  iii  the  earth  hy  means  of  the  dowsing  fork  or  divining
rod.  Mr.  Phippen  being  on  a  visit  to  Somersetshire  heard  and  saw  so
much  of  the  practical  use  of  dowsing  that  he  wrote  a  full  report  of
his  enquiries  in  the  Morning  Chronicle  and  Morning  Advertiser  of
November  15th,  1844.  He  gives  many  facts  that  came  under  his
own  observation,  and  quotes  some  cases  of  evidential  value  that  I
have  included  in  the  subsequent  record  of  experiments.  An  excellent
frontispiece,  by  A.  Crowquill,  shows  a  "  dowser  "  at  work,  the  flexed
arms  being  held  tightly  to  the  sides  of  the  body,  and  the  prongs  of  the
fork  (which  is  of  larger  size  than  those  now  generally  used)  passing
between  the  index  and  the  next  finger  of  each  hand.  This  is  not  the
method  of  holding  used  by  Stokes,  pictured  by  Miss  Cox ;  in  fact  at
the  present  day  the  metliod  of  holding  the  rod  varies  with  the
individual  dowsei'.

Another  method  of  holding  the  forked  twig  is  described  in  a  little
book  on  the  divining  rod,  written  by  two  amateur  dowsers,  Messrs,
Young  and  Robertson,  of  Llanelly,  South  Wales,  and  recently  published.
This  bi-ochure  is  not  in  any  sense  a  critical  or  scientific  production,
but  it  is  of  interest  as  presenting  the  exj^erience  of  two  men  who  are
enthusiastic  believers  in  the  practical  value  of  the  rod,  and  have  at
considerable  self-sacrifice  freely  given  their  neighbours  the  benefit  of
the  peculiar  faculty  which  they,  in  common  with  other  successful
dowsers,  appear  to  possess. A  straight  rod,  as  well  as  a  forked  twig,


xxxri.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


19


and  even  a  tiny  (waistcoat  pocket)  fork  of  alaminium,  are  used
indifferently  by  Messrs.  Young  and  Robertson. ^

Notes  and  Queries  contain  frequent  references  to  the  divining
rod.  By  far  the  most  useful  are  two  papers  by  Mr  W.  Bates  of
Birmingham  {Rotes  and  Queries,  Vol.  X.,  18-54,  pp.  449  and  467).
Mr.  Bates  gives  some  valuable  bibiiogcaphical  memoranda  which  I
have  not  found  in  any  other  writer  and  to  which  I  refer  those  who
are  interested.  ^

The  subject  of  the  divining  rod  was  discussed  and  several
well-authenticated  cases  quoted  in  the  Standard  newspaper  during
the  last  week  of  1888,  and  the  first  of  1889.  A  still  longer  dis-
cussion took  place  in  the  Mining  Journal  for  1875,  to  which  reference
will  again  be  made.  From  time  to  time  ephemeral  articles  on  the
divining  rod  are  to  be  found  in  magazines,  etc.,  to  which  it  is  needless
to  refer ;  a  list  of  these  will  be  found  in  Poole's  Index  to  Periodical
Literature.

In  the  United  States  the  A  miir  ican  Journal  of  Science  (Silliman's
•Journal),  the  leading  and  authoritative  American  scientific  journal,
contains  a  capital  paper  on  the  rod  by  (the  Rev.)  Ralph  Emerson,
in  1821, and  a  long  and  able  discussion  of  the  subject  in  1826.
I  shall  return  to  these.  There  are  also  papers  on  the  rod  and
its  use  in  finding  oil  springs,  as  well  as  water  and  mineral  veins,  in
other  American  magazines  of  more  recent  date  ;  notably  a  Lengthy
article  in  the  Democratic  Review  for  1850,  which  refers  to  the
use  of  a  new  type  of  divining  rod,  or  ball,  similar  to  the  pendule
explorateur.

In  1876,  Mr.  Chas.  Latimer,  an  Atnerican  Civil  Engineer,  published
an  essay  on  the  divining  rod  which  contains  an  interesting  I'ecord  of
his  own  experience.  Having  accidentally  discovered  that  the  rod
moved  in  his  own  hands,  he  was  led  to  try  whether  its  indications
were  of  any  practical  use,  and  the  experiments  which  he  narrates

1 1  have  had  a  long  correspondence  with  Mr.  Young,  who  has  given  me  many
instances  of  his  success  in  dowsing  for  water.  I  may  add  that,  though  self-taught,
and  with  few  opportunities,  Mr.  Young  has  devised  and  carried  out  some  extremely
interesting  and  novel  experiments  in  electricity.

-  Every  series  of  Nofa  and  Queries,  e?ccept  the  third,  contains  much  useful
information  on  the  divining  rod.  Having  examined  all  the  references,  it  may  save
trouble  to  others  if  I  name  only  the  more  important  notes.  Notes  and  Queries. —
Series  (1853),  Vol  VIII.,  400,  47!J,  623  ;  Vol.  X.  (1854),  18,  155,  449,  467.  4«A  Series
(1873),  Vol.  XII.,  412.  bth  Series,  Vol.  V.  (1876),  507  ;  Vol.  VI.,  19,  33,  150,  210  ;
Vol.  X.  (1878),  295,  316,  355.  Hth  Scries,  Vol.  VI.  (1882),  325.  7th  Series,  Vol.  VIII.
(1889),  186  ;  Vol.  IX.  (1890),  214,  338  ;  Sth  Series,  Vol.  III.  (1893),  107  ;  Vol.  IX.
(1896),  266,  335.

This  is  not  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  but  an  able  contemporary  of  his,  who
entered  the  ministry  a  little  earlier  than  his  more  famous  namesake.

c  2


20


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


convinced  him  that  it  was.  The  involuntary  movement  of  the  forked
twig  enabled  him  to  discover  underground  sjsrings  in  places  where  his
conscious  experience  and  judgment  would  not  have  led  him  to  locate
them.  He  also  arrived  at  a  method  of  estimating  their  depth  below
the  surface.  T  will  quote  the  evidence  of  an  eye-witness  to  Mi'.
Latimer's  powers  later  on.  I  have  before  me  numerous  cuttings  from
American  newspapers  which  illustrate  the  fact  that  "  water-witching,"
as  they  call  it,  is  in  considerable  vogue  in  certain  parts  of  the  United
States.

On  the  Continent  the  old  province  of  Dauphiny  corresponds  to  our
Somersetshire  as  regards  the  esteem  in  which  the  divining  rod  is  held
and  the  number  of  "diviners  "  for  which  it  has  been  remarkable  ;  they
were  known  by  the  name  of  tourneurs,  or  more  frequently  sourciers.
It  was  in  Dauphiny  that  the  charity  boy  Bleton  was  born,  and  at  the
age  of  seven  years  found  he  could  successfully  discover  underground
springs  and  streams  by  means  of  the  divining  rod.  In  the  year  1780
a  distinguished  physician,  Dr.  Thouvenel,  having  heard  of  Bleton,
sent  for  him,  and  was  so  struck  with  the  simplicity  of  the  lad  and  his
frank  demeanour,  that  he  determined  to  see  what  truth  there  was  in
his  alleged  powers.  The  result  was  a  prolonged  investigation,  which
satisfied  Thouvenel  that  the  lad  had  the  power  imputed  to  him,  and  he
published  a  short  treatise  on  the  subject,  entitled  Memoire  Physique  et
Medicinal,  montrant  des  rapports  evidens  entre  les  phe iiomenes  de  la
Baguette  divinatoire,  du  Magnetisme  et  de  V  Electricite,  etc.,  Paris,  17S1.
Three  years  later,  M.  Thouvenel,  whose  adherence  to  Bletonisme,  as  it
was  called,  had  drawn  on  him  a  host  of  antagonists,  published  a
Second  Memoire  Physique,  etc.,  Paris,  1784,  giving  affidavits  regarding
Bleton's  discoveries,  and  a  narrative  of  his  experiments  with  Bleton
and  another  Dauphiny  youth,  named  Pennet,  whom  he  found  similarly
endowed. 1  Thouvenel  was  the  first  to  submit  the  alleged  claims  of
the  divining  rod  to  systematic  scientific  investigation,  and  though  his
work  is  to  some  extent  vitiated  by  the  erroneous  theory  which
pervades  it,  still  it  is  fair  and  scientific  in  tone,  and  animated  by  the
spirit  of  the  true  philosopher,  who,  as  Laplace  has  well  said,  "  should
not  deny  any  phenomena  merely  because  in  the  actual  state  of  our
knowledge  they  are  inexplicable."  The  best  summary  of  Thouvenel's
treatise  will  he  found  in  the  Mo7ithly  Revieiv  for  1781  et  seq.,  appendix
to  Vols.  65,  67,  and  71  ;  a  briefer  account  is  given  by  Dr.  Ashburner
in  his  English  edition  of  Peichenbach's  Pesearches,  p.  96  et  seq.,  and

^  The  author  of  these  works  was  well  known  to  be  Dr.  Thouvenel,  although  on  the
title  paf^e  of  both  is  only  put  "  par  M.  T***D.  M.  M."  Both  these  Mimoi'rcs  are  in
the  British  Museum  Library  where  I  have  read  them),  but  they  are  difficult  to  find  in
the  catalopfue.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


21


by  Mr.  Bates  in  iVo/es  and  Queries,  1854,  p.  449,  and  by  Baring-Gould
and  Chevreul.

Some  of  Thouvenel's  experiments  with  Bleton  I  will  quote  later  on.
The  interesting  point  in  the  case  of  Bleton  is  that,  like  some
"  diviners  "  of  the  present  day,  he  cared  little  for  the  rod,  which  in  his
case  was  merely  a  bit  of  stick  lying  horizontally  upon  the  fore-fingers
of  the  two  hands,  and  served  simply  as  a  visible  index  of  an  internal
"commotion,"  the  access  of  which  he  could  neither  account  for  nor
control.  In  addition  to  some  600  experiments  with  Bleton,  Thouvenel
sent  circulars  to  all  he  could  find  who  had  employed  the  lad  to
discover  water,  etc  ,  and  obtained  a  multitude  of  testimonies  of  his
success — often  when  all  other  means  had  failed — from  learned  and
critical  persons  as  well  as  others.  Two  savants,  M.  Jadelot,  Professor
of  Medicine  at  Nancy,  and  M.  Sigaud  de  Lafond,  then  took  up  the
matter,  and  after  numerous  experiments  joined  Thouvenel  in  ardent
support  of  Bleton's  mysterious  powers.

Thouvenel,  having  moved  his  residence  to  Italy,  invited  several
distinguished  savants  of  that  country  to  test  his  new  sourcier  Pennet,
whom  he  brought  with  him.  Amongst  those  that  responded  was
Spallanzani,  who,  whilst  astonished  at  what  he  saw,  did  not  consider
the  experiments  conclusive,  and  finally  decided  against  the  reality  of
the  indications  of  the  rod,  as  a  new  form  of  "  hydroscope."  In  the
Memoires  by  Fortis,  1802,  quoted  by  Chevreul,  the  discussion  is
continued,  and  several  other  "  sensitives  "  are  named  by  the  author
who  could  find  underground  water  by  the  peculiar  sensations  they
experienced.

Few  more  instructive  instances  of  the  effect  of  prejudice  on  scientific
judgment  could  be  found  than  in  this  famous  discussion  a  century  ago.
Thus  the  asti'onomer  Lalande,  in  a  letter  to  the  Journal  des  Savants,
for  August,  1782,  denies  Bleton's  power,  and  asserts  that  the  baguette
turns  merely  by  the  adroitness  with  which  Bleton  handles  it.  He  then
proceeds  to  demonstrate  the  roguery  of  Bleton  by  showing  that  an
almost  imperceptible  muscular  effort  can  cause  a  curved  twig  (such  as
Bleton  generally  used)  to  rotate  when  resting  on  the  fingers.  Other
scientific  men  took  the  same  line,  and  when  a  mannikin  was  made
which,  by  mechanism,  could  turn  the  baguette  like  Bleton  did,  the
proof  appeared  complete ;  after  this  believers  like  Thouvenel  could  only
be  fools  or  knaves  !  Others  again  demonstrated  Thouvenel's  electrical
theory  of  the  rotation  of  the  baguette  to  be  baseless,  and  hence  con-
cluded that  the  facts  themselves  had  no  foundation.  All  these  savants,
starting  with  the  a  priori  conclusion  that  the  alleged  facts  were  im-
possible, did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  examine  the  evidence  as  to  the
facts,  and,  moreover,  they  appeared  to  forget  that  Bleton  often  used
no  baguette  at  all,  and  always  regarded  it  merely  as  a  visible  index  to


22


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


some  internal  spasm  that  seized  him  in  tlie  vicinity  of  underground
springs.!  This  strange  physiological  effect,  of  the  genuineness  of
which  Dr.  Thouvenel  satisfied  himself,  was  still  moi'e  marked  ten
years  earlier  in  the  case  of  Parangue,  a  little  girl  who  from  infancy
was  thrown  into  convulsions  when  brought  over  running  water
or  underground  springs  ;  hence  she  was  constantly  used  as  a
"  hydroscope,"  the  Abbes  Sauri  and  de  la  Roquette  testifying  to
the  facts  and  giving  minute  descriptions  of  the  effects  produced  on
the  child.

In  Fortis'  Memoires  j)our  servir  a  Vhistoire  naturelle,  d'c,  several
Italian  hydroscopes  or  dowsers  are  referred  to,  one  a  child,  10  years
old,  named  Anfossi ;  another  more  notable  was  Campetti,  who  was
taken  to  Munich,  in  1806,  to  have  his  water-finding  powers  tested.
Amoretti,  who  relates  the  facts  in  an  essay  on  Rhabdomancy,  states
that  several  of  his  own  relatives  had  the  gift  of  using  the  I'od  and
finding  water  by  its  means.

'1  lie  next  conspicuous  French  work  on  this  subject  is  by  the  Count  de
Tristan,  entitled  liecherches  sur  quehjues  efjieuves  Urrestres,  Paris,  1826.
Count  Tristan  states  that  he  was  led  to  undertake  the  investigation  of
the  divining  rod  by  witnessing  the  remarkable  performance  of  the  rod
in  the  hands  of  a  personal  friend.  Upon  experimenting  with  different
people  he  found,  in  spite  of  his  incredulity,  five  others  had  the  same
faculty,  and  to  his  astonishment  discovered  that  he  himself  possessed
it.  For  some  years  he  had  no  leisure  to  investigate  the  matter,  but
ultimately  in  1822  he  commenced  a  long  series  of  experiments,  from
1,500  to  1,800  in  number,  and  which  occupied  him  nearly  15  months  ;
"The  results,"  M.  Tristan  states,  "of  1,200  experiments  were  written
down  at  the  time  of  their  performance."  Dr.  Mayo,  F.R.S.,  in  his
Truths  Contained  in  Poptdar  Superstitions,  p.  7  et  seq,  gives  a  sum-
mary of  Tristan's  work,  and  so  does  Chevreul.  I  have  not  myself  seen
Tristan's  book,  ljut  there  is  no  doubt  he  was  an  enthusiastic  believer  in
the  rod.  Unfortunately  his  experiments  are  of  little  value,  except  as
illustrations  of  the  effect  of  sub-conscious  suggestion  on  the  rod,  an  effect
due  to  the  dominance  of  a  theory  which  he  endeavoured  to  establish.
This  theory  was  that  electric  effluvia  were  given  off  by  various  sub-
stances ;  the  bodies  of  certain  persons  conducted  this  effluvia,  which
thereby  passing  down  their  arms  caused  a  turning  of  the  forked  divin-
ing rod — this  he  names  the  furcelle  (from  furcilla), — or  a  rotation  of
the  straight  rod,  which  he  calls  the  baciUoyire  (from  bacillum  and

1  In  spite  of  the  weight  of  scientific  authority  arrayed  against  Bleton,  a  few
savants  carefully  tested  the  youth,  and  had  the  courage  to  puhli.sh  a  .statement  of  the
successful  results  they  obtained.  I  will  refer  to  this  when  dealing  with  the  evidence
on  behalf  of  Bleton  later  on  ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  one  of  the  most
remarkable  "  dowsers"  of  whom  we  have  any  record.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divinvng  Rod.


23


gyrus).  It  is  a  pity  so  much  industry  was  wasted  from  the  want  of
an  elementary  knowledge  of  physics.

In  1849  a  M.  Mortillet  published  a  little  book  called  Histoire  de
I hydroscopie  et  de  la  baguette  divinatoire,  in  which  he  reviews  the
experiments  of  Thouvenel  and  others,  and  claims  that  he  himself  was
an  expert  with  the  baguette.  He  became,  in  fact,  a  professional
"  dowser,"  but  owns  that  he  was  not  always  successful,  and  ultimately
abandoned  this  calling,  studied  art,  and  was  appointed  sub-director  of
the  museum  at  St.  Germain.

In  1863  was  published  a  quarto  volume  written  by  the
Abbe  Carrie,  called  Hydroscopograjjhie  et  MetalloscoiJographie,  on
I'art  de  decouvrir  les  eazix  souterraines  et  les  gisements  metalliferes.
This  is  an  ambitious  attempt  to  convert  the  divining  rod  into  a
scientific  instrument  and  to  explain  its  motion  by  an  application  of
Ampere's  well-known  laws  of  electro-dynamics.  The  Abbe  was  him-
self an  expert  watei'-finder  or  hydroscopist,  and  the  introduction  to
his  book  contains  abundant  testimonies  to  his  success  in  finding
water  springs ;  but  his  explanation  of  the  motion  of  the  rod  is  hope-
lessly wrong,  as  was  the  very  similar  attempt  to  explain  it  given  by
Dr.  Thouvenel  a  century  ago ;  electricity  is  still  believed  to  be  the
cause  of  the  motion  of  the  rod  by  the  jnajority  of  dowsers  and  others
ignorant  of  physics  at  the  present  day.  The  Abbe  Paramelle  was
another  famous  Hydrosco-pist  in  1830,  and  so  was  the  Abbe  Jacquet
a  little  later  (see  Carrie's  book,  and  the  Journal  d  Agriculture  Pratique
for  April,  1845);  but  both  Paramelle  and  Jacquet  claimed  to  be  and
were  Aj/c^ro-p'eoZoytste  and  rejected  the  use  of  the  rod  ;  a  -Ith  and  revised
edition  of  Paramelle's  i'  Art  de  decouvrir  les  Sources  was  issued  in
1S96  (see  Appendix  B).

Several  French  encyclopsedias  refer  fully  to  this  subject.  Under
the  heading  Baguette,  is  a  lengthy  article  in  Larousse's  Dictionnaire
Universel  du  XIX'^  siecle.  Under  the  same  heading  in  the.  Dictionnaire
des  Merveilles  de  let  Nature  the  writer  gives  some  illustrations  of  the
successful  use  of  the  rod  he  himself  had  observed,  and  states  that  two
persons  who  tried  could  not  stop  the  rod  when  it  turned.  Under  the
word  Abaris  there  is  an  article,  chiefly  on  J.  Aymar  and  the  rod,  in
Bayle's  Dictionnaire ;  but  this  is  not  modern,  for  the  first  edition  of
this  dictionary  goes  back  to  1710.  All  these  are  useful  historical  essays,
but  throw  no  fresh  light  on  the  subject.  There  are  also  vai'ious  essays
on  the  divining  rod  in  French  periodical  litei-ature.  I  have  read  many
of  these  going  back  to  1740,  when  an  excellent,  though  brief,  discussion
of  the  subject,  with  some  striking  evidence,  appeared  in  a  little  work
called  Caprices  de  V Imagination.

Modern  German,  Spanish  and  Italian  literature  I  have  not  yet
been  able  to  examine.


24


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Part  III.

THE DIVINING  ROD  AS  USED  IN  THE  SEARCH  FOR
UNDERGROUND  WATER.

Let  us  now  examine  what  evidence  exists  on  behalf  of  dowsing ;
i.e.,  of  a  special  faculty,  peculiar  to  certain  individuals,  by  which  they
believe  they  are  enabled  to  locate  the  position  of  mineral  lodes  or
underground  springs.  Though  the  search  for  metallic  veins  by  dowsing
is  the  older,  yet  the  dowser  is  now  mainly  in  request  as  a  "  water-
finder,"  and  as  the  evidence  now  obtainable  is  much  more  abundant  for
this  latter  use  of  the  rod,  I  will  take  this  part  of  my  subject  first,  and,
so  far  as  possible,  subsequently  deal  with  the  use  of  the  rod  in  finding
metallic  ores.

An  attempt  to  arrive  at  some  general  latvs  which  will  furnish  an
adequate  explanation  of  the  varied  phenomena  presented  by  the
divining  rod  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  will  be  made  after  the
first  and  larger  portion  of  the  evidence  has  been  presented.  Mean-
while it  Avill  be  obvious  from  the  evidence  cited  in  Group  I.  that —

The  movement  of  the  rod  is  not  due  to  trickery,  nor  any  conscious
voluntary  effort,  hut  is  a  more  or  less  violent  automatic  action  that
occurs  under  certain  conditions  in  certain  individuals.

Those  who  have  ever  seen  a  successful  dowser  at  work  will  not
need  to  be  convinced  of  this  statement.  So  vigorous  is  the  motion
of  the  twig  that  one  of  its  limbs  is  frequently  twisted  off  in  the  effort
to  restrain  it,  and  yet  there  is  often  little  or  no  sign  of  muscular
exertion  on  the  dowser's  part.  Sometimes  a  violent  tremor  convulses
the  arms  and  even  the  whole  body  of  the  dowser  when  he  comes  over
an  underground  spi'ing,  or  what  he  believes  to  be  such.  A  striking
instance  of  this  is  to  be  seen  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Lawrence,  cited  in
Group  III.,  and  also  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Young,  senr.,  mentioned  later.
The  cause  of  this  muscular  storm,  and  the  physiological  aspect  of
dowsing  in  general,  are  worthy  of  attention,  but  are  matters  with
which  the  trained  physiologist  must  deal.  In  no  case  is  the  dowser
conscious  of  having  exerted  any  muscular  action  in  turning  the
rod,  and  thei-eupon  naturally  ascribes  its  motion  to  some  influence
extei'nal  to  himself.  It  is,  in  fact,  almost  impossible  to  imitate  its
characteristic  movement  by  any  voluntary  effort.  Hence  nothing  but
sheer  ignorance  leads  any  one  to  assert,  as  does  an  English  geologist  in
a  letter  now  before  me,  that  "  the  whole  thing  is  a  fraud,  and  the
motion  of  the  forked  twig  a  bit  of  clever  legerdemain."  ^  Nor  is
any  evidence,  however  conclusive  it  may  appear  to  others,  likely  to

1  There  are,  no  doubt,  counterfeit  dowsers,  as  there  are  counterfeit  sovereigns,
but  it  is  needless  to  waste  any  time  over  them.


XXXII.]


071  the  So-called  JDivining  Rod.


25


aJBFect  those  who  appi'oach  the  study  of  a  novel  subject  with  such  a
determined  parti-pris.

Group  I. — Amateur  Dowsers.

The  first  group  of  evidence  I  will  cite  is  obtained  from  those  who
cannot  be  suspected  of  making  use  of  the  "  rod  "  for  the  purpose  of
gain  or  trickery.  This  evidence  also  shows  that  success  has  attended
the  practical  use  of  the  rod  in  finding  water  springs,  but  in  several  of
the  cases  given  below,  data  are  wanting  to  show  how  far  the  success  in
these  cases  exceeds  that  due  to  chance.

To  arrive  at  some  estimate  whether  underground  water  misrht  or
might  not  be  found  by  chance  sinking  at  any  spot  in  the  places  named,
I  consulted  a  high  geological  authority, — my  colleague,  Professor  Cole,
F.G.S.,  etc. — who  kindly  went  into  this  question  for  several  of  these
localities,  chosen  at  random  ;  as  far  as  his  personal  knowledge  and  the
geological  maps  would  allow.  Professor  Cole  sent  me  his  report  before
seeing  any  of  the  letters  here  given,  so  that  it  was  an  entirely  indepen-
dent opinion,  based  on  geological  grounds.  In  some  of  the  cases,
Professor  Cole  reports  that  spi'ing  water  might  be  found  anywhere
and  near  the  surface  ;^  in  some,  only  by  sinking  to  a  considerable
depth ;  but  in  others.  Professor  Cole  reports  the  chances  of  finding  a
spring  (not  surface  water)  were  extremely  small  unless  a  very  deep  well
was  sunk.  As  I  do  not  rely  on  this  group  of  cases  for  any  conclusive
evidence  as  to  the  existence,  or  not,  of  a  dowsing  faculty,  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  discuss  the  question  of  chance  success  farther  at  this  point.

It  is  worthy  of  note  that,  in  many  of  these  cases,  wells  had  been  sunk
fruitlessly  before  the  advent  of  the  "  dowser,"  who  was  in  every  case
an  amateur,  that  is  one  who  had  no  professional  object  to  serve  in
making  the  experiment.  It  will  also  l^e  noticed  that  a  "  dowsing
faculty,"  if  such  there  be,  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  age,  sex  or
class  in  life.  Thus  in  case  No.  1,  the  dowser  was  a  clergyman;  in
No.  2,  a  judge  ;  in  No.  3,  a  local  manufacturer;  in  Nos.  4,  13,  14,  18,
and  19,  a  lady  ;  in  Nos.  5  and  9,  a  gardener  ;  in  No.  6,  a  deputy-
lieutenant  ;  in  No.  8,  a  respected  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends;
in  No.  12,  a  miller;  in  No.  10,  a  little  girl;  in  Nos.  11  and  1-3,
a  boy  ;  in  No.  20,  a  French  Count,  etc.

No.  1. — The  following  case  was  sent  by  Miss  Grantham  : —

100,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.,  February  1st,  1893.
My  father  (Judge  Grantham)  was  going  to  dig  a  well  on  one  of  his
farms. The  Rev.  J.  Blunt  was  tlien  residing  in  our  parish,  and  as  he  had

1  Such,  for  example,  as  No.  10,  though  even  here  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Vicar  of
Lugwardine  states  that  two  wells  were  sunk  before  the  dowser's  visit,  and  no  water
found.


26


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


previously  told  us  he  was  able  to  discover  the  presence  of  water  underground
by  means  of  a  twig,  we  asked  him  to  go  with  us  one  day  to  see  if  he  could
find  water.  Mr.  B.  began  by  cutting  a  twig  out  of  tlie  hedge,  of  hazel  or
blackthorn,  V  shaped,  each  side  about  8  inches  long,  then  taking  hold  of  one
end  in  each  hand  betvvreen  the  thumb  and  first  finger,  and  pointing  the  angle
to  the  ground,  he  walked  about  the  field  in  which  my  father  proposed  digging  a
well,  and  at  two  sjoots  the  point  of  the  twig  turned  right  uji  exactly  reversing
its  previous  position  ;  in  fact  so  strong  was  its  impulse  to  point  upwards,  that
we  found  that  unless  Mr.  B.  relaxed  his  hold  the  twig  broke  off  near  his  fingers.
We  put  small  sticks  in  these  spots,  and  then  took  a  boy  about  12  years
old  who  was  in  Mr.  B.'s  employment,  and  who  had  since  quite  a  child  shown
that  he  possessed  this  power,  over  the  same  ground  ;  he  had  not  seen  the
spots  at  which  Mr.  B.'s  twig  found  water,  neither  did  we  point  them  out  to
him,  but  at  these  places  his  twig  behaved  in  the  same  way  as  Mr.  B.'s.  My
father,  mother,  and  four  or  five  others  then  cut  similar  twigs  out  of  the
hedge,  but  with  none  of  us  would  they  divine  water.  My  father  then  took
Mr.  B.  over  some  ground  where  he  knew  of  the  existence  of  an  underground
stream  ;  he  did  not  tell  Mr.  B.  this,  but  directly  Mr.  B.  passed  over  the
places  the  twig  again  turned  upwards  as  it  had  done  before.  A  well  has
since  been  dug  at  one  of  the  spots  in  the  first  field  where  the  twig  indicated
water,  and  it  was  found  at  the  depth  of  15  feet.  Mr.  B.  and  the  boy  both
said  tliat  they  did  not  feel  any  abnoi'mal  influence  whatever  when  the  twig
divined  water.  ^^^^  ^  Grantham.

The  following  I  subsequently  received  from  the  Rev.  Jno.  R.
Blunt,  of  Bugbrooke,  Weedon,  Northamptonshire  :  —

JulySfh,  1893.

In  answer  to  your  inquiries,  I  fear  I  cannot  add  to  what  has  already  been
told  you.  I  have  often  tried  the  divining  rod,  to  interest  or  amuse  my
friends,  here  tlie  matter  has  ended  ;  no  trial  for  water  has  ever  been  made,
except  in  the  case  at  Barcombe  (Sussex),  when  Sir  W.  Grantliam  sunk  a
well  at  the  spot  indicated  by  the  rod,  and  found  a  good  supply  of  water  near
the  surface  ;  this  was  of  interest  to  me,  as  wells  there  are  often  siuik  at  great
depth.  I  liave  found  the  rod  move  in  scores  of  places,  but  have  not  seen  it
tested  before.  I  mean,  so  far  as  my  own  experiments  go.  I  know  of  several
places  where  water  has  been  found  in  this  county  after  the  rod  has  been
used  by  Mr.  MuUins.

As  to  whether  it  moves,  as  you  considei',  owing  to  "some  unconscious
muscular  action,"  I  know  not.  Why  it  should  move  in  my  Iiands  and  not
in  the  hands  of  every  one  who  tries  it,  I  know  not.

I  liave  never  tried  it  near  to  any  pool  or  river,  nor  by  tlie  sea.  I  have
only  tried  it  for  underground  water.

I  was  using  the  rod  one  evening  for  the  amusement  ot  some  young  men,
in  a  garden  last  summer,  but  could  not  get  it  to  move  (to  their  great
glee  !),  until  at  last  close  to  the  boundary  wall  it  was  agitated  ;  of  course  they
declared  I  moved  it,  etc.,  etc.,  but  a  few  days  after  I  was  at  a  friend's  house
whose  garden  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall,  and  there,  to  my  delight,  was
a  well ! I  stopped  short  and  said,  "  Is  this  well  of  any  use  ?  " My  friend  at


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


27


once  said,  "It  is  a  .splendid  well  of  water  and  never  fails."  ...  I
have  found  the  rod  work  equally  well  when  wearing  thick  overshoes  of
rubber.

No.  2.  — His  Honour  Judge  Spink,  of  British  Columbia,  writes  as
follows  to  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  :—

Vernon,  Okanagan,  B.C.,  February  27th,  1893.

I  see  that  your  Society  take  some  interest  in  the  divining  rod. We  made

some  careful  tests  on  this  matter  last  year.  The  rod  works  in  my  hands.  I

was  rather  sceptical,  and  thought  that  my  own  mind  might  work  in  some

unknown  manner  on  the  rod  and  cause  it  to  turn  down  where  T  fancied  there

ought  to  be  water. I  was  blindfolded  and  led  about  with  the  wand,  for  about

an  hour  at  least,  until  I  could  not  hc>ld  the  wand  ujiright  without  great  pain.

Bach  time  the  wand  dipped,  a  peg  was  driven  into  the  ground  to  mark  the

spot. I  was  walked  in  all  directions,  and  passed  over  the  same  ground

again  and  again,  but  in  no  instance  did  the  rod  fail  to  dip  when  it  came

to  a  peg.  I  have  sunk  two  wells  on  the  credit  of  the  wand,  and  in  both

instances  have  found  water,  in  both  these  instances  contrary  to  the  advice

of  the  well-sinking  experts. The  power  appears  to  increase  rapidly  with

use. When  experimenting  with  the  rod  over  a  water  hose,  I  had  the  water

turned  on  and  off  several  times,  and  could  distinctly  feel  the  jar  that  one

hears  in  such  cases.  ^-,7-  „

Wm.  Wari)  fePINK.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Judge  Spink  writes  : —

Vernon,  Okanagan,  T^.C,  November  4//i,  1893.
The  divining  rod  has  succeeded  in  finding  me  water  for  the  third  time.
First  well,  at  the  foot  of  a  rock  bluff,  20  feet.  Second  well,  half  way  down  a
steep  slope,  about  8  feet  fall  in  40  feet,  at  25  feet  from  surface.  Third  well,
at  the  summit  of  slope,  100  feet  at  least  above  second  well,  at  85  feet  from
surface.  These  experiments  are  not  very  convincing,  as  water  seems  to  be
easily  found  round  here.  One  peculiar  fact,  however,  may  interest  you.  I
selected  the  three  spots  for  the  wells  before  the  foundations  were  dug  for  my
house.  Around  the  foundations  the  wand  would  not  act.  After  the  wells
were  begun,  and  the  foundations  dry,  Mr.  Attwoor,  who  has  had  a  great
mining  experience,  went  over  the  ground  with  me.  He  told  me  that  the
formation  of  the  ground  would  lead  him  to  expect  water  where  the  wells
were  being  dug,  but  that  it  would  be  useless  to  dig  for  water  where  the
foundations  were,  as  the  ground  there  was  drift.  The  foundations  are  100
feet  from  well  No.  2,  and  immediately,  or  only  a  few  feet  from  being  imme-
diately between  wells  2  and  3.

No.  3. — The  following  is  from  the  Westiviinster  Gazette,  of  May  5th,
1894

A  remarkable  instance  of  the  successful  use  of  the  hazel  twig,
generally  termed  the  "divining  rod,"  has  just  occurred  at  Cressing,  near
Braintree,  Essex.  Many  fruitless  attempts  have  been  made  in  the  parish
to  find  water,  the  boring  in  several  instances  extending  to  great  depths.
Mr. E.  Sach, of  Jeffrey's farm, wanted a well provided for  some


28


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


cottages,  they  being  without  a  water  supply,  and  he  invited  Mr.  H.  W.
Golding,  of  the  firm  of  Messrs.  Asliley,  Adkins  and  Co.,  mat  manufac-
turers. Becking,  who  has  acquired  some  skill  with  the  "rod,"  to  look
over  the  place.  He  did  so,  and  near  the  cottages  the  twig  turned  uja,  and
although  every  effort  was  made  to  keep  it  down  it  could  not  be  done.
Mr.  Golding  felt  certain  that  water  could  be  found  there,  and  men  were
at  once  set  to  work  boring,  with  the  result  that  an  abundant  supply  of
water  was  found  22  feet  below  the  surface.

In  replies  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Golding  writes  :  —

Booking,  Essex,  September  Wtli,  1896.

I  can  fully  confirm  the  Westminder  Gazette  report  you  sent  me,  in
reference  to  finding  water  at  Cressing  by  the  divining  rod.  I  may  add  that
until  this  experiment  was  made,  and  the  well  sunk,  it  was  the  general
opinion  of  those  who  knew  the  locality,  that  no  water  was  obtainable.

H.  W.  Golding.

In  a  later  letter  Mr.  Golding  says  :  —

September  2\st.

In  answer  to  your  questions,  I  had  tested  the  rod  with  my  eyes  blind-
folded, and  also  with  my  arms  held  by  four  men,  two  holding  each  hand
and  arms,  leaving  only  freedom  for  the  rod  to  move.  Being  thus  held  as
tightly  as  possible,  the  rod  w(juld  still  go  round,  and  if  prevented  it  would
break  with  the  force.  ^  Golding.

Mr  Golding  has  also  sent  me  particulars  of  several  other  cases, where
he  has  been  enabled  to  give  his  neighbours  an  abundant  supply  of  water
for  which  they  had  previously  searched  in  vain.  I  will  only  cite  one
case  of  special  interest.

No.  3a. — The  following  is  from  the  Daily  News  of  May  22nd,
1894  :  —

The  divining  rod  has  again  been  used  in  Essex  with  success,  this
time  on  the  estate  of  General  Thompson  of  Wethersfield-place,near  Braintree.
Some  yeai-s  ago  General  Thompson  had  a  field  surveyed  by  an  eminent
engineer  wIk),  after  testing  the  ground  with  boring  ap[>aratus,  expressed  an
opinion  that  no  water  was  obtainable  there.  Hearing,  however,  of  the  suc-
cess of  the  divining  rod  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  the  General  in-
vited Mr.  H.  W.  Golding,  of  Booking,  to  walk  over  the  field,  with  the  result
that  at  two  places  which  Mr.  Golding  marked  water  was  found  at  less  than  10
feet  from  the  surface.

The  Daily  Telegrai^h  of  the  same  date,  the  Essex  Herald,  and  other
newspapers  also  report  this  case.  I  wrote  to  General  Thompson  for
particulars,  but  learnt  with  regret  that  he  had  died  since  the  above
experiments  were  made.  His  widow  informs  me  that  tlie  newspaper
report  is  correct  and  that  "  Mr.  Golding,  who  was  quite  an  amateur,
indicated  by  the  rod  two  places  where  springs  of  water  would  be  found
on  the  estate,  and  on  digging  at  these  places  water  was  found."  I  have


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  29


had  an  interview  with  Mr.  J.  Wycliffe  Thompson  (son  of  General
Thompson,)  who  was  present  during  the  search  for  water  at  Wethers-
tield-place,  and  who  gives  me  the  interesting  information  that  his
father  made  the  experiment  on  purpose  to  test  in  a  systematic  manner
the  value  or  otherwise  of  the  indications  afforded  by  the  divining  rod.
Accordingly,  in  the  first  instance  a  boring  was  made  to  find  water  by
advice  without  the  use  of  the  rod.  Mr.  Thompson  tells  me  the  boring
was  made  to  a  considerable  depth,  but  he  does  not  know  the  exact
depth.  No  signs  of  water  were  found.  Then  Mr.  Gokling  was  in-
vited over,  and,  cutting  a  forked  twig,  traversed  the  ground.
Presently  the  twig  turned  vigorously  and,  following  its  indications,  he
professed  to  trace  an  underground  spring  running  not  far  from  the
expei'imental  boring  to  a  point  some  50  yards  away.  The  course
indicated  was  staked  out,  and,  after  Mr.  Golding  left,  a  well  was  sunk
in  two  places,  chosen  at  random  on  the  course  so  marked.  The  result
was  that  water  was  found  in  both  places  at  a  depth  of  some  10  feet.
Mr.  Thompson  is  certain  the  first  boring  was  "  far  deeper  than  this,"
and  he  tells  me  no  doubt  whatever  was  left  in  the  mind  of  General
Thompson  and  others  present  of  the  reality  and  practical  value  of  some
peculiar  faculty  for  discovering  underground  water  afforded  by  the
movement  of  the  rod.

K^o.  4. — In  the  next  case,  which  reaches  me  through  Mr.  Myers,  a
lady,  Miss  Douglas  P.,  found  to  her  surprise  the  rod  moved  in  as
marked  a  manner  in  her  hands  as  when  it  was  used  by  a  professional
diviner.  A  series  of  experiments  were  made  at  a  country  house,  both
out  of  doors  and  indoors.  Amongst  those  who  witnessed  the  experi-
ments indoors  were  Mr.  Scott  Gatty  and  Miss  Egerton.  The  former
writes  : —

71,  Warwick  road.  Earl's  Court,  S.W.,  March  7th,  1893.

The  great  difficulty  we  found  was  to  find  a  place  where  the  rod
would  not  work  ;  it  was  forever  turning  round.  At  last  two  places  were
found,  one  in  front  of  the  fireplace  in  the  entrance  liall,  and  another  about
halfway  up  the  stairs.  While  Miss  D.  P.  went  off  with  the  rest  of  the  party
down  some  of  the  passages  leading  out  of  the  hall,  I  secreted  some  sovereigns
under  the  rug  in  front  of  the  fireplace,  and  then  joined  the  rest  of  the  party.
By  degrees  we  worked  our  way  back  into  the  hall,  and  I  asked  Miss  P.  to
test  the  hearth  again,  so  as  to  make  sure  that  the  rod  would  not  work  there,
when — lo  and  behold— it  went  round  vigorously,  and  I  then  disclosed  my
hidden  treasure. T\lien  that  was  removed,  the  rod  refused  to  work  again.

I  think  there  was  nothing  else  very  remarkable  or  worthy  of  note.  The
cause  of  the  rod  working  so  much  in  the  house  is  that  almost  a  river  runs
under  it.  .  .  .  In  the  drawing-room  we  hid  money  in  the  seats  of
chairs,  and  made  Miss  P.  sit  upon  them,  but  if  I  remember  rightly,  she
was  not  always  successful.

Scott  Gattt.


30  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

The  foregoing  letter  was  sent  to  Miss  Egerton,  who  replies  : —

Whitwell  Park,  York,  March  mh,  1893.

Unfortunately  the  descriptions  of  the  experiments  made  in  the  evening
do  not  coincide  with  my  impression  of  the  same,  which  is  that  they  were
uniformly  successful.  1  being  one  of  the  sceptical  ones  in  the  party  (or  shall
we  ratlier  use  tlie  word  agnostic '?)  held  one  side  of  tlie  forked  stick,  whilst
Miss  D.  P.  held  the  other,  and  as  we  moved  over  the  chairs  where  the
sovereigns  were  hidden,  the  effect  was  mo.st  marked,  tlie  motion  coming
evidently  from  the  stick  and  not  from  Miss  D.  P.'s  pressure.  I  tried  to  stop
it,  and  it  at  once  broke  off  at  the  fork.  As  Mr.  Scott  Gatty  says,  we  were
not  thinking  at  the  time  of  making  any  scientific  investigations  ;  we  only
wished  to  prove  tlie  fact  that  the  action  of  the  stick  was  not  a  fraud  on  the
part  of  Miss  D.  P.  In  this  we  were  perfectly  successful— it  invariably
turned  over  the  chairs  where  the  sovereigns  were  hidden,  and  she  most
certainly  did  nut  know  where  they  were.  -^^^^  Egerton.

In  this  case  the  involuntary  movement  of  the  rod  over  the  hidden
coins  was  possibly  due  to  unconscious  indications  given  by  Mr.  Scott
Gatty,  or  others  present,  who  knew  where  the  coins  had  been  liidden.i

No.  5. — I  am  indebted  to  Colonel  Waring,  D.L.,  (M.P.  for  North
Down)  fi>r  the  following.  Colonel  Waring's  trial  of  the  professional
diviner  MuUins  is  given  on  a  subsequent  page.

Waringstown,  co.  Down,  Juhj  llUi,  1893.

I  have  sunk  a  well  50  ft.  deep  on  a  spot  indicated  by  my  own  gardener,
who  turned  out  to  be  possessed  (jf  the  power  of  working  the  rod,  and  found
water,  though  it  did  not  come  at  once  ;  in  fact  the  well  was  abandoned  as  a
failure  and  covered  over  with  an  old  slipa,  {i.e.,  a  rough  Irish  sledge),  and
some  months  afterwards  was  discovered  to  be  full  within  a  few  feet  of  the

Thos.  Waring.

In  answer  to  eiKjuiries  as  to  the  exact  site,  etc.,  Colonel  Waring
writes  : —

Waringstown,  September  2,1st,  1896.

My  gardener  tried  his  hand  at  a  farm  I  have  on  the  shore  of  Lough
Neagh  called  Armadroughall  (the  only  point  at  which  the  County  Down
touches  the  lake).  We  sunk  a  coujDle  of  years  ago  where  he  fixed  and  at  50
feet  had  got  no  water  and  gave  up,  harvest  operations  taking  us  off.  We
covered  the  well,  thought  no  more  of  it  till  about  Christmas  when  we  found
it  nearly  full  and  it  has  had  a  condcod  supply  ever  since.

It  is  impossible  to  disbelieve  the  fact  that  at  certain  places  and  under
certain  circumstances  the  hazel  fork  turns  vigorously.

I  tried  our  gardener  with  finding  g(jld  one  day  and  he  quite  failed  to
detect  a  sovereign  hid  in  the  gravel  of  the  walk,  but  a  friend  who  was  by
said  "My  spectacles  are  pure  gold,  let  us  see  what  they  will  do, "  and  he  held


^Assuming  thought-transference  as  a  rera  causa,  the  important  part  it  probably
plays  in  this  class  of  experiment  will  be  discussed  later  on.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


31


them  under  the  rod,  which  at  once  twisted  violently.  The  gardener  is
entirely  incapable  of  deception  and  I  am  unable  to  form  any  theory  on  the
subject.  If  the  of)erator  is  placed  on  a  platform  isolated  by  glass,  say  four
inverted  tumblers,  he  is  powerless. ^  Thos  W\finc

No.  6. — -Through  the  kindness  of  one  of  our  membei's,  the  Hon.
Kathleen  Ward,  Colonel  Aldworth,  D.L.,  writes  to  me  as  follows:  —

Newmarket,  Co.  Cork,  June  19th,  1896.
It  is  quite  true  that  I  have  the  power  of  using  the  divining  rod.  I  have
done  so  for  some  years,  but  have  not  as  yet  opened  any  well  ;  but  as  I  want
to  conduct  water  into  my  garden,  I  hope  to  be  able  to  do  so  in  a  few  months'
time  from  a  source  a  couple  of  fields  beyond  it.  I  can  hardly  quote  any  facts
to  you  at  present  that  would  be  interesting,  more  than  to  say  I  found  a
source  of  water  in  a  friend's  grounds  not  many  miles  from  this.  He  after-
wards emploj'ed  a  man  who  is  a  professional  water  finder,  and  he  found  the
water  in  the  same  place,  and  gave  the  depth  below  the  surface  as  26  feet,
which  I  was  not  able  to  do,  not  having  practised  gauging  the  depth  below
the  surface,  but  I  understand  this  is  merely  a  matter  of  practice,  and
depends  on  the  force  with  which  the  rod  rises  in  the  Iiands.

R.  W.  Aldwokth.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Colonel  Aldworth  writes  : —

Newmarket,  Co.  Cork,  July  20th,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  June  21st,  I  beg  to  say  I  have  tried  the

divining  rod  both  with  my  eyes  shut  and  open  and  it  acts  just  the  same  in

both  cases. I  know  of  a  young  fellow  who  possesses  the  power  and  who  had

a  farm  but  a  few  miles  from  this.  He  was  anxious  to  find  water  on  his  ground

and  he,  by  means  of  the  rod,  came  upon  water,  digged  for  it  and  found  it

about  7  feet  down,  a  fine  spring. I  have  often  tried  the  rod  with  my  eyes

shut,  and  the  young  man  got  his  sister  to  bind  his  eyes  in  the  case  I  mention

and  the  rod  mdicated  it  in  the  same  spot  where  he  dug  for  it. I  cannot  in

any  way  account  for  action  of  the  rod  ;  it  certainly  acts  with  some  people

and  not  with  others.  t,  n-  i

K.  \\ .  Aldworth.

Numerous  cases  from  Somersetshire  are  given  in  the  course  of  this
paper ;  here  are  two  or  three. The  following  is  an  instructive  case.

No.  7. — My  friend  Mr.  F.  J.  Clark,  F.L.S.,  writes  to  me  as  follows : — -
Netherleigh,  Street,  Somerset,  September,  1896.

Some  twenty  years  ago  an  opportunity  presented  itself  to  me  of  testing
the  value  of  the  indications  given  by  the  divining  rod.  The  then  manager  of
our  local  gas  works,  Mr.  Stears,  found  he  had  the  power  of  using  the  rod-;
others  in  our  neighbourliood  also  tried,  and  an  old  workman  I  knew  well,

1  I  shall  return  to  this  idea  later. See  also  foot-note  to  No.  21.

2  Mr.  Stears  is  now  living  in  Yorkshire,  and  has  recently  devoted  himself
entirely  to  '5 dowsing"  (see  Group  VII.).— W.F.B.


82


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Simon  Seymour  by  name,  was  equally  successful.  I  got  Mr.  Stears  to  go
over  my  ground,  and  the  rod  indicated  water  at  the  spot  A  on  the  rough


N

•4-


:C  Lawn


Stables.  Wall.  Path.

< —  About  280  ft.

Fig.  1.


O  w»


Path.


plan  (Fig.  1).  Some  little  time  after  I  tried  Seymour,  who  knew  nothing
of  Mr.  Stears'  experiment.  Seymour  found  the  rod  indicated  water  at  B.
Curiously  enough  a  neighbour  and  member  of  our  body  (Society  of  Friends),
Walter  Wyburn,  a  poor-law  guardian,  found  he  also  could  use  the  rod.  I
invited  Wyburn  to  my  place,  and  asked  him  to  try  where  he  could  find
water.  He  did  so,  and  the  rod  indicated  water  at  C  ;  he  had  no  knowledge
of  what  the  others  had  done.  Now  it  happens  that  a  well  liad  been  sunk  for
our  factory  at  W^,  and  a  good  supply  of  water  obtained  at  about  40  feet  depth.
Another  well,  in  the  cellar  of  my  house,  at  W^,  gave  us  a  supply  of  water
at  about  35  feet,  and  a  third  well  at  W^,  on  higher  ground,  and  about  280
feet  distance,  supplied  the  stable  yard  ;  this  well  was  only  about  27  feet
deep.  We  had  also  since  sunk  a  well  at  W*,  some  60  feet  North  (.)f  W^,  but
had  got  little  or  no  water  from  it  even  at  a  depth  of  50  feet.  We  tunnelled
about  20  feet  in  the  direction  of  W^,  and  found  rather  more  water  coming
in.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  a  fault  or  fissure  running  East  and  West
existed  in  the  strata  of  the  Blue  Lias,  and  along  this  fissure  water  could
be  obtained.  This  conclusion  is  rendered  very  probable  from  the  fact  that,
if  we  pump  a  large  supply  of  water  from  the  factory  Avell,  W^,  it  completely
drains  W-,  and  perceiDtibly  aff"ects  W^.  Now  it  was  just  when  the  three
dowsers  crossed  this  line  the  rods  indicated  water  beneath.  Their  trials,  as
I  have  said,  were  made  independently,  and  they  had  no  knowledge  of  the
position,  or  (so  far  as  I  know)  the  existence  of  the  wells  on  my  place.  I
may  also  mention  that  the  late  rector  of  the  parish  found  he  too  was  an
expert  with  the  "  rod,"  and  on  trying  my  grounds  with  it  he  also  hit  upon  </te
same  line  of  underground  water,  but  I  am  not  sure  whether  he  knew  of  the
other  trials  I  have  related.  -p j  Qj^^j^j^

No.  8. — Mr.  F.  J.  Clai-k  also  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Netherleigh,  Street,  Somerset,  Septeynhev,  1896.
A  few  years  ago  I  was  appointed  along  with  Walter  Wyljurn  and  the  late
A.  R.  Grace,  of  Bristol,  a  sub-committee  of  a  Charitable  Trust  Committee


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


33


belonging  to  our  religious  body  [the  Society  of  Friends].  One  object  of  this
committee  was  to  get  water  for  a  farmhouse  belonging  to  the  Trust  at
Chelbro',  in  Dorset,  about  25  miles  south-west  of  Yeovil.  We  spent  several
days  in  a  fruitless  search  for  water,  or  for  any  likely  place  to  sink  a  well.
However,  we  made  an  attempt  in  the  most  probable  spot,  according  to  our
local  geological  knowledge,  and  sunk  a  well  20  feet.  Alas  !  no  water  was
reached.  At  length  Walter  Wyburn  suggested  trying  the  divining  rod,  as  he
found  to  his  surprise  he  could  use  it  with  some  success.  We  agreed  ;  he  had
cut  a  forked  twig  and  tried  over  all  the  gi-ound.  After  a  good  deal  of  perambu-
lation the  rod  indicated  a  strong  spring  in  a  neighbouring  wood.  Accordingly
we  had  a  well  dug  ab  this  spot,  and  to  our  delight  found  a  capital  sjaring  ;
pipes  were  put  down,  and  a  constant  supply  for  the  house  has  been  given

^^^^  Francis  J.  Clakk.


No.  9. — Another  case  [from  Somersetshire]  is  given  in  the  Western
GazHle  of  February  10th,  1893.  Evercreech  is  at  the  foot  of  the
Mendips.

A  well  has  recently  been  sunk  on  the  premises  of  Messrs.  W.  Rules  and
Son,  of  Evercreech  Junction,  on  the  site  of  the  proposed  milk  factory.  Mr.
Henry  Smart,  head  gardener  at  Pennard  House,  was  successful  with  the
divining  twig  (or  rod),  and  a  well  was  sunk  to  a  depth  of  60  feet,  when  a
spring  was  found  which  yielded  no  less  than  15,000  gallons  of  water  in  ten
hours.  Water  came  at  such  a  rate  that  a  powerful  pump  had  to  be  erected
temporarily  by  Messrs.  Hill  and  Son,  of  Briiton,  and  was  kept  working  day
and  night  in  order  to  keep  the  water  down  for  the  purpose  of  walling  [the
well].  At  the  present  time  there  is  50  feet  of  water  in  the  well,  the  supply
increasing  daily.

I  wrote  to  Messrs.  Roles  to  know  if  a  well  had  been  sunk  previ-
ously, and  if  the  above  statement  was  correct.  They  reply  that  the
account  is  quite  correct,  and  add,  "We  had  previously  sunk  a  well
without  the  use  of  the  rod,  to  nearly  the  same  depth,  but  it  was
unsuccessful.  Six  yards  from  this  useless  well  the  diviner  found
the  spring  which  now  yields  enough  to  supply  a  small  village  if
required."

No.  10. — The  next  case,  that  of  Miss  "Wood,  is  quoted  from  a  letter
addressed  to  the  Ahinydon  Herald  by  our  fellow- worker,  Mr.  Vaughan
Jenkins  : —

Some  time  ago  there  appeared  in  a  contemporary  a  short  paragraph,
which  only  recently  came  under  my  notice,  giving  the  information  that
"  Miss  Wood,  a  daughter  of  Mr.  George  Wood,  of  the  Vallets,  and  agent  for
the  Whitfield  estates,  near  Hereford,  had  again  been  successful  in  findaig
water  at  Lugwardine  by  means  of  the  (so-called)  divining  rod."  Being
desirous  of  obtaining  full  and  authentic  particulars  of  this  young  lady's
experimental  operations,  I  addressed  several  specific  enquiries,  with  special
reference  as  to  how  and  when  Miss  Wood  discovered  that  she  possessed  the

D


34


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


dowsing,  or  "so-called  divining"  faculty,  to  her  father,  who  very  kindly  sent
me  the  following  interesting  details  : —

"  Whitfield  Estate  Office,  February  4th,  1890.

"  In  rejjly  to  your  letter  of  the  loth  ult.,  I  beg  to  say  that  in  January
last  (1889)  Mrs.  Greathed  of  Whitfield,  who  is  sister  of  the  late  owner  of
the  estate — C.  M.  B.  Olive,  Esq., — wrote  to  Mullins,  the  well-known  water-
finder  by  the  use  of  the  divining  rod,  asking  him  to  come  to  Whitfield  for
the  purpose  of  making  some  trials  there.  Mrs.  Greathed  requested  me  to
conduct  Mullins  to  various  elevated  places  on  the  estate,  which  I  did  in
company  with  several  persons,  including  Mrs.  Greathed  herself,  Mr.  Percy
Olive,  the  future  owner  of  the  estate,  etc.  I  took  Mullins  to  several  places
where  I  knew  there  was  water  running  through  the  earth,  but  not  the
slightest  trace  of  it  on  the  surface.  I  did  not  tell  him  that  I  knew  there  was
water  anywhere.  I  merely  took  him  to  the  gates  of  tlie  different  fields  and
asked  him  to  try  in  each  case.  He  quickly  spotted  each  place  to  a  great
nicety,  without  the  slightest  hesitation.

"  The  next  thing  was  for  each  of  the  company  to  try  with  the  rod,  but  not
one  of  us  had  the  'faculty'  excepting  my  little  daughter  May.  Subsequently
tlie  rod  indicated  water  in  several  places,  both  in  the  hands  of  May  and
Mullins — May  finding  it  first  sometimes  and  at  other  times  Mullins.

"  I  suggested  that  we  should  not  make  a  trial  by  sinking  wells  until  the
autumn,  when  springs  here  are  generally  very  low.  Well,  we  made  a  trial
in  November  last  at  a  spot  where  Mullins  said  the  water  would  possibly
be  found  at  a  depth  of  40  or  50  feet. We  came  on  water  at  40  feet.

I  may  mention  that  previous  to  sinking  this  well  the  rod  in  my
daughter's  hand  indicated  the  presence  of  an  underground  spring  there.
May  is  now  thirteen  years  of  age.  She  has  proved  successful  in
numerous  cases  ;  four  wells  have  been  sunk  where  she  said  there  was
water,  and  each  one  was  a  success,  viz.,  one  at  Ledliury,  one  at  Lugwardine,
and  two  at  Whitfield.  Hitherto,  all  her  predictii,)ns  have  proved  invariably
true.  Two  vrells  liad  been  unsuccessfully  sunk  at  Lugwardine  previous  to
my  daughter's  visit  there,  the  deepest  of  which  was  16  feet.  The  place  where
May indicated  water  is  distant  42  feet  from  this  abandoned  well,  and  at

II  feet  deep  a  superabundance  of  water  was  found,  and  pipes  are  now  laid  to
■convey  the  water  to  the  Vicarage,  which  is,  I  believe,  several  hundred  yards
away.  As  regards  her  modus  operandi,  .she  holds  the  forked  hazel  twig  down-
wards when  iir  search  of  water,  and  when  she  comes  on  a  spring  the  twig
quivers  and  rises  upwards,  sometimes  from  her  body  and  sometimes  towards
it,  until  it  comes  to  a  perpendicular  position.  She  practises  the  rod  as  you
suppose,  viz.,  as  an  amateur  only,  being  only  too  happy  to  use  her  powers
f(ir  the  benefit  of  friends  and  neighbours."  q  Wooi)

In  confirmation  of  the  foregoing  statements,  the  following  letters  may  be
■quoted  :  The  Rev.  Francis  Curtis,  rector  of  Coddington,  near  Ledbury,
writes: — "  The  spring  has  been  found  at  the  Stone-house  57ft.  below  the
surface,  exactly  at  the  spot  indicated  by  Miss  Wood.  She  said  she  thought
the  depth  would  be  as  much  as  .50ft.  So  the  event  proves  her  judgment  to
have  been  very  correct.  We  are  very  glad  that  we  availed  ourselves  of  her
•gifts." The  Rev.  A.  0.  Lee,  of  Lugwardine  Vicarage,  Hereford,  writes  :


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


35


"The  well  sinker  came  to  me  an  hour  ago  with  the  welcome  intelligence  that
he  had  come  upon  a  strong  spring  of  water,  at  the  depth  of  lift. ,  on  the  spot
Miss  Wood  '  found '  on  Monday,  and  which,  you  will  remember,  I  marked
with  two  sticks,  and  which  was  thought  to  have  the  strongest  indications.
Previous  to  Miss  Wood's  visit  two  wells  had  been  sunk,  but  no  water  found."

In  my  letter  of  thanks  to  Mr.  Wood  I  expressed  a  wish  to  be  informed  of
the  results  of  any  future  experiments  that  his  daughter  may  make,  and  on
the  23rd  February,  1890,  I  received  from  him  the  following  communication  :
— "  I  have  had  occasion  to  sink  a  well  for  the  use  of  four  cottages  and  a
public-house.  I  took  my  daughter,  May,  to  the  place,  and  she  spotted  a
place  where  she  said  there  was  water.  I  had  it  tried,  and  we  found  water  at  6ft.
deep.  I  instructed  the  men  to  sink  6ft.  further  down,  for  the  purpose  of
holding  a  supply,  and  the  water  rose  6ft.  deep  in  the  well  in  one  night."

I  wrote  to  Ml'.  Wood,  sending  him  the  above  report  and  asking  him
to  correct  any  inaccuracies,  and  also  enquiring  whether  his  daughter
had  had  any  further  experiences  with  the  "I'od." In  reply  he  writes:  —

Whitfield  Estate  Oflice,  Hereford,  May  9th,  1896.
The  report  enclosed  is  quite  accurate. My  daughter  May  has  been
requested  to  go  to  very  many  jjlaces  to  find  water  since  the  report  you  send
was  written,  and  has  always  been  successful. I  have  often  been  glad  of  her
services  myself.  _  ^Vood.

In  answer  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Percy  Clive  wa'ites  as  follows  : —

Tower  of  London,  April  24f7i,  1897.

I  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  the  statement  made  above  by  Mr.  G.Wood,
who  is  my  estate  agent  at  Whitfield.  I  saw  Mullins  "find  "  water  in  several
places,  where  his  findings  were  afterwards  proved  to  be  correct.  I,  as  well
as  others,  tried  to  find  water  in  the  same  way,  but  had  not  the  power.  But
when  Mullins  held  my  wrists,  and  I  held  the  tw'ig  over  running  water,  it
turned  round  in  my  hands  with  sucli  force  that  when  I  held  it  tight  it
broke.  Miss  May  Wood  has  been  very  successful  in  finding  water ;  and
seems  also  able  to  make  a  pretty  accurate  guess  at  the  depth  at  which  it  will

^®  fo^n^-  Percy  A.  Clive.

No.  11. — A  still  more  youthful  diviner  was  found  by  Mr.  Vaughan
Jenkins  in  Cornwall,  and  is  referred  to  in  Mr.  Pease's  report.  The
case  is  given  at  length  by  Mr.  A'''.  Jenkins  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  II.,  p.  106.  Since  then  Mr.  V.  Jenkins  has  sent  me  voluminous
additional  particulars,  which  I  have  incorporated  in  the  following
summary  of  the  case  : —

Mr.  V.  Jenkins  havmg  purchased  some  land  for  building  purposes  in
Christchurch-road,  iNewport,  Monmouth,  the  absence  of  a  water  supply
necessitated  his  sinking  a  well.  Guided  by  the  best  advice,  a  site  was
carefully  chosen  and  a  well  commenced.  When  the  well-sinkers  had  reached
51  feet,  and  no  water  found,  it  was  decided  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,
a  hard,  compact  marl,  it  would  be  useless  to  proceed  further.  A  con-
sultation of  local  experts  was  held,  and  the  conclusion  arrived  at  that  there


36


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


was  no  chance  of  obtaining  water  in  that  neighbourhood.  Thereupon  the
foreman  of  the  masons  (a  Coruishman)  suggested  using  the  divining
rod.  He  said  it  was  in  common  and  successful  use  for  the  purpose  of
finding  water  in  his  county,  and  liis  own  son,  eleven  years  old,  had  tlie
power  of  using  the  rod  in  a  remarkable  degree.  Mr.  Jenkins,  though  at
that  time  very  incredulous,  consented.  The  lad  was  sent  for,  and  with  a
hazel  rod  he  crossed  and  re-crossed  the  ground  several  times.  At  one
spot  the  rod  began  to  revolve,  and  continued  to  do  so  with  such  force
that  the  lad  was  obliged  to  let  it  go,  when  the  rod  tlew  to  some  distance.
Whereupon  the  father  of  the  lad,  George  Lockyer,  said,  "  I  will  stake  my
life  we  shall  find  a  good  spring  of  water  under  this  spot.  I  will  undertake
to  sink  the  shaft  myself,  and  no  water,  no  pay."  Accordingly,  a  well  was
begun  the  next  day  on  the  spot  indicated  by  the  "rod."  At  the  depth  of
48  feet,  so  strong  a  spring  was  struck  that  the  men  employed  had  to  beat  a
hasty  retreat,  the  water  rising  to  a  depth  of  10  feet  in  the  well,  and
subsequently  to  15  feet,  and  remains  at  that  depth  at  the  present  time,
constantly  yielding  an  abundant  supply.  The  lad  neither  asked  nor
expected  any  payment.  The  father  stated  that  he  himself  also  had  the
power  of  using  the  "rod"  when  he  was  a  boy,  but  he  lo.st  it  when
about  16  years  old.

The  discovery  of  this  water  supply  led  to  the  old  site  for  the  house  being
abandoned,  and  a  new  site  fixed  on  close  to  the  abundant  supply  of  pure
spring  water  that  was  obtained.  The  relative  position  of  the  two  wells,
marked  0  0,  is  shown  in  the  annexed  plan.  Fig.  2,  drawn  to  scale. The  old


I  S  C  A T  V,  u  i;  A  C  E

a

Bizn

o
w

0 40  120 200  ft.

t I I I I  I

Scale


Fro.  2.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  37


site  is  marked  S',  and  the  abandoned  well  shaft  W,  the  new  site  is  S",  and
the  new  well  W"  adjoins  it.  The  plot  A  belongs  to  Mr.  V.  Jenkins.  The
owner  of  the  adjacent  plot  B,  which  slopes  somewhat  .steeply  to  the  S.W.,
shortly  after  began  to  build  two  villas  at  B,  and  to  sink  the  well  W  adjoining.
He  declined,  indeed  ridiculed,  the  use  of  the  divining  rod,  and  informed  Mr.
Jenkins  that  he  was  confident  of  getting  water  at  20  feet  depth,  but  feared,
as  the  land  was  so  much  lower,  it  would  drain  otf  the  supply  from
Mr.  V.  J.'s  new  well.^  Accordingly  at  B  a  shaft  was  sunk,  but  no  water  was
met  with  at  25  nor  even  50  feet.  Eventually  the  well  sinkers  went  down  to
100  feet,  and  still  no  water  was  found.  A  boring  was  then  made  25  feet
deeper,  and  at  125  feet  water  was  struck,  but  though  the  boring  was
continued  still  deeper,  the  water  never  rose  beyond  18  to  24  inches  in
the  well  ;  a  fair  supply  was,  however,  obtained.  The  water  at  Mr.  J.'s
well  at  S"  was,  and  still  is,  entirely  unaffected  by  the  well  at  B.  The  soil
at  B  was  the  same  as  that  in  the  abandoned  well  shaft  at  S'  in  the  plot  A,
viz.,  a  "hard,  compact  marl."  Three  pairs  of  villas  were  subsequently
erected  on  the  plot  C,  and  three  wells  sunk  as  shown  at  W,  W,  W.  Water
was  obtained  at  50  feet  depth,  but  the  supply  ' '  was  poor,  and  is  not
sufficient  to  keep  the  wells  from  running  dry  in  a  very  dry  summer."  Tliese
wells  were  therefore  a  comparative  failure. ^

The  date  of  this  experience  is,  I  find,  1853,  but  full  notes  appear
to  have  been  kept.  The  plan,  Fig.  2,  I  made  from  the  estate  drawing.
It  would  be  interesting  to  have  a  geological  examination  of  this
laud,  and  a  report  on  the  foregoing  case.

No.  12. — The  Rev.  Martin  R.  Knapp,  M.A.,  vicar  of  Holy  Trinity,
Dalston,  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

72,  Forest-road,  Dalston,  N.E.,  Novemha-  Uth,  1896.

In  the  summer  of  1892  I  entered  on  the  vicarage  of  North  Wootton,  in
North  Somerset,  and  had  reason  at  once  to  look  for  water.  I  was  advised
to  try  a  "  water-finder,"  and  did  so.  The  dowser  was  a  retired  miller,  and
came  provided  with  a  number  of  forked  twigs.  Holding  one  he  traversed  the
place,  and  at  certain  jJoints  the  twig  oscillated  violently  in  his  hands,  and
there,  he  professed,  he  should  find  water.

There  was  an  interesting  side-light  in  the  matter  that  I  will  tell  you  of.
My  builder,  who  came  from  Bath,  was  very  scej^tical  about  the  whole  thing.
Three  or  four  of  us  who  were  on  the  spot  tried  to  see  if  the  twigs  would
"  play  up  "  with  us.

1  Upon  getting  this  information,  Mr.  Jenkins  asked  the  youthful  "dowser "to
go  over  the  ground  again  and  see  if  he  could  trace  the  direction  of  the  underground
water.  This  the  lad  did,  and  asserted,  on  the  evidence  of  the  rod,  that  water  would
be  found  on  the  West  side  of  the  new  well  W",  but  that  little  would  be  found  on  the
South  or  East  side  of  it ;  the  North  side  had  already  been  tried  and  abandoned.
The  father  of  the  lad  thereupon  assured  Mr.  V.  J.  he  had  no  cause  for  an,\iety
from  the  proposed  well  at  B.,  which  turned  out  to  be  correct.

-  It  was  the  success  of  the  rod  in  this  case,  and  its  personal  value  to  Mr.
Vaughan  Jenkins,  that  led  him  to  devote  much  of  his  time  for  the  past  40  years  in
collecting  evidence  bearing  on  the  subject  of  the  divining  rod.


38


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


We  were  unsuccessful  till  iiliis  man  tried  his  hand,  scoffing  the  while.
But  directly  that  he  came  to  the  spots  tlie  dowser  had  found,  the  twig  showed
vigorous  signs  of  animation.  When  his  hand  was  being  twisted  in  his
efforts  to  keep  the  twig  steady,  I  cried  to  him  to  hold  fast,  with  the  result
that  the  twig  twisted  itself  into  two  pieces.

At  Wells,  close  by,  a  coachman,  who  was  reported  to  have  the  power  to
find,  not  only  water,  bat  minerals.  He  carries  neither  rod  nor  twig,  and
told  me,  when  I  enquired,  that  liis  sensations  are  undoubted  and  extraordi-
nary whenever  he  is  directly  above  either  water  or  minerals.

Maetin  R.  Knapp.

In  answer  to  enquiries  Mr.  Knapp  tells  me  the  builder  was  a
stranger  to  the  locality,  and  the  spots  where  the  rod  moved  were
unlikely  to  suggest  water  below.  The  twig  in  the  builder's  hand,
Mr.  Knapp  says,  in  every  case  corroborated  the  dowser's  indications,
and  hence  he  (the  builder)  was  unmercifully  chaffed,  as  he  had  treated
the  whole  thing  with  such  contempt.  Mr.  Knapp  says  it  is  possible
that  the  places  indicated  by  the  dowser  might  have  been  perceived
by  the  builder,  but  it  was  the  spontaneous  and  vigorous  movement  of
the  twig,  evidently  contrary  to  the  holder's  intention  and  against  his
will,  that  excited  their  astonishment.

Unfortunately  Mr.  Knapp  was  unable  to  sink  a  well;  one  of  the
places  indicated  was  unsuitable,  and  at  another  he  began  to  dig,  but
at  the  time  had  no  means  of  going  deeper  than  a  few  feet,  and
afterwards  moved  his  residence.

No.  13. — Another  instance  of  a  successful  amateur  diviner  is  the
daughter  of  a  clergyman  in  Buckinghamsliire.  Her  father,  the  Rev.
Seymour  Ashwell,  M.A.,  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Finmere  Rectory,  Septemher  7th,  1896.

As  regards  my  daughter's  ability  to  find  water,  all  I  can  say  is  that  it
has  been  a  most  useful  gift.  She  has  found  springs  all  over  the  country,
and  wells  have  been  dug  at  the  spot  indicated  with  the  best  results,  and
villages  and  private  houses  that  had  been  badly  sui^plied  for  years  have  now
plenty.  I  might  mention  a  curious  feature  of  it  is  if  she  walks  hackiuarch
the  stick  does  not  move.^  Also  she  can  tell  when  she  is  getting  near  water
quite  twenty  yards  or  more  before  she  gets  to  the  spot  where  the  spring  is.
She  is  also  equally  successful  in  finding  gold,  as  she  proved  at  Lord  North's,
where  they  had  buried  some  quartz  containing  gold  for  her  to  find.  It
would  of  course  be  much  more  satisfactory  if  you  would  come  and  see
for  yourself  what  she  can  do. I  might  mention  she  finds  hazel  the  best

1  This  is  only  the  effect  of  a  "fixed  idea,"  as  will  be  seen  later  on,  and  corres-
ponds to  a  similar  phenomena  exhibited  by  Bleton  in  17S0,  and  by  many  other
dowsers.  In  fact,  in  a  later  letter,  Mr.  Ashwell  writes:  "If  my  daughter  holds
the  forked  twig  with  the  point  upioards,  and  walks  backwards,  then  the  stick
turns  dcnvn  ;  though  if  the  point  be  held  downwards  it  does  not  move  when  she
walks  backwards." — W.F.B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


39


wood  to  use,  though  some  others  will  do,  as  also  copper  wire,  but  that  acts
best  when  well  twisted  in  the  middle.  Seymour  Ashwell.

In  a  subsequent  letter  the  Rev.  Seymour  Ashwell  writes  from

Balnakilly,  Blairgowrie,  N.B.,  September  IWi,  1896.

I  may  add  I  this  day  had  a  letter  from  Worcestershire  to  say  that  two
wells  had  been  dug  at  spots  pointed  out  by  my  daughter  last  July.  The  one
is  13  feet  deep  and  has  8  feet  of  water  in  it,  the  other  30  feet  deep  and
has  17  feet  in  it.  I  should  not  think  that  the  most  sceptical  need  better
proof  as  to  the  power  of  finding  water.  In  what  the  power  consists  I  don't
pretend  to  explain.  Seymour  Ashwell.

No.  II. — In  Mr.  Pease's  report  is  given  an  account  of  the
successful  use  of  the  divining  rod  by  another  lady,  Mrs.  Bengough,
of  Bristol. See  Proceedings,  S.P.Fv.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  104.

No.  15. — Having  heard  from  the  Rev.  C.  Bicknell,  M.A.,  of
Bordighera,  Italy,  of  the  remarkable  dowsing  faculty  possessed  by  the
young  son  of  a  friend  of  his,  who  was  formerly  rector  of  Uggeshall  in
Suffolk,  I  wrote  for  further  particulars. Mr.  Bicknell  replies  :  —

Bordighera,  Italy,  Becemher  2Uh,  1896.

Oddly  enough,  Mr.  Edgell,  the  father  of  the  boy  whom  I  mentioned,  arrived
here  this  evening.  He  tells  me  that  his  son  (1)  when  at  Uggeshall  found
the  spring  and  well  which  supplied  his  pump  ;  the  whereabouts  of  which  was
not  known  to  the  present  rector  nor  to  the  Edgells,  the  former  occupants  of
the  rectory;  and  (2)  that  he  also  found  water  in  his  own  garden  at  Teddington,
the  existence  of  which  was  not  known  to  the  boy  or  the  father,  but  only  to
the  old  gardener,  who  had  said,  when  Mr.  E.  told  him  about  his  boy's  gift,
''Well,  sir,  I  know  where  there  is  a  spring  in  the  garden,  and  if  he  finds  it
I  shall  believe  there  is  st)mething  in  dowsing."

Mr.  Hanbury  (who  lives  near  here)  told  me  that  many  years  ago  while  he
was  away  a  diviner  indicated  water  in  his  garden,  but,  for  some  reason  or
other,  they  did  nothing.  Some  years  after,  however,  in  digging,  water  ivas
found  on  the  spot  that  had  been  previously  indicated.

Clarence  Bicknell.

No.  16. — Sir  Charles  Isham,  Bart.,  of  Lamport  Hall,  Northampton,
writes  to  me  on

March  mil,  1890.

We  found  water  at  Lamport  by  means  of  the  "divining  rod  "  three  years
ago.  My  carpenter  found  he  had  slight  power  in  doing  the  same  ;  he  could
feel  the  stick  move,  but  it  was  not  visibly  active.

Later  on.  Sir  Charles  writes  : —

Lamport  Hall,  Northampton,  September  22nd,  1896.
Three  weeks  since  we  discovered  that  my  carpenter  found  water  by  the
divining  rod  at  a  farmhouse  we  are  building. He  tells  me  he  went  over  the


40


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


ground,  with  his  eyes  shut,  several  times,  and  always  came  to  within  a  yard
of  the  place  he  had  fixed  on  ;  accordingly  a  well  was  sunk  there  and  a  good
supply  of  water  was  found.

No.  17. — This  list  of  amateur  English  dowsers  would  be  very
incomplete  without  some  notice  of  Messrs.  Young  and  Robertson  of
Llanelly  who,  together  with  several  of  their  children,  possess  remark-
able dowsing  powers,  judging  from  the  correspondence  that  is  before
me. Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins,  of  Oxford,  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Among  the  most  successful  diviners  are  Mr.  Young  and  Mr.  Robertson,
of  Llanelly,  South  Wales,  who  have  not  only  iwt  received  any  fee  or  reward
for  their  services,  but  have  spent  much  time  in  the  endeavour  to  ascertain
the  cause  of  the  rod's  movements.  No  two  men  could  be  found  who  would
more  readily  co-operate  with  an  honest  and  unbiassed  scientific  investigation
of  the  matter.

Here  the  faculty  seems  hereditary,  for  Mr.  Young's  father  was  able
to  discover  underground  water,  the  effect  on  him,  as  on  his  son^
creating  a  very  unpleasant  physiological  disturbance.  Mr.  Young
sends  me  the  following  illustration  of  his  father's  gift  : —

My  father,  who  is  living  in  Dorsetshire,  is  now  87.  Two  years  ago  he
pointed  out  a  spot  to  a  neighbour  who  was  about  to  build  two  villas  if  water
could  be  found.  A  well  was  sunk,  and  an  abundant  supply  of  beautiful
water,  at  about  40  feet,  was  struck.  Prior  to  the  sinking,  the  owner  of  the  land
got  three  otlier  local  diviners  to  look  for  water  in  this  field;  the  last  he  took
blindfolded  to  the  spot.  They  each  and  all  pointed  out  the  very  spot  my  father
did,  and  each  one  was  perfectly  ignorant  that  any  one  had  previously  tried.
Now  comes  the  curious  part.  The  village  doctor  was  building  a  villa  about
80  yards  away,  (on  the  same  level),  and  said  he  could  find  water  anywhere
in  that  locality  without  the  rod.  He  tried,  sank  a  well,  (a  built  well,)  to  50
feet,  and  never  had  a  drop,  and  the  well  was  closed.  This  was  about  two
years  ago.  Aljout  three  months  ago  the  doctor  decided  to  sink  another  well
ill  a  spot  close  by  his  first,  where  three  members  of  my  family  and  myself
pointed  out  as  being  a  likely  spot.  The  well  was  sunk,  and  is  now  in  daily
use  delivering,  with  a  pump,  a  plentiful  supply  at  a  less  depth  than  the
barren  well  a  few  yards  away.  He  had  been  jDaying  £12  per  year  for
water  carted  for  daily  use.

Amid  the  letters  which  Mr.  Young  has  written  to  me  on  this
subject  there  are  several  instances  of  successful  "dowsing"'  by  himself
and  by  liis  friend  and  neighbour,  Mr.  Robertson  ;  nothing,  however,  of
any  particular  evidential  value  is  to  be  found,  except  possibly  in  two
cases.  In  one  of  these,  both  he  and  Mr.  Robertson  independently  fixed
on  an  underground  spring  near  the  house  of  Mr.  Meredith  (son  of  the
novelist),  and  subsequently  a  strong  spring  burst  forth  from  the  very
spot,  though  no  signs  of  it  existed  before.  I  wrote  for  corroboration,
but  Mr.  Meredith  had  left  Llanelly,  and  Mr.  Young  sends  me  a  letter


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


41


from  a  gentleman  whose  house  was  near,  which  in  general  terms
confirms  Mr.  Young's  statements.  The  other  case  was  where  Mr.
Young  and  Mr.  Robertson  independently  determined  the  position  of  a
leak  in  the  town  reservoir  and  also  fixed  on  the  depth  below  the
embankment  of  the  culvert  or  out-flow  from  the  reservoir.  Neither  of
them  knew  this  depth,  both  fixed  on  the  same  amount, —  30  feet, — and
subsequent  inquiry  proved  they  were  exactly  right.  But  in  both  these
experiments  other  explanations  than  a  dowsing  faculty  (such  as
unconscious  indications,  latent  memory,  or  thought-transference),
might  account  for  the  facts.  Mr.  Young  tells  me  that  by  the
sensations  he  experiences,  when  his  mind  is  "  set  "  on  dowsing,  he
can  discover  an  underground  spring  even  when  quickly  driving  in  a
vehicle.  He  adds  that  not  only  his  father  but  all  his  sisters  are
able  to  use  the  divining  rod  with  more  or  less  success  ;  the  same
seems  to  be  true  of  Mr.  Robertson's  family,  judging  from  the  large
family  group  represented  as  dowsing  in  the  little  book  they  have
published.

Other  cases  have  reached  me  of  amateur  dowsers,  but  what  has
now  been  made  sufficiently  clear  is  that  the  movement  of  the  rod  is
not  due  to  any  voluntary  conscious  act  on  the  part  of  the  dowser.^
I  will  therefore  only  add  the  evidence  given  by  a  few  amateur  dowsers
of  older  date,  as  these  are  of  some  historical  interest.  The  list  might
be  largely  extended.

No.  18. — The  case  of  Lady  Milbanke,  the  mother-in-law  of  Lady
Byron,  is  a  well-known  example  of  an  amateur  diviner.  In  a  letter  to
Dr.  C.  Hutton,  F.R.S.,  dated  February,  1805,  Lady  Milbanke  describes
how  she  was  led  to  try  the  rod  from  witnessing  its  use  by  a  peasant
in  Provence,  who  had  successfully  found  water  springs  by  means  of
the  rod,  so  that  the  man  got  the  appellation  of  L'Homme  d  la
Baguette.  Lady  Milbanke  says  a  large  party  assembled  to  watch  the
gyrations  of  the  rod,  which,  in  spite  of  the  man's  hands  being
stationary,  twisted  round  so  enei'getically  when  he  stood  over  a  spring
that  the  rod  was  broken. Lady  Milbanke  continues  : — ■

After  seeing  him  do  this  repeatedly,  the  whole  party  tried  the  baguette
(a  forked  hazel  twig)  in  succession,  but  without  effect.  I  chanced  to  be  the
last  ;  no  sooner  did  I  hold  the  twig  as  directed  than  it  began  to  move  as
with  him,  which  startled  me  so  much  that  I  dropped  it  and  felt  considerably
agitated.  I  was,  however,  induced  to  resume  the  experiment,  and  found  the
eifect  perfect. On  my  return  to  England,  two  years  afterwards,  being  on

1 1  am  assuming  that  the  dowser  is  not  a  rogue  ;  one  might  no  doubt  by  practice
accomplish  the  twisting  of  the  rod,  with  aijparently  no  muscular  effort,  like  any  other
piece  of  legerdemain.


42


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


a  visit  to  a  nobleman's  house,  Kimholton,  Huntingdonshire,  and  his  lady
lamenting  that  she  was  disajjpointed  of  building  a  dairy-house  in  a  spot
she  particularly  wished  because  there  was  no  water  to  be  found — a  supply
she  looked  on  as  essential — I  told  her  I  would  endeavour  to  find  a  spring.
T  accordingly  procured  some  hazel  twigs,  and  in  the  presence  of  herself  and
husband,  walked  over  the  ground  proposed  till  the  twig  turned  with
considerable  force.  A  stake  was  immediately  driven  into  the  ground  to
mark  the  spot,  which  was  not  very  distant  from  where  they  had  before
sunk.  They  then  took  me  to  another  and  distant  building  in  the  park,  and
desired  me  to  try  there.  I  found  the  baguette  turn  very  strongly,  so  that
it  soon  twisted  and  broke  ;  the  gentleman  persisted  that  there  was  no  water
there,  unless  at  a  great  depth,  the  foundation  being  very  deep  (a  con-
siderable stone-cellar),  and  that  no  water  appeared  when  they  dug  for  it.
I  replied  that  I  knew  no  more  than  from  the  twig  turning  ;  that  I  had  too
little  experience  of  its  powers  or  certainty  to  answer  for  the  truth  of  its
indication.  He  then  acknowledged  that  when  the  building  was  erected
they  were  obliged  to  drive  piles  for  the  whole  foundation,  as  they  met  with
nothing  but  a  quicksand.  This  induced  him  to  dig  in  the  spot  I  first
directed.  They  met  with  a  very  flrtent  spring.  The  dairy  was  built,  and  it
is  at  this  time  supplied  by  it.i

No.  18a. — Di'.  Hutton,  F.R.S.,  the  distinguished  mathematician — to
whom  the  Royal  Society  entrusted  the  gigantic  labour  of  making  an
abridgement  of  the  whole  of  the  transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  from
its  foundation  in  1666  to  the  beginning  of  this  century, — gives  the
following  account  of  his  experiments  with  the  divining  rod  as  used
by  Lady  Milbanke.

At  the  time  appointed,  [11  a.m..  May  30th,  1806,]  the  lady,  with  all  her
family,  arrived  at  my  house  on  Woolwich  Common,  where,  after  preparing
the  rods,  etc.,  they  walked  to  the  grounds,  accomjianied  by  the  individuals
of  my  own  family  and  some  friends,  when  Lady  Milbanke  showed  the
experiment  several  times  in  difl'erent  places,  holding  the  rod  in  the  manner
described  elsewhere.  In  the  places  where  I  had  good  reason  to  know  that
no  water  was  to  be  found  the  rod  was  always  quiescent,  but  in  other  places,
where  I  knew  there  was  water  below  the  surface,  the  rods  turned  slowly  and
regularly  in  the  manner  above  described,  till  the  twigs  twisted  themselves
off  below  the  fingers,  which  were  considerably  indented  by  so  forcibly
holding  the  rod  betw  een  them.^

All  the  comjmny  stood  close  to  Lady  M.  with  all  eyes  intensely  fixed  on
her  hands  and  the  r(jds  to  watch  if  any  particular  motion  might  be  made  by

1  See  also  description  by  an  eyo-witness  given  in  the  Qiwrterly  Review,  Vol.
XXII.,  (1820)  foot-note,  pp.  373-4.— W.F.B.

-Dr.  Hutton  does  not  say /(0!(!  he  knew  that  water  was,  or  was  not,  below  the
surface.  He  was  not,  however,  one  likely  to  make  loo.se  and  random  statements.
According  to  a  footnote  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  Vol.  XXIT.,  p.  ,374,  ir,  appears  that
the  ground  chosen  for  the  experiment  vvas  a  field  Dr.  Hutton  had  bought,  adjoining  the
new  College  at  Woolwich  then  building.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


43


the  fingers,  but  in  vain  ;  nothing  of  the  kind  was  perceived,  and  all  the
company  could  observe  no  cause  or  reason  why  the  rods  should  move  in  the
manner  they  were  seen  to  do.

After  the  experiments  were  ended,  every  one  of  the  company  tried  the
rods  in  the  same  manner  as  they  saw  Lady  M.  had  done,  but  without  the
least  motion  from  any  of  them.  And  in  my  family,  among  ourselves,  we
have  since  then,  several  times,  tried  if  we  could  possibly  cause  the  rod  to
turn  by  means  of  any  trick,  or  twisting  of  the  fingers,  held  in  the  manner
Lady  M.  did  ;  but  in  vain,  we  had  no  power  to  accomplish  it.

No.  19. — Dr.  Mayo,  F.R.S.,  in  his  book  on  Popular  Superstitions,
quotes  the  case  of  a  Mrs,  R.,  sister  of  Sir  G.  R.,  then  living  at
Southampton,  who,  in  1806,  observing  the  successful  use  of  the  divin-
ing rod  by  the  wife  of  a  Colonel  Beaumont,  tried  it  herself,  and  found
she  had  the  power  in  a  remarkable  degree.  The  rod,  Dr.  Mayo
remarks,  continued  to  move,  even  when  Mrs.  R.'s  hands  were  grasped
so  firmly  that  muscular  action  by  her  wrists  or  fingers  seemed  to  be
prevented.  V-shaped  rods  of  iron  or  copjjer  wire  were  as  effective  as
a  hazel  rod,  but  no  motion  ever  occurred  when  the  two  handles  of  the
rod  were  covered  with  sealing  wax.  If,  however,  the  uncoated  parts
were  touched,  the  rod  immediately  revolved. ^

No.  20. — The  Comte  de  Tristan,  whose  book  on  the  divining  rod
has  already  been  mentioned,  published  in  1829  a  record  of  his  own
experience  with  the  rod,  extending  over  1,800  experiments,  1,200  of
which  were  carefully  noted.  He  mentions  five  or  six  friends  of  his
who  he  found  could  also  use  the  rod.  Count  de  Tristan  found  the  rod
would  only  move  when  he  passed  over  what  he  calls  "exciting  tracts"
of  ground,  and  that  its  motion  was  arrested  when  the  hands  were
covered  with  thick  silk. See  foot-note  to  No.  19,  also  No.  5.


Group  II. — Miscellaneous  Cases.

The  following  cases  of  water  finding  by  various  dowsers,  some
amateurs  and  some  not,  illustrate  the  use  of  the  divining  rod  in  various
countries,  and  also  its  employment  at  different  periods  during  the  last
hundred  years.  The  most  remarkable  of  the  foreign  cases  is  unques-
tionably that  of  the  French  youth,  Bleton,  described  by  Dr.  Thouvenel

1  That  "electricity  has  something  to  do"  with  the  motion  of  the  rod,  is  a
widespread  belief.  This  will  be  discussed  later  on  ;  here  I  will  only  say  that,  in  spite
of  the  foregoing  experiments,  and  others  to  be  related,  the  electrical  hypothesis  is  not
one  that  any  physicist  could  entertain.


44


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


in  1781.  This  I  have  reserved  for  separate  treatment  in  the  list  of
special  cases  that  are  too  long  to  be  included  in  the  varied  collection  of
evidence  which  it  is  my  object  to  present  in  the  tirst  instance.

No.  21. — In  the  American  Journal  of  Science^  for  1821,  Vol.  III.,
p.  102,  the  Rev.  Ralph  Emerson  suggests  the  publication  in  that
journal  of  "  a  sufficient  number  of  well  authenticated  facts  on  the  use
of  '  mining  rods  '  in  discovering  fountains  of  water  underground,  to  put
their  utility  beyond  a  doubt.  For  myself,"  he  adds,  "  I  was  totally
sceptical  of  their  efficacy  till  convinced  by  niy  own  senses."  He  then
relates  how  the  divining  I'od  moved  in  the  hands  of  his  friend  the  Rev.
Mr.  Steele,  and  how  he  made  a  crucial  expei-iment  to  test  the  value  of
its  indications.  Taking  Mr.  Steele  to  a  place  where  a  perennial  under-
ground stream  existed,  of  which  Mr.  Steele  was  unaware,  the  rod
instantly  dipped  down  when  he  came  over  the  stream,  and  when  asked
to  trace  its  course  he  did  so  for  50  rods  until  he  arrived  at  its  mouth
"  which  was  so  situated  as  to  prevent  his  discovering  it"  till  close  by
it.  "  The  mode  of  his  tracing  it  resembled  that  of  a  dog  on  his
master's  track,  crossing  back  and  forth,  and  he  proceeded  with  as  little
hesitation."

Here,  however,  it  is  possible  that  some  unconscious  indications
given  by  Mr.  Emerson  might  be  assumed  as  exciting,  sub-consciously,
the  suggestion  which  moved  the  rod  in  Mr.  Steele's  hands.  But  this
explanation  will  not  hold  good  of  the  next  case  quoted  by  Mr.  Emerson,
which  is  as  follows  : —

No.  22. — On  a  journey  to  the  south-east  part  of  New  Hampshire,  I  found
a  23ractical  use  has  been  made  of  these  rods  in  that  region,  for  a  year  or  two
jmst,  in  fixing  on  the  best  places  for  wells.  A  man  in  that  vicinity  could  not
only  designate  the  best  spot,  but  could  tell  how  many  feet  it  would  be
needful  to  dig  to  find  water,  and  had  frequently  been  employed  for  this  pur-
pose without  having  failed  in  a  single  instance.  I  will  recite  one  case  out  of
a  number.  A  man  who  had  dug  in  vain  for  a  good  well  near  liis  house,  re-
quested his  [the  dowser's]  advice.  Oa  trial  with  the  rod,  the  best  place  was
found  to  be  directly  under  a  favourite  tree  in  front  of  the  house  ;  and  there
the  proprietor  was  assured  he  would  find  abundance  of  water  at  a  moderate
depth.  But  on  reflection,  he  was  loth  to  sacrifice  the  tree,  and  concluded  it
would  answer  as  well  to  dig  pretty  near  it.  He  dug  ;  and  after  sinking  the
shaft  much  deeper  than  had  been  directed,  abandoned  it  in  despair.  He  soon
complained  of  his  disappomtment.  "  Did  you  then  dig  in  the  precise  spot  I
told  you?"  "  I  dug  as  near  it  as  I  could  without  injuring  the  tree."  "Go
home  and  dig  up  that  tree,  and  if  you  do  not  find  water  at  the  specific  depth,
I  will  defray  the  expense."  He  did  so  ;  and  obtained  an  excellent  well  at
the  given  depth.

1  This  monttily  journal  corresponds  to  our  Philosophical  Magazine,  as  a  leading
and  authoritative  scientific  organ.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  45


As  to  the  depth,  it  occurred  to  me  when  seeing  the  oj^eration  of  the  rods
in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Steele,  that  it  might  be  easily  ascertained,  by  taking  the
angle  they  made  at  a  few  feet  from  the  spot  where  they  became  directly
vertical.  Ralph  Emerson.^

Mr.  Emerson  does  not  say  whether  he  obtained  the  information  at
first  or  second-hand  ;  this  case,  therefore,  rests  upon  weak  evidence.


In  the  next  case  the  importance  of  sinking  at  the  exact  spot
indicated  by  the  dowser  will  also  be  seen.

No.  23.— I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  F.  T.  Elworthy  of  Foxdown,
Wellington,  Somerset,  (from  whose  well-known  Somerset  Word-book  I
have  already  quoted)  for  several  interesting  cases  of  the  reality  and
practical  value  of  the  faculty  possessed  by  dowsers.  Mr.  Elworthy
also  sends  me  the  following  communication  he  received  from  Mr.
E.  Neville  Rolfe,  H.M.  Consul  at  Naples,  whose  brother,  a  resident  in
Australia,  wrote  to  him  that  the  gift  of  "  dowsing  "  was  well  known
and  its  value  recognised  in  Australia. Mr.  Rolfe  continues  : —

On  the  Queensland  Central  Railway  and  next  to  tlie  cattle  station  I  live
on  ( say  400  miles  west  of  Rockhampton)  is  a  station  named  Coreena.  Near
the  head  station  the  manager  had  sunk  a  well,  but  the  water  proved  salt.  A
diviner  happened  to  pass  ;  the  manager  showed  him  his  well,  and  expressed
his  regret  that  he  had  been  so  unfortunate  as  to  get  salt  water.  Testing  the
ground,  the  diviner  indicated  the  place  where  the  manager  ought  to  have
sunk.  The  manager  considered  the  matter  and  determined  on  a  fresh  trial,
but  thinking  "there  or  thereabouts  "  was  near  enough,  sunk,  say  50  yards,
from  the  spot  indicated,  and  to  his  disgust  again  struck  salt  water.  The
diviner  passed  by  a  few  months  later  and  was  u^jbraided  by  the  manager  for
the  waste  of  money  he  had  caused  him  to  make.  "Let  us  see  in  the
morning,"  said  the  diviner;  "I  don't  understand  this  at  all."  In  the
morning,  on  seeing  the  new  well,  he  said,  ' '  This  is  not  where  I  told  you  to
sink  ;  liere  (indicating  the  exact  spot)  is  where  I  told  you."  "I  grant  it,"
said  the  manager,  "but  I  thought  those  few  yards  made  no  difference."
"You  try,"  replied  the  other,  and  again  departed.  The  manager,  after
much  deliberation,  determined  to  sink  a  third  well,  and  was  rewarded  by  an
abundant  supply  of  fresh  water.  The  three  wells  are  there  at  this  moment
as  evidence  of  the  truth  of  this  story — a  truth  I  can  vouch  for  myself,  on
what  I  consider  the  best  evidence  short  of  my  being  a  principal  in  the
transaction.  No  doubt  corroborative  evidence  could  be  easily  supplied.
If  it  were  required,  I  am  sure  an  ajaplication  to  C.  W.  Little,  Esq.,
Manager  Union  Mortgage  and  Agency  Co.,  Rockhampton,  Queensland,
would  meet  with  a  prompt  reply.  Mr.  Little  is  one  of  the  owners  of
Coreena.

1  As  I  have  already  said  this  is  not,  as  I  at  first  thoug-ht,  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,
but  apparently  a  contemporary  of  his,  who  was  ordained  as  a  Congregational
minister  a  little  before  Waldo  Emerson  entered  the  Unitarian  ministry.


46


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I  wrote  to  Mr.  Little's  addi'ess,  in  Queensland,  who  kindly  replied
as  follows  : —

Box  237,  G.P.O.,  Sydney,  January  27th,  1897.
Your  letter  addressed  to  Rockhampton  reached  me  a  day  or  two  ago.
Your  information  is  quite  correct  with  regard  to  the  well  you  mention  at
Loclmagar,  but  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  other  spots  on  other  parts  of  the  run
pointed  out  by  Mr.  SewelP  did -not  fulfil  expectations.  Mr.  E.  H.  King,
Eton  Vale,  Toowoomba,  Queensland,  was  at  that  time  managing  the  station.
I  have  sent  a  copy  of  your  letter  to  him  asking  him  to  answer  your
(questions.  He  has  also  had  experience  of  the  use  of  divining  rods  on  the
Darling  Downs.

I  have  also  sent  a  copy  of  your  letter  to  Mr.  Vincent  Dowling,  of  Lue,
Rylstone,  N.S.W.,  who  has,  I  believe,  had  some  experience,  and  may  be
able  to  give  you  some  interesting  information.  q -^y  Lj^tle

Sydney,  February  Sfh,  1897.
I  am  enclosing  cojjies  of  letters  from  Mr.  Dowling  and  Mr.  King.  With
regard  to  the  latter,  I  may  say  that  when  Mr.  Sewell — who  used  the  i-od —
was  at  Coreena,  an  artesian  flow  of  water  had  just  been  obtained  by  the
railway  department  on  the  run  at  180  feet,  and  Mr.  Sewell  endeavoured  to
select  sites  where  we  should  be  equally  successful,  but  entirely  failed  ;  had
he  confined  his  attentioii  to  ojDening  up  springs,  or  sinking  for  supplies  at
about  30  feet,  he  could  probably  have  been  more  successful.

■  C.  W.  Little.

The  following  is  Mr.  Dowling's  letter  to  Mr.  Little  : —

"  Lue  Homestead,"  Lue,  Febriuinj  2nd,  1897.
Yours  of  the  27th  ult. ,  enclosing  copy  of  Professor  Barrett's  letter,
received.

For  the  Professor's  information,  I  might  state  that  for  years  I  scoffed  at
the  "  divining  rod  "  ;  no  one  could  have  been  more  sceptical  than  myself.
I  have,  however,  changed  my  views  during  the  last  few  years,  as  I  have  had
many  instances  placing  beyond  all  possibility  of  a  doubt  the  fact  that  there
is  something  in  the  art,  or  gift,  or  electric  power,  whatever  you  like  to
call  it.

I  have  discovered  three  wells  by  the  agency  of  the  rod,  two  of  them
are  deejj,  one  about  100  feet,  another  about  130  feet,  and  another  about  40
feet.  The  first  I  do  not  use,  though  there  is  plenty  of  water,  but  it  is  deep,
and  I  have  another  well  near  ;  the  second  was  used  in  the  1888  drought,  but
never  since  ;  the  third  is  in  constant  use,  and  waters  about  6,000  sheep  and
700  head  of  cattle.  I  have  an  aermotor  mill  witli  an  open  top  lift  pump,
pumping  into  a  tank  holding  about  23,000  gallons  water  ;  the  water  is
abundant,  and  the  tank  often  full,  running  water  back  into  the  well.

I  know  of  several  wells  near  my  Gummin  station,  discovered  by  the  agency
of  the  rod.  The  eldest  son  of  my  overseer  at  Gummin,  a  man  now  about
35  years  of  age,  can  and  does  use  the  rod,  and  another  man  (Hitchins)  living
near  Gummin  also  possesses  the  gift. To  give  you  an  instance  of  the  use


1  This  is  the  name  of  the  amateur  dowser  referred  to  in  No.  23.— W.F.B.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  47

of  this  gift,  the  following  is  a  fact.  In  the  drought  of  1888  the  Ryder
Bros.,  of  Calga,  were  very  badly  off  for  water,  in  fact  were  losing  stock
heavily.  They  wrote  and  asked  me  if  I  would  lend  them  young  Passworth,
the  overseer's  son,  to  see  if  he  could  find  them  water.  I  lent  them  the  man,
and  he  found  them  three  sites  for  wells,  following  light  streams  of  water
until  they  joined  and  formed  a  large  body.  The  Ryder  Bros,  were  not
satisfied  altogether,  so  without  letting  the. other  man — Hitchins — Passworth,
or  myself  know  anything,  they  paid  Hitchins  to  go  over  and  see  if  he  could
find  water  ;  the  site  of  Passworth's  wells  was  not  marked  except  to  the
initiated,  the  Ryders  themselves.  Hitchins  followed  the  same  streams  and
marked  the  same  sites  within  a  few  yards  or  feet.  The  Ryders  then  put  down
three  shafts,  and  obtained  abundance  of  fresh  water  in  two  ;  the  third  was
never  finished,  as  the  rain  came.  However,  they  struck  the  water  before
the  rain  fell,  but  did  not  go  on.  These  wells  saved  thousands  of  sheep  for
Calga.

To  give  you  another  example,  I  once  got  Passworth  (overseer's  son)  to
follow  the  stream  from  the  "  Swamp  Well  "  (the  well  I  have  mentioned  as
watering  so  many  sheeiJ  and  cattle),  as  I  wished  to  see  whether  the  same
stream  supplied  other  old  wells  I  have  some  miles  distant,  but  in  the  same
fall.  The  stream  was  not  the  same  ;  we  followed  it  for  some  distance  and  it
suddenly  turned  into  the  main  Mambelong  Creek,  and  I  said  no  doubt  this
is  the  same  stream  ;  but  when  we  got  into  the  bed  of  the  creek,  which  was
perfectly  dry  at  the  time,  the  rod  stood  erect  when  we  faced  down  the
stream,  but  bent  when  kept  on  its  back  ;  it  crossed  the  creek,  and  I  followed
with  him  over  a  mile,  the  rod  working  well  on  a  strong  course  of  water,
which  eventually  led  us  to  the  site  of  an  old  spring  which  I  knew  of,  but
the  man  knew  nothing  about,  the  spring  having  been  trampled  in  and
destroyed  by  cattle  years  before  :  it  used  to  be  a  strong  spring.  This
satisfied  me  there  was  virtue  in  the  rod.  It  is  extraordinary  to  see  the  rod
working  on  a  long  course,  directly  the  man  gets  off  the  stream,  up  comes  the
rod,  more  to  the  right  or  left,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  down  it  comes  when
you  get  over  the  course.  -rr  -r,

•' ^  VINCENT  DOWLING.

The  next  is  Mr.  King's  letter  to  Mr.  Little  :—

Elton  Vale,  Cambooya,  February  1st,  1897.

Sewell's  experiments  were  interesting  so  far  as  they  went,  but  were  of  no
real  practical  value,  I  fear.  You  will  remember  we  tried  two  of  his  sites  in
Emu  Hills  Park,  both  of  which  proved  to  be  brackish  or  salt  water,  and
small  supplies  at  that,  when  big  ones  were  jjromised  ;  at  the  J ersey  Bore  we
were  to  get  a  big  flow  at  300  feet,  but  nothing  came  of  this  ;  at  head  of  Back
Creek  only  a  small  stream  found,  and  a  big  supply  promised  ;  his  only  success
was  at  Locknagaar,  where  I  believe  he  showed  Conway  where  there  was  a
supply  of  fresh  water  close  to  a  spring  that  was  known  to  be  salt ;  and  on
opening  it  up  it  proved  correct.  -g, jj  j^j^j^j


No.  24. — Mr.  Phippen,  in  his  little  work  published  on  the  rod  in
1853,  gives  several  cases  of  abundant  and  perennial  water  supply  found
by  the  dowsers,  Mapstone  and  Adams  of  Somersetshire ;  and  relates


48


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


experiments  he  himself  made  with  Adams  which  made  him  an  enthusi-
astic beUever  in  the  value  of  the  rod.  Like  others,  he  and  a  friend
could  not  hold  the  rod  still  when  it  was  over  a  subterranean  spring.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Foster,  of  Sodbury,  Gloucestershire,  had  sunk  a  well
60  feet  deep  without  finding  water.  Adams  was  sent  for,  and  by  the
dowsing  rod  fixed  on  a  spot  6  feet  from  the  dry  well,  where  he  said
was  a  good  spring  about  20  feet  deep  ;  a  tunnel  was  accordingly
driven  at  this  depth  from  the  old  well  to  the  spot  indicated,  "  wiien
an  abundant  supply  of  excellent  water  was  obtained  which  speedily
filled  the  old  well  up  to  40  feet,"  i.e.,  to  the  level  of  the  spring.

No.  25. — Mr.  J.  G.  Marshall,  of  Leeds,  a  well-known  manufacturer,
seeing  the  account  in  the  newspapers  of  that  day,  wrote  to  Adams,
who  lived  at  Rowberrow,  near  Shipliam,  in  Somersetshire,  to  come  to
Leeds,  as  he  needed  a  good  supply  of  water.  Adams  came,  and
Mr.  Marshall  gives  the  following  report  in  a  letter  he  wrote,  which  I
summarise  : —

Monk  Coniston,  October  2Uh,  1846.

I  watched  Adams  closely  :  he  appears  a  j)erfectly,  simple,  honest,
straightforward  man.  At  the  spot  he  indicated,  and  about  the  dejjth  he
specified,  «  good  spring  of  vxder  was  found.  An  old  well  sunk  near  the  place
but  not  so  deep  had  no  water,  and  other  wells  near,  of  the  same  depth,  had
much  less  water.  I  tested  Adams  by  taking  him  over  our  factory  where  ho
had  no  possible  guide  from  anything  he  could  see  ;  he  pointed  out  remark-
ably nearly  the  position  of  the  springs  found  by  deep  bore  holes.  The
same  residt  was  found  at  another  factory  where  he  could  not  have  got  any
information,  nor  was  there  any  guide  from  what  was  said.

I  then  completely  blindfolded  him,  and  after  walking  him  about  in  various
directions  I  asked  him  to  fix  the  spot  whei'e  he  had  located  a  spiing  ;  in  the
first  attempt  he  failed,  but  afterwards  succeeded  ;  he  said  he  was  not  used  to
being  blindfolded  and  was  much  confused  by  it.

He  thinks  it  is  some  sort  of  vapour  comes  from  the  water  or  mineral
vein,  which  affects  his  nervous  system,  ' '  giving  him, "  as  he  describes  it,
"a  sort  of  turn."

Adams  failed  to  detect  coins  placed  under  hats,  and  yet  the  rod  turned,
which  was  the  most  suspicious  circumstance  I  saw.

I  and  several  others  repeatedly  tried  to  detect  some  motion  of  Adams'
fingers  when  the  rod  turned,  but  could  find  none  whatever.

J.  G.  Marshall.

Mr.  Phippen  says  he  has  in  his  possession  nearly  100  certificates
from  gentlemen  in  Somersetshire,  testifying  to  the  success  of  Adams
in  finding  water  by  his  "  dowsing  rod,"  and  quotes  the  following  as
one  instance  : —

Mr.  M.  Teek,  of  Hill  House,  near  Wells,  certifies  that  he  had  lived
40  years  in  that  house,  had  sunk  two  wells  to  a  depth  of  50  feet  each  but
found  no  water  in  either  case,  and  consequently  water  had  to  be  carried


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


49


a  considei-able  distance.  Adams  was  at  last  sent  for,  and  the  dowser  found
an  excellent  spring  of  water  close  to  the  house.

Mr.  Phippen  thinks  one  in  every  seven  or  eight  persons  have  the
"gift"  of  using  the  rod  if  they  tried,  and  concludes  by  giving
directions  as  to  holding  the  rod,  which  is  quoted  in  Appendix  C.

No.  26. — Mr.  Young,  of  Llanelly,  sent  me  some  details  of  the  finding
of  water  for  the  Shepton  Mallet  gaol  long  ago  by  the  dowser  Kingston,
who  used  to  live  at  Evercreech ;  previously  to  the  dowser's  visit  a
fruitless  well  had  been  sunk.  I  asked  Mr.  Young  to  get  me  the  exact
particulars,  and  he  sends  me  the  following  letter  from  Mi\  W.  Stone,
an  old  man  who  was  formerly  employed  at  the  gaol.

Shepton  Mallet,  December  Idth,  1896.
It  is  between  40  and  50  years  ago  the  trial  with  the  divining  rod  took
place  at  the  gaol.  All  I  remember  is  that  shortly  after  the  enlargement  of
the  gaol  we  wanted  more  water  and  a  deep  well  was  sunk,  but  no  water  was
found.  The  magistrates  then  consulted  and  determined  to  call  in  a  man
named  Kingston  who  used  the  divining  rod.  When  he  came,  after  trying
various  places  became  to  a  spot  in  the  front  yard,  and  here  he  said  "you  will
tind  water."  A  well  was  sunk,  but  I  cannot  remember  the  depth,  it  was  not
deep,  when  water  rushed  in  and  has  continued  to  do  so.  Stone

Mr.  Young  adds  the  gaol  authorities  used  the  water  supply  thus
found  for  over  forty  years  till  a  town  supply  was  laid  on.  Shepton
Mallet  and  Evercreech  are  at  the  foot  of  the  Mendip  Hills.


No.  27. — The  following  is  a  more  remarkable  case,  and  an  important
one  from  an  evidential  point  of  view  ;  it  is  also  from  Shepton  Mallet.
I  have  not  heard  whether  the  "diviner"  in  this  case  was  an  amateur
or  not  :  he  is  now  dead,  I  am  informed.  The  Bristol  Times  and  Mirror,
of  June  16th,  1891,  states:  —

The  Anglo -Bavarian  Brewery  at  Shepton  Mallet  needed  a  lai'ge  water
supply  ;  accordingly  excavations  had  been  made  to  find  water,  but  without
success.  About  two  years  since,  during  an  exceptionally  dry  season,  it
became  absolutely  necessary  to  obtain  a  further  supply  of  brewing  water  ;
hence  several  boring  experiments  were  made  on  the  propertj^  At  the
suggestion  of  a  gentleman  in  the  locality,  the  services  of  a  "  diviner"  were
obtained,  and  although  the  principal  members  of  the  firm  professed  to  have
no  faith  in  his  "art,"  yet  he  was  allowed  to  try  the  fields  on  the  company's
property,  and  those  on  the  neighbouring  estate,  and  discovered  the  well  now
used  by  the  brewery.  .  .  .  The  soothsayer,  who  carried  the  divining  rod,  a
hazel  branch,  was  Mr.  Charles  Sims,  a  local  farmer,  and  a  notable  discoverer
of  wells  m  the  district.  Operations  were  immediately  commenced,  and,  after
excavatmg  and  dynamiting  through  the  rock,  to  the  depth  of  50  feet,  a
magnificent  spring  was  discovered  in  a  fault  of  the  rock,  which  proved  to  be  of
exceptionally  fine  water,  and  of  even  a  finer  quahty  than  the  town's  supply.

E


50


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I  wrote  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Ijrewery  to  make  enquiries  and  he
replies  : —

Shepton  Mallet,  Somersetshire,  September  12th,  1896.
Replying  to  your  letter  iu  regard  to  a  local  diviner,  we  had  one  of  the
name  of  Sims,  from  Pilton,  who  successfully  denoted  a  spot  on  our  ground
where  we  have  had  an  abundant  supply  of  water  since.  This  was  some  eight
years  ago.

The  wi-iter  of  this  letter  also  has  had  some  considerable  experience  with
Mr.  Lawrence  of  Bristol,  who  was  one  of  the  most  noted  divining  rod  men
ill  the  West  of  England.  He  also  was  successful  in  denoting  a  supply  for  a
Bristol  brewery  with  which  the  writer  was  connected  ;  and  in  numerous
other  instances  in  the  neighbourhood.  Mr.  Lawrence  bore  a  very  high
reputation. We  believe  he  died  a  few  months  ago  at  a  ripe  old  age.

The  Anglo-Bavakian  Brewery,  Limited,

J.  Clifford,  Manager.

Having  written  to  ask  if  a  previous  boring  had  been  made,  and
if  so,  to  what  depth,  and  with  what  result,  the  following  reply  was
received  : —

Shejiton  Mallet,  Somersetshire,  September  iSth,  1896.
Replying  to  yours  of  the  14th,  a  boring  was  carried  out  to  the  extent  of
some  140  feet  without  success  on  another  portion  of  our  premises,  before  it
was  succesfully  done  at  the  spot  indicated  by  the  water-finder  ;  here  a  well
was  sunk  and  abundant  water  obtained  at  a  dejoth  of  40  feet.

The  Anglo-Bavarian  Brewery,  Limited,

J.  Clifford,  Manager.

No.  28. — The  next  two  cases  also  occurred  in  Somersetshire.  Mr.
W.  G.  Hellier,  of  Wick  St.  Lawrence,  near  Weston-super-Mare,  Bailiff
of  the  Merchant  Venturers  of  Bristol,  states  : —

January  7  th,  1897.

I  should  as  soon  think  of  planting  a  tree  with  its  root  upwards,  as  I
should  of  digging  a  well  for  water  without  employing  a  "dowser."  I  never
knew  the  rod  to  fail  in  the  hands  of  Thomas  Hares  or  John  Blake,  but  I
have  heard  of  many  failures  in  the  hands  of  supposed  dowsers.  Thomas
Hares  used  to  find  both  water  and  minerals  by  the  rod,  but  he  told  me  that  a
watch  spring  would  not  do  in  his  hands  for  finding  water,  though  it  was  all
right  for  minerals.

The  following  facts  are  within  my  own  knowledge.

Within  200  yards  or  so  of  Rectory  Farm  house,  at  Locking,  near  Weston-
super-Mare,  four  wells  have  been  sunk,  the  position  of  which  is  marked  on
the  enclosed  rough  tracing  from  the  parish  mai^.  For  No.  1  well,  the  spring
was  found  by  Thomas  Hares.  After  walking  over  the  field  in  different
directions,  with  the  rod  in  his  hand,  he  crossed  the  fence,  and,  whilst  on  the
top  of  it,  the  rod  kept  turning.  He  marked  the  sj^ot  of  the  spring,  and  on
that  spot  I  removed  the  fence  and  sank  the  well  where  the  fence  had  stood.
There  has  been  a  constant  supply  of  water  in  it,  even  all  through  last  summer,
Trhen  there  was  a  general  drought.


XXXII.]


Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


51


For  No.  2  well,  the  spring  was  found  by  John  Blake,  on  the  lawn  of  the
Vicarage,  opposite  the  drawing  room  window,  a  most  unsuitable  position.  I
sank  t]ie  well  and  there  is  a  plentiful  supply  of  water,  with  no  lack  last
summer.

Position  of  the  fouk  wells  taken  from  the  Map  of
Locking  Parish.


O No.  2.


Church


No.  3.  O


No.  4.  O


O No.  1.


0  5  10
 I  I  I

Chains.
Fig.  .3.

No.  3  well  was  sunk  without  a  dowser.  It  is  10  feet  deeper  than  No.  1.
There  was  no  water  in  it  all  last  summer,  and  I  should  not  think  it  has  6
feet  of  water  in  it  now.

No.  4  well  was  also  sunk  without  a  dowser,  because  the  place  was  thought
likely  for  water.  It  is  nearly  as  deep  as  No.  1.  There  is  water  in  it  for  about
9  months  of  the  year,  but  last  summer  it  was  quite  dry.

Water  was  wanted  at  Edbrook  Cottage,  in  Fiddington,  near  Bridgwater.
There  was  a  good  S2:)ring  in  afield  200  yards  away,  and  the  dowser  traced  it
over  field,  fence  and  roadway,  and  marked  the  spot  for  a  well  just  opposite
the  door  of  the  cottage.  I  sank  the  well  there,  and  the  tenants  have  never
had  to  go  elsewhere  for  water  since.

Whilst  the  dowser  was  tracing  this  spring,  walking  backwards  and
forwards  across  the  line  of  its  course,  I  hid  my  pocket  compass  in  the  long
grass  in  his  track,  and,  when  he  came  to  it,  the  rod  turned  over,  and  he  said
"  There  is  summat  here."  I  am  certain  that  he  did  not  see  the  compass
until  afterwards,  when  I  showed  it  to  him  hidden.

The  most  striking  case  I  know  of  is  on  Sandford  Green,  in  the  parish  of
Winscombe,  Somerset,  where  Thomas  Hares  ofi"ered  to  sink  his  well  for
nothing,  if  lie  did  not  come  to  the  spriirg. There  was  already  a  well  on  the

E  2


52


Profeasor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


green,  but  it  had  scarcely  any  water  during  the  summer  months. The  well  '
sunk  by  the  dowser  was  so  near  it  that  the  sinkers  threw  the  dirt  as  they  dug
it  out  from  the  new  well  into  the  old  one. The  water  rose  to  within  6  feet  of
tlie  top  of  the  new  well. This  was  some  30  years  ago. The  spring  was  the
talk  of  the  neighbourhood  at  the  time,  and  it  is  still  a  noted  one.

I  could  go  on  telling  yarns  about  dowsers,  but  all  that  I  have  written  has
come  under  my  own  observation,  and  I  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  it.

W.  G.  Hellier.

Mr.  George  H.  Pope,  Treasurer  of  the  Merchant  Venturers  of
jjristol,  .sent  me  the  above  account,  with  the  following  letter  in  reply
to  mine  : —

Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol,  January  8th,  1897.
I  asked  my  bailiff,  Mr.  Hellier,  for  information,  and  digested  what  he
told  me  into  the  above  memorandum,  which  he  says  is  quite  correct  and  has
signed.

The  "dowsers"  mentioned  in  it,  Hares  and  Blake,  died  three  or  four
y^^'^"  Geokge  H.  Pope.

Mr.  Pope  kindly  made  enquiries  for  me  as  to  the  exact  depth  of
the  above  wells  and  writes  : — ■

Bristol,  Fehniarii  1st,  1897.
No.  1  well.  Church  Farm,  is  20  feet  deej).
No.  2  well,  Vicarage  Lawn,  is  31  feet  deejD.
No.  3  well  is  dry,  and  is  33  feet  deep.
No.  4  well,  Garden  well,  about  12  feet  deep.

Regarding  the  wells  on  Sandford  Green,  the  one  sunk  at  the  spot
indicated  by  tlie  dowser,  is  33  feet  deep,  and  has  at  present  19  feet  of  water
in  it. Unfortunately  the  old  well  has  been  filled  up.

George  H.  Pope.

No.  29. — In  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bath  Natural  History  and  Field
Club  for  1894  (Vol.  VIII.,  p.  61),  Colonel  Long  gives  the  following
account  of  the  discovery  of  "  a  perennial  water  supply  by  the  aid  of
two  noted  dowsers,  Thomas  Young  and  Thomas  Day."  Omitting  a
few  details,  the  following  is  Colonel  Long's  statement  :  —

Woodlands,  Congresbury,  Somerset.
For  many  years  I  have  been  dependent  on  rain  for  my  water  suj^ply,  and
those  who  do  the  same  well  know  how  unreliable  this  is.  ...  In  1885
I  moved  to  Clevedon  expecting  to  let  this  place  easily,  but  the  want  of
spring  water  prevented  my  getting  a  tenant.  In  1888  I  returned  and
determined  to  get  water  if  possible.  ...  I  sent  for  Thomas  Young
who  lived  at  Rowberrow,  and  was  noted  as  a  successful  dowser.  ...  I
asked  Young  to  dowse  over  a  field  called  Taylor  Hill.  Almost  immediately
he  struck  on  a  stream  and  on  tlie  side  of  the  Hill  (exactly  300  yards  from
my  house  and  several  feet  above  it),  the  stick  twisted  considerably.  Here
a  well  was  sunk  22  feet  deep.  This  filled  in  the  winter,  but  soon  became
dry  in  the  summer,  and  in  September,  1889  (Thomas  Young  had  died),


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  53


Thomas  Day,  another  noted  dowser  who  also  lived  at  Rowberrow,  descended
- the  well  with  me. The  twigs  were  much  agitated,  and,  one  after  the  other,
if  not  allowed  to  twist,  snapjaed  off.

Day  said,  "There  is  a  lot  of  water  under  here."  He  undertook  the
sinking  and  sunk  30  feet  more,  when  the  water  came  in  so  fast  he  had  to
leave,  and  ever  since,  even  during  this  dry  summer  (1893)  I  have  had  plenty.
Of  dowsing  I  can  offer  no  explanation. I  am  contented  with  the  result.

In  reference  to  the  above,  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Winwood,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,
adds  the  following  note  : —

The  well  in  question  was  sunk  through  the  New  Red  Marl  whicli  here
rests  on  the  carboniferous  limestone,  and  apparently  the  water  was  found
before  the  limestone  had  been  reached.  It  seemed  an  unlikely  place  to
meet  with  a  spring.

No.  30. — In  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,Vol.  II.,  p.l05,is  given  a  striking
instance  of  water  finding  by  the  diviner,  W.  Stokes,  an  aged  man,
living  in  Newbury,  Berks,  where  he  has  for  many  years  been  employed
as  a  wheelwright.  That  Stokes  really  was  an  excellent  dowser  Miss
Cox  has  shown  in  her  paper  before  the  Folk  Lore  Congress,  already
mentioned  ;  space  will  not  permit  my  quoting  the  evidence  cited  by
Miss  Cox.  Stokes,  however,  professed  to  be  able  to  discover  which
is  spring  water  and  which  rain  water.  Some  elaborate  trials  were
made  with  him  for  this  purpose  at  Donnington,  near  Newbury,  in
1886,  and  the  careful  tests  adopted  showed  that  the  result  was  no
moi'e  than  mere  chance  coincidence  would  have  given.  The  full  report
is  given  in  the  Reivbiiry  Weekly  News  for  July  29th,  1886,  and  signed
by  Di*.  Palmer,  H.  I.  Reid,  F.S.  A.,  and  the  three  other  members  of  the
investigating  committee.

Subsequently  Mr.  Reid  wrote  to  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney  as  follows  : —

Donnington,  Newbury,  Berks.,  August  2nd,  1886.
A  week  last  Saturday  the  old  man  came  here  again  for  another  trial,  but
I  could  not  be  worried  to  go  through  all  the  test  again,  so  we  simply  drew
lots  for  five  vessels,  and  placed  the  tickets  under  each  bucket  as  drawn.  He
tried  all  five  and  was  in  eacli  case  wrong,  three  spring  he  called  surface,  two
rain  he  called  spring.  The  buckets  were  again  emi^tied  and  refilled  again  by
lot,  he  tried  all  five,  and  I  then  again  told  him  before  lifting  the  bucket,  to
try  a  second  time  to  be  certain.  This  he  did,  and  the  fifth  bucket  he  had
declared  to  be  spring  he  then  saw  was  rain,  so  that  that  bucket  was  discarded,
for  in  one  case  he  must  of  course  have  been  right.  The  other  four  were
then  again  lifted  and  the  cards  beneath  showed  he  was  in  each  instance
.  wrong.  A  more  complete  failure  cannot  be  imagined.  He  seemed  very
do^vncast  and  again  requested  another  trial.  This  I  am  at  present  disinclined
to  trouble  about,  the  more  so  as  I  am  leaving  here  for  town  in  a  few  days.
It  seems  as  if  he  wanted  to  be  tested  until  he  had  achieved  a  success  !


Herbert  I.  Reid.


54


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


This  well  illustrates  the  absurdity  of  many  of  the  beliefs  held  about
the  divining  I'od.  Probably  Stokes  had  found  he  was  sometimes
successful  in  these  experiments  and  so  had  been  led  to  entertain  the
belief  he  expressed.  But,  as  I  shall  show  in  the  case  of  hidden  coins,
such  success  is  due  to  chance  coincidence  or  unconscious  indications
given  by  those  present.

No.  -31. — The  accompanying  letters  refer  to  a  dowser,  Rufus
A'Barrow,  of  Sturt  Farm,  Stalbridge,  Dorset,  who  has  since  died.
The  lirst  letter  is  from  Mr.  Dendy  to  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  ;  —

University  College,  Oxford,  Noconher,  1887.

You  asked  me  to  write  you  a  short  account  of  the  searcli  for  water  which
T  witnessed  last  July.  The  operator  was  one  Rufus  A'Barrow,  of  Stalbridge,
Dorset.  The  locus  in  quo  was  chiefly  slightly  rising  ground  behind  my
father's  house — Lattiford  House,  Wincanton,  Somerset.  The  operator  took
a  flexible  forked  twig  between  his  forefingers  and  thumbs  and  carrying  it,
point  downwards,  quartered  the  ground.  After  a  short  search  the  forked
stick  sprung  upwards  ;  the  two  twigs  of  the  fork  bending  and  tlie  man's
thumbs  remaining  in  their  previous  direction,  that  is,  pointing  downwards.
The  stick  retained  this  position  as  long  as  he  stood  upon  the  spot  of  ground,
where  he  was  supposed  to  have  discovered  water,  and  returned  to  its
downward  direction  as  soon  as  he  stepped  off'  it.  He  then  proceeded  to
trace  the  flow  of  the  water  and  followed  it  some  eighty  yards  to  a  small  lawn
behind  the  house  when  he  recommended  the  digging  of  the  well.  He
afterwards  experimented  for  our  amusement  in  other  places  with  the  same
results.  In  all  cases  but  one  when  the  stick  indicated  water,  he  was  able  to
follow  its  course.  In  that  case  he  could  find  no  flow  away  from  the  spot.
Some  of  us  tried  to  operate  with  the  twig.  It  showed  no  movement  in  the
hands  of  any  but  one  lady,  niy  brother's  wife.  When  she  held  it  over  the
course,  which  A.  Barrow  had  indicated,  it  rose  very  slightly  and  slowly  as  I
showed  you  when  here,  but  still  quite  distinctly.

My  father  writes  to  me  this  morning.  "  Rufus  A'Barrow  has  been  most
successful  in  these  pans,  not  one  failure.  Bradney  has  twenty-five  feet  of
water  in  his  well."  I  have  written  to  Bradney,  a  neighbour  of  ours,  and
have  asked  him  to  write  an  account  to  you  iif  the  discovery  of  his  well.

A.  Dendy.

Accordingly  the  following  letter  was  received  from  Mr.  Bradney: —

Bayford  Lodge,  Wincanton,  November  lOtJi,  1887.
Some  time  ago  I  was  anxious  to  find  a  spring  on  my  property,  so  sent  for
a  farmer,  by  name  Mr.  Rufus  A'Barrow,  who  was  renowned  for  this  kind  of
work  with  the  divining  rod.  He  duly  came  over,  and  the  first  thing  he  did  was
to  cut  a  Y  shaped  twig  out  of  the  hedge,  thus  c — <C^b' then  held  the  two
ends  of  the  fork  at  A  and  B  between  the  forefinger  and  thumb  of  his  right  and
left  hand,  the  point  being  straight-a-head  of  him  ;  he  then  commenced  his  ,
walk  and  in  a  very  short  time  the  twig  pointed  straight  upwards  thus  : —  1
here  he  said  was  the  spring,  which  he  traced  for  some  distance  and  '  '
eventually  pointed  out  to  me  where  he  thought  was  the  best  place  for  me  to


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  '  55

sink  a  well.  He  seemed  to  be  able  to  trace  to  the  eighth  of  an  inch  the  course
of  the  spring,  as  the  moment  he  went  to  the  right  or  the  left  of  it  or  in  any
way  got  off  its  course,  down  went  the  twig  immediately.  As  far  as  I  could
see,  the  twig  pointed  upwards  quite  of  its  own  accord,  but  the  best  proof  of
the  matter  is  that  I  sunk  for  water  where  he  told  me,  and  at  the  depth  of
some  fifty  feet  came  to  a  beautiful  spring,  and  I  have  now  twenty-six  feet  or
more  of  water  in  the  well.  If  there  should  be  any  more  facts  that  you
would  like  to  ask  about,  I  shall  be  most  happy  if  in  my  power  to  give  them.

John  Bradney.

In  answer  to  enquiries,  Mr.  Bradney  writes  : —

December  ith,  1887.
As  to  whether  there  might  be  water  10,  20,  30,  or  100  yards  on  either
side  of  my  well,  of  course  I  can't  say.  I  only  can  say  that  where  he  said  there
was  water  I  sunk  and  found  a  good  supply.


No.  32. — The  same  dowser  is  referred  to  in  a  letter  I  lately  received
from  Major  GofF,  of  Hale  Park,  Salisbury,  who  writes  : —

Hale  Park,  Salisbury,  Nocember  Id,  1896.

Some  years  ago  I  had  a  water-finder,  A'Barrow,  of  Stalbridge,  to  try  and
find  water  for  the  Home  Farm.  No  one  had  any  notion  as  to  where  any
was  to  be  found  except  from  the  existing  Avells,  which  were  some  30  to  50
feet  deep.  On  the  man's  arrival  he  was  taken  to  ground  rising  above  the
steading  and  at  once  found  traces  of  water,  which  he  said  must  be  near  the
surface  and  sprung  about  50  yards  from  the  farm  stables.  A  well  was
accordingly  commenced  and  water  was  come  to  at  13  feet,  to  every  one's
astonishment.  The  farm  and  neighbouring  people  looked  upon  the  pro-
ceeding as  uncanny,  and  declared  that  the  water  found  was  only  surface  ;
however,  the  well  has  never  given  out,  even  in  the  driest  summer,  which
rather  does  away  with  the  surface  idea.

I  had  the  man  over  again  a  year  or  so  after  to  try  for  water  on  one  of  our
down  farms  in  the  chalk  ;  he  found  traces,  but  said  the  water  was  very  deep,
so  I  did  not  dig  on  account  of  the  expense,  knowing  that  the  existing  wells
were  over  100  feet  deep.  .  ^  Goff

In  reply  to  mine,  Major  Goff  writes  : —

Nuvemher  3rd,  1896.
The  astonishment  of  tlie  local  people  was  due  to  the  water  being  found
where  it  was  not  expected,  and  at  a  lesser  depth  than  the  other  wells,  which
were  within  100  yards  and  had  a  habit  in  a  dry  summer  of  giving  out.

C.  Goff.

P.S. — A'Barrow  would  take  no  fee  if  water  was  not  found  where  he  said
it  was.

No.  33.— The  Rev.  C.  H.  Mayo,  M.A.,  of  Long  Burton  Vicarage,
Sherborne,  Dorset,  Editor  of  the  Somerset  and  Dorset  Notes  and
Queries,  kindly  sends  me  a  lengthy  account  of  another  instance  of
Rufus  A'Barrow's  use  of  the  rod,  which  Mr. Mayo  witnessed  in


56


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


August,  1890.  The  place  where  the  operations  were  conducted  was  a
farm  at  Holnest,  Dorset,  and  on  sinking  at  the  spot  indicated  by  the
dowser,  water  was  found.  A'Barrow  stated  that  it  was  through
watching  a  dowser  named  Kingston  at  Ditclieat,  Somerset,  40  years
previously,  that  he  discovered  he  also  had  the  power  of  using  the  rod  ;
though  at  hrst  he  was  disposed  to  think  the  indications  it  gave  were
worthless,  he  had  found  they  were  not  so.  Kingston  was  the  dowser
mentioned  in  No.  26.

I  am  also  indebted  to  the  Rev.  G.  H.  Mayo  for  kindly  obtaining
full  particulars  of  another  case  of  dowsing  for  water  in  his  neighbour-
hood, which  turned  out  a  complete  failure  ;  this  will  be  given  on  a
subsequent  page.

No.  34. — The  following  details  of  a  case  of  successful  water-finding
by  means  of  the  divining  rod  at  Meredith,  near  Gloucester,  were
kindly  written  for  our  Society  by  Sir  W.  Wedderburn,  Bart.,  M.P.
It  is  an  interesting  and  useful  report  from  the  careful  description
given. Note  the  straight  rod  used  by  the  dowser  : —

Meredith,  Gloucester,  January  Lst,  1888.

Up  to  the  present  year  the  water  supply  at  Meredith  has  depended  mainly
upon  a  well  near  the  house.  This  well  is  54  feet  deep,  and  at  the  most
favourable  times  is  about  half  full  of  water  ;  but  after  dry  seasons,  and
when  there  is  a  large  demand  upon  it,  the  level  becomes  much  lower,  and  in
1S8^  there  were  only  about  five  feet  of  water.  Previous  to  the  summer  of
1887  the  seasons  had  been  exceptionally  dry,  so  that  the  water  supply  began
to  cause  considerable  anxiety,  and  in  May  and  June  last  the  reduced  amount
coming  into  the  well  hardly  met  the  day's  consumption.

Under  these  circumstances  I  determined  to  sink  a  new  well,  and  the  time
seemed  opportune,  because  any  spring  ruiming  in  so  dry  a  season  was  not
likely  to  fail  at  any  other  time.  Also  Mr.  Price,  of  Tibberton's  Court,  had
recently  emjiloyed  a  water-finder,  or  "  dowser,  '  who  had  succeeded  in  finding
a  strong  spring  on  Mr.  Langford's  farm,  at  Rudford  ;  and  I  was  inclined  to
try  the  same  experiment,  both  because  the  water-finder,  Mr.  Thomas  Willis,
of  Gloucester,  was  reported  to  be  very  successful,  and  because  I  was  curious
to  see  the  working  of  the  "  divining  rod,"  which  is  generally  believed  in  in
this  part  of  the  country.  Accordingly,  Mi'.  Willis  came  by  appointment  on
the  morning  of  Monday,  4th  July.

I  believe  a  forked  rod  is  generally  used,  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  Mr.
Willis,  who  uses  a  simple  wand,  of  hazel  or  honeysuckle  for  preference,  some
18  inches  in  length,  and  as  slender  as  it  can  be  cut.  He  also  uses  sometimes
a  steel  wire,  such  as  can  be  taken  out  of  the  framework  of  an  umbrella,
and  during  his  operations  we  found  that  he  sometimes  tried  one  kind  of  wand
and  sometimes  another.  He  had  brought  a  steel  wire  with  him,  and  began
by  cutting  a  few  wands  from  a  hedge  of  filbert  bushes  and  from  a  honeysuckle,
and  he  then  enquired  whereabouts  I  wanted  to  find  water.  I  pointed  out  to
him,  as  the  desired  site,  an  orchard  near  the  garden  and  stables  ;  and  also
showed  him  where  the  old  well  is. Mr.  Willis  is  a  cabinet-maker  by  trade,


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


67


and  is  a  quiet  young  man,  apparently  about  25  years  of  age,  and  seems  to  be
of  a  sensitive  temperament.  .  .  .  After  a  few  minutes  lie  summoned  us
to  where  he  was  and  said  that  he  had  found  a  spring.  He  pointed  out  the
exact  spot,  where  we  drove  in  a  peg  ;  and  he  then  showed  us  how  the  rod
worked  when  held  over  the  spot.  What  we  saw  was  that  the  muscles  of  his
arms  appeared  to  work  and  twitch  as  if  he  was  holding  the  handles  of  a  mild
galvanic  battery,  and  the  wand  or  wire,  from  being  straight  between  his
handii  bent  into  a  sort  of  bow  and  worked  round  like  a  crank,  rotating
upwards  when  passing  the  holder's  body.  As  far  as  the  observers  could  see,
Sir.  Willis  was  using  all  his  force  to  keep  the  rod  in  its  horizontal  position,
and  the  result  of  the  tight  hold  he  kept  of  the  ends  of  the  rod  was  that,  as  it
rotated,  tlie  bark  was  crushed  and  twisted  at  the  place  where  he  held  it,  until
he  finally  let  go.  When  we  came  to  consider  the  spot  thus  indicated,  we  found
that  it  was  40  or  50  paces  due  south  from  the  old  well,  and  as  the  strata  are
believed  to  slope  from  south  to  north,  there  appeared  reason  to  think  that  we
had  struck  upon  the  spring  which  supplies  the  old  well.  We,  therefore,
decided  to  look  for  another  spring  further  east  in  the  same  orchard,  and  after
a  little  time  Mr.  Willis  found  one,  some  30  yards  to  the  east  of  the  first  peg.
Another  peg  was  driven  in  to  show  the  centre  of  the  new  well  to  be  dug.  He
was  of  opinion  that  the  sjjring  last  found  was  a  strong  one.  He  does  not
profess  to  be  able  to  say  at  what  depth  the  water  will  be  found,  but  ordinarily
he  is  not  able  to  detect  it  at  a  greater  depth  than  40  or  50  feet.  He  thought
we  should  have  to  go  some  25  or  30  feet  in  the  present  case.  Later  on  we
took  him  to  another  held  at  Runless  Hill,  about  half  a  mile  off,  where  I
wanted  to  find  water.  Here  he  tried  for  some  time,  but  although  he  found
indications  of  water,  he  did  not  tliink  there  was  a  sufficient  quantity  to  justify
digging.  He  also  tried  in  a  field  below  Meredith,  to  the  north,  and  we
mai'ked  places  where  he  found  water.

A  few  days  later  the  new  well  was  commenced  on  the  spot  indicated,  the
peg  No.  2  being  taken  as  the  centre.  For  30  feet  we  went  down  through  red
marl,  with  occasional  veins  of  a  somewhat  harder  rock,  but  no  signs  of  water.
We  then  came  to  a  stratum,  some  4  or  5  inches  thick,  of  hard,  tea-green
stone,  and  from  that  time  a  little  water  began  to  come  in,  trickling  in  small
quantities  from  the  sides  of  the  well.  This  continued  till  the  well  was  about
47  feet  deep,  when  water  began  to  come  in  so  fast  as  to  impede  the  working.
The  men  had  to  send  up  three  buckets  of  water  for  one  of  marl,  and  by  the
time  they  had  completed  three  feet  more  the  water  came  in  so  quickly  that
they  had  to  stop  working.  Subsequently  experiments  were  made  to  ascertain
whether  there  was  any  connection  between  the  two  wells.  On  the  10th  of
August  there  were  about  six  feet  of  water  in  each  well,  and  by  levelling  we
ascertained  that  the  bottom  of  the  new  well  was  some  two  feet  above  the
surface  of  the  water  in  the  old  well.  It  was,  therefore,  not  possible  that  the
water  in  the  new  well  could  come  from  the  old  well.  Also  at  difi"erent  times
we  pumped  the  water  out  of  the  two  wells,  and  found  that  pumping  one  well
did  not  affect  the  level  of  the  water  in  the  other.  We,  therefore,  concluded
that  there  was  no  connection  between  the  two  wells,  and  that  Mr.  Willis  had
discovered  a  new  spring.  We  also  ascertained  that  whereas  the  old  well  was
replenished  at  the  rate  of  about  a  gallon  in  ten  minutes,  the  new  well  filled  at
the  rate  of  a  gallon  a  minute,  being  about  ten  times  the  sup2:)ly  of  the  old  one.


58


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  water  in  the  two  wells  was  analysed  by  the  public  analyst  for  Gloucester,
with  the  result  that  the  water  in  the  new  well  was  found  to  be  different  from
and  sujjerior  to  the  water  in  the  old  well .

As  regards  the  nature  of  the  phenomena  we  witnessed,  I  may  note  that
we  were  all  satisfied  of  the  bona  fides  of  Mr.  Willis.  It  may  be  added  that,
though  almost  always  successful,  he  does  not  follow  the  occujmtion  of  a  water
finder  professionally,  and  only  accepts  a  uKjilerate  fee  after  the  water  has
been  dug  for  and  found.

I  can  only  add  two  facts  mentioned  to  me  by  Mr.  Willis.  One  is  that  he
can  (3nly  detect  a  spring  or  running  water,  the  rod  not  being  in  any  way
affected  when  he  stood  over  a  large  subterranean  reservoir.

W.  Wedderburn.

In  reply  to  recent  enquiries,  Sir  W.  Wedderburn  writes  : —

19,  Beaufort  Gardens,  S.W.,  February  19f7i,  1897.

I  have  little  to  add  to  the  account  of  our  water  finding,  except  that  the
well  continues  to  give  a  good  supply  of  water.  A  few  years  ago,  during  a
very  dry  season,  I  took  the  ojiportunity  to  deepen  it  a  few  feet,  but
ordinarily  the  water  stands  at  the  original  level.

I  do  not  remember  whether  in  my  former  communication  I  mentioned
that  Mr.  Willis  told  me  that  a  friend  of  his  polarised  the  steel  wire  he  had
been  using  to  find  water,  and  from  that  time  it  would  not  act.  This  seems
to  show  that  electricity  has  something  to  do  with  the  phenomenon,  and  this
is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  only  moving  water  (which  is  accompanied  by
friction)  seems  to  aftect  the  "  divining  rod. "  ^  Wedderbukn.

The  effect  of  polarising  (magnetising)  the  steel  wire  is  another  of
the  many  illustrations,  which  this  enquiry  has  brought  to  light,  of  the
profound  influence  exercised  by  a  pi'econceived  idea  upon  the  motion
of  the  rod.  Sir  W.  Wedderburn  would  find  the  inhibitory  effect  take
place  equally  well  if  Mr.  Willis  had  been  told  the  wire  was  magnetised,
and  yet  notliing  at  all  done  to  it.  In  Germany,  200  years  ago,  not
only  hazel  and  willow  and  whalebone,  but  snuffers,  tongs,  and  even  a
long  bent  German  sausage  were  used  as  divining  rods  according  to  the
idea  of  the  particular  dowser.

No.  35. — Mr.  Barber,  the  principal  of  a  firm  of  surveyors  in
London,  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

22,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  W.C.,  June  25th,  1896.

I  did  a  large  mansion  at  Ross,  in  Herefordshire,  and  there  we  engaged  a
man  wlio  found  water  bytlie  "divining  rod,"  and  plenty  of  it  ;  but  I  can  hear
nothing  of  him,  although  I  have  written  to  two  or  three  people,  but  I  fancy
he  came  from  Wales.  In  this  instance  I  sjient  a  morning  with  him  going
over  the  Estate,  and  suddenly  he  broke  out  into  a  fearful  perspiration,  and,
after  tapping  about  the  earth  for  some  time,  declared  there  was  water
beneath.  We  sank  a  well,  and  there  ivas.  I  may  add  that  water  is  very
scarce  in  that  neighbourhood,  and  at  the  time  the  man  was  considered  very
clever,  and  my  client  was  delighted.  Walter  W.  Barber.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


69


Mr.  Barber  is  unable  to  remember  the  name  of  the  dowser,  but  it
was  probably  INIr.  Heighway ;  see  Group  IX.  This  letter  is  only
quoted  as  an  instance  of  the  remarkable,  and,  I  believe,  perfectly
genuine  and  uncontrollable,  physiological  effect  which  seems,  in  many
oases,  to  accompany  the  dowser's  discovery  of  an  underground  spring.

No.  36. — In  his  little  book  on  the  divining  rod,  published  at  Cleve-
land, U.S.A.,  in  1876,  Mr.  Chas.  Latimer,  a  civil  engineer  of  repute  in
Ohio,  gives  several  instances  of  his  success  as  a  dowser,  especially  in
discovering  the  exact  depth  at  which  water  would  be  found.  This  he
arrives  at  by  noting  the  position  when  the  forked  twig  turns  to  45  deg.
as  at  A,  then  walking  on  till  it  points  vertically  downwards  as  at  B  ;

he  concludes  from  this  that B  A the  depth  of  the  water

from  the  surface  B  C  is  equal  /  to  the  distance  traversed,

A  B  ; BAG and  B  G  A  X being equal angles  :  he

states  he  has  verified  this  /  repeatedly.  This  would  be
very  satisfactory  if  it  could  be  ^  established,  but  Mr.  Latimer  fur-
nishes no  conclusive  evidence  of  his  theory,  and  the  effect  he
has  observed  may  be  due  to  his  own  unconscious  suggestion  on  the
motion  of  the  rod.

In  the  Cleveland  Leader  (September,  1893)  Mr.  Whitelaw,  the
engineer  to  the  township  waterworks,  states  that  the  severe  tests  to
which  he  has  submitted  Mr.  Latimer  have  completely  destroyed  the
profound  scepticism  he  previously  entertained  as  to  the  value  of  the
indications  afforded  by  the  divining  I'od.  Mr.  Whitelaw  narrates
several  of  these  tests  ;  amongst  others  he  took  Mr.  L.  to  a  particular
square  where  he  (Mr.  W.)  knew,  but  the  public  did  not  know,  that
there  was  a  certain  water  main  running  diagonally  across  the  square.
Casually  remarking  (apparently  to  mislead  Mr.  Latimer)  :  "You  know
there  are  no  mains  in  the  square,"  they  proceeded  to  cross  it.  At  a
certain  spot  the  rod  in  Mr.  Latimer's  hand  turned  downwards,  and
Mr.  L.  remarked,  "there  is  certainly  something  here."  This  was
correct.  Mr.  Wliitelaw  adds  ;  "  When  we  came  directly  over  the  main
the  butt  of  the  rod  pointed  down  to  it,  and  he  (Mr.  Latimer)  told  me
the  depth  as  well  as  I  knew  it  myself."  This  experiment  was  repeated
with  equal  success  at  other  parts  of  the  town,  so  that  Mr.  Whitelaw
asserts  Mr.  Latimer  found  the  different  water  mains  and  their  depths
as  accurately  as  if  he  had  gained  beforehand  a  minute  knowledge  of
their  location.  Of  Mr.  Latimer's  good  faith  and  high  position  the
report  furnishes  evidence.

I  add  the  following  cases  reported  in  newspapers,  for  which  I
have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  confirmation  ;  partly  because  they
are  of  some  interest  when  taken  together  with  the  others,  partly


60


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


because  I  may  possibly  i-eceive  confirmation  of  some  of  them  from
readers  of  this  paper.

No.  37. — The  Isle  of  Wight  Expr^ess,  for  March  18tli,  1893,  contains
an  interesting  report  of  the  success  of  two  amateur  dowsers  at
Shanklin.  It  seems  that  the  Local  Board  were  in  straits  for  want
of  a  good  water  supply  Eventually  they  employed  MuUins,  whose
remarkable  career  as  a  dowser  will  be  evident  later  ;  Mullins  came  and
fixed  on  two  spots  where,  he  said,  water  would  be  found.  The  Local
Board  employed  a  well  sinker,  Mr.  Parsons,  and  then  the  majority
thought  they  knew  better  than  Mullins,  and  made  a  boring  ia  a
different  place. The  leport  goes  on  : —

Tlie  Board  paid  a  gentleman  to  tell  them  where  the  water  was  ;  but  in
their  wisdom  they  decided  to  try  a  spot  of  their  own  choosing,  with  the
result  that  Mr.  Parsons  has  gone  to  a  considerable  depth,  and  broken  his
tools,  without  discovering  the  precious  liquid.  The  divining  abilities  of
Mr.  Mullins  were  looked  at  very  sceptically  by  some,  because  there  seemed
to  be  no  reason  why  the  hazel  twig  should  rise  when  Mr.  Mullins  passed
over  a  sjjring  ;  but  this  divining  quality  dwells  in  others  besides  Mr.
MulHns.

Two  members  of  the  Local  Board,  Messrs.  J.  Bailey  and  J.  Milman
Brown,  have  found  themselves  possessed  with  the  unknown  power,  and  in
consequence  have  been  making  experiments  in  the  Great  Woods,  with  the
result  that  they  have  proved,  to  their  own  satisfaction,  at  least,  that  strong
springs  exist  in  the  places  indicated  by  Mr.  Mullins,  but  stronger  ones  in
other  prats  higher  up  the  hill.  The  Board  at  their  last  nieeting  granted  £10
to  these  two  gentlemen  to  experiment  with,  and  they  have  thought  it  best  to
try  the  strongest  spot  marked  by  Mr.  Mullins  first.  This  they  have  done,
and  after  going  down  22  feet,  water  was  found  and  lias  risen  9  feet  10
inches. This  is  very  gratifying.

Our  Shanklin  correspondent  accompanied  Messrs.  Brown  and  Bailey
on  one  of  their  divining  expeditions  and  witnessed  the  marvellous
phenomenon  ;  and  while  no  explanation  can  be  given,  it  is  a  fact  beyond
dispute  that  the  twig  turns  over  with  an  irresistible  imjsulse  when  the
operator  is  in  the  vicinity  of  a  spring  and  cannot  be  kept  back  even  by
force. The  experimenters  are  delighted  with  their  success.

A  Mr.  Watson,  a  carter  in  the  employ  (jf  Mr.  Moorman,  has  the  divining
quality  even  more  strongly  developed  than  Messrs.  Brown  and  Bailey,  and
has  amused  himself  and  his  friends  by  being  blindfolded  after  indicating  a
spring  and  again  finding  the  same  spot.
*

No.  38. — The  Dublin  Daily  Express  for  January  15th,  1889,  states
that : —

A  farmer  named  Griffen,  living  at  Knocknaboley,  near  Tinahely,  having
seen  the  divining  rod  used  for  finding  water  in  America,  whence  he  had  lately
returned,  discovered  that  he  also  could  use  it.  Accordingly,  finding  on  his
return  that  his  family  were  carrying  water  from  a  great  distance,  he  tried


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


61


the  rod,  whicli,  contrary  to  the  local  belief,  as  the  house  was  on  a  hill,
indicated  an  underground  spring  close  to  the  house.  A  well  was  therefore
dug  at  this  spot,  and  at  a  depth  of  only  six  feet,  a  splendid  spring  was  struck,
which  has  since  given  a  copious  supply.

I  should  be  glad  of  any  confirmation  of  the  above  statement  from
those  living  in  the  neighbourhood  :  Tinahely  is  a  town  in  co.  Wicklow.

No.  39. — The  next  account  is  taken  from  the  Wesfe^-n  Mercury  of
March  1st,  1890.

The  divining  rod,  as  a  means  of  finding  a  good  supply  of  water,  stood
a  very  successful  trial  last  week  at  Oundle,  Northamptonshire.  Mr.  W.
Todd,  a  landowner,  requiring  a  well  on  a  portion  of  his  property,  sent  for  a
diviner,  a  man  named  Pearson.  There  has  lately  been  some  considerable
difficulty  m  obtaining  water  in  this  to^vn,  and  the  Commissioners  have  spent
£83  in  trial  borings.  Although  these  trials  were  conducted  by  a  professional
man,  they  proved  futile.  In  the  presence  of  a  number  of  spectators  drawn
together  by  the  novelty  of  the  experiment,  Mr.  Pearson  walked  over  the
estate  with  the  usual  V-shaped  hazel  twig.  The  rod  was  visibly  agitated  in
several  places,  but  the  diviner  kept  on  until  it  almost  bent  itself  double  in
his  hands.  At  this  spot  he  indicated  with  confidence  that  a  good  supply  of
water  would  be  found.  A  well  was  accordingly  sunk  with  tlie  result  that  at
17  feet  deep,  water  was  found  in  such  abundance  that  it  rapidly  rose  to
within  three  feet  of  the  surface,  at  which  height  it  has  since  remained.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Todd,  but  have  had  no  reply,  and  should  therefore
be  glad  of  any  further  information  from  the  Oundle  Commissioners  or
from  my  geological  friends.

No.  40. — I  had  not  before  heard  of  the  "dowser"  named  in  the
accompanying  paragraph,  which  is  taken  from  the  Wisbech  Standard
of  October  24th,  1890  :—

Mr.  F.  Read,  of  Wisbech  Market,  experienced  great  difficulty  in
getting  a  proper  supply  of  water  in  a  green  field  occupied  by  him  at  World's
End.  The  result  was  that  the  aid  of  Mr.  William  Upcroft  Hill  was  called  in,
and,  by  means  of  the  divining  rod,  a  spot  was  indicated  and  fixed  upon,  and
well-sinking  begun  at  once,  the  resttlt  being  that  at  a  depth  of  eleven  feet  a
plentiful  and  continuous  supply  of  water  was  obtamed.  In  this  case,  at
least,  the  use  of  the  "  divining  rod  "  has  been  attended  with  success.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Read  for  further  particulars,  but  my  letter  was
returned  with  the  intimation  that  he  had  left  the  neighbourhood.

No.  41. — The  Blackhiirn  Standard  of  June  2nd,  1894,  has  a  lengthy
letter  from  an  architect,  Mr.  T.  C.  M.  Crook,  giving  an  account  of
some  successful  dowsing  operations  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Black-
burn by  a  dowser  named  Mr.  Blanchard,  of  Wisbech,  of  whom
I had not before heard. The  fiirst  experiment  was at  Stanley


62


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Grange,  Samlesbury,  where  a  spot  was  fixed  on  by  the  dowser,
and  the  spring  said  by  him  to  be  about  40  feet  from  the
surface.  A  six-inch  bore  hole  was  made,  and  at  forty  feet  water
rose  in  the  tube  to  within  sixteen  feet  of  the  surface.  The  owner
determined  to  go  deeper  to  see  if  lie  could  get  a  larger  supply,  and
bored  down  2.32  feet,  finally  breaking  his  tools  in  the  rock,  but  he
was  disappointed,  the  greater  depth  was  useless.  He  then  sunk  a  well
six  feet  in  diameter  and  36  feet  deep  on  the  same  spot,  and  found
an  abundant  supply ;  the  dowser  having  remarked  that  the  small
bore-hole  might  not  cover  the  whole  of  the  water  veins  he  had
indicated.  In  two  other  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bridge  Hall
and  Samlesbury  paper  mills,  the  dowser  fixed  on  sites  whei'e  water
would  be  found,  and  in  both  cases  a  plentiful  supply  was  found  at
these  sites  and  at  the  depth  stated  by  the  dowser.  It  would  seem  how-
ever that  the  depth  was  approximately  the  same  (40  feet)  in  all  cases,
so  that  probably  at  that  depth  a  water  bearing  stratum  was  reached,
yielding  water  anywhere  it  was  tapped.  Mr.  Crook,  on  the  otlier  hand,
states  that  at  20  feet  from  the  surface  a  very  hard  rock,  mostly  of  red
sandstone,  was  reached  and  continued  to  a  great  depth.  If  the  facts
are  correctly  given,  the  interesting  point  is  that  a  stranger,  from  a
distant  part  of  England,  who  probably  knew  nothing  of,  and  cared  still
less  for,  geology,  hits  upon  the  exact  depth  where  water  is  actually
found.  It  maybe  a  chance  coincidence,  but  it  is  of  frequent  occurrence
in  other  cases  ;  or  it  may  be  the  dowser  had  secretly  made  inquiries  in
the  neighbourhood  as  to  the  usual  depth  of  wells  ;  but  this  is  not  their
practice,  as  they  seem  to  have  a  supreme  contempt  for  everything  but
their  own  infallibility.

Through  the  kindness  of  one  of  our  American  members,  Mr.
Albree,  of  Allegheny,  U.S.A.,  I  received  particulars  of  a  remarkable
case  of  successful  dowsing  which  appeared  in  the  Pittsburg  Leader  for
January  14th,  1897  ;  but  when  Mr.  Albree,  at  my  request,  made
private  enquiries  into  the  facts,  he  was  unable  to  obtain  any  confirma-
tion of  them.  The  narrative  is  therefore  omitted.  It  was,  however,
interesting  to  note  the  names  by  which  a  dowser  is  known  in  parts  of
Amei'ica,  viz  ,  "water-witch"  and  "water-smeller."

After  tlie  miscellaneous  cases  in  this  Group  had  been  printed,  I
received  a  collection  of  interesting  cases  relative  to  an  amateur
American  dowser,  Mr.  Cyrus  Fuller,  which  had  been  in  Mr.  Hodgson's
possession  for  some  time.  This  additional  evidence,  which  might  fitly
have  come  in  here,  has  been  placed  later,  (see  Gi'oup  X.),  partly  to
avoid  alterations  in  the  numbering  of  the  cases  already  printed,  and
partly  because  it  forms  a  small  group  by  itself.


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


63


At  the  close  of  each  group  I  will  add  the.  failures  in  that  group  that
I  have  been  able  to  discover,  i.e.,  where  the  dowser  has  been  wrong  ;  a
boring  having  been  made  or  a  well  sunk  at  the  spot  indicated  by  the  rod,
and  no  water  found  at  or  beyond  the  depth  he  predicted.  These  cases
will  be  lettered  F  1,  F  2,  etc.  It  has  been  much  more  difficult  to
obtain  first-hand  evidence  of  these  failures  than  of  successes  ;  the
prejudice  against  dowsing  amongst  the  educated  classes  readily  lends
itself  to  rumours  of  failure,  and  I  have  found  it  a  most  laborious
matter  to  trace  such  rumours  to  their  source,  often  with  the  result
that  the  failure  was  only  in  the  actual  depth  or  volume  of  water
obtained  not  corresponding  with  the  figures  predicted  by  the  dowsei*.
At  the  same  time  there  are  unquestionably  several  cases  of  absolute
and  complete  failure.  The  number  of  these  it  is  very  difficult  to
ascertain  with  any  approach  to  accuracy  ;  all  that  can  be  said  is  that
the  number  varies  with  the  particular  dowser  employed  ;  some  men
( a)  who  claim  to  possess  the  faculty  of  water-finding  being  evidently
charlatans  or  self-deluded,  whatever  success  they  have  had  being
doubtless  due  to  pure  chance.  On  the  other  hand  (/3)  some  of  the  most
remarkable  watei'-finders,  such  as  the  late  J.  Mullins,  occasionally
fail  in  their  prediction,  as  might  be  expected.  Here  are  the
only  two  failures  I  have  met  with  in  the  group  of  miscellaneous
cases;  both  appear  to  belong  to  the  former  class  (a).

F  1. — I  am  indebted  to  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Mayo,  M.  A.,  for  the
following  instance  of  failure.  Mr.  Mayo  says,  after  giving  me  instances
of  the  successful  use  of  the  rod  : —

Long  Burton  Vicarage,  Sherborne,  January  2lst,  1897.
Two  otlier  wells  have  been  sunk  at  farms  in  Holnest,  Dorsetshire,  on
the  divination  of  other  water-finders  ;  one  at  Dyer's  Farm, — which  has  been
successful, — the  other  at  Rye-water  Farm,  wliich  has  proved  a  lamentable
failure.  In  the  latter  case,  attempted  early  in  1895,  a  boring  has  been
carried  through  dense  clay  to  the  depth  of  2fi9  feet,  with  no  result  beyond
a  useless  expenditure  of  money,  and  the  work  has  ceased.  Holnest  is
situated  on  a  thick  bed  of  Oxford  clay,  capped  with  gravel  here  and  there.

I  wrote  at  once  to  ascertain  further  particulars  and  the  name  of
the  dowser.  But  Mr.  Mayo  could  give  me  no  more  information,  and
two  or  three  letters  I  addressed  with  the  same  object  to  the  occupier
of  Rye-water  Farm  met  with  no  response.

Subsequently  Mr.  Mayo  most  kindly  ascertained  for  me  the  facts ;
these  are  given  in  his  letter  which  follows  :  —

Long  Burton  Vicarage,  Sherborne,  Dorset,

February  Idth,  1897.

I  have  been  endeavouring  to  collect  some  further  particulars  relatin"  to
the  case  of  ^Rye-water  Farm,  and  liavo  spoken  to  JVIr.  S,  Thome,  the  agent
of  the  property,  on  the  subject.


64  -  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

I'

It  seems  that  two  water-finders  visited  this  farm — viz.,  W.  J.  Mitchell,
of  Cerne  Abbas,  Dorset  (see  enclosed  memorandum),  and  shortly  after,
A.  Russell,  of  Sturminster,  Newton  Common,  Dorset.  Both  traced  (it  is
affirmed)  the  s]ning  along  the  same  course.  A  well  was  begun,  and  then
abandoned,  and  another  begun  close  by,  which  w\as  dug  for  30  feet  (4  feet
diameter),  and  then  bored  for  269  feet  more  through  clay.  No  water  was
found,  and  at  this  depth  the  head  of  the  borer  was  broken  off,  and  I  believe
still  remains  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole.

I  am  told  that  Mitchell  also  claimed  to  discover  gold  by  means  of  the
rod,  and  met  with  a  sovereign  which  had  been  concealed  under  a  stone.
Also,  when  using  the  rod,  he  trembled  "and  became  as  pale  as  death."

Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  interviewed  the  wife  of  the  tenant  who
was  at  the  farm  when  the  boring  took  place.  Apparently,  one  well  was  sunk
for  30  feet,  and  then  bored  for  90  feet,  following  the  prognostications  of
Mitchell,  and  proved  a  failure.  It  was  then  filled  up,  and  another  water-
finder,  Russell,  consulted,  whereupon  the  second  well  was  dug  for  30  feet
deep,  very  near  the  former,  and  as  before  stated,  bored  for  269  feet  in
addition,  without  result,  till  the  breaking  of  the  head  of  the  borer  stopped
the  work.  These  operations  account  for  the  time  between  the  visit  of
Mitchell  on  March  23rd,  1893,  and  the  boring  which  I  witnessed  in  the
spring  of  1895.  I  have  in  my  diary  a  memorandum  written  in  May,  1895: —
"  This  spring  a  well  has  been  bored  at  Holnest  (Rye-water  Farm)  for  269  feet
without  meeting  water.  The  spot  was  indicated  by  Mitchell,  of  Cerne,  and
Russell,  of  Sturminster  Cominon,  with  divining  rods."

I  hope  these  particulars  will  sujjply  what  you  require.  I  shall  be  happy
to  help  further  if  y  ai  still  have  any  other  point  to  clear  up.

C.  H.  Mayo.

P.S. — I  am  informed  that  the  second  water-finder,  Russell,  was  called  in
when  the  former  of  the  two  wells  had  been  sunk  with  no  effect.  —  C.H.M.

Memorandum.

Mr.  W.  J.  Mitchell,  of  Cerne,  attended  at  Rye-water  Farm  on  Thursday,
March  23rd,  1893.  I  cannot  find  I  have  an  entry  of  Mr.  Russell's  coming,
but  he  did  shortly  after  Mr.  Mitchell,  and  found  the  same  spot  as  marked
by  Mitchell.  g_  Tj^objce.

I  know  nothing  beyond  the  above  of  the  two  dowsers  named,
Messrs.  Mitchell  and  Russell,  no  record  of  any  successes  on  their  part
having  reached  me.

F.  2. — The  next  case  of  failure  illustrates  the  fact  of  a  would-be-
dowser  having  evidently  mistaken  his  vocation.

Mr.  W.  H.  Barber,  the  head  of  a  firm  of  surveyors  in  Buckingham
Street,  Adelphi  (see  case  No.  35),  sent  me  a  memorandum  he
had  received  from  Mr.  Pullen,  a  friend  of  his  in  Guernsey,  giving
a  list  of  wells  sunk  in  Guernsey  through  the  indications  afforded  by
the  divining  rod. The  dowser  in  this  case  was  a  Guernsey  resident,


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


65


a  Mr.  Mellish,  who  apparently  wrote  the  memorandum  himself.  In
subsequent  correspondence  I  received  from  Mr.  Mellish  particulars  of
numerous  cases  whei'e,  according  to  his  statement,  attempts  to  find
water  by  sinking  wells  or  boring  had  been  made  unsuccessfully  in
vai'ious  places  in  Guernsey  before  his  visit,  and  how  in  each  case  he
had,  through  the  indications  afforded  by  the  divining  rod,  been  able
to  find  water  close  by  and  at  a  less  depth  than  the  useless  wells.  I
wrote  to  each  of  the  addresses  given  and  received  replies  from  the
majority  of  the  persons  named.  In  no  single  instance  was  Mr.
Mellish's  statement  confirmed.  Mr.  Mellish's  claim  to  possess  the
"  dowsing  faculty,"  if  such  there  be,  is  therefore  so  far  entirely
uncorroborated.  This  is  the  only  instance  I  have  met  with  of  what
looks  like  a  deliberate  attempt  to  mislead  in  the  course  of  this
prolonged  investigation.  I  communicated  the  foregoing  facts  to  Mr.
Barber,  who  replies  that  he  was  greatly  surprised,  for  "  both  Mr.
Pullen  and  a  friend  of  his  have  seen  Mellish  at  work  with  the  rod,
and  also  found  water  as  the  result."


Evidence  ov  Professional  Dowsers.

Let  us  now  examine  some  of  the  evidence  afforded  by  contemporary
professional  dowsers — that  is  to  say,  by  those  who  make  a  livelihood,
often  a  very  handsome  livelihood,  out  of  the  use  of  the  divining  rod.
It  will  already  have  been  noticed  that  the  majority  of  dowsers  a  genera-
tion ago  came  from  Somersetshire  ;  from  the  esteem  in  which  the
"  gift  "  is  still  held  in  that  county  this  might  be  expected,  just  as  the
majority  of  French  dowsers  used  to  come  (and  perhaps  still  come)  from
Dauphiny.  Thus  about  two-thirds  of  the  English  professional  dowsers,
whose  names  have  been  given  in  the  miscellaneous  cases,  lived  in
Somersetshire,  and  others  hard  by,  in  Gloucestershire,  Dorset,  and
Wiltshire.

Besides  the  foregoing,  I  know  of  nearly  a  score  of  contemporary
professional  dowsers  in  England  and  Wales,  and  there  are  doubtless
others  of  whom  I  have  not  heard.  With  the  following  I  have  been  in
correspondence  and  with  some  have  had  interviews  and  experimental
trials  ; — Messrs.  W.  S.  Lawrence,  J.  Mullins,  senr.  (both  of  these  famous
dowsers  have  died  since  the  beginning  of  this  inquiry),  H.  W.  Mullins,
W.  Mereweather,  W.  Stone,  B.  Tompkins,  J.  Stears,  L.  Gataker,
T.  Heighway,  H.  Chesterman,  H.  Bacon,  F.  Rod  well,  W.  Roth  well
and  R.  W.  Robertson.

I  will  begin  with  a  few  cases  from  Mr.  W.  Lawrence,  who  was  one
of  the  most  remarkable  and  successful  dowsers  of  this  century.  I


66


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


much  regret  that  Mr.  Lawrence's  death  renders  the  evidence  here  pre-
sented of  his  powers  so  very  meagre  ;  his  family  woiild  render  a  service
to  science  if  they  would  collect  a  trustworthy  record  of  their  father's
experiences  in  water-finding.  .

Group  III. — («)  Mr.  W.  S.  Lawrence.

The  oldest  of  the  pi'ofessional  dowsers  is  Mr.  W.  Scott  Lmi-renc^
who  resides  at  Bishopston,  Bristol,  where  he  is  much  respected.  ^
His  local  standing  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  he  has  been  a
Poor  Law  Guardian,  was  Chairman  of  the  Highway  Board,  and
for  21  years  successively  was  elected  vicar's  chvirchwarden.  He  is  a
retired  stone  merchant,  and  is  a  hale  and  fine-looking  old  gentleman
in  his  86th  year,  the  father  of  no  less  than  17  children  !  One  of  his
sons.  Dr.  Lawrence,  is  a  distinguished  West  of  England  physician,  and
is  consulting  physician  to  the  Bristol  General  Hospital ;  another,  a
clergyman  in  the  Church  of  England,  ajopears  to  have  inherited  his
father's  peculiar  "gift,"  and  in  reply  to  enquiry  stated  that  he  could
not  control  the  motion  of  the  rod,  which  appeared  to  be  even  more
violently  affected  with  him  than  with  his  father.  For  60  years  Mr.
W.  S.  Lawrence  has  been  in  repute  as  a  "water  finder,"  and  judging
from  the  lengthy  list  of  testimonials  he  has  received,  his  career  in  this
direction  has  been  singularly  successful. ^

Several  instances  of  Mr.  Lawrence's  success  are  quoted  in  the
previous  S.P.R.  report,  and  I  had  hoped  in  the  appendix  to  this  paper
to  have  given  a  summary  of  Mr.  Lawrence's  experiences  since  that

1  Since  the  above  was  in  type,  the  death  of  this  remarkable  octogenarian  diviner
has  occurred,  as  already  mentioned  ;  Mr.  Lawrence  died  in  June,  1896.

-  In  the  following  letter  (which  was  addressed  to  Mr.  C.  E.  De  Ranee,  F.G.S.,
Mr.  W.  S.  Lawrence  describes  how  he  happened  to  discover  that  he  possessed  the
dowsing  faculty.

Bishopston,  October  5th,  1893.

[Many  years  ago]  my  father  was  the  contractor  for  building  a  new  Rectory  House
at  Winterbourne,  Gloucestershire.  In  the  contract  he  was  to  find  a  supply  of  spring
water,  and  had  to  sink  a  well  for  such  ;  he  had  done  this  to  about  40  ft.  deep  without
success,  when  an  old  working  man,  a  gardener,  who  passed  the  spot  every  day,  stated
it  was  quite  useless  to  go  on  sinking  it,  being  in  the  wrong  spot.  On  being  asked  to
mark  the  right  spot,  he  went  to  the  hedge  of  a  field  and  cut  a  hazel  forked  stick,  and
on  arriving  at  the  well  marked  a  spot  about  15  ft.  away  from  the  well,  and  desired  us
to  sink  there,  which  we  accordingly  did,  and  at  alwut  15  ft.  deep  obtained  a  valuable
spring  of  water.  I  then  was  about  20  years  of  age,  and  asked  him  to  allow  me  to  try
and  see  if  the  forked  twig  would  act  same  with  me,  but  he  said  it  would  [probably]
be  quite  useless  ;  but  if  I  would  call  on  him  next  day  at  his  cottage  he  would  test  me.

I  did  so,  and  he  placed  in  my  hands  a  small  steel  watch  spring,  and  desired  me
to  walk  about  the  kitchen  with  such,  and  to  his  great  surprise  it  acted  with  me  similar
to  what  it  did  in  his  own  hands.  This  was  to  prove  and  ascertain  if  I  had  the  power,
as  he  knew  there  was  a  capital  spring  of  water  under  the  floor  of  the  cottage  ;  he  then
stated  his  great  surprise,  he  said  as  many  as  100  persons  had  been  there  previously,  and


XXXIl.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


67


report.  Mr.  Lawrence  was,  however,  too  ill  to  give  me  the  necessary
information  or  references  when  I  applied  to  him  in  the  spring  of  1896.

Mr.  Lawrence  had  previously  furnished  me  with  references  to
about  100  different  people,  for  whom  he  has  successfully  found  water
by  the  'rod.'  The  list  includes  such  well-known  names  as  the  Duke
of  Grafton,  Lord  Spencer,  Lord  Heytesbury,  Lord  Justice  Fry,  Sir
H.  W.  Peak,  Sir  H.  Selwyn  Ibbetson,  Lord  Arthur  Cecil,  etc.


No.  42. — The  following  is  from  Mr.  George  H.  Pope,  the  Treasurer
of  the  Merchant  Venturers'  Society  of  Bristol,  whose  kindness  I  have
already  acknowledged  in  sending  me  other  evidence.

The  Manor  House,  CHfton,  Bristol,  December  30th,  1896.

On  the  estates  which  I  look  after  we  always  employ  a  "dowser,"  and  I
do  not  recollect  any  instance  of  failure  to  find  water  ;  we  never  sink  a  well
before  using  the  rod.

My  friend,  Mr.  R.  W.  Butterworth,  (now  of  Percy  House,  Kensington,
Bath)  can  tell  you,  I  believe,  that  he  sunk  a  deep  well  on  his  property  at
Heubury,  near  Bristol,  without  getting  any  water  ;  that  he  then  consulted  a
dowser  (Mr.  Lawrence)  who  asserted  the  presence  of  a  spring  a  few  feet  ofl' ;
that  he  drove  a  horizontal  shaft  from  his  own  dry  well  in  tlie  direction
indicated,  and  struck  a  cojjious  spring,  as  predicted  — but  I  should  like  him
to  tell  you  his  own  story.

I  once  allowed  an  experiment  to  be  made  on  one  of  our  farms  by

Professor  Sollas,  and  an  account  of  it  is  given  in  Vol.  II.,  -pp.  73-78  of  the

Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  but  in  my  opinion  the  experiment  proved  little

or  nothing.!  ^

°  George  H.  Pope.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Butterworth  as  suggested  by  Mr.  Pope.  In  reply,
Mr.  Butterworth  states  he  cannot  now  recall  the  exact  particulars,  as
the  experiment  was  made  so  long  ago.  Happily,  however,  I  found
Mr.  Crisp,  of  Bristol,  the  ai-chitect  of  Mr.  Butterworth's  house,  had
already  put  the  facts  on  record,  and  they  were  printed  in  the  appendix
to  Mr.  Pease's  S.P.Pt.  report. Here  is  Mr.  Crisp's  letter  : —

Bristol,  March  '2m,  1883.
Prior  to  sinking  tlie  well,  we  consulted  a  geologist  as  to  the  probability
of  finding  water,  and  at  what  depth. He  informed  us  that  it  was  not  likely

nevei-  one  [had  the  rod]  acted  with  iwevions. From  which  time  I  have  made  use

both  of  steel  spring  and  hazel  rod. I  do  not  believe  I  have  any  power  without  the

rod  or  spring  to  discover  such.

You  may  make  any  use  whatever  of  these  remarks. I  have  just  returned  from  a

visit  to  Aboynes  and  Drum  Castle,  Aberdeen,  where  I  was  sent  for  to  go  over  a

large  quantity  of  land,  farms,  etc.,  and  I  marked  about  30  or  40  places  for  sinking.  I

shall  be  most  happy  to  give  you  any  further  information. -„t r,  t

' ' ^ ■'  W .  S.  Lawrence.

P.S. — I  am  now  in  my  84th  year,  and  write  this  without  the  aid  of  glasses.-

1  With  this  I  quite  agree,  judging  from  the  report  Professor  Sollas  has
published.— W.  F.  B.


68


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


that  water  would  be  found  until  we  had  sunk  through  the  hed  of  the  moun-
tain limestone  existing  there,  and  which  was  about  150ft.  deep,  when  we
should  come  on  a  bed  of  clay  and  find  an  abundant  supply  of  water.  This
applied  to  the  district  where  this  stone  exists,  and  therefore  the  well  could
be  sunk  in  any  part  with  the  same  chances  of  finding  water.  We  accordingly
sunk  a  shaft  to  a  depth  of  150ft.  through  the  rock,  and  then  bored  10ft.,
but  found  no  water.  This  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  to  some  extent,  as
by  ill  luck  Ave  came  in  contact  with  some  faults  (or  saddle-backs  as  they  are
sometimes  termed)  in  the  rock.  We  then  called  in  Mr.  Lawrence  with  his
rod  ;  he  held  it  over  the  mouth  of  the  well  and  it  was  motionless,  and  Mr.
Lawrence  stated  it  was  no  use  sinking  any  deeper  there  ;  lie  then  walked  in
a  spiral  line  round  the  well,  and  when  at  a  distance  of  about  20ft. ,  the  rod
moved  vigorously,  but  nowhere  else  near  the  well.  With  his  advice  we
drove  a  level  heading  from  the  shaft  at  a  depth  of  about  100ft.  from  the
surface,  towards  the  spot  indicated  by  the  rod,  and  after  proceeding  about
30ft.  the  water  suddenly  flowed  in  at  the  end  of  the  heading,  and  the  men
had  to  leave  the  heading  at  once  and  get  to  the  surface.  Since  this  tliere  has
been  a  good  and  regular  supply  of  water. jj j  Q^j-gp

Mr.  Mereweather,  the  contractor  who  sank  the  well,  also  gave  a
similar  account  in  a  letter  he  wrote  long  ago  to  Mr.  Yaughan  J enkins,
which  the  latter  has  sent  me.  Mr.  Mereweather  says  the  water  was
struck  when  the  lieading  reached  24  feet  from  the  shaft  of  the  well ;
here  they  came  uj^on  a  fissure  in  the  rock  which  yielded  so  lai'ge  a
supply  that  the  pumps  were  fixed  at  80  feet  from  the  surface.

1^0.  43. — Very  similar  testimony  is  borne  by  another  architect,
Mr.  Henry  Shaw,  of  New  Broad  Street,  London.  Here  also  a  deep
well  was  bored  and  no  water  found.  Mr.  Lawrence's  awl  was  sought.
The  rod  indicated  water  only  a  few  yards  from  the  old  boring.  A
well  was  sunk,  and  14  yards  from  the  surface  an  abundant  supjoly  of
water  was  detained.  The  contractors,  and  the  foreman  who  sunk
the  well,  also  send  letters  about  this  case,  which  will  be  found  in
Proceedings  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  103  and  104.  The  foreman  says
that  when  Mr.  Lawrence  came  to  a  certain  spot  the  twig  jumped
violently  up  and  down.  A  steel  spring  was  then  tried  by  the  dowser
with  the  same  result.  The  position  of  the  underground  spring  was
then  marked.  The  foreman  also  says  that,  owing  to  a  drain  being  in
the  way,  he  had  to  dig  a  little  on  one  side  of  the  spot  marked  by
Lawi-ence  as  the  centre.  On  sinking  to  40  feet  "  the  spring  burst  out,
as  large  as  a  hammer  handle,  beneath  the  very  spot  he  [the  dowser]
had  marked  for  the  centre  of  the  well."

1  In  the  previous  S.P.R.  report,  Vol.  II.,  p.  105,  a  note  is  added  stating  Mr.  Crisp's
account  was  "confirmed  by  Mr.  Butterworth,  the  owner  of  the  house,  Mr.  Lawrence
and  others.  There  is  some  slight  discrepancy  in  the  measurements,  -which,  however,
does  not  materially  affect  the  case."


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


69


No.  44. — The  next  case  is  an  illustration  of  the  implicit  faith  in  his
dowsing  power  which  Mr.  Lawrence  appears  to  have  inspired  in  those
who  had  employed  him.  The  letter,  which  is  too  long  to  quote  in  full,
is  from  the  before-mentioned  well-sinker  and  contractor,  Mr.  INIere-
weather,  who  subsequently  found  he  also  could  use  the  rod,  and  has
had  some  success  as  a  dowser.  The  following  summary  gives  the  chief
facts  :  —

The  late  Dr.  Fox,  of  Brislington,  directed  Mr.  Mereweather  to  sink  a
■well  to  supply  the  Lunatic  Asylum  at  that  ^dace.  Instead  of  sinking  at  the
spot  suggested  by  the  contractor,  Dr.  Fox  took  him  to  the  Park  and  after
searching  found  an  iron  peg  driven  in  the  ground,  where  he  told  the
contractor  to  sink  the  well.  Dr.  Fox  gave  as  liis  reason  that  Mr.  Lawrence'
had  been  over  the  ground  with  his  divining  rod  and  fixed  on  that  place.  The
well  was  sunk  90  feet  through  Pennant  stone  and  no  water  found.  Dr.  Fox
insisted  that  the  work  sliould  go  on,  as  he  had  absolute  confidence  that  water
would  be  found,  but  as  the  contractor's  experience  was  dead  against  finding
water  there,  he  (Dr.  Fox)  at  last  consented  to  a  four  inch  bore  hole  being-
driven  ;  this  was  done  and  after  35  feet  had  been  bored  (125  feet  from  the
surface)  a  large  body  of  water  was  struck,  which  has  supplied  the  Asylum
ever  since,  has  never  failed,  and  could  not  be  pumped  dry.

No.  45. — The  folbjwing  letter  gives  a  graphic  account  by  an  eye-
witness of  the  muscular  spasm  which  seems  to  lay  hold  of  some
dowsers  (especially  Mr.  Lawrence)  when  they  ai-e  over,  or  have  reason
to  believe  they  are  over,  an  underground  spring.  The  letter  was  sent
to  me  by  my  friend,  Mr.  H.  W.  Whitaker,  the  well-known  geologist.
I  ought  perhaps  to  add,  to  prevent  misconception,  that  Mr.  Whitaker  is
an  utter  disbeliever  in  the  dowsing  rod,  or  in  any  practical  good
resulting  from  its  use.

April,  1890.

We  went  yesterday  and  saw  the  divining  rod  used,  and  a  stranger
performance  I  never  saw.  The  diviner,  named  Lawrence,  an  old  white-
haired,  benevolent-faced  man,  walked  about  the  place  for  some  time,  it
appeared  fruitlessly,  holding  between  eacli  finger  and  thumb  a  piece  of  flat
steel  wire  bent  round  into  a  sort  of  horseshoe  shape.  This,  he  told  us,  would
detect  minerals  as  well  as  water,  so  that  when  it  presently  began  to  agitate
as  it  did,  scriggling,  and  wriggling,  and  twisting,  and  turning  in  his  fingers,
he  could  not  say  definitely  that  it  was  water  he  had  C(3me  upon,  until  he  took
in  his  hand  a  strong  forked  hazel  twig,  holding  an  end  of  each  fork  in  each
hand,  and  keeping  his  elbows  tightly  down  to  his  side.  I  can  only
de.scribe  the  antics  of  that  twig  as  a  pitched  battle  between  itself  and  him  !
It  twisted,  it  knocked  about,  it  contracted  and  contorted  the  muscles  of  his
hands  and  arms,  it  wriggled,  and  fought,  and  kicked,  until  it  snapped  in  two
— and  then — what  made  it  painful  to  watch  until  you  got  used  to  it,  tlie  old
man  reeled,  and  clutched  hold  of  any  one  nearest  to  him  for  a  few  moments.
It  evidently  exhausts  him  very  much,  though  afterwards  I  asked  him  what
effect  it  had  on  him,  and  he  said  it  only  made  his  heart  beat  most  violently


70


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


for  a  short  time.  Certainly  it  lias  not  shortened  his  life  !  Having  found
that  spring,  (I  must  tell  you  the  wire  and  twig  will  not  act  over  stagnant
water),  the  farmer  asked  him  to  try  if  there  was  a  spring  nearer  home.  He
did  not  find  one  until,  having  gone  into  the  garden,  he  suddenly  came  upon
one  close  to  the  hall  door.  After  that,  he  went  further  afield,  and  found
two  some  distance  from  the  house.  He  can  also  tell  the  direction  the  water
takes  underground  and  the  probable  depth  they  will  have  to  bore  for  it.
Mr.  C.'s  lawyer  was  tliere  "  to  watch  the  case"  ;  he  was  most  sceptical,  but
was  obliged  to  own  that  if  they  find  the  spring  he  must  believe  !  He  went
behind  Lawrence,  and  held  his  wrists  with  all  his  strength,  to  try  and  keep
him  quiet  while  the  twig  moved,  but  he  could  not.

I  asked  Lawrence  how  he  found  out  he  possessed  the  power,  and  lie  told
us  that  60  years  ago  he  saw  a  cottager  do  it,  so  he  tried  himself,  and  found
he  possessed  the  same  projjerty.  We  tried,  Lady  D.  and  I,  but  needless  to
say,  we  could  do  nothing.  Lawrence  makes  no  mystery  of  it,  though  he
cannot  explain  it  ;  he  says  it  is  a  gift.  He  was  asked  if  he  could  mesmerise,
and  he  said,  no.  He  held  the  wire  over  Lady  D.'s  watch,  and  it  wriggled  just
as  it  had  done  over  the  water.

We  are  going  to  see  the  water  when  it  has  been  found,  to  see  the
conclusion  of  the  matter.

Ill  a  later  letter,  dated  May  1890,  the  same  lady  relates  that,  the
farmer  liaviiig  ex^sressed  doubts  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  proceedings,
Lawrence  was  taken  again  to  the  farm  and  hlindfolded.  The  rod
performed  in  exactly  the  same  manner,  on  reaching  the  spot  where  it
had  indicated  the  water  before.  They  then  dug,  and  found  the  spring
at  15  feet  depth.

No.  46. — Lady  Dorothy  Nevill  sent  to  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  of
February  13th,  1897,  an  account  of  the  successful  dowsing  for  water  at
a  convent  at  Mayfield,  in  Sussex  ;  a  place  which  was  once  the  palace  of
Sir  Thomas  Gresham.  There  being  a  need  of  water,  the  aid  of  an  tiinateur
dowser  was  sought.  He  traversed  the  grounds,  and  fixed  on  a  certain
spot  where  he  said  water  would  be  found.  Before  digging  a  well  a
second  dowser  was  called  in  some  time  after  ;  he  selected  the  same
spot  as  the  previous  one  had  done.  Accordingly  a  well  was  dug,  and
at  30  feet  deep  water  was  found.  Subsequently  they  wanted  a  well
nearer  tlie  house,  and  sunk  at  another  spot  which  both  the  amateur
and  expert  dowsers  had  also  fixed  upon.  Again  water  was  found,  and
boring  to  a  greater  depth  they  have  had  an  inexhaustible  supply.

I  have  also  had  accounts  of  this  case  sent  to  me  by  pei'sonal
friends ;  it  is  interesting,  and  whilst  the  fixing  upon  similar  spots  by
independent  dowsers  is  important,  yet  we  are  not  told  what  precautions
were  taken  to  prevent  any  knowledge  of  the  spots  chosen  by  tlie  first
dowser  reaching  the  second.

Lady  D.  Nevill,  at  my  request,  kindly  forwarded  to  the  Superioress
of  the  Convent  a  letter  I  wrote  asking  for  further  particulars.  In


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


71


reply,  I  was  informed  that  they  had  little  additional  information  to
impart ;  but,  in  answer  to  my  questions,  stated  the  expert  was  Mr.  W.  S.
Lawrence,  and  the  date  of  the  experiment,  June,  1893.  The  place  was
Mayfield,  in  Sussex,  and  the  depth  of  the  well  sunk  was  270  feet.
They  did  not  know  what  precautions  were  taken  at  Lawrence's  visit,
and  so  far  as  they  knew  no  previous  attempt  to  sink  a  well  had  been
made.  The  name  of  the  amateur  dowser  they  were  not  at  liberty  to  give.

Lady  Dorothy  Nevill  says  the  expert  used  a  watch  spring  as  his
divining  rod,  which  was  Lawrence's  custom,  and  that  "he  went  into
a  species  of  convulsions,  shook  and  trembled  at  the  spots  he  considered
to  be  over  the  water."

No.  47. — The  next  case  is  taken  from  the  Bristol  Times  and
Mirror  of  May  17th,  1890  :—

Mr.  Lawrence  marked  two  spots  on  the  farm  of  Mr.  Prout,  Frauipton-
on-Severn,  where  he  stated  springs  of  water  would  be  found,  and  in
each  case,  after  boring  10  feet,  water  was  struck,  and  rose  to  within  6
feet  of  the  surface  ;  but  as  many  persons  said  that  water  might  be  found
in  any  other  part  of  the  field  which  Mr.  Lawrence  had  passed  over,  the
tenant,  to  test  this  matter,  directed  the  men  to  bore  in  another  part  to
the  same  depth,  and  the  result  proved  the  subsoil  to  be  perfectly  dry.
Both  the  steward  and  tenant  consider  the  trial  to  be  most  satisfactory,  and
that  Mr.  Lawrence  possesses,  in  a  most  remarkable  degree,  the  power  of
finding  water  by  aid  of  his  divinmg  rod.  The  following  letters  on  the
subject,  have  been  received  by  Mr.  Lawrence  : —

"Dursley,  May  10th,  1890.

"I  have  seen  the  two  places  at  Mr.  Prout's  farm  where  they  bored
at  the  spots  mdicated  by  you  with  the  divining  rod,  and  in  both  places
there  appears  to  be  a  good  supply  of  water.  Mr.  Prout  told  me  that
he  had  also  bored  at  a  place  between  the  other  two,  and  which  you  had
passed  over  without  indicating  water,  and  found  the  subsoil  perfectly  dry.
This  is  a  very  satisfactory  proof  that  you  possess  an  extraordinary  power  of
indicating  where  water  is  to  be  found.  rn  -t-

^  TkEWEEX \  IZAKD.

"  The  Park  Farm,  Frampton-on-Severn.
' '  Dear  Mr.  Lawrence,  — We  thought  you  would  be  pleased  to  hear  that,
after  a  few  hours'  work,  on  Friday  the  men  came  upon  a  spring  of  water
about  ten  feet  do^ra,  the  spot  bemg  just  outside  the  garden  gate,  on  a  line
with  the  place  in  the  garden.  We  have  since  bored  at  the  place  where  you
first  declared  there  was  a  spring,  and  likewise  found,  at  just  about  the  same
dejjth,  and  the  water  rises  to  witliin  nearly  six  feet  of  the  surface  of  the
ground.  Because  some  people  were  suggesting  that  perhaps  water  might  be
found  anywhere  in  the  same  ground,  we  have  made  the  men  bore  to  the
same  depth  midway  between  the  places  where  water  has  been  found  in
springs,  and  none  has  been  found  there  ;  so  I  should  now  think  that  every
•one  must  be  conrmced  and  satisfied  tliat  you  can  find  a  spring  of  water.

Kate  Prout."


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


No.  48. — I  will  conclude  this  group  by  quoting  two  or  three  letters,
addressed  to  Mr.  Lawrence,  out  of  many  similar  testimonials  that  I
have  read. The  first  is  a  letter  from  Samuel  Lang,  Esq.,  Bristol.

After  vain  endeavours  to  obtain  a  supply  of  water  for  iny  kennels,
and  sinking  130  feet  deep,  I  was  advised  to  send  for  you,  who,  by
aid  of  your  divining  rod,  in  my  presence,  indicated  the  spot  within  20
feet  of  the  spot  where  I  had  sunk,  and  directed  me  to  drive  there,  which  I
did,  and  obtained  at  30  feet  deep  most  plentiful  supjoly.  I  have  the  greatest
belief  in  your  powers  with  the  divining  rod.  Samuel  Lang

No.  49. — The  next  (from  the  Ely  Paper  Works,  Cardiff),  is  quoted
in  answer  to  an  objection  sometimes  made  that  no  larye  supply  of
underground  water  has  ever  been  found  by  a  dowser.

May,  1888.

At  your  request  we  liave  much  pleasure  in  stating  the  result  of  your  visit
to  our  works.  We  sunk  two  wells  in  s^Jots  marked  by  you  ;  in  the  first  one
we  have  a  supply  of  over  20,000  gallons  per  hour  at  a  depth  of  31  feet  ;
and  in  the  other,  about  300  yards  away  from  the  first,  a  supply  of  12,000  to
14,000  gallons  per  hour  of  spring  water.  ^^^^^


Again,  we  have  the  following  addressed  to  Mr.  Lawrence  : —

No.  50. — From  the  Bristol  Municipal  Charity  Trustees.

February  26th,  1892.

In  reply  to  yours  of  yesterday's  date,  I  am  directed  by  the  Trustees  of

the  Bristol  Municipal  Charities  to  state  that  they  have  much  pleasure  in

recording  the  fact  that  you  were  most  successful  with  your  divining  rod  in

discovering  water  at  the  spot  on  their  estate  at  Burnett,  on  wliich  they

afterwards  bored,  though  the  surface  certainly  afforded  no  evidence  of  the

presence  of  water  there.  -c. -.-.j  t„-  „

^  If  RED.  W.  JNewton,  Secretary.

(/3)  Mr.  W.  Mereweather.

The  name  of  Mr.  Mereweather  has  occurred  in  connection  with
some  of  the  preceding  cases.  It  will  be  convenient  if  I  give  here  the
account  Mr.  Mereweather  has  kindly  sent  me  of  his  own  use  of  the
dowsing  rod,  for  he  found  it  was  so  successful  in  his  hands  that  he
constantly  uses  it  now  when  consulted  about  the  best  site  to  sink  a
well,  his  business  being  that  of  a  well-.sinker  and  contractor  at
Bedminster,  near  Bristol.  Those  Avho  regard  a  professional  dowser  as
a  professional  rogue  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  Mr.  Mereweather,
like  the  late  Mr.  Lawrence,  is  highly  respected  in  his  own  neighbour-
hood. He  is  a  Poor  Law  Guardian  and  Vice  Chairman  of  the
Boaid. He  was  also  for  three  years  on  the  Bristol  Town  CouneiL


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


7a


In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Mereweather  gave  the  following  account
of  his  powers  : —

South  View  House,  West-street,  Bedminster,  Bristol,

May  1st,  1893.

For  the  last  45  years  I  have  been  more  or  less  engaged  as  a  contractor  for
water  works,  and  in  a  great  many  cases  I  have  executed  the  work  for  Mr.
Wm.  Scott  Lawrence,  who  is  noted  for  his  power  to  find  water.  Finding-
what  Mr.  Lawrence  said  to  come  true,  although  I  did  not  believe  in  the
divining  rod,  I  made  an  engagement  to  meet  him,  and  after  he  had  used  the
twig  or  steel  spring,  and  pointed  out  where  the  ^vater  was,  I  asked  him  to  let
me  try,  and  to  my  great  astonishment,  I  could  not  keep  it  down,  the  tighter
I  held  it  the  greater  the  indentation  it  made  in  my  fingers,  until  I  was  obliged
to  let  it  go. It  is  about  16  years  ago  since  I  first  tried  it.

I  do  not  know  whether  this  power  is  hereditarj',  but  I  find  that  my
youngest  son  can  use  it  as  well  as  myself.  I  do  not  notice  any  particular
sensation  in  using  the  sjjring,  but  upon  coming  over  underground  water  it
suddenly  seems  to  stiflfen  in  my  hands,  raises  itself  up  and  turns  towards  the
body.  I  notice  there  is  a  quicker  motion  wherever  I  find,  on  boring,  the
water  is  near  the  surface,  or  if  there  is  a  plentiful  supply  deeper  down.

In  the  year  1880  I  was  consulted  respecting  the  water  supply  at  the
residence  of  the  late  Captain  Quayle,  Backwell  House.  The  house  is
situated  nine  miles  from  Bristol  and  stands  700  feet  above  the  level  of  the
sea.  The  hill  is  of  mountain  limestone.  Hitherto  the  house  had  only  been
supplied  with  rain-water.  At  about  200  yards  from  the  house  there  was  a
well,  which  had  been  sunk  to  the  depth  of  110  feet,  but  no  supply  of  water
could  be  obtained.  I  tried  the  steel  spring  round  the  well,  but  no  action  was
produced  upon  it.  After  trying  in  difl'erent  parts  some  time  I  came  across
a  spot  some  70  yards  from  the  house  where  the  spring  turned  vigorously.  I
traced  the  water  some  little  distance  across  the  lawn  to  a  spot  where  it  was
decided  to  bore  a  three  inch  hole.  This  was  done  and  at  60  feet  deep  we
struck  a  good  supply  of  water,  which  rose  10  feet  in  the  bore  hole.

In  the  year  1884  I  found  water  by  using  the  steel  spring,  at  Messrs.
James  and  Co.'s  brewery,  Midsomer  Norton  ;  the  depth  from  the  surface  to
the  water  was  12  feet  ;  the  stratification  was  conglomerate  stone.

In  1886,  the  water  supply  of  the  workhouse  at  Bourton  (Bedminster
Union)  was  very  deficient.  I  pointed  out  a  spot  where  water  could  be  found,
a  well  was  sunk  through  the  new  red  sandstone  formation  to  the  depth  of
about  40  feet,  a  good  and  abundant  spring  of  water  was  struck,  the  supply
kept  up,  and  the  water  is  being  used  to-day.  About  two  years  ago  a  supple-
mentary supply  was  laid  on  from  the  Bristol  Water  Works  Co.  main,  chiefly
because  of  the  improved  sanitary  arrangements  in  the  house.

In  1890,  new  oil  tanks  and  stores  were  erected  at  Avonmouth.  We  were
consulted  respecting  the  water  supply  for  the  engine,  boilers,  etc.  I  found
them  water,  and  sunk  a  bore  hole  to  the  depth  of  68  feet ;  the  water  rose  to
within  12  feet  of  the  surface,  and  was  pumped  direct  from  bore  hole,  but
after  some  time  was  given  up,  because  the  water  was  brackish,  the  hole  being
close  to  the  tidal  river.

In  October,  1890,  the  Rev.  C.  0.  Miles  consulted  me  respecting  a  water
supply  for  some  20  cottages  and  a  cottage  hospital  that  has  since  been  built


7i  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [pakt

at  Almondsbury  ;  after  some  time  searching  I  found  water,  and  sunk  a  well
to  tlie  depth  of  about  30  feet  in  the  blue  lias  formation.  The  water  rises  to
within  8  feet  of  the  surface ;  it  is  pumped  to  a  brick  reservoir  on  the  hill,
and  from  this  reservoir  flows  by  gravitation  to  the  stand-pipe  and  houses
in  the  locality,  and  I  believe  the  sup])ly  is  sufficient  for  all  their  require-
ments.

In  1891  we  found  water  and  sank  a  well  at  a  new  house  belonging  to  Miss
Lippingcote  in  the  parish  of  Over,  adjoining  Almondsbury  ;  the  well  was
44  ft.  deep,  the  bore  hole  50  ft. ,  a  very  good  household  supply  was  obtained,
and  I  have  no  heard  it  has  ever  failed.  The  stratification  was  an  up-
lifted coal  shale.

In  1891  we  ojjened  a  new  brick-and-tile  works  at  Parson-street,  in  the
parish  of  Bedminster  ;  the  extent  of  our  land  is  about  6  acres.  Knowing
that  for  this  class  of  works  and  for  steam  purjjoses  a  great  quantity  of  water
would  be  required,  which  would  be  a  very  heavy  item  of  cost  if  purchased
from  the  Water  Works  Co.,  we  decided  if  water  could  be  found  to  sink  a
well.  I  ti'ied  the  sjiring  over  a  large  portion  of  the  land  without  any  success
and  was  on  the  point  of  giving  it  up,  when  within  6  ft.  of  our  boundary  the
spring  turned  up,  and  I  knew  we  were  over  the  water.  We  sank  the  well
-30  ft.  through  red  marl,  and  boi'ed  30  ft.  through  new  red  sandstone,  when
we  struck  the  water  at  a  depth  of  60  ft.  It  rose  to  within  12  ft.  of  the  sur-
face. The  whole  of  the  water  that  has,  and  is  still  being  used,  for  the  whole
of  the  works,  which  we  apjjroximate  at  about  5,000  gallons  per  day,  is  being
drawn  from  this  well,  l)ut  at  the  very  driest  time  the  water  in  the  well  is

within  l(i  ft.  of  tlie  surface.  t.^

W.  Merewbather.

Mr.  Mereweatlier,  in  reply  to  my  enquiries,  states  that  in  all  the
above  cases,  and  in  many  other  trials  (some  of  which  he  sent  me
subsequently),  he  cmjployed  a  forked  twig  or  steel  spring  to  indicate
where  to  sink  ;  lie  does  not  pretend  to  explain  why  the  spring  moves,
liut  he  has  great  faith  in  it.

No.  5,1. — The  Rev.  C.  O.  Miles,  Vicar  of  Almondsbury,  in  reply  to
enquiries'  writes  as  follows  : —

Vicarage,  Almondsbury,  3Iay  21st,  1893.
C(.)lonel  Master  wished  to  supjjly  water  here  to  many  of  his  cottages,
and  the  finding  of  a  supply  close  at  hand  was  a  very  imjjortant  matter.
Watching,  myself,  the  rod  being  used,  I  saw  it  rise  up  again  and  again
when  crossing  veins  of  water  known  to  me,  but  unknown  to  the  operator.
When  the  watch-sjiring  used  for  the  purpose  was  discarded,  and  strong
forked  rods  cut  from  a  hedge  were  used,  these  broke  off  short  when  crossing
the  veins  of  water.  They  were  held  in  such  a  position,  downwards,  as  to
prove  that  the  force  tliat  impelled  them  upwards  was  not  naturally  exerted
by  the  operator  ;  and  when  I  add  that  the  operator  was  Mr.  Mereweather,  of
Bedminster,  I  have  written  enough  to  jjrove  that  no  fraud  on  the  part  of  the
operator  is  even  conceivable.  I  should  add  that  Mr.  Mereweatlier  is  quite
unacquainted  with  this  parish.

C.  0.  Miles,  Vicar  of  Almondsbury.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


75


Group  IV. — («)  Mr.  John  Mullins.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  records  of  .successful  dowsing
that  I  have  obtained  is  the  next  series,  where  the  dowser  is  the  late
Mr.  John  Mullins,  of  Col  erne,  Chippenham,  Wilts,  who  for  30  years  was
professionally  engaged  all  over  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in  finding
water  springs  by  the  divining  rod.  In  business  he  was  a  well-sinker,
and,  if  allowed  to  follow  the  indication  of  his  rod,  agreed  I  understand,


THE  LATE  MK. J.  MULLINS.


to  receive  no  payment  for  sinking  a  well  if  a  good  supply  of  water  were
not  obtained.  When  one  remembers  the  heavy  outlay  involved  in
making  a  well,  often  through  solid  rock  to  a  depth  of  70  to  100  feet  or
more,  this  agreement  is  a  forcible  illustration  of  the  faith  Mullins  had
in  his  divining  rod  ;  a  faith  that  appears  justified  by  its  works,  for
Mullins  had  probably  sunk  more  wells  than  any  other  man.  Mr.
John  Mullins,  whose  portrait  is  here  given,  was  only  56  when  he  died


76  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

in  May,  1894 ;  he  was  quite  an  uneducated  man.  His  sons  carry  on
their  father's  business.  One  of  them,  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins,  seems  to
have  developed  the  faculty  of  water  finding,  as  several  successful  cases
of  his  are  quoted  at  the  end  of  this  group.

Some  striking  instances  of  Mullins'  success  were  given  in  Vol.  II.
of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings.  The  volume  of  testimonials  which  Mr.
Mullins  has  published  is  a  remarkable  collection  of  evidence  on  behalf
of  the  practical  usefulness  of  dowsing,  and  also  contains  an  account
of  the  manner  in  which  Mullins  was  found  to  possess  the  faculty  of
dowsing.  In  the  lengthy  list  of  those  who  have  employed  him  to  find
water,  and  have  been  led  by  actual  experience  to  have  faith  in  the
dowsing  rod,  will  be  found  nearly  a  score  of  distinguished  noblemen^
more  than  a  dozen  owners  of  breweries  and  distilleries,  or  of  pajoer  and
cloth  mills  and  print  works  ;  town  commissioners,  and  clergymen  ;  and
landlords  and  their  agents  by  the  dozen.  To  many  of  these  I  have
written  and  obtained  corresponding  statements  to  those  printed  by
Mullins.

It  is  impossible  to  quote  more  than  a  few  of  these  cases,  and
I  shall  therefore  confine  myself,  as  far  as  possible,  to  those  which
are  of  evidential  value,  that  is,  where  unsuccessful  attempts  to  find
water  by  boring  had  been  made  in  the  neighbourhood  prior  to  the
dowser's  visit.

No.  52. — The  first  case  I  will  quote  is  a  rejnarkable  one,  and  I
have  to  thank  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Christie-Miller  for  the  trouble  they  have
taken  in  obtaining  for  me  the  particulars  here  given.  Mr.  Christie-
Miller  writes  : —

Britwell  Court,  Maidenhead,  December  5th,  1891.

Mr.  Mullins  came  to  us  at  Broomfield,  Clielmsford,  in  June  this  year,
and  marked  a  number  of  springs.  Two  wells  have  been  dug  with  great
success.  Tlie  depth  in  the  first  was  exactly  that  indicated  (40  feet),  the
direction  of  the  spring  ;dso  coincided.  In  the  second  case,  the  depth
foretold  was  50  to  60  feefc  ;  water  was  reached  about  40  feet,  the  spring
being  very  strong.

Mr.  Mullins'  next  visit  was  at  Kircassock,  Lurgan,  Ireland.  Out  of
17  springs  marked  we  have  so  far  tested  two.  The  first  well  coincided
in  depth  and  quantity  with  his  expectations.  The  second  yielded  about
50  gallons  per  hour  at  40  feet,  and  is  n<.)w  being  bored  to  60  feet,  the
depth  foretold.

W.  Christie-Miller.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mrs.  Christie-Miller  tells  me  that  the
first  well  at  Kircassock  was  15  feet  deep,  the  depth  predicted,  and
supplies  cottages  ;  the  second  well  supplies  the  house,  garden,  and
stable-yard.


xxxri.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


77


In  reply  to  my  enquiries  Mrs.  Christie-Miller  writes  : —

Britwell  Court,  Maidenhead,  December  31st,  1896.
As  my  husband  is  just  leaving  home,  I  write  in  reply  to  your  enquiries.
Our  experience  of  the  divining  rod  extends  over  nearly  seven  years.  \V e
were  first  persuaded  to  experiment  in  a  place  where  we  had  bored  some  1,000
feet  without  success.  After  MuUins  left  we  again  sunk  on  the  spot  indicated
by  him,  which  was  only  a  few  yards  off,  and  at  between  80  and  90  feet  in  depth,
■came  on  a  spring  which  has  proved  excellent  ;  yielding  over  50  gallons
per  minute.  Since  then  we  have  successfully  sunk  both  in  Essex  and
•on  our  Irish  estate,  Kircassock  (near  Col.  Waring's;,  so  far  without  a
failure.

We  are  unable  to  quote  an  instance  of  failure  with  the  divining  rod,
and  can  therefore  .speak  most  confidently  in  favour  of  water  finding  by
the  twig.  We  have  seven  wells  sunk  after  marking  by  Mullins  with
his  rod.

M.  E.  Christie-Miller.

In  reply  to  my  further  enquiries  Mrs.  Christie-Miller  writes  : —
Britwell  Court,  Maidenhead,  Ja unary  ith,  1897.

Mullins  first  worked  for  us  in  1889,  at  Waterford.  He  was  not  aware
•of  the  attempt  to  find  water  by  the  Diamond  Boring  Co.  who  guaranteed
to  find  it.  When  the  boring  failed  at  1,000  feet,  we  were  most  reluctantly
induced  to  have  Mullins.  The  man  marked  several  places,  but  said  at  one
.spot  the  several  springs  met,  and  we  should  succeed  at  between  80  and  90
feet.  The  same  company  were  set  to  work  and  found  a  splendid  spring  at
the  spot  marked  by  Mullins,  at,  I  believe,  about  84  feet.  The  supply  has
never  varied  or  failed.  In  each  instance  Mullins'  estimate  of  the  yield
per  hour  and  depth  were  marvellously  accurate.  Mullins,  after  marking
the  site  of  well  at  Waterford,  was  taken  to  the  abandoned  boring,  and
said  even  at  2,000  feet  we  should  fail.  One  of  our  Essex  neighbours
who  had  sunk  in  vain  repeatedly  had  Mullins  with  marked  success,  after
he  had  been  with  us.

M.  E.  Christie-Miller.

Mrs.  Christie-Miller  kindly  writes  again  in  reply  to  my  wish  for
exact  measurements  : —

January  8th,  1897.
As  regards  the  Essex  well,  the  measurement  of  40  feet  6  inches  I  know
to  be  exact.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries  I  received  the  enclosed  answers  to  my
questions  about  the  wells  at  Waterford  ;  they  are  written  by  a  gentle-
man on  the  spot  who  was  a  strong  disbeliever  in  the  divining  rod,  and
opposed  Mulhns  bemg  brought.  He  walked  with  him  over  the  ground
and  had  the  man  guarded  so  that  no  one  should  give  him  a  hint  of  the
existing  bore.

These  figures  you  can  use,  and  depend  ou  their  accuracy.  I  do  not  think
you  can  find  a  stronger  case.

M.  E.  Christie-Miller.


78


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


M"


Endosvre.

Exact  depth  bored  by  Diamond  Boring  Company  without  finding  water  ?
Answer :  1,011  feet.

Distance  from  this  boring  to  place  marked  by  Mullins  ?  M'
Answer: 53  feet. This is the shortest  distance:
Mullins  said  we  would  find  water  anywhere  in  the  O'' — 53'— »i
line  between  the  two  places  where  he  made  his  marks.
One  mark,  M',  is  in  Hodges'  field  ;  another,  M",  is  ^
where  the  innajj  is. This  latter  is  296  feet  away  from
the  deep  bore  hole,  O.  \r

Exact  depth  of  boring  in  Mullins'  well? Aiisicer:  79  feet.

Yield  of  water  from  this  well? Ansiver :  3,000  gallons  an  hour  have
been  tested.

This  case  is  rendered  more  important,  as  I  have  since  learnt  that  the
best  geological  advice  was  sought  prior  to  Mullins'  visit,  but  the  boring-
made  under  that  advice  yielded  no  water.  It  seemed  advisable,  there-
fore, in  this  case  to  make  a  careful  study  of  all  the  facts  :  this  was
done,  and  the  details  are  given  on  a  subsequent  page,  under  the  heading
of  "The  Waterford  Experiments."

No.  5-3.— Through  the  kindness  of  my  friend,  the  Rev.  Maxwell
Close,  M.A.,  of  Dublin,  I  received  the  following  account  from  Colonel
Waring,  M.P.,  of  some  of  Mullins'  operations  in  Ireland  : —

Waringstown,  c6.  Down,  November  5th,  1891.

Mullins  was  employed  by  my  neighbour,  Mr.  Christie-Miller,  at  Kir-
cassock,  and  I  was  asked  to  see  him  at  work  there.  He  then  volunteered  to'
come  to  Waringstown,  and  did  so  the  next  day.  He  first  walked  across  the
gravel  on  the  garden  side  of  the  house,  and  detected  the  source  of  the  cellar
well,  at  once  saying  it  was  a  small  and  shallow  spring,  which  is  so.  He  then
went  into  the  yard  and  ti'ied  for  a  deep  well  there,  and  told  us  that  it  was
sunk  12  feet  to  the  eastward  of  the  proper  line,  and  that  an  abundant  supply
would  be  got  by  boring  a  tunnel  from  the  liottom  of  our  present  well  hori-
zontally that  distance.  He  then  went  over  the  fields  and  marked  several
places  where  water  was  to  be  found,  some  of  which  were  known  to  me  as
such  (but  not  to  him  or  to  anyone  else  present).  He  found  acovei-ed-up  well
in  an  adjoining  tenant's  farm  ;  the  tenant,  however,  a  young  man,  said  the
well  was  situated  12  or  15  yards  from  where  Mullins  said  it  was.  But  when
the  "  oldest  inhabitant  "  was  summoned,  Mullins  proved  to  be  right  and  the
tenant  wrong.

The  gold-finding  was  not  done  by  him  here,  but  at  Mr.  James  Bruce's.
Mrs.  Bruce  hid  half-a-sovereign  in  the  gravel  of  a  walk  and  sent  Mullins  to
find  it.  She  said  to  her  husband  :  "  He  has  passed  the  place  "  ;  a  few  steps
further  Mullins  stopped  and  the  gold  ivas  there,  and  not  where  Mrs.  Bruce
had  fancied  she  put  it.

Harwood,  my  gardener,  can  turn  the  twig  for  water  nearly  as  well  as

Mullins  There  is  no  trick  ;  firstly,  I  watched  Mullins  closely  ;

secondly,  Harwood  is  incapable  of  deceit,  and,  lastly  the  twig  turned  in  my


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


7&


own  hands  when  Mullins  grasj^ed  me  by  the  wrists. Mullins  cannot  do  it  if

placed  on  a  stand  insulated  by  four  inverted  tumblers  or  glass  bottles  ;  his

feet  must  touch  the  ground.

Mr.  Christie-Miller  has  sunk  wells  here,  at  Waterford,  and  in  Essex,  at

Mullins'  direction  and  never  failed  to  find  water  at  the  depth  and  in  the-

volume  promised.  -  „  ^tt

Thos.  Warikg.


In  a  subsequent  letter  Colonel  Waring  writes  :

Waringstown,  co.  Down,  November  11th,  1891.

I  send  you  herewith  two  of  the  "Dowsing"  or  divining  rods,  for  dis-
covering  water  or  minerals  ;  a  fresh  cut  one  (Fig.  1)  and  one  after  being  used
by  Mullins  (Fig.  2).i The  portion  nearly  twisted  off  the  end  of  it  (C,  Fig.  2),

1  The  cuts  are  drawn  from  pliotographs  of  the  twigs  sent  me  by  Col.  Waring.  In
Fig.  2  (the  one  actually  used  by  MulHns),  the  end  was  nearly  twisted  oflF,  only  a^shred
of  bark  remainina:  at  C.  The  twigs  are  of  pliable  green  wood,  about  15  inches  in
extreme  length,  three-sixteenths  of  an  inch  diameter  at  A  and  B,  and  a  quarter  of
an  inch  diameter  (not  quite  as  thick  as  a  cedar  pencil)  at  the  junction.


80


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


will  show  the  action  ;  it  was  done  while  I  was  looking  on,  and  no  move-
ment of  the  hand  was  made  to  occasion  the  twisting.  In  fact,  if  you  hold
the  rod,  or  rather  fork,  as  directed,  such  action,  whether  voluntary  or  the
i-everse,  ou  the  part  of  the  operator  is  impossible.  You  jiass  the  ends  of  the
fork  between  the  second  and  third  fingers  of  the  liand,  palm  upwards,  and
close  the  thumb  and  first  and  second  fingers  tightly  on  the  points  of  the  fork
(A  and  B,  Fig.  1)  and  hold  it,  apex  downwards,  out  before  you  ;  when  you  come
on  the  spring  the  apex  of  the  fork  bends  forward  and  upward,  and  if  one
•end  be  held  tight  and  the  other  allowed  to  revolve  it  will  twist  itself  nearly
(or  quite)  off,  as  in  the  sj)eciraen  (Fig.  2.)  The  violence  of  the  action,
Mullins  says,  depends  on  the  volume  and  proximity  of  the  running  water.

Thos,  Waring.

I  enquired  from  my  colleague,  Prof.  Cole,  F.G.S.,  what  chance  there
Avas,  (geologically  speaking)  of  finding  water  at  Col.  Waring's  ;  Prof.
Cole  replies  : —

Wariugstown,  3  m.  S.E.  of  Lurgan,  Co.  Down.
Depends  entirely  on  exact  .spot  of  boring. In  town  and  West,  Ordovician
rocks,  and  no  chance. Immediately  East  of  town,  admirable  chances,
through  Triassic  Sandstone, — the  farther  E.  for  a  mile  or  so,  the  better.

Whereupon  I  wrote  to  Col.  Waring  to  know  the  exact  position
that  Mullins  had  fixed  on. Col.  Waring  replies  : —

All  the  places  at  which  Mullins  said  water  would  be  found  are  West  of
the  village,  as  it  is  on  that  side  my  demesne  is  situated,  but  I  have  not  as  yet
sunk  for  water.

I  trust,  therefore,  Col.  Waring  will,  from  the  scientific  interest  of
the  question,  if  for  no  other  reason,  make  the  horizontal  tunnel,  12
feet  long,  recommended  by  Mullins,  and  note  the  result.

With  regard  to  the  insulation  on  glass  tumblers  stopping  the  motion
of  the  twig,  the  same  result  was  found  by  Col.  Waring's  gardener  (see
No.  5).  Tt  seemed  desirable,  therefore,  to  make  a  decisive  experiment
to  test  this  electrical  belief  held  by  nearly  every  dowser.  Through
Col.  Waring's  kindness  I  was  enabled  to  do  so,  and  paid  a  visit  to  his
beautiful  estate  for  this  purpose.  The  result  I  have  given  in  the
theoretical  discussion  towards  the  end  of  this  paper  ;  suffice  it  to  say
that,  as  might  be  expected,  the  inhibitoiy  effect  is  not  due  to  insulation,
but  entirely  to  the  preconceived  idea  on  the  part  of  the  dowser.

No.  54. — In  Notes  and  Queries  for  October  24th,  1896  (8th  series,
Vol.  X.,  p.  345),  occurs  the  following  evidence  from  Mi'.  Leeson
Prince,  F.R.A.S.

The  Observatory,  Crowborough  Hill,  Sussex.
The  Divining  Rod. — I  must  confess  that  I  have  been  converted  to  belief
in  the  power  of  the  divining  rod,  and  for  tlie  following  reasons. Some  eight
or  nine  years  since  a  stranger  called  upon  me  respecting  a  contemplated  local


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


81


improvement,  and  upon  leaving  me  he  said  tliat  lie  was  a  person  who  made
use  of  the  divining  rod  to  find  water.  I  took  him  into  my  garden  and  asked
him  to  point  out  where  water  would  be  found.  After  wandering  about  over
nearly  an  acre  of  ground,  he  came  to  a  spot  which  he  said  would  be
succe.s.sful.  He  then  left  me,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  it.  About  three
years  since,  a  lady  bought  this  property  of  me,  and,  having  a  large  establish-
ment, .she  was  rather  apprehensive  of  not  finding  a  sufficient  water  suppl}'.
I  pointed  out  to  her  the  spot  where  it  had  been  stated  to  me  that  water
wiiuld  be  found.  She  did  not,  however,  pay  much  attention  ti>  tliis,  and  dug
for  water  in  another  part  of  the  property  ;  but  she  was  not  successful.
Without  having  any  further  conversation  with  me,  she  sent  for  a  "  diviner,"
who,  after  walking  about  in  various  directions  (and  without  her  having
mentioned  to  liina  what  the  otlier  person  had  said),  told  her  that  she  would
find  abundance  of  water  if  she  dug  down  at  a  certain  place  which  was  within
a  yard  of  the  same  spot  which  the  former  person  had  pointed  out.  She
accordingly  acted  upon  his  information,  and  at  a  depth  of  rather  less  than
twenty  feet  she  found  an  ample  sujjply.  When  the  lady  saw  the  twig  point
downwards  in  the  man's  hand,  she  expressed  a  wish  to  try  if  it  would  act  in
the  same  way  in  her  hand  ;  which,  of  course,  it  did  not.  He  then  told  her
that  if  he  put  liis  hand  upon  liers  it  would,  which  it  accordingly  did.  I  may
say  that  I  report  this  case  from  personal  information  of  the  facts.  Only  a
few  weeks  since  I  heard  of  another  successful  case,  in  an  adjoining  parish,
precisely  similar  to  the  above  in  every  particular.

C.  Leeson  Peince.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Prince  for  further  information  and  he  replies  as
follows  : —

The  Observatory,  Crowborough  Hill,  Sussex,

Odoher  26^7*,  1896.
The  lady  I  mentioned  is  Mrs.  G-resson,  and  Iier  jjroperty  lies  between
my  observatory  and  Dr.  Roberts',  F.R.  S. The  dowser  who  came  to  her
was  J.  Mullins,  from  Colerne,  who,  I  believe,  is  now  dead.

C.  Leeson  Prince.

No.  55. — Tlie  following  is  taken  from  'flie  Garden  of  April  lltli,
1885. The  writer  is  Mr.  Crump,  of  Madresfiekl  Court,  Malvern  : —

Many  successes  in  finding  water  on  Earl  Beauchamp's  estates  could  be
named  ;  in  fact,  not  a  single  failure  is  known.  Amongst  the  most  recent
consultations  with  Mullins  was  one  concerning  a  well  that  had  been  sunk
116  feet  without  finding  water.  Mullins  selected  a  spot  a  few  yards  distant,
where,  at  a  depth  of  50  feet,  an  inexhaustible  supply  was  found  by  him.
He  again  selected  a  spot,  naming  water  at  30  feet  deep,  and  it  was  found  at
27  feet.  Many  otlier  instances  could  be  mentioned,  and  so  certain  is  he  of
his  power  that  he  offers  to  dig  the  wells  without  charge  if  proved  wrong  in
his  judgment.

Mullins  was  engaged  to  find  some  water  on  an  estate  at  Madresfield  last
week,  and  on  the  day  before  his  visit  we  prepared  for  him  a  series  of  severe
tests.  No.  1  was  to  send  him  into  a  field  which  he  had  never  seen  before,
in  which  a  six-inch  socket  glazed  pipe  drain  conveyed  a  stream  of  water  to

G


82


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


supjDly  the  moat.  On  the  .surface  there  was  not  the  slightest  trace  of  this
drain,  the  depth  of  which  was  about  three  feet.  All  being  in  readiness,
Mullins  commenced  to  cast  about  with  his  twig,  when,  to  every  one's
astonishment,  the  moment  he  came  upon,  or  over  the  water,  up  went  the
twig  to  the  perpendicular.  He  further  proved  the  exact  subterranean
position  of  the  drain  again  and  again.  No.  2  test  was  similar  to  the  last,
but  the  pipes  in  this  case  were  of  iron  rather  deeper.  Nevertheless  the
result  was  equally  satisfactory  ;  of  course  every  member  of  the  party  tried
to  use  the  rod,  but  amongst  them  imly  one  young  lady  had  any  influence
over  it.

Madresfield  Court  is  the  property  of  Earl  Beauchamp,  and  Mr.
Crump  is  the  head  gardener.  In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Crump
writes  as  follows  : —

The  Gardens,  Madresiield  Court,  Malvern,

February  22n(/,  1897.

The  enclosed  [i.e.,  the  above]  account  is  strictly  accurate,  and  could  be
corroborated  by  the  Rev.  G.  S.  Munn,  of  this  parish,  and  by  several  others.
Our  tests  were  deeply  planned,  but  Mullins  was  always  correct.  He  has
been  employed  here  on  many  occa.sions  since.  I  became  a  convert  against
my  will,  and  so  did  others.  Some  of  us  held  the  hind  part  of  the  twig  when
in  Mullins'  hands,  and  we  could  feel  the  strong  power  of  the  twig  to  rise

W.  Crump.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Crump  writes  to  me  as  follows  :  —

The  Gardens,  Madresfield  Court,  Malvern,

Febr  uary  2*711),  1897.
Mullins  must  be  seen  at  actual  work  before  scepticism  can  be  entirely
overcome.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Munn  and  myself  prepared  the  test,  unknown  to  Mullins,
who,  in  fact,  was  unaware  he  was  being  tested.  The  first  test  was  to  send
him  across  a  part  of  the  pleasure  grounds,  where  we  knew  lay  six  inch  glazed
earthenware  pipes,  conveying  [running]  water.  As  these  pipes  did  not  lie  in
the  direction  that  a  person  would  expect,  judging  from  the  surface,  the  test
was  a  fairly  "  dodgey  "  one;  but  the  moment  Mullins'  twig  reached  the
point  where  the  pipes  lay,  up  went  the  twig,  and  Mullins  there  and  then
said  what  was  quite  true,  and  pointed  out,  with  the  help  of  the  little  twig
(.previously  cut  from  the  nearest  bush),  the  exact  course  of  the  water.  He
also  was  tried  over  other  (iron  and  lead)  pijjes,  very  deep  in  the  ground,  all
with  the  same  result.  He  told  us  also  of  sjDrings  of  water  in  various  parts  of
the  fields  that  he  tried  for  us,  but  we  couldn't  prove  this.

Mullins  was  such  an  unassuming  man,  and  was  most  willing  and
communicative  to  all. He  showed  us  how  glass  insulated  him  i

W.  Ckxjmp.

1  Mr.  Crump  then  describes  how  the  twig  would  not  move  when  Mullins  was
insulated,  which,  as  already  explained,  is  merely  due,  in  all  probability,  to  the
influence  of  a  preconceived  idea. — W.  F.  B.


i


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


83


I  wrote  to  the  Rev.  G.  S.  Munn,  and  he  kindly  replied  as  follows: —
Madresfield  Rectory,  Malvern,  Febmanj  24f/i,  1897.

In  reply  to  queries  respecting  Mullins  and  water-finding,  I  may  say  that
I  was  told  off  to  test  Mullins  on  his  first  visit  to  Madresfield.  Snow  was  on
the  ground  two  or  three  inches  deep,  entirely  obliterating  all  external
indications  of  water.  Knowing  the  locality  well,  I  took  him  alone  in  a  line
across  two  places  beneath  which  water  ran.  One  of  these  had  been  laid  down
so  many  years  before  that  I  believe  it  was  known  only  to  myself.  In  both
cases  the  rod  turned  up  exactly  on  the  spot.  I  won't  trouble  [you]  with  other
instances  where,  as  in  the  above,  aU  collusion  and  deception  was  quite
impossible,  except  to  say  that  on  one  of  Lord  Beauchamp's  farms,  which  had
been  very  short  of  water  for  many  years,  after  much  searching,  he  indicated
a  spot  where  water  would  be  found  at,  so  far  as  I  remember,  from  20  to  30
feet  below  the  surface.  A  well  was  sunk  through  the  rock  ;  the  water  was
found,  and  I  believe  there  has  been  an  ample  supply  smce.

On  the  last  occasion  Mullins  was  here,  a  considerable  number  of  persons
came  to  see  his  performances  ;  many  tried  to  see  if  they  had  the  power.
When  all  had  failed,  I  persuaded  one  of  my  daughters  to  take  the  rod,  and  to
my  great  surprise,  it  acted  in  her  hands  as  well  as  in  Mullins'.  She  has  used
her  power  on  some  few  occasions  to  tind  water  for  friends,  and  also  to
convince  those  who  have  doubted  the  possibility — as  I  did,  entirely,  before  I
was  convinced.

If  you  .saw  the  rod  act  when  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  the  power,
you  would  see  at  once  that  no  possible  action  of  the  hands  could  produce  the
results.  I  shall  be  happy  to  answer  any  further  questions  ;  or,  if  j^ou  should
be  in  these  parts,  you  can  see  for  yourself.  Geopge  S  Muxx

P.S. — Since  writing  the  enclosed,  I  have  been  talking  to  my  daughter,
and  she  thinks  that  her  power,  from  some  cause  or  other,  has  considerably
decreased.

No.  56. — I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  Mr.  W.  R.  Bruce  (one  of  the
Masters  in  the  Queen's  Bench  Division  of  the  High  Court  of  Justice
in  Ireland),  for  a  record  of  a  similar  experiment  he  also  tried  with
Mullins. Master  Bruce  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Rockford,  Blackrock,  Co.  Dublin,  May  6fh,  1897.
I  engaged  J.Iullins  to  come  here  for  a  day  on  his  way  back  from  my
brother's,  where  I  had  seen  him  try  for  water.  To  test  his  powers  I  took
him  into  my  yard,  across  which  a  small  pipe  ran  underground,  supplying  the
house  with  water  from  the  main.  Before  doing  this  I  turned  the  cock  and
stopped  the  flow  of  water.  Mullins  passed  the  pipe  and  the  rod  gave  no
sign.  Wilde  he  and  the  persons  about  him  were  engaged  in  this,  I  went
into  the  house  unobserved,  and  having  turned  on  the  cock  suggested  his
again  maldng  a  circuit  of  the  yard.  He  did  so,  and  when  he  crossed  the
pipe,  the  rod  turned  up,  the  water  then  not  being  stagnant,  but  flowing
through  the  pipe.  There  were  certainly  no  signs  in  the  yard  to  show  that  a
pipe  had  been  laid  under  the  ground,  and  I  am  convinced  there  was  no
audible  sound  of  running  water,  and  nothing  in  my  action  to  give  Mullins
any  hint  on  the  s.ubject.


84


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I  put  hiin  to  another  test ;  he  said  that  gold  had  the  same  effect  as  water.

While  he  was  in  the  house  getting  his  dinner,  I  went  out  and  hid  half-a-

sovereign  in  the  ground  on  the  marked  line  of  a  tennis  ground. I  am

certain  no  one  saw  me  do  this. I  tlieu  took  him  out  and  told  him  to  try  and

find  the  coin,  which  was  some  place  under  the  line. He  did  find  the  coin.

I  am  certain  that  nothing  in  my  face  or  manner  gave  him  any  indication  of

where  it  was,  and  it  was  aljsolutely  impossible  for  any  one  to  have  discovered

it  by  eyesight. In  fact,  I  had  some  difficulty  in  finding  the  exact  spot

myself. I  should  add  that  in  going  round  the  tennis  ground  the  divining

rod  turned  up  two  or  three  times  before  Mullins  arrived  at  the  spcjt  over  the

coin. This  he  accounted  for  by  saying  there  was  water  there,  which  is  quite

comprehensi))le.  -r,  -n

'  Wm.  K.  Bruce.


No.  57. — Master  Bruce  having  told  me  his  brother,  who  lived  in
Gloucestershire,  had  found  difHculty  in  obtaining  a  water  supply  until
he  employed  Mullins,  I  wrote  for  particulars,  and  obtained  the
following  interesting  evidence  : —

Norton  Hall,  Campden,  Glo'stershire,  April  2'inl,  1897.

With  reference  to  Mullins,  it  is  about  12  years  since  he  came  here.  I
believe  he  had  never  been  here  or  in  the  neighbourhood  before.  We  sunk  at
three  places  pointed  out  by  him,  and  got  water  at  each  of  them.  The
sub-soil  here  is  blue  lias  clay,  and  goes  down  a  great  depth.  A  friend  of
mine,  who  bored  near  liere  five  or  six  years  ago  got  down  over  1,200  feet
before  he  got  through  the  clay  ;  this  clay  is  quite  impervious  to  water,  the
neighbouring  hills  are  oolite  brash.

This  house  is  built  on  a  levelled  or  terraced  slope.  When  Mullins  first
got  to  work  at  the  hall  door,  before  he  had  gone  10  yards  he  stopped  and
said  there  was  water  there,  but  it  was  not  a  convenient  place  to  sink,  so  we
went  on.  It  was  some  time  before  he  got  to  another  place,  which  was  in  the
stable  yard  ;  there  he  said  we  would  find  water  at  about  30  feet.  When  we
came  to  sink,  we  got  to  water  at  altout  the  depth  he  said,  whicli  rose  at  the
rate  of  aV)out  6  feet  a  day  (that  is,  24  hours)  till  we  had  about  20  feet  in  the
well  of  about  3  feet  diameter.  We  then  tried  another  place  he  pointed  out,
with  a  similar  result.  Then  the  men  who  were  sinking  for  me,  local  men,
said  that  any  one  would  know  how  to  find  water  there,  that  there  was  water
anywhere  along  the  bank,  meaning  the  slope  on  which  the  house  stands.  I
told  them  to  go  and  pick  a  place  and  try.  After  some  discussion,  they  sank
close  to  my  lodge  ;  when  they  had  got  30  feet  down  they  had  not  got  water,
and  they  said  there  was  no  use  going  further,  as  they  were  then  down  into
the  l)lue  clay  ;  at  the  end  of  a  week  there  were  not  6  inches  of  water  in
that  well.

We  then  tried  another  place  that  Mullins  had  marked  close  to  tlie  house,
and  about  20  yai'ds  from  the  place  where  he  first  stopped  by  the  hall  door.
Mullins  had  told  us  we  would  find  a  very  strong  spring  here,  about  20  feet
down.  When  we  got  about  12  feet  down,  we  got  signs  of  water,  and  wlien
we  got  17  feet  the  water  came  so  fast  the  men  could  not  sink  any  further  ;  it
was  a  case  of  getting  out  three  buckets  of  water  to  one  of  clay.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


85


The  men  that  were  sinking  had  vip  to  now  rather  scoffed  at  MuUins'
theories,  but  now  the  head  man  said,  "  This  man  must  know  something  more
than  we  do  after  all,  for  this  water  is  coming  through  a  vein  of  gravel  not
bigger  than  my  hat,  and  if  we  had  been  three  feet  one  side  or  other  of  it  we
would  not  have  got  a  drop  ;  "  these  men  were  well  sinkers  by  trade.  This
well  did  not  hold  out  when  we  got  a  long  spell  of  dry  weather,  and  I  always
think  that  there  is  an  underground  connection  between  it  and  the  well  in  the
stable  yard,  and  also  with  another  one  in  the  house  yard,  and  this  well  being
the  shallowest  of  the  three  gives  out  ;  probably  the  vein  of  gravel  runs  on
and  connects  with  the  others.  Once,  in  a  very  dry  time, — 1887,  I  think, — it
was  the  well  in  the  stable  yard  failed,  and  we  had  a  lot  of  water  from  a  pond
tilled  into  it  ;  we  found  that  the  well  in  the  house  yard  rose  as  we  filled  into
the  one  in  the  stable  yard,  and  the  water  was  dirty  like  pond  water.  I  don't
think  I  can  give  you  any  more  information  on  the  matter.

MuUins  also  found  a  half-sovereign  that  I  had  buried  in  a  walk  we  were
then  making.  I  would  have  lost  the  half-sovereign  if  it  had  not  been  for
him,  as  I  was  so  careful  not  to  put  any  mark  lest  he  might  notice  tliat  I  was
not  able  to  find  the  place  myself,  and  when  he  stopped  and  said  it  was  under
his  foot,  I  thought  he  was  wrong,  but  there  it  was  1  g  Bruce

In  reply  to  my  enquiries  Mr.  Bruce  writes  : —

Norton  Hall,  Campden,  Glo'stershire,  April  29th,  1897.
Yes,  certainly,  this  neighbourhood  is  verij  badly  watered,  and  springs
few  and  far  between,  at  least  those  that  are  known  to  exist.  As  I  mentioned,
we  are  on  the  blue  lias  clay,  and  in  one  case  this  was  found  to  go  to  a  depth
of  over  1,200  feet.  I  have  not  the  exact  figures  of  the  boring,  but  I  think
it  was  1,250  feet  of  clay,  and  then  they  went  on  over  100  feet  more  and  got
no  water  that  they  could  utilise.  g  Bruce

The  finding  of  the  half-sovereign  in  both  these  cases,  as  elsewhere,
must  be  considered  in  connection  with  the  specific  experiments  made
in  this  direction,  to  be  related  later  on.  Though  the  foregoing  are
certainly  striking  successes,  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  explanation
already  given,  which  is  discussed  more  fully  on  a  subsequent  page.


No.  58. — The  next  case  is  quite  as  remarkable  as  Mr.  Christie-
Miller's  experience.  Here  also  the  best  advice  was  obtained  and  some
£1,000  spent  fruitlessly  searching  for  an  underground  spring  prior  to
the  dowser's  visit.  The  first  notice  of  this  case  appeared  in  a  local
newspapei',  the  West  Sussex  Times  and  Sussex  Standard,  from  which  the
following  letter  is  reprinted  :  —

Warnham  Lodge,  Horsham,  January  3rd,  1893.
Having  had  very  great  difficulty  in  the  supjjly  of  water  to  this  house,  I
sent  for  John  Mullins,  of  Colerne,  near  Chippenham,  who,  by  the  aid  of  a
twig  of  hazel,  pointed  out  several  places  where  water  could  be  found.  I
have  sunk  wells  in  four  of  the  places,  and  in  each  case  have  been  most
successful.


.S6  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

It  may  be  said  that  water  can  be  found  anywhere  —this  is  not  my  ex-
perience. I  have  had  the  best  engineering  advice  and  have  spent  many
hundreds  of  pounds,  and  hitherto  have  not  obtained  sufficient  water  for  my
requirements,  but  now  I  have  an  abundant  sujjply.

I  certainly  should  not  think  of  sinking  another  well  witliout  previously

consulting  John  Mullins.  tt  tt

^  Henry  Harben.

Further  details  of  this  case  are  given  later  under  the  head  of
The  Horsham  Eayperiments.


No,  59. — Having  heard  from  Mr.  Harben  that  a  neighbour  of  his
at  Horsham  had  sunk  two  wells  with  very  poor  results,  but  that  an
abundant  supply  had  been  obtained  at  a  spot  indicated  by  Mullins,  I
wrote  for  particulars,  and  received  the  following  letter  from  the  owner
of  the  estate  in  question  :  —

Hedgecocks,  near  Horsham,  Sussex,  May  3rd,  1897.

Tliere  were  two  wells  previously,  but  only  land  springs,  about  27  feet
deep,  and  apt  to  get  dry.  I  then  employed  Mullins,  and  sank  a  well  at  a
place  where  he  said  I  should  find  water.  The  result  was  I  found  a  good
supply  at  about  26  feet.  The  water  was  found  within  6  inches  of  where
Mullins  divined  it.

I  have  employed  him  since  with  equal  success  with  three  wells.

William  Renton.


No.  60.— The  following  is  from  Mr.  F.  Bastable,  14,  Foskelt  Road,
Fulham,  and  appeared  in  the  Carpenter  and  Builder,  of  September  30th,
1892.  The  contractor  of  the  Somerset  and  Dorset  Railway,  Mr.  T.  A.
Walkei",  here  employed  Mullins  under  the  following  circumstances

At  the  )Shepton  Mallet  Station,  on  that  line,  it  was  decided  to  sink  a  well
close  to  the  rails  to  supply  water  for  the  locomotives.  We  had  sunk  a  depth
of  250  feet  entirely  through  blue  lias  rock  as  dense  and  hard  as  possible,  and
as  dry  as  a  bone,  and  began  to  look  upon  it  as  a  forlorn  hope,  when  Mr.
Mullins  was  mentioned  as  a  man  likely  to  helj^  us  in  the  matter.  After
much  hesitation  and  fear  lest  it  should  turn  out  to  be  a  hoax — we  were  very
incredulous — it  was  decided  to  ask  the  advice  of  Mr.  Mullins,  who  came  at
once,  and  with  very  little  trouble  discovered  for  us  close  at  hand  that  for
whicli  we  had  sought  so  long.  .  .  .  The  most  favourable  spot  was  found
to  be  about  50  feet  from  our  well.  Mr.  Mullins,  from  his  observations  of
the  action  of  the  forked  twig,  advised  us  to  commence  and  drive  a  heading
about  50  feet  down  the  well,  and  under  [where  the  twig  turned]  we  should
have  abundance.  This  was  done,  and  when  at  that  spot  our  miners  had  to
rush  out  and  up  for  their  lives,  leaving  behind  them  their  steel  drills,
hammers,  clothes,  etc.  The  well  soon  filled  up,  and  when  we  left  in  1879
the  water  was  within  12  feet  of  the  surface.

We  procured  two  pairs  of  smith's  tongs  to  see  if  the  twigs  did  actually
twist,  and  held  them  in  a  tight  grip,  with  one  pair  securing  the  tips  and  the


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


87


other  the  fork,  but  the  contortions  still  went  on  between  the  jjoints  held.
What  the  power  consists  of  I  am  still  at  a  loss  to  conceive  ;  but  this  I  know,
not  one  of  us  present  at  the  operation  had  any  doubts  afterwards  as  to  his
ability  in  discovering  water  in  the  earth.

In  a  letter  to  the  Daily  Graphic  for  March  30th,  1892,  Mr.  T.  J.
Hickes,  of  Truro,  describes  this  same  case.  He  writes  from  a  personal
knowledge  of  the  facts,  but  both  he  and  Mr.  Bastable  appear  to  write
from  memory,  and  it  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that  the  figures  they
give  do  not  quite  correspond.  Mr.  Hickes  remarks  that  the  water  was
found  exactly  at  the  spot  Mullins  predicted  and  came  with  such  force
that  the  well  sinkers  had  to  fly  and  leave  everything.  Mr.  Hickes  adds,
"  I  have  used  the  divining  rod  on  many  occasions  myself  to  find  and
trace  springs  and  thus  been  able  to  be  of  benefit  to  others."

Mr.  F.  J.  Clark,  F.L.S.,  who  lives  in  Somerset,  and  kindly  sent  me
one  or  two  cases  in  Group  1,  writes  to  say  he  is  well  acquainted  with
the  foregoing  facts,  which  came  to  his  knowledge  at  the  time  they
occurred,  his  father  being  then  a  director  of  the  line.  Mr.  Clark
adds : —

I  went  to  see  my  father  on  receipt  of  your  letter,  and  he  tells  me  that  the
account  you  have  printed  [as  alcove]  is  correct,  though  his  impression  is  that
tlae  well  was  not  quite  so  deep.  ^  My  father  proposed  their  having  a  dowser
from  the  first,  but  the  contractor  laughed  at  the  idea  ;  however,  afterwards
he  was  very  sorry  he  had  not  taken  my  father's  advice  at  the  beginning.

No.  61. — I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Clifford  Gibbons  for  the  following
interesting  case  : —

Great  Walstead,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath,

January  7t]i,  1897.

In  reply  to  your  letter,  I  have  much  pleasure  in  giving  you  particulars  of
the  success  of  Mr.  Mullins  in  finding  water  on  my  estate.

Three  old  wells,  20  feet  apart,  sunk  without  the  dowsing  rod,  are  50  feet
deep  and  communicate  with  each  other  by  means  of  a  tunnel.  About  150
yards  to  the  west  of  these,  and  at  the  spot  indicated  by  Mr.  Mullins,  a  large
supply  of  water  was  found  at  a  depth  of  30  feet,  and  v/ith  much  difficulty  the
well  was  sunk  another  15  feet.  There  are  two  wells  both  about  50  feet  from
the  above,  one  Ijeing  to  the  north-  and  the  other  to  the  south-east ;  the
latter  is  a  very  old  farm  well.  When  these  two  wells  are  dry,  as  they  were
last  season,  Mr.  Mullins'  well  stood  at  12  feet  of  water,  and  at  least  1,000
gallons  a  day  were  pumped  out.  The  three  wells  first  mentioned  were
pumjoed  once  or  twice  a  week,  but  gave  only  a  little  water.

The  most  remarkable  thing  to  me  is,  that  when  Mr.  Mullins  was  survey-
ing the  ground  with  his  rod,  I  tried  it  myself  without  any  result,  but  on
going  over  it  again  with  my  wrists  held  by  him  the  twig  rose  in  my  hands  in
the  same  manner  as  it  had  done  in  his.


^  On  further  enquiry,  Mr.  Clark  informs  me  the  depth  was  100  feet.


88


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  thing  in  altogether  a  mystery  to  lae,  but  certainly  if  I  were  to  sink
another  well,  I  should  get  Mr.  Mullins  to  select  the  spot,  as  I  have  spent
very  large  sums  of  money  almost  fruitlessly  before  1  knew  him.

Any  further  particulars  you  may  desire,  I  shall  be  pleased  to  give  you.

S.  Cliffoed  Gibbons.

Writing  again  to  Mr.  Clifford  Gibbons,  I  asked  him  to  give  me  the
«xact  depth,  distance  apart,  and  relative  level  and  position  of  the  wells.
Mr.  Gibbons  replied  as  follows  : —

Great  Walstead,  Lindfield,  January  20th,  1897.
The  accompanying  rough  sketch  plan  shows  the  relative  position  of  the
six  wells  on  my  estate  at  Lindfield.

NOKTH.

.-•  .  .-^

West. G  O  -  ^ (1 '  ^'^^t.


South.


Nos.  1,2,  3,  are  the  old  wells  about  50  feet  deep.  Nos.  4  and  5  wells
are  about  28  feet  deep,  the  .surface  level  of  these  west  wells  being  about  one
foot  higher  than  those  at  the  east.  No.  6  well  is  the  one  made  by  Mullins.
It  was  commenced  in  October,  1893  ;  abundant  water  was  found  at  30  feet
deep,  but  it  was  sunk  to  45  feet.

Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5,  were  almost  dry  in  September  and  October  last,

but  No.  6  well  stood  with  about  12  to  16  feet  of  water  in  it,  and  sujjplied  all

the  water  that  was  required.  an

^  S.  Clifford  Gibbons.

Tliis  remarkable  case  would  be  still  more  instructive  if  Mr.  Clifford
Gibbons  would  sink  either  No.  i  or  5  well  two  or  thi-ee  feet  lower,  and
see  if  the  supply  found  in  No.  6  would  be  reached.  I  wi-ote  to  ask
Mr.  Gibbons  if  this  could  be  done  as  a  matter  of  scientific  interest,  but
he  replies  it  is  impossible  at  present,  "  as  it  might  disturb  all  the
pumping  arrangements  I  have,  which  are  most  satisfactory,  and  the
supply  of  water  excellent  from  Mullins'  well."

No.  62.— The  next  is  from  Mr.  E.  G.  Allen.

Highfield,  Metheringham,  Linc(.iln,  March  25th,  1893.

Having  frequently  availed  myself  of  Mr.  John  Mullins'  services  during
the  last  20  years,  I  can  say  I  have  never  known  him  to  fail.  I  have  sunk  six
wells,  two  on  a  heath  farm  about  30  feet  deep  (surrounding  wells  measuring


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divin'vng  Rod.


89


about  70  feet)  in  limest(jiie  I'ock,  thus  saving  a  great  expense  in  sinking.  I
took  him  one  morning  to  a  farm  whicli  was  at  tliat  time  farmed  by  the
owner,  the  Right  Hon.  H.  Chaplin,  M.P.  The  well  in  the  yard  (nearly
always  dry)  was  about  30  feet  deep,  and  water  had  to  be  led  some  distance
from  the  Carr  Dyke.  In  a  few  minutes,  Mullins,  carrying  in  his  hand  his
twig,  found  a  good  spring  a  very  sh(jrt  distance  from  the  old  well.  A  new
well  was  sunk,  and  at  10  feet  a  splendid  supply  of  water  was  found.  It  has
never  failed,  and  has  supplied  the  yards,  etc.,  with  water  ever  since.

Being  in  want  of  water  for  a  large  grass  field,  called  ' '  Catley  Abbey
Field,"  I  went  with  Mullins,  who  placed  down  a  peg  to  denote  a  spring.  We
sank  a  well,  and  bored  70  feet,  obtaining  a  good  supply  of  water.  Being
struck  with  a  peculiarity  in  the  taste,  it  was  submitted  to  Professor  Attfield,
Ph.D.,  who  pronounced  it  to  be  the  only  natvral  seltzer  spring  in  the  kingdom.

E.  G.  Allen.

No.  63. — There  is  an  interesting  sequel  to  this  case.  The  L  incohishire
Chronicle  of  June  8th,  1895,  contains  a  long  report  of  a  visit  of  Mr.
H.  W.  Mullins,  the  son  of  John  Mullins,  to  Catley  Abbey.  The
newspaper  report,  which  I  have  abridged,  is  as  follows  : —

The  object  of  the  Catley  Abbey  Company  in  sending  for  Mr.  Mullins  was
to  secure  a  well  of  pure  water  for  bottle  washing.  A  well  on  the  adjoining
farm  of  Mr.  Allen  had  run  dry,  and  recently  the  seltzer  water  had  been
used  for  the  purjjose  of  bottle  washing.  Eight  years  ago  Mr.  J.  Mullins,
the  father  of  the  family,  located  the  spot  at  Catley,  where  now  stands  the  only
natural  seltzer  spring  in  Britain,  and  the  Company  had  ample  evidence  of
the  success  which  had  attended  the  diviner  in  other  directions.  Proceeding
to  the  site  of  the  dried  up  well,  Mullins  took  out  a  V  shaped  twig,  the  forks
of  which  were  each  about  a  foot  long,  and  walked  slowly  along  the  ground  a
short  distance  from  the  well.  Suddenly  the  twig  revolved,  having  the  apex
at  the  top,  and  Mullins  confidently  asserted  that  he  was  standing  over  a
subterranean  water-course.  Proceeding  to  the  other  side  of  the  well  he
traced,  or  professed  to  trace,  the  course  of  the  hidden  stream,  and  marked  a
spot  contiguous  to  the  buildings,  where  he  asserted  a  good  spring  would  be
tapped  at  a  depth  of  from  120  to  130  feet,  and  he  advised  that  a  well  should
be  sunk  there.

It  was  told  to  Mullins  that  his  father  asserted  the  seltzer  spring  flowed
under  a  hedge  on  the  other  side  of  the  field,  in  which  we  were  then  standing,
and  he  was  asked  to  indicate  the  place.  Starting  at  one  end  of  the  field  he
walked  close  by  the  hedge  side.  He  had  gone  about  100  yards  when  the
twig  began  to  play,  and  digging  his  heel  in  the  ground,  he  thus  marked  the
spot.  Mr.  Allen,  who  was  present  when  Mullins,  senr.,  also  located  the
spring,  sent  a  man  for  a  spade,  and  a  stake  was  dug  up,  which  eight  years
ago  was  driven  m  by  Mr.  Allen  to  mark  the  place.  Mullins,  junr. ,  had
touched  the  spot  exactly.

The  same  newspaper  of  August  23rd,  1895,  announces  the  result
of  digging  in  the  spot  indicated  as  follows  : — •

Our  readers  will  remember  that  a  few  weeks  ago  our  columns  contained
an  article  relative  to  the  finding  of  water  at  Catley  Abbey  by  means  of  hazel


90


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


twigs  in  the  liands  of  Mr.  Mullins,  the  eminent  "dowser."  We  are  now
able  to  state  that  a  well  having  been  sunk  in  the  position  indicated  by  Mr.
Mullins,  a  valuable  supply  of  water  has  been  obtained,  and  that  at  a  depth
of  about  five  feet  less  than  mentioned  by  him.

I  sent  Mr.  Allen  the  foregoing  account,  and  asked  if  it  were  correct,
he  I'eplies  that  "it  is  perfectly  accurate,  the  facts  being  most  interesting,
and  occurred  as  stated  in  the  letter  and  newspaper  report."

No.  64.— The  Bath  Chronicle  (date  missing)  gives  the  following
account : —

Captain  A.  K.  Barlow,  who  recently  purchased  an  estate  near  Braintree,
Essex,  had  made  several  borings  for  water,  but  without  the  desired  result,
and  he  had  reluctantly  made  up  his  mind  to  sell  the  property  and  leave  the
neighbourhood  ;  but,  being  strongly  urged  to  try  the  divining  rod,  he,
without  having  much  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  the  powers  of  the  hazel  twig,
resolved  to  send  for  Mr.  Mullins.  Mullins  came,  and  next  morning  walked
up  and  down  a  portion  of  the  estate  with  his  hazel  twig  before  him,  and
eventually  marked  a  spot  about  250  yards  from  an  empty  well.  Mullins
remarked  that  this  spot  was  the  very  best  place  to  sink  a  well,  and  if  it  was
bored  50  feet  a  capital  sujijjly  of  water  would  be  found.  CajDtain  Barlow  set
men  on  to  dig  a  well  at  the  place  marked,  and  they  have,  at  a  distance  of  34
feet  from  the  surface,  dug  right  into  a  fine  body  of  water  in  a  gravelly  soil.

I  wrote  to  Captain  Barlow  for  confirmation  of  the  above  state-
ments, which  I  enclosed,  and  he  replies  : —

Wivenhoe  Hall,  Essex,  February  2m,  1897.

I  can  only  say  that  the  report,  as  printed,  is  perfectly  true  and  accurate.
I  have  since  sold  Lynden  Wood.  The  supply  of  water  there  is  unfailing  and
constant.  Lynden  Wood  also  stands  on  the  top  of  one  of  the  highest  points
of  land  iii  tliis  county.  I  remember  noticing  that  Mullins  had  hard
callosities  on  his  hands  just  where  the  hazel  twigs  fitted  between  his  fingers,
and  seemed  to  be  in  a  very  highly  nervous  state  when  oi^erating  with  the  twigs.

Alexander  Barlow.

No. 65.— The  following  letter from  Mr.  W.  D. Little,  estate
agent  to  the  Earl  of  Jersey,  is  addressed  to  Mr.  J.  Mullins  :  —
Estate  Office,  Middleton  Park,  Bicester,  Oxon,

Augvd  20th,  1890.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  inquiry,  I  have  much  pleasure  in  informing
you  that  since  August,  1884,  I  have  had  upwards  of  25  wells  dug  on  sites
where  you  had  found  springs  liy  means  of  the  dowsing  rod,  and  in  every
instance  an  abundant  and  unfailing  supply  of  water  has  been  obtained.
These  wells  have  been  sunk  on  the  estates  of  the  Earl  of  Jersey  in  the
counties  of  Oxfordshire,  Warwickshire,  and  Middlesex,  and  on  the  Charter-
house Estate  in  Wiltshire.  I  send  you  a  copy  of  a  letter  which  appeared
in  Farm  and  Home  in  1885.

W.  D.  Little.


XXXII.]


Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


91


The  following  is  the  letter  Mr.  Little  addressed  to  the  journal  he
names  : —

As  it  may,  perhaps,  interest  some  of  the  readers  of  Farm  and  Home,
I  venture  to  send  a  statement  of  the  practical  results  of  seven  wells  sunk
during  the  autumn  of  1884  on  the  Earl  of  Jersey's  estate  at  Middleton
Park,  near  Bicester,  Oxon,  on  sites  located  by  John  Mullins,  of  Colerrie,
Chij^penham,  Wilts,  by  means  of  the  dowsing  rod.  I  may  preface  the
following  statement  by  saying  that  the  unprecedented  drought  of  last  year
was  most  severely  felt  in  Oxfordshire,  and  water  had  to  be  carted  a  consider-
able distance  at  great  expense  for  several  months,  for  all  descriptions  of
stock.  Mullins'  search  for  water  was  made  during  the  last  week  in  August,
1884,  and  the  sinking  of  the  wells  was  proceeded  with  as  soon  after  as
possible.

No.  1  was  sunk  22  j'ards  from  a  well  sunk  in  1879,  which  had  proved  to
be  useless  even  for  supplying  two  cottages  only.  At  a  depth  of  18  feet  an
abundant  supply  of  water  was  obtained  on  the  spot  selected  by  Mullins.
No.  2  was  also  sunk  to  substitute  a  well  made  in  1879,  which,  although  in  a
position  likely  to  yield  plenty  of  water,  had  turned  out  useless.  At  a
distance  of  60  yards  from  the  old  well,  the  new  well,  sunk  on  a  site  selected
by  Mullins  at  a  depth  of  12  feet  0  inches,  yielded  more  water  than  two
ordinary  portable  pumps  would  keep  down,  the  continued  drought  not
seeming  to  affect  it  in  any  way.  No.  3  was  a  well  that  had  gone  dry,  and
was  deepened  on  the  strength  of  Mullins'  recommendation  with  a  satis-
factory result.  No.  4,  a  well  sunk  to  supply  the  mansion  with  drinking
water  ;  it  is  49  feet  deep,  and  has  an  excellent  spring  with  the  water
standing  about  25  feet  deep  in  the  well,  the  diameter  of  which  is  of  large
size.  It  is  projjosed  to  further  increase  the  inflow  of  water  by  boring  at
some  later  period.  No.  5  sunk  to  supply  two  cottages.  Although  situate
in  a  district  proverbially  dry  and  badly  off  for  water,  a  good  supply  was
found  at  a  depth  of  30  feet.  No.  6 — this  is  perhaps  the  most  remarkable
well  of  the  seven  alluded  to  in  this  notice.  At  a  dejitli  of  13  feet  6  inches
a  spring  (whose  existence  was  not  even  suspected)  was  found  that  has  been
proved,  after  being  tested  by  steam  pumps  for  several  days,  to  yield  between
20,000  and  30,000  gallons  of  water  per  diem  ;  and  this  after  an  abnormally
low  rainfall  during  the  year.  No.  7 — at  a  depth  of  18  feet  an  abundant
supply  has  been  found,  and,  like  the  wells  Nos.  1  and  2,  has  been  sunk  to
substitute  a  well  that  cannot  be  relied  upon.

W.  D.  Little.

No.  66. — Among  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney's  papers  were  found  several
communications  on  dowsing.  Here  are  two  which  relate  to  Mullins.
The  first  is  from  Mr.  Henley  of  Oxford.

Waterperry  House,  Oxford,  Jamianj  2nd,  1887.

Having  heard  from  Lord  Jersey  that  Mullins  had  been  successful  in
iinding  water  on  his  estate  in  the  previou  year,  and  that  his  wells  (eight  in
number)  had  stood  the  test  of  the  late  exceptional  summer,  I  requested
Mullins  to  come  here  for  one  day  only  to  search  for  water  on  two  farms  that


92


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


had  been  without  any  water  for  months,  with  the  exception  of  one  pond  fed
by  a  gravel  spring.

(I)  Mullins  commenced  at  Park  farm,  situated  on  the  clay,  with  gravel
one  field  distant  ;  he  marked  two  spots  where  his  stick  indicated  water  :  1,
near  the  house  (clay),  2,  near  the  pond  before  mentioned  ;  result,  water
found  near  the  pond  at  No.  2,  but  no  water  in  Vjore  of  30  feet  at  No.  1.  The
house  is  vacant,  and  having  found  water  in  one  place  I  did  not  persevere
at  No.  1.

(II)  Baker's  farm — no  water  all  summer,  two  places  marked  ;  water  in  both
at  bore  hole  about  the  depth  indicated,  well  thereupon  sunk  ;  result,
excellent  supply.  (Ill)  Baker's  house  in  village — present  well  in  clay,  no
spring  :  place  marked  by  Mullins  near  the  existing  well,  bored  between
30  and  40  feet  without  success,  but  I  did  not  persevere  as  the  other  wells  in
the  village  are  well  supplied.  (IV)  Entrance  Lodge — well  sunk  at  place
indicated — ample  supply.

About  fifty  people,  men,  women,  and  children,  tried  the  rod  without
success,  with  the  exception  of  a  young  lady  who  was  on  that  day  and
subsequently  able  to  deflect  the  rod  in  the  same  manner  as  Mullins,  though
it  appeared  to  have  an  injurious  effect  ujjon  her  nerves  and  this,  I  am  told,
is  commonly  the  case.

Mullins  has  lately  been  employed  by  Messrs.  Franklin  Bros.,  the  well-
known  land  agents,  to  find  water  at  Charndon,  Bucks,  on  the  estate  of
Mr.  Wykeham  Musgrave,  and  has  been  there  eminently  successful.  You
ask  me  to  mention  failures  and  I  am  only  in  a  position  to  quote  one  in  this
neighbourhood.  I.e.,  at  Colonel  Miller's  on  the  top  of  Shotover  Hill,  where
they  are  said  to  have  gone  to  considei-able  expense  without  finding  water,
but  it  is  only  fair  to  Mullins  to  suggest  that  the  depth  of  search  was
insufficient.

I  was  a  disbeliever  before  seeing  the  experiment  on  my  estate,  but  the
evidence  of  my  own  eyes  convinced  me  of  its  practical  utility.

I  tested  Mullins  by  taking  him  over  springs  of  which  I  alone  was  aware,
and  to  other  spots  where  I  knew  no  springs  existed,  and  he  was  in  both
instances  correct.

J.  J.  Henley.

No.  67. — The  next  letter  is  from  Mrs.  Burton,  of  Shrewsbury  : —
Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury,  Jamtary  31st,  1888.

On  December  22nd,  1887,  we  sent  for  Mr.  Mullins,  the  water-finder.
He  was  driven  from  the  railway  station  to  the  Weir  Hill  farm,  where  water
lias  been  scarce  (and  sometimes  altogether  absent)  from  time  immemorial  ;
and  the  consulting  engineer  thought  it  useless  to  make  any  further
search.

Mr.  Mullins  having  cut  a  number  of  twigs  from  nut  trees,  held  one  by
the  two  prongs  and  proceeded  to  walk  over  a  field  ; — it  sprung  up  suddenly
and  broke;  he  .said,  "there  is  water  at  a  depth  of  60  feet."  He  then
followed  the  spring  up  a  ploughed  field  ancl  m;irked  the  spot  where  we  were
to  dig.  He  said  we  should  find  a  strong  spring  from  35  to  45  feet  down,  but
if  we  failed  at  that  dejith  we  were  to  go  on  ;  he  then  took  his  fee  and
departed. We  sunk  to  a  depth  of  45  feet  and  began  to  despair  and  doubt


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  93


Mr.  Mullins'  powers  extremely.  However,  we  went  on  througli  a  seam  of
coal,  when  suddenly,  at  48  feet,  the  water  rushed  in  and  is  now  29  feet  in

*^^P*^h-  C.  T.  Burton.

Mr.  Gurney  thereupon  wrote  to  Mrs.  Burton  the  following  letter,
which  T  quote  as  an  illustration  of  the  vast  amount  of  letter  writing
that  he  undertook,  and  the  admirable  way  he  seized  the  main  issue  of
an  investigation.

26,  Montpelier  Square,  S.  VV.,  Febniani  otli,  1888.
Dear  Madam, — Very  many  thanks  for  your  acc^iuut  of  the  water- finding.
But  one  would  need  to  know  one  thing.  Had  there  been  ever  digging  to  as
great  a  depth  as  48  feet  before  1  If  not,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  water  might
not  have  been  found  at  numbers  of  other  places,  had  the  digging  been
continued  to  that  depth  ;  and  so  the  evidential  value  of  the  case  is  left
doubtful. Would  you  kindly  let  me  know  this  ?  and  believe  me,  yours  very

^^^^y^  Edmund  Gurney.

Mrs.  Burton  replies  : —

Yes,  we  had  dug  before  deeper  than  48  feet,  about  200  yards  nearer  the
farmhouse  50  years  ago  and  some  water  unfit  for  use  was  found.  Last  year
we  sank  a  very  deep  well  also  near  the  house  ;  blasting  through  the  rock  we
came  to  what  is  called  a  "pocket  "  of  water  and  all  the  water  disappeared
and  the  well  remained  dry,  the  foul  gas  being  too  strong  to  continue  the

C.  I.  Burton.

Mr.  Gurney's  letter  happens  to  be  preserved,  as  Mrs.  Burton
attached  it  to  her  reply.


No.  68.— The  Bristol  Times  and  Mirror  of  October  9th,  1888,  con-
tains the  account  of  water  finding  by  Mullins  at  Cirencester,  "  under
circumstances  of  great  interest "  according  to  the  newspaper  report : —

Some  farm  buildings  at  Bagendon,  occupied  by  Mr.  J.  Hayvvard,  had  no
water  supply,  except  the  runnings  from  the  roofs.  The  buildings  stand  on
the  summit  of  the  rollmg  Cotswold  district,  the  ground  level  being  on  a  level
with  Cirencester  church  tower,  and  144  feet  above  the  road  from  Cirencester
to  Cheltenham.  Mullins  undertook  to  sink  a  well,  the  depth  he  estimated
as  necessary  being  from  70  to  80  feet  ;  whereas  owners  of  house  property  in
the  vicinity  situated  on  much  lower  levels  have  sunk  from  120  to  150  feet,
and  then  often  failed  to  keep  a  supply  of  water  in  di-y  weather.  By  the
terms  of  the  contract,  Mullins  is  to  receive  a  certain  stated  sum  on  finding  a
supply  of  water,  but  if  he  fails  he  receives  no  payment  whatever.  His  men
have  now  been  at  work  for  seven  or  eight  weeks,  and  have  sunk  just  over  70
feet  through  tlie  rock  without  coming  to  water,  but  they  entertain  no  anxiety
as  to  the  result.  The  termination  of  the  undertaking  is  being  looked  forward
to  with  interest.

A  subsequent  report  informs  us  that  the  men  sunk  the  well  to  a
depth  of  101  feet,  when  an  abundant  supply  of  water  was  obtained


94


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


standing  11  feet  in  the  well.  This  case  is  quoted  to  show  the  absolute
faith  Mullins  had  in  dowsing,  as  tested  by  a  heavy  pecuniary  loss  had
he  failed.

No.  69. — In  the  Bath  Natural  Ilistorji  and  Field  Club  Proceedings
for  1889  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  411),  is  a  lengthy  paper  on  the  divining  rod,  by
Mr.  T.  Forder  Plowman.  In  this  paper  the  author  gives  the  evidence
of  his  friend,  Mr.  W.  J.  Brown,  of  Middlehill  House,  Box,  Wilts,
a  gentleman  occupying  a  high  position  in  the  county,  and  a  member
of  the  council  of  several  public  bodies. Mr.  Brown  states  (p.  415)  :  —

I  employed  Mullins  t<j  try  for  water  near  Box,  the  only  well  near,  which
was  180  feet  deep,  being  often  out  of  water  from  September  to  December
after  a  dry  summer.  Mullins  marked  the  track  of  four  different  springs,
one  of  which,  he  said,  was  rather  stronger  than  the  others.  I  asked  him
how  deep  the  best  spring  was  under  the  surface,  and  he  said  about  110  feet.
I  then  directed  Mulhns  to  search  for  an  old  well,  which,  when  I  was  a  lad,
my  father  had  discovered  in  an  open  quarry  at  the  time  the  Box  tunnel  was
being  made.  Although  it  had  been  filled  up  many  years  ago  and  there  were
no  outward  signs  of  it,  I  had  an  opinion  as  to  where  it  was  and  directed
Mullins  to  try.  They  worked  all  day,  but  came  upon  no  trace  of  it,  and
the  general  opinion  was  that  I  was  mistaken  as  to  the  spot.  Ho"wever,  [
ordered  them  to  go  on  in  the  same  direction  next  day,  and  in  the  afternoon,
after  working  a  little  more  westward,  they  suddenly  came  upon  the  well,
and,  on  examming,  we  found  that  the  marks  Mullins  had  made  in  the  first
place  to  denote  the  position  of  the  strongest  spring  pointed  exactly  into  the
centre  of  the  well.  [In  another  communication  Mr.  Brown  says  they  found
the  depth  of  the  old  well  to  be  70  feet,  and  that  he  contracted  with  Mullins
to  sink  it  50  feet  deeper.]  I  then  directed  him  to  sink  down  further  for
water,  and  strange  to  say,  at  111  feet,  viz. ,  within  a  foot  of  the  distance  he
had  stated  at  first,  we  found  the  spring  come  in,  and  just  where  he  had
marked  it.  The  well  now  supplies  twenty  cottages  and  if,  in  a  very  dry
season,  tliey  draw  all  the  water  out  by  night,  there  is  plenty  again  the  next
morning.

Whilst  this  work  was  in  progress,  S(jme  friends  and  myself  arranged  to
test  Mullins'  capacity  for  discovering  metal.  In  his  absence  we  took  ten
stones  off  the  top  of  a  wall,  and  having  placed  them  on  the  road,  we
deposited  a  sovereign  under  three  of  them.  Mullins  passed  his  rod  over
the  top  of  each  stone,  and  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  told  us  at  once
under  which  stones  the  sovereigns  were.  When  he  came  to  a  stone  under
which  there  was  no  sovereign,  he  at  once  said,  "  Nothing  here,  master,"  but
when  he  got  to  the  others,  he  remarked,  "  All  right,  master,  thankee,"  turned
the  stone  over  and  put  the  sovereign  in  his  pocket.

He  afterwards  tried  for  water  on  the  Cottle's  House  Estate,  the  then
owner.  Dr.  Parfitt,  being  very  anxious  to  obtain  it,  as  thex'e  was  none  on  the
estate.  Mullins,  however,  tried  in  vain,  and,  having  given  it  up  as  a  bad
job,  was  leaving  for  home,  when  just  as  he  passed  the  front  of  New  House
Farm,  with  his  rod  in  his  hand,  it  suddenly  indicated  the  presence  of  water


xxxir.j


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


95


He  at  once  said  there  was  a  strong  spring  at  a  depth  of  only  about  18  feet
below  the  surface.  He  sank  a  well  on  the  spot,  and  the  water  was  found  at
the  depth  he  stated.  [In  another  letter  Mr.  Brown  says  the  depth  of  the
well  was  20  feet.]  The  tenant  told  me  it  is  cajjital  water,  and  the  supply
never  runs  short.

After  Mullins  has  indicated  water  I  have  blindfolded  him  and  turned
him  round  and  round,  but  whenever  after  this  he  crossed  the  spring  up  went
the  rod  directly. I  conclude  by  saying  I  believe  in  him  thoroughly.

The  author,  Mr.  Plowman,  bears  testimony  "  to  the  ojjen  and
straightforward  manner  of  Mullins,  and  that  he  is  without  any  of  the
outward  characteristics  of  the  professional  charlatan."  In  answer  to
enquiries  Mullins  stated  to  Mr.  Plowman  that  whenever  he  is  dowsing
and  gets  over  a  stream  of  water  he  feels  a  tingling  sensation  in  his
arms  like  a  slight  electric  shock,  and  the  strength  of  this  sensation
enables  him  to  guess  the  approximate  volume  or  depth  of  a  spring.

Somewhat  similar  evidence  of  the  success  and  accuracy  of  the  dowser's
art  was  also  given  to  the  author  of  the  above  paper  by  Mr.  Malton
Druce,  of  Abingdon,  by  Mr.  W.  D.  Little,  estate  agent  to  the  Earl  of
Jersey,  (I  have  referred  to  this  evidence  elsewhere,  p.  90),  by  Mr.  W.
H.  Ashhurst,  J.P.,  of  Waterstock,  by  Mr.  F.  Webster,  of  the  Queen's
Home  Farm  at  Osborne  (whose  testimony  is  endorsed  by  Mr.  A.
Blake,  Her  Majesty's  Steward)  ;  Mr.  Webster  discovered  to  his
surprise  that  he  himself  was  a  good  dowser.  The  author  also  quotes
at  length  the  remarkable  evidential  cases  furnished  by  Sir  W.  E.
Welby  Gregory,  Bart.,  and  by  the  Hon.  M.  E.  G.  Finch-Hatton,  now
the  Earl  of  Winchilsea  and  IS^ottingham. (See  Nos.  73  and  71).

iSTo.  70. — Another  interesting  case  is  given  in  full  by  Mr.  Forder
Plowman,  on  p.  421,  Vol.  VI.,  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bath  Field
Club.  It  is  from  Mr.  H.  D.  Skrine,  J.P.,  D.L.,  of  Claverton  Manor,
Bath. Mr.  Skrine  wi-ites  :  —

My  first  acquaintance  with  the  divining  rod  was  in  January,  18G5.  I  had
heard  that  one  John  Mullins,  a  well  sinker,  who  lived  at  Colerne,  had  the
gift  of  finding  water  by  the  rod.  I  sent  for  him  and  took  him  to  a  field
adjoining  the  village  of  Conkwell,  where  I  had  thought  of  building  a  cottage
as  a  sort  of  sanatorium  for  my  wife.  On  the  way  he  tried  the  divming  rod
several  times,  and  I  was  aware  that  in  a  line  below  the  points  where  the
twig  turned  with  him,  there  was  a  spring  in  the  wood  which  came  to  the
surface.  Arrived  on  the  field,  the  twig  turned  witli  him  in  several  places,
and  he  set  a  mark  on  the  wall  opposite  the  s,pot.

A  few  days  after  I  asked  Mr.  Earle,  Rector  of  Monkton  Farleigh,  to
meet  John  Mullins  and  myself  on  the  field  on  January  20th,  1865  ;  as  I  had
heard  that  Mr.  Earle  had  the  gift,  and  had  discovered  water  by  it  on  his
own  land  at  Monkton  Farleigh.  He  was  not  aware  of  the  marks  on  the
wall,  but  the  twig  turned  with  him  at  the  same  places  as  with  Mullins  ;  they


!)6


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


differed  only  in  the  position  in  tlie  field  as  to  the  hest  place  to  sink  the  well,
lioth  being  in  the  same  line.  The  well  was  sunk,  and  water  was  found  at
about  80  feet  in  yellow  clay  under  the  rock,  but  this  not  being  of  sufficient
depth  and  the  clay  being  a  thin  bed,  Mullins  went  down  about  25  feet  lower
and  came  on  a  good  spring  in  the  blue  lias.

Mullins  afterwards  found  some  springs  near  tlie  house  and  traced  them
up  to  the  spot  where,  under  the  croquet  lawn,  a  spring  had  been  found  some
years  before.  Since  then  I  have  emphjyed  liim  at  Claverton,  and  sunk  two
wells  succesfully,  and  he  has  again  traced  several  sjirings  which  have  been
verified.  In  two  instances  where  tlie  line  of  a  drain  had  been  lost,  he
recovered  the  spot  and  was  always  correct.  My  two  sons,  who  had  watched
the  operation,  found  they  also  had  the  gift.  I  cannot  resist  the  conclusion
that  it  is  a  real  gift  possessed  by  some  persons,  and  that  it  may  have  been  a
natural  provision  to  enable  men  to  obtain  that  very  necessary  element
(water)  when  there  are  no  signs  above  the  surface.

The  following  abstracts  of  cases  already  published  in  our  Pro-
ceedim/s  are  added  here  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader  : —

No.  71. — Captain  Henry  Smith,  J. P.,  of  Horbling,  Folkingham,  Lincoln-
shire, writing  on  December  26th,  1882,  states  that  his  scepticism  as  to  the
practical  value  of  the  indications  given  by  the  divining  rod,  as  used  by
Mullins,  were  overcome  by  what  he  himself  witnessed  and  describes  in  full
in  FriK-eedingfi  S.P.R. ,  Vol.  II.,  p.  95,  etc.  Mullins  fixed  on  certain  spots
where  water  would  be  found,  and  again  indicated  tlie  same  spots  when
unable  to  see  the  previous  places.  Against  Captain  Smith's  opinion,  Mullins
said  an  abundant  supply  of  water  would  be  found  at  a  particular  spot,  and
on  sinking  a  well,  this  was  found  to  be  the  case.  Other  evidence  is  also
given.  ■  •

No.  72. — Mr.  G.  Hancock,  of  Corsham,  Wilts,  writing  on  January  23rd,
1883,  states  he  employed  Mullins  to  find  the  best  place  for  sinking  shafts  for
mining  operations,  so  as  to  avoid  the  inrush  of  water,  which  had  previously
hindered  their  work.  Mr.  Hancock  says,  "  In  every  case  Mullins  was
right. " (Proceed; mjii  S.  P.  R. ,  Vol .  II. ,  p.'  96).

No.  73.— Sir  Welby  Gregory,  Bart.,  formerly  M.P.,  of  Denton  Manor,
Grantham,  writing  on  .January  28th,  1883,  states  he  employed  Mullins  to
find  water  for  a  new  country  house  he  was  liuilding.  As  a  test,  Sir  W.
Gregory  first  tried  whether  Mullins  could  find  water  on  the  lawn,  through  a
certain  part  of  which  a  drain-pipe  carried  running  water  ;  the  exact  position
was  known  to  Sir  W.  G.,  but  not  to  M.  ;  the  twig  instantly  moved  whenever
M.  crossed  the  drain.  After  traversing  the  grounds,  Mullins  fixed  on  two
lines,  A  and  B  (about  30  yds.  apart),  where  he  said  water  would  be  found,
from  20  ft.  to  30  ft.  deep  at  A,  and  from  30  ft.  to  40  ft.  deep  at  B,  the  latter
the  more  copious  supply,  the  former  small.  A  neighbouring  hill,  which
Mullins  thought  likely  to  yield  a  better  supply,  was  traversed,  but  no  indica-
tions of  water  were  given  by  the  rod.  Subsequently  Sir  W.  Gregory
consulted  an  eminent  civil  engineer,  who  stated  from  his  geological  knowledge
of  the  country,  that  tlie  hill  was  tlie  best  place  to  bore  for  water,  but  that  none


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


97


would  be  found  at  the  places  indicated  in  the  grounds,  A  and  B,  at  a  less  depth
than  120  feet  to  130  feet.  This  opinion  was  confirmed  by  another  geological
authority.  Sir  Welby's  gardener  having  found  the  rod  moved  in  his  hands,
tried  his  skill,  and  fixed  on  the  same  spots  as  Mullins  had  done  ;  the  rod,  held
by  pincers,  violently  twisted  itself  over  the  spots,  A  and  B.  Sir  Welby
blindfolded  the  man,  and  at  the  same  spots  again  the  rod  moved.  Hence  he
decided  to  sink  on  both  the  lines  indicated.  In  one  (A),  he  found  water  at
20  feet,  and  in  the  other  (B),  as  stated  by  Mullins,  a  much  larger  supply  at
28  feet.  Between  the  two  lines  Mullins  said  there  was  no  water.  Sir  Welby
sank  a  shaft  midway,  and  went  down  10  to  12  feet  deeper  than  the  deepest
well,  but  found  no  water,  although  the  formation  appeared  precisely  similar  ;
neither  well  was  affected  by  this  trial  shaft.  This  is  a  striking  case,  and  is
given  in  full  in  Proceedbvjs  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IT.,  pp.  97-99.

In  a  speech  Sir  Welby  Gregory  made  at  Grantham  (reported  in  the
Grantham  Journal,  September  28th,  1888)  he  refers  to  his  experience  of  the
practical  value  of  the  divining  rod  and  remarks  that  in  future  he  prefers  to
trust  to  the  dowser  rather  than  to  the  geologist  in  sinking  wells.

No.  74.— The  Hon.  M.  E.  G.  Finch-Hatton,  then  M.P.  (now  the  Earl  of
Winchilsea),  writing  on  February  29th,  1884,  from  23,  Ennismore  Gardens,
S.W., describes  his  own  experience  with  Mullins,  at  Haverholme Priory,  a  place
Mullins  had  no  previous  acquaintance  with.  (1)  Mullins  found  and  traced
the  water-supply  pipe  up  to  the  house,  though  no  indication  on  the  surface
was  visible,  nor  had  any  information  been  given  to  Mullins.  (2)  He  found  a
sj^ring  on  the  lawn,  the  existence  of  an  old  well  at  the  very  spot  being  after-
wards proved,  though  unknown  at  the  time.  (3)  He  was  unable  to  fi.nd  another
water  pipe,  when  the  distant  tap  was  nut  turned  on,  but  when  the  water
was  running  he  fixed  the  spot  correctly.  Mullins  was  then  blindfolded,  and
though  led  round  by  a  different  route,  again  fixed  on  the  same  spot.  "At
first  he  slightly  overran  it  a  foot  or  so,  and  then  felt  round,  as  it  were,  and
seemed  to  be  led  back  into  the  exact  centre  of  influence  by  the  twig.  All
present  considered  the  trial  conclusive  of  two  things  :  (1)  of  the  man's  perfect
good  faith  ;  (2)  that  the  effect  produced  on  the  twig  emanated  from  an
agency  outside  of  himself,  and  appeared  due  to  the  presence  of  running
water." (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  101).

No.  75.— Mr.  F.  T.  Mott,  F.R.G.S.,  whom  I  know  personally,  writing
from  Bristol  Hill,  Leicester,  states  that  on  his  estate  at  Charnwood  Forest
there  was  no  spring  water.  The  formation  was  metamorphic  slate  ;  several
wells  had  been  sunk,  and  no  water  found  ;  in  one  case  the  boring  went  to
100  feet,  but  unsuccessfully.  Mullins  was  employed,  and  by  the  movement
of  the  twig,  which  Mr.  Mott  states  he  could  not  restrain,  though  he  tried  to
do  so,  certain  spots  were  marked.  "  Anywhere  along  that  line,"  Mullins
said,  "you  will  find  water  if  you  sink  about  30  feet."  A  well  was  sunk,  and
at  28  feet  water  was  found.  On  sinking  to  31  feet,  a  constant  supply,  standing
6  feet  in  the  well,  has  been  obtained.  (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,
p.  100).

I  have,  after  considerable  enquiry,  met  with  two  or  three  failui'es
on  the  part  of  Mr.  J.  Mullins,  which  are  narrated  on  a  later  page.

H


98


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


•  ■  . (/3)  Mr.  H.  W.  MuLLiNS.

Although  no  conclusive  evidence  exists  to  show  that  the  faculty  of
"  dowsing  "  is  hereditary,  yet  in  several  instances  one  or  more  of  the
children  of  notable  dowsers  do  possess  the  "  gift."  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins,
of  Colerne,  Box,  AVilts,  son  of  the  late  J.  Mullins,  is  a  case  in  point,
judging  from  the  following  cases  of  his  that  I  have  investigated.

No.  76. — Having  been  informed  that  Mullins,  junr.  had  been  suc-
cessful in  finding  water  for  a  brewery  where  an  old  well  existed  that
was  of  no  use,  I  wrote  to  the  proprietor,  Mr.  Bean,  and  the  following
is  his  reply  : —

Wothorpe  House,  Stamford,  May  2Uh,  1896.
I  had  Mr.  Mullins,  the  water  finder,  some  time  last  year  down  to  my
brewery  at  Ketton,  in  which  there  was  an  old  well  with  only  a  very  small
quantity  of  water.

Before  Mr.  Mullins  came  I  had  the  well  covered  over  so  as  to  comjoletely
conceal  it  from  view.  Mr.  Mullins  walked  uj)  my  yard  and  when  he  came
to  the  spot  marked  B  on  sketch,  said,  "  there  is  a  very  strong  S2:)ring  here,
flowing  in  this  direction,'"  marked  C.  I  then  showed  him  the  well,  W,  and  he
said  the  amount  of  water  we  got  from  it  was  not  as  large  as  the  spring  he
found  at  B.  He  advised  me  to  sink  lower,  when  I  should  pi'obably  tap  the
spring  which,  according  to  him,  ran  in  the  direction  of  the  wells.  I  asked
how  many  gallons  per  hour  did  he  think  I  should  find  ;  he  said  from  1,000  to
1,500.  I  did  nothing  to  the  well  until  three  months  ago,  when  T  sank  three
feet  lower  in  the  well  and  tunnelled  four  feet  in  the  direction  of  the  supposed
spring,  when  one  day  the  men  heard  a  rumble  and  a  large  amount  of  water
broke  in  and  rapidly  rose  in  the  well.  I  gauged  the  amount  and  found  it
about  800  gallons  per  hour  (by  pump).


B


•  w ■-  ■  -


W,  site  oi  old  well.  B,  position  of
strong  spring  indicated  by  Mulhns,  said  to
be  flowing  in  the  direction  of  C.  Water
broke  into  the  well  at  the  spot  A,  when
tunnelling  towards  B.


This  is  all  I  can  tell  you  as  to  water  finding,  but  if  you  write  to  my
friend,  Mr.  W.  Barber,  C.E.,  22,  Buckingham-street,  Strand,  W.C.,  he  will
give  you  some  more  information  about  water  finding  at  diflferent  parts  of
the  country.

W.  Bean.


xxxir.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


99


Mr.  Barber  kindly  replied  to  my  enquiries  and  gave  me  informa-
tion that  appears  elsewhere.

No.  77. — The  next  letter  furnishes  a  still  more  striking  case  of  Mr.
H.  W.  Mullins'  success.  In  answer  to  my  enquiries  Mr.  Bayley
writes  : —

Arnold's,  Holmwood,  Surrey,  December  29tli,  1896.
In  reply  to  your  communication  of  the  26tli  inst.,  I  beg  to  inform  you
when  I  bought  this  property  10  years  ago  there  was  an  old  well  about  60
feet  deep  on  the  premises  which  was  said  to  have  a  good  supply  of  water,
but  when  I  came  to  pat  it  to  the  test  I  found  it  quite  inadequate  for  the
wants  of  my  house,  so  consulted  Messrs.  Isler  and  Co.  as  to  the  best  means
of  iiicreasing  the  supply.  On  their  advice  I  got  them  to  bore  through  the
bottom  of  the  old  well  to  a  depth  of  about  100  feet,  making  in  all  about  160
feet,  but  found  no  water.  Some  time  after,  seeing  an  account  of  the  divining
rod,  I  sent  for  Mullins  and  he  said  there  was  water  to  be  had  at  about  60
feet  deep  on  the  top  of  a  hill  300  yards  from  the  old  well.  He  dug  a  well  on
the  site  and  found  water  at  a  depth  of  90  feet,  and  now  we  have  an  abundant
supply. Holmwood  is  28  miles  from  London  and  is  under  the  Surrey  Hills.

Edmond  K.  Bayley.

No.  78. — It  is  sometimes  urged  that  only  springs  yielding  a  limited
supply  of  water  are  found  by  dowsers,  who  fix  on  spots  where  more  or  less
surface  water  can  be  got  from  shallow  wells  rather  than  run  the  risk
of  sinking  a  deep  well.  Many  of  the  cases  already  cited  refute  this
notion,  and  the  following  sent  to  me  in  answer  to  my  enquiries  bears
on  the  same  point.  It  is  from  Messrs.  Beamish  and  Crawford,  the
well-known  brewers  of  Cork.

Cork  Porter  Brewery,  Cork,  December  30th,  1896.
In  reply  to  your  letter  of  26th  inst.  we  beg  to  state  : —

1.  We  had  an  old  well  yielding  a  small  supply  of  water.  It  was  about
30  feet  deep.

2.  No  new  well  was  fixed  on  by  Mullins.  He  bored  down  to  a  depth  of
about  60  feet  below  the  bottom  of  the  old  well,  and  therefore  about  90  feet
below  the  surface  of  the  ground.

3.  The  supply  of  water  now  obtained  from  the  new  pipes  sunk  by  MuUin.s.
is,  as  nearly  as  we  can  estimate,  about  10,000  gallons  per  hour.

Beamish  and  Ckawford,  Ltd.

No.  79. — The  next  letter  in  answer  to  my  enquiries  is  from  the
Rev.  H.  F.  Ramsay,  M.A.  :—

Brendon,  Lynton,  N.  Devon,  December  30th,  1896.
In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  26th  instant,  I  beg  to  state  that  before
commencing  the  building  of  the  new  rectory  at  Oare  we  sunk  a  well  close  to
the  site  of  the  house  to  a  depth  of  28  feet.  As  hard  rock  full  of  fissures  was
there  met  with,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  water,  we  decided  to  discontinue
the  sinking. It  was  at  this  stage  that  we  called  in  Mullins,  who  went  all

H  2


100


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


over  the  ground  in  the  usual  way  holding  a  hazel  twig.  He  tried  about  the
site  and  jironottnced  our  well  to  be  absolutely  hopeless  ;  afterwards  he  tried
helow  the  site  and  at  the  lowest  spot  on  the  field  he  pointed  out  a  place  where
we  should  get  400  gallons  a  day  at  35  feet  deep  and  a  big  spring  at  70  feet.
We  soon  started  to  dig  and  came  to  a  small  sj^ring  yielding  about  200  gallons
at  26  feet.  I  find  the  supply  insufficient,  so  I  propose  to  deepen  the  well
somewhat,  as  there  is  not  more  than  three  feet  of  water  in  it.  The  new  well
is  about  40  yards  from  the  old  well.

I  do  not  pretend  to  explain  Mullins'  mochis  operandi,  but  it  does  appear
to  me  that  he  has  a  marvellous  jjower  of  finding  water  underground.  To
test  him  we  took  him  to  two  fields  (far  apart  from  each  other),  and  in  each
case  he  discovered  a  hidden  covered  spring,  of  the  existence  of  which  he
could  not  possibly  have  been  aware  beforehand.  In  the  one  case  the  water
was  drained  off  by  underground  drain  tiles  into  the  river  Badyworthy,  and
in  the  other  the  water  shows  on  the  surface  of  the  grass  only  when  the
sjjrings  ljurst  after  prolonged  heavy  rain.  -g jp  j^^jjg^y

P.S. — Perhaps  I  ought  to  mention  that  the  house  is  in  the  Lynn  Valley,
but  not  quite  at  the  bottom  of  the  slope.


No.  80. — Mr.  F.  T.  Elwortliy,  of  Foxdown,  Wellington,  sends  me
the  following  : —

At  the  Parsonage  Farm,  Bishop  Nympton,  North  Devon,  the  owners  had
expended  large  sums  in  the  hope  of  finding  a  better  supply  of  water,  but  all
to  no  purpose.  At  last  they  determined  to  avail  themselves  of  the  assistance
of  Messrs.  J.  Mullins  and  Sons,  water-finders,  of  Colerne,  Chijoijenham,
Wiltshire.  Mr.  Henry  Mullins  (one  of  the  firm)  visited  the  farm,  and,  by
the  aid  of  a  twig  of  hazel,  jjointed  out  several  places  where  springs  might
be  found  at  depths  varying  from  six  feet  to  twenty-five  feet.  He  succeeded
in  finding  one  six  feet  deep  at  a  short  distance  from  the  farmhouse,  and  two
more  a  little  further  off,  from  eight  to  ten  feet  deep,  each  of  which  Mr.
Mullins  estimated  would  jDroduce  from  300  to  400  gallons  of  water  per  day. —
From  North  Devon  Herald,  September  27th,  1894,  communicated  by  Mr.
G.  M.  Doe  to  the  Devon  Association,  Vol.  XXVIII.  (1896)  p.  96.

Mr.  Elworthy  adds  : —

Parsonage  Farm  is  well-known  to  me.  It  belonged  to  an  uncle  of  mine
up  to  and  since  his  death,  when  it  was  sold  to  the  present  owners.

With  reference  to  the  foregoing,  Mr.  R.  S.  Crosse,  solicitor  to  the
trustees  of  the  estate,  writes  as  follows  : —

25,  Broad  Street,  South  Molton,  North  Devon,

October  mh,  1895.

I  am  ij]  eased  to  say  that  the  result  of  Mr.  Mullins'  experiments  on
Parsonage  Farm,  Bishop  Nympton,  Devon,  has  j^roved  highly  satisfactory.
At  the  second  place  indicated  by  Mr.  Henry  Mullins  a  well  has  been  sunk
and  water  found  at  the  exact  depth  he  foretold.  His  judgment  as  to  the
quantity  of  water  was  also  quite  correct.

Reginald  Stawell  Ckosse.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  B,od.  101


I  wrote  to  the  present  proprietor  for  further  information,  and  Mr.
Crosse  replies  : —

25,  Broad  Street,  South  Melton,  North  Devon,

January  6tli,  1897.
My  tenant,  Mr.  George  Rucld,  has  handed  me  your  letter,  and  in  reply  I
may  say  that  the  divining  rod  as  used  by  Mr.  Mullins  was  a  complete  success.
I  had  spent  (on  behalf  of  my  trustees)  a  considerable  amount  for  sinking
wells  prior  to  Mr  Mullins'  visit,  and  the  places  indicated  by  Mr.  Mullins
were  not  far  away  from  where  the  first  sinking  operations  took  place.

I  was  with  him  at  Oare,  near  Lynton,  and  he  was  just  as  successful  there.

Reg.  S.  Crosse.

No.  81. — Writing  on  December  29th,  1896,  in  reply  to  my  enquiries,
Captain  Hobbs  states  he  is  the  agent  for  some  property  near  Warrington,
Cheshire,  where  a  supply  of  water  was  obtained  by  sinking  a  well  at  a
spot  indicated  by  the  dowsing  rod,  though  several  other  wells  had
previou.sly  been  sunk  unsuccessfully  without  the  use  of  the  rod.  In  a
subsequent  letter.  Captain  Hobbs  gives  me  the  following  details  : —

8,  King-street,  Manchester,  January  7th,  1897.

I  have  to-day  been  able  to  get  all  the  information  about  the  findmg  of
water  on  the  farm  at  Burton  wood,  near  Warrington.  The  property  is  owned
by  the  executors  of  the  late  Wm.  Bmdloss,  and  is  situated  about  five  miles
from  Warrington.  Up  to  the  visit  of  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins,  the  farmer  had
used  the  rain  water,  filtered.

On  November  29th,  1895,  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins  accompanied  me  and  several
ladies  and  gentlemen  to  the  place  (he  had  never  been  in  that  neighbourhood
before),  and  after  walking  over  the  farmyard,  garden,  and  field  near  the
house,  he  fixed  on  a  spot  about  50  yards  from  the  house,  in  the  garden,  where
he  said  we  should  find  a  supply  of  water  suflicient  for  the  use  of  the  house.

There  a  well  has  been  sunk,  and  a  supply  of  from  60  to  70  gallons
(probably  more,  as  we  have  never  pumped  it  out  quite  dry)  an  hour  was
found.  The  water  was  first  found  at  40  feet  from  the  surface,  but  sinking
was  contuiued  for  5  feet  more  (througli  quicksand).  There  is  now  an  ample
supply  at  all  times  in  the  well.

In  1880  a  well  was  sunk  about  12  yards  from  the  house  ;  48  feet  were
sunk  and  18  feet  bored  (a  total  of  66  feet),  but  no  water  was  found.  No
further  steps  were  taken  since  that  date  until  Mullins'  visit.

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  road  from  the  farm  in  question,  in  or  about
1877,  three  wells  were  sunk  about  50  feet  deep.  In  two  of  them  no  water
was  found,  and  hardly  any  in  the  third,  but  the  supply  was  so  small  that  it
was  useless.  The  farm  on  wliich  these  wells  were  sunk  is  in  a  north-west
direction  from  the  Forest  Farm  (that  is  the  name  of  the  farm  where  our  well
is),  and  about  80  to  100  yards  distant.

These  three  wells  were  all  in  sand  ;  our  well  was  through  15  feet  of  clay,
then  sand,  and  lastly  quicksand.

The  river  nearest  to  these  farms  is  the  Mersey,  distant  about  four  miles.

The  following  were  present  at  the  finding  of  the  water  [a  lengthy  list  of
names  and  addresses  is  here  given.]


102


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


W e  ull  were,  and  are,  convinced  that  the  operation  of  the  divining  rod  in  Mr.
Mullins'  hands  was  perfectly  honest  and  genuine,  as  well  as  very  wonderful.

J. C.  HOBBS.

Replying  to  my  further  enquiries  Captain  Hobbs  writes  : —

8,  King  Street,  Manchester,  January  2\st,  1897.
The  ground  all  round  the  house  is  nearly  level. I  give  below  a  sketch,
as  you  wish,  of  the  relative  position  of  the  wells  ;  but  I  am  a  bad  hand  at
drawing.


N  .  On

-Y  Farm O  O

S


W.  W.  W.  Three  wells  sunk  in  1877.

F.  Farm  hoiise.

W.  Old  well,  12  yards  from  F.  house,  and  22  yards  deep  ;  no  water.

W".  New  well,  abont  50  yards  from  F. ;  good  supply.

No.  82.- — Another  illustration  of  young  Mr.  Mullins'  faculty  is  given
in  the  War7-iiigton  Guardian  for  the  last  week  in  April,  1896.  The
report  states  that  a  Mr.  Beck  Chad  wick,  J.  P.,  having  sunk  borings  and
failed  to  find  water,  was  led  to  employ  Mr.  Mullins,  who  from  the
indications  given  by  the  dowsing  rod  fixed  on  a  certain  spot,  where  he
asserted  an  abundant  supply  of  water  would  be  found  at  about  70  feet
deep.  A  well  was  accordingly  sunk,  and,  at  between  50  and  60  feet,  a
great  inrush  of  water  occurred  and  a  copious  supply  has  been  obtained.
The  Editor  of  the  Warrwigton  Guardian  to  whom  I  applied,  referred
me  to  Mr.  Chadwick's  agent,  Mr.  J.  Shaw  Green,  F.S.S.,  an  accountant
at  Warrington,  who  could  vouch  for  the  facts.  Mr  Shaw  Green's
reply  to  my  letter  is  as  follows  : —

18,  King  Street,  Warrington,  January  11th,  1897.

The  whole  of  the  circumstances  are  very  familiar  to  me.  The  spot  is  in
the  township  of  Kingsley  at  a  place  whei'e  a  valley  runs  for  a  considerable
distance.  Two  trial  borings  were  made  by  an  eminent  firm  of  well-sinkers
at  places  selected  by  them,  but  without  result,  and  it  was  upon  their  failure
that  the  services  of  the  water  diviner  were  brought  in.

In  reply  to  the  queries  stated  in  your  letter  :

1.  The  facts  [in  the  newspaper  report]  are  correctly  stated.

2.  Two  previous  attempts,  as  stated  above,  had  been  made,  one  of  them
immediately  before  the  water  diviner  was  called  in.  I  cannot  give  the
exact  depth.


w'
O


w"
O


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


103


3.  The  results  are  set  out  in  the  cutting.  A  well  already  existed  with  a
small  quantity  of  water  in  it  at  about  35  feet.  The  distance  between  place
indicated  by  water  diviner  and  well  is  about  18  yards.  One  of  the  trial
borings  was  made  at  a  distance  of  about  25  yards  from  the  spot  indicated  by
the  diviner.

It  is  altogether  a  most  interesting  case  and  the  full  particulars  of  the

search  appeared  in  the  Warrington  Guardian,  I  believe,  in  the  month  of

April  last.  to  /-<

^  J.  Shaw  Green.

In  reply  to  my  inquiry,  Mr.  Shaw  Green  writes  : —

18,  King  Street,  Warrington.  January  20th,  1897.
The  gentleman  who  made  the  search  for  us  was  the  eldest  son  of  J.
Mullins,  who  died  nearly  three  years  ago.

The  date  of  the  search  was  Friday  the  24th  April,  1896.
I  will  obtain  and  send  you  particulars  of  the  abortive  borings,  but  it  may
be  a  few  days  before  I  can  do  so,  for  the  particulars  are  at  Kingsley  and  not

in  niv  office.  to  ^

J.  Shaw  Green.

No.  83.— The  Fall  Mall  Gazette  of  February  20th,  1897,  publishes
the  following  letter  from  Lord  Burton  : —

We  are  situated  in  Needwood  Forest,  on  the  top  of  a  mass  of  marl  thrust
up  between  the  rivers  Dove  and  Trent.  Our  water  is  derived  from  wells
averaging  from  140  ft.  to  180  ft.  deep,  and  owing  to  a  series  of  dry  years  our
supply  has  recently  been  very  scanty.  Our  best  Avell  gives  about  4,000  gallons
in  the  twenty-four  hours.

About  three  months  ago  I  sent  for  Mr.  Mullins,  the  well-known  water
finder,  who  walked  round  the  property  with  a  small  hazel  wand  or  twig  in
his  hands.  Every  now  and  then  the  wand  seemed  to  twitch,  and  he  indicated
that  water  would  be  found  in  these  places,  naming  an  approximate  depth  and
probable  supjjly.  At  last  we  came  to  a  field  where  the  twig  gave  indications  of
a  row  of  springs,  and  Mullins  informed  us  that  if  we  sank  we  should  probably
get  a  supply  of  nearly  40,000  gallons  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  We  have  sunk,
and  at  140  feet  to  150  feet  we  have  a  most  abundant  supply,  quite  equal  to
what  was  promised,  and  we  expect  to  get  more  by  driving  adits  right  and  left.

One  curious  thing  was  that  when  the  twig  was  placed  in  another  person's
hands  turning  towards  the  ground,  on  Mullins  grasping  the  hands  the  twig
slowly  turned  vip  ;  but  this  happened  only  with  two  out  of  four  persons
experimented  on.  I  cannot  explain  the  phenomenon,  but  it  appears  to  me
to  be  perfectly  genuine,  and  certainly  in  my  case  the  result  has  been  very
successful.  Burton.

February  IStli.

I  wrote  to  Lord  Burton  asking  him  whether  any  wells  had  been
sunk  on  his  estate  unsuccessfully  prior  to  young  Mr.  Mullins'  visit.
His  reply  is  as  follows  : —

Rangemore,  Burton-on-Trent,  March  9th,  1897.

I  fear  I  can  add  no  facts  to  the  short  letter  I  sent  to  the  Fall  Mall.  [Prior
to  Mullins'  visit]  we  may  have  sunk  a  dozen  wells  in  all,  varying  from  40  to


104


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


60  yards  in  dei^th  ;  the  supply  is  not  copious  in  any  of  them  ;  the  stable  yard
is  the  best,  about  4,000  gallons  in  the  24  hours  at  the  most, — this  well  is
over  60  yards  deep.  The  supply  at  the  new  [Mullins]  well  about  half  a  mile
to  the  east  of  the  above  and  about  300  yards  below  and  soutli  of  the  village,
is  so  good  that  we  are  going  to  considerable  expense  in  sinking  and  putting
down  pumps,  erecting  tank  and  tower  and  su  forth.  Mullins  marked  five
springs  in  a  line  extending  over  perhaps  30  yards  or  more.  We  are  driving
side  adits  from  the  well  and  they  seem  to  be  producing  a  quantity  of  water.

Burton.

No.  84.— The  Essex  Times  of  January  29th,  1896,  reports  :  —

Considerable  difhculty  has  been  experienced  in  finding  a  sufficient  supply
of  water  for  the  Bower  House,  Havering,  the  residence  of  Mr.  A.  Money
Wigram,  M.P.  As  Havering  stands  on  very  high  ground,  the  only  chance  of
finding  supplementary  sources  of  supply  lay  in  the  discovery  of  the  course  of
the  underground  springs.  Investigation  in  this  direction  by  the  ordinary
methods  having  proved  fruitless,  Mr.  W.  H.  Pemberton  Barnes  a  few  days
ago  invited  Mr.  John  Mullins.'  A  field  near  the  top  of  the  hill  was  selected
as  the  sjjhere  of  ojjerations.  Providing  himself  witli  the  indispensable  rod,
Mr.  Mullins  began  by  walking  slowly  across  the  ground,  holding  one  end  of
the  rod  in  each  hand  with  the  point  downwards,  until  he  came  across  what  he
intimated  was  an  underground  spring,  when  the  twig  would  turn  in  his  hands
in  a  half-circle.  He  indicated  a  certain  sjjot  as  the  place  where  the  spring
was  strongest,  giving  as  his  opinion  tliat  water  would  be  obtained  at  a  depth
of  from  30  to  35  feet.  Here  a  shaft  was  afterwards  sunk,  but  before  the
specified  depth  was  reached  the  water  came  in  so  rapidly  that  operations  had
to  be  suspended,  owing  to  the  impossibility  of  working  the  pumps  fast
enough  to  keep  the  well  empty.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Money  Wigram  for  further  particulars,  and  the
following  is  his  reply,  which  has  been  delayed  for  the  reasons  given : —

101,  Eaton  Square,  S.W.,  May  15th,  1897.
I  have  left  Havering,  and  for  the  last  few  months  have  been  travelling  in
the  East.

In  answer,  I  would  say  the  first  experiment  made  at  Mullins'  suggestion
failed  through  no  fault  of  his.  He  said,  "  You  will  find  water  [at]  37  feet."
We  did,  in  a  shifting  bed  of  sand,  but  on  going  3  feet  lower  we  struck  clay
and  lost  it  all.  Afterwards  he  indicated  two  springs  within  a  few  feet  of
each  other,  and  both  were  tapped  with  success.

I  believe  in  him  strongly  for  surface  springs,  and  should  always  consult
him  were  I  building  cottages,  &c.,  where  the  supply  required  is  small.

A.  Money  Wigram.

It  will  be  seen  that  none  of  these  cases,  where  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins
was  the  dowser,  afford  such  striking  evidence  on  behalf  of  a  dowsing

1  This  is  the  name  of  tlie  firm,  but  here  and  elsewhere  in  this  group  [f-j)  the  dowser
is  the  son,  Mr.  H.  W.  MulHns.— W.  F.  B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Bivinvng  Rod.


105


faculty  as  was  given  by  the  portion  of  his  father's  work  that  I  have
been  able  to  investigate.  Though  I  have  not  heard  of  any  distinct
failures  on  the  part  of  the  son,  beyond  wrong  estimates  of  the
depth  and  volume  of  the  underground  water,  (if  the  Richmond
Experiments  to  be  narrated  later  are  excepted),  yet this  is  not


JIE.  H.  W.  MULLIKS.

surprising,  as  Mr.  Mullins,  junr.,  has  not  long  been  engaged  at  this
particular  work.  That  he  has  had,  or  will  have,  occasional  failures
is  likely  enough,  but  what  proportion  they  bear  to  his  successes  I
have  no  independent  means  of  ascertaining.


106


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  Watekford  Experiments.

In  the  group  of  cases  under  the  head  of  the  kite  Mr.  J.  Mullins
will  be  found  a  very  striking  one,  No.  52,  (p.  77),  the  particulars  of
which  were  kindly  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Christie-Miller.  Subsequently
my  friend  Mr.  Kilroe,  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Ireland,  told  me
of  a  very  similar  case  occurring  at  Messrs.  Richardson's  factory  at
Waterford.  I  l)egged  Mr.  Kilroe  to  put  the  facts  in  writing  for  me,
which  he  did  in  the  accompanying  letter.  Afterwards  additional
evidence  of  eye-witnesses  was  obtained  and  it  then  became  evident  the
case  was  the  same  as  that  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Christie-Miller ;  this  led
to  enquiry  and  it  turned  out  that  Mr.  Christie-Miller,  though  not
living  at  Waterfoixl,  is  the  proprietor  of  Messrs.  Richardson's  factory.
As  the  case  is  of  special  importance  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  some,
I  fear,  rather  tedious  details.

Mr.  Kilroe  writes  : —

Geological  Survey  of  Ireland  OfBce,  14,  Hume  Street,  Dublin,

January  23cd,  1897.

In  or  about  the  year  1888,  Messrs.  Richardson,  bacon  curers,  of  Water-
ford,  required  a  considerable  water  supply  and  got  professional  advice,  based
upon  geological  gi'ounds,  as  to  where  to  obtain  it  by  sinking.  The  amount
procured  on  sinking  proved  entirely  insufficient.  This  was  surface  water,
and  when  the  rock  was  reached  it  proved  quite  dry,  giving  a  worse  rather
tlian  a  better  prospect  as  the  sinking  progressed.  The  strata  at  the  place
are  nearly  vertical  and  the  bedding  much  folded.

An  English  "diviner"  was  engaged,  and  to  hinder  collusion,  the  chief
clerk  of  the  firm  met  him  at  the  boat  on  arrival  in  Waterford  ;  who  also
brought  him  to  the  works.  There  the  diviner  was  accompanied  by  the  head
of  the  firm  and  his  stalF  of  clerks,  as  he  went  around  the  premises.  He
carried  in  his  two  hands  a  forked  hazel  twig,  holding  a  branch  of  the  fork  in
each  hand,  the  stem  extending  from  him  in  front  horizontally.  He  almost
immediately  came  to  a  spot  over  whicli  the  rod  bent  slightly  and  quite
spontaneously,  as  well  as  could  be  observed.  This  spot  was  marked  and  the
search  continued.  Similar  indications  appeared  at  two  or  three  other
places.  At  one,  the  effect  was  so  manifest  that  the  rod  twisted  completely
round  and  hi'vhe  ! — also  of  its  own  accord.  (The  man  liad  several  of  these
rods  with  him.)  The  firm  sank  at  one  of  the  places  indicated  and  obtained  a
copious  supply  of  water.

Mr.  Budd,  a  local  amateur  geologist,  ascertained  tlie  above  j)articulars
and  communicated  all  to  Mr.  Clark,  of  the  Irish  Survey,  who  gave  them

t«  J.  R.  Kilroe.

I  wrote  to  Messrs.  Richardson  requesting  them  to  give  me  a  reply
to  a  series  of  questions  I  enclosed.  The  following  are  my  queries  and
their  answer  to  each  : — -

Query.  Name  of  the  "dowser"? Ansn-er.  The  late  J.  Mullins.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


107


Q.  Were  any  borings  made  or  wells  sunk  prior  to  the  dowser's  visit  ?
A.  Yes  ;  three.

Q.  If  so,  how  deep?  A.  One  was  300  feet,  one  1,011  feet,  and  one
52  feet  deep.

Q.  With  what  success  as  to  water  supply  ?  A.  Neither  of  the  three  wells
yielded  more  than  120  gallons  per  hour.

Q.  How  far  from  the  old  well  did  the  diviner  fix  on  for  a  new  well  ?
A.  40  or  50  feet  (shortest  distance).

Q.  How  deep  was  the  new  well — sunk  on  the  spot  indicated  by  the
divining  rod? A.  82  feet.

Q.  With  what  success  as  regards  water  supply  ?  A.  3,000  to  5,000
gallons  per  hour  ;  according  to  the  rainfall.

Q.  What  was  the  date  of  the  dowser's  visit  ? A.  1889.

As  I  was  anxious  to  get  exact  details  of  this  case,  I  again  wrote  to
Messrs.  Richardson  for  further  particulars  and  an  accurate  plan  of  the
respective  position  of  the  wells. Their  reply  is  as  follows  : —

February  2nd,  1897.

In  rejjly  to  yours  of  the  28th  January,  I  regret  the  delay,  but  owing  to

the  disf)ute  in  our  trade  at  jjresent  I  am  very  pressed  with  work. I  have

had  a  rough  sketch  made  out  of  the  lie  of  the  wells,  and  a  description  of  same,

and  trust  it  is  what  you  require. Should  you  want  any  further  information

I  shall  do  my  best  to  get  it  for  you.  -.ht -r,  „

J  o  J  W.  Richardson.

Memorandum  from  Messrs.  Richardson  and  Co.,  Waterford.

February  2nd,  1897.

In  the  year  1887,  we  received  an  estimate  for  boring  a  2h  inch  artesian
bore  from  John  Henderson  and  Son,  Glasgow.  He  started  to  bore  on  the
18th  May,  1887,  with  jumper  steel  drills.  The  first  15  feet  was  clay,  the
following  17  feet  was  slaty  sandstone,  after  which  the  rock. became  harder
with  the  result  that  the  rate  of  boring  slowed,  varying  from  2  to  5  feet  per
day.  When  going  through  extremely  hard  rock  they  bored  (on  Monday,  the
18th  June,  1887)  only  4  inches.  We  continued  boring  until  we  had  reached
a  depth  of  292  feet,  after  which  we  widened  the  bore  for  100  feet  to  allow  a
pump  to  be  lowered,  but  the  yield  was  not  sufficient  to  justify  our  going
deeper,  so  relinquished  this  bore.

We  next  started  to  bore,  in  1888,  a  7  inch  bore  hole  at  the  bottom  of  a
well  62  feet  deep.  This  bore  was  executed  by  the  Diamond  Rock  Boring
Co.,  of  London,  and  was  bored  by  a  revolving  tube  7  inches  in  diameter
having  black  diamonds  set  in  a  nose  piece  fastened  to  bottom  of  tube.  We
bored  612  feet  with  this  size  tube  and  then  reduced  to  6  inches  and  with
the  6  inch,  tube  bored  337  feet  7  inches,  making  a  total  depth  bored  of
949  feet  7  inches  from  the  bottom  of  well,  and  from  the  ground  level  of
1,011  feet  7  inches.  We  had,  during  the  process  of  boring,  tested  at
intervals  for  yield  of  water  but  with  no  satisfactory  result.  We  again  tested
at  1,011  feet  7  inches,  and  again  failure,  so  relinquished  this  bore.

We  then  asked  Mr.  Kinahan  [senior  geologist  of  H.M.  Geological  Survey
of  Ireland]  to  come  down — which  he  did,  and  suggested  a  spot  to  bore.
This  bore  we  .started  with  a  4  inch  tube  diamond  drill,  and  bored  40  feet


108


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


tlirough  yellow  sandstone  when  we  came  on  bine  slate  for  8  inches  ;  we  then
stoiDped  and  wired  Mr.  Kiiiahan  what  we  ought  to  do.  In  the  interval  we
tested  for  water ; — result,  230  gallons  per  hour,  not  one-tenth  part  of  what  we
required.  Mr.  Kinahan  advised  going  on  again.  Went  on  11  feet  more,
tested  again,  with  the  yield  180  gallons  per  hour,  a  loss  of  50  gallons  ;  wired
Mr.  Kinahan  again ;  — reply,  give  up  boring— which  we  did; — another  failure.

We  then  sent  for  John  Mullins,  the  water  diviner.  He  suggested  that
we  put  down  a  bore  on  a  marked  out  line,  which  we  did,  with  the  result  that
we  have  an  ample  supply. See  below  for  rough  plan  of  wells.


No.  1.
O


No.  4.
O—


156  ft.


No.  2.
O


No.  3.


113  ft.


335  ft.


No.  1. First  Bore  Hole,  sunk  to  a  depth  of  292  feet : — not  satisfactory.

No.  2. Second  Bore  Hole,  sunk  to  a  depth  of  949  ft.  7  in.  from  bottom  of  well

62  feet  deep  ; — from  gfround  level  1,011  ft.  7  in.  : — another  failure.
No.  3. Bore  Hole  suggested  by  Mr.  Kinahan  ; — third  failure.
No.  4. Bore  Hole  suggested  by  John  Mullins,  around  which  bore  hole  we  sank

a  6  ft.  well,  82  feet  deep. Yield  from  3,000  to  5,000  gallons  per  hour

depending  on  rainfall.
Line  from  No.  4  shows  course  of  spring  as  .suggested  by  Mullins,  anywhere  along

which  line,  he  says,  water  will  be  found. The  line  runs  N.N.E.

The  particulars  sent  me  by  Messrs.  Richardson  are  obviously  of
great  interest  and  evidential  value  in  connection  with  our  subject.
I  was  therefore  anxious  to  obtain  the  best  geological  evidence  on  this
case.  Happily  Mr.  G.  H.  Kinahan,  M.R.I. A.,  who  at  the  time  was
senior  geologist  of  the  Irish  Geological  Survey,  had  not  only  been  called
in  by  Messrs.  Richardson,  prior  to  Mullins'  visit,  but  had  kept  the
contemporary  notes  and  correspondence  relating  to  this  case.  The
letters  which  Mr.  Kinahan  sent  me  (with  an  accompanying  note  from
himself)  are  from  Messrs.  Richardson  and  from  a  local  geologist,  Mr.
Budd,  and,  as  will  be  seen,  they  were  written  at  the  time  of  Mullins'
visit  to  Waterford.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


109


Mr.  Kinalian  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

[jTannary  25th,  1897.]
I  am  glad  to  learn  through  Mr.  Clark  that  you  are  taking  up  the
Divining  Rod  question.  I,  therefore,  through  him,  send  you  a  rather
interesting  case.  These  letters  [which  follow]  I  give  solely  up  to  you,  and
you  are  at  liberty  to  use  them  as  you  like.  I  should,  however,  let  you
know  how  I  was  connected  with  them.  A  bacon  firm  in  Waterford  (Messrs.
Denny  and  Co.)  were  looking  for  water,  and  their  trials  were  unsatisfactory.
My  friend,  the  late  Mr.  James  Budd,  advised  them  to  apply  to  me.  This
they  did,  and  as  their  case  was  a  simple  one,  I  easily  put  them  right.  Then
another  firm,  Messrs.  Richardson's,  was  in  a  similar  jjredicament  ; — they
had  a  water  supply,  but  not  sufficient.  They  employed  a  borer  who  bored,
I  think,  1,000  feet,  without  finding  water.  They  were  tlien  advised  by  Budd
to  employ  me  ;  when  I  visited  tlieir  premises  I  found  it  was  probably
crossed  by  three  water  lines,  one  south,  another  at  their  well,  and  the  third
to  the  northward — as  the  strata  was  hard,  impervious  ordovician  shale.  It
was  evident  that  unless  the  bore  hole  was  exactly  on  one  of  the  water  lines  a
bore  was  useless.  I,  therefore,  advised  sinking  and  driving.  While  they
were  considering  my  report,  young  Richardson  heard  of  the  water-man,
and  what  happened  afterwards  you  will  know  from  the  letters.  I  have
my  theory  about  their  "water-finder,"  and  would  like  to  talk  it  over
with  you.

G.  H.  KiNAHAN.

The  next  letter  is  from  Mr.  Richardson,  addressed  to  Mr.
Kinahan  in  the  year  1889  : —

Waterford,  October  2m,  1889.
In  reply  to  your  favour,  re  John  Mullins,  Colerne,  Chippenham,  Wilt-
shire, I  will  give  you  a  short  account  of  his  doings  here.  The  morning  he
came  I  had  him  met  at  the  Milford  steamer,  in  order  to  prevent  his  having
communication  with  any  one  in  Waterford,  and  making  inquiries  about  our
premises. I  myself  went  with  him  when  he  began  his  searches  for  water.


He  had  in  his  hands  a  hazel  fork  of  this  shape


end  between  his  fingers  of  each  hand.  He  then  walked  about  until  the
hazel  fork  twisted  suddenly  in  his  hands.  He  did  this  over  and  over  again
to  test  it,  and  marked  several  places  for  us  to  bore  where  he  said  he  was
certain  we  should  find  water,  and  gave  the  depths.  One  place  in  particular
he  pointed  out  to  us  and  advised  our  boring,  saying  we  should  find  about
1,500  gallons  ^er  hour  at  a  depth  of  80  to  90  feet.  We  procured  the  boring
people,  and  the  result  of  it  was  we  obtained  water  at  the  dejjth  of  79  feet
from  the  surface.  We  tested  to  1,072  gallons  per  hour,  but  we  are  sure
there  is  more,  only  our  pump  could  not  test  a  greater  supply.  He  [told  us
he]  has  six  sons,  and  not  one  of  them  has  this  power.

It  is  a  most  curious  thing,  but  must  be  genuine  witliout  doubt.  I  know
several  people  in  the  north  who  had  Mullins  there,  and  found  water  where
pointed  out  by  him.  It  was  from  them  I  heard  of  Mullins  in  the  first
instance.


110


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  rod  often  breaks  with  the  force  it  turns  in  his  hands.  The  greater  the
movement  the  more  water  is  there,  and  by  this  he  tells  the  depth.

W.  Richardson.

Mr.  Richardson  adds  later  : — •

He  holds  the  twig  straight  out  in  front  of  liim,  with  the  ends  passing
between  his  finger  and  thumb  and  coming  out  between  liis  second  and  third
fingers  ;  backs  of  hands  downwards.

The  next  letter  is  from  Mr.  Budd,  addressed  to  Mr.  Kinahan,  and
is  interesting  on  account  of  its  having  been  written  whilst  the  boring
experiments  were  in  progress  : —

Tivoli,  Tramore,  Waterford,  September  Serf,  1889.

Your  being  interested  in  Messrs.  Richardson's  case  here  will  be  my
apology  for  my  inflicting  on  you  the  following  authentic  account  of  the  late
proceedings  there.

Well,  they  pierced  where  you  pointed  out  to  a  depth  of  about  40  feet,
got  a  little  water,  and  then  came  on  our  blue  metamorphic  rock.  Then  tlie
boring  machine  was,  I  believe,  out  of  order,  and  while  waiting  for  some  new
parts  from  London  the  borers  got  some  jobs  in  Clonmel  ;  this  delayed  work
here.  Meantime  young  Mr.  R.  heard  in  the  North  of  a  man  named  Mullins,  I
think  from  Chippenham,  who  had  been  most  successful  in  finding  water
with  his  hazel  twigs.  He  is  one  of  a  few  who  possesses  this  "faculty."  He
cannot  communicate  it,  for  none  of  his  own  sons  possess  it.  They  sent  for
him,  and  to  prevent  any  collusion  or  prefatory  inquiries,  one  of  their  clerks
met  him  at  the  Milford  boat,  and  walked  up  with  him  to  the  concern.
He  carried  with  him  about  a  dozen  fresh  forked  twigs  as  thick  as  a  quill,
each  side  of  the  fork  12  or  15  inches  long.

He  traversed  the  whole  of  the  premises,  marking  out  four  places  where
water  might  be  got. The  premises  are  about  700  feet  long  [see  diagram].

O

X.

o

G.H.K.


O

J.M.  (1)


O

J.M.  (2)


700  ft.

X  =  the  abortive  1,000  bore  ft.  hole.


No.  1  he  said  was  the  best  place.  No.  2  was  not  20  feet  from  the  place
that  you  marked  out  (marked  G.  H.  K.).

He  held  the  twigs  near  their  ends,  between  his  second  and  third  fingers,
as  if  you  were  going  to  write,  the  point  of  the  fork  pointing  downwards.
At  No.  1  the  point  lifted  itself  up  till  it  turned  over  backward  and  twisted
itself  till  it  broke  !  "Water  liere  not  more  than  80  feet  deep,"  said  he.
He  used  another  and  another  twig.  The  clerks  then  held  them  with  him,
and  held  his  hands,  always  the  same  effect.  I  saw  to-day  two  of  the  broken
twisted  twigs.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


Ill


Now  for  the  result  [at  J.M.  (1),  which  corresponds  to  No.  4  in  Messrs.
Richardson's  drawing.]

The  diamond  borers  pierced  through  41  feet  of  boulder  clay,  then  through
39  feet  of  our  ordinary  clay  slate.  Then  on  the  2nd  [yesterday,]  touched  our
old  friend,  the  blue  metamorphic  rock,  and  stopped,  sounded,  and  found
36  feet  of  water  in  their  four-inch  tube.  Tliey  were  told  to  pump,  a  steam
one,  which  they  did  all  night,  3  o'clock  on  2nd  to  9  o'clock  on  3rd — 18  hours
— without  any  diminution  of  the  supply,  their  estimate  being  800  to  900
gallons  per  hour.

Arrangements  were  then  made  while  I  was  there  to  pump  into  a  cistern
containing  270  gallons.  After  repeated  trials  the  average  was  found  to  be
1,560  gallons  per  hour  without  the  slightest  sign  of  abatement.  To-day  it  is
reported  to  me  to  be  2,000  gallons  per  hour.  Good  water,  temperature  52°,
an  important  item  to  Messrs.  Richardson's.

I  would  like  to  know  what  you  think  of  this  thing.  To  me  it  is  wholly
unaccoimtable.  All  I  know  is,  they  are  singing  "  Jubilate  "  at  Richardson's.
What  would  Professor  Huxley  say  ?  -r  -o^,^^

Mr.  Budd  gives  additional  particulars  in  the  next  letter,  also
addressed  to  Mr.  Kinahan  : —

Tivoli,  Tra)nore,  Septemher  IWi,  1889.

I  have  been  not  only  considering  the  bearings  of  the  case,  and  it  is  an
extraordinary  one,  but  I  have  been  making  myself  up  on  all  the  facts  of  it.

Mullins  was  never  in  the  South  of  Ireland  before,  and  certainly  had  no
idea  of  Messrs.  Richardson's  locality.  As  to  reading  faces  :  they  had  no
expectation  of  success  ;  indeed,  the  failure  of  your  boring  made  them  give
up  all  hope,  and  one  of  their  principal  persons  utterly  scoffed  at  the  idea  of
the  twigs  ;  their  faces,  they  tell  me,  must  have  expressed  only  incredulity
and  curiosity.  I  can  quite  believe  that  some  nervous  or  muscular
force,  voluntary  or  involuntary,  affected  the  twigs,  for  certainly  they  could
not  move  of  themselves.  But  was  this  force  derived  from  some  innate
faculty  1  Mullins  made  no  pretence  of  magic  ;  there  was  nothing  about  him
of  "See  now  vot  you  vill  see."  Quite  in  a  business-like  way  he  walked
through  the  premises  as  each  door  was  opened  for  him,  most  of  the  clerks
folloiving  him,  and  stopping  every  now  and  then.  Uid  to  the  present  there
has  been  no  effect  on  other  wells  with  them  or  elsewhere.  As  to  his  know-
ledge, he  did  not  know  whether  there  was  any  well  in  the  concern,  but
he  had  the  general  idea,  which  every  one  in  Waterford  has,  that  they  had
bored  and  utterly  failed.

The  clerk  who  accompanied  him  from  the  steamer,  and  whom  I  cross-
examined  to-day,  is  a  reliable  man.  He  was  warned  to  answer  no  questions
as  to  wells,  water,  or  strata. Mullins  did  not  ask  him  a  single  question.

When  M.  was  asked  before  he  left  about  his  successes  elsewhere,  he  said
he  had  often  gone  to  places  where  there  was  no  water,  but  when  he  had
indicated  water  in  any  place,  as  far  as  he  knew,  it  had  always  been  found,
but  he  made  no  boast  of  this,  said  only  he  could  not  account  for  it.

As  to  80  feet,  no  one  said  this  to  him,  nor  did  any  one  know  the  depth
of  the  strata  there.  Your  boring  was  only  41  feet  deep.  The  well  through
which  the  1,000  feet  was  bored  was  originally  60  feet  deep,  and  it  was  only


112


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


to-day  that  I  learned  for  the  first  time,  with  some  difficulty,  that  the  steam
pump  well  is  72  feet  deep.  This  I  learned  from  tlie  clerk  who  manages  the
machinery  ;  none  of  the  others  knew  it,  nor  had  ever  asked.

As  to  the  sailors'  ; — as  I  said  before,  every  one  [here]  knew  of  their
boring,  and  failing,  but  no  one  outside  the  office  but  myself  knows  the
particulars.  They  keep  their  business  to  themselves.  I  believe  it  was  quite
impossible  that  any  sailor  could  know  anything  about  their  [Messrs
Richardson's]  concern,  or,  indeed,  would  care  to  know.

Well,  he  [Mullins]  was  written  to,  to  come  over  and  try  his  liand,  as
they  were  very  anxious  to  get  water.

He  came,  drove  up  to  the  concern,  and  they  first  brought  him  to  the
field  you  indicated.  He  walked  about  and  said  there  was  water  in  a  spot
about  20  feet  east  of  yours.  "Oh,"  said  they,  "We  tried  near  this  and
failed."  "  No  matter,"  said  he,  "  There  is  water  here."  They  then  brought
him  through  each  of  their  yards  and  stores.  In  most  of  them  he  paused,
and  said,  "  There  is  no  water  here,"  but  in  two  of  them  he  said,  "  There  is
water  here,"  and  they  marked  them  in  red.

The  last  place  they  came  to,  to  their  surprise,  he  said,  "  This  is  by  far
the  best  place  I  have  come  to.  Mark  it  No.  1."  "Now  mark  t\\e  first
place  I  went  to  No.  2,  the  others  3  and  4.  I  am  sure  you  will  get  at  least
half  the  quantity  you  require  at  No.  1."

He  has  the  look  of  an  honest  John  Bull  master  mason,  has  picked
up  a  good  deal  of  information  going  about,  and  is  of  quiet  manner,  but
answers  any  question  he  is  asked  promptly  and  in  the  most  straightfor-
ward manner.  He  said  he  could  not  tell  the  depth  at  No.  1,  but  probably
it  would  be  within  80  feet.  Their  since  finding  it,  at  exactly  80  feet,  was  a
mere  coincidence.  He  left  by  the  boat  that  evening.  He  asked  no  questions
as  he  walked  about,  nor  did  they  volunteer  any  information.

Jas.  Budd.

In  reply  to  ray  enquiry  as  to  the  exact  direction  of  the  spots
marked  by  Mullins,  and  as  to  the  cost  of  boring  prior  to  Mullins'
visit,  Messrs.  Richardson  kindly  send  the  following  additional
particulars  : —

Waterford,  Fehrnarij  22nd,  1897.
The  Mullins  line  runs  N.N.E.  and  almost  in  the  direction  of  the  bedding
of  the  rocks.

This  was  merely  a  coincidence,  as  Mullins  had  no  local  knowledge  what-
soever of  the  locality,  it  being  his  first  visit  to  this  part  of  the  country,  and
we  gave  him  no  knowledge  in  any  way,  as  to  position  of  wells,  or  that  we
had  bored.  In  fact  we  kept  him  in  entire  ignorance,  until  he  had  located
his  line.

The  line  as  marked  on  our  map,  and  position  of  well,  is  tlie  correct
position,  and  all  the  borings  and  old  wells  are  to  the  east  of  Mullins'  line
except  the  final  well,  which  of  course  is  on  the  line.

1  In  reply  to  my  enquiry  Messrs.  Richardson  tell  me  this  probably  refers  to  the
sailors  on  board  tlie  steamer  in  which  Mullins  crossed  over  from  England  to
Waterford.— W.  F.  B.


xxxn.]


Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


113


Mullins'  line  was  not  theoretically  straight,  but  was  comparatively  so.
Mullins  started  with  his  twig  ( a  light  hazel  fork)  at  the  top  of  Hodges
field,  and  worked  down  through  the  concern, and  when  finished  the  marking
and  pegs  were  almost  a  straight  line  running  N.N.E.

No.  1.  Bore  Hole,— sunk  to  a  depth  of  292  feet,  cost  £267  13s.  4d.  ;
widening  same  down  to  a  depth  of  100  feet,  cost  extra  £100,  total
£367  13s.  4d. [These  numbers  refer  to  the  plan  on  p.  108.]

No.  2.  Bore  Hole, — sunk  to  a  depth  of  949  feet  7  inches  from  bottom
of  well,  cost  £916  16s.  6d.

No.  3.  Bore  Hole, — cost  about  £40,  with  pumping  tests  and  delay,
awaiting  Mr.  Kinahan's  advice.

The  cost  of  a  bore  hole  depends  on  the  size  of  the  bore,  and  depth,  as
the  contractors  will  not  bore  a  100  foot  bore  at  the  same  rate  as  the  first
100  feet  of  a  5  or  600  foot  bore.  Carriage  of  engine  and  gear,  and  pumping
test  have  to  be  paid  for,  and  add  also  to  the  comparative  cost  of  the  shorter
bore  hole.

The  No.  4.  Bore  Hole — bored  on  Mullins'  line — was  composed  as
follows  : —

First  38  feet  clay,  loose  shingle  3  feet,  yellow  shaley  sandstone  39  feet,
last  few  feet  slate  and  yellow  shaley  sandstone.

Mullins  w"orks  his  rod  with  the  back  of  hands  down,  and  holds  each  rod
of  fork  between  the  second  and  third  finger  of  each  hand  witli  the  apex  of
the  fork  pointing  to  the  ground,  and  each  rod  of  fork  passing  over  the
second  and  first  finger,  and  under  the  thumb,  and  held  firm  by  thumb.

When  the  rod  passes  over  any  flowing  water,  the  apex  rises  from  the
downward  position,  to  a  position  with  the  apex  of  the  fork  in  an  almost
vertical  position  and  pointing  upwards  with  a  very  perceptible  jerk,  although
the  diviner's  hands  are  apparently  inactive  and  without  any  movement
whatever.

ExoKS.  OF  J.  J.  Richardson,  pee  C.  F.  Hodges.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  cost  of  the  unsuccessful  borings  and
well  sinking  prior  to  Mullins'  visit  was  some  £1,324, — an  expensive
experiment.

One  other  point  required  elucidation,  viz.,  the  level  of  the  water
in  the  Mullins'  well  compared  with  the  level  of  the  water  in  the
adjoining  tidal  river.  As  to  this  Messrs.  Richardson  write  as  follows: —

March  11th,  1897-

In  reply  to  your  enquiry,  the  surface  of  the  well  is  95  feet  above  low
water  level  ;  while  the  bottom  is  13  to  14  feet  above  it.  The  level  of  the
water  in  the  well  when  not  pumping  is  44  feet  from  the  surface.

W.  Richardson.

So  that  the  water  level  in  Mullins'  well  is  some  50  feet  above  the
low  water  level  of  the  river ;  the  well  is  therefore  not  supplied  by
percolation  from  the  river.

1  The  o;round  is  covered  with  buildings  and  sheds,  and  I  understand  Mullins  had  to
go  in  and  out  of  these  in  the  course  of  tracing  out  the  water  line.  — W.  F.  B.

I


114


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Kinahan  has  also  sent  me  the  following  as  to  the  geological
aspect  of  the  locality  : —

February  2\d,  1897.
The  Waterford  rocks  are  Ordoviciaii  with  protrudes  or  intrudes  of  basic
igneous  rocks.  From  the  wells  above  and  below  the  premises  tliere  seemed
to  be  two  water  lines  crossing  it,  both  of  which  our  friend  [Mullins]  found
by  instinct,  due  either  to  his  being  able  to  smell  water,  or  that  water  has
such  an  influence  on  his  nervous  system  that  he  can  tell  the  distance  and
quantity  when  he  is  near  it ;  unless  he  was  a  Sherlock  Holmes  who  could
draw  conclusions  from  trifles  that  no  one  else  could  detect. 0 H  K

Having  submitted  the  foregoing  case  to  the  Geological  Survey  of
Ireland,  Mr.  J.  R.  Kilroe  was  good  enough  to  send  me  a  memorandum
on  the  subject,  discussing  the  whole  matter  from  a  geological  point  of
view,  accompanied  by  a  geological  map  and  section  of  the  locality.  Mr.
Kili-oe's  memorandum  is  as  follows  : —

H.M.  Geological  Survey  of  Ireland,  Dublin.
Notes  on  the  Borings  at  Waterford.

The  rocks  of  the  neighbourhood  are  of  Silurian  age  (Ordovician),  and  are
in  great  part  concealed  by  glacial  drift.  The  drift  area  is  indicated
by  stippling  on  the  accompanying  map  ;  the  portions  enclosed  by  chain
(boundary)  lines  are  those  where  the  rock  is  devoid  of  drift,  and  appears  at
or  comes  very  near  the  surface .

The  strata  consist  of  slates  and  grits  in  alternating  bands  ;  the  former
are  comparatively  impervious  to  water  while  the  latter  are  more  or  less
porous,  and  some  may  be  sufficiently  so  to  constitute  reservoirs  for  under-
ground water.

The  beds  of  rock  are  set  at  a  uniformly  high  angle — about  60'  to  the
horizontal  near  Waterford, — technically  called  the  d'q) :  they  are  also  much
folded  and  contorted  and  dislocated  by  faults,  as  may  well  be  observed
along  the  sea  coast  not  far  distant,  though  no  faulting,  and  but  little
contortion  of  the  strata,  seems  to  have  been  noticed  at,  or  near,  Waterford
city.

The  strata  at  Waterford,  moreover,  are  cleaved  in  a  direction  which
accords  with  that  of  the  stratification  ;  but  stratification  and  faulting,  in
general,  affect  the  location  of  underground  waters,  rather  than  cleavage,
so  that  the  latter  is  not  of  apparent  import  in  our  case.

The  futility  of  the  first  three  attempts  to  find  water  proves  the  absence
from  the  rocks  piei'ced,  of  water-bearing  strata,  in  other  words,  of  porous
sandstone  or  grit  bands  of  any  importance.  A  particular  case  in  which  a
thick  sandstone  band  might  be  supposed  to  exist,  concealed,  notwithstanding
the  unsuccessful  .sampling  afforded  by  the  first  experiences,  is  discussed
below  ;  about  this,  however,  one  cannot  speak  confidently  without  a  more
inti7nate  knowledge  of  the  ground.

The  lack  of  water  in  those  borings  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  accounted
for  by  concealed  faults  or  breaks  in  the  strata  ;  for  if  the  rocks  were  thereby
sufficiently  shattered  to  admit  of  leakage,  and  descent  of  the  water  from  the
ground  tried,  it  would  not  descend  lower  than  the  level  of  the  Suir and  the


xxxil]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  115


116


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


same  conditions  would  with  equal  facility  and  greater  probability  admit  of
percolation  from  the  river  to  the  point  reached  by  the  borings.

The  water  in  Mullins'  well,  however,  stands  at  44  feet  from  the
surface,  and  is  dependent  on  the  rainfall.  It  cannot  therefore  be  due  to
percolation  from  the  river  ;  and  must  collect  beneath  the  more  or  less
porous  drift  which  covers  the  rock  at  Richardson's  works  (see  section).


UlAGEAMMATlc  SECTION  along  a  vertical  plane  supposed  to  cut  through  strata
at  Waterford,  at  right  angles  to  Mullins'  water  line. The  wells  are
numbered  as  on  page  108.


Assuming  that  water  would  be  found  at  the  other  points  indicated  by
Mullins,  equally  with  that  at  which  the  successful  boring  was  put  down,
we  should  have  a  wefc  zone  stretching  N.N.E.-ward,  in  which  a  copious
supply  would  be,  in  fact  loas,  tapped  [at  one  point]  at  some  80  feet  below  the
.surface.

This  zone  might  be  coincident  with  a  line  of  fault  in  which  water  fallin
upon  the  sloping  sui'face  northwestward  would  collect ;  and  such  a  supposition
is  favoured  by  the  circumstance  that  it  is  not  coincident  with  the  direction
taken  by  the  outcrop  of  the  bedding.

On  the  other  hand,  a  break  of  sufficientdimensions  to  supply  over  1,500
gallons  of  water  per  hour  would  in  all  probability  extend  to  and  beyond
the  river,  and  admit  of  very  great  if  not  entire  leakage  of  the  water  entering
it,  to  a  much  lower  level  than  44  feet  from  the  surface  at  all  events  ;  and  no
fault  is  represented  here,  on  the  published  maps  of  the  Geological  Survey.

An  alternative  supposition  is  that  of  a  porous  stratum  concealed  beneath
the  drift,  in  the  slight  hollow  at  Richardson's  pi-emises.  The  only  manner
in  which  such  a  stratum  could  occur,  consistently  with  the  direction  and
amount  of  cZip  recorded  for  the  beds  in  the  vicinity,  is  such  as  that  repre-
sented in  the  above  section,  drawn  at  right  angles  to  Mullins'  wet  zone,
and  showing  the  relative  distances  from  the  latter  of  Kinahan's  boring  B,
the  1,000  feet  boring  C,  and  the  first  one  D.  In  this  section  the  porous
stratumand  the  thin  grit  beds  ai'e  rei^resented  by  dots,  Mullins'  boring  by
A,  and  the  glacial  drift  by  larger  dots  immediately  beneath  the  surface  line.

The  stratum  mentioned  cannot  be  regarded  as  continuous  (see  line  X  Y)
according  to  the  dij)  of  the  beds,  as  seen  at  the  surface,  for  in  this  case  it
would  have  been  tapped  by  the  1,000  feet  boring.  It  therefore  should  assume


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  117


a  synclinal  curve,  and  form  a  trough-shaped  reservoir  receiving  the  rainfall
between  the  point  marked  99,  Gallows-hill  (241  A)  and  the  water  shed
south-westward.  Such  folding  of  the  strata  is  common  in  Silurian  rocks
throughout  the  country.  j  Kilroe

The  bearing  of  this  case  on  the  general  theory  of  a  "  dowsing
faculty "  must  be  considered  in  connection  with  the  rest  of  the
evidence.


The  Horsham  Experiments.

Reference  to  this  remarkable  case  has  already  been  made  in  the
preceding  group.  No.  58,  p.  85.  The  facts  are  briefly  as  follows  : —
The  owner  of  an  estate  near  Horsham,  in  Sussex,  Mr.  Henry  Harben,
found  there  was  a  scarcity  of  water  on  his  property.  He  called  in  the
aid  of  an  experienced  local  well  sinker  and  had  a  well  sunk  some  90
feet  deep  (well  A,  see  p.  118),  but  got  little  water — in  fact,  this  well,
Mr.  Harben  states  in  a  memorandum  he  sent  me,  is  "  absolutely
useless."  In  an  adjoining  field,  some  200  yards  off,  and  at  the  lowest
part  of  the  estate,  another  well  was  sunk  under  the  advice  of  another
well  sinker  (well  C)  ;  at  some  55  feet  down  a  small  spring  of  water
was  met  with  running  into  the  well,  but  the  quantity  was  so  small
that  the  supply  was  quite  insufficient.

Having  spent  a  considerable  sum  uselessly  in  sinking  these  two
wells,  Mr.  Harben  determined  to  obtain  from  London  the  highest
engineering  and  geological  advice.  His  position,  as  one  of  the
directors  of  the  New  River  Company,  and  his  ample  means,  rendered
this  comparatively  easy.  Acting  under  such  advice  another  well  was
sunk  (well  B)  not  far  from  the  first  one  (well  A).  This  well  was  of
large  dimensions  and  sunk  to  nearly  100  feet,  with,  howevei-,  little
result  as  regards  water  •  tunnels  were  then  driven  in  various  directions,
and  finally,  after  £1,000  had  been  spent  on  this  last  attempt — made
under  the  best  scientific  advice  and  with  the  most  modern  and
approved  engineering  methods — the  well  B  was  abandoned.

Finally  Mr.  Harben  was  induced  to  send  for  the  dowser,  Mr.  J.
Mullins,  of  whom  he  had  heard,  and  whom  he  had  distinctly  refused
to  employ  before  sinking  well  B,  as  he  utterly  disbelieved  in  him.
Mullins  came  some  time  in  the  year  1893  (not  long  before  his  death),
and,  to  prevent  his  gaining  any  local  information,  Mr.  Harben  met
Mullins  at  the  railway  station  and  drove  him  to  his  estate,  Warnham
Lodge,  some  four  miles  off.  Mullins  said  it  was  his  first  visit  to  that  part
of  Sussex,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  otherwise.  Arrived  at  Warn-
ham Lodge,  Mullins  traversed  the  estate,  said  there  was  no  water


118


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


WARNHAM LODGE  PARK.
From  1'6  inch  Ordnance  Survey  Map  of  Sussex  (West),  1897,  2nd  Edition.
The  numbers,  260,  etc.,  indicate  height  above  sea  level.


XXXII,]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


where  wells  A  and  B  were  situated,  unless  an  immense  depth  were
bored.  As  he  came  near  well  C  he  was  narrowly  observed.  Mr.
Harben  tells  me  he  and  the  well-sinker  alone  knew  the  exact  direction
of  the  streamlet  of  water  which  entered  this  well ;  no  hint  of  any
kind  was  given  to  Mullins.  Suddenly  the  rod  turned — "There  is  a  small
stream  here,"  he  said,  ''flowing  in  this  direction."  This  was  absolutely
correct,  I  am  informed ;  Mullins  indicated  the  exact  dii'ection  the
streamlet  was  known  to  enter  the  well.  Mullins  told  Mr.  Harben
that  the  depth  of  this  well  was  between  50  feet  and  60  feet,  the
actual  depth  being  55  feet.  Dissatisfied  with  this  supply,  MuUitis
said  he  would  try  the  higher  ground.  Mr.  Harben  tried  to  dissuade  him,
as  that  part  had  been  examined  and  rejected  by  the  scientific  experts.
"  ISIever  mind,"  said  Mullins,  "I  am  going  to  try  it."  At  the  top  of
the  hill  the  rod  turned  vigorously,  and  the  spot  was  marked  ;  30  feet
further  on  (absolutely  on  the  crest  of  the  hill)  it  turned  again.  "  Call
this  No.  1,''  said  Mullins ;  20  feet  further  it  turned  again.  "Call
this  No.  2,"  said  Mullins,  "  and  the  first  No.  3."  Mr.  Harben  then
remarked  that  water  doubtless  existed  everywhere  at  a  certain  depth
beneath  the  hill.  Mullins  tried  carefully  and  said  "  No.  Nos.  1  and
2  are  independent  springs,  there  is  no  water  between  them,  but  you
will  find  plenty  of  water  at  either  of  these  places  at  12  feet  or  15  feet
deep."

Mullins  was  then  taken  across  the  road  to  find  a  well  for  the  supply
of  some  cottages  on  the  estate,  about  250  feet  distant  from  these  last
springs ;  he  found  a  place  where  he  said  water  would  be  obtained  at  a
depth  of  about  10  feet.  Here  a  well  was  subsequently  dug,  and  at
35  feet  deep  a  good  spring  was  found,  which,  however,  on  analysis,
proved  to  be  chalybeate  ;  accordingly  this  well  was  filled  up.  Mullins
had  indicated  another  place  for  a  well,  75  feet  distant  from  No.  2
spring,  and  some  little  distance  from  the  cottages.  Upon  sinking
here,  water  was  found  in  this  well  in  sufficient  quantity  for  the  I'equire-
ments  of  the  cottages  (well  G.).

The  spots  Mullins  had  marked  as  springs  Nos.  1  and  2  on  the  crest
of  the  hill  were  then  dug  ;  soon  a  hard  limestone  was  encountered
and  after  blasting  and  sinking  at  each  spot  to  a  depth  of  12  feet  from
the  surface,  a  copious  supply  of  excellent  water  was  suddenly  met  with
(wells  E  and  F).  At  No.  3  a  good  spring  was  also  found  at  19  feet
deep  (well  D).  Much  to  Mr.  Harben's  surprise,  Mullins  had  proved
right  in  each  case.

Mr.  Harben,  fortunately  for  our  enquiry,  then  resolved  to  go  to  the
expense  of  testing  Mullins'  assertion  that  no  water  would  be  found
between  wells  E  and  F,  but  that  ^  both  were  independent  springs.  By
means  of  a  powerful  pump  he  had  one  of  the  wells  pumped  nearly  dry  ;
the  water  level  in  the  other  was  unaffected. To  leave  no  room  for


120


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


doubt,  however,  Mr.  Harben  went  to  the  expense  of  further  testing
IMullins'  statement  by  tunnelling  through  the  solid  rock  the  inter-
mediate 20  feet  from  the  bottom  of  well  E  to  the  bottom  of  well  F.
Mr.  Harben  assures  me  from  his  own  personal  observation,  corroborated
by  the  overseer,  whom  I  saw,  that  no  water  was  found  between  the
two  wells,  the  intermediate  rock  being  dry.i  As  the  tunnel  joined  the
water  in  the  two  wells  a  large  storage  tank  has  thus  been  formed  some
5  feet  in  diameter  and  20  feet  long.  "  We  have  had,"  Mr.  Harben
writes  to  me,  "  ever  since,  even  in  the  driest  season,  a  most  abundant
supply  of  water,  and  MuUins  was  right  not  only  in  indicating  the
precise  spots  where  water  was  to  be  found,  but  also  in  his  assertion  that
water  would  not  be  found  between  the  two  wells  E  and  F."

Writing  to  me  on  April  8th,  1897,  Mr.  Harben  says  : —

I  had  forgotten  to  tell  ydu  of  another  illustration  of  Mullins'  power.
He  was  walking  vvitli  me  towards  my  Farm  Buildings  [marked  Home  Farm
on  the  map]  trying  his  rod  occasionally  ;  when  he  came  to  the  spot  marked
with  an  asterisk  [see  riglit  hand  side  of  map],  he  stopped  and  said  that  liere
was  another  spring.  I  told  him  there  was  a  well  in  the  neiglihourhood.
Mullins  then  said,  "  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  whereabouts  it  is."  He  walked
to  and  fro  witli  his  rod  and  said,  "The  spring  runs  tliat  way,  and  the  well  is
probably  behind  that  chimney  "  [see  map,  well  H].  This  was  perfectly
correct  ;  a  well  witli  pump  attached  was  in  an  outhouse  behind  the  Farm
building.  There  was  no  possibility  of  Mullins  seeing  the  well  or  jjump,  as
it  was  entirely  out  of  sight  and  in  a  closed  building  ;  nor  had  he  left  my
side  to  make  any  enquiries.  We  had  not  yet  verified  his  other  predictions
and  this  incident,  together  with  his  discovery  of  the  direction  of  the  sj^ring
running  int(j  the  well  C,  and  the  depth  of  that  well,  imjjressed  me  much.

On  visiting  Warnham  Lodge,  I  found  what  Mr.  Harben  said  was
strictly  accurate  as  to  the  impossibility  of  Mullins  seeing  the  well  and
pump  H  from  the  position  he  occupied.  In  fact,  I  could  not  discover
it  until  taken  into  the  building  where  it  was  situated.

The  foregoing  account  was  compiled  from  information  Mr.  Harben
gave  me  either  in  writing  or  verbally  ;  it  has  been  seen  and  revised  by
Mr.  Harben,  v/lio  writes  as  follows  : —

Warnham  Lodge,  Sussex,  May  5th,  1897-
I  return  the  account  you  have  written,  which  is  quite  accurate,  and  have
added  one  or  two  additional  particulars. I  have  just  heard  of  another
feat  of  Mullins'. After  doing  his  work  at  Captain  McCalmont's,  Mullins  was

1  What  is  known  to  geolo3ists  as  "jointing"  in  the  rocks  sufjgests  itself  as  a
possible  exphination  of  this  peculiar  distribution  of  water.  But  I  should  be  glad  to
have  some  competent  geological  opinion  on  the  whole  of  this  case  ;  no  geological
explanation,  however,  can  lessen  the  remarkable  character  of  Mullins'  water-finding
faculty.  A  geological  section  of  Sussex  is  given  in  the  maps  of  the  Geological
Survey,  and  runs  very  close  to  Warnham  I,odge  ;  the  district  is  Weald  clay  witli
Horsham  stone  ;  the  latter  is  a  sandstone  often  calcareous.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  121

in  the  dining-room.  He  said  there  was  water  below  the  floor.  On  opening
the  floor  a  disused  well  was  discovered. ^  xj tt  ^^^^^

a..  ilARBEN.


Failures.

The  evidence  thus  far  presented  shows  that  certain  persons,  among
whom  the  lat6  John  Mullins  was  conspicuous,  certainly  possess  some
faculty  which  is  not  given  to  all  men,  and  not  recognised  by  the  science
of  to-day.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  many  failures  Mullins
had  in  the  course  of  his  career  ;  but  this,  I  fear,  it  is  impossible  now
to  ascertain.  There  could  not  have  been  very  many,  or  news  of  them
would  probably  have  reached  me,  as  I  have  made  numei'ous  enquiries
for  this  purpose  throughout  the  districts  visited  by  Mullins  in  England
and  Ireland.  A  few  cases  have,  however,  been-reported  to  me  which
I  will  here  detail.

The  first  was  the  case  of  the  Hastings  Board  of  Guardians^  who
engaged  Mr.  J.  Mullins  in  1888.  A  new  workhouse  had  been  erected
and  attempts  to  find  an  adequate  svipply  had,  I  believe,  been  unsuccess-
fully made  before  Mullins  was  called  in.  The  Guardians  were  subject
to  some  criticism  for  asking  a  "  dowser  "  to  advise  them  where  to  sink  a
well,  and  this  was  increased  when,  after  sinking  some  80  feet  at
one  of  the  spots  indicated  by  Mullins  and  no  water  found,  the  case
was  reported  a  failure.  Later  on,  however,  after  the  well  had  been
sunk  some  200  feet,  the  architect  reported  (according  to  the  local
papers  and  the  Gas  Journal  of  June  4th,  1889),  that  a  supply  of
2,300  gallons  daily  was  obtained.  In  a  letter  to  Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins,
John  Mullins  writes  that  he  marked  three  places  where  water  would  be
found,  and  indicated  the  best,  but  "  the  Guardians  chose  to  sink
on  the  worst  and  had  to  go  deeper  than  they  expected,  but  they  did,
at  last,  get  a  good  supply  of  water,  though  not  sufficient  for  their  wants,
which  were  great."  In  the  Sussex  Daily  News  of  May  23rd,  1890,  a
meeting  of  the  Board  of  Guardians  is  reported,  at  which  a  discussion
took  place  concerning  the  success  that  had  attended  Mullins.  Councillor
Perrins  moved  that  whilst  the  Board  believed  in  Mullins'  sincerity
they  regretted  their  hopes  had  not  been  realised,  as  at  the  best  spot
indicated  by  Mullins  they  had  sunk  80  feet  and  found  no  water.  [This
was  evidently  a  second  well.]  Others  raised  some  objection  to  Mr.
Perrins'  motion,  and  Councillor  Chapman  thought  it  only  fair  to  say

1  I  wrote  to  Captain  McOalmont,  M.P.,  who  informed  me  that  this  incident  did
not  occur  at  his  house,  but  at  a  neighbour's  in  the  country.  The  name,  I  learnt  on
enquiry,  was  Mr.  Crawshay,  to  whom  I  wrote.  It  is,  I  find,  a  reference  to  the
incident  that  occurred  with  the  dowser  Mr.  Tompkins,  related  by  Mr.  Crawshay,
■iji  particulars  of  which  are  given  on  a  subsequent  pag-e.  See  latter  part  of  No.  102
p.  151.— W.F.B.


122


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


that  at  the  first  well  they  had  a  yield  of  2,300  gallons  a  day  and  that
they  had  not  driven  headings  as  Mullins  recommended.

I  wrote  to  the  local  newspaper  and  also  to  the  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Guardians  to  know  whether  any  greater  success  had  been
obtained  later,  as  I  saw  by  another  newspaper  report  that  such  was
the  case.  To  neither  of  my  letters  was  any  I'eply  sent.  Through  the
kindness  of  a  relative  at  Hastings  who  saw  Councillor  Perrins  on  my
behalf,  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Perrins  was  sent  to  me  : —

157,  Queen's-road,  Hastings,  March  26th,  1897-
The  Hastings  Guardians  a  few  years  ago  purchased  a  piece  of  land  for
a  workhouse  site,  and  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  best  spot  to  sink
a  well,  the  late  Mr.  Mullins  was  engaged  to  test  the  land  by  means  of  the
twig  .

[Mr.  Perrins  then  describes  the  modus  operandi,  and  the  evident
sincerity  and  absence  of 'trickery  on  the  part  of  the  dowser.]

Mullins,  at  the  end  of  his  experiments,  was  able  to  indicate  the  best
spot  at  which  the  well  should  be  sunk,  as  being  the  place  where  the  various
springs  converged  nearest  to  each  other  ;  he  also  stated  the  probable  depth
at  which  the  water  would  be  found,  but  would  not  absolutely  pledge  himself
on  that  point.  Suffice  it  to  say,  water  was  ultimately  found  in  fairly  large
quantity,  and  the  well  only  needed  the  requisite  headings  to  store  the  water
to  make  it  a  complete  success.  The  water  was  found  at  a  depth  of  about
25  to  30  feet.  ^  Pberins.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  foregoing  letter  gives  a  much  more
favourable  account  of  Mullins  than  the  statement  made  by  the  writer
of  the  letter  at  the  Board  of  Guardians  in  1890,  nor  was  I  able  to
obtain  from  Mr.  Perrins  any  explanation  of  the  discrepancy.

This  case  cannot  thei'ef ore  be  regarded  as  a  complete  failure,  in  fact
I  am  informed  by  Mr.  Percy  Clive  that  it  was  hearing  from  a  friend  of
his  of  the  success  which  attended  Mullins  at  this  Hastings  visit  that  led
Mr.  Clive  to  employ  Mullins  on  his  estate  in  Herefordshire  (see  p.  35).

F.  31. — The  next  case,  however,  is  more  pi'operly  a  failure ;  here
also  I  found  it  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  precise  details.  Mullins,
it  appears,  was  called  in  by  the  governors  of  the  Berry  Wood  Asylum,
near  Northampton,  to  find  a  water  supply,  and  as  no  water  was  found
at  the  depth  he  estimated,  he  was  considered  an  impostor.  I  wrote
to  the  authorities  at  the  Asylum  for  particulars,  and  eventually
obtained  the  following  information  : —

Berry  Wood,  Northampton,  Fehrvary  27th,  1897.
Mullins,  father  and  son,  were  liere  in  March,  1892.  They  said  we  should
find  water  at  a  given  place,  and  there  we  sunk  a  well  about  70  feet  deej)  right
through  the  ironstone  and  drove  headings  in  two  directions  without  result.


1  The  niimbering,  "F.  3,  etc,"  is  continued  from  p.  64.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


123


I  should  say  that  water  is  often  found  under  the  Northamptonshire
ironstone,  and  one  of  our  wells  draws  its  supply  from  that  source.

The  marlstone  lies  about  300  feet  from  the  surface  here.  We  knew  we
could  obtain  water  at  that  depth,  as  numerous  wells  in  the  county  get  their
water  from  this  marlstone.  Having  failed  with  the  ironstone  we  bored  to  the
marlstone  and  found  abundant  water.  Of  course,  MuUins  liad  nothing  to  do
with  this,  as  it  was  well  known  the  water  was  there.

Richard  Greene.

With  reference  to  this  case  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins  writes  that  he  went
to  Berry  Wood  with  his  father  and  that  a  very  large  supply  of  water
was  ultimately  obtained,  only  at  a  greater  depth  than  they  had
estimated.  This  does  not,  however,  put  any  different  construction  on
the  result.

F.  4. — The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  Denny,  of  Waterford,  whose
large  bacon-curing  establishment  is  near  Messrs.  Richardson's  premises,
where  Mullins  had  the  remarkable  success  detailed  under  the  head  of
the  Waterford  Experiments.

Mr.  Denny  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Waterford,  February  5th,  1897.
Mullins  indicated  several  spots  on  which  he  said  water  would  be  found,
but  in  our  case  we  got  nothing  practically  but  surface  water. In  fact  with
us  here  Mullins'  plan  proved  as  great  a  failure  as  it  proved  a  success  in  Mr.
Richardson's  case.

Mullins  also  indicated  a  spot  on  our  Cork  premises  where  water  would
be  found,  and  following  his  advice  we  dug  a  well  and  found  a  good  supply  at
about  the  depth  he  mentioned.  E  H  M  Denny

I  wrote  to  ascertain  some  further  particulars,  and  learnt  that  at
AVaterford  they  sunk  through  clay  and  slaty  rock  down  to  57  feet,
and  then  bored  a  six  inch  hole  to  a  depth  of  207  feet  from  the
surface,  but  found  no  good  spring,  the  water  obtained  from  the  well
being  mostly  surface  water.

When  the  Waterford  case  (p.  106)  is  read  in  connection  with  this,
it  will  be  seen  how  easy  it  is  to  miss  the  exact  water  line  in  this
locality.  Messrs.  Denny  tell  me  Mullins  pointed  out  several  places
where  they  would  find  water,  and  they  sank  at  one  of  these  ;  it  is,
however,  conceivable  that  a  very  small  deviation  by  the  dowser,  or  the
well-sinker,  would  be  fatal  to  success  in  this  particular  instance.

These  are  all  the  failui'es  of  the  elder  Mullins  which  I  have  been
able  to  obtain  ;  even  if  multiplied  tenfold  they  probably  would  not
amount  to  one  per  cent  of  the  successes  which  he  appears  to  have  had  ;
for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  whilst  I  have  printed  all  the
failures  of  which  I  can  get  any  corroboration,  only  those  successes  are
given  which  I  have  heard  of  that  appear  to  bear  upon  the  main  object
of  this  paper.


124


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Group  V. — Mr.  W.  Stone.

Mr.  W,  Stone,  now  residing  at  Bolingbroke  Hall,  Spilsby,  Lincoln-
shire, is  a  native  of  Burbage  in  Wiltshire  ;  he  is  a  contractor  for
well-sinking,  etc.,  and  has  had  a  wide  and  successful  experience  as  a
dowser.  Though  he  has,  I  believe,  risen  from  humble  circumstances,
his  local  standing  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  he  is  Rector's  Church-
warden and  a  District  Councillor  of  his  parish.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Stone
and  asked  him  to  tell  me  how  he  found  he  had  the  art  of  dowsing,  and
to  furnish  me  with  evidence  of  his  success  and  of  any  failures  he  has
met  with. He  replies  as  follows  : —

Bolingbroke  Hall,  Spilsby,  (Jctober  mh,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  first  question  in  your  letter  of  the  17th  inst.,  1  was
invited  by  a  friend  who  had  some  susj)icion  that  I  possessed  the  power  of  a
"  diviner"  to  try  the  rod  ;  I  did  so,  and  when  walking  with  the  rod  in  hand
I  felt  a  peculiar  twitching  in  the  rod,  and  hearing  that  the  rod  would  turn
with  any  one  who  had  this  feeling,  I  was  determined  to  stop  it,  if  possible  ;
but,  to  my  astonishment,  the  rod  twisted  itself  over  until  it  broke  in  my
grasp  ;  a  good  spring  of  water  was  found  to  be  running  beneath.  I  was,  of
course,  some  time  before  I  would  take  hold  of  the  rod  and  try  it,  as  I  was  an
unbeliever,  and  after  I  found  I  possessed  the  power,  I  was  a  long  time  before
I  would  practise  it,  though  I  had  numerous  invitations.

Since  then  I  have  discovered  thousands  of  springs  of  water  with  my
divining  rod,  and  can  ojaenly  say  that  I  have  never  failed  to  find  water  at  the
spots  I  have  indicated.  In  numerous  cases  I  have  been  called  in  after  great
expense  had  been  incurred  without  success  ;  also  in  many  instances  I  have
discovered  water  within  a  very  few  yards  of  the  unsuccessful  operations.  I
may  say  that  I  have  discovered  over  a  hundred  springs  within  a  radius  of
about  30  miles  of  where  I  am  now  living.  I  still  feel  a  peculiar  tingling
sensation  passing  through  my  body,  when  standing  immediately  over  springs
of  water.

The  power  to  use  the  rod  is  not,  I  think,  hereditary.  My  father  did  not
I^ossess  the  power,  but  I  have  a  little  daughter  who  possesses  the  power  to  a
slight  degree.  ^

On  my  venturing  to  question  Mr.  Stone's  statement  that  he  "never
had  a  failure,"  he  replies,  "I  would  frankly  tell  you,  if  I  could  recall
a  single  failure,  but  I  do  not  know  of  even  one  that  I  have  had."
This  statement  is,  however,  not  quite  correct,  as  Mr.  Stone,  like  other
dowsers,  has  had  occasional  failures,  particulars  of  which  have  reached
me  and  will  be  given  in  a  subsequent  section  In  another  letter,  Mr.
Stone  adds,  "  The  sensation  I  experience  when  over  an  underground
spring  is  very  like  what  is  felt  when  grasping  the  handles  of  an
electric  machine,  often  seen  at  railway  stations."

The  book  of  testimonials  Mr.  Stone  sent  me  certainly  contains
a  very  remarkable  and  lengthy list  of successes  testified to  by


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


125


owners  and  agents  of  landed  property,  manufacturers,  etc.  ;  the
following  is  one  of  these.


No.  85.— The  manager  of  a  brewery  in  Newcastle  writes  : —

Newcastle-on-Tyne,  November  7th,  1894.
The  success  which  has  attended  the  sinking  and  completion  of  our  well
affords  another  striking  proof  of  Mr.  Stone's  marvellous  power  in  the  use  of
the  divining  rod.  He  visited  us  in  May,  1894,  and  with  his  divining  rod
directed  us  to  a  spot  where  he  said  we  would  find  water  about  40  feet  from
the  surface.  His  prediction  was  correct,  for  after  sinking  41  feet,  we  came
upon  a  spring  of  beautiful  water,  large  enough  to  supply  our  wants  at  this
brewery.  We  need  scarcely  say  that  our  confidence  in  Mr.  Stone's  ability  is
beyond  doubt,  and  he  fully  merits  the  fame  which  he  has  achieved  in  this
distiict.  p^.^  rj,^^  Akthur's  Hill  Brewery  Company,

A. H.  HiGGINBOTTOM.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries  Mr.  Higginbottom  writes  : — ■

Post  Office  Chambers,  ITewcastle-on-Tyne,

October  23rd,  1896.
Before  engaging  Mr.  Stone  no  attempts  had  been  made  to  find  water  by
boring. I  cannot  believe  Mr.  Stone's  success  in  our  case  was  a  mere  chance.
His  prediction  as  to  the  depth  at  which  we  should  find  water  was  about
accurate.

These  replies  answer  your  questions.  I  may  now  add  that  the  experi-
ments were  made  inside  and  outside  the  brewery  ;  the  strongest  indication
of  the  presence  of  water  exhibited  by  the  twig  in  the  hands  of  Mr,  Stone
was  in  a  cellar,  the  floor  of  which  was  covered  with  cement  about  three  inches
thick.  Having  in  my  own  mind  perfect  confidence  in  the  power  of
Mr.  Stone  I  did  not  even  bore,  but  at  once  proceeded  with  the  sinking  of
the  well  with  the  result  that  at  a  depth  of  20  feet  we  came  across  good
feeders  ;  but  at  40  feet,  predicted  by  Mr.  Stone  as  the  depth  at  which  we
should  find  a  good  supply,  we  found  all  the  water  we  wanted  and  now  can
draw  3,000  gallons  per  day.  In  order  to  put  Mr.  Stone  to  a  further  test  I
took  him  to  a  back  street  about  2.5  yards  from  the  brewery  where  very  many
years  ago  there  was  a  pump  (but  of  which  Mr.  Stone  knew  nothing)  and  on
the  very  spot  where  it  stood  the  twig  denoted  the  presence  of  water,  but  not

of  sufficient  quantity  for  our  requirements.  1  » tj  tt

^  ^  A.  H.  Higginbottom.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Stone  to  furnish  me  with  particulai's  of  any
cases  where,  as  he  stated  in  his  letter  of  October  1.3  th,  he  had  been
called  in  to  iind  water  by  the  rod  "  after  great  expense  had  been
incurred  without  success."  He  replied  he  had  not  kept  a  list  of  all
these  cases,  but  quoted  a  few  he  remembered  as  follows  : —

No.  86. — Colonel  Grantham,  West  Keal  Hall,  Spilsby,  dug  to  the  depth
of  50  feet  for  a  water  supply  for  a  house,  without  success,  and  sent  for  me

1  This  is  referred  to  by  another  correspondent  see  No.  94. — W.  F.  B.


126


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


to  come  and  test  wich  my  divining  rod.  I  did  so,  and  tested,  and  about
ten  yards  of  where  his  deep  sinking  had  been  carried  out,  I  discovered  a
beautiful  spring  of  pure  water  at  a  depth  of  30  feet.  The  water  came  in  so
strong  when  tapped,  that  the  men  had  great  difhculty  in  bricking  the  well.
I  have  had  just  the  same  results  in  other  parts  of  the  estate.

I  wrote  to  Colonel  Grantham  asking  him  if  the  foregoing  state-
ment, which  I  sent,  was  correct.  Colonel  Grantham,  I  learnt  with
regret,  had  recently  died.  His  son.  Captain  Grantham,  who  was
present  at  the  experiments  and  took  much  interest  in  them,
writes  : —

West  Keal  Hall,  Spilsby,  Lincolnshire,

October  mh,  1896.

Mr.  Stone  is  quite  correct  in  saying  that  he  has  sunk  two  most  successful
wells  for  us  in  West  Keal  ;  the  spring,  or  as  it  was  in  this  case  the  run,  of
water,  being  found  by  use  of  the  divining  rod.  Certainly  in  one  case  a  well
had  been  sunk  to  considerable  depth,  without  success,  within  twenty  yards
of  where  Stone  found  a  large  supjjly  at,  as  he  says,  about  30  feet.  I  do  not
know  the  depth  of  the  well  originally  sunk  witliout  success,  but  could  find
out  if  you  care  to  know.  Not  only  did  he  find  the  stream  of  water,  but
could  tell  in  what  direction  it  was  running.  Having  found  two  streams
running  at  right  angles  he  pointed  out  the  spot  where  they  would  meet,  and
on  walking  over  it  with  his  rod  proved  to  be  right  within  a  few  feet.  He
also  told  us  pretty  nearly,  if  not  quite,  the  exact  depth  of  the  water  both
times  he  has  sunk  for  us.  There  is  an  under-drain  running  a  small  run  of
water  across  the  drive  in  front  of  my  house,  with  nothing  to  indicate  the
place  ;  I  got  him  to  walk  along  tlie  drive  with  the  rod  ;  as  soon  as  he  stood
over  the  drain  the  twig  turned  over.

E.  M.  Grantham.

In  reply  to  further  enquiries,  Captain  Grantham  writes  : —

West  Keal  Hall,  Spilsby,  October  27th,  1896.

Mr.  Stone  assured  us  that  we  should  get  a  sufficient  supply  of  water  by
sinking  on  what  he  said  was  the  strongest  run.  It  being  a  suitable  place  we
did  so,  with,  as  I  have  already  told  you,  every  success.  That  there  is  some-
thing in  the  indication  of  the  rod,  after  seeing  it  used,  is  not  in  my  mind
open  to  question.  I  consider  it  is  of  the  greatest  use  and  saving  in  finding
springs,  and  should  not  now  think  of  sinking  a  well  when  I  was  not  sure  of
water  without  the  use  of  the  divining  rod.  I  have  not  as  yet  been  able  to
ascertain  the  dej^th  of  the  unsuccessful  well  you  mention,  as  I  have  been
away  from  home,  but  will  do  so  and  let  you  know.

E.  M.  Grantham.

Asked  the  exact  depth  of  the  wells,  in  a  subsequent  letter  Captain
Grantham  informs  me  that  the  unsuccessful  well  was  42  feet  deep  ;
28  feet  of  this  were  dug  and  14  feet  bored.  The  successful  well  sunk
by  Mr.  Stone  was  only  30  feet  deep,  and  was  15  yards  distant  from
the  useless  well.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


127


No.  87. — The  next  "  evidential "  case  Mr.  Stone  quoted  was  as
follows  :  —

Mr.  Shirley,  Ettington  Park,  near  Stratford-on-Avon,  had  gone  to
great  expense  in  a  Held  this  summer,  and  had  to  give  up .  the  same  as
Colonel  Grantham  did,  without  any  success,  and  he  sent  for  me  to  go  and
test.  I  at  once  went,  and  in  the  same  field,  only  15  yards  from  his  expensive
excavation,  I  discovered  an  abundant  supply  of  water  at  7  feet  deep,  and  my
men  have  just  completed  the  laying  on  of  the  water,  by  natural  gravitation,
to  the  top  of  a  very  large  mansion,  gardens,  stables,  and  yards.  Many
expensive  trials  had  been  made  in  trying  to  obtain  a  water  supply  to  this
house,  but  without  sviccess.  Therefore  the  house  could  not  be  occupied
through  not  having  a  water  supply.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Shirley,  sending  him  the  foregoing  statement  by
Mr.  Stone,  and  asking  how  far  it  was  correct. Mr.  Shirley  replies  :—

Lough  Fea,  Carrickmacross,  Ireland,

October  23rd,  1896.
Mr.  Stone's  statement  is  correct.  I  was  with  him  when  he  went  over
various  portions  of  ray  English  projjerty.  He  marked  five  or  six  places
where  he  said  there  would  be  water,  but  so  far  I  have  only  had  one  actually
tested  ;  this  was,  however,  perfectly  successful,  the  water  was  found  where
he  pointed  out  and  at  the  depth  he  stated.  I  had  previously  gone  to
considerable  expense  in  sinking,  but  could  not  find  a  sufficient  supply.  I
was  quite  satisfied  with  Stone.  g -g  Shirley

In  a  subsequent  letter,  after  reading  the  proof  of  the  above,  Mr.
Shirley  writes  : —

Ettington  Park,  Stratford-on-Avon,  March  23rd,  1897.

We  sank  at  various  places  looking  for  water  before  Stone's  visit  ;  the  one
nearest  to  the  subsequent  supply  found  by  Stone  was  about  20  or  30  yards
off  and  about  10  feet  deep  :  Stone  went  a  little  deeper  but  there  was  water
before  we  got  to  this  depth.  The  supply  has  continued  very  good.
Stone  found  the  main  supply  at  once  and  without  hesitation,  and  certainly
saved  me  a  great  deal  of  expense.  g  Shirley

No.  88. — The  following  is  the  next  "evidential"  case  quoted  by
Mr.  Stone:—

A  large  hall  called  Preston  Hall,  Uppingham.  Rutlandshire,  had  been
standing  empty  for  several  years  through  not  having  a  water  supply.
Major  Codrington,  of  110,  Eaton-square,  London,  went  to  look  at  it  with  the
view  of  purchasing,  and  when  he  found  there  was  no  water  on  tlie  place  he
refused  to  purchase,  but  agreed  he  would  wait  and  see  if  I  could  find  water.
I  was,  therefore,  sent  for,  and  upon  my  arrival  I  met  Major  Codrington  and
the  agents  of  the  estate.  They  had  also  a  gentleman  from  London  to  meet
me  who  is  a  leading  geologist.

I  at  once  tested  with  my  rod,  and  said  a  spring  of  water  would  be  found
flowing  at  about  the  depth  of  60  feet. The  geologist  said  water  would  be


128


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


found  at  20  feet  anywhere  about  the  place,  and  he  said  to  the  Major,  "If
you  don't  find  water  at  20  feet,  don't  smk  deeper  whatever  you  do,  for  you
won't  find  water  until  you  get  to  150  feet."  It  was  decided  to  have  a  trial
for  the  water,  and  the  well  is  n(jw  sunk  ;  not  a  drop  of  water  was  found  at
20  feet,  so  the  well  was  carried  deeper  until  it  reached  60  feet.  Just  at  this
depth,  to  the  inch,  a  beautiful  spring  uf  water  was  tapped,  which  yields  an
abundant  supply  for  all  purposes,  and  througli  this  result  Major  Codrington
has  purchased  the  estate.

Nine  wells  had  been  sunk  on  this  estate  before  I  visited  it,  without
success,  and  useless  wells  are  on  each  side  of  the  well  I  have  just  sunk.  My
sinking  plant  is  still  on  the  spot  and  the  well  is  just  completed  and  ojjen  for
inspection.

I  sent  the  foregoing  to  Major  Codrington  and  asked  him  how  far  it
was  an  accurate  statement.  Major  Codrington's  reply  and  subsequent
letters  are  as  follows  : —

110,  Eaton-square,  S.W.,  October  19fh,  1896.

Stone's  account  is  substantially  accurate.  There  are  a  few  details  which
are  not  quite  accurate,  however.  There  was  water  on  the  place,  but  the
supply  was  insufficient.  The  geologist  did  not  imply  that  water  was  to  be
found  at  150  feet,  but  he  merely  said,  ' '  The  clay  is  150  feet  thick  at  least,
and  there  is  no  water  in  it."

At  about  60  feet  the  clay  was  noticed  to  be  very  wet,  and  the  actual
supply  of  water  comes  from  a  point  66  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,
where  there  is  a  band  of  rock  about  7  or  8  inches  thick.

I  sent  a  piece  of  this  rock  to  the  geologist,  and  he  j^ronounced  it  to  be
a  band  of  limestone,  such  as  frequently  occurs  in  the  upper  lias  clay.

I  may  say  that  the  soil  which  lies  above  this  clay,  and  which  is  from
20  to  25  feet  thick,  is  known  as  "  Northampton  sand."  All  the  old  wells  are
merely  dug  in  this,  but  they  have  apparently  been  neglected  for  years.
They  nearly  all  contained  some  water,  but,  as  I  liave  said,  the  supply  has
not  been  sufficient  for  the  place.

As  to  the  name  of  the  geologist,  I  do  not  like  to  give  it  to  you  without
his  permission,  but  I  will  ask  him,  and  if  lie  has  no  objection,  send  his  name
to  you.

I  had  tlie  water  in  the  newly  made  well  analysed,  and  the  first  analysis
was  not  satisfactory.  Being  told  that  it  frequently  happens  that  new  wells
are  contaminated,  either  by  accident  or  design  (men  washing  in  them,  etc.),
I  had  precautions  taken,  and  the  well  cleaned,  and  the  water  analysed
again. The  final  analysis  being  satisfactory,  I  decided  to  purchase  the

WV^^^y-  A.  E.  Codrington.

110,  Eaton-s([uare,  S.W.,  October-  22ml,  1896.

Stone  is  a  very  decent  man,  and  I  am  much  struck  with  the  confident
way  he  works,  and  the  practical  knowledge  he  appears  to  jDossess.  I  saw
him  test  for  water  ;  he  walked  very  slowly,  holding  the  rod  thus  Y,  the
point  being  about  12  inches  from  the  ground. At  one  spot  it  curled  up.

We  tried  again.  This  time  he  held  one  branch,  and  I  held  the  other,
and  it  curled  up  again.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


129


Then  I  tried  alone  over  the  same  spot,  but  absolutely  no  result  whatever.
On  the  spot  where  the  rod  curled  up  we  found  water  at  60  to  66  feet

^^^V-  A. E.  CODRINGTON.

110,  Eaton-square,  S.  W.,  November  5th.,  1896.
My  geological  friend  preferred  that  his  name  should  not  be  mentioned.
He  said  to  me  the  other  day  that  the  pi'esence  of  the  water  wliere  it  was
.  found  was  a  great  surprise  to  him.  Codrington.

No.  89. — The  next  case  quoted  by  Mf.  Stone  was  as  follows  : —

I  discovered  a  sj^ring  in  an  estate  in  the  North  of  Ireland  for  a
gentleman  who  lives  at  Nevvcastle-on-Tyne,  after  he  had  spent  an  enormous
amount  of  money  without  success.  Upon  my  arrival  on  the  scene,  I  pointed
■out  a  spot  where  a  spring  of  water  would  be  found,  after  walking  about  five
minutes.  Water  ivas  found  at  this  spot,  less  than  20  feet  deep,  and  the
previous  sinking  and  boring  had  been  abandoned  after  being  put  down  to  the
depth  of  about  50  feet  with  no  results.  This  had  been  done  in  the  same
field  I  d  iscovered  the  spring  in  at  20  feet  deep.  -^y  Qtonb

Having  obtained  the  name  and  address  of  this  gentleman,  I  wrote
to  him  for  particulars. He  replies  as  follows  : —

6,  Brandling-park,  Newcastle-on-Tyne,

December  2Srd,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  13th,  with  reference  to  Mr.  Stone  and  his
■"divining  rod  "  (whom  I  employed  on  my  place  in  county  Down,  in  1895),
iDefore  employing  him  I  had  quarried  through  17  feet  of  granite  for  water
without  success.  T  then  sent  a  man  from  Northumberland  with  j^i'oper
appliances  to  bore  through  the  granite,  still  hoping  to  find  water.  He
worked  for  several  months.  In  December,  1894,  he  reported  to  me  that  he
had  found  a  good  spring.  In  June,  1895,  we  had  no  water  ;  after  a  great  deal
of  expense  it  had  turned  out  a  complete  failure.  In  December,  1895,  I  sent
for  Mr.  Stone,  and  I  must  confess  my  faith  in  liim  was  not  very  great  at  first,
but  I  was  soon  convinced  he  could  point  out  where  there  was  water.  He  did
so  on  several  f)laces  on  my  land,  and  on  one  spot  where  lie  said  there  was  a
■good  spring,  we  started  and  quarried  down  some  20  feet  in  hard  granite  ;  we
found  a  splendid  spring  and  we  have  a  great  suj^ply  of  water.  Through  all
the  long  drought  last  spring  and  summer,  when  most  of  the  springs  in  the
neighbourliood  were  dry,  ours  showed  no  signs  of  diminishing.  Where  Mr.
Stone  found  the  spring  was  not  near  where  we  thought  we  had  a  spring  ;  in
fact,  I  would  never  have  looked  for  one  in  the  place  he  pointed  out.

I  have  great  confidence  in  Mr.  Stone  and  his  divining  rod,  and  I  am  very
pleased  to  recommend  him.  He  has  been  successful  in  finding  water  in
■several  places  in  Northumberland  and  Durham  to  my  kmiwledge.

I  shall  be  very  pleased  to  answer  any  more  questions  with  reference  to
the  finding  of  water  on  my  land.

J.  McKay.


K


130


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I  wrote  again  to  enquire  the  exact  depth  of  the  unsticcessful  boring
nd  of  the  successful  well,  and  the  locality. Mr.  McKay  replies  : —

Jamiarii  'Sid,  1897.

(1)  The  depth  uf  the  old  well  quarried  was  17  feet  deep.  We  then  bored
through  hard  granite  29  feet,  in  all  44  feet.  There  is  a  lake  a  little  distance
from  where  the  well  was  sunk.  We  were  6  feet  6  inches  below  the  level  of
this  lake.  We  expected  to  have  a  good  supply  of  water  on  account  of  this.
The  depth  we  quarried  where  Mr.  Stone  pointed  out  was  23  feet,  and  we  got
a  good  spring.

(2)  The  locality  where  the  land  is  situated  is  in  South  Down,  between
Rathfriland  and  Castlewellan  (about  midway).  Cabra  Towers,  Cabra  by
Newry,  is  the  postal  address,  and  the  nearest  railway  statiiin  is  Ballyroney
via  Scarva.  j_


No.  90. — The  next  "evidential"  case  which  Mr.  Stone  sends  me  i.s.
a  remarkable  one.  The  place,  Woodside,  is  on  the  north  coast  of  the
Isle  of  Wight,  Ijetween  Osborne  and  Ryde ;  it  is  indicated  on  the
geological  map  of  the  district. Mr.  Stone's  account  is  as  follows  : — ■

Woochlde,  Wuotton,  Ida  of  Wight.

The  owners  of  this  estate  had  never  been  able  to  obtain  a  supply  of  water,
although  they  had  gone  to  a  great  expense  to  try  and  find  a  supply.  I  was
therefore  sent  for,  and  upon  niy  arrival  T  cut  a  hazel  rod  and  immediately
commenced  to  work.  I  had  not  been  walkmg  ten  minutes  before  I  discovered
an  enormous  spring  of  water,  and  being  convinced  by  the  action  of  my  rod
that  there  was  an  abundant  supply  for  all  purposes  beneath  the  spot  upon
which  I  was  standing,  I  did  not  trouble  to  test  further.  I  was  then  asked
at  what  depth  I  thought  the  water  would  be  found.  I  said  at  about  seven
feet.  The  agent  said  to  me,  "Mr.  Stone,  there's  a  well  over  the  fence  there,
80  feet  deep  and  no  water  in  it,  and  another  well  30  feet  deep,  just  behind
you  and  no  water."  I  said,  "Never  mind  the  old  wells  ;  you  will  find  an  abun-
dant supply  at  the  spot  I  indicate,  at  about  seven  feet  deep."  I  was  asked  if  I
would  undertake  to  carry  out  the  necessary  work,  and  agreed  to  do  so.  I
started  two  of  my  sinkers  to  dig  at  the  sjjot  I  had  marked,  and  they  had  not
been  at  work  a  day  before  they  struck  the  water,  which  rapidly  rose  to  the
surface.  I  then  laid  on  the  water  by  gravitation  to  the  mansion,  garden,
stables,  etc.,  and  after  all  was  completed  Dr.  Morgan  expressed  himself
entirely  satisfied  with  everything  I  had  done.

My  first  visit  to  the  Isle  of  Wight  was  to  a  village  called  Arreton.  Several
attempts  had  been  made,  at  great  expense,  to  obtain  a  water  supply  to  this
village  without  success,  and  upon  my  arrival  I  was  told  by  the  old  men  that  I
should  never  find  a  spring  of  water  in  their  neighbourhood.  I  said,  "Well,
you  must  wait  and  see,"  and  I  started  to  work  with  my  rod  in  hand,  and  in  ■^
few  minutes  I  discovered  a  spot,  beneath  which  a  good  supply  of  water  was
flowing,  and  all  the  company  who  were  with  me  were  astonished,  and  said
that  was  a  spot  they  thought  water  would  never  be  found  at  ;  I,  however,
guaranteed  a  spring  at  10  feet,  and  the  work  was  entrusted  to  me  to
carry  out,  which  I  did,  and  my  men  tapped  water  at  nine  feet,  which  quickly


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


131


rose  to  the  top,  and  I  laid  it  on  to  the  rectory  and  -^-illage  by  gravitation.  A
■well  had  been  sunk  within  20  yards  of  this  spot,  to  a  depth  of  about
50  feet,  and  not  a  drop  of  water  was  found.

An  account  of  this  case,  I  find,  appeared  in  the  Isle  of  Wight
papers,  and  also,  as  follows,  in  The  2Iorning  Post  for  September  20th,
1892:—

No  little  astonishment  has  been  caused  amongst  the  inhabitants  of
Fishbourne  and  Woutton,  Isle  of  Wight,  by  the  successful  use  of  the
divining  rod.  Un  the  shore  near  Wootton  Creek,  overlooking  the  Solent,  is
a  yachting  estate  known  as  Woodside,  the  residence  of  the  Rev.  J.  B.
Morgan,  which  has  hitherto  been  witliout  a  good  supply  of  water.  Twi_>
wells  have  been  sunk  at  considerable  expense,  but  without  success.  It  was
thereupon  decided  to  call  in  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Williain  Stone,  a  well-
known  operator  with  the  divining  rod.  On  his  arrival,  Mr.  Stone,  after
cutting  his  rod  in  the  neighbouring  coppice,  set  to  work,  and  within  ten
minutes  indicated  a  spot  which  every  one  seemed  to  consider  the  most
unlikely  on  the  estate.  It  was  on  the  brow-  of  the  hill,  and  over  100  feet
above  the  house,  whereas  the  wells  had  been  previously  sunk  in  low-lying
land.  Men  were,  however,  quickly  set  to  work,  and  at  a  depth  of  7  feet  the
water  rushed  into  the  well  so  fast  that  the  men  were  obliged  to  get  out,  and
the  water  came  to  the  top  of  the  well.  This  spring  has  been  found  an  ample
supply,  and  the  quality  is  excellent.  This  is  Mr.  Stone's  third  visit  to  the
Island.  On  his  first  visit  he  discovered  a  spring  at  Arreton,  which  yields
enough  water  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  village,  and  he  subsequently  found
water  on  another  estate  near  Hyde.

On  writing  to  Mr.  Morgan  for  information,  he  replied  to  me  as
follows  : —

5,  Avenue  Montaigne,  Paris,  October  21st,  1896.
I  do  not  know^  the  details  of  the  account  of  Mr.  Stone's  work  at  Wood-
side  House,  I.W. — which  has  reached  you, — but  it  is  quite  true  that  he
discovered  an  abundant  supply  of  water  where  efforts  had  jjreviously  been
made  in  vain.  " '  t t>  Tv,r

J. B.  M0R(iAN.

I  then  sent  Mr.  Moi'gan  the  above  particulars  and  he  I'eplies  : —

Paris,  November  6th,  1896.
The  account  which  you  sent  to  me  of  Mr.  Stone's  work  at  W^oodside  is
substantially  correct.  j_  g_  Morgan.

Mr.  Morgan,  in  answer  to  my  request  for  further  details,  wrote-
to  say  Mr.  Taylor,  of  Woodside,  would  be  able  to  give  me  the
facts  desired.  T,  therefore,  wrote  to  Mr.  Taylor,  at  the  same  time-
enclosing  him  a  copy  of  Mr.  Stone's  statement,  and  asking  him  if  it
were  correct.  Mr.  Taylor  returns  Stone's  statement,  endorsed,  "Quite-
correct,  William  Taylor,"  and  also  sent  the  following  letter  and  plan
of  the  respective  position  of  the  wells.  It  will  be  seen  that  "  quite-
correct  "  does  not  apply  to  the  relative  depths  of  the  wells.


132


Professor  W.  F.  Barrvtt.


[part


Woodside  House,  Wootton,  Isle  of  Wight,

March  31st,  1897.

In  reply  to  your  letter  as  to  Mr.  Stone  and  his  finding  water,  I  beg  to
inform  you  liis  statements  are  quite  correct.  The  good  well  is  about  200  feet
from  the  old  supply,  which  was  very  scarce  through  the  summer,  and  I  am
pleased  to  say  the  supj^ly  from  the  new  well  is  abundant.  I  enclose  a  sketch
of  the  land,  with  the  wells  marked.  The  well  said  by  Stone  to  be  30  feet
deep  is  only  12  feet,  and  the  one  said  by  him  to  be  80  feet  deep  is  120
feet  deep.

William  Taylor.


C  O Well,  sunk  hy  Stone,  7  feet  deep.

Abundant  supply  always  i-unning.


B O Well  12  feet  deep.
'I Small  supply.


o


o


Well  120  feet  deep.
No  water.


Wells  A  and  B  were  sunk  before  the  diviner's  visit. C  is  sunk  at  a  spot  selected
by  Mr.  Stone. C  and  B  are  on  the  same  level. A  is  14  feet  lower-
In  a  subsequent  letter,  dated  April  5th,  Mr.  Taylor  says  in  reply  to
ray  inquiry—"  The  well  that  Stone  sunk  is  only  7  feet  deep  and  is


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


13S


nearly  always  running  over  ;  it  is  on  the  same  level  as  the  ^-ell  with
hardly  any  water,  as  you  will  see  by  the  sketch,  and  14  feet  above  the
deep  well  with  no  water."

I  should  be  glad  if  any  friends  living  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  would
kindly  make  further  enquiries  into  the  Arreton  case  mentioned  on
p.  130.  The  various  replies  to  my  enquiries  show  that,  after  making  due
allowance  for  occasional  exaggeration,  the  accounts  of  the  various  cases
Mr.  Stone  has  given  me  were  substantially  correct,  and  I  have  no
reason  to  think  it  would  be  otherwise  in  the  case  of  Arreton.
Subsequently  Mr.  Stone  sent  me  some  fine  photographs  that  had  been
taken  of  the  springs,  one  of  which  we  reproduce  (see  next  page),  and
which  he  describes  as  follows  : — •

[It]  sliows  me  standing  by  the  spring  of  water  I  discovered  for  the
Rev.  Mr.  Morgan,  Isle  of  Wight,  and  the  rod  I  have  in  niy  hand  shows  me
holding  it  just  as  I  did  when  I  tested  for  this  valuable  spring.  The  moment
I  put  my  foot  over  the  water  the  rod  turned'in  spite  of  me,  broke  itself,  and
left  the  two  ends  between  my  fingers  and  thumb.  I  was  photographed  with
the  same  rod,  but  of  course  it  was  much  shorter  than  when  I  first  tested,  as
about  three  inches  from  each  end  had  been  broken  oif.  I  always  hold  the
rod  in  the  jDosition  you  see.  The  photograph  is  taken  near  the  house,  the
water  from  the  spring  having  been  "  laid  on."  y^,

No.  91. — The  next  case  Mr.  Stone  sends  me  is  an  interesting  one,
but  unfortunately,  owing  to  the  death  of  the  gentleman  for  whom  the
work  was  undertaken,  the  account  given  is  only  imperfectly
corroborated.

The  Harehxj  Estate.,  Spilsby,  Lincolnshire.

This  estate  recently  belonged  to,  and  was  occupied  by,  the  late  Mr.  F.
Tooth  ;  it  is  now  occupied  by  Mr.  George  Mftrriner.  It  comprises
about  1,000  acres  of  land,  upon  which  is  built  a  large  mansion,  several
cottages, — forming  the  village, — farm  premises  and  a  church.  No  water  was
obtainable  here,  only  by  two  water  carts,  continually  being  used  to  fetch
water  from  a  distance.  In  addition  to  the  mansion,  cottages,  farm  buildings
etc.,  the  cattle  had  to  be  supplied  witli  water.  In  this  case  numerous  well
sinkers  had  been  called  in  and  they  all  failed.  Hearing  of  me  Mr.  Tooth
visited  me  when  I  was  engaged  carrying  out  some  extensive  work,  and
having  satisfied  himself,  there  and  then  specially  engaged  me  for  his  estate.
On  my  arrival  there  I  found  five  wells  had  been  sunk,  from  which  no  water
was  obtainable.  I  tested  with  my  divining  rod,  and  near  one  of  these  wells,
I  discovered  a  spring  of  water,  at  a  less  depth  by  some  80  feet ;  this  was  only
within  a  few  yards  of  one  of  the  previous  sinkings.  When  I  discovered
this  spring,  I  guaranteed  to  bring  the  water  to  the  surface  and  above  it.  Let
me  say  at  once  that  that  spring  now  delivers  itself  into  a  reservoir  rising  four
feet  above  the  ground,  and  when  tested  was  yielding  24,000  gallons  j^er  24
hours  ;  this  same  spring  is  now  supplying  the  whole  of  the  wants  of  the
above  named  mai\sion,  village,  farm  buildings,  etc.


^\M. \V.  «T()>^F,.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


135


In  connection  with  this,  Mr.  Tooth,  since  deceased,  wrote  to  Mr.
Stone  as  follows  : —

Hareby,  Spilsby,  Lincolnshire,  June  12</(,  1893.

I  am  greatly  pleased  with  the  result  of  your  discovery  of  sjjrings  by  the
"  divining  rod  "  on  this  farm  in  October  last,  and  by  the  practical  way  you,
have  since  earriedr  out-the  necfissary  works.

I  have  hitherto  had  great  difficulty  in  keeping  my  stock  supplied  with
water  during  the  winter  months,  while  in  the  yards,  let  alone  the  cost  of
leading  ;  now  I  am  pleased  to  witness  a  constant  supply,  which  has  begun  at
about  17,000  gallons  per  twenty -four  hours,  of  clear,  pure,  spring  water  ;  an
advantage  to  a  stock  farm  that  cannot  be  too  highly  estimated.  I  shall  be
pleased  to  answer  any  inquiry  ujjon  the  subject ;  meanwhile  the  drainage
work  to  my  grass  fields  will  have  your  attention.

Frederick  Tooth.

I  wrote  to  the  present  occupier  of  the  farm,  Mr.  Marriner,  and  his
reply  is  as  follows  : —

Hareby,  Spilsby,  Jamiary  13th,  1897.
The  water  discovered  on  the  Hareby  estate  has  proved  most  satisfactory,
and  I  can  faithfully  substantiate  the  late  Mr.  Tooth's  testimonial,  for  the
water  discovered  by  Mr.  Stone  has  proved  abundant  all  through  last  summer,
which  as  you  know  was  exceptionally  dry.

G.  T.  Marriner.

In  reply  to  further  enquiries  from  me,  Mr.  Marriner  writes  : —

Hareby,  Spilsby,  January  20th,  1897.

In  answer  to  your  first  question  :  Was  a  well  or  wells  sunk  prior  to  the
diviner's  visit,  and  if  so  with  what  result  and  at  what  place  1

Only  one  new  well  had  been  sunk  by  Mr.  Tooth,  and  that  one  proved  a
failure ;  he  had  sunk  28  feet.  Mr.  Stone  then  commenced  operations  and  said
there  was  water  three  yards  away,  and  he  sank  15  feet  and  found  plenty  of
water  ;  this  well  is  some  distance  from  the  house  and  buildings  and  simjjly
supplies  a  tank  in  the  field  for  stock.  There  are  several  old  wells  about  the
jjlace  which  Mr.  Tooth  had  oinened  into,  but  from  information  learned  from
present  foreman,  who  was  here  before  Mr.  Tooth  came  into  possession,  I
gather  that  the  above  well  was  the  only  one  sunk  by  him.

Second  question  :  How  deep  were  the  useless  wells,  and  how  deep  the
well  or  wells  successfully  sunk  by  Mr.  Stone,  and  how  far  apart  ?

One  old  well  is  80  feet  deep.  The  well  sunk  by  Mr.  S.,  which  supplies
house  and  buildings,  is  near  one  which  supplied  same  before  Mr.  Stone  did
anything,  but  which  used  to  run  dry  m  summer.  The  well  sunk  by  Mr.
Stone  was  only  seven  feet  deep  ;  it  proved  and  has  all  along  proved,  a  never-
failing  supply ;  the  water  here  rises  to  the  surface,  and  is  conveyed  into  three
circular  reservoirs.

I  myself  think  that  Mr.  Stone  could  very  well  do  without  the  "divining
rod,"  it  being  simply  a  visible  sign  of  the  effect  which  water  has  upon  his
body.

G.  T.  Marriner.


136


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Writing  again  in  explanation  of  the  difference  between  Mr.  Stone's
statement  and  the  foregoing  letter,  to  which  I  called  his  attention,
Mr.  Marriner  says,  "  I  am  afraid  my  last  letter  was  misleading,  as  I
understood  from  the  foreman  only  two  wells  had  been  sunk  ;  he  now
tells  me  that  several  others  were  dug  before  Mr.  Stone's  visit ;  our
water  supply  now  never  gives  us  any  trouble."

I  sent  the  proof-sheets  of  the  above,  with  Mr.  Stone's  statement,  to
Ml'.  Marriner  for  revision.  In  his  reply  Mr.  Marriner  states  that
further  careful  enquiry  led  him  to  make  one  or  two  slight  corrections
in  his  letter  of  January  20th,  which  I  have  incorporated,  and  he
adds  : — "  I  find  eight  wells  had  actually  been  sunk  on  this  place  prior  to
Mr.  Stone's  visit,  but  no  satisfactory  water  supply  was  got  until  Mr.
Stone  came.  Three  or  four  of  these  wells  had  been  dug  by  Mr.  Tooth
and  filled  in  again.  Stone  discovered  a  spring  at  15  feet  below  the
surface,  only  three  yards  from  the  useless  well  sunk  to  28  feet  by  Mr.
Tooth,  as  shown  by  Mr.  Tooth's  letter,  a  copy  of  which  I  enclose."
The  letter  enclosed  is  from  Mr.  Tooth  to  his  agent,  Mr.  Parish,  dated
October  23rd,  1893,  and  corroborates  Mr.  Marriner's  statement.  The
subjoined  plan  and  explanation  were  also  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Mai'riner.


wO
wO


O  S-
O  w


O


O  SI


O  w


O  w


w,  w,  etc.,  are  the  wells  sunk  before  Mr.  Stone  came  and  are  pi-actical!y  useless,
and  considerably  deeper  than  S'  and  S'-,  the  wells  sunk  by  Stone.  S^  supplies  the
house  and  buildings.  S-  is  the  15  feet  well,  3  yards  from  the  well,  w,  which  is  28  feet
deep  and  has  ho  water.


xxxn.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


137


jSTo.  92. — -Mr.  Stone  also  sends  me  the  following  : —  •  •

The  Bhjth  and  Tyne  Breu-ery,  Blyth,  Nurtlnimberland.

At  this  place  they  had  a  well  which  had  been  sunk,  and  they  only  got  a
very  little  water.  I  was  called  in  and  tested  with  my  divining  rod.  I  found
a  spring  from  six  to  eight  feet  from  the  well.  I  suggested  I  should  send
some  of  my  skilled  men  and  that  they  should  cut  a  drift  from  the  side  of  the
well  in  the  direction  of  tlie  spring.  My  suggestion  was  adopted  ;  the  men
cut  the  drift  and  immediately  the  spring  was  tapped  it  commenced  to  flow
into  the  well  and  the  supply  was  and  is  sufficient  (and  amply  so)  for  all  the
purposes  of  brewery,  etc.  I  have  heard  nothing  from  Mr.  Carmicliael,  the
manager's  director,  lately,  but  he  would,  no  doubt,  furnish  you  with  the
plain  facts  of  the  case.

I  wrote  to  the  managing  director,  Mr.  Carmichael,  enclosing  the
foregoing  account,  and  he  replies  as  follows  :  —

Blyth,  Northumberland,  February  IQth,  1897.

In  reply  to  yours  of  the  12th  inst.,  I  have  to  say  that  what  Mr.  Stone  has
informed  you. about  his  work  here  is  practically  correct.

The  date  when  the  work  was  done  was  in  May,  1894.  The  site  was
in  the  brewery  yard.  Depth  of  old  well  24  feet  ;  it  was  by  no  means
useless,  as  we  had  a  regular  supply  of  water,  although  small.  The  well  is
now  28  feet  deejj,  and  the  supply  is  what  I  would  call  fairly  good  but  not
large.

The  place  in  the  rock  where  Mr.  Stone  found  the  spring  would  be  about
6  feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  old  well  in  a  drift  which  had  previously  been
made  by  us  ;  this  was  where  we  were  getting  the  water  from,  and  when  the
rock  was  cut  away  it  so  relieved  the  spring  as  to  give  us  a  much  larger
Cjuantity  and  a  quicker  sup^jly.

James  Cakmichael.

In  subsequent  correspondence  with  me,  Mr.  Stone  remarks  that
he  thinks  Mr.  Carmichael's  recollection  of  the  facts  is  not  quite  as
favourable  as  the  case  deserves,  and  mentions  some  additional
particulars.  I  forwarded  Mr.  Stone's  remarks  to  Mr.  Carmichael,  who
replies  that,  though  Mr.  Stone's  recollection  of  certain  particulars  is
not  quite  accurate,  yet  "both  I  and  my  co-directors  were  very  pleased
to  get  the  increased  supply."

No.  93. — The  Lincolnshire  Chronicle  of  November  7th,  1896,
describes  some  experiments  in  water-finding  by  Mr.  Stone  in  front  of
the  Sessions  House  at  Spilsby ;  at  a  certain  spot  the  "little  twig
which  had  been  held  horizontally,  rose  perpendicularly  and  curled
towards  the  operator."  Digging  was  commenced,  and  at  15  feet  a
copious  supply  of  water  was  met  with.  I  wrote  to  the  magistrates
clerk  at  Spilsby — Mr.  Thimbleby,  a  solicitor, — to  enquire  whether
previous  attempts  to  find  water  near  the  Sessions  House  had  been


138


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


made  without  the  dowser's  aid,  and  with  what  result.  But  this
question  Mr.  Thimbleby  does  not  answer ;  he  replies  : —

Magistrates'  Clerk's  Office,  Spilsby,  Janxiunj  dtli,  1897.
Mr.  Stone's  power  to  find  water  is  something  marvellous.  The  only
instrument  he  uses  is  a  branch  of  hazel  or  willow.  He  can  tell  at  once
where  the  water  is,  and  approximately  the  distance  to  bore.  I  saw  Mr.
Stone  "divine"  for  water  at  the  Sessions  House  at  Spilsby  with  great  success,
and  his  jirediction  of  depth,  namely  15  feet,  was  exact.  I  have  seen  what
he  has  done  at  Hareby  on  the  estate  of  Mr.  Tooth  and  he  was  most  successful.
He  found  water  at  Newcastle  for  a  laundry  company  on  a  space  between  two
disused  coal  pits.  Every  one  thought  he  was  mad  when  he  stated  that  there
would  be  water,  as  each  of  the  pits  showed  no  signs  of  the  jaresence  of  water,
but  by  the  aid  of  his  rod  he  struck  a  spring  which  has  supplied  the  laundry
company  at  a  saving,  I  believe,  of  some  £500  or  £600  a  year.'

Thos.  Wm.  Thimbleby.

1^0.  94. — Reference  is  made  in  the  foregoing  letter  to  water-finding
.at  Newcastle-on-Tyne.  I  have  had  some  correspondence  with  the
Laundry  Company  referred  to  and  obtained  full  particulars  from  them,
■though  the  facts  named  by  Mr.  Thimbleby  are  not  mentioned  ;  possibly
he  was  mistaken.

A  long  account  of  the  Newcastle  experiments  was  given  in  the
Netvcafitle  Daily  Leader  for  April  12th,  1894.  The  rejjorter  minutely
■describes  ]\Ir.  Stone's  appearance  and  mode  of  using  the  rod,  "  merely
.a  small  V-shaped  branch  of  a  sapling,  the  legs  not  more  than  nine
inches  long  and  the  sixth  of  an  inch  thick," — and  how  it  rose  up  and
pointed  to  the  dowser's  chin  whenever  "  he  had  struck  water."  The
positions  were  marked  and  then  trials  were  made  at  the  Moor  Edge
Laundry,  where  a  spot  was  marked  as  likely  to  yield  a  large  supply
■"  about  50  feet  below."  The  reporter  states  that  "  the  keenest
.scrutiny  could  not  see  a  persuasive  movement  of  his  [the  dowser's]
fingers."-  Then  other  persons  tried  their  hands  but  the  rod  "  would
not  rise,  not  even  for  a  reporter."  The  dowser's  hands  were  swollen
by  the  strain,  the  report  adds.

The  Neivcastle  Daily  Journal  gives  a  very  similar  account,  and  in
its  issue  of  May  17th,  1894,  states  that  after  digging  a  well  a  powerful
.spring  was  struck  at  only  L5  or  16  feet  deep,  at  the  precise  spot
marked  by  Mr.  iStone.

J  The  secrecary  of  the  Laundry  Co.  (see  next  case)  informs  me  this  should  be  £.50
or  £G0  a  year.— W.  F.  B.

-  To  this  statement  one  of  the  directors  of  the  Laundry  Co.,  Mr.  R.  J.  Charleton,
who  was  present  at  the  trials,  replies  in  a  letter  he  has  kindly  sent  me.  I  will  quote
this  letter  subsequently, — when  dealing  with  the  que?tion  of  unconscious  muscular
.action  in  the  motion  of  the  rod.


-TXXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divininq  Rod.


139


The  secretary  of  the  Newcastle  Laundry  Co.,  in  reply  to  my
•enquiries,  writes  as  follows  : —

The  American  Steam  Laundry  Co. ,  Ltd. ,
New  Bridge-street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  March  5th,  1897.

I  had  the  pleasure  of  reading  your  letter  of  enquiry  before  my  directors
-on  Monday  last,  and  one  of  them  who  took  notes  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Stone's
visit,  promised  to  look  them  over  and  comnnmicate  his  impressions  to  me.
The  notes  he  has  evidently  mislaid,  but  I  enclose  you  his  letter  that  you  may
peruse  and  judge  of  his  opinions. ^

In  reply  to  your  queries —

(1.)  No  previous  attempts  had  been  made  to  find  water  within  my
knowledge.

(2.)  The  well  we  sunk  at  the  identical  spot  marked  by  Mr.  Stone  and
■only  went  15  feet  deep.

Personally,  I  consider  the  extract  from  Daily  Leader  a  very  true  report
■of  all  that  took  place.

Perhaps  another  instance  may  be  of  interest  to  you  :  —

Some  little  time  after  the  experiment  at  our  -works  I  was  invited  to  meet

Mr.  Stone  whilst  he  tried  the  ground  at  a  brewery  here. After  indicating

•one  spot  inside  the  building  where  water  would  be  found,  he  was  conducted

•over  some  adjacent  property  and  stopping  short  at  a  spot  some  50  yards  off,

be  indicated  another  find. The  jDrincipal  of  the  brewery  then  stated  to  Mr.

.Stone  that  the  ground  he  was  upon  was  not  theirs,  but  that  he  had  conducted

him  thither  to  test  him,  adding  that  "the  ground  you  are  now  on  is  the

exact  spot  where  an  old  public  well  was  closed  by  the  Newcastle  Corporation

years  ago,  owing  to  the  unfitness  of  the  water  for  drinking  purposes."

I  should  add  that  Mr.  Stone  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  this  part  of

Newcastle  and  I  cannot  see  that  he  could  possibly  have  known  of  the

■existence  of  this  old  well.  •  -  -o

VV.  Bird.

The  description  given  by  Mr.  Bird,  in  the  latter  part  of  his  letter,
•appears  to  refer  to  the  incident  already  mentioned  in  No.  85.

In  the  beautifully  illustrated  pamphlet  issued  by  this  Laundry
Company,  there  is  a  reproduction  of  a  photograph  taken  of  Mr.  Stone
in  the  act  of  discovering  the  spring  which  now  supplies  this  laundry  ;
the  picture,  which  we  have  to  thank  the  directors  for  allowing  us  to
reproduce  (see  next  page),  is  prefaced  by  the  remark  : —

An  important  item  in  Laundry- work  is  to  get  pure  water  and  jDlenty  of  it.
An  abundant  supply,  fulfilling  its  requirements,  we  are  pleased  to  say,  has
been  found  on  the  premises  at  the  spot  indicated  by  Mr.  Stone.  It  will  be
noticed  in  the  photograph  that  the  rod  is  pointing  upwards,  indicating  the
presence  of  water  below.


1  This  letter,  from  Mr.  Charleton,  w-ill  be  quoted  later  on,  as  already  stated.—
W.  F.  B.


140


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


No.  95. — Mr.  Bolam,  the  agent  to  the  Duke  of  Buccleugh,  writes
to  say  he  has  employed  Stone  for  several  years,  and  that  he  is  most
successful  in  finding  water  by  means  of  the  divining  rod. Mr.  Stanton,


MR.  W.  STONE.


a  contractor,  gives  several  instances  of  Stone's  success.  Here  is  one  im
a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Stone  : —

Gedclington,  near  Kettering,  October,  1891.
I  have  sunk  the  well  on  Acreland  Farm,  where  you  found  the  sjjring,  and
got  a  good  supply  of  pure  water  at  54  feet.  This  is  a  great  success,  as  there
have  already  been  three  wells  sunk  and  no  good  water.  In  fact  there  never
has  been  any  gond  water  on  the  farm  before.  All  the  old  men  on  the  place
said  there  would  not  be  this  time.  Akthitr  Stanton.


zxxxn.J  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  141


In  answer  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Stanton  writes  : —

Geddington,  Kettering,  March  20th,  1897.

Acreland  farm  in  about  half  way  between  Geddington  and  Grafton-under-
Avood,  by  the  roadside  ;  the  old  wells  were  about  20  feet  deep,  the  new  one
sunk  was  about  80  feet  [distance]  from  one  of  the  old  ones  which  I  filled
up  ;  one  is  in  use  now  for  the  cattle,  and  the  other  was  filled  up  some
years  ago.

I  have  also  sunk  wells  after  four  men  using  the  divining  rod,  but  most
after  Mr.  Stone  and  Mr.  Mullins.  In  every  case  I  found  water,  but  in  some
•cases  a  very  short  supply  where  the  springs  were  shallow.  At  Barnwell
Oastle  where  I  sunk  a  well,  after  Mr.  Stone's  trial,  in  a  field  for  the  use  of
<;attle,  I  found  a  strong  spring  about  four  feet  below  the  surface.  At  Burton
Latimer  I  deepened  an  old  well  40  feet,  which  was  35  feet  before,  making  the
total  deiDth  75  feet.  I  came  across  the  spring  exactly  in  the  line  as  Mr.
Stone  indicated.  ^^^^^^^  Stanton.

Mr.  Stanton's  reply  shows  the  importance  of  ascertaining  the
relative  depth  of  the  old  and  new  wells.  It  appears  that  at  Acreland
the  old  wells  were  "about  20  feet"  deep  and  the  new  one  54  feet,  and
as  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  water  might  not  be  found  anywhere  in
this  locality  at  50  or  60  feet  deep,  the  case  ceases  to  be  of  the  evidential
value  it  first  appeared.


No.  96. — Having  heard  that  attempts  to  find  water  had  been  made
unsuccessfully  at  the  Oakworth  Mills,  Keighley,  Yorks.,  prior  to  the
use  of  the  rod  and  that  Stone  had  found  an  abundant  supply,  I  wrote
to  Messrs.  Haggas  and  Co.,  the  owners  of  the  Mills,  and  the  following
is  the  reply  of  the  managing  director  : — ■

Oakworth  Mills,  Keighley,  March  2Uh,  1897.

In  reply  to  your  questions  :  1.  We  have  made  attempts  to  get  water
previously  by  boring  without  success.  2.  We  bored  50  feet  without  finding
water  in  one  jjlace,  and  60  feet  in  another,  about  two  years  ago.

Recently  Mr.  Stone  has  had  men  sinking  on  places  indicated  by  himself
with  the  following  results  : —

(1)  A  well  sunk  10  feet  and  found  water  to  fill  a  half-inch  pipe.

(2)  A  well  sunk  14  feet  and  found  a  small  supply,  fill  perhaps  quarter-
inch  pipe.

(3)  A  horizontal  drift  into  a  hill  perliaps  25  to  30  yards  long,  and  25  feet
•deep  at  far  end,  yielding  water  about  equal  to  a  one  inch  to  one  and  a-half
inch  pipe.

(4)  A  well  sunk  about  25  feet ;  the  water  rose  to  within  10  feet  of
top,  and  then  ran  off.  This  will  necessitate  our  drifting  the  water  ofl'  at
10  feet  down.

(5)  A  well  30  feet  deep  without  result,  and  we  have  abandoned  this,  as
we  think  we  have  got  the  underground  stream  in  about  100  yards  distant  (6),
where  at  a  depth  of  18  feet  we  have  got  a  strong  run,  perhaps  250  to  300


142


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part-


gallons  per  hour. This  will  not  rise  in  the  well,  but  will  require  drifting  olT
at  18  feet  down,  or  pumping. We  shall  drift,  as  the  ground  falls  rapidly,
and  we  shall  have  a  short  adit  only.

FoK  W.  Haggas,  Sons,  and  Co.,  Ltd.
William  W.  Vint,  Directok.

No.  97.— The  Liverpool  Daily  Post  o£  March  12th,  1897,  has  the
following.  Holywell  is  in  North  Wales,  Penymaes  is  a  village  near-
Holywell.

A  remarkaljle  instance  of  the  finding  of  water  by  means  of  the  divining-
or  "dowsing"  rod  has  just  occurred  at  Holywell.  The  governors  of  the-
intermediate  school  now  in  course  of  erection  at  Penymaes  were  desirous  of
obtaining  a  supply  of  water,  and  with  that  end  in  view  sank  a  well,  but
although  the  excavation  reached  a  very  considei'able  depth  and  was  a  very-
expensive  undertaking,  there  was  not  the  slightest  trace  of  water.  In  their-
difficulty  the  governors  decided  to  employ  a  "water  finder,"  and  Mr.
William  Stone,  of  Spilsby,  Linc(jlnshire,  was  consulted.  He  duly  appeared'
upon  the  scene,  and,  having  procured  the  usual  hazel  twig,  went  with  it  over-
the  grounds  of  the  school,  and  ultimately  indicated  a  S2:)ot  where  water  would-
be  found.  On  this  spot  accordingly  a  borehole  was  made,  and  at  a  depth  of
about  twenty  feet  an  abundant  supply  of  water  was  discovered,  and  yesterday
there  were  fourteen  feet  of  water  in  the  hole,  with  every  indication  of  a.
splendid  supply.

A  very  similar  i-eport  was  also  published  in  many  other  Lancashire
and  Welsh  papers.  I  wrote  to  the  governors  of  the  school  at  Penymaes^
but  received  no  reply.  I  then  wrote  to  the  solicitor  to  the  board  of
governors  (whose  name  I  oljtained  from  Mr.  Stone),  who  had  engaged
Mr.  Stone  and  again  had  no  reply.  Hearing  that  Mr.  S.  K.  Muspratt,
Grove  Park,  Liverpool,  w-as  chairman  of  the  board  of  governors  of  the
school,  I  asked  my  friend.  Professor  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  if  he  would
kindly  make  enquiries.  Professor  Lodge  had  an  interview  with  Mr.
Muspratt,  who  is  also  mayor  of  FUnt,  and  forwards  me  the  following-
notes  of  Mr.  Muspratt's  replies  to  his  enquiries.

"  The  newspaper  account  is  correct,  except  that  they  had  not
previously  sunk  for  water  (an  important  exception).  But  there  is  not
a  full  supply  of  water  yet.  The  dowser  asserted  a  depth  of  70  to  100
feet,  and  the  boring  is  going  on  and  has  reached  45  feet  about  at
present.  No  previous  boring  was  made,  but  advice  from  local  men  and
others  was  got,  and  not  being  very  satisfactory,  was  not  acted  on.

"  The  general  impression,  however,  is  that  there  is  a  good  deal  of
water  about  Holywell  altogether.  The  dowser  indicated  four  springs,
and  on  one  of  these  spots  the  boring  is  being  made  and  seems  likely  to
be  successful.  There  is  no  supply  to  the  town,  except  surface  water.
The  town  and  school  are  near  top  of  the  hill." — O.J.L.


XXXII  ]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


143:


Here  I  may  remark  by  way  of  caution  that  newspaper  paragraphs
on  behalf  of  the  success  of  any  particular  professional  dowser  are
often  mere  paid  advertisements  of  the  man  ;  so  that  little  value  should
be  attached  to  them  until  corroborated  by  independent  testimony.

The  rivalry  of  the  professional  dowsers  and  the  network  of  corre-
spondents who  are  in  communication  with  me  from  all  parts  of  England,
enables  me  to  hear  of  failures  as  well  as  successes  in  the  use  of  the  rod.
In  fact,  it  is  my  practice  specially  to  ask  for  information  as  to  any
failures.  One  correspondent  gave  me  a  list  of  three  or  four  failures
Stone  had  made.  I  wrote  to  each  of  the  persons  concerned.  One  or
two  appear  to  be  failures,  and  are  given  in  the  list  of  "  failures  "
below,  whereas  another  writes  that,  though  he  does  not  like  Stone-
personally,  he  would  certainly  employ  him  again  if  he  wanted  to  find
water  elsewhere  on  his  estate.

No.  98. — Again,  another  of  these  reported  failures  turns  out  tO'
have  been  more  or  less  a  success,  and  brought  the  following  letter  :  —

Conheath,  Bellingham,  March  2Uh,  1897.
There  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  of  his  (Mr.  Stone's)  powers  to  find  water;
the  only  objection  I  have  to  liiin  is  that  his  rod  is  too  susceptible  and  finds
water  in  too  small  quantities  to  he  of  practical  value  in  all  cases  ;  altliough
in  justice  to  him  it  is  only  right  to  say  that  when  T  had  hiui  the  weatlier  had
been  extremely  wet,  so  tliat  at  the  time  small  springs  were  running  aljun-
dantly.

He  gave  one  remarkable  instance  while  sitting  in  the  room  at  an  inn  with
a  piece  of  steel  in  his  hand  ;  he  said,  "  there  is  water  here,"  and  on  taking
the  hazel  twig  and  walking  round  the  room  he  indicated  tlie  spot  where  it
could  be  found.  An  old  man  in  the  room  at  the  time  tlien  spoke  up  and
informed  the  company  that  he  could  remember  a  former  tenant  of  the  place
having  a  well  in  the  cellar  below  the  room  where  we  were  sitting.

R.  Riddle.

In  reply  to  my  further  enquiries,  Mr.  Riddle  writes  :  —

Conheath,  Bellingham,  March  29th,  1897.

The  incident  of  Stone  finding  the  water  in  the  inn  is  quite  correct,  and
there  was  no  possibility  of  him  getting  any  previous  knowledge,  as  I  met  hun
at  the  place  and  was  in  his  presence  during  the  whole  time.  Another
incident  of  the  same  nature  occurred  in  one  of  the  fields,  where  he  indicated
a  supply  of  water  which  had  been  drained  away  at  some  time,  and  no
indication  of  such  was  visible  ;  another  old  resident  that  I  had  with  us  to
mark  the  places  called  out,  "I  believe  m  him  now,  I  have  carried  water  from
this  place  when  I  was  a  boy."

The  scheme  [of  well  sinking]  was  not  carried  out  properly  ;  the  part  that
was  done  was  at  my  own  expense,  and  as  the  other  proprietors  did  not  join
with  me  in  going  to  a  source  where  I  have  every  confidence  plenty  of  water
could  be  found,  I,  of  course,  gave  the  thing  up.

RoBT.  Riddle.


144


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


In  reference  to  this  case  Mr.  Stone  says,  "  the  ratepayers  com-
plained that  the  sinking  was  not  done  skilfully,  which  is  the  usual
cause  of  these  so-called  failures."

In  the  case  of  another  failure  of  Stone's  that  was  mentioned  to  me,
I  could  get  no  reply  to  my  repeated  enquiries  addressed  to  the
gentleman  named  ;  but  from  other  enquiries  I  have  made  it  appears
that  in  this  case  a  supply  of  water  was  obtained,  only  not  of  the
volume,  nor  at  the  depth  anticipated.

F.  5.1 — The  next  letter,  however,  records  a  more  distinct  failure.
Mr.  Hodgson  writes  to  me  as  follows  :  —

Redesdale  Cottage,  Otterburn,  Northumberland,

March  2Uh,  1897.

I  have  yours  of  the  23rd  inst.,  respecting  Mr.  Stone.  He  made  a  good
many  tests  for  me,  and  on  one  estate  I  followed  up  three  of  them,  and
in  each  instance  got  a  good  supply  of  water,  though  generally  at  a  greater
depth  than  that  named  hy  Mr.  Stone.

I  tried  two  places  on  anotlier  estate,  at  each  of  which  Mr.  Stone  said  I
should  get  water  at  about  45  feet.  I  sunk  a  well  of  about  5  feet  in  diameter
to  over  50  feet  in  depth  in  each  case.  I  tlien  bored  from  tlie  bottom  of  the
well-  in  one  case  over  100  feet,  and  in  the  other  about  70  feet,  and  never
got  a  drop  of  water  in  eitlier  i.if  tliem.  When  "divining"  Mr.  Stone
pronounced  the  last  mentioned  to  be  the  l)est  and  strongest  spring  he  had
found  in  Northumberland.  After  the  two  trials  above  referred  to,  I  lost
faith  in  Mr.  Stone,  aiid  several  other  places  which  I  have  marked  out  remain
""tiieth  William  Hodgson.

I  sent  the  preceding  letter  to  Mr.  Stone  and  asked  what  he  had  to
say  to  it.  He  replied  that  the  well  sinking  and  boring  was  not  done
by  him,  that  the  work  was  badly  carried  out,  and  he  was  in  no  way
responsible  for  the  failure.  I  sent  Mr.  Hodgson  Stone's  explanation,
and  he  replies  as  follows  : —

Otterburn,  Northumberland,  March  29th,  1897.

I  tried  by  boring  at  one  place,  and  went  deeper  than  Mr.  Stone  said,
but  did  not  get  sufficient  water  to  be  of  any  use.  This  boring,  I  must  say,
was  not  very  satisfactorily  conducted,  as  it  was  done  for  me  gratuitously,
<ind  I  could  not  have  the  same  command  of  the  men  as  I  should  have  had  if
they  had  been  employed  and  jmid  by  myself.  William  Hodgson.

It  will  be  noticed  that  Mr.  Hodgson  now  speaks  of  boring  at  one
place,  and  getting  some  water.  I  do  not  understand  the  discrepancy
Ijetween  his  two  letters.  Mr.  Hodgson  adds  that  Stone  was  a
complete  failure  at  Otterburn.  On  the  other  hand  Mr.  Reynard,  a
gentleman  who  formerly  resided  at  Otterburn,  states  that  it  was
owing  to  Stone's  success  which  he  witnessed  in  that  town,  that  he

1  The  numbering,  "F.  5,  etc.,"  is  continued  from  p.  123.


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


145


recommended  his  employment  elsewhere.  Without  attempting  to
reconcile  these  different  points  of  view,  it  is  sufficiently  clear  that,
even  after  wide  enquiry,  and  making  allowance  for  cases  that  have  not
reached  me,  the  ratio  of  Stone's  failures  to  his  successes  is  a  very  small
fraction.!  For  here,  as  elsewhere,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  whilst
all  the  failures  I  have  been  able  to  substantiate  are  cited,  only  such
successes  are  given  as  are  needful  for  the  main  object  of  this
investigation.


Group  VI. — Mr.  B.  Tompkins.

The  next  group  of  cases  relates  to  Mr.  B.  Tompkins,  of  Pipsmore
Farm,  Chippenham,  Wilts,  whose  experience  as  a  professional  dowser
only  extends  from  1890.  Prior  to  that  time  Mr.  Tompkins  was  a
tenant  farmer,  and  gives  me  the  following  account  of  how  he  discovered
his  dowsing  power.

On  his  farm  he  had  been  to  some  expense  in  trying  to  obtain  a
good  supply  of  water  for  his  cattle  and  at  last  was  advised  to  send  for
MuUins  and  get  the  aid  of  the  divining  rod.  This  he  did  ;  Mullins
came  and  found  a  spot  where  he  said  a  plentiful  supply  of  water
existed  at  a  depth  of  less  than  30  feet.  A  well  was  sunk  and  at
15  feet  deep  a  strong  spring  was  tapped,  which  has  yielded  an  unfailing
supply  ever  since.  After  Mullins  left  Tompkins  tried  his  own  skill,
and  found  the  forked  twig  also  moved  in  his  hand.  He  traversed
another  part  of  his  land,  and  found  three  spots  where  the  twig  turned
vigorously.  Mullins  was  asked  subsequently  to  try  the  same  ground  ;
he  came  during  Tompkins'  absence  from  home,  tried  over  the  place,  and
fixed  on  the  same  spots  that  Tompkins  had  found,  and  privately  marked,
unknown  to  Mullins.  This  led  the  former  to  test  his  own  powers  in
other  ways,  and,  having  gained  confidence,  he  was  asked  by  Messrs.
Smith  and  Marshall,  of  Chippenham,  the  agents  to  the  late  Lord
Methuen,  to  try  if  he  could  find  a  spring  on  Lord  Methuen's  estate,  as
a  well  already  sunk  had  proved  useless.  Mr.  Tompkins  tried,  and  after
a  long  search  the  rod  moved  at  a  certain  spot  on  a  hillside,  where  he
predicted  a  good  supply  of  water  would  be  found. A  well  was  sunk,

1  Albeit  one  correspondent  holds  a  very  poor  opinion  both  of  Stone's  success  and
of  his  veracity ;  but  there  apftear  to  be  extraneous  personal  reasons  for  this  opinion.
I  have  never  seen  Stone :  judging  only  from  the  evidence  before  me,  he  certainly
seems  one  of  the  best  dowsers  now  living.

L


146


Professor


W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


by  blasting  through  9  feet  of  solid  rock,  and  at  18  feet  a  spring  was
struck,  which  rose  some  9  or  10  feet  in  the  well.  Messrs,  Smith  and
Marshall  afterwards  wrote  as  follows  to  Mr.  Tompkins  : —

Chippenham,  Wilts,  and  7,  Whitehall  Place,  London,

Nommher  24i/i,  1891.
Tlie  decision  you  arrived  at  was  perfectly  correct,  and  it  is  our  opinion
that  if  we  had  made  the  well  six  feet  either  way  to  the  right  or  left  of
the  spot  you  marked,  we  should  have  missed  the  water,  which  is  now
abundant.

Sjniith  and  Marshall.

I  wrote  to  Messrs.  Smith  and  Marshall,  sending  them  a  proof  of
the  foregoing  paragraph  and  letter,  and  begged  them  to  make
any  corrections  that  were  necessary.  They  replied  from  Chippenham
that  "  the  statements  in  the  proof  are  perfectly  correct,"  both  as
regards  their  own  letter  and  the  facts  mentioned  in  the  preceding
paragraph.

No.  99. — Mr.  Charles  Maggs,  who  is  a  Wiltshire  county  magis-
trate, and  proprietor  of  the  Melksham  Dairy  Company,  required  a
large  supply  of  pure  water  for  his  butter  factory,  and,  after  ineffectual
attempts  to  obtain  it,  wrote  to  Mr.  Tompkins  to  come  over  and  try  the
divining  rod.  This  was  done,  and  subsequently  Mr.  Maggs  writes  to
Mr.  Tompkins  as  follows  : —

Melksham  Dairy  Company,  November  10th,  1890.
We  found  water  at  30  feet,  as  stated  by  you  at  time  of  finding  the  spring
—  a  very  strong  spring. Our  hojjes  had  almost  gone  and  faith  was  all  but
spent. I  have  written  an  article  thereon  in  the  Wiltshire  Times.

Charles  Maggs.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  article  Mr.  Maggs  refers
to  :—

Proof  positive  of  the  eflicacy  of  the  divining  rod  has  been  recently
supplied  in  this  town  for  water  in  the  paddock  in  the  rear  of  Mr.  Charles
Maggs'  Butter  Factory.  To  obtain  a  good  supply  of  cold  water  for  the  dairy,
a  well  had  been  sunk  in  close  proximity  to  the  buildings  ;  but  after  going
down  21  feet  and  boring  a  further  18  feet,  no  water  of  any  consequence  was
met  with.  This  led  Mr.  Maggs  to  request  Mr.  B.  Tompkins,  of  Chippenham,
to  come  over  to  ascertain  if  water  was  present  in  the  field.  After  considerable
search,  the  twig  began  to  rise,  and  the  upAvard  movement  was  so  strong  that
the  rod  bent  considerably  in  its  frantic  endeavour  to  turn  over,  which  it  at
once  did  on  coming  over  the  spring  head,  and  broke.  Sinking  operations
were  shortly  commenced  ;  but  the  faith  of  the  workers,  after  going  down  25
feet  without  any  results,  was  well  nigh  gone.  However,  they  were  instructed
to  continue,  and  on  reaching  a  depth  of  30  feet,  the  axe  "pricked"  the


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


147


spring,  and  up  came  the  water  straight  in  a  column  of  about  9  inch  circum-
ference with  great  force.  It  continues  to  rise,  and  Mr.  Maggs  has  now  a
good  supply  of  cold  spring  water,  which  rises  to  within  three  feet  of  the
surface  level  and  as  fast  as  the  powerful  centrifugal  pumps  carry  it  away  to
the  Dairy  ;  dui'ing  the  extreme  drought  of  1893  this  spring  has  stood  the
test  and  yielded  a  plentiful  supply  for  our  use.


MK. B.  TOMPKINS.


I  wrote  to  Mr.  Maggs,  and  had  the  following  interesting  letter  in.
reply  :—

Bowerhill  Lodge,  Melksham,  March  8th,  1897.

Briefly  the  facts  are  : —

I  sunk  a  well  to  find  water  for  my  dairy,  and  found  none.  Then  I  wrote
to  Mr.  Tompkins,  who  came  the  following  day  ;  he  cut  a  forked  stick  out  of


148


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  hedge,  and  havmg  placed  it  over  the  well,  said,  "  There  is  no  water  here,"
but  found  a  slight  spring  within  10  feet,  too  small  to  be  of  any  service,
he  reported.  He  walked  all  over  the  field,  and  said  he  had  not  come  across
any  spring  at  all.  However,  in  the  extreme  corner  of  the  field  a  bunch  of
nettles  was  growing,  and  he  entered  this,  and  instantly  exclaimed,  "Here  it
is  ;  and  a  good  head  of  water,  too  !  Not  running  away,  but  just  ready  for
tapping,  and  as  soon  as  you  strike  it,  it  will  come  surging  up."  "How
deep?"  "Not  over  25  feet."  He  cut  out  a  turf  to  indicate  the  spot,  and
we  commenced  sinking  next  day.  The  person  employed  was  an  old  well
sinker,  and  he  came  to  me  two  or  three  times  whilst  engaged  in  sinking,
showing  specimens  of  the  soil  or  marl,  assuring  me  there  never  was  water
where  such  existed,  and  it  was  worse  than  useless  to  go  further.  I  told  him
to  go  on  if  he  had  to  get  to  New  Zealand — it  was  my  money,  and  he  need  not
regard  me  nor  my  pocket.  When  he  had  gone  about  22  feet,  his  pickaxe
tapped  the  spring  and  tlie  water  came  up  like  a  fountain,  and  at  such  a  rate
he  feared  he  should  be  drowned  before  he  could  get  pulled  up — his  mates
being  away  !  The  water  rose  rapidly  to  within  twelve  or  fifteen  inches  of  the
surface.  We  j)ut  on  pumps  and  kept  the  water  down  whilst  he  went  a  little
deeper,  but  the  rush  of  water  was  such  that  we  had  to  desist  going  lower.
Since  then  we  have  had  a  splendid  supply.  This  was  the  beginning  of  his
[Mr.  Tompkins']  public  career,  and  since  then  he  has  found  water  in  several
English  counties,  and  has  been  doing  like  work  in  the  African  Bush,  also
with  equal  success.  Chas.  Maggs.

No.  100. — -Following  the  preceding  case,  tlie  local  newspapers  give
an  account  of  Mr.  Tompkins'  success  in  finding  a  strong  spring  on  the
estate  of  Sir  Gabriel  Goldney,  Bart.,  at  Bradenstoke  Abbey,  Wiltshire.
Having  heard  that  the  agent  to  Sir  Gabriel  Goldney  could  give  some
evidence  bearing  on  our  subject,  I  wrote  to  Mr.  H.  B.  Napier,  the
agent,  who  replies  as  follows  : —

Chippenham,  Wilts,  Man  H^'n  1896.

In  reply  to  yours  of  the  6th  inst.,  on  the  subject  of  water  finding  or
"  dowsing,''  as  we  call  it  : —

I  have  employed  Mr.  Tompkins  on  several  occasions,  and  up  till  now  he
certainly  has  not  been  at  fault,  except  in  his  estimate  of  the  depth  of  the
spring.  Undoubtedly  there  is  a  great  deal  of  humbug  about  the  practice  of^
these  water  finders,  but  at  the  same  time  I  am  satisfied  that  they  have  the
power  of  detecting  a  spring,  but  I  am  driven  to  the  oj^inion  that  beyond  this
their  powers  do  not  extend. i  I  remember  an  interesting  case  where  Mr.
Tompkins  traced  gold.  When  the  Bath  and  West  of  England  Show  was  held
at  Gloucester  some  years  ago,  a  sovereign  was  lost  under  the  board  floor  in
the  Finance  Oftice.  The  members  of  the  Council  did  not  themselves  know
exactly  where  to  find  it,  and  sent  for  Mr.  Tompkins,  who  indicated  a  parti-
cular spot  on  the  floor,  and  on  a  carpenter  being  sent  for,  the  sovereign  was
found  to  be  immediately  Ijeneath  the  spot. In  conclusion  I  may  say  that  I

1  Mr.  Napier  probably  means  that  their  powers  do  not  e.xtend  to  finding  the  depth
:ind  volume  of  water. — W.  F.  B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


149


am  so  satisfied  of  the  "dowsers'"  power,  that  I  should  never  dream  of
sinking  a  well  without  their  asssistance.  H  B  N  ipier

With  reference  to  the  finding  of  the  sovereign,  this  is  certainly  an
interesting  fact,  and  appears  inexplicable  by  the  hypothesis  hitherto
advanced  of  sign-reading  or  possible  thought-transference.  I  am  dis-
posed, however,  to  consider  it  merely  a  chance  coincidence.  It  is  true  Mr.
Tompkins  gives  a  detailed  account  of  his  finding  concealed  coins  on
other  occasions  ;  see  pages  16  and  17  of  a  little  book  on  the  "Theory  of
water  finding"  which  he  has  published. ^  Here,  however,  the  persons
present  knew  where  the  coins  were  hidden  :  the  experiment  narrated
by  Mr.  Napier  is  much  less  common  and  the  result  probably  due  to
the  cause  I  have  assigned.

No.  101. — Mr.  Cowper  Coles,  who  is  agent  to  the  Duke  of  Beaufort
and  Sir  Joseph  Bailey,  at  Crickhowell,  near  Abergavenny,  informed
me  in  May,  1896,  that  he  was  sinking  two  wells  at  spots  where  Mr.
Tompkins  predicted  water  would  be  found,  and  would  send  me  the
result  when  the  work  was  complete.  Writing  a  few  months  later,  Mr.
Coles  tells  me  the  result  in  both  cases  was  successful.  I  wrote  to  ask
in  either  case  had  prior  attempts  to  find  water  been  made,  and  with
what  result. Mr.  Coles  replies  : —

Penmyarth,  Crickhowell,  September  IdtJi,  1896.

In  the  case  of  Penjmsk,  Crickhowell,  two  wells  had  previously  been
sunk  ;  both  were  failures.  Tompkins  said  water  would  be  found  at  a  certain
spot  at  about  100  feet  deep.  After  going  through  98  feet  of  rock  we  came  on
a  gravel  bed,  and  partly  lost  the  water  ;  we  are  going  deeper  now  into  the
next  rock. Tlie  rock  is  a  very  hard  stone  ^

The  other  case,  at  Easton  Court,  near  Tenbury,  no  prior  attempt  to  find
water  had  been  made.  The  rock  here  is  sandstone.  The  well  was  sunk  50
feet,  and  is  doing  well. We  are  now  pumping  with  a  windmill.

I  am  sinking  several  other  wells  now  under  Tompkins'  guidance,  and
believe  in  the  man.  g jj Cq^pek  Coles.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Cowper  Coles  again  this  year  to  ask  whether  they
had  yet  sunk  deeper  at  Penprisk.  Mr.  Coles  replies,  under  date


'  Like  all  the  other  pamphlets  and  booklets  issued  by  tlie  various  professional
dowsers,  this  is  simply  a  traHe  advertisement  of  Mr.  Tompkins,  and  is  not  so  remark-
able a  collection  of  testimonials  as  some  others  of  the  same  kind.  The  late  Mr.
Mullins'  little  book,  c.;/.,  is  far  more  striking  and  contains  numerous  instances  of  his
success  which  I  have  not  quoted  in  Group  IV.  On  asking  Mr.  Tompkins  what  his
"  theory  "  was,  for  it  is  not  mentioned  in  his  brochure,  he  replies,  much  as  I  expected,
as  follows  :—"  My  theory  is,  it  is  the  action  of  the  water  naturally  which  produces
electricity  and  magnetism  in  the  body;  this  acts  upon  the  twig,  which  serves  to  indicate
the  presence  of  water,  and  the  greater  the  strength,  the  stronger  is  the  pressure  on  the
operator,  who  is  of  a  sensitive  nature."  !  !


150


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


March  2211(3,  1897,  that,  "owing  to  the  continued  wet  weather,  they
had  not  been  able  to  do  anything  more  to  Penprisk  well."

No.  102. — The  next  case,  from  Mr.  Codrington  Crawshay,  D.L.,
J. P.,  of  Abergavenny,  is  instructive  from  the  precautions  taken  by
Mr.  Crawshay  to  avoid  any  local  knowledge  being  gained  by  the
dowser. The  letter  is  quoted  from  Mr.  Tompkins'  list  of  testimonials.

Llanvair  Grange,  Abergavenny  ;  Aiujnd  29tli,  1893.
For  the  last  four  months  I  have  been  almost  without  water  (and  in  con-
sequence could  not  have  uiy  family  home),  and  I  now  find  that  my  prede-
cessors were  short  every  summer.  Having  ascertained  from  Mr.  Tompkins
his  fees,  I  wired  for  him  to  come,  and  met  Iiiui  at  the  station  myself,  so  as  to
prevent  him  sjjeaking  to  anybody  who  knew  my  jilace.  He  at  once  started
work,  cutting  a  V-shaped  twig  from  a  white  thorn  in  the  garden.  He  soon
came  on  a  stratum  of  water,  and,  following  it  up  through  my  smoking-room,
eventually  came  (jn  the  spring  at  a  distance  of  86  yards  from  the  house.  As
my  readers  may  imagine,  I  did  not  believe  him,  and  told  him  I  wanted  to
see  the  water.  He  immediately  offered  to  sink  the  well  on  the  condition  of
no  water,  no  pay,  whicli  offer  I  closed  with.  After  arranging  terms,  which
were  the  ordinary  well-sinking  charges,  ^.)ii(.s  the  fee  for  finding  the  water,  he
started  sinking  tlie  well,  and  at  a  depth  of  14  feet  struck  a  very  strong
spring — so  strong  that  it  was  impossible  to  sink  deeper  than  18  feet,  as  no
pump  was  able  to  keejJ  the  water  down  so  that  the  men  could  work.  Since
then  I  have  connected  my  engine,  etc.,  to  the  well,  and  I  am  glad  to  say
that  I  now  have  an  abundance  of  water,  and  I  find  it  impossible  to  lower
the  well  more  than  2  feet  6  inches.  The  water  never  rises  more  than  5  feet  at
the  most.  Codrington  Crawshay.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Crawshay  to  ask  if  he  had  sunk  any  wells  unsuc-
cessfully prior  to  Mr.  Tompkins'  visit ;  Mrs.  Crawshay  replies  to  me
from  Ijlanvair  Grange,  under  date  of  February  10th,  1896,  that  her
husband  was  at  the  Cape,  but  she  believes  that  no  previous  attempt  to
find  water  had  been  made  by  them.  Mrs.  Crawshay  kindly  sends  me
her  own  recollection  as  to  the  particulars  of  Mr.  Tompkins'  \'isit,  which
coincides  with  the  facts  stated  above.  Mrs.  Crawshay  adds  that  Mr.
Tompkins  has  been  most  successful  elsewhere,  but  "  he  is  not  always
correct  as  to  the  probable  depth  of  the  spring ;  he  said  we  should  have  to
sink  between  30  and  40  feet,  and  instead  of  that  it  was  only  14  feet."

I  wrote  again  subsequently  to  Mr.  Crawshay  with  reference  to  the
incident  mentioned  by  Mr.  Harben  at  the  end  of  the  "  Horsham
Experiments,"  p.  121,  and  enclosed  the  printed  account  of  what  is
there  said. Mr.  Crawshay  replies  : —

Llanvair  Grange,  Abergavenny,  May  2oth,  1897.
Mr. B. Tompkins,  of Chippenham, Wilts,  was  the water-finder  I
employed,  and  I  can't  sjDcaktoo  highly  of  the  work  he  did  for  me. He  came
here  a  perfect  stranger,  and  after  casting  round  with  his  twig  he  came  on  a


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


151


stratum  of  water,  wluch  he  eventually  ran  to  ground  under  our  kitchen.  This
afterwards  j)roved  to  be  true,  as  the  following  November  the  spring-
burst  through  the  tioor,  and  nearly  flooded  us  out,  and  I  had  to  cut  a  drain
to  run  the  water  off.  He,  after  having  found  the  above  stratum,  carried  the
line  through  the  house,  and  found  the  heart  of  the  spring  about  80  yards
away.  At  his  advice,  we  sank  the  well,  and  at  a  depth  of  14  feet  came  on
water  in  marly  rock,  and  on  driv  ing  the  crow  bar  through,  we  came  on  a
spring,  enough  to  supply  a  large  town.  We  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in
sinking  the  well  to  a  depth  of  23  feet,  which  we  eventually  did.  From  that
day  to  this  we  have  had  a  most  alnnidant  supply  of  water,  and  although  I
have  an  engine,  I  don't  think  we  can  pump  the  well  out,  as  the  water  comes
in  with  a  regidar  stream.

One  of  the  curious  things  in  sinking  the  well  was,  at  a  depth  of  12  feet,
we  came  across  several  green  frogs  in  the  marl,  and  as  soon  as  they  were
exposed  to  the  air  they  turned  black  and  died.

I  see  by  the  paper  you  enclosed  me  that  MuUins  is  the  name  mentioned
as  having  found  the  water  in  the  dining-room  ;  I  don't  know  anything  about
this,  but  the  facts  I  have  told  you  happened  under  my  own  eyes.  Captain
McCalmont,  M.P.,  has  an  estate  about  25  miles  from  me.  Any  other
information  that  I  may  have  I  shall  be  only  too  pleased  to  give  you.

CODKINGTON  CrAWSHAY.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Crawshay  writes  in  reply  to  mine  : — ■
Llanvair  Grange,  Abergavenny,  May  28f/t,  1897.

Prior  to  Tompkins'  visit  we  had  a  well  sunk  over  60  feet  deep,  which
always  ran  di-y  in  the  summer.  Tompkins  knew  nothing  about  this  well,  nor
its  position  :  20  yards  from  the  old  well  he  came  on  the  stratum  of  water  I
have  previously  described  ;  this  led  him  to  the  spring  where  we  sank  the  new
well.  The  depth  of  this  well  is  only  2.3  feet,  and  it  gives  us,  as  I  have  said,
an  abundant  and  never-failing  supply  of  excellent  water.

I  am  sure  there  are  many  peojjle  who,  like  myself,  would  greatly  benefit
if  they  only  believed  in  water-finding  by  the  so-called  divining  rod  ;  in  fact,
I  can  never  repay  Tomjikins  for  the  service  he  did  me  at  Llanvair.  You  are
quite  at  liberty  to  publish  anything  I  have  told  you.

CODRINGTON  H.  CraWSHAY.

No.  103. —  Another  spring  was  found  by  Mr.  Tompkins  for  the
Rector  of  Llanvair,  under  circumstances  of  considerable  importance  in
connection  with  the  theory  of  the  dowser's  art,  for  the  ground  was
covered  with  snow  at  the  time.  This  was  the  case  also  with  the  ex-
periments recorded  on  page  83,  No.  5-5,  where  the  dowser  was  the  late
J.  Mullins. The  Rev.  W.  J.  C.  Lindsay  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Llanvair  Rectory,  Abergavenny,  September  1th,  1896.
The  snow  was  on  the  ground  when  the  "diviner"  came  here  the  first  week
in  February,  1895.  There  was  the  usual  walking  over  the  grounds  round  the
house,  with  the  forked  hazel  rod  in  his  hands,  which  occasionally  gave  an
upward  movement  that,  he  said,  indicated  the  presence  of  water.  Ai  last
the  evolutions  of  the  rod  became  so  marked  and  vigorous,  that  it  almost


152


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


skinned  the  fingers  of  the  holder,  and  he  said  a  strong  spring  would  be  found
here.  This  was  at  a  distance  of  some  250  yards  from  the  house,  and  at  an
elevation  rather  above  the  level  of  the  top  of  the  house.

A  well  was  sunk  and  water  found  at  a  depth  of  31  feet,  the  water  rising
to  as  high  as  29  feet  in  the  well.  During  all  the  dry  weather  we  have  had  an
abundant  supply,  and  little  pumping,  as  the  cisterns  are  mostly  filled  by
gravitation.  j q  Lindsay.

In  reply  to  certain  specitic  enquiries  I  made,  Mr.  Lindsay  writes  as
follows  : —

Llanvair  Rectory,  Abergavenny,  September  11th,  1896.
My  gardener  will  give  you  answers  to  your  questions.  Mr.  Crawshay's
well  is  about  a  mile  and  a-half  from  this.  The  diviner  was  anxious  in  my
case  to  find  a  good  spring  as  near  the  house  as  possible,  to  save  the  expense
of  pipes  to  convey  the  water  to  the  house.  He  knew  nothing  of  the
surroundings,  and  made  a  diligent  search  all  round,  and  found  this  splendid
spring  in  a  place  where  we  should  have  never  thought  of  looking  for  it.

W.  J.  C.  Lindsay.

The  gardener's  letter  is  as  follows  : —

Abergavenny,  September  IWi,  1896.
(1)  We  had  not  tried  to  find  water  before  Mr.  Tompkins  came.  (2)  It
is  therefore  impossible  for  me  to  say  whether  a  spring  would  be  found
anywhere  on  the  grounds.  (3)  I  am  sure  the  diviner  had  no  knowledge  of
the  place  to  guide  him.  (4)  Mr.  Crawshay's  place  is  about  two  miles  from
here,  but  I  had  not  seen  Mr.  Tompkins  before  he  came  here.

James  Hughes.


No.  104. — Of  more  value,  from  an  evidential  point  of  view,  is  the
following  letter,  sent  to  me  in  reply  to  my  enquiries.  It  is  from  the
proprietor  of  the  "  Western  Counties'  Creamery  Company  "  :—

Marston  House,  Marston  Magna,  Bath,  May  28th,  1896.

In  reply  to  yours,  I  beg  to  say  that  previous  to  Mr.  Tompkins'  visit  I  had
sunk  two  wells,  one  20  feet,  and  the  other,  phis  boring,  50  feet,  with  the
result  of  only  a  very  limited  supply  of  water.

After  a  careful  search  by  Mi'.  Tompkins,  he  assured  me  he  had  found
a  good  sirring  at  less  than  30  feet.  1  agreed  to  let  him  sink  the  well,
and  at  18  feet  he  struck  on  a  rock  more  than  a  foot  thick,  which,  by  the  bye,
we  had  not  found  in  the  other  two  instances.  The  water  came  in  so  fast
that  for  several  months  I  hoj^ed  I  had  sufficient,  but  some  time  after  I  found
the  supply  was  not  enough,  and  I  was  then  induced  by  a  friend  to  bore  at
the  bottom  of  Mr.  Tompkins'  well.  This  we  did,  and  went  down  130  feet,  but
then  came  on  salt  water,  and  had  to  plug  down  the  bore  hole.  I  then
consulted  some  civil  engineers,  and  they  advised  me  to  tunnel  at  the  bottom
of  the  18  feet  where  Tom])kins  stopjjed.  This  I  did  ;  and  followed  the
springs  10  feet  each  way,  with  (I  am  pleased  to  say)  success.  We  now  have
plenty  of  water  for  factory,  and  I  have  just  connected  the  well  to  the
house  besides.  E.  Marden.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  153-


In  reply  to  my  enquiries  as  to  the  nature  of  Mr.  Tompkins'  search,
and  the  position  of  the  useless  wells,  Mr.  Marden  writes  : —

Marston  House,  Marston  Magna,  Bath,  June  1896.

The  search  by  Mr.  Tompkins  was  with  the  divining  rod. The  other  two

instances  were  wells  we  had  previously  dug  nearer  the  factory. Perhaps  I

should  add  the  first  well  was  sunk  as  close  as  possible  to  the  building  for  th&

convenience  of  machinery,  but  we  found  no  water. No.  2  is  only  6  feet  from

No.  1,  and  I  dug  down  25  feet  with  this  ;  I  here  bored  at  the  bottom  of  it,

25 feet more, making  a  total  of  50  feet  from  surface. In  neither  of

these  wells  did  we  come  across  any  material  rock,  and  at  the  bottom  of  No.  1

we  drove  a  pipe  to  connect  the  two  wells  for  storage. Why  I  made  the  two

wells  so  close  together  was  on  account  of  an  amateur  twig-man  assuring  me

that  although  there  was  no  water  in  the  first  well,  yet  there  was  some  within

6  feet  of  it. This  proved  true,  but  when  Mr.  Tompkins  (the  expert)  came

down,  he  informed  me  that  the  real  spring  was  e.xactly  under  the  engine.

Of  course  it  was  not  practical  to  sink  there,  so  Tompkins  started  to  find  a

spring  elsewhere. After  a  search  of  about  an  hour  he  came  upon  No.  3,

which,  as  before  said,  he  told  me  was  within  30  feet  from  the  surface.

Tompkins  sank  No.  3  himself,  and  at  18  feet  came  upon  a  thick  rock,  and  a

good  supply  of  water.  „  t.^^

" ^  ^  E.  Marden.


Plan  of  Factory  and  Wei.ls.


O

3


,t  oo


Section  of
No.  3  Well.


10  ft.


10  ft.


No.  105. — I  am  indebted  to  Captain  tlie  Hon.  T.  S.  Brand,  Pt.N.,  a
son  of  the  late  Viscount  Hampden,  for  the  following  evidence.  Mr.
Brand  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Home  Farm,  Glynde,  Lewes,  Sussex,  May  28th,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  letter,  I  have  made  the  enquiries  asked  for,  and  am  now
able  to  enclose  a  statement  of  what  happened  on  this  estate  with  regard  to
"  water  finding."

Thomas  S.  Bkand.


154


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Statement  Enclosed.

(1.)  An  attempt  was  made  to  find  water  about  30  years  ago.  After  sinking
some  distance,  air  came  into  the  well.  This  was  then  abandoned.  After  this
another  attempt  was  made,  and  a  well  dug  167  feet  deep,  Init  no  water  was
found. This  was  given  up.

(2.)  In  189.3,  Tompkins  of  Chippenham  was  engaged.  The  spot  selected
by  him  was  450  feet  from  the  old  well,  the  ground  rising  from  8  to  10  feet.
He  went  over  the  ground,  tracing  all  the  springs  to  one  point,  saying  that
water  would  be  found  at  a  depth  of  70  feet.  We  dug  at  the  spot  selected,
and  found  indications  of  water  at  70  feet,  and  struck  the  spring  at  124  feet
below  the  surface.  We  have  since  run  a  bore  something  like  20  feet,  to
obtain  a  better  supply,  but  I  do  not  think  it  has  improved  it.

(3.)  Site  of  well,  Southdown  Hills,  in  white  chalk,  with  flints.  When
Tompkins  visited  the  place,  he  was  taken  over  the  old  well,  which  was  then
covered  up,  and  according  to  liim  there  was  no  spring  in  the  old  well,  or
anywliere  near  it.

Some  further  particulars  of  the  case  (2)  were  given  at  the  time  by
Mr.  Pickard,  the  steward  of  the  estate,  in  the  following  letter  addressed
to  Mr.  Tompkins  : —

Home  Farm,  Glynde,  Lewes,  Sussex,  October  2nd,  1893.

You  will  be  interested  to  hear  that  water  has  been  found  at  the  Toy
Farm  ;  at  a  depth  of  alxiut  118  feec  a  spring  was  found,  and  within  a  few
inches  from  an  opposite  direction  a  second  has  broken  forth,  giving  a  strong
supply.  The  digging  operations  were  carried  on  for  a  day  or  two,  gaining  an
additional  6  feet  before  the  water  gained  the  upper  hand.  We  have,  there-
fore, a  well  of  124  feet  in  depth,  with  12  feet  of  water  in  the  well,  which
■certainly  is  very  satisfactory.  Water  has  been  found  where  you  indicated.
The  spring  flows  from  the  directions  yini  named  from  either  end  of  the
Plantation,  and  I  am  vei-y  thankful  for  the  suppl}'.

I  think  as  you  have  found  a  spring  of  water  on  the  Toy  Farm,  you  will
And  one  anywliere. I  should  not  liave  a  well  dug  unless  I  employed  you.

T.  W.  Pickard.

No.  106. — The  next  letter  is  addressed  to  me  from  the  Rev.  G.
Booker,  M.A.,  and  gives  particulars  of  Mr.  Tompkins'  dowsing  for  water
at  Woolhope,  Herefordshire  :-  -

5,  Norfolk  Terrace,  Brighton,  May  11th,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  queries,  my  brother  in  his  lifetime  tried  to  deepen  a
small  well  at  his  lodge  gate  ;  and  he  lost  the  very  insignificant  quantity  of
water  which  he  had.  There  was  on  a  higli  level,  not  far  from  the  st-al)le
yard,  a  small  well  ;  but  there  was  no  quantity  of  water  in  it  ;  quite  in-
sufficient for  tlie  supply  of  the  house,  and  much  more  of  the  stables  and
gardens.  The  principal  supply  of  the  house  and  stables,  &c. ,  was  drawn
from  two  ponds  used  as  reservoirs  to  collect  the  surface  water  from  the  rain,
and  a  so-callud  land  spring  on  a  neighbouring  estate.  There  was  trouble  about
the  water  sujjply  almost  every  summer.  ^Under  these  circumstances,  I  being  a
trustee  of  the  estate,  had  Mr.  Tompkins'  work  as  a  water-finder  brought  under


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


155


my  notice.  I  communicated  with  him  at  once,  and  he  came,  and  without  any
trouble  or  delay  found  two  sjjrings,  one  of  which,  more  convenient  in
position,  we  adopted,  and  found  water,  sinking  through  the  hardest  blue-
.stone,  at  51|  feet.  Mr.  Tompkins,  in  reply  to  an  enquiry  of  mine  when  he
found  the  spring,  named  50  to  55  feet  as  the  probable  depth  we  should  have
to  sink  ;  you  will  see  that  the  actual  distance  was  between  his  two  limits.  .

As  to  your  tliird  question  [whether  any  prior  attempts  to  find  water
in  the  neighbourhood  had  been  made  without  the  aid  of  a  dowser]  I  have
heard  of  attempts  being  made  to  sink  wells  and  get  water  in  the  iunuediate
neighbourhood  of  my  son's  property  ;  but  without  success.

The  latter  part  of  the  sinking  in  our  well  had  to  be  done  with  dynamite.

The  water  came  in  too  quickly  for  the  use  of  gunpowder. .  When  last  I

enquired,  there  were  25  feet  in  the  well,  and  the  workmen  are  now  fixing  a

wind-i3uuip  to  lift  the  water  from  the  well  and  force  it  to  the  house  and

stables. There  may  be  charlatans  amongst  the  so-called  water-tinders  :  but

Tompkins  is  a  genuine  man  and  may  be  trusted.  -r,

f  o  J  .  (teo.  Booker.

Two  days  later,  the  Rev.  G.  Booker  kindly  sent  the  following
further  details  : —

May  13th,  1896.

The  sprmg  was  found  on  the  19th  SeiDtember,  1893  ;  but  the  well  was  not
sunk  for  some  months  after  that  date,  as  Tompkins  was  very  busy  ;  and  when
he  got  to  work  he  had  to  proceed  by  blasting  with  large  charges  all  the  way
down.  It  was  jjast  midsummer  in  1894,  I  think,  before  he  finished  the  well,
and  had  a  head  of  water  of  30  feet.  I  said  25  in  my  last,  but  it  is  recorded  as
last  mentioned.  The  parish  where  the  well  was  sunk  is  that  of  Woolhof)e,
which  is  in  County  Hereford,  and  distant  (si^eaking  roughly)  equally  from
Hereford,  Ledbury  and  Ross.  It  is,  you  may  be  aware,  well  known  to  geo-
logists from  its  presenting  a  sample  of  the  siluri;in  formation  ;  and  is,  I
believe,  mentioned  by  Sir  Roderick  Murchison  in  one  of  his  works.
Tomj)kins'  success  on  my  son's  estate  got  him  employment  on  the  Earl  of
Chesterfield's,  which  is  close  at  hand.  If  you  were  to  see  him  at  work  you
would  not  doubt  him.  It  is  most  interesting  to  see  him  following  the  run  of
the  spring.  q^.^  Booker.

No.  107. — I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Eastes,  the  Clerk  to  the  Parish
Council  at  Yelling,  Huntingdon,  for  the  following  statement.  I  have
also  to  thank  Mrs.  Rowley,  of  The  Priory,  St.  Neots,  who,  at  my
request,  kindly  made  enquiries  at  Yelling,  and  confirmed  the  facts
narrated  below  : —

Yelling  Parish  Council,  Yelling,  Huntingdon,

January  2m,  1896.
Yelling  is  a  village  and  pari.'?h  on  the  borders  of  Cambridgeshire,  six
miles  from  St.  Neots,  and  seven  and  a-half  from  Huntingdon.  The  inhabi-
tants have  suffered  much  at  times  from  scarcity  of  water,  there  being  in
reality  no  supply.  What  was  procurable  was  from  ponds  and  brooks,  and
was  known  to  be  contaminated  with  organic  impurities.  There  are  several
surface  wells  in  the  place,  but  their  position  at  once  indicates  that  the  water


156


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


which  percolates  into  them  would  be  unsatisfactory,'  and  a  chalybeate  spring
situated  at  some  distance  from  the  village  is  useless  for  domestic  purposes.

In  February,  1895,  the  water-supply  question  was  brought  before  the-
Parish  Council,  and  it  was  decided  to  seek  the  services  of  a  water-tinder.
Mr.  B.  Tompkins,  of  Pipsniore,  Chippenham,  Wilts,  was  connnunicated  with
and  engaged  to  visit  Yelling.  This  he  did  on  April  8th.  Mr.  Tompkiiis
carried  a  white  thorn  twig  in  front  of  him.  Following  quickly  its  lead,  Mr.
Tompkins  was  soon  [as  he  alleged]  vipon  the  spring-head,  when  round
and  round  went  the  twig,  over  and  over,  twisting  below  where  it  was  being
held  firmly,  and  eventually  breaking  off  on  one  side.  Mr.  Tompkins  then
stated  that  here  was  what  he  termed  "a  water-flat  "  ;  the  spring  pointed  out
was  the  strongest  jjoint.  It  was  [he  said]  about  80  feet  down,  and  capable
of  supplying  2,000  gallons  of  water  a  day.  (Spring  No.  1.)  This  was-
satisfactory,  but  it  was  hardly  in  the  right  position.  Another  start  was  made-
from  the  centre  of  the  village,  and  shortly  round  went  the  twig  again,
over  and  over  ;  this  was  in  the  right  place,  near  the  centre  of  the  village
he  said,  about  20  to  25  feet  down  [we  should  have  a]  supply  of  about  1,000-
gallons  a  day.  (Spring  No.  2.)  A  third  spring  was  also  afterwards  found  in
the  same  manner.

The  Parish  Council  then  set  to  work.  Had  a  well  dug  over  Spring  No.
2.  Found  water  at  23  feet  8  inches.  Water  analysed  and  found  good.  The
Council  have  laid  pij^es  from  the  well  to  the  roadside,  and  there  erected  a
pump  to  supply  the  central  part  of  the  village.  They  have  also  dug  over
No.  3  Spring,  found  good  water  and  erected  a  pump.  The  rock  over  the
Spi-ing  No.  2  was  2  feet  8  inches  thick  ;  the  soil  consisting  of  blue  gault.
The  rock  (jver  the  Spring  No.  3  was  thicker.  There  appeared  to  be  two
rocks  to  get  through,  between  which  was  a  layer  of  blue  gault.

J.  P.  Eastes.

In  reply  to  enquiries  Mr.  Eastes  writes,  "  No  definite  attempt  to
find  a  spring  by  sinking  a  well  beyond  the  surface  wells  had  been  made
before  Mr.  Tompkins  came."  In  a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  Eastes  tells
me  that  the  depth  of  No.  2  Spring  was  23  feet  8  inches,  and  of  No.  S
was  80  feet.

Further  particulars  were  also  sent  to  me,  in  answer  to  enquiries,  by
Mr.  Anthony,  of  Yelling,  who,  Mr.  Myers  informed  me,  could  also  use
the  dowsing  rod. Mr.  Anthony  writes  : —

Yelling,  Hunts,  December  24f/i.,  1896.
The  water-finding  here  has  proved very satisfactory. Although  no
attempts  had  been  made  to  find  water  by  sinking  wells  in  Yelling  prior  to
Mr.  Tompkins'  visit  in  1895,  yet  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  we  sliould  not  find  a
spring  of  water  by  sinking  a  well  anywhere  in  Yelling.^ For  there  are  several

'  In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Eastes  informs  ine  that  the  Parish  Council  emptied  the
best  of  these  surface  wells  and  after  it  had  refilled  had  the  water  analysed.  The
result  showed  "  it  was  highly  charged  with  organic  impurities,"  and  unfit  to  drink.
N')  spring  therefore  existed  in  the  well.

-  Mr.  Anthony  tells  me  he  means  "  anywhere  at  random,"'  as  will  also  be  seen  from
the  latter  part  of  his  letter.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bud.


157


old  wells  ill  the  village  which  have  been  sunk  many  years  ago,  not  with  the
idea  of  tinding  a  spring  of  water  (as  no  sucli  spring  was  ever  found  in  those  old
wells),  but  the  idea  was  to  sink  wells  and  lay  drains  in  the  land  2  or  3  feet
deep  so  that  the  surface  water  might  be  drained  into  them,  and  so  storing
water  in  winter  for  summer  use  ;  frequently,  however,  the  supply  fell  short
in  summer  and  great  inconvenience  was  caused  thereby.  Since  [Mr.  Tompkins'
visit  in]  1895,  we  have  had  a  plentiful  suj^ply  from  two  wells  sunk  last
summer,  and  which  proved  to  be  two  good  springs.

I  find  I  can  also  tell  where  there  is  water  [even]  without  the  use  of  the
Tod,  but  the  rod  indicates  more  distinctly  the  spot  or  strata  where  water
may  be  found.

I  would  further  say  here,  that  I  know  instances  in  the  neighbourhood
where  boring,  or  rather  digging  and  boring  operations,  Ixave  been  c.-irried  on
to  a  depth  of  some  200  or  300  feet  without  success.  I  am  (juite  satisfied  if
we  sank  wells  in  Yelling,  in  many  places  we  should  find  no  water,  and  yet  by
means  of  using  the  rod  it  is  possible  to  find  water  within  a  few  yards  of  such
wells  without  going  many  feet  down.  •  Anthony

In  a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  Anthony  replies  to  my  inquiry  as  to
the  depth  of  the  surface  wells  which  existed  prior  to  Tompkins'  visit  : —

January  nth,  1S97.

The  surface  wells  are  various  depths,  from  30  to  40  feet.  The  success  which

attended  the  sinking  of  two  wells  in  the  neighbouring  village  of  Croxton  is

satisfactory,  although  water  was  not  found  at  the  depth  Mr.  Tompkins

■expected. In  one  case  it  was  found  at  about  12  feet,  in  the  other  at  80  feet.

TVIr.  Tompkins  said  they  would  find  water  about  35  or  40  feet  from  surface.

Those  two  wells  are  sunk  where  the  surface  is  about  level,  but  in  our  case

fat  Yelling]  one  is  on  a  hill,  the  other  in  a  valley.  t->  a

L  oj  J  ji  Anthony.

In  a  recent  letter  I  am  informed  that,  Mr.  Anthony  having  found
that  the  rod  (in  his  own  hands)  moved  strongly  at  one  particular  spot
on  his  farm,  he  determined  to  sink  a  well  there,  and  has  just  obtained
A  good  supply  of  water  at  a  depth  of  65  feet.  The  last  sentence  of
Mr.  Anthony's  letter  of  December  24th  should  be  read  in  connection
^y'lth  this  result.  ■

No.  108. — The  next  two  letters  are  from  a  tenant  farmer  and
iruitgrower,  Mr.  Beaven,  of  Hereford.  I  had  heard  of  the  use  which
the  dowsing  rod  had  been  to  his  fruit  farm,  and  wrote  to  Mr.  Beaven.
He  replies  : —

Highfield  House,  Holmer,  Hereford,  May  9th,  1896.
In  answer  to  your  questions,  in  the  summer  of  1893  we  had  not  a  drop  of
water  on  the  premises: — a  farm  of  50  acres — other  than  what  was  carried
from  a  road-side  spring.  Though  the  house  well  was  80  feet  deep,  it  was
■dry,  and  never  could  be  depended  on  in  a  drought.  No  attempt  [besides  the
above  named  well]  had  been  made  to  obtain  water  here  prior  to  the  visit  of
the  "diviner,"  nor  should  we  have  been  at  all  likely  to  sink  for  water  without


158


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


some  certainty  of  finding  it,  as  the  whole  formation  of  the  subsoil  is  of  a  very
dry  nature.  The  farm  lies  on  a  bank,  and  the  dwelling-house  is  at  the  foot  of
the  bank.  The  spot  where  Mr.  Tompkins  discovered  water  is  some  50  feet
above  the  level  of  the  house,  exactly  on  the  highest  point  of  our  fruit  plan-
tations. The  spring  had  two  subterranean  outlets, ^  and  by  means  of  one  of
these  the  water  finder  traced  the  head  of  the  spi'ing,  the  twig  pointing  and
leading  him  in  a  zigzag  course  till  at  length  it  revolved  rapidly  in  his  hands.
There,  he  said,  water  would  be  found,  probably  at  a  depth  of  60  feet.  The
well  sinkers,  however,  had  to  go  to  97  feet,  through  dry  marly  strata,  before
they  tapped  the  spring,  which  has  since  yielded  at  the  rate  of  2,000  gallons
per  day.  No  sooner  had  the  confined  water  been  properly  released,  than
the  rod  refused  any  further  action,  though  up  to  that  time  it  had  been  tried
almost  daily,  not  only  by  Mr.  Tompkins  himself,  but  by  a  workman  on  the
farm  who  discovered  he  had  the  power,  and  the  twig  indicated,  and  turned
over  the  spot  up  to  the  very  hour  the  full  flow  commenced.  A  windmill
pumps  the  water  for  us  into  a  5,000  gallon  tank,  and  at  the  present  hour  we  are
using  it  on  a  freshly  planted  strawberry  plot  of  1^  acres,  the  water  being  con-
ducted through  pipes,  and  from  taps  at  intervals  by  means  of  hose.

E.  W.  Beaven.

Highfield  House,  May  21st,  1896.

(1)  No  attempt  was  made  to  find  water  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the
diviner,  for  the  simple  reason  that  we  should  not  have  thought  of  attempting
anything  of  the  kind.  It  was  only  on  the  guarantee  that  water  would  be  met
with,  and,  in  fact,  the  absolute  certainty  of  the  rod's  indicating  power,  a
power  that  every  unprejudiced  mind  must  admit  to  be  undoubted  and
genuine,  that  induced  us  to  sink  for  water.  I  am  convinced  that  a  thousand
pounds  might  have  been  laid  out  in  boring,  &c.,  with  no  successful  result.
It  would  have  been  entirely  chance  work  without  tlie  divining  rod.

(2)  As  I  said  before,  a  workman  on  the  premises  discovered,  quite
unknown  to  us  at  first,  that  the  twig  would  turn  in  his  hands  just  over  the
spot  indicated  by  Mr.  Touipkins,  and  this  was  the  only  instance,  although
many  ladies  and  gentlemen  tried  their  hands.  -g  Beaven

Mr.  Beaven,  it  will  be  seen,  is  (as,  in  fact,  he  tells  me)  "a  thorough
believer  in  the  divining  rod,"  and  has,  I  understand,  published  a  book
called  "Tales  of  the  Divining  Rod."  Although  the  dry  well  was  80
feet  deep  and  the  well  sunk  at  the  spot  indicated  by  the  dowser  was
97  feet  deep,  the  surface  level  of  the  dry  well  appears  to  be  50  feet
lower  than  the  other.  Geological  opinion  on  this  case  would  be
important.

No.  109. — Mr.  Tompkins  has  recently  returned  from  a  visit  to
South  Africa,  where  he  was  engaged  in  sinking  for  springs  by  the  rod.
The  accompanying  picture,  from  a  photograph  taken  on  the  spot,


1  Mr.  Beaven,  I  understand,  means  "the  spring  supposed  to  be  indicated  by  the
rod."— W.  r.  B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


159


ME.  TOMPKINS  DOWSING  IN  SOUTH  AFRICA.


160


Professor  If.  F.  Barrett.


[part


shows  him  at  work  in  British  South  Africa,  and  the  following  letter,
addressed  to  Mr.  Tompkins,  is  from  the  same  quarter  : —

Prieska,  Cape  Colony,  South  Africa,  October  19th,  1896.
We  have  struck  water  at  the  spot  indicated  by  you,  57  feet  deep.  The
news  came  in  yesterday.  You  can  imagine  we  are  all  delighted  with  the
success.  The  mining  work  was  completely  at  a  standstill  for  want  of  water.
We  are  sinking  at  three  other  spots  you  marked,  and  we  believe  we  shall  get
lots  of  water  in  the  "Bult, "  and  make  the  property  a  valuable  one.  The
drought  is  still  very  severe,  and  the  difficulties  of  obtaining  water  for  the
men  and  cattle  are  very  great.  . Hedley  Bros.

Mr.  Tompkins,  in  a  letter  to  me,  states  that  "The  syndicate  which
owned  this  large  South  African  property  had  spent  some  £7,000  in
the  attempt  to  find  water,  but  completely  failed.  Within  100  yards
of  one  of  the  borings  made  I  found  a  good  spring."  This  statement
must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth,  for  [  have  no  independent
information  whether  any  unsuccessful  boring  for  water  had  been  made
previously  at  this  place.

I  wrote  to  Prieska,  and  also  to  Mr.  Hedley's  brother,  who  lives  in
England  ;  the  latter  can  give  me  no  further  information,  and  from  the
former  I  have  not  yet  heard  in  reply.


No.  110. — Mr.  R,  C.  Warner  writes  to  Mr.  Tompkins  as  follows  : —

Oaksey,  Malmesbury,  Octobur  27th,  1892.

We  have  sunk  the  well  in  the  rick-yard,  and  at  49  feet  we  found  the
water.  There  is  now  9  feet  standing  in  the  well  of  6  feet  diameter,  and  I
believe  we  shall  have  a  sufficient  supply  for  my  requirements.  We  have  also
sunk  the  second  well  for  the  garden  and  house  supply,  and  believe  that  both
will  prove  very  successful.  At  the  second  well  the  water  rose  quickly  to
within  4  feet  of  the  top,  the  well  being  25  feet  deep.  At  the  first  well  we
have  12  feet  of  water  now,  and  from  this  one  we  can  draw  400  gallons  per
day  continuously,  and  this  quantity  is  as  much  ;is  we  are  likely  to  require  in
any  one  day.  ^  ^  Warner.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Warner  to  ascertain  whether  any  prior  attempts  to
find  water  had  been  made  ;  he  does  not  reply  to  this,  but  writes  : —

Eversley,  Oaksey,  Malmesbury,  April  Uth,  1897.
In  reply  to  yours  I  have  very  little  ti>  add  to  the  testimony  already  given
as  to  the  utility  of  the  divining  rod  in  finding  springs  of  water  ;  in  my  case
the  result  is  still  very  successful,  for  during  the  last  two  seasons,  which,  as
you  know,  were  extremely  dry,  we  had  quite  sufficient  water  for  my  use.

■  R.  C.  Warner.

In  a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  Warner  adds  that  "  many  failures  had
occuri'ed  in  my  district  in  sinking  wells  at  hap-hazaixl."


xxxii.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  161


I  have  not  space  to  quote  the  replies  to  other  enquiries  I  have  made
in  this  group,  as  they  merely  indicate  that  a  copious  supply  of  water
was  found  at  the  various  places  indicated  by  the  dowser ;  the  Rev.  G.
Piatt  Dew,  of  Shirenewtown  Rectory,  Chepstow,  and  others,  write  to
me  to  that  effect.  The  Press  Cutting  Agency  has  also  sent  me
newspaper  reports  of  similar  results  in  other  places,  including  some
Parish  Councils  who  have  engaged  this  dowser  to  tind  water  in  their
localities.  Mr.  Tompkins  also  sent  me  a  lengthy  list  of  different
persons  for  whom  he  has  found  underground  springs  by  the  rod,  and
no  doubt  among  the  list  evidential  cases  are  to  be  found.

Whether  the  dowser's  estimate  of  the  depth  and  volume  of  the
underground  spring  be  pure  guesswoi'k,  or  is  arrived  at  by  some
instinct  or  experience,  only  a  careful  examination  of  the  evidence  can
establish.  As  I  have  quoted  some  letters  which  mention  that  Mr.
Tompkins  was  often  incorrect  as  to  the  depth,  it  is  only  fair  to  say
other  correspondents  tell  me  he  was  singularly  accurate  in  his
prediction  of  the  probable  depth  of  the  spring.

No.  111. — Here,  for  example,  are  two  letters  which  reached  Mr.
Tompkins  unasked,  and  the  originals  of  which  he  has  sent  me  : — ■

Parnacott,  near  Holsworthy,  Devon,  Julxj  22ncl,  1896.
I  should  have  written  to  you  sooner  to  say  how  extremely  gratified  we  are
with  the  result  of  your  "  findings  "  here.  The  spring  I  sank  upon  last  year
which  we  found  at  342  feet  (you  guessed  33  feet  I  think)  keeps  the  5  feet
diameter  well  even  now  supplied  with  20  feet  of  excellent  water.  I  am  now
sinking  for  the  deeper  spring  you  found  (the  first)  for  my  fruit  plantations.

D.  C.  Cousins.

Stapeley  House,  Knighton,  Radnor,  January  27th,  1897.
T  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  we  have  found  a  good  supply  of  water  in
my  meadow  at  the  spot  indicated  by  you  in  September  last. You  reported
the  spring  to  be  about  30  feet  below  the  surface,  and  as  we  "  tapped  "  it  at
33  feet,  I  have  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  result  of  your  water-

fin<^i°g-  A.  H.  Wainwright.

In  answer  to  my  enquiry  as  to  whether  he  experiences  any  sensa-
tion when  over  an  underground  spring,  Mr.  Tompkins  replies  : —

I  feel  a  tingling  sensation,  and  the  twig  begins  to  quiver  when  I  get  on  to
a  running  stratum  (^f  water,  and  when  over  it  the  twig  rises  immediately.
It  does  not  move  for  surface  water  nor  water  in  pipes  or  drains,  only
natural  live  water,  as  I  term  it.  The  moment  I  cross  a  stratum  of  water  I
feel  a  sort  of  bracing  sensation,  which  passes  up  my  legs,  back,  and  shoulders,
and  down  the  arms  to  the  twig  ;  when  I  get  off  the  water  course  I  feel  the
loss  of  this  power,  till  I  cross  the  water  again.  When  I  get  over  the  exact
spot  the  twig  revolves  over  and  over,  and  I  am  powerless  to  keep  it  still.

M


162


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Whether  this  tingling  sensation  which  is  described  by  most  dowsers
is  due  to  their  imagination  or  not,  I  have  no  means  of  knowing  ;  and
meanwhile  we  must  not  attribute  too  much  importance  to  it.  Every
dowser  believes  electricity  moves  the  rod,  and  the  chief  effect  of
electricity  is  popularly  believed  to  be  this  tingling  sensation.  Hence
ifc  is  possible  enough  that  if  the  dowser  thought  electricity  always  pro-
duced a  peculiar  taste,  we  should  find  taste  substituted  for  tinfjlinf/
when  over  a  spring.  I  shall,  however,  return  to  the  question  of  the
physiological  effect  alleged  to  be  produced  when  dowsing  for  water.


Failures.

F.  6.1— Mr.  G.  F.  Lambert,  of  Bridgend,  Glamorganshire,  informed
me  on  September  10th,  1896,  that  Tompkins  had  been  engaged  by  the
Urban  District  Council  of  Porthcawl,  to  find  a  supply  of  water  for
that  favourite  seaside  resort.

Tompkins  fixed  on  a  certain  spot  where  he  said  "  an  ample  supply
of  water  would  be  found  at  a  depth  of  80  feet."  A  well  was  sunk  here
and  on  September  18th,  1896,  in  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Lambert
informed  me  that  water  was  found  at  the  spot  indicated  at  a  depth  of
50  feet ;  and  he  adds,  "  the  water  collects  in  the  well,  which  is  8  feet
in  diameter,  to  a  depth  of  20  feet  in  one  night."  Subsequently,  how-
ever, I  heard  that  the  supply  was  insufficient  and  that  the  Local
Government  Board  had  disallowed  the  expenditure  involved,  which
was  stated  to  amount  to  £800.

In  response  to  my  further  enquiries,  Mr.  Lambert  kindly  went
over  to  Porthcawl,  and  writes  to  me  on  June  24th,  1897,  that  he  had
seen  the  clei'k  to  the  District  Council,  who  explained  that,  hoping  to
get  a  larger  supply,  the  well  was  sunk  to  a  depth  of  140  feet,  but
though  some  additional  springs  were  intercepted,  the  total  yield  was
quite  inadequate  to  the  requirements  of  the  neighbourhood.  The  well
was  sunk  through  a  conglomerate  magnesian-limestone  (well  known  to
exist  round  Porthcawl).

Mr.  Tompkins  had  previously,  in  answer  to  my  enquiry,  frankly
given  me  particulars  of  three  cases  where  he  had  not  been  successful.
He  states  these  are  the  only  failures  of  his  he  had  heard  of  ;  quite
possibly,  but  the  dowser's  estimate  of  the  number  of  his  own  failures,
as  well  as  the  usual  attempt  he  makes  to  explain  them  away,  must
obviously  be  taken  cum  yrano  salis.  After  ascertaining  where  the
failures  occurred  in  these  three  cases,  I  wrote  to  each  person
concerned,  and  asked  for  further  particulars.

^  The  lettenngf  F.  G  is  continued  from  p.  144.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  163


Y.  6a. — From  the  agent  to  the  Kemble  Estate,  Cirencester,  I
received  the  reply  that  they  "bored  to  a  considerable  depth  at  the
spot  indicated  by  Tompkins,  but  found  no  water."

F.  7. — The  only  other  information  of  these  failures  I  have  been
able  to  obtain  is  from  ISir  Henry  Mather  Jackson,  Bart.,  D.L.,  etc.,
who  kindly  gave  jue  full  details  of  his  case,  and  to  whom  I  sent  Mr.
Tompkins'  own  account  of  this  failure.  After  some  correspondence,
Sir  Henry  gives  me  permission  to  publish  the  following  letter  : —

Llantilio  Court,  Abergavenny,  April  Qth,  1897.

I  am  obliged  to  you  for  allowing  me  to  see  Mr.  Tompkins'  statement  in
reference  to  his  attempt  to  find  a  water  supply  for  Buguderi — a  house  of  my
mother's  near  to  here.

Mr.  Tompkins  advised  sinking  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  and  stated  that  in  his
opinion  there  would  be  water  enough  to  supply  a  cottage.

Boring  was  first  adopted,  and  at  one  period  there  was,  as  Mr.  Tompkins
states,  a  certain  amount  of  water  in  the  bore-hole,  but  whether  this  vvas
spring  or  surface  water  it  was  impossible  to  say.

After  boring  to  a  depth  of  87  feet  without  any  satisfactory  result,  Mr.
Tompkins  came  over  to  see  the  place  again,  and  he  then  said  that  it  was  a
mistake  to  have  bored,  that  sinking  should  have  been  adopted,  and  that
though  a  considerable  quantity  of  water  had  been  allowed  to  escape,  enough
was  left  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  required.  Sinking  operations  were
then  commenced  on  the  same  spot,  and  after  going  down  122  feet  without
any  sign  of  water,  or  evidence  of  there  having  been  any  water,  the  whole
thing  was  abandoned.  Mr.  Tompkins  is  mistaken  in  stating  that  the  boring
was  continued  in  the  hopes  that  the  "water  would  rise  to  the  top  of  the  well;"
no  such  hope  was  ever  entertained,  and  had  any  quantity  of  water  been
found  in  the  bore-hole,  sinking  to  that  point  would  at  once  have  begun.

In  my  opinion  Mr.  Tompkins  failed  entirely  in  this  instance,  but  I  know
of  so  many  cases  of  success  that  I  do  not  myself  doubt  the  existence  of
the  "  gift "  ;  moreover,  as  you  say,  the  fact  of  his  giving  my  name  to  you,
though  he  failed  here,  shows  his  honesty. ^^^^^  Matskk  JacksOxX.

In  concluding  this  group  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  readiness  with
which  Mr.  Tompkins  has  offered  to  assist  me.  He  writes  :  "  I  will
gladly  submit  to  any  test  or  expei'iment  you  may  like  to  impose,  in
order  to  arrive  at  the  truth  of  the  enquiry  you  are  engaged  in."  Not
only  so,  but  Mr.  Tompkins,  at  his  own  expense,  came  from  Chippenham
to  the  meeting  of  our  Society  in  London,  when  this  paper  was  read,
to  meet  me  and  also  to  show  the  members  of  the  S.P.R.  the  method
he  adopts  in  dowsing.'  Since  then  he  has  been  to  Cheltenham  to  submit
to  a  series  of  experiments  which  Colonel  Taylor  has  made  for  the
purpose  of  this  enquiry,  the  results  of  which  will  be  given  later  on.

1  Mr.  Chesterman,  aiKjther  professional  dowser,  also  did  the  same,  kindly  coming
up  from  Bath  to  London.

M  2


164


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Group  VIT. — Mr.  J.  Stears.

Mr.  Stears'  name  has  already  been  mentioned  in  connection  with
the  very  interesting  case  sent  me  by  Mr.  Clark  (No.  7,  p.  31).  Mr.
Stears  is  now  living  at  Westholme,  Hessle,  Yorkshire,  and  was  until
recently  engaged  in  business  as  an  engineer  in  Hull.  For  some  time
he  was  hon.  sec.  of  the  Hull  Field  Naturalists'  Society,  and  is  much
respected  by  all  who  know  him.  My  attention  was  first  directed  to
Mr.  Stears'  use  of  the  divining  rod  by  the  following  letter  which
appeared  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  and  the  Leeds  Mercury  for  October
9th,  1890.  The  writer  is  the  Rev.  W.  Spiers,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,  of  Hull:—

Recently  in  the  company  of  a  few  geologists  on  the  Yorkshire  Wolds,
it  was  stated  that  one  of  our  company  (Mr.  John  Stears,  engineer  of  Hull)
was  able  to  discover  hidden  water  or  metals  by  means  of  the  rod.  Our
friend  cut  out  of  the  hedgerow  a  fork  of  hawthorn,  shaped  like  a  long  V.
Holding  a  prong  in  each  hand  with  the  apex  downward,  we  soon  had  an
opportunity  of  seeing  "  there  was  something  in  it."  Here  and  there,  as  he
slowly  walked  along,  the  apex  of  the  branch  curled  upwards  as  if  alive.  I
know  the  gentleman  too  well  to  suspect  that  he  was  cheating  us  ;  but  in
order  to  see  that  he  was  not  self-deceived,  I  placed  my  hand  around  those
muscles  which  must  have  moved  had  the  contortions  of  the  rod  been  due  to
unconscious  muscular  contractions.  I  quite  satisfied  myself  upon  that
point.

I  then  requested  him  to  close  his  eyes,  and  I  led  him  over  a  small
stream  that  was  running  down  the  hill  on  which  we  were  walking,  and  the
moment  we  reached  it,  the  rod  commenced  its  remarkable  movements.  As
soon  as  I  touched  it  with  my  fingers  it  resumed  its  natural  position.  For
water,  it  moved  away  from  the  operator,  but  for  metals  it  swung  round  in
the  opposite  direction.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Stears,  and  the  following  is  his  reply  : —

My  exjjerience  has  been  most  satisfactory  (extending  over  20  years),  and
I  have  always  found  water  where  the  rod  indicated  it,  also  iron  pipes.  In
some  towns  I  have  mapped  out  their  position  for  the  purpose  of  repairs,  and
the  pipes  have  been  found  exactly  where  I  stated,  some  even  left  deep
where  a  road  had  been  raised.

I  may  say  that  I  notice  a  diflferent  sensation  with  waters  and  metals  ;
there  is  a  chilly  feeling  creeps  up  my  legs  when  the  rod  shows  water.

My  powers  vary  with  health  ;  if  tired  I  lose  the  power  ;  provide  the
animal  system  with  a  fresh  supply  of  food,  and  back  the  power  comes.  I  do
not  like  blindfolding.  It  seems  to  interfere  with  that  calmness  which  is
desirable,  but  I  have  tried  it  on  roads  where  I  denoted  water  ;  having  been
taken  backwards  and  forward  I  have  been  started  in  the  middle  of  the  road
and  stopped  at  the  part  previously  marked.  Darkness  does  not  interfere
with  the  power  in  the  least.

Mr.  Stears  then  relates  how  he  finds  the  nature  of  hidden  metals  by
trying  various  metals  in  his  hand  along  with  the  rod,  the  corresponding


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


165


metal  stopping  all  movement  This  is  referred  to  in  Appendix  C;
it  is  the  survival  of  an  old  tradition,  but  is  nothing  more  than  the  effect
of  the  dowser's  own  idea.  Experimental  proof  of  the  fallacy  of  this
among  other  superstitions  connected  with  the  divining  rod  will  be
given  subsequently.

Mr.  Stears  states  that  it  was  after  watching  the  noted  dowser,
Adams  (see  No.  25,  p.  48),  that  he  found  he  also  possessed  a  similar
power,  and  he  adds  that  .in  1870  he  and  Adams,  quite  independently
of  one  another,  located  the  same  spot  as  the  source  of  a  good  under-
ground spring.  On  sinking  a  well  a  strong  spring  was  found  some  ten
feet  beneath  the  surface  in  the  magnesian  limestone.  When  in  Brazil
in  1872,  Mr.  Stears  says  he  occasionally  ti'ied  his  powers  as  a  dowser
and  found  a  good  supply  of  water  for  a  resident,  who  sank  a  well  at
the  spot  indicated  by  him  through  the  motion  of  the  rod.

Mr.  Stears  has  at  my  request  furnished  me  with  a  tabular  statement
showing  the  places  and  the  depths  at  which  he  has  found  water  by  the
rod  within  the  last  two  years  only,  at  the  same  time  furnishing  me
with  references'  to  those  who  had  engaged  him  for  this  purpose.  The
list  includes  sevei^al  local  boards,  noblemen,  landowners  and  their
agents,  mill-owners,  farmers,  &c.,  a  lengthy  list.  From  many  in  this  list
I  have  received  several  letters  in  answer  to  my  enquiries,  and  there  can
be  no  doubt  of  the  success  Mr.  Steai's  has  obtained  as  a  water  finder.

No.  112. — At  a  farm  belonging  to  Mr.  J.  Letts,  at  Rillington,  near
Malton,  in  Yorkshire,  a  previous  bore  of  120  feet  had  been  made
unsuccessfully,  not  a  drop  of  water  being  obtained  ;  nevertheless,  close
by  Mr.  Stears  found,  by  the  use  of  the  rod,  a  tremendous  spring  which  he
informs  me  "fii'es  up  as  high  as  the  house  and  continues  to  do  so  when
the  pipe  is  open." I  wrote  to  Mr.  Letts  and  had  the  following  reply  : — ■

Rillington,  Yorks,  January  23rd,  1897.

1.  Boring  for  water  had  been  made  prior  to  Mr.  Stears'  visiting  the  farm
at  my  recommendation,  but  without  success,  although  they  bored  a  distance
of  120  feet.

2.  The  place  where  Mr.  Stears  selected  to  bore  would  be  about  30  yards
distant  from  the  previous  place.  Mr.  Stears  found  a  very  good  supply  at
84  feet.

3.  The  site  of  the  farm  is  in  the  valley  between  the  Moors  and  the  Wolds.
I  may  add  Mr.  Stears  selected  another  sj^ot  for  boring  on  my  other  farm.

Although  he  found  water,  it  was  not  nearly  a  sufficient  quantity,  consequently
I  didn't  consider  in  that  case  he  was  so  successful.  I  know  several  other
places  where  he  was  most  successful.  John  Lett"

In  correspondence  Mr.  Stears  informs  me  that  in  addition  to  the
120  feet  useless  boring,  there  was  also  another  well  close  by,  some  70
feet  deep,  which  was  contaminated  with  sewage,  and  that  by  the  rod


166


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


he  traced  an  underground  stream,  which  fed  this  well,  to  a  spot  where
the  new  and  successful  well  was  sunk.  It  was  important  to  know  the
exact  position  of  the  useless  deep  boring,  and  in  reply  to  my  enquiries
Mr.  Stears  sent  me  the  accompanying  sketch  plan. The  dotted  lines


To  Ma,ltori.


R/VEP  DERWENT


N


i_


A  ^  OB


S tech  7^


PLAN  OF  MR. JOHN  LETTS*  STABLES  AT  RILLINGTON,  YOKKS.

A— Old  bore,  strong  but  contaminated  with  manure,  about  70  feet  deep.
B— 120  feet  bore,  5  feet  off  A  ;  no  water  found  by  Halliday.
C— Bore  ordered  by  J.  Stears  ;  plenty  of  good  water  with  pressure  at  84  feet.
D— Stream  which  feeds  A  and  C.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


167


marked  "underground  streams,"  Mr.  Stears  has  put  in  solely  on  the
faith  of  the  indications  afforded  by  the  rod ;  they  must  therefore  be
taken  as  merely  hypothetical.  Moreover,  as  the  well  A  is  con-
taminated, if  a  stream  flows  towards  the  river  in  the  direction
indicated  by  Mr.  Stears,  one  would  expect  the  well  0  to  show  signs
of  contamination  also.  I  sent  this  plan,  with  the  foregoing  remarks,
to  Mr.  Letts,  and  asked  him  if  he  had  any  corrections  to  make.  Mr.
Letts  returned  it  with  merely  a  verbal  correction,  and  marked
"  correct."

I  am  indebted  to  Mrs.  Williams,  of  Temple  House,  Great  Mar  low,
Bucks,  for  a  list  of  places  in  Aberdeenshire,  where  it  was  stated  Mr.
Stears  succeeded  in  finding  water  by  the  rod  after  other  attempts  had
been  made  in  vain.  This  latter  statement,  however,  is  not  shown  in
the  correspondence  that  follows.  Mrs.  Williams  says,  "  The  facts  were
related  to  me  by  my  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Muirhead — Lord  Aberdeen's
estate-agent — who  would  tell  you  about  his  experience  with  Mr.  Stears.
Mrs.  Irvine,  of  Drum  Castle,  tried  the  rod,  but  it  made  her  quite  ill
and  exhausted."

No.  113. — In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Muirhead  writes  ; —

Estate  Office,  Haddo  House,  Aberdeen,  March  23rd,  1897.

On  July  7th  last,  accoaipanied  by  Mr.  Stears,  water-tinder,  I  visited  the
farm  of  Braiklay,  on  the  Haddo  House  estates  of  his  Excellency  the  Earl  of
Aberdeen,  in  the  parish  of  Tarves,  and  county  of  Aberdeen,  the  tenant  of
which  is  Miss  Elizabeth  Bean.  The  object  of  our  visit  was  that  Mr.  Stears
niiglit  indicate  a  place  on  the  farm  where  a  supply  of  water  might  be  found,
which  could  be  introduced  to  the  buildings  on  the  farm  by  gravitation.

Tlie  farm  lies  entirely,  according  to  the  Geological  Survey  Map,  on  the
gneiss  formation,  and  slopes  generally  to  the  east  and  south,  from  about  380
to  250  feet  above  sea  level,  the  farm  buildings  lying  about  half-way  down
the  slope.

Mr.  Stears  proceeded  from  the  farm  buildings  ujj  the  slope,  and  very  soon
indicated  by  means  of  the  rod  a  stream  of  water  whose  course  he  followed  to
the  highest  point  on  the  boundary  of  the  farm.  Leaving  this  stream  he
proceeded  along  the  boundary  until  he  found  another  stream,  which  he
followed  down  the  slope  until  he  reached  a  ijoint  where  he  said  tliat  this
second  stream  joined  the  first,  which  he  had  followed  upwards  from  the
farm  steading.

The  crop  on  the  field  at  the  time  of  the  visit  was  turnips,  and  as  the
tenant  did  not  wish  the  crop  interfered  with  until  the  turnips  were  ready  to
be  consumed  by  cattle,  it  was  not  until  the  month  of  November  last  that
boring  operations  were  commenced.  After  boring  21  feet  water  was  found,
which  flowed  at  the  rate  of  four  gallons  per  minute,  with  steady  pumping.
The  boring  was  continued  to  a  depth  of  40  feet  where  a  great  supply  was
found  and  which  has  never  been  pumped  dry.

The  water  was  recently  introduced  to  the  farm  buildings.


168


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Stears  also,  about  the  same  time,  visited  the  farm  of  Newton,  in  the
parish  of  Methlick,  also  on  his  Excellency's  estates,  the  tenant  of  which  is
Mr.  Robert  Wilson.

Here  Mr.  Stears  also  indicated  a  sjDot  where  water  might  be  found,
and,  on  boring  operations  being  carried  out,  water  was  found  at  a  depth
of  10  feet.  The  boring  was  continued  to  25  feet,  where  a  satisfactory  supply
was  got.

I  will  ))e  glad  to  afford  you  any  further  information  in  my  power.

George  Muirhead.

In  a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  Muirhead  writes,  in  reply  to  mine  : —

No  attempt  either  by  boring  or  sinking  for  water  had  been  made  in  the
neighbourliood  of  the  place  where  Mr.  Stears  indicated  that  water  would  be
found,  prior  to  Mr.  Stears'  visit.

There  was  no  evidence  of  there  being  any  water  at  hand  either  at
Newton  or  Braiklay,  both  farms  being  on  hills,  and  water  had  previously
to  be  carried  some  distance. There  is  now  a  good  supply.

George  Muirhead.

No.  114. — I  wi'ote  to  Mrs.  Irvine  aiid  the  following  is  her  reply  :

Drum  Castle,  Aberdeen,  March  Wtit,  1897.
In  reply  to  your  note  I  beg  to  state  that  in  1893  we  had  the  late  Mr.
Lawrence  of  Bristol  to  find  us  water,  which  he  did  successfully  in  three  or
four  different  jjlaces.  In  1897  Mr.  Stears  came  twice  and  marked  a  great
many  places.  Some  for  future  use  we  have  not  yet  tried,  but  in  seven  cases
we  have  found  water  on  the  exact  spot  marked  by  him.  Both  with  Mr.
Lawrence  and  Mr.  Steers  I  tried  the  divining  rod  several  times,  but  on  each
occasion  it  made  me  feel  so  ill  that  I  do  not  care  to  rej^eat  the  attempt.

M.  A.  F.  Irvine.

I  asked  Mrs.  Irvine  if  any  previous  attempts  to  find  water,  without
the  aid  of  a  dowser,  had  been  made  on  her  property.  Mrs.  Irvine
writes  in  reply:  —

Drum  Castle,  Aberdeen,  Marcli  30th,  1897.
We  had  been  obliged  to  provide  water  for  various  cottages  and  farms
prior  to  the  diviners'  visits,  as  there  was  not  a  good  suj^ply,  and  one  that
was  very  apt  to  fail  in  the  summer.  Our  attempts  were  not  very  successful,
so  hearing  that  Mr.  Lawrence  was  coming  to  our  neighbourhood,  we  decided
to  have  him  l)efore  making  any  fresh  attempts  in  new  places,  with  the
result  that  I  have  told  you. I  am  afraid  that  is  all  the  information  I  can

y""-  M.  A.  F.  Irvine.

No.  115. — The  following  report  I  abridge  from  the  Bury  Times  of
August  15th,  1896  :—

Some  interesting  experiments,  in  regard  to  the  search  for  underground
water,  took  place  on  land  occui:)ied  by  Mr.  J.  Eddleston,  farmer,  Wrigley  Carr,


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  169


Birtle,  yesterday.  The  exjjeriments  were  occasioned  owing  to  a  well  which
had  supplied  the  wants  of  the  farm  since  1888  having  recently  become  dry.
In  consequence  Mr.  Eddleston  has  been  put  to  some  inconvenience  in
(»btaining  an  adequate  supply  of  water,  and  he  decided  to  invite  Mr.  John
Stears,  of  Hull,  to  visit  the  locality  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  by
means  of  a  "divining  rod"  where  water  could  be  found.  About  twenty
persons,  including  farmers  and  others  interested,  witnessed  the  experiments.

After  proceeding  for  some  little  distance,  the  ' '  divining  rod "  (a
forked  branch  of  hawthorn)  held  in  tlie  hands  of  Mr.  Stears  about  three  feet
from  the  ground,  began  to  turn,  and  Mr.  Stears  announced  that  a  good
stream  of  water  would  be  found  underneatli  where  they  were  standing,  some
distance  below  the  surface.  Wooden  pegs  were  driven  into  the  ground,  in
places  indicated  by  Mr.  Stears,  to  mark  tlie  course  of  the  stream.
While  tracing  this  stream  the  current  indicated  was  so  strong  that  the  twig
was  snapped  in  two,  and  a  little  further  on  a  second  twig  which  had  been
obtained  was  also  broken.  .  .  .  The  well  which  had  previously  supplied
the  farm,  and  which  had  been  worked  by  one  of  Mr.  Webster's  wind-power
pumping  engines,  was  next  visited,  but  no  satisfactory  result  was  obtained
in  the  vicinity  of  the  well.  A  route  was  then  taken  in  the  direction  of  the
farm,  and  it  was  soon  apparent  that  another  stream  had  been  struck.  This
was  traced  for  some  distance  and  eventually  found  to  cross  the  stream  first
discovered,  although  the  two  water-courses  were,  according  to  Mr.  Stears,
at  different  levels.  He  found  the  junction  of  the  two  streams,  and  a  number
of  pegs  were  driven  into  the  ground.  Boring  operations  will  be  commenced
in  due  course,  and  if  these  are  succes.sf  ul  the  wind  engine  will  be  removed
to  the  place  from  the  well  previously  referred  to  The  spot  indicated  is  on
rising  ground.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Eddleston  to  ascertain  if  the  foregoing  report  were
correct  and  whether  water  had  been  found  as  indicated.  The  following
is  his  reply  :  —

Wrigley  Carr  Farm,  Birtle,  near  Rochdale,

September  15th,  1896.
I  gladly  comply  with  your  request  for  report  of  the  water  found  by  means
of  the  divining  rod.  Having  been  very  much  troubled  this  dry  sunmier  for
good  water,  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Jonas  Webster,  water  engineer,  of
Bolton,  I  agreed  that  he  should  get  Mr.  Stears  from  Hull.  At  the  time
appointed  Mr.  Stears  came,  and  on  a  very  dry  hill  above  the  house  he  found
a  good  stream  running  in  a  west  to  east  direction,  and  another  smaller  stream
crossing  the  same  north  and  south,  i  We  considered  [it]  best  to  take  the
crossing  point,  so  I  at  once  engaged  men  to  sink  a  well  there  ;  they  went  on
sinking,  and  bricking  as  they  went  on,  through  the  different  minerals  as  dry
and  hard  as  possible  until  they  got  to  the  depth  of  30  feet ;  then  they  came  to
the  stream  [running]  north  and  south,  which  made  a  fair  supply  of  water.  But
I  kept  them  sinking  on  till  they  came  to  tlie  next  stream  at  the  depth  of  42
feet,  which  was  an  excellent  stream  running  across  the  bottom  of  the  well,

1  Mr.  Eddleston,  of  course,  means  that  Mr.  Stears  stated  these  underground
streams  existed. — W.  F.  B.


170


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


just  in  the  direction  the  diviner  indicated.  I  should  think  we  get  as
much  water  as  would  supply  four  or  five  farms ;  and  it  has  risen  in
the  well  ten  feet.  I  am  glad  to  say  the  result  is  very  successful,  and
Mr.  Webster  is  now  going  to  put  up  one  of  his  wind  pumping  engines.

Joseph  Eddleston.

No.  116. — Another  case,  which  needs  further  investigation,  is
given  in  a  letter  to  a  journal  called  The  Carpenter  and  Builder,  of
November  18th,  1892.  Mr.  W.  Smith,  of  Atherby,  Malton,  Yorkshire,
writes  : —

"  In  order  to  supply  a  small  cottage  property  with  water,  I  dug  a  new
well,  and  got  to  a  considerable  depth,  when  to  our  dismay,  we  struck  solid
rock,  when  on  account  of  the  cost  it  might  entail,  we  were  compelled  to
cease  further  operations,  and  in  despair,  filled  it  in  again.

"  I  was  relating  my  experience  to  Mr.  Nelson,  the  courteous  surveyor  of
the  Norton  (Malton)  Local  Board,  who  suggested  Mr.  John  Stears,  of
Hull,  with  his  divining  rod. . .  .

"Mr.  S.  proceeded  to  cut  out  of  the  hedge  a  forked  thorn,  which  he
held  by  the  forked  ends,  with  both  hands  straight  out  before  him,  and
walked  leisurely  across  the  ground.  Immediately  he  came  across  the
spot  underneath  which  he  said  lay  water,  the  rod,  which  he  held  firmly
with  both  ends,  began  to  move  upwards  until  it  touched  his  breast.  At
that  spot  we  have  dug,  and  found  water  at  a  depth  of  only  seven  yards,
which  has  set  at  rest  any  doubt  as  to  tlie  success  or  otherwise  of  the
experiment."

No.  117. — -The  following  is  from  the  Peterborough  Express  of
September  12th,  1895.

As  we  briefly  announced  in  a  recent  issue,  the  Arborfield  Paper  Mills  at
Helpston,  owned  by  Messrs.  A.  Towgood  and  Sons,  are  being  provided  with
a  fresh  supply  of  water,  a  spring  having  been  discovered  by  means  of  the
divining  rod  in  the  yard  at  the  rear  of  the  premises.  A  plentiful  supply  of
water  is  highly  necessary  for  the  manufacture  of  brown  paper,  and  the
finding  of  the  spring  will  give  to  the  mill  that  which  has  long  been  required.
The  services  of  Mr.  J.  Stears,  water  exjjert  and  engineer  of  Westholme,
Hessle,  near  Hull,  were  called  into  requisition.  He  found  water  in  the  yard,
and  it  was  eventually  decided  to  bore  at  a  sjjot  behind  the  mill.  The  boring
operation  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  J.  E.  Noble,  builder  and  contractor,
of  Bourne.  Boring  proceeded  steadily  for  several  days,  various  strata  of
earth,  including  rock,  being  passed  through.  At  a  depth  of  49ft.  rock  was
again  reached,  and  at  52ft.  a  steady  stream  of  water  was  discovered.  The
operations  were  still  continued,  the  rock  being  again  pierced,  and  at  G9ft.  the
main  spring  was  tapped,  a  volume  of  water  of  tremendous  pressure  shooting
up.  The  boring  was  intended  for  a  two  and  a-half  inch  pipe,  but  it  has
since  been  decided  to  have  a  four  inch  pipe.  The  quality  of  the  water  is  to
all  appearances  exceedingly  pure,  and  the  volume  of  water  is  estimated  to  be


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


171


between  seven  and  eight  thousand  gallons  per  hour.  The  method  of  passmg
the  water  into  the  mill  has  yet  to  be  dealt  with.

Mr.  Stears  sent  me  the  following  letter  from  Messrs.  Towgood
to  him  : —

Arborfield  Mill,  Helpston,  May  lUh,  1896.

The  boring  for  water  which  we  made  hei'e  at  the  spot  indicated  by  you  by
means  of  the  divining  rod  has  proved  entirely  successful  ;  a  continuous  supply
at  the  rate  of  10, 000  gallons  per  hour  is  now  rising  to  the  surface.

Alfred  Towgood  and  Sons.

I  wrote  to  Messrs.  Towgood  asking  if  the  above  newspaper  report
were  correct,  and  if  a  previous  boring  had  been  made,  and,  if  so,  how
deep. They  reply  : —

The  printed  report  you  send  is  quite  correct.  No  previous  boring  had
been  made. We  quite  believe  in  the  divining  rod.

Alfred  Towgood  and  Sons.

No.  118. — Mr.  Stears,  writing  to  me,  states  that  he  was  also
engaged  by  the  local  authorities  at  Helpston,  who  were  in  want  of  a
better  supply  of  water,  and  that  he  succeeded  in  finding  an  abundant
supply  by  the  indications  of  the  rod.  This  is  described  at  length  in  the
local  papers.  I  abridge  the  following  from  the  Feterbor-ough  Ex'press
of  August,  1896  :—

The  question  of  the  water  supply  of  Helpston  has  been  the  one  absorbing
topic  for  some  time,  and  the  villagers  have  been  in  sore  straits  owing  to  the
inadequate  supply.  So  short  was  water  in  the  village  a  few  weeks  ago  that
the  inhabitants  trooped  to  the  pump  in  the  early  morning,  but  many  had  to
return  disappomted.  A  well  sunk  last  year  proved  to  be  of  little  use.  Mr.
Howes,  the  representative  on  the  District  Council,  interested  himself  to  a
great  extent,  and  his  efforts  resulted  in  the  matter  being  placed  in  the  hands
of  the  Parish  Council  with  power  to  act.  This  body  called  in  the  service  of  a
"diviner,"  Mr.  Stears,  of  Hull,  who  successfully  operated  in  the  case  of  the
water  supply  at  the  Paper  Mills.  One  of  the  spots  tried  was  at  the  four
cross  roads  in  Woodgate.  Here  so  strong  was  the  current  that  the  divining
rod  was  broken,  and  Mr.  Stears  recommended  that  boring  operations  should
take  place.  The  work  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Noble,  of  Thurlby,
and  boring  operations  were  commenced.  By  Saturday  night  a  depth  of  37
feet  had  been  ±-eached,  6i  feet  of  rock  having  been  passed  through  at  the
top,  followed  by  a  thick  layer  of  clay.  By  Monday  a  depth  of  46  feet  had
been  reached,  a  second  layer  of  rocks  being  pierced  at  about  43  feet.  The
water  was  "  struck  "  on  Tuesday  and  rose  to  the  surface  in  great  quantities.
The  flow  from  the  top,  notwithstanding  that  the  drill  had  not  been  removed,
was  more  than  a  six-inch  pipe  could  take  away,  and  the  immediate  locality
was  flooded.  Immediate  steps  had  to  be  taken  to  open  the  drains.  There
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  a  supply  has  now  been  tapped  which  is  more


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


than  sufficient  to  supply  the  whole  of  the  village,  besides  providing  an
unlimited  quantity  for  flushing  and  other  sanitary  pui-poses.

Mr.  Stears  has  sent  me  a  copy  of  Mr.  Noble's  letter  to  him  which
is  as  follov^rs  : —

Thurlby,  Bourne,  Lincolnshire,  September  ith,  1896.

I  am  pleased  to  tell  you  the  bore  on  the  Village  Green  at  Helpston,
marked  out  by  you,  has  given  very  great  satisfaction.  At  a  depth  of  50  feet,
the  water  rushed  up,  the  overflow  being  measured  at  7,000  gallons  per  hour  ;
the  Helpston  people  are  delighted  at  the  success,  having  been  without  water
so  long.

J.  E.  Noble.

No.  119. — The  next  case  was  described  by  Miss  A.  W.  Richardson,
of  Moyallon  House,  Gilford,  Co.  Down.  She  wrote  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick
in  1885,  a,s  follows  : —

On  one  occasion,  being  with  my  father  on  business  at  one  of  our  homes  in
Ireland,  Mr.  Stears  offered  to  tell  him  if  there  were  water  beneath  a  certain
part  of  my  father's  property,  in  which  he  wished  to  build,  and  in  which  being
very  rocky,  it  was  troublesome  to  bore.

The  idea  was  quite  novel  to  us  then,  but  upon  his  assuring  my  father  that
water  existed  there,  it  was  proved  to  be  the  case.  This  is  the  only  in.stance
where  the  process  was  at  all  removed  from  the  possibility  of  thought-
transference.  At  our  other  home  (he  had  never  been  to  either  before)  he
was  led  over  a  piece  of  ground  where  several  of  us  knew  that  drains  at
periodical  distances  existed,  and  his  rod  went  up  quite  correctly  as  he  passed
over  them.

In  this  case,  of  course,  it  could  at  once  be  referred  to  transference  of
thought.  Of  course  in  these  cases  it  is  almost  impossible  to  devise  a  plan  by
which  it  may  be  tested  without  the  knowledge  of  some  spectator.

I  have  observed  that  the  very  sli(jhtest  muscular  motion  sends  up  the
vertex  of  the  rod  ;  but,  of  course,  the  ambiguous  jjart  of  the  process  is  the
coincidence  of  tlie  sensation  which  produces  this  movement  with  the  presence
of  water.

My  sisters  were  interested  in  finding  that  the  custom  commonly  obtains
in  a  remote  part  of  the  South  of  France,  in  which  they  spent  a  winter,  lately.

A.  W.  Richardson.

Mr.  Stears  is  now  on  a  "  water-finding"  visit  to  the  West  Indies,
where  he  has  been  professionally  engaged.

Failures.

I.  have  heai'd  of  a  few  failures  in  connection  with  Mr.  Stears  ;
others  doubtless  exist  which  have  never  reached  me.  (As  before,
the  numbering  F.  8  is  consecutive,  following  on  from  p.  163.)


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


173


F  8. — Here  is  one  where  the  failure  has  led  the  Parish  Council
to  a  very  heavy  and  useless  expenditure : —

Bardney,  Lincoln,  February  16th,  1897.
Bardney  Water  Supply.
Mr.  John  Stears,  of  Westholme,  Ilessle,  Yorkshire,  diviner,  was
employed  by  our  Parish  Council  to  find  water.  He  tried  many  parts  of  the
village,  and  indicated  several  places  where  he  was  sure  water  would  be
found,  particularly  in  one  spot,  where  he  was  satisfied  a  very  copious  supply
would  be  found.  At  this  spot  we  commenced  boring  about  three  months
ago,  and  have  got  to  a  depth  of  about  240  feet  still  in  blue  clay,  but  at
present  without  any  signs  of  water.  No  engineer  has  been  consulted.  As
soon  as  water  is  found  I  will  let  you  know.

J. R.  HiRD,

Clerk  to  the  District  Council.

In  reply  to  my  subsequent  enquiry,  Mr.  Hird  writes  : —

Bardney,  Lincoln,  April  IZth,  1897.

A  depth  of  340  feet  has  now  been  reached,  but  unfortunately  without
any  signs  of  water.  They  are  still  in  blue  clay.  At  a  depth  of  286  feet  they
came  to  rock  2  feet  9  inches  in  thickness,  and  at  300  feet  the  like  3  feet  in
thickness.  t t>  tx

J.  K.  HiRD.

From  the  following  which  arrived  as  this  paper  is  going  to  press,  it
will  be  seen  the  boring  has  been  made  still  deeper.  I  enquired  who
was  the  Chairman  of  the  Parish  Council.

Bardney,  Lincoln,  May  21d,  1897.
A  depth  of  390  feet  has  now  been  reached,  without  at  present  any  signs
of  water. They  are  now  in  rock,  and  have  got  about  18  feet  into  it.  Mr.
John  Sharpe,  of  Bardney  Manor,  is  our  Chairman.

J.  R.  Hird.


F.  9. — In  the  next  case  my  informant,  Mr.  Bradley,  gives  me
evidence  of  Mr.  Stears'  success  as  well  as  failure.  Here  is  his
letter  : — -

Estate  Office,  Ebberston,  York,  May  20th,  1897.

I  heard  of  Mr.  Stears  being  at  Heslerton,  Ganton,  Knapton,  etc.  ;  several
parties  bored  where  Mr.  Stears  said  there  was  water,  and  were  successful.
I  went  over  to  some  of  the  places,  and  saw  for  myself.

I  recommended  Mr.  Stears  to  the  managers  of  Trainton  School,  and  they
sent  for  him.  He  came  over,  and  pointed  out  where  there  was  water,  and
they  sunk  a  well  and  bored  about  80  feet,  and  got  plenty  of  water.

I  also  recommended  Mr.  Stears  and  Mr.  Gataker  to  the  Parish  Council  at
Appleton  le  Moors.  They  sent  for  Mr.  Stears,  and  he  went  over  and
pointed  out  to  them  that  there  was  water  in  a  certain  field,  a  very  high
point.  They  also  sent  for  Mr.  Gataker,  and  he  sent  his  assistant,  named
Wills,  and  he  fixed  on  the  same  place  that  Stears  did. But  some  of  the


17i


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Parish  Council  tliought  that  Mr.  Wills  had  overheard  them  say,  "  That  would
he  the  best  place  if  there  was  water."  Mr.  Wills  said  there  was  water,  and  a
good  supply  could  be  got.

The  Parish  Council  sunk  a  well  about  45  feet,  and  bored  36  feet  (81  feet
altogether)  and  then  stopped  because  there  were  no  signs  of  water.  They  had
been  told  they  would  get  water  at  60  feet,  or  might  have  to  go  80  feet.

The  Parish  Council  then  asked  me  to  go  over  and  see  the  place.  I  went
and  inspected  the  well,  etc.,  and  the  whole  district,  and  1  have  not  the  least
doubt  in  my  mind  they  would  have  to  go  down  a  great  depth.  At  the  place
where  the  well  is  sunk  there  is  at  least  280  feet  of  limestone  before  they  get
to  the  clay  bed.  Bkadley.

Mr.  Bradley  adds  a  geological  section  of  the  district,  which
confirms  his  statement.  Mr.  Bradley  informed  Stears  and  Gataker  of
this  failure,  and  both  say  the  water  is  there,  only  somewhat  deeper
than  the  Parish  Council  has  bored  !

F.  10.  -  I  have  also  had  some  correspondence  with  reference  to
another  case  of  failure  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Stears,  which  occurred  at
Flamborough  in  Yorkshire.  Here  a  well  was  sunk  at  the  .spot
indicated  by  Mr.  Stears,  and  sinking  or  boiing  carried  down  to  170
feet  through  the  clay  into  the  chalk,  and  no  water  reached.  My
correspondent,  however,  does  not  wish  his  name  or  letters  published.
Mr.  Stears,  in  reply  to  my  enquiry,  gives  as  his  explanation  that  "  the
boring  was  not  carried  deep  enougli,  as  the  chalk  is  upheaved  and  the
strata  contorted  at  the  place."

Doubtless,  if  a  boring  goes  deep  enough,  water  might  be  reached,
but  failure  is  the  only  name  to  be  given  to  cases  where  water —
predicted  at  a  certain  spot  and  limit  of  depth— is  not  found,  after
sinking  to  this  depth,  or,  say,  20  per  cent,  deeper  than  was  indicated
by  the  dowser.


Experiments  in  Kingstown.

Mr.  Stears  happening  to  be  on  a  visit  to  Ireland,  in  July,  1892,  I
requested  him  to  submit  to  some  tests  of  his  powers,  to  which  he
readily  consented.

Experiment  1. — The  experiments  were  made  in  the  private  pleasure
grounds  opposite  my  house,  at  Kingstown,  a  place  entirely  new  to  Mr.
Stears,  who  had  never  been  in  this  neighbourhood  before.  Cutting  a
forked  twig,  Mr.  .Stears  started  from  the  point  marked  A  in  the  accom-
panying plan,  and  walked  to  and  fro  until  he  reached  the  point
marked  with  an  asterisk,  when  from  the  sudden  and  vigorous  movement


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.  175


of  the  twig  he  asserted  that  a  considerable  spring  of  water  was  under-
neath this  spot.  Thei'e  was  nothing  whatever  to  indicate  that  such
was  the  case,  but  on  enquiry  from  the  gardener  (who  was  not  present
during  the  experiment)  I  learnt  for  the  first  time  that  the  very
spot  upon  which  Mr.  Stears  had  fixed  was  the  site  of  an  old  well,  now
completely  hidden  beneath  the  level  greensward.  I  now  begged  Mr.
Stears  to  walk  slowly  over  the  ground,  and  if  the  rod  indicated  any
other  springs,  to  allow  me  then  to  blindfold  him  and  so  retrace  the
ground. Mr.  Stears  consented,  and  with  this  object  he  moved  in  the


direction  of  the  dotted  line.  The  rod  moved  at  the  points  marked
on  the  plan.  At  the  point  B.,  Mr.  Stears,  notwithstanding  the  very
reasonable  objection  he  had  made  in  his  letter  to  me  18  months  before,
(p.  164),  was  carefully  blindfolded,  and  endeavoured  to  retrace  his
steps  :  the  rod  moved  at  the  points  marked  x^.  He  now  asked  me  to
let  him  try  the  same  course  with  his  eyes  closed  and  the  bandage
removed.  This  I  did,  and  the  rod  moved  at  the  points  marked  x^.
Finally,  at  C,  he  consented  to  be  again  carefully  blindfolded,  and  once
more  he  retraced  his  steps,  the  rod  moving  at  the  points  marked  x*.
It  will  be  seen  that  these  points  do  not  coincide,  but  in  two  or  three
places  they  are  nearly  in  the  same  straight  line, — approximately  N.
and  S. It  is  possible  that  there  may  be  underrgound  water  in  this


I

176  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part


direction,  as  Mr.  Stears  subsequently  declared  there  was  from  the
movement  of  the  rod,  and  tracked  out  the  supposed  course  of  two  or
three  imaginary  streams.

Experiment  2. — Mr.  Stears  having  stated  that  the  rod  moved  over
comparatively  small  masses  of  metal,  I  procured  nine  bandboxes  and
removing  their  lids,  put  large  lumps  of  iron  beneath  some  of  them,  and
nothing  under  others  ;  Mr.  Stears  did  not  see  this  arrangement  I  made
on  the  lawn  till  it  was  completed,  when,  as  the  boxes  were  all  inverted,
it  was  impossible  to  tell  under  which  one  the  iron  weights  were  con-
cealed, nor  was  I  quite  certain  in  each  case  myself,  so  that  thought-
transference  need  hardly  be  considered.  The  result  was  that  out  of
the  nine  boxes  Mr.  Stears  indicated  five  correctly ;  that  is,  he  was
certain  from  the  movement  or  non-movement  of  the  rod  that  iron  was
or  was  not  beneath  the  box  ;  three  indications  were  wrong,  and  one  was
doubtful.  The  trial  was  therefore  inconclusive,  as  the  number  told
correctly  was  not  beyond  the  probability  of  chance  coincidence.

Experiment  3. — Another  trial  was  made  with  three  bandboxes,  a
mass  of  iron,  unknown  to  Mr.  Stears,  being  placed  under  No.  3.  On
testing  with  the  rod,  Mr.  Stears  asserted  from  the  movement  of  the  rod
that  the  iron  was  beneath  No.  2,  and  nothing  under  No.  3.  This  was
therefore  a  complete  failure.

Experiment  4. — Finally  I  chose  two  exactly  similar  boxes  and  put
a  half  cwt.  beneath  one  and  nothing  beneath  the  other ;  recalling  Mr.
Stears,  I  begged  him  to  make  a  succession  of  trials,  at  short  intervals,
on  the  two  boxes,  whilst  I  noted  the  results.  I  got  some  one  to
change  the  position  of  the  iron  each  time  (or  not  change  it),  and  then
go  away  without  letting  Mr.  Stears  or  myself  know  what  had  been
done.  On  adding  up  the  number  of  successes  and  failures,  I  found
that  the  result  was  just  what  chance  coincidence  would  have  given,
that  is  to  say,  there  was  almost  exactly  an  even  number  of  successes
and  of  failures.

With  the  exception,  therefore,  of  the  location  of  the  old  well,  the
first  experiments  with  Mr.  Stears  were  inconclusive,  and  the  latter,
metal-finding,  distinctly  adverse  to  the  existence  of  any  such  alleged
power.  At  the  same  time  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  of  the  bona  fides  of
Mr.  Stears,  and  have  cordially  to  thank  him  not  only  for  so  readily
acceding  to  every  test  I  proposed,  but  for  having  put  himself  to  some
expense  and  inconvenience  by  prolonging  his  stay  in  Ireland  to  enable
me  to  carry  out  these  trials.


XXXII.]


On  tJie  So-called  Divining  Rod.


177


Group  VIII. — Mr.  Leicester  Gataker.

One of the  younger  water  finders  is  Leicester  Gataker,

formerly  of  Weston-super-Mare,  now  residing  at  Crescent-gardens,
Bath.  He  is  a  gentleman  by  birth  and  education ;  his  father  was  a
captain  in  the  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  and  the  son,  after  leaving  Bath
College,  where  he  was  educated,  discovered  to  his  surprise  that  a
forked  twig  revolved  in  his  hands  in  the  same  way  as  it  did  with
a  local  "diviner." Jlr.  Gataker  states  that  whenever  he  is  over  a


spring  of  water  a  sensation  not  unlike  a  slight  shiver  comes  over  him,
chiefly  in  his  arms,  and  the  forked  twig,  or  wire,  he  sometimes  holds,
continues  to  revolve — independently  of  his  volition — so  long  as  he
remains  over  the  bed  of  the  stream  or  spring  ;  running  water  alone
affecting  him.i Judging  from  his  sensations,  or  the  movement  of  the

1  111  conversation,  Mr.  Gataker  told  me  this  sensation  was  most  marked,  and
usually  began  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  :  a  feeling  of  sickness  often  being-  produced.
This  is  what  some  other  professional  dowsers  have  also  told  me,  quite  independently
of  each  other. How  far  this  experience  is  due  to  a  preconceived  idea,  I  do  not  know.

N


ITS


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


rod.  he  asserts  that  by  practice  he  has  been  able  to  estimate  the
dt^pth  and  volume  of  the  underground  spring  or  stream.  Repeated
trials  having  satisfied  Mr.  Gataker  that  his  success  was  not  due  to  a
mere  "fluke,"  he  determiaed  to  make  water  finding  his  profession,
liis  health  not  permitting  him  to  continue  the  sedentary  life  of  a
London  office.  In  addition  to  finding  water,  Mr.  Gataker,  like  many
other  professional  "  diviners,"  employs  workmen  to  sink  the  well  ;
like  others  also,  he  agrees  to  the  terms  of  "no  water,  no  pay,"
but  charges  25  per  cent,  extra  for  his  work  if  carried  out  under
these  conditions  !

Unlike  other  dowsers,  Mr.  Gataker  does  not,  ordinarily,  use  a
forked  twig  or  any  kind  of  rod.  An  eye-witness  thus  describes  his
proceeding.  The  rod,  it  will  be  seen,  is  discarded  : — "  His  procedure
seems  to  be  a  rapid  survey  of  the  ground.  He  walks  along  with
a  quick  step,  with  his  hands  hanging  by  his  side,  until  (according
to  his  statement)  he  strikes  a  stream  of  water,  when  he  at  once
becomes  visibly  agitated.  With  outstretched  hands  he  appears
carefully  to  feel  his  whereabouts,  until  he  ascertains  tlie  direction
the  stream  is  flowing  and  follows  it  up.  Then  he  marks  the  spot
of  greatest  supply  and  estimates  the  depth  and  quantity  likely  to
be  obtained."

The  accompanying  woodcut  (taken  from  Black  and  White)  shows
Mr.  Gataker  at  work  (see  p.  177).

Again,  Mr.  G.  F.  Tregelles,  of  Barnstaple,  gives  me  the  following
description  of  Mr.  Gataker's  procedure  :—

On  October  28th,  1896,  I  went  down  to  Ilfraconibe  to  join  a  party  of
members  of  the  Ilfraconibe  Local  Board,  who  had  engaged  Leicester  Gataker,
•of  Weston-super-Mare  and  Bath,  to  look  for  additional  supplies  of  water  for
their  reservoir.

Gataker,  who  is  a  young  man,  did  not  use  the  forked  twig,  but  walked
about  with  long  strides,  holding  out  liis  hand,  or  hands,  ijalui  down,  and
every  now  and  tlien  making  a  dash  or  lurch  to  one  side,  diverging  right  or
left,  sometimes  walking  straight,  and  sometimes  in  a  circle,  and  at  last,  if
satisfied,  digging  his  heel  into  the  turf  at  the  chosen  spot.  He  seemed  to  be
fulloiving  a  sensation,  which  is  wliat  he  professes  to  do,  and  he  looked  very
like  a  dog  following  tlie  traces  of  a  raljbit  over  the  grass.

On  questioning  liini  he  said  that  when  over  a  hidden  spring,  even  with
arms  folded,  he  felt  a  tingling  all  through  his  body,  and  still  more  so  when
one  or  both  hands  were  extended.  The  depth  and  quantity  ot  water  he
estimated  by  the  intensity  of  this  feeling,  couj^led  with  experience.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Gataker  and  asked  him  to  furnish  me  with  a
summary  of  any  cases  where  he  had  been  called  in  to  find  an  under-
ground spring,  Ijy  the  exercise  of  his  dowsing  faculty,  after  previous


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


179


attempts  to  find  water  in  the  ordinary  way  had  failed.  In  reply,  ]Mr.
Gataker  sent  me  brief  particulars  of  some  two  dozen  cases — drawn  up
in  a  business-like  and  excellent  manner, — and  writes  as  follows  :  —

Bath,  January  12th,  1897.

1  think  I  am  right  in  saying  that  water  was  sought  for  unsuccessfully
prior  to  my  visit,  in  each  case.  However,  clients  can  substantiate  my  claim
•or  not. If  the  latter,  I  should  like  to  know  of  it.

I  can  give  you  other  cases,  only  my  own  time  being  so  much  occupied,  I
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  few  I  have  sent  will  be  sufficient.

Leicester  Gatakee.

The  particulars  given  by  Mr  Gataker  were,  in  nearly  all  these  cases,
followed  by  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  the  person  who  employed  him,
supporting  in  general  terms  Mr.  Gataker's  statement  ;  these  letters,
some  of  which  I  here  quote,  did  not,  however,  indicate  that  previous
attempts  to  find  water  had  in  each  case  been  made.

No.  120. — Mr.  Ash  worth,  agent  to  Mr.  Arkwright,  of  Hampton
Court,  writes  as  follows  to  Mr.  Gataker  : —

Hampton  Court  Estate  Office,  near  Leominster,

October  30th,  1895.

Referring  to  your  visit  to  Bodenham  on  August  3rd,  1894,  I  am  writing
to  inform  you  that  a  well  was  sunk  at  the  spot  indicated  by  you  at  the  back
of  the  keeper's  cottage,  and  water  was  found  at  a  depth  of  53  feet,  being  13
feet  lower  than  the  extreme  depth  as  estimated  by  you.

The  supply  of  water  is  sufficient  for  tlie  purposes  for  which  it  is  required,
the  water  rising  about  3  ft.  6  in.  in  the  well,  and  being  of  excellent
quality.  Henrv  A.  Ashworth.

Respecting  this,  Mr.  Gataker  states  he  was  employed  on  this
occasion  to  find  water  in  consequence  of  a  deep  well  formerly  in  use
liaving  run  dry  ;  and  he  succeeded  in  locating  the  above  supply  within
a  few  yards  of  the  old  well.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Ashworth  asking  if  Mr.  Gataker's  statements  were
correct,  and  received  the  following  reply  :  —

Hill  House,  Bodenham,  Leominster.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  5th  inst,  Mr.  Gataker  visited  Hampton
Court  Estate  in  the  summer  of  1894,  and  asserted,  after  searching,  that  water
would  be  found  at  a  certain  depth — about  20  ft.  east  of  the  old  well  which
has  been  sunk  for  the  use  of  the  cottage,  for  which  a  supply  was  recjuired —
the  old  well  proving  dry.  An  excellent  supply  of  water  was  found  on  sinking
at  the  sjjot  he  indicated,  but  at  about  10  ft.  lower  than  he  thought  it  wuuld
be  found.


180


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


No  attempts  [beyond  the  old  well]  to  sink  had  been  made  previous
to  his  visit.

H.  A.  ASHWORTH,

Agent,  Hampton  Court  Estate,  Near  Leominster.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries  Mr.  Ashworth  writes  further  ; —

Hill  House,  Bodenham,  Leominster,  April  2()th,  1897.
The  following  are  the  particulars  you  require  : —

(1)  Depth  of  new  well,  sunk  at  the  spot  Mr.  Gataker  indicated,  53  feet.

(2)  Character  of  ground  sunk  through  :  hard  marl,  with  the  exception  of

a  thin  bed  of  stone  6  inches  thick,  6  feet  from  surface.

(3)  Depth  of  water  in  well  :  from  36  to  42  inches.

(4)  Depth  of  old  well,  which  was  situated  8  yards  west  of  new  well  :
about  72  feet.

H.  A.  Ashworth.

No.  1"21. — The  next  letter  is  addressed  to  Mr.  Gataker,  from  Mrs.
Holloway,  of  Stroud  : — •

Farm  Hill,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire,  December  13th,  1894.

Your  search  for  water  at  Farm  Hill,  Stroud,  was  most  successful,  the
water  being  found  at  the  spot  indicated  by  yon.

The  men  told  me  there  were  18  feet  of  water  in  tlie  well,  which  I  have
had  analysed  twice,  and  it  is  found  very  good.

Anne  Holloway.

Here  Mr.  Gataker  states  that,  prior  to  his  visit,  boring  for  water
had  been  made  to  a  depth  of  70  feet,  but  no  water  found.  I  wrote  to
Mrs.  Holloway  and  asked  if  this  statement  were  correct ;  the  following
is  the  reply  : —

Farm  Hill,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire,  March  16th,  1897.
The  statement  made  by  Mr.  Gataker  is  correct. The  distance  between
the  unsuccessful  and  the  successful  bore  was  a  gradual  ascent  of  about  300
yards. Mr.  Gataker  gave  the  limit  of  depth  at  50  feet,  but  a  good  spring  of
water  was  actually  found  at  45  feet.

Ann  Holloway.

No.  122. — In  the  next  case  Mr.  Gataker  writes  to  me  as  follows: —
"  I  was  engaged  on  the  estate  of  Mr.  Geake,  near  Launceston,  and  after
searching  for  water  in  Mr.  Geake's  field,  I  was  brought  to  an  old  well
(dry),  and  which  was  looked  upon  as  useless.  Full  particulars  of  the
work  carried  out  following  my  advice  will  be  found  in  the  letter  I
received,  as  follows  "  :  —

Millways,  Launceston,  Cornwall,  October  4:th,  1895.

You  will  be  pleased  to  hear  we  found  the  spring,  after  sinking  one  well  to
65  feet,  and  driving  a  heading  about  15  feet,  exactly  as  you  predicted.  This
we  had  to  do  to  get  at  the  spot  marked  by  you.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


181


The  find  was  more  remarkable  because  you  said  we  ought  to  come  to  this
spot  very  soon,  and  you  could  not  see  how  the  well  should  go  quite  dry,
considering  the  spring  was  so  near.  The  well  was  not  straight,  and  was  sunk
the  opposite  way.

We  have  now  10  feet  6  inches  of  water  deep,  15  feet  long,  and  about  an
average  of  5  feet  wide,  which  has  kept  to  the  level  through  September.

John  Geake.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Geake  writes  : —

Mill  ways,  Launceston,  April  1st,  1897.
The  well  was  sunk  many  years  ago  to  supply  20  acres  of  grazing  land.
Origmally  it  was  about  25  feet  deejj.  It  was  taken  in  liand  from  time  to
time  by  different  men,  and  put  down  to  55  or  56  feet.  Even  after  that  it
went  dry  for  three  and  four  months,  according  to  the  summer  weather.
When  we  sent  for  Mr.  Gataker,  we  did  not  open  the  well  ;  it  had  been  quite
dry,  as  usual,  for  some  time.  Mr.  Gataker  came  upon  it  suddenly.  He  had
been  going  over  other  ground.  We  had  hoped  he  would  find  a  shallow
spring  somewhere  else.  After  asking  a  few  questions  about  the  well,  he
walked  on  one  side  of  it,  and  simply  said,  "  I  have  it."  He  turned  and  said,
"There  should  be  a  certain  quantity  of  water  at  the  bottom  of  that  well,  if
it  is  55  or  56  feet  deep  ;  there  is  a  spring  running  near,"  pointing  to  one
side  of  the  well,  "  and  it  should  have  touched  the  top  of  it."  We  found  out
afterwards  that  if  the  well  liad  been  sunk  straight  down,  as  we  supposed  it
to  be,  this  should  have  been  the  case,  but  in  order  to  escape  some  hard
ground,  the  men,  years  before,  had  gone  all  on  one  side,  quite  the  opposite
side  to  where  Mr.  Gataker  was  pointing.  He  gave  instructions  to  sink  the
well  10  feet  deeper,  and  drive  to  the  place  he  marked.  When  it  was
accomplished  we  had  a  room  of  water,  about  15  feet  long  and  10  feet  deep,
at  the  bottom  of  the  old  well  ;  the  water  rose  to  the  level  of  the  bottom  of
the  old  well.

An  old  Cornish  miner,  who  went  down,  said  that  at  the  spot  Mr.  Gataker

pointed  out;  and  depth,  there  was  a  lode,  about  12  feet  wide,  showing

"Manganese." The  water  is  of  excellent  quality,  and  we  have  raised  the

rent  accordingly.  fJl  -r  ^

" ■'  JoHX  Geake.

In  answer  to  my  enquiry  whether  Mr.  Gataker's  predictions  were
verified  upon  actual  trial,  and  whether  it  was  probable  water  might
have  been  found  elsewhere  on  the  estate,  or  by  sinking  the  existing
well  deeper,  Mr.  Geake  replies  :  —

MUlways,  Launceston,  Ajjril  loth,  1897.
We  verified  Mr.  Gataker's  predictions.  The  spring  was  found  at  the  very
place  he  indicated.  A\  e  [probably]  should  not  have  found  a  similar  supply
by  sinking  deeper,  or  anywhere  about  but  the  place  he  marked.  In  my  last
to  you,  I  quite  forgot  to  mention  that  we  had  gone  to  great  expense  by
having  two  holes  bored  at  the  bottom  of  the  well,  20  and  30  feet,  which
made  the  well  and  holes  86  feet  deep.  We  had  given  up  trying  a  year  or
two  before  Mr.  G.  came  to  us.

John  Geake.


182


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


No.  123. — Mr.  Gataker  states  that  being  engaged  by  Messrs.
Ruscombe  Poole  and  Son,  the  well  known  solicitors  of  Bridgwater,  he
found  a  spring  less  than  14  feet  deep,  and  within  3  or  4  yards  of  a
useless  well,  20  feet  deep,  sunk  prior  to  his  visit.  In  corroboration,
he  encloses  the  following  letter  :  —

Bridgwater,  Somerset,  July,  1896.
We  have  sunk  a  well  in  tliij  garrlyn,  and  a  copious  spring  has  been  found
at  13ft.  6in.,  which  amply  verifies  your  prediction.

J.  Ruscombe  Poole  and  Son.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Ruscombe  Poole,  and  asked  him  if  Mr.  Gataker's
statement  were  correct,  and  he  replies  : —

Bridgwater,  January  15th,  1897.

We  return  the  paper  you  sent  us.  As  regards  the  statement  that  there
was  a  well  about  20  feet  deep  which  was  useless,  this  is  perfectly  true,
because  the  water  in  it  was  foul,  and  smelt  badly.  The  supply  found  is  a
very  much  more  copious  one  than  the  old  well,  which  contained  very  little
water.

J.  Ruscombe  Poole  and  Son.

No.  124. — In  the  next  case,  Mr.  Gataker  states  he  was  engaged  by
the  Messrs.  Pacey,  of  Melton  Mowbray,  who,  prior  to  his  visit,  had
sunk  a  well  on  the  advice  of  a  water-finder,  but  the  supply  proved
useless  ;  that  he  found  a  spring  close  by,  and  agreed  to  sink  a  well
on  the  terms  of  "  no  water,  no  pay."

I  wrote  to  Messrs.  Pacey,  who  replied  on  September  17th,  1896,
that  they  had  not  yet  got  to  the  depth  of  50  or  60  feet,  predicted  by
Mr.  Gataker,  but  would  write  later.  In  December  they  wrote  to  Mr.
Gataker  they  had  found  "  abundance  of  water  at  the  depth  of  58
feet."  In  reply  to  my  specific  enquiries  (1)  Whethei"  Mr.  Gataker  had
been  successful  1  (2)  Who  was  the  unsuccessful  diviner  previously
employed  1  (3)  What  was  the  distance  off  and  depth  of  the  old  well  ?
Messrs.  Pacey  write  : —

Egerton  Brewery,  Melton  Mowbray,  December  19th,  1896.

Replying  to  yours  of  the  17th,  we  beg  to  say,  in  answer  to  your  questions
(1)  Very  successful.  (2)  No  other  diviner  was  employed  by  us.  (3)  There
is  a  well  5  yards  distant  from  the  site  the  diviner  indicated.  The  new  well
has  14  feet  6  inches  of  water,  the  old  well  only  2  feet  6  inclies.

Adcock,  Pacey,  and  Co.

I  had  to  write  again  to  get  the  depth  of  the  wells,  when  I  was

informed  the  unsuccessful  well  was  about  45  feet  deep,  and  the

successful  one  56  feet.  After  all,  therefore,  this  case  is  not  of
evidential  value.


xxxu.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


183


No.  125. — The  next  letters  are  addressed  to  Mr.  Gataker  from  the
agent  to  Sir  J.  de  Hoghton,  Bart.,  of  Hoghton.  Tower,  near  Preston,
Lancashire  : —

Hoghton  Estate  Office,  Walton-le-dale,  Preston,

April,  1895.

Several  farms  on  these  estates  being  short  of  water,  your  advice  was
obtamed,  and  you  pointed  out  places  where  water  would  be  found,  giving  the
depth.

In  a  field  close  to  Hoghton  Station,  at  one  of  these  spots,  where  the
depth  was  estimated  at  from  10  to  15  feet,  a  boring  was  made  and  water
reached  at  10  feet  ;  a  well  will  probably  be  sunk  there  at  some  future
time.

At  Hardshaw  Hillock,  Walton-le-dale,  you  indicated  a  place  where  water
might  be  found  at  from  20  to  25  feet.  Here,  in  March,  1895,  water
was  found  in  a  bed  of  sand,  after  sinking  through  22  feet  of  stiff  marl,  and  a
large  supply  is  being  yielded.

In  this  latter  case,  you  used  your  hands  only,  without  any  rod.

Walter  de  H.  Birch.

Jnly  30th,  1895.

Another  w'ell  has  been  sunk  at  a  neighbouring  farm,  Leigh  House,
Walton-le-dale.  Here  you  had  indicated  a  spot  whei'e  water  would  be  found
at  from  30  to  35  feet  deep.

After  getting  down  30  feet  of  exceptionally  hard  clay  and  marl,  the
well  sinkers  were  beginning  to  lose  heart,  and  the  tenant  suggested
that  a  rain-water  tank  would  answer  his  purpose,  but  continuing  to
sink,  they  struck  a  vein  of  sand  at  about  31  feet,  with  a  good  supply
of  water.

At  34  feet,  clay  was  again  reached,  and  boring  10  feet  more  at  tlie  bottom
of  the  well  showed  only  hard  clay,  so  it  was  decided  to  "let  well  alone,"  as
the  result  was  so  satisfactory.

Walter  de  H.  Birch.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Birch  to  inquire  if  any  previous  attempts  tO'
find  water  had  been  made,  and  what  was  €he  result,  and  whether
Mr.  Gataker  had  any  failures.  The  following  is  the  reply  I
received  :  —

Hoghton  Estate  Office,  Walton-le-Dale,  Preston,

April  12th,  1897.

Mr.  Gataker  certainly  has  been  remarkably  accurate  in  his  estimate  of  the
deptli  at  which  water  will  be  found,  though  sometimes  he  has  been  wroni;.
T  do  not  place  much  reliance  upon  his  estimate  of  quantity.

His  most  notable  failure  was  the  last.  Here  he  gave  the  depth  at  from
12  to  18  feet,  but  after  sinking  that  in  quite  dry  sand,  he  came  again  and  said
there  must  be  a  quicksand,  which  threw  him  out,  and  that  it  was  about  60  to
70  feet  deep.  We  bored  through  dry  sand,  and  found  a  quicksand  at  a  depth


184


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


of  72  feet,  so  that  he  redeemed  his  character  in  this.  This  is  a  list  of  his
predictions,  and  the  results  : — ^


li,  lif )  '111  f~l  TPfi

/J  /'I'if/'il

a.

20  it.

zz  it.

good  supply.

0.

Z\J  xz.

O  flllCl  rJi

two  springs  one  above  the  other.

C.

25  ft.

10  ft.

very  small  spiing.

d.

30  ft.  to  35  ft.

34  ft.

c.

10  ft.  to  15  ft.

10  ft.

/•

15  ft.

about  15  ft.

.'/•

20  ft.  to  30  ft.

about  11  ft.

a  fair  stream.

h.

30  ft.

Here  water

was  found  on  boring  and  rose

in the  bore  to  22  feet  from  the  surface.
Exact  depth  of  spring  not  ascertained.
i. 12  ft.  to  18  ft. No  water,  but  on  boring  deeper,  a  quicksand
struck  at  the dejith  of  72  feet,  as  already
mentioned.

In  "  </  "  there  was  more  water  lower  down,  and  you  will  notice  that  in  the
least  accurate  estimates  there  were  two  springs  at  difierent  depths.

Walter  db  H.  Birch.

No.  126.— Lord  Llangattock  writes  as  follows  to  Mr.  Gataker: —

The  Hendre,  Monmouth,  June,  1896.

Mr.  Gataker,  at  my  request,  has  been  searching  for  water  in  several
places  on  this  estate,  and  has  been  most  successful.

Water  has  been  found  wherever  he  has  indicated,  and  at  the  depth
mentioned  by  him.

I  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  him  and  the  wonderful  skill  he  shows  as  a

water  finder.  t

Llangattock.

AVith  reference  to  tliis  case,  Mr.  Gataker  informs  nie  that,  prior  to
his  visit,  attempts  had  been  made  to  find  water  by  digging  deep
trenches  in  many  directions,  ljut  without  success.  I  wrote  to  Lord
Llangattock  for  corroboration,  and  he  replies  as  follows  :  —

The  Hendre,  Monmouth,  A2yril  12th,  1897.
I  sent  your  letter  to  Mr.  Lipscomb  and  asked  him  to  give  you  all
information. I  have  great  faith  in  Mr.  Gataker. I  wanted  to  find  springs
in  the  Park  to  strengthen  a  pond,  and  he  marked  several  places,  and  told  me
exactly  the  depth  we  should  find  tlie  water,  and  he  was  always  correct.

Llangattock.

Mr.  Lipscomb  writes  : —

The  Hendre,  Monmouth,  Jirril  12th,  1897.

Mr.  Gataker  was  asked  to  find  water  to  strengthen  tlie  supply  of  water  to
the  lake  in  the  park.  He  located  five  sjirings,  near  the  lake,  within  a  100
yards  of  the  margin  of  the  lake  at  separate  points,  and  varying  from  11  to  20


1  Mr.  Birch  explains  that  the  lettering  indicates  different  places  on  the  estate
where  the  trials  were  made. — W.  F.  B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


185


feet  in  dejjth.  There  was  uo  sign  of  water  on  the  surface  at  these  points.
In  every  case  his  j)reclictions  as  to  depth  and  yield  were  correct.  This  is  as
far  as  we  have  proved  him.  No  sinking  had  been  done  previous  to  his  visit,
the  lake  being  fed  by  natural  surface  sti'eams.  In  Pearson's  Magarune,  p.  311,
you  will  find  some  account  of  Gataker's  work  here.  He  is  there  depicted
bunting  for  springs  in  the  bed  of  the  lake.  He  had  let  the  water  out  of  the
lake  to  repair  a  liole  in  the  bank.  I  shall  be  glad  to  answer  any  questions
you  may  wish  to  ask.  q  Lipscomb.


No.  127.— The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Cardiff,  who  has  frequently
given  most  valuable  assistance  in  the  course  of  this  research,  sends  me
the  following  letter  addressed  to  him  by  Captain  Stansfeld,  in  answer
to  Mr.  Fryer's  enquiries  :  —

Dunninald,  Montrose,  N.B.,  September  18th,  1896.

On  the  24th  of  July  Mr.  Gataker  visited  this  estate,  and  as  he  was  rather
pressed  for  time  on  that  occasion,  he  is  to  give  me  another  call.  We,
however,  walked  over  two  fields,  in  each  of  which  points  were  marked  where
Mr.  Gataker  said  springs  of  water  at  various  depths  would  be  found.  I  have
up  to  the  present  only  experimented  on  one,  and  this  at  about  9  feet  deep,
which  is  well  within  the  estimated  depth  made  by  Mr.  Gataker,  and  the
apparent  water  suj)ply  is  nearly  as  stated  by  Mr.  Gataker,  viz.,  about  two
gallons  a  minute.  Mr.  Gataker,  wlien  pointing  out  this  supply,  told  me  that
in  a  jjrevious  digging  I  had  just  missed  the  proper  spring  by  about  4  or  5
yards,  and  in  this  he  seems  to  lie  correct.  The  excavation  was  almost
entirely  through  rock.

I  shall  be  happy  to  report  further  if  you  desire  it,  but  work  is  necessarily

slow,  as  there  is  so  much  rock  to  go  through.  t  o

'  "  ^  John  Stan,sfeld.

Subsequently  I  wrote  to  Captain  Stansfeld,  who  stated  he  was
expecting  another  visit  from  Mr.  Gataker,  and  that  the  spring  the
water-finder  had  previously  found  continued  to  give  a  plentiful  supply.
Later  on,  I  received  the  following  : —

Dunninald,  Montrose,  October  24:th,  1896.
Mr.  Gataker  did  not  use  the  rod  in  discovering  water,  but  in  order  to
show  the  working,  he  took  a  forked  hazel  rod,  and  this  rod  twisted  round  in
his  hands.  A  gentleman  then  tried  the  rod,  but  in  his  hands  it  did  not
move,  till  Mr.  Gataker  put  his  own  hands  on  the  wrists  of  the  gentleman,
when  the  rod  immediately  turned  round.  t  c<

John  feTANSFELD.

No.  128.— The  Bath  Chronicle  of  January  7th,  1897,  has  tlie
following  : —

Mr.  Leicester  Gataker  was  recently  engaged  by  the  Belfast  Brewery  to
put  them  in  the  way  of  obtaining  a  good  supjjly  of  water.  They  had
previously  sunk  four  wells,  and  had  also  some  time  before  had  the  services  of
another  diviner. Acting  upon  Mr.  Gataker's  advice,  they  have  sunk  two


186


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


wells.  In  the  case  of  the  second  one,  he  advised  the  company  that  at  a  depth
of  from  120  to  150  feet  they  would  obtain  what  they  required.  After  going
80  feet  they  tapped  a  spring.  This  did  not  come  up  to  tlieir  requirements,
so  they  asked  Mr.  Gataker  to  come  again,  doubtless  in  view  of  their  pi'evious
failures.  He  accordingly  went,  and  informed  the  company  that  tliey  must  go  on
to  the  depth  originally  given — 150  feet.  They  went  on,  and  at  the  depth  named
tlicy  secured  a  second  spring  of  large  power.  While  in  Ireland  last  month
he  again  visited  the  place,  and  after  descending  the  well,  he  predicted  that  by
going  nine  feet  deeper  they  would  obtain  an  even  stronger  (third)  spring.
They  no  longer  had  any  doubt  as  to  what  course  to  pursue,  and  by  doing  as
last  advised,  tliey  have  increased  tlie  sujjply  by  2,000  gallons  a  day.

A  subsequent  issue  of  the  same  newspaper  states  that  :  —

Well  No.  2  has  now  been  carried  out,  and  Mr.  T.  R.  Caffrey,  the  pro-
Ijrietor,  gives  the  yield  at  7,000  gallons  per  24  hours.  He  has  also  stated
that  "it  would  have  been  a  saving  of  many  hundreds  of  pounds  had  I  known
Mr.  Gataker  when  I  first  started  looking  for  water."  Both  wells  are  197
feet  deep.

I  wrote  to  the  proprietor  of  the  brewery  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the
foregoing  newspaper  reports,  and  asked  for  further  particulars.  Mr.
Caffrey  replies  : —

The  Brewery,  Belfast,  February  26th,  1897.

Tlie  enclosed  cuttings  are  quite  correct,  save  and  except  the  No.  2  well
is  now  giving  over  9,000  gallons  in  the  24  hours.

I  had  a  water-finder  before  I  met  with  Mr.  Gataker,  who  marked  out  four
places.  I  got  water  in  one  of  the  four,  none  in  the  other  three.  Mr.
Gataker  marked  the  two  wells  I  liave  opened  and  found  the  water  all  right.

Thomas  R.  Caffrey.

I  could  not  ascertain  from  Mr.  Caffrey  the  name  of  the  previous
unsuccessful  dowser.

The  next  letter  is  from  Dr.  A.  A.  Mantell,  of  Bath  : — ■

The  Elms,  Bathampton,  Bath,  July,  1894.

On  June  4tli,  1894,  I  took  Mr.  Leicester  Gataker  to  a  neighbour's  tennis
lawn  in  Bathampton,  which  was  made  by  him,  and  during  the  excavations  a
sjuring  of  water  was  found,  which  now  runs  diagonally  acixiss  the  lawn.

Mr.  Gataker  had  not  entered  the  premises  before,  nor  had  he  the  slightest
knowledge  that  there  was  any  water  there  ;  I  therefore  proposed  to  the
owner  of  tlie  lawn  to  put  him  to  a  severe  test  as  to  his  powers  of  divining.  I
carefully  blindfolded  him,  and  in  order  to  prevent  his  injuring  himself
fastened  a  rope  to  his  arm,  and  held  it  loosely  in  my  hand  ;  he  was  then
asked  t(j  walk  about  and  see  if  there  was  any  water  to  be  found.  Imme-
diately, when  he  walked  over  the  spring,  which  lies  about  three  or  four  feet
deep,  the  rod  revolved,  and  whilst  still  blindfolded  he  traced  its  pa.ssage  most
accui'ately  across  the  lawn.  At  a  recent  meeting  of  the  Bath  Field  Club  to
witness  some  experiments  by  a  "  Water  Dowser,"  we  asked  him  to  walk  on


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


a  row  of  bottles,  v/liich  were  placed  over  a  spring,  and  which  was  known  to  be
there.  When  he  was  quite  insulated  by  these  bottles,  the  rod  ceased  to
revolve,  and  several  members  of  the  Club  were  under  the  impression  that
the  bottles  acting  as  non-conductors  prevented  the  current  of  electric  fluid,
or  whatever  it  may  be,  from  passing  into  the  dowser's  body.  I  therefore  put
Mr.  Gataker  to  a  similar  test,  but  with  him  the  rod  revolved  as  well  with
as  without  the  intervention  of  the  bottles  ;  this  seems  to  indicate  Mr>
Gataker's  great  susceptibility  to  the  influence.

My  neighbour  and  those  present  on  this  occasion  feel  convinced  that  Mr.
Gataker  has  the  power  of  water-finding  in  a  remarkable  degree,  and  we  hope-
that  he  may  be  successful  in  making  it  his  profession.

A.  A.  Mantell,  M.D.

The  foregoing  letter  illustrates  how  necessary  it  is  to  guard  against
giving  unconscious  indications  and  suggestions,  which  may  account
for  the  dowser's  success  on  this  occasion.  The  failure  of  the  insulation
test  corroborates  what  has  already  been  said  about  the  fallacy  of  this
experiment.

No  129. — The  next  letter  to  Mr.  Gataker  is  the  result  of  work
done  on  the  Duke  of  Devonsliire's  Estate.

Chatsworth,  Chesterdeld,  June  22iid,  1895.

You  stated  that  you  believed  we  should  find  water  at  a  depth  of  between
60  and  70  feet.  We  found  a  supply  at  69  feet,  and  there  is  every  probability
that  it  will  be  sufficient  for  the  requirements  of  the  farm.

You  are  no  doubt  aware  that  we  had  previously  sunk  a  well  to  a  consider-
able depth  without  success.

I  was  much  surprised  to  find  that  you  first  indicated  the  locality  of  water
with  your  hands  and  no  rod,  only  using  the  rod  as  a  secondary  aid  to  confirm
your  indication.  ^^^^^^  Martin.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries  Mv.  Martin  writes  : —

Chatsworth,  Chesterfield,  Januarij  14Wi,  1897.

Mr.  Gataker's  statements  enclosed  are  quite  correct. The  well  which

was  sunk  before  he  came  was,  so  far  as  I  remember,  about  45  feet  deep  ;  the

well  which  proved  successful  was  about  300  yards  from  the  useless  one,  and

upon  much  higher  around.
^  & o  GiLsoN  Martin.

Mr.  Martin  adds  that  he  has  increased  the  cheque  due  to  Mr.
Gataker,  as  he  was  so  gratified  with  the  success  attained.


Failures.

I  have  received  reports,  but  no  details,  of  several  failures  on  the
part  of  Mr.  Gataker.  I  spoke  to  Mr.  Gataker  about  these  when  he
called  upon  me  in  Dublin,  and  he  frankly  said  there  was  no  doubt  he


188


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


was  occasionally  wrong,  but  he  did  not  think  his  failures  averaged
]nore  than  10  per  cent,  of  his  total  engagements.  He  told  me  he  kept
a  careful  record  of  all  his  work,  and  he  had,  as  I  had  requested,  gone
over  all  his  cases  to  iind  the  number  of  failures  of  which  he  had  heard,
with  the  result  .stated.  This  statement  I  have,  of  course,  no  means  of
verifying.

The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  sends  me  some  particulai's  of  the  failure  of
dataker  and  H.  W.  MuUins  to  find  water  for  a  Brewery  near  Bath,
but  I  cannot  ascertain  which  of  the  two  dowsers  was  really  at  fault,
as  it  appears  the  well  was  sunk,  not  on  the  spot  where  both  dowsers  —
independently  of  each  other — agreed  there  was  a  spring,  but  at  a  spot
where  one  said  there  was  a  spring  and  the  other  said  there  was  not.
In  the  Richmond  Experiments  which  follow,  Gataker  and  H.  W.
MuUins  were  also  employed,  with  the  result  described  below.

It  will  have  been  noticed  on  a  preceding  page  (p.  173),  that  Mr.
Gataker  sends  an  assistant  when  he  cannot  go  himself.  These
assistants  Mr.  Gataker  professes  "  to  train  "  for  a  fee.  If  there  is  a
peculiar  instinct,  or  faculty,  for  iinding  underground  water,  such  as
the  dowsers  themselves  claim  to  jDOssess,  this  so-called  "  training  "  is  a
piece  of  the  charlatanism  which  crops  out  in  so  many  of  these  "  water-
experts."  Here,  for  example,  is  an  extract  from  the  Richmond  Times,
of  January  11th,  1896,  where  an  account  is  given  of  Mr.  Gataker's
dowsing  for  water  at  Richmond,  as  fully  detailed  in  the  "  Richmond
Experiments,"  which  follow.  The  account,  the  editor  informed  me,  was
written  by  an  experienced  reportei-,  who  states  that

"Mr.  Gataker  was  closely  questioned  as  to  whether  the  stream  of
running  water  in  the  channel  of  the  adit  might  not  alFect  his  judgment.  To
tliis  he  replied  most  positively  in  the  negative,  saying  that  it  miglit  affect
the  twig,  but  tliat  by  '  a  new  dodge  '  which  he  had  discovered  about  ten
inonths  ago,  in  working  with  his  hands,  he  could  absolutely  eliminate  that
disturbing  influence.  He  could  also  discriminate  between  natural  and
artificial  currents,  and  could  even  tell  if  there  were  two  springs,  one
immediately  beneath  the  other,  and  could  divine  the  depth  and  quantity
of  each."

This  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  can  only  provoke  well-deserved
contempt.


The  Richmond  Experiments.

Among  the  more  extensive  and  costly  series  of  experiments  made
to  test  the  value  of  the  "  divining  rod  "  as  a  means  of  finding  under-
ground water,  must  be  included  those  carried  out  at  Richmond,
Surrey,  in  the  spring of  1896. Though  the  results  were  only  of


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


189


transient  success,  the  experiments  derive  additional  interest  from  the
following  facts  : —

(1)  Prior  to  the  "diviners'"  visit,  a  series  of  borings  for  water
had  ineffectually  been  made  ;  (2)  the  independent  opinions  of  two
different  "diviners"  were  obtained;  (3)  a  full  record  of  the  experi-
ments, as  they  took  place,  was  published  from  time  to  time  in  the  local
newspapers  ;  and  (4)  the  opinion  of  the  highest  geological  authorities
on  underground  water  was  also  obtained  and  borings  made  according
to  their  directions.  It  will  be  necessaiy,  therefore,  to  consider  this  case
at  some  length,  the  more  so  as  public  attention  was  widely  called  to
these  experiments  by  the  I'eports  in  the  London  papei-s  which  will  be
quoted  presently.

It  appears  that  the  water  supply  of  Richmond  is  derived  from  wells,
but  was  found  inadequate  to  the  growing  needs  of  the  township.
Attempts  to  increase  the  supply  were  made,  whereupon  a  coiTes-
pondence  arose  in  the  local  newspaper  suggesting  that  the  aid  of  the
"  divining  rod  "  should  be  called  in.  The  whole  question  was  discussed
by  the  Water  Supply  Committee  of  the  Borough,  who,  however,  could
not  officially  take  so  novel  a  course  ;  but  the  chairman  of  the  committee,
Mr.  T.  H.  Watney,  acting  upon  the  suggestion  of  the  editor  of  the
Richmond  Times,  undertook  in  his  private  capacity  to  defray  the  cost
of  putting  the  "  divining  rod "  to  the  test.  Arrangements  were
therefore  made  for  two  "  dowsers "  to  come  to  Richmond.  The
dowsers  selected  were  unfortunately  two  young  and  comparatively
unproved  men.

In  the  Hichmond  Times  of  January  11th,  1896,  a  lengthy  and
admirable  report  is  given  of  the  search  f(.)r  water  l^y  the  two  young
"diviners,"  who  were  first  Mr.  H.  W.  Mullins  and  afterwards  Mr.
Gataker. From  this  report  I  condense  the  following  : —

The  water  hitherto  obtained  from  the  chalk  at  Richmond  is  taken  from
a  depth  of  over  two  liundred  feet,  and  as  there  appeared  to  be  no  record  of
the  divining  rod  being  influenced  at  so  great  a  distance,  it  was  determined  to
take  the  diviners  or  dowsers  down  the  Borough  well  and  along  the  adits,  of
which  there  are  some  miles.  It  was  decided  that  the  two  "  dowsers  "  should
make  independent  examinations  on  different  days,  and  that  the  first  report
should  be  kept  secret  till  after  the  other  had  been  obtained.  Accordingly  on
December  11th,  1895,  "  Messrs.  Mullins  "  came  as  requested.  Before  going
down  the  well  Mullins  showed  the  use  of  the  rod  on  the  surface  of  the
ground.  At  one  spot  it  was  found  to  twist  violently,  Mr.  Mullins  stating  that
water  was  to  be  found  not  far  from  tlie  surface  at  that  spot.  Mr.  Peirce,  of
the  Borough  water  works,  confirmed  this,  stating  a  water  pipe  passed  under
the  ground  there  only  a  few  feet  down.  Mr.  Mullins  had  no  previous
knowledge  of  this  fact.  The  party  then  went  down  the  well  and  spent  some
hours  exploring  the  adits,  Mullins  walking  in  front  carrying  the  forked  twig.
The  indications  of  the  rod,  he  said,  were  against  a  good  supply. One  place,


190


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


however,  was  better  and  the  quantity  promised  went  as  high  as  1,000  or
1,500  gallons  a  day,  the  other  places  much  less.  In  all  some  thirty  places
were  indicated  by  the  "diviner,"  but  Mr.  Mullins  repeatedly  said,  "I
cannot  hold  out  any  hopes  of  large  quantities  of  water."  The  depth  to  be
sunk  he  estimated  at  from  thirty  to  seventy  feet.  Mr.  Peirce  marked  the
places  indicated.

Three  weeks  later  Mr.  Gataker  made  his  examination.  Here  a  noticeable
diflerence  was  oljserved  in  Gataker's  method  of  working,  as  compai'ed  with
jMullins'.  He  discarded  the  twig  or  any  other  artificial  aid  \\-hatever,  and
simjDly  walked  about  with  his  arms  held  stiffly  down  by  his  sides,  the  palms
spread  outward.  There  were  consequently  no  outward  manifestations  to
indicate  the  supposed  presence  or  absence  of  water  beneath  the  ground,  and
it  was  necessary  to  take  his  word  entirely  for  the  matter.  A  twig,  however,
was  carried  by  his  pupil  who  accompanied  him,  and  by  its  lively  dippings  and
twistings  sustained  the  divinations  of  the  master.  As  before,  the  party,  after
descending  the  well,  tramped  for  some  hours  through  adit  after  adit,  until
Gataker  had  exjilored  every  portion  of  the  workings.  The  results  were
rather  startlingly  diffei'ent  to  those  obtained  per  Mullins.  Gataker  marked
many  more  points  than  the  other,  and  he  jiredicted  for  each  a  vastly  larger
flow.  The  range  of  depth  at  which  water  w^ould  be  obtained  was,  in  his
opini(jn,  from  50  to  200  feet  l^elow  the  flo(.)r  ui  the  adit.  In  one  or  two  cases
his  points  tallied  almost  exactly  \\'ith  those  of  Mr.  Mullins,  and  in  several
other  cases  they  were  within  a  few  feet,  but  this  could  not  be  said  of  the
great  majority.  Altogether  he  marked  55  places  where  a  good  supply
Could  be  obtained  at  an  average  depth  of  SO  feet  ;  the  points  marked
were  distributed  pretty  equally  all  over  the  present  headings.  The  total
daily  supply  he  predicted  would  be  277,000  gallons.  It  should  be  added
that  <:)ne  of  the  members  of  the  Richmond  Town  Council,  who  accompanied
the  party,  found  the  "twig  "  moved  in  his  hands,  also  at  some  of  the  points
which  were  indicated  by  Gataker  as  likely  to  yield  the  best  supply.

In  the  Thames  Valley  Times  of  January  15th,  1896,  a  week  after  Mr.
Gataker's  visit,  is  a  report  of  a  meeting  of  the  Richmond  Town  Council,
when  the  chairman  of  the  water  committee  announced  that  borings
had  been  made  at  a  spot  indicated  by  both  the  diviners,  working
independently  of  one  another,  one  stating  water  would  be  found  at  a
depth  of  50  feet,  the  other  30  to  50  feet,  the  former  naming  800
gallons  a  day  as  the  yield,  the  latter  7,000.  Water  to  the  extent  of
8,000  gallons  a  day  was  actually  found  here  at  a  depth  of  21^  feet.
Public  attention  was  directed  to  the  matter  by  the  following  notice  in
the  London  Times  of  January  17th,  1896  : —

A  supply  of  water,  estimated  at  about  8,000  gallons  a  day,  has  just  been
tapped  at  Richmond  in  somewhat  remarkable  circumstances.  For  some  time
l^ast  extensive  borings  have  been  made  in  the  adits  of  the  Richmond-terrace-
gardens  well,  but  with  comparatively  little  success.  Last  week  two  ' '  water
diviners,"  named  Gataker  and  Mullins,  visited  the  well,  and  both  predicted
that  water  would  be  found  at  certain  indicated  spots,  the  former  alleging  that
by  making  50  borings,  at  a  cost  of  about  £800,  an  enormous  supply  might


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


191


1)6  obtained,  worth  to  the  town  about  £5,000  a  year,  on  the  Southwark  and
Yauxhall  valuatiiin.  On  Monday  last  it  was  decided  to  begin  boring  at  a
point  where  botli  the  "  diviners "  predicted  a  find,  from  30  feet  to  50
feet  below.  At  a  depth  of  about  20  feet  a  spring  was  tapped  which  i.s
yielding  8,000  gallons  a  day.  The  experiments  have  been  carried  out  at  the
expense  of  Councillor  Watney,  and  he  has  undertaken  to  bear  the  cost  of
further  borings  at  other  points  indicated  by  the  water-finders.

The  Standard  of  the  same  date  also  had  the  following  : —

A  remarkable  discovery  of  water  by  the  aid  of  professional  water-finders
lias  just  occurred  at  Richmond,  Surrey.  The  Corporation  have  had  wells
sunk  to  a  considerable  depth  to  procure  water  sufficient  to  meet  the
Tequirements  of  the  borough,  and  a  supply,  which  for  the  past  five  or  six
weeks  averaged  233,000  gallons  per  day,  was  discovered.  Further  borings
for  a  greater  yield  have,  however,  been  attended  ^^  ith  little  success.  Last
week  two  water  diviners,  named  Gataker  and  Mullins,  visited  the  Terrace-
_gardens  Well,  and  indicated  a  number  of  places  in  tlie  adits  at  which  they
alleged  water  would  be  ff)und.  The  former  stated  that  by  making  about
50  borings  at  indicated  spots  a  supply  of  water  would  be  found  -svorth  about
£5,000  a  year  to  the  town,  on  the  valuation  of  the  Southwark  and  Yauxhall
■Company.  This  suggestion  was  acted  upon,  and  when  the  boring  reached
about  20  feet,  a  spring  of  water  was  tapped  yielding  about  8,000  gallons
per  day.

Ttie  local  newspaper,  in  coiniaenting  on  these  facts,  states  that
the  finding  of  the  water  may  be  merely  a  coincidence,  though  a  large
number  of  borings  had  been  previously  made  with  practically  no
result.  It  also  points  out  that  the  "  dowsers "  worked  under
■conditions  entirely  new  to  them,  not  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  but
in  tunnels  far  underground,  with  water  probably  all  round  them.

The  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  Richmond  Times,  Mr.  F.  W.
Dimbleby,  J. P.,  in  reply  to  ray  enquiries  (1)  as  to  the  accuracy  of
the  reports  in  his  newspaper,  and  (2)  as  to  evidence  of  any  previous
toring  for  water  being  made  prior  to  the  use  of  the  "  divining  rod,  '
writes  : —

Richmond,  Surrey,  February  oth,  1896.

(1)  You  may  entirely  rely  upon  the  reports  referred  to.  Being  interested
in  the  matter  (as  a  former  member  of  the  Water  Supply  Committee  of  the
Corporation),  I  went  down  the  well  with  Mullins  myself,  so  that  the  jjart  of
the  report  referring  to  his  visit  is  my  own  work.  The  part  relating  to
Oataker  was  written  by  my  cliief  reporter,  an  experienced  and  reliable
man.

(2)  By  this  post  I  send  you  another  paper  of  mine,  the  Thames  Valleij
Times  of  January  loth,  which  answers  your  question  as  to  previous
unsuccessful  attempts  to  find  water,  and  shows  that  a  supply  has  now  been
obtained  at  the  spot  iirdicated  by  Gataker  and  Mullins.  I  should  add,
liowever,  that  since  that  date  the  yield  of  8,000  gallons  a  day  has  greatly


192


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


diiuiiiished. This  usually  happens  when  a  fissure  is  tapped,  and  the  water

"  backed  up  "  in  it  has  had  time  to  run  away.

(o)  Gataker  paid  us  another  visit  on  January  23rd,  as  reported  in  the

Richmond  and  Twickenham  Times  of  January  25tli,  also  sent  by  this  post.

We  have  now  had  three  visits  in  all,  at  a  cost  (including  expenses)  of  from

ten  to  fifteen  guineas  each,  and  as  the  work  has  been  done  very  thoroughly

by  two  independent  men,  both  well-known  as  expert  "  water- finders,"  it  does

not  appear  to  me  to  be  necessary  to  go  further  until  the  reports  of  Mullins-

and  Gataker  have  Iieen  fully  tested.  „  t-v

Fbedk.  W.  Dimbleby.

The  newspaper  of  January  1.5th,  referred  to  in  the  above  letter,
contained  tlie  following  extract  from  the  official  report  of  the
Borough  Engineer  to  the  Town  Council  as  to  previous  borings  to
find  water  : — ■

Dining  the  past  five  weeks  the  workmen  have  been  engaged  boring  in  the
adits  ia  various  directions  624  feet,  viz.,  1794  feet  horizontally,  six  holes  from
7  to  70  feet,  248  vertically  (downwards),  seven  holes  13  to  80  feet  in  depth
(since  increased  to  88  feet),  lOG^  feet  inclined  ujjwards,  thirteen  holes  8  to
20  feet,  yielding  a  very  little  water.

The  local  paper  of  January  25th  states  that  the  supply  of  8,000
gallons  from  the  boring  made  at  the  place  indicated  by  both  Gataker
and  Mullins  had  diminished,  as  was  usual  in  newly  tapped  chalk
springs,  to  5,000  or  6,000  gallons.  Concerning  Gataker's  second  visit
on  January  23rd,  the  Richmond  Times  of  that  week  gives  a  detailed
account  which  I  here  condense  : —

At  more  than  one  point  Gataker's  "  divinings  "  were  in  close  proximity
to  the  places  previously  marked  by  Mullins  and  the  dejjtlis  given  approxi-
mately equal.  At  two  jjoints  where  bore  holes  had  been  sunk  and  only  a
moderate  supply  obtained,  Gataker  advised  deepening  the  holes  to  the  limit
named  in  his  former  predictions,  viz.,  about  80  feet.  In  the  south  adit
Gataker  estimated  the  depth  of  water  as  greater,  reaching  from  100  to  150
feet,  and  in  one  place  as  probably  200  feet.  At  the  next  point  reached,  five  men
were  then  engaged  in  sinking  a  bore  hole  at  the  place  Gataker  had  previously
marked,  a  depth  of  63  feet  had  been  reached  and  no  spring  as  yet  tapped.
Gataker  advised  going  d<jwn  to  at  least  80  feet,  which  was  also  the  limit
he  had  given  on  his  pi'evious  visit.  Two  other  places  where  borings  were
going  on  Gataker  also  advised  that  the  bore  holes  should  be  carried  deeper.

Commenting  on  this  visit  the  same  paper  remarks  : —

The  result  of  the  inspection  may  be  described  as  fairly  satisfactory.
There  are  certain  points  of  difficulty  in  connection  with  the  experiments,
which  cause  a  critical  test  to  be  arrived  at  less  easily  than  would  otherwise
be  the  case,  and  tend  to  lessen  the  practical  value  of  the  method.  Chief
amongst  these  may  be  mentioned  the  apparent  impossibility  of  fixing  the
exact  spot,  to  a  foot  or  two,  where  water  may  be  found,  and  as  the  diameter
of  the  bore-hole  is  only  about  four  inches,  a  slight  error  in  giving  the  j^recise


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  193


point  might  render  tliat  particular  bore-hole  useless.  But  notwithstanding
these  difficulties,  a  sufficient  prima  facie  case  has  been  made  out  to  justify
Mr.  Watney  proceeding  with  these  experiments,  which  he  is  carrying  out  at
his  own  expense.

My  friend,  3Ir.  ^Y.  Whitaker,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  who  is  well  known
both  as  an  eminent  geologist  and  authority  on  undei'ground  waters,
writes  in  answer  to  enquiries  as  to  his  opinion  of  the  foregoing
reports^  : — •

Southampton,  January  28th,  1896.
I  know  the  Richmond  waterworks,  having  been  all  along  the  underground
galleries,  etc  ,  on  two  occasions.  ...  As  the  two  "rodders"  were  more
or  less  surrounded  with  water,  their  rods  ought  to  have  been  twiddhng-;
everywhere  1  I  enclose  the  Engineer's  answer  to  a  letter  of  mine  which
lowers  the  reported  success.

The  enclosure  is  as  follows  : —

Borough  Waterworks  Office,  Richmond,  Surrey,

January  22nd,  1896.
ith  regard  to  the  divining  rod  reported  in  the  London  press,  too  much
has  been  put  forward.  The  truth  is  our  new  chairman  has  engaged  both
Mr.  MuUins  and  Mr.  Gataker  at  his  own  expense,  to  prove  whether
there  is  any  power  of  proving  water  sprmgs,  as  had  been  suggested  in  our
local  paper  by  one  who  had  seen  the  rod  used.  We  have  not  yet  had  much
from  the  experiment  ;  that  reported  was  at  a  spot  where  both  the  diviners
said  there  was  water  and  so  we  bored  a  three-inch  hole  ;  it  has  now  very
sensibly  diminished.  We  have  benefited  most  by  the  adit  driving  and  must
go  in  for  more,  that  being  the  only  sure  method  of  getting  water  here.

W.  G.  Peikce.

The  next  information  comes  from  the  local  newspapers  of  February
8th,  1896,  as  follows  :—

We  are  compelled  to  mention  to-day,  and  we  do  it  with  no  small  regret,
that  the  prospect  of  obtainuig  any  greatly  mcreased  supply  of  water  from  the-
Richmond  well  through  the  assistance  of  the  "  water  diviners  "  has  darkened  .
this  week  considerably.  The  bore-hole  in  the  south  adit,  at  whicli  during
each  of  his  visits  Mr.  Gataker  has  so  confidently  promised  that  a  supply  of
five  to  six  thousand  gallons  a  day  would  be  found  within  the  extreme  hmit  of
a  depth  of  100ft.,  has  been  abandoned  after  beuig  driven  to  a  depth  of  12oft.
without  producing  a  drop.  This  is  the  second  of  Mr.  Gataker's  points  that
have  been  tested,  the  first  being  that  at  which  an  additional  supply  of  8,000-
gallons  a  day  was  tapped,  but  quickly  ran  itself  ofi".  However,  in  the
absence  of  any  other  guide  as  to  desirable  localities,  some  more  of  tlie  points
indicated  by  Jlr.  Gataker  and  Mv.  Mulhns,  where  borings  have  already
begun,  will  be  thoroughly  tested.

1 1  am  indebted  to  the  Rev.  Osmond  Fisher,  M.A.,  for  this  information.

O


194


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Probably  the  bore-hole  referred  to  above  «vas  the  one  at  which  the
five  meii  were  working  in  the  previous  report  which  Gataker  advised
to  be  sunk  to  at  least  80  feet  ;  otherwise  there  seems  a  discrepancy
in  the  statements,  as  in  the  south  adit  the  reporter  stated  previously
that  Gataker  advised  boring  to  some  150  feet  or  even  deeper  in
one  place.

A  month  later,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Richmond  Town  Council,
reported  in  the  Thames  Valley  Times,  of  March  11th,  1896,  the
borough  engineer  reported  as  follows  : —

During  the  past  four  weeks  the  workmen  have  been  engaged  boring  in  the
adits  at  various  places  indicated  by  Messrs.  Mullins  and  Mr.  Gatalter,  iOOjft.
in  all,  viz.,  thirteen  bore-holes  completed  and  in  hand,  varying  from  lO^ft.  to
125ft.  in  depth,  yielding  220  gallons  of  water  per  day.  Messrs.  Mullins
«stimated  1,500  gallons  i:>er  day,  and  Mr.  L.  Gataker  30,000  gallons  per  day,
at  the  places  selected  and  depths  bored  during  the  past  month.

Six  feet  of  adit  driving  in  the  North-East  Adit  has  been  completed,  and  a
bore-hole  put  down  to  the  depth  advised  by  Mr.  L.  Gataker,  but  without
result  as  regards  an  increase  of  water.

The  total  quantity  of  water  pumped  from  the  Terrace  Gardens  and  Water-
lane  wells  during  the  past  four  weeks  has  been  (1,464,670  gallons,  averaging
230,881  gallons  per  day.

Councillor  Watney  said  he  was  afraid  he  had  very  little  to  report  in
regard  to  the  work  at  the  well.  He  regretted  that  there  was  a  decreased
supply  this  month  of  water  pumped  from  the  well.  They  had  been  most
inisuccessful  during  the  past  month  iu  tapping  any  new  fissures  or  sujjplies  of
water.  He  was  not  going  himself  to  be  a  prophet,  or  to  predict  what  would
happen  in  tlie  future.  He  desired  to  remind  the  Council  that,  although  not
mentioued  in  his  report,  the  period  of  his  three  months'  holiday  at  the  well
would  expire  before  the  next  Council  meeting.  He  thought  if  they  would
allow  him,  he  would  go  on  with  his  experiments  until  the  next  Council
meeting,  when  he  would  ask  leave  to  continue  for  another  three  months. — It
was  resolved  that  Councillor  Watney's  application  should  ])e  acceded  to.

In  Notes  and  Queries  of  April  2.^th,  1896,  there  is  a  letter  from  the
Borough  Engineer,  who  writes  as  follows  to  a  correspondent  of  that
journal : —

The  diviners'  success  was  of  short  duration  ;  the  one  bore-hole  that
yielded  8,000  gallons  a  day  on  the  first  day,  gradually  fell  ofi^  and  was
exhausted  at  the  end  of  the  week.  About  22  bore-holes  have  been  driven  to
the  directions  with  a  very  small  increase  in  the  quantity  of  the  water.

W.  G.  Peirce.

Writing  to  me  on  October  2nd,  1896,  Mr.  Dimbleby  says,  in
answer  to  my  enquiry  : —

Mr.  Watney  is  still  carrying  on  the  boring  operations  at  his  own  expense,
pending  an  application  to  the  Local  Government  Board  by  the  Corporation,
for  power  to  borrow  more  money  for  these  works. Small  fissures,  yielding


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  195


very  small  quantities  of  water  are  frequently  met  with,  but  no  large  increase
in  the  supply  has  been  obtained.  ^  Dimbleby.

Finally,  the  same  kind  correspondent,  in  reply  to  my  recent  en-
quiries, writes  on  May  24th,  1897  : —

14,  King  Street,  Richmond,  Surrey,  May  24i/i,  1897.

The  Richmond  Corporation  have  now  resumed  the  boring  works  on  their
own  account ;  the  Local  Government  Board  having,  after  a  i^ublic  inquiry,
sanctioned  a  further  loan  of  £5,000  for  this  purpose.

No  reliance  is  now  placed  on  the  advice  of  the  so-called  "water-finders."

I  send  you  the  last  report  of  the  Water  Committee,  dated  May  4th,  1897,

and  also  the  one  for  the  previous  year.  xri  -i^r  t~i

Fredk.  W.  Dimbleby.

In  the  last  report  of  the  Water  Committee  it  is  stated  that  the
total  length  of  adits  driven  is  6,991  feet;  "one  fairly  good  fissure,
passed  on  April  8th,  still  keeps  up  the  yield  of  5,846  gallons  per
day  .  .  .  The  total  quantity  pumped  from  the  wells  during  the
past  four  weeks  averaging  225,848  gallons  per  day."  Though  this  is  a
less  amount  than  that  given  above  for  the  preceding  year,  yet,  as  the
report  shows,  a  regular  increase  in  the  water  supply  has  been  obtained
in  proportion  to  the  length  of  adits  driven.  The  cost  of  the  wells  and
adit  driving  at  Richmond  has  been  considerable.  The  Water
Committee's  report  shows  that  the  Water-lane  wells  and  bore-hole  cost
.£20,753  ;  the  Terrace  Gardens  well,  adits  and  boring,  cost  £16,590,  or
a  total  of  £37,343.1  of  this,  Mr.  Watney  has  refunded  £670,  the
expense  only  incurred  up  to  March  31st,  1896,  in  his  public-spirited
experiments.

With  regard  to  these  experiments,  it  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that
John  Mullins  was  not  available.  But  Mullins  was  not  living  when
his  "  firm "  were  invited,  and  nothing  could  be  more  misleading
than  the  practice  adopted  by  "  Messrs.  J.  Mullins  and  Sons,"  of
sending  out  a  book  of  testimonials,  which  chiefly  relate  to  their  father's
succes.s,  and  not  stating  the  fact  that  their  father  is  dead.  The  public
ignorance  of  the  whole  subject,  which  ignorance  this  paper  will,  T  hope,
in  some  measure  dispel,  is,  however,  the  most  fruitful  source  of  errors
like  the  preceding.  The  respective  qualifications  of  various  dowsers
should  be  ascertained  from  independent  evidence,  or  their  work  paid
for  in  proportion  to  the  success  achieved.


^  >leverthele.ss,  as  the  report  shows,  the  actual  cost  to  the  ratepayers  is  less  than  if
they  had  bought  the  water  from  the  London  water  companies.


O  -J,


196


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Group  IX. — {a)  Mr.  H.  Bacon.

I  heard  of  this  dowser,  who  lives  at  Newport,  Essex,  through  Mr.
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  he  sent  me  several
testimonials  from  those  for  whom  he  had  successfully  found  water  by
the  divining-rod.  In  some  of  these  cases  Mr.  Bacon  tells  me  that
attempts  to  find  water  by  sinking  or  boring  had  been  made  unsuccess-
fully before  his  visit  to  the  place.  Stagnant  water  he  cannot  detect,
only  running  water,  and  he  says  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  him
whether  he  goes  over  the  ground  at  day  or  night ;  or  whether  blind-
folded or  not.  Having  seen  a  dowser  at  work  some  five  years  ago,  he
tried,  and  found  the  forked  twig  moved  with  him  ;  hence,  he  was  led
to  take  up  this  business.  According  to  his  own  statement, — which
must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth, — he  has  never  had  a  failure,
though  he  admits  he  is  sometimes  mistaken  in  estimating  the  depth
and  the  volume  of  the  spring.  When  over  an  undei'ground  spring
he  states  that  the  rod  revolves  strongly,  and  "  I  begin  to  shake  from
head  to  foot  ;  in  fact,  I  shake  so  much  that  often  my  knees  begin  to
knock  together."

Among  Mr.  Bacon's  testimonials  are  letters  from  Lord  Calthorpe's
agent,  from  Sir  Walter  Gilbey,  Bart.,  from  Hudson's  Breweries,  &c.
Mr.  Hudson  writes  that  he  was  "  previously  very  sceptical,  but  the
proof  of  the  pudding  is  the  eating,"  a  good  supply  of  water  being
obtained  on  his  premises  at  19  feet  deep  ;  whereas  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  (according  to  Bacon's  statement  to  me)  a  deeper  well
had  been  sunk  prior  to  his  visit  with  no  result.

No.  130. — I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  J.  Christian  Smith,  the  Clerk  of
the  Works  on  Colonel  Houblon's  estate  in  Essex,  for  the  following
interesting  facts  : —

Great  Hallingbury.  Bishop's  Stortford,  Essex,  December  1st,  1896.

I  liave  pleasure  in  giving  you  some  particulars  of  water-finding  by  the
divining  rod  on  the  estate  of  Col.  G.  B.  A.  Houblon,  Essex.

We  wei'e  making  extensive  alterations  in  the  year  1893  at  Threenhall
Priory,  Essex,  which  necessitated  a  new  water  supply.  We  looked  about  for
what  we  thought  was  a  suitable  place  to  have  a  well  sunk  ;  we  proceeded  to  a
considerable  depth  without  any  signs  of  a  supply.  We  then  resorted  to  the
divining  rod,  and  sent  for  a  Mr.  Stone  out  of  Northamptonshire.  ^  By  the  aid
of  his  rod  he  informed  us  where  we  slionld  find  a  good  supply  of  water  ;  the
depth  he  could  not  give,  but  did  not  think  it  was  very  deep.  He  also  traced
the  direction  the  spring  took.  We  sank  at  the  point  indicated,  at  the  depth
of  38  feet. The  spring  proved  to  be  so  strong  that  it  rose  and  filled  the


[1  Now  of  Spilsby,  Lincolnshire. See  Group  V.]


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


197


well  nearly  full.  It  wixs  only  about  twenty  yards  from  the  well  we  had
previously  sunk  and  failed  ;  the  nearer  Mr.  Stone  went  Avith  his  rod  to  this,
the  weaker  the  latter  became.

The  latest  experience  we  have  had  was  with  Bacon.  I  took  him  to  several
places  whei'e  we  were  anxious  to  obtain  a  sujjply  of  water.  I  am  pleased  to
say  that  those  places  we  have  tried  have  been  most  successful.  The  first
well  we  sank  was  20  feet  deep  ;  at  this  depth  we  obtained  an  excellent  supjily,
indeed,  it  has  been  up  to  the  top.  The  second  well  we  obtained  a  bountiful
supply  at  53  feet  deejj  ;  standing  supply,  17  feet.  This  well  was  sunk  within
200  yards  of  the  old  well,  where  there  was  an  inefficient  supply  after  being-
bored  (depth  of  sinking,  30  feet).

Bacon  informed  me  that  he  invariably  finds  that  the  springs  run  from
east  to  west,  or  vice  verm  ;  he,  therefore,  carries  in  his  pocket  a  .small
compass,  so  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  cross  the  spring  ;  walking  as  the
spring  runs,  he  says,  punishes  him  more  than  he  can  bear.

If  I  can  be  of  any  further  service,  I  shall  esteem  it  a  great  pleasure.

John  Christian  Smith.

In  answer  to  my  further  specific  enquiries,  Mr.  J.  C.  Smith  writes  : —
Great  Hallingbury,  Bi.shop's  Stortford,  December  7th,  1896.

Bacon  is,  I  understand,  a  clever  mechanic,  and  at  the  present  time  acting
as  foreman  to  a  local  builder,  unknown  to  me,  until  this  year,  when  his
services  were  required.  Living  near,  and  hearing  of  his  successes,  we  were
induced  to  try  him.

(No.  1.)  The  exact  locality  of  this  estate  is  about  28  miles  north-east  of
London,  20  miles  south  of  Cambridge,  5  miles  west  of  Great  Dunmow,
1  mile  east  of  Bishop's  Stortford.

(No.  2.)  Bacon's  trials  were  on  the  same  estate,  about  four  miles  distant
from  Threenhall  Priory,  where  Stone  was.  I  do  not  think  water  is  likely  to
be  found  anytvhere.

(No.  3.)  The  well  [at  Threenhall  Priory]  was  sunk  to  the  dejjth  of  twenty-
eight  feet  only,  with  no  signs  of  water,  nothing  but  boulder  clay  coming  out.
Stone  went  over  this,  "said  we  should  never  find  any  water  there;"  the
nearer  he  came  to  it  from  the  present  spring,  the  weaker  did  the  crutch
[effect]  become.

(No.  4.)  I  cannot  say  how  deep  the  old  30  ft.  well  had  been  bored.
When  we  were  anxious  to  get  a  better  supjjly  here  we  examined  this,  and
found  that  a  false  bottom  of  wood  had  been  put  in  and  the  bore  hole  plugged
up  ;  we  concluded  that  the  boring  had  taken  away  the  little  water  there  was,
and  had  to  be  plugged  up  again.  Bacon  went  all  round  this,  but  could  find
no  trace  of  water.  Jo^n  Christian  Smith.

Again  my  correspondent  kindly  replies  : —

Great  Hallingbury,  Uecember  12th,  1896.

I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  my  experience  proves  that  the
indication  of  the  rod  has  enabled  us  to  find  water  when  other  means  had
failed.


198


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I  am  trying  to  get  at  the  depth  of  the  bcning  of  that  well  ;  if  1  succeed  I
will  inform  you.  [In  a  subsequent  note  I  am  informed  it  was  50  feet  deei^.]
I  mentioned  in  my  previous  letter  to  you  that  I  took  Bacon  all  round  this
old  well,  in  hopes  that  we  might  find  water  near  to  the  dwelling  house,  but
there  was  not  tlie  slightest  indication  of  his  rod  moving.

The  28  feet  well  does  refer  to  the  one  we  sank  at  Threenhall  Priory  with-
out success.  The  38  feet  well,  sunk  where  Stone  indicated,  where  an
abundant  supply  was  (obtained,  was  about  20  yards  distant.  At  the  28  feet
well  Stone  went  over  and  around.  He  said,  "  You  may  go  as  deep  as  you
like,  you  will  get  no  water  there." We  therefore  abandoned  it.

The  nearer  he  came  to  the  unsuccessful  one,  the  weaker  the  indication
became,  losing  it  entirely  before  he  got  to  that  well.


20  yards

Unsuccessful  O  :  O  Successful  Well.


I  can  only  add  my  experience  of  this  method  of  finding  water  has  been

highly  successful  on  this  estate. In  the  future  there  is  not  the  least  doubt

we  shall  resort  to  the  same  methods  ;  not  having  a  single  failure  gives  us

every  confidence.  t n  o

John  Christian  Smith.


No.  131. — Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Salisbury  Baxendale,  who
has  sent  me  several  letters  on  the  subject,  I  have  received  the
following  information  regarding  Bacon's  success  on  his  estate  at
Henham  in  Essex.  Bacon  informed  me  he  had  found  a  considerable
underground  sprijig  at  18  feet  deep,  not  far  from  a  useless  Avell  which
was  deeper  than  this.  Mr.  Baxendale's  reply  to  my  enquiry  is  as
follows  : —

1,  Sloane  Gardens,  S.W.,  December  2nd,  1896.
In  answer  to  yours  of  30th,  Bacon  was  a  very  satisfactory  "  water
diviner."

I  went  down  to  see  him  "divine,"  and  he  "  found  water"  at  about  the
depth  he  mentions,  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  which  looks  down  east  and  west  on
the  source  of  the  Cam,  the  "  Bench  Mark  "  at  the  top  being  321'5.  There
was  a  waterless  well  very  near.^

After  this  we  went  to  look  for  water  near  some  cottages,  and  he  marked
a  spot  where  he  said  water  would  be  found,  but  in  my  absence  my  tenant
thought  that  he  could  m;ike  one  well  do  for  txvo  sets  of  cottages — sunk  a  well
some  70  yards  to  the  north  of  the  place  marked  by  Bacon,  and  found  much

1  Subsequently  Mr.  Baxendale  tells  me  this  was  not  a  well,  but  a  very  deep  pond,
IS  feet  deep.  By  "  found  water  "  is  meant  on  a  well  being  sunk  water  was  found  at
about  the  depth  indicated  by  the  "diviner." — W.F.B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


199


chalk  aud  no  water.  As  he  was  an  honest  fool  I  declined  to  sink  another
well,  and  told  him  to  use  the  chalk  for  "top  dressing."

Since  then  Bacon  has  been  divuiing  in  Hampshire  for  Lord  Calthorpe—
and  successfullj^  He  was  very  modest  as  to  his  powers,  there  was  no
"  conjuring"  about  his  manner  ;— nor  could  any  of  my  party  do  the  same—
though  we  tried  it.

Salisbury  Baxendale.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mr.  Salisbury  Baxendale  sent  me  the
following  plan  and  memoranda  concerning  the  second  place  that  Bacon
fixed  on  for  a  well,  and  adds,  "my  father  sank  many  wells  without
finding  a  reasonable  water-supply."

Farm


I  I  I


D. Situation  of  well— TO  feet  deep— that  held  chalk,  and  not  water.

C. Small  pond  at  corner  of  road  that  always,  or  nearly  always,  held  water,— not

more  than  3  or  4  feet  deep.
B. Well— 30  yards  from  C  -  sunk  by  my  father  and  his  agent,  guided  only  by  the

light  of  nature,  and  not  by  the  light  of  Bacon. My  tenant  tells  me  that  it

is  100  feet  deep  (I  think  not  so  deep,  but  cannot  go  and  measure  it),  that  it

holds  2  feet  of  water  in  winter,  and  is  dry  in  summer.
A. The  place  that  was  suggested  to  me  by  Bacon,  and  where  the  well  should

have  been  sunk.

Salisbury  Baxendale.

In  answer  to  enquiries  whether  a  well  or  boring  could  be  made  at
the  spot  A,  marked  by  Bacon,  and  also  as  to  the  exact  locality,  Mr.
S.  Baxendale  writes  :—

1,  Sloane  Gardens,  S.W.,  December  17th,  1896.
In  answer  to  yours  of  yesterday,  I  do  not  feel  mclined  to  spend  any  more


200


Frofessor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


money  in  search  of  water  at  jDresent— although  I  have  a  benevolent  wish  to
give  any  kindly  person  jiermission  to  do  it  at  his  own  expense.  Times  are
hard  with  landowners.

Henham  is  6  miles  N.N.E.  of  Stortford,  and  about  64  miles  S.  of  Sati'ron
Walden.  Brayshots  is  one-third  mile  from  Little  Henham  Hall — where  the
Kiisuccessful  well  was  sunk  by  my  father  at  (Bj.

Salisbury  Baxendale.

F.  11. — In  the  Herts  and  Essex  Observer  Icr  December  19th,  1896,
is  ail  account  of  the  employment  of  Bacon  by  the  Maklen  District
Council  to  find  a  water  supply  for  that  neighbourhood.  The  rod
indicated  a  strong  spring  at  a  certain  spot  where  it  was  decided  to
sink  a  well.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Blyth,  of  ToUeshunt  D'Arcy,  who  had
taken  an  interest  in  the  matter,  who  replies  as  follows  : —

(Jxley  Lodge,  T'Darcy,  Witham,  Essex,  May  11th,  1897.

We  have  not  yet  bored,  but  have  driven  a  tube  to  a  depth  of  27  feet  with
no  result.  It  is  a  difficult  matter  to  move  a  Parish  Council  to  bore  where
they  have  always  been  told  tliere  can  be  no  water.  They  fear  a  failure  and
also  a  surcharge  by  the  auditor.  But  if  they  will  not  move,  I  shall  try  on
my  own  account,  and  will  then  let  you  know  the  result.

Fred.  W.  Blyth.

So  far,  therefore,  this  may  be  taken  as  a  failure  by  Bacon  :  othex'
like  cases  of  his  doubtless  exist  of  which  I  have  not  heard.


(6)  Mr.  H.  Chesterman.

Among  the  many  West  of  England  dowsers  is  Mr.  H.  Chesterman,
of  Bath,  who  states — in  the  course  of  a  lengtliy  account  he  has  sent  me
— that  30  years  ago  he  found  he  had  the  "  gift  "  of  dowsing,  and  has
been,  to  some  extent,  engaged  as  a  "  water  expert  "  ever  since,  though
it  is  not  the  business  of  his  life,  his  occupation  being  keeper  of  some
recreation  grounds  in  Bath.  Mr.  Chesterman,  like  the  late  Mr.
Lawrence,  jirefers  to  use  a  loop  of  wire  instead  of  a  forked  twig  when
dowsing,  and  states  that  when  approaching  an  underground  spring  he
experiences  "  a  peculiar  sensation,  like  an  electric  shock,  creeping  up
the  hands  and  arms,  becoming  more  violent  when  directly  over  the
hidden  spring ;  the  wider  the  space  over  which  the  shock  is  felt  the
nearer  the  spring  is  to  the  surface,  and  the  smaller  the  space  the
deeper  the  spring."  Mr.  Chesterman  also  adds  that  he  has  made  a
scale  by  which  he  can  approximately  tell  the  depth  of  the  spring  ;  this
he  has  described  at  length  to  me  ;  an  account  of  it  is  also  given  in  the
Gentleman's  Journal  for  October  1st,  1896,  but  it  is  of  no  value  to  any


sxxii.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  201


one  but  himself,  and  not  much  to  himself,  judging  from  Mr.  Cree's
experience  given  below.

Like  other  dowsers,  Mr.  Chesterman  states  that  the  rod  ceases  to
move,  and  the  sensation  he  experiences  is  completely  cut  off,  when  he
is  insulated  on  glass  vessels.  Again,  like  others,  Chesterman
finds  that  when  he  holds  the  wrist  of  a  person,  in  whose  hands  the  rod
would  not  previously  move,  then  the  rod  or  wire  instantly  revolves  if
over  a  spring.  This  transference  of  what  is  apparently  involuntary
muscular  action  is  doubtless  an  effect  of  suggestion,  which  plays  so
large  a  part  in  the  present  as  in  the  past  history  of  the  divining  rod.
Like  other  dowsers,  also,  Chesterman  believes  the  faculty  of  dowsing
is  hereditary  ;  out  of  his  seven  children  he  tells  me  five  have  the  "  gift."
He  claims  to  have  "  trained  "  Mr.  Gataker  in  the  proper  use  of  the
-gift  he  possessed,  just  as  Mr.  Gataker  oifers  to  train  other  appren-
tices— for  a  substantial  fee.  The  utter  nonsense  of  this  so-called
ti'aining  is  obvious  enough.

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Cree,  of  Over  Moigne,  near  Dorchester,  for
giving  me  particulars  of  an  abundant  supply  of  water  found  for  him  by
Chesterman ;  but  though  geological  information  had  been  obtained,
and  a  well  dug  unsuccessfully  prior  to  the  dowser's  visit,  yet  the  case  is
of  no  evidential  value,  as  the  unsuccessful  well  was  only  a  third  of  the
depth  of  Chesterman's  well.  Moreover,  Chesterman's  prediction  of  the
depth  of  the  spring  was  completely  wrong,  the  prediction  being  20  feet,
the  actual  depth  double  this.  At  the  same  time  I  believe  Chesterman
lias  been  much  more  successful  in  other  instances.

I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Chesterman  for  kindly  coming  to  London
from  Bath  at  his  own  expense  to  exhibit  his  method  of  dowsing  before
fche  members  of  the  S.  P.  li.,  when  this  paper  was  read.


(c)  Mr.  F.  Rodwell.

Another  dowser  is  the  lad  who  bears  the  appropriate  name  of
Fred  Rodwell,  and  who  came  into  some  notoriety  a  few  years  ago
through  the  animadversion  of  Professor  Ray  Lankester.

Rodwell  is  the  son  of  a  mining  engineer  and  surveyor,  living  in
"Wensley,  Yorkshire,  and  in  this  case  the  use  of  the  rod  has  chiefly
been  for  the  purpose  of  finding  mineral  veins.  I  shall,  therefore,
reserve  the  evidence  of  Rodwell's  success  in  this  direction  to  the  next
part  of  my  paper.  I  have  before  me  an  extensive  correspondence, —
partly  addressed  to  me  and  partly  to  Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins, — from
the  father  and  other  friends  of  young  Rodwell,  relating  the  tests  to
which  the  lad  was  subjected  in  his  search  for  minerals,  till  at  last  he
was  regularly  employed  by  the  Grinton  Mining  Company  to  prospect


202


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


for  mineral  lodes  on  their  property.  The  Graphic  of  November  2nd,
1889,  gave  an  account  of  the  lad  and  a  wood  cut  illustrating  his  method
of  procedure. From  this  account  the  following  extract  is  taken.

"  Not  long  ago  tliere  was  a  long  and  animated  correspondence  in  tlie
Standard  on  t\\e  use  of  the  'divining  rod'  for  finding  water  and  minerals.
A  good  many  of  the  writers  held  that  it  was  a  mere  sujjerstition,  handed
down  from  the  dark  ages,  and  that  the  belief  in  it  was  due  to  a  few
accidental  successes  on  the  part  of  the  water-tinders.  On  the  other  side,
however,  a  multitude  of  evidence  was  adduced  showing  that  there  are  certain
persons  who  do  possess  this  peculiar  faculty.  One  such  is  the  lad  named
Rodwell.  He  is  in  the  employment  of  the  Grinton  Mining  Company  in  the
North  of  England,  and  according  to  the  chairman  of  the  company  has  never
failed  when  tested.  Wherever  he  has  indicated  the  presence  of  water  or
minerals,  at  that  very  spot  a  spring  or  lode  has  been  discovered.  He  proceeds
thus.  Taking  in  his  hands  a  light  rod,  or,  if  he  has  no  rod,  with  his  hands
clasped  in  front  of  hinr,  Rodwell  walks  about  in  likely  places.  As  soon  as
he  steps  over  water  or  a  mineral-vein  the  rod  springs  up  to  his  breast,,  or  tlie


hands  clench  themselves  immovably,  and  he  cannot  unclasp  them  till  he^
moves  from  the  spot.  The  lad  in  whom  this  strange  faculty  has  developed,
is  about  14  years  of  age.  We  are  not  told  whether  his  peculiar  employment
has  any  effect  ujDon  his  health."

For  the  above  wood  cut,  which  illustrates  young  Rodwell  at  work
as  a  dowser,  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  proprietors  of  the
Graphic.

No.  132.— The  following  letter  relates  to  Rodwell  in  his  capacity
as  a  dowser  for  water.

The  Grange,  Aysgarth,  Yorks.,  May  13th,  1893.
It  may  be  interesting  to  you  to  know  tliat  there  is  a  youth  (Fred  Rodwell
by  name),  who  has  on  three  separate  occasions  found  the  ecfact  locality  of
underground  water  on  my  property. The  first  occasion  was  tlie  location  of


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


water  pipes  underground,  of  the  existence  of  which  he  could  not  possibly
have  had  an  J'  previous  knowledge.  The  other  two  instances  were  the  discovery
of  two  powerful  springs  of  water,  one  of  which  has  since  been  taken  for  a
village  for  the  supply  of  500  fieople,  and  in  neither  of  these  two  cases  was
there  suspected  or  was  there  the  least  external  appearance  to  mdicate  the
presence  of  underground  spring. These  facts  speak  for  themselves.

James  C.  Winn.

I  sent  Mr.  Winn  the  printed  proof  of  the  foregoing  letter  and
asked  him  to  correct  any  inaccuracies. Mr.  Winn  replies  : —

The  Grange,  Aysgarth,  R.S.O.,  N.  Yorks,  June  10th,  1897.
The  proof  of  my  letter  is  absolutely  correct  in  every  particular. I  believe
Rodwell  is  now  residing  at  West  Witton,  near  Leyburn,  but  I  have  no
particulars  of  him  recently.  j q  Winn

The  evidence  in  my  possession  respecting  Rodwell's  water-finding
power  is  very  meagre  and  inconclusive  ]  he  may  have  had  more  success
of  latBj  but  of  this  I  have  not  heard.

The  following  account  of  experiments  I  made  with  Rodwell  at
Wimbledon  were  conducted  and  recorded  in  the  year  1890.  Had  I
then  the  information  I  now  possess,  I  should  hardly  have  selected  this
young  dowser  for  the  purpose  of  experiment.

The  Wimbledon  Experiments.

I  was  anxious  to  obtain  some  direct  experimental  evidence  of  my
own  as  to  Rodweil's  ability  to  find  hidden  water  or  metal.  Accordingly
I  wrote  to  Dr.  McClure,  who  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Grinton  Mining
Company  in  Yorkshire,  and  from  whom  I  learnt  that  the  lad  was
not  only  employed  by  this  Mining  Company  to  seek  for  mineral  lodes,
but  according  to  Dr.  McClure  he  was  also  under  an  engagement  to  go
to  Australia  to  "  dowse  "  for  water  and  minerals.  Hence  I  arranged  to
examine  the  alleged  powers  of  the  lad  before  he  left  England  ;  for
this  purpose  instead  of  going  to  Yorkshire,  on  ground  with  which
Rodwell  was  acquainted,  my  friend,  Mr.  R.  S.  Donkin,  M.P.,  kindly
allowed  me  to  make  use  of  his  extensive  private  grounds  on  the  edge
of  Wimbledon  Common,  where  it  is  needless  to  say  the  lad  had  never
been  before.  The  experiments  I  am  about  to  describe  were  made  on
July  17th,  1890.

Before  Rodwell  arrived  from  Yorkshire  I  went  over  the  place  care-
fully with  the  head  gardener,  and  the  various  buried  water  pipes, drains,
disused  wells,  and  underground  springs  were  pointed  out  to  me.  On
the  arrival  of  Rodwell,  who  was  a  fat  heavy-looking  youth,  and  who
was  accompanied  by  Dr.  McClure,  I  begged  the  lad  to  try  first  of  all


204


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  lawn  beneath  whicli  (unknown  of  course  to  the  lad  or  Dr.  McClure)
.a  troublesome  spring  was  known  to  exist.

Experiment  1. — Pulling  from  his  pocket  a  bundle  of  small  forked
hazel  twigs,  he  selected  one  and  holding  it  in  the  usual  way  marched
to  and  fro  across  the  lawn ;  presently  the  twig  turned  up  and  he
declared  there  was  a  small  spring  below  his  feet.  This  was  within  a
foot  of  the  right  place  and  looked  promising.

Experiment  2. — He  then  endeavoured  to  trace  the  course  of  the
stream,  which  ran  through  drain  pipes  in  a  direction  that  had  previously
been  pointed  out  to  me,  but  here  he  blundered  a  good  deal.

Experiment  3. — Next  I  told  him  to  see  if  he  could  tind  any  of  the
water  mains,  and  for  this  purpose  to  walk  all  round  the  grounds  on  the
pathway.  He  did  so.  I  observed  that  as  he  walked  along  his  eyes  were
constantly  on  the  alert,  and  when  he  came  to  a  part  of  the  gravel  walk
that  had  lately  been  disturbed  he  said  a  pipe  occurred  there,  but  that
there  was  none  under  the  path  he  had  traversed.  As  a  matter  of  fact
the  pipe  ran  under  his  feet  to  the  stables  all  the  way  he  had  gone,  and  a
branch  had  recently  been  taken  off  to  a  greenhouse  at  the  only  spot  he
stopped  at.  The  test  was  therefore  a  complete  failure  ;  he  was  correct
only  where  it  was  probable  that  plumbers  had  been  at  work.

Experiment  4. — He  then  tried  the  archery  ground  and  orchard  ;  in
the  latter  an  Abyssinian  well  had  been  sunk  for  watei',  but  had  been
removed,  as  a  supply  had  not  been  obtained  ;  here  the  result  was
doubtful,  as  I  was  unable  to  test  his  assertion.

Experiment  5. — He  then  went  to  the  paddock,  an  extensive  held
where  an  old  and  long  disused  well  existed.  The  grass  had  so  com-
pletely covered  the  site  of  the  well  that  its  position  was  hidden
Rodwell  wandered  over  the  held,  but  found  no  water.  He  was  told  to
walk  in  the  dii'ection  where  I  knew  the  well  existed  ;  he  did  so  and
crossed  and  recrossed  the  site  of  the  old  well,  but  found  no  indications
of  water,  though  it  is  highly  prol^able  there  was  an  abundance
below  ;  a  little  further  on,  however,  the  twig  bent  strongly  upward
and  he  declared  that  there  was  a  large  supply  of  water  under  that  spot.
The  place  was  marked,  and  was  subsequently  tested  by  digging.

Experiment  6. — I  now  took  the  lad  into  the  kitchen  gardens  where
a  sunken  tank  full  of  water  existed  ;  the  tank  was  so  well  concealed
beneath  the  ground  that  its  position  could  not  be  detected  by  the  eye.
He  walked  twice  over  the  place  where  the  tank  was  buried,  but  gave
no  indication.  I  then  told  him  what  we  were  looking  for  and  suggested
he  should  try  again ;  after  moving  slowly  about,  presently  at  a  certain
spot  the  twig  turned  and  he  said  the  tank  was  under  that  spot,  but
it  certainly  was  not.  This  trial  also  was  therefore  a  complete  failure ;
it  is  fair  to  say  dowsers  state  they  cannot  detect  stagnant  water.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


205


Experiment  7. — I  now  proposed  to  blindfold  the  lad  and  take  him
again  to  the  lawn  and  paddock  to  see  if  he  indicated  the  same  spots
as  when  unblindfolded.  But  both  Dr.  McClure  and  Rod  well
strenuously  opposed  blindfolding.  At  last  they  gave  way,  l3ut  only
upon  my  insistence.^  For  the  purpose  of  blindfolding  a  quantity  of
cotton  wool  was  placed  over  his  eyes  and  on  each  side  of  the  nose,  and
an  ample  cloth  tied  round  his  head.  I  then  led  him  to  the  paddock
and  brought  him  near  to  the  spot  where  he  had  found  water  before
(Experiment  5) ;  he  traversed  and  re-traversed  the  spot  where  he  had
previously  located  water,  without  giving  any  indication,  and  walked
some  distance  in  the  wrong  direction,  when  he  pulled  the  bandage  off
saying  he  was  too  hot.  I  readjusted  the  bandage  and  told  him  to  try
again  ;  this  time  the  twig  moved  violently  very  near  the  spot  he  had
before  indicated.  His  hands  appeared  locked  in  a  convulsive  effort  ;
he  declared  that  he  was  perfectly  sure  that  water  was  below,  and  he
thought  near  the  surface.  With  the  permission  of  my  host  T  caused  a
well  to  be  dug  next  day  ;  two  men  were  employed,  but  after  several
hours'  work,  and  a  depth  of  about  eight  feet  had  been  reached,  no  water
was  found ;  an  unusual  fact,  as  in  that  gravelly  soil  water  sj^rings
abounded  very  near  the  surface.-

Ex])eriment  8. — Finally  I  took  the  lad  back  to  the  lawn  and  told
him,  when  blindfolded,  to  find  the  spring  he  had  previously  discovered
(Experiment  1).  He  crossed  the  lawn  two  or  three  times,  going  over
the  right  sj^ot  without  giving  any  indication,  and  then  fixed  on  another
spot  where  it  is  true  there  might  be  a  spring,  but  its  existence  was  not
known,  nor  could  it  be  ascertained  without  injury  to  the  lawn.

This  ended  my  experiments  with  Rodwell  ;  as  will  be  seen  the
result  was  unsatisfactory,  or  to  say  the  least  inconclusive,  and  if  I  were
to  generalise  from  this  one  day's  experiments,  I  should  agree  with
Professor  Ray  Lankester,  who,  the  year  previously,  had — after  a  similar
but  rather  hasty  trial  with  the  same  lad — come  to  the  conclusion
that  the  boy  was  a  rank  impostor,  and  "the  divining  rod  business  of

1  Rod  well's  father,  in  a  lengthy  letter  which  he  addressed  to  Mr.  Vavighan
Jenkins,  and  the  latter  sent  on  to  me,  exjalains  the  reluctance  of  the  lad  to  be  blind-
folded as  due  to  the  harsh  treatment  he  received  at  the  hands  of  Prof.  Ray  Lankester,
who,  according  to  Mr.  Kodwell's  statement,  almost  frightened  the  boy  to  death  !
Hence  Mr.  Rod\v-ell  says,  "  I  charged  my  son  never  to  submit  to  anything  of  the  kind
again,  and  told  Dr.  McClure  I  would  not  allow  it."  It  was  for  that  reason,  thinking
I  was  about  to  treat  him  as  a  rogue  and  impostor,  that  they  objected  to  the
blindfolding.

-  Subsequently  I  had  the  hole  dug  deeper  and  about  two  feet  of  water  came  into
the  hole,  but  the  gardener,  an  experienced  man,  told  me  that  in  the  light  sand  and
gravel  soil  that  exists  there,  water  would  probably  be  found  in  any  spot  that  was
dusr  10  or  12  ft.  deep.  It  would,  of  course,  have  been  better  to  sink  deeper,  but  it
seeined  hardly  worth  going  to  the  further  expense  involved  by  so  doing.


206 ■  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

the  same  ordet'  as  fortune  telling."  To  generalise  from  a  single
instance  is,  however,  unphilosophical  at  all  times  and  is  absolutely
forbidden  in  dealing  with  those  problems  whicli  come  within  the  scope
of  this  Society.

Group  X.

Welsh  Dowsers. — («)  Mr.  Thomas  Heighway.

Mr.  J.  F.  Young,  of  Llanelly,  kindly  sent  me  the  name  and
address  of  Mr.  Heighway,  who  is  a  "Welshman,  the  proprietor  of  the
Park  Pump  Room,  Llandrindod  Wells.  Plis  father,  John  Heighway,
was,  I  believe,  most  successful  as  a  dowser,  but  ho  does  not  write
English.

Mr.  Thomas  Heighway  tells  me  when  he  is  dowsing  and  gets  over
an  underground  spring  his  nervous  system  is  so  much  affected  that  he
does  not  recover  from  it  for  some  hours  ;  he  therefore  does  not  care  to
use  the  rod  much  ;  his  father  does  not  suffer  in  the  same  way.  I  have
not  much  information  of  Mr.  Heighway's  experiences,  but  the  following
letters  are  interesting,  and  present  a  new  aspect  of  the  subject,  viz.,
dowsing  for  mineral  springs.

No.  133. — Mr.  Heighway  having  referred  me  to  Captain  Penry
Lloyd,  for  whom  he  had  recently  found  a  sulphur  spring,  I  wrote
to  Mr.  Lloyd,  and  the  following  is  his  reply  : — ■

Glasbury,  R.S.O.,  Radnorshire,  February  2'7th,  1897.

I  have  only  one  fact  of  evidential  value  regarding  the  use  of  the  rod,  and
that  is  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Thomas  Heighway,  of  Llandrindod,  Radnorshire,
who,  in  November  last,  disc<ivered  a  sulphur  spring  on  my  land  at  Llanwrtyd,
Breconshire,  at  a  depth  of  75  feet  from  the  surface,  68  of  which  was
solid,  tough  clay.  Directly  we  struck  rock,  we  struck  water,  and,
curiously,  on  the  very  side  of  the  well  which  Mr.  Heighway  had  predicted,
the  water  bearing  lode  crossing  the  diameter  (6  feet)  of  the  well  on  tlie
south  half.  From  a  profound  scejitic,  I  am  now  a  firm  believer  in  the
power  of  the  rod.  p  j^^^^,^^

Captain  liloyd  kindly  sends  the  following  additional  particulars  in
reply  to  my  enquiries  : —

Glasbury,  R.S.O.,  March  15th,  1897.

(1)  I  had  been  seeking  for  sulphur  mineral  water  previous  to  the  dowser's
visit,  and  failed  to  find  the  spring.

(2)  Mr.  Heighway  was  engaged,  and  I  went  with  him  over  the  ground.  He,
with  the  twig,  soon  found  three  several  springs,  and  I  selected  the  most
suitable  for  sinking,  and  found  the  water  at  75  feet  ;  the  vein  of  rock
carrying  the  water  crossed  the  bottom  of  well  from  west  to  east,  and  if  we


3:xxil.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  207


had  sunk  3  feet  more  to  the  north,  should  have  missed  it.  When  about
35  feet  down  lie  came  again,  and  went  down  the  well,  and  told  me  to  mind
and  sink  well  to  the  south  side,  as  the  water  was  there.  And  he  was  quite
right.  He  was  confident  from  first  to  last,  when  I  had  given  up  all  hopes.
I  am  now  sinking,  on  his  advice,  for  a  chalybeate  spring,  and  we  are  now
•down  about  25  feet,  but  have  not  yet  come  to  the  rock.  He  also  traced  the
■springs  across  the  river,  w^hich  runs  near  the  well.

There  is  no  doubt  whatever  as  to  his  power,  and  lie  can  distinguish
Tjetween  fresh  water  and  mineral  xvater.

I  enclose  rough  sketch  and  section  (see  next  jiage).  P  T


VICTORIA W  ELLS


i


Note.

t  is  where  Mr.  Heighway  found  sulphur  spring,  and  followed  it  to  No.  1  well.

No.  1. Sulphur,  75  feet  deep.

No.  2. Chalybeate,  35  feet  deep,  running  over.

No.  3. Sulphur. Now  sinking


208


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


SEC

T  1

ON  OA/

LINE  A

-  B

o  \

<^  \

/VOr TO  SCALE

<9

o

o

Li

C E  I.  OF

1  V  £  R

BED

c

c

C

4

Subsequently,  Captain  Lloyd  writes  : —

Glasbury,  R.S.O.,  March  23rd,  1897.

You  will  be  interested  to  know  that  Mr.  Heighway  has  again  been,
successful  ;  we  have  struck  water  at  32  feet  from  the  surface,  in  a  rock  full
of  minerals,  mainly  iron,  I  believe.  Mr.  Heighway's  prophecy  was,
"  Chalybeate  water,  very  strong  spring,"  and  he  has  proved  liimself  to  be
correct.

I  quite  believe  he  has  the  power  of  distinguishing  between  mineral  and
plain  water  ;  at  all  events,  he  has  succeeded  in  many  instances,  and  I  have
not  heard  that  he  has  been  wrong  once.  He  tells  me  he  acquired  the  power
by  practising  over  known  mineral  springs,  and  finds  that  he  is  affected  in
different  ways.  Mineral  water,  he  says,  has  much  more  power  over  him,  and
"  draws  stronger,"  and  is  more  difficult  to  determine  as  to  depth.  He  also
says  that  plain  water  intervening  would  not  affect  him,  owing  to  the  greater
strength  of  mineral.  It  is  indeed  a  wonderful  attribute  of  the  human  body,,
and  he  certainly  is  an  exceptionally  good  subject.  Penry  Lloyd.

Writing  again  on  May  14th,  Mr.  Lloyd  says  : —

Glasbury,  May  14th,  1897.

We  have  just  completed  shiking  No.  3  well,  on  the  spot  indicated  by  Mr.
Thomas  Heighway,  and  found  sulphur  water  52  feet  below  surface,  and
6  feet  down  in  the  solid  rock.  p  Llqyd.

One  interesting  feature  in  the  above  letters  will  be  noticed,
namely,  that  tlie  prediction  of  the  dowser  in  two  of  the  cases  was
communicated  to  and  received  by  me  before  the  actual  discovery  of  the
mineral  springs.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


209


(b)  Mr.  R.  Rothwell.

Rothwell  is  a  gardener  living  at  Cardiff,  (65,  Upper  George-street,
Cathays,  Cardiff),  and  is,  I  believe,  over  60  years  of  age.  Our  friend
and  felloAv-worker,  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Cardiff,  to  whom  I  am
mainly  indebted  for  the  evidence  concerning  this  dowser,  knows
Rothwell,  and  was  favourably  impressed  by  his  e^ddent  sti'aight-
forwardness.  The  Vicar  of  the  parish  also  writes  in  answer  to
enquiry,  "  I  know  Rothwell  well ;  he  is  an  excellent  gardener,  and
quite  trustworthy  as  far  as  I  know."

Rothwell  states  that  he  experiences  "  a  slight  tingling  sensation
when  the  rod  bends,  just  the  same  as  he  has  felt  with  an  electric
battery."  He  determines  the  depth  at  which  the  water  will  be  found
by  walking  away  from  the  supposed  stream  at  right  angles  to  its
course ;  the  rod  invariably  bends  with  lessening  force  as  he  moves
away.  Directly  the  rod  is  stationary,  Rothwell  stops,  and  then
measures  the  distance,  from  the  spot  at  which  the  rod  ceases  to  act,
to  the  stream. This,  he  asserts,  gives  him  the  distance  down.

No.  134. — Mr.  Lyddon,  Rothwell's  employer,  sent  Mr.  Fryer  the
following  account  of  Rothwell's  first  essay  at  dowsing  : —

Bute  Docks,  Cardiff,  July  oth,  1893.

A  well  had  been  sunk  by  the  builder  when  my  house  was  being  erected,
but  on  my  occupj'ing  tlie  house  the  supply  of  water  was  found  to  be
insufficient ;  not  knowing  wliere  to  sink  a  well,  I  was  advised  by  a  member
of  a  large  firm  in  Bristol  to  let  one  of  his  engineers,  who  had  the  power  of
discovering  water  by  the  aid  of  a  divining  rod,  see  if  he  could  find
water  by  the  aid  of  the  rod.  This  person,  a  complete  stranger  to
the  neighbourhood,  came,  and  accompanied  by  W.  Rothwell,  my  gardener,
went  over  my  field.  He  told  me  I  should  find  water  in  two  places,
at  the  extreme  nortli  end,  and  at  a  spot  in  the  south  end,  and  nowhere  else.
There  was  nothing  to  show  that  water  was  underneath.  The  Bristol  man
advised  me  to  bore  in  the  north  corner  of  my  field.  I  did  this,  and  found
water,  but  not  a  good  supply.

Rothwell,  when  accompanying  the  Bristol  man,  thought  the  whole  thing
ridiculous,  and  had  no  faith  in  it,  but  after  the  departure  of  the  man
Rothwell  tried  the  rod,  and  to  his  surprise  found  that  in  his  hands  it  moved
as  it  did  with  the  other  jDerson.  With  the  aid  of  the  rod  he  discovered
another  spring,  and  considered  I  should  find  water,  about  40  to  45  feet
down.  I  found  some,  I  think  at  about  55  feet,  and  I  believe  a  better  supply
was  obtained  at  62  feet.

Rothwell  has  been  in  Cardiff  many  years,  has  worked  for  me  three  years,
and  is,  I  believe,  a  perfectly  truthful  man.

The  4^  inch  bore  to  the  spring  did  not  give  us  sufficient  water,  so  on
Rothwell's  advice  I  sank  a  well,  and  have  now  a  good  supj^ly.

E.  T.  Lyddon.

P


210


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


No.  135. — The  next  letter  is  from  Mr.  Jaines,  of  the  Malting
House,  CardilF,  and  Chepstow.

Cardiff,  June  30th,  1893.

Some  years  since,  I  called  in  the  services  of  a  man  named  Lawrence,  a
"diviner,"  in  order  to  find,  if  possible,  indications  of  water  on  property
adjoining  our  Maltings,  at  Cardiff,  with  the  result  that  he  pointed  out  a  spot
at  which  water  would  be  found  at  a  depth  of  20  to  25  feet.

Two  years  since  I  made  tlie  acquaintance  of  Rothwell,  a  gardener,  in
Cardiff,  who  had  very  recently  found  out  he  possessed  this  "  gift."  As  I  was
anxious  to  test  his  powers  and  see  if  he  could  find  the  same  spring  which  was
indicated  by  Lawrence,  he  came  up,  and  after  carefully  walking  over  the  field,
in  a  few  minutes  found  the  precise  spot,  but  fixed  the  depth  at  28  to  30  feet.
Since  then,  we  have  followed  up  the  course  of  this  spring,  which  runs  into
property  belonging  to  the  Bute  Docks  Gas  Works,  the  manager  of  which
niformed  us  that  when  erecting  a  new  gasometer  two  years  ago,  when  about
26  feet  below  the  surface,  they  were  unexpectedly  flooded  out  by  some  spring
breaking  up,  which  necessitated  a  steam  pump  to  keep  the  water  down
whilst  certain  work  proceeded.

We  have  to-day  finished  sinking  a  well  at  the  place  indicated  by  the
two  diviners  (Lawrence  and  Rothwell)  and  found  a  good  spring — even  in
this  severe  drought — in  the  upper  strata  of  marl,  at  a  depth  of  18  to  24  feet.
The  main  spring  is  18  feet  below  surface.

You  will  note  the  Bute  Dock  Glas  Works  found  water  at  about  26  feet.
This  may  be  explained  by  the  stratum  dipping  very  considerably  as  it  nears
the  sea-board.

Being  successful  at  Cardiff,  I  took  Rothwell  up  to  Chepstow,  at  which
place  we  also  have  maltings,  with  result  that  he  has  pointed  out  a  spot  at
which  we  may  expect  to  find  water  at  about  28  feet.

We  commence  operations  next  week,  and  shall  be  pleased  to  inform  you

of  result  later  on.  a *  t

A.  A.  James.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  James  to  enquire  whether  Rothwell  had  any
means  of  ascertaining  befoi'ehand  the  site  of  the  spring  fixed  on  by
Lawrence.

Mr.  James  replied  that  the  only  information  Rothwell  had  was
that  Lawrence  had  somewhere  indicated  a  certain  spot  where  he  said  a
good  spring  of  water  would  be  found  ;  Rothwell  was  then  left  entirely
to  himself  to  locate  the  place,  which  he  found  within  a  few  minutes,  after
walking  to  and  fro  over  the  ground.  Mr.  James  adds  that  Rothwell,
so  far  as  he  knew,  had  never  been  in  Chepstow  before.  Subsequently,
in  answer  to  enquiries  whether  water  had  been  found  at  Chepstow  at
the  place  indicated  by  Rothwell,  Mr.  James  writes  : —

The  Cardifl'  Malting  Company,  Limited,  East  Moors,  Cardiff,

September  10th,  1896.

As  regards  the  result  of  Roth  well's  "  divining  "  for  water  at  Chepstow,  in
1893,  we  found,  by  sinking  a  30  foot  shaft  of  4  foot  diameter,  water  coming
through  the  limestone  at  about  26  feet  below  the  surface.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


211


The  rock  is  hollowed  out  by  the  action  of  the  water,  which  no  doubt  at
one  time  was  a  very  strong  spring — but  owing  to  the  drought  of  the  last  two
years  the  supply  has  become  limited,  but  the  water  is  there.

I  may  mention  a  fact  which  I  learned  a  few  days  after  his  visit,  the
existence  of  a  disused  well  near  the  river  Wye,  within  the  old  fortified  town
wall,  on  a  direct  line  from  our  present  well  to  the  river,  the  course  of  which
he  indicated  exactly.  ^  James.

The  following  letter  was  sent  to  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  in  answer  to
his  enquiries  : —

Severn  Side  Brewery,  Wick,  Bridgend,  May  22iid,  1897.

I  am  in  receipt  of  yours  of  the  20th  inst.,  and  in  reply  have  to  say  that
Mr.  Rothwell  visited  my  place  for  the  purjiose  of  finding  water,  and  hit  upon
a  spot  where  he  told  me  I  sliould  find  a  large  suf)ply  at  about  36  feet  deep.
I  then  engaged  a  sinker,  and  when  he  got  to  the  36  feet  a  very  weak  spring
was  discovered.  Wet  weather  then  set  in  and  prevented  any  further
working,  and  nothing  has  since  been  done.  I  feel  quite  certain  that  there  is
water  at  no  great  distance,  and  should  we  have  a  dry  summer  I  intend
going  a  few  feet  lower.

I  may  state  that  I  put  a  test  to  Mr.  Rothwell,  and  that  was  to  ask  him  to
trace  the  spring  from  a  distance  before  reaching  the  spot  by  the  Brewery  ;
this  he  did,  and  followed  it  for  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  across  the  road,
under  the  buildings,  and  across  the  fields  to  an  old  disused  parish  well.  Mr.
Rothwell,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  had  never  been  in  the  neighbourhood
before.  Not  being  altogether  a  believer  in  the  art,  I  took  care  that  every-
thing was  fairly  carried  on,  and  I  am  now  a  firm  believer  in  it.

W.  J.  M.  Herbert.

In  the  following  letter  the  Ptev.  A.  T.  Fryer  kindly  gives  me  an.
account  of  some  experiments  he  made  with  Rothwell.  Though  the
results  obtained  are  of  no  evidential  value  in  connection  with  a
"  dowsing  faculty,"  yet  several  points  of  considerable  interest  are
referred  to.  The  use  of  a  wet  pad  on  the  rod  to  test  whether  the
motion  of  the  rod  be  due  to  water  or  metal,  is  identical  with  the  device
employed  in  America  and  elsewhere,  see  Appendix  C.  It  is  undoubtedly
an  entire  fallacy,  the  effect  being  in  all  probability  merely  due  to
suggestion.  It  is  possible  Rothwell  heard  of  it  through  Lawrence,  but
it  is  curious  how  these  traditions  spread.  Much  the  same  remark
applies  to  the  experiment  with  the  glass  bottles  and  insulation.

13,  Dumfries  Place,  Cardiff,  September  Ufh,  1893.
We  went  this  morning  to  a  small  estate  at  St.  Briavel's,  Gloucestershire,
named  Woodside,  and  occupied  by  a  Mr.  Cuthbert,  retired  sea-captain  and
merchant,  of  Cardiff.  He  has  been  without  water  for  some  time,  and  at  last
determined  upon  .sinking  a  well  near  where  a  spring  had  hitherto  given  a
good  supply.  Having  gone  down  30  feet  and  meeting  with  no  reward,  he
felt  in  a  fix.  [This  well  was  marked  D  on  an  accompanying  plan.]  He  then
made  up  his  mind  to  give  Rothwell  a  trial. R.  had  never  been  to  the  place

p  2


212


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


before  he  went  with  me  to-day.  We  started  the  search  in  the  field  behind
the  house,  Rothwell  having  cut  a  hazel  forked-twig  from  tlie  wood,  and
water  was  found  in  a  very  few  minutes.  To  test  the  find,  R.  placed  on  the
top  of  the  twig  a  piece  of  paper  which  he  liad  wetted  with  water.  The  rod
I'emained  quite  vuiaffected,  and  did  so  also  at  other  points.  I  have  not  heard
of  this  test  in  any  other  case,  but  R.  is  satisfied  with  it.  I  may  mention
here  tliat  at  another  spot  where  R.  said  he  felt  the  influence  of  iron,  the  water
test  was  also  resorted  to,  and  the  paper  made  no  difference,  it  remained  on
the  stick,  and  the  stick  bent  down  as  for  iron,  all  the  same.

The  water  was  traced  up  the  field,  into  the  wood  above.  Here  we  applied
the  bottle  test.  I  had  two  champagne  bottles  stuck  into  the  earth,  and
when  R.  stood  on  their  broad,  uppermost  bottoms,  the  rod  ceased  to  act.
Then  we  followed  the  indications  of  water  across  a  wall,  and  into  the  next
field.  At  [a  jjoint  marked  A  on  the  plan]  the  source  was  found  ;  no  trace  of
water  above  it,  or  anywhere  else,  in  the  same  field.  Then  R.  descended  the
well,  D,  and  held  the  rod  over  the  water  at  the  bottom  of  the  well  (a  little
accumulation  of  surface  drainage),  and  reported,  "  No  spring  there."  Then
I  blindfolded  him  and  made  him  walk  towards  A  ;  the  rod  was  quiet  until
we  came  to  A,  when  it  dipped.  It  was  settled  that  the  well  should  be  sunk
at  C  [a  certain  spot  on  the  course  indicated  by  R.],  and  Mr.  Cuthbert  has
promised  me  that  I  shall  have  the  news  of  the  result  as  soon  as  possible.

"Writing  to  me  six  weeks  later,  Mr.  Fryer  says,  "  I  sent  Rothwell
over  to  Wooclside  the  other  day  to  see  if  they  had  begun  sinking,  and
he  has  reported  to  me  that  they  are  sinking  6  feet  away  from  the  spot
which  he  indicated  !  Mr.  Cuthbert  is  rather  a  self-willed  man."  On
November  4th,  1893,  Mr.  Cuthbert  writes  to  Mr.  Fryer,  in  a  letter
which  is  before  me,  stating  that  he  "  has  sunk  58  feet  through  very
hard  rock,  and  according  to  my  [Mr.  C's]  measurement  of  depth  have
only  to  go  two  feet  more,  for  tlie  water  is  certainly  under  where  we  are
sinking.  This  is  nearly  the  same  place  as  Rothwell  fixed  upon.  .  .  .
Had  I  not  been  able  to  use  the  rod,  I  would  never  liave  reached  water
by  Rothwell's  advice."  From  which  it  would  appear  that  Mr.  Cuthbert
believed  that  he  was  a  better  dowser  than  Rothwell,  and  so  preferred
to  trust  his  own  opinion.  Upon  subsequent  enquiry  I  learnt  that  Mr.
Cuthbert  had  died,  but  had  not  found  any  water  in  the  well,  which  he
had  sunk  to  a  considerable  depth.

These  particulars  are  given,  as  it  is  not  improbable  the  case  may
be  quoted  in  the  neighbourhood  as  one  where  great  expense  was
uselessly  incurred  on  the  strength  of  the  advice  given  by  Rothwell.
At  the  same  time  Rothwell's  success  as  a  dowser  is  not  so  marked  as
many  others.  I  have  before  me  a  letter  from  a  Mr.  Stacey,  who  lives
near  Cai-dilF,  dated  July  5th,  1893,  stating  he  sunk  a  well  12  feet  deep
at  a  spot  where  Rothwell  said  a  good  spring  existed,  and  "  only  a
little  water  was  found,  which  went  off  in  a  few  days ;  it  cost  me  £12,
and  as  there  is  now  no  water,  I  do  not  believe  in  the  man  at  all."
Rather  a  sweeping  conclusion  for  one  trial  only  12  feet  deep.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  213


Rothwell  frankly  informed  Mr.  Fryer  that  he  had  been  asked  to
find  water  at  Vaynor  Rectory,  near  Cardiff,  but  there  he  had  partly
failed.  This  spontaneous  admission  on  Rothwell's  part  is  some
evidence  of  his  undoubted  honesty.  Mr.  Fryer  wrote  to  the  rector  of
Vaynor,  and  the  following  is  his  I'eply  : —

Vaynor  Rectory,  May  22nd,  1897.

Mr.  W.  Rothwell  found  water  in  our  village  two  years  ago,  and  was  paid
by  the  local  authority  for  his  work,  and  his  train  expenses  paid  by  myself
and  another  gentleman.

There  was  no  failure,  but  we  had  him  here  twice.  The  men  after  sinking
down  about  20  feet  at  the  spot  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Rothwell,  came  to  a  hole
or  a  fault,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  water  at  the  depth  suggested.  Fearing  that
this  hole  or  favilt  had  something  to  do  with  it,  we  asked  Mr.  Rothwell  to
come  up  again.  He  came  and  held  his  twig  over  the  shaft,  and  said  that  water
was  there,  but  had  been  thrown  downwards  by  some  convulsion  ur  fault.
We  asked  him  to  point  out  another  spot  on  the  same  [invisible]  stream,
and  he  did  ;  we  found  beautiful  soft  water  at  a  dejjth  of  22  feet,  and
it  still  runs  a  splendid  [supply].  Mr.  Rothwell  had  not  been  to  Vaynor
before.  He  found  another  stream  and  followed  it  for  a  mile  until  he  got  to
the  well.

Since  that  time  I  have  practised  the  art  myself,  and  can  find  water  any-
where where  there  is  water.  I  found  water  on  my  own  land  here,  in  the
midst  of  lime-rock.  I  have  not  yet  finished  the  well,  but  the  men  have  gone
down  25  feet,  and  have  found  already  nearly  3  feet  of  water.

T  read  in  an  old  book  that  there  was  a  stream  of  water  running  under  the
old  Castle  of  Brecon.  I  was  there  last  Tuesday,  and  with  my  twig  found  the
stream.

I  am  writing  a  pamphlet  on  water-finding,  which  will  include  my  questions
to  Lord  Kelvin.  t n  t„

J. G.  .JENKINS.

F.  12. — Mr.  Fryer  also  sends  me  the  accompanying  letter,  addressed
to  him,  which  gives  an  account  of  a  distinct  failure  on  Rothwell's
part  : —

Steam  Flour  Mills  and  Ship  Biscuit  Works,  Cardiff,

May  2m,  1897.

In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  20th  inst,  Mr.  Rothwell's  water  finding
was  not  at  all  satisfactory.  We  did  not  come  to  water  at  the  depth  he
predicted,  but  had  to  go  a  good  deal  lower,  and  then,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,
only  came  t<:)  surface  water.  We  think  we  should  have  come  to  the  same
surface  water  wherever  we  had  sunk  the  well,  which  is  about  36  feet  deep.
We  could  find  no  trace  of  a  lead  pipe  in  aiiother  place  where  Mr.  Rothwell
said  we  should  find  one.  Altogether,  we  regard  his  experiments  with  us  as  a
complete  failure  ;  but  we  have  heard  that  he  has  been  very  successful

Spillers  and  Bakeks,  Ltd.

Mr.  Fryer,  in  a  recent  letter,  tells  me  Rothwell  has  signed  a
contract  to  go  to  Australia  to  dowse  for  water  there.


21.4


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


(c)  Mr.  R.  W.  Robertson.

In  the  eai-ly  part  of  this  paper  (p.  18)  I  referred  to  two
enthusiastic  amateur  water  finders,  Messrs.  Robertson  and  Young,
of  Llanelly,  South  Wales,  several  of  whose  children  have  inherited
their  fathers'  faculty.  Mr.  Robertson's  son  has  now  become  a  pro-
fessional dowser,  and  has  sent  me  a  copy  of  the  testimonials  he  has
received  in  this  capacity. One  of  these  is  as  follows  : — ■

No.  136. — The  following  letter  from  Mr.  G.  S.  Richmond,  hydraulic
engineer,  is  addressed  to  Mr.  R.  W.  Robertson  : —

Llanelly,  November  23rd,  1895.
My  sinkers  struck  the  spring  on  Wednesday  last,  at  Goodig,  at  28  ft.  6  in.
frum  the  surface,  and  considering  that  this  spot  is  less  than  100  feet  from  an
old  quari'y,  the  rock  in  which  shows  no  signs  of  water,  and  also  that  the
surface  of  tlie  ground  where  the  well  is  sunk  is  about  50  feet  higher  than  the
faruiyard  only  107  feet  away,  I  think  it  extraordinary  that  you  should  have
found  a  spring  at  all,  and  more  so  that  you  should  have  estimated  the  depth
at  which  it  would  be  found,  so  near,  being  only  3  feet  beyond  your  estimate.
The  position  of  the  well  is  quite  unique,  and  I  do  not  think  a  pump  will  be

^^<^^^^^^y-  G.  S.  Richmond.

Mr.  Buckley  Roderick,  a  solicitor  of  Llanelly,  for  whom  the  well  was
sunk,  also  writes  to  the  same  effect,  and  states  that  before  the  spring
was  found,  all  the  water  for  the  farm  had  to  be  carried  a  great
distance. I  wrote  to  Mr.  Richmond,  and  he  replies  :  —

Llanelly,  September  22nd,  1896.

Goodig  is  a  farm  near  Peuibrey,  South  Wales.  The  place  chosen  by  Mr.
Robertson  was  a  very  remarkable  and  unique  spot  for  a  well,  which  is  sunk
on  the  side  of  a  steep  hill ;  the  bottom  of  the  well  being  higher  than  the
farmyard.  Water  rose  some  18  feet  in  the  well,  and  a  plentiful  supply  was
obtained,  which  I  have  laid  on  to  the  farm  by  a  siphon.  No  indications  of
water  existed  anywhere  about,  nor  for  300  yards  distance  before  this  spring
was  found.

I  liave  sunk  a  good  many  wells  in  M<jnmouthshire  and  South  Wales  at
spots  marked  by  tbe  divining  rod,  and  in  every  case  with  success.

G.  S.  Richmond.

Mr.  Pv,.  S.  Seymour,  the  agent  to  the  Earl  of  Ashburnham,  also
testifies  to  the  fact  that  great  difficulty  has  been  found  in  providing  a
sufficient  water  supply  to  Pembrey  House,  the  property  of  Lord
Ashburnham,  and  in  1895,  the  springs  that  supplied  the  house  having
run  dry,  Mr.  R.  W.  Robertson  was  called  in,  and  by  the  rod  fixed  oti
a  certain  spot  ;  here  a  well  was  sunk,  and  at  a  depth  of  13  feet  from
the  surface  a  copious  spring  was  struck,  yielding,  by  measure,  8,000
gallons  a  day.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


215


Other  letters  are  before  me  also  testifying  to  Mr.  R.  W.  Robertson's
success,  whilst  on  the  other  hand  I  have  heard  of  his  being  less
successful,  particulai's  of  which  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  give,  as  there
is  not  yet  a  sufficient  body  of  evidence  on  behalf  of  young  Mr.
Robertson's  powers  to  enable  a  fair  estimate  to  be  formed  of  the
percentage  of  his  successes.

No.  137. — Mr.  G.  Blake,  the  agent  to  the  Stradey  Castle  estate,
writes  to  me  as  follows  respecting  Mr.  Robertson,  the  father  of
Mr.  R.  W.  Robertson  :—

New  Road,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire,  February  14i/(,  1897.

On  the  estate  of  C.  W.  Mansel  Lewis,  Esq.,  at  Llanelly,  three  springs  were
found  at  spots  indicated  by  Mr.  Robert  Robertson  (Steward).  There  was
not  the  slightest  surface  indication  of  wetness.

By  means  of  the  divining  rod  these  three  spots  were  suggested  by  Mr.
Robertson  as  likely  to  afford  a  subterranean  supply.  Tubes  were  driven
down  from  18  to  23  feet  and  I  with  pleasure  certify  that  a  continuous  supply
of  water  of  great  value  to  the  cottagers  on  this  estate  has  been  regularly
pumped  up  since. As  a  result  the  expense  of  carting  water  has  been  saved.

G.  Blake,

Land  Agent  for  G.  W .  Mansel  Lewis,  Esq.

Mr.  Robertson  informs  me  that  one  of  the  above  springs  he
discovered  on  the  Stradey  Castle  estate  is  25  yards  from  a  bore  hole
that  was  sunk  haphazard  prior  to  his  visit  to  a  depth  of  50  feet.  The
bore  hole  was  a  complete  failure,  not  a  vestige  of  water  being  found  ;
whereas  the  spring  discovered  by  the  rod  was  struck  at  a  depth  of
only  18  feet  and  continues  to  yield  a  copious  and  undiminished
supply. The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  has  verified  this.


An  American  Bowser. — Mr.  Cyrus  Fuller.

After  the  greater  part  of  this  paper  was  in  type,  I  received  from
our  friend,  Mr.  Hodgson,  Secretary  to  the  American  Branch  of  the
S.P.R.,  the  following  account  of  a  successful  American  dowser,  Mr.
Cyrus  Fuller,  of  Plymouth,  Wayne  County,  Michigan.  Mr.  Fuller
was  a  farmer  and  Quaker  by  birth,  and  died  at  the  age  of  85,  three
years  ago.  An  article  was  published  about  him  in  the  Religio-
Philosojjhical  Journal  of  December  9th,  1893,  by  Mr.  Giles  B.  Stebbins,
who  in  reply  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  enquiries,  writes  : —

143,  Pitcher  Street,  Detroit,  Michigan,  November  22nd,  1894.
Cyrus  Fuller  is  over  eighty  years  old,  and  his  reply  and  handwriting  may
be  imperfect,  but  his  mind  was  clear  as  ever  when  I  last  saw  him.  His


216


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


integrity,  judgment  and  ability  are  of  high  order.  He  is  of  Quaker  birth —
a  spiritualist  of  the  higher  grade,  but  has  no  theory  as  to  his  water  finding
save  of  a  subtle  rapport  in  his  temiDeraurent — no  miracle  in  the  case,  but
natural  law.  He  has  found  some  200  wells,  with  no  single  failure.  Some
years  ago  he  sent  some  twenty  names,  signed  to  a  statement  that  he  had
found  water  for  them  on  the  first  trial,  and  a  lasting  flow,  to  the  Detroit
Tribune,  which  had  flippantly  treated  previous  statements.  Men  of  solid
influence,  Hon.  Mr.  Penniman,  ex  M.C.  of  Plymouth,  now  departed,  among
them.  The  Tribune  published  the  list,  and  became  respectful.  I  have
looked  out  from  his  home  windows  and  seen  a  dozen  windmills  drawing
water  to  feed  human  beings  and  cattle  from  wells  of  his  finding.  It  has
never  been  a  money-making  work,  as  he  is  not  a  poor  man.

Giles  B.  Stebbins.

Mr.  Stebbins  attempted  to  find  for  Mr.  Hodgson  the  Detroit
Tribune  containing  the  statement  referred  to,  but  unfortunately  with-
out success.  He  C]Uotes  the  following  from  a  letter  from  Mr.  Fuller
to  him,  dated  April  19th,  1894: — "Two  of  my  neighbours  have
just  opened  wells  ■which  I  located  with  my  rod,  both  a  success."
He  also  sent  Mr.  Hodgson  a  letter  written  by  Mr.  Fuller  to  the
Religio-Plbilosophical  Journal  to  correct  some  inaccuracies  in  their
account,  part  of  which  we  print.

Plymouth,  Michigan,  December  I'Sth,  1893.
We  have  nine  flowing  wells  in  this  school  district,  all  located  by  the
divining  rod,  and  not  one  has  been  found  by  putting  the  wells  down  at
random.

There  are  very  few  wells  in  this  vicinity  but  those  located  by  the  divining
rod.  I,  myself,  have  located  between  four  and  five  hundred.  The  depth  of
the  wells  in  this  vicinity  on  the  timber  land  is,  as  near  as  I  can  calculate,  on
an  average  of  forty-five  feet.  I  have  located  a  good  many  wells  since  I  saw
Mr.  Stebbins.

I  went  to  Hudson,  Lenawee  County,  170  miles  south,  on  the  solicitation
of  the  water  board  of  that  village,  and  located  a  vein  of  water  where  they  put
down  five  wells.  The  pump  [with  which]  they  tested  the  wells  threw  two
hundred  gallons  per  minute.  Each  well  would  produce  that  amount  of
water  without  being  exhausted.  The  village  contains  fifteen  hundred  in-
habitants ;  tliey  got  all  the  water  they  wanted.

I  have  located  wells  every  season,  I  think,  for  the  last  fifty  years,  and
I  ncrer  solicited  a  job  of  that  kind,  — they  all  come  to  me.  I  commenced  on
this  farm  that  we  live  on  sixty-one  years  ago,  and  it's  our  home  yet.  There
are  four  wells  I  located  this  last  season,  that  were  to  be  put  down  this  last
fall  ;  hard  times  prevented.  One  of  these  wells  I  located  when  the  snow,
last  winter,  was  a  foot  and  a-half  deeji.  The  man  was  putting  up  a  barn,
and  wanted  to  build  the  barn  by  a  well,  instead  of  digging  the  well  by  the
barn,  so  as  to  have  it  handy.  In  the  dry  time  this  season  I  went  to  the
place  and  found  it  located  all  right.

I  located  a  well  at  Plymouth  that  may  prove  celebrated.  The  medical
properties  are  said  to  be  superior  to  almost  any  in  this  county. They  sent


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod,


217


off  twenty-five  gallons  of  the  water  to  be  tested  at  Detroit.  Since  then  I
met  a  load  of  jugs  of  the  water  going  in  the  cars,  destination  Cincinnatti.

Cyrus  Fuller.

Mr.  Fuller  having  died  a  few  months  later,  Mr.  Hodgson  was,  by
the  kindness  of  Mr.  Stebbins,  put  into  communication  with  his  son-in-
law,  Mr.  Ransom  L.  Alexander,  who  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson  as
follows  : —

Plymouth,  Mich.,  March  oth,  1895.
I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have  not  the  newpaper  article  to  which
you  refer,  and  cannot  obtain  it,  several  years  having  elapsed  since  its
publication.  Cyrus  Fuller  found  many  wells  in  this  section  of  the
country  ;  I  believe  somethmg  over  100,  but  I  do  not  find  among  his  papers
any  list  of  the  names  of  those  for  whom  he  found  them.  I  send  you  a  few
names  that  occur  to  me.  He  found  three  flowing  wells  for  himself,  which
are  still  running.  Two  of  them  have  run  50  years,  the  other  30.  He  found
wells  for  the  following  named  persons  : —


William  Hake  ...
Grant  H.  Joslin,..
Otto  Melon
Albert  Durf  ee . . .
WiUiam  E.  Fry...
William  Riddle  ...
William  T.  Rattenbury
Joseph  Clizbee  ...
Otis  Warner
Robert  Rhead . . .


ich.j


Plymouth  P.O.,  Mich
Since  deceased
Plymouth
Grand  Rapids
Northville
Plymouth
Stark

Bell  Branch
Wayne

Hudson,  Lenawee  Co,


Flowing
wells


He  used  a  forked  peach  tree  or  witch  hazel  twig,  commonly  the  former.

R.  L.  Alexander.


Mr.  Hodgson  w  rote  to  the  persons  named  by  Mr.  Alexander,  but
received  only  the  following  replies  : —

No.  138.— The  first  is  from  Mr.  Durfee.

103,  Ottawa  Street,  Grand  Rapids,  Michigan,

ilarch  25th,  1895.

Mr.  Cyrus  Fuller  did  locate  not  one,  but  two  wells  on  my  farm  in
Livonia  Township,  Wayne  Co.,  Michigan ;  one  is  50  feet  deep,  the
other  87^.  The  first-named  is  a  flowing  stream  running  into  a  tank,  from
which  stock  may  drink.  The  other,  water  rises  within  20  feet  of  the  sui-face,
to  which  a  windmill  is  attached,  and  by  letting  the  mill  run  continuously  for
forty-eight  hours  I  was  only  able  to  lower  the  water  two  feet,  and  withm  a
few  minutes  after  mill  was  stopped  water  came  to  the  same  level  (namely,
twenty  feet  from  surface).  I  have  known  Mr.  Fuller  all  my  life,  having
lived  neighbour  to  him,  until  five  years  ago  I  came  to  Grand  Rajjids.
During  the  past  year  Mr.  Fuller  has  departed  this  life.  I  know  of  eight
wells  located  by  him  within  a  radius  of  one  mile,  all  flowing  ones,  together
with  a  great  many  that  were  good  ones,  but  not  flowers.


218


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Fuller's  method  of  locating  underground  streams  was  by  the
"divming  rod."  Those  he  used  were  either  jjeach,  witch-hazel,  yellow  or
swamp  willow.  He  has  told  me  no  other  kinds  of  wood  that  he  had  ever
tried  would  turn  in  his  hands.

Some  other  things  I  can  remember  his  having  told  me  ;  in  following
veins,  as  he  called  them,  through  forests,  that  they  would  lead  directly  under
many  of  the  largest  trees,  and  one  other  thing  was  that  if  a  tree  was  stricken
by  lightning,  he  was  sure  to  find  a  stream  leading  very  near  to  it.

Within  the  past  ten  years  he  was  called  to  many  places  to  locate  wells,
some  out  of  the  State,  one  in  Canada,  I  think  for  a  railroad  company.

I  will  conclude  by  saying,  I  know  Mr.  Fuller  to  be  a  man  honest  in
purpose,  and  one  whose  name  was  above  reproach.  Deceived  he  might  have
been,  but  dishonest  never.  If  time  and  space  would  permit  I  could  add
much  more,  and  if  of  interest  to  you  may  do  so  at  some  future  time.

A.  B.  DURFEE.

No.  139.— The  next  is  from  Mr.  Hake.

Plymouth,  Michigan,  March  2oth,  1895.
Mr.  Cyrus  Fuller  located  five  wells  for  me,  and  all  are  good  ones.
We  had  no  one  else to locate  them  but Mr. Fuller. Two  of  those
wells  are  flowing  wells,  the  others  are  jjlenty  of  water.

  William  Hake.

No.  140. — The  only  other  reply  received  by  Mr.  Hodgson  was
from  Mr.  Riddle  as  follows  : —

Plymouth,  Mich.,  March  25th,  1895.
I  went  112  feet  in  the  ground  where  Mr.  Fuller  did  not  locate  and
found  no  water.  Then  I  went  56  feet  in  a  four  foot  well,  and  got  30
feet  of  water  in  30  minutes  after  I  struck  it.  This  last  well  Mr.  Cyrus
Fuller,  who  was  a  neighbour  of  mine,  located.  This  was  about  eight
yeai's  ago,  and  the  well  has  never  failed. Mr.  Fuller  died  last  summer.

William  Riddle.

Mr.  Riddle  writes  as;ain  as  follows  : —

Plymouth,  April  12th,  1895.

I  had  a  well  in  my  barnyard,  but  it  was  dry,  and  Mr.  Fuller  told
me  that  there  was  water  if  I  would  dig  for  it.  I  tried  to,  but  it  caved
in,  and  I  had  to  abandon  it.  Then  I  moved  about  10  feet  from  the  old  well,
and  dug  about  112  feet,  as  I  told  you  before,  and  found  no  water.  This  last
well  was  not  located  by  anybody. I  dug  there  merely  for  convenience.

William  Riddle.

It  is  to  be  regretted  further  details  cannot  now  be  obtained  of  Mr.
Fuller's  work  as  a  dowser.  There  is,  I  find,  a  letter  of  his  published
in  Light  for  August  30th,  1884,  the  substance  of  which  is  as  follows: —

(1)  The  "Michigan  Central"  officials  invited  Mr.  Fuller  to  try  at  Esse
Centre,  15  miles  south  of  Detroit. They  had  previously  bored  nearly  1500


xxxil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


219


feet  to  get  water,  but  without  avail.  Fuller  located  a  certain  spot  with  the
rod  where  an  abundant  supply  of  pure  soft  water  was  obtained  at  110
feet  deep.

(2)  At  Wayne,  18  miles  west  of  Detroit,  a  large  sum  had  also  been  spent
by  "the  officials"  in  boring  for  water,  but  in  vain.  Water  was,  however,
found  at  the  spot  fixed  on  by  Mr.  Fuller  at  137  feet  ;  moreover  a  good
supply  was  also  obtained  at  a  second  spot  he  located  here  a  few  years
after.

(3)  At  Northville,  Michigan,  W.  Foy  (Fry?)  had  spent  200  dollars
digging  and  boring  to  97  feet,  but  got  no  water.  A  short  distance  from  this
useless  well,  the  rod  indicated  a  spot,  where  a  good  su]5ply  of  water  was
obtained  at  20  feet  from  the  surface .

It  would  be  useful  to  have  independent  evidence  of  these  state-
ments. Several  other  instances  of  the  success  of  dowsers  in  finding
underground  water,  often  when  other  means  had  failed,  are  to  be
found  in  the  columns  of  Light  from  1882  to  the  present  time  ;  but  as
the  majority  of  the  correspondents  do  not  give  their  names,  their
evidence  cannot  be  corroborated.  A  do'svser  of  whom  I  had  not  heard
before,  Mr.  Child,  writes  from  Norwich  in  Light  of  October  8th,  1887,
stating  he  had  repeatedly  found  water  by  the  rod  within  a  few  yards
of  wells  that  had  been  sunk  unsuccessfully.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Child
asking  for  particulars  of  these  places,  but  my  letter  was  returned
marked  "present  address  unknown."

Evidence  has  already  been  given  showing  the  wide  area  of
distribution  of  the  dowsing  rod.  This  fact  also  conies  out  in  the
correspondence  on  the  subject  that  appears  from  time  to  time  in
various  journals.  I  have  not  heard  of  its  use  in  Asia  or  South
America,  though  the  North  American  Indians  are  said  to  have  long
known  and  practised  dowsing.  The  London  Times  of  December  27th,
1881,  refers  to  its  use  in  Dakota,  as  Mr.  E.  T.  Bennett  has  pointed
out.i  In  an  article  on  "Farming  in  Dakota,"  reference  is  made  to  a
farm  near  Yalley  City  belonging  to  a  Mr.  Kindred,  and  according  to
the  Times : —

Water  is  got  in  abundance  from  a  bed  of  sand  30  feet  deep,  and  brought
to  the  tanks  by  a  pump  worked  by  a  windmill.  An  effort  had  previously
been  made  only  100  yards  further  north  to  find  water  ;  a  shaft,  138  feet,  had
been  ineffectually  dug.  The  bending  of  the  willow  twig  carefully  carried
over  the  surface  is  said  to  have  afforded  indications  which  justified  the
present  successful  opening.

1  See  Li/jht  for  January  7th,  1882,  where  Mr.  Bennett  asks  for  authentic  instances
of  water-linding  by  the  rod  and  originated  the  correspondence  on  the  subject  which
followed. Some  remarkable  cases  of  the  use  of  the  rod  in  Jersey,  by  a  local  dowser,  ■
are  given  in  Light  for  February  11th,  1882.


220


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


In  Italy  the  rod  has  been  in  use  for  over  three  centuries.  Lieut.-
Col.  Cocks,  in  a  letter  to  the  Times,  states  he  has  seen  certain  Italians
travelling  through  the  Riviera  locating  the  site  for  wells  with  a  twig
of  olive  bent  into  the  form  of  a  loop.  The  loop  turns  upwards  with
jerks,  often  striking  the  breast  of  the  operator  when  over  a  hidden
spring  ;  Colonel  Cocks  gives  instances  that  came  under  his  own
observation,  of  the  success  of  these  dowsers.  This  form  of  rod  is,  I
observe,  pictured  in  a  work  on  Practical  Mining  published  in  Bologna
in  1678,  and  is  also  described  in  various  Italian  essays  on  the  rod  of  a
century  ago  ;  a  loop  of  wire  is  used  by  some  English  dowsers.  In
parts  of  Switzerland  the  rod  has  also  long  been  in  use ;  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Lucerne  the  do  wser  appears  to  be  called  the
Brunnen-Scltmecker  (spring-taster)  ;i  in  the  United  States  he  is  often
called  ' '  water-smeller. "


Part  IV.

GEOLOGICAL  OPINION.

Before  Ijringing  to  a  close  the  evidence  for  or  against  the  dowser's
success,  in  the  search  for  underground  water,  I  wish  to  cite  the  opinion
of  a  few  geologists.

PROFESSOR  SOLLAS,  F.R.S.

It  is  certainly  a  singular  fact  how  very  few  attempts  have  been
made  by  competent  scientific  men  to  put  the  dowsers'  claims  to  the
test  of  experiment.  One  such  is  recorded  in  our  own  Proceedings,
Vol.  II.,  p.  73,  et  seq."  This  is  a  report  by  a  distinguished  geologist.
Professor  Sollas,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  etc.,  which  was  made  at  the  request
and  at  the  expense  of  our  Society  in  the  year  1883.  The  experiment
consisted  in  sinking  two  adjacent  similar  wells  in  an  alluvial  plain  at
Locking,  near  Bristol ;  one  well  was  sunk  at  the  spot  indicated  by  the
dowser,  and  the  other  at  a  spot  15  feet  distant  where  the  "rod"  did  not
indicate  water.^  At  the  former,  which  Professor  Sollas  called  the  -f-
well,  the  dowser  predicted  that  water  would  be  found  ;  at  the  latter,
or  —  well,  that  it  would  not. Professor  Sollas,  as  a  geologist,  predicted

1  See  Light  of  .January  28th,  1882,  where  a  good  instance  of  the  Swiss  dowser's
success  in  water-finding  is  given.

-  Reprinted,  as  already  mentioned  on  p.  18,  with  some  additions  and  majjs  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Bristol  Naturalists'  Society  for  1884.

3  The  dowser  was  Mr.  Thomas  Young,  since  dead,  see  No.  29,  p.  52.


xxxri.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


221


water  would  be  found  in  both  or  neither.  Wells  were  sunk,  and  when
the  +  well  was  16  feet  deep,  Professor  SoUas  reports,  "  it  contained  a
good  deal  of  water,  8  or  9  feet.  .  .  .  The  -  well  was  20  feet  deep
and  contained  feet  of  water.  Water  was  trickling  into  it,  but  not
so  fast  as  into  the  other.  The  well-sinker  said  this  feet  was  merely
surface  water."  A  fortnight  later  the  bailiff  to  the  estate  visited  the
wells,  and  reports  that  the  +  well  was  only  sunk  to  a  depth  of  17|
feet,  but  the  —  well  was  sunk  to  20  feet,  nevertheless  the  former  had
9  feet  of  water  in  it  and  the  latter  4|  feet.  Ten  days  afterwards  a
pupil  of  Professor  Sollas  visited  the  wells  and  reported  that  the  water
stood  at  the  same  level  in  both  wells,  and  a  similar  report  was  given
some  time  later. ^  A  month  after  this  last  Mr.  E.  R.  Pease  visited  the
spot  and  had  both  the  wells  emptied  of  water.  "  The  +  well  I  found
(he  remarks)  now  to  be  a  mere  hole  some  10  feet  deep,  whilst  the  -  well
was  a  carefully  timbered  shaft  24  feet  deep."  Measurements  of  the  rate
at  which  water  flowed  into  the  two  wells  "  seem  to  show  that  the  +
well  filled  more  rapidly  than  the  -  well,  although  its  depth  was  so
much  less.  The  tenant  of  the  farm  told  me  that  the  water  in  the  +
well  was  of  bett;er  quality  than  that  in  the  -  well."

The  conclusion  Professor  Sollas  draws  fi-om  this  experiment  is  that
"  The  case  for  the  dowser  has  conspicuously  failed  "  :  any  success
dowsers  may  have  he  believes  due  to  their  possession  of  much  mother
wit  and  a  large  experience  of  the  behaviour  of  underground  water.
Mr.  Pease,  however,  remarks  "  I  cannot  feel  his  [Professor  Sollas']
complete  confidence  in  the  conclusive  nature  of  this  particular  ex-
periment." An  opinion  from  which,  with  all  respect  to  my  friend.
Professor  Sollas,  few,  I  imagine,  would  be  disposed  to  dissent ;  even
although  the  -  well  certainly  could  not  be  called  "dry."^

MR. T. V. HOLMES,  F.G.S.

Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  the  President  of  the  Geologists'
Association  of  London  for  1889-90,  who  read  a  paper  on  the  divining

1  The  dowser  and  his  assistants  attributed  the  water  in  the  —  well  to  an  outflow
from  the  +  well,  and  the  tenant  of  the  estate  said  he  had  seen  it  flowing  in  from  the
side  nearest  the  +  well ;  Professor  Sollas  confirms  this  from  his  own  observation,  but
adds  it  trickled  in  from  the  other  sides  also,  and  remarks  that  if  the  rock  between  the
two  wells  were  so  porous  as  to  allow  percolation  from  one  well  to  the  other,  then  the
rock  would  be  water-bearing  and  furnish  water  tc  both.

-  At  the  close  of  his  paper  Professor  Sollas  draws  attention  to  the  incompatibility
of  the  dowser's  pretensions,  in  this  and  like  cases,  with  the  assumption  that  some
physical  effect  is  produced  on  the  dowser  by  underground  water,  provided  this
effect  be  assumed  to  radiate  from  the  water  and  decrease  as  the  square  of  the  distance
increase.s.  I  shall  return  to  this  argvmient  subsequently  when  discussing  the  suggested
explanations  of  the  "  dowsing  faculty,"  if  such  there  be.


222


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


rod  before  the  Anthropological  Institute  on  March  30th,  1897,^  writes
to  me  as  follows  : —

28,  Crooms  Hill,  Greenwich  Park,  S.E.,  June  23rfZ,  1897.
A  priori  conclusions  seem  to  me  absurd  and  unscientific,  whether  put
forward  by  the  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  or  by  a  village  cobbler.  As
regards  the  water  diviner,  I  am  only  anxious  that  he  should  be  brought
from  the  realm  of  disorderly  mystery,  which  is  ignorance,  to  that  of  orderly
mystery,  which  is  science — to  use  a  phrase  of  Huxley's.  That  a  somewhat
abnormal  nervous  organisation  may  make  given  persons  specially  sensitive
in  special  ways,  where  ordinary  persons  remain  unconscious,  is  a  perfectly
possible,  and  not  improbable  thing  to  me.  It  is  simply  a  matter  of
evidence.

Whilst  geology  as  a  science  is  very  modern,  a  knowledge  of  water-
bearing surface  beds  is  extremely  ancient,  as  the  evidence  afforded  by  the
sites  of  ancient  towns  and  villages  amj^ly  demonstrates  ;  in  fact,  the  presence
of  a  water-bearing  stratum,  such  as  a  flat  of  old  river  gravel,  was  one  of  the
strongest  attractions.^  Nowadays,  the  existence  of  water  companies  allows
the  extension  of  London  over  thick  clay.  But  the  ancient  London,  ' '  the
City,"  is  on  the  first  high  terrace  of  old  river  gravel  to  be  met  with  on  going
up  the  Thames  from  the  sea.  Innumerable  instances  of  a  similar  kind
might  be  given.  This  perception  of  water-bearing  surface  beds  is  therefore
a  knowledge  quite  independent  of  a  knowledge  of  geological  structure,  and
one  which  has  existed  from  time  immemorial.

Indeed,  (as  I  have  elsewhere  remarked),  the  rise  of  geology  as  a  science
tended  to  f>ut  this  older  knowledge  of  water-bearing  surface  beds  into  the
background.  The  Geological  Survey  had  been  at  work  many  years  at  the
deep-seated  geology  of  England  and  Wales,  before  any  drift-maps,"  or
those  showing  the  superficial  beds,  which  lie  indifl'erently  on  the  older  rocks
of  various  ages,  were  even  thought  of.  But  at  a  later  period  it  was  dis-
covered that  to  ignore  the  superficial  beds  in  such  a  district  as  the  Eastern
Counties  was  to  ignore  the  strata  forming  four-fifths  of  the  surface  to  an
average  depth  of  thirty  or  forty  feet.  So  drift-maps  became  more  common.
But  geologists  seldom  bestow  much  thought  on  these  various  drift-beds,
unless  interested  in  flint  imi^lements.  Again,  with  the  rise  of  geology  as  a
science  came,  pari  ^^asiu,  a  distrust  of  water  from  surface  beds  as  a  source
of  domestic  supply,  and  a  preference  for  deep  wells  and  water  companies.
In  short,  the  tendency  of  the  great  bulk  of  geologists  is  to  ignore  utterly
surface  beds  as  a  source  of  water  sup23ly,  and  to  care  but  little  for  them  from
any  other  jioint  of  view  ;  while,  as  regards  older  rocks,  most  would  be
found  interested  in  them  rather  as  showing  deposition  under  marine,
estuarine,  fresh  water,  warm  or  cold  water,  conditions,  than  in  their
relations  to  water-supply.

Consecpiently,  I  am  not  surprised  to  learn  from  one  of  the  cases  you  cite,
(No.  73,  p.  97),  that  a  "  geological  authority"  had  said  that  no  water  would
be  found  at  a  less  depth  than  120  to  130  feet,  and  that  Mullins  found  water

1  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend,  Mr.  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  for  this  information,
which  reached  me  too  late  for  insertion  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  paper.

2  This  fact  was  pointed  out  some  time  ago  by  Professor  Prestwich. — W.F.B.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


223


at  20  feet  in  a  surface  deposit.  Whether  the  geologist  ignored  the  surface
deposit,  or  thought  water  from  it  unwholesome,  I  know  not.

In  another  case  (No.  42,  p.  68)  the  geologist  is  not  so  wrong  as  he  seems.
Limestone  is  a  water-bearing  rock,  and  water  would  tend  to  flow  to  the
lowest  level  in  that  rock,  impervious  clay  beneath  preventing  it  from  getting
lower.  But  while  water  tends  to  percolate  evenly  through  gravel  and  sand,
it  flows  through  sandstones  and  limestones  mainly  along  their  lines  of
jointing.  Hence  it  is  by  no  means  rare  to  find  that  little  if  any  water  comes
into  a  shaft  driven  into  a  limestone  or  sandstone  to  a  supposed  suflicient
depth,  and  a  very  common  practice  of  practical  well-sinkers  to  run  headings
in  various  directions  to  tap  joints  and  fissures  when  such  is  the  case,  with
results  as  successful  as  in  the  above  example.

In  certain  Essex  cases  north  of  Chelmsford  and  between  Braintree  and
Bishop's  Stortford,  where  the  diviner's  success  was  thought  wonderful,  there  is
a  plateau  of  Boulder  clay  intersected  by  valleys  which  show  the  underlying


Fig.  1.


Glacial  gravel  and  sand,  London  clay  underlying  both.  The  villages  are  on
the  gravel  and  sand  of  the  valleys,  and  any  practical  well-sinker  would  see  at
once  that  water  would  be  attainable  at  a  moderate  depth  on  the  plateau  on
sinking  through  the  Boulder  clay  into  the  underlying  gravel,  see  Fig.  1  ;  the
London  clay,  of  course,  prevents  the  water  from  getting  lower.  The  valleys
thereabouts  .are  very  close  together,  in  addition.  Non-drift  maps  of  Essex
ignore  almost  everything  above  the  London  clay ;  hence  a  Government  oflicial,
reporting  a  year  or  two  ago  on  Essex  agriculture,  stated  that  most  of  the
soil  of  Essex  was  London  clay.  Much  more  of  it  is  Boulder  clay  than  London
clay.  But  drift-maps  are  of  recent  date,  and  all  geological  maps  of  less  scale
than  one  inch  to  the  mile  necessarily  ignore  drift  for  the  sake  of  clearness  in
more  fundamental  points  of  structure.

With  regard  to  Lady  Milbanke's  and  Dr.  Button's  experiments  (p.  42)  ;
the  "  new  college  "  was  evidently  the  Royal  Military  Academy  on  Woolwich
Common,  at  which  Dr.  Hutton  was  Professor  of  Mathematics  (1773-1806.)
Now  the  surface  of  Woolwich  Common  between  the  Military  Academy  and
the  Artillery  Barracks  and  Rotunda  (northward)  consists  of  Blackheath
Pebble  Beds  ;  while  from  the  Academy  (southward)  the  Pebble  Beds  become
covered  with  a  gradually  increasing  thickness  of  London  clay.  Whether  the
spot  at  which  the  lady  discovered  the  water  had  Pebble  Beds  at  the  surface,
or  they  were  covered  by  a  few  feet  of  London  clay,  is  immaterial,  as  the  water
would  be  found  only  towards  the  bottom  of  the  Pebble  Beds. And  as  water


224-


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


percolates  evenly  and  freely  through  them,  and  they  are  lying  almost
jjerfectly  flat,  water  would  be  found  thereabouts  at  very  nearly  the  same
depth  wherever  the  Pebble  Beds  are  uncovered,  and  at  a  greater  distance
from  the  surface  as  the  thickness  of  the  London  clay  above  increased.  It  is
therefore  obvious  that  whatever  influence  may  have  caused  the  lady's  agita-
tion and  the  twisting  of  the  rod  in  her  fingers,  it  could  not  have  been  a
peculiar  and  special  nearness  of  underground  water  at  that  particular  spot.
In  this  instance,  too,  there  can  be  no  suspicion  that  she  was  trying  to  give
herself  a  reputation  for  an  abnormal  faculty  ;  nor  that  her  movements  were
the  result  of  knowing  that  water  was  almost  certain  to  be  found  at  no  great
depth  in  a  bed  of  gravel.  We  learn  also  that  the  most  perfect  integrity  is
quite  compatible  with  complete,  though  unconscious,  self-deception.  In  short,
this  case  i.s  one  best  explained  by  the  conclusion  of  Paramelle,  that  "the
wand  turns  in  the  hands  of  certain  individuals  of  peculiar  temperament,  and
that  it  is  very  mucli  a  matter  of  chance  whether  there  are,  or  are  not,  wells
in  the  places  where  it  turns."  Records  of  experiments  with  the  divining  rod
show  many  apparently  similar  cases.

In  my  paf)er  I  spoke  of  myself  as  a /!e^f?-geologist,  because  having  worked
on  the  Geological  Survey  of  England  and  Wales  about  1]  years,  in  Yorkshire
and  Cumberland,  I  have  often  since  felt  the  advantage  of  having  been
compelled  from  official  duty  to  note  much  about  superficial,  and  other  beds,
which  the  non-ofticial  geologist  almost  invariably  neglects.  And  when
president  of  the  G  eologists'  Association,  at  a  later  date,  (1889-90),  it  often
struck  me  how  little  many  otherwise  accomplished  geologists  saw  in  the  field
of  those  points  which  would  be  instinctively  noted  by  the  Geological  Survey,
who  had  to  map  the  various  beds  in  detail.  But  many  of  these  points
would  equally  attract  the  attention  of  the  professional  diviner.  But  the
geologist — on  water  being  found  at  a  certain  depth,  whether  in  Carboniferous
sandstone,  or  river  gravel,  or  anywhere  else — would  not  call  water  so  found
"a  spring."  A  spring  is  a  natural  fountain.  Where  a  permeable  bed  of  sand-
stone— for  example — lies  above  impermeable  shale,  water  will  flow  downwards
through  the  sandstone  in  the  direction  of  its  dip.  Where  the  sandstone
becomes  saturated  to  a  level  above  that  of  the  surface,  there  may  be  one
strong  sprmg,  many  slighter  ones,  or  a  belt  of  wet  ground,  according  to  local
circumstances.

If  the  permanent  level  of  the  water  is  at  W.  L.  (see  Fig.  2,  representing
a  section)  then  there  will  be  springs  along  the  line  of  the  valley. But  if  I


Fig.  2.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


225


sink  a  well  at  my  house  at  H.  and  find  water  30  or  40  feet  below  the  surface  I
cannot  call  water  so  found  a  "  spring."  A  geological  surveyor  or  a  practical
well-sinker  would  see  the  dip  of  the  sandstone,  and  note  any  spring  or  belt
of  wet  ground  in  the  valley,  the  latter  telling  him  that  the  sandstone  being
full  of  water  there,  he  need  not  go  very  deep  for  it  at  H.  In  a  map  the
sandstone  would  probably  be  traceable  for  miles,  and  have  a  breadth  of
perhaps  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  Anywhere  towards  the  bottom  of  the  .slope
water  might  be  expected  at  a  moderate  depth.  In  sliort,  where  water  may
be  found  at  a  moderate  depth  is  a  question  of  acres  or  square  miles,  not  of
feet  or  inches,  as  the  diviner  absurdly  thinks.  And  when  the  finding  of
water  by  diviners  is,  nevertheless,  treated  as  though  it  were  equivalent  to
the  finding,  in  each  case,  of  a  pot  of  ancient  coins,  six  feet  below  the
surface  of  a  ploughed  field,  belief  in  his  abnormal  powers  follows  as  a  matter
of  course.

Nevertheless  I  may  add,  that  to  me  abnormal  sensitiveness  to  the
proximity  of  water  seems  quite  as  possible  as  abnormal  sensitiveness  to  the
action  of  some  special  drug,  or  to  the  presence  of  some  particular  animal,  of
which  many  curious  examples  are  known.

As  to  the  nature  of  the  nervous  sensibility  which  produces  these
performances  with  the  divining  rod  ;  how  much  its  possessors  resemble  in
nervous  organisation  persons  subject  to  hypnotic  influences,  or  those  who
speedily  become  convulsed  at  fervid  religious  meetings, — that  is  a  question
of  much  interest,  but  one  into  which  I  have  not  entered.

I  am  amused  at  the  fee  demanded  (note  p.  G  of  your  paper)  for  training.
For  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  diviner  depends  solely  on  his  inner
sensations,  "training"  seems  likely  to  do  harm  rather  than  good.  The
usual  dislike  of  diviners  to  be  blindfolded  also  becomes  unintelligible.  For,
if  blindfolded,  he  would  be  much  more  likely  to  be  governed  solely  by  his
inner  sensations.  I  know  that  they  do  not  always  object.  If  I  were  a
diviner,  I  would  object  or  not  according  to  the  nature  of  the  ground.  If  I
were  in  the  midst  of  a  large  flat  of  river  or  other  gravel,  I  would  cheerfully
consent.  But  if  progress  in  a  certain  direction  for  100  or  200  yards  might
lead  to  a  mistake,  I  would  prefer  to  see.  So  far  as  I  can  make  out,  the
diviner  acts  in  this  way.

As  to  the  question  of  sensitiveness  to  the  nearness  of  mineral  lodes,  I
have  not  touched  upon  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  two  things  are  better
treated  separately.  And  mineral  lodes  being  confined  to  special  lines  of
country,  to  definite  and  very  limited  areas,  it  would  be  much  more  easy  tO'
obtain  satisfactory  evidence  in  their  case  of  abnormal  sensitiveness  than  in
that  of  so  broadly  diff"used  a  thing  as  water.  Indeed,  as  regards  water,  I
cannot  think  of  any  country  in  which  the  matter  could  be  tested  satisfactorily.
And  with  regard  to  mineral  lodes,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  practical
observer  sees  much  in  his  own  line  where  vei-y  able  men,  in  other  walks,  see
nothing  particular,  as  regards  surface  indications.  The  "Savage"  is  a  far
better  observer  than  most  of  our  "educated"  people,  who  see  little  and
ai'gue  much.  Had  I  known  you  were  writing  on  the  subject  I  should  not
have  written  my  own  paj^er,  but  have  sent  you  my  notes  thereon.  But  I
heard  of  it  only  about  two  months  ago.

T.  V.  Holmes.

Q


226


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Holmes  had  not  seen  the  whole  of  the  sheets  of  my  paper
when  he  wrote  the  foregoing  letter.  After  receiving  the  rest  of  the
paper,  Mr.  Holmes  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

I  think  no  intelligent  person  can  doubt  the  practical  successes  of  dowsers
(pp.  4-7).  The  question  with  me  is  :  Does  a  recognition  of  them  involve
the  recognition  of  an  abnormal  faculty  in  the  dowser  1  It  seems  to  me  too
much  forgotten  that  a  man  may  become  a  "Sherlock  Holmes"  as  an
observer  of  the  special  natural  phenomena  in  which  he  is  interested,  and
remain  a  very  average  observer  in  other  departments.  I  am  very  far  from
thinking  that  dowsers  are  guilty  of  conscious  deception  when  they  attribute
their  successes  to  an  abnormal  power.  But  people  who  owe  little  or  nothing
to  education,  so  far  as  education  means  "  booklearning,"  are  particularly  apt
to  believe  themselves  the  possessors  of  special  abnormal  gifts,  simply  because
they  know  that  their  success  cannot  be  the  result  of  what  is  commonly  called
education.  1  In  his  special  sphere  a  gamekeeper  may  point  out  many  things
to  a  Darwin  which  the  latter  would  not  otherwise  have  noticed.

P.  48. — Adams.  Blindfolding  should  have  helped  him  by  preventing  any
confusing  of  his  sensations — on  the  sensations  hypothesis.  ^

P.  53.  —  Stokes  doubtless  was  "an  excellent  dowser,"  but  his  sensations
deceived  him  very  decidedly.  Should  like  to  have  his  views  as  to  the  origin
of  "  spring  water."  ^

P.  55. — As  to  Hale  Park,  I  note  on  looking  at  the  geological  map  that  in
Hale  Park  Bagshot-sands  come  on  eastward  above  Lower  Tertiary  clays,  etc.
I  have  not  visited  the  spot,  but  have  no  doubt  that  the  sands  occupy  higher
ground  than  the  Lower  Tertiary  beds.  As  the  sands  occupy  a  large  area  of
the  surface  east  of  the  house  at  Hale  Park,  they  must  contain  a  large  amount
of  water,  which  is  "surface"  water  as  coming  from  surface  beds.  Any
discovery  more  simple  and  less  "uncanny"  it  would  be  hard  to  mention.
It  makes  one  suspect  that  many  other  cases  which  seemed  extraordinary  to
the  narrators  would  prove  equally  simple  if  one  could  get  a  similar
knowledge  of  the  geology.*

1  This  i.s  very  true.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  dowser's  liability  to  self-
-deception.— W.  F.  B.

-  This  is  quite  true,  blindfolding  ought  to  help  the  dowser  as  it  does  the  quasi
thought-reader,  like  Stuart  Cumberland,  whose  performances  are  due  to  slight  and
ordinarily  imperceptible  variations  of  muscular  pressure  unintentionally  imparted  by
thf'se  who  know  what  has  to  be  found  or  done.  At  the  same  time,  if  the  rod  be  an
autoscopc  (p.  11)  one  can  quite  understand  how  unexpected  blmdfolding  might
disturb,  rather  than  induce,  that  passive  state  of  mind  which  seems  necessary  for
success  in  the  whole  group  of  sub-conscious  phenomena. — W.  F  B.

3  This  particular  experiment  of  Stokes  is  recorded  to  illustrate  what  is  said  at
the  top  of  p.  54  ;  it  ought  not  to  have  had  a  number,  but  should  have  been  classed
among  failures  of  a  specific  kind. — W.  F.  B.

■*  Possibly  this  case,  like  some  other  successes  of  the  dowser,  is  readily  ex-
plicable on  geological  grounds.  I  wrote  to  Major  Goff  to  enquire  why  "everyone
was  astonished  "  at  water  being  found.  His  reply  is  given  on  p.  55.  Mr.  Westlake,
F.G.S.,  writes,  "I  know  Hale.  The  well  referred  to  is  near  the  top  of  the  London
clay  and  not,  I  think,  as  shown  in  the  old  Geological  Survey  map,  actually  on  the
Bagshot-sand."— W.  F.  B.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  227


P.  104.—  Close  to  Bower  House,  but  higher  up,  Edward  the  Confessor  had
a  palace. The  patch  of  Bagshot-sand  on  which  it  stood  gave  a  water  supply.

P.  196. — The  Bacon  cases  are  in  the  Boulder  clay  district  of  Essex.
The  thicknesses  of  the  Boulder  clay  forming  the  surface  of  the  plateau  and
of  the  underlying  glacial  sand  and  gravel,  seen  in  the  valleys  of  the  various
streams,  vary  considerably  within  certain  moderate  limits.  But  the  water
is  diffused  through  the  gravel,  and  obtainable  when  the  gravel  is  reached.
Perhaps  the  usual  depth  to  which  it  would  be  necessary  to  sink  through  the
Boulder  clay  is  from  20  to  40  ft. (See  Fig.  1,  p.  223.)

The  Hurshani  Experiments  (p.  117). — The  position  of  Warnham  Lodge  is
not  shown  on  the  old  Ordnaiace  map  on  which  the  geological  surveyors
worked,  but  it  evidently  stands  where  the  words  '•'■Lit.  ilfai/s  "  appear  on
that  map,  about  a  mile  N.W.  of  the  village  of  Warnham,  which  is  about
2\  miles  N.W.  of  Horsham.  Horsham  stands  on  the  Tunbiidge  Wells  Sand
of  the  Hastings  Beds,  while  Warnham  and  Warnham  Lodge  are  both  on  the
overlying  formation  known  as  the  Weald  Clay,  as  the  great  bulk  of  it
consists  of  clay.  Topley,  in  the  "  Geological  Survey  Memoir  on  the  Weald
District  "  (p.  101),  gives  a  section  of  a  "  well  at  Warnham,  near  Horsham. "


ft.  in.

Bluish  clay

  7  0

Red  sandstone

  0  9

Bluish  clay

  20  0

Red  sandstone

  0  8

Blue  clay

  49  7

Water-bearing  bed

  1  0

Clay,  chiefly  blue

  73  0

152  0

[This  is  slightly  condensed,  the  names  of  varieties  of  clay  being  omitted.]

Topley  notes  (p.  396)  that  of  97  towns  and  villages  on  the  Hastings  Beds
(which  consist  of  alternations  of  sands  and  clays,  neither  decidedly  pre-
dominating as  regards  the  area  they  cover),  79  are  on  sandy  sites.  To  obtain
a  water  supply  by  means  of  shallow  wells  and  pumps  has  been  the
chief  cause  of  this  selection,  clay  yielding  no  water.  In  the  Weald  Clay
district,  the  most  important  of  the  subordinate  beds  of  stone  is  the
Horsham  Stone,  on  which  the  village  of  Warnham  and  Warnham  Court
stand.  The  presence  of  one  of  these  beds  of  stone,  where  it  attains  a
thickness  of  a  few  feet,  will  be  marked  by  the  existence  of  a  ridge,  which
will  make  higher  ground  than  that  where  the  surface  beds  are  almost  wholly
clay.  As  water  supply  in  such  a  district  depends  so  largely  on  the  presence
of  these  beds  of  stone,  the  dowser  naturally  has  a  keen  eye  for  the  elevated
ground,  and  ilhU  go  there,  to  the  horror  of  his  backers  at  first,  and  to  the
enormous  increase  of  their  wonder  at  his  powers,  when  a  well  is  successfully
sank  at  the  top  of  a  hill,  after  failures  down  below.

There  are  signs  of  the  presence  of  a  bed  of  stone  on  the  high  ground
where  Warnham  Lodge  and  farm  buildings  stand,  and  Topley  mentions
(p.  104)  a  bed  of  sand  and  sandstone  ranging  by  Hurst  Hill,  Gearing's,
Little  Muij's,  Charman's,  and  other  sjpots  to  Rudgwick,  which  is  evidently  the

Q  2


228


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


stone  in  question .1  Whether  in  Yorkshire,  Sussex,  or  anywhere  else,  where
beds  of  stone  alternate  with  others  of  clay  or  sliale,  the  high  ground  is
composed  of  the  beds  of  stone,  and  the  lower  of  the  shales,  and  the  former
are  waterbearing,  the  latter  not.

I  do  not  wonder  that  the  non-dowsing  advisers  ignored  the  surface  stone
bed,  and  thought  of  (I  suppose)  going  down  to  the  Horsham  Stone,  or  even
the  Tunbridge  Wells  Sand  ;  or,  perhaps,  of  tapping  a  sufficient  number  of
waterbearing  beds,  which  individually  insignificant  might  collectively  prove
sufficient,  and  be  free  from  jiossible  dangers  arising  from  surface  pollution —
dangers  by  no  means  uncommon  in  similar  cases.  The  dowser's  triumph  is
to  find  water,  and  to  find  it  as  near  the  surface  as  possible  ;  he  has  no  further
responsibility.  But  the  geologist  who  should  recommend  water  from  a  source
easily  polluted,  and  which  gave  rise  to  disease  in  persons  using  it,  would  be
deemed  to  have  shown  a  most  culpable  recklessness — at  the  very  least.

However,  the  dowser  in  this  case,  after  "  blasting  and  sinking"  in  hard
limestone,  ol)tained  a  supply  of  water  at  a  depth  of  12  feet,  at  spots  known
as  E  and  F,  and  at  19  feet  at  D  (p.  119),  all  these  wells  being  only  a  few
yards  apart.  The  dowser,  however,  insisted  that  no  water  would  be  found
between  wells  E  and  F,  as  "botli  were  independent  springs."  One  of  the
wells  was  pumped  nearly  dry,  and  the  water-level  in  the  other  was  unaffected.
But  this  merely  showed  that  there  were  no  lines  of  bedding  or  jointing  giving
an  easy  passage  to  the  water  between  the  two  wells.  And  the  water  from  the
stone  for  some  distance  around  having  been  collected  into  the  two  wells,
the  space  between  them  was  likely  to  be  a  spot  comparatively  free  from
water.  Of  course,  ultimately,  a  well  midway  between  E  and  F  would  have
become  as  full  of  water  as  they  were.  But  the  days  necessary  for  this  to
take  place,  in  the  absence  of  a  good  system  of  jointing,  were  not  allowed,
but  a  tunnel  was  at  once  made  connecting  the  wells  E  and  F,  and  ensuring
a  better  supply  than  could  otherwise  be  obtained.

This  stone  was  evidently  an  extremely  hard  and  compact  rock,  very  much
more  so  than  the  chalk,  but  the  best  illustration  I  can  think  of  to  show  the
difference  between  the  restricted  circulation  of  water  in  jointed  rocks,  and
its  free  percolation  in  gravel  and  sand  is  from  the  chalk.

In  the  Essex  Naturalist,  Vol.  I.,  p.  254,  (1887)  there  is  a  brief  account  of
souie  "  chalk  wells  "  in  Buckinghamshire.  These  chalk  wells  were  situated  at
a  tile  works,  and  consisted  of  some  five  or  six  shafts,  about  70  ft.  deep,  which
after  piercing  through  the  surface  beds,  entered  the  chalk  to  a  depth  of  about
6  ft.,  and  then  widened  out  into  bell-shaped  chambers.  The  object  of  their
makers  was  to  obtain  chalk  for  lime  from  the  ground  beneath  tlie  limited
area  of  the  tile  works.  The  chalk  being  locally  full  of  water  almost  to  the
top,  these  chambers  were  hollowed  out  as  near  the  top  of  the  chalk  as
possible.  After  a  considerable  amount  of  chalk  had  been  removed  from  one
of  these  chambers,  it  would  become  unplea.santly  wet,  and  would  ultimately
be  abandoned  and  another  shaft  sunk,  and  so  on.  The  important  point  is
that  these  chambers  became  unpleasantly  wet  only  after  some  time  had
elapsed,  though  from  their  size,  as  compared  with  that  of  a  mere  well,  they
must  have  been  comjjaratively  far  more  likely  to  be  speedily  flooded.  I

'  It  is  called  a  limestone  in  your  pajjer.  Probably  it  is  more  calcareous  than
usual  at  Warnham  Lodge.


XXXIl.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


229


have  no  doubt  that  the  Warnham  well  between  E  and  F  would  eventually
have  had  water  in  it,  had  sufficient  time  been  allowed,  just  as  in  the  case  of
the  chalk  chambers  at  the  tile  works.  That  Mullins  fixed  ujjon  the  spot
midway  between  two  wells  as  a  dry  place,  seems  to  me  simply  caused  by  his
experience  of  the  behaviour  of  water  in  jointed  rocks,  not  as  showing  the
veracity  of  his  sensations.  The  dowser  in  the  case  reported  by  Professor
Sollas  no  doubt  fancied  that  he  was  directed  by  his  sensations.  But  he
probably  thought  also  that  water  circulated  as  irregularly  through  the  sand
of  an  alluvial  flat  as  through  a  jointed  rock — and  consequently  deceived
liimself.  T  V.  Holmes.

Mr.  Holmes'  criticism  of  some  of  the  cases  which  I  have  cited  is
extremely  interesting  and  useful,  and  I  am  much  indebted  to  him  for
the  tx'ouble  he  has  taken.  Regarding  the  Horsham  experiments,  the
explanation  suggested  by  Mr.  Holmes  presumes  that  Mullins  had  not
only  local  knowledge,  but  also  a  geological  knowledge  of  the  locality.
This  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  (see  p.  117).  I  never  met
John  Mullins,  but  every  one  who  has  done  so  testifies  to  the  fact  that
he  never  troubled  himself  in  the  least  about  gaining  the  advantage  to
be  derived  from  even  an  elementary  acquaintance  with  geological  facts.
Whatever  information  of  water  beai'ing  strata  he  has  gained  by
experience  was  probably  not  consciously  drawn  upon,  but  may  have
aided  him  in  a  kind  of  instinctive  selection  of  the  right  spot  where  to
sink  a  well.  The  question  to  be  discussed  presently  is  whether  this
instinct  gained  by  experience  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  dowser's
success  in  the  whole  of  the  cases  I  have  cited.  At  Warnham  Park
there  was  absolutely  nothing  in  the  surface  of  the  ground  to  indicate
which  was  stone  and  which  Weald  clay.  The  hill  and  its  slopes  as  well
as  the  rest  of  the  ground  were  covered  with  vegetation,  under  which
was  a  thick  layer  of  alluvial  soil.  Moreover  the  water  found,  though
from  a  shallow  well,  is  an  excellent,  abundant,  and  perennial  supply.
If  its  discovery  was  so  very  obvious,  as  Mr.  Holmes  points  out,  why  did
not  the  experienced  local  well  sinkers  and  the  eminent  engineers  who
were  consulted, — aided  as  they  were  by  geological  maps  and  geological
advice, — indicate  the  fact  to  Mr.  (now  Sir  Henry)  Harben  and  save
him  the  fruitless  expenditure  of  over  XI, 000?  If  Mr.  Holmes  visited
the  site,  he  would  see  the  source  chosen  is  the  highest  point  on  the
estate ;  it  is  not  easily  polluted  and  in  fact  it  furnishes  the  whole  of
the  drinking  water  which  is  used  in  the  establishment.  It  is,  as  we
all  know,  very  easy  to  prophecy  after  the  event,  but  in  this  case  not
quite  so  easy  beforehand,  apparently. ^

1  Writing  to  me  on  July  8th,  1897,  after  the  above  was  in  type,  Mr.  Hohiies  says : —
I  visited  Horsham  on  June  30th. As  you  say,  there  is  no  evidence  of  stone  on
the  surface,  bvit  that  would  not  matter  to  the  dowser. He  would  see,  as  I  saw,  that
there  was  a  ridge  capped  by  stone  of  some  sort  there,  i.e.,  by  .something  harder  than


230


Professor  Tf.  F.  Barrett.


[part


With  regard  to  the  absence  of  water  between  wells  E  and  F
(p.  118)  if  I  understand  Mr.  Holmes  aright,  he  argues  this  is  merely
relative,  water  would  gradually  have  percolated  into  the  intervening
space,  if  time  were  allowed  for  it  to  do  so.  Possibly,  but  that  is  not  the
point  in  question.  How  did  MuUins  find  the  exact  spots  where  bedding
or  jointing  allowed  an  abundant  supply  of  water  to  be  tapped  ?  And
how  did  he  know  that  between  E  and  F  in  the  solid  rock  12  ft.  below
him  there  was  "an  absence  of  a  good  system  of  jointing,"  to  u.se Mr.
Holmes'  words  ■?  He  did  not  remove  the  trees,  the  shrubs,  the  grass,
and  the  surface  soil,  and  explore  the  rocks  beforehand.  Had  Mr.
Holmes  himself  been  in  Mullins'  place,  he  must  have  been  more
than  a  geological  Sherlock  Holmes  to  have  discovered  all  this  in  a
rapid  walk  over  entirely  new  ground.

No,  Mr.  Holmes'  criticism  leaves  the  solution  of  the  question
as  a  tohole  as  far  off  as  ever.  Many  individual  cases  are,  no  doubt,
readily  explicable;  but  nothing  Mi*.  Holmes  has  said  explains  the
Waterford  experiments,  nor,  I  venture  to  say,  the  Horsham
experiments,  nor  the  numerous  cases  I  have  cited  where  useless  wells
or  borings  had  previously  been  made,  and  where  water  was  found  by
the  dowsei'  at  a  less  depth,  or  a^  a  corresponding  depth  close  by.

The  laext  letter  may  be  contrasted  with  Mr.  Holmes'  instructive
criticism,  or  with  the  opinions  given  on  pp.  6,  7,  and  67.


MR. J. H. BLAKE,  F.G.S.

I  wrote  to  several  well-known  geologists  to  ask  for  any  information
they  could  give  me  either  favoui-able  or  unfavourable  to  the  pretensions
of  the  dowser.  Among  other  replies,  my  friend,  Mr.  W.  Whitaker,
F.R.S.,  referred  me  to  Mr.  J.  H.  Blake,  F.G.S. ,  of  the  Geological  Survey,
who  has  had  considerable  experience  in  hydro-geology.  I  wrote  to  Mr.
Blake,  and  the  following  is  his  reply : —

Re  "The  Divining  Rod."

16,  Polstead-road,  Oxford,  October  1st,  1896.
I  have  received  your  letter  of  September  26th,  desiring  some  information
as  to  the  'iiou-siiccess  of  the  above. When  was  it  ever  successful  ?

clay,  which  would  be  enough  for  his  purpose.  And  the  information  which  he  would
inevitably  gather  from  Mr.  Harben  and  others  would  suffice  without  asking  many
questions,  I  did  not  notice  the  Waterford  ease,  because  I  do  not  know  the  country
at  all.  The  majority  of  recorded  cases  cannot  be  discussed  by  a  geologist,  from  the
absence  of  sufficient  geological  details.  rj,  y  jjQj^jjj,g

It  was  extremely  good  of  Mr.  Holmes  to  take  the  trouble  to  visit  Warnham
specially  ;  he  is,  however,  entirely  mistaken  in  his  assumptions,  as  Sir  Henry  Harben
would  inform  him  ;  how,  except  by  trial,  or  from  some  geological  knowledge,  was
Mullins  to  know  the  ridge  was  "capped  by  stone  of  some  sort,"  when  Mr.  Holmes
himself  says  "  there  was  no  evidence  of  stone  on  the  surface"?


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


231


The  late  VV.  J.  Palmer,  of  the  Biscuit  Factory,  Reading,  wanting  a
water  supply  at  Kingwood  House,  Lambourn,  Berkshire,  employed  a
divining  rod  man,  who  walked  over  the  ground  and  stated  water  would  be
found  at  a  few  feet  beneath  the  surface  over  a  certain  area  which  he  pointed
out.  1  was  afterwards  consulted,  and  having  inspected  the  site,  and  made
some  calculations,  informed  Mr.  Palmer  that  no  water  would  be  met  with
until  the  plane  of  saturation  in  the  chalk  was  reached,  which  at  the  locality
mentioned  would  be  about  300  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Mr.
Palmer  then  decided  to  have  a  well  dug,  six  feet  in  diameter,  which  was
carried  out  by  a  man  1  know  very  well,  and  who  supplied  me  with  all
particulars,  and  no  water  was  found  until  the  plane  of  saturation  in  the
chalk  was  reached  at  about  the  depth  I  stated.  This  well  was  sunk
in  1892.

To  mention  a  more  recent  case,  last  June,  the  owner  of  "The  Hollies,"
Burghfield,  near  Reading,  called  upon  me,  and  stated  that  her  tenant — a
General,  who  believed  in  the  divining  rod — had  employed  a  well-known
divining  rod  man,  who  went  over  the  ground,  and  told  him  water  would  be
found  at  about  40  feet  beneath  the  surface.  After  making  some  calculations,
I  informed  the  owner  that  no  water  would  be  met  with  until  the  basement
bed  of  the  London  clay  was  reached,  which  at  the  site  of  the  house  would  be
about  183  feet  beneath  the  surface.  This  information  was  communicated  to
the  General,  who  shortly  afterwards  called  upon  me,  when  I  explained
to  him  how  I  arrived  at  my  conclusions,  and  that  the  divining  rod
business  was  absolute  nonsense  !  I  advised  a  boring  to  be  made,  which
was  completed  a  few  days  ago,  and  no  water  was  met  with  until  the  water-
bearing basement  bed  of  the  London  clay  was  reached  at  a  depth  of  190
feet  from  the  surface.

I  will  mention  one  more  case  to  show  the  fallacy  of  the  divining  rod,  or
'"dowsing  fork,"  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  but  better  known  on  the
Geological  Sui'vey  as  the  "chousing  fork  !  "

A  well-known  divining  rod  man  visited  Reading  a  few  years  ago,  when
Mr.  Walker,  the  waterworks  manager,  took  him  along  a  street,  at  a  certain
spot  beneath  which  the  Holy  Brook  (which  used  to  supply  the  old  Abbey)
flows  in  a  culvert.  When  they  came  to  it,  all  those  present  watched  the  hazel
twig,  or  fork,  which  lie  carried  in  the  usual  manner,  and  not  the  slightest
movement  occurred,  although  all  those  present,  excepting  the  divining  rod
man,  knew  perfectly  well  there  was  running  water  beneath  them  !

In  conclusion,  I  consider  those  who  profess  to  find  water  by  means  of  the
divining  rod,  and  receive  moneys  for  their  erroneous  information,  ought  to
be  prosecuted  for  fraud,  quite  as  much  as  a  fortune-teller,  for  deceiving  her
Majesty's  subjects.  .  j jj  -^^^^^

As  Mr.  Blake  mentions  two  specific  instances  of  failure,  it  was
desirable  to  obtain  information  about  these  at  first  hand,  so  that  they
might  be  recorded  with  other  adverse  evidence. Upon  enquiry,  I

1  The  General  alluded  to  paid  a  fee  of  £3  3s.,  and  Mr.  W.  J.  Palmer,  I  believe,
considerably  move. — J.  H.B.


232


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


ascertained  the  name  of  the  General  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  letter,
and  wrote  to  him. General  Buck  kindly  replies  as  follows  :  —

The  Hollies,  Burghfield,  Mortimer,  Berks.,  Odoher  oth,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  October  2nd,  1896,  I  have  to  inform  you  that

Mr.  MuUins,  the  diviner,  came  here  and  pointed  out  places  where  I  should

find  water,  but  T  did  not  sink  a  well  at  the  jjlace  pointed  out,  as  he  said  I

should  have  to  go  down  70  or  80  feet. I  subsequently  consulted  Mr.  Blake,

Government  geological  surveyor,  who  informed  me  that  I  should  get  no  water

nearer  the  surface  than  186  feet. As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  had  to  bore  210  feet

before  I  got  a  supply. No  doubt  I  should  have  found  water  at  that  depth  at

the  place  pointed  out  by  the  diviner,  as  I  was  aware  that  if  I  went  deep

enough  I  should  get  water.  -r

"  L.  Buck.

The  dowser  in  this  case  could  not  have  been  John  Mullins,  who  was
dead,  but  must  have  been  one  of  his  sons.  Mr.  Blake,  it  will  be
observed,  is  not  quite  accurate  in  his  statements  as  to  the  depth
predicted  by  the  dowser,  or  that  at  which  water  was  actually  found.
This,  however,  is  immaterial,  as  the  well  was  not  sunk  at  the  place
indicated  by  the  dowser.  Nevertheless,  the  geological  evidence  shows
that  the  dowser  employed  was  probably  mistaken.  It  would,  however,
have  been  rash  to  make  any  such  prediction  in  the  case  of  a  spot  fixed
on  by  John  Mullins,  as  the  Waterfoi'd  experiments,  the  Horsham
experiments,  and  other  evidence  already  cited  demonstrate.

With  regard  to  the  first  case  mentioned  by  Mr.  Blake,  that  of  the
late  Mr.  W.  J.  Palmer,  of  Reading,  I  wrote  to  the  address  given  by
Mr.  Blake,  and  received  the  following  reply  from  Mr.  G.  W.  Palmer  : —

Elmhurst,  Reading,  February  2oth,  1897.
In  reply  to  your  letter,  I  write  to  say  you  have  been  entirely  misinformed  ;
my  experience  with  the  divining  rod  has,  I  am  glad  to  say,  been  eminently
satisfactory.  ^^^^  ^^^^  p^^^^^_

Upon  explaining  that  the  reference  was  to  the  late  Mr.  W.  J.
Palmer,  I  was  informed  that  the  latter  had  been  dead  some  years,  and
no  information  was  possessed  by  my  correspondent  as  to  the  facts
nari'ated  by  Mr.  Blake.  In  reply  to  my  enquiries  as  to  any  one  who
could  give  me  the  requisite  information,  Mr.  G.  VV.  Palmer's  private
secretary  states  that  he  has  submitted  my  letter  to  Mr.  Palmer,  who
had  to  leave  home  on  account  of  illness,  and  that  "  he  is  unable  to  throw
any  light  upon  the  matter."  Whilst  I  do  not  in  the  least  dispute  Mr.
Blake's  statement,  it  will  be  observed  that  his  information  in  this  case
does  not  appear  to  be  first-hand.  Certainly,  Mr.  G.  W.  Palmer's  letter
disposes  of  Mr.  Blake's  assertion  in  another  letter  which  is  before  me,
viz.,  "  The  Palmers  now  are  no  longer  believers  in  the  divining  rod,
but  strong  believers  in  Geology  and  ITydro-geology. "


xxxii.]  071  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  233


The  parti-pris  with  which  the  investigation  of  our  subject  is
approached  bj  most  geologists  is  seen  in  the  first  sentence  of
Mr  Blake's  letter,  when  the  question  is  asked,  "  when  was  it  ever
successful  ? "  By  this  is  evidently  meant,  "  when  was  a  dowser  ever
successful  in  discovering  underground  water  ?  "  Even  without  reference
to  the  bulk  of  the  evidence  collected  in  this  paper,  an  answer  to  this
question  is  given  by  an  experienced  and  practical  inan  like  the  bailiff
to  the  Merchant  Venturers'  estates,  who  remarks  (No.  28,  p.  50)  that
he  "  would  as  soon  think  of  planting  a  tree  with  its  root  upwards  as  of
digging  a  well  for  water  without  employing  a  dowser."

MR. C. E. DE  RANGE,  F.G.S.

Among  English  geologists  who  have  made  the  question  of  water
supply  their  special  study,  few  are  more  qualified  to  speak  than  Mr.
C.  E.  De  Ranee,  Assoc.  Inst.  C.E.,  F.G-.S.,  of  the  Geological  Survey  of
England  and  Wales.i  Mr.  De  Ranee  was  secretary  to  the  British
Association  "  Undergroimd  Water  Committee,"  and  drew  up  the  whole
of  their  twenty  annual  published  reports.  In  a  letter  to  Mr.  E.
Westlake,  which  I  am  permitted  to  print,  Mr.  De  Ranee,  like  most
other  geologists,  speaks  of  the  divining  rod  as  a  fi'aud,  though  he
thinks  many  of  its  operatox's  are  honest  and  deceive  themselves ;  and
adds,  under  date,  November  16th,  1896  : —

With  an  exjjerience  of  a  quarter  of  a  century  I  know  of  no  public  water
supply,  or  first  class  pumping  station  for  trade  purposes,  which  originated
with  a  dowser.  As  regards  shallow  wells  for  domestic  use,  sunk  by  local
well  smkers,  it  is  very  seldom  that  a  small  supply  of  water  cannot  be  got  for
the  limited  requirements,  and  failures  are  few.  The  dowser  is  in  the  same
general  condition ;  for  a  small  quantity  he  can  hardly  go  wrong,  and  one
never  hears  of  his  failures  in  the  newspapers  !

How  far  the  evidence  I  have  presented  confirms  this  opinion  of  Mr.
De  Ranee  I  leave  the  reader  to  judge  ;  certainly  local  well  sinkers  do
frequently  sink  without  finding  water^  as  a  large  number  of  the  cases  I
have  cited  prove.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  De  Ranee,  and  asked  him  if  he
could  supply  me  with  any  facts  as  to  the  relative  success,  or  non-success,
of  a  good  dowser  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  good  geologist  on  the  other,
in  determining  the  correct  sites  of  wells  for  various  private  properties.
I  received  the  following  interesting  letter  in  reply  : —

55,  Stoke  Road,  Stoke-on-Trent,  December  15th,  1896.
Divining  rod. — I  agree  with  you  that  facts,  and  not  belief  or  unbelief,
should  be  the  basis  of  the  enquiry. But  the  difficulty  is  to  get  facts  on  both

^  See  Appendix  B,  where  Mr.  De  Ranee's  work  on  the  Water  Supply  of  England
and  Wales,  London,  1882,  is  referred  to.  Mr.  De  Ranee  kindly  sent  me  a  number
of  press  cuttings  on  the  divining  rod  of  older  date  than  those  I  had.


234


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


sides  that  are  comparable.  It  does  not  follow,  because  a  man  is  an  emUient
geologist  or  civil  engineer,  that  he  has  studied  "  Hydro-geology";  the  chances
are  that  he  has  not.  There  are  at  the  present  time  barely  twenty  under-
ground water-experts  in  the  British  Islands,  so  the  "  personal  equation"  is
of  the  greatest  importance.  There  are  probably  1,500  geologists,  including
geologically  inclined  civil  and  mining  engineers,  but  twenty  would  be  the
outside  wlio  could  give  a  reliable  opinion  on  underground  water,  any  more
than  on  fossil  insects,  or  fossil  fish.

It  is  a  matter  of  common  experience  that  local  authorities  do  not  know
who  are  the  underground  water  specialists,  and  call  in  a  leading  geologist,  who
may,  or  may  not,  respond  to  the  call,  just  as  some  surgical  experts  may,  or
may  not,  advise,  when  asked  for  an  opinion  outside  tlieir  special  branch.
The  opinions  of  such  geologists  rest  upon  chance,  and  I  should  not  be
surprised  to  hear  that  their  success,  or  non-success,  was  on  all  fours  with
that  of  "  the  dowser."

Then  again,  as  regards  comparing  successes,  it  is  important  to  remember
an  underground  water-expert  is  hardly  ever  called  in,  except  a  daily  supply
of  from  100,000  to  4,000,000  gallons  is  required.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  no
public  or  private  supply  of  over  100,000  gallons  per  day  has  ever  been
advised  by  a  "dowser,"  though  such,  of  course,  may  be  the  case,  unknown
to  me.

Underground  water  travels  in  s/teets  and  noilines,  and  though  underground
"  channels,"  or  "  courses,"  occur  in  limestones  and  impure  limestone — like
the  chalk, — occasionally,  they  are  wholly  absent  in  other  rocks  ;  though,  of
course,  these  throw  up  lines  of  springs,  where  the  flow  of  water  is  intercepted
by  faults,  throwing  in  some  impermeable  material,  forming  a  water-tight
barrier. Such  lines  are  well  marked  by  melted  hoar-frod  at  daybreak,  on  a


Mr.  De  Ranee  is  doubtless  right  that  no  large  jmhlic  water-supply
is  due  to  a  dowser ;  this  is  one  of  the  special  functions  of  the  hydro-
geologist,  who  will  on  scientific  grounds  accurately  advise  where  to
sink  dee]?  wells.  Here  I  should  expect  the  dowser  would  be  quite
useless.  Mr.  De  Ranee  is,  however,  mistaken  in  thinking  no  water
supplies  of  over  100,000  gallons  a  day  (say  4,200  an  hour)  have  ever
been  found  by  dowsers,  see  e.g.,  No.  49,  where  20,000,  and  No.  78,
where  10,000  gallons  pe7-  hour  were  obtained  ;  but  as  a  rule  the  supply
found  is  not  so  enormous,  though  ample  for  private  purposes.

It  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  there  are  two  distinct  kinds  of
wells,  viz.,  skallmv  ivells,  sunk  into  a  superficial  permeable  stratum  ;
and  deep  wells,  sunk  through  the  superficial  stratum  and  through  an
impermeable  stratum  beneath,  until  the  underlying  water-bearing

1  This  is  an  intere.sting  observation  and  one  to  which  I  shall  return  in  discussing
the  theory  of  a  possible  "  dowsing  faculty."  In  mining  districts  the  melting  of  hoar-
frost and  the  peculiar  growth  of  herbage  have  long  been  known  to  afford  some
indications  of  the  direction  of  mineral  lodes  beneath. — W.  F.  B.


frosty  morning.


1


C.  E.  De  Range.


x^;xII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


235


stratum  is  reached.  Shallow  wells  are  often  contaminated  and  yield
as  a  rule  moderate  supplies  of  water  ;  deep  wells  generally  yield  a
much  larger  supply  of  pure  water.  Though  the  evidence  in  this  paper
shows  that  some  deep  wells  have  been  successfully  found  by  dowsers,
ail  analysis  of  the  whole  of  the  cases  shows  that  the  success  of
the  dowser  evidently  lies  in  fixing  the  best  spot  where  to  sink
comparatively  shallow  wells,  the  average  depth  of  the  dowser's  wells
mentioned  in  this  paper  being  a  little  over  40  feet,  and  the  average
supply  found  being  sufficient  for  the  purpose  required,  though
insufficient  for  a  public  water  supply.  There  is,  however,  abundant
evidence  to  prove  that  in  these  wells,  as  a  rule,  the  quality  of  the
water,  even  in  the  12  foot  well  (p.  119)  sunk  by  Sir  Henry  Harben,  is
excellent  for  drinking  purposes.  The  dowser,  it  must  be  remembered,
is  rarely  employed  in  towns,  where  shallow  wells  are  undoubtedly  a
source  of  danger.

Again,  in  estimating  the  success  or  failure  of  the  dowser,  it  should
not  be  forgotten  that  the  most  experienced  geologists  are  sometimes
mistaken  in  the  advice  they  give  as  to  water  supply.  Mr.  De  Ranee
goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  even  the  opinion  of  leading  geologists  (the
result  of  their  opinions  is  probably  meant)  "rests  upon  chance."
There  is  a  well-known  case  of  the  serious  and  costly  failure  of  scientific
advice  in  well-sinking  recorded  in  the  Encyclajxedia  Britannica,  (Art.
Water  Supply,  p.  405).  This  was  at  the  deep  well  on  Southampton
Common,  "  which  has  only  yielded  a  small  supply  of  water,  though
carried  852  feet  into  the  chalk."  This  well  has  since  been  sunk,  by
boring,  to  a  depth  of  1,317  feet,  and  was  ultimately  abandoned  after
the  ratepayers  had  been  put  to  an  expense  of  £13,000.^  Other  cases
of  failure  on  the  part  of  scientific  experts  in  sinking  deep  wells  have
occurred.  A  French  engineer  congratulates  himself  that  out  of  16
deep  borings  he  has  made,  only  two  Were  unsuccessful ;  that  is,  his
failures  wei'e  rather  over  12  per  cent.  The  writer  of  the  work  in
Weale's  Series  already  cited,  an  experienced  hydraulic  engineer,  states
"  the  non-success  of  these  borings  is  worthy  of  remark,  as  illustrating
the  uncertainty  of  this  class  of  operations."  Nor  do  these  deep  wells
always  yield  a  large  supply  ;  according  to  the  same  writer,  the  artesian
well  sunk  at  the  "Model  Prison,  Caledonian-road,  London"  to  a  depth
of  370^  feet  only  yielded  800  gallons  per  hour.  The  artesian  well  at
Chichester  is  sunk  and  bored  to  a  depth  of  1,054  feet,  but  does  not
yield  100  gallons  an  hour  and  "the  water  is  of  a  repulsive  taste  and
smell." These,  I  suppose,  would  be  cases  which  Mr.  De  Ranee  would

1  Treatise  on  WcU-difiging  and  horiwj  in  Weale's  Series,  7th  edition,  p.  89.  Mr.
Westlake,  f.G.S.,  informs  me  the  total  cost  of  this  well  was  £19,600;  it  did  yield
from  2  to  5,000  gallons  per  hour,  but  this  was  a  failure  for  the  object  intended  and
the  well  was  abandoned  as  useless  in  1882  ;  though  now  used  for  road  watering.


236


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


maintain  illustrate  his  contention.  Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  the
significant  point  is  that,  when  a  failure  on  the  part  of  a  dowser  occurs,
an  outcry  is  immediately  raised  and  his  successes  are  ignored ;  whereas
similar  treatment  is  not  accorded  to  the  engineer  or  geologist.  This
is,  no  doubt,  inevitable,  though  the  problem  being  to  obtain  a  water
supply,  it  is  a  matter  of  supreme  indifference  to  the  user  whether  the
process  by  which  it  is  obtained  be  rational  and  explicable  on  scientific
grounds,  or  irrational  and  inexplicable.

As  these  sheets  are  passing  through  the  press  a  sheaf  of  newsjDaper
cuttings  has  reached  me,  containing  comments  on  the  surcharge  of  the
Urban  District  Council,  at  Ampthill,  in  Bedfordshire,  of  the  fee  paid
by  them  to  the  dowser.^  The  geological  reasons  for  this  surcharge  are
fair  enough,  the  site  being  on  the  Oxford  clay,  which  it  is  said  has
been  bored  7 00  feet  without  finding  water  ;  albeit  it  appears  that  a
fair  yield  of  water  was  obtained  at  a  moderate  depth,  on  the  site
selected  by  Gataker;  but  the  supply  was  quite  inadequate  for  public
use. 2  A  similar  dispute  has  recently  arisen  at  Porthcawl,  in
Glamorganshire,  which  is  referred  to  on  p.  162.  In  both  these  cases  I
am  informed  that  the  newspaper  comments  ai'e  based  on  misleading
reports.  The  solicitor  to  the  Porthcawl  District  Council  and  Clerk  to
the  Boai'd,  in  answer  to  my  enquiry  writes  to  say  that  the  dowsing

1  One  of  the  legal  reasons  given  by  the  auditoi-  for  the  surcharge  was  based  on  a
decree  of  the  High  Court  to  the  effect  that  "  the  pretence  of  power,  whether  moral,
physical,  or  supernatural,  with  intent  to  obtain  money,  was  sufficient  to  constitute  an
oifence  within  the  meaning  of  the  law. "  Some  sensible  remarks  on  this  case  are  to  be
found  in  one  or  two  papers,  but  the  bulk  of  the  Press  make  merry  over  "  the
superstition,"  "the  mediseval  ignorance,"  "the  corporate  blindness,"  etc.,  of  the
District  Council.

-  In  justice  to  Mr.  Gataker  I  append  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  of  his
which  appeared  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  for  July  3rd,  1897  :—

' '  Two  misstatements  have  appeared  in  the  papers  in  relation  to  my  work  for  the
Ampthill  Urban  District  Council.  The  first  misstatement  is  that  a  boring  to  700  ft.
without  result  was  made  on  my  advice.  This  is  not  the  fact.  A  boring  to  a  depth  of
700  ft.  was,  I  believe,  made  at  considerable  expense,  for  a  brewery  company,  long  before
I  was  consulted  by  the  Council,  and  in  a  totally  different  locality  to  that  in  which  I
located  the  springs  for  the  Council.  .  .  .  The  second  is  that  test  borings  were  made
on  my  advice  by  the  Council,  and  that  my  predictions  were  not  verified.  This,  again,
is  not  the  fact.  At  the  monthly  meeting  of  the  Council  held  on  Tuesday,  June  15th,  the
•chairman  of  the  Covincil,  as  reported  in  the  Bedfordshire  Mercury  of  Saturday,
June  I'Jth,  said  :  '  The  Council  had  really  tested  but  one  of  his  spots  (that  is,  the
spots  at  which  I  had  located  springs  for  the  Council),  and  there,  where  he  said  they
would  find  a  yield  of  2,500  gallons,  they  had  actually  found  2,800.  He  contended
that  Mr.  Gataker  had  been  treated  in  a  very  un-English  way.'  ;

"  It  would  be  a  matter  of  great  gratification  to  me  were  the  whole  question
investigated  by  some  well-known  scientific  person,  or  scientific  body."

Leicester  Gatakek.


XXXII.]


Un  the  So-called  Divinivg  Rod.


237


experiment  was  not,  as  stated  in  the  papers,  a  complete  failure,  but  the
quantity  of  water  found  was  less  than  anticipated  and  insufficient  for
public  purposes.

The  action  of  the  Local  Government  Board  auditors  in  sur-
charging some  District  Councils  for  fees  paid  to  a  dowser  is  closely
connected  with  the  hostile,  a  priori,  geological  opinion  that  is  now
current.  And  rightly  so,  for  our  administratoi's  cannot  go  behind  the
recognised  and  authoritative  exponents  of  any  branch  of  science  and
enquire  whether  their  views  are  based  on  a  wide,  patient,  and  unbiassed
examination  of  the  evidence  for  and  against  the  possible  existence  of  a
"dowsing  faculty."  It  must  be  assumed  that  no  competent  scientific
authority  would  unhesitatingly  give  an  opinion  on  any  subject  without
ha\  ing  scientific  grounds  for  so  doing.  The  a  priori  improbability  of
any  alleged  phenomena,  or  the  difficulty  of  finding  any  immediate
explanation,  are  grounds  for  demanding  ample  and  trustworthy
evidence,  but  are  not  reasons  for  rejecting  such  evidence,  or  science
would  not  have  accepted  the  aid  to  surgery  given  by  the  Rontgen  rays
— among  other  instances  that  might  be  cited.  On  the  contrary,  it  is
the  received  dictum  of  scientific  investigation,  as  long  ago  pointed  out
by  Sir  John  Herschel,  that  "  The  observer  ...  in  any  department
of  science  .  .  .  will  have  his  eyes,  as  it  were,  opened,  that  they
may  be  struck  at  once  with  any  occurrence  which,  according  to  received
theories,  ought  not  to  happen ;  for  these  are  the  facts  which  serve  as
clues  to  new  discoveries,"  ^ — a  sentence  that  might  well  form  the
motto  of  our  Society.


Part  V.

BRIEF  SURVEY  OF  THE  EVIDENCE.

To  those  who  have  had  the  patience  to  toil  through  the  wearisome
body  of  evidence  which  has  so  far  been  adduced,  two  things  are
sufficiently  clear.  One  is,  that  the  absurd  and  preposterous  idea
entertained  by  many  advocates  of  the  di\ining  rod  in  the  present
day,  as  in  the  past,  that  the  indications  afibrded  by  the  "rod"  are
infallible  for  whatever  special  purpose  it  is  employed,  has,  it  need
hardly  be  said,  no  foundation  in  fact.  The  other  is,  that  the  current
\-iew  entertained  by  most  men  of  science,  especially  by  geologists,  that
there  is  nothing  to  investigate  but  "  absolute  nonsense,"  "  a  miserable

1  Discourse  on  IfaUtral  Philosophy.,  section  127,  p.  132. The  italics  are  mine.


238


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAKT


superstition,"  "a  pestilent  heresy,"  "a  bit  of  clever  legerdemain,"
that  dowsers  "  ought  to  be  prosecuted  for  fraud," — if  not  so  absurd,
is  equally  erroneous.

"Whatever  l^e  the  explanation,  the  evidence  shows  that  failures  in
the  use  of  the  rod  for  the  discovery  of  ^mde7-grou7id  springs  is  a  small
percentage  of  the  total  number  of  trials  whe^i  a  skilful  dotvser  is
employed.  How  large  the  actual  percentage  of  failure  is,  it  is  difficult
to  estimate.  It  varies  undoubtedly,  and  very  largely,  with  different
dowsers ;  with  some,  like  the  late  John  Mullins,  the  number  of  failures
seems  to  have  been  very  few  ;  with  pthers,  failure  is  far  more  frequent.
Tliis  is  what  might  be  expected  if  there  be  a  peculiar  instinct  or
faculty  in  certain  persons  which  is  not  common  to  all.  Moi'eover,  as
an  easy  way  of  earning  a  living  without  the  trouble  of  any  education,
the  class  of  professional  dowsers  is  sure  to  be  recruited  by  a  number  of
rogues  and  charlatans,  and  also  by  ignorant  fools,  who,  because  a  forked
twig  turns  in  their  hands,  without  any  apparent  muscular  action  on
their  part,  call  themselves  "  water  experts,"  and,  as  such,  demand  big
fees  from  the  credulous  public  who  employ  them.  Such  men  are  pretty
sure  to  quote  in  large  type  the  first  sentence  of  this  paragraph  to
advertise  themselves.  An  emphatic  caution  is  therefore  necessary  in
advance,  to  warn  the  public  against  putting  the  smallest  faith  in  the
puffs  of  a  dowser,  unless  his  work  has  stood  the  test  of  thorough  and
independent  investigation.

It  must  not  be  assumed  that  all  the  professional  dowsers  whose
careers  I  have  endeavoured  to  investigate  are  equally  satisfactory.
The  evidence  shows  that  this  is  7iot  the  case ;  on  the  contrary  I  have
grave  doubts  whether  some  of  them  are  not  self-deceived  and  their
successes  due  to  mere  chance.  What  is  needed  is  a  record  of  every
trial  they  have  made  for,  say,  a  couple  of  years,  and  an  exact  statement
of  the  results  in  each  case  ;  supplemented  by  a  report  from  a
competent  geological  authority,  as  in  many  districts  water-bearing
strata  are  easily  reached  over  a  wide  area.

But  how  any  reliable  statistics  of  this  kind  are  to  be  obtained  I  do
not  know.  All  that  was  possible  in  the  present  investigation  was  to
make  the  range  of  evidence  as  wide  and  unbiassed  as  possible,  and  not
exclude  a  single  case  of  failure  that  was  substantiated.  This  has  been
done,  and  I  may  add  here  that  among  other  enquiries  as  to  failures,  I
addressed  a  letter  to  JVotes  and  Queries.^  For  many  years  past  this
useful  and  carefully  edited  journal  has  published  a  large  number  of
letters  from  various  correspondents  on  the  divining  rod. Accordingly  I

1  Notes  and  Queries,  Eighth  Series,  No.  248,  p.  255.  The  case  of  a  failure  in
Northumberland,  quoted  by  an  anonymous  correspondent  in  the  previous  volume  of
Notes  and  Queries,  p.  336,  probably  refers  to  the  one  I  have  given  on  p.  144.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


239


asked  to  be  informed  by  letter  or  otherwise  of  any  cases  adverse  to  the
pretensions  of  the  dowser.  But  I  did  not  receive  either  pubHcly  or
privately  a  single  reply  in  the  direction  asked  for,  though  fresh
instances  of  its  successful  use  were  given  by  subsequent  correspondents,
and  other  similar  replies  were  sent  to  my  private  address.^  It  must,
however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  (especially  among  amateur  dowsers)
one  is  more  likely  to  hear  of  success  than  of  failure^;  and  therefore  an
extensive  and  searching  enquiry  is  necessary  before  any  safe  induction
can  be  drawn.  This  must  be  my  apology  for  the  tedious  length  of  the
evidence  cited,  and  the  long  delay  in  the  publication  of  this  paper.
Protracted  as  this  enquiry  has  been,  it  does  not  pretend  to  be  a  final
one,  but  only  the  starting  point  for  further  and  more  exhaustive
investigation.

Two  points  adverse  to  the  dowser  must  be  noted.  One  is  that  their
general  idea  of  the  distribution  of  underground  water  is  absurd.  As
a  rule,  they  imagine  springs  exist  like  a  buried  treasure,  or  as  Mr.
Holmes  says  "  like  a  pot  of  ancient  coins,"  located  to  an  ai'ea  of  a  few
square  inches  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground  :  or  they  believe  these
springs  to  be  the  source  of  narrow  underground  rivers,  which  they
profess  to  trace  to  within  an  inch  on  either  side.  Underground  water
usually  exists  in  wide  saturated  areas,  as  is  fully  explained  in  Appendix
B.  Nevertheless,  the  evidence  cited  in  this  paper  shows,  as  is  well-
known,  that  narrow  streaks  of  permeable  water-bearing  strata, — sand,
or  gravel,  or  rock,  —  or  water-bearing  fissures,  do  often  occur  in  waterless
localities,  so  that  while  water  may  not  be  found  in  one  spot,  it  is  found
in  another  a  few  feet  away,  see  e.g.,  Nos.  11,  27,  42,  89,  p.  108,  etc.
I  am  not  a  geologist,  and  may  be  wrong,  but  it  seems  to  me  that
geologists  have  not  sutficiently  recognised  this  fact  in  their  discussion
of  the  subject.

The  other  fact  adverse  to  the  dowser  is  the  failure  or  inconclusive
character  of  test  experiments  ;  e.g.,  those  I  have  made  with  Stears  and
Rod  well,  the  one  Professor  Sollas  made  with  Young,  and  those  Mr.
Watney  made  at  Wimbledon  with  G-ataker  and  H.  W.  Mullins.  To
this  it  may  be  replied  that  none  of  these  dowsers  are  i-eally  in  the  first
rank — like  the  late  W.  S.  Lawrence  and  J.  Mulhns,  (or  Bleton  of
the  last  century)  ;  and,  except  Young  (whose  case  has  already  been
discussed)  and  Stears,  they  are  all  comparatively  young  and  in-
experienced.  Moreover, — and  this,  I  think,  is  the  more  cogent  reply,  —

1  The  Waterworlcs  and  Investment  Review  for  May,  1897,  contains  an  unsigned
article  on  the  divining  rod  in  which  reference  is  made  to  a  complete  failure  on  the
part  of  some  dowser  ;  but  no  names  or  localities  are  given.  I  wrote  to  the  editor  to
ask  for  these  particulars,  but  received  no  reply.

-Of  course  professional  dowsers  give  their  "hits"  and  not  their  "misses"  in
their  pamphlets,  but  their  failures  get  sooner  talked  about  for  obvious  reasons.


240


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  conditions  of  the  experiment  did  not  sufficiently  resemble  the
actual  operations  of  the  dowser  in  the  discovery  of  underground
springs.  1

After  all,  the  best  test  that  can  be  applied  is  the  result  of  actual
trials  in  finding  water  where  wate*'  had  not  been  found  before  the
advent  of  the  dowser.  And  here  the  evidence  is  so  clear  that  I  have
not  the  least  hesitation  in  saying  that,  had  I  to  sink  a  well,  I  should
prefer  to  have  the  precise  spot  selected  by  a  good  dowser  rather  than
general  advice  given  by  a  geologist, — provided  that  the  depth  of  the
well  did  not  exceed,  say,  50  feet,  and  the  quantity  of  water  required
was  for  a  private  and  not  for  a  public  supply.'^  Deep  wells  and  large
water  supplies  shoidd  always  be  left  to  the  hydro-geologist.

As  a  practical  and  commercial  test,  the  evidence  afforded  by  the
owners  and  agents  of  landed  property  who  have  employed  an  expert
dowser  is  of  considerable  value.  In  several  of  the  letters  I  have
received  this  opinion  is  incidentally  expressed.  Thus  the  Treasurer  of
the  Merchant  Venturers'  Society,  Mr.  C-.  H.  Pope,  writing  to  me  from
Bristol,  p.  67,  says:  —

On  the  estates  which  I  look  after  we  always  employ  a  dowser,  and  I  do
not  recollect  any  instance  of  failure  to  find  water  ;  we  never  sink  a  well
hefure  using  the  rod.

The  forcible  opinion  of  the  experienced  bailiff  to  these  estates
(p.  50)  has  already  been  quoted.  If  these  witnesses  be  considered
biassed  by  local  custom,  this  objection  could  hardly  apply  to  an
extensive  Wiltshire  land  agent  and  surveyor  like  Mr.  H.  B.  Napier,
who  writes,  p.  149  :  —

I  am  so  satisfied  of  the  dowsers'  power,  that  I  should  never  dream  of
sinking  a  well  without  their  assistance.

Or  again  take  the  opinion  given  on  pages  86  and  120  of  Mr.  Harben,
(now  Sir  Henry  Harben),  whose  judgment  as  one  of  the  directors  of
the  New  River  Company  and  a  business  man  of  wide  experience  is
certainly  entitled  to  no  little  weight.  Or  the  opinion  of  Sir  Welby
Gregory,  Bart., (p.  97)  who  states  that  he  prefers  to  trust  to  the  dowser
rather  than  to  the  geologist  in  sinking  wells  ;  or  that  of  the  Earl  of

1  If,  as  is  asserted,  dowsers  can  discover  water  running:  in  pipes  underground,  the
experiment  ought  to  be  capable  of  easy  disproof  or  verification.  This  experiment  I
propose  to  try,  though  dowsers  not  being  indigenous  to  Ireland  makes  the  trial
somewhat  more  difficult  for  me  to  bring  .about.  It  need  hardly  be  pointed  out  that,
if  established,  the  fact  adds  enormously  to  the  difficulty  of  whatever  explanation  be
adopted.  I  am  inclined  to  believe,  in  spite  of  the  remarkable  success  which  Bleton
had  in  this  particular  experiment,  that  the  results  are  due  to  indications  unconsciously
given  by  those  who  were  conducting  the  experiment.

-  The  dowser  will  also,  in  most  cases,  take  the  risk  of  sinking  a  well  on  the
condition  that  if  the  promised  supply  be  not  found  the  loss  will  fall  on  himself.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


241


Winchilsea,  given  on  the  same  page.  Or  of  Captain  Grantham  (p.  126)
who  writes  :  —

I  should  not  now  think  of  sinking  a  well,  when  I  was  not  sure  of  water,
without  the  use  of  the  divining  rod.

Or  of  Mr.  Clifford  Gibbons  (p.  88),  who  says  :—

The  thing  is  altogether  a  mystery  to  me,  but  certainly  if  I  were  to  sink
another  well,  I  should  get  Mullins  to  select  the  spot,  as  I  have  spent  very
large  sums  of  money  almost  fruitlessly  before  I  knew  him.

Again,  there  is  the  opinion  of  a  man  of  affairs  and  large  landed
proprietor  like  Mr.  Christie-Miller,  whose  wife  writes,  p.  77  : —

We  are  uaable  to  quote  an  instance  of  failure  with  the  divining  rod,
and  can  therefore  speak  most  confidently  in  favour  of  water  finding  by  the
twig. We  have  seven  wells  sunk  after  marking  by  Mullins  with  his  rod.

An  astronomer,  Mr.  Leeson  Prince,  writes,  p.  80,  "  I  confess  I  have
been  converted  to  belief  in  the  divining  rod,"  and  then  gives  his
reasons,  and  the  same  opinion  is  expressed  by  others,  e.g.,  Mr.  Crump
says  (p.  82),  "  I  became  a  convert  against  my  will  and  so  did  others."
Mr.  H.  D.  Skrine,  D.L.,  states  (p.  96),  "I  cannot  resist  the  conclusion
that  it  is  a  real  gift  possessed  by  some  persons."  Captain  Penry  Lloyd
writes,  (p.  206),  "  From  a  profound  sceptic,  I  am  now  a  firm  believer  in
the  power  of  the  rod,"  and  other  similar  expressions  of  opinion  founded
on  experience  might  be  cited, Mr.  F.  T.  Elworthy  on  p.  6.

It  may  be  useful  to  contrast  with  the  foregoing  the  opinion  of  a
leading  English  scientific  journal.  In  Nature  of  June  10th,  1897,  the
following  comment  appears  a  j^foi^os  of  the  employment  of  a  dowser
at  Ampthill,  Bedfordshire.

It  is  depressing  to  think  that  there  exist  not  only  i:)rivate  j^ersons,  hut
public  bodies,  who  put  more  trust  in  the  wild  assertions  of  charlatans  than
in  the  matured  conclusions  of  science.  The  latest  instance  of  gullibility  of
this  character  comes  from  Bedfordshire.  .  .  .  The  decision  [of  the
Local  Government  Board  auditor]  will  assist  perhaps  in  reducing  the  number
of  believers  in  the  water-diviner's  art.

The  editor  of  Nature  will  have  cause  to  be  still  more  depressed  when
he  hears  from  the  distinguished  Bursar  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,
Mr.  R.T.  Glazebrook,  F.R.S.,  that  his  College  has  employed  with  success
a  dowser  on  one  of  their  estates.  IVL'.  Glazebrook  kindly  put  me  in
communication  with  Mr.  Reginald  WooUey,  of  Lincoln,  the  College  agent,
who,  in  reply  to  my  request  for  some  particulars,  writes  as  follows  : — ^

Minster  Yard,  Lincoln,  June  20th,  1897.
We  determined  to  try  the  dowser, — who  had  been  successful  for  my  firm
elsewhere, — before  undertaking  experimental  boring.

1  Owing  to  Mr.  Woolley  having  been  abroad  for  his  health,  his  reply  reached  me
too  late  for  the  insertion  of  this  case  in  its  proper  place,  Group  IV.


242


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


I  met  John  Mullins  at  the  Farm  (Walkeringham),  alone  with  the  tenant,
on  May  16th,  1893.  I  took  him  to  the  place  which  would  be  convenient  as
the  site  of  a  windmill  pump  to  supjjly  the  farmstead.  He  soon  passed  a
point  at  which  the  twig  turned  up  strongly.  He  estimated  the  spring  as
fairly  good,  and  from  60  to  70  feet  deep.  He  marked  other  pohits,  but  we
bored  only  at  the  first.  A  spring  was  found  at  45  feet  9  inches,  and  others
at  about  80  feet,  the  depth  to  which  we  went.  These  springs  yield  an
ample  supply.

A  point  of  interest  is  that  the  contractor  for  the  boring,  who  was  a  local

jnan  quite  unconnected  with  Mullins,  stated  that  if  the  boring  had  been

driven  a  few  inches  from  the  point  fixed,  the  first  spring  would  have  been

missed.  1  -r>  -^ht

Kbginald  Woolley.

Mr.  "VVoolley's  brother  also  Avrote  to  me  as  follows  :  —

South  Collingham,  Newark,  June  2^t.h,  1897.

We  have  emjjloyed  the  late  J.  Mullins  for  other  clients  than  Trinity
College,  Cambridge,  with  satisfactory  results.  ^

I  made  use  of  his  services  in  Gloucestershire  on  Lord  Leigh's  estate,
where  he  found  us  an  excellent  and  invaluable  spring  of  water.

It  may  interest  you  to  know  that  in  one  spot  where  he  indicated  water,
I  took  the  twig  in  my  own  hands  and  went  over  the  same  spot  with  no  result.

He  then  took  hold  of  my  wrists  without  touching  the  twig  himself  and
when  we  together  walked  over  the  same  place,  the  twig  turned  ujj  in  niy
hands.  This  was,  T  suppose,  caused  by  muscular  action  on  my  part,  but  if
so,  it  was  certainly,  as  far  as  I  was  concerned,  perfectly  unconscious  action.
My  mental  attitude  was  one  of  neutrality  !  rp Cecil  S  Woolley


The  fact  mentioned  by  Mr.  Woolley  in  the  latter  part  of  his  letter
is  also  described  by  others,  see  p.  244.

It  will  be  noticed  later  on  that  in  the  discovery  of  metallic  veins
there  also  exists  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the
practical  value  of  the  indications  afforded  by  the  rod ;  evidence  that
stretches  back  from  the  present  time  to  the  year  1540.  But  when  we
come  to  the  other  multifarious  uses  to  which  the  rod  has  been  applied
in  the  past,  such  as  the  finding  of  buried  treasure,  of  lost  property,  of
strayed  cattle,  the  settlement  of  disputed  boundaries,  the  tracking  of
criminals,  and  other  uses  in  the  moral  world, — all  of  which  were
rampant  two  centuries  ago, — its  history  will  be  seen  to  have  been  a  very
chequered  one,  ever  apt  to  degenerate,  as  it  once  did,  into  a  mis-
chievous superstition.  Even  at  the  present  day,  owing  to  the  impulse
that  moves  the  rod  being  apparently  derived  from  an  unseen  external
source,  some  perfectly  honest  dowsers  will  tell  you  they  can  find  the
difference  between  a  bucket  of  spring  or  rain  water  {e.g.,  No.  30),

1  How  the  contractor  knew  this  is  not  stated  :  I  do  not  dispute  the  fact,  as  similar
statements  by  others  abound,  but  the  reason  should  in  each  case  be  given. — W.F.B.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  243


can  discover  hidden  coins,  buried  treasure  and  buried  objects  of  all
kinds,  can  trace  underground  gas  pipes  and  electric  cables,  find  the
place  where  you  intended  to  hide  an  object,  or  the  spot  on  which  you
have  breathed,  or  on  which  a  ray  of  light  has  fallen,  etc.  !  In  a  few
of  these  things  the  reading  of  natural  signs,  such  as  the  disturbed
surface  of  the  ground,  or  of  unconscious  signs  or  thought-transference
from  those  who  knew  the  position  of  the  object  searched  for,  will
explain  such  success  as  is  observed  ;  but  otherwise,  needless  to  say,
failure  is  absolute,  when  chance  coincidence  is  excluded  and  a  rigid
investigation  made  ;  proof  of  this  will  be  given  subsequently.


Part  VI.

/ •  THEORETICAL  CONCLUSIONS.

These  remarks  will  help  to  clear  the  ground,  and  enable  me
presently  to  give  a  brief  enunciation  of  the  provisional  laws  which
appear  to  me  to  embrace  the  whole  of  the  phenomena  of  the  divining
rod.  It  is,  however,  desirable  that  the  reader  should  bear  in  mind  that
the  subject  before  us  is  necessarily  a  most  entangled  one,  and  that  the
usual  rough  and  ready  explanations,  given  by  the  scoffer  on  the  one
hand  and  the  believer  on  the  other,  are  wholly  inadequate  from  any
rational  point  of  view.  Problems  of  considerable  scientific  interest
appear  to  be  involved.

(i.)  Few  will  dispute  the  proposition  that  the  motion  of  the  forked
twig  is  due  to  unconscious  muscular  action.  When  the  rod  is  held  in
the  manner  described  by  Cookworthy  (see  Appendix  C),  as  was  the
custom  up  to  recent  years,  it  is  more  or  less  in  a  sensitive  state  (p.  11),
and  an  unintentional  and  almost  imperceptible  approach  of  the  two
hands  will  cause  it  to  turn  upwards.  But  this  is  not  the  case  when
the  rod  is  held  as  J.  Mullins  used  to  hold  it,  or  as  many  other  dowsers
hold  it  at  the  present  day.  I  have  tried,  and  asked  many  friends  to
try,  to  rotate  the  rod  under  these  circumstances,  and  it  is  certainly
most  difficult  to  produce  any  motion  of  the  twig  without  a  very  visible
motion  of  the  hands.  This,  however,  is  not  all.  Both  with  practised
professional  dowsers  like  Lawrence  and  J.  Mullins,  and  with  amateurs
like  the  Rev.  J.  Blunt,  Lady  Milbanke,  and  others,  the  forked  twig
not  only  rotates,  but  one  limb  is  frequently  twisted  completely  off  by
the  force  with  which  it  is  driven  round  and  round;  see  e.g.,  Nos.  1,  4,
12,  18,  45,  53,  60,  107,  115,  and  pp.  57,  110,  133.  How  is  this  to  be
explained  1  A  good  deal  depends  on  the  thickness  of  the  twig.  This
varies  ;  some  dowsers  use  a  thickish  forked  stick,  others  a  much  more

K  2


244


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


slender  one.  The  twig  that  Colonel  Wai-ing,  M.P.,  sent  me,  which  was
the  actual  one  he  had  seen  thus  twisted  and  broken  in  the  hands  of
Mullins,  is  about  as  thick  as  a  cedar  pencil  in  the  thickest  part  and
tapers  off ;  the  exact  dimensions  are  given  in  the  foot-note  to  p.  79.
Using  this  twig  neither  I,  nor  any  muscular  friends  who  tried,  could
in  the  least  imitate  the  effect  produced  by  Mullins.  One  side  must  of
course  be  rigidly  held  and  the  other  allowed  to  rotate,  and  the  fists
must  be  kept  practically  still.  Any  one  can  cut  a  forked  twig  and  try
the  experiment ;  the  only  advantage  of  hazel  is  that  the  two  limbs  are
more  symmetrical  in  size,  and  the  wood  is  tough.  One  witness  states
that  even  when  the  rod  was  held  between  pincers  (bottom  of  p.  86)
"  the  contortions  still  went  on."

Certainly  no  voluntary  effort,  without  long  and  laborious  practice  at
legerdemain,  could  produce  an  effect  corresponding  in  kind  or  degree
to  that  which  actually  takes  place  in  the  cases  cited.  We  may  com-
pare it,  as  regards  the  kind  of  motion,  to  the  involuntaiy  pressure
exerted  by  the  "medium"  or  agent,  which  guides  the  percipient  in
the  "willing  game,"  or  the  quasi  thought-reader  in  writing  down  the
number  of  a  bank  note, — a  sub-conscious  pressure  that  cannot  be
intentionally  imitated  by  voluntary  effort.  And  so  also,  in  degree,
the  amazing  force  with  which  the  twig  is  sometimes  twisted,  without
apparent  cause,  is  like  the  extraordinary  and  involuntary  spasm  of
muscular  power,  which  often  occurs  in  cases  of  hysteria  or  in  moments
of  great  excitement,  and  which  cannot  be  repeated  at  will  in  the
ordinary  state.

(ii.)  There  is  also  another  curious  point  which  cannot  be  disputed,
for  it  rests  not  only  upon  the  testimony  of  numerous  credible  witnesses
at  the  present  day  and  in  England  alone,  but,  as  historical  investiga-
tion has  revealed,  goes  back  to  a  remote  period  and  was  as  noticeable
with  Bleton,  in  Dauphiny,  in  1780,  as  with  Mullins,  in  Wiltshire,  a
century  later.  This  is  the  appai-ent  transmission  of  the  power  to  twist
the  rod  from  the  dowser  to  another  person  whose  wrist  he  grasps.
The  twig,  hitherto  passive,  immediately  begins  to  move  in  the  hands  of
the  second  person,  without  conscious  effort  on  his  part,  and  in  a
manner  he  could  not  imitate  at  will ;  among  other  instances  which  are
given,  see  Nos.  53,  61,  83,  and  pp.  35,  242.  Here  also  the  directive  action
may  be  analogous  to  the  faint  sub-conscious  muscular  pressure  that  is
transmitted  from  the  agent  to  the  quasi  thought-reader.  In  any  case
the  phenomena  described  in  this  and  the  two  preceding  paragraphs
seem  worthy  of  more  careful  investigation  by  the  trained  physiologist.

(iii.)  The  same  remark  applies  to  another  interesting  characteristic
of  dowsing,  which  is  as  follows.  A  successful  dowser  has  to  "  set "
himself  (as  some  term  it),  when  he  uses  the  rod  or  trusts  to  his
sensations  in  dowsing. By  this  he  means  rendering  himself  as  far  as


XXXII.]  071  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  245

possible  oblivious  to  the  ordinary  stream  of  sense  impressions  ;  making
his  mind  as  passive,  as  effortless,  and  as  much  a  tabula  rasa  as  he  can.i
A  psychical  state  appears  to  be  set  up,  analogous  to  that  which  a  good
subject  in  the  "  willing  game,"  or  in  telepathic  experiments,  is  able  to
bring  about.  This  is  a  well-known  condition  of  automatism.  Just  as
when  the  sun  sinks  the  stars  become  visible,  so  the  dark  continent
within  us,  the  large  unconscious  background  of  our  life,  only  emerges
when  the  light  of  consciousness  is  dimmed.  A  good  dowser  is  largely
an  automatist  and  the  rod  is  a  convenient  form  of  autoscope.

Further  it  is  occasionally  noticed  in  the  so-called  willing  game
that  a  sense  of  malaise,  a  faintness  and  trembling,  sometimes  even  a
more  serious  nervous  shock,  is  exhibited  by  a  successful  subject  (see
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  57,  etc.).  A  similar  physiological
disturbance  is  still  more  frequeatly  exhibited  by  the  dowser.  For  one
of  the  curious  and  well-attested  facts  revealed  in  the  course  of  this
enquiry  is  that  an  obscure  pathological  or  sensory  effect,  sometimes
resulting  in  a  convulsive  action  either  of  the  limbs  or  epigastric  region,
is  exhibited  by  the  dowser  when  he  is  on  the  "scent."-  This  cannot
be  a  stage  effect,  nor  a  traditional  idea  transmitted  from  one  dowser
to  the  other,  for  it  crops  up  in  all  parts  of  Europe  and  will  be  found
amongst  the  most  illiterate  dowsers,  from  the  time  of  Jacques  Aymar
in  1692  to  Bleton  a  century  later,  and  is  exhibited  to-day  by  dowsers
in  the  country  districts  of  England.  I  have  given  historic  and  con-
tempoi'ary  evidence  of  this  in  Appendix  D,  but  the  reader  will  have
noticed  how  this  sensory  effect  is  referred  to  incidentally  in  some  of
the  evidence  already  cited.  The  asserted  sensations  may  be  due  to
causes  purely  imaginary  on  the  part  of  the  dowser,  but  to  what
association  of  ideas  is  this  widespread  illusion  due  ^  It  seems  more
probably  a  genuine  physiological  disturbance,  due  to  a  pyschological
cause  common  to  the  group  of  sub-conscious  phenomena  of  which  the
divining  rod  is  a  remarkable  type.'^

^  That  a  partial  hypnosi-s  occurs  with  some  dowsers  is  very  probable.  I  have
referred  to  this  elsewhere.

-  The  sympathetic  nervous  system,  especially  the  solar  plexus,  appears  to  be
the  chief  seat  of  the  disturbance  with  the  dowser,  as  it  is  also  frequently  asserted
to  be  among  so-called  clairvoyantes  in  the  hypnotic  state.

In  an  article  published  in  Light  for  August  4th,  1883,  p.  349,  it  is  stated  that
Professor  Loch  man,  of  the  University  of  Christiania,  who  is  described  as  a
distinguished  physiologist,  recently  read  a  papi-r  on  the  divining  rod  before  a
scientific  society  in  Christiania,  in  which  he  stated  that  his  scepticism  on  this  subject
had  lately  been  overcome  by  the  discovery  that  he  himself  could  use  the  rod  success-
fully He  had  personally  tested  its  indications  over  and  over  again,  and  was  now
convinced  that  a  peculiar  gift,  of  which  he  could  give  no  explanation,  was  possessed
by  certain  persons  that  enabled  them  to  find  underground  water.  He  thought  the
phenomenon  was  of  a  physiological  nature,  an  opinion  with  which  Professor  Monrad,
an  eminent  confrere,  agreed.  I  should  be  grateful  if  any  friends  at  Christiania  could
send  me  particulars  of  the  foregoing  report.


246


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


(iv.)  Another  point  that  appears  worthy  of  enquiry  is,  why  should
the  rod  move  in  the  hands  of  some  persons  and  not  with  others  ?  In
the  answer  to  this  there  is,  of  course,  involved  the  whole  phenomena
of  automatism,  and  the  general  theory  of  autoscopes,  like  planchette,
etc.  Reliable  statistics  are  wanting  as  to  the  number  of  persons  in
every  hundred  who  can  use  the  rod.  Amoretti,  working  in  Italy
towards  the  close  of  the  last  century,  states,  in  his  Storia  della
Rabdoiitanzia,  that  he  found  20  per  cent,  of  the  persons  he  tried  had
the  "gift."  Sementini,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of
Naples,  who  published  a  short  treatise  on  the  rod  in  1810,^  thinks  this
estimate  too  small,  and  that  probably  in  4  out  of  5  persons  the  rod  will
move  successfully  :  but  I  prefer  Amoretti's  estimate.  The  childi'en  of
dowsers  almost  invariably  can  manipulate  the  rod  ;  they  have  "  caught
the  trick,"  or  "inherited  the  instinct  "  from  their  father, — the  reader
will  take  which  view  he  pleases  :  probably  there  is  some  truth  in  both
points  of  view.

(v.)  We  have  now  to  consider  ivkat  determines  the  automatic  motion
of  the  rod  ;  what  pulls  the  trigger  ?  The  first  point  to  be  noticed  is
the  2)7-ior  iiUention  of  the  dowser.  As  Malebranche  pointed  out  two
centuries  ago,  the  rod  moves  only  for  that  particular  thing  the  diviner
has  the  intention  of  discovering.  When  J acques  Aymar  was  in  search
for  underground  water,  his  rod  was  unaffected  by  the  track  of  a
criminal,  or  vice  versd.  And  so  to-day,  if  a  mineral  lode  be  the  object
of  quest,  a  sheet  of  underground  water  may  be  passed  over  without
any  effect  on  the  dowser  or  his  rod.  The  object  to  which  the  dowser
"  sets  "  himself  is  the  determining  factor  in  the  unconscious  move-
ment he  imparts  to  the  rod.

Precisely  similar  is  the  preconceived  idea  that  electricity  is  the
cause  of  the  motion  of  the  rod,  an  idea  entertained  by  most  dowsers
and  by  others  ignorant  of  physics.  Dr.  Thouvenel  was  the  first  to
suggest  this  explanation  in  1781,  nor  did  the  complete  experimental
disproof  of  his  explanation,  given  by  some  distinguished  physicists  in
Paris  at  the  time,  much  affect  Ids  belief.  "  I  strongly  suspect  it  is  the
devil ;  but  if  not,  it  must  be  electricity  "  is  still  the  exjjlanation  given
by  multitudes  who  encounter  any  phenomena  outside  the  daily  range
f)f  their  somewhat  limited  experience.  Hence  it  is  improbable  any-
thing I  can  say  will  disturb  so  widely  cherished  and  so  simple  a  faith.
Lest,  however,  I  myself  should  be  accused  of  sacrificing  truth  to  a
preconceived  idea,  I  made  some  dii-ect  experiments  on  this  very
point,  visiting  the  N.E.  of  Ireland  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  an
unsophisticated  amateur  dowser,  who,  with  his  master,  strongly  held
to  "electricity." It  is  needless  to  detail  my  experiments  ;  suffice  it  to

^  Pcnsieri  e  Spcrimmti  suUa  Bachctta  Divinatoria,  p.  24.


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  247

say  that  wlien  the  dowser  believed  I  had  insulated  him  from  the
earth,  the  rod  ceased  to  move ;  when  he  believed  he  was  electrically
connected  with  the  earth,  the  rod  promptly  moved.  Nevertheless,  in
the  former  case  he  was,  unknown  to  himself,  uninsulated  and  in
the  latter  insulated.  It  was  the  dowser's  idea,  and  not  electricity,
that  moved  the  rod.

That  the  motion  of  the  divining  rod  is  determined  by  a  fixed  but
sub-conscious  idea  is  seen  again  and  again  in  a  historical  study  of  our
subject.  The  most  striking  example  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  pre-
cisely opposite  behaviour  of  tlie  rod  claimed  by  some  now,  and  by  those
who  used  it  in  the  search  for  metals  1 50  years  ago.  Some  assert  when  a
simiiar  metal  to  that  in  the  vein  was  held  in  the  hand,  it  arrested  the
motion  of  the  I'od  ]  others  that  a  similar  metal  held  in  the  hand  had  no
effect,  but  a  dissimilar  arrested  the  rod.^  Again  take  the  following
from  Dr.  Mayo,  F.R.S.,  who,  in  1847,  made  some  experiments  with  the
divining  rod  when  he  was  staying  at  a  watering  place  in  Russia.
Four  or  five  persons  were  found  in  whose  hand  the  forked  twig
moved,  though  they  had,  presumably,  never  seen  a  divining  rod
before.  With  one  of  these  the  rod  moved  in  the  orthodox  way
whether  he  walked  backwards  or  forwaixls,  with  others  the  rod
reversed  the  direction  of  its  motion  when  they  walked  backwards.'^
Dr.  Mayo  then  says  : — •

I  tried  some  experiments,  touching  the  jjoint  of  the  rod  with  a  magnetic
needle.  I  found,  in  the  course  of  tliem,  that  when  my  man  knew  which  way
I  expected  the  fork  to  move,  it  invariably  answered  my  expectations  ;  but
when  I  had  the  man  blindfolded,  the  results  were  uncertain  and
contradictory. The  end  of  all  this  was,  that  I  became  certain  that  several  of

'  In  a  little  work  on  the  divining  rod  by  an  American  engineer,  Mr.  Latimer,  C.E.,
it  is  stated  that  a  Mr.  Sangster,  of  Tennesse,  wrote  to  the  author  in  1876,  that  he  had
been  50  years  experimenting  with  the  rod,  and  added  "I  can  tell  to  a  certainty  whether
I  am  over  any  substance,  either  water  or  mineral.  ...  I  find  out  by  taking  a
sponge  and  saturating  it  with  ordinary  water,  putting  it  on  the  top  of  the  rod  ;  if  the
substance  beneath  be  water  of  the  same  kind,  it  will  turn  much  stronger.  If  the  rod
should  not  turn  at  all,  it  will  be  some  other  substance,  either  mineral  or  metal.  The
tests  are  made  in  the  same  manner  for  metals.  I  put  a  piece  of  metal  on  the  top  of
the  rod,— iron,  lead,  silver,  copper,  etc., — until  I  hud  one  of  these  that  will  ckuse  the
rod  to  turn  in  a  manner  sufficiently  strong  ; — that  indicates  the  same  metal  under-
ground." Mr.  Latimer,  who  could  also  use  the  rod,  says  that  after  receiving  this
letter  he  made  similar  experiments,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Mr.  Sangster's
statements  were  quite  correct !  "I  took  a  wet  rag,'  he  remarks  on  p.  81,  "and  fastened
it  on  to  the  top  of  the  twig  or  divining  rod  ;  I  found  the  rod  turned  over  a  cistern  of
water,  but  would  not  turn  over  iron  pipes.  I  then  put  a  key  at  the  end  of  the  rod
over  the  wet  rag  ;  now  the  rod  at  once  turned  over  the  iron  pipes."  Contrast  this  with
the  opposite  results  given  by  Cookworthy,  etc.,  in  Appendix  C  !  Mr.  Latimer  also
say.",  "  Upon  insulating  myself  there  was  no  motion  of  the  rod,  which  proves  the
motion  is  due  to  electricity."  Contrast  Mr.  Blunt's  experience,  given  on  the  top  of
page  27,  when  he  was  insulated  by  thick  rubber  shoes.

^  See  also  an  example  of  this  I  have  given  in  No.  13,  p  38.


248


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


those  in  whose  hands  the  divining  rod  moves  [unconsciously]  set  it  in  motion.
In  walking  forwards  the  hands  are  unconsciously  borne  towards  each  other  ;
in  walking  backwards,  the  reverse  is  the  case.  ^

A  curious  example  of  the  influence  of  unconscious  intention  is  to  be
found  in  Priestley's  old  work  on  Electricity.  A  distinguished  scientific
man,  Dr.  Grey,  in  1736  thought  he  had  discovered  the  fact  that  light
bodies,  when  suspended  and  electrically  attracted,  always  moved  from
west  to  east.  This  Grey  thought  was  the  secret  of  the  mechanism  of
the  heavens  and  he  sent  his  results  to  Dr.  Mortimer,  the  Hon.
Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society.  Dr.  Mortimer  repeated  the  experi-
ments and  obtained  similar  results.^  Dr.  Wheeler,  however,  repeated
with  great  care  the  experiments  and  showed  that  a  preconceived  notion
or  the  desire  to  jDroduce  this  particular  movement  of  an  electrified
body,  really  determined  its  direction,  unknown  to  the  experimenter.
For  the  movement  was  only  produced  when  the  body  was  suspended
from  the  experimenter's  hand,  but  not  when  it  was  suspended  from  a
fixed  support.  It  was  in  fact  a  form  of  pendule  exjylorateur, — usually
a  ring  suspended  by  a  thread  and  thus  held  by  the  fingers  in  a  glass ;
this  will  often  strike  the  hour  of  the  day  or  oscillate  in  a  determined
direction.  The  motion  of  the  divining  rod  and  of  the  ^^endule  are
equally  due  to  a  latent  prior  intention  and  unconscious  muscular
action.

What  then,  it  may  be  asked,  remains  to  be  investigated  if  this  be
the  key  to  the  mystery  1  The  answer  to  this  has  already  been  given  in
the  survey  of  evidence  cited,  where  the  success  of  the  dowser  remains
to  be  explained.  Is  this  merely  due  to  his  practical  knowledge  of  the
signs  of  underground  water  %

(vi.)  The  opinion  that  certain  appearances  on  the  surface  of  the
ground  do  indicate  the  site  for  shallow  wells, — i.e.  the  existence
of  underground  water  comparatively  near  the  surface  — as  other
appearances  also  indicate  underground  metallic  veins,  has  long  been
entertained,  and  with  more  or  less  justice.  Mr.  De  Ranee,  on  p.  234,
has  already  referred  to  one  of  these  signs,  and  Paramelle,  in  his
work  on  the  Discovery  of  Springs,  to  which  reference  is  made  in
Appendix  B,  quotes  several  of  these  traditions.  In  the  treatise  on
Wells  in  Weale's  series,  7th  edition,  1877,  p.  22.it  is  stated,  as  a  guide
to  the  well  sinker  : —

(1.)  That  when  the  grass  is  of  a  brighter  colour  on  one  part  of  a
field  than  another,  or  when  in  ploughed  ground  the  earth  is  of  a
darker  hue  in  one  place,  water  may  be  suspected  below.

1  Mayo,  TrutJis  contained  in  Popular  Superstitions,  p.  19.

2  See  Priestley's  Elcctricitii,  London,  1775,  p.  00,  et  scq ;  also  Phil.  Trans,  of  the
Royal  Society  (abridged  edition),  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  404,  405,  and  418.


XXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


249


(2)  That  when  gnats  hover  in  a  column  at  a  definite  height  above
the  ground,  a  spring  will  probably  be  found  below  that  spot.^

(3)  At  all  times  of  the  year  a  greater  humidity  is  said  to  exist
over  the  places  where  subterranean  springs  exist,  and  hence  in  the  early
morning  or  evening  a  denser  cloud  of  vapour  will  be  seen  at  those
spots.  It  is  said  well  sinkers  in  Northern  Italy  determine  the  site
for  a  well  by  lying  on  the  ground  and  looking  towards  the  sun  in  the
early  morning ;  wherever  the  exhalation  of  vapour  from  the  ground  is
seen  to  be  more  copious,  that  spot  is  selected.

This  last  appears  to  have  been  an  ancient  practice ;  the  power  of
detecting  the  vapour  doubtless  varies  with  different  people  ;  moreover
some  appear  to  have  an  abnormal  sensitiveness  and  it  has  even  been
supposed  that  they  are  able  to  perceive  it  by  other  methods  than  sight ;
see  e.g.,  the  letter  quoted  at  the  end  of  Appendix  D.

Thus  also  the  learned  Jesuit  Dechales,  in  his  Mundus  Mathematicus,
which  was  published  in  Lyons  in  1674,  states  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  190,  that
a  certain  noble  person,  whom  he  knew,  could  not  only  find  springs  by
the  bending  of  a  forked  twig  of  hazel,  "so  surely  that  he  could
trace  the  whole  course  of  the  underground  water ;  but  he  had
also  other  signs,  for  he  used  to  detect  a  vapour  issuing  from  the  earth,
and  by  this  means  immediately  pointed  out  the  head  of  the  spring."
Owing  to  the  wonderful  power  of  discernment  of  this  ancient  amateur
dowser,  Dechales  says: — "At  first  I  suspected  he  had  a  compact
with  the  devil,  but  when  I  observed  no  incantations  nor  sorcery,  I
suspended  my  judgment,  as  there  are  many  things  we  know  to  be
true,  but  cannot  explain."  -

This  philosophical  remai'k  of  Dechales'  may  also  be  apphed  to  the
well  known  idiosyncracies  of  certain  persons  which  afford  an  instruc-
tive parallel,  the  faintest  ti-ace  of  certain  odours  or  the  presence  of
certain  animals,  etc,  being  instantly  detected  by,  and  often  causing
extreme  discomfort  to,  such  persons,  who  are  abnormally  sensitive  in
one  direction.  Probably  a  divining  rod  held  by  these  sensitives
would be  unconsciously  and  vigoi'ously  moved by  them,  in  the

1  There  is  also  a  curious  tradition  referred  to  by  the  late  Dr.  Brewer,  and  used
by  Thomas  Moore  in  one  of  his  poems,  that  in  Arabia  the  lapioing  indicates  the
presence  of  an  underground  spring. I  have  not,  however,  been  able  to  obtain  any
confirmation  of  this  tradition. In  *•  Lalla  Rookh  "  Moore  sings  : —
"  Fresh  as  the  fountain  under  ground,
When  first  'tis  by  the  lapwing  found."
A  note  explains  :  "The  hudhud,  or  lapwing,  is  supposed  to  have  the  power  of
discovering  water  under  ground." — W.F.B.

-  This  passage  translated  from  Dechales  is  the  earliest  account  I  can  find  of  the
successful  use  of  the  divining  rod  for  the  discovery  of  springs.  (See  Appendix  C.)
Dechales  was  a  man  of  marvellous  erudition,  as  seen  by  his  folios  on  mathematical
physics.


250


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


presence  of  the  obnoxious  object,  and  thus  reveal  it,  even  before  the
sense  of  discomfort  had  risen  to  the  level  of  a  conscious  impression.

Doubtless  in  all  these  cases  the  impression  comes  through  one  of  the
recognised  channels  of  sense ;  in  the  same  way  as  acute  vision  enables
some  persons  to  detect  distant  objects,  invisible  to  others,  or  an  acute
sense  of  smell  enables  the  bloodhound  to  trace  tlie  footsteps  of  a
fugitive.  The  Zahories  of  Spain  were  credited  with  a  miraculous  sense
of  vision  i  :  a  writer  in  the  Quarterly  Review  (Vol.  II.,  p.  264)  says,
"The  Zahories,  by  attending  to  indications  which  escape  the  less
experienced  eye,  are  able  to  give  a  tolerable  guess  of  underground
waters.  Something  similar  is  told  of  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  .
who  have  the  faculty  of  discovering  distant  wells  by  signs  which  do
not  affect  the  senses  of  Europeans."  The  camel  is  said  to  have  a
similar  power  of  discovering  unseen  water.

According  to  Professor  Milne,  who  was  for  many  years  Professor
at  Tokio  in  Japan,  and  has  devoted  his  life  to  a  study  of  seismic
phenomena,  the  faint  preliminary  tremors  of  an  earthquake,  detected
by  extraordinarily  sensitive  apparatus,  are  perceived  by  pheasants,
geese,  ponies  and  some  other  animals.  Professor  Milne  states  that
"  the  late  Professor  Sekiya,  of  Tokio,  kept  pheasants  in  order  to
observe  their  behaviour  at  the  time  of  earthquakes,  with  the  result
that  he  found  they  gave  him  a  few  seconds'  warning  of  shocks  of
local  origin  by  screaming."

In  the  United  States  dowsers  are  often  used  to  find  mineral  oil
springs  and  are  called  oil-smellers  ;  though  it  is  pi'obable  keen  observa-
tion rather  than  a  keen  sense  of  smell  is  employed.  So,  too,  in  parts
of  Ireland  I  am  informed  that  the  local  fishermen  term  the  look-out
man  who  apprises  them  of  the  approach  of  fish  the  herririg -smeller,
though  I  imagine  in  this  case  it  is  unquestionably  the  sense  of  sight,
and  not  of  smell,  that  is  concerned.

It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  the  professional  dowser  has  the  power
of  detecting  signs  of  underground  water  which  escape  the  ordinary
observer,  and  as  this  power  would  be  trained  by  long  practice  at  one
employment,  part  of  their  success  may  fairly  be  taken  to  be  due  to  this.

1  The  only  authentic  reference  in  history  to  the  Zahories  which  I  have  been  able
to  find  is  in  Delrio's  Latin  folio  on  Magic,  published  300  years  ago.  In  a  passage  which
will  be  quoted  in  the  subsequent  historical  paper,  Delrio  says  in  1.575  he  met  one  of  these
Zahories  in  Madrid,  and  that  the  man  could  see  underground  metals,  water,  and
buried  corpses.  No  evidence  is  however  adduced,  but  it  appears  to  have  been  a  long
standing  tradition  with  this  tribe  of  Spanish  gypsies,  as  they  probably  were.  Delrio
says  the  facts  are  "most  fully  received  and  well  known,'"  and  he  adds,  ''the
Zahuris  probably  know  veins  of  water  from  the  vapours  exhaled  at  those  places
morning  and  evening,  and  veins  of  metal  from  the  kind  of  grass  growing  there ;
but  treasure  and  corpses  I  consider  are  indicated  by  demons."  (!)  Delrio  spells  the
word  Zahuris,  and  says,  "  the  redness  of  their  eyes  is  particularly  to  be  observed."


XXXII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  251


But  it  does  not  cover  all  the  ground.  The  supposition  of  Mr.  Holmes
that  professional  dowsers  have  a  hereditary  practical  knowledge  of
the  geological  features  which  indicate  the  presence  of  subterranean
springs  has  no  support ;  Lawrence  was  a  stonemason,  so  was  MuUins,
Tompkins  was  a  farmer,  Stone  a  drainage  artizan,  Stears  a  gas-
engineer,  etc.  The  fathers  of  none  of  these  were  dowsers,  nor  did  they
know  any  of  the  secrets  of  their  craft,  if  such  exist,  when  they  scored
their  early  successes.  Mr.  Holmes,  however,  very  justly  points  out  that
uneducated  persons,  as  many  of  these  dowsers  are,  usually  imagine
themselves  the  possessors  of  abnormal  gifts  when  they  find  they  can
discern  natural  signs  overlooked  by  the  ordinai'y  observer,  and  further
they  exaggerate  their  success  by  regarding  the  underground  water,
which  may  really  extend  over  acres  or  square  miles,  as  if  it  were  only  a
few  square  inches  in  area,  and  located  at  one  spot  like  a  buried  treasure.
But,  as  already  remarked,  the  striking  successes  of  the  dowser  in  find-
ing water  where  none  existed  in  adjacent  wells  is  probably  due  to  his
discovery  of  fissures,  or  jointing,  or  water-bearing  veins.  But  the  same
problem  meets  us  :  how  is  he  able  to  discern  from  a  superficial  inspec-
tion of  ground,  often  entirely  new  to  him  and  sometimes  covered  with
snow  (No.  103,  p.  151),  the  signs  which  indicate  these  interruptions
of  continuity  in  the  strata  below  ? See  e.g.,  Nos.  57,  88,  etc.

(vii.)  The  question  then  before  us  is  whether  the  success  of  a  good
dowser  is  only  due  to  his  practical  knowledge  of  surface  water-bearing
localities,  indications  being  perceived  by  him  that  escape  an  ordinary
observer ;  or  to  some  peculiar  instinct  or  faculty,  the  explanation  of
which  involves  considerations  new  to  science.  Mr.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,
writes  to  me  to  say  that,  "  looking  at  the  professional  dowser  as  the
possessor  of  an  ancient  practical  knowledge  of  surface  water-bearing
beds,  I  should  expect  him  to  be  right  in  detecting  them  19  times
out  of  20  .  .  .  but  when  they  trust  to  their  sensations  to  'locate
springs  '  in  the  water-bearing  bed,  they  become  the  victims  of
delusion."

Four  methods  suggest  themselves  at  first  sight  in  order  to  test
whether  the  pretensions  of  the  dowser  have  any  more  solid  basis  than
chance  coincidence,  or  shrewdness  gained  from  long  experience  at  one
vocation.  The  successful  issue  of  any  of  these  tests  would  go  far  to
prove  the  dowser  was  not  a  charlatan,  but  the  tests  1  and  3<i  would  only
show  that  his  success  might  be  due  merely  to  a  useful  practical
knowledge  of  water-bearing  localities. The  suggested  tests  are  : —

(1)  Separate  and  entirely  independent  examination  by  different
dowsers.

(2)  Blindfolding  the  dowser  with  care  and  taking  him  over  the
ground  again ;  or  repeating  the  trial  on  a  dark  night.


252


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


(3a)  Geological  opinion  as  to  whether  water  is,  or  is  not,  likel}'  to
be  found  on  the  spots  and  at  the  depths  indicated  by  the  dowser  ;  i.e.,
agreement  of  geologist  and  dowser.  Or,  more  conclusive  (3/3),  dowser
vers^is  geologist, — water  actually  found  at  the  spot  and  about  the
depth  predicted  by  ths  dowser,  in  spite  of  geological  opinion  to  the
contrary.

(4)  A  well  or  boring  made  to  a  corresponding  depth  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  where  water  has  been  found  by  the
dowser,  but  at  a  spot  where  no  spring  was  indicated  by  the  dowser.

All  of  these  tests,  successfully  made,  are  to  be  found  in  the  course
of  the  evidence  in  the  foregoing  paper,  e.g.,

Test  1  in  Nos.  6  ;  7  ;  17  ;  23  (p.  47)  ;  46  ;  54  ;  63  ;  70  and  135.
Test  2  in  Nos.  2  ;  6  ;  17  ;  25  ;  45  (p.  70)  ;  69  (p.  95)  ;  73  ;  74.
Test  3/3,  in  Nos.  42  ;  52  (pp.  78  and  108)  ;  58  (pp.  85  and  117)  ;

73  ;  88  (p.  128).
Test  4  in  upwards  of  50  of  the  cases  cited.

But  these  tests  are  of  very  different  value.  Tests  1  and  2  are  liable
to  be  vitiated  by  sign- reading  or  thought-transference  from  the
bystanders  (assuming  telepathy  to  be  a  vera  causa).  Test  3ci  is
occasionally  quite  misleading,  as  the  Horsham  and  Waterford  experi-
ments, and  other  cases  of  3/3,  illusti-ate.  The  most  reliable  test  is  the  last
named,  namely,  borings  in  adjacent  places  made  either  before  or  after
the  advent  of  the  dowser.  The  existence  of  such  borings  has  chiefly
influenced  me  in  the  selection  of  the  evidence  presented  in  this  paper.

Let  me,  therefore,  enumerate  the  cases  where  adjacent  wells  or
borings,  which  yielded  little  or  no  water,  had  been  made  to  at  least
the  same  depth  as  the  successful  wells  or  borings  located  by  the
dowser.  So  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,  40  of  these  may  be  regarded  as
good  evidential  cases  ;  these  are  : —

With  Miscellaneoiis  doivsers Nos.  3« ;  9:  10; 11;  17;


23  (?);  24;  25  ;  26  ;  27;  28

Total,  11

ir.  ,S'.  Laivrence  Nos.  42  ;  43  ;  47  ;  48

J.  Mullins  Nos.  52  (p.  78  and  106);  55;  57;  58

(p.  85  and  117)  ;  60  ;  62  ;  65  ;  67  ;  73  ;  75

H.  W.  Mulli7is  Nos.  77;81

2

IF.  Stone  Nos.  86  ;  88  ;  90  ;  91  ;  96

5

B.  Tompkins  Nos.  99  ;  102  ;  105

3

L.  Gataker  Nos.  120;  121;  122

3

Other  dowsers  Nos.  130,  140  ...

2

40


SXXII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


253


It  is  quite  possible  that  furtlier  local  or  geological  examination
may  lessen  the  significance  of  some  of  these  cases ;  but  on  the  other
hand,  the  evidence  presented  is  only  a  small  portion  of  what  might  be
obtained  by  a  wider  and  more  exhaustive  enquiry.  It  will,  I  think,
be  admitted  by  every  candid  and  careful  reader  that  the  evidence  on
the  whole  affords  a  strong  prima  facie  case  on  behalf  of  the  existence
of  some  peculiar  instinct  or  faculty  in  certain  individuals,  the  explana-
tion of  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  narrow  region  of  the  dowser's
conscious  experience,  but  in  the  wider  realm  of  his  sub-conscious  life.^
Whether  this  faculty,  which  we  may  provisionally  assume  to  exist,  is
so  rare  as  it  appears,  whether  it  is  hereditary,  or  whether  it  can  be
exalted  by  cultivation,  are  questions  to  be  answered  in  the  future.-

The  explanation  of  the  divining  rod  is  therefore  probably  a
complex  one,  and  its  full  discussion  cannot  be  appreciated  until  the
reader  is  in  possession  of  the  historical  evidence  to  be  adduced  in  a
subsequent  paper.  Here  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  doubtless  a  sub-
conscious suggestion,  of  some  kind,  evoked  in  the  dowser's  mind,  excites
the  reflex  action  to  which  the  actual  movement  of  the  rod  is  due.
The  evidence  shows  that  this  suggestion  cannot  come  only  from  a
capricious  idea  in  the  dowser's  own  mind,  but  is  also  derived  from  an
impression  he  gains  from  without  :  how  far  that  impression  is  cor-
related to  the  object  of  his  search,  and  if  so,  how  much  is  due  to
practical  knowledge,  and  how  much  is  due  to  some  unknown
cause  or  unrecognised  instinct,  are  questions  which  can  only  be  solved
by  a  careful  study  of  ample  and  trustworthy  evidence.  Cases  such  as
the  Waterford  and  Horsham  experiments,  where  special  precautions
were  taken,  and  the  ground  was  entirely  new  to  the  dowser,  or  some
of  Stone's  cases,  such  as  those  on  pages  128  and  129,  and  others,  tend
to  exclude  the  idea  of  any  inforination  being  derived  from  surface
indications  or  practical  knowledge,  and  suggest  either  a  novel  and
useful  instinct  on  the  part  of  the  dowser,  or  that  his  perception  is  due
to  some  physical  effect  associated  with  underground  water.  The  recent
discovery  of  a  new  type  of  obscure  radiation  from  certain  bodies,  such
as  uranium  salts,  and  also  from  numerous  common  bodies  with  which
we  are  surrounded,  renders  it  conceivable  that  a  radiation,  to  which
opaque  bodies  are  permeable,  may  be  emitted  by  water  and  metals,
which  unconsciously  impresses  some  persons. The  great  difficulty  in

1  "  The  sum  total  of  our  impressions  never  enters  mto  our  experience,  consciously
so-called,  which  runs  through  this  sum  total  like  a  tiny  rill  through  a  broad  flowery
mead.  Yet  the  physical  impressions  which  do  not  count  are  there,  as  much  as  tho»e
which  do." Prof.  W.  .James'  Text-hook  on  Psychology,  p.  217.

-  It  must  not  be  assumed,  let  me  repeat,  that  ability  to  twist  the  rod  necessarily
indicates  the  existence  of  a  dowsing  faculty  in  the  operator.  The  motion  of  the  rod
is  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward  and  psychical  state  due  to  various  causes.


254


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  way  of  this,  or  any  physical  hypothesis,— a  difficulty  which  would
be  insuperable  but  for  the  fact  that  no  hypothesis  can  be  purely
physical  where  human  automatism  plays  so  large  a  part — is  that
which  Malebranche  pointed  out  200  years  ago,  viz.,  that  exposed
running  water  and  exposed  metals  ought  to  produce  a  still  greater
effect  than  those  that  are  underground  and  further  off,  and  yet  the
dowser  appears  for  the  most  part  insensible  to  these.

Assuming  the  actual  motion  of  the  rod  to  be  caused  by  involuntary
muscular  action,  a  summary  of  the  causes  determining  that  motion,
excluding  of  course  cases  of  fraud  or  self-delusion,  may,  in  my  opinion,
be  given  as  follows  :  —

(1)  In  every  case  the  direction  of  the  motion  of  the  rod,  upwards
or  downwards,  and  probably  in  all  cases  tlie  motion  itself,  will  be  found
to  arise  from  a  suggested  or  preconceived,  but  usually  latent,  idea  in
the  dowser's  own  mind.  It  is  the  unconscious  emergence  of  a  fixed  or
derived  idea  registered  in,  or  made  upon,  the  sub-conscious  self.i

(2)  In  some  cases  (such  as  those  already  alluded  to,  finding  coins,
etc.)  an  idea  is  unconsciously  conveyed  to  the  dowser's  mind  by  almost
imperceptible  signs,  unintentionally  made  by  those  present ;  or  by  (3).

(3)  In  many  cases,  an  impression  from  without,  derived  through
the  ordinary  channels  of  sensation,  appears  to  be  unconsciously  made
upon  the  dowser  by  faint  indications  associated  in  the  dowser's  mind
with  the  particular  object  of  his  search.  These  indications, — usually
visual,  or  it  may  be  a  vague  diffused  sensation, — would  probably
entirely  escape  the  bystander  :  the  impression  that  comes  in  through
the  sensory  apparatus  going  out  through  the  hands  of  the  dowser
without  recognition  or  conscious  effort  on  his  part.  Added  to  this  we
have  the  ordinary  observing  power  of  the  dowser,  trained  by  years
of  continuous  practice  at  one  particular  occupation,  and  constantly
confirmed  or  corrected  by  the  results  of  his  previous  trials.

(4)  In  other  cases,  however,  an  impression  from  without  appears
to  be  gained,  oiot  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sensation.
Thought-transference  will,  I  believe,  be  found  to  receive  remarl^able

1  An  amusing  illustration  of  the  effect  of  suggestion  in  determining  the  motion
of  the  rod  is  given  by  Mr.  B.  B.  Tylor,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  (Nature,  May  17th,  1883,
p  58) ;  the  suggestion  in  this  case  arising  jiurely  from  an  association  of  ideas.  Mr.
Tylor  remarks  that  he  does  not  believe  that  the  dowser  fraudulently  moves  the  rod,
but  that  slight  movements  of  his  hands  unconsciously  cause  the  twig  to  turn,  and
he  adds,  "  I  noticed  that,  when  I  allowed  my  attention  to  stray,  the  rod  would  froni
time  to  time  move  in  my  hands  in  a  way  so  lifelike  that  an  vmeducated  person  might
well  suppose  the  movement  to  be  spontaneous."


xxxir.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  255


contirmation  from  experiments  with  the  dowsing  rod.  But  only  here
and  there  can  this  agency  be  even  supj^osed  in  the  evidence  cited  in
this  paper :  it  may  occasionally  come  into  play  in  finding  hidden  coins,
or  tracing  the  direction  of  underground  pipes  conveying  water .1

(5)  There  appears  to  be  evidence  that  a  more  profound  stratum
of  our  personality,  glimpses  of  which  we  get  elsewhere  in  our
Proceedings,  is  associated  with  the  dowser's  art ;  and  the  latter  seems
to  afford  a  further  striking  instance  of  information  obtained  through
automatic  means  being  often  more  reliable  than,  and  beyond  the  reach
of,  that  derived  from  conscious  observation  and  inference.^  The  whole
of  the  evidence  cited,  in  my  opinion,  cannot  be  explained  away  merely
by  the  practical  knowledge  of  the  dowser,  nor  by  the  explanations
given  in  1,  2,  3,  and  4.

In  some  cases  a  peculiar  pathological  effect  is  produced  upon
the  dowser,  often  strong  enough  to  rise  to  the  level  of  consciousness
and  even  discomfort ;  or  it  may  be  so  weak  that  it  is  not  perceived,
though  sufficient  to  start  the  motion  of  the  rod.'  This  effect  appears
to  be  associated  with  the  object  of  the  dowser's  search,  and  may  be
merely  due  to  nervous  excitement,  or  a  secondary  result  of  some
hitherto  unsuspected  impression  made  upon  the  nerve  centi"es  of
certain  individuals.  Whether,  if  this  latter  be  the  case,  it  can  be
traced  to  an  abnormal  sensibility  of  one  or  other  of  the  recognised
channels  of  sensation,  resembling  the  hypersesthesia  of  hypnotised
subjects,  or  is  due  to  some  more  transcendental  psychological  condition,
or,  far  less  probably,  to  some  physical  cause,  can  only  be  conclusively
ascertained  by  a  persevering  and  unbiassed  investigation,  which  this
paper  may  perhaps  help  to  stimulate.

1  The  fact  that  the  water  must  be  running  and  not  stagnant  (see  Nos.  56,  74,  etc.),
suggests  that  hearing,  or  possibly  a  slight  tremor  produced  by  the  running  water,
may  be  the  means  whereby  the  desired  information  is  picked  up  by  the  sub-conscious
or  secondary  self.  Sir  Philip  Smyly,  M.D.,  told  me  of  a  hyperasthetic  patient  of  his,
who  heard  and  repeated  to  him  the  words  he  had  uttered  in  a  low  voice  two  floors
below,  and  with  closed  doors  between.  Hearing  in  such  cases  is  beyond  the  normal
power  of  strained  attention,  as  any  one  can  prove.  The  most  remarkable  instance  of
the  dowser's  power  of  tracing  underground  water  jjipes,  conveying  running  water,
occurred  with  Bleton  and  will  be  given  in  the  subsequent  historical  paper.

^  Numerous  cases  of  extraordinary  subliminal  perception  are  given  by  Mr
r.  W.  H.  Myers  in  his  essays  on  the  subliminal  self  published  in  our  Proceedings.
The  frequent  success  of  the  dowser  in  forecasting  the  approximate  depth  of  springs
is  remarkable  (see  pp.  02,  70,  109,  119,  etc.) ;  but  it  njeds  somewhat  more  evidence  to
eliminate  local  knowledge  and  chance  coincidence.

•*  See  Appendix  D.


256


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAET


APPENDIX  A.


The  Words  "Dowse"  and  "Dowser."

The  origin  and  derivation  of  these  words  is  at  present  unknown,
according  to  all  our  best  dictionaries.^  I  have  applied  to  Dr.  Murray,
editor  of  the  new  Oxford  English  Dictionary,  for  the  latest  results
of  etymological  investigation  upon  the  word,  and  he  tells  me  that
these  results  are  at  present  absolutely  nil.  The  part  of  the  diction-
ary containing  the  word,  though  printed,  is  not  yet  published,  and  I
am  indebted  to  Dr.  Murray  for  kindly  allowing  me  to  see  the  proof-
sheet  and  for  liberty  to  make  the  following  extract  here  ; —

"  Dowse  (dciuz)  also  doivze,  douse, — Derivation  unknown  ;  appa-
rently a  dialect  term.  To  use  the  divining  or  dowsing  rod  in  search
of  subterraneous  supplies  of  water  or  mineral  veins.  Hence  Dowsing
vbl.  sb.  ;  Dowser,  one  who  uses  the  divining  rod,  or  water  diviner  ;
Dowsing  rod,  the  rod  or  twig  used  by  dowsers.  1691.  Locke  {Lower.
Interest,  p.  40)  '  Not  of  the  nature  of  the  densing  rod  or  virgula
divina,  able  to  discover  mines  of  gold  and  silver.'  1838.  Mrs.  Bray
{Tradit.  Devonsh.  III.,  p.  260),  '  The  superstition  relative  to  the
dowsing  or  divining  rod,  etc'  "  [A  series  of  later  examples  of  the  use
of  the  word  follows  down  to  1894.]

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  word  in  a  slightly  altered  spelling  goes
back  to  the  end  of  the  17th  century,  but  that  no  quotations  are  given  of
its  use  in  the  18th  century.  Dr.  Murray  has  asked  me  if  I  can  supply
any,  but  I  cannot.-  There  is  a  long  account  of  the  divining  rod  and
its  manner  of  use  in  Hooson's  Miner's  Dictionary  (1747),  and  in
Pryce's  great  work  on  Cornish  mines  (1778),  but  in  neither  work  is
any  mention  made  of  the  word  "dowser  "  or  "to  dowse." Neither  is

1  The  ws  in  dowse  is  pronounced  like  the  same  letters  in  broiosc.  The  word
dowse  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  word  douse  (pronounced  to  rhyme  with
house)  which  has  various  meanings  in  our  language,  and,  according  to  Dr.  Murray,
has  no  etymological  connexion  with  dowse  or  dowser.

-  Since  this  was  printed,  I  have  found  the  word  josinrj  mentioned  at  the  close  of
the  18th  century  by  Billingsley  in  his  Survey  of  the  County  Somerset,  Bath,  1797 ;  he  says
the  miners  in  the  Mendip  Hills  use  the  divining  rod,  "  which  they  call  josincj,  etc."  ;
he  goes  on  to  speak  of  their  complete  faith  in  its  efficacy, — a  faith  which  is  as  strong
among  the  miners  in  the  Mendips  to-day  as  it  has  been  for  the  last  250  years.  Locke's
acquaintance  with  the  word  dcusing  rod  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  he  was
a  native  of  Somerset  and  born  under  the  shadow  of  the  Mendips.  The  published
copy  of  Locke's  letter  on  Loiocring  of  Interest  in  the  British  Museum  is  dated  1692,
and  the  page  on  which  the  word  "  deusing  rod  or  Virgila  [sic)  Divina  "  occurs  is  127,
not  40,  as  given  above.


XXXII.]


Appendix  A.


257


there  in  Borlase's  Natural  History  of  Cornwall  (1758,)  where  the
divining  rod  or  virgula  divinatoria  is  referred  to ;  neither  is  there  in
the  Gentleman's  Magazine  of  1751,  where  there  is  a  lengthy  description
of  the  rod  ;  nor  are  the  words  used  in  the  account  of  the  divining  rod
in  North  "Wales,  given  by  Pennant  in  his  Tour  in  Wales,  1770,  nor
in  a  similar  work  by  Mr.  Evans  in  1800,  nor  in  Emerson's  account  of
the  rod  in  New  Hampshire  (U.S.)  given  in  1821,  nor  in  the  lengthy  and
detailed  paper  on  the  rod  given  in  the  American  Journal  of  Science
for  1826.  Moreover  in  the  earliest  English  accounts  of  the  divining  rod
which  ray  investigations  have  recently  brought  to  light,  viz.,  Childrey's
Britannia  Baconia,  or  Natural  Rarities  of  England,  1660,  G.  Platte's
Discovery  of  Subterranean  Treasure,  1638,  and  the  extract  from
Boyle's  works,  1663,  to  be  given  later  on,  there  is  no  mention  of  the
word  deusing,  or  dowsing  rod,  or  dowser.  The  use  of  the  word
deusing  rod  by  Locke  in  1691,  is  therefore  remarkable  and  apparently
unique,  until  we  come  to  1830,  when  the  word  is  used  freely  in  the
Quarterly  Mining  Revietv  of  that  date.  Vol.  I.

In  the  glossary  of  Pryce's  work  already  mentioned,  and  also  in  the
glossary  to  Borlase's  Cornwall  (1758)  occurs  the  Cornish  word  '^dizzue,
to  discover  unto;  to  dizzue  a  lode  is  to  discover  or  expose  the  good  ore."
Looking  at  Locke's  "  deusing  rod,"  I  thought  that  possibly  a  "dowser"
might  originally  have  been  a  "dizzuer"  of  a  lode.  But  Dr.  Murray
tells  me  that  this  word  dizzue  is  entirely  irrelevant,  and  neither  in
sound  nor  sense  allied  to  dowse.^  The  same  remark,  Dr.  Murray
says,  applies  to  the  well-known  word  "  douse,"  which  is  common  in
Cornwall  for  dipping  or  lowering,  as  "douse  the  sail."  Dr.  Murray
also  points  out  that  we  must  not  make  too  much  of  Locke's  spelling,
since  the  word  occurs  in  a  single  passage,  and  may  be  merely  a
misprint  for  dousing,  which  in  the  case  of  an  unknown  word  might
easily  happen.  Such  instances  are  not  at  all  uncommon.  But  it  may
also  be  founded  in  the  Somerset  and  Devon  pronunciation,  since  in
these  dialects  ou  or  ow  is  often  sounded  in  a  way  that  a  "  foreigner  "
might  mistake  for  eu  or  eiv.  De  Quincey  and  some  other  writers  of
the  present  century  have  spelt  the  word  jowser  or  jouser,  and  we
learn  from  the  West  Somerset  Wordbook,  by  Mr.  Fred.  T.  Elworthy,
in  which  there  is  an  interesting  article  on  the  word  Dowse,  that
this  is  a  real  dialect  pronunciation  in  some  parts  of  the  county.
De  Quincey's  suggestion  that  the  slang  word  chouse,  to  swindle,  may
be  derived  from  the  "jowser,"  regarded  as  a  charlatan,  is  absurd  and
baseless  (see  chouse  in  Oxford  English  Dictionary)  ;  but  it  may  be

1  An  incidental  evidence  of  the  marvellous  range  of  Dr.  Murraj-'s  Dictionary  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  this  word  "  di7,zue  "  and  Pryce's  references  thereto  are  all
quoted  in  this  Dictionary,  as  I  see  from  the  proof  slieets  Dr.  Murray  sent  me  when
I  ventured  to  suggest  this  origin  of  the  word  "  dowse. "

S


258


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


responsible  for  the  facb  that  (as  I  am  informed)  in  the  Geological
Survey  of  Great  By-itain,  the  dowsing  rod  is  called  the  chousing-iovk,
which  has  certainly  no  local  support  in  any  dialect.

Two  conjectures  as  to  the  possible  etymology  of  the  term  dowsing
rod  occurred  to  me,  but  I  fear  they  must  be  dismissed,  as  the  dis-
tinguished philologists  to  whom  I  ventured  to  submit  these  conjectures
regard  them  as  valueless.  ^  It  may,  however,  be  useful  briefly  to  refer
to  them  here,  as  collateral  questions  of  interest  are  opened  up.

It  is  well  known  that  the  English  language  was  not  spoken  in
Cornwall  till  the  middle  of  the  16th  century.  At  the  close  of  that
century,  when  the  virgula  divina  was  introduced  by  the  German
miners  into  Cornwall,  the  Celtic  Cornish  language  was  still  widely
used.  The  Cornish  miners  might  therefore  naturally  call  the  rod  by
the  nearest  Cornish  equivalent  to  the  Latin  name.  In  Williams'
Lexicon  Cornua-Britannicum,  a  dictionary  of  the  ancient  Celtic
language  of  Cornwall,  as  Mr.  E.  Westlake  first  pointed  out  to  me,  the
Cornish  word  for  "  Divinity,  Godhead,"  is  "  Dowses"  and  Williams
gives  also  another  form,  "  Dewsys.  "  Pryce  in  his  glossary  of  Cornish
■words  gives  "Deuyse"  for  goddess.  One  might  conjecture,  therefore,
that  the  "  divining  rod "  or,  as  some  early  writers  called  it,  the
"divine  rod,"  might  to  the  Cornish  miners  become  the  "  dowses-rod  "
or  "  deuyses-rod,"  which  would  accord  with  Locke's  "  deusing-rod "
in  1691.2

1  I  have  specially  to  thank  Dr.  Murray,  who,  though  overwhelmed  with  his
moffnum  opus,  kindly  took  immense  trouble  in  explaining  to  nie  the  reasons  for  his
opinion,  which,  of  course,  I  do  not  venture  to  question.

-  I  had  remarked  in  writing  to  Dr.  Murray  that  though  "  dowses  "  is  "  divinity,"
and  not ' '  divining,"  yet  the  Latin  divinitas  has  the  double  meaning  of  "divinity" and
"  divining."  In  his  reply  Dr.  Murray  writes  fully  on  this  point,  and  coming  from  so
high  a  philological  authority,  the  following  extract  from  Dr.  Murray's  letter  is  of
in.  t^rGS  t  *

Oxford,  November  2\st,  1896.

"  Certainly,  in  Latin,  divinitas  has  the  twofold  meaning  ;  that  is  the  initial  fact
on  which  we  have  been  going  all  along,  and  upon  which,  as  I  understood  it,  3'our
conjecture  as  to  dowse  started.  For  it  is  only  because  of  this  Latin  fact  that  there  is,
in  any  language  descended  from  or  borroxuing  from  Latin,  any  connexion  of  notion
between  god,  godhead,  and  soothsaying.  And  it  is  precisely  because  it  is  a  Latin  fact,
and  so  far  as  I  know,  a  Latin  fact  only,  that  I,  as  a  philologist,  consider  it  irrelevant.

"In  Latin,  divinus  meant  not  only  '  of  or  pertaining  to  the  divus  or  deity,' but
also  '  inspired  by  the  deity,'  hence  '  prophetic,' '  soothsaying.'  Consequently  divinitas
meant  not  only  divineness,  divine  nature,  but  also  divine  inspired-ness,  prophetic
character;  and  divinarc  to  act  the  prophet,  to  'divine.'  Divinare  became  in
French  dcviner,  and  the  French  word  became  in  English  to  divine ;  hence  English
inherits  through  French,  from  Latin,  an  etyviological  connexion  between  the  notions  of
'  divine,  godlike  '  and  the  verb  to  '  divine,  to  guess  supernaturally,'  with  its  noun  of
action  divination. To  us,  it  is  only  an  etymological  connexion,  for I  think  no


XXXII.]


Appendix  A.


259


Professor  Rhys,  the  Professor  of  Celtic  in  Oxford  University,  to
whom  this  conjecture  was  submitted,  advised  that  Dr.  Jago  (one,  I
believe,  of  the  best  living  authorities  on  the  Celtic  Cornish  language),
should  be  consulted,  though  the  term  "dowsing  rod"  is  not,  Pi-ofessor
Rhys  adds,  in  Dr.  Jago's  English  CornisJo  Dictionary.

Accordingly  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Jago  and  have  received  in  reply  a
series  of  lengthy  and  interesting  letters,  of  which  I  regret  that  space
only  allows  me  to  give  a  few  extracts.  In  his  second  letter  to  me  Dr.
Jago  writes  : — ■

13,  Ham  Street,  Plymouth,  November  26f./i.,  1896.
I  cannot  but  think  that  the  rod  was  looked  on  as  a  sacred  instrument,
hence  "  virgula  divinatoria  "  for  its  name,  and  so  would  the  Cornish  m
their  tongue  apply  a  term  as  meaning  what  is  sacred  or  G-od-like.
In  Cornish  we  have  for  God  these  forms  : — Dew,  Deu,  .  .  .  etc  ,  etc.,
the  plurals  ending  in  various  ways,  as  in  oiv,  ov.,  etc.,  etc.  Williams  {Lex.
Corn.  Brit.)  has  for  "Divinity  (Godhead)"  Duse's,  Deivsys,  Deusys,  terms
nearest  to  Dowser,  and  Doiusing.  .  .  .  My  own  opinion  is  that  dowsing
is  in  its  origin  from  the  Latin  Dens,  through  tlie  Cornish  forms  dnses,  deusys,
dewsys.

December  0th,  1896.
For  Goddess  we  have  in  Cornish,  Dii.es  (Lex.  Corn.  Brit.)  Deuijse  (Pryce),
Dnwies  (Welsh),  Doue'es  (Armoric). Borlase  gives  as  Cornish  '■'■rhudl,  a
branch." All  trees  and  plants  are  in  t\iQ  feminine  gender  in  Cornish.

In  a  letter  dated  December  7th  Dr.  Jago  sends  me  a  long  and
carefully  compiled  list  of  changes  in  words  and  names  of  places
brought  about  by  the  mingling  of  the  ancient  Cornish  with  English.^
"Writing  again  on  December  14th,  Dr.  Jago  says  : —

December  Uth,  1896.
I  sent  you  the  list  of  compound  words  to  show  how  dewsys  and
rhodl,  the  ancient  Cornish  for  goddess  and  rod  may  easily  be  changed


one  feels  any  connexion  of  idea  between  '  divining  what  a  person  would  be  at,
and  the  'divine  nature,'  any  more  than  he  feds  between  seeding  a  letter,  and
seaZ-fishery.

"But  the  fact  is  only  a  Latin  one;  there  is  nothing  analogous  in  Greek,  in
Germanic,  or  in  Celtic  ;  in  none  of  these  languages  has  the  word  for  '  god  '  happened
to  give  birth  to  a  derivative  meaning  'soothsay';  they  might,  perchance,  have  done
so  as  well  as  Latin,  but  they  did  not.  Now  '  the  illegitimate  process  '  of  your  reasoning  a
that  you  take  a  fact  which  is  true  of  Latin  only,  and  apply  it  without  proof  to  a
Celtic  language.  .  .  .  But  this  is  the  very  thing  to  be  proved;  and  investigation
shows  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  it,  that  all  the  words  connected  with  divination  in
the  Celtic  language  are  quite  different  and  have  no  connexion  with  the  word  for  od
or  divine.  Thus  to  the  philologist,  the  conjecture  is  one  that  lies  outside  the  lines  of
scientific  notice,  and  is  for  him  no  solution.  ,,j  ^  jj  Mueray  "

1  See  Appendix  in  .Jago's  English-Cornish  Dictionary,  "English  changes  of
Celtic-Cornish  words,"  containing  a  long  list  of  curious  changes  of  Cornish  into
English,  e.g..  Men  Eglos,  the  Chapel  Rock,  changed  to  "The  Manacles:"  rocks
near  Falmouth.


260


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAKT


by  passing  from  the  Cornish  to  the  English,  and  for  want  of  a  better
term,  I  call  such  changes  ^'phonetic."  The  terms  used  by  the  Cornish
miners  are  mostly  of  great  antiquity,  and  so  far  as  I  know,  the  dowsing
rod  was  in  use  in  Cornwall  long  before  the  Cornish  language  became
extinct.  This  being  so,  the  Cornish  miners  must  naturally  have  had  a
Cornish  name  for  the  rod.

It  was  not  till  towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  (1509  to
1547),  that  English  was  used  in  any  of  the  Cornish  churches.  Before  this
time  Cornish  only  was  known  or  spoken.  .  .  .  But  the  Cornish
was  so  well  spoken  in  the  parish  of  Feok  (near  Falmouth),  in  1640,
"that  the  Rev.  William  Jackman,  chaplain  and  vicar  of  Pendennis
Castle,  Falmouth,"  at  the  siege  thereof  by  the  parliament's  army,
was  forced  for  divers  years  to  administer  the  sacrament  in  the  Cornish
tongue  ;  but,  says  Drew,  "  So  late  as  1650  the  Cornish  language  was  spoken
in  the  parishes  of  Paul  and  St.  Just  (near  Penzance),  the  fish-women  and
market-women  in  the  former  and  the  miners  in  the  latter  for  the  most  part
conversing  in  their  old  vernacular  tongue."  .  .  .  Old  Dolly  Pentreath
who  died,  aged  102,  at  Mousehole,  near  Penzance,  in  January,  1778,  was
the  last  known  person  whose  mother  tongue  was  Cornish  ;  she  could  not
speak  English  till  she  was  a  grown  woman.

I  am  of  opinion  that  the  modern  doiosing  rod  was  with  the  Cornish
miners,  before  the  old  Celtic  tongue  died  out,  kno-\vn  as  the  Deivsys  Rlwdl,
and  corrupted  by  English-speaking  people  into  doiosing  (or  deusing)  rod,  and
that  it  is  a  sacred  term  in  origin.  Fred W P  Jagg

On  the  other  hand,  no  evidence  is  forthcoming  in  support  of  this
conjecture,  and  the  highest  philological  authorities,  such  as  Dr.  Murray,
of  Oxford,  and  Professor  Skeat,  of  Cambridge,  to  both  of  whom  I  sub-
mitted Dr.  Jago's  letters,  are  entirely  opposed  to  the  foregoing
conjecture,  and  state  that  it  is  "  not  even  a  possible  suggestion  of  the
etymology  of  the  word  dowsing  rod."  ^


The  other  conjecture,  suggested  by  a  historical  investigation  of  the
rod,  seems  more  plausible,  but  to  it  there  are  also  philological  objections.
In  the  earliest  references  to  the  use  of  the  dowsing  rod,  it  is  called
(written  in  Latin  or  German)  "the  striking  rod,"  and  it  is  always
spoken  of  as  "striking"  when  it  comes  over  a  hidden  vein  of  ore.  Thus
Basil  Valentine,  in  his  Novum  Testamentum  (date  uncertain,  assigned
to  1440,  probably  later),  speaks  of  the  dowsing  rod  as  the  "  Furcilla,

1  I  sent  the  proof-sheets  of  this  note  to  Dr.  Jago,  who  writes,  "  With  the  highest
respect  for  the  authorities  you  have  referred  to,  I  am  still  of  opinion  that  dowzin-rod
is  only  a  corrupted  form  of  Dnusys  rhodl,  the  rod  of  the  goddess  ;  this  is  not  more
strained  than  the  Cornish  x>cn-y-hal,  head  of  the  mine,  into  the  corrujited  form  '  penny
ball '  or  men  cglos,  church  rock,  into  manacles.'  "


XXXII.]


Appendix  A.


261


oder  von  der  SMag-ruthen  "  ;  in  the  English  translation  (1657)  o£  this
alchemist's  work  this  is  given  as  the  "  Furcilla,  or  striking  rod,"  and
we  are  told  "if  it  strikes,"  the  ore  is  beneath.  The  phrase  Die
Wiinschel-ruihe  schlclgt  (the  divining  rod  strikes)  occurs  continually  in
works  of  the  17th  century.  Beyer,  in  his  work  on  mining  (1749),
discusses  why  the  rod  strikes  (schlagt)  with  some  persons  and  not
with  others.  Formerly  the  motion  of  the  rod  was  always  downwards  ;
it  turned  until  it  struck,  or  nearly  struck,  the  ground  ;  and  it  is  still
called  in  parts  of  Cornwall  "  the  dipping  rod."  Now,  one  meaning  of
the  word  dowse,  or  douse,  is  to  strike,  and  another,  to  dip  ;  thus
Professor  Skeat,  in  his  Etymological  Dictionary,  under  "  Dowse,"
gives  "middle  English  (13th  to  15th  centuries),  duschen,  to  strike ;
Cf.  0.  Dutch,  doesen,  to  sti'ike."  It  seemed  possible,  therefore —
to  one  who  is  not  an  etymologist — that  the  "  deusing  rod  "  of  Locke,
and  the  "  dowsing  I'od  "  of  to-day,  might  simply  be  the  "  striking  "  or
"dipping  rod."i  On  the  other  hand.  Dr.  Murray  says  the  two  words
are  no  more  related  than  to  "  seal "  a  letter  is  to  "  seal "  fishery.
Professor  Skeat  writes,  "  That  dowse  means  to  strike,  especially  in  the
face,  is  well  authenticated,  so  that  the  etymology  suggested  is  not
phonetically  impossible,  and  this  is  something."  But  in  a  subsequent
letter  Professor  Skeat  says,  "I  did  not  know  the  dowse  you  refer  to
is  pronounced  dowz  ;  it  makes  a  great  difference,  and  to  my  mind
completely  severs  it  from  the  verb  douse,  to  strike,  which  rhymes
with  house. To  douse  means  to  slap,  rather  than  merely  to  strike."

Here  I  leave  the  question  still  in  obscurity  ]  if,  as  Professor
Skeat  remarks,  "people  will  have  etymologies,  '  Recte  si  possint  ;
si  non,  quocunque  modo,' "  then  the  perusal  of  this  Appendix  may  be
instructive.-


1  Dr.  Jago,  though  opposed  to  this  derivation,  tells  me  that  in  Cornwall  douse
means  to  dip  or  lower  mddenly  or  forcibly  ;  this  is  precisely  what  occurs  with  the
dowsing  rod  when  it  "strikes  "  the  vein  or  spring.  The  Rev.  W.  Jago,  of  Bodmin,
independently  suggests  the  same  etymology  as  his  namesake.  It  will  be  interesting
to  see  what  the  Oxjard  English  Dictionary  has  to  say  on  the  word  "  strike,"'  and  the
history  of  its  many  meanings.

2  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  one  George  Bowsing,  a  schoolmaster  of  St.
Faith's,  near  Norwich,  used  "magic"  to  find  treasure  in  the  early  part  of  the  reign
of  Henry  VIII.,  (1521).  A  license  had  been  given  to  Sir  R.  Curzon  to  search  for
hidden  treasure  in  Norfolk,  and  the  aid  of  George  Dowsing  was  sought,  he  being
considered  an  expert  "hill-digger,"  as  those  were  called  who  searched  for  minerals
and  buried  treasure,  an  uncanny  occujjation  in  those  days.  See  Dr.  Jessopp's  Eandom
Roamings,  p.  103.  Oddly  enough,  one  of  the  very  earliest  uses  of  the  divining  rod
was  in  the  search  for  hidden  treasure.  This  superstition  became  the  subject  of  one  of
Sheppard's  Epigrams  on  the  Virgula  Livina,  published  in  London  in  1651,  p.  141 :

"Some  sorcerers  do  boast  they  have  a  rod,  Gathered  with  vows  and  sacrifice,
And  (borne  about)  will  strangely  nod,  To  hidden  treasure,  where  it  lies.
Mankind  is  (sure)  that  rod  divine,  For  to  the  wealthiest  (ever)  they  incline."


262


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


APPENDIX  B.


Geological  Opinion  upon  Underground  Water.

The  available  sources  of  underground  water  depend  mainly  on  the
rainfall. 1  The  rain  water  which  sinks  into  the  earth,  or  the  water
which  has  leaked  from  the  bed  of  a  river  or  lake,  passes  through  more
or  less  porous  strata,  which  it  gradually  saturates,  until  it  meets  with  a
more  impermeable  layer  ;  here  it  accumulates  underground,  "until  by  the
pressure  of  the  descending  column,  it  is  forced  to  find  a  passage  through
joints  or  fissures  upwards  to  the  surface.  The  points  at  which  it  issues
are  termed  springs.  In  most  districts  the  rocks  underneath  are
permeated  with  water  below  a  certain  limit  which  is  termed  the  [under-
ground] water  level.  This  line  is  not  a  strictly  horizontal  one,  like  that
of  the  surface  of  a  lake.  Moreover,  it  is  likely  to  rise  and  fall  accord-
ing as  the  seasons  are  wet  or  dry.  In  some  places  it  lies  quite  near,  in
others  far  below,  the  surface.  A  well  is  an  artificial  hole  dug  down
below  the  water-level,  into  which  the  water  percolates.  Hence,  when
the  water-level  happens  to  be  at  a  small  depth  the  wells  are  shallow  ;
when  at  a  great  depth  they  require  to  be  deep.  Since  the  rocks
underneath  the  surface  vary  greatly  in  porosity,  some  contain  far  more
water  than  others.  It  often  happens  that,  percolating  along  some
porous  bed,  the  subterranean  water  finds  its  way  downward  until  it
passes  beneath  some  more  impervious  rock.  Hindered  in  its  progress,
it  accumulates  in  the  porous  bed.  ...  If  a  bore  hole  be  sunk
through  the  impervious  bed  down  to  the  water-charged  stratum
below,  the  water  will  rise  in  the  hole,  or  even  gush  out  as  a  jet
d'eau  above  ground.  Wells  of  this  kind  bear  the  name  of  Artesian,
from  the  old  province  of  Artois  in  France,  where  they  have  long-
been  in  use."  -

1  Mainly,  because  from  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  water  is  continually  filtering  down-
wards. Moreovei-,  Mr.  I.  Roberts,  F.R.S.,  has  shown  in  an  admirable  series  of
experiments  {Proc.  Brit  Association,  1878,  x>.  397),  that  sea  water  filtering  through
the  Bunter  sandstone  is,  by  a  pm-ely  mechanical  and  j^hysical  process,  deprived  of  the
salts  it  contains,  and  issues  as  potable  water  ;  this  action  continues  until  the  sandstone
is  saturated  with  saline  particles,  which  can  be  washed  out  by  fresh  water.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  this  filtration  from  the  salt  water  of  the  Mersey  is  the  source  of  fresh
water  in  numerous  wells  in  Liverpool,  which  "yield  daily  several  million  gallons  of
water,  the  yield  liaving  been  continuous  for  years."  Of  late,  however,  the  water  in
many  of  these  wells  had  mysteriously  become  more  and  more  brackish,  and  in  some  was
as  salt  as  its  source.  Mr.  Roberts'  experiments  have  now  cleared  up  this  mystery  ;
tlie  sandstone  is  becoming  saturated  with  salt.

2  Sir  A.  Geikie,  F.R.S. "Geology,"  in  Enajc.  Brit.,  9th  Ed.,  p.  269.


XXXIl].


Ap2Jendix  B.


263


A  spring,  therefore,  depends  for  its  supply  upon  the  extent  of  the
underground  reservoir  furnished  by  the  permeable  stratum.  Owing
to  their  permeability,  "  the  old  red  sandstone,  the  triassic  sandstones,
some  beds  of  millstone  grit,  the  jurassic  limestones,  the  lower  green-
sand  and  chalk  formations  constitute  the  more  important  water-bearing
formations  of  the  British  Isles."  ^  Rocks  absorb  varying  quantities  of
water,  from  the  oolite,  which  reaches  up  to  an  absorbing  power  of  2 '2
gallons  per  cubic  foot,  down  to  the  carboniferous  limestone  ;  one  gallon
of  water  absorbed  per  cubic  foot  corresponds  to  over  80  million  gallons
per  square  mile  of  rock  for  every  yard  of  its  thickness.  ^

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  there  is  a  circulation  of
underground  water,  the  direction  of  its  flow  depending  on  the  dip  of
the  impermeable  strata,  or  on  the  direction  of  the  faults  and  fissures  of
the  rocks,  which  act  as  ducts  for  the  underground  water.  Thus  Dr.
Ansted  in  his  Physical  Geography  writes  : — "  It  is  certain  that  water
must  be  constantly  circulating  through  natural  fissures  in  the  earth  at
all  depths."  As  Sir  A.  Geikie  points  out : — "  That  the  water  really
circulates  underground  and  passes  not  merely  between  the  pores  of  the
rocks,  but  in  crevices  and  tunnels,  which  it  has,  no  doubt,  to  a  large
extent  opened  for  itself  along  numerous  natural  joints  and  fissures,  is
proved  by  the  occasional  rise  of  twigs,  leaves,  and  even  live  fish  in  the
shaft  of  an  artesian  well.  Such  evidences  are  particulai'ly  striking
when  found  in  districts  Avithout  surface  waters,  and  even,  perhaps,
with  little  or  no  rain.  ...  In  these  and  similar  cases  it  is  clear
the  water  may,  and  sometimes  does,  travel  for  many  leagues  under-
ground away  from  the  district  where  it  fell."  3

In  certain  districts,  moreover,  actual  subterranean  rivers  exist.
Thus  in  the  limestone  district  of  the  West  of  Ireland,  Professor
Hull  remarks  : — "  The  limestone  itself  is  often  penetrated  by  under-
ground rivers,  which  create  hollows  arched  over  by  the  rocks,  but
when  these  give  way  a  chasm  is  created,  and  the  commencement  of  a
lake  may  be  the  result."  *  But  prior  to  this,  Mr.  G.  H.  Kinahan,
M.R.I.  A.,  in  his  excellent  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  Ireland,  published
in  1878,  devotes  a  section  of  his  book  to  subterranean  streams  and
rivers,  and  gives  the  various  localities  where  they  are  to  be  found  in
Ireland.  In  most  cases  Mr.  Kinahan  believes  the  origin  of  these
rivers  to  be  due  to  "  dykes  of  incoherent  fault  rock,  through  which
the  water  flows  as  through  shingle ; "  in  other  cases  they  are  passages
"  dissolved  out  along  the  joints  in  the  peculiar  limestones  of  the

1  Dr.  Hull,  F.R.S. Text  Book  of  Phiisiographij,  p.  203.
-  Report  of  British  Association  Committee  1882,  ji.  237.
3  Sir  A.  Geikie. "  Geology,"  Eneyc.  Britannica,  p.  270.
■*  Dr.  Hull. Physical  Geography  of  Ireland,  p.  234,


264


Professor  TF.  F.  Barrett.


[part


district."  Similar  phenomena  exist  in  Fermanagh  and  in  the  lime-
stone districts  of  Derbyshire  and  Yorkshire,  the  underground  river
channels  being  dissolved  out  by  water  beneath  the  surface.

The  "diviner"  has,  therefore,  some  reason  for  speaking  of  under-
ground rivers ;  but  the  place  in  which  he  locates  them  is  often  where
geologists  assert  they  do  not  exist,  and  there  is  no  geological  evidence
to  show  that  there  is  anything  in  nature  analogous  to  his  peculiar
notions  of  the  distribution  of  water  underground.  Albeit,  in  justice
to  the  dowser,  the  following  remarks  of  a  distinguished  geologist,  the  late
Professor  Ansted  may  be  quoted  (it  occurs  in  his  Geological  Gossip,
p.  17);  speaking  of  underground  water,  he  remarks: — "It  will  exist
sometimes  in  open  cavities,  and  sometimes  under  great  pressure  in
crevices  to  which  the  day  never  penetrates,  and  of  whose  position  no
one  can  guess  who  is  not  endowed  xoith  the  peculiar  second-sight  of  the
dowser." (The  italics  ai-e  mine.)

This  brief  notice  of  geological  views  on  underground  water  would
be  incomplete  without  special  reference  to  De  Ranee's  comprehensive
work  on  the  Water  Supply  oj  England  and  Wales,  published  in  1882.
It  embodies  the  author's  experience  as  one  of  the  staff  of  the  Geological
Survey  of  Great  Britain,  and  also  as  secretary  of  the  B.A.  Committee
on  underground  water.  The  mass  of  statistics  which  Mr.  De  Ranee
has  collected  are  arranged  on  a  geological  basis;  some  215  catchment
basins  are  given,  and  985  urban  sanitary  districts  are  dealt  with.^

The  neighbourhood  of  London  has  obtained  most  attention  from
the  hydro-geologist, — the  name  now  applied  to  experts  in  this  special
brancli  of  applied  science.  The  principal  works  on  this  are  Prestwich's
Water-hearing  Strata  around  Lon,don,  1851,  and  Lucas'  Horizontal
Wells  for  Supplying  London,  1874;  important  papers  on  "Water
Systems,"  by  the  latter  author,  will  be  found  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Institute  of  Civil  Engineei's,  and  also  of  the  Institute  of  Surveyors,
from  1877  to  1880.  The  ordinary  reader  will  find  in  the  second
chapter  of  Huxley's  Physiography  an  admirable  account  of  the  origin
of  springs,  with  especial  reference  to  the  London  basin.^

1  As  Mr.  De  Ranee  has  pointed  out,  the  sea  bottom  near  coasts  can  also  yield  fresh
water, — for  the  sea  bottom,  like  the  land,  consists  of  permeable  and  impermeable
strata  ;  the  former  receive  the  water  from  the  land,  which  travels  down  the  line  of
dip,  and  issues  as  fresh  water  springs  beneath  the  floor  of  the  sea, — when  intercepted
by  faults  or  penetrated  by  well-borings.  An  instance  of  the  latter  is  seen  at  Spithead
Forts,  where  a  well  sunk  beneath  the  sea  bed  supplies  sufficient  fresh  water  for  the
large  garrison  stationed  there.

-  Those  interested  in  the  subject  of  underground  water  should  consult  Daubree's
La  Eaux  Soutcrraincs,  or  any  standard  work  on  geology  or  physiography.  Much
information  will  also  be  found  in  the  series  of  reports  presented  to  the  British
Association  by  the  Committee  on  Underground  Waters  from  1875  to  1894. For  the


XXXII.]


Appendix  B.


265


In  connexion  with  the  subject  of  underground  water,  I  wish  in  con-
clusion to  draw  special  attention  to  the  remarkable  treatise  by  M.  1' Abbe
Paramelle,  called  "  L'art  de  decouvrir  les  sources.'^  This  bulky  volume
was  first  published  in  Paris  in  the  year  1827,  several  editions  have  been
issued,  the  last  appearing  in  1896.  Paramelle,  so  far  as  I  know,  was
the  first  hydro-geologist,  and  the  first,  I  believe,  to  use  that  term.  His
book  is  the  result  of  a  careful  study  of  the  geological  conditions  which
determine  the  presence  or  absence  of  water-bearing  strata,  more
especially  of  the  district  in  which  he  lived,— the  Department  of  Lot,
in  the  south-west  of  France.  So  successful  was  Paramelle  in  his
prognostications  that  he  was  appointed  the  ofiicial  "  Hydroscopist  "  to
the  Department.  Towards  the  close  of  his  book  a  series  of  documents
are  quoted  from  the  Prefecture  of  the  Department,  these  being
the  ofiicial  records  of  his  work  in  that  immediate  neighbourhood.
The  last  document,  dated  February  1st,  1843,  certifies  that  out
of  338  wells  sunk  at  places  indicated  by  Paramelle,  305  continued  to
yield  an  abundant  and  excellent  supply  of  water,  which  in  all  cases
was  found  at  the  depth  which  the  Abbe  had  predicted.  M.  le  prefet
du  Lot,  writing  to  the  prefect  of  Versailles,  remarks  : —

Aujourd'hui  I'experience  a  confirme  la  realite  du  pouvoir  de  M.  TAbb^
Paramelle  pour  decouvrir  les  sources  :  les  faits  sent  tellement  nombreux,
tellement  accumules  que  le  doute  n'est  plus  permis.  On  evalue  a  pr^s  de
six  mille  le  nombre  des  sources  decouvertes  par  ce  savant  hydroscope  dans
plus  de  trente  departements.  .  .  .  On  ne  peut  porter  a  moins  de  quatre
ou  cinq  millions  [francs]  la  valeur  des  sources  deja  mises  au  jour  d'apres  les
avis  de  M.  FAbbe  Paramelle.  ^

Though  Paramelle  professed  to  be  guided  solely  by  scientific  reasoning
in  his  discovery  of  underground  water,  yet  his  manner  in  locating  the  site
for  a  well  was  more  like  intuition  than  scientific  deduction,  and  strongly
reminds  one  of  the  ordinary  dowser.  It  is  possible  that  if  the  faculty
claimed  by  the  latter  really  exists,  Paramelle  may  unconsciously  have
possessed  it.  Be  that  as  it  may,  his  book,  from  the  eaily  date  at  which
it  appeared,  seems  to  deserve  a  wider  recognition  in  England  than  it
has  received.


non-scientific  reader  I  have  met  with  nothing  so  admirable  on  this  subject  as  a  little
book  by  Professor  Ansted,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  called  Lectures  on  the  AxipUcation  of
Geology  to  the  Arts  and  Meinufaciitres :  the  second  lecture  is  devoted  to  an  exposition
of  Springs  and  Water  Supply.  Prof.  Ansted  also  published  a  paper  on  Subterranean
Water  Storage  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Agricultural  Society  for  18GG.  A
chronological  list  of  works  referring  to  underground  water  (England  and  Wales)  is
given  by  Mr.  W.  Whitaker  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  British  Association  for  1895  and
1897  ;  in  all,  695  works  are  cited,  ranging  from  the  years  1650  to  1895.

1  Quoted  in  an  article  on  Paramelle,  published  in  the  Journal  d' Agriculture
pratique,  Avril,  1845,  p.  459.


266


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


APPENDIX  C.


How  THE  Rod  is  Held.

A  writer  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1751,  p.  507,  gives  a
description  of  the  method  he  had  found  best  for  holding  the  rod,  and
says,  "after  numerous  experiments  he  has  good  reason  to  believe  the
elfects  of  the  divining  rod  to  be  more  than  imagination,"  remarking  that
he  believes  all  persons  could  use  the  rod,  though  "  some  have  the  virtue
intermittently. "1  He  uses  either  a  forked  hazel  twig  or  two  straight
twigs  tied  together  in  the  shape  of  an  X,  and  continues  : —

' '  The  most  convenient  and  handy  method  of  holding  the  rod  is  with  the
palms  of  the  hands  turned  upwards,  and  the  two  ends  of  the  rod  coming
outwards  ;  the  palms  should  be  held  horizontally  as  nearly  as  possible,  the
part  of  the  rud  in  the  hand  ought  to  be  straight,  and  not  bent  backwards  or
forward.  The  u^jper  part  of  the  arm  should  be  kept  pretty  close  to  the
sides,  and  the  elbows  resting  on  them  ;  the  lower  part  of  the  arm  making
nearly  a  right  angle  with  the  U2:)per,  though  rather  a  little  more  acute.  The
rod  ought  to  be  so  held,  that  in  its  working  the  sides  may  move  clear  of  the
little  fingers.  The  position  of  the  rod  when  properly  held  is  much  like  the
figure  annexed  (Fig.  1.)  where  the  distance  between  the  four  downward
lines  is  the  part  that  is  sujjposed  to  be  held  in  the  hands.


Fig.  1.


The  best  manner  of  carrying  the  rod  is  with  the  end  prolaided  {sic)  in  an
angle  of  about  80  degrees  from  the  horizon,  as  by  this  method  of  carrying  it

1  The  writer  in  the  Gentleman'' s  Magazine  does  not  give  his  name  ;  the  Editor  calls
him  an  "ingenious  gentleman,  who  has  revived  with  great  success  the  use  of  the  rod."
There  can  be  Httle  doubt,  however,  from  internal  evidence,  that  the  writer  was
William  Cookworthy,  of  Plymouth,  who,  in  the  obituary  notice  published  of  him  in
1780,  is  described  "  as  an  eminent  Minister  of  the  people  called  Quakers,  and  one  of
the  greatest  chemists  this  nation  has  ever  produced."  This  latter  statement  is  of
course  merely  local  colour  ;  Cookworthy  was,  however,  a  notable,  learned,  and  high-
niinded  man  ;  to  him  is  due  the  discovery  of  the  existence  of  china-clay  in  Cornwall,  a
discovery  which  has  so  largely  enriched  that  part  of  England.


XXXII.]


Appendix  G.


267


the  repulsion  is  more  plainly  perceived  than  if  it  was  held  perpendicularly.
But  after  all  the  directions  that  can  be  given,  the  adroit  use  of  it  can  only  be
attained  by  practice  and  attention.  It  is  necessary  that  the  grasp  should  be
steady,  for  if,  when  the  rod  is  going,  there  be  the  least  succussion  or
counteraction  in  the  hands,  though  ever  so  small,  it  will  greatly  impair
and  generally  totally  prevent  its  activity,  which  is  not  to  be  done  by
the  mere  strength  of  the  grasp,  for,  provided  this  be  steady,  no  strength
can  stop  it.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  foregoing  description  of  the  way
of  holding  the  rod  closely  resembles  that  given  by  Agricola,  in  his
famous  folio,  De  Re  Metallica,  published  in  Basle  in  1546.  Agricola's
work  is  the  earliest  detailed  account  we  have  of  the  use  of  the
Virgula  divina,  and  refers,  of  course,  only  to  its  use  in  finding  mineral
lodes.  In  like  manner  the  learned  Jesuit  Dechales,  in  his  great  work
3Iundus  Mathematicus,  Lugduni,  1674,  Vol.  II.,  p.  190,  gives  a
similar  description  of  the  way  the  rod  is  held.  The  following  is  a
translation  of  the  passage,  which  is  of  great  interest,  as  it  is  the
earliest  reference  I  can  find  to  the  successful  use  of  the  rod  in  finding
underground  water  (the  italics  are  mine)  : —

They  hold  it  [a  forked  branch  of  hazel]  with  both  fists,  in  such  a  way
that  the  outer  part  of  the  fists  turns  downwards,  i.e.,  the  two  little  fingers
face  each  other.  Thus  each  branch  being  grasped  firmly  in  each  fist,  they
walk  to  and  fro.  .  .  .  When  they  come  perpendicularly  over  under-
ground water,  the  branch,  hoirever  strongly  it  is  held,  titrns  iq^side  down ;
that  is,  the  vertex  points  downwards,  so  that  the  forked  sides  are  twisted;
but  it  does  not  succeed  with  all  persons.  .  .  .  Once  on  a  certain
occasion  I  purposely  hid  some  money  in  the  earth,  which  was  found  by  a
certain  noble  person  by  the  hazel  twig  in  my  presence.  The  same  person
used  to  find  springs  so  surely  that  he  would  trace  the  whole  course  of
underground  water.

One  of  the  earliest  English  references  to  the  use  of  the  rod  for
finding  underground  water,  is  contained  in  the  article  before  quoted  from
the  Geyitleman's  Magazine  oi  1751  :  the  writer  says,  "The  hazel,  willow,
and  elm  are  all  attracted  by  springs  of  water  ;  some  persons  have  the
virtue  intermittently,  &c."

A  detailed  account  of  the  manner  of  holding  the  divining  rod  is  also
given  by  Pryce  in  his  Mineralogia  Cornubiensis,  p.  118.  The  date
of  this  folio  is  1778.  Pryce,  or  rathei*,  again,  Cookworthy,  who,  we  are
told,  wrote  this  part  of  the  work,  says  : —

"  It  is  very  difficult  to  describe  the  manner  of  holding  and  using  the  rod  :
it  ought  to  be  held  in  the  hands,  in  the  position  shown,  the  smaller
ends  lying  flat  or  parallel  to  the  horizon,  and  the  upper  part  in  an  elevation
not  perpendicular  to  it,  but  70  degrees,  as  shown  (Fig.  2).


268


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


"  Alonzo  Barba  directs  the  rod  to  be  fixed  across  the  head  of  a  walkmg
stick  in  the  form  of  a  T,  and  the  end  which  is  nearest  the  root  will  dip  or
incline  to  the  mineral  ore.i


"The  rod  should  be  firmly  and  steadily  grasped  ;  for  if,  when  it  hath
begun  to  be  attracted,  there  be  the  least  imaginable  jerk,  or  opposition  to  its
attraction,  it  will  not  move  any  more,  till  the  hands  are  opened  and  a  fresh
grasp  taken.  The  stronger  tlie  grasp  the  livelier  the  rod  moves,  i^rovided
the  grasjj  be  steady,  and  of  an  equal  strength.

"  A  little  practice  by  a  person  in  earnest  about  it  will  soon  give  him  the
necessary  adroitness  in  the  use  of  this  instrument  ;  but  it  must  be  particularly
observed  that,  as  our  animal  sjjirits  are  necessary  to  this  jjrocess,  so  a  man
ought  to  hold  the  rod  with  the  same  indifference  and  inattention  to,  or
reasoning  about  it  or  its  effects,  as  he  holds  a  fishing  rod  or  a  walking  stick  ;
for  if  tlie  mind  be  occupied  by  doubts,  reasoning,  or  any  other  operation  that
engages  the  animal  spirits,  it  will  divert  their  powers  from  being  exerted  in
this  process,  in  wliich  their  instrumentality  is  absolutely  necessary  ;  from
lience  it  is  that  the  rod  constantly  answers  in  the  hands  of  f)easants,
women,  and  children,  who  hold  it  simply  without  puzzling  their  minds  with
doubts  or  reasonings.  Whatever  may  be  tliought  of  this  observation,  it  is  a
very  just  one,  and  of  great  consequence  in  the  practice  of  the  rod.

The  remark  in  the  last  paragraph  is  interesting,  and  Cookworthy's
observation  is  confirmed  by  the  quite  independent  testimony  of
others.  Thus  the  German  writer,  Beyer,  makes  a  similar  observation  on
the  divining  rod  in  Chapter  12  of  his  folio  on  Mining,  published  in
1749. If  the  dowsing  faculty  be  some  intuitive  sub-conscious  sense

1  I  can  find  no  mention  of  this  in  Alonzo  Barba's  interestinff  old  Spanish  work
on  mining  called  Arte  de  los  Mctaks,  Madi-id,  1639.  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  the
ever  ready  and  kind  help  of  my  friend  and  colleague.  Professor  J.  P.  O'Reilly,
Foreign  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  for  examining  on  my  behalf  this  and
other  Spanish  works  to  which  I  have  had  occasion  to  refer  in  the  preparation  of  this
monograph.  There  is  a  reference  to  a  T  shaped  extemporised  rod  in  a  book  by
Gabriel  Plattes,  called  The  Discovery  of  Suhterrancarh  Treasure,  viz.,  of  All  Manner  of
Mines  and  Minerals,  London,  1638.  This  is  the  earliest  English  reference  to  the  use
of  the  divining  rod  for  finding  mineral  veins  which  I  have  been  able  to  find. — W.F.B.


Fig.  2.


XXXII.]


Appendix  C.


269


perception,  possessed  by  certain  individuals,  of  which  the  rod  is  the
outward  and  visible  sign,  we  should  expect  to  find  "  doubts  or  reasonings  "
fatal  to  the  successful  use  of  the  rod,  as  they  would  be  in  the  case  of
any  other  autoscope.

Cookworthy  then  goes  on  to  describe  how  the  motion  of  the  rod
may  be  stopped  by  various  objects  held  in  the  hand  or  put  under  the
arm.  In  other  writings  of  his,  he  tells  us  that  "  a  piece  of  the  same
matter  with  the  attracting  body,  held  in  the  hand,  or  applied  to  any
part  of  the  rod,  prevents  its  attraction.  Its  attraction  to  springs  of
water  is  prevented  by  spitting  on  the  hands  or  moistening  them  with
water."  Thus,  he  explains,  the  diviner  can  discover  whether  it  be
metal  or  water,  or  what  kind  of  metal  is  indicated. ^  This  is  another  of
the  numerous  illustrations  with  which  the  history  of  the  divining  rod
abounds,  of  the  effect  of  suggestion  on  the  motion,  or  arrest  of  motion,
of  the  rod.  For  in  1663,  exactly  the  opposite  effect  is  assigned  by  no
less  an  authority  than  Robert  Boyle,  who  in  his  Philosophical  Essays
states  that  he  has  been  informed  "  the  wand  will  bow  more  strongly  "
when  a  piece  of  the  similar  metal  to  that  underground  is  held  in  the
liand.2 See  also  the  letter  quoted  in  the  foot-note  to  p.  247.

I  have  already  referred  (p.  18)  to  the  excellent  picture  by
A.  Crowquill,  of  a  dowser  at  work,  given  in  Mr.  Phippen's  brochure  on
the  rod,  published  in  1853.  Here  also  the  arms  are  held  tightly  to
the  sides  of  the  body,  but  the  prongs  of  the  fork  pass  between  the
index  and  next  finger  of  each  hand.  ^ Miss  Cox  in  her  paper  on  the


Fig.  3.

rod,  shows  Stokes,  the  dowser,  holding  the  rod  pointing  downwards
with  the  prongs  grasped  by  the  fists. (See  Fig.  3).

1  So  also  the  writer  of  La  Verge  de  Jacob,  a  little  work  on  th°  rod,  published  at
Lyons  in  1693,  states  that  a  wet  rag  will  stop  the  rod  when  it  turns  for  underground
water,  but  not  when  it  is  turning  for  metallic  ore  ;  similar  assertions  are  made  to-day
by  Tompkins  and  other  dowsers,  see  pp.  105,  212,  etc.,  so  this  belief  is  wide-spread
and  long  lived  !

-Vol.  I.,  p.  172,  in  the  complete  edition  of  Boyle's  Philosophical  Works:  the
whole  passage  will  be  given  in  the  historical  part  of  my  paper.

3  I  had  intended  quoting  the  careful  description  Mr.  Phippen  gives  of  the  way
the  rod  is  held,  but  it  is  hardly  necessary,  as  it  closely  resembles  that  already  given.


270


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


The  late  J.  MuUins,  however,  whose  success  as  a  dowser  was  the
most  remarkable  in  modern  times,  always  held  the  rod  as  shown  in

rig.  4.


Fig.  4.

This  is  much  the  same  way  as  Tompkins  is  shown  holding  the  rod
on  pp.  147  and  1-59  ;  this  might  indeed  be  expected,  from  the  nai'rative
given  on  p.  14.5.  On  the  other  hand,  W.  Stone,  who  is  also  a
successful  dowser,  is  seen  on  p.  134  to  be  holding  the  rod  in  quite
another  manner.  Again,  in  the  American  Journal  of  Science
(Silliman's  Journal)  for  1826,  p.  201,  in  the  course  of  a  lengthy  article
on  the  rod,  a  picture  is  given  showing  how  the  rod  must  be  held,  and
here  the  prongs  of  the  fork  pass  between  the  thumb  and  foretinger  of
each  hand.  Messrs.  Young  and  Robertson,  in  their  little  book  on
the  divining  rod,  mentioned  on  p.  18,  give  illustrations  showing  their
way  of  holding  the  rod  :  they  have  sent  me  a  little  waistcoat-pocket
forked  rod  made  of  aluminium,  which  they  recommend  to  be  held  in  the
way  shown  in  Fig.  -5. They  also  use  a  straight  rod  or  wand  some  three  or


9


Fig.  5.


four  feet  long,  which  they  hold  inclined  in  the  right  hand,  the  thinner
end  being  held  in  the  hand  and  "  the  eye  resting  on  the  top  of  the
thick  end."  This,  they  assert,  dips  down  over  an  underground  spring.
This  "dipping  rod  "  is  a  return  to  an  old  form  of  divining  rod,  a  picture
of  which  is  given  in  an  Italian  work  on  the  rod,  published  in  1678,  and


XXXII.]


Appendix  C.


271


will  be  reproduced  in  the  subsequent  historical  part  of  this  paper.
The  Abbe  de  Vallemont  gives  pictures  of  straight  rods  in  his  La
Physique  Occulte,  published  in  1693;  and  Bleton,  as  already  mentioned
(p.  21),  in  the  last  century  used  a  nearly  straight  rod  placed  horizontally
on  the  index  fingers  of  the  two  hands.  This  slightly-curved  rod
revolved  from  30  to  80  times  a  minute  when  Bleton  came  over  undei--
ground  water.  Here  (Fig.  6.)  are  some  other  ways  of  holding  the  rod
in  use  in  the  17th  century.^


Fig.  6.


It  will  thus  be  evident  that  the  manner  of  holding  the  rod  varies
with  the  individual  dowser,  and  obviously  cannot  be  of  much
consequence.  Some  positions  in  which  the  rod  is  held  doubtless
render  it  a  more  sensitive  indicator  to  the  muscular  tremor  which
determines  its  motion.  It  may  be  held  in  a  position  of  tension  or
poised  equilibrium  (as  mentioned  on  p.  11),  and  it  then  becomes  a  very
sensitive  autoscope  ;  in  this  position  it  is  desirable  some  experiments  on
thought-transference  should  be  made  with  the  holder  of  the  rod.


1 1  am  indebted  to  the  editor  of  Pearson's  Magazine  for  this  woodcut.  Though  not
stated  the  picture  is  a  copy  of  one  of  the  plates  in  Lebrun's  LUtres  .  .  sur  la  baguette,
1693. Aymar  sometimes  used  a  straight  rod  held  in  one  hand.


272


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


APPENDIX  D.


The  Sensations  Alleged  to  Occur  in  Dowsing.

The  assertion  is  made  by  numerous  dowsers  that  when  they  are
over  underground  water  they  experience  a  peculiar  sensation, — which
some  describe  as  felt  in  the  limbs,  like  the  tingling  produced  by  a  mild
electric  shock,  others  as  a  shivering  or  trembling,  and  others  as  an
unpleasant  sensation  in  the  epigastric  region,  etc.  It  is  unnecessary  to
quote  the  various  statements  made  by  different  dowsers,  quite
independently  of  each  other  ;  they  will  be  found  on  pages  22,  48,  69,  95,
124,  161,  161,  177,  196,  200,  206.  But  these  sensations  seem  to  be
only  experienced  when  they  are  dowsing  ;  when  off  duty,  underground
water  seems  to  have  no  effect.  This  fact,  coupled  with  the  apparent
absence  of  any  feeling  produced  by  the  much  greater  masses  of  visible
water  in  lakes,  rivers,  or  the  sea,  indicate  the  purely  psychological
origin  of  the  asserted  sensations.  The  interesting  point  is,  however,
that  this  psycho-physiological  disturbance  in  the  use  of  the  divining  rod
can  be  traced  back  at  least  two  centuries,  and  exists  among  diviners
in  different  countries. ^

Among  the  most  remarkable  symptoms  were  those  exhibited  by  the
French  dowser,  Bleton,  in  the  last  century.  A  careful  medical  examina-
tion of  Bleton  was  made  by  Dr.  Thouvenel,  who  was  a  distinguished
French  physician,  and  in  his  Memoire  Physique  et  Medicinal,  Paris,
1781,  page  53,  he  describes  these  symptoms  as  follows:—

La  premiere  impression  que  fait  dprouver  au  corps  de  Bleton  la  presence
de  I'eau  souterraine,  se  porte  sur  le  diapliragme,  en  s'^tendant  vers  ses
appendices  superieurs  ou  ses  attaches  avec  le  sternum,  et  produisant  un
seiTement  avec  de  Toppression,  dont  le  siege  paroit  boru4  a  la  partie
anterieure  et  superieure  de  la  poitrine.  Un  saisissement,  un  tremblement
et  un  refroidissement  general  s'emparent  en  meme-tems  de  lui.  Ses  jambes
chancellent.  Les  tendons  des  poignetsse  roidissent  et  entrent  en  convulsion.
Le  pouls  se  concentre  et  diminue  peu-a-peu.  En  un  mot,  cet  etat  repr^sente
et  caracterise  1'  invasion  d'  une  veritable  attaque  de  spasme  convulsif.  II
Rubsiste,  avec  des  nuances  cependant  et  des  variations  du  plus  au  moins,
tant  que  cet  homme  reste  sur  la  source,  et  disparoit  presque  subitement

1  That  nervous  excitement  is  partly  at  the  root  of  these  sensations  seems  to  be
indicated  by  the  case  of  Jacques  Aymar.  In  a  copy  of  the  Journal  des  S(;avans
(Savants)  for  January  l(i9.3,  for  the  possession  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  zeal  of
Mr.  Rolland's  excellent  book  agency  in  Paris,  it  is  stated  by  a  contemporary  witness,
Dr.  Chauvin,  that  when  Aymar,  who  had  gained  repute  as  a  spring  finder,  was  taken
with  his  haguettc  into  the  cellar  where  the  Lyons  murder  had  been  committed,  Aymar
"n'y  fut  pas  plutot  entre  qu'il  se  sentit  tout  emu,  et  que  son  poux  s'eleva  comme  une
grosse  fifevre."


XXXII.]


Ap2:>enclix  D.


273


lorsqu"  il  se  place  a  cote,  si  ce  n'est,  a  ce  qu'il  difc,  un  sentiment  interieur  de
froid  et  de  serrement  legers,  au  devant  de  la  poitrine.  Ce  sentiment  ne  cesse
totalement  qu'a  une  cerfcaine  distance  de  I'eau  ;  et  cette  distance  exprime
selon  luila  profondeur  de  cette  derniere,  coramenousle  verrons  ci-apres."

Dr.  Thouvenel  states  Bleton  did  not  feel  any  eifect  from  stagnant
water  ;  a  headache  and  lassitude  were,  however,  produced  by  a  river,
when  in  a  boat,  "  mais  point  du  tout  ce  qu'il  appelle  sa  commotion
dans  la  poitrine,  ni  le  contre-coup  de  cette  commotion  dans  les
extremites."

It  is  said  that  when  Bleton  was  a  child,  the  discovery  of  his  "  gift "
was  accidentally  made  from  perceiving  that  a  feverish  attack  seized  him
whenever  he  happened  to  be  at  a  certain  sjDOt  where  a  subterranean
spring  was  subsequently  discovered.  In  one  of  the  numerous  pieces
justificatives  and  proces-verbaux  attached  to  Thouvenel's  book,  the
following  evidence  is  cited.  The  writer  of  the  certificate,  after  stating
that  numerous  persons  in  Burgundy  can  testify  that  Bleton  is  neither
an  impostor  nor  a  charlatan,  goes  on  to  say  : —

C'est  un  pauvre  paysan  qui  a  ^te  6levi  par  charite  dans  une  des  Chartreuses
de  Dauphine,  et  voici  comment  ce  talent,  si  e'en  est  un,  lui  a  ^te  connu.

A  I'age  de  sept  ans,  portant  le  diner  a  des  ouvriers,  il  s'assit  sur  une
pierre,  oil  la  fievre  le  prit :  les  ouvriers  I'ayant  fait  mettre  a  cote  d'eux,  la
fievre  cessa  ;  il  retourne  a  plusieurs  reprises  sur  la  pierre,  toujours  la  fievre.
On  raconta  cette  histoire  au  Prieur  de  la  dite  Chartreuse,  qui  voulut  par  lui-
meme  en  voir  I'experience.  Convaincu  par  le  fait,  il  fit  creuser  sous  la
pierre  ;  il  s'y  trouva  une  source  qui,  a  ce  que  Ton  m'a  assure,  fait  rnoudre
aujourd'hui  un  moulin.^

Several  witnesses  of  high  standing  are  cited  by  Dr.  Thouvenel,  who
testify  to  the  pathological  effect  which  underground  water  had  upon
Bleton ;  the  curious  point  being  that  Bleton's  prognostications  were  so
rarely  wrong,  water  being  found,  according  to  the  evidence,  even  in  the
most  unpromising  places  when  Bleton  was  affected  in  this  manner.

M.  le  President  d'  0  , who  made  numerous  experiments  with

Bleton,  relates  that,  a  generation  before  Bleton,  in  1735,  another
sourcier,  or  water  finder,  had  said  when  there  was  a  difficulty  in  finding
him  a  proper  I'od  or  baguette  : —

N'importe,  Monsieur,  ce  n'est  pas  la  baguette  qui  me  dirige,  c'est  un
sentiment  que  j'eprouve  au  dedans  de  moi-meme.

On  p.  263,  Dr.  Thouvenel  gives  an  account  of  a  visit  paid  by  M.

C  to  a  Prior  at  Autun  who  possessed  the  "  gift  "  of  water-finding,

which  he  had  gratuitously  exercised  for  the  benefit  of  his  commune.


1  Memoire  physique  et  medicinal,  etc.  (Paris,  1781),  p.  251 .

T


274


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  Prior  states  that  he  detected  an  underground  spring  by  a  peculiar
malaise  it  produced  upon  him,  which  was  more  marked  in  following
the  spring  upwards  than  downwards.  He  stated  a  shivering  was
pi'oduced  in  his  shoulders  and  muscles  of  the  arm  and  leg,  and  if  he
continued  following  an  underground  spring,  extreme  and  abnormal
fatigue  was  produced  ;  the  sensation  was  stronger  after  fasting  tlian
after  meals.

Dr.  Thouvenel  also  refers  to  Parangue,  a  young  girl,  born  in  1760,
who  from  her  infancy  appeared  to  have  the  faculty  of  detecting
underground  water  by  the  terror  she  displayed  when  over  an  under-
ground spring.  A.ccording  to  the  Abbe  Sauri,  Parangue  apparently
saiv  the  water  below,  "the  earth  becoming  transparent  to  her  vision."
A  similar  case  is  related  by  Dr.  Asliburner  of  a  girl  who,  when
hypnotised,  declared  she  "  saw  "  a  spring  at  a  certain  depth  below  a
certain  spot ;  upon  digging,  a  spring  was  found  at  the  spot  and  at  the
very  dej^th  stated.^  But  these  cases  of  clairvoyance  obviously  need
confirmation  and  critical  examination  ;  the  same  may  be  said  of  the
following.  In  an  article  on  Modern  Magic  by  M.  Shele  de  Vere,
published  in  1873,  it  is  stated  that  Catherine  Beutler,  of  Thurgovia
in  Switzerland,  and  Anna  Maria  Briegger,  of  the  same  place,  were  both
so  seriously  affected  l^y  the  presence  of  water  that  they  fell  into  violent
nervous  excitement  and  became  quite  exhausted  when  they  happened
to  cross  places  where  water  was  concealed  underground.

We  have  also  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Mayo,  F.R.S.,  who  states  in  his
essay  on  the  divining  rod  -  that  when  in  Russia  he  met  with  a  youth
who  had  not  handled  a  divining  rod  before.  Instructing  him  how  to
hold  the  rod  and  to  walk  over  some  ground  where  Dr.  Mayo  believed

1  The  incident  as  related  by  Dr.  Ashburner  is  as  follows  :  A  respectable  girl,  a
lady's  maid,  was  found  to  pass  into  a  mesmeric  sleep  on  holding  for  a  few  seconds  a
hazel  twig  ;  wlien  asleep  the  twig  was  so  tightly  held  that  in  spite  of  using  much
force,  a  bystander  could  hardly  turn  it.  Her  mistress  wrote  in  July,  184.5,  "We
made  a  curious  experiment  with  Harriet.  We  have  very  bad  water  here  and  have
long  been  una/ble  to  find  a  good  spring.  Mr.  G.  has  dug  and  dug  in  vain.  I  proposed
the  divining  rod  ;  Harriet  was  willing,  so  we  went  to  a  field  .  .  .  put  Harriet
to  sleep,  v/ith  the  hazel  stick.  She  grasped  it  so  tightly  we  were  obliged  to  use  the
gold  chain.  She  then  held  it  only  in  one  hand  and  began  to  walk  very  carefully  for
about  20  yards,  then  suddenly  stopped  ;  not  a  word  was  uttered,  we  all  looked  on,  and
were  not  a  little  surprised  to  see  the  rod  slowly  turn  round  until  her  hand  was  almost
twisted  backwards.  Suddenly  she  exclaimed  '  There,  there,  don't  you  see  the  stick
turn?  The  water  is  here,  under  my  hand.  I  see  it,  I  see  it.'  'How  deep  is  the
water?'  said  Mrs.  G.  'Oh,  about  ,3  feet.'  We  marked  the  place,  and  after  a  few
moments  a,woke  her.  Mr.  G.  caused  a  large  hole  to  be  dug  and  just  at  the  dejath  of
3  feet  the  water  was  found.  A  brick  well  has  been  construoted  and  we  have  now
a  good  supply  of  excellent  water.  When  awake  Harriet  knew  nothing  of  the
circumstance." — Note  added  by  Dr.  Ashburner  to  his  translation  of  Reichenhach's
Researches  (London,  1851),  pages  100-103.

-  Truths  contained  in  Popular  Superstitions,  (London,  185G)  \).  18.


XXXII.]


Appendix  D.


275


underground  water  to  exist,  the  forked  twig  instantly  began  to  ascend.
Dr.  Mayo  goes  on  to  say  that  tlie  lad

Laughed  with  astonishment  at  the  event,  which  was  totally  unexpected
by  him,  and  he  said  that  he  experienced  a  tickling  or  thrilling  sensation  in

his  hands  The  experiment  was  repeated  by  him  in  my  presence

with  like  success  several  times  during  the  ensuing  month.  Then  the  lad  fell
into  ill  health  and  I  rarely  saw  him.  However,  one  day  I  begged  him  to  make
another  trial  with  the  divining  fork.  He  did  so,  but  the  instrument  moved
sluggishly  and  when  it  moved  ....  the  lad  said  he  felt  an  uneasy
sensation,  which  quickly  increased  to  pain  at  the  \nt  of  the  stomach,  and  he
became  alarmed.

This,  doubtless,  was  a  purely  nervous  elTect,  but  the  coincidence  is
curious,  as  Dr.  Mayo  seems  to  have  been  wholly  ignorant  of
Thouvenel's  experiments  with  Bleton,  and  of  course  the  Russian  lad
knew  nothing  about  them.

On  the  other  hand,  the  profound  effect  of  suqgestion  in  producing
or  arresting  pathological  disturbance  comes  out  very  clearly  in
Thouvenel's  experiments.  Believing  that  the  motion  of  the  divining
rod  was  due  to  some  unknown  electric  agency,  Thouvenel  experimented
upon  Bleton  with  what  he  calls  "electric  compositions,"  and  also
"compositions  magnetiques  recemment  electrifees."  When  Bleton  was
over  underground  water,  if  he  were  touched  with  one  of  these  com-
positions, the  usual  symptoms  and  the  rotation  of  the  rod  were  instantly
diminished  by  three-fourths,  and  (p.  91) —

Des  I'instant  meme  que  le  retirois  mes  preparations,  les  phenomenes  de
I'eau  sur  Bleton  reparoissoient  dans  toute  leur  force.

Now  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  any  physical  eflfect  could  have  been
produced  upon  Bleton  by  these  compositions,  which  were  probably  bits
of  sulphur  or  of  iron  that  had  been  sparked  upon  by  an  electric  machine  ;
the  result  was  undoubtedly  an  effect  of  sub-conscious  and  possibly
telepathic  suggestion.  The  latter  (telepathy)  seems  indicated  also  in  the
subsequent  experiments  with  Bleton  to  test  the  effect  of  insulation,  for
Thouvenel  appears  to  have  taken  the  precaution  not  to  let  Bleton  know
the  fact  nor  the  object  of  the  experiment.

Coming  to  the  present  day,  an  old  amateur  dowser,  Mr.  Robert
Young,  of  Sturminster  Newton,  Dorset,  writes  to  say  that  whenever
he  comes  over  an  underground  spi'ing,  so  violent  a  trembling  seizes
him  that  he  has  to  be  supported  or  he  would  fall.  Mr.  Young,  I
am  assured,  is  entirely  ignorant  of  the  literature  of  this  subject,  so
that  he  has  not  been  affected  by  what  others  have  said.  His  daughter
writes : — •

One  day  I  asked  father  to  point  out  to  me  the  spring  in  Gough's  close  ;
he  walked  to  and  fro,  and  when  he  came  to  a  certain  spot  he  reeled  and

T  2


276


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


staggered  and  said  the  spring  was  below.  To  test  the  reality  of  his  indica-
tions, I  privately  marked  the  spot  where  he  said  the  spring  was.  I  then
took  him  to  the  far  end  of  the  field  and  blindfolded  him  carefully,  then  led
him  about  the  field  by  a  circuitous  route.  Directly  he  came  on  the  spot  I
had  marked,  he  reeled  as  before  and  would  have  fallen  if  I  had  not  held  him
up. Directly  he  came  off'  the  place  he  was  all  right.

As  perhaps  might  be  expected,  the  son  of  Mr.  R.  Young,  Mr.  J.  F.
Young  of  Llanelly,  (also  an  amateur  dowser)  feels  somewhat  similar
sensations  when  he  is  dowsing.  I  have  already  referred  to  Mr.  Young
in  the  foot-note  to  p.  19  ;  though  a  hard-working  tradesman  with  little
time  at  his  disposal,  Mr.  Young  has  devoted  his  leisure  to  an
investigation  of  the  rod,  and  I  may  add,  the  extensive  correspondence
Mr.  Young  has  had  with  me  has  impressed  me  with  his  sincere  love
of  truth. Mr.  Young  writes  : —

I  have  noticed,  when  divining,  unpleasant  and  peculiar  symptoms  always
occur  when  I  am  over  an  underground  spring  ;  often  a  convulsive  feeling
and  staggering  comes  on.  My  father,  though  never  otherwise  sick,  staggers
and  vomits  when  over  a  spring.  These  unpleasant  symptoms  only  occur
when  we  are  "set"  on  divining."

Writing  to  me  again  on  November  29th,  1896,  Mr.  J.  F.  Young
says  : — -

The  sensation  I  experience  when  I  get  over  a  sirring  in  divining  is  very
like  that  experienced  at  the  epigastrium  when  on  the  dowuAvard  stroke  of  a
swing,  together  with  a  i^eculiar  tingling  of  the  fingers.  There  is  no  mistaking
this  and  I  have  also  seen  tlie  fingers  of  Mr.  Robertson  [a  friend  of  Mr.
Young's,  also  an  amateur  dowser]  severely  contracted  when  he  gets  over  a
Spring.

Mr.  Thomas  Heighway,  the  Welsh  dowser  referred  to  on  jj.  206,
also  sends  me  an  account  of  the  very  similar  sensations  he  experiences,
and  so  with  other  dowsers  quite  independently  of  each  other.

These  symptoms  may  only  be  the  result  of  nervous  excitement,
but  as  Bleton  a  century  ago  trusted  to  his  "sensations"  in  finding-
water  and  as  some  dowsers  still  do  so  to-day,  it  would  seem  as  if  they
had  some  psychical  root  deeper  than  mere  imagination.  In  connection
with  this  I  will  quote  the  following  interesting  letter,  which  has
recently  appeared  in  the  columns  of  Trvtlt,  (July  22nd,  1897)  ;  the
writer  is  personally  known  to  me,  he  is  an  F.R.S.,  and  a  dis-
tinguished London  physician  : —

Although  the  great  majority  of  jieople  disbelieve  in  the  power  of  a  man
to  detect  the  presence  of  water  even  a  fev/  feet  under  the  ground
upon  which  he  is  standing,  they  readily  credit  tlie  story  of  a  camel  scenting
water  half  a  mile  oft'  in  the  middle  of  a  desert.  I  believe  that  the  almost
incredible  acuteness  of  sight,  scent,  and  hearing,  which  are  found  universally


XXXII.]


Appendix  D.


277


in  certain  classes  of  the  lower  animals  and  are  not  uncommon  in  savage
races,  are  occasiancdhj  possessed  hy  certain  individuals  amongst  civilised
races.  For  instance  :  the  presence  of  water-vapour  in  the  air  over  certain
spots  makes  itself  evident  to  every  one  as  a  visible  fog  in  early  morning.
Now  Jo«i  acquainted  loith  a  rheumatic  patient  loho,  on  passing  over  snclo  a  spot
duri'iuj  the  day,  v:hen  no  vapour  is  visible,  feels  pains  in  her  joints.  Of  course,
such  a  condition  of  hyperesthesia  is  very  rare  indeed.  I  think,  however,
that  the  diviner  detects  water  by  some  sensation  which  afl'ects  either  his
nostrils,  or  his  body  generally,  vrhen  he  is  standing  in  a  place  where  there
is  water  below  the  surface.  The  only  use  of  the  divining  rod  is  to  magnify
involuntary  muscular  motions,  and  thus  convert  what  might  otherwise  be  a
vague  sensation  into  a  definite  and  perceptible  action.  But  the  moving  of
the  rod  in  a  diviner's  fingers  dejjends  simply  upon  the  bodily  condition  of  the
diviner  himself,  just  as  the  rigidity  of  a  pointer's  tail  when  scenting  game
depends  entirely  upon  the  excitement  of  the  dog.

The  part  I  have  italicized  is  interesting  in  connexion  with  what
is  stated  on  p.  249.

The  comparison  of  a  dowser  to  a  pointer,  though  inadequate  in  my
opinion,  is  quite  as  far  as  the  present  state  of  scientific  knowledge  will
be  disposed  to  admit.  From  this  point  of  view  it  is  a  very  just
analogy  ;  the  wondei'ful  scent  of  the  dog,  in  its  sensitiveness  far
beyond  any  instrumental  means  of  detection  which  science  could
employ,  corresponding  to  the  dowser's  "scent"  for  underground
water ;  the  nervous  excitement  of  the  dog,  corresponding  to  the
dowser's  psycho-physiological  disturbance  ;  and  the  index  afforded  by
the  rigid  tail  of  the  dog  when  pointing,  being  the  analogue  of  the
involuntary  motion  given  to  the  indicating  rod  of  the  dowser.^


1  Dr.  Carl  du  Pre],  in  a  brief  essay  on  Die  Wiinschclruthc,  believes  the  explanation
of  the  rod  will  be  found  "in  the  domain  both^of  transcendental  physics  and  trans-
cendental psyctiology,  the  rod  being:  the  historic  fore-runner  of  tlie  modern  practice
of  'questioning  the  oracle  '  by  automatic  writing."  But  this  was  an  ancient  use  of
the  rod,  as  will  be  seen  in  Zeidler's  PaiUoniysteriiim  (Magdeburg,  1700),  where  the
prescience  displayed  by  tlie  rod  is  attributed  to  the  spirit  of  nature,  the  anirtia  vmndi,
"the  Soul  needing  the  rod  as  an  instrument."  Of  the  theories  of  the  rod  held  in
successive  centuries  by  the  learned  world,  Zeidler's  was  one  not  discordant  with
certain  views  of  psychical  phenomena  set  forth  in  our  Proceedings.


278


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


APPENDIX  E.


Note  on  the  Horsham  Experiments,  •

Since  this  pcaper  was  printed,  Mr.  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  who  has
devoted  attention  to  hydro-geology,  has  visited  Sir  Henry  Harben's
estate,  Warnham  Lodge,  and  sent  me  some  geological  notes  on  the
Horsham  Experiments,  detailed  on  pages  117-121.  These  notes  are
interesting  in  connection  with  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes'  remarks  on  pages
227-9,  and  also  as  correcting  some  slight  inaccuracies  in  the  state-
ment originally  given  to  me.  Mr.  Westlake  went  over  the  ground  with
Mr.  Ogilvie,  the  bailiff,  and  with  Mr.  Edwards,  the  head  gardener,
(called  the  overseer  by  me  on  p.  120),  who  superintended  the  work  of
the  well-sinking.  It  seems  the  I'ock  mentioned  on  p.  119  was  not  a
limestone,  as  Sir  Henry  Harben  thought,  but  a  '"white,  fine-grained,
close-jointed,  compact  sandstone,"  nor  was  it  so  hard  as  to  require
blasting :  a  sand  pit  some  300  feet  to  the  west  of  the  well  G  shows  the
same  stratum.  Some  3  to  4  feet  of  soil  and  sand  or  sandy  loam
covered  the  stone,  which  rests  on  an  impervious  "blue  marl"  (the
Weald  clay),  the  latter  being  found  some  14  feet  below  the  surface
in  the  case  of  well  D,  which  j^enetrated  5  feet  into  this  marl.  Most
of  the  water  comes  from  little  veins  in  the  sandstone  and  runs  into
the  wells  from  the  direction  of  the  pond  (see  map,  p.  118)  "as  Mullins
had  said  it  would."  Mr.  Westlake  says,  "  The  main  source  of  the
water  thus  appears  to  lie  to  the  east  of  the  wells,  though  what  should
confine  its  flow  to  certain  lines  in  a  tolerably  pervious  bed  is  not
easy  to  understand,  nor  yet  the  large  flow  from  what  seems  a  small
collecting  ground.  It  is  possible  the  direction  of  the  flow  may  be
detei'mined  l)y  the  patchy  chai-acter  of  the  bed,  which  is  soft  in  certain
places,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  sand  pit,  and  was  said  to  be  also  in  the
wells.  The  depth  of  the  water  in  the  wells  varies  from  4  feet  in
summer  to  9  or  10  feet  in  winter.  The  water  is  soft  and  good  in  all
respects ;  the  analyst  who  examined  it  said  he  had  never  seen  a
better."

An  additional  fact  was  ascertained  by  Mr.  Westlake,  which  is  of
considerable  importance  in  connection  with  Mr.  Holmes'  remarks.  In
oi'der  to  run  the  water  from  the  wells  to  the  pumping  house,  which  is
on  lower  ground,  (near  well  A,  see  p.  118),  a  trench  was  sunk  to  within
a  foot  of  the  bottom  of  the  wells  E  and  F,  and  carried  85  yards  to  the
north  of  well  E ;  24  yards  from  E  an  offset,  8  yards  long,  connects  the


XXXII.]


Appendix  E.


279


2  inch  water  pipe,  which  was  laid  in  the  trench,  to  the  well  D.  Mr.
Westlake  says  :  "  These  trenches,  Edwards  assured  me,  were  all  dry
to  the  bottom  and  no  springs  were  intersected,  except  the  one  sup-
plying D;  at  that  time,  October,  1893,  the  water  in  the  wells  E  and
F  stood  more  than  6  feet  deep,  but  it  was  kept  down  by  pumping
when  the  trench  was  being  brought  near  to  the  wells.  It  was  not
a  'tunnel,'  but  a  trench,  subsequently  arched  over,  4  feet  wide,  that
connected  the  bottom  of  the  wells  E  and  F,  and  here  also  no  spring  was
met  with  in  the  stone  between  the  two  wells,  as  is  stated  on  p.  120."

I  regret  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the  length  of  time  that  elapsed
before  the  trenches  were  covered  in,  but  whether  a  few  hours  or  days,
it  is  obvious  the  water-bearing  character  of  the  surrounding  sandstone
was  very  different  in  different  places,  through  jointing  or  otherwise.
Even  allowing  for  possible  looseness  of  observation  on  the  part  of
Edwards,  the  broad  facts  remain  that  a  copious  supply  was  found  in
certain  spots  indicated  by  the  dowser  and  not  in  others  closely
adjacent.  Sir  Henry  Harben  confirms  the  fact  that,  prior  to  connecting
the  wells  E  and  F,  one  of  these  wells  was  pumped  "  continuously  while
the  work  was  proceeding,"  during  which  the  level  of  the  water  in  the
other  well  did  not  sink  perceptibly.

Sir  Henry  Harben  also  informed  Mr.  Westlake  that  the  engineer
whom  he  consulted,  and  whose  advice  failed^  was  a  leading  water-
engineer  of  large  experience.  He  walked  over  the  whole  ground  and
his  attention  was  specially  directed  to  the  pond  and  to  the  fact  that
water  was  sometimes  seen  on  the  higher  ground ;  but  he  decided  to
reject  that  locality,  and  the  high  ground  generally,  and  fixed  on  the
site  where  the  well  B  was  sunk,  with  adits,  at  a  useless  expenditure
of  £1,000.  Mullins  was  told  exactly  what  the  engineer  was  told,
though  he  did  not  see  the  pond;  on  trying  with  the  "rod,"  he
utterly  scouted  the  place  the  engineer  had  fixed  on,  and  decided  on
the  higher  ground.

It  seems  that  Mullins  (who  is  now  dead)  came  twice  ;  at  first  he
"  located  "  the  wells  D  and  E,  and  on  the  second  visit  the  wells  F  and
G ;  it  was  then  he  stated  no  water  would  be  found  between  E  and  F.
Having  contracted  for  the  well-sinking,  his  son,  Joseph  Mullins,  carried
out  the  work  and  also,  it  is  said,  independently  found  by  the  "rod"  the
spring  at  F.

The  bed  of  stone  in  which  the  wells  are  sunk  is  about  100  feet
above  the  outcrop  of  the  Horsham  Stone  at  Warnham  (Geological
Survey,  sheet  8),  and  is  the  "  No.  2,  Sand  and  Sandstone  "  of  Messrs.
Topley  and  Drew — viz.,  the  second  of  seven  subordinate  permeable  beds
that  occur  in  the  Weald  Clay,  of  which  the  Horsham  Stone  is  the  first
and  lowest. (See  Topley's  Geolo<jij  of  the  Weald,  1875,  pp.  102,  101.)


280


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Westlake  suggests  that  one  of  the  best  tests  of  the  claims
of  the  dowser  would  be  a  series  of  experiments  in  connection  with
suitable  engineering  works,  such,  for  example  as  a  projected  deep,
cutting  for  a  new  railway.  The  dowser  should  be  taken  over  the
ground  before  the  cutting  was  begun,  and  his  report  as  to  the  existence,
the  exact  location,  and  the  probable  depth  of  any  underground  water
that  might  be  met  with  should  be  carefully  noted.  The  cutting  should
then  be  watched  and  reported  on  during  construction  in  respect  of  any
springs,  or  lines  of  flow  that  might  be  encountered.  The  expense  of
such  a  test  would  not  be  great,  and  I  think  it  is  most  desirable  it
should  be  made  ;  two  dowsers  should,  however,  be  employed,  indepen-
dently of  each  other,  to  examine  and  report  beforehand.


My  best  thanks  are  due  to  the  Editor,  and  to  Miss  A.  Johnson,  of
Cambridge,  for  tlie  careful  reading  of  the  proof-sheets  of  this  paper,
and  for  many  valuable  suggestions.


Book  II.,  on  the  use  of  the  divining  rod  in  the  search  for  Mineral
Veins  and  for  other  purposes,  together  with  the  Historical  Survey  and
a  Bibliography  compiled  by  Mr.  E.  Westlake,  E.G.S.,  will  not  be
published  till  next  year.


END  OF  BOOK  I.


X.XXII.]


Tahle  of  Contents.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.
BOOK  I.


PART  L'

PAGE

Introductory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  2

The  Rod  an  Indicator  of  Sub-conscious  Tmpressiona .. ... ...  7

Nomenclature  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  9

Autoscopes . . ... ... ... . . ... ... ... ...  10


PART  II.

Brief  Historical  Statement  ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  12

Modern  Literature  on  the  Divining  Ro:l ... ... 13


PART  III.

The  Rod  as  Used  in  the  Search  for  Underground  Water ... ...  24

Gkoup  I. Amateur  Dowsers — Nos.  -1-20  ... ... ... ...  25

,, II. Miscellaneous  Cases — Nos.  21-41 ... ... ...  43

PROFESSIONAL  DOWSERS.

Group  III. (a)  W.  S.  Lawrence — Nos.  42-50 6U

,, ,, (/3)  W.  Mereweather— No.  51 72

IV. (a)  J.  Mullins— Nos.  52-75 75

O)  H.  W.  Mullins— Nos.  76-Si 98

V. V/.  Stone— Nos.  85-98 124

,, VI. B.  Tompkins— Nos.  99-111 145

„ VIL J.  Stears— Nos.  112-119 164

,,  VIII. L.  Gataker— Nos.  123-129 177

IX. (a)  H.  Bacon— No^;.  13),  131 196

,, ,, (6)  H.  Chesterman 200

(c)  F.  Rodwell— No.  132 201

X. ((  (  )  Thos.  Heigh  way— No.  133 206

(6)  R.  Rothwell— Nos.  134,  135 209

,, (c)  R.  W.  Robertson— Nos.  136,  137 214

Cyrus  Fuller— Nos.  138-140 215

U


282


Table  of  Contents.


DETAILED  REPOKTS.

PAGE

The  Waterford.  Experiuients — J.  Mullins  {see  also  pp.  77,  78)

106

The  Horsham  Experiments — ./.  Mullins  (see  also  p.  85)

117

The  Kingstown  Experiments— J".  .S'fears  ...

174

Tlie  Richmond  Experiments — li.  W.  Mullins  and  L.  Gntaher...

188

The  Wimbledon  Experiments — F.  Rodvjell

203

iiauures  :  JNos.  x AJ. ... Uo,  121,  14d,  loi?,  172,  187,

200,

213

P  A TV ■  ■  ■

{  tF^'IT  C\il~\i'^  AT i  iPTlMTOX'v

Professor  Sollas,  F.R.S.

220

Mr.  T.  N_  Holmes,  F.C^i.S

221

Mr.  J.  H.  Blake,  F.G.S

230

Mr.  C.  E.  De  Ranee,  F.(;.S

233

Success  of  DuAvscr  lies  in  Fiiiclmt^  Sites  foi'  t>ludiow  \Vells

235

PART  V.

BniEf  Survey  of  the  Evidekce  ...

237

Caution  as  to  So-called  "  Dowsers  "  ;  Involuntary  Motion  of

the

Rod  no  Proof  of  a  "  Dowsing  Faculty  "

238

Evidence  Afforded  by  Frequent  Actual  Success  of  Expert  Dowsers,

and  Extensive  Employment  of  them  by  Practical  Men

240

PART  VI.

Theouetical  Conclusions 243

(i)  (ii)  Motion  and  Breaking  of  the  Forked  Twig 243,  244

(iii)  (iv)  MnJftiix' of  Dowser  ;  percentage  of  Dowsers ...  244-246

(v)  Preconceived  Ideas  ;  Electricity  ... ... ..  246

(vi)  Signs  of  Underground  "Water  ;  Practical  Knowledge  of  Dowser  248

(vii)  Probable  Dowsing  Faculty  or  Instinct ;  Tests  applied  ...  251
^Vorking  Hypotheses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... •••  254


APPENDICES.

.V.  The  Words  "  Dowse  "  and  "  Dowser  " 256

B.  Geological  Views  of  the  Distribution  of  Underground  Water ...  262

C.  How  the  Rod  is  Held  ;  Fallacious  Ideas  of  how  to  Discriminate

between  Water  and  Metals 266

D.  Sensations  said  to  be  Experienced  in  Dowsing 272

E.  Note  on  the  Horsham  Experiments 278


PEOCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,  .

PART  XXXIII.


PROCEEDINGS OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  87th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West
minster  Town  Hall  on  Friday,  May  28th,  1897,  at  4  p.m.;  Mr.  St.
George  Lane  Fox  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "  The  Moral  and
Intellectual  Limits  of  Suggestion."


The  88th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
November  5th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Dr.  A.  Wallace  in  the  chair.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson  gave  an  address  on  the  "Later  Investiga-
tions of  Trance  Phenomena  manifested  through  Mrs.  Piper."


The  89th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
December  10th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Professor  H.  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson  gave  an  address  on  the  "  Latest  Investiga-
tions of  Trance  Phenomena  manifested  through  Mrs.  Piper,"  the  paper
being  a  continuation  of  that  read  at  the  previous  meeting  of  Novem-
ber 5th.  Part  I.  of  these  papers  is  printed  below  j  Part  II.  will
appear  in  the  following  number  of  Proceedings.


The  90Lh  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
January  28th,  1898,  at  4  p.m. ;  the  President,  Sir  William  Crookes,
F.Pt.S.,  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  two  papers  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  on
"  Crystal  Visions  "  and  on  "  Oppositions  of  Science,"  which  it  is  hoped
will  appear  in  a  future  Part  of  the  Proceedings.


V


2S4


liichard  Hodgson.


A  FURTHER  RECORD  OF  OBSERVATIONS  OF  CERTAIN
PHENOMENA OF  TRANCE.i

By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.

{This  Paper  is  a  sequel  to  those  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  436-050,  and

Vol.  VIII.,  pip.  1-167.)


PART  I.
§  1.  Introductory.

Two  reports  on  the  trance-phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  have  been
published  in  our  Proceedings  (see  above),  and  to  these  I  refer  the  reader
for  information  concerning  the  experiments  made  with  her  prior  to  the
year  1892.  All  that  I  need  repeat  here  is  that  Mrs.  Piper  passes  into
a  trance,  during  which  apparently  other  personalities  than  the  normal
waking  Mrs.  Piper  "control"  her  body,  use  her  organs  of  speech,  or
write  witli  her  hand,  and  show  a  knowledge  of  facts  which  Mrs.  Piper
could  not  have  obtained  by  ordinary  means.  These  other  personalities
purport  to  be  the  "spirits"  of  disembodied  human  beings,  and  make
communications  wliich  take  the  form  of  coming  from  the  still  existing
"  deceased  "  friends  or  relatives  of  the  persons  who  have  "  sittings  "
with  Mrs.  Piper.  In  the  early  years  of  INIrs.  Piper's  trances,  her  voice
was  usually  controlled  by  a  personality  that  went  under  the  name  of
Doctor  Phinuit,"  who  acted  as  intermediai'y  in  the  communications;
but  of  late  years  the  communications  have  been  chiefly  independent  of
Phinuit,  who  for  the  past  year  has  not  manifested  at  all.

Of  course  the  first  point  that  will  occur  to  the  reader  is  how  we
know  that  these  manifestations  are  not  due  wholly  to  imposture.  This
question  has  been  fully  considered  in  the  above-mentioned  reports,  but
it  may  be  well  for  me  to  give  a  brief  summary  of  our  previous  conclu-
sions. My  own  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper  began  in  May,  1887,  about  a
fortnight  after  my  arrival  in  Boston,  and  my  first  appointment  for  a
sitting  was  made  by  Professor  William  James.  Professor  James  had
visited  her  about  a  dozen  times  during  the  previous  year  and  half,  and
had  sent  a  large  number  of  persons  to  her,  making  appointments  himself

1  The  responsibility  for  the  views  expressed  in  this  paper  rests  entirely  with  its
author.


XXXIII.]  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  285


"for  most  of  these  people,  whose  names  were  in  no  instance  announced
to  the  medium."  As  a  result  of  his  inquiries  he  became  fully  satisfied
that  Mrs.  Piper  had  supernormal  powers.

I  had  several  sittings  myself  with  Mrs.  Piper,  at  which  much
intimate  knowledge,  some  of  it  very  personal,  was  shown  of  deceased
friends  or  relatives  of  mine ;  and  I  made  appointments  for  sittings  for
at  least  fifty  persons  whom  I  believed  to  be  strangers  to  Mrs.  Piper,
taking  the  utmost  precautions  to  prevent  her  obtaining  any  informa-
tion beforehand  as  to  who  the  sitters  were  to  be.  The  general  result
was  the  same  as  in  my  own  case.  Most  of  these  persons  were  told  facts
through  the  trance-utterance  which  they  felt  sure  could  not  have  become
known  to  Mrs.  Piper  by  ordinary  means.  For  several  weeks,  moreover,
at  the  suggestion  of  one  of  our  members,  detectives  were  employed  for
the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  there  were  any  indications  that
Mrs.  Piper  or  her  husband,  or  other  persons  connected  with  her,  tried
to  ascertain  facts  about  possible  sitters  by  the  help  of  confederates,  or
other  ordinary  methods  of  inquiry  ;  but  not  the  smallest  indication
whatever  of  any  such  procedure  was  discovered.  My  own  conclusion
was  that — after  allowing  the  widest  possible  margin  for  information
obtainable  under  the  circumstances  by  ordinary  means,  for  chance
coincidence  and  remarkable  guessing,  aided  by  clues  given  consciously
.and  unconsciously  by  the  sitters,  and  helped  out  by  supposed  hyperfes-
thesia  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper, — there  remained  a  large  residuum
of  knowledge  displayed  in  her  trance  state,  which  could  not  be
accounted  for  except  on  the  hypothesis  that  she  had  some  supernormal
power;  and  this  conviction  has  been  strengthened  by  my  later
investigations.

Further,  Mrs.  Piper  came  to  England,  at  our  request,  in  November,
1889,  and  remained  till  February,  1890,  and  during  that  time  gave
■eighty-three  sittings  under  the  supervision  of  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,
Professor  Lodge,  and  Mr.  Myers.  Due  precautions  were,  of  course,
taken  as  regards  the  introduction  of  sitters,  etc.,  and  suffice  it  to  say
that  the  above  observers  became  convinced  that  the  claim  to  super-
normally  acquired  knowledge  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  was  fully  justified.

But  although  this  general  conclusion  was  reached,  there  was  no
"unanimity  of  opinion  as  to  the  explanation.  Thus  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,  for
■example,  adopted  the  position  that  Dr.  Phinuit  was  "only  a  name  for
Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality,  assuming  the  name  and  acting  the
part  with  the  aptitude  and  consistency  which  is  shown  by  secondary
personalities  in  other  known  cases " ;  and  that  the  supernormal
phenomena  shown  were  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of  thought-
transference  from  the  sitters.  Professor  Lodge,  on  the  other  hand,
held  that  something  more  of  supernormal  character  was  involved  in
many  of  the  instances  than  could  be  explained  by  thought-transference

u  2


2S6.


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


fi-om  the  sitters,  and  he  found  himself  forced  to  the  hypothesis
of  "  telepathy  from  distant  persons  if  that  is  in  any  way  feasible^
telepatliy  from  deceased  persons  only  as  a  last  resort,  but  telepathy
of  some  kind,  as  distinct  from  any  conceivable  method  of  extracting
information  from  persons  present."

In  my  own  previous  reports  which  dealt  with  sittings  up  to.
October,  1891,  I  stated  that  the  hypothesis  which  for  a  long  time
had  seemed  to  me  most  satisfactory  was  that  of  an  auto-hypnotic
trance  in  which  a  secondary  personality  of  ]\Irs.  Piper  either
erroneously  believes  itself  to  be,  or  consciously  and  falsely  pretends
to  be,  the  "spirit"  of  a  deceased  human  being,  and  further  fictitiously
represents  various  other  personalities  according  to  the  latent  ideas  of.
some  of  the  sitters.  I  added,  however,  that  my  confidence  in  this
explanation  had  Ijeen  considerably  shaken  by  further  familiarity  with
the  Phinuit  personality  and  other  allied  manifestations  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  state,  and  that  I  had  no  certain  conviction  that  any  single
tlieory  which  had  been  put  forward  was  really  the  correct  one.  It  was
indeed  the  case  that  many  sitters  believed  themselves  to  be,  through
Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  in  actual  communication  with  deceased  friends ;
but  various  considerations  made  this  view  very  difficult  of  acceptance.
The  personality  known  as  Phinuit  could  give  no  satisfactory  account
of  himself;  he  was  unable  to  justify,  by  any  evidence  of  identity,
his  claim  that  he  was  a  deceased  human  being,  and  still  less  could  ho
justify  his  claim  that  he  had  been  a  French  doctor.  In  some  cases
the  sittings  were  total  failures.  And  in  many  others  the  correct
statements  were  mixed  up  with  much  other  matter  that  was  irrelevant
or  wrong.  There  was  also  at  times  a  great  deal  of  w  hat  appeared  to.
be  guessing  and  "fishing"  on  the  part  of  Phinuit,  and  even  when
extraordinary  specific  knowledge  was  shoAvn  of  private  matters  con-
cerning sitters  and  their  deceased  friends,  Phinuit  was  unable  to  get
satisfactory  replies  to  other  questions,  the  answers  to  which  were  well
known  to  the  alleged  communicators  when  living.  In  short,  while  any
unbiassed  student  of  the  previous  records  in  our  Froceedings  would
conclude  that  the  phenomena  demanded  some  hypothesis  which  went
at  least  as  far  as  telepathy,  there  were  difficulties  in  the  way  of
accepting  either  the  spiritistic  hypothesis,  or  telepathy  from  the  living,
as  an  adequate  explanation.

These  diificulties  have  by  no  means  been  altogether  removed,  but
since  the  writing  of  the  last  Report  on  the  trance-phenomena  mani-
fested by  Mrs.  Piper,  several  circumstances  have  occurred  the  result
of  which  has  been  that  a  marked  improvement  has  taken  place  in  the
quality  of  tiie  evidence,  and  some  new  light,  I  incline  to  think,  has
been  thrown  upon  its  significance.  One  of  these  circumstances  was
the  sudden  death,  early  in  1892,  of  a  young  man  keenly  interested  in


-xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  287


intellectual  pursuits  generally — and  aware  of  the  investigations  of  the
S.P.R. — who  purported  to  make  himself  known  about  four  weeks  later
through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance, — and  who  since  that  time  has  been  ready
with  assistance  for  most  other  "  communicators."  I  shall  refer  to  him
as  George  Pelham,  or  G.  P.  AVhciher  the  real  G.  P.  has  anything  to
do  with  it  at  all,  whether  there  are  any  "  communicators  "  concerned
beyond  some  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  personality  and  the  personalities  of
the  sitters  and  other  living  persons,  remains  for  consideration  later.
This  manner  of  speech  is  the  most  convenient  for  rendering  the  facts
intelligible  to  my  readers,  and  is  of  course  merely  descriptive  of  the
fashion  which  they  assume.  It  would  give  a  totally  wrong  impression
of  the  phenomena  were  I  to  simply  speak  of  3Irs.  Piper  as  producing
the  manifestations  which  occur  through  her  organism  in  a  state  of
trance ;  and  to  attempt  to  give  a  full  description  in  each  case  of  wliat
is  "claimed"  or  "alleged"  or  "purported"  would  involve  a  tedious
and  useless,  if  not  a  confusing,  repetition.  Hence,  I  shall  as  a  rule
refer  to  the  alleged  communicators,  Phinuit,  G.  P.,  and  others,  as
though  they  were  distinct  personalities.  Superficially  at  least  they
take  this  form  ;  it  is  this  form  which  gives  a  very  special  character  to
the  sittings ;  and  provisionally,  therefore,  I  adopt  it,  for  the  sake  of
clearness  and  convenience  of  description.

Another  circumstance  leading  to  the  impi'ovement  of  the  quality
of  the  evidence  was  the  development  of  aiitomatic  writing  during  Mrs.
Piper's  trance.  That  is  to  say,  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  during  the  trance  is
frequently  taken  possession  of  by  some  other  "control,"  while  Phinuit
still  remains  master  of  the  voice.  Phinuit  "  loses  the  hand,"  and
apparently  is  unaware  of  what  it  writes.  This  channel  of  communica-
tion, while  not  absolutely  originated  by  George  Pelham,  was  developed
chiefly  by  him,  and  has  thereafter  served  for  a  large  number  of  different
"communicators"  as  a  method  substitutive  of^  or  auxiliary  to,  that  of
■using  Phinuit  as  their  intermediary.  Further,  Pliinuit  himself  claims
and  appears  to  have  been  benefited  by  the  stimulation  of  his  new  co-
worker in  the  task  of  providing  proof  of  supernormal  faculty.  Later,
in  March,  1893,  Mrs.  Piper  underwent  a  capital  surgical  operation  in
a  Woman's  Hospital,  for  the  removal  of  a  traumatic  tumour,  thereby
getting  rid  of  a  continual  source  of  ill  health  which  had  troubled  her
for  many  years,  and  Avhich  had  interfered  much  with  her  sittings.  It
was  the  accumulated  result  of  an  injury,  caused  many  years  ago  by
a  collision  with  an  ice-sled.  (See  Appendix  III.,  p.  479).  After  Mrs.
Piper's  recovery  she  was  able  to  give  sittings  with  much  greater
regularity  than  before,  and  appeared  to  be  much  less  exhausted  by
them.  But  in  the  course  of  1895  the  development  of  a  serious  hernia,
not  an  unusual  result  after  such  an  operation  as  hers,  again  interfered
much  with  her  sittings,  so  that  finally  another  operation  became


-2S8


Richard  Hodgson.


[VAllT


necessary.  This  was  performed  in  February,  1896  ;  and  it  was  nob
till  October  of  that  year  that  she  resumed  lier  sittings.  Since  then
her  health  has  been  uniformly  better  than  I  have  ever  known  it  to
be,  and  she  may  now  be  regarded  as  a  thoroughly  healthy  woman.

Altogether-,  since  my  last  Report,  I  am  familiar  with  the  results  of
more  than  500  sittings,  of  which,  however,  only  about  130  were  for
first  sitters,  and  of  some  of  these  I  received  only  oral  accounts.  Of  the
written  reports  of  first  sittings  there  are  many  which  I  am  practically
unable  to  use  as  evidence,  owing  to  the  reluctance  of  the  sitters  to
allow  the  private  matters  concerned  to  be  puljlished  in  any  form.
There  are  others  which  I  could  publish  only  under  such  restrictions
and  with  such  alterations  that  they  would  lose  much  of  their
significance.  Others  again  I  am  prevented  from  using  by  the  fact
that, — notwithstanding  repeated  inquiries  on  my  part,  and  the  express
or  implied  promise  by  the  sitters  beforehand  that  such  results  as  were
not  too  private  would  be  at  our  disposal, — I  have  failed  in  getting  the
sitters  to  make  detailed  comments  upon  the  reports.  Owing  to  these
various  causes  a  large  amount  of  the  best  evidence  derivable  from  first
sittings  is  unavailable  for  publication.

Of  the  other  sittings  some  fell  into  series  which  I  am  able  to  use,
to  a  certain  extent,  as  explained  below ;  many  were  for  persons  who
had  frequently  sat  before  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the  conununications
at  these  were  chiefly  of  a  personal  character ;  many  were  held  by
myself  or  other  persons  for  the  purpose  of  getting  some  light  if  possible
from  the  communicators  themselves  concerning  the  rationale  of  the
phenomena.  This  last  matter,  not  being  of  directly  evidential  value,  is
scarcely  adapted  for  publication  in  detail  in  our  Froceedrngs,  or  at  least
not  in  the  present  stage  of  our  inquiry ;  but  later  in  my  paper  I  shall
make  brief  reference  to  some  of  it  so  far  as  it  seems  to  be  of  assistance
in  the  way  of  explanation.

Notwithstanding,  however,  the  mass  of  matter  which  it  is  im-
possible or  undesirable  to  publish,  there  are  at  our  disposal  more
records  than  it  seems  at  all  profitable  to  print  171  extenso.  Much  of
this  available  matter  contains  nothing  specially  new  in  character,  and
resembles  the  ordinary  sittings  of  which  our  members  have  had
■  sufficient  illustration  in  the  previous  reports.  I  shall  therefore  omit
many  of  these  entirely  and  abridge  or  omit  portions  of  many  others,
being  careful  of  course  to  give  due  prominence  to  failures.

I  may  add  that  the  large  majority  of  the  sittings  were  supervised
by  myself,  and  I  was  also  the  chief  note-taker,  except  in  cases  where
a  stenographic  reporter  was  present,  or  my  place  was  taken  by  my
assistant,  Miss  Edmunds.

Now,  although  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  that  Mrs.  Piper
possesses  some  supernormal  faculty,  the  records  of  "first  sittings,"


XXXIII.] Ohservaiions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  289


where  precautions  have  been  taken  to  prevent  Mrs.  Piper's  acquiring
knowledge  beforehand  as  to  the  sitter,  are  especially  valuable,  they
cannot  lead  us  very  far  in  the  direction  of  complete  explanation.
They  may  add  largely  to  the  proof  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-personality
shows  knowledge  of  particular  facts  about  the  sitter  which  Mrs.  Piper
cannot  intelligently  be  supposed  to  liave  acquired  by  normal  means,
that  private  facts  known  only  to  the  sitter  are  frequently  communi-
cated, and  that  occasionally  a  knowledge  is  manifested  of  events
entirely  unknown  to  the  sitter  and  afterwards  verified.  Further,
accompanying  this  exhibition  of  supernormal  knowledge  there  may  bo
a  more  or  less  personal  element  characteristic  of  some  deceased  friend
of  the  sittei",  and  leading  the  sitter  to  the  conclusion  that  he  is  in
direct  and  actual  communication  with  this  departed  friend.  It  is,
nevertheless,  difficult  to  suppose  that  however  remarkable  such  first
sittings  may  be,  they  could  form  a  satisfactoi'y  basis  for  the  "spiritistic"
theory.  They  might  indeed  be  profoundly  suggestive  of  such  a  theory,
and  in  the  minds  of  many  might  raise  a  presumption  in  its  favour,
but  they  would  still  be  apt  to  remain,  for  the  probing  investigator,
inadequate ;  they  would  still  be  apt  to  appear  as  comparatively
isolated  groups  of  facts,  bound  together,  as  it  were,  only  by  the  plastic
and  mystei'ious,  but  persistent  personality  known  as  Phinuit.

We  might  compare  such  phenomena  to  those  of  an  imaginary
haunted  house,  where  there  was  continually  some  manifestation  of  an
intelligent  but  somewhat  unreliable  personality,  that  exhil^ited  strange
information  about  most  of  the  successive  visitors  to  the  house— some  of
whom  thought  that  they  felt  there  the  conscious  presence  of  deceased
friends  and  relatives.  If  we  suppose  that  this  haunting  phantasm,
while  giving  such  strange  true  information  about  others,  was  far  from
able  to  give  information  about  itself  sufficient  to  identify  it  with  any
once  living  human  being,  and  that  the  information  actually  obtainable
concerning  the  inception  of  the  haunting  strongly  tended  to  show  that
the  phantasm  represented  a  character  in  a  pui'ely  invented  sensational
novel,  we  should  be  confronted  with  a  problem  much  like  that  pre-
sented by  Mrs.  Piper  so  long  as  we  confine  our  main  attention  to  the
results  of  first  sittings.

When  I  wrote  my  previous  Report,  there  wore  not  wanting  several
instances  where  the  witnesses  had  enjoyed  more  or  less  frequent
opportunities  of  judging  as  to  the  knowledge  and  peculiarities  of  certain
"controls"  purporting  to  be  their  personal  friends.  Cut  the  only
important  accounts  of  these  which  I  was  able  to  publish  were
contributed  by  Miss  A.  M.  Pt.  {I'ruceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.
111-114)  and  Miss  W.  {loc.  cit,  pp.  29-3-i),  each  of  whom  had  many
sittings  at  which  an  intimate  friend  purported  to  take  "  control "  and
use  the  voice  instead  of  Phinuit.


290 '  Richard  Hodgson.  .  [part


Miss  R.  wrote  concerning  her  friend's  "control"

"  In  a  great  many  little  ways  he  is  quite  like  what  my  friend  used  to  be
when  living,  so  much  so  that  I  am  afraid  it  would  take  a  great  deal  of
explanation  to  make  me  believe  that  his  identical  self  had  not  something  to
do  with  it,  wholly  apart  from  the  medium's  powers  or  from  anytliing  that
may  be  in  my  own  mind  concerning  him."

And  Miss  W.  wrote  : —

"  The  clearly-marked  personality  of  that  friend,  whom  I  will  call  T.,  is
to  me  the  most  convincing  proof  of  Mrs.  P.'s  supernatural  power,  but  it  is  a
proof  impossible  to  present  to  any  one  else."

Now  it  so  happens  that  I  have  before  me  several  series  of  sittings
recorded  in  detail  where  repeated  attempts  have  been  made  by  the
"same  deceased  person  "  to  communicate.  Much  the  longest  and  most
remarkable  of  these  series  of  communications  has  concerned  the  identity
of  the  young  man  to  whom  I  have  referred  above  as  George  Pelham  or
G.  P.  Unfortunately,  but  necessarily,  the  most  important  evidence
tending  to  show  that  the  real  G.  P.  was  in  some  way  "  communicating  "
cannot  be  published.  It  concerns  the  confidential  remembrances  of
friends,  dealing  not  only  with  personal  matters  pertaining  to  G.  P.
himself  alone,  but  with  incidents  of  a  private  nature  relating  to  other
persons  living.  T  shall  endeavour,  however,  as  far  as  possible,  to  give  a
fairly  full  description  here  of  the  general  character  of  the  communi-
cations and  the  kind  of  evidence  offered  in  justification  of  the  claim
that  they  emanate  fi'om  the  still  persisting  individuality  of  G.  P.  It
was  the  first  part  of  this  series  in  particular  to  which  I  referred  in  the
Addendum  to  my  previous  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  58)  when  I  wrote  that  :—

"Mrs.  Piper  has  given  some  sittings  very  recently  which  materially
strengthen  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  some  faculty  tliat  goes  beyond
thought-transference  from  the  sitters,  and  which  certainly  ^»'im«/acie  appear
to  render  some  form  of  the  '  sjjiritistic '  hyjiothesis  more  jjlausible."

Before  entering  into  the  details  of  this  series  of  sittings,  it  seems
desirable  that  I  should  describe  the  developmeirt  of  the  automatic
writing  aforementioned.  I  may  here  explain  briefly  the  order  which
I  propose  to  adopt  in  this  Part  of  my  Report.  After  describing  the
development  of  the  automatic  writing  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  I  shall
first  give  a  somewhat  detailed  running  history  of  the  early  G.  P.
connnunications,  following  this  by  a  suumiary  (p.  328)  of  the  general
character  of  the  evidence  pointing  to  the  real  G.  P.  as  the  com-
municator, and  offering  a  preliminary  explanation  of  the  failures  and
deficiencies  that  may  seem  at  first  sight  to  conflict  with  this  view.  I
shall  then  give  some  brief  accounts  of  other  communicators,  and
proceed  to  consider  specially  whether  the  "  spirit "  hypothesis  or
the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living  is the  more  probable


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Oertain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  291


explanation  of  the  manifestations  in  question,  pointing  out  that  the
results  present  an  appearance  precisely  in  accordance  with  what  we
should  expect  from  returning  "spirits"  communicating  under  the  con-
ditions involved,  and  that  such  results  do  not  fall  into  orderly  relation
with  one  another  on  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living.  I
shall  then  give  a  very  brief  account  of  recent  changes  in  Mrs.  Piper's
trance,  and  indicate  the  lines  of  investigation  that  seem  likely  to  be
most  fruitful  in  this  and  similar  cases.

Much  of  the  illustrative  material  which  I  quote,  apart  from  the
earlier  Gr.  P.  communications,  will  be  found  in  greater  detail  in  the
Appendices  which  follow  the  body  of  the  Report;  but  these  Appendices
contain  also  other  records  which  are  more  or  less  representative,  and
which  I  have  not  attempted  to  summarise.  Appendi.x  I.,  which
contains  extracts  from  a  series  of  stenographically-reported  sittings
specially  concerned  with  G.  P.,  should  be  read  in  connection  with
section  §  3  of  the  Report,  which  deals  with  the  Gr.  P.  communications.
The  sittings  recorded  in  Appendix  II.  cover  the  period  ISTovember,  1891,
to  February,  1893  ;  and  those  in  Appendix  III.  cover  the  period  from
October,  1893, — about  which  time  Mrs.  Piper  resumed  regular  sittings
after  her  operation  in  the  preceding  March,— to  the  latter  part  of
1895.  Appendix  IV.  contains  a  group  of  sittings  belonging  chiefly
to  the  period  of  1892,  and  concerned  with  the  family  and  intimate
friends '' f  Dr.  A.  B.  Tliaw.  I  fear  that  most  of  my  readers  will  avoid
these  somewhat  lengthy  detailed  records,  and  confine  themselves  to
the  incidents  which  I  quote  from  them  in  the  body  of  my  Report.
The  psychological  student,  however,  may  find  them  far  too  few,  and  I
hope  in  the  ful.ure  to  place  as  complete  a  record  as  possible  of  my
detailed  investigations  in  the  rooms  of  the  Society.

§  2.  Development  of  Automatic  Writing  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.

The  first  case  of  this  automatic  writing  which  I  witnessed  myself
occurred  on  March  12 th,  1892.  The  sitter,  a  lady,  had  taken  several
articles  as  test  objects,  among  them  a  ring  which  had  belonged  to
Annie  D  .

Phinuit  made  references  to  this  lady,  giving  the  name  Annie,  and
just  before  the  close  of  the  sitting  Mrs.  Piper's  right  hand  moved
slowly  up  until  it  was  over  the  top  of  her  head.  The  arm  seemed
to  become  rigidly  fixed  in  its  position,  as  though  spasmodically
contracted,  but  the  hand  trembled  very  rapidly.  Phinuit  exclaimed
Several  times  :  "  She's  taken  my  hand  away,"  and  added  :  "she  wants
to  write."  I  put  a  pencil  between  the  fingers,  and  placed  a  block-
book  on  the  head  under  the  pencil.  No  writing  came  until,  obeying
Phinuit's  order  to  "hold  the  hand,"  I  grasped  the  hand  very  firmly  at


292


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


its  junction  with  the  wrist  and  so  stopped  its  trembling  or  vibrating.

It  then  wrote:  "I  am  Annie  D  [surname  correctly  given]  ...  I

am  not  dead ... I  am  not  dead  but  living. ... I  am  not  dead

. . . world  .  .  .  good  bye  ... I  am  Annie  D  ." The  hold

of  the  pencil  then  relaxed,  and  Phiiiuit  began  to  murmur  "Give  me
my  hand  back,  give  me  my  hand  back."  The  arm,  however,  remained
in  its  contracted  position  for  a  short  time,  but  finally,  as  though  with
much  difficulty,  and  slowly,  it  moved  down  to  the  side,  and  Phinuit
appeared  to  regain  control  over  it.  Previous  to  this  I  had  witnessed
a  little  of  Phinuit's  writing,  but  I  was  not  aware  that  any  other
"  control  "  had  used  the  hand  while  Phinuit  was  manifesting  at  the
same  time.  I  have  since  learned  from  Miss  A.  INI.  R.,  some  of  whose
experiences  with  Mrs.  Piper  were  described  in  my  former  Report
(Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  111-114),  that  her  "friend  H.,"  to
whom  she  there  refers  as  having  written  when  controlling  the  body  in
the  absence  of  Phinuit,  wrote  several  sheets  on  Ma.y  23rd,  1891,  and
Miss  R.  finds  the  note  appended  : —

"  Written  when  Phinuit  had  control,  but  H.  said  that  he  seized  and
controlled  the  hand  and  wrote  it."

At  several  other  sittings  in  the  course  of  the  next  few  weeks  more
writing  was  produced  very  similarly,  the  block-book  being  held  on  the
top  of  the  head,  but  apparently  with  much  less  inconvenience  to
Phinuit.  On  April  29th,  1892,  I  placed  a  table  so  that  Mrs.  Piper's
right  arm  could  rest  comfortably  upon  it,  and  suggested  that  the  hand
should  write  on  a  block-book  on  the  table  instead  of  on  the  head.  The
arm  had  already  taken  up  its  position  with  the  hand  over  the  head,
Phinuit  saying  that  "  George  "  was  going  to  write,  but  partly  owing  to
my  request  for  the  new  position,  and  partly  by  using  not  a  little
force, — the  resistance  to  which  was  diminished  after  my  repeated
request,  "You  must  try  to  write  on  the  table," — I  succeeded  in
getting  the  arm  down,  and  thereafter  the  writing  has  been  habitually
produced  with  the  arm  resting,  more  or  less,  on  a  table  to  the  right  of,
Mrs.  Piper.  ^

When  the  arm  is  being  seized  "  for  the  purpose  of  writing,"  as  also,
to  a  less  extent  when  Phiiuiit  is  regaining  control,  it  shows  a  certain
amount  of  spasmodic  movement,  which  occasionally  is  extremely
violent,  knocking  pencils  and  block-books  helter-skelter  off  the  table,,
and  requiring  considerable  force  to  restrain  it.  Sometimes,  but  nob
often,  the  writing  will  be  interrupted  by  a  sjaasm  in  the  arm,  and  the
hand  will  be  strongly  clenched  and  bent  over  at  the  wrist,  but  after
an  interval  that  can  be  measured  in  seconds  rather  than  minutes,  the
hand  will  be  released  and  proceed  with  the  writing.  It  is  not  necessary
for  Phinuit  to  stop  talking  while  the  hand  is  writing. On  one  occasion


xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  29S


"when  I  was  present  Pliinuit  was  listening  to  the  stcno^^raphic  report
of  a  previous  interview,  commenting  vpon  it,  making  additions  to  hi»
statements  about  some  objects,  and  at  the  same  time  the  hand  was
writing  freely  and  rapidly  on  other  subjects,  and  holding  conversation
with  another  person,  the  hand  purporting  to  be  "  controlled "  by  a
deceased  friend  of  tliat  person.  This  lasted  for  over  twenty  minutes.
On  another  occasion,  when  I  was  not  present,  I  was  informed  that
Phinuit  for  about  an  liour  kept  up  a  specially  rapid  and  vigorous
talk,  more  voluble  even  than  usual  with  him,  with  two  or  three
young  girls  who  were  present  at  the  sitting,  and  during  the  whole  of
this  time  the  hand  was  writing  on  other  matters  with  another  person..
The  only  one  that  appeared  to  be  distracted  was  the  sitter  who  was-
talking  with  the  "  hand,"  who  was  remonstrated  with  by  the  "hand  "
for  not  paying  sufficient  attention  to  it.  I  have  frequently  witnessed,
during  lesser  intervals,  the  "  hand "  writing  with  one  person  and
Phinuit  talking  with  another,  and  also  the  "  hand  "  writing  and  Phinuit
talking  at  the  same  time  to  myself,  and  have  never  failed  to  get  this
double  action  when  desired  if  Phinuit  was  present  and  tlie  hand  was
being  used  by  another  "control."  In  all  cases  when  the  " hand  "  is,
wricmg  independently  of  Phinuit,  the  sense  of  hearing  for  the  "  hand-
control  "  appears  to  be  in  the  hand,  whereas  Phinuit  apparently  always-
hears  through  the  ordinary  channel.  This  apparent  hetersesthesia  will
be  considered  in  Part  IT.  of  my  Peport.

The  writings,  of  course,  as  already  implied,  do  not  always  purport
to  come  from  the  same  person,  nor  is  writing  always  produced  at
a  sitting.  If  writing  occurs  at  any  sitting  it  usually  purports  to>
come  directly  from  some  deceased  friend  of  the  sitter.  About  the
characteristics  of  the  actual  handwritings  themselves  I  shall  have
something  to  say  later.  At  present  it  is  enough  to  say  that  they  vary
superficially  a  great  deal,  according  to  the  excitement,  so  to  speak,  of
the  purported  "communicator,"  to  the  frequency  of  his  writing  in  that
way  previously,  and  probably  to  other  causes  difficult  to  estimate  excej^fc
speculatively.  It  would  seem,  moreover,  that  until  instructed  in  some
way,  the  quasi-personality  that  guides  the  writing  is  unaware  that  he  is
tvriting.  The  process  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  "communicator"
rather  resembles  the  definite  thinking  of  his  thoughts,  with  the  object
of  conveying  them  to  the  sitter, — and  I  feel  very  sure  that  this  is
true  whatever  theory  may  be  held  as  to  the  identity  of  the  "  com-
municator," whether  this  is  what  it  purports  to  be,  or  merely  another
stratum  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mind  believing  itself  to  be  an  extraneous
intellitrence.

Soon  after  this  writing  began,  it  occurred  to  me  that  possibly  the
left  hand  might  also  write,  and  that  it  might  be  possible  to  get  both
hands  writing  and  Phinuit  speaking  all  at  the  same  time  on  different


■291  R'lcluird  Hodgson.  [pari

^subjects  Avith  different  persons,  and  I  remarked  to  Pliinuifc  tliat  I
hoped  some  day  to  get  a  separate  "  control "  of  each  finger  and  toe
of  the  medium's  body,  while  he  could  manage  the  voice.  On
Februaiy  2-1  th,  1894,  what  we  have  called  the  "E"  control  wrote
in  the  course  of  some  remarks  about  certain  "mediums  "  :  "In  these
cases  there  is  no  reason  why  various  spiritual  minds  cannot  express
their  thoughts  at  the  same  time  through  the  same  organism."  I  then
referred  to  my  proposed  experiment  with  the  two  hands,  and  said
that  I  would  arrange  to  try  it  some  time,  with  "  E  "  using  one  hand
and  "George"  the  other,  but  tliat  I  was  not  prepared  to  make  the
•experiment  at  that  time.  At  my  next  sitting,  February  26th,  1894,
■when  I  was  unprepared  and  was  alone,  an  attempt,  only  very  partially
successful,  was  made  to  write  independently  with  both  hands  at  tlia
very  beginning  of  the  sitting.  On  March  18th,  1895,  another  attempt
nnich  more  successful  was  made,  when  I  was  accompanied  for  the
purpose  by  Miss  Edmunds.  Her  "  deceased  sister  "  wrote  with  one
hand  and  G.  P.  with  the  other,  while  Phinuit  was  talking,  all
simultaneously  on  different  subjects.  "Very  little,  however,  was
Avritten  witli  the  left  hand.  The  difficulty  appeared  to  lie  chiefly  in
the  deficiencies  of  the  left  hand  as  a  writin!i-machine.

Sometimes,  shortly  before  the  hand  starts  writing,  Phinuit  gives
•notice  that  some  one  is  "going  to  talk  with  you  himself."  Sometimes
the  hand  is  "seized,"  and  passes  through  its  convulsive  vagaries  while
Phinuit  gives  no  sign  but  talks  on  with  the  sitter  continuously,  even,
after  the  writing  has  started.  To  give  an  extreme  instance  of  this,
at  a  sitting  where  a  lady  was  engaged  in  a  profoundly  personal
conversation  with  Phinuit  concerning  her  relations,  and  where  I  was
present  to  assist,  knowing  the  lady  and  her  family  very  intimately,
the  hand  was  seized  very  quietly  and,  as  it  were,  surreptitiously,  and
wrote  a  very  personal  communication  to  myself,  purporting  to  come
from  a  deceased  friend  of  mine,  and  having  no  relation  whatsoever
to  the  sitter ;  precisely  as  if  a  caller  should  enter  a  room  where  two
strangers  to  him  were  conversing,  but  a  friend  of  his  also  present,  and
whisper  a  special  message  into  the  ear  of  the  friend  without  disturbing
the  conversation.

In  the  case  of  a  new  communicator,  however,  Phinuit  frequently
requests  the  sitter  to  "  talk  to  him,"  i.e.,  to  the  hand-writer,  though
Phinuit  is  not  averse  from  keeping  up  the  oral  conversation  as  well,  if
this  is  desired.  Indeed  he  seems  to  prefer  this,  but  when  the  sitter
turns  to  pay  attention  to  the  hand,  Phinuit  frequently  makes  some
such  enigmatical  remark  as  "I'll  help  him,"  or  "I'll  help  to  hold  hiiu
up."  At  other  times  Phinuit  will  request  that  an  article  should  be
given  to  himself,  so  that  he  might  have  something  to  engage  his  atten-
tion, and  I  have  known  him  to  blurt  out  something  about  the  article


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Fhenomena  of  Trance.  295


ill  the  middle  of  the  sitting,  while  the  writing  is  still  going  on.  At
any  time,  apparently,  under  these  circumstances,  Phinuit  can  be  evoked
from  his  silence  by  talking  into  the  ear,  and  will  at  once  I'esume  the
communication  while  the  writing  continues  without  a  break.

I  3.  History  of  the  G.  P.  Communications.

Now  to  proceed  with  the  history  of  the  G.  P.  communications.

Some  preliminary  statements  are  required  to  enable  the  reader  tO'
form  a  fair  judgment  on  the  facts  to  be  presented.

G.  P.  met  his  death  accidentally,  and  probably  instantaneously,
by  a  fall  in  New  York  in  February,  1892,  at  the  age  of  thirty-two-
years.  He  was  a  lawyer  by  training,  but  had  devoted  himself  chiefly
to  literature  and  philosophy,  and  had  published  two  books  which
received  the  highest  praise  from  competent  authorities.  He  had
resided  for  many  years  in  r>oston  or  its  vicinity,  but  for  three  years
preceding  his  death  had  been  living  in  New  York  in  bachelor  apart-
ments. He  was  an  Associate  of  our  Society,  his  interest  in  which
was  explicable  rather  by  an  intellectual  openness  and  fearlessness
characteristic  of  him  than  by  any  tendency  to  believe  in  supernormal
phenomena.  He  was  in  a  sense  well  known  to  me  personally,  but
chiefly  on  this  intellectual  side ;  the  bond  between  us  was  not  that
of  an  old,  intimate,  and  if  I  may  so  speak,  emotional  friendshij).  We
had  several  long  talks  together  on  philosophic  subjects,  and  one  veiy
long  discussion,  probably  at  least  two  years  before  his  death,  on  the
possibility  of  a  "future  life."  In  this  he  maintained  that  in  accord-
ance with  a  fundamental  philosophic  theory  which  we  both  accepted,
a  "  future  life  "  was  not  only  incredible,  but  inconceivable  ;  and  P
maintained  that  it  was  at  least  conceivable.  At  the  conclusion  of  the-
discussion  he  admitted  tliat  a  future  life  was  conceivable,  biit  he  did
not  accept  its  credibility,  and  vowed  that  if  he  should  die  before  I  did,
and  found  himself  "still  existing,"  he  would  "make  things  lively"  in
the  effort  to  reveal  the  fact  of  his  continued  existence.

On  March  7th,  1888,  he  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  one  of  a
series  arranged  by  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena
connected  with  the  American  S.P.R.  (See  Proceed'mgs  S.P.Il.,  Vol.
VIII.,  p.  2).  The  names  of  the  sitters  in  this  series  were  very  carefully
guarded  by  the  Committee,  and  I  may  add  my  own  opinion  that  Mrs.
Piper  never  knew  until  i-ecently  that  she  had  ever  seen  G.  P.  At  the
sitting  which  G.  P.  attended,  the  Rev.  Minot  J.  Savage  acted  as  the
supervising  member  of  the  Committee,  and  G.  P.  was  a  stranger  to
him. (See  p.  326).

G.  P.'s  conclusion  was,  briefly,  that  the  results  of  this  sitting  did
not  establish  any  more  than  hypenesthesia  on  the  part  of  the  medium.


296


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


I  knew  of  G.  P.'s  death  Avitliin  a  day  or  two  of  its  occurrence,  and
"was  present  at  several  sittings  with  JMrs.  Piper  in  the  course  of  the
following  few  weeks,  but  no  allusion  was  made  to  G.  P.  On  March
22nd,  1892,  between  four  and  five  weeks  after  G.  P.'s  death,  I
■accompanied  Mr.  John  Hart  [not  the  real  name],  who  had  been  an  old
intimate  friend  of  his,  to  a  sitting. ^  I  understood  from  Mr.  Hart  that
he  had  some  articles  with  him  to  be  used  as  tests,  but  he  gave  me  no
further  information  than  this,  though  I  surmised  that  the  articles  might
have  belonged  to  G.  P.  The  appointment  for  the  sitting  was  made  by
myself,  and  of  course  Mr.  Hart's  real  name  was  not  mentioned  to  Mrs.
Piper.  I  abridge  from  the  notes  of  the  sitting  made  by  myself  at  the
time,  and  substitute,  in  part,  other  names  for  those  actually  used.^

The  sitting  began  by  some  remarks  of  Phinuit  concerning  the  sitter,
followed  by  an  incorrect  statement  about  a  cousin  said  to  have  died
some  years  before  with  heart  trouble. Mr.  Hart  presented  a  pencil.^

Phinuit  :  Cousin.  Heart,  through  here  [clutches  throat  and  about  breast
and  lower]  something  like  pneumonia. Do  you  know  that's  a  brother  ?

I I  must  mention  here  that  towards  the  end  of  1S87,  at  a  time  when  Mrs.  Piper's
■sittings  were  given  in  a  very  muoli  more  hapliazard  way  tlian  at  present,  I  had  taken
Mr.  Hart  to  Mrs.  Piper  on  the  chance  of  getting  a  sitting.  Mrs.  Piper  was  just
«,bout  to  give  a  sitting  to  a  lady,  so  that  our  visit  was  futile.  In  my  own  opinion  this
■circumstance  is  irrelevant,  but  as  Mrs.  Piper  saw  Mr.  Hart  at  that  time  for  a  few
minutes,  although  his  name  was  not  mentioned,  it  might  be  regarded  by  some
pei'sons  as  important.  Further,  Mrs.  Piper  was  staying  in  New  York  with  one  of  our
members,  Dr.  Anna  Lukcns  (who  knew  nothing  of  G.  P.),  at  the  time  when  G.  P.
met  his  death.  She  went  to  New  York  February  8th,  1892,  and  returned  to  Boston
February  20th,  1892,  as  I  learned  from  Dr.  Lukens,  staying  with  Dr.  Lukens  all  the
time,  and  giving  a  series  of  sittings.  Mrs.  Piper  independently  gave  me  a  concordant
account.

-  Owing  to  the  personal  character  of  many  of  the  incidents  referred  to  in  the
G.  P.  communications,  I  have  in  nearly  all  cases  substituted  other  names  for  the  real
ones.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  important  witnesses  in  connection  with  the
G.  P.  evidence  may  have  been  in  collusion  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  absurdity  of  this
suggestion  would  be  at  once  apparent  if  their  I'cal  names  were  given,  but  since  the
only  real  full  names  given  of  actual  sitters  with  G.  P.  are  those  of  Professors  C.
Eliot  Norton  and  James  M.  Peirce,  of  Harvard  University,  who  are  referred  to
chiefly  as  cases  of  being  recognised  by  the  communicating  G.  P.  as  personally  known
to  him,  I  state  concerning  the  others  that  I  know  personally  all  but  two  of  the  G.  P.
sitters,  and  most  of  them  intimately,  that  they  belong  to  the  most  cultivated  and
responsible  class  in  the  United  States,  and  that  it  would  be  as  absurd  to  suppose  any
collusion  between  them  and  Mrs.  Piper  as  to  suppose  that  the  members  of  the  Council
of  the  S.P.R.  were  in  collusion  with  her.  Many  of  them  are  also  known  person-
■ally  to  Mr.  Myers,  who  adds  the  following  statement.— R.  H.

I  am  well  acquainted  with  fourteen  of  the  principal  persons  cited  in  the  sittings
above  recorded,  in  connection  with  "George  Pelham.'"  Several  of  these,  indeed,  are
among  my  most  valued  friends.  Not  only  would  the  idea  of  their  deliberate  collusion
with  Mrs.  Piper  be  absurd,  but  I  also  regard  them  as  very  unlikely,  from  tiieir  previous
opaiions  and  their  character,  to  supiily  the  unconscious  collusion— if  I  may  so  term
it--of  prepossessed  credulity.— Fbederic  W.  H.  Myers.

3  In  the  accounts  of  sittings,  the  sitter's  remarks  are  throughout  given  in  round
hraokets,  and  explanatory  notes  in  square  brackets.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  297


(Sometimes  lie  used  to  call  me  brother.)  He's  very  close  to  you.  (He  isn't
my  brother,  though  we  used  to  say  it  of  each  other.)  [The  pencil  had  been
•worn  by  an  uncle  of  mine  who  died  of  inflammation  of  the  bladder. — J.  H.]
[Phinuit  here  calls  out  a  name  that  suggests  an  attempt  at  Howards.  See
later. — R.  H.]  (I  don't  know  anyone  of  that  name.)
[Sitter  gives  locket,  saying,  "  He  also  wore  this."]

Phinuit  [fingering  locket  hard]  :  It  has  liair  in  it.  It  is  the  hair  of  his
father  .  .  .  George  .  .  .  and  of  another,  his  mother,  too.  (Yes,
that's  right.)  The  influences  are  confusing.  (I  have  something  else  here)
[giving  watch].  Yes.  George.  Ha  .  .  .  Har  .  .  .  Hart.  [All
correct.  The  name  of  my  uncle  George  is  in  the  back  of  the  watch.  When
he  died,  my  uncle  Albert  wore  it.  I  did  not  remember  that  the  name  was
engraved  on  the  inner  case  of  the  watch. — J.  H.]

Lai. . . lal . . . Albert ... is  that  the  way  you
pronounce  it  ? He  is  very  fond  of  you. He  says  he  is  not  d  e  d .  .
dead. He  will  see  you  again. He  is  glad  to  see  you. He  is  very
fond  of  you. [Lal  was  a  pet  name  my  father  sometimes  called  my  uncle
Albert.— J.  H.]

Who  is  James  .  .  .  Jim?  (Yes,  I  know,  but  he  is  not  dead.)  There
is  another  George  who  wants  to  s^^eak  to  you.  How  many  Georges  are  there
about  you  any  way  1

The  rest  of  the  sitting,  until  almost  the  close,  was  occupied  by-
statements  from  G.  P.,  Phinuit  acting  as  intermediary.  George
Pelham's  real  name  was  given  in  full,  also  the  names,  both  Christian
and  surname,  of  several  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  including  the
name  of  the  sitter.

Moreover,  incidents  were  referred  to  which  were  unknown  to  the
sitter  or  myself.

One  of  the  pair  of  studs  which  J.  H.  was  wearing  was  given  to
Phinuit.  .  .  .  "(Who  gave  them  to  me?)  That's  mine.  I  gave
you  that  part  of  it.  I  sent  that  to  you.  (When  1)  Before  I  came  here.
That's  mine.  Mother  gave  you  that.  (No.)  AVell,  father  then,  father
and  mother  together.  You  got  those  after  I  passed  out.  Mother  took
them.  Gave  them  to  father,  and  father  gave  them  to  you.  I  want  you
to  keep  them.  I  will  them  to  you."  Mr.  Hart  notes  :  "  The  studs
were  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Pelham  as  a  remembrance  of  his  son.  I  knew
at  the  time  that  they  had  been  taken  from  G.'s  body,  and  afterwards
ascertained  that  his  stepmother  had  taken  them  from  the  body  and
suggested  that  they  would  do  to  send  to  me,  I  having  previously
written  to  ask  that  some  little  memento  be  sent  to  me."

James  and  Mary  [Mr.  and  Mrs.]  Howard  were  mentioned  with
strongly  personal  specific  references,  and  in  connection  with  Mrs.
Howard  came  the  name  Kathai'ine.  "Tell  her,  she'll  know.  I  will
solve  the  problems,  Katharine."  Mr.  Hart  notes  :  "  This  had  no  special
significance  for  me  at  the  time,  though  I  was  aware  that  Katharine,
the  daughter  of  Jim  Howard,  was  known  to  George,  who  used  to  live


298 .  ■■ .  •^  "  Richard  Hodgson.


[part:


with  the  Howards.  On  the  day  following  the  sitting  I  gave  Mr.
Howard  a  detailed  account  of  the  sitting.  These  words,  'I  will  solve
the  problems,  Katharine,'  impressed  him  more  than  anything  else,  and
at  the  close  of  my  account  he  related  that  George,  when  he  had  last
stnyed  with  them,  had  talked  frequently  with  Katharine  (a.  girl  of
fifteen  years  of  age)  upon  such  subjects  as  Time,  Space,  God,  Eternity,
and  pointed  out  to  her  how  unsatisfactory  the  commonly  accepted
solutions  were.  He  added  that  some  time  he  would  solve  the  pi'O-
bleins,  and  let  her  know,  using  almost  the  very  words  of  the
communication  made  at  the  sitting."  Mr.  Hart  added  that  he  was
entirely  miaware  of  these  circumstances.  I  was  myself  unaware  of
them,  and  was  not  at  that  time  acquainted  with  the  Howards,  and
in  fact  nearly  evei'y  statement  made  at  the  sitting,  during  which
I  was  the  note-taker,  concerned  matters  of  which  I  was  absolutely
ignorant.

Meredith,  an  intimate  friend  of  J\lr.  Hart  and  Gr.  P.,  was  mentioned.
"  Lent  a  book  to  Meredith.  Tell  him  to  keep  it  for  me.  Go  to  my
room  where  my  desk  is."  In  reply  to  inquiries  (April,  1892),  Meredith
stated  that  the  last  time  he  saw  Pelham  was  in  Pelham's  own  room
several  months  before  the  latter's  death.  They  had  spent  the  greater
part  of  the  day  together,  and  Pelham  had  pressed  Meredith  to  take
away  some  of  his  manuscripts  and  books.  Thus  far  the  reference  to
Meredith  seems  to  have  been  correct.  But  Meredith  was  unable  to
remember  definitely  that  he  took  any  manuscript  or  book  away.

The  only  references  coming  from  G.  P.  that  were  apparently  con-
fused or  without  special  significance  were  the  remarks  towards  the  end
of  the  sitting  :  "  Give  me  a  j^'Jwder  ;  my  tongue  is  wet"— which  had
no  meaning  for  the  sitter  (but  which  the  Howards  thought  might
have  reference  to  a  time  when  G.  P.  was  ill  in  their  house) — and  the
statements  below  about  the  handkerchief  and  perhaps  the  "  Uncle
"Will." He  did  leave  his  papers,  letters,  etc.,  "  mixed  up."

John,  if  that  is  you,  speak  to  me.  Tell  Jim  I  want  to  see  him.  He  will
hardly  believe  me,  believe  that  I  am  here.  I  want  him  to  know  where  I
am  ...  0  good  fellow.  All  got  dark,  then  it  grew  light.  Where  is
Uncle  Wil'?  I  met  Uncle  Willie,  William.  (T  don't  know  what  you
mean.)  Ask  Motlicr.  She'll  know.  [G.  P.  had  no  Uncle  William  deceased.
He  had  a  deceased  great-uncle  William,  on  his  mother's  side,  who  was
thus  the  uncle  of  his  mother  deceased  and  his  stei^mother  living,  who  are
sisters.]

Go  up  to  my  room.  (Which  room  ?)  Up  to  my  room,  where  I  write.
I'll  come.  Speak  to  mo,  John.  (Wliat  room  ?)  Study.  (You  said  some-
thing about  a  desk  just  now.)  I  left  things  all  mixed  up.  I  wish  you'ld  go
up  and  straighten  them  out  for  me.  Lot  of  names.  Lot  of  letters.  I  left
things  mixed  up.  You  answer  them  for  me.  Wish  I  could  remember  more,
but  I'm  confused. CLUB. Went  to  the  Club. Two  things  at  the


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  299'


Club  to  mate  right.  (What  Club  ?)  His  hand-er— (handkerchief).  Hand-
kerchief. (What  does  he  want  with  his  handkerchief  ?)  I  left  it  at  the  Club.
(What  Club  ?)  OUR...  did  you  find  it  ?  (Yes,  no,  you  haven't
told  me  at  what  Club.)  I  saw  you  there.  It  isn't  like  you,  John.  [The-
last  time  I  saw  G.  was  at  the  Players'  Club  in  New  York. — J.  H.]

Who's  Rogets  ?  [Phinuit  tries  to  spell  the  real  name.]  (Spell  that
again.)  [At  the  first  attempt  afterwards  Phinuit  leaves  out  a  letter,  then
spells  it  correctly.]  Rogers.  (What  do  you  want  Rogers  to  get  ?)  I  want
you  to  tell  Rogers  to  get  my  handkerchief.  I  left  it.  He  found  it.  Rogers,
has  got  a  book  of  mine. (What  is  he  going  to  do  with  it  ?)

[Both  Hart  and  G.  P.  knew  Rogers,  who  at  that  time  had  a  certain
MS.  book  of  G.  P.  in  his  possession.  The  book  was  found  after  G.  P.'s-
death  and  given  to  Rogers  to  be  edited.  G.  P.  had  promised  during  his
lifetime  that  a  particular  disposition  should  be  made  of  this  book  after  liis-
death.  This  action  which  G.  P.  living  had  contemplated  with  regard  to  the
book  was  here,  and  in  subsequent  utterances  which  from  their  private  nature
I  cannot  quote,  enjoined  emphatically  and  repeatedly,  and  had  it  been  at  once-
carried  out,  as  desired  by  G.  P.,  much  subsequent  unhappiness  and  confusion
might  have  been  avoided.  Neither  Hart  nor  Rogers  knows  anything  of  the-
handkerchief  incident.]

During  the  latter  part  of  the  sitting,  and  witliout  any  relevance  to-
the  remarks  immediately  before  and  after,  which  were  quite  clear  as.
expressions  from  G.  P.  came  the  words,  "Who's  James?  Will —
William."  [It  must  be  remembered  that  Phinuit  was  talking-
throughout.]  This  Avas  apparently  explained  by  Phinuit's  further
remarks  at  the  close  of  the  sitting.

Phinuit  :  Wiio's  Alice  ?  (What  do  you  want  me  to  say  to  her  ?)  [To-
R.  H.]  Alice  in  spirit.  Alice  in  spirit  says  it's  all  over  now,  and  tell  Alice
in  the  body  all  is  well.  Tell  Will  I'll  explain  things  later  on.  He  [George]|
calls  Alice,  too,  in  the  body.  I  want  her  to  know  me,  too,  Alice  and.
Katharine.  .  .  .  Speak  to  him.  He  won't  go  till  you  say  good-bye.
[The  hand  then  wrote  :  George  Pelham. Good  day  (?)  John.]

[Phinuit's  reference  seemed  to  be  quite  clear  at  the  time  to  Professor
William  James,  and  the  three  Alices  were  discriminated.  It  seemed  as-
though  Phinuit's  mention  of  the  other  Alices  had  reminded  G.  P.  of  the  one^
well-known  to  him .  Alice  James,  the  sister  of  Professor  William  James,  liad
recently  died  in  England.  The  first  name  of  Mrs.  James  is  also  Alice.
Alice,  the  sister  of  Katharine,  is  the  youngest  daughter  of  Sir.  Howard  and.
was  very  fond  of  G.  P.]

As  I  have  already  said,  the  most  personal  references  made  at  the
sitting  cannot  be  quoted  ;  they  were  regarded  by  J.  H.  as  profoundly
characteristic  of  Pelham,  and  in  minor  matters,  where  my  notes  wer&
specially  inadequate,  such  as  in  the  words  of  greeting  and  occasional
remarks  to  the  sitter,  the  manner  of  reference  to  his  mother  with  him
"spiritually,"  and  to  his  father  and  [step]  mother  living  etc.,  the  .sitter
was  strongly  impressed  with  the  vraisemblance  of  the  personality  of
-Pelham.


X


300


lliclard  IToJr/son.


[part


It  so  happened  that  appointments  had  been  made  for  other  sitters,
and  it  was  nearly  three  weeks  before  a  special  opportunity  was  given
for  further  communication  from  G.  P.,  at  a  sitting  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.
James  Howard  were  present  alone.  In  tlio  interim  I  accompanied
several  different  persons  to  their  sittings,  and  at  each  of  tliese  Phinuit
represented  G.  P.  as  anxious  to  see  his  friends,  using  some  such  remark
jis  "  George  says,  when  are  you  going  to  bring  Jim?"  or  "George  says
lie  wants  to  tell  you  about  the  philosophy  of  this  bfe."  One  only  of
these  sitters,  Mr.  Vance,  had  been  known  to  G.  P.,  and  at  the
beginning  of  his  sitting,  which  was  on  March  SOth,  1892,  G.  P.  first
-wrote  a  few  words  to  myself  expressing  a  wish  to  see  his  father
{Mr.  P.)  about  some  private  matters;  then  Phinuit  spoke  for  him,
saying,  "  I  want  to  tell  you  where  I  am  and  what  I  am  doing  and
wliat  this  life  consists  of."  Then  refc<'ences  were  made  to  two  other
friends  of  G.  P.,  who  had  also  been  mentioned  at  John  Hart's
sitting,  and  then  for  the  first  time  the  sitter  was  noticed.  "How  is
your  son?  I  want  to  see  him  some  time."  "Where  did  he  know
my  son?'  "In  studies,  in  college."  This  was  correct:  Mr.  Vance
liad  a  son  who  was  class-mate  of  G.  P.  Mr.  Vance  then  asked  :
■"  Where  did  George  stay  with  us?"  and  received  a  correct  answei",  a
description  of  his  country  house  being  given. (See  pp.  457-8.)

At  the  Howards'  first  sitting,  on  April  11th,  1892,  for  which  I
made  the  appointment,  of  course  without  giving  names,  Phinuit  said
very  little.  After  a  few  words  at  the  beginning  lie  gave  way  for  what
purported  to  be  G.  P.  using  the  A'oice,  and  during  nearly  the  whole  of
the  time  of  trance  apparently  G.  P.  controlled  the  voice  directly.  The
statements  made  were  intimately  personal  and  characteristic.  Common
friends  were  referred  to  by  name,  inquiries  were  made  about  private
matters,  and  the  Howards,  who  were  not  predisposed  to  take  any
interest  in  psychical  research,  but  who  had  been  induced  by  the
a,ccount  of  Mr.  Hart  to  have  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  were  profoundly
impressed  with  the  feeling  that  they  were  in  truth  holding  a  conver-
sation with  the  personality  of  the  friend  whom  they  had  known  .so
many  years.  The  following  passages  are  from  Mr.  Howard's  notes
taken  during  the  sitting,  and  may  serve  to  suggest  to  some  extent
the  freedom  with  which  the  conversation  was  carried  on.  All  the
references  to  persons  and  individuals  are  correct.

G.  P.:  Jim,  is  that  you?  Speak  to  me  quick.  I  am  not  dead.  Don't
think  me  dead.  I'm  awfully  glad  to  see  you.  Can't  you  see  me  ?  Don't
you  hear  me  ?  Give  my  love  to  my  father  and  tell  liiui  I  want  to  see  him.
1  am  happy  here,  and  more  so  since  I  find  I  can  communicate  with  you.  I
j)ity  those  people  who  can't  speak  ...  I  want  you  to  know  I  think  of
jou  still.  I  spoke  to  John  about  some  letters.  I  left  things  terribly  mixed,
my  books  and  my  papers  ;  you  v/ill  forgive  me  for  this,  won't  you  ? . .  .


XXXIII.] Ohservallons  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  GOl


(What  do  you  do,  George,  where  you  are  ?)

I  am  scarcely  able  to  do  anytliing  yet  ;  I  am  just  awakened  to  tlie
reality  of  life  after  death.  It  was  like  darkness,  I  could  not  distinguish
anytliing  at  first.  Darkest  hours  just  before  dawn,  you  know  that,  Jim.  I
was  puzzled,  confused.  Shall  have  an  occupation  soon.  Now  I  can  see  you,
my  friends.  I  can  hear  you  speak.  Your  voice,  Jim,  I  can  distinguish  with
your  accent  and  articulation,  but  it  sounds  like  a  big  bass  drum.  Mine
would  sound  to  you  like  the  faintest  whisper.

(Our  conversation  tlien  is  something  like  telephoning  ?)

Yes.

(By  long  distance  telephone. )  ■  .

[G.  P.  laughs.]  ■  ■ '  ■

(Were  you  not  surprised  to  find  yourself  living  ?)

Perfectly  so.  Greatly  surprised.  I  did  not  believe  in  a  future  life.  It
•was  beyond  my  reasoning  powers.  Now  it  is  as  clear  to  me  as  daylight.
We  have  an  astral  fac-simile  of  the  material  body.  .  .  .  Jim,  what  are
you  Avriting  now  1

[G.  P.  when  living  would  probably  have  jeered  at  the  associations  of  the
■word  "astral."— R.  H.]

(Nothing  of  any  importance.)
Why  don't  you  write  about  this  ?

(I  should  like  to,  but  the  expression  of  my  opinions  would  be  notliing.
1  must  have  facts.)

These  I  will  give  to  you  and  to  Hodgson  if  he  is  still  interested  in  these
things.

( Will  people  know  about  this  possibility  of  communication  ?)

Thoy  are  sure  to  in  the  end.  It  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  people
in  the  material  body  will  know  all  about  it,  and  every  one  will  be  able  to
communicate.  ...  I  want  all  the  fellows  to  know  about  me.  .  .  ,
.What  is  Rogers  writing  ?

(A  novel.)

No,  not  that. Is  he  not  writing  something  about  me  ?
(Yes,  he  is  preparing  a  memorial  of  you. )

That  is  nice  ;  it  is  pleasant  to  be  remembered.  It  is  very  kind  of  him.
He  was  always  kind  to  me  when  I  was  alive.  Martha  Rogers  [deceased
■daughter]  is  here.  I  have  talked  with  her  several  times.  She  reiiects  too
much  on  her  last  illness,  on  being  fed  with  a  tube.  We  tell  her  she  ought
to  forget  it,  and  she  has  done  so  in  good  measure,  but  she  was  ill  a  long
time.  She  is  a  dear  little  creature  v.'hen  you  know  her,  but  she  is  hard
to  know.  Slie  is  a  beautiful  little  soul.  She  sends  her  love  to  her
father. . .  .

Berwick,  how  is  he?  Give  him  my  love.  He  is  a  good  fellow;  he  is
•what  I  always  thought  him  in  life,  trustworthy  and  honourable.  How  is
Orenberg  1  He  has  some  of  my  letters.  Give  him  my  warmest  love.  He
"was  always  very  fond  of  me,  tliough  he  understood  me  least  of  all  my  friends.
"We  fellows  who  are  eccentric  are  always  misunderstood  in  life.  I  used  to
liave  fits  of  depression.  I  have  none  now.  I  am  happy  now.  I  want  my
father  to  know  about  this.  We  used  to  talk  about  spiritual  things,  but  he
will  be  hard  to  convince. My  mother  will  be  easier. ...  .;  i-,

X  2


S02


Uicliard  Hodgson.


[part


[As  stated  above,  all  the  references  to  persons,  incidents,  characters,  etc.,
so  far  as  tliey  are  known  to  living  persons,  are  correct.]

Among  the  private  matters  referred  to  was  the  disposition  of  the
book,  concerning  which  G.  P.  expressed  orally  the  same  desire  as
before.  (See  p.  299.)  The  only  writing  produced  at  this  sitting
moreover  was  confined  to  this  matter,  and  was  a  message  to  his  father
repeating  his  wish.

He  referred  to  a  tin  box  of  German  manufacture  which  he  said

was  either  in  New  York  or  Z [giving  the  name,  a  very  peculiar

one,  of  the  locality  of  his  father's  country  residence].  He  said  that
it  contained  letters  from  three  persons  whom  he  specified.  He  wished
the  Howards  to  have  this  box.  They  replied  that  the  letters  were  all
burned.

G.  P.  :  I  think  not.  I  want  you  to  have  tliem.  I  want  you  to  tell  my
father  about  this.

(Can't  you  give  us  something  that  will  convince  him  1  something  we
don't  know  and  he  does  ?)

I  understand,  a  test.  You  can  tell  him  about  tliis  tin  box  that  I  left  in
my  room. I  know  they  have  taken  the  chest,  but  this  tin  box  they  have

not. [The  box  was  found  at  Z  ,  but  there  were  no  letters  in  it.  See

below.— R.  H.]

[Mr.  Yance,  the  sitter  of  March  30th,  1892,  had  sent  me  two  questions
for  G.  P.,  which  I  requested  the  Howards  to  put  at  their  sitting.  The
questions  were  "1.  AVhat  was  the  purpose  of  the  association  you  formed
two  years  ago  with  Miss  Helen  Vance  and  two  other  ladies  1  2.  Give  the
names  of  the  two  otlier  ladies."  My  imjjression  is  that  I  gave  Mr.  Howard
my  recollection  of  these  questions  without  having  the  original  letter  of  Mr.
Vance  at  hand,  and  probably  Mr.  Howard  put  the  questions  as  I  gave  them
to  him. His  account  is  as  follows  :  ]

Then  we  put  two  test  questions,  by  request  of  Mr.  Hodgson  :  1st.  Wliat
was  the  nature  of  the  Society  formed  by  you  and  some  other  young  people
He  was  obviously  confused,  and  in  trying  to  answer  said  "development.'*
We  told  him  not  to  bother  about  it  now,  but  to  tell  us  at  next  sitting,  a.
proposal  which  Phinuit  recommended,  but  he  himself  in  his  gruff  voice
suggested  "  Theosophic. "  I  told  him  no.  He  made  a  try  at  question  2nd.
Names  of  members  of  Societj',  "Helen  Bering —Derrich,  or  Plerrick."'
[The  questions  were  apparently  not  asked  until  towards  the  end  of  the
sitting,  and  Phinuit  had  evidently  taken  control  of  tlie  voice  and  was  acting^
as  intermediary.  The  answer  must  be  called  wrong,  altliough  Helen  was-
the  first  name  of  one  of  the  members. See  account  of  next  sitting. — R.  H.  j

April  13th,  two  days  later,  was  the  date  of  the  next  sitting,  when
the  Howards  were  present  again,  and  the  characteristic  personality  of
G.  P.  was,  if  possible,  made  still  mor'e  manifest  than  at  the  previous
sitting.

The  "  little  tin  box  "  (see  account  of  previous  sitting)  was  referred  to
again  by  G.  P.,  and  although  the  sitters  repeated  "All  your  letters  were


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  303


destroyed,"  he  reiterated  "No,  I  think  iiof,  not  those  in  box."  The
Pelhams  first  wrote  that  there  was  only  a  large  tin  box,  which  was  in  New

York,  not  Z  ,  but  finally  tlie  "little  tin  box"  was  found  at  Z  ,  but

was  emjjty  when  found.  [Mrs.  Howard  knew  that  G.  P.  had  once  possessed
such  a  tin  box.]  This  was  explained  to  G.  P.  at  a  sitting  on  May  14th,
1892,  by  Mrs.  Pelham.  Phinuit :  "  That's  the  one  I  had  reference  to.  He
says  he  put  some  letters  in  before  going  across  the  water,  but  he  doesn't
remember  taking  them  out."]

At  this  sitting  (April  13th)  G.  P.  had  direct  control  of  the  voice
for  about  twenty  minutes  only.  Then  Phinuit  acted  as  intermediary,
and  there  was  also  a  little  writing,  a  few  lines  by  G.  P.,  in  the  form
•of  an  affectionate  letter  to  IMi'.  and  Mrs.  Howard.  Apparently
O.  P.  was  more  confideiat  of  giving  his  own  exact  words  by  the  direct
writing  process  than  by  the  method  of  getting  Phinuit  to  repeat  them.

Mr.  Howard  was  absent  during  part  of  the  sitting,  and  during  his
absence  G.  P.  inler  alia  referred  to  Mr.  Vance's  questions.  (See
previous  sitting.)  The  following  is  from  Mr.  Howard's  notes  on  his
return  to  the  sitting  : —

I  answered  part  of  that  question  [the  part  he  answered  was  correct],  but
did  not  give  the  names  of  the  other  two  people  because  it  would  be  no  test,
because  I  told  her  [Mrs.  Howard]  the  names  of  the  other  two  in  life,  and
as  she  knows  them,  if  I  was  to  give  the  names  in  her  presence,  they  would
s:iy  it  was  thought-transference.  No,  I  shall  reserve  the  two  names  to  tell
Hodgson  some  time  when  he  is  alone  with  me,  because  he  does  not  know
them. [All  true.]

Many  will  regard  this  as  perhaps  an  excuse  for  ignorance,  as  names
subsequently  given  were  not  correct.

I  wish  you  could  convince  my  father  and  make  him  come  here.  (Can't
you  tell  us  something  he  or  your  mother  has  done  T)  I  saw  her  brush  my
■clothes  and  put  them  away.  I  was  by  her  side  as  she  did  it.  I  saw  her  take
my  sleeve  buttons  from  a  sinall  box  and  give  them  to  my  father.  I  saw  him
send  them  to  John  Hart. I  saw  her  putting  papers,  etc.,  into  a  tin  box.

The  incident  of  the  "  studs  "  was  mentioned  at  the  sitting  of  Hart
(p.  297).  G.  P.'s  clothes  were  brushed  and  put  away,  as  Mrs.  Pelham
wrote,  not  by  herself,  but  by  "  the  man  who  had  valeted  George."
The  statement  made  at  the  same  sitting  to  Mrs.  Howard,  who  had  put
some  violets  on  the  body  of  G.  P.  before  the  colhn  was  closed  :  "  I  saw
you  put  those  violets  on  my  body,"  can  of  course  be  accounted  for  by
jiiniple  thought-transference  from  the  sitter,  and  may  be  regarded  as  of
little  evidential  value.  But  other  cases  mentioned  in  the  reports  of
somewhat  similar  incidents  just  after  death  are  correctly  described.
/Compare,  for  example,  Phinuit's  description,  p.  539,  of  Mrs.  Thaw's
little  child,  Margaret,  as  having  some  flowers  in  her  hand;  it  was  in  her
liand,  after  death,  that  Mrs.  Thaw  had  placed  three  little  flowers.  In
the  case  of  Mrs.  Sutton's  child  it  was  a  hook  that  Mrs.  Sutton  placed


sot


R  ichard  IloJgso n.


[rART


in  the  lianrls,  p.  493,  aud  lilies  of  the  valley  in  the  casket,  p.  48G.  See
also  tlie  reference  by  John  Hart  to  the  question  of  the  disposition  of
las  body  after  death,  and  this  was  unknown  to  me,  p.  354.)

An  arrangement  was  made  with  G.  P.  that  he  should  watch  his-
father  and  see  him  do  something  that  the  Howards  could  not  know-
about  and  tell  them  at  their  next  meeting,  which  was  fixed  for  the
following  day.  Mrs.  Piper  was  ill  in  bed  next  day,  and  it  was  not  till
April  22nd  that  the  next  sitting  was  held.

Mis.  Howard  and  myself  were  present,  but  I  was  out  of  the  roon^
most  of  the  time  and  the  record  of  the  sitting  was  made  chiefly  from
Mrs.  Howard's  notes  written  immediately  afterwards.

Most  of  the  sitting  was  private,  and  of  the  rest  I  quote  only  the
passage  for  which  I  have  contemporary  documents. ^  G.  P.  wrote:  "I
saw  father  and  he  took  my  photograph  and  took  it  to  the  artist's  to
have  it  copied  for  me.  ...  I  went  to  Wasliington  ;  my  father  will
be  hard  to  convince ;  my  mother  not  so  hard."  JMi  s.  Howard  wrote
to  Mrs.  Pelhara  concerning  this  and  other  matters  referred  to  at  the
sitting. Mr.  Pelham  wrote  to  Mrs.  Howard  on  April  24ih,  1892  : —

.  .  The  letters  which  you  have  written  to  my  wife  giving  such
extraordinary  evidence  of  the  intelligence  exercised  by  George  in  some
incoinprehensilile  manner  over  the  actions  of  his  friends  on  earth  have  given
food  for  constant  reflection  and  wonder.  Preconceived  notions  about  the
future  state  have  reccivjd  a  severe  shock.  . , .  My  wife  is  writing. . .  ,

Mrs.  Pelham  wrote  : —

.  .  .  Some  of  the  things  you  state  are  very  inexplicable  on  any  other
theory  than  that  George  himself  was  the  speaker.  His  father  did,  without
my  knowledge,  take  a  photograph  of  him  (the  same  as  the  one  sent  you)  to  a
photographer  here  to  copy — not  enlarge. The  negative  had  been  broken.

Mrs.  L  was  going  to  have  it  copied  in  N.  Y. ,  and  Mr.  Pelham  thought

he  would  see  what  they  could  do  here.

The  Howards  had  arranged  for  another  sitting  on  April  28th,  and
in  the  interim  two  or  three  other  persons  had  sittings.  On  one  of
these  intermediate  days  I  requested  G.  P.  through  Phinuit  to  obtain
information,  if  possible,  concerning  certain  incidents,  and  com-
municate the  results  to  the  Howards  at  the  next  sitting.  But  the
Howards  in  the  meantime,  as  I  learned  later,  had  transfeired  their

J  In  connection  with  some  of  these  early  sittings,  the  contemporary  notes  are
deficient.  I  entrusted  my  office  cojiy  of  the  whole  first  batch  of  G.  P.  sittings,  with
appended  n^tes,  to  Hart,  who  was  about  to  make  a  visit  to  Europe,  to  show  to  some
friends  there,  and  to  be  returned  to  me  immediately  afterwards.  Hart  did  not  return
them,  was  ill  for  a  long  time  in  Europe,  where  he  died  in  1895,  and  I  have  not  beer»
able  to  recover  my  original  documents.  The  Howards  also  later  went  to  Europe  for
three  years,  leaving  such  notes  as  they  possessed  stored  away  in  Boston,  and  it  was
not  till  the  end  of  lb'J7  that  I  was  able  to  obtain  the  contemporary  documents  givea
above.  ' '  ■  ■  • • .  . •  -■


xxxiil] Ohservallons  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  305


sitting  to  a  friend  of  theirs,  Mr.  Peirce.  It  then  occurred  to  me  that
I  would  request  G.  P.  at  the  beginning  of  the  silting  on  April  28th  to
visit  the  Howards,  and  bring  me  word  before  the  end  of  the  sitting
concerning  the  doings  of  the  Howards  during  the  time  of  the  sitting,
and  I  sent  a  special  letter  to  the  Howards,  asking  them  to  do  various-
fantastic  things  and  make  a  memorandum.  The  sitting  was  pi'actically
a  complete  failure  as  regards  Mr.  Peirce,  much  that  was  said  being
wrong,  and  what  was  right  appearing  to  the  sitter  to  be  probably
derived  from  indications  given  by  himself  (see  p.  461).  But  the
sitting  had  one  peculiarity  which  is  noteworthy.  I  carried  out  my
intention  of  sending  G.  P.  away  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  to
watcli  the  Howards,  and  towards  the  close  Phinuit  was  interrupted
by  statements  about  what  G.  P.  claimed  to  have  seen  Mrs.  Howard
doing.  In  the  middle  of  these  statements,  the  sitter,  who  was  known
to  G.  P.,  seemed  to  be  recognised.

\_Phinuit  spealcinrj.]

She's  writing,  and  taken  some  violets  and  put  them  in  a  book.  And  it
looks  as  if  she's  writhig  that  to  my  mother.  .  .  .  Who's  Tyson
Davis  (R.  H  :  I  know.  That's  all  right.)  [I  apparently  .supposed  that
these  names  had  nothing  to  do  with  G.  P.'s  communication.  Mrs.  Tyson
was  well  known  to  me,  and  Davis  (or  Davies)  was  the  name  of  her  father
(deceased)  whom  I  had  also  met. — R.H.,  1897.]  ...  I  saw  her  [Mrs.
Howard]  sitting  in  the  chair.  By  George  !  I've  seen  that  fellow  [the  sitter]
somewhere  [touching  face]  (Why,  George,  you  know  me)  sitting  before  a
little  desk  or  table.  Took  little  book,  ojjened  it,  wrote  letter  he  thinks  to
his  mother.  Saw  her  take  a  little  bag  and  put  some  things  in  it  belonging
to  him,  placed  the  photograph  beside  her  on  the  desk.  That's  hers.  Sent
a  letter  to  T  A  S  O  N  (Tyson  ?)  T  Y  S  0  N.  Mrs.  [R.  H.  asks  for
George  to  tell  about  sitter's  name,  etc.]  You  knov^  [to  sitter]  that  George
is  a  comical  sort  of  fellow.  He  is  laughing  very  hard.  There  is  some  joke
about  his  telling  your  name,  I  don't  know  what.  He  will  not  tell.  [Phinuit
says  that  George  recognises  the  sitter,  but  doesn't  want  to  tell  because  we
will  say  he  got  it  out  of  the  sitter's  head.]  [See  p.  303,  where  a  similar
reason  was  offered  for  refusal  of  information  which  was  not  afterwards,  in
its  most  important  part,  obtained.  In  this  case,  however,  the  desired
information  was  given  before  the  close  of  the  sitting.  See  below. — R.H.]
She  hunted  a  little  while  for  her  picture,  sketching.  He's  certain  that  the
letter  is  to  his  mother.  She  took  one  of  George's  books  and  turned  it  over
and  said  :  "George,  are  you  here  1  Do  you  see  that  1 "  Tliese  were  the  very
words.  Then  she  turned  and  went  up  a  short  flight  of  stairs.  Took  some
things  from  a  drawer,  came  back  again,  sat  down  to  the  desk,  and  then
finished  the  letter.  [Phinuit  kept  feeling  sitter's  head  and  face.  R.  H.  was
urging  him  to  get  George  to  tell  about  the  sitter,  etc.  Phinuit  said  at  last
that  George  had  gone  again.  R.  H.  urged  Phinuit  to  find  out  sitter's  name,
etc.,  from  George.  Finally  Phinuit  said  he  had  to  go,  and  Mrs.  Piper  began
to  come  out  of  trance.  Convulsive  movements  worse  than  usual,  and  then
whispered  voice  muttering  some  words  indistinguishable. . . .  Further


S06


liichard  Hodgson.


[part


nnintelligible  sounds,  among  wliicli  the  name  Peirce  was  alone  distinct.
Tiiis  name  was  spoken  twice,  and  was  not  in  either  Phinuit's  or  Mrs.  Piper's
■ordinary  voice. Shortly  after  this  Mrs.  Pi^^jer  came  to  herself.]

Mrs.  Piper  had  seen  Llr.  Peirce  a  few  days  previously  (when  he
tried  for  a  sitting,  but  Mrs.  Piper  was  unable  to  go  into  trance),  and
as  lie  is  well-known  in  Boston,  may  have  been  aware  of  his  name.
This  is  Mr.  Peirce's  own  explatiation  of  the  whispering  of  the  name.
I  do  not  myself  believe  that  Mrs.  Piper  did,  in  her  normal  state,
linow  his  name.  I  should  supplement  this  by  adding  that  when
Phinuit  declined  to  give  the  name  of  the  sitter  on  the  alleged  ground
that  it  would  be  explained  by  thought-transference  from  the  sitter,
I  charged  him  with  ignorance  of  the  name,  and  implied  that  his
.'dleged  excuse  for  not  giving  it  was  false.  Tliis  made  Phinuit
apparently  very  annoyed,  and  he  upbraided  me  for  my  disbelief  in
him  and  his  "spirit"  existence  after  all  that  he  had  done  for  me.
I  endeavoured  to  pacify  Phinuit  and  thought  I  had  succeeded,  and  he
isaid  that  he  would  got  the  name  from  George  when  the  latter  came
back.  It  was  almost  immediately  after  this  that  Phinuit  "had  to  go."
Since  this  sitting  I  have  frequently  heard  Mrs.  Piper  speak  during
the  interval  between  trance  and  waking,  on  the  borderline  of  waking.
On  rarer  occasions  I  have  lieard  her  speak  just  as  she  is  losing  con-
sciousness before  the  trance.  At  both  these  times  her  voice,  though
slightly  different  from  tlie  ordinary  voice  in  conversation,  is  not
different  to  the  extent  that  the  remark  in  my  contemporaiy  note  above
seems  to  suggest.  Sometimes  it  is  a  whisper,  more  commonly  not ;  but
it  always  sounds  dreamy  or  automatic,  i.e.,  it  sounds  just  as  I  should
imagine  Mrs.  Piper's  voice  would  sound  if  she  were  talking  in  her
sleep,  either  aloud  or  in  a  wdiisper.

Now  the  statements  made  as  to  wliat  Mrs.  Howard  was  doinc;  at
the  time  of  the  sitting  were  not  one  of  them  correct  as  regards  that
particular  time,  though  they  seemed  to  indicate  a  knowledge  of  Mrs.
Howard's  actions  during  the  previous  day  and  a  half,  as  appears  from
the  following  statement : —

Deak  Mr.  Hodgson, — I  did  none  of  those  things  to-day  but  all  of  them
yesterday  afternoon  and  the  evening  before  !

Yestei'day  afternoon  I  wrote  a  note  to  Mrs.  Tyson  declining  an  invitation
to  lunch  ;  this  I  did  at  a  little  table.  Later  I  wrote  to  his  mother  at  a  desk,
and  seeing  George's  violets  by  me  in  their  envelope,  gave  them  to  my
■daughter  to  put  in  my  drawer,  not  "into  a  book."  This  is  the  only
inaccuracy  of  detail.  The  day  before  I  also  wrote  to  his  mother,  putting  his
photograph  before  me  on  the  table  while  I  was  writing — two  of  his  photos
in  fact,  one  from  another  photo  and  one  from  a  portrait  I  had  painted  of
him  ;  these  I  afterwards  put  into  his  mother's  letter.  Did  "  hunt  for  my
picture,"  my  painting  of  him.  Also  wondered  in  my  mind  what  they  had  done
with  the  i^hoto  of  me  painting,  and  received  letter  from  Mrs.  Pelliam  saying


XXXIII.] Ohscrvaiions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  307


they  had  burned  it.  What  he  says  about  the  book  is  also  true,  though  I
can't  tell  at  jirecisely  what  time  I  did  it  as  I  was  alone  at  the  time.  In  all
other  matters  my  memory  is  corroborated  by  my  daugliter  wlio  took  tlie
note  to  Mrs.  T.'s,  and  saw  me  put  photo  before  me  on  the  desk.  She  now
says  that  I  only  put  one  before  me  on  the  desk  and  went  and  got  the  other
just  before  [)utting  it  in  envelope. It  was  only  a  minute  on  table.

While  writing  to  his  mother  I  did  "go  and  take  things  from  a  drawer,
•came  back  again,  sat  down  to  the  desk,  and  then  finished  the  letter."  This
was  the  letter  written  at  the  desk,  not  the  one  written  at  a  table.

I  am  much  disappointed  that  he  did  not  see  what  I  did  this  morning.  I
am  afraid  he  was  right  in  saying  they  had  no  notion  of  time.  Perhaps  it
took  him  too  long  to  come  to  me,  or  he  did  not  understand  Phinuit's
question.

I  hope  to  have  a  chance  to  hear  what  you  think  of  this  soon. — Yours,

[]\Irs.  Howard.]

P.S. — I  don't  know  whether  I  made  it  quite  clear  that  I  sat  tliinking,
■wondering  where  the  photo  of  me  while  painting  could  be,  and  I  thirik  that
in  the  first  of  the  two  letters  I  wrote  to  his  mother,  I  told  her  he  had  asked
for  it. I  know  I  thought  of  doing  so.

I  seldom  write  to  Mrs.  Tyson  and  this  note  is  almost  the  only  one  I  have
written  her  this  wintei-, — have  not  written  to  her  for  weeks,  perhaps  months,
before  this.  It  is  certainly  strange  that  he  should  seem  to  know  so  much  of
any  doings. I  feel  as  if  he  must  have  seen  them.

[G.  P.'s  reference  to  a  bag  is  apparently  incorrect,  as  Mrs.  Howard  makes
no  allusion  to  it.  My  impression  is  that  Mrs.  Howard  told  me  later  that  in
lit-r  letter  to  Mrs.  Tyson  she  referred  to  the  "G.  P."  subject,  but  I  can  find
no  memorandum  on  this  point.  I  was  struck  at  the  time  by  tlie  consideration
that  all  the  incidents  mentioned  were  directly  connected  with  the  thought  of
G.P.— R.  H.,  1897.]

This  suggested  that  G.  P.  had  a  very  obscure  perception  generally
of  our  physical  world,  and  that  he  liad  mistaken  for  contenn  orary
phj^sical  events  a  series  of  recent  scenes  in  ]\Irs.  Howard's  subliminal
consciousness.  A  similar  conclusion,  to  which  I  called  attention  in
my  previous  I'eport,  was  indicated  by  the  experiments  which  I  made
with  Phinuit  in  relation  to  the  doings  of  ]\trs.  Holmes  in  New  York,
■which  I  said  "  strongly  suggested  that  Phinuit  in  some  way  "was
getting  glimpses  into  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Holmes,  was  reading  off  some  of
her  past  experiences."  [Proceedings  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  24-25.)
Another  conclusion  to  which  I  have  come  is  that  usually  for
experiments  of  this  type  to  be  successful,  the  agent  should  be  thinking
strongly,  and  "  emotionally,"  of  the  real  person  who  claims  to  act  as
percipient,  and  should  also  be  concerned  with  matters  directly  relating
to  him.  The  failures  as  well  as  the  successes  of  G.  P.  in  such
experiments  point  to  the  existence  of  a  real  G.  P.  as  distinguished
from  a  fragment  of  Mrs.  Piper's  personality. (See  p.  335).  ;


308


llicliaixi  llo'J<json.


[part


On  April  29th,  the  day  following  the  sitting  with  Mr.  Peirce,  Mrs>
Howaiil  and  myself  had  a  sitting,  and  nearly  all  the  time  was  occupied
l)y  G.  P.  writing.  I  hold  the  forearm  firmly  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  wrist,  in  accordance  with  Phinuit's  request  to  "help  by  holding."
The  result  of  this  was  to  keep  the  arm  steadier,  so  that  the  fingers
could  move  independently,  but  such  holding  at  later  sittings  soon
ceased  to  be  necessary,  except  upon  rare  occasions.

.  I  must  explain  some  tilings  wliich  you  would  like  to  know.  I
was  glad  to  see  Peirce.  I  could  not  speak  to  Dr.  Scliville  [i.e,  Phinuit,  wliO'
has  always  given  his  last  name  as  Scliville.  See  previous  Reports. — R.H.],
to  make  him  understand  what  I  wanted  him  to  say,  so  I  tried  to  tell  the-
medium  just  as  she  was  coming  into  her  body  again,  and  I  hope  she  told  you
the  test  you  asked  for.  Please  answer  me,  did  she  tell  you  ?  (Yes,  she  gave
us  the  name.)  Tliat  is  all  you  asked  me  for.  I  will  now  explain.  I  had  sO'
many  tilings  in  my  mind  about  .  .  .  and  other  things  which  yoa  had
asked  me  to  do  for  you.  Tlie  fact  is  I  really  had  no  time  or  strength  to  tell
you  anytliing  about  anybody  else.  Uowever,  I  will  tell  you  anything  I  can
from  time  to  time.

.  Tlie  better  way  for  you  .  .  .  to  get  things  from  me  is  to  ask
me  to  look  up  things  for  you  and  then  let  me  tell  them  to  you  quite  clearly^
and  tlien  if  you  want  mo  to  recall  my  friends  when  they  are  here  simply  ask
me.  Then  my  mind  is  not  full  of  otlier  things.  ...  I  knew  Peirce  at
once,  but  could  not  make  Dr.  Scliville  understand  the  propriety  or  good  of
your  wanting  me  to  gi\'e  his  name  to  him  for  your  benefit.  .  .  .  Tell
Mr.  Peirce  I  did  not  want  to  slight  him  or  sliuflle  about,  but  was  so  busy
with  other  things,  and  besides  talking  to  Dr.  when  in  tlie  medium's  body

read  it  •  .  .  it  is  more  or  less  confusing,  and  I  cannot  give  it
so  clear.  Do  you  see  how  it  all  is,  Hodgson?  (Yes,  I  understand  exactly.)
Words  can  never  express  what  I  feel  towards  you  .  .  .  for  trying  to  get
me  to  do  things  to  explain  to  you  where  I  am  and  how  1  live,  and  all  for  you
all.  Now  please  give  me  some  tests  for  me  to  give  to  you  the  next  time  I
come  to  you.

Mrs.  Howard  had  received  some  questions  from  Mrs.  Pelham,  anr{
one  of  these  was  given  to  G.  P.  at  the  latter  part  of  the  sitting.  "Did
you  ask  your  mother  to  do  anything  for  you  in  Washington,  a  short
time  before  your  death,  something  which  you  cared  a  great  deal  about
having  done,  and  do  you  remember  wdiat  it  was  1 "  Tlie  answers  first
given  showed  that  he  understood  the  question  as  referring  to  a  time
after  liis  death,  and  concerned  with  communications  at  previous
sittings.  After  it  was  explained  that  his  mother  wished  to  know
what  it  was  that  he  had  asked  her  to  do  in  Wasliington  "before  he
2:)assed  out,"  the  following  was  written  :  —

I  don't  think  I  told  you  anything,  only  in  regard  to  getting  me  some
pictures  and  the  papers  for  my  writing.  I  will  give  it  to  you  again  clearly.
1'here  is  no  use  trying  to  act  against  what  is  not  given  us — strengtli.  We
can  have  so  much  and  no  more. I  have  found  that  out. Do  tell  Peirce


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


how  I  tried  to  tell  the  medium,  but  I  don't  know  you  got,  whether  you  ^ct
it  or  no. (Yes,  we  got  it.) Good. You  see  I  saw  her  spirit  just  as  she-
was  going  in,  and  as  I  could  not  tell  Dr.  I  took  that  chance. (We  got  it
all  right.) Oh,  I  am  so  glad. Well,  Hodgson,  there  is  no  death. What  do-
you  think  now  ? (Do  you  remember  our  conversation,  when  I  told  you
about  my  hypothesis  about  a  physical  basis  of  a  future  life?) I  sneered  at-
it (Well,  it  wasn't  quite  so  much  as  that,  but  you  didn't  accefjt  it.) No,  I
did  sneer. (Is  it  the  kind  of  body  I  suggested,  etherial  ?) It  is  athcria,  and
. . . Etherial,  and  you  were  right. [See  p.  364.] . . . Now  give  me^
some  more  to  -do . . . that  I  may  prove  it  to  you. Hurry,  please,
for  I  am  weak. Good  bye,  friends .  .

[Phinuit  then  made  a  few  remarks  about  the  difficulty  of  seeing  things
clearly,  etc.  —  "It  is  like  looking  through  a  key-hole  into  a  room  and  trying
to  had  out  about  the  people  passing  backwards  and  forwards."]

It  was  ascertained  later  from  Mrs.  Pelham  that  a  lady  well-known
to  Gr.  P.,  whose  home  was  in  New  York,  had  been  taken  ill  in
Washington  during  a  visit  there,  and  that  G.  P.  had  requested  his-
mother  to  call  upon  her.  The  answer  would  have  been,  "To  call  upon
Mattie  Johnson."  [This  is  not  the  real  name.]  Following  the  words,
"  Good  bye,  friends,"  in  the  above  writing  came  three  or  four  other-
words.

The  last  five  letters  written  at  the  sitting  were  not  all  deciphered  at-
the  time ;  apparently  they  formed  no  word,  and  I  had  evidently  tried
to  link  the  letters  into  some  signiOcance  with  what  inunediately
preceded  by  conjecturing  a  reading  which  altered  one  of  the  letters
and  made  two  words  out  of  them,  and  putting  my  conjecture  in  square
brackets  with  a  note  of  interrogation. On  recently  examining  the-
original  writing  I  found  that  these  five  letters  were  quite  cleai",  and
represented  the  first  five  letters  of  the  first  name  (one  or  other  way  of
spelling  it)  of  the  lady  whom  G.  P.  had  wished  his  mother  to  see  in
Washington,  and  whose  name  would  have  been  the  substantial  part  of
the  answer  to  the  question. In  case  I  might  be  misi-eading  the-
writing,  I  submitted  it  independently  to  Miss  Edmunds  and  Dr.  W.
R.  ISTewbold,  both  of  whom  have  seen  much  of  Mrs.  Piper's  automatic-
writing. I  gave  them  no  indication  whatever  as  to  any  possible-
interpretation. Miss  Edmunds  interpreted  the  letters  as  Maiil,  and
Dr.  ISTewbold  interpreted  them  as  Matie — "short,  of  course,  for  Matilda."
Both  these  interpretations  had  occurred  to  myself. Although  I  have-
substituted  other  names,  the  analogy  is  very  close. The  case  would
appear  more  remarkable  if  I  could  mention  the  actual  circumstances.
I  do  not  know  of  any  other  word  in  the  English  language  that  the
letters  concerned  could  stand  for  except  the  first  name  of  the  lady  in
question.

This  may  appear  to  be  a  very  tiivial  circumstance,  but  it  is  by"
paying  special  attention  to  the  mistakes  and  the  obscurities  and  the?


510


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


oddities  of  these  curious  trance-phenomena  that  the  most  advance,  as
I  believe,  has  been  made.  Tliere  are  instances  in  later  sittings  which
indicated  that  when  some  question  in  the  nature  of  a  test  had  been
put  to  G.  P.,  the  answer  to  which  had  been  known  to  the  once  living
G.  P.,  some  desperate  attempt  was  made  to  give  the  answer  in  one
way  or  another,  by  a  last  movement  of  the  hand  in  writing,  a  last
axtterance  through  Phinuit,  or  automatic  speech  by  what  I  may  call
Mrs.  Piper's  ordinary  s^ihliminal,  as  in  the  case  recorded  above,  where
the  name  "  Peirce  "  was  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  as  she  was  coming  out  of
trance,  in  reply  to  the  request  for  the  name  of  the  sitter.^  There  are
instances  also  suggesting  that  the  same  kind  of  supreme  effort,  as  it
were,  has  been  made  by  G.  P.  on  behalf  of  other  persons.  Take,  for
example,  the  two  following  cases.  At  a  sitting  shortly  after  this  in
New  York,  G.  P.  was  acting  as  amanuensis  for  a  deceased  lady  whom
he  had  known  when  living.  The  first  name  of  this  lady,  a  very
unusual  one,  had  been  given,  also  the  place  where  we  had  both  been
guests  together  for  a  week  or  two  one  summer  was  designated,  and
G.  P.  went  on  to  write  some  more  general  statements  at  her  dictation,
which  were  not  meant  specially  for  my  benefit.  AVhile  these  were
being  written  I  asked  for  the  surname  of  the  lady,  and  G.  P.  rebuked
me  decidedly  for  my  interruption,  and  proceeded  with  the  statements
without  answering  my  question.  "This,"  thought  I,  "  is  an  evasion ;
it  would  have  been  much  easier  to  have  written  the  name,  if  it  were
known,  than  to  spend  so  many  words  in  telling  me  not  to  interrupt,"
and  my  suspicion  seemed  to  receive  confirmation  later,  when  the
writing  ended  without  (as  I  thought  at  the  time)  any  sign  of  a
reply  to  my  question.  Phinuit  followed  with  a  few  words  about
other  matters,  but  stopped  suddenly  and  called  out  the  letters
M  A  N  N  O  R  S  (pseudonym),  in  fact  almost  shouted  them,  and  then
lepeated  the  letters,  spelling  them  as  before.  He  said  that  George
was  "  yelling  at "  him  to  say  that.  The  letters  which  Phinuit  gave
were  indeed  the  answer  to  my  question.  Phinuit  spelt  the  surname
of  the  lady,  but  did  not  pronounce  it  (p.  471).

Another  striking  case  occurred  at  the  end  of  M.  Paul  Bourget's
sitting  on  December  11th,  1893.  He  put  four  test  questions  to  the
chief  communicator  at  his  sitting,  and  after  the  writing  apparently
was  finished  and  the  hand  dropped,  it  was  seized  again  suddenly  and
violently,  and  wrote  a  name  beginning  with  A,  but  the  other  letters
were  indecipherable.  This  was  followed  by  tho  name  Venice,  and  then
another  unavailing  attempt  at  the  name  A ... I  understood

1  This  particular  desire  to  answer  "  test  questions  "  if  possible  at  the  sitting  where
they  were  asked  seems  to  have  originated  after  my  discussion  with  Phinuit  at  the
.sitting  of  April  28th,  where  I  urged  my  dissatisfaction  with  the  reason  offered  for  nob
•giving  the  sitter's  name  at  once  (p.  30G).


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance  311


from  M.  Bonrget  at  the  time  tliat  a  name  beginning  with  A  was  the-
correct  answer  to  one  of  his  questions,  but  he  has  not  rephed  to  my
inquiries  on  this  and  other  points. He  himself  noted  that  "  Venice
was  correct  (apparently  as  the  answer  to  one  of  liis  questions)  ;
another  question  had  been  answered  previously  (see  p.  375).

It  is,  of  course,  by  no  means  usually  the  case  that  the  last  scrawls
are  apt  to  be  evidentialiy  the  most  valuable.  On  the  contrary,  the
latter  part  of  a  sitting,  aeteris  jxiribiis,  is  apt  to  be  inferior,  owing  to-
the  growing  exhaustion  of  the  medium,  or  what  the  communicator
would  be  more  likely  to  describe  as  the  dimming  of  the  light,  and  pari
pass2i  with  this  dinmiing  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  intelligence  at
work  to  become  dreamy  and  confused.  But  when  it  appears  that  the
intelligence  at  work  has  temporarily  ceased  from  the  act  of  com-
municating, and  afterwards  almost  immediately  returns  to  give  another
word  or  two,  the  circumstances  do  justify  the  expectation  that  the  final
fragments  may  be  specially  worth  study.  The  explanation  offered  is
that  the  communicator's  mind,  wlien  the  act  of  communicating  is-
broken,  regains  the  balance  which  it  lost  while  communicating,  realises,
more  fully  the  questions  that  were  put,  and  recalls  more  clearly  the-
answers.  The  swift  resumption  of  communication  while  the  answers
are  "on  the  mind,"  and  before  other  thoughts  can  intervene,  is  likely
to  result  favourably.

I  think  it  probable  myself,  then,  that  there  was  some  such  attempt
in  the  last  writing  of  the  sitting  of  April  29th.  The  answer  to  Mrs.
Pelham's  question  was  unknown  to  the  sitters  at  the  time,  and  w&
apparently  endeavoured  to  connect  the  last  letters  with  what  preceded.
It  never  occurred  to  us  to  look  for  an  answer  to  Mrs.  Pelham's  ques-
tion just  there,  whereas  after  my  later  experience  it  is  precisely  the
place  where  I  should  expect  to  find  the  answer,  especially  after
G.  P.'s  statement  earlier  in  the  sitting,  "  I  will  give  it  to  you  again
clearly."

I  may  add  a  few  words  in  explanation  of  the  general  tenour  of  the-
sitting  of  April  29th.  It  was  ixuportant  in  helping  to  bring  about  an
appreciation  of  the  difficulties  in  "  communicating,"  and  of  the  methods
to  be  followed  for  avoiding  confusion.  G.  P.  evidently  tried  to  explain
some  of  the  limitations  to  which  he  was  subject,  and  which  I  think
hold  good  whether  we  suppose  the  G.  P.  communicating  to  be  the-
complete  veritable  once  embodied  G.  P.,  or  only  a  small  portion  of  tliat
G.  P.,  or  a  fragment  of  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  consciousness.  He  urged
that  when  he  came  full  of  information  for  which  I  had  asked,  he  should
be  allowed  to  give  it  before  being  despatched,  so  to  speak,  on  another
errand,  and  that  when  he  had  certain  things  to  say  to  me  he  should
not  be  interupted  by  other  I'equests.  It  was  some  time,  however,  before-
I  understood  fully  the  advice  which  now  seems  so  clear  to  me,  and  I


312


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


would,  for  the  benefit  of  other  investigators,  specially  emphasize  the
fact  that  this  advice  appears  to  me  to  be  good,  even  if  we  distinctly
adopt  the  view  that  we  are  here  concerned,  not  with  any  extraneous
intelligences,  but  with  some  subliminal  personality  of  the  medium's.

At  the  next  "  G.  P."  sitting,  on  May  14th,  in  New  York,  when
Mrs.  Pelham  was  present  (see  below)  she  "asks  about  a  letter  written
by  a  friend  after  he  passed  out,  and  places  a  letter  on  Mrs.  Piper's
head."

The  friend  was  Mattie  Johnson,  p.  309.

[Wi-itten.]  Oh  yes,  I  know  her,  but  cannot  recall  her  name.  Mother,  I
<triily  cannot  think  of  her  name.  (Don't  you  renieuiber  you  asked  me  to  go
.  and  see  her  ?)

[Phinuit  speaks.] "The  test  you  were  after  ?  "

[Written.]  I  wanted  you  to  go  and  see  her,  but  I  have  forgotten  her
name. (It  begins  with  auM.) I  tliirik  it  was  Matilda.

No  further  reference  was  made  to  this  until  during  a  sitting  on
December  5th,  1892,  when  in  the  midst  of  another  entirely
unrelated  enquiry  which  I  was  making  (see  p.  423)  G.  P.  suddenly
referred  to  Mattie  Johnson,  asked  if  she  was  better,  and  also  wrote
"Washington."  I  paid  no  special  attention  to  this,  but  went  on  with
■my  previous  inquiry.

The  sitting  of  May  14th,  from  the  record  of  whicli  I  have  quoted
.above,  was  held  at  the  house  of  Dr.  A.  C.  Thaw,  at  whose  invitation
Mrs.  Piper  had  gone  to  New  York,  and  whose  guest  she  was  during
her  stay.  I  arranged  for  the  sitting  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pelham,  who
were  unknown  to  Dr.  Thaw,  and  introduced  them  under  other  names.
Phinuit  began  by  saying  that  somebody  was  going  to  write,  and  the
writing  started  :  "  Hallo,  father  and  mother,  I  am  George."  There
were  three  difFerent  batches  of  writing,  witli  intervals  of  speech  by
Phinuit  on  behalf  of  G.  P.  Several  articles  which  had  been  taken
by  Mrs.  Pelham  were  seized  with  much  excitement,  and  appropriate
remarks  made  about  them,  or  actions  performed.  My  report,
however,  is  too  fragmentary  to  be  of  much  service  as  regards  the
ensuing  conversation.  There  was  a  very  strong  personal  element,  and
.an  intimate  knowledge  was  shown  of  private  family  matters,  especially
iu  connection  with  a  living  brother.  But  there  was  also  a  certain
amount  of  confusion,  probably  owing  chiefly,  as  I  now  think,  to  the
continual  change  of  subject.  G.  P.  had  various  questions  to  ask,
.and  so  had  the  sitters,  and  they  were  continually  interrupting  ea.ch
otlier.  There  were  three  questions,  besides  the  one  concerning
]\lattie  Johnson,  which  were  apparently  not  answered,  or  answered
incorrectly.

(l\Irs.  Pelham  :  What  did  j'ou  give  Rogers  to  puhhsh  in  the  Cosmo-
. oUtan  ? ) . . . lie says  th-it's  about  his  life. [See  p.  301.]  [Mrs.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  313


Pdhnm  explains  that  she  means  something  which  George  gave  to  Rogers
to  publish  in  his  magazine  before  George's  death.]  He'll  write  it.  [Hand
moves  as  though  wishing  to  take  pencil,  but  then  apparently  relinquishes
the  idea.]

No  further  reference  was  made  to  this.  G.  P.  turned  the  conver-
•sation,  through  Phinuit,  to  family  matters.  Later  on  Mr.  Pelham
asked  a  question  about  a  lady,  giving  her  name.  Thereupon  Phinuit
repeated  three  other  Christian  names  of  ladies  wliich  had  no  I'elevance,
and  again  the  subject  was  changed.  Towards  the  end  of  the  sitting,
wliile  writing  was  going  on,  Mrs.  Pelham  asked  about  a  MS.  book
■of  poems,  and  the  reply  came,  "That  has  been  laid  in  one  of  my
■drawers."

[Mrs.  Pelham  says  thaf  this  isn't  so.] Ask  Harry  Meredith.  [Mrs.
Pelham  remarks  that  she  thought  Harry  Meredith  was  dead. R.  H.  says
that  he  supposed  that  Harry  Meredith  was  living,  but  was  not  sure.]  Harry
will  tell.  [See  p.  298. Harry  Meredith  was  then  and  I  believe  still  is  living.
— R.  H.] It  is  not  right  for  me  to  stay  longer.

There  was  evidently  some  misunderstanding  about  this  question,
as  the  book  referred  to  was  the  one  about  which  G.  P.  had  shown  a
full  knowledge  at  previous  sittings,  but  the  confusion  may  have  been
■due  to  the  failing  energy,  as  the  trance  was  ju.st  about  to  end.  All
■other  questions  apparently  were  exactly  appreciated,  references  to  his
brother,  to  his  father's  two  different  homes,  to  the  circumstances  of
the  accident  that  caused  his  death,  to  his  own  mother  and  sister
deceased,  his  unfinished  MSS.,  books  and  letters  that  he  had  received
and  that  he  wished  to  be  returned,  and  the  mutual  relations  between
his  father  and  mother  and  certain  friends.  Great  anxiety  was  shown
by  G.  P.  to  make  some  arrangement  for  giving  tests  by  describing  at
a  later  sitting  what  his  father  and  mother  were  doing  at  some  specified
time,  and  it  was  decided  that  he  should  follow  them  that  afternoon,
■during  which  they  should  do  something  special  having  relation  to  him,
which  he  should  recount  at  the  next  sitting.  The  day  was  Saturday,
and  the  ne.xt  sitting  was  held  on  the  following  Monday,  Mrs.  Howard
(who  was  visiting  New  York)  and  myself  only  being  present,  ilr.
and  Mrs.  Pelham,  who  were  staying  at  a  hotel  in  New  York,  left  Dr.
Thaw's  house  immediately  after  their  sitting  on  Saturday  morning,
and  did  not  enter  it  again.  After  Phinuit  had  said  a  few  words  at
the  sitting  on  IMonday,  May  16th,  I  was  sent  out  of  the  room,  and
then  G.  P.  took  direct  control  of  the  voice  and  talked  for  some  time
"with  Mrs.  Howard.  Almost  immediately  after  my  return  G.  P.
stopped  speaking  and  began  to  write.  He  first  (in  the  writing)
■expressed  his  desire  to  see  Berwick  soon,  a  friend  of  liis  v.hom  he
mentioned  to  the  Howards  at  their  first  sitting  (see  p.  301),  and  I
then  asked  him  what  his  father  did  on  Saturday  afternoon.


314


Jticharcl  Hodjson.


[PAKT


I  saw  him  talce  some  notepaper  and  write  an  errplanatoi-y  letter  to  Frank
about  what  1  had  said  to  him  when  I  saw  him  in  or  on  tliat  day.  [Phinuit
says:  "  Do  you  understand  ? "]  (Yes.)  [Then  followed  some  indecipherable
words,  some  of  which  resemble  " tout  ca.'i."]

The  flowers  which  I  saw  mother  put  before  my  photo,  she  and  father  will
understand  .

[The  next  sentence  not  written,  but  spelt  out  by  Phinuit.]  I  saw  them
do  [patting]  I  saw  mother  put  them  under  my  picture  on  the  afternoon  of
which  he  spoke  to  me  to  watch  him.

[Written.]  In  connection  with  this  I  saw  them  open  my  book  and  place-
therein  a  picture  of  X.  Y.  That  is  all  of  importance  that  I  saw  them  do,
I  saw  you  [Mrs.  Ploward]  and  saw  Litlier  give  you  the  roses.

[Spoken  by  Phinuit.]  He  saw  you  take  a  picture — that  is  after  he  had  a
talk  with  his  father.  Then  you  went  to  some  place  to  get  a  picture.  (Of
whom  ?)

[Phinuit  stumbled  over  a  word  sounding  something  like  "  himself."  ]
[Written.]  Himself  my  myself.  [Mrs.  Howard  asks  which  picture,
showing  portraits,  at  one  of  which  Phinuit  says,  "That's  it."J  I  mean  the
one  you  got  from  the  photographer.  I  saw  you  take  it  and  hold  it  in  your
hands  before  you  and  talk  to  me.  (What  did  I  say  to  you  1  Did  I  speak
to  you  ?) Yes,  it  but  what  you  said  was  wholly  mental.

[Phinuit  speaks  on  behalf  of  G.  P.]  Ask  Hodgson  whether  this  is
important  to  him  or  not.  I  am  determined  to  [writing  again]  transfer  to
you  my  thoughts,  although  it  will  have  to  be  done  in  this  uncanny  way.
(Nevermind.  Tliat's  all  right.  We  understand,  etc. )  Good.  I  will  move
heaven  and  eai-th  to  explain  these  matters  to  you,  Hodgson.  [Phinuit
speaks.]  You  see  I  am  not  asleep.  [Written.]  I  am  wide  awake,  and  I
assure  you  I  am  ever  ready  to  help  you  and  give  you  things  of  importance
in  this  work.  [Phinuit  speaks.]  It  was  like  Greek  to  him  before  he  came
here.  I  could  not  believe  this  existence.  [Written.]  I  am  delighted  ta
have  this  opportunity  of  coming  here  to  this  life,  so  as  to  be  able  to  prove
my  experiences  and  existence  here.  Dear  old  Hodgson,  I  wish  I  could  have
known  you  better  in  your  life,  but  I  understand  you  now,  and  the  philosophy
of  my  being  taken  out  and  (Didn't  you  go  too  soon  ?)  Not  too  soon,  but  it
is  my  vocation  to  be  able  to  explain  these  things  to  you  and  the  rest  of  my
friends.  (Does  it  do  you  harm  ?)  And  it  is  all  nonsense  about  its  doing  me
harm,  for  it  surely  does  no  harm,  and  will  help  to  enlighten  the  world.
What  think  you,  Hodgson  ?  (I  agree  entirely.  I  think  it's  the  most,
important  work  in  the  world.)  Oh,  I  am  so  glad  your  exalted  brains  are
not  too  pretentious  to  accept  the  real  truth  and  philosophy  of  my  coming-
and  explaining  to  you  these  important  things.  (Now,  George,  we  mustn't
keep  the  medium  in  trance  too  long.)  Do  not  worry  about  her,  she  is
having  a  good  time,  and  I  will  do  no  hai-m.  You  know  that  too  well.
[Phinuit  speaks.]  He  says  he's  not  an  idiot.  (Oh,  I  know  he's  not  an,
idiot,  etc.)

[Written.]  I  understand.  You  see  I  hear  you.  Now  I  will  proceed
with  my  important  conversation.  Your  material  universe  is  very  exacting,
and  it  requires  great  practice  and  perseverance  to  do  all  I  want  to  say  to
you.  ...


xxxiii.] ObservcUions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  315


Mrs.  Howard  informed  me  that  all  the  statements  about  the
circumstances  connected  with  herself  v/ere  correct,  and  she  left  at
once  to  ascertain  whether  the  statements  concerning  the  doings  of
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pelham  on  the  Saturday  afternoon  were  also  correct.  My
impression^  is  that  Mrs.  Howard  was  aware,  from  some  knowledge
which  she  obtained  directly  or  by  inference  during  a  call  upon  the
Pelharas  on  the  Satui'day,  that  they  had  done  something  with  flowers
and  photograph.  The  other  matters  mentioned  were  entirely  unknown
to  her,  though  she  might  indeed  liave  surmised,  consciously  or
unconsciously,  that  Mr.  Pelham  would  contemplate  writing  to  Frank
such  an  explanatory  letter  as  was  indicated.  It  appeared  that  two  of
the  acts  attributed  to  ?.Ir.  and  Mrs.  Pelham  had  been  done  as
described;  nor  were  there  any  other  test  incidents,  but  the  third,  viz.,
the  writing  of  a  certain  explanatory  letter  to  Frank  (brother  of  G.  P.)
had  not  been  actually  carried  out.  Mr.  Pelham  had  intended  writing-
such  a  lettsr  on  the  Saturday  afternoon,  and  had  consulted  his  wife
about  the  proposed  contents,  but  had  not  found  time  to  write.  This
experiment  again  suggests  that  the  supernormal  knowledge  shown  of
our  physical  world  by  the  communicators  through  Mrs.  Piper  is
obtained  indirectly  and  telepathically  through  the  minds  of  living
persons,  rather  than  by  a  direct  visual  perception  such  as  we  enjoy.

There  was  no  further  opportunity  for  investigating  G.P.  at  that
time,  as  Mrs.  Piper  was  giving  a  series  of  sittings  under  the  arrange-
ment of  Dr.  A.  B.  Thaw,  at  that  ti}ne  living  in  New  York,  by  whose
special  kindness  I  was  enabled  to  make  the  appointments  for  the
sittings  of  May  14th  and  16th.  However,  G.  P.  rendered  assistance
at  least  by  acting  as  amanuensis  for  other  communicators  at  moi'e  than
one  of  the  sittings  which  followed  in  May  and  June  in  New  York,  and
on  May  29th  talked  at  our  request  into  a  phonograph,  to  which
unfortunately  we  trusted  for  a  record  of  the  conversation,  but  were
disappointed. (See  Appendix  IV.,  p.  563).

AVithin  a  few  days  after  this  Mrs.  Piper  gave  one  or  two  sittings
to  personal  friends  of  her  own  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Boston,  and  was  then  away  in  the  country  resting  during  the  summer,
not  resuming  her  sittings  till  the  autumn.  Special  arrangements  were
then  made,  owing  to  the  generosity  of  one  of  our  members,  for  having
a  series  of  stenographically  reported  sittings  which  should  be  devoted
to  further  inquiries  concerning  the  G.  P.  personality.  Mrs.  Piper
suffered  much  from  ill-health  during  the  winter  of  1892-3,  the  cause
being  some  tumours,  for  the  removal  of  which  an  operation  was  finally
necessary  (see  p.  479).  This  interfered  to  some  extent  with  the
sittings,  of  which,  however,  we  were  enabled  to  hold  fourteen  reported


1  See  footnote  p  304.


316


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


stenogi'aphically.  Many  other  matters  were  referred  to  in  these
sittings  besides  those  connected  with  Gr.  P.  I  shall  licre  refer  only  to
some  of  the  more  important  incidents  having  relation  to  G.P.'s  identity.
Those  which  I  give  in  brief  will  be  found  more  in  detail  in  Appendix
I.,  together  with  some  additional  extracts  and  abridgments  and
explanatory  comments.

The  sittings  were  held  in  the  library  of  Mr.  Howard's  house,  in
Boston,  in  tlie  evening.  It  was  necessary,  of  course,  to  offer  some
explanation  to  Mrs.  Piper  for  our  making  such  an  arrangement,  and  I
informed  her  that  we  wished  a  special  series  of  sittings  for  the  purpose
of  getting  statements  from  a  communicator  whom  we  had  agreed  to
call  George.  This,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  was  his  real  first  name,  but  I
thought  it  highly  probable  tliat  it  would  be  used  by  some  of  the  sitters
in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence  during  her  normal  waking  state.  My  own
belief  is  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  unaware  till  long  afterwards  that  George
was  any  moi'e  than  a  pseudonym  ;  but,  of  course,  for  purposes  of
evidence  it  must  be  assumed  that  she  knew  the  full  real  name  and  was
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  object  of  our  inquiry.

The  first  sitting  of  the  series  was  lield  on  November  22nd,  1892.
G.  P.,  in  his  first  writing,  referred  to  his  knowledge  of  the  place,  and
asked  Mr.  Howard  if  he  remembered  how  he,  Mr.  Howard,  always
knew  just  where  to  find  certain  books.  G.  P.,  living,  and  Mr.  Howard
had  frequently  talked  together  there  and  had  occasion  to  turn  up
references  to  one  book  or  another,  and  G.  P.  had  I'emarked  several
times  on  Mx".  Howard's  accurate  knowledge  of  the  location  of  books  on
ins  shelves.  G.  P.,  later,  using  the  voice,  asked  about  the  letter  that
Orenberg  wrote  to  Mr.  Howard  in  regard  to  his  "passing  out,"  and  made
a  remark  which  seemed  to  show  a  specific  knowledge  of  its  contents.  It
was  Orenberg  who  informed  Mr.  Howard  of  G.  P.'s  death,  by  telegram,
followed  by  letter.  G.  P.  then  wrongly  stated  that  his  father  was  at
that  minute  writing  a  letter.  He  then  said,  "  Get  me  my  hair."  Since
the  last  sitting  in  the  previous  spring,  Mrs.  Pelham  had  sent  Mrs.
Howard  some  of  G.  P.'s  hahg  hair.  Mrs.  Howard  was  not  consciously
thinking  of  this  and  had  forgotten  to  bring  it  into  the  room.  After
receiving  it,  G.  P.  said :  "  Mother  gave  it  to  you.  She  had  it  a
long  time."

At  the  next  sitting,  November  28th,  Mrs.  Howard's  eldest  daughter,
Katharine,  was  present  part  of  the  time.  She  was  greeted,  naturally,
by  G.  P.,  who  used  the  voice,  and  later  asked  her  about  her  violin,  and
said  it  was  horrible  to  hear  her  playing  it.  G.  P.,  living,  was  annoyed
by  her  practising  it  when  she  was  a  little  child.  He  asked  after  a
special  picture  which  he  had  owned,  and  was  told  that  it  had  been  torn
up  after  his  death.  Mrs.  Howard  presented  a  picture  for  recognition,  and
G  P.  placed  it  on  top  of  the  head,  and  said  it  was  their  summer  house,


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  317


but  that  he  had  forgotten  the  name  of  the  town.^  Such  a  temporary
forgetfuhiess,  it  may  be  observed,  would  not  be  unnatural  in  any  one  of
us.  It  was  some  years  since  the  Howards  had  lived  there  in  the
summer,  and  they  had  since  spent  their  summers  in  another  country

place,  X  ville,  to  which  G.  P.,  later,  spontaneously  referred,  not  at

the  moment  remembering  the  first  part  of  the  name,  "  Then  you
bought  a  place  at  some  ville." When  Mrs.  Howard  mentioned  the

name  of  tlie  first  country  place,  D  ,  G.  P.  at  once  correctly  referred

to  the  little  brick  house  and  the  grape-vine,  and  asked  specially  wliere
the  little  out-house  was.  This  is  noteworthy,  as  the  "little  brick  hen-
house," IMrs.  Howard  notes,  "just  did  not  come  into  the  picture."  On
the  other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  a  country  house  is  sure  to  have  an
out-house.  Further,  Mrs.  Howard  handed  another  picture  to  G.  P.,  but
he  at  once  said  that  he  had  no  recollection  of  it,  and,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  G.  P.,  living,  had  never  seen  it.  Less  evidential  were  the
following  :  That  his  father  had  had  a  book  printed  (his  father  had
pi'inted  G.  P.'s  poems  in  a  small  volume,  which  appeared  just  before
the  first  sitting  of  this  series) ;  that  a  basket  presented  was  his  (it  had
been  given  by  him  as  a  Christmas  present) ;  that  a  paper  presented  by
Mrs.  Howard  was  written  to  him  by  her  that  morning  (it  was  a  poem
on  death,  written  that  morning  with  G.  P.  in  mind,  ljut  no  reference  to
G.  P.  in  it) ;  that  a  letter  presented  was  written  by  himself  a  long  time
ago  (correct);  that  a  newspaper  presented  by  Mr.  tloward  had  been  sent
to  him  by  Orenberg  (it  was  a  foreign  newspaper,  still  in  its  wrapper,
that  Mr.  Howard  had  received  from  Orenberg  that  morning,  and  that
he  had  at  once  hidden  away  without  telling  any  one  of  it :  but  G.  P.
first  mentioned  the  name  of  John  Hart  in  connection  with  it,  both
John  Hart  and  Orenberg  being  in  Europe). More  personal  was  the

1 1  may  say  liere  that  on  different  occasions  in  past  years  I  examined  Mrs.  Piper's
■eyeballs  during  the  trance,  and  always  found  them  rolled  up,  and  my  conviction  is
that  the  trance-personalities  do  not  obtain  any  information  by  tlie  ordinary  process  of
vision.  It  may  be  assumed,  however,  that  Mrs.  Piper  rolled  her  eyeballs  up
•temporarily  when  she  supposed  that  an  examination  was  about  to  be  made,  and  even
that  she  possesses,  during  the  trance  state,  some  hyperesthesia  of  ordinary  vision.
When  the  hand  and  voice  are  being  used  by  the  same  "  control,"  and  an  article  is  given
to  the  hand,  it  must  be  assumed,  in  the  absence  of  indications  to  the  contrary  in  the
record,  that  the  article  may  have  come  within  the  field  of  her  vision.  When  the  hand
is  being  used  independently  of  the  voice,  the  head  is  invaribly  turned  away  from  the
hand,  and  under  ordinary  circumstances  (unless  the  head  is  lifted  and  turned  and
sustained  by  the  sitter)  the  hand  on  the  table  and  any  articles  presented  to  it  there  are
outside  the  field  of  vision.  With  the  development  of  the  automatic  writing  Phinuit
•seemed  to  lose  the  ability  to  support  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  which  tends  to  sag
iorward  and  downward  with  the  head  turned  to  the  left.  In  the  early  stages  of  the
development  of  the  automatic  writing  it  was  usually  supported  to  a  certain  extent  in
that  position  by  one  of  the  persons  present.  Later  on  cushions  were  arranged  on  a
table  in  front  and  somewhat  to  the  left  of  Mrs.,  Piper,  and  the  head  has  usually
been  allowed  to  rest  more  or  less  buried  in  these  cushions,  but  still  turned  to  the  left.

V  9.


318


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


remark  to  l^fr.  Howard  in  connection  with  James  Peirce  :  "When  you
dine  with  him,  thinlc  of  me."  G.  P.,  living,  occasionally  dined  at  the
house  of  Mr.  Peirce  in  company  with  Mr.  Howard.  The  suggestion  to
Mr.  Howard,  "Get  the  long  pipe  and  smoke,"  may  be  regarded  by
some  persons  as  a  guess.  It  was,  however,  well  known  to  G.  P.,  living,
that  Mr.  Howard  was  in  the  habit  of  smoking  a  long  pipe  in  the
evening.

At  tlie  third  sitting  there  was  little  that  can  be  quoted  as  of
evidential  nature,  most  of  the  time  being  occupied  by  questions
concerning  G.  P.'s  new  state  of  existence.  Reference  was  made  to
Plato's  views  in  connection  with  a  discussion  which  I  had  with  G.P.
living,  in  a  way  which  indicated  a  knowledge  of  the  specific  issues
involved  ia  that  discussion.  (See  p.  363.)  Another  daughter  of  the
Howards,  Evelyn,  was  present  during  part  of  the  sitting.  G.  P.  living
used  to  tease  her  a  good  deal,  and  one  of  the  first  things  said  was  "  I
won't  tantalise  you  now,"  and  afterwards  again,  "  I  used  to  torment
Evelyn;  but  she  will  forgive  me,  I  know."  During  the  last  part  of
G.  P.'s  conversation  with  Evelyn  the  other  sitters  v/ere  sent  away.
G.  P.  wished,  as  it  apper.red,  to  give  her  some  ethical  advice.  Evelyn
gave  a  brief  account  of  the  conversation  immediately  after  the  sitting,
from  which  it  appeared  that  G.  P.  asked  if  she  remembered  the  little
book  which  he  had  given  her  and  had  written  her  name  in.  This  was
correct.  Evelyn  had  been  looking  at  it  a  few  days  before.  G.  P.  wrote
some  words  and  told  her  to  compare  them  with  his  writing  in  the  little
book.  There  was  no  special  likeness  between  the  two  writings.  (For
remarks  on  the  handwriting  see  Part  II.  of  this  Report.)

Part  of  the  fourth  sitting  was  occupied  by  G.  P.  in  explaining,  in
reply  to  questions  by  P^.II.,  some  of  the  obscurities  in  his  conversation
of  the  previous  sitting  concerning  his  new  existence.

During  this,  G.  P.  made  some  side  remarks,  as  it  were,  to  Mrs-
Howard,  asking  her  about  INIrs.  Warner  (who  was  known  to  G.  P.
living,  and  had  visited  Mrs.  Howard  that  morning  and  talked  with
her  on  the  G.  P.  matter)  and  referring  to  "another  friend  I  used  to
know,  a  Mrs.  Easton,"  Mrs.  Howard  for  a  momexit  not  thinking  who
was  meant,  and  then  remembering  that  Mrs.  Easton  was  the  sister  of
James  Peirce  (see  p.  305).  In  the  latter  part  of  the  sitting  Mr.
INIarte,  an  old  friend  of  G.  P.,  came  into  the  room  with  Mr.  Howard.
G.  P.  had  been  using  the  voice,  but  apparently  was  unable  to  continue
doing  so,  and  wrote  a  little.  There  was  some  confusion,  apparently,  in
what  followed.  (Sec  the  detailed  account,  p.  420.)  Mr.  Marte  was.
recognised,  and  the  subject  in  which  he  was  specially  interested  was-
referred  to  by  G.  P. ;  the  excitement  in  the  hand  and  the  remarks  made
by  G.  P.  v/erc  quite  in  keeping  with  the  relations  Avhich  had  existed
between  Mr.  Marte  and  G.  P.  living. But  Mr.  Marte  is  so  well  knowu


xxxill.] Observations  of  Cerlain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  319


both  as  an  author  and  a  lecturer  tliat  any  mere  knowletlgo  of  his  name
and  work  cannot  be  regarded  as  having  any  evidential  value.

The  fifth  sitting  was  largely  occupied  with  other  inquiries  and
communications.  Mr.  Howard  was  not  present  and  Phinuit  at  the
beginning  of  the  sitting  said  that  G.  P.  had  gone  to  find  him.  Later
on  G.  P.  wrote  that  Mr.  Howard  had  gone  to  see  his  friend  Fenton.
This  was  correct.  Fenton  lived  in  a  town  'in  the  country.  In  reply
to  a  question  as  to  what  Howard  and  Fenton  wei'e  talking  about,
<jr.  P. 's  statement  "  about  this  very  subject  and  about  me,"  although
correct,  cannot  of  course  count  for  anything  evidentially,  as  it  was  so
probable,  but  the  statement  made  earlier  in  the  sitting,  at  9.10  p.m.,
that  Mr.  Howard  was  reading,  or  was  a  few  minutes  previously,  and
which  was  afterwards  ascertained  to  be  correct,  perhaps  counts  for  a
little  in  the  direction  of  telwsthesia.  G.  P.  also  said  that  he  had
something  to  tell  Orenberg  that  would  surprise  him,  and  told  us  to  ask
Orenberg  "  what  he  wanted  to  destroy  my  papers  and  letters  which  I
gave  him,''  the  fact  being  that  Orenberg  had  helped  Mr.  Pelliam  to
destroy  G.  P.'s  letters  after  his  death.  This,  however,  was  known  to
the  Howards.

In  connection  with  this  I  may  refer  to  an  incident  that  occurred
much  later,  at  a  sitting  with  Mr.  A.  B.,  on  April  17th,  181)1,  who
inquired  whether  G.  P.  knew  what  he,  Mr.  A.  B.,  had  done  on  G.  P.'s
behalf  after  the  latter's  death.  G.  P.  stated  correctly  that  A.  B.  had
destroyed  some  "cigar  checks"  which  he  had  left  about.  These  had
apparently  been  retuined  to  G.  P.  living,  after  his  payment  of  Club
bills,  and  after  G.  P.'s  death  Mr.  A.  B.  had  found  them  and  destroyed
them.

During  the  sixth  sitting,  December  7th,  G.  P.  asked  for  his
mother's  letter.  A  letter  from  his  mother  had  been  received  by
Mr.  Howard,  and  this  was  put  into  the  hand.  As  I  have  explained
elsewhere  (p.  317  footnote)  when  the  hand  is  "  controlled  "  apparently
independently  of  the  head,  the  head  sags  down  and  to  the  left  ia
such  a  position  that  the  hand  is  outside  of  the  field  of  vision,
and  there  is  no  possiljility  of  Mrs.  Piper's  reading  by  any  normal
process  a  letter  given  to  the  hand  under  those  circumstances.  After
handling  the  letter  G.  P.  stated  correctly^that  his  father  was  not  well,
that  his  mother  said  in  the  letter  that  she  was  going  somewhere,  that
the  house  and  property  in  N.  Y.  were  to  be  disposed  of.  These
matters  were  mentioned  in  the  letter  and  also  known  to  Mrs.  Howard
who  had  read  it.  When  asked  to  mention  the  name  of  the  place  he
wrote  Potomac.  This  was  not  correct.  The  name  of  the  place  had
been  mentioned  correctly  by  G.P.  at  a  previous  sitting  (p.  302).

I  think  it  improbable  that  there  was  here  any  clairvoyant  reading
of  the  letter,  but  that  the  information  was  obtained  possibly  from  the


320


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAHT


mind  of  Mrs.  Pelliam  by  some  process  akin  to  telresthesia,  or  perhaps
from  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Howard  by  direct  thought-transference.  In  the
ninth  sitting  of  this  series,  December  19th,  when  G.  P.  was  using  the
voice,  a  letter  written  by  Mr.  Pelham  was  given  to  him  by  Mrs.
Howard.  The  Howards  supposed  that  it  was  a  letter  in  which
Mr.  Pelham  referred  to  G.  P.'s  manifestation  at  the  sittings  and  his
own  interest  in  hearing  of  them.  It  was  not,  however,  this  letter,  bub
another  one  from  Mr.  Pelham  entirely  on  business  matters,  whicli
Mi-s.  Howard  had  given.  Yet  G.  P.  referred  to  the  character  of  the
contents  of  the  letter  which  directly  concerned  himself,  saying  that  his
father  "  believes  that  I  exist.  He  was  pained,  but  he  is  no  longer  pained,,
because  he  feels  that  I  exist."  This  was  riglit,  but  obviously  was  not
obtained  by  any  reading  of  the  words  of  the  letter  which  had  been
given.  It  niny  be  said  that  G.  P.  merely  made  a  not  unlikely  guess,
especially  since  he  had  been  told  tliat  there  was  something  in  the
letter  that  would  please  him  ;  but  if  any  supernormal  knowledge  was
shown  it  must  apparently  be  ascribable  either  to  some  direct  apprecia-
tion of  liis  father's  slate  of  mind  or  to  thought-transference  from  the
Howards.  .  .  -

To  return  to  the  sitting-  of  December  7th.

O

Mr.  Howard  asked  what  it  was  G.  P.  referred  to  at  tlie  previous
sitting  in  connection  with  Orenljcrg,  and  the  reply  was  that  Orenberg-
had  written  to  Mr.  Howard  and  wanted  to  know  what  G.  P.  had  to  say.
This,  though  true,  would  have  been  more  interesting,  as  JMrs.  Howard
suggested  at  tlie  time,  if  told  before  the  letter  had  been  received.

At  the  next  sitting,  December  9th,  where  Mr.  Marte  was  again
present,  and  asked  some  questions  on  j^liilosophical  subjects,  there  was-
much  confusion.  Both  Phinuit  and  G.  P.  complained  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  sitting  that  the  "light"  was  weak,  apparently  owing  to
Mrs.  Piper's  increasing  ill-health  (which  eventually  led  to  an  operation
in  March,  1893).  Nearly  all  the  following  sittings  were  much  shorter,
and  contain  less  characteristic  matter.  jMr.  Marte  inquired  inter  alia.
concerning  a  booli  on  the  One  or  Many,  but  G.  P.  showed  no  know-
ledge of  it.  This  apparently  was  the  name  proposed  by  G.  P.  living  in
conversation  with  Mr.  JMarte,  for  a  book  written  by  G.  P.  It  existed
only  in  IMS.  form.  It  is  at  least  doubtful  whether  G.  P.  living  thought
of  it  under  the  title  proposed  by  him  to  Mr.  Marte.

Later  on  in  my  Report  I  shall  mention  some  other  incidents  in
connection  with  the  series  of  sittings  to  which  I  am  now  referring,
but  I  give  here  portions  of  the  account  of  the  eleventh  sitting  of  the
series,  December  22nd,  1S92  (see  p.  438).

At  the  sitting  a  personal  incident  was  correctly  mentioneil  by  G.  P.,  in
conuecfciun  with  a  particular  occasion  of  one  of  liis  meetings  with  the  Howards.
In  reply  to  iu(|uiries  lie  sj^ecitied  correctly  that  it  was  in  N.  Y..  hut  was


xxxiil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  32 L


unable  to  give  the  precise  cii'cumstances  ;  gave  names  of  two  common  New
York  friends  incorrectly  in  reply  to  the  query  where  the  dinner  was  when

they  met. . . . Arthur  C  was  referred  to  as  a  friend,  and  the  town

Portsmouth  was  also  mentioned,  near  whicli  I\Ir.  C  lives  in  the  summer.

[Correct.]

It  was  during  this  sitting  that  perhaps  the  most  di'amatic  incident
of  the  whole  series  occurred.  Mrs.  Howard  was  supporting  Mrs.  Piper's
head,  I  was  following  the  writing,  and  Mr.  Howard  was  sitting  some
distance  away  smoking  a  long  pipe,  when  the  following  conversation
ensued.

G.  P.  :  "Now,  what  will  I  do  for  you  ?  "

R.  H.  :  Well,  George,  is  there  anything  tliat  j'ou  would  like  to  give  us,
any  special  message  that  you  thought  it  would  be  desirable  for  us  to  have,  or
anything  about  philosophy,  we  should  be  glad  to  have  that  !

Mr.  Howard  :  Vv^ell,  George,  before  you  go  to  philosophy — you  know  my
opinion  of  philosophy —

G.  P.  :  "It  is  rather  crude,  to  be  sure."

Mr.  Howard  :  Tell  me  something,  you  must  be  able  to  recall  certain
things  that  you  and  I  know  ;  now,  it  makes  no  difference  v/hfvt  the  thing  is  ;
tell- me  something  that  you  and  I  alone  know.  I  ask  you  because  several
things  I  have  asked  you,  you  have  failed  to  got  hold  of.

G.  P.  :  "  Why  did  you  not  ask  me  this  before  1 "

Mr.  Howard  :  Because  I  did  not  have  occasion  to.

G.  P.  :  "  What  do  you  mean,  Jim  ?  "

Mr.  Howard  ;  I  mean,  tell  me  something  that  you  and  I  alone  know,
something  in  our  past  that  you  and  I  alone  know.
G.  P,  :  "  Do  you  doubt  mo,  clear  old  fellow  1 "

Mr.  Howard  : I  simply  want  something  —you  have  failed  to  answer
certain  questions  that  I  have  asked — now  I  want  you  to  give  me  the
equivalent  of  the  answers  to  those  questions  in  your  own  terms.
- G.  P.  :  "  What  were  they  1 "

Mr.  Howard  :  Tlie  questions  were  about  wliere  we  dined,  and  that  you
did  not  remember  [see  above,  pp.  320-1]  ;  now  tell  me  something  you  do
remember.

G.  P.  :  "  Oh,  you  mean  now."

Mr.  Howard  :  Tell  me  something  now  that  you  remember  that  haijpened
before.

G.  P.  :  "Well,  I  will.  About  Arthur  [see  above]  ought  to  be  a  test.
How  absurd  .  .  .  what  does  Jim  mean  Do  you  mean  our  conversation
on  ditl'erent  things,  or  do  you  mean  something  else  ?  "

Mr.  Howard  :  I  mean  anything.  Now,  George,  listen  for  a  moment,
listen,  listen.

G.  P.  :  "I  know"

Mr.  Howard  :  I  mean  that  we  spent  a  great  many  summers  and  winters
together,  and  talked  on  a  great  many  things  and  liad  a  great  many  views  in
common,  went  througlr  a  great  many  expsriences  together,  Now  [G.  P.
commencing  to  write]  hold  on  a  minute.

G.  P.  :  "  You  used  to  talk  to  me  about . .  ,"


322


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


The  transcription  here  of  the  words  written  by  Gr.  P.  conveys,  of
course,  no  proper  impression  of  the  actual  circumstances  ;  the  inert
inass  of  the  upper  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  body  turned  away  from  the
right  ai'm,  and  sagging  down,  as  it  were,  limp  and  lifeless  over  i\Irs.
Howard's  shoulder,  but  the  right  arm,  and  especially  hand,  mobile,
intelligent,  deprecatory,  then  impatient  and  fierce  in  the  persistence
of  the  writing  which  followed,  which  contains  too  much  of  tlie
personal  element  in  G.  P.'s  life  to  be  reproduced  here.  Several  state-
ments were  read  by  me,  and  assented  to  by  Mr.  Howard,  and  tlien  v/a3
written  "private"  and  the  hand  gently  pushed  me  away.  1  retired  to
the  other  side  of  the  room,  and  Mr.  Howard  took  my  place  close  to
the  hand  where  he  could  read  the  writing.  He  did  not,  of  course,
read  it  aloud,  and  it  was  too  private  for  my  perusal.  The  hand,  as  it
reached  the  end  of  each  sheet,  tore  it  off  from  the  block  book,  and
thrust  it  wildly  at  Mr.  Howard,  and  then  continued  writing.  The
circumstances  narrated,  JMr.  Howai'd  informed  me,  contained  precisely
the  kind  of  test  for  which  he  had  asked,  and  he  said  that  he  was
"perfectly  satistied,  perfectly."  After  this  incident  there  was  some
further  conversation  with  references  to  the  past  that  seemed  specially
natural  as  coming  from  G.  P.

"About  niy  work,  yes,  my  writing,  I  used  to  help  you  in  my  work,  and
you  ditto.  .  .  .  Jim,  I  am  dull  in  this  sphere  about  some  things,  but
you  will  forgive  me,  won't  you  1  .  .  .  but  like  as  Avlicn  in  the  body
sometimes  we  can't  always  recall  eveiytliing  in  a  moment,  can  we,  Jim,  dear
old  fellow  ?  .  .  .  God  bless  you,  Jim,  and  many  thanks.  You  often
gave  me  courage  when  I  )ised  to  get  depressed.  You  know  how  you  especi-
ally used  to  fire  at  me  sometimes,  but  I  understood  it  all,  did  I  not,  old
fellow  1  .  .  .  and  I  used  to  get  tremendously  down  at  tlie  heel  some-
times, but  I  am  all  right  now,  and,  Jim,  you  can  never  know  how  nuich  I
love  you  and  how  much  I  deliglit  incoming  back  and  telling  you  all  this  .  .  .
When  I  found  I  actually  lived  again  I  jumped  for  joy,  and  my  first  tliought
was  to  find  you  and  Mary.  And,  thank  the  Infinite,  here  I  am,  old  fellow,
living  and  well . .  ."

Characteristic  also  of  the  living  G.  P.  was  the  remarlc  made  to  me
later,  apparently  with  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the  private
statements :

"  Thanks,  Hodgson,  for  your  kind  help  and  reserved  manners,  also
patience  in  this  dillicult  matter."

As  I  have  already  said,  jNIrs.  Piper  suffered  much  from  illdiealth  at
this  time,  and  the  last  sitting  given  Ijefore  her  operation  was  held  on
March  r2th,  1893.  This  sitting  was  held  primarily  that  the  doctors
who  were  to  operate  might  have  some  experience  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
in  case  any  unusual  feature  might  develop  while  she  was  undergoing
the  operation  under  ether. G.  P.  wrote  only  a  few  words  of  advice,


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Gerlain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  323


saying  that  he  came  '■  just  one  minute  to  spsak  to  you.  I  undci-stand
everything  now.  I  will  wait  for  you  and  be  with  you  all  I  can  in  the
meantime."

Phinuit  gave  a  description  of  Mrs.  Piper's  troul)le  in  substantial
agreement  with  the  surgeon's  diagnosis,  and  verified  at  the  operation,
which  was  performed  successfully,  and  without  the  occurrence  of  any
abnormal  circumstances  (see  p.  479),  on  March  14th,  189-3.  Tlie  first
sittings  wliich  Mrs.  Piper  gave  afterwards  were  two  in  September,  to
Mr.  M.,  a  previous  sitter.  G.  P.  appeared  at  the  first  of  these  and
sent  some  brief  messages  to  friends,  and  rendered  assistance  almost
constantly  at  later  sittings,  until  the  assumption  of  the  control  of
Mrs.  Piper's  trance  by  persons  who  claimed  to  have  been  the  chief
communicators  through  the  late  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses  (see  p.  408).
References  to  G.P.'s  presence  at  sittings  will  be  found  in  various
accounts  given  in  the  Appendices  to  both  Parts  of  this  Report.  Very
fi'equently  he  professed  to  act  as  amanuensis  for  deceased  friends  or
relatives  of  sitters  who  were  strangers  to  him,  and  at  other  times  he  is
represented  as  offering  advice  and  explanations  to  those  trj-ing  to
communicate  directly  themselves  by  writing  with  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,
lie  stated  about  the  latter  part  of  1893  that  he  was  going  "  farther
away  "  and  would  not  be  so  available  for  tests,  but  that  he  would
continue  to  assist  as  far  as  possible,  and  help  any  "stragglers"  to
communicate.  The  Howards  had  several  more  sittings,  chiefly  of  a
pei'sonal  sort,  before  they  left  for  Europe  in  the  spring  of  1894,  and
they  also  arranged  sittings  for  several  persons  known  to  G.  P.  living,
all  of  whom  were  recognised  with  complete  appropriateness  by  the
G.  P.  communicating.

This  recognition  of  friends  appears  to  me  to  be  of  great  importance
evidentially,  not  only  because  it  indicates  some  supernormal  know-
ledge, but  because,  when  all  the  circumstances  are  taken  into
consideration,  they  seem  to  point,  in  G.  P.'s  case,  to  an  independent
intelligence  drawing  upon  its  own  recollections.  I  have  more  or  less
complete  records  of  nearly  all  the  sittings  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  since  the
first  appearance  of  G.  P.  Of  most  of  the  remaining  few  I  received
accounts  shortly  after  the  sitting.  At  the  outset  of  the  communications
from  G.  P.,  he  was  particularly  anxious — I  describe  it  as  it  seemed
'prima  facie  to  be — to  see  the  Howards  and  his  father  and  mother  for
the  purpose  of  clearing  up  some  private  matters.  After  tiie  sitting  of
Mr.  Hart,  when  G.  P.  expected  soon  to  see  the  Howards,  he  manifested
his  presence  at  the  following  sittings  wliich  I  attended  until  he  saw  the
Howards.  During  this  interval  Mr.  Vance  had  a  sitting,  and  although
he  made  an  appropriate  inquiry  of  Mr.  Vance  and  answered  correctly  a
test  question,  the  incident  was,  as  it  were,  casual ;  he  did  not  stay ;  he
was  not  there  to  see  jMr.  Vance,  and  Mr.  Vance  was  not  there  to  see


324


Richard  Hodgson.


[pari


liim  (see  p.  457).  Before  the  silting  of  Mr.  Peirce  (see  p.  305),  Mr.s.
Warner,  known  to  G.  P.,  had  a  sitting  on  April  25th,  1892,  at  which
G.  P.'s  presence  was  not  announced  at  all,  as  far  as  appears  from  my
record  of  the  sitting,  which  is,  however,  not  complete,  as  I  was  out  of
the  room  part  of  the  time.  Mrs.  Wai'ner  did  not  go  to  see  G.  P.  She
had  taken  a  chain  that  had  been  worn  by  Madame  Blavatsky  and  a  cap
that  had  been  worn  by  Walt  Whitman,  about  which  she  desired  to
inquire.^

On  April  28th  occurred  the  incident  which  I  have  described  on
p.  305,  when  G.  P.  said  that  he  knew  the  sitter,  and  I  asked  for  the
sitter's  name,  which  was  given  correctly  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  "  sub-
liminal" stage  of  her  recovery  from  trance.  On  April  29tli  came  the
explanation  from  G.  P.  about  the  difficulties  invohed  in  the  act  of  com-
municating, and  I  believe  that  I  emphasised  the  importance  of  his  always
recognising  any  friend  of  his  who  happened  to  attend  a  sitting,  no
matter  what  other  communications  he  might  wish  to  make.  From  that
time  ouwai'ds  he  has  never  failed  to  announce  himself  to,  and  to  recog-
nise, with  the  appropriate  emotional  and  intellectual  relations,  the  sitters
who  were  known  to  G.  P.,  living,  and  to  give  their  names  in  one  form
or  another,  with  one  exception.  This  exception,  liowever,  seems  to  me
to  be  as  noteworthy  as  if  the  recognition  had  been  complete.  It  is  the
case  of  Miss  Warner,  who  had  her  first  sitting  on  January  6th,  1897.
G.  P.  wrote  a  little  near  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  but  seemed  to
have  only  some  vague  remembrance  of  the  sitter,  who,  nevertheless,
was  given  a  good  deal  of  correct  information  by  Phinuit  and  others
concerning  the  members  of  her  family  and  friends.  x\t  the  end  of  the  -
sitting  G.  P.  wrote  a  few  words  to  ask  how  Rogers  was  getting  on,  and
sending  regards  to  him.  At  Miss  Warner's  second  sitting,  held  the
next  day,  Januaiy  7th,  G.  P.  wrote  part  of  tlie  time,  and  asked  the
sitter  if  she  knew  Orenberg.  Slie  did  not.  The  sitter  mentioned  at
the  previous  sitting  that  she  remembered  G.  P.,  but  that  he  knew  her
mother  belter,  and  at  this  second  sitting  G.  P.  asked  who  she  was.  I
said  her  mother  was  a  special  friend  of  Mrs.  Howard.

I  do  not  think  I  ever  knew  you  very  well.  (Very  little.  You  used  to
come  and  see  my  mother.)  I  heard  of  you,  I  suiipose.  (I  saw  you  several
times.  You  used  to  come  with  Mr.  Rogers.)  Yes,  I  remembered  about  Mr.
Rogers  when  I  saw  you  before.  (Yes,  you  spoke  of  him.)  Yes,  hut  I  cannot
seem  to  place  you.  I  long  to  place  all  of  my  friends,  and  could  do  so  before
I  liad  been  gone  so  long.  You  see  I  am  farther  away.  .  .  I  do  not
recall  your  face.  You  must  have  clianged.  .  .  .  (R.  H.  :  Do  you
remember  Mrs.  Warner  ? )  [Excitement  in  hand]  Of  course,  oh,  very  well.
For  pity  sake  are  you  her  little  daughter  ?  (Yes.)  By  Jove,  how  you  have
grown. ... I  thought  so  much  of  your  mother,  a  charming  woman.


1  Mrs  Warner  was  later  on  mentioned  by  G.  P. See  p.  318.


XXXII].] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  325


(She  always  enjoyed  scehij^  yon,  I  know.)  Our  tastes  were  similar  (about
writing  ? )  Yes.  Do  you  know  Marte  at  all  ?  (I've  met  him  once  or  twice.)
Your  mother  knows.  Ask  her  if  slie  remembers  the  book  I  gave  her  to  read..
(T  will.)  And  ask  her  if  she  still  remembers  me  and  the  long  talks  we  used
to  have  at  the  home  evenings.  (I  know  she  does.)  I  wish  I  could  have
known  you  better,  it  would  have  been  so  nice  to  have  recalled  the  past.  (I
was  a  little  girl.)

Now  it  should  be  remembered  that  these  sittings  were  held  five
years  after  the  death  of  G.  P.,  and  that  G.  P.  had  not  seen  Miss  Warner
for  at  least  three  or  four  years  before  his  death,  that  slie  was  only  a.
little  girl  wlien  he  had  last  seen  her,  that  she  had  not  been,  so  to  say,
a  special  friend  of  his,  and  that  she  had,  indeed,  changed  very  much  in
the  intervening  eight  or  nine  years.

This  non-recognition,  then,  by  G.  P.  is  a  perfectly  natural  circum-
stance, and  when  we  compare  the  details  given  by  Phinuit  of  Miss-
Warner's  family,  and  the  incidents  mentioned  by  Hart,  tlirougli
G.  P.  writing,  in  connection  with  her  brotlier  (see  p.  3-56), — incidents,
moreover,  which  were  unknown  to  the  sitters, — and  when  we-
remeraber  also  that  both  Mi.ss  Warner  and  myself  were  fully  aware  of
her  name  and  of  the  fact  that  she  had  known  G.  P.,  the  very  non-
recognition  seems  to  me  to  afford  an  argument  in  favour  of  the
independent  existence  of  G.  P.,  as  contrasted  with  the  conception  of
some  secondary  personality  depending  for  its  knowledge  upon  the  minds
of  living  persons.

Several  other  incidents  point  in  the  same  direction.  Thus,  at  the
sitting  of  December  22nd,  1892  (p.  321),  G.  P.  referred  to  his  friend,

Arthur  C  ,  and  gave  the  name  of  the  town  near  which  Mr.  C

lives  in  the  summer.  In  the  following  year  Mr.  C.'s  brother,  also  knov.-n
to  G.  P.,  died,  and  at  the  first  sitting  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  afterwards,
G.  P.  sent  a  message  from  tliis  brother  to  Mr.  C.  On  November  IStli,
1893,  Mr.  C.  had  his  first  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  G.P.  was,  apparently,
not  present  at  first,  but  afterwards  wrote  a  little,  said  that  he  knew
the  sitter  well,  and  a  name  beginning  with  C  was  written,  but  the  rest
was  not  clearly  legible.  Tie  said  there  was  much  confusion,  and  ha
would  try  to  clear  it  up.  The  confusion  Avas  apparently  caused,  in  part,
at  least,  by  the  attempt  of  two  previous  communicators  to  send
messages  to  their  friends,  and  I  had  encouraged  both  of  them  ;  one  of
them  because  he  liad  given  the  name  of  Harry,  which  was  also  t]i&
name  of  Mr.  C.'s  brother,  and  the  other  because  the  first  three  letters,
of  his  surname  were  also  those  of  Sir.  C.'s.  G.  P.  wrote  that  the
"light"  was  not  so  good  as  it  was  sometimes,  and  he  apparently
mistook  me  at  first  for  Howard.  But  at  the  close  of  the  sitlinf^.
there  was  some  strong  writing  purporting  to  come  from  the  sitter's
brother,  giving  in  full  his  three  names  and  also  tiie  sitter's  first  name.


32G


Li  chard  Hodgson


[PATIT


•addressing  him  as  Lis  brother,  etc.  Further  details  arc  given  in
Appendix  III.  (See  p.  483).  Wliat  I  suppose  happened  was  that
■C  P.  saw  what  was  needed,  and  sent  the  broiher.

Again,  there  was  a  curious  recognition  of  tlie  Rev.  Minob  J.  Savage,
•on  March  21st,  189  i. After  G.  P.  began  to  write,  I  asked  : —

"(Do  you  know  this  gentleman,  M.  J.  Savage  ?)  [Mr.  Savage  had  had
■sitting.?  years  previously  and  was  known  to  Mrs.  Piper.]  Yes.  I  do.  How
^irc  you,  sir?  Speak  to  me.  This  is  too  delightful.  I  am  so  pleased  to  see
your  face  again.  (You  remember  meeting  him  in  the  body  ?)  Oh  yes,  well,
I  do  well."

I  supposed  at  the  time  that  Mr.  Savage  had  never  met  G.  P.,  and
that  was  l\lr.  Savage's  opinion  also,  and  we  both  expected  the  answer
"No  "  to  my  first  question,  and  I  at  least  was  further  suiprised  at  the
•amount  of  feeling  indicated  both  by  the  words  written  and  the  excite-
ment of  the  hand.  Very  soon,  however,  during  the  sitting,  I  recalled
what  I  had  temporarily  forgotten,  viz.,  that  when  G.  P.  had  his  sitting
•with  Mrs.  Piper  on  March  7th,  1888  (see  p.  295),  the  Rev.  M.  J.
•Savage  was  the  Committee  Officer,  who  was  present  officially  at  the
•sitting.  Rut  G.  P.  was  not  introduced  under  his  real  name  to  Mr
Savage,  and  it  was  specially  recorded  in  the  report  of  the  sitting  that
he  was  unknov/n  to  Mr.  Savage.  It  is  probable  and,  I  think,  almost
■certain  that  later  Mr.  Savage  may  have  heard  or  read  in  MS.  (the
reports  were  never  published)  what  the  name  of  the  sitter  was,  but  he
Jiad  no  recollection  of  having  done  so.  I  should  prob.ibly  myself  have
forgotten,  beyond  any  normal  recollection,  the  circumstances  of  their
having  met,  had  I  not  had  occasion  to  consult  all  my  documents
concerning  Mrs.  Piper  in  connection  with  my  previous  Report  and  so
refresh  my  memory  of  the  1888  sitting.  The  excitement  on  March  21st,
1894,  seems  thus  to  be  quite  natural,  if  we  regard  it  as  connected  in
G.  P.'s  mind  with  the  remembrance  of  his  only  other  (so  far  as  known)
meeting  with  ]\lr.  Sa\  age,  when  he,  G.  P.,  was  in  the  position  of  the
^sitter,  whereas  now  he  was  in  the  position  of  communicator.

Parenthetically  the  incident  is  instructive  about  mistakes  which
may  easily  be,  and  doubtle^^s  frequently  are,  made,  and  we  must  admit
an  indefinite  margin  for  error  on  the  part  both  of  living  witnesses  and
of  alleged  communicators.  Thus  the  communicating  G.  P.  might  have
failed  to  recognise  Mr.  Savage.  Both  Mr.  Savage  and  I  would,
probably,  have  regarded  this  as  correct,  and  later  on,  either  myself  or
someone  else  might  have  discovered  that  G.  P.,  when  living,  had  met
Mr.  Savage,  and  tlifc  incident  wouhl  have  been  considered  as  going  to
establish  that  the  failure  at  recognition  was  due  to  the  ignorance  of
Mv.  Savage  and  myself,  and  that  the  knowledge  of  the  "  automatic
writing  "  was  bounded  by  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the  sitters.  Or,
G.  P.  might  have  forgotten  Mr.  Savage,  but  Mr.  Savage  may  have


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Ccrfain  ritenomsna  of  Trance.  827


remembered  G.  P.'s  name  as  that  of  the  sitter  whom  he  accompanicch
Or  again,  G.  P.  might  have  actually  met  Mr.  Savage  under  other
circumstances  which  were  unveiifiable,  and  his  statement  that  he  knew
Mr.  Savage  might  well  have  been  regarded  as  an  ei'ror.^

This  incident  leads  to  another  curious  one  that  occurred  at  th&
sitting  of  January  30th,  1893.  In  this  case  G.  P.  stated  that  he
remembered  the  sitter  not  "  by  name,  but  only  by  face,"  and  he-
apparently  associated  his  memory  chiefly  with  Marte  and  with  a  club.
This  partial  I'ecognition  was  entirely  contrary  to  the  expectation  of  the
sitter  or  myself.  But  the  sitter  and  G.  P.  were  both  members  of  the
University  Club  in  New  York,  and  the  sitter  attended  a  reception  to
Marte  in  New  York  during  the  time  of  G.  P.'s  residence  there,  and  it
cannot  be  regarded  as  improbable  that  G.  P.  was  also  present,
considering  his  friendship  and  admiration  for  jMarte.  (See  Appendix  T,
p.  440).

Finally,  on  November  21st,  1896,  G.  P.  wrote,  near  the  boginniiig-^
of  the  sitting,  after  starting  to  make  a  statement  to  mc  concerning
another  matter :  —

[Hand  gestures  towards  Mrs.  By  Jovo,  H. WIio  is  this  ? I  have

met  lier  before. (Have  you  ?) Yes. I  wish  to  speak  to  her. Why,  why,

why,  Mrs.  M  •. I  am  George  Pelhani,  and  I  have  seen  you  in  the  body.

Yes,  I  met  you  at  Mrs.  [pause]  S  . (Mrs.  M.  :  I  don't  think  I  was  ever

at  Mrs.  S  ). Mrs.  Somebody's. V/aifc  a  moment  until  I  just  think.

Yes.  I  heard  you  read  once  at  a  friend's  house,  and  yet  at  this  moment  I
cannot  recall  juc t  where  it  was.

Mrs.  M.  did  not  regard  it  as  improbable  that  G.  P.  had  met  her,
and  here  again  it  is  much  more  likely  that  he  should  remember  her
than  that  she  should  remember  him.  I  do  not,  therefore,  regard  this
as  a  mistake  of  G.  P.'s. Taken  in  connection  with  the  case  mentioned

1  There  is  j'et  another  incident  at  this  same  sitting  of  March  21st,  1891,  which
illustrates  apparently  the  recoileotion  by  another  person,  and  as  it  concerns  J\Ir.
Savage  also  I  quote  the  account  of  it  hei-e.  The  "  E  "  control  (see  Proceed iiu/s,  Vol.
VIII  ,  p.  44)  was  anxious  to  write  a  few  words  concerning  the  course  of  an  experiment
I  was  trying  and  I  introduced  the  sitter  :—

"(Tills  is  Minot  J.  Savage)  delighted  to  see  you— I  used  to  read  ahont~Li[/kt  —
you  I  think  .  .  .  do  .  .  .  (Vou  mean  in  the  magazine  Lijht'i  Yes,  very
probably.)"

Here  then  w.xs  no  claim  at  recognition  of  Mr.  Sivage,  but  a  remembrance
apparently  of  having  read  about  liim  in  the  spiritualistic  periodical  Now  ib

is  highly  probable  that  the  living  "  E  ,"  an  Englishman,  deeply  interested  in  psychical
research,  had  seen  references  to  Mr.  Savage  in  L^fjht,  and  I  incline  to  think  highly
improbable  that  he  had  seen  references  to  Mr.  Savage  anywhere  else.  The  very
opposite  of  this  would  be  true  of  G.  P.,  who  not  improbably  never  saw  a  nopy  of
Light,  and  to  whom  the  name  of  Mr.  Savage  was  doubtless  known  with  i-arious
associations,  so  that  he  was  much  more  likely  to  remember  Mr.  Savage  than  Mr.
Savage  to  renieinber  him,  and  the  evidential  value  of  the  incident  consists  in  the
emphatic  claim  that  G.  P.  made  that  he  had  met  Mr.  Savage,  accompanied  by  the
ei.citement  sl.„  ,\  n.


S2S


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


immediately  above,  and  with  the  case  of  Mr.  Savage,  it  seems  to  me
•on  the  wliole  to  sti-engthcn  tlie  pi-esumption  that  we  are  here  dealing
with  an  intelligence  whose  memory  is  independent  of  the  conceptions
of  the  sitters.  In  no  other  case  has  G.  P.  claimed  any  personal
acquaintance  with  a  sitter  to  whom  G.  P.  living  was  unknown  ;  and  in
all  other  cases  where  he  was'  known  the  recognition  was  clear  and  full,
■and  accompanied  by  an  appreciation  of  the  relations  which  subsisted
between  G.  P.  living  and  the  sitters.  Omitting  the  case  of  Mrs.
Warner,  wlien  G.  P,  did  not  profess  to  be  present,  and  which  occurred
tefore  he  started,  so  to  speak,  upon  his  work  of  assistance,  and  was
specially  requested  to  identify  his  friends, — and  the  cases  of  Miss
"Warner  and  Mrs.  M.,  both  of  which,  in  my  opinion,  strengthen  the
presumption  of  an  independent  communicating  intelligence, — there
are  thirty  cases  of  true  recognition  out  of  at  least  one  hundred  and
fifty  persons  who  have  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  since  the  first
•appearance  of  G.  P.,  and  no  case  of  false  recognition.^

Other  friends  of  G.  P.,  moreover,  have  been  referred  to,  living  and
dead,  besides  those  who  have  had  sittings,  and  always  with  an
appreciation  ^^roper  to  G.  P.  living.  As  I  have  suggested  above,  there
have  been  indications  that  G.  P.  was  almost  invariably  present  at
sittings  during  the  five  years  following  his  first  appearance  in  March,
1892,  frequently  acting  as  amanuensis  for  other  communicators,  or
sending  brief  messages  to  his  friends,  or  offering  some  explanations  to
myself.  Most  of  these  communications  are  of  a  personal  nature  and
cannot  be  regarded  as  evidential  from  the  ordinary  point  of  view  ;  but
the  continual  manifestation  of  tliis  personality, — so  different  from
Phinuit  or  other  communicators, — with  its  own  reservoir  of  memories,
with  its  swift  appreciation  of  any  reference  to  friends  of  G.  P.,  with  its
■"  give  and  take  "  in  little  incidental  conversations  with  myself,  has
helped  largely  in  producing  a  conviction  of  the  actual  presence  of  the
'G.  P.  personality,  which  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  impart  by  any
mere  enumeration  of  verifiable  statements.  It  will  hardly,  however,
be  regarded  as  surprising  that  the  most  impressive  manifestations  are
at  the  same  time  the  most  subtle  and  the  least  communicable.

I  may  now  give  a  brief  summary  of  the  kinds  of  evidence  which  I
have  illustrated  in  some  detail  in  the  foregoing  pages.

On  the  first  appearance  of  the  communicating  G.  P.  to  Mr.  Hart  in
March,  1892,  he  gave  not  only  his  own  name  and  that  of  the  sitter,  but

^  The  above  estimate  includes  the  Howard  family  (five)  and  myself.  Twenty-one
persons  were  residents  of  Boston  (or  vicinity),  five  were  New  York  residents  who  had
sittings  in  New  York  among  various  other  persons  unknown  to  G.  P.,  two  were  New
York  residents  who  had  sittings  in  Boston  (or  vicinity),  and  two  (Mr.  and  Mrs.
Pelham,  the  only  relatives  of  G.  P.  who  had  .sittings)  were  residents  of  Washington
who  had  a  sitting  in  New  York.


XXXIII.] Obseivations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  329


also  the  names  of  several  of  their  most  intimate  common  friends,  and
referred  specifically  to  the  most  important  private  matters  connected
with  them.  At  the  same  sitting  reference  was  made  to  other  incidents
vuiknown  to  the  sitters,  such  as  the  account  of  Mrs.  Pelham's  taking
the  studs  from  the  body  of  G.  P.  and  giving  them  to  Mr.  Pelham  to  be
sent  to  Mr.  Hart,  and  the  reproduction  of  a  notable  remembrance  of  a
conversation  which  G.  P.  living  had  with  Katharine,  the  daughter  of
his  most  intimate  friends,  the  Howards.  These  were  primary  examples
of  two  kinds  of  knowledge  concerning  matters  unknown  to  the  sitters,
of  which  various  other  instances  were  afterwards  given ;  knowledge  of
events  connected  with  G.  P.  wliich  had  occurred  since  his  death,  and
knowledge  of  special  memories  pertaining  to  the  G.  P.  personality
before  death.  A  week  later,  at  the  sitting  of  Mr.  Vance,  he  made  an
appropriate  inquiry  after  the  sitter's  son,  and  in  reply  to  inquiries
rightly  specified  that  the  sitter's  son  had  been  at  college  with  him,  and
further  correctly  gave  a  correct  description  of  the  sitter's  summer
home  as  the  place  of  a  special  visit.  This,  again,  was  paralleled
by  many  later  instances  where  appropriate  inquiries  were  made  and
remembrances  recalled  concerning  other  personal  friends  of  G.  P.
Nearly  two  weeks  later  came  his  most  intimate  friends  the  Howards,
and  to  these,  using  the  voice  directly,  he  showed  such  a  fulness
of  private  remembrance  and  specific  knowledge  and  characteristic
intellectual  and  emotional  quality  i^ertaining  to  G.  P.  that,  though  they
had  previously  taken  no  interest  in  any  branch  of  psychical  research,
they  were  unable  to  resist  the  conviction  that  they  were  actually
conversing  with  their  old  friend  G.  P.  And  this  conviction  was
strengthened  by  their  later  experiences.  Not  least  important,  at  that
time,  was  his  anxiety  about  the  disposal  of  a  certain  book  and  about
certain  specified  letters  which  concern  matters  too  private  for  publica-
tion. He  was  particularly  desirous  of  convincing  his  father,  who
lived  in  Washington,  that  it  was  indeed  G.  P.  who  was  communicating,
and  he  soon  afterwards  stated  that  his  father  had  taken  his  photo-
graph to  be  copied,  as  was  the  case,  though  Mr.  Pelham  had  not
informed  even  his  wife  of  this  fact.  Later  on  he  reproduced  a  series
of  incidents,  unknown  to  the  sitters,  in  which  Mrs.  Howard  had  been
engaged  in  her  own  home.  Later  still,  at  a  sitting  with  his  father  and
mother  in  New  York,  a  further  intimate  knowledge  was  shown  of
private  family  circumstances,  and  at  the  following  sitting,  at  which
his  father  and  mother  were  not  present,  he  gave  the  details  of
certain  private  actions  which  they  had  done  in  the  interim.  At
their  sitting,  and  at  various  sittings  of  the  Howards,  appropriate
comments  were  made  concerning  different  articles  presented  which  had
belonged  to  G.  P.  living,  or  had  been  familiar  to  him ;  he  inquired
after  other  personal  articles  which  were  not  presented  at  the  sittings,


330


IticJuird  Hodgson.


[part


and  showed  intimate  and  detailed  recollections  of  incidrnts  in
connection  with  them.  In  points  connected  with  the  recognition  of
articles  with  their  related  associations  of  a  jiersonal  sort,  the  G.  P.
communicating,  so  far  as  I  know,  lias  never  failed.  Nor  has  he  failed
in  the  recognition  of  pei'sonal  friends.  I  may  say  gem  rally  that  out
of  a  large  number  of  sitters  who  went  as  strangers  to  Mrs.  Piper,  the
communicating  G.  P.  has  picked  out  the  friends  of  G.  P.  living,
precisely  as  the  G.  P.  living  might  have  been  expected  to  do,  and  has
exhibited  memories  in  connection  with  these  and  other  friends  which
arc  such  as  would  naturally  be  associated  as  part  of  the  G.  P.  person-
ality, which  certainly  do  not  suggest  in  themselves  that  they  originate
otherwise,  and  which  are  accompanied  by  the  emotional  relations
which  were  connected  with  such  friends  in  the  mind  of  G.  P.  livino-.
At  one  of  his  early  connnunications  G.  P.  expressly  undertook  the
task  of  rendering  all  the  assistance  in  his  power  towards  establishing
the  continued  existence  of  himself  and  other  communicators,  in
pursuance  of  a  promise  of  which  he  himself  reminded  me,  made  some
two  years  or  more  before  his  death,  that  if  ho  died  before  me  and
found  himself  "  still  existing,"  he  would  devote  himself  to  prove  the
fact,  and  in  the  persistence  of  his  endeavour  to  overcome  the  difficulties
in  communicating  as  far  as  possible,  in  his  constant  readiness
to  act  as  amanuensis  at  the  sittings,  in  the  effect  which  he  has
produced  by  his  counsels,  to  myself  as  investigator,  and  to  numerous
other  sitters  and  communicators,  he  has,  in  so  far  as  I  can  form
a  judgment  in  a  problem  so  complex  and  still  presenting  so  much
obscurity,  displayed  all  the  keenness  and  pertinacity  wdiich  were
eminently  characteristic  of  G.  P.  living.

Finally,  the  manifestations  of  this  G.  P.  communicating  have  not
been  of  a  fitful  and  spasmodic  nature,  they  have  exhibited  the  marks
of  a  continuous  living  and  persistent  personality,  manifesting  itself
through  a  course  of  years,  and  showing  the  same  characteristics  of  an
independent  intelligence  whether  friends  of  G.  P.  were  present  at  the
sittings  or  not.  I  learned  of  various  cases  whore  in  my  absence  active
assistance  was  rendered  by  G.  P.  to  sitteis  who  had  never  previously
heard  of  him,  and  from  time  to  time  he  would  make  brief  pertinent
reference  to  matters  with  which  G.  P.  living  was  acquainted,  though  I
was  not,  and  sometimes  in  ways  which  indicated  that  he  could  to  some
extent  see  what  was  happening  in  our  world  to  persons  in  whose  welfare
G.  P.  living  would  have  been  specially  interested.

Thus  the  occasional  references  to  his  father  and  mother,  and
brother  and  sister,  and  a  fev/  of  his  most  intimate  friends  living,  were
of  the  kind  that  might  be  expected  to  come  from  the  G.  P.  personality,
and  sometimes  were  of  direct  evidential  value  otherwise,  though  it  is
only  in  thcii'  indirectly  evidential  nature  that  I  refer  to  them  here.


XXXIII.] Obsermtions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  331


Tn  all  such  personal  references  the  G.  P.  communicating  lias  shown
the  remembrances  and  the  continued  interest  that  we  should  expect  tO'
find  in  the  independent  intelligence  of  the  real  persisting  G.  P. —
so  far  at  least  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain — and  in  ways
too  complicated  and  private  for  any  but  two  or  three  of  his  nearest  and
dearest  friends  to  know  or  appreciate.  Up  to  the  last  series  of
sittings  which  I  had  with  Mrs.  Piper,  (1896-7)  in  a  sitting  which
Evelyn  Howard  had  in  November,  1896,  and  in  a  sitting  which  Mrs.
Howard  (just  then  returned  to  America  after  between  three  and
four  years'  absence  in  Europe)  had  since  my  departure  from  Boston  in
September,  1897,  the  same  persistent  personality  has  manifested  itself,
and  what  change  has  been  discernible  is  a  change  not  of  any  pi'ocess
of  disintegration,  but  rather  of  integration  and  evolution.

On  the  other  hand  there  are  certain  failures  and  mistakes  and
certain  real  or  supposed  deficiencies  to  be  considered,  which  v>'e  can
scarcely  suppose  would  have  emanated  from  G.  P.  living,  and  these
require  some  explanation  if  we  are  nevertheless  to  regard  them  as
manifestations  of  the  real  G.  P.  personality.  I  shall  deal  with  them
briefly  now,  and  offer  a  more  general  explanation  later.

Prima  facie  there  appear  to  have  been  four  chief  methods  of
expressing  their  thoughts  used  by  the  communicators  through  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  :  (1)  Where  INIrs.  Piper's  voice  was  used  directly  by  the
communicator  himself.  The  chief  instance  of  this  was  Phinuit,  but
there  have  been,  and  still  are,  various  other  persons  who  are  able  to
use  the  voice  directly,  independently  of  Phinuit.  (2)  Where  Phinuit,
or  some  otlier  "controller"  of  the  voice,  served  as  intermediary.
Nearly  all  the  communications  in  the  earlier  years  of  Mrs.  Piper's-
trance  were  given  in  this  way.  (3)  Where  the  communicator  used
Mrs.  Piper's  hand  to  write.  Since  the  development  of  the  automatic,
writing,  most  communicators  have  made  some  attempt  to  express  their
thoughts  directly  through  this  channel.  (4)  Where  G.  P.,  or  some
other  "controller"  of  the  hand,  served  as  intermediary  by  a.cting  as-
amanuensis.

Most  of  the  G.P.  communications  have  been  by  (3),  but  some  of
the  most  important  earlier  communications  were  by  (1).  Each  method
apparently  has  advantages  and  difficulties  of  its  own.i

1  I  feel  absolutely  certain  that  no  progress  will  be  made  in  this  branch  of  our-
investigation  until  questions  like  those  which  I  am  considering  are  understood.  It
would  make  this  report  far  too  voluminous  were  I  to  attempt  to  give  the  details  of
incidents  upon  which  I  found  my  conclusions,  and  I  must  content  myself  at  present
with  stating  those  conclusions  in  the  text  as  among  the  results  of  a  long  practical
experience.  And  I  repeat  that  I  have  no  doubt  that  these  conclusions  in  the  main.
hold  ^ood  even  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  "communicators^^  are  merely  fragments  o
Mrs.  Pixiers  personality  and  have  no  direct  relation  with  the  '^deceased"  persons  the)/-
j)urport  to  he ■  ....  .  ,


^32


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Thus  very  few  communicators  are  able  to  use  tlie  voice  at  all.
Many  have  tried  and  failed.  Some  can  use  it  for  a  short  time  only.
<jr.  P.  was  able  to  use  it  more  fully  and  freely  soon  after  death  than  in
the  later  stages  of  his  conmiunications.  The  main  advantage  in  usinsr
the  voice  is  that  the  conversation  can  proceed  more  naturally  as  it  did
in  ordinary  life,  and  that  the  communicator  is  not  so  much  hampered
by  interruptions  and  changes  of  subject  on  the  part  of  the  sitters.  The
main  disadvantage  is  that  the  resulting  language  shows  a  tendency  to
■depart  more  or  less  from  the  language  that  would  have  been  used  by
the  communicator  when  living;  it  is,  apparently, — and  this  we  might
■a  priori  expect — much  harder  for  the  communicator  to  adjust  the
language  to  the  thought  when  operating  through  what  we  may
suppose  to  be  the  speech-centres  of  the  medium,  than  it  is  to  adjust
the  language  to  the  thought  when  using  the  writing  mechanism
•of  the  medium.  Little  as  I  understood  myself  the  conditions  for
•obtaining  the  clearest  results  at  the  time  of  the  early  communications
from  G.  P.,  other  sitters  understood  them  much  less,  and  in  fact  there
are  few  persons  now  who  have  begun  to  realize  the  difficulties  that
must  necessarily  be  in  the  way  of  holding  a  clear  conversation  with  the
writing  communicators  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  Compare,  for
■example,  the  natural  flow  of  the  conversation  in  the  record  of  the
sitting  on  November  28th,  1892  (Appendix  I.,  p.  41-i)  with  the  con-
fusion produced  at  the  sitting  with  Marte,  December  2nd,  1892.
{Appendix  I.,  p.  420).

Let  the  reader  start  to  hold  a  conversation  with  two  or  three
friends,  but  let  him  be  forced  to  spell  out  his  words  instead  of
speaking  them  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  be  absolutely  confined  to
this  method  of  expressing  himself,  no  matter  what  his  friends  may
•do  or  say.  Let  him  be  interrupted  at  every  two  or  three  words  by
bis  interlocutors,  who  tell  him  that  they  "  didn't  catch  the  last
word,"  and  ask  for  it  to  bo  repeated,  and  occasionally  several  times
repeated.  Let  them,  further,  frequently  interrupt  him  by  asking  fresh
<juestions  before  his  answer  to  a  previous  question  is  completed.
Further,  let  him  suppose  that  it  is  very  diiiicult  for  him  to  hear
precisely  what  their  questions  are,  so  l^liat  he  hears  only  portions  of
what  they  say.  Having  made  this  experiment,  let  him  then  suppose
further  that  instead  of  using  his  own  voice  to  spell  his  words  with,  he
is  placed  in  one  side  of  a  machine  so  constructed  that  the  thoughts
running  in  his  mind  have  a  tendency  to  be  registered  in  writing  on  the
■other  side  of  the  machine,  not  as  fast  as  he  thinks  them,  but  at  the  rate
of  writing,  and  that  it  is  only  by  reading  this  writing  that  his  interlo
■cators  know  what  he  has  to  tell  them.  Let  him  suppose,  further,
that  one  or  more  other  persons  are  standing  near  him  on  his  side
-of  the  machine  and  talking  to  hun  or  to  one  another  WRiiin  his


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  333


hearing,  so  that  the  words  which  they  say  tend  to  be  registered  in
the  writing ;  and  let  him  further  suppose  that  he  is  unfamiliar  with
the  machine,  aad  that  the  writing  produced  has  a  tendency  to  vary
somewhat  from  the  words  actually  thought  of  by  hiin,  owing  to
imperfections  in  the  machine.  Let  him  further  suppose  that  the
part  of  the  machine  in  which  he  is  placed  is  filled  with  a  more
•or  less  suflfocating  gas  which  produces  a  partial  loss  of  consciousness,
that  sometimes  this  gas  is  much  more  poisonous  than  usual  (weakness
or  ill-health  of  medium)  and  tliat  its  effects  are  usually  cumulative
while  he  remains  in  the  machine.

The  important  failures  of  G.  P.  were  due  primarily,  I  believe,  to
the  i<xnorance  of  the  sitters  that  he  was  communicatin<r  under  some
such  conditions  as  these.  And  I  cannot  too  strongly  emphasise  my
•conviction  tliat,  unless  the  presence  of  such  conditions  is  constantly
recognised  by  the  investigator,  his  further  research  in  this  field  will  be
futile.  Having  recognised  the  limitations,  he  may  be  able  to  modify
them  and  minimise  the  effect  of  them  ;  and  in  my  opinion,  it  is  to  the
fuller  and  more  exact  appreciation  of  what  these  limitations  are,  and
to  what  extent  they  can  be  removed,  that  the  main  path  of  progress
in  psychical  investigation  trends.  Once  more  I  repeat  that  I  hold  this
to  be  true,  even  if  the  "  communicators  "  are  but  fragments  of  Mrs.
Piper's  personality.

Applying  this  conception  then  to  the  failures  of  G.  P.,  we  find
that  they  are  readily  explicable.  That  the  written  communications
should  present  a  certain  amount  of  confusion  and  incoherence  after
frequent  interruptions  by  the  sitters  and  repeated  inabilities  to  de-
cipher the  writing,  will  occasion  no  surprise.  That  the  writing  should
frequently — especially  tov/ards  the  end  of  the  sitting,  as  the  commu-
nicator becomes  exhausted  and  stupefied,  and  loses  the  power  of
inhibition — become  extremely  automatic  and  dreamy  is  to  be  expected  ;
and  questions  put  to  the  communicator  in  this  state  will  be  answered
by  the  first  vague  associations  that  rise  to  the  surface  of  the  failing-
consciousness.  Not  only  is  this  the  case,  but  such  irrelevant  (as  they
may  be)  associations  occasionally  tend  to  recur  at  later  periods,  when
the  communicator  lapses  into  the  same  stage  of  dreaminess,  precisely
^is  they  might  be  expected  to  do  in  oui'selves.  For  example,  in  the
latter  part  of  Professor  Norton's  sitting  on  May  26th,  1894,  (see
p.  525)  when  Professor  Norton  put  a  question  which  G.  P.  living  in
full  consciousness  would  have  answered  by  a  reference  to  an  essay  he
wrote  at  Harvard  on  Jane  Austen,  G.  P.  replied  by  references  to  what
lie  had  written  about  Robert  Noyes  (pseudonym),  the  life  of  whom  he
had  published  not  long  before  his  death,  and  to  articles  in  the  Sun,  a
New  York  paper  with  which  he  was  connected  at  the  time  of  his  death.
Professor  Norton  then  mentioned  Jane  Austeni, On  two  or  three  later


II icli a  rd  II oJrjson.


[part


occasions  at  the  end  of  a  sitting  when  the  writing  became  particularly
dreamy,  the  name  of  Professor  Norton  appeared  in  connection  with
that  of  Jane  Austen. ^  Another  special  failure  occurred  at  the  sitting
of  Mr.  A.  B.  on  April  I7th,  1894  (see  also  p.  319),  who  was  well-
known  to  G.  P.,  and  with  whom  G.  P.  held  a  "natural"  conversation,
asking  after  some  common  friends,  etc.  But  he  referred  to  his  MS.  on
"  The  One  and  the  Many  "  (see  Appendix  I.,  p.  428),  and  Mr.  A.  B.
asked  him  a  series  of  questions  concerning  the  number  of  pages,  the
paper  on  which  it  was  written,  its  division  into  chapters,  its  external
title  page,  and  its  first  sentence  and  its  dedication,  to  all  of  which  the
answers  were  wrong,  as  I  learned  afterwards.  There  was  plainly  some
confusion,  and  G.  P.  wrote  "  do  not  talk  too  fast  because  I  am  in
daze,  so  to  speak."

Again  at  the  end  of  December,  1896,  he  was  asked  whether  he
could  give  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  he  had  once  entrusted
some  family  documents,  but  he  replied  that  he  could  not  remember,
and  that  he  had  been  "  gone  too  Ion"."

I  believe  that  these  are  the  only  notable  failures  of  this  type  which
I  have  in  my  records  besides  those  mentioned  already,  or  given  in  the
records  of  Appendix  I.  Incidents  illustrating  temporary  forgetful-
ness  occur,  I  need  hardly  saj^  very  frequently  to  all  of  us,  so  that  we
momentarily  fail  to  recall  even  the  name  of  a  well-known  friend,  and
it  is  therefore  not  surprising,  for  example,  that  in  the  latter  part  of  the
sitting  on  May  14th,  1892,  when  G.  P.  was  becoming  more  comatose,
he  should  have  experienced  some  difficulty,  after  the  variety  of  subjects
that  had  been  introduced  by  the  sitters,  in  immediately  recalling  the
circumstances  to  which  his  mother  referred  relating  to  another  matter
altogether  (see  p.  312).

But  there  were  also  failures  of  other  types,  which  do  not,  however,
seem  to  me  to  afford  an  argument  against  the  "  identity  "  of  G.  P.  I
refer  to  prophecies  and  to  descriptions  of  events  occurring  in  our
world  after  his  death,  and  to  attempts  to  find  objects  that  were  lost.
Thus  a  bangle  with  which  G.  P.  was  familiar  during  life  and  which
had  been  used  at  sittings,  was  lost,  and  G.  P.  located  it  wrongly.
Similarly  a  bell  Avith  which  he  was  familiar  was  supposed  to  be  lost
and  he  located  it  wrongly,  adopting  a  suggestion  of  mine  that  it  was
left  in  a  certain  hotel.  Also  a  book,  with  which  he  had  nothing  to
do,  but  about  which  he  was  asked,  he  located  wrongly.  Incidents  of
this  class  help  us  in  ascertaining  the  limits  of  knowledge  of  communi-
cators, and  correct  answers  to  such  inquiries  would  strengthen  the
evidence  for  the  possession  of  supernormal  faculty  going  beyond
telepathy  from  the  sitters,  but  they  do  not  directly  affect  the  question


1  See,  for  a  somewhat  similar  case,  the  report  of  Mrs.  M. ,  p.  347.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  335


of  identity.  The  same  general  statement  applies  to  G.P.'s  prophecies,
■which  were  not  many  and  were  chiefly  personal,  though  here  I  think  his
success  would  outweigh  liis  failure.  Nor,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  there
any  indication  in  these  groups  of  incidents  that  tlie  wrong  statements
made  depended  telepathically  upon  the  expectations  of  living  persons.

There  is  another  type  of  incident  yet  where  G.  P.  made  at  least  two
notable  failures  and  two  notable  successes.  He  failed  completely  to
describe  my  own  doings  at  a  time  agreed  upon  under  circumstances
which  appeared  especially  favoui'able  for  a  correct  description  if  he
could  see  into  our  world  as  we  do  (p.  439),  and  in  New  York,  a  few
clays  after  sittings  with  Miss  IM.  and  her  brother,  whom  G.  P.  living
knew  well  (and  recognised  appropriately  at  their  sittings),  he  made  an
attempt  to  desciibe  Miss  M.'s  doings  during  a  sitting  which  I  held  for
the  purpose.  The  result  was  a  complete  failure.  On  the  other  hand  he
succeeded  on  at  least  two  occasions  in  describing  certain  actions  of  his
father,  and  on  another  occasion  described  correctly  a  series  of  actions
performed  by  Mrs.  Howard.  In  the  case  of  his  father  the  time  (after-
noon following  the  sitting)  was  correct  in  one  set  of  incidents,  but  the
time  did  not  enter  into  the  photograjDh  incident  (see  pp.  304,  314).  In
the  case  of  Mrs.  Howard,  the  one  to  which  I  specially  refer,  the  time
was  wrong  (p.  306).  As  I  have  already  said,  these  incidents  point  to  a
failure  of  supernoi'mal  power  to  see  what  is  going  on  in  our  world  as  we
see  it,  and  suggest  rather  some  form  of  perce^jtion  of  scenes  in  the  sub-
liminal consciousness,  perhaps  of  telepathic  nature.  There  was  also  some
slight  success  in  connection  with  Mr.  Howard,  where  the  time  element
was  correct  (p.  319).  On  the  whole  this  group  of  incidents  appears  to
me  to  strengthen  the  evidence  jjointing  to  G.  P.'s  "  identity,"  since
although  G.  P.  living  knew  Miss  M.  and  myself  well  in  certain  ways,
there  was  not  by  any  means  the  same  feeling  that  he  had  for  his
father  and  the  Howards.  That  G.  P.  could  get  into  some  closer
relation  with  his  father  and  the  Howards  than  with  Miss  M.  or  myself
is  intelligible;  but  it  is  not  so  olivious  why  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary
jjersonality  should.  But  the  experiments  in  this  direction  that  are
mentioned  in  the  records  are  too  few  for  any  coiiclusion.

§  4. Brief  Accounts  of  Other  Communicators.

T  pass  on  now  to  consider  briefly  the  results  obtained  from  some
other  communicators,  and  begin  with  the  case  of  the  lady  wliom  I  have
called  Madame  Elisa  Mannors.  Other  names  are  substituted  for  the
real  ones.  She  was  known  to  G.  P.,  and  her  first  appearance  was  to
lier  sister,  Madame  Frederica,  on  May  17th,  1892  (Appendix  II..
y.  471). She  had  died  the  previous  summer. TliC  cause  of  her  death


S3G


Richard'  Hodgson.


[part


was  designated  by  Phinuit,  who  also  described  correctly,  purporting
to  repeat  what  she  was  telling  him,  some  incidents  which  had  occurred
at  her  death-bed.  The  sitter  inquired  about  a  watch  which  had
belonged  to  Madame  Elisa,  but  the  statements  made  at  this  sitting,
and  to  myself  at  subsequent  sittings,  did  not  lead  to  its  recovery.
Some  Italian  was  written  by  request,  the  lady  being  as  familiar  with
Italian  as  with  English,  but  only  two  or  three  common  words  were
decipherable.  The  first  names  of  sitter  and  communicator  were  given,
and  the  last  name  was  both  written  and  afterwards  given  by  (1.  P.  to
Phinuit.  Some  of  the  writing  was  of  a  personal  character,  and  some
about  the  watch,  and  G.  P.  stated  correctly,  inter  alia,  that  the
sitter's  mother  was  present  (in  "  spirit ")  with  the  communicator,  and
that  he  himself  did  not  know  her.  The  real  names  are  very  uncommon.
The  Italian  for  "  It  is  well.  Patience  "  was  whispered  at  the  end  of
the  sitting  as  though  by  direct  control  of  the  voice  by  Madame  Elisa.
Both  the  sitter  and  her  sister  were  well-known  to  me,  and  also  to
the  Howards,  and  Madame  Elisa  made  several  personal  conmiunica-
tions  in  the  course  of  the  sittings  recorded  in  Appendix  I.  (see
pp.  417-19,  423*,  v/here  further  attempts,  only  partially  successful,
were  made  to  write  Italian  clearly,  and  also  to  speak  it,  but  not  much
was  said.

She  communicated  by  writing  later  to  three  or  four  other  friends  or
relatives,  always  in  a  strongly  personal  way,  and  very  clearly.  In  her
statements  to  one  very  personal  friend,  at  sittings  when  I  was  present,
she  showed  on  several  occasions  an  intimate  private  knowledge  of  her
sister  and  her  sister's  family,  in  connection  with  events  that  wera
occurring,  and  also  of  other  relatives  to  whom  she  was  deeply  attached.
She  also  had  several  "  written  talks  "  with  myself  alone,  referred  tO'
incidents  with  which  we  were  both  familiar  when  guests  at  the  same
house  in  another  part  of  the  country,  and  appreciated  properly  other
references  which  I  made  myself.  It  always  seemed  like  the  woman  I
knew.

As  I  have  mentioned  elsewhere  (pp.  293,  332),  the  intelligence  com-
municating by  writing  is  not  conscious  of  the  act  of  writing.  The
chief  difficulty  apparently  in  getting  another  language  written  by  the
hand  is  that  strange  words  tend  to  be  written  phonetically  unless  they
are  thought  out  slowly  letter  by  letter.  The  writing  is  usually  mucli
more  legible  now  than  it  was  during  the  period  of  the  records  from
which  I  am  quoting,  when  there  was  frequently  much  dilliciilty  in
deciphering  even  the  simplest  English  words.  It  was  therefore  not
surprising  that  so  little  of  the  "  Italian  "  written  by  Madame  Elisa
was  decipherable.

In  another  case  there  was  an  attempt  to  write  Hawaiian  (p.  481).
This  was  at  a  sitting  auranged  for  by  Mrs.  Howard  in  October,  1893.


XXXIII.]  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  337


Mi's.  Howard  made  some  notes  at  the  time  from  which  the  report
was  prepared,  and  I  obtained  some  additional  information  later  from
the  sitter,  Mr.  L.  Vernon  Briggs,  The  original  writing  was  apparently
lost,  and  Mr.  Briggs  never  had  the  opportunity  of  studying  it  after
the  sitting.  The  communication  purported  to  come  from  a  Honolulu
boy  named  Kalua,  who  became  much  attached  to  Mr.  Briggs  during  a.
six  months'  stay  of  Mr.  Briggs  in  Honolulu  in  1881,  and  who  followed
Mr.  Briggs  to  Boston  under  somewhat  romantic  circumstances  in  1883.
He  was  soon  sent  back  to  his  native  island,  but  again  returned  to  Boston,
where  he  was  shot  in  1886,  in  a  sailor's  Bethel,  whether  intentionally
or  not  was  unknown.  There  was  some  suspicion  against  a  Swede,  whi>
Avas  imprisoned,  bub  there  was  no  evidence  against  him,  and  he  was-
finally  discharged.  The  Swede  said  that  Kalua  had  accidentally  shot
himself  with  a  revolver,  and  eventually  confessed  that  after  the  accident
he  had  himself  hidden  the  revolver  behind  a  flue,  where,  after  taking-
part  of  the  chimney  down,  it  was  found.  Mr.  Briggs  had  taken  a  hand-
kerchief belonging  to  Kalua  to  the  sitting.  Kalua  had  been  shot
through  the  heart,  and  there  was  some  confusion  apparently  about  tlie
locality  of  the  suffering,  "  stomach  "  and  "  side  "  being  mentioned,  under
what  appeared  to  be  the  direct  control  of  the  voice  by  "Kalua,"  and
Mr.  Briggs  asked  if  it  was  Kalua.  Phinuit  then  spoke  for  "  Kalua,"
who  said  that  he  did  not  kill  himself,  that  he  had  been  gambling  with
the  other  man  who  disputed  with  him  and  shot  him,  but  did  not  mean
to,  and  who  threw  the  revolver  "  into  the  hot  box  where  the  pepples
are"  (meaning  "the  furnace  "  and  the  "coals"),  and  hid  his  purse  under
the  steps  where  he  was  killed.  "Kalua"  also  said  there  was  shrubbery
near  it.  The  cellar  of  the  house  was  examined,  but  no  purse  was  found,
and  there  was  no  shrubbery  in  the  cellar.  "Kalua"  tried  to  write
Hawaiian,  but  the  only  "ordinary"  words  deciphered  were  "lei"  (mean-
ing toreaths,  which  he  made  daily  for  Mr.  Briggs)  which  was  written
clearly  and  frequently,  and  an  attempt  at  "aloha  " — greeting.  Phinuit
tried  to  get  the  answer  to  the  question  where  Kalua's  father  was,  but
could  only  succeed  in  getting  "  Hiram."  But  the  writing  gave  the
answer  "  Hawaiin  Islands."  In  reply  to  the  question  which  one,  the
answer  in  writing  was  Kawai,  but  Phinuit  said  Tawai.  The  word  is
spelt  Kawai,  but  is  pronounced  Tawai  by  the  natives  of  the  island
itself  and  in  the  island  where  Kalua  was  born.  The  natives  of  the
other  islands  call  it  Kawai.

Another  instance  of  a  clear  "  communicator  "  is  that  of  an  artist,
Louis  R.,  who  died  from  cancer  of  the  liver,  on  February  24th,  1892,
and  appeared  first  at  a  sitting  to  Mr.  W.  L.  P.,  on  jMarcli  10th.  The-
locality  of  the  trouble  that  caused  his  death  was  pointed  out.  With  a
cheque  book  of  liis  held  above  the  head  wiiere  no  direct  vision  of  it  wa.s
possible,  the  leaves  were  turned  over  by  Phinuit,  and  the  fingers  finally,


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


stopped  over  a  pencilled  statement  on  the  back  of  one  of  the  pages  of
the  cheque  book,  "  It's  there.  He  says  it's  there."  It  appeared  that>
^he  day  before  his  operation  at  the  hospital,  in  January,  Louis  R.
•"drew  his  hxst  cheque,  and  when  alone  occupied  himself  in  figuring
Avith  pencil  on  the  back  of  the  next  page  the  balance  and  the  possible
•amounts  due  him  from  various  sources."  When  Phinuit  said  "It's
there,"  the  finger  was  "passed  exactly  over  the  balance  in  the  bank."
Pertinent  statements  were  made,  through  Phinuit,  showing  knowledge
•of  the  busuress  relations  that  subsisted  between  himself  and  Mr.  P.,
with  expressions  characteristic  of  Louis  P. — and  calling  Mr.  P.  Will,
•iis  Louis  R.  used  to  call  him,  though  he  is  commonly  called  Billie.  The
■name  Louis  was  given.  "Tell  Will  it's  Louis."  At  a  sitting  which
Mrs.  W.  L.  P.  had,  two  days  later  (and  to  which,  of  course,  she
went  as  a  stranger),  she  was  at  once  asked  "How's  Will?"  The
names  Augusta  (wife)  and  a  close  approximation  to  Bowditch  (intimate
friend)  were  given,  and  "Louis"  recognised  a  knife  presented  as  one
that  he  used  to  scrape  the  blobs  of  paint  from  his  pictures,  and
seemed  to  be  aware  that  Mrs.  P.  had  the  cu.stody  of  his  pictures.  The
most  curious  incident  was  that  in  reply  to  Mrs.  P.'s  request  for  "  a  sort
of  nickname,  German,"  by  which  he  "used  to  call  Will";  the  name
she  had  in  mind  was  not  given,  and  Phinuit  refused  to  accept  the
suggestion  of  the  sitter  that  the  name  she  wanted  began  with  Auf.
The  name  that  Phinuit  gave,  after  stumbling  over  durstan  and  Appen-
dtisf,  was  Uppendivst.  The  words  were  not  spelt,  and  I  took  them
■down  as  they  sounded,  knowing  nothing  myself  of  the  name.  Up  and
Dust  was  another  nickname  which  Louis  R.  occasionally  applied  in
joke  to  Mr.  W.  L.  P.,  as  the  latter  himself  explained  to  me,  arising
out  of  an  odd  pronunciation  which  he  had  once  given  in  saying  Iclb
haV  ein'  Durst.  Mr.  P.  had  another  sitting  on  March  25th,  where
other  friends  and  relatives  occupied  most  of  the  time  communicating,
.and  a  reply  to  an  inquiry  which  he  put  about  a  book  in  a  sealed
package  elicited  no  result  of  any  significance  from  Louis  R.  Other
incidents  of  interest  connected  with  other  communicators  occuri-ed  at
ihese  sittings  (see  especially  p.  291),  though  there  was  some  confusion.
Louis  R.  was  known  to  me,  as  he  stated  at  Mrs.  P.'s  sitting,  and  asked
if  I  was  "still  fi.shing  for  facts."  I  replied  that  I  was,  and  should  be
glad  if  he  would  help.  At  the  first  sitting  held  at  the  house  of  Mr.
Howard,  November  22nd,  1892  (p.  413)  G.  P.  wrote  that  Louis  was
there  and  wanted  to  see  Billie.  "  Go  out  and  tell  him  to  come."  The
Howards  sav^  no  relevance  in  this,  and  they  did  not  think  of  Louis  R. ;
but  Mr.  AV.  L.  P.  lived  very  close  to  the  Howards,  and  Louis  R.
himself  was  an  intimate  friend  of  the  Howards,  and  had  often  been  in
Mr.  Howard's  library,  where  the.  sitting  was  held.  (An  interesting
commentary  on  the  freaks  of  memoiy  exhibited  by  communicators  I


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  339


Tliis  was  followed  by  the  writing  of  a  namo  unknown  to  me,  Foxcroft,
and  apparently  no  one  recognised  this  either,  so  I  told  Phinuit  to  send
those  persons  away;  that  we  wished  to  talk  to  G.  P.  I  learned  after-
wards that  Foxcroft  C  ,  deceased,  was  a  fellow  artist  and  friend  of

Louis  R.  and  was  also  known  to  the  Howards,  and  in  the  following
sitting  the  names  of  his  wife  Mary  and  daughter  Addie  were  giv^en  by
Phinuit.  At  the  twelfth  sitting  held  at  the  house  of  Air.  Howard,
January  24:th,  1893  (p.  439),  Louis  R.  appeared  again,  and  sent  some
messages  through  Phinuit,  referring  to  the  room  as  the  place  where  he
liad  been  many  a  time,  mentioning  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  L.  P.,  and
recognising  some  brushes  brought  by  Mrs.  Howard  as  ones  which  lie
had  given  her,  and  saying  he  had  been  to  Philadelphia  to  see  his
friends — the  living  Louis  P.  had  friends  there — and  asking  after
Theodore,  the  first  name  of  another  artist  living,  a  friend  of  Louis  R.
and  also  of  the  Howards.  On  two  or  three  later  occasions  Louis  R.
*'  dropped  in,"  as  it  were,  to  send  a  little  personal  message  by  writing,
on  one  occasion  seizing  the  left  hand  when  Madame  Elisa  (see  p.  335)
■was  using  the  right.  Madame  Elisa  drew  my  attention  to  the  fact
that  some  one  else  was  speaking,  and  then  mentioned  his  name,  not

Louis,  but  "  Mr.  R  ,"  writing  the  surname  correctly.  Numerous

incidents  of  this  kind  have,  as  I  think,  thrown  much  light  on  the
cause  of  many  of  the  irrelevancies  manifest  when  Phinuit  was  pi'acti-
cally  the  only  intermediary.  Thus  at  Mr.  MacDonough's  only  sitting
(p.  473),  on  February  9th,  1893,  Louis  R.  was  mentioned  by  Phinuit.
The  sitter  would  count  this  as  a  mistake,  and  as  diminisiiing  the
evidential  value  of  the  sitting.  But  G.  P.  seemed  to  be  able  to
distinguish  much  better  than  Phinuit  which  communicators  were
friends  of  a  sitter,  and  which  were,  for  the  time  being,  outsiders,  and
he  would,  as  it  appeared,  sometimes  tell  such  outsiders  to  go  away  and
not  interrupt,  and  at  other  times  make  it  clear  that  they  were  not
connected  with  the  sitter,  and  would  give  their  messages  in  an
"  aside,"  as  it  were,  to  me.

A  good  instance  of  the  confusion  arising  from  what  appears  to  be
the  "  return  "  of  a  recent  communicator  to  send  further  messages  to
friends,  is  given  in  Appendix  IIL  (see  pp.  499-501).  On  March  2nd,
1894,  Mrs.  M.  E.  P.  and  Mrs.  Alice  Dale  (pseudonym)  liad  a  sitting,
and  on  March  3rd,  when  Mr.  Heywood  was  present,  the  first  writing
that  came  was  a  message  to  Alice  Dale,  purporting  to  be  from  her
sister  Polly,  who  said  she  was  with  Elsie  at  all  times.  But  the  wiiting
further  on  contained  the  statement  "I  often  see  Alice  AYilkinson."
Polly,  whose  real  name  was  Alice  Wilkinson,  was  the  adopted  sister  of
Mrs  Dale,  and  Mrs.  Dale's  last  baby  had  been  named  Alice  after  her,
but  was  called  Elsie  to  avoid  confusion,  as  Mrs.  Dale's  name  was  also
Alice. Of  these  circumstances  the  only  one  known  to  me  was  that


340


RicJidrd  Hodgson.


[part:


Mrs.  Dale's  name  was  Alice.  I  asked  at  later  sittings  for  an  explana-
tion of  this  error,  and  concluded  that  "Daisy"  ("deceased"  wife  of
Mr.  Heywood),  from  whom  the  immediately  following  communications
purported  to  come,  was  in  contact  with  the  writing  mechanism  (see  p.
399),  v/hich  reproduced  what  "Daisy"  heard  "Alice  Wilkinson"  say,
and  also  what  was  passing  through  her  own  mind  (or  possibly  what  she
heard  another  "  intelligence  "  say).  I  did  not  appreciate  until  long
afterwards  that  apparently  G.  P.  saw  what  was  happening,  and
perceived  that  something  was  wrong  Avith  the  writing  mechanism  or
that  "Daisy"  could  not  manage  it.  He  therefore  took  her  place,  saying
"  I  saw  her  and  in  consequence  right  it  for  you."  Mr.  Heywood  and
myself,  who  were  not  aware  that  there  was  anything  to  rirjht,  assumed
that  uTite  was  intended,  and  we  laughed  and  remarked  upon  it.  To
which  G.  P.  wrote  emphatically,  "  Am  I  not  rit/ht  1  "  and  then
continued  :  "  Well,  do  speak  and  I  will  help  you.  This  was  a  mistake,
if  you  please.  Trust  me — trust  it  to  me,  sir/'  i.e.,  to  act  as  amanuensis.
G.P.'s  discernment  in  such  cases  has  apparently  been  of  great  assist-
ance, and  my  own  more  complete  supervision  of  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings-
and  knowledge  of  the  records  has  enabled  me  to  keep  out  much
confusion  by  either  taking  the  message  in  any  particular  case  and
promising  to  deliver  it,  or  by  sending  the  "  intruder "  away.  The
results  have  proved  to  be  in  precise  accordance  with  the  theory  that
the  communicators  are  what  they  purport  to  bo,  which  thus  conforms
to  one  important  canon  of  scientific  requirements. - .  ■

At  Mr.  MacDonough's  sitting  (p.  473)  there  were  some  messages,
from  the  sitter's  brother,  John  MacDonougli,  including  specific
directions  for  the  discovery  of  a  leak  in  Mr.  MacDonough's  house  at
Long  Branch,  N.Y.  Tlie  leak  was  said  to  be  under  a  certain  window-
sill,  and  there  indeed  the  leak  was  afterwards  found  and  repaired.
John  MacDonougli  also  seemed  to  know  the  state  of  his  son's  business
interests,  and  that  he  had  trouble  with  his  throat  and  head,  none  of
these  circumstances  being  known  to  the  sitters  at  the  time,  but
verified  afterwards.  On  five  later  occasions  messages  came  from  John
MacDonougli  which  on  tlie  whole  suggest  that  he  was  better  than
most  communicators  as  regards  his  knowledge  of  contemporary  mun-
dane affairs.  On  two  of  these  occasions  G.  P.  acted  as  amanuensis,;
and  the  first  time  apparently  wanted  to  make  sure  that  MacDonougli-
was  not  an  "interloper"  before  he  would  give  the  message  (p.  477).
One  of  the  five  messages  was  personal  and  non-evidential,  and  on&-
was  confused,  and  seemed  to  convey  the  information  that  the  com-
municator's son  John  had  died.  His  son  John  was  apparently  well
at  the  time,  but  died  in  the  following  year.  At  least  two  of  tlio-
remaining  three  messages  contained  specific  information  not  referred,
to  previously  and  unknown  to  me,  but  correctly  given.


xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  341


The  question  may  arise  wliefclier  all  such  incidents  demand  a-
hypothesis  which  goes  at  least  as  far telepathy  from  distant  persons.
If  they  were  known  to  tlie  sitter  at  the  time  of  his  sitting,  then,
although  not  mentioned  by  the  coaimunicators  at  that  time,  it  might,
be  supposed  that  the  knowledge  was  acquired  then  for  reproduction
afterwards. INIany  however  cannot  be  explained  in  this  way,  even  if
we  allowed  a  very  wide  margin  for  the  presence  at  sittings  of  persons-
who  might  be  supposed  to  know  of  the  facts  incidentally. Thus  it  will,
hardly  be  considered  probable  that  one  of  the  above  messages,  which
referred  to  Mrs.  MacDonough's  apprehensions  concerning  her  then
illness,  could  be  thus  explained. I  think  that  few  if  any  of  my  readers-
will  be  likely  to  press  this  hypothesis  into  much  service,  but  I  may
point  out  that  theoretically  it  might  be  assumed  tliat  the  supraliminal
and  subliminal  consciousness  of  all  persons,  on  this  earth  at  least,  if"
not  elsewhere  also,  are  open  to  Mrs.  Piper's  inspection.

I  know  of  several  instances  where  other  communicators  have  had
the  oiDportunity  of  frequent  communication  through  Mi'S.  Piper's  trance
during  a  course  of  several  yeai's,  and  at  many  of  these  sittings  I  have  been..
present.  They  have  strengthened  my  conviction  that  primarily  depended
upon  the  communications  from  G.  P.,  but  the  sitters  regard  them  as  too-
personal  for  publication.  The  best  things  can  obviously  never  or  very
seldom  be  repi-oduced ;  if  they  could  be,  they  would  prove  themselves,
by  that  very  fact,  to  fall  short  of  being  the  most  convincing.  Andj
hence  all  one  can  offer  is  a  few  dry  bones  instead  of  a  living  and
breathing  personality,  to  use,  the  words  of  the  lady  who  prepared  the
following  account.  I  shall  call  her  Mrs.  M.  She  is  an  eKceptionally
good  witness,  and  I  confirm  the  statements  which  she  makes  as-
regards  my  share  in  her  sittings.  Other  names  have  been  substituted^
for  the  real  names.

April,  1836.

I  met  Mrs.  Piper  for  the  first  time  on  the  23rd  of  April,  1894,  in  New
.York,  at  1003,  Lexington  Avenue,  where  she  was  then  giving  "  sitting..^."'

.1  had  made  the  appointment  from  a  town  in  Georgia  by  letter,  through
Mr.  Hodgson,  and  arrived  alone  at  the  house  at  ten  o'clock  a.m.  1  inquired,
for  Mr.  Hodg.ion,  who,  T  was  told,  had  nob  come  yet,  but  was  expected  soon.
I  waited  a  few  moments,  when  Mr.  Hodgson  arrived,  addressed  me  as
"Mrs.  Smith,"  and  called  Mrs.  Piper— who  was  upstairs,  and  whom  I  had
not  before  seen, — introduced  me  to  her  as  "  Mrs.  Smith,"  and  arranged  the
room  for  the  "sitting." There  was  a  little  indifi^erent  convensation,  but.

.nothing  which  could  in  any  way  give  a  clue  to  my  identity.

Mr.  Hodgson  I  had  never  seen  until  that  morning,  and  had  had  only  a-

-  slight  correspondence  with  him  referring  to  my  appointiuent  with  Mrs.  Piper-
and  my  associate  membership  in  the  S.P.R. ,  and  as  far  as  I  am  awai"e  he=
knew  absolutely  nothing  about  me,  except  that  I  was  anxious  to  have  some-
sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  At  that  time  I  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  the
reports  of  Mrs.  Piper  in  Parts  XVII.  and  XXT.  of  the  Pyoceediii'js  of  the:


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


S.P.R.,  but  I  had  read  tlie  account  of  her  written  by  Miss  X.  in  Borderland
for  January,  1894,  so  was  somewhat  prepared  for  the  peculiarities  of  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  and  for  "  Pliinuit"  when  he  made  his  appearance.  About  the
fir-it  remark  "  PJiinuit "  made  to  me  was,  "There  is  a  gentleman  in  your
surroundings  who  won't  stay  in  tlie  body  long — a  relative  of  yours."  The
description  which  "  Pliinuit "  gave  me  did  not  ajjply  to  any  near  relative  of
my  own.  He  then  said,  "  Who  is  Richard  ?  He's  here  with  me,  wants
to  speak  to  you.  He  hasn't  been  out  of  the  body  a  great  while."  I  asked
what  relation  Richard  was  to  me. Phinnit  said,  "He  will  try  to  write  it."

IVriting. "  I  see  my  sister  and  I  am  her  brother,  but  I  am  a  little  less

light  tlian  I  wish  to  be." I  then  said,  "  Is  this  B  ?"  using  a  pet  name

of  my  brother's  ;  there  seemed  to  be  great  excitement  in  the  hand,  which
grasped  mine  and  shook  it  frantically.  This  question  was  then  written,
"  Where  is  James  ?  "  [Richard  is  the  name  of  a  younger  brother  of  mine
-who  died  early  in  1891,  and  James  is  the  name  of  my  elder  brotlier,  and
he  was  with  me  when  I  was  taking  care  of  Richard  during  his  last  illness.]
The  rest  of  the  sitting  was  very  much  confused,  and  reminded  me  painfully
of  the  last  hours  of  my  brother's  illness,  which  had  been  passed  in  delirium,
l)ut,  as  at  that  time,  a  clear  thought  would  be  expressed  now  and  then.  He
said  he  wished  to  send  a  message  to  his  mother  (who  is  living),  but  seemed
too  confused  to  be  able  to  do  so.  There  were  many  little  things  very
-characteristic  of  the  boy,  but  the  effect  of  most  of  the  "  sitting "  was
like  the  half-intelligible  muttering  of  delirium.  The  hand  felt  my  jacket
jind  seemed  to  try  to  reach  something  inside.  I  gave  it  a  small  locket  and
vchain  which  I  wore  around  my  neck  under  my  dress.  The  hand — all  the
time  holding  the  locket — then  wrote,  but  very  con'^asedly,  and  with  many
])au3es,  "  I  remember  ...  he  is  here  and  will  come  in  again  .
tell  my  sister  all  about  it  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  he  loves  lier  and  understands
rail  .  .  .  1  do  not  quite  get  it  ;  Turn.  I  do  not  hear  quite  distinctly —
Faidine  is  on  my  mind."

The  locket  contained  some  hair  and  a  small  picture  of  my  husband,
Avho  died  in  1892.  Tom  is  the  name  of  a  person  who  was  well  known  to  my
husband  and  who,  for  reasons  known  only  to  myself,  was  very  much  in  my
thouglits  at  that  tim3.  Pauliae  is  the  name  of  my  eldest  sister.  After  the
-writing  had  ceased  "  Phinuit "  took  the  locket  and  chain  and  remarked,
"There  ai'e  two  different  people  here  ;  a  gentleman  connected  with  this  lady
who  passed  out  with  sourething  the  matter  with  his  heart,  and  an  old  lady
■called  Jlama  (?),  she's  been  passed  out  some  years.  The  other's  a  gentleman's
influence."

No  one  had  owned  the  locket  and  chain  but  myself.  I  bought  it  a  few
-weeks  after  my  husband's  death,  put  the  hair  and  picture  in  it,  and  it  had
Tiever  afterwards  been  out  of  my  possession,  so  the  reference  to  the  "old
lady  "  had  no  meaning  for  me.

My  second  "sitting  "  occurred  the  next  morning.  I  had  no  conversation
Tvith  either  Mrs.  Piper  or  Mr.  Hodgson  in  the  meantime,  except  to  tell
Mr.  H.  that  I  had  a  brother  Richard  and  that  I  had  not  found  tlio  person  I
liad  hoped  to  hear  from,  and  to  beg  for  another  sitting.  Mr.  Hodgson
suggested  that  I  bring  some  article  belonging  to  the  person  T  was  trying  to
iind,  and  I  therefore  brought  with  me  a  letter  of  my  husband's  when  I  came


XXXIII.] (Jhservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  345


the  next  morning  (April  24tli).  Mrs.  Piper  went  into  trance  as  usual,  and
at  once  "  Phinuit  "  remarlved  to  me,  "  After  I  went  out  I  found  your  brother
and  another  gentleman  with  Iiim.  .  .  .  The  gentleman  is  everything  to-
you.  He  will  come  ...  is  getting  liglit.  Has  something  important
to  say.  ...  I  get  the  name  of  Broivn.  B-r-o-w-n.  I  get  it  from  j'our
gentleman. He  says  you  will  know. Richard  says  Susy. "

In  my  first  "sitting"  the  name  Susii  had  occurred  a  number  of  times,
but  it  had  no  special  nreaning  for  me  in  connection  with  my  brother,  and  E
was  constantly  thinking  of  Bath,  the  name  of  a  young  girl  to  whom  my
brother  had  been  engaged  to  be  married,  but  on  my  way  home  it  flashed  over
me  that  Siisij  was  the  name  of  a  sister  two  years  older  than  my  brother-
Richard.  She  died  before  he  was  born,  so  when  "Phinuit"  said  "Richard
says  Sd'sy"  I  asked,  "Did  he  mean  Susij  when  I  suggested  Ruth  to  him
yesterday?"  "  Yes,  it  is  Susy.  He  told  you  forty  times  the  last  time,  but
you  wouldn't  understand  ;  he  said,  '  If  that's  my  sister  she  must  know  who-
Susy  is.'  She's  here  with  him  ;  she  was  his  sister,  she  passed  out  many
years  ago  ;  it  was  very  sad  for  her  mother,  the  most  sad  of  any  trouble  she
ever  had.  She  was  very  bright.  She  would  have  been  very  musical ;  it  was-
very  sad  for  her  mother."

The  baby  <St6siy  died  at  seven  months  old,  was  "very  bright"  — and  my
mother  has  often  told  nie  how  fond  of  music  slie  was,  and  that  the-
sound  of  tlie  piano  would  quiet  her  when  she  was  in  pain.  Her  death  was  a-
great  sorrow  to  my  mother.

When  "the  writing"  began  it  was  confused  and  trembling,  "Do  yovt
know  who  I  am  ? "  Then  the  names  Brown  a,nd  Parker  were  written — the-
names  of  tlie  doctor  and  nurse  who  had  cared  for  my  husband  during  his  last
illness — and  then  a  sort  of  cry  seemed  to  come  with  tlie  words,  "  Oh,  don't
you  know  me  1  Don't  you  know  me  ?  I  am  Roland  and  I  love  you  al\va3-s.
Speak  to  me."  [Roland  was  correct,  and  was  the  name  by  which  Mrs.  M.
usually  called  her  husband.  As  I  have  stated  above,  in  introducing  Mrs.
M.'s  account,  this  is  not  the  real  name.  Boland  and  Hollo — see  below — are
chosen  as  substitutes  for  the  real  names. — R.  H.]  What  followed  was-
perfectly  intelligible  and  much  of  it  characteristic,  but  seemed  like  the  weak
and  trembling  words  of  a  very  sick  man  trying  to  keep  his  thoughts  clear
and  make  himself  understood.  After  a  short  time  this  was  written  :  "I  tokl.
Richard  to  tell  you  about  Tom  for  me  ;  too  bad  he  was  all  mixed  up."  Theii-
Tom  was  spoken  of  as  only  my  husband  would  have  been  likely  to  speak  of
him,  and  aflairs  connected  with  him  and  unknown  to  any  person  but  myself
were  mentioned.

An  intimate  friend  of  my  husband's  was  spoken  of  by  name,  and  I  was
begged  to  caution  him  not  to  overwork. He  referred  directly  to  the  last

time  we  were  in  tlie  park  together  at  T  ,  and  answered  a  question  which

I  had  asked  liim  when  he  was  dying,  but  wliicli  he  had  been  too  weak  to
answer  at  that  time — it  was  a  curious  incident.  Mr.  Hodgson  was  in  the
room  with  me  most  of  the  time,  as  I  was  too  unused  to  Mrs.  Piper's  automatic
writing  to  read  it  without  help,  and  I  said,  "If  this  is  my  husband,  will  ypu:
answer  the  question  I  asked  you  when  you  were  dying  ? "  The  hand  grasped!
mine,  but  no  reference  was  made  to  my  question  for  a  few  moments,
then  very  cautiously  a  name  was  written,  and  my  question  fullj'  answered,.


-344


Richard'  Hodgson.


[part


Inifc  in  Rucli  a  way  tliafc  Mr.  Hodgson— or  any  stranger — would  not  under-
rstand  to  what  he  referred,  but  v/hich  was  perfectly  plain  to  me. It  was,  to
iiie,  tlie  most  wonderful  part  of  my  "  sitting."
On  April  25tli  Mr.  Hodgson  wrote  me  : —

"At  1038,  Lexington  Avenue,  this  morning,  one  of  our  members,
"Mrs.  R.,  Avas  trying  exi)eriments  in  crystal  gazing  and  automatic  writing.
Tilrs.  Pip3r  had  her  hand  resting  occasionally  on  Mrs.  R.'s.  Mrs.  P.  felt
some  pushing,  etc.,  in  hor  hand. I  put  pencil  in  and  we  went  on  talking.

Turning  to  talk  to  another  lady  present,  a  Mrs.  G  ,  my  attention  was

.attracted  suddenly  by  Mrs.  P.'s  breathing.  She  was  on  the  point  of  being
entranced,  and  v/hile  I  was  managing  to  keep  her  out  of  trance  successfully,
her  right  hand  with  joencil  was  dashing  off  the  enclosed,  viz.  : — 'Add  lo
instead  of  and.'  Sitting  late  this  afternoon  began  without  speech.  Writing  :
''Add  lo  in  place  of  and.  Hollo.'  Then  writing  changed.  Pli.inii.lf.  turned  up
at  end  of  sitting  for  brief  period— little  strength,  but  I  gathered  from  '  him  '
-that  this  message  is  for  you.  Apparently  Phinuit  said,  '  It  was  Rollo,
called  Roland.'  "

At  my  "  sitting,"  April  24th,  I  had  twice  asked  my  husband  to  write  his
name,  and  each  time  lie  wrote  lloland.  I  was  not  thinking  of  "Rollo,"  but
hoped  that  the  full  name  would  be  written,  because  I  knew  neither
Mrs.  Pi})er  nor  Mr.  Hodgson  knew  it.  I  am  quite  sure  I  did  not  use  the
name  "  Rollo."

In  niy  next  sitting,  STay  1st,  the  incident  is  not  mentioned,  perhaps
Ijecause  there  was  so  much  to  say,  but  on  May  31st,  at  a  sitting  Mr.  H.  was
liaving,  this  was  written  :  "Do  you  recognise  me,  sir?  Add  lo  instead  of
iind." My  husband's  family  usually  called  him  "Rollo,"  and  I  ofte.i  did  also.

At  the  sitting  April  24:th  he  had  begged  me  to  call  him  by  the  name
I  used  to,  and  I  did  call  him  a  foolish  little  pet  name  I  often  used,  and  which
seemed  to  satisfy  him  at  the  time,  but  once  again  in  the  sitting  Mr.  H.
was  having  for  me  (June  15th)  he  wrote  :  "  Ask  her  if  she  re:nembers  what
Hollo  means,"  and  in  the  letter  I  wrote  my  husband,  and  which  Mr.  Hodgson
read  at  the  sitting  on  June  28th,  I  spoke  to  him  as  "  Rollo,"  and  at  once  was
written,  "Rollo  !  ah,  ah — now  you  know  what  I  meant."

My  third  "sitting"  was  on  May  1st.  It  was  much  better  than  the
•others,  though  the  effect  of  some  of  it  was  still  like  a  sick  and  very  weak
person  trying  to  talk.

The  night  before  this  sitting  [when  alone]  I  had  asked  my  husband  if  he
could  not  tell  me  on  the  following  morning,  through  Mrs.  Piper,  of  something
I  had  done  or  said  in  the  last  few  days,  simply  as  a  proof  that  he  could  hear
.and  see  me,  ai  he  had  told  me  at  my  last  "sitting  "  that  he  could.  A  young
brother  who  was  a  great  favourite  with  my  husband  was  spoken  of  by  name,
and  I  was  told  that  my  husband  had  seen  us  walking  together  lately  in  what
seemed  to  him  to  bo  a  garden  and  water  near  it  ;  also  that  he  had  heard  us
talking  of  his  mother's  building  another  house.  Between  my  sitting  on
April  24th  and  that  on  May  1st  I  had  taken  a  walk  with  my  young  brother-
in-law,  and  we  paused  several  minutes  to  look  at  the  fresh  grass  and  trees  in
the  garden  of  St.  Luke's  Hosjiital,  58th  Street  and  5th  Avenue,  and  tJien
]iassed  the  Park  at  59th  Street,  and  during  the  afternoon  we  had  talked  a
long  time  about  a  new  house  my  mother-in-law  was  thinking  of  building.


■XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  345


There  were  no  mistakes  in  names  during  the  "sitting,"  and  nothing
■which  my  husband  might  not  have  written.

In  answer  to  a  question  of  mine  referring  to  "  tlie  gentleman  in  my
surroundings  to  pass  out  soon,"  who  liad  been  spoken  of  in  my  first  sitting,
I'hinuit  said,  "There  are  three  different  friends  of  yours  going  to  pass  out
within  six  months."  He  then  gave  me  a  quite  different  description  of
■"the  gentleman"  from  the  first,  and  which  strongly  reminded  me  of  a  near
relative,  yet  it  was  by  no  means  a  perfect  description,  and  Phinuit  did  not
say  who  the  man  was,  or  in  what  relation  he  stood  to  me,  only  that  "  He
comes  very  near  to  you."  He  said  the  others  were  "A  little  lady  with
something  the  matter  with  her  stomach;  I  think  tlie  other  is  a  relative."
I  have  lost  no  near  friend  or  relative  since  that  time.  An  aunt  of  my
husband's  died  within  a  few  weeks,  and  afterwards  Phinuit  told  me  she  was
one  of  the  people  he  meant,  but  he  was  very  confused  and  uncertain  about
what  he  said.

After  my  last  sitting  Mr.  Hodgson  called  at  my  hotel  one  evening  to
help  me  decipher  the  automatic  writing,  and  during  the  evening  suggested
that  I  try  to  send  him  a  message  by  my  husband  through  Mrs.  Piper.  I
.agreed  to  it,  and  when  Mr.  Hodgson  returned  to  Boston  he  hud  a  series  of
"sittings"  for  other  purposes,  during  which  a  good  deal  of  the  writing
purported  to  come  from  my  husband.

On  May  2ist,  1894,  Mr.  11.,  who  had  at  previous  sittings  requested
Phinuit  to  get  "Roland"  to  give  the  message  which  his  wife  was  going  to
send,  wrote  me  that  he  had  given  one  of  my  letters  to  Mrs.  Piper  to  hold
during  her  traiice,  and  that  this  writing  came  :  "She  gave  me  this  message,
sir."  Then  followed  what  purported  to  be  the  message  I  was  to  send
Mr.  Hodgson,  but  which  was  no  approach  to  it.  Several  references  were
made  to  people  who  had  been  mentioned  in  my  '.'sittings"  in  New  York —
nothing  irrelevant  was  written,  but  no  new  matter  was  introduced.

Again,  on  May  olst  another  message  came,  different  from  the  first  but  no
nearer  the  few  words  I  was  trying  so  hard  to  convey  to  my  husband.  How-
■ever,  tliis  occurred  :  "  She  told  me  to  tell  you,  sir,  that  she  put  some  flowers
-on  the  tomb,  and  asked  me  if  I  saw  lier  do  it.  If  so,  come  and  tell  you."
A  few  days  before  I  had  planted  some  wood  violets  on  my  husband's  grave.
I  had  sent  the  gardener  away  for  water  and  was  quite  alone.  It  seemed  to
me  my  husband  was  very  near.  I  looked  up  from  my  work  and  said,  as  if  1
was  speaking  to  some  one  standing  by  me,  "Roland,  if  you  can  see  me  I
wish  you  would  go  and  tell  Mr.  Hodgson  so,"  but  I  had  no  thought  of  the
message  really  being  taken,  for  there  had  already  been  a  failure  to  take  the
;Specific  message  I  was  trying  to  send.  Of  course  I  had  no  corroborative
testimony  to  this  incident,  as  I  never  spoke  of  it  to  anyone,  and  might  have
forgotten  it  had  it  not  been  for  the  writing  coming  so  soon  afterwards.

On  June  5th,  6th,  Ofch,  11th,  and  loth,  Mr.  Hodgson  had  "  sittings,"  at
which  my  husband  wrote,  always  giving  some  "message,'  but  never  any
nearer  the  right  one,  though  always  something  I  might  have  said  which
would  have  seemed  natural  enough.  There  was  often  much  confusion,  as
if  many  people  were  trying  to  talk  at  once,  and  it  reminded  me  of  a  "  crossed
telephone  wire."  There  was  also  much  complaint  of  the  difficulty  in  keepint;
the  thoughts  clear  in  so  much  confusion,  and  remarks  like  this,  "  It  is  not


346


liichard  Ilodjson.


[part


so  easy  to  express  one's  thoughts  to  a  marriage  ring  as  it  is  to  one's  wife."
I  had  sent  Mr.  Hodgson  a  ring  of  my  husband's  and  a  lock  of  hair  of  my
own  to  be  used  at  the  "sittings,"  both  of  which  were  correctly  recognised,
and  the  remark  made  that  the  ring  had  been  made  for  Mr.  M.,  and  taken
from  his  body  after  his  death,  whicli  was  true  ;  but  the  ring  had  rather  ;x.
peculiar  history,  known  to  my  husband,  which  was  not  referred  to  in  any
way,  though  I  wrote  Mr.  Hodgson  to  say  at  the  next  sitting  that  there  was
something  more  about  the  ring  I  would  be  glad  to  hear.

On  June  4th  an  aunt  of  my  husbaird's  died,  and  I  hoped  that  some-
reference  to  tlio  fact  would  appear  in  the  "sittings,"  aiid  tried  to  get  that
message  to  my  husband.  I  wrote  Mr.  Ilodgson  that  some  special  event  liad
taken  place  at  lioiue,  and  asked  him  to  asli  my  husband  if  he  knew  what
it  was. No  knowledge  of  it  was  shown  until  June  IGth,  when  this  occurred  :

•'  Ask  her  if  this  was  the  message,  viz.,  'Take  my  thanks  to  Mr.  H  ,

and  toll  him  tliere  is  another  spirit  friend  of  mine  with  you — yes— and  ask

lier  to  go  with  you  and  give  her  name  to  H  .' Thanks. Will  you  ask

her  ?  If  you  wall,  I'll  bring  the  lady  to  you.  First  I  wish  to  know  if  this
is  not  exactly  what  she  asked  me,  sir.  Ask  her,  and  if  she  wishes  the  lady'.-i
name  you  will  have  it."  Unfortunately  Mr.  Hodgson  was  to  have  but  ona
more  "  sitting"  at  wdiich  my  affairs  could  be  given  any  attention,  and  I  li;id
written  a  letter  to  my  husband  for  Mr.  Hodgson  to  read  at  the  sitting,  and
in  it  had  mentioned  the  name  of  the  aunt  who  had  just  died,  so  that  it
was  of  no  use  to  "ask  for  the  lady's  name."  Nearly  all  of  the  comments
which  were  made  during  the  reading  of  the  letter  were  quite  out  of  the  way,
and  a  number  of  names  were  mentioned  of  supposed  friends  on  "  that  side,"
none  of  which  were  correct  as  ajjplied  to  any  of  my  own  or  my  husband's,
connections.

On  June  9th,  in  answer  to  a  question  I  had  asked  Mr.  Hodgson  to  ask  for
me,  Phinuit  said  he  did  not  think  it  best  for  me  to  know  who  the  friends
were  who  were  to  "pass  out,"  but  that  he  would  give  their  names  ta
Mr.  Hodgson,  who  might  keep  them  till  after  the  events  had  tixken  place.
The  next  fall,  at  my  reque.st,  Mr.  Hodgson  gave  me  the  paper  (after  Phinuit
had  given  him  permission  to  do  so).  The  name  of  a  near  relative —  of  whom
Phinuit's  second  description  had  made  me  think — was  given,  and  the  remark
made  that  a  cousin  would  pass  out  in  a  specific  manner.  Neither  event  has
taken  place.

My  next  "sitting"  with  Mrs.  Piper  was  in  Arlington  Heights,  Mass.,
October  19th.  I  had  ten  sittings  at  that  time  — from  October  19th  to
December  7th — and  again  in  the  spring  of  1895  I  had  two  sittings,  May  11th
and  13fch.  One  on  August  23rd,  two  Seiitember  16th  and  17tli,  and  four
from  November  12th  to  December  Cth,  making  21  in  all.

On  February  15th  and  March  7th,  1895,  Miss  Edmunds  had  two  sittings
for  me,  using  articles  I  had  sent  her  for  the  purpose,  and  of  the  ownersliip
of  which  she  was  entirely  ignorant.  All  of  the  articles  were  correctly
recognised,  and  several  projshecies  which  had  been  made  to  me  about  their
owners  repeated  with  some  detail.  I  asked  Miss  Edmunds  to  ask  my  husband
to  write  his  full  name,  which  was  not  on  my  visiting  card  and  which  she
could  not  possibly  be  aware  of.  The  name  was  at  once  correctly  written,  but
for  some  reason  Miss  Edmunds  did  not  think  it  was  right,  and  asked  if  the


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  Si7


■writer  was  quite  sure  of  it.  The  name  was  then  differently  written,  though
commencing  with  the  same  letter  H  (which  was  on  my  visiting  card),  and  ab
a  sitting  which  Miss  Edmunds  had  for  me  on  January  25th  of  the  nresent
year  the  name  was  written  again  in  the  same  way,  though  Miss  Edmunds
then  knew  it  was  wrong,  and  knew  what  the  real  name  was.

During  the  ten  sittings,  from  October  19th  to  December  7th,  1894,  many
prophecies  were  made  as  to  the  death  of  near  relatives  and  friends,  and
events  to  take  jDlace  in  my  own  and  my  friends'  lives.  No  definite  time  was
given,  more  than  to  say  "it  will  come  soon,"  or  "before  a  great  while."
With  a  very  few  minor  exceptions,  none  of  the  things  told  me  at  that  time
have  happened.

At  my  two  sittings  in  May,  1895,  I  was  told  I  would  be  in  three  different
places  that  summer — one,  Boston,  where  I  then  was  ;  another,  a  place  my
husband  had  never  been  and  did  not  know  the  name  of,  so  he  said,  but
Phinuit  described  it  as  "near  the  water,"  which  is  his  usual  way  of
speaking  of  the  sea-shore;  the  third  place  was  "where  Dr.  P.  lives  in  the
summer"  [Dr.  P.  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  several  years  previously. —
E.H.],  and  I  was  told  I  would  stay  in  "a  weather-stained  sort  of  house,  near

a  red  house,  some  water  in  front  of  it." I  had  never  seen  D  ,  Dr.  P.'s

summer  home,  and  had  heard  no  description  of  it,  beyond  the  fact  that  it  was
a  beautiful  country  place,  with  mountain  scenery,  and  from  some  remark  of
Dr.  P.'s,  I  had  supposed  there  was  no  water  there.  When  I  told  him  what
Pidnuit  had  said,  he  remarked  that  the  ' '  Evergreen  Cottages,"  where  I  would

probably  stay  if  I  came  to  D  ,  could  not  be  better  described  than  as

"weather-stained  and  red,"  for  one  was  a  shingled  and  stained  house,  the
other  painted  red,  and  there  was  a  beautiful  little  lake  very  near  them.  At

that  time  I  w'as  hoping  to  come  to  D  ,  but  so  uncertain  about  it  that  I

would  not  allow  Dr.  P.  to  engage  my  rooms  at  the  "Evergreen  Cottages,"
although  I  knew  there  was  little  chance  of  securing  them  later  in  the  season,
and  I  had  no  thought  of  going  to  the  sea-shore,  it  seemed  the  last  thing
likely  for  me  to  do. However,  I  did  go  to  the  sea-shore  for  ten  days  in

August,  and  later  spent  a  month  in  D  ,  staying  in  the  weather-stained

house  described  by  Phinuit.  During  the  same  sittings  I  was  told  that  the
near  relative  of  whose  death  so  much  had  been  said  would  not  "  pass  out "
for  a  year  yet.

In  my  sittings  in  August  and  September  I  was  told  that  certain  properties
I  hold  would  be  sold  at  a  given  figure  "  within  three  months."  It  would  have
been  impossible  to  sell  any  of  them  for  half  the  value  given,  at  any  time
since  the  sittings,  but  other  minor  details  of  a  financial  nature  have,  rathei*
to  my  surprise,  come  about  as  stated  at  that  time.

Daring  the  sittings,  particularly  the  series  of  ten— October  19th  to
December  7th,  1894 — there  were  many  mistakes  in  Christian  names.  For
instance,  I  asked  to  have  the  names  of  my  husband's  three  sisters  written.
The  names  of  two  were  at  once  written  ;  the  second  name,  the  real  name  of
niy  sister-in-law,  but  not  the  name  by  which  we  usually  call  her.  Her  name
is  also  that  of  my  eldest  sister,  so  that  when  it  was  written  I  said,  "That  is
my  sister  ;  I  want  the  names  of  your  sisters."  At  once  came  the  remark,
"Butmme,  too.  Have  you  forgotten?"  The  name  of  the  third  sister  I
could  not  get  written,  and  there  seemed  the  strangest  hesitancy  abouti

2  A


348  Richard  Hodgson.  [vAm

ntbempting  it,  and  evasion  and  "trickiness"  naosb  distressing,  and  very
uncharacteristic  of  the  living  personality  of  the  writer.  At  last  a  name  was
written,  but  not  the  correct  one,  though  a  near  approach  to  the  pet  name  by
v/hich  she  was  called.  I  have  never  been  able  to  get  the  pet  name  correctly
written,  though  the  real  name  has  since  been  written,  or  any  reasonable
explanation  of  why  it  could  not  be  written.  Nothing  more  than  "Names
are  one  of  the  most  difficult  things  to  recall  here."

The  aunt  of  my  husband's  who  died  in  June,  1894,  has  often  sent  me,
through  Phiniiib  or  my  husband,  some  appropriate  sounding  message,  and
twice  purported  to  write  herself,  but  never  seemed  able  to  give  her  own
name  correctly  ;  it  is  an  unusual  name,  probably  unique  in  this  country,
and  I  tried  to  get  it  written  a  number  of  times,  but  with  no  success.

The  matter  of  the  four  sittings  from  November  12th  to  December  6th,
1895,  is  of  too  private  a  nature  to  quote  here,  and  owing  to  the  fact  that
much  of  it  referred  to  other  people  and  their  atliiirs,  I  have  been  unable  to
verify  many  of  the  statements  made.  When  I  had  the  sitting  on  November
12th,  I  expected  to  leave  Boston  in  a  very  few  days,  and  spoke  of  the
fact,  and  that  I  feared  I  should  have  no  opportunity  for  another  sitting.  I
was  told  I  would  stay  in  Boston  much  longer  than  I  expected,  and  in  a  day
or  two  I  received  a  letter  which  changed  my  plans,  and  I  did  remain  in
Boston  until  December  9th.

It  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  explain— as  Mr.  Hodgson  has  requested  me
to— just  what  general  effect  the  "sittings  "  have  made  on  my  mind.  If  I
had  never  had  a  "  sitting  "  with  Mrs.  Pilfer,  and  this  report  had  been  written
by  some  one  else,  I  am  sure  I  should  say  :  "There's  not  enough  evidence
here  to  prove  that  the  living  personality  of  the  man  called  Roland  ever
reached  his  wife  through  Mrs.  Pij)er's  '  mediumship '  ;  there  is  little  beside
coincidence,  suggestions  unconsciously  made  by  the  sitter  to  Mrs.  Piper
•during  the  highly  susceptible  condition  of  her  trance  state,  incidents  that  can
be  fully  explained  by  thought-transference  from  living  persons,"  etc.,  etc.  I
am  quite  sure  I  should  never  be  convinced  by  any  such  report  as  this  of  the
reality  of  "spirit  return."  Yet  I  am  convinced  of  it,  but  it  is  because  there
is  much  in  my  "  sittings"  which  rnhjlit  help  to  convince  a  stranger,  which  is
of  too  personal  a  natui'e  to  quote,  and  perhaps  the  most  convincing  thing  is
the  accumulation  of  little  touches  of  personality  which  make  the  "sittings  "
so  real  to  me,  but  which  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  rej^roduce  in  jirint.
Peculiarities  of  expression  in  the  writing  and  of  manner  in  that  wonderfully
dramatic  hand  of  Mrs.  Piper's.  Anyone  who  has  had  a  riood  sitting  with
Mrs.  Piper  will  know  exactly  what  I  mean.  One  feels  the  hand  is  alive  with
a  distinct  personality  very  different  from  "Phinuit"  (who  has  "controlled"
the  voice  in  all  my  sittings).  The  behaviour  of  the  hand  when  it  is  controlled
by  my  husband  or  my  brother  is  as  distinct  and  as  characteristic  of  the  two
men  as  anything  of  the  kind  could  possibly  be.

There  is  a  great  difference  in  the  quality  of  the  sittings  ;  at  some  of
them  no  irrelevant  matter  would  be  written,  and  at  others  much  which
sounded,  as  I  have  before  said,  like  the  odd  scraps  of  conversation  one  might
hear  over  a  telephone  wire.  I  have  generally  found  that  the  poor  sittings
were  on  days  when  either  Mrs.  Piper  or  I  was  not  up  to  our  normal  physical
condition.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  319

At  my  first  foiu-  sittings  Mr.  Hodgson  was  present  and  took  notes  for  me;
after  tiiat  I  have  always  taken  notes,  during  the  "sitting,"  of  "Plrinuit's"
remarks,  and  immediately  afterwards,  generally  on  my  way  to  Boston  from
Arlington  Heights — where  most  of  my  sittings  took  place — written  out  as  full
a  statement  as  I  could  of  all  that  had  occurred,  looked  over  the  automatic
\pritiug,  and  filled  in  my  own  remarks  and  questions  as  accurately  as  possible.
It  is  from  these  notes  and  MSS.  I  have  made  this  Ileport.

I  have  other  records  of  sei-ies  of  sittings  which  I  have  been
requested  not  to  publish  except  under  such  restrictions  as  would  make
them  practically  useless,  but  which  I  hope  at  some  future  day  to  obtain
permission  to  give  in  detail,  as  they  have  been  of  much  help  in  enabling
me  to  understand  the  causes  of  obscurity  in  communicating.  I  make
the  following  brief  statement  about  three  of  them,  in  illustration.

The  first  was  the  case  of  a  gentleman  intimately  known  to  me,
whom  I  shall  call  A.  I  devoted  a,bout  six  sittings,  more  than  a  year
after  his  death,  in  the  attempt  to  obtain  clear  communications  from
him.  Various  names  and  incidents  were  referred  to  in  which  he  had
been'  specially  interested  when  living,  including  two  or  three  specific
references  to  matters  unknown  to  me.  Tliere  was  much  incoherence,
but  of  a  character  which  distinctly  suggested  the  mind  of  A.  and  not
the  mind  of  anyone  else,  as  rega,rds  the  more  or  less  disassociated
fragments  of  knowledge  exhibited.  He  had  been  troubled  much  for
years  before  his  death  by  headaches  and  occasional  mental  exhaustion,
though  not  amounting  to  positive  mental  disturbance.  I  finally
£>'ave  up  the  attempt,  on  the  advice  of  G.  P.,  who  affirmed  that
he  would  not  be  clear  for  some  time  to  come.  There  was  no  opportu-
nity afterwards  for  any  detailed  communication  from  him.  He
manifested  to  four  other  persons  at  sittings  incidentally,  claiming
correctly  that  he  knew  them,  and  he  did  not  claim  any  recognition  of
persons  who  were  strangers  to  him.  But  I  do  not  know  whether  other
sitters  may  have  been  known  to  him  to  whom  he  did  not  appear.

The  second  case  was  that  of  a  gentleman  whom  I  shall  call  B.,  and
with  whom  I  had  a  short  correspondence  two  or  three  years  before  his
death,  but  he  was  unknown  to  me  personally.  He  took  his  own  life  in
&  moment  of  temporary  aberration.  Communications  purporting  to
come  from  him  were  obtained  originally  by  means  of  articles  which
had  been  used  by  him  and  which  were  presented  to  Phinuit.  Here
the  incoherence  at  first  was  even  greater  than  in  the  case  of  A.,  and
there  seemed  to  be  as  much  difficulty  in  getting  facts  known  to  me  as
in  getting  those  which  were  not.  Thus  in  reply  to  inquiries,  he  named,
as  the  cause  of  his  death,  a  trouble  from  which  he  had  suffered  for  a
year  before  his  death,  and  which  led  to  his  temporary  aberration.  This
was  unknown  to  me ;  but  the  circumstance  that  he  had  taken  his  own
life,  which  was  known  to  me,  was  not  mentioned  till  long  afterwards.

2  A  2


350


liichard  Hodgson.


[part


At  somo  of  the  sittings  later  on,  two  friends  of  his  were  present,  and
were  fully  and  apjjropriately  recognised,  but  it  was  several  years
before  he  could  communicate  with  any  continuous  clearness.  In  the
meantime,  amidst  much  confusion,  and  various  wrong  statements,
there  was  much  specific  information  correctly  given  which,  as  in
the  case  of  A.,  indicated  the  mind  of  B.  rather  than  the  mind
of  anyone  else.  Some  of  this  information  was  unknown  not  only  to
myself,  but  to  his  friends  who  had  sittings.  Gradually,  however,
owing,  as  I  think  myself,  to  the  lapse  of  time  and  greater  familiarity
with  the  act  of  communicating  on  the  part  of  B., — or,  as  some  may
think,  owing  to  the  development  of  a  pseudo  B. -personality  in  Mrs.
Piper, — these  confusions  cleared  away.  I  quote  the  following  from  a
statement  made  by  one  of  the  two  friends  of  B.  who  had  sittings.

We  at  first  thought  mind-reading  might  play  an  important  part  in  the
sittings,  but  the  more  we  experimented  the  less  weight  we  gave  to  it.  On
several  occasions  no  information  could  be  obtained  of  facts  known  perfectly
to  both  sitters,  and  on  which  both  our  minds  were  fixed.  Several  of  the
sittings  were  excellent  throughout,  notably  one  [tlie  last]  at  which  [the  other
friend]  and  I  were  alone  present.  It  seemed  as  if  B.  stood  before  us  in
person  ;  the  answers  came  immediately,  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  and.
showed  an  intimate  knowledge  of  our  past  relations  to  each  other.  Many
facts  were  related  and  cii'cumstances  referred  to  which  were  known  only  to-
B.  and  ourselves,  but  which  are  of  too  personal  a  nature  for  publication.
These  were  given  not  in  the  nature  of  a  rest,  but  in  the  course  of  conversa-
tion as  one  friend  would  talk  with  another.  Small  touches  of  character,
peculiarities  of  expression,  and  modes  of  thought,  we  instantly  recognised  as
a  part  of  his  individuality.

In  the  third  case,  C,  another  friend  of  mine  who  also  took  his
own  life,  there  was  much  confusion  even  a  year  after  his  death,  when
he  first  came  into  communication,  and  there  was  a  lamentable  failure
in  answering  questions  concerning  matters  well-known  to  C.  living.
Later  on,  however,  he  became  clearer  and  gave  specific  information,
unknown  to  the  sitters,  of  a  private  and  personal  kind,  well  suited
as  a  proof  of  identity,  and  showed  in  written  communications
afterwards  much  that  was  suggestive  of  C, — in  tendencies  of  thought
and  particular  remembrances, —  operating  under  peculiar  difficulties
through  an  inferior  mechanism.  More  than  seven  years  after
death  he  wrote,  "  My  head  was  not  clear,  and  is  not  yet,  when  I  speak
to  you."

As  I  suggested  at  the  beginning  of  this  paper,  it  is  to  series  of
sittings  with  the  same  communicator  that  we  must  look  for  special
light  upon  the  question  how  far  the  continued  personalities  of  the'
"  dead "  are  actually  concerned  in  these  phenomena,  but  there  are
various  incidents  in  the  detailed  records  given  in  the  Appendices
published  herewith,  where  only  one  or  two  opportunities  have  been


xxxni.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  351


afforded  to  the  same  communicator,  which  I  think  add  to  the  evidence
derived  from  the  longer  series.  Tlius,  at  the  sitting  of  ]\Iiss  Macleod
(p.  447),  where  her  sister  Etta  seemed  to  be  the  chief  communicator,
through  Phinuit,  though  several  mistakes  were  made  and  several  names
mentioned  that  had  no  relevance,  she  was  told  that  her  uncle  David
would  die  soon.  So  far  as  the  sitter  knew,  his  health  was  then  perfectly
good,  but  he  died  in  a  year.  Etta  while  living  supposed  that  her
illness — the  cause  of  her  death — had  to  do  with  "  the  stomach,"  and
this  was  stated  at  the  sitting,  but  it  was  known  to  the  sitter  and  her
family  that  the  cause  of  death  was  heart  trouble.  Again  "Etta"  said
that  the  last  thing  she  saw  was  her  mother's  face  until  she  became
conscious  in  a  room  and  saw  her  body  lying  under  something  white.
This  was  confirmed  by  the  mother,  who  said  that  Etta  was  looking
right  into  her  face  "when  the  light  went  out  of  her  eyes."  But  the
sitter  had  always  thought  that  Etta's  eyes  were  closed  at  this  time.

The  records  of  M.  Bourget's  sittings  (p.  494)  and  Mr.  Heywood's
(p.  501)  and  Mr.  Mitchell's  (p.  517)  all  appear  to  me  to  be  interesting-
examples  of  the  complicated  form  M'hich  the  communications  have
frequently  taken  during  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  At  Mr.  Heywood's
sittings,  besides  much  that  was  personal  and  characteristic  of  his  late
wife,  including  knowledge  that  he  believed  to  be  known  to  no  other
person  living  but  himself,  several  facts  were  mentioned  of  which  he  was
entii-ely  ignorant.  But  the  records  should  be  read  throughout  to  be
appreciated. (See  especially  pp.  504-510).

Dr.  F.  H.  K.  (p.  527)  also  received  information  unknown  to  him,  at
his  sittings,  and  afterwards  verified,  besides  much  that  was  personal  to
him,  producing  as  he  says  "  a  very  strong  conviction  that  the  control
was  what  it  purported  to  be,  that  of  my  late  wife."  At  his  second
sitting,  on  his  way  home  after  a  year's  trip  abroad,  he  received  some
communications  from  his  "  uncle  G.,  recently  deceased."  Among  other
statements  was  :  "  Give  my  love  to  L.,  and  tell  her  I  see  the  trouble
with  her  eyes."  L.  was  the  initial  of  his  uncle  G.'s  widow,  but  Dr.  K.
did  not  understand  the  message  till  he  reached  his  home  in  Illinois
and  found  that  his  aunt  L.  had  been  "  for  some  little  time  under  treat-
ment for  some  trouble  with  her  eyes."

Various  instances  of  the  giving  of  information  unknown  to  the
sitters  occurred  in  the  series  of  sittings,  the  records  of  which  are  given
as  a  group  in  Appendix  IV.,  as  all  being  closely  concerned  with  the
friends  and  relatives  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  B.  Thaw.  At  their  first
sitting  a  very  intimate  friend  of  theirs,  who  had  been  dead  about  a
year  and  a  half,  and  whom  they  have  called  Dr.  H.  in  the  records,
gave  (through  Phinuit)  a  nickname  by  which  he  had  been  called.  This
name  was  not  known  to  the  sitters.  On  inquiry  his  widow  said  it  was
the  name  commonly  used  by  his  mother  and  sisters,  all  dead,  but  not


352


Michard  Hodgson.


[part


used  by  anyone  living.  At  a  later  sitting  a  test  question,  which  was
sent  for  the  purpose  by  the  widow  of  Dr.  H.,  and  the  answer  to  which
was  unknown  to  the  sitters,  was  correctly  answered  at  the  same
sitting.  These  incidents  were  in  addition  to  vai-ious  personal  references
to  his  wife  and  children  and  other  interests, — such  as  the  church  and  a
volume  of  his  poems  unpublished  before  his  death,  but  published
afterwards, — and  some  utterances  repeated  by  Pliinuit  that  were  so
characteristic  of  Dr.  H.,  that  Dr.  Thaw  supposed  that  he  had  taken
direct  control  of  the  voice,  and  asked  him  for  information  about
Phinuit  (p.  567).

At  the  sitting  which  Mr.  G.  Perkins  had  on  March  18th,  1892,  he
presented  a  chain  which  he  knew  had  been  worn  by  his  mother,
deceased.  Phinuit  said  that  both  his  mother  and  sister  recognised
the  chain,  and  that  both  had  worn  it.  Tliis  was  true,  although  Mr.
Perkins  did  not  know  that  his  sister  had  also  worn  it.  She  died  when
he  was  a  small  child  (p.  555).  Again,  the  nurse  of  Mrs.  Thaw's  children
presented  a  parcel  which  she  supposed  contained  lier  mother's  hair.
Phinuit  speaking  of  the  sitter's  mother  said,  tlirusting  his  finger
down  the  neck  of  the  sitter,  "  Put  it  in  there  and  wear  it,  just  as  she
told  you  to."  The  sitter  insisted  that  Phinuit  was  wrong,  but  he  tore
open  the  paper  and  showed  that  it  contained  an  Agnus  Dei,  which  as
a  matter  of  fact  the  sitter's  mother  liad  told  her  to  wear  (p.  573).  There
are  other  minor  instances  of  tlie  giving  of  information  unknown  to
the  sitters  in  the  records  printed  in  Appendix  IV.,  with  an  enormous
mass  of  correct  detail  concerning  friends  and  relatives  of  the  sitters,
and  with  very  little  error.  Several  minor  prophecies  proved  correct ;
one  important  prophecy  concerning  the  success  of  certain  machines
was  wrong  as  to  time,  as  well  as  other  circumstances  connected  with
them  ;  but  another  concerning  the  death  of  a  brother,  who  was  never
present  at  a  sitting,  was  right.  This  brother  was  a  chronic  invalid
with  asthma.  At  the  sitting  of  May  10th,  1892,  Phinuit  said  that
his  kidneys  were  out  of  order,  and  it  was  discovered  for  the  first  time
that  he  had  kidney  disease  on  a  careful  medical  examination  made  two
weeks  later.  At  the  same  sitting  Phinuit  said  that  he  would  die
"  within  six  months  or  a  j'ear,"  and,  in  reply  to  the  question  how,  said,
"  He's  going  to  sleep,  and  when  he  wakes  he'll  be  in  the  spirit.  Heart
will  stop."  On  May  22nd,  the  time  was  given  as  "six  months  or  a
little  less."  He  died  in  sleep,  of  heart  failure,  on  the  3rd  of  the  follow-
ing September.  At  the  first  sitting  which  the  Thaws  had  afterwards,
four  months  later,  he  communicated  (p.  580).

There  are  many  interesting  details  regarding  what  I  might  speak
of  as  related  groups  of  communicators,  including  persons  who  knew
something  about  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  directly  or  indirectly,  before
death  ;  and  of  these  I  shall  give  some  instances  in  Part  II.  of  my


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  353


Report  (to  be  published  in  the  next  number  of  Proceedings),  where  I
shall  also  give  some  account  of  a  few  other  special  communicators  who
belong  chiefly  to  the  period  of  1896-7.  I  close  this  section  of  my
Report  by  a  brief  account  of  the  case  of  the  friend  whom  I  have  called
Mr.  Hart,  to  whom  in  the  first  instance  G.  P.  manifested  (p.  29G)
and  who  himself  died  in  Naples  on  May  2nd,  1895.  As  in  G.  P.'s
case,  I  substitute  other  names  for  the  real  ones.  I  had  not  been
having  regular  series  of  sittings  at  this  time,  and  lieard  incidentally  on
Jlay  3rd  that  a  cablegram  had  been  received  by  a  relative  announcing
the  death  of  Hart.  My  assistant  Miss  Edmunds  went  out  to  Mrs.
Piper  at  my  request  to  arrange  a  sitting  for  me  for  the  next  day,  May
4th,  and  to  say  tliat  it  was  extremely  important  that  I  must  have  the
sitting.  I  did  not  tell  Miss  Edmunds  the  reason,  and  she  made  a
totally  erroneous  conjecture  concerning  it.  The  announcement  of  the
death  however,  with  the  place,  and  cause  of  death  (inflammation  of
the  heart),  appeared  in  a  Boston  evening  paper  on  May  3rd.  At  tlie
sitting  on  May  4th,  after  a  few  words  from  Phinuit,  G.P.  wrote  and
gave  several  messages  from  friends,  and  then  asked  what  he  could  do
for  me.  I  replied  that  I  had  something  for  liim  to  do,  but  could  not
tell  him  what  it  was.  He  made  a  brief  I'eference  to  his  father  and
mother,  and  then  to  a  friend  of  my  own,  and  then  came  the  following: —

Hold,  H.  See  all  of  these  people  bringing  a  gentleman.  [R.  H.  thinks
this  is  unintentionally  written,  and  doesn't  repeat  the  words  aloud.]

Read  ...  do  you  see  them,  H.  1  (No.)  He  is  coming  here.  I
think  I  knew  him.  [R.  H.  can't  decipher  after  think.]  That  I  knew  him.
Come  here  and  listen,  H.  He  has  been  here  before  and  I  have  seen  hiui
since  I  passed  out.  (Who  is  it  ?)  John.  "  Do  you  see  me,  H.  ?"  He  says
this.  (No.)  "What  about  my  health,  Oli  George,  I  am  here,  do  not  go
away  from  me,"  .  .  .  not  to  you,  H.,  to  me.  (Yes,  I  understand.)  "I
thought  I  should  see  you  once  more  before  I  came  here."  (What  is  the  full
name?)  John  H.  (Give  me  the  second  name  in  full.)  Did  you  speak?
(Write  the  second  name  in  full.)  Hart.  (That's  right.  Hart,  old  fellow.)
"Will  you  listen  to  me,  Hodg.  .  .  .  [Much  excitement  in  hand,  and
letters  jumbled  over.  G.  P.  writing  throughout,  but  at  times  ajiparently
mucli  perturbation  introduced.]  George  knew  I  was  here  and  met  me  but  I
was  to  weak  to  come  here  and  talk  H."  .  .  .  Yes,  H.,  but  the  dear  old
fellow  is  short  breathed.  .  .  .  "I  expected  to  see  you  before  I  came
here,  H.  (Yes,  I  hoped  to  have  met  you  in  the  body  again)  but  you  see  I
was  failing. How  are  you  ? "

What  [api^arently  from  G.  P.  to  Hart.]

"I  brought  Ge  here  first." (Yes,  you  did.)

Yes,  I  do  [from  G.  P.  to  Hart.]  [More  probably  from  Hart  to  G.P.,  in
answer  to  some  such  question  as  "do  you  mean  me?"  from  G.  P.  to  Hart.
1898.]

Oh  what  about  me,  H.  ?

(He  means  your  first  messages  came  to  him.)


S54


Ricluird  Hodgson.


[part


Oh  I  see  !  but  I  was  .  .  .  but  (you  were  out  of  the  body)  yes.
,  .  .  "I  am  a  little  dull,  H.,  in  my  head."  (Isn't  the  liglit  good  to-
day ? )  Yes,  but  it  is  I,  H.,  niy  (you  mean  yon  are  not  in  good  trim,  George  ?)
No  no  I  Hart  no,  H.  I  Hart  (I  see,  Hart  is  dull,  Hart  can't  do  so  well.)
[H.  is  the  initial  of  Hart's  real  name.  1898.]  [Thump  with  fist.  Much
thumping  with  fist  during  sitting  indicative  of  assent  at  different  times.]

The  above  is  transcribed  from  the  type-written  copy  of  the  record
of  the  sittinsf,  and  the  quotation  marks  were  doubtless  inserted  by
myself  to  make  the  record  clearer.  There  was  much  confusion  in  the
rest  of  the  sitting.  The  cause  of  death  he  stated  to  be  inflammation
of  the  stomach,  which  was  not  correct,  though  he  had  suffered  much
from  this  for  a  year  before  his  death.  I  may  have  known  of  this  but
was  not  consciously  aware  of  it.  I  knew  that  he  had  been  ill  in  Europe,
but  when  I  last  heard  from  him  several  months  previously  I  under-
stood that  he  had  recovered.  There  were  confused  references  to  the
Howards.  He  referred  to  two  other  friends  in  Europe  (whose  names
had  been  given  in  previous  sittings  by  Gr.  P.),  mentioned  several  names
imknown  to  me,  and  referred  to  incidents  in  connection  with  them,  as
well  as  other  matters,  none  of  which,  fur  family  reasons,  I  have  yet
been  able  to  verify.  I  think  it  probable  that  they  will  be  partially,
but  only  partially  correct.  There  seemed  to  be  glimpses  here  and
there  of  a  clear  consciousness.  He  wanted  to  know  if  it  was  Paris
(where  he  had  stayed  some  time  while  in  Europe).  I  said  it  was
Arlington  Heights.

"Arlington,  I  remember  Arlingbon — did  you  not  take  me  here  ?  (Yes,
this  is  the  very  room  where  George  came  to  you).  Oh,  yes,  I  had  his
[article  of  G.  P.  specifically  mentioned]  and  my  watch.  .  .  Will  they
send  my  body  on  to  New  York?  (I  don't  know.)  I  hope  they  will.  They
are  now  talking  about  it."  [I  learned  later  that  the  desirability  of  taking
the  body  to  America  was  discussed.]

When  I  asked,  "Why  didn't  George  tell  me  to  begin  with?"  he
replied,  "because  I  told  him  to  let  me  come  and  tell  myself."  This
"was  like  Hart,  and  so  was  the  statement  quoted  above  that  it  was  he
Avho  brought  G.  P.  first.

At  this  sitting,  and  several  also  in  the  following  week,  during  which
the  confusion  continued,  a  knowledge  was  showji  of  various  matters
known  to  me  which  were  specially  suggestive  of  Hart,  references  to
friends  and  relatives,  presents  which  he  had  given  me,  jokes  about
cigars,  magazines  which  he  had  entrusted  to  me  just  before  he  went
to  Europe  three  years  previously,  etc.,  but  of  course  I  was  anxious  to
obtain  information  concerning  events  in  Europe  of  which  I  was
entii-ely  ignorant,  especially  any  that  occurred  just  before  his  death ;
and  I  have  such  on  record  but  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  discovering
how  much  correct  statement  they  include. Between  the  first  and


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  PlLenomena  of  Trance.  355


second  sitting  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  announcement  of  his  being
there  to  communicate  was  "led  up  to"  by  G.  P.,  and  at  the  second
sitting,  when  Hart  wrote  part  of  the  time  himself,  I  said,  "  I  suppose
last  time  you  thought  I  took  your  coming  very  coolly."  The  hand
wrote  excitedly  :  "  You  seemed  very  inconsiderate  to  what  you  used
to  do."  I  explained  that  I  had  heai-d  of  his  death  by  a  cablegram
which  had  been  received  by  his  "brother-in-law."  He  theii  wrote  the
name  of  the  brother  of  his  sister's  husband.  I  said  no,  "  your  wife's
brother."

Another  incident  at  the  same  sitting  showed  a  curious  remem-
brance.

.  ,  .  Ask  for  my  cigar  case  .  .  .  am  I  dreaming  ...  I  think
I  know  that  one  I  sat  in  this  corner  [hand  points  to  other  side  of  the  room,
to  place  where  Mrs.  Piper  sat  at  time  wlien  Hart  attended  his  sitting  on
March  22nd,  1892.]  (You  mean  you  sat  there  ?)  Yes  I  did  (yes,  I  remember)
I  know  ■where  I  am  now.

As  T  recall  this  incident,  I  did  not  understand  what  was  meant  at
first  when  the  hand  pointed,  as  it  was  more  than  three  years  since
Mrs.  Piper  had  sat  there.  That  position  in  the  room  was  not
associated  specially  in  my  mind  with  Hart,  as  various  other  persons
whom  I  had  accompanied  to  sittings  had  sat  in  the  same  position,  both
before  and  after  Hart's  sitting,  and  it  was  only  after  April  29th,  1892
(see  p.  292),  when  I  succeeded  in  getting  the  hand  to  write  with  the
block-book  on  the  table  instead  of  on  the  top  of  Mrs.  Piper's  head,
that  T  requested  Mrs.  Piper  to  change  her  position,  so  that  there  might
1)0  plenty  of  room  for  the  table  and  for  a  sitter  on  the  other  side  of  it.
But  the  occasion  was  a  very  memorable  one  to  Hart,  and  if  he  was
communicating  and  waking  to  a  consciousness  of  his  surroundings,  it
was  a  natural  observation  for  him  to  make.

In  J une  and  July  a  friend  of  mine  was  having  a  series  of  sittings,
and  Hart  sent  a  message  to  me  through  him  ;  he  was  becoming  clearer,
and  wished  to  communicate.  There  were  no  opportunities  for  any
further  series  of  sittings  however,  and  Mrs.  Piper  stopped  sitting  for
her  summer  rest,  and  I  visited  England  later.  Few  sittings  were
given  in  the  winter  of  1895-6  owing  to  Mrs.  Piper's  ill-health.  Harb
gave  brief  messages  on  several  occasions  ;  said  that  he  wanted  to  follow
in  "G.  P.'s  tracks,"  and  seemed  somewhat  aggrieved,  so  to  speak,
because  he  did  not  have  the  same  opportunity  as  had  been  afforded  to
G.  P. Thus,  on  January  22nd,  189G  :—

.  What  in  the  world  is  the  reason  you  never  call  for  me  ?  I  am
not  sleeping.  I  v/ish  to  help  you  in  identifying  myself,  ...  I  am  a
good  deal  better  now.  (You  were  confused  at  lirst.)  Very,  but  I  did  not
really  understand  how  confused  I  was.  It  is  more  so,  I  am  more  so  when  I
try  to  speak  to  you. I  understand  now  why  George  spelled  his  7/ords  to


356


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


me.  [Several  sentences,  even  of  ordinary  words,  wore  spelt  out  by  Pliinuib
from  G.  P.  at  his  first  appearance,  to  Hart.]

He  became  clearer  later  on,  and  purported  to  take  part  in  an
inquiry  I  was  making  concerning  a  person's  whereabouts  in  Mexico
(an  account  of  wliicii  will  be  given  in  Part  TI.  of  this  Report).  It  was
during  this  time  that  Miss  Warner  (p.  '32i)  had  her  two  sittings,
January  6th  and  7th,  1897.  She  remai-ked  to  me  during  the  sitting  of
January  7th,  1897,  that  Hart  knew  one  of  her  brothers,  Charlie,  and
that  they  went  to  the  Azores  together.  I  asked  Phinuit  if  he  or  G.  P.
could  get  Hart.  Shortly  afterwards  G.  P.  wrote,  and  after  a  short
conversation  with  the  sitter  came  the  following  : —

Did  you  have  a  brother  Jack,  Hart  asks.  (Yes.)

[For  Hart.] I  am  here. George  tell  her  I  see  her  and  I  long  to  ask  hei
brother  if  he  recalls  the  storm  we  experienced.
(I  know  he  does. I've  heard  him  speak  of  it.)

Good,  and  ask  him  if  he  still  has  tlie  stick  like  mine.  Take  the  pipe,  old
chap,  I  do  not  wish  it.  Hear  you  ?  (R.  H.  :  Yes,  it  may  be  the  one  he
gave  me)  and  I  have  it  in  my  mind.  A  memento.  He  ought  to  have  it.
[Hart  gave  me  a  pipe.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  reference  is  to  this,  or
to  one  connected  with  sitter's  brother. — R.  H.]

We  went  to  a  queer  little  Hotel,  at  a  little  Hotel  together.  Cliarlio  had
a  headache  from  hunger.  We  were  almost  starved  when  we  got  there,  the
food  was  bad,  the  food  was  so  bad,  poor.  I  am  content  liere,  quite.  Do  you
ever  see  me  as  I  really  am  1  (No.  I  don't  see  you  at  all.)  Not  at  all.  I  do.
H.  Hear  Hart  say  have  a  smoke,  anything  for  relief.  Ask  liim  [Charlie]
about  this  for  me.  Hungry.  (R.  H.  :  He's  still  talking  about  Charlie  and
their  experiences  together  ?) Yes,  H. He  is.

(Tell  some  more.)  We  went  up  to  the  Hotel  and  ask  him  if  he  recalls
the  laugh  we  had  after  we  got  to  our  room. Give  him  ray  love.

(What  did  j'ou  laugh  about  T)  because  of  the  dirt  etc.  .  .  .  very
amusing.  He  has  not  been  well  but  he  is  going  to  be  [Disturbance  iu
hand] Hold  on,  old  man,  I  cannot  hear  if  you  grab  me  in  this  way.

Did  you  ever  have  a  fever  ?

(R.  H.  :  Who  says  that  ?) I,  J.  H.

(Do  you  mean  me  ?)  Yos.  (Yes.  I  had  a  fever.  Pneumonia,  and
typhoid  fever.)  Never  have  another.  Going  to  be  well  now.  I  said  it.
(Do  you  mean  me  ?)  Yes,  Charles  too.  Give  him  my  love  and  do  not  forget
about  the  stick.  ...

Miss  Warner  wrote  :

I  had  known  that  Cliarley  and  Hart  took  a  trip  in  a  sailing  vessel  to  the
Azores  but  absolutely  no  details,  except  that  the  boat  was  driven  on  the
rocks  and  they  watched  her  break  up.

This  was  all  she  could  recollect  in  connection  with  the  statements
made  by  Hart  about  her  brother.  I  remembered  also  about  the  ship-
wreck at  the  Azores,  but  had  no  recollections  of  any  sort  connecting


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Fhenomena  of  Trance.  35T


Hart  with  Charley  Warner,  or  about  any  of  the  other  incident*
referred  to.  I  think,  however,  that  as  Hart  himself  told  me  of  the-
shipwreck  at  the  Azores,  he  probably  mentioned  Warner  in  connection
with  it.  He  may  possibly  also  have  spoken  of  some  of  the  other
incidents.  But  I  am  unable  to  recall  the  vaguest  memory  of  any
sort  about  them.  Chai'ley  Warner  was  then  in  California,  and  ia
reply  to  inquiries  he  wrote  on  February  2nd,  1897  : —

J.  H.  and  myself  once  were  hove  to  on  the  North  Atlantic  for  about  three-
days  during  a  severe  storm.  At  another  time  we  were  at  Horta,  Fayal
Island,  and  watched  our  vessel  drag  ashore  and  break  up  on  account  of  a.
very  bad  storm,  or  hurricane.  J.  H.  had  a  very  serviceable  stick.  As  I
remember  it  a  stout  little  blade  drojiped  out  of  the  ferrule.  I  never  had  one-
like it  that  I  can  remember.  He  thought  highly  of  it  and  advised  me  to  get
one  like  it.  I  don't  remember  anything  about  a  pipe.  What  he  says  about
the  queer  little  hotel  is  all  true  ;  I  don't  remember  that  I  had  a  headache,
but  we  were  hungry.  J.  H.  was  extremely  amused  about  something  at
that  hotel  and  we  had  a  hearty  laugh. It  was  connected  with  dirt.

This  was  the  last  appearance  of  Hart.  Soon  afterv/ards  the
"  controls  "  of  Rev.  W.  S.  Moses  took  supervision  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance. (See  p.  408).

§  5.  The  "  SriRiT  "  Hypothesis  and  the  Hypothesis  op  Telepathy

FROM  the  Living.

We  may  now  turn  to  the  more  definite  consideration  of  the-
significance  of  such  manifestations  a-s  I  have  illustrated.

In  my  previous  report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  {Proceedings,  Vol.
"VIII. ),  in  discussing  the  claims  of  Phinuit  to  be  a  "spirit"  and  to-
be  in  communication  with  the  "  deceased  "  friends  of  sitters,  I  urged
that  there  were  almost  insuperable  objections  to  the  supposition  that
such  "  deceased  "  persons  were  in  direct  communication  with  Phinuit^
at  least  in  anything  like  the  fulness  of  their  personality  ;  but  it  seemed
to  me  a  hypothesis  that  should  be  continually  borue  in  mind  that
there  might  be  some  actual  communication,  even  if  it  was  only  partial
and  fragmentary  {loc.  cit.,  p.  57).  I  am  now  fully  convinced  that
there  has  been  such  actual  communication  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,
but  that  the  communication  has  been  subject  to  certain  unavoidable-
limitations,  the  general  nature  of  which  I  shall  shortly  indicate  ;  and
in  the  I'emaining  portion  of  this  Part  I.  of  my  paper  I  shall  consider
the  main  classes  of  facts  which  appear  to  point  in  this  direction,
reserving  Part  II.  (to  be  published  in  the  next  number  of  Proceedings)
for  the  consideration  of  objections  which  may  be  brought  against  this
view,  for  the  account  of  some  additional  and  more  recent  evidential
communications,  and  for  the  explanation  of  certain  points  in  connection


358


Richard  Hodgson.


[pari


■svibli  the  actual  modus  operandi  of  the  trance-manifestations,  and  of
various  unusual  obscure  incidents.

And  first  I  may  again  say  that  I  think  it  needless  to  devote  any
more  special  attention  to  the  view  that  the  manifestations  in  question
■can  be  accounted  for  by  the  supposition  of  imposture  on  the  part  of
Mrs.  Piper.  I  refer  the  reader,  on  this  point,  to  what  I  have  said  at
the  beginning  of  this  paper,  and  to  the  previously  published  reports
there  mentioned,  in  which  the  possibility  of  accounting  for  Mrs.  Piper's
phenomena  by  fraud  has  been  fully  considered  and  rejected.  Further
•evidence,  were  it  needed,  rendering  the  "  fraud  "  hypothesis  yet  more
nntenable,  is  offered  in  the  records  of  sittings  included  in  this  report.

Ilegarding  these  phenomena,  then,  as  supernormal,  I  may  first
€m23hasise  the  fact  that  they  are  much  more  difficult  of  explanation
now  on  the  assumption  that  the  supernormal  knowledge  exhibited  has
its  source  in  the  minds  of  living  persons  than  in  the  earlier  yeai's  of
Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  when  pi-actically  the  only  intermediary  was  the
Phinuit  personality.  With  the  advent  of  the  G.  P.  intelligence,  the
development  of  the  automatic  writing,  and  the  use  of  the  hand  by
scores  of  other  alleged  communicators,  the  problem  has  assumed  a  very
different  aspect.  The  dramatic  form  has  become  an  integral  part  of
the  phenomenon.  With  the  hand  writing  and  the  voice  speaking  at
the  same  time  on  different  subjects  and  with  diffei*ent  persons,  with  the
hand  writing  on  behalf  of  different  communicators  at  the  same  sitting,
with  different  successive  communicators  using  the  hand  at  the  same
•sitting,  as  well  as  at  different  sittings,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the
impression  that  there  are  here  actually  concerned  various  different
and  distinct  and  individually  coherent  streams  of  consciousness.  To
the  person  unfamiliar  with  a  series  of  these  later  sittings,  it  may  seem
a  plausible  hypothesis  that  perhaps  one  secondai'y  personality  might
do  the  whole  work,  might  use  the  voice  and  write  contemporaneously
with  the  hand,  and  pretend  in  turn  to  be  the  friends  of  the  various
sitters ;  might  in  short  be  a  finished  actor  with  telepathic  powers,
producing  the  impression  not  only  that  he  is  the  character  he  plays,
but  that  others  are  with  him  also,  though  invisible,  playing  their
respective  parts.  I  do  not,  however,  think  it  at  all  likely  that  he
would  continue  to  think  it  plausible  after  witnessing  and  studying  the
numerous  coherent  groups  of  memories  connected  with  different
persons,  the  chai-acteristic  emotional  tendencies  distinguishing  such
•different  persons,  the  excessive  complication  of  the  acting  required,  and
the  absence  of  any  apparent  bond  of  union  for  the  associated  thoughts
and  feelings  indicative  of  each  individuality,  save  some  persistent  basis
of  that  individuality  itself.  This  general  impression,  I  venture  to
thinlc,  cannot  altogether  be  disregarded ;  I  am  of  course  conscious  in
my  own  case  that  as  regards  these  trance  phenomena  I  have  had  a


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  359


practical  experience,  very  much  of  which  is  incommunicable  to  others,
but  which  has  had  nevertheless  some  influence  in  determining  my  mind
to  incline  to  this  hypothesis  rather  than  to  that.  By  practical
experience  here  I  mean  to  indicate  just  what  the  words  ordinarily
imply,  and  not  the  very  large  mass  of  information  as  to  specific  details
about  private  matters.

An  operator  may  talk  through  a  telephone  himself,  and  may  talk
frequently  on  behalf  of  other  people,  and  we  may  suppose  him  to  be-
cognisant  of  conversations  between  numerous  other  persons  who  are
talking  together.  He  will  thus  get  a  practical  experience  of  different
personalities  which  can  be  separated  from  his  ascertainment  of  specific
private  matters  talked  about,  and  which  suggests  that  the  speakers  at
the  other  end  were  those  whom  the  callers  wished  to  summon.

Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  no  explanation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  pheno-
mena "  begins  to  be  "  plausible  which  does  not  take  account  of  these
various  apparently  separate  and  individually  coherent  streams  of  con-
sciousness,— which,  of  course,  purport  to  be  the  "spirits"  of  deceased
human  beings.  But  I  think  it  is  easy  to  frame  a  hypothesis  which
fulfils  the  needed  requirement,  and  which  does  not  go  beyond  the
consciousness  (subliminal  as  well  as  supraliminal)  of  living  persons.
(I  do  not,  be  it  observed,  regard  this  hypothesis  as  the  true  explana-
tion.) It  might  be  expressed  somewhat  as  follows.  The  brain
symbolically  represents  that  which  holds  together  various  states  of
consciousness  associated  into  some  kind  of  personality.  In  the  separate
streams  of  consciousness,  where  manifested  in  connection  with  a  single
organism,  we  find  evidence  of  disassociation.  The  apparently  individual
star  is  not  single,  but  double,  or  triple,  or  multiple  ;  or  it  is  a  solar
system  ;  or  it  may  be  broken  up  into  a  group  of  asteroids.  And  we
find,  in  the  fragments  of  Mrs.  Piper's  broken  individuality,  the
various  quasi  deceased  friends  of  the  sitters.  It  may  not  be  necessary
to  assume  a  diflerent  fragment  for  every  communicator.  We  may
assume  that  there  are  a  few  fragments  such  as  Phiuuit,  G.  P.,  and  a.
dozen  or  so  others,  which  have  become  specially  separated ;  they  are
dominant  groupings  of  some  of  the  conscious  elements  of  Mrs.  Piper,
which  by  conversation  with  the  living  friends  of  the  persons  whom
they  represent,  and  by  knowledge  drawn  telepathically  from  those
friends  and  other  distant  persons,  have  obtained  coherent  forms  which
serve  as  very  good  simulations  of  the  deceased  persons  who  they
purport  to  be.  They  acquire  the  form  much  as  a  viscous  mass  may
take  the  impress  of  a  mould,  and  have  got  considerably  hardened.
But  other  forms  may  be  continually  more  or  less  changing,  taking  the
impress  of  new  moulds  according  to  the  conceptions  which  7iew  sitters
have  of  their  friends,  and  occasionally  some  of  these  may  become  more
coherent  and  get  hardened.


3G0


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Thus,  II  we  suppose  that  A  to  Z  represent  the  at  present  available
fragments  of  Mrs,  Piper's  personality,  A  to  N  may  represent  the  most
<leOnite  and  experienced  communicators,  which  have  acquired  a  very
stable  form,  and  O  to  Z  may  represent  other  plastic  combinations
which  take  on  a  temporary  form  only  during  a  sitting.

To  some  such  hypothesis  I  think  we  are  driven  if  vv'e  refuse  to
accept  the  independent  conscious  existence  of  the  alleged  communi-
cators. But  such  a  hypothesis,  besides  its  complication,  is  not  without
dilHcuUies  of  its  own.

I  do  not  find  any  evidence  tending  to  show  that  the  bond  of
continuity  in  the  case  of  tlie  most  successful  communicators  depends
for  its  existence  upon  the  minds  of  living  persons.  And  the  hypothesis
is  far  from  accounting  for  the  efforts  of  the  more  confused  communi-
cators. The  mixtures  of  truth  and  eri'or  bear  no  discernible  relation
to  the  consciousness  of  the  sitters,  but  suggest  the  action  of  another
intelligence  groping  confusedly  among  its  own  remembrances.  And  as
further  light  appears  in  this  confused  groping,  the  bonds  of  associa-
tion appear  more  and  more  to  be  traceable  to  no  other  assignable
personality  than  that  of  the  deceased.  It  is  not  this  or  that  isolated
piece  of  private  knowledge  merely,  not  merely  this  or  that  supernormal
perception  of  an  event  occurring  elsewhere,  not  merely  this  or  that
subtle  emotional  appreciation  for  a  distant  living  friend, — but  the
union  of  all  these  in  a  coherent  personal  plan  with  responsive  intellect
and  character  that  suggests  the  specific  identity  once  known  to  us  in  a
body  incarnate.

To  this  it  may  be  replied,  however,  that  the  basis  of  this  personality
may  be,  not  the  conception  of  this  person  or  that  person  or  the  other
persons  who  have  been  brought  into  relations  direct  or  indirect  with
Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  but  a  composite  conception  formed  from  all  of
these.

And  this,  I  take  it,  cannot  yet  be  rejected  as  an  impossible
hypothesis.  And  when  we  remember  the  various  forms  of  hypnotic
trance,  and  the  efficacy  of  subtle  suggestion,  and  reflect  upon  our
ignorance  of  our  own  "  subliminals  "  and  their  possible  inter-relations,
telepathic  or  otherwise,  we  must  allow  a  very  wide  margin  for  the
building  up  of  fictitious  personalities.  But  while  I  think  this  hypo-
thesis a  legitimate  one,  I  think  it  highly  improbable  that  it  is  the  true
one  ;  and  I  believe  that  further  investigation  will  show  that  the  very
reasons  given  for  its  adoption  by  those  who  may  incline  to  hold  it,  will
prove  to  be  the  very  reasons  that  will  render  it  more  and  more
improbable.  I  shall  now  attempt  to  justify  this  somewhat  paradoxical
statement.

Those  who  maintain  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living  as
the  most  probable,  are  largely  influenced  by  other  considerations  than


XXXIII.]  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  3G1


those  drawn  from  the  case  of  G.  P.  They  will  admit  that  the  evidence
for  personal  identity  in  his  case  is  strong,  but  they  will  urge  that
it  is  outweighed  by  the  failures  of  so  many  others.  If  all  the
communicators  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  had  succeeded  as  well
as  G-.  P.,  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living  would  seem  to
them  much  less  acceptable.

"Why,"  they  will  say,  "if  discarnate  persons  are  really  communi-
cating, do  they  not  give  us  much  more  evidence  1  We  ourselves,  if  pub
in  the  witness-box  here  and  cross  examined,  could  do  vastly  better
even  than  G,  P.,  and  why  have  so  few  others  been  able  to  show  even
an  approximation  to  such  clearness  as  he  exhibited?  Why  all  the
incoherence  and  confusion  and  irrelevancy?  Wliy  the  mistakes  and
why  the  failures,  even  in  cases  where  other  striking  incidents  appear
to  suggest  the  actual  presence  of  the  communicator  ?  Why  in  some
cases  is  there  so  much  that  seems  distinctly  unlike  the  alleged
communicator?  And  why  do  some  sitters  get  almost  nothing  that  is
correct  ?  Granted  that  J\Irs.  Piper  is  in  a  genuine  trance,  and  that  she
exhibits  a  mass  of  information  not  obtained  by  normal  means,  there
is  so  much  of  lapse  and  error  and  complete  failure  that  we  cannot
suppose  that  these  manifestations  emanate  from  the  persons  alleged.
W^e  cannot  isolate  one  or  two  fragments.  Take  the  communications  as
a  whole,  and  we  find  them  coming  very  far  short  indeed  of  what  we
should  expect  from  the  real  friends  who  once  lived  with  us."

As  I  have  suggested  in  the  previous  section,  there  are  various
instances,  other  than  that  of  G.  P.,  where  the  "deceased"  persons
concerned  have  had  many  opportunities  of  communicating  frequently,
and  have  made  coherent  statements  from  the  beginning,  besides  many
other  cases  where  it  is  strongly  suggested  by  the  few  opportunities
which  alone  have  been  afforded,  that  the  communicator  could  have
supplied  much  detailed  evidence  pointing  towards  his  identity  if  his
friends  could  have  had  a  continuous  series  of  sittings.  But  even  if
such  cases  were  multiplied  many  times,  and  even  if  the  results  were
actually  comparable  with  those  obtained  from  G.  P.,  they  still  would
not,  I  think,  furnish  an  adequate  reply  to  the  above  statement  that
the  communications,  as  a  whole,  fall  far  short  of  what  we  should
expect.

What  then,  are  we  justified  in  expecting  if  discarnate  "spirits"
do  indeed  return  to  communicate  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  in  the
ways  described?  And  how  far  do  the  results  actually  obtained  accord
with  such  expectations  ?

The  answers  to  these  questions  I  shall  content  myself  at  present
with  briefly  indicating,  and  what  I  have  to  say  constitutes  the  general
reply  to  which  I  referred  in  considering  the  specific  failures  of  G.  P
(p.  331).


362


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


If,  indeed,  each  one  of  us  is  a  "  spirit  "  that  survives  the  death  of
the  fleshly  organism,  there  are  certain  suppositions  that  I  think  we
may  not  unreasonably  make  concerning  the  ability  of  the  discarnate
"  spirit  "  to  communicate  with  those  yet  incarnate.  Even  under  the
best  of  conditions  for  communication — which  I  am  supposing  for  the
nonce  to  be  possible— it  may  well  be  that  the  aptitude  for  communicat-
ing clearly  may  be  as  rare  as  the  gifts  that  make  a  great  artist,  or  a
great  mathematician,  or  a  great  philosopher.  It  may  be  a  completely
erroneous  assumption  that  all  persons,  young  or  old,  good  or  evil,
vigorous  or  sickly,  and  whatever  their  lives  or  deaths  may  have
been,  are  at  all  comparable  with  one  another  in  their  capacity  to
convey  clear  statements  from  "the  other  world"  to  this.  Again,
it  may  well  be  that,  owing  to  the  change  connected  with  death  itself,
the  "  spirit "  may  at  first  be  much  confused,  and  such  confusion
may  last  for  a  long  time ;  and  even  after  the  "  spirit "  has  become
accustomed  to  its  new  environment,  it  is  not  an  unreasonable  supposi-
tion that  if  it  came  into  some  such  relation  to  another  living  human
organism  as  it  once  maintained  with  its  own  former  organism  it
would  find  itself  confused  by  that  relation.  The  state  might  be
like  that  of  awakening  from  a  prolonged  period  of  unconsciousness
into  strange  surroundings.  If  my  own  ordinary  body  could  be  pre-
served in  its  present  state,  and  I  could  absent  myself  from  it  for  days
or  months  or  years,  and  continue  my  existence  under  another  set  of
conditions  altogether,  and  if  I  could  then  return  to  my  own  body,
it  might  well  be  that  I  should  be  very  confused  and  incoherent  at
first  in  my  manifestations  by  means  of  it.  How  much  more  would
this  be  the  case  were  I  to  return  to  another  human  body.  I  miglit
be  troubled  Avith  various  forms  of  aphasia  and  agraphia,  might  be
particularly  liable  to  failures  of  inhibition,  might  find  the  conditions
oppressive  and  exhausting,  and  my  state  of  mind  would  probably  be
of  an  automatic  and  dreamlike  character.  Now  the  communicators
through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  exhibit  precisely  the  kind  of  confusion
and  incoherence  which  it  seems  to  me  we  have  some  reason  a  priori  to
expect  if  they  ai'e  actually  what  they  claim  to  be.  And  Gr.  P.  himself
appeared  to  be  well  aware  of  this.  Thus  he  wrote  on  February  15  th,
1894  :—

.  .  .  Remember  we  share  and  always  shall  have  our  friends  in  the
dream-life,  i.e.  your  life  so  to  speak,  which  will  attract  us  for  ever  and  ever,
and  so  long  as  we  have  any  friends  sleeping  in  the  material  world  ; — you
to  us  are  more  like  as  we  understand  sleep,  you  look  shut  up  as  one  in  prison,
and  in  order  for  us  to  get  into  communication  with  you,  we  have  to  enter
into  your  sphere,  as  one  like  yourself  asleep.  This  is  just  why  we  make
mistakes  as  you  call  them,  or  get  confused  and  muddled,  so  to  put  it,  H.
[R.  H.  repeats  in  his  own  language.]  Your  thoughts  do  grasp  mine.  Well
now  you  have  just  what  I  have  been  wanting  to  come  and  make  clear  to  you.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  363


H.,  old  fellow.  (It  is  quite  clear.)  Yes,  you  see  I  am  more  awake  than
asleep,  yet  I  cannot  come  just  as  I  am  in  reality,  independently  of  the
medium's  light.  (You  come  much  better  than  the  others.)  Yes,  because  I
am  a  little  nearer  and  not  less  intelligent  than  some  others  here.

And  again  on  February  16th,  1894  : —

[After  a  reference  to  Mr.  Marte.]  That  he  with  his  keen  brain  and
marvellous  perception  will  be  interested  I  know,  He  was  a  very  dear  friend
of  ...  I  was  exceedingly  fond  of  him.  Cosmical  weather  interests
both  he  and  I — me— him — I  know  it  all.  Don't  you  see  I  correct  these.
Well,  I  am  not  less  intelligent  now.  But  there  are  many  difficulties.  I  am
far  clearer  on  all  points  than  I  was  shut  up  in  the  prisoned  body.  (Prisoned  1
prisoning  or  imprisoning  you  ought  to  say.)  No,  I  don't  mean  to  get  it  that
way  you  spoke— perhaps  I  have  spelled  it  wrong.  Prisoned  body.  Prison-
ing. See  here,  H.  "Don't  view  me  with  a  critic's  eye,  but  pass  my
imperfections  by."  Of  course  I  know  all  that  as  well  as  anybody  on  your
sphere.  (Of  course.)  Well  I  think  so.  I  tell  you,  old  fellow,  it  don't  do  to
pick  all  these  little  errors  too  much  when  they  amount  to  nothing  in  one
way.  You  have  light  enough  and  brain  enough  I  know  to  understand  my
explanations  of  being  shut  up  in  this  body  dreaming  as  it  were  and  trying  to
help  on  Science.

With  these  statements  we  may  compare  a  description  given  long
ago  by  the  Platonic  Socrates,  of  the  bewilderment  of  a  "  returning
soul. '  Before  quoting  this,  I  make  a  digression  for  the  purpose  of
explaining  an  incident  which  happened  to  lead  my  thoughts  to  this
description.  The  incident  concerns  G.  P.,  and  a  few  preliminary
explanations  are  needed.

G.  P.  held  the  "Mind-Stuff"  theory  in  somewhat  the  crude  form
expressed  by  Clifford.  According  to  this  general  theory,  the  world
consists  of  something  wliich  is  intrinsically  identical  with  what  we
know  as  our  own  consciousness,  and  which  in  its  more  elementary
forms  may  be  called  mind-stuff.  Each  one  of  us  consists  of  a  special
coherent  aggregation  of  mind-stuff,  and  this,  acting  upon  another
similar  aggregation,  produces  in  it  the  perception  of  a  human
organism.  Also  G.  P.  and  myself  had  several  times  spoken  together
of  the  analogy  used  by  Plato  in  the  7th  Book  of  the  Republic,  where
a  description^  is  given  of  a  cave  in  which  are  prisoners,  fettered  from
earliest  childhood,  so  that  they  cannot  move,  and  can  look  only  straight
before  them.  Behind  and  above  them  is  a  fire,  blazing  at  a  distance,
and  between  the  fire  and  the  prisoners  are  men  passing  along  with,
various  kinds  of  vessels,  statues,  figures  of  animals,  etc.,  and  casting
their  shadows  on  the  wall  of  the  cave.  The  prisoners  have  no  know-
ledge save  of  the  shadows,  which  to  them  are  the  reality.  In  our
application  of  this,  the  objects  which  we  perceive  in  the  physical


1  I  abridge  and  quote  from  Jowett's  translation.

2  B


364


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


■universe  may  be  like  these  shadows,  and  the  things  to  which  they
correspond  are  in  reality  composed  of  mind.

Now  in  the  special  (liJcuision  which  I  had  with  G.  P.,  some  two
years  before  his  death,  con3  rning  a  future  life,  he  maintained  that  in
accordance  with  the  "  muid-stuff "  theory,  a  future  life  was  incon-
ceivable, since  although  the  material  body  with  its  brain  was  only  the
shadow  of  the  mind,  yet  since  that  shadow  went  tlirough  a  process  of
disintegration,  we  must  conclude  that  the  mental  thing  corresponding
to  it  also  went  through  a  process  of  disintegration.  To  this  I  said
that  we  might  frame  a  hypothesis  which  should  be  in  accord  with  the
general  mind-stuff  theory,  and  to  which  such  an  objection  as  his  could
not  be  urged, — that  the  gross  material  body  might  be  the  shadow  of  a
coarser  and  cruder  form  of  mind-stuff,  that  it  might  be  tenanted  by  a
more  subtle  oi-ganic  body  composed  of  the  luminiferous  ether,  that
such  etherial  body  might  be  the  correlate  of  the  human  personality,
and  that  although  the  gross  material  body  might  disintegrate  at
death,  the  etherial  body  might  not.  After  a  long  discussion  G.  P.
agreed  that  such  a  hypothesis  might  be  made  in  legitimate  accord  with
the  mind-stuff  theory,  and  that  it  rendered  a  future  life  conceivable,
though  this  still  seemed  to  him  incredible  ;  and  it  was  then  that  he
pledged  himself  to  do  all  that  he  could  to  establish  it  if  he  died  before
me,  and  found  that  there  was  a  future  life  after  all.

Now  at  one  of  the  early  sittings  in  the  G.  P.  series  (see  Appendix
I.,  p.  418),  in  reply  to  some  questions  by  Mrs.  Ploward,  as  to  the
possibility  of  his  having  access  to  books  which  had  ceased  to  exist  for
lis,  such  as  the  Alexandrian  library,  he  replied  : — •

"  It  does  not  make  any  difference  how  much  the  material  is
destroyed.  Plato  was  a  philosopher  and  a  good  one.  You  know,
Hodgson,  that  was  our  argument,  our  discussion."  I  said :  "  That
came  in  certainly,  we  used  the  old  Platonic  analogy."

This  was  a  very  direct  reference  to  the  central  point  of  our
discussion,  and  is  the  kind  of  incidentally  evidential  remark  of  which
there  are  many  instances  in  connection  with  personal  matters  relating
to  G.  P.  and  his  intimate  friends.  G.  P.  at  this  time  was  using  the
voice.  He  followed  with  the  remark  :  "  Socrates  was  a  medium."  It
was  not,  I  believe,  till  15  96,  when  abridging  the  series  of  G.  P.  sittings,
that  my  attention  was  drawn  specially  to  this  last  remark,  and  I
re-read  the  account  given  by  Plato.  So  far  as  my  memoxy  serves,  G.  P.
and  myself  had  always  referred  to  Plato  (and  not  Socrates)  in  connec-
tion with  the  shadow  analogy,  and  had  never  thought  of  considering
it  in  connection  with  any  "  mediumistic "  experience.  The  Platonic
Socrates,  who  is  giving  the  description  of  the  cave  and  the  shadows,
supposes  one  of  the  prisoners  in  the  cave  to  be  released  and  to  bo
compelled  to  move  up  into  the  light. He  describes  his  distress  at  the


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  365


glare,  and  his  inability  to  see  clearly  ;  the  objects  in  the  upper  world
of  light  will  at  first  appear  less  real,  and  he  will  need  to  grow
accustomed  to  the  sight  of  them.  But  afterwards  he  imagines  such  a
one  to  be  suddenly  "  replaced  in  his  old  situation ;  would  he  not  be
certain  to  have  his  eyes  full  of  darkness  ?  .  .  .  And  if  there  were
a  contest,  and  he  had  to  compete  in  measuring  the  shadows  with  the
prisoners  who  had  never  moved  out  of  the  den,  while  his  sight  was
still  weak,  and  before  his  eyes  had  become  steady  (and  the  time  which
■would  be  needed  to  acquire  this  new  habit  of  sight  might  be  very
considerable)  would  he  not  be  ridiculous  ?  Men  would  say  of  him  that
up  he  went  and  down  he  came  without  his  eyes  ;  and  that  it  was
better  not  even  to  think  of  ascending,"  and  so  on.  "  And  you  will  not
misapprehend  me  if  you  interpret  the  journey  upward  to  be  the  ascent
of  the  soul  into  the  intellectual  world  according  to  my  poor  belief,
which,  at  your  desire,  I  have  expressed,  whether  rightly  or  wrongly,
<jrod  knows."

Plato  then  proceeds  to  apply  this  to  the  relation  between  the  world
of  ideas,  illuminated  by  the  Idea  of  Good,  and  the  world  of  sense
which  ordinary  men  regard  as  the  sole  object  of  knowledge.  But  it
is  permissible  to  suppose  that  Socrates, — to  whom  we  cannot  attribute
Plato's  metaphysical  system — may  have  actually  used  this  analogy  to
represent  the  possible  relation  between  this  life  and  another  one,
especially  if  we  compare  it  with  some  passages  in  the  Pha;do,  where
Plato  makes  him  refer  to  men  in  this  life  as  being  in  a  sort  of  prison,
and  speak  of  the  soul  as  being  made  giddy  and  intoxicated,  as  it  were,
by  the  body.  (Compare  the  expressions  in  the  passages  quoted  from
■G.  P.  above,  p.  362).  In  any  case,  however,  whatever  either  the
Platonic  or  the  actual  Socrates  may  have  said  or  meant,  the  analogy
suggests  a  very  good  description  of  what  I  have  frequently  witnessed
in  connection  with  Mrs.  PijDer's  trance.

"Anyone,"  says  Socrates,  "  who  has  common  sense  will  remember
that  the  bewilderments  of  the  eyes  are  of  two  kinds,  and
arise  from  two  causes,  either  from  coming  out  of  the  light,  or  from
going  into  the  light,  and  he  will  not  be  too  ready  to  laugh  at  a
person  whose  vision  is  perplexed  and  weak,  or  if  he  have  a  mind  to
laugh  at  the  soul  which  comes  from  below  into  the  light,  there  will
•be  more  reason  in  this  than  in  the  laugh  which  greets  him  who
returns  from  above  out  of  the  light  into  the  den."

The  reader  may  apply  this  analogy  if  he  pleases  to  some  of  the
■circumstances  recorded  in  the  accounts  of  sittings.  Thus  he  may
notice  that  the  observer  in  the  light  who  is  looking  at  the  real  things
may  perceive  objects  which  have  not  yet  cast  their  shadows  on  the
■wall  of  the  cave,  but  which  probably  will  do  so  ;  and  he  may  similarly
perceive  objects  which  have  already  cast  their  shadows  but  have  passed

2  3  .1


3GG


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


beyond  the  shadow  line.  It  may  be  easier  for  him  to  see  such  objects
than  to  see  such  as  ai^e  actually  at  the  moment  casting  their  shadows.
And  it  is  not  improbable,  as  Socrates  points  out,  that  he  should  make
the  most  grotesque  failures  in  estimating  the  shadows  themselves.
But  we  must  not  forget  that  this  is  only  an  analogy.

Returning  to  the  actual  circumstances,  I  say  that  if  the  "spirits"
of  our  "  deceased  "  friends  do  communicate  as  alleged  through  the
organisms  of  still  incarnate  persons,  we  are  7iot  justified  in  expecting
them  to  manifest  themselves  with  the  same  fulness  of  clear  conscious-
ness that  they  exhibited  during  life.  We  should  on  the  contrary
expect  even  the  best  communicators  to  fall  short  of  this  for  the  two
main  reasons  :  (1)  loss  of  familiarity  with  the  conditions  of  using  a
gross  material  organism  at  all — we  should  expect  them  to  be  like
tishcs  out  of  water  or  birds  immersed  in  it;  (2)  inability  to  govern
precisely  and  completely  the  particular  gross  material  organism  which
they  are  compelled  to  use.  They  learned  when  living  to  play  on  one
very  complicated  speaking  and  writing  machine,  and  suddenly  find
themselves  set  down  to  play  on  another  of  a  different  make.

And  we  should  reach  a  similar  conclusion  if  we  suppose  that  it  is
not  mei'ely  the.  nervous  mechanism  of  the  "medium  "  that  is  acted  upon
by  our  supposed  "spirits  "  (in  some  such  Avay,  whatever  that  may  be,
that  each  one  of  us  acts  upon  his  own  material  organism), — but  the
consciousness  of  the  medium  that  is  acted  upon  by  the  communicators.
In  this  case  we  must  suppose  that  the  process  of  communication  is
telepathic.  But  from  our  knowledge  of  telej^athic  communications
between  embodied  persons,  even  if  we  include  the  large  number  of
spontaneous  experiences  of  phantasms  of  the  dying,  we  should  certainly
infer  that  no  percipient  while  yet  embodied  could  receive  the  full  and
complete  impression  of  another  personality.  Such  telepathic  impressions
indeed  as  we  are  warranted  by  direct  experiment  in  holding  to  occur
between  one  living  person  and  another  are  of  extremely  partial  and
fragmentary  character,  not  in  any  way  comparable  with  even  the
ordinary  results  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  if  we  suppose  the  agent
to  be  removed  to  a  "world  "  whence  he  can  affect  the  percipient  more
clearly,  we  must  still  suppose  that  the  manifestations  through  the
percipient  will  partake  of  the  percipient's  limitations.  And  here  also,
of  course,  the  modus  operandi,  whatever  it  may  be,  must  be  a  new
and  untried  way.  Whichever  point  of  view  we  take, — whether  the
consciousness  of  the  medium  is  impressed  by  the  supposed  spirit,  or
whether  the  consciousness  of  the  medium  is  entirely  absent  and  her
nervous  mechanism  is  used  as  a  machine, — we  should  expect  obscurities
and  deficiencies.  If  we  had,  say,  an  exceptionally  good  telepathic
percijiient  receiving  impressions  from  "spirits,"  we  should  not  expect
to  find  him  receiving  telepathic  impressions  from  all  agents  equally


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  367


we  should  expect  that  souie  agents  would  be  much  more  successful
than  others,  and  should  be  quite  prepared  to  find  that  some  were  not
successful  at  all,  even  after  repeated  experiments.  We  should  not  be
surprised  at  finding,  even  amidst  highly  successful  results,  other
completely  wrong  guesses,  as  well  as,  in  partial  successes,  distortions
presumably  due  to  the  mind  of  the  percipient.  "We  might  also  expect
to  find  occasionally  that  the  percipient  received  impressions  that  were
not  intentionally  conveyed.  So  also  in  the  working  of  the  complex
nervous  mechanism,  we  should  expect  to  find  great  differences  in
expertness  of  operating.  Some  persons  would  begin  to  understand  the
new  machine  at  once,  whereas  others  would  continue  automatically  in
the  habits  they  had  formed  with  their  old  machines,  and  need  to
j)ractise  very  many  times  before  they  could  produce  coherent  results.
And  if  their  productions  through  the  old  machines  had  themselves
been  incoherent,  still  more  incoherent  might  we  expect  their  working
of  the  new  machine  to  be.

It  will  be  obvious,  I  think,  upon  such  considerations  as  these,  and
similar  ones,  that  the  confusion  and  failure  which  we  find  in  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  communications,  are  so  far  from  being  what  we  should
not  expect,  that  they  are  exactly  what  we  should  expect,  if  the  alleged
spirits  are  communicating.

But  to  all  this  it  may  be  replied  :  "  Granted  that  the  results
obtained  are  in  accordance  with  what  we  should  expect  if  they  come
from  'spirits.'  It  still  remains  an  open  question  whether  they  do  come
from  'spirits.'  All  that  you  say  applies  equally  well  to  the  hypothesis
that  living  persons  only  are  concerned.  The  same  partial  and  frag-
mentary character  that  you  allege  must  be  exhibited  if  the  supernormal
information  in  question  comes  from  spirits,  must  also  be  exhibited  if
it  comes  from  the  minds  of  living  persons,  and  since  we  do  not  doubt
the  existence  of  the  minds  of  living  persons,  but  do  doubt  the  existence
of  'spirits,'  we  adopt  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living."

To  this  I  answer  that  the  character  of  the  results  would  not  be
the  same.  The  results  would  be  fragmentary  in  both  cases,  but  not
fragmentary  in  the  same  way.

And  herein  we  find,  as  I  think,  what  will  eventually  prove  to  be
the  differentiating  charactei'istics  that  point  to  the  "spirit"  hypothesis
as  the  true  explanation.  I  say  evejituaUy,  because  I  think  that  there
is  at  present  not  by  any  means  enough  mnterial  on  hand  to  justify  a
positive  conclusion.  This  point  is  so  impo:-tant  that  I  devote  a  separate
section  to  it.  But  first  let  me  give  a  brief  summary  up  to  the  stage
we  have  reached.

INIrs.  Piper  has  been  giving  sittings  for  a  period  extending  over
thirteen  years.  Very  early  in  her  trance  history  she  came  under  the
attention  of Professor  James,  who  sent  many  persons  to  her  as


3G8


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


stranc^ers,  in  most  cases  making  the  appointments  himself,  and  in  no
case  giving  tlieir  names.  Slie  came  to  some  extent  under  my  own
supervision  in  1887,  and  I  also  sent  many  persons  to  her,  in  many
cases  accompanying  them  and  recording  the  statements  made  at  their
sittings,  and  taking  all  the  care  that  I  could  to  prevent  Mrs.  Piper's
obtaining  any  knowledge  beforehand  of  who  the  sitters  were  to  be.
In  1889--90  Mrs.  Piper  gave  a  series  of  sittings  in  England  under  the
supervision  of  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  and  Mr.  Myers  and  Professor  Lodge,
where  also  the  most  careful  precautions  possible  were  taken  to  ensure
that  the  sitters  went  as  strangers  to  Mrs.  Piper.  Further  sittings
were  supervised  by  myself  in  1890-91  after  Mrs.  Piper's  return  to
America.  Many  persons  who  had  sittings  in  the  course  of  these
earlier  investigations  were  convinced  that  they  were  actually  receiving
communications  from  their  "  deceased  "  friends  through  Mrs.  Piper's
trance,  but  althougli  the  special  investigators  were  satisfied,  from  tlieir
study  of  the  trance-phenomena  themselves  and  a  careful  analysis  of
the  detailed  records  of  the  sittings,  that  some  supernormal  power  was
involved,  there  was  no  definite  agreement  as  to  their  precise  signifi-
cance. And  to  myself  it  seemed  that  any  hypothesis  that  was  offered
presented  formidable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  its  acceptance.  In  the
course  of  these  earlier  investigations,  the  communications  were  given
almost  entirely  through  the  speech-utterance  of  the  trance-i^ersonality
known  as  Phinuit,  and  even  the  best  of  them  were  apt  to  include  much
matter  that  was  irrelevant  and  unlike  the  alleged  communicators,
while  there  were  many  indications  that  Phinuit  himself  was  far  from
being  the  kind  of  person  in  whom  we  should  be  disposed  to  place
implicit  credence.

During  the  years  1892-1896  inclusive,  I  exercised  a  yet  closer
supervision  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  than  I  had  done  in  previous  years,
continuing  to  take  all  the  precautions  that  I  could  as  regards  the
introduction  of  persons  as  strangers.  This  period  was  marked  by  a
notable  evolution  in  the  quality  of  the  trance  results,  beginning  early
in  1892.  The  character  of  the  manifestations  changed  with  the
development  of  automatic  writing  in  the  trance,  and  with  what  was
alleged  to  be  the  continual  rendering  of  active  assistance  by  the
communicator  whom  I  have  called  G.  P.  As  a  result  of  this  ifc
appeared  that  communicators  were  able  to  express  their  thoughts
directly  through  the  writing  by  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  instead  of  conveying
them  more  dimly  and  parti;i'ly  through  Phinuit  as  intermediary  ;  and
the  advice  and  guidance  wh  ch  they,  apparently,  received  from  .G.  P.,
enabled  them  to  avoid  much  of  the  confusion  and  irrelevancy  so
characteristic  of  the  earlier  manifestations.  I  may  remind  the  reader
of  t'.ie  striking  evidence  of  different  kinds  furnished  by  the  communi-
cating G.  P.  (p.  328),  and  of  the  brief  indications  which  I  have  given


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  369


in  the  previous  section  of  this  report  that  other  communicators  have
presented  strong  characteristics  of  personal  identity.  Among  these  are
more  than  half-a-dozen  intimate  friends  of  my  own,  who  have  produced
upon  me  the  impression,  through  different  written  communications,  that
they  are  the  personalities  I  knew,  with  characteristic  intelligence  and
emotion,  questioning  me  and  answering  me  under  difficulties,  but  with
their  peculiar  individual  and  responsive  minds  in  some  sense  actually
there.  Now,  to  give  Phinuit  his  due,  notwithstanding  all  his  short-
comings and  delinquencies^,  I  was  inclined  to  think,  even  before  the
publication  of  my  previous  report,  that  Phinuit  believed  himself
to  be  a  "spjirit."  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  57.)  But  there  was
so  much  that  was  inferior  about  him  that  one  could  not  attribute
any  force,  on  the  ground  of  either  his  intelligence  or  his  sincerity,  to
his  persistent  affirmations  that  he  was  a  "  spirit "  and  giving  communi-
cations from  "spirits."  But  we  must,  I  think,  allow  some  weight  to
such  statements  when  they  are  made  persistently  by  a  continually
increasing  number  of  coherent  personalities  manifesting  directly
through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  characterised  by  a  high  moral  tone,  a
pervading  sincerity,  and  a  deep  earnestness  of  purpose,  who  indi-
vidually insist  that  they  are  the  persons  we  knew  in  bodies  incarnate  ;
when  they  all  make  their  statements  from  the  point  of  view  that
would  naturally  belong  to  such  persons  under  the  conditions  in  which
they  claim  to  be  ;  and  when  they  stoutly  resist  any  suggestions  to  the
contrary.  Those  who  adopt  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the
living  must  clearly  recognise  the  fulness  and  completeness  of  many  of
the  personalities  which  they  suppose  to  be  fictitiously  formed  in
connection  with  JVIrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  the  inversion,  as  it  were,  of
the  conceptions  of  living  persons  ;  so  that  there  is  produced  this
marvellous  simulation  of  the  "  deceased,"  accompanied  not  only  by
their  specific  memories,  but  by  the  presentation  of  each  chai-acter  in
its  unity,  showing  a  clear  self-consciousness,  a  worliing  intelligence  of
its  own,  and  a  morality  in  no  case  less  than  that  of  the  persons
concerned  when  living,  but  showing  rather  a  more  definite  upward
movement,  a  stronger  determination  towards  the  "  things  that  are
higher." And  yet  with  all  this  apparently  complete  independence  and

1  Phinuit  has  of  course  been  frequently  commented  upon  by  other  communicators,
and  sometimes  apparently  resented  somewhat  the  statements  made  about  him.  See
the  sitting  of  December  16th,  1892,  (Appendix  I.,  p.  429).  G.  P.  there  began  to
make  some  remarks  about  Phinuit,  which  were  apparently  followed  by  a  struggle  in
Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  after  which  there  was  quiet,  and  G.  P.  who  was  writinr/,
wrote  {and  emphatically  underlined  it)  This  is  a  tabula  rasa.  Later  on  he  used  tho
voice.  On  January  14th,  1894,  G.  P.  wrote:  "I  don't  think  it  wise  for  you  to  ask
Dr.  Phinuit  much  now  he  is  inclined  to  try  too  much  at  times,  H,  and  thinks  he
hears  things  when  they  are  not  close  enough  to  him.  He  is  a  mighty  good  fellow,
but  exaggerates  a  little  occasionally  when  he  is  dull.  Better  not  tell  him  I  say  this."
(Compare  Proceedings  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  517,  552-3.)


370


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


power  of  reasoning  and  lofty  ethical  aspirations,  they  must  be  regarded
as  either  lying  or  mistaken  about  the  fact  of  tlieir  existence  itself,
and  must  be  assumed  to  be,  one  and  all,  merely  fragments  of  Mrs.
Pij^er.

But  the  reply  to  this  consists  in  the  statement,  firstly,  that  these
communicators  themselves  are  unable  to  do  things  which  they  could
have  done  when  living,  they  make  mistakes  which,  living,  they  would
not  have  made,  aud  they  show  deficiencies  in  other  ways  ;  and,
secondly,  that  there  are  numerous  other  conimunicators  who  present
very  little  evidence  of  being  what  they  claim  to  be,  and  many  who  may
be  said  to  be  entirely  without  any  verisimilitude  whatever  ;  that  the
manifestations  must  be  taken  as  a  general  group  together,  and,  as  such,
are  very  different  from  anything  we  should  expect  if  the  communicators
were  really  "  spirits."

In  answer  to  this  I  have  adduced  various  considerations  which
make  it  clear  that  the  partial  and  fragmentary  character  which  we  find
in  these  manifestations  as  a  whole  is,  on  the  contrary,  precisely  what
we  should  expect  if  the  communicators  are  the  persons  they  claim  to
be,  manifesting  in  our  world  by  difficult  and  unfamiliar  modes,  and
hampered  by  restricting  conditions,  of  which  there  may  be  many
unknown  to  us,  but  of  which  some  are  very  obvious.

This  being  agreed  upon,  it  is  then  urged  in  reply  that  the  results
obtained  at  the  sittings  are  also  such  as  might  be  supposed  on  the
hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living,  which,  therefore,  still  remains
in  the  field  as  a  legitimate  hypothesis.

To  this  I  answer  that  the  results  in  question  might  in  truth  be
expected  to  be  partial  and  fragmentary  on  either  hypothesis,  but  that
the  deficiencies  would  be  of  different  character  in  the  two  cases.  In
one  case  we  have  a  relation  between  the  "  medium  "  and  a  group  of
"  deceased  "  persons  ;  in  the  other  case,  a  relation  between  the
"  medium "  (or  percipient)  and  groups  of  living  persons.  Since  the
groups  are  different  from  each  other,  the  results  must  also  be  different,
and  we  have  now  to  inquire  whether  any  indications  exist  which  seem
to  point  to  the  one  group  of  agents  rather  than  the  other.

§  6.  Indications  that  the  "  Spirit  "  Hypothesis  is  true.

If  we  suppose  an  extension  of  telepathy  between  one  living  person
and  another  far  beyond  what  we  have  been  able  to  produce  experi-
mentally— a  telepathy  which  shall  involve  not  only  specific  impressions
from  many  distant  persons  who  have  never  been  near  the  percipient,
but  also  realistic  conceptions  of  numerous  persisting  personalities  with
their  own  individual  streams  of  consciousness  and  abiding  reservoirs  of


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  371


memories,  personalities  moreover  which,  so  far  as  we  can  ascertain,
continue  to  gruiv, — then  indeed,  on  this  arbitrary  supposition,  we  mip;hb
theoretically  explain  tlie  success  connected  with  any  single  communi-
cator. If  all  communicators  were  equally  successful,  or  if  they  wei'e
successful  with  the  same  living  persons  as  sitters,  but  not  with  others,
the  indications  would  not  point  so  strongly  as  they  actually  do  to  the
"  Spirit  "  hypothesis.  It  is  the  very  failures  which,  when  contrasted
with  the  successes,  point  away  from  the  living  to  the  "dead."  The
complex  mass  of  manifestations  falls  into  systematic  order  if  we  relate
them  to  the  supposed  still  existing  personalities  of  the  dead,  and  they
fall  into  no  systematic  order  in  relation  to  the  consciousnesses  of  the
living.  There  are  perturbations  in  the  results  which  vary  according  to
the  invisible  pei'sonalities  who  claim  to  be  there,  and  not  according  to
visible  living  persons.

And  here  I  must  clear  the  ground  by  a  few  preliminary  con-
siderations, referring  to  classes  of  cases  that  may  be  regarded  as
neutral,  in  the  sense  of  not  favouring  one  view  more  than  the  other.
There  are  certain  persons  who  appear  to  be  almost  entirely  unsuccessful
as  regards  communications  from  their  "  deceased  "  friends,  and  indeed
at  "  sittings  "  altogether,  and  from  causes  which  apparently  inhere  in
themselves.  This  might  be  expected  on  either  hypothesis.  The  agent
in  ordinary  thought-transference  experiments  could  scarcely  look  for
success  if  he  amused  himself  with  other  matters  instead  of  trying  to
impress  the  percipient ;  and  the  sitter  should  not  expect  his  remem-
brances of  the  dead  to  be  reproduced  by  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient
trance-personality  unless  his  mind  is  actively  concerned  with  them.
And  so  the  sitter  who  hopes  for  a  communication  from  a  "deceased  "
friend  can  scarcely  expect  to  get  it  unless  his  thoughts  and  emotions
are  directed  towards  that  friend  with  longing  sympathy.  It  may  well
be  supposed  that  such  a  friend  though  living  in  "  another  world  "  may
be  conscious  of  such  an  appeal,  but  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  the  "  dead  "  are  perpetually  waiting  upon  the  living,  whether  the
latter  are  longing  for  their  presence  or  not.  And  it  may  even  be  that
the  state  of  mind  of  some  persons  is  actually  repellent  to  the  efforts
which  their  "  deceased "  friends  make  to  communicate,  as  I  have
witnessed,  I  believe,  on  more  than  one  occasion ;  and  in  many  cases
is  not  very  helpful.

Parenthetically  I  may  say  that  there  are  of  course  many  cases
where  communicators  appear  who  were  not  in  the  conscious  minds
of  the  sitters,  and  these  taken  together  point  as  a  group  to  the
existence  of  independent  intelligences.  Such  has  been  especially  the
case  with  communicators  who  have  previously  met  friends  at  sittings,
and  wh(j  thus  "know  the  way,"  and  return  either  to  recognise  new
sitters,  or  to  send  messages  to  other  living  friends. The  cases  of


S72


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Louis  R.  (p.  337)  and  MacDonough  (p.  340)  are  instances  of  what
I  mean.  There  are  numerous  other  examples  in  my  records.  Be  it
observed  that  I  am  not  now  arguing  that  because  certain  incidents
were  not  in  the  conscious  minds  of  the  sitters,  they  indicate  an  intelli-
gence independent  of  sitters  and  medium.  It  is  plain  througliout  the
reports  that  the  communications  do  not  directly  depend  upon  the
supraliminal  consciousness  of  the  sitters,  and  that  the  facts,  if  they
are  to  be  accounted  for  by  telepathy  from  the  living,  demand  at  least)
the  supposition  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  of  the  sitters  may  be
drawn  upon  for  information  and  also  the  minds  of  distant  living
persons.  I  am  now  considering  a  particular  class  of  those  facts,  and
asking  whether  they  point  to  the  action  of  extraneous  intelligences  or
to  thought-transference  from  living  persons  to  Mrs.  Piper's  personality.
I  give  another  instance  to  make  my  meaning  quite  clear.  Miss
Edmunds  was  holding  a  sitting  on  behalf  of  a  lady  entirely  uncon-
nected with  G.  P.  and  his  group  of  friends.  G.  P.  wrote  a  little.  As
Mrs.  Piper  was  coming  out  of  the  trance,  the  voice  .shouted  excitedly,
"Tell  Aleck  Bousser  [pseudonym,  the  A.  B.  mentioned  pp.  319,  334].
tell  Aleck  Bousser  not  to  leave  them  alone."  Miss  Edmunds  knew
nothing  of  Aleck  Bousser,  but  he  was  well-knoAvn  to  me.  He  was  an
intimate  friend  of  G.  P.  and  was  also  the  husband  of  Madame
Frederica,  the  living  sister  of  Madame  Elisa  (p.  335),  for  whom
G.  P.  had  acted  as  amanuensis  on  more  than  one  occasion.  I  sent
the  message  immediately  to  A.  B.,  and  received  the  following
reply  :—

There  certainly  do  happen  to  be  some  people  I  just  was  happening  to
have  been  debating  alxiut  in  niy  own  mind  in  a  way  that  makes  your  short
message  perfectly  signiticant  and  natural.  I  am  sorry  thus  to  be  obliged  to
feed  your  creduhty,  for  I  hate  your  spirits.

I  understood,  as  it  was  described  later,  that  Madame  Elisa  arrived
with  this  message  too  late  to  give  it  herself,  and  G.  P.  gave  it  to
the  "returning  consciousness  "  of  Mrs.  PijDer  in  the  same  way  that  he
gave  the  name  Peirce  (pp.  305-6).  That  Madame  Elisa  should  select
some  significant  circumstance  in  connection  with  living  fiiends  or
relatives  is  intelligible  ;  but  to  suppose  that  a  fragment  of  Mrs.  Piper's
personality  selects  it  is  not  intelligible, — it  is  not  explanatory,  and
sugsrests  no  order.

Returning  to  the  first  class  of  cases  which  I  mentioned,  then,  it
seems  clear  that  cither  the  failure  or  the  success,  in  getting  the
person  desired  as  the  alleged  connnunicator,  is  explicable  on  either
hypothesis.

Similarly,  in  many  cases,  the  correct  answers  to  special  questions,
"wlien  known  to  the  inquirer  at  the  sitting,  may  also  be  regarded  as


XXXIII.] Ohservaiions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  373


explicable  on  either  hypothesis.  For  example,  when  Mrs.  Howard
asked  G.  P.  if  he  could  tell  the  name  of  a  certain  book  which  she
placed  on  Mrs.  Piper's  head  without  bringing  it  into  Mrs.  Piper's  field
of  vision  at  all,  and  the  correct  answer  at  once  came  that  it  was
his  "  French  Lyrics,"  it  might  be  regarded  as  a  case  of  direct  thought-
transference  from  Mrs.  Howard,  or  as  a  case  of  knowledge  shown  by
the  independent  G.  P.

The  cases  which  seem  in  themselves  to  suggest  merely  thought-
transference  from  the  sitters  are  exceedingly  rare,  and  even  these  are-
nearly  all  explicable  otherwise.  For  example,  the  letter  from  Mr^
Pelham  given  to  G.  P.,  which  the  Howards  supposed  to  be  about  G.  P.
himself  (p.  320),  but  which  was  a  letter  about  business  matters,  did
not  lead  to  any  statement  about  business  matters  from  G.  P.,  but  to-
statements  referring  to  the  contents  of  the  contemporary  letter  which
Mrs.  Howard  thought  she  had  presented.  But  the  letter  may  have
served,  as  G.  P.  at  the  time  said  it  did,  to  bring  him  "  nearer  to  his
father,"  and  to  get  at  his  father  s  state  of  mind.  Still  we  may  well
suppose  that  some  cases  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  due  to  direct  thought-
transference  from  sitters.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  emotional  state  of"
sitters  is  usually  readily  discerned  by  the  communicating  intelligence,
and  think  it  probable  that  in  rare  cases,  analogous  to  occasional
instances  of  thought-transference  between  living  friends,  the  person-
ality purporting  to  communicate  is  affected  by  specific  informatiou
possessed  by  the  sitter.

There  is  further  another  type  of  case  which  is  explicable  equally
well  on  either  hypothesis,  where  a  test  is  given  that  the  sitter  tliinks-
might  be  given, — though  not  specially  asked  for,  except  in  general
terms.  For  example,  a  club  friend  of  my  own  named  Otis  made^
several  brief  communications  at  sittings.  I  asked  him  for  a  test,  and
he  replied  by  reminding  me  of  the  "  sword-dance."  He  had  on  a.
previous  occasion  referred  spontaneously  and  naturally  to  the  fellows
at  the  club  and  the  Christmas  festivities,  but  did  not  then  refer  to  the
sword-dance,  though  that  was  in  my  mind.  He  was  my  vis-a-vis  in  a
sword-dance  given  by  ourselves  and  six  other  members  of  the  club  in
connection  with  some  Christmas  festivities.  Now  if  Otis  had  asked
me  how  he  could  know  that  I  was  Hodgson,  I  should  liave  replied
*'  sword-dance,"  as  that  was  the  only  special  matter  between  us  in
which  we  were  both  particularly  concerned.  But  where  the  communi-
cators have  other  personal  and  striking  remembrances  in  common  with
the  sitter,  we  find  that  such  a  coincidence  rarely  ]\appens,  or  I  should
say  that  there  is  no  indication  that  it  happens  more  frequently  tliau
we  should  expect  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  communicator  is  drawing
iipon  his  own  remembrance  j.  Very  frequently,  indeed,  the  answer
given  by  the  communicator  to  a  particular  question  strongly  suggeslis


S74


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


in  itself  an  independent  mind.  For  example,  when  Mrs.  W.  L.  P.
■asked  Louis  R.  for  the  German  nickname  by  which  he  used  to  call  her
husband,  he  referred,  not  to  the  one  of  which  she  was  thinking,
but  to  another.  Up  and  Dust  (p.  338).  Again,  when  Miss  Vance
(p.  437)  asked  G.  P.  for  the  name  of  a  deceased  college  friend  of  her
brother  Ken,  G.  P.  answered  Harry  Guild.  This  was  the  name  of
another  college  friend  who  died  in  1888.  The  one  of  whom  Miss
Vance  was  thinking  died  in  1887,  and  his  first  name,  Charles,  was
•given  by  G.  P.  after  he  was  told  that  Harry  Guild  was  not  the  name
intended,  although  a  correct  answer.  Similarly,  in  the  case  mentioned
by  Professor  Nichols  (p  535).  He  and  his  mother  one  Christmas
■exchanged  rings,  and  each  had  engraved  in  his  gift  the  first  word  of
the  giver's  favourite  proverb.  Professor  Nichols  lost,  many  years
before  the  sitting,  the  ring  which  he  had  received  from  his  mother.
AVhen  his  mother  died,  a  year  before  the  sitting,  the  ring  which  he  had
given  her  was  at  her  request  taken  from  her  finger  and  returned  to
him.  This  ring  he  held  in  his  hand  at  the  sitting — having,  as  he
says,  "in  mind  only  that  ring" — and  asked  what  was  written  in  his
mother's  ring.  His  mother  at  the  moment  purported  to  be  using  the
hand,  which  immediately  "  slapped  down  on  the  paper,"  not  the  word
in  the  ring  which  he  was  holding,  but  "  the  word  in  tlte  other  ring  "
which  his  mother  had  originally  given  him  and  which  "  had  been
lost  years  ago  while  travelling.  As  the  word  was  a  peculiar  one,
doubtfully  ever  written  in  any  ring  before,  and  as  she  wrote  it  in
■such  a  flash,  it  was  surely  curious."  It  might  be  said  that  wherever
the  correct  statements  made  by  the  communicator  were  known  to
the  communicator  when  living,  and  are  not,  or  have  not  just  been,
in  the  conscious  mind  of  the  sitter,  although  once  known  to  the  sitter,
they  make  for  the  hypothesis  of  an  independent  intelligence.  I  think
myself  that  they  do,  at  least  to  some  extent,  but  I  am  assuming  for
the  present  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  of  the  sitter  may  be
■drawn  upon  by  the  "  medium."

Putting  aside  then,  as  not  pointing  definitely  to  either  of  the  views
we  are  considering,  any  cases  of  complete  failure,  and  cases  of  partial
or  complete  success  of  the  ordinary  kind  where  information  is  given
about  facts  once  known  to  the  sitter,  we  come  to  a  type  of  failure  that
-appears  to  me  to  point  distinctly  to  the  agency  of  the  "  dead."  Take
such  cases  as  I  have  described  on  pp.  349-50.  The  sittings  which  I  held
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  counnunications  from  A.,  were  held  under
■circumstances  which  seemed  favourable,  so  far  as  1  could  judge,  in
■other  respects.  Other  communicators  manifested  clearly  at  some  of  the
sittings.  My  own  mind,  as  well  as  the  minds  of  distant  living  relatives
and  friends  of  his,  according  to  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the
living,  might  have  been  drawn  upon. If  the  information  given  to  me


xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  SYS^


at  some  of  these  sittings,  and  at  other  times  from  other  persons,  about
private  incidents  in  my  own  life,  m.any  of  which  I  believe  to  have  been
known  to  no  other  person  living  but  myself,  and  about  an  enormous
number  of  other  matters  concerning  myself  and  deceased  friends-
which,  if  not  exclusively  known  to  myself  alone,  are  of  so  intimate-
a  character  that  I  have  no  doubt  that  they  must  be  assigned  to  some
supernormal  origin, — if,  I  say,  all  this  information  came  from  my  own
mind, — then  it  is  unintelligible  that  definite  information  could  not  b»
"  given  back "  to  me  concerning  A.  To  sujjpose  that  the  mass  of
facts  associated  in  my  mind,  supraliminal  and  sublimiiial,  with  A.,  and
bound  by  strong  sympathy,  should  result  in  incoherencies  of  expression
from  "A."  when  contemjsorary  communications  from  other  persons
were  clear,  is  not  exj^lanatory.  The  circumstances  suggest  a  confusion
in  the  actual  communicator  A.,  and  when  we  remember  that  his  head
frequently  troubled  him  for  some  years  before  his  death,  and  when
we  find  a  similar  confusion  manifesting  itself  in  connection  with  other
communicators  M'ho  suffered  for  a  long  time  under  confusing  bodily
conditions,  the  facts  begin  to  fall  into  order.  In  some  respects,  of
course,  each  example  stands  by  itself,  and,  as  I  have  stated,  I  da
not  think  that  we  have  enough  material  yet  to  apply  any  calculus
of  probabilities,  but  I  hope  that  such  material  as  I  have  on  hand
may  be  largely  increased  by  further  investigations  and  by  other
investigators.  The  causes  of  confusion  in  communicators  are  still  very
obscure ;  but  prolonged  bodily  disturbance,  especially  if  associated
with  mental  disturbance,  in  the  communicator  while  living,  seems
invariably  to  be  followed  by  confusion  in  his  early  attempts  at
communication.

Take  a  case  like  that  of  the  communicator  at  M.  Bourcet's  sittincr
(p.  495).  The  communicator,  a  lady,  apparently  tried  to  write  herself,
but  was  unable  to  produce  anything  more  than  two  or  three  French
words,  among  them  what  seemed  to  be  mo7i  dieii.  Very  little  that
was  coherent  could  be  obtained  from  her.  G-.  P.  nevertheless  correctly
stated  that  she  was  a  beautiful  lady  who  was  an  artist  by  pi'ofession,
that  she  had  very  expressive  eyes  and  short  hair,  combed  and  parted
curiously  on  the  side,  that  she  had  a  severe  trouble  with  her  head,
followed  by  confusion,  and  that  in  a  fit  of  insanity  she  jumped  out  of
a  gondola  or  boat.  Only  the  first  syllable  of  Bourget  could  be  obtained,
and  another  communicator,  who  apparently  offered  to  render  assistance
as  being  a  good  French  scholar— as  G.  P.  was  not — succeeded  only  in
getting  the  lady's  first  name,  for  which  M.  Bourget  asked.  He  was
thinking  of  Matilda.  The  name  given  was  Tillie.  "  Venice  "  was  th©
answer  to  another  question  put  by  M.  Bourget,  and  "  Venice  "  was
written  spasmodically  at  the  end  of  the  sitting,  probably  by  G.  P.
(see  p.  310).


S1G


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Various  cases  of  communications  from  suicides  have  come  under  my
■attention,  at  least  six,  in  three  of  which  repeated  opportunities  have
been  given  for  communication,  and  in  which  tlie  details  of  nearly  all
the  sittings  are  known  to  me.  I  have,  besides,  five  cases  of  prolonged
bodily  disturbance  where  many  opportunities  have  also  been  given  for
communication,  and  where  I  am  also  familiar  with  all  the  results.  In
four  of  the  eight  cases  where  many  opportunities  to  communicate  were
given,  the  alleged  communicators  were  intimate  friends  of  my  own,  and
finother  I  knew  very  well ;  and  my  own  mind  was  full  of  clear  and
"vivid  memories  concerning  them.  In  two  cases  I  had  never  met  the
persons  concerned  when  living,  but  I  knew  intimately  living  friends  of
theirs  wliose  minds  might  have  been  diawn  upon  for  clear  statements
according  to  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living.  In  one  of  these
cases  the  friends  themselves  had  repeated  sittings.  In  the  remaining
case  I  knew  the  person  when  living,  though  not  intimately,  and  I  knew
a.  good  deal  about  him.  In  all  these  cases  the  confusion  persisted
through  varying  conditions  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  while  clear
communications  were  received  from  other  persons ;  and  yet,  so  far  as
the  sitters'  minds  were  concerned,  there  seemed  no  assignable  reason
why  the  communications  were  not  clear  originally,  or  did  not  soon
become  cleai-,  if  dependent  upon  living  persons.  Similarly  in  other
cases,  where  the  mental  disturbance  was  less  pronounced,  or  where  we
can  scarcely  suggest,  owing  to  our  ignorance  of  the  circumstances,
what  the  precise  cause  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  communicator  might
be.  Probably  in  many  cases, — and  this  applies  particularl}''  to  the
gi'oup  of  clearer  communicators,  between  whom  we  find  individual
differences — the  skill  in  "  controlling  "  the  nervous  mechanism  of  the
medium  is  as  little  traceable  to  any  external  differences  discernible  in
the  persons  known  to  us  when  living,  as  would  be,  say,  tlie  ability  to
play  the  violin  well.  And  thus  we  get  all  varieties  of  communication  ;
some  of  them,  purporting  to  come  from  persons  who  when  living
were  much  mentally  disturbed,  suggesting  the  incoherency  of  delirium;
others  of  them,  purporting  to  come  from  persons  who  have  been  dead
very  many  years,  suggesting  a  fainter  dreaminess  ;  others,  purporting
to  come  from  persons  i-ecently  deceased  whose  minds  have  been  clear,
showing  a  corresponding  clearness  in  communication.  Even  these  last
indeed  require  some  practice  in  handling  the  writing  mechanism,  and
at  first  the  assistance  of  G.  P.  or  some  other  experienced  amanuensis
lias  usually  been  required.

But  I  am  anxious  to  avoid  any  misunderstanding  as  to  the  causes
■of  failure  in  communicators.  I  have  referred  to  certain  extreme  types
of  persisting  confusion  as  indicating  most  markedly  the  actual  presence
(if  the  communicators,  inasmuch  as  in  these  cases  there  have  been
I'P.peatcd  opportunities  for  conmiunication,  in  some  cases  with  different


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  3/7


sitters,  and  under  numerous  varying  conditions.  Thus,  to  take  one
case,  at  the  time  of  my  earliest  sittings  for  0.  (p.  3.50),  I  lielieve  that
I  was  unaware  that  he  liad  taken  his  own  hfe.  And  in  other  cases  tlie
confusion  in  the  communicator  was  not  consciously  expected  in  any
way  by  the  sitters,  including  myself,  who  were  on  the  contrary  entirely
unable  to  understand  the  strange  incoherencies  and  irrelevancies  that
purported  to  come  from  their  "  deceased "  friends,  rather  than  the
clear  utterance,  and  the  sweeping  recollections  of  which  we  ourselves
were  so  vividly  conscious,  and  of  wliich  we  looked  to  see  some  striking
manifestation  from  that  "superior  world"  to  which  our  friends  had
gone.  My  own  conclusion  as  to  what  might  be  anticipated  in  such
cases,  where  the  communicators  when  living  suffered  from  prolonged
bodily  weakness  or  extreme  mental  disturbance,  is  a  late  induction
of  my  own,  forced  upon  me  by  experience,  and  strengthened  by  various
statements  of  the  communicators  themselves  concerning  the  causes  of
confusion.

In  most  other  cases,  not  of  this  extreme  type,  where  only  one  or  two
opportunities  have  been  given  for  communication,  and  where  there  haj
not  been  any  prolonged  mental  disturbance,  or  any  mental  disturbance
at  all,  the  incipient  confusion  is  fully  accounted  for  by  the  necessary
conditions  of  communicating,  if  the  persons  alleged  are  actually  there,
trying  to  express  themselves  for  the  first  time  through  an  unfamiliar
organism.  And  when  opportunity  is  given  for  further  communication,
part  of  this  confusion  seems  to  clear  away,  and  what  remains  is  what
we  should  expect  under  the  circumstances.  I  now  refer  to  various
instances  of  this  in  illustration.  In  some  cases  the  confusion  is
comparatively  slight,  in  others  it  is  very  marked.  Thus,  there  was  a
certain  amount  of  confusion  in  G.  P.'s  first  communications  to  Mr.
Hart,  and  one  of  the  statements  suggested  to  the  Howards  a  time
when  G.  P.  had  been  ill  at  their  house.  Similarly  at  the  first  sitting
of  Mrs.  M.  (p.  341),  her  brother  wrote  although  she  was  hoping  for
some  communication  from  her  husband,  and  the  confusion,  as  she  says,
reminded  her  painfully  of  the  last  hours  of  her  brother's  illness  wliich
had  been  passed  in  delirium.  This  was  obviously  contrary  to  any  con-
scious expectation  of  Mrs.  M.,  and  if  it  be  urged  that  it  was  drawn
telepathically  from  her  subliminal  consciousness,  we  ask  vv'hy  was  that
particular  group  selected  by  the  medium.

Again,  that  persons  just  "deceased"  should  be  extremely  confused
and  unable  to  communicate  directly,  or  even  at  all,  seems  perfectly
natural  after  the  shock  and  wrench  of  death.  Thus  in  the  case  of
Hart  (p.  353),  he  was  unable  to  write  the  second  day  after  death.  In
another  case  (p.  440)  a  friend  of  mine,  whom  I  may  call  D.,  wrote,
with  what  appeared  to  be  much  difticulty,  his  name  and  the  words,
"I  am  all  right  now. Adieu,"  within  two  or  three  days  of  his  death.


878


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


In  another  case,  F.,  a  near  relative  of  Madame  Elisa  (p.  335),  was
unable  to  write  on  the  morning  after  his  death. i  On  the  second  day
after,  when  a  stranger  was  present  with  me  for  a  sitting,  he  wrote  two
or  three  sentences,  saying,  "  I  am  too  weak  to  articulate  clearly,"  and
not  many  days  later  he  wrote  fairly  well  and  clearly,  and  dictated  also
to  Madame  Elisa,  as  amanuensis,  an  account  of  his  feelinss  at  findino-
himself  in  his  new  surroundings,  Both  D.  and  F.  became  very  clear
in  a  short  time.  D.  communicated  later  on  frequently,  both  by  writing
and  speech,  chiefly  the  lattei',  and  showed  always  an  impressively
marked  and  characteristic  personality.  Hart,  on  the  other  hand,  did
not  become  so  clear  till  many  months  later.  I  learned  long  afterwards
that  his  illness  had  been  much  longer  and  more  fundamental  than  I
had  supposed.  The  continued  confusion  in  his  case  seemed  explicable
if  taken  in  relation  with  the  circumstances  of  his  prolonged  illness,
including  fever,  but  there  was  no  assignable  relation  between  his  con-
fusion and  the  state  of  my  own  mind.

The  more  or  less  incoherent  writings  of  different  communicators
appear  to  me  to  be  invaluable  as  regards  the  light  that  they  throw
upon  the  workings  of  consciousness  in  the  communicators  and  upon  the
process  of  communication  itself,  but  the  readers  of  these  Proceedings
may  probably  find  it  tedious  to  read  even  the  examples  I  have  given  in
the  Appendices,  where  a  little  of  the  detailed  direct  writing  of  first
communicators  is  reproduced.  Take  the  sittings  of  Mr.  Mitchell  (pp.
617-23).  At  his  first  sitting,  held  in  the  afternoon,  Phinuit  was  unable
to  use  the  voice,  owing  to  the  lack  of  "light."  Mrs.  Piper  had  become
partially  entranced  in  the  morning  unintentionally,  and  Mr.  Mitchell
and  myself  waited  for  more  than  two  hours  before  the  trance  began.
The  communicator  purported  to  be  the  wife  of  the  sitter,  recognised  her
husband,  giving  his  name  James,  gave  her  own  name  as  Margaret,  and
as  M.  M. — all  correct — made  attempts  to  write  the  name  Edith  (that  of
a  living  daughter),  writing  E.M.  and  ddie  and  ed,  and  "our  ddie,"  and

1  The  notice  of  his  death  was  in  a  Boston  morning  paper,  and  I  happened  to  see
it  on  my  way  to  the  sitting.  The  first  writing  of  the  sitting  came  from  Madame
Elisa,  without  my  expecting  it.  She  wrote  clearly  and  strongly,  explaining  that  E.
was  there  with  her,  bvit  unable  to  speak  directly,  that  she  wished  to  give  me  an
account  of  how  she  had  helped  F.  to  reacli  her.  She  said  that  she  had  been  present
at  his  death-bed,  and  had  spoken  to  him,  and  she  repeated  what  she  had  said,  an
imusual  form  of  expression,  and  indicated  that  he  had  heard  and  recognised  her.
This  was  confirmed  in  detail  in  the  only  way  possible  at  that  time,  by  a  very  intimate
friend  of  Madame  Elisa  and  myself,  and  also  of  the  nearest  surviving  relative  of  F.
I  showed  my  friend  the  account  of  the  sitting,  and  to  this  friend,  a  day  or  two  later,
the  relative,  who  was  present  at  the  death-bed,  stated  spontaneously  that  F.  whfn
dying  said  that  he  saw  Madame  Elisa  who  was  speaking  to  him,  and  he  repeated
what  she  was  saying.  The  expression  so  repeated,  which  the  relative  quoted  to  my
friend,  was  that  which  I  had  received  from  Madame  Elisa  through  Mrs.  Piper's
trance,  when  the  death  bed  incident  was  of  course  entirely  unknown  to  me.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  379


"  she  was  very  ill,  but  will  get  well."  She  had  been  very  ill,  and  was
"  about  recovered."  The  communicator  apparently  tried  to  write  her
name  at  the  beginning,  but  wrote  "  Mit,  Jlitel.  I  am  she."  JMrs.
Mitchell  died  of  cancer,  and  in  the  writing  came  "  no  more  cancers
— you  know,  dear."  Sevei'al  other  names  were  also  mentioned  that  were
unknown  to  the  sitter.  The  special  confusion  was  in  my  view  owing
to  two  circumstances  :  (1)  the  lack  of  "light"  ;  (2)  the  inexperience  of
the  communicator.  At  lie.  JMitchell's  second  sitting,  five  days  later,
the  results  were  much  clearer.  Phinuit  gave  the  name  Margaret
Mitchell  quite  distinctly,  and  in  reply  to  the  sitter's  demand  for  a  test,
his  "wife,"  writing,  correctly  referred  to  the  little  house  where  they
first  lived  and  the  little  stoop  where  she  used  to  sit,  and  in  reply  to  the
demand  for  a  pet  name  he  called  her,  she  wrote  that  hi  called  her
Maggie  first,  as  was  true,  and  then  wrote  Dellie,  the  pet  name  to  which
the  sitter  referred  being  Dollie.  She  also  referred  to  "  the  baby/'  as
with  her ;  a  little  grandchild  who  had  died  a  year  previously  was
always  thus  spoken  of  in  the  family.  There  was  some  writing  also
from  the  sitter's  son  George,  whose  name  was  correctly  given  and  who
referred  to  his  brother  James  correctly  as  being  "with  us."  The  sitter
had  taken  a  gold  watch  to  the  sitting  which  "George"  rightly  claimed
and  then  referred  to  a  silver  watch  which  he  had  owned,  also  true,  though
of  little  evidential  value.  The  middle  initial  of  his  name  was  given
first  as  A  and  then  as  I,  before  being  given  correctly  as  S.  A  name-
Davidson,  which  was  unknown,  was  mentioned  in  connection  with  th&
watch,  and  later  on  the  name  Rich,  a  gentleman  well  known  in  the-
sitter's  family,  with  Robert,  which  apparently  had  no  special  signifi-
cance. In  the  writing  came  :  "  My  lungs  are  well,"  and  *'  Do  you  think
consumption  a  bad  thing?"  George  had  died  of  consumption.  In
reply  to  questions  as  to  where  he  went  for  his  health  and  whom  he  met
there,  he  stated  correctly  that  it  was  South,  and  gave  the  name  Wilson
(correct),  after  several  attempts  at  words  beginning  with  a  "W."  This
was  followed  by  a  little  obscurer  writing  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  from
''James,"  the  other  son  of  the  sitter,  who  placed  a  notebook  on  the
hand  and  asked  what  it  was.  "  My  accounts  and  description  of  a  tr  ip
to  "  .  .  .  The  next  words  were  undecipherable.  The  book  was  one  of
several  containing  a  journal  of  a  voyage  to  China  via  Australia.  The
important  matter  about  sittings  like  these  and  many  similar  ones
appears  to  me  to  be  not  so  much  the  mere  facts  that  are  offered,  false
or  true,  but  the  matrix  in  which  they  are  imbedded  ;  and  this  cannot
be  appreciated  without  a  careful  study  of  the  detailed  reports  them-
selves. Thus,  in  the  second  sitting,  G.  P.  is  represented  as  rendering
assistance.  "All  right,  I  remember,  but  it  is  hard  to  put  it  as  Pelliam
asks  me — WILSON."  The  communicator  has  diiHculty  in  repro-
ducing the  name  Wilson  clearly  through  the  writing  meelianism,  and'


sso


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


•G.  p.,  as  on  many  occp^sions  at  otlier  sittings,  tolls  him  to  make  'capital
letters.  Compare  this  with  the  early  part  of  Mr.  C.'s  sitting  (p.  514)
where  the  communicator,  after  greeting  the  sitter  naturally,  tries  to'
"write  his  own  name.

Don't  you  remember  me  Duane  ?  I  will,  D  W  A  I  N  E,  D-W-  I  am
Taothered. This  is  it,  it  alone,  DUANE.

I  reproduce  this  with  explanatory  comments.

Don't  you  remember  me  Duaue  ?  [Sitters  not  sure  of  word  Dnane.
G.P.  tells  communicator  to  put  it  in  capitals.  Communicator  says  to  G.P.:]
I  will  [and  tries.  Writing  mechanism  spells  out]  D  W  A  I  N  E  [sitters  spell
out  tlie  letters.  Communicator  tries  again.]  D  W  [Sitters  spell  out  the
letters.  Communicator  says  to  himself  or  to  G.  P.]  I  am  bothered.  [Per-
haps to  himself]  This  is  it,  it  alone.  [Final  successful  effort]  DUANE
;[correct  name].  ■  .

I  shall  say  more  about  the  writings  themselves  in  Part  II  of  my
report,  but  this  instance  will  suffice  here  to  illustrate  the  fact  that
there  is  often  a  confusion  in  result  which  is  not  the  confusion  of  the
communicator's  mind.  There  are,  indeed,  three  kinds  of  confusion  that
need  to  be  distinguished  by  the  investigator:  (1)  the  confusion  in  the
"spirit,"  whether  he  is  communicating  or  not,  due  primarily  to  his
mental  and  bodily  conditions  when  living  ;  (2)  the  confusion  in  the
"  spirit "  produced  by  the  conditions  into  which  he  comes  when  in  the
act  of  communicating ;  (3)  the  confusion  in  the  result  due  to  the  failure  of
con^plete  control  over  the  writing  (or  other)  mechanism  of  the  medium.
(2)  and  (3)  are  increased  very  much  by  the  failures  of  sitters  to
understand  the  process.  Thus  when  "  Mrs.  Mitchell  "  was  requested
to  repeat  words  which  we  had  difficulty  in  deciphering,  she  wrote: —

No,  I  can't,  it  is  too  much  work  and  too  weakening;,  and  I  cannot  repeat —
you  must  help  me  and  I  will  prove  myself  to  you.  I  cannot  collect  my
thoughts  to  repeat  sentences  to  you.  My  darling  husband,  I  am  not  away
from  you,  but  right  by  your  side.  Welcome  me  as  you  would  if  I  were  with
you  in  the  flesh  and  blood  body.  [Sitter  asks  for  test].  *  *  *  I  cainiot
tell  myself  just  how  you  hear  me,  and  it  bothers  me  a  little  .  .  .  how
d- you  hear  me  sjieak,  dear,  when  we  speak  by  thought  only?  But  your
thoughts  do  not  reach  me  at  all  when  I  am  speaking  to  you,  but  I  hear  a
strange  sound  and  have  to  half  guess.^ . .  .

Of  such  confusions  as  I  have  indicated  above  I  cannot  find  any
satisfactory  explanation  in  "  telepathy  from  the  living,"  but  they  fall
into  a  rational  order  when  related  to  tlie  personalities  of  the  '•  dead."

Most  communicators,  when  they  attempt  to  produce  the  writing
themselves,  find  themselves  in  a  state  of  complete  bewilderment  at
first,  and  frequently  an  extreme  mental  automatism  is  shown,  but  so

'  Note  how  this  corresponds  with  the  difficulties  which  I  ha\e  suggested  on
p.  ?32  as  being  in  the  way  of  the  coir!niunic<itor.


xxxrii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  SSI


far  as  I  have  been  able  to  extend  my  analysis,  such  automatism  in
each  case  seems  to  suggest  the  mind  of  the  alleged  communicator.
And  in  these  extreme  types  there  may  be  given  not  merely  information
peculiar  and  private  to  the  communicator  that  was  known  to  him
when  living  and  that  may  or  may  not  be  known  to  the  sitter,  but
information  of  contemporary  events  elsewhere,  unknown  to  the  sitter.
Thus  one  of  our  members  in  Boston,  Mrs.  J.,  had  much  difficulty  iu
getting  her  husband  to  write  his  own  name  in  full,  and  afterwards  had
the  same  difficulty  in  getting  her  own  first  name  written  ;  at  her
second  sitting  when  she  asked  for  it,  it  was  not  written  at  all,  though
other  matters  connected  with  her  family  were  correctly  mentioned.
At  the  third  sitting  she  asked  about  her  son  living  : —

. . . the  silver  handle  troubles  him . . . my  shop  .
where  is  my  shop ... or  my  work . . . the  new  handle  troubles
me  or  him." Later  this  was  repeated.

Mrs.  J.  called  at  her  son's  office  the  same  day  and  wrote  to  me  on
the  following  day  that  "the  bother  about  a  silver  handle  was  correct."
Her  son  was  engaged  in  jewellers'  designing  work,  as  her  husband  had
been,  and  she  "found  him,'"  as  she  wrote  in  more  detail  two  days  later,
■"quite  upset  by  the  'bother'  he  had  had  to  make  the  handle  in  perfect
keeping  with  a  very  fine  creamer  he  had  designed  and  made."  Jlrs.  J.
was  unaware  of  the  trouble,  and  no  such  incident  had  occurred  before.
This,  of  course,  belongs  to  a  type  of  case  to  which  I  have  previously
referred,  as  occiu'ring  frequently  among  clearer  communicators  (p.  372);
where  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality
selects  such  an  occurrence  for  reproduction,  but  where  it  becomes
intelligible  on  the  view  that  Mr.  J.  was  interested  in  his  son's  doings,
and  that  the  mention  of  his  son  brought  up  the  consciousness  which  he
had  just  acquired  of  his  son's  worry.  Yet  this  was  consistent  with  the
utmost  difficulty  in  keeping  his  thoughts  together  sufficiently  to  follow
and  answer  our  questions  about  his  own  name  or  the  name  of  his  wife.

I  (live  another  case  connected  with  Mr.  Vance,  whose  first  sitting
was  on  March  30th,  1892  (p.  457).  Besides  G.  P.'s  inquiry  after  the
sitter's  son  and  his  correct  statement  that  the  son  and  himself  were  in
college  together,  and  his  correct  description  of  the  sitter's  country
house  in  reply  to  the  question  where  he  had  stayed  with  the  Vances,
another  striking  piece  of  information  was  given  by  Phinuit.  The
sitter  presented  a  paper,  and  Phinuit  said  it  looked  more  like  a  little
verse  than  anything  else.  "Do  you  know  there's  two  Marys  connected
•with  this.  Two  Mai'ys  were  in  the  body.  One  Mary  suggested  it;
•and  the  other  Mary  wrote  it.  One  is  mother,  and  mother  suggested
i'j."  This  was  true.  It  was  a  short  verse  from  the  Bible,  and
•"  was  written  by  my  sister  at  my  mother's  request  shortly  before
lier  death  ;  it  was  given  to  me  witii  a  special  motive,  and  has

2  r  2


382


Michard  Hodgson.


been  kept  under  lock  and  key  until  it  was  taken  to  Mrs.  Piper."'
The  information  purported  to  come,  through  Pliinuit,  from  Mary,
the  "  deceased  "  writer  of  the  verse.  Mr.  Vance,  then,  if  this  com-
munication and  the  answers  from  Gr.  P.  were  instances  of  thought-
transference  from  his  mind,  was  not  altogether  a  "  bad  agent."  Three
years  later  Mr.  Vance  had  another  sitting  for  the  purj^ose  of  getting
conmiunications  from  a  recently  deceased  friend.  G.  P.  appeared,  gave
the  name  of  the  sitter,  asked  after  his  son,  and  tried  to  get  some  clear
communications  from  the  friend,  who  purported  to  be  there.  The
sitter  asked  the  friend  various  questions,  but  all  the  answers  or
remarks  were  irrelevant,  and  names  asked  for  were  given  wrong.  He
asked  specially  for  the  name  of  a  book  written  by  the  friend,  to  which
no  answer  was  given  at  the  time,  and  an  answer  given  at  a  later
sitting  was  wrong.  Yet  the  name  of  this  book  was  well-known  to
me  as  well  as  to  Mr.  Vance,  who  also  I  believe  at  the  time  knew  the
answers  to  the  other  questions  which  he  asked.  G.  P.  himself  however
appeared  to  be  quite  clear,  and  when  I  finally  suggested  that  he
should  stop  wi'iting  as  the  results  were  all  confused,  wrote  :  "  Adieu.
Vance.  Sorry  to  be  put  out  in  this  way,  but  suppose  I  shall  have
to  swallow  it.  G.  P.  Adieu.  Sorry  you  did  not  wish  to  see  me."
The  friend  apparently  complained  of  his  head  at  the  beginning  of  the
sitting,  and  later  on  said,  "  I  feel  very  sleepy."  In  life,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  he  suffered  from  mental  trouble  for  which  he  was  compelled  to
take  hospital  treatment,  and  from  other  details  known  to  me,  I  should
say  that  this  is  precisely  the  type  of  case  from  which  I  should  noiu
expect  to  get  no  clear  communications  until  long  after  death  and  after
much  familiarity  with  the  process  of  communication.

It  was  out  of  the  automatic  dreameries  of  persons  in  some  such
conditions  as  those  which  I  have  illustrated  above,  that  Phinuit  in  my
present  view  so  often  had  to  fish  his  facts,  and  I  think  that  assent  to
correct  statements  and  other  clues  from  the  sitters,  besides  helping  the
"  communicator,"  were  probably  of  great  service  to  Phinuit,  enabling
him  to  "  cast  his  line  "  for  those  mental  automatisms  that  specially
concerned  the  sitter.  Mucli  light  seems  to  me  to  have  been  thrown
upon  Pliinuit's  mistakes  and  obscurities  and  general  method  of  trying
to  get  at  facts,  in  what  were  on  the  whole  bad  sittings,  by  comparison  of
the  results  obtained  from  the  various  communicators  writing  directly  or
using  G.P.  as  amanuensis;  and  I  feel  pretty  sure  that  much  of  Phinuit's
"fishing"  was  due  to  the  confusions  of  the  more  or  less  comatose
communicators  whose  minds  had  let  loose,  so  to  speak,  a  crowd  of
earthly  memories.  And  in  cases  where  we  should  a  priori  be  led  to
expect  that  the  communicators  would  certainly  not  be  confused,  or,  if
they  were  confused,  the  confusion  would  not  make  much  difference,
Phinuit  was  particularly  successful. These  cases,  in  whicli  there  was


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  383


also  a  little  direct  communication  with  the  voice,  seem  to  me  to  afford
a  special  argument  in  themselves  in  favour  of  the  "  spirit "  hypothesis.
They  maybe  contrasted  with  the  type  of  extreme  failures  which  I  have
connected  with  chronic  morbid  habits  or  disruptive  dominant  ideas.
The  cases  I  refer  to  are  those  of  little  children  recently  deceased.

Before  describing  these  I  refer  to  the  cases  of  two  children  who  had
.been  dead  many  years.  Mvs.  J.  (to  whom  I  have  referred  on  p.  381)
received  at  her  first  sitting  a  little  writing,  only  a  few  sentences,  pur-
porting to  come  from  her  son,  who  died  twenty-four  years  before  at  the
age  of  two  years  and  three  months,  from  suppressed  scarlet  fever
causing  congestion  of  the  lungs.  He  gave  his  name  Arthur,  wrote,
"Here  I  am,  Mamma,  after  all  these  years,"  and  said  that  his  father,
recently  deceased,  was  with  him  ;  mentioned  three  names  that  had  no
relevance  for  the  sitter,  and  said  that  his  head  and  stomach  were  all
riuht.  Mrs.  J.  knew  well  that  there  was  no  trouble  with  the  head  or
the  stomach,  and  she  had  other  vivid  rememljrances  of  her  child  which
were  not  mentioned.  This  is  not  an  unnatural  result  if  regarded  as
coming  from  the  professed  communicator,  in  whom  we  should  perhaps
hardly  expect  to  find  much  recollection  of  events  that  occurred  in  the
life  on  earth  when  he  was  such  a  little  child  twenty-four  years  before.

The  other  case  is  that  of  the  son  of  Mrs.  R.  (p.  511)  who  was  killed
in  an  accident  some  thirteen  years  previously  when  about  thirteen
years  old.  Through  G.  P.  writing,  he  gave  his  name  Roland,  and
referred  to  his  having  been  killed.  I  knew  somewhat  of  the  circum-
stances and  made  some  remark  about  the  "little  boy."  G.  P.  wrote : —
"  Roland  is  a  gentleman,  not  a  boy."  He  referred  to  a  picture  as  being
dear  to  his  mother  (she  was  in  the  habit  of  carrying  a  portrait  of  him
about  with  her),  referred  to  the  years  that  had  passed,  and  quoted  a
passage  :  "  Don't  worry  about  me.  Mamma,  I  am  all  right,  and  as
happy  as  possible,"  words  which  Mrs.  R.  states  were  in  a  letter  received
by  her  from  "  a  strange  medium  "  soon  after  her  son's  death,  and  which
purported  to  be  a  message  from  her  son.  She  refused  to  accept  it  at
the  time  as  such.  This  communication  was  apparently  referred  to  at
the  sitting.^  So  far  as  this  communication  went,  concerning  the
matters  pertaining  to  Roland  himself,  it  seemed  \evy  clear,  but  there

1  There  are  several  other  cases  in  the  reports  where  reference  is  made  to  communi-
'■cations  through  some  other  mediums.  See  Mr.  Mitchell's  sitting,  p.. 518,  and  Dr.  K.'s,
p.  527.  In  Dr.  K.'s  case  the  circumstance  might  be  of  some  evidential  value  if  we
Iiad  more  details.  The  case  of  Mr.  T.  B.  C,  p.  472,  is  interesting,  but  might  of
course  be  accounted  for  by  direct  thought  transference.  I  have  two  or  three  other
private  cases  in  my  records,  but  at  best  they  merely  add  a  few  incidents  wliioh
strengthen  the  view  that  telepathy  from  the  sitter  is  not  an  adequate  exjilanation.
See  p.  351.  Of  course  if  the  real  persons  are  actually  communicating  under  the  novul
conditions  to  which  I  have  referred,  it  is  probable  that  they  themselves  would  have  an
tinusually  vivid  recollection  that  they  had  done  so. ■.


381


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


was  no  reproduction  of  boyish  incidents  which  must  have  been  stored
in  Mrs.  R.'s  mind,  and  of  some  of  which,  as  I  know,  she  had  thouglit
much  and  constantly.  Yet  it  is  not  unnatural  that  after  thirteen
years  in  another  world,  if  we  suppose  a  change  from  childhood  to
maturity,  such  boyish  incidents  should  not  be  dominant  in  the  mind  of
the  actual  communicator.

If  we  had  numerous  cases  like  these  two,  and  numerous  cases  like
those  which  follow,  they  would,  when  contrasted,  furnish  an  additional
argument  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  alleged  communicators  are
actually  the  persons  that  they  claim  to  be.

There  are  various  references  in  the  I'ecords  given  in  Appendix  IV.
to  the  twin  children  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  B.  Thaw.  One  of  these,
Margaret,  died  a  year  before  their  first  sitting  at  the  age  of  six
months,  and  the  other,  Ruthie,  died  three  months  before  their  first
sitting  at  the  age  of  fifteen  months.  The  communications  concerning
these  children  were  given  almost  entirely  by  Phinuit,  who  had,  how-
ever, some  difficulty  with  the  names.  At  the  lirst  sitting  several
attempts  were  made  before  the  name  Margaret  was  given  clearly.
Trouble  with  teeth  was  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  children,
apparently  as  the  first  impression  on  the  appearance  of  Margaret,  but
not  actually  specified  as  Margaret's.  Margaret  was  teething  when  she
died.  Phinuit  also  said  that  one  of  the  children  wanted  baby's  beads.
Margaret  used  to  play  with  a  necklace  of  beads  belonging  to  her  older
sister  living.  And  referring  to  Margaret,  Phinuit  said  that  she  had
some  flowers  in  her  hand,  that  "she  liked  them  and  took  them
with  her."  Mrs.  Thaw  had  placed  three  little  flowers  in  Margaret's
hand  after  her  death.  Phinuit  got  much  more  in  connection  with
Ruthie,  whose  first  appearance  seemed  to  be  accompanied  by  a
recurrence  of  associations  connected  with  the  trouble  that  caused  her
death,  dysentery  and  sore  throat.  Phinuit  indicated  the  locality  and
the  distress,  and  Ruthie's  dislike  of  "  the  powder."  Bismuth  was
given  through  the  entire  illness  of  two  weeks  and  was  always
given  with  trouble.  Phinuit  spoke  of  Ruthie  as  having  light  golden
hair,  afterwards  adding  curly; — correct — but  called  her  a  boy.  The
living  Ruthie  was  very  generally  mistaken  for  a  boy,  but  not,  of
course,  by  the  Thaws.  Yet  Phinuit  had  nmch  difficulty  in  getting  the
name,  and  failed  to  get  nearer  than  Ethie,  and  the  sitters  told  him  it
be^an  with  R.  Phinuit  said  that  she  had  not  learned  to  talk,  bub
later  on  he  got  the  name  Ruth-ie  correctly.  He  remarked  that  she
only  said  papa  and  mamma.  Other  words  that  the  living  Ruthie  said
were  given  in  later  sittings.  Phinuit  desciibed  her  as  wanting  to  see
the  stars.  For  two  or  three  months  before  her  death  Ruthie  was  fond
of  pointing  at  the  stars  through  the  window.  At  the  beginning  of
the  sitting  Phinuit  said  she  put  hor  hand  on  Dr.  Thaw's  head,  and


xxxili.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  SS5-


afterwards  described  her  as  wanting  to  pat  his  face,  actions  which
were  characteristic  of  the  living  Ruthie  towards  Dr.  Thaw.  Similarly
she  wanted  to  hear  the  tick  tick  (watch)  in  connection  with  her  uncle
Aleck,  and  it  was  he  who  chiefly  used  to  hold  the  watch  for  her  ta
hear  it.  And  another  characteristic  action  was  reproduced  in  con-
nection with  Mr.  Melvin  W.  ;  Phinuit  said  she  wanted  him  to  wave
the  hand  in  a  certain  way  to  Mr.  W.,  and  the  living  Ruthie  waved
her  hand  in  that  way  to  Mr.  W.,  and  to  him  only.  Reference  was  also
made  to  her  picture,  and  Mrs.  Thaw  was  painting  a  picture  of  Ruthio
when  she  was  taken  ill.  In  later  sittings  Phinuit  described  her  as
saying  other  words,  baby,  pi^etty,  Betti'',  and  pussie,  with  the  accent  used
by  Ruthie  when  living.  These  were  the  only  words  besides  the  p'lpn
and  mamma  mentioned  before,  used  by  Ruthie  when  living.  The  first
time  Mrs.  Thaw  wore  fur  at  a  sitting,  the  hand  stroked  it,  and  Phinuit
whispered  "pussie"  as  Ruthie  living  used  to  do.  But  Ruthie  had
whispered  "  pussie  "  at  a  previous  sitting.  Two  or  three  times  theio
seemed  to  be  a  direct  control  of  the  voice  by  Ruthie  who  took  theplaca
of  Phinuit  (pp.  564,  576,  578).  The  first  time  she  whispered  j'itee  and
pssee  (pretty  and  pussie)  and  the  second  time  ^i!ifee  only,  the  words  bein'^
many  times  repeated.  This  second  occasion  was  connected  with  rather
a  striking  incident.  Mrs.  Piper  was  visiting  the  Thaws  in  iSTew  York,
and  they  took  her  up  the  river  Hudson  to  their  country  house  and  had
a  sitting  on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  of  their  ariival.  I  was  taking
notes,  sitting  sliglitly  to  one  side  and  partly  behind  Mrs.  Piper,  while
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  were  sitting  in  front  of  her,  with  their  heads  some-
what bowed.  Pliinuit  apparently  "left,"  and  his  place  was  taken  by
Ruthie,  who  began  whispering  pitee  pltee.  The  hand  rose  and  turned
somewhat  diagonally  and  extended  the  forefinger  and  pointed  towards
a  picture  on  tlie  far  side  of  the  room.  The  Tliaws  did  not  see  this  action
until  I  drew  their  attention  to  it,  when  they  looked  up,  and  followed  the
direction  of  the  pointing.  The  hand  then  trembled  and  sank.  Dr.
Thaw  noted  :  "  During  the  last  month  of  Ptuthie's  life  it  was  a  regular
morning  custom  to  bring  her  to  the  room  in  which  this  sitting  was
held— our  bedroom — and  she  would  always  point,  as  hand  did  iu
sitting,  with  one  finger  (unusual  with  a  baby)  and  say  '  pt-tee,  pt-tee,''
just  as  in  sitting.  This  little  incident  had  not  been  in  either  sitter's
conscious  mind  since  baby's  death,  six  months  before.  Mrs.  Piper  had
never  been  in  that  room  until  the  actual  time  of  sitting.  Many  other
pictures  in  the  room,  two  of  which  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  could  have
pointed  at  more  easily  than  the  particular  one  always  noticed  by  the
baby."  i

1  Dr.  Thaw  was  a  careful  investiprator,  and  I  have  no  doubt  myself  that  Mrs.
Piper  herself  in  her  normal  state  knew  nothinpr  of  the  room  or  the  incident  of  the-
picture,  but  of  course  I  do  not  offer  an  incident  like  this  by  itself  as  any  proof  of
supernormal  power. Mrs.  Piper  was  a  guest  of  the  Thaws  at  the  time,  and  those


336


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


In  the  two  sittings  which  Mrs.  Sutton  had  in  December,  1893,
(p.  484)  she  had  articles  which  had  been  used  by  her  recently  deceased
little  girl  Katherine.  One  incident  that  was  characteristic  in  the  case
of  Ruthie,  the  patting  of  her  father's  face,  was  repeated  in  the
-case  of  Katherine,  when  it  had  no  special  significance.  There  were
(,)nly  three  points  that  might  be  described  as  in  part  common  to  the
two  children  Ptuthie  and  Katherine.  Katherine  had  "lovely  curls,"
mentioned  by  Phinuit,  and  also  called  for  "  the  tick-tick,"  but  Phinuit
added  cori'ectly  that  she  called  it  "  the  clock,"  and  the  word  babee  was
given  correctly,  as  Ruthie  also  used  to  pronounce  it.  Apparently  the
•only  incorrect  statement  purporting  to  come  from  the  child .  was  that
slie  called  a  lady  (Mrs.  C,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Sutton,  who  purported  to
be  present  in  "spirit,"  bringing  the  child,  and  whose  Christian  name
.and  surname  were  given  correctly  by  Phinuit)  Auntie.  The  lady  was
not  her  aunt.  The  statements  made  came  through  Phinuit.  Concern-
ing a  silver  medal  it  was  said  that  she  wanted  to  bite  it,  and
concerning  a  string  of  buttons  that  she  wanted  to  put  them  in  her
mouth,  both  correct.  Phinuit  said  that  she  had  no  sore  throat  any
more,  and  that  she  kept  showing  him  her  tongue.  Katherine  living
had  sore  throat  and  her  tongue  was  paralysed.  She  gave  correctly  the
name  by  which  she  called  herself,  Kakie,  the  name  Dodo  by  which  she
called  her  brother  George,  the  name  Bagie  by  which  she  called  a  living
•sister,  Margaret,  and  tlie  name,  Eleanor,  of  another  living  sister  for
Avhom  she  called  much  in  her  last  illness.  She  also  asked  for  Dinah,
this  being  the  name  of  an  old  rag-doll.  She  said  truly  that  Dodo
used  to  march  with  her,  "he  put  me  way  up."  She  wanted  to  go
to  "  wide  horsey  " — as  the  living  Katherine  had  pleaded  all  through
Jier  illness,  and  to  be  taken  "  to  see  the  mooley-cow,"  the  name  by
which  the  living  Katherine  called  the  cow,  which  she  was  taken
■almost  daily  to  see.  She  said  she  had  "  the  pretty  white  flowers  you
put  on  me,"  and  Phinuit  described  lilies  of  the  valley,  which  were  the
flowers  that  had  been  placed  in  the  casket,  (see  p.  303).  .  She  said  she
was  happy  with  grandma, — Mrs.  Sutton's  mother  had  been  dead  many
jeai's, — and  later  on  wanted  to  send  her  love  to  her  grandma  and  also
•apparently  to  her  great  grandma  who  was  referred  to  as  Marmie.  She
had  a  grandmother  and  also  a  great  grandmother  then  living,  and

persons  who  are  di  po  ed  to  explain  these  phenomena  by  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  can
readily  suppose  thut  Mrs.  Piper  may  have  acquired  the  information  needed  to  gQ
through  the  scene  descril>ed  above.  Believino;  that  there  is  abundant  proof,  in  this
and  the  previous  records  published,  that  Mrs.  Pi)5er  in  her  trance-state  possesses
supernormal  power  of  a  kind  which  goes  at  least  as  far  as  telepathy  from  distant
livinf?  persons,  and  being  satisfied  myself  otherwise  that  Mrs.  Piper  does  not  hunt  up
information  about  sitters,  I  have,  in  considering  what  hypothesis,  seems  best  to  fit  the
phenomena  as  a  whole,  put  aside  the  question  of  fraud.  I  refer  to  the  subject
occasionally  in  this  way  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding. misunderstandings.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  PlLenoraena  of  Trance.  387


Marmie  was  the  name  by  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sutton  spoke  of  the
great  grandmother,  but  Katheriue  always  called  her  Grammie}  She
also  I'eferred  to  two  songs  she  used  to  sing  :  "  Bye  bye,  O  baby  bye,"
and  "  Eow  Row,  my  song."  This  "  Row  Ptow "  song  was  sung
frequently  by  Katherine  during  her  illness,  and  was  the  last  sung  by
her  when  living,  and  she  asked  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sutton  to  sing  it  at  the
sitting.  They  sang  the  first  four  lines,  and  the  voice — presumably  still
"  controlled  "  by  Piiinuit  in  imitation  of  Katherine — sang  with  them.
Phinuit  then  hushed  the  sitters,  and  the  voice  sang  the  remaining
four  lines  above.  It  is,  of  course,  a  familiar  child's  song  (p.  486).
At  the  second  sitting  a  fortnight  later,  the  voice  sang  all  eight
lines  alone,  then  asked  Mrs.  Sutton  to  sing  it  with  her,  as  she  did,
and  then  at  Mrs.  Sutton's  I'equest  also  sang  with  her  the  other  song
"Bye  bye,"  precisely,  according  to  Mrs  Sutton,  as  the  living  Katherine
sang  it.  Mr.  Sutton,  who  was  present  at  the  first  sitting,  did  not
attend  the  second  sitting,  and  he  was  asked  for  immediately  after  this
singing,  which  came  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting.  "  Kakie  wants
papa."  This  was  a  very  characteristic  expression.  There  were  indi-
cations suffo-esting  a  knowledge  of  what  was  goinir  on  in  Mrs.  Sutton's
family.  At  the  first  sitting  Katherine  said  she  went  "  to  see  horsey  "
evei'y  day.  The  sitters  had  been  staying  in  the  country  with  Mr.
Sutton's  parents  and  had  been  driving  frequently.  Margaret,  a  living
sister,  was  still  there,  and  driving  daily.  Mrs.  Sutton,  who  has  had
many  psychical  experiences  herself  in  seeing  the  "  apparitions "  of
"  deceased  "  persons  (see  p.  484)  had  "  seen  Kakie  "  during  that  visit  to
Mr.  Sutton's  parents.  At  the  second  sitting  Katherine  said  that  she
saw  Bagie  with  grandma,  and  that  she  played  with  Eleanor  every  day
and  liked  the  little  bed.  A  lady  had  recently  lent  Eleanor  a  doll's
bed,  but  Mrs.  Sutton  had  not  associated  this  with  Kakie.  There  were
incidents  at  both  sittings  v/hich  showed  associations  that  seemed  to
be  in  the  mind  of  the  child,  which  did  not  awaken  the  corresponding
associations  in  t^  minds  of  the  sitters  even  when  the  contemporary
notes  to  the  sittings  were  made.  Thus  in  the  first  sitting  she  asked
for  "horsey."  Mrs.  Sutton  gave  a  little  toy  hor'se  with  which  the
child  had  played  during  her  illness.  But  the  child  said  "  big  horsey,
not  this  little  one,"  and  Mrs.  Sutton  surmised  that  she  referred  to
another  toy  cart-horse  that  she  used  to  like.  At  the  second  sitting
came  "  Kakie  wants  the  horse,"  and  the  little  horse  was  again  given.

No,  that  is  not  the  one.  The  big  horse — so  big.  [Pliinuifc  shows  how
large.]  Eleanor's  horse.  Eleanor  used  to  put  it  in  Kakie's  laj).  She  loved
that  horsey.  • \  •  ....

1  It  scarcely  needs  mentioning  that  this  is  explicable  on  either  of  the  hypotheses
tmder  view.


388


Richard  Hodgson.


These  additional  particulars,  which  were  true,  then  reminded  Mrs.
Sutton  of  tlie  horse  referred  to,  which  was  packed  away  in  another
city,  and  which  liad  not  occurred  to  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Sutton  in
connection  with  Kakie.  Similarly  at  the  first  sitting  she  asked  two
or  three  times  for  "the  little  book."  The  sitter  noted  that  she  liked  a
linen  picture-book.  But  the  remarks  made  at  her  second  sitting
suggest  tliat  the  little  book  in  the  child's  mind  was  not  this  one.

CO

"Kakie  wants  tlie  little  bit  of  a  book  mamma  read  by  her  bedside,
with  the  pretty  bright  things  hanging  from  it — -mamma  put  it  in  her
hands — tlie  last  thing  she  remembers."  Mrs.  Sutton  states  that  this
was  a  little  prayer-book  with  a  cross  and  other  symbols-  in  silver
attached  to  ribbons  for  marking  the  places,  and  that  it  was  sent  to
her  by  a  friend  after  Kakie  had  ceased  to  know  anyone  except
perhaps  for  a  passing  moment.  Mrs.  Sutton  read  it  when  Kakie
seemed  unconscious,  and  after  Kakie's  deatlt}  placed  it  in  her  hands  to
prevent  the  blood  settling  in  the  nails.  She  adds  later  that  Mrs.
Piper's  liands  when  the  book  was  asked  for  at  the  sitting,  were  put
into  the  same  position  as  Kakie's.

Another  book  was  mentioned  at  the  second  sitting  which  apparently
was  the  one  Mrs.  Sutton  thought  of  at  the  first  sitting.  '"Kakie  wants
the  book  with  red  letters  and  pictures  of  animals."  Correct  description.

At  this  second  sitting  also  Katherine  again  apparently  referred  to
Mrs.  C, — who  was  not  a  relative, — as  Auntie,  and  to  her  great
grandmother  as  Marinie.  At  this  sitting  Mrs.  Sutton  twice  saw  the
"apparition"  of  Kakie  (and  she  also  saw  the  figure  of  Dr.  Clarke,
another  communicator,  just  as  Phinuit  said  :  "  Here  is  an  old
gentleman  wdio  wa.nts  to  speak  to  you.  Dr.  Clarke,"  see  p.  48-1).  On
one  of  these  occasions  Mrs.  Sutton  "  saw  her  for  a  moment,  standing
at  the  table,  trying  to  reach  a  spool"  of  silk,  and  at  the  same  moment
Phinuit  reached  for  it  saying :  "  She  wants  that,  she  and  Eleanor  used
to  play  with.  She  calls  it  Eleanor's."  This  was  all  true,  but  the  sitter
"  had  not  connected  it  with  Eleanor  in  her  thoughts."  Another  incident
I  quote  here  just  as  it  is  given  in  the  detailed  report  of  the  sitting.

[Kakie  asks  for  her  ball.  I  gave  it  to  Phinuit,  who  tries  to  find  what
she  wants  to  do  with  it.]

Bite  it  ? Toss  it  1 Roll  it  1 Tln-ow  it  ?

[No,  she  wants  a  string.  Mrs.  H.  gave  liini  a  string.  He  tries  to  tie  it
around  the  ball.]  [A  little  red  wooden  ball  with  a  hole  througli  it.  The
ball  had  a  string  through  it  when  she  used  to  ^jlay  with  it.]

No,  that  is  not  right,  thr(nigh  it.

There,  there,  be  a  good  little  girl.  Don't  cry.  Don't  be  impatient,  you
want  your  mamma  to  see  how  you  do  it,  so  she  will  know  it  is  you,  don't
you,  dear  1 Old  man  will  do  it  for  her.

ilf  the  hinnnn  persoiia'ity  survives  death,  it  may  be  a  difficult  question  to  decide  in
individual  cases  precisely  when  the  consciousness  is  finally  withdrawn  from  the  body.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  SS9


[lie  put  the  string  through,  held  it  up,  and  hit  it  with  the  finger,  making:
it  swing.]

That  is  it,  is  it  not,  darling.  ? Nice  little  girl  as  ever  was.

[While  slie  was  sick,  it  was  Jier  great  delight  to  have  me  hold  the  string,
and  let  her  hit  the  little  red  ball  with  lier  finger  or  spoon.  She  made  the
motions  as  if  doing  it,  after  she  became  unconscious.]

Mrs.  Sutton  had  some  brief  communications  also  from  other  friends
and  relatives.  One  from  a  deceased  friend  Hattie  she  thought  not  in
the  least  like  Hattie.  And  there  was  much  apparently  painful  ellbrt
and  confusion  and  agitation  in  writing  at  both  sittings  from  another

o  o  o

communicator  through  whom  an  attempt  was  made  unsuccessfully  to
get  a  certain  address  ;  yet  Pliinuit  correctly  specified  where  the  person
was  born  and  where  he  died,  though  at  the  time  Mrs.  Sutton  believed
both  to  be  wrong.

What  seems  to  me  to  be  suggested  by  the  references  to  theso^
children  in  the  records  is  that,  on  their  first  coming  to  communicate,
the  recollection  of  the  troubles  from  which  they  suffered  when  living
came  to  the  front  in  tlieir  consciousness,  but  tlieir  definite  remem-
brances were  few  in  number.  The  half-a-dozen  words  that  Ruthie
was  represented  as  saying  were  all  that  the  living  Ruthie  had
been  able  to  say,  and  similarly  there  were  only  a  few  characteristic
actions,  and  these  were  naturally  associated  with  the  persons  with
whom  the  living  Ruthie  had  associated  them.  Since  there  were  only
a  few  persons  with  whom  Ruthie  had  any  definite  associations  at  all,
and  since  these  definite  associations  themselves  were  few  in  number,  it
would  make  no  practical  difference  how  much  confused  she  might  be.
These  associations  were  easily  recognised  as  hers.  In  such  cases  alsa
the  wrench  of  death  may  be  less  violent  than  in  more  mature  persons,
and  the  change  from  one  set  of  conditions  to  the  other  may  be  less,
disturbing.  Similarly  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Sutton's  child.  But  here  th&
definite  associations  were  much  more  numerous,  and,  as  I  have  j)ointed
out,  Mrs.  Sutton  apparently  did  not  understand  two  of  the  allusions-
made  at  the  first  sitting.  But  add  another  thirty  or  forty  years  of
life,  with  the  myriads  of  associations  involved,  and  with  the  mind
inured  to  the  habits  of  a  particular  fleshly  organism,  and  then  after  a.
change  to  another  completely  new  set  of  conditions,  draw  the
personality  back  once  more  into  the  bonds  of  another  and  different
body,  where  it  has  little  or  no  control  over  the  mass  of  its  mental
associations,  and  the  result  might  be  expected  to  be  very  different  from
that  of  the  "simple  child  that  lightly  draws  its  breath."

On  the  other  hand  it  may  be  urged  that  such  cases  are  equally
explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transference  from  the  sitters.
We  can  of  course  suppose  that  parents  whose  little  children  have  recently
died  are  good  telepathic  agents  for  the  group  of  associations  connected


390


Hichard  Hodgson.


[part


with  those  children.  But  we  can  see  no  reason  why  they  should  be
better  telepathic  ap;ents,  that  is,  to  Mrs.  Piper's  personality,  than,  say,
a.  wife  who  has  just  lost  her  husband.  I  have  known  cases  of  this  type
where  strong  grief  and  vivid  remembrance  have  served  apparently
to  bring  the  desired  "  communicator,"  but  not  to  make  him  clear.

Let  us  finally  contrast  another  kind  of  failure  with  what  seems  to  be
a.  very  simple  kind  of  success.  I  refer  to  the  naming  of  sitters.  G.  P.
had  the  opportunity,  by  his  frequent  "return,"  of  becoming  expert  in
communicating,  and  was  unusually  clear,  to  begin  with,  in  his  manage-
ment of  the  v/riting  mechanism.  The  ordinary  comuiunicator  has
much  difficulty  in  giving  names  apparently  ;  he  is  like  a  man  half
asleep,  who  only  half  knows  what  you  want,  and  through  whoso  con-
sciousness may  drift  a  mass  of  irrelevant  names  which  tend  to  be
written,  but  which,  if  he  were  in  full  waking  consciousness  living,
M'ould  be  inhibited.  In  very  good  sittings  of  the  old  type,  the  sitter's
surname  was  rarely  given.  What  is  it,  then,  that  in  the  G.  P.
communications  happened  to  give  the  surnames^  of  the  particular
group  of  persons  known  to  G.  P.  ?  AVhat  is  it  that  selected  the  thirty
persons  recognised  as  G.  P.'s  friends  and  knew  their  appropriate
relations  with  G.  P.  living  ?  Why  should  the  supposed  Mrs.  Piper's
telepathic  power  succeed  so  strangely  with  these  G.  P.  recognitions,
and  be  so  failing  and  uncertain  in  the  case  of  so  many  persons  who
happened  to  be  unknown  to  G.  P.  living  ?  What  was  it  that  picked
out  the  odd  associations  of  Marte  and  the  club  with  Mr.  Smith
•(p.  327),  and  yet,  witli  all  this  supposed  telepathic  capacity  failed  to
recognise  Miss  Warner,  who  liad  changed  so  much  that  G.  P.  living
would  probably  not  have  recognised  her,  but  who  knew  well  herself,  as
I  did  also,  that  she  had  met  G.  P.  in  years  gone  by  1  I  think  that
there  is  here  a  strong  indication  pointing  to  the  actual  G.  P.  It
suggests  the  existence  of  something  which  has  the  perceptions  and
memories  of  G.  P.,  but  not  a  genei'al  telepathic  capacity  outside  this.
•Otherwise  we  must  make  some  such  extraordinary  supposition  as
that  all  G.  P.'s  friends  were  good  telepathic  agents  with  Mrs  Piper  as
percipient,  and, — when  we  take  the  detailed  records  into  consideration,
— that  they  sliowed  this  united  telepathic  capacity  only  as  regards
their  relations  with  G.  P.

Now,  as  I  stated  in  §  5  of  this  Report  (p.  367),  I  do  not  think  that
we  have  by  any  means  enough  material  on  hand  to  form  a  positive

1  G.  P.  gave  the  surnames  in  all  cases  where  I  have  not  specified  otherwise,  or
-where  it  was  obviously  not  required,  as  in  the  case  of  his  father  and  mother,  and  the
children  of  the  Howards,  whom  he  called  by  their  first  names  only.  (See  pp.  323-328.)
In  nearly  all  the  other  cases  he  gave  the  first  names  also,  in  all  where  the  first  names
were  familiar  to  G.  P.  living.  In  addition  to  this,  various  other  Christian  names  and
-Surnames  were  given  of  intimate  friends  and  relatives  of  G.  P.  living.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  391


judgment,  though  I  regard  such  cases  as  those  which  I  have  men-
tioned in  iUustration  as  very  strongly  suggestive  of  variations  in  the
individual  communicators  themselves. I  am  not  attempting  to  prove
this  here,  but  only  to  show  that  there  are  facts  which  apparently  point
in  that  direction,  and  to  indicate  lines  of  inquiry  for  future  work  and
for  new  investigators,  who  may  eventually  obtain  enough  material  ta
make  a  positive  conclusion  possible. And  I  must  warn  the  reader  yet
further  that  by  positive  conclusion  I  do  not  mean  absolute  demonstra-
tion to  the  exclusion  of  any  other  hypothesis. There  will  still  be  a^
question  of  presumption  and  probability  which  will  appeal  to  diiferent
minds  diflerently,  as  do  for  example  the  general  conclusions — with
which  I  myself  agree — put  forward  in  the  Report  of  the  "Census  of
Hallucinations"  {Proceedings,  Vol.  X.),  concerning  the  existence  of  a
causal  relation  between  certain  hallucinations  and  dying  persons.  To-
give  the  full  force  of  the  probability  as  it  has  affected  my  own  mind
would  make  the  present  Report  much  too  long,  even  were  all  the
available  material  at  my  disposal,  as  it  is  not. In  a  future  Report,
with  the  accumulation  of  fresh  material,  I  hope  to  undertake  this  task.
It  will  involve  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  general  psychology
of  memory  and  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  mental  automatisms-
manifested in  dream and reverie  and  delirium  and  insanity  and
hypnotic  trance,  and  more  or  less  allied  states,  where  the  manifesta-
tions of  the  personality  concerned  are  different  in  various  ways  and  in
various  degrees  from  those  of  his  normal  waking  consciousness.  After
acquiring  a  familiarity  with  the  tendencies  exhibited  in  such  manifesta-
tions, we  should  then  have  to  consider  in  detail  the  specific  mental
automatisms  displayed  by  groups  of  alleged  communicators  through
the  tran-^,  obtaining,  for  our.  comparison  with  these,  as  complete  a
knowledge  as  possible  of the  alleged  communicators  when  living.
One  man's  madness  is  not  the  same  as  another's. And  a  similar
detailed  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  the  other  classes  of  cases
to  which  I  have  referred. Should  any  other  persons  like  Mrs.  Piper
come  before  us  for  our  investigation,  it  seems  to  me  desirable,  if
possible,  that  the  experimenting  should  be  confined  to  a  few  investi-
gators, who  should  endeavour  to  make  an  absolutely  complete  record
from  the  beginning. As  regards  the  evidence  in  such  cases,  I  am-
convinced  that  it  has  been  dealt  with  altogether  too  much  "in  the
rough." It  is  the  detail  that  counts,  since  it  is  from  the  detail  that
we  get  the  most  important  light  concerning  the  actual  processes^
involved.

AVith  this  caveat,  then,  I  indicate  the  results  to  which  my  own
observations  seem  to  tend.

The  persistent  failures  of  many  communicators  under  vaiying  con-
ditions ;  the  first  failures  of  other  communicators  who  soon  develop-


S92


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


iato  clearness  in  communicating,  and  whose  first  attempts  apparently
can  be  made  much  clearer  by  the  assistance  of  persons  professing  to  be
experienced  communicators ;  the  special  bewilderment,  soon  to  dis-
appear, of  communicators  shortly  after  death  and  apparently  in
consequence  of  it ;  the  character  of  the  specific  mental  automatisms
manifest  in  the  communications ;  the  clearness  of  remembrance  in
little  children  recently  deceased  as  contrasted  with  the  forgetfulness  of
childish  things  shown  by  communicators  who  died  when  children  many
years  before, — all  present  a  definite  relation  to  the  personalities
alleged  to  be  communicating,  and  are  exactly  what  we  should  expect  if
they  are  actually  communicating  under  the  conditions  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  manifestations. The  results  fit  the  claim.

On  the  other  hand  these  are  not  the  results  which  we  should  expect
-on  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living.  That  persons  who
must  be  assumed  on  this  hypothesis  to  be  good  agents  otherwise,  should
fail  continuously  and  repeatedly  with  certain  persons  as  "  com-
municators"; that  first  communicators  of  a  clearer  type  should  show,
•especially  when  themselves  professedly  directly  communicating,  the
peculiar  strangeness  which  they  do  even  to  experienced  agents  who  are
familiar  with  the  modus  operandi  of  the  communication  ;  that  there
should  be  a  special  temporary  bewilderment  shown  in  cases  immediately
after  death  and  that  this  should  be  followed  in  a  few  days  by  a
comparatively  complete  clearness  in  various  cases  where  there  is  no
assignable  change  in  the  agent  (unless  it  were  a  diminution  of  his
telepathic  power) ;  that  there  should  be  sjaecific  mental  automatisms
which  suggest,  not  the  mind  of  the  supposed  agent,  or  the  mind  of  the
supposed  percipient,  but  the  mind  of  the  "deceased"  person;  that
memories  of  little  children  recently  deceased  should  have  a  special
telepathic  agency, — such  results  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  from
what  we  know  or  have  reason  to  surmise  concerning  telepathic  action
between  one  incarnate  living  person  and  another.

Further  there  are  certain  kinds  of  successes  with  particular  com-
municators connected  with  their  knowledge  and  recognition  of  friends,
shown  most  notably  in  the  case  of  G.  P.,  but  exhibited  to  some  extent
by  others  also  {e.g.,  Madame  Elisa  and  Louis  R.)  which  suggest  the
recollections  and  continued  interest  in  personal  friends  living  which
we  should  naturally  expect  from  the  alleged  communicators  themselves,
but  for  which  there  seems  to  be  no  adequate  cause  in  Mrs.  Piper's
percipient  personality.

In  general,  then,  we  may  say  that  there  are  on  the  one  hand
various  limitations  in  the  information  shown  through  Mrs.  Piper's
trance,  which  are  ^:)ri??i^  facie  explicable  on  the  assumption  that  it
comes  from  the  alleged  communicators,  and  for  which  we  can  find  no
•corresponding  limitations  in  the  minds  of  living  persons ;  and  on  the


xxxni.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  393


other  hand,  that  there  are  various  selections  of  information  given  in
connection  with  particular  communicators,  which  are  intelligible  if
regarded  as  made  by  the  alleged  communicators  themselves,  but  for
which  discrimination  there  is  no  satisfactory  explanation  to  be  found
by  referring  them  to  Mrs.  Piper's  personality.  With  one  class  of
duceased  persons  Mrs.  Piper's  supposed  telepathic  percipience  fails  ;
with  another  class  it  succeeds  ;  and  it  fails  and  succeeds  apparently  in
accordance  with  what  we  should  expect  from  the  minds  of  the
deceased,  and  not  in  accordance  with  what  we  should  expect  from  the
minds  of  living  persons  acting  upon  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient  personality.
The  question  is  whether  this  particular  distribution  of  successes  and
failures  is  due  to  mere  chance  coincidence  in  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient
personality,  or  can  be  traced  to  any  adequate  causes  there,  or  whether
it  points  to  the  agency  of  the  invisible  personalities  whom  we  once
knew  incarnate.  My  own  conclusion  is  that  it  points  to  the  latter,
but  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  evidence  enough  producible  to  make
this  pointing  a  certainty.  But,  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  suggests  that  the
natural  grouping  "  of  the  facts  affiliates  them  to  the  personalities  of
the  dead.

Notwithstanding  all  this  it  may  still  be  urged  that  the  hypothesis
of  telepathy  from  the  living  may  be  extended  so  as  to  cover  even  the
various  types  of  cases  illustrated  above.  It  may  be  so  extended  by
making  further  additional  arbitrary  suppositions,  and  what  this  exten-
sion leads  us  to  we  .shall  see  presently.  I  first  recur  briefly  to  some
other  series  of  facts  bearing  on  the  question.

Let  us  go  back  to  what  we  know  of  experimental  thought-
transference,  r  have  supposed,  for  the  sake  of  allowing  as  much
latitude  as  possible  to  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living,  that
the  subliminal  consciousness  of  the  sitters  and  also  of  distant  living
persons  might  be  drawn  upon  by  the  medium.  But  this  itself  is  a
purely  arbitrary  supposition,  and  as  Professor  Lodge  emphasised  in
his  report  on  Mrs.  Piper  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  4.5.3),  '■'  it  ought
to  be  constantly  borne  in  mind  that  this  kind  cf  thought-transference
Avithout  consciously  active  agency  has  never  been  experimentally
proved."  Now,  so  far  as  I  can  judge  from  my  own  experience  as
a,  sitter,  and  from  the  experience  of  other  sitlers,  without  any
statistical  record, ^  I  should  say  that  if  we  exclude  the  bringing  of
the  communicator,  the  results,  as  regards  the  giving  of  specific
information,  would  prove  conclusively  that  the  information  was  not

1 1  mean  by  this  a  record  in  which  the  successes  and  failures  are  classified  in
relation  to  what  the  sitter  was  consciously  thinking  of  at  the  time.  It  will,  however,
I  think,  be  plain  to  any  reader  of  the  reports  that  neither  the  successes  nor  the
f  .:ilures  in  regard  to  the  general  information  given  at  sittings  show  any  direct  relation
to  the  conscious  m.nds  of  the  sitters.


394


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


obtained  by  a  process  like  that  involved  in  experimental  thought-
transference,  and  that  for  the  kind  of  telepathy,  if  telepathy  it  be,
involved  in  these  manifestations  there  is  no  experimental  basis
whatever.  At  the  same  time,  if  the  information  given  at  the  sittings,
both  in  matter  and  form,  was  limited  by  the  knowledge  possessed  by
the  sitters,  we  should  have  no  hesitation  in  supposing  that  it  was
derived  from  their  minds,  telepathically  or  otherwise  ;  but  enough
examples  are  cited  in  this  report  alone  to  show  that  the  information
given  is  not  so  limited.  We  must  then  make  the  arbitrary  supposi-
tions that  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient  personality  gets  into  relation  with
the  minds  of  distant  living  persons,  (1)  who  are  intimate  friends  of
the  sitters  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  (e.g.,  p.  297,  Hart's  sitting  and
references  to  the  studs  and  the  Howards,  etc.),  and  (2)  who  are
scarcely  known,  or  not  at  all  known,  to  the  sitter  (eg.,  MacDonough
messages  p.  340,  and  Aleck  Bousser  message,  p.  372).  And  many  of
these  distant  livi)ig  persons  had,  so  far  as  they  knew,  never  been  near
Mrs.  Piper.  These  cases  then  compel  us  to  assume  a  selective  capacity
in  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient  personality,  and  not  only  selective  as  to  the'
occurrences  themselves,  but  discriminative  as  to  the  related  persons
that  is  to  say,  attaching  the  various  pieces  of  knowledge  respectively
to  the  fictitious  personalities  whom,  if  real  and  living,  the  events  in
question  would  have  concerned.  If  now  we  widen  this  supposed
percipient  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  differentiate  its  parts  so  as
to  cover  all  the  various  successes  of  the  communicators  described  in
this  report,  with  the  verisimilitudes  of  the  different  personalities  of
the  "deceased,"  and  so  as  to  cover  also  all  the  types  of  confusion  and
failure,  and  so  as  to  allow  for  the  yet  increasing  number  of  new
communicators,  we  reach  a  conception  which  goes  as  far  as  the
"  spirit "  hypothesis  itself.

And  I  may  add  here  that  these  arbitrary  suppositions  may  he
increased  yet  further  to  cover  other  forms  of  evidence  tliat  may  be
obtained  hereafter,  such  as  the  giving  of  infoi-mation  supposed  to  be
possessed  by  the  dead  alone,  or  the  manifestation  of  knowledge  not
yet  acquired  by  the  human  race,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  such  as  the
existence  of  heavenly  bodies  previously  unknown  or  the  customs  of
the  inhabitants  of  other  planets, — verified,  let  us  assume,  in  future
years.  All  that  we  need  suppose  in  such  cases  would  be  that  the  facts
known  consciously  to  the  dead  alone  were  communicated  by  them-
when  living  telepathically  to  the  subliminal  consciousnesses  of  other-
persons,  that  the  giver  of  knowledge  concerning  the  heavenly  bodies
obtained  it  clairvoyantly,  and  so  on.

But  I  have  supposed  that  the  personality  of  Mrs,  Piper  exhibit*
numerous  individually  coherent  but  different  fragments  of  conscious-
ness, and  in  my  own  practice)  experience  I  have  reached  conclusions


XXXIII ] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  395


as  to  the  (^itasi-independence  of  the  apparent  communicators  which  1
cannot  expect  all  my  readers  to  share.  I  accommodate  my  supposition,
therefore,  to  conform  with  the  conclusion  to  which  I  believe  that  all
persons  would  come  concerning  the  manifestations  through  Mrs.
Piper's  trance,  if  they  could  witness  a  series  of  sittings  and  observe  tho
two  contemporaneous  "  controls  "  of  the  hand  and  the  voice.  I  put
aside  the  cases  where  both  hands  have  written  independently  at  tlis
same  time  that  the  voice  was  independently  speaking,  these  cases  being
too  few  to  rely  upon  as  evidence  (see  p.  294).  But  there  has  been  an
independence  between  the  streams  of  consciousness  using  respectively
the  hand  and  voice  which  compels  us  to  suppose  that  there  are  at  least
two  distinctly  dilferent  and  individually  coherent  intelligent  conscious-
nesses of  some  kind  manifesting  themselves  contemporaneously  through
Mrs.  Piper's  organism.  I  believe,  also,  that  the  observer  of  Mrs.
Piper's  phenomena  in  detail  would  have,  further,  no  doubt  but  that
neither  of  these  consciousnesses  is  identical  with  that  of  the  normal
waking  Mrs.  Piper.  This  at  least  dual  consciousness,  acting  indepen-
dently of  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper,  must  be  taken  into  full  consideration,
though  we  may  suppose  here  that  the  two  streams  of  it  represent  only
divided  parts  of  iMrs.  Piper's  personality.  These  two  intelligent
fragments,  we  may  suppose,  do  all  the  acting ;  they  get  impressions
telepathically  from  the  minds  of  the  sitters  and  of  distant  living
persons,  they  form  conceptions  of  the  alleged  communicators,  they
dramatise  the  results  and  present  them  with  the  completeness  that
is  shown  at  the  sittings.  "We  may  even  go  further  in  our  sup-
position and  contemplate  the  manifestations  as  the  result  of  a
single  consciousness  playing  all  the  parts  as  described.  To  realise^
what  such  a  consciousness  implies,  we  must  bring  before  our  thought
the  fulness  of  knowledge  shown  continuously  through  Mrs.  Piper's,
trance  by  so  many  alleged  communicators,  the  varying  ways  in  which
that  consciousness  has  manifested  itself  in  accordance  with  the  minds
of  such  communicators,  the  completeness  of  the  personalities  repre-
sented in  many  cases,  and  the  confusions  and  failures  of  others,  all
conforming  to  what  we  should  expect  from  such  communicators,  if
actually  existing  as  they  describe  themselves  to  be,  showing  a  dis-
criminative diversity  of  telepathic  power  which  exactly  suits  the
respective  communicators,  manifesting  emotional  remembrances  and
desires  and  intelligence  characteristic  of  the  alleged  communicators,
and  urging  further  towards  higher  aspiration  and  noble  deed,  and
constantly  affirming  their  independent  existence.

What  kind  of  a  consciousness  is  this  that  we  must  suppose,  and  to
Avhose  domain  must  it  be  attributed  1  According  to  our  outlook  upon
the  universe,  one  hypothesis  will  appear  more  plausible  than  another'.
In  my  own  case  my  conclusions  have  been  largely  determined,  no

2  D


396


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


doubt,  by  intimate  actual  experience  of  the  manifestations  and  a
knowledge  in  detail  of  nearly  all  the  personal  and  private  matters
that  cannot  appear  in  the  evidential  record.  There  may  be  many
persons  who  are  willing  to  take  the  evidence  here  presented  and
give  it  due  weight,  and  Avho  nevertheless  will  adopt  some  such  view
as  that  a  form  of  Consciousness  manifests  itself  through  Mrs.  Piper's
entranced  organism,  in  which  Consciousness  the  "pseudo-personalities"
of  our  "  deceased  "  friends  appear,  and  grow,  and  behave  in  all
discernible  ways  as  their  actual  personalities  might  be  expected  to
behave  if  existing  independently  and  confined,  in  their  communications
to  us,  to  the  manifestations  possible  through  such  a  limited  organism.
Such  a  form  of  Coiisciousness,  with  all  the  capacities  that  must  be
attributed  to  it,  is  very  much  an  "unknown  quantity."  For  myself,  I
do  not  object  to  calling  this  unknown  quantity  a  large  Consciousness,
but  it  seems  to  me  simpler  to  call  it  another  world  than  to  call  it  the
secondary  personali/.y  of  Mrs.  Pi-per.

But  this  is  not  all.  And  here  I  must  again  state  my  conclusion  as  a
result  of  practical  experience,  which  will  however,  I  have  no  doubt,  be
confirmed  by  all  those  who  have  had  much  to  do  with  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  or  similar  manifestations.  If  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from
the  living  is  acted  upon  in  anything  like  the  ordinary  experimental
way,  the  supernormal  i-esults  will  be  lessened.  If  the  investigator
persistently  refuses  to  regard  the  communications  as  coining  from  the
sources  claimed,  he  will  not  get  the  best  results.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
he  acts  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  communicators  are  "spirits,"  acting
under  adverse  conditions,  and  if  he  treats  them  as  he  would  a  living
person  in  a  similar  state,  he  will  find  an  improvement  in  the
communications.  I  have  several  times  got  better  results  alone  from
communicators  who  were  strangers  to  me,  than  the  intimate  friends  or
relatives  were  able  to  get,  and  including  information  unknown  to  me.
To  describe  it  as  it  appears,  the  "spirit  "  in  the  attempt  to  communi-
cate seemed  like  a  living  friend  wandering  in  his  mind  owing  to  an
accident.  To  clear  such  a  person's  mind  we  should  soothe  him,  not
bother  him  with  questions,  but  let  him  unburden  his  mind  of  whatever
his  dominant  ideas  were,  remind  him  of  strong  associations  that
were  dear  to  him,  express  sympathy,  etc.,  etc. ;  but  to  ask  him  one
question  after  another,  to  put  him  through  a  cross-examination  and
expect  him  to  have  all  the  answers  ready  at  once,  would  obviously
not  be  conducive  to  anytliing  but  a  worse  confusion.  And  having
tried  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living  for  several  years,
and  the  "  spirit "  hypothesis  also  for  several  years,  I  have  no
hesitation  in  affirming  with  the  most  absolute  assurance  that  the
"  spirit "  hypothesis  is  justified  by  its  fruits,  and  the  other  liypothesis
is  not.  -  .  ■


i


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  397


Here  I  may  explain  more  specifically  than  I  have  hitherto  done
what  seems  actually  to  occur  during  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  First,  I
must  ask  the  reader  to  revert  to  what  I  have  said  on  pp.  332-3  con-
cerning the  position  of  the  communicator,  and  on  pp.  358-60  concerning
the  supposititious  fragments  of  Mrs.  Piper's  personality.  And  I  repeat
that  I  believe  that  this  brief  general  account  of  the  manifestations  of
Mrs.  Piper's  organism  holds  true  in  the  main,  even  if  we  regard  the
different  alleged  communicators  as  parts  not  of  a  unique  larger  con-
sciousness, but  of  a  consciousness  limited  in  most  ways  like  our  own,
a  merely  human,  though  peculiar,  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper.
I  shall  use  terms  as  far  as  possible  which  are  familiar  to  the  readers
of  our  Proceedings,  even  although  they  may  not  be  strictly  accurate  in
their  application  ;  they  will  probably  convey  my  meaning  better  than
if  I  adopt  a  new  terminology.

When  Mrs.  Piper  begins  to  pass  into  trance,  her  normal  or  supra-
liminal consciousness  begins  to  disappear,  and  her  subliminal  conscious-
ness begins  to  manifest  itself.  It  is  as  though  her  supraliminal
consciousness  was  sinking,  and  her  subliminal  consciousness  was  rising.
There  is  one  stage  where  the  subliminal  consciousness  seems  to
come  into  view  before  the  supraliminal  consciousness  has  completely
disappeared.  In  this  stage  she  is  apparently  dreamily  conscious  of  the
sitter,  and  dreamily  conscious  of  "  spirits."  She  seems  to  be  partly
conscious,  as  it  were,  of  two  worlds.  This  stage,  as  she  passes  into
trance,  is  usually  very  brief  and  changing.  She  sees  figures  and  hears
voices  before  she  has  completely  lost  her  consciousness  of  her  ordinary
physical  surroundings ;  as  is  indicated  by  her  appearance  and  her
occasional  remarks  to  the  sitters,  or  to  the  "persons"  that  she
apparently  sees  or  hears.  In  the  next  stage  the  supraliminal  con-
sciousness has  entirely  disappeared,  and  the  subliminal  consciousness
only  is  manifest.  It  is  as  though  her  own  personality  held  much
the  same  relation  to  her  organism  as  Phinuit  or  other  "spirit"
controller  of  the  voice.  This  stage  also  is  very  brief  as  she  passes  %nto
trance,  but  occasionally  it  lasts  somewhat  longer  than  usual,  and  she
repeats  a  remark  addressed  to  her  by  some  "spirit,"  or  makes  a  remai-k
herself  to  a  "spirit."  She  seems  then  to  possess,  not  the  dreamy
consciousness  of  the  previous  stage,  partly  aware  of  two  worlds  and
in  a  dream-like  relation  to  both,  but  a  fuller  and  clearer  consciousness
— we  may  call  it  her  subliminal  consciousness — which  is  in  direct
relation,  however,  not  so  much  with  our  ordinary  physical  world  as
with  "another  world."  In  the  next  stage  this  consciousness  also
disappears ;  it  seems  to  be  withdrawn  from  any  direct  governance  of
her  body,  the  upper  part  of  which  becomes  inert  and  apparently
lifeless.  What  I  believe  happens  is  that  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  or  supra-
liminal consciousness  becomes  in  some  way  dormant,  and  that  her

2  D  2


398


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


subliminal  consciousness  withdraws  completely  from  the  control  of  her
Ijody  and  takes  her  supraliminal  consciousness  with  it.  Whether  this
is  the  true  explanation  or  not,  the  body  seems  to  be  no  longer  under
the  control  of  any  consciousness.  The  upper  part  of  her  body  tends  to
fall  forward,  and  I  support  the  head  upon  cushions  on  a  table.  About
this  time,  or  shortly  afterwards,  there  arises  a  very  slight  disturbance
in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  which  becomes  less  inert  and  which
appears  to  have  come  to  some  extent  under  the  "  control "  of  some
consciousness,  and  at  the  same  time,  or  frequently  earlier,  some-
times before  Mrs.  Piper's  consciousness  has  completely  disappeared,
sometimes  before  even  her  supraliminal  consciousness  has  disappeared,
the  light  hand  and  arm  manifest  a  control  by  what  seems  to
be  another  consciousness  and  begin  to  ]nake  movements  suggesting
writing. 1

The  upper  part  of  the  body  including  the  left  arm  is  then  usually
controlled  by  one  personality  and  the  right  arm  by  another.  For  the
several  years  during  which  the  personality  calling  itself  Phinuit
continued  to  control  the  voice  in  the  trance,  after  the  development  of
the  "automatic  writing,"  the  personalities  controlling  respectively  the
ha7id  and  the  voice  showed  apparently  a  complete  independence.
Whether  "  spirits,"  as  they  assert,  or  not,  Phinuit  and  the  conscious-
ness controlling  the  hand  appeared  to  be  entirely  distinct  from  each
other,  and  frequently  carried  on  separate  and  simultaneous  independent
conversations  with  different  sitters  (see  pp.  292-3).  Since  Phinuit's
"  departure "  (see  p.  409)  the  voice  has  been  used  on  a  few  rare
occasions  only,  and  almost  exclusively  by  communicators  Avho  pur-
ported to  be  relatives  of  the  sitters,  and  who  had  used  the  voice  before
Phinuit's  "  departure."

To  continue  with  my  description,  the  consciousness  controlling  the
hand  holds  a  conversation  with  the  sitter  by  writing,  but,  so  far  as  I
have  been  able  to  ascertain,  it  is  not  directly  conscious  of  the  act  of
ivritinc].  The  writing  seems  to  be  an  automatic  registering  which  is
produced  by  the  nervous  mechanism  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  and  of
which  the  consciousness  communicating  is  as  little  aware  as  the
ordinary  person  talking  into  a  phonograjjhic  mouth-piece  is  aware  of
the  registration  on  the  revolving  cylinder.  The  sense  of  hearing  for
this  consciousness  appears  to  be  in  the  hand,  and  the  sitter  must  talk
to  the  hand  to  be  understood.  I  do  not  profess  to  be  able  to  give
any  satisfactory  explanation  of  some  of  the  processes  which  I  am
describing. What  the  precise  relation  is  between  this  consciousness

1 1  describe  what  occurs  now,  and  not  what  occurred  in  the  earlier  trances  when
Phinuit  "  controlled  "  ;  but  so  far  as  the  hand  is  coucerned,  the  process  is  the  sama
as  when  Phinuit  used  to  manifest.


XS.XIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  399


and  the  movements  of  the  hand  I  do  not  know.  I  do  not  know
whether  or  not  the  motor  centres  of  the  brain  ordinarily  concerned  in
the  movements  of  hand  and  arm  are  in  operation  or  not.  I  inchne  to
think  not,  certainly  not  in  the  ordinary  way.  The  writing  produced
is  very  different  from  Mrs.  Piper's  ordinary  writing;  it  shows  individual
differences,  but  belonging  to  the  same  generic  type  on  the  whole,  with
different  alleged  communicators,  and  does  not  resemble  the  writing  of
those  persons  when  living  any  more  than  it  does  Mrs.  Piper's.^  The
thoughts  that  pass  through  the  consciousness  controlling  the  hand  tend
to  be  written,  and  one  of  the  difficulties  apparently  is  to  prevent  the
writing  out  of  thoughts  which  are  not  intended  for  the  sitter.  Other
*'  indirect  communicators  "  frequently  purport  to  be  present,  and  the
"consciousness  of  the  hand"  listens  to  them  with  the  hand  as  though
they  were  close  by,  as  it  listens  to  the  sitters,  presenting  the  palm  of
the  hand,  held  in  slightly  different  positions  for  the  purpose  by
different  "direct  comraunicatoi'S,"  so  as  to  bring  usually  the  region  of
the  junction  between  the  little  finger  and  the  palm  towards  the  mouth
of  the  sitter.  The  writing  at  its  best  is  liable  to  include  occasionally
remarks  not  intended  to  be  written,  words  apparently  addressed  by  an
"  indirect  communicator  "  to  the  consciousness  of  the  hand,  or  by  the
consciousness  of  the  hand  to  an  "  indirect  communicator,"  or  by
"  indirect  communicators "  to  one  another ;  or,  in  worse  cases,  where
the  power  of  inhibition  seems  to  have  been  almost  entirely  wanting,
the  wandering  thoughts  of  the  "  direct  communicator "  were  appar-
ently produced  in  writing  in  incoherent  fragments,  mixed  up  with  his
-attempts  at  replies  to  questions  of  the  sitter,  and  bits  of  conversation,
as  it  were,  between  him  and  other  "  indirect  communicators."  But
there  never  seemed  to  be  any  confusion  between  the  personality  using
the  hand,  whether  this  was  "  clear  "  or  not,  and  the  personality  using
the  voice.

The  behaviour  of  the  hand  during  a  sitting,  not  merely  in  relation
to  the  sitters,  but  in  relation  to  the  one  or  more  "  indirect  communi-
cators," for  whom  some  "  direct  communicator "  professes  to  act  as
amanuensis,  is  not  easily  described  in  words.  It  behaves  at  times
as  though  the  "direct  communicator"  was  holding  a  conversation
with  the  "  indirect  communicators "  (when  sometimes  the  Avriting
mechanism  goes  on  producing  writing  movements  while  the  hand  is
held  in  the  air),  listening  to  them  as  described  above  ;  at  other  times
as  though  one  consciousness  withdrew  from  the  hand  to  make  room  for

1  Miss  R.  (p.  292),  whose  friend  was  apparently  the  first  to  write  at  all,  using  the
hand  while  "  controlling  "  the  body  generally,  and  also  using  the  hand  while  Phinuit
was  controlling  the  voice,  has  shown  me  some  of  this  early  writing  and  some  writing
of  her  friend  when  living.  Some  peculiarities  were  common  to  both,  but  not  enough
to  found  an  argument  upon  as  to  the  identity  of  the  communicator.


400


Rlclixurl  Hodgson.


[part


another  ;  at  other  times  as  though  tlie  smlden  arrival  of  another
"indirect  comnumicator "  nearly  ousted  the  "direct  communicator"
from  the  hand ;  and  it  shows  various  other  intelligent  relations.  The
communicators  themselves  do  not  profess  to  know  precisely  what
occurs  between  the  thinking  of  their  thoughts  and  the  production  of
the  writing,  or  to  know  even  what  movements  of  the  liand  are  being
produced.

The  statements  of  the  "  communicators  "  as  to  what  occurs  on  the
physical  side  may  be  put  in  brief  general  terms  as  follows.  We  all
have  bodies  composed  of  " luminiferous  ether"  enclosed  in  our  flesh
and  blood  bodies.  The  relation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  etherial  body  to  the
etherial  world,  in  which  the  "communicators"  claim  to  dwell,  is  such
that  a  special  store  of  peculiar  energy  is  accumulated  in  connection  with
her  organism,  and  this  appears  to  them  as  "  a  light."  Mrs  Piper's
etherial  body  is  removed  by  them,  and  lier  ordinary  body  appears  as
a  shell  filled  with  this  "light."  Several  "  communicators  "  may  be  in
contact  with  this  light  at  the  same  time.  There  are  two  chief
"masses"  of  it  in  her  case,  one  in  connection  with  the  head,  the  other
in  connection  with  the  right  arm  and  hand.  Latterly,  that  in  connec-
tion with  the  hand  has  been  "brighter"  than  that  in  connection  with
the  head.  If  the  "  communicator  "  gets  into  contact  with  the  "  light  ""
and  thinks  his  thoughts,  they  tend  to  be  reproduced  by  movements  in
Mrs.  Piper's  organism.  Very  few  can  produce  vocal  effects,  even
when  in  contact  with  the  "light"  of  the  head,  but  practically  all  can
produce  writing  movements  when  in  contact  with  the  "light"  of  the
hand.  Upon  the  amount  and  brightness  of  this  "light,"  cateris
paribus,  the  communications  depend.  When  Mrs.  Piper  is  in  ill-
health,  the  "  light  "  is  feebler,  and  the  communications  tend  to  be  less
coherent.  It  also  gets  used  ujj  during  a  sitting,  and  when  it  gets  dim
there  is  a  tendency  to  incoherence  even  in  otherwise  clear  communi-
cators. In  all  cases,  coming  into  contact  with  this  "  light "  tends  to
produce  bewilderment,  and  if  the  contact  is  continued  too  long,  or  the
"  light "  becomes  very  dim,  the  consciousness  of  the  communicator
tends  to  lapse  completely.

Returning  to  my  own  description  of  what  occurs,  independently  of
such  statements,  there  are  usually  marked  indications,  towards  the  end
of  a  sitting,  of  increasing  weakness  on  the  part  of  the  controlling
consciousness,  and  it  ceases  to  manifest,  withdrawing  apparently  front
any  governance  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  and  leaving  it  in  what
appears  to  be  much  the  same  state  as  immediately  after  what  seemed
to  be  the  complete  disappearance  of  Mrs.  Piper's  consciousness  when
she  was  passing  into  trance.  Once  more  tlie  body  appears  inert  and
lifeless  for  a  short  time,  and  then  Mrs.  Piper's  consciousness  appears  in
the  reverse  order  of  its  disappearance. But  in  passing  out  of  trance.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  401


the  stages  are  usually  of  longer  duration  than  when  she  enters  it.
She  frequently  rejieats  statements  apparently  made  to  her  by  the
"communicators"  while  she  is  in  the  purely  "subliminal"  stage,
as  though  she  was  a  "  spirit "  controlling  her  body  but  not  in  full
possession  of  it,  and,  after  her  supraliminal  consciousness  has  begun
to  surge  up  into  view,  she  frequently  has  visions  apparently  of  the
distant  or  departing  communicators."

There  are  many  questions  that  will  occur  to  the  reader  of  this
short  outline  of  what  seems  to  take  place,  questions  for  most  of  which,
probably,  I  have  at  present  no  answer.  But  it  is  important  that  he
should  remember  constantly,  in  considering  the  value  of  the  resulting
manifestations,  what  the  difliculties  are  under  which  the  communi-
cators labor,  if  they  are  what  they  claim  to  be.  Where  the  "  direct
communicator  "  is  one  who  acts  as  intermediary  owing  to  his  greater
experience  with  the  machine  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  some  of  the
sources  of  confusion  can  be  avoided, — or  rather  lessened  in  degree,
since  we  still  have  to  allow  for  the  sources  of  confusion  in  the  inter-
mediary himself, — but  we  must  add  the  difficulty  that  the  "  indirect
communicator"  has  in  conveying  the  thoughts  that  he  wishes  to
convey  to  the  intermediary  ;  and  this  is  superposed  upon  the  bewilder-
ment produced  in  the  "indirect  communicator"  by  his  relation
to  the  "light."  Then  floods  of  excited  emotion  at  the  presence  of
incarnate  friends,  dominant  ideas  that  disturbed  him  when  he  was
incarnate  himself,  the  desire  to  render  advice  and  assistance  to
other  living  friends  and  relatives,  etc.,  etc.,  all  crowd  upon  his
mind  ;  the  sitter  begins  to  ask  questions  about  matters  having  no
relation  to  what  he  is  thinking  about,  he  gets  more  and  more
bewildered,  more  and  more  comatose,  loses  his  "grasp"  of  the  "light,"
and  drifts  away,  perhaps  to  return  several  times  and  go  through  a
similar  experience.

I  remind  the  reader  again  that  I  am  here  giving  the  conclusions
to  which  I  have  myself  been  led,  and  I  wish  to  emphasise  strongly
certain  points  as  to  the  condition  of  the  "  communicatoi's,"  if  they
are,  as  I  believe,  the  persons  they  claim  to  be.  I  shall  endeavour  to
illustrate  their  position  from  a  somewhat  different  point  of  view,  and
as  briefly  as  possible.

The  physical  world  that  I  know  is  presented  to  me  within  my
consciousness.  I  suppose  that  if  I  could  have  regarded  that  world
during  past  ages  I  should  have  seen,  displayed  therein,  a  gradually
increasing  complexity  of  manifestations  of  such  a  kind  that  I  should
eventually  have  been  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  consciousnesses  like
my  own,  as  regards  their  manifestations  on  this  planet,  have  gradually
been  developed  during  a  very  long  period,  in  connection  with  the
development  of  specific  fleshly  organisms. Analogous  evolutions,  but


402


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


vastly  shortened  in  time,  occur  now  in  connection  with  the  growth
of  individual  human  organisms. In  these  two  main  ways  human
consciousness  has  come  to  manifest  itself  in  my  physical  world  in
connection  with  human  organisms. I  do  not  know  directly  the
consciousnesses  connected  with  these  human  organisms ;  I  know  them
indirectly  through  the  manifestations  of  the  organisms,  and  it  is
through  such  manifestations  alone,  directly  or  indirectly,  that  I  know
tliem.  Putting  aside  for  the  present  any  consideration  of  whether  such
human  consciousness  as  I  believe  thus  to  manifest  itself  can  manifest
itself  directly  in  connection  with  movements  of  inorganic  matter, —
as  alleged  in  relation  to  certain  "  so-called  physical  phenomena  of
spiritualism," — I  may  say  that  human  consciousness,  if  it  manifests
itself  in  my  physical  world,  does  so  primarily  and  with  an  .almost,  if
not  quite,  exclusive  universality,  by  changes  in  a  human  organism.
And  with  changes  of  a  particular  organism  I  come  to  associate  in
my  own  mind  changes  which  I  think  of  symbolically,  as  being  in  a
particular  consciousness  not  my  own. I  observe  also  that  these  other
consciousnesses,  as  I  suppose,  vary  and  cease  and  renew  their  manifesta
tions  in  special  ways,  as  I  infer  from  the  behaviour  of  the  organisms.
There  are  cases  of  accident,  fever,  insanity,  epilepsy,  double  personality,
sleep,  trance,  anassthetisation,  etc. The  manifestations  of  consciousness
under  such  varying  circumstances  present  at  times  very  great  variations
from  the  normal. I  believe  that,  for  all  these  organisms  eventually,
there  comes  a  time  when  consciousness  ceases  entirely  to  manifest  itself
by  changes  therein. When  this  occurs  I  usually  call  the  change  in
the  organism  death.^ If  the  consciousnesses  that  manifested  through
such  organisms  are  still  persisting,  I  should  suppose  that  the  easiest
way  for  them  to  manifest  again  in  my  physical  world  would  be  by
some  such  way  as  they  had  previously  manifested,  by  means  of  a
human  organism. The  ditliculty  would  be  to  obtain  an  organism.  I
cannot  produce  changes  in  other  organisms  directly  as  I  can  in  my
own;  neither  can  I,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  produce,  directly,
changes  in  the  consciousnesses  which  I  suppose  to  be  connected  with
those  organisms. Occasionally  however  such  effect  seems  to  be  pro-
duced, as  shown  in  the  evidence  for  telepathy,  where  one  human
consciousness  affects  another  without  using  any  assignable  manifesta-
tions of  organisms. I  may  suppose  then  that  if  the  consciousnesses
which  have  ceased  to  manifest  in  what  I  may  call  "  their  own "

1  I  purposely  leave  open  such  questions  as  :  whether  siich  consciousnesses  existed
in  any  individualised  form  or  not  jjrior  to  their  manifestations  to  me  through
organisms  ;  or  whether  the  consciousnesses  which  have  temijorarily  ceased  to  manifest,
but  later  again  manifest,  through  their  own  organisms,  are  or  are  not,  during  the
cessation  of  such  manifestations,  in  a  state  similar  to  that  of  those  whose  organisms
have  died.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  403


organisms,  are  still  existing,  they  may  be  able  to  affect,  in  some  cases
at  least,  and  to  some  extent,  those  which  still  continue  to  manifest
thernselves  through  organisms.  I  should  also  suppose  that,  owing  to
the  fact  that  the  same  general  fundamental  structure,  the  result  of  a
long  process  of  evolution,  is  common  to  human  organisms,  if  any  such
consciousness  could  be  brought  into  a  similar  relation  with  an  organism
not  its  own  that  it  once  had  with  its  own,  it  would  be  able  to  manifest
itself  to  some  extent.  But  its  manifestations  would  be  affected  accord-
ing to  differences  between  that  organism  and  its  own,  and  could  in  no
case  be  precisely  identical  with  those  which  it  showed  with  its  own.
If  I  suppose  such  an  event  to  occur,  I  must  seek  for  analogies,  when
considering  what  results  to  expect,  in  what  occurs  when  the  conscious-
ness of  a  person  I  call  living  fails  to  manifest  in  the  ordinary  way
owing  to  some  incompleteness  of  control  over  its  organism.  Such
incompleteness  is  shown  in  relation  to  states  like  those  which  I  have
indicated  above.  There  may  be  an  inability  to  control  different  parts
of  the  organism,  the  organism  itself  may  be  injured,  or  its  working
may  be  temporarily  disordered  in  a  variety  of  ways.  I  find  further
that  there  may  be  states  of  some  particular  organism,  when  not  only
are  the  manifestations  to  me  of  the  consciousness  connected  therewith
limited  and  disordered  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  but  my  manifesta-
tions to  that  other  consciousness  are  also  limited  in  an  extraordinary
manner,  and  owing  to  certain  deficiencies  which  have  some  direct
relation  to  the  state  of  the  organism  which  I  perceive.  For  example,
that  other  consciousness  may  neither  "see"  my  organism  as  it  usually
does,  nor  "hear"  its  voice  ;  it  may  both  "see"  and  "hear"  and  yet  not
recognise ;  it  may  see  and  hear  and  recognise,  but  yet  be  temporarily
unable  to  recall  its  memories;  it  may  even  be  unable  to  tell  its  name;  it
may  be  entirely  incapable  of  following  and  understanding  the  simplest
questions.  If  I  observe  the  returning  manifestations  of  consciousness
in  an  organism  which  has  ceased  for  some  time  to  manifest  any
consciousness,  as  after  etherisation  or  profound  sleep,  and  which  is
otherwise  not  disordered  in  its  brain,  I  observe  many  differences  with
different  organisms.  In  some  cases  the  consciousness  very  soon
manifests  itself  in  its  ordinary  fulness.  In  other  cases  the  process  of
complete  manifestation  is  very  slow ;  and  in  spite  of  all  my  efforts  to
obtain  some  recognition  of  myself  or  some  replies  to  my  questions,  the
manifestations  continue  for  some  time  to  be  incoherent.  I  may
succeed  in  obtaining  a  partial  recognition,  in  stimulating  the  pro-
duction of  maniestations  which  indicate  glimpses  of  clear  conscious-
ness, but  there  is  often  a  tendency  to  relapse  into  incoherence  and
irrelevancy  of  manifestation  which  indicate  an  almost  complete
want  of  control  on  the  part  of  what  I  call  that  other  conscious-
ness. I  hnd  that this  incoherency  tends  to  persist  until  what  I


40i


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


call  the  waking  stage  begins.  This  in  ordinary  cases  is  apt  to  be
first  accompanied  by  the  manifestation  of  memories  vivid  in  that
consciousness  just  before  it  ceased  to  manifest  through  its  organism,
often  mingled  apparently  with  other  ideas  which  it  seems  to  have
liad  just  before  renewing  its  manifestations.  Slowly  it  seems  to  gain
control  over  its  recollections,  to  be  able  to  disentangle  this  from
that,  to  realise  the  surroundings  of  its  organism,  to  understand  the
questions  to  which  it  has  been  responding  by  vaiious  kinds  of  irrele-
vant manifestations,  and  to  become  finally  "normal"  and  "awake."
The  relation  of  the  consciousness  to  its  organism  in  the  preceding
stage  has  been  such  that  there  has  been  apparently  a  confusion  of
comprehension  of  me,  and  not  merely  a  confusion  of  manifestation  to
me.  I  need  not  extend  these  considerations  into  greater  detail.  In  a
consciousness  beginning  to  manifest  through  its  own  organism  after
a  period  of  cessation  from  manifestation  I  should  expect  certain
deficiencies.  If  for  a  long  time  prior  to  the  cessation  of  its  manifesta-
tions it  had  shown  continual  symptoms  of  disorder,  I  should  exjject
similar  symptoms  to  appear  on  the  first  recurrence  of  its  manifestations.
In  all  cases  I  should  expect  at  first  a  confusion  in  understanding  me,
as  well  as  a  confusion  in  manifesting  to  me.  If  the  cessation  from
manifestation  has  been  very  complete  and  has  lasted  a  very  long  time,
I  should  expect  a  greater  bewilderment,  for  a  short  time  at  least,  when
it  besan  again  to  manifest.  These  deficiencies  and  bewilderments  I
should  expect  to  be  much  more  marked  if  such  a  consciousness,  instead
of  trying  to  manifest  itself  once  more  through  its  own  organism  with
which  it  had  practised  for  years,  were  restricted  for  its  manifestations
to  another  organism.  In  such  an  event  I  should  expect  the  manifesta-
tions to  partake  in  the  first  instance  of  the  same  lack  of  inhibitory
control,  the  same  inability  to  appreciate  my  injunctions  and  questions,
the  same  dreamy  irrelevancy  that  characterises  all  the  manifestations,
in  my  physical  world,  of  a  consciousness  that  has  temporarily  ceased
to  manifest  therein  and  begins  once  more  to  reveal  itself  in  what  I  call
the  waking  state, — varying  in  individual  cases  as  I  find  they  do  in
ordinary  life, — whether  it  be  after  ordinary  sleep,  or  prolonged  coma,
or  aniBsthetisation,  etc. — ^but  with  a  tendency  for  the  incoherency
of  the  manifestations  to  be  much  more  pronounced  inasmuch  as  the
consciousness  is  trying  to  regain  its  wakefulness  towards  me  by  an
unwonted  way.  Whether  such  a  consciousness  could  ever  regain  its
complete  former  fulness  in  my  world  through  another  organism
seems  highly  improbable.  Wliat  I  should  expect  to  find  is  that
through  another  organism  it  could  only  partially  wake.  Hence  I
must  suppose  that  even  the  best  of  direct  "communicators"  through
Mrs.  Piper's  trance  is  jmrtly  asleep.  This  is  the  first  point  I  wish
to  emphasise.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  405-


The  second  point  is  one  that  I  have  already  mentioned  more  than-
once,  but  it  needs  iteratinn;  and  reiteratinsf  to  brino;  it  home  to  th&
reader.  I  have  not  had  enou;:jh  experience  with  different  "  communi-
cators "  using  the  voice  under  circumstances  permitting  of  adequate-
investigation,  to  come  to  any  such  positive  conclusion  as  to  the-
closeness  of  relation  between  the  thoughts  passing  through  the-
"communicator's"  mind  and  the  words  uttered, — as  I  have  been  able-
to  reach  in  the  case  of  the  "  communicators  "  producing  writing.  After-
having  endeavoured  as  best  I  could  to  follow  the  writing  of  thousands,
of  pages,  with  scores  of  different  writers,  after  having  put  many
inquiries  to  the  communicators  themselves,  and  after  having  analysed
numerous  spontaneously  occurring  incidents  of  all  kinds,  I  have  no  sorb
of  doubt  whatever  but  that  the  consciousness  producing  the  writing —
whatever  that  consciousness  be,  whether  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary
personality  or  the  real  communicator  as  alleged, — is  not  conscious  of
mriting,  and  that  the  thoughts  that  pass  through  "  his "  mind
tend  to  be  reproduced  in  writing  by  some  part  of  the  writing
mechanism  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism.  This  writing  mechanism  is-
far  from  perfect,  and  it  frequently  produces  words  that  cannot  be-
read.  This  entails  a  repetition  of  the  word  and  checks  the  thought
of  the  communicator,  already  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  thinking-
his  words  at  the  slow  rate  of  writing,  and  of  excluding  other
thoughts  that  he  does  not  wish  written,  in  a  state  when  he  has.
already  been  steeped  into  a  state  of  partial  sleep  by  coming  into
relation  with  an  organism  not  his  own,  for  the  purpose  of  manifesting-
in  my  physical  world.

But  I  must  draw  this  part  of  my  Report  to  a  close.  I  am  far  from
thinking  that  there  are  no  difficulties  yet  remaining  to  be  solved,
though  many  of  what  were  once  difficulties  to  myself  in  the  way  of
believing  that  these  phenomena  were  the  result  of  the  agency  of
"deceased"  persons  have  been  removed  by  the  fuller  evidence  pre-
sented by  G.  P.  and  other  communicators  acting  directly,  taken  ia
connection  with  the  failures  of  yet  other  classes  of  communicators,  and
all  together  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  considerations  which  I  have-
tried  to  make  clear  to  the  reader  concerning  the  restricting  but
necessary  conditions  of  communication.  What  my  future  beliefs  may
be,  I  do  not  know.  Rontgen  suggested  that  certain  special  effects
produced  in  his  famous  experiments  were  due  to  rays  whose  vibrations:
■were  longitudinal  to  the  path  of  propagation,  but  later  experiments,
have  tended  to  show  that  they  are  due  to  vibrations  of  the  same
general  character  as  those  with  which  we  were  familiar,  but  of  a
higher  order  of  frequency.  And  it  may  be  that  further  experiment
in  the  lines  of  investigation  before  us  may  lead  me  to  change  my
view ;  but  at  the  present  time  I  cannot  profess  to  ha\"e  any  doubt


406


Ilichard  Hodgson.


[PAIIT


but  that  the  chief  "  communicators,"  to  whom  I  have  referred  in
the  foregoing  pages,  are  veritably  the  personalities  that  they  claim
to  be,  that  they  have  survived  the  change  we  call  death,  and  that
t'ley  have  directly  communicated  with  us  whom  we  call  living,  through
Mrs.  Piper's  entranced  organism. There  are  doubtless  many  inci-
dents that  may  seem  inexplicable  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis
which  my  experience  has  compelled  me  to  adopt. I  also  hold  the
general  doctrine  of  Evolution, but  unless  my  memory  deceives  me,
there are many biological incidents which  have  not  yet  been
fully  explained  on  that  theory. What  I  have  said,  so  far,  taken  in
•connection  witli  the  further  detailed  evidence  given  in  the  Appendices,
I'epresents  the  substantial  part  of  my  Report. In  Part  II.  I  shall
■deal  with  various  objections  that  may  be  raised  to  the  views  which  I
have  here  expressed,  and  shall  refer  also  to  some  statements — giving
illustrations — made  by  the  "  communicators  "  concerning  the  writings
and  their  production.  I  shall  also  add  some  accounts  of  other  incidents
which  occurred  chiefly  during  the  period  189G-7,  and  which  go  to
streno'then  t!ie  general  evidence  which  I  have  offered  in  this  Part  of
my  Report,  and  if  there  are  any  notable  inadequacies  or  failures  which
have  come  under  my  own  attention,  and  which  are  not  adduced  by
those  who  differ  with  my  conclusions,  I  shall  endeavour  also  to  give
due  consideration  to  these. By  the  superficial  observer,  especially  if
he  has  not  revised  his  conceptions  of  what  he  should  expect  from  the
^'  returning  dead,"  and  does  not  keep  constantly  before  his  mind  the
■conditions  involved  in  their  returning  through  Mrs.  Piper's  entranced
organism, — the  fragmentary  and  obscure  utterances  of  wliich  he  will
find  so  many  examples  in  the  records,  might  not  unnaturally  be
regarded,  in  the  incipient  stages  of  a  "  spirit's  "  effort  to  communicate,
•as  the  incoherent  output  of  a  disordered  and  disrupting  intelligence;
but  a  closer  analysis  reveals  that  in  many  of  these  the  want  of
coherence  lies  not  primarily  in  the  source  of  the  information,  but
in  the  new  untried  methods  of  its  distribution. Behind  them  is
manifest,  and  grows  more  and  more  manifest,  the suggestion  of
some  larger  knowledge,  the  presence  of  some  persistent  personality
that knew  and  knows  us  well. And  my  main  hope,  as  I  offer
this  Report  to  our  members,  is  that  it  may  be  serviceable  to  other
investigators, — whether  they  a^ree  with  my  views  or  not, — a.s  regards
the  understanding  of  the  conditions  under  which  these  alleged  com-
munications come.

I  shall  now,  before  concluding,  give  a  brief  account  of  the  recent
•changes  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  offer  some  practical  considerations
wliich  seem  to  me  to  be  directly  suggested  by  the  position  which  I
have  taken  in  this  section  of  my  Report.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  497


g  7.  Recent  Changes  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.

If  the  conclusions  to  which  I  have  been  led  concerning  the  real
existence  of  the  personalities  professing  to  manifest  through  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  are  Justi6ed,  certain  very  obvious  inferences  may  be
drawn,  some  of  which  I  shall  now  indicate.  If  "  communicators
vary  in  their  ability  to  use  IVIrs.  Piper's  nervous  mechanism  as  a  means-
of  communication,  it  seems  desirable  that  only  those  who  can  use  it
best  should  be  allowed  to  use  it  at  all.  Again,  those  communicators,
who  were  disordered  in  their  minds  when  living,  should  be  debarred
from  the  use  of  the  mechanism  until,  at  least,  then*  disorder  has  dis-
appeared. If  my  consciousness  were  temporarily  withdrawn  from  my
organism,  and  my  organism  could  be  used  in  the  meantime  by  another
consciousness,  I  should  object  to  its  being  used  by  any  consciousness-
less  moral  and  intelligent  than  my  own.  Also,  if  my  conclusions
hold  that  greater  familiarity  on  the  part  of  the  manifesting  intelli-
gence with  the  use  of  the  mechanism  conduces  to  clearer  communica-
tions, we  are  likely  to  obtain  the  most  satisfactory  explanations
of  the  rationale  of  the  phenomena  so  far  as  they  appear  to  such
communicating  intelligence,  by  encouraging  the  continued  use  of  the
mechanism  by  the  same  operator  until  he  can  express  himself  as  fully
and  freely  as  the  development  of  the  mechanism  appears  to  allow.
If,  further,  the  personalities  concerned  ai'e  actually  "  spirits,"  it  is
desirable  to  obtain  as  operators  such  individuals  as  know  most  about
the  use  of  such  "mediumistic  mechanisms,"  and  about  the  relations
between  the  "  other  world "  and  ours.  The  same  considerations,  of
course,  apply  to  any  other  case  similar  to  Mrs.  Piper's,  and  especially
in  the  early  stages  of  its  development.  If  we  have  a  delicate  proto-
plasmic machine  that  may  conceivably  be  used  as  a  means  of  com-
munication from  "  another  world  "  to  this,  that  is  only  beginning  to  be
used  as  a  machine,  that  is  probably  much  more  complex  and  much
more  delicate  than  any  material  machine  of  man's  invention,  that  may
not  improbably  be  a  machine  in  the  incipient  stages  only  of  its  evolu-
tion, and  the  evolution  of  which  may  be  marred  in  all  kinds  of  ways
by  injudicious  handling — then  I  say  that  we  should  make  the  most
strenuous  efforts  possible  to  put  that  machine  into  the  most  experienced
hands — not  for  the  purpose  of  forcing  it  into  the  production  of
immediate  results,  but  for  the  purpose  of  developing  it  in  the  first
place  into  the  most  perfect  form  of  which  it  is  susceptible.  Certain
lenses  are  ground  for  years  before  they  are  used  in  telescopes.  The
musician  practises  for  a  goodly  portion  of  a  lifetime  before  he  is  a
skilled  performer.  "  Do  you  think  that  I  am  easier  to  be  played  on
than  a  pipe  1 "


408


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Such  considerations  as  these  have  been  forced  upon  me  especially
by  the  advent  of  the  communicating  personalities  professing  to  be  those
whom  W.  Stainton  Moses  when  living  alleged  to  be  the  communicators
through  his  organism.  In  the  summer  of  1895,  when  a  friend  of  mine
was  having  a  series  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  asking  questions
of  G.  P.,  certain  statements  were  made  by  G.  P.  denying  the  so-called
"obsession  by  evil  spirits."  My  friend  referred  to  the  alleged  "Spirit
Teachings  "  published  by  W.  S.  Moses,  and  the  result  of  the  conversa-
tion was  that  later  on  W.  S.  Moses  purported  to  communicate  at  my
friend's  request  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance^.  He  was  confused  and
incoherent, — and  G.  P.  offered  a  warning  to  that  effect.  He  gave
entirely  Avrong  names  in  reply  to  questions  concerning  the  real  identity
of  the  Imperator,  Doctor  and  Rector  mentioned  in  his  "  Spirit
Teachings,"  and  failed  later  in  attempting  to  answer  test-questions
propounded  by  some  of  his  friends.  Later  still,  however,  he  did
furnish  some  private  information  unknown  to  the  sitters,  and  after
wards  verified  in  England,  and  well  adapted  so  far  as  it  went  as  an
indication  of  identity.

I  shall  not  enter  into  detail  concerning  the  professed  appearances
of  W.  S.  Moses  at  later  sittings.  Mrs.  Piper  gave  few  sittings  in
the  winter  of  189d  >,  and  early  in  1896  underwent  a  second  opera-
tion, as  I  have  aire  idy  mentioned,  resuming  her  sittings  in  October
of  that  year.  I  p  nnted  out  to  G.  P.  the  importance  of  making
W.  S.  Moses  "  clear,"  and  getting  the  answers  to  my  test  questions.
The  final  result  was  that  W.  S.  Moses  professed  to  get  the  assis-
tance of  his  former  "controls,"  who  after  communicating  on
various  occasions  directly  in  November  and  December,  1896,  and
January,  1897,  demanded  that  the  control  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "light"
should  be  placed  in  their  hands.  In  other  words,  "  Imperator "
<:laimed  that  the  indiscriminate  experimenting  with  Mrs.  Piper's
organism  should  stop,  that  it  was  a  "  battered  and  worn  "  machine,
and  needed  much  repairing ;  that  "  he  "  with  his  "  assistants,"
"Doctor,"  "Rector,"  &c.,  would  repair  it  as  far  as  possible,  and  that
in  the  meantime  other  jjersons  must  be  kept  away.  I  then  for  the
first  time  explained  to  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  about  W.  S.  Moses
and  his  alleged  relation  to  "Imperator,"  and  she  was  willing  to  follow
my  advice  and  try  this  new  experiment, — to  which,  I  may  say,  I  was
repeatedly  and  emphatically  urged  by  the  communicating  G.  P.  I
■explained  at  t!ie  following  sitting  to  "Imperator"  that  the  medium
and  myself  agreed  to  the  change.  Much  of  what  followed  later  was
personal  and  non-evidential. It  was  stated  that  there  were  many

1  A  more  detailed  account  of  this  incident  given  by  my  friend  himself,  will  ba
published  in  Part  II.  of  ray  Report.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  409


difficulties  in  the  way  of  clear  communication,  due  chiefly  to  the  fact
that  so  many  inferior  and  perturbed  communicators  had  been  using  the
machine.  Phinuit's  last  appearance  was  on  January  26th,  1897.  Later
on,  other  alleged  •''  communicators "  were  specitled  as  persons  who
would  not  injure  the  "light,"  in  addition  to  what  I  might  call  W.  S.
Moses's  group,  and  various  persons  who  have  had  sittings  in  previous
years  with  Mrs.  Piper  had  opportunities  of  being  present,  and  some
new  sitters  also.  Those  who  had  sittings  in  previous  years  and  who
have  been  present  since  the  change  which  I  have  described,  were  all
struck  by  the  improvement  in  the  clearness  and  coherence  of  the
communications  from  their  "deceased"  friends.  Most  remarkable  has
been  the  change  in  Mrs.  Piper  herself,  in  her  genei*al  feeling  of  well-
being,  and  in  her  manner  of  passing  into  trance.  Instead  of  the  some-
what violent  contortions  which  she  was  apt  to  show  in  earlier  years
when  Phinuit  "controlled,"  she  passes  into  trance  calmly,  easily,
gently,  and  whereas  there  used  to  be  frequently  indications  of
dislike  and  shrinking  when  she  was  losing  consciousness,  the
reverse  is  now  the  case ;  she  seems  rather  to  rejoice  at  her
"  departure,"  and  to  be  in  the  first  instance  depressed  and  disappointed
when,  after  the  trance  is  over,  she  "  comes  to  herself  "  once  more  in
this  "  dark  world  "  of  ours,  and  realises  her  physical  surroundings.
Various  attempts  by  these  new  "controls"  to  describe  contemporaneous
incidents  occurring  elsewhere  in  this  world  have  been  notable  failures.
On  the  other  hand  there  have  been  a  few  cases  under  this  regime
where  opportunity  has  been  given  for  tests  purporting  to  come  from
recently  "deceased"  persons.  And  in  these  cases,  so  far  as  I  can
judge,  and  so  far  as  the  incidents  go,  the  results  as  a  whole  have  been
much  clearer  and  more  coherent  than  they  were  in  similar  cases
formerly.  "Imperator"  occasionally  purported  to  produce  the  writing,
not,  however,  as  amanuensis  for  any  other  person,  and  seemed  to  be
free,  in  a  way  that  no  other  communicator  was  free,  from  "  writing  "
the  disturbing  thoughts  of  other  communicators.  The  chief  amanuensis
now  purports  to  be  "  Rector."  G.  P.  would  occasionally  write  a
little,  making  some  personal  inquiries,  etc.  It  has  been  stated
repeatedly  that  the  "  channel  is  not  yet  clear,"  that  the  machine
is  still  in  process  of  repair ;  and  it  has  been  prophesied  that  I
shall  myself  return  eventually  to  America  and  spend  several  years
further  in  the  investigation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  that  more
remarkable  evidence  of  identity  will  be  given  than  any  heretofore
obtained.  I  hope  that  this  prophecy  may  be  realised  and  that
I  may  be  able  to  present  such  additional  evidence  in  some  future
Report.

In  my  own  view,  whether  this  particular  experiment  succeeds  or
not,  it  is  obviously  the  right  kind  of  experiment.


410


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


We  do  not  regard  it  as  useless  employment  to  seek  for  the  best
conditions  possible  in,  say,  ordinary  thought-transference  experiments.
If  the  percipient  fails  when  sitting  in  an  uncomfortable  position,  or  in
a  foul  atmosphere,  or  when  disturbed  by  frequent  noises,  or  by  the
constant  interruption  of  his  thoughts  by  the  I'emarks  of  persons
present,  or  by  continual  change  of  the  class  of  object  selected  for
experiment,  or  after  much  exhaustion,  we  should  scarcely  think  it  wise
to  insist  on  one  or  other  of  these  conditions,  nor  should  we  infer  that
the  failing  percipient  was  a  person  telepathically  insensitive.  By
removing  these  interfering  conditions  as  far  as  possible,  we  may
succeed  in  getting  remarkable  results.  The  case  is  sufficiently  analogous
to  that  of  the  supposed  communicator  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.
As  a  conclusion  from  prolonged  and  varied  experience  I  have,  as  I
believe,  ascertained  that  the  confusions  and  incoherencies  of  the  sup-
posed communicator,  while  partly  due  to  its  own  peculiar  state  or
make-up,  are  partly  due  to  various  other  causes  which  are,  more  or
less,  removable, — and  where  not  altogether  removable,  the  incoherent
results  of  them,  when  the  causes  are  understood,  become  more  in-
telligible. This  is  rather  fact  than  theory,  and  is  true  whatever  theory
we  adopt  about  the  communicator, — ^whether  we  regard  it  as  a  mani-
festation of  Mrs.  Piper's  personality,  or  of  some  other  intelligence.
Among  these  other  causes  of  confusion  is  the  physical  weakness  of  Mrs.
Piper's  organism  during  the  trance,  whether  this  prevails  througliout
the  sitting  owing  to  Mrs.  Piper's  ill-health,  or  whether  it  becomes
manifest  only  in  the  latter  part  of  the  trance,  owing  to  the  growing
exhaustion  consequent  upon  her  loss  of  energy  during  the  trance.  I
speak  of  "  weakness "  and  "  loss  of  energy."  What  it  is  that  gets
used  up  during  the  trance  I  do  not  definitely  know,  bub  that  there  is
something  that  does  get  used  up,  that  represents  directly  or  indirectly
some  peculiar  form  of  energy,  that  when  this  is  abundant  the  commu-
nications are  clearer,  and  that  when,  cceteris  2^^^11118,  it  approaches
exhaustion,  the  communications  become  obscure  and  even  absolutely
incoherent,^  I  have  no  doubt.

Another  cause  of  perturbation  in  the  directly  communicating
intelligence  is  the  presence  of  other  intelligences — other  tlian  those  of
which  the  sitters  are  directly  and  consciously  aware  as  users  of  the
hand  or  voice.  (These  other  intelligences,  of  course,  purport  to  be
"  spirits,"  but  I  believe,  and  once  more  repeat,  to  avoid  misunderstand-
ings, that  my  conclusions  as  to  conditions  hold  good  whatever  these
intelligences  are.)  They  frequently — whether  in  a  way  unknown  to  us,
and  which  may  be  telepathic,  or  by  processes  in  the  medium's  mentation

1  lu  other  words,  the  consoiousness  manifesting  itself  is,  from  the  point  of  view
of  its  manifestations  to  me,  lapsing  into  complete  sleep.


xxxrn.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  411


like  those  of  the  association  of  ideas— inject  their  more  or  less  irrelevant-
thoughts  or  words  into  tlie  writing  or  speech  of  the  directly  com-
municating intelligence.  This  in  actual  practice,  whatever  the  real
explanation  may  be,  can  be  largely  prevented  by  a  strong  appeal  to
those  other  intelligences  to  keep  away  and  to  keep  others  away,  and
to  allow  the  then  and  there  communicator  to  express  what  he  has  to
say  v/ithout  interruption.  Phinuit,  for  example,  claims  to  have  done^
much  work,  while  the  hand  has  been  used  for  writing,  in  keeping  back,,
so  to  speak,  various  other  would-be  communicators.  Interruptions,
nevertheless,  were  frequent  enough  until  the  advent  of  the  group
connected  with  "W.  Stainton  Moses,"  and  the  establishment  of  their
supervision.  Whatever  else  has  been  done,  it  seems  to  rae  that  one
result  of  this  change  has  been  to  make  the  way  clearer,  and  free  from
interruptions  and  from  the  admixture  of  apparently  foreign  elements-
that  prevailed  so  largely  in  earlier  sittings.  The  new  "controls"'
claim  to  have  both  the  desire  and  the  power  to  exclude  "  inferior
intelligences,  whom  they  speak  of  as  "earth-bound  spirits,"  from  the
use  of  the  "light,"  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  perturbations  referred
to  have  practically  disappeared.  That  the  exclusion  of  influences  that
are  continually  changing, — and  that  may  be  otherwise  not  conducive-
to  the  clearest  results — is  a  desirable  thing,  is  also  perhaps  indicated
by  the  methods  which  we  have  found  most  successful  in  forms  of
ordinary  telepathic  experiment.

We  there  take  into  consideration  the  attitude  of  mind  of  agent
and  percipient ;  we  give  the  percipient  a  chance  to  receive  impressions,
of  one  object  before  we  hurry  him  along  to  another;  we  have  regard  to
what  may  be  the  extremely  sensitive  state  of  his  "  telepathic  faculty,"
whatever  that  may  be,  and  whether  it  resides  in  his  subliminal
consciousness  or  not.

Similarly,  if  we  find  a  particularly  good  agent  and  a  particularly
good  percipient,  we  should  think  it  wise  to  give  them  the  best
opportunity  possible,  in  long  series  of  experiments,  to  get  better
results,  and,  by  varying  the  conditions,  to  ascertain  if  possible  what
are  the  limits  of,  and  what  the  causes  most  conducive  to,  clear  tele-
pathic communication.

And  so  I  think  that  in  Mrs.  Piper's  and  similar  cases,  the
introduction  of  persons  more  or  less  indiscriminately  may  not  be:
a  condition  for  general  success,  but  a  condition  for  perpetual
blundering.  We  can  all  use  telephones  noiv ;  but  when  Reis  and
Bell  and  Blake  and  others  were  making  experiments  on  lines  that
eventually  led  to  satisfactory  instruments,  they  would  hardly  have
thought  it  worth  while  to  let  the  general  public  spend  their  time
m  listening  to  more  or  less  inarticulate  noises  through  their  incipient
receiving  apparatus.


412


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Now,  if  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  represents  one  end  of  a  line  the
other  end  of  Avhich  is  in  the  so-called  "spirit  world,"  or  if  there  is  a
recognisable  possibility  of  this,  it  seems  to  me  eminently  desirable
that  we  should  try  to  find  out  what  will  improve  the  line  and  the
transmitting  and  receiving  apparatus,  and  if  possible  obtain  knowledge
concerning  the  methods  to  be  used  in  making  and  improving  other
similar  machines.


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  413


APPENDIX  I.


Extracts  and  Abridgments  from  Stenograpldc  Reports  oj  Thirteen
Sittings,  November  2'2nd,  \%%'2-January  oOlh,  1893.

Tliese  sittings  were  held  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Howard,  for  the
purpose  chiefly  of  obtaining  further  information  concerning  George
Pelham. (See  pp.  315-322.)

First. November  22nd,  1892.

Present  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  Pt.  H.  and  Reporter.

After  a  short  conversation  with  Phinuit,  G.  P.  wrote  :

"  Haloo,  Hodgson,  you  know  me.  Haloo,  Jim,  old  fellow,  I  am  not  dead
yet.  I  still  live  to  see  you.  Do  you  remember  how  we  used  to  ask  each
other  for  books  of  certain  kinds,  about  certain  books,  where  they  were,  and
you  always  knew  just  where  to  find  them."  [This  was  characteristic.  The
sitting  was  held  in  my  library,  where  George  and  myself  had  frequently
talked  together  and  had  frequent  occasion  to  turn  up  references  in  one  book
or  another.  George,  living,  had  remarked  several  times  on  my  accurate
knowledge  of  location  of  the  books  in  my  sholves. — J.^]  "Halloa,  I  know
now  where  I  am.  .Jim,  you  dear  old  soul,  how  are  you  ?  Who  is  this,  Louis.
He  wants  you  to  tell  you  for  him ... he  wants  to  see  Billie."

Phinuit  :  Ha  !  he  wants  to  know  something.

R.  H.  :  Who  is  Louis  1

Phinuit  :  He  is . . . who  is  that  gentleman,  that  German  fellow
talking  to  you,  George,  can't  you  tell  them  ?
R.  H.  :  He  wants  to  see  Billie,  does  he  ?

Phinuit :  Who  is  he  talking  about? I  am  all  jumbled  ^x^p . .  ,
G.  P.  [written]  "  Hodgson,  it  is  I. Go  out  and  tell  him  to  come."

This  incident  is  an  illustration  of  numerous  more  or  less  similar
cases  that  have  occurred,  and  that  throw  some  light,  as  I  think,  upon
many  instances  that  have  been  regarded  as  guesses  or  fishings  on  the
part  of  Phinuit. Neither  Mr.  nor  Mrs.  Howard,  when  the  name  Louis

was  written,  thought  of  Louis  R  ,  who  was  German  on  his  father's

side,  was  an  intimate  friend  of  theirs,  and  had  often  sat  in  Mr.
Howard's  library,  and  indeed  in  the  very  chair  occupied  by  Mrs.  Piper.
The  remarks,  "He  wants  to  see  Billie" — "Go  out  and  tell  him  to  come,"
evidently  referred  to  William  L.  Parker,  at  whose  sittings  on  March

10th  and  25th,  1892,  Louis  R purported  to  be  communicating.

Mr.  Parker's  house  is  but  a  stone's  throw  distant  from  Mr.  Howard's.

G.  P.  stopped  writing,  and  soon  afterwards  Phinuit  insisted  upon
writing,  and  wrote "Foxcroft"  in  mirror  writing. This  was  nob


1  J.  Mr.  Howard. K,  Mrs.  Howard.


414


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAET


decipliered  at  the  time,  and  Phinuit  then  wrote  it  in  capitals,  and  also
in  ordinary  writing.  I  knew  nothing  of  this  name,  and  explained  to
Phinuit  at  some  length  that  we  wished  to  talk  to  him  and  George,  and
that  unless  something  extremely  important  was  involved  in  the  way  of
a  test,  he  mast  keep  all  other  persons  away. I  learned  afterwards,

tliat  Foxcroft  C  ,  deceased,  was  a  fellow  artist  and  friend  of  Louis

R  ,  that  he  was  known  somewhat  to  the  Howards,  had  also,  when

living,  sat  in  Mr.  Howard's  library,  and  in  the  chair  occupied  by
Mrs.  Piper.

Lafcer,  G.  P.  toolc  direct  control  of  the  voice  .  .  .  "WliatcanI
do  for  you  to  prove  it  all  ?  I  am  anxious,  I  am  impatient.  ...  I  want
to  ask  Jim  about  the  letter  that  Orenberg  wrote  him  in  regard  to  my  passhig
out.  It  was  all  right,  Jiui,  don't  you  fear."  [It  was  Orenberg  who  first
informed  me  of  G.'s  death,  by  telegram,  followed  by  letter.  Tlie  remark  made
with  reference  to  the  letter  seemed  to  show  a  specific  knowledge  of  its  con-
tents.— J.]  "Father  is  writing  this  minute."  Q.  "  What  is  he  writing  ?  "
"  Shn[)ly  a  letter."  [Since  ascertained  from  Mr.  P.  that,  as  far  as  he  can
rcmeudjer,  he  was  not  writing  any  letter  at  or  near  the  time  in  question.]

G.  P  :  Get  me  my  hair.  [Package  brought  from  another  room.]
Mother  gave  it  to  you.  She  had  it  a  long  time.  [Mrs.  Howard  had  for-
gotten to  bring  tliis  into  the  room,  was  not  thinking  of  it,  and  had  received
it  from  Mrs.  Pelham  since  the  last  sitting  in  the  previous  spring.  Mrs.
Pelham  had  possessed  the  hair  for  a  long  time,  as  it  was  some  of  Georgo'a
baby  hair. — R.  H.].

Second. Novemher  28/5/i,  1892.

Present :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  and  (part  of  the  time)  their  eldest
daughter  Katharine,  R.  H.  and  Reporter.

Phinuit  :  Ho  [G.  P.]  has  been  to  see  his  father,  and  he  has  seen,  he  has
taken  a  book  and  carried  it  to  have  it  prhited.  [His  father  had  collected  his
poems  and  had  tliem  printed  in  a  small  volume,  which  appeared  just  before
tlie  first  sitting  of  this  series].

During  the  early  part  of  the  sitting,  Katharine  entered  the  room  and  sat
down  in  a  remote  corner.  Almost  immediately  Phinuit  said  "he  Vv'ants  to
see  who  is  Katrine  ? "  Katliarine  comes  over,  and  G.  P.  takes  control  of
the  voice,  and  personal  greetings  follow.  .  .  .  Recognition  of  dress,  also
of  shawl,  whicli  was  asked  for,  and  which  was  placed  over  Mrs.  Piper's
shoulders.

"  Wliat  is  it  takes  me  to  Paris?"  The  shawl  had  been  worn  in  Pai-is
frequently  during  a  year,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  tliat  G.  P.
living  was  aware  of  tliis.

G.  P.  inquii'ed  what  had  been  done  with  a  special  pictui'e  which  he  had
owned.

Mrs.  H.  :  That  got  torn  up  after  you  passed  out,  but  here  is  a  picture  that
I  don't  know  wliother  you  will  recognise,  but  you  used  to  know  the  place.
[G.  P.  puts  picture  on  top  of  the  head].

G.  P.  :  What  is  this  ? This  is  your  summer  house.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  415


Mrs.  H.  :  Yes,  you  have  got  it  right.

G.  P.  :  But  I  have  forgotten  the  name  of  the  town.

Mrs.  H.  :  Don't  you  remember  D  ?

G.  P.  :  O,  the  little  brick  house  and  the  little  vine,  grape-vine,  some  call
them.  Yes,  I  remember  it  all ;  it  comes  back  as  distinctly  as  the  daylight.
.  .  .  Where  is  tlie  little  out-house  ?  [All  correct.  The  little  brick  hen-
house that,  like  the  house  itself,  was  solidly  built  of  brick  just  did  not  come
into  the  picture,  but  came  to  the  very  edge  of  it,  so  it  was  natural  for  George
to  ask  where  it  was.  The  grape-vine  tliat  covered  thewliole  house  up  to  the-
reof was  a  striking  feature  of  it. — K.]. . .  .

Mrs.  H.  There  is  the  painting  [iianding  another  picture].

G.  P.  :  No,  I  have  no  recollection  of  that.

Mrs.  H.  :  No,  I  painted  it  when  you  wore  not  there.  You  never
saw  that.

G.  P.  :  It  is  not  fresh  to  me  at  all  ;  but  this  [fingering  the  photo  of  the
house]  is  verj'  clear.  Katharine.

Mrs.  H.  :  She  remembers  that  too.

G.  P.  :  She  was  a  little  thing. Then  you  bought  a  place  at  some  ville

[Katharine's  age  when  we  left  D  was  six,  nearly  seven. We  first  bought

the  place  at  X  ville  in  1886]. Further  references  to  personal  incidents

at  D  . "  Katharine,  how  is  the  violin  1 " [She  plays  the  violin]. . .  .

To  hear  you  playing  it  is  horrible,  horrible.

Mrs.  H.  :  But  don't  you  see  she  likes  Iier  music  because  it  is  the  best
she  has.

G.  P.  :  No,  but  that  is  what  I  used  to  say,  that  it  is  horrible.  [George
•was  always  more  or  less  annoyed  by  hearing  Katharine  practise  when  she
was  beginning  the  violin  as  a  little  child.- — K.]

G.  P.  :  [A  basket  put  into  G.  P.'s  hands  which  he  had  given  as  a
Christmas  present.]  That  is  mine.  AVhere  is  my  lamp  arrangement?  I
■was  very  fond  of  that,  you  know.  [He  had  also  expressly  got  a  small  light
shade  that  could  be  moved  round  the  shade  of  an  ordinary  lamp  to  cut  off
the  light  from  the  eye,  and  he  had  used  this  much  when  living.  He  had
made  other  references  to  this  in  previous  sittings.] . .  .

Mrs.  H.  :  I  want  you  to  see  that  [handing  a  paper.^]

G.  P.  :  You  wrote  that  to  me  this  morning.  [It  was  a  poem  on  death
•written  that  morning  with  G.  P.  in  mind,  but  no  reference  to  G.  P.
in  it.] ...  ...

[Another  paper  handed. i]  That  is  a  letter.  That  is  mine.  That  is  my
own,  but  that  was  written  a  long  time  ago.  [Correct.  A  letter  of  his
written  many  years  before.] . .  .

Give  my  regards  to  James  Peirce.  Tell  him  I  could  not  speak  to  him,
but  I  will  again,  and  when  you  dine  with  him,  think  of  me.

[George  occasionally  dined  at  the  house  of  James  Peirce  in  company
fwith  Mr.  Howard.]

Mr.  H.  :  George,  do  you  know  who  this  is  from?  [handing  an  unopened
newspajjer'^  enclosed  in  a  wrapper  as  if  just  received  in  tlie  mail.]

1  It  must  be  as.suined  that  these  papers  may  have  come  within  the  field  of  vision
of  Mrs.  Piper,  but  my  conviction  is  that  the  trance- personalities  do  not  obtain  any
iufoiraation  by  the  ordinary  process  of  vision. See  p.  317,  footnote.


416


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


G.  P.  :  Where  is  John  Hart'?  I  am  too  weak  to  tell  you.  Is  that
Orenberg  ?  Mr.  H.  :  Yes.  G.  P.  :  Yes,  that  is  he.  You  take  that  away
and  I  will  tell  you  better  [referring  to  the  wrapper  which  Mr.  H.  takes  off.]

That  is  Orenberg,  clear  old  fellow.  I  would  like  to  see  him.  His  own
hand  folded  it.  [It  was  a  foreign  newspaper  that  Mr.  H.  had  received  from
Orenberg  that  morning,  and  had  at  once  hidden  away  without  telling  anyone
of  it.]  .  .  .  [To  Mr.  H.]  Get  the  long  pipe  and  smoke.  [Mr.  Howard  was  in
the  habit  of  smoking  a  long  pipe  in  the  evening,  as  was  well  known  to  G.  P.]
.  [Mrs.  Piper  was  entranced  at  8.30  p.m.  G.  P.  leaves,  and  at  9.1(>
she  comes  out  of  trance,  but  as  usual  is  somewhat  dazed  at  first.]

Mrs.  Piper  :  "  There  is  the  man  with  the  beard."

]\Irs.  Piper  then  described  what  she  thought  was  a  dream.  "I  saw  a
bright  light  and  a  face  in  it,  a  gentleman  with  a  beard  on  his  face,  iind  he
had  a  very  high  forehead  and  he  was  writing."

R.  H.  :  Would  you  know  it  again  if  you  saw  it  ?

Mrs.  Piper  :  Oh,  yes. I  would  know  it,  I  think.

R.  H.  :  Well,  try  and  recall  it. [See  note  at  end  of  sitting.]

[Medium  says  she  feels  queer  and  as  if  she  could  turn  right  round  and  go
into  the  trance  again.  Does  not  know  what  is  the  matter  with  her.  After*
saying  this  she  becomes  entranced  again  very  quickly  at  9.22,  and  Phinuib
appears,  shouting.]

Pli.  :  You  know  you  don't  play  that  on  me.  George  Pelham  is  a  very
clever  fellow,  but  I  am  going  to  tell  you  he  passed  by  me,  and  do  you  know
wliat  he  did,  he  let  her  go  without  signalling  to  me  at  all  ;  he  did  it  by
mistake  ;  he  told  me  afterwards,  and  so  I  came  back  to  tell  you.
[To  Katharine]  Vous  etes  bonne  fille.  C'est  la  petite  de  madame  :  bonne
file,  bonne  fille,  grande  belle  fille.  [I  was  struck  by  Phinuit's  speaking
French  all  at  once  to  Katharine,  as  she  always  speaks  French  with  her
sisters,  having  lived  so  long  in  France.  There  was  more  French  than  was
here  reported,  as  the  stenographer  does  not  know  French  well,  and  had  to
get  what  we  could  remember  from  us  afterwards.  Mr.  Howard  and  I  were
much  struck  by  the  thoroughly  French  use  of  the  word  belle.  Katharine  is
in  no  sense  of  the  word  a  beautiful  girl  as  English  people  generally  under-
stand the  word  belle,  but  she  is  conspicuously  a  tall,  well-developed,  well-
made  girl,  of  the  sort  to  wliich  belle  in  the  French  sense  would  ba
applied.— K.]

. . , Phinuit  :  WhoisFarnan?  . . .  •

Mr.  H.  :  Vernon  ?

Piiinuit  :  I  don't  know  how  you  pronounce  that.  It  is  F-a-r-n-s-w-o-r-t-h.
R.  H.  :  What  about  it  ?  . .  .  ■

Phinuit  :  He  wants  to  see  you.
R.  H.  :  Wants  to  see  me  ?
Phinuit  :  Not  you,  but  this  lady.

Mrs.  H.  :  Well,  what  does  he  want  to  say  to  mel  Is  it  a  woman  or  a
man  ?

Phinuit  :  It  is  a  gentleman,  and  do  you  remember  your  Aunt  Ellen  ?
Mrs.  H.  :  Yes,  which  Aunt  Ellen  ?

Phinuit :  She  has  got  this  gentleman.  [I  have  seen  and  asked  my
*'Aunt  Ellen"  about  "Farnworth,"  without  telling  her  why  I  wished  to


xxxni.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  417


know.  Phinuifc  was  right — that  is,  there  was  a  man  named  Farnworth,  since
deceased,  who  was  gardener  in  my  uncle  J  's  family,  and  afterwards-
worked  for  my  grandfather  J  ,  probably  in  1847  ;  but  my  grandfather

died  before  I  was  born,  so  I  never  saw  or  heard  of  this  man  before. — K.]

Mrs.  Howard :  Tell  Mr.  Foxcroft  his  daughter  is  very  happy.  Did
you  have  a  message  fi'om  Mr.  Foxcroft  ?  Foxcroft  is  his  first  name  ;  we
know  his  other  name  now  ;  you  wrote  it.  [See  sitting,  November  22nd,
p.  413.]

Phinuit  :  Oh,  he  told  me  to  write  it.  Oh  I  know,  but  that  gentleman
wanted  to  send  his  love  to  her,  and  to  be  remembered  to  you  ...  so-
that  you  may  know  he  is  here  and  it  is  a  test.  These  little  things  sometimes
interrupt  me  greatly,  and  when  I  go  to  explain  it  to  you  you  can't  understand
it ;  but  sometimes  when  I  am  talking  to  you  I  am  suddenly  interrupted  by
somebody  who  don't  realise  what  they  are  doing,  and  then  I  give  you  what
they  say  as  near  as  I  can,  you  understand  that,  and  it  is  very  difficult  some-
times for  me  to  discern  it  and  place  it  in  the  right  place.  ,  ,  .  Who-
is  Marie,  Marie  [iMary]  that  is  with  him  ?

Mrs.  Howard  :  His  wife.

Phinuit :  And  that  is  Allie,  Ellie,  in  the  body,  Addie.
Mrs.  Howard  :  Addie. You  have  got  it.

Phinuit  :  She  is  the  one  he  wants  to  send  his  love  to. [Foxcroft  C  's

daughter  is  named  Addie.  I  know  her  somewhat,  and  she  has  been  to  see
me  in  that  library  shortly  after  her  father's  death. — K.]

At  the  previous  sitting  a  suggestion  was  made  that  G.  P.  might  talk  or
write  Italian  on  behalf  of  a  deceased  Italian  lady,  Madame  Elisa,  and  an
attempt  was  made  here  apparently  to  write  some  Italian  words.  They
were,  however,  not  very  legible.

Mrs.  Piper  is  apparently  about  to  come  out  of  trance  when  another
control  takes  possession  for  a  few  minutes,  who  is  thought  by  Mrs.
Howard  to  be  Elisa,  and  who  whispers  something  in  Italian  to  Mrs.
Howard.  Again  Mrs.  Piper  is  apparently  about  to  come  out  of  trance  when
Phinuit  returns  for  a  moment  to  say  au  revoir.  [What  follows  is  in  substanc©
the  conversation  between  Elisa  and  Mrs.  Howard.]

E.  :  Pazienza,  pazienza,  pazienza.

Mrs.  H.  :  Si  cai-a  Elisa.

E.  :  [Tries  to  give  a  message  in  Italian  to  her  sister,  but  Mrs.  H.  could
only  catch  a  few  words.]

Mrs.  H.  :  Non  comprendo  bene.

E.  :  Taceo,  pazienza,  pazienza.  Dire  tutto  a  Frederica  [name  of  sister]
a  rivederla. Elisa  a  rivederla.

[Signs  of  suffering  indicating  the  trouble  that  caused  the  death  of
Madame  Elisa.]  -

Mrs.  H.  says  in  Italian  "Don't  suffer,  Elisa."

E.  :  Pazienza  a  rivederla.  ■
After  Mrs.  Piper  comes  out  of  trance  she  is  shown  a  collection  of  thirty-
two  photographs,  nine  of  them  being  of  men,  from  which  she  selects
picture  of  the  person  whom  she  saw  when  coming  out  of  trance  the  first  time.
The  photograph  that  she  first  picked  out  was  an  excellent  likeness  of  G.  P
She  afterwards  picked  out  another  photograph  of  him. She  stated  that  she


418


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


never  knew  the  gentle-nan  when  living.  [My  remembrance  is  that  Mrs.
Piper  was  left  alone  while  she  made  her  choice  of  the  photographs,  but  I
•cannot  find  any  notes  of  the  incident  other  than  the  preceding  statement
made  at  the  time  by  the  stenographic  reporter.— R.  H.]

Third. Novemhev  2,0th,  1892.

Present :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  and  (during  part  of  the  sitting)
their  daughters  Katharine  and  Evelyn,  R.  H.  and  Reporter.

Part  of  this  sitting  was  occupied  by  Phinuit's  attempts  to  obtain  some  in-
formation about  certain  articles  that  were  presented  and  that  had  no  connec-
tion with  G.  P.

There  was  also  some  writing,  purporting  to  be  Italian,  written  by  G.  P.
at  the  dictation  of  Madame  Elisa,  but  apparently  illegible  except  the  final
words  for  "Good-bye."  Most  of  the  time  was  occupied  by  questions  con-
cerning G.  P's.  impressions  of  his  new  state  of  existence,  etc.,  and  there
was  not  much  of  an  evidential  nature.  Incidentally  there  were  several
•curious  points  which  struck  the  Howards  and  myself  as  j^articularly  sug-
gestive of  G.  P.  The  most  important  are  too  personal  to  quote,  but  the
following  may  be  given.

G.  P.  :  [controlling  the  voice.]  "Take  Kant  and  Aristotle,  take  Locke,
Descartes."  [George  had  a  habit  of  pronouncing  French  words  like  English
ones,  at  which  we  have  often  laughed  and  accused  him  of  affectation.  He
pronounced  Descartes  in  this  way  here. — K.]

Mrs.  H.  :  Could  you  have  the  Alexandrian  library  that  was  burned  ?

G.  P.  :  Yes,  everything.  It  does  not  make  any  difference  how  much  the
material  is  destroyed.  Plato  was  a  philosopher  and  a  good  one.  You  know,
Hodgson,  that  was  our  argument,  our  discussion.

R.  H.  :  That  came  in  certainly  ;  we  used  the  old  Platonic  analogy.

G.  P.  :  Socrates  was  a  medium. . .  .
[For  remarks  on  this  incident  see  pp.  363-5.]

There  was  some  special  conversation  between  G.  P.  and  Evelyn,  during
'the  last  part  of  which  the  other  sitters  were  sent  away.  One  of  the  first
things  said  was,  "Well,  I  won't  tantalise  you  now,"  and  later  on  "I  used
to  torment  Evelyn  ;  but  she  will  forgive  me,  I  know."  [He  used  to  tease
her  a  great  deal].  ..."  Evelyn  is  a  girl  that  can  always  tell  how  much
two  and  two  is."

E.  :  Yes.

G.  P.  :  You  have  just  learned,  haven't  you?  You  are  not  a  great  one
for  mathematics,  are  you  1 [She  is  specially  weak  in  matliematics.]

[Evelyn  gave  the  following  account  of  her  conversation]  : —

She  says  that  she  was  unable  to  hear  all  that  was  said.

G.  P.  :  Now  be  (jood,  Evelyn.  It  doesn't  matter  so  much  about  your
lessons  ;  being  good  is  the  most  important  thing  of  all.  Do  you  remember
the  little  book  I  gave  you,  and  wrote  your  name  in  ?  E.  :  Yes,  I  was  looking
at  it  but  the  other  day.  G.  P.  :  Well,  you  bring  it  and  show  it  to  me  next
time.  [Here  G.  P.  wrote  a  few  words  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  told  E.  to
keep  these  words  and  compare  them  with  the  handwriting  in  the  little  book.


XXXIIl] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  419


He  told  her  she  might  tell  her  mother  what  lie  had  said,  and  show  her  the
writing  afterwards. The  writing  has  no  special  likeness  to  G.  P.'s].

Fourth. December  2nd,  1892.

Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  Katharine  Howard,  K.  H.,
Mr.  Robert  Marte,  and  Reporter.

[The  sitting  was  originally  arranged  for  the  latter  part  of  the
afternoon,  but  iMrs.  Piper  was  unable  to  go  into  trance.  The  sitting
was  then  postponed  till  9  p.m.  Jlr.  Howard  took  Mr.  IMarte  to  his
Club  to  dine,  and  Mrs.  Piper  remained  with  Mrs.  Howard.  Mr.
Howard  and  Mr.  Marte  did  not  return  till  nearly  the  end  of  the
sitting. — R.H.]

Phinuit  took  control  and  made  some  statements  [afterwards  ascertained  to
be  incorrect]  about  a  scarf  and  a  locket  that  were  presented,  and  concerning
which  the  sitters  were  ignorant.  At  9.21  Elisa  (see  p.  335)  took  direct
control  of  the  voice  and  talked  a  few  sentences  while  G.  P.  wrote  at  the  same
time.  G.  P.  then  took  control  of  the  voice,  and  shortly  afterwards  II.  H.
came  into  the  room,  and  for  most  of  the  time  talked  with  G.  P.,  who
explained  some  obscurities  in  his  conversation  of  the  previous  sitting.  This
talk  was  interrupted,  as  it  were,  by  some  remarks  to  Mrs.  Howard.

G.  P.  :  Where  is  your  friend— wait  until  I  think  .  .  .  Mrs.
Warner  1

Mrs.  H  :  She  was  here  this  morning,  but  she  is  not  here  now.  I  told
her  about  you  this  morning.

G.  P.  :  I  heard  you  talking  with  her  when  you  were  telling  her  about  me,
was  with  you  all  the  time,  and  she  questions  a  little,  she  does  not  know
whether  it  is  I  or  somebody  else.

[Mrs.  Warner  had  called  to  see  me  on  the  morning  of  December  2nd,  and
I  talked  with  her  about  the  previous  sitting,  and  gave  her  the  message  for
Addie  (see  p.  417).  She  has  also  since  confirmed  G.  P.'s  statements  as  to
her  state  of  mind.— K.]  [Mrs.  Warner  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  the
early  part  of  the  year,  when  her  name  was  not  mentioned. —R.  H.]

G.  P.  :  Then  there  is  another  friend  I  used  to  know,  a  JMrs.  Easton.
[Pseudonym.]

R.  H.  :  Did  Mrs.  Howard  know  Mrs.  Easton  1  Was  she  a  friend  of  Mrs.
Howard  ?

Mrs.  H.  :  I  don't  know  anybody  well  by  the  name  of  Easton.  Oh,
James  Peirce's  sister  1

G.  P.  :  Yes,  that  is  she.

Mrs.  H  :  Well,  I  know  her  slightly.

G.  P.  :  Oh,  I  know  what  I  have  in  mind.  I  forgot  to  speak  to  him  about
her.  [Mrs.  Easton  is  a  sister  of  James  Peirce,  who  had  a  sitting  with
Mrs.  Piper  on  April  28th,  1892.  See  p.  305.]  [Mrs.  Piper  had  been
entranced  for  probably  about  an  hour  when]  Mr.  Howard  and  Mr.  Marte
entered  the  room,  Mr.  M.  seating  himself  close  to  the  medium.
R.  H.  :  George,  can  you  tell  me  anything  about  this  person  1
G.  P.  :  I  don't  want  you  to  bother  me  ;  I  have ...


420


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


R.  H.  :  But  tills  is  very  important,  more  important  tlian  anything  else.

G.  P.  [taldng  the  hand  of  M.  and  then  reaching  for  pencil]  :  Give  it  to
me,  I  will  write  it.

[The  quotation  marks  indicate  what  was  written,  and  the  writing  was
done  very  rapidly,  and  in  an  excited  manner.]

G.  P.  :  "  Hello,  hello. Jim,  where  did  you  see  Mar  "  [breaking  off

here  and  shaking  Mr.  M.'s  hand]  "oh,  help  me."

Mr.  H.  :  We  will  help  you.

R.  H.  :  Can't  you  talk,  George  ?

G.  P.  :  "I  was  just  getting  weak  when  he  came  in.  Hallo,  Mart.  How
are  you,  old  fellow  1 "

Mr.  M.  :  How  are  you,  George  ?

G.  P.  :  "All  right.  Thanks,  dear  old  chap.  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  dear
old  friend. How  is  your  family  ?  "

Mr.  Isl.  :  They  arc  all  very  well,  indeed,  George,  all  very  well.

G.  P.  :  "Oh,  I  am  so  glad. Have  you  seen  father?"

Mr.  M.  :  Whoso  father  1

G.  P.  :  "His  father."

Mr.  M.  :  Have  you  seen  my  father  ?

G.  P  :  "  yes,  he  is  very  well,  and  wishes  to  be  remembered  to  you."
Mr.  M.  :  Can  George  give  his  name  ? Can  George  know  my  father's
name  1

Mrs.  H.  :  Write  his  father's  name.

G.  P.  :  "Why  did  you  not"  •  ■  '

Mrs.  H.  :  What  is  his  father's  name  1

Mr.  M.  :  Does  he  keep  the  same  name  there  ?

G.  P.  : "come  here  before? I  nev  .  . I  don't  know,  but  I  will  ask
him. He  seems  to  know  you. Halo,  Jim. Hallo,  Jim."
Mr.  H.  [taking  the  medium's  hand.] Here  I  am,  George.
G.  P.  :  "  Oh,  you  peojile  are  so  stupid."

Mr.  H.  :  Well,  George,  I  know  we  are,  but  we  cannot  help  it.

G.  P.  :  "The  fact  is  you  all  want  me  to  work  for  you,  but  you  don't  care
a  straw  about  helping  me."

Mrs.  H.  :  [to  Mr.  M.] Speak  to  him  just  as  you  would  to  anybody.

Mr.  M.  :  It  is  not  easy  to  carry  on  a  natural  conversation  under  the
circumstances,  being  the  first  time  that  a  fellow  has  seen  this  sort  of  thing,
George  !

G.  P.  :  "Is  it  Mart?"  .  .  :  .

Mrs.  H.  :  He  does  care.

Mr.  M.  :  Very  much  indeed.

R.  H.  :  George,  can  you  talk  ?

G.  P.  :  "I  can't  now,  I  am  too  weak  !  "

Mr.  M.  :  George,  have  you  seen  your  grandfather,  Robert  Noyes,  there  ?
Have  you  met  Robert  Noyes  there  ?

G.  P.  :  "Robert  N.  is  all  right,  and  so  is,  and  so  is  Robert  Mart.  I
know  you  and  am  glad  to  see,  right  glad  to.  Oh  do  help  ine,  Jim."
[Shaking  hands  with  Mr.  M.  again.]

Mr.  M.  :  I  will  come  again  sometime,  George.

G.  P.  ;  "Evolution  is  all  right  in  the  re  il  life,  as  Darwin  says,  but  it  goes


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  421


on  evoluting  in  the  ideal  life,  which  fact  he,  of  course,  who  knew  nothing

until  he  came  here."  .

Mr.  M.  :  Have  you  seen  old  Robert  Noyes  since  you  have  been  there  1
G.  P.  :  "Kind,  kind  old  Jim  dear,  please  excuse,  oh  yes.  Mart,  he  is  as.

I  thought,  but  kind  friends  you  ."

Mr.  M.  :  Was  he  satisfied  with  your  account  of  his  conduct  in  the  peace

negotiations  1

G.  P.  :  "Yes,  perfectly,  after  I  explained  it  to  liim."

Mr.  M.  :  Have  you  seen  Franklin  1

G.  P.  :  "Whom  do  you  mean.

Mr.  M.  :  I  should  thmk  George  would  know  that.

G.  P. :  " . . .  Ben?"

Mr.  M.  :  I  mean  Jim's  ancestors.

G.  P.  :  "  Yes,  of  course  I  have.  He  has  told  me  all  about  the  philosophy
of  electricity.  Good-bye,  friends."  .  .  .  "  I  am  so  glad  to  have  seen  my
good  friend,  and  hope  he  will  come  again  soon."  .  .  .  "Yours  most
cordially  and  sincerely,  George  Pelham."

Phinuit  takes  control  again  at  10. 16. Trance  ends  at  10. 20.

I  heave  quoted  the  above  written  communication  complete,  as  it
illustrates  very  well  the  kind  of  confusion  for  which  sitters,  ignorautly,
are  partly  responsible.  And  it  may  be  worth  while  for  me  to-
present  my  interpretation  of  this  incident,  as  I  am  inclined  after  much
later  experience  to  conceive  it — far-fetched  though  such  an  interpre-
tation may  seem  to  persons  unfamiliar  by  practical  experience  with
Mrs.  Piper's  trance-phenomena.  Let  us  suppose  for  the  moment,  as  is
claimed,  that  the  "  energy"  available  for  the  trance  is  nearly  used  up,,
and  that,  not  only  for  this  i-eason,  but  because  the  act  of  communicating;
itself  benumbs  the  agent,  G.  P.  is  at  the  point,  so  to  speak,  of
exhaustion.  At  this  stage  an  old  friend  enters,  there  is  a  rush  o£
excitement ;  G.  P.  immediately  greets  him  in  a  natural  way,  but  is-
compelled  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case  to  express  himself  at  the
slow  rate  of  writing.  C ceteris  paribus,  more  energy  is  needed  to  use  th&
voice  than  to  use  the  hand,  and  there  seem  also  to  be  other  difficulties-
in  the  way,  as  very  few  communicators  are  able  to  use  the  voice  at  all.
The  writing  itself  moreover  appears  to  be  not  the  result  of  any-
conscious  effort  of  writing  on  the  part  of  the  communicator,  but  the
result  of  the  communicator's  thinking  what  he  has  to  say  at  the  slow
rate  of  writing.  (See  p.  332).  The  next  important  point  to  notice  is^
that  G.  P.  appai-ently  starts  out  in  a  natural  conversation  with  his  old
friend,  but  is  immediately  pulled  up  short  by  questions  which  are
entirely  foreign  to  the  thoughts  and  emotions  surging  througli  his
mind.  Still  at  the  first  opportunity  where  a  question  is  not  thrust
upon  him  he  begins  to  say  something  which  is  peculiarly  appropriate
to  the  sitter,  connecting  evolution  in  this  life  with  evolution  in  another,
but  is  not  allowed  to  tiuish. The  sitter  interrupts  with  his  series  of


422


B-ichard  Hodgson.


[part


questions,  and  remonstrance  on  the  part  of  G.  P.  is  entirely  unavailing.
G.  P.  was  the  author  of  a  biography  of  his  own  grandfather,  Robert
Noyes,  of  whose  conduct  in  certain  international  peace  negotiations
<jr.  P.  took  a  special  view.  Mr.  Marte's  question  at  this  point  evidently
referred  to  this.  Further,  G.  P.  is  deprived  of  the  op230rtunity  of
finishing  his  sentences,  in  reply  to  the  sitter's  inquiry.  G.  P.'s  reply  to
the  question,  "  Have  you  seen  Pranklin  1"  was  evidently,  "Whom  do
you  mean,  Ben  1 "  It  must  be  remembered  that  as  soon  as  words  are
written  they  are  uttered  aloud,  usually  by  me  when  I  am  present  at  a
sitting.  This  was  originally  in  accordance  with  the  request  made  by
•G.  P.,  so  that  he  might  know  that  he  was  understood.  Thus  as  soon
as  "  whom  "  was  written  it  was  pronounced  aloud,  and  so  on.  In  this
•case  the  sitter  interrupted  after  the  word  "  mean  "  Avas  written,  just
as  G.  P.'s  question  higher  up,  "  Why  did  you  not  come  here  before?"
was  interrupted  in  the  middle  of  the  writing  by  two  questions  which
ignored  what  G.  P.  was  trying  to  express.  G.  P.'s  reply  about
Franklin  v.-as  exactly  to  the  point,  but,  of  course,  Benjamin  Franklin's
■experiments  in  electricity  are  probably  a  matter  of  almost  universal
knowledge.  I  have  said  that  the  statement  about  evolution's  con-
tinning  in  the  other  life  was  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the  sitter ;  but
it  must  be  added  that  during  a  portion  of  the  previous  sitting  and  the
early  portion  of  this  sitting  G.  P.  had  been  talking  on  this  very  point.
INTr.  Marte  is  widely  known  for  his  contributions  to  the  doctrine  of
■evolution,  was  an  intimate  friend  of  G.  P.,  and  had  talked  much  with
him,  when  livhig,  on  philosophical  subjects.  But  Mr.  Marte  is  so  well
known,  both  as  a  writer  and  lecturer,  that  any  mere  knowledge  of  his
name  and  work  cannot  be  regarded  as  haA'ing  any  evidential  value.
(See  the  sitting  of  December  9th,  1892,  p.  428.)

Fifth. December  oiJi,  1892.

Present :  Mrs.  Howard,  R.  H.,  Reporter,  and  (part  of  the  time)
Katharine.

Phinuit  says  that  George  has  gone  to  find  Jim  and  will  "  come  back  and
tell  Hodgson  what  Jim  is  doing."

R.  H.  makes  an  inquiry  and  presents  articles  on  a  matter  having  no
relation  to  G.  P.  A  locket  (also  presented  at  the  previous  sitting)  was  given
to  Phinuit  for  further  statements.

[The  reporter  reads  over  to  Phinuit  what  was  said  in  connexion  with  the
locket,  and  Phinuit  makes  a  few  corrections.  While  doing  this  he  stops  the
reading  at  the  word  Susie  and  uses  the  right  (left  ?)  hand  in  making  letters
of  the  deaf  and  dumb  alphabet  quite  rapidly,  then  tells  her  to  go  on.  (The
reporter  recognised  some  of  the  signs  used,  but  not  enough  for  any  intelligible
interptetation. — R.  H.) Wliile  the  reporter  is  talking  with  Phinuit,  George


xxxiil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  423


uses  the  right  Iiaml  of  the  medium  and  carries  on  a  conversation  in  writing
with  Hodgson  and  Mrs.  Howard.  The  quotation  marks  indicate  what  was.
written.]

"Hello  ...  I  am  with  you  now  and,  Hodgson,  Jim  has  seen
Fenton.  [Correct.  Mr.  Howard  had  gone  into  the  country  to  visit  a  friend
named  Fenton.]  Tell  jMart  [see  previous  sitting]  I  am  so  glad  to  have  seen
him." [Several  words  here  supposed  to  be  Italian,  but  indecip)lierable].

Mrs.  Howard  :  Are  you  writing  for  Madame  Elisa  1

"Si — Yes."  [Several  more  words  supposed  to  be  Italian,  but  indecipher-
able.] .

[R.  H.  tries  for  some  time  to  obtain  an  ansv/er  to  a  question  given  him
by  Mr.  Y.  Z.]  [I  cannot  give  an  intelligible  account  of  this  incident  without
referring  to  private  matters.  It  was  of  evidential  value  only  indirectly  as
indicating  an  emotion  in  G.P.  concerning  circumstances  of  which  I  was
ignorant. See  next  sitting. — R.  H.]

Jim  is  reading,  or  was  a  short  few  minutes  ago  (9.10). [Correct]. . .  .

Tell  Orenberg  I  will  tell  hira  sometliing  when  I  come  here  again  that  will
surprise  him.  Ask  him  for  me  what  he  wanted  to  destroy  my  papers  and
letters  which  I  gave  him.  [Orenberg  helped  G.  P.'s  father  to  destroy  G.  P.'s
letters  after  his  death.] [This  was  known  to  the  Howards. — R.  H.]. , ,  .

[Here  came  the  reference  to  Mattie  Johnson  ;  see  p.  312.  ]

******

At  10.12  [G.  P's.]  place  at  the  writing  was  taken  by  Madame  Elisa
(see  p.  335),  who  wished  to  tell  her  sister  that  she  was  living.

Mrs.  Howard  took  a  paper  from  her  pocket  and  placed  it  in  the
hand,^  saying  that  she  had  received  it  from  Frederica  (the  name  of  the
sister).  The  hand  was  passed  wholly  over  the  paper  and  then  a
Christian  name  was  written,  and  almost  immediately  afterwards  a  sur-
name, both  correct.  The  natne  was  that  of  Frederica's  husband,  and
the  paper  was  some  verses  written  by  hira  and  given  to  Mrs.  Howard
some  months  previously.  Other  personal  and  characteristic  messages
were  written,  including  appropriate  references  to  the  sitters,  the  full
name  of  the  communicator  and  several  (not  uncommon)  Italian  words,
viz.  :  stabene,  pazienza,  adagio,  taceo,  addio  a  rivederci.  The  writing
ended  "  addio.  I  remember  the  flowers  you  sent  me."  Mrs.
Howard's  impression  was,  that  she  did  send  some  flowers  [apparently
during  Madame  Elisa's  illness]  but  could  not  be  absolutely  sure.

G.  P.  then  took  control  of  the  voice  and  talked  for  a  short  time.  I
quote  a  portion  of  the  rest.

G.  P.  :  .  .  .  There  are  two  things  :  first  of  all  is  the  argument,  and
second  is  the  test.

R.  H.  :  Yes,  first-rate.

G.  P.  :  It  is  hard  work,  Hodgson,  but  I  have  got  courage  to  brave  it  out.
R.  H.  :  You  are  doing  first-rate.

G.  P. :  That  is  what  I  am  here  for.  And  I  will  make  Orenberg  realise  that
I  exist  or  else  I  will  go  back  in  the  bcdy  and  do  it  over  again. Dear  old


421


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Orenberg.  He  has  the  same  views  of  this  life  as  I  had  before  T  went  away.
You  know  his  views  are  tlie  same.  [Correct  statements  according  to  the
Howards]. He  has  a  lot  of  incoherent  views.  ...

It  is  difficult  to  convey  ideas  through  the  medium,  but  it  would  be  diffi-
cult tlirough  any  medium. It  is  like  crawling  through  a  log,  a  hollow  log.

Mrs.  Howard  :  George,  you  said  you  had  been  following  Jim.  Do  you
know  where  he  is  now,  or  where  he  went  1

G.  P.  :  He  has  gone  to  see  his  friend  Fenton  [correct]  saw  him  not  three
■quarters  of  an  hour  ago,  as  near  as  I  can  go  by  the  time.

R.  H.  :  Well,  it  was  more  than  three  quarters  of  an  houi'.

G.  P.  :  That  I  can't  specify.

Mrs.  Howard  :  George,  do  you  know  what  Fenton  and  Jim  were  talking
4ibout  ?

G.  P.  :  About  this  very  subject  and  about  me  [correct].  They  have  been
discussing  it,  but  Fenton  is  as  hard-headed  as  Orenberg,  for  you  could  not
turn  him  any  more  than  you  could  Orenberg,  but  they  will  have  to  turn  and
be  glad  to  come  back  and  acknowledge  it  as  I  have. . .  .

Sixth. December  7th,  1892.

Present :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  R.  H.,  the  Reporter,  and  (part  of
the  time),  Katharine.

R.  H.  presented  some  fresh  articles  in  connexion  with  the  case  about
which  he  inquired  on  December  2nd  and  December  5th,  and  Phinuit  made
-various  statements  about  them  after  sending  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard  out  of
the  room.

Later  on  G.  P.  writes  and  gives  satisfactory  reasons  for  his  treatment  of
my  inquiry  concerning  the  questions  of  Y.  Z.  at  the  previous  sitting,  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Howard  having  returned.  This  inquirj',  owing  apparently  to
iintagonistic  personal  remembrances  which  G.  P.  living  entertained  towards
Y.  Z,  on  account  of  private  matters  unknown  to  me  at  the  time  of  the
inquiry,  seems  to  have  produced  a  certain  temporary  irritation  on  the  part
of  G.  P.  communicating  towards  myself  (see  below).  Then  came  the
following  (written) :

G.P.  :  "Don't  you  want  me  to  give,  please  give  me  mother's  letter."
{Mrs.  Howard  had  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Pelham  which  was  then  given
to  the  hand.]i "  Qh  I  see  father  is  not  well. "

Mrs.  Howard  :  She  says  that  in  the  letter.

G.  P.  :  "I  am  sorry,  but  it  cannot  be  helped.  Where  is  it  that  she  says  in
that  letter  she  is  going  ?"

Mrs.  Howard  :  First  to  New  York  and  then  perhaps  to  come  here,
■George,  to  see  you.

G.  P.  :  "Oh,  I  am  sorry  I  asked  you  now  [crumpling  letter  in  hand]
^oing  to  dispose  of  it  all  right,  then  it  will  be  far  better  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  Let  us  see  that  word  again,  George.

G.  P.  :  "for  father,  since  he  is  so  delicate."

lEeyond  the  field  of  vision  of  Mrs.  Piper  (see  p.  317,  footnote).


'XXXIII.]


Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena


of  Trance.


425


Mrs.  Howard  :  Now  what  is  the  place  that  they  are  going  to  dispose  of,
■what  does  it  say  in  the  letter,  George  ? Tell  me  the  name.
G.  P.  :  "the  house  and  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  I  can't  read  that,  write  it  again. The  house  and  what  ?
G.  P.  :  "  property  in  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  Wait  a  minute,  have  another  sheet.
G.  P.  :  "N.  Y."

Mrs.  Howard  :  What  is  the  name  of  the  place,  George  ? If  you  remem-
ber the  name  write  it  down.
G.  P.  :  [Scrawl.]
R.  H.  :  Can't  read  that,  George.

Mrs.  Howard  :  Never  mind,  George. Take  the  letter  and  read  it  and
then  you  write  it  down. Wait  a  second,  be  patient.
G.  P.  :  [crumpling  letter.]  [Scrawl.]

R.  H.  :  Take  your  time,  George,  capital  letters,  George,  capital  letters.
G.  P.  :  "I  do  wish  Hodgson  would  be  more  patient."
R.  H.  :  I  think  I  am  patient,  George. I  am  telling  you  to  be  patient."
G.  P.  :  "He  exasperates  me  "

R.  H.  :  All  right,  George. I  will  keep  entirely  silent  if  you  like.

G.  P.  : "in  the  extreme. Fire  away,  Mary, Go  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  Now  George,  I  want  you,  if  you  remember  the  name  of
that  place  in  New  York,  that  counti-y  place  that  is  going  to  be  disposed  of,
I  want  to  know  the  name  of  it.  Yes,  here  is  the  letter,  and  if  you  can  give
me  the  name  write  it  down.

G.  P.  :  "  Well,  why  do  you  confuse  me  so,  why  don't  you  let  me  go  on
and  tell  you  what  she  says  ? "

Mrs.  Howard  :  Yes.

G.  P.  :  "Without  inberrujiting  me  so  often  [crumi^ling  letter  again]  why
don't  you  answer  ?  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  George,  you  know  there  is  a  question  she  wants  me  to  ask
you  in  that  letter.

G.  P.  :  "Potomac."

Mrs.  Howard  :  Yes,  it  is  on  the  Potomac.  That  is  all  right.  [Some
confusion  here.  The  town  Z.  which  had  been  mentioned  by  G.  P.  in  a
j)revions  sitting  (see  p.  302)  and  which  was  the  place  referred  to,  was  on  the
Hudson,  and  this  was  well-known  to  Mrs.  Howard.  Washington,  where  his
father  lived  in  the  winter,  is  on  the  Potomac. — R  H.]

G.  P.  :  "  What  is  it,  Hodgson  ?  "

R.  H.  :  Nothing,  George,  nothing. I  am  listening.

G.  P.  :  "  Wliy  don't  you  say  your  say  ?  "

R.  H.  :  I  have  said  my  say  :  now  I  am  letting  Mrs.  Howard.

IMrs.  Howard :  George,  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question.  Just  read  what
she  says  there,  something  about  what  she  has  l)een  doing.

G.  P.  :  "I  prefer  you  [Hodgson]  to  nsk  ior  eoHeutiul  purposes,  for  she
knows."

Mrs.  Howard  :  Yes,  I  do.

R.  H.  :  Well,  but  she  knows  what  questions  to  ask,  George,  and  I  don't.
It  is  all  right  if  she  asks,  never  mind  if  she  does  know.
G.  P.:  "those . . . oh,  all  right."  .


426


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


U.  H.  :  Now,  Mrs.  Howard  will  ask.

Mrs.  Howard  :  I  want  to  know,  George,  wliat  you  have  seen  your  mother
doing.

G.  P.  :  "I  simply  see  tlie  letter  and  tell  you  for  test."

R.  H.  :  Well,  George,  I  am  going  to  look  at  this  letter  again  and  ask  a
test  that  nobody  knows  here  at  all. She  says  that  you  perhaps  .saw  her.

G.  P.  :  "please  look,  but  I  tell  you  all  I  can  any  way  whether  you  ask
or  not."

R.  H.  :  Yes,  well,  that  is  a  question,  George  ;  if  you  will  wait  just  a
minute,  I  want  to  ask  because  your  mother  asks  it.

G.  P.  :  "  She  has  asked  me  what  she  has  been  doing."
Mrs.  Howard  :  Yes,  that  is  true.

G.  P.  :  "  Well,  she  has  been  shaking  up  my  things  a  little,  I  mean  my
clotlies,  it  is  a  simple  thing  but  will  go  for  a  test."  [I  believe  that  this  was
ascertained  by  Mrs.  Howard  to  be  correct,  bat  she  has  not  filled  up  the
spaces  for  her  notes  to  this  sitting. — R.  H.,  1896.]

R.  H.  :  First-rate,  George,  we  will  find  out  from  her  about  this.
******

[He  is  told  that  Marte  is  coming  the  next  time,  and  requested  to  find  out
the  name  of  Marte's  father  in  the  spirit.  Some  remarks  with  reference  to
Marte  and  the  difference  between  him  and  Y.  Z.]

G.  P.  :  . . . "  Ask  me  anything  you  like. "

Mr.  Howard  :  Well,  he  said  at  the  last  sitting  he  had  something  for
Orenberg.

G.  P.  :  "  Well,  it  was  tliis  he  wrote  you  Jim  about  me.  •  •

Mrs.  Howard  :  Yes.

G.  P.  : "And  wanted  to  know  what  I  had  to  say." [Orenberg  had
written  for  information  about  the  sittings. — J.]
Mrs.  Howard  :  Go  on,  yes.
G.  P.  :  "Well."

Mrs.  Howard  :  If  we  had  got  that  before  the  letter  it  would  have  been
interesting.

G.  P.  :  "  All  I  want  is  to  convince  him  that  there  is  a  real  existence  after

the  liberation  of  the  spirit  from  the  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  Wait  a  minute,  I  can't  see.
G.  P.  :  "  material  organism."
R.  .  H:  Material  organism.

G.  P.  :  "  Good,  Hodgson,  if  you  can  read  this  you  do  mighty  well."
R.  H.  :  Well,  I  think  you  are  doing  mightier  well  to  write  it,  George.

G.  P.  :  "Well,  I  wish  you  knew  how  many  "

R.  H.  :  Write  that  word  over  again. Difficult  1

G.  P.  :  "Oh,  no" . . . " stumbling  blocks  there  are,  Hodgson."

R.  H.  :  Well,  perhaps  I  shall  know  them  some  day,  George,  when  I
come  to  try  it  myself.

G.  P.  :  "  Yes,  then  you  will  be  glad  to  congratulate  me  for  what  I  have
done."

*  *  *  *-  •  *  *  ■

Phinuit  makes  some  more  statements  about  the  articles  given  to  him  at
the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  during  which  the  hand  is  seized  and  makes  the


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  427


letters  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  alphabet.  Phinuit  on  being  asked  who  is
using  the  liand,  says  that  he  does  not  know  "who  she  is."  (See  pp.  439-40.)
After  Pliinuit  leaves,  Madame  Elisa  talks  in  a  whisper  for  a  short  time  to
Mrs.  Howard — personal  messages,  no  fresh  evidential  matter.  The  trance
ends,  and  while  Mrs.  Piper  is  recovering  she  says,  half  dazed,  "I  dreamed
I  saw  a  lady  with  a  lot  of  liowers  in  her  hand.  "Where  am  I  ?  Do  you
know  Walter  Leaf?  ...  I  tell  you  what  I  do  remember,  of  seeing
a  lady  with  something  in  her  hand,  I  don't  know  what  it  was.  .  .  She
had  dark  curly  hair,  not  very  much  curly,  crinkled  a  little  up  here  (fore-
head) brushed  back  like  that.  She  had  a  very  pronounced  looking  face,
very  fine  looking  face,  quite  large  eyes,  quite  a  large  mouth."  (What  sorb
of  flowers  ?)

"I  can't  tell  you,  it  is  going  from  me  now."

To  the  ordinai-y  reader,  mosb  of  what  I  have  quoted  above  may
seem  not  merely  tedious  but  worthless  from  any  point  of  view.  This
obviously  is  not  my  own  opinion.  It  would  be  indeed  impossible,
even  by  fillin,g  some  thousands  of  pages  with  full  reports  and  detailed
comments,  to  convey  to  the  reader  the  impressions  produced  by
attending  hundreds  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  I  should,  however,
entirely  fail  in  producing  any  approximation  to  a  correct  impression
were  I  to  limit  myself  to  a  bald  enumeration  of  the  facts  indicating
supernormal  knowledge  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personalities.
It  is  my  desire,  if  possible,  to  enable  the  reader  to  appreciate,  if  only
to  a  small  extent,  the  mise  en  scene  of  the  sittings,  the  subtleties  of
the  different  personalities  that  purport  to  communicate,  particularly  of
George  Pelham,  and  the  difficulties  involved  in  such  communications
under  the  circumstances  described.  It  is  important  that  the  reader
should  remember  that  in  the  above  dialogue,  as  in  most  of  the  other
communications  from  G.  P.,  what  he  has  to  say,  either  spontaneously
or  in  reply  to  questions,  is  written,  that  in  these  earlier  communica-
tions at  least,  while  I  was  yet  ignorant,  so  to  speak,  of  what  the
difficulties  appear  now  to  me  to  be,  he  was  continually  being
vexatiously  interrupted,  and  that  frequently  the  writing  was  illegible,
and  it  was  necessary  that  the  words  should  be  re-written.  The
scrawls  and  the  re-writings  are  not  as  a  rule  here  reproduced,  but
there  is  enough  indication  in  what  I  have  quoted  to  show  the  kind
of  difficulty  that  this  re-writing  must  occasion  in  the  mind  of  the
communicating  intelligence,  whatever  that  may  be.  Further,  it  is
only  by  more  or  less  prolonged  conversations  that  glimpses  into  per-
sonality may  be  obtained  in  inquiries  of  this  sort,  and  the  evidence  in
relation  to  G.  P.'s  identity  rests  not  a  little  upon  the  characteristics
of  his  mental  make-up,  including  not  only  his  intellectual,  but  his
emotional  qualities,  his  affections,  his  weaknesses,  his  sympathies  and
antipathies,  and  his  loyalties.  In  the  badgering  (this  is  really  the'
nearest  term  to  suggest  the  actual  fact)  to  which  I  had  subjected  him"

2  F


428


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAllT


by  the  persistence  of  the  inquiry  which  I  made  in  connection  with
Y.  Z.'s  question,  I  had  touclied  unwittingly  the  very  core  of  that
loyalty  to  his  friends  which  was  highly  characteristic  of  the  living
G.  P.,  and  which  apparently  led  by  my  association  with  Y.  Z.  to  the
manifestation  against  myself  of  a  certain  amount  of  annoyance —
followed,  be  it  noted,  by  a  desire  to  I'emove  the  dissatisfaction
produced  in  me  by  his  remarks.

Seventh. December  9lh,  1892.

Present :  Mr.  Howard,  Mr.  Marte,  R.  H.  and  Pi,eporter  at  beginning
of  sitting,  and  a  little  later  Mrs.  Howard.

Phinuit  said  at  the  previous  sitting  that  he  would  not  be  present  the
next  time  at  all,  but  he  appeared  at  the  beginning,  and  said  that  he  had  come
because  he  had  got  some  further  information  about  the  subject  of  the
articles  presented  at  several  previous  sittings.  He  complained  that  "the
light"  was  "not  so  strong,"  "not  so  good  as  it  is  sometimes."

R.  H.  asked  if  it  was  because  the  medium  was  not  very  well.  Phinuit
said  she  was  ill;  "there  is  something  wrong  down  here,"  and  shortly
nftervi'ards,  just  before  the  writing  began,  said  again  :  "  You  know  there  is
something  wrong  with  the  medium."  Also  near  the  beginning  of  the
writing  G.  P.  remarked  "this  light  is  weak,"  and  later  on  "don't  huri-y
me,  for  this  medium  is  not  clear  physical  organism."

Partly  (as  I  now  think)  owing  to  Mrs.  Piper's  ill  health,  and
partly  to  our  inexperience,  the  sitting  was  not  successful,  though  the
personal  relations  between  G.  P.  and  Mr.  Marte  were  marked  as  on
the  previous  occasion  of  Mr.  Marte's  presence. (See  p.  419.)

Mr.  Marte  put  some  questions  on  philosophical  subjects,  and  there  was
some  confusion  of  the  kind  which  I  have  illustrated  in  the  account  of  the
sitting  of  December  2nd,  1892,  p.  421.  Mr.  Marte  also  asked  about  the
book  One  or  Many,  and  G.  P.  showed  no  knowledge  of  such  a  book.  It
appeared  that  G.  P.  living,  in  conversations  with  Mr.  Marte,  had  proposed
giving  the  name  "One  or  Many"  to  a  philosophical  MS.,  which  he,  G.  P.,
had  written.  Mrs.  Howard  noted  that  G.  P.  living  never  so  called  his  MS.
in  conversations  with  her,  tliough  she  saw  him  constantly  at  the  time  it  was
written,  but  always  referred  to  it  as  his  philosophical  book.  He  also  several
times  mentioned  it  to  myself  without  giving  any  name  to  it.  I  supposed  that
the  general  subject  was  the  "  Mind-StufF  Theory."  The  MS.,  as  I  learnt
long  afterwards  from  the  present  custodian  of  it,  does  not  bear  any  title  like
One  or  Many."  The  communications  were  chiefly  in  writing,  but  partly
in  speech  from  G.  P.

Most  of  the  conversation  that  followed  after  G.  P.  took  control  of  the
voice  was  of  a  non-evidential  character.  In  reply  to  enquiries  he  said  that
he  had  seen  us  three  (Mr.  M.,  Mr.  Howard,  and  R.  H.)  in  a  club  that  day,
eating,  the  Tavern,  that  he  had  been  there  with  R.  H.,  and  once  with  John
Hart.  .  ,  ....


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  429


[All  correct,  except  that  whether  he  liacl  been  at  the  present  quarters  of
the  Club  once  or  more  than  once  with  John  Hart  is  uncertain.  He  had
been  to  the  old  quarters  of  the  Club  several  times  with  John  Hart.] Also  :

G.  P.  :  I  saw  you  in  Marte's  library  a  few  clays  since.

Mr.  Howard  :  All  three  of  us  ?
. G.  P.  :  No,  simply  you,  Jim. [I  was  there,  but  not  alone,  all  the  time
with  Marte,  December  1. — J.]

He  had  heen  asked  at  tlie  previous  sitting  to  find  out  tlie  name  of  the
father  of  Mr.  Marte.  He  said  here  tliat  he  had  not  got  it,  could  not  find
everybody  in  a  minute,  etc.

Mr.  Marte  formed  an  opinion  entirely  unfavourable  to  Mrs.  Piper.

The  remaining  sittings  of  this  series  are  nearly  all  much  shorter,
and  contain  much  less  characteristic  matter.  This  fact  I  attribute  to
Mrs.  Piper's  increasing  ill-health,  leading  to  an  operation  in  March,
1893.

Eighth. December  lG//(,  1892.

Present :  Mr.  Howard,  R.  H.,  and  Reporter,  and,  later,  Mrs.
Howard,  Katharine,  and  Evelyn.

Phinuit  talked  for  a  short  time  about  various  persons  and  makes  a
prophecy  not  yet  fulfilled.  G.  P.  began  to  write  :  "How  are  you,  Jim  and
Hodgson.  Where  is  Mary,  and  what  is  that  little  piece  of  paper  she  has  in
lierliand?"  I  then  inquired  if  he  could  tell  us  what  Mrs.  Howard  said  to
him  alone,  if  he  happened  to  be  there,  soon  after  the  last  sitting.  "She
asked  me  to  help  her  and  try  and  make  things  right,  and  asked  nie  to  help
her  convince  you  and  others  that  this  is  I.  Nov/  I  think  that  is  all  I  heard
her  say."  Mrs.  Howard  comes  in  shortly  after,  and  reads  this,  and  says  :  "I
knew  you  knew  some  of  the  things  I  said  to  you.  Did  you  see  me  writing
to  you  1 "  [Mrs.  Howard  did  not  fill  in  her  notes  to  this  sitting.  My  im-
pression is,  that  she  had  thought  something  more  specific  than  this  which
was  not  mentioned  by  G.  P.  She  writes  at  the  end  of  1897  :  "What  1
said  to  G.P.  alone  was  said  for  him  alone  and  was  therefore  not  put  in  any
note,  but  all  his  references  to  that  and  to  my  writing  were  I  think  correct.
I  thutk  I  had  the  piece  of  paper  in  my  hand  in  my  own  room  but  not  when
I  came  into  the  library,  where  the  sitting  was  held,  but  I  cannot  be  sure  of
this  as  my  memory  may  play  me  false."]  Previous  to  Mrs.  Howard's
entering,  G.  P.  had  expressed  a  wish  to  speak  to  me  one  moment,  and  now
proceeded  with  this.  He  wished  to  explain  again  about  the  difficulty  of
communicating,  and  the  necessity  of  his  not  being  interrupted  when  he  was
Answering  a  question.  "This  is  the  most  diflicult  task,  I  must  say,  that  I
€ver  had  to  i:)erform,  so  please  be  as  kind  and  patient  as  possible  .  .  .
first  you  asked  me  to  pump  Phinuit."

Phinuit  :  You  better  shut  up  about  me. ...  '  '

Mrs.  Howard  gives  Phinuit  some  articles,  and  is  talking  witli  Phinuit
while  the  hand  is  writing: "His  proper  name  is  John  Pt.  [?]  Scliville,

•only  P  no  Phinuit  at  all." [Phinuit  seems  to  be  having  a  struggle  with

the  hand. George  in  the  meantime  is  trying  to  go  on  with  the  writing.]

2  F  2


430


Ridiard  Hodfjson.


[part


Two  or  three  illegible  words  written  and  the  paper  is  torn. Then  "this
is  a  tabula  rasa, "  emphatically  underlined.

Mrs.  Howard  :  Who  has  got  the  hand,  doctor  ?

G.  P.  :  "George,  I  am  going  into  the  head.  .  .  .  T  want  Horlgson
to  speak  his  mind  fully  to  nie  personally  nuiv."  .

R.  H.  :  Well,  I  have  not  got  anything  specially  on  my  mind  now,
George.

G.  P.  :  "Have  I  said  anything  to  trouble  you?  be  frank,  please."

R.  H.  :  No,  you  have  not  said  anything  to  trouble  me,  except  this,  except
the  things  that  make  it  difficult  to  reconcile  with  your  identity.  You  said
things  that  easily  contradict,  George,  and  those  things  conflict  evidentially
■with  the  proof  that  it  is  you.  Of  course,  those  tilings  trouble  me  a  good  deal,
but  I  have  nut  anything  special.

G.  P.  ;  "I  think  you  will  find  my  statements  contradictory  only  when
you  confuse  by  all  talking  at  once,  or  when  I  do  not  fully  understand  your
questions."

R.  H.  ;  Well,  George,  I  am  going  to  go  over  all  the  things  that  appear  to
be  contradictory,  and  ask  you  about  them,  but  I  was  not  going  to  do  that  to-
night.

G.  P.  :  "That  is  what  I  want.  It  has  worried  me  far  more  than  it  has
you,  my  dear  fellow."

R.  H.  :  Well,  I  suppose  it  must  have,  George. I  can  understand  that.

G.  P.  :  "Now  just  let  me  illustrate.  When  I  began  to  speak  about
my  existence  here  and  was  ready  to  quote  it  philosophically,  you  interrupted
me  continually."

R.  H.  :  Well,  we  are  very  sorry,  George  ;  we  would  like  you  to  go.
straight  on  without  our  saying  a  word  for  an  hour,  if  you  could.

G.  P.  :  "  Don't  you  know  you  did  it  ? Please  be  frank."

R.  H.  :  No,  I  am  not  aware  that  we  did,  George,  except  you  seemed  aa
though  you  needed  us  to  speak  to  you  occasionally.

G.  P.  :  "Have  you  not  got  the  things  written  ?  "

R.  H.  :  Yes.

Mrs.  Howard  :  Yes,  I  think  he  was  interrupted  a  good  deal  by  Marte  at
the  last  sitting.

G.  P.  :  "Well,  please  read  them  carefully  .  .  .  and  see  if  I  am  nob
right."

R.  H.  :  Well,  we  will  take  care,  I  think,  George,  not  to  do  you  an
inj  ustice.

G.  P.  :  "Thank  you."

The  statements  made  here  by  G.  P.  I  now  believe  to  be  fully  justified,
though  apparently  I  did  not  think  so  at  the  time.

R.  H.  :  Now,  George,  if  you  can  give  us  a  description  of  your  life  there,
or  of  the  views  that  you  had  on  pliilosophy  here,  or  anything  of  that  sort,
continuously,  we  shall  be  glad  to  have  you  write  or  speak  without  saying  a.
word.

G.  P.  :  "  Yes,  but  this  has  worried  me  so  much  I  had  to  speak  to  you
about  it."

R.  H.  :  Well,  we  are  very  glad,  George,  that  you  have  spoken,  and  I
know  that  we  have  interrupted,  but


sxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  431


G.  P.  :  "Because  it  is  most  difficult  to  express  one's  thoughts  through
material  substance.  Now  when  you  consider  this,  I  think  you  will  allow  for
some  snags,  won't  you  '?  "

R.  H.  :  Certainly.  Now,  would  ycu  like  to  answer  Marte's  questions  or
to  talk  on  your  own  account  ?

Gr.  P.  :  "Thought  exists  without  material  substance,  and  is  in  no  wise
dependent  upon  it.  [We  probably  could  not  decipher  it  iuimediately,  and
so  he  wrote]  body.  I  assure  you  tliis.  For  thought  continues  to  exist  even
after  the  anniliilation  of  or  non-existence  of  body. Is  that  not  like  me  ?  "

R.  H.  :  Well,  go  on,  George,  we  are  taking  it  all  down.

Mrs.  Howard  :  That  is  like  you.

G.  P.  :  "  Well,  the  personal  existence  or  the  reality  of  the  Ego  is  not  a
truth  of  inference. Am  I  getting  you  mixed  up  1 "
R.  H.  :  No,  not  at  all,  George.

G.  P.  :  "All  right.  I  want  to  be  sure  that  I  am  clear  myself."  "The
[Ego  ?]  exists  after  the  disposition  of  the  body,  and  in  an  immediate
intuition  .  .  .  [This  last  sentence  was  apparently  not  deciphered  at
the  time,  and  the  result  was  tliat  G.  P. 's  attempt  to  distinguisli  between
"  an  inunediate  intuition  "  and  "  a  truth  of  inference  "  as  applied  to  "  the
reality  of  the  Ego  "  entirely  escaped  us,  and  the  train  of  his  thought  was
switched  off.  I  said  we  could  not  read  it,  and  asked  him  to  write  it  again,
•etc.  Then  followed]  "  The  Ego  exists  after  the  disposition  of  the  body,
and  consolidated  witli  thought  in  which  one  and  the  same  is  thought.  Am  I
confused?"  We  read  this  aloud,  and  "consolidated  with"  was  rejected
for  "combined  in,"  and  finally  "it  is  all  one.  That  is  what  I  want  to
explain."  .

G.  P.  :  "All  right.  Well,  now  then,  after  the  Ego  (which  goes  to  make
lip  the  material  organism)  leaves  the  material  organism,  it  goes  on  existing
just  the  same  as  in  the  material,  only  is  much  more  free,  and  can  express
itself  in  a  much  clearer  sense  than  when  in  the  material.  Man's  mind  or
soul  is  a  tabula  rnsa  here  for  a  register  of  thought.  Read  it  now
please  .  .  .  you  know  that  already  .  .  .  but  let  me  tell  you  what
I  know."

At  this  stage  Katharine  and  Evelyn  were  introduced  and  greeted,  and
G.  P.  was  asked  if  he  could  talk  to  them.

G.  P.  :  "  Not  now,  dear  Jim. Well,  I  want  to  finish  this  article.  Tlien
as  thought  goes  on  in  the  spiritual,  I  express  myself,  my  thought  to  you.
[Questions  and  repetitions,  owing  to  difficulty  in  deciphering]  .
All  right. Here  I  am  as  the  Ego  of  George  Pelhara . . . well,  now,
you  see  as  thought  is  not  cause,  but  cause  is  thought. Do  you  understand  1 "

R.  H.  :  Certainly,  exactly. [  ?  ]

G.  P.  :"  Well,  then,  so  thought  goes."

[Pause.  Feeling  of  cap  on  head  and  working  his  arm.]  ,  .  "I
want  my  shawl. "  [Shawl  placed  on  head.]  Here  G.  P.  begins  to  use  the
voice,  speaks  again  about  the  difficulty  of  recalling  everything  in  a  moment,
and  the  confusion  produced  by  interruptions,  etc.,  and  says  inter  alia  :  "I
am  getting  farther  away  from  you  each  time.  I  am  going  on  ;  it  is  too  bad
in  one  sense,  but  it  is  all  right  for  me."  He  wanted  to  know  what  Marte's
questions  were,  could  not  remember  to  whom  the  book  on  The  One  or  th&


432


RicJtaixl  Hodgson.


[part


Ma  n  y  was  dedicaf-ed.  When  aslced  if  he  remembered  anything  about  any  book
called  One  or  the  Many,  lie  said  :  (Mrs.  Ilowaixl  having  previously  remarked
that  it  was  not  a  printed  book)  "No.  1  did  not  know  there  was  such  a
book  printed."

R.  H.  :  You  never  heard  of  any  book  bj'that  name  ^jrintcd  or  unprhited  ?
[See  previous  sitting.]

Gr.  P.  :  "Yes  I  have. Wait  a  minute. Say  that  again,  Hodgson."

R.  H.  :  You  don't  know  of  any  book  by  the  name  of  One  or  the  Manif
printed  or  unprinted  ?

G.  P.  :  "Yes  I  do  ;  that  is  mine — [pause]— let  mo  think  ;  let  me  write  ifc.
for  you,  will  you  !  "

Shortly  afterwards  there  was  some  writing,  very  confused,  and  not
all  deci]3herable,  in  which  the  names  of  Orenberg  and  Rogers  were
mentioned.

R.  H.  :  Do  you  mean  that  you  think  it  was  Rogers  wlio  wrote  The  One
or  the  Many  ?

G.  P.  :  "  I  think  so,  but  do  not  remouiber."  Then  followed  a  little
more  writing,  expressing  a  consciousness  of  being  mixed  about  the  book,
Phinuit  in  the  meantime  taking  control  of  the  voice  and  talking.  The  last
writing  was  "remind  me  of  it  when  I  come  again,  and  all  I  ever  knew  I
v/ill  tell  you."  Phinuit  talks  for  some  time,  chiefly  with  Katharine  and
Evelyn.  [The  references  to  Orenberg  and  Rogers  suggest  an  automatic  or
dreamy  association  of  ideas.  He  had  been  told  at  a  previous  sitting  that  his
MS.,  about  which  he  inquired,  was  in  the  care  of  Orenberg,  and  he  knew
that  a  volume  of  his  poems  had  been  in  the  hands  of  Rogers  for
posthumous  publication.]  ■  , .  ,

I  have  given  these  lengthy  and  detailed  extracts  from  the  sittings
partly  to  lead  my  readers  along  the  path  by  which  I  myself  have
travelled,  that  they  may  be  to  a  certain  extent  equipped  for  some
of  the  points  to  be  considered  in  asking  whether  there  is  any
evidence  here  of  an  extraneous  intelligence  or  not,  biit  partly  also
because  of  the  impossibility  of  summarising,  in  any  brief  statement,
the  evidential  value  of  a  conversation  where  one  of  the  interlocutors
may  bo  restricted  to  frequently  indecipherable  "  automatic  writing "
as  a  channel  of  communication.  Whether  spoken  or  written,  I  regard
the  dramatic  form  of  the  utterances  as  an  integral  part  of  the
phenomenon,  which  must  in  no  wise  be  neglected,  even  though  we
may  think  that  it  can  be  fully  explained  as  an  outcome  of  still  embodied
minds — for  example,  on  the  analogy  of  morbid  or  ordinary  dream
processes.  Much  of  this  dramatic  form  is  incommunicable,  and  hereia
lies  one  of  the  difficulties  of  affording  a  fair  estimate  of  those  manifesta-
tions of  personality  which  depend  upon  intimate  habits  of  thought  and
emotion,  and  cannot  be  expressed  by  the  verbal  reproduction  of
definite  remembrances.

The  above  instances  may,  however,  suffice  to  illustrate  some  of  the
causes  of  obscurity  and  confusion  in  this  automatic  writing.


XXXIII.] Ohsei^ations  of  Certain  Flienomena  of  Trance.  4C3


Ninth. December  l^lh,  1892.
Present :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  R.  H.,  and  Reporter.

Sitting  begins  by  G.  P.'s  using  the  voice.  .  .  .  Mr.  Howard  and
R.  H.  leave  the  room  on  request  of  G.  P.,  who  holds  a  short  conversation
with  Mrs.  Howard,  after  which  they  return.  G.  P.  says  he  wants  to  under-
stand Marte's  question.  After  some  references  to  this  by  Sir.  and  Mrs.
Howard,  G.  P.  expresses  a  strong  desire  to  see  Helen  Vance,  saying  that  ho
liad  seen  her  father  [who  had  a  sitting  March  30th,  1892].  He  is  told  that
she  is  coming  the  next  time.

Mrs.  Howard  gives  a  letter,  [this  must  be  supposed  to  have  come  within
the  field  of  vision  of  Mrs.  Piper  though,  as  I  have  explained,  I  believe  that
the  trance-personalities  do  not  acquire  any  information  by  the  ordinary
process  of  vision  (see  p.  317). — R.  H]  saying,  "I  want  you  to  see  your
father's  letter,  because  there  is  something  in  it  that  will  please  you."

G.  P.  :  This  does  not  sound  as  father  would  talk  when  I  was  in  the  body.
.  He  believes  that  I  exist  [calls  for  Hodgson,  complains  of  being
muddled,  and  asks  Hodgson  to  put  his  hand  "  up  there"  ((.e.,  probably
against  the  forehead)  ]  He  was  pained,  but  he  is  no  longer  pamed,  because
he  feels  that  I  exist.

Mrs.  Howard  :  That  is  right ;  I  have  read  it.

G.  P.  :  That  brings  me  nearer  to  my  father  ;  now  give  him  my  tenderest
love  and  tell  him  that  I  am  very  near  him,  and  see  him  almost  every  day,  if
I  could  go  by  days,  but  I  can't  judge  of  that,  because  I  have  no  idea  of  time  ;
that  is  one  thing  I  have  lost,  Hodgson.  .  .  .  But,  still,  I  am  veiy  near
to  him,  and  wish  to  express  my  kindest  feelings,  Jim,  Hodgson,  both  of  you,
and  I  see  him  and  hear  him  when  he  is  talking  of  me,  hear  him  discussing
with  mother  certain  things  about  my  life,  some  things  that  perhaps  pained
him,  and  some  things  that  perhaps  pleased  him.  I  often  hear  him  discussing
my  good  qualities  and  my  weak  points,  but  it  is  a  pleasure  to  me  to  know  I
can  be  so  near  him.

R.  H.  :  He  will  be  very  glad,  and  we  will  be  sure  to  send  the  message.

[The  letter  handed  to  George  was  one  entirely  on  business  matters,  not
the  one  we  supposed,  in  which  his  father  did  speak  of  George's  re-appearance
at  these  sittings,  and  his  own  interest  in  hearing  of  it. — J.]

G.  P.  :  You  of  all  others  are  the  one  that  T  want  to  be  absolutely  certain
of  my  identity.  .  .  .  Hodgson,  I  mean,  and  Jim,  I  want  you  both  to
feel  I  am  no  secondary  personality  of  the  medium's  [struggling  to  get  the
last  phrase  out.]

Shortly  after ivards  he  says  he  is  "getting  weak,"  and  soon  Phinuib
"  takes  control  of  the  head  "  and  greets  the  sitters,  but  is  interruf)ted  by
the  seizing  of  the  hand  by  G.  P.,  who  writes.  I  quote  the  first  part  of  the
writing,  omitting  the  remarks  connected  with  our  interruptions.

"  Now,  about  my  theory  of  spirit  life  independent  of  the  material
substance.  I  live,  think,  see,  hear,  know,  and  feel  just  as  clearly -as  when  I
was  in  the  material  life,  but  it  is  not  so  easy  to  explain  it  to  you  as  you
would  naturally  suppose,  especially  when  the  thoughts  have  to  be  expressed
through  substance  materially.  However,  this  only  gives  me  jjleasure  to
express  to  you  all  that  I  can  possibly  even  in  this  peculiar  way. I  am  not


Richard  Iloclgson,


[part


distressed,  though,  because  I  cannot  do  as  I  would  like.  I  am  very  thankful
and  willing  to  do  all  I  can  (for  you  in  this  way)  even  though  it  is  not  all
clear.  .  .  Nevertheless,  I  am  bound  to  do  just  all  I  can  for  you  to  prove
to  you  that  I  (George  Pelham)  do  absolutely  exist,  independently  of  the
luaterial  body  which  I  once  inhabited.  .  .  .  Now,  then,  what  I  want  to
•say  is  that  I  am  light  and  free,  and  much  clearer  in  thought  than  I  was  in
my  material  body.  .  .  .  You  see  as  I  was  explaining  to  you  about
thought,  and  had  not  strength  materially  nor  time  to  finish,  I  will  go  on
to  that  again  and  in  a  little  more  detail,  which  will  explain  to  you  (as  well  as
anything)  how  and  what  I  am  now,  i.e.,  as  a  spiritual  Ego.  Thought  is,  as  I  said
before,  in  no  wise  dependent  upon  body,  but  must  necessarily,  as  yon  see,  depend
upon  the  body  of  another  person  or  Ego  in  the  material  to  express  one's
thought  fully  after  the  annihilation  of  one's  own  material  body.  ...  In
consequence  of  this  you  see  that  there  must  necessarily  be  more  or  less
confliction  between  one's  spiritual  Ego  or  mind,  and  the  material  mind  or
Ego  of  the  one  which  you  are  obliged  to  use  to  explain  these  difficult
problems  to  you,  my  friends,  in  the  material.  .  .  .  Well,  then,  thought
is  an  immediate  intuition  or  primary  datum  of  consciousness  ...  in
my  present  life  everything  is  expressed  by  thought.  Now  I  am  getting  a
little  hazy."

Questions  asked  for.  R.  H.  asks  what  becomes  of  the  medium  during
trance.  "  She  passes  out  as  your  etherial  goes  out  when  you  sleep."  R.  H.  :
Well,  do  you  see  that  there  is  a  conflict,  because  the  brain  substance  is,  so
to  speak,  saturated  with  her  tendencies  of  thought  ?

G.  P.  :  "  No,  not  that,  but  the  solid  substance  called  brain,  it  is  difficult
to  control  it,  simply  because  it  is  material  .  .  .  her  mind  leaves
the  brain  empty,  as  it  were,  and  I  myself  or  other  sjjiritual  mind  or
thought  takes  the  empty  brain,  and  there  is  where  and  when  the  conflict
arises."

A  little  further  conversation  with  G.  P.  writing,  followed  by  a  short
general  talk  with  Phinuit.

Tenth. December  list,  1892.

Present :  Mr.  and  ]\Irs.  Howard,  Reporter,  and  most  of  the  time
Miss  Helen  Vance.  Miss  Vance  was  not  present  at  the  beginning  of
the  sitting,  and  Mrs.  Piper  did  not  see  her  at  all  while  in  the  normal
state.

[G.  P.  had  been  informed  at  the  previous  sitting  that  Helen  Vance  was
"coming  next  time,"  and  after  the  previous  sitting  was  over,  and  Mrs.
Piper  was  perfectly  normal,  it  was  mentioned  in  her  presence  that  Helen
Vance  was  coming  to  the  next  sitting,  though  Mrs.  Piper  appeared
indeed  not  to  have  heard  this  remark.  But  it  would  be  fair  to  assume
in  any  case  that  Miss  Vance  might  have  been  known  to  Mrs.  Piper.
Her  father,  the  reader  may  be  again  reminded,  had  a  sitting  on  March  30th,
1892. —R.  H.]

[Towards  the  close  of  the  previous  sitting,  Mr.  Howard  remarked  to
Phinuit  that  he  was  going  to  see  "that  old  friend  of  mine"  (referring
obviously  to  Fenton,  whom  Phinuit  had  described,  and  G.  P.  mentioned  by


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  435


name  at  previous  sittings,  and  who  lives  in  a  country  town).  Pliinuit  replied
"Good,  I  will  go  with  you.  You  do  something  special,  move  some  object
or  something,  and  I  will  go  and  see  if  I  can  tell  you  what  it  is."] . .  .

Phinuit :  Where  is  Jim  ? I  saw  him  at  a  place.

Ml".  Howard  :  What  did  you  see  me  do  ?

Phinuit :  I  saw  a  thing  like  that  there  ;  what  is  that  thing  there?
Mrs.  Howard  :  A  table.

Phinuit  :  I  saw  you  thei-e,  and  saw  you  take  a  lot  of  things  on  that —
what  do  you  call  that— books  '(
Mr.  Howard  :  Books,  yes.

Phinuit  :  And  what  is  the  scarf  thing  you  had  over  you  there,  you  and
the  old  gentleman  there  1  He  is  an  elderly  gentleman.  You  had  a  thing
something  like  this  that  attracted  my  attention,  a  desk  ;  you  know  what  I
mean  ;  and  then  I  saw  you  take  and  put  one  book  on  the  other,  books  they
were.

Mr.  Howard  :  Yes,  there  was  a  lot  of  books  there.
Phinuit  :  Well,  what  were  you  doing  with  them  ?

Mr.  Howard  :  I  was  looking  over  them  to  see  what  I  could  get  to  read.
Phinuit  :  I  saw  you  do  that  particularly  ;  I  mean  to  say  that  one  thing.
Mr.  Howard  :  Well,  I  wanted  to  get  some  old  books  to  bring  down  to  the
library.

Phinuit  :  Oh,  T  see  ;  I  saw  you  lay  them  on  this  thing,  you  know,  like
a  desk.  I  saw  you  lay  two  or  three  there.  You  see  what  I  mean  ;  you
remember  of  doing  it  ?

Mr.  Howard  :  I  do  perfectly.  I  brought  the  books  down  and  gave  them
to  the  public  library  to-day.

Phinuit  :  Oh,  I  see.  And  then  I  saw  this  gentleman  sitting  in  a  big,  like
a  chair,  with  arms  to  it ;  you  know  what  I  mean,  and  you  were  sitting  back
in  another  one  with  arms  to  it,  talking  to  him.

Mr.  Howard  :  Yes,  I  was  sitting  in  a  chair  with  arms,  and  he  was  lying
down.

Phinuit  :  He  was  reclining,  but  you  were  in  a  chair  with  arms  to  it.
.  .  .  And  there  were  in  the  room  where  they  were  a  great  many  books,
<lo  you  know,  all  round  the  place,  and  right  over — I  am  not  very  good  at
illustrating,  but  you  know  what  they  call  the  mantel  there,  a  great  big
thing,  looks  like  a  picture  in  a  frame,  and  there  is  one  in  that  ;  then  on
the  other  side  there  is  another  one,  and  a  great  big  curtain  drawn,  what  we
call  in  French  a  portiere,  in  that  same  apartment.

Mr.  Howard  :  Yes.

Phinuit :  Then  there  is  a  great  big  desk  with  feet  to  go  under  it.
Mr.  Howard  :  Yes,  he  has  that  right  by  where  he  sits.

*  *  *  *  *  *

Phinuit :  Well,  is  there  any  question  you  want  to  ask  me  about  that  old
gentleman  ?

Mr.  Howard  :  He  is  ill,  isn't  he  ?

Phinuit  :  He  is  quite  ill,  and  he  has  trouble  right  here  [chest],  and  right
round  here  ;  right  round  the  heart  there  is  a  little  bit ;  it  is  difficult  for  him
to  breathe  ;  you  see  what  I  mean  1

Airs.  How  ard  :  Yes,  he  said  so  yesterday.


436


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Mr.  Howard  :  Yesterday  he  had  a  sort  of  an  attack.

Phiiiuit :  Well,  that  is  what  I  am  getting  at,  his  physical  when  you  were
with  him,  and  his  breathing  [medium  breathing  hard]  ;  then  he  has  got  a
white  medicine,  looks  something  like  a  little  powder,  that  he  takes.  I
don't  know  as  you  have  seen  that.

Mr.  Howard  :  No,  I  have  not.

Phinuit  :  Well,  he  has  taken  that  sometimes  when  he  is  not  well.  It
seems  like  a  valvular  trouljle.

*  *  *  *  *  *  ■

Phinuit :  I  saw  you  sitting  at  that  desk  too,  Jim.

Mr.  Howard  :  Yes.  I  sat  there  talking  with  him.  I  went  up  and
wondered  whether  you  would  see  me. We  spoke  about  you.

Phinuit  :  Do  you  know  that  scarf  thing  '? — he  has  got  something  with
him — what  do  you  call  that,  afghau  [struggling  over  the  last  woi-d],  like  a
scarf,  round  thing  ;  I  saw  him  have  that  on.  And  do  you  know  really  that
fellow  knows  in  his  mind  that  he  is  not  going  to  get  well  1  Do  you  know
that?

Mr.  Howard  :  Oh,  yes.

Phinuit :  And  he  may  not  say  to  you — that  I  am  not  prepared  to  say,
but,  however,  in  his  mind  he  feels  that  he  is  not  going  to  get  well  ...

[I  placed  about  half  a  dozen  different  volumes  on  tlie  writing  table  by
the  side  of  the  bed  on  which  my  friend  lay.  These  he  examined,  at  my
request,  to  determine  which  he  would  give  to  the  Boston  Public  Library,
as  early  American  imprints.

I  wore  no  "scarf  tiling,"  merely  my  usual  velveteen  coat.  He  wore  a
sort  of  thick  blue  dressing  gown.

He  sat  in  no  chair,  but,  as  I  said,  lay  in  his  bed,  resting  on  pillows  and
one  elbow.  I  sat  much  of  the  time  opposite  him  in  an  arm-chair.  There
are  bookshelves  pretty  much  all  round  the  room.  Over  the  mantel  is  a
moderate  sized  picture  about  18  by  20  inches.  Opposite,  two  curtains,
not  large  ones,  overhang  a  window,  keeping  out  the  light  from  my
friend's  eyes.

He  has  trouble  with  his  heart.  I  know  nothing  of  any  white  medicine.
He  feels  that  he  will  not  recover.  He  wrote  to  me  December  22nd:  "I
have  no  special  appreliensions,  but  it  seems  to  me  obvious  that  I  lose  strength
and  vitality  from  year  to  year  (to  put  it  mildly)  and,  anyhow,  it  can't  last
for  ever." — J.]

Phinuit  says  that  G.  P.  is  coming,  and  writing  begins  just  after  the
entrance  of  Miss  Vance.  There  is  much  misunderstanding  of  the  writing,
owing  partly  to  the  absence  of  R.  H.,  who  is  more  accustomed  to  dociplicring
rapidly.  G.  P.  gives  both  names,  Helen  and  Vance,  asks  after  the  society
[a  little  society  for  literary  purposes  {i.e.  practice  in  writing),  to  which
George  and  Miss  Vance  belonged  as  well  as  two  others,  young  women. — H.  V.]
[George  had  been  questioned  about  this  society  before.  See  p.  302 — R.  11.],
after  her  father  and  mother  and  brother  [natural],  and  said  that  one  died  in
infancy,  that  he  sees  her.  [The  statement  that  a  sister  died  in  infancy  was
correct. — H.  V.]  Miss  Vance  asked  tlie  name  of  this  sister,  and  then  just
afterwards  tlie  name  of  "Ken's  friend  who  i)assod  out,  in  college  with
Ken." G.  P.  begins  to  explain  about  the  need  of  asking  questions  slowly.


xxxiir.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  437


and  waiting  for  tlie  answer. Phinuit  also  begins  to  explain  to  the  sitters
what  to  do. In  the  meantime  Miss  Vance  apparently  dropped  the  question
about  lier  deceased  sister's  name,  and  repeated  her  request  for  the  name  of
her  brother  Ken's  friend,  and  the  replies  suggest  that  G.  P.  thought  that
she  wanted  to  speak  with  that  friend. "I  will  bring  him  for  you."  "He-
will  tell  you  and  send  a  message  to  Kenneth." [Name  of  Miss  Vance's
brotlier.]  Later  on  G.  P.  writes  the  name  of  Harry  Guild.  [The  name  of  one-
of  my  brother's  college  friends  who  died  more  recently  than  the  one  wliose
name I wanted. — H.  V.] Later  on  he  wrote:  "Charles  is  with  me.
You  asked . . . tell  Ken ... to  keep  the  book  he  gave  him
in  college (what  book,  history  ?)  Macaulay's. (Charles  gave  it  to  Ken
in  College ;  is  that  it  1 ) Yes, at  least  he  had  it,  so  he  says.  Tell
him  about  Hale  and . . . how  is  Berwick  1 [See  p.  301]. Tell  him
Charles  says  he  is  to  keep  work  he  instructed  him  about  and  help  him  write.
I  don't  think  you  understand." [Charles  was  the  first  name  of  the  class-
mate of  Kennetii  and  George,  about  whom  Miss  Vance  was  inquiring.  He-
died  in  1887. Harry  Guild  died  in  1888. She  notes  that  Ken  has  no-
recollection  of  any  book,  and  does  not  vmderstaud  the  allusion  to  Hale.};
He  referred  to  having  seen  Miss  V.'s  father  [sitting  on  March  30th,  1892],
asked  after  "the  rest  of  the  girls  connected  with  our  Society." Miss  V.
made  a  statement  about  one  of  these  other  members,  giving  her  name,  and.
soon  afterwards  asked  if  he  remembered  the  names  of  the  others  in  the  club^
G.  P.  asked  after  ' '  May . . ." [My  sister  Mabel  sometimes  called  May.
In  this  place  George  wrote  May  followed  by  last  name  we  could  not  read.
Some  scribbles,  one  of  which  was  dotted,  may  have  been  meant  for  Davis,
the  correct  name. Later  on  (after  Miss  Vance  mentioned  this  name.  — R.  H.)-
when  George  said  he  had  already  writteii  it,  he  turned  back  to  tliis  page  and
wrote  above  the  two  names,  "It  is  there." — H.  V.] Miss  Vance  repeated,
later  her  question  about  the  other  lady  member  of  the  club,  and  asked  also-
to  be  told  about  "a  girl  we  both  know  who  liked  you  and  you  liked  her  very
much." As  interpreted,  "  Alice  "  was  written. [Iircorrect. — H.  V.]  Later
G.  P.  asked  after  Nell. [No  "Nell  "  I  know  of.— H.  V.] Some  time  after-
wards Miss  A^ance  mentions  the  name,  apparently,  of  this  third  lady  member-

[Louie  ]  of  the  club  in  answer  to  G.  P. 's  question, — "Nov/,  whom  do-

you  have  to  correct  your  writings  1  "  [We  all  corrected  each  other's  papers,
in  turn. — H.  V.], — "But  do  they  give  satisfaction ?  (Yes).  What,  iix
their  corrections  !  [Miss  Vance  did  not  at  first  understand.  Reporter
explains.]  (Yes,  but  not  as  much  as  j'ou  ;  your  corrections  were  better  than
theirs).  Well,  that  is  what  I  am  trying  to  get  out  of  you.  (In  other-
words,  George,  you  wanted  a  compliment  from  me).  Oh,  bosh,  you  know
me  better  than  that."  After  references  to  other  matters  (among  them  a.
question  about  a  pencil  which  he  said  he  had  given  Kenneth,  who  has,
however,  no  recollection  of  any  pencil)  he  wrote  that  he  had  asked  half  a.
dozen  times  about  Louie  but  could  not  got  any  answer,  and  he  finally  insisted
on  their  turning  back  to  tlio  early  sheets  of  the  writing,  where  he  claimed
that  he  had  written  it.  At  the  time  of  original  writing  the  word  which  he-
now  said  was  Louie  was  read  as  Sadie  (as  it  certainly  is),  but  this  interpre-
tation was  negatived  at  the  time  by  G.  P.,  and  the  subject  was  not  pursued
then  by  the  sitters.  ...


438


Richard  Hodgson,


[part


Eleventh. December  22,nd,  1892.

Present  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  R.  H.,  and  Reporter,  and,  part  of
the  time,  Katharine  and  Evelyn.

Phinuit  talks  with  Evelyn,  about  her  health,  diet,  etc.

G.  P.,  writing,  refers  to  my  absence  last  time:  "I  followed  you  on  a
railway  train  for  some  distance  and  then  I  thought  you  were  in  N.  Y.
•{correct,  but  of  no  importance  evidentially]  but  am  not  sure  ...  I
would  not  be  too  positive,  as  things  louk  differently  to  me  now  from  what
they  did  when  I  was  in  my  material  body.  (I  suppose  .  .  .  that  you
•don't  see  the  physical  universe  directly,  but  come  into  relation  with  our
percefjtion  of  the  physical  universe  1 )  Yes,  absolutely  in  a  spiritual  sense  ;
in  fact  it  is,  and  must  necessarily  be,  through  the  spiritual  that  I  see  you,
.and  can  follow  you,  and  tell  what  you  are  doing  from  time  to  time."

See  pp.  320-2  for  the  rest  of  the  account  of  this  sitting.

TuxlJ'tli. January  2-k//,  1893.

Present  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard  and  Reportei",  and,  part  of  the
time,  R.  H.,  Katharine,  and  Evelyn.  Mr.  Hodgson  comes  in  after  the
^sitting  is  begun  and  leaves  before  it  is  finished.

Mrs.  Howard  places  a  book  on  Mrs.  PijDcr's  head,  just  after  G.  P.  has
begun  to  -write,  and  says  :  "  Do  you  remember  that  1 "

G.  P.  :  "Oh,  yes.  It  is  my  French  Lyrics."  [Correct.]  [There  is  no
other  contemporary  memorandum  as  to  how  Mrs.  Howard  placed  the  book
on  Mrs.  Pij^er's  head.  My  own  remembrance  is  that  Mrs.  Howard  came
into  the  room  holding  the  book  behind  her  own  back  and  placed  it  on  Mrs.
Piper's  head  from  behind.  Mrs.  Howard  writes  at  the  end  of  1897  that  her
recollection  agrees  with  this.  She  adds  :  "I  brought  it  in  for  a  test,  and  put
it  so  that  it  could  only  be  perceived  by  supernormal  means."  The  correct
.statement  may  of  course  have  been  due  to  simple  thought-transference.
^R.  H.].

Very  little  communication  from  G.  P.  He  says  he  has  not  yet  found
Marte's  father  [see  p.  429],  that  he  had  seen  Marte  himself,  that  he  thought
lie  was  out  west,  Chicago,  or  some  place  like  it,  lecturing.  [Correct,  but  of
no  special  importance,  known  to  Mrs.  Howard,  and  easily  ascertained
knowledge. —R.  H.]

R.  H.  :  Well,  George,  I  want  to  ask  you  if  you  can't  do  something.

G.  P.  :  "What  you  want  me  to  do  for  you  I  will,  and  I  know  what  it  is
.  .  .  you  want  to  do  something,  and  have  me  tell  you  what  you  are
•doing."

In  reply  to  cpiestions  he  wrote  that  he  heard  me  say  so  to  Jim  ;  "heard
it  distinctly."  I  replied  that  he  "  heard  my  thought,"  (I  had  not  mentioned
it)  and  asked  if  he  could  tell  me  more  specifically  what  I  was  going  to  ask
liim  to  do. "  Oh,  no,  not  until  you  are  doing  it."

R.  H.  :  Well,  George,  I  want  to  go  away  very  shortly  while  you  are  still
here,  and  I  want  you  to  either  go  yourself  or  to  get  Phinuit  to  go,  and  if
possible  tell  them  here  where  I  am  going  and  what  I  am  doing.


XXXIil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  439'


G.  P.  :  "Yes,  I  will  try  my  best,  but  it  will  depend  wholly  on  my  seeing
your  spiritual  body,  so  please  send  out  your  spiritual  body  to  me  as  much  as.
you  possibly  can  while  you  are  doing  the  trick."  .

Shortly  afterwards  I  left,  and  G.  P.  also  stopped  writing.  Phinuit  talked
about  some  articles  that  were  given  (two  of  them  presented  at  previous
sittings).  Later  he  snid  there  was  a  Mr.  Osgood  there  who  seemed  to  know
the  Howards  [correct].  Then  came,  through  Phinuit,  Louis  [see  p.  337],
who  mentioned  Billy  Parker,  spoke  of  himself  as  a  painter,  asked  if  it
wasn't  the  room  where  he  had  been  many  a  time,  asked  "  Wliere  is  Bessie  1 "
Mrs.  Parker.]  Mrs.  Howard  brouglit  some  brushes.  "These  are  tlie-
brushes  I  gave  to  you."  [Correct.]  He  said  he  had  been  to  P  li  i  1  d  e
[Mrs.  Howard  then  said  Philadelphia]  [Phinuit  trying  unsuccessfully  to-
pronounce  it]  and  seen  his  friends  there  recently.  He  also  asked  after  his
friend  Tlieodore  [the  fii'st  name  of  an  artist  friend  of  Louis].

Phinuit  then  described  a  little  girl  named  Grace.  "  She  used  to  know
you  years  ago. She  has  reddish  hair  ;  she  passed  out  with  diphtheria."

Mrs.  Howard  :  I  am  sure  I  don't  know.  [Sae  Proceedin.js,  S.P.R.,
Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  40-1.]

Mrs.  Howard  asks  several  times  for  the  return  of  G.  P.,  and  after  an-
absence  of  about  thi'ee  quarters  of  an  hour  t'ne  writing  comes,  "I  have  only
returned  for  one  minute,  and  really  must  go  immediately  back  with  Hodgson,
or  I  shall  lose  it  all  now.  He  met  my  friend  Vance,  and  now  I  must  leave-
and  watch  them. An  revoir. George  P."  [Incorrect.]

Almost  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  there  is  a  communication  apparently
having  something  to  do  with  "Laura  Bridgman,"  the  hand  gesticulating
deaf  and  dumb  characters,  and  afterwards  writing  words  backwards  (not
mirror  writing). [See  pp.  422,  427,  440.]

A  sitting  had  been  arranged  for  Mr.  T.  B.  C.  (see  p.  472)  on  Januarys
28th,  and  I  i-equested  Mr.  Howard  to  take  the  first  part  of  this  sitting
and  report  to  me  what  G.  P.  claimed  to  have  seen  me  doing.  The
following  is  from  Mr.  Howai'd's  notes  made  the  same  day  :

He  [R.  H.]  went  to  Arthur  Carey's  house  and  talked  with  him  there-
[thei-e  were  several  persons  present,  then  or  later,  I  tliink  he  said],  and
R.  H.  got  on  a  table  or  some  elevated  thing,  and  turned  a  chair  upside-
down. These  things  he  said  he  saw.

All  this  was  wrong.  Mr.  Howard  reported  that  he  had  a  clos©
and  intimate  conversation  about  friends,  etc.  Among  the  statements.
Avas  the  following  :

He  said  he  had  seen  Mrs.  Howard  recently  doing  up  some  tilings  to  send
to  his  mother.  "What  things  could  you  see?''  "Books  and  pictures."
[Correct.  ]

Thirteenth. January  30th,  1893.

Piesent :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  R.  H  ,  and  a  gentleman  who  was.
introduced  to  the  medium  under  the  name  of  Smitli,  also  a  reporter.
G.  P.  did  not  manifest  until  specially  asked  for  hj  Mrs.  Howard.


llichard  Hodgson.


[part


Pliinuit  spoke  a  little  of  Mr.  Smith's  character,  and  said  there  was  a
young  man,  also  ap;)arently  an  older  one,  who  wished  to  commuoicate  with
liim.  The  latter  tried  to  write  a  few  words,  but  they  were  almost  entirely
illegible,  and  Phinuit  said  he  would  go  and  try  to  get  George  to  help  him.
There  were  further  vain  attempts  at  writing  while  Phinuit  was  talkii)g  about
persons  and  articles  imiuired  about  at  previous  sittings,  and  then  came  some
legible  writing  :  "I  am  glad  to  see  you,"  and  soon  after,  Phinuit  still
talking,  "  Tell  her  I  am  living  still,  Walt  W.".  ...  [On  April  25th,
1892,  Mrs.  Warner  had  presented  a  cap  which  had  belonged  to  Walt
Whitman,  to  whom  she  was  known  personally. See  p.  324.]

Then  came  several  different  writers.  A  lady  wrote  a  short,  message  to  a
previous  sitter.  A  friend  who  had  died  two  or  three  days  before,  as  was
known  to  us,  wrote  his  name  and  "I  am  all  right  now,  adieu."  Alice
James  (sister  of  Prof.  William  James)  made  a  brief  statement  about  her
brother  "  Bob,"  as  Robertson  James  was  commonly  called  by  members  of
liis  family.  All  this  was  accompanied  by  }uuch  violent  movement  in  the
hand  and  arm.

Ph.  :  What  is  the  matter  1  I  don't  know  what  they  are  doing  with  mo,
any  way.

R.  H.  :  Seems  to  be  a  regidar  stream  of  them  now.

Ph.  :  I  can't  help  it  ;  they  say  these  things,  and  they  will  say  them,
Hodgson. I  can't  help  it.

Then,  "I  am  with  you,  also,  Laura  Bridgman."  .  .  .  Mrs.  Howard
then  asks  for  George,  and  the  writing  stops  and  Phinuit  complains  because
Mrs.  Howard  has  "  sent  that  lady  out,"  and  there  is  some  discussion  in  con-
sequence, after  which  G.  P.  writes  that  he  does  not  recognise  this  gentleman
and  does  not  tliink  he  is  a  friend  of  his,  thinks  he  has  met  him,  but  doesn't
quite  recall  him.  Asked  where  he  thinks  lie  met  him,  he  writes  :  "  I  think
with  my  friend,  Marte.  Ask  him  if  he  remembers  me,  please  tell  him  who  I
am.  I  am  George  Pelliam."  Sitter  asks  if  he  has  been  in  New  York  ?  G.  P.
asks  if  he  did  not  meet  him  once  in  the  club,  or  reading-room,  of  his  friend,
Berwick.  Sitter  had  met  a  Mr.  Berwick,  but  not  for  many  years.  G.  P.
referred  again  to  the  club,  also  to  Marte,  asked  that  his  jjhoto  should  be
shown  to  the  sitter  and  said  :  "  I  do  not  remember  you  by  name,  only
by  face."  Sitter  said  that  he  had  met  ]\Tarte  in  New  York  when  there
v^'ere  many  others  present,  whose  names  he  did  not  know.  "I  really
was  there."

[On  the  morning  of  this  day  the  gentleman  here  spoken  of  as  Smith,  one
of  our  members  living  in  New  York,  happened  to  call  at  my  office.  A
desirable  experiment  occurred  to  me,  and  I  inquired  if  he  know  anything
about  George  Pelham  ;  he  replied  in  the  negative,  and  I  requested  him  to
attend  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  that  evening  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Howard.
Ho  accompanied  me  tliere  and  I  introduced  him  as  Mr.  Smith,  not  giving
any  information  whatever  to  the  Howards.  On  a  previous  occasion  I  had  in
the  same  way  taken  a  friend  who  knew  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pelham,  but  not  George
Pelham,  and  was  unknown  to  Mr.  and  Mi's.  Howard.  On  that  occasion
there  was  no  sitting  owing  to  Mrs.  Piper's  illness,  and  after  it  was  decided  that
Mrs.  Pijier  was  too  ill  to  sit,  I  had  introduced  him  by  his  real  name  to  the-
Howards,  who  then  learned  that  he  was  a  personal  friend  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  441


Pelham.  I  wislied  to  see  whether  at  this  sitting,  G.  P.  communicating  would
claim  some  personal  knowledge  of  Mr.  Smith,  or  would  claim  that  Mr.  Smith
was  known  to  his  father  and  mother,  as  I  felt  certain  that  the  Howards
would  infer,  from  the  fact  of  my  taking  Mr.  Smith  to  their  house  under  the
circumstances,  that  he  had  some  special  relation  to  G.P.  I  might  thus,  I
thought,  obtain  some  clue  as  to  how  far  the  minds  of  the  Howards  might
affect  the  communication  from  G.  P.  The  result  was  quite  different  from
any  anticipations  that  I  had  formed.

After  seeing  G.  P.'s  photo,  the  sitter  wrote  :  "  The  features  in  the  photo
do  not  look  unfamiliar,  yet  thej'  do  not  serve  to  assure  me  of  my  having
previously  met  Mr.  Pelham.  While  it  is  entirely  possible,  or  probable  even,
that  I  may  have  done  so,  I  cannot  recall  any  definite  memory  of  such
occurrence."  But  it  is  not  improbable  that  on  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Marte's
visit  (March  1890)  to  New  York  to  which  the  sicier  referred,  G.  P.  was
present  at  the  meeting.  Mr.  Marte  v\'as  unable  to  make  any  statement  as  to
whether  G.  P.  was  present  or  not.  Also  the  sitter  and  G.  P.  were  both
members  of  the  University  Club  in  New  York.  This  last  fact  must  I  think
have  been  known  to  me,  though  I  did  not  consciously  tluuk  of  it  at  the
time.  I  may  add  that  the  Berwick  referred  to  in  the  G.  P.  writing  was  a
Harvard  classmate  of  G.  P.,  that  the  Berwick  referred  to  by  the  sitter  was
a  Yale  man  ;  and  that  both  were  members  of  the  University  Club.  The
sitter  afterwards  recollected  further  that  he  had  once  met  Mr.  Pelham,
Senr.,  quite  casually,  also  at  the  University  Club.]


442


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAUT


APPENDICES  II.  AND  III.


Unless  otherwise  specified,  or  obvious  from  the  reojrd,  the  accounts
given  in  Appendices  II.  and  III.  are  of  first  sittings,  which  were  held
at  Mrs.  Piper's  house  in  Arlington  Heights,  Mass.,  and  the  appoint-
ments for  which  were  made  by  me.  I  believe  that  in  all  these  cases
the  sitters  were  previously  unknown  to  Mrs.  Piper.  Their  names
were  never  mentioned  by  myself,  and  I  introduced  all  sitters  by  a
pseudonym,  usually  Smith.  Of  other  first  sittings  of  which  I  know,
held  during  the  period  covei'ed  by  these  Appendices,  from  the  end  of
1891  to  the  end  of  1895,  there  are  not  more  than  six  that  can  be
classed  as  complete  failures. — R.  H.


APPENDIX  11.


The  following  accounts  are  of  first  sittings  held  during  the  period
November,  1891-February,  1893.

November  &th,  1891.

Sitter:  Miss  Cornelia  Hartshorn,  Providence,  R.I.  (Associate
A.B.S.P.R.).  R.  H.  taking  notes.  Miss  Hartshorn  added  a  few
aninor  points.

Miss  Hartshorn  wrote  on  November  7th,  1891,  after  her  return
home  : —

The  result  of  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  becomes  more  and  more
interesting,  both  directly  and  indirectly.  The  round  silver  box  had
absolutely  no  associations.  It  did  not  "amount  to  a  row  of  pins,"  altliougli
I  supposed  it  did.

The  handkerchief  was  left  at  T.'s  house  at  a  party,  and  we  do  not  know
to  whom  it  belonged.  Janet  (Janette)  was  present,  and  when  she  returns
next  week  we  will  see  if  it  is  hers.

"Elsie"  is  explained.  T.  thought  seriously  of  sending  something
belonging  to  Elsie.

I  have  made  full  commentary  notes,  and  will  forward  all  to  you  as  soon
as  we  see  Janet,  who  is  engaged  after  great  opposition  on  the  part  of
parents,  but  she  has  not  run  away.  Perhaps  you  have  forgotten  what  Mrs.
Piper  said,  but  I  will  return  your  notes  as  I  have  copied  them.

******

Miss  Hartshorn  wrote  on  January  6th,  1892  : —

By  this  mail  I  send  you  your  notes,  and  in  another  envelope  the  whole


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  44'3'


thing  as  T  wrote  it  out  for  myself  just  after  I  returned.  I  have  remembered
a  few  trifles  that  you  had  not  noted.

*  *  *  *  *  * '  ■

[The  following  is  the  report,  with  notes  by  Miss  H.  I  have  made
a  few  slight  changes,  where  Miss  H.  probably  misread  my  scrawly
original  contemporary  notes,  and  have  altered  most  of  the  names-
except  her  father's  in  accordance  with  her  request. — K.  H.]

Phinuit  :  You  have  lots  of  friends.  Middle  aged  elderly  lady  friend  of
yours,  not  well,  she  has  a  very  spiritual  nature.  People  don't  know  how
lovely  she  is.  I  am  very  sorry,  she  is  not  going  to  recover,  she's  going
to  pass  out.  .  .  She's  got  a  daughter,  she's  got  two,  one  of  them  is
naturally  younger  than  the  other.  One  of  them  is  with  her  mother  more
than  the  other.  One  of  them  goes  to  and  fro  to  see  her  mother.  The;
youngest  one  is  going  to  be  very  sad.

[Quite  correct.  Both  daughters  live  at  home,  but  one  rooms  with  the
mother.  It  is  the  youngest.  Lady  in  very  frail  health.  (Has  just  been
very  ill,  but  is  gaining.  January  6th,  1892)].  ["  She  died  in  the  spring  of
1894." From  letter  by  Miss  H.,  July  12th,  1896.]

[Ring  ?]  Tillen,  Tillien,  Tilie  [stumbling  over  sound  of  Till]  — very  nice
person,  good  traits.  Takes  care  very  hard.  She  mustn't.  [Correct.  Tillie-
a  great  favourite  with  sitter. Characterised  correctly.]

I  got  your  mother's  influence  very  strongly.  Don't  like  her  as  well  as  I
do  you.

Sitter  :  Is  she  living  ?  ■ '  ■  '  '

Phinuit  :  No,  she's  in  the  spirit.  ■  ■ ■'  '

Wait  a  minute. There's  Tillie's  mother. There's  a  cousin  of  yours
Tillie's  mother  is  your  own  cousin. (That's  a  fact). That  makes  Tillie  your-
second  cousin. [Relationship  correct]. You  know  I  get  a  boy's  influence.
He  makes  me  very  nervous.

Sitter:  What  boy  is  that  ? '  ■ ■ -  .

Phinuit :  Oh,  he's  a  trial.  Tillery,  Tillie,  there's  a  child  in  her  surround-
ings. It  comes  very  close  to  you.

[No  child  in  Tillie's  surroundings.]  .  •  ■  '  '■

It's  a  boy,  very  nervous  temperament,  very  positive.

Sitter  :  Are  you  sure  it's  a  boy  1  ^'
Phinuit  :  Well,  he  looks  like  a  boy,  he's  got  his  hair  short  any  way.
Hullo,  here's  Marie — M-a-r-y. That's  connected  with  her  too.  She's^'
living.

Lou,  Louis,  Louie,  Louie.  Well,  I  don't  know  whether  it's  a  girl  or
a  boy. It's  Louie  any  way.  " "  . " '.  ..1

[No  clue  to  any  of  this.]

You  tell  her  there's  some  severe  trouble  with  somebody's  eyes  in  con-_
nection  with  that. They  told  me  that  afterwards. . _  .  ^.  '  '

[Sitter  gives  ring].  '

Phinuit :  Person  connected  with  this  that's  passed  out  of  the  body.
[Correct.]  . .  ' .  ■  ,

I  get  the  name  of  Sarah.  ■' "  '• '  " '  "■■ -i  -'"

■Sitter  :  No.  .

2  a


444


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAllT


Phinuifc  :  There's  a  lady  by  tliat  name  connected  with  you.  Hadn't  you
an  aunt  of  that  name  ?  ^

Sitter  :  No — yes  I  did,  uncle's  wife,  I  had  forgotten.  [I  never  saw  this
aunt.]

Phinuit :  There  are  two  influences  with  this.  Another  lady  wore  it  and
then  you  wore  it.  [Correct.]  And  I  get  your  mother's  influence  strongly,
if  Mother  not  connected  with  it  in  any  way.]

Also  I  get  a  sister  here.

Sitter  :  A  sister  ?

Phinuit:  Not  your  sister,  your  mother  and  her  sister. [Motherhad  no
own  sister,  only  sisters-in-law — all  dead.]
Sitter  :  Is  she  in  the  body  or  not  ?

Phinuit :  Yes.  An  aunt  by  marriage  in  the  spirit  and  she  is  very  cranky.
[Easily  applies  to  two  aunts.]

Former  owner  [of  ring]  is  in  spirit,  and  it  passed  from  her  to  you.
{Correct.]

What's  the  matter  witli  your  mother's  foot  ? [Sitter  afterwards  recalled
dropsical  affection  of  feet,  necessitating  bandaging.]
Sitter  :  I  don't  know,  do  you  mean  now  ?

Phinuit  :  Yes. (In  the  spirit  world  1)  Yes. She's  holding  up  her  foot.
[Sitter  gives  square  silver  box.]
Phinuit  :  Do  you  know  who  Emily  is  ?
Sitter  :  I  know  several  Emilys.

Phinuit :  There's  somebody  connected  with  tliis  (box)  that's  had  some
"trouble  with  the  ear,  a  little  deaf.  [Box  belonged  to  an  uncle,  afterwards  to
mother,  who  became  somewhat  deaf  from  age.]

Now  I  get  Louie  clear.  (Not  with  the  box),  o  jb  comes  clear  now,  Louie's
in  the  body. [No  Louie  known.]

That  [box]  was  found,  the  material  of  it. [Source  of  box  unknowui.]

Sitter  :  How  did  I  come  to  get  it  ?

Phinuit :  That  was  passed  to  you  for  me  to  try.  [Wrong.]

There's  a  gentleman's  influence  comes  from  that  in  the  body.  [Wrong.]
There's  a  gentleman's  influence  upon  that,  that's  passed  out  of  the  body.
That's  the  father's  influence.  [Wrong.]

Two  persons  that  owned  this  are  now  in  the  spirit.  [Correct,  but  not
connected  witli  father.]

Sometimes  I  get  mixed  up,  but  I  get  the  name  of  Charles.  That's  one
■of  the  names  in  connection  witli  one  of  the  persons  who  owned  this.

Sitter  :  No,  try  again.

Phinuit :  I  think  it's  a  second  name.  [Wrong.]

Sitter  :  What  did  they  use  it  for  ?

Phinuit  :  I  see  some  square  things,  stamps  like.

Sitter  :  Well,  I  just  took  some  stamps  out,  but  what  was  [it]  used  for
before  ?

Phinuit :  He  used  to  carry  little  round  things  in  that,  things  to  eat  you
know. Cowchoose  [as  pronounced].

[Sitter  could  not  for  several  hours  remember  what  she  had  been  told
her  uncle  kept  in  the  box,  finally  recollected  it  was  camomile  flowers  to
cliew.]


xxsiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  445


Sitter  :  Cachous  1

Pliinuit  :  That's  what  I  was  trying  to  get  at  when  I  got  Charles.  How
would  you  like  to  have  people  say  ch,  cli,  ch  to  you,  and  you  thought  they
,  were  giving  you  a  name  1 That's  what  you  blame  me  for,  Hodgson.
Do  you  know  anyone  named  Jennie  ?
[Sitter  knows  several  Jennies,  intimate  with  none.]
Sitter :  Yes.

Phinuit  :  Well,  Jennie  doesn't  have  much  to  do  witli  you.
[Dr.  Hodgson  asks  about  Jennie.]

Plimuit  :  Jennie  be  hanged  .  .  .  That  [box]  comes  in  connection
■with  this  lady. It  has  her  uncle's  influence  upon  it.  [Correct.]

[Concerning  first  ring.]  Belonged  to  a  verj'  dear  friend  of  yours  in  the
spirit. Not  a  relative. (That's  riglit.)  [Correct.]

[Sitter  gives  bracelet.]

Phinuit :  Uncle  John.  I  want  to  get  it  over  that  way.  [Inside  of
bracelet  on  head.]

I  get  your  uncle's  influence  still.  This  takes  me  with  it.  This  was  got
ncross  the  country.  This  was  given  to  a  lady  wlio  had  some  trouble  with
her  throat.  This  was  made  to  order.  It  came  through  a  lady's  influence
to  you  in  the  body.  Lady  in  spirit  to  whom  it  belonged  received  it  from
her  uncle.  Name  Willie  comes  in  connection  with  it.  Susie  connected
with  it. Lady  who  owns  it  now  is  in  some  trouble.

[Sitter  knew  nothing  of  bracelet.  It  was  lent  to  her  by  Tillie.  No  John
about  it.  It  was  brought  from  Africa,  made  to  order,  and  sent  by  an  African
prince  to  sender's  family. Details  of  transmission  unknown.]

You've  got  an  Uncle  William.  (In  the  body  or  not  ?)  In  the  sjjirit.
[Correct.]

[Sitter  gives  round  silver  box.]

Phinuit :  A  gentleman  gave  this  to  a  young  lady  who  is  now  in  the  body.
Por  sweet  things,  little  peppermint  things  like.  I  can't  tell  you  so  much
about  that,  because  I  don't  get  any  influence  with  that.

[Bon-bon  box  given  by  a  lady  to  a  lady,  both  living.  No  especial  associa-
tion. Sitter  knew  nothing  about  box,  but  supposed  it  had  associations.]

[Sitter  gives  ear-ring.]

Phinuit :  That  belonged  to  elderly  lady  who  passed  out  of  the  body.
Elizabeth  and  Aunt  Martha  connected  with  it.  The  place  where  that  was
bought  is  burst  up  long  ago.  Aunt  Caroline  connected  with  it.  Sarah  wore
dt  originally.

[Sitter  knew  nothing  of  ear-rmg.  Finds  out  afterwards  it  belonged  to
owner  of  the  finger-ring  she  first  presented. No  names  are  riglit.]

Lady  in  the  body  owns  this  [correct]  ;  this  was  kept  in  a  little  case
with  a  lot  of  other  things,  a  sort  of  keepsake,  [correct].  People  now
■surrounded  with  this  had  a  great  deal  of  means,  financially,  they  lost  it;
principally,  [correct]  they  had  something  to  do  with  something  like  mines
Jnot  mines,  however].  The  loss  of  money  was  connected  with  the  deatli
of  a  relative.  [Correct.]  [All  this  happened  so  long  ago  sitter  had  almost
forgotten  it.]

Liza  connected  with  ring. [Wrong.]  '
Don't  you  know  your  Uncle  William  ?  :  •

9  9


446


Bichard  Hodgson.


[part


Sitter  :  Yes,  of  course  I  do.

Phiuuit :  Well,  I'm  talking  to  you.  He's  very  much  surprised  to  see
you  here.

Give  me  the  ring  your  mother  gave  you.
Sitter  :  I  haven't  any.

Phinuit  :  Well,  there's  one  in  the  family  that  belonged  to  your  mother.
[Wrong.]

[Feels  sitter's  rings.]  There's  no  association  with  any  of  them.  [Correct.]
[Sitter  gives  a  handkerchief.]

Phinuit  [putting  handkerchief  on  head,  much  interested.]  I  like  this.
There  was  a  young  girl  in  connection  with  this  that  ran  away,  married  against
her  parents'  wishes. Looks  to  me  like  a  Christmas  present. Came  with  a

toilet,  set. I  get  the  name  of  Janette,  Alice,  Elsie. He  no,  I  won't  tell

you  that.

[Sitter  knew  nothing  of  handkerchief  given  to  her  by  Tillie.  When  it
was  returned  to  Tillie  before  any  details  of  sitting  have  been  mentioned^
sitter  said  "Phinuit  liked  this  handkerchief."  Tillie  said  "I  hesitated
whether  to  give  you  this  handkerchief  of  which  I  know  nothing,  as  it  was
left  at  my  house  at  a  party,  or  to  give  you  a  ring  belonging  originally  to-
Elsie.  I  took  them  both  out  of  the  drawer,  and  finally  decided  on  the
handkerchief."]

Dr.  H.  :  Yes,  tell  us.

Phinuit :  No,  it  is  too  sad. Elsie  had  a  child  and  lost  it.

[Elsie  died  at  the  birth  of  a  child,  who  lived,  though  she  had  previously
lost  one  ;  her  husband  was  nearly  insane  at  the  time  from  grief.  Elsie  had
the  ring  on  when  she  died,  and  her  husband  gave  it  to  Tillie.  Sitter  did  not
know  Elsie,  and  did  not  know  Tillie  had  such  a  ring.]

There's  a  young  fellow  named  Arthur  in  the  surroundings  who's  very
clever.  The  person  who  gave  you  that  is  very  eccentric,  likes  to  read,  the
person  who  takes  care  very  hard.  She  had  a  lot  of  school  friends.  Ran
away  ;  that  is  she  left  her  home  and  married.

[Janet  was  at  the  party,  but  the  handkerchief  was  not  hers,  and  as  yet
no  owner  has  been  found.  She  was  the  only  Janet  there,  and  has  not
married.]

Elsie  cfjmes  from  different  surroundings.

Tillie,  Tilie.  (Way  you  spell  it,  double  I).  Tell  her  not  to  be  so  nervous.
She  went  away  a  while  ago,  and  that  did  her  a  lot  of  good.  She's  going
away  again  before  a  great  while,  tell  her  I  said  so.  Tell  her  she  mustn't
take  things  so  hard.  Gentleman's  influence  in  her  surroundings  makes  her
nervous. He  is  poky.

[Tillie  is  very  quick,  and  her  husband  is  slow.  This  amuses  the  family
vastly.]

Do  you  know  who  Robert  is  1  He  is  an  elderly  gentleman  in  the  spirit
who  knows  you.  He  wants  to  sent  his  love  to  you.  Grandfather's  influence.
[Correct.]  ■ . .  •.  •

Sitter  :  Grandfather  1

Phinuit  :  Yes,  I  don't  think  you  know  him  very  well.  He  passed  out  of
the  body  before  you  were  born. [Correct.] .  ,  •

Do  you  know  Kittie  1  - -  V


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Cerlain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  447


Sitter  :  No,  I  think  not.  [After  the  sitting,  sitter  remembered  a  child
friend  Kitty  who  died  many  years  ago.]

Phinuit :  You  may  find  Kittie  in  connection  with  this  [handkei'chief].
[MSS.  given.]

Phinuit  :  That's  nothing  but  a  notebook.
Sitter  :  What  influence  is  upon  it  1

Pliinuit :  1  get  very  strongly  the  name  of  Thomas.  There's  something
written  tliere  by  him.  He  recognises  it,  and  he's  in  spirit.  That's  your
father'*  influence. He  says  he  is  your  father.  [Correct.]

This  lady  had  an  Uncle  William.  He's  in  spirit,  and  he  had  something
the  matter  with  his  lieart.  There  was  pressure  here,  crowded  on  the  heart,
don't  you  know  1 [Cause  of  death  forgotten.]

[Phinuit  handles  the  articles  again.]

[First  ring.] From  a  dear  friend.  [Correct.]

[Square  6ox.] Her  uncle's.  [Correct.]

[Euund  hox.']  Another  lady  gave  her  that.  That  don't  amount  to  a  row
of  pins.  [Correct.]

March  7th,  1892.

Sitter  :  Miss  Gertrude  E.  Macleod,  Cambridge,  Mass.

The  following  report  was  received  early  in  1893,  probably  in
February,  and  I  knew  nothing  about  the  sitting  until  shortly  before  I
received  the  report.  The  sitter.  Miss  Macleod,  died  in  August,  1894.
She  was  not  a  member  of  the  Society  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  Her
sister,  the  Mabel  referred  to  in  the  sitting,  has  given  us  the  following
further  information.  The  sitting  was  arranged  " for  a  friend  of  his''
by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  [who  remembers  making  the  appointment],
and  Miss  Macleod  went  as  an  entire  stranger  to  Mrs.  Piper.  The
Etta  referred  to  in  the  sitting  was  Miss  Macleod's  sister,  who  died  on
December  21st,  1891,  at  the  age  of  twenty-four.  Miss  Macleod  asked
Etta  what  Mrs.  Putnam,  a  friend,  and  Mabel  were  doing  at  the  time,
as  a  test,  and  first  mentioned  their  names.  The  Albert  was  Albert
Braid,  not  a  relative,  who  died  about  the  end  of  November,  1886,  at
the  age  of  six ;  Susie  was  the  name  of  his  mother.  Agnes  and  Annie
were  friends, — Annie  Mary  not  known  to  Miss  Mabel.  Frank  and
Georgie  were  deceased  brothers.  Georgie  died  in  1876,  at  the  age  of
thirteen.  ]\liss  Macleod  never  crossed  any  large  body  of  water,  and
•did  not  "  have  many  books  behind  her."

Copy  of  notes  made  immediately  after  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on
Monday,  March  7th,  1892.

At  12.15  o'clock. — Mrs.  Putnam  writing  in  her  room.  A  lady  was  there
at  first  who  was  not  there  when  Etta  came  away.  [I  asked  if  Mrs.  Putnam
wrote  with  a  pen  or  a  pencil,  and  Phinuit  said  "a  pencil."  Mrs.  Putnam
wrote  a  letter  with  a  pen,  and  her  landlady,  whom  Etta  had  never  seen,  was
tliere  for  a  little  while,  but  Mrs.  Putnam  thouglit  she  was  not  there  just  at
that  time.]


448


Richard  Hodgson.


PART


At  12.45. — Mabel  walking  in  a  large  building.  She  arranged  her  hair  a
little  and  brushed  her.self.  [Mabel  was  at  Fay  House  at  that  time,  but  did
not  remember  doing  the  other  things.]

Some  picture  to  be  turned  round  in  our  house  ;  Annie's  picture  or  a
pictui'e  of  a  girl  with  a  pail.  [He  was  very  angry  because  I  could  not  think
of  the  right  picture. No  picture  was  turned  around.]

David  will  die  soon. [David  is  still  living,  but  is  now  very  ill.]

Annie  Mary  has  turned  her  ankle. [Not  true.]

Albert  wants  his  mother  to  go  to  Wilton,  and  will  go  with  her.  [I
mentioned  Albert  first,  but  Phinuit  talked  about  Wilton  himself.  VVilton
is  a  place  in  New  Hampshire,  where  Albert  went  once  with  his  mother.]

Agnes  will  be  ill.  [For  the  first  time  since  early  childhood  Agnes  was
ill  for  a  week  in  the  fall  of  1892.]

Susie. — [I  did  not  understand  about  Susie,  but  Phinuit  may  have  meant
Albert's  mother.]

[More  notes  on  this  sitting  written  on  March  9th.]  Phinuit  said  that  I
could  write  for  Etta.  [This  was  after  saying  that  I  could  be  a  medium.]
Albert  could  come  to  his  mother  if  she  would  let  him.

I  had  many  books  behind  me,  and  should  cross  the  water  soon,  after
writing  much  more  than  ordinarily.

Cousin  Mattie  wanted  to  know  v/here  David  was.

Something  which  I  did  not  understand  about  Fred ,  Henry,  and  Edward,
and  Marion. [I  do  not  know  what  Marion.]

Etta  said  that  the  last  thing  she  saw  was  mother's  face  until  she  became
conscious  in  a  room  and  saw  her  body  lying  under  something  white.  [This
is  really  the  only  thing  which  had  already  happened,  and  which  I  did  not
know  until  after  the  sitting.  I  always  thought  that  Etta's  eyes  were  closed
while  mother  held  her  in  a  sitting  posture  to  aid  her  breathing,  and  that  she
fell  back  without  opening  them.  But  when  I  told  mother  what  Phinuit  said,,
she  said  at  once,  "Why,  yes,  did  you  not  know  that?  Etta  was  looking
right  into  my  face  when  the  light  went  out  of  her  eyes.'']

Phinuit  decided,  after  some  hesitation,  that  Etta's  hair  was  gold  coloured,,
and  very  light.  [True.]

He  said  Frank  was  a  little  fellow,  and  did  not  seem  to  know  Gertie  as
well  as  Gcorgie.  [I  had  not  mentioned  Frank,  nor  indeed  anyone  but
Albert,  and  Frank  died  at  six  months  old,  before  I  was  born.]

Georgie  had  lung  trouble  which  made  Pliinuit  cough,  but  Etta  had
stomach  trouble,  and  that  Etta  did  not  like  some  broth  which  we  gave  her.
[Georgie  died  of  quick  consumption.  If  Mrs.  Piper  had  asked  any  person
in  Cambridge  what  caused  Etta's  death  she  would  have  learned  that  she  had
a  heart  trouble.  But  what  Phinuit  said  is  just  what  Etta  would  have  said  if
someone  had  asked  her  the  day  she  died.  She  did  not  in  the  least  know  that>
her  heart  had  anything  to  do  with  her  distress,  and  called  it  her  stomach.
Still  it  seems  more  like  something  from  the  things  she  knew  before  leaving
her  body  than  like  what  she  would  have  said  if  she  had  been  around  and
heard  us  talking  afterward.  And  about  the  broth  which  she  did  not  like —
there  was  a  kind  of  medicine  which  she  hated  and  finally  refused  to  take.]

Albert  is  afraid  his  mother  will  never  get  over  the  loss  of  him.  He
wishes  she  would  not  grieve  so  much,  but  would  go  to  AVilton.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  4.49'


Georgie  and  Etta  and  Frankie  are  all  altogether  and  h.ippy,  and  not  very-
far  away.  "What  we  want  you  to  know  is  that  we  are  alive."  Phinuit
said  that  Etta  was  so  eager  that  it  seemed  as  if  she  would  tour  liini  to  pieces.

Tliis  is  the  end  of  my  notes,  but  I  remember  a  few  more  things  whick
may  explain  some  of  them  better.  When  Phinuit  spoke  of  Mattie  he  said  :
"Your  cousin  Mattie  is  here,  and  wants  to  know  where  David  is."  David
is  her  father.  Phinuit  explained  that  David  and  Mary  and  my  father  were
brothers  and  sister,  which  is  true.

He  spelled  several  of  the  names,  and  could  not  pronounce  them  until  I
told  him  how.

When  he  said  Etta  was  there  he  said,  "There  is  a  very  pretty  lady  who-
wishes  to  speak  to  you.  I  am  trying  to  get  her  name.  She  is  telling  me
her  name,  Ada,  Edda,  how  do  you  say  that  name  V  I  thought  that  was-
near  enough,  and  told  him.

He  spelled  Gertie,  and  said  "Who  is  Gertie  V  and  seemed  sur-
prised at  its  being  I.  If  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  doing  it  she  would  have
called  me  Gertrude,  as  nobody  calls  me  Gertie  of  late  years.  Only  Etta,
used  to  call  me  Gertie  occasionally  for  fun.

In  speaking  of  my  sisters  and  me  he  said,  "  There  are  three  of  you,  one,,
two,  three  1  "  This  was  rather  odd,  because  we  had  a  little  joke  about  there
being  "one,  two,  three"  of  us,  about  which  Etta  was  very  much  amused.
[It  is,  however,  not  uncommon  for  Phinuit  to  count  up  in  this  way  wheir
trying  to  give  the  number  in  a  family. — R.  H.]

In  telling  the  colour  of  Etta's  hair  he  said  at  first  that  it  was  darker  than,
mine.  Then  Mrs.  Piper  put  her  hand  on  my  head,  saying,  "Let  me  see
what  colour  your  hair  is.  Why  it  is  dai'k.  I  thought  it  was  light.  My
friends  say  that  I  make  mistakes  about  colours.  Is  thei'e  gold  colour  I  Her-
hair  is  that  colour." Her  hair  was  really  very  golden.

Gertrude  E.  Macleod.

~ Miss  Macleod  added,  on  March  27th,  1893  :

"  My  uncle  David,  whose  death  Mrs.  Piper  predicted  at  the  sitting  which-.
I  had  with  her  on  the  seventh  of  March,  1892,  died  at  Chicago  on  last
Tuesday,  the  twenty-lirst  of  March.  As  far  as  I  know,  his  health  wai
perfectly  good  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,"

March  10  th,  1892.

Sitter  :  W.  L.  Parker  (Associate  A.B.S.P.R.).  [R.  H.  taking  notes.]
[The  words  in  large  capitals  were  s;)e'<.]

[Mixed  and  unimportant  at  first,  until]

(I  want  to  speak  to  a  friend  who  used  this  [giving  cheque-book]  )
Hodgson,  that  reminds  me  of  Dr.  L. [Books  were  placed  in  Phinuit's
hands  in  experiments  in  connection  with  Dr.  L.]

1.  Here  comes  a  spirit  who's  got  rheumatism.  He  passed  out  with
trouble  round  here  [pointing  exactly  to  region  of  liver,  and  pressing  hard  and.


450


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


pounding  on  that  spot.]  [My  friend  Louis  R.  [an  artist]  died  February
24th,  1892.  Had  suffered  with  rheumatism,  and  died  from  cancer  of  liver,
Tv'hich  was  discovered  by  an  operation  in  January  1892.  The  spot  touched
:and  pressed  hard  was  ahnost  exactly  where  the  incision  was  made.]

2.  He's  a  very  nice  gentleman,  but  he's  older  than  you  are.  [Wrong.
Age  38  at  time  of  death  ;  mine  44,  but  he  looked  much  older  than  he  was.]
[He  was  known  to  me,  and  I  should  say  that  he  certainly  looked  older  than
Mr.  Parker.— R  H.]

[Much  turning  over  of  leaves  of  cheque-book,  and  feeling  with  fingers  as
though  seeking  for  sometliing.  Cheque-book  held  with  back  to  forehead  and
front  part  of  head.  No  direct  vision  of  it  possible.  Finally  stops  at  a
■particular  page  with  pencil  marks.]  It's  there.  He  says  it's  there.  (That's
it.)  [The  day  before  the  operation  at  the  hospital,  Louis  drew  his  last
■cheque,  and  when  alone  occupied  himself  in  figuring  with  pencil  on  the  back
of  the  next  page  the  balance  and  the  possible  amounts  due  him  from  various
sources,  all  of  which  1  found  when  I  received  the  book  later  on.  This
particular  spot  had  more  of  his  personality  than  any  other,  and  I  had  made
aip  my  mind  beforehand  that  the  spirit  would  stop  at  that  page,  but  was  not
prepared  to  find  the  finger  passed  exactly  over  the  balance  in  bank.]

3.  Where's  his  pocket-book?  (Pocket-book  1  Don't  know.)  [At  the  same
time  I  received  a  pocket-book  containing  a  letter  to  his  wife,  and  sundry  last
wishes  which  he  kept  near  his  person  until  his  death.  This  was  handed  to
his  wife  and  forgotten  by  me  at  this  time.  Hence  my  answer,  but  in  a
moment  I  remembered.]

W  A  L  C  E,—  Who's  ADWALCE?—  ALACE?  (Not
quite.)  W  A  L  A  S  E  (A  S  E?)  A  C  E  [apparently  Phinuit's  attempts
.at  Alice. See  below. — R.  H.]

4.  W'  I  L  L  A  M  (He  says  that  ?)  He  says  that  to  you.  R  U  B—
Eenben.  [Note  that  Beiibcn  represents,  apparently,  Phinuit's  attempt  to
•catch  the  words  "  you' ve  beeti." — R.  H.]

Oh!  You've  BEEN  hoddered  (Troubled?)  About  Utis  —  Don't  .  .  .
William. WILLIAM. [My  name  William.]

5.  Don't  worry  about  this.  You're  doing  rigid.  There's  stones  and  sticks
■tliroivn,  but  let  litem  throw.  Don't  mind  them.  Go  ahead.  I  leave  it  to  you.
'[Expressions  very  like  those  used  by  Louis  in  the  body.]

(Want  something  else  ?)

Where's  DAVIS?  (What  name?)  Roberts.  (What's  that  other
nan^e?)  David — Sometliing  like  Davison.  Somebody  he  knows  in  the
•body.

(Give  me  the  name  of  the  spirit?)  " " .'  :

His  mind's  very  unsettled. (He  hasn't  been  with  you  long  ? )
What  about  the  b  al  k'?  (Not  quite  right)  b  u  f  a  1— It's  b  a  l-bxdf  buf  b  a
— b  a  1  s  n. (Give  you  something  else  of  his  ? )  Yes.

6.  Ash  Will  about  it.  [Exactly  as  I  have  heard  him  talk.  He  was  one  of
xhe  few  who  called  me  "Will,"  and  as  I  helped  him  in  a  business  way  this
very  expression  was  common.]

[Giving  watch  and  chain]  That's  his.  WHITE.  Pencil  and  bunch  of
keys  goes  with  this. Wlio's  THOMAS?


XXXIII.] Ohservatlons  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  451


He  wants  fo  lell  Will  to  take  care  of  the  b  a  1  c  k  (DaiiJc,  is  he  thinking
of  ? ) No. That  isn't  it.

But  who's  the  lady  that's  deaf?  (Ask  her  if  it's  my  mother-in-law.)
She's  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble.

(Give  j'ou  something  else  ? )  ■  .

7.  Give  me  all  you  can.  This  [ring  attached  to  watch-chain]  came  from
across  the  water.  [Ring  was  one  found  in  his,  "Louis',"  father's  house  after
his  death,  and  v^rorn  by  Louis,  and  later  worn  by  me  and  ofiered  for  sale.]
[Gives  recei[)t-book]  Father,  here  with  him.  Your  mother's  got  a  cough.
(She  used  to  have  a  very  bad  one.) She  makes  me  cough.

[Turning  over  receipt-book  leaves,  said,  "stop  there  "  two  or  three  times.
Nothing  special  where  Phinuit  stopped.]
(Tell  me  about  the  ring.)

8.  Two  different  influences.  That  came  from  across  the  water.  That's
got  your  influence  on  it  [ring].  [I  wore  it  on  my  watch  chain  in  my  pocket
for  some  weeks.] That  belonged  to  him.

Who's  Henry  1  That's  the  old  gentleman  in  the  body.  He'll  find  him
at  the— where's  the  office  ?

(My  office  ? ) Yes. Tell  Will  he'll  go  into  it.

Who's  BRADLEY? (Don't  know.) There's  a  J  0—

9.  I  tell  you  I  hear  the  name  of  Louis  LOUIS.  (That's  right.  Is
that  the  person  talking  ?  )  I  got  it  mixed  up  with  the  ladies  before.  [Louis,
correct  name  of  owner  of  the  article.]

10.  He  says,  tdl  Will  it's  Louis.  It'll  come  out  all  right,  but  there's  a  good
deal  of  fault  found,  loilli  it  one  way  or  another.  [Repetition  of  my  name,
familiar  phrase.  I  am  at  present  settling  his  estate,  and  have  had  much
trouble  and  many  difficulties.]

11.  Balk  (Tell  him  to  use  the  French  word  for  it.)  (Bank?)  No.
(Balance?) That's  it.

(Balance  in  bank  to  be  kept  by  itself?)  Yes.  [When  very  sick  at
hospital,  one  day  his  wife  asked  him  to  draw  a  considerable  cheque  for  her  ;
he  replied,  "  Jsfc  Will  about  it."  "He  has  got  money  of  mine,  and  T  want
to  keep  the  money  in  the  bank  as  large  as  I  can,  and  make  a  good  sum  for
you."] Person — Parson— Pearson.

He's  [sitter]  going  across  the  water.  (I  am  ?)  Yes,  you  are.  I  see  that
myself. Trip  — not  long  trip,  but  you're  going  across  just  the  same.

Young  girl,  musical,  got  a  sore  throat,  in  body.

Who  is  Alice  ?  [Sister  of  sitter.]  Tliat's  the  one  I'm  telling  you  about.
She  plays  and  sings  —She's  going  across  too.  (She's  going  with  me  ? )  Yes. —
(I  understand.)

(Can  Louis  tell  me  anything  more  ? )

Balance.— There's  ins  ranee  (Insurance?)  That's  got  to  be  replenished.
(Renewed  ? )  Yes.

12.  [Phinuit  then  says  he  will  try  to  write.  The  name  "Louis  "  is  twice
■written,  and  on  five  separate  sheets  a  sentence  is  written  very  indistinctly,
which,  on  the  second  and  third  sheets,  appears  to  be  "  Go  to  the  bank  and
get  the  railroad  bonds."]  [Writing  small  and  running,  not  unlike  Louis'
own  hand.]


452


R icUard  Hodgson.


[PAUT


Where's  the  f.-ictory  ?  (?)  (I  don't  know.)  Goto  the  hnnlc  it  is.  (Wiiy
can't  lie  talk  that  ? ) He's  too  weak.

You  tell  Alice  about  your  mother.  Tell  Alice  your  mother  tolls  her  to
take  care  of  her  tliroat.

Bring  this  book  [cheque-book]  and  he'll  help  you  out  of  all  the
difficulties.

[Fur  other  references  to  Louis  R.,  sea  the  two  following  records,
and  also  p.  337. — R.  II.]

March  I2ih,  1892.

Sitter :  Mrs.  W.  L.  Parker,  wife  of  sitter  of  March  10th.  [R.  H.
taking  notes.] [The  words  in  large  capitals  were  sj)elt.'\

[To  R.  H.]  How's  Will  1  You  tell  him  I've  seen  Louis,  and  he's  got  a
lot  of  things  he  wants  to  say  to  liim.

There's  a  lady  round  you  that's  ill. (Which  one  ? There  are  several.)

Old  or  rather  middJe-aged  lady,  sick  in  stomach,  internally,  sort  of  form
of  infiannnation — betv/een  60  and  70. — Well  developed  head,  high  forehead.
'  Hair  originally  brown,  now  mixed  with  grey.

Who's  Gus  1  (Gusta,  Augusta  ?)  Augusta — Augustus.  It's  Gusto,
G  U  S  T  A.  Some  such  name  as  that.  Very  nice  person  indeed.  Slie's
not  very  well.

(Tell  me  something  moi-e  about  Louis).  He  talks  about  the  B  0  W-
D  I  T  A  H— B  0  W  I  D  T  H.  (What  about  them  ?)  He  says  you  know
who  he  means.  (Y'es,  if  he  has  any  message  I'll  give  it.)  Al — Alfred — He
says  he  wants  to  see  Alfred.  Who's  Alfred  ?  Somebody  he  knows  anyway.
Paper — something  to  do  with  a  paper,  that  nobody  knows  anything  about.
Old  lady  with  him  and  his  father — elderly  gentleman,  high  forehead,  large
nose,  curious  mouth,  curious  chin.

[Soon  after  the  death  of  a  friend  of  "  Will's  "  and  mine,  named  Louis

R  ,  I  had  this  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper. Augusta  was  the  name  of  the

wife  of  Louis,  and  Dr.  Bowditcli  one  of  his  greatest  friends.]

(Does  he  wear  a  moustache  ?) No  moustache. Medium  height.

1.  [Gives  letter.]  [Must  be  assumed  to  have  been  within  the  field  of
vision  of  Mrs.  Piper.  See  p.  317,  footnote. — R.  H.]  (That  has  something
to  do  with  Louis).  That's  an  awful  funny  name  he's  giving  Tne.  He  says
he  told  Will  about  Henry  in  the  body,  and  he  was  confused  about  the
person.  AL — Al — Alfred.  Sounds  like  Alfred,  anyway.  You're  a  nice
lady,  you're  a  medium.  Hodgson,  have  you  had  tliis  letter  1  (No.)  This
letter  was  made  since  Louis  passed  out.  (No.)  There's  two  persons  con-
nected with  this  letter.  (Yes.)  [The  last  note  I  had  from  Louis.  It  was
in  reply  to  a  note  I  wrote  him,  and  was  written  on  the  reverse  of  my  note,
in  pencil.]  Who's  the  doctor  connected  with  Louis  ?  (Bowditch  ?)  [Seizing
fob  of  sitter's  watch].  This  came  from  a  long  way  off.  Lady's  influence
came  from  that  to  you  when  travelling.  (What  part  of  it  ?)  This  part.
[The  upper  part.]  This  [lower  part]  gentleman's  influence.  This  [upper
part]  a  lady's.


xxxiil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  455


2.  (Tliis  is  something  that  belonged  to  Louis), — [giving  book.]  Hi  I
Here's  three  spirits  connected  with  this  book,  in  the  spirit,  you  understand.
(Isn't  Louis  one  ?)  Yes.  Then  there's  an  elderly  gentleman  and  a  lady.
[Book— an  old  German  Testament,  which  had  belonged  for  a  long  time  t'>
Louis.  I  do  not  know  where  he  got  it  from.]  [Describes  lady  with  hair-
parted  on  each  side,  bluish -grey  eyes,  pretty  mouth,  pleasant  face,  etc.]
She  smiles  to  you  in  the  body.  (Not  in  the  body).  I  mean  you  in  the  body.
He  calls  for  William.

[Pause.  Feeling  round  sitter's  waist,  etc.,  and  pressing  ou  region  of
liver,  etc.]

He  says  he  knows  you,  Hodgson.  He  wants  to  know  if  you're  still
fishing  for  facts.  (Yes,  I'll  be  glad  for  liim  to  help  me.)  He  bows  his  head
and  says  he  will.  [Book.]  This  was  Louis'  father's.  That  was  handed
down  to  him.

You're  going  away.  (Am  I  ?)  Yes.  He  tells  me  Will's  going  across
the  water.  (Am  I  going  with  him  ?)  There's  two  of  you  going.  I  get  the
name  again  of  Alice.  Somebody  says  she  must  take  good  care  of  her
throat.

(Tell  Louis  to  give  me  messages  for  William. )  Doctor — Will.  (Dr.  and
Will).  Doctor  and  Will.  They  are  to  see  about  a  house  in  country.  There's
something  the  matter  with  the  pipe.  Don't  care  much  about  it  himself,  but
thinks  it  better  be  known.  He's  so  pleased  to  see  you,  but  there's  a  sort  of
veil,  and  he  can't  see  you  so  clearly  as  he  would  like.  (Can  he  come  to  sea
me  ?)  Yes,  he'll  come.  He  can  come  to  you  very  easily  when  you  sit
quiet.

(Ask  him  if  he  can  remember  the  name  he  used  to  call  Will,  a  sort
of  nickname — German  ?)  Ho  !  He  laughs  at  that.  He  smiles.  (He-
may  !  I  want  that  name  badly).  He's  trj-ing  to  get  that  for  you.  (Can
you  hear  it?)  I  can't  get  that  quite  distinctly.  [Pause.]  Ha  !  Thafs
very  funny.

3.  [Gives  knife.'}  He  says  this  is  the  letter  [see  above]  he  wrote  about
the  pictures.  Ask  her  if  that's  so.  (Yes,  it  is).  He  wrote  this  about  the
pictures,  that  they  are  good.  He  says  ask  her  if  that's  right.  I  mean
right  not  write.  (Yes.)  That's  for  scraping  off  the  edges  of  some-
thing. (Yes.)  The  edges.  He  says  you'll  know.  [The  letter.]  He  was  ill
when  he  wrote  that.  (Yes.)  [Old  clasp  knife  used  in  the  studio.  The  letter
was  about  certain  pictures  to  be  exhibited.] Who's  hut  bote-er?

4.  (Ask  again  about  German  name  for  Will.)  Sounds  something  like
durstan.  (Get  another  name  that's  not  like  that. )  (Does  it  sound  as  thouglv
it  began  with  auf  ?)  Xo  there's  man — op — an — appen — (appendustan  ?)
appendust — (appendust  ?) — appendust.  [Significant,  as  Uj-)  and  Dust  was  a
joke  between  Louis  and  Will,  having  Ich  habe  Durst  as  its  origin.  It  was
not  the  word  I  had  in  mind.]  (Ask  him  whether  the  other  name  isn't
■written  in  this  letter.)

Hodgson,  he's  calling  for  his  watch. (Will  has  it.)

5.  Curlin. — [Carline  ?J  I  never  saw  another  spirit  peck  at  another  as  ho
does  at  me.  He's  very  anxious  for  you  to  know  that  he  lives.  (Will  you
try  to  find  out  what  he's  trying  to  say  about  Alfred  ?) Tell  V>'ill  to  se&


-454


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Alfred,  and  he'll  find  out  what  it  means.  Tell  him  to  go  to  the  vault  and
get  the  cheque.  No  matter  what  anybody  says,  he's  to  do  it.  He  can  call
Alfred  as  witness  or  something.

6.  Where  is  the  last  joicture  I  was  going  to  have  put  up  ?  Scene.
(Scene  ?  Landscape  ?  Paysage  ?)  Oui,  oui,  merci.  (In  my  room  ?)  Yes.
Have  it  varnished.  Scrape  a  spot  ofT  the  lower  corner  of  the  big  picture.
Take  this  [knife]  and  scrape  it  off.  He'd  like  you  to  keep  that.  (The  big
one?)  Yes,  the  big  one.  There's  one  without  frame.  Keep  it  for  yourself,
but  scrape  off  that  spot  in  the  lower  corner.  [Curious,  as  I  had  had  the
custody  of  Lor.is'  pictures  from  the  time  he  was  taken  very  ill.]

"Who's  Heeleti  ? . . . Something  to  do  with  the  picture.

[Book]  That's  what  you  call  a  bible.  (Ask  him  if  he  remembers  painting
it  once  1)  He  did  that  to  keep  it,  you  know,  to  keep  it.  The  lady  that's
with  him  looks  something  like  you.  (Isn't  she  darker  than  I  am  ?)  She
looks  something  like  you,  a  little  bit.  Who's  Mllen — 11  ?  Two  I's  in  it.
And  there's  a  spirit  named  Sarah  here,  a  young  woman,  and  .she  had  a
trouble  here  [left  jaw]. (Bad  ti'ouble  ?) Yes,  it  took  her  out  of  the  body.

7.  She  has  a  young  lady  with  her  named  Annie,  wlio  passed  out  with
trouble  here  [stomach]  something  like  peritonitis.  [Location  of  trouble
incorrect.]

8.  (Does  she  know  anything  about  this  ?)  [handing  ring.']  Oh  !  That's
this.  How  did  she  forward  it  so  quickly  1  Wear.  She  used  to  wear  it
there.  [Left  hand,  third  finger.]  [Correct  about  the  ring  in  every  respect.]
AVho's  Lou— Lou — ■  (Louie?)  Louie.  (Man  or  woman  ?)  Louie — Louis  is
nil  right,  I've  met  him.  Now  I  hear  that  funny  name  again — Uppendust.
,[See  above.— R.  H.]

9.  Where's  her  mother's  [gives  needle-cas&\.  [Needle-case  belonged  to
Annie's  mother.]  Where's  the  old  chest?  She's  got  an  old  chest  in  the
body,  a  sort  of  trunk.  It's  got  a  little  lace  thing  here  [pointing]  in  it.
Here's  Louis  again.  (Ask  Louis  if  he's  got  any  message  for  his  wife.)
Who's  Marie — friend  of  Annie's  who  owns  the  ring.

10.  I  get  the  name  Elizabeth. Elizabeth  ov\ms  this  [the  needle-case].
[To  R.  H.]  (What  name  was  mentioned  early  in  the  sitting?) [R.  H.

.«ays  Gusta.]  Augusta's  in  th-  body.  Aunt  Elizabeth  in  the  spirit  owns
this.  She  passed  out  of  the  body  with  trouble  in  the  stomach.  She  says
you're  a  good  girl,  a  good  girl.  That  brings  me  very  close  to  this  case.
Black  lace  thing  she  used  to  wear  round  her  neck.  You  know  she  wants
3'ou  to  bring  it.  [Correct.  She  always  called  me  her  good  girl,  and  we  used
to  have  much  fun  about  the  name.]

11.  Annie  sends  her  love  to  you. —  INS—  She  wants  you  to  have
lier  pictures. She  wants  you  to  look  after  them.  (Yes.)

[The  riiinuit  personality  then  seemed  to  lose  control  of  Mrs.  Piper's

hand, and the  hand  wrote  : "I  ani  Annie  T> [correctly  given] — I

am  not  dead — I  am  not  dead  but  living — I  am  not  dead  world — Good-

l)ye. I  am  Annie  D  ."] [Name  correctly  given.] [Mrs.  W.  L.  P.]

[See  p.  291.]

Good  girl,  good  girl.  .  .  . ■  • ■  •  - •  -  .


xxxIil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  455-


March  25th,  1892.  '  •

Sitter:  W.  L.  Parker.  (Second  sitting.  See  March  10th,  1892,
p.  449.)  [R.  H.  taking  notes.]  [Tlie  words  in  large  capitals  were
spelt.^

[Nothing  given,  only  hoLling  hands.]

That's  Will.  You're  a  good  fellow,  happy-go-lucky,  jolly,  genial  kind  of
a  chap.

Hodgson,  you  and  Will  are  both  good  fellows. You  haven't  grown  old
since  I  saw  you. There's  a  lady  coming  here. (Who  is  she? Describe  her,
or  tell  me  her  name.) She's  getting  hold  of  me. She's  getting  my  hand.
She's  gesturing  to  me. [Much  moving  of  hand,  and  hnally  demand  for
pencil  and  paper.  ]

[Writes.]  "  Good-day,  Will — Billie,  I  am  glad  to  see  you.  You  look
quite  natural." (2)  "I  am  so  glad  and  happy,  do  think  of  as  not  dead."

(3)  "  You  will  know  me. lam  Annie  D  ." [Evidently  intended  for

D  ,  though  not  very  plain.] (4)  "  If  you  will  will  paint  for  your  sdio."

[Studio?]  (5)  "Go  to  Lewis' studio."  (6)  "And  look  after  everything.
Good  bye,  Billy. — Annie."

Who's  AUNT  ELIZABETH? (Aunt  Elizabeth.) I  called  her
your  mother  before. I  made  a  mistake. She  wants  you  to  read  my
MESSAGES,  and see if you can COMPREHEND  thetn.
(Shall  I  give  you  some  articles  ?) Have  you  got  anything  belonging  to  her  ?'
She's  gone  and  brought  an  elderly  gentleman.

Who's  Dustanuppan  ?  Uppendustan.  He's  so  glad  to  see  you.  I  saw
you  in  the  S  T  U  D  A  0  (studio  ?)  cleaning  up  the  things,  tidying  them  up.

[Giving  watch  and  chain]  (Was  this  watch  yours  ?)  That's  mine.
LEW Lewis. He's  here,  and  he's  very  fond  of  you.

The  picture  tliat  isn't  finished  may  be  left  as  it  is.  He  says  you'll
understand  that,  but  it's  all  like  Greek  to  me. (Left  where  it  is  ?)  Yes.

I  had  a  cheque-book,  you  know.  Who's  BILLIE?  (Billy's  got
the  cheque-book  at  the  office).  Well,  he  wants  you  to  keep  it.  Who's-
Alfred  ?  (He  talked  about  that  before.  I  can't  find  out  who  he  is.)  Well,
I'll  try  and  explain  about  that  after.

Elizabeth. Who's  BOW  DITCH? (Bowditch  ?) You  didn't-
bring  anything  belonging  to  Annie. That's  too  bad. Elizabeth,  mother.
One  aunt,  one  cousin. Alice  connected  with  them. (Y\^ith  them  or  witli
me  ?) With  both.

1.  [Giving  lace  barbe  with  inn.]  (What  is  this  you  have  got  in  your
hand  ?)  A  tie.  Mary.  Tliat's  connected  with  this.  [My  sister  Mary  wore
this  barbe  until  near  her  death,  nearly  five  years  before  this  time.  It  was
put  away  and  never  worn,  but  given  to  my  wife  two  years  ago.  Never  been
worn  since.]

2.  Awful  glad  to  see  you,  Willie.  [Very  characteristic  expression  of  the-
same,  and  she  always  called  me  "Willie." It  is  curious  that  while  Mi^s

D  spoke  of  me  as  "Billy"  and  Louis  as  "Will,"  they,  as  well  as  my

sister,  used  the  same  expression  that  each  used  in  the  body.]  I  toll  you,
Willie,  I've  only  discarded  the  flesh. I  suffered  a  good  deal  that  you  didn't


456


Richard  Hod  [/son.


[part


^realise.  I'm  better  now,  and  wakened  to  find  out  all  is  right.  (Where  did
you  suffer?) Here. . . . [Description  of  locality  of  pain.]

I  think  Alice  had  this.  It  seems  to  me  I  saw  her  have  it.  She  put  it
away  in  a  little  box.  She  took  it  out  and  gave  it  to  you.  (Well,  not
exactly,  doctor.)

(Where  was  the  most  pain  T) Here  [toucliing  same  spot  again].  (Where
was  the  principal  pain  ?) What  is  PATIENCE? (Patience. ) Do  you
think  the  same  of  me  as  before  ? (Tell  Mary  to  tell  where  was  the  trouble
.s!ie  passed  out  of  the  body  with.) She'll  tell  you  directly.

3.  [Giving  ear-rings.]  (What's  this  ?)  [Puts  up  to  left  ear.]  That's
cancerous — cancer.  .  ,  .  [Description  of  locality  of  pain.]  Opiates  at
tlie  last.  She  thinks  she  passed  out  in  the  evening,  dusk. —  (Between
daylight  and  dark  ?)  dusk,  early  evening.  She  wants  you  to  know  that
slie's  free  from  pain  now,  &c.  [Ear-ring  worn  only  by  my  sister.  .  .  .
(Verification  of  Pliinuit's  description  of  locality  of  pain,  witli  cancer.)
-Suffered  very  much,  and  opiates  were  used  very  freely,  but  died  shortly  after
midnight.]

4.  Alice  has  been  very  good  to  preserve  things  in  my  memory,  [Alice,
name  of  my  living  sister,]

5.  [Sealed  paclutgc]  Oh,  that  brings  the  gentleman.  That's  one  of  his
books. (Now,  I  want  to  talk  to  him  seriously. Will  you  ask  him  if  this  is

•one  of  his  own  books,  or  whether  it  belongs  to  the  outside  library).  [Pause.]
No.  That's  his.  That's  mine,  he  says.  Tell  Uppendust  that's  mine.  [This
was  a  test  question,  a  valuable  book  that  I  do  not  know  about,  if  private
property,  or  belonging  to  a  musical  library  now  for  sale,  and  this  question
was  put  to  see  if  so  important  a  fact  could  be  obtained,  with  no  result.]
Who's  Woffen,  WafFen  1 That's  some  kind  of  German  lingo.

[Ra^uling  watch  and  c/iont].  That's  his.  (\Vliat  does  he  want  me  to  do
-with  ib  1)  He  wants  you  to  put  it  with  the  rest.  [My  impression  is  that
this  referred  to  the  sealed  package. — R.  H.]  He  got  this  from  across  the
water.  He  had  another  book  his  father  gave  him.  This  came  from  across
the  water.  Where's  the  poems  There's  some  MSS.  that's  written  there.
What  have  you  done  with  it  sent  them  to  his  relatives.)  Who's

mother  ?  That's  hers.  That's  got  the  mother's  influence  about  it.  Who's
Mers — Mers— Merric  1  Poems — There  s  some  MSS.  Partly  written.
(What  am  I  to  do  with  this  ?)

I  Send  this  home  HOME.  (Where  is  home  ?)  1  2  3  4  5  G  7.  Every
place  is  home  to  me.  Give  me  watch.  How  is  everything  in  Newark  ?
(I've  got  the  money.)  All  collected.  Good  on  yoin-  head.  (That  sounds
like  him.)  Who's  Frank?  (Yes  1)  He's  in  the  body,  and  he  wants  some-
thing to  do  with  him.  He  wants  him  to  call  round.  Who's  marriking —
something  he's  trying  to  remember.  I  knew  all  would  be  settled  well.  I
think  on  the  whole  I'll  leave  this  to  you.  You  do  with  it  what  you  like.
C  L  L.  Hyston— something.  Who  is  it's  got  the  funny  finger  ?  [Feels
right  thumb.] He's  an  artist. You'll  call  it.

Boter— B. . . .— B  0  T  H  E  R— Tliat's  what  I  tried  to  get  before.
I  can't  get  it. Name  of  some  person  in  the  body.

Neimirh. Place  where  he  had  some  dealings,  place  where  he  had  collec-
tions to  be  made.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  457


[Talk  about  Phinuit's  understanding  English,  French,  etc. — purgatory,
liell,  etc. J

Mary,  pain  in  internal  body,  iii  the  womh.  [Giccs  tie.']  Your  sister  Mary
is  back  here  again.  She  wants  to  ask  if  sister  Alice  always  understood  me.
I  may  have  been  irritable  sometimes, — but  I  had  pain,  etc.  (Yes,  well,  we
used  to  differ  somewhat.)  Well,  this  was  coming  on  years  before,  you  know.
On  the  religious  topic  we  never  agreed.  (No,  that  we  didn't.)  I  was  a  little
jirejudiced,  a  little  agnostic,  you  know.  [Long  quotation  of  Mary's  remarks
liere  about  things  in  general.]  (What  do  you  call  that  in  French  ?)  [R.  H.
says  what  is  it?  Answer  to  R.  H.  by  sitter:  Barbe.]  Ficliu.  Barbe.
[Fichu  was  mentioned  by  a  previous  sitter.]  [Tiie  previous  note  was  a
<;ontemporary  note  made  by  me,  as  I  recalled  that  Mrs.  W.  L.  P.,  the  wife
of  the  sitter,  had  mentioned  the  word  ficlut  in  coiniection  with  the  "black
lace  thing  "  referred  to  by  Phinuit  towards  the  close  of  her  sitting. — R.  H.]

What's  HURST,  Huston.  (Hospital  ?)  H  U  S  T  I  P  A  L.  I  don't
liear  it  quite  distinctly. . .  .

I  want  you  to  tell  Alice  that  in  my — is  that  a  German  chest — truitJc, —
there's  that  old  black  dress  of  mine.  It's  there  with  a  lot  of  other  things.
Sometime  when  you  come,  fish  out  some  of  those  things,  and  bring  them
with  you.  That's  your  mother.  The  lady.  (That  came  with  Mary  ?)  Yes.
******

6.  You're  well.  You've  got  no  kidney  trouble.  Sometimes  a  little
•trouble  there — [ear] — a  little  liver  trouble  and  sometimes  a  little  indigestion.

(Well,  I  used  to  be  sick  once.)  Well,  you've  outgrown  that.  You're  not
going  to  be  sick  much  to  speak  of. You  may  have  a  little  rheumatic  pain.

(Where  was  my  trouble  ?)  [Tries  stomach,  back  of  head,  etc.,  and  finally
stops  on  stomach  and  says]  :  Flatulency  principally,  but  of  no  importance.
There's  no  special  organic  disease.  [And  details  all  the  organs  one  l)y  one.]
Two  Marys  connected  with  you,  one  is  a  mother  and  one  is  a  sister.  She
just  came  back  to  whisper  that. [Wrong  about  the  "  ear."  Balance  correct.]

mo's  P  A  ?— Purly— Purly— P  ARC  K— P  ARC  K— let  me  hear
that  again— P  ARK. . .  .


March  30th,  1892.

Sitter :  Mr.  Vance  [pseudonym],  (Associate  A.B.S.P.R.),  R.  H.
taking  notes. [The  words  in  large  capitals  were  spelt.]

[Phinuit  began  by  saying  that  George  wanted  to  tell  me  something. —
R.  H.]

[Writing.]  Pelham,  Father — George,  George  Pelham,  Father,  Pelham.
Tell  to  Father  I  want  to  see  him — I  have  some  things  to  say  to  him,
private.

[Phinuit  gives  messages  from  G.  P.  to  R.  H.]  I  want  to  tell  you  where
1  am,  and  what  I'm  doing,  and  what  this  life  consists  of. . .  .

He  says  [i.e.  George  says  to  sitter]  "  How  is  yoitr  son? I  want  to  see
him  some  time." (Where  did  he  know  my  son?) In  studies,  in  college
[This  is  correct. I  have  a  son  who  was  class  mate  of  George.]


458


Richard  Hodgson,


[PAKl'


(Where  did  George  stay  with  us  ?)  That  gentleman's  got  a  lady  here,  a
lady  in  spirit.  That  isn't  George  that's  talking— wait  a  minute.  Who's
Mamie,  Mary  1  There's  an  elderly  lady  around  you  in  body,  not  very  well.
Sister,  a  little  bit  cranky,  passed  out  many  years  ago.

[Reference  to  previous  sitting.]  ...

Young  man  in  spirit  belongs  to  you.  Passed  out  when  very  young.  A
girl  also.  There  are  three  of  them.  A  lady  and  two  children.  I  get  the
father's  and  mother's  influence. What  are  you  doing  ? You  are . .  .

Country.  Peculiar  house,  trees  around,  porch  that  projects  at  the  front.
(Who  is  this  talking,  George  Pelham  ?)  He  was  here  talking  a  minute
ago  and  told  me  this.  Vine  at  the  side.  Porch  at  the  front,  and  siving  on
the  other  side.

Pazza — What  is  that,  Hodgson  ? (Piazza  1) No,  a  sort  of  landing.

[This  is  a  correct  answer  to  the  question, "  Where  did  George  stay  with
us  f My  country  house  has  projecting  jiorch  in  front  and  vine  at  side  ;  the
porch  is  especially  prominent ;  the  swing  had  been  removed  before  the  visit
alluded  to  ;  but  George  might  have  seen  it  on  some  earlier  visit.]
******

Mary. — I  want  to  speak  to  you  particularly.  You  look  familiar  to  me,
but  you've  grown  older.  (We  all  do  that.)  Haven't  you  got  something
belonging  to  her  ?  (I  have  something  associated  with  her.)  Well,  give  it  to
me,  quick.  Who's  Doctor  Bowditch  1  W  o  d.  ...  Elwood— connected
with  this  gentleman  in  the  body.

[Gives  paper  A.]  [Must  be  assumed  that  it  came  within  the  field  of
vision  of  Mrs.  Piper.  See  p.  317,  footnote. — R.  H.]  Ellis — Woodbury — No,
I'll  get  that  directly.  Aunt,  mother's  sister.  CHARLES  connected
■with  this  [pajjer].  Mary  connected  with  this  gentleman  in  early  life  many
years  ago.  Cousin  (Mary,  is  that  right  ?  Are  you  a  cousin  ?)  No,  she's  got
a  cousin  of  yours  with  her.  Did  Mary  put  that  there  ?  (Yes.)  This  has
been  written  a  long  time. [It  was  written  18  years  ago.]

She  is  his  lady. (Do  you  mean  his  wife  ? ) Yes. Speak  to  her.

(Well,  I  know  a  Mary,  but—) He's  her  brother.  [Correct].

(Do  you  recollect  under  what  circumstances  you  wrote  what  is  on  that
paper  ?)

Katherine  in  the  body  is  connected  in  some  way  with  tliis  [i.e.  a  previous
recent  sitter  who  was  called  Katherine  at  sitting.]

Have  you  been  well?  (Yes,  fairly  well.)  Well,  you've  had  a  loss  of
vitality.  .  .  .  Have  you  got  anything  else  of  hers  1  (No. )  Got  some-
thing of  your  mother's?  (Yes.)  ELLEN  Ellen  — and  she's  in  the
body  still.  You  don't  recall  that,  do  you  ?  (No.)  Ellen  had  trouble  here.
.  .  .  Mary  had  trouble  here.  .  .  .  Who's  Craigie—C  R  A I  G  E.
Something  about  the  Doctor  here.  She  thinks  she  wasn't  feeling  well  when
she  wrote  that.  Long  distance  away — across  water  this  letter  was  written
(No)  as  she  came  home.  [The  sister  had  come  from  South  America,  vice
England,  shortly  before  she  wrote  what  was  on  the  paper.]

(She  wrote  that  at  some  one's  request.  At  whose  request  did  she  write
that  ? )

It's  awful  little  to  go  by,  isn't  it  Hodgson  ?  (Yes.)  I'll  do  the  best  I
can  for  you.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  459


There's  some  disposition  of  something  here.  Who  is  it  they're  calling
Doctor  ? Ask  the  Doctor  about  this.

It  looks  more  like  a  little  verse  than  anything  else.  (Yes.)  [It  was  a
short  verse  from  the  Bible.]

Do  yui(,  hnow  there's  tivo  Marys  connected  with  this.  Two  Marys  tvere  in
the  body.  One  Mary  suggested  it  and  the  other  Mary  u^rote  it.  One  is  mother,
and  mother  suggested  it.  [This  is  strikingly  correct,  and  suggests  mind-read-
ing, or  something  else.]

It's  a  long  time  ago,  and  its  hard  for  her  to  remember  things  so  long  ago
in  earth.  She  was  literary — great  deal  of  talent.  Writing  still  in  the  spirit.
She  had  a  poetical  turn  of  mind.  [In  a  general  way  this  is  true  of  my  sister.
No  doubt  about  her  talent.]

Who's  Madgie  ?  (I  don't  know.)  Wait,  it's  Mary — again.  That  was  my
mistake. It  was  for  mother's  benefit  I  wrote  that.  [Correct].

ALLEN.  She's  got  a  fiiend  in  tlie  body  named  Mrs.  Allen.  [Sister
knew  a  lady  of  that  name,  but  she  was  no  special  friend.]

Any  question  more  to  ask  ? (What  was  it  written  for  ?)

What  have  they  done  witli  all  my  books  ?  (Who  says  that  ?)  SJie  says
that. [No  significance  in  question.]

(Was  Mary  married "?  Can  she  tell  me  that  ?)  No.  (She  was  not
married  ?)  Who  is  it  that  calls  Helen  ?  H  E  L  L  E  N.  (This  letter  has
nothing  to  do  with  that.)  No,  but  she's  a  sister.  Helen's  in  the  body.
The  lady  I'm  talking  to  is  married,  and  had  children.

Helen  is  more  closely  connected  with  you.  That's  yours— your  Helen.
[I  have  a  living  daughter  of  that  name.]

Who  is  Aunt  Ellen  ? That's  mother's  mother — as  true  as  you  live.

(Are  there  any  children  with  my  sister  T)

There's  two  that  belongs  to  her. The  little  child  in  spirit  belongs  to  her.
There  are  two  in  the  spirit  with  her. [Correct.] (How  many  has  she  in
this  world  1)

There's  two  more —  Two  in  the  body  and  two  in  the  spirit.  That's  all
she  remembers. [My  sister  has  three  living  children.]

There's  something  to  do  with  singing  in  connection  with  that.  [This
may  possibly  refer  to  the  vocal  powers  of  sister,  who  was  famous  as  a  private
singer  ;  a  fact  tliat  I  was  anxious  that  Phinuit  should  mention.]  She  got
more  from  this  [bit  of  envelope]  than  from  the  writing.

******

I  want  something  belongs  either  to  your  father  or  your  mother.  (Well,
here's  a  letter  of  my  mother.)  [Must  be  assumed  that  it  came  within  the
field  of  vision  of  Mrs.  Piper.  See  p.  317,  footnote. — R.  H.]  There's
somebody  connected  with  you  named  Wood.  Can  you  recall  a  relative  of
your  mother  that  married  a  Wood  1  (No,  I  don't  think  I  can).  Wood. — •
It  sounds  very  much  like  it.  Who's  Hul  HOWARD?  That's
where  I  got  the  Wood.  It's  Howard.  [These  names,  which  had  no  signifi-
cance for  Mr.  Vance,  are  the  names  actually  mentioned  at  the  sitting,
and  have  no  relevance  to  the  friends  of  G.  P.  whom  I  have  called  Howard.
— R  H.]

Cancer,  cough,  and  rheumatism.  There's  a  relative  of  this  gentleman's
mother  who  passed  out  with  a  cancer.

2  n


'460


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


That's  an  aunt  of  his  mother's. She  had  a  son  whose  name  is  Howard.
S  N  M  I  —  sounds  somethmg  like  Stevens— S  N  M  I  S  O  N— I  can't
get  that.

It's  connected  with  this  letter.  [The  letter  was  written  in  1856  and
contains  much  about  a  Mrs.  Sherman.  I  had  not  read  it,  and  had  no  idea
what  was  in  it.]

Recently  he  [the  sitter]  hasn't  lost  any  friends.

(I'll  give  you  a  watch.  It  was  worn  by  a  friend.  I've  worn  it  for  some
time,  but  a  friend  wore  it  for  a  great  many  years  )  H  O  W  E  L  S  —
DAVIDSON.  (Who  are  these  ?)  This  belonged  first  to  an  elderly
gentleman,  than  a  younger  man  had  it.

Tliis  came  fronr  across  the  w^ater. (Was  its  owner  any  relative  of  mine  1)

Gentleman  connected  with  this  used  to  write.  [All  wrong  about  the
ov\-ner  of  the  watch.]

Clergyman — man  who  used  to  lecture.  That's  where  I  get  the  cousin's
influence.  (Where  ?)  On  this  watch— cousin  and  an  uncle.  Give  me  the
letter  again.  There's  a  gentleman  here  in  spirit  looks  like  you.  Looks  like
enough  to  be  his  son.  Old  gentleman  who  formerly  owned  this.  That's
where  the  name  Will  comes  in. . .  .

Mr.  Vance  adds  : —

I  have  noted  the  points  of  significance  in  this  sitting.  Most  of  Phinuit's
deliverances  were  wide  of  the  mark,  and  had  the  appearance  of  guessing,
with  perhaps  some  dream-like  source  of  information  as  a  starting-point.
His  be.st  hit  was  striking.  The  verse  referred  to  was  written  by  my  sister
at  my  mother's  request  shortly  before  her  death  ;  it  was  given  to  me  with  a
special  motive,  and  has  been  kept  under  lock  and  key  until  it  was  taken  to
Mrs  Piper.

April  28th,  1892.

Sitter  :  Professor  J.  M.  Peirce. R.  H.  taking  notes.

Several  days  previously  (I  believe  on  April  •23rd)  Professor  Peirce
accompanied  me  to  Mrs.  Piper  for  a  sitting,  but  she  was  unable  to
go  into  trance.  This  sitting  of  April  28th  was  a  failure  as  regards
the  sitter,  but  is  noteworthy  as  having  led  to  tlie  incident  in  con-
nection with  George  Pelham  which  I  have  described  on  p.  305.  Tlie
sitter's  explanation  of  the  giving  of  his  name  in  Mrs.  Piper's  whisper
was  (quite  naturally  from  his  point  of  view)  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  got
to  know  it  by  ordinary  means.  And  as  Professor  Peirce  is  well
known  in  Boston  and  had  moreover  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Piper  several
days  previously,  when  she  failed  to  go  into  trance,  his  explanation
was,  of  course,  the  rational  one  for  him,  though,  as  the  reader  is
aware,  I  have  no  doubt  myself  that  it  was  Mrs.  Piper's  "  subliminal "
that  whispei'ed  the  name  Peirce,  whether  at  the  instigation  of  "  George
Pelliam  "  or  not.  The  following  is  a  general  statement  by  Professor
Peirce  himself.


xxxiir.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  461


472,  Broadway,  Corner  of  Prescott  Street,  Cambridge,

Id,  1892.

My  Dear  Hodgson, — I  return  the  notes  of  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Pijjer,
after  having  filled  in  some  passages  from  my  memory.  I  am  sure  of  the
essential  (and  generally  almost  of  the  literal)  correctness  of  my  additions  ;
but  in  one  or  two  cases  I  am  not  quite  certain  of  their  place.

It  is,  of  course,  still  true  that  much  was  said,  especially  while  you  were
out  of  the  room,  which  is  unrepresented  in  the  notes,  but  I  think  nothing  of
real  importance.  At  any  rate,  I  am  unable  to  amend  the  notes  further  with-
out danger  of  error.

Would  it  not  be  well  to  mark  the  place  at  which  you  were  recalled  and
came  back  ?  Mrs.  Piper  said  something  like:  "Hodgson,  coine,  tell  the
gentleman  what  to  say."

You  asked  for  my  comment  on  the  sitting.  I  find  it  difficult  to  convey
the  impression  left  on  my  mind,  —  there  was  so  strange  a  mi.xture  of  truth
and  error, — some  correct  knowledge  of  a  few  facts,  on  the  one  hand,  and  a
complete  failure  to  indicate  personality,  or  even  to  identify  the  spirits
alleged  to  be  present  on  the  other.  I  am  still  in  doubt  about  all  bufc
my  mother,  as  to  who  was  meant.

Of  the  names  mentioned,  the  greater  number  are  names  of  persons  known
to  me  and  closely  connected  with  me.  But  some  of  these  were  strangely
confused,  and  nearly  all  were  left  in  the  air,  as  it  were,  without  any  indica-
tion of  the  persons  whom  they  designated.  Two  of  them  appeared  to  be
•wrongly  applied  at  first,  but  were  afterwards,  in  obedience,  as  it  seemed  to
me,  to  indications  conveyed  automatically  by  me  by  intonation  of  voice  or
otherwise,  used  differently.  Some  of  the  names  wholly  unknown  to  me.
Names  could  not  be  given  in  several  important  cases.  Nearly  all  the  nauaes
given  are  very  common  ones.  There  seemed  to  me  to  be  only  one  striking
case  in  the  use  of  names.  The  name  of  Rogers,  an  unusual  first  name,
was  spoken  distinctly,  and  without  any  of  the  gradual  process  of  formation
which  is  commonly  employed  by  this  medium.  This  is  a  name  of  marked
significance  to  me,  and  w.-is  rightly  closely  associated  with  my  mother.  It
is,  of  course,  also  a  name  which  might  easily  be  ascertained  by  enquiry  to
have  interest  for  me  ;  while  it  would  be  less  obviously  a  part  of  common
knowledge  concerning  me  than  my  father's  name,  for  example,  or  other  more
public  matters.

Of  the  matters  of  fact  and  other  things  which  make  up  the  substance  of
the  interview,  less  success  is  to  be  predicated.  One  or  two  points  were
correctly  stated,  or  indicated.  The  greater  number,  including  all  those  on
■which  special  stress  was  laid,  are  utterly  without  meaning  for  me.  They
are  simply  mistakes.

In  regard  to  the  indefinable,  unreasoned  impression  made  by  the  inter-
view,— a  point  to  which  I  am  forced  to  attribute  much  imijortance  in  the
case  of  some  of  my  friends  who  have  visited  Mrs.  Piper, — I  must  say  that
I  received  none  that  tends  to  strengthen  the  theory  of  a  communication
■with  the  departed.  No  personal  trait,  no  familiar  and  private  sign,  no
reminiscence  of  old  affection,  no  characteristic  phrase  or  mode  of  feeling  or
thought,  no  quality  of  manner  was  there,  to  make  the  presence  of  a  beloved
spirit  seem  real. I  never  for  one  instant  felt  myself  to  be  speaking  with

2  H  2


4G2


IlicJiard  Hodgson.


[part


Jiny  one  hut  Mrs.  Piper,  nor  do  I  perceive  any  change  of  voice  or  personality,
beyond  what  is  ordinarily  witnessed  in  skilled  impersonation,  even  whero
there  is  no  abnormal  psychical  condition,  and  constantly  shown  by  persons
in  the  hypnotic  trance.

You  will  understand  that  I  am  not  undertaking  to  discuss  Mrs.  Piper's
manifestations  in  general — I  am  only  trying  to  transmit  to  you,  as  trans-
parently as  possible,  the  view  which  remains  in  my  mind  as  the  result  of
my  own  experience.  I  think  it  ought  to  be  remembered  as  an  essential
fact,  bearing  on  that  expci'ience,  that  my  first  visit  was  entirely  without
result,  and  that  an  interval  of  several  days  passed  before  my  second  visit.
I  regret  not  to  have  witnessed  any  of  the  wonders  which  are  reported  of
this  case.  Had  I  seen  them,  I  should  have  gladly  borne  my  testimony  to
them.  A  real  communication  with  the  glorious  dead  would  surely  be
the  greatest  conceivable  satisfaction  to  one  who  cannot  be  many  years,
separated  from  the  state  in  which  they  abide.

I  meant  to  have  added  that  Phinuit  seemed  to  me  to  bo  constantly
groping  after  indications  from  me  to  correct  and  direct  his  intelligence,
and  in  some  cases  he  seemed  to  mo  to  be  so  directed.  Whatever  the
explanation  of  the  phenomena,  I  believe  this  process  to  go  on, — a  struggle
for  knowledge  to  whose  issue  the  sitter  contributes.  j  -j^^  Pe-'^c'I!'

P.  S. — Since  writing  the  foregoing,  I  have  gone  over  the  notes  in
detail,  making  a  memorandum  of  successes  and  failures.  I  am  surprised
to  see  how  little  is  true.  Nearly  every  ai)proach  to  truth  is  at  once  vitiated
by  erroneous  additions  or  developments.


May  6fh,  1892.

Sitters  :  Dr.  and  Mrs.  L.  E.  H. New  York.

The  notes  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  from  additional  information
supplied  by  Dr.  PI.  in  1897,  and  are  as  nearly  as  possible  in  Dr.  H.'s
words.  He  adds  :  "  It  would,  I  think,  be  of  interest  to  preface  th&
sitting  witii  the  remark  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  entirely  unknown  to  both
of  us,  and  we  to  her  ;  that  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  were  the  only  mutual
acquaintances,  and  that  they  said  nothing  to  Mrs.  P.  about  us  except-
ing that  we  were  to  have  a  sitting.  The  large  number  of  little  details
brought  out  about  the  family  are  extremely  interesting,  the  most
marked  being  those  relating  to  "Walter,  his  death  and  his  friends,  and
to  David, — many  of  the  remarks  made  by  both  of  these  are  strictly
characteristic.  However,  nothing  appeared  in  the  sitting  wliich  could
be  afterwards  confirmed,  which  was  not  fully  known  either  to  Mrs.  II.
or  myself.  All  tlie  things  here  brought  out  might  be  explained  as
simply  mind-reading,  but  a  wonderful  example  of  that."

[At  the  house  of  Dr.  A.  B.  Thaw,  who  arranged  for  the  sitting,  Mr.  A.
Dow  taking  shorthand  notes,  Mrs.  Thaw  present  at  beginning.]


sxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  463


Pliinuifc  :  Comment  vous  poi-tez-vous,  Monsieur  ?  Hodgson  !  Where  am
I?  Where  am  I?  What's  this  thing  ?  [Feeling  Dr.  H.'s  head.]  Wliat's
tills  ?  What  this  ?  Where  is  this  place  1  Where  is  this  place  ?  Where's
Hodgson? (Dr.  H. He's  not  here.)

Phinuit :  I  want  to  know  v/hcre  I  am.  Oh,  I  see,  I'm  some  other  place.
Oh,  I  see,  you  want  me  to  talk  to  this  gentleman  and  this  lady.  Why  the
Dickens  didn't  you  tell  mo  so  in  the  fir.st  place?  [Feeling  Mrs.  H.'s  head.]
How  are  you,  sis?  You're  a  good  girl.  (Mrs.  H.  :  I'm  very  well.  Glad  to
see  you.)  Phinuit  :  Oh,  you're  all  right.  (Dr.  H.  :  You're  well  to-day,
Phinuit?)  Phinuit:  I'm  always  all  right.  I'm  never  ill.  [To  Mrs.  T.]
Who's  that  lady  1  [To  Mrs.  H.]  Here's  a  gentleman  wants  to  speak  to  you.
Come  here.  I  want  my  watch.  [Dr.  H.  olfers  his  watch.]  [To  Mrs.  H.]
Your  father  wants  his  watch.  He's  a  doctoi' — a  doctor.  [Phinuit  then  made
a  motion  as  though  unwinding  something  about  the  hand  and  then  dropping
it  off  the  side.  Repeated  several  times.  Then  put  something  to  Dr.  H.'s
nose  as  if  to  smell.]  Give  me  that  thing.  I  want  that  thing  quick,  [[s
giving  paper  and  jjencil.  Several  words  written — among  them  "Evelyn."
"  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  and  see  you  well.  Think  of  me  not  dead."  "  I  am
living." "Yours  truly.  Dr.  P." Also, "Did  you  get  the  bottles  of

medicine? Yours  truly,  Dr.  R  ." "I  am  your  friend,  Dr.  R  ."]

[Mentioning  correct  name  of  a  doctor  whom  Dr.  H.  had  recently  visited
in  Boston.] (Dr.  H.  :  Is  he  in  the  body  or  in  the  spirit?)  Phinuit:

[Writes.] "Body." "Do  tell  me if  you  want  to  ask  Dr.  R  ."

[Writes  again.]  "Come  and  see  me,  William."  [Unknown.]  "Doctor,
I  am  Chamberlain."  [Unknown.]  [Writing  down  very  rapidly,  Phinuit
turning  leaves.]

[Evelyn,  five  years  old,  daugliter  of  Mrs.  H. Dr.  R  .  was  not  asked

concerning  the  possible  significance  for  hiin  of  the  names  William  and
Chamberlain.*]

[To  Mrs.  H.] :  Give  me  j'our  father's  watch.

(Mrs.  H.  :  I  haven't  it.)  [Before  coming  Mrs.  H.  had  made  an  unsuc-
cessful attempt  to  bring  the  watch.]

Phinuit :  There's  a  trouble  in  his  head.  [Incorrect.]  There's  also  a
trouble  here,  right  in  the  stomach.  [Correct.]  That's  true.  Perhaps  you
don't  believe  me,  but  you  ask  him  and  he'll  tell  you.  I  want  that  lady  to
come  here,  and  I  want  you  to  step  out.  I  want  that  lady.  I  want  to  tell
that  lady  all  about  her  friend. I  wish  you'd  all  go  away.

[To  Mrs.  H.]  You'll  remember  what  I  say  to  you,  and  what  I  say  to  you
you  can  tell  your  friends.  I  want  to  tell  you  about  your  little  girl,  you
Itnow  what  I  mean,  that's  in  the  body,  the  little  girl  that's  in  the  body,  that's
yours.  She's  a  sweet  little  thing,  but  awfully  po.sitive.  She's  awfully
positive,  but  you  let  her  have  her  own  way.  I  can  talk  to  you,  and  then  to
the  gentleman.  I  want  Lewis.  [Unknown.]  You  know  what  I  mean.  I'll
tell  you  about  your  Ellie — Ethel,  Ethie.  [Evelyn,  the  name.]  No,  that's
not  quite  right.  Wait  a  minute— I'll  get  that  for  you  in  a  minute.  She's
got  a  pretty  good  temper  of  her  own  ;  excuse  me  for  telling  you  that.
She's  got  a  lot  of  talent  in  her  ;  just  give  her  her  own  way.  Don't  oppose
her  any.  She's  a  little  headstrong.  You  see  what  I  mean,  don't  you  ?
Go  away,  Alex, [to  Mr.  A.  Dow.] That's  too  bad.  isn't  it  ? I  get  also


464


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


the  influence  of  your  mother.  [Cliaracteristics  of  child  quite  striking.]
(Mrs.  H.  :  My  mother?)

Phinuit :  You  speali  to  me,  don't  go  to  sleep.

(Mrs.  H.  :  You  tell  me  about  my  motlier.)

Phinuit  :  She  says  that  if  you  will  follow  my  instructions  she  will  come
out  all  right.  There  is  one,  two,  three  ;  you  see  what  1  mean.  I  want  to
tell  you  about  the  ditferent  ones.  Tliere  are  two  children,  and  that's  all.
[Correct.]  There  are  no  more.  How  do  you  suppose  I  know  that  ?  There's
one  ;  that's  tlie  little  girl ;  she's  the  one  that  is  so  positive  that  I  told  you
nboufc.  And  that's  the  one  who'll  have  lier  own  way.  She's  a  little  sensitive.
She  has  a  little  trouble  here.  [Correct.]  Right  inhere  [feeling  throat],  and
it's  the  only  trouble  slie's  liad  about  the  whole  physical  body.  She's  pretty
well,  pretty  strong  in  the  legs  here.  What's  the  matter  with  her  foot  the
other  day  1  [Probably  alluding  to  Mrs.  T.]  (Mrs.  H.  :  I  don't  think  there
was  anything  the  matter  with  her  foot.)

Phinuit :  That's  there  ;  but  all  her  little  trouble  is  riglit  here.  [Feeling
throat.]  You  know  I  see  her  going  a  distance  where  there  is  water  around
her.  I  don't  think  you  understand  me.  Where's  that  other  lady  ?  She'll
[tell?]  you  how  to  talk  to  nie.  She's  got  two  children,  and  tliere's  a  little
girl  tliat's  got  a  little  trouble  with  her  throat,  but  she'll  get  well  and  strong,
and  stay  in  tlie  body.  She's  going  where  I  see  water  around  her  ;  she's  nob
going  to  fall  in  the  water.  [A  journey  to  a  town  on  Lake  Ontario  was  taken
very  soon  after.]  [This  journey  was  intended  at  tlie  time  of  the  sitting,  and
Evelyn  went  there  a  few  days  after.*]  Tell  those  fellows  to  go  out  and  keep
quiet. Her  mother  is  here.

(Mrs.  H.  :  What  do  you  mean  by  here  ?)  Phinuit :  Here  with  me,  right
beside  me.  (Mrs.  H. :  Is  slie  in  the  body  or  in  the  spirit  ? )  Phinuit  :  In
the  body  [correct],  but  I  get  her  spirit  influence,  so  I  can  tell  you  about  her.
She's  what  —what  do  you  call  it  ?  Your  double.  That  is,  the  mother  and
you  are  alike.  You  look  alike,  you  know  wliat  I  mean  ;  that  is,  you  are
both  the  same.  [Correct.]

(Mrs.  H.  :  See  if  you  can  get  any  friends  of  hers.)  Phinuit  :  I  called  for
your  father's  watch  and  you  said  you  couldn't  give  it  to  me.  You  ought  to
bring  that  fi>r  me  to  help  me  out.  I  can't  Ijring  any  one  without  their
infliuence.  He's  in  the  s|)irit  and  the  mother's  in  the  body.  [Correct.}
Oh,  she's  such  a  beautiful  lady.  (Rlrs.  H.  :  I  tliought  about  bringing  the
watch. )

Phinuit  :  I  know  you  wanted  to  bring  that,  and  that's  why  I  called  for  it.
But,  oh,  weren't  you  stupid  ?  [To  otliers.]  Why  don't  you  keep  away  ?  I'll
talk  to  j'ou  and  then  I'll  talk  to  them.

[Mrs.  H.  gives  Phinuit  a  toy  wheelbarrow  made  by  Walter.]  Novv' wait  a
minute.  Who's  that  they  call  Bub  ?  Who's  B-r-o-b-e-r-t-s  ?  I  get  tliat.
R-0-,  he's  in  tlie  body.  Tell  Mr.  Roberts  I'm  all  right.  [No  one  of  that
name  known  in  this  connection.]

[Writes.]  "  Daughter,  I'm  your  father."  [Mrs.  H.'s  father  deceased.*]
"  Walter,  Walter."  Phinuit  :  I  want  him  to  toll  the  Dr.  I'm  all  right.  He's
j'our  cousin.  [Correct,  both  as  to  name  and  fact.]  Evie  Evy.  [Sister-
in-law  of  Walter,  with  whom  he  lived.]  Tell  him  not  to  worry  about  me  for
I  am  happy  now. Ilow'a  Fred  ? [Abrupt  and  positive.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Gertaisi  Phenomena  of  Trance.  4G5


(Mrs.  11.  ;  Did  you  suffer  ?)

Phinuit  :  Tell  Fred  I'm  all  O.K.  [Characteristic  of  Walter.]  AVliat  does
that  mean  1  Put  tliat  down  there  quick.  That's  father's.  Here's  Willis.
[Unknown.]  Here's  a  mother,  Marie.  Marie  is  the  mother  [Mary,  correct]
and  a  wife  of  this  gentleman  that's  talking  to  you.  Don't  you  suppose
I  know  that.  She's  the  lady's  mother.  [Yes.]  [Mary  is  the  name  of
Mrs.  H.'s  mother,  not  Walter's  wife*]  Your  father  just  told  me  that.
Tell  him  that  I'm  aliv^e  in  the  spirit.  I  am  not  dead.  That  name  was
Ed — Ed.  [Emphatic]  [Ed.  correct  name.]  He  wanted  to  send  a  message
to  you.  It  sounded  like  Fred.  I  called  it  Fred,  but  it's  Ed,  if  you  please.
Ed.  That's  my  dear  friend,  you  know.  [Ed.,  Mrs.  H.'s  brother,  living,
a  dear  friend  of  Walter.*]  [The  apparent  confusion  here  becomes  clear  if
we  suppose  that  the  father  of  Mrs.  H.  and  also  her  cousin  Walter  were  both
present  giving  messages. — R.H.]  Evly— Evie — Evie.  Dear  Evie,  I  want
her  to  be  good.

(Mrs.  H.  :  She  is  good. )

Phinuit :  I  want  her  to  live  right.  He  is  awfully  anxious  to  send  his  love
to  his  mother.  And  to  Mary,  too.  She  didn't  understand  him,  that  is,  since
he  passed  out.  That  is,  since  he  was  here  she  didn't  understand  that  he
lived.  She  doesn't  understand  that  he  is  here.  She  didn't  understand  him,
and  never  did  since  he  came  out  of  the  body.

(Mrs.  H.  :  Can  you  get  tlie  father's  name  ?)

Phinuit  :  Henry. Who  is  Henry  ? Who's  your  father  1 He  wants  to
send  his  regards  to  Heniy. Tell  Henry  I'll  talk  to  him  soon.
(Mrs.  H.  :  Who  is  Henry  I)

Phinuit :  He  is  my  brother  ;  he  sends  me  to  see  him.  [Correct.]  [Henry
is  brother  of  Mrs.  H.'s  father.*]

(Mrs.  H.  : Wants  to  see  Henry  f)

Phinuit :  That's  your  Uncle  Henry.  He  is  in  the  body.  [Correct.]  How-
ever, he  wants  to  be  remembered  to  you,  and  asks  me  how  tilings  are  at  the
office — at  the  office.  He  wants  to  know  that  because  he's  frequently  at  the
office.  [Intimate  business  relations  existed  between  the  two.]  Please  speak
to  me. Give  me  something  belonging  to  your  father.

(Mrs.  H.  :  I  haven't  anything. )

Phinuit  :  Well,  give  me  Walter's  little  instrument.  Here  he  comes.  He
had  a  little  clock-shaped  thing,  and  he  made  that  also,  he  tells  me.  [Correct.]
There's  a  little  chair,  you  recollect  that.  [No.]  The  little  chair,  little  stool,
with  a  round  top,  with  a  pyramid  on  the  top.  He  made  that  and  he
remembers  it  distinctly.  [Walter's  instrument  is  the  toy  wheelbarrow
previously  referred  to.  He  also  made  many  little  brackets  and  other  things,
among  them  a  small  clock  which  he  had  given  to  Mrs.  H.'s  mother.  Nothing
remembered  about  the  chair.*]

But  who  is  Evie  'I  He  .says  he  remembers  her  i:)erfectly,  and  wants  her  to
know  that  he  is  satisfied  over  here.  That's  where  the  sister  comes  in  that  I
told  you  about.  J-o-h-n.  Tell  John,  J-a-ane, — wait  a  minute.  I  haven't
got  that  right.  That  connected  with  Evie.  [No.]  Oh,  here's  Will.
[Unknown].  He's  smiling,  and  he's  in  tlie  body.  J-o-h-n.  I  don't  know
how  you  pronounce  that,  but  that  is  connected  with  him  too.

(airs.  H.  :  Who  is  John  ?)


4G6


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Phiuuit :  Tliat's  his  John.  [John,  cliild  of  W.'s  intimate  friend,  of  whom
he  was  very  fond.]  [See  below. — R.H.]  He  belongs  to  him,  and  that
belongs  to  you.  Tliat's  his  boy.  There  is  a  little  girl,  and  he's  trying  to  tell
me  about  them  all,  and  he's  very  fond  of  these  two  children.  [Correct.]
I've  got  something  the  matter  with  my  head.  [Killed  by  an  injury  on  the
head.]

(Mrs.  H.  :  Did  you  suffer  with  your  head  ?)

Phinuit  :  He  tells  me  it  hurt  him.  It  hurt  his  head.  In  here  [feeling  of
tlie  neck,  arm,  and  shoulder].  She'll  know  all  about  it.  Now  I  woke  up
quick  and  I  didn't  know  I  was  out  of  the  body.  I  woke  up  and  found  that  I
was  living  again.  Tell  her  that.  You'll  forgive  me  if  I  ramble,  but  this  is
straAge  to  me.  I'll  get  over  this  condition  in  a  minute.  It  hurt  me,  didn't
it  ? It  was  accidental. It  was  too  bad,  wasn't  it  1

(Mrs.  H.  :  Has  he  any  message  for  his  mother  ?)

Phinuit :  He's  a  little  confused,  but  he's  all  right.  Where's  Florence  ?
[Unknown.]  I  want  Hattie.  [Unknown.]  That's  not  right.  That's  the
brother.  I  told  you  about  him.  But  he's  a  little  confused.  Please,  people,
leave  me  alone  a  few  minutes.  You're  really  good  fellows,  and  after  I  get
these  messages  clear,  you  can  come  all  you  like.  I  want  you  to  stay  with
me.  Y(m  took  good  care  of  the  little  girl,  didn't  you  ?  John  belongs  to  you,
[John,  nephew  of  Mrs.  H.]  that's  the  little  one.  That's  tlie  brother.  That's
your  child.  The  brother's  child — your  nephew,  that's  what  you  call  it.  It's
your  brother's  child,  any  way.  [There  is  only  one  John,  a  little  son  of  Ed,
who  is  Walter's  intimate  friend,  and  brother  of  Mrs.  H.*]  This  Walter  is
your  cousin.  [Correct.]  He  calls  Ed.  He's  a  friend  of  his,  you  know — most
intimate  friend  on  earth,  you  know.  [Correct.]  And  he  says  he  wants  to
send  his  love  to  him  particularly.  He  gives  you  this  so  you  know  he  is  here.
Tell  him  that  I  wish  he  wouldn't  fret  because  everything  is  all  right.  It  was
so  to  be,  and  I  am  happy  now.  You  can  a.sk  me  any  questions  you  like.
There  are  two  of  us  here.  Then  he  wants  to  send  his  love  to  his  mother.
Who's  Davy — David  ?  [A  friend  recently  dead  ]  Give  me  David's  book.
[Dr.  H.  brought  David's  book  from  a  chair.]  I  want  to  speak  to  him — but
where  are  father's  things  ?  Oh,  you  didn't  bring  them.  No,  this  is  David's
book.  He  wants  me  to  tell  you  he  is  all  right.  Aren't  you  glad  to  see  me  ?
I  want  to  tell  him  that  he  is  as  near  right  as  they  make  them.  That's  all
right.  Tell  the  doctor  I'll  speak  to  him.  He's  the  one  that  brought  these
bottles  of  things.  [Dr.  H.  attended  David  in  last  illness  and  took  him  many
things,  some  in  bottles.*]

(Dr.  H.  :  David,  do  you  want  to  speak  to  me  ?)

Phinuit  :  I  want  you  to  feel  that  I  am  with  you  still.  It's  only  a  tie
that  binds  us  here.  We  live  and  then  we  pass  out.  Stand  up.  You  look
just  the  same.  That's  the  greatest  treat  I  ever  had.  And  you're  the
best  fellow  I  ever  knew.  You're  glad  to  see  me,  old  fellow.  Speak  to  me
quick.  He's  close  beside  me  and  is  very  happy.  I  wish  you  were  as  happy
as  I  am.

(Dr.  H.  :  What  are  you  doing  ?)  Phinuit :  Writing.  I'll  write  for  you  so
you  can  get  it  legibly,  in  a  way  that  you  will  know  that  it  is  I.  (Dr.  H.  :  Ask
liim  how  he's  getting  on.)  Phinuit :  All  right.  Where  are  the  rest  of  the
fellows  here  ?


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  467


That's  mine.  [Takes  book.]  He  is  David's  friend.  He  used  to  live  with
him.  He's  the  friend  that  he  lived  with  when  he  passed  out  of  the  body.
[Correct.]  I'll  tell  you  about  him,  but  he  seems  a  little  confused.  How  are
the  children  ? [David  fond  of  the  children.] (Dr.  H.  :  Very  well.)

Phmuit  :  Busy  as  ever  ?  You're  all  right,  feeling  well  1  He  says  that
he  is  going  to  see  his  friend  and  is  coming  back  to  see  you.  (Dr.  H.  :  Is  his
friend  in  the  body  now  ?)  Phinuit  :  He  is  in  tlie  body,  he  has  not  passed
out.  (Dr.  H.  :  Is  he  well  ?)  Phinuit  :  He's  going  to  see.  He's  left  for  a
minute,  and  he  will  come  back  and  tell  you  all  about  hiin.  I'll  talk  about
him  in  a  minute.  Is  there  anybody  else  you  want  to  see  ?  That  gentleman's
mother  is  here. (Dr.  H.  :  Is  she  in  the  body  ?)

Phinuit :  .  .  .  That  little  girl  of  yours  is  a  perfect  little  positive  ;
she  will  have  her  own  way.  I  would  let  her  have  it  if  I  were  you.  She'll
make  a  noble  woman.  As  soon  as  she  gets  over  this  little  difficulty  she'll
be  all  right.

(Dr.  H.  :  How  about  the  other  child  ?)  Phinuit  :  The  little  rascal.  He's
good,  honest,  different  in  temperament,  that  all.  [Correct.]  Is  there
anything  you  want  to  say  particularly  ?  (Dr.  H.  :  Can  you  tell  me  something
about  this  person  ?)  [An  old  silver  spoon  was  placed  on  Mrs.  Piper's  head.
It  was  one  of  a  pair.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  H.  knew  very  little  of  its  history,  and
nothing  of  the  people  connected  with  it.]

Phinuit  :  You  know  he  keeps  calling  El — rie.  [Unknown.]  Wait  a
minute.  I  have  called  it  to  you  two  or  three  times.  That's  connected  with
this.  Oh,  I  have  heart  trouble.  A  difficulty  around  here,  and  a  kidney
trouble  comes  with  this.  [Phinuit  at  this  point  had  silver  spoon  on  head.]
,1  don't  believe  I'll  get  that  so  clear  for  you.  Now  there'.s  a  lady  and  gentle-
man both  connected  with  this  ;  the  lady  is  in  the  body  and  the  gentleman's
in  the  spirit.  [No  history  of  spoons  except  they  were  made  from  the  hilt  of
an  old  sword. No  names  connected  witli  them  known.*]

(Dr.  H.  :  Is  the  lady  well  ?)

Phinuit :  There's  something  I'll  tell  you  about.  You  may  not  believe  it,
but  there's  something  the  matter  with  her  head.  [Age  only.]  There's  also
a  nervous  condition.  I  can't  get  that  so  well  as  I  can  the  other.  Who's
that  they  call  L-u-r-i-e,  L-a-u-r-i-e, — Laurie,  Laurie?  [Unknown.]  Here's
a  gentleman  wants  to  speak  to  you  very  much.  He's  connected  with  this
article.  AVho  is  N-o-t — N-o  r-t  ?  Tell  George  I  am  hapj\v,  and  if  the  doctor
knows  who  that  is,  I'll  be  satisfiad. That's  all  right.  [Unintelligible.]

(Dr.  H.  :  Who's  George  ? Is  that  connected  with  the  spoon  1)

Phinuit :  That's  connected  with  the  book.  [George,  brother  of  Mrs.
H.,  but  not  intimate  with  David.]

(Dr.  H.  :  Has  David  come  back  ?)

Phinuit  :  I'll  leave  that  until  later.  (Dr.  H.  :  Is  George  connected  with
the  book  or  spoon  1)

Phinuit :  With  the  spoon — with  that.  I  get  these  two  a  little  mixed.
That's  connected  with  this,  and  there's  something  else  belonging  to  him.
You  know  there  are  two  like  this.  [Dr.  H.  brings  second  spoon  from  bag
and  gives  to  Phinuit.]  Nov/  I've  got  them  together,  now  I  want  the  glove.
[Dr.  H.  gets  glove  from  bag  also,  which  is  placed  with  spoon  on  Phinuit's
head.]  Merci.  Merci,  Monsieur.  That's  right,  if  I  can  attract  their  attention


4GS


R  iciici  7x1  Hodgson.


[part


I'll  get  them  all  riglit.  He  says  there's  a  lady  and  gentleman  here.  Tell
George  I  want  him  to  .  .  .  that  desk.  What  does  that  mean  1  D-e-s-k,
[Unintelligible. J (Dr.  H.  :  Whose  desk  is  it,  Doctor?)

Phinuit :  Tell  him  to  take  those  books  and  put  them  back,  and  get  the
paint  and  the  brush  together.  What  does  that  mean  ?  For  the  j^ictures  are
all  disturbed.

(Dr.  H.  :  Is  this  with  the  spoons'?)  [Dr.  H.  knew  nothing  of  the  history
of  the  spoons.]

Phinuit :  That's  with  these  things  here.  And  he  says  that  the  easel  has
been  turned  around  the  otiier  side  too.  Now  what  does  that  mean  ?
[Unknown.] (Dr.  H.  :  I  don't  know.)

Phinuit  :  If  you  get  that,  you'll  underst.and  him,  perhaps.  What  is  it
about  the  easel? [Unknown.] (Dr.  H.  :  I  don't  know.)

Phinuit  :  And  the  books  have  all  been  taken  from  the  desk  and  he  wants
them  to  be  put  up.  [Unintelligible.]

(Dr.  H.  :  That's  a  man  that  wants  them  put  back  ?)

Phinuit :  There's  a  gentleman  and  a  lady,  his  sister.  That's  your  cousin,
that's  not  Walter.  Walter  is  gone.  There's  another  one  here,  and  he  talks
to  me.  I  tell  you  I  get  that  name  Lulu  and  Ellen.  [Unknown.]  I  want
you  to  know  that  this  was  originally  Lola's.  [Lola  u)\known.]  If  you  can
remember  that  you  can  find  out  about  it  afterwards — and  then,  the  old
lady's  name  was  Hellen.  [Unknown.]  You've  got  that,  haven't  you  ?  (Dr.
H.  :  Who  gave  it  to  Lola  ?)

Phinuit  :  Margaret,  Margaret.  You  know  who  Margaret  is.  (Dr.  H.  :
T  know  one  Margaret.)

Phinuit :  That's  not  connected  with  you  at  all.  Take  those  spoons
away.  (Dr.  H.  :  Can  you  tell  me  about  the  glove  ?  Will  you  tell  about
Mary  ?)

Phinuit  :  Mary,  that's  Elizabeth.  That's  all  connected  with  these  two
things.  [Unintelligible.]  [In  this  connection  a  name  Dorton  is  mentioned
by  Phinuit.]  (Dr.  H.  :  Tell  about  the  glove.)  Phinuit :  C-a-r-r-i-e.
(Dr.  H.  :  Has  David  come  back  ?)  Phinuit :  That's  passed  out  of  the  body.
That's  the  one  whose  lady  is  in  the  body  and  has  trouble  in  the  head  and  in
the  heart.  That's  the  one  that  I  just  called  Margaret,  and  this  is  connected
■with  you  ;  she  is  an  aunt.  She  is  connected  by  blood,  you  know,  not  by
marriage.  [Glove  belonged  to  Margaret's  sister.  The  facts  correct.]
[Margaret,  great  aunt  of  Mrs.  H.,  was  seriously  ill  with  heart-disease.
Her  husband,  Charles,  had  been  dead  less  than  a  year.  Carrie  perhaps  an
attempt  at  Charlie.*]

(Dr.  H.  :  Is  she  going  to  get  well  ?)

Phinuit  :  This  has  something  to  do  with  Margaret,  and  tliis  is  the  one
who  has  got  the  trouble  v^ith  her  head  and  with  her  heart.  She  looks  very
poorly  to  me.  You  don't  know  this  friend,  I  think.  If  I  could  I  would  toll
you  she  is  going  to  get  well,  but  I  see  inwardly  a  more  serious  condition,
that  is  develoiied  in  the  loAver  part  of  the  body,  down  here.  That's  Margaret.
[This  trouble  (swelling)  had  existed  lief  ore  ;  was  sujiposed  by  Mrs.  H.  to  be
absent  at  time  of  sitting,  though  it  did  exist  at  that  time,  and  was  observed
by  Mrs.  H.  upon  visiting  Margaret  some  time  afterward.]

(Dr.  H.  :  Do  you  hear  from  Margaret's  husband  at  all  1)


xxxTii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  469'


Phinuit  :  That's  the  gentleman  who  is  connected  with  the  other  articles,
tliat  cauie  with  this.  The  other  influence  you  gave  me  and  this  came  from  a
gentleman  in  the  spirit,  and  a  lady  in  the  body.  I'll  try  to  get  a  message-
for  you  as  soon  as  I  can.

(Dr.  H.  :  Has  David  come  back  ?)  Pliinuit :  He's  gone  to  iind  his  room
mate.  [Room-mate  living.  Room-mate's  wife  dead.*]  He'll  bs  back  in  a
few  minutes,  don't  you  hurry  me.  Give  me  plenty  of  time  and  I'll  tell  you
all  about  it.  Tliat  physical  condition  is  a  poor  one.  Can  you  help  her  t
(Dr.  H.  :  Well,  we'll  try.)

Phinuit :  She  doesn't  worry  because  there  is  no  necessity  of  worrying^
She's  got  some  sense  about  it. [Very  characteristic  of  the  lady.]

(Dr.  H.  :  I'll  turn  this  inside  out  for  you.  Doctor.)

Phinuit  :  That's  better. That's the mother. That's  connected  with
your  mother,  your  mother's sister. [Mary the motlier of  Mrs.  H.
Margaret,  Mary's  aunt,  but  brought  up  in  same  family  and  usually  addressed
each  other  as  sisters.*] She's  a  good  lady. They're  both  good. Mary  and.
Margaret. Two  good  names,  don't  you  think  so  ?

(Dr.  H.  :  Yes.  Tell  me  about  the  lady  and  the  glove.)  [This  glove  had
been  worn  by  the  owner  to  the  house  of  her  sister  Margaret.  It  is  curiou.s
tliat  no  mention  was  made  of  the  owner,  but  only  of  the  invalid  sister,  about
whom  all  the  statements  made  are  entirely  correct.]

Pliinuit  :  You  know.  I  get  this.  That's  not  Margaret  that's  connected
with  her,  but  that's  the  daughter.  Oh,  you're  Marie's  daughter.  [Feeling
Mrs.  H.'s  head.]  [Correct.]

(Dr.  H.  :  Do  you  hear  anything  from  Marie'vS  husband,  that  is,  this  lady's,
father  ?)

Phinuit  :  You  know,  I  see  a  great  long  couch,  a  long  couch  in  the  room,
with  a  little  alcove  place  in  it  [correct]  and  I  see  this  girl  there.  I  get  music-
with  tills.  There  is  some  music  connected  with  this.  There's  somebody
who  plays  well.  [All  this  connected  with  Margaret.  Her  daughter  very
musical.]  Wlio  plays  very  nicely.  Is  nervous  and  a  little  curious.
Margaret  is  in  the  body  too.  That's  funny,  and  that's  her  that's  speaking.
I  hear  that  name  very  distinctly.  Send  for  Charles,  and  tell  him  I'm  all
right.  Tell  him  I'm  not  dead,  I'm  alive.  (Dr.  H.  :  Who  says  that  ?)
Phinuit  :  David  says  that.  [David  not  connected  with  Margaret  or  her
deceased  hu.sband,  Charles.*]  You  folks  will  have  to  straighten  that  out.
You  connect  these  people  if  you  can.  I  could  do  better  if  you  would  leave
this  with  me,  and  then  come  back  and  I'll  tell  you  later.  I  do  like  you
very  much.  You're  getting  on  all  right  in  everything,  and  she's  the  nicest
lady  in  the  country.

(Dr.  H.  :  Do  you  hear  about  Eugene  ?)  Phinuit  :  E-v-e-n,  I  called  him
several  times,  but  the  lady  didn't  know  whom  I  meant.  I  tried  to  get  that
name  for  you  but  I  couldn't  get  it.  I  could  get  part  of  the  name  but  I
couldn't  get  all  of  it.  [Abruptly.]  I'd  like  to  know  who  Warren  is>
[Another  deceased  relative.]  This  comes  in  connection  with  this.  [Warren
had  no  connection  with  the  glove.*]  Well,  it's  very  trying.  He's  in  the
spirit,  Warren  is.  There  now,  I  got  that  all  right.  Now,  friends,  you  must
tell  me  what  you  want  to  know  most  about.  (Dr.  H.  :  Has  David  come
back  ?) Phinuit  :  David  is  coming. In  the  meantime  about  David's  friend's.


470


Richard  IloJfjson.


[PAET


-wife.  Is  she  there  ?  The  wife  of  David's  room  mate  ?  That's  Charles.
{ I'ho  Charles  alluded  to  above,  but  he  was  not  David's  room  mate.]
(Dr.  H.  :  Tliat's  all  right.)  Phinuit :  Tliat  Charles  sends  a  message
to  her.  Tell  her  I  am  all  right.  That's  her  husband.  (Dr.  H.  :
Is  David  here  ?)  Phinuit  :  Louise,  Louise.  She's  in  t!ie  body.  Wait  a
minute.  Louise  is  connected  with  this  Warren.  They  both  want  to  be
remembered.  They  are  in  the  body.  Warren  is  here  and  the  lady  is  there.
So  that  makes  two  of  them,  but  she's  in  the  body  and  he  is  in  the  sj^irit.
[Warren  dead  was  Louise's  grandfather.*]  (Dr.  H.  :  That's  right.)  Phinuit :
'Can  you  tell  me  as  much  as  that  1  You'll  be  satisfied  when  I  tell  you.  Don't
think  I'm  not  going  to  tell  you,  because  I  am.  (Dr.  H.  :  Who's  the  lady
with  David  ?)  Phinuit  :  David's  gone.  I  don't  know  who  he'll  bring  back,
t>ut  he'll  be  back  in  a  few  minutes.  Margaret  is  connected  with  this  also,
■and  I  get  the  name  very  distinctly  of  Henry  and  Will,  William.  The
William  is  a  brother  also.  Henry  is  a  brother  of  the  fatlier,  I  thought
•that  there  was  a  Will  and  Henry,  but  it's  William  Henry,  one  person,  the
two  names  come  together.  [Quite  correct.]  [William  Henry,  brother  of
Mrs.  H.'s  father,  whose  liome  was  in  Brooklyn.*]
(Dr.  H.  :  Is  the  fatlier  happy  ?)

Phinuit  :  That  fellow  had  a  trouble  with  las  head,  with  his  neck.
.[Probably  referring  to  Walter.]  Frank  is  coming.  Rockwood — Rockwood.
Brooklyn  ;  with  David,  just  returned  from  Brookwood.  This  is  David.
Dr. — Dr. — Hertford. — Herford.  [Unintelligible.]  Who's  he  talking  about,
Doctor? (Dr.  H.  :  I  don  t  know,  Doctor.)

Phinuit :  H-o-u-g-h-t-o-n — Houghton.  Oh,  I  can't  get  it.  (Dr.  H.  :  Is
it  David  that's  talking  ?)

Phinuit :  I  can't  get  tliat.  B-e-l-l-e-n.  B-a-r-r-e-t-t.  (Dr.  H.  :  Who
■said  that  ?)  Phinuit  :  Barrett,  that's  it.  Now  you  have  it.  He's  connected
with  David.  He  is,  indeed,  and  lie's  all  right.  [Barrett,  a  business  friend
•of  David.]  (Dr.  H.  :  Is  Barrett  in  the  body  ?)  Phinuit  :  Tell  the  Doctor
lie  is  with  him  and  he  is  all  right. [Barrett  living.*]

(Dr.  H.  :  How  about  the  wife  of  David's  room  mate?)  Phinuit  :  She's
"in  tlie  spirit.  She's  the  one  I  spoke  to  you  about  in  the  first  place.  Her
irame,  that  is  the  one  I  told  you  about,  that  she  has  you  know,  is  Evelyn.
{No.]  (Dr.  H.  :  What  was  her  name,  the  wife  of  David's  room  mate?)
Phinuit :  She's  tlie  one  who  came  in  with  Evelyn,  Alice  we  called  her.  She
is  all  right,  and  sends  lier  love  to  you.  [Alice  was  the  name.  But  Mrs.  H.
had  brought  with  her  sometliing  given  by  Alice  to  Evelyn,  and  the  names
and  persons  were  closely  associated  in  her  mind.]

AVho's  Tom?  He  knows  him.  David's  connected  with  him  also.  [A
friend.]  Thompson.  [Unknown.*]  There  you've  got  it.  I'll  have  to  see
jou  again,  friends.  You  speak  to  David  and  ask  him  if  there's  anything  he
wants  to  do  in  the  meantime.  (Dr.  H.  :  Has  David  any  message  for  his
father  ?)  Phinuit  :  Ask  the  lady.  His  father  came  to  him  with  her.
[Unknown.*]  He's  what  you  call  not  low,  but  poorly — not  in  good  health.
{Correct.]  I  can't  tell  you  anything  about  this,  I'm  too  weak.  [Phinuit
takes  a  ring.]  That's  connected  with  that  also.  I  wish  I  had  had  that  a
little  sooner,  but  I'm  too  weak  now.  I'm  sorry,  good-bye.  Ruthie.  Mollie.
{Unknown.]


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  471


May  11th,  1892.

At  the  house  of  Dr.  A.  B.  Thaw  ia  New  York.  [R.  H.  taking
notes.]

The  following  account  is  an  abridgment  with  names  changed,  and  one  or
two  other  circumstances  somewhat  modified.  I  was  sent  out  of  the  room
part  of  the  time,  and  tlie  lady,  friend  of  the  sitter,  who  was  to  have  written
out  the  record  of  the  sitting,  began  but  did  not  complete  it,  and  the  notes
are  particularly  deficient  as  to  which  questions  were  asked  by  the  sitter-
in  Italian  and  which  in  English.

The  sitter  was  an  Italian  lady,  Madame  Frederica,  who  had  lived  long-
enough  in  America  to  be  familiar  with  English.  The  deceased  sister,  Madame-
Elisa,  also  spoke  English  as  well  as  Itali:in.

Phinuit  referred  to  the  "  sister,"  attempted  a  name  that  had  no  signifi-
cance, made  attempts  at  the  name  Frederica,  gave  a  personal  desciiption  of
Elisa,  also  designated  (by  pointing  out  locality,  etc.),  the  trouble  that  caused
her  death,  and  mentioned  some  specific  points  in  connection  with  the  scene-
at  the  moment  of  her  dying.  A  watch  which  had  belonged  to  Madame  Elisa
had  been  lost  or  mislaid  by  the  sitter,  who  inquired  about  it  ;  but  the
statements  made  concerning  its  whereabouts  did  not  lead  to  its  being
found.

The  communicator  began  to  write  "  Dear  Sister,"  and  was  at  once
requested  to  write  in  Italian,  and  several  sheets  were  written— some  fifty
-words,  of  which  a  few  are  evidently  repetitions,  attempts  to  write  more-
clearly,  but  none  of  ib  is  clearly  decipherable  except  the  words  si  [yes]  and
mia  [my]  and  the  Christian  names  of  the  "  communicator  "  and  the  sitter..
The  hypothetical  interpretation  of  several  other  words  is  much  too  doubtful
to  be  of  any  evidential  value  as  indicating  a  knowledge  of  Italian  words.
The  communicator  Avas  then  requested  to  write  in  English,  and  Phinuit
begged  the  sitter  not  to  speak  so  loud.  The  sitter  then  asked  in  Italian,
"Does  my  voice  hurt  you,  Elisa  ?"  The  reply  was,  '■  My  dear  sister,  I  hear
you  speak  to  me  aiid  it  makes  me  so  happy  to  hear  your  dear  voice  again."
There  were  then  some  replies  written  to  questions  about  the  whereabouts  of
the  lost  watch,  some  of  the  words  being  undecipherable,  but  the  writing
ended,  as  -we  ascertained  afterwards,  by  an  attempt  to  write  the  communi-
cator's full  name.

George  Pelham,  known  to  both  the  sitter  and  her  sister,  then  acted  as.
amanuensis  for  Madame  Elisa,  after  greeting  the  sitter,  and  wrote  replies  to
questions  about  the  watch.  I  interrupted  her  by  a  demand  for  the  last  name
of  the  communicator,  to  which  G.  P.  wrote:  "Don't  bother  me  while  her
sister  is  speaking  to  me  please,  for  I  have  quite  enough  to  do  without  this. "
Later  on  G.  P.  referred  to  the  sitter's  mother  as  with  the  communicator,
adding  that  he  himself  did  not  know  her.  [Correct.]  There  was  further
writing  of  a  personal  character,  after  which  I  asked  where  had  I  been  with
the  communicator,  at  Newport.  We  had  been  guests  at  the  same  house
together,  and  the  name  of  our  hostess  was  correctly  written.  The  writing
ended,  and  I  supposed  that  the  surname  of  the  communicator  had  not  been
given  but  the  last  faint  scrawls,  as  we  found  later,  were  clearly  intended
for  this  name. Suddenly  Phinuit  called  out  "Who's  M-A-N-N-O-R-S.  j


472


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


<rot  that  for  H-O-D-G-S-O-N.  Tell  Hodgson  I  gave  this  to  you  as  I  could
not  stay  there  longer  on  account  of  Elisa."  This  was  G.  P.'s  message
sipparently  through  Phinuit.  "Manners"  was  the  surname  of  Madame
Elisa.  Immediately  after  Phinuit's  departure,  and  before  Mrs.  Piper
Tecovered  consciousness,  the  following  was  wliispered  in  Italian  :  Si  a  Bene,
tita  Bene,  Pazienzn,  Pazienza,  Pazienza.  [It  is  well.  Patience.]  [For  other
■communications  from  Madame  Elisa,  see  pp.  335-G.]


January  2Sth,  1893.

Sitter  :  Mr.  T.  B.  C.  (Associate  A.B.S.P.R.),  Minneapolis,  Minn.

[Mr.  C.  gave  me  the  following  account  on  the  afternoon  of  the  clay
of  the  sitting. — R.  H.] : —

Phinuit  said  there  was  a  lady  who  wanted  to  speak  with  me,  my  wife.
He  indicated  that  she  died  of  intlaramation,  and  gave  the  name  of  the  disease
verifonitis.  He  gave  the  name  Louise,  and  said  Louise  was  my  daughter,
■tind  was  with  lier  mother,  and  that  others  were  there  also  with  them.  He
then  gave  the  names  Irvie,  Nellie,  Dellie  (D  E  L  L  I  E)  and  Lizzie,  and  said
they  were  my  [four  other]  children  in  spirit,  as  is  true.  [All  these  state-
ments were  correct. — R.  H.]

Laura  was  mentioned  and  said  to  be  my  sister.  [Correct.  She  died
neai'ly  forty  years  ago.]

Phinuit  further  said  there  were  two  children  in  the  body — some  distance
•away.  One  of  them,  "nice  bright  little  fellow,"  was  sick,  had  sore  throat
and  something  the  matter  with  his  head.  [True,  when  I  left  tliem  three
■days  ago  in  AVashington.]  Phinuit  said  that  he  would  come  out  all  right,
■and  live  a  long  time.  Phinuit  gave  these  statements  as  coming  from  my
wife  and  Louise.  Louise  also  said,  "Give  my  love  to  Lon."  There  was
.some  stumbling  over  the  name  Lon,  which  was,  however,  finally  correctly
given,  and  spelled  out  Alonzo,  which  is  the  full  name.  But  she  always
•called  him  Lon. This  is  her  husband,  still  living.

Irvie  was  rightly  said  to  have  died  of  consumption.

[There  was  some  writing  apparently  by  Louise,  as  follows]  : —

[If  by  Louise,  she  must  have  been  acting  as  amanuensis  for  her  mother
"whose  name  was  Sarah. — R.  H.]  "I  told  you  in  my  note  to  keejj  the
-appointment,  did  I  not,  dear?"  Spoken.  " This  appointment  was  what  I
meant."  [See  note  below.]  [I  had  given  one  of  my  wife's  rings  to  a  friend
•of  hers. Knowledge  of  this  was  shown  in  the  following  writing]  : —

"Give  my  ring  to  niy  dear  friend."  (Was  that  riglit  ?)  Yes.  (Who
was  the  friend  ?)  [Attempts  at  Shepherd,  which  was  linally  written]
^  H  E  P  A  U  D. [Should  have  been  Shepherd.]

The  other  writings  ai'e  jorivate  messages  of  personal  affection  to  convince
me  that  my  relatives  were  actually  present  and  talking  with  me.

It  was  mentioned  that  Hattie's  mother  had  died  of  cancer,  and  that  I
•could  find  this  from  Hattie.  Tliis  is  not  yet  known  to  me,  but  Hattie  is  my
brother's  wife  still  living. [Afterwards  ascertained  to  be  not  true.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  473


Note  by  Mr.  0.

On  January  22nd,  1893,  I  tried  Ouija  Board  for  the  first  time  with  a
private  lady  friend  in  Washington  who  has  had  various  remarkable  experiences
with  it.  A  few  private  things  came  out  at  the  first  sitting  which  were  a  great
surprise  to  me,  but  somewhat  personal.  At  our  next  trial,  which  was  on
January  24th,  several  messages  were  spelt  out  as  coming  from  my  wife,  who
wrote,  inter  alia  : —

"  All  your  movements  are  noticed.  (By  whom  ?)  By  me.  (Wlio  ?)  By
Sarah.  Did  I  not  mention  to  you  that  I  am  always  waiting  for  you.  Bitter
it  is.  Meet  your  appointment.  You  should  trust.  I  make  you  no  promises.
I  am  a  law  at  your  side. "

I  kept  this  appointment  [sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper]  sj)ocially  because  of
this  message,  which  was  thus  indirectly  corroborated  as  coming  from  her  by
the  communication  through  Mrs.  Piper.

I  have  never  seen  any  Spiritualistic  medium  before  of  any  sort.

[Some  weeks  previously  I  had  made  two  different  appointments  for  Mr.
C  to  accompany  me  to  Mrs.  Piper,  but  both  these  sittings  had  to  be  given
up,  in  one  case  owing  to  Mrs.  Piper's  illness,  and  in  the  other  owing  to
circumstances  connected  with  the  death  of  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Piper's.  In  one
of  these  cases  Mr.  0.  met  ine  at  the  Boston  station.  In  the  other  case  I
sent  a  note  to  his  hotel  to  prevent  his  going  to  the  station.  In  neither  case
did  he  go  out  to  Arlington  Heights.  Mr.  C.  was  travelling  about  a  great
deal,  and  arranged  that  I  should  have  a  sitting  on  his  behalf  with  some
articles  which  he  sent  me  for  the  purpose.  I  informed  him  by  letter  that
I  would  have  the  sitting  on  January  28th,  but  he  finally  decided  to  come  to
Boston  again  himself.  Not  finding  me  at  the  Boston  Station,  he  thought
that  the  arrangement  for  the  sitting  had  fallen  through,  but  was  induced  to
go  on  to  Mrs.  Piper's  by  the  persistent  iteration  of  the  thought  "Keep
your  appointment."  I  had  requested  Mr.  Howard  to  take  my  place  that
morning,  so  that  he  might  ask  G.  P.  a  question,  the  answer  to  which  was
known  to  me,  but  not  to  Mr.  Howard  (see  p.  439),  who  explained  the  matter
to  Mr.  C.  on  meeting  liim  at  Mrs.  Piper's  house. — R.  H.]


February  8(h,  1893.

Sitters  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thomas  B.  MacDonough.  R.  H.  taking
notes,  but  not  very  full  ones.  Mr.  MacDonough  is  an  Associate
A.B.S.P.R.,  New  York  district.  Mr.  MacDonough's  comments  were
not  made  till  about  the  time  of  his  letter  which  follows  the  report,
July  1st,  1896,  when  he  made  some  notes  on  the  type-written  copy
of  my  record  which  I  sent  him,  and  gave  further  explanations  in
his  letter.

[Phinuit.]  .  .

Here's  the  Colonel. Wants  to  speak  to  this  gentle.Tian.
Little  children. Two  of  them. Two  children  ; both  belong  to  you
[Indicates  size  by  hand.] . . . [A  gap  in  my  notes  here. — R.  H.]


474


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAKT


[Colonel  Bundy  wanted  to  speak  to  me.  He  had  died  not  long  before.
The  two  cliildren  spoken  [of]  were  both  mine  by  former  marriage,  one  two
yeai's  yomiger  than  the  other.]

[Written.]  Fred.  (Fred  Cleveland  ?)  [An  acquaintance  who  died  of
consumption  ut  Denver,  Col.]

[Spoken.]  He's  got  a  mother  here — in  the  body,  that  lie  wants  to  send
a  message  to. She  lives  up  in  a  hotel — flats. [Do  not  know  her.]

(What  city  ?)  New  York.  He  passed  out  with  consumption.  [Right.]
Old  gentleman — grey  hair,  nearer  to  you  than  any  of  them  except  those  two
children.  One  is  a  little  bit  of  a  thing.  [Very  correct.]  Samh,  Sarah
Warren — no  Purcell — had  little  locket  in  body,  was  well  acquainted  with
this  lady's  mother. [Cannot  connect  this  with  anything  I  know  about.]

Old  gentleman  says  :  What  about  those  papers  ? [No.  1. See  note.]

Do  you  know  Louis  R.  ?  [No.]  [Known  to  me  and  several  previous
sitters.— R.  H.]

[Describe  the  old  gentleman.]  High  forehead,  prominent  nose,  bright
eye,  hair  back  like  this  [indicating.] [Can't  identify  by  this  descriptioji.]

William — That  belongs  to  the  lady.  [Unintelligible.]

Mickles,  Michols.  (Michael.)  That's  it — Mickle.  He  wants  to  speak  to
you  very  much. Double  twisted  sort  of  brother. [See  note  No.  1.]

Two  children  and  Fred,  and  Will  and  Michael.  (Ask  him  what  relation
he  was  to  me  1)

Who's  that  young  girl  in  the  body  that's  musical  ?  She  jjlays,  and  would
like  to  sing  but  can't.

[The  Avord  Fatlier"  written  apparently  in  answer  to  question  of  sitter
while  Phinuit  was  speaking. — R.  H.]

You  know  that  I  see  your  father.  You've  got  some  paper  belonging  to
him. Insurance  paper. (No.) Deed,  paper. [Know  nothing  about  paper.]

[Word  very  much  like  Gilder  written  in  mirror-writing,  not  deciphered
at  time.]  (Carvers  and  Gilders'  Association.  That's  what  he  means.  He
was  very  proud  of  that.) [Embraced  in  note  No.  1.]

[Written.] John  Mc  is  here. Mc  . John  Mc I  am.  Yours

for  ever,  your  brother,  J.  Mc. [My  brother  John.]

(Why  could  you  not  do  more  for  us  yesterday  ?)  [This  refers  to  a
sitting  of  Mr.  MacDonough  with  his  wife  alone,  not  with  any  other  medium.
— R.  H.,  1897.] Because  I  could  not,  but  left  to  reserve  for  now.

[Mr.  MacD.  asks  about  some  leakage.]  Look  at  them  at  once.  But  you
will  find  them  in  the  cellar.  (Not  in  the  cellar  in  the  tower  ?)  [Undecipher-
able.] Toiver.  [In  mirror-writing.]  (What  side  ?  East  or  west,  north  or
south  ?)  East,  emphatically,  emphatically.  (On  the  east  side  ?)  Yes,  yes.
You  will  find  it  in  the  pipe,  pipe  under  the  sill  near  the  window  in  the
partition. But  I  will  s . . . water. [Note  No.  2.]

Tom,  you  dear  old  bro.  I  will  keep  my  promise  and  help  you
through  with  it. [Can't  connect.]

[Pliinuit  speaks.]  Who's  Murray,  Mary  ?  [Not  7-ecognised.']  [Written.]
M. . . . [under.] Mother  is  all  right. Michael. [My  father.]

(How  are  things  in  Kansas  City  ?) [Question  by  Mr.  Mac  Donough.]

[Phinuit  says.]  Where's  the  glass — a  lot  of  pottery  things  ?  [unin-
telligible.] ^  ,.  .


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  475


[Wiitteu.] Broken  property  is  going  to  be  all  right. Tom,  old  chap.
Hold  on  to  a  good  thing. [Kansas  City.]
Find  tlie  leak  at  once.

Mary,  Nellie,  Nellie,  Nellie  [unintelligible.]

Tell  my  son  John  Jr.  to  stick  to  his  interests.  [My  brother's  son.  Note  3.]
[Undecipherable.]

[Spoken.]  John  has  something  the  matter  with  his  throat  and  in  his
head.  (Nervous  ?)  That'll  do  liim  good  to  be  out  there.  In  big  building  in
present  time.  His  healtli's  going  to  bo  a  great  deal  better.  [My  brother'.s
son.]

(Tell  us  about  our  health.)

[To  Mr.  MacD.]  You've  got  no  heart  trouble.  You  thought  you  had.
You're  an  old  chumj^.  A  little  too  fat,  tliat's  all.  I  should  advise  you  to
practise  with  dumb  bells.  No  Bright's  disease  of  the  kidneys.  You've  just
got  a  little  indigestion.  You'll  stay  in  tlie  body  a  long  time  yet.  [Note
No.  4.]

[Feeling  him  all  over.] You  go  home  and  go  to  sleep  [to  Mr.  MacD—.]

[To  Mrs.  MacD.]  You  needn't  get  nervous.  [Mr.  MacD.  and  R.  H.
sent  out  of  the  room.  On  return  Phinuit  says  :]  She  has  a  little  bronchial
trouble.  Looks  as  if  she  inhaled  smoke  at  some  time.  Little  trouble  by  a
fall.  Spray  her  throat  with  a  teaspoonful  of  "  hamamelis  "  in  tea-cupful  of
water,  with  an  atomiser  twice  a  day.

[Written.]  Don't  forget  me,  Tom,  For  I  will  watch  over  you  always.
Good-bye. Yours,  etc.,  J.  Mc —

["  Looks  as  if  she  inhaled  smoke  at  some  time."

Some  years  ago  Mrs.  MacDonough,  during  tlie  Southern  Hotel  Fire  in
St.  Louis,  when  several  lives  were  lost — in  trying  to  escape  from  fifth  story
window  by  means  of  sheets  tied  together,  fell,  and  was  picked  up  almost
lifeless  and  badly  burned.  She  was  laid  up  about  six  months.  Her  fall
and  escape  were  miraculous,  and  furnished  the  newspapers  at  the  time  with
material  for  illuminated  cuts,  etc.,  etc.]

Thos.  B.  MacDonough.

The  Birches,  Lake  Mooselookmeguntie.

Rangeley  Lakes,  Maine,  July  1st,  1896.

Dear  Mr.  Hoijgson, — I  kept  no  notes  of  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,
and  therefore  the  three  years  which  have  elapsed  leaves  me  hazy  regarding
it.  All  I  can  positively  remember  I  have  set  down  on  schedule,  or  incor-
porate here.

Note,  No.  1.  The  old  gentleman  who  asks  "  what  about  those  papers  ? "
was  Michael  MacDonough,  my  father.  Phinuit,  in  struggling  with  his  first
name,  called  him  "Michel  "  which  is  French  for  Michael.  As  I  seemed  at
the  time  to  recognise  my  father,  I  suggested  the  correct  name  or  English  of
it,  and  Phinuit,  with  emphasis  accepted  the  translation.  The  only  connec-
tion I  can  make  with  the  ' '  papers  "  asked  about  and  my  fatlier's  pride  about
them,  arises  from  this.  My  father  was  an  Englishman,  who  came  to  tliis
country  in  18.34.  He  was  treasurer  of  the  Carvers'  and  Gilders'  Association
or  Guild  of  London— now  defunct.  As  its  representative  he  had  purchased
a  building  site  for  tlie  guild—the  deeds  for  which  were  somehow  made  iii


476


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


his  name.  I  can  reniGvii'b3i',  when  I  was  a  lad,  quibe  a  little  excitement  in
our  household  over  a  letter  from  Loadon  askint(  my  father  to  go  before
some  authority — possibly  the  British  Consul,  and  make  over  the  property
to  the  guild  —since  they  could  do  nothing  with  it  or  about  it  while  he  had
legal  possession.  We  were  very  poor.  My  father's  pride  arose  from  the
fact  of  his  prompt  compliance.

No.  2.  The  leak  referred  to  was  a  defect  in  tower  on  the  east  side  of  our
cottage  at  Long  Brancli.  We  followed  my  brotlier's  directions,  discovered
the  leak  under  the  window  sill  and  repaired  it.

No.  3.  My  brother's  son — John  Jr. — was  at  this  time  quarrelling  with
his  employers,  .  .  .  Theatrical  Agents  .  .  .  and  was  contem-
plating throwing  up  his  situation.  His  head  and  throat  were  ailing  liim—
all  this  I  heard  about  after  the  sitting.  I  had  hitherto  supposed  liis  relations
with  his  firm  to  be  most  amicable.

No.  4.  At  this  time  I  had  been  suffering  for  some  time  with  pains  about
the  heart,  and  was  alarmed,  supposing  it  to  be  organic.  I  asked  Pliinuit
Vv'Iietlier  he  could  see  anything  the  matter  with  me.  His  reply  was  remark-
able. Some  time  after  the  sitting  I  consulted  a  physician,  and  by  the  way,
he  was  Dr.  Pomroy,  a  clairvoyant,  who  pronounced  my  case  one  of  indiges-
tion— using  almost  tlie  same  words  Phinuit  used.  Both  have  been  proven
correct. Indigestion  has  long  been  my  tormentor.

I  am  unable  to  recall  all  of  the  message  signed  George  [February  21st,
1894,  see  below]  except  that  part  which  said  "  you  will  sell  Kansas  property
this  year."  The  property  is  not  in  Kansas — but  Kansas  City,  Mo.  It  is
not  sold. My  brother  died  February  12th,  1892.

I  hardly  think  you  will  make  much  out  of  this,  bub  it  is  the  best  I  can
do. Mrs.  MacD.  appends  her  signature  and  unites  in  regards. — Youi-s,  etc.,

Thos.  B.  M.vcDonough.

I  have  read  my  husband's  notes  of  the  sitting  we  jointly  held  witli  Iilrs.
Pil)er  in  company  with  Dr.  Hodgson,  February  8th,  1893,  and  append  iny
signature  in  corroboration.

Feances  MacDonough.

[It  is  probable  that  on  February  8th  I  told  "John  Mc  "  that  he  could
send  communications  to  his  brother  through  me.  Numerous  instances  of
brief  messages  of  this  type  from  various  communicators  have  occuiTed  at
sittings,  and  I  give  the  following  as  illustrations.]

On  February  13th,  1893,  in  the  presence  of  another  sitter,  Phinuit  said  :
*'  John  sends  his  love  to  Tom  and  Frank,"  and  on  February  17th,  1893,  at  a
sitting  which  I  was  holding  on  behalf  of  another  j)srson,  the^  following
message  was  written  : —

"  I  am  John  Mc,  you  [wanted  ?]  me,  did  you  not.  I  am  John  Mc,  very
well,  I  came  here  to  speak  to  you  one  minute.

Whose  hat  is  tliat '{  (That  is  not  yours  )  I  see,  I  don't  recall  it.  Oh,  I
see  now,  but  who  are  you,  please  ?  (I'm  a  friend  of  your  brother's.)  Tom's
Oh  !  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  sir.  (I  was  with  them  before.)  Oh,  yes,  are
you  the  gentleman  ? Well,  will  you  be  kind  enougli  to  give  both  him  and


xxxiii.] OhservaLlons  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  477


Frank  my  love,  and  ask  them  to  especially  advise  my  son  John  to  still
•continue  travelling,  as  this  is  most  important,  and  tell  him  it  is  especially
good  for  his  weak  condition  of  health,  v/eak  state  of,  and  love  to  him  and
Si-**  also.

(R.  H.  reads  it  over.  Is  tliat  right  ?)  Tes  sir.  Now,  pleasa  tell  Tom,
my  brother,  that  I  will  advise  him  as  to  when  he  had  best  sell  liis  land  in
Kansas  City.  [R.  H.  reads.]  Yes,  sir,  and  it  will  be  a  help  to  him.
Thank  j'ou  very  much. Good  day,  sir. I  am,  yours,  etc.,  J.  Mc."

I  learned  later  from  Mr.  MacUonough  that  the  name  whose  omission
is  indicated  by  asterisks  and  which  was  unknown  to  me,  liad  sjjccial
significance  but  of  a  private  nature.  Kansas  City  was  mentioned  by
Mr.  MacDonough  at  the  sitting  on  February  8th.  "Frank"  is  Mrs.
MacDonough,  but  Mr.  Mac  Donough  may  have  called  her  "Frank"  at  the
sitting  of  February  8th.  On  January  18tli,  1894,  when  G.  P.  was  writing,
the  following  occurred  :  —

"There  is  a  confusion,  H.,  you  had  better  wait  a  little  until  it
gets  more  quiet  here.  Do  [you]  know  this  is  just  like  being  in  a  very  large
hall  and  hearing  two  or  three  dozen  voices  all  at  the  same  time  discussing
■different  subjects.

Who  is  this  John  McDonough.  (I  know  his  bi'other.  I  understand  and
■will  send  message).  Give  my  love  to  him  and  say  that  I  should  be  deliglitecl
to  see  him  and  Frank  again  some  time  and  tell  him  to  hold  on  for  awhile
longer  and  I  will  advise  him  just  what  to  do.  I  am  ever  your  brother,
Jolm  Mc.  Do  you  know  tliese  people,  H.  ?  (Yes,  that's  all  right).  0.  K.
I  didn't. (Tell  lum  I'll  send  the  message). Oh,  good."

I  forwarded  this  to  Mr.  MacDonough,  who  replied  : —

"Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  January  29th,  1894.

Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — The  message  you  send,  and  vvhich  I  re-enclose,  is
singularly  opportune.  I  am  in  great  i:>erplexity  over  a  business  venture
of  grave  importance.  "Jolm"  seems  to  be  aware  of  my  perplexing
.anxiety. . . .  rp^^^^  ^  MacDonough.

On  February  21st,  1894,  when  G.  P.  was  writing,  the  following
occurred  : —

"  Here's  a  message  from  John  INIcDonough.  Tell  Tom  ....
^undecipherable.]  is  here.  (You're  writing  too  fast.  I  can't  read  it.)  I  nmsfc
■give  it  quickly  while  I  am  clear,  H.  I  am  looking  after  him  and  he  is  better
■off,  for  he  never  could  be  well  in  the  body.  Tell  him  this.  Got  it,  H.  ?  (Yes).
And  we  are  awfully  glad  to  be  able  to  help  him  out.  He  would  have  lost;
liis  mind  if  he  had  remained  longei-.  (Who  is  this  he's  talking  about?)
\Vait.  His  son.  (Whose  ?)  John's.  (Passed  out  recently  ?)  Not  long
:ago.  (He  wanted  to  send  a  message  about  some  property,  didn't  he  ?)  Yes,
he  told  me  this,  also.  The  Kansas  property  will  go  this  year  and  all
satisfactorily  to  him.  Hold  on  a  bit  longer.  Tom,  dear  brother,  I  am
helping  you  out.  Trust  in  me  thoroughly,  and  I  assure  you  it  will  be  all
right,  and  go  riglit,  Tom.  .  .  .  He  is  waiting  a  moment.  I'll  tell  you
■soon  .  .  .  keep  the  house  at  the  island.  Lovingly  your  brother,  Jh —
Mc  . Thanks  to  you  sir,  good-day. . . . Bring  me  some  thing

2  I  2


478


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


belonging  to  him  some  time.  He  is  in  a  little  dreamy  state  at  times,  yet  he
is  clear  with  me  as  his  interpreter."

To  this  Mr.  MacDonough  replied  : —

Providence,  R.  I.,  March  1st,  1894.

Dear  Mil.  Hodgson,  .  .  .  The  message  is  very  confusing.  "John,"
a  son,  has  not  passed  away,  but  is  doing  very  well.  We  have  no  island
property.  We  have  property  at  Long  Branch.  We  have  no  thought  of
disposing  of  Kansas  City  property.  The  character  of  the  message  is  unlike
my  brother.  I  have  been  in  some  uncertainty  as  to  a  business  matter  of
importance,  which  John  however  does  not  seem  to  see.  ...

Thos.  B.  MacDonough.

In  July,  1896,  Mr.  MacDonough  informed  me  that  the  son  John  died
in  Philadelphia  "just  about  one  year  ago  "  [about  July,  1895J.

On  October  14th,  1893,  Phinuifc  said  :  "  McDonough  says  tell  Prank
she's  good  for  a  good  many  years  yet."  I  sent  this  to  Mr.  MacDonough's
permanent  address  in  New  York  City,  and  on  October  20th  received  a
letter  from  him  from  Detroit,  Michigan.  He  says:  "The  message  is
understood,  Mrs.  MacDonough  ('  Frank ')  for  the  past  month  has  been
under  the  weather,  and  conjured  up  visions  of  disintegration.  Thanks."


xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  479


APPENDIX  III.


The  records  in  this  Appendix  are  of  first  sittings  given  by  Mrs.
Piper  after  hei-  operation,  which  was  performed  on  March  14th,  1893,
by  Lena  V.  Ingrahajn,  M.D.,  of  Boston^  Mass.,  who  has  furnished  me
witli  the  following  account.  The  reference  to  Mrs.  Piper's  pulse  and
temperature  concerned  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  March  12th,
1893,  which  was  almost  exclusively  devoted  to  conversation  between
Phinuit  and  Dr.  Ingraham  and  two  other  doctors,  during  which  I  was
not  present.

May  20th,  1896.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — The  operation  upon  Mrs.  Piper  was  cceliotomy
for  removal  of  diseased  Fallopian  tubes  and  ovaries.  .  .  .  Tlie  wound
healed  by  first  intention,  and  the  patient  had  an  uninterrupted  and  uneventful
recovery.  Upon  examination  after  operation  the  parts  were  found  in  good
condition,  with  complete  relief  of  all  symptoms  for  which  the  operation
was  done.

Mrs.  Piper's  pulse  before  the  trance  was  rapid,  from  the  fact  that  she
became  rather  excited  over  dread  of  examination,  operation,  etc.,  but  just
before  the  trance  it  was  about  seventy-two  per  minute,  and  was  nob
accelerated  during  the  trance.

Her  temperature  Avas  99  deg.  before,  during  and  after  the  trance.  She
took  ether  without  any  unusual  symptoms. — I  am  very  truly,

7,  (jrloucester  street.

The  operation  was  performed  at  Dr.  Cushing's  Sanitarium,
Brookline,  Mass.,  and  I  went  out  to  the  Sanitarium  and  remained  in
the  building  while  the  operation  was  performed,  so  that  I  might  be  of
assistance  in  case  of  any  unusual  occurrence.  After  the  operation,
and  while  Mrs.  Piper,  who  bad  been  taken  to  her  room,  was  still  under
the  influence  of  the  ether,  and  apparently  unconscious  of  any  person
present,  Dr.  Ingraham  requested  me  to  enter  the  room,  as  Mrs.  Piper
was  calling  for  me.  I  went  in  and  spoke  to  her,  but  she  seemed  to  be
quite  unaware  of  my  presence,  although  she  moaned  occasionally,  and
several  times  called  out  spasmodically  "  Mr.  Hodgson.''  During  this
interval  of  unconsciousness  her  attention  became  fixed  as  upon  an
object  of  interest,  and  she  exclaimed  :  "  Who  is  that  old  man  1  Take
bim  away."  Then  came  a  pause,  as  if  she  was  listening,  and  she  then
added,  "  Oh,  no.  He's  a  nice  old  man.  He  can  stay.''  This
naturally  caused  me  to  think  of  Phinuit.

The  first  sittings  Mrs.  Piper  gave  after  her  operation  were  two  in
the  early  part  of  September  to  a  previous  sitter,  and  were  largely


4S0


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


personal.  I  was  present  taking  notes.  There  Avere  personal  messages
to  other  previous  sitters  from  G.  P.  and  others.  At  tlie  first  sitting,
September  7th,  189.3,  Phinuit  said,  with  reference  to  the  operation  :
"  I  saw  the  medium  on  a  long  table  and  helped  her  out.  I  saw
Hodgson  too,  and  tried  to  make  the  medium  see  me."

I  believe  that  the  first  sittings  givea  afterwards  were  those
arranged  for  by  Mrs.  Howaixl.

Early  in  Octoher,  1893.
Sitter  :  Mr.  L.  Vernon  Briggs,  Hanover,  Mass.

During  this  month  I  was  in  Chicago,  and  Mrs.  Howard  arranged
for  two  sittings  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  T.  in  Boston,  who  was  present
for  a  few  minutes,  for  a  private  conversation  with  Phinuit,  nob
recorded,  at  a  sitting  of  March  12th,  1893.  Some  notes  were  made  at
these  two  sittings,  chiefly  by  Mrs.  Howard,  but  I  did  not  i-eccive  a.
copy  till  sevei'al  months  later  from  Mrs.  T.  Mr.  Briggs  was  present
at  the  second  sitting  only.  I  understood  at  the  time  that  the  sitters
were  anxious  for  privacy,  and  did  not  learn  who  Mr.  Briggs  was  till
the  summer  of  1895.  Mr.  Briggs  never  had  an  opportunity  of  study-
ing at  leisure  the  attempts  at  Hawaiian  writing  at  his  sitting,  the
original  writings  of  which  were  apparently  lost.  I  received  in  the
early  part  of  Noveuiber  a  brief  account  orally  from  Mrs.  Howai'd  of
the  sitting  concerned  with  Kalua,  at  which  she  was  present,  and  also
Mrs.  T.  The  following  is  from  the  written  account  which  I  received
from  Mrs.  T.

*  *  *  *  -K-  *

The  medium  was  then  given  a  handkerchief  of  a  Honolulu  boy  who  had
been  shot  in  Boston — intentionally  or  unintentionally  was  not  known.  This
boy  had  shown  great  affection  for  a  person  present — following  them  twice  to
Boston  from  Honolulu  as  a  stowaway.  The  medium  showed  great  suffering
— placed  her  hand  to  her  side,  saying,  "It's  my  stomach — Oh,  my  side.
They  put  me  out  too  quick."  Here  the  medium  seemed  to  suSer  too  much,
and  Dr.  Phiunit  was  asked  to  take  cotitrol  and  speak  for  the  boy.  Conver-
sation continued  through  Dr.  Phinuit. — "Is  this  you,  Kalua?"  [This
question  was  put  by  Mr.  Briggs. — R.  H.]

"  Yes,  I  did  not  kill  myself.  He  killed  me.  We  were  g^imbling— that
was  wrong.  He  hid  my  purse  under  the  ste[)s  where  I  was  killed."  [The
cellar  was  examined — five  planks,  one  below  another,  we.-e  taken  up  but  no
purse  was  found.]  Kalua  also  said  there  was  shrubbery  near  it.  [Tliere
was  no  shrubbery  in  the  cellar  of  this  house.]

The  boy  seemed  delighted  to  speak  with  his  friend,  and  finally  took  the
hand  and  wrote,  "This  is  splendid — Oh,  Dr.,  help  me."  He  asked  questions,
and  tried  to  give  the  name  of  a  place  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  which  finally
was  made  out. He  then  tried  to  write  his  own  language,  and  did  write  some


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  481


words  which  were  understood.  For  instance,  he  wrote  "lei,"  which  means
"wreaths" — and  wliicli  he  always  made  daily  for  his  friend.

Dr.  Phinuit  said  what  lie  heard  sounded  like  Italian — and  that  the  boy
was  singing — which  he  was  always  doing  in  life.  He  spoke  again  of  his
death,  and  said  :  "  The  man  had  a  hot  temper  and  disputed  with  me,  and
he  shot  me — he  did  not  mean  to."  [Question]  "What  became  of  the
revolver?"  [Answer]  "  He  threw  the  revolver  into  the  hot-bos  where  the
pepples  are."  [Note. — This  was  true — the  revolver  was  found  in  the
furnace.]  [Known  to  Mr.  Briggs.  By  pepplea  was  meant  pebbles,  inter-
preted by  the  sitters  as  coals. — R.  H.]

"  Did  you  get  my  trunk?"  "Yes."  "So  glad  you  have  it — keep  my
things." "  Did  you  get  them,  M.  V "  Yes."

He  was  asked  where  his  father  was.  And  we  could  only  understand
Hiram. —  Phinuit  could  not  get  Hawaii  for  sometime — it  was  linally  written
Hawaiin  Islands.  We  asked  which  one  — Plunuit  said  it  was  Tawai.  Tliis
was  interesting,  as  the  island  is  spelled  with  a  K,  but  pronounced  with  a  T.

The  following  is  my  record  from  notes  of  a  conversation  with  JMi'.
I/.  Vernon  Briggs  on  June  11th,  1895,  revised  by  Mr.  Briggs. — R.  H.

Jnne  12th,  1895.

Sir.  L.  Vernon  Briggs,  of  Hanover,  Mass.,  called  upon  me  yesterday  morn-
ing, and  gave  me  an  account  of  his  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  October,  1893.

The  .sitting  was  arranged  for  by  Mrs.  Howard,  and  was  held  at  the  house
of  Mrs.  T.  Mr.  Briggs  attended  the  sitting,  and  was  introduced  as  Mr.
Smith.

Mr.  Briggs  had  taken  with  him  a  handkerchief  and  other  articles  that)
had  been  worn  by  a  Hawaiian  whose  acipiaintance  he  had  made  originally  in
Honolulu. His  name  Vi'as  Kalua.

During  the  time,  six  months,  that  Mr.  Briggs  lived  in  Honolulu,  Kalua
became  very  much  attached  to  him,  and  was  very  anxious  to  accompany  him
when  he  left  the  Islands  in  the  year  1881  to  return  to  America.

One  day,  about  July  in  the  year  1883,  a  cousin  of  Mr.  Briggs  entered  his
office  accompanied  by  Kalua.  It  appeared  that  Kalua,  when  the  ship  which
had  taken  Mr.  Briggs  away,  returned  to  the  island,  had  concealed  himself
in  the  hold  and  lived  on  raw  onions  till  the  ship  was  well  out  to  sea.  When
he  revealed  himself  the  Captain  sent  him  to  the  forecastle,  and  finding  that
he  was  intelligent,  and  taking  a  liking  to  him,  employed  him  as  cabin-boy.
He  accompanied  the  ship  to  China,  and  when  it  returned  to  Boston  left  it
and  inquired  for  Briggs.  Some  person  explained  the  directory  to  him,  and
it  happened  th'-i^t  the  first  person  by  tlie  '.lame  of  Briggs  whose  address  he
got  from  the  directory  was  a  cousin  of  Mr.  L.  V.  Briggs.  This  gentleman
knew  something  about  Kalua  from  the  letters  wliich  liis  cousin  had  written
him  from  Honolulu,  and  he  took  him  around  at  once  to  Mr.  Briggs'  office.
He  lived  with  Mr.  Briggs  some  months.  He  was  a  very  devoted  servant,
and  was  very  ambitious,  and  anxious  to  be  educated.

After  three  months  he  was  sent  back  to  his  native  island  very  much
against  his  own  wish,  but  when  the  ship  arrived  at  Honolulu  he  refused  to
land,  climbing  to  the  top  of  the  mast  and  remaining  there  half  a  day  lest  he
should  be  dragged  from  the  vessel,  possibly.


482


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Eventually  the  Captain  brought  him  back  again  to  Boston,  and  he  again
sought  out  Mr.  Briggs,  who  placed  hiiii  at  an  academy,  where  he  learned
very  rapidly.

"While  in  the  academy  he  went  to  a  sailors'  Bethel,  wlierc  he  had  some
clothes  stored  in  a  trunk.  He  had  purchased  a  new  trunk,  and  was  taking
the  clothes  from  the  old  and  putting  them  into  the  new  trunk.  Word  came
to  Mr.  Briggs  that  Kalua  had  committed  suicide  by  shooting  himself.
Inquiry  was  made,  and  it  appeared  that  Kalua  was  engaged  in  the  work  of
removing  his  clothes  from  one  trunk  to  the  other  when  a  revolver  went  off
and  shot  him  through  the  heart.  The  announcement  of  his  having  shot
himself  was  made  by  a  Swede,  Olaf,  who  immediately  disappeared.  Officers
were  immediately  sent  in  search,  and  discovered  him  after  some  time  on
board  a  Gloucester  fishing  smack  that  was  about  to  sail.  He  said  that  Kalua
was  engaged  in  taking  out  the  cartridge  from  a  revolver  with  a  knife  when  it
went  off,  and  that  he  had  run  away  because  he  was  afraid  of  being
imprisoned.

He  was  imprisoned,  but  there  was  no  evidence  against  him,  and  eventu-
ally, after  remaining  some  time  in  prison,  he  was  discharged.  The  revolver
could  not  be  found  anywliere,  and  it  was  supposed  that  the  Sw^ade  must
have  thrown  it  into  the  harbour.  Finally  the  Swede  was  induced  to  confess
he  had  hidden  it  behind  a  flue.  Part  of  the  chimney  was  taken  down,  and
the  revolver  was  actually  found  there.

Sitting  tvith  Mrs.  Piper  : — The  articles  were  produced.  Phinuit  placed
his  hand  on  the  heart  and  spoke  about  the  heart.  There  was  also  some
writing  purporting  to  be  by  Kalua.  The  word  "  lei,"  meaning  wreaths,  was
written  clearly  and  frequently,  and  tliere  was  also  an  attempt  to  write  the
word  "aloha,"  which  means  greeting.  There  were  apparent  attempts  at
other  words  in  Hawaiian,  which  could  not  be  deciphered.

Kalua  was  very  fond  of  making  wreaths  of  wild  flowers.

Phinuit  also  gave  the  name  of  "Tawai,"  pronouncing  it,  but  in  the
writing  the  word  was  spelled  "Kawai."

By  the  natives  of  the  island  itself,  and  on  the  island  where  Kalua  was
born,  this  Avord  is  pronounced  "Tawai,"  although  it  is  spelled  "Kawai."
The  natives  of  the  other  islands  call  it  "  Kawai."

[I  think  if  you  refer  to  the  notes,  that  this  statement  can  be  added  to
considerably.  I  first  met  Kalua  probably  in  February,  1881.  He  came  to
Boston  first  in  1883,  lastly  in  1885.  He  was  killed  in  June,  1886.  I  left
Honolulu  in  May,  1881.

L.  Vernon  Bkiggs.]

Early  in  October,  1893.

Sitter  :  Dr.  S.  "Weir  Mitchell,  Professor  W.  James  present.  Sitting
arranged  for  by  Professor  James  at  his  house  in  Cambridge,  Mass.  A
failure. See  the  letter  from  Professor  James,  p.  494.

1524,  Walnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  January  27th,  1894.
My  Deaii  James. — I  have  read,  with  care,  since  the  receipt  of  your
note,  the  memoranda  you  and  I  made  at  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  I


xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  4S3


return  them  to  you,  as  they  are  of  no  special  value  to  me,  and  you  may
find  the  name  desired. My  reporb  would  be  this  : —

If  I  had  never  seen  you  and  heard  your  statements  in  regard  to  Mrs.  P.,
my  afternoon  sitting  with  her  would  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the
whole  thing  was  a  fraud  and  a  very  stupid  one.  Of  course  I  do  not  tliink
this,  because  I  am  bound  to  consider  all  the  statements  made,  not  merely
the  time  spent  with  me.  As  to  this  point  I  want  to  make  myself  clear,
because  I  should  like  on  another  occasion  to  repeat  my  sitting.

On  re-reading  your  notes  I  find  absolutely  nothing  of  value.  None  of
the  incidents  are  correct,  and  none  of  the  very  vague  tilings  hinted  at  are
true,  nor  have  they  any  kind  or  sort  of  relation  to  my  life,  nor  is  there  one
name  correctly  given. . .  .

S.  Weir  Mitcuell  (M.D.).

November  16th,  1893.

Sitter:  Mr.  A.  A.  C.  (Member  A.B.S.P.R.) [R.  H.  taking  notes.]

In  September,  1893,  a  message  was  sent  to  Mr.  C.  purporting  to  come
from  his  deceased  brother  Harry  through  G.  P.

Near  the  beginning  of  this  sitting  Phinuit  said,  "Do  you  know  who's
Harry  ?  He  hasn't  been  here  a  great  while."  As  this  applied  to  the  sitter's
brother,  Phinuit  was  encouraged  to  get  all  the  information  he  could  from
"Harry,"  but  in  Pliinuit's  talk,  as  also  in  the  writing  that  followed,  the
names  and  other  references,  amid  some  confusion,  had  no  significance  for  the
sitter.  Especially  the  "  Plarry  "  was  anxious  to  send  a  message  to  "  Gussie
in  the  body."  G.  P.  wrote,  but  there  was  some  confusion  which  perplexed
him,  and  he  apparently  did  not  recognise  me  at  first,  but  thought  I  was
Howard.  He  wrote  that  there  was  "not  so  much  liglit  as  there  is  some-
times," and  he  left  to  try  and  clear  the  matter  up.  Then  came  some  more
writing,  probably  from  the  first  communicator,  and  then  again  another  wrote,
•who  soon  gave  his  name  as  Carrington.  [This  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  T.  B.  C,
who  had  the  previous  sitting,  November  16th,  at  tlie  end  of  which  sitting
Carrington  was  represented  as  present,  and  I  had  explained  that  at  some
other  time  I  would  take  a  message  for  him.]  I  told  him  that  I  would  be
glad  to  listen  to  him  another  day,  but  that  I  was  anxious  to  hear  then
from  the  friends  of  the  sitter.  He  then  apologised  for  mixing  things  up,
but  reminded  me  that  I  had  told  him  to  come.  "  Did  you  not  tell  me  to
come  another  time  ?  .  .  .  Then  why  did  you  not  explain  to  me  ?  .  .  .
But  you  see  I  am  sorry  for  thifs,  as  I  did  not  know,  and  besides  there's  not
much  strength  to  come  in  on,  so  I  have  tried  to  make  the  best  of  it.
Excuse  me,  sir,  and  I  will  go  out.  Now  I  am  going.  Good-day,  sir."
Following  this  Phinuit  talked  again,  but  the  only  relevant  matter  was,
"  Young  man  named  Harry — I  want  to  see  my  brother."  Phinuit  also  com-
plained of  confusion.

Mrs.  Piper  had  begun  to  come  out  of  trance,  but  was  strongly  convulsed
again,  and  the  hand  moved  to  write.  I  put  a  pencil  in  it,  and  a  very  direct
personal  communication  was  written  to  the  sitter,  who  was  addressed  by  his
first  name. The  full  name — first,  middle,  and  surname — of  his  brother


481


Ti'icliard  Hodgson.


[part


Harry,  from  whom  the  communication  purjiortecl  to  come,  Aras  written
several  times  with  great  violence,  tearing  the  paper  of  the  block  book.  The
wild  anxiety  of  the  communicator,  as  shown  in  the  writing  and  in  the
movements  of  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  and  arm,  was  very  striking,  but  it  would
be  dilBcult  to  appreciate  this  without  witnessing  it.  Phinuit  stated  on
November  23rd  that  when  he  "went  out"  he  found  this  young  man,  who
begged  most  earnestly  for  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  his  brother,  and
that  he,  Phinuit,  had  "helped  him  in,"  &c. (See.  p.  325.)

Two  or  three  days  later  I  learned  of  circumstances  which  threw  some
light  upon  the  confusion  in  connection  with  the  Harry  who  was  represented
as  sending  messages  at  tlie  beginning  of  the  sitting,  and  whom  I  had
encouraged.  Mrs.  Howard  not  long  before  had  taken  a  lady  to  a  sitting
who  was  very  anxious  for  privacy,  and  who  had  received,  as  Mrs.  Howard
informed  me,  very  remaikable  communications  from  her  deceased  husband
Harry,  and  it  was  arranged  that  if  he  wished  to  communicate  with  her
again  lie  .should  announce  that  Harry  wished  to  send  a  message  to  Gussie.
JNlrs.  Howard  was  to  tell  me  of  this,  so  that  in  case  of  such  a  message  I
might  deliver  it  to  her  for  transmission  ;  but  Blrs.  Howard  had  not  had  an
opportunity  of  giving  me  this  information  until  after  the  sitting  of
November  18th.  It  reminded  me  of  the  statements  at  Mr.  C.'s  sitting,  and
I  submitted  them  to  Mrs.  Howard,  who  stated  that  they  were  relevant,  and
evidently  intended  for  her  friend.  I  have  received  no  statement,  however,
from  her  friend,  who  remains  unknown  to  me.


December  8th  and  '2lst,  1893.

The  appointments  for  these  sittings  were  made  by  me.  Mrs.
Howard  was  present  on  both  occasions  and  took  notes,  which  I  think
can  be  substantially  relied  upon,  as  Mrs.  Howard  is  a  rapid  writer,
and  had  been  present  at  many  previous  sittings  (the  G.  P.  series  and
others,  see  Appendix  I.),  and  was  aware  of  the  importance  of  recording
any  information  given  by  the  sitter.  Mrs.  Sutton  herself  has  had
many  remarkable  psychical  experiences,  especially  in  seeing  the
"figures"  of  deceased  persons,  and  in  1887  published  a  little  book
giving  an  account  of  some  of  these.  It  was  called  Lif/ht  on  the  Hidden
Wai/,  with  an  Introduction  by  James  Freeman  Clarke.  (Boston :
Tieknor  and  Company).  The  book  was  published  anonymously.  It
happened,  however,  that  I  knew  a  member  of  the  publishing  firm,  who
sent  me  a  copy  of  the  book,  with  a  letter  of  introduction  to  Mrs.
Katharine  B.  Paine  (as  her  name  then  was),  who  at  that  time  lived  in
Cooperstown,  N.Y.  I  never  used  the  letter  of  introduction,  and  did
not  see  JNlrs.  Katharine  Paine  Button  till  after  her  sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper.  Mrs.  Howard,  I  believe,  had  made  her  acquaintance  only  a
short  time  before  the  sittings,  when  Mrs.  Sutton  was  staying  for  a
short  time  in  Boston.  The  Rev.  James  Freeman  Clarke,  wlio  lived  in
Boston,  (or  its  immediate  vicinity),  was  well  and  widely  knov/n.  I


XXXIIl] Ohscrvatlons  of  Certain  riicnomena  of  Trance.  48.>


regard  Mrs.  Sutton  as  a  most  excellent  witness.  Mrs.  Howard  was
present  at  various  first  sittings  for  persons  who  were  friends  of
hers,  and  assured  me  that  she  always  introduced  the  sitters  by  the-
name  of  Sinith.  The  notes  marked  with  an  asterisk  were  added  in
1897.— R.H.

Sitting  tvith  Mrs.  Piper  at  Arlington  Seigltts,  December  8th,  1893.

Present,  Mrs.  Howard,  Rev.  S.  W.  Sutton,  and  myself.  Report  by
Mrs.  Sutton  from  notes  taken  by  Mrs.  Hov.^ard  during  the  sitting.

Mrs.  Howard  held  Mrs.  Piper's  hands.  She  became  immediately
entranced  under  the  control  of  Dr.  Phinuit.  After  a  brief  communication
to  Mrs.  Howard  I  took  Mrs.  Piper's  hands  and  Phinuit  said  :  This  is  a  lovely
lady, — she  hae  done  much  good, — has  helped  so  many  poor  souls.  A  little-
child  is  coming  to  you.  This  is  the  dearest  lady  1  have  met  for  a  long  time —
the  most  light  I  have  seen  while  in  Mrs.  Piper's  body.  He  reaches  out  his-
hands  as  to  a  child,  and  says  coaxingly  :  Come  here,  dear.  Don't  be  afraid.
Come,  darling,  here  is  your  mother.  He  describes  the  child  and  her  "  lovely
curls."  Where  is  papa?  Want  papa.  [He  takes  from  the  table  a  silver
medal.]  I  want  this — want  to  bite  it.  [She  used  to  bite  it.*]  [Reaches  for
a  string  of  buttons.]  Quick!  I  want  to  put  them  in  my  mouth.  [The-
buttons  also.  To  bite  the  buttons  was  forbidden.  He  exactly  imitated  her
arch  manner.*]  I  will  get  her  to  talk  to  you  in  a  minute.  Who  is  Frank  in
the  body  ?  [We  do  not  know.]  [My  uncle  Frank  had  died  a  few  years
before.  We  were  much  attached.  Possibly  Pliinuit  was  confused  and  my
uncle  was  trying  to  communicate.*]  A  lady  is  here  who  passed  out  of  the
body  with  tumour  in  the  bowels.  [My  friend,  Mrs.  C,  died  of  ovarian
tumour.*]  She  has  the  child — she  is  bringing  her  to  me.  [He  takes  some
keys.]  These  bring  her  to  me — these  and  the  buttons.  Now  she  will  speak
to  me.  Who  is  Dodo  ?  [Her  name  for  l;er  brother  George.]  Speak  to  me
quickly.  I  want  you  to  call  Dodo.  Tell  Dodo  I  am  haj^py.  Cry  for  me  no-
more.  [Puts  hand  to  throat.]  No  sore  throat  any  more.  [She  had  pain
and  distress  of  the  throat  and  tongue.*]  Papa,  speak  to  me.  Can  not  you
see  me  ?  I  am  not  dead,  I  am  living.  I  am  happy  with  Grandma  [My
mother  had  been  dead  many  years.*]  Phinuit  says  :  Here  are  two  more.
One,  two,  three  here, — one  older  and  one  younger  than  Kakie.  [Correct.*];
That  is  a  boy,  the  one  that  came  first. [Both  were  boys.*]

Tlie  lady  has  a  friend,  Elizabeth, — Lizzie.  Mary  wants  to  send  love  to-
Elizabotli. [This  last  is  not  intelligible  to  us.]

The  little  one  calls  the  lady.  Auntie.  [Not  her  aunt.*]  I  wish  you  could
see  these  children.  Phinuit  turns  to  Mr.  Sutton  and  says  :  You  do  a  great
deal  of  good  in  the  body.  [To  me.]  He  is  a  dear  man  !  'Was  this  little
one's  tongue  very  dry  1  She  keeps  showing  me  her  tongue.  [Her  tongues-
was  paralysed,  and  she  suffered  much  with  it  to  the  end.]  Her  name  is
Katherine.  [Correct.*]  She  calls  herself  Kakie.  She  passed  out  last.
[Correct.*]  Tell  Dodo  Kakie  is  in  a  spiritual  body.  Where  is  horsey?  [I  gave
him  a  little  horse.]  Big  horsey,  not  this  little  one.  [Probably  refers  to  a.
toy  cart-horse  she  used  to  like.]  Dear  Papa,  take  me  wide.  [To  ride.]  Do
you  miss  your  Kakie  ? Do  you  sec  Kakie  ? The  pretty  white  fiov/ers  you


486


Rlclmrd  Hodgson.


[part


j)ut  on  me,  I  have  here.  I  took  their  little  souls  out  and  kept  them  with
ine.  riiinuit  describes  lilies  of  the  valley,  which  v/ere  the  flowers  we  placed
in  her  casket.

Pajia,  want  to  go  to  wide  horsey.  [She  plead  this  all  through  her  illness.]
livery  day  I  go  to  see  horsey.  I  like  that  horsey.  I  go  to  ride.  I  am  with
jou.  every  day.  [We  had  just  come  from  Mr.  Sutton's  parents,  where  we
■drove  freij^uently,  and  I  had  seen  Kakie  with  us.  (This  means  that  Mrs.
Sutton  had  seen  the  "apparition  "  of  Kakie. — R.  H.)  Margaret  (her  sister)
is  still  there,  driving  daily.]  [I  asked  if  she  remembered  anything  aft-jr  she
was  brought  down  stairs.]  I  was  so  hot,  my  head  was  so  hot.  [Correct.*]
asked  if  she  knew  who  was  caring  for  her,  if  it  was  any  comfort  to  her  to
have  us  with  her.]  Oh,  yes, — oh,  yes.  [I  asked  if  she  suffered  in  dying.]
I  saw  the  light  and  followed  it  to  this  pretty  lady.  You  will  love  me
always  ?  You  will  let  me  come  to  you  at  home.  I  will  come  to  you  every
day,  and  I  will  put  my  hand  on  you,  when  you  go  to  sleep.  Do  not  cry  for
me, — that  makes  me  sad.  Eleanor.  I  want  Eleanor.  [Her  little  sister.
She  called  her  much  during  her  last  illness.*]  I  want  my  buttons.  Row,
How, — my  song, — sing  it  now.  I  sing  with  you.  [We  sing,  and  a  soft  cliild
'voice  sings  with  us. J

Lightly  row,  lightly  row,
O'er  the  merry  waves  we  go.
Smoothly  glide,  smoothly  glide
With  the  ebbing  tide.

[Phinuit  hushes  us,  and  Kakie  finishes  alone.]

Let  the  winds  and  waters  be
Mingled  with  our  melody.
Sing  and  float,  sing  and  float,
In  our  little  boat.

Papa  sing.  I  liear  your  voice,  but  it  is  so  heavy.  [Papa  and  Kakie  sing.
Phinuit  exclaims  :  See  her  little  curls  fly  1]  [Her  curls  were  not  long
-enough  to  fly  at  death,  six  weeks  before.*]  Kakie  sings  :  Bye,  bye,  ba  bye,
bye,  bye,  0  baby  bye.  Sing  that  with  me,  papa.  [Papa  and  Kakie  sing.
These  two  songs  were  the  ones  she  used  to  sing.]  [She  sang  slight  snatches
of  othci's  in  life — not  at  the  sitting.*]  Where  is  Dinah?  I  want  Dinah.
{Dinah  was  an  old  black  rag-doll,  not  with  us.]  I  want  Bagio  [her  name  for
her  sister  Margaret.]  I  want  Bagie  to  bring  me  my  Dinah.  I  want  to  go  to
Bagie.  I  want  Bagie.  I  see  Bagie  all  the  time.  Tell  Dodo  when  you  see
him  that  I  love  him.  Dear  Dodo.  He  used  to  march  with  me, — he  put  me
way  up.  [Correct.*]  Dodo  did  sing  to  me.  That  was  a  horrid  body.  I
have  a  pretty  body  now.  Tell  Grandma  I  love  her.  I  want  her  to  know  I
live.  Grandma  does  know  it,  Marmie — Great — gi-andma,  Marmie.  [Wo
•called  lier  Great  Grandmother  Marmie  but  she  always  called  her  Grammie.
Both  Grandmotlier  and  Great  Grandmother  were  then  living.*]

If  ere  is  Hattie.  Speak  to  her.  I  am  so  happy.  [Button  string  broke —
Phinuit  is  distressed.  We  gather  them  up  and  propose  to  re-string  them.]
Hattie  says  that  is  a  joretty  picture  there.  [Hattie  was  the  name  of  a  dear
friend  who  died  several  years  ago.  She  was  veiy  fond  of  my  coj^y  of  the
Sistine  Madonna,  and  in  her  last  illness  asked  to  liave  it  hung  over  her  bed.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  487


where  it  remained  till  after  she  passed  away.  This  did  not  occur  to  ma
when  Phinuit  gave  her  words,  nor  for  some  weeks  after  the  sitting.]

I  want  the  tic-tic.  Take  the  buttons,  and  give  me  the  pretty  tic-tic>
Open  the  tic-tic.  Mamma,  do  you  love  me  so  ?  Don't  cry  for  me.  I  want
to  see  the  mooley-cow, — where  is  the  mooley-cow  ?  [R.  H.  :  Did  she  so  call
it  ?  A.  :  Yes.*]  Take  me  to  see  the  mooloy-cow.  [She  used  to  be  taken
almost  daily  to  see  the  cow.]  Phinuit  says  :  I  cannot  quite  hear  what  it  is-
she  calls  the  tic-tic.  She  calls  it  "the  clock,"  and  holds  it  to  her  ear.
[That  was  what  slie  called  it.]  I  want  you  to  talk  to  me  bef(.)re  I  go  away
from  this  pretty  place.

Phinuit  asks  :  What  was  the  matter  with  her  tongue  1  She  shows  it  to
me.  All  well  now.  She  has  the  most  beautiful,  great,  dark  violet  eyes.
[Correct.*]  She  is  very  full  of  life — very  indejiendent,  but  very  sweet  in
disposition.  She  is  very  fond  of  Bagie  and  Dodo,  and  so  very  glad  to
see  you.

Here  is  Eddie — little  thing  passed  out  quite  small — she  knows  him.
[Correct.*]

Phinuit  tries  to  get  a  new  name — Louie — Louie — Alonzo.  He  is  here
with  Kakie  and  he  is  a  dear  fellow.  He  says  :  Don't  think  it  wrong  to  call
me  back, — I  am  so  glad  to  come.  Did  not  you  dream  about  him  after  he
passed  away  ?  some  time  ago  ?  a  few  years  since  ?  [Not  that  he  remembers.}
Here  is  a  little  one  Kakie  calls  your  brother.  Alonzo,  Kakie  wants  you  to
speak  to  her  uncle  Alonzo.  [Mr.  Sutton  had  a  brother  Alonzo,  also  Eddie,
who  died  young,  and  his  mother  lost  a  .still-born  child.]  [Boy.*]  Mr.  Sutton
asked  :  Can  he  hear  and  speak  in  that  life  ?  [He  was  a  mute.]  He  can  hear.
We  talk  by  thought  here.  [Phinuit,  for  Alonzo.]  How  strange  your  voice-
is  !  I  went  up,  up,  up,  and  came  into  the  light.  I  suffered  a  great  deal
more  than  you  realised,  and  was  depressed.  T  will  take  the  best  care  of  your
little  ones.  [He  had  dreaded  death,  thinking  of  it  as  going  down  into  the
dark.*]

Phinuit  tries  to  give  the  full  name — says  it  has  two  t's,  ends  in  ton — tries
to  pronounce  it  Csutton.  Mr.  Sutton  said  tlie  middle  initial  in  his  name  was
C.  "That  is  it,"  cried  Phinuit.  Alonzo  C.  Sutton.  He  is  very  happy.  He
can  look  back  and  see  you  and  your  work.  Adeline — little  Addie — he
remembers  her. [His  sister's  baby  at  the  time  of  his  death  .*]

[Kakie  again.]  I  will  be  with  you  when  you  do  not  see  me.  I  want  you
to  tell  Eleanor  [her  little  sister*].  I  send  her  my  love,  and  my  love  to  Bagie.
I  don't  forget  Bagie.  Do  not  worry  for  us,  we  are  so  happy.  Where  is
Grandma  Sutton  ?  I  want  her  to  know  that  I  love  her  and  come  round  her,
and  sing  "Bj^e,  bye,"  when  I  am  in  heaven.  I  am  so  hajipj'  with  all  these
little  girls.  What  was  tlie  pretty  white  thing,  with  the  pretty  flowers
hanging  over  it,  that  you  put  in  the  little  mound  ?  [The  little  casket  of  our
dead,  new  born  baby.]  Phinuit  says  :  Three  little  mounds,  but  only  their
bodies  there  ;  their  spirits  are  happy  here.

Phinuit  says  the  lady  who  has  Kakie  wants  to  speak  to  me. He  tries  to

give  her  name— Mary — where  is  the  school  ? C  who  is  Mary  C  ?

[That  is  the  name  of  the  lady.]  [The  surname  correctly  given  but  omitted
at  request  of  sitters. — R.H.]  She  wants  you  to  always  remember  that  your
brothers  and  I  are  always  with  those  children. [1  had  one  brother  only,  but


488


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Mr.  Sutton's  may  have  been  meant,  or  both.*]  I  will  be  with  them  as  you
would  wish  me  to  be.  [I  asked  about  her  death.]  The  thread  connected
me  with  the  body  for  a  time,  till  at  last  I  passed  up  and  saw  the  body.

Phinuit  says  :  A  in  the  body,  daughter  to  Mary  ? M:iry  says  so,  and

sends  her  love. A  great  change  in  her  life  since  she  passed  out. She  is

pleased— it  was  not  right  that  A  should  be  so  much  alone. [Name  and

■statement  correct.  *]

There  will  be  more  harmony  bj'-and-byo. Slie  likes  him  very  well.

.[This  to  my  question  if  she  likes  him.] A  •  will  understand  him  better

later  on.  There  is  o|5portunity  for  him  to  grow  spiritually.  They  will  be
happy  together.

[Kakie  again.]  I  will  put  my  hand  on  papa's  head  when  he  goes  to  sleep.
Want  the  babce.  [Her  characteristic  pronunciation.*]  Phinuit  takes  the
■doll  and  says  :  She  wants  it  to  cuddle  up  to  her,  so.  She  wants  to  sing  to  it,
Bye  baby,  bye  bye.  God  knew  be.st,  so  do  not  worry.  The  little  book.
Kakie  wants  the  little  book.  [She  liked  a  linen  picture  book.*]  I  gave
Phinuit  a  neck-tie  and  some  writing,  and  he  began:  Where  is  father?  I
•don't  believe — Charles  in  the  body — where  is  my  desk  in  my  room  ?  [Not
intelligible.]  [I  do  not  know  what  is  the  significance  of  this.  I  did  nob
know  tlie  gentleman  and  but  little  about  him.  I  afterward  learned  that  the
■desk  is  significant,  also  the  beautiful  face.*]  Phinuit  describes  a  gentleman
with  a  beautiful  face,  greatly  agitated,  also  a  very  large  gentleman  with  him
— he  was  a  great  preacher — Phillips — Phillips  Brooks.  He  says  :  I  want  to
■say  that  when  T  made  mistakes  in  life,  I  hope  you  will  do  all  in  your  power
■to  rectify  them.  [1  asked  if  he  did  not  believe  in  an  after-life  ?]  Yes,  bub
I  did  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of  communication  after  death.  [Mrs.
Howard  thought  this  correct.  In  Dr.  Brooks'  sermons,  "  New  Starts  in  Life,"
VIII.,  series,  recently  published,  p.  66,  in  a  sermon  written  in  1873,  he
^lvows  his  belief  in  tlie  possibility.*]  [Mrs.  Sutton  said  tliat  she  did  nob
know  Dr.  Brooks,  but  it  aj^pears  from  her  account  given  to  Miss  Edmunds,
that  she  had  met  him  several  times,  once  at  a  tea  with  six  other  persons,  bub
had  no  speci;il  conver.sation  Vidth  him.  Mrs.  Howard  notes:  "I  knew
Phillips  Brooks  from  the  time  I  was  a  girl  and  had  more  than  one  long  talk
with  him."  It  was  known  to  myself  and  also  to  Mrs.  Howard,  that  the
Rev.  Pliillips  Brooks  had  si^oken  disparagingly  of  attempts  to  obtain
communications  from  the  "deceased"  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance. — R.H.]
Here  we  see  its  full  importance.  [He  adds  that  a  mutual  friend  is  very
■anxious  to  speak  to  me.]  [Dr.  Brooks  (deceased)  was  friend  and  pastor  of
the  gentleman  whose  necktie  Mrs.  Piper  held.*]  Where  is  that  little  book  ?
{Possibly  the  little  book  referred  to  twice  at  this  sitting  was  the  little
prayer  book  mentioned  more  specifically  at  Mr.s.  Sutton's  next  sitting.
See  p.  493.— R.H.]  Oh,  will  you  help  me?  Where  is  John?  [Possibly
intelligible  if  from  a  difi"erent  influence.*]  Where  am  I  ?  [Phinuit  says.]
He  puts  his  hand  on  his  heart.  He  passed  out  with  heart  disease.  [Correct
of  the  gentleman  whose  necktie  Mrs.  Piper  held.*]

*******

Here  [the  hand]  wrote  for  some  time.  [Dr.  J.  F.  Clarke's  name  was
"written.  I  was  affectionately  greeted  by  him,  and  he  asked  that  I  would  tell
his  daughter  his  desire  that  she  would  believe  in  spirit  communication.  He


XXXIII.] Observations  of  CerUln  Phenomena  of  Trance.  4S9


also  greeted  Mr.  Sutton  with  great  w;irmth— prophesied  a  bright  and
prosperous  future  for  us,  and  said  that  I  would  write  books.  There  was  also
a  long  and  painful  effort  with  great  agitation  and  anxiety  to  give  an  address
asked  for.  This  address  is  not  known  by  those  desiring  to  have  it.  To
obtain  it  was  the  object  of  the  communication  with  the  gentleman  whose
necktie  was  placed  in  Mrs.  Piper's  hand.  Nothing  intelligible  was
obtained.*]  After  the  writing,  we  thought  the  sitting  over,  and  Mr.  Sutton
had  gone  across  the  room,  when  Kakie's  little  voice  piped  up.  Want  papa —
want  papa.  Dear  papa.  [Phinuit  i^ats  his  face.]  Do  you  love  me,  p;ipa  ?
Want  babee.  Sings,  Bye,  bye — papa,  sing — mama  sing.  Cuddles  doll  up  in
neck  and  sings. [An  exact  imitation  marvellously  animated  and  real.*]

It  may  be  of  interest  to  note  that  the  day  before  the  sitting,  Mr.  Sutton
had  questioned  whether  it  was  right  or  desirable /or  them  to  bring  them  back
for  our  gratification.  It  did  not  occur  to  him  during  the  sitting,  but  Alonzo
said — "Do  not  think  it  wrong  to  bring  us  back — we  love  to  conre. "

The  "sitting"  was  as  a  whole  very  satisfactory.  The  convei'sation  did  not
follow  the  order  of  our  conscious  minds,  a  id  had  tlie  movement  and  vivacity
of  objective  personalities.

KATHAraNE  Paine  Sutton.


Second  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  at  Arlington  Heights,  December  2lst,  1893.

Present,  Mrs.  Howard  and  myself.  Rejjort  by  Mrs.  Sutton  from  notes
taken  by  Mrs.  Howard  during  the  sitting.

[Mrs.  Piper  was  sitting  talking  with  us,  not  ready  to  be  entranced,  when
she  suddenly  put  her  hand  to  her  head,  rose,  and  moved  toward  the  window.
Before  reaching  it  she  staggered  and  would  have  fallen  but  that  we  sujaported
her  to  a  chair.  For  an  instant  only  she  seemed  lifeless,  then  as  suddenly
rose  full  of  animation  under  the  control  of  "G.  P."],  who,  after  a  few  words
of  greeting  to  IMrs.  Howard,  said  so  many  were  waiting  for  a  word  with  Mrs.
Sutton  that  he  Avould  not  detain  them  longer.  Dr.  Phinuit  assumed  control,
and  I  exchanged  seats  with  Mrs.  Howard,  holding  Mrs.  Piper's  hands.  He
recognised  me  cordially  and  said  :  Baby  wants  to  see  her  mamma,  come,
dear. A  sweet  child  voice  sang  softly, —

Lightly  row,  lightly  row,
O'er  the  rippling  waves  we  go.
Smoothly  glide,  smoothly  glide,

With  the  ebbing  tide.
Let  the  winds  and  waters  be
Mingled  with  our  melody,
Sing  and  float,  sing  .and  float,

In  our  little  boat.

[The  words  and  tune  were  sung  frequently  by  the  child  during  her
illness, — the  last  she  sung  on  earth.]

Mamma  sing  with  Kakie.  ["Kakie  "  was  her  name  for  herself,  though
she  could  say  Katherine.] She  sang  it  through  again  witli  me.

Mamma,  where  is  papa  1  Want  papa.  Kakie  wants  papa.  [Nothin<»
could  be  more  characteristic  : — her  call  wlienever  she  missed  him,  or  lieard
his  voice.]


490


Ricliard  Hodgson.


[PAllT


I  told  her  that  papa  staid  with  Eleanor.
Kakie  go  to  papa.

Phitiuit  described  the  child  accurately — beautiful  eyes  with  long,  dark
lashes,  the  sweetest  little  mouth,  and  such  lovely  curls — "the  dear,  happy
little  girl."  [The  child  voice  again.]  Kakie  did  see  papa.  Papa  is  march-
ing with  Eleanor.  Sings,  "  March,  march, "  etc.  [Eleanor  is  a  little  invalid.
Mr.  Sutton  carries  her  a  great  deal — often  sings,  "March,"  etc. — had  done
so  at  tliis  time.*]

I  asked  her  to  sing  "  By  Bye  "  with  me,  which  she  did  precisely  as  when
here.  I  could  not  repress  the  tears.  Phinuit  said  :  You  must  not  weep.
When  the  little  shroud  is  wet,  the  child  grieves.

"  Kakie  "  says  :  Dear  Mamma,  do  you  love  me  so  1  I  love  you  and  I  see
you.  I  am  happy  here,  I  have  so  many  little  children  to  play  with  and  I
love  my  Auntie.  I  like  to  be  with  you.  I  play  with  Eleanor.  Does
Eleanor  see  me  ?  I  play  with  her  every  day.  I  like  the  little  bod.  I  j^lay
with  it.  [The  lady  witli  whom  we  staid  in  Duxbury  had  lent  Eleanor  a
doll's  bed,  which  she  greatly  enjoyed.  Of  course  we  had  not  associated  ifc
with  Kakie.]  Where  is  Bagie  ?  [Her  name  for  lier  sister  Margaret.]  Tell
Bagie  I  love  her.  I  see  Bagie  witli  Grandma.  [Margaret  was  visiting  lier
grandmother.*]  I  love  Grandma.  Where  is  Marmie  ?  I  love  Marmie.
[Great  Grandmother — we  called  her  Marmie,  but  the  child  called  her
Gammie,  and  never  Maruiie.*]  Where  is  Dodo  1  I  want  Dodo.  [Her
brother  George.] Tell  Dodo  I  love  him.

Phinuit  said  :  Maiy  C.  wishes  to  speak  to  you.  [See  previous  sitting. —
R  H.]

She  said  :  We  will  care  for  your  babies.  We  love  them  dearly.  Hattie
[a  deceased  friend*]  is  here.  She  loves  them  too.  I  was  not  mistaken  in  tlie
reality  of  your  experiences,  or  in  the  good  you  do.  I  can  see  you  and  know
the  darkness  and  perplexities,  but  it  is  the  darkness  just  before  the  dawn.
I  see  you  in  such  a  pleasant  home,  where  you  will  do  such  good.  Why  do
you  get  so  discouraged  ?  You  are  bright  and  good,  and  help  so  many  others
to  be  better.  I  see  you  are  nervous  and  impatient  sometimes  when  the
aching  body  is  tired  out, — but  control  your  nerves,  can't  you,  dear  ?  that  is
all  I  want  to  change  in  you.  I  know  you  try,  but  it  seems  as  if  you  ought
to  rise  above  it. [Tliis  is  not  in  the  least  like  her.*]

Phinuit  said  :  There  are  many  here  anxious  to  speak  to  you.  Here  is
your  father  and  your  motlier.  They  have  been  here  a  long  time, — your
mother  came  first.  [Correct.*]  They  are  very  bright.  They  want  to  tell
you  to  be  patient.  They  see  bright  days  before  you.  [No.  We  have  had
much  illness  and  tribulations  manifold  with  smaller  income  than  ever
before.*]  And  much  usefulness,  and  that  all  is  well  with  your  children
here.

I  asked  my  mother's  middle  name.  I  only  knew  the  initial,  M.  Mary,
was  the  reply.

Kakie  wants  her  buttons.  [I  gave  them  to  Phinuit.]  She  wants  them
all,  they  are  not  all  here.  [At  the  previous  sitting  !_  j  string  had  broken  and
they  scattered  on  the  floor.  We  thought  we  found  them  all,  but  when  Mrs.
Piper's  sweeping  day  came,  the  rest  were  found  and  sent  to  Mr.  Hodgson,
who  did  not  know  to  whom  they  belonged.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  491


Phinuit  said  :  There  are  eight  buttons  here. Kakie,  let  me  see  how
many  you  have. [He  counts  twelve  in  French.]
I  exclaimed  :  Do  you  have  buttons  there  1

He  replied  :  She  had  not  the  button,  but  she  has  the  idea  of  them,  which
is  the  reality.  Kakie  wants  the  horse.  [I  gave  him  the  little  horse  she
played  with  during  her  illness.]  No,  that  is  not  the  one.  The  big  horse —
so  big — [Phinuit  shows  how  large].  Eleanor's  horse.  Eleanor  used  to  put
it  in  Kakie's  lap.  She  loved  that  horsey.  [This  horse  was  packed,  in
Trenton,  and  had  not  occurred  to  me  in  connection  with  Kakie.  What  she
said  of  it  was  true.]

[Kakie  asks  for  her  ball.  I  gave  it  to  Phinuit,  who  tries  to  find  what  she-
wants  to  do  with  it.]

Bite  it  ? Toss  it  ? Roll  it  ? Throw  it  ?

[No,  she  wants  a  string.  Mrs.  H.  gave  him  a  string.  He  tries  to  tie  it
around  the  ball.]  [A  little  red  wooden  ball  with  a  hole  through  it.  The
ball  had  a  string  through  it  when  she  used  to  play  with  it.*]

No,  that  is  not  riglit,  through  it.

There,  there,  be  a  good  little  girl.  Don't  cry.  Don't  be  impatient,  you
want  your  mamma  to  see  how  you  do  it,  so  she  will  know  it  is  you,  don't
you,  dear  ? Old  man  will  do  it  for  her.

[He  put  the  string  through,  held  it  up,  and  hit  it  with  the  finger,  making
it  swing.]

That  is  it,  is  it  not,  darling,  ? Nice  little  girl  as  ever  was.

[While  she  was  sick,  it  was  her  great  delight  to  have  me  hold  the  string,
and  let  her  hit  the  little  red  ball  with  her  finger  or  spoon.  She  made  the
motions  as  if  doing  it,  after  she  became  unconscious.]

[Again  I  saw  her  for  a  moment,  (i  e.  Mrs.  Sutton  herself  saw  the
"apparition"  of  Kakie.  See  introductory  remarks  to  her  sittings  p.  484. —
R.  H.)  standing  at  the  table,  trying  to  reach  a  spool  of  tangled  red  knitting
silk,  and  at  the  same  moment  Phinuit  reached  for  it,  saying  :  ]  She  wants
that,  she  and  Eleanor  used  to  play  with.  She  calls  it  Eleanor's.  She  is
delighted  with  it — it  brings  her  nearer  her  little  sister.

[All  true,  but  I  had  not  connected  it  with  Eleanor  in  my  thought.]

I  gave  Phinuit  a  lock  of  Eleanor's  hair.  He  felt  it  a  moment  and  said  :
You  cut  that  close  to  the  head — that  was  right.  I  can  see  her  perfectly —
lovely  little  girl.  [I  had  not  told  him  whose  hair  it  was.]  She  is  inclined  to
be  irritable — nervous,  I  mean — nerves  are  irritable.  One  of  the  dearest
little  things  that  ever  lived.  Must  be  watched  carefully  on  account  of  her
nervous  condition.  Do  everythmg  to  soothe  her.  Rub  her  a  great  deal,,
that  is  good  for  her.

Mrs.  Howard  asked  :  Would  Christian  science  help  her  ?

Would  what  ?  exclaimed  Phinuit.

Mental  treatment.

Oh,  yes,  that  would  be  good  for  her.  Keep  her  in  the  open  air  as  much
as  possible.  Do  not  let  her  get  tired.  Carry  her  out  with  something  soft  at
her  back.  She  has  been  very  ill.  How  that  poor  child  has  suffered  !  [She
is  recovering  from  spinal  meningitis  and  paralysis.]  She  sleeps  badly —
twitches — delicate  stomach — that  is  nervous — bowels  constipated.  Keep-
them  open. Poor  little  back  ! Do  not  give  her  any  fruit  for  some  time.


492


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


With  care  slie  will  get  over  it  in  time.  At  least,  I  do  not  see  her  go  out  of
the  body,  but  I  see  she  is  very  frail.  She  must  have  great  care,  or  she  will
go  out  like  tliat  [snapping  his  fingers].  [She  .still  lives  and  now  begins  to
walk  and  improve,  but  has  been  very  ill  and  a  great  sufferer  ever  since  this
sitting. We  have  only  held  her  by  the  greatest  care.*]

You  have  a  s<m, — tall — I  see  him — a  beautiful  young  man.  Dodo —
Kakie  calls  him  Dodo.  .  .  .  Kakie  wants  the  book  witli  red  letters  and
pictures  of  animals.  [Correct  description  of  a  book  she  was  fond  of.*]  She
wants  Eleanor's  hair.

Phinuit  makes  the  motion  of  drawing  something  from  it  and  giving  it  to
her,  saying  :  Now  she  has  it.  She  can  get  nearer  her  little  sister  with  it.
...  I  gave  him  a  bit  of  Mr.  Sutton's  hair,  without  saying  whose  it  was.
As  he  took  it,  he  said  laughing:  That  is  papa's  hair, — miglity  little  of  it,  was
not  he  stingy  of  it  thougli  ?  [When  I  cut  it,  Mr.  Sutton  warned  me  playfully
that  he  had  not  much  to  spare.]  He  will  live  to  be  a  hundred.  You  need
not  worry  about  that.  [Mrs.  S.  has  all  of  a  woman's  solicitude  for  a
jierfectly  healthy  husband. — S.  W.  S.*]

He  described  his  character  accurately, — noble,  unselfish,  broad-minded,
too  modest — not  enough  self-appreciation.  He  is  not  appreciated,  except
liy  the  few  who  know  him  well.  Never  mind,  it  will  not  be  always  so,  it
will  come  all  right.  He  has  a  brother  here, — Alonzo,  and  there  are  two
others  v.dth  him — they  came  here  very  young — one  never  lived  on  earth.
[True.]  Alonzo  loves  them  and  your  children  very  much.  He  is  very  hajjpy
— so  glad  he  came  here. .  .

Phinuit  described  Mr.  Sutton's  mother. — The  dear,  sweet  old  lady — she
is  so  good — I  like  her.  Described  Mr.  Sutton's  father — said  he  was  not  well,
ftrue],  that  he  would  not  live  long — tliat  he  would  go  there  then — that  he
would  benefit  Mr.  Sutton.  [He  lived  three  years.  His  wife  died  a  year
Ijefore  him. He  left  a  small  insurance  which  Mr.  S.  shared.*]

Phinuit  exclaimed  :  I  see  you  in  such  a  pleasant  home  !  All  the  sur-
roundings so  pleasant— lovely  trees.  Mr.  Sutton  will  receive  a  "  call  "  soon
from  a  good  parish,  and  will  accept  it.  Substantial  people— a  good  work  in
a  small  town  near  water.  [I  asked  if  it  was  Duxbury.]  No,  Ne«  burgh  ?
No,  not  so  far  from  Boston.  [I  named  several  places.]  T  think  it  ends  in
ton — Wincliendon  sounds  like  it.  I  think  it  is  tliere.  He  says  there  are
two  churches  there  on  a  hill, — a  little  cliurch  with  quaint,  peculiar  spire,
.and  a  chapel, — what  do  you  call  it  ?  Vestry,  church  parlors,  etc.— a  comfort-
able support  and  opportunity  for  a  good  work.  You  will  be  successful
there,  and  it  will  be  a  permanent  settlement.  But  before  tliis  comes,  it
will  seem  very  dark,  very  dark  to  you.  [We  came  to  Athol  to  a  small
struggling  parish  and  small  salary!  No  vestry,  or  anything  of  the  sort.
The  church  is  the  usual  old  New  England  white  church  and  steeple.  It  is
on  a  hill-side.  Our  house  is  among  pine  trees  and  charmingly  situated,  but
the  permanence  of  the  settlement  is  problematical.*]  Here  is  Kakie  with
Uncle  Charlie  [my  brother.]  He  did  not  know  he  was  coming.  It  was  very
:sudden.  He  went  to  bed  with  terrible  pain  in  his  head,  and  tlae  next  he
knew  he  was  here.  He  is  so  grateful  to  you  that  you  never  doubted  him —
it  grieved  him  that  anyone  could.  How  could  anyone  have  thought  ho
would  do  that? [He  was  found  dead  in  bed  in  liis  twenty-fourth  year.


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  493


Some  thought  he  committed  suicide.]  [A  small  vial  that  had  contained
chloroform  was  found  in  the  room.  He  had  sometimes  put  it  on  his  head
when  in  acute  pain.  The  physician  who  was  called  said  that  had  it  been  full
it  was  not  enough  to  cause  death.  He  died  of  valvular  disease  of  the  heart.
He  had  been  told  by  two  physicians  a  month  before  that  he  was  liable  to  die
any  hour  and  could  not  live  long.*]  He  is  very  happy  here.  He  would  not
come  back  for  all  the  world,  Phinuit  turns  his  head,  as  if  looking  at  a
child  beside  me,  and  says  :  Yes,  I  know  "Kakie  wants,"  but  Kakie  must  be
patient,  others  want  to  speak  to  mamma.  [She  was  very  persistent  with
"Kakie  wants"  wlien  here.]  He  loves  your  children,  and  they  love  him.
He  is  with  you  in  all  your  trouble.  He  sees  a  brighter  future  for  you — this
will  not  last.  .  .  .  You  dear  little  girl,  you  want  to  get  in  mamma's  lap,
and  you  shall.  [Phinuit  makes  the  movement  of  lifting  her  into  my  lap,
and  for  a  moment  I  saw  her  distinctly  lying  in  my  arms,  with  the  sweet  look
of  demure  contentment  she  used  to  have  when  I  held  her.]  Phinuit  said  :
You  have  a  child  here  who  came  long  ago.  He  is  a  beautiful  spirit  now,  he
does  not  get  near  enough  for  me  to  hear  him,  but  I  can  see  him.  And  there
is  another  little  one  here,  too,  they  call  "  baby,"  not  long  here,  it  never

lived  on  earth. Mary  C  has  it. She  does  love  that  baby  so,  she  and

Hattie.  Elizabeth  is  here,  too,  they  love  you  and  will  care  for  your  babies.
l^Elizabeth.  Possibly  an  old  lady  I  dearly  loved,  but  I  never  called  her  or
heard  her  called  Elizabeth.*]

Kakie  wants  the  little  bit  of  a  book  mamma  read  by  her  bedside,  with
the  pretty,  bright  things  hanging  from  it — mamma  put  it  in  her  hands — the
last  thing  she  remembers.  [This  is  curious.  It  was  a  little  prayer-book,
with  cross,  anchor,  and  other  symbols,  in  silver,  attached  to  ribbons  for
marking  the  j^laces.  It  was  sent  to  me  by  a  dear  friend,  after  Kakie  had
■ceased  to  know  anyone,  excejDt,  pei'haps,  for  a  passing  moment.  I  read  it,
smd  so  did  our  physician,  in  the  night  watches,  when  she  seemed  un-
■conscious,  and  after  Iter  death  I  placed  it  in  her  hands  to  prevent  the  blood
settling  in  the  nails.  The  last  thing  she  remembered  was  my  jjlacing  it  in
her  hands  !  What  does  this  signify  ?  ]  [Mrs.  Piper  held  her  hands  in  just
that  position  when  she  asked  for  it.*]

You  have  so  many  friends  here,  but  you  do  not  need  to  come  here  to
meet  them.  They  come  to  you,  and  you  see  and  hear  them.  There  are
many  here  whom  you  have  helped,  and  they  crowd  about  you.  You  have
done  much  good,  but  you  have  much  more  to  do.  You  have  many  dear  ones
liere — so  many.  Here  is  an  old  gentleman  wants  to  speak  to  you.  Dr.
•Clarke. [I  saw  James  Freeman  Clarke  as  he  spoke.] He  asks  if  you  gave  his

message  to  [name  of  his  daughter*]. [I  had  not  written  to  her,  as  I  had

expected  to  see  her.]  Here  is  a  gentleman  very  anxious  to  .speak  with  you.
{I  hoped  to  get  the  much  desired  address.*]  He  did  not  know  you  in  the
body.  You  have  seen  him  since  he  came  here.  He  has  tried  to  speak  to
you.  You  have  a  mutual  friend.  Tell  her  he  is  living  here  in  this  beautiful
world. He  told  where  he  was  born  and  where  ho  died  [correctly,  though

.at  the  time  I  thought  both  wrong]. Asked  that  his  papers  in  A  be

sent  for,  and  tried  to  give  an  address. All  we  could  get  was,  B  ,

:2771. Orvae  [Nothing  in  the  least  satisfactory]. Phinuit  said  :  Try  to
<tvrite  it.

2  K  2


494


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


The  remainder  of  the  sitting  w<is  occui^ied  in  writing.  [I  cannot  give
more  details  of  this.  It  was  all  confused  and  agitated.  Nothing  given  that
I  had  not  known  that  was  intelligible.*]

Tliis  sitting  was  more  satisfactory  than  the  lirst.  It  v>'as  freer  in  move-
ment, more  friends  communicated,  and  there  was  less  agitation.

[Mrs.  Sutton.]

[It  may  be  worth  noting  that  in  these  sittings  no  mention  was  made  of
the  near  death  of  my  grandmother,  who  always  helped  me.  She  lived  with
me,  and  at  her  death  left  me  enough  to  somewhat  ease  our  straitened,
circumstances.*]  •  .

December  7th,  1893.

Sitters  :  M.  Paul  Bourget,  Mme.  Bourget,  and  part  of  the  time,,
Marie  Garin,  a  servant  of  Professor  W.  James,  who  made  the
appointment  for  the  sitting  and  at  whose  house  in  Cambridge  the
sitting  was  held.  I  understood  from  Professor  James  later  that  the
sitting  was  successful  as  regards  Mme.  Bourget  as  well  as  M.  Bourget.
But  Professor  James  never  received  any  account  from  them.  On  the
day  following  the  sitting  Professor  James  wrote  me  the  following
account  of  the  statements  made  concerning  Marie  Garin.  (M.
Bourget  had  another  sitting  on  December  11th,  1893,  p.  495).

Cambridge,  December  8th,  1893.
Dear  Hodgson, — The  Piper  sitting  with  the  Bourgets  yesterday  was  a
fairly  successful  one,  though  there  was  much  confusion  owing  to  the  number
of  clues  that  were  started  and  could  not  develop  in  the  2  hours  and  20
minutes  that  the  trance  lasted.  ...  I  have  urged  B.  to  send  me  a
written  account.  Meanwhile  something  interesting  occurred  to  my  servant
Marie.

In  Weir  Mitchell's  very  bad  sitting,  six  weeks  or  so  since  [see  p.  482],
the  name  "Marie"  kej)t  coming,  and  he  failed  to  connect  it  with  any  one
whom  he  knew.  I  thought  of  our  bonne,  but  said  nothing,  as  I  didn't  wish
to  confuse  M.'s  hour.  Yesterday  the  sitting  opened  with  Mme.  Bourget
holding  Mrs.  P.'s  hand,  and  this  same  name  "  Marie  "  and  "  I  want  you  to
tell  my  sister  Marie,  in  the  body,"  kept  coming  through  the  hand,  mixed
with  much  other  matter.  At  last  a  name  "Carrie",  or  "  Garie  "  came,
which  was  so  like  Marie  Gavin's  surname  that  I  got  her  to  come  up  to  see  if
she  were  the  Marie  in  question.  Immediately  she  took  Mrs.  P.'s  hand  the
other  hand  wrote  "  Sunstroke.  I  passed  away  with  sunstroke,  I  am  glad
to  see  my  dear  sister  Marie.  Toll  Mother  I  am  happy.  The  children  are
well  with  her.  There  has  been  great  confusion  but  the  two  children  will  be
well  with  her,  etc."

I  don't  give  the  exact  words,  some  of  which  came  through  mouth.  There
were  other  names  and  references  which  Marie  couldn't  understand.  One  of
these  was  "James."  Mme.  Bourget  said  to  Marie  "That's  Jacques  in
Trench,  have  y(  z -lacques  ?  " The  hand  tlien  wrote  Jack  Alexandre.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenoviena  of  Trance.  495


Jacques  Alexandre  being  the  name  of  an  uncle  of  Marie's  who  many  years
ago  came  to  America  .mcl  had  never  been  heard  from.  Louise,  Daniel,
Julie,  Eugenie,  Charles  -syere  mentioned,  all  being  members  of  Jlarie's
immediate  cii'cle,  Louise  her  mother's  name. The  whole  thing  very  brief.

Now  Marie's  brother  had  had  a  grave  sunstroke  shortly  before  we  left
Switzerland  in  August.  In  Sej^tember  Marie  got  a  letter  from  her  mother
saying  he  was  dead.  The  mother,  Louise,  has  Marie's  two  children  with  her.
1^0  member  of  this  famUy  ever  mentioned  this  to  Mrs.  P.  I  mentioned  it  to
you  and  M.,  as  a  good  possible  test  for  Mrs.  P.  before  the  news  had  come  of
the  death,  but  M.'s  sitting  was  otherwise  so  full  that  Marie  was  crowded
out.  Marie  herself  hardly  speaks  two  words  of  English,  and  only  knows
two  persons  in  Cambridge,  servants  who  know  nothing  of  Mrs.  Piper.  She
is  very  reticent  and  says  she  does  not  th  hih  she  has  mentioned  her  brother's
•death  to  these  persons,  one  of  whom  is  a  recently  arrived  Italian  servant
and  the  other  a  French  Canadian  servant  of  the  Miinsterberg's. . .  .

Wii.  James.

December  llth,  1893.

I  met  M.  Bourget  on  the  evening  of  December  10th,  and  he
referred  to  Mrs.  Piper  [see  record  of  December  7th,  1893]  and
expressed  the  wish  to  have  another  sitting.  It  happened  that  a  person
for  whom  I  had  arranged  a  sitting  for  the  next  day  was  unable  to  be
present  and  I  took  M.  Bourget  to  the  sitting  instead.  He  took  an
article  to  the  sitting  about  which  Phinuit  occasionally  made  some
comments  while  the  writing  was  going  on.  I  ascertained  later  from .
Professor  James  that  some  reference  had  been  made  at  M.  Bourget's
previous  sitting  to  the  lady  who  had  drowned  herself.  The  notes
italicised  in  square  brackets  were  made  by  M.  Bourget  himself  during
our  return  to  Boston  in  the  train,  and  the  other  confirmatory  or  non-
confirmatory  notes  were  my  contemporary  notes  from  statements  made
by  M.  Bourget.  The  notes  of  Phinuit's  remarks  during  the  sitting
were  made  by  M.  Bourget.  The  record  is  not  adequately  annotated.  •
I  hoped  to  have  made  some  further  inquiries  through  Mrs.  Piper's  ■
trance,  and  I  understood  from  M.  Bourget  that  he  would  send
me  some  articles  for  experiment  so  that  I  might  obtain  answers  if
possible  to  his  special  questions.  He  did  not,  however,  communicate
with  me  again,  and  made  no  reply  to  my  later  inquiries.  I  now',
insert  some  additional  explanatory  remarks  in  the  record,  according
to  my  remembrance  of  what  Bourget  told  me,  signing  these
R.  H.  Soon  after  the  sitting  began,  M.  Bourget  asked  questions,
four  specially,  which  he  continually  repeated,  in  English.  He  wished
to  know

1.  The  name  of  the  painter  who  painted  the  portrait  of  the  lady,  a  •
portrait  which  M.  and  Mme.  Bourget  had  seen  on  a  visit  to  the  lady  in.


496


Richard  HoJrjson.


[part


question  when  the  lady  herself  however  was  absent.  M.  Bourget  did
not  know  the  name  of  the  painter.

2.  The  first  name  of  the  lady.

3.  Place  where  the  lady  lived.

4.  Place  where  the  lady  died.

Some  of  the  writing  is  addressed  to  M.  Bourget,  some  of  it  to
myself  and  some  of  it  apparently  to  the  would-be  communicator,  to  be
imagined  as  talking  to  G.  P.

[So  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  communication  purporting  to  come  from
Mrs.  Pitman  is  the  first  and  only  one  from  her  through  Mrs.  Piper.
Part  at  least  of  what  she  first  Avrote  was  apparently  addressed  to
Phinuit,  "if  you  will  forgive  me  for  doing  as  I  did  by  you  when  I  was
in  the  body."  Early  in  June,  1888,  Mrs.  Pitman,  who  was  a  member
of  the  American  S.P.B.,  had  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  SI  e  was  on
the  point  of  making  a  trip  to  Paris,  and  died  in  France  that  year,  and
my  notes  of  her  sittings  were  not  commented  upon  in  detail.

At  the  time,  Mrs.  Pitman  apparently  regarded  them  as  failures,
but  was  much  impressed  before  her  death  at  what  she  believed  to  be
the  fulfilment  of  Phinuit's  prophecies.  This  I  ascertained  afterwards
from  a  Boston  lady,  Miss  Josephine  Jenkins,  who  was  with  Mrs.
Pitman  during  her  last  illness.  Phinuit  said  "  You're  going  to  be
very  sick  ....  You're  going  to  Paris.  Going  to  be  quite  sick.
Going  to  have  a  weak  state  of  organs  of  stomach. Weak  in  head.

.  .  Sandy-complexioned  gentleman  will  take  care  of  you  when  you
are  sick  across  the  ocean."  As  I  remember,  Phinuit  several  times
evaded  Mrs.  Pitman's  question  as  to  her  health  after  this  prophesied
illness,  until  finally  she  requested  me  to  get  an  answer.  I  urged
Phinuit  to  tell  us,  and  he  replied  "  After  she  gets  over  illness  she'll  get
on  all  right."  These  quotations  are  from  my  original  notes  made  at
the  sitting.  Mrs.  Pitman  denied  that  she  could  have  anything  the
matter  with  her  stomach,  and  contradicted  Phinuit  on  this  and  other
matters  in  a  way  which  seemed  to  annoy  Phinuit  very  much.  When
Mrs.  Pitman  was  seriously  ill,  and  was  attended  by  Dr.  Herbert
(described  by  Miss  Jenkins  as  "a  decided  blond")  who  treated  her  for
"inflammation  of  the  membrane  of  the  stomach,"  she  recalled  the
details  of  her  sittings  and  reflected  that  she  had  done  Phinuit  an
injustice,  and  believed  that  she  would  recover,  since  Phinuit,  she
thought,  had  so  prophesied.  Phinuit's  exact  words,  however,  as  given
above,  appear  to  be  somewhat  oracular.

As  I  learned  from  Miss  Jenkins,  Dr.  Cliarcot  in  June  said  that
Mrs.  Pitman's  trouble  Avas  a  nervous  one  and  put  her  under  his  hydro-
pathic treatment.  "  At  first  the  baths  improved  her,  but  when  they
were  renewed  in  the  autumn  she  seemed  to  go  all  to  pieces  and  her


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  497


mind  was  affected.  A  seeming  cold  after  one  of  these  baths  developed
into  this  inflammation  of  the  membrane  of  the  stomach,  as  Dr.
Herbert  said."  Mrs.  Pitman  grew  worse,  and  IMiss  Jenkins  finally
sent  for  Charcot,  who  pronounced  the  trouble  to  be  "  consumption  of
the  spinal  cord,"  and  said  that  she  could  not  live.  "  This  consumption
of  the  spinal  cord,  I  forget  the  technical  term,  is  not  a  rapid  matter,,
and  poor  Mrs.  Pitman  had  been  suffering  with  it  for  years."

When  the  "Mrs.  Pitman"  statement  came  I  suggested  to  M.
Bourget  that  he  should  talk  in  French,  as  he  then  did.  My  impressioa
now  is  that  he  continued  talking  in  French  till  the  end  of  the  sitting,:
and  that  he  told  me  afterwards  that  his  remarks  and  questions
appeared  to  be  clearly  understood  by  the  "  writer."  The  last  two-
words  written  followed  a  spasmodic  resumption  of  the  pencil  after  the
writing  had  apparently  come  to  an  end. — R.  H.,  1896.]

[After  a  few  remarks  by  Phinuit,  the  hand  was  seized  and  the  first  two-
words  were  written  faintly.  Then  came  a  strong  writing,  beginning  Oai,
coming  from  G.  P. — R.  H.]

A  Lcuille.

Oui  rou  de  la  Monserer,  Paris. [My  styeet."}

How  are  you,  Hodgson.  I  came  in  to  help  you  out.  Mademoiselle  .  .  .
[undec]  is  here  in  the  spirit,  but  she  speaks  in  French,  which  I  do  not

understand,  and  she  wishes  to  speak  to  the Hodgson,  tell  me  wl>o  she

is,  Hodgson, , . . No,  I  think  not. I'll  go  and  speak  to  her  directly.

She  had  a  severe  trouble  with  her  head  before  she  passed  out,  then  she
had  some  confusion.  [TrMe.]

But,  now  believe  me,  Hodgson,  she  is  most  anxious  to  awaken  so  as  to
speak  to  this  gentleman,  and  .  .  .  give  me  my  hat  or  the  bangle
[articles  which  had  been  worn  by  G.  P.  and  had  been  used  in  previous

sittings.] Help  her  and  I  will  do  my  level  best. . . . give  0  the

fire  away,  Hodgson.

Sir,  I  get  from  your  friend  here  a  beautiful  lady  who  was  an  artist  by
profession,  who  had  very  expressive  eyes  and  short  hair,  combed  and  parted
curiously  on  the  side.  [True.]

Bou  P.  [undecipherable]  yes,  did  you  say  1  Whose  do  I  see.  ,  .  .
but  she  is  talking  to  me  and  you  must  not  crowd  but  wait  patiently  until  I
translate  what  she  says  .  .  .  not  trouble  her  about  any  one  thing,  but
first  wait  until  I  get  her  quite  clear.

She  says  that  she,  in  a  tit  of  insanity,  she  jumped  out  of  a  gondola  or
boat,  as  I  get  it.  [TrKe.]  And  when  she  awoke  slie  was  here  and  I  speak
to  her  to  come  here  with  me  and  tell  her  friend  who  she  is  and  what  she  can
remember.

Arselieu  (?)... Ar  P. ... J  A  J. ... A  1. . .  .

she  is  spelling  it  to  me.  .  .  .  Al,  yes,  it  is  .  .  .  yes,  where  are
my  books  ?.  .  .  where  is  the  little  Petite  .  .  .  little  ring  [this
unknown]  ....  Yes,  she  gave  to  you.  .  .  .  but  she  lias  it.
.  .  .  Where  is  B  ?  .  .  .  Tell  liim  to  speak  to  her  now.  .  .  .
Millen. . . . Millen  (?).., speak  to  me,  Bou. . . .  tlien^


498 ■"  '  Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Eour,  she  is  doing  very  well. . . . Hodson. ... yes,  very.

but  I  understand  you  wish  her  to  give  two  names.  Now,
which  is  it  ?  Her  name  and  tlie  Adelin  (?)  [Not  known  to  B.]  I  do
hear  her  say  .  .  .  A  .  .  .  Artist.  .  .  .  Oh,  I  see.  I'll  ask
her. . . . she  is  thinking  (?)... and  she  will  get  it.

Who  is  this  man  Jenks,  who  is  talking  to  Gr.  ? Oh,  no,  something  which
you  said . . . told. But  it  was  (?)  lasn  (?)...  Pot.
jea. . . . yes. . . . that  is  right. [Reference  to  previous  sitter.
See  p.  381.]

P  P  [undecipherable.]  Borshing(?)  Bou. Oh,  that  she  calls  continually.

Where  is  my  friend  B —  .  .  .  But  I  am.  I'll  go  and  speak  to  her,
then  I'll  come  back  soon. Yours,  etc.,  G.  P.

Yes,  I'll  get  it  for  youfr'^m  her. I  am  going  now. Adieu. G.  P.

I  remember.  Remmi  (?)  .  .  .  R  E  A.  .  .  .  II  e  m  e  m  ber.  I
-\vill  return  soon  and  get  it.  Adieu.

[Phinult.'}  Some  person  connected  with  the  writer  of  the  letter  has
.something  matter  with  the  sole  (?)  of  the  foot.

Pictures  all  around  it.

Who  is  John  ?  .  .  .  he  is  very  funny — he  is  in  the  body — in  some
large  building — in  the  college — across  the  water — he  writes  something —
jjapers. . .  .

N  [uncertain.]

[Written  by  G.  P.]  Now  I  have  returned  and  the  name  is  not  to  gotten
Tuy  her,  Hodgson,  to  be  found  out  from  her.  No  she  refuses  to  give  it  to
me.  I  have  asked  and  urged  her  to  give  it  me,  but  alas  no  it  is  no  fault  of
•ours  I  can  assure  you.

But  she  passed  out  of  a  city  and  in  the  water.  \_True.^

What  does  it  mean.  Oh,  Hodgson,  she  knows  perfectly  but  I  caimot
.seem  to  make  her  understand  but  she  has  just  told  me  that  she  was  in  a
.  but  she  doesn't  [?]  recall  everything  in  .  .  .  What  does  she
mean  by  Rede — lean — Re  den — Reu  de  .  .  .  she  told  me  to  give  it
yes — yes — Reudemer — yes— yes — yes — yes — can't — he  cannot —
R  enned — Rendemet— R  E  N— N  e  E— R  M  I  E— yes — yes  .  .  .  aU
right  I  will  give  it. Remmer  [?]

N . . . oh . . . please  talk  to  me. ... all  right  I  will.

[New  writing.  Three  words,  the  first  and  second  probably  mon,  and
the  third  probably  rfien.]

[New  writing.]  I  came  in  for  one  moment  to  sjjeak  to  you  sir  .  .  ,
and  say  that  if  I  can  do  you  any  good  I  will.  Who  are  you  first  of  all  1  I
used  to  understand  French  very  well,  so  I  will  assist  this  lady  if  you  will
tell  me  who  you  are,  and  if  you  will  forgive  me  for  doing  as  I  did  by  you
when  I  was  in  the  body.  I  am  Marie  Pitman.  Pitman— I  used  to  see  you
when  I  was  in  the  body.  I  kinskey — spinkinsey.  [Attempts  at  an  answer
to  one  of  B.'s  questions. — R.  H.]  Putman — Pitman.  .  .  .  she  is
Polish  [An  approximation. — R.  H.]  Yes.  .  .  .  bur.  I  understand  just
what  you  wish  and  am  .  .  .  yes,  I  will  ask  her  who  painted  her  por-
trait ...  all  right.  .  .  .  she  says  she  knows  him  very  well,  and
2iis  name  is  W  .  .  .  [undecipherable,  like  Worleasnee]  yes  W  .  .  .
no  it  should  not  be  W,  but  speak  your  messages  quite  clear. Tillie.  [Her


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  499


name  was  Matilda.]  Yes  it  [undecipherable]  understand.  A.  I  do  not
go  yet. want  to  help  you  do  this  and  I  will  try  for  him.

Will  you  like  tliis  Monsieur  .  .  .  [undecipherable.]  Bonny  (?)
[Bourey  (?)]  [Undecipherable.]  B  .  .  .  there  have  it  .  .  .  it  is
written  for  him  .  .  .  oh,  I  do  wish  I  could  have  been  in  here  before
.  .  .  yet  I  will  help  you  .  .  .  but  I  am  going  [undecipherable]  with
you,  don't  you  want  me  to  .  .  .  [?]  [Scrawl — undecipherable.]  A
.  .  .  [Undeciplierable.]  [A  name  beginning  with  A.  the  correct  answer
to  one  of  B.'s  questions. — R.  H.]  Venice.  [Venice  correct  answer  to  one
of  B.'s  questions.]

March  2nd,  1894.

Sitters  :  Mrs.  M.  E.  P.  (Associate  A.B.S.P.R.),  and  lady  relative,
]\rrs.  Dale  (pseudonym).  R.  H.  present  at  beginning  and  end  of  trance.
The  following  record  reached  me  with  a  letter  of  March  29th,  1894.

On  March  2nd,  1894,  a  young  relative  and  I  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper,  a
sitting  having  previously  been  arranged  for  us  by  Mr.  Hodgson.

When  we  reached  Arlington  Heights,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Hodgson,  who
tindly  went  with  us,  we  drove  directly  to  Mrs.  Pijaer's  house.  We  were
introduced  to  the  medium,  who  opened  the  door  to  us,  as  Mrs.  Jones  and
Mrs.  Robinson.  We  had  never  seen  her  before,  She  struck  us  agreeably
at  first  sight.  A  natui-ally  refined  and  womanly  woman,  and  very  genuine
she  seemed  to  us.  After  a  little  desultory  conversation  she  went  into  a
trance  and  was  controlled  by  Dr.  Phinuit.  The  passing  into  the  trance
state  was  disagreeable  to  witness.  It  seemed  to  me  like  a  person  inhaling
ether  very  unwillingly,  and  with  more  or  less  struggle.

As  soon  as  Mrs.  Piper  was  well  under  the  influence  of  the  so-called  "Dr.
Phinuit,"  Mr.  Hodgson  left  the  room,  and  we  had  our  experience  to
ourselves.

Dr.  Phinuit  turned  to  my  companion  and  told  her  accurately  the  number
and  sex  of  her  children,  and  described  very  truly  the  character  of  her
governess  and  nurse,  and  also  gave  some  advice  about  one  of  the  children
who  is  rather  delicate.

I  had  taken  a  hat-band  with  me,  belonging  to  a  young  friend  who  had
gone  away  for  his  health.  This  band  Mrs.  Piper  applied  to  her  forehead,
and  described  fully  the  person  to  whom  it  belonged,  saying  he  had  a  great
deal  of  headache  from  over  study,  but  rest  and  a  change  he  was  then  having
would  soon  set  him  right.

A  good  deal  of  the  time  of  our  sitting  was  taken  up  with  the  effort  of  a
friend  to  make  himself  known  to  us  through  writing.  He  had  been  dead  27
years,  and  it  was  difficult  for  this  reason,  so  he  said,  to  communicate.

Much  of  what  was  imparted  to  us  was  too  personal  to  be  repeated,  but
nothing  was  said  that  was  not  true.  We  afterwards,  however,  came  to  the
conclusion  that  every  thing  we  had  been  told  might  be  explained  by  the
theory  of  tliought-transference,  except  one  or  two  predictions  that  are  yet;
to  be  verified.

After  seeing  her,  we  felt  no  doubt  of  Mrs.  Piper's  genuineness.

M.  E.  P,


500


Richard  Hodgson.


[PART'


In  reply  to  my  inquiry,  Mrs.  P.  writes  on  August  3rd,  1896  : —
"In  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  March,  1894,  she  predicted  three  things
that  v/ere  to  come  to  pass  in  my  life.  One  has  been  fulfilled,  the  other  two
are  still  to  be  verified  ;  "  and  on  August  10th,  she  adds:  "The  prophecy
that  was  fulfilled  was  that  we  should  leave  our  (then)  home  and  settle  in  the
city  in  a  corner  house.  This  has  come  to  pass.  The  other  predictions
unfulfilled  are  of  a  more  private  nature."

On  March  Srd,  189  i  (see  p.  505),  the  first  writing  that  came  was  as
follows  [names  altered]  : —

"I  am  Polly,  sir,  and  I  want  to  see  my  sister,  Alice  Dale.  You  tell  my
sister  I  am  happy.  I  am  with  Elsie  at  all  times,  also  my  own  [or  "  come  "  ]
little  girl.  Tell  her  I  am  living  [?]  for  her  and  Will.  I  often  see  Alice
Wilkinson  .  .  .  yes,  sir.  [R.  H.  asks  if  she  will  be  able  to  speak  witk
the  voice.]  Yes,  this  old  gentleman  [Phinuit]  has  told  me  I  could  .  .  .
thank  you,  sir  [to  the  sitter  who  deciphered  the  word  "  could."]  I  shall  be-
so  happy,  sir,  thank  you  ever  so  much.  [Then  evidently  to  Phinuit.]  You-
are  a  dear  old  fellow  and  I  like  you  already,  sir.  [Phinuit  says:  "Never-
mind talking  to  me.  You  go  on,  sis."]  for  letting  me  come  in  here  so
dearly  [?]  [Disturbance  in  the  hand,  and  scrawls]  do  help  me,  sir.  [Scrawl.];
Uncle  Will  is  so  fond  of  mama  he  cannot  help  coming  in  here  to  express  his
love  for  her,  thank  you,  sir  [to  the  sitter,  who  deciiDhered  the  words  "for
her  "].  You  have  light,  haven't  you,  so  you  see  what  I  say  very  well,  and  I
am  very  grateful  to  you  for  your  kind  help,  assistance  .  .  .  do,  oh  j'es,^
I  see  his  father,  yes  I  do,  also  a  lady  friend  of  his.  Alice  is  all  right  and  I
love  her  dearly."

I  sent  this  communication  to  Mrs.  Dale  with  inquiries  as  to  its
relevance,  and  asked  her  whether  the  names  had  been  mentioned  at^
the  sitting  of  March  2nd. She  replied  on  March  5th  : —

"  'Dale'  and  'Elsie'  may  have  been  casually  mentioned  at  our  sitting.
Alice  Wilkinson  was  not,  but  the  wording  of  the  sentence  spoilt  what  might
have  been  quite  a  remarkable  knowledge  of  names.  It  reads,  '  I  am  with
Elsie  at  all  times,'  and  further  down  the  page,  'I  often  see  Alice  Wilkinson.'
'  Polly,'  who  purports  to  write  the  communication,  was  my  adopted  sister,
whose  real  name  was  Alice  Wilkinson.  My  last  baby  is  named  after  her^
but  is  called  Elsie,  to  avoid  confusion,  as  my  name  is  also  Alice."

On  March  8th,  1894,  another  writer  ("Q.")  in  the  middle  of  a
communication  wrote  : —

"  Here  is  a  dear  lady  whom  I  have  met  who  is  very  anxious  to  speak  one
word.  Her  material  name  is,  or  was,  Polly  Watson.  She  says,  do  not  worry
about  her  she  is  happy.  God  knows  best.  This  is  all  I  hear.  [R.  H.  asks,
about  confusion  in  previous  message.  Why  should  Polly  say  she  was  with
Alice  Wilkinson  when  Alice  Wilkinson  was  herself  ?  If  she  is  there  still,
ask  her  to  explain  this.]  Yes.  Alice  Wilkinson  and  Watson  are  both  is  her
name,  but  this  was  not  she  who  wrote  it  for  you  but  anothenjady  who  was
just  coming  in,  and  cauglit  wliat  she  said,  and  I  have  no  doubt  she  put  it
on  paper  as  she  heard  it. You  will  understand  it."


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  501


Again,  on  March  13th,  1S94,  Phinuit  said  (whether  in  reply  to  a
question  of  mine  or  not  I  do  not  know,  but  no  question  was  recorded)
that  "  Polly  began  to  write  her  own  message,  but  that  Daisy  [name  of
deceased  wife  of  sitter  on  March  3rd]  completed  it."

The  next  communication  was  from  Mrs.  Dale,  but  whether  I  sent
hoth  the  foregoing  explanations  or  not  I  do  not  remember.  I  must-
have  sent  her  at  least  one.  She  was  away  from  home  at  the  time,  and
her  letter  is  dated  April  6th,  1894,  and  was  forwarded  to  me  to  New
York  when  I  was  busy  interviewing  witnesses  and  supervising  a  series
of  sittings  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  giving  in  that  city.  She  wrote  :  "  Dr.
Phinuit  has  made  a  delightful  mess  out  of  his  explanations.  You
misunderstood  my  complicated  note,  and  Dr.  P.  took  your  version  of"
the  affair."

In  going  over  my  documents  I  found  that  this  letter  from  Mrs.
Dale  was  apparently  never  answered,  and  I  wrote  to  her  recently  tO'
have  the  matter  cleared  up.  My  explanation  is  that  probably
"Daisy"  was  in  contact  with  the  writing  machine  as  it  were,  and
was  communicating  the  words  thought  by  "  Polly,"  but  also  her  own
words  or  possibly  the  words  of  some  other  "intelligence  "  present,  so-
that  it  was  either  "  Daisy "  who  thought  the  words  "  I  see  Alice-
Wilkinson,"  or  some  other  person — possibly  "  Q."

]\Irs.  Dale,  who  is  now  at  a  distance,  states  in  a  letter  received
August  13th,  1896  :—

"As  you  have  written  out  the  words  and  explanation  in  this  letter,
it  all  makes  sense.  I  will  read  it  over  with  you  some  day  and  explain  it  to-
you.  It  would  be  all  too  long  and  complicated  now.  Mrs.  Piper  is  certainly
a  most  interesting  phenomenon,  but  I  do  not  like  to  have  her  brought  into-
spirituaUstic  relations  with  one.  It  seems  sacrilegious  to  me,  as  I  do  not
believe  that  such  things  are  any  more  than  mind-readings."

The  names  and  circumstances  referred  to  in  the  above  com-
munications were  unknown  to  me.

March  3rd,  1894.

Mr.  Charles  Heywood,  Gardner,  Mass.  (Associate  A.B.S.P.R  ).
R.  H.  present  part  of  the  time.

Mr.  Heywood  accompanied  me  for  a  sitting  on  ilarch  1st,  1894.
There  was  no  speech  but  apparently  strenuous  attempts  at  writing  as
by  different  persons.  The  oddities  of  spelling  and  writing  were
probably  Phinuit's.  The  following  is  the  complete  record  of  the
writing  of  March  1st.

no  light  no  light  here  [Spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards,  ojt
thfjil,  etc.].


502


Michard  Hodgson.


[part


no  liht  liht  [spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards]  no  [written  correctly].

no  liht  can't  stay  y  yes  no  liht  [Spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards].

can't  stay  [spelt  forwards  and  written  backwards,  i.e.  yats  tnac,  begmning
with  the  letter  c  and  writing  from  right  to  left].

here  [spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards,  the  h  in  mirror-writing].

Phinuit  [mirror-writing]  followed  by  a  stroke  with  an  r  perhaps  intended
for  Dr.

on  tighl  [or  lighl].

too  bad  [spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards]  bad  dab  oat.

Dr.  Phinuit  [spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards,  and  some  of  the
letters  mirror-writing].  .  ■  •  ■

Adieu  [Spelt  backwards  and  written  forwards].  - .

No  use  Gr.  P.  [followed  by  a  scrawl  suggesting  Adieri].

I  want  to  see  my  brother  Alice  [followed  by  a  scrawl  which  I  conjectured
at  the  time  might  be  James. Professor  James  has  a  sister  Alice  deceased].

Walter  [?]

Water  [?  Vater  ?]

[Two  illegible  words,  the  first  looking  like  /is  written  ujiside  down,  and
the  other  conjectured  by  me  on  the  day  of  the  sitting  a]pj)arently  to  be
FhinnvAt  written  upside  down  in  mirror-writing].

No  use  (We'll  come  again)  oh  do  oh  do  I  must  speak  to  him  because
I  was  wrong  to  him.

[illegible  scrawls  suggestmg  a  signature  of  initials]. Adieu  G.  P.

Mr.  Heywood  accompanied  me  again  on  March  3rd,  1894,  and  had
a  successful  sitting.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  he  wrote  me
the  following  letter:  —

Gardner,  March  3rd,  1894.

My  Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — After  arriving  here  this  afternoon,  I  took  the
■envelope  containing  articles  belonging  to  my  wife  to  the  room  where  her
belongings  are,  and  requested  her  to  ask  Mr.  Pelham  or  Dr.  Phinuit  to  give
to  you  from  her  some  furtlier  exjilanation  of  one  or  two  things  in  our
interview.  So  I  will  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  watch  out  for  anything
from  Pelham  or  Phinuit.

On  looking  over  my  notes,  I  find  tliis  curious  thing  ;

D.  P.  B.  :  "  Where  are  those  pants  ?"

C.  H.  :  "Pants?"

D.  P.  B.  :  "  Yes,  those  light  things.  I  do  not  like  them — too  much  like
a  negro."

C.  H.  :  "Negro?"

D.  P.  B.  :  "  Yes."

The  fact  is  that  in  the  summer  of  1891  (the  year  before  my  wife  died),  I
bad  a  pair  of  very  light  coloured  and  very  loud  trousers,  which  afforded
infinite  amusement  to  my  wife  and  myself.  I  used  to  call  them,  in  allusion
to  their  similarity  to  the  nether  garments  of  coloured  gentlemen,  my  coon
pants  !

Will  transcribe  and  send  soon.  There  are  some  things  which  I  am  much
in  doubt  about,  as  there  are  various  possible  readings.

C.  Heywood.


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  503


Concerning  the  first  paragraph  of  tlie  above  letter,  tlie  only
memoranda  which  I  can  find  of  any  special  messages  concerning
Mr.  Heywood  are  that  on  March  7th  Phinuit  said  :  "  Do  you  know
Daisy  Bradford?  She's  very  grateful  to  you.  She  isn't  here  now,  but
she  told  me  to  tell  you,"  and  on  March  10th  he  said  :  "Do  you  know
anybody  named  Heywood  ?  (Yes).  There's  a  lady  wants  to  send  her
love  to  him."

The  following  documents  explain  themselves.

Gardner,  Januar]/  10th,  1895.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — In  fact,  it  occurs  to  me  m  looking  over  my  jDapers-
that  I  never  sent  you  the  promised  transcription  of  the  results  of  my  sittings-
with  Mrs.  Piper  last  spring.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this.  My  interpre-
tation of  several  obscure  passages  obtained  at  the  first  [second]  sitting,  which-
I  wrote  out  fully  and  carefully,  were  materially  modified  by  comimmications
received  at  the  second  [third]  sitting  ;  and  all  the  writing  secured  at  that-
sitting,  I  regret  to  say,  has  disappeared,  and  I  am  afraid  got  burned  up  with,
a  lot  of  old  newspapers,  etc.,  which  a  servant  had  received  orders  to  destroy.
At  any  rate  I  can't  find  any  traces  of  it.

Much  of  the  report  already  written  out,  therefore,  was  rendered  value-
less, and  some  of  the  more  strikmg  proofs,  or  at  least  coincidences,  were  so-
entirely  personal  as  to  exclude,  for  ^propriety's  sake,  their  appearance  in
print.  There  are  many  things,  however,  which  I  can  write  out  for  you,  and
this  I  will  do  gladly  if  you  desire.

Phinuit  made  some  remarkable  prophecies  at  my  last  sitting.  The  mmor-
predictions,  many  of  them,  were  fulfilled,  and  I  naturally  expected  a  corres-
ponding realisation  of  the  two  great  predictions  up  to  which  the  Issser  led  ;
but  the  Doctor  evidently  took  too  much  for  gi'anted.  The  big  things  failed
to  occur.  If  Mrs.  P.  is  still  giving  sittings  please  remember  me  to  Phinuit,
and  ask  him  if  he  ever  sees  Daisy  Bradford  or  Charles  Heywood.  You  were-
obliged  to  interrupt  my  last  sitting  at  the  critical  point  when  the  intelligence
purporting  to  be  that  of  C.  H.  (my  father)  was  about  to  say  something  which
he  considered  of  very  great  importance,  and  of  vital  interest  to  me.  I  have
always  wanted  to  get  hold  of  him  again. — Truly  yours,

Charles  Heywood.

Gardner,  February  10th,  1896.

Dear  Sir, — After  writing  my  letter  of  last  week,  I  made  a  strict  search,
among  my  papers  in  an  endeavour  to  find  the  MSS.  obtained  upon  the
occasion  of  my  second  visit  to  Mrs.  Piper  (the  first  visit  which  afl'orded-
satisfactory  results).

But  I  was  unable  to  find  them,  and  learning  from  a  friend  of  the  family
that  my  mother  had  liad  them  in  her  possession  a  short  time  before  her
death,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  could  be  found,  if  at  all,  among -
her  papers.

I  dismissed  the  subject  from  my  mind  for  the  time. But  last  night,,
having  occasion  to  open  my  mother's  safe,  my  brother-in-law  and  I  found
therein,  not  only  the  original  writings,  but  my  transcription  and  supple-,
mentary  dialogue,  made  within  a  week  after  the  .sitting,  together  with  some-^


.504


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


-additional  comments  in  my  handwriting,  the  existence  of  which  had  entirely
-escaped  my  memory.  In  fact,  I  hadn't  seen  the  transcription  itself  for  a
very  long  time,  and  I  couldn't  have  sworn  to  its  existence,  nor  whether,  in
iact,  an  entire  transcription  had  been  made.

*****  *

Of  course  any  attempt  at  this  late  day  to  construct  a  dialogue  from  the
.automatic  writings  would  be  almost  valueless,  but  the  selections  which  I  send
you  are  from  the  aforesaid  transcript  made  within  a  very  short  time  of  the
sitting.  I  send  all  which  I  can  positively  submit  to  strange  eyes,  and  I  beg
to  assure  you  that  what  is  omitted  is  of  a  character  which  exhibits  startling
rinternal  evidences  of  being  communicated  by  the  personality  of  my  dead  wife.

As  I  have  said,  the  notes  of  the  second  (really  the  third)  seance  are  lost,
but  from  the  memoranda  concerning  it  found  last  night,  and  from  my
memory  of  its  salient  points,  I  am  enabled  to  give  some  interesting  informa-
tion  about  it. . . .-Sincerely  yours,  Chaeles  Hey  wood.

Gardner,  Mass.,  February  lOth,  1896.

Some  Notes  upon  Automatic  Writing  ohtained  iltrough  3Irs.  Piper.

I  have  had  three  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  first  was  unproductive.
Phinuit  said  there  was  not  enough  "light."  The  second  lasted  about  one
hour  and  a  qiiarter,  and  was  devoted  wholly  to  automatic  writing.  Phinuit
was  very  quiet,  and  "George  Pelham"  seemed  to  be  the  controlling  and
directing  intelligence.  Of  course,  nearly  all  the  writing  was  done  by  the
"D.P.B."  intelligence,  but  Pelham  seemed  to  sujiervise,  and  at  times  took
the  pencil  himself  and  assured  me  that  he  was  looking  after  things.
"D.P.B."  spoke  of  Pelham  as  standing  within  "earshot,"  if  such  a  term
may  be  used.

The  third  sitting  occupied  one  hour,  and  was  divided  between  some
" psychometry  "  by  Phinuit,  and  writing  by  "D.P.B."  and  an  intelligence
said  by  "D.P.B."  and  by  himself  to  be  the  spirit  of  my  father  (died  1882).
The  writing  obtained  at  this  time  cannot  be  found,  but  from  the  memoranda
in  my  possession  I  can  say  that  the  results  were  in  most  respects  eminently
satisfactory.  "D.P.B."  gave  an  eminently  satisfactory  explanation  of  the
"Haskins"  matter  [see  p.  505]  ;  while  my  father  brought  along  the  spirit  of
Amos  Morrill  (died  1891)  with  whom  he  had  been  in  business  relations  for
many  years,  and  they  gave  me  some  exceedingly  good  business  advice,  and
made  one  or  two  predictions,  in  a  general  way,  which  have  been  fulfilled.

Phinuit's  readings  from  locks  of  hair,  gloves,  etc.,  pressed  against  Mrs.
Piper's  forehead,  were  excellent  so  far  as  they  related  to  the  character  of  the
persons  and  their  circumstances,  but  his  predictions  were  simjjly  my  own
ideas  of  the  pi-obabilities,  and  in  almost  every  instance  have  failed.

From  my  minutes  made  shortly  afte^c  the  first  [second]  sitting  I  quote  : —

"The  intelligence  which  controlled  Mrs.  Pijjer's  hand,  whatever  it  was,

possessed  or  had  acquired  an  intimate  knowledge  of  my  married  life,  and  an

intimate  acquaintance  with  the  little  mannerisms and more  superficial

characteristics  of  my  late  wife."

******

"Favourite  expressions  often  used  by  her,  i.e., 'Don't be  stupid!'

'  Now  you  are  waking  up  ! '  '  Well,  I  should  say  I had  ! '  '  Don't  I  ? '


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  505


*Well  T  guess!'  'Dear,'  and  particularly  'Dear  little  boy,'  flowed  from
the  pencil  in  such  a  familiar  way  that  I  felt  the  influence  of  her  personality
-very  strongly.  Some  little  traits  were  shown  in  the  impatient  brushing
away  of  loose  articles  upon  the  table,  and  the  pounding  of  the  table  with
the  Angers  when  perplexed."  When  I  saw  that  motion  I  exclaimed  :  "  Ah  !
now  I  recognise  you  bej'ond  a  doubt  !  "  Little  things  like  that  seemed  to
supply  the  missing  links  in  the  chain  of  identity.

In  closing  I  wish  to  mention  one  fact  which  struck  me  at  the  time  as
Tery  awe-ful  and  imijressive.  On  one  occasion  the  point  of  the  pencil  was
broken  suddenly,  and  the  hand  turned  the  point  up  in  precisely  the  fashion
it  would  be  turned  up  for  the  inspection  of  one  standing  just  at  the  medium's
shoulder.  My  sensation  at  the  moment  was  that  it  was  as  if  some  person
behind  the  medium  had  slipped  his  arm  through  the  medium's  sleeve,  and
Avas  in  this  manner  writing.  Chakles  Hevwood.

[From  the  Automatic  Writing  at  Sitting  of  March  Srcl,  ISOi.]

D.  :  Charlie,  I  am  Dorothy  [a  pet  name  of  my  wife]  C-h-a-r-l-i-e,  this  is
to  you. Will  tell  you  all  soon. Wait  for  him  [me,  her.]

G.  P.  :  The  lady  is  [through  ?]  [This  was  a  fragment  intended  for  some-
l)ody  who  had  sat  the  previous  day.]  [See  pp.  499-501. — R.H.]  George.
Head  [a  scrawl,  perhaps  meant  for  "  Charlie."]

[Daisy  ?] I  am  here  [a  scrawl,  then  "  strong."]

C.  H.  :  What  is  that  ?

G.  P.-  :  Strong. I  am  and  I  saw  her  and  in  consequence  right  it  for  you.

Hodgson  and  Heywood  :  Ha  !  ha  ! See  how  George  spells  "  write  !  "

G.  P.  :  Am  I  not  right?  [Presumably  to  D.  P.  B.]  Well,  do  speak  and
T  will  help  you.  This  was  a  mistake,  if  you  please.  Trust  me — trust  it  to
lue,  sir.

C.  H.  :  What,  to  her?

G.  P.  :  No,  to  me.  [Probably  G.  P.  was  acting  as  amanuensis  throutrh-
out.— R.H.]

C.  H.  :  Is  this  Daisy  1

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  and  I  love  you  and  I  want  you  to  forgive  me  for  not

■coming  before. I  tried  so  hard  to  reach  you,  dear  Charley,  you  know

^Neither  I  nor  my  wife  ever  spelt  my  name  "  Charki/." — C.H.,  '96.]

C.  H.  :  Yes,  I  know,  dear,  but  now  you  have  come  to  me.

D.  P.  B.  :  Oh,  speak  to  me  !  My  cough  is  right  all  now  [all  right  now.]
Where  is  my  picture,  dear  ?  Give  it  to  me  a  minute.  [Sly  wife  had  no
■cough.]

[I  carry  a  photograph  of  my  wife  in  my  watch  case.  Taking  tlie  watch  from
my  pocket  I  placed  it  in  the  hand,  which  rested  upon  it  a  few  seconds,  and
then  resumed  as  follows  :]

D.  P.  B.  :  Do  you  miss  me  now  ? I  see  you  always.

C.  H.  :  I  can  scarcely  believe  this  to  be  you,  Daisy.  Can't  you  give  me
some  proof  ?

[Then  followed  an  attempt  to  write  a  name.  Probably  ten  minutes  were
•consumed  in  this  efi'ort,  but  she  seemed  unable  to  write  the  whole  name.  It
■was  a  name  similar  to  "  Haskins,"  let  us  say,  and  she  wrote  "  Askins,"  over
and  over  again,  confessed  her  inability  to  complete  it,  and  then  wrote  the


506


Richard  Hodqson.


[part


first  three  letters  of  the  given  name  of  the  person.  She  finally  spelt  it
phonetically,  but  I  absolutely  failed  to  recognise  what  she  was  driving  at,
and  remained  in  utter  ignorance  until  the  next  sitting,  when  she  was  able  to
write  the  full  name  correctly,  and  imparted  a  bit  of  information  of  which  I
was  entirely  ignorant.  She  had  intended  to  tell  me  the  matter,  and  about  a
month  before  her  death  had  started  to  do  so,  but  something  had  turned  the
conversation.  The  whole  affair  was  so  trivial  (although  very  personal)  and
so  natural  a  solution  of  the  difficulty  that  I  have  often  wondered  at  my
blindness,  and  laughed  at  the  ridiculous  answers  which  I  hatched  out  in  the
interval  between  the  two  sittings.

In  attempting  to  explain  the  matter  at  her  first  sitting,  she  referred  me
by  name  to  a  person  who  miglit  readily  have  given  me  the  needed  informa-
tion, but  I  felt  unwilling  to  discuss  the  matter.]

C.  H.  :  I  can't  thiiik  what  that  means.

D.  P.  B. :  Do,  dear.  Give  it  [the  watch]  to  me  a  minute.  Oh,  how
this  helps  me.  I  am  still  a  little  confused — fused — fused  :  I  will  be  all
right  in  time.  "Wait  for  me.  I  could  not  stay  longer — [any  ?] — longer.
Where  is  Jack  ?

C.  H.  :  Jack  ? I  don't  know  whom  you  mean.

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes.

[I  am  now  convinced  that  this  was  "George  is  speaking." — C.H.,  '96.]
[Then  appears  what  is  evidently  the  autograph  of  George,  and  aa
undecipherable  word  which  may  be  "speaks,"  followed  by  "is"  or  "in"
or  "ie."  I  said  I  didn't  understand,  whereupon  the  writing  continued:]
[Probably  an  attempt  to  explain  that  G.  P.  was  acting  as  amanuensis. — R.H.]
D.  P.  B.  :  George  is  here  with  you.  I  see  his  [face,  power  ?]  and  he
helps  me.

C.  H.  :  George  who  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  George  Pelham — Pelham — yon  read — P-e-l-h-a-m,  Pelhham
Pelham.

C .  H.  :  Do  you  know  him  ?

D.  P.  B.  You  doxi't  know  him,  do  you  ? Where —

C.  H.  You  are  controlling  that  hand,  are  you  ?

D.  P.  B .  Yes,  I  am,  dear,  and  I  did  want  to  see  you  before  I  came  here
now.  Do  you  hear  me,  dear,  do  you  hear  me  1  Do  you  hear  nie,  can  you
see  me  ?

C.  H.  :  I  am  reading  what  you  say. Can  you  see  and  hear  me  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes.  Don't  do  anything  wrong.  You  know  what  I  told
you. You  know  I  love  you  and  always  did. All  is  well.

******

[Then  follows  a  reference  of  an  extremely  personal  nature,  Avhich  afforded
me  a  strong  proof  of  personality.  It  was  perfectly  intelligible  at  the  time,
and  it  began  with  "I  tell  you  this,  but  don't  let  that  gentleman  hear  me," — ■
evidently  referring  to  Pelham,  as  Hodgson  had  left  the  room — sent  out
some  time  before  by  Phinuit. — -Abridged  from  original  transcript. — C.  H.  '96.'[

D.  P.  B.  :  Don't  feel  strange  with  me,  dear,  for  I  love  you  and  always
did.

C.  H.  :  Can't  you  give  me  some  further  proof  of  your  identity  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  I  will.


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  507


[Then  follows  an  extended  reference  to  another  matter  wliieh  was  known
only  to  myself  and  my  wife.  Then  the  pencil  began  to  flutter  and  wander,
and  wrote  a  few  woi'ds,  like  "lean — remember  your — speak  so  I  can  hear
hear  you,  dear,"  and  then  it  brought  up  as  follows  :  ]

D.  P.  B.  :  Am  I  dreaming  ? Where  are  you  now  ?

C.  H.  :  Right  here,  near  you. I  wish  I  might  see  you.

D.  P.  B.  :  I  will  try  to  have  you  see  me  as  I  am.  Poor  little  boy — too
bad — yes — do  you  recall— recall — can't  I  help  you  when  you  go  home. I  say
— don't  you  hear  me  ?  Do  you  remember  the  Sunday . , . and .  ,
went  oflf  down  to  the  Island —

C.  H.  :  The  Island  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes.

C.  H.  :  What  island  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  I  can't  make  it — [and  the  pencil  tapped  the  word  Island
sharply  and  impatiently.  I  did  not  reniembcr  the  circumstance  and  said  so,
whereupon  the  conversation  changed].

[Then  followed  an  allusion  to  some  private  matters  with  which  I  was  little
acquainted.  This  part  of  the  manuscript  is  obscure  and  unsatisfactory.
— C.  H.,  '96.]

[When  I  professed  ignorance  of  some  of  the  circumstances  the  pencil
rather  impetuously  wrote  "Don't  be  stupid,"  and  then  "Don't  be  dis-
couraged." ]

D.  P.  B.  :  A  .  .  .  is  gone  and  I  am  glad  of  it.  I  am  so  happy  for
that.  Now  talk  to  me,  dear.  Don't  you  know  the  Sunday  we  went  to  the
Point—

C.  H.  :  —Point  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes  [joyfully].  That  is  wliat  I  want  to  say  :  was  it  Sunday  ?
And  I  remember  it  so  well. P — oiut  Pines  [triunijihantly].

C.  H.  :  Oh,  the  Point  of  Pines.

D.  P.  B.  :  —Yes.

C.  H.  :  And  that  is  what  you  were  trying  to  say,  is  it  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  — Yes,  al  the  time.  Do  you  remember  the  little  place
where  we  sat. I  go  there  often,  yet  I  don't  see  you  there.

C.  H.  :  Well,  haven't  you  seen  mo  there  sometimes  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  (joyously)  Well,  I  should  say  I  had  !

C.  H.  :  Oh,  I  recognise  that  expression  !  I  know  now  that  you  are
Daisy.

D.  P.  B.  :  Well,  I  know  I  am  D.— [a  scrawl].

C.  H.  :  Can  you  write  your  name  1

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  I'll  give  it  to  you — Bb-R-A-a.  [Here  the  hand  seemed
angry  at  its  inability  to  write,  and  covers  the  paper  with  dots.]  Over.  I
wrote  it.  I  wrote  it.  Do  read.  It  is  over  hei'e,  turn,  [hand  fumble?;
among  tlie  loose  sheets  lying  on  the  table  covered  with  writing].

C.  TI.  :  Can  you  give  me  your  middle  initial '?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  P.  D.  B. — do  read — R — no  more — A — that  is  not  [a
scrawl].

C.  H.  :  Will  you  give  it  mo  later  1

D.  P.  B. :  Yes,  before  I  go  I  will  write  it  in  full.  Yes.  Now  let  me
speak  my  mind. Do  you  go  west  ?

2  r.


508


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


C.  H.  :  No. Didn't  you  like  me  to  go  West  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Not  a  bit.  You  know  how  I  felt.  Don't  try  to  fool  with
me  now.

C.  H.  :  You  see  mo  now,  do  you  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  I  see  you  better  than  ever  I  did.  .  .  .  You  want  me  to
speak  natural[ly]  [which  was  exactly  the  wish  framed  in  my  mind].

C.  H.  :  You  feel  well  and  hapj^y,  then  1

D.  P.  B.  :  Don't  I — well,  I  guess  !  [one  of  her  favourite  idioms].  All
burden  that  about.

[Then  follows  some  advice  upon  a  certain  matter  which  events  have
proven  to  be  invaluable.  Any  other  course  than  the  one  advised  would  have
been  fatal  to  my  welfare. — C.  H.,  '96].

C.  H.  :  Can  you  tell  me  what  is  in  the  room  where  our  things  are  1

D.  P.  B.  :  B-o-o-t  [scrawl,  evidently  intended  to  be  an  "s. "] Now  read.

C.  H  :  Is  that  Boots  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  No. I'm  exasj^erate — ex-asperate.

C.  H.  :  With  me  1

D.  P.  B.  :  Me. Yes. I  can't  seem  to  say  all  I  know.

C.  H.  :  But  you  are  sure  you  are  here.

D.  P.  B.  :  My,  yes,  I  am  just  as  sure  as  sure — what  ?— S-U-R-E.  I
can  [make — think]  it  now. S-B-o-o-  S.lno-no-S-I-St — can't.

C.  H.  :  I  will  try  to  make  out  your  meaning.

D.  P.  B.  :  Oh,  do  ! S-I  [scrawl]  Slippers.

[Stockings  was  the  word  in  my  mind  when  the  question  was  asked  ;  but  I
have  found  since  that  a  pair  of  slippers,  unlinown  to  myself,  was  in  the  room
referred  to.]

D.  P.  B.  :  [resuming] Wliat  became  of  the  chair  ?

C.  H.  :  The  chair  in  your  room  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes.

C.  H.  :  Oh,  that  is  in  the  baby's  room  now.

D.  P.  B.  :  Look  at  my  dresses.  Too  l^ad,  they  are  all  put  up  there  in
the  attic. I  go  there  often.

C.  H.  :  Have  you  seen  me  there  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  I  should  think  I  had. Where  are  those  pants  ?

C.  H.  :  Pants  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes — those  light  things.  I  did  not  like  them — too  much
like  a  negro.

C.  H.  :  Negro,  is  that  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes  [joyfully  and  flourishingly].

[During  the  summer  of  1891,  the  year  before  the  death  of  my  wife,  I
owned  a  pair  of  very  light  and  very  loud  trousers,  which  atiorded  endless
amusement  to  my  wife  and  myself.  In  honour  of  their  resemblance  to  the
garments  often  worn  by  gentlemen  of  colour,  we  called  them  my  coon  pants  !
But  reminiscences  of  that  sort,  as  may  be  imagined,  were  far  from  my  mind
during  the  seance.]

D.  P.  B.  :  [with  a  long  dash,  to  change  the  subject.]  I  hear  you  call
for  me.

C.  H.  :  Then  you  see  me  1

D.  P.  B.  :  Well,  I  think  I  do.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  509


C.  II.  :  And  you  don't  consider  yourself  dead  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  I  don't  think  I  am  dead — not  much  !  I  want  to  trouble  you
a  little  while  longer.  What  about  your  liair  1  Yes,  dear.  [Tlie  hand  dropped
the  pencil  and  came  forward  to  my  head  and  fingered  my  hair.  ]

C.  H.  :  It's  longer  than  it  was  when  you  were  here.  That's  the
fashionable  cut  now.

D.  P.  B.  :  Looks  well.

C.  H.  :  You  like  it,  don't  you  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes.

C.  H.  :  Others  do,  too.

D.  P.  B. :  I  don't  care  whether  they  do  or  not.  I  do.  Wliere  is  the
cradle  ?

C.  H.  :  It's  in  the  baby's  room.

D.  P.  B.  :  It's  where  I  can't  see  it. I  can't  find  it.

C.  H.  :  If  you  go  in  there  you  can't  fail  to  see  it.

D.  P.  B.  :  But  the  cradle

C.  H.  :  [suddenly  recollecting] Oh,  I  know  what  you  moan  !

D.  P.  B.  :  [energetically] Now  you  are  just  waking  up  !

[The  hand,  in  the  exuberance  of  its  pleasure  at  my  evidence  of  intelligence,
swept  watch,  note  book,  loose  sheet  and  pencils  olf  the  table  on  the  floor.
After  they  were  replaced  the  writing  continued.]

D.  P.  B.  :  Too  bad.

C.  H.  :  Oh,  that's  all  right.

D.  P.  B.  :  I  know,  but  see  what  I  did.  Look  here,  do  you  remember
the  cradle  you  never  got  ?

C.  H.  :  Yes,  and  that's  a  very  good  eviilence  that  Daisy  is  here.  I
remember  very  well. And  you  remember  that  promised  cradle.

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  I  am  now. Well,  I  guess  I  do.

[Then  follows  another  attempt  to  give  light  on  the  "  Haskins  "  matter.
Then—]

C.  H.  :  I  will  try  to  find  out.

D.  P.  B.  :  Now  do,  yes,  do.  What  can  I  do  to  help  you.  Can't  you
take  my  picture  at  home,  as  you  used  1 Now  talk  to  me  as  you  could. .  .  .

C.  H.  :  Will  you  be  near  me  and  help  me  in  the  future  ?

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  I  will. I  promise. Ask  him  [G.  P.  ?]  to  help  me.
George  [?] :  Yes,  I  will.

D.  P.  B.  :  You  can  help  me,  dear,  will  you  ? Do  speak.

Enter  Hod'json.

Hodgson  :  Come,  Dr.  Phinuit,  it  is  time  to  close  the  sitting.
D.  P.  B.  :  Wlio  are  you  ?

C.  H.  :  Tliis  is  Mr.  Hodgson,  the  Secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Hesearch.

D.  P.  B.  :  Do  you  know  my  baby  ? He  is  a  very  nice  boy. You  go  and
see  him. He  looks  like  me.

C.  H.  :  Now  remember  your  promise  to  write  your  full  name.

D.  P.  B.  :  Yes,  D.  P.  B.  [indistinctly].  Now  D.  P.  B.  [in  startlingly
distinct  capitals] Daisy — Park — Bradford. [The  "Park" scrawly  ;  the


510


Richard  Hodjson.


[PAKT


"  Bradford  "  very  plainly  written].  Da  [scrawl]  Par — [oh  well,  this — me  ?J
Forgive  me  for  my  wrongs.

C.  tl.  :  But  tliere  are  no  wrongs  to  forgive.

D.  P.  B.  :  Mistakes.  [Then,  as  if  seized  by  desire  to  summarise
rapidly  the  proofs  of  identity,  the  hand  scrawled  in  coarse,  hurried  letters — ■
"  Point  of  Pines"— "the  Seat Don't  take  A.  .  .  .—no"— "My
stomach  is  better — so  is  the  baby  "].

C.  H.  :  You  remember  what  we  dreaded  for  the  baby  1  '  ■  _

D.  P.  B.  :  Well,  yes,  but  no  fear  of  them  now. I  must  go.
H.  :  Good-bye  !

D.  P.  B.  :  No,  don't  say  good-bye.  [And  with  this  the  sitting
terminated.]

Ajxril  ith,  1894.

Sitter  :  Mrs.  J.  E.  Pt.  U.  (Associate  A.B.S.P.R.),  at  the  house  of
Dr.  A.  JB.  Thaw  in  New  York.  Appointment  made  by  Pi.H.  Notes
taken  by  11. H.  during  the  sitting,  and  a  few  remarks  added  afterward.'}
by  the  sitter.  The  names  Wilson  and  ][''ilton  are  pseudonyms  substi-
tuted for  the  real  names.  Mrs.  R.  has  had  some  veridical  psychical
exDerienccs,  especially  in  connection  with  crystal-gazing.

Mrs.  Piper  became  first  controlled  by  Dr.  Phinuit.  :  .

[Spoken\  :

That  lady's  a  medium.  You  have  a  very  wonderful  light,  but  you  doubt
yourself  sometimes.

I  get  Catlierine  round  you.  I  like  her  influence  very  mucli.  You're
going  to  write  sometime.  There's  a  gentleman  in  the  sfurit  world  helps
you  to  write.  I'll  bring  lady  and  gentleman  l)oth  together.  Lady  sufl'ered
a  good  deal — nervous  temperament.

I  get  a  funny  name  spelled  with  a  K.  This  is  your  gentleman,  he  is
passed  out  of  the  body.  I  get  child  here  (question  by  sitter  :  "  Little  child
or  large  child  ?  ")  C-II-I-L-D,  name  of  a  i)erson.  Here's  a  doctor  wants  to
speak  to  her.

IWritten]

[Control  appeared  to  change,  right  hand  violently  sliaking,  writing  nob
very  clear.]  Are  you  Sarah?  [undec],  too  bad  I  could  not  see  Eliza.  Tell
her  T  see  Mary  come  [?]  here  to  me  now  [7].  I  want  her  to  know  I  am  not
dead.

[G.  P.  apparently  here  acts  as  amanuensis.]  How  are  you  and  where  is
my  wife  ?  I  am  William  Wilton,  yes  [in  answer  to  Dr.  H.,  "  Ls  Wilson  the
name  ? "]  No,  W-I-L-T-O-N.  Yes,  mam  [?],  do  speali;  to  me  and  tell  me
how  my  wife  is.  W  yes — Will  is  my  son's  name.  Yes,  sir,  he  is  physically
not  well,  and  should  not  have  gone  south.  No.

George  is  helping  me.  I  shall  be  clear  soon — wait  for  me.  Tliis  is  not
easy  to — C  H-alli,  Caroli,  C-A-R-O-line. I  want  you  to  know  me.

Caroline — I  came  here  at  first,  and  I  am  the  lady  (that  Phinuit  called
Catherine  ?)  Yes,  six-,  you  were  very  sympathetic  to  me  once,  when  I  gave
message  througli  an(.)ther  personality. Yes. (Sitter:  "I  don't  recognize


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  513


you.")  Yes,  yon  do,  do  you  remember  the  strange  [or  stranger  ?]  light  and
■when  I  wrote  all  I  am  thinking  1  Well  and  will  tell  you  all  about  uiy
interest.  Where  is  G.  ?  .  .  .  [or  J]  osiu  G  or  J-o-s  J  Joseph  [scrawl
like  monogram.]  (Sitter:  "I  think  I  know  what  you  mean.")  Yes,  you
know,  and  I  want  you  to  feel  that  I  am  with  you,  and  I  want  you  should
talk  to  me  in  this  strange  light.  (It  is  rather  hard,)  but  it  is  worse  for  me
than  you. Where's (?) Who  is  this  ? Mother — oh.

(Sitter:  "Is  it  my  mother  ?  ")  Yes,  mother.  You  ought  to  know  who
we  are.  Joseph  also.  We  are  the  ones  who  came  because  W  [?]  came  to
tell  you  about  you  [?]  .  .  .  [?]  (husband  ?)  No,  sir,  not  husband,
H  A  [?]  ag  H-a-n  A  B  not  [undec] — wait,  I  aui  thinking — H-a-r — no — IM-a —
I  forget.  A — .  .  .  Harris  ?  Not  exactly.  H.  you  correct.  Not  I — no
Oh,  do  read. I'll  spell  it,  sir. Thank  you. K. MI  don't  make  it.

.  A-n-n-a  (Airna  ?)  Yes,  sir.  Yes,  and  she  is  in  trouble — yes,  she  is,
Elizabeth  ought  [?]  to  know.  This  Joseph  is  ?  [scrawls  undec]  S-No — Yes
• — Lizzie  is  here.  I  wrote  to  j'ou  before,  yes,  I  did.  This  is  why  I  say
this.  .  .,  .  Now  read.  Please  not.  .  .  .  read  over  [?]  to  me  first,
sir.  Yes,  we  did.  .  .  .  will  help  me.  Yes  sir,  I'll  find  it  for  you.  I
want  you  to  keep  riglit  on  as  you  are.  No  matter  what  people  think.
Elizabeth  is  there.

C  E  S  (?)  R  or  K  .  .  .  W  .  .  .  (What  is  the  whole  name  ?)  all.
You  read,  sister  Lizzie — also  Caroline  R  E  A — (A  ?)  I  have  the  greatest
difhculty  in  making  that  letter.  C  E  C  (G  ?)  no  G  (G  ?)  No  Y  (Y  ?)  yes,  I
will.  Lizzie  is  well  and  happy  now,  so  is  your  father  ....  and  me
.  .  do  you  know  he  .  ...  (Is  Josephine  there  ?)  Oh,  yes,  she
is  helping  you  with  your  work,  but  I  am  afraid  you  don't  always  know  about
it.  Do  you  see  her  standing  at  the  desk?  Yes,  when  you  are  at  work,
writing, — she  often  is  there  (Where  ?)  down  in  your  room  away  up  there  ia
the  evening  when  you  sit,  now  you  know  what  I  mean,  your  sister,  and  I  am
George  P.  writing  now  for  her.  I  shall  keep  her  thoughts  clear  quite,  she
is— ready  [?]  do  you  remember  H-E-N-R-Y  W-I-L-T-O-N  ?  .  .  .  O,
yes, — I  could  not  keep  him  away.  Excuse  me, — Hodgson,  is  that  you,  old
chap?  Good,  never  mind,  H.,  I  know  .  .  .  yes — thanks — they  told  me
so  ...  .  this  peritonitis  condition  and  fever  still  lingers, — too  bad.
He  Henry  W.  do  you  not  know  your  uncle  ?  (Sitter  :  "I  had  a  ste^j-uncle
so  named,  but  I  don't  care  about  him")  Well — he  was  only  a  step-uncle,  but

you  ought  to  know  him . . . Yes,  indeed.  Col.  is  with  him. Dr.  a

friend  of  his  in  England — Yes,  sir,  we  know — yes,  he  has,  yes,  yes, — yes  G
E  W  (RE  W  ?)  Yes.  Are  you  not  glad  ...  1  should  .  .  .  '.  he
had  caused  trouble  enough  ...  he  amends  [?]  Do  you  know  Robert
who  troubled  your  whole  life  ?  .  .  .  Never  will  any  more.  Yes,
indeed,  Robert  was  a  great  sorrow,  and  we  are  glad  to  reform  liim  here.
No — we  know  it  all.  Yes — R  .  .  .  we  .  .  .  forever  [Trouble  all
gone  now  ?]  always  and /ore cer, — no  more  I  assure  you.  Tliat  is  a  passing
thought.

[hSitter  asks  about  her  son.]  Son, — yes,  he  was  killed  very  suddenly,
poor  R. — and  too  late  to  settle  as  he  wished  he  would  have  done.  Have  you
the  book  or  letter — Roland  [here  gave  medium  necktie  worn  by  son  at  death,
wound  it  round  wrist]  Yes,  he's  trying  to  recall  circumstances . . . .  ,


512


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAUT


Yes,  j'ou  know  ....  but  will  mention  killed — we  knew  all,  and  will
help  you  as  your  dear  father  has  asked  us  to  do.  Oh  !  Oh  !  yes,  he  did,
exactly — jioor  boy,  but  is  clear,  light  and  liapi^y,  and  with  you  a  great  deal.
Don't  you  remember  when  those  initials  were  given  with  Lizzie's  ?  It  was.
he  who  tried  to  say,  be  comforted,  all  is  well.  [I  think  Dr.  II.  had  said
something  about  Mrs.  II. 's  lilllc  boy,  wliich  led  to  the  following]  who  is  the
little  boy  that — no— he  is  a  gentleman,  i.e.,  Eoland  is  a  gentleman,  not  a.
boy.  [Sitter:  "Had  he  lived,  he  would  now  be  26."]  Yes,  yes,  he  did
really  come,  and  is  with  you  now.  Mother.  Do  you  love  me  still  ?  (Sitter  :
"  Ah,  why  do  you  ask  ?  You  know  I  do.  I  think  of  you  without  ceasing.").
Yes,  I — but  I  like  to  hear  your  voice  ;  although  you  cannot  see  me  I  am  by
your  side,  and  that  picture  of  mine  will  always  linger  in  your  memory — yes,
only  one,  and  since  it  was  so  dear  to  you,  you  must  know  I  am  attracted  by
it,  yes — I  knew  it,  knew  the  letter — oh,  yes,  years  have  passed  slowly  since-
that  was  written,  but  yet  I  did  tliis  after  I  came  here,  yes  I  did.

Dear  mother,  ....  M^una — but  do  trust  me  nutv,  I  am  truly  Ji.y
mama. This  is  all  I  can  do,  let  me  live  with  you  for  ever  and  ever.

[Note  by  sitter  :  Shortly  after  my  son's  death,  I  received  tlirough  a,
strange  medium  a  letter,  said  to  have  been  given  in  trance  bj'  him,  signed
RoLand.  It  bore  internal  evidence  of  being  a  true  communication,  but
being  at  that  time  bitterly  sceptical,  I  refu.sed  to  accept  it.  This  seems  tO'
refer  to  that  fact.]

Call  for  me  and  I  will  come  to  you — or  I.  Ycfi, — but  don't  mind  them  now
— oh,  no  !  because  I  see  this  bright,  clear  light,  and  I  like  it,  dear.  "  Don't
worry  about  me,  mama,  I  am  all  right,  and  happy  as  possible."  [Note. —
These  words  were  iu  the  earlier  letter  received  and  repudiated.]  I  assure
you,  I  am,  and  old  Dr.  Robert  will  trouble  you  no  more — No.  D  (?)  (unde-
cipherable) You  knew  Dr. — Dr.  ■ . , . Yes, yes, oh  yes — yes.

I'll  try — M — Ma  N  is  it  ? N  yes,  yes,  yes,  may  I  see  you  again  once  more.
Mama  ?  only  once  is  all  I  ask,  only  once  is  all  I  ask. I  want  to J. .  Je-
J . . Joscphnie  I  wanted  to  say,  is  going  on  soon. What  troubles
her  is . . . A  u  n  (t  ?)she  is  here  in ... I  don't  know  as  I  can  tell

you  all  they  want  to  say,  but  cheer  uj),  Mama, — all  will  be  tcdi — R.  Drew

[Spol'eiL.]

[Dr.  Phinuit  here  resumed  control,  and  told  me,  in  answer  to.
Dr.  H.'s  question  whether  he  could  control  we  and  use  my  "light"
tliat  he  could  and  would.  He  added:]  "You  know  that  b.all  thing  you.
have.  Well,  I  can  make  you  see  me  in  that."  [I  liave  a  crystal  in  wliich  I
often  look.]

Dr.  Phinuit  told  me,  in  answer  to  questions,  that  the  spirit's  work  is
the  same  as  our  highest  work,  helping  others  upwards,  and  then  broke
off  to  say,  "  I  see  a  little  child  coming  into  the  bodj^  isn't  going  to  stay
in  tlie  body," — and  describes  its  coming  spirit  guardian.  Here  the  sitting
closed.

[Notes  by  sitter.]

Caroline  and  Joseph  ai'e  the  correct  names  of  my  fatlier  and  mother.
Henry  Wilton  is  the  correct  name  of  my  stepmother's  uncle.  Dr.  R.  E.
Wilton  is  the  correct  name  of  the  relation  to  whose  evil  intluence  I  owe  all


xxxiil  ] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  513


the  trouble  of  a  saddened  life.  Lizzie,  also  called  Liesje  (as  evidently
attempted  by  the  control),  is  a  sister  also  known  to  me  as  Anna.  Josephine
may  be  either  a  sister  or  a  niece  still  living,  both  being  ill.  Nan  is  a  sister,
living.  My  son's  name  was  Roland.  [I  think  that  Mrs.  R.  told  me  that  he
was  killed  in  connection  with  a  horse  accident. — R.  H.]  The  portrait  alluded
to  Ls  kept  in  a  little  case  with  the  necktie.  I  am  in  the  habit  of  carrying  it
about  with  me  and  never  show  any  other  picture,  without  producing  it  as  the
only  good  one.  The  letter  sent  by  him  to  me  shortly  after  he  passed  on,  I
have  alluded  to  in  the  report.

Taken  as  a  whole,  it  would  appear  that  the  effort  was  made  by  several  of
my  nearest  relatives  to  inform  me  of  the  death  of  the  bad  intiuenee  of  my
life,  and  to  let  ine  know  that  they  knew  a  story  I  had  never  told  to  any  onu
of  them. I  do  not  know  whether  R.  E.  W.  is  living  or  dead.

Mrs.  R.  writes  later  : —

Deap.  Dii.  Hodgson, — What  do  you  think  of  this  ?  I  have  just  received
rejily  from  England  as  to  Dr.  W.,  who  you  will  remember  George,  through
Mrs.  Piper,  said  was  "there."  Well,  he  is  alive,  well,  and  stronger  than
ever,  having  given  up  Cathedral  duty.  Singular,  isn't  it  ?  The  peritonitis
condition  must  have  existed  in  Phinuit's  imagiiaation.  One  cannot  explain
such  an  experience  as  this  in  any  satisfactory  way.  I  for  years  have  not
thought  consciously  of  Dr.  W.  nor  cared  whether  he  lived  or  died,  nor  have
I  borne  him  malice  for  the  trovhle,  as  "George"  emphasised  it,  that  his
influence  brought  into  my  young  life.  Why  then  so  strange  a  re-awakening  ?
Why  so  false  a  test  ? . .  ,

J.  E.  R.  R.

[I  do  not  know  what  my  interpretation  of  the  R.  E.  W.  incident  was  at
the  time  of  the  sitting.  It  seems  to  me  clear  now  from  the  record  that  tho"
"peritonitis  condition  and  fever"  referred  to  the  Hairy  W.  There  seems  to
be  some  confusion  about  the  Robert  E.  W.  Mrs.  R.  may  have  asked  a
question,  unrecorded,  about  his  death.

I  have  no  recollection  of  Mrs.  R.'s  question  referred  to  in  the  following
letter.  I  remember  that  I  was  anxious  to  bring  the  sitting  to  a  close,  that
Phinuit  was  answering  some  questions  of  the  sitter  regarding  the  "  work  of
sjDirits,"  that  I  ceased  to  take  notes,  and  prepared  to  assist  in  the  departure
of  Phinuit,  and  that  it  was  at  this  stage  that  Phinuit  made  the  prophecy
about  the  little  child.— R.  H.]

Carnegie  Studios,  March  23rd  [1895].  :
Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — WHien  I  had  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  perhaps
you  remember  that  Phinuit  broke  otf  suddenly  to  say  :  "There's  a  little  child
coming,  it  is  still  in  the  body,  not  born  yet."  I  asked  ii  it  was  Dr.  Moore's
baby  whose  arrival  I  was  then  anxiously  awaiting.  Phinuit  said  :  "  Yes,  but
he  is  not  coming  to  stay, — he  is  guarded  by  a  great  spirit."  The  baby  w;  s
born  a  couple  of  weeks  later,  and  died  suddenly  this  morning.

I  have  not  the  papers  here  but  I  think  my  recollection  is  correct.  I  have
remembered  it  several  times  since  the  child's  birth,  but  it  seemed  so  healthy
I  thought  it  was  all  a  mistake.  It  may  seem  worth  while  to  note  this  with-
out menti'jning  names.—  Cordially  yours,

J.  E.  R.  R.


514


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


April  dth,  1894.  ; ' -  .  ; :  ;

Sitters  :  Mrs.  L.  E.  H.  and  Mr.  C,  in  ISTew  York.  Appointment
made  by  R.  H.,  who  was  present  only  at  beginning  and  end  of  sitting.
Record  by  Mrs.  L.  E.  H.  and  Mr.  C.  Dv.  and  Mrs.  L.  E.  H.  Iiad  a
sitting  on  May  6th,  1892  (see  p.  462).  [I  think  that  the  sitting  was
held  at  the  house  of  Dr.  L.  E.  H.  Mr.  C.  was  unknown  to  me,  and  I
was  not  awai-e  of  his  real  name  until  towards  the  close  of  the  sitting.
I  knew  beforehand  only  that  the  sitter  was  to  be  a  friend  of  Mrs.
L.  E.  H.— R.  H.].

Mrs.  Piper  went  into  trance  rather  easily  at  10.30  a.m. Slie  took  Mrs.

Tx  's  hand  with  her  left  hand,  the  right  arm  being  rigid  behind  her,  and

began  : —

Ph.  :  The  last  time  I  saw  you  tliere  was  a  little  gentleman  wI'lIi  you  in
the  body. [Correct, — about  two  years  previous.]

Ph.  :  David  is  here  and  sends  love  to  his  fatlier  in  the  body.  [David  has
.sent  love  to  his  father  at  previous  sittings.  His  father  was  his  only  near
relative  living. David  not  living.]

Ph.  :  Oh  !  the  baby  has  had  the  measles  !  [One  cliild,  not  the  baby —
had  just  had  the  measles.]

[The  hand,  after  mani])ulation,  began  to  write,  after  letters  from  J.D.S.
had  been  bound  around  wrist.]

Yes,  thank  you  very  much,  I  have  it  all  right  now.  Oh,  where  am  I,
sir  ?  Will  you  stay  with  me  and  help  me  ?  I  wish  to  speak  to  my  friend  on
earth.

Oil,  how  are  you  ?  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you.  My  name  is  David  [jDossibly
Duane.]  You  dear  old  John.  God  bless  you  always.  (I  am  very  well.)
Good.  I  am  not  dead.  Do  you  remember  our  boys  [sitters  were  unable  to
read  last  word]  yes,  yes  that's  B-o-y-s.  Don't  you  remember  me  Duane  1  I
will,  D-W-A-I-N-E,  D-W— I  am  bothered.  This  is  it,  it  alone  D-U-A-N-E
[correct  name]  (Are  you  happy  ?)  (Are  you  happy  ?)  Yes,  John,  are  you
happy  ?  What  about  the  will  ?  [Mr.  C.  was  executor  and  has  had  trouble
regarding  will.]

Too  bad.  (It  will  be  all  right.)  I  am  glad.  O.K.  Thanks  to  your  dear,
clear  pen.

Not  yet.  Do  not  drive  me  off.  [This  not  in  answer  to  any  question  or
remark  on  part  of  the  sitters.]

I  will  wait  a  moment.  (Who  is  with  you  ?)  David,  also  David  Haynes.
[Deceased  friend  of  sitters  and  Duane.]

My  head  is  clear  now,  John.  J.C.  Dear  old  chap.  How  are  the
children  ?  [Reference  probably  made  about  some  nephews.]  How  are  the
boys "? [This  refers  to  a  set  of  friends.]

Do  tell  me  about  G.  [A  brother  of  one  of  tlie  sitters.]  (He  is  happy.)
Good. (Can  you  see  us?) Yes,  indeed,  I  can.

(Does  it  trouble  you  when  we  are  sad?)  No,  for  I  can  see  how  things
are  going  to  terminate.  (Are  they  going  well  witli  us  ?)  Indeed  they  will,
and  the  worst  is  over.  [Nothing  very  sad  or  trying  had  recently  happened
in  the  immediate  family.]


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  515


(Is  M.  going  to  be  well  ?)  Yes,  tell  her  not  to  worry  so,  because  all
things  are  getting  better  than  even  she  could  hope,  and  she  will  be  well.
There  are  two — yes,  there  are  two.  [Sitters  did  not  know  to  what  this
referred.]

(Mr.  C.  :  "Wliat  am  I  going  to  do  ?)  There,  print  right  away,  print  right
away,  John,  I  see  it. [Mr.  C.  is  an  editor  of  a  paj^er.]

[Some  prophecies  made  regarding  the  paper,  and  name  given  of  the  man
who  would — it  was  written — soon  buy  it.  Also  a  trip  to  Europe  jjredicted
for  Mr.  C]

(Do  you  see  aunt  A  ?) Yes,  indeed,  she  is  all  riglit,  but  she  is  not

well.  Did  you  know  that  she  is  a  medium,  and  a  good  one  ?  [The  per.son
spoken  of  has  all  her  life  had  premonitions,  against  which  she  has  struggled.]

(Will  she  give  any  manifestations  of  it  ?) Yes,  can't  help  it.

Oh  ! This  is  delightful. Where  is  M.,  your  sister  ?

(In  K.)  Well,  let  her  stay  there.  Good.

(Have,  you  no  message  for  E  ?) [E H  ,  full  name  written

out,  and  great  excitement  in  hand.  E.H.  was  a  dear  friend,  and  phj'sician
of  Duane.]  Well,  I  guess  so,  think  so.  Give  him  my  warmest  love.  Yes,
he  is  a  good  doctor.  .  .  .  Oh  !  tell  E.  he  was  very  kind  to  me.  Where
is  my  chair  ?  (Which  chair  ?)  My  reclining  chair.  [Sitters  did  not  remember
any  particular  chair.]

(Have  j'ou  anything  to  say  about  the  disposition  of  your  things  ?)  Not
that  I  care.  Let  them  do  as  they  wish.  I  don't  care  a  lig.  [Characteristic
phrase  of  Duane,  who  is  J.D.S.]

(Will  Mrs.  M.  go  to  Europe  ?) Very  soon,  in  June.

(No,  she  has  given  up  her  trip.) But  she  will  have  to  see  the  end  of  A.

(How  is  Aunt  A. II. H.  ?)  [This  person  was  supposed  to  be  seriously  iU
with  heart  disease.] O.K. First  rate,  she  is  going  to  be  belter.

(Do  you  wish  you  could  come  back  ?)  Oh,  I  doji't  want  any  part  on
earth,  not  in  the  least.  My  heart  is  strong  and  well,  so  are  my  kidneys.
[These  organs  had  not  been  diseased  in  J.D.S.]

(Are  you  occupied  ?) Yes,  all  the  time.

(Do  you  know  about  G.'s  happiness?)  Yes,  I  know,  and  he  is  going
away  soon,  and  I  am  glad.  .  .  .  He  will  travel  a  good  deal.  But  I  see
one  thing  wrong.

(What  is  it?) Would  you  have  me  tell  you  ?

(No,  do  not  tell  us.) I  don't  want  to. It  is  better  so.

[G.,  a  brother  of  one  sitter,  about  to  be  married,  and  travel  abroad.]

Where  is  Ballard  going?  [B.,  a  friend,  who  was  visiting  one  of  the
sitters  at  the  time,  and  was  changing  his  business.]  When  is  he  going  south
of  France  ?  [Not  sure  whether  this  last  referred  to  Ballard,  or  whether  it
was  in  answer  to  another  question.]

(Tell  us  about  yourself.)  Do  you  know,  when  I  left  the  body  that  P.M. —
riot  P.  but  A.,  I  intended  to  say  A.M.  [A.M.  correct.]  I  saw  a  light,  ancl
then  I  saw  father  (Saw  your  father  ?)  farther  into  this  world  than  I  at  first
thought  I  should.  Then  Alice  [his  wife,  who  had  died  five  years  before]
held  out  her  hands,  and  told  me  I  was  all  right.  Then  I  took  her  hand,
dear  Alice,  and  we  weirt  together.  Then  I  found  the  baby.  [Baby  had  died
before  it  was  born.] Can  you  hear? (Yes.) And the  baby  was  so


516


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAllT


delighted  to  see  me.  You  can  never  know  how  light  and  happy  we  are  here.
(Are  there  others  there  with  you?)  Yes.  Did  you  know  Nell?  (No.)
You  are  stupid,  stupid,  John.  Try  and  know  sis — sis.  Don't  you  know  ?
But  I  do.  (Was  that  your  mother's  name  ?)  Eliza  was  mother's  name.
[Correct.] I  saw  her.

(Are  you  witli  Christ  ?)  Jesus  —his  face  is  the  light,  and  whereas  his
face  is  not  discernible,  yet  wo  see  his  light,  and  know  that  it  is  he.  (Does
he  help  you,  and  do  you  progress  there  ?)  Always.  Yes,  and  grow  on  and
ever.  This  I  cannot  speak  clearly  to  you  on  earth.  [J.D.S.  was  a  man  of
strong  religious  feeling,  who  fully  exjjected  to  go  into  the  immediate  presence
of  Christ  after  death.]

Well,  J  [illegible]  well,  J  [probably  John],  how  are  things  progressing  at;
the  ofhce  ?  (Well.)

Good.  Where  is  Henry  ?  (What  Henry  ?)  Where  is  dear  Henry,  where
is  he  now  ?  Dr.,  Dr.,  (Oh  !  Dr.  Henry,  lie  is  at  C,  doing  nicely.)  Good,
good. [H.,  a  physician  who  had  attended  him  a  short  time  at  C]

That's  you,  John,  you  are  the  same  old  John,  and  all  is  well  with  you.
[Something  was  written  that  sitters  could  not  understand  or  read.]

Call  that  gentleman  back  (Sir.  Hodgson  ?)  I  don't  know  his  name.  (The
one  who  was  here  when  you  first  came  V)  Yes,  I  think  he  will  interpret  this
forme.  Oh!  do.  [Mr.  C.  went  to  call  Mr.  II.,  and  meanwhile  Mrs.  H.
addressed  the  hand.]

Your  dear  little  one's  well  1  (Yes,  we  miss  you  very  muL-h,  but  cannot
■vvi.sh  you  back.)  Do  you  ?  Well,  I  am  better  off.  [Mr.  II.  returned,  inter-
preted writing  and  said]  (I  will  know  you  another  time,  and  if  you  wish  to
send  a  message  to  your  friend,  I  can  take  it.)  Thank  you,  sir.  Do  you
know  J.C.  [full  name  written]  in  the  body  1  (I  have  met  him  to-day.)  He
has  contrdl  of  my  papers,  and  I  will  look  into  things,  let  you  know,  [to  J.]
It  will  be  best  for  me  to  go,  dear  old  fellow. Adieu,  from  D-U-,  etc.


Ph.  then  said  that  some  tie  prevented  him — J.D.S. — from  leaving,
which  I'ecallcd  to  sitters  the  letters  bound  around  the  wrist ;  after  their
removal,  the  hand  was  quiet.

Ph.  began  to  talk  to  Mrs.  H.,  but  soon  said,  "  V/ho  is  this  little  gentle-
man who  passed  out  of  the  body  with  consumption  ?  He  s^ieaks  so  hoarse  I
can  hardly  hear  him.  He  wants  to  say  something  to  his  friend."  Mr.  C.
then  came  forward,  and  Ph.  said  :  "This  gentleman  wants  to  tell  you  about
some  papers  in  that  little  piece  of  furniture  in  the  corner  (the  escritoire  ?)
Yes,  that's  it. There  are  some  papers  of  his  about  some  kind  he  owns."

Mr.  C.  ;  At  C.  ?

Ph.  :  No,  not  there.

]Mr.  C.  :  At  Round  Island  ?

Ph.  :  Yes,  that  is  it  ;  and  he  wants  to  tell  you  about  some  things  of  his.
It  is  hard  for  me  to  understand.  If  you  can  get  him  to  use  the  hand,  you
can  get  the  messages  more  direct.  They  often  get  confused,  coming  through
nie.

Then  followed  directions  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  a  cane  [which  was  not
found  where  it  was  said  to  be],  a  jug  with  a  handle,  and  other  things,  which
Ph.  said  were  safely  put  away,  and  that  no  one  had  taken.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  517


Mr.  C.  asked  about  some  cut-glass  dishes,  but  Ph.  said  he  heard  nothing
about  them.

Some  prophecies  were  made  about  A.P.H.,  and  it  was  stated  that  a  lady,.
E.  P.,  had  recently  changed  her  surroundings  entirely,  and  felt  that  it  was-
the  best  thing  she  had  ever  done.  [In  fact,  the  lady  had  really  gone  to-
Europe  for  the  first  time  in  her  life,  within  a  month  before  date  of  sitting.]

Mr.  Hodgson  then  sent  Ph.  away,  and  Mrs.  Piper  came  out  of  trance^
about  11.45.

New  York,  April  9th,  18'J4.


April  10,  1894.  On  this  date,  at  the  beginning  of  a  sitting  with  persons-
unknown  to  Mr.  C.  and^  Mrs.  H.,  the  hand  wrote  :  "  Duane  Scott,  where  is
John  ? John,  are  you  there,  dear? If  so,  speak."

Mr.  Hodgson  then  explained  that  others  were  sitting,  and  that  he  must,
go  away.  "Oh,  I'll  go.  Too  bad,  sir.  He  asked  mo  to  come  in  and  finish
my  statements.  Why  did  he  ask  this  of  me  ?  Why  did  ho  not  exjjlain  ?
You  see,  I  don't  know  this — too  bad.  I'll  go  then.  Good  evening,  sir..
Duane  (?)  S."

A2oril  2rjth,  IS 94.

Sitter:  James  Mitcliell  (Associate  A.B..S.P.R.),  at  house  of  Dr.
Anna  Lukens,  New  York. II.  H.  taking  notes.

It  was  on  the  morning  of  this  day  that  Mrs.  Piper  lost  conscious-
ness momentarily  while  sitting  witli  some  persons  v^'ho  were  trying
experiments  in  crystal  gazing  and  automatic  writing,  (fjce  p.  344.)'
It  was  probably  owing  to  this  that  there  was  a  lack  of  available  energy
for  the  trance  in  the  afternoon.  Several  different  writers  apparently-
seized  the  hand  in  quick  succession  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  and
I  inserted  interrogatively  what  I  conjectured  to  be  the  names  of  these
writers,  the  brief  messages  being  directly  pertinent.

[Sitting  arranged  for  soon  after  3.30  p.m.  IMrs.  Piper  tries  several  times,
vainly  to  go  into  trance.  Finally  goes  into  trance  about  6  p.m.  Apparently
vain  attempt  to  speak. Hand  writes  :  ]

[Ph.  writes  ?]  cot  das  [  =  too  sad]  on  [  =  no]  light  [g  and  h  nearly  written
mirror  writing.]

["  Pvoland  "  writes  ?]  Add  LO  in  place  of  AND  .  .  .  ROLLO  [See
p.  344.]

["  M.  M."  writes?]  tell  James  I'll  see  him  later.  [See  second  part  of
sitting.]

[Ph.  writes  ?]  oot  das  [  =  too  sad]

[M.  M.  writes  ?]  Ma  [y  or  g  ?]  M— yes.

[Then  followed  a  wild  rush  of  incoherent  writing  interspersed  with  words
that  suggest  portions  of  a  Latin  prayer,  purporting  to  come  from  a  Roman
Catholic  priest  who  said  that  he  had  taken  morphine,  and  had  "  just,  passed
out "  but  had  not  intentionally  committed  suicide.  Various  other  statements
were  made,  and  names  and  localities  were  mentioned. I  caused,  incjuiries


518


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


to  be  made  about  what  was  said  (and  also  about  come  further  statements
made  at  later  sittings),  but  could  find  no  trace  of  anything  correct.  After
this  came  the  following  writing  purporting  to  be  by  the  wife  of  the  sitter.]

Mit  Mitel — I  ai:L  she . . . where  is  my  son  ? ... do  give  me
strength . . . oh,  yes,  indeed,  I  do,  dear,  do  you  miss  me  ? . . .  I
want  to  see  niy  husband  and  you . . . H . . . not  yet  I  will
L  [?]  will  in  a  moment . . . will  you  help  me  to  print  I  a  L  [?]
yes . . . L.M. . . , I  do . . . E.M.  is  [undecipherable]  mine,
and  I  see  my  husband ... I  do ... I  will  don't  (1)  you  know  E.
. . . E.M. . . . E.M.  mother . . . and  I . . . we  [?]  arc
with [or lioth] here . . . Anne . , . Yess, also . . .  ddie
. ddie . . . ed . . . James . . . (2)  Ja . . .  speak,
speak, — Jane  Jane . . . no  me ... I  want  to  see  you  .
•did  you  not  ask  for  ine  ? . . . no,  but  if  she  was  here . . .  sister
sister ... I  want  to  say  the  children  are  all  right,  and  I  am
helping  you  continually  and  Vv-ill  do  so  forever  and  ever  eternally. I  wish  I
could  sjjeak  and  explain  my  (3)  thoughts  [undecipherable]  what  are  canars —
no  more  cancers — you  knov/,  dear — but  I  want  you — I  want  you — I  want  you.

Not  dead,  dear ... I  see  you ... I  see  you  at  all  times
j\Iargaret  dear . . . Margaret  (4)  dear ... I  am  M.  M.
•as  sure  as  you  live . . . and  not  dead,  but  oh,  so  strange  just  now
. yes,  I  wish  to  tell  you  all ... I  have  been  patience,  have  I  not
. I  have  don't  you  think  so  1 Why  did  you  come  to  me  before,  dear
one . . . Will . . . W . . . seen  you,  dear, — do,  oh,  help  (5)
jne . . . seen  you,  do  you  mean  1 I  did  once  through  a  gentleman, ' — I
•don't  know,  dear. I  am  with  you. Don't  go  away. Take  good  care  and
-don't  worry. I  said  this . . . similar . . . yes . . . yes . .  .
no,  sir ... I  was  in  a  strange  liglit,  something  like  this. Where  is
Harry . . . Oh,  Hariy . . . mine  [?] What  dear,  am  I  dreaming  ?
. . . H . . . no,  he  is  speaking  to  me . . . yes  .

(6)  Will  .  .  .  Will  .  .  .  Willie  come  .  .  .  Sargent-he  ia
liere  and  his  mother,  Mrs.  S.  Mrs.  S.  .  .  .  He  knows  our  ddie.  But
where  is  ddie . . . ddie . . , he  is  not  (7,  8)  well . . ,  El

. . she  will — yes,  dear,  E . . . I  wish  I  could  print  it,  sir,  but  it

(Do  you  mean  Edith  ?)

Yes,  our  ddith  .  .  .  dith  .  .  .  di — T  cannot  make  it,  dear,  but
jou  know  what  I  wish  to  say  ;  she  was  very  ill  but  will  get  well  and  I  was
very  anxious  to  let  you  know  this  because  it  is  one  of  the  many  things  I  now
see  and  know  all  about,  dear.  All  will  be  right,  and  she  will  get  strong  and
the  change  will  do  her  good . . . yes,  niy  dear,  I  wish  you  would.

.  .  .  I  told  one  .  .  .  no  on  .  .  .  S —  I  did,  dear  Mary  [or
Moy  ?]  S.,  don't  dear,  because  I  am  trying  to  tell  hiiu  .  .  .  Mary  [or
Moy  ?]  S.  and  Mrs.  S.  .  .  .  C.  .  .  .  have  I  seen  him  .  .  .  yes,
dear.  Will  is  his  and  he  or  .  .  .  no,  dear  ...  I  have  not  seen  him,
have  I,  dear  ...  he  is  not  with  me  now  .  .  .  where  is  Al.  .  .  .
A  L,  where  is  Allien . . . Allen  ? , . . yes . . . there  a,re  a


^[Re  message  throuffb  another  medium.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  519-


number  of  peoj^le  who  are  confusing  me  a  little  ...  it  is  so  hard.  t'>
tallf,  dear  .  .  .  why  .  .  ,  yes,  our  C.  .  .  .  wliat  is  the  matter
I  have  no  cancers  more  .  .  .  don't  think  about  me  as  dead,
will  F  you  .  .  .  there  is  so  much  I  want  to  say  and  I  can't  talk  to  you,,
dear  .  .  .  will  you  .  .  .  will  you,  dear,  will  you  ...  I  am
your  wife,  M.M.  ,  .  .  and  I  am  in  heaven,  dear,  and  now  that  I  can-,
speak  I  will  wait ... I  will,  will  you,  will  you  wait  for  me  1

Notes  on  Sitting  of  April  2oth.

The  sitter,  J.M.,  has  a  wife  and  two  sons,  James  and  George,  in  Sijirifc-
life.  Of  course,  nothing  of  this  was  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  or  to  Mr.  Hodgson,,
and  no  help  was  given  at  the  time  to  Phinuit  or  the  intelligence  controlling
the  automatic  writing.

(1)  "E.M."  is  a  daughter  living,  who  has  been  very  ill  and  is  now  about,
recovered.

(2)  I  think  this  "Jane"  is  an  attempt  to  write  "Jamie,"  the  favourite^
name  of  her  husband.

(3)  Mrs.  M.  died  of  cancer.

(4)  Mrs.  M.'s  name  was  Manjaret.

(5)  J.  M.  a.sked  if  she  has  ever  communicated  with  him  before.

(6)  These  names  are  not  known.

(7)  See  note  (1).

(8)  Mr.  Hodgson  asked  that  this  name  be  printed.

New  York,  April  2Gth,  1894.
De.  E.  Hodgson, — Dexk  Sir, — It  may  interest  you  to  know  that  my
wife  died  of  cancer, which  explains  the  allusion  to  tliat  disease  in  the
automatic  writing  of  yesterday. . . . I  can't  exjjiain  the  "  Willie  and
Mrs.  Sargent  "  at  all.

*  *  *  -s:-  -i:-  *

Jas.  Mitchell.

A2n-n  30tJi,  1894.

Sitter:  Mr.  James  iMitchell,  at  house  of  Dr.  Anna  Lukeiis  in  New
York.  This  was  Mr.  Mitchell's  second  sitting.  (First  sitting  April
2utli,  1894. See  p.  517.) R.  H.  taking  notes.

[Phinuit.]  You're  not  the  strongest  man  in  tlie  country.  Blood  very
poor,  vitality  weak,  not  very  much  of  it,  nerves  not  very  strong.  You'll.
have  to  take  care  of  yourself,  if  you  v^ant  to  stay  long  in  the  body.  Take
exercise  and  open  air,  etc.  I  don't  tell  you  this  for  idle  talk,  there's  a  great
deal  of  meaning  in  what  I  say.

Do  you  take  milk  1  (Yes,  some.)  Don't  take  it,  it  sours  in  the  stomach.
Not  very  good  for  you.  Take  a  glass  of  lemonade,  hot  or  cold,  better  than
milk.

(Wine?)  I  shouldn't  advise  you  to  take  much  wine — not  very  good  for
you. Take  acid  wine  instead  of  sweet. There's  a  little  catarrh  in  your


520


Tdcliard  Hodgson.


[part


stomach,  and  its  nil  through  your  system.  Right  down  through  the  mem-
brane, and  right  through  stomach  and  bowels. You  don't  want  to  take  milk.

You  sometimes  have  bad  taste  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning.  E,inse  your
anouth  out  with  warm  water,  and  take  glass  of  hot  water.

Take  a  tepid  sponge  bath. Rub  yourself — friction  with  coarse  towel.

Don't  think  too  much. You  worry,  too.

(1)  There's  a  voice  I  hear  as  plainly  as  you  would  a  bell  ring,  and  she
says:  "  That's  right,  doctor,  tell  him  not  to  worry,  because  he  always  did
so — my  dear  hu;band — I  want  him  to  enjoy  his  remaining  days  in  the  body.
Tell  him  T'm  Margaret  Mitchell  and  I  will  be  with  him  to  the  ends  of
■eternity,  spiritually."

******

Do  you  know  a  gentleman  named  Adams  1  (In  the  spirit  ?)  Yes,  he  used
to  know  you  years  ago  and  your  father  before  you.

(2)  Do  you  remember  a  funny  little  house  with  low-pitched  roof,  door  in
■centre,  room  on  each  side,  and  unfinished  room  at  the  end  ?  It  had  a  long
walk — a  little  jjointed  jDath  all  about  it.  (Beds  ?  flower-beds  ?)  a  blossoming
■shrub  in  the  corner.  A  gateway  entrance  on  the  side.  This  lady's  telling
ine  all  about  this.

The  lady's  going  to  borrow  my  hand.
Thei'e's  a  George  comes  here  too.
[Hand  writes.]
I  am  I\Iargaret  M.

[To  R.  H.  apparently]  You  are  not  my  husband,  sir.

Oh,  you  are  here,  aren't  you,  dear  ?  I  see  you  now.  I  want  to  tell  you
liow  and  where  I  am.  How  is  Edith  getting  on  1  She  will  be  well  and
strong  yet,  deai',  but  I  am  most  anxious  to  see  and  hear  about  you,  dear.
Are  you  [Requested  to  write  again  the  last  words,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of
■deciphering.]

No,  I  can't — it  is  too  much  work  and  too  weakening,  and  I  cannot  repeat
— you  must  help  me  and  I  will  prove  myself  to  you.  I  cannot  collect  my
thoughts  to  repeat  sentences  to  you.  My  darling  husband,  I  am  not  away
from  you,  but  right  by  your  side.  Welcome  me  as  you  would  if  I  were  with
you  in  the  flesh  and  blood  body. [Sitter  asks  for  test.]

(3)  Yes,  do  you  remember  the  little  house  where  we  first  lived — but  you
must  read  for  me — and  the  little  stoop  where  I  used  to  sit  .  .  .  (yes).  Who
<;ould  know  this  but  your  loving  Marg  .  .  .  Margie  .  .  .  Maggie,  I
mean, — yes . . yes,  dear,  yes . .  Maggie

(4)  [Sitter  asks  for  pet  name.]  B  i  .  .  .  B  M  You  called  me  Maggie
first ... I  shall  recall  the  rest  and  give  to  you . . . help  me . .  .

(5)  Where  is  [undecipherable]  D  e  11  i  e  .  .  .  not  quite,  dear  .  .  .
but  El  .  .  .  (6)  can't  do  it  .  .  .  the  baby  .  .  .  Baby  with  me
.  .  .  Yes,  I  tried  to  say  this  but  you  see  I  cannot  tell  myself  just  how  you
hear  me,  and  it  bothers  me  a  little  .  .  .  how  do  you  hear  me  speak,
dear,  when  we  speak  by  thought  only  ?  but  your  thoughts  do  not  reach  me  at
all  when  I  am  speaking  to  you,  but  I  hear  a  strange  sound  and  have  to  half
guess  .  .  .  How  strange  you  look,  my  dear,  yet  I  do  know  you,  and
here  ...


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  521


(Don'b  you  see  me  at  otlier  times  ?)

Oh,  yes,  dccarest,  and  much  better  than  I  do  wlien  I  t"y  to  speak,  dear,
consequently  have  to  go  by  what  I  hear  from . . . I'll  try,  dear.
(Did  you  ever  speak  to  me  before  1)
Yes,  once,  I . .  .
(How  ?)

Writing  ? . . . this  very  way  by  writing —
(R.H.  :  You  mean  through  this  medium?)  Yes.
(But  through  any  other  person  1)

Yes,  once  I  followed  a  light,  but  it  was  a  long  way  oflF,  dear.
(Do  you  remember  what  you  said  ?)

Not  very  well.  ...  I  am  with  you, — I  think  it  was  tliis,  namelj',  if
I  remember  rightly, — do  not.

[R.  H.  refers  to  change  of  pencil,  which  is  broken.]  Pencil,  what  do  yoa
mean  ?  I  did  not  say  that.

[R.  H.  explains,  and  says,  not  to  bother  about  pencil,  etc.]

You  must  have  forgotten,  dear. . . . Do  not  worry  about  me  .
for  me  . . . because  I  am  still  with  you. . . . Do  you  remember  it  ?

(?)

Yes,  in  a  moment — I  will  tell  j'ou,  dear  .  .  .  but  let  me  recall  one
thing  more  about  the  little  house.  Do  you  recall  how  I  liked  it  ?  We  were
Tery  ha^Dpy  there.  Dearest,  I  am  so  happy  to  see  you  in  this  peculiar  way.
.  .  .  (7)  George,  dear,  is  all  right,  and  will  get  settled  soon.  ...  he
•will  tell  you  ...  he  will  soon  get  clear  as  I  am, — don't  be  anxious
I  see  something  belonging  to  him — give  it  me,  dear.

(8)  [Sitter  produces  gold  ^vatch,  hand  touches  it.]

(Do  you  remenrber  this  1)

Yes,  indeed,  dear  papa . . . father  .

My  dear — what  about  Peggy— Polly  .  .  .  P-O-L  ...  I  can't
■write — nevermind,  dear,  here  is  George — hero— all  right,  now.

Yes,  dear  father,  if  you  ever  had  a  boy,  I  am  he,  George  Mitchell  [?]
[Hand  much  excited,  and  R.  H.  remonstrates,  and  holds  it,  enjoining  it  to  be
careful  about  the  medium's  sore  finger,  and  saying  that  if  he  can't  be  quieter,
he  can't  stay.]

All  right,  I  will  go  if  you  wish  me  to,  sir, — oh,  do  be  kind  to  me,  sir  1
[R.H.  says  of  course  he  can  stay,  etc.]

Where  is  my  dear  father .... have  him  see  me  as  I  am  .
. . I  am  with  you,  dear  father,  and  v^ill  you  ever  forget  the  day  I  came
liere — night  it  was — we  have  none  here  now — we  have  no  night  here,  dear
father — I  with  mother  now . . . do  you  remember  Grandma  ?

(Oh  yes.)

She  is  with  us  too  .  .  .  the  little  one  ...  he  is  not  so  little
now  .  .  do  you  hear  me  .  .  .  mother  [?]  baby  happy  [?]  b-a-y
Qjerhaps  intended  for  baby  ?]  .  .  .  yes,  not  key  .  .  brother  J-a-m  e-s
. . . They  are  all  with  us . . we  are  .

Your  name  is  James,  too,  and  my  little  brother  ...  or  not  so  little,
after  all  .  .  .  is  named  for  you,  dear  father.  Kow  how  can  I  prova
nioi'e  to  you,  dear  ?

[Sitter  asks  about  some  deceased  friend,  once  known  to  George.]


522


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Di)  I  know  liim  ?  mine.

(You  did  know  him, — your  mother  knew  him  better.  Tell  Ids  name  if
you  cm. Have  you  seen  him  ? )

Did  I  ? I'll  find  him  for  you  if  he  is  here  near  us,  father  dear.
[Hand  feels  for  something,  watch  apparently.]  .  . ■  '

I  remember,  Ma  told  me  you  had  it.

[Watch  produced  again. Hand  indicates  wants  it  opened.]

Yes, [Fingers  feel  inside  of  case,  as  though  looking  for  inscription.]

(10)  I  put  it  there. — Oh  I  remember  now — it  was  the  silver  one  I  had  in
yes,  you  remember  I  lost  the  chain  I  had  for  the  other,
yes,  I  did, — and  (11)  Davidson — yes — found  it  had  [?]  in  the  water  after  [?]
I  came  here. I  put  this  in  my  watch,  G.  A.  M.

(A  isn't  right. )

.Not  A.— not  A. . . G.  I.  M.

(No.)^

I  can't  write  it.
(Who  is  Davidson  ? )

My  friend,  don't  you  remember?  .  .  all  right,  yes,  dear  mother,  I
■will.  Mother  had  a  cancer  [?]  did  she  not.  .  .  .  did  you  know  .  .
too  bad,  but  it  is  all  right  now  and . . . not  in  the  least.

S  [Q  or  S]  is  the  middle.

(12)  (S,  that's  right. S  is  the  midtlle  letter.) Yes— yes-
Read. . . . they  are  in  my  old  silver  watch  G.  S.  M. Oh,  it  will

help  me  so. —

(13)  What  became  of  Rif.  .  .  .  Rich.  .  .  R's?.  .  .  .  you
know  who  I  mean.  .  .  .  Robert.  .  .  .  S  [or  O  ?]  ...  I  wish
I  could  remember  his  name.  .  .  .  what— am  I.  .  .  .  (14)  Mylungs
are  well — yes,  my  lungs  are  strong  and  well.

(Do  you  remember  where  yovi  went  for  your  health  ?)

(15)  Yes,  South. . . . good,  but  not  well. . ,  ,
(What  friend  of  ours  did  you  see  there  'I)

f  [J  ?]  a.  .  .  .  do  you.  .  .  .  W-i-l-l-i.  .  .  .  W-a-l-t.  .  .  .
not.  .  .  .  W-O-D.  ...  I  can't  do,  father,  yet  I  know  perfectly
well.  ...  he  is  here.  .  .  .  W.  ...  I  wish  I  could  tell  you
more  about  him. W-i-l-l-i-o-n  ? Looks  like  Wilson  perhaps.

(That's  right,  Wilson.)

(16)  W-i-l-S-o-N.  .  .  .  all  right  I  remember,  but  it  is  hard  to  put  it,
as  Pelham  asks  me — W-I-L-S-O-X.  [G.  P.  aj^parently  asking  liim  to  write
the  name  in  capital  letters. — R.H.]

(I  didn't  give  him  any  hints  to  it.)

Father,  why  do  you  say  hints  ? . . . I  don't  need  hints. I  am  here^
father,  l>ut  imperfect  as  I  am,  I  am  your  son  George  S.  Mitchell  [?]
Do  you  think  consumption  a  bad  thing  ?
(Yes,  I  do,  don't  you  ?)

No,  not  so  bad  after  all, — Goodbye,  father,  dear,  I'll  see  you  clearer
Boon. ...  ,  .  .

G.S.M.  in  my  watch.


XXXIII.] Observcdions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  5.23


Father,  dear,  T  am  with  you.  .  .  .  James.  .  .  .  Jamie.  .  .  .
James . , . think  about  me  often.

■  [Sitter  places  note-book  on  hand  and  "  What  is  this  ?  "] -  .

(17)  My  accounts  and  description  of  my  trip  to.  .  .  .  Geloo  ?
[undecipherable.] V  E. . . . No,  I  will,  [undeciplierable.]

■  Oh,  I  remember ... at  the  office . . .  office.
I  go  there  ?  often  ?

Svvitz-land  ?  in — too  bad, — yes,  dear  mother. . . . love  all  to  Edith,

dear  little  sister. ..  ..  .  •

(Anybody  else  you  want  to  send  your  love  to  ?)

Yes  [undecipherable] . . .J  [?]  tell  [?  undeciplierable]  J-o-s-e.  .  .  »

(18)  I  am  too  weak . . I'll  go  with  you  in  heaven  [?]


:  '  Notes  on  Sitting  of  30/ /(.  /.  •

(1)  This  description  of  J.M.'s  physical  condition  is  accurate.  Although
well  he  is  not  strong,  has  had  catarrhal  trouble  for  years  (although  Mr.
Hodgson  said,  on  being  asked,  that  he  would  not  have  susjiected  it).  Has
been  too  much  given  to  "  worry  "  during  life.

(2)  This  description  of  our  first  home  is  not  quite  accurate,  especially  as.
regards  the  garden  in  front,  it  answers  to  the  garden  in  the  rear  of  the  house.

(3)  Correct.  , •  '

(4)  Quite  true.

(5)  This  is  evidently  an  attempt  to  write  "  Dollie,"  the  name  asked  f<.)r.

(6)  "  The  baby  "  is  probably  a  dear  little  grandchild  who  died  a  year  ago,
— always  spoken  of  iii  our  family  as  "  the  baby."

(7)  George  is  my  youngest  son,  dead  these  eleven  years. ' ■  ■ "  ■

(8)  This  watch  belonged  to  George.

(9)  "  Jamie  "  is  the  other  (dead)  son.  . .  ,

(10)  This  was  in  a  silver  watch,  the  first  one  owned  by  him. It  cannoli
now  be  found.

(11)  "Davidson"  is  not  known.

(12)  S  is  the  correct  middle  letter  of  name.

(13)  Rich  was  the  name  of  a  gentleman  well  known  in  our  family.

(14)  George  died  of  consumption.

(15)  Correct.  . '  •  .  '.

(16)  Wilson  is  the  right  name,  but  he  is  still  alive.

(17)  The  book  given  him  was  one  of  several  containing  a  journal  of  a
voyage  to  China  via  Australia.

(18)  Perhaps  an  attempt  to  write  Jessie,  the  name  of  another  sister.  \

New  York,  May  9th,  '94. ,  '
Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — ... I  am  very  sorry  to  find  that  my  son's
silver  watch  was  given  to  a  poor  relation  some  years  ago,  and  was  afterwards  -
stolen — so  that  all  trace  of  it  of  course  has  disappeared. ...  -

.  ■. .  . .  .  James  Mitchell.  ■  •  ,

2  m


524)  Bichard  HoJrjson.  [part

2[ay  lUh,  189  i.

Sitters  :  Professor  and  Mrs.  N.  S.  Slialer,  at  the  house  of  Professor
"W.  James.  The  sitting  was  arranged  fur  by  Professor  James,  who  was
4ilso  present  taking  notes.  I  quote  the  account  of  the  sitting  given  by-
Professor  Shaler  (of  Harvard, — the  well-known  geologist),  in  a  letter  to
Professor  James.

Cambridge,  June  6lh,  [1894.]
My  Dear  James, — At  the  sitting  with  I>Irs.  Piper  on  I\Iay  2ofch,  I  made
the  following  notes  : —

As  you  remember,  I  came  to  the  meofcing  with  my  wife  ;  when  Mrs.
Piper  entered  the  trance  state,  Mrs.  Shaler  took  her  hand.  After  a  few
irrelevant  words,  my  wife  handed  Mrs.  PijDer  an  engraved  seal,  which  she
knew,  though  I  did  not,  had  belonged  to  her  brother,  a  gentleman  from
Richmond,  Virginia,  who  died  about  a  year  ago.  At  once  Mrs.  Pij^er  began
to  make  statements  clearly  relating  to  the  deceased,  and  in  the  course  of  the
following  hour  she  showed  a  somewhat  intimate  acquaintance  with  his.
affairs,  those  of  his  immediate  family,  and  those  of  the  family  in  Hartford,
■Conn.,  with  which  the  Richmond  family  had  had  close  social  relations.  The
.statements  made  by  Mrs.  Piper,  in  my  opinion,  entirely  exclude  tlio
hypothesis  that  they  wore  the  results  of  conjectures,  directed  by  the  answers
made  by  my  wife.  I  took  no  part  in  the  questioning,  but  observed  very
closely  all  that  was  done.

On  the  supposition  that  the  medium  had  made  very  careful  preparation
for  her  sittings  in  Cambridge,  it  would  have  been  possible  fur  her  to  have
gathered  all  the  information  which  she  rendered  by  means  of  agents  in  the
two  cities,  though  I  must  confess  that  it  would  have  been  rather  difficult  to
have  done  the  work.

The  only  distinctly  suspicious  features  were  that  certain  familiar
baptismal  names  were  properly  given,  while  those  of  an  unusual  sort  could
not  be  extracted,  and  also  that  one  or  two  names  were  given  correctly  as
regards  the  ceremony  of  baptism  or  the  directory,  but  utterly  wrong  from
the  point  of  view  of  family  usage.  Thus  the  name  of  a  sister-in-law  of  mine,
a  sister  of  my  wife's,  was  given  as  Jane,  which  is  true  by  the  record,  but  in
forty  years  experience  of  an  intimate  sort  I  never  knew  her  to  be  called
Jane,  in  fact  I  did  not  at  first  recognise  who  was  meant.

While  I  am  disposed  to  hold  to  the  hypothesis  that  the  performance  is  one
that  is  founded  on  some  kind  of  deceit,  I  must  confess  that  close  observation
of  the  medium  made  on  me  the  impression  that  she  is  honest.  Seeing  her
under  any  other  conditions,  I  should  not  hesitate  to  trust  my  instinctive
sense  as  to  the  truthfulness  of  the  woman.

I  venture  also  to  note,  though  with  some  hesitancy,  the  fact  that  the
ghost  of  the  ancient  Frenchman  who  never  existed,  but  who  purports  to
control  Mrs.  Piper,  though  he  speaks  with  a  first-rate  stage  French  accent,
does  not,  so  far  as  I  can  find,  make  the  characteristic  blunders  in  the  order
of  his  English  words  which  we  find  in  actual  life.  Whatever  the  medium  is,
I  am  convinced  that  this  "influence"  is  a  preposterous  scoundrel.

I  think  I  did  not  put  strongly  enough  the  pecuUar  kind  of  knowledge
which  the  medium  seems  to  have  concerning  my  wife's  l;rother's  affairs.


xxxiil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  525


Certain  of  tlie  facts,  as  for  instance,  those  relating  to  the  failure  to  find  his
■will  after  his  sudden  death,  ^^'ere  very  neatly  and  dramatically  rendered.
They  had  the  real  life  quality.  So,  too,  the  name  of  a  man  who  was  to  have
married  my  wife's  brother's  daughter,  but  who  died  a  month  before  the  time
fixed  for  the  wedding,  was  correctly  given,  both  as  regards  surname  and
Christian  name,  though  the  Christian  name  was  not  remembered  by  my  wife
or  me.

I  cannot  determine  how  probable  it  is  that  the  medium,  knowing  she  was
to  have  a  sitting  with  you  in  Cambridge,  or  rather  a  number  of  them,  took
pains  to  prepare  for  the  tests  by  carefully  working  up  the  family  history  of
iseveral  of  your  friends.  If  she  had  done  this  for  thirty  or  so  persons,  I  think
she  could,  though  with  some  difficulty,  have  gained  just  the  kind  of
^knowledge  which  she  rendered.  She  would  probably  have  forgotten  that  my
wife's  brother's  given  name  was  Legh,  and  that  of  his  mother  Gabriella,
•while  she  remembered  that  of  Mary  and  Charles,  and  also  that  of  a  son  in
■Cambridge,  who  is  called  Waller.  So,  too,  the  fact  that  all  trouble  on
f'-ccount  of  the  missing  will  was  within  a  fortnight  after  the  death  of  Mr.
Page  cleared  away  by  the  action  of  the  children  was  unknown.  The  deceased
is  represented  as  still  troubled,  though  he  purported  to  see  just  what  was
going  on  in  his  family.

I  have  given  you  a  mixture  of  observations  and  criticisms  ;  let  me  say
that  I  have  no  firm  mind  about  the  matter.  lam  curiously  and  yet  absolutely
uninterested  in  it  for  the  reason  that  I  don't  see  how  I  can  exclude  the
liypothesis  of  fraud,  and  until  that  can  be  excluded,  no  advance  can  be  made.

When  I  took  the  medium's  hand,  L  had  my  usual  experience  with  them,
a  few  preposterous  compliments  concerning  the  clearness  of  my  under-
standing, and  nothing  more. — Faithfully  yours,

N.  S.  SH.ilEE.

May  -26 th  and  ^dlh,  1894.

Sitter :  Professor  C.  E.  Norton,  of  Harvard,  at  the  house  of
Professor  W.  James.  Appointment  made  by  Professor  James,  who
•was  also  present  most  of  the  time.  R.  H.  also  present.  The  sitting
■on  May  29th  was  very  short ;  there  was  apparently  very  little
"  energy,"  not  enough  for  the  use  of  tlie  voice,  and  the  writing  was
very  incoherent.  On  May  26th  also  the  writing  was  more  incoherent
ithan  usual.  G.  P.  wrote  most  of  the  time  and  referred  to  Professor
Norton  by  name.  The  most  important  incident  had  reference  to  an
inquiry  made  by  Professor  Norton  which  (as  was  quite  obvious  to  me
4xt  the  time  and  must  have  been  quite  obvious  to  G.  P.  living  and  in
full  consciousness)  concerned  a  prize  essay  on  Jane  Austen,  which
G.  P.  had  gained  at  Harrard.  Put  G.  P.  communicating  did  not
give  the  name  of  Jane  Austen.  Professor  Norton  has  made  the
following  statement : —

Ashfield,  Mass.,  September  Isf,  1896.
Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — Dr.  James  asks  me  to  write  to  you  twenty  lines
giving  my  impression  of  the  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  wliich  I  had  at

9  9.


526


RicJtard  Hodgson.


[part


liis  liouse  gome  two  years  ago.  You  may  recall  tliat  tlio  sittings  were  not
regarded  as  altogetber  satisfactory.  I  made  no  memoranda  of  them  at  the
time,  and,  after  such  an  interval,  any  account  which  I  might  give  of  the
sittings  would  be  open  to  question.

I  can  only  give  you  a  statement  of  certain  general  conclusions  to  which  I
came  at  the  time.

First,  that  there  was  no  question  as  to  Mrs.  Piper's  good  faitli,  or  as  to
her  delusion  in  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  influences  to  which  she  was.
subject  wlien  in  the  trance  state.

Her  conditions  seemed  to  me  analogous  to  those  of  an  ill  person  dreaming
a  suggested  dream,  in  which  trains  of  dream  to  which  the  dreamer  has  been
accustomed  are  modified  by  the  special  conditions  of  the  moment.

There  was  no  indubitable  evidence  of  mind-reading,  but  there  were  some
evidences  of  imperfect  thought-transference.

Tiiere  was  no  evidence  of  acquaintance  with  any  facts  known  only  to
myself,  or  which  were  remote  and  obscure.

But  tliere  was  enough  that  indicated  a  pjeculiar  influence  upon  the  medium
to  interest  me  greatly  in  tlie  sittings,  and  I  should  not  have  regretted  a
further  opportunity  of  trial  of  Mrs.  Piper's,  I  will  not  say  powers,  but
conditions  when  in  a  trance.

As  to  the  origin  of  many  of  the  phantasmagorias  of  hor  trance  dreams,  I
formed  a  very  distinct  opinion,  but  many  experiments  would  be  required  to
test  its  correctness,  and  these  I  shall  never  make.

I  am  not  sure  that  what  I  have  written  is  to  your  purpose.  If  not,  and
you  will  be  so  good  as  to  put  to  me  the  questions  which  you  wish  to  have
answered,  I  shall  be  glad  to  answer  them  to  the  best  of  my  power. — I  am,,
very  truly  yours,

C. E.  NoRTOiV.

June  1st,  1894.

Sitter:  Professor  J.  Trowbridge,  of  Harvard,  at  house  of  Professor
W.  James.  Appointment  made  by  Professor  James.  R.  H.  present.
Professor  James  taking  notes.  Professor  Trowbridge  made  the
following  statement  in  a  letter  to  Professor  James  : —

Cambridge,  June  7th,  1894.

Deak  J  ABIES, — I  took  to  the  sitting  an  Indian  handkerchief,  brought
from  India  by  Captain  Thayer,  a  brother  of  Mrs.  Trowbridge,  who  died
about  a  month  ago.  He  brought  it  from  India  in  1859.  It  has  never  been
out  of  Mrs.  Trowbridge's  hands,  and  has  been  worn  by  her  constantly.

I  can  only  give  you  my  general  impressions,  which,  of  course,  are  those-
of  an  untrained  observer  in  the  region  in  question.

I  was  struck  by  a  sort  of  insane  cunning  in  the  groping  of  the  woman-
after  something  intangible.

It  did  not  seem  to  me  that  she  simulated  a  trance  state.  She  was.
apparently,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  in  some  abnormal  condition.

I  could  not  discover  tliat  slio  hit  upon  anything  that  was  connected  with
the  handkerchief. • .  .

John  Trowbridge.


xxxiil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  527


June  \2th,  1891.

Sitter  :  Dr.  F.  H.  K.,  Illinois.  Alone.  Appointment  made  by  R.  H.
Dr.  K.  afterwards  became  an  Associate  A.B.S.P.R.,  but  was  a  stranger
to  me  before  the  sitting.  He  called  at  my  office  as  a  stranger,  and  as
I  happened  to  have  a  "sitting"  day  vacant  just  afterwards  I  told  him
that  he  might  take  the  appointment. His  account  follows  : —

The  Quincy  House,  Boston,  [.June  13th,  1894.]

On  Tuesday,  June  12fch,  '9-1-,  through  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  R.  Hodgson,  I
enjoyed  the  opportunity  of  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  communications
yvere  almost  entirely  in  writing,  and  at  times  were  somewhat  illegible,  but
during  the  better  part  of  tlie  interviev.-  were  quite  satisfactory.

During  the  first  third  part  of  the  sitting,  several  names  came,  all  of  which
were  those  of  strangers  to  me.  The  communications  to  which  these  names
were  signed  were  irrelevant  and  upon  matters  unknown  to  the  writer.  After
these  names  appeared  the  personality  of  the  control  seemed  to  change,  and
from  that  time  through  the  remainder  of  the  sitting  the  control  purported  to
be  my  late  wife,  and  the  name  by  which  I  knew  her  was  frequently  written.
The  messages  were  in  the  main  very  coherent,  and  corroborated  some
messages  I  had  received  prior  to  this  in  another  city.  Reference  was  made
du"ectly  to  these  messages  by  the  medium.  ]\Iost  of  the  messages  were  of  a
private  and  personal  character,  but  still  a  few  hmts  may  be  worthy  of  record.
1  was  asked  as  to  the  disposition  of  my  wife's  watch,  and  upon  my  veply  that
I  intended  giving  it  to  her  namesake,  the  name  of  the  little  namesake  was
at  once  written  and  a  minute  later  the  name  of  the  child's  raother.  Upon
enquiry  as  to  the  relationship  between  these  two  names,  it  was  correctly
.stated  that  the  little  girl  was  the  daughter  of  the  C,  whose  name  had  been
given.  Reference  was  made  as  to  the  location  and  character  of  the  disease
from  which  my  wife  died  in  correct  terms.  Many  statements  were  made  as
to  private  matters,  which  can  only  be  verified  or  disproved  at  a  later  date.
I  had  been  introduced  to  the  medium  under  an  assumed  name  and  my  true
name  had  not  been  mentioned.  At  the  close  of  the  interview  I  asked  for
the  signature  in  full  of  the  control,  and  at  once  the  three  initials  of  the  name
of  my  wife  were  correctly  given.  I  asked  for  the  surname,  and  the  maiden
name  of  my  late  wife  was  at  once  written — a  name  which  has  the  same  mitial
letter  as  my  own  name.  I  then  asked  for  the  married  name,  and  at  once
received  it  correctly  spelled.

I  will  add  that  I  am  an  entire  stranger  in  Boston  and  some  of  these
names  could  be  known  to  no  one  liere  but  myself.  After  the  control  ceased
to  write,  another  control  of  the  medium.  Dr.  Phinuit,  told  me  that  a  little
boy,  a  living  relative  of  mine,  had  sustained  an  injury  to  an  elbow  or  wrist,
"but  he  was  doing  well  at  the  time.  This  was  correct,  for  a  nephew  of  mine
had  sustained  a  fracture  of  the  arm  a  few  days  i)reviously,  a  fact  which  had
not  been  mentioned  by  me  to  anyone.

During  the  latter  part  of  the  mterview,  the  impression  produced  by
frequent  allusions  to  private  matters  and  the  character  of  the  messages
themselves  gave  rise  to  a  very  strong  conviction  that  the  control  was  what
it  purported  to  be,  that  of  my  late  wife.— Very  respectfully,


528


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


To  Miss  Edmuncls,  at  a  sitting  on  June  IStli,  1804,  was  said  : —
[Phinuit]  Do  you  linow  Etta '? (No.) She  wants  to  send  her  love  to  her
husband  in  the  body.

To  R.H.  on  June  14th,  1894,  was  said  concerning  Dr.  K.  : —
[Pliinuit.]

Tell  him  tliat  she  will  prove  the  test  to  him  that  was  private  to  him.  She
will  do  what  she  said  she  would.  She  won't  let  me  tell  you  what  it  is,  but
he  will  tell  you  afterwards. — G-O-O-D— He'll  know  what  that  means.

I  sent  these  statements  to  Dr.  K.,  who  replied  as  follows  : —

London,  Jubj  20lh,  1894.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir,- — Your  very  kind  letter  ol  June  29th
giving  me  the  messages  from  "  Etta  "  which  came  after  my  visit  to  Mrs.
Piper  was  received  here  this  morning.  .  .  .  They  are  perfectly
intelligible  to  me,  as  I  can  explain  to  you  at  some  future  time  as  she  said.

With  reference  to  the  writing  of  June  12th  one  matter  concerning  which
there  was  a  positive  statement  which  I  could  only  verify  in  New  York  after  I
left  Boston,  I  found  to  be  exactly  as  she  stated  it  would  be.  I  cannot  go
further  into  particulars  at  present,  but  will  at  some  future  time. . .  .

F.  H.  K.

Dr.  K.  had  another  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  about  a  year  later,  on
his  way  home,  I  understand,  after  a  trip  in  Europe.  On  May  16th,
1896,  he  made  the  following  statement  in  the  cour.oe  of  a  letter  in
reply  to  my  inquiry  on  another  matter.

I  am  tempted  to  give  you  a  little  incident  connected  with  my  last  visit  to
Mrs.  Piper,  which  was  only  verified  when  I  reached  my  home.  I  received
from  Mrs.  P.  a  few  words  of  communication  from  some  one  who  claimed  to
1)3  my  Uncle  G.,  recently  deceased.  I  had  an  uncle  with  that  initial  who
had  died  a  short  time  befoi'e.  Among  other  things  said  was  "  Give  my  luve  to
L.  and  tell  her  I  see  the  trouble  with  her  eyes."  L.  is  the  initial  of  my  uncle's
widow.  As  you  remember  I  had  but  just  returned  from  a  year's  trijD  abroad,
and  I  knew  nothing  about  my  Aunt  L.,  and  of  course  did  not  understand  the
message.  Later,  when  I  reached  my  home,  I  found  out  that  my  aunt  had
been  for  some  little  time  under  treatment  for  some  trouble  with  her  eyes.

December  \olh,  1894.

Sitters  ;  Professor  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  of  Oxford,  and  Mrs.
Carpenter,  at  the  house  of  Professor  James,  hy  whom  the  sitting  was
arranged,  and  who  was  present  till  Pliinuit  had  said  a  few  words,
when  his  place  as  recorder  was  taken  by  Professor  Edward  Cummings,
of  Harvard,  who.  Professor  .James  informs  me,  had  had  tv/o  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper  some  years  previously  "  with  success."  Professor
James  adds  : —

"  Mrs.  James  and  Mrs.  Piper  were  in  the  same  room  wlnn  Professor
J.  Estlin  Carpenter  of  Oxford  entered.  Pie  was  introduced  as  Mr.  Smith


XXXIII.] Ohservaiions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  529


to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  withdrew,  speaking  to  her,  to  the  end  of  the  room.
His  wife  then  entered  and  was  greeted  by  Mrs  James  inadvertently  as
'  Sirs.  Carpenter,'  which  of  course  annuls  the  best  test  of  this  sitting."

The  following  is  the  statement  by  Professor  Carpenter  : —

Cambridge,  December  Uth,  1894.

Dear  Pbofessoe  James, — I  had  a  sitting  yesterday  with  Mrs.  Piper  at
your  liouse,  and  was  greatly  interested  with  the  results  obtained,  as  they  were
entirely  unexpected  by  me.  Vai'ious  persons  were  named  and  described
whom  we  could  not  identify  (my  wife  was  present)  ;  but  the  names  of  my
father  and  mother  were  correctly  given,  with  several  details  which  were  in
no  way  present  to  my  mind  at  tlio  time.  The  illness  from  which  my  father
was  suft'ering  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  identified,  but  not  the  accident
which  took  him  from  us.  A  penknife  which  I  happened  to  have  with  me
was  rightly  referred  to  its  place  on  the  desk  in  his  study  ;  and  after
considerable  hesitation  Mrs.  Piper  wrote  out  the  word  orcjan  when  I  asked
concerning  other  objects  in  the  room.  She  added  spontaneously  a  very
remarkable  item  about  which  I  was  in  no  way  thinking,  viz.,  that  on  Sunday
afteimoons  or  evenings  (her  phrase  was  "twiUght")  we  were  accustomed  to
sing  there  together.  She  stated  correctly  that  my  mother  was  older  than  my
father  but  died  after  him  ;  and  she  connected  her  death  with  my  retuni  from
Switseiiand  in  a  manner  that  wholly  surprised  me  ;  the  fact  being  that  her  last
illness  began  two  or  three  days  after  my  arrival  at  home  from  Lucerne.  She
gave  the  initials  of  my  wife's  name  riglitly,  and  addressed  words  to  her  from
her  father,  whose  first  name  George  was  correct.  She  also  desired  me  in  my
father's  name  not  to  be  anxious  about  some  family  matters  (which  have  only
recently  come  to  my  knowledge),  though  their  nature  was  not  specified.
Finally,  though  I  should  have  mentioned  this  first,  as  it  was  at  the  outset  of
the  interview,  she  told  me  that  I  was  about  to  start  on  a  voyage,  and
described  the  vessel  in  general  terms,  though  she  could  not  give  me  its  name,
or  tell  me  the  place  where  it  was  going.  I  saw  enough  to  convince  me  that
Iilrs.  Piper  possesses  some  very  extraordinary  powers,  but  I  have  no  theory
at  all  as  to  their  nature  or  mode  of  exercise. — Believe  me,  faithfully  yours,

J.  EsTLiN  Carpenter.

February  IQth,  1895.

Sitter  :  Mr.  "W.  B.  C,  alone.  Appointment  made  by  R.  H.  Mr.
C.  sent  the  following  account  with  subjoined  table.  I  believe  that  I
was  unaware  of  any  of  the  facts  referred  to  at  his  sitting  except  his
connection  with  music.

June  21sf,  1895.

My  Dear  Mr.  Hodgsox, —  .  .  .  Mrs.  Piper's  manner  of  entering
the  trance  was  in  no  v/ay  different  from  what  your  descriptions  led  me  to
expect.

There  was  physical  contact  during  the  whole  sitting,  the  weiglit  of  the
upper  part  of  her  body  being  supported  through  her  forehead  resting  on  the
back  of  my  wrist  and  hand.


'  5^0  ■ ' ' .'  • '  Richard  Hodgson.  ^ f.  {rART

I  endeavoured  to  keep  track  of  the  statements  which  were  not  correct
.  equally  ivith  those  wliich  were,  but  I  am  quite  aware  of  the  difHculty  of  so
'  doing,  and  that  nothing  short  of  a  stenographic  report  would  be  trustworthy
in  that  respect.  In  cases  where  there  was  au  unmistakable  element  of
truth  I  found  my  mind  constantly  tending  to  overvalue  the  amount  of  the
truth  and  to  fit  in  or  ignore  the  incorrect  to  an  alarming  degree.  The  value
therefore  of  my  conclusions  is  limited  by  my  personal  equation  of  self-control
of  which  1  can  naturally  not  be  a  judge.

I  have  endeavoured  to  divide  the  statements  made  by  Mrs.  Piper  into
several  headings,  for  a  description  of  Avhich  I  will  refer  you  to  the  subjoined
little  table.  I  have  numbered  the  items  and  have  commented  on  them
following  the  table.

I  may  say  at  once  that  the  thesis,  which  this  sitting  tended  to  support,  is
tliat  she  was  in  condition  to  be  able  to  draw  uf>on  my  unconscious  memory
■witli  limitations  which  I  had  not  evidence  enough  to  define. The  eflbrt  to
will  a  particular  vividness  of  remembrance  seemed  of  no  avail  whatever  in
'  assisting  her,  and  was  possibly  even  an  imjiediment  to  the  ease  of  her

■  demonstrations.

Before  going  to  Mrs.  Piper  I  had  no  knowledge  that  anyone  else  held  the

■  same  view  in  regard  to  her.  It  came  to  me  before  speaking  to  any  one  about
the  sitting  as  the  result  of  that  sitting  and  was  reinforced  by  many  small
points  which  I  could  only  describe  at  great  lengtli  if  at  all.  I  have  given  a
few  below.

I  should  say  further  that  though  some  months  previously  a  separation
from  a  most  valued  friend,  a  man,  under  the  most  painful  circumstances,
.find  the  death  of  a  very  near  relative  had  taken  place,  it  was  not  with  the
slightest  idea  of  hearing  anything //'oin  them  that  I  went  to  Mrs.  Piper.  I
did  not  then  believe  nor  do  I  now  see  any  reason  for  believing  anything
proplietic  or  supernatural  in  anything  Mrs.  Piper  accomijlishes.  i

From  all  possible  evidence,  for  whicli  in  fact  you  can  best  vouch,  Mrs.
Pijjer  never  saw  or  knew  of  me  or  my  name.

Some  of  the  items  in  tlie  table  are  marked  H  to  indicate  those  which  it
,  was  within  possibility  that  you  should  have  known  and  informed  Mrs.  Piper
about. I  leave  you  to  make  such  statements  in  that  respect  as  you  see  fit.

Referring  to  the  table  I  will  now  take  up  some  of  the  statements.

1.  Immediately  on  going  into  the  trance  Mrs.  Piper  spoke  of  my  being
surrounded  by  music,  sheets  of  music.  I  have  placed  this  in  the  column
"  Could  have  Been  Observed  "  because  before  the  trance  began  I  went  to  a
piano  standing  in  the  room,  remarked  upon  your  having  spoken  of  her
daughter's  studying  music  and  asked  leave  to  look  at  the  title  of  the  piece

■  on  the  rack.  The  composer  was  Hunter,  who  writes  for  children  and
students.  I  carelessly  enough  showed  my  familiarity  with  him  which  would
have  been  sufficient  to  show  that  I  had  done  something,  even  much,  with
music,  which  has  always  been  the  case.

2-7.  Next  followed  a  torrent  in  regard  to  the  difliculty  with  the  friend  of
wliom  I  have  spoken  above.  The  chief  assertions  (such  as  that  there  was  a
ditticulty  with  a  friend,  misunderstanding,  life  broken  up,  would  all  come

■  right,  etc.,  etc.)  I  have  divided  into  six  points,  three  of  whicli  might  have
been  the  stock  guessing  of  a  fortune  teller  in  a  similar  case,  but  the  other


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  '  531


.'  three  were  certainly  more  remarkable. I  do  not  give  details  as  they  are  too
personal,  and  because  I  found  in  this  part  of  the  sitting  nothing  to  put  into
.  the  column  (the  last  two)  bearing  nicsfc  strongly  on  the  general  thesis,  except
.  that  they  raise  tlie  average  of  correctness  and  were  perhaps  a  little  more
'  than  could  have  been  expected  in  concord  and  proportion  v.  ith  the  weight  of
this  matter  on  my  mind  over  all  others. A  photograph  of  this  person  was
touched  by  Mrs.  Piper  according  to  her  custom,  but  no  name  or  writing.
She  gave  immediately  and  correctly,  however,  the  first  initial  of  his  name,
,  which  is,  it  should  be  remarked,  one  of  the  most  common  in  the  English
language. But  she  could  only  complete  the  name  with  difficulty.  This
rather  curiously  coincides  with  the  fact  that  none  but  his  intimates  ever
;  knew  and  none  at  all  used  his  first  name,  as  he  always  signed  witli  the  first
initial, full  middle, and  full  last  names. The  name  by  which  he  was
commonly  known  was  his  middle  one  and  that  Mrs.  Piper  failed  wholly
to  give.

8.  A  first  name  imperfectly  pronounced  in  Mrs.  Pij^er's  French  accent
was  then  given  of  the  only  person  who  knew  the  circumstances  of  the  above.
It  was  not  till  several  days  after  that  I  recognized  from  niy  notes  and

•  descrijjtion  the  person  and  connection,  which  were  then  unmistakable,  a
;  circumstance which easily  places  this  mention  in  the  column  marked

"Remarkable"  from  the  point  of  view  of  connection  with  my  unconscious

memory.

9.  In  response  to  the  question  as  to  the  health  of  the  jjerson  referred  to
in  2-7,  he  was  said  to  have  a  cold  and  to  be  at  home  lying  on  a  couch  with
his  throat  bandaged.  He  did  have  a  cold  at  the  time  but  was  on  no  day
absent  from  his  business.

10.  The  next  statement,  most  suddenly  and  disconnectedly  made,  was  in
regard  to  pictures,  both  pictures  and  sketches,  which  she  saw  about  in  great
numbers.  She  insisted  on  this  several  times,  while,  my  mind  being  intent
on  the  person  previously  spoken  of,  I  could  see  no  connection  whatever.

:  Asking  her  for  a  description,  she  began  to  describe  my  sister,  a  step-sister,
;  who  had  died  a  few  months  before  and  whose  whole  life  was  bound  up  in
.  painting.  [11]  The  fairly  correct  physical  description  had  gone  but  a  little
;  way  when  she  seemed  to  bo  seized  with  an  extreme  pain  most  alarming  to

■  me,  as  it  did  not  seem  possibly  a  part  of  her  trance.  The  pain  was  in  a  part
:  of  the,  body  where  a  surgical  operation  had  been  performed  of  which  my

sister  immediately  died.

[24]  Mrs.  Piper  then  took  to  writing  as  under  control  of  my,  sister  and
after  a  few  sentences  wrote  the  complete  signature,  first  name,  middle
^initial,  and  last  name  of  my  sister. Mrs.  Piper  had  had  in  touch  a  letter
from  my  sistei",  and  I  afterwards  sujjposed  she  had  somehow  seen  the  last
name  signed  to  that  and  I  knew  she  had  mentioned  the  abbreviated  form  of

■  the  first  name.  But  on  referring  to  tlie  letter  still  later  it  was  only  signed
,  by  initials,  and  the  full  name  was  nowhere  mentioned  in  it  nor  had  been  by

me  during  the  sitting.  I  should  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  as  this
;  sister  was  a  step-sister  her  last  name  was  clitFerent  from  mine.

12.  During  the  writing  very  insistent  mention  was  made  in  regard  to^  a
ring  which  she  wanted  taken  from  its  then  resting  place  and  given  to  her


532


Richard  Hodgson.


[PAET


most  intimate  friend,  M.  In  answer  to  niy  questions  the  ring  was  described
as  containing  a  small  diamond  and  as  kept  in  a  small  box  in  a  wriiiiig-desk
upstairs  as  distinguished  from  one  downstairs.  On  investigating  this
question  afterwards  I  found  that  there  was  such  a  ring  but  that  it  contained
two  other  stones,  one  each  side  of  the  diamond,  that  it  was  kept  in  a  small
box  in  a  chest  of  drawers  upstairs  at  the  home  of  a  sister  who  lives  in  a
distant  city,  and  that,  as  a  singular  coincidence,  it  had  been  taken  from  there
for  tlie  fii'st  time  in  many  months  on  that  very  date,  February  10th,  and
placed  in  a  writing-desk.  I  see  no  value  in  any  of  this  part,  especially  as
the  family  speak  of  there  being  another  ring  also,  about  which  I  can  get  no
information  as  yet.

13.  The  assertion  was  made  that  at  the  moment  slio  spoke  of  it,  11.53
a.m.,  a  person,  G.  M.  L.,  was  at  home  writing  a  letter  at  his  desk.  From
tlio  best  information  afterwards  obtainable  there  were  two  short  periods
during  that  day  when  he  could  have  written.  During  one  of  them  he  had
written  a  note,  and  one  of  these  periods  corresponded  with  the  one  during
"which  I  was  with  Mrs.  Piper.

14.  The  dcatli  of  this  sister,  a  difl'erent  one  from  that  mentioned  in  No.
10,  was  not  by  consumption  but  by  typhoid  fever.  We  always  regarded  her
however  as  inheriting  consumption,  and  already  then  showing  various
symtoms  of  it.

16.  Her  description  was  meagre  but  correct,  which  would  accord  with
the  cii'cumstance  that,  as  she  died  nineteen  years  ago,  my  own  rememln'ance
is  meagre.

17-23.  Then  followed  the  description  of  a  very  intimate  friend,  F.W.B.,
lately  dead,  of  whom  the  two  most  remarkable  cliaracteristics,  one  a  very
unusual  one,  as  ditTerent  from  other  men,  were  correctly  stated.

25.  A  return  to  the  person  mentioned  in  2-7  brought  up  a  description  on
a  mutual  friend'who  would  most  naturally  have  come  up  in  the  connection.
I  did  not  at  first  recognise  the  person  till  Mrs.  Piper  abruptly  said  that
something  was  the  matter  with  either  the  first  or  second  finger  of  the  right
liand.  I  instantly  recognised  the  person  then,  and  that  this  was  the  ono
slight  physical  deformity  by  which  he  might  have  been  described  by  thoso
of  us  who  had  known  the  cause  of  it.  It  then  became  a  question  as  to
whether  Mrs.  Piper  could  name  tlie  finger  correctly.  I  exercised  all  possible
will-power  to  assist,  but  she  wrongly  named  the  second  finger  instead  of  the
first.

20-29.  IMrs.  Piper  then  passed  abruptly  to  a  criticism  of  my  own  physic;-.]
condition.  There  were  four  chief  points,  all  correct,  but  as  my  own  ills  are
those  of  thousands,  especially  in  America,  I  have  valued  them  as  in  the
table,  very  little.

30.  During  the  writing  purporting  to  be  by  my  sister,  mention  was  con-
stantly made  of  the  name  of  her  most  intimate  friend,  and  that  without  any
question  or  allusion  on  my  part.  In  this  event  tliere  was  what  seems  to  me
a  singular  piece  of  support  for  my  thesis,  for  tlie  name  by  which  this  friend
was  called  was  that  by  which  I,  not  knowing  her  well  personally,  always
supposed  she  was  called  l^y  my  sister.  But  it  seems  that  between  tliem-
selves  the  middle  nam.e  only  was  used.


xxxiii.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  535


STANCE WITH Mes.  Piper,


February  10th,  1895.


Event.


Connectincc  nie  with  music


Difficulty  with  friend

Mention  of  names  and  description
in  connection  with  above

J.  ill  with  cold
At  home

Pictures

Pain  and  location  ...

Ring

Exact  time  of  writing  letter

Enumeration  of  family,  living  am
dead

R.  H.  C.  died  of  consumption  ..

R.  H.  C.  description

F.  W.  B.  description  :
height — medium  ...
nose — large...
sides  of  face  very  large  ...
somewhat  heavy  over  eyes
forehead  rather  high
hair — brown

Whole  signature  ...

D.'s  injured  finger
,, middle  ,,

My  own  state  of  health  ...


Naming  intimate  friend  correctly
Other  names — several
Other  statements  ...


—  yi

~o


n


to


X
X
X


X
X
X


Direct
Assertions.


X?
X?


11


H


>  3


ir

X


Tliosj  marked  H  could  have  been  known  to  Mr.  Hodgson  though  I
have  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  they  were.  [The  only  one  known  to
me  was  (1).— R.  H.]


53  i  Tdchard  Hodgson.  [part

31.  Various  other  names  were  mentioned  in  both  the  writing  and  speak-
ing, some  entirely  unknown  to  mc  and  otiiers  proving  nothing.

32.  Various  statements  also  were  made  whicli  were  such  as  any  fortune-
teller might  make,  having  a  general  bearing,  but  no  special  worth.  I  am
bound  to  say,  however,  that  they  were  few,  which  on  the  other  hand  again
may  be  accounted  for  by  my  inter j)osing  definite  questions  when  such
remarks  became  at  all  tedious.

I  have  nothing  more  to  add  except  that  the  total  result  seems  best
represented  by  the  contents  of  columns  6  and  7  of  the  table.

W.  B.  C.

September  dth,  189.5.  ■  ■  •

Sitter  :  Professor  J.  M.  Baldwin.  Appointment  made  by  Professor
W.  James.  [Sitting  probably  held  at  liouse  of  Professor  James  in
Cambridge.] Professor  Baldwin  made  the  following  statement  :  —

Princeton,  N.J.,  September  loth,  1895.
My  impressions  noted  immediately  after  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,
September  9th,  are  about  as  follows  : —

1.  There  are  three  elements  of  truth  in  tlie  matter  of  her  "messages"
which  need  explanation  :  lier  description  of  certain  facts  of  my  brother's
life  ;  the  initials  H.  B.  and  H.  H.  B.  (my  wife's  initials)  in  connection  with
the  seal  whicli  I  i)ut  in  her  hands — a  seal  given  to  me  by  my  wife  ;  and  her
telling  of  the  death  of  another  brother  in  boyhood.

2.  These  elements  of  truth  were,  however,  so  buried  in  masses  of
incoherent  matter  and  positive  errors  as  to  matters  in  whicli  slie  tried  to
give  information,  that  the  sense  of  her  failure  on  the  whole  is  far  stronger
with  me.

3.  Even  as  to  the  fact  of  her  being  in  a  trance  at  all,  my  impression  is
not  strong  despite  the  fact  that  I  came  fully  expecting  to  be  convinced  on
that  point.

4.  My  state  of  mind,  therefore,  is  almost  the  same  that  it  was  before  the
sitting,  i.e.,  a  condition  of  willing  approach  to  any  evidence  on  either  side
iif  the  question  at  issue  ;  I  am  only  disappointed  that  she  did  not  give  me
more  data  for  forming  a  positive  opinion.  I  am  fully  aware,  however,  that
one  such  sitting  has  very  little  negative  weight,  considering  the  variations
which  this  sort  of  phenomena  are  subject  to.

J.  Mark  Baldwin.

About  A'^ovember  30lh,  ISdb.

Sitter  :  Professor  Herbert  Nichols.

Professor  Nichols  lectured  for  some  time  at  Harvard  University.
The  following  account,  undated,  was  forwarded  to  me  by  Professor
James,  to  whom  it  was  sent.  I  knew  Professor  Nichols,  though  not
intimately,  and  was  unaware  that  he  had  a  sitting  until  several  days


XXXIII.]  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  535


after  his  sitting,  when  a  brief  message  came  apparently  from  his
mother,  that  led  me  to  surmise  that  he  may  have  been  the  "unknown'"
sitter  for  whom  I  had  appointed  a  day.

******

[Received  by  U.  H.  December  2m,  1895.]

Just  before  coming  awiiy  I  had  a  wonderful  sitting  with  3Irs.  Piper.  As
you  know,  I  have  been  a  Laodicean  toward  her  heretofore.  But  that  she  is
no  fraud,  and  that  she  is  the  greatest  marvel  I  have  ever  met  I  am  now
Avholly  convinced.  Think  my  interview  more  wonderful  than  any  I  have-
ever  heard  reported  of  her  before.  I  went  under  an  assumed  name  through
appointment  made  with  Hodgson  by  letter — even  he  did  not  know  who  I
was — probably  does  not  now.  The  most  of  the  interview,  and  by  far  the
important  part,  was  of  such  a  nature  I  can't  write  about  it,  but  should  like  to
tell  you  somewhat  of  it  sometime.

I  asked  her  scarcely  a  question,  but  slie  ran  on  for  three-quarters  of  an
hour,  telling  me  names,  places,  events  in  most  startling  manner.

Then  she  suddenly  stoj)ped  talijing  and  began  writing — this  was  far  less-
satisfactory  and  about  an  entirely  [ditTerent]  set  of  matters  — mostly  about
Mamma  (who  recently  fell  and  was  killed)  and  message  to  her  grandcliildren.

One  thing  here,  however,  will  interest  you.  Mamma  and  I  one  Christmas
exchanged  rings.  Each  had  engraved  in  his  gift  the  first  word  of  his
favourite  proverb.  The  ring  given  me  I  lost  many  years  ago.  When
Mamma  died  a  year  ago,  the  ring  I  had  given  her  was,  at  her  request,  taken
from  her  linger  and  sent  to  me.  Now  I  asked  Mrs.  Piper  "What  was
written  in  Mamma's  ring  ?"  and  as  I  asked  the  question  I  held  the  ring  in.
my  hand  and  had  in  mind  only  that  ring.  But  I  had  hardly  got  the  words
from  my  mouth  till  she  slapped  down  on  the  jjaper  the  word  in  the  other  ring-
— the  one  Mamma  had  given  me,  and  which  had  been  lost  years  ago  while
travelling.  As  the  word  was  a  peculiar  one,  doubtfully  ever  written  in  any
ring  before,  and  as  she  wrote  it  in  such  a  flash,  it  was  surely  curious. . .  ^

[Nichols.]


536


Hichard  Hodgson.


[part


APPENDIX  lY.


The  following  series  of  sittings  with  Dr.  and  I\Irs.  A.  Blair  Thaw
and  several  of  their  closely  connected  relatives  and  friends  aro
■quoted  in  full  as  a  specimen  series,  owing  to  the  completeness  of  the
record.  Some  weeks  before  the  date  of  their  first  sitting,  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Thaw,  who  had  heard  that  Mrs.  Pipsr  had  been  reported  upon
favourably  in  our  Proceedings,  called  oji  Mrs.  Piper  at  her  house  in
Arlington  Heights,  Mass.,  and  requested  a  sitting,  without  giving  their
names.  Mrs.  Piper  was  ill  at  the  time,  and  not  giving  any  sittings,
.and  referred  them  to  me.  They  called  on  me,  and  expressed  their
■desire  for  a  sitting,  and  finally  gave  me  their  address  in  New  York.
They  were  previously  entirely  unknown  to  me  and  were  not  members
•of  our  Society,  and  did  not  give  me  their  names  till  the  end  of  our
interview.  I  told  them  that  Mrs.  Piper  expected  soon  to  visit  one  of
■our  members,  Dr.  Anna  Lukens,  living  in  New  York,  and  a  sitting
might  be  arranged  for  them  there.  In  consequence  they  had  their  first
sitting  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Lukens,  to  whom  they  were  previously
unknown.  Their  next  three  sittings  were  at  Mrs.  Piper's  house  in
Arlington  Heights,  and  the  May  sittings  were  in  New  York  or  its
-vicinity,  where  Mrs.  Piper  was  their  guest.  The  sitting  of  January
IGth,  1893,  was  at  a  friend's  house  in  Boston.  The  omitted  portions
of  the  sittings,  marked  by  asterisks,  and  all  of  which  I  have  seen,
consist,  for  the  most  part,  of  references  to  living  persons,  showing  an
intimate  knowledge  of  their  character.  The  record  of  one  sitting,
which  came  between  the  numbered  sixth  and  seventh,  is  omitted
altogether,  at  the  request  of  the  sitter,  as  being  too  intimately  personal,
and  containing  much  very  private  matter  concerning  the  deceased.

The  persons  who  had  sittings  were  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  B.  Thaw,  Mr.
Lorenzo  Dow  and  Mrs.  Sabrina  Dow  (the  father  and  mother  of  Mrs.
'Thaw),  Mr.  Alexander  Dow  (the  brother  of  Mrs.  Thaw),  Mr.  George
Perkins,  an  intimate  friend  of  the  Thaws  and  of  Mr.  A.  Dow,  and  at
that  time  associated  in  business  with  him,  Mr.  Melvin  W.,  the  agent
■of  Dr.  Thaw's  country  estate,  and  Miss  Ellen  HefFern,  the  nurse  of
Dr.  Thaw's  children.  It  may  be  said  that  in  the  later  sittings,  at  any
rate,  some  of  the  information  given  may  have  been  acquired  by  Mm.
Piper,  since  she  was  a  guest  at  the  house  of  the  Thaws.  Thi.s,  of
■course,  cannot  be  denied.  Dr.  Thaw,  however,  was  a  careful  investi-
gator, and  was  well  aware  of  the  necessity  of  adopting  such  precautions
as  were  possible  under  the  circumstances ;  and  there  are  various


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Puenomena  of  Trance.  537


incidents  in  the  later  sittings  wliich  probably  few  persons  would
suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  "  got  up  "  or  heard  about  before-
hand, such  as  the  information  given  in  connection  with  special  articles
presented  as  tests,  or  the  prophecy,  afterwards  fulfilled,  that  Dr.

Thaw's  brother  W  would  die  in  sleep^  in  six  months  or  less,  of

heart  failure.

Some  of  the  most  striking  incidents  in  the  series  occurred  at  the
first  sitting,  in  connection  with  the  deceased  children  of  the  Thaws,
and  with  their  friend  "  Dr.  H."  In  considering  the  hypothesis  of
imposture,  first  sittings,  of  course,  cceteris  paribus,  are  of  the  most
evidential  value ;  but  it  is  only  from  series  of  sittings  with  the  same
sitters,  or  the  same  "  communicators,"  that  we  can  hope  to  arrive  at
satisfactory  conclusions  concerning  the  significance  of  the  phenomena.
Some  of  the  more  important  incidents  that  occurred  in  this  series  of
sittings  are  quoted  on  pp.  351-2,  381—5.  Of  the  many  other  references
to  friends  and  relatives  mentioned  at  the  sittings  I  have  not  given  any
summary.  The  records  should  be  read  in  detail  to  be  appreciated,  as
the  form  in  which  the  information  is  given  is  in  most  cases  not
less  important  than  the  matter.

First  Sitting. February  14<A,  1S92.

[Present:  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  B.  Thaw;  also  Mrs.  Holmes,  who  has
quieting  physical  influence  on  Mrs.  Piper.  Sitting  arranged  for  by
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw,  without  giving  names.  Mrs.  Piper  says  she  is  in
strong  physical  condition.  Dr.  T.  writing  notes.  Mrs.  T.  and  Mrs.  II.
both  sitting  with  Mrs.  P.  Convulsions  strong  ;  continue  ten  muiutes.
Mrs.  H.  steps  aside.]

Phinuit :  Bon  jour  !  Comment  vous  portez-vous  1  I'm  Dr.  Phinuit.
Frenchman  !  [Stroking  Mrs.  T.'s  faoe.]  This  is  nice  little  kxJy.  Not  very
well,  but  good  little  lady,  nice  little  lady.

Ciiarlie  !  Come  here.  Sis!  [Pliinuit's  name  for  Mrs.  H.]  [To  Mr3.
H.]  "Keep  your  Charlie  and  Harry  out  of  the  way.  I  want  to  talk  to  these
people.  Who's  that  standing  there  writing  ?  He's  a  good  fellow,  but  kind
of  cranky. I  don't  mean  any  harm  by  "  cranky."

[1.]  A  little  child  comes  here  to  gentleman.  Puts  hand  on  his  head.
[Child  always  did  so.]  Light  golden  hair.  [Correct.]  [Dr.  T.  has  hair  in
pocket ;  stands  ten  feet  away.]  Little  boy.  [Child  was  very  generally
■mistaken  for  boy.]

Phinuit  [in  a  child's  voice,  for  "R."]:  Tell  mamma  not  to  trouble  so.
[Here,  and  at  times  later,  there  seemed  to  be  great  physical  distress  and  pain
in  abdomen,  throat  and  head.]  It  pains  me  so  here.  [Hands  on  abdomen.]
{Correct.  Child  had  dysentery,  with  sore  throat.]  My  throat  hurts.  The
powder  !  Take  it  away.  I  don't  like  it.  Take  it  away.  [Bismuth  was  given
thi'ough  entire  illness  of  two  weeks,  and  was  always  given  with  trouble.]


538


Ricltarcl  Hodgson.


[PAR'I


:  Phinuifc  :  Curly  golden  haii-. [Hair  was  very  curly.]

Phinuit  [for  R.]  : I  am  not  dead. I  am  not  dead. I  am  not  dead.

Phinuit :  IMy  head  aches  so  !  [To  Mrs.  H.]  Sis  !  Put  your  hand  on
my  head. Throat  so  bad  ! Hurt  so  !  [Pause.]

Phinuit  [for  P.]  :  I  can't  toll  why  rnamma  don't  speak  to  me  !  Don't
put  it  in  the  bottle. Take  it  away.

Phinuit:  Little  girl!  Long  light  hair.  Eh— Eh— Eth-Ethie,  Ethie,
Ethie.  [Changing  sound  of  E.]  She's  trying  to  tell  me.  Net-tie.
Ne-thie.  Can't  get  it.  There's  something  the  matter.  Tliis  little  child
hasn't  learned  to  talk.  [Correct,  excejjt  for  a  few  words  wliich  were  men-
tioned at  later  sittings.]

[2.]  Phinuit  [for  P.]  :  Take  me  up  in  your  arms  !  The  stars  !  Stars  I
When  I  saw  tlie  stars,  then  I  knew  I  wouldn't  stay.  The  book  !  I  want
the  book.  The  book  !  I  want  mamma  to  speak  to  me.  I  am  trying  to
reach  my  mamma. [Phinuit  has  pains  or  distress  here.]

Phinuit :  Never  saw  any  one  so  anxious  to  come.  Trying  to  get  through
the  veil. But  can't  do  it. [Some  mumljling  here.]

Phinuit  [for  P.]  :  I've  come  such  a  long  way  lo  speak  to  you,  mamma.
They  took  all  my  things  and  put  them  in  the  box.  [Correct.]  I  didn't  like
that. Oh,  dear  ! There's  papa  too.

Phinuit :  This  is  dreadful.  This  little  girl  will  take  me  out  with  her.
She's  tearing  me  to  pieces.  [Great  pain  apparently.]  See  the  little  curls  I
Ethie!  Ethie!  Oh,  dear  !  Oh.  dear  !  [More  suffering.]  What  do  I  see?
I  don't  want  Harry.  [To  Mrs.  H.]  [Pause.]  Here  come  two  !  Baby  and
little  girl. [Correct. She's  gone  to  get  baby.

Phinuit  [for  R.]  : She's  here,  too. And  I'm  not  sorry. ■  .

Phinuit  :  Ellie— Ethie.  [We  tell  Phinuit  that  the  first  letter  of  the
name  is  R.]  These  children  are  crazy,  trying  to  get  to  you.  To  reach
through  the  veil.

Phinuit  [for  R.]  :  I've  been  to  you  once.  [About  six  weeks  after  her
death  Mrs.  T.  woke  one  night  and  heard  a  noise  like  light  rapping  on  the  foot
of  the  bed,  which  lasted  for  several  minutes.  She  told  me  about  it  in  the
morning.]  I'll  come  again  often.  Some  time  you'll  see  me.  See  papa
writing.  Tell  papa  to  go  home  and  think  about  it.  Tell  papa  I'll  come  to
him,  too. I'll  touch  him.

Phinuit :  Ret-tie.  Ret-thie.  [Phinuit  is  given  watch  and  chain  that
belonged  to  Dr.  T.'s  mother,  who  died  thirty  years  before.]  Here  comes  a
lady.  Grandma  !  She's  here,  too,  with  children.  Grandpa  in  the  bodj'.
[Mrs.  T.'s  father  is  living.]  Never  saw  such  a  trouble  to  reach  anybody.
[Another  pause.]

[Loud.] H-T-U-R  H-T-U-R. [Rnih  backward.] Ruthie.  [Child

was  always  so  called  and  with  about  cnual  accent  on  each  syllable,  a.s
pronounced  here  by  Phinuit.]  Wlio's  Mar — Maa— Mar — Mar —  [Mary  and
Iilargaret  pronounced  later.]

Oh,  dear  !  In  the  body.  Another  one,  to  be.  Coming  to  stay  with
you. [See  later  in  this  sitting.]

I've  got  something  the  matter  with  my  teeth.  [Baby  was  teething  when
she  died.]

Two  little  girls. One  want's  baby's  beads. Mar — Marie. Mar — Ma —


xxxili.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  539


[Margaret  used  to  play  with  a  necklace  of  gold  beads  belonging  to  her  older
sister  Beatrice  (living).] Grandma's  sister  Marie. [Mary.  Correct.]

Phinuit  [for  R.]  :  Speak  to  me.  Don't  fret  for  me  so.  Take  me  in  your
arms,  mamma.  [Suddenly.]  And  there's  my  picture  !  [Mrs.  T.  was  painting
a  picture  of  Ruthie  when  she  was  taken  ill.]  It's  good.  It  was  tlie  last
chance. I  watched  it  every  day. And  you  never  did  better.

Pliinuit  :  They're  not  very  old.  She  seems  to  be  delighted.  Puts  arms
around  mamma's  neck.  One  comes  first  and  brings  little  one.  Only  says
papa  and  mamma.

Phinuit  [for  R.]  :  That  thing  they  put  in  the  box  was  not  me.  I'm  not
dead.

Phinuit :  This  little  girl  had  some  flowers  in  her  hand.  [Referring  to
the  other  one,  Margaret.]  Liked  them  and  took  them  with  her.  Now  she's
brought  them  with  her  to  you.  [Mrs.  T.  placed  three  little  flowers  ia
Margaret's  hand  after  her  death.]

Pliinuit  [for  R]  :  Little  chain  and  locket  !  I  want  it.  I'm  not  talking
about  locket.  I  want  the  chain.  [See  later  about  necklace  and  rosary.]
Little  sister's  not  dead.

Phinuit :  I  can  see — •  Who's  EUie — Ella — Ellen  1  [Kurse's  name  is
Ellen.]  Mar — •  This  little  one  makes  me  quite  ill.  [Motion  of  patting.]
Pat !  Pat !  Pat !  [Foi  R.]  I  want  to  pat  papa's  face.  [Dr.  T.  takes  one
hand  of  Mrs.  P.] Phinuit  pats  Dr.  T.'s  face. [This  very  characteristic]

Phinuit  :  Maa —  Maa —  Mar —  Look  at  the  light  hair.  Mamma  puts  it
on  her  finger.  [Feeling  heads  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.  above  the  ears,  where  tlia
baby's  hair  curled  most.]

Phinuit  [for  R.]  :  Not  Ruth. Call  me  Ruthie.

Phinuit  :  Who's  mother  1 Grandma. Hear  the  little  one  call  Grandma.
Phinuit  [for  R.]  :  Tell  papa  to  think  it  over,  and  when  alone  I'll  come
again.

Phinuit  :  Give  me  the  watch.  [Takes  watch  again.]  There's  a  little
book.  Cards  !  With  picture  on  it.  Four  together.  One  separate.  [Not
recognised.] Where's  Sis  ? [Pain  in  head  again.]

[To  Dr.  T.]  :  I'll  let  you  go,  gentleman.  I'll  speak  to  you  presently.
[Pause.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  Tell  me  about  baby.)  Phinuit  [suddenly  and  loud]  :  She's
gone  to  get  Margaret.  [Correct.]  Margery — Margaret — Marguerite.  Thoy
want  to  speak  to  mamma. This  little  girl  brings  flowers.

Phinuit  [for  R.]  :  Come  to  me  often. I  will  touch  you  and  papa  both.

Phinuit  [impressively]  :  Friends,  let  me  speak  a  word  to  j^ou.  Let  me
tell  you  there  will  be  another  that  will  stay.  [Mrs.  T.  asks  if  there  are  any-
more.] One  now. Only  one.

Mrs.  T.  :  (Will  she  stay  ?)

Phinuit  :  She  will  stay. One  more  ! [Mrs.  H.  asks,  "  Boy  or  girl  ?  "]
Phinuit :  I'm  a  little  boy. Three  sisters  ! Two  to  stay  and  two  to  go,

but  not  to  die  ! [Pause.] [Mrs.  T.  has  since  had  two  children,  both  girls,

born  one  in  October  1893,  the  other  in  September,  1895.]

H  . H  . H  . Oh,  dear. He's  with  us,  too. Seems  to  bo

a  gentleman. He's  coming,  too. [Confused.] [To  Mrs.  H.] That's  yours,

kiis  ! H  ,  you  go  off. Oh,  my  head  feels  so  bad  !

2  N


.540


Rlcliard  Hodgson.


[part


Pijiiiuifc  [for  R.]  :  Speak  to  me,  mamma  !  Speak  to  me.  I  want  to  stay.
Oaii't  you  think  I'm  here  ?  Toll  papa.  [Watch  is  given  a.i^ain.]  Watch.
Grandma's. Put  Sis's  hand  on  my  head. [Short  pause.]

Ruth  !  Two  Ruths  !  Two  of  them.  Mamma's  grandma.  [Correct.]
[Pause  ]

Phinuit :  George,  in  the  body.  A  friend.  111.  Is  going  to  pass  out
suddenly.  Lung  trouble.  Away  now.  [See  reference  to  George  Perkins
in  later  sittings.]

Pliinuit  [for  R.]  :  Great  gi'andma.  My  namesake.  [Correct.]  [A.  B.  T.
asks  whose  watch  it  is.]  Watch  not  Ruthie's,  but  papa's  mamma's  watch.
[Correct.]

(A.  B.  T.  :  Do  you  know  her  name  ?)  Phinuit :  Slie'll  tell  me.  Too
weak  now.  [Another  pause.]  [Loud.]  Friend!  HOWA —  He's  talking
to  me.  I  hear  him  whisper.  He's  coming  nearer.  [Phinuit  here  gives  a
nickname  for  a  friend  recently  dead.  Nickname  not  known  to  any  one
present.  On  inquiry  widow  said  it  was  the  name  commonly  used  by  his
mother  and  sisters,  all  dead,  but  not  used  by  any  one  living. A.  B.  Thaw.]

[3.]  H  . H  . [Giving  name  of  friend.]

(Mi's.  T.  :  Does  he  know  the  babies  ?) Phinuit :  [Speaking  softly  and
with  feeling.] (^wite  well,  quite  well.  [True.]
(Mrs.  T.  :  What  is  he  doing  ?)

Phinuit :  Hears  music.  Puts  paint  on.  [Mumbling.  Indistinct.]  [Loud.]
He  writes  fast. H  .

H.  :  Write  it  for  me. Write  it  for  me. H  . Ko  more  tronble  now.

It  was  my  head. [Correct.] I  was  wandering  a  little. [Correct.] Not  now.

[4.] Tell  F  I  don't  suffer  any  more. [Voice  weaker.] [Loud  and

in  characteristic  manner.]  How  are  you  ?  We  are  all  brothers  and  sisters.
[Weaker.] Give  me  love. [Pause. Something  about  F  .  Whisi^ers.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  Have  you  a  message  for  any  one  else  ?)  H.  :  Give  my  love —
to  my  wife.  [Whispering.]  Tell  her  I'm  very  happy  now.  Phinuit :
[Loud.] He's  gone.

(Mrs.  T  :  Is  there  any  other  friend  ?  What  about  the  one  who  paints  ?)
Phinuit :  He  puts  it  on  that  way.  [Motions  with  hand.]  Ho  puts  it  on
canvas. Who's  Louis  ? Tell  C.  H. [Unintelligible.] [Loud.] Here  it  is.

Oh,  here. Oh, dear ! You seem so stupid. W  11  W  ,

[Surname  began  with  W.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  How  does  he  look  ?) Phinuit  :  He  looks  so  fine. He  puts

hand  on  head. [Suddenly.] Where's  F  1 [F  was  the  first  name

of  the  painter  friend.]  I  am  not  so  far  away  after  all.  Did  you  see  me
paint  1  I  painted  for  him.  [Points  at  Dr.  T.  One  of  his  last  pictures  was
an  order  for  Dr.  T.]  Phinuit  :  Friends  !  I  can  say  no  more.  R.  :  Mamma  !
Don't  trouble.

Farther  Comments  on  Sitting  of  February  lith,  1892,  hy  Dr.  Tliaxo.

1.  My  child  Rutliie  had  died  three  months  previously,  at  the  age  of
fifteen  months.  Her  tv/in  sister  Margaret,  mentioned  later,  died  twelve
months  before  the  sitting.  Ruthie  had  a  special  habit  of  putting  her  hand
on  my  head,  and  also  of  patting  it.


sxxiil] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  511


2.  For  two  or  three  months  prior  to  her  death  Rutliie  was  fond  of
pointing  at  the  stars  through  the  window.  She  was  particularly  fond  of
her  picture  books.

3.  Dr.  H  ,  our  dearest  friend,  though  known  to  us  for  only  tlirce

years  before  his  death,  which  occurred  about  eighteen  months  prior  to  the
sitting.

4.  F  was  the  name  of  his  brother,  a  physician,  with  whom  Dr.  H.

had  corresponded  concerning  the  cause  of  his  illness  and  the  nature  of  the
early  head  symptoms.

Second  Silting. February  11th,  1892.

[R.  Hodgson  and  Miss  R.  have  first  part  of  sitting  ;  those  present
at  last  half  are  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  B.  Thaw  and  Mrs.  Thaw's  brother,
Mr.  A.  Dow,  who  writes  shorthand.]

Phinuit :  V/ell,  well,  well,  where  did  you  come  from? — Oh  look  !  Well,
you  are  a  dear  little  lady  any  w?.y.  Uodgson,  you  go  out.  H. :  Well,  good  bye.
Doctor.  [He  goes  out.]  Phinuit:  Au  revoir,  Hodgson.  Keep  a  stiff  upper
lip  and  behave  !  [To  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.]  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you.  [To  Miss
R.] Good-bye. Why  don't  you  stay  ?

Oh,  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you.  Are  you  pretty  well?  All  pretty  well?
Well  !  Here  is — Oh  dear!  Give  me — [Feeling  in  Dr.  T.'s  pockets  ;  gets
■envelope  with  chain  of  beads  mentioned  in  last  sitting  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.,
and  belonging  to  Beatrice. See  helow.'\

Baby's  here.  [Rubbing  chain  on  head  and  breathing  hard.]  I'm  here.
But  I  want — that's  what  I  want. [Getting  chain  out  of  envelope.]

Phinuit  :  Come  here,  little  girl,  come  here.  Tells  me  to  pat  you  on  the
head.  [To  Dr.  T.]  That's  it.  She  talks  very  sweetly  and  very  softly.
She  comes  here  and  says  that  —  Who  is  B  —  Berthie  —  Bertie  —
B-E-A-R-T-A-I-C-E.  [Living  child  Beatrice— her  own  pronunciation.]
Ruth,  Ruthie  — Rathie  here — This  little  girl — Will  you  give  me  a  piece  C'f
something  belonsing'  to  this  little  girl  ?  I  want  those  little  \vA\t  curls.
She  has  a  whole  head  full  of  little  curls. [See  first  sitting.]

Speak  to  me.  I'm  not  dead — not  dead — not  dead.  She  makes  me  pub
my  hand  on  you.  She  tells  me  to  do  this.  She  has  brought  another  little
girl.  Little  Mar jery — Marjarefc.  You  speak  to  papa  too.  She's  your  baby
—She  comes  very  near  to  you.  There  !  Talk  to  her.  Wait  a  minute.
fPause.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  What  do  they  do  there  ?)  Phinuit  :  They're  playing  with  tlie
I)eads.  [Twines  beads  around  hands.]  She  makes  me  take  this  little  thing
this  way,  and  puts  it  down,  down  over  my  wrist  that  way.  You  see  she
inows  this.  She  used  to  have  this  to  play  with  in  the  body.  And  she  sees
jnamma  in  the  body. And  there's  only  a  veil.

M.  :  I  can  see  you,  but  you  can't  see  me.  I  will  come  to  you — I  will
■come  to  you. You  will  see  me  soon  ! Soon  !

Phinuit :  She  says  j'ou  will  see  her  soon.  This  dear  little  thing  is  all  in
^yllite.  And  she  says  you  will  see  her  when  she  comes,  wearing  something
looking  white. You  talk  with  her. She  makes  me  play  with  these.

2  N  2


512


Tilchard  Hodgson.


[part


(Dr.  T.  :  Can  you  ask  wlio  is  taking  care  of  them  ?)  Pliinuit  :  Slie's  all
right.  She's  all  right.  Margie's  all  right.  But  who  is  Bet— Bet  ? -Tie— it
sounds  like  Tic — I  send  love  to  Bettie.  [Family  name  for  Beatrice.]  Bettie's
in  the  liody. Is  all  right.  [Pause.]

Who's  George?  [Mr.  D.'s  chum,  Geoi-ge  Perkins.  Last  name  given
later.]  [Feeling  Mr.  D.'s  face.]  Oh,  you're  a  good  fellow.  You  go  on  and
write.  Who's  George,  George  there— George  1  George.  [Loud.]  Here,
Uncle  George  !  Uncle  George  in  the  body.  There  is — this  isn't  right — I'll
straighten  it  out.

II.  :  I  want  you  to  speak  to  me,  mamma  !  (Mrs.  T.  :  Dear  baby  !)  R  :
And  I  see  you.  (Mrs.  T.  :  Wliat  can  I  do  to  see  you  'I)  R.  :  You  do  what
you  do  do.  Yuu  wiU  hear  my  iiugei's  tapping,  tapping.  I  vrill  be  there — I
Avill  be  there.  My  stomach  is  not  sick  any  more.  And  I'm  happy.  Anl
I'm  so  glad  to  see  you.

(Mrs.  T.  :  What  are  you  doing  ?)

R.  :  I'm  playing.  I'm  playing  all  right.  Don't  you  see  ?  Don't  yo-i
know  baby  ?  Papa,  dear,  you've  changed.  You  look  funny.  Wliy  is  that  i
I  want  to  pat  you  so. (Dr.  T.  :  WJio  takes  care  of  you  ?) R  :  I  have  a  sister.

Phinuit :  Grandmother's  watch.  [Taking  watch.  Correct.]  I'll  take  it.
Here's  Rutliie  and  a  Ruth. Great  grandmother.  [Correct.]

(Dr.  T.  :  Whose  watch  was  it  O  Phinuit  :  That's  my  grandmother's-
watch.  I  will  get  her  here  in  a  minute.  She  didn't  come  with  the  child.
But  I'll  bring  her  here  to  talk  with  you.  She's  been  here  a  long  time.  Bub
I'll  send  the  children  away  to  get  her  and  bring  her  here  to  me.  [Aside.];
You  get  out  of  the  way.

Love  to  Betty,  Betty  in  the  body.  Dear  Betty.  I  want  to  see  Betty,
Betty  ! I'm  not  dead. I'm  alive.

(Dr.  T.  :  How  about  grandmother  ?)  Phiuuit  :  That  youngest  child  has
gone  to  get  her.

(Mrs'.  T.  :  Can  they  walk  now  ?)  Phinuit  :  Walk  !  Certainly  !  There's-
only  a  veil  between.

Hodgson  !  Where's  Hodgson  ?  (Dr.  T.  :  He's  gone).  Phinuit  :  One  of
liis  friends  just  came  up  here.

[To  Dr.  T.]  If  you  will  be  a  little  patient  v/ith  mo,  I  can  get  the
influence  of  these  here. [V/atch.] I  can  get  your  mother. I  will  get  her.

But  who  i.s  that  calls  Abbie  ? A — B — I  don't  Icnr.w  how  you  spell  this-

Tvord. A — D — Who  is  that  ? Tell  A [A  is  name  of  living  daughter

of  Dr.  H  .] She's  calling  for  this  lady. Here  comes  a  lady  to  you.  Yoa

have  got  her  picture — a  very  large  picture  of  her.  [Correct  of  Dr.  T.'s
mother.]  And  she  has  come.  She  is  attracted  by  the  influence  in  the  body.
I  will  awaken  her  in  a  minute.  Don't  hurry  me,  please.  The  children
tlon't  like  to  be  sent  away.  The  little  one  is  gone.  Little  Ruth  is  here  Avith
me,  with  little  light  curls  all  over  her  head.  [To  Dr.  T.]  She  makes  me
pat  your  head.  But  two  will  stay.  Little  Betty  is  going  to  stay  in  the  budy
with  you.  And  there  is  going  to  be  one  more  that  is  going  to  stay.  There
will  be  two  with  you  and  two  of  us  here. I  can't  quite —  [Broken.]

Her  voice  isn'c  very  strong  — and  it's  a  child's  voice,  you  see.  And  it's-
weak,  you  understand.  And  it's  very  much  like  a  little  baby  that  doesn't,
talk  quite  plain.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Gcvlain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  54<^


(Mrs.  T  :  Does  slielive  in  a  home  the  way  we  do  ?)

Phinuit :  She  lives  in  a  house  just  exactly  as  you  do.  And  you  attract
her  attentiou  ;  she  notes  every  motion  of  your  body.  Yv'ill  you  speak  to
this  little  girl  ?  She  used  to  ]jiay  with  tliese  when  in  the  body.  This  one. —
Where's  the  crib? —  You  know  the  picture?  Llamma's  lovely  picture.
You  did  the  picture.

(Dr.  T.  :  What  kind  of  a  picture  ?)

Phinuit  :  Oh,  the  hair  is  so  pretty  !  It  looks  as  if  it  was  going  to  speak,
doesn't  it,  dear?  [Pause.]

You  know  me,  dear  ? Where  is  A  in  the  body  ? [A  living  daughter

of  Dr.  H.,  and  a  great  friend  of  l\Irs.  T.'s.] Mother  comes  here,  a  lady,

and  sends  her  love  to  A  .  A  .  A  . Who  is  this  lady  ? I  don't

know  this  lady.  You  wait  a  minute.  A is  in  the  body  ;  she  is  con-
nected with  you.  [To  Mrs.  T.]  And  that  sister  died.  Brother  George.  Her
brother  George.  [A.'s  dead  brother.]  I  can't  tell  you.  But  there  is  an
elderly  lady  here.  Tell  me  this.  .  .  .  You  know  I  have  something  the
matter  with  my  heart. You  know  wliat  I  mean,  and  I'll  be  all  right.

[A  had  a  brother  George,  deceased,  and  also  a  sister  deceased.  These

facts  were  known  to  us.  We"i\ere  unaware  of  the  cause  of  tlie  sister's  death,
but  afterwards  ascertained  that  the  cause  was  heart  disease. — A.  B.  T.]  Any
■([uestions  you  want  to  ask?  (Dr.  T.  :  How  about  grandma?)  Phinuit:
Little  girl  gone  for  grandma.

Mamma,  speak  to  me.  Speak  to  little  Rulhie.  I'm  here  just  now.  I'm
Lere  alone.  They  will  be  here  soon.  Don't  worry.  The  little  one  is  gone
to  get  her. [Pause.] Here's  H  .

I've  come  to  put  in  a  word  a  minute.  I  want  to  say  there  is  no  death.  I
AT,m  living.  I  am  with  you  still  — and  fear  not.  Close  your  eyes  and  go
to  sleep.  Waken  up,  and  it's  all  over.  You  live  again.  And  not  much
memory  of  what  has  transpired.  I  see  you  clearly  ;  as  clearly  as  anything
you  like.  I  will  answer  for  it.  I  was  never  so  glad  to  see  anybody  as  I  am
tjlad  to  see  you.  Tell  my  wife  I  live.  What  are  they  doing?  (Mrs.  T.  :
What  are  who  doing  ? )  Why  do  they  mourn  ?  Why  fret  for  nie  ?  They
must  not  weep  ;  I  cannot  have  it  so.  Tell  thorn  it  is  wrong.  I  live.  I  —
Phinuit  :  Wait  a  minute.  He  has  lost  his  word.  Wait  a  minute.  I'll  bo
l)ack  in  a  minute.  [Pause  of  several  seconds.]  Phinuit  :  Here  he  is  !  Here
he  comes  !

Has  anybody  a  word  from  Top  ?  [Nickname  of  best  friend  of  painter  F —
in  first  sitting.]  I  want  to  do — I  want— Tell  Top  all's  well  that  ends  well  ;
and  all  that  is  well,  is  well.  You  tell  them  I'll  prove  it  to  them  yet.  Hurry  !

Who's  Penkie — Perkie — Pinkins— Perkins  ?  [Mr.  D's  chum.]  I  couldn't
get  that  name. But  it  is  he  I  want.

(Mrs.  T  :  Is  he  all  right  ? )  Phinuit :  Well,  I  should  laugli  if  he  wasn't !
Tell  them  I  am  level  headed  yet.  [Common  saying  of  Perkins's  friend  who
<3ied  recently.] It's  all  right. It's  all  right,  now.

He  is  writing.  Who  is  writing  ?  Who  is  writing  ?  Where  is  Top  ?  Here's
the  little  one.  Who's  Margaret  ?  There  are  two— two  Margarets.  There  aro
two  Margarets.  One  for  you  [to  Dr.  T.]  and  then  there's  a  little  one.
There  are  two  Margarets.  [All  correct.]  And  there  is  something  to  do
Avith  this. [Beads  again.]


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Miirgaret  liad  this— owned  this. I  got  that  as  a  playtliing. Slie  says
you  gave  that  to  her  to  play  with. Well,  take  that  away. [Watcli  again.]

There  is — Who's  Amit  IMai-garet  ?  But  if  I  see  rightly,  I  will  hear  it  over
again.  There's  a  sister  of  somebody — Aunt !  Wo  have  called  Margaret.
She's  an  aunt  Margaret,  if  I  see  rightly.  [Dr.  T's  sister  Margaret,  and
Babies'  aunt.]  If  you  can't  connect  this,  I  can't  get  it  for  you.  It  is  very
diflicult  for  me  to  get  it  straightened.  S-A-R-A-IT.  [P.'s  grandmother's
name.]  It  sounded  like — I  don't  know,  I  don't  know.  Yes  !  She  is  talking
v.'itli  me,  but  it's  so  indistinct  !  [To  Dr.  T.]  Wliich  one  of  your  brothers
had  a  sore  throat  ?  He's  had  a  sore  tliroat,  they  tell  me,  Init  it's  better  now,
and  he's  gone  away.  He's  writing.  He's  getting  well  now,  and  he's  going
to  be  better  still.  [All  correct.]  But  he  is  positive  !  lie's  such  a  peculiar
fellov/.  And  they  liardly  understand  him  sometimes.  He'll  be  better  some-
time. But  wait  a  minute  ! Who's  this  calling  me  ?

[To  Dr.  T.] This  is  your  mother. This  is  her  watch. She  says,  "Tell

W  [Dr.  T's.  father]  that  the  baby  is  all  right." [Mother  died  in

premature  childbirth,  but  fatlier  was  also  dead  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.}  i

[But  Dr.  Thaw's  then  living  brother  v/as  also  named  W  . Sec  below. —

R.  H.] I  don't  know  what  that  means.

(Dr.  T.  :  Will  she  say  anything  more  to  me  ?)  Phinuit :  It  seems  to  me
she  was  unconscious.  She  loses  herself.  But  I  tell  you  slie's  been  here  a
long  time.  [Twenty-nine  years.]  And  it  bothers  her  to  recall.  I  think
she'll  recall  it  all  right.

But  I  wisli  you  would  tell  me  who  A — A — Wait  a  minute  !  A — 1 — Alfred
— Al — Elf— I  tried  to  get  that  for  you,  but  I  can't — Alfred.  Will  you  under-
stand that,  if  you  can  1  Wait  a  minute  !  He's  connected  with  you.  [Dr.  T.
had  brother  Albert.]  And  I  got  the  name.  Florence — Florry.  [jMrs.  T.'s
name.]  Who  is — She  doesn't  seem  to  know  quite  who  that  was — (Mrs.  T.  r
That's  I.)  Phinuit  :  Why  don't  you  tell  her  so  ?  Tell  her  !  Talk  to  her
and  make  her  recollect.  What  can  she  say — •  She  has  sometimes  lost
consciousness.  She's  very  well  indeed.  But  you  must  tell  her  !  Explain
to  her  !  But  it's  hard  for  her  to  recall.  But  you  are  married  since  she
passed  out  of  the  body. And  there  are  three  children.  [Correct.]

(Dr.  T.  :  Are  they  with  her  ? Does  she  know  about  my  father  1 )

Pliinuit  :  W  . Who  is  W  ?  W  ,  that's  a  brother  !  [Correct.]

Brother  W  . [Correct.] Well  ! There  are  two  W  's. There  are

W  and  W  ,  a  father  W  and  a  son  W  you  see  ?  [All  correct.

jName  of  father  and  son,  with  diminutive  for  son  correctly  given.]

I  have  a —  of  tliat  for  you.

(Dr.  T.  :  How  about  father?)  Phinuit:  I  get  his  influence  too.  I  get
yiiur  father's  influence,  not  very  strongly.  It  is  weak.  And  he  is  weak.  Do
you  know  what  I  mean?  [Turning  to  Mrs.  T.]  Who  is  connected  with  you
that  is  paralyzed  ?  There'.s  a  relative  of  yours  here,  who  passed  out  of  the
body,  who  had  paralysis,  and  don't  you  forget  it  !  I  know  what  I  am  talking
nbout  !  (Mrs.  'T.  :  You  are  right.)  Phinuit :  Of  course  I'm  right.  I  know
that  you  can't  recognise  everybody,  but  at  the  same  time  he  is  here.  At
the  same  time,  he  is  a  gentleman.  [Jlrs.  T.  saw  her  grandfather  only  once,
when  a  child.]  Wait  a  minute  !  He  is  a  relative  of  yours.  But  he  brings
one  that  passed  out  with  paralysis. [To  Mrs.  T.] And  this  is  a  relative  0£


XXXIII.] Ohservcdions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  545


yours.  But  also  there  is  Ruth.  She  passed  out. — This  is  your  mother's
mother.  [Correct.]  And  she  passed  out  of  the  body  with  paralysis  ;  and
don't  you  forget  it ! [All  con-ect.]

Now  wait  a  minute  !  Here  is — I  want  you  to  tell  who  M  is  —  M  .

[To  Dr.  T.].  That  comes  to  you.  And  this  woman  sends  her  love  to  father
— and  this  in  the  body.  And  this  seems  to  be  connected  with — But  let  us
see— [Dr.  T's  sister  living.] That's  all  ri^ht. Here  comes  the  baby  again.

Speak  to  me,  papa.  She's  with  me.  We're  both  here.  (Dr.  T.  :  Can  you
talk  ? ) Can  I  talk  ? Can  I  talk  ?  This  is  the  baby. This  is  little  Margaret.

I  can  spsak  to  you,  but  not  very  j^lain.

Phinuit  :  But  still  .she  speaks.

I  found  grandma. Other  lady. Who  is  L  L  E  ?  [Correct.]

[To  Dr.  T.] Dear  boy  ! [E.  is  Dr.  T's  mother.] W  is  here  too.

Phinuit  :  Friends,  you  know  I  am  getting  too— will  you  tell  me  what  I
shall  say  to  him  ?

I  can't  say  good-bye  to  you,  for  I'll  be  with  you  just  the  same.  Tell  my
son  I  love  him  well.

E.  ;  Ask  him  if  he  doesn't  love  me.
Phinuit :  She  says  to  them —

E.  :  I  have  been  here  for  many  a  long  year.  I  love  you,  and  my  interests
are  always  with  my  children.  I  cannot  stay  here.  I  am  weak  yet.  I  will
talk  with  you  better  next  time. Shall  I  speak  to  you  before  you  go  ?

(Dr.  T.  :  Are  you  all  happy  there  ?)

E.  :  I  am  very  happy.  Oh,  if  you  will  only  believe  there  is  no  death  !
I  live  and  love  you.  Don't  let  these  little  things  worry  you.  It  grieves
me.  Will  you  cherish  me  in  your  memory  as  you  always  did,  and  think  of
me  as  I  am  ? Watching  over  you. [To  Mrs.  T.] This  dear  little  woman.

[Placing  hands  on  heads  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.] Who  is  L  ?  I  don't  know.

I  only  love  you. I  will  stay  with  you.

R.  :  Speak  to  me. Tell  Betty  I  love  her.

(Mrs.  T.  :  How  does  Margaret  look  ?)

Phinuit  :  The  dear  little  thing — dear  little  thing.  There,  pat  her,  and
papa,  we  love.

M.  :  He  used  to  take  me  on  his  arm.  I  see  him.  He  can  take  me  no
more  in  the  bodj%  but  in  the  spirit,  if  he  will.  You  have  carried  me,  you
have  seen  me. You  will  see  me  again. Truly,  truly,  truly  !

(Mrs.  T.  :  What  can  we  do  to  see  you  ?)

Mamma,  dear  !  Mamma,  dear  !  We'll  be  with  you.  Do  nothing.  Be
patient.  When  your  pillow  is  wet,  I  cannot  rest.  When  you  are  cheerful,
I  am  happy.  Don't  cry.  — In  the  body.  Dry  away  those  tears,  and  don't
fret. That's  all  right.

Phinuit  :  Friends,  I  am  growing  weak,  and  I've  got  to  go.  Au  revoir.
Au  revoir. [A  sentence  of  French  here.] Now  I  want  to  say  "  good-bye."

Third  Silling. March  Uth,  1892.
[Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  sitting, ilr.  A.  Dow  writing  shorthand.]

Phinuit:  Come  liere.  I'm  here.  Now  let  me  speak  to  you.  My  name's
Dr.  Phinuit. I'll  sjjeak  to  you  ;  glad  to  see  you.  How  are  you  ?  Oh,  I  know


546


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


you,  friends  !  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you  again.  You  know  me,  don't  you  1
Well,  I'm  not  far  away,  after  all.  There's  only  a  little  distance  between.
[To  Dr.  T.]  I've  seen  your  mother.  You  remember  her  not  very  well,  if
at  all.  She  says  that  when  you  left  her  you  were  a  little  fellow,  and  since
then  have  made  many  changes  in  your  life — you  see  your  mother  tells  me  so.
She  left  your  father.  She  left  him  in  the  body,  you  understand.  Come
here  !  [Putting  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.'s  heads  together.]  Well,  well  !  I  like  to
see  you  two  together.  You  speak  to  this  lady  here — she  comes.
(Dr.  T.  :  Is  my  mother  here  ?)

Pliinuit  :  Give  me  her  influence.  She's  gone  and  brought  the  baby.  She
says  she  is  a  bright  little  thing,  the  little  one  who  went  to  hud  hor,  little
Margery,  and  she's  here  too,  and  she's  very  glad  to  see  you.  She  says  she's
very  glad  you  have  made  your  life  what  it  is.  Let  me  tell  you  a  word.
You  know  spirits  can  see  ahead — she  says  there's  still  a  brighter  prospect,
and  you've  a  long  life  in  the  body.  She  wanted  me  to  tell  you  that,  and
she  wanted  me  to  send  her  love  to  your  father.

(Dr.  T.  :  How  about  fatlier  ?)

Pliinuit :  Your  father  passed  out  after  she  did.  She  passed  out  first —
she  doesn't  know  how  many  yeai's  ago.  She  wants  to  tell  you  she  is  witli
me,  and  there  are  two  little  children  with  them  ;  also,  there  is  a  little
brother — a  little  one  in  the  spirit — another  in  the  spirit — in  the  spirit.
There  is  one  that  passed  out  years  ago.  I  think  that  was  before  you  came,
who  passed  out  before  you  came  in  the  body  [correct],  and  there  are  with
you  also  others.  You  can  speak  to  them.  This  will  help  me  to  straighten
this  out.

(Dr.  T.  :  Can  I  speak  to  them  ?)

Pliinuit :  I  told  you  about  them.  I  told  j'ou  about  tliem  once  before,
but  I  got  a  little  mixed.  There  is  a  Betty  in  the  body.  You  speak  to
them.  You  do  not  know  them,  of  course,  you  were  not  born  then.  But
you  understand.  ■  ■

(Dc.  T.  :  What  is  father  doing  ?)

Phinuit  :  Your  fatiier  remembers  you  better  than  your  mother.  But
where's  your  aunt  that  had  some  care  of  you  ?
(Dr.  T.  :  An  aunt  ?)

Pliinuit :  An  aunt— years  ago,  that  passed  out  of  the  body.
(Dr.  T.  :  Does  her  name  come  ?)

Phinuit :  You  had  an  aunt  that  was  kind  to  you.  [Correct.]
Phinuit  [to  D.]  :  But  I've  seen  your  influence  before  —but  I  don't  know.
But  I've  told  you  about  what  the  babies  said  about  you.  Said  about  their
uncle.  The  baby  told  me  about  it.  Sent  her  love  to  her  uncle — her  uncle
Allen — Alfred — It's  something  like  that.  [V/rong.  Name  comes  later.]  I
tried  to  tell  you,  but  you  know  the  baby  told  me — and  I  couliln't  get  it  from

her. But  I  do  the  best  I  can. There's  a  W  . [Correct, father  of

Dr.  T.]

(Dr.  T.  :  But  what  does  he  say  ?)

Phinuit  :  He  sends  his  love  to  you,  and  wants  to  know  what  you  are
looking  for. He's  got  a  liigh  forehead  — and  ho  comes. Do  you  know  Cler—

Clerk — C  . C  ? Who  is  that  gentleman  that  comes  to  you  ?  High

forehead. Bald  on  top. He  wants  to  speak  to  you.


xxxiii.] Ohservalions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  547


(Dr.  T.  :  Is  he  in  the  body  ?)

Phiiuiit :  I  think  he  is,  but  he's  going  to  pass  oat  of  the  body.  He's  a
friend  of  yours.

(Dr.  T.  :  Is  he  a  young  man  ?)

Phinuit :  No,  he's  not  very  old — but  at  the  same  time  he's  in  the  body —
I  don't  know  his  age.  [Correct  description  and  name  of  a  cousin  and  friend
of  T.'s.]  Your  father  is  here  with  a  high  forehead.  You  don't  look  much
like  your  father. [Correct.] Your  fatlier  sends  love  to  you.

T.'s  father  :  Well,  I'm  here,  and  E  ,  E  . [T.'s  mother's  name.]

<Dr.  T.  :  Any  other  name  ? Does  he  call  her  any  other  name  ?)

Phinuit  :  I'll  tell  you  as  fast  as  I  can.  Here's  the  baby.  Oh  !  I'm  so
fond  of  this  little  one.  She  wnnts  me  to  tell  you  she's  not  afraid  of  me  any-
more. She  knows  I  talked  ti.  yo  i  in  the  body.  You  know  what  I  mean  ?
I  explained  it  to  Ruthie.

(Mrs.  T.  :  Little  Ruthie  1)

Phinuit :  The  little  baby  is  Margaret.  She  is  very  delighted.  She  wants
a  posie — give  her  some  posies.  [Mrs.  T.  had  brought  some  Kttle  flowers  for
the  babies,  at  this  time  on  the  table  in  paper.]  Posie,  posie, — give  one
posie. [Taking  flowers  and  separating  them.] That's  for  the  little  one.

(Mrs.  T.  :  I  brought  them  for  the  little  ones.)

Phinuit  :  That's  for  the  little  one.  She  wants  some  for  the  other  one —
just  two  or  three.  You  don't  know  how  the  little  one  can  speak  now.  You
know  she  takes  the  spirit  of  these  things — the  spiritual  thing — and  the
spirit  part  is  just  as  real  to  her  as  your  life  is  to  you.

M.  :  Come  to  me.  Mamma.  (Mrs.  T.  :  If  I  might  see  her  1)  Phinuit:
What  a  bright  face  !  She  has  gr.iyish  blue  eyes — large,  full  and  j^retty.  I
call  them  blue,  a  grayish  blue.  Wliat  a  very  bright  and  pretty  little  mouth
she  has  !  [Correct  description  of  M.]  She  loves  you  both.  Do  you  know,
I  can  get  more  from  the  children  than  I  can  from  the  old  ones,  because
there  is  such  a  strong  tie  betw^een  you.

Who's  George  in  the  bodj'  ?  Well  !  I  hear  something — Oh  !  I  thank
you  for  the  posies.  She  wants  me  to  separate  the  posies  and  give  some  to
the  other  baby.  I  will  give  her  so  many  [separating  flowers],  and  that  one
will  have  so  many. Just  the  same  for  each  little  one.

R.  :  Pretty,  pretty,  pretty,  pretty.  Where's  the  little  blue  flowers  ?
Pretty,  pretty,  pretty.

Phinuit  :  Oil  !  That's  a  pretty  bal)y — Ruth — Pretty,  pretty,  pretty.
Do  you  love  the  babies  ?  (Dr.  T.  :  What  do  you  think,  Dr.  ?)  Phinuit  :
She  says  that.  Baby,  baby,  babie.  Tiiis  little  one  says — Pretty,  pretty,
pretty,  pretty,  pretty.

BA.BY— Can  you  hear  her  speak  ?  Do  you  hear  her  speak  ?  Bettie — -
Bettie — Bettie — slie  keeps  calling  Bettie.  Give  me  the  little  toy  thing.  I
like  that — it  refreshes  her.  I  never  saw  two  brighter  children.  You  know
they  have  no  more  pain  in  the  stomach.

(Dr.  T.  :  Doctor,  don't  they  ever  suffer  in  the  spirit  body  1)

Phinuit  :  No  more  pain— no  pain.

(Dr.  T.  :  Do  they  grow  up  as  we  do  here  ?)

Phinuit  :  In  just  the  same  number  of  years,  but  in  this  world  there  is  no
time. Life  goes  on  for  ever. That  is,  thei^e  is  no  death. I  tell  you.


548


7?  ich ard  Hodijson.


[part


friends,  just  as  sure  as  you  live  in  the  body,  I  lived  once  in  the  body.  I
lived  in  Germany  and  Paris  and  Marseilles.  I  I  now  if  those  cranks
weren't  so  stujjid  they  could  find  me.  [Referring  to  eflbrts  on  the  part
of  the  S.  P.  R.  to  find  out  about  hiin.]

Well !  I  hear  Baby,  calling  baby,  baby,  baby.  [All  these  words— baby —
pretty — Bettie — were  given  with  just  tlie  accent  Ruth  gave  when  she  was
alive.  Fretty  was  one  of  the  first  words,  and  she  said  it  constantly  about
anything  she  liked.  These  were  the  only  words,  except  Mamma  and  Papa
and  pussie.]  Do  you  know  she  takes  your  hand  and  pats  it  like  that  [patting
Mrs.  T.'s  hand]  like  that.  You  will  see  her  just  as  sure  as  you  live.  The
veil  will  be  lifted  so  you  can  see  these  two  little  ones  when  you  are  partially
dreaming.  It  will  not  be  a  dream.  It  will  be  real.  I  promise  that  will  be
your  reward  for  blunging  these  little  things.  They  realise  these,  just  as
much  as  you  realise  that  you  live.  There  is  grandma  taking  care  of  them.
(Dr.  T.  :  Which  grandma  is  that  ?)  Phinuit  [to  Dr.  T.]  :  That's  your  mother.
There  are  two  mothers  with  them,  and  at  the  same  time  a  grandjja.

Phinuit  : Do  you  know  who  Gr is  ? He's  a  relation  of  yours.

[Correct.  Name  of  a  brother-in-law  and  also  of  a  cousin.]  He  is  here  with
them,  and  he  is  in  the  spirit.  You  know  what  I  mean.  He  sends  love  to
them.  Love,  love,  love — that's  all  I  can  get.  It  is  with  the  children  that  I
see  him.

Do  you  know  who  Cor — - It  sounds  like — Speak  to  him— You  must.

Who  is  Perkins  ?  [Mr.  D.'s  chum.]  He's  all  right  ;  a  good  fellow,  a  good
fellow,  l)ut  he  has  forty  minds  at  once,  and  doesn't  know  which  way  to
turn. He's  going  across  the  water.

[Pointing  to  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.'s  foreheads.]  I  see  a  great  big  light.  What
is  that  light  ?  What  is  that  light  here  ?  [Pointing.]  You,  friends,  are
going  to  make  a  change  in  your  life.  It  is  going  to  be  the  best  change  you
can  make.  The  baby  speaks  to  me.  It's  in  a  dift'ercnt  street — a  different
place  entirely.  It's  a  pretty  place.  I  see  the  change.  I  see  all  the  little
details. I  see  it  in  detail,  that  I  can't  describe. [All  correct.]

Who  is  tliat  lady  that  is  with  you  ? No,  the  stout  lady. [Not  stout.]
She  is  very  good  to  your  little  girl,  and  she  is  very  faithful. You  knov/
what  I  mean  1 But  she  gets  very  cranky  sometimes,  but  she  doesn't  mean
anything,  but  she  gets  cranky  sometimes. She  is  what  you  call .  .
She  lias  care  of  the  little  ones,  and  is  cranky  sometimes.

(Mrs.  T.  :  Do  the  babies  remember  her  ?)  [She  was  the  nurse  who  had
charge  of  them  all  their  lives.]

Pliinuit :  The  little  ones,  the  babies  in  the  spirit  world,  remember  her
very  well.

Do  you  know  who  Jane  is  1  Jenny — this  is  connected  with  this  gentle-
man. [Pointing  to  Dr.  T.] Wait  a  minute. Tliis  connects  with  this  lady.

(Dr.  T.  :  AVho  was  she  ?)  Phinuit  [to  Dr.  T.]  :  She  is  connected  with  you.

You  know  what  I  mean. It's  an  Aunt  J  Aunt  J  . (Dr.  T.  :

Any  other  name  ?) Phinuit  :  Who's  M J  1 Your  mother  told  me

to  tell  you. [All  correct. Aunt  of  Dr.  T.'s.]

(Dr.  T.  :  Is  she  happy  now  1)  Phinuit  :  She  remembers  you  when  you
were  a  little  fellow.  She  was  with  you  wlien  your  mother  come  out  of  tha
body.  [Correct.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Cer(ain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  549'


(Mrs.  T.  :  Can  yon  get  H—  back  ?)

Phinuit :  All  the  rest  of  the  friends  want  to  speak  to  you.  But  you  seo
there's  a  brotlier  G  .  [Correct.  Brother-in-law  mentioned  before.]  He-
wants  to  speak  to  you. Don't  bo  indifferent. Where's  W  1 He  wants-

to  send  love  to  W — — . [His  own  brother.] (Dr.  T.  :  Who  is ?>

Phinuit  :  Brother  W  it  is. He's  got  a  friend  W  . Named  W  .

Two  of  them  in  the  body. It  is  his  brother  W  . [All  correct.]

(Dr.  T.  :  Does  he  send  any  message  to  anyone  else  ?)

Phinuit  :  There's  a  lady  in  the  body  ;  his  lady  [correct]  and  he  wants  to-
recall  her. He's  talking  to  me  as  fast  as  he  can.

Ali—  WIio  is  Ellie?  Who  is  Nellie?  The  baby  calls  that— she-
calls  her  Nellie.  [Nurse  spoken  of  before.]  Nellie  !  That's  a  good  memory
for  the  little  one,  isn't  it  ?  Such  pretty  light  curls  !  All  over  her  head.
Just  as  perfect  a  little  girl  as  can  be  I  Tells  me  she  remembers  you.  You
will  see  her  in  the  new  house.  She  wants  me  to  go  there  for  you.  She  saya
there  is  going  to  be  a  better  change  for  you.  It's  going  to  be  near  th&
corner  [correct  of  new  house],  and  you  will  go  up  to  the  ui)per  room,  up
one  flight  front,  and  in  that  room  you  will  see  the  babies  come  to  you.
This  is  a  kind  of — what  do  you  call  it  ?  A  sitting  place.  You  will  get  tlie
babies  there.  You  stay  there  some  twilight  evening.  They  will  come  to
you.  You  will  hear  some  patter,  patter  of  the  little  ones,  and  soon  you
will  realise  they  are  with  you. I  shouldn't  be  surprised  if  you  saw —

How  funny  your  mother  wears  her  hair  !  [Smoothing  hair  as  Dr.  T.'s
mother  always  wore  it.]  Wears  it  so  funny.  She's  the  picture  of  modesty  ;
she's  the  most  modest  looking  woman  you  ever  saw  !

You  know  that  what  you  call  death  in  the  body  is  natural.  You  know
that  it  is  hard,  particularly  when  those  you  love  i)ass  over  beliind  the  veil.
But  they  are  far  more  happy  behind  tlie  veil  than  in  tlie  body.  For  it  is
God's  will  to  take  tiiem,  as  they  have  lived.  We  tell  you  of  these  things,
because  it  is  right  for  you  to  know,  and  the  instrument  like  the  one  I  have
here  is  to  use  to  explain  what  we  are  in  the  spirit.  But  sometimes  it  is
very  hard  to  get  the  influences  straiglib,  and  I  tell  you  everything  I  can,  and
even  then  it  is  hard  for  every  one.

^  -If  -it-  ^  -w-

Look  on  it  right.  Don't  let  it  worry  you  and  affect  your  health.  Little
woman,  keep  straight.  Don't  be  too  much  exercised,  and  keep  perfectly
cool.  You  will  get  all  you  want.  It  will  be  a  help  to  you  in  the  body.
When  you  meet  a  friend  and  you  want  them  to  know  your  experience,  you
can  explain  it  to  them  witli  perfect  reason.  Go  on  with  your  own  experi-
ence. If  they  do  not  wish  to  listen  to  you  do  not  bother  them.  Your
mother  is  guiding  me  every  minute.

(Dr.  T.  :  Any  message  ?)

Phinuit  :  You  know  Aunt  M  1 M J  ? She  wants  to  send

love.  Who  is — who  is — who  is — who  is  All — Ell — Ell — in  the  body  ?  He  is
connected  with  her.  [Points  to  Mrs.  T.]  Who  is  that  ?  Tell  me  o.uick.
It  begins  with  L — That'-s  it.

(Dr.  T.  :  A  man  or  a  v.-n?Ba;:  ?)  I'hinuit :  It's  a  gentleman  in  the  body,
and  he  has  a  fiister.  [To  Dr.  T.]  How  many  relatives  have  you  got?
Goodness  gracious  ! How  should  I  Vnov  ihrui  1 They're  such  a  lot  of


550


liicJiavd  Hodgson.


[rART


tliem.  It's  a  ]mz7.]e  to  me.  You  have  cousins— uncles — aunts.  One  of
them  passed  out  of  the  body  in  the  water.  lie  went  across  the  water  and
passed  out. [True  of  Dr.  T.'s  father.]

(Dr.  T.  :  Docs  my  father  come  ?)  Phinuit :  You  know  this  gentleman  ?
He  has  a  beard  here — the  beard  here.  [Toucliing  T.'s  face.]  You  have
none.  He  has  a  prominent  nose.  (Dr.  T.  :  What  does  he  do  there  ?)
Phinuit  :  He  is  reading  and  writing,  your  father  is  ;  but  that's  not
connected  with  the  body.  He  never  was  so  pleased  with  anything  as  with
the  babies.

[Reaching  for  A.  D.]  Pliysically  you're  pretr.y  v.-ell.  L  )ok  at  the
bottles  of  medicine.  [In  A.  D. 's  pocket.]  Give  them  to  me.  [Bottles
given.]  Ilomreopathique — pellets.  Belladonna.  Can't  quite  tell  large  B —
Belladonna.  (No.)  Bryonia — that's  it.  Good  medicine  for  babies.  You
won't  have  to  take  medicine  long.  It's  very  good  medicine — these  pellets.
I'd  rather  give  you  a  2  oz.  iron  powder  ;  some  cincliona.  You  won't  have
to  take  medicine  long.  The  more  medicine  the  worse  for  you.  Headache
better  now  ?  E.xpect  a  headache — you  will  be  sure  to  have  one.  [A.  D.  up
late  ;  in  consequence,  bad  headaclie.]  How  many  girls  have  you  got  ?  One,
two,  three.  Look  out  for  the  girls.  You  don't  cire  for  them,  but  they're
after  y()u.

Oh  heavens  !  What  a  lot  there  is  in  your  life.  You  haven't  begun  yet.
You  write  a  good  deal.  Don't  write  too  much.  That's  a  funny  one.
[Laughs.]  You're  all  right.  You  won't  pass  out  of  the  body.  No  trouble
vt'itli  you.  Good  stomach.  Good  heart.  Good  lungs.  It  makes  me  laugh.
[Laughing.]

Here's  Eliza  here.  She  comes.  You  can  ask  her  any  question  you  like.
******

Here's  11  . II — — . lie  is  calling  to  see  you. lie  says  you  are

— [?]  since  he  has  passed  out.  Give  me  your  handkerchief.  [Places  this
•over  head. Pubs  forehead  and  eyes  and  top  of  head  for  several  minutes  in.

manner  peculiar  to  Dr.  H  during  period  of  last  illness,  a  period  of  two

years.]

Phinuit :  But  he  is  here  now  beside  me.  Who's  Ida  ?  He  has  got  an
Elice — no — wait  a  moment. Who's  E-L — Elice  ?

Here's  H — — . Hurry,  he's  speaking  to  me. Ho  wants  to  a^^k  you

something  about — [pause.] Who's  Clark  ? That's  some  one  else. H  .

H  . He  comes  here. He  wants  me  to  take  my  handkerchief  and  pub

it  over  that  way.  He  wants  you  to  tell  his  wife  in  the  body  that  he  is  alive
in  the  spirit.  Whose  childx'en  are  these  ?  He  gives  his  love  to  the  children.
He  says  they  are  very  happy  little  things,  and  not  to  worry  about  them,
because  they  are  better  oti"  than  you  are.  He  wants  you  to  tell  this  one  in
the  body.  Tliere  are  two — three  in  the  body — four  and  one  more.  Tliat's
all.  That  makes  tive.  I  mean  them — for  him — that  you  would  know  it
was  all — [Correct.]

(Dr.  T.  :  What  should  I  say  ?)

Phinuit :  He  lias  two  with  him.  He  has  two  that  talk — two  that  talk
with  him.  There's  one  speaking  to  him  now.  There's  one  that  they  have
just  put  to  lessons,  and  then  others.  He  wants — wants  you  to  send  his  love
to  them — to  take  a  message — to  tell  them  there  is  no  death. Where's  the


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  551


w^tch  ?  You  bring  something  belonging  to  him  that  you  may  get  hh
influence — like  this.

Ob,  your  mother  has  been  here  a  long  time.  We  can't  make  her  refresh
her  memory  as  she  could  if  she  had  been  here  a  short  time.

But  who  is  Grace  ?  I  have  a  Grace  here — in  the  spirit,  T  mean.  She-
wants  to  be  remembered  to  you  in  the  body. [Mrs.  T.'s  half  sister.]

Who's  that  they  call  Dr.  ? I. don't  know,  but  there's  a  gentleman  her&

calling  Dr.  Somebody. It's  H  . [Evidently  to  Dr.  T.] I  am  so  glad  to

have  you  come  in  and  see  mo.  You  used  to  come  and  see  jne  before  I
passed  out.

I  should  like  to  know  who  this  F is. He  wants  to  speak  too.  [See

previous  sitting.]

Wlio's  that  they  call  Dr  ? Speak  to  those  you  recognise. There's  a  Dr.

here,  [H was  called  Dr.]  and  a  Dr.  in  the  body. (Dr.  T.  :  I  am  a.

doctor.)  Phinuit  :  I  am  glad  you  corrected  that  for  me — it  leaves  too  much
for  me  to  do. Who's  sj^eaking  ?

(Dr.  T.  :  What  does  F  say  ?) Phinuit  : Hush  ! F  wishes  ta

bo  remembered  to  you.  [Painter  friend  spoken  of  in  first  sitting  ]  (Dr.
T.  :  What  is  he  doing  now  ?)  Phinuit :  I  told  you  about  him  before,  you
know.  Who's  Carrie  ?  [Tiie  most  intimate  friend  of  Mrs.  T.'s  mother  was
called  Carrie.  Named  as  Caroline  in  later  sitting.  She  knew  Mrs.  T.  well
when  a  child.] B-e-a-t-r-i-c-e. They  call  Bettie — Bettie.

(Dr.  T.  :  But  wlio  is  she  ?)

Phinuit :  She's  a  sister  in  the  body.  You  will  correct  that  for  me.  She
is  going  to  stay  n  the  body.  That  ought  to  please  you  when  I  say  that  s»
clear.  But  here's — well,  wait  a  minute — Annie — Annie — no,  Anna  Eliza.
That's  the  name.  Comes.  Anna  Eliza.  That's  the  mother,  Eliza.  Anna
Eliza.  I  hear  it.  [Mrs.  T.'s  dead  aunt.  Slie  was  called  Aunt  Eliza,  and  it
was  unknown  to  us  at  the  time  that  she  had  a  first  name  Anna.]

That's  not  H  . There's  his  sister  somebody. Who  is  that  they  call

Lizzie — that's  with  H  ,  not  with  you  ? [Unknown.] There  are  two  we

have  named — Anna  Eliza — because  with  this  watch  I  get  these  names  mixed
up.  ftlarie  Jane  and  Eliza.  [A  careful  distinction  made  between  thesef
names.]  S-u-s — I  don't  know  who  that  is — I  can't  get  it.  You  speak  ta
them  and  ask  them  what  you  like.

(Dr.  T.  :  Who's  speaking  now  ?)  Phinuit  :  Your  mother  is  here  now.
(Dr.  T.  :  Does  she  want  to  send  a  message  to  any  one  else  ?)  Phinuit  r
Which  one  of  your  brothers  is  that  who  is  kind  of  funny  ?  (Dr.  T.  :  Perhaps-
two.)

*  *  *  *  *  -X-

Don't  try  to  mix  me  up.  You  talk  straight.  You  ask  questions,  and  I
answer  them. Two  sisters. There  are  two  sisters.

******

Don't  hurry  me.  I  have  to  hear  and  then  tell  it  to  you.  You're  a  good
fellow,  but  you  mustn't  hurry  me.  Well,  you  talk  to  her.  Which  one  of
them  is  it  that  draws  ?  [To  Mrs.  T.]  It's  you.  You  draw  or  paint  or
something.  But  there's  one  that  plays — that's  very  musical.  Yes,  this
sister  plays,  she's  very  musical — has  taste  for  music.  [True  of  both  sisters,
of  Mrs.  T.] [To  A.  D.] Oh  psh  aw  ! The  dit'kens  take  you  ! I  can't  get


■552


Richard  Hochjson.


[part


ymir  name.  A-l-e —  [To  Mrs.  A.  B.T.]  You  had  two  mothers.  You  had
a  grandma  named  Riitli.  Sh.e's  a  nice  lady,  and  there'.s  another  named —
wait  a  minute — A — V/ell,  I  hear  someone  calling  Fannie.  [Unknown.]  It's
got  two  e's — B-o— How  do  you  pronounce  it  ?  B-e-s-s-i-e  I  caught  that.
[Mrs.  T.'s  father's  first  wife's  name  was  Elizabeth.]  She's  trying  to  toll  nie
about  someone  that's  in  the  body.

(Mrs.  T.  :  How  about  my  father  and  mother  ?)

Phinuit :  Your  father  is  going  to  live  a  good  wliile  yet.  He  has
rheumatism.  (Dr.  T.  :  Oh,  that's  a  good  guess  !)  Phinuit :  Oh,  lie  has
rheumatism,  I  can  tell  you.  (Mrs.  T.  :  What  are  their  names  ?)  Phinuit:
T  don't  know  their  namas  at  all — but  I'll  tell  you  who  I  hear  speaking  to  you.

(Dr.  T.  :  Wlio  ?) Phinuit  :  I'd  like  to  know  who  that  A  is. You  say

you  can't  place  her.  You  don't  see  who  she  is.  A — — .  I  hear  your  mother
:say  that  you  know.  [Dr.  T.'s  aunt  living.]  Sach  an  awful  lot  of  relations  !
How  do  you  ex[)ect  me  to  remember  them  all  1

(Dr.  T.  :  Will  my  brother  say  anything  to  me  ?)

Phinuit  :  I  told  you  about  your  fatlier  W  . I  told  you  about  your

brotlier  W  . [Using  the  diminutive.] I  told  you  about  your  aunt.  I

told  you  about  your  sister  M  ,  and  I  told  you  about  L — L — L — who  is

she  ? (Dr.  T.  ;  Slie's  a  sister  of  mine.) Phinuit  :  Well,  it  is  L  .

Wait  a  moment.  I  know  what  her  name  is  perfectly,  but  the  last  part  I
can't  get.

(Dr.  T.  :  She's  connected  with  some  one  in  the  spirit  ?)

Phinuit :  They  tell  mo  I  am  smart  enough  to  hear  this  all  right.  [Dr.
T.  OiFers  suggestion.]  I  don't  want  any  of  your  help,  Ellen.  [To  A.D.]
What  the  dickens  is  your  name?  A-1 — [Laughs.]  (Dr.  T.  :  What  is
it  V)  Phinuit :  I  know.  I  know  what  it  is.  [Laughs.]  (Dr.  T.  :  Well,
tell  us  what  it  is.)  Phinuit  :  Oh,  no.  I  know  what  it  is  just  the  same.
{Dr.  T.  :  Tell  us.)  Phinuit  :  Well,  it's  a  great  long  name,  and  it  ends  with
•e-r.  (Dr.  T.  :  Good  guess,  Doctor  !)  Phinuit  :  Oh,  I  am  guessing,  am  I  ?
What  a  good  fellow  I  am  to  guess  !  [Spells.]  A-l-e-x-a-n-d-e-r.  How  do
you  like  that  ?  You  can  call  that  what  you  like.  You  can  give  it  a  name.
Do  you  know,  if  it  hadn't  been  for  your  little  girl  I  never  should  have
found  it  out.  The  little  curly  headed  one.  She  tried  to  spell  it  for  me  bub
couldn't.  She  told  your  sister  [pointing  to  Mrs.  T.],  and  she  asked  this  lady
— the  lady  the  little  one  went  to  find — [Dr.  T.'  s  mother  in  first  sitting],  and
she  tells  her,  and  then  she  came  and  spelled  it  for  me.  Grace  is  with  your
little  ones,  and  she  makes  me  put  your  hand  up  there  so— and  she  wants  to

be remembered  to  her  papa  in  the  body. [All  true.] Who's  L  ?

[Spelling  diminutive.]  Your  mother  just  called  that  to  me.  She  comes
-closer — closer.  She  wants  you  to  tell  I-d-a — it  sounds  like  that— I-d-a.
01^  I L  ! [Dr.  T.'s  sister's  usual  name.]

■}!■  *  *

[To  A.  D.] I  think  your  arm  aches.
(Mrs.  T.  :  Does  Gracie  send  her  love  to  anyone  ?)
Phinuit  :  To  you. She's  the  one  I  spoke  to  you  about.
(Mrs.  T.  :  Whom  does  she  send  her  love  to  ?)

Phinuic  :  To  the  one  that  has  the  rheumatism.  In  fact  both  of  them
have  the  rheumatism. [Correct.] Who's  that  with  one— two— three — f^ur


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  553


letters — who's  F  ?  This  is  a  cousin. Coiinected  with — who?  With  you.

[To  Dr.  T.] Cousin  F  . [Dr.  T.'s  cousin.] Yes,  cousin  F  has  gone

away.  He  has  got  a  sister,  and  she's  all  right.  Hear  that  ?  Tell  them  I
say  it. Will  you  ? They're  speaking  to  me  now. He  has  got  a  sister  in

the  body. F  's  got  a  sister,  and  F  's  there  too. [All  correct.]

(Dr.  T.  :  Who's  speaking  ?)

Phinuit :  That's  F  ^'s  brother — brother. Wait  a  minute. He  has

a  brother  in  the  body,  too. [Wrong.] I  don't  know  who — I  can't  correct

this  for  you. Who's  Eliza,  connected  with  F  ? [Aunt.] Wants  to

send  her  love  to  F  here. You  know  Marie? (Dr.  T.  :  I  know  her.)

Phinuit :  Marie  says  tell  L  what  she  says. (Dr.  T.  :  Who  sends  this  ?)

Phinuit  [loudly]  :  Your  mother.  I  told  you  all  this.  Here  come  the  babies
again.  There  are  two  others  of  your  relatives  here,  too.  I'll  tell  you  just
as  well  as  I  can.  But  here  comes  the  little  one.  She  makes  me  put  her
hand  on  your  hand.  This  is  the  youngest  of  the  little  ones,  and  she  wants
to  speak  to  you.  And  I  want  to  tell  you,  you  will  see  the  babies  in  your
new  house.  They  will  be  there,  and  then  you  will  recognise  them.  They
are  in  the  spirit,  but  you  will  see  them.  They  know  it.  You  will  hear  the
little  patter,  patter,  patter.  Don't  be  afraid.  Ask  for  it  and  you  will  liave
it,  just  as  sure  as  you  live.

******

Foiu-lh  Silting. March  I8th,  1892.

[Mr.  Perkins  sitting.  Mr.  A.  Dow  writing.  Mrs.  Thaw  in  back
part  of  room.]

Phinuit :  My  name's  Pliinuit.  [Feels  Mr.  D.'s  head.]  Oh,  Alex  !  how
are  you?  I'm  glad  to  see  you.  [Feeling  Mr.  P.'s  head.]  V/ell,  George  !
Well,  you  little  rascal,  George  !  George,  you  have  called  to  see  me.  George  !
George  !  George  !  Perkins  !  Oh,  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you.  How  are  you  ?
How  are  you,  George  ?  You've  no  throat  trouble — not  a  hang  bit.  You're
riot  going  to  pass  out  with  consumption  ;  who  said  so  ?  That  makes  mo
laugh. Speak  to  me  ;  don't  be  afraid. Where's — where's  the  doctor  ?

(Mrs.  T.  :  He  couldn't  be  here  to-day).

Phinuit :  George,  I'm  glad  to  see  you.  I  have  seen  you  in  the  distance  a
long  time.  You  know  what  I  mean,  don't  you  ?  You're  not  ill,  are  you  ?
{George  :  No).

You're  a  pretty  good  fellow,  take  you  all  together.  A  good,  square,
upright,  honest  fellow  ;  mean  well,  but  there's  lots  of  fun  in  you  down  at
the  bottom,  but  you're  kind  of  serious.

Well,  how  are  you,  friends  ?  I  see  a  brother.  [Wrong.]  Don't  bo  afraid
to  talk  to  me.  ^Yho  is  that  lady  ?  [Points  to  Mrs.  T.  on  sofa.]  Oh,  you
dear  little  woman.  I  have  some  friends  that  want  to  speak  to  you  iti  a
minute.  [To  George.]  You  have  some  friends,  too.  Do  you  know  that  I
get  the  influence  of  your  mother,  George  ?  That  is  the  influence  of  some-
thing belonging  to  her,  that  you  can  give  me.  [Mr.  P.  takes  out  of  pocket
chain  belonging  to  mother,  and  hands  it  to  Phinuit.]  I  mean  the  influence
of  your  mother.  [Insists  on  keeping  cotton  which  is  around  cliain  as  well
as  chain.]


554


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


Phinuit  to  Mr.  D.  :  Aleck,  you  pay  more  attention  to  me  and  stop  your
-writing.  [To  Mr.  P.]  This  is  your  motlier's  ;  you  Icnow  what  I  mean  ?
[Correct.]  But  you  know  I  get  this  spiritually.  You  know  what  I  mean,
don't  you  ? You  want  to  speak  to  her. (Mr.  P.  :  Yes).

Phinuit  :  Don't  be  afraid  to  speak.  This  spirit  who  conies  to  call  me  is
your  mother.

[To  Mr.  D.] Alex.  ■
(Mr.  P.  :  What  hour  was  I  born?)

Phiiiuit  [counting]  :  Un,  deux,  trois,  quatre  [up  to  ten].  Oh,  you  were
born  at  two  o'clock.  We  begin  at  one,  that's  dark  ;  then  two.  [After  some
confusion,  not  understanding  whether  night  or  day,  decides  at  two  at  night.]

(Mr.  P.  :  Father  thought  it  was  eleven.)

Phinuit  :  Your  raotlier  tells  me  you  were  born  at  two,  and  she  was  there
then  and  ought  to  know.  If  your  father  says  you  were  born  at  eleven  he
makes  a  mistake,  that's  all  there  is  about  it.

Mai'io.  Marie.  [Mr.  P. 's  mother's  name,  Mary  Etta.]  Elmaly,  Emily —
How  do  you  pronounce  that,  Alex?  Emily,  that's  an  aunt  ;  you  recall  that,
George  ?  [Not  known.]  I  don't  know,  but  I  get  this.  You  know  she's
been  in  the  spirit  a  long  time.  Then  you  know  her,  but  don't  remember
much  about  her,  do  you  ?  I  tell  you,  you  were  a  little  fellow,  you  were  a
little  fellow  when  she  passed  out.  A  trouble  in  the  heart.  What  was  it?
You  know  what  cancers  are.  She  had  an  inflammation  in  her —  [Placing
hand  on  lower  part  of  chest  and  abdomen] —  had  an  inflammation  ;  that  is  it
— looks  red.  She  did  not  pass  out  with  the  cancer.  She  puts  her  hand
here. She  had  inflammation  here. What  do  you  call  it  ?

Here's  little  Ruthie.  Here's  little  Ruthie.  [Mrs.  T.  goes  to  Phinuit.]
"I  can't  stay  away  any  longer.  I've  come  to  speak  to  you.  I  want  mamma.
Mamma.  Do  let  me  speak.  I  have  the  baby  now.  I  want  to  see  you,
mamma. I  am  not  dead — don't  cry — I'm  all  right — all  right."

(Mrs.  T.  :  Dear  Ruthie  ! Wait  a  minute  longer.)

Phinuit :  She  can't  wait  any  longer.  [To  Mr.  P.]  There's  an  influence
here  with  your  mother.  There's  a  child  witli  her  that  comes  with  her,  iu
the  spirit  that  has  passed  out  of  the  body — a  sister.  [Correct.]

Who's  John,  in  tlie  body  ?  You  speak  to  him.  He's  connected  with  you
in  the  body  ;  he's  kind  of  cranky  ;  all  rattle  headed,  you  understand.  It's
smoking.  He's  always  at  it  ;  he  never  dues  anything  else.  [True  of  friend
of  Mr.  D.'s  and  Mr.  P.'s  named  John.]  He's  a  good  fellow;  he's  a  good,
fellow,  but  he's  a  little  too  full  of  fun,  and  erratic,  and  carries  on  like  a
good  one  when  he  gets  a  chance.  I  mean  to  say  no  evil  of  him,  you  knov/.
He's  going  away,  John  is  ;  tell  him  I  say  so  ;  tfll  him  anything  you  like.

[To  Mr.  P.]  You  have  no  heart  trouble.  You  have  no  stomach  trouble.
But  you  catch  cold  mighty  easy.  [True.]

(Mr.  P.  :  Does  my  mother  send  any  message  ?)

Phinuit :  I  don't  get  your  father  here.  Your  father  is  in  the  Ijody.
[True.]

(Mr.  P.  :  How  is  he  ?)

Phinuit :  He's  got  a  troul)le  wdth  him  right  through  here.  [Places  hand
over  kidneys.]  Right  through  the  back  and  kidneys  ;  he  has  kidney  trouble,
has  had  it  for  some  time. Well,  it's  a  weakness,  an  inactive  state,  and  then


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Trance.  555


lie  has  a  little  dyspepsia,  and  it  troubles  him  quite  a  little  sometimes.  He
has  indigestion  ;  the  blood  is  a  little  impure,  the  Ftomach  being  a  little  out
of  order — his  digestion  not  proper,  and  on  account  of  that  he  doesn't  sleep
as  well  as  he  ought  to. [All  correct.]

But  he  has  no  heart  trouble.  He  thinks  there  is  something  the  matter
there,  but  there  isn't.  Did  you  ever  hear  him  say  he  had  heart  trouble  ?
(Mr.  P.  :  Xo.)  Well,  he  said  so,  whether  you  heard  him  or  not.  [All  this
not  known  to  any  one  present,  but  verified  afterwards.  Mr.  P.'s  father  had
never  mentioned  it,  even  to  his  doctor.]

Phinuit  :  Wait  a  ;ninute,  where's  Sis —  That  little  girl  is  here  with  her.
She'll  be  back  in  a  minute.  That  is,  there's  a  sister  and  a  mother  both  here,
[Correct.] Now,  I'll  talk  to  them  and  tell  you  about  them.

This  is  very  peculiar.  I  get  the  sister  and  the  mother  both  with  this.
Do  you  know,  they  both  wore  this  ?  You  know  what  I  mean.  Both
recognise  this  ;  it's  connected  with  them.  [Mr.  P.'s  sister  died  when  he
was  a  small  child,  and  he  did  not  know  she  wore  the  chain.  Verified
afterwards.]

[Mr.  P.  gives  badge.]  Does  this  bring  any  one  ?  Phinuit  :  [Evidently
•stiU  referring  to  chain.]  Oh  !  this  brings  another  lady.  Look  here  !  Who's
Ettie  ?  Ellie  ?  Ellie  1  Ellie  has  a  sister  in  the  spirit.  ~\Mio's  Mary  ?
[Mother's  name,  Marj^  Etta.]  Talk  to  me.  There  has  been  a  change  in  your
home  since  that.  But  who  is  it  they  call  Aunt  Mary  ?  (Mr.  P.  :  My  aunt.)
Phinuit :  Why  the  dickens  didn't  you  say  so  ?  Mary's  her  name.  Well,
that's  all  right.  Aunt  Mary.  Who's  calling  for  her  '?  That's  the  mother
calling  for  her,  your  mother.  She's  your  mother's  sister.  Your  mother's
sister-in-law.  [Correct.]  (ilr.  P.  :  That's  right.)  Phinuit  :  I  think  I  know
Tvhat  I'm  talking  about. I  know  as  fast  as  they  tell  me.

[Mr.  P.  hands  a  fraternity  badge  belonging  to  Alfred  Howell.  The  other
boys  who  came  on  it  were  friends  and  members  of  the  same  fraternity.]

Pliinuit  :  Do  you  know  there's  a  young  man  connected  with  this  ?  He
had  a  cough.  Do  you  recognise  that  ?  Tell  me  who  Arthur  is.  [Nothing
known.]  (Mr.  P.  :  I  don't  know  who  Arthur  is.)  He  had  something  to  do
with  this  Arthur.  As  true  as  you  live.  There's  another  spirit  named
Frank.  [Not  known.]  These  are  cousins  of  this  gentleman  on  whose
influence  this  is.

(Mr.  P.  :  Are  they  in  the  body  ?)  Phinuit  :  One  of  them  is  living  in  the
material  world,  and  the  other  in  the  spiritual.  (^Ir.  P.  :  Does  this  bring  any
one  else  ? )  Pliinuit  :  This  brought  the  strongest  of  the  two.  [To  Mr.  P.]  I
don't  think  this  belongs  to  you.  But  there's  a  j'oung  lady  and  also  a  gentle-
man comes  with  this  ;  you  see  what  I  mean,  and  perhaps  you  will  recognise
one  of  them.  There's  a  young  lady  who  passed  out  of  the  body  and  died
some  years  ago  ;  I  think  fell  from  a  horse  ;  had  a  fall.  Well,  well,  you  find
out  about  it.  This  is  not  a  relative  of  yours,  it  is  a  friend.  I  get  the
influence  all  right  from  this.

Who's  Louise — Liz — Lizabeth — Liz  ?  I  don't  know  if  I  spell  this  right,
but  it's  Elizabeth  and  Annie.  These  connected  with  this  young  man.
[Unverified.]  Just  as  soon  as  I  can  speak  to  him  I  will.  He's  in  the  spirit.
He  says  something  about  Bawldin — Baldwin.  I  don't  know  how  you
pronounce  it. You  know  who  he  is  ? Well,  he  sends  love  to  you,  and  says

2  o


556


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


tliat  you  kind  of  misunderstood  him,  and  it  was  too  bad.  Tou  can  make  ib
fill  right  novr.  And  he  says  "Tell  George  he  is  a  good  fellow,  but  he  didn't
understand  me  ;  you  must  say  so."  [Mr.  P.  and  friend  B.  had  misunder-
standing for  several  months  before  B's  death.]

I  tell  you  what  ihey  say,  but  I  don't  know  whether  it's  riglit  or  not.

Who's  Orton  1  Arthur  ?  It's  some  friend  in  the  body.  Do  you  know
the  fellow  1 He  has  a  swagger — he  has  red  hair.

Who's  Oliver?  [Unverified.]  I  don't  know  him — wait  a  minute.  I
don't  know,  but  there's  some  one  calling,  who  speaks  in  a  whi.sper.  George
will  tell  you  something.  [This  friend's  name,  George  Baldwin.]  (Mr.  P.  :
Yv^ell,  I'll  listen.)  Phinuit :  Ask  Fred.  He's  there  with  you  ;  tell  him  I'm
nil  right.  [Verified  afterwards.  Fred,  an  intimate  friend  of  G.  B.]  It  was
a.  cough  that  took  me  off,  consumption,  for  I  passed  out  with  it  [True]  and
you  fellows  were  good  to  me,  but  you  never  quite  understood  me  ;  you  never
<lid,  quite.  I  was  in  the  school  with  you.  Not  in  the  same  school,  but
taught  in  the  school,  so  you  would  know  who's  talking  to  you.  [G.  B.  taught
in  preparatory  departuient  of  same  school.]  You  know  this  is  characteristic
of  me.  It's  not  long  since  I  came  here.  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you.  Look  here  !
I  want  to  talk  to  you. I  tell  you  there's  only  a  veil  between  us.

There's  a  good  time  for  you  boys,  there's  a  good  time  for  you.  I  don't
see  you  come  here  for  a  long  time.  I  hope  one  of  you  will  drop  round  and
see  me  sometimes.  I  didn't  think  I  was  coming  here — but  woke  up.  I
choked  at  first,  but  I'm  better  now.  You  wouldn't  go  to  sleep  if  you  had
■se3n  me  when  I  first  waked  up.  I  didn't  think  I  was  going  to  wake  up
like  this.  You  haven't  got  all  your  wits  about  you  yet,  and  so  you  don'c
recognise  your  fi'iends.  I'll  be  with  you  ;  I'll  help  you  out  in  all  your  little
difficulties. I'll  be  with  you. I  mean  well.

(Mr.  P.  :  Will  you  tell  me  about  them  ?  There's  one  that  passed  out
after  you  did.)

Phinuit :  This  one  talks  in  a  wliisper  to  me.  Good  fellow,  means  well.
What  a  funny  nose  he  has.  He  looks  as  if  his  nose  turned  up  a  little.  You
know  what  I  mean.  [Correct.]

Who's  Charlie  1  Wait  a  minute — A-N-D-Pv;-A — There's  a  fellow  with  hira
in  the  body  that  he's  calling  for — Chester — something  like  Blown.  I'll  try
again. [Not  able  to  verify  many  names.]

Baldwin  has  been  here.  Here's  another  fellow.  Now  he  belongs  to  this,
this  fellow  ;  let  me  look. He's  in  the  body  ;  he's  writing.

There's  a  Harry  connected  with  this.  Will  you  tell  them  one  of  his
cousins  passed  out  with  stomach  trouble  1  And  also  there  is  one  who  passed
out  with  typhoid  fever.  [True  of  owner  of  badge,  A.  Howell.]  There's  a
brother.  He's  got  a  brother  in  the  body.  He  sends  love  to  his  brother.
[A.  H.  has  a  living  brother.]  He  knows  this  influence  and  he's  coming,  just
■as  fast  as  he  can.  He'll  be  here  so  I  can  talk  intelligently  in  a  minute,  but  he
does  speak  so  indistinctly — and  the — of  what  I  have  here — wait  a  minute  -I
think — I  get  him  here  to  me. [Long  pause.]

Uncle  Willie.  I  wonder  if  he  belongs  to  you.  Uncle  Will — William,  he's
in  the  body,  and  I  think  he's  an  uncle  of  yours — because  they  tell  me  so —
they  will  call  the  name  Uncle.  [Correct.]  I  am  sure  if  he  had  taken  better
care  of  thing.-?,  been  more  provident,  he  would  have  been  in  a  better  position.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  TroMce.  557


I  don't  tell  you  what  they  don't  tell  me. How  many  Georges  have  you  ?
Here  is  one  in  the  body  and  one  in  the  spirit.  [True.]
[Spelling  name  of  Dr.  H  .]

[Mrs.  T.  goes  to  Phinuit] Tell  them  the  children  are  all  right. I  want

to  speak — It's  a  great  temptation  to  resist. I  will  be  [The  full  name  of

friend  called  H— . Dr.  H  .]

Phinuit:  What  does  that  mean?  Bro  —  Bron — Burrie — That's  not
right.  F.  D-V-A-L— Where's  the  fellow  that's  calling  that  ?  A-N-D-R-E—
Andre.  He  calls  it  Andre.  I  was  uncertain — I  could  not  get  the  rest  of  it.
[Name  of  another  friend  in  fraternity,  recently  dead  ;  Andre  do  Valliere.]

(Mr.  P.  :  How  is  he  ?)  Phinuit  :  He's  O.  K.  he  says.  What  does  that
mean,  O.  K.  ?

(Mr.  P.  :  That  means  he's  all  right,  very  well.)

Phinuit  [for  Andre]  :  But  I  tell  yo'i  I'm  not  alone.  I'm  here.  I'm  alive
and  well.  I  was  never  so  glad  to  see  any  one  as  to  see  you.  [To  Mr.  P.
and  A.  D.]  How  heavy  you  are  !  But  I  see  I  have  taken  off  the  material
■body  and  you  have  yours  on. Speak  to  me.

Piiinuit :  He  wants  you  to  speak  to  him. He  says  he's  very  light.  '

Phinuit  [for  Andre]  :  This  is  news  to  me.  I  didn't  know  we  could  com-
municate like  this.  I  didn't  know  I  should  have  a  chance  to  speak  to  you
so  soon. How  is  mother  ?

(Mr.  P.  :  Any  message  for  her  1)

Phinuit  [for  Andre]  : Tell  mother  to  put  my  check  suit  in  the  closet,
and  not  to  give  it  away  ;  I  liked  it  very  well. [Unable  to  ascertain. — R.H.]
(Mr.  P.  :  Does  this  bring  anyone  else  1)

Phinuit  :  He's  here,  will  be  here  presently,  but  this  one  who  is  sjieaking
to  me;  he  wants  to  know  where  you  got  that.  [Pointing  to  G.'s  embryo
moustache]. Never  mind,  it  will  grow. You  look  a  little  different.

(Mr.  P.  :  Only  a  very  little,  I  am  afraid.)

Phinuit  [for  Andre]  :  Well !  It's  a  pleasure  to  see  you.  Where's  the
iDOok  1

(Mr.  P.  :  Can't  you  get  Stump  for  me  ?) [See  below. — R.  H.]
Phinuit  :  There  are  so  many  fellows  around  me.
(A. ,  referring  to  Andre  :  Did  he  take  cold  ?)
Phinuit  :  Sort  of  influenza,  not  a  cold. Had  chills.

Who's  Ellice  ? — What  they  call  the  little  sister  ?  He's  gone  away,  and
Tiere  comes  another  one  ;  he  called  a  fellow  with  dark  hair,  dark  eyes,  high
forehead,  and  small  dark  moustache — and  a  kind  of  little  colour  in  his  cheeks
— a  good-looking  fellow,  and  he's  coming  trotting  along  with  a  smile.
[Exact  description  of  A.  Howell.]  I'll  see  who  this  is.  He  says  this  is  his
pin.  [The  fraternity  badge  mentioned  above  as  having  belonged  to  Alfred
Howell,  known  to  some  of  his  intimates  as  Stump. — R.  H.]

Phinuit  [for  A.  Howell]  :  "  This  is  my  pin  ;  where  did  you  get  it  ?
Tell  father  that  I  don't  want  him  to  worry  about  me,  and  I  want  him  to
think  I  live."

Phinuit  :  Wait  a  minute — give  me  that — who's  George  ?
(Mr.  P.  :  I'm  George.)

Phinuit  :  Well,  he's  calling  George.  Who's  Hen — Alfred  [Correct.]
'Wants  that. [Phinuit  making  motions  with  hand  for  something,  after  some

2  0  2


558


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


delay  writes  the  fullowing  with  pencil  given  him,  first  at  distance,  then  with
book  placed  on  top  of  head,  exclaiming  during  middle  of  writing  :  "He's
taken  away  my  hand  and  won't  give  it  to  mo  !  "]
[Writing  follows.]

Alfred  Howel.  A.  Hall.  I  am  not  dead.  Alfred  Hall.  Howard —
Hello  George  1  Don't  think  of  me  as  dead.  I  am  old  Stump.  Alfred
Howall.  Como  and  see  me  often.  Tell  father  to  go  to  the  Lodge,  and  I
Avill  go  with  him.  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you  fellows  !  You  know  me  now,  don't
you  ? Where's  my  photo  ? Keep  it,  it  looks  just  like  me.

[Mrs.  T.  in  great  anxiety  to  get  Mr.  P.  to  go  away,  as  forty  minutes  liad
already  gone.  Mr.  P.  was  unable  to  unclasp  medium's  hand.  Then  he  said,
"Well,  good-bye,  Howell.  Now  this  little  lady  is  Alex's  sister,  and  she
wants  to  speak  to  some  of  her  friends.  You  help  her  to  get  them."  Medium's
hand  gradually  relaxed  while  this  speech  was  going  on.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  I  am  so  afraid  you  will  be  getting  weak  and  have  to  leave.
Dr.  Phinuit.)

Phinuit  :  Don't  hurry  him,  I'm  not  weak.  I'm  not  going  away.
[Laughs.]

[Mrs.  Thaw  sittinrj.']

Phinuit  :  Here's  Ruthie. [Phinuit  talks  for  Ruthie. — R.  IL]

R's  small  voice  :  Mamma. Mamma. I'm  here. I  send  love  to  you  and

Bettie. Bettie. Dear  Bettie. I  want  Bettie. Tell  Bettie  I  love  Bettie.

I  want  Bettie. I  love  Bettie. Margery's  all  right. Take  me,  mamma:

Take  me,  mamma. I  sit  on  your  knee. Where's  papa  ? I  send  love.  Tell

papa  I  love  papa. Grandma  is  all  right.

Phinuit  :  There  she  is,  standing  by  Aleck. See  !

R.  :  But  I  want  jiosie.  I  want  posie.  I  want  posie,  posie,  posie-.
Pretty  posie.  Pretty  posie.  [Always  with  accent  on  last  syllable,  exactly
like  child.]

(IMrs.  T.  :  I  couldn't  get  any  to-day.)

R.  :  Don't  cry  for  me,  mamma.  I  want  a  posie.  I  have  no  posie.  I
got  six  posies.  I  gave  three  to  Margery  and  I  kept  three.  I  want  Bettie.
Bettie,  dear  Bettie.  Dear  Bettie  has  got  a  cold.  She's  getting  better^
[Correct.]

Phinuit  :  Here's  this  little  girl  talks  just  as  if  she  were  alive.

II.  :  I  want  to  hear  the  tick-tick,  Uncle  Aleck.  Give  me  the  tick-tick,
Uncle  Aleck.  [Mr.  D.  holds  watch  to  medium's  ear.]  [Mr.  D.  used  to  hold
watch  to  R.'s  ear  much  more  than  any  one  else.]  I  hear  the  tick-tick.  I
can't  hold  it,  it's  heavy.  You  hold  it.  It's  too  heavy  for  me.  I  want  to
pat  Bettie.  Love  to  Nellie.  Nellie  is  a  good  girl.  She  was  so  very  good
to  me.  So  good  to  me.  So  don't  be  afraid,  mamma,  she  takes  good  cai'e  of
Bettie,  dear  little  Bettie.  I  see  Bettie  asleep.  I  see  Bettie  asleep.  Don't
worry  about  me.  I'm  all  right.  Nellie  sings  to  me  sometimes.  I'm  happy
now.  I've  got  a  big  girl,  Gracie.  [Half-sister  of  Mrs.  T.  who  died  many
years  ago.]  Gracie  looks  out  for  me.  She's  very  kind  to  me.  Tell  Nellie
the  little  one  sends  me  to  tell  Nellie  that  it's  all  right,  that  she's  all  right.

Phinuit  :  Your  mother's  not  feeling  well,  but  she  has  rheumatism..
True.] [Mrs.  T.  hands  Phinuit  a  glove  belonging  to  her  mother.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  559


This  is  mother's  influence.  Mother's  going  to  be  all  right.  She's  not
well.  She's  not  well.  She's  poorly.  She — I'll  tell  you  about  this.  She's
got — [Working  with  glove  fingei's.]  This  is  a  weak  influence.  This  is
your  mother's  influence  in  the  body,  and  she's  not  well,  you  know.  She's  got
a  trouble  with  her  stomach,  with  her  head.  She  has  headache  a  little.
There's  something  wrong  with  her  liver.  She's  got  rheumatism  a  little,  too.
Something  in  her  blood.  She  ought  to  get  it  out.  [True.]  Her  mother
wants  to  send,  love  to  her.  Who's  Ruth,  grandmother  ?  Ruth,  grandmother
wants  to  send  her  love  to  her,  and  tells  her  to  take  a  good  deal  of  fresh  air.
Her  father  is  here  with  her.  But  you  know  there's  a  little  trouble  with
your  mother's  hand.  [Feeling  Mrs.  T.'s  hand.  Lets  go  Mrs.  T.'s  right
hand,  and  takes  hold  of  forefinger  of  her  left  hand,  and  rubs  all  around
joint  and  nail.]  Her  father  tells  me  she's  had  great  trouble  with  her  hand
here.  Right  on  that  finger  of  that  hand  ;  yes,  right  there.  And  it's  a
swelling  round  here.  Inflammation.  A  sort  of  felon.  From  a  sliver  he's
got  there.  And  it  has  an  inflammation  all  around  that  nail.  [All  this  about
Mrs.  T.'s  mother,  right  in  every  particular.]

Her  father  sends  his  love  to  her.  (Jlrs.  T.  :  Can  you  give  his
name?)  Phinuit :  I  told  you  about  him  before.  (Mrs.  T.  :  Can  he  send  his
name  ?)

Phinuit  :  He  was  here  when  the  fellow  was  here.  I  called  it  to  you,
but  I  told  you  it  was  a  little  mixed.  I'll  talk  to  you — Ruth  it  here  too —
Little  Ruth  and  big  Ruth,  and  Margery,  and  there's  aunt  Anna,  and  do  you
iemember  this  aunt  Eliza?  Ah!  You  know  who  this  is!  [Mrs.  T.'s
aunt  Ann  Eliza.] Well,  there's  aunt  Mary  Jane.

You  tell  Dr.  Thaw  that  L  is  all  riglit,  and  she's  got  to  come  to  it,

and  that's  what's  the  matter.  I  never  saw  such  a  lot  of  people.  It's  too
bad  about  mother's  linger.  There  are  forty-two  Alecks  in  that  country.
[Probably  refers  to  sittings  in  England.]

Here's  H  . Here's  H  . He  wants  to  send  his  love  to  the  doctor,

and  to  tell  him  he's  all  right.

Who's  Henry  ?  James,  he's  here  now  and  wants  to  send  his  love  to  her —

James — [Mrs.  T.'s  grandfather.] Henry  is  a  friend  of  Dr.  H  -.  [We

knew  that  a  Mr.  French,  deceased,  had  been  an  intimate  friend  of  Dr.  H.,
but  we  were  unaware  of  his  first  name,  vvhich  proved  to  be  Henry.]

H.  :  How  are  they  all  at  home  1  (Mrs.  T.  :  Pretty  well.)  H.  :  Do  they
know  of  this  ? (Mrs.  T.  :  Yes,  I  told  them  and  they  are  very  glad.)

H.  :  Well,  you  tell  them  I  am  not  dead,  and  I  wish  they  were  as  well
off  as  I  am.  This  is  only  one  of  the  first  signs  of  what  is  coming  to
the  whole  world — of  what  is  opening  to  you,  and  I  tell  you  I  have  seen  your
little  children,  and  they  are  well  and  happy.  All  these  things  are  natural,
and  you  have  1  o  expect  them  as  natural,  as  natural  consequences,  so  what's
the  use  of  making  a  fuss  and  kicking  up  a  broil  over  nothing  ?  Just  pass
out  of  the  body  and  it's  all  right.  Who's  this  George  ?  I  think  I've  seen
him  in  the  distance.  I  don't  quite  recollect  him.  But  perhaps  you  will
remember  me  to  him.  [H.  had  seen  George  Perkins  only  once  since  he
knew  him  in  boyhood.]

Phinuit  :  You  know  Ellen,  Helen.  [Not  recognised.]  I  think  this  is
connected  with  him,  with  that  other  fellow.


560


Richard  iloaason.


[part


(Mrs.  T.  :  Does  lie  remember  what  Mr.  French  said  when  he  was  dyuig,
and  does  he  see  him  ?)  [This  was  a  test  question  asked  on  behalf  of  Mrs.
II. The  answer  was  unknown  to  us.]

H  :  I  see  liim,  of  course.  He  said,  "  Some  things  are  very  bitter  ;  I'll
come  to  you  if  I  can."  [Unknown.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  Can  you  tell  me  what  he  believed  about  these  things  1)

H.  :  He  was  a  little  mixed,  but  ho  believed  that  he  should  exist.  And
he  exists  just  as  lie  thought  he  would,  and  tells  me  to  tell  you  so.  [This  is
the  correct  answer  to  Mrs.  Dr.  H.'s  test  question.]

Phinuit :  Here's  James,  an  elderly,  gentleman  comes.  [Mrs.  T.'s  mother's
father.]  Phinuit,  for  J.  :  Tell  your  mother  that  I  am  all  right,  and  I  wish
she  would  tie  up  her  fingers  and  take  care  of  her  toes,  and  they'll  get  well,
[Very  characteristic  of  James.] I  am  here  to  send  love  to  her.

Phinuit :  The  babies  are  here.  Tell  mamma  about  the  pictures  of  little
Margery.

(Mrs.  T.  :  No,  the  picture  is  of  little  Ruth.)

Phinuit  :  A  picture  of  little  Ruth,  and  a  picture  of  little  Margery.  Ifc
was  hardly  finished.  Ruthie's  was  begun,  but  it  was  not  finished.  It  is
finished  now,  and  it  looks  very  pretty.  Looks  as  if  she  could  speak.  She
wants  you  to  make  one  of  the  little  one.  There  is  one — what  you  call  a
lihotograph. [All  true.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  Will  she  come  to  me  so  I  can  get  it  like  her  ?)

Phinuit  :  Well,  she  wants  you  to  copy  that,  and  then  she'll  come,  and
you'll  get  a  picture,  and  she'll  look  exactly  as  if  you  had  drawn  her  in  the
body.  [Mrs.  T.  gives  a  pin,  about  which  we  knew  no  more  than  that  it  was
given  to  us  to  test  Phinuit  with  by  a  cousin.  The  pin  was  very  small.
Phinuit  muttered  a  good  deal  of  French,  repeating,  "Petite,  petite,  petite,"
several  times.]  Well,  there's  a  young  girl  connected  with  this  in  the  body,
that's  got  sandy  hair.  She's  got  a  motlier  in  the  spirit.  She's  been,  or
going,  across  the  water.  That  belonged  to  a  gentleman  and  then  to  a  lady.
There's  somebody  named  Will  connected  with  it.  I  don't  get  the  intelli-
gence of  any  spirit  ;  if  I  did  I  could  get  it  straightcr  for  you.  Oliver,
Arline — [a  cousin's  name]  somebody,  but  I  can't  get  that.  I  don't  know
about  it.  This  was  given  to  a  lady  by  a  gentleman.  It's  a  young  man,  yoa
know  what  I  mean.  They  are  both  in  the  body,  and  he  has  a  mother  in  the
spirit.  Then  she  also  had  a  friend  named  Lucy.  [Pin  was  given  to  Arline
by  a  gentleman,  H.  L.,  who  received  it  from  his  father  William.  H.  L.'s
sister  has  sandy  hair. Their  mother  is  dead. Lucy  unknown.]

[Mrs.  T.  gives  mother's  glove  again.]  Your  mother  and  father  both  have
rheumatism.  You  must  look  after  them.  They  are  going  to  take  a  trip
that  will  be  very  beneficial  to  them.  She's  nearer  to  you  [pointing  to  Mr.  D.,
then  to  Mrs.  T.]  I  can't  make  out  which  one  she's  more  with,  but  she's
nearer  one  of  you.

(Mi's.  T.  :  Siie's  living  with  me  now.)

Phinuit :  Oh,  you  live  in  one  home,  but  I  see  the  other  in  another  home,
and  she  lives  with  you  [pointing  to  Mrs.  T.]  [Pointing  to  Mr.  D.]  She's
very  fond  of  you.

(Mrs.  T.  :  Yes,  he's  better  than  I  am.)

Phinuit :  What  nonsense,  he  isn't  better  than  you,  don't  be  jealous.


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  oGl.


(Mrs.  T.  :  I'm  not  jealous.)

Phinuit  [rubbing  Mrs.  T.'s  head]  :  No,  and  you  are  not  going  to  begin  in
your  old  age,  ai-e  you  ?  You  be  a  good  girl.  You'll  bs  all  riglit  if  you  don't
read  lying  down.  If  you'll  only  read  when  you're  standing  up  you'll  keep
all  right.  Your  sister  is  not  your  sistjr  but  a  half-sister.  [Correct.]  Your
father  had  two  wives.  [Correct.]  Well,  tliat's  mighty  funny.  I  told  you
her  name  a  long  time  ago,  but  you  wouldn't  recognise  it.  [Name  Elizabeth..
Phinuit  gave  Bessie.]  You  were  not  quite  right.  You  speak  to  her  and
tell  her  you  are  sorry. Why  didn't  you  recognise  her  '?

Phinuit  for  E.  :  You  tell  your  father  Gracie — Gracio  is  all  right.  (Mrs,
T.  re''erring  to  E.  :  What  did  my  father  use  to  call  her  ?)  Phinuit :  She's
laughing  and  says  he  knows,  ask  him. Siio  v.'ants  to  send  her  love  to  him.

Who's  Nana  ?  That's  another  name  for  Nellie.  Well,  you  tell  Nana
she's  all  right.  [Nana  was  a  pet  name  of  Bettie's  for  Nellie.  Ruth  mads
attempts  to  say  it  before  her  last  illness.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  What  about  Father's  business  ?)  [Phinuit  immediately  makes
motions  as  of  playing  on  piano  keys.  I\Irs.  T.'s  father's  invention,  a  type-
setter, with  keys  like  a  piano.]  Phinuit  :  It  has  keys.  Keys  with  letters
on  them.  [Correct.]

[Mr.  D.  takes  Mrs.  T.'s  place.]  Oh,  it's  such  a  funny  thing.  Did  Iio
invent  them  ?  Well,  he's  a  great  man.  There's  going  to  be  a  spring  addition
that's  going  to  be  very  useful,  and  after  a  few  months  of  dulness  it  will  be
all  right.  You  are  going  to  change  the  surroundings.  [True.]  And  that
will  be  much  better.  He's  going  to  sell  some  of  these  things.  What  does
he  want  to  do  with  them  ?  Wants  to  rent  them.  [Correct.]  It's  been  a
long  pull  and  a  hard  pull,  but  he's  going  to  rise  out  of  this  like  a  lisli
jumping  out  of  water.  Add  the  spring  part,  and  it  will  be  good.  All  this
long  pull  and  dull  time  was  for  the  best.  [L(jng  struggle  to  get  the  thing
started.]  You're  going  across  tlie  water.  A  William  is  in  the  surroundings.
Who's  L-o-w-r-e-n-z-e— who's  L-o-r-e-n-z-e  ?  (Mr.  D.  says:  "Lorenzo").
[Lorenzo  Dow,  living,  the  father  of  Mr.  A.  D. — R.  H.]

Phinuit :  That's  what  we  call  it  in  our  language.  He's  coming  out  aU
right  from  the  word  go.,  A  long  struggle.  But  he's  coming  out  all  right..
Be  a  little  patient.  A  William  is  coming  into  the  surroundings,  and  then  it
will  be  all  right.  You're  going  across  the  water.  It  is  going  to  be  a  great
thing.  Get  the  patterns  all  right.  [Mr.  P.  and  Mr.  D.  were  making
drawings  of  the  machines,  called  "patterns"  by  them.]  It  will  be  dark  a
few  months  ;  afterwards  all  right.

George  Perkins.  Do  you  know  how  I  got  his  name  6rst.  One  of  liis
friends  whispered  me  his  name.  George  is  a  good  fellow.  Holiest  fellow.
George  is  true  blue. Don't  tell  that  t)  him  ;  he  might  get  conceited.

(Mr.  D.  :  I  don't  believe  he'll  get  conceited.)

Phinuit  :  Well,  I'm  only  in  fun.

[Mrs.  T.  takes  Phinuit' s  hand.]  (Ai'e  we  going  to  do  any  good  in  our
work  ?)

Phinuit :  You  are  gC'ing  to  make  a  change.  Who's  Emily  '  You're  going
t)  change  your  life.  I'll  be  there.  [Mrs.  T.  found  on  getting  home  that
the  Christian  name  of  principal  of  the  school  they  were  starting  was  Emma.
This  we  had  never  heard  or  seen,  as  the  lady  was  not  known  personally


5G2


Richard  Hodgson


[part


to  Mrs.  T.,  and  her  acceptmce  of  the  position  was  not  received  by  us  until
after  the  sitting.]  You  are  getting  on  with  it.  I  might  say  you're  just
beginning  with  it,  but  it's  going  to  be  splendid.  It  has  to  do  with  the  mind.
[Feeling  Mrs.  T.'s  eyes.]  The  physical  being  of  those  who  can't  see.  To
benefit  the  blin^il,  the  ignorant.  I  don't  mean  the  eyesight.  [Dr.  and
IMrs.  T.  starting  free  primary  school  and  kindergarten.]  Margery  will  be
there.

Mamma,  mamma,  I  love  you. Don't  cry. Ruthie  will  be  thei'e.
(Mrs.  T.  to  children  :  Do  you  sleep  there  ?)
Rutliie  :  I  sleep,  I  wake,  I  play. I  wake,  I  sleep,  I  i^lay.
(Mrs.  T.  :  Won't  they  knock  for  me  again  ?)

R.  :  I'll  go  on  Bettie's  bed  and  tap,  tap,  tap  for  you.  Don't  cry.  I  live.
I  am  here.  Tell  mamma  I  am  here.  Pat  papa  for  me.  Posie — posie —
ijosie.

Phinuit :  Speak  to  me,  friends,  I'm  getting  weak.  Speak  to  me,  I  can't
hear  you.  (Mrs.  T.  :  Good-bye,  Dr.  Phinuit.)  Phinuit  [in  a  weak  voice]  :
Speak  louder,  friends,  I'm  going.

Fifth  Sitting. May  StJ>,  1892.

[Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  present  during  first  part  of  sitting ;  Mr.  A.
D.  reporting  at  sliort  distance.  Mrs.  Dow  (Sabrina),  mother  of  Mrs.
T.,  in  next  room.]

*  *  *  *

Phinuit  [after  some conversation  with  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.  about  the
children,  &c.] You  know  Elizabeth  ? She  has  gone  around  tliat  way.
(Mrs.  T.  :  Does  she  want  any  one  ?)

Phinuit :  Wait  a  minute. Where  the  dickens  is  she  going  to  ? She  has
got  Gracie  and  is  here  again. Sabrine. Sabrine. Sabrine.  Sabrine.
(Mrs.  T.  :  What  does  she  want  with  Sabrine  ?)

Phinuit :  James.  James.  Yes,  that  right.  James  ;  you  go  awa}',  Dr.
She's  talking  to  him.  Who  is  that  ?  She  wants  me  to  go  and  find  her.
She  wants  you  to  go  and  find  Sabrina.  Sabrina  is  the  name.  Sabrina.
My  [?]  father  wants  Sabrina.  I  don't  know  what  that  means.  Sabrina  is
the  name.

[Mrs.  Dow  here  enters.]  Phinuit  :  Come  here.  [Continues  as  if  James
was  speaking.]  God  bless  your  life,  your  soul,  your  heart.  There  she  is.
That's  my  daughter.  But  how  she  has  changed.  Are  you  happy  now  ?
James  says  that  he  wants  to  know  if  you  are  ha])py  now?  It's  a  long  road
that  has  no  turning  to  it.  I  liave  been  here  many  years.  But  you  will
remember  the  old  place.  Home  is  home  in  the  body,  and  my  home  is  near
to  me,  dear.  It  has  been  a  long  struggle,  but  you  have  waded  through  it.
It's  going  to  be  all  right.  All  you  have  to  do  is  to  trust  in  God  and  he  will
take  care  of  you  ;  trust  in  God.  I  am  living  still,  but  changes  have  been
made  since  I  came  here.  You  look  older,  but  there  is  a  beautiful  young
freshness  about  you,  and  I  am  glad  to  see  you  as  you  are.  Speak  to  me,
dear,  don't  be  afraid  ;  it's  all  right.  The  truth  is  the  truth  and  love  is  love,
and  I  love  you  still. I  can  see  your  life  has  been  changed  tliere,  but  all's


XXXIII.] Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  563


well  that  ends  well,  and  it's  indeed  well  with  me.  This  meeting  is  great.
Tills  is  a  great  pleasure  to  me.  [Pushing  back  veil.]  Put  this  back,  you
look  so  fair.  Mother's  here  too.  We  are  both  happy  together.  Think  nob
of  us  as  dead  ;  think  of  us  as  alive.  Ruth,  Ruth,  mother  is  with  us,  too.
Mother,  mother.  Ruth.  Tell  Lorenzo  he  has  been  very  good  and  very
kind,  and  we  are  very  fond  of  him,  and  we  have  a  place  arranged  for  him
when  he  comes  here  that  wiU  not  be  a  path  of  thorns,  but  a  path  of  flowers.
He  has  been  very  kind.  It's  been  a  long  struggle,  but  it's  over  now.  Speak
to  me.  Ask  me  something.  The  years  have  been  a  good  many,  I  can  tell
you.  I  look  at  the  old  place  when  I  go  down  home  thei'e.  I  think  how
many  times  things  have  changed,  and  Marie  is  all  right.  Marie,  yes,  Marie.
I  can  hear  that.  Speak  to  him  cpiick,  he  is  getting  a  little  weak.  Who  is
Jane,  Janey  ?  Tell  him  I'll  be  home  later.  [Mrs.  Dow  had  a  brother  Janus,
who  died  in  infancy.  It  was  not  until  after  the  sitting  that  she  made  the
connections  between  "  Janey"  and  him. The  child  was  called  Janey.]

I  want  Liza  ;  that's  Elizabeth,  Elizabeth,  two  of  them.  One  is  the  sister.
One  is  your  sister  ;  that's  the  one  the  fatlier  tells  mo  about.

You  are  pretty  well  put  together,  I  must  say.  There  is  no  danger  of
your  going  out  of  the  body.  Tou  have  no  kidney  disease,  no  tumours  nor
no  cancers.  Sometimes  you  think  you  are  going  to  have  another,  but  you
are  not.  When  you  pass  out  of  the  body  it  is  going  to  be  weakness — old
age.  No  paralysis  about  you.  I  am  telling  you  wliat  I  know  to  be  a  boni
tide  fact,  and  all  the  spirits  in  the  world  can't  make  me  take  it  back.  I
know  yi7ur  physical  condition  just  as  well  as  [though]  you  are  [were  ?]  here.
You  t/jiiik  you  are  going  to  have  something  of  the  kind,  but  I  tell  you  yoa
are  not.

[Introduction  of  phonograph.]
*******
Phinuit  :  . . . I  want  to  know  who  the  gentleman  is  connected  with
you  that  they  call  Alva.

(Mrs.  D. Not  connected  with  my  father  ? )
Phinuit  :  This  brings  that. Isn't  that  funny  ?

[Mr.  Lorenzo  Dow  enters.]

Phinuit  :  Lorenze  !  Don't  let  the  other  people  talk  to  him  first.  Who's
that  ?  Here's  another  one  for  him.  You  are  the  nicest  man  in  tlie  world,
without  any  compliments  to  you  at  all.  You  have  a  pretty  good  brain  there.
That's  Lorenze,  Lorenze  ! Good,  good,  good,  good,  good.

(Mr.  D.  :  You  seem  to  know  me  pretty  well.)

Phinuit :  Elizabeth  belongs  to  you,  and  wants  to  send  her  love  to  you,
and  wants  to  tell  you  that  the  longest  day  you  live  in  the  body  she  will
never  forget  you,  and  she  and  Gracie  are  happy  togetlier,  and  the  spirit
world  is  not  so  remote  but  what  our  friends  can  return  to  us.  You  came  in
last  but  not  least.  Do  you  know  I  get  tlie  influence  of  the  machines.  I  can  see
the  spring  addition  that  is  going  to  be  put  on,  and  it  is  going  to  be  a  success.
******

[Phonograph.]  [Mr.  D.  got  Phinuit,  with  some  difliculty,  to  talk  into  the
phonograph,  which  Pliinuit,  after  feeling  tlie  mouthpiece,  called  ' '  that  tube


5G4


llichard  Hodgson.


[part


thing."  But  Phinult  apparently  did  not  understand  the  explanations  of  its
use.  Mr.  D.  requested  him  to  talk  to  mo,  and  Pliiiiuit  evidently  expected
an  answer  there  and  {hen  to  his  remarks,  which  were  of  no  special  impor-
tance. The  phonographic  record  was  fairly  good. — II. H.]

Sixth  Sitting,  Maij  lOtJi,  1892.

[Present :  Dr.  and  ^Mrs.  Thaw. R:  H.  taking  notes.]

Phinuit  :  Florence,  I'm  glad  to  see  you.  (Well,  we're  glad  to  see  you.)
Good  boy,  doctor.  Good  boy.  Sometimes  I  come  a  long  way  to  see  you.
Where's  the  tube  ? [Reference  to  phonograph. See  sitting  of  May  8.]

[Asks  about  Hodgson  and  says  a  few  words  to  him.]

*  *  *  -H-  *  *  ,

Here  comes  the  baby.  Give  her  room  to  get  in  tliere.  That's  papa,  she
says.  .  .  .  [Pause.  Pliinuit  leaves.  Then  whisiiering  sound  which  be-
comes intelligible  as  P-ttie  (Pretty).]  (She  used  to  talk  and  whisper  that
way.)

(Did  you  learn  to  talk  any  more  ? )  Pitty.  Pssy,  Pttee,  Pussee,  Pittee,
Pittee  [repeated  again  frequently].

[Phinuit :  returns.]  (Doctor,  are  you  there  still  ? )  I  stepped  out  a
minute.  I  couldn't  help  it.  I  let  the  little  girl  come  in.  She  brought  the
cat.  She's  got  a  big  dog,  too.  Two  animals  she  plays  with  all  the  time.
Don't  think  she's  dead,  because  that's  the  hardest  thing  you  could  put  on
her.  She's  growing  more  beautiful  every  day.  She's  got  a  mass  of  golden
hair. She  looks  like  wax  in  the  spirit  world,  she's  so  beautiful.  ,

[Remark  to  Hodgson  about  names  given  to  previous  sitter.]

I  had  a  long  talk  with  Alva.  He  wants  me  to  tell  this  to  you  and  to
Sabrina  when  I  saw  her.  He  caused  her  a  great  deal  of  sorrow,  and  he's
sorry  for  it.  [Sabrina  is  Mrs.  Dow.  Alva  was  her  first  husband,  deceased.
The  statements  made  about  him  are  true. — R.  H.]  Tell  her  about  this,  or
you'll  do  him  a  great  injustice.  He's  been  in  great  suffering.  You  can
lielp  him  out  of  this.  (What  can  we  do  ?)  Get  her  to  say  that  inwardly
and  in  her  very  soul  she  freely  and  frankly  forgives  him.  You'll  be  the
means  of  saving  his  soul.  I  talked  with  him.  [Further  remarks  about
the  great  distress  of  Alva  and  his  desire  to  be  forgiven,  and  to  be  hel^jed  in
attaining  a  higher  state.]

James  did  this,  and  wanted  me  to  give  the  message  as  quickly  as  I  could.
James  goes  and  prays  with  him.

Here's  F  . Wait  a  minute. I'll  talk  to  you,  F  ,  directly.

-T^  -it  "^t"  Tf-

He's  in  a  dark  room,  and  ho  looks  through  a  gate  into  the  light  and  he^
can't  get  tliere. [This  evidently  refers  to  Alva.]
[Writing.]

Halloo. . . . [Illegible.] Florence.  [Illegible.]

I  don't  know  what  I  want  to  say. . . . Wrong  [?]...

[Illegible.] Smith. . .  Fred ... I  went  to  see  you  and  my  j^ainting.

[A  drawing  was  made  here.] Tliis  is  for  you  and  the  Dr. . . .  Painting.

. . . Tell  mother  I  am  with  her. . . . (Tell  me  the  name  of  your


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  5G5


best  friend.) micli  friend  ? . . . [Illegible.] W  .  [A  friend  of

F  .] G  . lam. . . . [Illegible.]  "[G  is  a  brother  of  F  .]

Hollo  [?]  friends  [About  here  Phinuit  said  "Do  you  mean  his  painter
friend  ? "]

Do  you  mean  J  ? Tell  him  I"m  here. ... [Illegible]. . .  »

him  in  spirit.

Oh  I  am  so  glad  to . . .  [Illegible.]

(The  name  I  want  was  mentioned  once  before.)  [Referring  to  a  previous
sitting.]

Herbert. . •  •  -

(Won't  you  tell  us  the  name  of  your  dearest  friend  T)

I  told  it  to  you  before.

You  helped  me  to  get  settled  and  I  am  thankful  to  you  for  .  e  c
[Illegible.]

You  gave  me  the  only  help  I  had.  [Remark  not  inappropriate.]
[Spoken  while  the  writing  was  going  on.  Dr.  Thaw  takes  notes  while
TL.  H.  is  holding  Phinuit's  right  hand.  (In  what  follows  Phinuit  is  first-
speaking  as  if  to  Mrs.  Thaw's  little  child  Margaret,  deceased.  He  then
apparently  assists  the  writing  communicator,  and  gives  a  message  on  his-
bohalf.— R.  H.)]

"Margaret,  dear  little  Margaret.  Tell  your  mother  all  about  it.  Tell  her
■what  you  have  to  s-iy.''  [As  if  to  Margaret.]  [Aftar  she^t  7,  just  before-
the  word  "  Herbert."] "  Tell  Herbert  he's  all  right."]

[Writing  ends.]
[F's  relatives  not  known  to  us,  except  brother  G.]

Phinuit  :  He  doesn't  know  where  he  is.  Go  away,  you  people.
Hodgson,  go  out.  He  says  you  are  a  stranger.  [R.  H.  goes  out.  Dr.  T»
takes  notes.]

Oh  dear!  Passed  out  witli  consumption.  [Correct.]  [Of  F — . — R.H.]
I  can't  tell  you  how  anxious  this  spirit  is  to  get  here.  [Phinuit  apparently
leaves.]

[Deep  coughing.]  .  .  .  [Hand  to  chest.]  Oh  !  .  .  .  [Phinuit
comes  back.]  Oh  dear !  I'm  coming  back  after  all.  .  .  .  Who's
Tom,  Thompson  1  That's  his  father.  He's  aspired  to  come,  but  he  can't
get  here.  [Thompson  was  the  name  of  the  husband  of  the  mother  of
George  Perkins,  the  sitter  of  March  18th,  1S92.— Dr.  Thaw,  1898.]

Here's  the  little  child — Margery.

[R.  H.  returns  and  takes  notes.  Dr.  T.  gives  a  watch  not  given  before.]
You  give  me  the  watch  and  I'll  take  it  to  her.  .  .  .  Ho  !  That  brings
the  gentleman.  There's  your  mother's  watch  I  vv'ant.  (Tell  me  about  that
watch.)  That's  the  father  and  the  mother.  (Whose  father  ?)  That's  i/ojtr
father.  (Wrong  that  time.)  [The  other  watcli  given.]  [Phinuit  says  tho
two  watches  confuse  him.]  This  is  the  one  she  wanted.  Your  mother.
[Correct.  Same  watch  as  in  first  sitting.]  She's  been  out  of  the  body  a
long  time.  [Phinuit  asks  that  explanation  be  made  to  Dr.  T.'s  mother
about  his  marriage. She  died  when  he  was  a  little  child.] She  I'emembers

H  ,  and  W  is  with  her  and  W  is  coming  to  us  soon  and  suddenly.

[Phinuit  apparently  bewildered  with  names.] W  says  W  is  coming


566


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


to  us. [At  this  place  Phinuit  said,  "How  can  W  be  here  and  W

be  coming  ? " Dr.  T.  said  he  understood  it.]

(How  soon  ?)  He's  coming  within  six  montlis  or  a  year.  You've  got
two  fathers. One's  name  is  Lorenzo  and  one  James.

(Mrs.  T.  :  That's  my  fatlier  and  grandfather.)

(How  is  W  going  to  pass  out  ?) He's  going  to  sleep,  and  when  he

wakes  he'll  be  in  the  spirit.  Heart  will  stop.  Kidneys  out  of  order.  He's
out  of  order  all  over.  It'll  be  one  of  the  greatest  reliefs  to  all  concerned.
[See  note  at  end  of  sitting.]

[In  reply  to  question  about  L  .] L  is  going  to  change  her  views.

(Shall  I  help  to  bring  this  change  ?)  Your  spiritual  self  will  act  on  her
unconsciously  to  yourself.  Consciously  you  can't  do  her  good.  Your
mother  says  that  they  are  going  to  influence  her.

I  want  to  know  who  you  call  J  -. He's  here  in  the  spirit. He  comes

in  connection  with  your  mother  and  father.  He's  a  relative.  (How  old
was  he  when  he  passed  out  ?)  A  little  fellow.  TJiat's  your  brother.
{Bi'other  J.  died  in  infancy,  eight  years  before  Dr.  T.'s  birth.]

(Is  there  another  J  ?) And  there's  another  J  ,  that's  a  funny

•old  crank,  etc. [Also  name  of  grandfather.]

(Why  don't  you  tell  us  more  about  W  ?) [Slight  altei'ation.]  When

he  came  out  of  the  body,  the  first  interest  was  back  with  his  children  in  the
material  body.  (Didn't  he  want  to  see  my  mother  ?)  She's  with  him.  (Why
didn't  he  see  her  first  ?) Well,  he  did. After  he  saw  her  he  went  to  the

•children. (Has  W any  message  to  send  to  his  scientific  friends  ?)

[Phinuit  explains  that  question  must  be  given  now,  and  answered  another
time.]

[Letter.]

[Sitter,  Mrs.  Thaw,  asks  for  name  of  friend  of  her  mother  which  Phinuit
promised  at  previous  sitting  to  get  and  give.]

That's  the  lady  who  passed  out  of  body  with  cancer.  [True.]  What  do
you  want  to  know  about  her?  (You  said  you'd  get  her  name.)  Well  now,
I'll  go  find  the  lady  and  come  back  and  tell  you.

Here's  this  lady.  Her  name's  Ellern.  .  .  .  (No,  that's  not  right.)
Yes,  it  is  too. — A-L-E-R-I-A-N,  Ellerine.  (No,  not  quite.)  [Further
•attempts  at  name.  Hequested  to  get  name  and  give  it  at  next  sitting.]
[Name  Caroline  given  correctly  in  next  sitting.]

(Can  you  tell  us  about  Dr.  H to-day  ?) [Pause.] Hallo,  doctor.  I

want  to  thank  you  for  all  the  many  kind  things  you've  done  for  me.  The
children  are  all  right.  There's  not  one  of  them  coming  to  me.  What's
that  about  the  grave,  the  tomb?  (I  don't  know.)  Well,  tell  them  not  to
worry  about  it.  [Dr.  H.'s  wife  was  for  nearly  a  year  much  depressed
by  the  fact  that  H.'s  body  lay  in  vault  awaiting  burial.]  He  says  some-
thing about  A  . [Spelling  nanre  of  daughter.] She  coming  out  all

right,  and  I  know  it. She's  going  to  stay  in  the  body  for  the  present.

[H.'s  daughter  A was  dangerously  ill  at  that  time,  but  on  our  next

visit  Avas  found  to  have  passed  the  crisis.]  I'm  glad  to  see  you,  my  best
friends.  The  first  time  I  saw  you,  you  looked  like  great  black  specks  to
me. Now  you  look more  like  yourselves. [Speaks  of  the  spiritual


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  567


activities  there],  "a  liigher  range  of  activities  is  carried  on  tlian  in  your
universe.  Words  cannot  express  how  beautiful  it  is — like  the  dawn  in
the  body,"  etc.,  etc.  [This  long  speech  so  characteristic  of  Dr.  H.  that
Dr.  T.,  wishing  to  know  whether  he  or  Phinuit  was  speaking,  said  :]  (Can
you  tell  me  anything  about  Dr.  Phinuit?)  I'm  talking  to  you  myself,  you
rascal.  I'm  talking  for  him.  (Well,  you're  trying  to  make  us  think  he's-
talking.) I'm  simjjly  telling  you  what  he  says. I'm  trying  to  imitate  him.

[Writiiig.]

[Writing  by  "Dr.  H."]  Give  me  something  to  do  for  you.  Dr.  dear-
Tell  me  what  I  shall  do  for  you.  I  will  bring  anything  I  can  to  prove
myself  to  you.  (Tell  us  something  that's  known  only  to  your  wife.)  All
right.  I  will.  (Will  you  do  more  than  one  thing  ?)  Yes.  Please  tell  me^
Dr.  dear,  what  you  want.  (Will  you  tell  us  several  things  that  your  wife-
only  knows  ?)  All  right.  I  will.  You  know  who  is  speaking  with  you  ?
[Full  name  written  here.]

[\Vriting  ends.]

Baby,  baby. Baby— hapjjy,  happy,  happy. Don't  cry.

[Special  spasm  in  coming  out  of  trance,  and  struggles  to  say  some  name-
— sounded  like  Par — Por — Par— Porline,  Polline,  Parline.  Evidently
attempts  at  Caroline.  At  the  next  sitting  (not  published  by  request  of
sitter)  the  name  Caroline  was  spelled  out  in  writing.]

Note. — At  the  time  of  sitting  Dr.  T.  had  no  more  reason  to  exjDect  the

death  of  W  than  at  any  time  for  two  or  three  years,  W  being  a.

chronic  invalid  with  asthma.  There  had  been  some  increase  of  difficulty  of
breathing  and  circulation  during  the  past  eighteen  months,  and  a  brief
period  of  slight  dropsical  symptoms  during  the  winter. Two  weeks  after

sicting  W  came  to  New  York  for  a  careful  medical  examination,  and  for-

the  first  time  kidney  disease  was  discovered.

W  ■  died  September  3rd,  in  sleep,  of  heart  failure,  four  months  later.

In  the  sitting  of  May  22nd  the  time  of  death  is  put  at  "  six  months,  or  a,
itlle  less."

W  had  been  a  great  sufferer  most  of  his  life.

.• .  Seventh  Sitting. May  Idth,  1892.

[Present :  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  and  Mr.  Melvin  W.  Mr.  W.  sitting:
with  Mrs.  Piper.]  [I  believe  that  the  notes  were  taken  by  Dr.  Thaw.
— R.  H.]

I'm  Dr.  Phinuit.  Where's  Hodgson  1  (He  is  not  here).  [To  Dr.  T.]'
Hello,  Dr.  !  [Touching  Mr.  W.]  That's  a  gentleman.  You  want  me  to  tell"
you  about  all  j'our  friends,  don't  you.  I  have  a  message  for  you  Dr.  from.
Dr.  H. (That's  all  right). [Dr.  T.  goes  out.]

[To  Mr.  W.]  You're  not  ill.  There's  nothing  the  matter  with  you.
Why  don't  you  talk  to  me  ?  First,  I  want  to  see  how  you  feel.  Ha,  that's.
funny.  [Feeling  head.  Feeling  stomach.]  There's  no  danger  of  your-
passing  out  yet  awhile.  You  think  there's  something  the  matter  with  you:
physically  here,  but  you're  pretty  well. Mentally  you  get  all  muddled  up..


■568


Ricliard  Hodgson.


[part


Sometimes  you  don't  know  what  to  do  or  which  way  to  turn.  Before  your
friends  come  liere  I'll  talk  to  you  yourself.  You're  going  away.  Across  a
large  body  of  water.  It  is  unexpected,  but  pretty  near  by.  You  will  be
practicallj'  alone,  but  friends  of  some  kind  will  be  with  you.  [This  pro-
phecy had  a  curiously  exact  fulfilment  within  two  weeks,  though  without
iiny  expectation  of  it  at  the  time  of  sitting.]

There's  a  little  child  around  j'ou.  Funny  little  thing.  In  the  body.
That's  queer.

You  don't  know  which  is  which  or  what  is  what,  sometimes.  [Feeling-
head.]  That  impresses  me,  but  you're  a  pretty  good  fellow  all  the  same.
Have  you  got  anything  belonging  to  anybody?  [Gives  a  pin.]  I've  got  a
■C3ugh.  You  won't  believe  me,  but  there's  a  lady  and  gentleman  both
connected  with  this.  [Pin,  belonging  to  gentleman  (dead)  was  thrust
through  a  silk  band  painted  by  a  lady  who  died  of  consumption.]  The  lady
passed  out  of  the  body.  I'll  tell  you  about  her  in  a  few  minutes.  You
won't  believe  me,  but  there  was  a  trouble  through  here.  [Lower  abdomen.
Unverified.]  It  t.ikes  some  time,  because  this  is  a  small  thing.
Another  one  has  liandled  this,  in  connection  with  the  lady  wlio  is  here.  Do
you  know  about  this  ?  (Yes.)  I  am  sorry  because  you'll  say  I  got  that
out  of  your  head. [To  Dr.  T.]  Dr.,  you  go  out. [Dr.  goes  out.]

I  get  your  mother  on  this.  These  articles  were  put  together.  They
•were  mixed  up. [Tiiat  was  true.]

[Gives  a  ring.]  That  belongs  to  the  mother.  This  is  a  lady  who  also
passed  out  of  the  body.  The  two  connected  in  a  funny  way.  Like  mother
and  daughter-in-law.  [Not  true.]  You  liave  a  little  piece  of  your  mother's
hair  somewhere.  (Yes.)  There's  something  funny  about  it.  You  cut  it  oil
afterwards.  After  she  passed  out.  (That  is  true.)  I  get  Mara,  a  sister.  I
■don't  know  how  you  pronounce  it.  It  is  in  connection  with  this  lady.  It's
an  aunt.  M-A-R-I-E.  [Only  sister  of  fatlier.  Sitter  did  not  recollect  ab  the
"time,  but  this  is  true.]  You  will  find  that  out.  Herotlier  name  is  Elizabeth.
Marie  Eliza.  You'll  find  that  out.  [Her  name  was  afterwards  found  to  be
Mary  Eliza. See  below.]

(What  do  you  get  about  my  mother  ? )  You  haven't  the  piece  of  hair  ?
(  No.  )  Who's  this  she  calls  Alvin  ?  Elvin— E-L-V-A.  Well,  it  sounds  like
that,  any  way.  She's  talking  to  you.  Elvin.  She  says,  "  Why  don't  you
tell  him  his  name's  Elvin  ?  "  She  knows — you  know  -what  I  mean.  She  is
trying  to  break  through  the  veil.  Slie  wants  you  to  know  she's  not  dead.
Speak  to  her.  (Who  is  with  her  ?)  Slie  speaks  in  a  whisper.  She  had
trouble  here.  [Touching  chest.]  She  filled  all  up.  She  passed  out  with
that.  But  she  didn't  suffer  as  she  seemed  to.  [All  true.  Consumption.]
There's  this  lady,  a  sister  of  your  father,  passed  out.  Marie  Eliza.  Some-
thing like  that.  There's  another  sister.  That  makes  two,  three.  Some
one  in  body,  Jane.  Jon.  She  was  kind  to  her.  (Maria?)  Before  she
passed  out.  She  was  not  a  relative.  Ann.  Who's  this  ?  A  sister.
J-E-N-N-I-E. There's  a  good  test  for  you.  Maria?

Had  trouble  in  her  throat.  Some  time  before  she  passed  out.  There's
•one  they  call  L-A-U-R  A.  [An  aunt.]  One  that  sends  her  love.  [Takes
object.] You  put  that  on  head.

Who's  \Yilliam  ? Warren. [Nothing  known.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Cerialn  Phenomena  of  Trance.  569


[Gives  a  hat  ribbon.]  Now  you're  woke  up  at  last.  This  belongs  to  a
lady  talking  to  me.  Mary  L-O-U-I-S-E.  [Xut  known.]  Tell  Eh'in  to  speak
to  me  and  don't  be  afraid. I  got  a  Laura  too.

(What's  my  mother's  name  ?)  She  sends  her  love  to  you.  What  are  }"ou
■writing?  There  are  papers  all  about  you.  You  get  awfully  mixed  up.
[True  at  this  time.]

Tell  Caroline  I'll  speak  to  her  later.  That  belongs  to  the  lady  that  spoke
to  you.  [Mfs.  T.  had  spoken  to  sitter  a  moment  before.]  You  don't  talk
to  your  mother  at  all.  Tell  Elvin  I  am  here.  Who's  that  other  person  ?
There  are  three. An  aunt  and  a  sister  of  this  lady,  j-our  mother.

[Gives  liat-band  again  ]  Hat.  This  belongs  to  your  own  family.  (The
one  who  gave  that  ?)  Who's  Laura  ?  (A  sister  of  that  one.)  Your  mother
had  a  sister  and  your  father  had  a  sister.

IMaria  calls  Will — V/illiam.  He  passed  out  of  the  body  by  drowning.
[Unable  to  obtain  answer  to  inquiry. — R.  H.]

Louisa  and  Jane  were  friends  of  this  sister.  [Louisa  not  known.]  Who
took  care  of  her  wlien  she  passed  out  ?  Louise  had  rheumatism  in  her  hands.
Y*ou  find  out  about  that.  [Nothing  known.]  One  was  a  sister  by  marriage.
There  was  a  name,  Norton.

•  Who  does  Iluth  belong  to  ?  She  sees  somebody  and  wants  to  talk  to
somebody.  She  puts  my  hand  that  way.  [Waving  hand  like  a  child.]  Tell
doctor  he  is  good.  I  like  him.  My  son.  My  son. Tell  them  my  son  is  good.

[To  the  doctor.]  Tell  him  I'll  speak  later.  They're  all  right.  Tell  them
all  about  Margaret.

Elvin.  Elvin.  Why  didn't  you  come  when  she  passed  out  ?  To  speak
to  her, — after  she  passed  out.  Sura.  Surie  ?  .  .  .  S — S-a-r-a-h.  S-e-u-s-a.
S-e-u-s-a-n. S-u-s-a-n. [Correct.] I  can't  say  it. Tell  Elvin  I  am  Susan.

You  wanted  to  know  my  name,  and  I've  told  you.  Don't  doubt  I'm  your
mother.  She  passed  out  in  the  evening  or  afternoon.  She  passed  out  of
the  body  and  reached  here  in  the  evening,  and  wished  to  speak  to  you  but
could  not.

Somebody  else  has  handled  this.  It  has  your  influence  and  hers.  Susan
■wants  me  to  tell  you.  .  .  .  [Writing  begins  with  difficulty  until  Phinuit
changes  ring  from  left  to  right  hand,  then  proceeds  with  careful  slow
■writing.]

[First  letter  looks  like  an  N  rather  more  than  an  M.]  Nelvin.  [On
being  asked  to  repeat,  writes  it  Melvin.]  I  am  your  mother,  dear  boy.
Susan. Melvin. Melvin  dear,  speak  to  me. I  am  not  dead.

(What  were  the  last  words  I  said  to  you  ?)  Called  "mother,"  and  asked
me  if  I  could  see  you,  if  I  rem.ember  rightly.  Those  were  the  last  words  I
heard  you  say.  [Correct.]  (What  were  the  last  words  you  said  ?)  I  am
going,  raise  me. Tell  father. [Nothing  remembered  positively.]

[Here  Phinuit  talks.]  This  is  a  lovely  lady.  Just  as  bright  and  spiritual
as  she  can  be.  She's  a  beautiful  lady.  She  suffered,  but  not  a,s  much  as  you
thought  she  did.  ;

[Writing.]

Tell  father  to  get  the  things.'*  [This  is  the  sense  of  last  words  to  husband.]
I  do  not  remember  just  that.  Dear  Melvin,  I  see  you,  dear  child.  I  love
you,  my  boy,  and  want  you  to  think  of  me  often. Tell  him  I  am  happy.


570


Richard  Hodgson,


[part


(Have  you  any  message  to  send  to  father  ?)  G is  all  right.  I  know-
it. Poor  [?]  boy.

(Have  you  any  message  for  father  ?)  Who  do  you  mean  ?  Oh  yes.  [The
hand  here  turns  back  to  page  having  writing  marked  by  star  above,  then
goes  on  writing]  and  bring  tliem  to  me.  Yes,  I  told  him  to  bring  the  things
homo. Tell  him  he  brought  them  and  I  was  pleased.

(Won't  you  send  some  other  message  1)  Yes.

(Is  my  father  happy  in  his  life  now  ?)  Ko.

[The  hand  here  was  writing  "yes"  while  sitter  was  asking  second
question.  The  sitter,  not  Ivuowing  which  answer  applied  to  second  question
asked,  "Yes  or  no  1 " The  hand  then  tried  to  scratch  out  the  yes.] . .  .

[Sitter  asks  about  owner  of  pin.]

He  is  here,  but  I  do  not  know  him  personally.  How  can  I,  dear  ?  I
will  find  him.

[Sitter  asks  about  some  misunderstanding  in  the  house.]  (Did  you
rememl^er  it?)  I  do  perfectly,  and  I  told  [something.]  [Confused.]  [End
of  writing.]

[Phinuit  conies  back,  with  great  difficulty  getting  hand  away,  until  ring
was  removed  from  the  finger  ;  then  talks.]  [On  several  occasions  Phinuit
has  purported  to  leave  the  body  for  a  short  time  while  the  hand  was  being
used  by  another  communicator.  But  the  phrase  used  above  probably  here
means  only  that  he  began  again  to  talk.  He  frequently  remarked  about  tlie
difficulty  of  "getting  the  hand  back  "  from  the  control  of  a  writing  com-
municator. See  p.  292.  —  R.  H.]  Here's  the  baby  Ruthie.  Pat  papa.
[Pats  for  a  long  time.]  She  says  I  don't  do  it  right.  I  am  not  gentle
enough.  I  don't  do  it  the  way  she  used  to  do.  [Medium  waves  hands  afc
Mr.  W.]  This  is  for  that  gentleman.  She  says  this  is  for  him.  [Waves
hands  in  the  way  in  which  she  always  waved  them  to  Mr.  W.,  and  to  liim
only.]  This  little  girl  is  so  lovely.  Mumsey.  [Pats  mother.]  Little
Margaret  too.

Dr.  H  wants  me  to  say  he  has  some  very  important  things  for  you.

Ruthie  says,  "  Pussie,  pretty  pussie."

(Mrs.  T.  :  You  promised  we  should  see  them.  When  ?)  Don't  hurry  j
you  can't  get  everything  in  a  hurry. You'll  see  them.

(Dr.  T.  :  Before  we  leave  the  body  ?) Yes,  as  sure  as  you  live.
(Tell  Dr.  H.  to  have  some  things  ready  for  us  soon.)

[Dr.  Phinuit  listened  to  his  own  voice  in  phonograph,  saying,  "Oh,
you're  a  nice  old  fellow. You've  got  me  on  record."]

[Phonograph  says,  "I'm  goiarg  out."]  So  I  am  going  out.  Ha,  ha,  that's
good.

Ruthie  wants  to  see  Nana  soon  and  bring  Betty.

Eiglith  Sitting. May  20th.

[Mr.  L.  Dow  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  about  30  minutes.  Dr.  T.
taking  longhand  notes.  Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop  had  the  second  half  of
the  sitting — omitted.]


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,  571


Ha  !  That's  so  funny.  I'm  Dr.  Phinuit.  You  came  with  the  tube.
You're  the  fellow  with  a  little  weakness. How  are  you,  pretty  well  ?

(Is  there  anything  particularly  the  matter  witli  me  ? )  Well,  you're  pretty
level-headed,  to  say  the  least.  I'll  tell  you  one  thing  very  good,  you're  over
the  worst  of  your  troubles.  You  have  no  Bright's  disease,  no  heart  trouble —
just  a  little  nervous.  A  little  pressure  on  the  bladder.  You're  going  to  be
all  right.  You  may  have  a  touch  of  neuralgia  or  rheumatism.  But  you'll
come  all  right.

(How  about  Medium  ? She  has  a  cough.)

My  Medium  ? She  has  a  cough,  has  she  1  Well,  you  have  her  put  a  half
ounce  of  turpentine  in  a  half  a  cup  of  boiling  water,  and  inhale  it.
(What  for  her  trouble  under  the  arm  ? )

Oh,  that's  poor  blood.  A  tonic  will  scatter  that.  You  give  her  two
ounces  of  tincture  of  cinchona  ;  four  ounces  of  French  dialyzed  iron  and  four
ounces  simple  syrup. Give  her  a  teaspoonful  one  half-hour  before  meals.

Fabin. He  knew  you  years  ago. [Name  not  known.]

Before  I  forget  it,  Susan  wants  to  tell  Elvin  she  has  found  the  young  man
in  the  spirit.  His  mother  saw  him.  He  wants  to  see  Elvin.  (Who  is  he
with?) He's  with  his  own  friends. He's  all  right.

Here's  your  lady.  Elizabeth.  And  Grade.  [Correct.  See  former
sittings.]  She  says  you  must  take  things  easy.  We  are  watching  you  in  a
way  you  know  nothing  about.

You're  in  something,  in  business.  It's  coming  out  all  right.  lb  needs
patience  and  time.  Everything  has  been  good.  What  seems  bad  is  for
your  advantage. You  will  see  that.

(What  do  you  want  me  to  do  ? )

Give  me  something  connected  with  your  work.  [Sitter  gives  small  steel
piece  of  machine.]  I  want  to  tell  you  something  important.  There's  a  tall,
dark-complexioned  gentleman  with  a  heavy  beard.  He  will  put  his  interest,
in  the  thing.  His  name  is  something  like  Atwood.  Atwood.  [L.  D.  had
been  talking  business  with  a  Mr.  Wood,  of  said  complexion,  etc.]  (Do  I
know  him  ?)  I  think  not.  He  will  be  super— what  do  you  call  it  ?  Super
— something.  (Superintendent.)

It  will  be  the  greatest  success  of  the  kind  in  your  country.

I  see  the  propellor,  or  something  of  that  kind.  (Pusher.)

I  see  five  of  these  things.  More.  Many  come  running  together.  [Asked
ibout  Atwood,  counts  five  or  sis  weeks  in  French.]  He  will  come  in  that
number  of  weeks.  He  has  dark  eyes  and  a  prominent  nose.  [Not  true.]
The  name  is  nearly  right,  an  A-t-  and  then  two  O's  and  a  W.  I  see  this  my
own  self.  There  are  no  special  spirits.  [Asked  how  he  sees  it.]  I  see  it
back  of  you,  j  ust  as  plainly  as  if  it  were  before  your  eyes.

There's  a  young  man  has  sometlaing  to  do  with  this.  How's  Aleck  1  He's
tired,  but  he's  going  to  be  better.  When  this  gentleman  comes  there  will,
be  rest  for  all. I  don't  want  to  tell  you  things  that  are  not  right.

[Sitter  says  he  knows  a  Mr.  Wood.]

Well,  I  see  an  A  and  a  T  and  two  O's  and  a  W  and  a  D.  This  man  is
very  honest.

You're  a  good  fellow.  You're  going  to  succeed.  Do  you  know  who  Tom
is? T-h-o-m-a-s— He's  connected  with  your  uncle. [Not  known.]

2  p


572 ■  Richard  Hodgson.  [rART

Do  you  know  VVilliani  1  Will — he  calls  in  the  body.  [Brother  William
living.]  He  wants  to  talk  to  him,  too.  I  have  sent  your  lady  Elizabeth
after  him.

James  [Wife's  father]  wants  to  send  love  to  his  daughter.  Tell  her  not
to  worry.

What  relation  are  you  to  the  baby  ? [Grandfather.] She  knows  you.

She's  lovely,  like  wax. And  the  other  is  very  beautiful.

Andre.  Tell  the  boys  I'm  happy.  Valer.  [See  Fourth  Sitting,  p.  557.]
How  do  you  do,  sir  ? I'm  glad  to  see  you. I  think  I  know  you.  This

is  a  great  change,  and  I'm  much  better  oli'.

Ninth  Sitting. May  I'lnd,  1892.

[Two  follov/ing  sittings  at  country  house  where  child  R.  died,  and
quite  new  to  Mi's.  P.] [Pt.  H.  taking  notes.]

First  Half.

Sitter  :  Miss  Ellen  HefFern  (nurse  of  Mrs.  Thaw's  children.)
How  are  you,  Sis  1

[The  right  hand  is  then  seized,  and  a  message  written  by  "George
for  Hodgson  to  give  to  friends.]

Who's  Marie  ?  [Mary,  a  niece,  daughter  of  Bridget  whose  name
follows.]  Tell  Bridget  I  am  hajipy.  I  don't  want  Hallan  [Ellen]  to  fret
about  me. I  am  hajjpy.

There's  an  old  lady  with  funny  collar  about  her.

(Where  is  she  ?) She's  got  two  boys  with  her,  two  she's  brought  and
another  one's  coming,  that's  three. There  with  her.
(That's  right.)

Who's  James  1 [A  brother  dead.]

Tell  J-A-C-K — Jack — [Another  brother,  not  known  whether  alive  or
not.] Tell  James  I'm  all  right.

Ellen.  Who's  Ellen  ?  (I'm  Ellon.)  There's  a  baby  comes  here,  same
light-haired  little  girl.

Who's  Nanna  1  I  tell  Nanna.  I  come,  say  pttee,  pttee,  pttee.  That's
Ruthie.  Happy  day.  Happy  day.  (I  love  to  see  little  Ruthie.)  Give
me  the  funny  things.  [Rosary  given.]  Here,  baby,  take  this.  Prettee,
prettee.  (Ask  little  Ruthie  where  is  she  ?)  Here  comes  the  little  thing.
She  wants  that.  She  pulls  them  up  that  way.  [Moving  rosary  up  and
down.]

Who's  James  she  keeps  calling  for  ?  Tell  Ellen  I'm  all  right,  not  to
worry  about  me.

Who's  Jack  1 Who  followed  the  water,  passed  out  of  body  in  water  1
[Her  uncle  was  drowned.]
Here,  baby,  take  this.

(Did  she  have  the  Sacrament  before  she  died  ?)  She  says  yes,  all
right,  all  right  and  happy,  too.  Somebody  calls  mother.  Who's  Margaret  1
And  there's  one  they  call  Border— B  R  I  D  G  E  T. (What  shall  I  say  to


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  573


Bridgeb?)  Tell  her  thab  the  paia  in  the  head  is  all  right.  [Mofclier
suffered  much  with  head  before  death.]  Boys  all  right  with  me— one,  two,
three  boys.  (She's  got  more  than  that.)  She's  got  thiee  with  her.  (What
are  their  names?)  Who's  Mike— little  fellow?  [A  brother  Mike  died
young.]

The  baby  passed  with  bowel  trouble.  (This  one  ?)  [Giving  hair  and
iooket.]  Yes,  this  one.  [True  of  a  baby  Ellen  had  nursed,  and  whose  hair
was  in  this  locket.]

Mary.  She  puts  her  arms  up  to  you.  She's  got  very  pretty  eyes,  blue.
Speak  to  me,  all  of  you.  She  loves  you  in  the  spirit.  [This  very  true  of
sitter's  sister  Bridget's  child  Mary,  who  is  dead.]  (How  long  will  it  be  before
I  go  and  see  her  ?)  Not  for  a  long  time. You're  going  across  the  water  first.

Three— only  three,  that's  all  there  is.  Who's  Mary?  (That's  baby'.s
name.)  Keeps  saying  Mary,  Mary.  Why  didn't  you  tell  me  so  ?  Who's
Nanna?  (lam.)  There's  anotlier  one.  That's  your  mother.  She  says  you
gave  her  a  big  round  orange.  [Can't  remember  this.]  (Did  mother  see  me
since  she  passed  out  ?)  Yes,  and  she's  coming  again.  [Ellen  says  that
.she  has  seen  and  spoken  with  her  mother  twice  ;  once  just  before  the
death  of  Ruthie,  and  once  before  the  death  of  a  nephew.  Both  occasions
preceded  her  first  information  as  to  anything  regarding  Mrs.  Piper  or  similar
subjects.]  There  was  a  dream.  She  comes  and  walks  around  you.  She's
got  something  here.  [Meaning  that  there  was  sometliing  belonging  to  the
mother  there.]

(Ask  my  mother  if  she  sees  my  father.)

Little  Mary. That  belongs  to  you.

Who  does  Fred  belong  to  ? [Mrs.  T.  called  out,  "  To  me,  I  guess."]

She  told  me  to  get  that.  [Object  given  which  the  sitter  supposed  to  be
her  mother's  hair.  It  was,  however,  an  Agnus  Dei.  Sitter  did  not  know
that  this  object  was  in  parcel  in  her  lap.]  [Miss  Heffern  brought  several
articles  to  the  sitting  in  a  parcel.  She  did  not  know  that  the  Agnus  Dei
was  among  them.  It  was  wrapped  in  paper,  and  she  supposed  that  this
particular  packet  contained  her  mother's  hair.  The  Agnus  Dei  was  given  to
her  by  a  priest,  and  her  mother  when  living  had  told  her  to  wear  it. — R.  H.,
1898.]  Put  that  in  tli.ere.  Put  it  in  there  and  wear  it,  [thrusting  his  finger
•down  the  neck  of  the  sitter]  just  as  she  told  you  to.  [When  sitter  insisted
that  Phinuit  w^as  wrong  about  this  object  he  tore  off  paper  and  showed  the
Agnus  Dei-I  [True.  Mother  had  told  sitter  to  wear  it.]  (Who  gave  me
that  ?)  That's  hers.  (No,  that  wasn't  hers.)  You  did  everything  you  could
for  her  after  she  passed  out  of  the  body.

Give  me  something.  Give  me  the  father's.  (Haven't  got  anything  of
father's.) Well,  give  me  the  mother's.

Two  Marys  in  connection  with  this  lady.  [True  ;  a  sister  and  a  niece.]
!{Hair  given.] There's  an  aunt  and  a  little  one.

(Mrs.  T.  :  Baby  and  aunt.)  (E.  H.  :  My  sister's  in  the  body.)  She
svants  to  send  her  love  to  her.

Who's  James?  He's  going  to  be  ill.  (Will  he  get  better?)  [Coughs.]
Through  there.  [Pointing  through  there.]  .  .  .  Passed  out  of  body
with  consumption.  [A  cousin  James  Donohue,  of  whom  nothing  known. J
.(Who  is  it  ?) Dannis— Denny  something.  (Donohue.)

2  p  2


571


RicJiard  Hodgson.


[part


Diinnasu — [Farther  attempts  at  pronouncing  name.]  He  wants  to  speak
to  you.  Trouble  tlirough  there.  (Does  he  want  me  to  do  anything  1 )
Passed  out  of  body  across  the  water,  suddenly.  Somebody  in  body  named
James  going  to  be  ill — cold — -Your  mother  tells  rae.  [True.  Baby  James-
liad  cold  next  time  Ellen  saw  him.]

Who's  Bridget  ? She  calls  this  lady's  name.

(Where  did  mother  come  to  ma  first  after  she  passed  out  of  the  body  ? )
She  came  to  you.  (What  did  she  say  to  me  ? )  She's  glad  to  sea  you,  she-
says. (Ask  her  if  I  can  be  of  any  use  to  her.) You  done  [sic]  all  right.

(What  religion  is  the  best  to  follow — Presbyterian  or  Catholic,  or  what  ?)
She  saj'sicep  the  way  you  are.  That's  all  right.  Go  and  do  as  I  told  you
first  wlien  I  come  [sic — for  "  came."]

(Ask  her  if  she  sees  my  father.)  Tell  her  to  do  what  I  told  you  when  I
come  [sic].  She  saj's  you  do  as  she  told  you  to  when  she  came.  Understand
that  ?  (Yes.)

(Ask  her  how  many  brothers  of  mine  she  sees  ? ) Five. [Five  dead.]
Who's  James  ? There's  one  called  .Tames. [Brother  James  had  long,
curly  hair.] Funny  hair. Light  brownish  like.  [True.]
Eyes  bluish  grej'.  [True.]

(What  was  the  height  ? )  Not  very  tall.  (That's  wrong.)  Have  you  got
that  in  your  mind?  (Yes.)  You  don't  know  much  about  talking  to  me,,
do  you  ?

[Message  from  the  motlier.]  .  .  .  Tell  her  I  told  her  to  change,
I'll  watch  over  her  wherever  she  goes.  .  .  .  You  do  right  if  you  keep  aa
you  are.  You  get  kind  of  mixed  up  sometimes  and  don't  know  where  you,
are.

That  brother's  a  fine-looking  fellow.  [James.]
(What  did  the  brother  die  of  ? Of  disease  ? )

One  was  choked — Oh,  that's  your  father's  brother.  [Unverified.]
Another  one  was  drowned. (What  was  his  name  ?) Andrew.  [Correct.

Mother's  brother  Andrew  drowned.] And  you  never  had  Mass  for  him.,

[True.]

(Shall  I  have  one  said  now  ?)  Never  mind.  She  wants  you  to  remember
always  that  big  orange  you  gave  lier.  You  gave  it  to  her  behind  the  curtain.
[No  recollection  of  this,  but  Ellen  brought  many  things  once,  including
basket  of  fruit,  from  south  of  France  to  her  mother's  house  in  Ireland.  Bed
had  curtains.]

[Dr.  and  Mrs.  Tiiav,^  enter  and  talk  to  Phinuit.]

(Ask  mother  if  she's  got  anything  to  say  to  the  boy  that  wrote  that.)-
[Giving  letter.]  I  want  to  tell  her  lots  of  things.  (I  want  to  know  if
mother  is  in  heaven.)  Your  mother's  in  heaven.  She's  all  right.  She's,
much  happier  there  than  you  begin  to  be  here,  etc.  (Is  she  in  purgatory  ?)■
Purgatory  be  hanged. You  get  your  purgatory  here,  etc.

[Exit  Nellie.]

Second  Half.

[Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  sitting.]

[Dr.  T.  gives  a  daguerreotye  of  W  .] Who's  W  ? W.  says  I'm.-

here. Wliat  do  you  want  ? That's  father. W  . That's  my  son.  How


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  575


are  you  1  I'm  glad  you  brought  me  back.  I  want  to  break  tliroiigli  this
veil.  [Some  question  asked  by  Dr.  T.  about  how  he  got  there.]  [Some
remark  about  mother,  and  tlisn  about  development,  etc.]  I  improved
spiritually,  mentally,  and.  every  other  way.  Wiien  I  lirsfc  opened  my  eyes  I
saw  nobody.  (Do  you  want  to  give  a  message  to  any  of  your  scientitio
friends  ?)

I  have  one  friend  that  I'd  like  to  see  very  much  on  earth.  Cannot  think
of  his  name  just  now,  but  will  in  a  minute.  [Portrait.]  This  brings  me
well. . .  .

You  tell  LangenwinD  [struggles  at  name,  approximations  to  Langley.]
I  want  him  to  come  and  see  me.  You've  changed  since  I  came  here.
You're  getting  thin. (What  shall  I  say  to  Langley  1) Ask  him  how  he's

■contented,  getting  on. Who's  J  1 He's  a  very  peculiar  old  fellow.

They've  straightened  things  out.  They've,  explained  all  matters.  I'd  do
identically  just  as  I  did  before — more  than  half.  You  tell  Davis  that  I'll
help  him  in  a  few  days. (Who's  Davis  1) He's  a  friend  of  mine — wrote

*i  letter  for  me. [Unverified.] Tell  me  about  the  other  Yv''  .  He's

■coming  to  us.  (How  long  ?)  About  six  months  or  a  little  less.  The
■children  are  coming  out  all  right.  You're  the  one  that  studied  medicine.
Doctor,  you  tell  him  that  I'm  going  to  straighten  the  children.  He'll
■write  it. Til  \^^.•ite  it.

[Writing,]

[Phinuit  writes  Marry  twice,  in  mirror  writing.  (Harry  is  the  name  of
■one  (if  Dr.  Thaw's  brothers.* — R.  H.)  The  hand  was  then  sei/,ed  by  another
■"influence,"  and  the  following  was  written,  during  the  course  of  which
Phinuit  made  occasional  remarks  like  these  to  the  communicating  intelligence  :
■"I  told  you  if  you'd  come  with  me  I'd  show  you  your  friends,  you  old
idiot."  .  .  .  "He's  as  stubborn  as  a  mule."  .  ,  .  "Don't  thump
me,"  etc.]

[Writing.]  How  do  you  do,  my  son  1  I  am  your  father,  and  you  ought
to  know  me. (Very  glad  to  see  you,  etc.) Thank  you.

■»  ■*  -X-  ■*  ■!(•

(What  were  the  last  words  you  said  before  you  passed  out  ?}  The  boys
-  .  .  I  said  I  was  going  to  sleep,  and  I  am  anxious  to  have  j'ou  know  I
was  lingering  between  this  life  and  yours  in  the  body.  Then  I  tried  to  tell
you  about  the  money.  I  am  .  .  .  yes  ...  I  v.dll,  pob,  pob,  rob,
Bub. — I  will  tell  you  when  I  come  again,  but  I  shall  have  to  recall  my  last
words. [Nothing  relevant. — U.  H.]

[Question  repeated.]  Yes,  I  surely  will.  What  is  it  ?  B  .  ,  ,
Give  me  a  glass  of  v.'ater. My  head —

(Do  you  see  the  babies  1) Yes.  Blair.

(Can  you  bring  the  children  now  ?)  I  v/ill.  Yes.  You  know  your
father  William.  I  must  go.  Good-bye,  dear.  I  must  go,  must  go,  good-
bye.

[End  of  writing.]

[Phinuit  then  struggles  to  "get  his  hand  back."]  I  got  it  away.  [To
Mrs.  T.]  What  are  you  worrying  about  ?  (I  want  to  go  to  you.)  What?
(To  the  babies  sometimes.) Oh,  you  wicked,  wicked  little  thing,  etc.  Dr


576


Richard  IIod<json.


[pari


can't  you  straighten  her  out  hetter  than  that?  You  stop  your  worrying.
You've  nothing  to  worry  aljout. Go  to  sleep.

(Is  he  going  to  be  sick  ?)  No.  That's  a  whim  you've  got  into  your  head.
No  heart  trouble,  no  kidney  trouble,  no  stomach  trouble.  His  head's  a  little
tired. That's  all. (I  want  to  see  them  so  much  sometimes.)

Oh,  you  act  like  a  baby.  Come  here,  dearie,  come  along.  Look  ■nt  the
little  curly-headed  one.  [To  Dr.  T.]  Your  mother's  got  her.  See  her  jump
her.  [Dandling.]  Can't  you  see  her,  you  stupid  fools?  (No.)  You  can
see  her,  can't  you,  Hodgson  ? (No.)  Humph.

Tell  mamma  p-tee,  p-sse,  happy  little  Ruthie.  Bring  a  posies.  That's  a
spirit  posy.  Don't  worry  mother.  Dranma,  she  says.  Ruth,  dranma,
don't  wori-y  papa,  don't  worry  you  [to  Mrs.  T.]  pt-tee,  pt-tee.

[Phinuit  departs — heavy  breathing.]

Pttee.  Pttee.  (Little  baby.  How  do  you  do,  baby  ?)  Pt-tee.  (Little
Margaret  witli  you  ?)

Pt-tee.  [Points  upwards  and  to  one  side  at  picture  with  forefinger.
Hand  rises,  finger  points,  trembles,  and  hand  sinks.]  [During  the  last
juonth  of  R.'s  life  it  was  a  regular  morning  custom  to  bring  her  to  the
room  in  which  this  sitting  was  held — our  bedroom — and  she  would  always
point,  as  hand  did  in  sitting,  with  one  finger  (unusual  with  a  baby),  and
say  "pt-tee,  pt-tee,"  just  as  in  sitting.  This  little  incident  had  not  been
in  either  sitter's  conscious  mind  since  baby's  death,  six  months  before.
Mrs.  Piper  had  never  been  in  that  room  until  the  actual  time  of  sitting.
JLany  other  pictures  in  the  room,  two  of  which  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  could
have  pointed  at  more  easily  than  the  jjarticuLir  one  always  noticed  by
the  baby.]

[Phinuit  returns.]  Baby  wanted  to  come.  The  old  lady  stood  up  behind
her  so  she  wouldn't  fall.  Don't  be  so  impatient,  little  one,  wait  a  minute,
darling.  Thank  mamma  for  the  posy.  Bring  the  po.sy  again  another  day.
She  has  no  pain — no  teeth. I'm  hai^py,  happy. Don't  cry  any  more.

(And  little  Margaret  ? )

Little  one  can't  talk  so  well.  Little  Margaret,  Margie,  beautiful,  they're
just  like  flowers  in  blossom.

(Why,  they  were  twins.  Why  can't  she  talk  as  well  as  the  other  ? )  She
doesn't  talk  so  much.  Her  talk  is  different  ;  she  doesn't  articulate  quite  so
distinctly. I  can  understand  it,  but  you  wouldn't. Little  da  da  da  dada.

(Why  did  she  put  her  finger  up  ? )

Pt-tee,  Pt-tee. That's  what  she  ..ised  to  do  in  the  body. Your  mother
says  she  had  the  baby  do  that  so  that  you'd  know  it's  baby.
(How  about  L  ? )

L  's  going  to  get  out  without  you. W  is  going  to  have  a  dream

Defore  he  passes  out. Here's  F  . F  ,  you  be  still  a  minute  ;  you  can

talk  directly.

(What's  that  about  the  dream?)  He'll  tell  you  about  it.  [Unverified.]
He's  goiiag  to  see  your  father.  His  eyes  are  going  to  be  opened.  That's  all
fixed.  I  saw  Susan.  She  found  the  gentleman  he  wanted  to  know  about.
[This  evidently  refers  to  Melvin.]

(How's  F.  ? )  He  sends  his  love  to  you.  Much  obliged  for  what  you  did
for  him  when  he  was  in  the  body.


XX.XIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  577


[Pi?!..]  (That  belongs  to  friend  of  Melvin.)  You  stick  it  in  there,  and
it'll  stay. (Not  in  medium's  skin. )

[Written.]

How  are  you,  Melvin  and  Dr.,  and  Florence  1  I  am  so  glad  to  be  with  you
again.  1  am— I  am  Steve.  Dr.,  this  is  my  cravat  pin.  This  is  my  cravat
pin.  Melvin  just  gave  it  to  me.  (Whom  did  you  give  it  to  ?  )  [Attempts  at
names  beginning  with  M—  finally  reacliing  M-A-E,  clearty  ;  other  letters
vmdecipherable  ;  ending]  I  am  very  weak.  ["Steve's  sister  Mary  had  the
article  spoken  of,  we  believing  at  the  time  she  had  not.  We  did  not  know
his  sister's  name  even." — Dr.  Thaw,  1896.]

[Hand  here  seized  by  another  "influence."]

Tell  J  [?] B. [Surname  correctly  given.— R.  H.]  J.A.B.

[Initials  correctly  given. F.  W.  was  an  artist. J.  A.  B.,  also  an  artist,  was

an  intimate  friend  of  F.  W. — R.  H.] I  am  not  dead. F  . Give  my

love  to  Top.  [Nickname  of  best  friend,  given  independently  at  second
sitting.] F W  . [Names  correctly  given. — R.  H.]

(Don't  be  so  excited.  Take  your  time,  etc.),  and  I  ti'y  to  be  good,  but
you  don't  know  how  glad  I  am  to  get  to  you. Andrew. . . .  Andrew

. . . Andrew. Adieu. [Andrew  unverified,] Dear  old  B  and  Top.

Give  my  love  to  them.  Oh,  how  I  thank  you  for  all  you  did  for  me.  Good-
bye, dear  Di*.  Thaw.  Blair.  [F.  called  Dr.  T.  by  first  name  only  during
visit  just  before  his  death.]

Who  is  this  man  ?  (That's  Mr.  Hodgson,  Mr.  W  .  R.H.  says,  "Glad

to  know  you,  Mr.  W  . ") Glad  to  see  you,  sir. (I  know  your  friend

B  very  well.) Oh,  do  you Give  him  my  love  and  tell  him  I  would

like  to  see  him. Did  you  know  nie  ? (No. I  don't  think  I  ever  met  you.)

I  am  F  W  .  Give  me  my  stick  and  brush  and  I  will  paint  it.  They

ought  to  have  known  better.

Good-bye. . . . With. . . . (You  know  Mr.  W  ?)  [Mr.

Melvin  W.,  who  has  come  into  the  room. — R.  H.]

Yes. How  are  you  1 M  ? Will  you  speak  to  me  ?

Good-bye. . . . Yours. . . . F  .

E,emember  me  to  your  mother  and  father.  What  was  your  brother's
name  ?  (Alexander.)

Oh  yes. Remember  me  to  him. [Writing  ends. Sitting  ends. — R.  H.]


Tentli  Sittinrj,  May  -lord.,  1892.

[Present :  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw. H.  H.  taking  notes.]

Well,  little  girl,  yoii've  got  over  your  worrying.  I'll  go  and  find  some
friends  for  you.

(I  want  to  bring  my  little  Betty  in  to  you.)  [Servant  Nellie  brings  in
Beatrice,  Mrs.  T.'s  little  daughter.]

Ha  !  Nice  little  girl,  come  here.  Here  comes  the  baby.  Two  babies.
Give  me  Ruthie's  play-toys.  [Rosary.]  See  the  baby.  It's  too  heavy  for
her. [Puts  rosary  round  Mrs.  T.'s  head,  between  her  and  Betty.] See  !


578


Richard  Hodgson.


[pari


Tliat's  little  Margaret.  Dad,  Dad,  Dad.  Ptee,  pssy,  Naiina,  Nanna.
[Stroking  B's  hair.] Pfctee,  pttee,  jDttee.

[Phiniiit  leaves.  Baby  comes.  Finger  points  toward  picture.]  Pttee —
pttee,  etc.  There,  there,  etc.  [Places  B's  hand  on  Mrs.  Piper's  head,
strokes  B's  hair,  etc.,  points  toward  picture  again,  "Pttee,  ptt-eo.  Places
hand  on  Dr.  T.'s  head  and  pats  it.]

[Phinnit  returns.  Mrs.  T.  is  sending  B.  away.]  Puthie  wants  the  little
one  to  stay. * * * [Personal  and  non-evidential  talk. — P.  H.]

Here's  W  . [Father  of  Dr.  Thaw.— R.H.] (I  asked  him  to  tell  me

what  he  said  just  before  he  passed  out,  and  what  he  meant.)  He  was  dazed.
He  thinks  he  said  something  about  a  glass  of  water,  but  he  doesn't  know.

(But  he  said  something  about  a  man.)  He  doesn't  know.  He  was
between  the  two  worlds.  He  doesn't  know  just  what  he  did  say.  Susan
knew  exactly  what  she  said  before  she  passed  out.  [Correct.  See  sitting  of
May  19,  1892.]  [Dr.  T.  e.xplains  what  he  thought  about  it,  that  it  was
probably  unconscious  talking,  &c.]

*  *  -X-  *  *  ■}!•

Give  me  the  thing  that'll  bring  him  nearer. [D.iguerreotype  given.!

I  understood  you  better  than  I  did  the  rest.  I  didn't  understand  how  to
treat  you  all. What  about  Langdn —  Lang —  ?

(L  ,  you  mean. Has  he  something  to  say  to  him  ?)

Is  he  satisfied  with  what  I  did  for  him  ? [Appropriate  remark.]

That's  Florence.  This  was  taken  before  the  war.  [True  of  daguerreo-
type.] A  knows  all  about  this. She  kept  it  for  years. A  .  (A

NVhat  ?)  Your  mother,  of  course. Don't  you  know  your  mother  ?  [IMistake.

A  ,  name  of  W. 's  sister.] . . . [The  difficulty  with  A.  here  seems  to

l)e  due  to  Mrs.  T.'s  aunt  having  had  name  of  Eliza  A  .] . . .  She

liad  this  for  a  long  time.  But  she's  been  liere  twenty  or  thirty  years  or
more.  She  looks  as  much  In'jher  than  your  father  as  your  father  is  higher
lhan  you.

He's  explained  to  her  all  about  your  being  here,  your  being  married,  and
the  children,  and  all  about  it.

(Where  did  my  father  get  this  thing  ?)  Where's  South  ?  (Where's  what  ?)
He  had  that  taken  years  ago,  before  your  mother  passed  out  of  the  body.
He  liad  it  taken  years  ago,  before  the  war.

(Just  one  thing  I'd  like  to  ask  my  father.  What  name  did  he  call  my
mother?) He  talks  about  two  mothers,  one  in  tlie  body,  one  in  the  spirit.

(My  mother  and  my  stepmother.  Won't  he  give  the  nam.e  of  my  mother?)
That's  A  ,  too.

(No,  that's  his  sister).  [Pause.]

Oh,  that's  the  name  I  gave  you  one  day,  and  I  mixed  it  up  witli  tlie  name

of  another  lady. [Referring  to  Ann  Eliza,  Mrs.  T.'s  aunt.] Wlio's  L  ?

(That's  his  daughter-in-law).

*  *  *  *  -X-  *  ■

Who's  Margaret  ? Oh,  little  Margaret.
(Won't  he  give  mother's  name  ?)
He'll  write  that  name  directly.

*  *  *  -S  * .  *


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  579


"Who's  Elsine  ? [Struggles  after  name.] That's  W  ,  too. W in

the  body. (Who's  speaking?) Dr.  H.  :  George  William . .  .  Andre

Valliere  says  tell  George  I'm  all  right. I  have  seen  Wliiskcrs.  ["Alfred

Howell's  dog,  then  dead." — Dr.  Thaw,  1893. See  p.  557-8.] o  .  .

Eleventh  SiUiny. May  20ih,  1S92.

[Miss  Ellen  Ileffern  at  first  part  of  sitting. E,.  H.  taking  notes.]

Phinuit :  .  .  .  She  wants  you  to  tell  Ellen  I'm  glad  to  see  her.  I'm
here  in  anotlier  life.  Are  you  lonely  without  me  ?  Do  you  miss  me  1  Call
for  me  and  I'll  come  to  you.  Ask  me  to  come  to  you  in  the  name  of  God
when  you  go  to  your  little  cot.

Who's  Mary?  (My  sister.)  Bridget.  I'll  stay  with  you  all,  and  help
you  well.  I'll  be  with  all  of  you.  (Father?)  He's  with  her.  She  wants
you  to  remember  a  bandage  here,  dipping  it  in  water  and  put  it  over  here.
You  bathed  his  head.  [True.]  In  another  land — country.  There  was  a
little  candle  there  you  lit.  [True.]  You  remember  a  red  handkerchief.
Keep  that.  [The  only  relic  of  her  father  E.  possesses.]  He  wants  her  to  go
v/here  his  body  is. He'll  be  with  her,  and  tell  you  what  she  does.

Be  a  good  friend  to  the  one  tliat  gave  you  the  little  thing  to  wear
here.  He's  blessed  the  thing.  (Referring  to  A'jiuis  Del  meritioned  in.
former  sitting.]

Who's  Map  ?  Mac — something.  (His  name  is  John.)  That's  the  John
I  told  you  about  and  you  said  no.  I  told  you  of  two  Johns.  One  called
Jack,  and  he's  got  a  brother  Mike. There's  land  on  that  side  [.John

Mac  ]  and  he's  going  to  give  you  that  land. Wasn't  I  a  good  fellow  to

you? You'll — Take  my  blessing.

John  will  do  what's  right  for  you,  but  it  will  be  through  Mary.  And  I
tell  you,  friends,  this  lady's  father  and  mother  are  here.  You're  not  going
to  see  about  it.  But  you're  going  to  before  you  leave  your  surroundings.
Ellen.  (Yes.)  Speak  to  your  mother,  quick.  She's  going  away.  She'll
<^ome  and  stay  with  you.  (How  long  shall  I  stay  with  this  lady  ?)  Help  her
out.  Seethe  old  gentleman  and  lady.  What's  the  matter  with  his  leg  ?
[Father  was  lame.  Rheumatism.]

[The  notes  of  the  remaining  part  of  this  sitting,  at  which  Dr.  .and  Mrs.
T.  were  present,  besides  myself,  are  too  fragmentary  to  be  of  much  use.  I
talked  with  Phinuit  for  some  time,  and  then  asked  him  to  get  "  Mr.  E."  if
possible,  to  control  the  voice,  and  talk  into  the  phonograph.  Shortly  after
there  were  indications  of  "change  of  control,"  after  which  there  was  a  long
silence  while  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  pulled  as  though  at  a  moustache,  moved  her
hair  back  from  the  forehead,  and  felt  my  face  over.  I  said  "  Hallo,  who's
there  ?  What's  the  matter  ?  Why  don't  you  speak  ?  "  Finally  the  voice
came,  very  different  apparently  from  Phinuit's  :  "That's  the  funniest — I
<lidn't  think  I  could  get — it  can't  bo  possible  I've  got  here  at  last.  Well !
Well  !  Well !  You've  changed  since  I  came  here,  tremendously.  You
don't  know  me,  do  you?  I'm  George  Pelham."  (See  p.  315.  This  incident
occurred  about  a  fortnight  after  the  sitting  with  G.  P.'s  father  and  mother.
The  series  of  stenograpliically  reported  sittings  did  not begin tUl  the


580


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


following  November. — R.  H.)  Along  conversation  ensued,  in  which  one
or  two  obscurities  in  recent  sittings  were  referred  to,  but  dealing  chieflj''
with  Gr.  P.'s  experiences  immediately  after  death,  first  impressions,  anxiety
to  speak  with  friends,  etc.  Nearly  all  this  was  spoken  into  the  phonograph,
and  scarcely  any  notes  were  taken.  Unfortunately  we  found  later  that  the
phonographic  record  gave  us  only  a  few  scattered  words  here  and  there.
Near  the  beginning  of  the  conversation,  as  I  remember,  when  asking  G.  P.
to  talk  into  the  phonograph,  I  said,  "  You  know  what  a  phonograph  is?"
"Of  course  I  do.  Why,  Hodgson,  you  must  think  I've  got  very  unintelli-
gent since  I  came  over  here."  The  sitting  ended  by  another  conversation
with  Phinuit.]

Twelfth  Silting. January  lG</t,  1893.

[Di'.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  sitting. A.  D.  taliing  shorthand  notes.]

Phinuit  :  Tliat's  Florrie.  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you.  How  are  you  ?
Where's  ■the  doctor  1  (I'm  here.)  Phinuit:  You're  here  too!  I'm  so  glad
to  see  you.

******
[Personal  and  non-evidential  talk. — R.H.]

Here,  speak  to  the  baby.  She  has  a  gentleman  with  her.  Who  is — who
is — I  know  that  gentleman  just  as  well  as  can  be. That  is  the  gentleman  I

told  you  was  going  to  pass  out  of  the  body. That  is  W  . That's  your

brother  W  . [See  pp.  566-7,  575.]

Well,  I  never !  Oh,  hello !  B-l-r.  B-l-r.  B-l-r.  [Dr.  A.  B.  Thaw  is  usually
called  by  his  middle  name,  Blair,  by  liis  relatives  and  intimate  friends. —
R.  H.]  Hello,  Florence,  Florence.  How  are  you? — He  speaks  kind  of
queer. — I  want  to  sjjcak  to  you.  Come  here.  Well,  I  never  !  I  have  seen
you  a  great  many  times  since  I  passed  out  of  the  body,  but  there  is  one  thing
I  want  to  toll  you  of  particularly.  Listen  to  me.  B-l-r.  B-l-r.  B-l-r.  I
can't  get  that  name  right.  You  listen  to  it  and  intei-pret  the  best  you  can.
Look  here,  I  want  to  tell  you,  my  brother,  one  thing — my  brother.  I  wish  I
had  my  life  in  the  body  over  again,  I  would  do  differently.

(In  what  way  ?) In  many  ways,  I  assure  you. Where  is  L  ? L  -.

L  . Well,  did  you  think  I  was  coming  here  like  this? (The  Dr.  told

me. W  . ) Why  didn't  you  tell  me? I  had  no  sooner  got  out  than  I

realised  I  lived  again.  But  I  didn't  know  this.  Did  you  know  this  ?  Why
didn't  you  tell  me  ?  You  wanted  to  surprise  me.  Well,  I  am  happy.  I  can
say  I  am  hapjjy,  and  it  is  the  first  time  l  could  say  it  in  years.  Believe  me
that  my  sufferings  are  at  an  end.  I  have  no  more  pain,  and  I  want  you  to
think  of  me  as  being  perfectly  happy.  I  am  satisfied,  and  I  am  with  father
and  mother.  I  am  all  right,  B-l-r.  Do  not  think  of  me  as  dead,  because  I
am  not.  I  think  fatlier  was  glad  to  see  me,  but  you  know  he  didn't  think
this  any  more  than  I  did.

(What  did  he  say  about  it  ?  Do  you  ever  talk  about  coming  to  see  me
with  father  ?)  Father  has  been  here  before,  and  he  knew  it,  and  he  told  me
about  it. But  this  is  the  first  channel  that  has  been  open  to  me. . .  .


XXXIII.] Observations  of  Cerlain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  581


Ko  more  pain. I  am  glad  to  get  out  of  it,  thank  the  Lord  ! I  wouldn't

go  back  into  the  body  for  all  the  world  and  all  there  is  in  it.

*  *  *  *  '  *

Phinuit :  Giv^e  me  the  flo\yers  for  the  baby.  [Takes  flowers.]  [Whispering.  J

(Do  you  like  the  pretty  flowers?) Phinuit:  [Wliispering.] Pretty,  pretty.

[lyiany  times  repeated.] HapjDy,  happy,  happy. [Smoothing  fur  on  Mi-s.

T.'s  shoulder  some  time.] Pussie  ! Pussie  ! Pussie  ! [Ruthie  used  to  dc

so  with  her  mother's  fur  coat  in  tlie  last  month  of  her  life,  and  say,  Pussie,,

Pussie. This  was  the  first  time  fur  was  worn  at  a  sitting.]
*  *  *  *  *

Here's  H  . (How  are  you.  Doctor  ?)

Phinuit  :  I  want  to  speak  to  j'ou.  Do  you  know  you  have  done  so  much,
for  me  ?  I  am  so  happy  here.  Do  you  know  this  world  is  nut  what  you
think  it  is  ?  The  world  that  I  am  in  is  peace  and  plenty.  Tlie  world  of
peace  and  plenty.  That's  so,  he  says.  Do  you  hear  what  I  say  1  You.
can't  see  me,  can  you.  Doctor  ?  God  bless  you  always,  for  ever  and  for  ever,
and  you  too,  you  dear  little  woman.  Did  you  miss  my  Christmas  letter  ?
[Dr.  H.  sent  us  a  Christmas  letter  every  year.]  (We  did.  We  shall  never
forget  your  Christmas  letter. )

Phinuit  :  Did  you  keep  it  all  these  days  ?  How  long  is  it  since  I  was
liberated  from  my  body  1  (A  year  and  a  half. )  Phinuit  :  A  year  and  a  half
gone  in  the  material  body,  and  still  the  little  church  goes  on.  [The
reference  to  the  church  was  pertinent. — R.  H.]  (It  is  over  two  years.).
Phinuit  :  How  are  all  my  family  1  But  they  have  so  much  trouble  and  so
much  worry. They  worry  unnecessarily,  I  believe.

(How  is  your  vv^ife  ?  Is  she  going  to  be  better  ?)  Phinuit  :  She  is  going,
to  be  much  better  1  Don't  you  remember  what  I  told  you  ?  (About
what  ?)  Phinuit  :  I  told  you  about  one  of  his  children,  and  how  she  would
get  better. (She  is  better.)

Phinuit :  And  his  wife  is  going  to  be  better  too,  much  better  in  the
material  body,  and  will  be  a  comfort  to  him  yet.

(What  about  B  ?) Phinuit :  She  is  the  one  that  is  going  to  get

married. She  is  going  to  be  married. (We  could  not  get  the  name  of  the

lover.) Phinuit:  Oh,  couldn't  you  ? W  ■. [One  letter  wrong.]

H  wants  to  know  about  the  verses  he  left. He  wants  to  know  if

they  were  printed,  if  the  little  book  was  printed.  [A  posthumous  volum&
of  his  poems  was  printed  about  that  time,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  prior
to  the  sitting  or  not. — R.H.]  Have  you  missed  me  much  since  I  came
here?  (We  love  you  so  much.)  Phinuit:  As  I  go  dreaming  along  I  look
back  to  you  with  a  great  deal  of  happiness.  You  were  my  ideals,  you.
always  will  be.  I  see  you  a  great  many  times  when  the  body  is  quiet  and
die  soul  goes  on,  wandering  on.  (Where  does  the  soul  go  when  wo  sleep  ?)
Phinuit  :  It  travels,  and  we  can  communicate  witli  them  freely.  You  do  not
remember  it,  and  you  do  not  realise  it.  When  you  sleep  I  oftentimes  go
to  you  and  I  shall  never  forget  you . And  do  tell  my  family  so. . .  .

[A.  Dow  sitting. Dr.  T.  taking  brief  notes.]

How  about  the  machines  ?  They  will  be  a  grand  success.  I  see  them  in
a  great  big  building.


582


Richard  Hodgson.


[part


There  is  a  man  signing  a  big  paper.  [Mr.  Dow's  father  had  signed
application  for  space  at  Chicago  fair  two  clays  previously.  This  known  only
to  A.  D.]  [The  machines  were,  however,  not  exhibited  at  the  World's  Fair
in  Chicago. — R.  H.]

I  said  I  will  go  back  into  the  spirit  world  if  these  things  are  not  a
^success.

( Will  there  be  any  more  machines  ?)
There  will  bo  two  more  new  styles.

You  will  have  more  calls  than  you  caa  fill  for  them.  Un,  deux,  trois,
quatre,  cinq,  six.  Inside  of  six  months  your  father  won't  want  for
.anything.  [Tiie  machines  are  only  now,  as  this  Report  goes  to  press,  on
the  point  of  being  placed  on  the  market. — R.  IT.]

In  the  business  pa.rb  of  the  machines  there  will  be  a  man  named  Burton.
'Two  men. One  has  a  sandy  beard. An  elderly  gentleman  in  the  West.

Who's  Ben  ?

I  see  a  patent  in  the  patent  place.  It's  all  right.  (Are  there  to  be  any
new  inventions  1)

No. I  told  you  clearly  about  these  things.

Here's  Stump.  You  are  going  to  be  better  off.  Tell  George,  Stump
^sends  love  to  him. [See  pp.  557-8.]

(Mrs.  T.  :  How  about  my  sister  in  the  body  ?)

She's  not  very  well. [True.] Is  there  anybody  named  H  connected

with  her? [Her  husband.]

Little  gu'l. [Good  advice  given  here  in  regard  to  their  little  girl.]
Their  little  boy  is  not  very  well. Has  been  having  a  cold. An  inward

lever,  in  the  stomach. A  little  cold  too. Coming,  perhaps. [Boy  had

acute  gastric  disturbance  five  days  after  sitting.]

*  *  *  a  *  %


XXXIII.] Psychical  Research  in  American  Universities.  SSS


SUPPLEMEI^T.

L

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  IN  AMERICAN  UNIVERSITIES.

By  Harlow  Gale.

Psychological  Laboratonj,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,

Minn.,  U.S.A.


As  a  part  of  my  own  interost  in  psychical  research,  it  seemed  to  me  it
would  be  interesting  and  profitable  to  try  to  gather  together  some  report  on
the  place  of  psychical  research  in  our  university  teaching.  For  in  any  new
line  of  investigation  there  comes  a  time  when,  with  the  development  of
methods  and  the  accumulation  of  a  sufficiently  trustworthy  mass  of  material,
some  claim  can  be  ii:  le  to  the  presentation  of  its  methods  and  results  in
educational  institutions.  Psychical  research  seems  naturally  to  fall  under
PsychologJ^  and  so  it  is  for  instructors  in  psychology  to  decide  when  these-
newer  subjects  of  psychical  investigation  deserve  a  place  in  our  university
courses.

At  Harvard,  Professor  James  gives  about  fifteen  out  of  forty-five-
lectures  in  his  course  in  Abnormal  Psychology  to  psychical  research  woi'k.
But  neither  of  his  psychological  colleagues,  Royce  or  Miinsterberg,  takes  at
present  any  active  interest  in  the  subject.  In  Columbia  the  only  allusion
to  the  subject  is  by  Professor  Hyslop,  who  regrets  that  lack  of  time  and  a
proper  psychological  course  only  allow  him  to  mention  it.  He  hopes,
however,  to  offer  some  special  work  in  this  subject,  and,  if  time  and
opportunity  presented  itself,  would  give  a  course  for  the  whole  year.  He  is
"convinced  that  the  experimentalist  who  ignores  it  and  taboos  it,  or  refuses
to  understand  it  (it  is  not  necessary  to  believe  in  it)  is  going  to  be  left
behind,  and  will  lose  his  influence  ;  for  the  time  is  comii)g  in  the  near
future  when  he  will  be  called  upon  to  discuss  a  problem  which  he  has  not.
equipped  himself  to  discuss."  However,  neither  of  those  in  cliarge  of  the-
expei-imental  or  abnormal  Psychology  "pays  the  slightest  attention  to
psychical  research  a  la  the  English  Society."  The  experimentalist  "taboos
it  throughout,  but  has  never  even  read  the  reports  and  their  experiments
in  telepathy."

At  Pennsylvania,  Professor  Newbold  says,  My  own  interest  in  the
matter  is  very  keen,  and  I  regret  very  much  that  my  work  leaves  me  no
time  for  originfJ  research.  I  do  not,  however,  introduce  it  into  my  teaching.
In  the  first  place  I  am  giving  no  courses  in  which  the  subject  would
naturally  find  its  place,  and  in  the  second,  lam  by  no  means  sure  that  it
is  desirable, either  for  the sake  of  the  cause  or  for  the  sake of  the


584


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


■students,  to  do  so.  I  alwaj's,  however,  so  far  as  possible,  endeavour  to
arouse  the  interest  of  any  individual  student  who  seems  j)ossessed  of  the
good  sense  and  judguient  which  are  so  essential  in  one  who  intends  to
deal  with  such  questions."  Perhaj5S  quite  naturally  Professor  Fullerton's
six  years  of  work  with  the  Seybert  Commission,  in  which  he  came  in  contact
■with  fraudulent  mediums  only,  has  resulted  in  giving  him  a  thorough  distaste
for  the  whole  suljject.  The  experimental  Psychologist  there  is  an  orthodox
■of  the  pronounced  type,  and  glories  in  the  fact  that  he  is  not  in  tlie  least
interested  in  "  so-called  psychical  research."  Since  the  same  man  has  charge
■of  tlie  work  in  experimental  Psychology  at  Bryn  Mawr  (Women's),  this
■complacent  superiority  prevails  there  also  ;  althougli  Professor  D.  S.  Millei',
Associate  Professor  of  Philosophy,  gives  four  or  five  lectures  of  his  intro-
ductory course  to  Hypnotism  and  psychical  research,  and  formerly,  in  an
advanced  course,  gave  them  more  time.

At  Brown,  Professor  Delabarre  has  a  "Seminary  on  '  Abnormal  and
Unusual  States  of  Consciousness '  during  the  winter  term,  in  which  the
work  of  the  S.P.R.  is  referred  to  and  criticised."

At  Smith  (Women's)  Professor  Gardner  reports  :  —"My  reference  to  that
Avork  in  my  classes  is  only  incidental.  Some  years  ago  I  had  an  elective
course  in  which  hypnotism,  clairvoyance,  telepathy,  etc.,  were  considered  in
some  detail,  but  I  gave  it  up,  as  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  work  was  not  of
tliat  disciplinary  character  which  I  consider  the  main  work  of  a  college
should  be."

The  subject  gets  some  attention  at  Chicago  in  connection  Avith  the
Tegular  psychological  work,  but  it  is  given  no  independent  treatment.

A  Psychologist  of  one  of  our  larger  Universities  gives  some  criticism
to  psychical  research,  but  does  not  wish  his  name  mentioned  in  this
•connection.

From  Cornell  an  Associate  of  the  Society  reports  that  not  only  is  there
no  psychical  research  work  there,  but  that  the  Psycliologist  "will  not  even
have  the  S.P.E..  Proceedings  in  the  library  lest  tliey  should  inflame  the
imaginations  and  corrupt  the  minds  of  the  students.  This  policy  recently
led  to  the'somewhat  comical  result  that  he  had  to  borrow  the  books  of  me,
when  he  needed  them  for  polemical  purposes."

The  attitude  at  Yale,  aside  from  indifference,  is  shown  in  the  warning
"against  the  unjustifiable  application  of  the  term  'experiment'  to  hyimotic
•exhibitions,  to  thought-transference  follies,  and  to  the  so-called  psychical
research  experiments.  These  amusements  are  as  unrelated  to  scientific
experiments  as  clairvoyant  healing  and  faith-cure  to  the  science  of
medicine "  (Scripture  :  Thinking,  Feeling,  Doing,  1895,  p.  26).  In  his
New  Psychology,  1897,  the  same  "  New  Psychologist  "  selects  some
■S.P.R.  cases  as  a  travesty  contrast  to  the  experimenting  of  the  trained
■scientist,  and  again  sums  up  the  detailed  study  thus:  "The  objections  to
jisychical  research  lie  in  its  unscientific  methods  of  experimentation  and  in
the  air  of  occultism  in  which  the  whole  is  enveloped.  If  the  investigators
were  trained  in  the  jisychological  laboratory,  we  might  expect  interesting
•discoveries  in  regard  to  mind,  while  at  the  same  time  the  repellent  mysticism
would  disappear  along  with  odic  force,  animal  magnetism,  thought-transfer-
ence, and  other  ghosts"  (pp.  62-69).


Part  XXXIII.]  Psychical  Research  in  American  Universities.  585


At  our  distinctively  psychological  University,  i.e.,  Clark,  the  position  of
President  Stanley  Hall  was  shown  in  his  review  of  the  Froccediwjs  and
Phantasms  of  the.  Livinrj  in  the  first  number  of  his  Journal  of  PsycJtologij.
He  then  wrote  in  1887  from  Johns  Hopkins  that  the  formation  and  plan  of
the  S.P.R.  were  "such  as  to  commend  it,  not  only  to  every  psychologist,
but  to  every  true  and  intelligent  friend  of  culture  and  religion  "  ;  and,  in
most  gratifying  contrast  to  many  cases  of  dogmatic  incredulity,  he  has
followed  the  publications  of  the  S.P.R.  in  two  reviews  (Journal  of  Psychology,
Vol.  I.,  pp.  128-146  ;  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  135-142).  He  has  made  experiments
in  normal  and  hypnotic  reaction  times  (Mind,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  170)  in  his
laboratory  at  Johns  Hopkins.  There  also  Drs.  Jastrow  and  Nuttall  made
their  investigation  "on  the  existence  of  a  magnetic  sense"  {Proceedings  of
the  American  S.P.R. ,  p.  116).  He  himself  had  also  up  to  1887  "spent
much  time  and  labour  in  repeating  with  many  subjects  nearly  all  the  experi-
ments of  the  English  Society."  Under  these  conditions  of  experience,  and
along  with  much  suggestive  criticism,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  then
concludes  "that  the  crude  and  premature  theory  of  telepathy  .  .  .  lacks
everything  approaching  proof  save  to  amateurs  and  speculative  psycho-
logists" (Journal  of  Psychology,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  143  and  146).  Instead  of
bettering  its  claim  during  the  next  eight  years  his  judgment  seems  more
severe.  For  he  is  profoundly  convinced  that  "the  telepathic  presumption  is
yet  very  far  from  being  a  'prima  facie  case,  is  premature  at  best,  and  that  it
is  at  present  with  its  rank  mazes  of  mystic  guess-work  a  source  of  befuddle-
raent  and  obfuscation  galore.  To  say  that  telepathy  '  is  a  name  given  in
lieu  of  a  theory  about  it,'  or,  with  Mr.  Podmore,  to  say  it  'involves  just  as
little  theory  as  Newton's  conception  of  gravity,'  seems  to  us  almost  grossly
misleading,  to  say  the  least.  Telepathy  began  as  a  definition  of  a  new  mode
of  psychic  interconnection,  and,  instead  of  resting  on  the  commonest  facts
of  sense,  and  proving  by  mathematics,  it  has  yet  to  find  a  single  fact  that
can  be  demonstrated  regularly  in  laboratory  courses  that  proves  or  even
illustrates  it  with  certainty.  .  .  .  The  writer  has  diligently  read  the
experiments  of  the  proceedings,  and  can  honestly  say  that  there  is  not  one
in  which  the  conditions  as  reported  seem  to  him  satisfactory.  .  .  .  Give
us  one  little  fact,  ever  so  little,  that  we  can  freely  test  and  reproduce  once  a
year  in  our  laboratory.  We  will  cross  seas  to  see  it,  will  acknowledge  our
mistaken  scepticism,  and  confess  telepathy,  and  turn  the  research  of  one
laboratory  at  least  in  a  new  direction"  (Journal  of  Psychology,  Vol.  VII.,
pp.  137  and  139).

On  the  other  hand,  however,  Professor  James  gives  most  weighty
influence  to  psychical  researcli  through  such  reviews  as  those  in  the  Psycho-
logiccd  Eeviciv,  Vol.  II.,  p.  67,  and  his  reply  to  Professor  Cattell,  of  Columbia,
in  Vol.  III.,  p.  648  ;  not  to  speak  of  his  presidential  address  and  papers
within  the  S.P.R.  itself.

Here  in  the  University  of  JVIinnesota  I  have  given  in  the  spring  term  of
my  junior  year  course  in  Psychology  nine  weeks  or  thirty-six  hours  to
psychical  research,  including  two  weeks  on  Hypnotism.  In  the  first  twelve
hours  the  evidence  on  Telepathy  is  outlined  after  tlie  plan  in  the  Phantasms
of  the  Living. Mr.  Podmore's  f^'^f^  Thought-transference  makes

an  invaluable  book  for  the  students  in  this  problem,  and  the  cases  brought


586


Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


into  the  lecture  room  are  largely  supplementary  to  those  in  these  books.
Practical  demonstrations  of  the  methods  in  the  experimental  cases,  and  a
constant  analysis  and  criticism  of  these  and  of  the  spontaneous  cases,,
stimulate  some  students  to  experiment  with  valuable  results.

In  the  next  sixteen  hours  the  other  more  negative  parts  of  the  Society's
work  are  outlined.  In  addition  to  the  most  useful  summaries  on  some  of
the  subjects  given  in  IMr.  Podmore's  Studies  in  Psijchical  Itesearch,  Mr.
Myers'  "Resolute  Credulity,"  and  in  Professor  James'  Essay  in  his  Vi^iU  to
Believe,  perhaps  the  appended  note  of  references  may  be  stimulating  to  a
further  presentation  of  theui.  Upon  our  reference  table,  as  well  as  in  the
University  and  Public  Libraries,  are  sets  of  the  S.P.R.  publications,
together  with  some  of  the  standard  works  on  the  subjects.  To  these  I  add
something  from  notes  of  my  own  experiences  with  professional  mediums,  and
show  a  collection  of  alleged  spirit  photographs  compared  with  ones  of  my
own  manufacture.

Then  follow  the  eight  hours  of  demonstration  in  non-sensational  psycho-
logical plienomena  of  Hypnotism,  and  the  following  of  suggestion  through
its  various  names  and  phases  of  suggestive  Therapeutics,  "School  of
Psychology  "  (Chicago),  Mind  and  Faith  Cures,  Metaphysical,  Magnetic  and
Divine  Healing,  Christian  Science,  Miracles,  etc.,  etc.

Coming,  as  this  term's  work  does,  after  one  term  of  lectures  and
demonstrations  in  the  Physiology  and  Psychology  of  Sense  Perception,  and
a  second  term  on  Association,  Memory,  Feeling,  and  Willing,  it  gives  a  m.ost
valuable  review  of  many  of  these  phenomena,  and  their  meaning  is  greatly
enlarged  by  the  new  light  from  these  points  of  view.  So  that  this  term  is-
not  only  naturally  more  popular  than  the  other  two,  but,  so  far  as  I  can  judge
from  three  years'  trial,  it  is  the  most  profitable  of  all  to  the  students.  For
few  undergi'aduates  get  any  serious  meaning  of  the  relation  of  the  modern
knowledge  of  our  wonderful  nervous  mechanism  to  our  conscious  life,  of  the
complex  processes  of  sense  perception  to  our  real  criterion  of  truth  and
limits  of  knowledge,  of  the  pleasure-pain  elements  on  the  highest  develop-
ments of  our  evolution  and  the  ultimate  basis  of  all  conduct.  But  most
students  are  still  surrounded  by  a  bewildering  maze  of  alleged  supernatural
psychical  phenomena  which  the  ordinary  psychological  instruction  does  not-
attempt  to  pierce.  If,  however,  the  student  can  gain  some  analytical  power
in  the  classification  of  these  mixed  phenomena,  so)ne  critical  sense  of  what
proof  has  boon  oflered  and  must  be  offered  in  each  category,  the  relations  of
the  residuum  thus  gained  to  our  already  established  and  explained  psychical
facts,  sucli  an  acquirement  will,  I  think,  do  vastly  more  than  the  usual
harmless  psychological  "discipline"  towards  making  strong  men.  This  so
neglected  function  of  criticism  in  education  accounts  for  the  often  exaspera-
ting slowness  with  whicli  jjhenomena  are  transferred  from  some  modern
form  of  Animism  to  natural  Science.  Though  I  appreciate  in  the  highest
degree,  and  after  four  years'  experience  of  tlie  Psychological  Laboratories
of  Leijjzig  and  Berlin,  the  great  work  which  experimental  Psychology  is
consciously  or  unconsciously  doing  in  freeing  Psychology  from  Metaphysics
and  raising  it  to  a  worthy  place  among  the  Sciences,  yet  I  deliberately
believe  that  for  immediate  practical  returns  in  education,  the  S.P.R.  has
more  to  offer  than  all  the  Psychological  Laboratories. If  others  do  not  go.


Partxxxin.]  Psychiccd  Research  in  American  Universities.  587


so  far,  may  we  at  leiasfc  beg  that  one  of  the  two  groups  of  psycliological
workers  so  excellently  described  by  Mr.  Myers  ("Resolute  Credulity,"
Proceedings,  XI.,  p.  233)  may  try  to  enlarge  its  horizon  to  get  a  fair  view
of  the  other  1

References  to  Fsycldcal  Research  Phenomena,  aside  from  Telepathy.

[Roman  numerals  refer  to  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  unless  otherwise  indicated.]

Phantasms  of  the  Dead  :

Mrs.  Sidgwick's  Report. III.,  69.
Professor  Sidgwick's  Address. V.,  274.
Gurney  and  Myers. V.,  403.
Podmore. VI.,  229.
Myers. VI.,  13  and  314  ;  VIII.,  170.

Premonitions  :

Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  Evidence  for. V.,  228.
Myers. XI.,  334.

Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism  :

Mrs.  Sidgwick's  Report. IV.,  45. See  also  a,T:ticle  in  Encyclojmdia

Britannica.
Professor  Barrett. IV.,  25.
Massey. IV.,  25.
■ Lewis  and  others. IV.,  338  (on  Eglinton).
Crookes. VI.,  98  (on  Home).

Crookes,  Horsley,  Bull,  and  Myers.  III.,  460  (on  Husk's  iron
ring).

Myers. VII.,  146  and  383  ;  IX.,  245  ;  and  XI.,  27  (on  Moses).

Also  Journal,  VI.,  264,  304.
Davey  and Hodgson. IV.,  381,  and  VIII.,  253  (conjuring

imitation).

Wallace. Journal,  VI.,  33  (claiming  Davey  as  medium).

Paladino  Case.  Jomnal,  VI.,  306  ;  VII.,  36  and  148.  Pro-
ceedings, IX.,  218.

Hodgson.  Investigation  of  Theosophical  Society.  III.,  201  ;
IX.,  129.

Mrs.  Sidgwick.  Spirit  Photography.  VII.,  268.  Journal,  VIII.,
165.

Haunted  Houses:  I.,  101 ;  II.,  137;  VIII.,  311,
Podmore. Poltergeists. XII.,  45.

Unconscious  Movement  :

Sugden. Note  on  Muscle-reading. I.,  291.

Myers. Automatic  Writing. II.,  217  ;  III.,  1 ;  IV.,  209  ;  V.,  403.
Barkworth. Automatic  Writing. VII.,  23.

Hallucinations  :

Gurney.  III.,  151.
Census  of. X.,  25.

Miss  X Crystal  Vision. V.,  488  and  505  ;  Vl.,  358  ;  XI.,  114.
Lang. Tlie  Voices  of  Jeanne  d' Arc. XL,  198.

0


588


Harlow  Gale.


Supplement.


Hallucinations  :  {Continued.)

Hyslop. Crystal  Vision. XII.,  259.

Marillier. Ajjparitions  of  tlie  Virgin  in  Dordogne. VII.,  100.

Miscellaneous  :

Divining  Rod. II.,  73  and  79.

,,  Professor  Barrett. XIII.,  pp.  2-282.

Lodge  on  "Georgia  Magnet." Journal  V.,  168.
Reiclienbacli  Flames. I.,  99  and 231  ; II., 56  ;  Proceedings

A  merican  S.P.B.,  116  and  127.
Hodgson. Indian  Magic  and  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  IX.,  357-

Hypnotism  :

Reports  on. I.,  217,  251,  283  ;  II.,  12.

Gurney. Stages  of. II.,  61,  201. Problems  of. II.,  265.

,, Peculiarities  of  certain  j^ost-hypnotic  states. IV.,  268.

Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory. IV.,  515.
,, Recent  experiments  in  Hypnotism. V.,  3.
,, Hypnotism  and  Telepathy. V.,  216.
,, and Myers. Some higher Asjjects of  Mesmerism.

III.  ,  401.

Local  AniBsthesia induced in tlie normal  state  by  mesmeric

passes. III.,  453.
Myers. Human  Personality  in  the  light  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

IV.  ,  L

,, On  Telepathic  Hypnotism. IV.,  127.
„ Multiplex  Personality. IV.,  496.

„ Note  on  certain  reported  cases  of  hypnotic  Hyperses-

thesia. IV.,  532.
(On  Gurney 's  work  in  Hypnotism). V.,  365.
,, French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality. V.,  374.
„ Subliminal  Consciousness.  VII.,  298;  VIII.,  333,436;

IX.,  3  ;  XL,  334.
,, Mind Cure, Faith  Cure,  and Miracles of  Lourdes.

IX.,  160.

The  connection  of  Hypnotism  with  the  subjective  phenomena  of

Spiritualism. V.,  279.
Barkworth. Duplex  Personality. VI.,  84.

Delbceuf. Re  I'Appreciation  du  Temps  par  les  Somnambules.
VIII.,  414.

Fryer. The  Holywell  Cures. Journal,  VII.,  85.

Ramsay. Partial  Anossthesia. IX.,  236.

Dill  and  Green. Dipsomania  and  Hypnotism. XL,  18.

Pierce  and  Podmore. Subliminal  Consciousness  or  Unconscious

Cerebration. XL,  317.
Newbold. Sub-conscious  Reasoning. XII.,  11.
Barrows. Suggestion  without  Hypnotism. XII.,  21.
Bramwell. James  Braid  :  his  work  and  writings. XII.,  127.

,, Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  XII.,  176.

„. What  is  Hypnotism  ? XII.,  204.


Pi;.rt  XXXm.]


Reviews.


589


IT.

REVIEWS.


Zur  Kritik des Tdepatlilschcn Beweis  Maleriels. By  Edmund  Parish.
Leijjzig.  1897.

This  pamphlet  of  forty-eight  jjages  is  a  criticism,  read  before  the
Psychological  Society  of  Munich,  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  afforded  by
the  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  published  in  the  Pruceedinrjs  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Vol.  X.  (Part  XXVI.).

The  author  in  his  preface  characterises  the  discussion  of  the  subject  in
this  Report,  as  "the  most  important  attempt  yet  made  to  prove  the  existence
of  telepathy."  This  was  not  the  view  taken  of  it  by  the  Committee  respon-
sible for  the  work.  To  them  the  most  important  evidence  appeared  to  be,
first,  the  experimental  evidence  published  at  various  times  in  the  Proceedings
and  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living ;  and  secondly,  the  large  collection  of
spontaneous  cases  published  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  and  since  added  to.
Experience  had  already  shown  them  that  evidence  equal  to  this,  either  in
quantity  or  quality,  could  not  be  exj^ected  fi-om  a  body  of  seventeen  thousand
persons  chosen  at  random  ;  and  accordingly  the  object  in  the  part  of  the
Report  which  deals  with  telepatliy  was  to  contribute  to  the  proof  of  its
existence,  not  so  much  by  accumulating  fresh  evidence  as  by  supplying  a
more  complete  answar  to  one  of  the  objections  urged  against  the  evidence
from  spontaneous  cases, — the  objection  that  the  coincidences  are  accidental.

Herr  Parish  has,  however,  evidently  given  more  attention  to  our  work
than  our  opponents  usually  vouchsafe  to  it.  He  in  the  main  does  justice  to
the  care  with  w-hich  the  Committee  endeavoured  to  carry  out  tlieir  task  ;  and
gives  a  good  short  account  of  their  method  (pp.  10-17).  Nevertheless,  he
dissents  from  their  conclusion.  He  admits  that  the  difSculties  and  objections
he  urged  in  his  work  on  Hallucinations  and  Illusions'^  against  the  telepathic
interpretation  of  certain  results  of  the  "  census,"  are  most  of  them  found  to
have  little  weight  in  the  light  of  the  since-published  full  report  of  the
Committee.  Either  they  are  removed  by  facts  not  known  to  him  at  the
time  he  advanced  them,  or  they  have  been  considered  by  the  Committee
themselves  and  shown  not  to  affect  their  general  conclusion  (p.  17).  He
still  thinks,  however,  that  certain  considerations,  based  on  the  material
furnished  by  the  census  of  hallucinations  itself,  can  be  shown  to  overthrow

1  Uber  die  Triiowahrnchmu'ig.  Leipzig,  1804.  This  work,  published  before  the
Report  of  the  Census  of  HaUucinations  came  out,  was  reviewed  in  Protcedings,  Vol.
XL,  p.  1C2.  It  has  since  been  translated  into  English  and  published  in  the
Contemporary  Science  Series  under  the  name  of  Hallucinations  and  Illusions:  A
study  of  the  fallacies  of  Perception.  Most  of  the  additional  discussion  contained  in
the  pamphlet  now  under  review,  and  other  matter  arising  out  of  the  Census  Report,
was  included  in  the  English  edition,  where,  however,  it  is  not  always  worked  into
the  earlier  matter  with  complete  success.

2  Q  2


500


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwich.


[Supplement.


tlio  evidence  for  telopafcliy  afforJeJ  by  it.  To  these  arguments  I  sh;ill
eiiileavour  to  reply.  He  deals  with  them  in  order  of  importance,  beginning
with  that  to  which  he  attaches  least  weight.  Put  briefly  they  are  as
follows.

(1)  A  person  who,  in  good  faith,  reports  himsolf  to  have  experienced
a  hallucination  of  the  senses,  may  very  often  be  really  suffering  from  an
illusion  of  memory, — a  "  retro -active  hallucination  "  (p.  17).

(2)  Given  that  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  really  occurred,  it  is  very
questionable  whether  the  j^oint  (e.g.,  tlie  recognition  of  the  figure)
which  chiefly  connects  it  «'ith  the  coinciding  death  or  other  event,  has
not  l)een  imported  into  it  afterwards  by  "  raemoi-y-adaptation  "  (p.  18).

(3)  He  believes  that  the  choice,  as  the  object  of  statistical  enquiry,,
of  waking  hallucinations  of  persons  in  good  health,  is  itself  the  reason
why  there  appear  to  be  too  many  coincidences  to  be  explained  by  chance-
(p.  23),  because  (p.  25)  the  coincidence  causes  what  might  otherwise
be  remembered  only  as  a  dream  to  be  remembered  as  a  waking
hallucination.

(4)  The  content  of  a  hallucination  may  be  due  to  association  of
ideas,  and  if  this  possibility  be  not  excluded — and  it  is  practically
impossible  to  exclude  it — we  are  not  justified  in  attributing  the-
hallucination  to  a  telepathic  impact  (pp.  40-45).

The  first  three  of  these  objections  all  turn  on  supposed  defects  of
memory,  and  are  all,  by  implication  at  least,  dealt  with  in  Chapter  XII.  of
the  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  It  is  there  said  (pp.  210-211),
"There  are  two  questions  to  ask  about  each  case.  (1)  Have  we  good
reason  to  believe  that  the  hallucination  really  occurred  within  twelve
hours  of  the  deatli  1  (2)  Have  we  good  reason  to  believe  that  it  was-
recognised  before  the  death  was  known,  and  not  merely,  having  been
unrecognised  at  the  time,  assumed  afterwards  to  have  represented  the
decedent  because  of  the  coincidence  1 "  Tlie  first  of  these  questions  covers
t'.xe  ground  of  Herr  Parish's  first  objection,  and  also  of  his  third,  though
there  are  points  in  this  last  which  we  shall  have  to  return  to  and  consider  in-
more  detail.  The  second  of  our  questions  covers  the  ground  of  Herr
Parish's  second  objection.  The  Report  goes  on  to  point  out  that  the  best
guarantee  against  both  kinds  of  exaggeration  is  a  written  note  of  the
hallucination  made  before  the  death  was  known,  and  that  confirmation  may
also  be  afforded  by  evidence  of  the  hallucination  having  been  mentioned  to
another  person,  or  of  action  of  some  kind  having  been  taken  on  it  before  the
death  was  known.  And  in  a  large  number  of  cases  we  have  confirmation  of
this  kind.

There  is  a  curious  disagreement  between  the  writers  of  the  Report  and
Herr  Parish  in  connection  with  the  second  question.  They  say  that,  though
the  remembering  of  an  unrecognised  figure  as  a  recognised  one  is  an  error
against  which  we  ought  to  bo  on  our  guard,  yet  it  is  one  of  which  we  have  no
proved  instances.  Herr  Parish  on  the  other  hand  finds  in  the  Report  itself
instances  of  what  had,  he  says,  previously  been  with  him  mere  conjecture  ;,
and  he  quotes  and  discusses  three  of  these.  I  have  carefully  examined  these
three  again  and  endeavoured  to  see  why  they  affect  Herr  Parish  and  the


Part  XXXIIl.]


Reviews.


591


Committee  so  differently,  but  I  am  bound  to  say  that  T  fail  to  discover  where
Herr  Parish  finds  the  proof  tliat  recognition  "svas  read  into  them  afterwards.

It  will  be  instructive  to  discuss  some  points  ia  these  tliree  cases  a  little
more  fully.  Two  of  them — the  experiences  of  Dr.  H.  C.  {Proceedings,
Vol.  X.,  p.  117)  and  of  Dr.  Jamieson  (Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  p.  265),  are
frankly  described  as  unrecognised  from  beginning  to  end,  so  that  there
seems  to  be  no  room  for  memory-adaptation.  Dr.  H.  C,  it  is  true,  says  he
at  one  time  connected  the  hallucination  with  a  death  tliat  occurred  some  days
later,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  ever  thought  he  had
recognised  the  figure.  1  Dr.  Jamieson  connected  the  figure  with  the  death,
when  he  heard  of  the  latter,  because  of  the  coincidence  of  time,  and  because
uU  that  was  discerned — a  female  figure  of  medium  height — corresponded
with  the  appearance  of  the  decedent,  not  because  he  imagined  that  he  had
recognised  it.  In  the  third  case,  Countess  I^ixpnist  (Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,
p.  2Slr)  describes  herself  as  e.^periencing  that  kind  of  half  recognition  of  the
.sipparition  with  which  we  are  all  familiar  when  we  recognise  a  face  bufc
cannot  put  a  name  to  it.  She  felt  it  represented  some  one  she  knew,  bufc
could  not  think  who  it  was  till  the  news  of  the  death  brought  the  person  to
her  mind.  In  dealing  with  a  real  person  the  genuineness  of  the  half  recogni-
tion may  often  be  verified  because,  when  we  do  succeed  in  putting  the  name
and  face  together,  we  may  ascertain  that  the  person  seen  was  really  the  owner
of  the  name.  In  the  case  of  an  apparition  no  such  verification  is  possible,
;ind  therefore  for  evidential  purposes  we  must  treat  it  as  unrecognised.
Bat  we  may  observe  that  Countess  Kapnist's  description  of  the  phantasm
appears  to  have  resembled  the  dying  person  v\'ith  whom  it  was  afterwards
connected,  sufficientlj'  for  her  sister  to  agree  as  to  the  resemblance.

It  seems  to  be  only  in  a  quasi-coincidental  case  that  this  kind  of  deferred
recognition  strikes  Herr  Parish  as  suspiciously  suggestive  of,  and  even
proving,  memory-adajDtation.  An  instance  of  it  given  in  the  Report  (Vol.
X.,  p.  143)  as  a  case  v/here  the  content  of  the  hallucination,  as  afterwards
recognised,  can  be  traced  to  definite  associations  of  ideas,  appears  to  him  to
be  very  interesting  from  the  latter  point  of  view  (p.  42).  ^

1  His  woi'ds  are  :  "  five  days  before  the  death  of  a  lady  whom  I  used  to  connecfc
in  my  mind  with  my  vision.  But  I  did  liot  do  this  when  I  related  my  story  in  the
morning,  nor  till  after  the  death  of  the  lady  ;  and  I  now  reject  this  connection  as  a
f;\neiful  .iddend  im."  This  does  not  justify  Herr  Parish's  statement  {p.  20)  "dass  die
hallueinierte  Gestalt  wiihrend  fiinf  Tagen  unei'kautit  blieb,  dass  aber  in  Folge  einer
aufregenden  Todes-nachricht,  die  Gesichtstauschung  sich  sofort  adaptierte. "  Merely
to  connect  a  vision  and  a  death  is  a  very  different  thing  from  the  act  of  recognition,
and  if  an  illusion  of  memory  led  a  man  to  believe  falsely  that  he  had  recognised  a
figure,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  he  could  believe  afterwards,  without  positive  evidence
to  the  contrary,  that  he  had  not  recognised  it.

2  In  this  case  the  percipient  saw  very  clearly  and  deSnitely  a  hallucinatory  figure,
and  was  a  good  deal  disturbed  by  her  inability  to  put  a  name  to  it.  About  a
•week  later  it  suddenly  struck  her  that  it  had  been  the  figure  and  face  of  a  certain
Mrs.  Beasant  whom  she  bad  known  years  before.  She  believes  that  this  particular
person  was  b  ought  to  her  mind  by  complicated  associations  of  ideas  arising  from
recent  annoyance  connected  with  another  woman  of  the  same  name,  a  storm  raging
at  the  time,  and  a  tree  falling  on  the  house  a  little  time  before.  Mrs.  Beasant  had
been  killed  by  a  falling  tree.


592


Mrs.  II.  Sidijwick.


[Supplement.


Unless  I  have  misunder.sfcooci  Herr  Parish,  I  think  that  soine  of  his
observations  on  these  cases  Ijetray  a  certain  confusion  of  thought  as  to  the
purely  subjective  character  of  apparitions,  whether  veridical  or  not.  There
is  a  tendency  in  sensory  hallucinations,  as  is  pointed  out  in  tlie  RejDort,
to  take  a  realistic  form — to  look  as  real  figures  or  objects  would  look  in  the
same  place  and  the  same  light.  Thus  in  a  good  light  the  hallucinatory-
figure  will  generally  look  clear  and  distinct,  and  in  a  dim  liglit  is  not  unlikely
to  be  correspondingly  incompletely  seen.  This  is  doubtless  an  effect  of  self-
suggestion.  It  was  thus  perhaps  more  probable  than  not  that  a  hallucination
seen  by  Dr.  Jamieson  in  the  almost  darkness  of  7.30  a.m.  on  the  24th  of
December  at  Edinburgh  ^  would  be  seen  as  he  would  have  seen  a  real  person
under  similar  circumstances,  namely,  as  a  dark  figure  without  recognisable
features.  At  the  same  time  tliere  is  no  difficulty  in  a  liallucination  appearing
as  a  physical  object  could  not,  e.r/.,  coloured  in  a  faint  light,  as  Countess
Kapnist  describes  hers  as  doing.  So  to  describe  a  real  figure  would  be  a
contradiction  in  terms,  and  Herr  Parish  writes  as  though  tlie  same  con-
tradiction existed  in  the  description  of  the  hallucinatory  figure  and  afforded
evidence  of  confusion  due  to  pseudo-memory.  But  tliere  is  no  reason  to
suppose  this,  since  a  hallucination  cannot  be  affected  by  the  state  of  the
light  except  so  far  as  the  latter  may  act  suggestively  on  the  mind  of  the
seer.

When  a  hallucination  is  indefinite  as  Dr.  Jamieson's  was,  an  interesting
psychological  question  arises  about  it.  Was  the  indefiniteness  due  to
vagueness  in  the  underlying  niental  impression,  or  was  it  due  to  defective
externalisation  of  a  definite  subconscious  impression  ?  The  question  seems
to  Herr  Parish  absurd  (see  f(jotnote,  p.  22)  but  here  again  I  think  he  shows
a  want  of  complete  grasp  of  tlie  j^^rely  subjective  character  of  the
hallucinatory  process.  According  to  tlie  provisional  conception  that  we
have  formed  of  the  process  of  telepathic  hallucination,  there  are  three  stages
involved  in  it :  first  a  subconscious  mental  impression  of  some  kind,  tlien
the  externalisation  of  this  as  a  hallucination,  and,  thirdly,  the  suggestion
by  that  hallucination  of  conscious  ideas  and  judgments.  Of  the  first
stage  we  have,  in  the  case  of  spontaneous  hallucinations,  no  direct
evidence  ;  but  the  supposition  of  it  is  suj^ported  by  the  case  of  post-
hypnotic hallucinations  where  we  are  able  to  trace  all  tlie  steps  of  the
process.  A  good  hypnotic  subject  can  be  told  that  he  will  see  a  certain
person  or  thing  at  a  certain  Iiour,  and  tliough  he  knows  nothing  of  tlii.s
suggestion  when  roused  from  the  hypnotic  trance,  will  punctually  see  the..
hallucinatory  form  suggested.  The  ex]jeriment  is  so  familiar  to  students  of
the  subject  that  it  seems  almost  impertinent  to  give  instances,  but  I  may
perhaps  refer  the  reader  to  a  striking  example  reported  in  a  paper  by
Mr.  Gurney  on  Eecent  Experiments  in  Hupnolism  (Proceedings,  Vol.  V.j
pp.  12,  lo).

Granting  tliese  three  stages  in  the  hallucinatory  process  it  seems  reason-
able to  sujDpose  tliat  indefiniteness  may  enter  into  it  at  any  of  them  ;  i.e.y
either  (1)  the  original  mental  impression  may  itself  be  vague,  or  (2)  it  may
1)0  externalised  in  a  vague  hallucination,  or  (3)  a  clear  externalisation


1  The  sun  rises  on  that  day  at  8.47  according  to  an  Edinburgh  ahnanac.


Part  XXXnL]


Reviews.


593


may,  as  in  Countess  Kapnist's  case,  be  incompletely  or  erroneously
interpreted.  Here,  again,  we  can  appeal  to  hypnotic  experiments.  I  will
give  first  a  case  where  the  vagueness  in  the  hallucination  was  doubtless  due
to  vagueness  in  the  original  idea.  It  is  an  account  of  an  experiment  made
by  Mr.  Myers,  and  is  described  in  a  paper  by  him  on  the  Subliminal
Consciousness  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  460). Mr.  Myers  writes  : —

"Next  time  I  suggested  a  hvppopotam}is—&\\  animal  which  P.  had
never  seen  in  the  flesh.  On  being  awakened  he  saw  on  the  card  what  he
called  a  rhinoceros.  He  complained  that  it  was  rather  indistinct  ;  he
was  not  sure  whether  it  had  horns  or  tusks.  There  is  a  certain  interest
in  this  as  indicating  that  the  hallucination  was  founded  upon  a  mental
picture  suggested  by  my  words,  rather  than  on  the  words  themselves.
One  might  have  supposed  that,  since  my  whole  suggestion  consisted  of
the  word  Jiiiopopotamus,  the  awakened  subject,  however  vaguely  he  saw
the  beast,  would  have  known  that  it  was  meant  for  a  hippopotamus.
But  the  picture,  vague  as  it  was,  seemed  to  be  more  communicable
from  the  hypnotic  to  the  supraliminal  self  than  the  word  which  had
originally  generated  it.  A  picture  was  what  had  been  ordered,  and  a
picture  came."

The  same  series  of  experiments  furnishes  a  case  where  the  suggested
idea  must  have  been  clearly  apprehended  by  the  percipient,  but  where
jiart  of  it  failed  to  externalise  itself  so  as  to  be  consciously  recognised.  Mr.
Myers  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  at  Barnum's  circus  there  was  a  race  of
ponies  with  monkeys  on  their  backs.  T.  was  awakened  and  set  to  gaze  into
a  glass  of  water.  He  said,  "  Look,  there's  something  going  round  and
round  in  the  water  .  .  .  it's  horses — they're  horses  going  round  and
round — they've  got  something  small  on  their  backs,  not  so  big  as  those  girls
who  jump  through  hoojjs.  It's  like  a  circus."  The  idea  was  externalised  as
a  hallucination,  but  not  clearly  enough  for  the  monkeys  to  be  recognised  as
such.  In  many  of  the  experiments  tried  by  myself  and  Miss  Johnson  and
described  in  the  same  volume  of  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  VIII.),  similar
indistinctness  was  exhibited  in  the  initial  stages  of  hallucinations  which
afterwards  became  clear.  Here  is  one  (p.  565,  No.  19)  in  which  there  was
initial  incomplete  externalisation  which  ultimately  developed  itself  on  wrong
lines.  1  I  select  it  because  it  affords  an  example  of  arrested  development  due
to  the  suggestion  of  physical  limitations— the  edge  of  the  card — which  is
analogous  to  what  I  supjiose  may  be  produced  by  the  dim  light  in  cases  like
Dr.  Jamieson's.  It  was  intended  that  P.  should  see  on  a  blank  card  a  picture
of  a  vase  with  flowers. He  said  : —

"  I  see  something  round,  like  a  round  ring.  I  can  see  some  straight
things  from  the  round  thing.  I  think  it's  a  glass — it  goes  up.  I'll  tell
you  what  it  is  ;  it  must  be  a  pot — a  flower  pot— you  know,  with  things
growing  in  it.  I  only  guessed  that,  because  you  don't  see  things  growing
out  of  a  glass.  It's  not  clear  at  the  top  yet.  You  see  something  going
up  and  you  can't  see  the  toj),  because  of  the  edge  of  the  paper — it's  cut

'  There  was  a  possible  reason  for  this,  which  is  pointed  out  in  the  account  from
which  I  quote,  but  I  omit  it  here  as  irrelevant  to  the  present  discussion.


594


Ilrs.  R.  Sidcjwick.


[Supplement.


off. I  don't  wonder,  becaufse  it's  no  good  wondering  what  Mr.  Smith^
does,  he  does  such  funny  things. I  should  fancy  it  might  be  a  geranium,
but  there's  only  sticks,  so  you  can't  tell."
Here  again  is  an  example  with  the  same  percipient  in  which  an  apparently
clear  hallucination  is  misinterpreted. It  was  intended  that  P.  should  see  on
his  blank  card  a  picture  of  a  choir  boy. {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  565,
ly"o.  18). He  said  :  —

"Edge  of  card's  going  a  dark  colour.  Somebody  dressed  up  in  white,
eh  ?  Can  see  something  all  white  ;  edge  all  black,  and  like  a  figure  in
the  middle.  There's  his  hands  uj) "  (making  a  gesture  to  show  the
attitude)  "like  a  ghost  or  something — you  couldn't  mistake  it  for
anything  but  a  ghost.  It's  not  getting  any  better,  it's  fading — no,  it's
still  there. It  might  frighten  any  one."

Some  more  complicated  and  very  amusing  instances  of  misinterpretation
will  be  found  among  Mr.  Myers'  experiments  before  mentioned  {Pr-jceedings,
Vol.  VIII,  pp.  459-462).

Of  course  in  a  case  like  Dr.  Jamieson's  it  is  impossible  to  determine  at
which  of  the  first  two  stages  the  indefiniteness  began.  By  hypnotising  a
person  who  had  just  had  an  indefinite  hallucination  the  subconscious
impression  might  be  arrived  at,  but  it  would  have  to  be  done  before
coincidence  or  any  process  of  reflection  had  suggested  an  interpretation.

Let  us  now  return  to  Herr  Parish's  third  objection,  his  hypothesis  that
coincidental  cases  are  remembered  as  waking  hallucinations  in  greater
proportion  than  non-coincidental  cases.  He  is  concerned  first  to  establish
that,  since  sensory  hallucinations  occur  only  when  the  percipient  is  in  a  state
of  "  dissociation,"  there  are,  properly  speaking,  no  such  things  as  waking
hallucinations  at  all.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  a  mere  question  of  words.
No  one  probably  would  maintain  that  while  a  sensory  hallucination  is
experienced,  the  brain  of  the  perciiDient  is  working  in  a  perfectly  normal
way.  We  may,  if  we  like,  call  its  condition  a  condition  of  dissociation  ;  and
the  question  what  characterises  that  condition  besides  the  experiencing  of  a
hallucination,  and  whether  any  physiological  conditions  sjjecial  to  sleep  are
always  present,  is  an  interesting  one  for  physiologists.^  We  may  further
admit  with  Mr.  Gurney  the  psychological  identity  of  dreams  and  waking
hallucinations.  "One  step  farther,"  he  says,  "and  we  realise  the  complete
continuity  of  the  waking  and  the  sleeping  phenomena.  Dreams  are  by  far
the  most  familiar  instances  of  the  projection  by  the  mind  of  images  that  are
mistaken  for  realities  :  indeed,  it  is  just  because  they  are  so  familiar,  and
waking  hallucinations  comparatively  so  rare,  that  there  is  a  danger  of  over-
looking the  psychological  identity  of  the  two  classes."  (Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  484).  We  may  even  admit,  as  we  do  in  Chapter  IV.  of
the  Report,  the  difliculty  in  some  cases  of  deciding  whether  they  should  be

1  The  hypnotist.

"  Herr  Parish  continually  refers  to  the  frequent  absence  of  surprise  or  other
appropriate  emotion,  when  an  apparition  is  seen,  as  evidence  of  a  state  of  "  dissocia-
tion." This  is  one  of  the  things  that  suggests  a  close  connection  between  apparitions
and  dreams,  but  it  does  not  necessarily  suggest  the  physiological  or  psychological
condition  of  sleep.


Part  XXXin.]


Reviews.


595


classed  as  waking  or  sleeping  experiences.  But  all  tliis  is  in'elevant  as
regards  the  present  discussion.  For  it  is  not  denied,  even  by  Ilerr  Parish,
that  the  percipient  may  not  be  aware,  either  at  the  time  or  afterwards,  of
his  condition  of  "dissociation,"  so  that  the  hallucination,  though  it  really
occurred  when  he  was  not  fully  awake,  may  leave  in  his  recollection  a  kind
of  waking  quality  (Wachqualitiit).  Or,  as  Herr  Parish  shortly  expresses  his
view,  "Dream  phenomena  and  waking  hallucinations  are  in  recollection
quite  different  in  character  ;  in  reality,  at  the  moment  of  tlieir  occurrence,
they  are  identical."  (p.  24.)  Now  all  that  we  are  concerned  with  from  the
statistical  point  of  view  is  the  percipient's  classification  of  his  experience.
He  must,  after  it  is  over,  and  when  he  is  in  a  completely  wakeful  and
normal  state,  attribute  to  it  the  waking  quality, — recollect  and  class  it  as  a
waking  hallucination.  It  was  in  order  to  avoid  any  begging  of  the  very
question  Herr  Parish  raises,  that,  in  collecting  the  statistics,  we  inquired —
nob  as  to  the  fact  of  the  percipient's  being  awake  when  the  hallucination
occurred— but  as  to  his  belief  about  it.  Of  course  assurance  is  required  that
the  classification  was  made  immediately  ;  that  the  percipient  believed,  as  soon
as  he  was  able  to  reflect  on  the  hallucination  as  a  jDast  experience,  that  he
was  awake  while  it  occurred  and  had  not  awoken  from  it ;  and,  in  particular,
in  coincidental  cases  assurance  is  required  that  the  waking  quality  was
attributed  to  the  experience  before  the  coincidence  was  known.  But  this
assurance  is  obtained  by  evidence  of  precisely  the  same  kind  as  that  which
leads  us  to  believe  that  the  hallucination  occurred  at  the  time  stated,  or
represented  the  person  stated,  or  anything  else  about  it.

Herr  Parish's  contention  is  that  the  peculiar  memory  illusion  involved  in
believing  later  that  an  experience  was  a  waking  hallucination  which
immediately  after  its  occurrence  was  classed  as  a  dream,  is  specially  liable  to
befall  a  dreamer  after  the  knowledge  of  a  coinciding  external  event  has
reached  him.  If  he  could  establish  this  and  if,  further,  he  could  sliow  that
we  had  not  taken  sufficient  precautions  against  this  source  of  error,  he  would
have  revealed  a  serious  flaw  in  our  evidence.  But  he  has  not  attempted  to
do  so.  All  he  has  tried  to  show  is — what,  as  I  have  already  said,  is  really
irrelevant  as  regards  evidence  for  telepathy — that  almost  all  the  accounts
given  of  supposed  waking  hallucinations  suggest  to  some  extent  what  he  calls
"dissociation."  For  this  purpose  he  takes,  as  a  sample  of  the  collection,  the
death  coincidences  given  in  Chapter  XII.  of  the  Bepoi  t.  ^  I  jjrojjose,  at  the
risk  of  boring  the  reader,  to  follow  him  through  these  cases,  with  a  view  to
showing  what  the  grounds  are  for  believing  that  they  were  classed  as  waking
hallucinations  before  the  coincidence  was  known  ;  and  incidentally  to  show
that  there  undoubtedly  are  hallucinations  whicli  occur  when  the  pei-cipient;
is  in  a  condition  which,  whatever  its  physiological  characteristics  may  be,

1  Herr  Parish,  when  he  begins  to  discuss  these  cases  (p.  27),  rightly  presents  them
as,  from  the  point  of  view  in  question,  an  unselected  group  and  therefore  a  fair
sample  of  the  whole.  Later,  at  page  39,  he  seems  less  clear  about  this,  claiming  to
have  proved  the  practical  impossibility  of  distinguishing  waking  hallucinations  from
dreams— not  on  doubtful  cases  on  the  margin  (einzelne  Grenzfalle  und  Beispiele
eines  flussigen  Uebergangs)  but  on  the  twenty-six  best  cases  evidentially  (best-
beglaubigten  Falle).  liut  these  twenty-six  cases  are  those  which  seemed  to  the
Committee  to  be  on  the  whole  the  best  cases,  evidentially,  of  death  coincidences — nob
the  twenty-six  cases  exhibiting  most  strikingly  the  waking  quality.


596


Mrs.  II.  Sldgiviclc.


[Supplement


does  not,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  percipient  himself  or  those  with  him,
resemble  sleep  or  half  sleeji,  or  drowsiness.

The  first  case  referred  to  is  that  of  Mr.  S.  Walker  Anderson  (Report,
p.  211)  who  saw  his  aunt  on  the  day  of  her  death.  Mr.  Anderson  was  in
bed,  but  as  he  believes  fully  awake.  He  distinguishes  clearly  between  this
experience  and  others  in  which  he  does  not  think  he  was  awake  (Report,
p.  382).  The  experience  led  Mr.  Anderson  to  believe  that  his  aunt  was
dead  and  he  mentioned  this  to  his  wife  and  they  both  made  notes  of  the  fact.
Is  it  likely  that,  when  some  time  later  the  news  of  the  death  came,  this
confirmation  of  the  anticipated  coincidence  should  produce  a  memory
illusion  that  what  he  had  previously  believed  to  be  a  dreani  was  a  waking-
hallucination  ?

This  percipient  had  another  experience — not  coincidental — which  is
referred  to  by  Herr  Parish.  While  crossing  a  river  his  horse  was  carried
down  the  stream  unable  to  swim  across  ;  he  had  given  himself  up  for  lost,
when  he  saw  his  aunt  standing  on  a  floating  tree.  He  felt  the  apparition  to
be  an  indication  that  he  was  to  leave  the  horse  and  seize  hold  of  the  tree,
which  he  did,  and  was  carried  safe  to  the  bank  (Report,  p.  382).  Under
such  circumstances  as  these,  could  the  percipient  regard  himself  as  having
been  otherwise  than  fully  awake  ?

Hei-r  Parish's  next  case  is  that  of  Mrs.  J.  P.  Smith,  (Report,  p.  214).  This
is  one  of  those  cases  near  the  line  between  waking  and  sleeping  which  we
found  difficult  to  classify.  The  difficulty  and  tlie  line  adopted  are  discussed
and  illustrated  in  Chapter  IV.  of  the  Report,  pp.  71,  72,  where  a  very
similar  non-veridical  case  (729.  17)  is  given.  The  reason  for  adopting  Mrs.
Smith's  classification  of  the  experience  as  a  waking  hallucination  is  that  she
got  up  and  followed  the  figure  out  of  the  room.  This  detail  is  not  likely  to
liave  been  introduced  by  a  memory  illusion  when  the  coincidence  became
known.

The  third  case  discussed  is  Mrs.  Baldwin's  (Report,  p.  217).  Herr
Parish  omits  to  mention  that  while  the  vision  persisted  Mrs.  Baldwin
described  it  to  her  husband.  Under  these  circumstances  they  could  not
either  of  them  be  expected  to  regard  her  as  otherwise  than  awake.  Herr
Parish  may  suggest  that  there  was  here  a  further  memory  illusion  and  that
she  did  not  describe  it  to  her  liusband  at  the  time  at  all.  To  this  I  can  only
reply  that  I  myself  discussed  the  question  with  Mrs.  Baldwin,  that  her
memory  on  the  point  was  perfectly  distinct,  and  that  her  daughter,  whom  I
also  saw,  had  lieard  a  similar  account  from  her  father,  now  dead.

Herr  Parish's  fourth  case  is  tliat  of  Madame  Obalechcff.  (Report,  ]).  218.)
That  she  was  at  the  time  awake  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  and
believed  herself  to  have  been  so,  is  shown  by  her  assumption  that  the
servant  was  sharing  her  experience  and  by  her  asking  her  husband  to
examine  the  adjoining  room  to  make  sure  that  her  brother-in-law  in  person
was  not  there.

The  next  experience — Miss  S.R.R.'s  (Report,  p.  231) — is  an  unusual  one
because  of  its  persistency,  or  recurrence  whenever,  tlu'ougli  tlie  night,  the
percipient  looked  in  a  particular  direction.  The  location  of  the  figure  in
a  particular  part  of  the  room,  and  the  sense  of  turning  round  to  see  it,
seem  to  indicate  a  waking  quality  which  it  is  gratuitous  to  suppose  was


Part  XXXm.]


Reviews.


597


imported  into  the  experience  afterwards  ;  especially  as  the  conviction  at  the
time  was  clear  that  it  meant  that  her  sister  was  dead,  so  that  the  confirma-
tion of  this  would  give  no  shock  of  surprise,  or  new  importance  to  the
experience.  The  details,  I  may  remark,  are  less  confused  and  dreamlike
than  Herr  Parish  supposes.  He  has  not  quite  understood  the  narrative.
There  is  no  mention  in  it  of  a  bier  ("Bahre.")  Professor  Sidgwick  questioned
the  percijHent  as  to  the  position,  etc.,  of  the  figure  seen,  with  a  view
to  ascertaining  whether  it  was  likely  that  the  experience  had  been  an  illusion
(which  is  what  its  persistence  and  the  dim  light  suggested).  He  ascertained
that  by  her  bed  was  a  long  chest  (real,  not  hallucinatory)  made  of  cedar
wood ;  that  on  this  she  first  saw  something  white,  which  developed  into  a
figure  of  her  sister  lying  dead  in  bed  with  her  arm  outside  the  bed  clothes.
The  chest  had  no  covering  of  any  kind  on  it  which  could  have  formed
the  basis  of  an  illusion  of  any  ordinaiy  kind  ;  the  place  of  the  bare
chest  was  taken  by  a  hallucinatory  bed  with  the  sister  lying  in  it,  her  face
distinctly  seen.

The  next  nine  cases'  may  be  taken  together,  as  the  facts  supporting  the
view  that  the  experience  was  at  the  time  regarded  as  a  waking  one  are  in
each  case  immediate  action  or  immediate  communication  to  another  person.
Thus  Mr.  Beer  "  was  so  disturbed  [by  the  apparition]  that  he  got  up  and
told  a  footman  of  it  in  an  adjoining  room."  Dr.  B.  Gr.  woke  his  wife,  told,
her  wliat  he  had  seen  and  asked  her  to  look  at  the  watch.  Mrs.  C.
"pressed  her  [friend's]  arm  and  whispered  the  fact  and  hour  to  her  as  a
witness  to  the  truth  of  it."  Mrs.  A.  immediately  told  another  woman  in
the  room,  who  was  talking  to  her  at  the  time,  what  she  had  just  seen  (her
father's  hand  )  ;  and  her  impression  that  a  misfortune  awaited  her  was  sc
strong  that,  though  she  had  only  that  day  arrived,  she  started  on  the  return
journey  early  the  next  morning.  Mrs.  Murray  woke  her  husband,  told
him  wliom  she  had  seen,  and  he  searched  the  room  and  house,  to  discover  if
a  real  person  had  been  there.  In  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sims'  case  the  apparition  is
stated  to  have  been  collective  ;  they  must  therefore  have  compared  notes
and  known  at  the  time  that  they  believed  themselves  to  be  awake.  Mr.
Cass  said  to  his  wife  at  the  time,  "my  sister  Isabella  is  dead,  I  have  just
seen  her  pass  through  the  room."  Miss  J.E.L.,  after  seeing  her  friend,  got
out  of  bed  and  looked  at  the  hour  ;  it  was  between  6  and  7  o'clock.  Mr.
J.  H.  woke  his  brothers  who  were  sleeping  in  the  same  room  with  him,  bub
they  could  not  see  anything.

Herr  Parish  then  proceeds  to  consider  a  series  of  cases  which  ho  regards
as  strongly  suggestive  of  Crystal-vision  This  may  afford  evidence  of
"dissociation,"  but  from  our  point  of  view  it  establishes  the  cases  as  waking-
hallucinations,  for  crystal-vision  appears,  both  to  the  percipient  and  to  those
with  him,  to  be  a  waking  experience.  To  these  he  adds  cases  where  the
perci])ient  was  sewing  or  reading,'  occupations  which  also,  as  a  rule,  betoken

1  645.11,  (p.  23.3);  725.6,  (p.  237)  ;  385.20,  (p.  230) ;  579.2.5,  (p.  241);  307.20,
(p.  229) ;  418.  4,  (p.  230) ;  523.  12,  (p.  231)  ;  215.  9,  (p.  224) ;  030.  5,  (p.  227).

2  Cases  571. 14,  (p.  237) ;  452.  10  (second  case),  (p.  238)  ;  328.  5,  (p.  235) ;  191.  3
(p.  240).

»Cases  579.  21  (p  223)  ;  S3.  21,  (p.  228) ;  730.  21,  (p.  233)  ;  412.  17,  (p.  213).


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


[Supplement.


what  is  ordinarily  called  a  waking  condition  ;  moreover  in  each  of  them  the
percipient  immediately  spoke  of  the  experience  to  a  companion.

Horr  Parish  thus  establishes  to  his  satisfaction  reasons  from  internal
•evidence  for  suspecting  "dissociation"  in  twenty-one  out  of  twenty-six
cases.  I  think  that  I  may  claim  to  have  shown  that  whether  there  was
"dissociation"  or  not,  the  percipients  classed  their  experiences  as  waking
experiences,  and  that  the  ground  for  believing  that  they  did  this  before
the  coincidence  was  known  is  in  every  case  strong.

Herr  Parish  believes  that  the  fact  that  there  are  not  similar  indications
of  "dissociation"  in  the  remaining  five  of  the  twenty-six  cases  is  princi-
pally due  to  the  Committee  not  having  specially  inquired  about  such
indications.  If  they  had,  he  thinks  indications  would  have  been  brought  to
liglit  in  more  cases.  But  so  far  as  dissociation  means  absence  of  wakefulness,
facts  bearing  on  it  were  very  carefully  inquired  into  by  the  Committee,  for
it  was  of  extreme  importance  from  the  statistical  point  of  view  to  know  the
broad  fact  that  the  experiences  had  really  the  "  waking  quality."  Evidence
iibout  the  more  subtle  questions  in  the  physiology  and  psychology  of
hallucinations  must  be  obtained  from  experiments,  and  from  critical
•observations  of  their  own  experiences  by  intelligent  observers.  Many  cases
published  by  the  S.P.R.,  both  in  connection  with  the  statistical  inquiry
reported  in  Volume  X.  of  the  Proceediiuif:  and  otherwise,  afford  a  valuable
contribution  towards  material  for  a  study  of  the  subject  ;  but  to  hope  to
■elicit  from  informants  reliable  details  about  things  to  which  their  attention
had  never  before  been  drawn  concerning  experiences  often  remote,  is  futile.
Herr  Parish  practically  admits  this,  and  is  all  the  more  pleased  at  having
found  indications  of  "  dissociation"  in  so  many  cases.  What  he — rightly  or
wrongly — regards  as  indications,  however,  are  for  the  most  part  somewhat
marked  facts  about  the  percipient's  position  or  occupation  at  the  time  of  the
experience  ;  such  as  his  having  been  in  bed,  or  reading,  or  sewing.  Facts
such  as  these  a  percipient  is  likely  to  remember  in  connection  with  a  striking
•experience,  and  an  account  must  be  meagre  indeed  which  failed  to  answei:
the  Committee's  question,  "  How  were  you  occupied  at  the  time  ?  "  I
refer  to  this  now  because  at  tliis  point  of  his  argument  (p.  38)  Herr  Parish
goes  out  of  liis  way  to  introduce,  as  evidence  of  the  influence  of  time  in
■obliterating  the  circumstances  accompanying  hallucinations,  a  table  in  the
Report  which  is  differently  interpreted  by  the  Committee  ;  and  his  criticisms
seem  to  call  for  some  reply.  The  table  is  the  one  on  p.  66  of  the  Reiyort.
It  shows  that  supposted  apparitions  of  living  persons  of  which  the  accom-
2)anying  conditions  exliibit  one  of  three  specified  characteristics  suggesting
that  the  figure  seen  may  have  been  a  real  person  and  not  a  hallucination  at
,;ill,  are  fox'gotten  more  rapidly  than  the  mass  of  a23paritions  of  living  persons.
Herr  Parish  thinks  that  it  probably  is  not  the  whole  experience,  but  the
•specified  accompanying  circumstances  which  are  forgotten.  I  cannot  agree
with  him — not  because  I  do  not  think  that  the  memory  of  apparitions  fades
<ind  loses  in  definiteness  like  the  memory  of  other  things— but  because,  for
•one  thing,  the  specified  circumstances  seem  to  me  such  as  almost  must  be
observed  and,  if  the  experience  is  remembered  at  all,  remembered.  They  are'-


1  Report,  p.  643


Part  XXXIII.  ]


Reviews.


599^


(1)  the  seeing  of  the  figure  at  some  distance  either  out  of  doors  or  in  a
public  room  ;  (2)  seeing  the  figure  passing  outside  the  door  of  the  room  in
which  the  percipient  is,  or  seeing  it  inside  a  room  as  the  percipient  passes-
the  door  ;  (3)  seeing  it  in  a  bad  light,  without  any  positive  circumstances-
which  show  that  a  real  person  could  not  have  been  there.  But  secondly,  ■
the  Committee  does  not  base  its  conclusion  that  cases  having  these-
characteristics  are  forgotten  or  ignored  more  than  others  only  on  their
occurrence  in  smaller  proportion  in  the  reports  of  remoter  years.  This
conclusion  was  strongly  confirmed  by  finding  that  if  cases  having-
these  characteristics  were  omitted  from  among  those  that  occurred
^vitkin  the  last  three  montlis,  the  remainder  were  distributed  fairly  evenly
over  that  period.  So  that,  so  far  as  the  evidence  went,i  it  seemed  to  show"
that  within  that  period  almost  the  whole  brunt  of  the  effect  of  oblivion  was-
borne  by  those  cases.  If  this  were  not  due  to  the  experience  being  forgotten-
or  ignored  as  a  whole,  we  should  have  to  supjiuse  that  the  very  niaiked
specified  characteristics  were  specially  liable  to  be  forgotten  ;  or  rather — as:
our  percipients  almost  all  describe  some  conditions — mis-remembered.  We
should,  have  to  sujajjose,  for  instance,  that  a  person  who  had  within  the  last-
three  months  seen  a  supposed  apparition  at  some  distance  out  of  doors  would
be  apt  to  remember  it  as  having  occurred  in  his  room.

The  question  is  chiefly  of  interest  as  bearing  on  the  whole  number  of
waking  hallucinations  that  occur.  It  does  not  materially  affect  our  con-
clusions as  to  the  evidence  for  telepathy.  The  argument  for  this  may,  if  it  is-
preferred,  be  based  on  the  assumption  that  these  "suspicious"  cases  are  as,
real  as  others,  and  the  number  of  reported  cases  be  multiplied  by  six  and  a-
half  instead  of  four  as  the  correction  for  oblivion. (See  Report,  p.  247.)

I  now  come  to  wdiat  Herr  Parish  considers  to  be  his  chief  and  mosfc-
important  objection  to  the  argument  from  tlie  census  for  the  operation  of
telepathy.  It  is,  I  think,  fairly  represented  in  my  description  of  it  at  the-
beginning  of  this  article.  The  content  of  a  hallucination  may  be  due  to-
association  of  ideas,  and  if  this  possibility  be  not  excluded,  and  it  is
practically  impossible  to  exclude  it,  we  are  not  justified  in  attributing  the
hallucination  to  a  telepathic  impact.  He  states  his  general  principle  in  a
more  comprehensive  form  thus  :  "  If  the  content  of  a  hallucination  can  be
traced  to  certain  content-forming  elements,  it  is  not  legitimate  to  regard  the-
hallucination  as  the  outcome  of  another  heterogeneous  chain  of  causes"
(p.  40).  He  adds,  however,  that  our  Committee  has  endeavoured  to  show
that  there  are  cases  where  certain  content-forming  factors, — e.g.,  anxiety  and_
verbal  suggestion — are  excluded,  or  can  be  shown  to  afford  an  insufficient-
explanation.  But,  strange  to  say,  they  have  overlooked  one  f^itor,  namely,
association  of  ideas.  Ho  attributes  this  strange  oversiglit  to  a  want  of  a.
clear  perce^jtion  of  the  distinction  between  the  circumstances  which  produce
the  condition  in  wliich  a  lialluciiiation  is  liable  to  occur  and  the  circumstances
which  determine  the  content  of  the  hallucination. Anxiety  about  a  person

1  If  the  Committee  had  been  deahng  here  with  a  suflBcient  number  of  cases  to
make  it  certain  that  the  element  of  chance  was  oxchided,  the  inference  drawn  would
have  been  an  established  fact.  What  prevents  our  accepting  the  conclusion  as  a
certainty  is  not  any  weakness  in  the  reasoning,  V)Ut  the  small  number  of  cases  to
which  it  is  applied.


600


Mrs.  II.  Sklgwick.


[Supplement.


who  is  ill  m<ay  operate  both  as  a  hallucination-favouring  condition  and  as  a
determinant  of  the  form  of  a  hallucination.  It  thus  naturally  attracted
attention  ;  while  association  of  ideas — which  cannot  cause  hallucinations,  but
only  determine  the  content— did  not.  This  Herr  Parish  thinks  the  more
unfortunate,  as  in  his  view  it  is  the  content  of  the  hallucination  alone
that  we  are  concerned  with  in  the  numerical  comjaarison  of  coincidental  and
non-coincidental  cases.

To  a  member  of  the  Committee,  and  I  venture  to  think  to  most  careful
readers  of  the  Report,  all  this  is  very  surprising.  We  were  under  the
impression  that  throughout  Chapters  VI.  and  X.  the  effect  of  the  percipient's
ideas  on  the  form  of  the  hallucination  was  constantly  urged  on  the  attention
of  the  reader  ;  that  instances  of  the  same  thing  occurred  and  were  considered
in  other  chapters  ;  and  moreover  that  the  very  instances  cjuoted  by  Herr
Parish  to  illustrate  the  effect  of  association  of  ideas  are  quoted  and  referred
to  in  the  lieport  in  the  same  connection.

To  me  it  seems  probable  that  association  of  ideas  plays  at  least  some  part
in  the  construction  of  every  hallucination.  Even  when  there  is  good  reason
to  attribute  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  hallucination — the  idea  of  the  person
seen— to  telepathy,  the  attitude  and  dress  and  the  apparent  position  of  the
figure  in  space  seem  generally  to  be  due  to  association  of  ideas.  The  grounds
for  thinking  so  seem  to  me  to  be  strong — what  evidence  there  is  for  reciprocal
action  between  agent  and  percipient  and  for  telepathic  clairvoyance  notwith-
standing—if we  consider  on  the  one  hand  (1)  the  extremely  meagre  amount
of  information  conveyed,  as  a  rule,  to  the  percipient  by  a  telepathic
hallucination,  and  (2)  the  way  the  hallucination  tits  into  his  ordinary
surroundings  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  the  rule  obviously  played  in  hypnotic
■hallucinations  by  association  of  ideas  working  on  the  ideas  originally  put  into
the  percipient's  mind  by  the  liypnotiser.

But  interesting  and  imjjortant  as  is  the  effect  of  association  of  ideas  on
hallucinations,  it  has  no  bearing  on  the  question  whether  the  coincidence
of  apparitions  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen  can  be  attributed  to  chance
■or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a  causal  connection  between  the
death  and  tlie  hallucination.  In  the  first  place  we  are  not  concerned  only
with  the  content  of  the  hallucination  ;  we  are  concerned  with  the  hallucma-
tiou  (Munts  content.  In  the  second  place  Herr  Parish's  general  principle
■cannot  be  maintained.  The  known  existence  of  one  series  of  causes  leading
up  to  an  event  does  not  exclude  the  operation  of  another  series  of  causes,
unless  the  first  series  can  be  shown  to  be  absolutely  necessary  and  sufficient
under  all  conditions.  The  fact  that  we  caught  a  catarrh  by  sitting  in  a
draught  does  not  prevent  the  catarrh  being  due  to  a  microbe.  If  we  can
■show  that  a  certain  microbe  is  cajsable  under  favourable  conditions  of
producing  catarrh,  and  that  when  catarrh  occurs  the  microbe  is  always
present  in  the  organism,  then  the  connection  of  microbe  and  catarrh  is
■established,  and  a  strong  presumption  that  the  microbe  is  necessary  to  the
catarrh.  If  we  can  further  show  that  sitting  in  a  draught  is  followed  by
■catarrh  much  more  often  than  would  haj^pen  by  chance,  it  follows  that  there
must  be  a  causal  connection  between  sitting  in  a  draught  and  a  catarrh.  It
is  not  necessary,  in  order  to  prove  this,  that  sitting  in  a  draught  should  always
be  followed  by  catarrh,  nor  that  a  catarrh  should  invariably  be  preceded  by


Part  XXXin.]


Reviews.


601


the  sitting  in  a  draught  ;  nor  is  it  necessary  that  we  should  know  how  the
draught  tends  to  produce  the  catarrh.  Moreover,  if  the  drauglit  is  a  vera
causa  of  the  catarrh  in  certain  cases,  it  follows  that,  unless  tlie  draught
introduces  the  microbe  into  the  organism,  the  microbe  is  not  by  itself  and
unconditionally  a  suflicient  cause  of  the  catarrli.  It  must  have  favourable
conditions,  and  the  draught  is  one  way  among  others  in  which  the  favourable
conditions  are  brouglit  about.  Similarly  if  visual  hallucinations  coincide
with  the  death  of  the  person  seen  much  more  often  than  would  happen  by
chance,  there  must  be  some  causal  connection  between  the  two  events.  This
is  all  that  the  statistical  inquiry  attempts  to  prove  ;  and  this  conclusion  is
not  affected  by  any  number  of  other  conditions  which  may  be  found  necessary
or  favourable  to  the  production  of  visual  hallucinations  representing  recog-
nised human  beings.

But  I  need  not  reiterate  this.  Herr  Parish  does  not  in  fact  deny  it,
though  in  some  of  his  reasoning  he  seems  to  do  so.  On  page  45  he
gives  us  his  real  conclusion,  which  is  that,  as  it  is  not  legitimate  to
assume  a  causal  connection  between  the  death  and  the  hallucination,  we
must  turn  the  statistical  argument  round.  We  must  assume  that  if,  as  the
Committee  concluded  after  allowing  for  selection  and  exaggeration, ^  thirty
death  coincidences  occurred  among  the  experiences  of  17,000^  informants,
then,  since  1  in  19009  is  the  number  of  such  coincidences  that  chance  would
produce,  the  '/•eal  number  of  apparitions  of  living  persons  seen  must  have
been  19000  x  30  or  570000.  As  therefore,  they  report  only  350,  569659,  or
1627  out  of  every  1628,  must  have  been  forgotten  or  ignored.  This,  it  will
be  observed,  involves  the  almost  immediate  forgetting  of  a  large  jjroportion
of  the  waking  hallucinations  that  occur.  The  exijeriences  are  distributed
over  thirty  years,  so  that  in  Herr  Parish's  view  they  occurred  at  the  rate  of
19,000  per  annum,  and  of  19000  divided  by  26,  or  a23proximately  730,  pev
fortniglit.  Now  the  number  of  visual  hallucinations  of  all  kinds  (not  only
apparitions  of  living  persons)  reported  by  our  informants  as  having  occurred
to  them  within  the  most  recent  fortnight  is  twelve  ;  they  must  therefore,
on  Herr  Parish's  supposition,  have  forgotten  or  ignored  at  least  718, — or
more  than  98  per  cent,  of  those  which  had  occurred  to  them  a  fortnight  or
less  before  they  were  asked  if  they  had  ever  experienced  one  !

If  Herr  Parish  finds  himself  able  to  adopt  so  extravagant  a  conclusion
there  is  no  more  to  be  said.  But  why  did  he  take  the  trouble  to  write  this
long  and  elaborate  criticism  ?

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgvvick.


1  The  number  reported  was  62.  Herr  Parish  on  p.  15  of  his  pamphlet  attributes
the  Committee's  reduction  of  sixty-tv/o  death  coincidences  to  thirty  to  allowance  for
selection  by  the  collectors.  The  Committee,  however,  for  rensons  given  by  them
regard  eight  as  an  ample  allowance  for  this  possible  source  of  error,  and  allow
twenty- two,  also  for  reasons  given,  for  possible  exaggeration  by  the  percipients  as  to
the  closeness  of  the  coincidence,  etc. (See  iJe^jori,  pp.  242-3).

'-  Herr  Parish  prefers  to  operate  at  this  point  of  his  argument  with  round  numbers
— 20,000  informants,  50  coincidences,  500  apparitions  of  the  living — but  I  have  thought
it  more  convenient  to  adhere  to  the  actual  numbers.

3  See  Report,  p.  03.  ■  •  .  .


602


William  Komaine  Netvbold.


[Supplement.


Demon  Possession  and  Allied  Tltemes. By  John  L.  Nevius,  D.D. Edited  by
Henry  W.  Rankin. Second  Edition,  F.  H.  Revell  Co.,  1890,  pj].  520.

Dr.  Nevius  was  for  forty  years  a  missionary  in  China.  Early  in  his
ministry  he  found  that  demon  jjossession  is  a  common  occurrence  among  the
Cliinese  and  although  he  was  able  to  observe  in  person  one  case  only,  he
succeeded  in  collecting  a  large  amount  of  information  abciut  the  phenomena
and  the  construction  put  upon  them  by  the  natives.  This  material  forms
the  basis  of  the  book  in  hand.

A  few  illustrations  will  serve  to  give  a  conception  of  its  general
character.  The  second  case  is  that  of  a  mountaineer,  Kwo  by  name,  wha
gives  an  account  of  his  own  experiences.  He  had  been  arranging  for  the
household  worship  of  the  Goddess  Wang-Muniang,  when  one  night  ho
dreamed  that  the  goddess  appeared  to  him  and  announced  that  she  had
taken  up  her  abode  in  liis  house.  This  was  followed  after  the  lapse  of  a
few  days  by  a  feeling  of  restlessness  coupled  witli  an  irrational  impulse
to  gamble  ;  his  mind  became  confused,  memory  was  impaired.  He  was
then  seized  by  an  epileptiform  attack,  to  which  succeeded  mania  with
homicidal  impulses.  The  "demon"  proclaimed  its  presence,  demanded
vrorship.  Upon  compliance  with  its  demands  it  departed.  For  some
months  the  "demon"  reappeared  at  intervals,  promised  to  heal  disease.
Kwo  notes  that  "  many  diseases  were  not  under  its  control,  and  it  seemed  as
if  it  could  perfectly  cure  only  such  as  were  inflicted  by  spirits  " — a  significant
remark.  When  the  sufferer  became  a  Christian,  the  "demon"  disappeared
saying  "  This  is  no  jjlace  for  me."

Case  3  is  narrated  by  a  native  Christian.  He  described  the  patient  as
*' sitting  up,  her  eyes  closed,  with  a  fluttering  motion  of  the  eyelids,  her
countenance  like  one  weeiaing  and  the  fingers  of  both  hands  tightly  clenched.
She  would  allow  no  one  to  straighten  her  closed  fingers.  I  then,  liardly
expecting  an  answer,  as  the  woman  had  hitherto  been  speechless,  said  to  the
demon  :  '  Have  you  no  fear  of  God  1  Why  do  you  come  here  to  afflict  this
woman  1 ' To  this  I  received  instantly  the  following  reply  :

'  Tien-pu  Yia-su  puh  Kwan  an,
Wo  tsai  che-li  tsih  pa  nian,
Ni  iao  nien  wo,  nan  shang  nan,
Pi  iao  keh  wo  pa-shin  ngan.'

(Translation)

'  God  and  Christ  will  not  interfere.  I  have  been  here  seven  or  eight  years  r
and  I  claim  this  as  my  resting  place.  You  cannot  get  rid  of  me.'"  This
patient  was  relieved  by  prayer.

In  several  instances  the  "  demon"  claims  identity  with  the  spirit  of  some
deceased  human  being.  Thus  in  case  24  a  bride  on  her  wedding  night  was
seized  by  what  purported  to  be  the  spii-it  of  a  girl  to  whom  her  husband  had
been  engaged,  and  who  had  drowned  herself  on  account  of  the  ill-treatment
of  her  future  mother-ia-law.  In  other  cases  the  "  demon  "  claims  to  be  on©
of  the  lower  animals — e  rj.  in  one  which  occurred  in  Japan, — page  105— it
professed  itself  a  fox.

The  entire  collection  gives  a  most  interesting  glimpse  of  Chinese  spiritism.
We  find  the  cult  of  spirits  a  recognised  institution. "Physical  phenomena"


Part  XXXIII.]


Reviews.


603


are  alleged  to  be  matters  of  daily  occurrence.  Every  village  has  its
"medium."  The  "developing  seance"  has  its  counterpart  (page  G7).  The
medium  sometimes  goes  into  "quiet  trance,"  and  sometimes  communication
with  the  unseen  world  is  effected  by  means  of  an  instrument  essentially
identical  with  planchette  (pages  48,  69).

Evidence  of  this  sort  is  not  without  its  value  as  going  to  show  that
spiritism  is  a  growth  indigenous  to  many  countries,  that  it  is  a  plausible
interpretation  of  phenomena  which  occur  spontaneously  among  all  races  and
is  not  merely  a  mass  of  imposture  based  upon  the  "  llocliestcr  knockings  "
and  peculiar  to  the  last  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  No  one  who  believes
that  the  natural  basis  of  such  a  belief  deserves  thorough  investigation  will
refuse  to  Dr.  Nevius  and  his  friend  and  editor,  Mr.  Henry  W.  Rankin,  the
gratitude  due  them  for  having  put  a  mass  of  new  information  within  reach.
But  if  one  goes  further  and  asks  what  Dr.  Nevius  has  done  toAvards
vindicating  the  popular  interpretation  of  these  phenomena,  tlie  reply  cannot
but  be  unfavourable.

Every  page  bears  witness  to  the  author's  desire  to  be  exact  in  description,
unbiassed  in  interpretation,  and  just  in  criticism  ;  it  is  rather  his  misfortune
than  his  fault  that  he  has  fallen  so  far  short  of  the  mark  in  all  three  respects.
Practically  all  his  material  rests  upon  the  evidence  of  native — Chinese  or
Mongolian — witnesses.  All  are  fully  convinced  of  the  diabolical  origin  of
the  phenomena,  and  without  in  the  least  impugning  their  good  faith,  we  can
scarcely  accept  their  accounts  as  literally  true  and  uncoloured  by  precon-
ceptions. Such  evidence  can  scarcely  do  more  than  sup])ly  illustrations  of
facts  already  independently  established.

Of  alleged  supernormal  phenomena  the  book  is  almost  barren.  One  case
of  a  "  Poltergeist"  rests  solely  upon  the  evidence  of  Mongolians,  whom  the
missionary  transmitting  the  account  stigmatises  as  "so  imbued,  one  and  all,
with  the  spirit  of  lying  that  I  have  found  it  useless  to  repeat  what  the  most
respectable  say."  In  a  few  other  cases  it  is  claimed  that  the  demoniac  was
possessed  of  supernormal  knowledge  and  of  the  gift  of  healing,  but  no
definite  facts  are  given.  It  is  consequently  somewhat  surprising  to  find
Dr.  Nevius  claiming  (page  190)  that  the  possession  of  supernormal  knowledge,
and  especially  of  the  power  of  speaking  languages  unknown  to  the  patient,
is  a  differentiating  mark  of  demon-possession  as  distinguished  from  hystero-
epileptic  disorders.

Dr.  Nevius's  interpretation  of  the  facts  is  what  might  be  expected  of  a
man  of  his  antecedents.  His  creed  already  required  of  him  a  belief  in  the
person  and  work  of  devils,  and  his  experiences  in  China  seem  to  have  done
no  more  than  bring  this  intellectual  assent  to  events  of  the  past  down  into
the  realm  of  vivid  conviction  as  to  the  happenings  of  the  present.  That  once
done  his  credulity  is  almost  unlimited.  He  assents  to  the  view  of  the  early
fathers  that  pagan  divinities  are  but  devils  in  disguise.  Mohammed  was  a.
demoniac.  The  "  bewitched  "  of  Western  Europe  were  demoniacs,  inspired
by  the  devil  to  utter  false  accusations  against  the  innocent.  ' '  All  his-
(Satan's)  attributes  as  a  deceiver,  a  liar,  a  murderer,  and  a  false  accuser,
reappear  conspicuously  in  this  one  transaction  "  (page  309).  So  of  modern
"Spiritualism,"  the  marvels  of  which  he  seems  to  accept  without  serious
question. Its  Satanic  origin  is  sufficiently  proved  by  its  anti-Christian

2  R


604


Andrew  Lang.


[Supplement.


tendencies.  The  negative  results  of  such  an  investigation  as  that  of  the
Seybert  Commission  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  are  to  be  explained
upon  the  hypothesis  that  "it  is  hai'dly  reasonable  to  suppose  that  these
demons  v^^ould  voluntarily,  gratuitously  and  without  restraint,  submit  them-
selves to  an  examination  which  might  only  serve  to  disclose  their  actual
character"  (page  317).

Dr.  Nevius's  criticism  of  other  theories  brings  his  limitations  even  more
clearly  to  light.  He  refuses  to  group  possession  with  the  hystero-epilepsies
on  the  ground  that  in  joossession  we  have  secondary  personalities  and  super-
normal knowledge,  whereas  in  merely  pathological  disorders  we  never  find
cither.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  understood  the  attempts  to  explain  the
phenomena  upon  psychological  principles  and,  after  giving  a  few  quotations
from  James,  Myers,  Ribot,  and  Moll,  contents  himself  with  remarking,  in
effect,  that  these  authorities  do  not  agree  and  their  explanations  do  not
explain.  Of  the  epoch-making  work  of  Pierre  Janet,  Binet  and  their
co-workers  he  says  nothing,  and  seems  ignorant  of  the  phenomena  of
suggestion,  especially  of  the  psychical  contagion  that  springs  from  collective
or  mass-suggestion.  This  is  the  line  of  work  which  has  brought  to  light  the
graded  series  of  phenomena  between  those  of  normal  life  and  those  of
possession,  amoking  and  the  like.

Dr.  Nevius  failed  to  see  that  the  evidence  which  is  sufficient  to  bring  a
mass  of  phenomena  under  an  accepted  category  may  be  wholly  insuflicient
to  establish  the  category.  The  evidence  which  he  has  collected  may  be
subsumed  under  several  categories  with  equal  ease,  but  there  is  nothing  in
the  evidence  to  determine  us  to  the  choice  of  the  sj)iritistic  rather  than  of
another.  That  must  be  done  by  the  more  complex  considerations  that  fix
for  each  man  his  attitude  towards  the  Universe.

William  Romaine  Newbold.

INovemher  11th,  1896.]


Studies  in  Psychical  Research.  By  Frank  Podmoee,  M.A.  London  :  Kegan
Paul,  Trench,  Triibner,  &  Co.  New  York :  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons.
1897. pp.  458.

Mr.  Podmore  is,  of  course,  responsible  for  his  own  conclusions  in  his
work  on  the  results  attained,  so  far,  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.
He  shines  therefore  with  no  borrowed  light  in  "  exjilanations."  While
sympathising  with  his  determined  efforts  to  keep  things  at  their  lowest  level,
to  make  the  largest  allowances  for  the  mythopoeic  element  in  our  fallen
nature,  I  think  that  Mr.  Podmore  is  too  mythopujic  himself.  All  our
theories  of  all  obscure  processes  or  facts  are  essentially  myths,  stories
which  we  tell  ourselves  in  our  attempt  to  account  for  the  world.  But  we
know  that  our  theories  are  myths,  till  they  are  verified,  and,  if  we  are  not
spiritists,  we  keep  the  animistic  element  out  of  our  explanations.  Now
Mr.  Podmore's  explanations  of  a  number  of  alleged  facts,  or  rather  his
explanation  of  "how  such  stories  came  to  be  told,"  do  seem  to  me  to  be
myths  not  verified,  and,  I  fancy,  perhaps  not  verifiable.  He  is  none  the
less  mythopoeic  because  his  inventions  coincide  in  character  with  those  of


Part  XXXIII.]


Revieius.


605


irresponsible  common  sense.  Examples  will  be  given  when  we  come  to  the
cliajjters  on  Home,  and  on  the  Poltergeist.  There  Mr.  Podmore  seems  to
iiie  to  be  sacrificing  to  common  sense,  which  wants  an  explanation,  and  a
normal  explanation,  and  does  not  care  whether  it  is  verifiable,  or  even
plausible  or  not.  AVliy  did  we  Researchers  come  forth  from  the  world  to
hunt  dark  corners,  if  we  are  to  carry  the  superstitions  of  the  world  into  our
researches  ?  Our  attitude,  I  think,  should  be  that  of  pure  agnosticism  in
cases  where  all  is  obscure.  There  are  the  stories  of  marvels  filed  for
reference.  If  we  meet  with  modern  instances,  we  can  compare  them  with
the  records  ;  meanwhile,  we  can  only  explain  the  tales  by  unverifiable
guesses,  whether  "psychical,"  "spiritual,"  or  "sensible."  It  is  much
better,  surely,  not  to  fashion  such  {etiological  myths,  not  to  "pay  ourselves
with  words."

Meanwhile  I  ofier  some  jottings  on  Mr.  Podmore's  chapters,  I  believe
(p.  1)  that  " hospitality  to  the  marvellous"  is  more,  not  less,  general  than
"  in  Dr.  Johnson's  day."  The  mere  existence  of  the  Society  is  a  jaroof  of
that.  The  general  m.ass  of  the  "educated  public"  is  "hospitable,"  and
always  has  been,  in  regard  to  stories  of  experiences.  But  the  genei-al  public
has  no  inkling  whatever  of  the  trend  of  such  stories  in  regard  to  philosophy.
Men  of  physical  science,  as  a  rule,  merely  refuse  to  examine  alleged  facts,
first,  because,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  experiments  in  human  faculty  are
incapable  of  constant  and  exact  repetition  in  experiment ;  secondly,  because
an  affirmative  conclusion  would  upset  a  number  of  theories  which  are
regarded  with  an  almost  theological  jealousy.  Moreover  there  are  one  or
two  awful  examples  of  the  debasing  effect  which  psychical  research  produces
in  scientific  minds,  whether  the  controversialists  take  the  affirmative  or
negative  side.  But  this  ought  only  to  teach  scientific  men  the  imperative
duty  of  cultivating  logic,  accuracy,  and  self-restraint.  Meanwhile  we
Researchers  are  a  little  flock,  engaged  in  quite  novel  work.  In  tlie  last,  and
€arly  in  the  present  century,  Kant,  Hegel,  Schelling,  and,  I  think,  Fichte,
went  into  these  things  a  good  deal."  But  Kant  turned  away  with  a  sneer
and  a  sigh,  while  Hegel  calmly  swallowed  the  whole  mass  of  "  facts  "  (except
perhaps  phantasms  of  the  dead,  and  volatile  furniture)  and  digested  them
Iby  aid  of  his  vast  boa-constrictor  of  an  universal  philosophy.  He  was
reckless  of  exact  evidence,  being  convinced  in  his  own  mind.  Our
■object  of  course,  is  to  get  the  facts  fit  to  go  to  a  jury,  before  we
philosophise.  Nevertheless  Mr.  Myers's  "subliminal  self"  deserves  com-
jjarison  with  Hegel's  fiihlcnde  Seele,  both  in  its  points  of  resemblance  and  of
■difference.

Mr.  Podmore  has  easy  sport  with  popular  spiritualism,  about  which
nothing  need  be  said  here.  The  movement,  at  best,  produced  examples  of
psychological  anomalies,  which  were  naturally  ascribed  to  "  spirits,"  and  it  in-
cidentally encouraged  the  art  of  detecting  imposture.  Gasparin's  experiments
laisscnt  a  desirer  inaccuracy,  Mr.  Podmore  thinks,  and  then  we  come  to  Home,
Lord  Crawford,  and  Sir  W.  Crookes.  I  have  no  theory  of  Home,  but
Mr.  Podmore  "explains"  by  dint  of  what  I  call  myths.  He  is  "not
3)repared  with  any  cheap  and  ready  solution  of  the  problem,"  yet  he  offers
solutions  marvellously  inexpensive.  "The  witnesses  were  to  some  extent
lhallucinated. "  Why  all  in  the  same  way  1  By  communicated  "  suggestions,''

2  R  2


60G


Andrew  Lang.


Supplement.


I  presume. There  is,  (1)  Home's  fire  tricks. He  "really  took  live  coals
out  of  the  fire,  and  possibly  on  Eom3  occasions  held  them  in  his  hand,
protected  liy  some  non-conducting  sulj.stance." This  "substance"  is  a
mytli  of  Queen  Entelechy  ! What  substance  1 We  might  as  well  posit  a
sf)irit  as  talic  of  a "substance" unknown  to  science. Sir  W.  Crookes
analysed  tlie  handkerchief  wliich  did  not  burn  (mucli)  when  Home  put  a  hot
coal  on  it,  and  found  no  "non-conducting  substance." He  knows  of  no-
such substance in rerutn  natuni. (Proceedings VI., 103).  Perhaps
Home  "palmed"  another  handkerchief? Then  he  had  been  thoughtful
enough to provide the substituted fogle with tlirce similar,  and
similarly  situated,  slight marks  of  burning. Certainly,  were  I  Sir  W.
Crookes,  I  could  not  swallow  Mr.  Podmore's  explanation. Then  how  die!
Home  get  his  non-conducting  substance  on  to  the  hands  of  Lord  Crawford
and  others,  who  could  usually,  but  not  always,  take  the  coals  with  impunity
from  Home  ? An  acquaintance  of  mine  retains  the  mark  of  the  blister.
Was  he  so  hallucinated  that  fancy  produced  a  blister  ;  a  beautiful  case
for  MM.  Binet  and  Fere? Till  Mr.  Podmore  exhibits  his  "non-conducting
substance," he  ranges  in  pure  mythology. As  for  the  fire  trick,  the
Fijians  did  it  publicly,  in  September,  1897,  before  a  crowd  of  spectators-
from  New  Zealand. I  may  here  refer  to  a  mass  of  evidence  in  the  chapter
on  "  The  Fire  Walk  "  in  my  Modern  Mythology. But  I  fear  nobody  will
take  the  trouble  to  look  at  it ;  one  is  as  a  vox  clamantist  in  eremo.  (2)  "When
levitated.  Home  at  least  thrust  his  head  and  shoulders  out  of  the  window."
(p.  121.) If  he  did,  the  three  spectators  could  not  see  him  do  so  through  a
brick  wall ! Home  was  in  the  next  room,  and  returned  to  that  where  the-
spectators  were  by  way  of  the  window,  seventy  feet  from  the  ground,
(p.  52.) He  then  went  out  and  in  again,  in  the  next  room,  to  which  the
spectators  had  adjourned. Mr.  Podmore  has  to  imagine  that  three  men  of
sense.  Lord  Crawford,  Lord  Adare,  and  Captain  Wynne,  were  so  "excited"
that,  when  Home  thrust  his  head  out  of  window  A,  (which  was  to  them
invisible,)  they  all  three  believed  they  saw  his  whole  body  outside  of  window
B,  and  that  they  then  went  to  window  B,  in  the  next  room,  and  fancied
they  saw  Home  emerge  longitudinally,  and  re-enter. There  is  no  use  in
citing  here  the  illusions  of  "  hypnotised  boys  ; "  these  gentlemen  had  not
been  hypnotised. Tlieir  "  strained  expectation  "  could  not  see  through  a
brick  wall,  and  enable  them  to  infer,  in  all  cases,  the  same  hallucinatory
conclusions  from  what  they  saw. And  if  one  of  the  three  spectators  was
capable,  as  is  alleged,  of  hallucinatory  experiences,  how  did  he  communicate
them  to  his  friends  ? Of  course  you  may  say  "suggestion,"  or  "  chimcvra
boynbinans." Obviously  it  should  be  proved,  by  experiment,  that  precisely
this  sort  of  suggestion  is  possible  in  persons  not  subjected  definitely  to
hypnotism. Mr.  Podmore's  explanations  (tentative  of  course)  seem  to  me
myths,  and  I  must keep  asking  him  to produce that  "non-conducting
substance." When  Home  was  "  levitated  "  or  did  fire  tricks,  "  the  light  in
the  room  was  lessened." The  light  in  tlie  fire  trick  was  given  by  a  candle  on
the  table,  and  one  on  the  chimney  piece,  and  by  the  fire. That  is  enough
light  whereby  to  see  a  man  standing  not  a  foot  from  you,  with  a  red  hob
coal  in  his  hands. Home  also  "  passed  his  fingers  several  times  through  tlie-
candle  flaine  so  slowly  that  they  must  have  been  severely  burnt  under


Part  XXXIII.]


Reviews.


607


ordinary  circumstancos."  He  anticipated  Bernadette  and  the  Miracle  de
•Cierge.  A  candle  would  give  light  Gnougli  to  see  ^/^«^  by  I  Again,  '■'■when
the  gas  was  turned  up,''  objects  moved,  while  Home  was  "at  a  distance  and
liis  harxJs  held."  Alteration  of  weights  was  registered  by  a  mechanical
appai'atus  on  smoked  glass.

There  are  two  other  points  to  be  urged  against  Mr.  Podinore's  theory
that  observers  of  Home  were  hallucinated.  The  Society's  records  contain
plenty  of  "collective,  so-called  telepathic  hallucinations."  But  surely  these
hallucinations  offered  visionary  figures  of  persons  and  things  not  present  in
fact.  Has  Mr.  Podmore  one  case,  except  Home's,  of  a  collective  hallucination
in  which  a  person  actually  present  is  the  hallucination  ;  floats  in  air,  holds
red-hot  coals,  and  so  forth, — ajDpears  outside  of  the  window,  for  instance,
when  he  is  inside  the  room  ?  Of  course  where  conjuring  is  barred.  Again,
Home's  marvels  are  attested  by  witnesses  violently  prejudiced  against  him,
and  (far  from  being  attentively  exijectant)  most  anxious  to  detect  and
expose  him.  Mr.  Hamilton  Aide  is  an  example.  Mr.  Podmore's  theories
do  not  give  to  himself  much  "mental  satisfaction."  They  are  not  calculated
to  do  so.  It  would  be  better  to  leave  such  explanations  to  popular
science,  and  to  admit  that  we  are  confronted  by  an  enigma  which  we
have  no  present  means  of  answering.  The  performances  of  Mr.  Moses  are
different.  These  things  were  "done  in  a  corner."  The  "alleged  spirit
messages"  of  Mr.  Moses,  under  Mr.  Podmore's  criticism,  are  seen  to  have
no  evidential  cogency.  The  sprites  rap  out  a  story  which  has  been  in  the
Daily  Telegraph,  or  in  an  old  Annual  Register  !  This  makes  one  entertain
the  most  lurid  opinions  about  Mr.  Moses's  "  physical  phenomena."  Perhaps
he  was  only  a  humbug  in  a  subliminal  sense,  when  not  quite  himself.  I  am
acquainted  with  a  parallel  case  of  combined  imposture  and  self-belief  in
quite  a  different  field, — I  am  not  speaking  of  politics.  The  thing  can  exist,
and  that  Mr.  Moses  was  an  example  of  the  double  mood  is  less  incredible
than  that  his  miracles  were  genuine.  Believing  this,  why  do  I  remain
agnostic  in  Home's  case  1  Merely  because  Home's  marvels  were  infinitely
better  observed  and  recorded  than  those  of  Mr.  Moses.

As  to  the  Poltergeist,  Mr.  Podmore's  explanation  of  his  first  case  seems
to  me  on  a  level  with  his  "non-conducting  substance."  The  reader  should
compare  Mr.  Podmore's  original  version  in  Proceedings.  There  he  abandons
the  hypothesis  of  "  mechanical  means."  And  if  the  "agent"  was  "a  half-
witted child  of  an  imbecile  mother,"  how  could  she  do  what  could  not  be
done  by  mechanical  means  1  Is  Mr.  Podmore  sure  that  the  child  ivas
half-witted  1  And,  if  so,  would  that  explain  the  first  abnormal  occurrence,
when  the  child  had  not  yet  been  received  into  the  house  ?  The  child  was
aged  eighteen.  The  thing  began  on  February  20,  or  21,  and  became  a  pesb
on  March  1.  Mr.  Podmore  was  not  on  the  spot  till  Afiril  7.  But  he  does
not  print  the  contemporary  newspaper  accounts,  so  that  we  may  compare
them  with  evidence  collected  on  April  7.  I  have  compared  them,  and  very
curious  they  are.  The  discrepancies  in  testimony  at  that  date  are  exactly
such  as  occur  in  all  human  evidence  in  the  most  ordinary  affairs  of  life.
Were  they  absent,  we  might  be  certain  that  the  witnesses  were  in  a  concerted
effort  to  deceive.  If  a  policeman  attests  that  he  saw  a  bowl  wobble  slowly
up  into  the  air  (as  in  this  case),  my  judicial  powers  remain  at  a  standstill.


€08


Anclreiv  Lang.


[Supplement.


But  when  this  peculiar  kind  of  movement  is  described  by  a  consensus  of
independent  evidence  in  many  lands  and  ages,  I  cannot  fly  to  "hallucina-
tion" for  a  theory,  like  Mr.  Podmore,  or  to  "  sensory  illusion,  conditioned
by  the  excited  state  of  the  percipient."  If  he  is  right,  we  have  a  new  law  of
perception,  "Poduiore's  Law,"  "  percipients  in  an  excited  condition  will  see-
inanimate  objects  meandering  with  a  mazy  motion  through  air."  Let  me  add
bhat  they  will  also  feel  and  hear  the  objects  descend  softly  and  gently  on
themselves,  or  on  the  floor.  How  does  "  excitement "  here,  and  now,  and
in  the  seventeenth  century,  in  America,  Germany,  Russia,  France,  or  in
Galloway,  produce  this  unanimity  of  hallucinated  i^erception?  It  aSects
Sir  W.  Crookes  and  his  friends,  as  it  aflected  Mr.  Telfer,  of  Rerrick,  or
William  Morse,  of  New  England,  in  1680-90,  or  every  one  at  Cideville,
in  1851,  exactly  as  it  aflected  Policeman  Higgs.  White  calls  in  that  active
and  intelligent  officer;  "Here's  a  jolly  turn  up  in  my  house,"  says  he.
Thereon  the  excited  Higgs,  with  everybody  present,  is  hallucinated  exactly
like  our  historical  friends,  or  Sir  W.  Crookes,  or  Mr.  Bristow  when  examining^
with  a  good  deal  of  care,  during  six  weeks,  some  odd  phenomena  in  a
carpenter's  shop  (PvoceecZiiij/s  VII.,  383-394).  All  these  witnesses  were  un-
acquainted with  the  reports  by  Telfer,  Glanvil,  Cotton,  and  the  rest.  Their
coincidence  of  testimony,  to  which  I  may  add  some  given  to  myself  by  a  person
who  was  in  no  state  of  excitement  at  all,  seems,  prima  facie,  rather  evidence-
to  facts  than  proof  of  Mr.  Podmore's  Law.  I  allude  here  to  the  testimony  of
a  man  who  employed  Esther  Teed,  the  "Amherst  Mystery,''  and  who,  while
engaged  in  his  normal  stable  and  thinking  of  no  such  matter,  beheld  the
phenomena  attributed  by  Mr.  Podmore  to  "a  sensory  illusion  conditioned  by
an  excited  state."  This  explanation  wins  its  way  to  the  mytliical.  Every
one  must  agree  that  the  Poltei'geist  kind  of  occurrence  is  often  the  result  of
trickery,  but  cases  like  that  at  Worksojj  remain,  I  think,  to  be  pigeon-
holed for  reference.  Perhaps  tlie  most  interesting  point  is  the  coincidence
of  testimony  as  to  the  peculiar  fliglit  of  objects.  It  either  attests  a  fact  of
observation;  or  proves  that  "excitement"  is  wonderfully  uniform  in  it.g^
production  of  sensory  illusions.  The  discovery  of  this  psychological  law
would  alone  deserve  high  consideration  for  Mr.  Podmore's  book.  But  we
cannot  test  the  law  till  tlie  S.P.R.  succeeds  in  catching  a  poltergeist  in  active
business,  and  does  not  arrive  the  day  after  the  fair.  Indeed  I  regard  this
secular  uniformity  of  evidence  to  the  non-natural  movements  of  objects  as
the  best  ground  for  supposing  that  something  odd  has  really  sometimes
occurred.  The  idea  of  expectant  "  excitement "  must  be  dismi.ssed  in  cases  of
hostile  witnesses,  like  Alphonse  Karr  und  Mr.  Ai'de.  Excitement  could  not^
last  through  six  weeks'  experience  of  floating  bits  of  wood,  in  Mr.  Bristowe's
case.  My  informant  in  whose  family  Esther  Teed  was  a  servant  was  not
excited  or  expectant.  "Suggestion,"  as  producing  identity  of  collective
hallucination,  is  excluded  when  the  witnesses  are  of  diff'erent  lands  and
ages,  all  unaware  of  tlie  .same  evidence  previously  given  by  others  to  the
f-ame  set  of  facts.  The  Marquis  de  St.  Victor  never  heard,  we  may  be  sure,
of  the  Rev.  Alexander  Telfer,  and  probably  Sir  W.  Crookes  was  not
cunscioHshj  in  the  same  tale  with  William  Morse.  The  idea  that  the  members
of  Sir  W.  Crookes's  party  unconsciously  adapted  their  memories  into
uniformity  is  checked  by  the  notes  made  during  tlie  seaftce;  and  Morse,  in


Part  XXXIIL]


Revieius.


Qd9


New  England,  cannot  have  fitted  his  story  to  match  Telfer's  in  Galloway.
Therefore,  either  the  events  occurred  as  described,  or  fits  of  crazy  percep-
tion, uniform  in  character,  beset  mankind  whether  excited  or  not  excited.
Mr.  Podraore  is  reduced,  by  facts,  to  the  last  form  of  explanation.  It  is
calculated  to  stagger  common  sense.

Omitting  Madame  Blavatsky  as  exploded,  we  come  to  Experimental
Thought-transference,  and  transference  of  sensation,  as  in  Hegel's  work
already  cited.  The  examples  here  given  are  familiar  to  readers  of  the
Proceedings,  as  are  the  "Telepathic  Hallucinations."  Mr.  Podmore  seems
rather  to  hanker  after  an  explanation  involving  ether  and  the  nervous
system.  Mr.  Podmore's  Theory  of  Ghosts  is  already  well  known.  lb
draws  heavily  on  any  balance  which  Telepathy  may  have  at  the  bank,
and  Mr.  Myers's  reply  seems  telling.  But  the  subject  is  obscure,  and
a  larger  collection  of  facts  is  necessary.  As  to  "haunted  houses"  and
"expectancy,"  expectancy  is  too  often  a  failure,  alas,  and  ghosts  "come
not  by  observation."  For  the  present  Mr.  Podmore  "can  but  regard"
premonitions  "as  the  sports  of  chance."  I  could  add  a  good  deal,  and
may  do  so  later,  to  his  evidence  for  clairvoyance,  but  the  facts  would
be  set  down  to  Telepathy.  Mrs.  Piper  has  a  faint  kind  of  charm  for
Mr.  Podmore.  But  as  we  knoio  that  her  Dr.  Phinuit  tries  to  cheat  (how-
ever honest  Mrs.  Piper  may  be  in  her  normal  state),  I  put  no  trust  in  his
revelations .

I  have  dwelt  on  my  differences  from  Mr.  Podmore,  which  amount  to
little  more  than  a  distaste  for  "  explanations  "  like  those  which  he  tentatively
offers.  To  take  a  case  apart  from  his  work  : — A.  made  certain  arrangements
deeply  affecting  the  common  interests  of  himself  and  B.  B.  had  a  surmise,
accidentally  caused,  that  some  arrangements  had  been  made.  A.  died  ;  B.
dreamed  a  vision  of  a  mass  of  details,  all  unknown  to  him,  some  of  which
■were,  while  others  could  not  possibly  be  known  to  A.  The  dream  was
accurate.  These  facts  a  philosopher  of  my  acquaintance  explains  by  saying
that  A.  had  told  B.  the  details,  but  B.  had  not  listened.  The  fact  that  the
details  were  of  the  highest  interest  to  B.,  (who  did  not  listen  to  them),  and
that  the  essential  details  were  unknown  to  any  one  not  omniscient, — lying,  as
they  did,  in  the  future, — makes  no  difference  to  my  friend.  His  explanation
pleases  him  vastly.  We  shall  not  make  much  progress  while  philosophers
insist  on  exfilanations,  and  are  satisfied  with  their  own  conjectures.
My  friend,  to  assist  my  comprehension  of  his  hypothesis  (sub-conscious
knowledge  brought  to  consciousness  in  a  dream),  told  me  the  old  yarn  of  the
servant  girl  who  talked  Hebrew.  I  asked  for  the  evidence  to  the  fact.
There  was  no  evidence  ;  but  then,  said  ray  friend,  "  philosophy  had  only  to
expZam  facts."  There  is  not  much  use  in  explaining  a  fact  which  probably
never  occurred.  There  are  times  when  one  despairs  of  human  reason,  for  if
these  things  are  done  by  professors  of  pliilosophy,  what  must  we  expect
from  the  educated  public  1  The  real  use  of  psychical  research  is  its  value  in
enabling  us  to  understand  the  system  of  paying  ourselves  with  words.  We
may  discover  no  "  psychical  "  laws,  but  we  are  compelled  to  tear  up  a  world
of  prevalent  logical  fallacies.

Andrew  Laxg.


610


James  II.  II  y slop.


[Supplement.


Telepath/y  and  the  Snbliininal  Self.  By  R.  Osgood  Mason,  A.M.,  M.D.,
Fellow  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine,  8vo,  pp.  343.  New
York  :  Henry  Holt  and  Company,  1897.  ..

Psychical  research  still  continues  to  have  its  advocates,  and  they  come
from  a  source  that  is  not  unworthy  of  the  cause.  Dr.  Mason  represents
the  medical  profession,  and  thus  an  interest  that  might  be  more  widely
cultivated  among  his  compeers  could  individuals  declare  their  independence
of  certain  scientific  superstitions  in  tlie  matter.  Physicians  are  specially
well  situated  to  study  exceptional  phenomena, — I  shall  not  say  abnormal, —
like  those  classified  for  psychical  research,  because  they  are  presumably
connected  with  the  conditions  and  opportunities  for  their  occurrence.
Perhaps  this  implies  that  they  are  abnormal  and  thus  unworthy  of  any
other  attention  than  to  be  prevented  by  therapeutics.  This  I  would  not
grant  of  all  of  them,  even  if  it  be  true  of  any  or  a  small  portion  of  them.
But  suppose  that  they  are  to  be  labelled  with  the  suspicion  of  being
pathological,  what  difference  does  this  make  1  Are  they  to  be  discarded  on
that  account,  or  to  pass  under  the  insinuation  that  they  have  no  such  value
as  is  claimed  for  them  simply  because  they  are  associated  with  pathological
conditions  ?  This  can  be  denied,  and  a  most  eflective  case  made  out  for  the
claim  that  many,  if  not  the  most,  of  the  phenomena  sheltered  under  the
name  of  psychical  research  are  connected  with  as  normal  conditions  as  our
customary  thoughts  and  experiences  and  not  more  impugnable  than  they  on
the  ground  of  j)athology.  But  Dr.  Mason  does  not  discuss  this  question,
though  it  would  be  open  to  a  physician,  if  not  obligatory  in  his  situation,  to
thresh  out  this  subject  for  the  satisfaction  of  tliose  who  see  that  no  regard  is
paid  to  the  principles  involved  in  such  a  contention  when  the  diagnosis  of
pathological  cases  depends  uj^on  the  testimony  of  pathological  cases,  and  for
the  discomfiture  of  those  who  would  make  psychiatry  impossible  by  their
assumptions.  I  should  like  to  have  seen  a  physician  like  Dr.  Mason  handle
this  subject  as  it  needs  and  deserves  to  be.  But  he  has  chosen  to  discuss
the  general  phenomena  and  jiroblems  of  psychical  research,  a,s  data  for
profounder  theories  of  j^sychology  than  those  depending  solely  upon  the
more  universal  events  of  experience.

Dr.  Mason  has  covered  the  whole  field  of  psychical  research  in  his
discussion,  and  in  a  much  more  scientific  way  than  most  of  the  popular
treatises  on  such  phenomena  in  the  past,  though  I  shall  have  occasion,  before
concluding,  to  point  out  some  defects  which  the  thorough  scientific  mind
would  remark  in  his  treatment.  But  he  has  gone  briefly  over  the  topics  of
teleimthy  or  thought-transference,  hypnotism,  clairvoyance,  dujalex  person-
ality, natural  somnambulism,  and  dreams,  automatism,  planchette,  automatic
drawing  and  writing,  crystal  gazing,  and  phantasms.  These  constitute
a  rather  large  subject  for  so  small  a  book,  though  the  matter  illustrating
them  is  admirably  abbreviated  :  a  fault  for  science  but  not  for  the  general
reader  who  is  interested  in  conclusions  and  not  in  evidential  details.  Most
of  the  facts  or  alleged  facts  are  taken  from  the  Frocccdiiigs  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  but  some  are  from  Dr.  Mason's  own  experience  and
investigations,  and  liave  also  been  put  on  record  in  a  completer  form  with
the  Society.  The  style  of  treatment  is  fair  and  judicious,  and  governed  by
the  consciousness  of  what  has  to  be  met  in  converting  scientific  minds  to  an


Pait  xxxin


Rtviews.


611


interest  in  the  subject,  even  when  the  author  does  not  supply  the  conditions
for  securing  that  conversion.  There  is  sobriety  in  the  discuwsion  and  balance
of  judgment,  as  all  must  admit  even  when  they  do  not  agree  with  the  author
in  the  sjaeculative  value  attaching  to  the  alleged  facts.  Dr.  Mason  does  not
commit  himself  to  any  theory  of  these  phenomena  except  that  of  telepathy,
if  that  be  called  a  theory,  and  possibly  that  of  clairvoyance,  though  the
distinction  between  cases  that  can  be  explained  by  telepathy  and  those  which
cannot,  but  which  require  clairvoyance,  is  not  as  clearly  stated  as  might  be.
Dr.  Mason  also  makes  a  wide  use  of  automatism  to  explain  cases  which  many
persons  bring  under  the  class  of  spiritualistic  phenomena.  Dr.  Mason  is
loth  to  admit  that  there  are  any  evidences  of  spiritualism  which  absolutely
demand  the  abandonment  of  either  telepathy,  clairvoyance  or  automatism  to
explain  them.  He  does  not  deny  the  possibility  of  that  doctrine  ;  on  the
contrary,  in  the  preface  to  tlie  second  edition  of  the  book,  which  we  are  glad
to  see  has  been  issued,  he  mentions  with  some  gratification  that  some  persons
have  felt  that  the  facts  discussed  furnish  much  evidence  for  survival  after
death,  though  he  protests  that  this  was  not  the  intention  of  the  work.  No
one  could  ask  for  more  caution  in  the  annunciation  and  defence  of  theories.
The  work  is  largely  a  narrative  of  phenomena  alleged  to  be  facts,  with  a
beai'ing  upon  the  problem  of  supernormal  human  faculty.

When  it  comes  to  critical  remarks  upon  Dr.  Mason's  book,  it  is  proper  to
say  that,  in  the  mind  of  the  present  reviewer,  the  work  is  much  superior  to
Hudson's  Law  of  Psychic  Phenomena.  Dr.  Mason  is  far  more  judicious  and
discriminative  in  the  selection  of  cases  for  illustration  and  proof.  He  has
had  a  definite  regard  to  cases  that  are  both  more  pertinent  to  his  problem
and  more  evidential  in  their  origin,  though  it  must  be  confessed  that  the
evidence  for  their  genuineness  is  not  presented  here  in  its  fulness.  But  in
spite  of  this  omission,  which  was  a  concession  to  the  popular  readei*,  the
selection  of  reported  and  original  cases  has  some  reference  to  the  jaroblem  of
evidence,  which  is  not  even  raised  in  Hudson's  book.  The  only  fault  that
can  be  found  is  that,  on  the  one  hand,  this  evidential  feature  is  irot  so  fully
considered  as  science  demands,  and  on  the  other,  the  problems  of  mal-
observation,  illusions  of  memory,  and  coincidental  experiences  have  nob
been  discussed,  as  they  require  to  be  in  this  connection.

For  this  defect  there  is  no  doubt  some  excuse  in  the  fact  that  the

objections  which  tell  against  one  case  often  have  no  weight  against  another.

This  is  to  say  that,  even  if  one  case  like  another  is  defective  in  evidence,

though  still  ijossibly  a  fact,  the  satisfaction  of  this  demand  by  the  second

instance  may  have  the  retroactive  effect  of  proving  the  credibility  of  the

other,  and  hence  it  is  not  enough  to  discredit  a  particular  case. The  whole

collective  bunch  of  them  has  to  be  broken. When  Dr.  Mason  tells  one

story  that  is  borrowed  from  the  narrative  of  some  one  we  do  not  know,  we

maybe  justified  for  a  sceptical  attitude  of  mind,  but  then  he  tells  us  one  or

more  of  his  own  experiences,  perhaps  more  striking  than  the  questioned

case,  and  knowing  Dr.  Mason,  we  wonder  whether  after  all  scepticism  is

anything  more  than  an  excuse  to  remain  in  respectable  company,  or  at  least

in  the  good  opinion  of  those  who  pass  for  that. Dr.  Mason's  book  is  thus

not  without  its  interest  and  weight,  though  we  wish  that  it  had  been  gauged

to  meet  the  severest  tests  of  scientific  method.  t tt  tt

James  H.  Hyslop.


G12


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Supplement


Letters  from  Julia  ;  or.  Light  from  the  Borderland. Edited  by  W.  T.  Stead.
London  :  Grant  Richards,  1897,  pp.  188.

Mr.  W.  T.  Stead,  the  well-known  editor  of  the  Review  of  Reviews,  and,
until  October  last,  of  Borderland,  a  magazine  which  has  now  ceased  to
appear,  has  collected  under  the  above  title  a  scries  of  letters  purporting  to
have  been  written  automatically  through  his  hand  by  a  deceased  lady,  and
dealing  mainly  with  religious  matters  and  with  the  conditions  of  the  life  after
death.  This  is  of  course  a  very  far-reaching  claim,  and  it  will  be  summarily
put  aside  by  most  persons.  Our  Society,  however,  is  bound  not  to  put
such  claims  aside  without  examination  ;  and  inasmuch  as  I  have  dealt  much
with  similar  claims  in  the  cases  of  the  late  Mr.  Stain  ton  Moses,  and  of  Mrs.
Piper, — and  have  also  (in  Proceedings  IX.,  pp.  52-61)  discussed  certain
previous  evidence  offered  l)y  Mr.  Stead  himself,  it  may  be  convenient  that  I
should  say  a  few  words  as  to  this  volume.  In  order  to  make  my  criticism  as
little  personal  as  possible,  I  will  begin  with  some  considerations  applicable
to  all  this  class  of  religious  literature,  claiming  to  be  automatically  produced,
of  which  there  are  now  a  good  many  examples.

There  are  three  separate  points  to  be  considered  in  analysing  any  work  of
this  kind.

(1)  Is  the  book  really  automatic  ?  That  is  to  say,  is  the  alleged  automatist
sincere  and  accurate  in  his  claim  to  have  written  it  without  knowing  what  he
was  writing  ?

(2)  If  so,  does  the  book  contain  what  wo  may  call  moral  evidence, — ■
evidence  of  style  and  general  content, — which  convinces  us,  without  going
further,  that  it  does  not  come  from  some  region  of  the  automatist's  own
mind  ?

(3)  Or,  failing  this,  is  thei-e  definite,  objective  evidence  (as  the
occurrence  in  the  writing  of  facts  presumably  unknown  to  the  writer,  &c.,)
which  obliges  us  to  connect  the  book,  or  any  part  of  it,  with  some
other  mind  1

The  first  two  questions  can  in  this  case  be  answered  easily.

(1)  I,  for  my  part,  fully  believe  in  Mr.  Stead's  sincerity.  I  take  it  on  his
word  that  the  book  was  written  automatically,  and  that  he  believes  ex  animo
that  it  comes  from  a  disembodied  spirit,  and  contains  important  truths.

(2)  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  general  style  and  contents  of  the  book
convey  for  me  no  real  indication  of  origin  external  to  Mr.  Stead's  mind.
They  appear  to  me  to  bear  about  the  same  relation  to  the  style  and  matter,
say,  of  Mrs.  Oliphant's  "Little  Pilgrim  of  the  Unseen"  as  Mr.  Stead's
literary  output  in  general  bears  to  Mrs.  Oliphant's.  When  Mr.  Stead  says,
"I  only  wish  my  conscious  self  could  write  so  well,"  I  think  that  he  pays
either  too  low  a  compliment  to  his  conscious  self  or  too  high  a  compliment  to
"  Julia."

The  contents  of  almost  all  these  automatic  utterances,— through  Stainton
Moses,  Mrs.  Piper,  &c.,  and  also  of  almost  all  the  best  romances  on  such
subjects,-— Mrs.  Oliphant's  stories,  Balzac's  Seraphita,  &c.,  appear  to  me  to
be  more  or  less, — not  necessarily  directly  derived  from  Swedenborg,  but —
analogous  to  Swedenborg.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  Swedenborg's
utterances  convey  much  of  inspired  truth,  and  that  spirit-communicators


Part  XXXIII.]


Reviews.


615


and  romancers  alike  give  much  the  same  messages  simply  because  the  spirits
knoiv  them  to  be  true,  and  the  romancers  ;/i(ess  them  to  be  true.  It  is  also
possible  that  Swedenborg's  own  mind  anticipated  ideas  which,  though  in  hi.s^
time  scouted  as  bizarre  or  impious,  have  in  our  time  become  a  constant
element  in  serious  thouglit.  In  neither  case  can  the  mere  repetition  of
similar  ideas  claim  inspiration  on  moral  or  internal  grounds  alone.

(3)  The  third  point,  then, —  the  objective  evidence  to  authorship  other
than  Mr.  Stead's, — becomes  here  of  high  importance.  My  readers  may,
perhaps,  recall  some  narratives  which  I  quoted  in  our  Proceedings  {loo.  cit.)-
which  seemed  to  offer  goo(\.  prima  facie  evidence  of  a  teleiDathic  coranmnicatioir
between  Mr.  Stead's  and  other  incarnate  minds.  "  Mr.  Stead's  experiments,
indeed"  (I  wrote,  Proceedings  IX.,  p.  60),  "are  so  precisely  confirmatory  of
the  existence  of  a  continuously  active  subliminal  consciousness  in  all  man-
kind that  I  almost  shrink  from  pressing  cases  which  look  as  though  tliey  had
been  constructed  (although  they  most  certainly  were  not)  to  bolster  up  my
own  hypotheses."  I  concluded  with  the  hope  of  being  "able  to  report  furtlier
on  Mr.  Stead's  writings  at  no  distant  date  "  ; — a  hope  in  which  I  was
encouraged  by  some  expressions  of  liis  willingness  to  submit  further  evidence
to  the  S.P.R.  Until  that  evidence  should  come,  I  deferred  any  notice  of
"  Julia."  Mr.  Stead  was,  in  fact,  good  enough  to  show  me  some  evidence  as-
to  another  alleged  spirit  communicator,  but  that  evidence  was  not  convincing
to  me  ; — nor  quite  so,  I  fancy,  to  Mr.  Stead  himself.  When,  therefore,  this-
new  volume  appeared,  I  looked  at  once  for  evidence  re  Julia's  identity  ; —
hoping  to  see  some  matter  thereanent  which  had  appeared  in  BorderUuul
reprinted,  and  much  addition  made  thereto.  I  was  disappointed  to  find  that
such  evidence  was  given  only  with  a  brevity  such  as  that  of  the  following-
assertions,  which  Mr.  Stead  ".states as  facts."  (1)  "  That  strangers  who  have-
never  heard  of  her  existence  have  described  her  as  standing  near  me  when
my  automatic  hand  was  writing."  (2)  "  That  several  of  these  have  not  only-
described  her,  but  have  given  her  name"  {i.e.,  "Julia,"  as  the  next  sentence
shows).  (3)  That  one  here  and  one  in  "  her  native  land  have  also  given  her
surname,  which  I  have  refrained  from  publishing,  and  which  I  have  equally
in  vain  endeavoured  to  telepath  to  the  minds  of  other  mediums."

Now,  considering  the  details  given  in  Mr.  Stead's  first  account  of  "Julia,"
and  the  publicity  of  that  lady's  career,  both  before  and  after  physical
dissolution,  I  feel  that  the  only  inference  which  we  are  entitled  to  draw  from
the  above  facts  is  that  the  mediums  to  whom  Mr.  Stead  "  in  vain  endeavoured
to  telepath  "  her  surname,  must  have  been,  on  that  occasion  at  any  rate,
perfectly  honest  persons.

Mr.  Stead,  however,  it  is  fair  to  say,  does  not  rely  on  these  heads  of
evidence  alone.  The  headings  (2),  (3),  and  (4)  on  page  xi.  of  his  Preface  in-
dicate lines  of  proof  which  might  have  a  real  cogency  if  set  forth  at  length  and
properly  substantiated.  The  automatic  production  of  an  affectionate  private
sobriquet  not  known  to  Mr.  Stead  ; — of  a  definite  incident  also  unknown  to
him  ; — of  various  names  of  friends,  also  unknown  to  liim  ; — these  are  just
the  kind  of  facts  which  we  should  like  to  sec  given  in  full,  and  multiplied  by
continued  in(|uiries  from  the  "control."  Mr.  Stead  says,  indeed,  "It  is
not  necessary  for  me  to  enter  into  a  detailed  statement  of  the  evidence-
which  has  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  these  'Letters  from  Julia,'  are


FranJc  Podmore


[Supplement


really  what  they  jirofess  to  be."  But  I  cannot  see  the  grounds  for  this
abstinence ;  I  cordially  invite  him  to  set  forth  his  evidence — whether
for  i^ublication  or  not — in  a  more  complete  form.  I  make  no  doubt  whatever
tJiat  he  has  acted  in  his  manner  of  publication  of  this  book  with  sincere
-conscientiousness.  But  there  exists  another  point  of  view.  There  are  some
men  who  would  shrink  from  the  resjDonsibility  of  laying  before  the  public  a
series  of  assertions  which,  if  true,  are  so  momentous  as  those  made  by
"  Julia,"  without  at  the  same  time  giving  with  the  utmost  care  and  complete-
ness the  evidence  which  has  led  the  earthly  editor  to  accept  them  as
authentic  and  veritable  messages  from  a  lady  who  has  been  privileged  to
meet  and  speak  with  Jesus  Christ  in  the  spiritual  world.

F.  W.  H.  Myeiis.


The  Subconscious  Self  and  its  Relation  to  Education  and.  Health. By  Louis
Waldstein,  M.D. (London  :  Grant  Richards,  1897,  pp.  171.)

This  is  not  an  easy  book  to  analyse,  or  even  to  read.  It  has  no  index  nor
•table  of  contents,  and  the  chapters,  of  wdiich  there  are  four,  have  neither
heading  nor  summary.  Carlyle  once  said  of  Coleridge's  talk,  that  it  was  of
excellent  quality,  but  that  it  started  from  no  premises  and  arrived  at  no
conclusion.  It  would  not  be  quite  fair  to  apply  this  to  Dr.  Waldstein's
essay,  for  his  statement  of  premises  and  conclusion  is  fairly  definite.  But  it
is  by  no  means  easy  to  trace  the  intermediate  steps  of  the  argument.
Part  of  this  obscurity  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  difficulties  of  a  language  to
which  Dr.  Waldstein  may  be  presumed  to  be  a  foreigner.  But  it  may  be
doubted  whether  in  any  other  tongue  his  reasoning  would  be  found  either
lucid  or  cogent.  His  argument,  summed  up  in  his  own  words,  runs  as
follows  : —

"I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in  this  short  sketch  that  our  mental
personality  is  represented  by  the  sum  of  all  the  impressions  which  have  been
deposited  in  our  memory  during  our  lifetime,  impressions  which  depend
primarily,  as  has  been  indicated  at  the  outset,  upon  peculiarities  of  organic
structure  preformed  in  us.  The  nature  of  all  these  impressions,  however,
differs,  as  has  been  seen,  in  two  well-defined  manners.  The  conscious
impressions,  towards  which  we  learn  gradually  to  direct  our  attention,  form  in
tlieir  aggregate  a  conscious  self,  which  directs  in  its  turn  our  attention  and
our  acts  as  they  affect  principally  our  relation  to  the  outer  world.  Through
the  conscious  self  we  also  control  that  other  part  of  our  self  from  which
emanate  impulses  and  moods,  the  consuming  desire  to  live  our  own  life,  to
realise  our  ideals  irrespective  of  the  relations  which  surround  us.  Hence  it
comes  that  a  dualism  exists  in  the  life  of  every  one  of  us,  more  or  less
accentuated  according  to  the  difference  between  our  conscious  and  our
subconscious  self."

From  these  premises  Dr.  Waldstein  draws  a  practical  deduction  that  the
■due  training  and  subordination  of  tlie  suliconscious  self  in  early  life  is  a  matter
of  the  highest  importance,  and  he  makes  certain  suggestions  for  effecting
this  end. The  practical  part  of  the  book  contains  some  matter  of  value.


Part  XXXin  ]


Reviews.


C15


supplied  by  the  author's  experience  as  a  physician.  But  his  theoretical
conclusions  are  imperfectly  worked  out  and  insufficiently  supported.  He
draws  too  absolute  a  line  between  what  is  conscious  and  what  is  subconscious.
Moreover,  he  does  not  apparently  realise  that  the  content  of  the  subconscious
is  largely  made  up  of  ideas  which  have  lapsed  from  the  conscious  field.  Nor
is  he  at  all  clear  as  to  what  constitutes  a  conscious  impression.  He  asserts
repeatedly  that  the  child's  impressions  are  wholly  of  an  unconscious  kind
"until  comparatively  late  in  life  "  (see,  e.g.,  p.  44),  and  yet  writes  elsewhere
that  "the  eye  of  the  hawk,  the  ear  of  the  horse,  even  the  antenn;"e  of  insects
must  convey  definite  conscious  impressions  to  the  animal  "  (p.  159).  What
manner  of  thing  is  tliis  "consciousness"  which  is  granted  to  the  ant  or
the  beetle,  but  denied  to  the  jDupils  of  a  kindergarten  1  Again,  in  support  of
the  highly  controvertible  statement  that  "in  whatever  degree  or  manner
these  impressions  (conscious  or  unconscious)  are  received  they  are  registered
permanently,"  he  thinks  it  enough  to  say  "that  countless  instances  of  the
reappearance  of  most  feeble  impressions,  coming  up  again  after  many  years,
should  make  further  proof  unnecessary  "  (p.  3).  It  would  be  as  logical  to
claim  the  recent  discoverj'  of  the  Words  of  Jesits  as  a  proof  that  no  ancient
MSS.  have  ever  been  lost  or  destroyed.  A  subsidiary  argument  for  his
position  is  even  less  calculated  to  convince.  "  Impressions  that  have  been
registered  in  early  childhood  reappear  involuntarily,  thus  showing  their
original  tenacity  at  a  period  of  life  when  no  selection  process,  or  reasons  for
remembering  or  forgettinrj,  can  possibly  have  been  at  worli."  Even  if  we  grant
his  postulate  that  there  is  no  conscious  selection  at  an  early  age,  this  statement
is  purely  very  wide  of  the  mark.  Tlie  state  of  the  child's  health,  the  cerebral
state  at  the  moment,  tlie  competition  of  other  impressions,  tlie  likeness  or
unlikeness  of  the  particular  impression  to  others,  all  that  is  comprehended
under  the  term  "association  of  ideas  "  and  many  other  factors  must  operate
subconsciously  to  select  and  differentiate  impressions.

In  brief  the  book  reads  like  a  rough  assortment  of  ill-digested  memoranda  ;
it  is  an  organism  held  together  by  connective  tissue,  in  default  of  a  solid,  well-
articulated  skeleton.  There  are  a  fair  number  of  interesting  illustrations,
and  some  few  acute  observations,  and  if  Dr.  Waldstein  had  taken  the  trouble
to  arrange  and  digest  his  material,  he  might  have  contributed  something  of
solid  value  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Subconscious  Self.  If  he  fails  in  his
present  work  for  the  most  part  either  to  impress  or  convince  us,  it  is  from  no-
lack  of  impressive,  even  ostentatious,  conviction  on  his  own  part.  Throughout
the  book  "I  hold,"  "I  maintain,"  "I  venture  to  assert"  are  made  to  do
duty  for  argument  and  illustration.  He  hints,  indeed,  vaguely  at  vast  stores
of  observation  and  experiment ;  but  the  few  instances  he  quotes  are  quite
insufficient  for  his  purpose.  And  when  he  says  "it  is  clear"  we  feel  that
"it  is  probable  "  would  have  been  a  wiser  and  a  juster  claim.  For  instance : —
"  The /ii/sierica?  condition  ,  .  .  need  not  necessarily  include  any  feebleness  of
the  faculties  for  observation  or  judgment;  they  are,  indeed,  in  many  cases
uncommonly  strong,  but  here  the  subconscious  memory  has  been  unduly
developed.  Such  subjects  are  highly  impressionable,  and  are  governed  by
their  vague  and  powerful  emotional  moods,  so  that  the  mental  reflexes  are
set  going  upon  the  slightest  stimulation,  while  the  inhibiting  power  of  the
■will,  however  much  it  may  be  exerted,  remains  ineffectual. It  is  clear,.


<316


J.  G.  Smith.


[Supplement


therefore,  that  the  first  causes  of  hysteria  must  be  looked  for  in  the  habits
•which  the  mind  was  allowed  to  form  in  early  youth  "  (p.  107).

Is  this  really  "clear"  to  anyone  Vmt  Dr.  Waldstein  ?  are  the  arguments
adduced  such  as  to  make  the  deduction  "clear," — i.e.,  beyond  dispute  1

One  more  illustration  of  the  author's  reasoning  may  be  quoted.  This  is
how  he  refers  to  the  subject  of  telepathy  :—

"  The  experience  of  one  person  in  a  given  moment  might  very  well  be
identical  to  that  of  another,  for  we  are  to-day  subject,  even  at  great  distances,
to  a  multitude  of  similar  inqjressions,  mostly  induced  by  vague  sensations.
The  direct  effect  of  modern  journalism  and  tlie  telegraph  must  necessarily  be
to  set  in  motion  mental  activity  of  precisely  the  same  imture  all  over  the
globe,  and  call  up  much  the  same  interests  and  emotions.  The  uniformity
of  daily  habits,  fashions,  food,  and  the  like,  will  serve  to  awaken  numberless
subconscious  moods,  which  might  suggest,  in  their  turn,  the  same  course  of
ideas.  May  we  not  explain  in  this  way  the  origin  of  some  of  the  phenomena
which  have  been  ascribed  to  telejxdhic  influences  ?"  (pp.  83-4).

This  is  a  forcible  statement  of  the  considerations  wliich  render  telepathy
a  dubious  explanation  of  simultaneous  dreams  and  other  commonplace
impressions.  But,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  one  has  professed  to  found  a  belief  in
telepathy  on  such  occurrences.  And  even  tlie  association  of  ideas  is  limited
in  its  operation  ;  it  could  scarcely,  for  instance,  be  supposed  to  affect  the
drawing  of  a  card,  or  operate  to  produce  the  death  of  the  agent  in  sub
■conscious  correspondence  to  a  hallucination  on  the  part  of  the  percipient.

Frank  Pobmoee.


Tlie  Booh  of  Dreams  and  Gliosts. By  Andrew  Lang. Longmans,  Green,
and  Co.,  1897.

Mr.  Lang  has  certainly  succeeded  in  attaining  the  object  which  he
sought  in  writing  The  Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts,  namely,  "  to  entertain
people  interested  in  the  kind  of  narratives  here  collected."  The  stories
are  written  with  admirable  clearness  and  brevity,  and  the  titles  of  some  of
the  tales  are  alone  sufficient  to  make  the  readers'  flesh  creep  : — "The  Weii'd
Moon,"  "The  Lady  in  Black,"  "The  Old  Family  Coach,"  "The  Assyrian
Priest,"  "The  Foul  Fords;  or,  The  Longformacus  Farrier,"  "The  Black
Dog  and  the  Thumblcss  Hand,"  and  "The  Ghost  that  Bit."  The  simple
sensation-loving  reader  will  perhaps  regret  that  the  series  was  not  published
in  a  magazine,  with  gruesome  illustrations  to  accompany  the  text.  The
author  has  to  a  great  extent  relied  on  well-known  stories  like  Lord  Lyttelton's
Ghost,  Mr.  Williams's  dream  of  the  murder  of  Spencer  Perceval,  etc.,  and
esj)ecially  on  narratives  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.  He  gives,  however,  some  veridical  dreams,  and  some
cases  of  crystal-vision  which  have  not  appeared  before.  Of  the  latter,  one
has  been  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R,  :  the  others  are  given  in  greater
detail  than  here  in  Mr.  Lang's  paper  on  "  Crystal- Vision,"  which  was  read
^it  the  meeting  of  the  Society  on  January  28th,  1898.  Besides  these,  there
is  a  case  of  apparently  veridical  waking  hallucination  (p.  4.5),  told  to  the


Part  XXXIII.]


Reviews.


617


writer  by  his  old  headmaster,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Hodson,  brother  of  Hodson,  of
Hodson's  Horse,  "  a  person  whom  I  never  lieard  make  any  otiier  allusion
to  such  topics  ;  "  and  also  a  "  collective  "  case,  which  we  give  in  Mr.
Lang's  words.

"  The  following  story  was  told  to  myself,  a  few  months  after  the  curious
event,  by  the  three  witnesses  in  the  case.  They  were  connections  of  my
own,  the  father  was  a  clergyman  of  the  Anglican  Church  ;  he,  his  wife,  and
their  daughter,  a  girl  of  twenty,  were  the  percipients.  All  are  cheerful,
sagacious  people,  and  all,  though  they  absolutely  agreed  as  to  the  facts  in
tlieir  experience,  professed  an  utter  disbelief  in  '  ghosts,'  which  the
occurrence  has  not  all'ected  in  any  way.  They  usually  reside  in  a  foreign
city,  where  there  is  a  good  deal  of  English  society.  One  day  they  left
the  town  to  lunch  with  a  young  fellow-countryman,  who  lived  in  a  villa  in
the  neighbourhood.  .  .  .  His  house  was  kept  by  his  sister,  who  was
present,  of  course,  at  the  little  luncheon  party.  During  the  meal  some  ques-
tion was  asked,  or  some  remark  was  made,  to  which  the  clerical  guest  replied
in  English  by  a  reference  to  '  the  maidservant  in  pink.'  '  There  is  no  maid
in  pink,'  said  the  host,  and  he  asked  both  his  other  gue.sts  to  corroborate
him.  Both  ladies,  mother  and  daughter,  were  obliged,  to  say  that,  unless
their  eyes  deceived  them,  tliey  certainly  had  seen  a  girl  in  pink  attending  on
them,  or,  as  least,  moving  about  in  the  room.  To  this  their  entertainers
earnestly  replied  that  no  such  person  was  in  their  establishment,  that  they
had  no  woman  servant  but  the  elderly  cook  and  housekeeper,  then  present,
who  was  neither  a  girl  nor  in  pink.  After  luncheon  the  guests  were  taken
all  over  the  house  to  convince  them  of  the  absence  of  the  young  woman
whom  they  had  seen,  and  assuredly  there  was  no  trace  of  her.  On  returning
to  the  town  where  they  reside,  they  casually  mentioned  the  circumstance  as
a  curious  illusion.  The  person  to  whom  they  spoke  said,  with  some  interest,
'  Don't  you  know  that  a  girl  is  said  to  have  been  murdered  in  that  house
before  your  friends  took  it,  and  that  she  is  reported  to  be  occasionally  seen,
dressed  in  pink  ? '  They  had  heard  of  no  such  matter,  but  tlie  story
seemed  to  be  pretty  generally  known,  tliough  naturally  disliked  by  the  occu-
pant of  the  house.  As  for  the  percipients,  they  each  and  all  remain  firm
in  the  belief  that,  till  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  her  presence,  they
were  certain  they  had  seen  a  girl  in  pink,  and  rather  a  pretty  girl,  whose
appearance  suggested  nothing  out  of  the  common."

Moreover,  in  several  well-known  historical  cases,  Mr.  Lang  has  carefully
investigated  the  diEFerent  versions,  and  gives  evidence  for  their  various
degrees  of  authenticity.  Li  one  case, — that  of  the  foretelling  of  the  death
of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  by  the  apparition  of  his  father, — the  narrative
of  a  Mr.  Wyndham,  who  had  the  story  direct  from  the  percipient,  a  kinsman
of  his  own,  is  given  ;  this  has  never  before  been  jjublished.

Mr.  Lang  has  also  discovered  a  curious  fact  in  connection  with  the
murder  of  Mr.  Perceval,  about  which  Mr.  Williams  had  his  well-known
premonitory  dream  in  1812,  namely  that  there  was  a  report  of  the  murder  in
Bude  Kirk,  a  village  near  Annan,  on  Sunday,  May  10th,  the  day  before  the
crime  was  committed.  "This  was  stated  in  the  Dumfries  and  Galloway
Courier,  and  copied  in  the  Times  of  May  25th.  On  May  28th,  the  Perth
Courier  quotes  the  Dumfries  paper,  and  adds  that  '  the  Rev.  Mr.  Yorstoun


618


J.  G.  Smith.


[Supplement.


minister  of  Hoddam  (ob.  1833),  has  visited  Bude  Kirk  and  has  obtained  the
most  satisfactory  proof  of  the  rumour  having  existed '  on  May  10th,  but  the
rumour  cannot  be  traced  to  its  sovu'ce."

Mr.  Lang  does  not  profess  a  severely  scientific  treatment  of  tlie  subject,
but  several  of  his  remarks  on  evidence  are  instructive,  and  he  gives  some
quotations  from  Professor  William  James'  Principles  of  Psychology  fgr  tlie
purpose  of  explaining  the  meaning  of  "hallucination"  in  its  technical
sense.  His  only  system  of  tacking  the  stories  together  is  by  classing  them
"in  different  grades,  as  they  advance  from  the  normal  and  familiar  to  tlie
undeniably  startling  ; "  and  this  plan  does  not  seem  to  be  very  strictly
adhered  to  ;  since  to  the  last  story  of  all,  "  The  Ghost  that  Bit,"  a  footnote
is  appended  to  explain  that  "this  story  should  come  under  the  head  of
'  Common  Death-Bed  Wraiths,'  but  it  is  such  an  uncommon  one  !  "

To  some  members  of  our  Society  the  book  will  probably  appear  to  be
written  in  a  frivolous  and  dilettante  spirit.  And  no  doubt  the  journalist,
the  ordinary  reader,  the  man  in  the  street,  when  he  finds  story  after  story
quoted  from  the  publications  of  the  S.P.R. ,  will  take  occasion  to  have  his
usual  laugh  at  the  expense  of  a  Society  which  amuses  itself  with  collecting
blood-curdling  ghost  stories,  and  expects  to  be  taken  seriously.  But  unless
he  is  a  very  dull  journalist,  or  a  very  careless  reader,  he  will  perceive  that
Mr.  Lang's  levity  is  at  any  rate  impartial  and  comprehensive,  and  that  he
intends  the  laugh  to  go  round,  holding  that  fun  may  be  as  legitimately
derived  from  the  "fallacies  which  impose  on  the  credulity  of  common-sense,"
as  from  the  rash  conclusions  of  dreamers  and  ghost-hunters.  In  the  preface
he  says  :  "This  book  does  not  pretend  to  be  a  convincing,  but  merely  an
illustrative  collection  of  evidence.  It  may,  or  may  not,  suggest  to  soma
readers  the  desirableness  of  further  inquiry  ;  and  the  author  does  not  hope
to  do  more,  if  as  much."  Let  us  hope  that  this  modest  aspiration  will  be
realised.

J.  G.  Smith.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


619


EDMUND  GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1897.


Additioyis  since  the  list  in  ^'Proceedings,"  Vol.  XII.


Dailey  (Abram  H.),  Slollie  Fancher,  the  BrooklJ^l  Enigma.  An
Authentic  Statement  of  Facts  in  the  Life  of  Mary  J.  Fancher.

Brooklyn,  1894

Dee  (Dr.  John),  On  Spirits, \yith  a  Preface  by  M.  Casaubon,  D.D.

London,  1659

James  (William),  The  Will  to  Believe,  and  other  Essays  in  Popular

Philosophy  Neiv  York,  1897

Mason  (R.  Osgood,  M.D.),  Telepathy  and the Subliminal  Self

London,  1897

Pakish  (Edmund),  Hallucinations  and  Illusions. A  Study  of  the

Fallacies  of  Perception  London,  1897

PoDMOKE  (Frank,  M.A.),  Studies  in  Psychical  Research  London,  1897

Raymond  (Rossiter,  W.),  Tiie  Divining  Rod. (Transactions  of  the

American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers,  ISSJ) 1883

Scripture  (E.  W.,  Ph.D.),  The  New  Psychology  London,  1897

Waldstein  (Louis,  M.D.),  The  Sub-conscious  Self  audits  Relation

to  Education  and  Health  London,  1897

"Woods  (John  F.,  M.D.),  The  Treatment  by  Suggestion,  with  and
without  Hypnosis.  (Reprinted  from  the  Journal  of  Mentcd
Science,  April  1897.)  London,  1897


Carrie  (L'Abbe),  Hydroscopographie  et  Metalloscopographie,  ou  I'art

de  decouvrir  les  eaux  souterrames  Saintes,  1863

Chauvin (Dr.), [The Original  Report  on  Jacques Aymar.]  Le

Journcd  des  S^avans,  January,  1693 Paris,  1693

Figuier  (Louis),  Histoii'e  du  Marveilleux. 4  Vols  Paris,  1881-89

Laurent  (Dr.  L.),  Des  Etats  Seconds,  Variations  Pathologiques  du

Champ  de  la  Conscience  Paris,  1892

Lebrun  (Le  Pere,  S.J.), Lettres  qui decouvrent I'lllusion  des

Philosophes  sur  la  Baguette  Paris,  1693

  Histoire  Critique  des  Pratiques  Superstitieuses  Paris,  1702

Parasielle  (L'Abbe),  L'Art  de  decouvrir  les  Sources.  [New  Edition.]

Paris,  1896

Essay  on  Hydro.'^copie (about  I'Abbe  Paramelle),  Journal
d' Agriculture  Pratique,  April,  181.5  Paris,  1845


620


Edmund  Guraey  Library,


Thouvenel  (Dr.),  Memoire  Physique  et  Medicinal . . . de  la

Baguette  Divinatoire  Paris,  1781

Vallemont  (L'Abbe  de),  La  Physique  Occulte,  ou  Traite  de  la

Baguette  Divinatoire  Amsterdam,  1693


Albinus  (Tlieophilus),  Das  entlarvete  Idolum  der  Wiinschel-ruthe

Dresden,  1704

Benedikt  (Prof.  Dr.  Moritz),  Hyjmotismus  und  Suggestion... Leipzig,  1894

Du  Prel  (Carl),  Die  Wiinschel-ruthe  circ.  1890

Hansen  (F.  C.  C.  und  A.  Lehmann),  Ueber  unwillliiirliche
Fliistern  ;  eine  kritische  und  experiraentalische  Untersuchung
der Sogenannten Gedanken-uebertragung. (Reprinted  from

VVundt's  Philosophische  Studien,  XL,  4.)  Leipzig,  1897

WiLLEN  (Matthew),  Die  Wiinschel-ruthe.  Together  with  a  German
translation  of  Abbe  de  Vallemont's  Physica  Occulta.  Illustrated

Nuremberg,  1694


Sementini  (L.),  Pensieri  e  Sperimenti  sulla  Bacclieta  Divinatoria

Naples,  1810


ViRGULA  Metallica  (Dc),  Mescellania  Curiosa. Academias  Csesaro-

Leopoldinfe Frankfort,  1697


A  full  Catalogue  of  the  hoolis  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  was  printed
fit  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Siipplementanj  Catalogues  were
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,  X.,  XI.,  and  XII.
Separate  copies  of  these  Catalogues  are  still  o«i  hand,  and  ca?i  be  obtained
from  the  Secretary.


Officers  and  Council  for  ISOS.


621


FORMER  PRESIDENTS.


Professor  H.  Sidgwick - - .  .
Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.
Professor  H.  Sidgwick - - -  .
Eight  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Professor  William  James  (Harvard,  U.S.A.)
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.  - -  -


1882-1884.
1885-1887.
1888-1892.-
1893.

1894-1895.
1896-1897.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1898.

PRESIDENT.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.


The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,
M.P.,  F.R.S.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.E.

The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.

Professor  William  James,  Har-
vard, U.S.A.


Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithson-
ian Institution, Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of

RiPON.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


COUNCIL.


The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.

A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.

J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.

The  Earl  of  Cr.wford  and  Bal-

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
St.  George  Lane  Fox.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.
Mr.  Registrar  Hood.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
ProfessorMacalister,M.D., F.R.S.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


Frank  Podmore.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

George  F.  Rogers,  M.D.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.

H.  Arthur  Siniith.

H.  Babington  Smith,  C.S.L

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Sir  Augustus  K.  Stephenson,

K.C.B.,  Q.C.
Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
J.  Venn,  D.  Sc.,  F.R.S.
Abraham  Wallace,  M.D.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  Queen's  Mansions,  Broolc  Green,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARY.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

ACTING-SECRETARY  FOR  THE  UNITED  STATES.
Miss  Edmunds,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelplii,  London,  W.C.

2  s  2


622


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

{Febrmmj,  1898.)


PRESIDENT.
Sir  William Crookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S. ,  1,  Carlton  gardens,  S.W.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Sfcaart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Sraibhsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigii,  F.R,.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Esse.-c.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  PvIpon,  The  Palace,  Ripon,
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S. ,7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  Hawarden  Castle,  Gliester.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantsvood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.
Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  ISTevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Prof.  H.  Bkauxis,  Villa  Josejjhine,  Boute  d'xlntibes,  Cannes,  France..
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge^
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A..

Dr.  Darihx,  G,  Pi.ue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  27,  Krithener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A..

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartm.vnn,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.

Professor  Piurre  Janet,  22,  Rue  de  Bellechasse,  Paris.

Dr.  a.  a.  Lieseault,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


623


Peofessor  E.  C.  Pickerixg,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.
Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  PJiilosopliique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  T  Universite,  Paris.
Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr.  Freiherr  vox  ScHRENCK-iSToTzisG,  2,  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

De.  H.  de  Varignt,  7,  Rue  de  Sfax,  Paris.

Professor  N".  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.

De.  Otto  C  Wetteestrantd,  Stockholm.

Dr.  G.  0.  WiTTiG,  22,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.

MEMBERS,  HOI^ORARY  ASSOCIATES,  AND  ASSOCIATES

Names  of  2Iembers  are  ]orinted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  hy  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  are  j^rinted  in  Small  Capitals.

Adair,  Desmoid,  Bank  of  England,  Plymouth.
AoAiis,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  Hexrt,  Heathcote,  Christ  church,  New  Zealand.

Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchesber.

Allex,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  83,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.

Amery,  W.  C,  34a,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.

Ahgles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.  .

Arxott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.

Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.

Astley,  ]Miss,  3,  Halkin-place,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.

Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.

Bacle,  E.,  57,  Rue  de  Chateaudun,  Paris.

Badelier,  EiiiLE,  Ptangoon,  British  Burmah.

Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  23,  Lower  Phillimore-place,  Kensington,  W.
Baines,  Miss  W.,  Kames  Cottage,  Port  Bannatyne,  Bute,  N.B.
Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  47,  Russell-road,  West  Kensington,  W,
Baker,  Edmond  G.,  High  View,  Shooters-hill,  Kent.
Baker,  Miss  Morrint,  Boston  Lodge,  Harvai-d-rd.,  Gunnersbury,  S.W.
Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  A.  J., M.  P. ,  F. R. S.,  4,  Carlton-gdns.,  S.  W.
Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  G.W.,  M.P.,  24,  Addison-road,  London, W.
Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardeas,  London,  S.W.
Ballard,  Rev.  F.,  M.A,  B.Sc,  Morschach,  Anlaby-road,  Hull.
Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Barclay,  Rev.  Chas. AY.,  M.A.jTheYicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
Barkly,  Mrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  near  London.
Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.  P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  co.  Dublin.


C24


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Barlow,  Colonel  W.  R.,  56,  Penywern-road,  London,  S.W.
Barrett,  Ashley  W.,  M.B.,  7,  Cavendish  pLace,  Cavendish-square, W.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  GlengaritF,  co.  Cork.
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  1,  Connaught-

street,  London,  W.
Bates,  Mlss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  The  College,  Eastbourne.
Beatty,  OcTAVius,  Fairholt,  Merton-hall-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.
Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redclitfe-sq.,  S.W.
Bective,  The  Countess  of,  Barnacre  Lodge,  Garstang.
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterfield-gai-dens,  London,  W.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bell,  Ma.tor  Wm.  Morrison,  Thor,  Birchington,  Tlianet,  Kent.
Bellasis,  ]\L\jor  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  M.A.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.
Benson,  Mrs.,  9,  St.  Thomas-street,  Winchester.
Benson,  Miss  Annette  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay.
Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.Vv^
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  .32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.
Bernard,  John,  Captain,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "Nelson,"  Portsmouth.
Berry,Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson, M.D., 60, Welbeck-st.,Cavendish-sq.,AV.
Bevan,  Miss  N".  H.,  Clialet  Passiilora,  Cannes,  France.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W,
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bickford-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,  Endyraion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W.
Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Bidder,  Mrs.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
BiDDULPH,  The  Lady  Elizaeeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.
BiELBY,  Horace  C.  V.,  67,  Lord-street,  Liverpool,  W.
Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  Lyndhurst,  Luton.  .  -

BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
BiRRELL,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Lansdowne-road,  Worthmg.
Blackburn,  Ernest  M.,  38,  Egerton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  IM.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.
Blackwood,  Mrs.,  N(.)rton  Court,  Sittingbourne,  Kent.
Blakelock,  Rev.  R.,  M.A.,  Horbury  Bridge  Vicarage,  Wakefield.
Blatch,  Miss  Alice,  34,  Blandford-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


625


Bois,  Henry  Gordox,  c/o  J.  M.  Robertson  and  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.

Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  W.

BoLDERO,  Lieut. -General  G.  IST.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.

BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.

Bolton,  Miss  A.  J.,  B.A.  (IST. Z.),  Hillside,  Bourton-road,  Buckingham.

BooRNE,  Herbert  H.,  9a,  Sackville  street,  Piccadilly,  London,  "W.

BosANQUET,  Mrs.  O.  V.,  52,  Queen's-gate,  London,  S.W.

BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Airel  (Manche),  France.

Boswell-Stone,  Miss  E.  L.,  Dayrells,  47,  Wickliam-road,  Beckenham.

Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.

BouLNOis,  H.  Percy,  M.Inst.O.E.,  7,  Devonshire-road,  Liverpool.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  at  Carey's,  Brockenhurst.

BowELL,  Ernest  W.  W.,  Sissinghurst  Vicarage,  Cranbrook,  Kent.

BowNESS,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Bramston,  Miss  A.  E,.,  Witham-close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Suntrap,  Radcliffe-road,  Croydon.

Bramwell,  John  M.,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square, W.

Brandretii,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Weybi-idge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.

Briggs,  Mrs.,  Welbury  Drive,  Bradford.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  126,  Kennington  Park-road,  London,  S.E.
Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  Villa  Raffo  Bogliasco,  near
Genoa.

Brooke,  Col.  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A.,  M.A.,  1,  Manchester-square,  London,  W
Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  26,  Carisbrooke-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidston,  Alleyn-road,  West  Dulwich,  S.E.
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryant,  A.  C,  B.A.,  2,  Langham-road,  West  Green,  London,  N.

Bryant,  Captain  G.  E.,  R.A.,  c/o  J.  M.  Edwards,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill- square,  W.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.A.,  9,  Upper  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

BuLLEY,  Mrs.  Arthur,  West  Kirby,  near  Birkenhead.

Bullock,  Mrs.,  St.  Margaret's,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

BuLMER,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York.

Bunshaw,  N.F.,  Med.  Off.,  B.G.  J.P.  Rail  way,  Ghadechi,  Kathiawar,  India.

Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.


626


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Burton,  Mrs.,  Logner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

EuRY,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow-ou-the-Hill.

Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.

Butt,  Lady,  17,  Viale  P^^^-  Margherita,  Florence,  Italy.

BuTTEMER,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.

Caillard,  Sir  Vincent,  Constantinople.

Caillard,  Miss,  Wingiield  House,  near  Trowbridge,  Wiltshire.

Caldecott,  Rev.  Professor  Alfred,  M.A.,  Lopham  Rectory,  Thetford.

Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Nortonbury  House,  Tewkesbury.

Cameron,  George  Fenton,  M.D.,  J.P.,  34,  Guil£ord-st.,  London,  W.O.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  N.B.

Campbell,  Colin  E.,  B.A.,  22,  Market  Hill,  Cambridge.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37,  Commercial-road  East,  London,  E,

Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.

Carbery,  William  E.,  21,  Eldon-road,  Kensington,  W.

Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Greywell  Hill,  Winchfield.

*Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-i'oad,  Aston,  Birmingham.

Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.

Carnegie,  Lady  Helena,  Kinnaird  Castle,  Brecliin,  N.B.

Carter,  Mrs.  L.  Brudenell,  Kenilworth,  Clapham  Common,  S.W.

Catiiels,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  KB.

Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  Binsted,  Cambridge.

Cave-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W,

Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.

CiiASE,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  ApoUo-street,  Bombay.
Ohattock,  Professor  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Ciiichele-Plowden, Trevor, C.S.I., The Residency,  Hyderabad,

Deccan,  India.
Chichester,  Miss  May,  Wotton  Rectory,  Dorking.
Childers,  Miss  F.  L,  46,  Gunter's-grove,  London,  S.Y/.
Clark,  W.  W.,  Denehurst,  Dorking.
Clark,  Miss,  Suffield  Park,  Cromer.
Clarke,  Francis,  17,  Hoi'nsey  Rise  Gardens,  London,
Clarke,  J.  F.  Howard,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.,(Eng.)  105,  AVardour-street,  W.
Clarke,  John  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-street,  London,  W.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  RedhiU.
Clarke,  The  Rev.  Father  R.  F.,  S..L,  40,  St.  Giles,  Oxford.
Clarke,  Rev.  W.  J.,  186,  Bristol-road,  Birmingham.
Clayton,  Charles  E.,  152,  North-street,  Brighton,
Clemens,  S.  L.  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.  .


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


627


Cleveland,  The  Duchess  of,  18,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  S.W.
Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Fawley  Lodge,  Lansdown-road,  Cheltenham.
Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.

Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
CoATES,  Andrew,  Pitcullen  House,  Perth,  JST.B.

Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  9-i,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
CoGHiLL,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Cosheen,  Castle  Townshend,  co.  Cork.
CoLEGRANE,  Mrs.  E  ,  Bracebridge,  Norwood,  S.E.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
COLLINGWOOD,  Miss  A.  M.,  5,  Addison-mansions,  West  Kensington,  W.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
CoLLisoN,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  17b,  Great  Cumberland-place,  London,  W.
CoLTHURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CoLviLE,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-sqnare,  S.W.
CoJiPTON,  Lady  Alwyne,  7,  Balfour-place,  London,  W.
CoONEY,  Rev.  SteWiVRT  E.,  M.A.,  28,  Donegall-passage,  Belfast.
Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  Churchills,  Caterham  Valley,  Surrey.
Cotterell,  James,  140,  Earlslield-road,  Wandsworth  Common,  S.W.
CoRT  van  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  W.A.,  6,  Swimame-st.,  The  Hague.
Cousens,  Charles  H.,  Star  Chambers,  30,  Moorgate-st.,  London,  E.G.
Cousens,  John  S.,  Wanstead,  Essex.

Cowan,  William  H.,  11,  Malborough-road,  Bournemouth.
CowPER,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  Grosvenor  Plotel,  London,  S.W.
Crackanthorpe,  Mrs.,  65,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Caven-
dish-square, London,  W.
Crawford,  F.  Marion, Villa  Crawford,  Sant' Agnello  di  Sorrento,  Italy.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Colinton-road,  Edinburgh.
Crawley,  Mrs.  Chas.,  97,  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-squai-e,  London,  W.
Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rua  24  de  JuUio,  No.  12,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Crewdson,  Miss  Gwendolen,  The  Barons,  Reigate.
Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  29,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.
Crooks,  Miss,  Kensington,  South  Australia.

Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  10,  Jeffrey's-square,  St.  Mary  Axe,  London,  E.C.
Cruise,  Sir  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  W.,  Dublin.
Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,  The  Chestnuts,  St.  Margaret's,  Twickenham.
Cunningham,  G.,D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.  A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge.
CuRRiE,  Andrew  S.,  M.D.,  81,  Queen's  Road,  Fiusbury  Park,  N.
Currie,  Mrs.,  Warders,  Tonbridge,  Kent.
Gushing,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  4,  Rue  Chalgrin,  Paris.
D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120  Rue  de  Bac,  Paris.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M. A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  IIG,  King  Henry's-rd.,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.


628


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Damania,  Surgeon-Major,  P.  ].,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.
Danvicrs,  Mrs.,  4,  Cranley  Mansion,  Gloucester-road,  S.W.
Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenham.
Darley,  Lady,  Quanibi,  Woollohra,  'New  South  Wales.
Dartnell,  George  E.,  Abbottsfielcl,  Stratford-road,  Salisbui-y.
Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.
Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  M.B.C.M.  (Aberdeen),  76,  Portland-place,  W
Davies,  Benjamin,  26,  Moscow  Drive,  Liverpool.

Davis,  A. E.,  F.B.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.I.,  20,  Great  George-sq., Liverpool.

Davis,  Joseph  T.,  Holly  Bush,  Snaresbrook,  Essex.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Gatefield,  Clarendon-road,  Lewisham,  S.E.

Davison,  Miss  Annie,  1,  Stanford-road,  Kensington,  W.

De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.  •

Delouest,  Edward,  Ocala,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Dem,  John,  Walsingham,  Chislehurst.

*Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
De  Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid,  67,  Cadogan-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.
DiCKSEE,  Frank,  A.Pt.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dixon,  Edward  T.,  4,  Cranmer-road,  Cambridge.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  East  Park  Parade,  Northampton.
Dixon,  Prof.  W.  Macneile,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Litt.  D.,  Mason  College,
Birmingham.

DoBBiE,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Dodge,  Miss  Mary  M.  H.,  39,  Bromptou-square,  London,  S.W.

Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.

DouGALL,  Miss  Lily,  463,  Elm-avenue,  Westmount,  Montreal,  Canada.

Douglas,  Rev.Dr.  G.W., 23 9, Whitney -a venue, Newhaven,Oonn.,U.S.A.

Doveton,  F.  B.,  Eastcliffe,  Babbacombe,  South  Devon.

DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.L,  91,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Duke,  Thomas,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  33,  Bilton-road,  Rugby.

Dulley,  PtEV.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.

Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom-road,  Guildford.

Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  11,  Half-Moon-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

DuTT,  Pt.  C,  CLE.,  Burdwan,  Bengal,  India.

Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  (Retired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  11,  Chepstow-villas,

Bayswater,  London,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Devonia,  St.  Andrew's-road,  Henley-on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Alma  Lodge,  The  Mount,  York.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


629


Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Elder,  Mrs.,  38,  Hyde  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.

Elliot,  Gilbert,  10,  Hanover-sqnare,  London,  W.

Elliot,  Mrs.  Minto,  7,  George-street,  Hanover-scjuare,  "W.

Elliot,  Miss,  Sandecotes,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.D.,  Calcutta.

Elliott,  Rev.  W.  A.,  54,  Kirkgate,  Shipley,  Yorkshire.

Ellis,  Mrs.  Robert,  4,  Rylett-road,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  IL,  M.A.,  The  Vicarage,  Windsor.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  3,  Palace  Mansions,  Addison  Bridge,  W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Encombe,  Viscount,  Bachelor's  Club,  8,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.

Eno,  J,  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermacora,  Dr.  G.  B,,  Padua,  Italy.

Ermen,  Walter  F.  A.,  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge.

Esterhazy,  Count  Michael,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.

Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Eagan,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  48,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pamp-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Institute  Tecnik,  Alessandria.

Farrer,  The  Lady,  Abinger  Hall,  Dorking.

Fawssett  Thomas,  97,Philbeach-gardens,  Earl's-court,  London,  S.W.

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5,  John-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Feilding,  The  Lady  Louisa,  Broome  Park,  Betchworth,  Surrey.

Field,  Allan  B.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Field,  E.  M.,  M.A.,  Cotswold,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N.

Finch,H.Wynne,Junr.,M.  A.,TheManorHouse,Stokesley,R.S.O.,York3.

*FiNzi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.

Fisher,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  24,  Duke's-avenue,  Chiswick,  near  London.

Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.

FitzGerald,DesmondG.,M.S.T.E.,94,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W.

Fletcher,  Mrs.  K.  R.,  The  Orchard,  Buckland,  near  Betchworth,  Surrey.

Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redcliffe- square,  Soutli  Kensington,  S.W.

Flouknoy,  Professor  Th.,  Tlie  University,  Geneva.

Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  Mandeville-place,  London,  W.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Gavell  House,  Kilsyth,  N.B.

Fox,  St.  Georg-e  Lane,"Traveller's  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.

Fraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Bellary,  Madras  Presidency.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  G,  Belgrave  Mansions, Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.

Freemann,  PtEV.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  1,  Soho-square,  London,  W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  41,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-v.ale,  London,  W.
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  11,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.
*Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.


■630


Lid  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


FaRNfivALL,  Percy,  34,  Adelaide-road,  London,  jST.W.
Galloway,  The  Countess  of,  17,  Upper  Grosvenor-street,  W.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Long  Wittenham,  Abingdon.
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-squai-e,  W.
Garet-Ciiarles,  Georges,  The  Nook,  Titchfield-rd.,  Regeut's-pk.,  N.W.
Garner,  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.
Garth,  Henry,  IM.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  4,  Harringfcon-streefc,  Calcutta.
Gernet,  Miss  Nina,  Basseynaya,  33,  Lodg.4,  Sfc.  Petersbui'g.
Ghose,  N.  N.,  the  Indian  Nation  Office,  43,  Baiicharam  UnkoorVlane,
Calcutta.

Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Russia.
*Glardon,  Rev.  Augusts,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.
Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.
GodfreYjMrs.,  c/o  Col.  C.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.
GooDHART,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  RI.A.,  Lambourae  Rectory,  Ptoniford.
GooDiER,  Miss  B.  M.,  Seighford  House,  Hardwick-square,  Buxton.
*Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  27,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  W.
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

Gover,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.
GovETT,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  Gibraltar.
GovETT,  F.  Molyneux,  Veytaux,  Canton  de  Vaud,  Switzerland.
Gow,  William,  184,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.
Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.
Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
GRAY,EDWARDW.,SuRGEON-CAPTAiN,c/oMessrs.Holt,  17,  Whitehall, S.W.
Green,  C.  T.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.
Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn-
Greener,  V\/.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.
Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A,,  Cottenham  Rector}',  Cambridge.
Greville,  Miss  C.  C,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.
Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.
Griffiths,  Joseph,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.,  4,  Kings' -parade,  Cambridge.
Grignon,  R.EV.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essendon,  Hatfield,  Herts.
Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.
■*Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  5,  22,  Crosby-road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Shallow,  Ongar,  Essex.
Grunbaum,  O.  F.  F.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.

Gunton,  Rev.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.
Gunton,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magd;)]ene  College,  Cambridge.
Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas'  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  S.W.
GuRNEY,  Rev.  F.,  M. A.,  St.  John's  Cottage,  BoveyTracey,  Newton  Abbot.
PLvcKETT,  James  T.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


631


Haggard,  John  G.,  H.B.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria.
Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.
Hailey,  Alfred  J.,  26,  Bruce-road,  Willesden,  N.W.
Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  3,  Pitt-street,  Campden  Hill,  W.
Hall,  AVilfred,  Dilston  Hal!,  Corbrids^e-on-Tyne.
Hall,  Mrs.,  3,  St.  Alban's-road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Hall,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton.

Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  E.owan,  Kil]}deagh  Castle,  co.  Down,  Ireland.
Hamilton,  W.  Stirling,  Woodgaters,  Horsham.
Hannah,  Robert,  82,  Addison-road,  Kensington,  W.
Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorcliester.
Harding,  G.  Palmer,  Trouville,  France.

Hargrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Larches,  Heaton  Mersey,  Manchester.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southport.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  R^ev.  Chas.,M.  A.,The  Institute,  Mansfield-st.,  Haggerston,  IST.E.

Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  Hanover  House,  St.  Peter's-road,  Bournemouth.

Harris,  Mrs.  Leverton,  4,  Green-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Dawns,  Hartley,

near  Longfield,  Kent.
Hartshorn,  Miss  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Sliipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.C.
Harvey,  Alfred  S.,  Hurstbourne,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N.
*Haslam,  Prof.  F.  W.,  M.A.,  Canterbury  College,  Christchurch,  New

Zealand.

Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Crom well-road,  S.W.

Haweis,  Miss,  127,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.

Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Hay'ward,  Miss  Grace  G.,  25,  St.  George's  Road,  Kilburn,  N.W.

Heard,  Richard,  37,  York-place,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Heath,  Mrs,  Cuthbert,  47,  Portman-square,  London,  AV.

Hebert,  p.  Z.,  M.D.,  L.R.C.P.,  16a,  Old  Cavendish-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.

Hehner,  Mrs.  Otto,  Woodside  House,  Woodside,  South  Norwood,  S.E.

Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  AVatford  Court,  Rugby.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Ai^gyll- villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  AV.C.
Hewetson,H.Bendelack,  F.L.S.,  M.R.C.S.,ll,Hanover-sq.,Leeds-
Higpord,  Miss  Katharine,  23,  Eaton-place,  London,  S.AV.
Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.
Hildyard,  F.  AV.,  The  Shuttleworth  Club,  Fye  Foot-lane,  Queen  Victoria-
street,  E.C.

Hill,  Clement  Hugh.  63,  Church-road,  St.  Leonard.s-on-Sea.


G32  List  of  Memhers  and  Associates,


Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.
Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.
HiNE,  Thosias  C,  25,  Regent-street,  Nottingham.
HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Sehvoocl  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  36,  Great  Ormond-street,  London,  "W.C.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C,  2,  Busby-place,  Camden-road,  N.W.
Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  M.P.,  B.A.,  58,  Conduit-street,  W.
Holland,  jMrs.,  Villa  Eliva,  Bogliasco,  Riviera  di  Levante.
Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Hollander,  Bernard,  L.R.C.P.,  61,  Chancery-lane,  London,  W.O.
HoLLiNS,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  77,  Park-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  Wonhaui,  Dampton,  Devon.
HoLSTEiN,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hood,  Mrs.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.C.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,  W.
Hooper,  Mrs.  Pitman,  5,  Endsleigh-street,  Tavistock-square,  W.C.
HoPKiNsoN,  Prof.  Alfred,M.A.,B.C.L.,  The  Lodge,  32,  Heme  I-Iill,  S.E.
Hopps,  John  Page,  Oak  Tree  House,  South  Norwood  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Horne,  Alderson  B.,  Ditton-place,  Balcombe,  Sussex.
HoRRACK,  Philip  J.  de,  4,  Rue  du  General  Foy,  Paris.
Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penrith.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.
Ho\VELL,  Alexander,  109,  High-street,  Portsmouth.
Huddleston,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hudson,  Norman  W.,  B.A.,  Pebble  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterham
Valley,  Surrey.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  The  Pines, Worcester  Pk., Surrey.

HuMFREY,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.

Hunter,  Thomas,  Elmhurst,  Hillmorton-road,  Rugby.

HuTCHiNS,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town.

Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Brooklands  House,  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Hutchinson,  William  B.,  C.E.,  F.R.A.S,  &c.,  Southport,  Lancashire.

Hyslop,  Dr.,  Bethlem  Hospital,  London,  S.E.

Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Innes,  Lady,  Winslow,  Dai-ling  Point,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.

Ireland,  Wm.  W.,  M.D.  (Edin.),  Mavisbush,  Polton,  Midlothian,  N.B.

Isaachsen,  Rev.  Thorveld  E.,  44,  Boompjes,  Rotterdam.

Jackson,  Rev.  F.,  The  Vicarage,  Newton-upon-RawclifFe,  Pickering.

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  633


Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,  S.  Hilda's  School,  Clifton-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  M.  A.,  Villa  degli  Angoli  Fiesole,  Florence

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotlierham.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Overton,  Lansdowne-road,  Bournemouth.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyfi  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.

*Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energiyn,  38,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.

Jevons,  F.  B.,  Litt.  D.,  Hatfield  Hall,  Durham.

Jessdp,  a.  E.  jVilla  St.  Dominique,  Valescure,  St.  Raphael,  ( Var),  Franca
Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.
Johnes,  Mrs.,  Dolaucothy,  Llanwrda  R.S.O.,  South  Wales.
J OHNSOX,  Miss  Alice,  LlandafF  House,  Cambridge.
Johnson,  Rev.  WATLAND,LL.D.,Fredon,  Sussex  Co.,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  The  Writer's  Club,  Hastings  House,  Norfolk-
street,  Strand,  W.C.
Jones,  Captain  Henry  Michael,  Y.C.,  H.B.M.  Legation,  Lima,  Peru.
Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.
Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.
Jones,  Professor  P.,  64,  Via  S^^-  Lucia,  Naples.
Joyce,  Samuel,  Latchford  House,  Greenheys-lane,  Manchester.
Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.
Kearne,  Percy,  37,  Avonmore-gai-dens,  West  Kensington,  W.
Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  26,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Kelso,  Commander  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester.
Kenmare,  The  Countess  of,  Killarney  House,  Killarney.
Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.
Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.
*Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  York-terrace,  Brewery-road,  Southend.
King,  Miss,  50,  Gloucester-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Kinsgbury,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-pai-ade,  Blackpool.
Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W.
*KiRK,  Joseph,  35,  Ptipon  road,  Plumstead,  Kent.
Knight,  Charles  N.,  M.A.,  31,  Holland-park,  London,  W.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.
Knox,  Nathaniel,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Knutsford,  The  Lady,  75,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.
Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27,  Mikealsgatan,  Helsingfors,  Finland.
Laoh-Szyrma,  Rev.W.S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford.
Lafone,  A.  W.,  M.P.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
Laing,  R.M.,M.A.,B.Sc.,Boys'High  School,  Christchurch,New  Zealand.
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Rokeby  Rectory,  Barnard  Castle.
Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.  B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.


634


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


Laurie,  Prof.  H.,  LL.D.,  Melbourne,  South  Australia.
Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  1,  The  Cloisters,  Temple,  London,  E.G.
Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  9,  St.  Paul's  Churchyard,  London,  E.C
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Piegent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Lee,  Rev.  W.  T.,  4,  Edith-terrace,  Mount  Gold-road,  Plymouth.

Legge,  The  Lady  Frances,  Woodsome,  Huddersfield.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.  A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,

Levy,  Mrs.,  16,  Campdeu  House-road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  N'orthumbcrland-av.,W.O.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Library,  Buffalo,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial-street,  Leeds.

Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.

LiMOND,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Linden,  Miss  Olga,  3,  Versailles  Road,  Anerley,  S.E.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.

Lindsay,  R.,L.R.C.S.,M.B.,c/oMessrs.Holt&Co.,Whitehall-place,S.W.

Lloyd,  Major  Francis,  22,  Cadogan-square,  London,  S.W.

Lloyd,  Otho Holland,  6,  Place  d' Amies,  Canton Neuchatel,  Switzerland.

Lloyd,  Thos.  Edward,  J. P.,  Coedmore,  Cardigan.

Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool.

Lodge,  Robert,  Laurie  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

LoEWE,  Hugo  L.,  3,  Southampton-street,  London,  W.C.

LovELL,  PtEGiNALD  H.,  449,  Collins-streot,  Melbourne.

Lucas,  Henry,  "Thirlmere,"  Anderton  Park-rd.,  Moseley,  Birmingham,

Ludlow,  Col.  William,  Army  Building,  New  York,  U.S.A.

LuNN,  Charles,  24,  Avonmore-road,  West  Kensington,  W.

LuxMOORE,  Miss,  Bryn  Asaph,  St.  Asaph,  North  Wales.

Lyall,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Fetcham,  near  Leatherhead.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  The  Vicarage,  Eccles,  Manchester.

Lyttelton,  Sybella  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.

Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.

MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.

James's,  S.W.
*Macdonald,  Rev,  J.  A.,  Broadstairs,  Kent.
Macintyrk,  Miss  G.  C,  145,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Macintyee,  John,  M.B.,  F.R.S.E.,  179,  Bath-street,  Glasgow.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


635


Mackat,  George  D.,  Inveralmond,  Cramond,  IMidlotliian,  N.B.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  W.
Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborougli.
*Mangin,  Marcet,  102,  Hue  Erianger,  Paris.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  M.A.,  Grange  House,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  6,  Shalston  Villas,  Ewell-road,  Surbiton  Hill.
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornliill-on-T\veed,  Northumber-
land.

Marsh,  Edward  H.,  B.A.,  30,  Bruton-st.,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.
Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
]\[arten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  34,  Elvaston-place,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.
INIartin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
ISIartin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Martinez,  Mrs.,  16b,  Hyde  Park-mansions,  London,  W.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Chief  Court,  Lahore,  India.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.
Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Masterman,  Charles  F.  G.,  B.A.,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.
MATHEWS,G.B.,B.A.,9,Mcnai  View-terrace,Upper  Bangor,  North  Wales.
Matthews,  Frank  H.,  22,  Wentworth-street,  Bolton,  Lancashire.
Matthews,  Mrs.,  15,  Stanley-gardens,  London,  W.
Maud,  Miss  Constance,  Sanderstead  Rectory,  near  Croydon.
Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  M.P.,  48,  Belgrave  square,

London,  S.W.
Maxwell,  Joseph,  37,  Rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
Mayo,  Ernest  S.  G.,  5,  Castle-arcade,  Cardiff.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Dalnottar,  Kirkpatrick,  Dumbartonshire.
McClure,  Henry,  M.D.,  Cromer,  Norfolk.

McCoNNEL,H.W.,M.A.,M.B.,M.R.C.S.,ManorHouse,Ryburgh,Norfolk.
McKuon,  P.  A.,  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLachlan,  David  B.,  Grosvenor  House,  Ridgway,  Wimbledon.
McLaren,  jNIrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N.,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McNeily,  a.  J.  W.,  Q.C.,  Supreme  Court,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Meath,  The  Most  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.
Medeikos  e  Albuquerque,  Jose  de,  Rua  S.  Cliristovam,  36,  Rio
Janeiro,  Brazil.

Mellor,  Miss  Emily,  The  Cottage  Hospital,  Wellington,  Somerset.
Merrilees,  J  .  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria.


636


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


]\Ietgalf,  Francis  W.  Pv.,  Soiithborough,  Tunbridge  Wells.

Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley.

Miles,  Miss,  Woodhill,  Gen-ai-ds  Cross,  Bucks.

Milford,  Tlie  Lady,  IG,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  "VY,

Miller,  Mjis.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

Mills,  TiiOiHAS  E.,  Cabra  Parade,  Dublin.

Mitchell,  Mus.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

MiTCiiiNER,  J.  H.,  Acacias,  Barhani  Road,  South  Croydon.

INIoLESWORTir,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.

Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,Walsingham  House, Piccadilly, W.

Montagu, The  Lady  Cecil  Scott,  The  Lodge,  Beaulieu,  Southampton.

MoNTEAGLE,  TiiE  LoKD,  K.P.,  Mount  Trencliard,  Foynes,  co.  Limerick.

Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

MoNTMORENCY,.J.E.G.de,B.A.,L.L.B.,20,Old-l)ldngs.,Lincoln's  Inn,W.C.
Moore,  Lieut.-General  Montgomery,  Bellevue,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.
Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Pemnark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh.
MoRisoN,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligai-h,  N.W.P.,  India.
MoUL,  INIrs.,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  G59,  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  N,Y.,  U.S.A.
Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Babbacombe  Cliff,  Torquay.
MoYNiHAN,  B.  G.A.,  M.B.  (Loml.),  The  General  Infirmary,  Leeds.
MuNRO,  H.  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Lulworth,  Bushey  Green,  Catford
Murray  Donald,  M.A.,  Sydney  Morning  Herald  Office,  Sydney,
N.S.W.

Murray,  Professor  Geo.  G.  AiME,B.A.,The  University,  Glasgow,  N.  B.
Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R..A.,  28,  Gower-street.  London,  W.C.
MuRRAY,R.M.,M.A.,M.B.,M.R.O.P.(Edin.),ll,Chester-st.,  Edinburgh.
Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile-park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  N.
Murray,  T.  Douglas,  29,  Albemarle-street,  London,  W.
Murray-Aynsley,  Mrs.,  43,  Cromwell-houses,  Queen's-gate,  S.W.
Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  Mrs.  F.  AV.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Mylne,  Mrs.,  83,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Neate,  P.  J.,  F.G.S.,  M.T.M.E.,  Belsize,  AVatts-avenue,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Rev.George,  LL.D.,  St.  Michael's  Vicarage,  Bromley,  Poplar,  E.
Nelson,  Mrs.  R.  A.,  Redbourne,  East  Molesey  Park,  Surrey.
Newbold,  Miss  A.,  4,  Artillery-buildings,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W
Nev/mann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  East  Hampton,  Suffolk  Co.,  New  York,  U.S  A.
NiCHOLL,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.
NicnoLLS,  Rev.  T.  B.,  T^LA.;  St  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth.


List  of  Members  and  Assoc'icitcs.


G37


Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  31. D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridije,  Herts.
Nicholson,  jMus.  R.  W.,  32,  Oadogan-square,  London,  S.W.
NicoLSON,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I.E.,  G.M.G.,  British  Legation,  Tangier,  Morocco.
■"•jSTisbet,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.

Noble,  James  B.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  167,  Kennington  Park -road,  S.B.
Noel-Cox,  H.  L.  N.,  Soutliville,  Lewin-rd.,  Streatham-coramon,  S.W.
Norman,  Mrs.  Herbert  G.  H.. 5, Southwell  gdus, S.Kensington,  S.W.
Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Birchtield,  Aston,
Birmingham.

Norris,  William  Alfred,  Holmwood  Lodge,  Laton-road,  Hastings.

NoRTHCOTE,  Hon.  Hugh  Oliver,  The  Hyde,  Luton.

Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotliam,  Kent.

Oates,  F.  Edward,  St.  Peter's  Presbytery,  Gloucester.

*Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  23,  Ptue  Vladimir,  Warsaw.

Ogilvy,  Mrs.  N.  Hamilton,  Biel,  Prestonkirk,  East  Lothian,  N.B.
Ogilvie,Mrs.,c/o  Dr.Ogilvic,H.M.Chief  Inspectorof  Schools, Edinburgh.
Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.
O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,M.B.,291,Elizabeth-st.,Sydney,NewSouth  Wales.
Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J.P.^  Pirie-street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Orr,  Mrs.  Sutherland,  11,  Kensington-park-gardens,  London,  W.
Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlo%y.
Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.
Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguai-do,  Florence.

Palmer,  Miss,  3,  Carlisle-place,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  81,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W.
Passingham,  Mrs.,  Fermoyle,  Castle  Gregory,  Co.  Kerry.
Pedley,  Charles  Herbert,  Winterley  House,  near  Crewe.
Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  xVpollo-st.,  Bombay.
Percival,  Mrs.,  2,  Soutliwick  Place,  London,  W.
Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  TenerifFe,  Canary  Islands.
Perry,  E.  C,  M.D.,  M.A.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.
Pethybridge,  Walter,  3,  Rhodesia-road,  Clapham  Rise,  S.W.
Petrovo-Solovovo,  Michael,  38,  Serghievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Phillips,  Rev.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Mon.
Phipps,  Miss,  Knebworth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts.
Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I.E.E.,  5,  Carew-road,  Thornton  Heath.
Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.

Playford,  Louis  L.,  P.O.  Box,  377,  Johannesburg,  Transvaal,  S.  Africjw
Plenderleitii,  V/illiam,  126,  Stroud  Green-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.
Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street.  London,  W.
PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.AV.
PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Rye  Vale,  Leixlip,  co.  Kildare.


2  T  2


638


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


PoxTiFEX,  Miss,  72,  Coniwall-ganlens,  London,  S.W.
PoPH,  George  H.,  jNI.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.
Porter,  Mrs.,  Sydney  House,  Westclifle  road,  Bournemouth.
*PoRTER,  IMis.s,  16,  Bussell-square,  London,  W.C.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  AVestrainster,  S.W.
Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Cainpden  Hill-square,  London,  W.
Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.
PowLES,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W^
PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Prescott,  Miss  Frances  E.,  152,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.
PuiBiTKOF,  v.,  67,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
PuLLEN,  Miss,  ]\Iilton  View,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.
PuMPHREY,  Mrs.,  Derwent-hill,  Ebchester,  co.  Durham.
Purdie,  Mrs.,  27,  Palace-court,  London,  W.

PvM,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  -52,  Grosvenor-street,  London,  W.
Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W»
Ramsay,  Lady,  23,  Draycot-place,  Cadogan-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.
Rarer,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
Raupert,  Rev.  J.  G.  F.,  30,  Belsize-square,  London,  N.W.
Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Reade,  Hicrbert  v.,  6,  Searsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor.
Rensburg,  Miss  Netta  L.,  37,  Croxteth-road,  Sefton  Park,  Liveri^ooL.
Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  Thorncliffe,  Cheltenham.
Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.
Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  Farcliffe-place,  Bradford.
Richardson,  Miss  J.,  72,  Hamilton-terrace,  London,  N.W.
Riddiford,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Clialfont,  Barnwood,  near  Gloucester.
Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Singapore.
Ridley',  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.
Robb,  Mrs.,  46,  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.
Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  39,  Addison-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh..
Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.
PtOBERTSON,  Miss  N.,  Alfriston  House,  Alfriston,  Sussex.
Robin,  Percy  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robinson,  Edward,  C.E.,  F.R.A.S.,  4,  Castelnau-gardens,  Barnes,  S.W.,
Robinson,  Lady,  4,  Belgrave-place,  London,  S.W.
PtOBiNSON,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.
RoDEWAi.D,  Alfred  E.,  The  Albany,  Liverpool.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


63d


*IloGERS,  E.  Dawson,  Hose  Villa,  Church  End,  Fincliley,  IST.
Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Foxley  Lodge,  West  VN'orthing,  Sussex
Rogers,  George  F.,  M.A.,  M.D.,  4,  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.
Rogers,  R.  S.,  M.C,  Flinders-street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Roome,  Henry  A.,  J. P.,  Oudenarde,  Victoria-road,  Soutlisea.
Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.
Ro-XBURGii,  11.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  18,  Gladhow-gardens,  S.W.
RusHTON,  C.  H.,  7,  Queen  Elizaljeth  s-walk,  Stoke  ISTewington,  N.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  Cripplegate,  Woking.

Rylands,T.G.,F.L.S.,F.G.S.,Highfields,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.
SAJ0U3,CHARLEsE.deM.,M.D.,  2, 043,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  U.S.  A.
•Salmond,  Percy  N.,  Captain  3rd  Ptoyal  Scots,  1,  Easby  Drive,  Ilkley.
Samaldas,  Lalubhai,  Chief Revenue  OlEcer,  Bhavnager,  Bombay

Presidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxslialls,  Lindlield,  llayward's  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sanderson,  J.  Murray,  B.A.,  London  Hospital,  London,  E.
Sanger,  Charles  Percy,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.
Schiller,  F.C.S.,  M.A.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
ScnRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.  :
Sghreiber,  Major,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  London,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  22,  Old  Queen-street,  Westminstei',  S.W.
ScHWABE,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  c/o  Major-General  Scliwabe,  G.O.C.  Mauritius.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRiPPS,  T.  Cecil,  4,  Drapers '-gardens,  London,  E.G.
■*ScuDAM0KE,  Mrs.,  3,  Tollington-park,  Holloway,  London,  N.
Scull,  Mrs.,  The  Pines,  2,  Langland-gardens,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmersley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N.
Sellin,  Professor  C.W.,  .5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.
Selous,  Edmund,  Wamil  Hall,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.
Seymour,  Captain  Ed\vard  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.
S^AD^VELL,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sharpe,  J.  W.,  M.A.,  V/oodroffe,  Portarlington-road,  Bournemouth.
Shaw,  Rev.  Charles  J.  M.,  The  Orchard,  Swanley,  Kent.
Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  ISI".,  Emmanuel  House,  Cambridge.
SiiEAVYN,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.

Sheldon,  Mrs.  L.  V.,  52,  Queen's-rd.,  Marlborough-rd.,  London,  N".W.
*Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gilford  Rectory,  Essex.

Shove,  Miss  E.,K.Q.C.P.L,M.B.,  25,  St.  Mark's-cre.s.,  Regent's Pk.,  N.W.
^Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.W., Smithsonian  Institution, AVashington,  D.C.U.S.A.


€40


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.

SiDGWiCK,  Mrs.  Edwakd,  25,  CoUingham-road,  S.W.

Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W.

Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.

Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  M.A.,  LL.D.,Downpatrick,  co.  Down,  Ireland

Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.

Sloman,  Samuel  George,  39,  West-street,  Farnhani.

Smith,  Mrs.  Apsley,  Flore  House,  Weedon,  Northamptonshire.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Gi-een,  London,  W\

Smith,  LI.  Babingtox,  B.A.,  C.S.T.,  Government  House,  Calcutta.

Smith,  John  George,  87,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  W.

Smith,  Martyn,  Abberton  Hall,  Pershore.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson  Park,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  riE(aNALi)  A.,  B.A.,  78,  Cranwich-rd.,  Amhurst-park,  London,  N.

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Mrs.,  Barnes  Hall,  Sheffield.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Somerset,  The  Lady  Henry,  Eastnor  Castle,  near  Ledbury.

Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Fairholme,  Ventnor,  Isle  of  Wight.

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W,

Sperling,  Arthur,  J. P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Spinks,  Judge,  Vernon,  British  Columbia.

Squarey  Andrew  T.,  J. P.,  Gorsey  Hey,  Bebington,  Birkenhead.

St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.

Stainforfch,  Miss  Emily,  15,  Matheson-i-oad,  West  Kensington,  W.

Stanley,  Henry  M.,M.P.,D.C.L.,LL.D.,2,Richmond-terrace,S.W.

Stan.sfeli),  J.  B.  Evelyn,  M.A.,  Junior  Carlton  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Stapley',  PtiCHARD,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.

Stapley,  Mrs.,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.

Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  PTouse,  Wimbledon,  S.W.

Steam,  H.  T.,  M  A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stephenson, SirAugustusK..K.CB.,Q.C., 46, Ennismore-gdns,S.W

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  Andrew,  M.A.,  16,  Warrender  Park  Crescent,  Edinburgh.

Stevenson,  George,  c/o  filessrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta.

Stewart,  IMrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Larghani,  CuujDar  Angus,  N.B.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


641


Stewart,  Miss  Susan,  89,  Plulbeacli-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stirling,  J.  M.  Moiuiies,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Stone,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  5,562,  Clemens-avenue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stopp,  Paul,  c/o  Dresdner  Bank,  Dresden,  Germany.

Stout,  George  F.,  M.A,,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  SpectatorOI&ce,  l,Wellington-st., Strand, W.C

Sturges,  Mrs.  Williasi,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W,

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.

*SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

Sullivan,  W.  R.  Washing-ton,  Purleybury,  Parley,  Surrey.

SuMjiERSON,  Samuel  J.,  West  House,  Daidington.

Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere  street,  London,  S.W.

Swanwick,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Sweeney,  Hubert  J.  P.,  17,  Quay-street,  Sligo.

Sweeting,  Richard,  D.H.,  B.A.,  D.P.H.,  6,  Hereford  Mansions,  Here-
ford-road, Bayswater,  W.

Swire,  Commander  Herbert,  R.N.jH. j\r..Coastguard,Berwick-on-Tweed.

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmoi-e-street,  London,  W.

Synge,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  1,  Daleham-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.

Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  Bela  Maria  .Joseph  de,  Austro-Hun-
garian  Consulate,  Alexandria,  Egypt.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  .J.,  131,  Ashley-gardens,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  23,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  "W.

Tanner,  Ernest,  Hazlehurst,  Penarth.

Tanner,  Slingsby,  104b,  Mount-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Tattersall,  .James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-sti-eet,  Oxford.

Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  A^ale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
T.A.YL0R, Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.A..  Churchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.,  6,  College-lawn,  Cheltenham.
Tebb,  a.  E.,  M.D.,  9,  Langland-place,  Finchley-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Temple,  Reginald  W.,  Ashley  House,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  W.C.
Terrill,  George  Morton,  M.D.,  336,  Post-street,  San  Francisco,
California,  U.S.A.,  (President  of  the  California  Psychical  Society).
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  J.  W.,  F.LC,  F.C.S.,  2,  Hampstead  Hill  Mansions,  KW
Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  53,  Croxteth-road,  Liverpool.
Thomson,  Edward  John,  Glen  Tower,  Great  Western-road,  Glasgow.


642


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A,,  F.R  S.,  THnity  College,  Cambridge
TiiURN  AND  Taxis,  H.I.H.  TriE  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.
TiiUESTAN,  F.  W.,  M.A.,  17,  Buckingham  Gate  Mansions,  James-street.

Buckingham  Gate,  S.W.
Tooth,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  Woodside,  Croydon.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Waukem,  M.A.,  Peumon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris.
Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
TuKER,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Sunnyside,  Maidenhead  Bridge.
Tweedie,  David  M.,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Va.cher,  William  H.,  51,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crenia,  Italy.

Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.

Van  Gruisen,  Mrs.  A.  H.,  Alcira,  Bidston-road,  Oxton,  Cheshire,

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  251,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.

Vian-Williams,  PiEV.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place.  North  Shields.

A^ickers,  Mrs.,  26,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.

ViLLAMARiNA,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quiriiiale,  Piorne.

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France.

AVade,  Rev.  William,  19,  St.  Charles'-square,  North  Kensington,  W

Walford,  Col.  Neville  L.,  R.A.,  1,  Asliburn  place,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Mrs.  Emma,  Priors  Barton,  Winchester.

Walker,  Mrs.  Stewart,  51,  Elgin-ci-escent,  Notting  Hill,  S.W.

Wall,  Miss  M.  M.,  49,  Lambert-road,  Brixton  Hill,  S.W.

Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39,  Plarley-street,  London,  W.

Wallop,  Rev.  Edward,  Missionary  Coll.,  Burgh  le  Marsh,  R.S.O.,  Line.

VfARBURTON,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M,  A.,  St.  James's  Vicarage,  Congleton.

Ward,  Wilfrid,  Molescroft,  Eastbourne.

"Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

AV^ardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eatoii-square,  S.W.

"Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  87,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.

AV ARTER,  M  RS.  Tatiiam,  Longdcn  Manor,  Pontesf ord,  Salop.

Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.,Addenbrook  A^illa,01d  Swinford, Stourbridge.

AVatsoNj  Mrs.  W.  C,  Col  worth,  Bedford.

AVay,  AA'illiam  Pi.,  Hillside,  XJpminster,  Essex.

AVebber-Smitii,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shafbesbury-avenue,  London,  W.
Webb,  Godfrey,  167,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Wkdd,  N.,  ALA.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on  the-Hill.  Middlesex.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


C43


Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W.
Wkstcott, William Wyn.v,M.B.,D.P.H., 396,  Camden-road,  London, N.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Vale  Lodge,  Ilampstead  Heatli,  N.W.
AVestlake,  Mks.  Erxest,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Wheery,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  BEUNnARO,  173,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
WniTAKER,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
White  Leedham,  D.L.,  F.C.S.,  16,  Wetherby-gdns.,  London,  S.W.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  5,  St.  Andrew's  road,  Enfield.
Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  Mostjn  House,  Cambridge.
Whiting,  J.  Mahkby,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Clave  Cottage,  E.isfc  Mailing,  Maidstone.
WIGGLES^voRT^,  Alfred,  157,  Fenchurcli-street,  London,  E.C.
Wilberforce,  Rev.  Canon  Basil,  M.A.,  20,  Dean's  Yard,  London
WiLKiNS,  SiLVANUS,  15,  Victoi'ia-street,  Westminster,  S.W.
WiLLAN,  Miss  F.  M.,  Mayfield  House,  Old  Ford-rd.,  Bethnal  Green,  E.
WiLLARD,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Rest  Cottage,  Evanston,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  9,  Upper  Beulah-hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Williams,  J.  Leon,  D.D.S.,  L.D.S.,  30,  George-street,  Hanover-sq.,  W.
Williams,  PtEV.  Nelson  G.,M.  A.,  Ivetteringham,Wymondham,  Norfolk.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  AVarley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  Miss,  7,  Cromwell-terrace,  Scarborough.
Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  8,  Jasper-road,  Gipsy  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Wilson,  Robert,  M.I.C.E.,  7,  St.  Andrew's  Place,  Regent's  Park,N.W\
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.
Wisden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
WiTiiERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  8,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  S.W
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.C
WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  9  Moika,  St.  Petersburg.

WooDD,  Mrs.  Basil,  Leckby,  Hollington  Park,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.

Woodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Woods,  John  F.,  M.D.,  Hoxton  House  Asylum,  London,  N.

Wright,  Mrs.  Almroth  E.,  Ingleside,  Netley,  Hants.

AVyld,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbk-don  Park,  S.W.

Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.

Yearsley,  p.  MACLEOD,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings

bury-Neasden,  N.W.
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.
Young,  Prof.  W.  H.,  SS3,  East  Main-street,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.

N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  !vny
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Seceetaey,  19,  Buckingham  Street,
Adelfhi,  London,  W.C.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

(February,  1898.)


Names  of  ilemhers  are  jmnted  in  Black  Type,

Kames  of  Honorary  Associates  are  i)rpfixed  by  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  am  2'>'>'i7ifed  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  when  another  Country  is  named.


Abbott,  Henry  W.,  11,  CoiiDnonwealtli-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Abbott,  Lawrence  F.,  13,  Astor-place,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ageslesto,M.,c/o  Nusbaum  Book  &  News  Co., 274:,Main-st., Norfolk,  Va.

Albery,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.

Albree,  John,  Junr.,  Swampscott,  Mass,

Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.

Alden,  r.  E.,  Vandergrift  Building,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.

Alden,  Henry  M.,  Metuchen,  New  Jersey.

Alexander,  Don,  253,  Fourth-avenue,  Louisville,  Ky.

*Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.

Alexander,  W.  L.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Ames,  Miss  Evelyn,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  Bros.,  London.
Anderson,  Professor  A.  W.,  Macalester  College,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Anderson,  Richard  G.,  Deadwood,  .South  Dakota.
ARnuELLES,  Don  Pedro,  Collector  of  Customs,  N.  Laredo,  Mexico.
Arnold,  Miss  Fannie,  323,  North  17th-street,  Oinoha,  Neb.
Atwood,  Dr.  G.  Wilson,  17,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Ayer,  J.  C,  M.D.,  Bellevue  Hospital,  New  York,  N.Y.
Baker,  Alfred  L.,  2G41,  Prairie- A  venue,  Cliicago,  111.
Baldwin,  Elbert  F.,  13,  Astor-place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Barber,  Rev.  George  E.,  Marlborough,  N.Y.

Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  Ellis-ave.  and  Oakwood-boulevard,  Chicago,  111.

Barker,  Miss  Jenny  M.,  479,  4th-street,  Manistee,  Mich.

Barrows,  C.  M.,  The  Aspinwall,  465,  Washington-st.,  Brookline,Mas3.

Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.

Baths,  Charles  F.,  2,G42,  Euclid-avenue,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Beale,  Rev.  Chas.  H.,  33,  Waverly-street,  Roxbury,  Boston,  Mass.

Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda  W.,  4,722,  ^Yoorllawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Berryiiill,  Mrs.  James  G.,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.

Bigelow,  Dr.  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Blodgett,  C,  M  D.,  2-38,  ^Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Blodgett,  Mrs.,  23S,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Boaedman,  Hon.  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canafla.

Boon,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  Molino  di  Sopra,  Alassio,  Liguria,  Italy.

Booth,  Mrs.  Lucy  C,  Great  Barrington,  Mass.

Botii-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon  street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y„

Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  jMass.

BowDiTCH,  Professor  H.  P.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Boyd,  IMrs.  Ella  F.,  Hyde  Park,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.

Brimmer,  Mrs.  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Hexry,  11-3,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Alfre;d  S.,  195,  Broadway,  ISTew  York,  IST.Y.

Brown,  Edmond  G.,  132,  JSTassau-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Henry  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  JMrs.  H.  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Rev.  Howard  N.,  9,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Bruguiisre,  Emile  a.,  Junr.,  1,800,  Franklin-st.,  San  Francisco,  CaL

Bryan,  W.,  Houston,  Texas.

Buffet,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.
BuLLARD,  Dr.  W.  JSr.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BuLLEY",  R.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Bundy,  Mrs.  John  C,  624,  Sheridan-square,  Evanston,  111.

Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  31,  East  69th-street,  New  York,  N.Y

Cabot,  Caroline  X.,  M.D.,  126,  West-48tli  St.,  New  York  City,  X.  Y

Carey,  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carey,  Mrs.  Arthur  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  46,  Exchange-place,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carpenter,  Franklin  R.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  Mrs.  Franklin  R  ,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  W.  O.,  517,  Adams-street,  Chicago,  111.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle  street,  Cauibridge,  Mass.

Caer,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Casey',  Theodore  B.,  169,  Park-street,  Newton,  Mass.

Caulkins,  Silas,  310,  Requena-street,  Los  Angeles,  California.

Chard,  Thomas  S.,  534,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  Hi.

Chase,  G.  N.  (Lieut.  U.S.  Army,  Rtd.),  Box  198,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Chase,  Harvey  S.,  12,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  120,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


€46


JAsl  of  Ilemhcrs  and  Associates.


Chick,  Fkaxk  W.,  Madrid,  Franklin  Co.,  IMaine.

Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  603,  Buchtel-avenue,  Akron,  Ohio.

Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  N.H.

Clough,  H.  W.,  Nashville,  Tenn.

CocKERiLL,  Mrs.  R.  D.,  Glasgow,  Mo.

CoE,  Mrs.  Andrew  J.,  P.O.  Drawer,  101,  New  Haven,  Conn.

Coffin,  Abraham  B.,  Winchester,  Mass.

Coleman,  Miss  Anne  C,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania.

*CoLEMAN,  William  Emmette,  Chief  Quartermaster's  Office,  Phoenix

Building,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Conner,Mrs.E.  A.,  c/o  Miss  Edmunds,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Cope,  Porter  F.,  The  Bertram,  3.3rd  &  Chestnut-sts ,  Philadelpliia,  Pa.
Cooke,  Dr.  Joseph  B.,  269,  West  138th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Coryell,  V.  M.,  310,  Sixth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Crafts,  Prop.  .Ja^ies  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Gardner-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Crothers,  Dr.  T.  D.,  AYalnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.
Curhan,  Richard  L.,  60,  Oneida-street,  Utica,  N.Y.
Curtis,  W.  E.,  30,  Broad-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
CusHiNG,  Miss  Eleanor  P.,  76,  Ehn-street,  Northampton,  Mass.
Dawson,  Miles  M.,  136,  Liberty-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
L)elabarre,  Prof.  E.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Derby,  Captain  George  McC,  3,232,  Prytania-st.,  New  Orleans,  La.
Dewing,  O.  M.,  M.D.,  State  Hospital,  King's  Park,  Long  Island,  N.Y.
l^EXTER,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
DiCKERMAN,  Rev.  W.  F.,  276,  Orange  street.  New  Llaven,  Conn.
Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Room  22,  91,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  HI.
Dike,  Miss  Florence  B.,  156,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Dillard,  Pi;of.  J.  H.,  Tulane  University,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.
DiMMOCK,  George,  36,  Grant-street,  Springfield,  Mass.
Dixon,  George  E.,  82,  West  Jackson-street,  Chicago,  HI.
DoANE,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Dodge,  Joseph  T.,  316,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.
Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  George  B  ,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dow,  Alexander,  1,  West  83rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Dyer,  Walter  H.,  Kniglitsville,  Maine.

Easton,  Prof.  Morton  W.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  221,  South  43rd-st.,  Phila.,  Pa.
Edjiunds,  Miss  L.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  IMass.
Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  161,  Main-street,  Keene,  N.H.  '
Eldridge,  Prof.  E.  H.,  The  Temple  College,  Broad  &  Berks-streets,

Philadelphia,  Pa.  -  .

Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  180^  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


EsTY,  Professor  William  C,  Aralierst  College,  Anilier.st,  Mass.

Etheridge,  Miss  Fanny  S.,  1,G34,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Mrs.  Glexdower,  12,  Ofcis-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  53,  Garden-street,  Cambiidge,  Mass.

Farmer,  iMiss  Sarah  J.,  Eliot,  Maine.

Felton,  Thomas  C,  Hotel  Ludlow,  Boston,  ]\Iass.

FiLLEBROWN,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  157,  Newbury-street,  Boiton,  Mass.

FiNNiGAN,  John,  61,  Beek man-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Fletcher,  Horace,  323,  Baroane-street,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.

Fluiirer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  95,  Main-street,  Albion,  N.Y.

FoRMAN,  G.  A.,  824,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

FoRfdAN,  Lawren'CE  C,  25,  Dunster  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Frankland,  Frkderick  W.,  346,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Frost,  Jon.  B.,  75,  Peachtree-street,  Atlanta,  Ga.

Fuller,  S.  C,  M.D.,  Insane  Hospital,  AVestborough,  Mass.

FuUerton,  C.  W.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.

Fullerton,  Professor  G.  S.,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  West  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Gage,  Hon.  Lyman  J.,  1715,  Massachusetts-ave,  Washington,  D.C.

Gale,  Prof.  Harlow  S-,  Univ.  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.

Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  131,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Craft's  Avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Gardiner,  J.  Hays,  Grays,  18,  Harvard  Univ.,  Cambi-idge,  Mass.

Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Gay,  Walter,  73,  Rue  Ampere,  Paris,  France.

Gehrixg,  Albert,  626,  Pearl-street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H,,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.

GoDDARD,  George  A.,  1,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Goodale,  Hexry  Sterling,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

GooDNOW,  H.  R.,  95,  Riverside  Drive,  New  York.

Gorton,  Dr.  D.  A.,  174,  Clinton-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Greene,  Bertram,  6,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Greer,  W.  R.,  c/o  S.  C.  Loan  and  Trust  Company,  Charleston,  S.C.

Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Mrs.  Josephine,  547,  Dearborn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Griffin,  Rev.  H.  A  ,  P.O.  Box  6,  South  Billerica,  Mass.
Griffing,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  196,  Lexington  Avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Gross,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  48,  Lake  Shore  Drive,  Chicago,  111.
Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.
Hall,  A.D.,M.A.,  Morgan  Hall,  1,7 1 3,  NicoUet-ave.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Hall,  Professor  James,  Room  32,  State  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.
Hall,  James  P.,  6,  Poplar-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Tabor,  Fremont  Co.  Iowa.


Litst  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Hamilton,  C.  M.,  M.D.,  45,  Court-street,  Biugbampton,  KY.
Hapgood,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  Alton,  111.

■Hardaway,  AV.  a.,  M.D.,  2,922,  Locust-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.
Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  1,303,  P.-street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.O.
Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  57,  Bentley-avenue,  Jersey  City,  JST.Y.
Hartzell,  F.  S.,  96,  North  Walnut-street,  Canton,  Ohio.
Harvey,  Anson  B.,  M.A.,  140,  North  16th-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Haworth,  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hayward,  Alvinza,  532,  Market-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Heilner,  PiEV.  S.  A.,  D.D.,  1,410,  Christian-strest,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hemenway,  Augustus,  ReadviUe,  Mass.
Heywood,  Charles,  Gardner,  Mass.
Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen's  Co.,  N.Y.
Higbee,  Col.  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa.
Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Bailing  Bros.,  London,  E.G.
Hodgson,  Pi,ichard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Hodgson.  Dr.  Thomas,  Gertrude-street,  Fitzroy,  Melbourne,  Australia..
HoLBROOK,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  N.Y.
HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
HoLLADAY,  Prof.  Waller,  120,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  28,  West  120th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Rev.  S.  V.  V.,  Westminster  Church,  Bulfalo,  N.Y.
Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
HosKiN,  John,  4,100,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Householder,  Frank,  Kansas  City  Stock  Yards,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
HowLAND,  Miss  B.  M.,  cor.  Carver  and  Museum-sts.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.O.
Hull,  IMiss  P.  C,  22,  John-street,  Providence,  R.I.
HusE,  Wm.,  Ponca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska.

Hutchinson,  Miss  Mary  S.,  2,006,  De  Lancey-place,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jackson,  Mrs.  Louisa  S.,  16,  Rue  Auguste  Yacqueria,  Paris,  France.  ■
James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,627,  Olive  street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Johnson,  Charles  R.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.
Johnson,  Professor  Pv,ogee  B.  C,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.
Joline,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  Miss  Alice,  Santa  Monica,  Los  Angeles  Co.,  Cal.
-Jones,  George  H,  561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


649


Kennedy,  Mis3  Leila  M.,  715,  Forinan-pai-k,  Syracuse,  JST.Y.
KiDD,  G.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Kimball,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Rockford,  111.

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Common  weal  th-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Kinney,  Thomas  W.,  220,  East  Third  street,  Portsmoutli,  Ohio.
Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  LL.U.,  Lock  Box  15,  Oxford,  Mass.
KoPTA,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podiuok  in  Podraok,  Post  Shiittea-

hofen,  Bohemia,  Europe.
Krebs,  Rev.  ^tanley  L.,  Reading^a.

KuHN,  Hamilton,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Lamont,  Rodert  G.,  68,  St.  James's-plaee,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Lane,  Mrs.  Charles  D.,  Angels  Camp,  Calaveras  County,  California.

Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.

Lav/rence,  A.  E.,  Junr.,  53,  Devonshire-st,  Room  15,  Boston,  Mass.

Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  116,  West  103rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  New  York,  N.Y.

Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22nd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.

Librarian,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pennsylvania.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Librarian,  Cassadaga  Lake  Library  Association,  Lily  Dale,  N.Y.

Librarian,  Cazenovia  Public  Library,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  IMass.

Librarian,  Lowell  City  Library,  Lowell,  Mass.

Librarian,  Maiden  Pablic  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.  :

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

LiPPiTT,  General  Francis  J.,  1412,  Hopkins-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Llewellyn,  F.  T.,  B.A.,  C.E.,  1,012,  Hennen-bldg.,  New  Orleans,  La.

LocKWOOD,  Colonel  J.  S.,  146,  Franklia-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

LoMBARDi,  C,  1,314,  Rusk-avenue,  Houston,  Texas.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

LouNSBERRY,  C.  A.,  c/o  The  Record,  Fargo,  North  Dakota.

Low, Clarence  F.,  Common  and  Carondelet-sts.,New  Orleans,  Louisiana.

MacDonough,  Thomas  B.,  1,227,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Main,  W.  F.,  cor.  College  and  Dubuque-streets,  lov  a  City,  Iowa.


650


List  of  ifemhcrs  and  Associates.


Marciiaxd,  G.  L.,  112,  Clark  streefc,  Room  516,  Cliicago,  111.

MARTiy,  Miss  Emma  H.,  71,  Scio-street,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Marvix,  Walter  T.,  6,  West  130th-streefc,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  ]\1iss  Ida  M.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York,  N.Y

McClellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Galena,  111.

McEwEN,  Alfred,  512,  La  Salle-a venue,  Chicago,  111.

McEwfiN,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y'.

McGke,  W.  J.,  Bureau  of  Araer.  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Institution,

Washington,  D  C.
McHenry,  Miss  J.  Howard,  200,  E.  Bidille-st.,  Baltimore,  Maryland.
McManama,  M.  G.,  504,  Rialto-building,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Meaciier,  William,  M.D.,  Portage,  Wisconsin.
Mendeniiall,  Mrs  E.  R.,  1,804,  Green-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Millet,  Josiaii  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  2,909,  Groveland  Park,  Chicago,  111.
Montgomery,  Ciias.  A.,  Box  2,444,  New  York,  N.Y.
IMuRLiN,  Rev.  L.  H.,  President  Baker  University,  Baldwin,  Kansas.
Murphy,  Hon.  Franklyn,  1,027,  Broad-street,  Newark,  N.J.
Murphy,  M.  J.,  614,  Center-avenue,  Bay  City,  Mich.
Myers,  W.  H,  M.D.,  157,  West  Wayne-street,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.
*Newbold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Penaa,  Philadelplila,  Pa.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Newton,  Mrs.  Mary  B.,  1,811,  Capitol-avenue,  Omaha,  Neb.
Noble,  Raymond  G.,  South  Windsor,  Conn.
NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary,  206,  West  71st  street.  New  York,  N.Y.
Norbury,  Mrs.  J.  F.,5th-avenue  Hotel,  Madison-sq.,  New  York,  N.Y,
NoRRis,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Marion,  Marion  Co.,  Ohio.
Norton,  Mrs.  F.  L.,  30,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119^-,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia,,
O'Hara,  Ur.  R.  G.,  Bedford  City,  Va.
Olcott,  Miss  Edith,  4,  East  53rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Oldham,  F.  F.,  Blymyer  Building,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Oliver,  George  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.
Orrick,  N.  C,  ]M.D.,  Canton,  M. dppi.  ...
Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Bo.ston,  Ma.ss.
Osborne,  A.  E.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  Eklridge,  P.O.,  Sonoma  Co.,  Cal.
Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffixlo,  N.Y.
Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  JMass.
Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.
Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.
Peabody,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  47,  Connnonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mas3r
Peckhaji,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111. -  ■  •  .


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


651


Pellew,  Mrs.  Hexry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Perkins,  Franklix  R.,  29-1,  Liiiwood-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34tli-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Perry,  Thos.  S.,  312,  Mavlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  511,  Commonsvealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Philpott,  a.  J.,  c/o  Boston  Globe,  Boston,  Mass.

Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y. . .  .

Post,  C.  W.,  Battle  Creek,  Michigan.

Powers,  Mrs.  Ellex  F.,  Townsend,  Mass.

Pratt,  Frederick  H.,  53,  West-street,  Worcester,  Mass.

Prescott,  Miss,  78,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  458,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  5Iarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  George,  50,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  106,  Marlboi-ough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82,  Chai-les-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quirk,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  c/o  Fred.  H.  Quirk,  Casilla  Correo,  825,

Buenos  Ayres,  South  America.  .
PiADCLIFFe-Wiiitehead,  Ralph,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.  •
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Ransom,  Frank  H.,  130,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.  •
PtAYMOND,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  Corey-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  176,  West  75th-sti-eet,  New  York,  N.Y.
Rees,Mrs.  Janet  E.  PtUUTZ,  Studio  864,  Carnegie  Hall,  New  York,  N.Y»
Reininger,  E.  E.,  M.D.,  353,  South  Oakley-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.
Richardson,  M.  T.,  Ridgewood,  New  Jersey.
RiNN,  J.  F.,  178,  Reade-street,  New  York,  N.Y.  . '  .  •

Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  29,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Rolfe,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.
Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.  ■■
Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
RuDDiMAN,  J.  C,  247,  27th-avenue,  North,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Russell,  Arthur  J.,  Minn.  Journal,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Russell,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  6,  Mercer  Circle,  Cambridge,  Mass.  '
Salter,  William  M.,  Silver  Lake,  N.H.

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Church  of  the  Messiah  Study,  34th-street  and"

Park-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
ScRiBNER,  H.  D-,  1,008,  Central-avenue,  Alameda,  Cal.
Shaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  34,  Limvood-stieet,  Roxbury,  ]\lass.

2  u


G52  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Shav/,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  '23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

.Sued,  Z.,  Room  3,  Masonic  Temple,  Denver,  Colorado.

Sheets,  Joiin  C,  College  Hill,  Station,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.

SiiEUiiAN,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.

*Stiufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.

Smith,  Bolton,  405,  Washington-street,  Memphis,  Tenn.

Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

SMiTri,  J  Hkber,  M.D.,  279,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass,
Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson  Park,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Winfield,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.

SoMERViLLE,  Rev.  T.  E.,  709,  West  Adams-street,  Chicago,  111.
Sparkhawk,  Dr.  Samuel,  Burlington,  Vermont.

Si'RiNGLE,  Jeffrey,  II.,  D.D.S.,  L.D.S.,  2,430,  St.  Catherine-street,

Montreal,  Canada.
Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  JIo.
Stephens,  Miss  Mary,  2,713,  Prairie-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Sterling,  Mrs.  E.  C,  22,  Westmoreland-place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stillman,  Mrs.  W.  O.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.
Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  30,  Rue  St.  Dominique,  Paris,  France.
Stone,  Charles  W.,  G8,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Stone,  Mrs.  Ricii-^rd,  Junr.,  18,  Cliestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Street,  Edgar  L.,  13,  West  102iid-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
SrnicCT,  Miss  Ida  M.,  703,  Euclid  avenue,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.
.Strong,  Charles  A.,  Box  208,  Lakewood,  N.J.
Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  336,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sutherland,  J.  G.,  135,  B-street,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
*Sutton,  Mrs.  Katharine  P.,  The  Higlilands,  Athol  Centre,  jNIass.
SwEETSER,  L.  H.,  Yale,  Idaho.

SwENSON,  J.  IT.,  811,  25th-avenue,  N.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  128,  W.  59-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Tappan,  Miss  M.  A ,  73,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Taylor,  Fredk.,  121,  School-street,  Lowell,  Mass.
Temple,  Rev.  H.  W.,  400,  Locust-st.,  Washington,  Pa.
Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara  Co.,  Cal.
Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara  Co,  Cal.
Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Thorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  19,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Tighe,  Judge  J.  G.,  337,  Fulton-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
ToTrEN,  ]\tRS.  Enoch,  1,708,  I  street,Washington,  D.C.
Tracey,  Dr.  Paul  H.,  469,  West  152nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
TuBNBULL.  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Menxbers  and  Associates.


653


Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  IsLand.

TwiTciiiiLL,  H.  E.,  M.t>.,  24,  S.  "  B."-st.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Tyler,  Mrs.  Mosiis  Corr,  5,  East-avenue,  Ithaca,  N.Y.

TysO-v,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  3,827,  H-st.,  Sacramento,  Cal.

Wait,  JNIarshall,  5,144,  JtL.ulison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  UL

"Wake,  C.  Staniland,  411,  East  45th-street,  Chicago,  Ilh

Ward,  Rev.  Duren  J.  H.,  Ph.D.,  205,  Central  avenue,  l^over,  N.ll.

Ward,  Dr.  J.  N.,  Auburn,  California.

Ward,  Mrs.  L.  A.  Coonley,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.

Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

AVasiiburn,  Oscar  F.,  Reading,  Mass.

Waterman,  L.  E  ,  265,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-strest,  Boston,  Mass.

Watts,  H.M.,  "  The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Webb,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  34,  Chestnut-street,  Salem,  IMass.

Wklls,  David  W.,  M  U„  391,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Wheeler,  Mrs.  Stephen,  504,  Sixth-avenue,  Fort  Smith,  Ark.

Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  326,  Madisrm-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Whipple,  Mrs.  Sherman  L.,  Warren-street,  Brookline,  Mass.

Whiteside,  jMiss  H.,  c/o  A.  A.  Carey,  29,  Fairfield-st.,  Boston,  Mass.

Whiting',  Miss  Lilian,  The  Brunswick,  Back  Bay,  Boston,  Mass.

Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

WHiTON,REV.J.M.,Ph.D.,c/oOutlookCo.,13,Astor-place,NewYork,N.Y.

Whittaker,  Thomas,  71,  East  6Gth-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

WiLKiNS,  Miss  M.  L.,  cor.  Carver  and  Museum-sts.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

WiLLi.VMS,  Marshall  S.  P.,  1,372,  Beacon-street,  Brookline,  Mass.

Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111,

Wilson,  Miss  Martha,  564,  Dearborn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

■*Wiltse,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Lancing,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.

W^ing,  Isaac  H.,  Bayfield,  Wisconsin.

Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Woodbridge,  Professor  F.  J.  E.,  Univ.  of  Minn.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Wood  man,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.
AVright,  Major-General  H.G.,  1,203,  N.-st.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.G.
Wright,  Miss  Henrietta  C,  Old  Bridge,  New  Jersey.
Wyatt,  Melvin  H.,  Sparkill,  Rockland  County,  N.Y.
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Wynne,  TiIrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
ZuG,  C,  P.O.  Box  1,053,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.


N.B.— Members  anil  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  The  Secretary,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Ma.s-s.


PROCEEDINGS

OP  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO  VOLUME

XIII.

(PARTS  XXXII -XXXIII.)

1897-98.

American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psyeliical  Research,  List  of

Members  ...

  644

American  Universities  and  Psychical  Research,  Professc

)r  Harlow  Gale  on  .58.3

Anderson,  S.  W. ,  Case  recorded  Ly

 596

Animals,  Sensitiveness  of  ...

  250

Automatic  Writing

  291,  612

Autoscopes ...  ..,

  10-12,  271

Baldwin,  Mrs.,  Case  recorded  by

  596

Baldwin,  Professor  J.  M.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper  ...

  534

Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  On  the  So-called  Divining

Rod,  or  Vivgula

Divina

 2-282

Bourget,  M.  and  Mme.  Paul,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper

.,,  310,  .375,  494,  495

Boiisser,  Aleck

319,334,372

Briggs,  L.  Vernon,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper

  337,  480

C,  Mr

  380,  514

C,  A.  A.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper

,321,  .325,  483

C,  T.  B., ,,  ,,

  383,  472

C.,W.  B., „  „

  529

Carpenter,  Professor  J.  Estlin,  Seance  with  Mrs,  Piper

  528

Close,  Rev.  Maxwell,  Case  contributed  by

  78

Demon  Possession  and  Allied  Themes,  by  Dr.  J.  L.  Nevins — Review  of  602


11


Index  t)  Volume  XIII.


Discovery,  by  Divining  Rod,  of  Artesian  Springs 147-148,  165,  170,  171,  217

Coins 17,  -29,  30,  64,  78,  84,  85,  94,  148-149

,, Dry  Ground ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ...  96

Metals 164,  176,  247

Mineral  Lodes 17,  201-202,  225,  242

,, Minerals 38,50

Mineral  Water 206-208

Miscellaneous  Objects 13,  30,  38,  51,  164,  213.  242-243

Oil  Springs 19

,, Seltzer- water  Spring  ... ... 89

Sulpbur  Springs 206-208

Water 3-280

,, in  large  quantity ...  72,91,99,108,148,151,171,172

Divination,  Works  on 9

Divining  Kod,  or  Virgula  Divinu,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  on 2-282

[See  also  tmder  titles — Discovery,  Dowsers,  Dowsing,
Failures,  Geologists,  Localities,  Materials,  Movements,
Water)

How  Held  ... 6,  7,  18,  26,  34,  54,  80,  110,  113,  133,  266-271

Literature  and  Nomenclature  ... ... 13,256,266

„  Sensations  Described  by  Dowsers  7,22,24,27,38,40,41,48,

57,  58,  59,  64,  69,  71,  90,  92,  95,  124,  138,  161-162,
164,  177,  178,  196,  197,  200,  201,  20  >,  206,  209,  226,

244,  245,  272-277

,, not  Felt  by  Dowsers ... ... 26

,, Different  for  Water  and  Metals 164

„  ,,  ,, for  Fresli  and  Mineral  Water  207,208

„  Surveys  and  Analysis  of  P]vidence ... ..  24,237,252-255

„  Table  of  Contents". 281-2

,,  Theoretical  Conclusions  ... ... 243

,,  Experiments  with,  described  by  : —

Adcock,  Pacey  and  Co.,  Messrs.,  182;  Aldvvorth,  Col.  R.  W.,  31;  Alexander,
R.  L.,  21.7  ;  Allen,  E.  G.,  88-«9  ;  Anglo- Bavarian  Brewery  Co.,  41)-.50  ;  Anthony,
R.,  156-157  ;  Arthur's  Hill  Brewery  Co.,  125  ;  Ashburner,  Dr.  J.,  274  ;  Ash  well.
Rev.  S.,  38-39  :  Ashworth,  H.  A.,  179-180  ;  Barber,  W.,  58,  64,  98-99  ;  Barlow,
Capt.  A.  K.,  90  ;  Barrett,  W.  F.,  174-170  ;  Bastable,  P.,  86  ;  Bath  C/ironicle,  90,
18.5-186;  Baxendale,  S.,  198-200,  227;  Bayley,  E.  K.,  99;  Bean,  W.,  98;  Beamish
and  Crawford,  Messrs.,  99  ;  Beaven,  E.  W.,  157-158  ;  Belfast  Brewery  Co  ,
185-186;  Bicknell,  Rev.  C,  39 ;  Birch,  W.  de  H  ,  183-184;  Bird,  W.,  138,  139;
Blake.  G..  215  ;  Blake,  J.  H.,  231 ;  Blyth,  F.  VV.,  200,  227  ;  Booker,  Rev.  G.,
154-155;  Bradley,  J.,  173-174  ;  Bradney,  J.,  54-55;  Brand,  Capt.  T.  S.,  153;
Bristol  Times  and  Blirror,  49,  71,  93;  Brown,  W.  J,  94-95;  Bruce,  S.,  and
W.  R.,  83-85;  Buck,  General  L.,  231-232  ;  Budd,  .J.,  110-112;  Burton,  Lord,
103-104;  Burton,  Mrs.  C.  I.,  92-93;  Burij  Times,  168;  Caffrey,  T.  R.,  186;
Carmiohael,  J.,  137;  Christie-Miller,  W.,  and  Mrs.  M.  E.,  76  77,  106;  Clark,
F.  J.,  31-33;  Clifford,  J.,  50;  Clive,  P.  A.,  35,  122;  Cocks,  Col.,  220;  Codrington,
Major  A.  E.,  127-129  ;  Coles,  S.  H.  C,  149  ;  Cousins,  D.  C,  161 ;  Crawshay,  C,
150-151  ;  Cree,  201 ;  Crisp,  H.  J.,  67-08  ;  Crook,  T.  C.  M.,  61-62;  Crosse,  R.  S.,
100-101;  Crump,  W.,  81-82;  Curti.s,  Rev.  P.,  34  ;  Daily  News,  28;  Daily  Telegraph,
28;  Dendy,  A.,  54  ;  Denny,  E.  H.  M.,  123  ;  Dimbleby,  F.  W.,  191-195  ;  Dowling,
v.,  40-47  ;  Dublin  Daily  Express,  00  ;  Durfee,  A.  B.,  218  ;  Eastes,  J.  P.,  155-150  ;
Eddleston,  J.,  168-170;  Egerton,  Miss  M.  L.,  30;  Elworthy,  F.  T.,  6-7,  100;
Emerson,  Rev.  R.,  44-45;  Enys,  .J.  D.,  7  ;  Essex  Herald,  28  ;  Essex  Times,  104  ;
Evans  and  Owen,  Messrs.,  (Ely  Paper  Works),  72  ;  P^inch-Hatton,  Hon.  M.  E.  G.,


Index  to  Volume  XIII.


Ill


Divining  Rod,  Experiments  with,  described  by  {continued)  :  —

97  ;  Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  211-212  ;  Fuller,  C,  216-218  ;  Gataker,  L.,  179,  23(5;  Gatty,
S.,  29;  Geake,  J.,  180-181  :  Gibbons,  S.  C,  87-88;  Gotf,  Major  C.,  55,  22G  ;
Golding,  H.  W.,  28  ;  Grantham,  Col.  E.  M.,  126  ;  Grantham,  Miss  E.  L.,  25-2G  ;
Graphic,  202;  Green,  J.  S.,  102-103  ;  Greene,  R.,  123  ;  Gregory,  Sir  Welby,  96-97;
Hagffas  and  Co.,  Messrs.,  141-142;  Hake,  W.,  218;  Hancock,  G.,  96;  Harben,
Sir  Henry,  85-86,  117-121,  227,  279;  Headley  Bros.,  Messrs.,  160;  Hellier,  W.  G.,
50-52;  Henley,  J.  J.,  91-92;  Herbert,  W.  J.  M.,  211;  Herts  and  Essex  Observer,
200;  Hickes,  T.  J.,  87  ;  Higginbottom,  A.  H.,  125;  Hird,  J.  R.,  173;  Hobbs,
Capt.  J.  C,  101-102;  Hodgson,  W.,  144;  Holloway,  Mrs.  A.,  180;  Hudson,  196;
Hughes,  .1.,  152;  Hutton,  Dr.  C,  41-43,  223  ;  Irvine,  Mrs.  M.A.  F.,  168  ;  Isham,
Sir  C,  39-40 ;  Isle  of  Wight  Express,  60  ;  Jack.son,  Sir  H.  M.,  163  ;  James,  A.  A.,
210-211  ;  Jenkins,  Rev.  J.  G.,  213;  Jenkins,  Vaughan,  4,  33,  35-37,  40  ;  Kinahan,
G.  H.,  108-109  ;  King,  E.  H.,  47  ;  Knapp,  Rev.  M.  R.,  37-38  ;  Lambert,  G.  F.,
162;  Lang,  S.,  72;  Lawrence,  W.  S.,  66-67;  Lee,  Rev.  A.  C,  34-35;  Letts,  J.
165-167  ;  Light,  219,  220,  245  ;  Lincolnshire  Chronicle,  89  ;  Lindsay,  Rev.  W.  J.  C,
151-152;  Lipscomb,  C,  184-185;  Little,  C.  W.,  46;  Little,  W.  D.,  90,  91  ;
Liverpool  Daily  Post,  142;  Llangattock,  Lord,  184  ;  Lloyd,  P.,  206-208;  Lodge,
Prof.  O.  J.,  142;  Long,  OoL,  52-53;  Lyddon,  E.  T.,  209  ;  Magg.s,  C,  146-148;
Mantell,  Dr.  A.  A.,  186-187  ;  Marden,  E.,  152-153  ;  Marriner,  G.  T.,  135-136  ;
Marshall,  J.  G.,  48;  Maitin,  G.,  187;  Mayo,  Dr.  H.,  274-275;  Mayo,  Rev.  0.  H.,
55,  63;  McKaj',  J.,  129-130;  Meveweather,  W.,  69,  73-74;  Milbanke,  Lady,
41-42,  223  ;  Miles,  Rev.  C.  O.,  74  ;  Morgan,  Rev.  J.  B.,  131 ;  Morning  Post,  131  ;
Mott,  F.  T.,  97 ;  Muirhead,  G.,  167-168  ;  Munn,  Rev.  G.  S.,  83 ;  Muspratt,  S.  K.,
142  ;  Napier,  H.  B.,  148-149  ;  Nevill,  Lady  D.,  70  ;  Newcastle  Daily  Leader,  138  ;
Newcastle  Laundry  Co.,  139  ;  Newton,  F.  W.,  72  ;  Noble,  J.  E.,  171-172  ;  Pacey,
Messrs.,  182  ;  Palmer,  G.  W.  and  W.  J.,  231,  232  ;  Pease,  E.  R.,  221  ;  Peirce,
W.  G.,  193,  194;  Perrins,  W.,  122;  Peterborough  Express,  170,  171;  Phippen,  F.,
47-49  ;  Picard,  T.  W.,  154  ;  Poole  and  Son,  Messrs.  J.  R.,  182  ;  Pope,  G.  H.,
52,  07  ;  Prince,  C.  L.,  80-81  ;  Front,  Miss  K.,  71  ;  Ramsay,  Rev.  H.  F.,  99-100  ;
Reid,  H.  I.,  53,  226  ;  Renton,  W.,  86  ;  Richardson  and  Co.,  Messrs.,  107-108  ;
Richardson,  Miss  A.  W.,  172;  Richardson,  W.,  107,  109-110;  Richardson,  G.  S.,
214:  Richmond,  G.  S.,  214  ;  Richmond  Times,  188,  189,  192;  Riddle,  R.,  143;
Riddle,  W.,  218;  Robertson,  R.  W.,  215;  Roles  and  Son,  Messrs.  W.,  33;
Rolfe,  E.  N.,  45;  Seymour,  R.  S.,  214;  Shaw,  H.,  68;  Shirley,  S.  E.,  127;
Skrine,  H.  D.,  95  ;  Smith  and  Marshall,  Messrs.,  146  ;  Smith,  Capt.  H.,  96  ;
Smith,  J.  C,  196-198,  227  ;  Smith,  W.,  170 ;  Spiers,  Kev.  W.,  104 ;  S))illers
and  Bakers,  Messrs.,  213 ;  Spink,  Judge,  27 ;  Stacey,  212 ;  Standard,  191  ;
Stan.sfeld,  J.,  185;  Stanton,  A.,  140-141;  Stebbins,  G.  B.,  215-216;  Stone,
W.,  49;  Stone,  W.,  124-137;  Sussex  Daily  News,  121;  Taylor,  Col.,  163;
Taylor,  W.,  131-132;  Thames  Valley  Times,  190,  194;  Thimbleby,  T.  W.,  138;
Thompson,  Mrs.  General,  28;  Thompson,  J.  W.,  29;  Thouvenel,  Dr.  P.,  272-275;
Times,  190,  219  ;  Tooth,  F.,  135;  Towgood  and  Sons,  Messrs.  A.,  171  ;  Tregelles,

G.  F.,  178  ;  Vint,  W.,  141-142  ;  Vizard,  T.,  71  ;  Wainwright,  A.  H.,  161 ;  Waring,
Col.  T.,  30-31,  78-80;  Warner,  R.  C,  160;  Warrington  Gazette,  102,  Watney,
239;  Wedderburu,  Sir  W.,  56-58;  Western  Gazette,  33;  Western  Mcrcvry,  61;
Westlake,  E.,  278-279  ;  Westminster  Gazette,  27-28 ;  Whitelaw,  59 ;  Wigram,
A.  M.,  104,  227;  Winchilsea,  Earl  of,  97;  Winn,  J.  C,  203;  Winwood,  Rev.

H.  H.,  53 ;  Wisbech  Standard,  61 ;  Wood,  G.,  34,  35  ;  Woolley,  R.  and  T.  C.  S.,
241-242  ;  Young,  J.  F.,  40-41,  49,  276;  Young,  Miss,  275-276.

"  Dowse  "  and  "  Dow.ser,"  The  Words  6-7,  256-261

Dowsers,  Names  of  [amateurs  in  italic].

A'Barrow,  R.,  54-55  ;  Adams,  47,  48,  49,  165,  226;  Aldivorth,  Col.  R.  W.,  31;
Amorctti's  relatives,  22  ;  Anfossi,  22  ;  Anthony,  R.,  156-157  ;  Ashwell,  Miss,
38-39  ;  Aymar,  J.,  23,  271,  272 ;  Bacon,  H.,  196-200,  227  ;  Bailey,  J.,  00  ;  Bengough,
Mrs.,  39;  Beutler,  C,  274;  £lake,  J.,  50-52;  Blanchard,  61;  Bleton,  20-22,  43,


IV


Index  to  Volume  XIII.


Dowsers,  Names  of  [awateurs  in  italic]  contimied  : —

244,  271-271;  ;  Blunt,  Rev.  J.  JR.,  25-27  ;  Briegger,  A.  M.,  274  ;  Brovjn,  J.  M.,  60;
Campetti,  22  ;  Carrie,  Abbe,  23  ;  Chesterman,  H.,  200-201 ;  Child,  219  ;  CutJibert,
212  ;  Day,  T.,  52-53  ;  Earlc,  Rev.,  95  ;  Ed'jell,  39  ;  Elworthii,  Miss,  6-7  ;  Enys,
J.  D.,  7  ;  Fuller,  a,  62,  215-219  ;  Gataker,  L.,  173,  177-194,  236,  239  ;  aolding,
H.  W.,  28,  29  ;  Griffin,  60  ;  Hares,  T.,  50-52  ;  Harwood,  78  ;  Heighway,  T.,  59,
206-208,  276;  Hill.  W.  U.,  61;  Hitchiiis,  46,  47;  Jenkins,  Rev.  J.  G.,  2L3 ;
Kingston,  49,  56  ;  Latimer,  C,  19-20,  59.  247  ;  Lawrence,  W.  S.,  50,  65-72,  210  ;
Lochmann,  Prof.,  245  ;  Lockyer,  G.,  36  ;  Mapstone,  47  ;  Mellish,  65  ;  Mereweather,
W.,  69,  72-74;  Milbanke,  Lady,  4,  41-43,  223;  Mitchell,  W.  J.,  64;  Mortillet,  23;
Miillins,  J.,  34,  35,  60,  75-97,  106-123,  145,  242,  270,  279  ;  MuUins,  W.  H.,  89,
9S-105,  122,  189-195,  232,  239  ;  Munn,  Miss,  83  ;  P.,  Miss  Douglas,  29,  30 ;
Parangue,  22,  274  ;  Passworth,  47  ;  Pearson,  61  ;  Pennet,  20,  21  ;  Robertson,  R.,
18-19,  40-41,  270;  Robertson,  R.  W.,  214-215;  Rodwell,  F.,  201-205;  Rothwell,
R.,  209-213;  Russell,  A.,  64;  Sewell,  45-46;  Seymour,  S.,  32;  Sims,  C,  49-50;
Skrine,  H.  I),  {sons  of),  96;  Smart,  If.,  33;  Stears,  J.,  Sl-.f;^,  164-176;  Steel,  Rev.,
44-45  ;  Stokes,  W.,  18,  53,  226,  209  ;  Stone,  W.,  124-145,  196-197,  270  ;  Tompkins,
B.,  145-163,  270  ;  Toioers,  J.  [Sir  Welbifs  gardener),  97  ;  Tristan,  Count  de,  22,
43  ;  Watson,  60  ;  Webster,  F.,  95  ;  Willis,  T.,  56-58  ;  Wills.  173  ;  Wood,  Miss  M.,
33-35;  IVyburn,  W.,  32,  33;  Young,  J.  F.,  18-19,  40-41,  276;  Young,  R.,  40,  275;
Young,  T.,  52,  220,  239.

Dowsers,  Percentage  of ... ... ...  49,246

Training  of 6,188,190,201,225

Dow.sing,  Health  in  Relation  to 70,  164,  167,  168

Heredity  in  30,  36,  40,  41,  66,  73,  76,  98,  110,  124,  201,  206,  214,  246

,, Hypnosis  in 245,  274

Intention,  or  "set"  of  mind,  in 41,244-245,246,276

,, Loss  of  Power  ... ... ... 36,  83,  164

Without  a  Rod  38,  41,  177,  178,  190,  202

Dowsing,  Phenomena  of  (i'ee  Divining  Rod) ... ...  2

Di-eams  and  Ghosts,  A  Book  of,  by  A.  I^ang — Review ... ... ...  616

FAILURE.S  by  Divining  Rod  to  Find  Coins 30,  48

„  '  Find  Water 63-65,  92,  97,  121-123,  143,  145,

162-163,  172-174,  187-188,  193-
195,  200,  212,  213,  236,  238-239
,,  Distinguish  Kinds  of  Water  ... ... ...  53

,, Proportion  to  Successes .. 123,  188,  238

„  ,,  ,, (of  Engineers) 235

Folk-lore  of  Divining  Rod ... ... ... ...  15

"  Fredorica,  Mdme. ,"  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 335,471

Gale,  Professor  Harlow,  Psychical  Research  in  American  Universities  583

Geologists,  Opinions  on  Divining  Rod —

Blake,  J.  H.,  230-233  ;  Cole,  Prof.,  25,  80  ;  De  Kanco,  C.  E.,  233-235  ;  Enys,  J.  D.,
7  ;  Fisher,  Rev.  0  ,3;  Holmes,  T.  V.,  221-230  ;  Hunt,  R.,  17  ;  Jacquet,  Abbe,
23;  Kilroe,  J.  R,  106,  114-1J7  ;  Kinahan,  G.  H.,  108-109,  114;  Paramelle,
Abbe,  23  ;  Phillips,  W.,  17  ;  Sollas,  Prof.  W.  J. ,  18,  67,  220-221  ;  Tawney,  E.  B.,
17  ;  Whitaker,  H.  W. ,  69,  193.

Gurney,  Edmund,  Memorial  Library  Catalogue 619


H.,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  L.  E.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper
Hart,  John  ,,  ,,


462,  514
.  296-9,  353-7


Index  to  Volume  XIII.


V


Havtshoni,  Miss  C,  Seance  with  INIrs.  Piper 442

Hey  wood,  C,  ,,  ,, 339,351,501

Hodgson,  R. ,  LL.  D.,  A  Further  Record  of  Certain  IMienoinena  of  Trance

284-582

,,  Case  contributed  by ... 215

Howard,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Seances  with  Mr.s.  Piper ... 300-335,  413,  484,  489

Hydro-geologists 264,  265

Hydroscopes 22

Hydroscopists 23,  205

Hypnotism,  Miscellaneous  Phenomena 592-594

Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Review  of  Dr.  Osgood  Mason's  "  Telepathy  and

the  Subliminal  Self  "  610

Ingkaham,  Dr.  Lena,  Report  on  the  Physical  Condition  of  Mrs.  Piper  479

J.,  Mes 381,  383

Johnson,  Miss  Mattie ... ...  309,312

Jowsers  and  Jowsing 7,  16,  256,  257

Juanita 11

K.,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 351,  383,  527

Lang,  Andrew,  "  A  Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts,''  by— Review  of ...  616

,,  ,, Case  recorded  by ... 617

,, Divining  Rod,  on  the 15

,,  ,, Review  of  "  Studies  in  Psychical  Research ''  by  Frank

Podmore ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  604

"Letters  from  Julia,"  by  W.  T.  Stead,  Review  of 012

Localities,  Divining  Rod,  Used  in

Abergavenny,  150-152,  103;  Aboynes,  67 ;  Acreland  Farm,  140-141;  Alinondsbury,
74 ;  Ampthill,  236,  241  ;  Appleton  le  Moors,  173 ;  Armadrouglial),  ."0  ;  Arreton,
130,  131 ;  Atherby,  170 ;  Avonniouth,  73 ;  Aysgarth,  203 ;  Back  Creek,  47 ;
Backwell  House,  73  ;  Bagendon,  93  ;  Baroombe,  25-26  ;  Bardney,  173  ;  Barnwell
Castle,  141 ;  Bathampton,  186;  Bedminster,  74;  Belfast  Brewery,  185;  Berry
Wood  Asylum,  122;  Bicester,  91;  Birtle,  169;  Bishops  Nympton,  100;  Blackburn,
61 ;  Blackrock,  83  ;  Blytb,  137  ;  Bodenham,  179  ;  Bourton,  73 ;  Bower  Hou.se,
104,  227;  Box,  94;  Bradenstoke  Abbey,  148;  Braiklay,  167,  168;  Braintree,
28,  90,  223;  Brazil,  165;  Bridgewater,  182;  Bridge  Hall,  62;  Bristol,  39,  50,  72,  73;
British  Columbia,  27  ;  Burghfield,  231  ;  Burnett,  72 ;  Burton  Latimer,  141 ;
Burton-on-Trent,  103;  Burtonwood,  101;  Cabra  Toweri;,  12U-130 ;  Calga,  N.S.W.,
47;  Campden,  84;  Canada,  218;  Cape  Colony,  160;  Cardiff,  72,  210,  212,  213;
Catley  Abbey,  89 ;  Chardon,  92 ;  Cbarnwood  Forest,  97 ;  Chatsworth,  187 ;
Chelboro',  33  ;  Chelmsford,  76,  223  ;  Cheltenham,  163  ;  Chepstow,  210 ;  Chippen-
ham, 145;  Ohristiania,  245;  Cirencester,  163;  Claverton,  96;  Cleveland,  59;
Coddington,  34  ;  Congresbury,  52-53  ;  Oonkwell,  95  ;  Coreena,  45  ;  Cork,  99,  123  ;
Cornwall,  7, 13,  180;  Corsham,  96;  Cressing,  27;  Crickhowell,  149;  Crowborough,
80-81;  Croxton,  157;  Dakota,  219;  Darling  Downs,  4(i  ;  Dauphir.y,  20,  172  ? ;
Donnington,  53  ;  Down,  County,  129  ;  Drum  Castle,  67,  168  ;  Dunninald,  185  ;
East  Moors,  210  ;  Easton  Court,  149  ;  Emu  Hills  Park,  47  ;  Esse  Centre,  218 ;
Ettington  Park,  127 ;  Evercreech,  33 ;  Fiddington,  51  ;  Flamborough,  174 ;
Folkingham,  96 ;  Frampton-on-Severn,  71  ;  France,  20-23,  (South  of)  172 ;
Germany,  ]3;  Glynde,  153-154;  Goodig,  214;  Grantham,  96;  Great  Hallingbury,
197  ;  Grinton  Mine,  201-202 ;  Guernsey,  64-65  ;  Hale  Park,  55,  226  ;  Hampton


VI


Index  to  Volume  XIII.


Localities,  Divining  Kod,  Used  in  (continued)

Court  Estate,  179  ;  Hareby,  133,  135  ;  Harz  Mountains,  13 ;  Hastings,  121-122  ;
Haverholme  Triory,  07;  Havering,  104;  Hedgecocks,  8G  ;  Helpstone,  171-173  ;
Henbury,  07-68  ;  Henham,  198  ;  Hereford,  157  ;  Hill  House  near  Wells,  48  ;
Holmer,  157;  Holmwood,  99  ;  Holnet,  50,  63-64  ;  Holywell,  142  ;  Horbling,  96  ;
Horsham,  85,  86,  117-121,  227-230,  278-279;  Houghton  Station,  183;  Hudson,
Mich.,  210,  217;  Ilfracombe,  178  ;  Ireland,  30,  31,  00,  76-78,  83,  99,  100-117,  123,
129-130,  172,  174-170,  185  ;  Italy,  21,  220,  246  ;  Jersey,  219  ;  Jersey  Bore,  47  ;
Keighley,  141;  Kemble  Estate,  103;  Ketton,  98;  Kimbolton,  42;  Kingsley,  102;
Kingstown,  174-170  ;  Kircassock,  70,  77  ;  Knighton,  101  ;  Knocknaboley,  60 ;
Lambourn,  231 ;  Lamport  39  ;  Launceston,  180-181  ;  Ledbury,  34  ;  Le  Hendre,
184;  Lindfield,  87-88;  Livonia,  Mich  ,217;  Llanelly,  215,  270;  Llanvair,  150-152;
Locking,  18,  50-52,  220  ;  Lochnagar,  40,  47  ;  Lucerne,  220  ;  Lue,  N.S.W.,  46-47  ;
Lugwardine,  34;  Lurgan,  76  ;  Lynden  Wood,  90  ;  Lynton,  99,  101;  Madresfield,
81-83;  Malton,  170;  Malvern,  81-82;  Marston  Magna,  152-153;  Mayfield,  70-71;
Melkshani,  146-148  ;  Melton-Mowbray,  182  ;  Mendip  Hills,  16-17,  48-51,  86,  256  ;
Meredith,  56;  Metheringham,  88  ;  Michigan,  217  ;  Middleton  Park,  91 ;  Mid-
somer  Norton,  73  ;  Millways,  180-181  ;  Monkton  Farleigh,  95  ;  Monmouth,  184  ;
Montrose,  185 ;  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  125,  138-139 ;  New  Hampshire,  44  ;  New
House  Farm,  94  ;  Newmarket,  Cork,  31  ;  Newport,  Mon .,  35-37  ;  New  South
Wales,  40-47;  Newton,  168;  Northville,  Mich.,  219;  North  Wootton,  37-38;
Norwich,  219  ;  Oaksey,  100  ;  Oare,  99,  101 ;  Otterburn,  144  ;  Oundle,  61  ;  Over,
74  ;  Oxford,  91-92  ;  Parnacott,  101  ;  Pembrey,  214  :  Penpri.sk,  1-19  ;  Penymaes,
142  ;  Plymouth,  Mich.,  210-218  ;  Porthcawl,  162,  236  ;  Prieska,  100  ;  Provence,
41  ;  (Queensland,  45-47  ;  Rangemore,  103  ;  Richmond,  188-195  ;  Rillington,
165-160;  Ross,  .58;  Rudford,  ,50  ;  Ryde,  131  ;  Rylstone,  N.S.W.,  40-47;  Samles-
bury,  02  ;  Sandford  Green,  51-52 ;  Shanklin,  60  ;  Shepton  Mallet,  49,  50,  80-87  ;
Shotover  Hill,  92  ;  Sodbury,  48  ;  Somersetshire,  6-7,  16-17,  18,  31-33,  37-38,  47-55,
6.5,  73,  86-87,  182,  186,  256  ;  South  Africa,  158-160  ;  Southampton,  43  ;  South
Down,  130;  Spain,  5,  2.50;  Spilsby,  125-120,  133,  135,  137-13S  ;  St.  Briavel's,  211;
Stradney  Castle,  215  ;  Street,  31-32  ;  Stroud,  ISO  ;  Sturminster  Newton,  275  ;
Switzerland,  220;  Teddiugton,  39 ;  Tenbury,  14'.) ;  Tennosse,  247;  Threenhill  Priory
190-198;  Tinahley,  60;  Toy  Farm,  154  ;  Trainton,  173  ;  Uggeshall,  39  ;  United
States,  19-20,  44,  59,  215-219,  247,  250;  Uppingham,  127;  Valley  City,  219;  Vaynor,
213;  Walkeringham,  242 ;  Walton-le-dale,  183;  Waringstown,  78;  Warnham  Lodge,
85,  117-121,  227-230,  278-279;  Warringt.-n,  101;  Waterford,  77,  106-117,  123;
Wayne,  219  :  Weir  Hill  Farm,  92;  Wells,  .38;  West  Indies,  172;  Whitfield,
33-34  ;  Wick.  211  ;  Wimbledon,  203-206,  239  ;  Wincanton,  54-55  ;  Winscombe,
51-.52  ;  Winterbouriie,  00  ;  Wisbech  Market,  01  ;  Woolhope,  154-155  ;  Woolwich
Common,  42,  223  ;  Wotton,  Isle  of  Wight,  130-134  ;  Worcestershire,  39  ;  World's
End,  01  ;  Wrigley  Carr,  108-109  ;  Wrington,  10,  17  ;  Yelling,  155-157 ;  Yorkshire
Wolds,  104.

M.,  Mrs.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 341-9

MacDonougli,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  l^iper 340,  473

Macleod,  Miss  G.  E.,  ,,  ,, .351,447

Manners,  Madame  Elisa 310,  335-6,  378,  471

Marte,  Robert 318-320,  419-422,  428  9

Mason,  Dr.  Osgood,  "Telepathy  and  the  Subliminal  Self,"  by— Review  of  610

Materials  of  Divining  Rod,  Kinds  of  Wood  Used 218

Metallic  Wires  or  Springs 19,  39,  43,  50,  56,  58,  66-71,  73,  74,  143,

177,  200,  220,  270

,, Miscellaneous ... ... ... ... ... ...  58

Meetings  of  the  Society .. 1,283

Members,  x\ssociates,  and  Hon.  Members  of  the  S.P.R.,  List  of 622

,,  ,,  American  Branch 644


Index  to  Volume  XII 1.


Mineral  Lodes,  Surface  Indications  of 234,  250

Miners,  Opinions  on  Divining  Rod 5,  17

Mitchell,  J.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 351,  378,  383,  517,  519

Mitchell,  Dr.  S.  Weir,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 482

Moses,  W.  Stainton  ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ...  408

Movements  of  Divining-  Rod,  Breaking 7,  24,  26,  28,  30,  35,  38,  41,  42,  53,  57,

69,  74,  79-80,  92,  106,  110,  124,
133,  146,  156,  169,  l"!,  243-244
Inability  to  Restrain  23,  28,  36,  38,  48,  57,  60,  73,  97,  151-152,  161
Not  D.ie  to  Muscular  Action ... 43,  74,  80,  83,  164,  243-244
Stopped  by  Water  or  by  Similar  Metals... 164-165,  211,  212,  269

,, Stopped  by  Di.ssiinilar  Metals 247,  269

When  Held  by  Tongs  or  Pincers 86,  97

When  Holder's  Wrists  Held  by  Dowser 35,  78-79,  81,  87,  103,

185,  201,  242,  244

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Review  of  "  Letters  from  Julia,"  by  W.  T.  Stead ...  614

Nevius,  Dr.  J.  L.,  "Demon  Possession  and  Allied  Themes,"  by-
Review  of 602

Newbold,  Professor  W.  Romaine,  Review  of  "  Demon  Possession  and

Allied  Themes,"  by  Dr.  J.  L.  Nevius 602

Nichols,  Pi ofessor  H.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper ... 374,  534

Norton,  Professor  C.  E.,  Seances ,, ,, 296,  333-4,  525


Obalecheff,  Mme.,  Case  recorded  by  ...
Officers  and  Council,  List  of  (1898)
Oil-Smellers


596
621
250


P. "  G.  P."  Communications. (See  George  Pelliam)

P.,  Mrs.  M.  E.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 499

Parish,  Herr  Edmund,  "  Zur  Kritik  des  Telepathischen  Beweis  Materiels,''

by — Review  of  .589

Parker,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  L.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper  337-8,  419,  452,  455
Pease,  E.  R. ,  First  Report  of  the  S.P.  R.  on  the  Phenomena  of  the

Divining  Rod ... 4

Peirce,  Professor  J.  M.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 296,  305,  460

Pelham,  George,  History  of  the  "  G.  P."  Communications

286,287,290,291,295-335

Pendule  Explorateur 10-11,19,248

Piper,  Mis.,  Trance  Phenomena  of 284-582

Podmore,  Frank,  Review  of  "  The  Subconscious  Se'f  and  its  Relation  to

Education  and  Health,"  by  Dr.  L.  Waldstein ...  614
,,  ,, "  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,"  by — Review  of ...  604

R.,  Mrs.  J.  E.  R.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 383,  510

R.,  Louis ...  337-9

R.,  Miss  S.  R.,  Case  recorded  by 596

Rankin,  H.  W.,  Dr.  Nevius'  "Demon  Possession  and  Allied  Themes,"

Edited  by 602

Reviews 589,  602,  604,  610,  612,  614,  616

Bliabdomancy 9,  16


Vlll


Index  to  Volume  XIII.


Savage,  Rev.  Minot  J 295,  326,  327

Slialer,  Professor,  and  Mrs.  N.  S.  .Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper... ... ...  524

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  Review  of "  Zur  Kritik  des  Telepathischen  Beweis

Materiels,"  by  Herr  E.  Parish -- ...  589

Smith,  J.  G.,  Review  of  "  A  Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts,"  by  A.  Lang  616

Smith,  J.  P.,  Case  recorded  by 596

Sonrciers ... 20

Spirit  Identity,  Facts  Pointing  to  (see  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper)

Stead,  W.  T.,  "  Letters  from  Julia,"  by— Review.of 612

Subconscious  Self  and  its  Relation  to  Education  and  Health,  Dr.  L.

Wa'dstein  on ... 614

Subliminal  Self,  Telepathy  and  the,  Dr.  O.  Mason  on ...  610

Sutton  Rev.  W.  S.,  and  Mrs.  Paine,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper ... 386-9,  484

Telepathy,  Recent  Books  on 589,  610

Thaw,  Dr.  A.  B.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 351-2,  384-5,  536-582

Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,  A  Further  Record,  by  R.  Hodgson,

LL.D 284-582

Automatic  Writing  Developed ...  .. ...  291

,, ^ "  G.  P."  Communications,  History  of  286,  287,  290,  291,  295
Other  Communicators,  Account  of ... ... ...  335

„  "  Spirit "  Hypothesis,  and  Telepathic 357-370

,,  Recent  Changes  in  the  Trance 407

,,  Reports  of  Sittings  ... .. 413

Trowbridge,  Professor  J.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 526

Vance,  Mr.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 300,  381-2,  457

Vance,  Miss 374,  434

Waldstein,  De.  L. ,  "The  Subconscious  Self  in  its  Relation  to  Educa-
tion and  Health,  '  by— Review  of  614

Warner,  Mrs " 318,324

Warner,  Miss 324-5,  356

Water-smeller 62,  220

Water-witch 20,  62

Water,  Depth  of,  How  Found  by  Dowser .... 59,  209

,, Distribution  of  Underground 3,  222-225,  239,  262-265

„ Surface  Indications  of 234,  248-249,  250,  277

Welsh  Dowsers ..  206


Zahories
