Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. IX (1893-1894)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1893 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XXIV-XXV) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc09soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  IX.
(CONTAINING PARTS XXIV— XXV.)
1893—4.


The  responsibUity  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  published
in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors.


London :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.


1894.


Jr  CONTENTS.


)  3  0  j

(?)  J  , 3 -J 3 > .1  ,


■5  J


General  Meetings


The  Subliminal  Consciousness. By  Frbdeeic  W.  H.  Myers.
J  Chap. VI. The  Mechanism  of  Hysteria  .

Chap.  VII. Motor  Automatism  ....

^ The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists. By  Eichard  Hodgson,  LL.D.

A  Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  By  A.  T
^  Myers,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  and  F.  W.  H.  Myers  .


PAGE
1

3
26

129
160

Supplement.

Notices  of  Books  : —
^ Dr.  Moll's  "  Rapport  in  der  Hypnose." By  Walter  Leaf,
^  Litt.D  211

^  Dr. Schmidkunz's "  Psychologic der Suggestion."  By

A  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D  .214

'j^  Professor  Brofferio's  "Per  lo  Spiritismo." By  Walter

Leaf,  Litt.D  216

Experiments  at  Milan  with  Eusapia  Palladino. By  Frank.

PODMORE  ,218

0  Professor  Tamburini's  "Spiritismo  e  Telepatia." By  H.

Babington  Smith .......  22.5


b


Mr.  T.  .J.  Hudson's  "The  Law  of  Psychic  Phenomena." .  230

^ General  Meetings ..........  235

Partial  Anaesthesia. By  Professor  William  Ramsay,  Ph.D., F.R.S.  236

The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses. — I. By  Frederic  W.  H.

^ Myers 245

^ Indian Magic and the Testimony of Conjurers. By  Richard

p Hodgson,  LL.D 354


Supplement.

Review  : —

Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  (1)  Introduction  to  Kirk's  "Secret
Commonwealth  of  Elves,  Fauns,  and  Fairies."
(2)  Essay  on  " Compai'ative  Psychical  Research."
By  H.  Babington  Smith  367

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Libi-ary . .  370

List  of  Members  and  Associates . . . . . .  .371

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch . .  394

34^093


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEAECK


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS."


The  56th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
luiustei'  Town  Hall  on  Friday,  January  27th,  1893,  at  4  p.m.,.
Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  continued  his  paper  on  "Sensory  Automatism
and  Induced  Hallucinations,"  jjublished  iu  the  Proceedings,  Part
XXIII.


The  -57th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
March  10th,  at  8.30.  p.m.,  Mr.  Pearsall  Smith  in  the  chair.

Mr.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "  Motor  Messages  from  the  Sub-
liminal Self,"  the  substance  of  which  is  included  in  Chapter  VII.  of
his  paper  on  "  The  Subliminal  Consciousness,"  printed  below.

Mr.  F.  Podjiore  read  a  paper  on  "  Telepathic  Dreams."


The  58th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
April  21st,  at  4  p.m.,  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Mr.  Myers  read  a  paper  on  the  "  Mechanism  of  Hysteria,"  form-
ing Chapter  VI.  of  his  paper  on  the  "  Subliminal  Consciousness,"
printed  below.

Mr.  Podmore  gave  a  "  Criticism  of  the  Evidence  as  to  Phenomena
observed  at  Milan  with  Eusapia  Paladino,"  which  is  piinted  in  the
Supplement.


The  59th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place  on  Friday,
June  2nd,  at  8.30  p.m.,  Professor  Barrett  in  the  chair.

Professor  W.  Ramsay"  read  a  paper  on  "  Experiments  with
Anfesthetics,"  which  will  be  published  in  a  future  number  of  thlS
Proceedings.

Mr.  Myers  read  part  of  a  paper  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  himself  on
"  Mind-healing,  Faith-healing,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes,"  printed
below.

B


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc09soci


The  Sithliminal  Consciousness.


I.

THE  SUBLIMINAL  CONSCIOUSNESS.
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

Chapter  VI.
The  Mechaxism  of  Hysteria.


The  survey  of  human  personality  on  which  we  are  now  engaged  ; —
involving  as  it  does  the  discovery  and  discussion  of  such  intimations
as  upraise  themselves  in  many  quarters  from  the  hidden  or  submerged
strata  of  our  being  into  the  consciousness  of  ordinary  life; — is  a  survey
of  which  no  single  section  can  be  complete  until  the  whole  field  has
been  passed  under  review.  On  the  other  hand,  fresh  problems  present
themselves  in  each  department  as  fresh  phenomena  are  noted  in  other
departments,  and  closer  interrelations  discerned  or  divined.  And  be-
.sides  this  increasing  complexify  there  is  an  increasing  marvelloiisness
in  the  phenomena  gradually  encountered,  which  must  needs  send  us
back  again  and  again  in  search  of  phenomena  analogous,  but  less
startling  in  character.

It  is  reasonable,  therefore,  that  before  we  pass  on  from  the  complex
and  marvellous  phenomena  described  under  the  head  of  sensory
automatism  to  the  no  less  surprising  facts  of  moto7'  automatism —
especially  of  automatic  script  and  speech — we  should  pause  and  con-
sider how  far  our  definition  of  motor  automatism  is  to  extend,  and
what  earlier  or  simpler  phases  thereof  may  point  the  way  to  those
highly-developed  telepathic  motor  messages  with  which  we  are  mainly
to  be  concerned.

In  the  first  place  we  shall  observe  once  more — what  has  often  been
already  manifest — that  the  simple  partition  of  nervous  action  into
sensory  and  motor  does  not  suffice  as  a  logical  scheme  for  the  arrange-
ment of  subliminal  messages.  We  are  not,  indeed,  entitled  to  assume
that  what  we  call  sensory  or  motor  qualities  are  inherent  in  these
messages,  either  as  received  telepathically  from  others,  or  as  initiated
in  the  depths  of  our  own  being.  Such  qualities  may  be  the  mere
translation  into  terms  intelligible  by  the  supraliminal  self  of  impressions
for  which  we  possess  no  specialised  term  ; — impressions  which  we  should
be  obliged  to  describe  vaguely  as  "  organic  "  ; — although,  for  aught  we
know,  they  may  in  reality  be  themselves  specialised  in  categories  of

B  2


4  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

which  we  liave  at  present  no  conception.  This  seems  to  be  the  case
with  many  even  of  those  subUminal  messages  which  are  ultimately
clothed  in  the  most  definite  sensory  form.  An  apparition  or  a
phantasmal  voice  may  be  the  exteriorisation  of  a  telepathic  impact
which  has  first  shown  itself  in  a  mere  sense  of  apprehension  or  malaise.
Such  an  apparition  is  no  simple  optical  presentation  ;  we  may  call  it
if  we  please  an  internal  vision,  but  its  deeper  initiatory  processes  ai'e
as  yet  unknown.

Still  more  markedly  is  this  the  case  with  motor  automatisms.  The
telepathic  transmission  of  a  message  directly  prompting  to  a  motor  act
(as  of  writing)  has  no  even  apparent  parallel  in  ordinary  life.  For  I
cannot  diiectly  j^rompt  my  fiiend  to  a  motor  act ;  I  can  so  prompt  him
only  by  first  producing  upon  him  some  sensory  impression.  I  can  tell
him  to  write  ;  I  can  stir  him  to  answering  speech  ;  but  my  volition
cannot  touch  his  motor  centres  of  hand  or  thi'oat  except  through  some
such  indirect  road.  All  the  harder,  then,  is  it  to  conceive  from  what
form  of  initial  impulse  these  motor  automatisms  spring ;  all  the  more
are  we  bound  to  study  such  vague,  organic,  internuntial  messages  as
we  can  detect  in  their  passage  from  one  stratum  of  our  psychical  being
to  another,  before  we  deal  with  the  full-ljlown  motor  messages,
telepathic  or  otherwise,  which  are  conveyed  by  automatic  script  or
voice.  In  other  words,  and  using  my  old  metaphor,  before  we  follow
motor  automatism  above  the  psychological  end  of  the  conscious
spectrum,  we  must  trace  its  beginnings  below  the  physiological  end.
We  must  analyse  the  influence  of  motor  and  quasi-motor  messages  upon
the  organic  functions  before  we  analyse  the  intellectual  contents  of  such
messages,  or  discuss  the  source  of  such  definite  knowledge  as  they  may
contain.

To  some  extent  this  has  been  already  done  in  previous  chapters.
Discussing  the  Mechanism  of  Suggestion  (Chap.  II.),  we  encountered
many  vaso-motor  and  trophic  changes  over  which,  in  my  view,  the
hypnotic  stratum  of  the  Self  exerts  habitual  control.  Again,  the
Insjm-ations  of  Genius  (Chap.  III.)  were  seen  to  have  their  motor  side,
both  in  the  plastic  arts,  in  music,  and  in  oratory  ;  although  the  greater
definiteness  of  mathematical  achievements  led  us  to  dwell  mainly  on  a
form  of  genius  whose  results  are  conceived  and  expressed  mainly  in
visual  terms.  Dreams,  which  were  next  touched  upon,  involve  obscui'e
forms  of  motor  as  well  as  of  sensory  excitation  ;  and  the  very  name  of
souinambulism  points  to  a  pitch  of  dream-intensity  at  which  its  motor
impulses  translate  themselves  into  more  or  less  coherent  action.

On  these  topics,  then,  I  must  be  content  to  refer  my  readers  to
what  has  already  been  briefly  and  imperfectly  said.  But  there  is  one
cognate  topic  of  great  importance — one  repertory  of  subliminal  mes-
sages especially  of  the  vaguer  organic  types — on  which  I  have  as  yet


The  Sahlhninal  Consciousness.


5


touched  so  meagrely  that  I  must  needs  here  discuss  its  lessons  at
some  length  before  pi'oceeding  to  those  more  specialised  and  intellec-
tual motor  messages  of  which  automatic  writing  is  the  familiar  type.
I  allude  to  the  whole  range  of  morhid  interchanges  or  interactions
between  one  section  of  the  personality  and  another, — those  "  self-sug-
gestive maladies,"  or  "  diseases  of  the  hypnotic  stratum,"  as  I  have
tenned  them  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  309),  "  whose  differentia  is  an
irrational  self-suggestion  in  regions  beyond  the  powers  of  the  waking
will ; — a  morbid  or  uncontrolled  functioning  of  powers  over  the
organism  which  effect  profounder  modifications  than  the  empirical
self  can  parallel."  For  convenience'  sake  we  may  continue  to  give  to
all  these  perturbations  the  meaningless  name  of  "hysteria"; — trusting
that  the  reader  will  divest  his  mind  of  those  popular  notions  of  hysteria
which  merely  reflect  and  misintei'pret  some  superficial  symptoms  of  a
group  of  maladies  which  are  among  the  most  formidable,  and  the
most  instructive,  disturbances  to  which  human  minds  and  bodies  are
exposed.

To  define  hysteria  in  nosological  terms,  by  cataloguing  and  connect-
ing its  symptoms,  is  well  known  to  be  an  impossible  task.  In  our
ignorance  of  the  physical  genesis  and  interrelation  of  those  symptoms
we  cannot  predict  from  one  day  to  another  what  e'S'olution  the  disease
will  follow,  or  what  new  phenomena  may  occur.  If  we  would  attain
to  a  comprehensive  view,  we  must  seek  it  from  some  psychological
standpoint.  And  we  must  begin  by  distinguishing  all  ordinary
diseases,  taken  together,  from  their  hysterical  simulations,  as  profoundly
as  we  distinguish  all  placental  mammals  from  the  marsupial  parodies
which  by  some  freak  of  evolution  so  strangely  mimic  placental  forms.

On  the  one  hand  we  have  a  series  of  definite,  objective  lesions,
inflicted  upon  the  organism  by  some  external  injury,  or  by  some
internal  operation  of  microbes,  malnutrition,  heredity  disease,  or  senile
decay.  On  the  other  hand,  and  side  by  side  with  this  series,  we  have
another  series  of  what  I  may  term  pliantom  lesions,  depending,  of
course,  ultimately  upon  some  cerebral  conditions — hereditary,  self-
developed,  or  traumatic ; — but  so  depending  in  an  indirect  rather  than
in  a  direct  fashion,  not  as  incapacities  anatomically  following  on  injury
to  definite  nervous  centres  or  tracts,  but  as  the  apparently  capricious
manifestations  of  an  injury  presumably  affecting  some  unknown  seat
of  highest  co-ordination ;  in  short,  as  lyerturbations  of  i^ersonality,
which  work  themselves  out  through  some  morbid  process  of  self-sug-
gestion, according  to  laws  of  association  cognisable  by  us,  if  at  all,
from  the  intellectual  rather  than  from  the  anatomical  side.

These  phantom  lesions,  I  say,  are  not  like  anatomical  injuries,  but
like  some  ignorant  patient's  objectified  dream.  Hysterical  patches  of
ansesthesia  do  not  correspond  with  any  true  areas  of  ordinary  sensory


6


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


innervation  ;  they  seem  to  follow  the  patient's  crude  notions  of  where
his  limbs  begin  and  end  ;  they  are  "  aniesthetic  bracelets,"  "  anaesthetic
boots."  The  eye  -  troubles  of  the  hysteric  affect  not  the  optical
mechanism  alone,  but  all  that  the  ophthalmic  patient  would  call  his
"  eye  "  ; — all  that  occupies  or  surrounds  the  orbit.  Nay,  certain  well-
known  syndromes — as  the  so-called  hysterical  "  astasia-abasia,"  or
inability  to  walk  and  stand — are,  if  I  may  so  say,  unblushingly
intellectual  in  chai'acter,  are  the  mere  abolition  by  some  profound
self-suggestion  of  one  special  set  of  co-ordinated  movements  deeply
rooted,  first  in  the  supraliminal,  then  in  the  subliminal  life.  The
"rhythmic  chorea,"  or  "danse  de  S.  Guy,"  on  the  other  hand,  sa
common  in  mediseval  Germany,  is  an  intensification  of  an  acquired
synergy,  a  helpless  prolongation  of  a  set  of  co-ordinated  movements
which  the  patient  is  unable  to  arrest,  as  the  boy  in  the  fairy  tale  was
unable  to  arrest  the  mill,  whose  controlling  charms  he  had  foi'gotten,
and  which  is  still  grinding  out  salt  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  On  these
points  all  will  agree.  And  I  may  suggest  that  from  my  own  special
point  of  view  hysterical  "  allocheiria  " — the  confusion  or  reversal  of
motor  conceptions  of  left  and  right — is  but  the  degenerative  counter-
part of  that  ambidexterity  which  I  regard  as  now  accompanying  the
evolutionary  process  in  man  ;  and,  moreover,  that  hysterical  attaques  de
sommeil  are  but  that  reversion  to  our  primitive  state  of  personality
which  is  natural,  which  was  even  predictable,  amid  the  upheavals  of
this  psychic  storm.

It  is,  then,  this  fundamentally  psychological  character  of  hysteria,
as  a  perturbation  of  personality,  which  excuses,  or  rather  compels,
its  study  not  only  from  the  clinical,  but  from  the  psychological  stand-
point. But  before  we  discuss  symptoms  which  show  us  perturbed
personality  as  an  undoubted  evil,  I  feel  bound  once  more  to  disavow
a  view  which,  though  it  be  taken  for  granted,  for  instance,  by  all
writers  on  hysteria,  I  cannot  but  regard  as  erroneous.  I  mean  the
view  that  any  perturbation  of  the  ordinary  personality  is  necessarily
and  in  itself  an  evil.  Such  perturbations,  no  doubt,  disturb  the
"  normal  man " ;  but  the  "  normal  man  "  represents  in  my  eyes  no
true  ideal,  no  stable  synthesis,  but  rather  a  transitory  and  shifting
compromise  between  the  Sage  and  the  Dement.  The  Sage, — if  I  may
thus  use  the  name  of  the  imaginary  Stoic  hero  with  a  new  implication —
would  be  the  man  who  fully  controlled  all  faculties  immanent  within
him  ; — who  (for  instance)  could  voluntarily  receive  and  transmit  tele-
pathic impressions  ;  who  could  remedy  by  self-suggestion  his  body's
remediable  ills,  and  exempt  himself  at  last  from  any  painful  perception
of  its  inevitable  decay.  The  Dement,  on  the  other  hand,  has  suffered
the  almost  complete  obscuration  of  personality.  His  organism  retains
barely  so  much  of  unity  as  suffices  to  protect  it  from  piecemeal  disin-


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


7


tegration.  Between  these  two  extremes — the  one  imaginary,  the
other  real, — hes  an  almost  infinite  series  of  combinations  and  permuta-
tions of  the  elements  of  human  personality.  Combinations  superior
to  the  habitual  combination  which  makes  the  normal  man  of  the
time  being  are  wont  to  arise  slowly  by  evolution,  and  may  be  hastened
by  deliberate  experiment.  And  high  among  such  improved  plans  of
psychical  structure  I  reckon  the  condition  of  those  sensitives  who,
without  injury  to  normal  health  or  capacities,  can  exercise  an  easier
commerce  than  is  open  to  most  of  us  with  their  own  subliminal
selves.^  Of  course  I  am  not  saying  that  members  of  this  type  are
individually  superior  to  men  of  the  "normal"  type  any  more  than  all
persons  who  are  "immune"  against  influenza  are  individually  superior
to  all  who  catch  it.  Mr.  Keulemans  (on  whose  experiences  we  dwelt
in  the  last  chapter)  is  not  wiser  than  Charles  Darwin ;  but  he  never-
theless belongs,  in  my  view,  to  an  advanced,  a  forward-pointing  type  ;
he  is  wiser  than  he  would  have  been  if,  with  the  same  character  and
intelligence,  he  had  been  constructed  on  the  physical  pattern  of  the
normal  man.

But,  nevertheless,  among  adjustments  so  complex  and  delicate  as
those  of  our  psychical  being,  any  perturbation  will  naturally  be  injurious
more  often  than  beneficial.  For  the  most  part  it  will  indicate  no  pro-
gress towards  a  new  ideal,  but  a  mere  incapacity  of  maintaining  the
practical  compromise  which  has  been  found  needful  for  terrene  well-
being.  To  all  troubles  of  this  kind,  where  no  discernible  organic  lesion
is  suspected,  the  name  of  hysteria  is  loosely  given.  But  what  a  differ-
ence between  the  various  cases  massed  under  this  head  !  "  Great  wits  "
have  at  least  never  been  supposed  to  be  "  near  allied  "  to  blank  im-
becility ;  yet  we  are  content  to  include  in  the  same  class  of  "  hysterics  "
at  once  such  intense  and  epoch-making  spirits  as  St.  Theresa  or  Rousseau,
and  some  dead-alive  inmate  of  the  Salpetriere,  who  cannot  vary  the
pattern  of  wool-work  on  which  she  started  years  ago.  nor  leave  the
hospital  ward  for  the  garden  without  bewilderment  and  alarm.  "  Les
hysteriques  menent  le  monde,"  says  the  French  proverb.  "It  is  the
fact,"  say  Breuer  and  Freud,  "  that  among  hysterics  we  find  the  clearest-
minded,  the  strongest-willed,  the  fullest  of  character,  the  most  acutely
critical  specimens  of  humanity.""  Can  these  things  be  true  of  the
same  class  which  contains  all  those  poor  Lucies  and  Marcelles  who
seem  to  exist  flabbily  for  the  mere  purpose  of  moral  vivisection, — "  the

'  It  may,  of  course,  be  the  case  that  the  subliminal  Self  of  the  sensitive  is  not  only
more  easily  reached  but  also  more  capable  or  better-informed  than  with  ordinary  men.
But  since  different  degrees  of  facility  in  intercommunication  seem  enough  to  account
for  difference  in  results,  I  refrain  from  touching  on  that  other  (obviously  insoluble)
question.

Neurologisches  Central-Uatt,  January  15th,  1893,  p.  44.


31r.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


frogs  of  the  experimental  psychologist"?  There  is  need,  I  venture
to  think,  of  some  such  generalisation  as  I  propose,  if  definitions
apparently  so  discrepant  are  to  be  brought  under  a  higher  unity.  On
the  view  here  taken,  the  characteristic  both  of  St.  Theresa  and  of  Mar-
<3elle  is  a  perturbed  personality.  But  there  may  be  many  difl'ei'ent
forms  of  such  perturbation,  leading  to  almost  opposite  results.  Two
leading  types  of  possible  derangement  will  at  once  suggest  themselves.
It  is  the  business  of  the  supraliminal  Self  to  maintain  the  em-
pirical span  of  consciousness  and  faculty  both  unimpaired  and  un-
invaded.  "Just  in  this  fashion,"  has  that  Self  decided,  "is  it  needful
for  terrene  prosperity  that  man  should  feel,  and  should  I'eact  upon  the
world  outside  him.  There  may  be  faculties  deeper  down  in  him  which
can  perceive  more,  and  can  react  moi'e  profoundly.  Let  these  faculties
keep  to  their  proper  business  of  superintending  the  organic  processes,
whose  mechanism  I,  the  supraliminal  Self,  have  never  known  or  have
long  since  forgotten.  I  do  not  desire  the  casual  incursion  of  powers
which  I  am  unable  to  control.  Nay,  I  must  needs  keep  the  threshold
of  consciousness  stable,  the  psychical  diaphragm  impermeable,  if  I  am
to  secure  my  own  preservation.  If  that  partition  be  too  easily  tra-
versed, I  shall  fear  that  knowledge  and  faculty  essential  to  my  own
well-being  may  sink  into  subliminality  and  pass  beyond  my  control.  I
must  not  risk  such  losses.  I  need  to  be  able  to  catch,  retain,  digest,
the  impressions  from  without  which  subserve  practical  life  ;  to  mix
them  in  healthy  association  with  each  other,  and  to  excrete  them  from
memory  when  they  have  ceased  to  be  of  use  and  are  becoming  cumbei'-
some  or  even  noxious."

We  shall  find,  I  think,  that  in  most  cases  of  hysteria  these  two  corre-
lative dangers — of  insurgence  and  of  subsidence — are  represented,  but
are  represented  in  varying  proportions.  With  "  the  hysterics  who  lead
the  world  "  there  is  no  marked  loss  of  supraliminal  grasp  or  span,  hvtt
thei'e  is  irregular  uprush  of  subliminal  faculty — an  uprush  like  that  of
genius,  but  less  wisely  directed — depending  upon  a  lack  of  liminal
stability,  an  excessive  permeability,  if  I  may  so  say,  of  the  psychical
diaphragm  which  separates  the  empirical  from  the  latent  faculties  of
man.

With  the  confirmed  and  often  hereditary  hysteric  of  the  hospitals,
on  the  other  hand,  the  leading  phenomenon  is  not  the  uprush  but  the
down-draught.  It  is  the  gradual  sinking  of  one  supraliminal  faculty
after  another — sensation,  memory,  will — into  a  subliminal  region  where
indeed  experiment  or  inference  may  show  them  to  be  still  existing,  but
where  they  are  useless  for  the  purposes  of  common  life.  This  is  for  the
human  spirit  "  that  vast  Serbonian  bog,  where  armies  whole  have
sunk";  where  its  powers  are  absorbed  without  annihilation,  and  rot
beneath  the  treacherous  surface  iu  an  unseen  decay.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


9


We  must  now  come  to  concrete  examples.  And  tirst  let  me  remind
the  reader  that  there  is  nothing  unique  or  isolated  about  these  hysteri-
cal disturbances  of  personality.  The  personality  of  each  of  us  is  in  a
.state  of  constantly  shifting  equilibrium,  and  the  healthy  person,  under
the  influence  of  various  intoxications,  or  from  mere  changes  of  trophic
condition,  undergoes  shiftings  of  the  threshold,  uprushes  and  sub-
sidences of  many  kinds,  which  bear  to  hysterical  phenomena  somewhat
the  same  relation  which  those  in  turn  bear  to  the  more  permanent
psychical  changes  of  actual  insanity.  Alcoholic  intoxication  simulates
in  its  various  stages  a  strange  variety  both  of  hysterical  and  of  insane
symptoms.  Hunger,  fatigue,  slight  poisoning  by  impure  air,  produce  a
well-known  group  of  disturbances  of  memory  and  sensation.  A  very
small  degree  of  fever  is  enough  to  pi'oduce  a  transient  perturbation  of
personality  of  the  most  violent  kind.  Familiar  though  all  this  may  be,
there  is  yet,  I  think,  some  interest  in  the  following  account  of  a  feverish
experience,  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  from  Samoa.
For  in  Mr.  Stevenson's  paper  on  his  own  dreams,  elsewhere  alluded  to,
we  have  the  most  striking  living  example  known  to  me  of  that  helpful
and  productive  subliminal  uprush  which  I  have  characterised  as  the
mechanism  of  genius.  It  is,  therefore,  interesting  to  observe  how
under  morbid  conditions  this  temperament  of  genius — this  ready  per-
meability of  the  psychical  diaphragm — transforms  what  might  in  others
be  a  mere  vague  and  massive  discomfort  into  a  vivid  though  incoherent
message  from  the  subliminal  storm  and  iire.  The  result  is  a  kind  of
supraliminal  duality,  the  perception  at  the  same  time  of  two  personali-
ties,— the  one  rational  and  moral,  the  other  belonging  to  the  stratum
of  dreams  and  nightmare.

Vailima  Plantation,  Upoho,  Samoan  Islands.

July  Uth,  1892.

Dear  Mr.  Myers, — I  am  tempted  to  communicate  to  you  some  experi-
ences of  mine  which  seem  to  me  (ignorant  as  I  am)  of  a  high  psycliological
interest.

I  had  infamous  bad  health  when  I  was  a  child  and  suffered  much  from
night  fears  ;  hut  from  the  age  of  about  thirteen  until  I  was  past  thirty  I
did  not  know  what  it  was  to  have  a  high  fever  or  to  wander  in  my  mind.
So  that  these  experiences,  when  they  were  renewed,  came  upon  me  with
entire  freshness  ;  and  either  I  am  a  peculiar  subject,  or  I  was  thus  enabled
to  observe  them  with  unusual  closeness.

Experience  A.  Daring  an  illness  at  Nice  I  lay  awake  a  whole  night  in
extreme  pain.  From  the  beginning  of  the  evening  ane  part  of  my  mind  be-
came possessed  of  a  notion  so  grotesque  and  shapeless  that  it  may  best  be
described  as  a  form  of  words.  I  thought  the  pain  was,  or  was  connected
with,  a  wisp  or  coil  of  some  sort ;  I  knew  not  of  what  it  consisted  nor  yet
where  it  was,  and  cared  not  ;  only  I  thought,  if  the  two  ends  were  brought
together  the  pain  would  cease.  Now  all  the  time,  with  another  part  of  my
mind,  which  I  venture  to  think  was  myself,  I  w'as  fully  alive  to  the  absurdity


10


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


of  this  idea,  knew  it  to  be  a  mark  of  impaired  sanity,  and  was  engaged  with
my  other  self  in  a  perpetual  conflict.  Myself  had  nothing  more  at  heart  than
to  keep  from  my  wife,  who  was  nursing  me,  any  hint  of  this  ridiculous
hallucination  ;  the  other  was  bound  that  she  should  be  told  of  it  and  ordered
to  efiect  the  cure.  I  believe  it  must  have  been  well  on  in  the  morning
before  the  fever  (or  the  other  fellow)  triumphed,  and  I  called  my  wife  to
my  bedside,  seized  her  savagely  by  the  wrist,  and  looking  on  her  with  a  face
of  fury,  cried  :  "  Why  do  you  not  put  the  two  ends  together  and  jjut  me  out
of  pain  ?"

Experience  B.  The  other  day  in  Sydney  I  was  seized  on  a  Saturday
with  a  high  fever.  Early  in  the  afternoon  I  began  to  repeat  mechanically
the  sound  usually  written  "mhn,"  caught  myself  in  the  act,  instantly
stopped  it,  and  explained  to  my  mother,  who  was  in  the  room,  my  reasons
for  so  doing.  "That  is  the  beginning  of  the  mind  to  wander,"  I  said,
"and  has  to  be  resisted  at  the  outset."  I  fell  asleep  and  woke,  and  for  the
rest  of  the  night  repeated  to  myself  mentally  a  nonsense  word  which  I  could
not  recall  next  morning.  I  had  been  reading  the  day  before  the  life  of
Swift,  and  all  night  long  one  part  of  my  mind  (the  other  fellow)  kept  inform-
ing me  that  I  was  not  repeating  the  word  myself,  but  was  only  reading  in
a  book  that  Swift  had  so  repeated  it  in  his  last  sickness.  The  tempbition
to  communicate  this  nonsense  was  again  strongly  felt  by  myself,  but  was  on
this  occasion  triumj^hantly  resisted,  and  my  watcher  heard  from  me  all
night  nothing  of  Dean  Swift  or  the  word,  nothing  but  what  was  rational
and  to  the  point.  So  much  for  the  two  consciousnesses  when  I  can
disentangle  them  ;  but  there  is  a  part  of  my  thoughts  that  I  have
more  difficulty  in  attributing.  One  part  of  my  mind  continually  bid  me  re-
mark the  tiansrational  felicity  of  the  word,  examined  all  the  syllables,
showed  me  that  not  one  was  in  itself  significant,  and  yet  the  whole  expressed
to  a  nicety  the  voluminous  distress  of  one  in  a  high  fever  and  his  annoyance
at  and  recoil  from  the  attentions  of  his  nurses.  It  was  probably  the  same
part  (and  for  a  guess  the  other  fellotv)  who  bid  me  compare  it  with  the  non-
sense words  of  Lewis  Carroll  as  the  invention  of  a  lunatic  with  those  of  a
sane  man.  But  surely  it  was  myself  (and  myself  in  a  perfectly  clear-headed
state)  that  kept  me  trying  all  night  to  get  the  word  by  heart,  on  the  ground
that  it  would  afterwards  be  useful  in  literature  if  I  wanted  to  deal  with  mad
folk.  It  must  have  been  myself,  I  say,  because  tlte  other  fellow  believed  (or
jjretended  to  believe)  he  was  reading  the  passage  in  a  book  where  it  could
always  be  found  again  when  wanted.

Experience  C.  The  next  night  the  other  fellow  had  an  explanation  ready
for  my  sufi'erings,  of  which  I  can  only  say  that  it  had  something  to  do  with
the  navy,  that  it  was  sheer  undiluted  nonsense,  had  neither  end  nor  be-
ginning, and  was  insusceptible  of  being  expressed  in  words.  Myself  knew
this  ;  yet  I  gave  way,  and  my  watcher  was  favoured  with  some  references  to
the  navy.  Nor  only  that :  the  other  fellow  was  annoyed — or  I  was  annoyed
— on  two  inconsistent  accounts  ;  first,  because  he  had  failed  to  make  his
meaning  comprehensible,  and  second,  because  the  nurse  disjjlayed  no
interest.  The  other  fellow  would  have  liked  to  explain  further  ;  but  myself
was  much  hurt  at  having  been  got  into  this  false  position  and  would  be  led
no  further.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


11


In  cases  A  and  C  the  illusion  was  amorphous.  I  knew  it  to  be  so  and  yet
succumbed  to  the  temptation  of  trying  to  communicate  it.  In  case  B  the
idea  was  coherent,  and  I  managed  to  hold  my  peace.  Both  consciousnesses,
in  other  words,  were  less  affected  in  case  B,  and  both  more  affected  in  cases
A  and  C.  It  is  perhaps  not  always  so  :  the  illusion  might  be  coherent,  even
practical,  and  the  rational  authority  of  the  mind  quite  in  abeyance.  Would
not  that  be  lunacy  1

In  case  A  I  had  an  absolute  knowledge  that  I  was  out  of  my  mind,  and
that  there  was  no  meaning  in  my  words  ;  these  were  the  very  facts  that  I
was  anxious  to  conceal  ;  and  yet  when  I  succumbed  to  the  temptation  of
speaking,  my  face  was  convulsed  with  anger,  and  I  wrung  my  watcher's
wrist  with  cruelty.  Here  is  action,  unnatural  and  uncharacteristic  action,
flowing  from  an  idea  in  which  I  had  no  belief  and  which  I  had  been  conceal-
ing for  hours  as  a  plain  mark  of  aberration. Is  it  not  so  with  lunatics  I

I  have  called  the  one  person  myself,  and  the  other  the  other  felloiv.  It
was  myself  who  spoke  and  acted ;  the  other  fellow  seemed  to  have  no  control
of  the  body  or  the  tongue  ;  he  could  only  act  through  myself,  on  whom  he
brought  to  bear  a  heavy  strain,  resisted  in  one  case,  triumphant  in  the  two
others.  Yet  I  am  tempted  to  think  that  I  know  the  other  fellow  ;  I  am
tempted  to  think  he  is  the  dreamer  described  in  my  Chapter  on  Dreams  to
which  you  refer.  Here  at  least  is  a  dream  belonging  to  the  same  period,
but  this  time  a  pure  dream,  an  illusion,  I  mean,  that  disappeared  with  the
return  of  the  sense  of  sight,  not  one  that  persevered  during  waking  moments
and  while  I  was  able  to  speak  and  take  my  medicine.  It  occurred  the  day
after  case  B  and  before  case  C.

Case  D.  In  the  afternoon  there  sprang  ujj  a  storm  of  wind  with
monstrous  clouds  of  dust ;  my  room  looked  on  a  steej^  hill  of  trees  whose
boughs  were  all  blowing  in  the  same  direction  ;  the  world  seemed  to  pass  by
my  windows  like  a  mill-race.  By  this  turmoil  and  movement  I  was  confused,
but  not  distressed,  and  surprised  not  to  be  distressed  ;  for  even  in  good
health  a  high  wind  has  often  a  j^ainf ul  influence  on  my  nerves.  In  the  midst
of  this  I  dozed  off  asleep.  I  had  just  been  reading  Scott's  Life  of  Dryden,
had  been  struck  with  the  fact  that  Dryden  had  translated  some  of  the
Latin  hymns,  and  had  wondered  that  I  had  never  remarked  them  in  his  works.
As  soon  as  I  was  asleep  I  dreamed  a  reason  why  the  sound  of  the  wind  and
the  sight  of  the  flying  dust  had  not  distressed  me.  There  was  no  wind,  it
seemed,  no  dust  ;  it  was  only  Dryden  singing  his  translated  hymns  in  one
direction,  and  all  those  who  had  blamed  and  attacked  him  after  the  Revolu-
tion singing  them  in  another.  This  point  of  the  two  directions  is  very
singular  and  insane.  In  part  it  meant  that  Dryden  was  continuously  flying
past  yet  never  passing  my  window  in  the  direction  of  the  wind  and  dust,
and  aU  his  detractors  similarly  flying  past  yet  not  passing  towards  the  other
side.  But  it  applied,  besides  this,  both  to  the  words  and  to  the  music  in  a
manner  wholly  insusceptible  of  expression.

That  was  a  dream  ;  and  yet  how  exactly  it  reproduces  the  method  of  imj
other  fellow  while  I  was  awake.  Here  is  an  explanation  for  a  state  of  mind
or  body  sought — and  found — in  a  tissue  of  rabid,  complicated,  and  inex-
pressible folly. — Yours  very  sincerely,  Robert  Louis  Stevenson.

Let  us  now  turn  to  cases  of  definitely  hysterical  uprush  from  sub-


12


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


liminal  —and,  as  I  have  maintained,  specially  from  hypnotic  strata.  It
will  Ijegin  by  some  citations  from  one  of  the  best  recent  German  soui'ces,
that  the  English  reader  may  see  that  these  observations  are  not  peculiar
to  the  French  school.

In  an  important  essay  contributed  to  the  Neiirologisches  Central-
hlatt,  for  January  1st  and  January  15th,  1893,  Dr.  Joseph  Breuer  and
Dr.  Sigm.  Freud,  of  Vienna  (in  which  capital  there  has  already  been  much
fruitful  study  of  hysteria),  give  a  preliminary  account  of  a  long  series
of  observations  on  "  The  Psychical  Mechanism  of  Hysterical  Phe-
nomena," especially  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  incident  which
has  originally  started  the  train  of  symptoms.  That  incident,  they  say,
cannot  usually  be  discovered  by  examination  of  the  patient  in  his
ordinary  condition.  He  will  not  realise  its  connection  with  his  present
trouble,  he  may  even  have  forgotten  it  altogether.  But  hypnotise  him,
and  he  will  clearly  remember  the  incident  itself,  will  fully  realise  its
perturbing  effect  on  his  psychical  equilibrium.  In  fact  he  will  usually
tell  you  that  this  very  incident  reproduces  itself  with  distressing  vivid-
ness in  every  attack  which  he  undergoes.  This  close  connection
between  some  initial  lesion  and  the  subsequent  troubles  is  observable
not  only  in  cases  of  so-called  traumatic  hysteiia,  where  the  effect  of  the
primary  shock — the  rupture  (if  I  may  so  call  it)  of  the  psychical
diaphragm — is  marked  and  obvious,  but  also  in  cases  whei'e  the  complex
and  persistent  troubles  are  commonly  regarded  as  spontaneous  and
idiopathic  hysterical  symptoms.  Among  such  symptoms  which  have
been  found  on  analysis  to  be  reproductions,  more  or  less  symbolical  in
■character,  of  some  definite  original  shock,  are  neuralgia,  contractures,
tic,  persistent  vomiting  and  anorexia,  troubles  of  sight,  hallucinations,
(kc.  A  momentary  accident  at  the  time  of  maximum  shock  may
determine  the  character  of  years  of  malady ;  much  as  in  certain  cases
■of  aphasia  ((7/!  the  "come  on  to  me "  case,  to  which  I  have  often
alluded)  the  last  sentence  healthily  spoken  will  dominate  the  aphasic
utterance  ever  after.  Thus  a  German  girl,  endeavouring  to  pray  in  a
moment  of  bewildered  anguish,  could  think  of  nothing  but  an  English
child's  prayer  ;  somewhat  as  men,  piously  reared,  when  in  danger
of  shipwreck,  have  been  heard  muttering  "  What  is  your  name  ?  M.  or
N.," — the  first  words  of  the  English  Church  Catechism.  Hysteria
developed  itself,  and  for  a  year  and  a  half  this  German  girl  could  speak,
write,  and  understand  nothing  but  English.  In  other  cases  the  connec-
tion between  the  original  psychical  lesion  and  the  subsequent  symptoms
is  dreamlike  or  symljolical  in  character ;  as  when  a  shock  of  moral
disgust  is  followed  by  persistent  hysterical  vomiting.  The  distressing
idea  which  caused  the  original  lesion  seems  to  continue  to  keep  up
irritation  like  a  foreign  body  lodged  in  the  organism,  say  a  thorn  in  the
finger. It  must  be  brought  to  the  surface  and  extruded ; — the  painful


The  SxMlminal  Consciousness.


13


memory  must  be  diagnosed  in  the  hypnotised  patient  and  then  biought
back  to  his  waking  consciousness  and  freely  discussed,  and  thus
reduced  to  its  due  proportions.  "A  mere  unemotional  recollection,"  say
Drs.  Breuer  and  Freud,  "  is  generally  useless  ;  the  psychical  process
which  caused  the  trouble  must  be  again  set  on  foot,  brought  down  to  its
status  nascendi,  and  then  worked  out  {abreagi7-t)  and  talked  away."  The
neuralgia  or  the  hallucination  will  thus  recur  once  in  full  intensity  and
then  disappear  for  ever.  The  act  of  thus  luring  the  hypertrophied  idea
up  from  the  hypnotic  into  the  supraliminal  stratum  is  quite  analogous
to  the  "  bringing  out "  of  an  eruption,  or  the  re-establishment  of  an
arrested  secretion.  The  benefit  of  tears  in  emotional  shock — "she
must  weep,  or  she  will  die  " — comes  just  midway  beween  the  benefit  of
auricular  confession  and  the  benefit  of  getting  out  a  good  crop
of  measles.

"  It  is  not  in  the  normal  memory  of  the  patient,"  continue  our
authors,  with  emphasis,  "  but  in  his  hypnotic  memory,  that  the  recol-
lection of  the  operative  psychical  lesion  is  to  be  found.  The  more  we
busy  ourselves  with  these  phenomena,  the  surer  becomes  our  conviction
that  that  sundering  of  consciousness  which  is  so  striking  in  certain
classical  cases  of  duplex  personality  exists  in  rudimentary  fashion  in
every  case  of  hysteria.  The  tendency  to  this  dissociation,  and  conse-
quently to  the  appearance  of  abnormal  states  of  consciousness,  which  we
propose  to  include  under  the  term  hypnoid,  is  the  fundamental
phenomenon  of  the  hysterical  neurosis.  .  .  .  Beside  the  well-
known  saying,  'Hypnosis  is  an  artificial  hysteria,'  we  would  set  this
somewhat  different  dictum  :  The  foundation  and  condition-precedent  of
hysteria  is  the  existence  of  hypnoid  states.  Amid  all  their  differences
these  hypnoid  states  agree  in  this  ; — that  the  images  which  in  them  rise
to  the  surface  {auftauchen)  are  of  a  very  intense  character,  but  are
partitioned  off  from  the  rest  of  the  contents  of  consciousness.
The  intimate  nature  of  these  hypnoid  states,  and  the  degree  of  their
separation  from  the  remainder  of  consciousness,  vary  as  widely  as  the
hypnotic  trance  itself,  which  includes  all  conditions  from  light  somno-
lence to  somnambulism,  from  full  recollection  to  complete  forgetful-
ness."

And  here  it  is  noticeable  that  Drs.  Breuer  and  Freud,  who  come
to  this  discussion  unpledged  to  any  hasty  theory,  fully  recognise  the
gravity — nay  the  insolubility  under  present  conditions — of  that  problem
of  the  unique  effectiveness  and  power  of  hypnotic  suggestions,  and  of
hysterical  self-suggestions,  for  which  so  many  pseudo-solutions  have
been  based  upon  so  much  hypothetical  cerebral  physiology.

"The  question,"  they  say  (p.  44),  "why  it  is  that  the  pathological
associations  which  form  themselves  in  hypnoid  states  are  so  stable,,
and  influence  organic  processes  so  much  more  profoundly  than  do  the


14


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


ideas  or  presentations  of  our  ordinary  experience  ; — this  question  forms
a  part  of  the  general  problem  of  the  efficacy  of  hypnotic  suggestion  in
any  case  whatever.  Our  observations  throw  no  new  light  on  this  prob-
lem ;  rather  they  bring  into  relief  the  contradiction  between  the  dictum
'  Hysteria  is  a  psychosis,'  and  the  actual  fact  that  amongst  hysterics
we  find  the  clearest-minded,  the  strongest-willed,  the  fullest  of  char-
acter, the  most  acutely  critical  specimens  of  humanity.  In  the  cases
to  which  we  refer  those  characteristics  hold  good  for  the  man's  waking
•consciousness,  but  in  his  hypnoid  states  he  is  insane — as  we  all  are  in
dream.  But  whereas  our  dream-insanities  have  no  influence  on  our
waking  life,  in  his  case  the  products  of  his  hypnoid  conditions  break
in  upon  his  waking  life  as  hysterical  symptoms."

I  need  not  point  out  the  independent  coincidence  between  these
views  and  those  already  expressed  in  my  chapter  on  "The  Mechanism
of  Suggestion,"  and  elsewhere.^  But  I  may  repeat  my  conviction  that
this  problem  can  only  be  solved  by  continued  research  into  what  I  deem
the  healthy  and  orderly  functioning  of  those  subliminal  faculties
which  hypnotic  suggestion  reveals  to  us  acting  blindly  as  in  a  dream,
and  which  hysteria  reveals  to  us  acting  wildly  as  in  a  nightmare.

"  In  hysteria,"  say  our  authors  once  more,  after  citing  further  ex-
amples of  these  disturbed  messages,  these  explosive  uprushes  from  sub-
liminal strata, — "  in  hysteria  we  are  confronted  with  groups  of  formed
images  which  have  been  developed  under  hypnoid  conditions,  which  are
cut  off  from  interchange  and  association  with  the  rest  of  the  patient's
mental  imagery,  but  are  capable  of  association  amongst  themselves,
and  thus  constitute  a  more  or  less  fully  organised  rudiment  of  a  secondary
consciousness,  a  '  coyidilion  seconde.'  Thus  a  chronic  hysterical  symp-
tom corresponds  to  an  incursion  of  this  '  secondaiy  condition  '  upon
a  tract  of  innervation  previously  governed  by  the  normal  conscious-
ness, while  a  '  fit  of  hysterics '  indicates  a  more  organised  develop-
ment of  the  '  secondary  condition,'  and  marks  by  its  first  onset  a
moment  when  this  hypnoid  consciousness  {IJ ypnoidbevmsstsein)  has
made  itself  master  of  the  whole  existence,  as  acute  hysteria.
During  such  an  attack  the  control  over  the  whole  bodily  innervation
has  passed  to  the  hypnoid  consciousness.  Yet  the  normal  conscious-
ness, as  some  well-known  experiments  show  us,  is  not  always  entirely
set  aside.  It  can  itself  take  note  of  the  motor  phenomena  of  the
attack,  although  the  psychical  conditions-precedent  of  that  attack  lie
outside  its  cognisance  altogether."

I  could  not  wish  for  a  more  emphatic  support,  from  wide  clinical
experience,  of  the  view  of  hysteria  to  which  my  own  observations  on
different  branches  of  automatism  had  already, by  mere  analogical


1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  309,  349,  353,  &c.


The  Suhliminal  Consciousness.  15

reasoning,  directed  njy;  fihamglit.i '  What>'| '■^i^oufd^faiu  add  to  the
■exposition  of  Drs.  Breuer  and  Freud  the  reader  may  have  already
divined.  That  extraordinary  potency  of  subliminal  action,  which  they
frankly  present  as  insoluble  by  pure  physiology,  is  part  and  parcel  of
my  scheme  of  man ;  and  its  occasional  appearance  in  this  disordered
form  is  to  me  but  the  natural  concomitant  of  its  habitual  and
inevitable  residence  within  us  ;  in  readiness — if  we  can  contrive  to
summon  it — to  subserve  our  highest  needs.

For  I  have  urged  that  we  men  here  incarnated  are  in  very  truth
"  clausi  tenebriset  carcere  cajco"  ; — that  in  this  darkness  and  imprison-
ment our  terrene  faculties  represent  merely  such  fraction  of  our  pre-
terrene  faculties  as  the  struggle  for  existence  has  compelled  the
organisms  from  which  our  bodies  spring  to  conserve  and  develop.  And
I  have  claimed  that. the  potential  faculties  which  terrene  evolution  has
not  thus  developed  do  none  the  less  make  themselves  manifest  from
time  to  time  in  terrene  life  ;  that  gleams  of  a  wider  perception,  a  truer
insight,  may  flash  into  the  darkened  and  narrowed  chamber  of  con-
sciousness which  our  earthly  brain  allows.  Apart  from  such  super-
normal visitings,  the  evolutive  process  consists,  in  my  view,  of  a  constant
expansion  of  the  span  of  supraliminal  consciousness  ;  a  constant
re-selection  of  faculties  and  perceptions  to  suit  an  ever  moi'e  extended
purview,  a  wider  present  which  opens  upon  man.  We  add  the  higher
artistic  and  moral  faculties — drawing  these  from  their  latency  in  the
depths  of  our  subliminal  being  ; — and  at  the  same  time  we  lose  the
power  of  repairing  injuries  which  our  remote  ancestors  possessed,  the
acuter  sense  of  smell  which  our  near  ancestors  possessed ; — and  who
knows  what  other  faculties  which  existed  somewhere  in  our  long  ances-
tral line  ?  We  widen,  deepen,  and  select.  The  spectrum  of  empirical
consciousness  grows  both  longer  and  brighter ;  but  some  dark  lines
appear  in  places  which  once  were  bright.

A  process  thus  involving  our  own  selves  may  be  as  difficult  to
examine  directly,  and  by  our  own  sensations,  as  it  is  to  examine  directly,
and  by  our  own  sensations,  the  rotation  of  the  earth.  Or,  to  recur  to
our  earlier  metaphor,  if  we  would  study  solar  physics  we  do  not  only
watch  for  changes  in  the  spectrum  of  our  noonday  sun ;  we  look  for
the  spectrum  of  a  sun  in  the  making,  or  of  a  sun  eclipsed,  or  of  a  sun

'  Conceptions  of  what  I  have  called  stratified  consciousness  are  now  coming  to
the  front  in  so  many  places  that  it  may  be  of  interest  to  remark  that  (so  far  as  I
know)  such  a  conception  first  presented  itself  independently  to  three  observers,  as
the  result  of  three  different  lines  of  experiment.  Mr.  Gurney  was  led  that  way  by
experiments  on  hypnotic  memory  ;  M.  Pierre  Janet  by  experiments  on  hysteria  ;  and
to  myself  the  observation  of  various  automatisms  neither  hysterical  nor  hypnotic, — as
automatic  scrijit  and  the  like— brought  a  still  more  developed  (I  do  not  say  a  better
established)  conception  of  the  stratified  nature  of  our  psychical  being,  of  the  higher
faculties  discernible  in  the  deeper  strata,  and  of  the  unity  which  comprehends  them
all.


already  da'rkei>ing  ' ^o/,Y,irip.to  \he  night/;'^  The  •^animal  world  still  exists
to  show  us  our  sun  of  terrene'  consciousness  in  its  nebulous  making;
sleep  and  trance  show  that  sun  eclipsed  ;  and  the  subliminal  uprushes,
seen  more  clearly  when  waking  consciousness  is  obscured,  are  for  us
what  for  the  astronomer  are  the  rosy  prominences,  upleaping  from  the
hidden  flame.

But  where  shall  we  get  our  spectrum  of  a  sun  going  out  1  Where,
in  plain  words,  shall  we  come  upon  a  process  dissolutive  of  terrene
personality  which  may  be  the  nearest  approach  to  a  precise  reversal  of
the  evolutive  process  which  our  hypothesis  has  assumed  1  For  this  we
need  some  slow,  functional  l^rain-degeneration,  not  dependent  upon  any
localised  lesion  or  any  specific  intoxication.  The  process  through  senile-
decay  to  the  coma  of  imminent  dissolution  has  already  furnished  us  with
some  observati(jns  strongly  corroborative  of  the  scheme  of  personality
here  proposed.  Of  vivid,  supernormal  messages  received 'or  transmitted
at  or  about  the  moment  of  death,— and  of  the  inferences  which  such
facts  suggest, — my  readers  have  heard  much  and  often.  But  for  the
detailed  study  here  desired  we  need  to  find  a  narrowing  of  the  field  of
consciousness  at  once  more  definitely  progressive  and  more  persistent
under  our  prolonged  experiment.

Now,  surely,  is  the  moment  to  remember  that  other  result  of  hys-
terical loss  of  liminal  stability  to  which  we  have  as  yet  barely  alluded.
We  have  said  that  when  the  psychical  diaphragm  has  once  given  way
there  is  down-draught  as  well  as  uprush.  Besides  the  incursions  from
the  hypnotic  stratum  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  there  are  losses-
from  the  supraliminal  stratum  ;— narrowings  of  empirical  consciousness
which  may  look  like  absolute  abolitions  of  familiar  powers,  but
which  often  turn  out  to  be  the  mere  subsidence  of  those  powers  to  a
level  where  the  empirical  will  can  no  longer  reach  them.  Such  are
indeed  the  main  phenomena  of  advanced, of  chronic  hysteria;  and  to  these-
we  must  now  turn  ;  seeking  whether  in  this  disintegrative  process  there
are  traces  of  the  original  mode  of  integration  ;  whether,  when  the
stratum  which  remains  supraliminal  is  thinned  to  a  shell  and  straitened
to  a  speck,  there  come  to  it  upward  messages  from  its  own  lost  wealth
and  submerged  powei's, — simulating  in  that  misere  psychologique  the  gifts-
once  sent  upwards  to  its  affluence  from  the  still  richer  treasure-house
below.  In  this  inquiry  we  can  have  no  better  guide  than  Dr.  Pierre
Janet,  whose  recent  work,  L'Etat  Mental  des  Hysteriques,  is  full  of
precisely  such  observations  as  must  either  confirm  or  altogether  dis-
credit the  theory  with  which  we  are  now  concerned.

What  then,  to  begin  with,  is  M.  Janet's  general  conception  of  the
psychological  state  of  the  advanced  hysteric  ?

"  In  the  expression  /  feel,"  he  says  (Etat  Mental,  p.  39),  "we  have-
two  elements  ;  a  small  new  psychological  fact  '  feel,'  and  an  enormous;


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


17


mass  of  thoughts  already  formed  into  a  system  'I.'  These  two  things
mix  and  combine,  and  to  say  I  feel  is  to  say  that  the  personality,
already  enormous,  has  seized  and  absorbed  this  small  new  sensation  ]
.  as  though  the  /  were  an  amoeba  which  sent  out  a  prolongation
to  suck  in  this  little  sensation  which  has  come  into  existence  beside
it."  Now  it  is  in  the  assimilation  of  these  elementary  sensations
or  affective  states  with  the  percejition  j)S'>'sonnelle,  as  Janet  terms
it,  that  the  advanced  hysteric  fails.  Her  field  of  consciousness  is
so  far  narrowed  that  it  can  only  take  in  the  minimum  of  sensations
necessary  for  the  support  of  life.  "  One  must  needs  have  consciousness
of  what  one  sees  and  hears,  and  so  the  patient  neglects  to  perceive  the
tactile  and  muscular  sensations  with  which  he  thinks  that  he  can
manage  to  dispense.  At  first  he  could  perhaps  turn  his  attention  to
them,  and  recover  them  at  least  momentarily  within  the  field  of  personal
perception.  But  the  occasion  does  not  present  itself,  and  the  2^sycho-
logical  had  habit  is  formed.  .  .  .  One  day  the  patient — for  he  is
now  veritably  a  patient — is  examined  by  the  doctor.  His  left  arm  is
pinched,  and  he  is  asked  whether  he  feels  the  pinch.  To  his  surprise
the  patient  realises  that  he  can  no  longer  feel  consciously,  can  no  longer
bring  back  into  his  personal  perception  sensations  which  he  has
neglected  too  long — he  has  become  ansesthetic.  .  .  .  Hysterical
anaesthesia  is  thus  a  fixed  and  perpetual  distraction,  which  renders
its  subjects  incapable  of  attaching  certain  sensations  to  their  person-
ality ;  it  is  a  restriction  of  the  conscious  field."

On  just  the  same  principles  may  the  amnesia  and  the  akinesia
or  pseudo-paralysis  of  hysterics — which  last  is  really  an  aboulia  or
defect  of  will  and  not  a  paralysis — be  explained.  In  each  case  there
is  a  dropping  out  from  attention  of  groups  of  recollections,  which
through  enfeebled  attention  (aprosexia,.)  the  patient  is  no  longer  able
to  grasp.  The  life  has  shrunk  to  the  smallest  needs  of  the  actual
moment ;  it  has  ceased  to  look  before  and  after ;  its  threshold  of
consciousness  has  mounted  higher,  so  that  the  waking  consciousness  of
the  hysteric  embraces  only  a  shallow  and  narrow  layer  of  what  was  the
waking  consciousness  of  the  healthy  man.  "  0  dear  sjnrit,  half-lost  In
thine  own  shadow  "  ; — surely  the  words  which  the  poet  addresses  to  the
man-soul  undergoing  its  descent  into  generation  gain  a  fresh  signifi-
cance if  we  apply  them  to  the  man-soul  thus  shadowed  anew ;  his
normal  terrene  consciousness  shrinking  into  a  fragment,  even  as  into
a  fragment  had  shrunk  already  at  earthly  birth  his  memory  of  "  the
glories  he  had  known,  And  that  imperial  palace  whence  he  came."

Let  us  see  if  there  is  more  in  this  analogy  than  a  poetic  fancy.  I
have  urged — and  the  idea  draws  its  descent  from  philosophers  as  well
as  poets — that  amid  our  normal  terrene  life  we  trace  incursions  of
a  subliminal  consciousness,  with  obscure  pre-terrene  memories,  frag-

c


18


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


mentary  pre-terrene  powers.  And  I  now  ask  whether  any  like  uacur  ■
sion  of  pre-Salpetriere  faculties,  any  obscure  traces  of  the  freer,  more
potent  life  of  old,  are  discernible  amid  the  narrowed  life  of  hysterics,
and  show  to  those  who  watch  them  from  a  larger  existence  that  amid
all  their  dimness  and  bewilderment  those  imprisoned  spirits  yet  "  are
greater  than  they  know  "  ?

Let  us  take  first  a  question  as  definite  as  may  be  possible  ; — the
question  of  field  of  vision  and  subsequent  visual  memory.  I  have
contended  that  what  we  know  that  we  see  is  not  really  all  that  we  see,
and  that  what  we  know  that  we  remember  is  not  really  all  that  we
remember.  I  have  urged  that  it  is  at  least  possible  that  whatever  has
once  fallen  within  our  actual  field  of  vision  may  be  perceived  by  the
subliminal  self  and  permanently  registered  in  the  subliminal  memory,
and  I  have  adduced  cases  where  dream  or  crystal-vision  has  brought  to
the  surface  some  fact  thus  subliminally  observed,  but  which  provably
has  never  come  within  the  cognisance  of  the  supraliminal  self.  And  I
have  suggested  that  albeit  the  messages  or  reports  of  unobserved  objects
thus  cast  up  from  the  subliminal  storehouse — ■"  the  treasure  of  the
heart " — were  often  casual-seeming  and  trivial,  yet  sometimes  also
they  seemed  to  show  selective  choice,  and  to  indicate  a  guardianship
subliminally  exercised  over  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  the  empirical
self.

Can  we,  then,  find  any  parallel  phenomena  in  hysteria  1  Are  there
any  cases  where  the  narrowed  and  shallowed  field  of  hysterical  con-
:Sciousness  receives  messages  from  the  normal  perceptive  faculty,  still
persisting,  though  in  what  has  now  become  a  subliminal  fashion?  and
are  such  messages  ever  made  useful  as  warnings  of  danger,  or  as
guidance  to  a  fruitful  end  ?

Thanks  to  the  delicacy  of  modern  experiments  on  various
ansesthesije,  and  especially  on  optical  defects,  it  is  now  possible  to
distinguish  between  the  range  of  perception  (visual  field,  &c.),  of  which  .
hysterics  have  conscious  control,  and  the  range  of  perception  (visual
field,  ifec),  from  which  a  certain  amount  of  information  reaches  them  in
an  unconscious  fashion.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  has  now  long  been
known  that  a  hysteric  might  assert  himself  to  be  totally  blind  of  tlie
right  eye,  while  yet,  if  he  was  made  to  look  at  a  given  object  with  his
right  eye,  while  believing  that  he  was  looking  at  it  with  his  left,  he
could  see  the  object  perfectly  well.  This  anomaly  was  naturally
supposed  to  be  due  to  mere  simulation.  Similar  anomalies  were  soon
observed  in  hysterical  colour-blindness.  The  green  (for  example)  which
the  hysteric  said  he  could  not  see  did  nevertheless  affect  the  retina
and  induce  a  complementary  after-image.  A  still  more  naive  attempt
(as  it  might  seem)  at  deceit  was  exhibited  by  one  of  Professor  Janet's
subjects,  who,  when  her  head  was  placed  behind  a  screen  and  the  two


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


19


sides  of  her  body — that  on  which  she  could  feel  and  that  on  which  she
could  not  feel — were  pinched  at  intervals,  replied,  "I  feel,"  whenever  the
sensitive  side  was  pinched,  and  "  I  don't  feel  "  whenever  the  pinch  was
on  the  soi-disant  insensitive  side.

But  in  truth, — although  I  must  refer  my  i-eaders  to  Professor  Janet's
book  (see  especially  pp.  35-7)  for  the  proof  of  what  I  here  summarise, —
in  truth  we  are  dealing  in  the  great  mass  of  these  eases  not  with  deceit
nor  with  recklessness,  but  with  a  condition  of  things  which,  since  it
has  till  lately  entirely  baffled  medical  interpretation,  may  well  have
been  puzzling  enough  to  have  bewildered  the  sufferers  themselves.
We  are  dealing  with  a  fluctuating  constriction  of  the  conscious  field ;
with  a  shifting  faculty  which  can  at  one  moment  embrace  some  given
stimulation  within  the  range  of  "  personal  perception," — as  something
which  the  "I"  cognises  as  "my"  sensation, — and  then  at  the  next
moment  loses  grasp  of  the  stimulation,  which  thus  falls  back  into  the
condition  of  an  "  elementary  sensation,"  in  some  sense  still  existing
but  no  longer  comprised  in  the  conscious  personality.  Or  the  diflfer-
ence  may  be,  not  between  one  minute  of  wider  and  the  next  of
narrower  purview,  but  between  one  mode  and  another  mode  of  per-
ceiving the  stimulus ; — the  colour  green,  for  instance,  remaining
unnoted  when  the  subject  endeavours  to  apply  a  voluntary  act  of
choice  among  colours,  but  still  manifesting  itself  to  the  more  deeply-
lying,  more  automatic  perception  which  feels  the  red  blur  when  the
retina  is  exhausted  by  prolonged  gazing  on  the  green  spot.

These  phenomena,  which  to  readers  unfamiliar  with  the  subject  may
look  so  dubious,  are  phenomena  common  both  in  incipient  and  in  estab-
lished hysteria;  and  their  reality  derives  a  stern  confirmation  from  the
cases  in  which  their  slow  advance — still  on  the  same  lines  of  contracting
personality,  shrinking  power  of  attention — lands  the  sufferer  at  last
in  worldly  ruin,  in  compulsory  seclusion,  in  insanity  and  irremediable
decay.  For  ourselves  every  stage  of  this  process  is  rich  in  parallels
with  our  larger  conception  of  pre-terrene  personality  submitting  to,
and  reacting  against,  the  limitations  of  the  flesh.  The  internuntial
messages  v.'hich  for  us  reach  the  normal  terrene  field  or  stratum  of
personality  from  profounder  strata  ai'e  paralleled  for  the  hysteric  by
the  messages  which  reach  the  shallowed  hysteric  stratum  from  the
remainder  of  the  normal  terrene  field.  In  each  case  such  messages
may  be  frequent  or  rare,  trivial,  or  apparently  purposive  and  designed
to  guide  or  restrain.  They  are  frequent  and  trivial  in  the  crystal-seer
who  can  summon  up  a  picture  almost  at  will ;  and  in  the  hysterical
girl  who,  with  her  ordinary  field  of  vision  contracted  almost  to  a  point,
is  yet  able  to  play  at  ball  with  her  companions  ;  the  slight  excitement
of  the  exercise  widening  the  visual  field  sufiiciently  to  allow  her  to
follow  the  ball's  flight  through  the  air. Again,  the  messages  are  rare

c  2


20


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myeri


and  monitory  in  such  incidents  in  healthy  lives  as  that  (already
published)  of  the  hurrying  lady  who  saw  the  figure  whose  presence
checked  her  from  falling  through  the  open  door  of  the  elevator ; — or  o£
that  other  lady  whom  a  sense  of  a  touch  on  the  arm  hindered  from
heedlessly  throwing  her  banknotes  into  the  fire.  And  in  like  fashion
they  are  rare  and  monitory  in  the  hysteric  who  has  long  lost  all  feeling
in  the  hands,  but  who  nevertheless  in  some  way  avoids  the  burns  on
the  hands  characteristic  of  that  profound  insensibility  which  follows  on
the  nervous  lesions  of  syringo-myelitis.

Again,  we  have  printed  several  instances  where  the  nearness  of
some  object,  not  cognisable  by  the  ordinary  senses  (as  the  dried  body
of  a  baby  in  the  roof,  the  buried  body  of  a  murdered  man  in  a  field),  has
apparently  caused  a  distress  or  alarm  which  the  supraliminal  self  has
been  unable  to  explain.  Somewhat  similarly  we  find  that  when  an  object
which  specially  stimulates  the  hysterical  fears  of  a  given  subject  (as
a  lighted  match,  a  stuffed  mouse,)  is  brought  within  what  would  be
the  normal  visual  field  of  a  hysteric,  the  alarming  object  starts  a  hys-
terical attack,  although  an  indifferent  object  fails  to  be  discerned  until
brought  within  the  very  much  narrower  visual  field  over  which  alone
the  hysteric  is  aware  of  having  any  sight.  The  parallel  is  maintained
as  to  subliminal  calculation.  "When  I  count,"  said  a  hysteric,  "I
write  the  result,  but  I  know  that  I  have  not  really  worked  the  sum.
I  no  longer  understand  my  own  ideas  ;  they  seem  to  come  of  themselves  ;
it  is  as  though  they  were  written  on  a  great  roll  of  paper  which  un-
winds itself  before  me."  Compare  the  "  mental  blackboard "  of  the
"  calculating  boy."  Did  space  allow  it,  we  might  follow  out  these  analo-
gies in  further  detail.  It  must  here  suffice  to  say  that  this  great  mass
of  hysterical  phenomena  seems  explicable  only  by  the  very  conception
which  we  have  elsewhere  advanced  on  a  larger  scale, — the  principle
of  a  restricted  personality  reinforced  by  intimations  or  messages  pro-
ceeding from  a  wider  personality  subjacent  but  habitually  unreachable;
— yet,  meantime,  more  or  less  cognisant  of  the  proceedings  of  the  em-
pirical self.

Turning  from  sensory  to  motor  automatism,  the  more  special  topic
of  this  paper,  let  us  again  consider  what  phenomena  our  theory  would
lead  us  to  expect.

Do  we  find  that  beneath  the  kinesthetic  obtuseness,  the  confused
ataxia,  the  impotent  aboulia  of  these  miserable  women  there  are  any
indications  that  the  complex  movements  once  acquired  are  not  really
forgotten  1  that  there  is  still  a  will  which  can  rule  the  organism  in  the
old  way  ?  If  so,  we  shall  have  a  fresh  parallel  to  our  conception  of  a
more  potent  and  profounder  personality,  underlying  for  us  normal
persons  also  the  personality  which  we  know.  When  the  hysteric  is  in
an  "  aboulic  "  state — has lost  the  power  to  will  any  action  which


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


21


presents  novelty  or  difficulty — do  we  find  that  she  can  still  perform
such  actions  without  conscious  will,  and  as  though  by  help  of  a  motor
message  transmitted  from  the  self  which  for  her  is  now  subliminal  but
which  in  health  was  the  self  which  was  habitually  in  conscious  play  ?
Have  we  parallels  of  this  kind  to  the  automatic  writing  or  drawing  of
the  normal  man  1  or  to  his  automatic  speech  1  or  to  those  inspirations
of  genius  which  transcend  the  fruits  of  conscious  toil  1  I  leave  it  to
one  of  Prof.  Janet's  hysterics  to  reply  : —

"I  cannot  in  the  least  understand  what  is  going  on,"  said  Maria,  when
she  entered  the  hospital ;  "for  some  time  past  I  have  been  working  in  an
odd  way  ;  it  is  no  longer  I  who  am  working,  but  only  my  hands.  They
get  on  pretty  well,  but  I  have  no  part  in  what  they  do.  When  it  is  over  I
do  not  recognise  my  work  at  all.  I  ^ee  that  it  is  all  right  ;  but  I  feel  that  I
am  quite  incapable  of  having  accomplished  it.  If  anyone  said.  It  is  not  i/oit
who  did  that  !  I  would  answer.  True  enough,  it  is  not  I.  When  I  want  to
sing,  it  is  impossible  to  me  ;  yet  at  other  times  I  hear  my  voice  singing  the
song  very  well.  It  is  certainly  not  I  who  walk  ;  I  feel  like  a  balloon  which
jumps  up  and  down  of  itself.  When  I  want  to  write,  I  find  nothing  to  say,
my  head  is  empty,  and  I  must  let  my  hand  write  what  it  chooses,  and  it  fills
four  pages,  and  if  the  .stuff  is  silly  I  cannot  help  it."

"The  curious  point  is,"  continues  M.  Janet,  "that  in  this  fashion  she
produces  some  really  good  things.  If  she  makes  up  a  dress  or  writes  a  letter
she  sometimes  shows  real  talent,  but  it  is  all  done  in  a  bizarre  way.  She
looks  absorbed  in  her  work,  but  yet  unconscious  of  it ;  when  she  lifts  her  head
she  seems  dazed  as  if  she  was  coming  out  of  a  dream,  and  does  not  recollect
what  she  has  been  doing.  Her  way  of  acting  recalls  wliat  is  said  of  men  of
genius  who  obey  their  inspiration  without  being  themselves  aware  of  accom-
plishing their  masterpieces.  ...  To  take  a  humbler  comparison,  she  acts
as  we  occasionally  do  when  we  let  our  hand  write  of  itself  a  word  which  we
have  forgotten  how  to  speU.  But  what  with  us  is  accidental  is  with  her  per-
petual ;  although  she  has  still  activity  she  has  no  longer  the  personal
consciousness  of  this  activity,  and  her  acts  therefore  can  no  longer  be
called  voluntary.  .  .  .  Some  patients,  on  the  other  hand,  will  not  or  cannot
abandon  themselves  to  this  automatic  activity.  They  try  to  perform
the  actions  consciously  and  voluntarily,  and  then  they  fail  altogether."

I  pass  on  to  one  of  M.  Janet's  most  acute  observations  ' ; — a  case
where  the  difference  between  the  faculty  still  at  the  command  of  the
supraliminal  personality  and  the  faculty  transmissible  only  by
automatic  impulse  from  the  self  now  subliminal  reaches  its  maximum
point,  and  suggests  some  reflections  of  novel  import.

"  If  we  tell  hemiplegics  or  amyotrophies  to  squeeze  the  dynamo-
meter, we  get  such  figures  as  5  and  10, — very  much  what  these  hysterics
manage  to  reach.  But  with  the  truly  paralysed  such  figures  do  not
surprise  us.  We  know  that  we  are  dealing  with  impotent  persons,
whose  every  action  shows  their  weakness. But  our  hysterics  who  mark

1  Eiat  Mental  des  Hystiriqucs,  p.  171.


22


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


5  and  1 0  are  by  no  means  impotent ;  they  sew,  they  work,  they  carry
burdens  without  any  apparent  ti'ouble. Celestine,  for  instance,  is  a
robust  country  girl,  accustomed  to  hard  work,  and  still  asking  as  a
favour  to  be  allowed  to  sweep  and  rub  the  floors. She  is  quick-
tempered, and  when  things  do  not  go  just  as  she  likes  she  shakes  the
beds,  changes  their  places,  and  lifts  with  one  arm  the  wooden  ai'mchairs.
She  has  terrible  fits  of  passion ;  and  in  some  asylums  where  she  has
been  she  has  soundly  thrashed  strong  men. Well ; — I  stop  this  young
woman  in  the  middle  of  her  work,  and  give  her  the  dynamometer  to
squeeze. To  begin  with,  she  is  absolutely  anaesthetic  on  both  sides  of
her  body,  and  must  needs  look  at  the  instrument  in  order  to  be  able  to
squeeze  it  at  all. I  have  tried  this experiment often ; and  the
dynamometer  generally  marks  9  with  the  squeeze  of  her  right  hand,  5
with  that  of  her  left. Now  I  repeat  that  such  indications  of  feeble
muscular  power  are  in  comijlete  contradiction  with  what  I  see  her  doing
every  minute. I  have  made  the  trial  myself,  and  although  I  can
squeeze  the  same  dynamometer  up  to  50,  I  cannot  lift  and  move
the  chairs  and  beds  as  Celestine  does. ... It  is  clear  that  in  the
hysteric  there  is  a  special  moditication  of  muscular  power  when  she  is
made  the  subject  of  an  experiment ; — when  she  is  told  to  pay  attention,
and  to  squeeze  an  instrument  with  j'ersonal  ivill  in  order  to  show  her
personal  strength. She  can  then  no  longer  get  at  her  strength  ;  she
cannot  use  it  in  this  fashion  ;  albeit  the  strength  is  really  there  and
is  lavishly  expended  in  all  the  acts  of  common  life,  when  the  patient
is  not  thinking  of  it. What  we  have  here  is  a  defect  not  of  muscle
but  of  will."

I  venture  to  make  such  a  case  as  Oelestine's  the  starting  point  of  a
s  range  speculation.  Suppose  that  it  becomes  necessary  to  form  a  con-
ception of  what  really  happens  when  a  "spirit "is  said  to  move  an
object  lying  near  a  "medium,"  but  beyond  his  normal  reach;  suppose
that  we  come  to  think  that  here,  too,  as  in  hysteria  itself,  there  is-
something  beyond  the  fraud  and  beneath  the  confusion,— will  these
hysterical  phenomena  afford  us  any  analogy,  however  remote  1  We  see
these  hysterics  with  the  strength  of  a  mere  baby  at  command,  the
strength  of  a  strong  man  latent  and  operating  through  another
stratum  of  the  self.  We  see  them  with  only  vague  and  feeble  move-
ments under  their  conscious  control ;  while  strong  and  definite
movements  are  still  evocable  by  suggestion  coming  from  without.

And  now  let  us  suppose  that  each  man  brought  with  him  into  earth-
life  a  force  or  will  capable  of  a  far  more  exhausting  (and  a  far  less
useful)  form  of  activity  than  that  on  which  he  usually  employs  it.  He
uses  it  to  act  somehow  upon  the  brain,  and  somehow  upon  the  nerves,
and  so  to  move  heavy  objects  in  contact  with  his  muscular  organism.
But  it  is  also  (on  our  hypothesis)  capable  of  moving  small  objects


The  SiiMiminal  Consciousness.


23


which  are  near  his  person,  but  not  actually  in  contact  with  it.  Now
if  for  a  long  time  he  should  fail  to  discover  this  power  of  his,  that  need
by  no  means  surprise  us.  Until  a  few  years  ago  he  had  failed  to  discover
that  he  could  affect  matter  at  a  little  distance  from  him  in  a  far  more
stiiking  way  ;  namely,  that  he  could  light  a  fire  with  his  fingers.  Yet
how  to  light  a  fire  was  the  most  essential  discovery  which  man  ever
made ;  and  no  one  knows  how  many  thousand  years  it  took  our
ancestors  to  make  it.  If  the  cave-man,  and  Aristotle,  and  Bacon
together  could  have  seen  the  summer-boarder  at  Colorado  Springs
lighting  the  gas  vnth  his  fingers,  w^ould  they  not  have  exclaimed,  "  Ou
supercherie,  on  miracle  J"  in  absolute  unison  ?  Yet  all  that  the  summer-
Ijoarder  needed  to  do  was  to  rub  his  feet  on  the  floor.

Suppose,  then,  that  man  is  born  in  virtual  possession  of  this  telekinetic
power, — this  capacity  of  acting  upon  ponderable  objects  at  a  short  dis-
tance from  his  person  in  some  way  not  wholly  different  from  the  way  in
which  he  acts  upon  his  own  limbs.  And  suppose  that  this  latent  power
is  not  called  forth  and  developed  by  natural  selection,  but  remains
unobserved  and  unsuspected  in  the  subliminal  strata  of  his  being.  He
can  now  move  by  voluntary  effort  only  objects  in  contact  with  his
periphery  ;  just  as  the  hysteric  by  voluntary  effort  can  only  squeeze  the
dynamometer  with  a  baby's  strength.  But  sometimes  that  power,  less
deeply  subliminal  in  some  of  us  men  than  in  others,  crops  up  in
some  "spontaneous  physical  phenomenon,"  or  movement  of  an  object
at  a  small  distance  in  accordance  with  no  known  law.  So  also  with
Celestine,  the  muscular  strength — now  for  her  subliminaUy  controlled,
• — crops  up  sometimes  in  sudden  action,  when  the  hands  that  can
scarce  deflect  the  little  brass  index  thrash  the  strong  man.  Or  some-
times it  may  be  that  some  other  fuller  intelligence,  possessing  man's
terrene  faculties  in  their  entirety,  and  knowing  that  the  hysteric  does
in  truth  possess  those  faculties  too,  will  evoke  by  suggestion  and
artifice  the  latent  power  which  the  hysteric  herself  could  never  reach.
Even  so  does  M.  Janet,  who  knows  that  Isabelle's  co-ordinating  power
is  really  intact,  tell  her  to  touch  her  face,  and  she  succeeds  in  doing
so ;  although  if  she  tries  to  do  this  without  his  command  her  hands
go  helplessly  astray.  If  we  men  also  have  lost  by  disuse  and  forget-
fulness  some  pre-natal  power,  can  we  conceive  that  intelligences  who
consciously  possess  that  power,  and  who  discern  it  in  us  also,  may  by
suggestion  and  artifice  bring  it  to  the  sui-face,  and  startle  us  as
M.  Janet  stai'tles  the  confused  hysteric  by  the  seemingly  impossible
resurgence  of  what  is  her  Self  indeed  ?

One  more  reflection,  and  I  have  done.  I  would  call  attention
to  the  hysterical  indifference;  to  the  apathy  or  frivolity  of  these
wretched  sufferers  ;  to  their  unconsciousness  of  their  own  lost  powers,
of  their  paralysing  disabilities ; — of  what  we  feel,  in  spite  of  all


24


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


that  apathy,  to  be  their  pitiful  and  bewildered  woe.  Is  it  a  question
of  aniesthesia,  or  of  contraction  of  the  visual  field  1  To  the  ordinary
man  even  slight  losses  of  cutaneous  sensation  are  distressing  and
unforgettable.  In  graver  disturbances, — to  sufferers,  for  instance,
from  the  "tabetic  mask  "  of  facial  insensibility, — the  affliction  is  no
less  than  terrible.  So  likewise  a  retrenchment  of  the  field  of  vision
when  caused  by  pigmentary  retinitis  will  induce  a  sense  of  distressed
confusion  quite  disproportionate  to  the  actual  loss  of  self-guiding
power.  But  the  hysteric,  on  the  other  hand,  will  support  with  absolute
indifference  sometimes  an  almost  punctiforin  retrenchment  of  the  visual
field,  sometimes  an  antesthesia  of  half  or  of  all  her  body. '  She  will  not
even  be  aware  of  her  complete  incapacity  to  distinguish  objects  by  touch.
Sometimes,  indeed,  she  will  save  from  the  wreck  of  her  sensibility
some  pre-hysteric  reminiscence,  some  knowledge  which — to  adapt  again
the  poet's  description  of  man's  limitation  by  earthly  birth — she  has
"  trailed "  after  her,  "  not  in  entire  forgetfulness,  and  not  in  utter
nakedness,"  from  that  common  world  of  humanity  from  which  she
is  now  exiled.  She  will  still  know  by  touch  a  comb,  an  earring,  the
feel  of  her  own  fringe  of  hair.  She  will  dwell  fondly  on  these  recog-
nised objects,  and  j)lay  with  the  shells  which  she  has  thus  picked  up
upon  the  shore  of  the  ocean  of  truth.

Is  it  loss  of  will,  of  memory,  from  which  she  suffei's  ?  If  no
demand  is  made  upon  her,  no  stimulus  applied,  she  will  pass  days  in
re-reading  the  same  newspaper,  re-knitting  the  same  pattern,  with  no
apparent  desire  for  progress,  nor  outlook  beyond  the  present  hour.
Sometimes  indeed  there  will  be  "  obstinate  questionings  of  sense  and
outward  things  "  :  "  Is  all  this  tni,e  ?  "  said  Marcelle  at  a  concert ; — -
"  the  music,  the  dances  ; — it  seems  not  true,  it  must  be  a  dream."
The  same  patient,  allowed  to  pass  from  the  hospital  ward  into  the
garden,  found  her  "  shadowy  I'ecollections  "  too  much  for  her  peace.
"  Where  am  I  ?  What  is  this  1 "  she  cried  ; — with  "  fallings  fi'om  her,
vanishings,"  she  felt  with  anxious  feet  whether  the  earth  was  solid
beneath  her ;  and,  "  moving  about  in  worlds  not  realised,"  her  whole
outlook  merged  into  the  dark.

Might  not  this  tale  be  told,  mutato  nomine,  of  the  whole  race  of
mortal  men  ■?  What  assurance  have  we  that  from  some  point  of  higher
vision  we  men  are  not  as  these  shrunken  and  shadowed  souls  1
Suppose  that  we  had  all  been  a  community  of  hysterics  ;  all  of  us
together  subject  to  these  shifting  losses  of  sensation,  these  inexplicable
gaps  of  memory,  these  sudden  defects  and  paralyses  of  movement  and
of  will. Assuredly  we  should  soon  have  ai'gued  that  our  actual  powers

1  See  Janet,  op.  cit.,  p.  18,  &c.  Charcot,  Pitres,  and  many  other  observers  have
dwelt  on  the  same  phenomena  ;  but  here  as  elsewhere  Janet's  statement  is  the  best
from  the  psychological  side.


The  Suhlimmal  Consciousness,


25


were  all  with  which  the  human  organism  was  or  could  be  endowed.
We  should  have  thought  it  natural  that  nervous  energy  should  only
just  suffice  to  keep  attention  fixed  upon  the  action  which  at  the
moment  we  needed  to  perform.  We  should  have  pointed  out  that  our
lack  of  sensation  over  large  tracts  of  the  body  rarely  led  to  positive
injury ; — but  by  what  means  such  injury  was  averted,  by  the  action  of
what  subjacent  intelligence  our  skin  was  saved  from  steel  or  fire, — of
this  we  should  have  been  too  contentedly  ignorant  even  to  ask  the
question.  Nor,  again,  should  we  have  been  astonished  at  our
capricious  lack  of  power  over  our  organisms,  our  intermittent  defect  of
will.  We  should  have  held,  and  Avith  some  reason,  that  the  mystery
as  to  how  our  will  could  ever  move  any  limb  of  our  bodies  was  far
greater  than  the  mystery  as  to  why  certain  limbs  at  certain  moments
failed  to  obey  it.  And  as  for  defects  of  recollection ; — is  the  reader
inclined  to  think  that  the  hysterical  memoi-y  could  never  have  been
accepted  as  normal  1  That  some  guess  of  a  more  continuous  conscious-
ness, of  an  identity  urmioved  and  stable  beneath  the  tossing  of  the
psychic  storm,  must  needs  have  been  suggested  by  all  those  strange
interi-uptions  ? — by  the  lapses  into  other  phases  of  personality,  by  the
competing  fields  of  reminiscence,  by  the  clean  sweep  and  blank
destruction  of  great  slices  and  cantles  of  the  Past  ?  I  ask  in  turn  how
much  of  guess  at  an  underlying  continuity  has  been  suggested,  I  do  not
say  to  the  popular,  but  even  to  the  scientific  mind,  by  life  broken  as
we  know  it  now  ? — by  our  nightly  lapses  into  a  primitive  phase  of
personality  1  by  the  competing  fields  of  recollection  which  shift  around
the  hypnotic  trance  ?  by  the  irrecoverable  gaps  in  past  existence  when
the  sun's  ray  or  the  robber's  bludgeon  has  struck  too  rudely  on  the  skull  ?

Nay,  if  we  had  been  a  populace  of  hysterics  we  should  have
acquiesced  in  our  hysteria.  We  should  have  pushed  aside  as  a  fantastic
enthusiast  the  fellow  sufferer  who  strove  to  tell  us  that  this  was  not
all  that  we  were  meant  to  be.  As  we  now  stand, — each  one  of  us
totus,  teres,  atque  rotundus  in  his  own  esteem, — we  see  at  least  how
cowardly  would  have  been  that  contentment,  how  vast  the  ignored
possibilities,  the  foi'gotten  hope.  Yet  who  assures  us  that  even  here
and  now  we  have  developed  into  the  full  height  and  scope  of  our
being  ?  A  moment  comes  when  the  most  beclouded  of  these  hystei'ics
has  a  glimpse  of  the  truth.  A  moment  comes  when,  after  a  profound
slumber,  she  wakes  into  an  instant  clair  ; — a  flash  of  full  perception,
which  shows  her  as  solid  vivid  realities  all  that  she  has  in  her  bewilder-
ment been  apprehending  pliantasmally  as  a  dream.  'E^  ovel^ov  b'avTLKa —
^Hv  vTTaq.  Is  there  for  us  also  any  possibility  of  a  like  resurrection
into  reality  and  day  ?  Is  there  for  us  any  sleep  so  deep  that  waking
from  it  after  the  likeness  of  perfect  man  we  shall  be  satisfied  ;  and
shall  see  face  to  face ;  and  shall  know  even  as  also  we  are  known  1


26


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Chapter  VII.
Motor  Automatism.

The  ijhenomena  of  hysteria  which  we  discussed  in  the  last  chapter
were  perhaps  in  themselves  strange  to  many  of  my  readers.  Still
stranger  must  have  been  the  hypothesis  proposed  for  their  explanation,
and  assuming  them  under  the  general  theory  of  personality  which
these  chapters  set  forth.  Yet  neither  the  phenomena  themselves
(attested,  indeed,  by  leading  medical  authorities),  nor  the  theory
suggested  could  be  said  to  transcend  known  laws  in  the  same  way  as
any  form  of  thought-transference,  for  instance,  transcends  them.
The  "  messages "  which  I  described  as  passing  between  one  stratum
and  another  of  the  hysterical  personality  were  purely  inte^-nuntiative,
and  not  telepathic.  Their  whole  course,  that  is  to  say,  lay  within  the
individual  himself ;  they  transmitted  the  command  or  the  information
from  one  part  of  that  individual's  intelligence  to  another ;  but  they  did
not  involve  any  supernormal  communication  of  ideas  from  an  extraneous
mind.  Such  supernormal  element  as  hysteria  does  contain  is  of  a
different  order ;  it  consists  in  indications  of  powers  beyond  what  I
have  called  the  "  red  end  "  of  the  conscious  spectrum, — of  potent  in-
fluences exerted  over  organic  processes  by  the  apparently  random  orders
of  the  dreaming  or  distracted  hypnotic  self.

In  the  motor  messages  to  which  we  are  now  proceeding,  on  the  other
hand, — just  as  in  the  sensory  messages  discussed  in  Chapter  V., — the
main  interest  lies  in  the  original  source  of  the  message  which  in  some
way  reaches  the  automatist's  subliminal  self,  and  is  thence  transferred
to  his  supraliminal  pei'ception.

And  to  these  definite  telepathic  motor  messages  the  vaguer  inter-
nuntiative,  organic  messages  of  hysteria,  just  discussed,  as  well  as
those  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  discussed  in  Chapter  II.,  form  a  kind
of  approach  or  introduction.  They  form  such  ati  introduction,  I  say,
more  naturally  to  motor  than  to  sensory  messages ;  for  although  the
sensory  messages  also — spontaneous  hallucinations,  crystal-vision  and
the  like — are  presumably  themselves  also  based  upon  and  developed
from  obscure  organic  conditions,  yet  the  fact  of  such  development  is
more  obvious,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  with  messages  which,  like
those  with  which  we  shall  deal  in  this  chapiter,  often  involve  a  consi-
derable amount  of  varied  organic  disturbance,  from  which  the  definite
verbal  or  written  message  issues  at  last  as  the  final  product  towards
which  those  less  specialised  efforts  have  been  confusedly  tending.

Our  first  inquiry,  therefore,  will  naturally  be  :  Are  there  messages
which  conform  to  the  same  general  type  as  those  hypnotic,  those
hysteric  messages,  but  which  differ  in  containing  a  telepathic  or  a
clairvoyant  element  1


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


27


The  reader  well  knows  what  rejaly  we  have  to  make  to  this
question.  The  intermixture  of  telepathic  phenomena  in  the  phenomena
of  hypnotism  has  been  one  of  our  most  constant  themes  of  discussion.
And  the  telepathic  phenomena  thus  observed  have  often  been  of  that
comparatively  vague  organic  kind  with  which  we  are  at  this  moment
specially  concerned.  Thvis  the  sensory  messages  conveyed  telepathically
to  the  hypnotised  subject  have  not  belonged  only  to  the  higher,
exacter  senses  of  sight  and  hearing.  They  have  included — from  the
time  of  EUiotson  and  Esdaile  onwards — impressions  made  on  the  less
definite  or  intellectual  senses  of  taste,  smell,  temperature,  contact  and
pain.  And  there  have  been  motor  messages  also ; — especially  that
deep-seated,  pervading  form  of  motor  message  which  consists  (as  of  old
in  H.  S.  Thompson's  cases)  in  an  impulse  to  rush  to  the  distant
hypnotiser.  Without  repeating  what  has  been  so  often  narrated,  the
reader  may  be  reminded  that  at  this  special  point  of  our  scheme
we  have  much  corroborative  matter  to  introduce.

If,  then,  hypnotic  phenomena  have  proved  thus  fruitful  in
telepathic  incident,  can  we  say  the  same  of  hysteria  ■?  Hysterical  dis-
turbance mainly  affects  the  infra-red  spectrum ;  does  it  ever  affect  the
ultra-violet  spectrum  as  well  1

The  answer  to  this  question  is  still  doubtful.  It  is  only  in  France
that  there  is  enough  of  experiment  with  hysterics  to  promise  an
answer,  and  one  series  of  French  experiments,  which  seemed  at  one
time  to  afford  an  affirmative  answer,  is  not,  in  my  view,  sufficiently
confirmed.  I  allude  to  the  supposed  transference  of  hysterical  symp-
toms, by  aid  of  the  magnet,  from  one  patient  to  another,  as  often
demonstrated  by  Dr.  Babinski  at  the  Salpetriere,  and  kindly  shown  by
him  to  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  and  myself.  Inasmuch  as  these
experiments,  if  valid,  would  precisely  have  suited  my  argument  at  this
point,  the  reader  will  probably  not  demand  from  me  a  long  account  of
my  reasons  for  awaiting  their  further  confirmation.

Apart  from  these  doubtful  phenomena  there  seems  little  reason  to
think  that  hysteria,  as  apart  from  hypnotisability,  exerts  a  specially
favouring  effect  on  telepathic  phenomena.  Some  few  hysterics  (as  the
"Madame  B."  of  the  Havre  experiments)  who  have  been  very
constantly  hypnotised,  have  become  excellent  subjects,  but  it  is  not
clear  that  healthy  persons,  if  similarly  trained,  might  not  have  given
like  results.

A  converse  question  is  of  considerable  interest.  Even  if  hysterics
show  no  special  aptitude  for  transmitting  ordinary  telepathic  messages,
do  healthy  telepathic  agents  show  any  power  of  transmitting  hysterical
phenomena  1  This  is  in  fact  the  question  at  the  I'oot  of  sorcery.
Gurney  has  already  shown  that  such  phenomena  of  witchcraft  as  have
any  real  first-hand  evidence  to  support  them  are  explicable  by  hysteria,


28


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


hypnotic  suggestion  and  self-suggestion.  While  dealing  mainly  with  the
most  striking  point — the  el^'ect  of  self -suggested  hallucinations  upon  the
witch  herself, — he  remarks  also  that  "  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  prevalent
belief  that  the  witch  commanded  the  full  powers  of  the  devil,  we  need
not  refuse  to  connect  the  threats  and  angry  words  of  unpopular  old
women  with  a  certain  proportion,  at  any  rate,  of  the  illnesses  which  ai"e  so
freely  testified  to  as  having  soon  after  supervened."  '  We  may  expand
this  sentence,  perhaps,  by  saying  that  the  witch  induced  hypnosis  in
herself  and  hysteria  in  her  neighbours.  There  is  something  indeed  in
the  wasting  of  the  bewitched  person — apparently  progressive,  and  then
suddenly  mending — which  strongly  suggests  the  now  familiar  hysterical
malady  of  "pseudo-tabes."

Limus  ut  hie  durescit  et  hfec  ut  cera  liquescit
Uno  eodemque  igni  ;  sic  nostro  Daplinis  amore.

Could  we  better  describe  the  intercurrent  spasm  and  paresis  of
that  phantom  affection?  the  threatened  death,  yet  the  rapid  disappear-
ance under  the  influence  of  pleasurable  shock  ?

But  the  incantations  of  the  Pharmaceutria — unlike  the  face  to  face
■cursing  of  which  Gurney  speaks — Avere  intended  to  take  effect  tele-
imtldcaUy  .  Is  there  any  evidence  for  such  action  ?  any  evidence,  that
is  to  say,  that  there  can  be  a  telepathic  projection  into  other  minds
not  only  of  our  harmless  pictures  of  Queens  of  Hearts  or  of  hippopo-
tami, but  of  such  impulses  as  may  generate  in  the  percipient  some  of
those  hysterical  symptoms  which  we  know  to  be  generated  with  such
disastrous  ease  by  the  unconscious  self-suggestion  of  the  hysteric's  own
unstable  being  %  If  this  be  so,  we  should  have  something  like  an
explanation  for  many  tales  of  mediaeval  sorcery  and  of  the  so-called
"  black  magic  "  about  which  so  much  nonsense  is  still  occasionally
written.  Nor  is  there  any  obvious  reason  why  this  should  not  sometimes
occur  ;  why  a  telepathic  impulse  should  not  sometimes  be  felt  by  the
percipient  as  an  obsessing  presence,  a  disintegrating  intrusion  into  a
sensitive  mind.  I  can  only  say  that  we  have  not  as  yet  met  with  any  well-
attested  case  of  this  type  ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  heard
various  statements  of  telepathic  persecution  which  we  felt  bound  to  rank
as  examples  of  a  not  uncommon  class  of  insane  delusions.  It  was,  there-
fore, with  surprise  as  well  as  interest  that  we  received  some  years  ago
from  Dr.  Gibotteau  (known  to  Professor  Richet)  the  record  (since
published  at  greater  length  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques)  of
certain  experiments  made  partly  by  himself,  but  chiefly  under  his
supervision,  by  a  woman, — ignorant  indeed  of  most  other  arts — but
trained  (as  she  said)  in  sorcery  by  her  mother,  in  a  village  in  Nor-
mandy. This  woman  was  willing  to  communicate  her  hereditary  artifices,

''Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  182.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


29


which  turn  out  to  be  precisely  such  as  our  knowledge  of  other  tele-
pathic experiments  might  have  led  us  to  anticipate.  T  have  already
quoted  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  466)  some  of  Berthe's  doings.  I
add  some  accounts,  mainly  of  motor  disturbances,  akin  to  those  of
hysteria,  and  generated,  as  Dr.  Gibotteau  believes,  by  Berthe's  tele-
pathic action, — although  the  limits  of  suggestion  and  self-suggestion
are  in  some  cases  hard  to  define.

M.  57. — "Passive  telepathy,"  says  Dr.  Gibotteau,^  "the  role  of  percipient,
was  not  a  marked  feature  in  Berthe's  case  ;  and  it  was  generally  by  an  exercise
of  will  that  she  arrived  at  it.  I  do  not  remember  that  she  ever  became  sponta-
neously aware  of  any  action  performed  by  me.  More  commonly  she  would
seek  and  listen.  Sometimes  she  mentally  followed  the  track  of  her  subject ;
sometimes  she  watched  a  place  where  she  supposed  that  he  must  pass  ;  and
from  this  ambush,  as  it  were,  she  seized  him  as  he  went  by.  For  example,
she  had  resolved  to  prevent  me  from  walking  up  the  Boulevard  St.
Michel,  towards  the  Observatory, — a  street  by  which  I  do  not  often  pass.
Seldom  have  I  passed  that  way  without  feeling  her  presence,  and  a  resis-
tance which  took  two  quite  different  forms.  Sometimes  I  felt  an  un-
usual feebleness  in  my  legs,  whicli  seemed  paralysed.  It  was  as  though  I
had  been  carrying  on  my  shoulders  a  weight  too  heavy  for  me.  If  I  turned
to  walk  the  other  way,  I  felt  myself  light  and  free.  At  other  times  I  had  a
certain  difficulty  in  moving  forwards,  as  if  I  had  been  struggling  against  a
strong  wind,  or  rather  against  a  current  of  water  which  reached  to  my
middle,  for  the  sensation  was  confined  to  the  legs.  I  amused  myself  by
observing  this  effect,  which  I  quite  understood  to  proceed  from  Berthe.  If
I  turned  the  other  way,  the  opposite  effect  followed  ;  the  imaginary  current
seemed  to  drag  me  towards  the  Seine,  and  I  had  difficulty  in  preventing
myself  from  running.

"Berthe's  other  method  of  influencing  me  was  mentally  to  explore
a  place — my  own  room,  for  instance,  and  thus  somehow  to  discover  whether
I  was  there.  This  at  last  became  very  tiresome.  When  I  wished  that  she
should  leave  me  alone  I  deceived  her  by  the  following  artifice.  I  took  the
homeward  route  in  the  evening,  summoning  her  strongly,  and  as  soon  as  slie
mentally  replied  I  continued  my  route  in  imagination,  picturing  to  myself
one  point  in  it  after  another.  I  fancied  myself  entering  my  house,  mounting
the  staircase,  and  going  to  bed  and  to  sleep.  Then  I  suddenly  broke  contact
with  her,  and  continued  my  real  walk  in  another  direction.  It  will  be  under-
stood that  in  the  absence  of  notes  I  cannot  now  give  precise  details,  but  all
these  facts  stood  out  clearly  enough  at  the  time.  I  ought  to  add  that  she  by
no  means  always  succeeded  ;  nor  did  she  always  tell  the  truth,  being  given
to  boast  about  her  powers  of  this  kind.  Nevertheless,  the  kind  of  surveillance
which  I  felt  hanging  over  me  for  the  space  of  two  months  was,  perhaps,  the
most  interesting  to  me  among  all  Berthe's  phenomena.

"  My  friend  L.  on  one  and  the  same  evening  both  imposed  upon  Berthe,
and  received  from  her,  a  sensation  of  this  kmd.  After  a  single  sitting  with  her
he  endeavoured  to  prevent  her  from  returning  home,  at  about  11  p.m.,  and
to  make  her  take  a  road  which  led  her  away  from  her  lodgings  into  a  solitary

1  Annales,  September  and  October,  1892,  p.  259,  &c.  (abridged).


30


Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers.


quarter.  He  felt  as  if  he  had  succeeded  in  this  ;  and  indeed  he  had  suc-
ceeded, as  Berthe  told  us  next  day  that  she  had  been  astonished  to  find
herself  far  from  her  lodging  and  her  right  road.  But  she  took  her  revenge
at  once.  L.,  on  leaving  me,  went  after  a  time  to  his  club,  at  about  midnight.
He  was  there  watching  the  play,  when  suddenly  he  felt  a  foreign  influence  ;
everything  became  distasteful  to  him  ;  he  only  stayed  a  few  minutes,  and
went  home  almost  at  a  run.  Next  morning  he  told  me  of  this  experience,
and  said  he  was  sure  that  it  was  Berthe  who  had  made  him  thus  suddenly
change  his  mind.  And  Berthe  afterwards  gave  me  the  same  account,  boast-
ing that  she  had  made  him  change  his  mind.

"  Another  time  Berthe  taught  me  how  one  ought  to  proceed  in  order  to
make  a  person  fall  down.  The  method  is  thoroughly  logical.  First  you
must  get  to  know  him,  talk  to  him,  impress  him  as  much  as  you  can,  and
make  him  afraid  of  you.  When  he  is  in  the  street  you  follow  behind  him
and  imitate  his  walk  as  closely  as  you  can,  clianjiiKj  him  all  the  time.  (This
was  the  word  she  used  for  the  process,  to  her  quite  familiar,  of  mentally
possessing  herself  of  someone's  thoughts,  and  slightly  hypnotising  him.)
Then  you  must  see  a  string  stretched  across  the  road  a  few  steps  in  front  of
him.  You  follow  the  movements  of  your  victim,  and  then,  at  the  moment
when  he  reaches  the  imaginary  string,  you  yourself  intentionally  stumble,
and  the  poor  man  is  forced  to  tumble  down.i

"  We  had,"  he  continues,  "  been  having  a  seance  with  Berthe  ;  and  we
prolonged  it  in  an  open  carriage,  where  she  sat  between  P.  and  myself.
It  was  a  summer  evening,  near  midnight,  in  the  Quartier  des  Invalides.
Before  entering  the  carriage  I  said  to  Berthe  :  '  Since  you  say  that  you  know
how  to  do  it,  try  and  make  M.  P.  lose  his  sense  of  direction,  so  that  he  may
imagine  that  he  is  turning  his  back  on  the  direction  in  which  he  is  really
going.  Wait  to  do  this  until  I  give  you  a  sign.'  At  a  certain  moment  I  gave
her  the  sign  ;  and  after  a  few  moments  P.  said  to  me,  '  I  feel  very  odd  ;
everything  round  me  seems  turning,  and  I  feel  sick  ;  it  is  just  as  if  I  was
sea-sick. '

"  Nothing  further  occurred,  so  the  hallucination  remained  incomplete.  P.
is  entirely  ignorant  of  medicine  ;  he  knows  nothing  of  the  sense  of  direction,
or  of  the  intimate  connection  which  exists  between  a  disturbance  of  this
sense  and  the  special  discomforts  of  which  he  complained.  One  could  hardly
have  a  better  proof  of  the  reality  of  Berthe's  action,  or  a  better  commentary
on  the  power  of  causing  the  victim  to  lose  his  way,  so  often  attributed  to
sorcerers  of  every  country."

The  production  of  sleep  at  a  distance  is,  among  the  phenomena
which  we  have  already  discussed,  that  which  bears  the  closest
resemblance  to  these  unholy  tricks.

What  the  exact  mechanism  of  sommeil  a  distance  may  be  we  do  not
know.  We  do  not  know  whether  all  telepathic  transmissions  are  of
the  same  type  ;  nor  whether  the  typical  transmission  is  to  be  regarded
as  a  physical  transmission.  On  this  point  M.  Gibotteau's  experiments
are  of  interest : —


1  Annales,  Sept.,  Oct.,  1892,  p.  258.


The  Suhliminal  Consciousness.


31


M.  58. — "  I  had  been  reading  the  account  of  the  experiments  with  Mme.
B.  (Leonie)  at  Havre.  I  asked  Berthe  one  day,  '  Can  you  manage  sleep  at  a
distance?'  'Certainly,'  said  she,  'it  is  not  difficult;  I  have  done  it  often
with  [an  experimenter  whose  name  I  forget].'  'Well  then,  look  out,  some
time  to-day  I  will  send  you  to  sleep. '  After  lunching  at  the  hospital-officers'
hall  I  asked  a  colleague  to  choose  an  hour  for  me  at  random.  The  hour
chosen  was,  I  think,  2.30.  When  that  hour  came  I  walked  up  and  down  in
the  corridor,  at  least  300  yards  from  the  hall,  mentally  ordering  Berthe  to
go  to  sleep,  as  if  I  had  been  close  to  her.  After  ten  minutes,  it  seemed  to
me,  I  cannot  say  why,  that  I  had  succeeded.  I  walked  back  to  the  win-
dow of  the  creche,  where  Berthe  was,  and  looked  in.  She  was  asleep.  I
entered.  They  told  me  that  she  had  been  asleep]  for  ten  minutes  or  so.  She
had  lain  down,  and  they  had  seen  her  go  to  sleep.  It  was  her  ordinary  som-
nambulistic sleep — a  sleep  into  which  she  sometimes  fell  spontaneously.  I
repeated  the  experiment  a  great  number  of  times,  always  choosing  an  hour
at  random.  I  almost  always  succeeded,  with  occasional  failures  when  she
was  occupied  in  talking,  or  when  I  lacked  patience.  I  observed  that  a
prolonged  effort  was  necessary  for  success.  It  did  not  seem  that  I  merely
supplied  a  signal  at  which  she  voluntarily  sent  herself  to  sleep  ;  but  rather
the  sleep  itself  seemed  an  effect  directly  and  laboriously  produced  by  my
will.  I  have  had  the  same  feeling  in  sending  other  subjects  to  sleep  from  a
distance.

' '  I  tried  further  experiments  ;  I  used  to  succeed  pretty  well  in  making
Berthe  come  from  the  creche  to  the  hall  at  my  mental  order.  In  these  cases
she  went  to  sleep  first  and  moved  forward  totteringly,  her  eyes  ecstatically
fixed.  Unknown  to  me  the  head  nurse  forbade  her  to  enter  the  hall.  Slie
then  used  to  walk  into  the  garden  and  come  up  to  the  window  nearest  to
where  I  was  at  work.  I  tried  to  send  her  to  sleep  at  greater  distances  ;  for
example,  from  my  own  lodgings  in  the  Rue  des  Scales,  &c.  The  results  were
less  good,  but  still  encouraging."

It  is  certainly  satisfactory  that  among  the  veiy  few  efforts  which,
so  far  as  we  know,  have  been  made  to  repeat  our  Havre  experiments
one  series  should  have  been  thus  successful.  It  is  to  be  regretted,  how-
ever, that  even  an  inquirer  so  active  and  so  fertile  in  expedients  as  Dr.
Gibotteau  should  have  neglected  that  accurate  and  immediate  regis-
tration which  experiments  of  this  kind  so  manifestly  need.

And  as  regards  those  other  and  more  novel  experiments  of  Dr.  Gibot-
teau's  they  do  certainly  seem  to  afford  us  sporadic  examples  of  just  the
tind  which  our  series  needs.  If  correctly  described,  they  show  telepathic
affections  (1)  of  the  motor  system  generally,  (2)  of  the  centres  for
vertigo  and  nausea.  Our  argument  needs  both.  "We  want  to  be
able  to  point  to  vague  motor  affections,  from  which  our  more  definite
motor  affections  of  hand  or  throat  may  be  developed  or  specialised.
And  we  want  as  many  miscellaneous  organic  effects  of  telepathy  as  pos-
sible ; — instances  of  its  action  on  special  sensibilities,  on  the  vaso-motor,


32


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


circulatory,  respiratory  systems,  &c.'  "We  may  well  conjecture  that
the  telepathic  impact  may  affect  some  sensitive  internal  organs, —
la  vessie,  ce  miroir  de  Vdme, — and  so  forth.  We  have  had  at  any  rate
some  telepathic  cases  of  deep  ccenesthetic  disturbance,  of  a  profound
malaise  which  must,  one  would  think,  have  involved  some  abnormal
condition  of  the  viscera.  In  Gurney's  collection  of  "  emotional  and
motor  effects"  (^Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol  I.,  Chap.  VII.),  we  find
such  phrases  as  "a  cloud  of  calamity  which  was  almost  a  physical
feeling,"  "  deep  depression,"  "  a  dreadful  feeling  of  illness  and  faint-
ness,  and  I  felt  that  I  was  dying,"  "dreadful  trembling  with  prostra-
tion," "  trembling,  with  no  apparent  cause  whatever,"  "  conviction  that
I  should  die  that  night,"  and  so  forth.  And  we  have,  moreover,  the
definite  vaso-motor  phenomenon  of  sudden  weejmig,  which  in  one  case
{op.  cit.,  p.  275)  is  described  as  "  hysterics  "  by  a  lady  who  "  never
experienced  a  similar  feeling."  This  attack  corresponded  exactly
with  the  sudden  death  of  a  father  at  a  distance.  We  must  hardly
press  her  phrase  as  implying  more  than  a  sudden,  uncontrollable,
unmotived  fit  of  weeping,  though  it  would,  of  course,  be  specially
interesting  if  we  could  find  definite  hysterical  symptoms  originated  by
a  telepathic  shock.  Another  informant  (p.  277)  speaks  of  an  "  extra-
ordinary state  of  depression  and  restlessness ;  a  violent  fit  of  weeping,
a  thing  quite  alien  to  my  character,"  as  coinciding  with  the  sudden
illness  and  delirium  of  a  distant  husband.

Along  with  these  emotional  or  vaso-motor  cases,  Gurney  gives  some
narratives  of  pervading  motor  impulse, — "  a  sense  of  being  wanted —
an  impulse  to  go  somewhere  or  do  something."  It  is,  of  course,  not  easy
to  get  a  motor  impulse  quite  clear  of  intellectual  impression  ;  since  if
(for  instance)  a  man  feels  a  strong  impulse  to  go  home  he  probably  also
has  a  strong  impression  that  some  of  his  family  are  ill.  In  at  least  one
case,  however,  that  of  Major  Kobbe  ( p.  288),  the  percipient  is
prompted  to  visit  a  distant  cemetery,  without  any  conscious  reason,  and
there  finds  his  father  ; — who  had  in  fact,  for  certain  quite  unexpected
reasons,  sent  to  his  son.  Major  Kobbe,  a  request  to  meet  him  there  at
that  hour ;  a  request  which  Major  Kobbe  had  never  received.

I  add  a  case  where  the  object  of  the  motor  impulse  was  perfectly
well  known,  but  where,  nevertheless,  the  motor  impulse  itself  is
described  as  the  vivid  and  controlling  element.

Impressions  from  a  Distance. By  Rev.  C.  Badger,  Harvard  Library,

Cambridge,  Mass.

L.  957.

Two  cases  my  experience  has  met  in  which  I  must  recognise  powerful

1  Dr.  Purdon,  now  of  Florida,  has  endeavoured  to  show  by  sphygmographic  tracings
the  influence  of  an  agent's  thought  in  bringing  a  percipient's  pulse  to  the  same  rhythm.
His  tracings  may  be  seen  in  the  rooms  of  the  S.P.R.,  but  are  too  few  to  be  con-
vincing without  further  corroboration.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


33


impressions  from  a  distance,  even  if  one  also  indicated  that  ' '  coming  events
cast  a  shadow  before."

Case  1.

In  the  summer  of  1859  (I  being  twenty-six  years  of  age),  she  whom
I  was  about  to  marry  was  to  anive  by  steamer,  after  two  years'  absence  in
Europe,  at  New  York.

The  steamer  was  due  at  12m.  on  Saturday,  July  2nd.  I  had  engaged  to
preach  in  New  York  on  Sunday  the  3rd,  and  I  was  somewhat  amazed  when
Saturday's  sunset  came,  and  only  the  word  from  Sandy  Hook,  "no  signs  yet
of  the  Vanderbilt."  I  feared  the  steamer  might  come  in  during  the  fore-
noon while  I  should  be  detained  in  the  pulpit.  Late  at  night  I  went  several
miles  up  town  to  my  lodging-house,  having  been  officially  assured  that,  late
as  it  then  was,  with  no  tidings,  the  steamer  could  not  possibly  get  in  before
12m.  on  Sunday.  That  assurance  was  perfect  in  my  mind  and  gave  me  great
satisfaction  and  I  fell  asleep.

After  a  quiet  night,  I  suddenly  woke,  soon  after  six  a.m.,  finding,  myself
spring  out  of  bed,  exclaiming,  "  She's  in,  she's  in  I  "  It  was  not  a  question
I  was  discussing.  It  was  fully  settled  ;  there  was  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  in
my  mind  ;  and  I  began  dressing  with  all  conceivable  rapidity  to  fly  to  meet
her.  I  was  alone.  Anybody  with  me  would  have  deemed  me  as  good  as
insane,  so  eager  and  confident  was  my  assurance.  I  rushed  out  of  the
house,  across,  some  distance,  to  Broadway,  and  took  the  down  town  omnibus.
WhoUy  alone,  I  had  time  to  reflect  on  the  ridiculousness  of  my  conduct.
My  faith  in  my  impression  was  somewhat  shaken  by  the  long  shaking  in  the
slow  'bus  before  we  reached  the  Astor  House  about  7-30  a.m.  I  rushed  in,
however,  asking  at  the  desk,  "Any  news  of  the  Vanderbilt?"  "She's
coming  up  the  Bay,  sir,"  answered  the  clerk,  and  I  rushed  out  with  fresh
speed,  moved  quickly  over  the  intervening  mile,  sped  down  the  long  pier,
and  leapt  on  board  just  as  she  drew  up  to  the  dock — not  pausing  an  instant
in  my  eager  movement,  and  being  the  first  to  board  her  from  the  pier.  A
moment  later,  I  stood  quietly  leaning  against  the  jamb  of  the  upper  cabin
door,  gazing  upon  her  whom  I  sought,  who  sat  before  me  conversing  with  a
friend,  not  being  aware  that  the  steamer  had  drawn  up  to  the  dock,  and  by
no  means  expecting  to  see  anybody  she  knew  so  early  in  the  day.

I  consider  this  a  case  of  immediate  agnition,  or  perception  not  attained
by  any  process  of  unconscious  reasoning  during  sleep.  My  active  mind  had
previously  scrutinised  the  facts,  weighed  all  the  probabilities,  and  fully
settled  the  conviction  so  far  as  cognition  could,  that  the  Vanderbilt,  under
the  then  present  conditions  of  weather,  &c.,  could  not  reach  her  dock  before
12m.  on  Sunday.

The  two  following  cases,  in  both  of  which  the  same  percipient  was
concerned,  come  to  us  through  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society.
In  the  first,  the  conscious  desire  of  the  agent  seems  to  have  been  the
predetermining  cause  of  the  percipient's  impi-ession.

L.  877. Ae  Pn Motor  Impulse.

The  percipient,  Mrs.  Hadselle,  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson  as  follows  : —

28,  Bradford-street,  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  Mag  28th,  1888.
' '  Less  than  two  years  ago  a  curious  thing  liappened  to  me. I  had  been.

D


34


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


in  Wash.  Co.,  N.Y.,  giving  half  a  dozen  readings,  and  was  on  my  way  to
Williamstown,  where  I  had  spent  a  part  of  the  summer,  and  where  much  of  my
worldly  goods,  in  the  shape  of  wearing  apparel,  was  safely  .stowed  in  my  room
at  the  '  Mansion  House. '  With  ticket  purchased,  I  was  serenely  seated  in
the  car,  'box,  bundle  and  bag' be.side  me,  the  conductor's  'All  aboard' was
at  that  instant  in  my  ears,  wlien  I  sprang  to  my  feet  with  the  force  of  an
inward  command,  '  Change  your  ticket  and  go  to  Elizabeth  (N.J.).  Change

your  ticket  and  go  to  Elizabeth. Change  your  ' Here  a  gentleman  in  the

opposite  seat — an  utter  strangei* — rose  and  said  :  '  Madam,  have  you  for-
gotten something,  can  I  help  you  1 '  I  said  :  '  Do  you  think  the  train  will
wait  for  me  to  change  my  ticket  1 '  For  there  appeared  to  be  lao  alternative.
As  I  spoke  I  moved  towards  the  platform ;  he  followed,  and  seeing  that  the
office  was  but  a  few  steps  distant  said  :  '  Go,  I'll  see  that  you  are  not  left. '
I  did  go,  and  in  a  moment  more  was  on  my  way  to  Elizabeth,  though  I  had  not
before  even  thought  of  such  a  thing.  Next  morning,  on  reaching  ray  friend's
house,  she  threw  her  arms  about  me  and  sobbed  out  :  '  Oh,  T  have  wanted
you  so.'  Then  she  led  me  to  a  room  where  an  only  and  beloved  .sister  lay
in  life's  last  battle. In  an  hour  it  was  ended.

"My  poor  grief-stricken  friend  declared  then — declares  now — that  my
sudden  change  of  purpose  was  a  direct  answer  to  her  repeated  though
unsjDoken  demand  for  my  presence.  And  who  shall  say  it  was  not  ?  I  wish
to  add  that  while  I  had  learned  by  letter  of  the  sister's  illness  of  a  chronic
disorder,  I  did  not  suppose  her  case  hopeless  ;  indeed,  from  the  fact  that  no
tidings  had  reached  me  lately,  was  hoping  that  she  was  on  tlie  road  to
recovery,  and  had  I  been  questioned  concerning  her  that  10th  of  November,
1886,  should  have  replied  confidently,  '  She  will  without  doubt  last  through
the  winter.'  My  friend,  by  the  way,  is,  much  more  than  I,  a  believer  in
psychical  phenomena.

"  (Signed) C.  A.  C.  Habsblle."

Mr.  Hodgson  writes  : —

"Mrs.  G. — the  friend  referred  to — has  sent  me  her  corroboration,  dated
March  5th,  1890.  The  date  of  the  incident,  she  states,  was  November  11th,
1886. She  says  :—

"  'I  had  not  expected  Mrs.  H. ;  did  not  at  that  time  know  where  she
was,  so  could  not  have  summoned  her  had  I  wished  to  do  so, — but  in  my
trouble  there  grew  upon  me  a  great  desire  for  her  presence,  and  I  said  many
times,  "  If  she  would  only  come. If  she  were  only  here."  '

"  '  My  sister's  failure  at  the  last  was  somewhat  rapid, but  of  this  Mrs.  H.
knew  notliing,  and  when  she  told  me  of  her  sudden  change  of  purpose,
hundreds  of  miles  away,  I  said  :  "  The  impulse  was  sent  you  in  answer  to  my
wish,"  or  words  to  that  effect."  '

The  gentleman  wlio  helped  Mrs.  Hadselle  to  change  her  ticket,  the
Rev.  James  Wilson,  then  of  Greenwich,  N.Y.,  writes  in  answer  to  Mr.
Hodgson's  inquiries  : —

March  20th,  1890.

I  recollect  the  circumstance  of  "  assisting  a  lady  "  at  Greenwich  ticket
office,  who  exchanged  her  ticket  at  the  last  moment,  because  of  a  change  of
purpose  ;  and  it  was  in  November,  1886.  She  sent  me  a  few  lines  afterwards,


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


35


•detailing  certain  facts  touching  a  sick  friend  at  the  point  of  her  destination
— not  clearly  recalled  at  this  moment.

J.  T.  Wilson.

L.  878.  Ae  Pn  Impression.

Mrs.  Hadselle  sent  at  the  same  time  another  narrative,  of  which  she  said  : —
"  I  send  you  with  this  a  bit  of  experience  which  I  had  years  ago — so  long
ago,  indeed,  as  the  time  Dr.  Holland  edited  the  Springfield  Republican.
He  wrote  me  that  the  '  Warning  '  was  copied  from  Maine  to  California,  and
that  he  received  many  letters  asking  if  it  was  authentic.  To  this  he  could
■safely  reply,  as  I  was  an  old-time  contributor  to  that  and  other  leading
journals.  A  local  paper  lately  copied  it.  Many  of  the  then  witnesses  have,
-with  Dr.  Holland  and  my  darling  '  Eddie  '  (Kleber  Loomis  Hadselle),  gone
over  to  the  '  great  majority,'  but  there  are  several  still  living  who  remember
the  episode,  and  no  one  of  my  acquaintances  doubts  or  thinks  the  sketch
overdrawn.

"  The  account  is  taken  from  the  Berkshire  County  Eagle,  May  10th,  1888,
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  and  is  there  headed  '  The  Unspoken  Warning — A  Mother's
Experience.'  As  above  implied,  the  account  itself  is  nearly  contemporary
"with  the  incident,  being  here  quoted  from  a  repjrint,  which  the  author  accepts
as  correct : —

' '  One  bitter  cold  day  in  winter  a  merry  party  of  us,  nestled  down  under
furry  robes,  went  to  meet  an  appointment  with  a  friend  living  a  few  miles
distant,  with  whom  we  were  to  spend  the  afternoon  and  in  the  evening  attend
a  concert  to  be  held  near  by.  The  sleighing  was  delightful,  the  air  keen  and
inspiriting,  the  host  and  hostess  genial  as  the  crackling  iires  in  the  grates,
and  the  invited  guests,  of  whom  there  were  many  besides  ourselves,  in  that
peculiar  visiting  trim  which  only  old-time  friends,  long  parted,  can  enjoy.
Restraint  was  thrown  aside  ;  we  cracked  jokes  ;  we  chattered  like  magpies,
and  not  a  little  of  the  coming  concert,  which  promised  a  rare  treat  to  our
unsophisticated  ears.  All  went  merry  as  a  marriage  bell,  and  merrier  than
some,  till  just  before  tea,  when  I  was  seized  with  a  sudden  and  unaccount-
able desire  to  go  home,  accompanied  by  a  dread  or  fear  of  something,  I  knew
not  what,  which  made  the  return  appear,  not  a  matter  of  choice,  but  a  thing
imperative.  I  tried  to  reason  it  away,  to  revive  anticipations  of  the  concert ;
I  thought  of  the  disaj)pomtment  it  would  be  to  those  who  came  with  me  to
give  it  up,  and  running  over  in  my  mind  the  condition  in  which  things  were
left  at  home,  could  find  no  ground  for  alarm.

"  For  many  years  a  part  of  the  house  had  been  rented  to  a  trusty  family  ;
our  children  were  often  rocked  in  the  same  cradle,  and  half  of  the  time  ate
at  the  same  table  ;  locks  and  bolts  were  things  unused,  and  in  deed  as  in
■word  we  were  neighbours.  In  their  care  had  been  left  a  boy  of  ten  years,
the  only  one  of  the  family  remaining  at  home,  who  knew  that  when  he
returned  from  school  he  was  expected  to  bring  in  wood  and  kindlings  for  the
morning  fire,  take  supper  alone,  or  with  little  Clara  E.,  as  he  chose,  and
otherwise  pass  the  time  as  he  pleased,  only  that  he  must  not  go  into  the  street
to  play,  or  on  to  the  pond  to  skate.  He  had  been  left  many  times  in  tliis
way,  and  had  never  given  occasion  for  the  slightest  uneasiness  ;  still,  as  this
nameless  fear  grew  upon  me,  it  took  the  form  of  a  conviction  that  danger  of
some  sort  threatened  this  beloved  child.


36


M',.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  I  was  rising  to  go  and  ask  Mr.  A.  to  take  me  home,  when  someone  said,,
'  You  are  very  pale  ;  are  you  ill  ? '  '  No, '  I  answered,  and  dropping  back,
in  the  chair,  told  them  how  strangely  I  had  been  exercised  for  the  last  few
minutes  ;  adding,  '  I  really  must  go  home.'  There  was  a  perfect  chorus  of
voices  against  it,  and  for  a  little  time  I  was  silenced,  though  not  convinced.
Someone  laid  the  matter  before  Mr.  A.,  who  replied,  "Nonsense;  Eddie  is  a
good  boy  to  mind,  will  do  nothing  in  our  absence  that  he  would  not  do  if  we
were  there,  and  is  enjoying  himself  well  at  this  moment,  I'll  warrant.'  This
answer  was  brought  to  me  in  triumph,  and  I  resolved  to  do  as  they  said,
'  not  to  think  about  it. '  But  at  tea  my  trembling  hand  almost  refused  to
carry  food  to  my  lips,  and  I  found  it  utterly  impossible  to  swallow  a  mouth-
ful. A  death-like  chill  crept  over  me,  and  I  knew  that  every  eye  was  on  me
as  I  left  the  room.  Mr.  A.  rose,  saying  in  a  changed  voice  and  without
ceremony,  '  Make  haste  ;  bring  the  horse  round,  we  must  go  right  away.
I  never  saw  her  in  such  a  state  before  ;  there  is  something  in  it.'  He
followed  me  to  the  parlour,  but  before  he  could  speak  I  was  pleading  as  for
dear  life  that  not  a  moment  be  lost  in  starting  for  home.  '  I  know,'  said  I,
'  it  is  not  all  imagination,  and  whether  it  is  or  not  I  shall  certainly  die,  if
this  dreadful  incubus  is  not  removed  shortly.'

"  All  was  now  coiifusion  ;  the  tea-table  deserted,  the  meal  scarce  tasted  ;
and  my  friends,  alarmed  as  much  at  my  looks  as  at  my  words,  were  as  anxious
to  hurry  me  off  as  they  had  been  before  to  detain  me.  To  nie  those  terrible
moments  seemed  hours,  yet  I  am  assured  that  not  more  than  half  an  hour
elapsed  from  the  time  my  fears  first  found  expression  before  we  were  on  the
road  toward  home.  A  horse  somewhat  noted  for  fieetness  was  before  us,
and  with  only  two  in  the  cutter — the  rest  stayed  to  concert,  and  made  Mr.
A.  promise  that  if  nothing  had  happened  we  would  return — went  over  the
road  at  a  rapid  pace.  I  knew  from  the  frequent  repetition  of  a  peculiar
signal  that  the  beast  was  being  urged  to  his  best,  yet  I  grew  sick  with
impatience  at  the  restraint.  I  wanted  to  fly.  All  this  while  my  fears  had
taken  no  definite  shape.  I  only  knew  that  the  child  was  in  danger,  and  felt
impelled  to  huriy  to  the  rescue.  Only  once  was  the  silence  broken  in  that
three-mile  journey,  and  that  was  when  the  house  was  in  full  view.  I  said,
'  Thank  God,  the  house  is  not  on  fire. '  '  That  was  my  own  thought, '  said
Mr.  A.,  but  there  was  no  slackening  of  speed.

' '  On  nearing  home  a  cheerful  light  was  glimmering  from  Mrs.  E.  's  window ;
before  the  vehicle  had  fairly  stopped  we  were  clear  of  it,  and  opening  the
door,  said  in  the  same  breath,  '  Where's  Eddie  ? '  '  Eddie  ?  why,  he  was
here  a  little  while  ago,'  answered  Mrs.  E.,  pleasantly  striving  to  dissipate
the  alarm  she  saw  written  on  our  countenances.  '  He  ate  supper  with  the
children,  and  played  awhile  at  marbles  ;  then  spoke  of  Libby  Rose  having
a  new  picture  book,  and  that  he  wanted  to  see  it.  You'll  find  him  over
there.'  With  swift  steps  Mr.  A.  crossed  the  street  to  the  place  mentioned,
but  returned  with  '  He  has  not  been  there.'  Eddie  was  remarkably  fond  of
.•skating,  and  my  next  thought  was  that  he  had  been  tempted  to  disobedience.
I  said  calmly,  '  We  will  go  to  the  pond. '  I  was  perfectly  collected  ;  I  could
have  worked  all  night  without  fatigue  with  the  nerves  in  that  state  of  ten-
sion ;  but  Mr.  A.  said,  'No,  you  must  go  in  and  lie  down. Eddie  is  safe


The  Sublimincd  Consciousness. ■  Bf

■enough,  somewhere  about  the  village.  I'll  go  and  find  him.'  But  there
was  nothing  in  the  tone  as  in  the  words  to  reassure  me.

' '  As  he  spoke  he  crossed  the  hall  to  our  own  room  and  turned  the  knob.
The  door  was  locked.  What  could  that  mean  ?  Eddie  was  either  on  the
inside  or  had  taken  the  key  away  with  him.  Mr.  A.  ran  round  to  a  window
with  a  broken  spring  which  could  be  opened  from  the  outside.  It  went  up
with  a  clang,  but  a  dense  volume  of  smoke  drove  him  back.  After  an
instant  another  attempt  was  made,  and  this  time,  on  a  lounge  directly  under
the  window,  he  stumbled  on  the  insensible  form  of  little  Eddie,  smothered
in  smoke.  Limp  and  apparently  lifeless,  he  was  borne  into  the  fresh  cold
air,  and  after  some  rough  handling  Avas  restored  to  consciousness.

"Eddie  said,  on  returning  from  school,  he  made  a  good  fire,  and  as  the
wood  was  snowy  thought  he  would  put  it  in  the  oven  to  dry  ;  something  he
had  never  done  before.  Then  on  leaving  Mrs.  E.'s  room  he  went  in  for  an
apple  before  going  to  see  Libby  Rose's  picture  book,  and  it  seemed  so  nice
and  warm  he  thought  he  would  lie  down  awhile.  He  could  give  no  explana-
tion as  to  what  prompted  him  to  turn  the  key  :  it  was  the  first  and  last  time  ;
but  this  could  have  made  no  difference  in  the  result,  for  no  one  would  have
discovered  the  smoke  in  time  to  save  his  life.  The  wood  in  the  oven  was
burned  to  ashes,  but  as  the  doors  were  closed  there  was  no  danger  of  falling
embers  setting  the  house  on  fire  ;  and  had  we  stayed  to  the  concert  every-
thing'would  have  been  as  when  we  left,  except  that  little  Eddie's  voice  would
never  more  have  made  music  for  our  ears.  Everyone  said  that  with  a  delay
of  five  or  even  three  minutes  we  should  have  been  too  late.

(Signed) "  Mrs.  C.  A.  C.  Hadselle."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hadselle  informed  Mr.  Hodgson  that  the
event  took  place  about  1854,  Eddie  being  then  nine  or  ten  years  old.  Mr.
A.  is  no  longer  living,  but  the  lady  at  whose  house  the  party  met,  on  being
asked  by  Mrs.  Hadselle  what  she  could  remember  of  the  circumstances,
wrote  : —

Albany,  N.Y.,  January  6th,  1891.

"  I  remember  distinctly  the  incident  described  by  Mrs.  Hadselle  in  her
sketch,  'An  Unspoken  Warning.'  It  was  at  my  house  that  the  little  party
gathered  for  the  old-fashion  afternoon  visit  and  tea.  I  remember  well  her
strange  condition,  arising  from  anxiety  over  the  child,  which  had  been  left
at  home. The  statement  made  by  her  T  believe  to  be  true.

"  M.  W.  Rogers.'

These  cases  show  in  intimate  connection  general  malaise,  motor
impulse,  and  auditory  hallucination.  In  the  case  next  to  be  cited,
Lady  de  Vesci  described  to  me  in  conversation  a  similar  malaise,
•defining  itself  into  the  urgent  need  of  action, — namely,  of  sending  a
greeting  to  the  friend  then  dying  at  the  other  side  of  the  world.  Such
.an  impulse  was  unique  in  her  experience.

Maxj2Uh,  1891.

L.  885.

"Madame  X.  was  a  very  remarkable  woman,  and  I  was  most  deeply
attached  to  her.  She  had  had  great  troubles  and  difficulties  in  her  life,  an
unhappy  marriage, and  two  sons  who  were  entirely educated  by  her.


38


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


When  they  came  to  London  as  clerks  in  the  City  she  followed  them  to  make^
a  home  for  them  there  ;  but  as  one  was  soon  sent  out  to  work  at  Hong-Kong
and  the  other  to  a  business  at  Bahia,  she  sought  employment  for  herself  in.
London  and  came  to  us  as  governess  in  1864.  In  1869  she  became  ill,  and
spent  the  winter  alone  at  Bournemouth.  She  and  I  wrote  constantly  to
each  other,  and  when  she  moved  to  Norwood  for  the  summer  of  1870  my
eldest  brother  and  I  went  often  to  spend  long  afternoons  with  her.  He  died
that  summer,  and  although  she  had  not  left  her  sofa  for  months  she  came
at  once  to  see  me  when  she  heard  of  our  great  sorrow  ;  the  doctor  said  he
had  never  seen  such  an  indomitable  spirit  as  she  showed  through  her  illness^
and  when  in  the  spring  of  1871  Sii-  J.  Burrows  told  her  that  she  had  not
many  months  to  live  she  resolved  to  go  out  to  Hong-Kong  and  see  her
eldest  son  once  more.  It  was  not  thought  that  she  would  survive  the
voyage.  Our  deep  love  for  each  other  was  unchangeable,  and  this  final  fare-
well was  a  great  gi'ief  to  us  both.  She  reached  Hong-Kong  and  spent  the
last  18  months  of  her  life  with  her  son  there. I  heard  from  her  by  every  mail.

"In  1872  I  married,  and  shortly  afterwards  we  were  quartered  at  the
Curragh.  It  was  from  there  that  I  sent  the  telegram  which  she  received  less
than  24  hours  before  her  death.  Until  2  years  ago  I  had  in  my  possession  a
few  faint  lines  written  by  her  on  blue  foreign  paper,  saying  she  had  received
my  message  and  that  her  '  fever  dreams '  were  filled  with  memories  of  our
happy  days  together  at  Cannes  and  elsewhere.  Her  son  is  now  dead.  He
came  to  see  me  in  '76  and  told  me  that  my  telegram  had  made  his  mother
very  happy.

"  The  imjiulse  that  made  me  communicate  with  her  on  that  particular  day
was  a  very  strong  one.  It  came  to  me  suddenly  and  not  in  consequence  of  any
increased  anxiety  from  news  received.  On  the  contrary,  the  accounts  were
quite  satisfactoi-y.  I  had  heai-d  from  her  by  the  mail  a  few  days  before.  I
asked  my  husband  to  go  with  me  to  the  Curragh  Post  office,  as  I  wished  to
find  out  the  cost  of  a  telegram  to  China,  and  he  accompanied  me  to  the  Post-
office  and  we  were  told  it  would  cost  £5  to  send  12  words  or  so,  I  think.  I
at  once  wrote  and  sent  the  message  containing  a  few  words  of  loving  greet-
ing. These  words  she  received  and  acknowledged  only  a  few  hours  before
her  death.  Evelyn  de  Vesci."

Lord  de  Vesci  adds  : —

' '  I  certify  that  the  account  given  by  Lady  de  Vesci  is  correct  and  accurate.

"  De  Vesci."

June  2nd,  1891.

This  special  sensibility  to  the  motor  element  in  an  impulse  recalls
to  us  the  special  susceptibilities  to  different  forms  of  hallucination  or
suggestion  shown  by  different  hypnotic  subjects.  Some  can  be  made
to  see,  some  to  hear,  some  to  act  out  the  conception  proposed  to  them.
In  a  recent  paper '  Dr.  Berillon  has  even  shown  that  certain  subjects
who  seem  at  first  quite  refractory  to  hypnotisation  are  nevertheless  at
once  obedient,  even  in  the  waking  state,  to  a  motor  suggestion.
This  was  the  case  both  with  a  very  strong  man,  with  weak  men  and

i  Revue  de  I'Mi/pnotisme,  March,  1893,  p.  268.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


39


women,  and  with  at  least  one  subject  actually  suffering  from  loco-
motor ataxy.  It  would  seem,  then,  that  sometimes  a  loss  of  motor
control  may  predispose  to  motor  suggestibility.  On  the  other  hand,
a  specially  well-developed  motor  control  may  predispose  in  a  similar
way  ; — as  for  instance,  the  subject  who  can  sing  already  is  more  easily
made  to  sing  by  suggestion.  "VVe  must,  then,  await  further  obsei'va-
tions  before  we  can  pretend  to  say  beforehand  with  which  autom-
atist  the  messages  will  take  a  sensory,  and  with  which  a  motor  form.

Still  less  can  we  explain  the  special  predisposition  of  each  experi-
menter to  one  or  more  of  the  common  kinds  of  motor  automatism,
— as  automatic  speech,  automatic  writing,  table  movements,  raps,  and
so  forth.  These  forms  of  message  may  themselves  be  variously  com-
bined ;  and  the  contents  of  a  message  of  any  one  of  these  kinds  may
be  purely  dream-like  and  fantastic,  or  may  be  veridical  in  various
ways.

Let  us  enumerate  the  modes  of  subliminal  motor  message  as  nearly
as  we  can  in  order  of  their  increasing  specialisation.

1.  We  may  place  first  the  massive  motor  impulses  (like  Major
Kobbe's)  of  which  mention  has  already  been  made,  and  which  mark  a
kind  of  transition  between  ccenesthetic  affections  and  motor  impulses
proper.  There  was  here  no  impulse  to  special  movement  of  any  limb  ;
but  an  impulse  to  reach  a  certain  place  by  ordinary  methods.

2.  Next,  perhaps,  in  order  of  specialisation  come  the  simple  sub-
liminal muscular  impulses  which  give  rise  to  table-tilting  and  similar
phenomena.

3.  Musical  execution,  subliminally  initiated,  might  theoretically  be
placed  next ;  although  definite  evidence  of  this  is  hard  to  obtain,
since  the  threshold  of  consciousness  with  musical  performers  is
notoriously  apt  to  be  shifting  and  indefinite.  ("When  in  doubt,  play
with  your  fingers,  and  not  with  your  head.")^

■  4.  Next  we  may  place  automatic  drawing  and  painting.  This
curious  group  of  messages  has  but  seldom  a  telepathic  content,  and
may  be  better  considered  hereafter  in  connection  with  other  non-
telepathic  forms  of  subliminal  faculty.

5.  Next  comes  automatic  writing,  on  which  much  has  been  said  in
previous  pajjers,  and  much  remains  to  be  said  here.

6.  Automatic  speech,  which  would  not  seem  to  be  per  se  a  more
developed  form  of  motor  message  than  automatic  script,  is  often
accompanied  by  profound  changes  of  memory  or  of  personality  which
raise  the  question  of  "  inspiration  "  or  "  possession  "  ; — for  the  two
words,  however  different  their  theological  import,  mean  much  the  same

^  The  often-cited  case  of  "Blind  Tom"  (a  semi-idiotic  negro  of  extraordinary-
musical  gift)  will  be  better  dealt  with  later  in  connection  with  the  phenomena  of
trance.


40


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


thing  from  the  standpoint  of  experimental  psychology.  Much  has  been
said  on  this  subject  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Piper's  trances ;  and  since
those  trances  still  continue  it  is  hoped  that  the  topic  may  be  dealt
with  again  before  long.

7.  1  must  conclude  my  list  with  a  class  of  motor  phenomena  which
I  shall  in  this  present  paper  merely  record  in  passing,  without  attempt-
ing any  explanation.  I  allude  to  raps,  and  to  those  telekinetic  move-
ments of  objects  whose  i-eal  existence  is  still  matter  of  controversy.

Comparing  this  list  of  motor  automatisms  with  the  sensory
automatisms  enumerated  in  Chap.  V.,  we  shall  find  a  certain  general
tendency  running  through  each  alike.  The  sensory  automatisms  began
with  vague  unspecialised  sensations.  They  then  passed  through  a  phase
of  definition,  of  specialisation  on  the  lines  of  the  known  senses.  And
finally  they  reached  a  stage  beyond  these  habitual  forms  of
specialisation  : — beyond  them,  as  of  wider  reach,  and  including  in  an
apparently  unanalysable  act  of  perception  a  completer  truth  than  any
of  our  specialised  forms  of  perception  could  by  itself  convey.  With
motor  messages,  too,  we  begin  with  something  of  similar  vagueness.
They,  too,  develop  from  modifications  of  the  jJercipient's  general  organic
condition,  or  cojnesthesia ;  and  the  first  dim  telepathic  sense  apparently
hesitates  between  several  channels  of  expression.  They  then  pass
through  various  definitely  specialised  forms  ;  and  finally,  as  we  shall  see
when  automatic  script  is  considered,  they,  too,  merge  into  an  unan-
alysable act  of  cognition  in  which  the  motor  element  of  the  message
has  disappeared.

But  these  motor  messages  point  also  in  two  other  even  more  perplex-
ing directions.  They  lead,  as  I  have  said  above,  towards  the  old  idea
of  2^ossession ; — using  the  word  210  longer  in  an  unfavourable  sense,
but  simply  as  an  expression  for  some  form  of  temporary  manifestation
of  two  veritably  distinct  and  alien  j^ersonalities  through  the  self-same
physical  organism.  And  they  appear  to  lead  also  to  another  class  of
phenomena  in  which  (just  as  in  "possession")  the  influence  at  work,
instead  of  becoming  more  and  more  identified  with  the  automatist's
conscious  thought,  appears  to  become  more  and  more  markedly  dis-
tinguished from  it.  I  allude  to  telekinesis,  or  liyperhoulia,  or  whatever
name  we  may  decide  to  give  to  effects  apparently  exercised  in  the
automatist's  presence,  but  not  through  his  normal  agency,  upon  the
physical  world.

These  two  last  named  topics,  so-called  "  possession,"  and  so-called
*'  telekinetic  phenomena,"  although  unavoidably  mentioned  here,  must
be  reserved  for  fuller  description  in  a  subsequent  chapter.  It  will  be
enough  for  the  present  to  consider  motor  messages  as  running  parallel
to  sensory  messages  ; — as  covering  much  the  same  ground,  and  pre-


The  Suhliminal  Consciousness.


41


senting  the  old  problems  as  to  their  source  and  initiation  in  an  in-
structively different  light.

I  will,  then,  briefly  recount  what  seem  to  be  the  conceivable
origins  of  written  and  other  messages, — which  messages,  be  it  said,
usually  profess,  with  more  or  less  insistence,  to  come  from  some  de-
parted spirit.  Such  assertion  is  no  proof ;  and  judging  by  their
definite  contents  alone,  we  may  arrange  the  messages  in  the  following
classes.

A.  In  the  first  place,  the  message  may  come  from  the  percipient's
own  mind ;  its  contents  being  supplied  from  the  resources  of  his
oi'dinary  memory,  or  of  his  more  extensive  subliminal  memory  ;  while
the  dramatisation  of  the  message, — its  assumption  of  some  other  mind
as  its  source, — will  resemble  the  di'amatisations  of  dream  or  of  hypnotic
trance.

Of  course  the  absence  of  facts  unknown  to  the  writer  is  not  in
itself  a  proof  that  the  message  does  not  come  from  some  other  mind.
We  cannot  be  sure  that  other  minds,  if  they  can  communicate,  will  be
at  the  pains  to  fill  their  messages  with  evidential  facts.  But,  equally
of  course,  a  message  devoid  of  such  facts  must  not,  on  the  strength  of
its  mere  assertions,  be  claimed  as  the  product  of  any  but  the  writer's
own  mind.

£.  Next  above  the  motor  messa^'es  whose  content  the  automatist's
own  mental  resources  might  supply,  we  may  place  the  messages  whose
content  seems  to  be  derived  telepathically  from  the  mind  of  some  other
person  still  living  on  earth ;  that  person  being  either  conscious  or
xmconscious  of  transmittins;  the  susfgestion.

C.  Next  comes  the  possibility  that  the  message  may  emanate
from  some  unembodied  intelligence  of  unknown  type, — other,  at  any
rate,  than  the  intelligence  of  the  alleged  agent.  Under  this  heading
come  the  views  which  ascribe  the  messages  on  the  one  hand  to
"  elementaries,"  or  even  devils,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  "guides  "
or  "guardians  "  of  superhuman  goodness  and  wisdom.

D.  Finally  we  have  the  possibility  that  the  message  may  be  derived,
in  a  more  or  less  direct  manner,  from  the  mind  of  the  agent, — the
departed  friend, — from  whom  the  communication  does  actually  claim
to  come.

Let  us  consider  each  of  these  possibilities  in  turn.

A.  My  main  effort  has  naturally  been  thus  far  directed  to  the
proof  that  there  are  messages  which  do  not  fall  into  this  lowest  class,
— in  which  class  most  psychologists  would  still  place  them  all.  And  I
myself, — while  reserving  a  certain  small  portion  of  the  messages  for
my  other  classes, — do  not  only  admit  but  assert  that  the  great  major-
ity of  such  communications  represent  the  sublhninal  workings  of  the
automatist's  mind  alone. It  does  not,  however,  follow  that  such


42


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,


messages  have  for  us  no  interest  or  novelty.  On  the  contrary,  they
form  an  instructive,  an  indispensable  transition  from  psychological
introspection  of  the  old-fashioned  kind  to  the  bolder  methods  on
whose  validity  I  am  anxious  to  insist.  The  mind's  subliminal  action,
as  thus  revealed,  differs  from  the  supraliminal  in  ways  which  no  one
anticipated,  and  which  no  one  can  explain.  There  seem  to  be
subliminal  tendencies  setting  steadily  in  certain  obscure  directions,
and  bearing  as  little  relation  to  the  individual  characteristics  of  the
person  to  the  deeps  of  whose  being  we  have  somehow  penetrated  as
profound  ocean-currents  bear  to  waves  and  winds  on  the  surface  of  the
sea.i

Is  this  indeed  the  drift  of  the  Zeitgeist,  as  Professor  James
suggests,  steady  beneath  the  tossings  and  tumblings  of  individual  man?
Or  is  it  something  independent  of  age  or  season?  Is  there  some
pattern  in  the  very  fabric  of  our  nature  which  begins  to  show  when-
ever we  scratch  the  glaze  off  the  stuff?

All  this  may  be  better  considered  hereafter,  apart  from  the
evidential  discussions  with  which  this  chapter  must  be  mainly
concerned.

Another  point  also,  of  fundamental  importance,  connected  with  the
powers  of  the  subliminal  self,  will  be  better  deferred  until  a  later  chapter.
I  have  said  that  a  message  containing  only  facts  normally  known  to
the  automatist  must  not,  on  the  strength  of  its  mere  assertions,  be
regarded  as  proceeding  from  any  mind  but  his  own.  This  seems
evident ;  but  the  converse  proposition  is  not  equally  indisputable.
We  must  not  take  for  granted  that  a  message  which  does  contain  facts
not  normally  known  to  the  automatist  must  therefore  come  from  some
mind  other  than  his  own.  If  the  subliminal  self  can  acquire  super-
normal knowledge  at  all,  it  may  obtain  such  knowledge  by  means  other
than  telepathic  impressions  from  other  minds.  It  may  assimilate  its.
supernormal  nutriment  also  by  a  director  process, — it  may  devour  it
not  only  cooked  but  raw.  Parallel  with  the  possibilities  of  reception  of
such  knowledge  from  the  influence  of  other  embodied  or  disembodied
minds  lies  the  possibility  of  its  own  clairvoyant  perception,  or  active

*  Sse  James's  Psijcholoyy,  Vol.  I.,  p.  394:  "One  curious  thing  about  trance
utterances  is  their  generic  similarity  in  different  individuals.  ...  It  seems,
exactly  as  if  one  author  composed  more  tlian  half  of  the  trance  messages,  no  matter  by
whom  they  were  uttered.  Whether  all  sub-conscious  selves  are  peculiarly  susceptible
to  a  certain  stratum  of  the  Zeityeist,  and  get  their  inspivation  from  it,  I  know  not."
See  the  account  of  automatic  and  impressional  scrii)t,  by  Mr.  Sidney  Dean,  which
Professor  James  goes  on  to  quote,  and  which  is  closely  parallel  to  (for  instance)
Miss  A.  's  case,  to  be  given  below,  although  the  one  series  of  messages  comes  from
the  hand  of  a  late  member  of  Congress,  "all  his  life  a  robust  and  active  journalist,
author,  and  man  of  affairs,"  and  the  other  from  a  young  lady  with  so  different  a
history  and  entourage.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


43


absorption  of  some  kind,  of  facts  lying  indefinitely  beyond  its  supra-
liminal purview.  This  possibility  must  be  kept  in  sight  throughout ;
but  our  easiest  plan  will  be  to  defer  its  discussion  until  we  have,  in  this
chapter,  reviewed  the  evidence  so  far  as  it  makes  for  the  influence  of
different  orders  of  mind  external  to  the  automatist.

B.  We  may  proceed,  therefore,  to  those  motor  messages  which  seem
to  indicate  the  telepathic  influence  upon  the  automatist  of  other  still
embodied  minds.  Messages  of  this  kind  have  been  dealt  with  at
various  stages  of  our  past  woi-k.  The  transferences  of  diagrams  of
which  we  have  from  time  to  time  given  examples  sometimes  contained  a
motor  as  well  as  a  visual  element ; — the  percipient  feeling  an  impulse  to
draw,a,s  well  as  discerning  a  "mind's  eye"  sketch  of  the  diagram  on  which
the  agent  was  gazing.  Again,  a  case,  contributed  by  Dr.  Liebeault,where
automatic  writing  announces  the  death  of  a  distant  person,  is  regarded
by  Gurney  as  a  motor  message  ti'ansmitted  in  the  last  moments  of  the
decedent's  earth-life.'  But  our  leading  instance  of  this  kind  is-
undoubtedly  the  long  series  of  communications  between  the  Rev.  P.  H.
and  Mrs.  Newnham,  which  we  have  already  cited  at  so  much  length
that  I  need  not  repeat  them  here.^  These  experiments,  which  date
back  to  1871  and  whose  contemporaneous  written  record  is  preserved
in  the  archives  of  the  S.P.R.,  must,  I  think,  always  retain  their
primacy  as  early  and  trustworthy  examples  of  a  telepathic  transference
where  the  percipient's  automatic  script  answers  questions  penned  by
the  agent  in  such  a  position  that  the  percipient  could  not  in  any
normal  manner  discern  what  those  questions  were.  No  part  of  our
evidence  seems  to  me  more  worthy  of  study  than  this.

In  the  Newnham  case  we  have  the  advantage  of  seeing  before  us  the
entire  series  of  questions  and  answers,  and  thus  of  satisfying  ourselves
that  the  misses  (which  in  that  case  are  very  few)  are  mai'ked  as  well
as  the  hits,  and  consequently  that  the  coincidences  between  question
and  answer  are  at  any  rate  not  the  result  of  chance.  In  several  other
cases  which  I  have  known,  where  the  good  faith  of  the  informants  has
been  equally  above  question,  the  possibility  of  an  explanation  by  chance
alone  has  been  a  more  important  element  in  the  problem.  All  our  evi-
dence has  tended  to  show  that  the  telepathic  power  itself  is  a  variable
thing ;  that  it  shows  itself  in  flashes,  for  the  most  part  spontaneously,  and
seldom  persists  through  a  series  of  deliberate  exiaeriments.  And  if  an
automatist  possessing  jDower  of  this  uncertain  kind  has  exercised  it  at
irregular  moments  and  with  no  scientific  aim ; — and  has  kept,  more-
over, no  steady  record  of  success  and  failure  ; — then  it  becomes  difficult
to  say  that  even  some  brilliant  coincidences  afford  cogent  proof  of

'  Phantasms  of  the  Living, Vol.  I.,  p.  293.
2  Phantasms  of  the  Livinr/,  Vol.  I.,  p.  63;  Proccalinys,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  HI.,  p.  8.


44


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myerfi.


telepathic  action.  The  case  which  I  am  about  to  cite  presents  these
drawbacks;  but  it  presents  also  positive  points  of  interest  and
corroborations  of  memory  quite  sufficient,  I  think,  to  justify  me  in
laying  it  before  my  readers  as  an  example  of  telepathy  acting — not  just
in  the  way  in  which  we  should  like  it  to  act,  but  in  the  way  in  which
it  apparently  does  act ; — and  with  that  strange  intercurrence,  moreover,
Avhich  we  so  often  find  of  something  like  clairvoyance  and  premonition
mingling  with  the  reflection  of  thoughts  which  pass  through  minds  in
rap]jort  with  the  automatist's.

The  following  account,  dated  Thornes  House,  Wakefield,  January
30th,  1893,  is  signed  by  Lady  Mabel  Howard  ;  her  husband,  Mr.
Henry  Howard,  of  Greystoke  Castle,  Westmoreland,  attesting  the
facts  which  lie  within  his  cognisance.  Some  corroboVations,  and
some  comments  of  my  own,  are  added  in  brackets.

M.  Aut.  59.

"  1.  I  began  to  write  automatically  every  now  and  then  when  a  young  girl,
as  some  relations  of  mine  were  in  the  habit  of  doing  so.  I  do  not,  however,
remember  any  of  the  messages  until  I  was  eighteen,  when  one  day  a  girl
friend  asked  me  as  a  joke,  '  Who  wished  to  marry  her  ? '  My  pencil  wrote
two  initials  which  had  no  meaning  for  me.  The  girl  w^as  very  angry,  as
though  the  writing  imjilied  that  she  was  fated  to  marry  this  man.  She  told
me  nothing  ;  but  some  years  afterwards  a  man  with  these  initials  told  me
that  he  had  wished  to  marry  this  lady  at  just  that  time."  [The  transference
of  an  idea  latent  in  the  agent's  mind — to  tlie  exclusion  of  the  idea  wdiich  he
wkhes  to  have  transferred — is,  of  course,  a  frequent  phenomenon  in  these
experiments.]

"  2.  Some  time  after  my  marriage  (1885)  there  was  a  burglary  at  Netherhy
Hall,  in  Cumberland,  a  few  valuable  jewels  being  stolen.  The  robbers
were  caught  three  or  four  days  later,  but  the  jewels  were  not  found.  Next
Sunday  [apparently  November  1st,  1885,  see  below],  I  was  asked  by  some
friends  to  write  where  the  jewels  were.  I  wrote,  '  In  the  river,  under
the  bridge  at  Tebay.'  This  was  very  unlikely,  and  had  never  been  sug-
gested, so  far  as  I  know,  by  anyone.  Everyone  laughed  at  this  ;  but
the  jewels  were  found  there."  [The  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  J.  Cropiier,  of  Tolson
Hall,  Kendal,  corroborates  as  follows,  in  February,  1893  :  ' '  We  were
staying  at  Greystoke  just  after  the  capture  of  the  Netherby  burglars,  and
some  questions  about  the  burglary  were  answered  by  Lady  Mabel's  pencil.
I  am  absolutely  certain  that  in  answer  to  the  question  '  Where  are  the
jewels  1 '  the  pencil  wrote  'In  the  river.'  I  think  that  in  answer  to  a  further
question  it  added  'Under  the  bridge,'  but  I  am  not  so  certain  of  this.  I
aur  perfectly  certain  that  it  went  on  to  say  that  the  fourth  man,  who  never
was  caught,  was  then  '  in  Carlisle  '  and  that  it  also  gave  his  name.  (The
fourth  man  was  some  time  after  suspected  to  have  been  a  local  man. — M.  H.)
My  husband,  who  was  also  present,  is  quite  sure  about  the  words  '  under
the  bridge.' — Edith  E.  Chopper."]

[From  the  Carlisle  Express  and  Examiner,  October  31st,  1885,  it  appears
that  two  of  the  burglars  were  captured  at  Tebay  Station. The  guard  saw  them


The  Suhliminal  Consciousness.


45


conceal  themselves  in  a  truck,  and  telegraijhed  in  advance  for  assistance.
The  third  man  escaped,  but  seems  to  have  crept  back  to  the  train,  for  he  was
subsequently  caught  at  Lancaster,  as  he  was  quickly  making  for  a  London
train.  It  was  not  in  the  least  known  where  the  jewels  were  (a  fourth  man
having  got  away),  and  the  finding  of  the  first  jewel  near  Tebay  Station,  close
to  the  water  side  (reported  in  same  paper  November  7th),  was  accidental.
This  discovery,  of  course,  caused  search  to  be  made  in  the  river,  where  the
jewels  were  found  "near  the  railway  bridge, "  more  than  a  month  later.  (Same
paper,  December  19th.)  There  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  that  the  writing
was  on  November  1st.  Lady  Mabel  Howard,  writing  from  Lyidph's  Tower,
Penrith,  May  5th,  1893,  is  quite  certain  of  this  :  "It  was  immediately  after
the  men  were  caught,  and  before  any  jewel  at  all  was  found.  This  all  will
assert— the  Bullers,  Croppers,  my  brother  and  husband— for  all  five  of  us
were  local  people,  and  looking  out  for  every  fresh  detail  about  it,  and  only
the  capture  had  taken  place  when  the  pencil  wrote."]

"  3.  On  the  same  night  I  wrote  that  my  sister  would  be  engaged  to  be
married  in  September,  1887.  At  the  end  of  September,  1887,  she  became
engaged  to  a  gentleman  of  whom  there  had  been  no  idea  at  the  time."  [It
is,  of  course,  conceivable  that  the  prediction,  known  to  this  lady,  may  have
influenced  the  date  of  the  event.]

"4.  At  nearly  the  same.date  some  connections  of  mine  who  had  let  a  house,
the  lease  of  which  was  expiring,  were  expecting  to  hear  whether  any  damage
had  been  done,  but  did  not  speak  of  any  particular  possibility.  I  wrote
that  nothing  was  injured  except  a  particular  table  in  a  jmrticular  spot.
Next  day  they  heard  that  this  particular  table,  and  this  alone,  had  been
injured.

[Miss  Buller  corroborates  and  expands  this  statement  as  follows  : —

"36,  Green-street,  Park-lane,  W.,  ^pnZ  2Qth,  1893.

"  The  following  incident  happened  when  I  was  staying  at  Greystoke  more
than  a  dozen  years  ago  [discrepancy  as  to  date],  but  I  have  often  told  the
story  since,  and  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  the  facts  were  tliese  :—

"On  being  asked  what  damage  our  tenants  had  done,Lady  Mabel  Howard's
pencil  replied:  'They  have  broken  the  table  and  a  cliair,'  and  added,
'  the  table  has  been  mended.'  On  reaching  our  house  and  asking  the  same
question  of  our  housemaid,  she  replied  that  a  table  in  the  drawing-room  (the
only  one  of  its  kind)  had  been  broken,  but  had  been  mended,  and  one  of  the
kitchen  chairs  had  been  broken.  Nothing  else  in  the  way  of  furniture  had
been  injured.

"  Henrietta  J.  Buller."]
"  5.  Shortly  afterwards  I  went  for  some  winter  months  to  St.  Moritz.  For
some  reason  or  other  the  answers  were  particularly  good  there.  One  day,  a
lady  living  in  quite  a  different  part  of  the  huge  hotel,  and  on  the  fourth
floor,  while  we  were  on  the  first  floor,  missed  a  valuable  object  which  she
had  bought  as  a  prize  for  tobogganing.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  circumstances,
but  my  hand  wrote  that  the  object  had  been  taken  by  a  light-liaired  young
waiter  called  Richard.  I  knew  of  no  such  waiter,  as  he  had  notliing  to  do
with  our  part  of  the  hotel.  But  on  mentioning  this  answer  to  the  lady  in
question  she  said  that  there  was  in  fact  a  young  light-haired  waiter  called
Richard  who  waited  on  her  floor  ;  and  that  she  had  suspected  him.  My


46


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


hand  had  written  where  the  object  was  hidden  ;  but  the  lady  woiikl  not  have
jsearch  made.

"6.  A  Mr.  Huth,  who  was  staying  at  our  hotel,  was  leaving  the  next  day
for  Paris,  and  had  arranged  to  dine  the  day  after  with  a  friend,  a  young  doctor
attached  to  the  Embassy  in  Paris,  from  whom  he  had  just  received  an  invi-
tation. He  asked  me  to  predict  something  about  his  journey.  My  hand
wrote  words  to  this  effect :  '  You  will  have  an  accident  on  your  journey  ;
.and  you  will  not  see  your  friend,  and  you  cannot  see  him.'  He  derided  this,
as  the  arrangement  with  the  friend  had  just  been  made.  As  he  went  to  Chur
next  day  by  sleigh  his  sleigh  was  overturned,  and  his  journey  was  thus
-delayed  for  a  day.  When  he  got  to  Paris  he  found  that  his  friend  was  dead.

Mr.  Huth  independently  corroljorates  and  adds  to  this  account  as
follows  : —

Oakfield  Lodge,  Huddersfield,  April  16f/i,  1893.

"In  March,  1889,  I  was  staying  at  St.  Moritz  (Engadine),  where  I  met
with  a  very  serious  accident  tobogganing.  Although  still  crippled  I  decided  to
return  home,  and  on  the  morning  of  my  departure  the  weather  was  brilliantly
fine.  I  asked  Lady  Mabel  Howard's  pencil,  more  in  joke  than  anything  else,
what  sort  of  a  jouniey  1  should  have.  The  pencil  promptly  replied  that  I
should  have  an  awful  journey  and  meet  with  an  accident.  I  tlien  asked
whether  I  should  meet  and  dine  with  any  friend  in  Paris.  I  asked  this
question  because  I  had  arranged  to  dine  with  a  friend  of  mine,  a  Dr.  Davies,
who  was  living  there,  to  talk  over  some  theatricals  he  was  to  get  up  at  the
British  Embassy.  The  pencil  at  once  replied  that  I  should  neither  meet  nor
dine  with  anyone  I  knew.  Kn(jwing  of  my  arrangement  and  incredulous  as
to  this  reply,  I  repeated  my  question,  with  the  same  result.  I  then  asked
what  day  I  should  get  back  to  England,  having  decided  in  my  own  mind  to
return  on  the  Friday. The  pencil  at  once  answered  '  On  Thursday.'

"On  the  summit  of  the  Julier  Pass  the  weather  suddenly  changed  from
bright  sunshine  to  a  perfect  hurricane  of  wind,  snow  and  sleet,  which  com-
pletely blinded  us,  and  the  snow  was  so  thick  we  could  not  see  ten  yards  in
front  of  us.  Our  driver  missed  the  track,  the  sleigh  upset,  and  we  were  all
thrown  out  on  to  the  snow, and  it  was  three  hours  before  we  were  in  compara-
tive safety.  On  my  arrival  in  Paris  I  found  no  word  from  my  friend  Dr.  Davies
and  on  inquiry  at  his  rooms  I  learnt  that  he  had  died  from  typhoid  fever  ten
days  previously.  I  neither  dined  with  nor  met  anyone  I  knew  whilst  in  Paris,
and  I  returned  to  England  a  day  sooner  than  I  had  intended  in  consequence
of  my  friend's  death,  and  it  was  only  upon  my  arrival  in  London  that  I
remembered  it  was  Tliursday,  the  day  foretold  by  the  pencil.

"  Habey  Huth."

"  7.  In  1888  another  girl  friend  of  mine  asked  when  she  was  to  be  engaged
to  be  married.  My  liand  wrote  :  '  In  Mai'ch,  1890. '  She  became  engaged
in  that  montli  to  a  man  of  whom  there  had  been  no  idea  at  the  time.  [The
lady  in  question,  Mrs.  Lawson,  writing  from  Greystoke  Castle,  February,
1893,  confirms  and  enlarges  this  statement  as  follows  :  "I  was  at  Greystoke
in  February,  1888,  and  Lady  Mabel  Howard  was  writing  with  her  pencil,
which  said  that  I  should  be  engaged  to  be  married  in  March,  1890,  and  it  also
said  that  I  should  not  be  married  until  the  following  year. I  ims  engaged  to


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


47


be  married  on  March  27th,  1890,  and  it  was  all  settled  that  I  should  be
married  within  six  weeks  ;  but  most  unforeseen  circumstances  arose,  and  my
marriage  did  not  take  place  until  April,  1891. — Camilla  Lawson."]

"  8.  I  have  never  tried  experiments  in  thought-transference,  such  as  those
recorded  in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings.  But  I  have  no  doubt  that  words  and
ideas  do  pass  without  speech  from  my  husband's  mind  into  mine.  I  have
specially  remarked  this  apropos  of  bye-elections,  when  I  feel  certain  that
I  have  never  consciously  known  the  names  of  the  candidates.  Many  times
my  hand  has  written  those  names  (when  known  to  him)  truly,  and  some-
times it  has  predicted  results  of  elections  with  an  accuracy  which  seemed  to
both  of  us  not  to  be  the  result  of  chance.  In  one  case,  where  a  gentleman
named  Nanney  was  standing,  of  whom  I  was  quite  sure  that  I  had  never
lieard,  my  hand  kept  writing  '  Goat,  Goat. '  In  this  case  my  husband  was
mot  present,  but  someone  else  who  was  present  knew  the  name. — Mabel
Howard."

"  Correct,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned. — Heury  Howard."

[These  last  instances  must,  according  to  our  canons  of  evidence,  be
Teckoned  merely  as  revivals  of  subliminal  memory.  Names  which  have
"been  printed  in  newspapers  which  have  been  lying  about  must  be  taken  as
Slaving  possibly  fallen  within  the  field  of  at  least  unconscious  vision.  Tlie
emergence  of  an  unconsciously  observed  name  Nanney  in  the  grotesque
form  Gocd  would  thus  be  parallel  to  the  emergence  of  the  unconsciously
observed  word  BoniUon.  in  the  grotesque  form  VerhascumTliapsus,  mentioned
in  Proceedings,  Yol.  VIII.,  p.  455.]

9.  Writing  later,  from  P  Park,  April  18th,  1893,  Lady  Mabel  adds  :

"The  H.  girls  asked  what  entertainment  they  should  go  to  directly  on
arriving  in  London.  The  pencil  answered,  'Lady  C  This  puzzled  us
all,  as  no  one  knew  of  an  entertainment  to  be  given  next  week.  At  last,
as  it  continued  wi'iting  'Lady  C.,'  we  gave  it  up,  thinking  it  must  mean
dining  at  home.  Lady  C.  meaning  [their  mother].  That  very  evening,  8
liours  after,  a  letter  arrived  from  [Lady  W.  G.]  saying  Lady  Carrington
wished  to  know  if  the  H.'s  could  dance  the  minuet  at  her  house  on  the  27th.
They  will  arrive  in  London  on  the  25th."  [From  a  later  letter  it  appears
that  the  Ladies  H.  knew  that  this  engagement  impended,  but  believed  that
it  would  be  much  later  in  the  season,  ' '  and  were  much  surprised  themselves
at  receiving  the  letter."]

10.  I  have  myself  [F.W.H.M.]  succeeded  in  getting  two  correct  answers
to  questions  absolutely  beyond  Lady  Mabel's  knowledge.  I  was  asked  to
luncheon  at  the  house  of  a  gentleman  whom  I  knew  only  by  correspondence,
and  of  whose  home  and  entourage  the  rest  of  the  party  knew  absolutely
nothing.  On  my  return  I  asked,  "  How  many  people  sat  down  to  luncheon  ?  "
The  answer  was  "  Six,"  which  was  right.  "  What  was  the  name  of  the  gentle-
man, not  my  host,  with  whom  I  sat  and  talked  after  luncheon  ?  "  The  pencil
wrote  MO,  and  then  began  to  scrawl.  The  name  was  Moultrie.  It  was  impos-
sible that  Lady  Mabel  should  have  had  any  kind  of  notion  that  a  gentleman  of
that  name  would  have  been  present  in  a  group  of  wliich  she  knew  nothing
whatever.  But  here  the  impulse  to  write  seemed  spent,  and  a  few
further  questions  were  answered  by  erroneous  words  or  mere  scrawls.

11.  The following statement,  dated  Downes,  Crediton,  Devonshire,


48


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


April  8th,  1893,  is  signed  by  Sir  Redvers  Buller,  K.C.B.,  and  by  Miss
Dorothy  Howard  (daughter  of  Lady  Audrey  Buller).  "Lady  Mabel  Howard
was  stopping  with  us  this  week.  She  was  writing  with  her  pencil  just  after
arriving.  Someone  asked  :  '.Where  is  Don  1 '  The  pencil  immediately
answered,  'He  is  dead.'  Lady  Mabel  then  asked  who  Don  was,  and  was
told  that  he  was  a  dog.  No  one  in  the  room  knew  that  he  was  dead  ;  but
on  inquiry  the  next  day,  it  was  found  that  it  was  so.  One  of  the  party  then
asked  how  many  fish  would  be  caught  in  the  river  the  next  day.  The  pencil
at  once  wrote  i/i-ree,  which  was  the  number  obtained  the  next  day.

"  A  little  girl  in  the  house,  who  attends  a  school  in  London,  asked  who  was
her  greatest  friend  at  this  school.  The  pencil  answered  Mary,  which  was^
again  a  fact  absolutely  unknown  to  Lady  Mabel.

' '  Dorothy  E  .  Howaed.
"Redvers  Buller."]
I  defer  for  the  present  any  discussion  of  the  elements  of  clair-
voyance and  precognition  which  these  incidents  apparently  contain.  I
quote  the  case  as  one  where  thought-transference  from  the  living  seems
to  play  at  least  a  considerable  part  in  supplying  the  contents  of  the
messages.

I  pass  on  to  two  cases  where  an  actual  conversation  goes  on
between  the  distant  agent  and  the  automatist,  informing  the  automatist
of  matters  which  the  agent — consciously  or  unconsciously — wishes  him
to  know.  The  first  of  these  cases  was  ]3i'inted  in  the  S.P.R.
Journal  for  July,  1888,  but  is  now  published  for  the  first  time.
Evidentially  it  is  not  strong,  for  it  depends  upon  a  single  memory,
corroborated  on  one  collatei-al  point  alone  (althoiigh  not  invalidated
upon  any  point)  ;  and  the  writer  was  not  personally  known  to  any  of
us.  The  date  is  also  very  remote.  On  the  other  hand  the  reasons  for
the  absence  of  corroboration  seem  satisfactory  ;  and  in  my  view  at  least
the  narrative  offers  internal  evidence  of  honesty  and  care,  while  the
incident  is  such  as  might  stamp  itself  permanently  on  the  mind.

Mrs.  Kirby  wrote  to  me  from  Santa  Cruz,  California,  August  13th,,
1886,  as  follows  : —

M.  Aut.  GO.

' '  In  1850  I  left  New  York  for  San  Francisco.  Spiritualism,  in  the  sense
in  which  that  word  is  now  used,  had  no  existence.  The  facts  and  philosophy
it  covers  were  unknown,  except  partially  to  the  very  few  readers  of  Sweden-
borg's  cumbrous  and  involved  theology.

"Attention  had  been  called  to  some  rappings  which  had  made  themselves-
heard  in  a  house  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  there  had  been  some  violent
demonstrations  (breaking  of  windows,  moving  of  furniture,  and  unlocking
of  locked  drawers  and  doors)  in  the  house  of  an  orthodox  clergyman  some-
where in  Connecticut.

"  In  1853  I  was  living  on  a  ranche  three  miles  from  what  is  now  the  city
of  Santa  Cruz.  (It  was  but  a  village  then,  tliough  they  called  it  a  town.)
My  family  consisted  of  my  husband,  myself,  and  in  a  certain  sense,  of  a
young  English  sailor,  a  healthy,  kind-hearted,  and  very  decent,  though  very


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


49


ignorant  fellow,  whom  my  husband  had  employed  to  work  on  the  ranche
during  the  previous  year.  His  name  was  Thomas  Travers,  and  he  had  just
made  his  mark  ( x  )  to  a  written  agreement  for  another  year's  service.  As  it
will  be  seen,  I  had  no  servant,  but  Tom  stood  ready  to  help  me  in  any  way
he  could.  For  instance,  when,  at  intervals  of  weeks,  visitors  would  make
their  appearance,  he  would  immediately  kill  and  clean  some  chickens  for  me.
(If  you  wanted  beef -steak  in  those  days  you  could  only  have  it  by  killing  an
ox. The  nearest  neighbours  sometimes  combined  and  took  a  quarter  each.)

' '  On  one  occasion  the  two  most  intelligent  men  in  town  came  out,  a  Dr.
McLean  and  the  Rev.  —  Dryden,  and  they  presently  asked  me  if  I  had  a
small  table  I  could  let  them  have  (while  I  was  busy,  and  my  husband  a  mile
off  at  his  tannery),  with  which  they  could  continue  some  strange  experiments
that  had  lately  been  made  among  our  mutual  friends  in  town.  Sjairits  tipped
the  table,  and  they  said  sentences  were  spelled  by  the  use  of  the  alphabet.
The  A's  and  B's  had  in  this  way  heard  of  their  long  since  departed
children,  &c. ,  &c.

' '  I  listened  eagerly.  I  had  left  a  large  circle  of  friends  at  the  East,  and
here  was  not  one  of  the  old  kind  :  Lucretia  Mott,  Lucy  Stone,  Garrison,
Purvis.  A  view  of  the  entire  bay  of  Monterey  from  my  sitting-room  window
did  not  prevent  me  from  longing  continually  for  a  little  of  the  old  sympathy.
One  of  my  most  devoted  friends  had  a  few  years  since  passed  to  the
other  shore  ;  my  young  brother  was  there  too.  If  I  could  establish  commu-
nication with  them  what  a  relief,  what  a  pleasure  it  would  be  to  me  !

"  My  smallest  table  was  in  size  S^ft.  by  l|ft.  My  husband  was  willing  to
test  the  matter,  and  as  we  were  given  to  understand  that  three  or  four
persons  together  would  be  more  likely  to  succeed  than  two  (since  magnetism
or  electricity  was  drawn  from  them  by  the  invisibles  to  help  in  accomplishing
their  object),  Mr.  K.  went  out  to  Tom's  shanty  and  asked  him  to  come  and
sit  at  the  table  with  us.

' '  We  had  not  held  our  hands  one  moment  on  the  table  before  it  tipped  very
decidedly,  and  I  forthwith  proceeded  to  repeat  the  alphabet.  The  doing  so,
however,  struck  me  as  worse  than  ridiculous  ;  it  was  very  unj^leasant,  too,
and  I  observed  that  if  spirits  were  present  they  could  hear  me  say  the  letters
in  my  mind  as  weU  as  if  they  were  uttered  from  my  tongue.

"  'AH  right. Go  ahead  ! '  my  husband  replied,  'we  will  sit  and  wait
for  results.'

' '  I  did  so,  and  the  table  tijjped  promptly  to  the  letters,  spelling  out —
"  'Mary  Howells.'

"  As  I  knew  no  such  person,  I  asked  if  she  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  K. 's  ?"
Answer:  'No.'  Of  Tom's?  Answer:  'Yes.'  A  relation  of  his  1  Answer:.
'  Sister.' Are  you  married  ?  I  questioned. Answer  :  '  No.'

"  '  Oh,  don't  let  us  waste  any  more  time  !'  I  exclaimed.  'It's  all  false-
hood and  nonsense.  Here  is  someone  professing  to  be  Tom's  sister  wlio.
says  her  name  is  Mary  Howells,  and  that  she  is  unmarried.  If  this  were  true
of  course  her  name  would  be  Travers.'

' '  Tom  nodded  aside  to  me  and  said  in  a  low  tone —

"  '  Yes,  mum. That's  her  name. Mary  Howells.'

"  He  looked  extremely  confused  and  astonished.

"  '  Why,  what  do  you  mean  ? '  Mr.  K.  broke  in  ;  '  your  name  is  Travers„
how  can  hers  be  Howells  '? '

B


50


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  '  No,  sir,'  Tom  replied,  looking  down,  '  my  name  is  Ho  wells.'

"But  Mr.  K.  insisted  that  it  could  not  be.  Had  he  not  made  his  mark
after  the  Travers  only  the  other  day  1.  Five  minutes  were  taken  up  in  the
attempt  to  convince  Tom  that  he  did  not  know  his  own  name.

"  '  You  see,  sir,'  he  at  length  explained,  '  I  ran  away  from  a  whale  ship
in  San  Francisco,  and  sailors  is  so  scarce  there  I  was  afraid  they  would  hunt
me  up  and  take  me  back,  so  I  just  took  another  name.'

"  Hardly  convinced  now,  Mr.  K.  advised  him  to  drop  the  alias  at  once,
assuring  him  that  no  one  would  molest  him.  This  he  did,  and  the  second
year  following  married,  and  he  is  now  the  fatlier  of  12  girls  and  three  boys
who  bear  the  strangely  discovered  name.

"  But  to  return.  Finding  that  the  communication  had  been  so  far  correct
I  proposed  that  we  should  compose  ourselves  while  I  repeated  the  alphabet
as  before,  still  hoping  to  receive  the  name  of  my  dear  friend.  But  Tom's
sister  had  not  accomplished  her  purpose,  and  she  proceeded  to  spell  the
following  words  : —

"  'I — have— a — child — a — girl. — She  —is — seven — -years — old  — and — now
— is —  in  —  a — house  —  of  — ill  —  fame  —  in — Cat — street.  —  I — want — my —
brother — to — bring — her — away — from — there.'

' '  This  was  a  difficult  and  painful  message  to  convey,  and  I  told  Tom  that  I
did  not  like  to  tell  him  what  was  spelt.

"  '  She  says  that  she  has  a  little  girl  seven  years  old,'  I  began.

"  Here  he  removed  his  hands  quickly  from  the  table,  and  counting  on  the
fingers  of  one  hand  by  those  of  the  other,  looked  up  and  observed  : —

"  '  Yes,  mum,  that's  so. She's  seven  now.'

"  When  I  gave  him  the  rest  of  the  message  he  became  much  excited,  and
biegged  me  to  assure  his  sister  that  he  would  send  home  50dol.  the  next
month,  and  have  the  child  removed  to  a  better  [ilace,  and  that  as  soon  as  the
•crops  wei-e  in  he  would  go  home  and  get  the  child.

' '  I  assured  him  she  could  hear  all  he  was  saying.

' '  '  But  is  it  true  that  there  is  a  street  called  Cat-street  1 '  I  asked.

"  '  Yes,  mum  ;  and  it  is  the  worst  in  the  city,'  he  returned.

"  The  following  day  he  acknowledged  to  me  that  his  sister  was  a  woman
of  the  town.

' '  I  now  asked  my  husband  to  procure  me  a  smaller  and  lighter  table  so  that
I  might  sit  at  it  by  myself  and  in  that  way  be  more  likely  to  attract  my  own
friends.  This  he  did,  but  to  my  great  annoyance,  Mary  Howells  imme-
diately presented  herself.  This  time,  however,  she  came  to  say  that  her
child  was  ill.  When  she  left  the  movements  of  the  table  were  weak  and
uncertain.

"The  following  evening,  she  came  to  say  that  the  child  was  much  worse,
and  she  thought  it  would  die.  A  day  or  two  later  she  reported  it  dead.  I
asked  if  the  cliild  were  now  with  her,  and  she  replied  by  very  decided  move-
ments, that  she  was  not.

"  After  this,  Mary  Howells  never  put  in  an  appearance,  and  every  day  I
prayed  that  someone  I  loved  might  speak  a  word  to  me.  They  did  not.  I
know  now  that  they  could  not,  for  want  of  the  honest  sailor's  electrical  help,
which  I  rejected  in  my  ignorance.  Seafaring  persons  are  apt  to  possess
^reat  mediumistic  power.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


51


' '  After  hearing  that  the  child  was  dead  I  wrote  a  guarded  letter  to  Tom's
parents,  for  him,  asking  how  they  all  were,  including  the  little  girl.  In  due
time  I  received  a  reply,  or,  I  should  say,  Tom  did,  though  he  could  not  read
■writing.  They  said  they  were  all  well  except  Mary's  little  girl,  who  had
■died.  (They  did  not  say  exactly  when,  but  as  Tom  had  not  been  absent
from  England  mucli  over  a  year,  it  must  have  been  within  that  time,  and  we
had  every  reason  to  believe  the  mother's  statement  a  true  one.)  The  old
people  further  said  that  Mary  had  married  a  soldier.

"  I  understood  from  this  that  the  child's  mother  was  not  wholly  depraved,
that  she  was  concerned  about  the  welfare  of  her  little  one,  and  looking  about
for  help  in  her  destitute  circumstances  her  thoughts  had  turned  to  her
brother,  most  likely  persistently  turned  to  him,  and  this  resulted  in  her
leaving  her  body  temporarily  during  sleep  in  search  of  him.  We  had  assumed
that  she  was,  as  we  say,  '  dead.' She  had  not  asserted  the  fact.

"  I  submit  this  one  experience  and  will  write  out  another  as  soon  as  I
can. — Very  truly  yours,  Georgiana  B.  Kirby.  "

A  second  letter  from  Mrs.  Kirby,  dated  Santa  Cruz.,  Cal.,  October  12th,
1886,  gave  further  particulars,  as  follows  : —

"Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  September  9th  arrived  in  due  season.  My  reply
lias  been  delayed  by  my  ineffectual  efforts  to  ascertain  the  month  when  our
two  friends,  McLean  and  Dryden,  visited  us  on  the  ranche,  because  it  was
within  a  month  after  this  that  Mary  HoweUs  told  me  her  child  was  ill,  and
later  that  she  was  dead,  and  I  thought  it  might  not  be  so  difficult  to  search
the  death  record  of  one  month  for  the  child  under  the  head  of  'Howells.'
As  it  is  the  gentlemen  have  proved  to  me  that  their  visit  occurred  in  1852,
and  not  in  1853  as  I  had  supposed,  but  they  could  not  remember  if  it  were
the  spring  or  fall  of  that  year.  This,  our  ignorance  of  the  date  of  the  death
and  of  the  child's  Christian  name,  is  the  most  unsatisfactory  part  of  my
record.  Neither  were  mentioned  in  the  grandfather's  letter,  and  from  Tom
never  mentioning  the  name  I  fancied  he  did  not  know  it.  I  saw  him
recently,  but  I  covdd  not  venture  to  speak  to  him  of  his  sister's  illegitimate
child.  He  has  12  living  daughters  of  his  own,  and  he  would  be  justly
offended  if  I  should  remind  him  of  how  we  had  gained  a  knowledge  of  his
sister's  life.  He  told  us  that  his  father  was  still  alive  and  living  where  they
always  had  lived,  at  Saltasli,  which  he  thought  by  this  time  must  be  a
part  of  Plymouth.

"  I  should  explain  that  neither  Dr.  McLean  nor  the  Rev.  —  Dryden  were
personally  cognisant  of  our  doings,  so  that  they  could  not  act  as  witnesses  in
the  case.

"You  ask  if  I  can  point  you  to  any  contemporary  record.  Thirty-four
years  ago  no  Spiritualistic  paper  was  published  in  the  United  States,  and  such
a  narration  given  as  friie  in  any  ordinary  journal  would  have  laid  us  open  to
the  charge  of  lunacy.  And  had  this  been  otherwise,  we  could  not  have
proclaimed  the  fact  that  the  sister  of  the  honest  fellow  who  was  working  for
us  was  a  disreputable  woman.

"  As  to  fraud  on  Tom's  part,  he  could  hardly  understand  why  we  wanted
him  to  sit  with  his  hands  on  the  table.  I  repeated  the  letters  in  my  mind.
How  could  he  tip  the  table  at  the  right  instant  so  as  to  spell  words  which
disclosed  his  sister's  disgrace  ? Then  he  was  in  no  want  of  money. He  had

K  2


52


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


been  earning  60dol.  a  month  (and  had  spent  it  all,  mostly  at  Spanish
fandangos),  and  the  agreement  with  my  husband,  to  which  he  had  lately
placed  his  X,  bound  him  to  work  for  Mr.  K.  for  one  year  for  the  sum  of
60dol.  a  month  and  his  board  and  lodging.  You,  sir,  must  have  read  some-
thing about  the  higli  price  of  labour  in  California  in  those  early  years  of  its
settlement.

"  The  sittings  were  held  after  supper  (or  dinner,  you  would  call  it),  be-
tween seven  and  nine  o'clock.

"  Cat-street  was  in  Plymouth,  England.  If  it  has  given  place  to  another
the  fact  of  its  former  existence  could  be  verified. — Georgiana  B.  Kirby."

The  actual  existence  of  the  "  Cat-street "  of  the  narrative  is  shown  by
the  following  letter  : —

Post  Office,  Plymouth,  January  23j-d,  1888.
"  SiE, — In  reply  to  yours  of  the  21st  instant  I  beg  to  inform  you  that  a
few  years  ago  there  was  a  street  named  Catte-street,  but  it  is  now  called
Stillman-street. — I  am,  sir,  yours  obediently,

"R.  A.  Leverton  (for  Postmaster)."

The  regi'etted  death  of  Mrs.  Kirby  soon  after  the  date  of  her  last  letter
put  an  end  to  this  correspondence.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  connnunications  from  the  woman  at  Plymouth
were  received  at  an  hour  which,  in  England,  fell  in  the  middle  of  the  night.

The  case  next  to  be  cited  is  a  thoroughly  modern  one,  and  is  in
fact  still  in  course  of  development.  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead,  the  well-known
journalist  and  editor  of  the  Bevietv  of  Reviews,  has  rejjeatedly  called
attention  in  that  magazine  to  the  telepathic  correspondence  which  he
is  able  to  maintain  with  several  persons,  who  "  write  through  his
hand  "  while  at  a  distance,  and  thus  convey  to  him  information  which
though  sometimes  erroneous,  is  true  in  a  far  larger  proportion  of
instances  than  chance  would  allow.  Mr.  Stead  has  been  good  enough
to  introduce  me  to  four  of  these  correspondents,  who  confirm  his
statements,  and  to  give  me  the  written  testimony  of  a  fifth  and  sixth.
I  propose  with  his  permission,  to  quote  three  of  these  cases  at  length.

The  most  important  of  Mr.  Stead's  telepathic  correspondents  thus
far  is  a  lady  whom  he  describes  as  A,  but  on  whom,  for  the  sake  of
clearness — among  many  initials — I  shall  bestow  the  name  of  Miss
Summers.  This  lady  is  engaged  on  literary  work  of  a  kind  needing
much  care  and  accuracy. I  consider  her  a  good  witness.

Miss  Summers  verbally  confirmed  to  me  Mi\  Stead's  account,  given
below,  and  wrote  the  following  statement  :  "  I,  the  subject  of  Mr.
Stead's  automatic  writing,  known  as  '  A,'  testify  to  the  correctness  of
the  statements  made  in  this  report.  Mr.  Stead's  hand  wrote  these  things
just  as  they  happened ; — excepting,  of  course,  the  few  incidents  which
he  gives  as  errors.  I  should  like  to  add  what  I  think  more  wonderful
than  many  of  the  things  which  Mr.  Stead  has  cited,  namely,  the
con'ectness  with  which  he  has  on  several  occasions  given  the  name  of
persons  whom  he  has  never  seen  or  heard  of  Ijefore. I  remember  on


The  Suhliminal  Consciousness.


53


one  occasion  a  person  calling  upon  me  with  a  very  uncommon  name.
The  next  day  I  saw  Mr.  Stead  and  he  read  to  me  what  his  hand  had
written  of  the  visit  of  this  person,  giving  the  name  absolutely  correctly.
Mr.  Stead  has  never  seen  that  person,  and  till  then  had  no  knowledge
of  his  existence."

I  now  quote  from  the  Review  of  Reviews  for  April,  1893,  pp.  428-
4.30,  substituting  "Miss  Summers  "  for  "  A,"  and  giving  the  true  sex
of  the  correspondent,  which  Mr.  Stead  at  first  altered  as  an
additional  precaution  against  identification.

M.  Aut.  61.  How  IT  ALL  Began.

One  day  in  August  [1892],  ".Julia  " — as  I  call  the  invisible  intelligence
tliat  from  time  to  time  controls  my  hand — suddenly  wrote,  "  Why  do  you
think  that  it  is  strange  that  I  should  write  with  your  hand  ?  Any  one  can
write  with  your  hand."  I  asked  what  slie  meant,  and  she  answered,  "Any
of  your  friends."  "On  this  earth?"  I  asked  incredulously.  She  wrote,
"Try  it."  "Need  they  know  about  it?"  "No."  "Then,"  I  said,
"  there  will  be  an  end  of  all  secrets  in  the  world."  She  wrote,  "  No  ;  mind
is  in  contact  with  mind  all  over  tlie  world.  Any  one  to  whom  you  can
speak  if  you  were  within  range  of  the  physical  senses  you  could  speak  to
mentally  wherever  he  is,  because  the  mind  is  not  trammelled  by  the  limita-
tions of  matter."  She  explained  that  the  real  self,  the  Ego,  had  both  mind
and  body  as  its  instruments,  by  which  it  could  communicate  with  the  out-
side world.  Both  were  instruments,  either  could  be  used,  but  each  was  not
always  informed  of  the  use  which  had  been  made  of  the  other.  That  is  to
say,  it  was  perfectly  possible  for  the  Ego  to  use  your  mind  to  direct  my
hand  without  finding  it  necessary  to  inform  your  physical  consciousness
that  any  such  communication  had  taken  place.  But  the  mind  would  no
more  communicate  a  secret  which  the  Ego  did  not  wish  to  be  known,  than
the  tongue  would  be  guilty  of  such  an  indiscretion,  for  tongue  and  mind  are
alike  the  servants  of  the  real  self.

I.  The  Test  of  the  Old  Thistle.

I  was  rather  incredulous,  but  I  began  experimenting  with  a  friend  in
London  who  was  sympathetic.  I  found  that  it  succeeded  to  a  marvel.  That
is  to  say,  I  found  that  my  friend  had  no  difficulty  whatever  in  using  my  hand
to  communicate  information  or  the  expression  of  the  mood  of  the  moment.
When  my  friend,  whom  1  will  call  Miss  Summers,  was  writing,  I  said  to  her
in  the  middle  of  the  communication,  "Are  you  really  writing,  or  is  it  only
my  subliminal  consciousness?"  My  hand  wrote,  "I  will  try  and  prove  to
you  that  I  am  really  writing.  There  is  an  object  in  my  hand  just  now  which
I  will  bring  to  your  office.  I  am  sitting  at  my  table.  It  is  a  small  present
that  I  want  to  make  to  you. It  is  an  old  thistle."

"  What !  "  I  said,  "a  thistle  ?"

"  Yes,  an  old  thistle  ;  it  played  a  part  in  my  life  that  made  it  dear  to  me.
I  will  give  it  to  you  to-morrow.  I  will  explain  to  you  when  I  give  it.  I
hope  you  will  accept  it."

Next  day,  when  my  friend  came,  I  a.sked  her  if  she  had  brought  a  present
for  me. She  said  no,  she  had  not. She  had  thought  of  bringing  one,  but


54


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


she  had  left  it  at  home.  I  asked  her  what  it  was.  She  said  it  was  such  ait
absurd  thing  she  did  not  like  to  mention  it.  When  I  pressed  her  she  said
it  was  a  piece  of  scented  soap  !  I  was  considerably  disgusted  at  this  apparent
failure,  and  told  her  why.  She  said  at  once,  "  That  is  very  curious.  Every-
thing happened  as  you  have  it  written  there,  and  it  is  a  thistle,  and  an  old
thistle.  But  it  is  a  thistle  that  is  stamped  on  the  piece  of  soap.  I  will
bring  it  to  you  next  time  I  see  you.  It  did  play  a  part  in  my  life,"  which
she  then  proceeded  to  explain.  I  have  the  soap  now  in  my  possession.  It
is  stamped  with  a  thistle.  [The  private  incident  has  been  explained  to  me,
and  shows  that  it  was  the  thistle  stamped  on  the  soap  which  gave  that  object
its  significance.  Miss  Summers  had  thought  of  the  gift  before  Mr.  Stead's
hand  wrote, — perhaps  at  the  exact  time  of  his  writing. — F.W.H.M.]

A  Journey  Described.
She  wrote  from  time  to  time  describing  her  movements. The  first  dis-
patch which  is  wortli  quoting  was  one  I  received  on  Saturday,  September
18th. It  will  be  noticed  that  there  are  inaccuracies,  but  they  are  very
sliglit.

"  I  went  to  Waterloo  Station  by  the  12.0  train  and  got  to  Hampton
Court  about  one.  When  we  got  out  we  went  to  an  hotel  and  had  dinner.  It
cost  nearly  3s.  After  dinner  I  went  to  the  picture  galleries.  I  was  very
much  pleased  with  the  painting  of  many  of  the  ceilings  ;  I  was  also  inter-
ested in  most  of  the  portraits  by  Lely.  After  seeing  the  galleries  I  went  out
into  the  grounds.  How  beautiful  they  are  !  I  saw  the  great  vine,  that  lovely
English  garden,  the  avenue  of  elms,  tlie  canal,  the  great  water  sheet,  the
three  views,  the  fountain,  the  gold  fishes,  and  then  I  lost  myself  in  the  maze.
I  got  home  about  nine  o'clock.  It  cost  me  altogether  about  6s."

On  communicating  this  to  Miss  Summers,  she  said  that  everything  was
right  with  two  exceptions.  She  went  down  by  the  2.0  train  and  not  by  the
12.0,  and  got  to  Hampton  Court  about  three.  The  dinner  cost  her  2s.  lid.,
which  was  "nearly  3s.,"  and  the  total  cost  of  the  expedition  was  6s.  3d.
The  places  were  visited  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  named.  The  only
mistake  was  the  train  by  which  Miss  Summers  went  to  Hampton  Court.

The  Unreserve  of  the  Real  Self.

Then  came  some  curious  experiences  which  showed  that  the  real  self
which  wi'ote  with  my  hand  was  much  more  ready  to  communicate  its  wants
than  the  physical  self.  On  September  20th,  for  instance,  my  hand  wrote
from  Miss  Summers  : —

"I  have  had  rather  a  sad  day.  I  have  had  a  disappointment  in  some
work,  or  rather  in  the  paynaent  of  some  work,  and  as  the  result  I  am  rather
short  of  money.  I  don't  like  to  tell  you  this,  because  you  will  want  to  give
me  some.  But  I  don't  want  you  to.  I  am  rather  pinched  for  money
just  now  ;  I  have  £3  to  pay  for  lodgings. But  I  will  pull  through."

I  said,  "  I  will  send  you  the  money."  My  hand  wrote  and  said,  "  No,  I
won't  take  it.  I  will  send  it  back  if  you  do.  I  don't  like  to  seem
mercenary."  On  sending  up  to  Miss  Summers  the  next  day  I  found  that  it
was  as  stated,  but  that  she  was  very  much  disgusted  on  finding  that  I  knew
of  her  needs.

From  that  time  forward  any  incident  was  reported  as  a  matter  of  course


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


55


by  her.  Occasionally  an  incident  would  be  slightly  misstated,  but  broadly
speaking  out  of  100  statements  90  were  as  correctly  written  by  my  hand
as  if  Miss  Summers  had  written  them  herself.

A  Trip  to  Windsok.

One  among  many  may  be  mentioned.  It  was  written  on  October  15th.
This  was  interesting,  because  my  hand  wrote  the  communication  when  I
was  250  miles  distant  in  the  North  of  England.

"  It  is  a  very  fine  day.  I  went  from  Paddington  by  the  1.15  train.
When  I  got  to  Windsor  I  went  to  the  Castle.  I  went  first  upon  the  terrace,
then  I  went  to  St.  George's  Chapel.  I  thought  it  might  be  as  well  to  stay
there,  but  reconsidered  it,  and  thought  I  would  go  into  the  park.  So  I  left
the  Castle  and  went  into  the  park.  I  wanted  to  find  a  beautiful  oak  that
I  had  spoken  of  to  you.  There  were  many  deer  and  many  great  trees,
but  I  could  not  find  the  oak.  I  wandered  about  for  some  time  until  I  found
a  beautiful  oak,  but  it  was  not  the  oak  I  was  in  search  of.  After  finding  it
I  went  for  a  walk  to  seek  a  cavern,  but  could  find  none.  I  have  spent  for  the
railway  3s.  ;  for  food  I  spent  half-a-crown.  I  spent  6d.  for  a  telegram,  and
taking  two  busses  made  my  expenses  for  to-day  5s.  lOd. "

This  was  exactly  correct  in  every  particular,  as  to  the  time  of  the  train,
and  the  succession  of  events,  and  the  sum  of  money  paid,  [although  wrongly
added  up].

Automatic  Correspondence.
For  several  months  past  I  have  almost  every  day  received  communica-
tions from  my  friend  when  anything  interested  her,  or  she  felt  she  had  any-
thing to  communicate  with  me.  The  immense  majority  of  these  conununi-
cations  are  of  a  private  character,  and  can  only  be  referred  to  here.  Often
they  are  but  brief  memoranda  regarding  a  visit  to  a  church  or  a  business
appointment,  or  a  visit  to  some  friend.  Frequently  mention  is  made  of
books  she  has  been  reading,  and  the  usual  information  given  as  to  the  state
of  health,  of  good  spirits  or  depression,  which  one  friend  might  send  to
another.  On  one  occasion  she  startled  me  by  reporting  a  rather  disagree-
able fracas  which  had  taken  place  in  a  carriage  on  the  South  Western
Railway,  but  which  fortunately  terminated  happily.  The  aggressor  took
alarm  and  jumped  out  of  the  train  as  it  was  slowing  up  at  a  station.  Nor
was  it  only  contemporary  events  which  were  described.  On  one  occasion  a
rather  painful  chapter  in  my  friend's  history,  which  she  had  shrunk  from
telling  me  in  detail,  was  written  out  by  my  hand  witli  the  utmost  minutise,
and,  as  she  informed  me  when  I  read  it  over  to  her,  with  the  most  absolute
accuracy.  Although  it  had  happened  some  years  ago  it  had  made  a  very
deep  im^jression  upon  her  mind  at  the  time,  and  it  remained  as  vividly
present  in  her  mind  as  if  it  had  happened  on  the  previous  day.  In  my  com-
munications with  this  correspondent,  Miss  Summers,  the  mistakes  are
extremely  small.  I  have  frequently  kept  appointments,  and  written  letters,
and  even  sent  cheques,  in  response  to  communications  written  by  my  hand,
nor  have  I  on  any  of  these  occasions  found  that  there  was  a  mistake.
Once  or  twice  my  hand  has  written  that  Miss  Suuamers  was  about  to  visit
me  and  I  have  been  disappointed,  but  in  every  case  I  have  afterwards
learned  that  she  had  actually  started  to  call  upon  me,  but  had  been
hindered  by  some  unforeseen  event.


m


56


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


' .  Erkoes  in  Transmission.

There  have  been,  however,  two  or  three  occasions  when  there  have  been
curious  errors  in  detail.  These  are  quite  as  important  to  note  as  those  cases
in  which  the  messages  have  been  correct.  The  tirst  error  was  a  statement
that  on  a  certain  Saturday  afternoon  she  had  walked  in  Regent's  Park,
whereas,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  she  had  not  left  her  house.  I  do  not  know  how
that  error  arose  ;  there  may  have  been  some  expectation  on  my  part  that  she
was  going  to  walk  in  the  park,  but,  whatever  the  cause,  the  fact  remains
that  it  was  a  mistake.  On  another  occasion  a  still  more  remarkable  error
occurred.  It  was  when  I  was  at  Redcar.  My  hand  wrote  an  account  of  an
interview  which  it  said  Miss  Summers  had  had  with  a  certain  person  who
was  named.  It  was  a  disagreeable  interview,  and  portions  of  the  conversa-
tion were  reported.  On  comparing  notes  I  found,  to  my  surprise,  that  while
she  had  been  to  the  ofhce  of  the  person  in  question,  the  interview  which  was
reported  had  not  taken  place  with  him  or  my  friend.  The  conversation  re-
produced had,  however,  taken  place  between  a  friend  of  Miss  Summers's
and  another  person.  Miss  Summers's  friend  had  told  her  what  had  taken
place,  and  my  hand  had  given  a  very  much  exaggerated  account  of  that  con-
versation at  a  distance  of  250  miles.  Miss  Summers's  friend  was  personally
unknown  to  me,  and  Miss  Summers  was  very  much  astonished  to  find  that
her  friend's  interview  was  attributed  to  herself  and  interpolated  into  her
business  conversation  with  another  party.

Instances  of  Inaccuracies.

I  will  close  my  account  of  my  experiences  in  automatic  telepathy  with
Miss  Summers  with  a  report  which  was  curiously  inaccurate  in  some  points.
For  me  the  inaccuracies  have  more  interest  than  the  accurate  statement.  I
am  so  accust(3med  to  use  this  faculty  for  the  everyday  purposes  of  life,  that
an  accurate  statement  is  to  me  a  matter  of  course  ;  it  is  the  inaccurate  state-
ment which  puzzles  nie.  On  Christmas  Day  I  knew  that  Miss  Summers  in-
tended to  visit  Matthew  Arnold's  grave.  That  I  knew,  but  nothing  else.
On  the  afternoon  of  Christmas  Day  my  hand  wrote  a  narrative  of  what  had
happened.  It  stated  that  in  the  morning  my  friend  had  gone  to  St.  Paul's
to  attend  the  service,  where  she  had  enjoyed  the  music  very  much.  After
leaving  St.  Paul's  she  had  gone  home,  and  then  had  gone  to  Paddington
Station,  where  she  took  a  ticket  for  Laleham.  When  my  hand  wrote  this
I  stopped,  and  asked  whether  there  was  a  station  at  Laleham.  My  hand
wrote  Yes,  and  continued  that  she  had  taken  a  return  ticket  to  Laleham,
which  had  cost  about  3s.  Gd.  It  was  a  beautiful  day,  and  there  were  very
few  people  in  the  train.  It  went  on  to  say  that  she  had  gone  to  the  church,
and  had  had  no  difficulty  in  finding  the  grave.  There  was  no  one  in  the
churchyard  but  Miss  Summers.  She  stayed  there  about  half-an-hour,  and
laid  on  the  tomb  some  white  flowers,  the  name  of  which  my  hand  tried  to
write,  but  only  succeeded  in  making  unintelligible  scrawls.  She  had  then
come  back  to  the  station.  The  train  was  nearly  empty,  and  Miss  Summers
had  a  comjjartment  to  herself  all  the  way  to  London.  Returning  home
she  sj)ent  the  evening  in  front  of  a  roaring  fire ,  reading  Arnold's  j^oems.
I  did  not  see  her  for  several  days,  and  then  I  told  her  the  narrative.
I  learned  that  while  on  the  whole  the  statement  was  quite  correct,  in  three


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


57


minor  details  it  was  erroneous.  Miss  Summers  did  not  go  to  Laleliam
from  Paddington;  but  from  Waterloo.  I  can  only  explain  that  mistake  by
saying  that  as  the  previous  journey  to  Windsor  had  been  made  from
Paddington,  possibly  my  mind  thought  that  she  would  start  again  from  the
same  station,  and  thus  led  my  hand  to  write  wrongly.  As  for  the  railway
fare,  I  believe  it  was  wrong  ;  but  my  friend  did  not  remember  how  much
change  she  got  out  of  the  half-sovereign  with  which  she  had  paid  for  her
ticket.  The  other  mistake  was  that  the  flowers  she  had  laid  on  the  tomb
were  not  white,  but  blue.  The  name  of  the  flowers  Miss  Summers  did
not  know,  and  this  of  course  accounts  for  the  unintelligible  scrawl  which
was  the  only  reply  when  asked  for  the  name.  Before  seeing  my  friend,  I  had
referred  to  a  railway  guide  to  see  if  there  was  a  station  at  Laleham  ;  I  found
that  there  was  none.  I  thought  that  my  hand  had  been  writing  wrongly  ;
but  when  I  asked  my  friend  where  she  took  her  ticket  for,  she  replied
at  once,  "To  Laleham."  I  said,  "Why,  there  is  no  station  at  Laleham."
"  No,"  she  said  ;  "  but  I  asked  the  booking-clerk  for  a  ticket  to  Laleham,
and  he  gave  me  one  for  Staines,  and  said  that  was  the  station  for
Laleham."

II.  The  second  case  is  interesting  as  involving  a  very  distinct  state-
ment from  a  slight  acquaintance.  I  quote  from  the  Review  of  Revietvs,
p.  4.32,  and  add  a  corroborative  letter.

I  will  conclude  this  very  imperfect  account  of  the  communications  which
have  been  going  on  now  for  more  than  seven  montlis — hardly  a  day  of  which
has  passed  without  communications  of  one  kind  or  another — by  describing  a
remarkable  instance  in  which  a  comparative  stranger  to  me  communicated  to
me  things  by  my  hand  which  he  had  expressly  refused  to  communicate  face
to  face.  Last  February,  I  met  a  correspondent  in  a  railway  carriage  with
whom  I  had  a  very  casual  acquaintance.  Knowing  that  he  was  in  consider-
able distress,  our  conversation  fell  into  a  more  or  less  confidential  train,  in
which  I  divined  that  his  difficulty  was  chiefly  financial.

The  Hand  more  Communicative  than  the  Tongue.

I  said  I  did  not  know  Avhether  I  could  be  of  any  help  to  him  or  not,  but
I  asked  him  to  let  me  know  exactly  how  things  stood,  what  were  his  debts,
his  expectations,  and  so  forth.  He  said  that  he  really  could  not  tell  me,  and
T  refrained  from  pressing  him.  We  parted  at  the  railway  station.  That
night  I  received  a  letter  from  him  apologising  for  not  having  given  me
the  information,  but  saying  that  he  really  could  not.  I  received  that  letter
about  ten  o'clock,  and  about  two  o'clock  next  morning,  before  going  to
sleep,  I  sat  down  in  my  bedroom  and  said,  "  You  did  not  like  to  tell  me
your  exact  financial  position  face  to  face,  but  now  you  can  do  so  through  my
hand.  Just  write  and  tell  me  exactly  how  things  stand.  How  much  money
do  you  owe  ?"  My  hand  then  wrote,  "My  debts  are  £90."  In  reply  to  a
further  inquiry  whether  the  figure  was  accurately  stated,  "  ninety  jjounds  "
was  then  written  in  full.

"  Is  that  all  ?"  I  asked.

My  hand  wrote,  "Yes  ;  and  how  I  am  to  pay  them  I  do  not  know."
"Well,"  said  I,  "how  much  do  you  want  for  that  piece  of  property  you
wish  to  sell?"


58


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


My  hand  wrote,  "  What  I  hope  is,  say,  £100  for  that.  It  seems  a  great
deal,  but  I  must  get  money  somehow.  Oh,  if  I  could  get  anything  to  do,  1
would  gladly  do  anything  1  "

"  What  does  it  cost  you  to  live  ?  "  I  asked.

My  hand  wrote  :  "  I  do  not  think  I  could  possibly  live  under  £200  a-
year  ;  you  see  I  have  to  keep  some  relatives  besides  myseK.  If  I  were
alone  I  could  live  on  £50  per  annum,  but  there  is  rent  and  everything.
Where  can  I  get  this  ? I  cannot  tell."

A  Successful  Result.

The  next  day  I  made  a  point  of  seeking  my  friend.  He  said,  "I  hope
you  are  not  offended  at  my  refusing  to  tell  you  my  circumstances,  but  I  do
not  think  it  is  right  to  trouble  you  with  them."  I  said,  "  I  am  not  offended
in  the  least,  and  I  hope  you  will  not  be  offended  when  I  tell  you  what  I  have
done."  I  then  explained  this  automatic  telepathic  method  of  communica-
tion. I  said,  "I  do  not  know  whether  there  is  a  word  of  truth  in  what  my
hand  wrote.  I  hesitate  at  telling  you,  for  I  confess  I  think  that  the  sum
which  was  written  as  tlie  amount  of  your  debts  cannot  be  correctly  given.
It  seems  to  me  to  be  much  too  small,  considering  the  distress  in  which  you.
seemed  to  be.  Therefore  I  will  read  you  that  first,  and  if  it  is  right  I  will
read  yovx  the  rest  ;  but  if  it  is  wrong  I  will  consider  that  it  is  rubbish,  and
that  your  mind  in  no  way  influenced  my  hand."  He  was  interested  but
incredulous.  "  But,"  I  said,  "  before  I  read  you  anything,  will  you  form  a
definite  idea  in  your  mind  as  to  how  much  your  debts  amount  to  ;  secondly,
as  to  the  amount  of  money  you  hope  to  get  for  that  property  ;  thirdly,  what
it  costs  to  keep  up  your  establishment  with  your  relatives  ;  and  fourthly,
what  could  you  live  upon  if  you  were  by  yourself?"  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "I
have  thought  of  all  these  things."  I  then  read  out,  "  The  amount  of  your
debts  is  about  £90."  He  started.  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  that  is  right ;  but  the
figure  I  was  going  to  mention  was  £100.  But  that  includes  some  money  for
current  expenses."

Then  I  said,  "  As  it  is  right  I  will  read  you  the  rest.  You  hope  to  get
£100  for  your  property."  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  that  was  the  figure  that  was  in
my  mind,  although  I  hesitated  to  mention  it,  for  it  seems  too  much."

"  You  say  you  cannot  live  upon  less  than  £200  a  year  with  your  present
establishment." "  Yes,"  said  he,  "that  is  exactly  right."

"  But  if  you  were  by  yourself,  you  could  live  on  £50  a  year."  "  Well,"
said  he,  "  a  pound  a  week  was  what  I  had  fixed  in  my  mind."  Therefore
there  had  been  a  perfectly  accurate  transcription  of  the  thoughts  in  the
mind  of  a  comparative  stranger,  written  out  with  my  own  hand  at  a  time
when  we  were  at  a  distance  of  some  miles,  within  a  few  hours  of  the  time
when  he  had  written  apologising  for  not  having  given  me  the  information  for
which  I  had  asked.

I  could  multiply  instances  of  the  same  kind  of  thing,  but  this  will
probably  suttice.

The  unconscious  correspondent  confirms  as  follows,  in  a  letter  in
my  possession. I  suppress  his  name,  but  it  may  be  given  to  inquirers.

April  Ml,  1893.

Dear  Mb.  Stead, — I  received  your  commuiiication  and  have  no  hesitation


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


59


in  allowing  you  to  submit  it  to  the  P.  R.  Society.  The  statements  are-
correct.  I  was  unaware  of  the  experiment  until  next  day.  I  consider  the
proof  a  very  striking  one,  as  from  some  circumstances  connected  with  my
[affairs]  you  could  not  possibly  have  formed  an  estimate  even — at  least  I  think
it  hardly  possible, — of  what  my  debts,  prospects, or  expectations  were.

I  am,  yours  faithfully,  E.  J.

III.  The  third  case  which  I  shall  quote  also  involves  a  message
from  a  comparative  stranger  : —

An  Impromptu  Test.
It  may  be  said  that  between  my  friend  "  Miss  Summers,"  my  son,  and
myself  there  existed  a  knowledge  that  I  would  try  to  let  them  write  with  my
hand,  but  this  can  hardly  be  said  in  an  impromptu  experiment  which  I  made
with  a  correspondent  whom  I  had  only  seen  once  before  in  my  life.  Some
months  ago  I  was  at  Redcar,  in  the  North  of  England.  A  foreign  lady  who-
does  some  work  for  the  Review  had  to  meet  me  at  Redcar  railway  station
about  three  o'clock.  I  was  staying  with  my  brother,  who  lives  about  ten
minutes'  walk  from  the  station.  At  twenty  minutes  to  three  it  occurred  to
me  that  "  about  three, "  the  phrase  used  in  her  letter,  might  mean  some  time
before  three,  and  as  I  could  not  lay  my  hand  upon  a  time-table,  I  simply
asked  her  to  use  my  hand  and  tell  me  what  time  the  train  was  due.  This,  I
may  say,  was  done  without  any  previous  communication  with  her  upon  the
subject.  She  immediately  wrote  her  name,  and  said  the  train  was  due  at
Redcar  station  at  ten  minutes  to  three.  I  saw  that  I  should  have  to  leave  at
once,  but  before  starting  I  asked  her  where  she  was  at  that  moment.  My
hand  wrote,  ' '  I  am  in  the  train  at  Middlesborough  railway  station,  on  my
way  from  Hartlepool  to  Redcar."  I  then  went  off  to  the  station.  On  arriv-
ing there  I  went  up  to  the  time-table  to  see  when  the  train  was  due.  It  was
timed  to  arrive  at  2.52.  The  train,  however,  was  late  ;  three  o'clock  came,
and  it  had  not  arrived.  At  five  minutes  past  three,  getting  rather  anxious,.
I  took  a  slip  of  paper  from  my  pocket,  and  taking  a  pencil  in  my  hand,
asked  her  where  she  was.  At  that  moment  she  wrote  her  name  (they  always
write  their  names  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  each  communication),  and
said,  "  I  am  in  the  train,  rounding  the  curve  before  you  come  to  the  Redcar
station;  I  will  be  with  you  in  a  minute."  "  Why  the  mischief  have  you
been  so  late  ? "  I  mentally  asked.  My  hand  wrote,  "  We  were  detained  at
Middlesborough  for  so  long  ;  I  do  not  know  why."  I  put  the  paper  in  my
pocket,  walked  to  the  end  of  tlie  platform,  and  there  was  the  train  I  The
moment  it  stopped  I  went  up  to  my  friend  and  said  to  her,  "  How  late  you
are  !  What  on  earth  has  been  the  matter  ?  "  "I  do  not  know,"  she  said.
"The  train  stopped  so  long  at  Middlesborough,  it  seemed  as  if  it  never
would  start."  I  then  showed  her  what  my  hand  had  written.  The  lady  in
question  confirms  as  follows  : —

West  Hartlepool,  April  Uh,  1893.
My  Dear  Friend, — I  most  certainly  and  very  distinctly  remember  the
occasion  you  have  referred  to  in  the  subjoined  newspaper  cutting.  I  was
much  surprised  when  you  told  me  that  you  had  made  me  telepath  you  the
time  I  should  arrive  at  Redcar,  as  I  was  quite  unconscious  of  having  telepathed
any  information  to  you  with  regard  to  my  arrival. I  don't  see  that  I  can  add


Mr.  F.  W,  H.  Myers.


anything  to  your  account  of  the  incident.  It  is  very  clear,  and  I  can  make
no  corrections. — Yours  sincerely,  Gerda  Grass.

Mr.  Stead  also  favoured  me  with  an  account  of  further  experiments
Vi^ith  his  own  son  (see  p.  430  of  Review  of  Reviews),  being  a  narrative  of
incidents  on  a  bicycle  tour,  as  written  by  Mr.  Stead's  hand,  and  as
actually  recorded  by  his  son,  Mr.  William  Stead.  This  was  a  good  and
careful  experiment,  and  contains  messages  which  to  the  persons
concerned  seem  beyond  the  scope  of  chance.  There  are,  however,  a
good  many  mistakes  ;  nor  is  it  quite  easy  to  estimate  how  far  the  little
incidents  of  such  a  joui-ney  might  have  been  unconsciously  foreseen  by
a  father  at  home.

There  is  an  evidential  difficulty  of  a  somewhat  similar  kind  with
regard  to  the  experiment  with  "  B  "  given  on  p.  431,  of  which  "  B  "
has  kindly  given  me  a  written  confirmation.  The  point  which  Mr.  Stead
there  makes  is  an  interesting  one,  and  is  in  conformity  with  evidence
already  adduced.  "  B  "  willed  to  transfer  certain  statements  to  Mr.
Stead  ;  but  the  statements  which  were  actually  transferred  were  for
•the  most  part  not  these,  but  (as  "  B  "  expressed  it)  "  all  the  thoughts
that  kept  bobbing  up  in  my  mind  when  I  have  been  trying  to  make
you  write  the  other  things."  "  This,"  says  Mr.  Stead,  "  was  an
interesting  experiment,  as  it  seems  to  indicate  that  this  power  is
exercised  not  so  much  by  the  power  of  the  will  of  the  conscious  mind  as
by  the  spontaneous  action  of  the  subliminal  consciousness."  This  may
well  be  so  ;  but  in  the  present  instance  the  statements  written  by  Mr.
Stead  (and  which  he  read  to  me),  seemed  to  me  to  be  scarcely
so  unexpected  and  definite  as  to  make  it  quite  certain  either  that  Mr.
Stead's  own  subliminal  self  might  not  have  supplied  them,  or  that  "  B  "
could  clearly  have  remembered  that  these  special  facts  "  bobbed  up  "
at  that  special  moment.

It  will  be  observed,  indeed,  that  throughout  these  experiments  of  Mr.
Stead's  the  telepathic  correspondent  communicates  not  what  his  supra-
liminal self,  but  what  his  subliminal,  desires  to  communicate.  It  is  as
though,  not  Leonie  I.,  but  Leonie  II.,  were  to  have  used  Professor
Janet's  hand  for  the  purposes  of  her  outspoken  correspondence.  This
adds  some  difficulty  to  the  evidential  record  ;  but  in  itself  it  is  a  fact
of  great  interest,  and  is,  I  need  not  repeat,  in  thorough  accord  with  what
the  theories  advanced  in  these  papers  would  have  led  us  to  expect.
Mr.  Stead's  experiments,  indeed,  are  so  precisely  confirmatory  of  the
existence  of  a  continuously  active  subliminal  consciousness  in  all  man-
kind that  I  almost  shrink  from  pi-essing  cases  which  look  as  though
they  had  been  constructed  (although  they  most  certainly  were  not)
expressly  to  bolster  up  my  own  hypotheses.  ■  .

In  reply  to  further  inquiry  Mr.  Stead  says  :  —

"  I  quite  appreciate  the  need  of  seeing  the  original  MS.,  but  it  is  em-


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


61


bodied  in  a  mass  of  other  matter,  some  of  which  is  extremely  confidential,
and  I  think  that  it  would  be  much  better  to  begin  de  novo."

We  hope,  therefore,  to  be  able  to  report  further  on  Mr.  Stead's
writings  at  no  distant  date.

My  next  case  is  on  a  smaller  scale,  but  equally  encouraging,  I
think,  in  its  own  way.

I  have  often  urged  that  attempts  should  be  made  to  imitate  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Newnham's  series  of  experiments  in  the  transference  of  an
unseeii  question  through  an  automatist's  subliminal  self  to  his  pencil ;
and  I  have  lately  been  fortunate  enough  to  find  a  friend, — Mr.  R.  H.
Buttemer,  of  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge,  a  graduate  in  honour's  in
Natural  Science, — willing  to  make  a  serious  endeavour  of  this  kind.
Some  perseverance  was  required  ;  but  a  friend  of  Mr.  Buttemer's,  Mr.
H.  T.  Green,  having  first  been  several  times  lightly  hypnotised  by  Mr.
Buttemer,  showed  during  some  months  unmistakable  power  as  a  per-
cipient. I  was  cognisant  of  the  experiments  throughout  ;  although  on
the  only  occasion  on  which  I  was  myself  present  Mr.  Green's  mind  was
distracted  by  a  theological  examination  which  he  was  to  pass  next  day,
and  his  pencil  would  write  little  but  names  of  kings  of  Israel  and
J udah.  The  conditions  were  throughout  good  ;  the  question  being
written  down  out  of  Mr.  Green's  sight,  and  indications  carefully
avoided.  In  the  last  sitting  Mr.  Green  had  his  back  to  all  the  other
persons  present — which  is  of  course  the  right  plan  ; — and  that  sitting-
was,  as  will  be  seen,  the  best  of  all.  But  considering  the  nature  of  the
questions  asked,  there  was,  I  think,  little  opportunity  for  unconscious
indications,  even  when  some  of  the  persons  who  knew  the  question
were  within  sight  of  Mr.  Green.  There  was  never  any  contact.  Th&
selection  of  questions  and  answers  given  below  is  a  nearly  average
sample ; — those  which  are  omitted  being  mainly  questions  on  private
affairs,  where  the  answei's  were  necessarily  less  definite  than  numbers
or  letters,  and  where  their  degree  of  correctness  would  need  cumbrous
explanation.  The  best  answer  is  certainly  the  spelling  out  of  John
Bou — from  the  unseen  card.

The  answers  here  classed  as  "  irrelevant  "  were  sometimes  a  repro-
duction of  thoughts  likely  to  be  in  the  operator's  mind  (persons  like
Jeroboam  and  Omri  frequently  turning  up)  ;  and  sometimes,  I  think,
represented  imperfect  efforts  of  the  subliminal  self  to  get  at  the  unseen
question.  In  this  and  other  points  these  experiments  resemble  the
much  more  completely  successful  Newnham  series.  There  is  na
apparent  I'eason  for  the  cessation  of  Mr.  Green's  power.  He  is  a
healthy  man,  but  had  one  or  two  trifling  ailments  during  the  experi-
ments, which  seemed  to  check  the  faculty  for  the  time.  Mr.  Green,^
Mr.  W.,  and  Mr.  S.  are  known  to  me  ;  and  all,  I  think,  have  pursued
the  inquiry  in  a scientific spirit. The  frivolous and  roundabout


62


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


•style  of  the  replies  is  very  characteristic  of  automatic  messages  in  their
earlier  stages. I  now  give  Mr.  Buttemer's  account.

Automatic  Writing  Experiments  with  Planchette.
M.  Aut.  62.

The  following  series  of  experiments  were  conducted  at  Cambridge,  the
operator  being  Mr.  Green,  of  Emmanuel  College.  The  agents  (present
during  all  the  experiments  described)  were  Mr.  W.  and  Mr.  Buttemer.  The
.series  of  experiments  commenced  on  November  12th,  1892  :  prior  to  this  Mr.
Green  had  made  one  or  two  more  or  less  successful  attempts  at  automatic
writing,  but  the  obvious  difficulty  of  avoiding  the  chance  of  conscious  inter-
ference where  the  questions  put  were  asked  aloud  had  prevented  the
following  up  of  these  till  the  suggestion  was  made  that  the  questions  should
be  written  down  and  concealed  from  the  operator.  Under  these  conditions  a
trial  was  made  on  the  above  date,  time  2  p.m.,  the  questions  being  known
only  to  the  two  agents. No  one  else  was  present.

Q.  :  What  is  number  on  machine  1  (an  automatic  dice-box,  none  of  the
three  having  seen  the  numbers  on  it).

A.  :  Give  another.

Q.  :  Who  is  ill  on  this  staircase  ?

A.  :  Ke  pike  pike.  (A  man  of  that  name.  Pike,  was  ill,  as  all  were  aware  ;
but  Mr.  Green  had  not  seen  the  question.)  All  then  (Mr.  Green  included)
looked  at  the  dice-box,  and  saw  the  number — seven — -on  it.

Q.  :  Why  would  you  not  answer  first  question  ?

A.  :  Seven.

Another  question  was  then  correctly  answered.

Q.  :  What  is  the  matter  with  H.  T.  Green  ?

Answer  referred  to  previous  question.

Question  was  put  again,  still  without  Mr.  Green  seeing  it.

A.  :  A  bad  cold.  (Correct.)

Q.  :  Why  cannot  (Mr.  W.)  write  with  Planchette  ?

A.  :  W  ,  you  mean. There  is  nothing  in  good  health. Liver  is  not

in  good  condition.

Q.  :  Whose  liver  is  not  right  1

A.  :  i.  (Irrelevant.) ii.  Nobody  particularly.

Q.  (By  Mr.  Buttemer) :  Where  am  I  going  this  afternoon  ?

After  waiting  some  time  the  answer  was  written  rapidly.

A.  :  Away,  away,  away.

Mr.  Green  knew  where  I  was  going,  but  did  not  write  a  more  definite
answer  automatically.

Eight  questions  were  put  in  all,  of  which  four  were  answered  immediately
and  correctly,  and  two  after  a  sentence  referring  to  the  previous  question  had
been  written.  The  first  and  third  were  not  answered,  the  answer  to  the  first
being  vmknown  to  the  agents,  while  at  the  third  Mr.  Green's  subliminal
consciousness  appeared  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  showing  its  just-acquired
knowledge  of  the  first.  [Wlien  two  answers  are  given,  the  operator  was
simply  told  to  write  again,  after  the  first  irrelevant  answer,  without  being
shown  the  question  ;  excej^t  where  otherwise  stated.]

At  the  next  sitting,  on  the  14th  November,  Messrs.  W.,  S.,  and  Buttemer
were  present,  while  Mr.  Green  operated  Planchette,  as  before.  Six  questions


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


63


[the  answers  to  which  were  known  to  the  agents]  were  put  in  the  same  way,
two  being  answered  directly  and  unmistakeably,  while  one  was  answered
after  some  irrelevant  writing,  two  incorrectly,  and  the  last  was  not  answered,
the  operator  appearing  tired.

November  20th. Agents  and  percipient  as  before. 4  p.m.

The  questions  were  put  in  the  same  way.

Q.  :  Who  is  J.  O.  F.  M.  ?  (The  initials  being  given  in  the  question,  we
^Tished  the  name  to  be  written.)

A.  :  i.  Man.  Dean.  (Rather  illegible.  )  ii.  Murray.  (Right.  Dean  of
Emmanuel.)

Q.  :  Who  is  G.  R.  S.  1 (Only  S.  knew  who  was  meant.)

A.  :  Not  S  .  (Here  S.  told  the  other  agents  the  name — Smith.)  Mr.

Green  wrote  "Sleep,"  and  became  drowsy.  He  was  spoken  to,  to  rouse
him,  and  the  question  was  written.

Q.  :  Why  did  you  become  drowsy  and  write  "  Sleep  "  ?

A.  :  H.  T.  Green  (pause)  cannot  help  himself.

Q.  :  Why  ?

A.  :  He  is  tired,  he  is  tired,  he  is  tired. (Written  very  fast.)
January  31st,  1893. 4  p.m. Agents  as  before, with  the  addition  of  Mrs.
H.  and  Miss  B.

Q.  :  How  many  cups  of  tea  did  Miss  B.  have  ?

A.  :  i.  Cannot  be  ascertained, ii.  It  was  in  all  two — 2  2  2.  (Correct.)

(When  a  second  answer  was  waited  for,  care  was  taken  that  the  writer
should  glean  no  idea  of  the  question  iu  the  interval. )

Q.  :  Wliat  engraving  is  on  the  wall  over  the  piano  ?  (It  was  one  of  the
Queen  soon  after  her  marriage.)

A.  :  i.  You  may  perceive  it  was  so.  (Apparently  referring  to  previous
question.) ii.  It  is  a  girl,  the  daughter  of  a  man.

Q.  :  Who  was  playing  the  piano  when  the  ladies  came  in  ?

A.  :  i.  The  clock  hath  stricken  five.  (The  clock  struck  just  as  Mr.
■Green  began  to  write.) ii.  Mr.  S. (This  was  correct.)

Q.  :  What  was  it  ?

A.  :  i.  The  one  that  was  asked  first,  ii.  Something,  iii.  Explain  your-
self more  clearly.

Q.  :  What  was  S.  playing  when  we  came  in  1

A.  :  i.  The  original  one  of  all.  ii.  All  I  can  say  is  "  La  Cigale. "  (Correct.)

Two  more  questions  were  answered  correctly,  and  then  the  writer  began
-writing  on  a  subject  in  his  mind  at  the  time,  and  four  more  questions  that
were  put  received  no  direct  answers.

February  18th.  8  p.m.  Mrs.  H.,  Miss  B.,  Mr.  and  Miss  M.  present,  in
addition  to  Mr.  Green,  and  Messrs.  S.,  W.,  and  Buttemer.

Mr.  Green,  as  usual,  operated  Planchette,  and  on  this  occasion  sat  with
his  back  to  all  the  other  persons  present.

Q.  (from  Mr.  M.) :  What  was  I  doing  this  afternoon  1

A.  :  i.  the  sun  (all  else  illegible), ii.  Enjoying  the  fresh  air

of  heaven.

Q.  :  What  was  Mr.  Rogers  doing  in  Cambridge  ?

A.  :  i.  (Irrelevant,  or  possibly  connected  vaguely  with  the  question.)
ii.  Ask  another,  but  Mr.  Rogers  came  up  on  important  business  connected
with  the  Lodge.  (Correct.)


64


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Q.  :  Where  has  Mrs.  M.  gone  ?

A.  :  i.  (Irrelevant.)  ii.  Far,  far  away,  but  more  next  time.  iii.  Her
mother  has  gone  to — oh,  what  a  happy  place  is  London  !  iv.  All  change
here  for  Bletchley.  (Mrs.  M.  had  possibly  passed  this  station  on  her
journey.)

Q.  :  Who  has  won  the  Association  Match  to-day  1

A.  :  i.  (Illegible.)  ii.  Oye  simple  ones,  how  long  will  ye  love  simplicity  1
Why,  Oxford,  of  course.  [This  fact  was  known  to  some  persons  in  the  room,
but  not  to  Mr.  Green.]

One  of  the  company  then  suggested  the  attempt  to  get  the  name  on  a
visiting  card  transmitted,  and  the  question  was  written,  ' '  Write  name  on
card."  Mr.  Green  did  not  know  that  this  experiment  was  about  to  be  tried,
and  the  card  was  picked  from  a  pile  at  random.  The  name  was  John  B.
Bourne.  A  sentence  was  written  by  Mr.  Green,  which  proved  to  be,  ' '  Think
of  one  letter  at  a  time  and  then  see  what  will  happen." We  did  so.

A.  :  i.  J  for  Jerusalem,  O  for  Omri,  H  for  Honey,  and  N  for  Nothing,
ii.  B  for  Benjamin,  0  for  Olive,  U  for  Unicorn.  (The  remaining  letters  were
given  incorrectly.)

Q.  :  How  many  of  the  Society's  books,  are  here  1  (There  were  tw&
volumes  of  Proceedings  on  the  table.)

A.  :  i.  (Irrelevant.) ii.  The  answer  is  100-98.
Q.  :  What  is  2  X  3?

Two  irrelevant  answers  were  given,  possibly  owing  to  a  slight  disturbance
in  the  room.  The  third  answer  was — "  When  that  noise  has  ceased  and
S.  has  finished  knocking  the  lamp  over  I  say  6."

A  trial  sliortly  after  this,  February  19th,  gave  no  results,  and  the  power
of  automatic  writing  appears  to  have  entirely  left  Mr.  Green  for  the  present.

I  pass  on  to  a  small  group  of  cases  which  form  a  curious  transition,
from  these  communications  inte?'  vivos  to  communications  which  I
shall  class  as  coming  from  the  dead.  These  are  cases  where  the
message  professes  to  come  from  a  deceased  person,  but  shows  internal
evidence  of  having  come,  telepathically,  from  the  mind  of  someone
present.  I  shall  begin  with  a  case  such  as  is  often  cited  as  proof
(insvifficient  proof,  I  think,)  that  a  deceased  person  is  communicating.

Dr.  Hodgson's  informant,  Mr.  Lewis,  a  man  of  business  in
Cincinnati,  states  that  an  automatist  to  whom  his  (Mr.  Lewis's)  family
were  absolutely  unknown  wrote  a  message,  with  true  name,  purporting
to  come  from  an  infant  sister  long  deceased.  Mr.  Lewis,  naturally
enough,  accepts  this  message,  as  similar  messages  have  often  been
accepted,  as  an  indication  of  his  sister's  actual  presence.

From  Mr.  S.  Lewis,  347,  Baymiller-avenue,  Cincinnati.

M.  Aut.  63.  Ajml  9th,  1888.

' '  On  January  28th  last  I  called  at  the  house  of  some  friends  ;  and  on  this
occasion  there  was  some  planchette  writing.  The  friends  I  called  on,  I
believe,  are  professed  Sj^iritualists.  Some  four  or  five  of  us  (I  also  did)  sat
around  a  table  in  a  full  and  well  lighted  room  (lighted  the  entire  evening).
The  operator  of  the  planchette  was  a  lady  ;  her  husband  was  at  the  table,


The  SiiMiminal  Consciousness.


65


also  three  other  friends,  iiichiding  myself.  Different  communications  (so
called)  were  received  by  difierent  ones  at  the  table,  from  different  friends
(as  the  Spiritualists  say),  who  have  passed  into  the  spirit  world.  I  can't  give
all  communications  to-day,  but  one  I  wish  to  state.  But  first  let  me  say
that  many  years  since  in  my  father's  family  the  first  little  one  that  came  to
live — a  short  time — with  them  was  a  little  girl,  named  Angeline  ;  she  lived
only  about  two  years  and  died  ;  next  to  this  little  girl  was  a  brother,  named
Charles  (in  after  life  a  clergyman  in  the  Episcopal  Church)  ;  and  next  to
Charles  was  another  little  sister  also  named  Angeline,  and  next  to  her  was
another  sister  named  B.  Ann  ;  then  next  to  B.  Ann  appeared,  well,  your
humble  servant,  myself,  to  behold  many  of  the  beauties  of  this  beautiful
world.  So  that  you  see  that  between  the  two  brief  years  of  my  first  little
sister,  Angeline  (1st),  and  my  own  coming  on  this  globe  there  was  born  one
brother  and  two  sisters  ;  therefore,  my  first  little  sister,  Angeline  (1st),  I
never  saw  ;  and  only  heard  my  mother  (in  her  lifetime)  speak  of  AngeHne
(1st),  and  I  have  also  seen  her  name  in  the  records,  &c. ,  in  the  Bible  at  my
old  home.

"The  operator  of  the  planchette,  on  the  evening  of  which  I  am  speaking,
knew  nothing  of  my  father's  family  (excepting,  of  course,  myself).  I  never
had  mentioned  one  word  to  the  operator  (of  jjlanchette),  or  anyone  else  in
that  little  company,  anything  whatever  about  my  brothers  and  sisters  or  even
about  my  father's  family  in  any  way  or  manner  ;  and  besides,  we  all  lived
and  grew  up  in  the  north  part  of  the  State,  not  far  distant  from  Lake  Erie,
while  the  operator  lias  (I  think)  lived  in  the  south  part  of  this  State  not  far
distant  from  the  Ohio  River;  and  there  never  has  been  any  acquaintance  nor
any  commvniication  between  any  member  of  my  father's  family  (or  anyone
else  even)  to  give  any  history  or  information  of  any  kind  to  tlie  operator,
and  I  certainly  never  gave  the  operator  any  information  whatever  until  after
the  occurrence  and  the  writing  on  the  planchette,  which  wrote  this  evening,
January  28th  last,  the  following,  viz.  :  '  Mr.  Leivis,  I  am  his  sister,  I  am
glad  you  came  here  to-night ;  come  again  {signed)  Angeline.'

"  Now  I  want  to  ask,  how  could  originate  in  the  mind  of  operator  any
ideas  or  thoughts  about  this  little  sister  Angeline  (1st)  and  myself  ?  I  had  not
for  years  past  even  thought  of  her  until  the  name  was  written  on  the  evening
spoken  of.

"  The  operator  is  not,  never  has  been  a  paid  medium. S.  Lewls."

Now  let  us  consider  a  similar  message,  which  might  have  produced
a  similar  belief  in  another  informant's  mind.  But  here  it  so  happened
that  he  tested  the  alleged  fact  of  death ;  and  found  that  the  supposed
spirit  was  still  alive  at  the  time  of  the  message.  The  correspondent,
Mr.  G.  S.  Long,  is  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson.

M.  Aut.  64.

Jersey  City,  N.J.,  October  22nd,  1888.
*******

' '  I  think  I  wrote  you  once  that  about  two  years  ago  I  had  received  what

was  said  to  be  a  most  convincing  test  of  spirit-return,  convincing  to  all

except  myself. A  young  lady, a  Spiritualist  and  medium,  though  not  a

professional,  nor  one  that  ever  received  one  cent  in  pay,  by  means  of  a

lettered  board  and  toy  chair,  she  holding  one  leg  of  the  chair  and  I  another.


66


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


while  a  third  leg  of  the  chair  served  as  a  pointer,  gave  the  following  by
means  of  the  chair  : —

' '  First  the  chair  spelt  out  my  name  and  showed  a  disposition  to  get  in  my
lap  ;  then  it  spelled  out  '  GARY,'  and  when  I  asked  for  the  name  of  the
'  spirit '  it  spelt  out  '  George  (my  name),  you  ought  to  know  me  as  I  am
Jim.'  But  I  didn't,  and  said  so.  Then,  without  my  looking  at  the  board,
it  spelt  out  'Long  Island,  Jim  Rowe,'  and  'Don't  you  remember  I
used  to  carry  you  when  you  were  a  little  fellow,'  or  words  to  that  effect.  I
had  to  acknowledge  the  truth  of  it  and  also  to  say  that  as  he  was  an  ignorant
man  he  possiljly  intended  '  GARY  '  for  carry.  I  must  own  I  was  puzzled
for  the  moment.  To  make  sure  of  his  power  I  asked  that  he  count  the
pickets  in  the  fence  outside  of  the  house  and  I  would  go  out  and  confirm  his
statement.  Somehow  he  couldn't  agree  to  this,  and  eveia  the  medium
objected.  As  a  last  resort  I  asked  how  long  he  had  been  in  the  spirit  land
and  the  answer  came,  between  13  and  14  years.

"Now  to  the  sequel.  First  it  occurred  to  me  a  day  or  two  after,  that
while  all  the  incidents  given  were  correct,  the  name  should  have  been  given
as  ROE  instead  of  ROWE.  Second,  I  was  upon  Long  Island  this  summer,
and  the  matter  coming  to  my  mind  I  inc(uired  how  long  Jim  Roe  had  been
dead,  and  was  informed  he  died  last  winter  ;  so  when  I  received  this  test  so
convincing  to  the  believers  the  man  %oas  not  dead.

"  Yours  truly,  Geo.  E.  Long."

On  October  26th,  1888,  Mr.  Long  adds  :—

"  I  do  not  think  that  the  medium  was  fraudulent.  Her  family  consists
of  Mr.  S.  and  3  daughters,  she  being  the  youngest.  I  have  found  all
to  be  hypnotic  subjects,  with  the  exception  of  the  eldest  daughter.  They
are  all  believers  in  Spiritualism,  the  youngest  having  been  the  medium.
They  do  not  sit  now,  as  it  is  claimed  that  the  sittings,  while  rich  in  spiritual-
istic satisfaction,  were  productive  of  a  state  of  poor  health  in  the  medium.

"As  I  myself  have  obtained  information  supposed  to  have  been  impossible
for  me  to  have  reached,  I  cannot  say  for  certainty  that  she  had  not  obtained
information  about  Jim,  but  I  don't  believe  she  had.  As  the  name  Rowe
was  being  spelled  I  sat  with  my  eyes  turned  from  the  Ijoard  and  had  in  mind
the  name  Scudder,  and  mentally  followed  the  taps  of  the  chair  to  S  G  U  D —
when  the  medium  said,  '  The  name  Rowe  is  given,'  &c.  This  would  seem
to  leave  out  any  involuntary  muscular  action.  Why  Rowe  should  have  been
given  instead  of  Roe  is  still  another  phase.  I  wonder  whether  if  any  question
of  the  Roe  family  had  arisen  I  would  liave  had  in  mind  the  name  of  Rowe  1
If  so,  then  she  produced  that  which  I  had  long  while  before  been  conscious
of,  but  was  at  the  time  unconscious  of,  and  had  it  coupled  with  an  error  in
spelling  that  I  might  have  been  guilty  of  had  I  myself  been  called  upon  at
that  moment  to  spell  it.  Had  she  been  fraudulent  the  probability  is  she
would  have  spelt  it  correctly.

' '  It  seems  to  me  that  the  basis  of  Spiritualism  rests  mainly  upon  this  phe-
nomenon which  men  and  women  in  a  supernormal  condition  produce,  with-
out understanding  it,  and  credit  to  spiritual  agencies. "

[A  general  corroboration  of  Mr.  Long's  memory  of  the  incident  is  added
from  a  lady  present  at  the  time,  who  does  not  now  recall  the  details.]


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


67


The  next  case  is  very  remote ;  and  I  should  not  use  it  to  aid  in
establishing  communication  with  the  dead.  But  as  indicating  a
possible  source  of  error  it  seems  worth  quoting,  as  it  is  vouched
for  by  two  informants  who,  although  here  anonymous,  are  distinguished
and  intelligent  men. Professor  H.  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  in  1889  : — ■

M.  Aut.  65.

"  I  write  you  the  details  of  another  matter  told  me  by  a  friend,  Hon.  Z.,
of  C  .  He  is  one  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Bar,  has  repre-
sented his  State  several  times  in  the  National  Congress,  and  has  a  very  clear,
discriminating,  and  vigorous  intellect.  He  does  not  believe  in  Sijiritualism,
but  regards  its  phenomena  as  illusions  or  hallucinations. In  his  youth,  in

1854,  he  had  taught  a  winter's  term  in  his  native  town  of  P  ,  and  in  the

sprmg  returned  to  Q  to  complete  his  fit  for  college  in  the  Academy  in  that

place. One  evening  after  his  return  to  Q  ,  a  party  of  young  people  to  the

number  of  eight  were  gathered  about  a  table  to  witness  tlie  trance- writing
of  one  of  their  number,  a  Miss  A.,  a  very  beautiful  girl  of  eigliteen  years
of  age,  and  the  music  teacher  of  the  Academy. She  wrote  the  name  of  Mr.

Z.'s  father,  ,  who  had  died  in  1845,  and  whom  no  one  in  the  room

save  his  son  could  have  known. I  may  add  that  none  of  the  party  save

my  friend  knew  anything  about  P  or  its  inhabitants.  Mr.  Z .  declared

that  he  did  not  believe  his  father  had  anything  to  do  with  the  writing.  At
this  Miss  A.,  who  sat  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  table  from  Mr.  Z.,  arose,
came  about  to  his  side,  drew  her  pencil  several  times  rapidly  across  the  two
middle  fingers  of  his  left  hand,  returned  to  her  seat,  and  wrote  quickly,
'  Does  this  convince  you  ? '  Mr.  Z.  said  that  those  two  fingers  were  gone
from  his  father's  left  hand,  having  been  cut  off  in  his  boyhood.  Mr.  Z.  was
startled,  but  still  expressed  his  disbelief. Miss  A.  then  wrote  H.  T.  Y.'s

name,  and  continued  : '  Killed  on day  of ,  sliding  down  M

Hill,  running  off  embankment,  broke  his  neck  ; Rev.  Mr.  W.  attended

funeral;  text: book  ,  chap. ,  verse  ., Both  date  and  text

were  given  with  particularity. Mr.  W.  was  a  Congregationalist  clergyman

of  P  ,  and  Mr.  Y.'s  family  were  active and  leading  members  of  his

church.  Mr.  Y.  had  been  one  of  Mr.  Z.'s  pupils  that  winter  inP  ,  and  with

the  other  boys  had  coursed  M Hill,  a  very  steep  hill  near  the  school-
house,  and  covered  with  glare  ice  from  summit  to  foot.  Near  the  foot  was
an  embankment  wharfed  up  to  sustain  the  road-bed,  and  that  was  a  very
dangerous  place  to  slide  by.  Mr.  Z.  had  repeatedly  warned  the  boys  of  the
danger,  but  had  not  deemed  it  best  to  forbid  their  sliding.  He  had  worried
over  the  matter  a  great  deal,  and  was  exceedingly  relieved  when  school  closed
without  any  accident  having  happened.  Mr.  Z.  looked  up  the  text  and
found  it  entirely  inajapropriate  to  a  funeral  occasion. H.  T.  Y.  is  living

to-day,  and  is  the  head  of  the  K  School  of  Technology. This  fact  made

Mr.  Z.  scout  the  whole  affair  as  unworthy  of  his  notice  ;  but  to  me  it  seems
to  indicate  a  telepathic  explanation  of  both  occurrences.  I  asked  Mr.  Z.  if
either  his  father  or  Mr.  Y.  were  in  his  mind  at  the  time.  He  replied,  '  No,'
they  came  into  his  mind  with  a  shock  of  surprise  when  their  names  were
written.  We  must  so  suppose  the  telepathic  communication  to  be  without
•consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  agent."

The  Hon.  Z.  of  this  case  writes  as  follows  :—


68


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"This  statement  by  Professor  H.  is  correct,  and  I  cannot  improve  it,  or
make  it  more  correct  by  re-writing.  Now  you  may  use  these  facts,  but  I
earnestly  desire  you  not  to  make  use  of  any  names  ov  inluces."

My  laext  case  comes  from  Dr.  Ermacora,  of  Padua,  one  of  the  group
of  savants  whose  experiments  with  Eusapia  Paladino  are  mentioned  in
the  Supplement  to  this  Part  of  our  Proceedings.  Professor  W.  James
has  visited  Dr.  Ermacora  at  Padua,  and  tells  me  that  Dr.  Ermacora's
experiments  are  seriously  and  carefully  conducted.  Dr.  Ermacora
himself,  for  reasons  which  he  states  below,  regards  this  message  as  prob-
ably coming  from  a  disembodied  intelligence.  But  it  seems  to  me  that
the  statement  as  to  the  date  of  the  letter's  arrival  may  have  emanated
from  the  mind  of  the  Venetian  cousin  at  the  time  when  she  meant  to
post  her  letter  in  the  evening.  Dr.  Ermacora  has  sent  me  a  case  (not
for  publication)  where  a  message  written  by  the  same  automatist  pre-
dicted some  remarkable  points  with  regard  to  her  own  future  health.
Such  a  prediction,  however, — like  the  frequently  recorded  predictions  of
somnambulists  with  regard  to  their  own  epileptic  fits,  &c. — seems  to  me
to  belong  to  the  province  of  the  suliliminal  self,  which  I  conceive  as
more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the  organism  than  the
supraliminal  self  can  be.  Dr.  Ermacora  is  continuing  his  experiments,
and  we  may  hope  for  fresh  light  upon  the  source  of  these  messages.

M.  41.

Padua,  June  11th,  1892.
The  following  case  offers  some  resemblance  to  tliat  whicli  is  quoted  in  the
S.P.R.  Journal  for  April,  1892,  p.  246  [L.  936],  but  is  in  one  respect
more  complete,  inasmuch  as  it  seems  to  show  that  the  presence  or  near
neighbourhood  of  a  letter  containing  news  not  yet  read  by  the  percipient
(in  this  case  a  writing  medium)  may  be  without  influence  on  the  phenomenon.
It  has,  moreover,  I  think,  a  wider  interest,  as  showing  that  the  simple
messages  obtained  by  writing  or  similar  means  may  often  be  more  trustworthy
than  messages  obtained  in  more  complicated  and  elaborate  ways.  It  is  most
desirable  that  cases  of  this  type  should  be  collected  in  greater  numbers  and
with  greater  care.

Signora  Maria  Manzini,  residing  here  in  Padua,  has  been  for  a  few
months  experimenting  with  automatic  writing,  and  is  habitually  controlled
by  a  personality  which  announces  itself  under  the  name  of  Elvira

On  April  21st,  1892,  Signora  Maria  Manzini  received  a  letter  from  Venice
informing  her  that  her  cousin,  Maria  Alzett^i,  was  seriously  ill  with  phthisis.
It  was  long  since  Signora  Manzini  had  heard  news  of  this  cousin,  and  she
only  knew  that,  having  been  left  a  childless  widow,  she  had  remarried  and
had  two  children  by  her  second  husband.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day
Signora  M.  was  writing  in  my  presence,  under  the  control  of  Elvira,  and
asked  questions  as  follows  : —

Q.  :  Can  you  tell  me  if  my  cousin's  illness  is  really  serious  ?

After  a  pause  of  about  a  minute  and  a  half  the  answer  came —

A.  :  She  has  a  very  short  time  to  live,  and  she  leaves  three  lovely  children.

Q.  :  Did  you  first  know  this  when  I  received  news  of  the  illness  1


The  Sitblimincd  Consciousness.


69


A.  :  No,  I  have  known  it  for  many  days,  but  did  not  mention  it  for  fear
of  paining  Maria  [the  medium].

Q.  :  Why,  then,  were  you  so  slow  just  now  in  answering  my  question  ?

A.  :  I  went  to  see  how  she  was,  so  as  to  be  able  to  tell  you  precisely.

Next  day  Signora  M.  wrote  to  Venice  offering  to  go  and  see  the  invalid.
On  the  24th  she  received  an  answer  expressing  a  desire  for  her  arrival,  and
stating  that  the  invalid  was  at  the  hospital.  She  wrote  again  to  ask  on  what
days  it  was  allowed  to  visit  the  hospital  patients.  Before  an  answer  arrived,
Signora  M.  wrote  in  my  presence  (April  28th)  under  Elvira's  control,  and
we  put  the  following  questions  : —

Q.  :  How  is  the  invalid  at  Venice  ?  Do  you  know  why  the  answer  to  my
letter  has  not  arrived  >.  and  do  you  know  on  what  day  it  is  allowed  to  visit
the  hospital  ?

A.  :  The  invalid's  condition  is  the  same. There  is  little  hope. She  has
undergone  a  serious  operation  ;  there  is  danger. To-morrow  morning  Maria
will  receive  a  letter. Visitors  such  as  she  are  received  every  day  at  the  •
hospital.

Q.  :  Do  you  mean  because  Maria  is  a  relation  of  the  invalid's  1
A.  :  No,  but  because  she  comes  from  a  distance.

Failing  to  see  what  connection  there  could  be  between  pulmonary  disease
and  a  surgical  operation,  we  asked  :

Q.  :  If  the  patient  is  in  a  consumption,  what  operation  can  she  have
undergone  ?  ~"

A.  :  She  is  in  a  consumption  ;  but  the  operation  was  necessitated  by  the
birth  of  her  last  little  girl.

Next  moniing  Signora  M.  received  a  post-card  from  Venice  containing
these  words  :  "  Amalia  inquired  at  the  hospital  and  was  told  that  you  and
your  mother  would  be  received  on  any  day,  as  strangers  from  another  city,  if
you  will  come  when  it  suits  you."

The  date  of  the  letter's  arrival  and  the  news  contained  in  it  thus  corre-
sponded with  the  prediction.  But  an  embarrassing  circumstance  remained.
When  the  postman  delivered  this  letter  he  said  that  he  had  in  fact  brought
it  to  the  house  on  the  previous  evening,  but  finding  no  one  at  home  he  had
taken  it  away  with  him  again  till  the  following  morning.  Thus  the  messages
from  Elvira  had  been  received  after  the  postman  had  endeavoured  to
deliver  the  letter.  Had,  then,  the  fact  that  the  letter  was  already  in  Padua
determined  the  communication  which  announced  its  approaching  delivery
and  part  of  its  content  ?

On  April  30th  Signora  M.  went  to  Venice  and  found  that  her  cousin  had
really  had  a  third  child  a  few  months  previously,  and  after  its  birth  had
been  ill  in  a  way  which  had  ultimately  needed  a  surgical  operation.  Another
small  detail  previously  comnmnicated  to  Signora  Manzini  by  Elvira  was
likewise  found  to  be  true.  Signora  Manzini  made  no  mention  whatever  of
her  own  experiments,  and  her  cousin  at  Venice  continued  entirely  ignorant
of  them.

On  that  same  evening,  April  30th,  on  Signora  Manzini's  return  from
Venice  to  Padua,  I  was  anxious  to  inquire  from  the  "control"  as  to  the  effect
of  the  presence  in  Padua  of  the  letter  which  had  been  announced  on  the  even-
ing of  the  28th  for  the  following  morning. Under  the  control  of  Elvira,


70


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Signora  M.  wrote  the  following  answer  :  "I  did  not  know  that  the  letter
had  arrived  ;  but  I  was  sure  that  Maria  would  receive  it  next  morning,
because  those  who  wrote  it  had  intended  that  it  should  reach  her  in  the
morning.  Tliey  had  intended  to  post  it  in  the  evening,  but  instead  of  that
they  posted  it  directly  it  was  written.  I  was,  in  fact,  mistaken  ;  for  it  was
a  mere  chance  that  it  was  actually  received  in  the  morning."

I  then  requested  Signora  M.  to  write  to  her  friends  at  Venice  in  the  fol-
lowing terms  :  "I  would  beg  you  to  satisfy  a  feeling  of  curiosity  on  my  part
with  regard  to  a  presentiment  which  I  had  about  your  last  letter.  I  should
like  to  know  whether  it  was  posted  at  the  hour  which  you  originally
intended  ;  or  whether  you  changed  your  intention  and  posted  it  at  a  different
hour. Will  you  please  tell  me  all  you  remember  about  this  ?"

The  following  answer  was  received  on  May  2nd  : —

' '  I  had  meant  to  j)ost  my  last  letter  to  you  in  the  evening,  but,  fearing  to
forget  it,  I  posted  it  at  mid-day,  when  I  had  occasion  to  go  out."

To  resume  the  facts.  Automatic  writing  informed  us  of  facts  entirely
unknown  to  our  ordinary  consciousness  ;  namely,  the  fact  that  the  invalid
had  three  children,  and  the  fact  that  she  had  undergone  an  operation.  Thus
far  we  might  invoke  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  as  the  explanation.  Then
there  was  a  true  prediction  of  the  arrival  of  a  letter,  and  of  part  of  its  con-
tent. But  although  the  letter  was  delivered  on  the  morning  specified,  it
had,  in  fact,  already  arrived  in  Padua  when  the  communication  was  made,
and  its  non-delivery  in  the  evening  was  due  to  accident.  Clairvoyance  would
not  explain  this  incident,  as  that  power  might  have  been  expected  to  reveal
the  presence  of  the  letter  in  Padua.  Neither  was  there  an  indication  of  so-
called  psychometry — an  influence  from  the  nearness  of  the  letter  itself.  But,
lastly,  an  automatic  message  explains  the  incident  in  the  simplest  manner,
and  that  explanation  turns  out  to  be  the  true  one.

Dr.  G.  B.  Eemacora.

C.  Thus  much  for  the  present  with  regard  to  communications
from  the  living  ;  and  as  to  the  danger  that  a  message  purporting  to
come  from  a  deceased  person  may  in  reality  emanate  from  the  mind  of
one  of  the  living  persons  present.  But  this,  although  a  real  risk,  is  by
no  means  the  only  risk  of  deception  which  such  messages  involve.
The  communication  may  conceivably  come  from  some  unembodied
spirit  indeed,  but  not  from  the  spirit  who  is  claimed  as  its  author.
Have  we  any  way  of  guarding  against  this  deception  ; — any  hints  which
may  even  help  us  to  conceive  the  nature  of  a  danger  which  lies  so
entirely  outside  our  terrene  experience  ?

Let  us  at  least  make  an  attempt  to  consider  the  possibilities  of  dis-
embodied existence,  apart  from  any  dogmatic  preoccupation,  and
simply  in  the  light  of  such  analysis  of  terrene  personality  as  our
discussions  may  have  suggested.

It  is  clear  in  the  first  place  that  we  must  put  aside  the  moral
distinctions  on  which  men  have  mostly  dwelt  in  such  speculations  as
these.  Men  have  for  the  most  part  confined  themselves  to  imagining
personalities  shaped  on  their  own  familiar  type, — but  some  of  them  so


The  SiMiminal  Consciousness.


71


good  as  to  be  called  angels,  some  of  them  so  bad  as  to  be  called  devils.
These  conceptions  have  constantly  deflected  and  distorted  our  present
inquiries,  by  suggesting  that  if  we  are  dealing  with  intelligences  very
different  from  our  own,  these  strange  intelligences  must  either  be
immensely  better  than  ourselves  or  immensely  worse.  But  this  is
eminently  an  anthi'opomorphic  illusion.  Angels  and  devils  there  may
be,  if  you  like,  in  indefinite  numbers  ; — as  there  may  be  mermaids  and
sea-serpents  in  the  deep  sea  ;  but  that  does  not  make  it  logical  to
assume  that  every  form  of  deep-sea  life  which  comes  to  our  net  will  be
either  a  sea-serpent  or  a  mermaid.  For  our  present  purpose  it  will  be
more  instructive  to  regard  man — -not  as  a  moderately  good  being, — •
intermediate  between  possible  extremes  of  fiendishness  and  beatitude, —
— but  rather  as  an  extremely  comjjlex  being,  more  complex  and  at  the
same  time  more  integrated  than  any  other  being  that  we  know.  As
compared  with  a  civilised  adult  man,  all  other  creatures  are  less  com-
plicated and  some  are  less  coherent.  The  man's  earlier  stages,  whether
as  savage  or  as  infant,  are  less  coherent;  and  his  arrests  of  develop-
ment, or  retrograde  processes,  are  always  a  sort  of  disintegration.  The
hysteric  exhibits  this  disintegi'ative  process  in  its  active  stage  of
extreme  instability ;  the  dement  shows  us  a  kind  of  stability  reached
when  the  disintegration  of  personality  has  been  pushed  as  far  as  is
consistent  with  keeping  a  human  frame  alive.

In  the  animal  creation  we  have  unification  and  specialisation  secured
at  the  cost  of  range  and  adaptability.  And  we  must  remember  that  the
enormous  majority  of  animals  are  protozoa,  microscopic  and  unicellular;
and  that  the  enormous  majority  of  metazoa  or  multicellular  animals
are  parasitical.  So  that  if  we  were  simply  told  that  we  were  to  be  in-
troduced to  a  great  number  of  new  living  beings,  with  no  further
details,  the  presumption  would  be  that  these  new  beings  would  be
extremely  short-lived,  and  dependent  for  their  very  existence  upon
close  proximity  to  some  higher  organism.  And  by  analogy,  if  we  are
told  that  we  are  to  come  across  a  number  of  denizens  of  the  unseen
world,  taken  at  random,  the  presumption  will  be  that  we  shall  not
encounter  a  Gabriel  or  a  Plato,  a  Beelzebub  or  a  Napoleon,  but  simply  a
number  of  parasitical  existences  who  pei'haps  rise  into  individualisation
by  the  mere  momentary  contact  with  our  own  spirits,  and  sink  back  again
presently  into  some  psychical  "  womb  and  tomb  of  things "  out
of  which  they  for  an  instant  rose.  Or  if  this  be  lower  than  we  like  to
go  even  in  imagination  for  our  comradeships,  let  us  realise  at  least  that
spirits  of  the  same  grade  as  the  higher  animals  here  may  be  able  to
communicate  with  our  spirits  simply  from  the  removal  of  those
conditions  which  the  struggle  for  existence  has  here  imposed  on  the
animal  creation,  and  which  have  fitted  them  for  objects  more
important  to  their  well-being  than  converse  with  man.


72


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  only  excuse  for  speculations  so  wild  as  these  is  that  they  are  at
least  Jess  wild,  more  in  accordance  with  analogy,  than  the  popular  fears
which  see  a  full-blown  "  lying  spirit  "  in  every  random  utterance  of  a
planchette,  and  endeavour  with  Bibles  and  invocations  to  test  the
theology  of  suspected  entities,  which  (to  judge  from  all  that  we  can
learn  of  them)  may  be  about  on  the  level  of  a  psychical  jelly-fish.

Well,  it  will  next  be  said,  all  this  may  apply  to  the  nameless,
witless  agencies  from  which  (if  not  from  our  own  spirits)  most  of  our
messages  do  assuredly  come.  But  what  say  you  to  the  higher
communications  1  to  those  that  are  above  and  not  below  the  automatist's
ordinary  level  ?  If  these  messages  come  from  outside  ourselves,  have
you  anything  to  say  of  li.igh  spirits,  such  as  the  senders  claim  to  be  ?

One  suggestion  I  have,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  again  founded  on
analogy  and  to  help  in  explaining  certain  fresh  difficulties  of  "  spirit
identity "  which  meet  us  so  soon  as  the  alleged  spirit  assumes  the
character  of  a  "  guide,"  and  communicates  continuous  advice  or
teaching.

We  have  seen  that  on  earth  the  pathway  of  ascent  in  the  scale  of
organisms  is  through  integration,  through  unification.  The  cells  of  the
metazoon — say  of  man — could  have  carried  on  an  inferior  existence
separately ;  they  have  modified  and  unified  themselves  into  man,  and
have  made  an  organism  more  capable  than  any  other  of  subduing  the
world.  But  how,  again,  has  man's  organism  subdued  the  world  ?  By
its  capacity  for  further  integration  ;  its  ability  to  collabora.te  as  a  unit
in  a  social  organism,  in  which  the  minds  of  many  act  as  one.  These  are
truisms.  But  it  is  not  yet  a  truism  to  point  out  that  the  psychical  law
of  telepathy  (if  such  it  be)  represents  a  still  more  advanced,  a  still
closer  integrative  process.  It  points  to  a  surer  convergence,  a  more  in-
timate fusion  of  spirit  with  spirit  than  is  possible  so  long  as  all  converse
has  to  pass  through  mere  rifts  in  the  veil  of  flesh.  How  far,  then,  may
such  unification  extend  ?  We  have  suggested  the  possibility  that  para-
sitical minds  may  form  a  temporary  union  (possibly  a  permanent  union)
with  our  own.  What  if  minds  like  our  own  should  in  their  turn
become  in  some  way  components  of  a  larger  spiritual  aggregate  ?
This  need  not  interfere  with  our  individuality.  A  coi'puscle  in  a  human
artery  is  as  indefeasibly  a  cell  as  if  it  were  swimming  freely  in  pond-
water.  But  nevertheless  it  may  give  to  certain  communications
something  of  a  conjoint  and  collective  character,  which  may  interfere
with  our  attempts  at  individual  identification.

I  have  suggested  these  difficulties  as  possibly  inherent  in  the  very
nature  of  the  unseen  world  with  which  we  have  to  deal ; — quite  apart
from  any  deliberate  wish  to  deceive  us, — such  as  may,  of  course,  exist  in
that  world  as  well  as  in  ours.  There  also,  there  may  be  "  clashings  and
entanglements  " — opposing  wills,  confusion  of  memory,  desire  to  baffle


The  SvMimvaal  Consciousness.


rs


and  annoy.  Both  for  good  and  for  evil  the  possibilities  which  these
messages  open  out  must  long  remain  beyond  our  power  to  estimate  or
to  understand.

At  this  point  the  record  may  fitly  be  given  of  the  varied  experiences
of  automatic  writing  which  have  been  intermingled  with  Miss  A.'s
crystal-visions,  kc,  already  narrated  in  my  chapter  on  "  Sensory
Automatism."  Such  account  as  can  here  be  pi'oduced  is,  from  various
causes,  very  incomplete.  It  contains,  however,  specimens  of  several  of
the  problems  of  which  mention  has  already  been  made.  I  may  remind
the  reader  that  this  is  a  case  with  which  I  am  intimately  acquainted,
having  carefully  watched  the  pi'Ogress  of  the  phenomena  for  some
years.  The  following  statements  refer  largely  to  facts  within  my  own
knowledge,  and  these  are  given  without  exaggeration.

M.  Aut.  66.

Statement  of  Miss  A.  as  to  hek  Autojiatic  Writing.

"  1.  Origin  of  the  Writing. — About  eight  years  ago  we  first  heard  that
people  could  sometimes  write  without  knowing  what  they  wrote  ;  and  that  it
was  supposed  that  departed  friends  could  communicate  in  this  way.  We
determined  to  try  whether  any  of  us  could  write  thus.  We  tried  first  with  a
planchette,  and  when  my  mother's  hand  and  my  hand  were  upon  it  we  got
writing  easily.  We  did  not  at  first  get  any  message  jJrofessing  to  come  from
any  spirit  known  to  us.

"  2.  Mode  of  Writing. — We  soon  ceased  to  use  the  planchette,  and  I  was
able  to  write  alone.  I  can  now  generally,  but  not  always,  write  when  I  sit
quiet  with  a  pencil  in  my  hand.  The  writing  often  comes  extremely  fast  ;
at  a  much  faster  rate  than  I  could  keep  up  by  voluntary  effort  for  so  long  a
time.  I  have  to  turn  over  the  pages  of  the  large  paper  which  I  generally
use,  and  to  guard  the  lines  of  writing  from  running  into  eacli  other,  but
except  for  this  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  look  at  the  paper,  as  I  can  talk  on
other  subjects  while  the  writing  is  going  on.  I  can  always  stop  the  writing
by  a  distinct  effort  of  will.  One  curious  thing  is  that  my  hand  is  never  in
the  least  tired  by  automatic  writing.

"3.  Character  of  the  Scri^it. — I  get  various  handwritings  ;  I  may  have  had
a  dozen  altogether. I  may  divide  these  simply  into  two  classes.

"J..  Large  and  scrawly  hands,  which  seem  to  aim  at  ease  of  writing,
rather  than  at  individuality,  and  do  not  divide  their  words,  but  run  on  without
a  break.  Such  are  the  hands  of  the  so-called  'guides'  and  of  other
'  spirits  '  who  write  frequently.  (Whatever  the  sources  of  this  writing  may  be,
I  must  use  the  terras  which  the  writing  uses  in  order  to  avoid  constant
roundabout  phrases. )  These  large  running  handwi-itings  do  dhfer  somewhat
both  from  my  own  handwriting  and  from  each  other  ;  but  they  most  of
them  have  a  general  resemblance  to  a  large,  rapid  scrawl  of  my  own,
with  an  alteration  in  the  sliape  of  some  letters  so  as  to  avoid  breaks  in
the  continuous  scrawl.  I  can  almost  always  tell  who  is  \^Titing  ;  but  there
are  differences  in  energy,  in  little  details  of  management  of  the  paper,  &c.,
which  help  me  to  distinguish,  even  before  the  end  of  the  message  comes,
when  the  signature  shows  me  who  has  been  writing.  When  the  pronoun
'  we  '  is  used  there  is  no  signature,  as  that  represents  '  the  guides.'


74


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


' '  B.  There  are  also  several  handwritings  which  keep  a  strongly  individiud
character,  sometimes  plainly  of  an  assumed  kind  ;  I  mean  writing  in  a  way
in  which  no  one  would  have  written  in  life.  Thus  John  Longland  wrote  in
an  odd  twisted,  serpentine  way  and  very  small.  We  unluckily  burnt  all  his
writings  except  one  scrap,  as  we  did  not  believe  that  he  was  a  real  person.
A  spirit  calling  himself  Detorno  makes  all  the  letters  square.

"  Then,  again,  when  the  guides  are  writing  in  reply  to  a  private  question
put  by  some  friend  of  mine  tliey  write  wrong  side  up,  so  that  the  friend
sitting  opposite  to  me  can  read  the  writing  and  I  cannot.  They  seem  to
write  this  way  just  as  easily  as  the  other.  Sometimes  there  is  mirror-
writing.  Sometimes  each  word  in  a  sentence  is  written  backwards,  and
sometimes  the  whole  sentence  is  written  backwards,  beginning  with  the  last
letter  of  the  last  word.  In  a  few  cases  only  have  we  thought  that  the  hand-
writing resembled  what  the  supjjosed  spirit  wrote  in  life.  This  was  especially
so  in  the  case  of  a  communication  claiming  to  come  from  my  grandfather,
whose  handwriting  I  had  never  seen.  My  mother  produced  an  old  signature
of  his,  and  certainly  it  was  like  ;  but  there  was  not  enough  of  the  automatic
writing  to  make  us  quite  sure.  When  the  '  spirit '  or  '  control, '  or  what-
ever it  is,  leaves  me  I  cannot  make  it  come  again,  and  writing  from
spirits  known  to  us  on  earth  is  rare  in  comparison  with  writing  from  the
guides,  or  from  quite  unknown  spirits  giving  fantastic  names.  Sometimes  they
give  what  they  say  were  their  real  earth-names  ;  and  then  we  can  sometimes
identify  them  ;  although  there  is,  of  course,  this  difficulty,  that  if  they  are
obscure  we  cannot  find  them,  or  if  they  are  well-known,  people  who  give  me
credit  for  more  knowledge  of  history  than  I  possess  may  think  that  I
knew  all  about  them,  and  tliat  the  messages  come  from  my  own  mind.''

["I  think  Miss  A.  has  considerably  understated  the  number  of  distinctly
and  remarkably  difierent  types  of  handwriting  that  have  come  through  her
hand.  I  enclose  a  list  of  thirteen  names  of  'guides,'  each  one  of  whom
has  a  characteristic  handwriting, — invariably  the  same,  however  great  the
length  of  time  that  elapses  between  the  communications.  In  addition  to
these  there  have  been  many  instances  where  personalities, — the  so-called
dead,  or  occasionally  the  living — have  written  in  distinct  handwritings. —
H.  M.  Radnok."]

"  4.  Drmmngs. — Sometimes  my  hand  is  moved  to  draw  instead  of  to  write.
The  impulse  in  such  cases  is  quite  equally  distinct.  I  never  know  what  I
am  going  to  draw  till  the  jjicture  is  half  finished.  My  hand  begins  at  odd,
unexpected  places  ;  for  instance,  with  shading  in  a  corner,  or  at  the  ear  of  a
profile  ;  and  apjjroaches  the  principal  lines  in  a  way  which  no  artist  would
choose.  There  is  no  rubbing  out  or  alteration  of  what  is  once  done,  but  if
whatever  moves  my  hand  does  not  like  the  picture  it  suddenly  scrawls  it  all
over  and  begins  again  on  another  piece  of  paper.  Sometimes  twenty  or
thirty  pieces  of  paper  have  been  spoilt  in  this  way, — even  when  the  picture
was  al]  but  finished  ;  so  that  if  I  think  that  a  picture  is  pretty  I  sometimes
beg  someone  to  take  it  away  from  under  my  hand  for  fear  it  should  be
scrawled  on.  I  have  no  natural  gift  for  drawing,  and  have  only  received  a
few  lessons  as  a  child.  I  could  not  even  copy  some  of  these  automatic
drawings.  I  have  never  of  myself  painted  in  oils,  but  sometimes  I  am
moved  to  paint  automatically  in  water-colour  or  oils. I  put  out  a  number  of


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


75


oil  colours  in  a  row,  and  my  brush  goes  to  them  automatically  and  dabs  one
wet  colour  on  the  top  of  another,  making  a  picture  which  is  odd  enough,  but
much  less  muddled  than  might  be  supposed  ;  in  fact,  artists  have  said  that  it
was  curious  that  a  distinct  picture  could  be  produced  in  that  way.  When  I
paint  thus  there  is  no  drawing  or  outline,  only  the  brush-work.  These
drawings  and  pictures  have  a  certain  boldness  and  strangeness  about  them,
but  they  are  certainly  not  like  the  work  of  a  regular  artist.

"5.  Connection  of  written  until  other  messages. — The  writing  sometimes
explains  or  completes  other  phenomena,  as,  for  instance,  figures  seen,  or
sentences  begun  by  raps.  Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  raps  will  come  when
I  wish  to  have  writing.  But  the  writing  will  hardly  ever  explain  or  in  any
way  allude  to  what  really  most  needs  explanation,  namely,  the  crystal-visions.
The  guides  who  write  seem  to  know  nothing  about  these  visions.

"6.  Subject  of  the  Writing. — The  great  mass  of  the  writing  consists  of
teachings,  as  to  religion  and  philosojjhy.  This  is  what  my  guides  seem  to
wish  to  give,  and  it  is  strange  that  it  should  be  so,  as  my  own  thoughts  have
not  been  much  directed  to  such  matters.

' '  Another  large  part  of  the  writing  consists  in  a  kind  of  fantastic  descrip-
tion of  the  way  in  which  a  world  was  made.  The  name  given  with  these
writings  is  Gelalius.  I  suppose  that  this  is  a  kind  of  romance.  It  is  very
different  from  anything  that  I  should  myself  ever  write  or  dream  of,  nor  am
I  at  all  fond  of  reading  romances  of  that  kind.  The  writing  professes  to  be
copied  from  a  book  open  at  that  particular  chapter,  and  sometimes  a  passage
will  be  continued  weeks  or  montlis  after  the  iirst  part  of  it  was  written,  as  if
the  book  had  chanced  to  be  open  again  at  that  same  place.

"Some  of  the  messages,  however,  deal  with  earthly  matters.  Some  give
general  advice,  some  give  medical  advice,  and  some  show  a  knowledge  of
things  in  the  past  or  present  which  I  do  not  possess.  Some  of  these  messages
have  been  cui'iously  right  ;  some  have  been  partly  right,  but  confused  or
interrupted  ;  and  some  have  been  wrong  altogether.  Tlie  sense  of  time
seems  confused,  so  that  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  the  incidents  are  meant  to
have  happened  long  ago,  or  lately,  or  to  be  still  in  the  future.  Many  of  the
messages  we  have  not  tested,  as  they  were  about  things  wliich  did  not  interest
us.  Often,  for  instance,  there  would  be  messages  about  events  in  the  news-
papers which  I  had  not  thought  or  cared  about.

"  As  to  what  I  have  called  '  general  advice,'  I  think  that  tliis  has  always
been  good  when  it  related  to  the  conduct  of  the  automatic  writing  itself.
I  should  be  told,  I  mean,  when  to  write  and  when  not  to  write,  and  what
people's  presence  was  desirable,  and  so  forth.  The  advice  is  often  quite
different  from  what  we  wish ; — forbidding  us  to  ask  people  whom  we  had
desired  to  ask.  There  has  been  one  very  curious  case  where  we  were
repeatedly  told  to  'send  for'  a  gentleman  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  C.  D.,  of
whom  we  knew  nothing,  except  that  we  had  seen  his  name  in  the  papers  in
quite  a  different  connection.  It  so  chanced  that  a  friend  of  ours  knew
Mr.  C.  D.  and  brought  him  to  see  us,  but  for  some  years  there  seemed  to  be
no  particular  result.  Lately,  however,  Mr.  C.  D.'s  presence  has  very  greatly
helped  the  phenomena  ;  and  the  advice  given  so  long  ago  lias  turned  out
important  in  a  way  which  we  could  not  possibly  have  foreseen.

"  On  matters  not  connected  with  these  phenomena  I  should  always  care-


76


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


fully  read  what  the  writing  told  me,  but  I  should  not  go  by  it  unless  it
seemed  sensible.  It  does  not  always  advise  either  what  I  Avish  or  what  I
think  wise  ;  but  generally  it  is  wiser  than  I.

"7.  Medical  Advice  has  often  been  given  by  a  control  calling  himself
*  Semirus,'  and  this  has  been  often  successful  ;  which  is  strange,  since  I  am
quite  ignorant  of  medicine,  and  often  do  not  know  the  names  either  of
diseases  or  of  drugs  mentioned.  Of  course  I  cannot  be  quite  sure  that  I
have  never  read  the  words,  but  certainly  when  I  have  written  them  I  have
often  not  known  what  they  meant.

' '  At  other  times  the  facts  relating  to  the  illness  have  been  quite  outside
my  knowledge.  One  friend  has  given  an  instance  of  this  kind  [printed  later]  ;
but  I  have  not  liked  to  ask  others,  as  what  Semirus  says  is  generally  meant
for  the  questioner  alone.

"8.  Tlwii/jht-transfereme. — The  Avriting  occasionally,  but  not  often,  tells
me  of  thoughts  in  the  minds  of  persons  present.  One  day  a  lady  handed  me
a  letter,  in  a  handwriting  which  I  did  not  know.  I  held  the  letter  in  one  hand,
and  the  other  hand  wrote,  'Bright  metal  and  brown  earth.'  The  letter
was  from  a  gentleman  whom  I  had  never  seen,  and  who  committed  suicide
by  throwing  himself  on  the  rails  in  front  of  a  railway  engine.  I  think  that
this  message  came  from  thought-transference,  as  I  do  not  find  that  merely
holding  letters  in  my  hand  tells  me  anything  al)out  their  writers  unless
someone  is  there  who  knows  the  content  ;  and  even  then  I  so  seldom
succeed  that  I  do  not  care  to  try  experiments  of  this  kind."

[Lady  Brooke  (the  Ranee  of  Sarawak),  who  was  present  at  the  time,  has
given  me  a  written  confirmation  of  this  (quite  recent)  incident,  for  which  I
have  not  pressed  the  owner  of  the  letter,  on  account  of  the  painful  nature
of  the  circumstance.— F.  W.  H.  M.]

"9.  Clairvoyance. — I  sometimes  get  messages  which  perhaps  may  be
called  clairvoyant,  telling  me,  for  instance,  where  lost  objects  are,  or  warn-
ing me  of  some  danger  at  hand.  Thus  about  September  20th,  1888,  [this
incident  was  written  down  October  21st,  1889],  my  sister  M.  and  I  had
just  finished  dressing  for  dinner  in  the  dressing-rooms  leading  from  a  large
bedroom.  The  maid  had  left  the  room.  M.  had  left  her  dressing-room,  and
was  standing  in  the  bedroom,  when  suddenly  she  called  to  me  :  '  Get  a  bit
of  paper  ;  there  are  some  raps.'  I  came  in  and  took  an  envelope  and
pencil,  and  at  once  the  words  came,  by  raps  :  '  Look  to  the  candle  or  the
house  will  be  on  fire.'  We  saw  that  it  was  not  the  candle  in  the  bedroom,  so
we  went  into  M. 's  dressing-room,  and  found  that  her  candle  was  so  close
to  a  cardboard  pocket  depending  from  the  looking-glass  that  it  would  have
been  on  fire  in  a  moment.  It  was  already  smoking.  No  servant  would  have
come  in  for  sometime."  [Mrs.  A.  confirms  as  follows:  "I  heard  of  the
incident  in  my  daughter's  next  letter. "]

'  'Again,  I  was  descending  a  dark  corkscrew  staircase  at  Longford,  in  August
or  September,  1889,  [account  written  October,  1889]  when  I  heard  a  rapping
on  the  stair.  It  was  persistent,  and  drew  my  attention.  I  looked  about
with  a  candle,  and  at  last  saw  a  gold  pencil-case  of  Lady  Radnor's,  with
which  I  was  accustomed  to  write  automatically,  lying  on  a  dp-rk  little  landing
of  the  stair. I  did  not  know  that  the  pencil  had  been  lost.

' '  10.  But  the  most  puzzling  cases  are  those  where  the  message  professes  to


The  Suhliminal  Consciousness.


77


be  from  some  departed  person,  and  tells  some  true  things,  hut  perhaps  mixes
up  some  mistakes  with  them.  '  Jack  Creasy  '  was  a  case  of  that  kind.  [See
Proceedings,  XXIII.,  p.  513.  We  have  since  ascertained  that  the  widow's
name  is  not  Mary. — F.  W.  H.  M.]  I  certainly  had  not  read  any  newspapers
about  his  accident,  and  had  no  connection  whatever  with  Greenwich  or
Deptford.  I  can  see  no  link,  and  I  do  not  know  either  why  the  message
should  have  come  at  all,  Or  why  it  should  have  come  so  confusedly.  But
sometimes  I  do  think  that  the  message  really  comes  from  the  person  who
professes  to  communicate.

"  Another  frequent  writer  is  a  strange  person  to  have  come  to  us,  as  I
knew  nothing  about  him,  and  should  not  have  thought  that  we  had  anything
in  common.  That  is  Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke.  He — or  whatever  it  is
that  takes  that  name — has  become  a  sort  of  family  friend.  He  has  a  distinct
character  of  his  own,  which  is  not  quite  what  I  should  have  expected  in  a
Lord  Chancellor,  for  he  is  full  of  jokes  and  very  bluff  and  outspoken.  He
has  given  a  number  of  facts  about  himself,  names  of  friends,  and  laws  about
marriage  that  he  had  made.

"One  reason  which  makes  me  think  that  the  mes.sages  come  from  out-
side myself  is  the  feeling  which  I  have  sometimes  of  rivali-y  or  even  conflict
between  them.  When  I  am  writing  there  will  occasionally  be  sudden
changes,  as  if  some  new  personality  had  been  able  to  get  hold  of  the  pencil.
And  in  one  long  case  [John  Black]  there  seemed  to  be  spirits  purposely  try-
ing to  confuse  each  others'  messages  ;  or  perhaps  one  telling  a  story  and
others  smiply  trying  to  prevent  us  from  hearing  it.

' '  Again,  if  I  see  figures  and  then  have  wTiting  which  professes  to  come
from  those  figures,  it  seems  to  me  natural  to  suppose  that  it  does  so  come. "

I  will  now  give  some  examples  of  motor  messages,  by  writing  and  raps,
given  through  Miss  A.  Here,  as  in  the  case  of  Miss  A.'s  ciystal- visions,  I
am  obliged  to  confine  myself  mainly  to  cases  corroborated  by  the  few  friends
who  have  felt  in  the  messages  more  than  a  merely  fiersonal  interest.  It
must,  of  course,  be  remembered,  in  justice  to  other  friends,  (who  have  often
carried  oS  messages  without  even  showing  them  to  the  writer),  that  much  of
what  has  been  thus  written  has  dealt  with  very  private  matters.

The  first  message  which  I  shall  quote  is  evidentially  interesting,  on
account  of  the  mere  chance  by  which  its  truth  was  verified.  It  should  be
premised  that  Miss  A.  has  never  been  to  Blankney,  and  is  not  acquainted
with  the  Chaplin  family.

I.  Lady  Radnor  writes  under  date  January  15th,  1893  : —
"  The  following  case  has  always  struck  me  as  particularly  curious.
"About  8  years  ago,  when  Miss  A. 's  powers  had  only  quite  recently  shown
themselves,  her  automatic  writing  told  me  that  I  had  two  guides,  '  Estelle  '
and  'Silvo,' — spirits  who  accompanied  me  and  took  an  interest  in  my  welfare.
I  did  not  think  of  this  at  first  as  a  thing  which  could  be  either  proved  or
disproved.  But  one  day,  when  a  question  was  mooted  as  to  whether  '  spirit
guides'  had  ever  lived  on  earth,  I  asked  whether  mme  had  done  so,  and  was
told  that  Estelle  had.  I  asked  for  her  earth-name  ;  and  as  we  were  then
getting  an,swers  hy  raps  (through  Miss  A.'s  power)  it  was  rapped  out  'Loved
voices  called  me  Anne.'  I  asked  for  the  surname. C — H — A  was  rapped  out.


78


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


As  my  maiden  name  was  Chaplin  I  at  once  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that
that  was  the  name  meant.  But  the  raps  said  decidedly  No,  and  rapped  out
Chambers.  I  had  no  associations  with  this  name.  I  asked  if  connected  with
my  family  ?  'Yes.'  Any  portrait  ?  'Yes.'  At  Blankney  ?  (my  brother's
place).  'Yes.'

"Now  I  had  spent  much  of  my  childhood  at  Blankney,  and  I  had  been
particularly  fond  of  one  picture  there,  representing  a  lady  whose  name  I  did
not  know.  It  used  to  hang  in  the  morning  room,  and  then  on  the  staircase,
and  represented  a  lady  in  a  red  velvet  gown  with  a  basket  of  cherries  in  her
hand.  As  a  child  I  used  to  sit  and  talk  to  this  picture  and  make  a  friend  of
the  lady  with  the  cherries.

' '  So  when  I  heard  that  the  picture  of  my  '  guide  '  was  at  Blankney  I  hoped
it  might  be  this  lady,  and  asked,  'Is  it  the  lady  with  the  cherries  1 '  'Yes'
was  eagerly  rapped  out.  I  at  once  wrote  to  my  old  nurse  who  was  still  at
Blankney,  and  who  knew  a  good  deal  about  the  pictures,  and  asked  her  to
get  the  picture  examined  for  any  name  which  might  be  on  it.  She  got  the
picture  taken  down  and  carefully  examined,  but  there  was  no  clue.  She  told
me,  however,  that  she  thought  she  had  heard  a  Mrs.  S. — a  connection  of  the
family,  who  knew  the  pictures  better  than  anyone — say  that  the  lady  with  the
cherries  was  a  Miss  Taylor.  This  disheartened  me  ;  but  I  wrote  to  a  friend
at  the  College  of  Heralds  to  ask  whether  the  name  Chambers  occurred  any-
where in  the  Chaplin  pedigree.  He  wrote  back  that  there  was  no  such  name
in  the  pedigree.

"  The  same  day  that  I  got  his  letter  I  happened  to  meet  Mrs.  S.  (whom  I
had  not  seen  for  many  years)  in  a  shop  in  London.  I  knew  that  she  had  once
made  a  catalogue  (which  I  had  never  seen)  of  the  Blankney  pictures  ;  so  I
felt  that  here  was  my  last  chance.  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  who  the  lady
with  the  cherries  was.  'Oh,  tliat  is  Lady  Exeter,'  she  said,  'whose  daughter.
Lady  Betty  Chaplin,  married  an  ancestor  of  yours. '  '  Do  you  know  what
Lady  Exeter's  maiden  name  was  ? '  'It  was  Mellish.  '  I  now  lost  all
hope,  but  I  just  asked  :  '  Has  the  name  CJiambers  any  association  for  you  ? '
'  How  stupid  I  am  !  '  she  exclaimed,  '  Lady  Exeter  was  a  Miss  Chambers,  of
Mellish  ! '  My  friend  at  the  Heralds'  College  then  looked  in  the  Exeter
pedigree,  and,  sure  enough,  the  lady  with  the  cherries  was  Hannah
CJiambers.  H.  M.  Radnor."

"  I  was  cognisant  of  all  this,  and  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  account.

"Radnor."

In  a  later  letter  Lady  Radnor  adds  :  ' '  Personally  I  had  always  believed
'  the  lady  with  the  cherries '  to  be  someone  (name  unknown)  who  had  married
a  Chaplin  ancestor.  There  was  no  Chaplin  pedigree,  and  it  was  I  who
suggested  to  my  brother  that  he  should  ask  '  York  Herald  '  (Mr.  Gatty)  to
draw  one  up  ;  and  I  therefore  applied  to  Mr.  Gatty  as  being  the  only  person
who  would  know  the  names  of  the  families  connected  by  marriage  with  the
Chaplins.  I  knew  that  the  great-grandmother  was  '  Lady  Betty,'  nee  Cecil  :
but  as  in  those  days  pedigrees  and  family  history  did  not  interest  me,  I  had
never — and  up  to  the  present  time  never  have — seen  the  Chaplin  pedigree.
In  any  case  the  name  Chambers  would  not  appear  in  it."

II.  The  next  case  is  typical  of  many  similar  trifling  incidents.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


79


January  loth,  1893.

"  I  have  several  times  had  reason  to  think  that  some  intelligence  writing
through  Miss  A.  was  aware  of  trifling  circumstances  happening  to  myself.
A  good  instance  occurred  the  otlier  day.  I  came  back  from  hunting  and
joined  in  a  stance,  where  my  so-called  '  guide '  was  communicating.  I
asked  '  Well,  have  you  been  witli  me  in  my  run  to-day  ? '

"  'Yes,'  was  the  answer,  '  but  you  should  have  gone  up  the  hill  instead
of  down. '  '  Was  Nancy  right,  then  1 '  '  Yes. '  Now,  in  point  of  fact  we
had  changed  foxes  that  day  by  going  down  a  hill  instead  of  up,  one  hound,
alone,  Nancy,  running  up  hill  on  what  was  doubtless  the  original  scent.

"Radnor."

January  16th,  1893.

III.  "The  following  writing  was  given  at  Longford,  February  27th,  1890,
avowedly  by  '  Estelle  '  : —

"  '  You  ask  me  whom  I  see  in  this  habitation.  I  see  so  many  shades  and
several  spirits.  I  see  also  a  good  many  reflections.  Can  you  tell  me  if  there
was  a  child  died  upstairs  ?  Was  there  an  infant  wlio  died  rather  suddenly  ?
[Why  ?  ]  Because  I  continually  see  the  shadow  of  an  infant  upstairs,  near
to  the  room  where  you  dress.  [A  shadow  ?'\  Yes,  it  is  only  a  shadow.
[What  do  you  mean  ?  ]  A  shadow  is  when  anyone  thinks  so  continually  of  a
person  that  tliey  imprint  their  shadow  or  memory  on  the  surrounding
atmosphei'e.  In  fact  they  make  a  form  ;  and  I  myself  am  inclined  to  think
that  so-called  ghosts,  of  those  who  have  been  murdered,  or  who  have  died
suddenly,  are  more  often  shadows  than  earthbound  spirits  ;  for  the  reason
that  they  are  ever  in  the  thoughts  of  the  murderer,  and  so  he  creates  as
it  were,  their  shadow  or  image  ;  for  it  would  be  sad  if  the  j^oor  souls
suffered,  being  killed  through  no  fault  of  their  own,  —  that  they  should  be
earthbound  ;  though,  remember,  they  very  often  are  earthbound  too.'

' '  With  reference  to  the  above  communication  I  may  say  that  an  iixfant
brother  of  mine  dietl  of  convulsions  in  a  nursery  which  then  occupied  the
part  of  the  house  where  the  figure  of  the  baby  was  said  to  have  appeared.
I  do  not  see  any  way  in  which  Miss  A.  could  have  known  either  of  the
death  of  my  infant  brother  or  of  the  fact  that  that  part  of  the  house  had
previously  been  a  nursery.

Radnor."

IV.  A  few  further  points  connected  with  Longford  may  conveniently  be
added  here.

January  loth,  1893.

"  The  following  point  should  be  added  to  the  account  of  Miss  A.'s  vision
of  the  Long  Drawing-room  at  Longford  as  a  Chapel,  which  (as  we  knew)  it
was  in  Lord  Coleraine's  time,  although  she  had  no  means  of  knowing  this.

"  She  remarked  that  there  was  a  door  where  the  altar  ought  to  be  {i.e.,  at
the  east  end),  and  that  there  was  an  altar  between  two  of  the  side  windows,
which  she  designated.  None  of  us  knew  at  that  time  where  the  altar  had
been,  but  later  on  we  found  in  the  muniment-room,  (which,  of  course,  is
always  kept  locked),  an  old  plan  of  Longford,  in  which  the  Long  Drawing-
room  is  a  chapel,  and  the  altar  is  in  precisely  the  place  where  Miss  A.
located  it. This  is  just  like  her  putting  the  Cathedral  altar  in  the  place  in


80


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


which,  unknown  to  her,  it  used  to  be,  when  she  saw  the  induction  of  Brian
Duppa.  Radnor."

January  15th,  1893.

V.  "It  should  be  added  to  the  account  of  Brian  Duppa  that  Miss  A.
subsequently  in  my  presence  pointed  out  to  me  a  portrait,  in  a  room  and  house
which  she  had  never  previously  entered,  as  being  the  man  whom  she  saw  as
Brian  Duppa.  ^  Although  very  short-sighted,  she  recognised  the  face  and
figure  at  a  few  yards  distance.  I  did  not  know  the  picture,  and  although  I
have  long-sight,  I  could  see  no  name  on  it  from  where  we  sat.  I  went  up
and  examined  it,  and  found  that  the  name  Brian  Duppa  was  on  it  in  small
letters.  H.  M.  Radnor."

VI.  The  next  case,  so  far  as  it  goes,  supports  the  view  that  the  "douser's"
water-finding  may  be  the  result  of  a  real  motor  message  from  the  subliminal
self  ;  a  thrill  passing  unconsciously  through  the  organism  and  acting,  by  a
tightening  of  the  muscles,  upon  the  hazel-rod  : —

January  15th,  1893.
' '  Feeling  some  curiosity  as  to  the  alleged  powers  of  water-finders  or
diviners,  I  recently  sent  for  a  man  who  had  much  local  repute  of  this  kind,
and  set  him  to  find  water  in  the  park  at  Longford.  His  rod  turned  up  in
various  places  where  there  may  or  may  not  be  water,  but  when  we  came  to  a
place  where  I  knew  that  there  was  water  running  through  a  brick  conduit
underground,  his  rod  gave  no  sign.  I  taxed  him  with  this  and  he  replied
that  he  could  not  find  running  water  when  it  was  enclosed  in  a  conduit.
Miss  A.  was  at  Longford  at  the  same  time,  and  I  asked  her  to  try  the  rod,
which  I  myself  cut  from  a  hedge.  She  had  never  made  the  attempt  before.
I  placed  her  at  some  distance  from  the  brick  conduit  and  told  her  to  go  on
till  she  came  to  it.  I  took  care  not  to  give  any  indication.  Exactly  at  the
right  place  the  rod  turned  up.  She  then  followed  the  hidden  conduit  ;  when-
ever she  stepped  off"  it  the  rod  went  down.  Lady  Radnor  tlien  tried  her  in
the  Castle  itself.  She  went  into  the  central  hall,  which  had  been  the  court-
yard. In  one  corner  the  rod  went  up  strongly,  having  been  going  up  a  little
before.  In  my  memory  a  pump  had  stood  there  ;  but  no  one  in  the  house,
except  myself  and  my  aunt,  knew  of  the  existence  of  this  old  well.

"  Radnor."

VII.  The  following  statement  is  from  the  Ranee  of  Sarawak  : —

January,  1893.

' '  In  September,  1892,  my  maid,  who  was  not  known  to  Miss  A. ,  complained
of  persistent  pain  in  the  neck  and  arm.  She  told  me  afterwards  that  she
had  been  afraid  of  paralysis.  I  asked  Miss  A.  to  let  '  Semirus '  write
what  was  the  matter  with  her.  The  maid  came  into  the  room.  No  one
said  a  word  as  to  her  symptoms,  but  Miss  A. 's  hand  at  once  wrote  in
'  Semirus' '  handwriting  :  '  It  is  not  paralysis,  as  you  fear  ;  it  is  rheumatism  ;
your  bed  ought  to  be  moved  from  the  window,'  or  words  to  that  effect.
I  went  into  the  maid's  room,  which  it  so  happened  that  I  had  never  seen,  as
it  was  in  a  house  which  I  had  only  rented  for  a  short  time,  and  I  found  in

^  Her  words  were  :  "  Oh,  there  is  my  Bishop  !  only  his  hair  was  brown  and  in  this
picture  it  is  grey."


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


81


fact  that  the  bed  was  exposed  to  a  severe  draught.  It  was  placed  against
the  window. I  had  it  moved,  and  the  rheumatic  pain  disajjpeared.

Margaret  Brooioe."

VIII.  I  give  here  an  incident  of  which  I  was  myself  witness,  and  which
seems  to  me  typical  of  a  class  of  communications  of  which  I  have  already  said
something, — where  information  unknowai  to  the  automatist  is  given,  on  the
soi-disant  authority  of  some  departed  spirit  ;  but  yet  this  information,  so  far
as  true,  is  known  to  some  person  present,  and  when  anything  which  goes
beyond  the  knowledge  of  persons  present  is  asked  for,  the  answer  goes  off  into
mere  guessing  and  vagueness.  Note  also  the  fact  that  these  messages  were
given  by  a  distinct  rapping  sound  in  the  table.  This  phenomenon  is  often
spoken  of  in  spiritist  journals  as  a  very  common  one.  For  myself  I  may  say
that  having  sat  at  tables  many  hundred  times,  in  readiness  to  welcome  raps  if
they  appeared,  I  have  frequently  heard  raps  in  the  presence  of  paid  mediums,
and  I  have  frequently  heard  creaks  of  the  table  in  the  presence  of  my
own  friends  ;  but  only  in  the  presence  of  some  four  or  iive  non-profes-
sional and  trustworthy  persons  have  I  heard  unmistakable  raps,  answering
questions,  and  producing  upon  my  mind  the  conviction  that  no  kno^vn  agency
was  concerned  in  producing  them.

On  this  occasion  the  messages  given  were  private  enough  to  need  an
alteration  in  the  initials  of  the  friends  present.  Besides  Miss  A.,  a  sister,
and  myself,  there  sat  at  the  table  Lady  B.  and  the  Hon.  C.  D.  A  Christian
name  was  clearly  rapped  out,  which  was  recognised  by  Mr.  C.  D.  as  that  of
his  mother,  not  consciously  known  to  any  of  the  rest  of  us.  Since,  however,
the  name  was  in  the  Peerage,  it  was  of  little  evidential  value.  A  message  then
came  as  to  Mr.  C.  D.  's  efforts  on  behalf  of  a  friend,  for  whom  he  was  then
trying  to  get  a  post.  "What  kind  of  employment  shall  I  get  for  him?"
"Island."  "  What  island  1 "  "Jersey."  "  Can  you  mention  anyone  who  will
help  in  this  ?  "  "  Lang"  was  rapped  out,  and  then  came  many  confused  raps
and  the  message  ceased.

Now  Mr.  D.  was  in  reality  trying  privately  to  get  a  post  in  Jersey  for  his
friend, — about  whom  none  of  us  knew  anytliing.  How  easy,  therefore,  it
would  be  to  report  this  sitting  as  follows  :  "  Mr.  D.'s  mother  announced  her-
self by  raps,  and  gave  advice  on  a  private  matter."

But  now  compare  the  classical  case,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  of  the  Rev.  P.
and  Mrs.  Newnham,  and  consider  how  these  replies  might  be  explained  on  the
theory  of  mere  thought-transference  between  living  persons.  In  Mr.
Newnham's  case  we  found  that  the  automatic  writing  got  at  the  questioner's
ideas  gradually  and  imperfectly,  and  filled  up  gajjs  by  random  answers  made
to  look  as  interesting  as  possible.  So  here,  in  my  view,  some  intelligence
not  necessarily  other  than  some  part  of  Miss  A.'s  subliminal  self  readily
discerns  in  Mr.  D.'s  mind  an  idea  so  firmly  fixed  as  his  mother's  name,  and
takes  that  as  an  interesting  source  to  which  to  ascribe  the  replies.  It  next
gets  easily  at  the  idea  of  helping  the  friend  ;  but  the  definite  name  Jersey  is
harder  to  come  at,  and  is  preceded  by  island,  a  reply  which  could  hardly
have  been  given  save  by  someone  groping  for  the  clearer  notion.  Then
when  the  name  of  some  helpful  resident  in  Jersey  is  asked  for — Mr.  D.
himself  now  not  knowing  any  such  name — an  attempt  is  made  to  rap  out
the  name  which  is  in  most  minds  the  first  which  the  idea  of  Jersey  would  call

G


82


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


up.  Senseless  as  this  guess  was,  (for  Mi'.  D.  certainly  did  not  expect  Mrs.
Langtry  to  find  posts  for  his  friends),  it  was  quite  analogous  to  the  random,
dreamlike  associations  and  plays  upon  words  which  are  characteristic  of
subliminal  messages  of  all  kinds.

The  next  question,  again,  received  an  answer  which  might  have  been
credited  to  clairvoyance.  Mr.  C.  D.  handed  Miss  A.  a  ring  (not  that  I
see  reason  to  suppose  that  the  ring  made  any  difference)  and  simply  said,  "Tell
me  about  my  friend  now  at  a  hotel  in  Paris,  with  whom  this  ring  is
connected."  Immediately  raps  spelt  out  the  sentence,  "  Case  for  operation."
A  few  details  of  the  disease  were  then  given,  which  corresponded  with  what
Mr.  C.  D.  knew,  and  which,  where  they  went  beyond  his  knowledge,  admitted
of  no  proof.

I  can  hardly  myself  doubt  that  this  knowledge  also  came  from  Mr.  C.  D.  's
mind,  and  not  (as  is  usually  professed  in  such  cases)  from  actual  inspection
of  the  patient.

It  may,  of  course,  be  asked  why  experiments  like  this,  which,  even  if
they  prove  nothing  more  than  thought-transference,  do  at  least  seem  to
prove  that  so  definitely,  are  not  constantly  repeated.  The  answer  is  that
there  are  very  few  persons  with  whom  they  can  be  repeated  ;  and  that  Mr.

C.  D.'s  personality  was  in  this  case  probably  as  essential  as  Miss  A.'s.  Mr.

D.  ,  though  he  cannot  by  himself  obtain  raps,  has  marked  power  of  a  psychical
kind,  and  is  in  fact  the  gentleman  to  whoiii  Miss  A.  has  above  alluded  as
having  been  demanded  by  her  guides  before  she  or  her  family  knew  any-
thing of  him  beyond  official  mentions  of  his  name  in  the  papers.  I  can  my-
self vouch  for  the  recurring  scrawls,  "Bring  C.  D." — "Bring  C.  D."  which
puzzled  the  A.  family  some  six  years  ago,  when  they  certainly  were  not
aware  of  Mr.  D.'s  gift  (then  very  slightly  developed),  and  when  it  had  not
consciously  occurred  to  myself  that  good  might  result  from  the  collocation
of  the  two  sources  of  power.

IX.  The  next  case  which  I  shall  give  is  a  curious  one,  as  involving  (1)
raps,  (2)  a  crystal-vision,  (3)  an  apparition  seen  by  two  persons,  viz..  Miss  A.
herself  and  Mr.  Harry  de  Windt,  well  known  as  a  traveller  in  Russia.  Un-
fortunately no  notes  were  taken,  but  I  heard  of  the  incident  a  few  weeks
afterwards  from  Lady  Brooke,  Mr.  C.  D.,  Mrs.  A.  and  Miss  A.  (all  present
at  the  time),  and  a  letter  from  Mr.  de  Windt  confirms  two  of  the  main
points.

In  September,  1892,  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  meeting  of  Mr.  de
Windt  and  Miss  A.,  the  latter  wrote  the  word  Doishowalinksky,  which  at
first  was  thought  to  be  a  sentence,  but  turned  out  to  be  a  name  well  known
to  Mr.  de  Windt.

On  the  same  day  a  face  appeared  near  Mr.  C.  D.  wliich  was  clearly
seen  by  Miss  A.  and  Mr.  de  Windt,  and  recognised  by  the  latter,  as  stated
in  a  letter  to  me,  dated  October  5th,  1892:  "I  can  only  tell  you  that  I
distinctly  saw  the  face  of  an  exile  I  am  acquainted  with,  one  Dombrowski,
who  is  (or  was)  located  at  Tomsk,  in  Western  Siberia.  A  message  was  also
sent  me  "  [from  a  Russian  source  ;  but  Mr.  de  Windt  explains  the  inexpe-
dience  of  printing  further  particulars  of  this].

Miss  A.,  on  being  afterwards  shown  a  photograph  of  Dombrowski  (not,
however,  mixed  with  other  photographs,  as  it  should  have  been),  recognised  it,


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


88


but  said  that  the  face  as  seen  by  her  looked  older  and  more  worn  ;  in  which
Mr.  de  Windt  concurred.  It  is  not  known  whether  Dombrowski  is  dead
or  alive.

On  the  same  day  Miss  A.,  looking  in  the  crystal,  saw  a  small  man  with
bright  red  hair  and  red  face,  a  big  stick,  a  long  petticoat,  and  a  fur  cap,
walking  in  front  of  a  little  hut.  Mr.  de  Windt  recognised  this  figure  as
resembling  a  hill-man  set  to  watch  an  isolated  prisoner.  These  stunted  hill-
men  dye  their  hair  with  red  clay.

A  few  days  later  (September  loth,  1892)  a  message  was  given  by  raps  to
Lady  Brooke  (the  Ranee)  :  "  Tell  your  brother  (Mr.  de  Windt)  that  Shiskine
is  the  man  to  help  him."  Neither  Miss  A.  nor  Mr.  de  Windt  had  ever  con-
sciously heard  of  Sliiskine,  but  in  the  »S'^.  Jameses  Gazette  of  Sejitember  24th
they  observed  that  M.  Shiskine  had  received  a  certain  high  appointment,
which  explained  the  message.  His  appointment  had  also  been  mentioned
in  the  Times  of  August  31st.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  subliminal
memory  may  externalise  itself  by  raps,  as  by  other  means.

X.  Among  the  habitual  "controls,"  "Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke "  is
almost  the  only  one  of  sufficient  historical  mark  to  admit  of  our  testing
the  truth  of  his  statements.  He  gave  a  list  of  tlie  surnames  of  sixteen  of
his  friends  ;  and  Miss  Porter  has  been  good  enough  to  identify  with  proba-
bility most  of  these.  Most  of  the  names  (though  not  all)  appear  in  Harris's
Life  of  Lord  Sarclwicke ;  but  in  several  cases  there  are  reasons,  not  apparent
in  the  Life,  which  make  it  probable  that  there  was  more  intimacy  than
the  incidental  mention  in  the  Life  would  imply.  The  case  resembles  the
biographies  of  musicians  written  automatically  by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  (see
SiJirit  Identity),  which  I  hope  to  discuss  on  some  later  opportunity.  The
tone  of  boisterous  humour  which  runs  through  these  messages  is  unlike  Miss
A.,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  the  "  objectivation  of  types"  so
often  obtained  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  a  part  quite  alien  to  the  hypnotised
subject's  character  is  often  surprisingly  well  maintained.

XL  I  will  close  this  series  for  the  present  with  a  case  which  unites  all  the
perplexities  of  these  inquiries  in  a  singularly  tangled  form.  According  as
stress  is  laid  on  one  or  other  of  its  asjiects  it  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  the
weakest  or  as  one  of  the  strongest  items  of  our  present  evidence.  Against
it  are  the  broad  facts  that  the  central  story,  if  central  story  tliere  be,  never
got  itself  told  at  all ;  that  there  were  numerous  inaccuracies  in  the  fragmen-
tary stories  which  ivere  told  ;  and  that  these  included  an  impossible  incident
(the  experience  of  John  Black,  as  I  shall  call  hiiu,  in  the  hospital)  which
points  to  an  intentional  mystification.

In  favour  of  the  case  is,  first  of  all,  the  fact  that  the  communications  do
not  depend  upon  any  one  person.  They  are  shared  by  Miss  A.  with  four
other  members  of  her  family,  and  with  the  gentleman  here  called  Mr.  B.,
who  is  known  to  me,  and  whom  I  regard  as  an  excellent  witness,  although
for  official  reasons,  which  seem  to  me  adequate,  he  wishes  his  name  to  be
concealed.

Then  again,  we  have  the  several  mutually  corroborative  forms  in  which
the  message  was  conveyed,  raps — sounds,  visions,  and  writing.  And  finally,
besides  the  inaccurate  or  incredible  statements,  and  closely  mixed  up  with
these,  we  have  a  considerable  number  of  facts  accurately  given,  and  these


84


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


facts  of  the  oddest  character.  The  impression  left  upon  those  who  took  part
in  these  sittings  was  that  they  had  here  a  fragmentary  message,  confused
by  the  very  conditions  of  its  transmission,  and  its  confusion  worse  confounded
by  some  perverse  or  hostile  agency  ;  but,  nevertheless,  reflecting  certain  true
facts,  known  to  one  or  more  minds  altogether  distinct  from  those  of  the
group  who  received  the  communications.

The  account  here  quoted  was  written  partly  by  Mr.  B.,  and  partly  by
members  of  the  A.  family  who  were  present.

Be  John  [Black] — Gertrude  Tryon.

On  Sunday,  December  15th,  1889,  while  in  church  at  morning  service.
Miss  A.  and  B.  saw  among  other  things  a  form  in  the  iiuli)it,  dressed  in  some-
thing dark.  We  had  some  writing  and  were  told  that  if  we  had  a  sitting  that
evening  the  man  would  try  and  show  himself  and  tell  us  what  he  wanted,
and  that  he  had  appeared  in  church  to  attract  our  notice.  [Mr.  B.  tells  me
that  he  has  many  times  seen,  as  he  believes,  quite  independently,  the  same
phantasmal  figures  which  Miss  A.  has  at  the  same  time  seen. — F.  W.  H.  M.]

At  6.30  p.m.  we  sat  round  a  stz-ong  square  table  in  a  darkened  room,  and
loud  raps  began  almost  at  once.  A''ery  shortly  Miss  A.  saw  the  figure  of  a
man  lying  on  an  ordinary  hospital  stretcher,  and  what  appeared  to  be  his
double  standing  beside  it. B.  at  the  same  time  saw  the  standing  figure.

By  loud  raps  we  were  told  that  his  name  was  J.  [Black].

Raps  then  coiitinued  :  "  Water-lane,  Brixton."

Question  :  "  What  number  ?  "  Answer  :  "Kendal  Villas,"  and  then  "2."

Miss  A.  now  saw  sort  of  magic  lantern  pictures  at  the  end  of  the  room,  of
a  station,  lights,  trains,  &c.

A  low  indistinct  voice  now  began  to  speak,  but  we  could  not  make  out
what  it  said.

The  raps  now  continued,  and  in  spite  of  great  interruptions  by  the  voice,
we  made  out  the  following  : —

"  Once  dead  through  concussion  of  sj^ine. St.  Bartholomew's."

During  this  time  the  figure  kept  making  signs  of  approval  when  his
raps  were  understood,  and  a  very  cold  air  blew  at  intervals  over  our  hands.

At  about  this  time  we  noticed  another  figure  between  Miss  A.  and  B.,
evidently  the  one  who  was  speaking  so  indistinctly  that  we  could  only  make
"  Yes  "  or  "  No  "  at  times  of  what  he  said.

Question  :  "  What  can  we  do  for  you  1 "

Answer  :  "  Ask  Gertrude  for  the "  (we  fancied  "  will ").

Q.  :  "  Does  Gertrude  live  at  Kendal  Villas  V A.  :  "  No."

Q.  :  "  Do  you  know  where  she  lives  ?  " A.  :  "Ask  Dr.  Fyfe  to  help."

Q.  :  "  Can  you  give  us  Gertrude's  address  ?  " A.  :  "No."

Q.  :  "Can  you  give  us  Dr.  Fyfe's  address  1" A.:  "  Montpellier-square. "

Q.  :  "  Can  you  tell  us  the  number  V  A.  :  "Yes  "  (we  counted  and  they
stopped  us  at  4,  and  again  at  2),  "42."

This  conversation  was  rendered  very  diflicult  in  places  by  the  voice
interrupting,  especially  at  the  number  of  Dr.  Fyfe's  house.  After  this  the
raps  became  so  weak  that  it  was  suggested  that  the  figure  should  make  a
sign  at  the  right  letter,  and  this  was  carried  out.  A  little  difficulty  was
experienced  at  first,  but  finally  with  some  occasional  raps  the  conversation
recommenced.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


85


Q.  :  "  What  was  Gertrude's  other  name  1 "

The  voice  said  "Tryon"  and  the  hand  waved  approval.

Q.  :  "When  did  you  die?"

A.  :  "January  13th  "  (we  gathered).  "It  was  I  that  forgot  Gertrude
"when  I  had  the  accident.  Pray  find  Gertrude  and  give  her  money  to
live  on."

Q.  :  "  Where  did  you  see  Gertrude  last?" A.  :  "Richmond."

We  had  here  to  stop,  as  it  was  late.  After  the  sitting,  on  looking  in
a  Blue-book  we  found  the  name  and  address:  "Andrew  Fyfe,  M.D.,
M.R.C.S.,  42,  MontpeUier-square,  S.W."  [Dr.  Fyfe  is,  of  course,  in  no
way  connected  with  this  inquiry,  into  which  he  enters  only  as  responding
■with  prompt  courtesy  to  questions  about  a  patient.]

At  the  same  table,  about  9  p.m.  on  December  18th,  raps  again  began,
but  there  seemed  a  great  many  different  influences,  all  wishing  to  commu-
nicate. The  same  figure  appeared,  and  after  a  few  minutes  was  able  to  rap
and  sign  to  us,  but  throughout  there,  was  great  difiiculty.

J.  [Black]  said  :  "  I  want  to  tell  you  all,  help  me."  We  tried  then  to
make  out  on  what  line  of  railway  he  was  travelling  but  could  only  make  out
the  following  words  : —

Q.  :  "  What  was  the  accident  V

A.:  "Train — collision — Victoria — station  near."

Q.  :  "  Where  were  you  coming  from  ?  " A.:  "Richmond."

Q.  :  "Did  Dr.  Fyfe  help  you  then  ?  "

A.:  "No — Symons — in  accident  too."

Q.  :  "What  do  you  want  us  to  do  for  Gertrude  ?  "

A.  :  "I  owe  her  money. You  must  tell  Dr.  Fyfe  to  tell  you  that  address,
■he  knows  it. I  owed  her  money,  and  ask  if  I  left  a  letter  about  Gertrude."
Q.  :  "  How  much  did  you  owe  her  ?  "  and  we  thought  the  answer  was  £5.
He  then  said,  "  Write  to  Kendal  Villas."

Q. :  "What  is  the  name  of  the  person  who  lives  there  now."  A. :  "  [Black.]''

Q.  :  "  What  relation  to  you  ?  "

A.:  "Wife" — we  suggested  widow — "  No,  wife."

The  voice  then  got  stronger  a  great  deal  and  distinctly  said : —

"  It  is  all  quite  right. Look  for  accident  .Januai-y  1st  or  December  31st.

During  this  sitting  we  had  a  paper  and  pencil  on  the  table,  hoping  for
some  direct  writing,  and  we  heard  them  moved  about  several  times.  We
disked  if  there  was  anything  on  the  paper  and  the  voice  said,  "  Ernest  has

written. "  We  then  struck  a  light  and  found  written  on  the  paper  ' '  J.  [B]  . "

The  voice  before  we  finished  said,  "  I  am  George  Smith,  and  am  trying  to
lielp  :  thank  you. Going  to  write."

Tlie  guides  wrote  through  Miss  A.  that  George  Smith  was  not  a  bad
spirit,  though  not  very  higli ;  that  he  had  known  .J.  [Black]  and  was  anxious
to  help  him.  They  also  said  they  fancied  Gertrude  Tryon  was  drowned,  and
that  she  went  to  see  Dr.  Fyfe,  either  in  November  or  December,  1888,  by
J.  [Black's]  wish  ;  that  she  did  not  pay  him,  but  gave  him  her  address.

Wishing  to  follow  this  out,  a  telegram  was  sent  to  the  London  police
asking  for  news  of  J.  [Black]  and  the  following  answer  was  received  : —

"  Brixton. Head  Constable. December  Idth,  1889.
' '  J ohn  [Black]  has  been  stopping  at  2,  Kendal  Villas,  Water-lane.


86'


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Mtjer.


Married  Miss  [W.],  occupier's  daughter,  Sunday  last.  Expected  home  next
Sunday. Present  address  unknown."

On  December  20th  a  tile  of  the  Times  was  obtained  and  the  following
account  of  a  railway  accident  on  December  31st,  1888,  was  found  in  it : —

"  Copied  from  the  Times  of  January  1st,  1889  : —  .  .  .  "The  worst
case  was  that  of  a  Mr.  [Black]  of  Brixton,  who  received  such  serious  injuries
that  the  doctor  ordered  his  immediate  removal  to  a  hospital.  He  was
accordingly  placed  in  a  police  ambulance,  and  this  was  put  in  the  guard's  van
of  a  train  bound  for  the  City.  Mr.  [Black]  was  taken  to  St.  Bartholomew's
Hospital,  where  he  now  lies."  .  .  .  The  paragraph  stated  that  the  collision
was  between  a  L.C.  and  D.  train  in  Loughborough  Junction,  going  to
Victoria,  and  a  L.  and  S.W.  train  from  Richmond.  A  Dr.  Simonds
attended  the  injured.

A  telegram  was  then  sent  to  the  house  surgeon,  St.  Bartholomew's
Hospital,  and  the  following  reply  received  : —

"  [Black]  left  nth  January."

On  the  evening  of  December  21st  we  received  the  following  communica-
tion, partly  by  i-aps  and  partly  by  voice,  tlie  voice  being  stronger  than
before  : —

"The  real  J.  [Black]  is  here ;  this  is  me."  "On  January  7th,  I  was  com-
pelled to  leave  the  body  of  J.  [Black].'  "J.  [Black],  my  body  Avas  entered
into  by  another."  "  I  now  am  bodiless,  do  you  not  understand  ?"  "I  and
lie  are  one."  "Two  in  one  body."  "I  married  Gertrude  Tryon."  "Not
the  other." "Yes,  yes,  help  me — help  me  to  make  you  understand."

Q.  :  "  Were  you  married  in  church  to  Gertrude  Tryon  ?  "

A.  :  "No  I  promised  to  marry  her  in  January."  "I  will,  I  must  get
help."  We  had  said  :  "How  can  you  make  us  understand  what  it  is  you
want?"  "I  was  insensible  for  seven  days,  and  when  I  came  to  myself  I
saw  just  the  other  in  my  body  ;  I  could  not  get  back,  so  have  no  power  to
fulfil  my  promise."

Q.  :  "  Can't  you  influence  him  (J.  [Black]  ),  or  get  back  into  his  body  ?"

A.  :  "I  can  when  he  is  terribly  excited. I  implore  you  to  help  me."

Q.  :  "  Why  are  you  so  anxious  about  Gertrude  1  "

A.  :  "She  was  an  orphan,  I  used  to  meet  her  in  Richmond  Park.  I
promised  to  meet  her  on  New  Year's  Day."
Q.  :  "  Was  she  a  lady?"

A.  :  "  No,  she  was  a  '  dancer  '  at  Liverpool ;  a  '  dancer '  is  a  worker  in  the
mills.  "

Q.  :  "  Can  you  tell  us  the  name  of  the  mill  ?  "

A.  :  "  Darlings,  I  think,  cannot  be  sure."

Q.  :  "  What  was  her  address  in  Richmond  ?  "

A.  :  "I  think  tliat  she  had  lodgings  in  Castle-street."

Q.  :"  What  number  ? " A.  :  "  17."
- Q.  :  "  What  is  it  you  want  us  to  do  for  her  I  "

A.  :  "  You  must,  when  you  find  her,  place  her  somewhere  ;  she  has  no
friends,  and  it  is  my  fault."

On  the  evening  of  December  22nd,  at  a  sitting,  by  raps  we  were  told  :
' '  I  must  give  an  address  for  George  Smith.  Gertrude  Tryon  was  at  Bold-
street,  Liverpool."


Tlte  Siibliminal  Consciousness.


87


Q.  :  "  Can  you  give  us  the  number  1 " A.:  "No."

Q.  :  "  Will  you  tell  us  more  ?  " A.  :  "  Public-house — barmaid."

A  letter  received  on  December  26th  says: —

"  The  principal  street  for  shops  is  called  Bold-street."

"42,  Montpellier-square,  S.W.,  December  26th,  1889.

"  Dear  Sik, — I  remember  the  nameTryon,  I  fancy,  but  I  cannot  see  it  in
our  books. I  will  have  another  look,  however,  through  the  day-book  for
November  and  December,  1888,  to-morrow,  and  let  you  know. There  are
several  names  of  [Black]  in  the  book. Can  you  tell  me  where  he  lived  1
"  Believe  me,  yours  very  truly, Andrew  Fyfe."

December  28i/i,1889. — During  the  afternoon  E.  saw  in  the  crystal  a  small
room,  with  only  two  chairs  in  it  and  torn  curtains.  In  it  was  a  young
woman,  with  a  dark  dress  and  dark  hair,  sitting  with  her  back  towards  the
seer.  She  was  sitting  on  one  chair  with  her  feet  on  the  other,  in  a  very
dejected  attitude,  and  the  following  letters  came  "  G.  H.  T.  o  [Black]."

After  dinner  that  evening,  among  other  things,  a  mist  suddenly  seemed
to  us  to  form,  and  in  it  Miss  A.  saw  the  form  of  a  young  woman,  dripping
with  water,  with  her  hair,  which  was  long  and  black,  hanging  over  one
shoulder,  and  the  whole  circle  was  startled  by  the  most  distressing  moans.
The  voice  said  then  :  "I  am  Gertrude  Tryon,  and  I  want  to  talk  to  you.
I  threw  myself  into  the  water."  Q.  :  "Was  it  in  Richmond  Park?"
A.:  "About  Richmond."  ;

Q.  :  "  Was  it  in  the  river  V A.  :  "Yes."

Q.  :  "  Can  you  give  us  the  date  ?" A.  :  "  September  17th,  1889."
The  iigure  which  answered  these  questions  and  still  had  kept  moving,
then  faded  away.

December  29th,  1889. — At  a  sitting  after  tea,  towards  the  end  of  the  time,
when  we  had  had  several  other  messages  and  a  few  words  of  direct  writing,
raps,  and  voices,  the  spirit  who  gives  the  name  of  George  Smith  came.  He
said  :  "J.  [Black]  will  try  and  come  but  I  will  not  let  him  ;  I  will  make  a
form."  Then  we  saw  a  kind  of  indistinct  mask  or  face  on  the  table  which
G.  S.  was  evidently  trying  to  make.

Q.  :  "Was  what  Gertrude  Tryon  told  us  last  night  correct  ?  "

A.  :  "  Yes,  she  is  near,  I  can  ask  her  questions."

Q.  :"  Are  you  dead  ?" A.  :  "  Yes."

Q.  :  "What  were  you  I  " A.  :  "Ostler,  Richmond."

Q.  :  "  Whereabouts  in  Richmond  ?  " A.  :  "  Castle  Hotel."

Q.  :  "Do  you  know  if  there  was  any  account  of  Gertrude  Tryon's
suicide  1"

A.  :  "  There  was  a  notice  in  the  Star,  I  think."

Q.  :  "Can  you  tell  us  what  date?"

A.  :  "Not  certainly,  but  I  think  September  19th."

Q.  :  "  Is  it  the  woman  whose  body  was  found  in  the  Thames  ? "

Here  the  answers  became  rather  involved  and  we  could  not  make  out  if
he  was  speaking  of  Gertrude  Tryon  or  someone  else.

A.  :  "I  can  tell  you  who  made  (did  ? )  it  ;  she  threw  herself  in  and  Long
Jack  pulled  her  out.  He  took  her  to  Bermondsey  and  from  there  to  Chelsea  ;
from  there  I  cannot  trace  her,  and  that  was  early  in  September."

Q.  :  "  Was  she  alive,  or  did  he  take  her  body  ?"


88


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


A.  :  "(Alive)  first  ;  the  17th  September  was  killed."
Here  we  had  to  leave  off.

We  had  a  sitting  on  the  31st,  and  after  other  things  by  the  crystal  and
raps  we  got  this  message  :  ' '  Will  you  be  careful  of  what  G.  Smith  tells  you  ?
he  is  not  the  best  of  spirits,  he  is  one  who  knows  more  of  G.  Tryon  than
anyone  else  ;  it  will  not  be  any  use  for  him  to  try  to  deceive  you  for  you
will  find  him  out  ;  we  are  afraid  that  Long  Jack  is  only  an  alias  of  G.  Smith."

On  sending  to  Richmond  to  know  if  there  is  a  Castle  Hotel,  we  learn
that  there  was  one,  but  it  has  been  pulled  down.

On  January  1st  got  another  answer  from  Dr.  Fyfe.

"Dear  Sir, — I  have  looked  carefully  through  our  books  for  November
and  December,  but  I  cannot  see  the  name  of  Gertrude  Tryon  ;  I  remember
the  name  Tryon,  but  a  number  of  patients  used  to  come  to  me  whose  names
were  not  mentioned  in  the  books  afterwards.  If  you  could  give  me  any
further  particulars  of  her  and  [Black],  I  should  be  only  too  glad  to  try  and
trace  them.

December  mh,  1889.  "Andrew  Fyfe."

On  January  3rd,  when  C.  and  Miss  A.  had  gone  up  to  bed,  Miss  A.  had
loud  raps  in  her  room,  and  going  to  C.'s  room  tried  to  write  but  could  get
nothing,  so  sat  at  a  little  table.  This  message  was  rapped  out  :  ' '  Willow-
walk,  Bermondsey."

Q.  :  "  Who  are  you  ? " A.  :"  Gertrude  Tryon. "

Q.  :  "What  do  you  want  to  say  1" A.  :  "  Baker  met  ."

Here  the  raps  broke  ofi'  and  we  could  get  no  more.

On  January  4th,  we  heard  from  Liverpool  : —

"Sir, — I  have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  inquiry  of  the  2nd,
and  to  inform  you  that  there  is  no  hotel  or  public-house  in  Bold-street,  and
our  directory  gives  no  manufacturer  or  mill-owner  of  the  name  of  Darling.
By  the  enclosed  circular  you  will  see  we  are  precluded  from  making  any
inquiry. — I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

"G.  Williams
"(Chief  Superintendent)."

On  January  5th  were  told  by  "writing"  :  "You  must  remember  that
in  all  communications  there  are  those  who  try  and  tell  you  exactly  oppo-
site from  what  they  ought,  to  try  to  stop  you  from  finding  out  the  truth  ;
keep  everything,  it  will  do  more  good  in  proving  that  you  get  false  and
true.  Thei-e  are  two  sides  to  every  question,  but  you  need  not  think  that
because  all  is  not  to  be  found  out  directly  there  is  not  the  whole  truth  at
the  bottom."

On  January  7th,  after  tea,  B.  and  Miss  A.  took  a  small  table,  placing  the
crystal  on  it.  First  was  seen  in  the  crystal  a  cart  with  two  men  and  a
woman  (G.  T.)  in  it ;  the  man  who  was  sitting  between  the  driver  and  the
woman  was  clean  shaven  and  had  a  dark  blue  cap  on.  They  seemed  to  be
driving  tlirougli  a  square  and  along  a  narrow  street,  into  what  we  were  told
(by  raps)  was  Willow-walk.  The  cart  stopped  next  door  to  an  arch  ;  G.  T.
went  in  through  the  door.  By  raps  we  then  got,  "Baker  is  shortly  out
of  prison."  Then  again  in  tlie  crystal,  G.  T.  appeared  to  be  sitting  at
the  back  of  a  large  yard  full  of  carts,  as  if  she  were  hiding.  The  entrance
seemed  to  be  through  the  archway. Then  was  rapped  out  twice,  ' '  Stores  in


The  Sublivihicd  Consciotisness.


89


Willow-walk." Then  two  tin  canisters  appeared  in  the  crystal,  held  in
.someone's  hand,  and  the  words  "Baker  stole  "  were  rapped  out. Then  we
asked  some  questions  and  were  answered  by  raps  : —
Q.  :  "Who  is  Baker?"

A.:  "Baker  was  in  prison  for  stealing;  he  knows  about  G.  Tryon."
Q.  :  "  How  does  that  help  us  ?  "

A.:  "  Ask  anyone  who  lives  in  Willow-walk  if  they  know  about  Baker
who  was  found  stealing."

Q.  :  "How  long  ago  V A.  :  "  Not  sure— about  four  months  perhaps."
Q.  :  "  But  still  how  will  that  help  us  1  "

A.  :  "It  gives  you  a  clue,  but  be  very  careful  if  you  talk  to  Baker;  he
will  not  let  you  know  he  knows,  he  will  hide  it."

Q.  :  "  Where  was  Baker?"  (or,  where  did  he  steal).
A.  :  "  Van  depository  in  Willow-walk."

The  following  is  a  description  of  Gertrude  Tryon  as  she  appeared  in  the
crystal,  also  at  the  sitting  :— Very  nice  looking,  pale  complexion,  dark  eyes,
black  hair  brushed  off  the  face  ;  very  straight  features  ;  rather  long  face
with  scar  over  right  eye  ;  plain  gold  rings  in  her  ears  ;  hands  long  and  thin  ;
probably  left-handed  ;  in  the  crystal  was  seen  with  black  stuff  dress,  black
buttons,  and  steel  centres.

(While  we  were  writing  out  this  description  directly  after  we  had  got  it,
there  were  loud  tJmds  on  the  screen  behind  us,  and  a  noise  as  if  someone
were  talking  far  away,  heard  by  all  in  the  room ;  also  loud  knocks  the  other
side  of  the  room.)

We  have  found  that  there  is  a  Willow-walk,  Bermondsey,  and  also  there
is  a  Pickford's  van  depository  in  Willow-walk.

On  writing  to  Richmond  for  the  first  three  weeks'  local  papers  in  Septem-
ber, all  were  sent  up  to  the  15th  or  IGth  by  Edward  King.  On  writing
again  for  the  17th  and  18th,  the  dates  required,  the  following  answer  came
back  from  Edward  King  :  "  We  regret  we  have  no  papers  for  the  dates
you  refer  to."  We  sent  for  the  Stay  evening  paper  of  these  dates,  and  they
were  also  out  of  print.

We  learn  on  inquiry  that  there  are  two  Bakers  among  a  gang  of  burglars ;
one  is  caught  and  the  other  still  at  large.

On  January  30th,  a  letter  came  from  a  friend  who  was  making  inquiries
as  follows  : —

' '  A  detective  came  here  yesterday  with  information  from  Scotland  Yard
about  Baker  ;  he  was,  it  appears,  employed  on  the  railway  and  was  convicted
not  long  since  of  stealing  a  can  of  milk,  somewhere  in  Willow-walk,  Ber-
mondsey,  and  is  still  undergoing  his  months'  L.  H.  L.  "

On  February  15th,  1890,  Miss  A.  and  B.  again  obtained  the  following
answers  to  questions,  sitting  at  a  small  table  alone,  and  tlie  communications
coming  from  George  Smith  : —

"  That  man  that  knows  about  Gertrude  Tryon.  I  want  to  find  one  called
Sayce,  he  was  with  Gertrude  ;  find  him  ;  he  was  with  her  in  Liverpool."

Q.  :  "  Where  is  he  to  be  found  ?  "

A.  :  "  He  was  last  in  Pentonville-street,  N.W."  •  ;  .

Q.  :  "  What  had  he  to  do  with  Gertrude  ?  "

A.  :  "  He  worked  with  her."  .  . ■  .


90


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Q.
A.
Q.


"Where?"

"  Bar  in  pastry-cook's  shop  in  Bold-street,  Liverpool."
"What  is  the  name  of  the  shop?"  A.  (after  much  trouble) :  "Howard."
About  3  a.m.  on  the  night  of  the  loth  February,  1890,  Miss  A.  was
awakened  by  rapping  and  shaking  at  the  end  of  her  bed  on  the  wood.  She
asked  who  was  there  ?

A.  :  "  George  Smith.  I  will  tell  truth;  listen.  Helped  Gertrude  Tryon,
kill  child."

Q.  :  "Where?"  A.  :  "Richmond."  Q.  :  "How?"  A.  :  "Chloroform."
Q.  :  "You  are  telling  stories.  "  A.  :  "  Truth,  I  will  confess."  Q.  :  "When?"
A.:  "August."  Q.  :  "How  did  tliey  kill  it?"  A.:  "Chloroform."
Q.  :  "  Where  did  they  get  it  ?  "  A.  :  "  Won't  tell."  Q.  :  "  You  must  tell
me."  A.  :  "Don't  know."  Q.  :  "Unless  you  tell  me  where  you  got  it  I
shall  believe  you  are  telling  lies."  A.  :  "  Sayce  got  it."  Q.  :  "  Where  did
he  get  it  ?  "  A.  :  "  Crane-court.  "  Q.  :  "  Where  is  that  ?  "  A.  :  "  City.  "
Q.  :  "Where  in  the  City?"  A.:  "Quick-street,  no,  Fleet-street."
Q.  :  "What  was  the  name  of  the  shop  ?  "  A.  :  "  Can't  tell."  Q.  :  "  You
must." A.  :  "  Well,  shall  go  to  the  other,  he  will  help  me."

On  February  16th,  1890,  B.  and  Miss.  A.  sat  at  a  small  table,  and  got
the  following  by  raps  : —

Q.  :  "  What  are  we  to  do  about  this  case  ? "

A.  :  "  You  must  try  to  find  the  body — read  service."

Q.  :  "  Was  G.  T.  drowned?"

A.  :  "No,  she  was  murdered."

Q.  :  "  Tell  us  what  to  do  to  find  her."

A.:  "  She  never  came  from  Bermondsey. "

Q.  :  "  Who  murdered  her  ?  "

A.  :  "George  Smith."

Q.  :  "  Will  you  tell  us  how  and  where  G.  S.  died  ? "

A.  :  "  Yes,  though  I  will  not  pretend  to  know  the  name  of  the  vessel  ;
he  went  to  Liverpool,  — to  the  docks,  and  got  a  place  on  board  ship.  I  only
know  he  was  brought  before  the  highest  tribunal — God's. "

Q.  :  "  Can  you  tell  us  where  G.  T.'s  body  is  ?  "

A.  :  "Willow-walk — in  a  shed — stable — near  vans  ;  Pickford's  yards."

On  March  14th,  1890  (Friday),  Miss  A.  went  with  a  friend  to  Willow-
walk,  Bermondsey.  After  walking  nearly  down  the  whole  street  without
finding  anything  like  what  she  had  seen,  she  suddenly  recognised  the  grocery
stores  she  had  seen  in  the  crystal.  She  could  not  find  the  archway,  but  went
straight  into  the  yard  where  Pickford  keeps  his  vans  and  packs ;  and  after
going  some  way  she  found  the  archway  she  had  seen  close  by  the  loading-
place,  and  recognised  it  as  having  seen  it  in  the  crystal.

On  March  25th,  B.,  Miss  A.,  and  A.  W.  sat  at  a  small  table,  and  got
the  following  communications  hy  raps  : —

"  E.  (Emily  ? )  Joyce  must  be  found."


Q.
A.
Q.
Q.

A.


"  Where  does  she  live  ?  "

"  She  lived  last  in  Wimpole-.street  as  caretaker.'
"  What  number  ?  " A.  :  "39."
"  Who  was  she  caretaker  to  ?  "
"  Charwoman  also  at  the  church."


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


91


Q.  :  "Where  is  the  church  r' A.:  "  Raine-street."

(Here  George  Smith  came  and  interrupted  and  had  to  be  sent  away.)

Q.  :  "  Where  is  Raine-street  1 "

A.  :  "E.G. Chap.  Little  Bethel."

They  could  then  get  no  more,  so  left  off.  Miss  A.  sat  down  to  write  out
what  had  been  given,  and  the  raps  continued  on  the  writing  table.  ' '  You
will  find  E.  Joyce  by  applying  to  rooms,  Whitecross  Mission,  Upper  Nine."

On  sending  for  a  P.O.  Directory  it  was  found  that  there  is  a  mission
room  at  199,  Upper  Whitecross-street.

On  March  31st,  1890,  B.  and  Miss  A.  sat  at  a  small  table  and  got  the
following  by  raps  : —

"From  Gertrude  Tryon.  I  must  find  rest.  Murder  it  was  ;  my  body
lies  there — the  river — and  I  was  made  to  put  the  child's  body  in  the  yard  ;
it  is  there  now. I  can  never  get  help."

Q.  :  "  Then  it  is  the  child's  body  that  is  in  Pickf ord's  yard  ?  How  did
you  die  1 "

A.:  "  I  was  murdered.''

Q.  :  "  Where  is  your  body  1 "

A.  :  "They  cut  my  body  up,  they  put  the  pieces  wi  "

Here  it  broke  off  and  no  more  raps  could  be  obtained.

A  few  particulars  may  be  added  to  this  jumble  of  facts  incomprehensibly
accurate  and  fictions  absurdly  palpable.

1.  John  [Black's]  accident  and  illness.

We  owe  to  the  kindness  of  the  Surgical  Registrar  of  St.  Bartholomew's
the  following  copy  of  an  entry  in  Case-book  of  patients  under  Mr.  Morrant
Baker,  1888  :—

"  December  31st,  1888.  3856.  John  [Black],  ait.  21,  safe-maker.  He  was
in  train  which  collided  with  another  on  day  of  admission.  Insensible  for
some  time,  but  not  when  he  came  in.  Came  in  suffering  from  shock  and
pams  in  the  head."

Mr.  Black  had  moved  from  the  address  which  was  correctly  given  by
raps  in  the  case  above  cited  ;  but  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  after  some  difficulty,
succeeded  in  interviewing  him  at  his  new  home  on  February  25th,  1893,
and  reports  thus  as  to  the  effects  of  the  accident.

"  He  looked  about  25  or  26  years  of  age.  The  eyeballs  were  slightly
prominent,  the  pupils  regular,  equal,  rather  smaller  than  normal.  He  said
he  had  never  quite  got  over  the  accident.  Since  then  he  had  been  somewhat
an  altered  man.  He  had  had  to  do  lighter  work  than  that  of  a  safe-maker,
which  was  his  business  at  the  time  of  the  accident.  He  had  headaches  at
times  and  his  sight  was  not  so  clear  as  before  the  accident.  He  remembered
veiy  little  of  the  accident,  or  of  the  days  he  spent  in  hospital.  He  said  in
reply  to  my  questions  that  he  did  not  suffer  from  walking  or  talking  in  his
sleep.  He  was  very  little  inclined  to  be  communicative,  and  in  fact,  rather
suspicious  as  to  the  reasons  of  my  visit."

It  thus  appears  that  [Black's]  case  was  somewhat  more  severe  than  the
first  account  indicated,  and  that  there  was  a  period  of  unconsciousness.

2.  Upper  Whitecross-street.  Mr.  G.  A.Smith  reports  (May  28th,  1890)  :—
"I  went  to  this  street,  which  has  recently  been  renumbered,  and  what  was


92


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


199  is  now  98  and  99.  I  find  that  up  to  April  in  this  year  a  mission  was
carried  on  at  199,  but  after  that  month  it  moved  to  large  premises  built  on
purpose  in  Errol-street.  The  missionary  in  Errol-street  assured  me  that  no
Mrs.  Joyce  had  ever  been  connected  with  them  in  any  way."

3.  Crane-court. No  chemist's  shoji  in  Crane-court,  Fleet-street.

4.  Raine-street.  This  street  is  now  E.G.,  but  E.  runs  from  Old  Gravel-
lane,  Wapping.  A  church  in  Old  Gravel-lane,  a  few  yards  before  one  gets
to  Raine-street.

It  is  not  easy  to  frame  a  hypothesis  which  will  account  for  such
a  case  as  this,  with  its  odd  fragments  of  knowledge  or  vision,  and  the
dream-like  vagueness  and  shadowiness  of  the  story  which  connects
them.  It  is  like  a  collective  dream, — -for  be  it  remembered  that  the  per-
cipience  here  is  shared  by  several  persons, — working  upon  a  foundation
of  facts,  some  of  which  may  perhaps  be  referred  to  the  latent  memory  of
some  of  the  persons  concerned.  At  any  rate  the  reader  can  hardly  be
too  often  reminded  that  this  hypothesis  of  subliminal  memory  must  be
kept  closely  in  view  in  considering  all  retrocognitive  messages.

I  proceed  to  quote  a  series  of  messages  which  afford  an  interesting
iield  for  the  discussion  of  that  hypothesis.  The  automatist,  who
must  here  be  called  Mrs.  R.,  is  a  lady  well  known  to  me  for  some
years,  and  to  whom  I  was  first  introduced  by  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood
(the  cousin  and  brother-in-law  of  Charles  Darwin,  and  himself  a  well-
known  savant),  who  has  here  reported  certain  messages  obtained  in  his
l^resence,  and  partly  through  his  co-operation.  Mrs.  R.,  and  her  sister
Mrs.  v.,  now  deceased,  were  for  many  years  among  Mr.  Wedgwood's
most  valued  friends.  There  can  be  no  more  question  in  my  mind  as  to
Mrs.  R.'s  scrupulous  good  faith  than  as  to  that  of  Mr.  Wedgwood  him-
self in  endeavouring  to  i-ecall  the  utmost  that  they  had  ever  known  of
the  personages  who  professed  to  be  writing  through  the  help  of  the  two
human  hands.  The  question  is  one  of  subliminal  memory ;  and  as  to
this  it  may  be  remarked  that  Mr.  Wedgwood's  reading  was  wide, — but
that  he  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  showed  any  automatic  gift,  nor  ob-
tained writing  except  with  one  of  these  two  ladies.  On  the  other
hand,  Mrs.  R.'s  reading  has  not  been  wide  in  range  ;  and  both  Mrs.  R.
and  Mrs.  V.  had  many  psychical  experiences, — most  of  them  of  a  private
nature,^ — in  which  Mr.  Wedgwood  was  not  concei-ned.  The  automatic
impulse  seems  to  have  come  from  them  ;  but  it  may  be  that  Mr.  Wedg-
wood's presence  modified  the  character  of  the  messages  obtained.  I
give  first  a  general  account  by  Mr.  Wedgwood  of  the  mode  of  experi-
ment.

My  experience  in  jjlanchette-writing  has  been  mainly  acquired  in  sitting
with  two  sisters,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  R.  and  Mrs.  V.,  of  whom  the
younger,  Mrs  V.,  has  far  the  stronger  influence  in  producing  the  writing.

'  See,  however,  S.P.R.  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  293,  for  two  experiences  of  Mrs.  V.'s.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


93


With  her  the  board  in  general  begins  to  move  much  sooner' and  in  a  more
vivacious  way  than  with  her  elder  sister.  When  the  two  sit  together  the
board  moves  rapidly  along,  like  a  person  writing  as  fast  as  he  can  drive,
while  with  me  and  one  of  the  sisters  the  action  is  often  feeble  and  labouring.
But  neither  of  the  sisters  can  obtain  anything  whatever  when  they  sit  by
themselves.  The  board  remains  absolutely  motionless  under  the  hands  of
the  solitary  operator.

Wlien  trying  for  writing  we  sit  oiDposite  each  other  at  a  small  table,  I  with
my  right  hand,  my  partner  with  lier  left  on  the  planchette,  while  the  writing
produced  is  ujiright  to  me,  and  upside  down  to  my  partner,  from  whom,
however,  the  effective  influence  seems  to  proceed.  The  precise  nature  of
that  influence  is  not  very  easy  to  understand,  and  is,  I  think,  very
commonly  misapprehended.  Writing  by  planchette  is  often  called
"automatic,"  and  the  pencil  is  conceived  as  being  worked  by  the  muscular
action  of  the  sitters,  under  the  guidance  of  a  blind  impulse,  as  little  under-
stood by  them  as  the  finished  result  is  foreseen  by  a  pair  of  birds  instinc-
tively engaged  in  the  construction  of  their  first  nest.  But  this  is  directly
opposed  to  the  experience  of  myself  and  my  partners.  When  I  am  sitting  at
planchette  with  one  of  them,  I  know  that  I  am  merely  following  the  move-
ment of  the  board  with  my  hand,  and  not  in  any  way  guiding  it,  my  only
difficulty  being  to  avoid  interfering  with  it.  It  seems  to  me  exactly  as  if  my
partner,  in  whom  T  have  jjerfect  confidence,  was  purposely  moving  the  board
and  I  allowing  my  hand  to  follow  her  action,  interfering  with  it  as
little  as  possible.  And  she  gives  to  me  an  exactly  corresponding  account  of
her  own  share  in  the  operation.  Thus  we  give  to  the  outside  world  our
united  testimony  of  a  fact  which,  as  far  as  each  of  us  is  concerned,  lies  with-
in our  own  direct  knowledge,  viz. ,  that  the  writing  traced  out  by  the  pencil
is  not  produced  by  the  muscular  exertion  of  either  of  us.

We  have,  then,  in  planchette-writing,  if  our  account  is  to  be  believed,  the
manifestation  of  an  agency  invisible  to  us,  yet  capable  of  moving  the  bodily
pencil  either  in  mere  scribbling  or  in  such  a  way  as  to  fix  an  intelligent  mes-
sage on  the  paper.

The  first  case  which  I  shall  give  is  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Wedgwood,
in  the  Journal  for  December,  1889.
M. Aut.  673.

Whenever  I  have  an  opportunity,  perhaps  once  or  twice  a  year,  I  sit  at
planchette-writing  with  my  friend,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  R.,  a  most  obser-
vant witness  in  whom  I  have  entire  confidence.  We  sit  opposite  each  other
at  a  small  table,  each  resting  the  fingers  of  one  hand  lightly  upon  the  board,
and  when  the  board  begins  to  move,  allow  our  hand  to  follow  the  movement
freely  without  interfering  with  it  in  any  way.

The  following  account  of  our  last  sitting,  on  June  26th,  is  from  the
journal  of  Mrs.  R.,  written  the  same  evening,  transcribing  the  part  of  plan-
chette from  the  actual  writing,  and  filling  in  our  share  of  the  investigation
from  immediate  memory.

Extract  from  journal  of  Wednesday,  June  26th,  1889,  and  copy  of  plan-
chette-writing  with  Mr.  Wedgwood : —

"  A  spirit  is  here  to-day  who  we  think  will  be  able  to  write  through  tlie
medium. Hold  very  steady,  and  he  will  try  first  to  draw."


94


Mr.  F.  F.  H.  Myers.


We  turned  the  page  and  a  sketch  was  made,  rudely  enough  of  course,
but  with  much  apjjarent  care.^

' '  Very  sorry  can't  do  better.  Was  meant  for  test.  Must  write  for  you
instead. — J.  G."

We  do  not  fully  understand  the  first  drawing,  taking  it  for  two  arms  and
hands  clasped,  one  coming  down  from  above.  Mr.  Wedgwood  asked  the
spirit  of  J.  G.  to  try  again,  which  he  did.

Below  the  drawing  he  wrote  :  "  Now  look."  We  did,  and  this  time  com-
prehended the  arm  and  sword.

"Now  I  will  write  for  you  if  you  like."

Mr.  W.  :  "What  did  the  drawing  rejaresent?  "

"  Something  that  was  given  me."  -  .

I  said  :  "  Are  j'ou  a  man  or  a  woman  1  "
"Man.  JolmG."

Mr.  W.  :  "  How  was  it  given  to  you  ?  "

"On  paper  and  other  things.  .  .  .  My  head  is  bad  from  the  old
wound  I  got  there  when  I  try  to  write  through  mediums. "

Mr.  W.  :  "  We  don't  know  J.  G. Have  you  anything  to  do  with  us  ?  "
"  No  connection."

Mr.  W.  said  he  knew  a  J.  Giflard,  and  wondered  if  that  was  the  name,
"NotGifiard.  Gurwood."

Mr.  W.  suggested  that  he  had  been  killed  in  storming  some  fort.
"  I  killed  myself  on  Christmas  Day,  years  ago. I  wish  I  had  died
fighting."

"  Were  you  a  soldier  ? "

"I  was  in  the  army. "

"  Can  you  say  what  rank  1 "

"  No. ... It  was  the  pen  did  for  me,  and  not  the  sword."
The  word  |)en  was  imperfectly  written,  and  I  thought  it  was  meant  for  fall.
I  asked  if  this  was  right  ?
"No."

Mr.  W.  :  "  Is  the  word  2}en  ?  "
"  Yes  ;  pen  did  for  me."

We  suggested  that  he  was  an  author  who  had  failed,  or  had  been
maligned.

"I  did  not  fail. I  was  not  slandered. Too  much  for  me  after , .  .
pen  was  too  much  for  me  after  the  wound."

"  Where  were  you  wounded,  and  when  did  you  die  ? "
"  Peninsula  to  first  question."

We  were  not  sure  about  the  word  Peninsula,  and  asked  him  to  repeat.

"  I  was  wounded  in  the  head  in  Peninsula.  It  will  be  forty-four  years
next  Christmas  Day  since  I  killed  myself.  Oh,  my  head.  ...  I  killed
myself. John  Gurwood."

"  Where  did  you  die  ? "

I  These  sketches  were  sent  with  the  account,  but  are  too  large  to  be  reproduced
here.  For  evidential  purposes,  Mr.  Wedgwood's  sketch,  made  before  he  had  ascer-
t.iined  what  Colonel  Gurwood's  crest  was,  and  which  is  given  below,  is  sufficient. — Ed.
Journal,


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


95


"  I  had  my  wound  in  1810.  I  cannot  tell  you  more  about  myself.  The
drawing  was  a  test."

We  asked  if  the  device  was  intended  for  his  crest.
"I  had  it  seal."

' '  Had  it  anything  to  do  with  your  wound  '?  "  (I  cannot  remember  the
•exact  form  of  this  question.)

It  came  from  that  and  was  given  me.  Power  fails  to  explain.  Remem-
ber my  name. Stop  now."

The  only  person  besides  ourselves  present  at  the  sitting  was  Miss  H.,  £in
aunt  of  Mrs.  R.'s,  and  none  of  us  knew  anything  of  Colonel  Gurwood  be-
yond the  fact  of  his  having  edited  the  despatches  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,
not  even  that  his  name  was  John.  It  is  possible  that  I  might  have  heard
of  his  suicide  at  the  time  that  it  occurred,  without  its  making  any  impression
on  me,  but  I  am  sure  I  did  not  read  such  an  obituary  notice  as  would  be
published  in  the  Times,  and  when  my  attention  was  directed  to  his  editorial
work  18  or  20  years  afterwards  I  did  not  know  whether  he  was  alive  or  dead,
and  was  entirely  ignorant  of  his  military  career.  I  never  read  any  history
of  the  Peninsular  War,  and  am  perfectly  certain  that  I  never  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  seeing  Gurwood's  crest,  or  knowing  anything  about  it. — H.W.

The  following  is  the  account  Mr.  Wedgwood  m-ote  at  the  first  seance  at
the  time  : —

Jtme  2Qth,  1882.

Had  a  sitting  at  planchette  with  Mrs.  R.  this  morning.  Planchette  said
there  was  a  spirit  there  who  thought  he  could  draw  if  we  wished  it.  We  said
we  should  be  glad  if  he  would  try.  Accordingly  P.  made  a  rude  attempt  at  a
hand  and  arm  proceeding  from  an  embattled  wall  and  holding  a  sword.  A
second  attempt  made  the  subject  clearer.  P.  said  it  was  meant  for  a  test.
The  spirit  signed  it  "J.  G.,"  no  connection  of  any  of  ours,  he  said.  We
gradually  elicted  that  his  name  was  John  Gurwood,  who  was  wounded  in  the
Peninsula — in  1810,  and  killed  himself  on  Christmas  Day,  1845.  It  was  not
the  wound,  but  the  pen  that  did  it.


Something  like  that.

July  5th,  1889.

I  made  the  foregoing  memorandum  the  same  day,  having  very  little  ex-
pectation that  there  would  be  any  verification.  H.  Wedgwood.
Further  Extracts  from  Mrs.  R.'s  Journal.

Friday,  September  27th.
"  Mr.  Wedgwood  came,  and  we  had  two  sittings  in  the  afternoon  and  even.


96


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


ing.  I  think  the  same  spirit  wrote  throughout,  beginning  without  signature  ;
but  when  we  asked  the  name,  writing  (after  some  struggle  and  illegibility)
'  John  Gurwood.'

"The  effort  was  at  first  incoherent,  but  developed  into  the  following  sen-
tences : —

"  '  Sword — when  I  broke  in,  on  the  table  with  plan  of  fortress — belonged
to  my  prisoner  ;  I  will  tell  you  his  name  to-night.  It  was  on  the  table  when
I  broke  in.  He  did  not  exjject  me  ;  I  took  him  unawares.  He  was  in  his
room,  looking  at  a  plan,  and  the  sword  was  on  the  table.  Will  try  and  let
you  know  how  I  took  the  sword  to-night.'

' '  In  the  evening  after  dinner.

"  '  I  fought  my  way  in.  His  name  was  Banier '  (three  times  repeated).
'  The  sword  was  lying  on  the  table  by  a  written  scheme  of  defence.  Oh,
my  head.  Banier  had  a  plan  written  out  for  the  defence  of  the  fortress.
It  was  lying  on  the  table,  and  his  sword  was  by  it.'

"  To  a  question  : —

"'Yes;  surprised  him.'

"  Mr.  Wedgwood  thinks  the  name  of  the  G  overnor  of  the  fortress  of  Ciudad
Rodrigo  was  Banier  ;  but  he  says  this  would  not  be  a  test,  as  he  knew  it.  He
is  going  to  see  if  he  can  find  anything  in  Napier's  Peninsular  War  corrobora-
tive of  what  is  said  about  the  sword.

"  '  Look. I  have  tried  to  tell  you  what  you  can  verify.'  "

Mr.  Wedgwood  reports  his  verification  as  follows  : —

' '  When  I  came  to  verify  tlie  message  of  planchette  I  speedily  found  that
Colonel  Gurwood,  the  editor  of  the  Duke's  despatches,  led  the  forlorn  hope
at  the  storming  of  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  in  1812  [note  error  in  date],  '  and  re-
ceived a  wound  in  the  skull  from  a  musket  ball  which  affected  him  for  the
remainder  of  his  life. ' — Annual  Register,  1845.  In  recognition  of  the  bravery
shown  on  that  occasion  he  received  a  grant  of  arms  in  1812,  registered  in.
the  College  of  Arms  as  having  been  passed  '  upon  the  narrative  that  he
(Captain  G. )  had  led  the  forlorn  hope  at  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  and  that,  after  the
storming  of  the  fortress,  the  Earl  of  Wellington  presented  him  with  the
sword  of  the  Governor,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  Captain  Gurwood. ' '

"  The  services  thus  specified  were  symbolised  in  the  crest,  'Out  of  a.
mural  coronet,  a  castle  ruined  in  the  centre,  and  therefrom  an  arm  in
armour  embowed,  holding  a  scimitar. '  -

' '  It  is  plainly  this  crest  that  is  aimed  at  by  planchette  in  his  very  rude
design,  which  represents  the  arm  and  sword  as  issuing  from  the  mural
coronet  alone,  omitting  the  ruined  castle  as  too  complex  a  subject  for  the
powers  of  the  designer.  The  drawing  was  given  merely  as  a  test,  and  if  it
pointed  unmistakably  to  the  Gurwood  crest  it  would  fulfil  its  purpose.

' '  In  accordance  with  the  assertion  of  planchette,  Colonel  Gurwood  killed
himself  on  Christmas  Day,  184.5,  and  th^;,  Annual  Register  of  that  year,
after  narrating  the  suicide,  continues  :  '  It  is  thought  that  this  laborious
undertaking  (the  editing  the  despatches)  produced  a  relaxation  of  the
nervous  system  and  consequent  depression  of  spirits. In  a  fit  of  despondency

'  Information  received  from  the  College  of  Anns,  July  15th,  1889.
2 gQoj^  of  Family  Crests,  Washboume,  1856.


The  Subilminal  Consciousness.


97


the  unfortunate  gentleman  terminated  his  life.'  Compare  planchette  :
'  Pen  was  too  much  for  me  after  the  wound.'  "

I  continue  the  qiiotation  from  Mrs.  R.'s  journal : —

Mr.  W.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  -vvhere  else  to  look  ?  "

"  I  have  no  power  to  direct  you.  We  have  exhausted,  but  I  wished  to
tell  you  about  poor  Quentain  ...  to  tell  you  a  secret  of  poor  Quintain's,
which  is  on  my  mind. It  might  once  have  made  a  difference  ;  but  not  now."

We  had  a  difficulty  in  reading  the  name.  Mr.  W.  thought  it  Quinlon,
and  asked  if  this  was  right  1

"  Not  quite  :  a  t.  .  .  .  Quentain.  Not  quite  [right],  but  nearer  :  try
again  to-morrow."

Mr.  W.  :  "Is  power  exhausted  now,  and  shall  we  stop  1  "

"Yes."

Saturday,  Septemher  2Sth.

Mr.  Wedgwood  and  I  sat  again  this  morning.  First  came  some  pre-,
liminary  scribbling  and  circling,  and  then  the  right  spelling  of  the  name  at
which  John  Gurwood  was  trying  last  night.

"  Quentin.  I  knew  him,  and  a  secret  of  his  that  might  have  made  a
difference,  but  I  was  pledged."

Mr.  W.  :  "  Tell  us  what  the  secret  was  ?  "

"  I  should  like  to  try. "

Mr.  W.  :  "  What  difference  would  it  have  made  to  you  ? "
"Might  have  done  to  him  :  on  my  mind."

Then  followed  a  word  here  and  there  among  much  that  was  illegible.  I

copy  what  we  succeeded  in  reading. "  in  the  army  scrape

the  sake  of  another  very  foolish, but  nothing wrong  for

verdict  was  unfortunately  what  there  was  let  me  go  on, I  am

trying  say  that,  but  quite  mistaken  case  in  all  its  his  com-
mission  of  second  (company  ?)  private  soldier  going  out  gave  to  his

Colonel  very  strong  feeling  about  it  all."

The  above  filled  four  pages.  We  pondered  over  it,  but  could  not
make  out  any  more.  ^Vhen  planchette  was  put  back,  the  following  was
volunteered  : —

"Tell  James  I  remember  him  quite  well.  He  will  recollect  about  Quen-
tin's  trial."

Mr.  Wedgwood's  friend.  Captain  James,  of  course,  was  meant.  Mr.  W.
said  he  would  write  and  ask  him  ;  but  did  the  writer  mean  that  Captain
James  knew  the  secret  ?

"  No  one  knew  it."  (Two  lines  illegible.)  "  James  will  tell  you,  I  have
not  power. He  was  tried  by  court  martial."

Mr.  W.  :  "  This  Quentin  was  in  the  army  then  1  "

"  Yes. rest  of  them  would  have  but  1  cannot  write  plainly  in

answer,  though  I  try.  I  wantt  T'to  tell  you  about  poor  Quentin,  but  have
not  power  without  further  practice.  I  knew  a  secret  of  his  at  the  time  of
his  scrape  conduct  offices  . The  court  martial  1  did  not."

Mr.  Wedgwood  here  suggested  we  should  stop  for  a  time,  to  see  if  rest
would  increase  the  power.  We  sat  again  for  a  few  minutes  before  lunch,
directly  after  which  he  left  by  train  ;  but  the  control  was  then  different,  and
the  few  words  written  did  not  appear  to  have  any  special  interest  or  meaning.

H


98


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Mr.  Wedgwood  writes  on  October  31st,  1889  : —

I  find  that  there  was  a  famous  court  martial  on  Colonel  Quentin  in
October,  1814,  in  consequence  of  a  round  robin  signed  by  24  of  his  officers.
I  had  a  vague  recollection  of  the  name  of  Colonel  Q.  as  a  friend  of  George  IV. ,
and  something  must  have  turned  up  about  the  court  martial  in  the  early  twen-
ties when  the  10th  Hussars  became  notorious,  as  I  found  I  had  heard  of  the
round  robin.  The  accusation,  too,  was  of  a  want  of  proper  directions  to  his
subordinates  in  action,  so  no  reticence  of  anybody  could  have  made  any
difference,  and  he  was  himself  the  Colonel  of  the  regiment.

With  respect  to  the  capture  of  Banier,  the  only  cliance  of  verification
would  be  from  the  family,  and  Miss  Gurwood  has  not  answered  my  letter.

[Captain  James  writes  to  me  from  10,  Hereford-road,  June  29th,  1891 : —
"About  the  year  1830  my  regiment  was  quartered  at  Portsmouth,  and  Colonel
Gurwood  was  then  on  the  staff"  of  the  garrison  there.  The  Colonel  was  an
honorary  member  of  our  mess,  and  dined  with  us  nearly  every  day.  I
remember  I  used  to  be  very  fond  of  sitting  next  to  him,  and  conversing  with
him  about  the  various  events  that  occurred  during  the  Peninsular  War.  Of
course  the  Quentin  trial  must  have  taken  place  when  I  was  a  mere  child,  as
I  was  born  in  1804."— F.W.H.M.]

Mr.  Wedgwood  gives  in  the  Journal  for  November,  1890,  a  case
of  a  somewhat  similar  character.

M.  Aut.  676.

Extract  from  Mrs.  R.'s  Journal.

October  10th,  at  ,  Mr.  Wedgwood  and  I  sitting. The  board  moved

.after  a  short  pause  and  one  preliminary  circling.
"David — David — David — dead  143  years."

The  butler  at  this  moment  announced  lunch,  and  Mr.  Wedgwood  said  to
the  spirit,  "  Will  you  go  on  for  us  afterwards,  as  we  must  break  off  now  %  "
"  I  will  try."

During  lunch  Mr.  Wedgwood  was  reckoning  up  the  date  indicated  as
1747,  and  conjecturing  that  the  control  was  perhaps  David  Hume,  wlio  he
thought  had  died  about  then.  On  our  beginning  again  to  sit,  the  following
was  volunteered  : —

"  I  am  not  Hume.  I  have  come  with  [Mrs.  V.].  I  was  attracted  to  her
■during  her  life  in  America.  My  work  was  in  that  land,  and  my  earthly
toil  was  cut  short  early,  as  hers  has  been.  T  died  at  thirty  years  old.  I
toiled  five  years,  carrying  forward  the  lamp  of  God's  truth  as  I  knew  it."

Mr.  Wedgwood  remarked  that  lie  must  liave  been  a  missionary.

"  Yes,  in  Susquehannah  and  other  places."

"  Can  you  give  any  name  besides  David  1 "

"David  Bra — David  Bra — David  Brain — David  Braine — David  Brain."
Mr.  W.  :  "Do  you  mean  that  your  name  is  Braine  ?  "
"  Very  nearly  right."
Mr.  W.  :  "Try  again."

"David  Braine. Not  quite  all  the  name  ;  right  so  far  as  it  goes  .
I  was  born  in  1717."

Mr.  W.  :  "  Were  you  a  native  of  America  ? "

"(Illegible)  My  native  land.  The  Indians  knew  many  things.  They
heard  me,  and  my  work  prospered. In  some  things  they  were  wise."


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


99


Mr.  W.  :  "Are  you  an  American  ? "

"  America  I  hold  to  be  my  country  as  we  consider  things.  I  worked
at  "  (sentence  ends  with  a  line  of  D.'s).

Here  Mr.  Wedgwood  felt  tired,  and  Miss  Hughes  proposed  that  she  and
I  should  go  for  a  walk  while  he  rested.  When  we  came  in  Mr.  Wedgwood
said  he  thought  it  had  come  into  his  head  who  our  control  was.  He  had
some  recollection  that  in  the  18th  century  a  man  named  David  Brainard  was
missionary  to  the  North  American  Indians.  We  sat  again,  and  the  follow-
ing was  written  : —

"I  am  glad  you  know  me.  I  had  not  power  to  complete  name  or  give
more  details.  I  knew  that  secret  of  the  district.  It  was  guarded  by  the
Indians,  and  was  made  known  to  two  independent  circles.  Neither  of  them
succeeded,  but  the  day  will  come  that  will  uncover  the  gold."

It  was  suggested  that  this  meant  Heavenly  truth.

"  I  spoke  of  earthly  gold."

Mr.  Wedgwood  said  the  writing  was  so  faint  he  thought  power  was  failing.
"Yes,  nearly  gone. I  wrote  during  my  five  years  of  work. It  kept  my
heart  alive."

Mr.  Wedgwood  writes  : —

"I  could  not  think  at  first  where  I  had  ever  heard  of  Brainard,  but  I
learn  from  my  daughter  in  London  that  my  sister-in-law,  who  lived  with  me
40  or  50  years  ago,  was  a  great  admirer  of  Brainard,  and  seemed  to  have  an
account  of  his  life,  but  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  never  opened  the  book  and
knew  nothing  of  the  dates,  which  are  all  correct,  as  well  as  his  having  been
a  missionary  to  the  Susquehannahs."

In  another  letter  Mr.  Wedgwood  writes  : —

"  I  see  the  name  is  Brainerd,  not  ard,  as  I  had  supposed,  and  this  removes
a  difficulty  in  the  writing.  Planchette  had  written  Braine,  and  said  that
was  right  as  far  as  it  went,  which  it  would  not  have  been  if  the  name  had
been  Brainard.  My  daughter  has  sent  me  extracts  from  his  life,  stating  that
he  was  born  in  1718,  and  not  1717  as  planchette  wrote.  But  Mrs.  R. 's
Biographical  Dictionary  says  that  he  died  in  1747,  aged  30."

[Mrs.  R.  writes  to  me  that  she  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  David
Brainerd  before  this  incident. — F.  W.  H.  M.]

Extract  from  Biographical  Dictionary  sent  by  Mr.  Wedgwood  : —

Brainerd,  David.  A  celebrated  American  missionary,  who  signalised
himself  by  his  successful  endeavours  to  convert  the  Indians  on  the  Susque-
hanna, Delaware,  etc. Died,  aged  30,  1747. Mr.  Wedgwood  adds  : —

It  is  perhaps  noteworthy  in  connection  with  the  last  sentence  of  the
planchette-writing  that  in  the  life  of  Brainerd  by  Jonathan  Edwards
extracts  given  from  his  journal  show  that  he  wrote  a  good  deal,  e.g.,  "  Feb.
3,  1744.  Could  not  but  write  as  well  as  meditate,"  &c.  "Feb.  15,  1745.
Was  engaged  in  writing  almost  all  the  day."  He  invariably  speaks  of  comfort
in  connection  with  writing.

Finally,  a  few  months  before  Mr.  Wedgwood's  death,  I  received
from  him  the  following  letter.
M.  Aut.  67.

"  94,  Gower-street,  W.C.,  March  26th,  1891.
"  You  would  perhaps  like  to  see  the  enclosed,  which  is  our  last  planchette-

H  2


100


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


writing  with  Mrs.  R.,  who  came  here  for  a  couple  of  days.  It  is  interesting
to  me  on  account  of  the  pictures,  which  were  done  in  such  a  very  different
way  from  that  in  which  a  person  would  have  set  about  drawing  them.  I  feel
quite  sure  that  Mrs.  R.  knew  nothing  of  the  distinctive  crime  of  petty  trea-
son with  its  appropriate  punishment  of  burning,  so  that  the  story  could  not
have  been  suggested  by  anything  in  her  mind,  and  I  certainly  had  never
heard  of  Alice  Grimbold  and  her  misfortunes.  I  am  afraid  there  is  no
chance  of  verifying  the  story.  H.  Wedgwood."

March  22.

The  message  begins  with  scrawls,  developing  into  a  rude  drawing  of  a
woman  in  raediseval  cap  at  the  stake  : —
A.  G.  1605.

A.  G.  condemned  March,  1605.  Condemned  to  the  fear  and  the  fire.
A.  G.  A.  Grimbold.  [For  what  crime  ?]  Accomjjlice.  [What  crime  1  ]
Robbery  and  murder.  [Accomplice  with  whom  ?]  Harrison  and  Bradshaw.
I  was  old  Mrs.  Clarke's  servant.  No  ;  Harrison  was  my  lover  ;  the  fire
should  have  been  for  him.  I  never  meant  them  to  kill  her.  [Who  was
murdered  ?]  Mrs.  Clarke.  She  was  tight-fisted  and  fond  of  money,  but  I
did  not  mean  her  any  harm.  Harrison  promised  to  marry  me  if  I  helped
him  to  the  money.  Bradshaw  was  hung.  [What  became  of  Harrison  ?]  He
got  off ;  he  had  powerful  friends.  Adam  Bonus  knew  it.  Harrison  began  it
all.  He  came  to  the  inn  the  November  before,  and  I  told  him  about  the
money.  [Mrs.  C.  kept  money  in  the  house  ?]  In  a  coffer  in  her  bedroom.
[Were  you  tried  in  London  ?]  No  ;  wait  and  I'll  tell  you.  Leicester.  I
died  a  thousand  times  with  the  fear  before  it  came  to  the  fire.  Which  wa&
the  most  real — the  dreams  or  the  end  ?  It  was  long  since  ;  but  there  is  a
righteous  Judge.  I  was  afraid  to  agony,  but  I  did  not  repent.  I  loved  the
evil  and  it  clave  to  me.  I  repent  now,  and  this  is  part  of  the  work  I  am
given  to  atone.  Alice  Grimbold  servant  at  the  inn.  [Name  of  your  judge  ?]
I  said  have  mercy,  but  they  would  not  hear.  No  power  for  name,  but  I  will
write  again  to  morrow.

March  23rd.  (Another  handwriting.)  Before  the  Grimbold  control  there
is  a  message  to  be  given  you  from  one  risked,  so  to  call  him.  I  have  now
proved  these  things  and  they  are  true.  Put  aside  shadows  and  see  with  open
eyes  as  a  true  man,  and  you  will  do  noble  work.  [Then  in  the  former  hand.]
A.  Grimbold,  1605.  [Miss  H.  exclaimed,  "Oh  !  not  that  woman  !  we  want
to  know  who  sends  the  messages,  and  to  whom."]  [A.  G.'s  handwriting  con-
tinues.] This  is  my  allotment.  Cannot  write  name  of  judge,  but  the  inn
was  the  Blue  Boar.  Crook-backed  Richard  once  slept  there.  Ask  me  ;  I
will  tell  what  I  can.  [Name  of  your  counsel  ?]  No.  Yes,  it  is  easier  to
answer  questions,  but  I  will  try.  When  they  got  in  they  bound  me  so  that
I  might  be  found  tied.  They  strangled  Mistress  Clarke  in  her  bedroom.  I
doubt  if  they  would  have  hiu-t  her,  but  she  woke.  She  had  three  chests,  but
in  one  there  was  only  linen.  Adam  Bonus  knew  about  it.  They  went  to  him.
(Scrawls. )

Mr.  Wedgwood  inserted  inquiries  in  Notes  and  Queries,  and  in
Light,  and  a  correspondent  directed  him  to  the  following  passage
from  Thompson's  History  of  Leicester.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


101


Extract  from  James  Thompson's  History  of  Leicester,  pp.  327-330.

1st.  Edition,  1849.

"An  event  occurred  in  the  month  of  March,  1605,  which  has  acquired  more
than  ordinary  importance  :  we  refer  to  the  murder  of  Mrs.  Clarke,  land-
lady of  the  Blue  Boar  Inn,  by  her  servants.  Its  details  are  contained  in  the
depositions  taken  before  the  magistrates  at  this  time,  and  appear  to  have
been  these  : — About  six  weeks  after  Michaelmas,  in  1604,  a  man  named
Harrison,  who  had  fled  from  Staflbrdshire  in  consequence  of  having  done
bodily  injury  to  a  person  named  Philip,  came  to  Leicester  ;  the  Blue  Boar
being  the  first  inn  he  approached,  he  resolved  to  lodge  there,  and  slept  there
three  nights.  During  his  stay  he  '  fell  into  speech  with  a  maid  in  the  house,
in  the  way  of  marriage,  whereupon  she  told  him  her  mistress  had  great
store  of  money  in  her  house,  and  bade  him  come  again  some  night,  and
bring  a  secret  friend  with  him  whom  she  might  trust,  and  there  would  be
means  made  to  get  some  of  the  money. '  Accordingly,  Harrison  '  went
his  way, '  and  at  Lichfield  met  with  Adam  Bonus,  to  whom  he  communicated
the  nefarious  project,  and  Bonus  further  made  one  Edward  Bradshaw  ac-
quainted therewith.

"Harrison  and  Bradshaw  came  to  Leicester  together  on  the  1st  February,
1605,  and  that  night  lodged  at  John  Webster's  house  ;  on  Saturday,  2nd
February,  they  removed  with  their  horses  to  the  Blue  Boar,  where  they
slept ;  and  on  Sunday  they  remained  together  at  the  inn  all  day.

' '  In  the  evening,  about  10  o'clock,  one  of  the  female  servants  (Alice
Grimbold,  a  native  of  Peckleton)  went  with  her  companion  with  some
provender  for  the  horses,  to  the  stable,  whither  they  were  followed  by  the
men.  Alice  Grimbold  then  went  to  the  well,  to  fetch  some  water  for  the
horses,  and,  on  returning  to  the  stable  with  it,  found  her  fellow-servant
bound  therein ;  when  Harrison  immediately  laid  hands  on  her,  and
secured  her  also.  The  men  afterwards  took  some  drink,  and  wanted
the  servants  to  jiartake  of  it,  but  they  refused.  They  then  un-
bound Grimbold  (as  she  stated)  and  took  her  into  the  house  with
them,  and  obtained  her  mistress's  keys  from  her,  Bradshaw  having  bound
Mrs.  Clarke  while  Harrison  secured  the  servants  in  the  stable.  The  latter
in  his  examination  confessed  that  he  had  done  this,  and  added  that  the  '  big
maid '  (meaning  Grimbold)  after  she  was  unbound  went  with  them,  appa-
rently on  compulsion,  into  her  mistress's  parlour,  where  they  opened  three
cofl'ers — one  containing  linen,  the  second  being  full  of  writings,  and  the
third  having  six  or  seven  bags  of  gold  and  silver  therein.  The  robbers  took
most  of  the  money  (amounting,  as  was  variously  estimated  by  them,  to  not
less  than  £250 — more  probably  £500),  but  left  some  upon  the  bedstead  for
their  female  accomplice.  Bradshaw  then  murdered  Mrs.  Clarke,  fastened
Grimbold  in  the  chimney,  where  (she  said)  they  laid  her,  '  but  easily. '  He
and  his  accomplice  next  went  to  the  stables,  and  brought  out  their  horses,
and  lastly,  having  fastened  the  bags  about  the  pommels  of  their  saddles,  they
rode  away.  Grimbold  would  gladly  (according  to  her  own  confession)  have
gone  away  with  them,  but  they  swore  by  '  God's  wounds  '  they  would  hang
her,  and  themselves,  too,  if  she  attempted  to  do  so.  Harrison  had  jjreviously
given  her  a  linen  cloth,  containing  money  and  other  things,  promising  to  come
for  it  in  ten  days,  and  take  her  away  with  him  at  the  same  time. Her  legs


102


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


not  being  firmly  bound,  Grimbold  released  herself  from  her  position,  and
went  into  the  buttery  to  see  how  her  mistress  did,  but  could  not  get  out
again  :  so  she  lay  there  until  the  morning,  when  John  Walter's  man  came
into  the  house  to  light  a  candle,  and  completely  unbound  her.  The  deed  was
discovered  the  day  after  its  execution  ;  for  Bonus  (who  had  refused  to  take  a
part  in  the  robbery)  being  then  in  the  town,  was  on  Monday,  February  4th,
apprehended  and  examined  before  the  justices  and  the  coroners.  He  said
he  could  not  have  revealed  what  he  knew,  had  it  not  been  that  the
murder  had  been  committed  ;  and  he  affirmed  that  he  had  positively  told
Bradshaw,  on  the  Sunday,  he  would  take  no  part  in  the  action.  Harri-
son was  examined  on  the  20th  February  before  the  magistrates.  He  denied
having  aided  in  the  murder  of  Mrs.  Clarke,  and  said  she  was  living  when  he
left  the  house.  But  for  the  maid,  he  asserted,  he  should  not  have  known
what  money  Mrs.  Clarke  had  in  her  possession.  He  had  had  only  about  £17
as  his  share  of  the  booty,  which  Sir  Simon  Weston  had  then  in  his  custody,
while  the  remainder  was  hidden  in  a  bank  in  Pool  Park,  Wai-wickshire.
Bradshaw  was  not  examined  until  six  days  after  Harrison.  He  confirmed  his
accomplice's  account  of  the  concealment  of  the  money  in  Pool  Park,
Tamworth.  It  seems  he  had  succeeded  by  means  of  his  share  of  the  plunder
in  obtaining  bail,  and  his  release  from  Stafford  Gaol  (where  lie  and  Harrison
were  at  first  confined)  through  the  intervention  of  Lord  Staflbrd,  who  also
proceeded  to  London  to  procure  his  pardon.  But  the  latter  attempt  was
frustrated  by  the  intercession  of  the  Leicester  magistrates  with  Sir  John
Popham,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice,  on  February  17th.  They  informed  his-
lordship  on  that  date  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  added  that
Bradshaw  might  be  expected  to  go  to  Lord  Stafford's  lodgings  in  London.
The  murderer  was  consequently  apprehended  and  brought  to  Leicester.
The  witnesses  bound  over  to  appear  against  the  accused  were  Thomas  Davy
and  Richard  Hunt,  bakers  ;  Alexander  Simpson  and  William  Robinson,
labourers.  Harrison  was  specially  examined  relative  to  ten  questions,  by
order  of  the  judge,  while  he  "/as  in  gaol  and  under  sentence  of  death,  on
March  22nd,  1605.  In  rejjly,  he  stated  that  he  knew  not  what  was  given  to
Lord  Stafford,  to  Cotty,  or  the  gaoler,  to  procure  bail  for  Bradshaw,  but  it
was  reported  in  Stafford  that  Cotty  had  had  £40  ;  that  one  Reynish,  and
Greorge  Ewlins,  servant  to  Lord  Stafford,  and  Jane  Holmes,  wife  to  John
Holmes,  servant  of  Sir  Walter  Asten,  Knight,  did  assure  him  (Harrison)
that  Cotty 's  wife  said  to  Lord  Stafford,  '  Let  Bradshaw  be  bailed,  and  let
Harrison  be  hanged '  ;  that  Mr.  Humphrey  Chatterton's  wife,  of  Bowdis-
worth  Park,  interceded  with  Lord  Stafford  to  procure  bail  for  Bradshaw,  and
had  money  for  her  pains  ;  tliat  John  Bratt,  who  repaired  to  him  at  Stafford
Gaol,  went  to  see  him  from  motives  of  friendship — for  they  had  been  fellow-
servants  with  Sir  John  Bowes,  Kniglit  ;  and  that  no  persons  had  procured
him  instruments  to  enable  him  to  break  out  of  Stafford  Gaol.  The  other
questions  related  to  matters  which  had  been  previously  given  in  evidence,
and  were  not  of  importance.  Tlie  trial  took  jjlace  on  March  25th,  1606
[1605  ?  ],  probably  in  the  present  Town  Hall — before  Sir  Peter  Warburton,
Knight,  when  Bradshaw  was  sentenced  to  be  hanged,  and  Alice  Grimbold  to
be  burned."

From  Notas  and  Queries,  2nd  series.  Vol.  IV.,  August,  1857,  it  appears


The  Suhliminal  Gonscioiisness.


103


that  one  source  of  this  story  is  the  commonplace  book  of  Sir  Roger  Twisden,
August,  1653.  He  had  seen  a  Mrs.  Cumber,  who  had  herself  seen  Alice
burnt,  some  40  years  before.  He  mentions  a  legend  which  had  grown  up  by
that  time  of  the  way  in  which  Mrs.  Clarke  became  possessed  of  the  treasure
for  which  she  was  murdered  ; — namely,  that  it  had  been  found  on  the  bed-
stead on  which  Richard  III.  slept  before  the  battle  of  Bosworth,  and  which
after  his  death  was  left  at  the  Blue  Boar.  It  will  be  observed  that  the
automatic  script  does  not  adopt  this  legend,  but  states  incidentally  that
Richard  once  slept  there.  On  this  point  Mr.  R.  E.  Smith,  of  41,  Princess-
street,  Leicester,  writes  to  Mr.  Wedgwood,  as  follows  . —

"  I  give  at  foot  a  copy  of  the  inscription  you  inquire  about.  It  is  on  a
mural  tablet,  adjacent  to  the  Bow  Bridge,  and  it  was  placed  there  some  30
or  35  years  ago  by  the  owner  of  the  property.

' '  Tradition  points  to  the  locality  as  the  spot  where  the  remains  of  Richard
III.  were  thrown  after  having  been  brought  from  the  field  of  battle.

' '  However  that  may  be,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that]  he  slept  at  the
'  Blue  Boar '  Inn,  in  the  Southgate-street,  the  night  before  the  battle.  That
was  the  house  kept  by  Mrs.  Clarke. It  was  pulled  down  about  50  years  ago."

Near  this  spot  lie  the  remains  of
Richard  III.,
The  last  of  the  Plantagenets.  '  „

1485.

As  to  the  possible  knowledge  possessed  by  either  automatist  of  the
above  story,  Mr.  Wedgwood  writes,  May  19th,  1891  : —

94,  Gower-street,  May  IGth,  1891.
Mrs.  R.  says  :  "One  or  two  points  remain  unconfirmed,  such  as  the  way
in  which  Mrs.  Clarke  was  put  to  death  (A.  G.  says  she  was  strangled),  also
there  having  been  a  local  tradition  that  '  Crook-backed  Richard  '  slept  at
the  Blue  Boar  ;  but  I  suppose  Mr.  Smith  could  not  help  us  to  any  further
verification  1  I  am  rather  impressed  by  the  fact  that  A.  G.  communicated
with  us  in  March  (the  22nd  and  23rd),  so  near  the  anniversary  of  her  trial
and  condemnation,  and  probably  also  that  of  her  awful  death.  I  wonder
whether  the  fact  of  my  always  having  had  an  intense  horror  and  dread  of  a
death  by  burning,  and  of  this  manner  of  execution,  could  supply  any  link
for  the  control?  "  Mrs.  R.  proceeds:  "  The  efl'ect  of  the  influence  on  me
was  strong  and  peculiar.  I  sliould  recognise  its  return  even  apart  from  any-
thing written.  ...  I  have  never  been  in  Leicester  or  the  neighbour-
hood in  my  life,  nor  have  I  ever  seen  a  copy  of  Thompson's  History.  I  did
not  know  of  the  existence  of  the  book  till  mentioned  by  Mr.  Smith,  and
I  have  never  consciously  been  under  a  roof  with  it  in  my  life,  except,  as  you
suggest,  at  the  British  Museum,  and  my  last  visit  there  was  at  12  years  old  !
I  have  no  friends  or  acquaintances  living  in  Leicester." — Yours  very  truly,

H.  Wedgwood.

As  regards  himself,  he  writes.  May  21st,  1891:  "I  am  quite
certain  that  I  never  saw  Thompson's  History  of  Leicester,  nor  ever
heard  anything  about  the  incident."  Mrs.  R.  also  in  a  letter  tome,
May  20th,  1891,  repeats  the  statements  above  quoted  from  her  by  Mr.


104


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Wedgwood  and  adds  :  "  I  cannot  now  remember  any  communication
through  our  circle  for  which  so  early  a  date  was  given  as  that  of
Alice  Grimbold."

A  story  like  this  of  Alice  Grimbold's  may  probably  enough  be
quoted  in  some  books  more  easily  accessible  than  the  History  of
Leicester.  We  have  made  some  search  without  finding  it  thus  quoted,
but  should  be  glad  to  hear  if  it  is  found  in  any  common  work.

I  have  quoted  these  three  cases  in  succession,  so  that  the  reader  may
see  the  kind  of  growing  difficulty  which  the  theory  of  forgotten
memories  here  involves.  It  will  be  seen  that  with  each  automatist  of
good  faith  the  question  may  with  patience  be  capable  of  definite  solution.
Were  Mrs.  R.  willing  and  able — which  at  present  she  is  not — to  find
some  other  partner  with  whom  she  can  write,  now  that  Mr.  Wedgwood
and  her  sister  have  been  removed  by  death,  and  to  record  a  long  series
of  communications,  we  might  gradually  obtain  a  conviction  that  the
matters  therein  narrated  either  could  or  could  not  all  of  them  have  been
previously  seen  and  forgotten.  Similar  records  kept  by  many  other  auto-
matists  might  help  to  some  general  conclusion  as  to  the  source  from
which  these  retrocognitive  facts  come,  if  in  any  cases  forgotten  memory
fails  to  explain  them.  One  of  the  most  important  data  for  such  a
decision  consists  in  the  account, — absolutely  trustworthy,  as  I  believe,
— given  by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  in  Sjnrit  Identity,  (and  soon,  we
hope,  to  be  reproduced  in  these  Proceedings),  of  a  series  of  messages
from  musical  composers,  giving  the  principal  dates  of  their  respective
lives,  as  they  may  be  found  in  any  Biographical  Dictionary,  with
hardly  anything  more.  Now  were  such  messages  offered  to  us  as
coming  through  an  alleged  automatist  not  of  known  probity  or  who
could  bring  no  proof  of  other  messages  not  capable  of  being  got  up  be-
forehand, we  should  naturally  set  them  aside.  But  with  Mr.  Moses,  as
with  Mrs.  R.  above, — and  in  a  still  higher  degree, — there  was  so  con-
siderable an  independent  history  of  provably  supernormal  phenomena
that  we  are  bound  to  consider  these  musical  biographies  in  their  place
as  a  part  of  that  series.  Their  peculiar  nature  excited  the  surprise  of
Mr.  Moses  and  his  friends,  who  were  informed  by  the  "  guides  "  that
these  were  in  fact  messages  from  the  spirits  in  question,  but  that  these
spirits  had  refreshed  their  memory  of  their  eartli-lives  by  consulting
printed  sources  of  information.  It  is  obvious  that  this  is  to  drop  the
supposed  proof  of  identity  altogether.  If  any  given  spirit  can  consult
his  own  printed  life,  so  also  presumably  can  other  spirits  ;  and  so  per-
haps can  the  still  incarnated  spirit  of  the  automatist  himself.  This  was
of  course  felt  by  Mr.  Moses,  who  told  me  that  subjectively  also  the  feel-
ing which  accompanied  these  biographical  wi'itings  was  very  different
from  that  which  came  when,  as  he  held,  some  spirit  was  entering  with
him  into  real  and  direct  communication.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


105


The  truest  analogy  to  messages  like  these  from  a  remote  past  lies,
as  it  seems  to  me,  in  the  crystal-visions  of  scenes  in  a  remote  past,  of
which  examples  were  given  in  my  chapter  on  "  Sensory  Automatism."
We  are  face  to  face  with  the  problem  of  Retrocognition,  closer  akin
perhaps  to  the  still  stranger  problem  of  Precognition  than  to  the
question  of  personal  intercourse  with  recently  departed  friends  on
which  we  are  now  dwelling.  That  vaster  question  of  a  Universal
Memory,  a  Cosmorama  of  things  past,  present,  and  to  come,  must  be
left  for  later  discussion.

Before  leaving  this  series  of  cases  I  think  it  only  fair  to  print  a
fourth  experiment  with  the  same  operators,  but  apparently  involving  a
^'physical"  or  "telekinetic  phenomenon,"  as  well  as  either  clair-
voyance or  spirit  agency.  Mr.  Wedgwood  is  again  the  narrator.  The
account  was  printed  in  the  Journal  for  February,  1890.

M.  CI.  Aut.  674.

On  the  4th  December  last  I  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  R.  and  her  sister,
which  afforded  evidence  not  less  decisive  of  the  intervention  of  an  intelligence
cognisant  of  matters  of  which  we  had  no  intimation.

Not  long  after  my  arrival  on  a  visit  to  Mrs.  R.,  mention  was  made  of  a
mysterious  breakage  of  a  thick  washhand-basin  which  had  taken  place  on  the
previous  Sunday,  closely  resembling  other  breakages  which  had  occurred  in
the  house  from  time  to  time  in  a  like  unaccountable  manner.  On  one
occasion  a  water  bottle  was  seen  to  explode  on  the  dressing-table  when  no  one
was  near  it.  On  the  Sunday  in  question  Mr.  R.  and  his  sister-in-law,  Mrs.
v.,  were  in  the  breakfast-room  directly  under  Mrs.  R. 's  bedroom,  Mrs.  R.
with  the  children  in  the  drawing-room,  and  the  servants  at  supper  in  the
kitchen,  when  Mr.  R.  and  Mrs.  V.  were  startled  by  a  loud  crash  in  the  room
above  them.  Mrs.  V.  immediately  ran  in  to  her  sister  in  the  drawing-room
and  they  went  together  upstairs  to  see  what  had  happened.  They  found  the
thick  washhand-basin  in  fragments  on  the  floor  ;  the  larger  pieces  in  front  of
the  washstand,  but  quantities  of  smaller  fragments  scattered  over  the  floor  to
a  distance  (as  I  estimated)  of  five  or  six  feet,  in  a  way  that  could  not  possibly
have  been  produced  by  a  mere  fall  on  the  carpeted  floor  :  the  basin  must
have  been  dashed  down  with  great  violence.

While  talking  of  these  matters  I  sat  down  to  planchette  with  my  hostess
and  her  sister,  and  Mr.  R.  coming  into  the  room  and  hearing  what  we  were
talking  about,  said  that  some  half  an  hour  ago  he  had  heard  a  noise  in  the
breakfast-room  for  which  he  could  not  account  in  any  way.  It  sounded  like
the  lid  of  the  metal  coal-box  slamming  down,  but  the  box  had  been  already
closed,  and,  besides,  the  noise  seemed  to  come  from  the  other  side  of  the
room.  Soon  afterwards  he  said  that  his  presence  always  seemed  to  interfere
with  planchette-writing,  and  he  left  the  room.  Mrs.  R.  and  I  had  begun
sitting,  but  planchette  suggested  a  change,  and  Mrs.  V.  and  I  had  our  hands
on  the  board.

Planchette  :  "If  Mr.  Wedgwood  will  ask  I  will  try  to  answer."
I  asked  what  was  the  noise  Mr.  R.  had  just  heard.

Planchette  :  "Noise  from  upstairs  made  by  spirits  with  material  object."


106


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  Was  it  in  the  room  above  ? "
Planchette  :  "Yes."

"What  was  it?"  ,
Planchette  :  "Mrs.  R.  will  find  out."

Mrs.  R.  accordingly  went  upstairs  to  look,  and  while  she  was  away  some-
thing was  said  as  to  the  probability  of  my  witnessing  some  similar  display.

Planchette  :  "Not  yet — you  see  the  better  class  of  spirits  war  against
the  smashing  fraternity."

Mrs.  R.  could  find  nothing  out  of  order,  and  returned  saying  she  had
looked  everywhere.

Planchette  :  "  No,  you  did  not."

Mrs.  R.  :  "  Whereabouts  am  I  to  look,  for  I  can  see  nothing  1"
Planchette  :  "  Wash — (an  illegible  scribble) — that  side  of  the  room."
We  asked,  "Were  you  trying  to  write  washstand  1 "
Planchette  :  "Yes."

Mrs.  R.  went  up  again,  and,  meeting  with  no  better  success,  came
down  for  more  specific  instructions  where  to  look.
Planchette:  "Slop-jar"  (written  very  large).

Mrs.  R. ,  laughing,  said  she  hoped  that  was  not  smashed,  and  went  up  for
the  third  time.  She  found  the  slop-jar  in  its  usual  place  by  the  washstand,
and  when  she  came  to  look  closely  into  it,  found  the  water-glass  lying  broken
all  to  bits  in  the  bottom.  She  had  not  removed  it  from  its  usual  place  on
the  top  of  the  carafe  since  morning,  from  whence  it  had  apparently  been
lifted  olf  and  dropped  into  the  empty  slop-jar  from  a  height  suflicient  to  cause
the  crash  heard  in  the  room  below.

Mrs.  R.  brought  us  down  the  jar  to  show  how  completely  the  glass  was-
smashed.

We  then  asked,  "  Was  this  done  by  the  same  sjjirit  who  broke  the  basin  ? "
Planchette  : ' '  The  same  adverse  influence  ;  not  the  same  spirit,  but
influence."

Mrs.  R.  confirms  and  slightly  corrects  this  account  in  a  letter  to  Mr.
Wedgwood  dated  April  16th,  [1890]: — "I  have  referred  to  my  journal  of
December  4th,  1889,  and  it  confirms  our  clear  recollection  that  the  crash  of
the  glass  dropped  into  the  slop-jar  was  heard  by  my  husband  sitting  below  in
the  breakfast-room  j(tsi  before  he  came  in  to  join  our  planchette  s&ance,  and
while  [Mrs.  V.]  and  I  were  both  with  you  in  the  drawing-room.  On  the  pre-
vious Sunday,  December  1st,  we  had  had  a  breakage  in  the  same  room,  which
was  also  referred  to  in  the  planchette  writing.  My  sister  and  husband  were
both  in  the  breakfast-room  and  they  both  heard  a  noise  like  an  explosion  in
the  room  above,  and  running  up  immediately  to  see  what  had  happened,
found  my  thick  earthenware  washing-basin  broken  to  fragments  and
scattered  all  over  the  floor.  I  was  in  the  drawing-room  with  the  three  chil-
dren at  the  time  this  happened."

D. — I  by  no  means  wish  to  assume  any  clear  line  of  demarcation
between  messages  referable  to  some  intelligence  unknown  and  messages
referable  to  the  special  intelligence  which  claims  to  send  them.  In  our
present  state  of  knowledge  such  a  dividing  line  can  merely  subserve
our  own  convenience  of  study. By  beginning  my  next  class  at  this


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


107


point  I  would  indicate  that  the  six  cases  which  follow  involve  messages
avowedly  coming  from  persons  more  recently  departed,  and  into  which
something  more  of  definite  personality  seems  to  enter.  One  element
of  this  kind  is  liandwriting  ;  and  in  the  next  two  cases  it  will  be  seen
that  resemblance  of  handwriting  is  one  of  the  evidential  points  alleged.
Now  proof  of  identity  from  resemblance  of  handwriting  may  conceiv-
ably be  very  strong.  But  in  estimating  it  we  must  bear  two  points  in
mind.  The  first  is  that,  (like  the  resemblances  of  so-called  "spirit-
photographs  "  to  deceased  friends),  it  is  often  very  loosely  asserted.
One  needs,  if  not  an  expert's  opinion,  at  least  a  careful  personal
scrutiny  of  the  three  scripts, — the  automatist's  voluntary  and  his
automatic  script,  and  the  decedent's  script — before  one  can  feel  sure
that  the  resemblance  is  in  more  than  some  general  scrawliness.  This
refers  to  the  cases  where  the  automatist  has  provably  never  seen  the
decedent's  handwriting.  Where  he  has  seen  that  handwriting,  we  have
to  remember  (in  the  second  place)  that  a  hypnotised  subject  can
frequently  imitate  any  known  handwriting  far  more  closely  than  in
his  waking  state  ;  and  that  consequently  we  are  bound  to  credit  the
subliminal  self  with  a  mimetic  faculty  which  may  come  out  in  these
messages  without  any  supraliminal  guidance  whatever  on  the  automa-
tist's part.

The  case  now  to  be  quoted  contains  several  points  of  interest  besides
the  alleged  resemblance  of  handwriting.  It  shows  once  more,  for
instance,  the  great  similarity  of  ways  in  which  this  writing  takes  its
rise  with  automatists  all  over  the  world,  and  the  recurrence  of  the  same
puzzles  with  observers  of  many  different  types.

Psychic  Experiences.

M.  Aut.  68.

By  Sara  A.  Underwood. — Introductory  Hemarlcs  by  B.  F.  Undertvood.

{Arena,  August,  1891.)
"The  statements  in  this  paper  as  to  what  was  written  in  my  presence
purporting  to  be  communications  from  '  spirits,'  and  as  to  the  circumstances
under  which  it  was  written,  are  scrupulously  correct.  The  'communica-
tions,' it  is  certain,  are  from  an  intelligent  source.  Mrs.  Underwood  is  the
person  by  whose  hand  they  are  put  in  form.  That  she  is  not  labouring
under  a  mistake  in  thinking  that  she  is  unconscious  of  the  thought  expressed
until  she  has  read  the  writing, — if,  indeed,  such  a  mistake  in  a  sane  mind  is
possible, — I  am  certain.  Sometimes,  owing  to  the  illegibility  of  the  writing,
she  has  to  study  out  sentences.  The  writing  varies  in  style,  not  only  on
different  evenings,  but  on  the  same  evening  ;  it  is  apparently  the  writing  of
not  fewer  than  twenty  persons,  and  generally  bearing  no  resemblance  what-
ever, so  far  as  I  can  judge,  to  Mrs.  Underwood's  handwriting,  which  is
remarkably  uniform.  The  communications  are  unlike  in  the  degrees  of
intelligence,  in  the  quality  of  thought,  and  in  the  disposition  which  they
show.  Detailed  statements  of  facts  unknown  to  either  of  us,  but  which,
weeks  afterwards,  were  learned  to  be  correct,  have  been  written,  and


108


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


repeated  again  and  again,  when  disbelieved  and  contradicted  by  us.  All  the
writing  has  been  done  in  my  presence,  but  most  of  it  while  I  have  been
busily  occupied  with  work  which  demanded  my  undivided  attention.  The
views  expressed  are  often  different  from  my  own,  and  quite  as  frequently,
perhaps,  opposed  to  Mrs.  Underwood's  views.  "

Mrs.  Underwood  writes  as  follows: — "  The  modus  operandi  is  the  simplest
possible.  As  I  remembered  that  Mr.  Underwood  was  rather  averse  to  the
planchette  experiments  of  former  years,  thinking  them  unwholesome  and
deteriorating  in  their  tendency,  I  at  first  said  nothing  to  him  of  my  new
psychical  experiments,  though  these  were  made  oftenest  in  his  presence  in
the  evening  when  we  both  sat  at  one  writing  table,  near  each  other,  busied
with  our  individual  literary  work.  As  I  experimented  in  his  absence  as  well
as  in  his  jjresence,  I  soon  found  that  I  got  the  most  coherent  writings  when  he
was  present.  Indeed  I  could  get  nothing  coherent,  and  very  frequently
nothing  at  all,  when  he  was  away,  but  when  he  was  present  the  communica-
tions began  to  grow  strangely  interesting,  and  as  he  was  called  upon
repeatedly,  I  felt  obliged  to  invite  his  attention,  when  the  most  surprising
answers  were  given,  which  roused  his  curiosity  and  interest.  It  has  been
explained  that  his  presence  is  necessary  for  me  to  obtain  writing,  as  '  blended
power  is  best.'  Two  or  three  times,  at  the  suggestion  of  this  intelligence,
we  have  asked  two  of  our  intimate  literary  friends — non-Spiritualists — to
be  present,  but  each  time  with  comparative  failure ;  afterwards  we  were  in-
formed that  the  cause  of  failure  was  the  introduction  of  persons  unused  to
the  conditions,  who  broke  up  the  harmonious  relations  necessary  to  com-
munication ;  in  time  they  could  be  of  help.

' '  It  would  take  a  volume  to  present  all  the  interesting  statements  as  to  an
advanced  stage  of  existence,  only  hidden  from  us  because  of  the  inadequacy
of  our  sense  perceptions,  and  by  the  conditions  imposed  upon  us  at  this  stage
of  our  progress,  which  have  been  given  from  this  source.  Explanations  have
been  made  why  communication  through  the  agency  of  certain  persons,
though  not  through  all,  is  possible.  The  conditions,  it  is  alleged,  are  not
entirely  dependent  upon  the  superior  intelligence  or  morality  of  the  persons
with  whom  the  intelligences  can  became  en  rapport.  These  invisibles  declare
that  they  are  as  seriously  and  anxiously  experimenting  on  their  side  to  dis-
cover modes  of  untrammelled  communication  with  us,  as  we  on  our  side
ought  to  be,  if  what  they  write  be  true,  and  if  such  a  thing  is  possible.
'  Spirits  '  they  persistently  insist  upon  being  called.  In  this  paper  I  can
give  only  a  statement  of  some  things  which  do  not  seem  explicable  on  the
hypothesis  of  mind-reading,  thought-transference,  hypnotism,  or  subconscious-
ness. In  all  these  experiments  I  have  been  in  a  perfectly  normal  state.  The
only  physical  indication  of  any  outside  influence  is  an  occasional  slight  thrill
as  of  an  electric  curreiit  from  my  shoulder  to  the  hand  which  holds  the  wait-
ing pen,  Step  by  step  I  have  been  taught  a  series  of  signals  to  aid  me  in
correctly  reading  the  communications.  I  have  no  power  to  summon  at  will
any  individual  I  wish.  I  have  repeatedly,  but  in  vain,  tried  to  get  messages
from  some  near  and  dear  friends.  It  has  been  explained  that  on  their  side,
as  on  ours,  certain  'conditions'  must  exist  in  order  to  get  in  'control.'
When  '  eh  ? '  is  written  I  know  that  the  operator  at  the  other  end  of  the  line
is  ready  to  communicate. When  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence  or  a  word


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


109


'  cone  '  or  '  change  '  is  written,  I  understand  that  the  connection  is  broken,
and  I  must  not  expect  the  completion  of  that  message.  When  a  line  like
this  is  drawn,  it  is  a  sign  that  that  sentence  is  completed  or  the  communi-
cation ended.  So  with  other  things.  Rhymes  are  often  unexpectedly
written,  especially  if  the  '  control '  professes  to  be  a  poet,  and  they  are
dashed  off  so  rapidly  that  I  do  not  understand  their  import  until  the  close
when  I  can  read  them  over.  Impromptu  rhyming  is  a  feat  utterly  im-
possible to  either  iMr.  Underwood  or  myself.  Names  persistently  recur  which
are  unknown  to  us.  Many  different  handwritings  appear,  some  of  them  far
superior  to  my  own.  When  I  first  began  to  get  communications  I  destroyed,
in  a  day  or  two  after  they  were  written,  the  slips  of  paper  containing  the
writing,  but  as  the  developments  became  more  interesting,  Mr.  Underwood
suggested  that  they  be  preserved  for  reference.  I  acted  on  this  suggestion,
and  thus  in  the  instances  of  facts  given  outside  our  own  knowledge,  I  am
enabled  to  give  the  exact  wording  of  each  communication.  Our  questions-
were  asked  viva  voce,  and  as  they  were  often  suggested  by  what  had  been
previously  written,  I  either  at  the  time  or  soon  afterwards  wrote  them  just
above  the  reply.  I  am  not,  therefore,  trusting  at  all  to  memory  in  the  state-
ments I  shall  make.

' '  A  gentleman  of  this  city  (whom  I  will  call  John  Smith,  but  whose  real
name  was  a  more  uncommon  one)  with  whom  Mr.  Underwood  had  been
acquainted  many  years,  but  of  whose  family  relations  he  knew  little,  died
here  more  than  a  year  ago. Mr.  Underwood  had  met  him  but  once  in  the
year  previous  to  his  death,  he  having  been  away  on  account  of  failing  health,
staying,  we  understood,  with  a  daughter  recently  married,  whose  home  was
in  Florida.  The  first  name  of  this  married  daughter,  or  of  any  of  Mr.  Smith's
daughters  except  one,  was  unknown  to  Mr.  Underwood. I  had  met  one  of
his  daughters  whose  name  I  knew  to  be  Jennie. I  also  knew  that  there  was
another  named  Violet. I  was  not  sure,  however,  whether  this  was  the  name
of  the  married  one,  or  of  another  unmarried,  but  had  the  impression  that
Violet  was  unmarried. One  evening,  while  waiting  for  automatic  writing
with  no  thought  of  Mr.  Smith  in  my  mind,  and  Mr.  Underwood  sitting
near  me  at  the  table  with  his  thoughts  concentrated  on  an  article  he  was
preparing,  this  was  written  : 'John  Smith  will  now  enter  into  conversa-
tion with  B.  F.  Underwood.' I  read  this  to  Mr.  Underwood,  who  laid  aside
his  pen,  and  in  order  to  test  the  matter,  asked  if  Mr.  Smith  remembered  the
last  time  they  met,  soon  after  his  return  from  the  South,  and  a  short  time
previous  to  his  death. There  was  some  delay  in  the  answer,  but  soon  reply
came,  '  On  Madison-street.'  '  Whereabouts  on  Madison ?' was  asked.  'Near
Washington.' '  At  what  hour  1 ' 'About  10  a.m.,  raining.' As  it  was  rarely
that  Mr.  Underwood  was  in  that  part  of  the  city  at  so  early  an  hour,  and
especially  on  a  rainy  day,  I  doubted  the  correctness  of  this  reply,  but  Mr.
Underwood  recalled  to  my  mind  the  unusual  circumstance  which  made  it
necessary  for  him  to  be  in  that  vicinity  on  the  day  and  at  the  hour  named,  on
which  he  and  Mr.  Smith,  he  distinctly  remembered,  last  met. Only  a  few
words  passed  between  them  on  account  of  the  rain. After  this,  writing,  pur-
porting to  be  from  Mr.  Smith,  came  frequently. Very  soon  something
was  written  which  induced  Mr.  Underwood  half sportively  to  inquire
whether  there  was  anything  which  troubled  Mr.  Smith,  anything  which  he


ilO


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


wished  he  had  done  but  had  omitted,  before  his  death. The  answer  came,
'  One  thing— change  deeds  on  Violet's  account. None  of  my  wife's  are  at
my  daughter's  disposal. All  in  her  own  disposal.' Mr.  Underwood  asked
if  it  was  meant  that  he  had  not  left  his  property — for  he  was  a  man  of  some
wealth — as  he  now  wished  he  had. '  You  are  right,'  was  written,  '  want  all
my  girls  to  share  alike.' 'Which  daughter  do  you  refer  to?'  was  asked.
'  Went  away  from  her  in  Florida — Violet,'  was  the  answer. I  remarked,
'  Why,  I  thought  Violet  was  one  of  the  unmarried  girls,  but  it  must  be  that
that  is  the  name  of  the  married  daughter.'  Then  Mr.  Underwood  was  strongly
urged  to  call  on  Mr.  Smith's  married  son,  James,  with  whom  Mr.  Under-
wood had  a  slight  acquaintance,  and  tell  him  of  this  communication.  'Clearly
state  my  desire  tliat  my  daughter  Violet  share  equally  with  her  sisters.'  Of
course  this  was  utterly  out  of  the  question.  At  that  time  we  had  no  intention
of  informing  any  one  of  our  psychic  experience,  and  if  we  had,  Mr.  James
Smith  would  have  thought  us  insane  or  impertinent  to  come  to  him  with  so
ridiculous  a  story,  the  truth  of  which  we  ourselves  strongly  doubted.  Pages
v/ere,  however,  written  concerning  the  matter  in  so  earnest  and  pleading  a
manner  that  I  came  to  feel  conscience-stricken  at  refusing  to  do  what  was
asked,  and  to  shrink  from  seeing  Mr.  Smith's  name  appear. Once  was
v/ritten,  '  Say  to  James  that  in  my  new  position,  and  with  my  new  views  of
life,  I  feel  that  I  did  wrong  to  treat  liis  sister  Violet  as  I  did. She  was  not
to  blame  for  following  out  her  own  convictions,  when  I  had  inculcated
independent  thought  and  action  for  all.' This  and  other  sentences  of  the
kind  seemed  to  convey  the  idea  that  Violet  had  in  some  way  incurred  his
displeasure  by  doing  according  to  her  own  will  in  opposition  to  his.  This
was  puzzling  to  us,  as  we  knew  that  in  her  marriage,  at  least,  the  daughter
we  thought  to  be  Violet  had  followed  her  father's  wishes.

"  A  few  weeks  later,  however,  came  an  unlooked-for  verification  of  Mr.
Smith's  messages.  In  a  conversation  between  Mr.  Underwood  and  a  business
friend  of  Mr.  Smith,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  all  his  affairs,  regret
was  expressed  that  so  wealthy  a  man  had  left  so  little  for  a  certain  pur-
pose. Mr.  Underwood  then  inquired  as  to  what  disposition  had  been  made
of  his  property,  and  was  told  that  he  had  left  it  mainly  to  his  wife  and
children — so  much  to  this  one,  and  that.  'But  Violet, '  continued  Mr.
Underwood's  informant,  '  was  left  only  a  small  amount,  as  Mr.  Smith  was
angry  because  she  married  against  his  wishes.'  '  Why,'  remarked  Mr.
Underwood,  '  I  understood  that  he  approved  of  the  match,  and  the  fact
tliat  he  accompanied  herself  and  husband  to  Florida,  and  remained  with
them  some  time,  would  seem  to  indicate  that.'  'Oh,  you  are  thinking  of
Lucy,  the  eldest  girl  ;  her  marriage  was  all  riglit,  but  Violet,  one  of  the
younger  daughters,  going  to  Florida  with  her  [Lucy's]  husband,  fell  in  love
with  a  young  man  of  whom  her  father  did  not  approve,  so  she  made  a  run-
away marriage,  and  on  account  of  his  displeasure,  Mr.  Smith  left  her  only  a
small  sum.'  The  intelligence  writing  was  aware  of  facts  unknown  to  either
Mr.  Underwood  or  myself,  and  no  other  persons  were  in  the  room  when  these
communications  were  given."

In  The  Arena  for  June,  1892,  Mr.  Underwood  continues  : —
"  My  presence  has  been  and  is  now  one  of  the  conditions  of  Mrs.  Under-
wood's getting  connected  and  coherent  writing. Only  a  few  words  and  a


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


Ill


sentence  or  two  have  been  written  occasionally  in  my  absence.  Once
when  I  was  absent  from  home  the  peculiar  sensation  which  had  always  been
felt  in  Mrs.  Underwood's  right  hand  before  the  writing  began,  was  felt  in
the  left  hand,  with  which  a  name  was  written  with  letters  reversed,  and  she
could  read  it  only  when  impressed  to  do  so.  She  held  it  before  the  mirror.
It  was  the  name  of  a  person  two  hundred  miles  distant,  who  was  still  alive,
but,  as  was  subsequently  learned,  in  an  unconscious  state  at  the  time,  and
Tery  near  death,  which  occurred  two  or  three  days  afterwards.

"The  word  'death'  is  never  used  except  with  'so-called'  before  it,  or
'which  is  a  new  birth,'  or  some  other  explanatory  or  qualifying  expression.
The  writing  purport,s  to  be  from  extra-mediumistic  and  extra-mundane
sources — from  invisible  human  beings  who  once  inhabited  this  earth.  The
writing  always,  whether  purporting  to  be  from  a  person  of  high  or  low
degree,  claims  that  the  controlling  intelligence  is  a  spirit — a  discarnate
human  being.  Any  intimation  that  the  communicating  intelligence  may  be
the  medium's  subconscious  ego,  a  fraction  of  which  only  rises  to  the  level  of
conscious  knowledge,  is  met  with  responses  to  the  effect  that  it  is  strange
anybody  can  believe  such  a  vagary.  One  claim,  to  which  there  has  never
been  exception  in  any  writing  purporting  to  be  a  message,  is  that  a  '  spirit, '
a  discarnate  human  being,  moves  the  hand  that  holds  the  pen.  Generally
names  and  dates  are  not  given  ;  and  when  they  are,  they  are  as  liable  to  be
wrong  as  correct.  In  answer  to  questions  as  to  the  reason  of  this,  it  has
been  said  substantially  that  memories  and  reminiscences  are  only  gathered
up  as  the  departed  are  able  to  come  in  contact  with  persons  and  objects  of
earth.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  I  get  tired  and  nervous  when  this  writing
is  prolonged  ;  it  exhausts  me  much  more  than  it  does  Mrs.  Underwood,  on
whom  it  never  leaves  any  depressing  influence.

"The  intelligence  which  seems  to  be  extraneous,  which  invariably  claims
to  be  a  departed  spirit,  now  one,  now  another,  is  sometimes  inferior
intellectually  to  the  medium  ;  at  other  times,  in  certain  lines  of  thought,  in
the  use  of  words,  and  in  the  statement  of  facts,  the  intelligence  that  directs
the  pen  evinces  larger  knowledge  than  Mrs.  Underwood  consciously
possesses.  The  spelling  is  sometimes  different  from  her  own,  and  the  style
is  often  stilted,  and  even  grandiose,  while  her  style  is  simple  and  natural.
In  some  cases  the  writing  relates  to  what  is  entirely  unknown  to  the
writer, — to  her  ordinary  consciousness, — though  in  some  of  these  cases  I
can  conceive  it  as  possible,  and  deem  it  probable,  that  the  writing  relates  to
what  has  been  noted  or  learned  by  tlie  passive  consciousness,  and  is  evoked
therefrom  even  though  there  is  no  recognition  of  its  having  been  included
in  the  person's  experience.  But  in  other  cases  the  writing  has  contained
evidence  of  knowledge  that  Mrs.  Underwood  never  could  have  obtained  in
any  known  way.  She  gave  one  or  two  instances  in  the  August  Are)ia.  I
will  relate  another  of  her  experiences  which,  in  my  opinion,  proves  that
there  are  supernormal  methods  of  obtaining  knowledge.

"One  morning,  a  message  purporting  to  be  from  a  young  man  recently
deceased  was  received.  Neither  Mrs.  Underwood  nor  I  had  ever  seen  his
handwriting.  We  knew  his  name  only  as  William  S.  Tlie  message  was
signed  'Z.  W.  S.'  At  the  time,  I  remarked  that  I  did  not  believe  there
was  any  Z  in  his  name,  and  in  this  opinion  Mrs.  Underwood  concurred.  A


112


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


few  days  afterwards  we  met  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the  young  man,
who  were  so  impressed  with  the  resemblance  between  the  handwriting  and
that  of  their  son  that  tliey  wished  to  take  the  writing  with  them.  There  was
a  Z  in  the  name,  but  it  was  the  initial  of  his  second  name,  and  not  of  the
first,  as  it  was  written.  In  the  presence  of  the  young  man's  mother,  Mrs.
Underwood's  hand  was  moved  to  write,  and  the  lady  asked  if  her  father
would  give  a  test  by  writing  his  name.  The  first  name,  Solomon,  was  written
slowly  ;  and  after  a  pause,  the  surname  was  written  very  quickly.  Mrs.
Underwood  did  not  know  and  never  had  known  the  name,  which  was  written
correctly  ;  and  Mr.  S.,  who  is  a  lawyer  and  a  man  of  critical  and  discriminat-
ing mind,  and  his  wife  both  declared  that  the  signature  closely  resembled
that  of  the  old  gentleman.  Some  days  ago  I  wrote  to  Mr.  S.,  asking  him
whether,  after  further  reflection,  he  could  suggest  a  possible  explanation  of
what  Mrs.  Underwood  wrote  without  recourse  to  any  occult  theory.  He
replied  and  referred  to  the  message  purporting  to  be  from  his  son,  thus  :  '  I
have  compared  it  with  signatures  of  our  boy.  As  I  told  you  in  Chicago  at
the  time,  the  writing  bears  a  very  strong  resemblance  to  his  writing.  Mrs.
Underwood  did  not,  in  my  opinion,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,
have  any  knowledge  of  Will's  full  name.  The  writing,  while  quite  similar
to  Will's,  is  very  difi"erent  from  Mrs.  Underwood's.  My  wife's  father's
name  had  not  been  mentioned  at  all.  Never  had  been  in  Mrs.  Underwood's
presence.  I  don't  think  she  had  ever  met  a  member  of  Mrs.  S.'s  family  by
that  name,  yet  she  certainly  wrote  the  name  of  Mrs.  S.'s  father,  Solomon
M.,  very  plainly,  when  asked  to  write  the  name  of  the  person  who  had  just
written  that  he  had  something  to  say.  This  writing  was  also  very,  very  similar
to  the  handwriting  of  the  old  gentleman.'

' '  Fully  aware  that  incidents  long  forgotten  may  be  recalled,  that  possibly
no  lapse  of  memory  is  irrevocable,  and  that  under  certain  conditions  from  the
submerged  self  may  be  sent  up  memories  which  cannot  be  distinguished
from  newly  acquired  knowlege,  still,  I  am  confident  that  Mrs.  Underwood's
hand  has  written  names  and  statements  of  facts  not  only  once,  but  several
times,  which  were  not  and  never  had  been  any  part  of  her  conscious
knowledge. '

I  proceed  to  a  case  whose  interest  for  my  readers  is  much  impaired
by  my  obligation  to  conceal  the  identity  of  the  persons  concerned.  The
two  surviving  witnesses  are  known  to  me,  and  are  persons  of  position
and  intelligence.  The  third  dramatis  persona,  who  departed  this  life
a  few  years  since,  was  also  known  to  me ;  and  I  am  acquainted  with
the  joint  work  which  was  for  many  years  carried  on  by  the  deceased
and  a  survivor,  and  which  was  of  a  kind  which  may  be  conceived  as
still  interesting  a  departed  spirit.  I  give  to  these  three  persons  the
names,  in  all  respects  fictitious,  of  Mrs.  Laui-ence,  Mrs.  Plowden,  and
Mrs.  Seddon,  and  I  alter  the  Christian  name  quoted  and  the  initial
letter  of  Mrs.  Seddon's  home.  The  rest  of  the  account  is  not  altered
except  by  abridgment.

Mrs.  Laurence,  whose  account  must  first  be  given,  had  been
interested  in  the  work  done  by  Mrs.  Plowden  and  Mrs.  Seddon,  had


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


11.5


interchanged  a  few  letters  with  both,  and  had  seen  Mrs.  Seddon  on
a  few  occasions.  Some  months  after  Mrs.  Plowden's  death  (but  in  no
apparent  connection  with  that  event)  Mrs.  Laurence  began  to  expe-
rience certain  automatic  impulses,  which  were  subjectively  felt  as
proceeding  from  a  deceased  relative.

Late  one  Tuesday  evening  [date  given]  the  impulse  to  some  form
of  such  communication  came  on  with  unusual  force.

M.  Aut.  69.

' '  Feeling  very  doubtful  how  to  act,  yet  dimly  conscious  that  I  was  being
drawn  into  something  unusual,  and  unknown  to  me,  I  seated  myself  at  a
little  table.

"  Soon  I  began  to  feel  my  thoughts  drawn  out  strongly  towards  Mrs.
Plowden.  Next  there  reached  me  an  impulsion  to  get  writing  materials.  T
now  began  to  realise  that  I  was  not  alone,  and  that  my  services  were  required
for  some  purpose,  which  revealed  itself  when,  on  taking  up  a  pen,  I  imme-
diately felt  a  strange  thrill  flow  through  my  right  arm,  which  then  ceased  to
be  under  ray  full  control.  Such  an  experience  was  entirely  new  to  me,  and
with  amazement  I  watched  the  pen  write  rapidly.  Several  pages  were
written  in  this  manner.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if  several  influences  had  gathered
around  me,  and  were  endeavouring  to  aid  in  the  furtherance  of  a  design  much
desired  by  someone  whom  they  accompanied  and  to  serve  whom  they  thus
sought  to  employ  me.  I  quickly  became  convinced  that  the  guiding  mind  was
Mrs.  Plowden's  ;  the  reason  why  I  felt  so  positively  assured  of  her  presence
is  that  I  seemed  to  see  (with  an  inner  vision)  the  feelings  which  were
prompting  her,  and  her  mental  vibrations  seemed  to  mingle  with  mine,
making  me  share  her  emotion,  even  while  I  did  not  understand  its  cause.
So  deeply  did  her  earnestness  of  desire  and  effort  aflfect  me  that  the  tears
ran  down  my  cheeks  as  I  felt  her  striving  to  greet  and  instruct  the  friend,
Mrs.  Seddon,  to  whom  this  communication  was  being  poured  forth.

"  The  variety  of  influences,  my  inexperience  in  such  conditions,  and  the
strangeness  of  the  scene  in  which  I  found  myself  so  unexpectedly  participat-
ing, all  combined.  I  fear,  to  jirevent  me  from  acting  as  a  very  manageable
medium  to  write  through  ;  consequently  the  letter  was  written  in  a  large
scrambling  handwriting,  neither  mine  nor  Mrs.  Plowden's,  though  I  felt  and,
interiorly  saw  that  she  tried  to  reproduce  her  own  handwriting  ;  and  it
seemed  to  me  that  she  was  perplexed  by  the  difficulty  she  discovered  in  using
her  instrument  (my  hand),  which,  owing  to  my  inexperience  and  because  it
had  never  before  been  borrowed  in  this  way,  did  not  yield  itself  sufficiently
passively,  and  thus  failed  to  reproduce  the  mechanical  yet  individual  move-
ments of  another  hand.

"I  was  so  absorbed  by  the  pathos  and  strangeness  of  this  effort  made  by
one  '  beyond  the  veil '  to  communicate  with  the  friend  and  co-worker  who
had  shared  her  aspirations  and  life  mission  on  earth,  that  I  paid  small  heed
to  the  contents  of  the  letter  ;  which,  moreover,  referred  to  matters  of  which
I  was  entirely  ignorant.  All  that  I  understood  about  it  was  that  it  was  a
message  to  Mrs.  Seddon.  The  letter  ended  with  the  words,  written  with
extraordinary  intensity  and  underlined  several  times  : —

"  '  Ruth  I  Does  not  my  voice  reach  you  ? '  :  .

I


114


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


' '  T  was  rather  puzzled  at  this  name  (Ruth)  employed  by  Mrs.  Plowden,
till  the  recollection  flashed  into  my  mind  that  Mrs.  Plowden  was
accustomed  to  address  Mrs.  Seddon  by  it,  [in  consequence  of  certain  private
circumstances].  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  describe  adequately  in  words  the
intense  earnestness  with  which  the  above  appeal  and  question  were  made.
It  was  an  exceeding  bitter  cry,  as  though  the  speaker-writer  could  not
■comprehend  what  barrier  could  prevent  her  voice  from  being  heard.  And,
looking  back  to  that  memorable  evening,  I  can  distinctly  remember  how
there  appeared  before  my  mental  vision  the  picture  of  a  grassy  spot,  shaded
by  trees,  close  to  a  river.  I  did  not  understand  the  meaning  of  this  till
afterwards,  when  Mrs.  Seddon  explained  the  reason  why  Mrs.  Plow^len  had
thus  exclaimed  and  written  :  '  Does  not  my  voice  reach  you  '1 '

"The  letter  was  duly  dispatched.  I  did  not  even  glance  at  its  contents,
feeling  that  the  letter  did  not  belong  to  me  in  any  way.  The  sentences  I
have  quoted  were  impressed  on  my  consciousness,  and  have  remained  in
my  memory,  because  of  the  great  earnestness  which  prompted  them,  causing
me  to  feel  and  hear  the  sentiments  they  expressed.  A  day  or  two  after
this  first  letter  was  written  I  again  felt  myself  impelled  to  get  writing
materials,  and  once  more  my  hand  was  used  in  the  same  (to  me)  extraordinary
way.

"  This  time  the  conditions  and  mental  atmosphere  were  calmer,  and  I  was
not  conscious  of  such  a  mingling  of  influences  as  on  the  previous  occasion.
I  was  also  reassured  by  receiving  a  strengthened  impression  of  Mrs.
Plowden's  actual  presence,  and  of  her  urgent  desire  to  discharge  what  she
evidently  regarded  as  a  duty,  viz.,  the  expression  of  her  wishes  respecting
work  left  undone  by  her.

"  This  second  letter  contained  a  message  to  Mrs.  Seddon  bidding  her  to
use  as  preface  to  a  book  by  Mrs.  Plowden,  which  Mrs.  Seddon  was  editing,  a
paper  which  Mrs.  Plowden  had  written  some  time  previously.  Mrs.  Plowden
endeavoured  to  explain  that  Mrs.  Seddon  would  find  the  manuscript  which
Mrs.  Plowden  wished  her  thus  to  use  '  in  the  window-seat  of  the  school-
room at  K.'

"  On  this  second  occasion  Mrs.  Plowden  used  my  hand  to  write  a  note  to
Mrs.  Seddon,  and  one  to  a  relative.

"  This  time  also  I  felt  how  strenuously  she  endeavoured  to  produce  her
own  handwriting  ;  perhaps  because  she  thought  that  thus  her  wishes  would
receive  more  attention  ;  perhaps  simply  because  there  is  something  so
•characteristic  and  involuntary  about  one's  handwriting.

"  When  these  letters  were  being  written  I  felt  my  hand  grasped  by
some  soft  intangible  substance  ;  sometimes  in  forming  the  words  the  unseen
hand  seemed  to  become  tremulous,  as  if  the  writing  was  only  executed  by
an  effort  of  will  of  one  to  whom  a  return  to  any  material  conditions  was
painful  and  difiicult.

"  I  watched  the  words  trace  themselves  on  paper  and  again  seemed  to  see
them  arising  in  the  unseen  writer's  mind.  I  longed  to  help,  but  did  not
jealise  that  probably  complete  passivity  on  my  pait  would  have  been  the
most  helpful  course  to  follow  ;  on  this  point  the  intimation  reached  me
another  time  :  '  Try  to  stop  thinking  and  I  will  try  to  speak.' The  writing


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


115


of  these  letters  resembled  Mrs.  Plowden's.  The  envelopes  were  addressed
in  a  writing  exactly  like  Mrs.  Plowden's  own  hand,  I  was  afterwards  told.  I
distinctly  remember  that  while  the  addresses  were  being  written  the  hand
which  was  resting  on  mine  and  writing  with  it  pressed  with  increased
firmness  and  resolution,  as  if  the  writer  were  determined  that  no  mistake
should  be  made  in  the  names  and  addresses  of  the  persons  for  whom  the
communications  were  intended.

"  The  envelope  containing  the  note  to  the  relative  bore  the  name  in  full.

"The  letter  to  Mrs.  Seddon  bore  her  London  address  ;  where,  however,
she  was  not,  as  she  was  then  at  K.  (These  details  were  explained  to  me
afterwards.)

"  Owing  to  a  delay  in  postmg  the  letter  to  the  relative,  the  two  letters
reached  K.  at  the  same  time,  as  Mrs.  Seddon's  was  forwarded  to  her  from
London.  After  a  day  or  two  I  heard  from  Mrs.  Seddon  that  all  the  contents
of  the  letters  apparently  written  by  Mrs.  Plowden  in  the  way  just  described,
were  correct  in  every  respect,  excepting  that  the  room  called  in  the  letter
the  '  school-room  '  was  usually  called  the  '  study. '

"I  tried  throughout  to  pay  as  little  attention  as  possible  to  the  contents
of  the  letters,  because  they  were  not  intended  for  me  and  were  only  brought
thus  under  my  notice  from  stress  of  circumstances."

This  account  is  corroborated  by  Mrs.  Seddon,  the  recipient  of  the
two  aforesaid  letters.  Mrs.  Seddon's  account  begins  by  stating  that  she
had  been  vainly  endeavouring  to  enter  into  communion  with  the  spirit
of  her  departed  friend  by  sitting  in  the  churchyard  where  that  friend's
body  was  buried.  On  the  Tuesday  aforesaid  she  visited  that  spot  for
the  last  time,  and  retired  in  despair  of  obtaining  any  increased  sense  of
nearness  by  that  means.  "  My  last  attempt  was  made  on  Tuesday
[same  date  as  above],  and  I  made  no  mention  to  anybody  of  any
attempts  or  of  my  wish."  On  this  same  evening,  as  we  have  seen,  the
impulse  as  from  Mrs.  Seddon  came  to  Mrs.  Laurence  at  a  distance  ;  and
this  coincidence  was  heightened  by  the  fact  that  the  scene  flashed  upon
Mrs.  Laurence's  mind  corresponded  (so  far  as  such  scenes  can  be
expressed  in  definite  words)  with  the  actual  look  of  the  churchyard —
the  general  aspect  of  which  had,  however,  been  described  by  Mrs.
Seddon  to  Mrs.  Laurence  shortly  before.  I  continue  in  Mrs.  Seddon's
words  : —

"The  letter  which  I  received  on  Saturday  was  written  on  Wednesday,
and  in  it  she  stated  that  late  on  the  previous  night — the  night  of  the  day
on  which  I  had  abandoned  my  attempts  at  the  grave — she  had  been  influenced
by  someone  whom  she  recognised  as  Mrs.  Plowden,  and  who  had  caused  her
to  write  to  me  the  letter  now  enclosed.

"  The  message  thus  dictated  contained  warm  assurances  of  Mrs.  Plowden's
continued  regard  for  me  and  interest  in  our  work,  and  concluded  with  the
exclamation,  emphatically  underlined  and  written  with  great  energy  :
*  Ruth,  does  not  my  voice  reach  you  ? '  the  efl'ect  being  as  if  she  was  then
actually  calling  to  me  just  as  I  had  desired  her  to  call,  and  as  I  had  felt  that
she  was  calling  though  the  sounds  failed  to  reach  me.

I  2


116


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  On  the  following  day,  Sunday,  I  received  from  Mrs.  Laurence,  also
forwarded  from  London  under  cover,  another  letter  purporting  to  be
dictated  by  Mrs.  Plowden.  The  object  of  this  letter  was  to  charge  me  to  use
for  the  book  I  had  just  edited  a  preface  which  she  herself  had  written,  instead
of  one  of  my  own  composition  ;  and  a  copy  of  which  I  should  find  in  a
certain  place  in  the  room  which  had  been  her  study.  The  particulars  given
were  correct,  with  the  exception  that  the  word  '  school-room  '  was  used  for
'  study. '  As  it  happened,  I  had  already  made  use  of  the  preface  in
question,  having  set  aside  one  that  I  had  commenced  writing,  under  a  strong
impression  that  in  so  doing  I  was  acting  as  she  would  have  preferred  had  she
been  consulted.  The  book,  moreover,  had  actually  been  published,  so  that
the  instruction  now  received  came  too  late  to  be  observed.  From  which  it
was  clear  that  her  knowledge  of  my  doings  was  not  fully  up-to-date.

"  The  letters  thus  dictated  showed  a  gradual  and  increasing  assimilation
of  the  medium's  handwriting  to  that  of  Mrs.  Plowden.  But  the  envelope
containing  the  last  one  was  addressed  in  a  hand  which  was  not  merely  like
Mrs.  Plowden's,  but  ivas  hers,  and  was  written  with  great  freedom,  clearness,
and  firmness,  and  as  if  dashed  off  at  speed,  only  with  a  somewhat  coarser  pen
than  she  was  wont  to  use,  the  strokes  being  thicker  as  through  the  effort  of
using  another's  hand,  and  all  the  characteristics  were  hers  and  not  in  the  least
the  medium's.^  It  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Laurence,
describing  the  sensation  in  her  hand  when  writing  as  that  of  being  con-
trolled by  some  pervading  substance  which,  while  strong  and  firm,  was  soft
and  impalpable.  This  was  a  descrijjtion  which  tallied  exactly  with  that
which  other  mediums  had  described  to  me,  and  which  I  myself  had  expe-
rienced on  the  single  occasion  when  it  had  been  considered  desirable  to  give
me  a  practical  example  of  the  method  of  '  automatic  writing,'  though  in  niy
case  my  own  consciousness  was  not  set  aside,  the  words  being  presented  to
my  mind  when  being  written."

Mrs.  Seddon  proceeds  to  describe  the  disquieting  effect  upon  the
relative  to  whom  the  second  letter  was  addressed  of  the  close  resem-
blance to  the  handwriting  of  the  deceased.  The  subject  being  dis-
tasteful to  this  relative,  no  corroboration  can  be  sought  in  that  quarter.
In  a  subsequent  letter  Mrs.  Seddon  says ;  "  The  full  description,
written  through  the  medium,  of  the  place  of  the  MSS.  in  question  is
'  the  drawer  at  the  left-hand  side  of  the  window-seat  where  I  once  put
them  long  ago.'  This  was  a  receptacle  which  stood  by  Mrs.  Plowden's
accustomed  seat  in  her  study,  and  in  which  I  had  found  the  preface
referred  to.  The  study  may  have  been  called  the  schoolroom  [at  a
previous  period].  My  own  impression  is  that  intending  to  say  'study,'
the  controlling  influence  succeeded  only  in  impressing  a  corresponding
word  on  the  medium,  and  was  content  with  it  as  understanding  what
room  was  meant. . . . No  reference  to  or  mention  of  a  window-seat

I  have  seen  the  envelope  and  compared  the  handwritings.  I  think  the  statement
in  the  text  too  strong ;  but  there  is  much  resemblance  ; — and  undoubtedly  Mrs.
Laurence's  envelope  bears  the  impress  of  speed  and  confidence. — F.W.H.M.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


117


had  occurred  anywhere  until  the  phrase  was  used  in  Mrs.  Laurence's
message."

I  hold  it  as  certain  that  Mrs.  Laurence  had  never  visited  K.,  nor  had
she  ever  heard  of  the  window-seat  and  the  drawer.  Of  this,  I  repeat,  she
has  completely  satisfied  me  ;  nor  indeed  would  it  have  been  in  any  way
likely  that  she  should  have  known  of  these  details.  She  had  not
known  that  Mrs.  Seddon  had  hesitated  between  two  prefaces,  and
although  she  knew  that  the  book  was  out,  she  had  not  specially  noticed
the  preface,  and  cannot  now  recollect  whether  she  had  or  had  not
read  it.  The  degree  both  of  knowledge  and  of  ignorance  shown  in  the
automatic  message  is  therefore  noteworthy.  There  was  knowledge  of
a  very  specific  place — left-hand  drawer  of  a  window-seat.  Against  this
must  be  set  the  minor  mistake  of  school-room  for  study,  but  here  I
think  that  Mrs.  Seddon's  explanation  is  in  accordance  with  analogy.
On  the  other  hand,  we  have  ignorance  of  a  fact  fully  known  to  Mrs.
Plowden,  and  partially  known  to  Mrs.  Laurence,  namely,  that  the  book
had  already  appeared  with  the  desired  preface.  The  message,  there-
fore, is  not  exactly  like  the  product  of  either  living  mind,  and  does
somewhat  resemble  that  which  might  be  sent  by  someone  remembeiing
past  facts,  imperfectly  acquainted  with  recent  facts,  and  feeling  a  strong
personal  interest  in  the  matter.

An  interesting  corroboration  is  furnished  to  this  case  by  a  previous
experience  of  Miss  A.'s,  quite  unknown  to  Mrs.  Laurence,  who  is  not
acquainted  with  the  A.  family.  I  copy  the  following  passage  from  the
original  notes  taken  by  Mrs.  A.  at  the  time  of  the  incident, — shortly  after
Mrs.  Plowden's  death.  ["We  knew,"  writes  Mrs.  A., "  that  Mrs.  Plowden
was  dead  ;  but  did  not  personally  then  know  Mrs.  Seddon  ;  and  there
had  not  been  any  special  conversation  respecting  Mrs.  Plowden."]  One  of
Miss  A.'s  accustomed  "  guides,"  giving  the  name  of  "  E.  Swedenborg,"
wi'ote  :  "  I  want,  through  you,  to  fulfil  a  promise  which  I  have  given  to
one  very  dear  to  me  ;  one  who  drew  me  to  her  through  her  kindly  and
unselfish  influences  ;  one  whom  I  helped  to  the  best  of  my  ability  while
the  beautiful  spirit  was  yet  chained  to  earth.  I  speak  of  her  whom  I
knew  best  as  '  Naomi,'  but  whom  you  would  only  recognise  under  the
name  of  'Mrs.  Plowden.'  ...  I  would  for  her  sake  have  those
to  know  from  whom  she  has  parted  in  bodily  form  that  she  is  but
removed  to  a  higher  sphere  of  action,  there  to  await  those  who  worked
with  her  on  earth."

The  evidential  point  here  is  the  name  which  I  have  given  as
"  Naomi," — the  correlative  to  the  "  Ruth  "  which  appears  in  Mrs.
Laurence's  letter.  The  A.  family,  who  alone  were  present  when  the
above  writing  was  given,  all  of  them  feel  sure  that  they  had  never
heard  that  this  name  was  ever  given  to  Mrs.  Plowden.


118


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"As  far  as  I  can  see  by  my  notes,"  continues  Mrs.  A.,  "we  did  not
meet  Mrs.  Seddon  till  [some  months  later].  Like  many  other  messages,
we  did  not  like  to  send  it  to  the  person  it  concerned ;  but  it  was  given
to  her  at  last  by  a  mutual  friend,  and  she  came  to  see  us."  There  was
then  much  writing,  which  Mrs.  Seddon  considers  as  so  specially
appropriate  in  content  as  much  to  strengthen  the  proof  of  identity.
She  also  states  that  "  Swedenborg  "  had  influenced  Mrs.  Plowden  in  life
in  a  similar  manner — "a  fact  of  which  no  one  knew  but  ourselves."
On  the  degree  of  proof  which  such  coincidences  of  thought  can  afford,
I  may  have  to  speak  in  a  later  paper.  The  point  to  which  I  here  call
attention  is  the  appearance  of  the  two  private  names  through  two
automatists  entirely  independent  of  each  other.  In  one  case  the  private
name  was  unknown  to  the  automatist,  in  the  other  case  the  name  had
been  heard,  but  another  fact,  unknown  to  the  automatist,  was  given  in
the  same  connection.

I  will  now  place  together  four  cases  where  a  leading  point  of
interest  is  the  writing  of  words  which  the  automatist  could  not  have
written  by  conscious  effort.  In  one  case  an  unlettered  man  wrote
Greek  ;  in  one  a  girl  ignorant  of  Kaffir  wrote  Kaffir ;  and  in  the  two
other  cases  a  young  child  who  had  not  learnt  to  write,  wrote,  we  are
told,  legible  and  significant  words.

In  the  first  case  of  this  group  the  phenomena  were  various,  but  con-
sisted mainly  of  automatic  writing  and  speech.  Some  of  the  writings
evinced  a  knowledge  greater  than  the  automatist  possessed.  Especially,
two  lines  from  Homer  were  correctly  written  in  response  to  a  request
for  some  Greek,  although  the  writer  was  certainly  quite  ignorant  even
of  the  Greek  alphabet. Some  indications  of  identity  were  also  given.

Certain  physical  phenomena  (the  most  important  of  which  occurred
in  iny  informant's  absence)  were  interpolated  as  it  were  at  random
among  the  intellectual  phenomena,  and  carried  with  them  no  clear
indication  of  their  source ;  except  that  they  occurred  only  in  the
presence  of  the  sitter,  here  styled  Mr.  Andrew.

For  my  introduction  to  Mr.  0.  (as  I  shall  call  him),  the  narrator  of
these  incidents,  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.
I  first  heard  Mr.  O.'s  narrative  from  himself  by  word  of  mouth  on
November  20th,  1889,  while  the  events  were  still  fresh  in  his  memory.
I  regard  him  as  an  excellent  witness.  The  delay  in  producing  the
evidence  has  been  partly  caused  by  Mr.  O.'s  persistent  but  unavailing
efforts  to  induce  the  survivors  among  his  fellow-sitters  to  add  their
testimony  to  his  own.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  their  refusal  is  in
no  way  due  to  any  disagreement  with  Mr.  O.'s  account,  but  mainly  to
scruples  of  a  quasi-religious  nature.  Such  scruples  have  repeatedly
baulked  our  inquiries ;  but  I  hope  that  they  may  gradually  die  out


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.  119


among  our  informants,  as  the  innocence  and  the  importance  of  experi-
ments of  this  kind  come  to  be  better  understood.  In  Mr.  O.'s  own  case
there  are,  I  think,  amply  sufficient  reasons  why  his  anonymity  should
be  preserved.  His  brother — in  deference  to  whose  serious  wish  during
dangerous  illness  the  sittings  were  undertaken — is  now  dead.

I  will  add  that  the  intimacy  among  the  members  of  the  circle  was
such  that  I  cannot  doubt  that  Mr.  O.  heard,  without  delay,  from  his
brother  and  others,  of  the  physical  phenomena  which  had  occurred
during  his  own  absence  from  the  circle. Mr.  O.  writes  in  1890  : —

S.  11. — In  the  winter  of  '88-9  I  began,  along  with  a  few  intimate  friends,
to  investigate  the  phenomena  commonly  called  Spiritualistic.  None  of  the
company  was  at  all  anxious  for  any  specific  communication  from  another
sphere,  but  partly  for  the  gratification  of  an  invalid  brother,  and  partly  for
the  sake  of  satisfying  ourselves  as  to  the  possibility  of  some  things  we  had
read,  we  attempted  a  sitting.  The  results  far  exceeded  our  expectation.
We  were  favoured  with  phenomena  somewhat  startling  to  novices  in  the  art
— phenomena  styled  in  Scotland  uncanny— hnt  their  interesting  nature  soon
overcame  our  natural  diffidence,  and  before  the  end  of  the  winter  we  were
on  quite  familiar  terms  with  our  unsubstantial  visitants.

As  a  rule  the  circle  consisted  of  two  of  my  brothers,  two  personal  friends,
and  myself,  though  occasionally  we  admitted  other  members  of  the  family,
and  once  or  twice  an  acquaintance.  We  were  not  Spiritualists,  nor  had  we
any  desire  to  be  known  as  such  ;  all  we  did  was  done  solely  by  way  of  experi-
ment and  amusement.  The  opportunity  was  the  best  possible  ;  we  had  all
our  sittings  in  our  own  home,  the  circle  was  confined  to  personal  friends  in
whom  we  had  full  confidence,  so  that  there  was  neither  motive  nor  oppor-
tunity for  deception.  We  usually  met  twice  a  week  when  my  invalid  brother
was  able  for  company,  but  during  the  winter  months  relapses  of  his  illness
caused  interruptions  ;  and  indeed,  I  often  thought  the  excitement  of  our
sittings  did  not  affect  him  beneficially.

Our  sittings  were  all  in  the  dark.  Our  medium  was,  in  most  cases,  Mr.
Andrew,  though  we  had  also  a  less  efficient  medium  in  the  case  of  Mr.

S  . The  performances  of  the  latter  were  mostly  of  a  somnambulistic

kind,  and  do  not  call  for  special  notice.

With  Andrew,  however,  phenomena  assumed  quite  another  aspect.  He
would  play  charming  music  on  the  violin,  or  produce  beautiful  pencil  sketches
of  city  and  rural  scenes.  Sometimes  the  locus  of  these  scenes  was  named,
of tener  not,  but  they  were  invariably  unknown  to  any  member  of  the  company.

For  a  time  I  failed  to  see  anything  very  unaccountable  in  Andrew's  trance
productions.  I  knew  him  to  be  an  accomplished  violinist  and  a  fairly  good
sketcher,  and  I  naturally  put  everything  down  to  an  unconscious  exercise  of
his  own  skill.  One  little  thing  did  perplex  me,  namely,  the  very  different
styles  of  handwriting  he  seemed  to  accomplish  with  equal  facility.

I  mentioned  an  invalid  brother.  He  suffered  from  a  heart  affection
known  as  presystolic  murmur.  At  one  sitting  we  consulted  a  medical  man,
who  called  himself  Dr.  Snobinski  of  Russia.  This  gentleman  not  only  pre-
scribed for  my  brother,  but  also  furnished  us  with  a  diagram  of  the  human
heart,  and  put  a  special  mark  to  indicate  the  valve  diseased  in  my  brother's


120


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


case.  How  this  diagram  was  accurately  drawn  by  a  person  ignorant  of
human  physiology,  and  how  the  diseased  valve  was  shown  and  explained  by
one  ignorant  of  pathology,  was  more  than  I  could  account  for.

On  another  occasion  another  doctor,  calling  himself  Arnold,  confirmed  the
diagnosis  of  Dr.  Snobinski,  and  rated  my  brother  for  having  neglected  to
follow  the  regimen  recommended  by  the  famous  Russian.  On  this  occasion,
during  examination  of  the  chest,  when  the  patient  chanced  to  laugh,  the
doctor  [in  the  person  of  Mr.  Andrew]  suddenly  gave  him  a  mild  box  on  the
ear  with  his  open  palm.  This  I  understood  was  to  rebuke  his  laughter,
which,  as  is  well  known,  is  a  dangerous  luxury  to  one  suffering  from  valvular
disease.

At  times  we  were  entertained  by  a  negro,  who  gave  us  no  little  fun.  His
effort  to  speak  English  was  most  amusing,  and  presented  just  those  difficul-
ties which  perplex  the  negro  in  this  more  matter-of-fact  sphere.

These  phenomena  had  led  me  to  perplexing  thoughts,  and,  though  unable
to  explain  them  on  purely  psychological  grounds,  I  was  slow  to  admit  that
the  medium  was  not  also  the  cause  of  the  effects  he  produced.  I  had  so  far
accounted  for  the  music  and  the  sketches  ;  the  varieties  of  handwriting  were
a  little  puzzling,  the  diagram  and  the  prescription  a  little  more  so,  but  I  was
still  inclined  to  suspend  judgment  till  I  should  acquire  more  facts.  With  a
view  to  this,  I  one  evening  interrogated  :  "  Where  are  you  ?  "  Answer  :  "In
the  sphere  next  the  earth."  "Could  you  tell  anything  of  the  future?"
Answer:  "  We  are  as  ignorant  of  the  future  as  you  are."  This  I  thought
was  at  least  honest,  and  very  probable,  but  too  general  to  be  of  service  to  me
in  arriving  at  any  decision.  I  resolved  to  put  what  seemed  to  me  a  searching
test.  None  of  the  others  knew  Latin  or  Greek,  so  I  asked  an  answer  in
Latin.  This  was  readily  given,  but  so  badly  spelt  that  I  failed  to  fully
translate  it.  Not  yet  satisfied,  I  asked  any  quotation  from  a  Greek  author —
so  that  by  comparison  with  the  original,  identity  or  variation  might  be  satis-
factorily apparent.  This  resulted  in  a  quotation  from  the  Odyssey,  Bk.  XI.,
lines  57-8  : —

'EX7r?7i'op,  TTwy  fjXdes  imb  ^ocpov  rjepoevra  ;
€(p6r]S  Trevor  eoiv  fj  eyo)  cvv  vrji  fieXalvj].

These  lines  were  beautifully  written  in  cursive  characters,  and  minute  even
to  the  accents.  As  a  student  I  had  read  Odyssey  XL,  but  could  not  have
given  the  lines  from  memory,  or  written  them  out  with  correct  accents.  On
comparing  the  lines  with  the  Greek  text  I  found  them  to  be  without  flaw.
My  puzzle  was  now  twofold  :  (1)  That  I  was  not  able  to  read  the  Latin
proved  that  what  was  given  was  not  anything  I  had  previously  been
revolving  in  my  own  mind,  but  had  come  from  an  independent  intelligence  ;
(2)  The  medium  was  not  acquainted  with  either  Latin  or  Greek — did  not  know
one  from  the  other.  Clearly  I  must  now  quit  the  hypothesis  that  the
medium  was  the  author  of  his  own  message,  as  not  adequate  to  account  for
all  the  facts.

The  Greek  and  the  Latin  [Mr.  O.  adds  in  a  later  letter]  were  both
obtained  at  the  same  sitting.  I  asked  for  the  Greek  because  the  Latin  was
so  badly  written  I  could  not  fully  make  it  out.  The  medium  that  evening
was  Andrew,  who,  I  am  fully  convinced,  could  not  possibly  have  any  know-
ledge that  Greek  would  be  asked  for — and  even  if  he  had  known,  he  could


The  Sublimincd  Consciousness.


121


not  have  given  it,  since  he  did  not  know  the  Greek  when  it  was  given.  The
controlling  sjjirit  was  unknown  to  any  of  the  company.  In  reply  to  my
questions  he  described  himself  as  a  youth  of  nineteen,  according  to  tlieir
reckoning,  but  was  only  twelve  years  of  age  when  he  died.  When  I  asked
how  he  was  occupied,  he  told  us  he  was  still  at  school.  This  information  led
me  to  ask  for  the  Latin,  and  subsequently  for  the  Greek.

Still  more  inexplicable  was  the  evidential  sign  given  to  a  doubting
acquaintance.  This  gentleman  requested  permission  to  be  present  at  one  of
the  sittings,  but  his  general  behaviour  there  indicated  that  he  regarded  a
sitting  as  a  kind  of  farce.  He  brought  with  him  another  gentleman  of
equally  sceptical  temper.  The  first  remark  from  the  medium  that  evening
was:  "  There  are  strangers  present  to-night."  This  remark  seemed  to  our
friend  so  commonplace  that  he  requested  evidence  of  the  presence  of  a  spirit.
On  being  asked  what  evidence  he  would  like,  he  jokingly  said,  "Bring  a
candle  !  " — an  idea  probably  suggested  by  sitting  in  the  dark.  The  wish  had
scarcely  been  expressed  when  a  candle  was  placed  on  the  table  before  him,
with  the  request  that  he  should  immediately  quit  the  company.  The  candle
was  found  to  be  warm,  a  circumstance  explained  by  the  fact  that  it  had  been
used  in  the  next  room  only  a  few  minutes  before.  My  brother  immediately
went  to  the  next  room,  and  asked  for  a  candle.  The  good  lady  was  much
surprised  to  find  that  while  the  candlestick  was  still  standing  where  she  had
placed  it  shortly  before,  the  candle  itself  was  gone.  My  brother  then  showed
her  the  candle  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  and  this  she  identified  as  the
one  she  had  used  a  few  minutes  before  — indeed  there  could  not  be  two
opinions,  as  there  was  only  one  candle  in  the  house.  This  was  regarded  by
the  circle  as  the  most  wonderful  result  yet  obtained.  Here  was  proof
amounting  to  a  demonstration  that  a  material  object  had  been  passed  through
matter;  the  candle  had  been  brought  from  one  room  to  another,  though  both
doors  (there  were  two  doors  in  the  room  in  which  the  sittings  were  held)
were  locked  before  the  sitting  was  commenced.

This  candle  incident  I  give  on  the  testimony  of  the  others,  as  I  myself
was  not  present  that  evening,  a  circumstance  which  I  afterwards  regretted.
Personally  I  have  not  seen  a  case  of  matter  through  matter.

During  that  winter  we  obtained  many  interesting  phenomena.  The
spirits  (?)  would  strike  any  note  we  asked  on  a  violin  or  harmonium  which
stood  by,  The  notes  requested  would  sound  forth  distinctly,  though  no
visible  hand  was  near  ;  and  this  was  done  both  in  the  dark  and  in  the  light,
though  more  often  in  the  dark.

One  evening  a  visitant  addressed  one  of  my  brothers  as  an  old  school-
fellow, and  in  proof  of  his  identity  he  reminded  my  brother  of  a  poem  they
had  once  learnt  together  as  boys,  namely,  one  by  "  Surfaceman  "  (Alexander
Anderson),  entitled  ''■The  blood  on  the  wheel."  My  brother  perfectly  recol-
lected the  exercise,  and  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  speaker.  The
wonderful  thing  here  was  that  the  medium  had  become  acquainted  with  my
brother  later  in  life,  and  had  no  knowledge  of  his  schooldays.

Of  the  scientific  value  of  these  results  I  was  not  aware  till  I  had  the
pleasure  of  meeting  yourself,  and  if  we  had  met  some  months  earlier  I  should
certainly  have  preserved  the  legible  results  of  our  sittings.  They  were
destroyed  in  ignorance  of  their  scientific  worth,  and  chiefly  because  associated


122


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


with  a  departed  brother  whose  early  death  we  still  lament.  Though  our
sittings  are  long  past  their  results  still  dwell  with  me  in  all  but  their  first
freshness.  Circumstances  conspired  to  break  up  our  little  company.  Of
our  circle  of  five  two  have  since  married,  one  has  left  the  district,  and
another  has  departed  this  life.  The  death  of  our  most  spirited  member  was
the  end  of  our  meetings.

On  the  "  telekinetic  phenomena  "  involved  in  this  case  I  must  not
here  dwell.  The  case  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  with  which  I  hope  to
deal  later,  will  aflford  a  better  opportunity  for  discussing  the  relations
between  automatism  and  telekinesis.

The  next  case  came  to  Dr.  Hodgson  from  a  group  of  persons  who
may  not  be  very  critical,  but  who  are  plainly  sincere.  The  pheno-
menon alleged,  however  surprising,  involves  but  a  simple  act  of
observation  and  should  have  been  easy  to  note  and  remember.

M.  Aut.  70.

Flushing,  July  19th,  1890.

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.

"  Dear  Sir, — It  affords  me  pleasure  to  respond  to  your  inquiry  concern-
ing the  item  of  spirit  writing  through  the  hand  of  a  little  child  just  four
years  of  age  who  had  no  knowledge  of  its  letters,  unaided  and  untaught.

' '  My  wife  had  a  niece  who  passed  to  spirit-life  twenty  years  ago,  who  was
in  life  strongly  attached  to  her,  and  whenever  we  come  in  contact  with  a
mediumistic  person  she  invariably  makes  her  presence  known  to  us.  My
daugliter,  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  another  young  lady  of  the  same  age,
opened  a  school  for  small  children  in  a  little  room  used  for  a  Sunday-school
))y  the  Baptist  society,  where  the  event  took  place.  It  was  approaching
Easter,  and  to  add  to  the  coming  exercises,  the  little  girl  was  especially  in-
vited to  join  them  in  rehearsing  their  pieces,  as  most  all  the  pupils  were
members  of  the  Mission  Sunday-school.  The  first  morning  of  her  attend-
ance a  slate  and  pencil  were  given  her  to  keep  her  quiet ;  she  scribbled
awhile,  when  it  was  noticed  that  she  had  written  very  distinctly  the  name
Emma.  As  it  was  known  that  the  child  had  never  been  inside  of  a  school
before,  and  that  she  knew  no  single  letter  of  the  alphabet,  it  was  a  great
surprise.  Tlie  slate  belonged  to  some  of  the  pupils,  hence  was  not  preserved
by  the  young  ladies.  I  regretted  the  loss  of  such  a  rare  test  of  spirit  con-
trol, and  urged  them  should  such  a  thing  ever  occur  again  to  preserve  it.
The  child  attended  the  day  following,  and  instead  of  slate  a  leaf  from  a
tablet  and  lead  pencil  were  given  her.  After  she  had  amused  herself  awhile
she  returned  the  paper,  and  it  was  seen  that  a  number  of  attempts  to  write
the  name  Emma  had  been  made.  As  she  handed  in  the  paper  she  said,
'  Nozer,'  and  another  sheet  was  given,  with  an  improvement  ;  the  third  was
given,  when  upon  either  side  was  written  with  bold  running  hand,  '  your
aunt  Emma, '  quite  as  large  and  perfect  as  the  above.

"True,  she  was  aunt  to  the  little  one  whose  little  hand  she  was  holding.
The  pressure  upon  the  paper  of  the  first  two  sheets  was  uneven  and  it
requires  close  attention  to  follow  some  portions  of  the  first  attempt,  but  in


The  Suhlimincd  Consciousness.


123


the  last  she  seems  to  have  overcome  all  difficulties  and  accomplished  her  pur-
pose of  giving  us  a  fact  of  spirit  control.

' '  Little  Etta  has  passed  on  to  the  higher  life  within  a  year  of  this  event.

"It  is  fair  to  say  her  parents  were  not  Spiritualists.  They  took  the  child
and  gave  her  paper  and  pencil,  but  failed  to  get  satisfactory  results.

"  That  little  circle  of  innocent  children  singing  their  songs  had  created  an
atmosphere  of  harmony  favourable  for  that  sensitive  little  child  to  receive
the  impress  or  control  of  a  decarnate  spirit.  Those  familiar  with  phenomena
of  this  kind  will  readily  appreciate  the  difference  in  conditions. — Yours
truly,  A.  E.  Hempstead."

"  This  is  to  certify  that  we  were  present  and  witnessed  the  writing  of
little  Etta,  as  described  in  the  foregoing  statement,  and  know  that  neither
Etta,  nor  any  other  pupil  present  at  the  time,  could  have  written  the
messages  of  their  own  abilities.

(Signed)  Laura  Hempstead.
L.  A.  K."

"  I  am  the  mother  of  little  Etta,  and  know  she  had  not  been  taught  the
alphabet,  or  how  to  hold  her  pencil.

(Signed)  Mrs.  B.  W.  Terry."

Newtown,  N.Y.,  October  Wth,  1890.

In  another  letter  Mr.  Hempstead  adds  : — "In  reply  to  your  last  inquiry
I  will  say  Etta's  message  was  written  just  before  Easter.

"The  messages  we  still  have,  although  somewhat  difficult  to  read,  as  they
were  in  pencil,  and  the  uneven  pressure  upon  the  paper  requires  close
attention.  We  did  not  ink  it  over,  as  we  wished  to  preserve  its  purity.
Remember  she  held  the  pencil  between  the  middle  fingers  of  her  left  hand,
as  she  was  not  taught  the  art  of  holding  her  pencil.  I  have  written  in  ink
upon  their  margins  in  the  order  that  she  wrote  them.

"  Will  gladly  loan  them  to  you,  trusting  they  will  be  duly  returned."

Newtown,  November  19th,  1890.

Mr.  Hodgson.

"Dear  Sir, — By  a  strange  grouping  of  circumstances  your  letter,
little  Etta's  mother,  the  young  lady  who  witnessed  the  writing,  all
came  into  our  home  here  in  Newtown  together,  bringing  the  mail  with  them,
as  if  unconsciously  directed,  so  I  am  prepared  to  return  your  paper  promptly.
They  all  read  it  and  without  hesitation  gave  their  signatures.  In  the  case
of  Miss  K.,  she  said  she  would  rather  not  have  her  name  mentioned  publicly
on  account  of  her  connection  with  the  church,  &c.,  which  you  may  readily
understand.

' '  The  mother  explained  that  the  child  was  left-handed,  and  L.  did  not
remember  about  the  manner  in  which  she  (Etta)  held  the  pencil.  But  my
daughter  is  positive,  and  one  not  likely  to  forget  so  novel  a  feature.
Hoping  the  above  will  suffice,  I  remain,  very  truly  yours  for  humanity,

"A.  E.  Hempstead."

Mr.  Hodgson  adds  :—  October  30th,  1890.

' '  Mr.  Hempstead  has  kindly  sent  me  the  writings  by  the  little  girl  Etta  for
my  inspection.  There  are  three  small  sheets  of  paper  with  several  attempts
at  writing  on  both  sides  of  each  sheet. There  are  indications  of  '  Aunt '


124-


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


and  '  Emma '  on  the  first  and  second  sheets  ;  Emma  being  written
tolerably  well  on  the  second  sheet.

"  The  enclosed  tracing  is  of  the  last  attempt."

[An  account  (seen  by  me  and  concordant  with  the  above)  had  been  sent
by  Mr.  Hempstead  to  the  Banner  of  Light  immediately  after  the  incident,
and  was  printed  May  4th,  1889.  I  have  seen  the  tracing  of  the  last  written
phrase,  "your  aunt  Emma."  It  is  a  free  scrawl,  resembling  the  planchette-
writing  of  an  adult  rather  than  the  first  effort  of  a  child. — F.W.H.M.]

I  know  not  in  what  light  I  should  have  regarded  my  next  case
had  I  seen  it  only  in  a  book  bearing  the  somewhat  alarming  title  of
The  Holy  Truth,  (Arthur  Hallah,  1876).  But  just  as  my  last-cited
narrative  is  not  necessarily  proved  to  be  fictitious  by  having  once
appeared  in  that  not  over-trustworthy  periodical,  Tlie  Banner  of  Light,
so  also  the  aggressiveness  of  religious  conviction  with  which  Mr.  Hugh
Junor  Browne's  experiences  have  inspired  him  does  not  prevent  his
being,  as  I  have  heard  from  the  Hon.  Sir  W.  G.  Windeyer,  Judge
of  Supreme  Court,  Sydney,  and  have  found  on  personal  acquaintance,
a  man  of  high  standing  as  to  both  character  and  practical  capacity.
He  is  a  prosperous  man  of  business  at  Melbourne,  and  the  elder  of  the
two  daughters  with  whose  automatism  we  have  to  deal  is  married  to
one  of  the  foremost  men  of  the  Colony  of  Victoria.  I  regard  him,
therefore,  as  a  witness  whose  strong  opinions,  indeed,  might  help  a
fraudulent  medium  to  deceive  him,  but  who  is  fully  to  be  trusted  as
regards  easily  observed  events  occurring  in  his  own  family  circle.  I
discussed  this  case  with  him  and  Mrs.  Browne  on  October  3rd,  1891.
Mrs.  Browne  seemed  to  me  a  good  witness,  and  corroborated  the  facts
so  far  as  immediately  known  to  her,  giving  me  a  written  confirmation
of  the  writing  of  the  young  child,  who  was  j^resent  at  our  interview,
as  a  young  lady  of  about  twenty.  Miss  Browne  cannot  remember
the  incident  in  her  fifth  year,  but  told  me  that  she  had  sometimes
written  automatically  since  that  date  ; — her  arm  used  to  feel  numb
Avhile  doing  so.

M. Aut.  71.

"  In  this  [automatic  writing]  we  were  unsuccessful,  until  it  came  to  the
turn  of  my  eldest  daughter,  a  girl  of  eleven  years  of  age,  to  take  the  pencil
in  hand.  Immediately  on  her  doing  so  her  hand  was  influenced  to  write,
causing  her  to  be  considerably  alarmed.  She  called  out,  '  Oh,  mamma  '  I
am  so  frightened,  my  hand  is  moving.'  We  all  pacified  her  as  much  as  pos-
sible, and  on  taking  up  the  paper  we  found  her  hand  had  written  on  it  quite
legibly,  though  in  rather  tremulous  characters,  quite  different  from  her
ordinary  writing,  the  following  sentence  :  '  Helen,  Grace,  Browne,  I  am
come  to  see  you.  Your  beloved  aunt.  You  will,'  &c.,  &c.  The  remainder
of  the  writing  was  too  faint  to  decipher.  The  name  written  above  is  that  of
my  second  daughter,  between  five  and  six  j'ears  of  age,  wlio  is  called  after
two  of  her  aunts,  my  sisters  ;  one  of  whom,  the  wife  of  an  officer  in  the


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


125


Indian  army,  passed  away  many  years  ago,  having  died  on  her  passage  home
from  India,  and  whose  spirit  we  afterwards  ascertained  influenced  the  girl's
hand  to  write  this  message  to  her  little  niece  and  namesake.  We  had  a
number  of  communications  through  the  same  source  that  evening  from
different  spirit-friends,  and  since  that  time,  except  on  two  occasions,  when
she  said  she  felt  no  influence  (a  reason  for  which  afterwards  was  given)
whenever  my  eldest  girl  sits  down  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  with
our  spirit-friends,  her  hand  is  almost  immediately  influenced  to  write.  Her
hand  has  written  as  many  as  forty  pages  of  large  notepaper  within  half-
an-hour,  which  in  her  ordinary  handwriting  would  take  her  several  hours
to  copy.

"  My  daughter  is  quite  unaware  of  what  she  is  writing  and  describes  the
sensation  of  the  influence  as  though  electricity  were  running  down  her  arm
from  the  shoulder.  This  is  what  is  termed  mechanical  writing  medium-
ship.  She  often  writes  far  beyond  her  own  powers  of  comprehension  on
subjects  of  which  she  has  not  the  least  conception,  spelling  words  correctly
which  she  does  not  understand,  and  of  which,  when  read  over,  she  inquires
the  meaning — such  words  as  clairvoyantly,  physically,  &c.  At  other  times
she  spells  small  words  incorrectly  which  in  her  ordinary  writing  she  would
spell  correctly.  She  has  written  in  French,  of  which  language  she  knows
but  the  rudiments  ;  she  has  written  in  Chinese  characters,  and  also  in  the
Kaffir  language,  of  neither  of  which  does  she  understand  a  word.  She  has
written  in  blank  verse,  which,  though  it  would  not  stand  the  scrutiny  of  a
critic,  is  decidedly  beyond  her  powers  in  this  line,  she  being  more  of  a
romp  than  a  student.

"My  daughter  has  frequently  been  influenced  to  write  messages  to
strangers  from  their  spirit-friends,  giving  them  particulars  about  things  of
which  she  could  not  possibly  know  anything,  and  signing  correctly  the
names  of  their  spirit-friends  in  spirit-life  of  whom  she  had  never  before
heard.  Her  mother  and  I  have  thought  of  a  question,  to  put  to  one  of  our
spirit-friends  when  she  was  not  present,  and  calling  her  into  the  room  have
given  her  a  pencil  and  paper,  and  she  has  written  a  correct  reply  to  the
question  mentally  asked,  and  signed  the  name  of  the  spirit-friend  of  whom
we  thought.  She  can  write  either  looking  away  from  or  on  to  the  paper.  A
difference  can  be  seen  in  the  writing  from  each  of  our  spirit-friends.  If  I
see  even  the  word  '  yes  '  written  through  her,  I  can  generally  tell  what
spirit  is  influencing  the  medium's  hand.  I  have  seen  her  write  the  letters
upside  down,  backwards,  left-handed,  and  in  various  ways  quite  impossible
for  the  child  to  do  herself,  and  sometimes  so  fast  you  can  hardly  see  her
hand  join  the  letters,  and  at  other  times  slow  ;  sometimes  in  a  very  small
hand,  at  others  in  bold  text-writing.

"  On  one  occasion  it  was  written  through  my  daughter's  hand  that  I  was
to  take  a  bottle  of  a  specific  I  have  for  rheumatism  to  a  Mr.  Reed,  directing
me  to  inquire  at  a  shop  in  the  next  street  to  where  he  used  to  live  and  I
would  be  directed  to  where  he  then  resided.  I  had  formerly  given  a  man  of
this  name  some  of  this  mixture,  which  had  relieved  him  of  the  pain,  but  had
not  seen  or  heard  of  him  for  months,  and  I  was  not  aware  that  he  had
removed  from  where  he  then  lived.  On  calling  at  his  former  residence  I
found  he  had  removed,  and  on  calling  as  instructed  at  the  shop  indicated  I


126


ifr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"was  told  where  Reed  then  lived.  I  found  him  confined  to  his  bed,  suffering
acutely  from  rheumatism,  and  gave  him  the  specific.

"I  may  mention  another  incident  which  occurred.  One  day  when  out
walking  with  my  wife  I  met  a  black  man  whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  but
whom  I  recognised  as  a  Kaffir  from  large  holes  made  in  his  ears  peculiar  to
that  race.  I  accosted  him  in  his  native  tongue,  at  which  he  seemed  rather
surprised,  and  I  gave  him  my  address,  telling  him  to  call  on  me.  This  he
did  just  as  we  were  sitting  down  to  investigate  this  subject.  I  told  the
servant  to  show  him  into  the  room,  and  on  asking  him  if  any  of  his  spirit-
friends  were  present,  my  daughter's  hand  wrote  out  several  Kaffir  names,
which  on  my  reading  out  to  him  he  recognised,  and  which  evidently  caused
him  great  astonishment.  On  asking  if  they  had  any  message  for  him,  a
sentence  was  written  in  the  Kaffir  language,  some  of  the  words  of  which
were  beyond  my  comprehension.  On  my  reading  the  message  out  to  the
Kaffir  he  understood  every  word  of  it  excei^t  one.  This  I  pronounced  in
various  ways  to  try  to  make  him  comprehend,  but  all  to  no  purpose,  when  my
daughter's  hand  was  influenced  to  write  'Click  with  the  mouth.'  This
reminded  me  of  a  peculiar  click  which  frequently  accompanies  the  sounding
of  the  letter  '  T  '  in  the  Kaffir  language,  and  on  my  pronouncing  this  word
he  understood  the  meaning  of  it  at  once.  I  may  state  my  daughter  does  not
know  a  word  of  Kaffir,  having  been  born  several  years  after  I  was  last  in
that  country.  I  inquired  who  influenced  her  hand  to  write,  as  the  art  of
writing  is  generally  unknown  to  Kaffirs,  and  was  informed  my  old  friend
H.  S.,  whose  native  name  was  '  Nonquambeen,'  had  written  the  message
at  the  request  of  the  Kaffir's  spirit-friends.  I  may  add  H.  S.  was  a  well-
educated  man,  whose  memory  I  hold  in  regard,  and  who  when  in  this  life
could  talk  the  Kaffir  language  fairly,  having  been  an  old  settler  in  Natal.
I  explained  to  my  Kaffir  visitor  that  the  Insleseea,  or  souls  of  his  friends, were
present,  at  which  he  seemed  rather  terrified.  I  assured  him  there  were
numbers  of  my  spirit-friends  present  also,  and  that  my  children  frequently
described  both  the  spirits  of  my  friends  and  of  some  of  his  countrymen  who
were  in  my  emjaloy,  and  others  whom  I  knew  many  years  ago.  This  only
seemed  to  increase  his  fear.  I  think  I  have  referred  to  Chinese  having  been
written  through  my  daughter's  liand  imperfectly,  and  on  my  remarking  that
I  did  not  think  it  was  like  the  Chinese  characters,  I  was  informed  by  one  of
my  Anglican  spirit-friends  that  it  was  the  first  time  the  Chinese  spirit  had
influenced  a  medium  to  write,  and  that  he  would  improve  by  practice.  On
showing  it  to  a  Chinese  (there  were  thirteen  or  fourteen  pages  of  it)  he  could
not  make  out  many  of  the  characters,  but  here  and  there  he  said,  '  That
means  sound, '  '  That  means  twenty, '  and  so  on,  and  remarked,  '  This  like
little  China  boy's  writing,  not  know  write  good.'

"One  day,  while  receiving  communications  through  my  daughter's  hand,  I
observed  written,  '  Put  down  that  balloon.'  I  remarked  to  my  wife,  'What
on  earth  have  they  to  do  with  balloons  in  spirit-life  ? '  She  smiled,  and  told
me  that  our  daughter  had  in  her  left  hand  one  of  those  jjink  india-rubber  toy
balloons,  which  she,  childlike,  had  been  trying  to  inflate  with  her  breath
whilst  her  right  hand  was  writing  the  communications.  I  was  sitting  on  the
medium's  right-hand  side,  and  was  so  interested  in  tlie  communications  as
written  that  I  had  not  taken  notice  what  she  was  doing  with  her  left  hand.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


127


•on  which  side  my  wife  sat.  At  another  time,  in  reply  to  a  query  by  me  on
some  deep  theological  matter,  through  ray  daughter's  hand  it  was  written,
'How  can  you  expect  an  answer  to  such  a  question  through  a  child's
organisation  1 '  I  have  several  reams  of  paper  filled  with  communications
received  through  my  daughter's  hand." {The  Holy  Truth,  pp.  63-71.)

The  incident  of  the  child's  writing  is  given  in  the  same  book  (p.  71),
being  then  of  quite  recent  date.  I  will,  however,  give  here  the  account,
of  course  much  later,  but  concordant,  and  in  some  points  fuller,  which
was  given  to  me  at  the  interview  above  mentioned.

M.  Aut.  72.

' '  When  our  daughter  Nelly  was  nearly  five  years  old,  she  had  not  learned
a  single  letter  of  her  alphabet.  She  had  certainly  received  no  instruction
whatever.  One  day  her  elder  sister  was  writing  automatically.  To  please
the  child,  we  put  a  pencil  in  her  hand.  Presently  we  observed  that  she  had
written  some  words,  and  on  looking  we  saw  that  the  words  were  '  I  am  a  mes-
meric medium.'  [Words  'I  am  a'  not  present  in  earlier  account.]  She
had  been  under  our  eyes  all  the  time.  The  words  were  written  in  a  small
angular  lady's  handwriting.  I  then  asked  my  elder  daughter's  '  guide, '
the  late  Dr.  Godfrey  Howitt,  to  explain  this.  Instead  of  the  accustomed
writing,  a  message  came  in  the  writing  of  my  elder  sister,  the  late
Mrs.  Colonel  Kelso,  to  the  effect  :  [here  I  give  the  correct  wording  as  in
earlier  record]  '  She  will  be  very  mediumistic,  but  is  too  young  to  be  in-
fluenced ;  do  not  let  her  sit  until  she  is  older,  or  you  will  injure  her
health.'  We  did  not  let  her  write  automatically  for  some  years  afterwards  ;
then  she  did  write  for  some  little  time,  and  then  the  power  left  her.

' '  Hugh  Junor  Browne.

"  Octohcr  Srcl,  1891."  "  Elizabeth  Browne.

I  must  here  close  for  the  present  my  budget  of  evidence.  In  spite
of  repeated  limitations  of  the  subject  proposed  for  this  paper,  I  have
been  unable  within  my  limits  to  deal  adequately  with  any  one  group  of
motor  messages.  Of  the  class  last  touched  upon,  indeed, — alleged
communications  from  the  departed, — I  have  already  in  other  papers
published  several  examples.  Some  of  those  have  pointed,  as  some  of
these  fresh  narratives  do  also  point,  towards  a  direct  transmission  from
a  personality  still  vividly  concerned  with  the  loves  and  deeds  of  earth.
Other  cases,  especially  in  this  present  group,  suggest  something  of  less
personal  intercourse,  as  though  the  communion  were  rather  of  man's
own  incarnate  spirit  with  some  vaster  knowledge  existing  somewhere
"beyond  his  earthly  ken.

But  indeed  the  question,  "Can  I  communicate  with  a  departed
soul  ? "  can  seem  simple  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  imperfectly  understood.  At
each  end  of  that  desired  communication  lies  a  group  of  problems  which
only  darken  beneath  our  steadier  gaze.  Suppose  that  an  inhabitant  of
some  other  world  were  to  ask  me,  "  Can  you  communicate  with  other
men,  and  if  so,  with  which  men  ?  "  what  should  my  answer  be  ?  Can


128


Mr.  F.  F.  H.  Myers.


I  claim  to  communicate  with  Homer, — whose  very  personality  is  re-
mote and  uncertain, — in  a  truer  sense  than  I  communicate  with  a
living  clown  1  Must  T  not  needs  begin  any  intelligible  reply  by  ex-
plaining the  bodily  senses  Avliich  I  possess,  and  the  forces  of  nature
which  are  to  some  extent  at  my  disposal,  and  the  poAver  afforded  by
printed  books  of  holding  converse  with  the  past,  or  even  of  affecting
minds  akin  to  mine  in  the  near  future  1  Is  it  not  the  answering  thought,
the  common  emotion,  which  is  the  true  companionship,  whether  words
and  glances  have  passed  between  the  two  organisms  or  no  ?

And  if  there  be  such  difficulties  in  defining  communication  between
two  personalities  which  still  employ  methods  material,  familiar,  and
measurable,  what  will  be  the  case  when  one  of  those  interlocutors  is
already  "  beyond  our  bounds  of  time  and  place,"  and  operates  by  un-
known forces  from  a  centre  inconceivable  by  men  ?

For  what  indeed  is  to  be  our  conception  of  identity  prolonged
beyond  the  tomb  1  In  earth-life  the  actual  body,  in  itself  but  a  sub-
ordinate element  in  our  thought  of  our  friend,  did  yet  by  its  physical
continuity  override  as  a  symbol  of  identity  all  lapses  of  memory,  all
changes  of  the  character  within.  Yet  it  was  memory  and  character —
the  stored  impressions  upon  which  he  reacted,  and  his  specific  mode  of  re-
action— which  made  our  veritable  friend.  How  much  of  memory,  how
much  of  character  must  he  preserve  for  our  recognition  ?  We  do  not
ask  that  he  or  we  should  remember  always,  or  should  remember  all.
It  would  suffice  us  if,  as  Plato  has  it,  the  potential  memory  of  an
endless  Past,  lost  for  awhile  in  each  dreamlike  incarnation,  should
revive  in  intercurrent  spaces  of  absolute  Being.  But  what  if  some
vaster  memory  should  comprehend  our  friend's  and  ours,  and  should
speak  for  him  with  complete  retrospection,  and  should  know  us  better
than  we  know  1,  Again,  must  his  faults,  his  limitations,  persist  if  we
are  to  love  him  still  ?  Or  may  memory  be  expanded  into  omniscience
and  character  elevated  into  divinity,  if  only  the  imagined  Friend  can
still  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  1

Nothing,  surely,  need  be  lost  even  if  some  part  of  what  might
seem  immediate  converse  with  a  soul  known  and  dear  should  prove
rather  to  be  a  faint,  a  confused,  a  grotesque  intimation  that  somewhat
within  us  also  is  an  integral  element  in  the  Source  and  Sum  of  Things.
No  communion  of  finite  with  finite  soul  can  be  like  the  communion  of
finite  soul  with  Infinite; — "the  flight  of  the  One  to  the  One."  No
other  knowledge  can  be  like  the  knowledge  that  not  far  from  every  one
of  us  is  that  indwelling  and  limitless  SjDirit  which — as  one  of  these
strangely-written  messages  themselves  has  phrased  it — "  is  at  once
thine  innermost  Self  and  thine  ever  unattainable  Desire."


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


129


II.

THE  DEFENCE OF  THE  THEOSOPHISTS.

By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.  •  '

I  cannot,  I  fear,  anticipate  that  the  paper  which  follows  will  prove
of  thrilling  interest  to  many  of  my  readers  ;  nor  can  I  even  claim  that
it  has  been  rendered  necessary  by  any  evidence  of  doubt  or  hesita-
tion among  members  of  the  S.P.R.  as  to  the  validity  of  the  verdict
which  was  pronounced  against  Madame  Blavatsky  and  her  accomplices
in  Part  IX.,  Vol.  III.,  of  these  Proceedings.  Yet,  if  only  for  the  sake
of  historical  completeness,  it  seems  worth  while  to  set  forth  in  a  short
article  the  absolute  futility,  in  my  judgment,  of  the  appeals  against
that  verdict  which  have  been  thus  far  made.  With  the  death  of
Madame  Blavatsky  the  whole  discussion  has  lost  much  of  its  interest,
but  what  I  have  now  to  say  may  still  be  taken  as  tending  in  a  certain
sense  to  the  glorification  of  that  lost  leader,  as  showing  how  judicious
was  the  boldness  with  which  she  speculated  on  human  gullibility  ; — ■
how  sage  was  her  conviction  that  with  the  popidus  qui  vtdt  decijn  no
such  trifles  as  facts  or  figures  will  long  be  allowed  to  stand  in  the  way.

In  the  expiring  number  (March,  1891)  of  the  monthly  magazine
Time,  Mrs.  Annie  Besant  made  an  attack  upon  my  Report  on
Phenomena  connected  with  the  Theosophical  Society  published  in
Vol.  III.  of  our  Proceedings.  "Were  I  satisfied  that  the  reader  of
Mrs.  Besant's  article  would  consult  my  original  Report  for  the  purpose
of  seeing  how  far  her  statements  were  justified,  I  would  leave  the
question  as  it  stands.  This,  however,  is  hardly  to  be  expected,  and  it
seems  to  me  desirable  that  I  should  myself,  as  briefly  as  possible,  point
out  the  chief  mistakes  made  by  Mrs.  Besant,  referring  my  readers  for
additional  details  to  the  specific  passages  concerned  in  my  original
Report.

Further,  Mr.  Sinnett,  in  the  Review  of  Reviews  for  June,  1891,  has
repeated  some  statements  which  he  had  previously  made  as  to  the
method  of  my  investigations, — and  to  which  I  replied  at  the  time  in
the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  November,  1885.  My  reply  notwithstanding,
which  concerns  matters  of  fact  easily  verifiable  by  any  intelligent
person,  Mr.  Sinnett  has  chosen  to  repeat  these  statements  on  moi'e  than
one  occasion,  without  making  any  reference  whatever  to  my  reply,  and

E


130


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


as  our  Journal  is  not  readily  accessible  to  the  public  I  shall  repeat  my
reply  here.

I  shall  also  take  this  opportunity  to  notice  some  other  statements
made  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  1886,  not  long  after  the  publication  of  my
original  Report  ^December,  1885),  and  which  I  thought  at  that  time
scarcely  needed  any  fresh  consideration.  I  refer  to  the  pamphlet
entitled  The  "  Occult  World  Phenomena,'^  and  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  and  the  volume  entitled  Incidents  in  the  Life  of  Madame
Blavatsky.

I  shall  first  ask  the  reader's  attention  to  some  general  charges
made  originally  by  Mr.  Sinnett, — and  partly  i-epeated  since  by  Mrs.
Besant, — to  which  I  replied  some  years  ago  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.

Mrs.  Besant  speaks  of  my  "  English  ignorance  of  Hindu  thought  "
and  "  English  contempt  for  Hindu  veracity,"  and  regai'ds  the  Hindu
race  apparently  as  one  "that  to  guard  its  holy  things  from  the  insolent
foreigner  will  deny  point-blank  a  belief  that  will  be  frankly  acknow-
ledged among  sympathisers."  Mr.  Sinnett  makes  a  similar  suggestion
in  his  pamphlet  on  The  "  Occult  World  Phenomena"  (fee.  (pp.  5-7) ;
and  he  has  made  other  charges,  which  he  repeats,  in  the  Review  of
Reviews,  p.  556.  Referring  to  my  investigations  he  says:  "That
gentleman  never  sought  her  [Madame  Blavatsky's]  explanations  of  the
circumstances  he  thought  suspicious,  never  showed  her  the  originals  of
the  lettei'S  on  which  the  whole  accusation  tui^ned,  and  disguised  his
unfavourable  conclusions  while  staying  as  a  guest  at  the  Theosophical
headquarters."  Now  I  cannot  suppose  that  Mr.  Sinnett  did  not  see
my  reply  to  some  of  these  suggestions  which  he  circulated  among  the
members  of  the  S.P.R.  in  the  form  of  a  letter  dated  October  12th,
1885,  addressed  to  the  editor  of  Light;  and  his  repetition  of  these
charges — ignoring  both  my  own  reply  made  at  the  time  and  some
statements  made  still  earlier  by  Professor  Sidgwick — indicates  that
his  excess  of  zeal  on  behalf  of  Madame  Blavatsky  is  leading  him
into  actions  which  to  the  "  Western  "  mind,  "  unfamiliar  with  India
and  Indian  ways,"  seem  somewhat  questionable. ^  I  am  under  the
impression — subject  to  Mr.  Sinnett's  correction  if  I  am  wrong — that

1  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  in  a  letter  to  the  Review  of  Rcviexos  for  July,  18!)1,  called
attention  to  another  statement  by  Mr.  Sinnett  which  "suggested  an  inference  at
variance  with  fact."  Mr.  Myers  wrote  in  reply  :  "'At  first,'  says  Mr.  Sinnett,  'the
leaders  of  the  S.P.R.  undoubtedly  accepted  Mr.  Hodgson's  views.'  If  it  is  intended
to  suggest  that  the  members  of  the  Committee  who  inquired  into  those  alleged
marvels  have  since  that  date  in  any  way  modified  their  condemnatory  judgment,  that
suggestion  is  aljsolutely  without  foundation.  I  have  not,  indeed,  encountered  any
member  of  our  Society  who,  having  studied  the  evidence  contained  in  Part  IX.  of  our
Procecdinys  (pulalished  by  Trtibner  in  1885,  and  to  be  had  of  any  bookseller),  has  found
his  judgment  in  any  degree  affected  by  any  of  the  so-called  replies,  or  protestations
of  innocence,  which  have  as  yet  been  given  to  the  public."


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


131


■some  leading  Theosophists,  on  seeing  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters,^
took  refuge  in  the  explanation  (broached  by  one  of  the  "  Mahatmas  "  1 )
that  they  were  forgeries  perpetrated  by  Black  Magicians,  and  I
suppose  that  Mr.  Sinnett  was  anxious  to  obtain  an  expression  of
Madame  Blavatsky's  opinion,  from  some  occult  poi7it  of  vieio,  upon  the
authorship  of  the  letters.  Otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  light
she  could  possibly  throw  on  the  subject  by  inspection  of  the  originals.
From  the  Theosophists'  point  of  view  Madame  Blavatsky  was  not  an  ex-
pert in  handwriting ;  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Editor  of  the  Madras
Christian  College  Magazine,  in  whose  possession  the  letters  were,  she
was  an  unscrupulous  intriguer  who  would  not  hesitate  to  use  any  oppor-
tunity that  she  might  get  of  tampering  with  the  letters  in  question.  Had
the  letters  been  in  my  own  exclusive  possession,  I  should  have  felt  com-
pelled to  exercise  great  care  to  prevent  Madame  Blavatsky's  obtaining
any  such  opportunity.  But  the  letters  were  not  mine,  and  I  had  no
permission  to  show  them  to  Madame  Blavatsky  even  had  she  asked
me  to  do  so,  as  she  did  not ;  doubtless  because  she  was  well  aware
that  I  had  no  such  control  over  them.  All  this  and  more  I  sufficiently
indicated  in  my  letter  to  the  JoiLrnal  S.P.R.,  jSTovember,  1885, —
which,  as  I  have  said  above,  I  cannot  suppose  that  Mr.  Sinnett  has
not  seen.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  my  letter : —

In  the  first  place  I  had  no  authority  to  show  these  letters  to  Madame
Blavatsky,  and  Madame  Blavatsky  well  knew  that  I  had  none.  She
frequently  asked  me  whetlier  I  had  seen  the  letters  myself,  and  she  knew
that  a  considerable  time  had  elapsed  before  I  had  an  opportunity  of  doing
so,  in  consequence  of  the  absence  from  Madras  of  the  Editor  of  the  CJiristiaa
College  Magazine;  and  when  I  was  first  enabled  to  inspect  them,  I  spoke
to  her  of  certain  restrictions  which  were  placed — I  think  quite  rightly —
upon  my  use  of  them.  Several  of  them  I  had  in  my  own  possession  for
a  day  or  two  only,  for  my  own  examination.  The  remaining  ones  I
examined  in  the  house  of  a  gentleman  in  whose  custody  they  were  at  the
time,  and  two  groups  of  them  were  eventually  entrusted  to  me  for  the  specific
purpose  of  being  sent  to  England  for  the  judgment  of  the  best  caligraphic
experts  obtainable  here  (a  fact  of  which  I  did  not  think  it  necessary  to
inform  Madame  Blavatsky),  under  the  particular  condition  that  they  should
be  returned  as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  they  were  actually  sent  back  to  India
before  my  arrival  in  England.  Those  which  I  had  in  my  own  posssesion
for  a  short  time  I  was  requested  not  to  take  on  my  own  responsibility
to  the  headquarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  the  Editor  of  the  Christian

^  It  will  be  remembered  that  these  were  the  documents  adduced  in  support  of
their  charge  of  fraud  against  Madame  Blavatsky  by  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb,  who
had  been  attached  to  the  Theosophical  Society  for  several  years  in  positions  of  trust,
M.  and  Madame  Coulomb  alleged — correctly,  as  investigation  sliowed, — that  these
documents  were  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky  and  afforded  clear  proof  of  trickery
on  her  part. I  have  c^uoted  from  some  of  them  in  my  Report,  pp.  211-219.


132


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


College  Magazine  being  naturally  apprehensive  that  Madame  Blavatsky
might  seize  an  opportunity  of  tampering  with  them. '  In  the  second  place,
Madame  Blavatsky  had  explicitly  pronounced  certain  portions  of  them  to
be  forgeries,  when  they  were  first  published,  and  I  should  be  surprised  to
learn  that  she  had  ever  expressed  any  wish  to  see  the  originals  while  I  was  at
Madras.  Had  she  done  so,  I  have  no  doubt  that  some  arrangement  would
have  been  made  according  to  which  she  would  have  had  the  liberty  of
inspecting  them  in  the  presence  of  witnesses.  That  T  do  not  say  this
unadvisedly  is  sufficiently  shown  by  the  fact  that  some  of  the  disputed
letters  ivere  taken  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Society  and  shown  to
Theosophists,  in  September,  1884,  in  consequence  of  a  request  by  Major-
General  Morgan  to  see  the  letter  in  which  he  was  concerned.  The  Editor
of  the  Christian  College  Magazine  writes  in  the  number  for  April,  1885  : —

' '  We  took  with  us  to  headquarters  four  of  the  disputed  letters,  and
freely  allowed  all  present  to  examine  them.  In  return  we  asked  to  be
])ermitted  to  see  some  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  recent  letters  to  Dr.  Hartmann,
Damodar,  or  anyone  at  headquarters.  This  request  was  complied  with  only
to  tlie  extent  of  showing  us  a  portion  of  a  letter  written  from  Paris.  No
Theosophist  has  ever  asked  to  see  any  other  letter,  or  his  request
would  have  been,  under  proper  precautions,  at  once  complied  with."

I  have  no  doubt  that  what  the  editor  of  the  magazine  quoted  says
is  true,  and  that  Madame  Blavatsky  never  requested  permission  to
see  the  letters.  In  the  face  of  these  explanations  of  mine,  but  with-
out making  any  reference  to  them,  Mr.  Sinnett  repeats  the  statement
that  I  never  showed  Madame  Blavatsky  the  originals  of  the  letters  in
dispute, — a  statement  quite  true  in  itself,  but  introduced  by  Mr.
Sinnett  in  a  way  distinctly  and  apparently  intentionally  calculated  to
mislead  the  reader  concerning  the  actual  circumstances.

In  what  way  my  alleged  ignorance  of  the  natives  operated  I  am
somewhat  at  a  loss  to  conceive,  and  I  may  here  quote  another  passage
from  my  letter  [Journal  S.P.R.,  November,  1885)  in  reply  to  Mr..
Sinnett : —

He  speaks  of  my  "  unfamiliarity  with  India  and  Indian  ways  "  as  having
led  me  "into  many  serious  mistakes."  Of  course  I  do  not  claim  the
familiarity  with  India  which  Mr.  Sinnett  possesses,  but  I  do  not  see  how
this  fact  can  affect  my  investigation  in  the  way  Mr.  Sinnett  seems  to
suppose.  He  may,  indeed,  mean  tliat  I  ought  not  to  have  been  surprised  to
find  that  certain  ciidas  told  me  delil)erato  falsehoods,  and  that  had  I  been
more  familiar  with  Indian  ways  I  should  have  known  that  such  falsehoods
were  the  natural  outcome  of  "  Occultism."  This  I  anr  not  concerned  to
dispute  ;  but  if  he  means  that  my  unfamiliarity  with  India  and  Indian  ways
rendered  me  incapable  of  taking  down  evidence  correctly,  of  comjjaring
documents  and  drawing  reasonable  inferences,  of  examining  envelopes  which
had  been  surreptitiously  opened,  of  carefully  exploring  the  interstices  of
ceilings  and  other  localities  where  marvellous  phenomena  were  alleged  to

1  I  was  allowed  only  a  similar  degree  of  liberty  with  certain  documents  which  I
obtained  from  Theosophists.


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


133


liave  occurred,  I  must  simply  join  issue  with  him.  It  was,  at  any  rate,  not
Tinfamilarity  with  Indian  ways  that  led  the  Parsee  gentleman,  Mr.  K.  M.
Seervai,  formerly  Vice-President  of  the  Theosophical  Society  at  Bombay,  to
give  up  all  connection  with  the  Society,  or  that  led  Mr.  S.  K.  Chatter jee,
formerly  President  of  the  Lahore  Branch,  to  declare  that  the  Society  was
"  a  huge  imposture,  "  or  that  led  Mr.  A.  0.  Hume,  long  before  the  exposures
of  the  Coulombs,  to  the  opinion  that  some  of  the  chelas  were  morally
untrustworthy — that  the  Shrine  was  a  "conjurer's  box" — and  that  many
other  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  phenomena  were  fraudulently  produced,  or  that
led  Pundit  Dayanund  Saraswati,  the  President  of  the  Arya  Somaj  of  India,
to  inform  the  public,  in  1882,  that  "neither  Colonel  Olcott  nor  Madame
IBlavatsky  knows  anything  of  Yog  Vidya  (occult  science)  as  practised  by  the
Yogis  of  old,"  and  that  "for  them  to  say  that  they  perform  their
■phenomena  without  apparatus,  without  any  secret  pre-arrangement,  and
solely  through  the  forces  existing  in  nature  (electricity),  and  by  what  they
call  their  '  will-power,'  is  to  tell  a  lie."

The  other  general  statements  which  I  have  quoted  from  Mr.
Sinnett  are  also  misrepresentations,  and  further  show  his  ignorance  of
the  state  of  affairs  at  Adyar.  When  Madame  Blavatsky  was  likely  to
have  anything  to  say  of  any  importance  whatever,  I  questioned  her  on
the  matter.  Her  replies  consisted  chiefly  in  the  trumping  up  of  ex  post
facto  documents,  in  deliberate  falsehoods,  and  the  suborning  of  false
testimony.  For  references  to  Madame  Blavatsky's  statements  see  my
Beport,  pp.  211,  221  note,  292  note,  318-321,  324,  331,  335-6,  346.

Mr.  Sinnett  speaks  of  my  disguising  my  "unfavourable  conclusions
while  staying  as  a  guest  at  the  Theosophical  headquarters."  In  the
first  place  I  had  no  "  conclusions  "  at  the  time  referred  to.  I  reached
Madras  on  December  18th,  1884,  went  to  stay  at  the  Theosophical
Headquarters  on  December  25th,  and  left  on  January  3rd,  though  of
course  I  made  frequent  calls  there  afterwai'ds  until  the  end  of  my  stay
in  India,  March  26th,  1885.  As  an  instance  of  the  way  in  which  the
expression  of  my  unfavourable  conclusions  was  met  as  regards  one
special  part  of  my  investigation,  I  may  refer  to  a  case  given  in  my
Report,  pp.  335-6.  I  had  pointed  out  that  there  was  no  satisfactory
evidence  that  anyone  had  examined  the  west  side  of  the  wall  immedi-
ately behind  the  Shrine.  (The  Shrine  was  a  cupboard  placed  in  the
so-called  Occult  Room,  which  adjoined  Madame  Blavatsky's  bedroom.
It  was  fixed  against  the  party-wall  between  the  two  rooms.  Letters
and  other  objects  were  alleged  to  have  appeared  in  it  by  other  than
■ordinary  means.  The  evidence  adduced  in  my  Report  went  to  show
that  they  were  put  there  surreptitiously  through  a  sliding  panel  at  the
Lack,  to  which  there  was  access  through  Madame  Blavatsky's
Ijedroom.)  This  was  early  in  February.  The  result  was  an  ex  post
facto  Mahatma  letter  foisted  ujDon  Colonel  Olcott  by  Madame
Rlavatsky,  who  by  means  of  it  succeeded  in  engendering  a  pseudo-


134


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


memory  in  Colonel  Olcott's  mind  that  he  had  incidentally  made  such
examinations  himself.  I  assumed  Colonel  Olcott's  innocence  in  the
matter  ;  the  reader  of  my  Report  may  remember  that  I  quoted  Madame
Blavatsky  as  calling  Colonel  Olcott  a  "  psychologised  baby  "  (Report,
p.  311 ).  In  the  second  place,  when  I  did  reach  my  final  conclusions,  I
communicated  them  at  Adyar  with  some  interesting  results,  of  which
Mr.  Sinnett  is  manifestly  ignorant.  On  February  23rd  I  left  Madras
for  Bombay.  There  I  obtained  much  important  evidence  by  my  own
inquiries,  and  made  the  personal  acquaintance  of  Mr.  A.  O.  Hume,
who  gave  me  much  assistance  then  and  afterwards.  On  March  11th
I  returned  to  Madras,  whither  Mr.  Hume  had  preceded  me.  In  the
course  of  the  next  few  days  I  discussed  the  results  of  my  investigations
with  the  leading  Theosophists  at  Adyar.  It  was  on  the  evening  of
March  13th,  at  a  conference  between  Dr.  Hartmann,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cooper-
Oakley,  Mr.  Hume  and  myself,  that  Dr.  Hartmann  finally  confessed

that  "  nobody  was  allowed  to  touch  that  d  Shrine,"  and  he  then

related  the  incident  described  on  p.  224  of  my  Report,  concerning  the
discovery  of  the  sliding  panel  of  the  Shrine  and  the  subsequent  destruc-
tion of  the  Shrine  itself.  I  had  learned  from  Mr.  A.  D.  Ezekiel,  in
Bombay,  that  he  had  discovered  independently  that  there  had  once
been  a  hole  in  the  wall  behind  the  Shrine,  but  that  it  had  been  care-
fully blocked  up.  Dr.  Hartmann  then  admitted  that  traces  of  this
hole  had  been  discovered  previously,  but  the  discovery  was  kept  a
secret.  On  the  following  morning  Mr.  Hume  drew  up  some  statements
to  form  proposed  resolutions  for  an  informal  meeting  to  be  held  in  the
evening  by  himself,  the  Oakleys,  Hartmann,  Ragoonath  Row,  Subba
Row,  and  P.  Sreenevas  Row.  These  were  to  the  effect  that  most  of
the  phenomena  in  connection  with  the  Theosophical  Society  were
fraudulent,  as  ajjpears  from  such  of  the  Coulombs'  statements  as  have
been  verified,  and  the  independent  investigations  by  myself,  that  the
Society  be  reconstituted,  that  Madame  Blavatsky,  Olcott,  Damodar,
Babajee  and  Bhavani  Shankar  should  resign  their  connection  with  it,,
that  the  disputed  letters  are  genuine,  and  that  Hartmann's  pamphlet  ^
as  well  as  the  Defence  pamphlet  ^  should  be  withdrawn,  as  being  founded

'  Report  of  Observations  made  during  a  nine  months^  stay  at  the  headquarters  of
the  Theosophical  Society  at  Adyar  (Madras),  India,  by  F.  Hartmann,  M.D.,  F.T.S.

"  Other  curious  incidents  in  connection  with  this  pamphlet  were  known  to  some  of
the  Theosophists  at  the  Adyar  headquarters  as  well  as  to  myself.  The  "Defence
Pamphlet "  was  compiled  chiefly  by  Dr.  Hartmann,  and  is  that  quoted  from  by  Mrs.
Besant,  who  i-efers  to  it  as  "'Report  of  the  Result  of  an  Investigation, '  by  a  Com
mittee  of  the  Council  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  Madras,  1885."  It  is  also  quoted'
from  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  The  "Occult  World  Phenomena,"  and  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.  This  "Defence  Pamphlet"  was  issued  in  March,  1885.  Its.
full  title  is :  Report  of  the  Result  of  an  Investigation  into  the  charges  against
Madame  Blavatsky, brought  by  the  Missionaries  of  the  Scottish  Free  Church  at


The  Defence  of  the  Theoso'phists.


135


on  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  circumstances.  These  resolutions,
as  I  was  informed  by  Mr.  Hume,  were  not  carried,  the  Oakleys  and
Dr.  Hartmann  being  unwilling  to  go  so  far  as  to  condemn  the  pheno-
mena as  fraudulent.  It  was  decided,  however,  that  the  pamphlets
should  be  withdrawn.  The  circulation  of  these  pamphlets  was  there-
fore stopped,  and  early  in  April  the  following  announcement  appeared
in  the  Madras  Mail : —

"  The  Theosophists. — Colonel  Olcott  writes  on  behalf  of  the  General
Council  of  the  Theosophist  Society  to  say  that  '  as  a  number  of  copies  of  a
pamphlet  entitled  Report  of  the  Result  of  the  Investigations  into  the  Charges
brought  against  Madame  Blavatsky  have  been  circulated,  it  is  my  duty  to
state  that  the  issue  has  not  been  ordered  by  the  General  Council,  nor
authorised  by  the  Committee.'  "

It  is  from  this  pamphlet,  officially  disowned  by  the  Theosophical
Society,  that  Mr.  Sinnett  and  Mrs.  Besant,  as  we  shall  see  later,  quote
accounts  of  examinations  of  the  Shrine.  But  what  I  desire  the  reader
at  present  to  note  is  that  the  pamphlet  was  thus  officially  disowned
Mi  consequence  of  my  communicating  to  the  leading  Theosophists  at
Adyar  the  residts  of  my  investigations.  Madame  Blavatsky's  atti-
tude to  myself,  as  expressed  at  the  time,  was  as  characteristic  as  her
subsequent  vituperation.  With  her  keen  insight  into  human  nature,
she  was  well  aware  that  whatever  prepossessions  I  had  at  the  outset  of
my  investigation  were  distinctly  in  her  favour,  and  in  the  last  interview
which  I  had  with  herself  and  Colonel  Olcott,  she  declared  that  the
Brotherhood  was  unwilling  that  the  world  should  at  this  time  believe
in  their  existence,  that  I  had  in  fact  been  practically  guided  by  the
Brothers  themselves,  that  she  knew  I  had  done  the  most  possible  for
her  sake,  that  there  was  no  alternative  but  for  me  to  reach  the  con-
clusion which  I  had  reached,  that  it  was  partly  the  result  of  her  own
bad  Karma,  that  she  deserved  the  fate  which  had  overtaken  her,  but
that  some  day  in  the  far  distant  future  I  might  come  to  believe  that
after  all  she  was  innocent.  With  me  personally,  face  to  face,  she  was
courageous  unto  the  last.

I  pass  on  to  consider  the  article  by  Mrs.  Besant.  She  alleges  that
my  "  prejudice "  made  me  "  welcome  every  unproven  suspicion  or
charge  made  by  known  enemies  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  ignore
all  evidence  tendered  by  friends." As  to  the  "prejudice,"  it  was

Madras,  and  examined  hij  a  Committee  appointed  for  that  purpose  hy  the  General
Council  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  The  full  title  of  the  other  pamphlet,  referred
to  above  as  "Hartniann's  pamphlet,"  is:  Report  of  Observations  made  during  u
nine  months'  stay  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society  at  Adyar  [Madras),
India,  by  F.  Hartmann,  M.D.,  F.T.S.  (an  American  Buddhist).  The  first  edition
was  issued  in  September,  1884,  and  marked  "l^Private  and  Confidential]  ";  the  second
edition  was  published  apparently  in  October,  1884.


13G


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


known  to  my  personal  friends  and  also  I  believe  to  some  of  the  leading
Theosophists  at  the  time  in  London,  that  whatever  "  prejudice  "  I  may
have  had  was  certainly  not  against  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena
connected  with  Madame  Blavatsky  (Report,  p.  208).  I  was,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  prepossessed  in  her  favour.  Mrs.  Besant  states  that  I
ignored  "  all  evidence  tendered  by  friends,"  yet  she  claims  to  have
read  my  Report  "carefully."  If  so,  she  should  recall  that  apart  from  the
question  of  handwriting  the  great  bulk  of  the  evidence  oiiered  in  my
Report  was  furnished  by  Theosophists  themselves  (e.g.,  Report,  Appen-
dix IV.),  while  the  remaining  part  of  the  evidence  consisted  almost
exclusively  of  information  verifiable  by  any  person,  such  as  my  own
descriptions  of  specific  places  like  the  rooms  and  grounds  of  Crow's
Nest  Bungalow,  or  of  the  Adyar  Headquarters,  or  the  items  in  account
books  of  well-known  shops  in  Madras,  or  the  facts  about  cei'tain  letters
and  documents  (see  Report,  Appendices  V.,  XIV.,  and  XV.).  I  do
not  suppose  that  Mrs.  Besant  has  any  deliberate  intention  of  mis-
representing the  nature  of  the  evidence  furnished  in  my  Report,
though  the  reader  who  goes  to  that  Report  to  see  whose  statements
are  regarded  as  evidence  will  naturally  be  surprised  at  the  absurdity  of
her  assertion.

Mrs.  Besant  then  passes  from  the  general  charge  of  prejudice  to  a
more  specific  one  of  dishonesty,  alleging  as  follows  : —

There  is  one  crucial  inst^ince  of  Mr.  Hodgson's  lack  of  honesty  ;  he
publishes  a  ' '  Plan  of  Occvilt  Room,  with  Shrine  and  Surroundings  (from
measurements  taken  by  R.  Hodgson,  assisted  by  the  statements  of  Theo-
sophic  witnesses)."  On  jj.  220  Mr.  Hodgson  says  that  "  the  accompanying
rough  sketch  made  from  measurements  of  my  own  shows  the  positions."  As
a  matter  of  fact,  the  place  when  Mr.  Hodgson  saw  it  had  been  so  altered
that  "  measurements  "  were  impossible  ;  the  holes  he  shows  in  the  plan  did
not  exist  when  he  saw  the  rooms  ;  but  it  will  be  better  for  me  to  let  the
author  of  the  plan  speak  for  himself,  only  saying  that  lie  is  Mr.  William
Judge,  a  New  York  lawyer  of  standing  and  rejjute,  with  a  character  to  lose,
and  that  Mr.  Judge  went  from  New  York  to  Adyar  with  authority  from
Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott,  to  look  into  the  conduct  of  the
Coulombs  and  the  management  of  the  place,  and  arrived  the  day  after  the
Coulombs  had  been  dismissed.  He  says  :  "  I  made  a  plan  of  how  it  had  been
left  by  Coulomb,  and  that  plan  it  is  tliat  Hodgson  pirated  in  his  report,  and
desires  people  to  think  his,  and  to  be  that  which  ho  made  on  the  spot,  while
looking  at  that  which  he  thus  pretends  to  have  drawn.  He  never  could  have
seen  it  as  Coulomb  had  left  it.".  I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  pirating  of
another  person's  plan,  with  ' '  measurements  "  of  things  that  no  longer  existed
when  Mr.  Hodgson  visited  Adyar,  is  not  consistent  with  good  faith. — Time,
pp.  195-6.

I  repeat  :  "  Plan  of  Occult  Room  with  Shrine  and  Surroundings
(from  measurements  taken  by  R.  Hodgson,  assisted  by  the  statements


The  Defence  of  the  Theoso'phids.


137


of  Theosophic  witnesses)."  I  also  repeat  the  other  passage  which  Mrs.
Besant  quotes,  but  I  repeat  this  with  the  context : —

One  large  upper  I'oom  of  the  main  bungalow  was  used  by  Madame
Blavatsky  (see  Plan).  The  Occult  Room  vyas  built  later,  against  the  west
side  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  room.  The  north  window  on  this  side  was
removed,  and  a  layer  of  bricks  and  plaster  covered  the  aperture  on  the  side
■of  the  Occult  Room — a  recess  about  15in.  deep  being  left  on  the  east  side.
The  south  window  was  transformed  into  a  doorway  leading  from  Madame
Blavatsky's  room  into  the  Occult  Room.  Madame  Blavatsky's  large  room
was  divided  into  two  by  curtains  and  a  screen  ;  that  adjoining  the  Occult
Room  being  used  by  Madame  Blavatsky  as  her  bedroom,  and  at  the  end  of
1883  as  her  dining-room  also.  The  accompanying  rough  sketch  made  fr«m
measurements  of  my  own  shows  the  positions,  the  Occult  Room  being  about
2ft.  lower  than  Madame  Blavatsky's  room.  The  general  entrance  to  the
Occult  Room  was  through  Madame  Blavatsky's  sitting-room  (Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Part  IX.,  p.  220).

Now  the  reader  will  observe  that  in  the  title  of  my  Plan  I  have
described  myself  as  assisted  by  the  statements  of  Theosophic  witnesses.
It  is  clear  from  my  Report  for  what  particulars  I  had  to  depend  on
the  statements  of  Theosophists.  The  important  points  concerned  the
size  and  position  of  the  Shrine,  the  position  of  the  hole  in  the  wall
immediately  behind  the  Shrine,  and  the  position  of  the  sideboard.  I
questioned  Theosophists  at  Adyar  for  their  estimates  on  these  points,
and  formed  judgment  accordingly.  (See  my  Report,  pp.  224-6,  and
Appendix  IV.)  Further,  for  all  that  I  know  to  the  contrary,  Mrs.
Besant  may  confirm  my  own  measurements  now  on  all  the  other  points
of  any  importance  by  a  visit  to  Adyar.  The  walls  and  doors  and
windows,  Ac,  may  still  be  in  existence  ;  so  also  may  the  recess  in  the
party-wall  between  the  Occult  Room  and  that  formerly  used  by
Madame  Blavatsky  as  a  bedroom.  The  sideboard  may  still  be  where
I  saw  it  last,  in  the  "New  Room," —  and  the  bricked  frame  that  once
served  to  hide  the  recess  may  yet  be  lying  in  the  dust-heap  of  the
compound.

I  shall  now  quote  passages  from  my  Report  to  show  that  there
were  certain  measurements  which  I  distinctly  and  expressly  pointed
out  I  was  unable  to  make  ;  and  others  which  I  distinctly  and  expressly
pointed  out  that  I  was  able  to  make.  Mrs.  Besant  quotes  from  p.  220.
She  does  not  quote,  however,  what  I  say  on  that  page  about  the
Shrine's  disappearance  before  my  arrival  at  Adyar,  nor  does  she  quote
the  following  statement  : —

Moreover,  the  Occult  Room,  when  I  first  received  permission  to  inspect
it,  had  been  considerably  altered  ;  its  walls  were  covered  with  fresh  plaster,
and  I  was  informed  by  Mr.  Damodar  that  all  traces  of  the  alleged
' '  machinations  "  of  the  Coulombs  in  connection  with  the  Shrine  had  been
obliterated.  This  was  not  true,  for  the  bricked  frame  and  the  aperture  into
the  recess  still  existed  (see  p.  228). However,  under  the  circumstances


138


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


it  was  impossible  for  me  to  test  the  accuracy  of  much  of  the  descrii^tion
given  by  Theosophists  of  tlie  Occult  Room  and  the  Shrine  at  the  time  of
the  "  exjjosure  "  by  the  Coulombs.  But  by  analysing  and  comparing  the
evidence  given  by  various  witnesses,  I  was  able  to  put  together  the  following
history  of  the  Shrine  and  its  surroundings.^

Again,  on  j^p-  228,  229  I  wrote : —

Dr.  Hartmann  in  his  pamphlet  gave  the  dimensions  of  the  aperture  as
27in.  high  by  14in.-  wide,  and  these  dimensions  are  as  nearly  as  possible
correct.  This  I  was  subsequently  able  to  ascertain  for  myself,  as  the  frame
had  been  stowed  away  in  the  compound,  and  was  shown  to  me  by  another
Theosophist.  The  recess  was  alleged  by  Dr.  Hartmann  to  be  about  12iia.
deep,  and  about  5ft.  high  ;  the  depth  given  is  about  correct,  but  the  height
was  more  nearly  8ft. — as  I  found  by  measurement.

I  have  thus  explicitly  pointed  out  in  my  Report  that  there  were
certain  measurements  which  I  was  unable  to  make,  and  certain  others,
especially  concerning  the  size  of  the  recess  and  the  aperture  to  it,  which,
notwithstanding  the  alterations  in  connection  with  the  Occult  Room,
I  was  able  to  make  and  did  make,  and  references  to  these  points  are
given  on  the  very  page  from  which  Mrs.  Besant  draws  her  quotation,
which  she  separates  from  the  context,  and  so  makes  it  convey — I  do
not  say  intentionally — a  false  impression.  She  then  goes  on  to  mis-
represent me  as  claiming  to  have  made  measurements  which  I  have
thus  explicitly  pointed  out  in  my  Report  I  was  unable  to  make.  And
she  asserts  that  she  has  read  my  Report  "  carefully."

But  this  is  far  from  being  the  whole  of  Mrs.  Besant's  misrepre-
sentation. She  asserts  that  the  Plan  which  I  made  was  made  by
a  "Mr.  William  Judge."  Now,  the  only  plans,  except  my  own,  of
Occult  Room  and  Surroundings,  that  I  ever  heard  of,  were  (1)  an
incomplete  plan  of  the  rvalls  only  — made  by  M.  Coulomb  after  his
departure  from  the  Theosophical  Headquarters,  and  (2)  the  plan,
which  was  published  in  the  pamphlet  by  Dr.  Hartmann  entitled
Report  of  Observations  made  during  a  nine  months'  stay  at  the
Headquarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society  at  Adyar  (^Madras),  India,
Both  of  these  plans,  as  I  found  by  my  own  measurements,  were  inac-
curate. The  one  published  by  Dr.  Hartmann,  indeed,  was  absurdly
inaccurate.  Perhaps  this  was  the  one  made  by  Mr.  J udge.  Dr.  Hart-
mann's  pamphlet  was  both  prepared  and  issued  during  Mr.  Judge's
stay  at  Adyar.  I  reproduce  this  plan  here  so  that  the  reader  may
compare  it  with  mine  {Proceedings,  Part  IX.).


'  For  the  evidence  on  which  thi.s  account  is  based  see  Appendix  IV,


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


139


Shelf.


I-


Sitting  Room


o
o


Partilion.


■\  D


oor


W ard  robe


Bed  Room


Shrine.


"  Occult  Room."


o
o

3)

"3
o

a

D

o

i3  — ■


a.

s  g

_c  ;a  p

"5  "o  cc
-^fS  •


B3  M


s

_g

s
o

o
t»

.a

•a
o
«a
u
d
bi

CO

§

o
-a

It

a  c8  -J

o  DO  a>

-a  o  a

£  o  —


O  TO


I  do  not,  of  course,  know  whether  Mr.  Judge  ever  made  any  other
plan  at  all.  I  see  at  present  no  sufficient  reason  for  supposing  that  he
did.  But  if  he  did  make  any  other  plan,  and  if  it  agrees  with  mine,  T
venture  to  congratulate  Mr.  Judge  that  he  was  so  close  in  his  judgment
about  the  recess,  to  which  on  his  own  showing  he  had  no  access  except


140


ilir.  Richard  Hodgson.


by  the  aperture  in  the  bricked  frame,  and  which  I  was  able  to  measure
easily  as  the  bricked  frame  was  removed  during  my  stay  at  Madras.
I  also  venture  to  congr-atulate  myself  that  his  measurements  of  the
size  and  position  of  the  Shrine  are  found  to  justify  my  estimate  formed
from  the  various  statements  of  the  Theosophic  witnesses.  Mr.  Judge
had  opportunity  enough  for  the  measurement  of  the  Shrine.  I  take
the  following  j^assage  from  my  Report,  p.  224  : —

The  ultimate  fate  of  tlie  Shrine,  according  to  a  statement  made  by  Dr.
Hartmann  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cooper-Oakley,  Mr.  Hume,  and  myself,  was  as
follows.  After  the  expulsion  of  the  Coulombs,  Mr.  Judge,  an  American
Theosophist,  then  residing  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Society,  was  desirous
of  examining  the  Shrine.  Mr.  Damodar,  who  possessed  the  keys  of  the
Occult  Room,  avoided  this  examination  several  times  on  one  pretext  or
another  ;  but,  eventually,  a  party  of  Theoso2:)hists  proceeded  to  the  inspec-
tion of  the  Shrine.  The  Shrine  was  removed  from  the  wall  and  its  doors
were  opened.  Mr.  T.  Vigiaraghava  Charloo  (commonly  called  Ananda),  a
Theosophist  residing  in  an  official  position  at  the  headquarters,  struck  the
back  of  the  Shrine  with  his  hand,  exclaiming,  ' '  You  see,  the  back  is  quite
solid,"  when,  to  the  surprise  of  most  of  those  who  were  present,  the  middle
panel  of  the  Shrine  flew  ujd.  It  seemed  undesirable  to  some  of  the  witnesses
of  this  phenomenon  that  the  discovery  should  be  made  public,  and  they
resolved  accordingly  to  destroy  the  Shrine.  To  do  this  they  considered  that
the  Shrine  must  be  surreptitiously  removed,  but  such  removal  was  incon-
venient from  the  Occult  Room.  The  Shrine  was  therefore  first  removed
openly  to  Mr.  Damodar's  room,  and,  on  the  following  night,  was  thence
removed  secretly  by  three  Theosophists,  concealed  in  the  compound,  after-
wards broken  up,  and  the  fragments  burned  piecemeal  during  the  following
week.

In  a  written  account  furnished  to  me  by  Dr.  Hartmann,  given  in
full  on  p.  225  of  my  Report,  allusion  is  also  made  to  these  incidents  ^  : — ■

It  was  found  that  the  back  of  the  Shrine  could  be  removed,  and  on
moistening  the  wall  behind  the  Shrine  with  a  wet  cloth,  it  was  found  that  an
aperture  had  existed,  which  had  been  plastered  up.  ...  It  seemed  to
me  that  if  at  that  inopportune  moment  this  ne.%0  discovery,  to  which  I  then
alluded  in  the  papers  (see  Madras  Mail),  would  have  been  made  public,  it
would  have  had  a  bad  effect  on  the  jDublic  mind.  ...  A  gentleman  who
was  present,  and  who  sliared  my  opinions,  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  Shrine

1  The  defence  originally  offered  by  the  Theosophists  was  that  M.  Coulomb  had
made  the  trick  apparatus  after  Madame  Blavatsky's  departure  from  Adyar,  but  had
not  had  time  to  complete  his  tricks,  and  as  one  of  the  proofs  of  this  they  pointed  out
that  there  was  no  hole  in  the  wall  immediately  behind  the  Shrine.  When  it  was
afterwards  discovered  that  not  only  did  the  Shrine  have  a  sliding  panel  in  the  back,
but  that  a  hole  had  once  existed  in  the  wall,  thus  completing  the  required  communica-
tion between  the  .Shrine  and  Madame  Blavatsky's  bedroom,  it  became  obvious  that
the  defence  originally  put  forward  was  very  unsatisfactory  ;  so  unsatisfactory  indeed
that  Mr.  Judge  and  Dr.  Hartmann,  to  ' '  save  the  situation, "  suppressed  the
discoveries  and  destroyed  the  Shrine. (See  Report,  pp.  3W-1.)


Tlte  Defence  of  the  TheosopJdsU.


141


had  been  too  much  desecrated  to  be  of  any  more  use,  and  he  burned  the
Shrine  in  my  presence.

This  gentleman,  according  to  Dr.  Hartmann's  statement  to  us,  was
Mr.  Judge.

Nor  was  this  the  only  instance  in  which  Mr.  Judge  was  Avilling  to
act  for  the  purpose  of  "  saving  the  situation."  One  of  the  Blavatsky-
Coulomb  documents  refers  to  an  attemjDt  to  deceive  Mr.  Jacob  Sassoon
by  a  spurious  marvel,  viz.,  a  telegram  supposed  to  be  sent  by  a  Rama-
linga  Deb.  The  telegram  was  sent  by  Madame  Coulomb  according  to
instructions  from  Madame  Blavatsky  (Rejiort,  pp.  211,  217-8,  318-321),
and  it  was  clear  that  Ramalinga  Deb  was  a  fictitious  personage.
Madame  Blavatsky's  letter  to  Madame  Coulomb  arranging  for  this
marvel  was  published  in  the  Madras  Christian  College  Magazine  for
September,  1884.  I  take  the  following  passage  from  a  later  article  in
the  Madras  Christian  College  Magazine  for  April,  1885  : — ■

Mr.  W.  Q.  Judge  wrote  the  following  letter  on  the  subject  to  some  of  the
leading  Indian  newspapers  : —

"In  this  matter  which  has  now  spread  all  over  India  very  much  has  been
made  of  the  sending  a  telegram  to  Madame  Blavatsky  signed  '  Ramalinga
Deb,'  which  was  done,  the  Glwistian  College  Magazine  says,  by  order  of
Madame  Blavatsky  in  order  to  commit  a  fraud.

We  wish  the  public  and  all  our  friends  to  know  that  this  telegram
incident  is  perfectly  clear  to  us.  We  know  Mr.  Ramalinga  Deb  very  well.
We  also  know  how  Mrs.  Coulomb  obtained  possession  of  the  receipt  and  of
a  copy  of  the  telegram.

But  as  this  is  an  important  point  in  the  case  we  must  refuse,  at  this
moment,  to  inform  our  enemies  what  the  evidence  and  explanation  are.

At  the  proper  time  and  before  the  proper  tribv/iud  we  will  jjroduce  both
Mr.  Deb  and  the  explanation,  when  Mrs.  Coulomb  will  have  an  opportunity
of  confronting  the  substance  of  that  shadow  which  is  called  by  her  in  the
Christian  College  Magazine  'Ramalinga  Deb.'

I  am,  &c.,

William  Q.  Judge,  F.T.S.,

Barrister-at-Law. "

Wliat,  we  would  ask,  has  become  of  the  substance  of  Mr.  Ramalinga  Deb
now  ?  Or  what,  indeed,  of  the  substance  of  Mr.  Judge  himself  %  That,
gentleman  has,  we  believe,  preferred  a  trip  to  America  to  the  more  hazardous
enterprise  of  producing  "  Mr.  Deb  and  the  explanation."

I  cannot  profess  myself  to  attribute  any  importance  to  Mr.  Judge's
testimony.  If  he  acted  as  the  representative  of  Madame  Blavatsky
in  these  cases,  to  "  save  the  situation  "  at  Adyar,  he  may  have  acted  in
other  cases  also  to  "  prolong  the  situation,"  and  I  may  here  remark
that  it  would  be  very  easy  for  Madame  Blavatsky  in  a  short  time  to
produce  a  number  of  persons  who  could  master  the  characteristics  of
the  K.  H.  writing  sufficiently  to  deceive  the  elect  like  Mrs.  Besant,


142


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


and  that  when  Mrs.  Besant  speaks  of  having  received  K.  H.  letters
after  Madame  Blavatsky's  death,  we  need  to  know  the  precise  circum-
stances according  to  the  accounts  of  cautious  witnesses  before  we  can
regard  her  statement  as  worthy  of  serious  consideration.  But  not
even  Mrs.  Besant  has  offered  more  than  a  general  statement  which
seems  to  represent  her  mere  opinion.

We  may  now  consider  some  other  statements  which  Mrs.  Besant
quotes  from  this  same  Mr.  Judge  about  the  aperture  made  into  the
recess.

Mr.  Judge — who  saw  the  hole — describes  it  as  "a  rough,  unfinished  hole
in  the  wall,  opening  into  the  space  left  when  the  old  door  had  been  bricked
up.  .  .  .  This  hole  began  at  the  floor,  and  extended  up  about  22  inches.
From  each  edge  projected  pieces  of  lath,  some  three  inches,  others  five
inches  long,  so  that  the  opening  was  thus  further  curtailed.  .  .  .  The
plaster  was  newly  broken  off",  the  ends  of  the  laths  presented  the  appear-
ance of  freshly  broken  wood,  and  the  wall-paper  had  been  freshly  torn  ofi'."
These  facts  were  seen  and  signed  to  by  over  30  gentlemen,  sent  for  by  Mr.
Judge  as  witnesses.  Mr.  Judge  further  tells  us  that,  at  his  request,  Mr.
Damodar  tried  to  get  into  the  recess  through  the  hole,  but  could  not  ;  Mr.
Judge  himself  tried  and  failed,  as  did  a  ''thin  coolie";  finally,  "a  small  boy
about  ten  years  of  age"  squeezed  in,  but  found  that  he  could  not  stand
upright,  for  there  were  large  pieces  of  hard  mortar  projecting  from  the  sides.
Mr.  Judge  then  sent  for  a  man,  who  ' '  in  my  presence  bricked  up  the  aperture,
replastered  it,  and  tlien  repapered  the  wliole  space."  What,  then,  becomes
of  Mr.  Hodgson's  "measurements"  and  his  statement  that  the  space  was
sufficient  for  a  person  to  stand  in  ? (Time,  pp.  199-200.)

"With  these  statements  of  Mr.  Judge  we  may  compare  the  state-
ments of  two  other  prominent  Theosophists,  as  examples  of  conflicting
/ testimonies. Dr.  Hartmann  writes  in  the  pamphlet  already  referred
to  (Reijort  of  Observations,  &c.,  jd.  39)  : —

The  wall  behind  the  "shrine"  in  the  "occult"  room  was  found  to  be  partly
hollow,  forming  a  space  of  about  5  feet  high  and  3^  feet  wide,  with  a  depth
of  twelve  inches  between  the  walls,  and  with  an  aperture  of  about  14  inches
wide,  by  27  inches  high,  sufficiently  large  for  a  little  boy  (who  was  not
afraid  of  suffocation)  to  crawl  in,  and  opening  into  the  bedroom  next  to  the
"occult"  room.  This  aperture  was  hidden  by  a  heavy  piece  of  furniture
resembling  a  cupboard  or  clothes  press,  and  it  could  be  entered  through  the
same  by  opening  the  door  of  the  cupboard  and  removing  a  sliding  panel  (d)
at  the  back.

And  Damodar,  in  his  first  reply  to  Dr.  Hartmann's  circular  of
inquiry,  wrote  as  follows  (Report,  p.  336) : —

As  regards  the  hole  [through  the  sideboard  into  the  recess]  ...  in
the  presence  of  Dr.  Hartmann  and  Mr.  Lane-Fox,  I  attempted  to  enter  it.
All  who  know  me  or  have  seen  me  are  aware  how  thin  and  lean  I  am  ;  and
although  I  was  almost  half  naked  at  the  time,  I  could  enter  the  "hole"  with


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


143


difficulty.  And  when  once  inside  I  could  only  stand  abreast  without  being
able  to  move,  either  way,  an  inch,  or  to  lift  up  my  hand.

I  pointed  out  in  my  Report  (pp.  228-9)  that  the  dimensions  of  the
aperture  as  given  by  Dr.  Hartmann  were  "  as  nearly  as  possible  correct.
This  I  was  subsequently  able  to  ascertain  for  myself  as  the  frame  had
been  stowed  away  in  the  compound,  and  was  shown  to  me  by  another
Theosophist."  This  was  the  bricked  frame  which  filled  the  front  of  the
recess,  and  through  which  the  aperture  had  been  made.

The  recess  was  alleged  by  Dr.  Hartmann  to  be  about  12in.  deep  and  about
5ft.  high  ;  the  deptli  given  is  about  correct,  but  the  height  was  more  nearly
8ft. — as  I  found  by  measurement.  I  have  myself  entered  a  space  through  a
hole  the  dimensions  of  both  of  which  were  at  least  an  inch  less  than  the
■dimensions  given  by  Dr.  Hartmann.  The  hole  I  made  for  the  purpose
measured  less  than  13in.  by  26in.,  and  the  space  into  which  it  led,  and  in
which  I  stood  upright,  was  less  than  llin.  in  depth.  In  this  space  I  could
with  ease  lift  my  hand,  manipulate  objects,  and  utilise  the  position  generally
in  the  way  demanded  for  the  production  of  the  Shrine  phenomena.

Another  Theosophist  assured  me  that  "  he  regarded  the  aperture
and  the  recess  as  quite  large  enough  to  be  used  by  a  person  of  ordinary
size  for  the  production  of  the  Shrine  phenomena."  This  gentleman  was
Mr.  A.  D.  Ezekiel,  of  Poona,  the  same  discerning  witness  who  dis-
covered that  a  hole  had  once  existed  in  the  wall  immediately  behind
the  Shrine,  but  had  afterwards  been  blocked  up  (Report,  pp.  224-5),
and  who  also  detected  in  the  ceiling  the  "  screw-rings  " '  which  had
been  used  in  the  production  of  a  spurious  letter-phenomenon  intended
for  his  benefit  (Report,  p.  249).

When,  therefore,  I  stated  in  my  Report  that  the  space  in  question
-was  sufficient  for  a  person  to  stand  in,  I  did  so  while  giving  my
readers  full  information  as  to  how  I  was  able  to  make  the  measure-
ments, and  I  quoted  the  measurements  given  by  Dr.  Hartmann,  differ-
ing with  him  only  as  to  the  height  of  the  recess,  which  he  gave  as  5ft.-
.and  which  I  found  to  be  nearly  8ft.  Dr.  Hartmann  assuredly  cannot
he  accused  of  having  at  that  time  any  prejudice  against  Madame
Blavatsky. He  was,  on  the  contrary,  one  of  her  warmest  partisans  ;  he

1  Mr.  Ezekiel  informed  me  that  he  was  at  Adyar  some  time  after  the  "  exposure  "
hy  the  Coulombs,  and  Mr.  Judge  challenged  him  to  point  out  the  contrivances  men-
tioned above.  Mr.  Ezekiel  looked  up  at  the  ceiling  and  found  that  they  had  dis-
appeared, but  he  pointed  out  to  Mr.  Judge  the  marks  of  the  fresh  paint  which  showed
where  they  had  been. Mr.  Judge  said  nothing.

-  This,  I  think,  was  not  an  intentional  misrepresentation  by  Dr.  Hartmann.  He
evidently  estimated  the  height  of  the  recess  when  the  only  access  to  it  was  through
the  aperture  14x27  in.,  and  he  may  have  taken  a  statement  by  Damodar  as  to  its
height,  Damodar,  according  to  his  own  vn-itten  statement,  having  entered  it  in  the
presence  of  Dr.  Hartmann.  Later  on,  long  after  Dr.  Hartmann's  pamphlet  was
published,  and  while  I  was  at  Madras,  the  bricked  frame  was  removed,  so  that  I  was
able  to  measure  both  the  bricked  frame  and  the  recess.


144


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


had  been  nine  months  at  Adyar  when  he  published  his  pamphlet ;  and
three  months  and  a  half — ample  time  for  his  measurements — had
elapsed  since  the  departure  of  the  Coulombs.  "What  then,  will  the
reader  think  of  Mrs.  Besant's  charge  against  me  on  the  strength  of  a
written  statement  made  by  Mr.  Judge  to  herself  apparently  some  years
later  ?  Those  of  my  readers  who  have  followed  my  accounts,  in  other
articles,  of  the  unreliability  of  human  testimony,  may  perhaps  be  will-
ing to  let  Mr.  Judge's  statements  pass  as  a  case  of  ordinary  lapse  of
memory.  But  Mrs.  Besant,  claiming  to  have  read  my  Report  "  care-
fully," and  with  the  evidence  in  that  Report  presumably  before  her  con-
cerning Dr.  Hartmann's  statements  as  published  in  his  pamphlet—
which  surely  Mrs.  Besant  ought  to  have  also  studied  carefully, — makes
no  reference  whatever  either  to  the  detailed  circumstances  of  my
measurements,  or  the  explicit  declarations  of  Dr.  Hartmann,  who  wrote
in  defence  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

I  shall  now  proceed  to  deal  with  Mrs.  Besant's  other  (doubtless
unintentional)  misrepresentations.  In  dealing  with  the  question  of
structm-es  for  trickery  in  connection  with  the  Shrine,  she  makes  it
appear  that  I  have  adduced  the  statements  of  the  Coulombs  as  evidence.
"  All  this  Mr.  Hodgson  learned  from  the  veracious  M.  Coulomb,  and
nobody  else."  A  reference  to  my  Report  will  show  how  far  this  is
from  being  true.  My  consideration  of  the  Shrine  and  surroundings
will  be  found  chiefly  on  pp.  220-2.31  and  pp.  325-341.  On  pp.  220-1  I
give  the  early  history  of  the  Occult  Room  and  Shrine,  which  depends,
as  I  expressly  pointed  out,  on  the  statements  of  Theosophic  witnesses.
On  pp.  221-2  I  give  the  statements  of  M.  Coulomb  in  a  single  separate
paragraph  by  themselves,  and  point  out  that  his  "  statement  as  to  the
half  panel  cannot  of  course  be  verified,  and  must  be  taken  for  what  it
is  worth.  What  evidence  there  is  in  support  of  his  other  statements
will  be  seen  from  the  remainder  of  my  narrative,  derived  from  other
sources."  I  then  proceed  with  the  later  history  of  the  Shrine,  up  to
M.  Coulomb's  delivery  of  the  keys  and  the  investigation  of  the  various
contrivances  for  trickery.  I  stated  clearly  the  view  put  forward  in
defence  of  Madame  Blavatsky  : —

The  Theosophists  contended  that  the  structures  for  trickery  revealed  by
the  Coulombs,  who  had  had  exclusive  charge  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  rooms
during  her  absence,  had  been  made  after  she  had  left  ;  that  they  had  never
been  and  could  not  be  used  in  the  production  of  phenomena  ;  that  the
hollow  space  and  aperture  leading  to  it  were  too  small  to  be  utilised  in  any
connection  with  the  Shrine,  and  moreover  that  M.  Coulomb's  work  was
interrupted  before  he  had  time  to  make  a  hole  through  the  wall  between
the  hollow  space  and  the  Shrine  itself.

I  then  discuss,  entirely  apart  y?-o?/i  any  statements  whatever  made  by


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.  145


the  Coulombs,  the  evidence  given  on  these  points  by  Theosophists,  and
I  quote  all  the  important  part  of  this  evidence  in  detail  in  Appendix
IV.,  giving  much  fuller  and  more  numerous  citations  than  Mrs.  Besant
herself  has  given,  and  quoting  also  the  replies  of  many  of  the  witnesses
to  my  own  personal  inquiries  made  on  the  spot.  In  drawing  my  con-
clusions I  did  not  depend  on  a  single  statement  made  by  the  Coulombs,
as  the  reader  may  easily  see  for  himself.  My  conclusions  were
(Report,  p.  226)  :—

(1)  That  the  position  selected  for  the  Shrine  was  peculiarly  convenient  for
obtaining  secret  access  to  it  from  the  back  ;  and  that  none  of  the  changes
from  time  to  time  made  in  Madame  Blavatsky's  bedroom  behind  the  Shrine,
though  made  with  the  ostensible  object  of  removing  all  suspicion  of  trickery,
tended  to  diminish  this  convenience  ;  (2)  that  there  undoubtedly  were  all
the  necessary  apertures  for  access  to  the  Shrine  from  the  back,  at  some  period
before  the  Coulombs  left ;  (3)  that  there  is  no  trustworthy  evidence  whatever
to  show  that  this  access  did  not  exist  during  the  whole  time  from  the
moment  the  Shrine  was  put  up  till  Madame  Blavatsky  left  for  Europe,  in
February,  1884,  except  during  the  alterations  connected  with  putting  up
the  bricked  frame,  when  Mrs.  Morgan  saw  the  whole  wall  papered  over  ;  and
there  is  no  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  any  Shrine  phenomena  during  those
alterations.

These  results — altogether  apart  from  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  correspon-
dence— would  prevent  the  whole  mass  of  testimony  to  Shrine-marvels  from
having  any  scientific  value  ;  taken  along  with  this  correspondence,  they  can,
I  think,  leave  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  any  impartial  reader  as  to  the  mode
of  production  of  these  marvels.

Yet  Mrs.  Besant  has  thought  proper  to  represent  me  in  her  article
as  both  depending  on  the  evidence  of  the  Coulombs,  and  as  producing
no  other  evidence.  I  do  not  attribute  any  mtentional  insincerity
to  Mrs.  Besant.  I  regard  this  and  other  examples  of  her  misrepre-
sentation of  my  Report  as  springing  from  a  strong  emotional  bias
in  the  light  of  which  her  intellectual  faculty  at  least  has  become
obscured.  The  fact  is  that  Mrs.  Besant  is  wofuUy  ignorant  of  the  whole
matter  that  concerns  the  trick  structures  at  Adyar.  She  seems  to
have  adopted  without  any  question  the  crude  and  hasty  view  which
the  Theosophists  at  Adyar  first  put  forward  in  explanation  of  the
origin  of  those  structures,  and  to  have  paid  no  attention  whatever
to  the  evidence  that  has  been  produced  against  that  view.  Her
method  of  meeting  the  evidence  offered  in  my  Report  on  this  point
seems  to  be  to  take  no  notice  of  it,  although  it  is  the  evidence  of
Theosophic  witnesses  anxious  to  defend  Madame  Blavatsky.  And  she
quotes  inaccurate  statements  about  examinations  of  the  Shrine  from
a  pamiMet  disoivned  by  the  Council  of  the  Theosophical  Society  and
expressly  declared  to  be  untrustworthy  by  the  comp)iler  of  the  pamphlet,
Dr.  Hartmann  himself.

L


146


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


We  now  come  to  what  Mrs.  Besant  has  to  say  concerning  the
genuineness  of  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters.  She  wishes  her  reader
to  think  lightly  of  the  opinion  of  Messrs.  Netherclift  and  Sims,  chiefly
because  these  gentlemen  formed  a  certain  opinion  in  the  first  instance
concerning  some  other  writing  and  then,  when  additional  documents
were  submitted  to  them,  formed  a  different  opinion.  I  shall  have
more  to  say  on  this  point  presently.  Meanwhile  the  fact  remains  that
in  the  opinion  of  the  best  experts  obtainable,  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb
documents  were  undoubtedly  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  I
know  of  no  expert  in  handwriting  who  has  examined  the  letters  who
has  expressed  any  different  opinion.

I  notice  that  Mrs.  Besant  has  made  no  allusion  to  the  circumstan-
tial evidence  adduced  in  my  Report  which  corroborates  the  judgment
of  the  experts  in  handwriting.  She  uses  an  argument,  however,  which
may  appear  to  have  some  validity  to  those  persons  who  are  unac-
quainted with  the  old  relations  between  Madame  Blavatsky  and
Madame  Coulomb.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose,  she  says,  that  Madame
Blavatsky  "  would  be  such  a  fool  as  to  place  herself  at  the  mercy  of  a
woman  of  the  type  of  Madame  Coulomb."  But  the  case  is  very
different  when  we  remember  that  as  far  back  as  1872,  at  Cairo,
Madame  Blavatsky  had  been  associated  with  Madame  Coulomb
in  producing  bogus  "spiritistic"  phenomena,  and  that  the  latter
already  was  possessed  of  some  important  "secrets  "  of  Madame  Blavat-
sky's  life.  Madame  Blavatsky,  before  the  incriminating  letters  in
question  were  written,  was  already  in  Madame  Coulomb's  power.
{Report,  pp.  314-5.)  Mrs.  Besant  quotes  Mr.  Hume  as  having  put
this  view  well,  viz.,  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  "  far  too  shrewd  a
woman  to  have  ever  written  to  any  one  anything  that  could  convict
her  of  fraud."  She  does  not,  however,  refer  to  the  fact  that  Mr.
Hume  changed  his  opinion.  I  quote  what  I  said  on  this  point  in  my
Report  (p.  274)  :—

When  the  Blavatsky-Covilomb  letters  were  first  published,  Mr.  Hume
expressed  his  opinion  publicly  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  too  clever  to  have
thus  committed  herself  ;  latterly,  however,  and  partly  in  consequence  of  the
evidence  I  was  able  to  lay  before  him,  he  came  to  the  conviction  that  the
letters  in  question  were  actually  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  Further,
he  had  never  placed  the  slightest  credence  in  the  Shrine-phenomena,  which
he  had  always  supposed  to  be  fraudulent.

Mrs.  Besant  says  :  "  It  has  always  been  a  mystery  to  me  how  any-
one could  read  these  letters,  and  believe  them  to  have  been  written
by  Madame  Blavatsky."  This  I  suppose  is  largely  a  matter  of  personal
■opinion.  To  myself  the  mystery  is  how  Mrs.  Besant  can  believe  them
to  have  been  written  by  anybody  else.  And  that  Madame  Blavatsky
herself  saw  the  difficulty  in  foisting  them  on  any  other  person  is


The  Defence  of  the  Theoso'plusts.


147


sufficiently  indicated  by  the  fact  that  she  admitted  nearly  all  the  non-
incriminating  portions  of  the  letters  to  be  in  substance  genuine.

The  next  main  point  that  Mrs.  Besant  deals  with  is  the  authorship
of  the  Koot  Hoomi  documents,  which  I  have  given  reasons  for  thinking
were  written  chiefly  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  in  some  cases  by  Damodar.
Mrs.  Besant's  belief  that  many  Mahatma  letters  have  been  received
under  circumstances  which  precluded  their  having  been  written  by
Madame  Blavatsky  or  a  confederate,  has  obviously  no  more  evidential
value  than  Dr.  Hartmann's  general  statement,  which  she  quotes,  that  he
received  such  letters  at  Headquarters  when  Madame  Blavatsky  was  not
living  there.  The  only  specific  cases  to  which  Mrs.  Besant  refers  are
mentioned,  among  others,  in  my  Report  (pp.  215,  248,  etseq.,  373-377).
Mrs.  Besant  seems  to  take  it  for  granted  that  because  Madame
Blavatsky  did  not  know  Sanscrit,  Mahrathi,  &c.,  the  Mahatma  letters
in  those  languages  must  be  supernormal ;  as  if  it  were  not  superlatively
easy  for  Madame  Blavatsky  to  obtain  such  letters  through  one  of  her
confederates.  I  have  mentioned  in  my  Report  that  Mahrathi  was
Damodar's  vernacular.  It  was  much  easier  indeed  for  Madame
Blavatsky  to  provide  a  Mahatma  letter  in  one  of  the  Indian  languages
than  to  either  I'ead  or  provide  one  in  Helirew  or  in  Arabic.  And  we
iind  accordingly  that  when  Mr.  A.  D.  Ezekiel,  Theosophist  of  Poona,
prepared  a  question  in  the  Arabic  language  and  in  Hebrew  characters,
and  submitted  it  to  the  Mahatma,  he  received  a  reply  that  showed
complete  ignorance  of  his  question.  His  question  concerned  the
interpretation  of  a  specific  portion  of  the  Kabbala,  and  not  the  sJightest
reference  was  made  to  this  in  the  reply  which  he  received.

An  analysis  of  the  circumstances  of  the  appearance  of  all  the  Koot
Hoomi  writings  of  any  importance  that  came  before  us  previous  to  the
publication  of  my  Report,  showed  that  so  far  as  time,  place,  (fee,
"were  concerned,  they  might  have  been  written  either  by  Madame
Blavatsky  or  Damodar.  It  was  therefore  desirable  to  ascertain  what
grounds  there  were,  as  a  question  of  handwriting,  composition,  Ac,
for  supposing  that  the  K.  H.  documents  were  actually  the  work  of
Madame  Blavatsky  and  Damodar., — and  primarily  of  course  of  Madame
Blavatsky.  The  question  is  considered  in  detail  on  pp.  276-311  of
my  Report,  and  my  conclusions  were  confirmed  and  strengthened  by
the  examination  made  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  (Report,  pp.  378-380).  Messrs.
Netherclift  and  Sims  also  reached  the  same  conclusions  eventually,  but
thought  differently  on  their  first  examination.  Mrs.  Besant  makes
much  of  this  change  of  opinion  on  the  part  of  these  experts,  and
adduces  on  the  other  side  the  testimony  of  "  Herr  Ernst  Schiitze,  the
Court  expert  in  caligraphy  at  Berlin."  Now  the  circumstances  of  Herr
Ernst  Schiitze's  judgment  happen  to  be  given  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  the


148


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


volume  entitled  Incidents  in  the  Life  of  Madame  BlavatsJcy  (Appendix,
pp.  323-4).  The  documents  submitted  to  Herr  Schiitze  for  compari-
son were  a  K.  H.  letter  of  Septeml^er,  1884,  and  a  Madame  Blavatsky
letter  received  October,  1885.  He  replied  that  they  were  not  by  the  same
hand.  Later  on,  another  K.  H.  letter,  we  are  not  informed  of  what
date,  was  sent  to  Herr  Schiitze,  and  he  was  asked  whether  he  would
"  adhere  to  his  opinion."  He  did  so  adhere.  Now  I  venture  to  find
fault  with  the  circumstances  of  this  judgment,  as  described  by
Mr.  Sinnett.  In  the  first  place  the  writing  supplied  to  the  expert,
supplied,  I  presume,  as  the  imdoubted  ordinary  writing  of  Madame
Blavatsky,  was  written  a  year  after  the  publication  of  the  Blavatsky-
Coulomb  letters  in  the  Madras  Christian  College  Magazine.  Mr.
J.  D.  B.  Gi'ibble  had  also  published  a  pamphlet  at  Madras  in  1884
concerning  the  chai'acteristics  of  the  handwriting  of  these  letters,  and
had  pointed  out  many  of  the  peculiarities  of  Madame  Blavatsky's
ordinary  handwriting.  Further,  at  the  meetings  of  our  Society,  in
May  and  June,  1885,  I  had  myself  described  some  of  the  peculiar  for-
mations of  Madame  Blavatsky's  handwriting  especially  in  connection
with  the  K.  H.  documents.  One  would  suppose,  even  apart  from  these
circumstances,  that  a  letter  offered  to  an  expert  as  a  si^ecimen  of
Madame  Blavatsky's  undoubted  ordinary  handwriting  with  which  to
compare  some  disputed  document,  should  at  least  have  been  written
before  the  publication  of  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents.  Obviously
the  standard  of  her  undoubted  writing  must  not  be  such  a  standard
as  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  would  ex  post  facto  provide.  That  she
wished  myself  to  use  such  a  standard  plainly  appears  in  my  Report
(p.  281):-

Soon  after  my  arrival  at  Aclyar  [in  the  latter  part  of  December,  1884],  I
asked  for  a  specimen  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  undoubted  handwriting, — for
the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  disputed  documents.  Mr.  Damodar
avoided  giving  me  any  before  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott  reached
headquarters,  and  after  I  had  liad  some  conversation  with  them  on  the
subject.  Colonel  Olcott  said  that  Madame  Blavatsky  would  write  me  a  letter
at  once,  if  I  wished,  which  I  could  use  as  a  test  document.  I  replied  that  it
would  be  desirable  for  me  to  have  some  manuscript  that  was  written  before
the  appearance  of  the  Christian  College  Magazine  in  September,  whereupon
Colonel  Olcott  said  abruptly  that  he  could  take  no  action  as  to  giving  me  any
handwriting  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  until  their  own  Committee  had  met,  and
that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Theosophical  Society.

Madame  Blavatsky,  finding  that  I  would  not  use  as  my  standard  a
letter  professedly  written  by  her  for  that  purpose,  nevertheless
hoped,  as  I  believe,  that  I  might  take  as  a  standard  some  document  of
hers  ostensibly  written  for  another  purpose.  She  therefore  wrote  out
certain  statements  concerning  Madame  Coulomb's  charges.  These
writings,  as  I  have  shown  in  pp.  290-1  of  my  Report,  show  a  sudden


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


149


change  as  regards  one  of  the  most  important  characteristics  of  her  ordin-
ary writing  of  several  years  previous,  besides  other  minor  alterations,
and  they  would  therefore  have  proved  an  untrustworthy  standard.
The  device,  therefore,  which  we  might  suppose  that  a  person  charged
with  forgery  would  adopt,  if  opportunity  were  given,  was  actually
adopted  by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  my  own  case,  and  she  may  well  have
resorted  to  a  similar  device  in  her  letters  generally.

Not  only  is  this  flaw  manifest  in  the  data  submitted  to  Herr  Schiitze.
The  documents  that  caused  Messrs.  Netherclift  and  Sims  to  abandon
their  first  opinion  concerning  the  authorship  of  the  K.  H.  documents
were  a  series  obtained  from  Mr.  Sinnett,  "  eight  specimens  of  the
K.  H.  writing,  which  represented,  some  of  them  at  least,  consecutive
periods  of  time,  l^eginning  with  the  earliest  letter  received  by  Mr.
Sinnett."  Whether  this  was  known  to  Mr.  Gebhaxxl  or  not  when
he  invited  the  judgment  of  the  German  expert  on  a  K.  H.  letter  of
September,  1884,  and  a  Madame  Blavatsky  letter  received  October,  1885,
written  a  year  after  she  knew  that  she  was  suspected  of  writing  the
K.  H.  letters  as  well  as  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters — I  do  not  know.
One  thing  surely  is  very  clear,  viz.,  that  the  German  expert  was  far
from  having  as  complete  a  set  of  data  as  those  finally  submitted  to
the  English  exiaerts, — a  very  strange  neglect,  if  anything  more  than
a  mere  contrary  opinion  was  wanted.  Were  I  now  submitting  the
case  for  judgment,  I  should  provide  the  expert  with  letters  written
by  Madame  Blavatsky  some  time  previous  to  the  appearance  of  the
first  K.  H.  letter, — with  letters  written  about  that  time,  shortly  after-
wards, and  after  the  public  exposure.  I  should  for  comparison  with
these  submit  the  earliest  K.  H.  documents,  and  later  K.  H.  speci-
mens in  chronological  series  ;  and  then  put  the  inquiry  as  to  whether
these  "  might  not  perhaps  be  really  by  the  same  hand  "  as  the  undoubted
Madame  Blavatsky  letters.

I  notice  what  Mrs.  Besant  has  to  say  about  the  "  fragmentary
script "  which  I  quoted  in  my  Report  in  connection  with  my  remarks
as  to  the  possible  political  significance  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  career.
She  asserts  that  it  is  a  "discarded  scrap  of  a  translation,  by  Madame
Blavatsky,  of  a  Ptussian  work,  translated  for  and  published  in  the
Pioneer,  ordered  and  paid  for  by  its  editor,  and  to  be  read  there  by
anyone  who  cares  to  do  so."  I  am  aware  that  Madame  Blavatsky  said
something  of  this  sort,  and  I  gave  her,  in  my  Report,  p.  317,  the  credit
of  this  explanation,  which  Mrs.  Besant  produces  years  later  as  though
it  were  a  new  or  a  well-established  thing.  In  Mr.  Sinnett's  pamphlet,
The  "  Occult  World  Phenomena,"  &c.,  Madame  Blavatsky  said  that
it  was  "  a  fragniejit  of  an  old  translation  I  made  for  the  Pioneer  from
some  Russian  travels  in  Central  Asia"  (pp.  51-2) ;  Mr.  Sinnett  speaks


150


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


of  it  as  "  evidently  a  discarded  fragment  "  or  "  rejected  page  "  from
that  translation,  or  possibly  a  slip  that  might  have  happened  to  fall
"  from  some  other  Russian  translations  which  Madame  Blavatsky  .  .  .
once  made  for  the  Indian  Foreign  Office."  I  only  refer  to  this  "  script"
at  all  here  because  it  seems  to  afford  an  illustration  of  Mrs.  Besant's
method  of  examination  of  much  of  the  evidence  before  her.  Madame
Blavatsky  says  it  is  so,  and  it  is  so.  From  Mr.  Sinnett's  remarks  {loc.
cit.,  pp.  10-11)  it  is  clear  that  he  is  putting  forward  what  apjDears  to
him  to  be  an  adequate  explanation  for  the  existence  of  the  "script."
But  Mrs.  Besant  speaks  as  confidently  as  if  she  had  in  her  hand  the
copy  of  the  Pioneer  containing  the  jDassage.  Let  the  I'eader  not  forget,
however,  that  the  scrap  is  sjjoken  of  as  discarded.  It  is  pertinent,
therefore,  to  ask  Mrs.  Besant  what  evidence  there  is  for  her  assertion
beyond  the  fact  that  Madame  Blavatsky  said  and  Mr.  Sinnett  thinks  it.

I  shall  now  consider  very  briefly  the  reply  which  Mr.  Sinnett  made
in  his  pamphlet  entitled  The  "  Occult  World  Phenomena "  and  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  .

The  first  case  dealt  with  (Report,  pp.  256-7)  hinges  on  the  time  at
Madame  Blavatsky's  disposal  for  surreptitiously  opening  a  letter.  In
his  account  in  The  Occidt  World  Mr.  Sinnett  wrote  that  she  had  not
been  away  to  her  own  room  thirty  seconds,  that  she  had  not  been  out
of  his  sight  otherwise  except  for  a  minute  or  itvo  iyi  his  wife's  room,
and  that  she  spoke  for  a  few  minutes  in  the  adjoining  room  to  his  wife.
In  his  statement  before  the  Committee  he  said  :  "  She  was  out  of  my
sight  but  for  an  instant  of  time  when  she  cried  out,  '  Oh,  he  has  taken
it  from  me  now.'  I  will  undertake  to  say  that  she  was  not  out  of  my
sight  for  ten  seconds.  Having  uttered  that  exclamation,  she  returned
to  the  drawing-room,  and  we  then  proceeded  together  to  my  office  at
the  back  of  my  house.  I  went  on  with  what  I  was  doing,  and  she
simply  lay  on  the  sofa  in  my  full  view."  I  said,  "After  this  I  cannot
feel  certain  that  Madame  Blavatsky  may  not  have  been  absent  in  her
own  room  considerably  more  than  .30  seconds,  nor  do  I  feel  certain  that
Madame  Blavatsky  may  not  have  retired  to  some  other  room  [connected,
say,  with  Mrs.  Sinnett's  room]  during  the  interval  of  '  a  few  minutes '
which  Mr.  Sinnett  assigns  to  her  conversation  with  Mrs.  Sinnett  in  the
adjoining  room."  Mr.  Sinnett  does  not  tell  us  how  long  after  the
event  his  account  in  The  Occidt  World  was  written,  and  in  giving  his
account  to  the  Committee  he  had  manifestly  completely  forgotten  the
absence  of  Madame  Blavatsky  in  his  wife's  room.  Readers  of  my
accouirts  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  lapses  of  memory  to  which  human
testimony  is  liable  will  not  think  my  conjecture  unreasonable  that
Madame  Blavatsky  may  have  had  a  longer  time  at  her  disposal  than
Mr.  Sinnett  afterwards  estimated. And  Mr.  Sinnett  fails  apparently


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


151


to  see  that  the  important  point  of  the  incident  turns  on  a  question  of
seconds.^

Where  it  is  a  question whether,  for  a  task that  might  be
accomplished  in  30  seconds,  ten  seconds  elapsed  or  thirty,  and  when
the  recorder  in  one  account  estimates  thirty  and  in  another  ten,  the
discrepancy  is  certainly  noteworthy. I  have  not,  however,  dwelt  upon
this  point  at  any  length  in  my  Report,  nor  did  I  specially  impeach
Mr.  Sinnett's  care  in  the  rest  of  his  narrative  on  account  of  this  inci-
dent. Yet  Mr.  Sinnett  frequently  bespeaks  the  sympathy  of  his  readers
on  the  ground  that  I  make  him  out  as  an  inaccurate  observer  because
of  this  discrepancy  of  seconds  (although,  be  it  observed,  the  importance
of  the  incident  turns  upon  how  many  seconds were at  Madame
Blavatsky's  disposal). He  writes  :  "  Mr.  Hodgson  actually  goes  on  in
his  Report  to  argue  that  I  must  be  an  inaccurate  and  untrustworthy
narrator  because  of  this  discrepancy  of  my  evidence  about  the  ten  and
the  thirty  seconds"  (p.  16). He  speaks  of  my  "contention"  as  "the
foundation  of  the  major  part  of  Mr.  Hodgson's  subsequent  theorising
about  my  book"  (p.  17);  "that  impeachment  continues  to  underlie  all  the
groundless  pretences  which  Mr.  Hodgson  makes  throughout  this  Report
in  regard  to  having  shaken  the  value  of  my  testimony  "  (p.  21) ;  "  it  is
only  by  beginning  with  criticisms  so  absurd  that  it  is  difficult  to
understand  how  he  can  have  vanquished  the  sense  of  shame  he  must
have  felt  in  first  endeavouring  to  work  with  them — ^those  concerning  the
ten  and  thirty  seconds — that  he  was  able  to  inaugurate  the  system  on
which  he  has  striven  to  damage  the  credit  of  my  story. That  system
has  been  to  level  an  undue  reproach  at  me,  and  to  keep  referring
to  me  as  a  man  who  has  incurred  that  reproach  "  (pp.  42-3).  After
all  this  the  reader  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  beyond  my  first
reference  to  the  incident  on  p.  257  of  my  Report,  I  have  made  no
reference  whatever  to  the  discrepancy  in  question. Not  only  have  I
made  no  specific  reference  to  the  discrepancy,  but  where  in  the  course
of  my  criticisms  I  have  made  any  general  reference  to  Mr.  Sinnett's
want  of  care,  it  is  obvious  fr'om  the  context  that  I  had  other  cases  in
mind,  and  not  this  particular  instance.

The  next  case  is  that  of  a  fall  of  a  letter  in  a  room  at  Crow's  Nest
Bungalow.  1  supposed  that  this  letter  came  throvigh  one  of  the
cracks  in  the  ceiling  from  a  garret  above,  the  only  entrance  to  the
garret  being  a  trap-door  in  Madame  Blavatsky's  bedroom.  There
were  large  interstices  in  the  ceiling  when  I  examined  the  place  myself.
I  said  it  was  to  be  "inferred  from  Mr.  Sinnett's  accounts  that  he  made
no  examination  whatever  of  the  ceiling  either  from  the  room  below  or

1  The  envelope  which  I  described  myself  in  my  Report  as  having  manipulated  in
one  minute  I  opened  without  any  special  appliances.  I  opened  it  shortly  after  it  was
closed  before  the  gum  was  dry.


152


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


from  the  g.arret  above."  To  this  Mr.  Sinnett  practically  makes  no
reply,  though  he  still  thinks  that  the  phenomenon  was  genuine.  "Mr.
Sinnett  thinks  that,  and  I  think  differently," — to  change  the  words  of
Mr.  Sinnett's  remarks — but  "  there  is  no  particle  of  evidence  to
support  Mr.  Sinnett's  belief,  beyond  the  fact  that  Madame  Blavatsky
suggested  it."

The  third  case, — writing  in  a  "  sealed  envelope," — Mr.  Sinnett,
when  deposing  before  the  Committee,  regarded  as  "quite  complete."
He  now  regards  it  as  "relatively  trivial,"  and  makes  no  reply  to  my
statements  about  the  ease  of  opening  the  envelope  and  abstracting
the  contents.  Mr.  Sinnett  implies  much  in  other  places  about  the
light  which  he  could  have  thrown  on  the  subjects  mentioned  in  my
Report  if  he  had  only  been  consulted.  This  was  one  of  the  instances
where  he  was  consulted — the  result  being  to  show  at  once  that  Mr.
Sinnett's  account  of  the  security  of  the  letter-fastening  was  absurd,
and  that  there  was  no  evidence  at  all  for  the  genuineness  of  the
phenomenon  (Report,  pp.  258-9).

In  the  fourth  case,  the  alleged  instantaneous  transportation  of  a
piece  of  plaster  flaque,  the  only  reply  which  Mr.  Sinnett  makes
depends  on  a  misrepresentation  of  my  explanations.  He  regards  me
as  supposing  that  the  fragment  found  by  him  at  Allahabad  was  a  piece
broken  off  by  itself  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  he  says  that  the
nature  of  the  fracture  forl^ids  this  supposition.  If  the  reader  will  refer
to  my  Report  (p.  260)  he  will  see  that  I  do  not  suppose  this.  I  suppose
the  mould  to  have  been  broken  into  several  pieces,  and  that  one  of
those  pieces  was  conveyed  by  ordinary  means  to  Allahabad.  I  have
expressly  avoided  the  supposition  that  Mr.  Sinnett  attributes  to  me.
Thus  it  appears  that  Mr.  Sinnett  makes  no  real  reply  to  my  statements
about  this  incident.  Further,  he  makes  no  reply  to  my  statements
about  the  alleged  Mahatma  letters  connected  therewith,  and  I  refer
the  reader  specially  to  my  detailed  comments  on  this  point  in  the  foot-
note on  pp.  260-1  of  my  Report.

For  Mr.  Sinnett's  remarks  about  the  "  raps  "  and  "  astral  bells  "  I
simply  refer  to  my  Report,  pp.  262-3.

Mr.  Sinnett  passes  over  my  criticism  of  the  incident  of  the  "  pink
note  in  the  tree."

In  dealing  with  the  incidents  of  the  Simla  picnic,  and  taking
Colonel  Olcott's  account  as  distinguished  from  Mr.  Sinnett's,  I  pointed
out  that  there  was  no  special  difficulty  in  supposing  that  the  cup  and
saucer  and  diploma  had  been  prepared  beforehand,  and  that  the  bottle
of  water  might  also  have  been  provided  with  the  assistance  of  Babula.
Mr.  Sinnett  seems  to  think  that  after  all  that  I  have  said  in  other  places
about  the  unreliability  of  Colonel  Olcott's  testimony,  it  is  rather
absurd  for  me  in  this  case  to  take  Colonel  Olcott's  account  rather  than


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


153


his  own.  Now  I  cannot  say  positively  that  cceteris  j^a'^ibus  I  should
always  prefer  Colonel  Olcott's  account  of  an  incident  to  Mr.  Sinnett's,
but  in  the  present  case  Colonel  Olcott's  account  was  written  apparently
on  the  day  after  the  event,  and  he  had  also  noted  various  circumstances
in  his  diary.  When  Mr.  Sinnett  wrote  his  account  does  not  appear.
Presumably,  however,  it  was  much  later.  But,  aside  from  all  this,
given  two  accounts  by  different  persons  who  are  both  enthusiastic
followers  of  and  believers  in  the  "  occult "  phenomena  of  Madame
Blavatsky,  it  is  obvious  that  we  must  not  choose  the  account  which
renders  the  phenomenon  more  difficult  of  explanation  by  ordinary
means.  Further  still,  it  is  plain  from  even  so  much  of  Colonel  Olcott's
account  as  Mr.  Sinnett  is  now  willing  to  admit  as  being  "  broadly
speaking  right,"  that  Mr.  Sinnett  omitted  from  his  narrative  certain
important  facts  about  Madame  Blavatsky's  direction  of  the  party.  Yet
Mr.  Sinnett  not  improbably  had  these  facts  in  his  mind  when  he  itali-
cised the  word  "exact"  in  The  Occult  World,  p.  49  :  "The  exact  spot
on  which  the  ladies'  jampans  were  deposited  was  chosen  by  myself  in
concert  with  the  gentleman  referred  to  above  as  X  ."  There  is  there-
fore still  more  reason  for  accepting  Colonel  Olcott's  account  in  pre-
ference to  Mr.  Sinnett's.  And  I  remind  the  reader  once  more  that  of
the  seven  principals  at  the  picnic,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sinnett  and  Colonel
Olcott  were  the  only  ones  who  came  away  believing. Judge  M.,  Major

Henderson,  and  Mrs.  II  d  looked  upon  the  alleged  phenomena  as

fraudulent.  The  "  cup  and  saucer "  incident  depended  upon  the
appearance  of  a  seventh  person  who  was  supposed  to  have  been  unex-
pected. The  seventh  person  was  Judge  M.  Did  Mr.  Sinnett  ever  ask
him  whether  Madame  Blavatsky  had  not  specially  invited  him  to
come  ?

Mr.  Sinnett  makes  no  reply  whatever  to  my  statements  concerning
the  "  brooch  "  incident  (Report,  pp.  267-8),  no  reply  whatever  to  my
statements  concerning  the  cigarette  phenomena  (Report,  pp.  268-9).

His  reply  to  my  statements  concerning  the  "  pillow  incident  "  I  am
content  to  leave  for  comparison  with  my  explanation  of  it  (Report,
p.  270),  together  with  my  comments  on  the  incident  of  the  "  pink  note  in
the  tree  "  (Report,  pp.  263-5).  I  observe  that  Mr.  Sinnett  makes  no
allusion  to  the  corroboration  of  my  view  which  is  afforded  by  the  Koot
Hoomi  note  incidents  which  formed  part  of  the  day's  events.

The  next  case  is  the  Jhelum  telegram  incident ;  concerning  which
Mr.  Sinnett  remarks  :  "Mr.  Hodgson  has  not  much  to  say  that  is  very
crushing  about  the  Jhelum  incident  itself,  except  to  suggest  that  Madame
Blavatsky  may  have  read  my  letter  and  '  have  telegraphed  the  right  reply
to  a  confederate  '  at  Jhelum."  If  the  reader  will  refer  to  my  Report,
pp.  272-273,  he  will  see  that  what  I  suggest  as  the  probable  explana-
tion, in  the  paragraph  beginning  on  p.  272  and  ending  on  p.  273,  is


154


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


very  different,  and  that  Mr.  Sinnett  makes  no  reply  whatever  to  the
statements  there  made.

In  dealing  with  the  last  incident  under  discussion,  that  of  the
"profile  portrait,"  Mr.  Simiett  takes  occasion  to  "conjecture"  (possibly
for  the  purpose  of  suggesting  to  his  readers  that  my  "  conjectures  "
may  be  as  worthless  as  this  one  of  his)  that  the  "  blue  shading  drawings  "
shown  to  me  as  specimens  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  handiwork,  were
shown  to  me  "  as  occult  j^recipitations  of  hers,  though  he  now  calmly
suppresses  this."  To  this  I  have  simply  to  say  that  they  were  shown
to  me  as  specimens  of  her  ordinary  handiwork,  and  not  as  "  occult  pre-
cijntations."  Whether  they  have  ever  been  shown  to  other  persons
as  "  occult  precipitations  "  I  do  not  know.  I  spoke  of  the  "  exiguity
of  Mr.  Sinnett's  account "  of  the  production  of  the  profile  portrait
to  which  he  refers.  Mr.  Sinnett  apparently  takes  ofience  at  the  word
"  exiguity ",  as  though  it  were  unjustly  applied.  He  thinks  that
there  is  "  nothing  to  allege  or  urge  against  the  story,"  and  that  "  there
is  no  getting  out  of  the  conclusion  that  on  this  occasion  an  occult
phenomenon  was  wrought."  Now  it  seemed  to  me  so  obvious  that  the
difficulty  lay  not  in  getting  out  of  but  in  getting  into  such  a  conclusion,
that  I  did  not  consider  the  incident  in  detail.  I  will  now  do  so.
Mr.  Sinnett's  account  in  his  pamphlet  (p.  38)  is  :  "  The  paper  was  seen
to  be  blank  before  l^realcfast,  left  in  a  book  on  the  table  in  sight  of  us
all  while  we  had  that  meal,  and  found  to  bear  a  jDortrait  when  we
went  to  look  at  it  immediately  afterwards."  The  account  I  shall
consider  is  not  this  but  that  given  much  earlier, — though  we  are  not
told  how  soon  after  the  incident  the  account  was  written — in  The
Occult  World,  pp.  137-8  : —

Now  in  aspiring  to  have  a  portrait  of  Koot  Hoomi,  of  course  I  was  wish-
ing for  a  precipitated  picture,  and  it  would  seem  that  just  before  a  recent
visit  that  Madame  Blavatsky  paid  to  Allahabad,  something  must  have  been
said  to  her  about  a  possibility  that  this  wisli  of  mine  might  be  gratified.
For  the  day  she  came  she  asked  me  to  give  her  a  piece  of  thick  white  paper
and  mark  it.  This  she  would  leave  in  her  scrap-book,  and  there  was  reason
to  hope  that  a  certain  highly  advanced  chela,  or  pupil,  of  Koot  Hoomi's,
not  a  full  adejat  himself  as  yet,  but  far  on  the  road  to  that  condition,  would
do  what  was  necessary  to  produce  the  portrait.

Nothing  ha^jpeiied  tliat  day  nor  that  night.  The  scrap-book  remained
lying  on  a  table  in  the  drawing-room,  and  was  occasionally  inspected.  The
following  morning  it  was  looked  into  by  my  wife,  and  my  sheet  of  paper  was
found  to  be  still  blank.  Still  the  scrap-book  lay  in  full  view  on  the  drawing-
room  table.  At  half-past  eleven  we  went  to  breakfast ;  the  dining-room,  as
is  often  the  case  in  Indian  bungalows,  only  being  separated  from  the
drawing-room  by  an  archway  and  curtains,  which  were  drawn  aside.  While
we  were  at  breakfast,  Madame  Blavatsky  suddenly  showed  by  the  signs  with
which  all  who  know  her  are  familiar,  that  one  of  her  occult  friends  was  near.
It  was  the  chela  to  whom  I  have  above  referred. She  got  up,  thinking  she


The  Defence  of  the  Theoso]jhists.


155


might  be  required  to  go  to  her  room  ;  but  the  astral  visitor,  she  said,  waved
her  back,  and  slie  returned  to  the  table.  After  breakfast  we  looked  into  the
scrap-book,  and  on  my  marked  sheet  of  pajjer,  whicli  had  been  seen  blank
by  my  wife  an  hour  or  two  before,  was  a  precipitated  profile  portrait.  The
face  itself  was  left  white,  with  only  a  few  touches  within  the  limits  of  the
space  it  occupied  ;  but  the  rest  of  the  paper  all  round  it  was  covered  with
cloudy  blue  shading.  Slight  as  the  method  was  by  wliich  the  result  was
produced,  the  outline  of  the  face  was  jjerfectly  well-defined,  and  its  expres-
sion as  vividly  rendered  as  would  have  been  possible  with  a  finished  picture.

The  interval  between  Mrs.  Sinnett's  looking  at  the  blank  paper  and
the  discovery  of  the  portrait  is  described  vaguely  as  "an  hour  or  two."
We  may  therefore  assume  that  the  interval  may  have  been  at  least  two
hours.  Now  Mr.  Sinnett  says  nothing  about  any  person's  keeping  a
continuous  watch  during  that  whole  time  over  the  scrap-book  contain-
ing the  "blank  piece  of  paper."  It  is  a  fair  inference  from  his  account
that  such  a  continuous  watch  was  not  even  attempted,  much  less  suc-
cessfully carried  out.  Referring  to  the  day  and  night  previous  he
wi'ites  :  "  The  scrap-book  remained  lying  on  a  table  in  the  drawing-
room,  and  was  occasionally  inspected."  For  all  that  appears  in  Mr.
Sinnett's  account,  Madame  Blavatsky  might  have  had  ample  oppor-
tunity between  the  time  of  Mrs.  Sinnett's  inspection  and  the  "  discovery"
of  the  portrait  to  produce  the  drawing  by  ordinary  means  on  the  very
sheet  of  paper  that  Mrs.  Sinnett  previously  saw  blank, — not  to  speak
of  the  possibility  of  substituting  another  similarly  marked  sheet  with
the  drawing  on  it,  or  of  re-substituting  the  originally  marked  sheet
(with  drawing)  for  an  imitation  sheet  temporarily  taking  the  place  of
the  first  in  the  scrap-book.  The  scrap-book,  moreover,  belonged  to
Madame  Blavatsky.  I  repeat,  then,  that  Mr.  Sinnett's  account  is
"  exiguous."  We  need  to  be  assured  that  the  scrap-book  was  under
continuous  observation  by  trustworthy  persons  during  the  whole  time
that  elapsed  between  Mrs.  Sinnett's  inspection  of  the  blank  paper  and
the  discovery  of  the  portrait.  As  to  the  method  of  and  the  persons
concerned  in  such  continuous  observation,  their  positions,  the  position
of  Madame  Blavatsky,  details  of  the  examinations  before  and  after  of
the  scrap-book  and  the  blank  paper,  possibilities  of  imitation  of  mark
on  paper,  of  substitution,  &c. — all  such  considerations  meet  with  no
mention  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  account.

Mr.  Sinnett  claims  in  his  pamphlet  (p.  42)  to  have  shown  that
"  there  is  no  force  whatever  in  the  objections  which  Mr.  Hodgson
brings  against  any  one  of  the  long  series  of  experiences  related  in  niy
book."  To  my  objections  to  some  of  these  exijeriences,  Mr.  Sinnett,
as  we  have  seen,  makes  no  reply  tvhatever.  Whether  his  remarks  in
connection  with  the  other  experiences  show  that  there  is  no  force  in
my  objections  to  accepting  them  as  "  occult  phenomena  "  may  now  be
left  to  the  reader's  determination. Mr.  Sinnett's  faith  in  Madame


156


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


Blavatsky  I  do  not  have  any  expectation  of  disturbing.  The  question,
is  "whether  the  alleged  phenomena  can  be  accounted  for  by  ordinary
means,  whether  the  possibilities  of  trickery  have  been  excluded.  Mr.
Sinnett  himself  declared  (The  Occult  World,  p.  35)  that  it  was

' '  impossible  to  proceed  by  any  other  but  scientific  modes  of  investigation.
In  any  experiments  I  have  tried  I  have  always  been  careful  to  exclude,  not
merely  the  probability,  but  the  possibility  of  trickery  :  and  where  it  has
been  impossible  to  secure  the  proper  conditions,  I  have  not  allowed  the
results  of  the  experiments  to  enter  into  the  sum  total  of  my  conclusions."

What  I  have  said  in  my  Report  (p.  273)  I  venture  to  repeat  here  : —

On  tlie  whole,  then,  I  think  I  am  justified  in  saying  that  the  phenomena
relied  upon  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  Tlic  Ocindt  World  can  be  accounted  for  much
more  satisfactorily  than  can  the  performances  of  any  ordinary  professional
conjurer  hy  the  iniinitiated  observer,  however  acute  ;  that  the  additional
details  which  I  have  been  enabled  to  furnish  in  connection  with  some  of  the
incidents  Mr.  Sinnett  has  recorded,  clearly  show  that  he  has  not  been  in  the
habit  of  exercising  due  caution  for  the  exclusion  of  trickery  ;  and  that  he
has  not  proceeded  in  accordance  with  those  ' '  scientific  modes  of  investiga-
tion" which  he  explicitly  declares  (Occult  World,  p.  35)  he  regarded  as
necessary  for  the  task  he  attempted.

I  pass  on  to  deal  with  certain  statements  made  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in
the  Revieiv  of  Reviews  for  June,  1891.  He  writes  on  p.  550,  referring
to  my  Report :  "  Bit  by  bit  the  famous  Report  has  been  torn  to  pieces
by  competent  critics,  till  hardly  a  rag  of  it  remains ;  "  and  on  p.  556  :
"The  few  peojjle  who  had  been  intimate  with  Madame  Blavatsky  all
through  the  period  of  the  transactions  referred  to,  showed  by  degrees,
in  various  pamphlets  and  articles,  how  worthless  Mr.  Hodgson's
co2iclusions  were,  how  fatally  he  had  been  hoodwinked  by  the  enemies
of  the  Theosophical  movement  at  Madras,  and  how  narrow-minded  and
unjust  his  methods  of  inquiry  had  been."

The  best  way  to  meet  this  statement  is  to  consider  it  with  reference
to  the  summaiy  of  my  Report.^

In  the  first  place,  a  large  number  of  letters  produced  by  M.  and  Madame
Coulomb,  formerly  Librarian  and  Assistant  Corresponding  Secretary  respec-
tively of  the  Theosophical  Society,  were,  in  the  opinion  of  the  best  experts  in
handwriting,  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  These  letters,  which  extend
over  the  years  1880-1883  inclusive,  and  some  of  which  were  published  in  the
Madras  Christian  College  Magazine  for  September,  1884,  prove  that  Madame
Blavatsky  has  been  engaged  in  the  production  of  a  varied  and  long-continued
series  of  fraudulent  phenomena,  in  which  she  has  been  assisted  by  the
Coulombs. Tlie  circumstantial  evidence  which  I  was  able  to  obtain  concern-

1  The  reader's  attention  may  also  be  directed  again  to  the  conspicuous  cases  of
fraud  mentioned  by  our  Committee,  which  did  not  come  within  the  Hmits  of  my  own
investigations  in  India.  I  refer  to  the  "  Kiddle  incident,"  and  the  attempt  to  deceive
Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  by  a  bogus  marvel. See  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  206-7,  397-400.


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


157


ing  the  incidents  referred  to  in  these  letters,  corroborates  the  judgment  of
tlie  experts  in  handwriting.

In  the  second  place,  apart  altogether  from  either  these  letters  or  the
statements  of  the  Coulombs,  who  themselves  allege  that  they  were  con-
federates of  Madame  Blavatsky,  it  appears  from  my  own  inquiries  concerning
the  existence  and  the  powers  of  the  supposed  Adepts  or  Mahatmas,  and  the
marvellous  phenomena  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  connection  with  the
Theosophical  Society,

1.  That  the  primary  witnesses  to  the  existence  of  a  Brotherhood  with

occult  powers,— viz.,  Madame  Blavatsky,  Mr.  Damodar  K.
Mavalankar,  Mr.  Bhavani  Shankar,  and  Mr.  Babajee  D.  Nath,—
have  in  other  matters  deliberately  made  statements  which  they
must  have  known  to  be  false,  and  that  therefore  their  assertions
cannot  establish  the  existence  of  the  Brotherhood  in  question.

2.  That  the  comparison  of  handwritings  further  tends  to  show  that

Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing  and  Mahatma  Morya  are  fictitious  person-
ages, and  that  most  of  the  documents  purporting  to  have  emanated
from  these  "personages,"  and  especially  from  "K.  H."  (Koot
Hoomi  Lai  Sing),  are  in  the  disguised  handwriting  of  Madame
Blavatsky  herself,  who  originated  the  style  of  the  K.  H.  hand-
writing ;  and  that  some  of  the  K.  H.  writing  is  the  handiwork  of
Mr.  Damodar  in  imitation  of  the  writing  developed  by  Madame
Blavatsky.

3.  That  in  no  single  phenomenon  which  came  within  the  scope  of  my

investigation  in  India,  was  the  evidence  such  as  would  entitle  it
to  be  regarded  as  genuine,  the  witnesses  for  the  most  part  being
exceedingly  inaccurate  in  observation  or  memory,  and  having
neglected  to  exercise  due  care  for  the  exclusion  of  fraud  ;  while
in  the  case  of  some  of  the  witnesses  there  has  been  much
conscious  exaggeration  and  culpable  misstatement.

4.  That  not  only  was the  evidence insufficient  to  establish  the

genuineness  of  the  alleged  marvels,  but  that  evidence  furnished
partly  by  my  own  inspection,  and  partly  by  a  large  number  of
witnesses,  most  of  them  Theosophists,  concerning  the  structure,
position,  and  environment  of  the  Shrine,  concerning  "Mahatma"
communications  received independently of the Shrine,  and
concerning  various other incidents, including many  of  the
phenomena  mentioned  in  Hie  Occult  World,  besides  the  numerous
additional  suspicious  circumstances  which  I  have  noted  in  the
course  of  dealing  in  detail  with  the  cases  considered,  renders
the  conclusion  unavoidable  that  the  phenomena  in  question  were
actually  due  to  fraudulent  arrangement.
As  regards  the  first  main  point  I  am  not  aware  that  any  testimony
worth  consideration  has  been  brought  forward  to show  that  the
Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents  were  not  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky,
(or  that  they  were  written  by  the  Coulombs  or  by  Black  Magicians),  or
to  offset  the  circumstantial  evidence  which  I  adduced  in  confirmation
of  the  opinion  of  experts  in  handwriting.


158


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


As  regards  the  next  series  of  points,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  attempt
to  prove

(1)  that  the  statements  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  Damodar,  Bhavani

Shankar,  and  Babajee  are  to  be  regarded  as  trustworthy ;
(3)  that  the  evidence  for  any  of  the  phenomena  which  I
investigated  in  India  is  such  as  would  entitle  it  to  be
regarded  as  genuine  (unless  Mr.  Sinnett's  pamphlet  is
regarded  as  an  attempt  to  prove  the  genuineness  of  some  of
the  experiences  related  in  The  Occult  World.  See  below).
Attempts  have  been  made  to  deal  with  (2)  and  partially  with  (4).

(2)  is  met  by  pointing  to  the  fallibility  of  experts  and  to  the

opinion  of  Herr  Schiitze.  I  have  already  shown  that  the
opinion  of  Herr  Schiitze  was  founded  upon  inadequate  data,
and  I  may  now  add  that,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  attempt
has  been  made  to  show  how  the  various  similarities  between
Madame  Blavatsky's  writing  and  the  series  of  K.  H.
documents — together  with  other  related  points  which  I  have
enumerated — can  be  accounted  for  on  any  other  supposition
than  that  Madame  Blavatsky's  hand  wrote  them.
With  reference  to  the  K.  H.  writings  ascribed  to  the  handiwork  of

Madame  Blavatsky  there  are  two  points  to  be  observed  ; —

(a)  That  they  were  produced  under  circumstances  which  did  not
preclude  Madame  Blavatsky's  actually  having  written  them  ;
(6)  that  the  similarities  which  I  have  pointed  out  between  those
K.  H.  writings  and  Madame  Blavatsky's  ordinary  writing,
and  the  gradual  elimination  of  Blavatskian  forms  in  the
course  of  development  of  the  K.  H.  writings,  and  the  changes
in  Madame  Blavatsky's  ordinary  writing,  afford  abundant
proof  that  Madame  Blavatsky  actually  did  write  them.
No  attempt  has  been  made  to  deal  with  either  of  these  points  in

detail. Similar  statements  apply  to  the  K.  H.  writings  attributed

to  Damodar.

Concerning  (4)  Mr.  Sinnett  has  offered  a  reply  (considered
above,  pp.  150-6)  to  my  examination  of  his  accounts  of  phenomena
mentioned  in  The  Occidt  World,  and  he  quotes  old  testimony  concern-
ing the  Shrine  which  throws  no  new  light  whatever  on  the  subject,
and  nearly  all  of  which  is  given  xw  my  own  Report,  together  with
much  more  of  a  similar  character,  and  from  superior  witnesses.  I  am
not  aware  that  any  attempt  has  been  made  to  deal  with  the  other
incidents  which  come  under  the  head  of  (4),  such  as  Damodar's  alleged
"  astral "  journeys,  tiie  alleged  appeai'ances  of  Mahatmas,  either  in  their
ordinary  or  in  their  "  astral  "  bodies,  Mr.  Hume's  evidence,  numerous
alleged  precipitated  writings,  including  Mr.  G.'s  letter  and  Professor
Smith's  letter,  and  other  instances.


The  Defence  of  the  Theosophists.


159


So  far,  then,  as  I  am  aware,  much  the  larger  part  of  my  Report  has
not  been  even  touched  by  any  person,  while  such  attempts  at  replies  as
have  been  made,  both  by  their  ignorance  of  the  actual  circumstances
and  by  the  temper  of  mind  displayed  in  the  language  used  by  the
writers,  strengthen  my  previously  expressed  opinion  that  "not  only
was  the  evidence  insufficient  to  establish  the  genuineness  of  the  alleged
marvels,"  but  that  the  evidence  obtained  in  many  of  the  cases  ren-
dered "the  conclusion  unavoidable  that  the  phenomena  in  question
were  actually  due  to  fraudulent  arrangement."

In  a  final  word  I  must  remind  my  readei's  that  I  have  been  dealing
in  tliis  paper,  as  I  have  dealt  throughout,  with  the  phenomena  alleged
by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  support  of  the  tenets  which  she  preached,
and  not  -with  those  tenets  themselves.  Of  those  streams  of  super-
human knowledge  I  will  only  say  that  I  prefer  to  tap  them  at  least
one  stage  nearer  to  their  fountain-heads.  ^  I  lay  claim  to  no  vast
■erudition.  But  the  sources  which  were  good  enough  for  Madame
Blavatsky  are  good  enough  for  me  ;  and  so  long  as  Bohn's  Classical
Library  and  Triibner's  Oriental  Library  are  within  reach  of  a  modest
purse  I  shall  prefer  to  draw  on  those  useful  repertories  for  my  ideas  of
Platonic  and  Buddhistic  thought ; — even  though  I  should  thus  be
obliged  to  receive  those  ideas  in  a  bald,  old-fashioned  shape  ; — unspiced
with  fraudulent  marvels,  and  uncorroborated  by  the  forged  corre-
spondence of  fictitious  Teachers  of  Truth.


-  Mr.  W.  E.  Coleman,  of  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  has  pointed  out  voluminous
plagiarisms  and  contradictions  in  Madame  Blavatsky's  writings.  I  may  refer  especi-
ally to  his  articles  in  the  Mcligio-Ph'ilosojMcal  Journal  (Chica,go,  111.), for  August  10th-
September  7th,  1889 ;  in  The  Golden  Way  (San  Francisco)  for  April-October,  1891  ;
and  in  The  Carrier  Dove  (San  Francisco)  for  March,  1891-February,  1893  (and  suc-
ceeding numbers  to  be  published).


160  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


III.

MIND-CURE, FAITH-CURE, AND THE  MIRACLES  OF

LOURDES.  1

By  a.  T.  Myers,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  and  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Nnnc,  dea,  nunc  succurre  mihi ;  nam  posse  mederi
Picta  docet  templis  multa  tabella  tuis.

— Tihullus.

The  present  paper  is  an  attempt, — avowedly  of  an  imperfect  and
provisional  kind, — to  answer  certain  questions  which  have  been  fre-
quently and  reasonably  proposed  to  various  writers  in  these  Proceedings.
"  Your  Society,"  it  has  been  said  to  us  in  effect  by  various  American
correspondents,  "  professes  its  readiness  to  discuss  all  such  psychical
phenomena  as  are  supported  by  first-hand  modern  evidence,  although
they  may  lie  outside  the  pale  of  recognised  science.  You  talked  much
of  hypnotism,  even  while  hypnotism  was  still  scouted  and  ignored.
But  you  yourselves  persistently  ignore  an  experimental  movement  of
an  analogous  kind  which  claims  thousands  of  adherents,  and  hundreds
of  inexplicable  cures  of  disease. This  movement  takes  two  forms.

'  Among'  the  -worlcs  consulted  for  the  purpose  of  this  paper  we  may  cite  the  following.

I.  — On  Mind-cure  and  Faith-cure.

Buckley, .J.  M. Faith-healing, Christian  Science  and  Kindred  Phenomena,

London.  1892.
Carter,  R.  Kelso. Faith-cure. Cenf.urii,  March,  1887.
Charcot,  J.  M. The  Faith-cure. Nevj  Revicv;,  .January,  1893.
Corning,  .T.  L.  The  Limitations  of  the  Influence  of  the  Mind  on  the  Body.  Ncio

York  Medical  Jovrnal,  1889.
Eddy,  Mary  B.  f5-. Science  and  Health. vSixtieth  edition,  revised,  1891.
Evans,  W,  F. The  Mental  Cure,  1869.  Mental  Medicine,  1872.  Divine  Law  of

Cure,  1884.

Finlay,  Mary. The  Mind-cure. Neio  York  Medical  Record,  November  5th,
1887.

Lord.  Frances. Christian  Science  and  Healing. London,  1888.

Morselli.  L'  Influenza  del  Morale  sul  Fisico. RiviMa  Spcr.  di  Freniatria,  1886.

A.  T.  Schofield,  M.D. Faith-healing. London,  1892.

II.  — The  Miracles  of  Lourdat.

Annales  de  Lourdes,  Vols. XXIIL,  XXIV.,  XXV.
Boissarie,  Dr. Lourdes,  1891.

Buchanan,  Professor  George,  in  Lancet,  .June  20th,  1885.
Clarke,  Hichard  F. ,  S.  .J. Lourdes  and  its  Miracles. London,  1888.
Lasserre,  Henri.  Les  Episodes  Miraculeux  de  Lourdes,  1883.
Mackey,  E. Miracles  and  Modern  Science. Reprinted  from  Diihlin  Review,
October,  1880.

We  shall  be  glad  to  hear  of  other  works  on  these  subjects.  Many  pamphlets  on
Mind-cure,  &c.,  known  to  us  by  their  titles,  are  not  procurable  in  England.


M'mcl-Gure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  161


Mind-cure  ^  denies  that  matter  exists,  or  that  evil  exists,  and  heals  the
patient  by  inspiring  him  with  the  conviction  that  he  is  a  pure  spirit,
unassailable  by  disease  or  pain.  The  Faith-cure  teaches  that  pain  and
disease,  although  really  existing,  can  be  dispelled  by  an  act  of  faith  in
the  Divine  power.  Established  science  meets  this  movement  with
precisely  that  '  contempt  prior  to  examination '  which  your  Society  has
in  so  many  similar  instances  replaced  by  an  examination  which  has
not  led  to  contempt."

A  second  appeal  of  similar  tenor  reaches  us  from  a  quite  different
quarter.  A  distinguished  English  Catholic,  Father  Clarke,  S.J.,  whose
advocacy  of  the  Lourdes  miracles-  is  well  known,  calls  our  attention  to
the  evidence  for  these  extraordinary  cures,  and  assures  us  of  the  welcome
which  any  serious  inquirer  will  find  at  Lourdes  itself.  This  appeal  also
commands  our  attention.  Unable  at  the  present  moment  to  iind  a  com-
petent physician  disposed  to  give  the  time  necessary  for  adequate
inquiry  on  the  spot,  we  feel  bound  at  least  to  place  before  our  readers
some  preliminary  statement  which  may  interest  others  in  the  problem
of  this  great  pilgrimage  ; — unrivalled  as  it  is  in  modern  days,  and
supported  by  many  volumes  of  evidence  as  to  sudden  cures,  some  of
which  are  stated  to  transcend  all  human  possibility.

The  competence  of  the  present  writers  to  pronounce  a  valid  opinion
on  either  of  these  main  problems  is  greatly  impaired  by  the  fact  that
we  have  not  been  able  to  study  on  the  spot  and  at  first  hand  either  the
American  mind-healing  or  the  cures  which  take  place  at  Lourdes.  On
the  other  hand,  we  both  of  us  bring  to  the  task  one  obvious  pre-requisite
of  any  fruitful  discussion ; — namely,  a  considerable  familiarity  with
hypnotic  therapeutics,  and  with  other  forms  of  self-suggestion.  One
of  us  possesses  the  equally  indispensable  qualification  of  conversance,,
during  a  good  many  years,  with  the  diagnosis  and  registration  of  disease-
and  cure  as  practised  in  modern  hospitals  of  repute.  The  special  qualifi-
cation (if  such  it  can  be  called)  of  the  other  writer  lies  in  the  fact  that,,
having  already  avowed  his  belief  in  the  reality  of  some  manifestations
of  discarnate  souls,  he  is  one  of  the  very  few  non-Catholics  who  cannot
be  challenged  i7i  limine  by  believers  in  manifestations  of  the  Virgin
Mary  at  Lourdes  as  entering  upon  the  inquiry  with  a  mind  already
fixed  in  negation.

In  conformity  with  the  usual  rule  in  these  Proceedings,  the  main.

^  We  have  adopted  the  more  reasonable  name  for  this  system,  and  advise  its.
adherents  to  drop  the  title  of  "Christian  Science,"  which  has  naturally  incurred  both,
Christian  and  scientific  disapproval.

-  The  word  "  miracle  "  is  not  of  our  choosing,  and  seems  to  be  used  at  present  in  a.
somewhat  arbitrary  way.  It  is  not  commonly  applied  to  supernormal  plienomena
believed  to  occur  in  the  presence  of  "mediums,"  or  in  an  ajiparently  spontaneous
fashion  ;  but  only  to  such  phenomena  when  regarded  as  supporting  some  religious  creed.

M


162  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


part  of  ovlv  task  will  consist  in  examining,  not  the  theories  which  are
proposed  to  us,  but  the  actual  first-hand  evidence  offered  in  their
support.  But  since  we  have  to  deal  with  several  discrepant  theories,
«ach  of  them  supported  by  alleged  facts  of  the  same  general  kind,  we
must  needs  consider  first  of  all  to  what  extent  we  can  treat  these
various  theories  and  facts  all  together ; — what  is  their  respective  posi-
tion in  some  more  general  survey  of  human  beliefs  in  the  matter  of
disease  and  cure.

Disease  is  a  matter  first  for  diagnosis,  then  for  therapeutic.  We
have  first  to  find  out  what  is  wrong,  and  then  to  find  out  how  to  set  it
right.  Now  diagnosis  may  be  objective  or  subjective,  and  therapeutic
may  be  physiological  or  psychical.  In  jDrimitive  times  these  aspects
were  confused  vaguely  together.  Disease  was  diagnosed  partly  by
objective  symptoms, — as  when  a  white  nose  indicated  frost-bite  ; — but
mainly  by  subjective  notions, — as  when  the  patient  said  that  he  felt
something  inside  him,  and  the  medicine-man  told  him  it  was  a  devil.
So  also  thei'apeutic  was  always  partly  physiological  ; — since  the  most
superstitious  Samoyede  would  rub  his  neighbour's  frost-bitten  nose  with
snow  in  preference  to  uttei'ing  incantations.  But  it  was  mainly
psychical,  consisting  of  such  charms,  ceremonies,  invocations,  as  tradi-
tion assigned  for  the  cure  of  a  disease  which  tradition  had  already
diagnosed  after  its  own  fashion.

Now  the  aim  of  Science,  from  Hippocrates  onwards,  has  been  to
make  diagnosis  as  far  as  possible  objective,  and  therapeutic  as  far  as
possible  physiological.  In  examining  a  patient  in  a  modern  hospital,
we  rely  much  on  observable  and  measurable  facts  ;  less  on  the  patient's
■own  statements  of  what  he  feels  ;  least  of  all  on  his  theories  as  to  how
he  came  to  feel  it.  In  doctoring  him,  we  rely  much  on  definite  opera-
tions and  on  those  few  drugs  part  of  whose  action  on  the  human
-organism  we  can  in  some  sense  prove  and  show  ;  little  on  the  patient's
own  prayers  for  recovery ; — least  of  all,  perhaps,  on  the  encouraging
words  which,  in  common  humanity,  we  ourselves  throw  in.

But  this  objective  mode  of  regarding  disease  and  cure,  however
•  dominant  at  Guy's  or  St.  Bartholomew's,  has  not  yet  spread  itself  over
the  mass  of  mankind.  Diagnosis  continues  to  be  largely  subjective  ; — -
the  patient  deeming  himself  a  better  judge  of  what  is  the  matter  with
him  than  anyone  else  can  be,  and  the  physician  mistaking  functional
for  organic  maladies,  and  hysterical  disability  for  anatomical  lesion.
And  the  whole  practice  of  therapeutic  continues  to  show  traces  of
pre-scientific  beliefs  ; —  ideas  which  assume  new  forms  in  each  genera-
tion, but  which  carry  us  back  to  each  in  turn  of  the  stages  of  thought
which  we  associate  with  the  slow  development  of  civilised  man.

1.  Fetichism,  or  the  primitive  belief  that  certain  objects,  inanimate
.and  inert,  could  cure  disease  by  application  to  the  body,  shows  itself,


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  163


slightly  disguised,  in  such  phenomena  as  the  wide  sale  of  Harness'
Electropathic  Belts.  The  practical  inertness  of  these  appliances  has
now  been  proved  in  a  court  of  law ;  nor  was  any  valid  evidence  ever
offered  for  their  alleged  power.  Assertion  was  enough ; — assertion
adapted  to  that  belief  in  the  mysterious  potency  of  electricity  which  is
the  modern  counterpart  of  ancient  beliefs  in  the  mysterious  potency  of
talisman  or  totem.  Yet  how  many  sufferers  have  traced  their  cures  to
what  is, — to  use  gentle  terms, — a  purely  commercial  product !

2.  Polytheism.  The  transition  from  fetichistic  to  polytheistic
conceptions  of  cure  is,  of  course,  a  gradual  one.  It  may  be  said  to
begin  when  curative  properties  are  ascribed  to  objects  not  arbitrarily,
nor  on  account  of  the  look  of  the  objects  themselves,  but  on  account
of  their  having  been  blessed  or  handled  by  some  divine  or  semi-divine
personage,  or  having  formed  part  of  his  body  or  surroundings  during
some  incarnation.  Thus  Lourdes  water,  bottled  and  exported,  is  still
held  to  possess  curative  virtue  on  account  of  the  Virgin's  original
blessing  bestowed-  upon  the  Lourdes  spring.  But  generally  the
influence  of  the  divine  or  divinised  being  is  more  directly  exercised,  as
in  oracles,  dreams,  invisible  touches,  or  actual  theophanies,  or  appear-
ances of  the  gods  to  the  adoring  patient.  It  will  be  seen  as  we  proceed
how  amply  the  tradition  of  Lourdes  has  incorporated  these  ancient  aids
to  faith.

3.  Monotheism.  Theological  distinctions  between  polytheism  and
monotheism  lie,  of  course,  outside  our  present  purpose.  Practices
originally  polytheistic  may  continue  (as  in  fact  at  Lourdes)  under  a
religion  which  looks  up  to  one  Supreme  God.  Our  point  here  is  that
when  subordinate  divinities,  saints,  or  spirits  are  wholly  excluded,
prayer  may  still  be  regarded  as  potent  to  effect  cures  ;  and  signs  of
answer  to  prayer  may  still  be  sought.  Here  come  in  many  Protestant
forms  of  belief  (the  Peculiar  People,  &c.)  which  the  modern  Faith-
healing  does  but  present  in  a  concentrated  form.

4.  Metaphysics.  Once  more,  when  there  is  no  longer  a  belief  in  a
personal  Deity  or  in  a  direct  answer  to  prayer,  there  may  still  be  ways
of  regarding  the  Universe  which  seem  to  confer  upon  man  some  mode
of  issue  from  bodily  pain.  Oriental  ideas  of  the  unreality  of  matter
(Maya)  ;  Stoical  ideas  of  the  Sage's  command  over  external  circum-
stances ;  mystical  ideas  of  the  painless  ecstacy  into  which  the  purified
spirit  can  enter  at  will ; — all  these  conceptions  have  the  advantage  of
being  independent  of  dogmatic  systems ;  with  the  accompanying
disadvantage  of  being  difficult  for  ordinary  minds  to  grasp.  Mind-
healing  is  a  modern  name  for  this  ancient  and  lofty  protest  against  the
tyranny  of  the  flesh.

"We  have  roughly  arranged  these  forms  of  psycho-therapeutic  in
the  order  of  their  historical  evolution  in  the  mind  of  man. But  it

M  2


164


Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


does  not  follow  that  all  these  notions  together,  or  any  one  of  them,
must  necessarily  be  the  mere  figment  of  the  uncivilised  brain.  On  the
contrary,  it  is  evident,  it  is  certain,  that  there  is  truth  in  them  some-
where. Cures  are  and  always  have  been  elfected  by  other  than
demonstrably  physiological  means.  It  is  the  business  of  science  not  to
ignore  such  cures,  but  to  discover  how  they  are  in  fact  obtained.

And  here,  broadly  speaking,  there  are  two  alternative  possibilities.
Either  all  these  quasi-psychical  cures  can  be  referred  to  physiological
means  which  have  escaped  detection,  or  they  cannot  be  so  referred,  and
there  is  a  psychological  basis  which  must  be  inquired  into  in  other  ways.
The  former  of  these  alternatives  is  what  science  should  naturally  desire.
J ust  as  endemic  maladies  once  ascribed  to  the  wrath  of  heaven  are  now
discerned  to  be  due  to  microbes,  so  also  we  might  conceivably  discover
that  the  cures  ascribed,  say,  to  the  touch  of  saintly  personages  were  due,
not  to  their  saintliness  or  their  dogmatic  views,  but  to  some  physical
effluence  communicable  from  one  organism  to  another.  If  this  were  so
it  would  be  a  physiological  effect,  and  the  purely  physiological  explana-
tion of  psychological  marvels  would  have  made  an  enormous  stride.  It
is  strange  to  remember  that  this  thesis  was  actually  advanced  by
Mesmer,  whose  system  of  emanations  from  living  organisms,  metals,
magnets,  crystals,  was  thus  an  early  attempt  at  extending  physiological
and  physical  laws  over  a  region  till  then  abandoned  to  miracle.  His
theories,  however,  were  neither  proposed  nor  received  in  a  scientific
spirit ;  and  it  was  easy  to  show  that  many  of  the  phenomena  could  not
plausibly  be  explained  by  such  effluences  as  he  assumed  to  be  acting.
Different  portions  of  his  general  theory  (metallsesthesia,  influence  of
magnets,  passes,  ifec.,)  are  now  believed,  in  altered  forms,  by  different
schools  of  thought ;  but  with  these  modes  of  sensitivity  we  have  at
present  no  concern.  So  far  as  they  exist,  they  are  physiological ;  and
our  present  object  is  to  disengage  the  psychological  element  in  thera-
peutic, with  the  view  of  deciding  whether  any  of  the  modern  theories
set  before  us  for  discussion  has  a  predominant  or  specific  value  of  its
own.

We  may,  then,  take  it  as  admitted  that  the  first  of  the  two  alter-
native possibilities  of  which  we  spoke  above, — the  possibility  of  explain-
ing the  whole  of  psycho-therapeutics  by  purely  physiological  means, —
is  not  yet  an  accomplished  fact.  Where  Mesmer's  loose  generalities
failed,  the  less  grotesque  but  not  more  demonstrable  hypotheses  of
modern  physiologists  have  failed  also.  We  need  not  here  attempt  to
prove  this  in  detail.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  now  accepted  formula
for  all  these  quasi-psychical  cures,  as  we  have  termed  them,  is  simply
the  word  suggestion.  Now  if,  as  is  now  commonly  held,  we  have  not
here  to  do  with  any  real  effluence  proceeding  from  one  organism  to
another,  this  suggestion  from  others,  being  nothing  more  than  verbal,  is


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lomxles.  165


virtually  resolved  into  self-suggestion  ;  and  in  fact  we  see  that  self-sug-
gestion— itself  no  more  than  a  formula — -is  gradually  supplanting  all
other  formulje  in  psycho-therapeutics.  That  is  to  say,  the  second  of  the
two  alternative  possibilities  at  present  holds  the  field.  We  are  forced
to  recognise  in  these  cures  a  true  psychological  problem.  There  is  action,
as  we  say,  "  of  the  mind  upon  the  body,"  which  may  be  exerted  in
many  modes,  and  from  many  causes,  all  equally  beyond  our  ken.

This,  then,  is  in  one  sense  a  favourable  moment  for  the  supporters,
whether  of  mind-cure  or  miracle,  to  press  their  claim.  They  find  the
medical  world, — especially  on  the  Continent, — prepared  carefully  to
consider  well-attested  accounts  of  cures  such  as  in  earlier  generations
would  have  been  contemptuously  dismissed  without  inquiry.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  those  who  wish  to  prove  some  specific  and  peculiar
efficacy  in  any  one  mode  of  psycho-therapeutics  must  be  prepared  to
show  that  its  effects, — its  clearly  traceable  and  well-attested  effects, — go
beyond  any  recorded  effects  of  self-suggestion  ; — that  the  cures  cannot
be  paralleled  by  cures  occurring  without  metaphysical  meditations,  or
prayers,  or  the  intervention  of  the  "Virgin  Mary.

We  shall  have,  in  fact,  to  deal  with  alleged  miracles  of  healing  in
the  same  way  as  we  have  already  dealt  in  these  Proceedings  with  the
alleged  miracles  of  a  physical  or  "  telekinetic "  type.  Those
"  mediumistic  "  marvels,  evidentially  considered,  have  fallen  naturally
into  three  classes.  A  first  and  largest  class  we  have  rejected  in  limine
for  lack  of  first-hand,  contemporaneous,  exact  attestation.  A  second
large  class  we  have  discussed  minutely,  and  have  shown  that  they  could
be  paralleled  by  phenomena  due  to  ordinary  causes  (including  fraud), —
or  at  least  that  they  could  be  so  nearly  thus  paralleled  that  the  margin
of  difference  was  not  greater  than  ordinary  human  inaccuracy  or
prepossession  might  easily  cover.  A  third  small  class  are  not  obviously
liable  to  these  fatal  objections.  Some  of  Mr.  Crookes',  Lord  Crawford's,
Lord  Dunraven's  observations  are  very  well  attested,  and  have  not
yet  been  plausibly  paralleled  by  any  familiar  phenomena,  or  explained
by  any  known  laws.  These  experiences  still  stand  too  much  alone  to
command  general  scientific  assent.  But  should  similar  phenomena  be
more  widely  observed  in  the  future,  the  existence  of  these  records
will  strongly  confirm  the  fresh  observations.  Meanwhile  we  must,  of
course,  be  on  the  look  out  for  any  hitherto  undetected  explanation
which  may  bring  these  marvels  into  line  with  the  rest  of  our
knowledge.

Cases  which  would  fall  within  the  first  two  of  these  classes  we
shall  doubtless  find  in  the  collection  of  evidence  as  to  supernormal
healings  which  we  have  now  to  examine, — as  in  all  collections  of
miscellaneous  evidence  to  extraordinary  facts.  The  important  question
is  whether  any,  and,  if  so,  what  proportion  of  cases  will  survive  this


166  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


sifting  process  and  appear  in  our  third  class,  as  marvels  as  yet
unparalleled  and  unexplained,  and  which,  if  sufficiently  repeated,  may
compel  our  assent  to  their  specific  supernormal  or  miraculous  claims.

First,  then,  let  us  consider  what  is  the  kind  of  medical  evidence,
which  the  reports  submitted  to  us  ought  to  possess,  and  some  fragment
of  which  they  must  needs  possess,  if  they  are  to  claim  any  sort  of  con-
sideration.

A  good  history  of  any  medical  case  should  consist  of  first-hand
detailed,  expert  evidence,  supported  by  objective,  and  as  far  as  possible
by  automatic  records.  Let  us  consider  the  terms  of  this  definition  in
order.

First-hand. — Strictly  speaking,  the  evidence  should  come  at  first-
hand both  from  the  physician  and  from  the  patient.  In  disputed  cases
(as  where  the  physician  is  charged  with  incompetence)  this  double
testimony  may  be  essential.  But  in  cases  where  (as  in  those  which  we
have  here  to  consider)  the  patient  agrees  with  the  physician,  and  the
several  physicians  (if  there  be  several)  agree  among  themselves,  we  may
accept  the  physician's  report  of  the  patient's  statement,  which  the
physician,  of  course,  is  bound  to  record  as  carefully  as  the  objective
features  of  the  case.

Detailed. — The  physician  when  writing  his  account  should  endea-
vour to  supply  expert  readers  with  the  materials  for  forming  a  judgment
of  their  own.  Thus  he  is  bound  to  give  us  not  only  a  description  of
the  case  as  he  sees  it,  but  also  a  history  in  which  the  patient's  own
statements  are  confirmed  or  otherwise  by  such  other  testimony  as  can  be
procured.  In  many  cases  the  history,  including  heredity  and  early
environment,  is  the  most  instructive  part  of  the  whole  record.

Expert. — This  is  plainly  a  question  of  degree.  But  we  must  insist
on  having  a  j^hysician's  account ;  since  experience,  not  only  in  hospitals
but  in  private  practice,  has  abundantly  shown  how  defective  and  uir-
trustworthy  an  account  of  disease  may  be  given  by  a  layman, — himself
perhaps  more  intelligent  than  his  physician,  but  unfamiliar  with  those
detailed  and  elaborate  rules  which  enable  even  the  dullest  inheritor  of
the  great  mass  of  clinical  science  and  tradition  to  describe  the  complex,
confused  phenomena  of  bodily  disease  in  such  a  way  that  other  experts
shall  understand  him.  Be  it  noted,  however,  that  the  great  goddess
Hysteria  can  sometimes  deceive  j3i]sculapius,  and  that  in  such  a  contest
of  wits  the  expertry  is  not  always  on  the  side  of  the  profession.

Supported  by  objective  records. — All  things  in  this  world  are
fallible,  but  men  are  more  fallible  than  thermometers.  The  patient's
curve  of  temperature  is  often  more  instructive  than  anything  which
either  he  or  his  doctor  can  tell  us.  In  all  scientific  observation,
indeed,  it  is  an  object  to  have  as  many  facts  as  possible  recorded  by
instruments  which  need  only  to  be  read  off,  or  stamped  upon  impersonal


3Hnd-Gicre,  Faitli-Gv,re,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  16T

transcripts  which  can  be  studied  at  leisure.  And  the  progress  of
medicine  has  consisted  largely  in  the  accumulation  of  registers  of  this
type  ; — numerical  records  of  pulse,  respiration,  temperature  ;  localised
records  of  results  of  auscultation  and  percussion,  of  muscular  strength
and  electrical  condition  ;  chemical  analysis  of  excreta  ;  micro-photo-
graphs of  bacterial  or  cellvilar  contents  of  sputa  ;  measured  results  of
examination  in  the  waking  state  and  also  under  ansesthetics,  so  as  to
eliminate  conscious  or  unconscious  muscular  contraction.

"We  enumerate  forms  of  evidence  every  one  of  Avhich  would  have
been  of  important  service  in  many  of  the  cases  with  which  we  have  to
deal.  To  what  extent  they  have  been  actually  offered  to  our  scrutiny  we
shall  see  as  Ave  proceed.  Only  let  our  readers  at  once  understand
that  if  no  deiinite  evidence  whatever  of  these  kinds  be  supjjlied,  and  if
we  are  also  ignorant  as  to  the  degree  of  professional  skill  and  knowledge
possessed  by  the  reporting  physician,  our  own  judgement  on  the  case
can  hardly  go  beyond  conjecture.

Judging  by  the  antecedent  history  of  the  various  modes  of
psychical  healing  now  proposed  to  us, — by  their  position  in  the  scheme
of  psycho-therapeutics  set  forth  above, — it  is  for  mirid-healing  that
we  should  at  fii'st  sight  be  disposed  to  predict  the  most  lasting  success.
For  here  (as  already  pointed  out)  we  have  the  most  abstract  form  of
self-suggestion, — the  form  least  involved  with  dogma  liable  to  attack
or  disproof.  We  are  all  agreed  that,  whatever  sense  we  attach  to
matter  and  mind,  what  we  call  mind  does  in  some  way  affect  what  we
call  matter,  and  there  is  nothing  absurd  in  trying  to  make  our  mind
affect  the  matter  of  our  own  bodies  as  strongly  as  it  can.

Nothing  absurd,  Ave  say,  in  this  effort  itself.  We  do  not  say  that
some  of  its  preachers  haA-e  not  done  their  best  to  make  it  so.  The
sixtieth  edition  of  Science  and  Health,  with  Key  to  the  SciHptures,
by  Mary  Baker  G.  Eddy,  President  of  Massachusetts  Metaphysical
College,  lies  before  us.  It  begins  Avith  the  foUoAving  words  :  "In  the
year  1866  I  discoA-ered  the  Science  of  Metaphysical  Healing,  and
named  it  Christian  Science.  G-od  had  been  graciously  fitting  me,
during  many  years,  for  the  reception  of  a  final  revelation  of  the
absolute  Principle  of  '  Scientific  Mind-healing.'  "  We  did  not  close  the
book  after  this  passage,  and  were  rewarded  by  finding  (p.  441)  a
demonstration, — Avhose  naivete  is  only  one  step  from  the  sublime,
— of  the  essential  necessity  of  our  someAvhat  toilsome  perusal :  "  A
Christian  Scientist  requires  my  work  on  Science  and  Health  for  his
text  book,  and  so  do  all  his  students  and  patients.  Why  ?  Fi7-st  :
Because  it  is  the  voice  of  Truth  to  this  age,  and  contains  the  whole
of  Christian  Science,  or  the  science  of  healing  through  Mind.  Second  :  "
— but  the  first  reason  really  seems  enough  by  itself.

Now,  a  style  of  this  sort  in  a  popular  manual  by  no  means  proves


168  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


that  self-suggestion  may  not  be  successfully  practised  by  many  readers
on  the  lines  there  laid  down.  On  the  contrary,  these  gentle  indications
of  personal  merit,  like  the  chariots  and  trumpets  of  the  itinerant  quack,
may  actually  predispose  some  minds  to  the  belief  desired.  But  it
shows  us  nevertheless  that  the  buyers  of  the  sixty  editions  are  not
likely  to  have  much  sympathy  with  science  of  a  more  humble  and
ordinary  type,  or  to  have  taken  the  pains  to  record  very  accurately
the  cures  attained  by  such  a  "  high  priori  road."

We  know,  however,  by  correspondence  that  much  disinterested
zeal  for  others'  welfare, — as  well  as  much  of  eager  personal  hope, — is
being  thrown  into  the  effort  to  live  up  to  the  belief  that  Matter  and
Evil  are  non-existent,  and  that  Spirit  and  Good  are  all  in  all.  We
regret  the  more  that  the  actual  evidence  which  we  can  obtain  of  the
good  results  reached  by  this  ardent  abstraction  of  thought  should  be
as  yet  so  extremely  scanty.  There  must  be  more  behind  ; — and  we
earnestly  hope  that  those  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  send  us  such
evidence  may  recognise  that  while  we  join  with  them  in  deprecating
the  follies  which  have  sprung  up  around  their  line  of  effort,  our  atti-
tude towards  that  effort  itself  is  one  of  cordial  interest  and  sympathy.

An  American  friend  in  whom  we  have  entire  confidence  has
favoured  us  with  a  paper,  written  in  1892,  containing  accounts,  (which
do  not  pretend  to  medical  accuracy),  of  a  series  of  singular  cures
experienced  by  himself  and  his  immediate  group.

M.  73.

Case  I. — The  writer  says  of  himself  that  he  "is  occupied,  in  active  life,
has  a  strong  aversion  to  modern  '  Spiritualism,'  possesses  little  medical  know-
ledge, and  can  only  be  considered  an  average  observer  deeply  interested  in
psychical  phenomena.  He  has  never  undertaken  cures  by  faith  or  expectant
attention  save  in  his  own  case  and  that  of  his  children."  "In  1888,"  he
continues,  "  I  almost  totally  lost  the  sight  of  my  left  eye  through  a  con-
traction of  the  iris,  and  was  told  by  the  celebrated  specialist,  Mr.  Critchett,
that  it  could  only  be  restored  by  an  operation.  This  I  declined,  and  for
four  years  was  almost  blind  in  that  eye.  Last  week  I  suddenly  found  that
sight  was  restored  to  the  extent  which  had  been  promised  as  tlie  result  of
an  operation.^

Case  II. — "In  the  year  1867,  my  daughter,  then  three  years  old,  was
suffering  from  a  painful  illness,  and  in  reply  to  my  inquiries,  the  doctor  twice
told  me  that  he  had  given  up  every  hope  of  saving  her  life.  By  a  sudden
impulse  I  then  fixed  my  mind  in  certain  expectancy  tliat  she  would  recover,
and  caused  her  to  be  wrapped  in  wet  sheets.  She  at  once  rallied,  and  soon  was
well.  .  .  .  About  1871  my  son,  a  lad  of  fifteen,  was  very  ill  with  uncon-
trollable vomiting.  The  eminent  physician  who  attended  him  thought  it
necessary  to  pay  six  professional  visits  the  day  before  his  recovery,  and

J  It  would  seem  likely  that  this  was  due  to  an  accidental  and  unexpected  rupture
of  a  previous  adhesion  of  the  iris.


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  169


seemed  to  have  little  hope  of  his  life.  In  the  evening  the  boy  assured  me  that
at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  he  would  be  well.  In  the  night  he  talked  mco-
herently  of  a  favourite  spring  near  by.  At  five  in  the  morning  the  servant,
by  his  orders,  brought  the  water  from  that  spring.  The  boy  heard  with  joy
the  clicking  of  the  ice  which  had  been  put  into  it,  waked  up  fully,  and  drank
the  whole  of  two  glasses,  was  well  at  once  and  permanently.

Case  III. — "  One  of  my  neighbours,  after  lying  on  her  back  for  thirty
years,  under  the  care  of  my  own  medical  attendant,  from  unceasing  nausea,
called  in  a  new  physician.  He  gave  her  some  homoeopathic  jjowders  and
assured  her  that  she  would  be  sick  no  longer.  She  at  once  arose  and  resumed
her  active  out-door  occupations  after  this  long  interval.

Case  IV. — "  About  1880,  my  daughter  of  fifteen  had  her  foot  run  over
by  a  heavy  sledge.

"In  the  bourse  of  the  treatment  by  a  specialist  he  one  day  jjut  her
painful  foot  into  a  fresh  splint  and  said  she  could  not  give  up  her  crutches
for  nine  or  ten  months.  Driving  from  the  physician's  house  her  mother
recollected  to  have  heard  of  a  woman  physician  who  had  cured  many  sprains,
and  at  once  took  her  daughter  to  her  oflice.  A  few  passes  were  made  over
it,  and  the  girl  danced  around  the  floor  perfectly  well,  nor  was  there  any
relapse.  To  rest  even  slightly  on  that  foot  till  that  minute  had  been
unbearable  agony.  It  was  not  till  long  afterwards  that  we  became  aware
that  the  doctor  was  a  '  Spiritualist, '  performing  cures  by  the  mediumship  of
the  stereotyped  '  Big  Indian. '  Of  the  doctor's  personal  goodness  and
sincerity,  however,  there  could  be  no  possible  question.  Soon  afterwards,
a  nephew,  then  about  eleven  years  of  age,  now  my  guest,  had  strained  his
ankle  at  play  and  continued  to  use  it  till  at  length  he  was  laid  up.  The  foot
became  greatly  swelled  and  so  sensitive  that  any  stepping  on  the  floor
around  him  caused  him  increased  agony  of  pain.  Remembering  the  healing
of  his  cousin,  his  parents  sent  for  the  same  woman  physician.  The  lad  was
greatly  afraid  of  her,  had  not  the  least  hope  of  being  cured,  and  yet  after
about  ten  minutes  of  manipulation  the  foot  was  absolutely  free  from  pain
and  he  was  walking  round  the  room,  the  only  remainder  being  a  temporary
slight  sense  of  weakness. There  was  no  relapse.

Case  V. — "  My  younger  brother's  wife  had  a  disease  of  the  circulation
called  the  '  milk  leg,'  by  which  she  was  laid  up,  unable  to  stand  or  to  move
the  leg  for  about  a  year.  One  day  her  physician  had  made  a  fresh  special
examination  and  stated  that  there  was  no  hope  of  her  walking  for  another
year.  Under  a  strong  impulse  of  despair  succeeded  by  one  of  hope,  she  said,
'I  will  trust  God  and  walk.'  She  rose  up,  dressed  for  the  first  time  for
twelve  months,  and  has  in  the  six  years  since  had  no  relapse.  Her  physician
said  that  he  knew  no  precedent  for  or  clue  to  her  recovery.

Case  VI. — "A  well-known  lady  of  very  remarkable  scientific  attainments
tells  me  that  she  had  from  childhood  a  malposition  of  the  ribs  which  distorted
her  figure.  A  new  physician  who  supposed  himself,  in  addition  to  his  large
practice  of  medicine,  to  be  scripturally  authorised  at  times  to  act  on  the
injunctions  of  the  Epistle  of  James,  one  day  prayed  for  her  and  anointed
her  with  oil.  Soon  after  getting  into  her  carriage,  she  heard  a  sound  which
she  supposed  to  be  of  the  bones  of  her  thorax  moving,  and  soon  found  that
her  ribs  had  taken  their  normal  position. The  change  was  so  marked  that


170


Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


her  dresses  had  to  be  modified  to  her  greatly  altered  shape.  I  should  hesitate
to  tell  this  but  for  ray  long  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  lady,  and  a
close  friendship,  extending  over  twenty  years,  with  the  physician.

Case  VII. — "  My  little  daughter,  at  the  age  of  seven,  was  suffering  from
chronic  indigestion  which  caused  her  much  pain.  She  had  been  under  the
treatment  of  a  physician  for  several  months  and  he  gave  no  hopes  of  an  early
recovery.  The  faith-healing  doctor  above  referred  to  happened  at  the  time  to
be  visiting  at  my  house,  and  it  was  suggested  that  he  should  anoint  the  child
and  pray  with  her.  The  matter  was  explained  to  her  and  she  said  she  did  not
know  whether  she  would  like  to  have  it  done  or  not,  and  that  she  would  think
aljout  it.  This  she  did  for  a  day  and  then  came  in  a  great  hurry,  saying,
'  I'm  ready  now,  and  he  must  do  it  at  once.'  The  usual  ceremony  was  gone
through  and  the  child  was  at  once  cured.  Afterwards,  when  I  was  proposing
to  make  a  present  in  gratitude  for  cure,  the  child  said  earnestly,  '  Pajja,
you  ought  to  give  me  half  of  that,  for  if  it  had  not  been  for  my  faith  the
doctor  could  not  have  cured  me  at  all. '

"I  have  myself  known  of  most  successful  faith-healing  among  the  Mor-
mons at  Salt  Lake,  the  result  being  freely  acknowledged  by  the  surrounding
'  Gentiles. '  One  man  who  had  lost  a  leg  had  heard  so  much  of  this  that  he
crossed  the  ocean  and  went  to  Brigham  Young  to  get  it  renewed.  The  old
fox-like  prophet,  whom  I  knew,  said,  '  It  would  be  easy  for  me  to  give  you
another  leg,  but  I  must  explain  to  you  the  consequences.  If  I  give  you
another  leg  you  will  have  two  legs  till  you  die,  which  will  be  a  great  con-
venience, but  in  the  resurrection  not  only  will  the  leg  you  lost  rise  and  be  united
to  your  body,  but  also  the  one  I  now  give  you  ;  thus  you  will  be  encumbered
with  three  legs  for  ever.  It  is  for  you  to  decide  whether  you  will  take  the
inconvenience  of  one  leg  now  or  three  legs  through  eternity. '  The  man  chose
the  jjresent  inconvenience,  but  I  hold  that  the  prophet's  ingenuity  was  in
excess  of  his  power.  ^

Case  VIII. — "My  family  physician  habitually  cures  ulcers  on  ignorant
persons  by  laying  his  hand  on  them  and  assuring  the  patient  that  they  will  be
healed.  To  the  inquiry,  '  Then  why  do  not  you  do  it  for  me  ? '  he  candidly
rejjlies,  '  Oh,  it  don't  work  with  educated  people.'

"  His  son  at  twelve  years  of  age  broke  both  bones  of  his  arm  below  the
elbow,  which  were  set  by  an  uncle.  Two  days  afterwards  the  boy  came  to
his  father  and  asked  him  to  take  the  arm  out  of  the  splints.  The  father
explained  the  certain  results,  but  the  lad  said,  '  You  taught  me  to  ask  Jesus
for  what  I  wanted  and  to  be  sure  that  I  would  get  it,  and  I  have  asked  Him.'
Tlie  child  was  so  persistent  that  at  length  the  father  directed  the  uncle  to
remove  the  splints.  The  arm  was  tit  for  use  !  The  uncle  nearly  fainted
with  astonishment.  Told  to  me  at  the  time,  all  the  parties  my  trusted
friends,  I  am  compelled  to  believe  in  the  fact."

It  must  be  added,  however,  that  this  case"  was  thoroughly  investigated

'  This  reminds  us  of  a  story  of  Chan's  (Hist.  An.,  ix.  33),  where  the  Epidaurian
priests  of  iEsculapius  have  rashly  cut  off  a  woman's  head,  as  a  sanative  operation,  and
are  unable  to  restore  it.  Fortunately  in  that  case  ^soulapius  himself  visited  his
temijle,  and  set  right  the  little  mistake.

"  The  latter  part  of  this  account  is  as  given  by  Dr.  J.  M.  Buckley  in  his  book
Faith-healing,  Christian  Science,  and  Kindred  Phenomena,  p.  54.


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  171


by  Dr.  James  Henry  Lloyd,  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  the
Philadelphia  Medical  Record  for  March  27th,  1886,  Dr.  Lloyd  published  a
letter  from  the  verij  child,  who  has  become  a  physician.

"Dear  Sir, — The  case  you  cite,  when  robbed  of  all  its  sensational  surround-
ings, is  as  follows.  The  child  is  a  spoiled  youngster  who  would  have  his  own
way,  and  when  he  had  a  gveen-i-ftc/c  fracture  of  the  forearm,  after  having  had
it  bandaged  for  several  days,  concluded  he  would  much  prefer  going  without
a  splint.  To  please  the  spoiled  child  the  sj^lint  was  removed  and  the  arm
carefully  adjusted  in  a  sling.  As  a  matter  of  course  the  bone  soon  united,  as
is  customary  in  children,  and  being  only  partially  broken,  of  course  all  the
sooner.  This  is  the  miracle.  Some  nurse,  or  crank,  or  religious  enthusiast,
ignorant  of  matters  physiological  or  histological,  evidently  started  the  story,
and  unfortunately  my  name — for  I  am  the  party — is  being  circulated  in  cir-
cles of  faith-curites,  and  is  given  the  sort  of  notoriety  I  do  not  ci-ave. — Very
respectfully  yours,  Carl  H.  Reed."

"We  have  here,  in  fact,"  adds  Dr.  Buckley,  "the  testimony  of  the
patient  himself  that  his  cure  was  not  at  all  extraordinary,  and  not  depen-
dent upon  faith,  but  on  the  readiness  of  young  bone  to  heal."

A  second  somewhat  similar  series  of  cures  is  sent  to  us  by  an
American  lady  of  good  standing,  who  has  kindly  made  considerable,
though  unsuccessful,  efforts  to  get  for  us  the  sort  of  corroboration
desired.  The  change  of  physical  condition  in  these  cases  seems
indubitable,  but  the  rationale  of  these  changes  may  be  interpreted  in
very  various  ways.

M.  74.

Case  IX. — The  first  is  a  case  in  which  the  improvement  in  a  malforma-
tion of  the  foot  and  leg  is  accredited  to  "  Christian  Science."  The  stoiy  is
told  by  the  patient  himself,  Mr.  T.  (name  given),  solicitor,  of  Los  Angeles,
California.  ' '  I  was  born  September,  1858.  At  my  birth  my  right  foot  was
deformed,  being  turned  upon  one  side,  and  in  after  life  my  right  leg  did  not
grow  equallj'  with  the  left  leg,  so  that  at  the  time  when  Christian  Science  was
introduced  to  me  (.June,  1889)  my  right  leg  was  about  two  inches  shorter
than  my  left  leg,  so  that  I  had  to  wear  a  thick  cork  sole  upon  my  right  shoe.
While  in  Washington  in  January,  1891,  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Miss
Virginia  Johnson,  and  also  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Packard,  all  of  whom  were
pupils  of  Mrs.  Eddy.  When  about  to  leave  Washington  and  return  West,
Miss  Johnson  encouraged  me  to  go  to  Concord  and  call  upon  Mrs.  Eddy.
I  did  not  feel  it  would  look  well  for  me  to  do  so  wearing  the  unsightly  shoe
which  seemed  to  be  necessary.  On  the  Tuesday  before  my  departure  from
Washmgton  my  measure  was  taken  by  Simpson  tJie  tailor  (of  9th  and  G-
streets,  N.Y. )  for  a  pair  of  trousers,  which  were  ready  for  me  on  Thursday
following.  The  right  trousers  leg  was  too  short  and  it  was  found  necessary  to
let  down  the  hem,  so  I  did  not  get  the  trousers  until  Friday,  when  the  hem
had  been  let  do^vn  and  the  legs  appeared  to  be  all  right.  I  wore  the  trousers
Saturday.  The  next  morning,  Sunday,  January  25th,  while  lying  in  bed
and  wondering  how  I  could  manage  to  call  upon  Mrs.  Eddy  and  make  a
presentable  appearance,  I  chanced  to  stretch  out  my  legs  and  was  surprised
to  find  that  they  were  nearly  the  same  length. I  dressed,  borrowed  a  cast-


172  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


off  shoe  and  wore  it  upon  my  right  foot  that  day.  The  next  morning  I  found
the  right  leg  of  my  trousers  again  too  short,  and  as  soon  as  the  stores  were  open
I  bought  a  new  pair  of  shoes  and  a  pair  of  ready-made  trousers,  the  same  being
the  first  pair  of  trousers  with  the  legs  the  same  length  I  had  worn  since  a  boy.
These  trousers  fit  me  without  any  alterations,  but  I  had  to  have  a  new  leg  put
in  the  other  trousers  before  I  could  wear  them.  I  have  worn  straight  shoes  of
the  ordinary  ready-made  kind  ever  since,  while  before  I  required  for  my
right  foot  a  special  shoe  which  cost  me  lOdol.  This  demonstration  occurred
without  any  treatment,  and  I  have  never  received  treatment  for  my  deformity
except  a  short  time  by  a  so-called  Christian  Scientist  .  .  .  but  I
discovered  that  the  so-called  treatment  which  was  being  given  was  of  no
benefit,  but  rather  otherwise,  and  I  discontinued  it.  Miss  Johnson  informed
me  that  she  simply  put  it  out  of  her  thought,  and  declared  harmony  the  first
time  she  met  me.  I  consider  that  to  have  been  the  most  effective  treatment
that  could  have  been  given.  My  foot  does  not  yet  appear  to  be  straight,
and  I  have  never  made  any  effort  to  have  it  straightened.  I  had  studied
Christian  Science  for  a  year  and  a-half  before  the  above  demonstration
came."

In  evidence  of  the  accuracy  of  his  account  of  the  above  demonstration,
Mr.  T.  sends  the  corroborative  testimony  of  Lieutenant  F.  H.  Crosby,  dated
November  15th,  1892.  "  I  certify  that  I  am  personally  acquainted  with  Mr.
J.  R.  T.,  of  Los  Angeles,  Cal.  ;  that  I  saw  him  very  frequently  about
the  time  his  leg  was  lengthened  ;  that  I  walked  with  him  considerable
distances  ;  that  he  spent  Friday  evening  at  my  house  wearing  at  that  time
the  thick  cork  sole — at  least  l^in.  thick;  that  he  expressed  then  and  at  other
times  a  firm  conviction  that  his  deformity  would  be  at  some  time  overcome
through  the  truths  of  Christian  Science  ;  that  he  spent  the  following  Monday
evening  at  my  house  wearing  an  ordinary  pair  of  shoes  of  equal  thickness  of
sole  ;  that  I  walked  at  least  half  a  mile  with  him  that  evening  ;  that  I  looked
for  signs  in  his  walking  that  would  indicate  inequalities  in  the  length  of  his
legs  ;  that  he  walked  erect  and  with  no  sign  of  pain  or  inconvenience  ;  and
that,  although  I  have  no  means  of  proving  it,  I  believe — I  am  as  sure  as  I
can  be  of  another  man's  acts — that  he  used  no  other  means  to  bring  about
the  lengthening  of  his  leg  than  the  methods  of  Christian  Science. — F.  H.
Ckosby,  Lieut.,  U.  S.  Navy."

VVe  asked  for  some  details  of  this  rapid  change  and  lengthening  of  the
limb.  Was  there  any  full  description  of  the  limb,  its  bones,  joints  and
muscles,  before  the  lengthening  ?  was  there  any  elongation  of  the  long  bones  of
the  limb,  the  femur,  tibia,  or  fibula,  such  as  could  be  shown  by  the  comparison
of  measurements  made  between  different  parts  in  the  same  bone  before  and
after  the  lengthening  ?  was  there  any  curvature  which  by  being  straightened
could  have  made  the  bone  longer  1  was  there  any  evidence  of  chronic  muscular
spasm  before  the  lengthening,  of  tension  or  adhesion  of  the  tendons,  or
muscles,  or  fasciee,  or  slight  chronic  displacement  of  the  bones  at  the  joints,
the  hip,  the  knee,  or  the  ankle  ?  for  a  change  in  these  conditions  might  con-
stitute or  contribute  to  the  lengthening.  To  these  inquiries  Mr.  T.  wrote
a  reply  to  our  informant  saying  that  the  shortness  of  his  right  leg  "  was  by
reason  that  it  did  not  grow  equally  with  the  left  leg,  so  that  it  was  about  two
inches  shorter  than  my  left  leg."  "I  will  further  state,"  he  continues,  "that


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  173


the  above  statement  as  to  the  cause  for  my  shoi-t  leg  included  all  the  causes
which  I  then  or  now  believe  could  be  assigned  by  the  medical  profession.
The  statement  appears  to  me  to  exclude  the  hypotheses  that  the  lengthening
occurred  by  reason  of  relaxation  of  'chronic  muscular  spasm,  of  tension
or  adhesion  of  the  tendons,  muscles  or  fascia?.,  or  slight  chronic  displace-
ment of  the  bones  at  hip,  knee,  or  ankle.'  In  order  that  the  statement
may  be  understood  by  the  dullest  one  who  may  chance  to  read  this,  I  will
say  that  none  of  the  above  quoted  conditions  were  present  in  my  case.
I  cannot  say  whetlier  there  was  a  growth  of  the  bones  or  not,  and  I  know
of  no  way  in  which  such  a  question  could  be  determined.  To-day  the  bones
appear  to  be  the  same  length  as  those  of  the  other  leg  ;  but  as  to  having  an
'  M.D.'  to  perform  any  measurements  to  satisfy  his  unbelief  in  the  power  of
mind  to  shape  its  own  conditions  of  expression,  I  must  respectfully  decline.
The  proofs  of  Divine  Science  can  never  be  discerned  through  material  means
and  measures.  '  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh  after  a  sign,
and  no  sign  shall  be  given  except  the  sign  of  the  jDrophet  Jonas.  For  as  Jonas
was  three  days  and  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so  shall  the  Son  of
Man  be  three  days  and  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth.'  The  only  satisfac-
tory sign  the  human  thought  can  get  is  to  do  as  Jonah  did,  i.e.,  come  out  of
his  belief  of  life,  substance  and  intelligence  in  matter.  If  Mr.  Myers  and
those  with  whom  he  is  associated  will  open  their  minds  to  the  truth  that
there  is  no  life,  substance  or  intelligence  in  matter,  that  the  Son  of  Man  is
not  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  ;  that  is,  to-day,  if  they  will  come  out  of  their
material  beliefs,  they  will  learn  more  in  one  day  than  they  can  otherwise
learn  in  an  age.  They  with  their  belief  of  mind  within  a  skull,  of  them-
selves within  a  material  body,  fulfil  the  type  of  Jonah  within  the  body  of  the
whale.  When  they  appeal  to  Omnipotent  Mind  to  release  them  and  deliver
them  from  this  false  environment,  they,  like  their  prototype,  will  find  them-
selves placed  on  firm  ground.  .  .  .  If  I  were  to  destroy  every  scrap  of
evidence  that  I  had  ever  had  the  deformity  I  have  spoken  of,  it  would
relieve  me  of  much  that  is  not  desirable.  I  knew  when  the  Society  was
discussing  it,  and  was  almost  unable  to  put  on  my  shoe  by  reason  of  the
swelling  induced  in  that  member  when  it  was  being  mentally  discussed  in
London.  I  am  fearless,  though,  and  know  that  such  seeming  power  for  evil
is  a  myth."

Mr.  T.'s  perceptions  are  indeed  abnormally  acute  if  he  painfully
felt  our  Society  "mentally  discussing"  his  case  at  a  time  when,
that  discussion  was  confined  to  the  forum  coyiscientice  of  a  single
member.  Mr.  T.  compares  our  difHculties  to  those  of  Jonah  when
swallowed  by  the  whale  ;  but  at  this  moment  we  feel  more  disposed  to
sympathise  with  the  difficulties  of  the  whale  when  swallowing  Jonah.

In  the  other  cases  received  from  the  lady  above  mentioned  there  is
no  marked  repugnance  or  contemjjt  for  medical  testimony,  but  this  is,
nevertheless,  conspicuously  absent,  and  she  holds  out  little  hope  of
being  able  to  get  it.  A  fair  instance  of  the  kind  of  case  olTered  is  the
following  : — ■


174  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


M.  75.

Case  X.  — "  Eliza  H.  slipped  in  the  dark  and  was  thrown  against  the  stone
"wall  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs.  By  this  accident,  six  ribs  were  dislocated,  the
bones  of  my  right  wrist  were  all  displaced,  and  my  hand  pronounced  useless
henceforth  ;  my  skull  was  ci'ushed,  my  stomach  was  injured,  and  all  my  other
internal  organs  displaced  ;  my  spine,  too,  was  seriously  affected.  I  was  attended
by  the  most  prominent  physicians.  After  four  years  of  intense  suffering,  chills
and  fever  set  in  for  nine  months.  On  this  account  it  was  thought  necessary
to  send  me  out  West.  I  went  to  the  country  to  gain  strength  and  returned
to  the  city  in  the  autumn,  expecting  to  be  operated  upon  in  the  hospital  where
I  was  a  patient,  but  Professor  Fellowes  and  Dr.  Ludlam  stated  in  lectures
to  their  classes  that  it  would  be  impossible,  as  my  body  was  a  complete
wreck.  Also,  as  all  the  inward  organs  wei'e  displaced,  it  was  thought  I  could
not  rally  from  the  effects  of  chloroform.  Seven  years  of  intense  suffering
were  passed  in  a  pilgrimage  from  hospital  to  hospital.  I  was  entirely  help-
less and  pronounced  incurable,  when  a  friend  opened  my  eyes  to  the  truth.
From  that  hour  I  abandoned  all  medicine  and  trusted  God.  I  began  to
mend,  slowly  but  surely,  and  as  a  result  of  mental  treatment  only,  followed
by  earnest  study,  I  am  now  in  vigorous  health,  able  to  accomplish  any  work,
such  as  running  a  sewing  machine  for  hours  at  a  time,  walking  great  dis-
tances, going  up  and  down  stairs  with  perfect  ease  and  pleasure,  &c.,  and
find  my  happiness  in  imparting  to  others  what  I  have  received  and  am  con-
tinually receiving."

All  that  we  can  be  sure  of  from  this  report  as  it  stands  is  that  there
was  relief  from  pain.  But  for  any  real  estimate  of  the  powers  of
"  mind-cure  "  it  is  essential  that  we  should  learn  the  details  of  the  dis-
placement "of  all  the  inwai'd  organs  "  and  their  re-adjustment ; — points
certainly  sufficiently  difficult  to  tax  to  the  utmost  the  skill  of  the  most
expert  observers.  Why,  after  all  these  years  of  hospitals,  is  there  not
a  single  word  from  any  physician  ?  Have  "  Professor  Fellowes  and  Dr.
Ludlam  "  any  remark  to  make  1  We  cannot  but  remember  the  case  of
Maria  J  oily,  advertised  in  every  newspaper  in  the  days  of  our  youth,
where  "  thirty  years  of  indescribable  agony  "  were  cured  at  once  by  the
use  of  "  Revalenta  Arabica,"  which  turned  out  to  be  the  flour  of  lentils.

When  we  turn  from  faith-healing  in  America  to  faith-healing  in
England  we  find  an  equal  lack  of  satisfactory  evidence.  "  We  could
continue,"  says  Dr.  Schofield  {Faith-healing,  p.  50),  "  to  give  pages  of
most  interesting  unproved  or  unprovable  cases,  but  enough  has  been
narrated  to  show  that,  in  England  at  any  rate,  we  have  found  it
impossible  directly  to  verify  a  single  organic  case."  Dr.  Schofield  has
taken  much  trouble  in  the  matter ;  and  additional  weight  is  given  to
his  negative  conclusion  by  the  fact  that  he  writes  from  a  decidedly
Christian  standpoint,  and  that  his  book  is  published  by  the  Religious
Tract  Society.  Assuredly  rational  religion  has  little  to  gain  from  such
doctrines  as  Dr.  Schofield  quotes  :  "  '  I  hold,'  says  one  writer,  '  that  all
who  come  to  God  for  healing,  and  accept  it  by  faith  in  His  appointed


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  175


way,  are  healed, — no  matter  what  may  be  the  evidence  of  their  senses
to  the  contrary.'  ...  A  friend  of  mine,  a  Christian  doctor,  found
a  woman,  from  whom  he  had  to  remove  a  cancer,  actually  protesting
at  the  time  that  she  was  [already]  healed.  ...  'I  know,'  says
one,  '  many  people  who  have  been  cured  for  three  or  four  years,  hnt
who  still  wait  its  manifestation  ! '  "

The  fact  that  in  our  discussion  of  mind-healing  we  are  reduced  to
quoting  cases  like  those  given  above  indicates,  of  course,  that  no  real
evidence  for  the  alleged  cures  has  fallen  under  our  ken.  We  believe,
however,  from  private  statements  that  at  any  rate  marked  alleviations
of  pain  and  discomfort  have  often  followed  upon  self-suggestion  of  this
concentrated  kind ;  and  we  here  appeal  to  all  persons  seriously  interested
in  the  matter  to  send  us  evidence  somewhat  more  nearly  approaching
the  type  which  we  have  above  laid  down.  We  on  our  part  are  prepared
to  believe,  not  indeed  all  that  mind-healers  have  asserted,  but  a  good
deal  more  than  they  have  as  yet  made  any  attempt  to  prove.  We
make  this  appeal  with  considerable  hope,  in  spite  of  the  probability  that
some  prominent  persons  in  the  Faith-healing  camp  will  be  little  dis-
posed to  listen  to  iis.  The  founder  of  the  "  University  of  the  Science
of  Spirit "  — who  argues  that  ordinary  science  is  grossly  at  fault  because,
while  asserting  that  mercury  cures,  it  refuses  the  obvious  deduction,
"  Then  the  more  mercury  you  take  the  better," — will  be  unaffected  by
any  views  so  old-fashioned  as  those  which  we  can  offer.  The  keepers  of
"  faith -houses,"  whose  motto  is  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  the  money,"
will  discover  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of  the  money  still.  The  Brother
who  announces  in  the  "Crown  of  Glory  "  that  he  "has  given  up  rum,
wine,  tobacco,  and  everything  but  Jesus,"  will  be  content  to  call  our  at-
tention to  his  approaching  voyage  to  preach  salvation  (by  Faith-healing)
on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  whither  he  will  set  forth  "  as  soon  as  the
Lord  has  sent  the  balance  of  the  fare."  ^

The  existence  of  a  crew  of  this  kind  is  an  inevitable,  although,  it
may  be  hoped,  a  transitory  result  of  any  widespread  popular  attempt  at
cure  by  suggestion  and  self-suggestion.  Inasmuch  as  it  seems  to  matter
little  from  whom  the  suggestion  comes,  so  long  as  that  suggestion  is
sufficiently  vigorous  to  get  itself  accepted,  the  charlatan  has  some
excuse  for  thinking  that  this  is  just  the  field  for  charlatans,  and  that
patients  may  as  well  believe  in  him  as  in  Bernheim  or  Delboeuf.  As  time
goes  on  it  may  perhaps  be  found  that  the  lectures  of  Mind-healers  (300
dollars  for  a  three  weeks'  course)  and  the  prayers  of  Faith-healers  (tai'iff
not  stated)  are  alike  needless,  and  that  the  sufferer  himself,  by  the  mere
strong  exercise  of  his  own  volition,  can  at  least  control  or  alleviate
many  nervous  ills.

Two  warnings  only  we  feel  bound  to  give. May  not  the  solemn

''  See  Buckley's  Faith-healing,  p.  56,  &c.


176  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


invocations  of  the  Faith-healei' — his  assurances  in  the  most  sacred
names,  and  with  the  most  awful  adjurations,  that  the  disease  will  dis-
appear at  a  given  moment,  be  altogether  omitted  ?  These  assumptions
of  direct  personal  approach  to  the  Deity  are  merely  blasphemous  ;  and
when  the  solemn  covenant  fails  the  ignoi'ant  sufferer  is  apt  to  sink  into
the  same  bitter  unbelief  which  makes  the  savage  beat  his  idol  when  he
is  cheated  of  the  promised  rain.  And  it  is  our  duty  also  to  warn  all
patients  most  seriously,  when  trying  any  "suggestive"  or  "psycho-
therapeutical  "  treatment,  not  to  neglect  any  means  whatever  of
ordinaiy  and  orthodox  cure.

Alitur  vitium,  vivitque  tegendo,
Dum  medicas  adhibere  uianus  ad  volnera  pastor
Abnegat,  aut  meliora  decs  sedet  omina  poscens.^

We  must  now  proceed  to  the  second  part  of  our  task, — the  exami-
nation of  the  so-called  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  And  here  we  pass  at  once
from  the  atmosphere  of  the  future  into  the  atmosphere  of  the  past  ;
from  crude  attempts  to  popularise  modern  scientific  conceptions  to  a,
method  of  psycho-therapeutic,  which,  however  essentially  the  same  au
fond  as  the  modern  developments,  relies  for  its  efficacy  upon  beliefs
and  practices  which  have  come  down  to  us  thi'ough  many  transforma-
tions from  a  remote  past.  Deferring  for  the  time,  however,  any  notice
of  the  parallels  thus  suggested,  let  us  begin  by  examining  the  three
essential  factors  of  the  Lourdes  story.  In  a  few  words,  that  story  is  as
follows.  The  Virgin  Mary  appeared  to  Bernadette,  and  in  direct
consequence  of  that  apparition  miraculous  cures  are  performed  in  and
near  the  same  grotto  where  the  divine  figure  was  seen.

Plainly  we  have  three  points  to  look  into.  (1.)  What  is  the
evidence  that  the  apparition  was  really  seen,  or,  if  seen,  was  more  than
a  purely  subjective  hallucination?  (2.)  What  is  the  evidence  which
connects  the  apparition  with  the  cures?  (3.)  What  evidence  is  there
of  cures  so  far  surpassing  the  known  effects  of  suggestion  and  self-
suggestion  as  to  demand  a  special  or  a  miraculous  explanation  ?  On
each  of  these  points  there  is  a  good  deal  to  say.

(1.)  The  apparition.  "On  a  great  tablet  of  marble,"  says  Dr.
Boissarie,  "  magnificently  framed,  fastened  into  the  rock  near  the
grotto,"  the  following  inscription  is  to  be  read  : —

'  Virgil,  Qeorg.  III.,  454.  These  words— too  often  justified  in  faith -healing-
practice — may  be  rendered  as  follows  : —

Thus  grows  and  grows  the  hurt  which  none  can  heal.
While  the  false  leech  denies  the  saving  steel ;
He  with  hands  clasped  invokes  a  favouring  day  ;
And  dies  the  victim,  and  the  gods  delay.


Mind-Gure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  177


Dates  of  the  Eighteen  apparitions
•  and  words  of  the  Blessed  Virgin

in  the  year  of  grace  1858.
In  the  hollow  of  the  rock,  where  her  statue  is  now  seen
the  Blessed  Virgin  appeared  to  Bernadette  Soubirous
Eighteen  times.
The  11th  and  the  14th  of  February  ;
Each  day,  with  two  exceptions,  from  February  18th  till  March  4th,
March  25th,  April  7th,  July  16th.
The  Blessed  Virgin  said  to  the  child  on  February  18th,
' '  Will  you  do  me  the  favour  (me  faire  la  grace)  of  coming  here  daily

for  a  fortnight  ?
I  do  not  promise  to  make  you  happy
In  this  world,  but  in  the  next  ;
I  want  many  people  to  come  (qu'il  vienne  du  monde)."
The  Virgin  said  to  her  during  the  fortnight  :
"  You  will  pray  for  sinners  ;  you  will  kiss  the  earth  for  sinners.
Penitence  !  penitence  !  penitence  !
Go  and  tell  the  priests  to  cause  a  chapel  to  be  built  ;

I  want  people  to  come  thither  in  procession.
Go  and  drink  of  the  fountain  and  wash  yourself  in  it.
Go  and  eat  of  that  grass  which  is  there  (de  cette  herbe  qui  est  la).  "
On  March  25th  the  Virgin  said  :
"I  AM  THE  Immaculate  Conception."

This,  then,  is  the  official  account  of  the  vision.  We  will  simplify
our  discussion  by  waiving  all  question  as  to  its  good  faith  or  accuracy,
and  accepting  it  as  an  exact  account  of  what  Bernadette  believed  that
she  heard  and  saw.  How,  then,  should  we  classify  such  a  narrative,  if
sent  to  us  in  the  ordinary  course  of  our  collection  of  evidence  1

Undoubtedly  we  should  regard  it  as  a  purely  subjective  expei'ience.
It  does  not  answer  any  of  the  tests  which  we  habitually  impose  on  a
hallucination  which  claims  to  be  veridical.  The  figure  was  seen  by  one
person  only.  The  apparition  did  not  coincide  with  any  objective
event.  It  did  not  even — though  to  this  point  we  must  presently
return — contain  any  prediction  whose  fulfilment  could  be  a  retrospec-
tive proof  of  the  reality  of  the  message.  And — worst  of  all  from  an
evidential  point  of  view, — the  figure  seen  was  one  which,  by  the
admission,  we  believe,  of  the  Catholic  clergy  themselves,  has  been
often  reported  as  seen,  mainly  by  young  girls,  under  circumstances
where  no  objective  value  whatever  could  be  attributed  to  the
apparition.

It  so  happens  that  on  this  last  and  very  important  point  we  can
adduce  a  significant  series  of  facts.  In  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,
p.  100,  may  be  found  a  description,  written  for  the  S.P.R.,  by
M.  Marillier  from  observation  on  the  spot,  of  a  series  of  apparitions
of  the  Virgin  near  Pontinet  in  the  Dordogne. There  the  Virgin  was.

N


178  Bt.  a.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


seen  many  times  by  many  persons,  generally  through  a  special  hole  in
a  wall,  but  sometimes  on  the  open  heath.  We  entirely  concui'red,
however,  with  M.  Marillier  in  ranking  all  these  visions  as  purely
subjective.  We  considered  that  the  expectation  and  excitement
caused  by  Marie  Magontier's  account  of  her  first  vision — itself  probably
a  real,  but  entirely  subjective  experience, — might  well  have  predisposed
her  neighbours  to  similar  hallucinations.  The  case  was  like  that  of
a  haunted  room,  where  one  person  has  seen  a  figure,  and  then  others,
informed  of  this  apparition,  have  seen,  or  fancied  that  they  saw,
something  like  that  figure  again.  And  the  Bishop  of  Perigueux  must
obviously  have  shared  this  view,  for  he  discouraged  the  visions  at
Pontinet  and  nothing  has  come  of  them.

It  is  not  easy  to  explain  why  this  long  series  of  mutually
corroborative  visions  should  be  thus  tacitly  dropped,  while  the  similar
visions  of  a  single  uncorroborated  child  should  receive  so  much
attention.  Dr.  Boissarie  makes  two  points  based  on  the  apparition
itself ;  namely,  the  beauty  of  the  figure  and  the  loftiness  of  the
message.  "We  shall  be  able,"  he  says,  p.  31,  "to  arrive  at  a  scientific
demonstration  of  the  supernatural  by  placing  side  by  side,  on  the  one
hand,  the  faculties  of  this  ignorant  child ;  on  the  other  hand,  the
vision  of  this  ideal  Virgin,  a  creation  of  an  unknown  type,  which  the
genius  of  the  greatest  artists  had  never  conceived,  and  has  had
difficulty  in  reproducing.  The  name  of  this  Virgin,  the  words  which
she  uttered, — all  is  out  of  proportion  to  the  percipient's  intelligence.
Remembering  the  formal  principle,  admitted  by  all  authorities,  '  A
ballucination  is  never  more  than  a  reminiscence  of  a  sensation  already
perceived,'  it  is  evident  that  the  intelligence  and  the  memory  of
Bernadette  could  never  have  received  the  image  or  heard  the  echo  of
what  she  saw  and  heard  at  the  grotto."

How,  it  may  be  asked,  do  we  know  of  the  extraordinary  beauty  of
the  form  which  Bernadette  perceived?  We  know  this,  it  appears,  (p. 70)
from  the  statement  of  the  sculptor  Fabisch,  who  made  a  statue  of  the
■  Virgin  which  Bernadette  regarded  as  a  faithful  copy  of  what  she  had
seen.  Of  the  pose  and  expression  which  he  had  thus  faithfully
reproduced,  Fabisch  informs  us  that  "  he  has  seen  nothing  to  equal
them  in  suavity  and  rapture  in  the  chefs  d'ceuvre  of  the  greatest
masters, — of  Perugino  or  Raphael."  It  was  fortunate  that  the  task
was  committed  to  an  artist  so  fully  equal  to  the  occasion  ;  and  the  less
favourable  impression  made  upon  one  of  ourselves  by  the  sight  of  the
statue  in  the  grotto  should  not,  perhaps,  be  placed  in  opposition  to  this
decisive  judgment  of  the  sculptor  himself.

As  regards  the  loftiness  of  the  message  we have  less  definite
guidance. Dr.  Boissarie  does  not  tell  us  whether  it  is  the  divine

-o

command  to  kiss  the  earth  for  sinners,  or  the  divine  command  to  eat


Mind-Giire,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  179

grass,  which  is  manifestly  beyond  the  intelligence  of  a  simple  child.
He  dwells  only  upon  the  phrase  "  I  am  the  Immaculate  Conception  "  ;
and  we  may  indeed  admit  that  this  particular  mode  of  reproducing  the
probably  often-heard  statement  that  the  Virgin  was  conceived  without
sin  does  indicate  a  mind  which  is  either  supra  or  infra  grammaticam

We  have  quoted  this  passage  at  length  mainly  as  indicating  what  it
is  that  Dr.  Boissarie  is  willing  to  call  a  demonstration  scientifiqx(,e  du
surnaturel.  And  since  this  physician  is  sometimes  referred  to  as
though  his  judgments  carried  much  weight,  we  may  mention  here  that
the  most  definite  knowledge  which  we  have  been  able  to  gain  about
him  is  that  he  "  has  been  mixed  up  for  several  years  (mele  depuis
plusieurs  annees,  p.  147)  with  the  religious  and  scientific  movements  of
his  time."  This  fact  about  himself, — the  only  one  which  he  vouchsafes
us, — is  also  that  which  the  study  of  his  volume  would  have  enabled  us
to  divine  with  the  most  confident  assurance.

If,  however,  we  must  admit  that  the  story  of  the  apparition  is  not
one  which  could  have  found  a  place  as  evidential  in  these  Proceedings,
the  same  thing  cannot  be  said  of  another  incident,  much  less  noticed,
but  in  itself  far  more  surprising,  in  the  recorded  life  of  Bernadette.
This  incident  was  observed  and  described  by  Dr  Dozous, — the
physician  to  whose  advocacy  the  credence  bestowed  on  Bernadette,  and
the  consequent  fame  of  Lourdes,  seem  to  have  been  in  the  first  instance
mainly  due.  Dr.  Boissarie  quotes  from  Dr.  Dozous'  account,  but
without  giving  any  reference,  nor  even  the  name  of  the  work  where
the  citation  occurs.  We  repeat  the  story,  therefore,  as  Dr.  Boissarie
gives  it  (p.  49).

"  The  girl,  upon  her  knees,  held  in  one  hand  a  lighted  taper,  which
rested  upon  the  ground.  During  her  ecstasy  she  put  her  hands
together,  and  her  fingers  were  loosely  crossed  above  the  flame,  which
they  enveloped  in  the  cavity  between  the  two  hands  (dans  I'espece  de
voute  qui  les  separait).  The  taper  burnt ;  the  flame  showed  its  point
between  the  fingers  and  was  blown  about  at  the  time  by  a  rather  strong
current  of  air.  But  the  flame  did  not  seem  to  produce  any  alteration
in  the  skin  which  it  touched."

"  Astonished,"  says  Dr.  Dozous,  "  at  this  strange  fact,  I  did  not
allow  anyone  to  put  a  stop  to  it,  and  taking  out  my  watch  I  could
observe  it  perfectly  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Her  prayer  ended,
Bernadette  rose,  and  prepared  to  leave  the  grotto.  I  kept  her  back  for
a  moment  and  asked  her  to  show  me  her  hand,  which  I  examined  with
the  greatest  care.  I  could  not  find  the  slightest  trace  of  a  burn  any-
where. T  then  tried  to  place  the  flame  of  the  taper  beneath  her  hand
without  her  observing  it ;  but  she  drew  her  hand  quickly  back,  exclaim-
ing '  You  burn  me  ! '

"  This  fact,"  continues  Dr.  Boissarie,  "  has  often  been  imperfectly

N  2


ISO


Br.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


interpreted.  It  includes  two  elements  quite  distinct  from  each  other,
the  insensibility,  and  the  absence  of  actual  burning.  Bernadette  in
her  ecstasy  might  have  lost  the  sensation  of  pain  ;  .  .  .  but  actual
combustion,  actual  destruction  of  tissues  by  heat  takes  place  under  all
circumstances  and  inevitably,  irrespective  of  pain  or  absence  of  pain."
This  is  quite  true ;  nor  would  any  kind  of  preservative  application  have
sufficed  to  prevent  the  fingers  from  being  charred  under  the  conditions
described.

We  have  here,  then,  a  most  important  statement,  vouched  for  by
Dr.  Dozous,  one  of  the  most  essential  witnesses  in  all  this  case,  and
(according  to  him)  confirmed  by  all  the  persons  present,  who  "  saw  the
flame  mount  along  the  interlaced  fingers,  and  but  for  Dozous'  inter-
vention would  have  taken  the  taper  from  the  child's  hands."

It  seems  to  us  that  a  ^physician's  observation  so  easy,  so  prolonged,
and  l)y  the  observer's  account  so  corroborated  both  by  his  own  immediate
experiment  and  by  the  agreement  of  all  bystanders,  cannot  be  set
down  to  mere  mal-observation.  It  must  either  be  true  or  else  wilfully
false.  If  wilfully  false  it  brings  down  with  it,  one  may  say,  the  whole
legend  of  Bernadette,  of  which  this  is  by  far  the  most  remarkable  and
apparently  the  best-attested  incident.  If  on  the  other  hand,  Dr.
Dozous'  story  be  true,  what  are  we  to  hold  that  it  proves  1  What
parallel  cases  have  we  with  which  to  compare  it  ?  The  obvious  answer
is  that  we  have  a  series  of  similar  occurrences  reported  in  the  case  of
D.  D.  Home.  Home's  phenomena  of  resistance  to  fire  are  in  fact  both
in  themselves  more  striking  and  better  attested,  since  we  have  such
names  as  those  of  Mr.  Crookes,  Lord  Crawford,  Lord  Dunraven,  with
other  observers  of  known  position  and  probity,  to  set  against  the  little-
known  Dr.  Dozous,  and  the  still  less  known  peasants  who  witnessed
the  "  miracle  of  the  taper"  at  Lourdes.

This  parallel,  however,  striking  as  it  is,  does  not  carry  us  much
further  towai-ds  the  solution  of  the  Lourdes  problem.  For  in  the
first  place  D.  D.  Home's  phenomena,  in  spite  of  their  attestation,  have
not  gained  general  scientific  acceptance  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  those
who  do  believe  in  them  are  undecided  as  to  the  power — whether
resident  in  Home  himself  or  in  unknown  spirits — to  which  these
striking  effects  are  to  be  attributed.  The  "  miracle  of  the  taper,"
therefore,  if  truly  reported,  may  show  that  Bernadette  was  a  "  medium,"
but  cannot  fairly  be  used  to  prove  the  action  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  Still
less  safe  would  it  be  to  appeal  to  the  ecstasies  themselves  as  proving  the
divine  character  of  their  inspiring  cause.  Here  again  Mr.  Daniel
Home  also  had  his  ecstasies, — controlled  by  "  guides,"  who  were  quite
as  sensitive  to  human  incredulity  as  better-authorised  saints  might  have
been.  "  Little  faith  !  "  they  would  exclaim,—"  little  faith  !  Will  you
not  trust  in  Dan  ?  "


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Gv^re,  and  the  Miracles  of  Loitrdes.  181

And  this  brings  us  to  the  second  point  marked  out  for  our
discussion.  What  connection  is  to  be  discerned  between  the  visions  of
Bernadette  and  the  cures  subsequently  occurring  at  Lourdes  1

In  the  first  place  it  may  be  observed  that  the  original  words  of  the
message  make  no  mention  whatever  of  physical  healing.  On  the
contrary,  the  Virgin  expressly  states  that  the  happiness  which  she
promises  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  next  world  and  not  in  this.  What  she
apparently  aims  at  in  this  world  is  worship  for  herself  :  "I  want  people
to  come,"  "  1  want  people  to  come  in  procession."  There  was  also,
indeed,  a  direction  to  wash  in  the  stream,  and  to  drink  of  it.  Whether
this  stream  meant  the  visible  Gave,  or  its  visible  tributary, — both
within  a  few  yards  of  the  spot — or  the  spring  just  below  the  surface
which  Bernadette  is  said  to  have  scraped  clear  with  her  hands  ^ — it
seems  to  have  referred  to  a  stream  sufficiently  established  to  have
already  grass  growing  on  its  banks,  which  Bernadette  (presumably  with
other  believers)  was  commanded  to  eat.  Whether  Bernadette,  or  any-
one else,  did  eat  it  is  not  quite  clear.  And  ^vhy  they  were  to  eat  it,  tvhy
they  were  to  wash  in  the  stream,  is  still  more  mysterious.  It  may
have  been  for  the  same  reason  that  they  were  to  kiss  the  ground,  as  an
act  of  abasement  or  penitence  for  sin.  But  we  need  hardly  perhaps
further  analyse  the  somewhat  incoherent  message  which  has  since  been
made  to  mean  so  much  more  than  its  actual  words  will  carry.

A  quarryman  of  the  name  of  Bourriette,  however,  (Boissarie,  p.  99)
conceived  the  idea  that  the  water  of  the  spring  in  the  grotto  might
with  advantage  be  applied  to  his  eyes,  injured  by  an  explosion.  The
alleged  good  effects  of  the  water,  in  this  and  other  cases  among  the
neighbouring  peasantry,  started  the  long  series  of  cures  with  which  we
shall  presently  have  to  deal.

The  connection  between  these  cures  and  the  Virgin  Mary  lies  in
almost  all  cases  in  the  subjective  conviction  of  the  sufferer  that  he  will
be  cured  at  Lourdes  and  that  the  Virgin's  aid  will  do  it.  Sometimes,
no  doubt,  his  conviction  may  be  reinforced  by  a  dream,  as  when
Mustapha,  a  Mussulman  in  Constantinople,  dreamt  that  a  lady  in
white  told  him  that  she  was  the  Virgin  adored  by  the  Georgian
Fathers  in  that  city  ;  in  whose  chapel,  in  fact,  water  from  Lourdes  is
distributed  gratis.  Mustapha's  right  eye,  which  he  had  comjyletement
perdu  —  "lost  altogether," — was  radicalement  gueri  —  "completely
cured "  (we  are  told),  when  he  awoke,  and  Dr.  Boissarie  concludes
(p.  237)  that  "  Our  Lady  of  Lourdes  seems  to  have  commenced  the
religious  reformation  of  the  East."  Of  such  dreams  and  like  phenomena
we  shall  have  something  to  say  further  on.

'  It  would  be  interesting  to  compare  this  alleged  miraculous  discovery  of  a  spring
with  the  exploits  of  "dowsers  "or  "water-finders";  but  we  have  not  seen  any
account  definite  enough  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  discussion.


182  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


For  the  present  our  point  is  that  we  have  not  in  analogous  cases
considered  that  subjective  evidence  of  this  kind,  even  when  backed  up
by  definite  assertions  of  identity  and  continuous  action  on  the  part  of
some  unseen  agent,  did  really  constitute  a  proof  that  that  agent  was
at  work.  We  have  regarded  it  as  still  possible,  and  even  probable,
that  the  effects  were  pi'oduced  by  self-suggestion,  and  that  the  alleged
Spirit  or  Guardian  was  no  more  than  a  form  in  which  the  self-suggestion
clothed  itself.

A  remarkable  case,  recently  received,  may  here  be  quoted  to
illustrate  both  the  degree  of  insistent  assertion  and  apparently  of
active  supernoimal  influence  which  may  sometimes  point  to  the  inter-
vention of  some  given  spiritual  agency, — and  at  the  same  time  the
degree  of  doubt  and  reserve  with  which  it  seems  needful  to  meet
assertion  and  evidence  of  that  particular  kind.

The  writer  of  the  following  narrative  is  a  physician  occupying  an
important  scientific  post  on  the  Continent  of  Europe.  He  is  known  to
us  by  correspondence  and  through  a  common  friend, — himself  a  smiant  of
European  reputation, — who  has  talked  the  case  over  with  Dr.  X.  and
his  wife,  and  has  read  the  statement  which  we  now  translate  and
abbreviate.  We  are  bound  to  conceal  Dr.  X.'s  identity,  and  even  his
country  ;  nor  is  this  unreasonable,  since  the  bizarrerie  of  the  incidents
to  be  recorded  would  be  felt  as  greatly  out  of  place  in  his  actual
scientific  surroundings.  The  Dr.  Z.  who  here  appears  in  the  somewhat
dubious  character  of  a  mesmerising  spirit,  was  also,  as  it  happens,  a
savant  of  European  I'epute,  and  a  personal  friend  of  Dr.  X.'s.

M.  76.

Account  of  Phenomena  Oesekved  with  Mme.  X.

Case  XI. — Mme.  X.  is  a  lady  healthy  in  body  and  mind,  well-balanced,  of
sc)und  judgment,  strong  common-sense,  and  a  calm  and  firm  character  ;  she  is
charitable  without  excess  ;  is  not  susceptible  to  flattery,  nor  given  to  enthu-
siasm ;  she  detests  falsehood  and  duplicity  and  abhors  injustice.  She  has  never
had  any  one  of  those  serious  maladies,  such  as  meningitis,  typhoid  fever,  &c.,
which  are  apt  to  leave  traces  on  the  nervous  system.  Nor  has  she  suffered
from  any  nervous  complaint.  She  is  the  very  ojiposite  of  what  would  be
termed  a  nervous  or  hysterical  subject.  She  is  sensibly  affected  by  accounts
of  human  woes,  especially  among  children  ;  but  such  sensibility  by  no  nieans
explains  the  accesses  of  violent  laughter  whicli  I  have  remarked  in  her  since
the  commencement  of  the  series  of  events  to  be  now  related.  Tliese  accesses,
whicli  liave  nothing  in  common  with  tlie  hysterical  crises  which  they  super-
ficially resemble,  are  always  caused  by  some  extraordinary  communication
emanating  from  an  occult  intelligence.

In  Seijtember,  1890,  while  we  were  staying  in  the  country,  Mme.  X.
sprained  her  right  foot  on  a  very  dark  night. A  fortnight  after  our  return

to  M  the  foot  was  almost  well  ;  but  shortly  afterwards  I  fell  ill,  and  Mme.

X.  underwent  much  fatigue  in  nursing  me. The  injured  foot  then  became


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  183


inflamed  and  painful  ;  and  the  left  foot  also  became  painful.  For  all  that
winter  Mme.  X.  was  obliged  to  lie  up,  the  foot  being  kept  from  all  movement
by  plaster  or  silicate  dressings.  This  treatment  was  ultunately  abandoned  ;
the  foot  was  simply  bound  up  and  crutches  used.  There  was  inflammation
of  the  tissues  of  several  of  the  joints  of  the  right  foot,  and  we  were  seriously
alarmed.

At  this  point  certain  friends  talked  to  IMme.  X.  about  the  alleged  facts  of
Spiritism,  of  which  until  that  date  she  had  had  a  very  vague  notion.  They
praised  the  beneficent  intervention  of spirits  in  disease  ; but  had  much
difliculty  in  inducing  her  to  admit  the  mere  possibility  of  facts  of  this  nature.
I  can  affirm,  therefore,  that  it  was  only  ^vith  great  difficulty  that  these  friends
succeeded  in  vanquishing  Mme.  X.'s  scepticism  —  which was  moreover
supported  by  my  own  objections  to  Spiritism — and  at  last  persuaded  her  to
submit  herself  to  the  action  of  the  invisibles. The  spirit-guide  of  a  group  of
which  one  of  our  friends  was  a  member  advised  the  intervention  of  the
(spirit)-doctor  Z. A  day  was  arranged  when  Dr.  Z.  was  to  visit  Mme.  X.,
and  she  was  iiiformed  of  the  date. Owing  to  other  preoccupations  we  com-
pletely forgot  this  rendezvous. On  the  clay  named — it  was  in  April,  1891 —
Dr.  Z.  announced  himself  by  raps  in  the  table. Only  then  did  we  recollect
the  rendezvous  agreed  upon. I  asked  Dr.  Z.  his  opinion  on  the  nature  of
the  injury  to  Mme.  X.'s  foot. By  tilts  of  the  table,  through  Mme.  X.'s
mediumship,  he  gave  the  word  "tuberculosis." He  meant  that  there  was
tuberculosis  of  the  joints,  and  of  this  there  had  been  some  indications.  Had
Mme.  X.  been  predisposed  to  tubercle  I  doubt  not  that  this  would  have
supervened. Personally,  I  much  feared  this  complication,  and  Dr.  Z.'s
answer  (as  I  at  once  thought)  might  well  be  the  mere  reflection  of  my  fears.
It  left  me  no  more  anxious  than  before. We  now  know  that  there  was  in
fact  no  tuberculosis. In  any  case,  Dr.  Z.  ordered  a  merely  soothing  remedy,
a  sulphur  ointment. Some  days  later,  at  our  request,  Dr.  Z.  reappeared  and
promised  to  undertake  the  cure  of  Mme.  X.'s  feet;  warning  us,  however,
that  there  would  never  be  a  "restitutio  ad  integrum,"  but  that  the  patient
would  be  unequal  to  long  walks,  and  would  suffer  more  or  less  from  her  feet
in  damp  weather — which  has  proved  to  be  the  case.

I  come  now  to  the  phenomena,  mainly  subjective,  which  Mme.  X.'s  case
began  to  present.  On  August  17th,  1891,  the  patient  felt  for  the  first  time
a  unique  sensation,  accompanied  by  formication  and  sense  of  weight  in  the
lower  limbs,  especially  in  the  feet.  This  sensation  gradually  spread  over  the
rest  of  the  body,  and  when  it  reached  the  arms,  the  hands  and  forearms
began  to  rotate.  These  plienomena  recurred  after  dinner  every  evening,
as  soon  as  the  patient  was  quiet  in  her  armchair.  At  this  point  the
X.  family  went  into  the  country  to  il  ,  and  at  that  place  the  manifes-
tations took  place  twice  daily  for  some  15  or  20  minutes.  Usually  the
patient  placed  her  two  hands  on  a  table.  The  feeling  of  "magnetisation"
then  began  in  the  feet,  which  began  to  rotate,  and  the  upper  parts  of  the
body  gradually  shared  in  the  same  movement.  At  a  certain  point,  the  hands
automatically  detached  themselves  from  the  table  by  small,  gradual  shocks,
and  at  the  same  tune  the  arms  assumed  a  tetanic  rigidity  somewhat  resembling
catalepsy.  On  one  occasion  when  these  sensations  had  been  strongly  marked,
and  the  patient  had  felt  the  whole  of  the  upper  part  of  her  body  stiSened,


184


Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


she  went  to  bed  and  saw  in  the  dark  an  intense  light  which  lasted  foi'  several
minutes  and  then  gradually  disappeared.

Three  weeks  after  the  family's  return  to  M  the  phenomena  changed

in  cliaracter,  and  gained  in  interest.  The  jiatient  had  begun  to  be  able  to  walk
without  much  difficulty  ;  but  all  forced  and  voluntary  movement  of  the  foot
was  still  painful,  although  when  the  movement  was  initiated  by  the  occult
agency  no  pain  whatever  was  felt.  One  evening,  after  the  usual  seance,  the
patient  felt  her  head  move  against  her  will.  An  intelligent  intercourse  was
thus  set  up  between  the  patient  and  the  unseen  agent  or  agents.  The  head
nodded  once  for  "Yes,"  twice  for  "No,"  three  times  for  a  strong  affirm-
ation. These  movements  were  sometimes  sudden  and  violent  enough  to  cause
something  like  pain.  Words  and  phrases  could,  of  course,  be  spelt  out  in  this
way.  This  form  of  correspondence  has  never  wholly  ceased  ;  although  the
intensity  of  the  phenomenon  has  now  much  diminished.  The  occult  agent
now  impresses  one  or  other  of  Mme.  X.'s  hands  with  movements  which
trace  in  tlie  air  the  form  of  letters  of  the  aljjhabet ; — a  plan  which  works
well  and  quickly.

Mme.  X.  is  also  a  writing  medium  ;  and  this  power  first  showed  itself  in
a  strange  way  during  the  stay  in  the  country  of  which  I  have  already  spoken.
She  was  writing  a  letter  one  day,  with  no  thought  of  these  unseen  agencies,
when  suddenly  she  felt  her  hand  checked.  Warned  by  a  special  sensation,
she  still  held  the  pen.  Her  hand  placed  itself  on  a  sheet  of  paper  and  began
rajjidly  to  write  alarming  predictions.  The  writings  retained  this  tone  only
for  a  few  hours  ;  and  soon  the  communications  became  trivial  in  character,
and,  save  in  some  exceptional  instances,  have  since  remained  so.

Another  phenomenon  followed  shortly  afterwards.  One  day  Mme.  X.
felt  herself  lifted  with  force  from  her  armchair  and  compelled  to  stand  up-
right. Her  feet  and  her  whole  body  then  executed  a  systematic  calisthenic
exercise,  in  which  all  the  movements  were  regulated  and  made  rhythmic  with
finished  art.  This  was  renewed  on  following  days,  and  towards  the  end  of
each  performance, — sometimes  of  an  hour's  or  two  hours'  duration — the
movements  acquired  extreme  energy.  Mme.  X.  has  never  had  the  smallest
notion  of  chamber-gymnastics,  Swedish  or  otherwise,  and  these  movements
would  have  been  very  painful  and  fatiguing  had  she  attempted  them  of  her
own  will.  Yet  at  the  end  of  each  performance  she  was  neither  fatigued  nor
out  of  breath.  All  was  going  well,  and  Dr.  Z.  had  announced  that  henceforth
his  attentions  would  not  be  needed,  when  next  day  a  singular  accident  threw
everything  back.  Mme.  X.  had  mounted  with  great  precaution  upon  a  low
chair  with  four  legs  and  a  large  base  of  support  to  take  an  object  from  a
wardrobe.  Just  as  she  was  about  to  descend,  the  chair  was  violently  snatched
from  under  her  feet  and  pushed  to  a  distance.  Mme.  X.  fell  on  the  diseased
foot,  and  the  cure  had  to  begin  again.  [In  a  subsequent  letter  Dr.  X.
explains  that  by  Mme.  X.'s  account  this  movement  was  distinctly  due  to  an
invisible  force ;  no  natural  slipping  of  the  chair.]

Mme.  X.  was  accustomed  to  bandage  her  own  foot  every  morning.  One
day  she  was  astonished  to  feel  her  hands  seized  and  guided  by  an  occult
force.  From  that  day  onwards  the  bandaging  was  done  according  to  all  the
rules  of  the  art,  and  with  a  perfection  which  would  have  done  credit  to  the
most  skilful  surgeon  of  either  hemisphere. Although  very  adroit  with  lier


Mind-Guve,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  185


hands,  Mme.  X.  had  never  had  occasion  to  practise  nursing  or  to  study
minor  surgery,  yet  the  bandages  thus  automat icallij  applied  were  irreproach-
able, and  were  admired  by  everyone.  When  Mme.  X.  wished  to  renew  the
bandages,  she  placed  the  strips  all  rolled  up  upon  a  table  within  reach  of  her
hand,  and  her  hand  then  automatically  took  the  bandage  which  best  suited
the  occult  operation.

Mme.  Xi  is  accustomed  to  arrange  her  own  hair.  One  morning  she  said
laughingly,  "I  wish  that  a  Court  hairdresser  would  do  my  hair  for  me  ;
my  arms  are  tired."  At  once  she  felt  her  hands  acting  automatically,  and
with  no  fatigue  for  her  arms,  which  seemed  to  be  held  up  ;  and  the  result
was  a  complicated  coiffure,  which  in  no  way  resembled  her  usual  simjjle
mode  of  arrangement.

The  oddest  of  all  these  automatic  phenomena  consisted  in  extremely
graceful  gestures  which  Mme.  X.  was  caused  to  execute  with  her  arms, —
gestures  as  though  of  evocation  or  adoration  of  some  imaginary  divinity,  or
gestures  of  benediction.  When  the  occult  agent  placed  her  before  the
portrait  of  her  son  whom  she  lost  five  years  ago  the  scene  became
really  affecting, — and  moved  Mme.  X.  herself  to  tears.  The  few  persons
■who  witnessed  this  spectacle  are  agreed  that  it  was  worthy  of  the  powers  of
"the  greatest  actress.  Of  such  a  gift  Mme.  X.  has  nothing  ;  her  nature  is
simple  and  frank,  but  cold  rather  than  demonstrative.

At  the  Paris  Exhibition  of  1889  Mme.  X.  once  saw  the  "Javanese
dance,"  consisting  of  rhythmic  motions  of  the  body  with  contortions  of  the
arms.  The  occult  agents  caused  her  to  repeat  this  dance  several  times  with
perfect  execution.

[Disliking  these  phenomena,]  Mme.  X.  has  tried  very  hard  to  free
lierself  from  this  control,  and  has  to  a  great  extent  succeeded,  by  the  use  of
■cold  water,  by  strongly  resisting  all  communications,  and  by  ' '  passes  of
•disengagement  "  executed  by  a  hypnotiser.  [This  has  reduced  the  phenomena
almost  entirely  to  automatic  writing,  which,  though  vague  or  fantastic  when
dealing  with  ordinary  topics,  is  precise  and  intelligent  on  medical  questions.]

Thus  far  the  phenomena  recorded  have  been  purely  subjective  ;  in  those
which  follow  there  is  something  objective  also.  When  one  has  the  honour  to
be  treated  by  a  physician  of  Dr.  Z.'s  celebrity  (1)  ordinary  kindness  bids  one
sometimes  think  of  benefiting  one's  neighbour.  One  of  the  officials  of  my
department  had  suffered  for  many  years  from  pleurodynia,  which  occasionally
laid  him  up  altogether,  and  also  from  frequent  attacks  of  sick  headache.
Dr.  Z.  was  consulted  and  prescribed  an  internal  treatment  which,  to  my
great  surprise,  consisted  mainly  of  "dosimetric  granules";  [which  this
great  official  surgeon  had  not  in  his  lifetime  employed].  He  also  caused  Mme.
X.  to  perform  "passes  of  disengagement "  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  at  a
time.  It  was  noticeable  that  while  these  passes  were  made  with  extreme
violence,  Mme.  X. 's  hands  were  arrested  at  the  distance  of  a  millimetre  at
most  from  the  patient's  face,  without  ever  touching  him  in  the  least.  Mme.
X.  could  never  of  herself  have  given  to  her  movements  such  a  degree  of
precision.  For  two  years  now  the  patient  has  felt  no  more  of  his  pleurodynia,
and  his  migraine  is,  if  not  altogether  cured,  at  least  greatly  reduced.

One  day — I  suppose  by  way  of  a  joke, — Dr.  Z.,  after  one  of  these
seances,  pursued  the  patient  with  his  influence  as  he  walked  home,  and


1S6


Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


made  hiiu  execute  with  his  hands  various  gestures  and  contortions  wliich
drew  the  attention  of  passers-by.

Another  time,  our  servant  A.,  whose  husband  was  ill  in  hospital,  came
crying  to  Mme.  X.  and  told  her  tliat  she  had  lost  all  hope  of  ever  seeing  him
cured,  &c.  Mme.  X.  asked  Dr.  Z.  to  take  him  in  hand.  He  promised  to  do
so,  and  said  that  he  would  make  him  feel  his  presence.  Next  morning  k.
went  to  the  hospital  and  found  her  husband  in  despair.  "  Look  here,"  he
said,  "besides  wliat  I  had  already,  I  am  falling  into  a  nervous  malady.  I
have  been  shaken  about  all  night, — my  arms  and  legs  have  executed  move-
ments which  I  could  not  control."  A.  began  to  laugh,  and  told  her  husband
that  Dr.  Z.  had  taken  him  in  hand,  and  that  he  would  soon  get  well.  The
patient  is  going  about  as  usual  to-day,  and  is  as  well  as  an  incurable  pulmonary
affection  allows  him  to  be.

Under  other  circumstances  I  have  myself  consulted  Dr.  Z.  as  to  patients
under  my  professional  care.  On  each  occasion  he  has  given  a  precise
diagnosis  and  lias  indicated  a  treatment,  consisting  mainly  of  dosimetric
granules,  sometimes  associated  with  other  treatment.  These  facts  have
been  repeated  many  times,  and  I  owe  great  gratitude  to  Dr.  Z.  for  the  advice
which  he  has  given  me.  His  prescriptions  were  always  rational ;  and  when
I  showed  fears  as  to  certain  doses  which  appeared  to  me  too  large,  he  took
pains  to  reassure  me,  but  stuck  to  his  prescriptions.  I  have  never  had  to
repent  having  followed  the  advice  of  my  eminent  colleague  in  the  other
world  ;  and  I  am  bound  to  state  distinctly  that  every  time  that  a  medical
question  has  been  submitted  to  him  the  replies  and  advice  of  Dr.  Z.  have
been  of  an  astonishing  clearness  and  precision.  I  cannot  say  the  same  of
communications  obtained  on  other  subjects,  in  which  he  seemed  to  take  a
malicious  pleasure  in  leading  us  wrong.  He — or  someone  else — has  often
announced  to  us,  with  minute  and  intimate  detail,  the  deaths  of  persons
known  to  us  ;  who  were  found  on  inquiry  to  be  alive  and  well.  Lastly,  I
give  a  detail  which  tends  to  prove  the  reality  of  this  occult  magnetisation.
Mme.  X.  has  often  seen  two  luminous  rays  projected  upon  her  feet  during
the  seances  of  which  I  have  spoken  above.  The  rays  were  invisible  in  full
light,  and  in  complete  darkness,  but  were  seen  in  partial  obscurity  and
resembled  rays  of  the  sun  passing  through  small  openings  into  a  dark  room.
If  this  was  a  hallucination,  it  was  shared  on  two  occasions  by  the  hypnotiser
of  whom  I  have  already  spoken.  I  myself  never  saw  the  rays,  which  may
be  compared  with  those  said  to  have  been  seen  by  somnambulists  and  other
sensitives  as  emanating  under  certain  circumstances  from  the  human  frame.

In  reply  to  inquiries  Dr.  X.  adds  the  following  remarks.

It  is  not  impossible  that  Mme.  X.  should  have  at  some  time  heard
myself  or  others  pronounce  the  names  of  the  medicaments  prescribed.  But
when  she  gave  me  an  exact  diagnosis,  and  formulated  in  detail  a  rational
treatment,  I  am  sure  that  this  did  not  come  from  her  own  mind.  She  has
never  studied  any  branch  of  medicine — neither  the  therapeutic  art  itself,
nor  the  minor  art  of  composing  formulfe.  Nor  could  I  have  been  acting
suggestively,  since  my  own  ideas  were  often  quite  different  from  those  which
the  occult  agent  dictated  ; — unless  indeed  my  unconscious  self  acted  upon
Mme.  X.'s  consciousness, — which  seems  to  me  a  somewhat  too  elaborate  view.


Mind-Gitre,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  187

The  dosimetric  granules  are  a  convenient  mode  of  administering  alkaloids,
glycosides,  and  other  toxic  principles,  and  I  have  often  been  alarmed  at  the
doses  which  Dr.  Z.  prescribed.  I  confess  that  I  was  astonished  to  find  that
an  occult  agent  who  thus  claimed  to  be  a  bygone  Professor  should  have
selected  a  form  of  medication  on  which  the  Faculty  look  with  no  approving
eye.

As  to  Mme.  X.'s  foot,  I  have  a  firm  conviction  that  it  was  healed  by  the
rhythmical  movements  imposed,  and  by  the  "magnetisation"  of  the  occult
agent.

You  ask  me  whether  I  consider  these  agents  as  belonging  to  the  human
type.  Provisionally,  Yes  ; — unless  we  admit  that  there  exists,  superposed
upon  our  world,  another  world  of  beings  distinct  from  humanity,  but  knowing
it  and  studying  it  as  we  study  the  other  regions  of  nature,  and  assuming  for
the  sake  of  amusement  or  for  some  other  motive  the  rule  of  our  departed
friends.

Dr.  X.  concludes  with  warnings  against  the  dangers  of  such
influence  or  possession  ;  dangers  which  he  thinks  that  Mme.  X.  avoided
by  her  calmness  of  temperament  and  resolute  maintenance  of  self-
control.

The  savant  already  mentioned  as  introducing  us  to  this  case  sends
us  (May,  1893)  the  following  corroborative  statement.  He  is,  it  may
be  observed,  himself  a  physician.

"  I  have  frequently  seen  Mme.  X.  For  the  last  year  or  two  she  has  had
no  more  phenomena  ;  but  about  two  years  ago  she  presented  some  curious
symptoms.  In  the  first  place,  when  she  conversed  with  the  late  Dr.  Z.,  her
so-called  magnetiser,  his  replies  were  made  by  movements  of  her  head.  She
would  seat  herself  in  an  armchair,  and  according  as  Dr.  Z.  wished  to  say  yes
or  no  there  were  either  two  or  three  backward  movements  of  her  head.
Her  head  threw  itself  backwards  with  force,  and  gave  a  vigorous  blow  to  the
chair-back.  This  movement  was  sometimes  so  violent  that  the  shock  was
painful,  so  that  Mme.  X.  cried  out  at  the  sharpness  of  the  blows.  Long
sentences  could  thus  be  given,  for  when  the  alphabet  was  spelt  out  there
'  were  movements  and  blows  given  with  the  head,  just  as  in  ordinary
Spiritistic  conversations  there  are  tilts  of  the  table.  Often,  also,  while  one
was  talking  with  Mme.  X.,  there  were  movements  of  her  head,  indicating
that  the  so-called  Dr.  Z.  was  taking  part  in  the  discussion,  and  approving
or  disapproving  such  and  such  a  phrase.  More  rarely,  Mme.  X.  would
unconsciously  articulate  a  few  words  with  her  lips,  and  these  words  were
professedly  dictated  by  Dr.  Z.  As  to  the  other  phenomena,  I  have  twice
been  present  at  the  ample,  semi-ecstatic  movements  of  salutation  and  prayer
which  Mme.  X.  made  against  her  will.  It  was  a  curious  scene  ;  for  Mme.  X.
preserved  her  consciousness  all  the  time  and  continued  to  talk  to  us  while
executing  this  strange  and  complicated  mimicry.  It  is  to  be  observed  that
Mme.  X.  is  a  person  of  calm  nature,  and  rather  apathetic  than  nervous.
She  has  strong  common-sense,  is  healthy,  and  reasonable  in  character.  It
seems  that  she  never  had  any  previous  hallucination.  She  is  an  excellent
mother  of  a  family,  and  deservedly  enjoys  general  confidence  and  esteem."


188  Lr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Dr.  X.  has  sent  us  two  of  the  prescriptions  written  by  Mme.  X.'s
hand.  We  have  compared  them  with  British  Pharmacopffial  prescrip-
tions, by  the  aid  of  Burggi-aeve's  Guide  de  Medecine  Dosimetrique
(Paris,  1872).  Both  prescriptions  are  in  fair  accord  with  English
practice  ;  the  doses  of  arsenic  in  the  one  case,  of  strychnia  in  the  other,
being  rather  stronger  than  usually  given.  Each  prescription  contains
several  ingredients,  in  what  seems  reasonable  proportion.

Finally,  we  learn  that  Dr.  Z.  in  life  was  gay  and  fond  of  practical
jokes.

This  curious  narrative,  which  we  cannot  here  criticise  in  all  its
details,  forms  an  instructive  preparation  for  our  study  of  the  cures  at
Lourdes.  It  reminds  us,  in  the  tirst  place,  that  supernormal  citres  do
not  form  a  unique  or  sacred  group  of  phenomena,  needing  the  assump-
tion of  some  specially  lofty  origin.  However  effected,  they  will  fall
within  some  class  already  often  discussed.  If  effected  by  some  agency
within  the  patient  himself,  they  are  a  form  of  self-suggestion.  If
effected  by  some  extraneous  agency,  they  may  depend  upon  some
influence  fiom  living  or  departed  persons,  and  so  come  under  the
mesme^'ic  category;  or  they  may  depend  upon  actual  movements  oi
ponderable  objects  (as  where  a  needle  issues  rapidly  from  the  hand,  in
one  of  the  Lourdes  cases),  and  will  thus  fall  under  the  head  of  so-called
spiritualistic  or  telekinetic  phenomena.  In  Dr.  X.'s  case  both  mesmeric
and  telekinetic  phenomena  are  alleged  ;  and  also  that  apparent  com-
munication of  medical  knowledge  from  an  unknown  source  which  has
been  elsewhere  noted  in  automatic  messages,  and  which,  though  not  in
itself  an  act  of  healing,  may  lead  to  a  cure.  But  there  is  nothing
particularly  elevated  or  saintly  about  these  acts  of  medical  help  and
advice, — any  more  than  there  is  anything  specially  saintly  about  medical
advisers  while  still  in  the  flesh.  Rather,  the  departed  Dr.  Z.'s  skilful
good-nature  is  accompanied  with  a  tendency  to  caprice  and  mystifi-
cation, which  may  be  very  human,  but  is  certainly  not  even  semi-
divine.  Again,  this  story,  as  we  have  said,  illustrates  the  extreme
difficulty  of  establishing  a  connection  between  any  given  unembodied
agents  and  any  given  cure.  In  this  case  there  is  strong  and  repeated
assertion  on  the  agent's  part ;  and  there  is  also  a  kind  of  ft  priori
probability  that  such  help  as  this  should  come  from  a  great  surgeon,  who
is  also  an  old  friend.  Take,  for  instance,  the  skilful  bandaging  ;  that  is
just  what  Dr.  Z.  could  have  done  ;  he  asserts  that  he  is  doing  it ;  nor
can  any  other  more  likely  source  of  the  skill  be  suggested.  And
yet  to  Dr.  X.  himself,  to  us,  and  we  imagine  to  most  of  our  readers,
these  assertions  of  Dr.  Z.'s  identity  carry  no  conviction.  He  was  never
willing  to  give  any  test  involving  knowledge  of  his  past  life  ;  and  the
writings  which  he  claimed  to  give  were  on  all  save  medical  subjects
dreamlike  and  delusive. If  the  prescriptions  really  came  from  an  un-


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Loiirdes.  189

embodied  intelligence  we  cannot  be  any  more  sui'e  that  that  intelligence
was  Dr.  Z.  than  we  can  be  sure  that  the  author  of  similar  prescriptions
given  through  Miss  A.,  and  described  elsewhere  in  this  Part,  was
"  Semirus,  an  ancient  Egyptian."

And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phenomena  were  all  in  some  way  a
product  of  the  subliminal  selves  of  Dr.  and  Mme.  X.,  we  still  can  find
ready  analogies  for  their  ascription  to  the  discarnate  friend.  When  a
hypnotiser  has  been  in  the  habit  of  sending  a  patient  to  sleep  (take  for
instance  Dr.  Gibert  and  Mme.  B.)  he  can  give  her,  say,  a  photograph
of  himself,  or  a  box  of  lozenges,  and  tell  her  that  when  she  looks  at
the  photograph,  or  takes  a  lozenge,  she  will  go  to  sleep  as  if  he  were
there  to  hypnotise  her.  The  effect  will  in  fact  follow ; — and  the
symbolic  act  will  sometimes  be  accompanied  on  the  patient's  part
(through  strong  association  of  ideas)  by  an  impression  of  the
hypnotiser's  presence  in  the  room, — or  even  by  an  actual  hallucinatory
picture  of  him.  Yet  only  self-suggestion,  in  this  supposed  case,  is  now
at  work  ;  since  at  that  moment  the  hypnotist  is  not  thinking  of  the
patient  at  all.  Similarly,  Mme.  X.'smind  might  associate  the  deceased
friend  with  the  act  of  healing,  and  might  originate  a  sort  of  hallucina-
tion of  his  pi'esence  which  might  express  itself  in  the  automatic  script.

But  if  even  in  Dr.  X.'s  narrative  the  connection  of  the  cures  with
the  alleged  author  is  thus  problematical,  how  much  more  is  this  the
case  with  the  Lourdes  cures,  in  almost  all  of  which  the  patient's
subjective  feelings — his  prayers  and  piety, — are  all  the  evidence
forthcoming  to  the  Virgin's  intervention !  Almost  the  only  con-
nection of  the  Virgin  with  the  cures  which  can  pretend  to  an
objective  character  is  the  so-called  prediction  or  promise  contained  in
the  words  spoken  to  Bernadette.  But  we  have  already  seen  that  these
words,  naturally  construed,  contain  no  promise  of  cures,  and  no  pre-
diction whatever,  unless  an  expression  of  a  wish  that  people  should
come  in  procession  is  a  prediction  that  they  will  obey  what  they  take
to  be  a  divine  message.  As  to  the  idea  of  medical  aid,  it  seems  almost
expressly  excluded  by  the  words  "I  do  not  promise  to  make  you  happy
in  this  world,  but  in  the  next."  And  yet  the  supposed  utterance  of
these  vague  words  by  that  figure,  which  of  all  figures  is  admitted  to  be
the  one  most  frequently  seen  in  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  is
assumed  as  explaining  a  series  of  cures  which,  to  whatever  cause  they
may  be  due,  at  least  oflfer  no  more  intrinsic  evidence  of  the  action  of
the  Virgin  Mary  than  certain  other  cures,  to  which  we  shall  presently
allude,  offered  of  the  action  of  ^sculapius.

Judging,  we  repeat,  by  the  canons  of  evidence  generally  used  in
these  Proceedings,  we  can  neither  say  that  there  is  any  sort  of  proof
that  Bernadette's  vision  was  veridical  (truth-telling  as  opposed  to
merely  subjective),  or  that  the  cures  which  have  undoubtedly  since


190  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


occurred  at  LoiU'des  bear  any  relation  to  that  vision  beyond  what  the
minds  of  the  patients  have  chosen  to  assume  as  existing.  The  proof  of
divine  intervention  must  therefore  I'est  upon  the  cures  themselves  ;
and  these,  of  course,  may  prove  so  striking  as  to  lead  us  to  feel  that,
in  the  absence  of  all  ordinary  explanations,  we  are  bound  to  give
weight  to  those  stranger  causes  which  patients  and  physicians  here
combine  to  invoke.

The  medical  evidence  for  the  miracles  at  Lourdes  has  been  from
time  to  time  published  in  the  25  vols,  of  the  Annates  de  Lourdes  since
1868,  but  it  is  only  in  the  more  recent  years  that  its  apologists  have
claimed  high  accuracy  of  observation,^  and  in  such  a  wide  field  it  is  to
the  last  three  or  four  years  that  our  attention  had  best  be  given.  In
1891  Dr.  Boissarie  published  his  volume  already  cited,  entitled
Lourdes,  which  claims  to  be  an  exact  medical  summary  of  the
evidence  for  the  miraculous  cases  made  by  an  expert  after  long  personal
examination  and  complete  access  to  all  the  sources  of  information.
This  work  has  been  accepted  by  the  lay  supporters  of  the  school  as
their  technical  book  of  reference. ^  From  it,  therefore,  we  also  shall
take  our  medical  descriptions.

M.  77.

Case  XII. — The  ciu-e  of  Mile.  Blondel^  is  one  that  deserves  notice.  She
was  a  lady  whose  history  is  traced  far  back  and  who  had  been  the  patient  of
many  doctors. She  was  born  in  1839;  and  in  1863  and  the  winters  of  several
successive  years  had  suffered  from  severe  sore-throats  ("  laryngo-tracheite")
which  had  been  treated  at  Amelie,  Cauterets,  and  Mont-Dore. In  1873  (set.  34)
"a  rheumatic  attack,"  we  are  told,  "affected  her  spinal  cord  and  produced  a
paralysis  of  her  lower  limbs. " Treatment  by  electricity,  blistering,  hydro-
tlierapeutics  and  various  other  methods  was  tried  during  the  next  five  years,
but  without  improvement. In  1879  she  first  visited  Lourdes,  and  was  twice
bathed  in  the  sacred  bath  {■piscine),  but  even  that  was  useless. The  muscles
of  the  legs  were  atrophied,  flaccid  and  powerless,  the  skin  sallow  and  ill-
nourished.  For  three  years  treatment  was  abandoned  as  hopeless  ;  but  in  1882
she  was  brought  again  to  Lourdes  as  a  paralytic  who  could  only  be  treated  by
miracle  ;  and  this  time  the  result  of  her  first  bath  is  claimed  to  have  been
mii-aculous. "In  a  few  moments  she  felt  cured. Without  the  least  hesitation
she  could  get  out  of  the  bath,  stand  on  her  feet,  sit  down  or  walk  about,  and
full  powers  of  sensation  had  returned  to  all  parts." "  All  the  doctors,"
continues  Dr.  Boissarie, "who  had  had  the  treatment  of  Mile.  Blondel
gave  a  confident  opinion  that  this  was  a  supernatural  cure."  Whether
mong  this  company  of  doctors  are  included  Dr. Maurice  Raynaud  and
Professor  Charcot,  whom  she  consulted  in  Paris,  we  are  not  told. At  any
rate,  a  more  observant  doctor  at  Lourdes,  Dr.  de  St.  Maclou,  seems  to  have

^  Boissarie,  iyon>-dfs,  p.  238. "  Depuis  1884  les  gudrisons  sont  etudiees  avec  un
soin  plus  grand,  si  c'est  possible  ;  avec  une  severity  qui  poui-ra  defier  toute  critique."
"  Lourdes,  p.  239.  '  Annales  de  Lourdes,  XXIV.,  p.  235.


Mind-Oure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  191


had  his  doubts ;  but  the  cure  appeared  a  very  good  instance  of  the  supernatural
to  the  rest,  though  not  a  word  is  said  about  the  permanence  of  the  recovery,
or  the  alteration  in  nutrition,  reflex  action,  or  electrical  conditions  of  the
muscles,  as  to  which  we  might  have  expected  to  have  heard  something.
Granted  indeed  the  clinical  facts  of  her  ability  and  disability  to  walk,  and
loss  and  recoveiy  of  sensation,  there  seems  to  us  no  evidence  for  the  super-
natural. It  is  what  we  should  expect  to  find  in  any  case  of  hysterical
paraplegia  terminated  by  strong  emotion.

As  a  parallel  cure  which  makes  no  claim  to  be  supernatural  we
may  cite  in  detail  a  case  published  by  a  distinguished  Professor  of
surgery  in  Glasgow,  Mr.  Charles  Buchanan  (which  we  are  glad  to  notice
has  also  caught  Father  Clarke's  eye).  Mr.  Buchanan  visited  Lourdes  in
the  autumn  of  188.3  and  was  much  interested  in  the  undoubted  benefit
that  some  of  the  pilgrims  received.

M.  78.

Case  XIII.— "  With  regard,"  he  writes,^  "  to  persons  who  have  been  lame
and  decrepit  and  known  as  such  to  their  friends,  the  fact  of  their  leaving  their
crutches  and  walking  away  without  help  does  seem  astonishing  and  miraculous,
and  it  is  cases  such  as  these  which  make  the  greatest  impression."  "I  believe
that  the  simple  visit  to  the  grotto  by  persons  who  believe  in  it,  and  the  whole
surroundings  of  the  place,  might  have  such  an  effect  on  the  mind  that  a
sudden  change  in  the  nerve-condition  might  result  in  innnediate  improvement
in  cases  where  there  is  no  real  change  of  structure  but  where  the  malady  is  a
functional  imitation  of  organic  disease. Such cases are familiar  to  all
medical  men  and  are  the  most  intractable  they  have  to  deal  with,  the  disorder
being  in  the  imagination  and  not  in  the  part. . . . It  is  rather  a  remark-
able coincidence  that  on  October  2nd,  1883,  within  three  weeks  of  my  visit
to  Lourdes,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  F.,  reminding  me  that  some  years
before  I  had  performed  in  her  case  a  cure,  instantaneous,  and  to  all  appear-
ance miraculous,  and  which  she  properly  attributed  to  undoubting  faith  in  my
word. It  is  a  very  good  illustration  of  the  kind  of  case  to  which  I  have  been
alluding  and  of  the  power  of  mind  over  mind,  and  of  the  effect  of  imagination
in  simulating  real  disease. Mr.  F.  called  on  me  in  October,  1875,  and
requested  me  to  visit  his  wife,  who  had  been  confined  to  bed  for  many  months
with  a  painful  affection  of  the  spine. When  I  went  into  the  house  I  found
Mrs.  F.,  a  woman  of  about  thirty-one  years  of  age,  lying  in  bed  on  her  left
side  and  her  knees  crouched  up,  that  being  the  position  Uiat  afforded  most
relief. She  was  thin  and  weak-looking,  with  a  countenance  indicative  of
great  suffering. I  was  informed  that  for  many  months  slie  had  been  in  the
same  condition. She  was  unable  to  move  her  limbs,  any  attempt  beina
attended  with  pain,  and  practically  she  was  paralytic. Slie  was  not  able  to
alter  her  position  in  bed  without  help,  and  this  always  gave  so  much  trouble
that  she  would  have  remained  constantly  in  the  same  position  if  tlie
attendants  had  not  insisted  on  moving  her  to  allow  of  the  bedclothes  beino-
changed  and  arranged. She  had  altogether  lost  appetite  and  had  become

*  Lancet,  June  20tli,  1885,  p.  1117.


192  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


dreadfully  emaciated,  and  only  took  what  was  almost  forced  on  her  by  her-
husband  and  friends.  She  had  given  up  all  hope  of  recovery,  but  had  ex-
pressed a  strong  desire  to  be  visited  by  me  in  consequence  of  something  she
had  heard  from  her  husband  connected  with  a  health  lecture  he  had  been
present  at  many  years  before.  When  I  entered  her  bedroom  something  in
the  way  she  earnestly  looked  at  me  suggested  the  idea  that  I  might  have-
some  influence  over  her,  supposing  it  to  be  a  case  of  hysterical  spine  simu-
lating real  sjjinal  irritation  and  sympathetic  paralysis.  The  story  I  got  was
not  that  of  real  disease  of  spine  or  cord  or  limbs,  and  I  at  once  resolved  to-
act  on  the  supposition  that  it  was  subjective  or  functional  and  not  de-
pendent on  actual  molecular  change  or  disintegration.  I  went  to  her
bedside  and  said  suddenly  :  '  I  cannot  do  you  any  good  unless  you
allow  me  to  examine  your  back.'  In  an  instant  she  moved  slightly
round,  and  I  examined  her  spine,  running  my  finger  over  it  at  first  lightly,
then  very  firmly,  without  her  wincing  at  all.  I  then  said  :  '  Get  out  of  bed
at  once.'  She  declared  she  could  not  move.  I  said,  'You  can  move  quite
well  ;  come  out  of  bed,'  and  gave  her  my  hand,  when,  to  the  surprise  of
her  husljand  and  sister,  who  looked  perfectly  thunderstruck,  she  came  out
of  bed  with  almost  no  help  at  all  and  stood  alone.  I  said,  '  Walk  across  the
floor,  now '  ;  without  demur,  she  walked  without  assistance,  saying,  '  I  can
walk  quite  well  ;  I  knew  you  would  cure  me  ;  my  pains  are  gone.'  She  then
went  into  bed  with  very  little  assistance,  lay  on  her  back  and  declared  she
was  perfectly  comfortable.  She  was  given  a  glass  of  milk,  which  she  took
witli  relish,  and  I  left  the  house  having  performed  a  cure  which  to  the-
bystanders  looked  nothing  short  of  a  miracle.  For  many  years  I  heard
nothing  of  Mrs.  F.,  when  on  October  2nd,  1883,  I  got  the  letter  referred  to,
and  shortly  after  the  patient  herself  called  at  my  house.  In  February,  1885,,
she  again  called  on  me.  She  is  at  present  in  fair  health,  not  robust,  but
cheerful  and  contented.  She  says  she  never  altogether  regained  her  full
strength  ;  but  as  an  evidence  that  she  is  not  feeble  or  unable  for  a  good
deal  of  exertion  I  may  state  that  she  now  lives  about  five  miles  from  my
house,  and  she  made  her  way  alone,  partly  by  omnibus,  partly  by  tramway
and  the  rest  on  foot."

The  extent  to  which  such  hysterical  imitations  of  disease,  such
pseudo-maladies,  may  be  pushed  without  any  conscious  bad  faith  on
the  part  of  the  patient  is  very  difficult  to  define.  The  diagnosis
is  perplexing,  and  we  do  not  wish  to  accuse  any  of  these  Lourdes
patients  of  bad  faith.  We  are  glad  indeed  to  quote  a  recent  case,  too
recent  to  be  included  in  Dr.  Boissarie's  book,  which  is  described  in  very
glowing  terms  by  the  cure  of  the  district  as  a  miracle  which  had
produced  a  profound  impression  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  patient.^

M.  79.

Case  XIV.— Mme.  Antoinette  Toussaint  was  a  lady  set.  22,  who  on  July
14th,  1890,  felt  some  sudden  pain  in  her  left  calf  and  thought  she  must  have
sprained  it,  for  it  swelled  a  good  deal.  Various  svu-geons  tried  various  remedies
for  nearly  a  year,  but  without  any  success,  and  the  sprained  leg  grew  gradually


1  Annates,  XXIV.,  246-250.


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  193


more  and  more  powerless  and  its  muscles  wasted,  and  were  drawn  up  by  a
slight  contracture.  Her  religious  friends  said  that  a  healing  in  the  bath  at
Lourdes  was  the  only  chance  for  her.  For  three  months  her  thoughts  were
set  on  this,  and  at  last  on  August  26th,  1891,  more  than  thirteen  months
after  the  accident,  she  reached  the  grotto  and  after  a  night  of  pain  and  a
morning  of  solemn  ceremony  was  introduced  to  the  bath,  and  in  leaving
"the  miraculous  water  "  felt  her  pain  and  trouble  all  gone  and  her  leg  quite
straight  and  well  again.  There  was  a  little  pain  next  day,  it  is  true,  but
that  was  cured  by  another  bath  and  she  went  home  rejoicing  with  her  ' '  legs-
as  strong  as  iron  "'  and  all  the  wasting  and  contracture  gone.  She  was  cured
undoubtedly, — there  was  no  question  of  that ; — but  we  are  glad  to  observe
that  the  editors  of  the  Annales  for  January,  1892, ^  in  which  the  cures
account  is  printed,  have  shown  a  spirit  of  honest  criticism  by  adding  a  Jiote
to  the  effect  that  they  consider  this  a  case  of  ' '  traumatic  hysteria, ''  as  they
phrase  it  ;  and  that  though  they  would  not  deny  the  sudden  growth  of  the
wasted  muscles,  yet  they  had  not  sufficient  observations  to  prove  it.

To  come  now  to  the  majority  of  cases,  in  which  the  accurate  proof
of  many  facts  in  detail  by  first-class  evidence  at  the  time  is  a  most
essential  point,  we  may  quote  the  case  of  a  soldier — Francois  Vion-
Dury,  who  is  said  to  have  been  cured  of  blindness.  In  this  instance
the  late  official  doctor  of  the  Lourdes  water,  Dr.  de  St.  Maclou,  who
in  several  cases  has  shown  more  caution  and  appreciation  of  the
value  of  evidence  than  his  confreres,  is  very  distinct  in  his  avowal  that
this  is  undoubtedly  a  miracle.  "  JVous  sommes  vraiment  en  presence  d'un
miracle."  -

M.  80.  ■  '

Case  XV. — The  man  had  entered  the  infantry  ranks  of  the  French  army
in  1881,  when  he  was  21,  without  any  exception  being  taken  to  his  eyesight,
and  the  next  year  (November,  1882 )  he  was  employed  to  help  in  puttmg  out
a  fire  at  Monceau-les-Mines.  His  eyesight  was  damaged,  presumably  by  the
flames,  "  so  that  at  the  end  of  three  months,"  he  tells  us,  "I  could  not  see
at  all."  Treatment  was  tried  at  the  hospital  at  Dijon,  and  there,  the  patient
tells  us,  the  doctor  told  him  he  had  "  detachment  of  the  retina  in  both  eyes."
That  is  a  pathological  condition  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  invariably  causes,
so  long  as  it  is  mamtained,  loss  of  sight  over  that  part  of  the  visual  field
which  is  affected,  but  wliich  is  by  no  means  always  incurable  by  nature  or  by
surgical  art.  We  have  no  further  account  of  his  eyesight  or  of  the  pathological
condition  of  his  eyes  until  nearly  18  months  later  (September  16th,  1884),
wlien  Dr.  Dor,  of  Lyons,  gave  him  a  certificate  saying  that  he  suffered  from
detachment  of  the  retina  in  both  eyes,  and,  "  although  the  retina,"  to  quote
Dr.  Dor's  words,  ' '  of  the  left  eye  was  now  re-attached, "  yet  the  left
eye  could  not  distinguish  light  from  darkness  ;  and  the  right  eye  could  only
see  sufficiently  to  count  the  fingers  when  they  were  held  up  before  it  at  the
distance  of  about  a  foot.  About  18  months  later  (January,  1886)  some
further  treatment  was  tried  by  M.  Dufour  at  Lausanne,  which  the  patient

1  Annales,  XXIV.,  p.  250.
2  Annales  de  Lourdes,  XXIV.,  p.  30.

O


194  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


tells  us  had  no  result.  In  what  condition  M.  Dufour  found  the  eye  or  what
he  did  to  it  is  not  mentioned.  After  another  four  years  and  a  half  he
betook  himself  to  a  convent  and  made  a  novena  which  ended  on  Friday,
August  1st,  1890.  On  the  following  day,  Saturday,  August  2nd,  he  went  to
confession,  and  in  the  evening  one  of  the  convent  sisters  brought  him  a
bottle  of  the  Holy  Water  of  Lourdes.  He  touched  his  eyes  with  it,  and  tells
us  that  he  felt  it  sting  him  as  if  it  had  been  ammonia, — and  all  at  once,  he
goes  on,  as  quick  as  lightning,  his  sight  came  back  to  him,  and  he  could  see  a
little.  He  made  another  novena,  and  every  day  the  sight  of  his  left  eye
grew  better,  and  at  the  end  of  the  nine  days  he  could  see  perfectly.  About
nine  months  later  a  high  ecclesiastical  dignitary,  the  Abbe  Sonthonnax,
bears  witness  to  his  capacity  to  use  his  eyes  in  doing  some  manual  work.

Now  what  does  the  evidence  amount  to  here  for  a  recovery  which  the
wisest  and  the  most  prudent  of  the  judges  of  the  medical  phenomena  at
Lourdes,  the  late  Dr.  de  St.  Maclou,  does  not  hesitate  to  call  a  most  un-
doubted miracle  ?  One  medical  certificate,  given  six  years  before  the  miracle,
of  a  condition  which  all  ophthalmic  authorities  admit  is  sometimes  curable
by  nature,  and  whose  exact  observation  is  difhcvilt  even  to  the  most  highly
skilled  oculist, — and  not  a  single  further  word  of  expert  testimony,  either  to
the  state  during  the  intervening  6  years,  to  the  miracle  itself,  or  to  the  results
of  the  miracle  !  The  patient  tells  his  own  story  of  his  feelings  and  we  have
the  letter  of  the  Abbe,  who  tells  Dr.  de  St.  Maclou  that  the  man  could  see  to
use  his  hands  nine  months  after  the  miracle.  But  the  true  question  at  issue
is  not  whether  he  could  see,  or  thought  he  could  see,  much  better  at  one
time  than  another  ; — there  is  no  reason  to  dispute  that,  nor  would  it  in  itself
be  miraculous  ; — but  whether  we  can  be  perfectly  sure  that  he  had  a  patho-
logical condition  called  "detachment  of  the  retina,"  which  is  by  no  means
very  easy  to  observe,  even  for  expert  ophthalmological  observers,  and  which
follows  many  different  courses  towards  getting  better  or  getting  worse  ; '  and
whether  we  can  be  perfectly  sure  that  he  lost  that  pathological  condition  under
such  ahsohttely  unprecederded  and  unique  circumstances  as  to  justify  us  in
calling  the  change  a  miracle.  In  weighing  such  a  point  we  are  bound  to
remember  that  we  have  no  direct  evidence  that  any  retinal  detachment
existed  for  six  years  before  its  alleged  disappearance  ;  nor  any  medical  evi-
dence that  it  did  then  disappear.

The  group  of  cases  on  which  the  medical  authorities  of  Lourdes
seem  to  have  laid  more  weight  of  late  years  than  formerly  as  examples
■of  supernatural  healing  is  that  r)f  ulcers  and  sores,  both  superficial  and

'  Dr.  de  St.  Maclou,  in  relating  this  case  {A7males  dc  Lourdes,  XXIV.,  pp  23-30),
quotes  the  opinion  of  a  high  English  authority,  Mr.  Soelberg  Wells,  late  Professor  of
Ophtlialmology  at  King's  College,  London,  that  this  pathological  condition  of
detachment  of  the  retina,  if  there  is  not  early  treatment,  frequently  leads  to  complete
loss  of  sight  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the  Eye,  p-  381) ;  but  it  is  worth  notice  that  a
few  pages  later  in  his  book  (p.  399),  Mr.  Soelberg  Wells  mentions  that  "a  case  of
reattachment  with  restored  sight  is  described  by  von  Graefe  and  by  Dr.  Berlin  (Klin.
Monatsblattcr,  18C3,  p.  49),  and  Mr.  Bowman  has  also  mentioned  a  ease  to  me  in
which  he  has  observed  the  total  spontaneous  disappearance  of  a  considerable  detach-
ment. Other  cases  have  been  related  by  Liebreich,  Galezowski,  Steifan,  &c."


Mind-Care,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Loiordes.  195


deep,  as  these  afford  evidence  to  the  eye  easy  to  appreciate  when  a
firm  scar  can  be  shown  in  place  of  the  open  wound.  Some  such  cases
are  mentioned  by  Dr.  Boissaiie  in  the  Annates  de  Lourdes,  as  occurring
in  the  i^ational  Pilgrimage  to  Loui'des  in  the  summer  of  1891,  after
the  publication  of  his  book.  "We  shall  say  a  few  words  later  on  as  to
the  rationale  of  such  cures,  but  will  first  quote  an  illusti'ative  case.
M.  81.

Case  XVI. — Amelie  Chagnoniwas  a  girl  of  17,  who  was  reported,  by  her
doctor  to  have  suffered  for  about  a  year  from  a  white  swelling  of  one  knee
and  more  or  less  disease  of  a  bone  of  the  left  foot  (second  metatarsal)  from
^vilich  there  was  a  discharge  by  a  sinus  nearly  a  third  of  an  inch  deep.  She
was  not  in  good  general  health  and  any  attempt  at  a  surgical  operation  for  her
cure  was  put  off".  She  went  to  Lourdes  August  19th,  1891,  was  bathed  on
August  21st,  and  went  back  to  her  convent.  On  August  30th  the  doctor  makes
a  report  that  he  finds  the  knee  no  longer  painful  and  less  swollen,  and  a
healthy  scar  over  the  instep  where  there  had  been  at  one  time  a  running  sore.
About  the  same  time  another  girl,  Clementine  Trouve,^  came  from  a  distance
with  a  similar  disease  of  one  of  the  bones  of  her  ankle,  which  had  lasted  nearly
three  years,  and  had  not  improved  under  surgical  treatment.  She  came  to
Lourdes  for  cure.  Her  foot  was  enveloped  in  bandages  when  she  went  into
the  bath,  as  Amelie  Chagnon's  had  been  also.  She  left  the  bandages  in  the
water  ;  and  it  was  there,  in  the  bath,  "  in  a  few  seconds,"  Dr.  Boissarie
assures  us,^  "that  an  instantaneous  and  perfect  scar  was  formed,  at  3  p.m.,
August  22nd,  1891."  She  went  home,  and  eight  days  later,  on  September
1st,  1891,  her  doctor  at  Lusignan  gave  her  a  certificate  that  a  scar  and  a
considerable  amount  of  flattening  of  the  sole  of  her  foot  was  all  that  was  left
of  her  old  disease.  He  certainly  seems  to  have  felt  no  doubt  of  the
soundness  of  the  scar,  for  to  her  cure  he  writes  :  "  Que  ce  soit  le  bon  Dieu
ou  le  diable  qui  a  gueri  cette  enfant,  (ja  m'est  (5gal  ;  mais  la  verite  est  qu'elle
est  guerie."  But  we  should  have  liked  to  have  known  more  of  the  details.
What  was  the  exact  state  of  the  bone  and  of  the  sore  under  the  bandages
when  the  girls  put  their  feet  into  the  bath  ?  Whose  eyes  were  fixed  upon  the
sore  during  those  few  seconds  when  the  miraculous  cure  was  begun  and
ended  1  Was  the  change  too  rapid  for  any  human  eye  to  tell  whether  it
healed  from  below  or  from  above?  We  find  no  answer  to  such  questions,
and  fear  that  a  great  opportunity  has  been  missed.  If  we  are  called  upon  to
admire  an  mstantaneous  cure,  we  ought  surely  to  have  observations  written
and  witnessed  at  the  actual  time  of  the  change.  (Jn  the  other  hand,  we  can
feel  some  sympathy  with  Dr.  Boissarie  when  he  explains  to  us  how  really
impossible  it  is  for  a  small  group  of  half-a-dozea  doctors,  with  a  crowd  of
lookers-on,  some  sceptical,  others  ignorant,  to  get  an  accurate  history,  a
precise  record  in  writing  of  the  present  condition  and  of  every  change  m  and
out  of  the  bath  of  every  patient,  when  they  have  some  hundreds  a  day  on
their  hands  in  time  of  pilgrimage.

'  Annales,  XXIV.,  1.59-1G3.

=  Annales,  XXIV.,  163-lGC.

3  Cost  la  qu'en  quelques  secondes  une  cicatrisation  instantanee  at  complete  s'etait
op^ree. — Annales,  XXlV.,  165.


196  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Side  hy  side  with  this  last  case  we  will  place  an  experiment  in
suggestion  equally  surpi'ising  in  its  way  with  Clementine  Trouve's
experience.

M.  82.

Case  XVII. — Dr.  Gibert,  the  well-known  j^hysician  of  Havre,  desiring
recently'  to  test  the  efficacy  of  suggestion  in  the  waking  state  to  influence
some  ijathi  Jogical  processes,  took  a  boy  of  thirteen  who  had  been  brought
to  consult  him  for  the  warts  which  covered  the  backs  of  both  his  hands.
These  were  so  thickly  clustered  that  there  was  hardly  any  clear  skin  to  be
seen  between  them,  and  the  boy  could  not  bend  his  fingers  enough  to  hold  a
pen  or  even  a  knife  and  fork  for  his  meals.  M.  Pierre  Janet  and  some  of
the  doctors  of  Havre  were  gathered  together  to  observe  M.  Gibert's  treatment
and  its  results.  He  took  the  boy's  hands  into  his  own,  looked  at  them  closely,
and  then  gazed  steadily  in  his  face  and  asked  him  in  a  loud  clear  tone,  "  Are
you  wishing  to  be  cured  1  "  and  as  the  boy  answered  at  first  half-heartedly,
he  repeated  his  question  several  times  till  he  got  a  reply  with  more  decision.
"Yes,  sir,  I  am  wishing."  "Mind  what  I  say,  then,"  said  M.  Gibert.  "I  am
going  to  wash  you  with  blue  water  ;  but  if  the  warts  are  not  gone  in  a  week  I
shall  wash  you  with  yellow  water.  Here  1  Charles  !  bring  me  the  blue  water. "
Then  he  sponged  his  hands  with  some  water  with  a  little  blue  colouring  matter
in  it  and  dried  them  carefully.  When  they  met  again  on  that  day  week  the
warts  were  all  gone  except  two  or  three.  M.  Gibert  took  him  by  the  hands  as
before  and  gave  him  a  sound  scolding  for  not  having  got  rid  of  every  one  of
them.  Then  he  sponged  his  hands  with  yellow  tinted  water  without  any  drug
in  it,  which  the  boy  fancied  had  something  burning  about  it ;  and  a  few  days
later  the  last  traces  of  the  warts  were  gone  and  the  skin  was  completely
healthy.  This  bold  experiment  illustrates  the  effect  that  the  mind  when  duly
stimulated  may  in  some  cases  have  upon  morbid  conditions  of  the  body
which  medical  and  surgical  science  is  puzzled  how  to  relieve  ;  for  warts,
though  they  sometimes  grow  slowly  smaller  and  smaller  and  finally  after
much  more  than  a  week  disappear  "by  nature,"  as  we  phi'ase  it  in  our
ignorance,  yet  are  very  intractable  indeed  to  any  medical  or  surgical  treatment.

One  might,  moreover,  have  expected  that  warts,  which  involve  only  the
epidermis,  would  be  sijecially  rebellious  to  suggestions  which  aflect  directly,
as  we  must  suppose,  only  the  nervous  system.  To  make  a  wart  drop  off  is
almost  like  making  a  nail  turn  brittle.  Yet  from  the  days  of  Lord  Bacon
downwards  the  warts  themselves  drop  off  at  the  word  of  the  charmer,  while
the /oci  of  their  dropping  off,  as  that  philosopher  puts  it,  "doth  yet  stick
by  us."

One  further  specimen  of  a  cure  of  a  very  striking  class  may  be  here
given.

Congenital  deaf-mutism  may  be  due  to  causes  of  very  various  cur-
ability, but  it  is  naturally  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  and  distressing
of  all  bodily  defects.

M.  83.

Case  XVIII.— Dr.  Boissarie  gives  us  (p.  173)  a  short  history  of  the
'  Revue  Scientifique,  February  4th,  1893,  d.  187.


Mi'/fid-Cure,  Faith-Care,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lowrdes.  197


partial  cure  of  Aurelie  Bruneau,  who  after  being  educated  as  a  deaf-mute,
(though  we  have  no  medical  account  of  the  extent  of  her  infirmity),  partially
recovered  hearing  after  dropping  Lourdes  water  for  three  days  into  her  ears.
Dr.  de  la  Mardelle  thus  reports  :  "  She  hears  blows  struck  on  the  outside  of
a  door,  or  notes  of  a  piano  in  the  next  room  ;  and  not  only  does  she  hear  but
she  pronounces  some  words,  and  it  is  because  she  hears  that  she  speaks.
From  this  fact  we  are  obliged  to  conclude  that  this  cure,  obtained  outside
ordinary  processes,  and  without  tlie  help  of  any  treatment,  seems  invested
with  a  supernatui-al  character."

It  does  not  appear  to  us,  as  it  does  to  Dr.  Boissarie,  that  this  case  presents
"all  the  guarantees  which  the  severest  criticism  could  desire."  Is  the  per-
ception of  vibrations  from  blows  on  a  door  or  from  the  playing  of  a  piano  a
proof  of  restored  hearing  ?  Is  it  miraculous  that  a  deaf-mute  should  have
been  taught  to  speak  "a  few  words,"  when  she  has  been  brought  up  till
twenty  in  an  "institution  de  sourdes-muettes."  1

Let  us  place  beside  this  cure  another  somewhat  similar,  though
more  striking,  cure  of  deafness,  whose  supposed  author  was,  we  are
told,  addressed  in  consequence  "  in  language  of  Avorship,  and  exalted
to  the  height  of  a  supernatural  being."

The  narrative  was  first  published  in  D.  D.  Home's  Incidents  in
my  Life,  but  is  reprinted  with  further  names,  and  with  the  letters  of
Mme.  de  Cardonne,  by  Mme.  Home  in  B.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and
Mission,  p.  80.^

M.  84.

Case  XIX. — "On  March  19th,  1857,"  says  Mr.  Home,  whose  account  we
slightly  abridge,  "  when  I  was  residing  at  13,  Rue  des  Champs  Elysees,  I
received  a  letter  from  a  stranger  to  me,  Mme.  A.  de  Cardonne,  of  233,  Rue
St.  Dominique,  St.  Germain,  stating  that  she  had  had  a  dream,  in  which  she
had  seen  her  own  mother  and  mine,  and  that  the  latter  had  told  her  to  seek
me  at  once,  in  order  that  her  son,  who  had  been  deaf  four  years  from  the
effect  of  typhoid  fever,  might  be  cured.  This  was  so  strongly  imjiressed
upon  her  mind  that  she  wrote  to  me  to  say  that  she  would  call  upon  me
with  her  son  the  following  morning  at  ten.

"Accordingly,  the  next  morning  she  presented  herself  with  her  son  at  my

1  As  regards  the  genuineness  of  Mme.  de  Cardonne's  letters,  and  the  general  truth-
fulness of  the  account,  as  representing  the  facts  as  conceived  by  those  who  wer
parties  to  them,  we  may  refer  our  readers  to  the  S.P.R.  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  101.
"Madame  Home  has  been  good  enough  to  meet  one  of  us  (Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers)  in
Paris,  and  has  there  allowed  him  freely  to  examine  the  collection  of  autograph  MSS.
on  which  the  book  is  founded.  He  thus  went  through  the  letters  of  more  than  a
hundred  correspondents,  and  he  compared  these  letters,  in  important  cases  textually,
in  other  cases  in  a  more  general  manner,  with  the  printed  excerpts  or  translations  in
Mme.  Home's  volume.  The  conclusion  is  that  the  letters  given  in  the  volume  may  be
confidently  accepted  as  genuine.  In  many  cases  the  hand\vriting  of  the  correspon-
dents was  already  known  to  Mr.  Myers  ;  in  many  others  there  were  postmarks,  official
stamps,  crests,  monograms,  &c.,  on  the  letters  which  indicated  their  date  or  source  ;
and  in  no  case  was  there  any  circumstance  of  suspicion."  Mme.  de  Cardonne's
letters  were  among  those  thus  examined  ;  see  list  in  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  117.


198  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


rooms,  there  being  present  Princess  de  Beauveau  and  Miss  Elliee,  who
Avere  with  me  previous  to  my  leaving  Paris  that  very  day.  I  had  uniformly
refused  such  visits,  but  on  this  occasion  I  had  been  so  much  preoccupied
that  I  had  not  been  able  to  acknowledge  her  letter.  It  was  an  embarrassing-
meeting  for  Ijotli  of  us  :  the  mother  yearning  for  her  son's  recovery,  and  I  not
knowing  how  I  was  to  be  instrumental  in  healing  this  long  total  deafness,  the
more  so  that  operations  had  been  performed  on  the  boy,  as  I  afterwards
found,  by  eminent  surgeons  in  Paris,  who  had  said  that  it  was  impossible  he
should  ever  be  restored  to  hearing.  During  the  mother's  recital,  describing
the  various  surgical  operations  to  which  he  liad  been  subjected,  my  sympathies
were  deeply  moved,  and  I  had  unwittingly  tlirown  my  left  arm  about  the  boy
and  drawn  him  toward  me,  so  that  the  boy's  head  rested  upon  ray  shoulder.
Whilst  in  this  position,  and  as  Mme.  de  Cardonne  was  telling  some  of  the
most  jjainful  particulars,  I  passed  my  hand  caressingly  over  the  boy's  head,
upon  which  he,  partly  lifting  his  head,  suddenly  exclaimed  in  a  voice  trembling
with  emotion,  '  Maman,  je  t'entends  1 '  (Mamma,  I  hear  you  !)  The  mother
fixed  on  him  a  look  of  astonishment,  and  said  '  Emile  ! '  and  he  at  once
replied  '  Quoi  ? '  She  then,  seeing  that  the  child  had  heard  her  question,
fainted  with  emotion.  .  .  .  The  boy  was  able  to  resume  his  studies  and
has  continued  to  hear  perfectly  up  to  the  present  time."

"  It  was  characteristic  of  Home  (cimtinues  Mme.  Home)  that  as  soon  as
Mme.  Cardonne  had  left  him  he  quietly  finished  his  preparations,  and  started
for  America,  without  troubling  himself  in  the  least  to  make  public  the
particulars  of  this  wonderful  cure,  or  to  obtain  tlie  attestations  of  the  mother
and  the  witnesses.  It  was  not  till  his  return  from  America  with  his  sister
that  Mme.  de  Cardonne  could  write  to  him  the  grateful  letter  [May  30th,
1857]  from  whicli  I  extract  the  following  passages  :  .  .  .  '  Messenger
of  Divine  Providence  1  bless  you,  for  you  have  wrought  a  mii-acle  for  my
son  ! '  Mme.  de  C.  writes  again  .lune  17th,  1857  :  '  My  son,  who  never
ceases  to  bless  you,  begs  me  every  day  to  take  him  to  see  you.  He  is  so
happy  to  have  recovered  his  hearing  that  he  cannot  rest  till  he  expresses  to
you  his  gratitude.'  "

Thus  far  we  have  been  mainly  engaged  in  pointing  out  the
imperfections  of  the  Lourdes  evidence  to  cures,  and  the  parallels  to
those  cures  which  have  been  recorded  among  quite  other  surroundings.
We  have  a  few  remarks  to  add  on  the  uncertainty  and  difficulty  of
even  the  best  medical  diagnosis  and  prognosis  in  many  cases  where
popular  opinion  regards  the  malady  as  something  unmistakable,
whose  future  course  can  be  clearly  foreseen.  To  illustrate  this  point  we
take  five  maladies,  whose  cure  is  treated  in  the  Annales  de  Lourdes  as
obviously  beyond  the  powers  of  suggestion. These  are  : —

Phthisis,
Atrophy,

Organic  Paralysis,

Ulcer."?,

Cancers.

Let  us  say  a  few  words  on  each  of  these  heads  in  turn.


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdee.  199


Phthisis  may  be  a  disease  which  our  art  cannot  cure,  but  it  is  by
no  means  a  disease  which  cannot  cure  itself.  "  Complete  arrest  of  the
disease,"  (say  Drs.  J.  K.  Fowler  and  E.  Clifford  Beale,  in  the  Diction-
ary of  Practical  Medicine),  "  is  occasionally  observed  under  the  most
unfavourable  circumstances ;  such  cases  falsifying  every  rule  of
prognosis."  And  Professor  Jaccoud  (one  of  the  best  French
authorities)  insists  in  his  book  on  the  Curability  of  Phthisis,  that  the
tubercular  growth  in  the  lung  occasionally  dries  up,  becoming  caseous,
chalky  or  fibrous,  and  so  remaining  for  20  years  with  no  pei'cep-
tible  symptoms,  though  still  plainly  visible  on  post-^nortem  examina-
tion. And  apart  from  these  rare  lifelong  cures,  temporary  remissions  of
the  disease  occur  frequently,  and  with  such  surprising  suddenness
of  improvement  that  patients  constantly  think  that  there  is  a  comjalete
cure  when  there  is  not,  and  physicians  not  seldom,  after  many  years'
observation,  conclude  that  either  there  never  was  tubercle,  or  that  the
lung  now  contains  nothing  but  healed  scars  of  the  old  disease.  A
post-morte7n  examination  is  often  the  only  way  of  discovering  whether
there  really  has  been  phthisis  or  no.  Thus  the  best  judges  are  often
left  in  doubt ;  and  the  mistakes  of  the  less  experienced  are  innumerable.
Such  being  the  facts,  we  cannot  attach  importance  to  such  a  cure,
for  instance,  as  that  of  Sister  Julienne  (Boissarie,  30,  326),  where,
in  the  first  place,  we  have  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  tubercle  before
the  cure,^  and  in  the  second  place  no  proof  of  the  permanence  of  the
cure.  The  disease  may  have  been  a  chronic  nervous  cough,  with  bron-
chitis and  dyspepsia.

Atrophy. — The  rapid  disappearance  of  atroj}hy,  claimed  in  some  of
these  cases,  is  now  recognised  as  a  possible  result  of  nervous  stimulus.
The  statements  from  Lourdes  are  not  definite  enough  on  this  point.
Weights,  measurements,  records  of  pressure  exercised  on  dynamometer,
are  conspicuously  absent.

Organic  Paralysis. — Next  as  to  paralysis  depending  not  on  mere
hysterical  disability,  but  on  actual  cerebral  and  spinal  injury.  We
shall  quote  a  typical  recent  cure  from  Lourdes,  regarded  as  miraculous
by  the  patient's  medical  adviser, '  and  shall  then  give  our  reasons  for
considering  that  there  may  have  been,  in  fact,  no  organic  injury  still
persisting  at  the  time  when  the  cure  began.

M.  85.

Case  XX. — Mme.  Foure  had  led  a  healthy  life  on  a  farm  near  Dieppe  until

^  The  phrase  "crachats  caracteristiques  "  (p.  325)  is  an  insufficient  and  second-
hand statement.  "Creusee  par  les  tubercules  "  (same  page)  is  thus  an  unproved
assumption  ;  and  since  Koch  has  shown  that  tubercle  is  an  essentially  parasitic
disease,  we  cannot  be  satisfied  without  some  real  demonstration  of  the  presence  of  the
parasite  or  bacillus.

'  Dr.  C.  Helot,  Annates  dc  Lourdes,  XXIII.,  pp.  161-170,  104-208,  and  217-220.


200  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


at  the  age  of  55,  on  May  16th,  1886,  she  had  an  apoplectic  attack,  which  left
her  with  a  "  crossed  hemiplegia," — that  is  to  say,  some  paralysis  of  the  left
side  of  her  face,  and  also  of  her  right  leg  and  arm.  There  was  gradual  recovery ;
and  after  twelve  weeks  she  ccjuld  walk  with  a  stick  only.  There  was  no
aphasia,  but  an  indistinctness  of  speech,  which  got  well  before  she  visited
Lourdes.  As  is  usual  in  such  cases  the  arm  recovered  more  slowly  than  the
leg.  It  continued  very  weak,  the  fingers  and  elbow  in  a  state  of  senii-llexion
and  of  more  or  less  complete  anaesthesia.  Rigidity,  a  more  serious  symptom
in  such  cases,  seems  to  have  been  absent.  But  it  is  hard  to  realise  the  state  of
the  arm,  since  we  are  told  later  on  that  although  it  had  not  changed  its
condition  she  could  not  move  it  half  an  inch,  ^  and  also''^ — which  seems
absolutely  inconsistent — tliat  even  before  the  leg  recovered  she  used  the
right  as  well  as  the  left  arm  to  lift  the  leg.  After  the  first  three  months
progress  was  slow.  Dr.  H^lot  first  saw  her  sixteen  months  after  the  onset
of  the  paralysis.  He  tells  us  little  of  her  state  except  that  her  speech
improved  and  that  she  could  stand  on  her  right  leg  alone  for  a  few  seconds,
and  walk  haltingly.  He  gives  no  account  of  reflexes,  electrical  condition,
nutrition,  or  tone  of  muscles,  or  of  regions  of  cutaneous  anaesthesia  ;  nor
does  he  seem  to  have  attempted  any  treatment,  whether  by  medicine,
massage,  or  electricity.  In  September,  1888,  the  patient,  who  was  now  much
depressed  in  mind,  visited  Lourdes  with  her  son,  the  Abbe  Foure,  but  with
no  medical  man  in  attendance.  Three  baths  in  the  sacred  spring  failed  to  do
good  ;  and  on  leaving  Lourdes  she  insisted,  just  before  telling  her  beads,
that  more  grace  must  be  shown  her  next  year.  As  she  told  the  beads  she
noticed  more  power  in  her  right  hand  and  in  her  right  leg  also.  She  tried
more  movement  with  the  right  leg  and  found  that  it  succeeded, — and  then
with  the  right  arm  and  that  succeeded  also.  She  was  delighted  and  cried  out
loudly,  "  Cured  !  cured  I  Do  you  see  I  am  cured  I  "  She  seemed  to  the  Abbe
to  have  lost  both  her  anaesthesia  and  her  paralysis ;  and  three  days  later,  when
Dr.  H^Iot  saw  her  again,  she  seemed  to  him  certainly  to  have  lost  the
anaesthesia  of  the  right  arm  and  only  to  limp  a  little  from  habit,  as  convicts
do  who  have  worn  a  chain  on  one  side  for  a  long  time.  Within  a  fortnight  she
could  walk  easily  some  eight  or  ten  miles,  and  her  power  has  been  maintained
afterwards  for  the  two  years  following  ;  for  she  was  carefully  re-examined
by  Dr.  Helot  on  August  11th,  1890.  Such  a  case  is  interesting,  but  the
evidence  is  too  incomplete  for  any  clear  medical  diagnosis.  The  description
•of  the  patient  before  going  to  Lourdes  is  inadequate  ;  the  account  of  the
phenomena  at  Lourdes  is  unfortunately  second-hand  and  not  by  expert
witnesses,  and  deals  with  such  phenomena  as  need  the  most  highly  trained
observers  for  their  complete  description.

Now  we  suggest  that  although  there  was  here  almost  certainly
some  organic  paralysis  to  begin  with,  yet  the  history  of  the  case,  so  far
as  given,  is  consistent  with  the  supposition  that  this  true  paralysis
gradually  disappeared,  leaving  behind  it  a  functional  paralysis,  induced
(as  we  are  forced  vaguely  to  say)  by  the  altered  habits  of  the  organism,
but  not  necessarily  presenting  any  obviously  hysterical  symptoms.


1  p.  163.


2  p.  167.


Mincl-C are,  Faith-Care,  and  the  Miracles  of  Loardes.  201


Such  a  paralysis  might  rapidly  disappear  under  emotional  stimulus.  In
support  of  this  view  we  cite  the  following  sentences  from  a  recent
work  of  authority,  namely,  Variotis  Forms  of  Hysterical  or  Functional
Paralysis,  by  Professor  Bastian,  F.R.S.  (London,  1893).  On  p.  122,
Professor  Bastian  says  :  "It  has,  of  course,  long  been  known  that
organic  disease  of  the  nervous  system  often  co-exists  with  hysterical
symptoms  ;  but  I  have  only  lately  realised  the  extent  to  which  actual
functional  paralysis  and  paralysis  of  organic  oiigin  may  co-exist  so
as  greatly  to  lessen  the  apparent  gravity  of  the  cases,  or  vice  versd"
.  .  And  p.  124,  "The  ultimate  establishment  of  a  cure  may  be
considered  the  rule  in  cases  of  functional  paralysis.  ...  In  some
cases,  both  of  spasm  and  palsy,  a  cure  may  be  brought  about  compara-
tively speedily  and  often  abruptly."  Also  p.  1. :  "  Hysteria  is,  after  all,
only  one  of  the  general  conditions  under  the  influence  of  which  paralyses
of  a  purely  functional  type  may  develop  themselves.  Because  a  case
belongs  to  the  latter  category,  therefore,  we  must  not  on  this  account
look  upon  it  as  necessarily  hysterical  in  its  origin.  But  this  is  what  is
only  too  frequently  done."

Ulcers. — And  just  as  it  is  to  this  very  recent  work  of  Dr.  Bastian's
that  we  must  appeal  for  the  truest  view  yet  attainable  of  the  extent
to  which  so-called  hysterical  or  functional  conditions — conditions,  that
is  to  say,  not  involving  nervous  lesions  which  our  present  microscopes
can  discern — are  effective  in  inducing  paralysis  ;  so  also  is  it  to  an
equally  recent  utterance  of  Dr.  Charcot  that  we  .must  appeal  for  the
truest  view  yet  attainable  of  the  extent  to  which  similar  hysterical  or
functional  conditions  are  effective  in  inducing  actual  (neurotic)
tumours,^  (which  must  not  be  confounded  with  "  phantom  tumours  "),
actual  suppurating  ulcers  and  cutaneous  gangrene.  In  a  paper  in  the
New  Review  for  January,  1893,  Professor  Charcot  analyses  at  length  a
case  of  this  kind  whose  cure  was  imputed  to  miracle  ;  not  at  Lourdes,
but  in  1731,  and  by  virtue  of  the  touch  of  a  shift  which  had  touched
the  tomb  of  the  Deacon  Paris,  and  of  some  earth  from  the  neighbour-
hood of  that  tomb.  After  describing  the  details  of  a  really  terrible
disease,  which  had  lasted  for  fifteen  years,  Dr.  Charcot  gives  the
rationale  of  the  cure  as  follows  : —

"  The  cedema  which  was  due  to  vaso-motor  trouble  disappeared
almost  instantaneously.  The  breast  regained  its  normal  size.  There
is  nothing  astonishing  in  this,  since  we  know  with  what  rapidity
troubles  of  the  circulation  may  appear  and  disappear.  When  the
oedema  disappeared,  the  local  conditions  affecting  the  nutrition  of  the
tissues  were  favourably  modified ;  the  wound  on  the breast  was

^  See  Dr.  Fowler  on  Neurotic  Tumours  of  the  Breast,  a  paper  read  before  the
New  York  Neurological  Society,  January  7th,  1890.  New  York  Medical  Record,
February  19th,  1890.


202  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


permitted  to  heal  by  virtue  of  physiological  laws  as  well  known  as
those  which  had  previously  operated  to  produce  the  gangrene."

The  doctrine  which  Professor  Charcot  thus  formulates  is  no  mere
isolated  opinion.  It  belongs  to  a  general  view  which  has  of  late  years
been  rapidly  gaining  ground  as  to  the  trophic  function  of  certain
nerves,  and  the  rapid  changes  in  nutrition  which  vaso-motor  nervous
disturbance  can  induce.

It  is  strange  to  reflect  that  all  these  phenomena  are,  so  to  say,
lineal  descendants  of  the  stigmata  of  St.  Francis.  Ill-attested  though
that  famous  case  may  be,  it  can  now  no  longer  be  classed  as  in  itself
improbable.  If  it  be  true,  it  will  not  be  the  only  instance  in  which
the  Acta  Sanctonun  have  pointed  us  to  facts  of  deep  import  to  science,
— which  facts,  nevertheless,  have  had  to  overcome  the  strongest  scientific
prepossession.  The  danger  of  any  prepossession,  however  natural,  can
hardly  be  better  illustrated  than  by  the  position  of  those  who  still
endeavour  to  deny  all  save  the  most  superficial  effects  of  hypnotic
suggestion.  Such  reasoners,  when  confronted  with  the  phenomena
which  we  are  studying  in  this  paper,  are  obliged  either  to  meet  a  grow-
ing mass  of  testimony  with  blank  incredulity,  or  to  yield  to  the
miraculous  pretensions  with  which  that  testimony  is  accompanied.
Their  disbelief  in  stigmata,  for  instance,  although  that  disbelief  be
maintained  in  the  interest  of  "  natural  causes  "  as  opposed  to  "  super-
natural seemings,"  cuts  from  beneath  their  feet  the  actual  and  only
answer  to  some  of  these  reverse  processes  at  Lourdes, — these  abolitions
by  mental  impression  of  physical  disturbances  just  such  as  (in  our
view)  mental  impressions  can  themselves  create.  Tor  the  open-minded
inquirer,  on  the  other  hand,  these  wonders  begin  to  shape  themselves
into  something  like  law.  To  one  axioma  medium,  at  any  rate,  we
seem  now  to  see  our  way.  Whatever  suggestion  can  cause,  hysteria  can
cause  ;  and  ivhatever  suggestion  or  hysteria  can  cause,  suggestion  can
cure.

Cancer. — But  now  for  our  last  disease,  which  neither  suggestion
nor  any  form  of  medical  treatment  has  yet  dominated.  The  Annates
de  Lourdes  contain  several  cases  of  the  miraculous  cure  of  cancer.  It
would  be  of  little  use  to  cite  these  cases  in  detail.  The  objector  will
of  course  maintain  that  they  were  not  true  cancer ;  the  apologist  will
ask  what,  then,  is  the  definition  of  true  cancer,  unless  it  be  "  cancer
that  does  not  get  well "  ?  It  will  be  more  to  our  present  purpose  to
quote  in  brief  an  account — at  least  equally  well-attested, — of  the  cure
of  cancer  by  mesmeric  passes.  The  account  is  from  Dr.  Elliotson,  who,
be  it  remembered,  was  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  experienced  physicians
of  his  generation.

M.  86.

Case  XXI. — "On  the  6th  of  March,  1843,  a  very  respectable  per.son,


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  tlte  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  203


aged  42,  fair,  and  with  the  sallow  complexion  of  cancer,  called  to  solicit  my
advice  resjjecting  a  disease  of  her  right  breast.  I  found  an  intensely  hard
tumour  in  the  centre  of  the  breast,  circumscribed,  moveable,  and  apparently
about  five  or  six  inches  in  circumference  ;  that  pai-t  was  drami  in  and
puckered,  as  though  a  string  attached  behind  the  skin  at  one  point  had  pulled
the  surface  inwards  ;  and  upon  it,  to  the  outer  side  of  the  nipple,  was  a  dry,
rough,  warty-looking  substance,  of  a  dirty  brown  and  greenish  colour.  She
complained  of  great  tenderness  in  the  tumour  and  the  arm-pit  when  I  applied
my  fingers,  and  said  that  she  had  sharp  stabbing  pains  through  the  tumour
during  the  day,  and  was  continually  awakened  by  them  at  night.  ...  I
at  once  saw  that  it  was  a  decided  cancer  in  the  stage  termed  scirrhus.

Her  father's  mother  had  died  of  a  "bleeding  cancer"  of  the
breast.  ...  I  proposed  mesmerism  to  her  ;  my  purpose  was  to  render
her  insensible  to  the  pain  of  the  surgical  removal  of  the  breast,  seeing  no
other  chance  for  her ;  and  this,  indeed,  was  a  poor  chance,  for  cancer
invariably  returns."  Four  other  physicians  and  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  Professor
of  Surgery  at  University  College,  London,  concurred  in  pronouncing  it
cancer.  The  history  of  the  case  is  one  of  gradual  imin-ovement  under
mesmerism,  with  some  relapses,  apparently  coinciding  with  intermissions  of
mesmeric  treatment.  The  patient  was  extremely  susceptible  and  exhibited
remarkable  phenomena  of  many  kinds.

In  1846  all  pain  ceased.  In  1848  Dr,  Elliotson  rejjorts  : —
"The  cancerous  mass  is  now  completely  dissipated;  the  breast  is
perfectly  flat :  and  all  the  skin  rather  thicker  and  firmer  than  before  the
disease  existed.  Not  the  smallest  lump  is  to  be  found  :  nor  is  there  the
slightest  tenderness  of  the  bosom  or  the  armpit."  "  The  diseased  mass  was
dissipated  and  absorbed,  and  painlessly  and  imperceptibly."  ^

Of  this  case  we  will  only  say  that  it  seems  to  us  impossible  to
accept  any  one  of  the  Lourdes  cures  of  cancer  and  at  the  same  time  to
reject  Dr.  EUiotson's.  What  the  disease  was  in  either  case,  or  how  it
was  dispelled,  we  do  not  know.  We  quote  Dr.  EUiotson's  narrative
merely  as  one  more  non-miraculous  parallel  to  an  alleged  miraculous
cure.

And  here  our  detailed  discussion  of  the  Lourdes  miracles  must
close.  From  among  a  great  mass  of  striking,  but  ill-reported,  cures,  we
have  selected  some  of  the  most  striking,  which  were  at  the  same  time
among  the  best  attested,  and  we  have  shown  that  cures  greatly
resembling  these  have  been  attained  under  circumstances  where  no
claim  to  miracle  has  been  advanced.  We  have  also  pointed  out
some  of  the  points  in  which  the  Lourdes  evidence  must  be  greatly
improved  if  it  is  to  be  the  basis  of  any  serious  conclusions
for  the  scientific  world.  More  than  this  we  cannot  do.  We  have
left  many  striking  cures  untouched,  and  although  we  could  find
parallels  for  some  of  these,  we  could  not  for  all. It  would,  indeed,

^  Cure  of  a  true  Cancer  of  the  Female  Breast  with  Mesmerism,  by  Dr.  Elliotson,
Zoist,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  213-237.


204  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


have  been  surprising  if  we  could ;  if.  with  our  own  imperfect
knowledge,  applied  to  these  imperfect  records,  we  had  been  able  to
show  convincingly  what  happened  in  each  special  case.  Moreover,
among  the  vast  number  of  patients  treated  at  Lourdes,  there  are
likely,  by  the  mere  law  of  chances,  to  have  been  some  better  subjects
for  suggestion  than  have  elsewhere  been  found,  and  consequently  some
cures  which  have  not  as  yet  been  equalled  elsewhere.  For  a  fair
comparison  it  would  be  needful  to  take  some  other  group  of  patients,
bearing  a  known  proportion  to  the  Lourdes  patients,  and  to  compare
the  proportion  of  alleged  cures  in  each  group, — -a  test  at  present
impossible  to  apply.

If,  then,  we  are  asked  for  a  ^provisional  judgment  on  these  various
.groups  of  facts,  as  thus  far  recorded,  we  may  give  it  in  three  clauses,
as  follows  : —

1.  No  one  of  the  special  forms  of  psycho-therapeutic  which  we
were  asked  to  examine  has  yet  produced  evidence  definite  enough  to
satisfy  reasonable  men  of  any  miraculous  agency,  however  surprising
the  cure  may  sound.

2.  Many  forms  of  psycho-therapeutics  produce,  by  obscure  but
natural  agencies,  for  which  at  present  we  have  no  better  terms  than
suggestion  and  self-suggestion,  effects  to  which  no  definite  limit  can  as
yet  be  assigned.

3.  Thus  far  Lourdes  offers  the  best  list  of  cures ;  but  this  superiority
is  not  more  than  can  be  explained  by  the  greater  number  of  patients
treated  there  than  elsewhere,  and  their  greater  confidence  in  the  treaf>-
ment.  There  is  no  real  evidence,  either  that  the  apparition  of  the
Virgin  was  itself  more  than  a  subjective  hallucination,  or  that  it  has
any  more  than  a  merely  subjective  connection  with  the  cures.

With  a  few  words  on  each  of  these  clauses  we  must  conclude  our
paper.

1.  There  need  be  no  real  difficulty  in  greatly  improving  the  kind  of
evidence  now  offered,  if  there  is  any  real  cure  to  report.  The  Faith-
healers,  as  is  plain,  both  from  our  own  citations  and  from  Dr.  Schofield's
book,  are  the  worst  offenders  in  this  respect,  showing  too  often  a
positive  unwillingness  to  submit  their  alleged  cures  to  even  the
friendliest  medical  scrutiny.  At  Lourdes  much  has  been  done  to
improve  the  earlier  vagueness  of  record  ;  and  it  is  still  more  satisfactory
to  observe  that  the  present  physicians  (in  spite  of  protestations  which
sometimes  read  absurdly  enough  ^  )  do  sometimes  recognise  that  a

1  Boisaarie,  p.  2,38  :  "Since  1884  the  cures  have  been  studied  with,  if  possible,
even  greater  care,— with  a  severity  which  can  defy  all  criticism.  The  physician
deputed  to  the  care  of  the  patients  analyses  and  tests  all  the  facts  which  present
themselves. He  brings  to  this  great  inquiry  a  method  and  a  system  which  may


3Iind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  205


great  chance  of  evidence  has  been  missed  through  their  insufficiency,
"  Of  course,"  says  Dr.  Boissarie,  '  "  if  we  had  known  beforehand  that
Clementine  Trouve  was  going  to  be  cui'ed  at  3  p.m.  on  August  22nd,
1891,  we  should  have  got  together  fifteen  or  twenty  doctors  on  the
morning  of  that  day,  and  taken  them  to  see  her  ;  and  we  should  have
made  an  examination  and  probed  the  sore,  and  written  down  all  that
we  observed.  But  as  it  was,  we  had  no  time  to  do  it.  For  such  treat-
ment we  should  want  as  many  doctors  as  we  have  patients."

Not  quite  as  many  doctors  as  patients, — but  no  doubt  a  larger
proportion  of  staff  to  cases  than  is  usual  in  a  hospital  when  the  exact
state  of  a  patient  before  and  after  a  particular  moment  is  less  often  a
matter  of  importance.  If,  moreover,  as  we  gather  from  Father  Clarke,
only  about  two  per  cent,  of  the  Lourdes  cures  are  ultimately  classed  as
miraculous,  much  time  would  necessarily  be  consumed  in  noting  facts
to  which  little  subsequent  interest  would  attach.  But  what  of  that  ?
and  what  medical  discoveries  have  ever  been  made  without  some  such
lavish  and  ungrudging  expenditure  of  time  and  pains  ?  Such  investi-
gation at  Lourdes  is  in  the  last  resort  a  mere  question  of  money.
Large  sums  have  been  spent  for  emotional  purposes — in  churches  or
processions — and  have,  no  doubt,  achieved  emotional  ends.  If  scientific
ends  are  to  be  achieved  also,  the  number  of  physicians  at  Lourdes  will
have  to  bear  a  somewhat  higher  proportion  to  the  number  of  priests.

We  must  repeat  that  it  is  no  imaginary,  no  impossible  standard  of
evidence  which  we  have  been  throughout  upholding.  In  the  Trans-
actions of  the  Clinical  Society  of  London  (to  take  London  alone), — •
in  the  Reports  of  the  leading  hospitals, — nay,  in  the  principal
newspapers  which  treat  of  medicine, — the  reader  may  find  hundreds
of  cases  whose  evidence  reaches  the  level  on  which  we  insist.  One
case  from  the  first-named  source  we  will  briefly  cite,  as  illustrating
two  points  which  have  a  direct  bearing  on  our  present  discussion.  2
The  first  point  is  the  degree  of  care  and  accuracy  needed  to  determine
with  absolute  conclusiveness  even  one  single  and  simple  fact  of  clinical
observation.  The  second  point  is  the  strangeness  of  the  fact  itself — a
strangeness  which,  in  an  entourage  that  way  disposed,  might  well  have
been  held  to  reach  the  level  of  a  miracle.

Our  readers  are  doubtless  aware  that  since  the  general  introduction
of  the  elinical  thermometer  some  forty  years  ago  the  temperature  of
patients  in  grave,  or  often  in  slight  maladies,  is  habitually  taken  by

serve  as  a  model  to  all  those  who  may  wish  to  follow  in  his  steps. "  Read  in  con-
nection with  the  picked  accounts  given  by  Dr.  Boissarie  himself,  such  phrases  as
these  do  certainly  remind  us  that  their  author  has  been  vieli  depuis  iilusieurs  annees
au  mouvemcnt  relvjieux  de  son  temps.

'■  Anncdes  de  Lourdes,  XXIV.,  p.  128.
2  Clinical  Society's  Transactions,  1875,  p.  98.


206  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


its  aid.  Many  thousands  of  these  simple  observations  are  made  daily  in
the  United  Kingdom  alone.  Among  the  millions  of  observations  which
have  thus  far  been  recorded  a  remarkable  uniformity  prevails.  The
temperature  of  ordinary  health  is  from  98  deg.  to  99  deg.  Fahrenheit,
and  each  additional  degree  implies  a  perceptible  increment  of  febrile
disturbance.  A  temperature  of  106  deg.  is  a  most  serious  symptom ;
and  perhaps  not  one  person  per  million  per  annum  reaches  110  deg.
Not  one  person  in  a  generation,  so  far  as  we  know,  reaches  115  deg.  ;
and  no  one  in  any  country  had  ever  been  known  to  reach  120  deg.
Each  day — each  hour — during  which  temperatures  above  106  deg.
are  maintained  adds  to  the  gravity  of  the  prognostic.

Yet,  such  being  the  facts,  Mr.  J.  W.  Teale,  of  Scarborough,  on
February  26th,  1875,  presented  a  report  to  the  Clinical  Society  of
London,  of  a  lady  under  his  care,  who,  after  a  fall  from  her  horse,  had
maintained  for  seven  consecutive  weeks  a  temperature  never  found  less
than  lOSdeg.,  and  who  on  four  several  days  had  shown  a  temperature
of  122deg.  In  spite  of  this  unheard-of  condition  of  things,  he  reported
further  that  his  patient  had  recovered.  After  this  it  seemed  natural
to  ask  this  medical  Munchausen  whether  he  had  ever  personally
observed  a  case  like  that  of  St.  Denys,  who  walked  about  with  his  head
under  his  arm.^  But  gibes  were  silenced  when  Mr.  Teale  produced  his
proofs.  Seven  thermometers  had  been  used  for  the  observation.  Three
of  these  were  made  specially  for  the  occasion.  Four  were  sent  to  be
te.sted  at  Kew,  and  found  correct  within  a  tenth  of  a  degree.  Each
thermometer  was  inspected  by  two  or  three  trustworthy  witnesses
before  and  after  each  observation,  and  the  results  were  at  once
recorded  in  writing.  No  hot  water  bottles  were  allowed  in  the  room.
The  temperature  was  taken  in  two,  and  sometimes  in  three  parts  of  the
body  simultaneously.  Each  thermometer,  after  having  been  shaken  down
to  normal,  was  changed  in  position,  and  readings  again  compared,  to
eliminate  any  local  accident  or  fraud.  Finally,  these  elaborate  observa-
tions were  continued  daily  for  nearly  ten  weeks.  And  thus,  "  in  spite
of  the  widespread  consternation  at  such  a  revolution  of  [previous]
notions,  yet  it  was  impossible  to  question  the  accuracy  of  the  record."^

Hei-e  then,  is  a  fact.  And  if  it  was  worth  while  to  take  this
trouble  in  order  to  prove  the  truth  of  this  isolated  clinical  observation,
which  at  present  we  can  neither  understand  nor  make  use  of,  what
trouble  ought  we  not  to  take  if  we  had  any  chance  of  proving  that  a
direct  divine  intervention  has  remedied  even  the  least  of  human  ills  1

2.  The  second  clause  of  our  conclusion,  which  pointed  out  that  no
single scheme  of psychical  healing  could  at present establish  a

'  British  Medical  Jovrnal,  1875,  Vol.  I.,  p.  347.
2  Lancet,  1875,  Vol.  I.,  p.  340.


Mind-Cure,  Faith- Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  207

pre-eminent  claim  to  success,  simply  because  there  was  so  much  of
undefined  prospect  of  this  kind  in  so  many  directions,  is  naturally
intended  to  stimulate,  and  not  to  check,  further  effort  along  each  path
which  has  thus  far  led  to  success.  For  the  hope  is  that  that  second,
or  psychological,  element  in  all  therapeutics,  which  has  thus  far  been
left  to  chance  and  wonder,  while  the  physiological  element  has  fallen
under  settled  law,  may  itself  also  be  gradually  recognised  as  an  orderly
part  of  Nature,  presenting  definite  and  partially  soluble  pi'oblems  of
its  own.  Nascitur  ars  secunda  medendi.  Or  let  us  say,  in  purely
physiological  language,  that  we  seem  on  the  eve  of  one  more  forward
step  along  a  road  which  medicine  has  long  been  pursuing.  Our  process
has  as  a  rule  been  from  local  to  general  treatment ;  from  the  appli-
cation or  affusion  of  external  remedies  on  the  diseased  part  to  the
ingestion  of  remedies  through  the  stomach,  and  then  on  to  the  injection
or  infusion  of  remedies  through  the  blood.  We  now  propose  to  heal  the
patient's  tissues  not  through  the  stomach,  nor  through  the  blood,  but
through  the  brain  ;  to  utilise  the  controlling  and  innervating,  as  ■sre
have  utilised  the  diffusive  and  the  peptic  power.  Affusion,  ingestion,
infusion,  suggestion.  At  each  step  we  touch  the  ill  more  intimately  ;
we  call  more  directly  upon  the  patient's  own  inward  forces  to  effect  the
needed  change.

3.  The  third  clause  of  our  judgment  explained  the  superiority  of
results  at  Lourdes  over  results  at  other  faith-healing  centres,  by  the
superior  numbers  and  faith  of  the  pilgrims  resorting  thither.  But  how
is  that  superior  faith  itself  to  be  explained  ?  Why  should  the  Lourdes
grotto  prove  a  more  potent  rallying  point  than  the  "  Metaphysical
College  of  Massachusetts  "  1 — -"Wandering  between  two  worlds  "• — thus
has  a  poet  described  the  present  attitude  of  the  spirit  of  man ; —

Wandering  between  two  worlds,  one  dead,
The  other  powerless  to  be  born.

The  words  spoken  of  human  faith  in  its  wider  bearings  are
■eminently  true  of  the  special  form  of  faith  necessary  for  psycho-
therapeutics. We  have  discovered  that  faith  will  heal  ;  our  difficulty
is  to  find  something  in  which  to  have  faith.  For  the  patient  must  in
some  way  picture  to  himself  the  agency  which  is  to  effect  his  cure.
He  once  pictured  to  himself  the  mesmeric  effluence,  and  whether  that
effluence  were  there  or  no,  the  cure  often  came.  He  has  now  been
taught  to  distrust  mesmeric  effluence,  and  nothing  has  been  given  to
him  in  which  to  believe  in  its  stead.  He  is  ready  to  pin  his  faith  upon
great  hypnotising  physicians.  But  he  finds  these  very  physicians  dis-
claiming special  powers,  maintaining  that  hypnotic  sleep  is  ordinary
sleep,  and  that  "  there  is  nothing  in  hypnotism  but  the  name."  If
indeed,  they  succeed  in  hypnotising  him,  their  negative  theories  do  not,


208


Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


perhaps,  check  the  result.  But  in  his  habitual  waking  state  he  is  now
simply  advised  to  practise  self-suggestion,  and  for  the  ordinary  patient
this  is  not  enough.  Charlatans  step  in  and  occupy  the  empty  field.
Wild  theories,  as  we  have  seen,  are  invented.  The  new  faith  is  power-
less to  be  born.

And  in  the  meantime  that  faith  which  the  poet  counted  as  dead, —
which  science  is  apt  to  pass  by  unheeding, — is  living  and  efficacious
still.  It  is  not  really  with  Roman  Catholic  doctrines  alone  that  we
have  to  do  at  Lourdes.  That  great  Church  under  whose  wing  these
pilgrims  are  sheltered  still  represents  the  hopes,  the  fears,  the  creeds
of  a  thousand  generations  of  rude  and  ancient  men.  Lying  for
centuries  beneath  her  deeps,  those  primitive  symbols  have  "  suflfered  a
sea-change  Into  something  rich  and  strange  " ; — but  each  element  of
the  mystery  of  Lourdes — dark  grotto  and  sacred  spring,  neuvaine  and
dream  and  apparition — carries  us  back  to  primitive  memories  and  a
simple  and  pagan  Past.  Here  is  once  more  the  arofia  yrjs, — the
earth-mouth  of  the  old  Chthonian  worship,  with  its  hidden  fountain
where  Earth  the  TrpcoToixavris  herself  uttered  her  healing  oracles,  or
poured  her  virtue  through  divinities  of  later  birth  ; — as  at  Acharaca
through  the  Kop;;, — the  Virgin  of  the  underworld.  Around  that  grotto,
too,  the  votaries  gathered  in  their  rravrjyvpis, — a  gathering  half  fair,  half
pilgrimage, — and  sought  in  thousands  the  god-sent  life-renewing  power.
And  in  later  days,  when  the  Heroes — the  Saints  of  Hellenic  faith, —
began  to  be  more  widely  worshipped,  the  Asklepeia  of  Epidaurus,
of  Cos,  of  Pergamus,  give  us  examples  of  the  impassioned  expectation,
the  critical  moment,  the  sudden  cure.  There,  too,  on  every  side  were
the  puljlic  thanksgivings,  the  votive  offerings  ; — and  sometimes  after
the  solemn  "  incubation,"  (repi'esented  now  by  the  neuvaine  of
prayer),  the  rare  "  theophany,"  like  the  Lourdes  apparition,  would  add
its  consecrating  assurance  to  the  healing  shrine.  At  Pome  itself  there
was  an  Asklepeion  which  augurs  consulted  without  a  smile.  There,  too,
as  the  ex  voto  tablets  still  tell  us,'  "  the  blind  Gains  touched  the  altar,
and  then  his  eyes,  and  saio,  and  gave  thanks  before  all  men  "  ;  and  the
phthisical  Lucius  "  took  ashes  from  the  altar,  and  mixed  them  with
wine,  and  laid  them  on  his  side,  and  was  healed  of  that  disease,  and  the
multitude  rejoiced  with  him."

All  these  things  the  newer  Rome  has  received  and  transfigured  ;  and
with  them  nmch  of  emotion  which  the  world  cannot  lightly  lose ; —
the  succouring  comradeship  of  deified  natures, — Herakles,  Trophonius,
Asklepius,  Amphiaraus, — the  sense  of  the  nearness,  the  benignity,  of
heroic  and  enfranchised  souls.  We  seem  to  see  the  great  Church,  like
Nile  after  the  rout  of  Actium,  "  spreading  broad  her  breast,  and  with


^  Inscrr.  ap.  Bouche-Leclercq,  Hist.  Div.  III.,  p.  298.


Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes.  209

her  whole  robe  summoning  the  conquered  into  her  sea-blue  bosom
and  her  shadowy  sti-eam."

Pandentemque  sinus  et  tota  veste  vocantem
Cceruleum  in  gremium  latebrosaque  flumina  victos.

But  dare  we  press  the  parallel  further,  and  say  that  in  Science  we
have  an  Actian  Apollo,  armed  not  only  with  darts  that  pierce  through
error  but  with  rays  that  illumine  things  to  come  1  Can  any  new  faith,  as
absolute,  as  reverent  as  the  old,  guide,  like  the  old,  its  votaries  tO'
healing  of  body  as  well  as  soul  1

Absolute  as  the  old  the  new  faith  might  perhaps  become  if
psychological  therapeutics  should  win  their  assured  place  by  the  side
of  physiological ;  if  it  should  be  recognised  that  here,  too,  our  appeal  is
made  to  no  chance  caprice  or  uncertain  favour,  but  to  inflexible  and
eternal  Law.  Then,  perhaps,  the  most  scientific  man  would  be  the
most  confident,  and  it  would  be  the  sign  of  wisdom  to  seek  self-healing
with  the  directness  of  a  child.  Or  is  it  possible  that  something  beyond
mere  logical  conviction  may  be  needed  for  the  profounder  cure  ;  that
the  self-healing  must  needs  be  felt  to  depend  ultimately  on  something
behind  and  above  the  Self  ?  It  may  be  that  the  inmost  effort  must
still  be  a  religious  one,  and  that  to  change  man  deeply  it  needs  a  touch
upon  that  mainspring  deep  in  man.  What,  then,  for  such  a  purpose,,
must  the  religion  of  science  mean  ?  It  must  mean  at  least  the  ancient
acceptance  of  the  Universe  as  good,  the  ancient  sense  of  the  individual
effort  as  co-operant  with  a  vaster  Power.  If  science  can  regain  this
sense  for  man  she  may  do  with  him  what  she  will.  For  she  will  have
united  with  the  wonder-solving  analysis  the  wonder-working  faith,  and
with  the  wisdom  of  the  children  of  this  world  the  wisdom  of  the
children  of  light.


P


Supplement. )


Notices  of  Books.


211


SUPPLEMENT.


NOTICES  OF  BOOKS.


Der  Rapport  in  der  Hiipnose.  Untersnchungen  iiber  den  Thterischen
Magnet is7mis.  Von  Dr.  Med.  Albert  Moll,  in  Berlin.  A.  Abel,
Leipzig,  1892,  pp.  242.

Dr.  Moll  promised  us  in  his  well-known  work  on  Hypnotism  a  special
study  of  the  phenomena  of  rapport,  and  he  has  given  us  an  exceedingly
solid  and  valuable  piece  of  work.  He  records  an  elaborate  series  of
experiments,  often  most  ingenious,  carried  out  by  himself  with  the  aid
of  several  friends,  amongst  whom  Dr.  Max  Dessoir  and  Herr  Colonie-
Director  Sellin  were  his  most  constant  colleagues.

Dr.  Moll  directs  his  inquiry  to  the  problem  of  the  nature  of  the
influence  exercised  by  the  hypnotiser.  The  original  mesmerists  held  that
this  took  place  through  the  medium  of  some  special  force  effluent  from
the  body  of  the  agent,  and  directed  to  that  of  tlie  patient  by  the  mesmeric
passes  by  which  sleep  was  at  first  always  induced.

Under  the  surprise  produced  by  discoveries  in  electricity  and  magnetism,
which  happened  to  coincide  in  time  with  the  first  appearance  of  Mesmer,
this  fluid  received  the  name  of  Animal  Magnetism,  though  it  does  not
seem  that  any  serious  attemjjt  was  ever  made  to  prove  its  relation  to
the  magnetism  of  the  physical  laboratory.  Dr.  Moll  then  sets  himself
to  test  this  theory  ;  in  other  words,  to  find  out  whether  the  hyj^notic  influence
is  physical  or  psychical.  The  stress  which  advocates  of  animal  magnetism
have  laid  on  the  phenomena  of  rapport,  as  proof  of  a  peculiar  connexion
between  agent  and  patient  not  explicable  by  mere  suggestion,  shows  that
it  is  here  that  the  theory  can  be  most  successfully  approached.

Rapport  itself,  however,  on  the  most  superficial  inquiry,  turns  out  to  be
by  no  means  easy  of  clear  conception.  Like  all  else  in  the  domain  of
hypnotism,  it  is  a  most  Protean  phenomenon,  irregular  alike  in  its  appearance
and  in  its  symptoms.  That  it  is  frequently  found  in  a  most  marked  form  is
known  to  every  one  who  has  seen  the  commonest  experiments  ;  the  hypno-
tised person  is  often,  to  all  appearance,  absolutely  irresponsive  to  any  stimulus,
however  violent,  applied  by  any  other  than  the  original  hypnotiser.  But  in
many  other  cases  there  is  no  sign  of  such  rapport ;  the  person  hypnotised
may  be  perfectly  suggestible  by  anyone,  and  will  answer  anyone  as  well  as
the  operator.  Between  these  two  states  there  are  an  infinite  number  forming
a  gradual  transition.  But  for  practical  purposes  Dr.  Moll  divides  rapport
into  two  divisions  :  that  where  the  subject  does  not  ignore  other  persons,
though  motor  suggestions  are  accepted  from  the  hypnotiser  only  ;  and  that
where  others  are  in  no  way  recognised.  The  latter  he  speaks  of  as  "  isolated
rapport."

But  his  experiments  show  that  even  in  this  deeper  stage  the  rapport  is
not  really  isolated  ;  though  no  reaction  to  any  ordinary  stimuliis  is  to  be

p  2


212


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


seen,  yet  he  proves  in  the  most  conclusive  manner  that  the  subject  is  really
sensitive  to  the  words  and  actions  of  others  than  the  hypnotiser.  To  begin
with,  he  finds  that  rapport  can  be  transferred  without  any  suggestion  on  the
ljH,vt  of  the  hypnotiser,  even  in  the  apparently  deepest  stage  ;  not  indeed
universally,  for  no  general  rules  as  to  the  behaviour  of  the  hypnotised  can  be
laid  down,  but  in  a  large  number  of  cases.  Transference  can  be  obtained
by  repeated  verbal  suggestion  from  a  third  party,  even  if  for  a
considerable  time  it  seems  to  be  ignored  ;  but  a  better  method  is  continued
tactile  stimulus,  especially  such  as  is  provided  by  mesmeric  passes.  The
transference  can  take  place  even  while  the  hypnotiser  engages  the  subject  in
continuous  conversation,  but  then  it  is  much  slower  than  if  the  third  person
is  left  to  engage  his  attention  undisturbed.

It  is  not,  however,  to  be  concluded  that  there  is,  as  the  "mesmerists"
would  have  us  believe,  any  special  virtue  in  these  passes.  A  whole  series
of  experiments  was  directed  to  this  point.  Perhaps  the  most  decisive
were  those  in  which  two  persons  hypnotised  the  subject  simultaneously,
one  by  verbal  suggestion,  after  the  Nancy  method,  the  other  by  passes.
In  these  cases  it  was  impossible  to  say  beforehand  which  of  the  two
operators  would  obtain  the  rapport.  Sometimes  both  did  so,  sometimes
it  was  produced  by  the  passes,  sometimes  by  the  simple  suggestion.  It
may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  neither  Dr.  Moll,  nor  I  believe  the  French
hypnotists,  seem  to  have  come  across  the  disagreeable  phenomena  which
we  have  been  accustomed  to  associate  with  "  cross  mesmerism,"  though
they  do  not  hesitate  to  place  a  subject  under  the  iniluence  of  two  operators-
in  immediate  succession,  or  even,  as  here,  at  the  same  time.

Generally  speaking,  rapport  is  to  a  great  extent  a  matter  of  hypnotic^
education. It  is  comparatively  rare  at  a  first  sitting  and  increases  afterwards.
Transference  of  rapport  is  most  easily  ol^tained  by  those  who  have  frequently
hypnotised  the  subject  previously. But  it  often  appears  in  an  apparently
arbitrary  manner. For  instance,  Dessoir  is  mesmerising  the  subject  while
Moll  is  holding  his  hand  in  order  to  feel  the  pulse. When  sleep  has  been
produced,  it  is  found  that  Moll  and  not  Dessoir  has the  rapport.  Experi-
ment 63  is  an  interesting  one. "X  is  put  to  sleep  by  Dessoir  with  mesmeric-
passes. Moll  can  get  rapport  by  laying  his  hands  for  some  time  on  X's
head  ;  so  can  others,  who  are  present,  by  means  of  pressure  on  liis  forehead,,
temples,  or  other  parts  of  his  body. X  is  now  awakened  and  again  sent  to-
sleep  by  Dessoir,  after  the  following  experiment  has  been  agreed  on  in
another  room. Dessoir  and  Moll  stand  together  behind  X,  who,  as  appears,
on  questioning,  is  in  rapport  with  Dessoir  alone. Dessoir  lays  his  hands  on
X's  head  and  at  the  same  time  Moll  asks  him  how  he  feels. Tlie  question
is  immediately  answered,  though  Moll  has  not  touclied  X  and  had  no  rapport
with  him  before." Evidently  X  believed  tliat Moll's  hand  was  on  his-
head. So  again  in  65. "X  had  on  previous  occasions  been  hypnotised
by  Moll  for  the  sake  of  some  electrical  exjieriments  in  which  he  had
to  hold  a  large  electrode. X  is  on  tliis  occasion  in  rapport  with  Dessoir-
alone, who  has  hypnotised  him. Moll  gives  him  the  electrode  to  hold,
though  without  any  current  passing  through  it. He  immediately  comes  into-
rapport  with  Moll,  though  he  does  not  lose  that  which  he  previously  had
with  Dessoir." Here  rapport  is  the  result  of  association  of  ideas.  Then.


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


213


in  68.  "  While  Dessoir  is  standing  in  front  of  X,  apparently  with  tlie
intention  of  mesmerising  him,  X's  eyes  are  bandaged.  Sellin  then  silently
takes  Dessoir's  place,  and  makes  the  passes  till  X  is  asleejD.  It  is  then
found  that  Dessoir  and  not  Sellin  is  in  rapport  with  X."  Tliis  is  clearly
mistaken  self-suggestion.

These  experiments,  and  many  others  like  them,  all  point  convincingly  to
the  conclusion  that  rapport  is  not  a  physical  but  a  psychical  phenomenon  ;
that  it  is  produced  not  by  any  action  of  an  effluence  from  the  operator,
magnetic  or  otherwise,  but  by  the  action  of  the  subject's  own  mind,
obedient  to  suggestions  whether  received  externally  or  spontaneously
generated.  It  is  natural  to  conclude  that  rapport  is  no  more  than  a  con-
centration of  attention  on  the  operator,  an  exaggerated  case  of  the  state  of
mind  which  in  its  different  degrees  we  know  in  ordinary  life  as  reverie,
abstraction,  "absence  of  mind,"  and  so  on.  This  supposition  is  raised
almost  to  a  certainty  by  a  further  series  of  most  important  experiments,
which  prove  that  even  in  a  state  of  what  seems  to  be  completely  isolated
rapport  the  subject  is  still  accessible  to  stimuli  coming  from  other  sources.
These  stimuli  are  received  and  noted  by  the  "  subconsciousness  "  which
persists  in  the  hypnotic  as  well  as  in  the  waking  state  ;  and  by  means  of
various  artifices  Dr.  Moll  has  succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  fact.  Perhaps
the  most  striking  instance  is  that  given  in  Experiment  100.  "  Y  is  hypno-
tised and  only  answers  the  hypnotiser  Dessoir.  Moll  can  obtain  no  reply.
Moll  now  gives  the  command,  several  times  repeated  :  '  Y,  in  two  minutes
you  will  rise  from  your  chair  ;  an  irresistible  force  will  oblige  you  to  go  to
the  door  and  knock  at  it ;  you  will  then  return  to  your  place  and  go  to  sleep
again.'  The  command  is  executed.  While  Y  is  still  talking  tp  Dessoir  he
rises  and  does  what  he  was  told  after  about  two  minutes.  When  Dessoir  asks
what  he  has  just  done,  he  replies  tliat  he  has  got  up  from  his  chair.  He  can
give  no  satisfactory  answer  to  the  question  why  he  did  so.  Y  still  gives  no
reply  to  Moll's  questions  ;  he  is  evidently  in  isolated  rapport  with  Dessou-. "

The  analogy  in  this  case  to  what  is  so  often  observed  in  the  post-hypnotic
execution  of  commands  is  pointed  out  by  Moll,  and  must  indeed  strike
every  student.  But  it  seems  to  show  something  more  than  Moll  indicates  ;
namely,  that  there  is  not  a  duplication  but  a  triplication  of  personality  to  be
observed.  In  the  ordinary  rapport  of  hypnosis  the  self  which  is  sub-
conscious to  the  normal  self  receives  and  carries  out  the  command.  Here
it  is  a  self  which  is  subconscious  to  this  subconscious  self  again.  It  is  in
fact  analogous  to  the  deeper  stratum  which  was  demonstrated  by  Gurney  in
his  well-known  experiments  on  the  trains  of  memory  in  different  hypnotic
states.  In  this  connexion  it  is  well  to  mention  Experiment  164.  Here  the
subject  is  consecutively  hypnotised  and  awoke  by  four  experimenters,  each
of  whom  suggests  to  him  a  different  scene.  Subsequently  it  appears  that,
when  hypnotised  by  them  again,  he  remembers  only  the  scene  which  was
suggested  to  him  by  the  operator  with  whom  he  is  at  the  time  in  rapport.

But  it  is  by  means  of  automatic  writing  that  Moll  has  been  able  to  test
most  conclusively  this  subconscious,  or  rather  sub-subconscious  state.  It
is  only  rarely  that  a  suggestion  given  by  a  third  party  is  carried  out  as  in
Experiment  100.  But  even  when  the  subject  shows  no  sign  of  recognising
the  suggestion  it  can  often  be  proved  by  automatic  writing  that  he  was  not


214


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


entirely  unconscious  of  it.  Experiment  141  will  serve  as  an  instance,  the
more  instructively  because  the  stimulus  applied  was  not  in  the  nature  of  an
urgent  command.  X  is  in  rapport  with  Dessoir.  Moll  takes  from  him  a  book
which  he  is  holding  loosely  in  his  hand  and  puts  it  behind  a  sofa  in  front  of
X.  When  Dessoir  asks  X  about  the  book,  he  is  astonished  to  miss  it,  and
supposes  that  it  must  have  fallen  out  of  his  hand,  but  can  say  no  more.  He
searches  for  it  without  finding  it  ;  he  cannot  think  where  it  is,  though  urged
to  do  so  by  Dessoir.  When  told  to  write  automatically  where  the  book  is  he
writes,  while  conversing  with  Dessoir,  "Dr.  Moll  took  the  book  fi-om  me,
and  put  it  behind  the  sofa."  It  would  be  interesting  to  repeat  these
experiments  with  crystal-seeing  in  place  of  automatic  writing  for  the  test.

The  importance  of  the  book  for  the  study  of  hyjDnotism  is  obvious  ;  it  is.
most  suggestive  as  well  as  cogent.  For  instance,  it  makes  one  think  of  a
whole  series  of  experiments  which  should  throw  light  on  negative  hallucina-
tions. In  my  own  experience  I  have  seen  transference  of  rapport  obtained
with  a  few  passes  by  a  person  whose  presence  the  subject  absolutely  ignored
in  obedience  to  a  negative  suggestion.

Dr.  Moll's  last  chapter  is  devoted  to  matters  such  as  the  "  mesmerisation
of  objects. "  He  tried  to  obtain  mental  suggestion  ;  but  his  results  here  were
entirely  negative.  It  is,  however,  gratifying  to  find  that  he  does  not
therefore  conclude  that  the  subject  is  unworthy  of  serious  investigation.  In
the  mesmerisation  of  objects  he  found  that  the  subject  could  by  tasting  tell
out  of  a  number  of  glasses  of  water  the  one  which  had  been  "magnetised,"
with  a  success  far  beyond  chance  ;  but  he  gives  good  reason  for  supposing  that
this  was  really  done  througli  a  hypersesthetic  recognition  of  a  taste  which  had
been  imparted  by  the  manipulations  used.  It  seems  indeed  highly  probable
that  the  senses  both  of  taste  and  smell  can  be  by  concentration  of  attention
raised  to  a  pitch  of  acuteness  which  requires  very  serious  consideration  in  all
inquiries  such  as  these.

We  have  to  thank  not  only  Dr.  Moll  but  his  colleagues  for  a  book
remarkable  for  sobriety,  acumen,  and  patient  search  for  truth.  The  entire
absence  of  sensationalism  and  it  must  be  confessed  the  dryness  of  the  style
are  likely  to  rob  it  of  much  of  the  attention  which  it  deserves  to  receive  ;  but
they  cannot  detract  from  its  value  as  a  scientific  investigation.

Walter  Leaf.


Fsychologie  der  Surjgedion.  Von  Dr.  Phil.  Hans  Schmidkunz,  Privat-
docent  der  Philosophie  an  der  Universitat  Mianchen.  Mit
Aerztlich-Psychologischen  Ergtlnzungen  von  Dr.  Franz  Carl.
Gerster,  Praktischer  Arzt  in  Miinchen.  Stuttgart :  Enke,  1892,
pp.  xii.,  424.

One  is  always  reluctant  to  begin  a  review  of  an  obviously  serious  and  able
book  with  a  confession  that  one  has  been  unable  to  understand  it  ;  but  it  is
certain  that,  whether  from  my  own  inability  to  grasp  so  profound  a  subject
as  transcendental  psychology,  or  possibly  from  some  want  of  lucidity  in  the
author's  presentation  of  it,  I  have  not  succeeded  in  following  his  arguments
well  enough  to  form  an  approximately  clear  idea  of  his  position  as  a  whole.
His  main  thesis,  however,  seems  to  be  this. Modern  psychology  since


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


215


Berkeley  has  on  the  whole  followed  an  entirely  false  track  in  regarding  the
Psyche  as  a  taJnda  rasa,  a  purely  receptive  and  passive  organism,  partly  the
product  of  heredity,  but  for  the  rest  built  up  by  the  successive  eiTects  of
sensations.  It  is  on  the  contrary  above  all  an  assemblage  of  energies.  All
psychical  phenomena  are  dynamic  ;  sensations,  ideas,  judgments,  will,  are
alike  in  the  fact  that  they  have  the  power  of  mutual  interaction,  by  which
they  generate  the  infinite  complex  of  the  actual  Psyche.  Whether  behind
these  phenomena  there  is  "an  X,"  a  psychical  energy  in  itself,  is  a  further
question,  to  which  the  author  himself  seems  to  have  no  hesitation  in  giving
an  affirmative  answer.  Association  is  no  more  than  an  expression  of  the
influence  which  any  psychical  phenomenon  has  on  any  other  phenomena
nearly  related  to  it.

The  energy  of  psychical  phenomena  exhibits  itself  particularly  in  two
ways,  on  which  all  suggestion  ultimately  depends  :  in  the  persistence  of
ideas  and  in  the  tendency  of  all  ideas  to  external  realisation  of  themselves.
A  further  instance  of  this  energy  is  to  be  found  in  the  feelings  of  repulsion
and  attraction  which  the  contents  of  ideas  are  able  to  cause  us.  These  feel-
ings are  primary  and  not  to  be  analysed.  Psychical  energies  are  like
gunpowder,  latent  forces  always  ready  to  become  active  if  a  trigger  is  pulled.
Suggestion  is  the  pulling  of  the  trigger.

The  associative  energy  of  ideas  is  continually  tending  to  make  groups.
When  any  object  of  sensation  ailects  the  Psyche  in  such  a  way  as  to  give
such  a  temporary  group  disproportionate  prominence,  we  have  a  suggestion.
The  object  in  question  may  be  an  idea  within  the  Psyche  itself ;  then  we
speak  of  self-suggestion.  Or  the  idea  may  be  aroused  by  an  external
inanimate  object ;  in  this  case  Schmidkunz  calls  it  an  object-suggestion.  Or
finally  it  may  be  an  idea  imparted  by  another  mind  ;  this  is  known  as
Fremdsnggestion.  In  all  cases,  as  a  corresponding  idea  must  be  called  up
in  the  Psyche  itself  in  order  to  affect  its  state  of  aggregation  or  disaggrega-
tion, auto-suggestion  is  at  least  an  intermediate  step.  Still,  the  question
whether  an  individual  is  more  accessible  to  internal  or  external  suggestion  is
owe  which  leads  to  a  marked  division  of  mankind.  At  the  extremes  of  the  two
classes  Gerster,  Schmidkunz's  colleague — to  whom,  be  it  said,  the  book  owes
a  large  number  of  pregnant  and  fertile  thoughts — sets  two  opposed  phases  of
hysteria.  The  one  class,  whom  he  calls  "  Hysteriker  I.,"  are  psycho-
neurotically  affected,  and  exhibit  rapid  and  intense  corporeal  reaction  to
external  suggestion ;  such  are  Charcot's  subjects.  The  other,  "Hysteriker  II.,"
are  psychopathic,  subject  to  their  auto-suggestions,  but  possessing  thereby
an  almost  complete  immunity  against  external  suggestion,  and  therefore  not
to  be  hypnotised.

But,  for  reasons  which  I  have  already  stated,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  give
any  more  extended  review  of  the  system  as  a  whole,  and  will  confine  myself
to  a  few  points  which  may  have  especial  interest  to  readers  of  the  Proceedings.
They  will  probably  be  surprised  to  hear  that  Schmidkunz  has  little  or  nothing
to  say  about  the  phenomena  of  automatism,  and  dismisses  the  subliminal  self
in  a  passing  rejection  of  Max  Dessoir's  "Doppel-ich"  as  unsatisfactory.  He
would  apparently  explain,  e.g.,  automatic  writing  thus  :  The  pencil  placed
in  the  hand  acts  as  an  "  object-suggestion  "  which  calls  into  being  a  certain
train  of  associated  ideas  connected  with  writing,  and  having  the  innate


216


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


tendency  to  realise  themselves.  Their  action  being  unchecked  by  the  will,
they  form  themselves  into  a  group  dissociated  from  the  rest  of  the  mental
organism,  and  may  so  far  be  regarded  as  a  temporary  second  self  that  they
carry  with  them  the  related  power  of  judgment,  and  thus  are  capable
of  showing  a  logical  sequence  of  thought.  But  one  would  certainly  have
looked  for  a  fuller  discussion  of  these  phenomena.

Thought-transference,  on  the  other  hand,  he  says,  has  been  amply  proved
by  our  Society.  He  is  only  disposed  to  question  whether  it  needs  proof  at
all  ;  whether  on  his  dynamical  theory  it  is  not  a  matter  of  course,  and  its
absence  is  not  the  abnormality  which  needs  to  be  established.  The  view  is
not  one  which  we  in  England  are  prepared  to  accept  for  working  purposes  ;
but  the  book  contains  a  passage  which  is  of  such  practical  interest  to
us  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to  translate  it  nearly  in  full.  It  is  from  a  letter
written  to  the  author  by  Dr.  Wetterstrand,  of  Stockholm,  the  eminent
hypnotic  practitioner.

' '  I  have  recently  seen  a  striking  instance  of  mental  suggestion,  and  I  no
longer  have  any  doubt  in  the  existence  of  direct  thought-transference
from  one  human  being  to  another.  I  have  at  the  present  moment  under
treatment  a  lady  aged  33  who  has  slept  for  three  weeks  without  intermission.
By  fixed  thought  I  can  send  her  to  sleep  from  my  house  and  wake  her  up
again  ;  I  can  make  her  execute  a  prescribed  movement,  and  when  I  ask  her
why  she  did  so,  she  always  replies,  '  Because  you  will  it.'  I  have  made  her
get  up  in  a  state  of  sleep  from  her  own  room  and  come  to  mine,  and  when
asked  '  Why  did  you  get  up  ? '  she  answered,  '  Because  you  will  it.'  For  me
direct  thought-transference  is  now  a  proved  fact,  which  I  have  hitherto
doubted,  but  now  have  seen.  ...  If  you  know  a  good  somnambule,
let  him  sleep  for  a  week  on  end,  and  thought  -  transference  gradually
develops.  This  continued  sleep,  which  I  have  now  tried  four  times,
particularly  in  a  case  of  morphinomania,  which  I  have  discussed  in  the  Revue
de  I' Hypnotisme  for  Nov.,  1890  (Sxr  le  Traitement  de  la  Morphinomanie  par
I' Hypnotisrne),  entails  no  danger.  The  patients  eat  a7id  do  everything  as
well  in  the  sleeping  as  in  the  waking  state,  and  in  many  complaints  such
prolonged  sleep  has  an  extraordinary  effect  in  restoration  to  health.  I  have
recently  received  a  letter  from  my  friend  Dr.  Liebeault,  of  Naiicy,  in  which
lie  says  that  he  is  in  a  position  to  prove,  as  he  will  do  in  the  forthcoming
second  part  of  his  work  on  Sleep  and  Analogous  States,  that  there  is  a  '  force
neurique  d'honimes  a  hommes.'  How  is  this  thought-transference  to  be
explained  1  "

Dr.  Wetterstrand's  experiment  has  obvious  difficulties  ;  will  it  not  be
possible  to  get  over  these  and  try  it  ?

Walter  Leaf.


Per  lo  Spiritismo. 2a  Edizione,  Riveduta  ed  Ampliata. Prof.  Angelo
Brofferio. Milano  :  D.  Briola,  1893,  pp.  364.

Eusapia  Palladino,  the  peasant  woman  of  Naples,  is  having  a  deep  and
growing  influence  on  thought  in  the  Italian  peninsula. The  extraordinary


■Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


217


manifestations  which  she  produces  as  medium  have  been  vouched  for  by
numerous  observers  of  the  liighest  standing,  among  them  by  no  less  men  than
Lombroso  and  Schiaparelli,  who,  among  other  things,  have  seen  a  large  article
of  furniture  move  through  the  room  in  full  light  with(jut  the  contact  of  any
human  hand.  Lombroso  has  avowed  his  full  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  the
phenomena,  and  in  the  existence  of  an  occult  force  which  produces  them.
But  he  has  not  admitted  the  Spiritist  hypothesis,  and  goes  no  farther  than
a  psychic  force  exercised  by  the  unconscious  self  of  the  medium.

Professor  BrofFerio,  himself  converted  by  what  seems  to  have  been  a
careful  series  of  experiments  made  with  Eusapia,  accepts  heartily  the  full
theory  of  Spiritism  and  has  joined  issue  with  all  its  opponents.  But,  as  he  is
•convinced  of  the  facts  and  therefore  sure  that  they  will  in  the  end  have  to  be
admitted,  it  is  chiefly  with  the  interpretation  of  them  that  he  deals.  His
book  is  in  the  main  an  attack  upon  the  psychic  force  school,  in  which  he
recognises  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of  Spiritism.  He  has  in  fact  written  a
popular  counterpart  to  AksakofFs  Animismus  unci  Spiritismus  (see  Pro-
■ceedings,  XVII. ,  665).  In  liveliness  and  to  some  extent  in  persuasiveness,  he
has  the  advantage  of  AksakofF,  in  spite  of  a  somewhat  excessive  tendency
■to  repetition.  He  has,  too,  a  good  knowledge  of  the  literature  of  the  subject,
though  of  course  he  cannot  pretend  to  Aksakoff  s  exhaustive  acquaintance
with  the  evidence.  And  his  obvious  honesty  and  fairness  are  not  one  whit
behind  those  of  his  Russian  leader.  But  in  thoroughness  and  logical
■consistency  he  stands  rather  below  him  than  above.  He  has  more  of  the
•clever  advocate,  and  would  doubtless  have  more  chance  of  persuading  a
jury  ;  but  he  has  far  less  of  the  philosopher.

It  is  especially  in  his  treatment  of  the  unconscious  self  of  the  medium
(r 'mcoscienf.e  del  medio)  that  this  weakness  shows  itself.  The  Italian  phrase
is  neat  and  compact,  but  it  has  perhaps  some  tendency  to  mislead.  In
.spite  of  the  teaching  of  all  recent  inquiries,  BrofFerio  still  argues  that  the
phenomena  cannot  be  due  to  Vincoscieute  del  medio  because  they  contradict
the  conscious  wishes  and  convictions  of  the  medium,  or  involve  the  exercise
•of  a  reasoning  power  which  may  even  transcend  that  of  which  the  normal
medium  seems  cajsable.  Prof.  Brofferio  would  have  been  less  likely  to  fall
into  an  error  such  as  this  if  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  thinking  not  so
much  of  an  unconscious  as  of  a  subconscious  or  subliminal  self.  By  post-
hypnotic suggestion  we  have  no  difficulty  in  producing  automatic  writing
precisely  such  as  BrofFerio  would  have  to  be  the  work  of  the  dead  ;  what
reason  is  there  to  doubt  that  the  same  result  may  be  obtained  by  the
medium's  own  self-suggestion  l  Take,  too,  the  case  of  apports,  material
objects  brought  into  a  closed  room,  or  created  in  one,  where  they  did  not
exist  before.  BrofFerio  says  that  such  a  fact  implies  tlie  existence  of  a
knowledge  and  an  art  ;  a  knowledge  whether  of  a  fourth  dimension  of  space,
or  of  the  constitution  of  the  ether  by  which  it  can  be  formed  into  matter,  or
whatever  theory  we  may  prefer  ;  and  the  art  of  making  practical  use  of  .such
knowledge.  And,  he  says,  it  is  extravagant  to  suppose  that  so  exalted  a
skill  can  exist  in  the  mind  of  the  medium,  entirely  unknown  to  the  normal
consciousness.  Surely  all  that  we  have  learnt  of  automatism  entitles  us  to
say  that  such  a  supposition  is  by  no  means  absurd.  It  at  least  claims  to  be
left  an  open  question. Wliat  man  is  there  with  so  profound  a  knowledge  of


218


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


physiology  that  he  can  tell  exactly  how  a  blister  on  the  skin  is  produced  ?
Yet  we  have  learnt  that  the  subconsciousness  is  able  to  produce  it.  It
follows  that  in  each  of  us  there  exists  a  knowledge  of  the  processes  of  our
own  most  subtle  structure,  and  a  power  of  commanding  it,  of  which  our
normal  state  has  not  the  least  inkling.  Assuming  that,  on  the  facts  as
stated,  some  intelligence  has  a  similar  power  over  the  ether,  or  whatever  it  may
be,  why  should  not  that  intelligence  exist  within  the  brain  of  what  we  call
the  medium,  equally  unsuspected  in  its  capacities  and  processes  ?  Indeed,
BrofFerio's  arguments  would  lead  to  the  conclusion,  at  which  he  himself
seems  to  hint,  that  all  automatism  of  an  intelligent  nature  is  the  work  of
the  spirits  of  the  dead  ;  for  it  all  comes  from  some  intelligence  of  which  we
are  not  conscious  except  in  its  results.  He  is  in  fact  far  too  prone  to  argue
that  the  statement  of  the  intelligence  itself  that  it  pertains  to  some  dead
person  is  to  be  taken  as  a  presumption  of  its  own  truth  ;  a  line  of  reasoning
in  which  I  think  few  careful  thinkers  with  the  evidence  before  them  will
care  to  follow  him.  And  even  though  these  communications  do  generally
announce  themselves  as  coming  from  the  dead,  it  must  not  be  forgotten
that  they  do  not  always  do  so  ;  Professor  Broflerio  would  do  well  to  carefully
study  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Newnham's  planchette  in  Proceedings,  VIII.,  10.
Their  general  agreement  is  perfectly  intelligible  as  auto-suggestion  arising
from  the  conrmon  tendency  to  believe  in  the  return  of  the  departed.

But,  though  I  cannot  follow  BrofFerio  in  all  his  arguments,  I  willingly
acknowledge  that,  unlike  many  iSpiritists,  he  takes  eminently  rational
ground.  A  controversy  between  him  and  Lombroso  cannot  fail  to  do  much
to  attract  general  attention  to  the  subject  in  Italy,  whence  we  may  hope  for
large  contributions  alike  to  the  evidence  and  the  theory  of  supernormal
phenomena.  Walter  Leaf.


(1)  Experiences  de  Milan  ;  Notes  de  M.  Charles  Richet  ;  (2)  PMpport  de
la  Commission  reunie  a  Milan  pour  V  Etude  des  Phe'nomenes  Psycliiques.
Both  being  Articles  in  the  Annales  des  ISciences  Psychiques.
Troisieme  annee.  No.  1 — Janvier-Fevrier,  1893.  Paris:  Felix  Alcan.

■  During  last  autumn  a  Conuiiittee,  amongst  whom  were  M.  Schiaparelli,
Director  of  the  Astronomical  Observatory  at  Milan,  Professor  Gerosa,
Professor  BrofFerio,  and  M .  AksakolF,  held  a  series  of  sittings  at  Milan  with
a  "physical  medium,"  Mme.  Eusapia  Palladino,  of  that  town.  Professor
Lombroso  and  Professor  C.  Richet  were  present  at  some  of  the  meetings,
and  a  statement  by  the  latter  of  his  own  observations  is  published  together
with  the  formal  report  of  the  Committee  in  the  Jan. -Feb.  number  of
the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques.  The  phenomena  observed  were  of  a
kind  familiar  to  all  students  of  Spiritualistic  literature  :  tilting  and  levita-
tion  of  tables  and  other  movements  of  furniture  ;  alteration  of  the  weight
of  the  medium  in  the  balance  ;  raps ;  -And  the  appearance  and  contact  of  hands
in  the  dark,  or  in  semi-obscurity.  That  the  reports  now  under  discussion
deserve  more  respectful  consideration  than  the  innumerable  accounts  of
similar  manifestations  which  have  appeared  in  overwhelming  abundance


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


219


during  the  last  40  years,  is  due  not  so  much  to  the  fact  (though  that  is
entitled  to  some  weight)  that  the  medium  has  not  been  detected  in  fraud,  as
to  the  high  scientific  standing  of  the  witnesses,  and  the  obvious  care  and
freedijm  from  prepossession  with  which  their  observations  have  for  the  most
pai't  been  made  and  recorded.

The  most  striking  phenomena,  and  those  which  j^resented,  apparently,
the  best  opportunity  for  excluding  fi'aud,  since  they  took  place  in  full  light,
were  the  levitation  of  the  table,  and  the  alteration  of  the  medium's  weight  in
the  balance.  The  table  was  a  common  kitchen-table,  with  four  legs,  3  ft.  8  in.
long,  by  2  ft.  4  in.  wide,  and  weighing  about  17  lb.  Professor  Richet,
who  has  witnessed  the  levitation  of  tlie  table  on  several  occasions,  describes
it  as  follows  :  ' '  Eusapia,  seated  at  one  end  of  the  table,  gave  her  riglit  hand
to  one  of  the  investigators,  and  her  left  hand  to  another.  Usually  in  the
experiments  at  which  I  assisted,  M.  Schiaparelli  held  her  right  hand,  and  I
held  her  left.  The  other  persons  stood  more  or  less  aloof,  so  that  the  two
table  legs  at  the  end  farthest  from  Eusapia  could  be  seen,  and  the  two  at  her
end  of  the  table,  and  between  which  she  had  placed  her  legs,  knees  and  feet,
were  visible  all,  or  almost  all,  the  time.

"After  various  movements,  during  whicli  there  were  partial  liftings,  now  of
one  foot,  now  of  another,  the  table  was  suddenly  lifted  up,  all  four  feet  being
raised  slightly  from  the  ground,  from  about  3  to  5  inches.  But  in  several
instances  (when  there  was  little  or  no  light)  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  table
legs  were  lifted  off  the  ground  to  a  height  of  from  8  to  10  inches.  This  only
lasted  for  a  short  time,  difficult  to  estimate,  but  which  I  take  to  have  been
about  one  or  two  seconds.  Nevertheless,  on  one  occasion,  at  the  second
seance,  tlie  table  ajjpeared  to  me  to  be  raised  from  the  ground  for  about  3
seconds,  with  a  sort  of  swaying,  rocking  motion  in  the  air.  The  room  was
lighted  during  the  experiments."

The  light  in  some  cases  was  sufficiently  good  to  allow  of  photographs
being  taken.  A  copy  of  one  photograph,  appended  to  Professor  Richet's
article,  shows  the  table  suspended  horizontally  some  inches  above  the  floor,
whilst  Eusapia's  hands  were  held,  on  the  surface  of  the  table,  by  Professors
Richet  and  Lombroso  respectively,  the  former  having  his  other  hand  pressed
on  the  medium's  knees,  and  his  left  foot  in  contact  with  one  of  her  feet.
Two  other  members  of  the  Connnittee  were  watching  the  proceedings  at  a
little  distance  from  the  table.

In  discussing  the  possible  mechanical  explanations  of  tlie  movement,
Professor  Richet  adduces  strong  ai'guments  for  concluding  tliat  it  could  not
have  been  lifted  by  any  mechanism,  or  by  the  knees  or  hands  of  the  medium.
There  remains  the  hypothesis  that  the  movement  was  effected  by  the  feet — or
one  foot,  placed  under  one  of  the  legs,  and  aided  by  the  pressure  of  the
hands  on  the  top  of  the  table.  That  this  is  extremely  improbable  is
showTi  by  several  considerations.  One  or  other  of  the  experimenters  on
several  occasions  held  his  hand  on  tlie  medium's  knees  during  tlie  experiment,
but  no  movement  of  them  was  observed  ;  one  foot  of  the  sitter  on  either
side  was,  as  he  in  each  case  believed,  in  contact  with  one  foot  of  the  medium  ;
and  had  Eusapia's  foot  been  placed  under  a  leg  of  the  table,  the  table  could
only  have  been  raised  altogether  from  the  floor  by  the  exercise  of  consider-
able pressure  above  the  table  ;  and  whilst  no  indication  was  observed  of  any


220


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


such  pressure  being  exerted,  the  Committee  add  that  they  were  unable  to
credit  Eusapia  with  the  possession  of  the  muscuhir  force  required.  On  the  otlier
hand  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  levitation  of  tlie  table  appears  to  have  been
generally  preceded  by  a  puffing  out  {(jonfler)  of  Eusapia's  dress  until  it
touched  and  partially  covered  one  foot  of  the  table  ;  and  tliat  when  contact
of  the  dress  with  the  table  was  prevented  the  experiment  failed.  Further,
the  experiment  also  failed  when  Eusapia  and  the  experimenters  stood  upright ;
and  she  refused  to  try  the  experiment  sitting  at  one  of  the  longer  sides  of
the  table,  or  with  a  pasteboard  screen  placed  round  her  dress  so  as  absolutely
to  cut  oft"  all  possibility  of  contact  with  the  table.  Professor  Richet,  there-
fore, with  characteristic  scrupulousness  sums  up  : —

' '  The  hypotliesis  that  Eusapia  lifted  the  table  with  her  feet  is  not
absurd,  and  perhaps  however  improbable  such  an  hypothesis  may  seem  we
should  accept  it  sooner  than  the  absurdity  of  a  table  lifted  without  mechanical
force.  Indeed,  in  no  case  have  I  seen  the  four  feet  of  the  table  all  raised
from  the  ground,  when  both  Eusapia's  feet  were  so  placed  as  to  render
deception  impossible,  or  when  the  four  feet  of  the  table  could  be  seen
■distinctly  free  from  contact  with  Eusapia's  feet."

The  Committee,  it  should  be  added,  attempted  to  perform  tlie  feat  of
raising  the  table  from  tlie  ground  under  the  conditions  imposed  upon
Eusapia,  and  failed  to  do  so.

The  experiment  in  which  the  weight  of  the  medium  in  a  balance  presented
unaccountable  variations  exhibits,  unfortunately,  j^recisely  analogous  defects.
The  weight  on  several  occasions  was  observed  gradually  to  increase  or  diminish
— the  variation  in  one  instance  being  as  much  as  21  lb.  on  either  side  of  the
normal  weight. One  occasion  is  thus  described  by  Professor  Richet : —

"  EusajDia,  seated  on  a  chair,  was  placed  on  the  platform  of  a  weighing
machine  and  her  feet  were  strongly  bound  together  by  a  handkerchief.  One
of  us,  M.  Finzi,  was  told  oft'  to  read  the  weight.  M.  Schiaparelli  and  I
employed  ourselves  in  watcliing  closely  the  balance  and  its  surroundings,  so
as  to  be  sure  that  Eusapia  did  not  touch  with  hand  or  foot  the  ground  or
any  object  in  the  neighbourhood.

' '  Her  weight  with  the  chair  being  58  kilogrammes  (nearly  128  lb.  or  over
9  stone),  we  placed  (jn  the  scale  500  grammes  at  a  point  where  it  would  be
equivalent  to  50  kilogrammes,  and  then  the  rider  was  placed  at  the  figure  8.
Eusapia's  weight  was  thus  exactly  balanced.  Then,  though  Eusapia  did  not
jnove  her  cliair,  we  had,  in  order  to  maintain  equilibrium,  to  shift  the  rider,
first  to  6,  then  to  4,  then  tii  2,  and  finally  to  zero,  and  further,  to  obtain
exact  equilibrium  it  would  liave  been  necessary  to  take  away  a  little  of  the
weight  of  500  grammes  which  represented  50  kilogrammes.  It  will  be  seen,
therefore,  that  Eusapia  diminished  her  weight  in  this  experiment  by  at  least
8  kilogrammes  (17^  lb.).  We  are  certain  that  she  threw  nothing  away  (if
she  had  thrown  anything  away  she  would  have  had  to  recover  it  in  order  to
restore  her  original  weight),  and  equally  certain  that  she  derived  no  supjiort
from  any  neighbouring  object.  And  finally,  the  movement  was  sufficiently
slow — it  occupied  from  12  to  20  seconds — to  make  it  impossible  to  attribute
it  to  a  jump  or  quick  movement  of  any  kind.  Nevertheless,  the  observation
did  not  ajjpear  to  us  conclusive.  In  Inief,  in  the  ordinary  weighing  machine,
constructed  on  the  principle  of  the  steelyard,  tlie  weight  varies  (although  it


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


221


is  true  within  very  narrow  limits)  with  the  position  of  the  centre  of  gravity.
By  changing  his  position  on  the  platform,  especially  when,  as  was  the  case
here,  the  machine  is  not  a  very  good  one,  the  person  who  is  being  weighed
can  appreciably  vary  his  weight.

"  We  devised  accordingly  a  weighing  machine  of  a  different  kind,  in  which
the  platform  was  suspended  by  the  four  corners.  In  this  machine  the
weight  would  show  no  variation,  whatever  the  position  of  the  sitter  on  the
platform.  An  automatic  arrangement  devised  by  M.  Finzi  registered  the
movements  of  the  lever.  In  the  fifth  sitting  we  obtained  a  result  which  was
certainly  remarkable,  seeing  that  it  occurred  under  exceptionally  good
conditions.  M.  Schiaparelli  and  I  were  watching  the  machine  botli  above
and  below,  so  as  to  be  sure  that  Eusapia  did  not  touch  either  the  gi'ound,  or
the  support  from  which  the  platform  was  hung.

"Under  these  conditions,  there  was  certainly  a  slight  upward  movement  of
the  platform,  but  it  was  very  trifling  ;  and  although  the  automatic  register
indicated  a  marked  diminution  in  the  weight,  lasting  for  about  15  seconds,  I
cannot  say  for  certain  that  this  movement  of  the  register  did  not  occur  at  the
moment  when  Eusaj^ia,  in  order  to  gain  more  strength,  asked  one  of  the
investigators  to  give  her  his  hand,  whicli  slie  held  for  a  short  time  before
relinquishing."

The  Committee,  however,  point  out  that  this  experiment  succeeded  only
when  part  of  Eusapia's  dress  touched  the  floor,  and  that  when  precautions
were  taken  to  prevent  this  contact  no  appreciable  effect  was  produced
on  the  balance.  On  one  occasion,  indeed,  when  tlie  balance  was  placed
at  a  distance  of  more  than  10  inches  behind  Eusapia,  and  lier  hands,  feet,  and
knees  were  held,  a  rider,  apparently  in  response  to  an  energetic  movement
on  the  part  of  Eusapia,  oscillated  violently  on  the  beam,  as  if  some  weight
had  been  thrown  into  the  scale.  But  this  effect  was  never  repeated.  The
observed  alteration  in  the  weight  of  the  medium,  was,  of  course,  far  too
great  to  be  accovuited  for  by  the  mere  contact  of  part  of  her  dress  with  the
floor  ;  but  so  long  as  this  and  other  sources  of  error  cannot  be  eliminated,
the  evidence  for  some  new  physical  force  must,  as  Professor  Richet  points
out,  be  considered  incomplete.

Other  phenomena — tilting  of  the  table  on  two  legs,  lateral  movements  of
the  table  when  the  hands  of  the  medium  were  not  in  direct  contact  with  it,
movement  of  chairs,  raps  and  noises  of  various  kinds — occurred  also  in  the
light  ;  but  in  no  instance  were  the  conditions  more  favourable  or  the  evidence
more  complete  than  in  the  experiments  above  described.

Manifestations  of  various  kinds  occurred  when  tlie  room  was  darkened  or
partially  darkened,  each  person  holding  the  liand  of  his  neighbour,  so  as  to
form  a  chain. But  here,  again  to  quote  Professor  Ricliet : —

' '  During  the  experiments  Eusapia  generally  has  the  right  and  tlie  left  hand
held  differently.  On  one  side  her  whole  hand  is  firmly  held  ;  on  tlie  other
side,  instead  of  having  her  hand  held  by  the  person  next  her,  she  merely
places  her  hand  on  his,  but  touches  his  hand  with  all  five  fingers,  so  that  he  *
can  feel  quite  distinctly  whether  it  is  the  right  or  the  left  hand  with  which
he  is  in  contact.

' '  This  is  what  follows  :  At  the  moment  when  the  manifestations  are  about
to  begin,  the  hand  which  is  not  being  held,  but  which  is  lightly  placed  on


222


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


the  hand  of  the  person  on  that  side  (for  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  will
suppose  that  it  is  Eusapia's  right  hand,  thougli  it  is  in  fact  sometimes  tlae
right,  sometimes  the  left),  the  right  hand,  then,  becomes  very  unsteady,
and  begins  to  move  about  so  rapidly  that  it  is  impossible  to  follow  its  move-
ments ;  it  shifts  about  every  moment,  and  f(jr  the  mere  fraction  of  a  second
it  is  not  felt  at  all  ;  then  it  is  felt  again,  and  one  could  swear  it  is  still  the
right  hand."

Records  of  jshenomena  occurring  under  such  conditions  can  hardly  be
thought  to  add  much  strength  to  the  evidence  already  obtained,  even  though
they  included  such  feats  as  the  lifting  of  Eusapia  and  her  chair  bodily  on  to
the  table  ;  the  touching  of  those  present  with  a  hand  which  in  some  cases
appeared  larger  than  the  hand  of  tlie  medium  ;  the  appearance  of  two  hands
against  the  faintly  luminous  background  of  the  window  ;  the  discovery  of
finger  marks  on  paper  previously  prepared  with  lamp-black,  though  the  hands
of  the  medium  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  were  found  to  be  perfectly  clean  ;
and  the  removal  of  M.  Scliiaparelli's  spectacles,  performed  in  complete
darkness,  and  with  such  care  that  he  was  unconscious  of  his  loss  until  the
operation  was  actually  completed.

In  a  further  set  of  experiments,  however,  it  seems  clear  that  the  effects
produced  were  beyond  the  unaided  resources  of  the  medium.  A  portion  of
the  room  was  curtained  off  from  the  rest,  and  the  medium  placed  in  the
aperture  of  the  curtains,  which  were  joined  a  little  above  her  head.  The  space
curtained  off  was  left  in  absolute  darkness,  but  the  rest  of  the  room  was
dimly  lighted  by  a  lantern  with  red  glass  sides,  placed  on  tlie  table  round
which  sat  the  medium  and  the  experimenters.  On  one  occasion  Professor
Richet  liimself  took  up  his  station  in  the  darkened  part  of  the  room,  behind
the  curtains,  his  chair  placed  back  to  back  with  tliat  on  which  Eusapia  sat.
The  medium's  hands  were  held  on  either  side  by  M.  Schiaparelli  and  M.
Finzi,  and  the  latter's  stocking-clad  foot  was  placed  between  the  two  booted
feet  of  Eusapia.  Under  these  circumstances  M.  Richet  was  touched  three
times  on  various  parts  of  tlie  body. Then,  he  writes,

"  At  one  moment  she  became  rigid  and  said,  '  Hold  me  tight,  hold  me  tight,'
upon  which  M.  Schiaparelli  on  one  side  and  M.  Finzi  on  tlie  other  held  her
with  all  their  strength.  M.  Gerosa  took  notes.  I  said  to  M.  Finzi:  'Are
you  holding  her  left  hand?'  He  replied,  'Yes.'  I  then  asked  M.
Schiaparelli,  '  Are  you  holding  her  right  hand  ? '  He  replied,  '  Yes.'  Then
I  again  asked  M.  Finzi,  'Are  you  holding  both  her  feet?'  He  replied,
'  Yes.'  Then  on  turning  my  head  slightly  to  the  left  I  saw  something  was
preparing,  by  the  fact  that  the  curtain  was  bulging  and  seemed  to  be
approaching  Eusapia,  as  though  to  make  the  shadow  deeper.  Then  I  was
touched  on  the  right  shoulder  by  a  hand  which  seemed  to  me  to  be  a  right
hand  (supposing  it  belonged  to  the  medium).  Almost  at  the  same  instant,
after  Eusapia  had  asked  ine  to  put  my  head  near  hers,  I  was  touched  by  two
fingers,  which  pulled  with  some  force,  but  without  hurting  me,  the  hair  on
the  nape  of  my  neck  ;  I  was  certain  it  was  a  hand  which  touched  my  shoulder
and  neck.  At  the  same  time  M.  Finzi  was  touched  on  the  ear,  on  the  fore-
head and  on  the  temples  by  fingers  which  were  behind  the  curtain,  while  the
hand  which  touched  me  was  free  from  the  curtain.  M.  Finzi  was  touched
three  times. The  other  witnesses  observed  no  abnormal  movement  on


■Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


223


Eusapia's  part.  I,  who  was  behind  her,  felt  nothing  but  a  sort  of  general
convulsion,  and  that  at  the  moment  when  we  were  watching  most  attentively,
and  when  M.  Scliiaparelli  on  one  side  and  M.  Finzi  on  the  other  held
Eu.sapia's  hands  firmly,  and  could  distinguish  which  hand  they  held,  right  or
left.  This  experiment  seemed  thoroughly  satisfactory,  and  I  hardly
see  how  one  could  take  exception  to  it.  M.  Scliiaparelli  did  not  let  go
Eusapia's  right  hand  ;  on  the  other  side  M.  Finzi  cxtnld  not  let  go  her  left
hand  ;  for  he  had  put  his  lingers  in  the  copper  wire  which  surrounded  the
fingers  of  Eusapia's  left  hand.  Even  supposing,  what  is  difficult  to  suppose,
that  M.  Scliiaparelli  had  let  go  Eusapia's  hand,  it  is  almost  impossible  that
that  hand,  even  if  free,  could  reach  and  touch  M.  Finzi,  after  passing  behind
the  curtain — for  I  had  my  back  almost  touching  Eusapia's,  and  the  compli-
cated movement  which  she  would  have  had  to  make  to  carry  her  hand  behind
was  rendered  almost,  or  rather,  quite  impossible.  On  the  other  hand  it
seemed  impossible  for  Eusapia  to  stretch  out  her  hand  in  front,  for  the
shadow  was  not  deep  enough  to  prevent  those  present  from  seeing  this  move-
ment had  it  been  attempted,  and  besides  M.  Finzi  was  touched  on  the  face,
through  the  thickness  of  the  curtain.  This  is  the  experiment  which  seems  to
me  to  offer  the  strongest  proof  of  the  materialisation  of  a  hand.  For  unless
we  suppose — which  is  of  course  admissible — a  serious  experimental  error  on
the  part  of  M.  Scliiaparelli,  M.  Finzi  or  myself,  one  cannot  see  how  it  was
possible  for  Eusapia's  hand  to  touch  us  under  the  conditions  described."

On  other  occasions,  with  all  the  experimenters  in  front  of  the  curtain,
the  medium  being  seated  as  before,  in  the  opening  of  the  curtains,  and  her
hands  and  feet  held,  hands  were  felt  by  each  person  in  turn  through  the
opening  of  the  curtains  just  above  the  medium's  head,  and  afterwards  a  hand
was  seen  by  all  simultaneously  in  the  same  place.  Bluish  lights  were  also
seen  in  the  same  place,  and  a  pencil  was  taken  from  the  hand  of  one  of  the
Committee,  and  afterwards  thrown  back  through  the  opening.  To  quote  the
Committee's  report  : —

"  It  is  impossible  to  count  the  number  of  times  that  that  hand  appeared
and  was  touched  by  one  of  us  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  doubt  was  no  longer
possible  ;  it  was  indeed  a  living,  human  hand  which  we  saw  and  touched,
while  at  the  same  time  the  bust  and  arms  of  the  medium  remained  visible
and  her  hands  were  held  by  those  on  either  side  of  her."

Finally,  some  wet  clay  which  had  been  placed  in  the  dark  alcove  was
found  at  the  termination  of  the  sitting  to  bear  the  imprint  of  a  hand.

The  whole  series  of  experiments,  it  should  be  noted,  took  place  in  the
apartments  of  Dr.  Finzi.  The  Committee  do  not  apparently  hold  tlie
question  of  a  possible  accomplice  entering  the  room  after  the  commencement
of  the  sitting  as  worth  considering,  for  they  say  nothing  about  the  existence
of  a  door  in  the  darkened  alcove,  or  the  precautions  taken  to  keep  it  closed.
From  Professor  Richet,  however,  we  learn  that  there  was  such  a  door,  and
that  it  was  locked  and  sealed  during  the  progress  of  the  experiments.  He
adds  :  "  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  another  person  could  have  come  into  the
room,  which  is  small,  and  was  completely  shut  up.  It  was  in  M.  Finzi's  apart-
ments, we  were  making  no  noise,  we  could  light  up  the  room  instantly,
indeed  there  was  light  enough,  as  it  was,  to  see  its  general  appearance,
&c.,  &c."


224


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement-


It  will  be  seen  from  this  brief  survey  that  the  experiments  presented  many
suspicious  features.  The  results  in  every  case  can  be  paralleled  more  or  less
exactly  by  results  produced  through  the  agency  of  persons  who  have  been
detected  in  fravid.  Moreover,  there  were  many  circumstances  which  either
directly  suggested  fraud,  or  offered  facilities  for  its  intervention.  Such  are  the
darkness  that  was  found  essential  for  so  many  of  the  experiments  ;  the
movements  of  Eusapia's  dress  in  the  table  a;id  balance  experiments  ;  the
twitchings  and  convulsive  movements  of  her  hands  and  her  whole  body  ;
her  groanings  wlien  exciting  phenomena  were  taking  place  in  tlie  dark  ;  her
refusal  on  more  than  one  occasion  to  accept  conditions  wchih  would  have
rendered  fraud  more  ditticult,  and  the  failure  of  the  experiment  when  any
such  conditions  were  accepted  and  imposed.  In  Professor  Richet's  words  :
"The  results  degenerated  as  the  conditions  were  made  more  stringent."

In  short,  seeing  that  Eusapia  had  practically  an  unlimited  right  of  veto,
direct  or  indirect,  upon  the  conditions,  it  is  not  accurate  to  speak  of  the  re-
sults recorded  by  tlie  Committee  as  experimental.  The  Committee  did  not  and
could  not  experiment ;  they  were  permitted  to  observe  certain  phenomena,
produced  in  presence  of  the  medium  under  conditions  chosen  by  herself — ■
conditions  which  the  Committee  and  M.  Richet  (as  they  are  themselves
careful  to  jDoint  out)  were  unable  to  vary  in  any  material  point.  That  even
so  the  efifects  produced  were  such  as  can  only  be  ascribed  to  trickery  by  means
of  several  violent  and  improbable  hypotheses  will  readily  be  admitted.  But
in  all  cases,  it  will  be  observed,  the  question  between  fraud  and  a  new  physical
force  was  only  a  quantitative  one.  It  was  a  question  in  each  case  whether
Eusapia  was  strong  enough,  or  quick  enough,  or  clever  enough,  to  have  pro-
duced the  whole  of  the  effect  observed.  In  no  case  was  an  effect  produced
which  was  measurably  and  indisjjutably  beyond  the  power  of  any  human
being  in  the  circumstances  de.scribed.  That  after  saying  so  much,  we  should
admit  that  the  things  done  remain  inexjjlicable  is  the  strongest  tribute  that
can  be  paid  to  the  skill  and  patience  of  the  investigators.  For  in  this
admission  is  implied  that  we  have  no  ground  here  for  assuming — what
experience  has  shown  that  we  are  justified  in  assuming  in  most  records
of  similar  jjlienomena — serious  errors  of  observation  and  description  on  the
part  of  the  investigators.  Two  precautions,  indeed,  it  may  be  suggested,
would  not  be  superfluous  on  any  future  occasion  :  First,  that  the  person  of
Eusapia  should  be  searclied  immediately  before  each  sitting  ;  and  second,
that  when  the  room  is  darkened  tlie  doors  and  windows  should  be  guarded
from  the  outside.  If  the  same  phenomena  could  be  reproduced  under
these  conditions,  the  difficulty  of  attributing  the  results  to  fraud  would  be
greatly  increased  ;  if  compliance  with  the  conditions  were  refused,  or  if  the
phenomena  ceased  with  their  adoption,  the  argument  for  a  new  force  would
be  correspondingly  weakened.

The  Committee,  it  should  be  added,  exjjress  their  conviction  that  the
results  obtained  in  tlie  light,  and  many  of  those  obtained  in  darkness,  could
not  have  been  produced  by  trickery  of  any  kind.  M.  Richet,  who  does  not
sign  the  Committee's  report,  states  his  own  conclusions  more  cautiously  as
follows  :  ' '  Absurd  and  unsatisfactory  though  they  were,  it  seems  to  nie  very
difficult  to  attrilnite  the  phenomena  produced  to  deception,  consciovis  or
unconscious,  or  to  a  series  of  deceptions. Nevertheless  conclusive  and  indis-


SiippleiiieiU.I


Nutice><  of  Books.


225


putable  proof  that  there  was  no  fraud  on  Eusapia's  part,  or  illusion  on  our
part,  is  wanting  : — we  must,  therefore,  renew  our  eft'orts  to  obtain  sucli

proof."  F.  PODMORE.


Spiritismo  e  Telepatla.  Note  critiche  e  osservazione  del  Pkofessore
AuGUSTO  Tamburini,  Rivista  Sperimentale  di  Freniatria  e  di
Medicina  Legale. A' ol.  XVIII. Fasc.  II. August,  1892.

Professor  Tamburini,  at  the  beginning  of  Iiis  interesting  article,  remarks
upon  the  growing  attention  paid  in  Italy  to  the  examination  of  tlu)se
phenomena  whicli  may  be  described  generally  as  8i_)iritualistic  and  Tele-
pathic. Members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Researcli  will  welcome  all
accessions  to  the  company  of  unprejudiced  inquirers  into  these  i^henomena  ;
more  particularly  when  distinguished  scientific  attainments  and  liigh  position
in  the  medical  profession  give  special  weight  to  the  opinions  which  those
inquirers  form.  Professor  Lombroso  has  long  l)een  known  as  a  bold  and
ingenious  pioneer  in  many  branches  of  Psychical  Research  ;  and  several
other  distinguished  men  of  science  in  Italy  have  turned  their  energies  in
similar  directions.  Professor  Tamburini  is  a  noteworthy  addition  to  the
number.

But  besides  the  special  value  which  attaches  to  the  attitude  of  men  of
scientific  distinction,  there  are  two  general  reasons  why  the  extension  of
psychical  inquiries  in  Italy  seems  to  be  of  s^Jecial  importance.  In  the  first
place,  there  is  some  reason  to  think  that,  whether  from  national  tempera-
ment, climate,  or  otlier  cause,  the  Southern  branches  of  the  Latin  race
afford  a  specially  good  field  for  observation  of  psychical  phenomena  ;  and  in
the  second  place,  religious  orthodoxy  and  scientific  orthodoxy  are  perhaps
more  intolerant  in  Italy  than  in  most  other  European  countries.  For  this
reason  more  courage  is  required  for  embai'king  upon  a  course  of  inquiry
which  is  obnoxious  to  the  Church,  and  is  regarded  with  some  suspicion  by
men  of  the  oi'thodox  scientific  school  ;  and  the  difficulty  to  be  overcome
measures  the  strength  of  the  interest  felt  by  those  who  overcome  it.

The  object  of  Professor  Tamburini's  article  is  mainly  to  give  information  as
to  the  present  position  of  the  inquiries  into  some  of  the  less  obscure  psychical
problems,  in  view  of  recent  publications  on  the  subject.  Besides  giving  a
general  view  of  the  questions  of  which  he  treats,  he  contributes  two  cases  of
telepathy  whicli  have  come  under  liis  own  notice.  To  these  we  .shall  return
later,  after  giving  some  general  account  of  the  views  expressed  in  the
article.

The  article  is  divided  into  two  parts — the  first  dealing  with  Spiritualism,
the  second  with  Telepatliy.
1.  Spiritualism.

The  writer  attaches  great  importance  to  the  close  examination  of  the
condition,  mental  and  physical,  of  mediums.  He  calls  attention  to  the
conclusion  of  .Janet  that  the  mediums  belong  to  the  neuropathic  class,  and
are  generally  characterised  by  hj'steria,  somnambulism,  sen.sibility  to
hypnotism,  or,  in  the  most  marked  cases,  hysteria  combined  with
hemianiesthesia. Professor  Tamburini  regrets  that  more  care  has  not  been


226


Notices  of  Books.


iSupplenient.


given  to  observiitioiis  upon  these  points  ;  and  from  the  medictal  point  of  view
no  doubt  such  observations  may  be  of  the  greatest  value.  The  investigators
of  tlae  phenomena  produced  cannot  afford  to  neglect  tlie  study  of  any  of  the
conditions  under  wliich  they  take  place  ;  but  at  the  same  time  a  doubt
may  be  jtermitted  as  to  whether,  with  some  investigators,  pathological
problems  have  not  to  some  extent  obscured  the  question  which  for  the
present  is  more  important — namely,  the  question  of  what  phenomena  are
produced.

Witli  regard  to  the  phenomena,  Professor  Taml)urini  duals  first  witli
Table  Tilting  and  Automatic  Writing.  He  accepts  the  verdict  of  all
competent  observers  that  imposture  is  inadmissible  as  a  general  explanation,
and  endorses  the  view  that  the  muscular  action  whicli  causes  the  movements
of  the  table  or  the  jjeucil  is  produced  by  the  subliminal  consciousness.  The
subdivision  of  personality,  and  the  intelligent  action  of  the  subliminal
consciousness  are  fully  accepted  l)y  tlie  writer.  He  explains  the  definite  and
varying  cliaracters  cif  the  supijosed  authors  of  the  messages  as  the  result  of
self-suggestion.  As  by  hypnotic  or  post-hypnotic  suggestion  a  subject  nmy
be  made  Ui  think  he  is  Napoleon  or  a  chimney-sweep,  so  by  self-suggestion
tliu  sul)liminal  consciousness  may  be  made  to  tliink  that  it  is  X  or  Y,  and  to
tilt  or  rap  messages  in  tlie  character  of  X  or  Y.

Professor  Taml)uriui,  as  we  liave  .said,  is  mainly  interested  in  the
modifications  nf  normal  mental  action  in  connection  witli  whicli  spirit
rapping  and  autumatic  writing  are  produced,  and  does  not  discuss  the
content  of  the  messages  so  given.  This  is  tlie  p(-)int  of  tlie  investigation
which  has  had  tlie  greatest  interest  for  most  English  investigators.  The
question  wliich  they  ask  is  whether  the  messages  are  such  as  to  show
knowledge  on  tlie  part  of  the  medium  whicli  could  not  have  been  acquired
by  the  ordinary  channels  of  communication  ;  and  furtlier,  if  it  can  be  estab-
lished that  such  information  has  reached  the  medium  by  means  not  hitherto
recognised  as  normal,  viz.,  without  the  intervention  of  the  senses,  is  there
any  evidence  tliat  in  any  cases  it  is  derived  from  intelligences  other  than
embodied  human  intelligences  ?  Upon  the  first  of  these  questions  Professor
Tamburini  touches  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  later  part  of  the  article,  which
deals  with  telepathy  ;  but  he  does  not  extend  his  open-mindedness  so  far  as
to  admit  the  possibility  of  the  Spiritualistic  hypothesis.  He  commends
openness  of  mind  for  the  reception  of  all  evidence,  and  (Quotes  with  approval
Profes.sor  Lodge's  statement  that  "it  is  no  proof  of  wisdom  to  refuse  to
examine  certain  phenomena  because  we  think  it  certain  that  they  are  im-
possible, as  if  our  knowledge  of  the  universe  were  already  complete."  He
maintains  the  attitude  of  mind  so  indicated  with  the  greatest  consistency  and
frankness — but  only  up  to  a  certain  jioint.  He  has  notliing  but  contempt  for
those  who  acce^Jt  a  iSpiritualistic  exijlanation  of  tlie  phenomena  in  question
— not  because  he  considers  such  an  explanation  disproved,  but  because  he
thinks  it  so  impossible  and  retrograde  as  not  to  require  consideration.

With  regard  to  "Physical  Phenomena"  his  attitude  is  somewhat  more
cautious  than  that  of  Professor  Lombroso.  He  does  not  consider  that  the
evidence  ol)tained  l)y  Crookes,  or  by  the  Neapolitan  experiments  with
pAisapia  Palladino  as  medium — experiments  in  which  he  liimself  took  a  part —
gives  conclusive  proof  of  tlie  production  or  transmission  of  force  in  modes


Supplement.]  NuticCS  of  BooIm.  227

other  than  thoae  known  to  science.  At  the  same  time  he  fully  admits  that
there  is  strong  evidence  ptiinting  in  this  direction  ;  and  is  prepared  to  grant
the  possibility,  or  even  the  probability,  of  Lonibroso's  view  that  cerebral
movements  may  be  transmitted  by  means  of  the  "  ether  "  to  surrounding
objects,  and  act  upon  them  as  force,  without  the  intervention  of  muscular
action.

2.  Telepathy.  .  ■

Tliu  second  part  of  the  article  deals  with  Telepathy.  Professor
Tamburini's  verdict  with  regard  to  experimental  telepathy  is  "not  jjroven."
He  then  turns  to  that  part  of  the  evidence  which  depends  upon  observation,
not  experiment  ;  and,  after  paying  tribute  to  tlie  care,  perseverance,  and
scientific  rigour  witli  which  the  telepathic  cases  of  Plumtcmns  of  the  Llrimj
have  been  collected  and  investigated,  he  proceeds  to  classify  and  analyse
them,  and  finally  to  give  his  conclusion  as  to  the  infeiences  to  be  drawn  from
this  mass  of  evidence.  There  are  three  possible  explanations,  he  says,  of  the
large  number  of  well-attested  instances  of  coincidental  hallucinations.
(1)  They  may  be  fortuitous  coincidences  ;  (2)  they  may  be  illusions  of
inemory,  by  which,  after  the  event  is  known,  the  subject  believes  himself  to
have  had  impressions  which  he  did  not  really  have  ;  or  (3)  they  may  be
really  telepathic.  With  regard  to  (1)  he  does  mjt  follow  the  authors  of
Phantasms  of  the  Living  into  their  calculations  of  probability,  but  he
concludes,  on  general  grounds,  that  fortuitous  coincidence  is  extremely
improbable.  With  regard  to  (2)  he  justly  points  out  that  this  does  not
apply  to  the  considerable  number  of  cases  in  which  there  is  evidence  that  the
impression  was  recorded  by  the  percipient,  or  communicated  to  others  before
the  coincident  event  was  known.  There  remains,  therefore,  only  the  third
alternative  ;  but  upon  this  Professor  Tamburini's  final  conclusion  is  cautious.
He  considers  that  "  all  the  facts  collected,  however  conscientiously  weighed
and  checked,  cannot  be  held  sufficient  at  present  to  constitute  a  scientific
and  unshaken  proof  of  telejjathic  phenomena.  They  seem  only  so  far  serious
and  worthy  of  considei'ation  as  to  propound  a  iJi'oblem,  to  the  solution  of
which  further  research  and  observation  can  alone  contribute."^

It  is  of  great  interest  to  know  the  deliberate  judgment  of  a  highly
competent  person  upon  the  evidence  collected  thus  far.  Some  members  of  tlie
Society  for  Psychical  Research  will  no  doubt  think  that  Professor  Tamburini
inclines  too  nmch  to  the  side  of  caution  ;  but  this,  if  a  fault,  is  a  fault  on  the
right  side.  And  the  result  may  at  least  be  welcomed — that  Professor
Tamburini  has  himself  set  about  the  collection  of  further  evidence,  and

'  Professor  Tamburini  suggests  that  "  telresthetic  "  would  be  a  more  appropriate
word  than  "  telepatliic,"  on  the  ground  that  thoiight-transference  is  compatible  with
perfect  health,  and  that  telepathic"  suggests  that  the  percipient's  condition  is
"pathological,"  or  in  other  words  unhealthy.  Without  discussing  the  correctness  of
this  limited  use  of  the  word  pathological,  we  may  reply  that  telepathy  was  not
intended  to  convey,  and  need  not  convey,  any  suggestion  of  morbidity.  It  means  no
more  than  "action  at  a  distance,"  or  more  strictly,  "the  being  acted  upon  at  a
distance,"  It  is  to  be  preferred  to  "  telaesthesia "  as  the  more  general  word;  for
it  includes  purely  mental  impressions  as  well  as  sensory  impressions ;  while
"  teleesthesia "  Would  properly  exclude  the  former,  whieli,  as  Professor  Tambiu-ini
recognises,  constitute  an  important  class.


22S


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


invites  others  to  do  so  also.  Two  cases  ai-e  presented  in  the  article  under
review  ;  and  in  the  succeeding  number  of  the  llirista  di  Fraiiatr'm
(Vol.  XIX.,  Fasc.  I.)  Dr.  Giacchi  coinnuniicates  three  cases  and  Dr.
Bracaloni  another.

The  two  cases  which  Professor  Taniburini  gives  are  as  follows  : —
1.  Virginia  Guicciardi,  wife  of  the  head  doctor  of  the  Lunatic  Asylum  at
Reggio,  had  a  veridical  dream  on  the  night  of  April  25th-26th,  1892.  The
dream  was  told  to  her  husband  in  the  morning,  before  the  event  to  which  it
related  was  known.  The  story  is  best  told  in  the  words  of  the  jjerciinent  and
her  husband.  It  is  not  stated  when  these  accounts  were  written,  but  as  the
number  of  the  periodical  in  which  they  appear  was  puljlished  in  August,
1892,  it  cannot  have  been  long  after  the  event.

Professor  Tamburini  states  that  the  Signora  Guicciardi  is  cultivated  and
studious,  a  writer  of  distinction,  of  ([uick  and  impressionable  temperament,
but  not  generally  subject  to  terrifying  dreams.  She  has  never  had  any  other
remarka1)le  experiences  of  a  telepathic  character  ;  but  she  has  often  observed
herself  thinking  of  a  person,  or  having  his  image  jjresent  in  her  mind,
shortly  before  his  unexpected  arrival.

Account  hij  the  S'ujnom  Guicciardi.

"  ( )ii  the  evening  of  Ajiril  25th  last  T  went  to  sleep  quietly,  without
thinking  (jf  my  sick  friend  [Sign<jrina  (!.,  of  Modena].  About  halfway  through
the  night  I  woke  ujj  with  a  start,  thinking  I  heard  )uy  name  called.  Before
[  had  become  quite  clearly  conscious  I  got  out  of  bed,  and,  as  though  afraid
of  an  unknown  danger,  I  ran  into  the  next  room,  where  my  husband
was  sleeping.  When  he  had  assured  me  that  neither  he  nor  anyone
else  could  have  called  me,  I  immediately  went  back  to  bed,  was  quite  calm,
and  soon  went  to  sleep  again.  Later,  I  had  the  dream,  in  vvhich  I  saw  my
friend  on  the  point  of  death, — a  dream  which  was  extremely  clear  in  detail,
and  which  produced  so  strong  an  impression  <jn  lue  as  t(j  engrave  itself
indelibly  on  my  memory.  When  I  woke  up  it  might  be  half-past  six
or  seven  in  the  morning — judging  by  the  light  which  penetrated  the  closed
windows,  for  I  did  not  look  at  the  clock.  I  remained  for  a  time  in  an
uncomfoi  table,  half-awake  condition,  and  fixed  my  mind  upon  the  scenes  of
my  sad  dream.  1  seemed  to  see  my  young  friend  stretched  out  ujjon  her  bed,
having  on  her  face  the  terrible  expression  of  the  death-struggle.  Her  sisters
were  standing  round  her,  and  I  looked  at  her  from  a  little  way  off.  Suddenly
I  could  not  bear  the  sight  of  her  eyes,  of  which  the  white  alone  was  visible,
and  I  retired  to  the  window,  and  leant  my  forehead  against  the  panes.  Then
I  heard  them  say  in  low  voices,  'She  is  going;  she  is  dying  now.'  Mean-
while my  heart  beat  as  though  it  would  break.

"  In  tlie  morning,  when  I  told  my  husband  these  experiences,  I  was  more
imjjressed  by  the  terror  I  had  felt  than  by  the  belief  that  the  dream  might
prove  true.  In  fact,  the  news  conveyed  by  the  telegram  which  my  husband
gave  me  after  I  had  told  him  about  the  dream  was  unexjjected.

' '  That  same  day  at  Modena  I  received  from  the  family  the  curious  and
sad  intelligence  which  is  connected  with  my  dream.

"Virginia  Guicoiaudi."


Siippleineut.)


Notices  of  Boohs.


229


Accuiuit  bij  Dr.  Guiccianli.

"  Un  the  nioriiing  of  April  26th  last  I  went  into  iny  wife's  bedroom  jibtmt
eight,  and  found  her  awake  and  rather  disturbed  in  mind.  She  immediately
began  to  tell  nie  the  dream  which  she  had  had  about  two  licjurs  before  (with
all  the  jjarticulars,  as  I  remember  precisely,  which  are  related  above).
While  she  was  speaking  the  maid  came  in,  and,  turning  to  me,  said,
'  C  (a  man  wlio  works  for  the  asylum)  '  is  below,  and  wishes  to  speak  to  you.'
I  rei^lied  that  I  would  come  down  directly,  and  went  on  listening  to  the
story,  which  my  wife,  who  was  still  vividly  imjjressed,  resumed  as  soon  as
the  maid  had  gone  away.  I  laughed  a  little,  and  when  she  had  finished
advised  her  not  to  think  of  it.  We  talked  a  little  of  other  things,  and  then
I  left  her.

"On  the  ground  floor  I  found  C,  who  gave  me  a  telegram,  which  the
telegraphist  of  tlie  asylum  had  given  to  liim,  with  directions  to  deliver  it
into  my  hands  alone.  Before  that  he  had  not  told  the  luaid,  or  anyone  else
in  my  house,  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  j^rivate  telegram.  The  day  before
— and  I  remember  this  very  well — there  had  been  no  talk  in  the  family
about  the  lady  who  was  ill.  We  were  certainly  far  from  imagining  that  her
end  would  be  so  sudden  ;  for  the  day  before  that  we  had  received  a  postcard
from  the  sister  of  the  sick  lady,  telling  us  that  there  was  a  comparative  but
distinct  improvement  in  her  condition.

"DoTT.  Giuseppe  Guicciaiidi."

The  story  was  told  to  Professor  Tamburini  on  the  very  morning  on  which
tlie  events  took  place,  both  by  Dr.  Guicciardi  and  l)y  his  wife,  before  the
latter  went  to  Modena  to  see  the  family  of  Signorina  G.  She  went  to  Modena
the  same  day,  and  learnt  that  the  death  had  taken  place  unexpectedly,  about
six  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  that  in  the  course  of  the  night  the  Signorina  G.
had  begged  her  sisters,  who  were  nursing  her,  to  write  to  her  fiiend  to  come
"if  she  wished  to  see  her  again"  ;  and  further,  that  shortly  before  her  death
she  had  named  Dr.  Guicciardi,  and  said  that  she  thought  she  saw  him  behind
a  screen  which  was  in  the  i(jom.

It  will  be  noted  that  in  this  case  the  dream  was  told  to  one  person
before  the  fact  of  the  death  was  known  to  the  dreamer,  and  that  it  was,
further,  told  to  Professor  Tamburini  before  the  details  of  the  deatli  and  the
fact  that  the  dying  jjerson's  thouglits  had  been  directed  to  Dr.  Guicciardi
and  his  wife  in  the  course  of  the  night  were  known.

The  evidence,  however,  might  have  been  made  more  complete  in  some
particulars.  It  would  be  desirable  to  have  a  statement  from  the  sisters  of
Signorina  G.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  far  the  details  given  by
Signora  Guicciardi  as  to  tlie  appearance,  &c.,  of  the  dying  person  seen  in  her
dream  corresf)onded  with  reality. The  statements  given  should  bear  dates.

2.  Nice  Rossi,  a  lunatic  in  the  asylum  at  Reggio,  died  on  May  21st,
1892,  at  11  a.m.  She  had  been  in  the  asylum  since  December  20th,  1890,
and  had  previously  been  from  time  to  time  in  another  asylum.  No  inquiries
about  her  had  been  received  from  her  family  for  more  than  a  year,  but  on
the  morning  of  May  23rd  a  postcard  arrived  from  Mantua,  from  her  husband,
Giovanni  Berni,  dated  May  22nd,  and  asking  for  information  as  to  his  wife's
condition. On  inquiry  through  a  doctor  at  Mantua,  it  appeared  that  on  the


280


Notices  of  Books.


[sSupiileinent.


day  ))efore  writing,  i.e.,  on  tlie  day  of  his  wife's  dcatli,  ho  had  felt  "  uneasy,
as  though  some  misfortune  were  going  to  l)efall  liim,"  and  that  it  was  in
consequence  of  this  feeling  that  he  had  determined  to  write.

Against  the  vagueness  of  the  impression  in  this  case  may  be  set  oft'  the
fact  that  it  prompted  Berni  to  a  definite  action  ;  hut  the  coincidence  does
not  seem  sufliciently  exact  or  striking  to  exclude  the  likelihood  of  its  being
due  to  chance.

Dr.  Oscar  Giacchi,  of  Racconigi,  communicates  three  telepatliic  cases  in
the  Rimda,  Vol.  XIX.,  Fasc.  I.

1.  The  first  is  an  experience  of  his  own.  In  1853,  when  a  student  at
Pisa,  he  saw  in  a  dream,  or  when  half  awake,  his  father,  apparently  dying.
The  figure  spoke  to  him,  and  lie  kissed  its  lips.  Although  he  had  no  previous
cause  for  anxiety,  he  went  at  once  to  Florence,  where  his  father  was,  and
found  that  he  had  died  suddeidy  of  heart  disease.

This  experience  was  not,  apparently,  recorded  at  the  time,  and  no
confirmatory  evidence  is  given.

2.  An  old  woman,  for  three  years  an  inmate  of  the  Racconigi  Asylum,
liad,  before  she  was  shut  up  there,  received  kindness  from  the  parish  priest
of  iSan  Giovanni  di  Racconigi.  She  usually  slept  quietly  at  night  ;  but  at
midnight  on  the  night  of  November  18th,  1892,  she  began  to  howl  and
disturb  the  whole  ward.  She  told  the  nurses,  who  tried  to  calm  her,  that
she  had  "  seen  tlie  Prior  fall  to  the  ground,  with  bloody  foam  coming  from
liis  niouth,  and  die  in  a  few  moments."  The  morning's  report  to  the  doctor
I'elated  this  occurrence  ;  and  at  the  same  time  it  became  known  that  the
priest  in  question  had  died  of  an  apoplectic  stroke  at  the  time  of  the  dream.

Here  again  confirniJitory  evidence  is  wanting  :  and  it  is  not  stated
whether  the  "  medical  report  "  exists,  and  whetlier  it  contains  particulars  of
the  words  used  by  tlie  woman.

3.  Dr.  Giacchi's  tliird  case  is  similar  to  Professor  Tamburini's  second.
The  wife  of  a  patient  in  the  asylum  wrote  t<j  inquire  for  news  of  him  just  at
the  time  of  his  death.  But  the  coincidence  in  this  case  is  less  striking,  as
the  patient  had  only  been  in  the  asylum  fr)r  two  months.

Finally,  a  case  is  communicated  by  Dr.  Bracaloni,  in  the  same  number  of
tlie  Bicista.

In  Octoljer,  1880,  Signora  M.  was  at  Florence,  and  her  father  at  Siena.
Slie  was  suddenly  seized  with  violent  and  persistent  melancholy,  so  strong
as  to  produce  weejnng,  and  to  keep  her  awake  through  the  night.  Next
morning  a  telegram  announced  that  her  father — about  whom  she  had  no
cause  for  anxiety — had  been  murdered  at  about  the  time  when  the
melancholy  began.  This  is  related  in  a  letter  from  Signora  M.,  dated
March  25th,  1892.  jj_  Babington  Smith.


TItc  La  IV  <if  Pstjfli  ii:  I'lienomcna,  a  Working  Hypothesis  for  the  Systematic
Study  of  Hypnotism,  Spiritism,  Mental  Tlierapeutics,  &c.  By
Thomson  Jay  Hudson. London  :  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons,  1893.

It  is  not  quite  easy  to  decide  on  what  plane  Mr.  Hudson's  work  should
be  judged. If  it  be  regarded  as  a  purely  popular,  unscientific  handbook  to


Sui)])leinBnt.  I


Notices  of  Books.


281


"pyschical  research,"  intended  to  inspire  the  general  reader  with  an  interest
in  the  subject,  we  may  say  that  it  is  clear  and  readable,  and  reproduces
a  good  deal  of  l);)th  fact  and  argument  from  these  Fwceediwjs  and  elsewhere
in  an  easier,  tliough  often  in  an  inaccurate,  form,  and  occasionally  with
sums  ingenious  development.  If,  however,  we  judge  it  from  a  standpoint
more  nearly  approaching  what  seems  to  be  the  author's  own,  we  shall  l)e
o))liged  to  make  some  serious  reserves  even  in  this  modified  approval.

The  professed  aim  of  the  book  is  certainly  ambitious.  "My  primary
object,"  says  the  author  in  his  preface,  "  is  to  assist  in  bringing  Psycliology
within  the  domain  of  the  exact  sciences.  That  this  has  never  been  accom-
plished is  owing  to  the  fact  that  no  successful  attempt  has  ))een  made  to
formulate  a  working  hypothesis  sufhciently  simple  to  embrace  all  psychic
phenomana.  .  .  .  Tlie  London  K.P.R.,  whose  ramitications  extend  all
over  the  civilised  world"  (we  wish  they  did),  "  was  organised  for  the  pur-
pose of  making  a  systematic  search  for  that  law.  ...  I  have  tentatively
formulated  a  working  hypothesis  for  the  systematic  study  of  all  classes  of
psychic  phenomena.  .  .  .  Sincerely  believing  in  tlie  correctness  of  my
hypothesis,  I  have  not  hesitated  to  follow  it  to  its  legitimate  conclusion  in
every  field  which  I  have  entered."

We  naturally  looked  with  interest  for  the  hypothesis  which  lias  thus  far
eluded  our  own  researches  ; — of  which  researches,  we  hasten  to  acknow-
ledge, the  author  speaks  in  flattering  terms.  On  p.  26  that  hypothesis  is
produced.  But  it  hardly  brings  us  much  nearer  to  an  exact  science  than  we
were  before.

"  Under  the  rules  (jf  correct  reasoning,  tlierefore,  I  have  a  right  to  assume
that  Man  H.iS  TWO  MINDS  ;  and  the  assumption  is  so  stated,  in  its  broadest
form,  as  the  first  proposition  of  my  hypothesis.  For  convenience  I  shall
designate  the  one  as  the  objective  mind,  and  the  other  as  the  suhjccf.ive  mind.

"  The  second  proposition  is,  that  the  subjective  mind  is  constantly

AMENABLE  TO  CONTROL  BY  SUGGESTION.

' '  The  third,  or  subsidiary,  proposition  is,  that  the  subjective  imind  is

INCAPABLE  OP  INDUCTIVE  REASONING."

To  those  who  have  in  any  degree  followed  the  discussions  in  these
Proceetlitujs  on  "the  supraliminal  and  the  subliminal  self,"  "  duplex  jjer-
sonality,"  "the  hypnotic  stratum,"  "  the  mechanism  of  suggestion,"  and  so
forth,  it  will  not  at  once  be  obvious  for  which  part  of  this  tlieory  Mr.
Hudson  claims  originality.  "  Hitherto,"  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  no  successful
attempt  has  been  made  to  define  clearly  the  nature  of  tlie  two  elements  which
constitute  the  dual  mind"; — and  he  proceeds  "slightly  to  modify  and
extend  "  the  definitions  of  objective  and  subjective  in  order  to  effect  this
jjurpose.  The  words  "  objective  "  and  "  subjective  "  have  had  many  burdens
to  bear,  but  perhaps  have  never  yet  undergone  the  confusion  worse  con-
founded of  being  set  to  represent  two  different  forms  or  phases  of  what
would  commonly  be  called  subjective  consciousness.  Yet  this  nomenclature,
so  far  as  we  can  discover,  is  Mr.  Hudson's  main  original  contribution  to
the  psychology  which  he  is  anxious  to  transform  into  an  exact  science.

A  still  more  curious  assumption  of  novelty  for  a  theory  familiar  to  most
readers  will  be  found  on  p.  398.  "  I  have  interpreted  the  passages  "  (in  the
New  Testament),  says  Mr.  Hudson,  "relating  to  the  conditions  precedent


232


Nutlcoi  of  BouLs.


|Siiii)iIciniMit.


to  the  attainment  of  immortal  life  in  a  way  in  which  they  have  never  before
been  interpreted."  Mr.  Hudson's  interpretation  is  that  when  J esus  Christ
said  "  He  that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life,"  he  meant  that  "  belief
was  tlie  essential  prerequisite  to  the  attainment  of  innnortality  "  and  that
those  who  did  not  believe  simply  perished  altogether.  This  doctrine  of
"  conditional  immortality,"  as  it  is  usually  called,  is  a  perfectly  well  known
form  of  tlieological  escape  from  the  doctrine  of  eternal  perdition.  It  has
been  supported  by  tolerably  conspicu(jus  personages,  from  Origen  down  to
Sir  George  Gabriel  Stokes.  Whatever  the  theological  value  of  the  hypothesis
may  be,  it  is  hardly  convincing  as  a  mere  proposition  in  experimental
psychology  deduced  (as  Mr.  Hudson  deduces  it)  from  tlic  phenomena  of
hypnotism.  The  theory  of  "suggestion"  must  l)e  pushed  far  indeed  if  it
is  to  ])rovc  that  a  mere  change  in  a  man's  intellectual  attitude,  on  however
important  a  matter,  can  effect  a  fund;imental  revolution  in  the  relation  of
his  soul  to  his  own  body,  and  to  tlie  unseen  world.  Mr.  Hudson,  however^
has  no  fear  "that  even  prejudice  will  find  fault  with  my  interpretation  ;

[wliich]  is  confirmed  by  the  facts  of  modern  science,  and  mvist,
therefore,  shed  a  new  lustre  upon  the  name  and  attributes  of  Jesus."  The
critic,  perhaps,  may  Ije  excused  from  discussing  a  claim  sd  lofty  as  this.

But  indeed  here,  as  often  elsewhere,  it  looks  as  thougli  Mr.  Hudson  had
fallen  into  confusion  from  a  somewhat  hasty  attempt  to  simplify  theories
which  he  has  imperfectly  grasped.  His  "subjective  mind"  is  alternately
made  e([uivalent  to  tlie  whcjle  of  tlie  self  assumed  as  lying  beneath  the
ordinary  tliresliold  of  consciousness,  and  then  again  only  to  the  so-called
"hypnotic  stratum"  of  that  assumed  self, — that  dream-like  part  of  our
being  which  can  be  influenced  by  suggestions,  however  foolish,  from  our
ordinary  conscious  life.  Thus  he  says  (p.  324)  of  liis  "subjective  mind":
"Those  powers  of  which  we  catch  occasional  glimpses,  and  which  so  excite
our  admiration,  are  powers  which  pertain  to  its  existence  in  a  future  world.
They  are  jjowers  which  ]jroclaim  it  as  a  part  of  God,  as  partaking  of  the
nature  and  attributes  of  the  Divine  Mind."  And  yet  this  "  jwt  of  God,"
which  "sees  God  as  He  is,"  (p.  325)  may  be  practically  extinguished  for  ever
by  the  mere  suggestion  of  the  mortal  or  "objective  mind,"  if  the
"  ob  jective  mind  "  does  not  hap]jen  to  lielieve  in  its  companion's  existence.
"  A  life-long  scepticism  regarding  the  existence  of  the  soul,  and  a  conseij^uent
disbelief  in  immortality,  constitute  a  suggestion  that  must  operate  to  deprive
the  soul  of  a  conscious  existence,  if  the  law  of  suggestion  is  universal  in  its
operations  "  (p.  38()).  Tliis  seems  (we  repeat)  a  somewhat  serious  result  to
follow  u|)on  a  speculative  uncertainty  which  a  good  many  excellent  men  have
shared  ;  nor  are  we  convinced  of  its  truth  by  being  told  (p.  327)  that  "it  is
not  for  man  to  question  the  wisdom  of  God  in  so  ordaining  the  relations  of
the  soul  to  the  body  as  to  subordinate  the  eternal  to  the  perishable."

We  have  dwelt  thus  far  upon  Mr.  Hudson's  theories,  because  he  himself
has  insisted  much  on  their  novelty  and  imjjortance.  But  it  is  not  by  its  theovles
that  we  are  ourselves  disposed  to  judge  any  new  work  on  our  special  branch
of  experimental  jjsychfihjgy,  but  I'ather  by  the  new  observations  which  it
adduces,  and  most  of  all  by  the  new  experiments  which  it  recounts.  Let  us
see  how  Mr.  Hudson's  work  stands  in  the.se  particulars.  We  cite  the  best
new  observation  and  the  Ijest  (or  only)  new  experiment  wliich  ^ve  can  find.


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


233


On  p.  246  an  alleged  case  of  clairaudient  warning  is  given,  which,  if
correctly  reported,  is  in  the  highest  degree  remarkable.  But  all  that  is
vouchsafed  to  us  is  a  third-hand  report,  without  names,  date,  or  any  kind  of
authentication.  We  had  hoped  that  one  result  of  our  work  in  these  Proceedings
might  have  been  that  anyone  who  professed  to  accord  importance  to  that  work
would  have  become  ashamed  of  this  kind  of  looseness,— would  at  least  have
endeavoured  to  bring  his  narratives  up  to  a  fair  evidential  level.  What
confidence  can  we  accord  to  a  story  told  to  us  by  Mr.  Hudson,  as  told  to  him
by  an  unknown  person,  to  whom  it  was  told  by  a  "  well-known  colored
preacher "  at  a  date  unknown  ?  The  case  is  worse  here  inasmuch  as  the
story  happens  to  be  one  which,  if  true,  it  would  be  very  easy  to  verify.

One  series  of  experiments  of  Mr.  Hudson's  own  is  described  in  this  work
(pp.  192-5).  "The  best  possible  condition,"  he  says,  "for  the  conveyance
of  therapeutic  suggestions  from  the  healer  to  the  patient  is  attained  when
both  are  in  a  state  of  natural  sleep  ;  and  such  suggestions  can  be  so
communicated  by  an  efibrt  of  will  on  the  part  of  the  healer  just  before  going
to  sleep."  Mr.  Hudson  claims  to  have  himself  tried  this  method  with
success.  "  Over  one  hundred  experiments  have  been  made  by  the  writer
and  one  or  two  others  to  whom  he  has  confided  his  theory,  without  a  single
failure.  Some  very  striking  cures  have  been  eS'ected,— cures  that  would  take
rank  with  the  most  marvellous  instances  of  healing  recorded  in  the  annals  of
modern  psycho-therapeutics."  It  is  obvious  that  if  this  statement  represents
a  real  fact,  it  is  extremely  important.  Not  one  tittle  of  evidence,  however,
is  adduced  in  support  of  it ;  and  the  one  case  which  is  described  is  a  model  of
confused  vagueness.

The  patient  "was  subject  to  the  most  excruciating  spasms  during  his
nervous  attacks  of  rheumatic  trouble,  and  was  frequently  brought  to  the
verge  of  the  grave.  ...  An  idea  of  the  suffering  which  he  endured  may
be  imagined  from  the  fact  that  one  of  his  hips  had  been  drawn  out  of  joint,
by  which  the  leg  had  been  shortened  about  two  inches."  We  find  it
uncommonly  difficult  to  "  imagine  an  idea  "  (to  use  our  author's  phrase)  of
what  was  really  the  matter  with  this  patient  ;  and  the  description  of  his
cure;— "after  the  lapse  of  a  few  months"  he  became  "  comparatively  well  "  ;
— is  of  an  equally  mysterious  character.

Now  we  are  quite  ready  to  agree  that  Mr.  Hudson's  plan  of  endeavouring
to  affect  a  patient  at  a  distance  while  both  operator  and  patient  are  asleep
may  be  worth  a  trial.  But  who  can  pay  any  regard  to  alleged  cures  narrated
in  this  slipshod  unscientific  style  ?  If  our  author  can  really  effect  cures  in
the  manner  claimed,  he  certainly  can  do  nothing  more  useful  to  mankind
than  to  repeat  them  as  often  as  possible,  and  to  get  someone  to  watch  and
record  them  with  at  least  the  care  which  an  ordinary  student  bestows  on  a
thesis  sent  in  for  his  medical  degree.  We  can  assure  Mr.  Hudson  that
we  shall  be  the  very  first  to  welcome  any  real  and  effective  collaboration
of  this  kind.

We  had  marked  for  comment  many  passages  containing,  as  it  seemed  to
us,  inconsistencies,  exaggerations,  or  definite  and  demonstrable  mistakes.
But  it  is  distasteful  further  to  insist  on  these  in  a  book  which  does,  after
all,  range  itself  on  the  side  of  what  we  regard  as  important  and  seldom-
realised  truth. This  is,  we  assume,  a  first  work. We  hope  that  our  present


234


Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


words  may  have  the  effect,  not  of  alienating  the  author  from  this  difficult
study,  but  of  stimulating  him  to  something  more  of  that  steady  experiment
and  laborious  accuracy  which  alone  can  help  towards  his  avowed  object  of
"  bringing  Psychology  within  the  domain  of  the  exact  sciences."


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  GOth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster To\v]i  Hall  on  Friday,  July  lith,  1893,  at  4  p.m.,  Professoe
SiDGWiCK  in  the  chair.

Me.  W.  Leaf  read  part  of  his  translation  from  the  Russian  of
Mr.  V.  S.  Soloviolf's  account  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  which  will  be
published  in  a  separate  Supplement  to  this  Part  of  the  Proceedings.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  read  a  paper  on  "  The  Alleged  Evidence
in  Favour  of  the  Divining  Rod."


The  61st  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
October  27th,  at  4  p.m ,  Mr.  Pearsall  Smith  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  gave  an  account  of  his  visit  to  the  Congress
of  Psychical  Science  at  Chicago.

Mr.  W.  Leaf  read  a  further  part  of  his  translation  of  Mr.  Solovioff's
account  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

Mr.  Myers  read  part  of  his  paper  on  "The  Expei'iences  of  W.
Stainton  Moses,"  printed  below.


The  62nd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
December  1st,  at  8.30  p.m.,  Peofessoe  W.  F.  Bareett  in  the  chair.

Professor  Lodge  read  a  paper  on  "  The  difficulty  of  making
crucial  Experiments  as  to  the  Source  of  the  extra  or  unusual  Intelli-
gence manifested  in  Trance-speech,  Automatic-writing,  and  other
states  of  apparent  mental  inactivity."

Mr.  Myers  read  a  further  part  of  his  paper  on  "  The  Experiences
of  W.  Stainton  Moses,"  including  Mr.  Charlton  T.  Speer's  account  of
his  reminiscences  of  Mr.  Moses ;  and  Mr.  Speer,  who  was  present,  gaA'e
further  explanations  in  answer  to  questions.


E


236


Professor  William  Ramsay.


I.

PARTIAL ANESTHESIA.  "
By  Prof.  William  Ramsay,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.

Some  fourteen  years  ago  I  belonged  to  a  committee  of  the  British
Medical  Association  formed  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the
action  of  anjesthetics,  especially  chloroform  and  ether.  But  some
other  substances  capable  of  producing  an;esthesia  were  also  experi-
mented with ;  among  others,  ethylidene  dichloride,  ethylene  dichloride,
chloropropane,  amylene,  etc.  Professor  John  McKendrick  and  Dr.
Coats  bore  the  brunt  of  the  inquiry  ;  my  function  was  chiefly  to
purify  the  substances  employed,  and  in  some  cases  to  ascertain  their
composition.

One  of  the  questions  which  occurred  to  us  to  investigate  was  the
influence  of  anaesthetics  on  the  rate  at  which  the  muscles  respond  to
a  nervous  stimulus.  For  example,  a  bright  light  was  flashed  before
the  eyes  of  the  partially  ana;sthetised  person,  who  had  to  signal  his
perception  of  the  stimulus  by  touching  a  button,  which  registered  on
a  chronograph  the  interval  of  time  which  elapsed  between  the  flash
of  light  and  the  response  of  the  muscles.  I  was  frequently  the
subject  of  such  exjDeriments,  and  was  often  under  various  anajsthetics,
more  or  less  completely.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that  it  might  be  of
interest  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  were  I  to  put  on  record
some  account  of  the  mental  delusions  which  invariably,  with  me,
accompany  partial  insensibility ;  and  as  I  have  frequently,  though  often
at  intervals  of  a  year  or  more  between  each  trial,  taken  anaesthetics
without  any  tragic  object  in  view,  I  am  able  to  draw  conclusions,  not
from  one  or  two  impressions,  but  from  many,  extending  over  a  series
of  years.

The  antesthetic  was  always  administered  on  a  handkerchief  or  piece
'if  rag,  dipped  in  the  liquid,  whatever  it  might  be.  With  nitrous
oxide,  I  usually  breathed  through  an  india-rubber  tube  straight  from
the  iron  bottle  in  which  the  substance  is  sold,  turning  the  gas  on  and
off  at  each  breath.  When  I  failed  to  regulate  the  stop-cock,  my
assistant  closed  and  removed  the  bottle.

I  may  say  at  the  outset,  that  on  me  all  anpesthetics  produce  the
same  mental  state.  Some  are  more  agreeable  to  inhale  than  others.
To  breathe  chloroform  gives  a  feeling  of  slight  nausea  ;  ether  vapour
is  apt  to  excite  coughing ; but  they  all  produce  the  same  curious


Partial  Ancesthesia.


237


delusion.  My  early  recollections  are  of  a  kind  of  dream,  of  which
the  ruain  incidents  were  : — A  taste  of  pepjaermint ;  an  idea  oi  two
tones  sounded  together,  of  which  the  upper  one  was  a  harmonic  of
the  lower ;  my  eye  then  usually  caught  some  object  whose  distinctive
feature  was  pai^allel  lines  ;  for  example,  the  bars  of  the  grate,  or  the
cross-pieces  of  the  window-sash,  and  here  again  the  idea  of  a  harmonic
arrangement  suggested  itself,  as  if  the  bars  of  the  grate  were  arranged
so  as  to  form  gaps  cori'esponding  to  the  fundamental  note,  the  fifth,
and  the  octave.  I  have  recollections  of  a  certain  artist's  lay-figure
in  which  the  skin  is  removed  to  show  the  lie  of  the  muscles,  in  motion
round  me,  so  that  he,  too,  partook  of  the  rhythmic  nature  of  things,
continually  quickening  his  pace,  and  appearing  on  my  left  hand,  to
dart  quickly  past  and  disappear  on  my  right.  These  I  may  term
preliminaiy  impressions  ;  I  have  long  ceased  to  have  them,  and
they  are  more  of  the  nature  of  an  ordinary  dream,  in  which  things
pass  through  one's  mind  without  exciting  great  attention,  remarkable
though  they  may  seem.  I  remember  noticing  with  some  curiosity
the  mode  of  action  of  the  gentleman  without  his  skin  ;  how  the
muscles  of  the  thigh  and  calf  contracted  and  expanded  as  he  ran  ;
but  this  was  a  matter  of  no  great  moment.

During  this  dream  I  was  really  conscious,  and  was  able  to  reply
to  questions,  and  to  criticise  the  various  remarks  made  by  the  persons
round.  Up  to  this  point,  moreover,  I  retained  my  power  of  signalling
in  response  to  a  flash  or  a  sound,  with  little,  if  any,  greater  retardation
than  that  of  my  normal  state.  But  the  second  stage  gradually
approached  ;  and  I  failed  to  attend  to  external  objects,  except  for
•certain  reasons,  shortly  to  follow.  An  overwhelming  impression
forced  itself  upon  me  that  the  state  in  which  I  then  was,  was  reality  ;
that  now  I  had  reached  the  true  solution  of  the  secret  of  the  universe,
in  understanding  the  secret  of  my  own  mind  ;  that  all  outside  objects
■were  merely  passing  reflections  on  the  eternal  miii-or  of  my  mind  ;
some  more,  some  less  transient.  In  later  experiments  with  anaesthetics
I  have  tried  with  success  to  recall  events  of  the  day  ;  how  I  was
occupied  in  my  laboratory  ;  how  I  walked  down  Oxford-street  in
the  morning  ;  what  I  saw,  and  whom  I  met ;  and  with  success  ;
but  they  impressed  me  as  a  fleeting  vision  ;  something  quite  trivial
and  transitory.  The  main  and  impressive  fact  for  me  was  that  /  was
self -existent,  and  that  time  and  space  were  illusions.  This  was  the
real  Ur/o,  on  whose  surface  ripples  of  incident  arose,  to  fade  and
vanish  like  the  waves  on  a  pond.

But  to  test  the  truth  of  this  conception,  I  have  generally  noted
the  objects  near  me.  Someone,  perhaps,  made  a  remark  ;  for  example,
"He  has  had  nearly  enough  now."  This  remark  wea.ried  me,  because
I  had  heard  it  so  often  before ;  I  conceived  a  low  opinion  of  the

R  2


238


Professor  William  Ramsay.


being  who  could  pass  his  life  in  saying  such  a  trivial  and  unimportant
thing,  and  I  disdained  to  answer.  Or,  perhaps,  my  eye  caught  sight
of  a  Bvinsen  burner — a  common  object  in  every  laboratory  ;  and
here  again  I  knew  that  it  had  been  there  through  endless  ages.  Some
noise — the  emptying  of  a  cart  of  coals  on  the  street,  perhaps — struck
my  attention.  I  not  merely  knew  that  it  had  happened  before,  but  I
could  have  predicted  that  it  would  happen  at  that  particular  moment.

To  make  my  story  more  definite,  since  writing  the  above,  I  have
taken  ethei',  and  during  the  commencement  of  anjesthesia,  I  took
notes  ;  it  is  as  if  one  were  writing  in  a  dream  ;  I  wrote  until  the
muscles  of  my  hand  refused  to  obey  my  will  ;  and  I  have  little  doubt
that  the  concentration  of  attention  on  the  mechanical  process  of
writing  interfered  to  some  extent  with  the  normal  course  of  the
mental  impressions. The  notes,  such  as  they  are,  are  as  follows  : —

(I  began  with  nitrous  oxide.)

Singing  in  ears  ;  slight  difficulty  in  focussing,  and  dimness  of
vision  (that  is,  I  imagine,  the  partial  paralysis  of  the  muscles,  the
function  of  which  is  to  focus  the  eyes)  ;  tingling  in  legs  (continued
with  ether  ; the  numbers  refer  to  doses).

1.  Much  slower  than  niti'ous  oxide  :  became  unusually  sensitive  to
"  outside  things  "  ;  heard  water  dropping  from  cistern  outside  room.

2.  Deep  inhalations  ;  stage  of  singing  in  ears  not  reached  yet.
Just  come  ;  vision  affected  ;  tingling  in  legs  ;  tingling  in  spinal
cord  at  iieck. Beginning  of  consciousness  of  previous  existence.

3.  Slack  off,  keeping  about  the  same  stage.

4.  Ether  disagreeable  to  inhale.  Sivallow,  imjjortant.  (This
refers  to  the  fact,  either  true  or  imagined,  that  at  this  stage  I  always
swallowed  my  saliva.  It  appeared  to  me  to  mark  a  definite  stage
in  the  whole  range  of  sensations.)  I  allowed  myself  to  recover
slightly  and  wrote  :  "  This  refers  to  feeling  that  same  stage  always
recurs,  and  to  feeling  of  eternal  existence."

5.  Felt  perspiring.  Am  perspiring.  Absui'dly  self-conscious,
all  through.

6.  A  lot — things  going  too  slowly  ;  deep  inhalations.  ,  Swallow,
ifcc,  all  as  before.

(On  waking,  I  looked  at  my  watch,  and  found  that  I  had  Ijeen
unconscious  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.)

As  soon  as  I  regained  consciousness,  I  wrote  : — "  With  the
consciousness  of  writing,  sitting  at  this  table  ;  with  a  handkei'chief
at  my  mouth,  a  door  on  my  right,  a  window  on  my  left,  a  cigarette
on  the  table  (I  am  wearing  strijjed  trousers,  and  there  is  a  cane-
bottomed  chair  on  my  left),  a  ticket  before  me,  and  a  book  open
at  page  8.  All  these  and  other  things  convince  me  (as  I  have  been
convinced  before  by  seeing  a  piece  of  crumpled  paper)  that  this  is


Partial  Ancesthesia.


239


a  staf^e  in  the  cycle  of  the  universe.  The  notion  is  that  I  alone
am  privileged  to  see  all  this  ;  other  people  may  exist,  but  I  have
not  thought  of  them;  it  is  a  phase  in  my  development.  Each  time
I  am  under  the  influence  of  an  anaesthetic  I  am  able  to  penetrate  a
little  further  into  the  unfathomable  mystery.  The  recognition  of  jjast
stages  does  much  to  render  the  path  familiar."  I  do  not  think  that
I  am  a  follower  of  Bishop  Berkeley  in  my  ordinary  every-day  existence  ;
my  tendency  of  mind  is,  by  training,  and  by  the  nature  of  my  daily
avocations,  to  suspend  judgment — a  condition  of  scientific  scepticism.
But  under  the  influence  of  an  antesthetic  all  doubts  vanish  ;  I  knoio
the  truth  of  Berkeley's  theory  of  existence,  and  I  also  believe,  because  I
know  with  absolute  certainty,  that  self-existence  is  all  that  any
reasonable  man  can  be  convinced  of  ;  that  all  fellow-creatures  are
products  of  my  consciousness,  and  that,  although  they  may  be  real
to  themselves,  and  have  each  a  world  of  his  own,  to  me  they  are
merely  parts  of  my  thoughts,  and,  moreover,  not  very  important
elements  in  my  chain  of  life.  Faith,  I  take  it,  is  belief  without
reason,  because  of  a  supposed  certain  knowledge  ;  and  that  is  my
attitude  of  mind  with  regard  to  Berkeley's  theory  of  existence.  But
the  feelings  evoked  are  disappointing.  It  is  wot  satisfying  to  realise
that  the  goal  of  the  whole  universe  is  of  this  nature.  The  circum-
stances are  so  trivial  as  to  make  it  painful  to  believe  that  tlds  is  the
scheme  of  nature  ;  that  "  that  far-off  divine  event  to  which  the  whole
creation  moves  "  should  have  in  its  pi'ogress  no  higher  deeds,  and  for
its  outcome  no  nobler  aim  than  I  am  then  conscious  of.  My  feelings
are  sometimes  those  of  despair  in  finding  the  secret  of  existence  so
little  worthy  of  regard.  It  is  as  if  the  veil  that  hides  whence  we
come,  what  we  are,  and  what  will  become  of  us  were  suddenly  rent,
and  as  if  a  glimpse  of  the  Absolute  burst  upon  us.  The  conviction
of  its  truth  is  overwhelming  ;  but  it  is  painful  in  the  extreme.  I
have  exclaimed — "  Good  heavens  !  is  this  all  !  "  Such  impressions,
which  it  is  exceedingly  difiicult  to  express  in  words,  pass  off  gradually.
After  five  minutes  they  begin  to  fade  in  intensity  ;  the  conviction
of  their  absolute  truth  is  less  deep-seated  ;  that  there  exists  an
ordinary  work-a-day  world,  in  Avhich  I  and  innumerable  others  play
our  parts,  is  again  realised  ;  and  in  ten  minutes  or  a  quarter  of  an
hour  the  state  of  mind  is  again  perfectly  normal.  There  is  no  after-
impression  ;  no  nausea,  except  occasionally  after  chloroform  ;  and
my  nerves  are  as  steady  as  usual,  for  I  have  performed  the  operation
of  weighing  immediately  on  recovery — an  operation  requiring  a  steady
hand,  and  some  judgment.

It  may  be  worth  while  to  supplement  the  above  account  by  full
notes  taken  by  Miss  F.  W.  of  my  sayings  under  ether.  I  take  this
opportunity  of  thanking  her  for  her  kind  co-operation.


240


Professor  William  Ramsay.


Position. — Usually  standing,  leaning  slightly  forvvai-d.

Expression. — Concentrated,  but  no  rigidity  after  first  experiment.

Two  states  apparently  supervened  :  One  of  attention  to  minute  details —
furniture,  surrounding  objects,  &c.  ;  the  other  of  complete  subordination  to-
idea  of  "  Theory  of  Universe."  The  transition  from  one  to  the  other  was.
well  defined  and  instantaneous.

Pauses — and  partial  or  total  return  to  consciousness — always  occurred
after  preparing  a  new  dose,  before  taking  it.  Then  "breaks"  came  unex-
pectedly— like  a  sudden  idea  occurring  to  the  experimenter  ;  quite  distinct
from  the  jjhrase,  "  Now,  I  know  you  think,"  or  "  will  be  saying  that  I  have
taken  enough " — which  seemed  a  mere  fagon  de  'parler  and  was  never
succeeded  by  an  interruption  of  the  experiment.

Experiment  I.

Dose  I.  1.20|).«i.. — Begins  to  inhale.  "Pleasant  taste,  as  usual,  of
ether."  "Slight  fulness  about  head;  just  beginning  to  tell."  "  Least
possible  affection  of  eyes — not  dimness  of  vision."

Dose  II.  1.21  p.m. — "  Inclination  to  take  full  breaths  (coughing)  ;.
mental  state  still  perfectly  normal."  (coughing)  "  Tingling  m  ears  begins,
also  sense  of  'recurrence  of  events  ' — -i.e.,  everything  has  occurred  before."

Dose  III.  1.23  2). m. — "  Trace  of  beginning  sense  of  'having  been  here
before.'"  (swallows)  "This  is  not  the  important  moment."  Peeling  of
recui-rence,  e.g.,  table,  mantel-piece,  &c.,  "  having  been  oinw j/s  there."

(Here  talking  interfered  ;  goes  back  a  stage.)

Dose  IV.  1.25  p).m. — Outside  noises  jjeculiarly  intense  throughout —
back  at  recurrent  stage — (cough) — confused  sense  coming  on— (swallow) —
conscious  of  P.  A.  W.  sitting  at  table  as  unfamiliar  object  in  sequence —
(deep  breaths).  [Here  I  observed  a  slight  change  of  face — fulness  about
eyes,  swallow,  then  fixed  look,  motionless  and  silent  for  two  minutes — then
eyes  winked,  and  you  roused  yourself  to  speak.]  "Tliis,  one  little  piece  of
enormous  coherence  of  Universe — utterly  ridiculous  in  its  smallness."  (more
comi^lete  awakening)  ' '  Every  bit  of  these  events  recurred — except  fact
of  woman  instead  of  man  as  observer — cycle  of  events  recurring  bothers  me
greatly,  because  I  expect  each  stage  to  go  further — I.e.,  stage  in  evolution  of
Universe. "

Experiment  IL

Dose  I.  1.30  p.m. — Begins  again,  so  as  to  recover  former  stage  ;  deejv
breiiths  as  before.

Dose  II. — Can  still  speak — tells  me  what  to  note  down.  Taste  dulled,
1.31,  and  general  dulness  of  sensation,  but  no  choking  ;  feels  cold  touch  of
ether,  but  no  strong  taste. N.B. — Throat,  difficulty  in  articulation.

Dose  III. — No  difficulty  in  breathing — e.g.,  no  asphyxia — this  jioi  noticed
in  former  experiments.  1.33  (looking  at  me).  Very  close  upon  unconscious
stage  and  on  stage  of  repetition,  (speaks)  "  This  is  the  scheme  of  the
Universe  and  my  being  here — but  I  never  before  reached  the  jjoint  of  having
taken  ether  before."  (Sat  down  on  sofa,  having  previously  been  standing — ■
1.35  p).m.)

Dose  IV. — {on  sof(t)  Points  to  and  names  wall,  papers,  F.  A.  W^'s  watch
—notes  feeling  of  swallowing — points  to  bottle — book — No.  27,  Jour.  Chem.
Soc. — 1.36. (silence,  staggered.)


Partial  Ancesthesia.


241


Dose  V. — (Prepares  dose,  stops  short,  saying) :  "I  see  you  think  I  have
had  enough — I  will  stop  short  to  explain.  In  the  ordinary  "n-ork-a-day
world  this  is  an  untenable  theory — I  mean  the  sense  of  '  myself  alone  ' — of
what  affects  me — there  is  a  series  of  jDrecisely  similar  events.  I  believe,  as
far  as  1  can  comprehend,  that  this  is  the  Universe.  At  a  ceitain  point  the
order  of  reason  alters  — this  time  has  brouglit  me  a  stage  farther.  That  is
wrong.  (1.38.)  Here  I  have  recognised  the  ultimate  scheme  of  tlie  Universe,
as  far  as  I  am  concerned  up  to  a  certain  stage. It  will  probably  be  worked

out  when  I  die.  Yet  that  is  not  the  end — I  sliall  go  on  after  that,  but  to

what '? "

"  I  will  take  ether  again.''

Experiment  HI.

Dose  I.  1.44.  2>-in. — (deep  breaths — coughing)  Refiex  action  abolished
at  certain  stage — jjatient  does  not  choke.  That  stage  is  past,  (1.45)  and
recurring  stage  begins.

Dose  II. — "Feeling  of  repetition  of  details,  (coughs)  I  put  my  hand  in
my  pocket— characteristic  action?"  Feeling  of  swallowing — notes  look  of
board,  pen,  watch,  F.A.W.  writing.

Dose  III.  1.4(3  2:). —Notes  fact  of  taking  another  dose  of  ether  ;  points
to  letters — glass  plate — bottle  with  label,  (replaces  hand  in  pocket)  "Oh,
by  Jove  ! Yes,  I  know — after  all  it  comes  to  this."  (takes  dose)

Dose  IV.  1.47  p.m. — "It  is  one  or  the  other  Theory  of  the  Universe,  and
mine  must  be  the  most  probable — mine  or  somebody  else's.  Well,  I  may
be  the  central  j^erson  in  the  universe— I  don't  mind.  I  can't  help  it.  (1.48 —
deep  breaths — winking  of  eyes — silent  Ih  minutes.  1.49 — swallowed —
moved.)

Dose  V . — "  Have  I  been  unconscious  for  a  considerable  time  ?  By  Jove  I
if  one  only  knew  the  whole  thing.  This  may  be  the  truth — it  is  my  own  view,
and  deserves  to  be  known."

Dose  VI.  1.50p.m. — "  The  Universe  is  in  our  brain.  Is  this  a  big  thing  ?
Do  you  hear  the  man  sawing — more  or  less  quickly  ?  Now  I  breathe  hard.
Now  I  note  appearance  of  a  particular  man  there  (pointing  to  fireplace),
whom  I  never  asked  you  to  note  before,  nor  will  now,  but  he  appears  as
part  of  the  Universe."

1.52  p.m. — (Prepares  next  dose  but  stops  short — sits)  "  It  looks  to  me
as  if  the  Universe  were  the  creation  of  a  demon.  This  is  a  stage  in  the
development  bound  to  recur,  but  each  time  I  can  stop  it — and  anticipate  it.
Now,  I  want  to  go  on  a  stage  further  if  you  will  let  me.  This  is  quite  con-
sistent so  far.  (1.53.)  I  am  now  in  my  ordinary  common-sense  state  of  mind."

Dose  VII.  1.54  p.v)!.. — "Now  I  am  beginning  to  get  into  new  close.
There  are  two  Theories  of  the  Universe.  One  individual  undergoes  a  series
of  mental  transformations.  People  choose  to  imagine  that  there  are  worlds
— that  is  to  say,  build  mental  cosmogonies."

Dose  VIII.  1.55  p.m.  —  "  Of  course  it  is  an  open  question  whether  other
people  have  existence  as  well  as  one's  self.  Am  I  right  to  take  another
dose?  [I  replied  that  I  thought  you  might.]  No  good  without  ?  dying.  I
simply  put  it  in  this  way,  am  not  losing  time— that  is  to  say,  truth."  1.56.
(silent)  "This  ether  may  give  out.  Some  control  is  still  left,  (prepares
dose) Am  able  still  to  exercise  control  and  stop.  (1.57.)  By  some  chance  I


242


Professor  William  Ramsay.


am  picked  out  for  the  central  piu'pose  of  the  Universe."  {Liglds  cigarette.
Interruption  at  door — Williams  ;  answered  quietly  and  coherently,  sending
him  away.)  "In  this  state  of  mind,  quarrels  and  reconciliations,  woes  and
fears,  are  no  longer  the  chief  thing  of  the  Universe — but  one  asks — where
does  it  come  from — what  is  it  all  for — i.e.,  which  is  the  normal,  which  the
abnormal  state  of  affixirs  ?  When  I  come  back  to  my  sane  consciousness  I
hold  tlie  ether  state  to  be  abnormal,  and  vice  lersd.  We  are  mere  excrescences
and  little  bits  of  the  Universe.  The  main  fact  is  this  recurrence.  (2.3  p.m.)
Of  course  this  is  utterly  absurd  in  ordinary  life.  Now  I  am  sane  again,  but
under  ether  there  is  only  me.  It  is  all  myself — my  wife  and  friends  are
nowhere.  (2.10.)  Fact  of  recurrence  induces  me  to  think  of  it  as  perpetual."

At  the  end  of  anotlier  experiment,  in  whicli  tlie  remarks  bore  a  close
similarity  to  those  already  given,  I  am  reported  to  have  said:  "Have
been  drunk  with  ether  ;  am  now  recovering.  Of  course,  the  theory
of  other  people's  existence  is  the  most  convenient.  But  when  one  is  self-
centred,  evidence  goes  the  other  way — i.e.,  Universe  evolves  out  of  one's
own  mind.  The  whole  thing  turns  on  this  point — all  social  relations — all
develop  out  of  the  recurring  stage."  (I  suggested,  yes  as  "  nucleus.")  "Yes,
but  all  comes  out  of  this — far  more  than  you  can  imagine." (2.45,  stopped.)

Such  is  a  brief  chronicle  of  my  mental  state  under  anaesthetics.
Others  whom  I  have  seen  in  a  similar  condition  are  usually  unable  to
give  any  account  whatever  of  their  sensations.  One  gentleman,  how-
ever, now  in  Australia,  used  to  be  hypnotised  by  ether,  and  was  very
susceptible  to  suggestions  ;  but  he  was  highly  excited,  and  sometimes
became  unpleasantly  demonstrative,  even  dangei'ous.

At  the  end  of  a  very  interesting  work  by  8ir  Humphrey  Davy
(then  Mr.  Davy,  working  in  Dr.  Beddoes'  Pneumatic  Institution  at
Bristol),  entitled.  Researches,  Chemical  and  Philosophical,  cldejly
concerning  nitrous  oxide  or  dephlogisticated  nitrous  air  and  its  res-
piration published  in  1800,  twenty-nine  persons,  among  whom  are
Dr.  Joseph  Priestley,  Mr.  Josiah  Wedgwood,  Mr.  Boulton,  and  Mr.
Watt,  chronicle  their  feelings  under  the  influence  of  nitrous  oxide.
They  almost  all  speak  of  a  high  flow  of  animal  spirits,  and  great
pleasurable  excitement ;  but  no  one  has  placed  on  record  any  state  of
mind  like  that  which  I  have  attempted  to  describe.  The  only  account
tallying  in  the  least  with  my  impressions  is  by  Davy  himself,  and  with
him  such  impressions  were  exceptional.  He  says:  "As  I  recovered
my  former  state  of  mind,  I  felt  an  inclination  to  communicate  the
discoveries  I  had  made  during  the  experiment.  I  endeavoured  to
recall  the  ideas  :  they  were  feeble  and  indistinct ;  one  collection  of
terms,  however,  jiresented  itself  ;  and  with  the  most  intense  belief  and
prophetic  mannei-,  I  exclaimed  to  Dr.  Kinglake,  '  Nothing  exists  but
thoughts  ! — the  universe  is  composed  of  impressions,  ideas,  pleasures,
and  pains  ! ' "  It  is  curious  that  this,  with  Davy,  was  an  isolated
occurrence ;  it  appears  not  to  have  recurred.  With  me  it  was  a
permanent  impression.


Partial  Ancesthesia.


243


It  is  somewhat  startling  to  be  confi'onted  with  an  unexpected
condition  of  one's  own  mind.  The  saying,  i7i  vino  Veritas,  is,  I  suppose,
intended  to  imply  that  an  intoxicated  person  will  blurt  out  the  truth  ;
but  the  intoxication  of  anesthetics  forces  me,  while  in  that  condition,
to  believe  that  what  I  think  is  true.  The  theoiy  attril:)uted  to  Bishoj)
Berkeley  is  a  perfectly  consistent  one,  and  can  be  disputed  only
on  grounds  of  what  we  term  "  common-sense."  I  do  not,  in  my
ordinary  state  of  mind,  attribute  any  importance  to  this  theory,
beyond  regarding  it  as  a  somewhat  improbable,  but  incontrovertible
speculation  ;  but  I  confess  that,  since  my  experiences  with  antesthetics,
I  am  disposed  to  regard  it  as  worthy  of  a  little  more  consideration
than  it  usually  receives.  The  difficulty  in  accepting  it  is  our
practically  absolute  certainty  of  the  existence  of  our  fellow-creatures  ;
and  the  deduction  that  if  A  and  B  receive  the  same  impression
at  the  same  time,  that  impression  must  be  caused  by  some  thing,
external  to  both.  But  in  my  ant«sthetic  state,  this  objection  pi'esents
no  difficulty  to  me ;  I  conceive  each  ego  to  have  his  orbit,  and
to  stand  absolutely  alone,  conscious  of,  but  uninterfered  with  by,  the
other  egos.  To  choose  a  crude  illustration  : — two  mirrors  reflect,  but
do  not  influence  each  other  in  any  mechanical  or  material  sense.  The
recollection,  which  remains  after  return  to  the  ordinary  state  of  mind,
of  having  had  such  Berkeleian  views,  is,  perhaps  naturally,  not  without
some  influence  on  the  normal  mind  ;  and,  as  I  have  said,  it  appears  to
me  not  wholly  absuid  to  reconsider  the  usual  postulates  of  "  common-
sense."  In  short,  I  am  confronted,  under  ethei',  with  what  I  may  term
"recurring  events."  It  is  necessary  to  form  some  theory  which  will
reconcile  myself  with  this  new  environment  ;  and  the  idea  that  the
Universe  centres  itself  in  me  appears  to  me,  while  in  the  antesthetised
state,  to  be  a  satisfactory  one.

I  must  leave  to  others  speculations  regarding  the  nature  of  the
change,  which  has  occurred  in  my  brain  by  such  stimulation  or  perhaps
pai'tial  paralysis.  Whether  it  is  that  a  certain  region  of  my  brain  is
rendered  inactive,  and  that  a  speculative  tendency,  to  which  I  acknow-
ledge, escapes  the  control  of  certain  higher  centres  active  in  my
ordinary  state  of  existence  ;  or  whether  the  one  lobe  of  the  brain
which  I  habitually  use  has  become  paralysed,  and  one  which  usually
lies  dormant  is  stimulated  —  these,  and  such  questions,  I  cannot
attempt  to  solve.  The  fact  remains  that,  while  ana3sthetised,  my  belief
in  that  theory  of  existence  which  we  may  call  for  short  the  Berkeleian
hypothesis,  is  immeasurably  more  firm  and  decided  than  in  my  normal
state  is  my  belief  in  the  ordinarily  accepted  views  of  matter  and
motion  which  regulate  the  lives  of  most  human  beings.

In  conclusion,  I  owe  an  apology  for  the  egotistic  tone  of  this
paper. My  only  excuse  is  that,  under  the  circumstances,  it  was


241


Professor  William  Ramsay.


unavoidable.  It  might  also  have  been  desirable  to  have  hunted
through  the  literature  of  anassthetics,  and  to  have  compared  my
impressions  Avith  impressions  possibly  recorded  by  others.  I  have
purposely  avoided  doing  so,  and  for  this  I'eason,  that  I  feared  that  I
might  have  been  unconsciously  led,  before  placing  on  record  my
experiences,  to  give  a  biassed  account.  Such  impressions  are  so  apt  to
elude  one's  waking  grasp,  and  to  slip  away  like  a  dream,  that  any
inducement  to  add  to  or  to  take  from  them  has  been  carefully  avoided.

I  believe  that  an  examination  of  such  a  mental  state  is  not  without
value.  Everything  which  bears  on  the  pathology  of  the  mind  throws
light  on  its  physiology ;  and  I  trust  that  others  who  may  have
happened,  from  choice  or  necessity,  to  take  anesthetics,  will  be  induced
by  my  essay  to  give  some  details  of  their  impressions.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


245-:


II.

THE  EXPERIENCES  OF  W.  STAIXTON-MOSES.— I.
By  Eeederic  "W.  H.  Myers.

Mr.  William  Stainton  Moses,  who  depai-ted  this  life  on  September  5thy
1892,  entrusted  by  will  his  unpublished  manuscripts  to  two  friends  as-
literary  executors — viz.,  Mr.  Chai'les  Carleton  Massey,  barrister-at-law,
and  Mr.  Alaric  A.  Watts,  late  one  of  the  Assistant  Secretaries  to  the
Board  of  Inland  Revenue.  These  gentlemen,  at  my  earnest  request,
have  permitted  me  to  undertake  the  task  of  selecting  passages  from
the  MSS.  of  our  common  friend,  which  passages  they  allow  to  he-
printed  in  the  first  instance  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  In  aix
obituary  notice  of  Mr.  Moses,  already  published  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  597  (and  to  wliich  I  would  beg  to  refer  my  readers),  I
have  indicated  the  reasons  which  have  for  nearly  twenty  years  led  m©
to  attach  high  importance  to  these  records  of  his  phenomena,  and  to
desire  earnestly  that  they  should  be  placed  before  the  public  in  sufficient
detail  to  enable  them  to  be  rightly  appreciated.  Mr.  Moses  himself
was  for  a  long  time  averse  to  any  full  publication  of  the  documents,
which  do,  indeed,  contain  much  matter  of  a  private  and  personal  nature.
But  in  his  later  years  his  view  changed  ;  he  had  himself  begun  (in
1892)  to  publish  them  in  Light,  and  his  statements  to  intimate  friends
leave  no  doubt  that  this  posthumous  publication  (with  certain  reserves
to  be  mentioned  hereafter)  of  the  essential  part  of  his  records  is  in
accordance  with  what  would  have  been  his  own  desire,  as  it  is  the  desire
of  his  trusted  executors.

The  materials  here  available  for  the  exposition  of  Mr.  Moses' ,
unique experiences  are  of  four  kinds — viz.  : (1)  his  own  printed
works  ;  (2)  his  MS.  remains  ; (3)  the  written  and  printed  statements
of  witnesses  to  his  phenomena,  and  (^4)  oral  intercourse  with  himself
and  other  friends.

I.  Among  his  piinted  works  the  most  important  for  our  present
purpose  are —

1.  Researches  in  Sinritacdism, This  unfinished  work  was  pub-

lished in  Human  Nature — a  periodical  now  extinct — in
1874.-5,  and  not  reprinted. It  is  now  difficult  of  access.

2.  Sjnrit  Identity,  published  in  1879. This  work  also  has  been
.  ■  y.  for  some  years  out  of  print.


246


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


3.  Spirit  Teachings,  published  in  1883,  is  also  at  present  out  of

print ; but  a new  edition,  with  a biography  by  Mr.

Charlton  Speer,  is  now  in  preparation.
Two other volumes, Psychography and Higher Aspects  of

Spiritualism,  contain  little  which  bears on  our  present

theme.

Besides  these  books,  Mr.  Moses  wrote  much  in  the  weekly
periodical  Light,  of  which  he  was  for  some  years  the  editor.

II.  Mr.  Moses'  MSS.  entrusted  to  me,  and  of  which  I  have  made
use,  consist  of  thirty-one  note-books,  I'anging  from  September,  1872,  to
March,  1883,  and  vainous  letters.

The  note-books  may  be  divided  as  follows  : —

Twenty-four  books  of  automatic  script,  numbered  1-2-4,  and
extending  from  March,  1873,  to  March,  1883.

Four  books  of  records  of  physical  phenomena,  September,  1872 —
January,  1875.  These  books  run  concurrently  with  the  books  of  auto-
matic script.  The  first  book  of  this  series  (April-September,  1872)  is
missing.  Those  which  remain  I  have  numbered  2  B,  3  B,  4  B,  and  5  B.

Three  books  of  retrospect  and  summary,  which  I  number  25,  26,
27.  Books  25  and  26  recapitulate  physical  phenomena,  with  reflections.
Book  27  is  entitled  Tlie  Identity  of  Spirit,  and  contains,  in  briefer  form,
much  of  the  evidence  first  printed  in  Spirit  Identity ;  which  work,
indeed,  this  later  tractate  may  have  been  intended  to  supersede.  Some
of  the  letters  also  are  of  value,  but  mainly  as  adding  contemporary  con-
fii'mation  to  facts  already  to  be  found  in  the  note-books.

III.  Among  the  records  made  by  friends  the  most  important  are
Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer's  "  Records  of  Private  Seances,  from  notes  taken  at
the  time  of  each  sitting."  Over  sixty  instalments  of  these  records  have
now  (October,  1893)  been  published  in  Light.  They  begin  in  1872,
and  go  down  to  1881 — considerably  beyond  the  date  (1875)  at  which
Mr.  Moses'  extant  records  of  physical  phenomena  obtained  in  his
seances  cease.  As  will  be  seen  later  on,  these  independent  and  con-
temporary records  are  evidentially  of  capital  importance.  Dr.  and  Mrs.
Stanhope  Speer  were  Mr.  Moses'  most  intimate  friends  ;  and  they,  often
with  another  intimate  friend,  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival  (Barrister-at-Law
and  Examiner  in  the  Education  Department),  were  the  habitual  mem-
bers, and  generally  the  only  members,  of  the  small  group  who  witnessed
the  phenomena  about  to  be  described.

Mr.  Percival,  the  late  Dr.  Speer,  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  and  Dr.
Thomson,  and  the  late  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  have  at  different  times
printed  short  first-hand  records  of  certain  of  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena,
and  Mrs.  Garratt  and  Miss  Birkett  took  some  contemporary  notes  of
sittings  at  which  they  were  present.

Two  note-books  and  other  MSS.  by  Dr.  Speer  have  been  placed  in


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


247


my  hands,  and  contain  independent  contemporary  records  of  much
evidential  value.

IV.  In  estimating  the  evidential  value  of  oral  intercourse  as  to  Mr.
Moses'  phenomena,  the  character  of  my  own  friendship  for  him  is  an
item  on  which  I  am  bound  to  be  explicit.  Friendship  it  might  truly
be  called,  for  it  was  based  upon  a  consciousness  of  common  pui'-
suits  of  great  moment,  and  I  felt  for  him  much  both  of  gratitude  and
of  esteem.  He  responded  to  my  unfeigned  interest  with  a  straight-
forward intimacy  of  conversation  on  the  exijeriences  of  which  T  cared  so
much  to  learn.  But  there  was  no  such  close  personal  attraction  as  is
likely  to  prompt  me  to  partiality  as  a  biographer  ;  and,  indeed,  both
Edmund  Gurney  and  I  were  conscious  in  him  of  something  like  the
impatience  of  a  schoolmaster  towards  slow  students  ; — natui'al  enough
in  a  man  whose  inborn  gifts  have  carried  him  irresistibly  to  a  con-
viction on  the  edge  of  which  less  favoured  persons  must  needs  pause
and  ponder  long.  I  am  bound  to  add  thn:t  the  study  of  his  note-
books, by  making  him  more  intimately  known  to  me  as  he  was  in  his
best  days,  has  brought  me  nearer  to  the  warm  and  even  enthusiastic
estimate  implied  in  the  letters  of  various  more  intimate  friends  of  his
which  lie  before  me.

More  important,  however,  than  the  precise  degree  of  attractiveness,
or  of  spiritual  refinement,  in  Mr.  Moses'  personal  demeanour  are  the
fundamental  questions  of  sanity  and  probity.  On  these  points  neither
I  ]nyself,  nor,  so  far  as  I  know,  any  person  acquainted  with  Mi\  Moses,
has  ever  entertained  any  doubt.  "  However  perplexed  for  an  explana-
tion," says  Mr.  Massey,  "  the  crassest  prejudice  has  recoiled  from  ever
suggesting  a  doubt  of  the  truth  and  honesty  of  Stainton  Moses."
"  I  believe  that  he  was  wholly  incapable  of  deceit,"  writes  Mr.  H.  J.
Hood,  barrister-at  law,  who  knew  him  for  many  years.  The  people
who  assumed  that  he  must  somehow  have  performed  the  phenomena
of  his  dark  seances  himself ; — who  asked,  triumphantly,  "  Where  was
Moses  when  the  candle  went  out  1 " — even  these  never,  so  far  as  I
know,  suggested  anything  beyond  unconscious  fraud  in  a  trance-
condition.

A  brief  record  of  Mr.  Moses'  life,  with  some  estimates  of  the  work
done  by  him  in  ordinary  professional  capacities,  will  help  the  reader  to
form  something  of  a  personal  judgment  on  his  character.

On  the  events  of  his  life  the  Speer  family,  who  were  his  most
intimate  friends,  and  are  well  acquainted  with  his  nearest  surviving
relatives,  are  my  main  authority.  Their  importance  as  witnesses  of  the
phenomena  is  so  great  that  I  must  be  pardoned  for  inserting  a-
"  testimonial "  to  the  late  Dr.  Speer  (M.D.  Edinburgh) ;  which  shall
not,  however,  be  in  my  own  words,  but  in  those  of  Dr.  Marshall
Hall,  F.R.S.,  one  of  the  best  known  physicians  of  the  middle  of  this


248  ' ••  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


century.  Writing  on  ]March  18th,  1849,  Dr.  Marshall  Hall  says  (in  a
printed  collection  of  similar  testimonials  now  before  me) :  "  I  have
great  satisfaction  in  bearing  my  testimony  to  the  talents  and  acquire-
ments of  Dr.  Stanhope  Templeman  Speer.  Dr.  8peer  has  had  unusual
advantages  in  having  been  at  the  Medical  Schools,  not  only  of  London
and  Edinburgh,  but  of  Paris  and  Montpellier,  and  he  has  availed
himself  of  these  advantages  with  extraordinary  diligence  and  talent.
He  ranks  among  our  most  distinguished  rising  physicians."

Dr.  Speer  held  at  different  times  various  hospital  posts  of  credit,

.  and  was  much  valued  as  a  practising  physician  at  Cheltenham  and  in
London.  The  work  of  a  physician,  however,  was  rendered  somewhat
trying  to  him  by  an  over-anxious  temperament ;  and  as  he  possessed
private  means,  and  had  strong  scientific  and  artistic  tastes,  he  quitted
his  profession  at  thirty-four,  and  preferred  to  spend  the  latter  part  of
his  life  in  studious  retirement.  Dr.  Speer's  cast  of  mind  was  strongly
materialistic,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  his  interest  in  Mr.  Moses'
phenomena  was  from  first  to  last  of  a  purely  scientific,  as  contrasted
with  an  emotional  or  a  religious,  nature.

I  regret  that  I  never  mot  Dr.  Speer,  who  died  in  1889.  His
widow,  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer,  is  well  known  to  me  ;  and  I  regard  her  as
an  excellent  witness. Her  son,  Mr. Charlton  T.  Speer  (also  an

■  excellent  witness)  is  an  Associate  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Music,  and
is  well  known  in  musical  circles  as  a  successful  composer  and  performer.
With  these  words  of  preface  I  pass  on  to  the  facts — simple  and

•  ordinary  enough  in  their  external  aspect — of  Mr.  Moses'  life.

William  Stainton  Moses  was  born  in  Lincolnshire,  November  5th,
1839.  His  father  had  been  headmaster  of  a  grammar-school  at
Donington,  near  Lincoln.  His  mother's  family  name  was  Stainton.  Mr.
Stainton  Moses  believed  that  the  name  Moses  had  been  originally
Mostyn,  but  that  an  ancestor  had  changed  it  in  order  to  avoid  some
peril  in  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth.  There  seems  no  reason
to  suppose  that  the  family,  which  had  been  for  some  time  settled
in  Lincolnshire,  was  of  Jewish  descent.  Mrs.  Moses — still  living
and  vigorous  (1893)  at  the  age  of  ninety-one — was  a  serious  and
intelligent  woman,  and  brought  up  her  only  son  with  pious  care.  He
showed  ability;  and  the  family  moved  to  Bedford,  about  1852,  that
he  might  have  the  advantage  of  education  at  Bedford  College.  There
he  did  well,  and  in  due  time  gained  a  scholarship  at  Exeter  College,
Oxford.  In  his  school  days  he  occasionally  walked  in  his  sleep,  and  on
one  occasion  his  mother  saw  him  go  down  into  the  sitting-room  and
.write  an  essay  on  a  subject  which  had  puzzled  him  on  the  previous
evening,  and  return  to  bed  without  awaking.  The  essay  thus  written
was  the  best  of  those  sent  up  by  the  class  that  day  (Mr.  Moses

vtells  us),  and  was  fully  up  to  the  level  of  his  waking  performances.


The  Experiences  of  W.  .  Stainton  Moses.  249


This  is  the  only  incident  of  which  I  have  heard  which  in  any  way
foreshadowed  his  future  gift.  He  is  not  recorded  as  having  been  a
specially  nervous  or  excitable  child  ;  and  he  was  at  this  time  strong
and  healthy.  In  after  life  his  health  was  bad  ;  but  his  troubles  were
mainly  respiratory — constantly  recurring  catarrh  and  bronchitis — until
near  the  end  of  his  life,  when  he  was  attacked  hy  Bright's  disease,
which  ultimately  caused  his  death.  His  phenomena,  it  may  be  observed,
were  at  their  best  when  he  was  in  his  best  health,  and  declined  or
disappeared  altogether  when  he  was  ill.

To  return  to  his  Oxford  career.  At  Oxford  he  was  an  ambitious
and  hard-working,  but  not  in  other  ways  a  very  noticeable,  under-
graduate. His  health  broke  down  from  overwork,  and  he  left  Oxford
ivithout  taking  a  degree,  and  spent  some  considerable  time  in  travel,
mainly  with  friends,  but  in  part  alone.  He  was  already  much
interested  in  theology,  and  he  lived  for  some  six  months  (none  of  these
dates  are  very  precise)  in  a  monastery  on  Mount  Athos.  Beyond  the
mere  fact  of  his  residence  on  Mount  Athos,  to  which  his  surviving
friends  testify,  all  that  is  known  of  this  period  of  seclusion  consists
of  allusions  made  by  his  "spirit  guides,"  who  say  that  they  directed
bim  thither  that  he  might  study  the  Eastern  Church,  and  be  prepared
by  a  comparison  of  theologies  for  the  reception  of  a  wider  truth.  Be
this  as  it  may,  he  recovered  his  health,  returned  to  Oxford,  took  his
degree,  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Wilberforce,  and  accepted  a  curacy  at
Kirk  Maughold,  near  Ramsey,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  at  the  age  of  twenty-
four.  He  was  an  active  parish  clergyman,  liked  by  his  parishioners,  and
holding  Anglican  views  of  an  ordinary  type.  On  the  occasion  of  an
outbreak  of  small-pox  he  distinguished  himself  by  his  zeal  and  kindness ;
and  it  is  recorded  that  in  one  case  he  helped  to  nurse  and  to  bury  a
man  whose  malady  was  so  violent  that  it  was  hard  to  get  anyone  to
approach  him.  During  this  period  also  he  began  to  write  for  periodi-
cals, Punclt  and  the  Saturday  Review  being  specially  mentioned.  The
memorial  verses  to  the  Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice  which  appeared  in  Punch
have  since  been  quoted  as  of  Mr.  Moses'  writing ;  and  I  should  conceive
that  his  other  contributions  were  probably  in  this  serious  strain.  He
continued  to  write  much,  anonymously,  for  various  periodicals  during
many  years  of  his  life,  and  showed  an  easy  style  and  a  good  deal  of
miscellaneous  knowledge.

After  some  four  years  of  residence  near  Ramsey,  ^he  accepted  the
curacy  of  St.  George's,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.  Here  also  he  was
esteemed  as  an  active  clergyman,  and  admired  as  a  preacher.  In  April,
1869,  he  had  a  serious  illness,  and  hearing  that  Dr.  Speer,  whom  he
knew  slightly,  was  in  the  island  on  a  holiday,  he  called  in  his  medical
aid.  Dr.  Speer  brought  him  successfully  through  his  illness,  and
invited  him  as  a  convalescent  to  the  house  which  he  was  renting  in  the


250


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


island.  The  foundations  of  a  life-long  friendshijD  with  Dr.  and  Mrs.
Speer  were  then  laid.

In  1870  he  took  a  curacy  somewhei-e  in  Dorsetshire,  where  also  he
was  liked,  and  was  appointed  "  Lent  preacher  "  for  the  county.  A  very
severe  attack  of  hooping-cough  obliged  him  to  interrupt  his  parish
work,  which,  in  fact,  he  never  resumed.  Dr.  Speer  invited  him  to
become  his  son's  tutor,  and  for  seven  years  he  filled  that  office  in  a  way
which  attached  to  him  both  parents  and  pupil  more  closely  than  ever.
In  1871  he  was  offered  a  mastership  in  University  College  School ;  and
this  post  he  held  until  failing  health  compelled  him  to  resign  it  some
three  years  before  his  death.  The  physical  phenomena  about  to  be
described  began  in  1872,  and  continued  with  gradually  lessening
frequency  until  1881.  The  automatic  script  began  in  1873,  and  finally
died  out,  so  far  as  we  know,  in  188.3.  During  these  later  years
Mr.  Moses  was  active  in  contributing  to,  and  afterwards  in  editing,  the-
weekly  newspaper  Ligltt ;  and  he  took  a  leading  part  in  several
spiritistic  organisations.  Of  one  of  these — the  London  Spiritualist
Alliance — ^hewas  president  at  the  time  of  his  death.  In  1882  he  aided
in  the  foundation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  ;  but  he  left  that
body  in  1886,  on  account  of  its  attitude  towards  Spiritualism,  which
he  regarded  as  unduly  critical.  It  is  worth  remarking  that  although,
as  the  fact  of  his  withdrawal  shows,  many  members  of  the  Society  held
an  intellectual  position  widely  differing  from  that  of  Mr.  Moses,  and
although  his  own  published  records  were  of  a  kind  not  easily  credible,
no  suspicion  as  to  his  personal  probity  and  veracity  was  ever,  so  far  as
I  know,  either  expressed  or  entertained.

Mr.  Moses'  health  became  steadily  weaker.  He  suffered  greatly  from
suppressed  gout,  in  addition  to  other  ailments.  A  serious  fall  from^
the  top  of  an  omnibus  made  inatters  worse.  In  1890  he  was  attacked
by  influenza  in  the  severest  form,  and  was  reckoned,  I  believe,  to  have
had  twelve  separate  relapses  or  recurrences  of  that  complaint.  An
accident  to  his  eyes  also  gave  him  much  trouble.  He  worked  on,  as
best  he  could,  to  the  last ;  but  the  period  of  decline  was  tedious  and
distressing  ;  and,  it  would  be  very  unfair  to  judge  him  from  the
utterances  of  these  last  years.  When  in  September,  1892,  he  passed
from  earth,  we  may  surely  trust  that  his  achievements  here  had  won
their  way  to  promotion,  and  his  sufferings  to  repose.

Mr.  Moses  never  married,  and  went  very  little  into  general  society.
His  personal  apjsearance  offered  no  indication  of  his  peculiar  gift.
He  was  of  middle  stature,  strongly  made,  with  somewhat  heavy
features,  and  thick  dark  hair  and  beard.  The  accompanying  photo-
graph (reproduced  from  Light  by  the  kind  permission  of  Mr.  E.  Dawson
Rogers)  shows  his  face  as  his  body  lay  in  death.  His  expression  of
countenance  was  honest,  manly,  and  resolute. Many  testimonies  o£


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  251


affection  and  esteem  appeared  in  Light  and  elsewhere  after  his  decease  ;
especially,  of  course,  from  those  to  whom  his  experiences  and  teachings
had  brought  a  convincing  hope.  I  subjoin  a  few  letters  from  friends
who  had  good  opportunities  of  estimating  his  value  in  the  common
duties  and  intercourse  of  life.

Dr.  Johnson,  of  Bedford,  writes  to  me  as  follows  : — ■

"68,  High-street,  Bedford.

''March  2m,  1893.

"Dear  Sir, — -As  the  intimate  friend  and  medical  adviser  of  the  late
Stainton  Moses  I  have  had  ample  opportunities  of  thoroughly  knowing  his
character  and  his  mental  state.

"  He  was  a  man  even  in  temper,  painstaking  and  methodical,  of  excep-
tional ability,  and  utterly  free  from  any  hallucination  or  anything  to  indicate
other  than  a  well-ordered  brain.

"  He  was  a  firm  behever  in  all  that  he  uttered  or  wrote  about  matters  of  a
sijiritual  nature,  and  he  impressed  me — and,  I  believe,  most  othei's  he  came  in
contact  with — with  the  genuineness  of  his  convictions  and  a  firm  belief  not
only  that  he  believed  in  the  statements  he  had  made  and  written,  but  that
they  were  the  outcome  of  a  mind  which  had  given  itself  up  entirely  to  tlie
study  of  a  subject  which  he  considered  of  essential  value  and  importance
to  the  welfare  of  his  fellow  men.

"  I  have  attended  him  in  several  very  severe  illnesses,  but  never,  in  sick-
ness or  at  other  times,  has  his  brain  shown  the  slightest  cloudiness  or  suffered
from  any  delusion.  I  not  only  consider  that  he  believed  what  he  stated,  but
I  think  that  those  who  knew  him  best  would  not  for  an  instant  doubt  that  all
he  stated  were  facts  and  words  of  truth. — Sincerely  yours,

"  Wm.  G.  Johnson."

In  another  letter  Dr.  Johnson  says  : — -

"  He  was  a  most  lovable  character  ;  kind  and  generous  in  his  every  action  -
and  with  a  fund  of  information  on  most  subjects  which  made  him  a  most
welcome  guest."

Dr.  Eve,  headmaster  of  University  College  School,  writes  as  follows
to  Professor  iSidgwick  : —

"  University  College  School,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.

''March.  18th,  1893.
"My  Dear  Sidgwick, — Stainton  Moses  was  an  excellent  colleague.  He
confined  himself  entirely  to  English  ;  in  that  subject  he  took  classes  in  all
parts  of  the  school,  and  his  work  was  always  well  and  methodically  done.
He  taught  essay-writing  well,  and  was  very  skilful  in  appreciating  the  relative
value  of  boys'  essays,  which  is  not  easy.  He  was  much  looked  up  to  by  boys,
and  had  considerable  influence  over  them.  On  general  points  connected
with  the  management  of  the  school  he  was  one  of  the  colleagues  to  whom  I
most  naturally  turned  for  advice,  and  I  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to
him. — Yours  very  sincerely,  "  H.  W.  Eve."

Mr.  F.  W.  Levander,  a  master  at  University  College  School,  writes
to  me  thus  : —

s


252


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  University  College  School,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.

''May  mil,  1893.

"Deak  Sir, — My  acquaintance  with  the  late  W.  Stainton  Moses  com-
menced in  the  year  1871,  when  he  first  became  one  of  the  masters  here.
This  ac([uaintance  soon  extended  beyond  the  nature  of  that  generally  met
Vv'ith  betvveen  colleagues  ;  it  ripened  into  a  constantly  increasing  friendship,
whicli  continued  unbroken  till  his  death.  During  the  whole  of  this  long
period  he  always  impressed  me  with  the  idea  that  he  was  thoroughly
earnest  and  conscientious,  and  I  believe  that  perfect  reliance  can  be  placed
on  all  his  statements. — Yours  faithfully,  "  F.  W.  Levander."

I  have  often  heard  Mr.  Moses  discussed  by  persons  of  opinions
opposed  to  his  own  ;  and  since  I  owe  it  to  my  readers  to  make  the
present  paper  not  merely  eulogistic,  but  as  accurately  descriptive
as  my  materials,  allow,  I  feel  bound  to  reproduce  adverse  criticisms.  I
have,  then^  heard  him,  in  his  later  years,  characterised  as  an  obstinate,
confused,  and  irritable  controversialist.  I  have  heard  him  described  as
lacking  in  the  grace  of  humility,  and  in  that  spirituality  of  tastes  and
character  which  should  seem  appropriate  to  one  living  much  in  the
commerce  of  the  Unseen.  But  I  have  never  heard  anyone  who  had
even  the  slightest  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Moses  impugn  his  sanity  or
his  sincerity,  his  vei-acity  or  his  honour.

Thus  briefly, — and  with  a  dispassionate  coldness  against  which  an
impulse  of  gratitude  in  my  own  heart  rebels, — let  the  life  of  W.
Stainton  Moses  be  here  recorded.  But  now  our  narrative  must  pass  at
a  bound  from  the  co}nmonplace  and  the  credible  to  bewildering  and
inconceivable  things.  With  tlie  even  tenour  of  this  straightforward  and
reputable  life  was  inwoven  a  chain  of  mysteries  which,  as  I  have  before
•said,  in  what  way  soever  they  be  explained,  make  that  life  one  of  the
most  extraordinary  which  our  century  has  seen.  For  his  true  history
lies,  not  in  the  everyday  events  thus  far  recorded,  but  in  that  series  of
physical  manifestations  which  began  in  1872  and  lasted  for  some  eight
years,  and  that  series  of  automatic  writings  and  trance-utterances
which  began  in  1873,  received  a  record  for  some  ten  years,  and  did
not,  as  is  believed,  cease  altogether  until  the  earthly  end  was  near.

These  two  series  were  intimately  connected  ;  the  physical  pheno-
mena being  avowedly  designed  to  give  authority  to  the  speeches  and
writings  which  professed  to  emanate  from  the  same  source.  There  is  no
ground  for  separating  the  two  groups,  except  the  obvious  one  that  the
automatic  phenomena  are  less  difficult  of  credence  than  the  physical.
Since,  however,  to  the  physical  we  must  needs  come  sooner  or  later,
it  seems  the  simplest  plan  to  place  them  first,  as  coming  first  in
chronological  order.  I  shall,  therefore,  proceed  to  describe  some  of
these  sittings,  mainly  by  quotation  from  Mr.  Moses'  contemporary
notes.

Mr.  Moses'  notes,  however,  are  not  the  only  records  of  these  experi-


The  Experiences  of  ^Y.  Stainton  Moses.


253


meats.  For  almost  all  the  sittings  which  he  describes,  and  for  some
which  he  does  not  describe,  there  is  (as  already  stated)  a  second  detailed,
independent,  contemporary  record,  by  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer,  and  for
many  of  the  sittings  a  third  record,  also  independent  and  contempora-
neous, although  very  brief,  by  Dr.  Speer.  For  some  few  of  them  there
is  also  a  similar  record  by  Mr.  Percival;  whoso  memory  also  confirms
the  other  accounts.  Parts  of  Mr.  Moses'  own  record,  indeed,  are
avowedly  dei'ived  from  the  other  sitters,  since  he  depended  upon  theiu
for  information  as  to  what  went  on  when  he  was  in  trance.  But  he
has  always,  I  think,  made  this  distinction  clear  in  his  notes.  His  note-
books of  these  phenomena,  I  may  add,  Avere  very  privately  l^ept,  and
even  Mrs.  Speer  tells  me  that  she  has  never  read  any  of  them  except
the  first.  Curiously  enough,  therefore,  much  of  what  I  now  print  has
actually  never  been  read  till  now,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  by  anyone
except  the  writer  himself.  And  a  certain  combination  of  accidents  has
been  needed  even  now  to  enable  these  passages,  after  their  twenty  years
of  pi'ivacy,  to  see  at  last  the  light  of  day.

Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer's  notes  have,  as  already  stated,  been  for  the
most  part  ah'eady  published  in  Lvjht,  so  that  the  reader  can  judge  for
himself  as  to  their  accordance  with  Mr.  Moses'  record.  They  are
largely  concerned  with  trance-utterances  of  which  Mr.  Moses  was
unconscious,  but  the  description  of  the  physical  phenomena  seems  to  me
as  nearly  identical  in  the  two  series  of  records  as  can  be  expected  from
two  separate  observers.  I  have  not  thought  it  needful  to  reprint  here
more  than  a  few  passages  of  Mrs.  Speer's,  where,  for  some  reason  or
other,  her  account  seems  to  supply  a  useful  complement  to  Mr.  Moses
own.

Dr.  Speer's  notes,  which  are  short,  I  have  printed  almost  in  extenso,
— interwoven  with  Mr.  Moses'  own.  They  were  written  on  a  loose  sheet
of  paper  and  in  two  small  note-books,  which  do  not  appear  to  have
been  shown  to  anyone  but  Mr.  IMoses,  among  whose  pajDers  at  Bedford
they  were  found.  He  printed  some  extracts  from  them  in  Light.  An
important  statement  from  Dr.  Speer  is  also  incorporated  in  Mr.  Moses'
Researclies  iyi  Spiritualism,  and  will  be  quoted  below.  I  may  add  that
Mrs.  Speer,  examining  Dr.  Speer's  private  diaiy,  has  found  there  also
short  records  of  seances,  concordant,  though  not  verbally  identical,
with  the  accounts  given  in  his  note-books.  These  records  extend
further  than  the  note-books,  and  some  of  them  also  will  be  found  lijelow.

Several  passages  by  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival,  already  printed,  will  be
found  below ;  and  Mr.  Percival  has  verbally  confirmed  to  me  the
correctness  of  Mrs.  Speer's  record  of  those  sittings  at  which  he  was
himself  present.  Much  indeed  which  is  there  given  was  taken  down
by  Mr.  Percival  himself.

I  have  spoken  of  these  records  as  contemporaneous. Mrs.  Stanhope

s  2


254


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Speer  tells  me  that  her  notes  were  habitually  written  on  the  day  of  the
sitting,  or  at  latest  on  the  mon'ow.  As  to  Dr.  Speer's  and  Mr.  Moses'
notes  it  is  now  impossible  to  be  equally  certain,  except  in  Mr.  Moses'
books  of  automatic  script,  in  which  every  entry  begins  with  a  record  of
the  day,  and  often  of  the  hoibr  and  the  p^ace,  of  writing.  But  the  inci-
dental phrases,  and  the  changes  of  pen  and  handwriting,  in  his  note-
books of  physical  phenomena  lead  me  to  think  that  his  notes  were
roughly  jotted  down  daily,  and  written  out  in  the  note-book  either  at
once  or  at  intervals  of  a  few  days.  He  says  himself  that  they  "  were
very  regularly  written  when  the  events  of  the  seance  were  fresh  in  my
memory."  This  point  is  the  less  important  becaiise,  as  I  have  said,  the
various  series  of  records  are  so  concordant  that  (unless  it  be  suggested
that  they  were  fabricated  to  suit  each  other,  though  with  a  show  of
iirdependence)  it  is  clear  that  they  must  all  have  been  written  while  the
events  were  fresh  in  the  recorders'  minds.

The  passages  which  I  have  selected  for  quotation  are  simply  such
as  best  illustrate  the  subject  matter  ; — the  most  striking  and  charac-
teristic samples  of  the  recorded  phenomena.  This  may  not,  perhaps,
l)e  the  most  politic  course,  in  view  of  the  reader's  difficulties  of  belief  ;
but  (as  already  implied)  there  seems  no  valid  ground  for  selecting  what
he  might  regard  as  the  least  incredible  among  so  many  incredibilities.
The  evidence  for  all  the  incidents  is  practically  the  same  ; — the  whole
group  of  witnesses  are  as  fully  pledged,  say,  to  the  falling  of  pearls
from  the  air  as  to  the  automatic  script  or  the  trance-phenomena.  I  at
least  can  see  no  via  media  which  can  be  plausibly  taken.  The
permanent  fraud  of  the  whole  group,  or  the  substantial  accuracy  of  all
the  records,  are  the  only  hypotheses  which  seem  to  me  capable  of
covering  the  facts.  At  any  rate,  before  further  discussing  this  point,  I
propose  to  quote  at  sufficient  length  to  allow  my  readers  to  form  their
own  judgment.  My  only  personal  contribution  to  the  data  before  us
lies  in  my  somewhat  confident  impression  that  my  friends  whom  I  am
thus  frankly  discussing  are  and  were  in  the  habit  of  speaking  the  truth.

There  are,  indeed,  two  subsidiary  jioints  on  which  I  have  had  a
clear  principle  to  guide  me  to  certain  omissions.  In  the  first  j^lace,  I
have  almost  wholly  omitted  Mr.  Moses'  accounts  of  his  sittings  with
other  mediums.  What  in  those  sittings  is  important  for  our  present
purpose  may  be  briefly  summarised  as  follows  : —

1.  Mr.  Moses  spent  much  time  and  trouble  in  sitting  with  many
paid  and  one  or  two  private  mediums.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  at  once
recording  the  results  in  private  note-books  and  trying  to  decide
whether  the  phenomena  wei'e  genuine  or  no.  So  far  we  have  addi-
tional indication  of  a  serious  and  reasonable  interest  in  such  matters,
as  against  the  view  that  his  own  experiences  are  attributable  to
hallucination  or  fraud.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


255


2,  As  an  observer  he  seems  to  me  to  have  been  about  at  tlie  average
level  of  that  epoch.  Several  times  he  detected  fraud  ;  once  at  least  he
was  convinced  by  a  manifestation  afterwards  absolutely  proved  to  have
been  fraudulent.  On  some  other  occasions,  while  it  is  not  certahi  that
he  was  deluded,  he  shows  a  very  imperfect  perception  of  possibilities  of
deceit.  But  his  degree  of  acumen  as  a  detective  is  of  little  importance
to  our  present  inquiry.

3.  More  important  is  the  question  as  to  the  relation  Ijetween  these
seances  with  other  mediums  and  his  own  manifestations.  He
frequently  asked  the  '•  guides  "  or  "  controls  "  of  his  automatic  writing
their  opinion  on  what  he  had  witnessed.  Did  those  "  controls,"  we
may  ask,  ever  vouch  for  the  genuineness  of  what  was  afterwards  proved
to  be  false  1  or  did  they,  on  the  other  hand,  show  that  kind  of  intimate
and  infallible  detective  power  which  might  be  expected  from  observers
freed  from  the  trammels  of  the  flesh  ■  The  evidence  is  to  my  mind
inconclusive  either  way.  The  "  controls  "  themselves  are  of  various
types  ;  and  there  is  one  rare  "  control  "  ("Magus"),  to  be  later  discussed,
whose  utterances  seem  to  me  shifty  and  exaggerated,  in  a  way  very
common  in  automatic  script,  and  who  does  apparently  endorse  a  com-
plete impostor.  The  utterances  of  other  "  controls  "  for  the  most  part
I'eflect  Mr.  Moses'  own  opinions  on  other  mediums,  or  are  sometimes
more  severe.^ But  the  question  which  is  of  most  interest,  and  which

^  After  a  sitting  with  Mr.  Williams,  -which  Mr.  Moses  had  recorded  as  fully  con-
vincing, the  following  remarkable  colloquy  occurs  in  an  automatic  note-book  (Book
XV.,  p.  1.)

Aug.  Wi,  1874,  Bedford.

Q.  Was  anyone  present  at  the  last  seance  at  Mrs.  F.'s? I  was  much  impressed.
A.  Yes. I  was  not  present  myself  but  our  friends  were  there. We  do  not  advise
you  to  rest  much  on  that.

Q.  What I  thought  it  conclusive  proof.

A.  You  must  use  your  own  judgment. We  do  but  warn  you  to  be  careful.
<.J.  Do  you  mean  to  say  it  was  not  genuine  ?

A.  We  only  urge  you  to  be  wary.  The  manifestation  was  suspicious  and  is  not  to
be  depended  on.

Q.  I  am  surprised. Who  writes  ?

A.  It  is  I, — 1 1 :  S  :  D.  [Imperator,  Servus  Dei,  the  assumed  name  of  Mr.  Moses'
])rincipal  guide.]

Q.  Then  j'ou  will  tell  me.  Ain  I  to  understand  that  the  manifestation  was  not  of
a  materialised  form  ?

A.  We  do  not  feel  it  part  of  our  work  to  save  you  from  the  use  of  your  own
Ijowers. You  are  warned. Exercise  your  observing  faculties.
Q.  But  I  am  bewildered.

A.  It  is  needful  for  you  to  work  through  such  experience.  We  may  not  save  you
from  it. Only  be  wary.

Q.  I  have  long  wanted  information  about  those  forms  and  have  had  grave  doubts,
but  I  have  believed  in  J.K. [John  King.]

A.  It  is  not  our  plan  to  give  you  any  further  information  now.  We  only  say  that
what  was  then  presented  was  dubious.

Q.  But  I  am  to  write  about  it.  Was  it  a  materialisation  at  all '!  Is  there  such  a
thing  ?


256


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


is  now  insoluble,  arises  when  Mr.  Moses  and  his  accustomed  guides
concur  in  maintaining  the  genuineness  of  certain  phenomena  occurring
in  the  presence  of  a  medium  whose  occasional  fraud  neither  Mr.  Moses
nor  his  guides  deny.  Something  of  this  sort  is  the  case  with  regard  to
the  "  spirit  photographs"  of  the  late  Mr.  Hudson.  Hudson  was  clearly
shown  to  have  occasionally  cheated,  and  was  once  actually  caught
cheating — in  a  most  rudimentary  manner — by  Mr.  Moses  himself.  ^
Nevertheless,  if  such  things  as  genuine  spirit  photographs  shall  after-
wards be  shown  to  exist,  then  these  photograjihs  of  Hudson's  and  the
accompanying  statements  made  Ijy  the  automatic  script,  will  deserve
cai'eful  reconsideration.

The  second  point  on  which  omissions  fri»m  the  manuscript  are

A.  You  will  know  all  in  due  time,  but  that  was  not  reliable.  We  urge  you  to  be
careful.  You  are  always  careful,  as  you  think.  But  be  wary  as  to  generalising  too
I'apidly.  There  is  in  the  manifestation  of  the  lower  spirits  much  deception,  nor  can
you  ever  be  sure  that  such  is  not  being-  practised.  It  is  so  in  all  the  manifestations  in
which  the  more  material  spirits  are  concerned.

Q.  You  do  not  tell  me  much.

A.  We  do  not  purpose  to  do  so. We  only  warn. It  was  not  reliable.

Q.  But  I  had  my  hand  in  J.  K.'s  and  the  other  on  the  medium's  bodj\  There
could  be  no  deception  there.

A.  On  the  medium's  boot,  but  not  on  his  body,  as  Kabbila  informs  us.  But  we
will  go  no  further.  It  is  not  our  habit  to  go  so  far.  Seek  not  further  information.
It  will  not  be  given.  We  do  not  wish  to  communicate  at  length  now.  You  have
done  all  that  you  are  capable  of  doing.

y.  But  I  want  to  ask  further.  Are  my  senses  g'ood  for  nothing,  or  am  I  so  easily
deceived  ?

A.  No,  no.  Neither.  But  you  know  nothing  of  occult  influence  when  deceiving
spirits  are  present.  The  mixture  of  the  true  and  false  would  make  it  impossible  for
you  to  arrive  at  fact.  Hence  have  we  warned  you  so  urgently  to  beware  of  the  intro-
duction of  suoli. They  are  fatal  to  our  woi-k. Cease  now.

t  I:  S:D.  [Imperator,  Servus  Dei.]
t  R.  [Rector.]

(Two  hours  later — same  day — evening.)

A.  The  chief  will  not  speak.  He  is  very  cautious.  But  I  saw  and  can  testify.  It
was  all  bad.

Q.  How  do  you  know  ? I  can't  believe  it.

A.  It  was  all  bad. John  King  was  not  there  ;  but  another  who  deceived.
Q.  How  in  the  world  am  I  to  know  then  ? I  could  not  tell.

A.  You  would  have  known  if  you  had  been  well,  and  we  were  not  able  to  protect
you  against  false  spirits.

Q.  How  am  I  to  know  that  yon  are  not  mistaken  ?  or  if  j'ou  are  right,  how  am  I
to  know  what  is  true  and  wliat  false  ?

A.  We  have  already  told  you  that  false  and  deceiving  spirits  always  do  abound  iu
such  circles.  Hence  it  is  that  you  have  been  so  warned  of  the  danger  of  the  assaults
of  the  undeveloped.  The  chief  has  told  you  to  beware  of  such.  The  warning  is.
needed.

Q.  Then  you  mean  to  say  that  you  wei-e  there,  and  that  what  I  mistook  for  J.K.
was  the  medium. I  don't  want  to  misunderstand  you.
A.  Yes.

1  This  seems  to  be  perhaps  the  only  recorded  instance  of  actual  detection  of  Hudsoo
in  Hagr ante  delicto. See  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  remarks  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  274-


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


257


necessary  concerns  the  alleged  identity  of  some  of  the  communicating
intelligences.  As  a  general  rule  the  same  alleged  spirits  both
manifested  themselves  by  raps,  &c.,  at  Mr.  Moses'  sittings  with  his
friends,  and  also  wrote  through  his  hand  when  he  was  alone.  In  this,  as
in  other  respects,  Mr.  Moses'  two  series  of  sittings — when  alone  and  in
company — were  concordant,  and,  so  to  say,  complementary  ; — explana-
tions being  given  by  the  writing  of  what  had  happened  at  the  seances.
When  "direct  writing"  was  given  at  the  seances  the  handwriting  of
each  alleged  spirit  was  the  same  as  that  whicli  the  same  spirit  was  in
the  habit  of  employing  in  the  automatic  script.  The  claim  to
individuality  was  thus  in  all  cases  decisively  made.

Now  the  personages  thus  claiming  to  appear  may  be  divided
roughly  into  three  classes  : —

A.  — First  and  most  important  are  a  group  of  persons  recently
deceased,  and  sometimes,  as  will  be  seen,  manifesting  themselves
at  the  seances  before  their  decease  was  known  through  any  ordinary
channel  to  any  of  the  persons  present.  These  spirits  in  many  instances
give  tests  of  identity,  mentioning  facts  connected  with  their  earth-
lives  which  are  afterwards  found  to  be  correct.  With  all  such  cases
we  shall  have  in  the  next  paper  to  deal  at  length.

B.  — Next  comes  a  group  of  personages  belonging  to  genera-
tions more  remote,  and  generally  of  some  distinction  in  their  day.
Grocyn,  the  friend  of  Erasmus,  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  these.  Many
of  these  also  contribute  facts  as  a  proof  of  identity,  which  facts,  as  in
Grocyn's  case  given  below,  are  sometimes  more  correct  than  the  con-
scious or  admitted  knowledge  of  any  of  the  sitters  could  supply.  In
such  cases,  however,  the  difficulty  of  proving  identity  is  increased  (as
will  be  seen  later  on)  by  the  fact  that  most  (though  not  all)  of  the
facts  thus  given  are  readily  accessible  in  print,  and  may  conceivably
have  either  been  read  and  forgotten  by  Mr.  Moses,  or  have  l)ecome
known  to  him  by  some  kind  of  clairvoyance.

C.  — A  third  group  consists  of  spirits  who  give  such  names  as
Rector,  Doctor,  Theophilus,  and,  above  all,  Impei'ator.  These  from
time  to  time  reveal  the  names  which  they  assert  to  have  been  theirs  in
earth-life.  These  concealed  names  are  for  the  most  part  both  more
illustrious,  and  more  remote  tlian  the  names  in  Class  B, — and  it  is
these  which  will  here  be  withheld.  This  was  the  express  wish  of  Mr.
Moses  himself,  who  justly  felt  that  the  assumption  of  gi-eat  names  is
likely  to  diminish  rather  than  to  increase  the  weight  of  the  com-
munication. He  felt  this  in  his  own  person  ;  and  for  a  long  while  one
of  his  main  stumbling-blocks  lay  in  these  lofty  and  unprovable  claims.
Ultimately  he  came  to  believe  even  in  these  identities,  on  the  general
ground  that  teachers  who  had  given  him  so  many  proofs  both  of  their
power  and  of  their  serious  interest  in  his  welfare  were  not  likely  to


258


Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


have  deceived  him  on  such  a  point.  But  he  did  not  count  upon  a
similar  behef  in  others,  and  he  expressly  wished  to  avoid  seeming  to
claim  special  authority  for  the  teachings  on  the  ground  of  their  alleged
authorship.  It  must  be  added  also  that  some  of  these  teachings  them-
selves asserted  that  when  the  name  of  some  spirit  long  removed  from
earth  was  given,  the  recipient  must  sometimes  take  this  to  imply  a
stream  of  influence  emanating  from  that  spirit,  rather  than  his  own
presence  in  person.^

"The  higher  spirits  who  come  to  your  earth  are  influences  or  emanations.
They  are  not  what  you  describe  as  persons,  hut  emanations  from  higher
spheres.  You  must  learn  to  recognise  the  impersonality  of  the  higher  mes-
sages. When  we  fii'st  appeared  to  this  medium  lie  insisted  on  our
identifying  ourselves  to  him.  But  many  influences  come  through  our  name.
Two  or  three  stages  after  death,  spirits  lose  much  of  what  you  regard  as  in-
dividuality, and  become  more  like  influences.  I  have  now  passed  to  the
vei-ge  of  the  spheres  from  which  it  is  possible  to  return  to  you,  and  I  can
influence  without  any  regard  to  distance. I  am  very  distant  from  you  now."

With  these  special  exceptions,  made  on  the  grounds  above  explained,
the  quotations  which  follow  are  fully  representative  of  the  series  of
Mr.  Moses'  notes  of  physical  phenomena.  These  notes,  as  already
.stated,  were  contained  in  five  books,  numbered  by  me  IB,  2  B,  3  B,
4  B,  5  B, — of  which  the  first  is  missing.

The  now  missing  1  B  (as  is  incidentally  stated  by  Mr.  Moses)  con-
tained the  early  experiments,  and  was  the  note-book  from  which  he
took  much  of  the  material  for  certain  papers  summarising  those  exj^eri-
ments  which  he  printed  in  Human  Nature  in  1874.  I  shall  therefore
begin  with  quoting  the  important  parts  of  this  summary,  which  has
been  long  out  of  print.  The  subsequent  direct  quotations  from  the
note-books  will  explain  some  points  which  the  summary  leaves  obscure  ;
for  instance,  as  to  the  amount  of  observation  which  Mr.  Moses,  in  his
normal  state,  was  able  to  give  to  the  phenomena,  and  the  degree  to
which  he  depended  upon  information  from  his  fellow-sitters.

One  word  more  before  the  citations  begin.  It  must  be  remembered
that  the  phenomena  here  to  be  described,  strange  and  grotesque  as  they
often  seem,  cannot  be  called  meaningless.  The  alleged  operators  are
at  pains  throughout  to  describe  what  they  regarded  as  the  end,  and
what  merely  as  the  means  to  that  end.  Their  constantly  avowed
object  was  the  promulgation  through  Mr.  Moses  of  certain  religious
and  philosophical  views  ;  and  the  physical  manifestations  are  through-
out described  as  designed  merely  as  a  proof  of  power,  and  a  basis  for
the  authority  claimed  for  the  serious  teachings.'-'

1  I  have  here  had  to  draw  a  somewhat  .arbiti-ary  line,  and  have  decided  to  withhold
all  names  more  ancient  and  venerable  than  that  of  Seneca.

Spirit  Teachings,  which  includes  many  of  these  communications,  has  just  been
republished  with  a  Life  by  Mr.  Charlton  Speer.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


259


Quotations  from  Mr.  Moses'  "Researches  in  Spiritualism."'

"  All  that  I  have  described  [of  movement]  occurs  readily  when  the
table  is  untouched.  Indeed,  when  the  force  is  developed,  we  have  found
it  better  to  remove  the  hands  and  leave  tlie  table  to  its  own  devices.
The  tilting  above  noticed  has  been  even  more  marked  when  the  sitters
have  been  removed  from  it  to  a  distance  of  about  two  feet.  It  has
rapped  on  the  chair  and  on  the  floor,  inclined  so  as  to  play  into  a  hand
placed  on  the  carpet,  and  has  been  restored  to  its  normal  position  when
no  hand  has  touched  it.  The  actual  force  required  to  perform  this
would  be  represented  by  very  considerable  muscular  exertion  in  a  man
of  ordinaiy  strength.

"  We  had  ventured  on  one  occasion,  contrary  to  direction,  to  add  to
our  circle  a  strange  member.  Some  trivial  phenomena  occurred,  but
the  usual  controlling  spirit  did  not  appear.  "When  next  we  sat,  he
came  ;  and  probably  none  of  us  will  easily  forget  the  sledge-hammer
blows  with  which  he  smote  the  table.  The  noise  was  distinctly  audible
in  the  room  below,  and  gave  one  the  idea  that  the  table  would  be
broken  to  pieces.  In  vain  we  withdrew  from  the  table,  hoping  to
diminish  the  power.  The  heavy  blows  increased  in  intensity,  and
the  whole  room  shook  with  their  force.  The  direst  penalties  were
threatened  if  we  again  interfered  with  the  development  by  bringing  in
new  sitters.  We  have  not  ventured  to  do  so  again  ;  and  I  do  not  think
we  shall  easily  be  persuaded  to  I'isk  another  similar  objurgation.

"  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  ^  records  a  curious  instance  of  the  exercise  of  this
force,  in  the  second  volume  of  his  very  interesting  work,  "  What  am
I?  In  the  cases  specified  above,  the  table  was  a  small  square  one,
firmly  placed  on  four  legs,  and  weighing  about  40ib.  The  dining-
table  of  Serjeant  Cox,  on  the  contrary,  was  very  massive  ;  so  heavy,
that  the  united  exertions  of  two  strong  men  were  required  to  move  it.
The  experiment  is  so  curious  that  I  extract  the  account : —

' '  On  Tuesday,  J  une  2nd,  1873,  a  personal  friend  came  to  lay  residence  in
Russell  Square  to  dress  for  a  dinner  party  to  which  we  were  invited.  He
had  previously  exhibited  considerable  power  as  a  Psychic.  Having  half  an
hour  to  spare,  we  went  into  the  dining-room.  It  was  just  six  o'clock,  and
of  course  broad  daylight.  I  was  opening  letters  ;  he  was  reading  the  Times.
My  dining-table  is  of  mahogany,  very  heavy,  old-fashioned,  six  feet  wide,
nine  feet  long.  It  stands  on  a  Turkey  carpet,  which  much  increases  tlie
difficulty  of  moving  it.  A  subsequent  trial  showed  that  tlie  united  efforts
of  two  strong  men  standing  were  required  to  move  it  one  inch. There  was

^  Researches  in  Spiritualism  during  the  Years  1872-3.  By  M.  A.  Oxon.  Pages  21-23,
28-30,  34-39,  41-42,  49-54,  56-57,  59-62,  66-72  are  here  reprinted,  as  pp.  259-283  of  this
paper.

^  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  Serjeant  Cox  (vvlio  orally  described  this  scene  to
me)  was  not  himself  a  "  SpirituaHst, "  but  ascribed  tliese  and  similar  phenomena  to  a
power  innate  in  the  medium's  own  being. — F.W.H.M.  ■  .  ■


260


The  Experiences,  of  ^¥.  Stainton  Moses.


no  cloth  upon  it,  and  tlie  light  fell  full  under  it.  No  person  was  in  the  room
but  my  friend  and  myself.  Suddenly,  as  we  were  sitting  thus,  frequent  and
loud  rappings  came  upon  the  table.  My  friend  was  then  sitting  holding  the
newspaper  witli  buth  hands,  one  arm  resting  on  the  table,  the  other  on  the
back  of  chair,  and  turned  sideways  from  the  table,  so  that  his  legs  and  feet
were  not  under  the  table,  but  at  the  side  of  it.  Presently  the  solid  table
quivered  as  if  witli  an  ague  fit.  Then  it  swayed  to  and  fro  so  violently  as
almost  to  dislocate  the  big  pillar-like  legs,  of  which  there  are  eight.  Theji
it  moved  forward  about  three  inches.  I  looked  under  it  to  be  sure  that  it
was  not  touched  :  but  still  it  moved,  and  still  the  blows  were  loud  ujDon  it.

"This  sudden  access  of  the  Force  at  such  a  time  and  in  such  a  i^Iace,
with  none  present  but  myself  and  my  friend,  and  with  no  thought  then  of
invoking  it,  caused  the  utmost  astonishment  in  both  of  us.  My  friend  said
that  nothing  like  it  had  ever  before  occurred  to  him.  I  then  suggested  that
it  would  be  an  invalualjle  opportunity,  with  so  great  a  power  in  action,  to
make  trial  of  motiuii  witlioift  contact,  the  presence  of  two  persons  only,  the
daylight,  the  jDlace,  the  size  and  weight  of  the  table,  making  the  experiment
a  crucial  one.  Accordingly  we  stood  upright,  he  on  one  side  of  the  table,
I  on  the  other  side  of  it.  We  stood  two  feet  from  it,  and  held  our  hands
eight  inches  above  it.  In  one  minute  it  rocked  violently.  Then  it  moved
over  the  carpet  a  distance  of  seven  inches.  Then  it  rose  three  inches  from
the  floor  on  the  side  on  which  my  friend  was  standing.  Then  it  rose  equally
on  my  side.  Finally  my  friend  held  his  hands  four  inches  over  the  end  of
the  table,  and  asked  that  it  would  rise  and  touch  his  hand  three  times.  It
did  so  ;  and  then,  in  accordance  with  the  like  request,  it  rose  to  my  hand
held  at  the  other  end  to  the  same  height  above  it  and  in  the  same  manner."

"  Another  singular  instance  occurred  during  a  visit  that  I  made  to
a  gentleman  interested  in  this  subject.  After  some  conversation,  it  was
suggested  that  we  should  try  the  effect  of  placing  our  hands  on  a  pillar
work-table  belonging  to  his  wife.  It  was  filled  with  reels  and  tapes,
and  the  appliances  of  needlework.  We  had  scarcely  touched  it  when
it  began  to  move.  It  danced  about  like  a  live  thing  ;  executed  a  series
of  gyrations,  first  on  one  foot  and  then  on  another ;  and  finally  lay
down  on  the  floor  and  jerked  all  its  contents  about  the  room.  It  rose
again  unaided,  bounded  ofi'  the  floor,  and  waltzed  round  the  room.
When  it  was  still  I  held  my  hand  over  it,  and  it  began  to  quiver,  and
finally  I'ose  from  the  floor  until  it  touched  my  hand,  which  was  ten  or
twelve  inches  above  it.  It  afterwards  rose  to  the  height  of  eighteen
inches  or  two  feet.  While  this  was  going  on,  a  column  of  light  was
visible  over  it.

"Once  more, motion  without  contact,  directed  by  evident  intelligence,
is  seen  markedly  in  the  following  instance  : — -1  was  calling  on  a  friend,
and  the  conversation  fell  on  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  A  sitting
was  proposed,  and  nothing,  or  almost  nothing,  occurred.  We  were
quite  alone  in  the  room,  which  was  well  lighted.  We  drew  back  from
the  table,  intending  to  give  up  the  attempt.  My  friend  asked  why
nothing  occurred.  The  table,  untouched  by  us,  rose  and  gently  touched


The  Experiences  of  W.  Staiiffon  Moses.


261


my  throat  and  chest  three  times.  I  was  suffering  from  severe  bronchial
symptoms,  and  was  altogether  below  par.  After  this  no  rap  or  move-
ment could  be  elicited,  and  we  were  fain  to  accept  the  explanation  of
our  want  of  success.

"  My  first  personal  experience  of  levitation  was  aljout  five  months
after  my  introduction  to  Spiritualism.  Physical  phenomena  of  a  very
powerful  description  had  been  developed  with  great  rapidity.  We  were
new  to  the  subject,  and  the  phenomena  were  most  interesting.  After
much  movement  of  objects,  and  lifting  and  tilting  of  the  table,  a  small
hand  organ,  a  child's  plaything,  was  floated  about  the  room,  making  a
most  inharmonious  din.  It  was  a  favourite  amusement  with  the  little
Puck-like  invisible  who  then  manifested.  One  day  (August  30th,  1872)
the  little  organ  was  violently  thrown  down  in  a  distant  corner  of  the
room,  and  I  felt  my  chair  drawn  back  from  the  table  and  turned  into
the  coi'ner  near  which  I  sat.  It  was  so  placed  that  my  face  was  turned
away  from  the '  circle  to  the  angle  made  by  the  two  walls.  In  this-
position  the  chair  was  raised  from  the  floor  to  a  distance  of,  I  should
judge,  twelve  or  fourteen  inches.  My  feet  touched  the  top  of  the
skirting-board,  which  would  be  about  twelve  inches  in  height.  The
chair  remained  suspended  for  a  few  moments,  and  I  tlien  felt  myself
going  from  it,  higher  and  higher,  with  a  very  slow  and  easy  movement.
I  had  no  sense  of  discomfort  nor  of  apprehension.  I  was  jaerfectly
conscious  of  what  was  being  done,  and  described  the  process  to  those
who  were  sitting  at  the  table.  The  movement  was  very  steady,  and
occupied  what  seemed  a  long  time  before  it  was  completed.  I  was-
close  to  the  wall,  so  close  that  I  was  able  to  put  a  pencil  firmly  against
my  chest,  and  to  mark  the  spot  opposite  to  me  on  the  wail-paper.  That
mark,  when  measured  afterwards,  was  found  to  be  rather  more  than
six  feet  from  the  floor,  and,  from  its  position,  it  was  clear  that  my  head
must  have  been  in  the  very  corner  of  the  room,  close  to  the  ceiling.  I
do  not  think  that  I  was  in  any  way  entranced.  I  was  perfectly  clear
in  ray  mind ;  quite  alive  to  what  was  being  done,  and  fully  conscious
of  the  curious  phenomenon.  I  felt  no  pressure  on  any  part  of  my  body,
only  a  sensation  as  of  being  in  a  lift,  whilst  objects  seemed  to  be  passing
away  from  below  me.  I  remember  a  slight  difiiculty  in  breathing,  and
a  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  chest,  with  a  general  feeling  of  being
lighter  than  the  atmosphere.  I  was  lowered  down  quite  gently,  and
placed  in  the  chair,  which  had  settled  in  its  old  position.  The  measure-
ments and  observations  were  taken  immediately,  and  the  marks  which
I  had  made  with  my  pencil  were  noted.  My  voice  was  said  at  the
time  to  sound  as  if  from  the  corner  of  the  room,  close  to  the  ceiling.

"  This  experiment  was  more  or  less  successfully  repeated  on  nine
other  occasions.  On  the  2nd  September,  1872,  I  see  from  my  records
that  I  was  three  times  raised  on  to  the  table,  and  twice  levitated  in  the


262


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


corner  of  the  room.  The  first  movement  on  to  the  table  was  very
sudden — a  sort  of  instantaneous  jerk.  I  was  conscious  of  nothing  until
I  found  myself  on  the  table — my  cJiair  beiriff  uiimoved.  This,  under
ordinary  circumstances,  is  what  we  call  impossible.  I  was  so  placed
that  it  would  have  been  out  of  my  power  to  quit  my  place  at  the  table
without  moving  my  chair.  In  the  second  attempt  I  was  placed  on  the
table  in  a  standing  posture.  In  this  case  I  was  conscious  of  the  with-
drawal of  my  chair  and  of  being  raised  to  the  level  of  the  table,  and
then  of  being  impelled  forward  so  as  to  stand  upon  it.  I  was  not
entranced,  nor  was  I  conscious  of  any  external  pressure.  In  the  third
case  I  was  thrown  on  to  the  table,  and  from  that  j^osition  on  to  an
iidjacent  sofa.  The  movement  was  instantaneous,  as  in  the  first
recorded  case  ;  and  though  1  was  thrown  to  a  considerable  distance,
and  with  considerable  force,  I  was  in  no  way  hurt.  At  the  time  that
I  lay  on  the  sofa  I  felt  the  chair  in  which  I  had  been  sitting,  and
which  would  be  four  feet  from  where  I  lay,  come  and  press  my  back
several  times. It  was  finally  placed  on  the  table.

"  The  levitations  were  of  a  character  similar  to  the  one  described
before,  with  the  addition  of  one  very  important  particular.  On  the
wall  behind  my  chair  was  an  oil-painting  in  an  old-fashioned  massive
frame.  The  frame  projected  from  the  wall  far  enough  to  allow  my  arm
to  rest  upon  it,  as  my  dust-covered  sleeve  afterwards  testified.  This
frame  was  about  eight  inches  from  the  ceiling.  I  remember  distinctly
being  raised  until  my  hand  touched  the  top  of  this  frame.  I  was  then
turned  round,  and  my  body  was  longitudinally  extended  over  the  table
until  my  feet  were  close  to  the  head  of  one  of  the  sitters.  I  remained
in  that  position  long  enough  for  it  to  be  carefully  ascertained  by  passing
the  hand  over  ray  feet  and  legs.  In  this  case  the  lowering  to  the
ground  took  place  rapidly  and  suddenly  :  I  surmise,  from  the  fact  of
my  feet  and  legs  having  Ijeen  touched.  This  demonstration,  which  had
agitated  me,  closed  the  seance  ;  and  while  we  were  preparing  to  leave
the  room  another  display  of  force  under  well-ascertained  conditions
took  place.  We  had  risen  from  the  table,  and  one  of  the  party  was
near  the  door.  A  chair  was  close  to  his  right  hand ;  I  was  three  yards
from  him,  when  suddenly,  from  the  corner  in  which  I  had  been  sitting,
a  footstool  darted  across  the  room  as  though  it  had  been  violently
kicked,  struck  the  chair  near  the  door,  and  knocked  it  down  with  a
great  clatter.  I  saw  the  occurrence,  which  was  in  fair  light,  and  vei'y
convincing  as  a  display  of  force.  The  footstool  ran  along  the  floor  as
though  it  had  been  forcibly  kicked ;  and  started  from  a  corner  near
which  no  human  being  was  standing.

"These  phenomena  of  levitation have  presented  themselves  on  a  few
other  occasions  ;  but  the  most  marked  instances  have  been  those  above
described. I  lia\  e  discouraged  them  as  much  as  possible,  from  a  dislike


Tlte  Experiences  of  ^Y.  Stainton  Closes.


263


to  violent  physical  manifestations.  I  have  little  power  to  prevent  a.
special  kind  of  manifestation,  and  none  whatever  to  evoke  any  that  I
may  desire  ;  l)ut  I  do,  as  far  as  1  can,  pi'event  the  very  uncomfortable
phenomena  which  at  this  period  were  so  strongly  developed.  On
several  occasions  my  chair  has  been  raised  from  the  ground  slightly.
I  have  always  checked  any  attempt  to  raise  it  beyond  a  few  inches,
either  by  request,  or  by  rising  from  it,  and  so  checking  the  manifesta-
tion. In  the  instances  recorded  above  I  was  a  passive  agent,  and  did
not  aid  or  check  the  exhibition  of  the  force.

"  In  dealing  with  the  movement  of  objects  within  a  closed  room
without  the  intervention  of  human  agency,  I  make  reference  to  the
first  startling  manifestation  which  occurred  in  my  presence.  The  date
was  August  18th,  1872,  and  the  occui'rence  was  detailed  at  the  time
in  the  columns  of  the  Medium,  as  well  as  in  the  Liverpool  Mercury.
Our  circle  had  not  met  more  than  half-a-dozen  times,  and  no  results
had  been  elicited  beyond  raps  and  movement  of  the  table.  On  the
day  named  a  I'emarkable  access  of  the  force  was  manifest  throughout
the  day,  commencing  with  raps  on  the  table  during  breakfast.  The
day  was  Sunday,  and  we  all  went  to  church.  On  returning  I  found
on  entering  my  bedroom,  which  adjoined  the  drawing-room  on  the
first  floor,  that  three  articles  had  been  so  placed  on  the  bed  as  to
form  an  imperfect  cross.  My  attention  was  drawn  to  them  by  loud
raps  which  followed  me  round  the  room.  I  called  my  friend,  whose
guest  I  then  was,  and  he  observed  the  position  of  the  articles,  and
heard  the  loud  rappings  which  followed  me  from  chair  to  chair,  as  I
went  round  the  room  by  way  of  experiment.  Even  wlnilst  I  was  in  the
room  another  article  was  brought  and  added  to  the  cross.  We  thought
it  well  to  establish  beyond  doubt  the  intervention  of  an  agency  not
human.  As  yet,  though  we  ourselves  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  agency
at  work,  still  there  was  no  conclusive  proof  that  children  or  servants
might  not  have  hoaxed  us.  To  be  sure,  they  could  not  make  the  raps,
seeing  that  my  friend  and  I  were  alone  in  the  room,  but  we  thought  it
well  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  such  an  explanation.  Accordingly  we
searched  the  room  throughout — it  contained  no  cupboards — bolted  the
window,  and  locked  the  door,  my  friend  and  host  pocketing  the  key.
At  lunch  our  conversation  was  annotated  by  clear  raps,  and  distinct
evidence  of  the  presence  of  the  force  was  never  absent.  As  soon  as
lunch  was  over  we  went  to  the  locked  room,  and  found  two  more
articles  added.  The  room  was  again  searched,  and  again  locked  by  my
friend,  who  retained  the  key  in  his  possession  throughout,  and  we
retui'ned  to  the  dining-room.  Raps  loud  and  constant  followed  us,
and  the  heavy  dining-table,  with  all  its  load  of  dessert  and  decanters
and  glasses,  was  moved  several  times  out  of  its  place.  Another  visit
of  inspection  discovered  other  additions,  and  this  went  on  until  5  p.m.,


26-t


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


when  a  complete  cross  extending  the  whole  length  of  the  bed  was
made  entirely  of  little  articles  from  my  toilet-table.  My  friend,  his
wife,  and  myself  were  together  all  the  afternoon,  so  we  were  not  the
unconscious  authors  of  the  mystery.  The  door  was  locked  and  the  key
never  left  my  host's  pocket,  so  no  human  being  j^layed  a  trick.  Indeed,
there  was  no  one  who  could  or  would  do  so.  The  room  was  in  a  public
part,  next  to  the  drawing-room.  The  children  were  with  us,  and  were
incapable  of  such  tricks.  The  servants  were  old  and  trusted,  and  knew
nothing  of  Spiritualism,  nor  of  what  was  going  on.  Independently,
therefore,  of  the  messages  which  were  constantly  being  given  through-
out the  day,  and  of  the  direct  writing  which  informed  us  of  the  reason
for  this  remarkable  manifestation,  we  are  able  to  assert  w-ith  confidence
that  human  intervention  was  impossible.  The  formation  of  that  cross,
by  a  slow  process  of  growth  in  a  locked  room,  during  a  bright  August
afternoon  in  broad  sunlight,  remains  in  my  mind  one  of  the  most
remarkable  instances  of  assured  intervention  by  invisible  agency  with
which  I  am  acquainted.  Nor  is  it  the  less  remarkable  that  it  occurred
at  the  very  outset  of  my  experience,  while  I  was  yet  comparatively  new
to  the  subject,  as  though  to  overthrow  scepticism  by  one  fatal  blow,
and  to  furnish  by  anticipation  an  answer  to  the  theory  lately  put
forward  by  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  :  '  Psychics  are  developed.  Their  power
grows  with  practice.  The  phenomena  are  not  produced  immediately
and  together,  but  by  slow  degrees.  None  of  them  lias  found  himself
suddenly  possessed  of  the  power  to  'produce  any  but  the  commonest  indi-
cations of  its  presence.^  (The  italics  are  mine.)  Here  was  no  cii'cle
formed  for  the  purpose  of  eliciting  phenomena.  I  had  undergone  no
process  of  development ;  and  though  I  object  to  the  use  of  the  word
'  produce,'  seeing  that  it  is  not  projjerly  applicable,  still  what  was  then
produced  was  by  no  means  '  the  commonest  indication  of  the  presence  '
<jf  the  force.

[I  subjoin  an  account  of  this  incident  by  Dr.  Speer,  found  by  ]\Irs.  Speer
on  a  loose  sheet  of  paper.  He  had  apparently  made  the  sketches,  which
were  reproduced  by  Mr.  Moses  in  LUjht  for  February  19th,  1892,  but  which
I  deem  it  needless  to  give  liere.— F.W.H.M.]

Awjnst  17th,  1872. — On  this  day  the  Rev.  W.  S.  Moses,  self,  and  wife
resumed  our  evening  seances.  We  chose  the  back  diniug-room  of  the
house,  which  we  had  only  entered  a  few  days  previous  ;  the  table  being
a  heavy  square  table  with  a  deal  top  and  having  oilcloth  sewn  over  it.  We
had  scarcely  drawn  our  chairs  up  to  the  table  and  laid  our  hands  on  it,
when  it  was  violently  tilted  up  two  or  three  times,  Mrs.  S.  being  so
astonished,  if  not  alarmed,  at  the  sudden  and  violent  nature  of  the  move-
ment as  to  express  a  wish  that  it  might  not  be  repeated.  Kaps  of  various
khids  now  began  all  around  Mr.  M.  ;  on  his  clifiir,  in  the  centre  of  the  table,
on  the  floor,  &c.  Thuds  were  also  heard  in  various  i)];ices,  and  scrapings  on
the  floor — in  fact,  as  many  as  seven  different  kinds  of  sound  were  heard.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


26o


Mr.  M.  was  moved  away  from  the  table,  turned  round  in  his  chair,  and
pushed  against  the  wall.  He  was  then  brought  up  to  the  table.  The  table
was  then  moved  half  round  without  being  touched,  it  lifted  itself  up  again,
and  on  questions  being  asked  as  to  who  was  present  and  the  nature  of  the
spirits,  we  were  informed  that  there  were  forty-nine  spirits  present,  that  all
were  good,  and  were  commissioned  to  take  charge  of  the  sitters.

On  Sunday  morning,  August  18th,  1872,  my  wife  and  family,  and  the
Rev.  W.  Moses,  who  had  only  arrived  on  Friday  night,  went  to  St.  George's
Church,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.  On  returning,  the  latter  went  into  his
bedroom,  and  immediately  came  out  and  called  me  to  witness  the  manner  in
which,  during  his  absence  certain  articles  of  toilet,  &c.,  to  wit,  a  writing-case,
a  fly-book,  and  a  pocket  note-book,  had  been  symmetrically  placed  on  the
centre  of  the  bed.  We  at  once  noticed  the  crucial  appearance  exhibited  and
hazarded  a  guess  as  to  the  intention  thereof.  We  left  the  room  and  shortly
after  returned,  when  we  found  that  a  skull  cap  lying  on  the  chest  of
dravfers  had  been  placed  on  the  bed  post,  while  the  clerical  white
collar  which  Mr.  M.  had  removed  not  many  minutes  before  had  been  placed
like  a  halo  around  the  upper  portion  of  the  developing  cross  (fig.  2).  (It
should  here  be  noticed  that  our  expressed  surmises  as  to  the  design
apparently  in  progress  were  confirmed  by  various  loud  distinct  raps  on  the
foot-board.)  We  again  left  the  room  for  a  time,  and  found  that  now  the
lower  limb  of  the  cross  had  been  lengthened  by  the  addition  of  two  ivory-
backed  clothes-brushes  (fig.  3).  We  descended  to  dinner,  having  locked  the
door  and  taken  the  key  with  us.  After  dimier  and  while  sitting  round  the
table  at  dessert,  the  conversation  naturally  (on  the  children  leaving)  reverted
to  these  extraordinary  proceedings,  when  immediately  manifestations  com-
menced all  around  Mr.  M(5ses,  raps  on  the  table,  thuds  on  the  floor,  raps,  loud
and  repeated,  on  the  back  of  his  chair.  A  tune  played  on  the  table  with  my
fingers  was  accurately  imitated,  the  table  with  all  on  it  was  moved  out  of
its  place  and  everything  shaken.  This  was  put  a  stop  to  by  request,  but  the
milder  phenomena  persisted,  and,  it  may  be  said  once  for  all,  continued  till
9  p.m.  Mr.  M.  suggested  that  I  should  go  up  to  his  room  again.  1  did  so,
and  found  on  nuloddng  the  door  that  two  paper-knives  had  been  placed  like
rays  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  cross  bar  of  the  cross  (fig.  4).  I  again
locked  the  door,  put  the  key  in  my  pocket,  and  came  downstairs.  In  about
half-an-hour  we  returned  and  found  that  two  additi(jnal  articles  had  been
appended  (fig.  5).  We  again  left  and  locked  the  door,  and  on  return  after
another  half-hour  the  cross  had  been  fully  developed  into  halo  and  rays,
while  the  skull  cap  had  been  placed  above  all  as  in  a  crown  (fig.  6).  During
each  examination,  as  before,  our  comments  had  been  acknowledged  by  raps,
and  now,  as  we  meditated  going  to  church,  we  canvassed  the  propriety  of
removing  the  articles  from  the  bed,  in  the  event  of  the  servants  wishing  to
arrange  the  room  for  the  night.  It  now  occurred  to  Mrs.  S.  that  before  doing
so  an  opportunity  of  communicating  by  writing  should  be  aff"orded,  and
accordingly  a  piece  of  paper  and  an  aluminium  pencil  were  placed  on  the  bed.
We  retired,  locked  the  door,  and  on  returning  shortly  ascertained  that
nothing  within  had  taken  place.  A  piece  of  red  flannel  was  then  placed
under  the  paper  and  we  again  retired,  myself  being  the  last  again  to  leave,
and  locking  the  door  behind  me.  On  returning  we  found  that  the  paper  had
been  written  upon  (fig.  7). To  us  the  initials  were  unknown,  but  Mr.  M.  at


266  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


once  pronounced  the  monogram  to  be  that  of  two  friends,  man  and  wife,  both-
departed,  and  one  of  whom  Iiad  been  buried  on  the  Tuesday  previous.  The
other  initials  [confusedly  given]  were  those  of  a  long-departed  cousin,  who-
in  his  lifetime  had  been  strongly  attached  to  Mr.  M.  The  number  46  at  first
sight  was  puzzling,  but  taken  in  connection  with  the  tli  ree  autographs,  it  at
once  explained  the  assertion  of  the  spirits  that  there  had  been  49  present
on  the  previous  evening.  Before  replacing  the  various  articles  Mr.  M.
suggested  that  although  the  alphabet  had  hitherto  been  invariably  refused
it  might  now  be  acceptable  as  a  means  of  explaining  these  phenomena.  On
asking  the  question  the  answer  was  now  in  the  affirmative,  and  the  alphabet
being  called  out  by  myself  and  the  message  taken  dowia  by  Mr.  Moses,
we  received  the  following  : —

Cross. We  are  happy.

"  I  come  now  to  deal  with  the  carrying'  of  objects  into  a  locked
room,  and  the  passage  of  solid  objects  through  material  obstacles.

"The  days  immediately  following  the  day  above  mentioned  (August
18th)  were  filled  with  instances  of  such  phenomena.  I  have  before
noticed  the  prevalence  at  certain  times  of  certain  phenomena  ;  and
have  stated  my  belief  that  this  is  due  to  the  operation  for  a  time  of  a
particular  communicating  spirit,  who  gives  place  in  turn  to  another,
who  produces  a  different  manifestation.  This  was  so  at  this  time.  My
records  of  seances  during  the  latter  half  of  the  month  of  August
show  over  fifty  instances  in  which  objects  from  different  parts  of  the-
house  were  placed  upon  the  table  round  which  we  were  sitting.  They
were  invaiiably  small,  and  were  generally  thrown  on  the  table  ;  such
of  them,  howevei',  as  would  easily  break  were  placed  quietly,  and  our
attention  was  drawn  to  them  by  a  request  for  light.  They  came
from  all  parts  of  the  house  indifferently,  and  even  from  outside  ;  from
my  own  bed-room,  and  from  rooms  which  I  had  never  entered  ;  whilst
we  were  sitting  with  joined  hands  in  expectation  of  some  such  occur-
rence ;  and  whilst  no  seance  was  being  held,  and  our  minds  were  not
directed  to  the  subject.  It  is  in  vain  to  attempt  any  exhaustive
record.  I  have  not  space  for  it ;  and  it  would  be  but  a  wearisome
iteration  of  a  ten  times  told  tale.  It  will  suffice  if  I  mention  some
instances,  and  dwell  more  i^articularly  on  the  most  remai'kable  cases
which  I  have  observed.

"Our  seances  immediately  after  August  18th  began  to  show  instances
of  this  phenomenon  ;  and  on  the  21st  a  curious  instance  of  it,  and  of
intelligent  comment  on  conversation,  occurred.  The  room  in  wliich  we
used  to  meet  opened  by  folding  doors  into  tlie  dining-room.  In  this
latter  room  my  host  and  I  were  sitting  in  the  twilight  at  the  open
window,  talking  of  the  subject,  and  wondering  much  whether  we  were
deceived.  Raps  came,  and  we  were  told  to  go  into  the  next  room.  AVe
stood  l)y  the  table,  and  raps  came  again.  '  To  convince '  was  spelt
out,  and  a  small  copy  of  Paradise  Lost  was  gently  placed  on  the  table.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.  267


We  had  all  of  us  had  it  in  our  hands  during  the  evening,  and  could
testify  to  its  position  on  a  book-shelf  close  to  the  window  at  which  I
and  my  friend  had  been  sitting.

"  On  August  28th  seven  objects  from  diflerent  rooms  were  brought
into  the  seance-room  ;  on  the  30th,  four,  and  amongst  them  a  little
bell  from  the  adjoining  dining-room.  We  always  left  gas  brightly
burning  in  that  room  and  in  the  hall  outside,  so  that  if  the  doors  were
opened  even  for  a  moment  a  blaze  of  light  would  have  been  let  into  the
dark  room  in  which  we  sat.  As  this  never  happened  we  have  full
assurance  from  what  Dr.  Carpenter  considers  the  best  authority,  Com-
mon Sense,  that  the  doors  remained  closed.  In  the  dining-room  there
was  a  little  bell.  AVe  heard  it  commence  to  ring,  and  could  trace  it  by
its  sound  as  it  approached  the  door  which  separated  us  from  it.  What
was  our  astonishment  when  we  found  that  in  spite  of  the  closed  door
the  sound  drew  nearer  to  us  !  It  was  evidently  within  the  room  in
which  we  sat,  for  the  bell  was  carried  round  the  room,  ringing  loudly  the
whole  time.  After  completing  the  circuit  of  the  room,  it  was  brought
down,  passed  under  the  table,  coming  up  close  to  my  elbow.  It  rang
under  my  very  nose,  and  went  round  about  my  head,  then  passed  round
the  circle,  ringing  close  to  the  faces  of  all.  It  was  finally  placed  upon
the  table.  I  do  not  wish  to  theorise,  but  this  seems  to  me  to  dispose  of
arguments  which  would  put  forward  the  theory  of  our  being  jjsyeholo-
gised,  or  of  the  object  coming  down  the  chimney,  as  an  explanation  of
this  difficult  subject.

"Another  curious  case  occurred  at  a  later  date,  October  14th,  1873;
our  circle  of  three  sitting  alone.  An  unusual  length  of  time  elapsed
before  anything  occurred,  and  we  were  in  the  act  of  remai'king  this
when  a  little  Parian  statuette  from  an  upper  room  in  the  house  was
placed  on  the  table.  One  of  the  party  made  a  request  for  one  of  our
friends  who  usually  communicates,  asking  that  he  might  be  fetched.
'  We  are  doing  so,'  was  spelt  out  by  raps ;  and  as  the  sentence  was
complete  and  answered  our  thoughts,  we  ceased  to  call  over  the
alphabet.  However,  it  was  called  for  again,  and  '  mething  else  '  was
spelt.  We  could  form  no  idea  what  this  might  mean.  It  was  repeated,
and  after  much  puzzling  it  occurred  to  us  to  join  it  to  the  previous
message,  and  it  then  read,  '  We  are  doing  something  else.'  (What  a
clear  case  of  unconscious  cerebration  !)  We  were  told  to  sit  with  joined
hands,  and  very  soon  an  odour  like  Tonquin  bean  was  apparent  to  all
of  us.  Something  fell  on  the  table,  and  light  showed  that  there  had
been  brought  from  my  friend's  dressing-room  a  snuff-box  which  had
contained  Tonquin  bean.  The  box  was  closed,  and  the  odour  was
remarked  before  any  of  us  had  the  remotest  idea  that  the  box  was  in
the  room.

"With  rare  exceptions  the  objects  brought  seemed  to  come  from

T


268


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


behind  me.  I  have  noticed  this  in  cases  where  something  has  been
brought  from  a  distant  part  of  the  stance-room.  It  is  the  same  when
objects  are  brought  from  without,  except  in  certain  cases,  such  as  that
above  noted.  I  have  more  than  once  been  struck  on  the  top  of  the
head  by  objects  as  they  have  been  converging  on  the  table,  and  on  one
occasion  a  heavy  bronze  candlestick,  which  was  brought  fi'om  the  man-
telshelf in  a  room  near  (January  25th,  1873),  struck  me  a  severe  blow,
tlie  effects  of  which  remained  for  a  day  after.  I  will  undertake  to  say
that  I  was  not  biologised  on  that  occasion.

"Another  exception  to  the  rule  of  objects  coming  from  behind  me
occurred  lately.  A  friend  [Mr.  F.  "W.  Percival]  had  joined  our  circle,
and  we  sat  in  the  dining-room,  instead  of  our  usual  small  seance-room.
The  dining-table  is  very  large,  and  he  faced  me  with  a  good  six  feet  of
mahogany  between  us.  He  remarked  that  he  had  never  been  present
when  any  object  had  been  brought  into  the  room  from  without,  and
said  how  much  he  desired  to  witness  such  a  case.  The  request  was
made,  and,  contrary  to  rule,  promptly  answered.  A  round  stone  from
another  room  was  gently  thrown  from  behind,  so  as  to  strike  his  left
shoulder  before  rolling  on  to  the  table.  The  gentleman  in  whose  house
we  were  [Dr.  Speer]  could  testify  to  the  exact  position  of  the  stone  on
his  study  mantelshelf,  and  my  friend  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  direction
from  which  it  came  when  it  struck  him.  Like  the  bell,  its  presence
was  first  manifested  in  a  part  of  the  room  opposite  to,  and  most  distant
from,  me.

******
"Hitherto  I  have  described  phenomena  which  my  eyes  have  wit-
nessed, ^  which  have  occurred  while  I  was  in  full  possession  of  my
faculties,  and  when  my  powers  of  observation  were  unimpaired.  I  come
now  to  a  group,  which,  for  convenience,  I  have  classed  together,  where
the  case  is  somewhat  altered.  I  have,  indeed,  observed  all  the
phenomena  of  which  I  speak  at  many  different  times,  and  under
various  circumstances,  but  not  in  their  most  perfect  form  of  development.
In  all  cases  where  the  large  luminous  appeai-ances,  which  I  am  about
to  describe,  were  most  successfully  presented,  I  was  in  a  state  of
unconscious  trance.  In  a  similar  way,  the  most  perfect  musical  sounds
are  made  when  I  cannot  hear  them  ;  and,  as  a  general  rule,  to  which
the  exceptions  are  so  rai-e  as  only  to  serve  to  establish  the  principle,
the  best  and  most  successful  manifestations  occur  when  the  medium  is
deeply  entranced.  The  condition  of  absolute  passivity  on  his  part  is
then  most  perfectly  secured,  and  the  force  which  the  operators  use  can
be  more  safely  drawn  off.  Over  and  over  again  have  I  heard  this
passive  state  spoken  of  as  an  essential  condition  of  success.

"  The  fact  that  I  am  entranced  during  the  occurrence  of  the  best

These  phenomena  are  said  to  have  sometimes  occurred  in  light. — F.W.H.M.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


269


manifestations  renders  it  difficult  for  me  to  give  an  accurate  descrip-
tion. I  have  endeavoured  to  remedy  this  by  requesting  those  who
have  witnessed  specially  notable  phenomena  to  favour  me  ^vith  a
description  of  what  they  saw ;  and  I  have  been  at  pains  to  record  a
faithful  account  immediately  after  each  seance,  drawing  my  information
from  the  impressions  left  on  the  minds  of  the  sitters.  My  own  records,
therefore,  contain  exact  accounts  of  what  I  have  seen  myself,  and,
further,  of  the  descriptions  given  me  by  careful  observers  of  phenomena
which  occurred  during  my  entrancement.  These  sources  of  informa-
tion I  have  supplemented  by  accounts  kindly  furnished  me,  which  I
print  exactly  as  I  have  received  them.  As  a  consequence,  I  am  able  to
affirm  that  my  descriptions  and  statements  are  trustworthy,  and
within  the  margin  of  fact.

Sec.  T. — Perfumes  mid  waves  of  scent-laden  air.

"  In  every  circle  with  which  I  am  acquainted  the  conditions  are
harmonised  by  some  means. Usually  music  is  employed  for  that
purpose. It  seems  to  have  the  effect  of  soothing  the  minds  of  the
sitters,  and  leading  them  to  throw  aside,  for  the  time,  thoughts  of  other
matters,  while  they  dwell  harmoniously  on  what  is  being  attempted  in
the  circle. Whatever  other  effect  music  may  have,  I  believe  its  sooth-
ing property  to  be  its  chief  merit. This  harmonising  is  effected  in  our
circle  by  means  of  perfumes  and  waves  of  cool  scented  air. We  are
never  asked  for  music. If,  very  rarely,  a  musical  box  is  set  in  motion,
its  only  effect  is  to  elicit  a  peculiar  muffled  sound  in  the  floor,  and  to
cause  a  vibration  to  be  made  in  the  room. By  these  sounds  we  know
of  the  presence  of  a  particular  intelligence,  who  so  announces  himself.
But  they  are  never  asked  for  again,  and  they  apparently  have  no
harmonising  effect. Singing  is  never  introduced  ;  and  any  noise,  even
of  loud  conversation,  is  checked  at  once. We  are  told  to  keep  still.
But  when  any  opposing  conditions  are  to  be  removed,  then  the  room  is
pervaded  by  odours  of  subtle  and  delicate,  or  strong,  perfume. If  a
new  sitter  is  present,  he  or  she  is  censed  (if  I  may  adopt  the  expression)
and  so  initiated. The  chair  which  the  stranger  occupies  is  surrounded
by  luminous  haze,  from  which  issues  the  perfume  ;  and  very  frequently
wet  scent,  more  or  less  pungent  according  to  conditions,  is  sprinkled
from  the  ceiling  at  the  same  time. If  a  new  intelligence  is  to  com-
municate, or  sjjecial  honour  to  be  paid  to  a  chief,  the  room  is  pervaded
by  perfumes  which  grow  stronger  as  the  spirit  enters. This  scenting
of  the  room  in  which  we  are  about  to  meet  will  sometimes  commence
many  hours  before  we  begin. Indeed,  when  we  have  been  in  the
country,  far  from  the  polluted  atmosphere  of  smoke  and  dirt,  charged
with  the  nameless  odours  that  London  breeds,  the  air  of  the  seance-
room  is  always  laden  with  perfumes. There  is  a  subtle  odour  in  it


270


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Biases.


which  is  perpetually  being  changed.  Sometimes  the  aroma  of  a  flower
from  the  garden  is  drawn  out,  intensified,  and  insinuated  throughout
the  house.  Sometimes  the  odour  is  like  nothing  of  this  earth's  pro-
duction, ethereal,  delicate,  and  infinitely  delightful.  Sandal-wood  used
to  be  a  favourite,  and  rose,  verbena,  and  odours  of  other  flowers  have
been  plentifully  used.

"I  find  it  diflicult  to  convey  any  idea  of  the  subtle  odours  that  have
been  diffused  throughout  the  room,  or  of  the  i^ermanence  of  the  scent.
It  is  usually  the  first  manifestation  and  the  last.  The  perfume  is
sprinkled  in  showers  from  the  ceiling,  and  borne  in  waves  of  cool  air
round  the  circle,  especially  when  the  atmosphere  is  close  and  the  air
oppressive.  Its  presence  in  a  particular  place  is  shown  to  me  by  the
luminous  haze  which  accompanies  it.  I  can  trace  its  progress  round
the  circle  by  the  light — and  my  vision  has  been  many  times  corrobo-
rated on  this  point  by  other  sitters — and  can  frequently  say  to  a  certain
sitter,  '  You  will  smell  the  scent  directly.  I  see  the  luminous  form
going  to  you.'  My  vision  has  always  been  confirmed  by  the  exclama-
tions of  delight  which  follow.

"  When  we  first  observed  this  manifestation,  it  was  attended  by  a
great  peculiarity. The  odour  was  circumscribed  in  space,  confined  to  a
belt  or  band,  beyond  which  it  did  not  penetrate. It  surrounded  the
circle  to  the  extent  of  a  few  feet,  and  outside  of  that  belt  was  not
perceptible  ;  or  it  was  drawn  across  the  room  as  a  cordon,  so  that  it  was
possible  to  walk  into  it  and  out  of  it  again — the  presence  and  absence
of  the  odour  and  the  temperature  of  the  air  which  accompanied  it
being  most  marked. Judge  Edmunds  [in  his  book  on  Spiritualism]
especially  notes  the  presence  of  an  odour  which  was  not  diffused
through  the  room. He  describes  the  sensation  as  being  like  a  flower
presented  to  the  nostrils  at  intervals. I  should  rather  describe  Avhat
I  observed  as  a  scented  zone  or  belt,  perfectly  defined  and  not  more
than  a  few  feet  in  breadth. Within  it  the  temperature  was  cool  and
the  scent  strong,  outside  of  it  the  air  was  decidedly  warmer,  and  no
ti'ace  of  perfume  was  perceptible. It  was  no  question  of  fancy.  The
scent  was  too  strong  for  that. And  the  edges  of  the  belt  were  quite
clearly  marked,  so  that  it  was  possible,  instantaneously,  to  pass  from
the  warm  air  of  the  room  to  the  cool  pei'fumed  air  of  this  zone. I  do
not  remember  ever  hearing  of  a  precisely  similar  case  to  this,  which
occurred  repeatedly.

"  I  have  known  the  same  phenomenon  to  occur  in  the  open  air.  I
have  been  Avalking  with  a  friend,  for  instance,  and  we  have  walked  into
air  laden  with  scent,  and  through  it  again  into  the  natural  atmosphere.
We  have  gone  back,  and  have  found  that  the  air  in  a  certain  locality —
generally  a  narrow  belt — was  distinctly  perfumed,  while  the  air  on  each
side  bore  no  traces  of  scent. I  have  even  known  cases  where  wet  scent


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.  271


has  been  produced  and  showered  down  in  the  open  air.  On  one  special
occasion,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  my  attention  was  attracted  by  the  patter
of  some  fine  spray  on  a  lady's  [Mrs.  Speer's]  silk  dress,  as  we  were
walking  along  a  road.  One  side  of  the  dress  was  plentifully  besprinkled
with  fine  spray,  which  gave  forth  a  delicious  odour,  very  clearly
perceptible  for  some  distance  round.

"  During  a  seance  the  scent  is  either  carried,  as  it  seems,  round  the
circle,  and  is  then  accompanied  by  cool  air,  or  it  is  sprmkled  down  from
the  ceiling  of  the  room  in  liquid  form.  In  the  clairvoyant  state  I  am
able  to  see  and  describe  the  process  before  the  scent  is  sprinkled,  and
can  warn  a  special  sitter  not  to  look  upwards.  For,  on  certain  occasions,
when  conditions  are  not  favourable,  the  scent  is  pungent  and  most
painful  if  it  gets  into  the  eye.  At  other  times  it  is  harmless,  and  causes
no  pain  whatever.  I  have  had  a  quantity  of  it  thrown  into  my  eye,
and  it  has  caused  no  more  pain  than  Avater  would.  On  the  contrary,  I
have  seen  the  effect  caused  on  another  [Llrs.  SpeerJ  by  a  similar
occurrence.  The  pain  caused  was  excruciating,  the  inflammation  was
most  severe,  and  the  effects  did  not  pass  off  for  twenty-four  hours  or
more. In  fact,  whatever  the  liquid  was,  it  caused  severe  conjunctivitis.

"This  variety  in  the  pungency  and  potency  of  perfume  I  attribute
to  variety  in  the  attendant  circumstances.  The  illness  of  one  of  the
sitters  will  cause  the  scent  to  be  coarse  and  pungent.  Harmonious
conditions,  physical  and  mental,  are  signalised  by  the  presence  of
delicate  subtle  odours,  which  are  infinitely  charming.  I  have  said  that
sometimes  the  odour  of  flowers,  either  in  the  house  or  garden,  will  be
intensified.  A  vase  of  fresh  flowers  put  on  the  table  causes  the  difi'usion
through  the  room  of  one  or  more  of  the  odours  of  flowers  in  the  bouquet.
I  have  observed  the  process  of  drawing  out  the  natural  perfume  in  this
way.  We  used  frequently  to  gather  fresh  flowers,  and  watch  the  pro-
cess. Flowers  which  had  a  very  slight  smell  when  gathered  would,  by
degrees,  throw  off  such  a  perfume  as  to  fill  the  room,  and  strike  anyone
who  came  into  it  most  forcibly.  In  this  case  the  natural  odour  of  the
flower  was  intensified,  and  the  bloom  received  no  harm.  At  other
times,  however,  some  liquid  was  apparently  put  upon  the  blossom,  and  an
odour  not  its  own  given  to  it.  In  that  case  it  iavariably  withered,
and  died  very  rapidly.  I  have  frequently  had  flowers  in  my  button-
hole scented  in  this  way  ;  and  the  phenomena  to  which  I  refer  are  too
vinmistakable,  and  have  been  too  frequently  observed,  to  leave  any
room  for  doubt.

"Great  quantities  of  dry  musk  have  been  from  time  to  time  thrown
about  in  the  house  where  our  circle  meets.  On  a  late  occasion  it  fell  in
very  considerable  quantities  over  a  writing-desk  at  which  a  lady  was
sitting,  in  the  act  of  writing  letters.  It  was  mid-day,  and  no  one  was
near  at  the  time,  yet  the  particles  of  musk  were  so  numerous  as  to


272


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


pei'vade  the  whole  contents  of  the  desk. They  were  jilaced,  for  no
throwing  would  have  produced  such  a  result,  at  the  very  bottom  of  the
desk,  and  between  the  papers  which  it  contained. The  odour  was  most
pronounced  ;  and  the  particles,  when  gathered  togethei",  made  up  a
considei-able  packet. Some  time  after  this,  when  at  a  seance,  I  sav/
something  which  looked  like  luminous  dust  on  the  table. No  odour
was  perceptible,  but  in  my  clairvoyant  state  I  saw  a  heap  of  luminous
particles  which  appeared  to  me  extremely  brilliant. I  described  it,  and
putting  out  my  hand  I  found  that  there  really  was  a  heap  on  the  table.
I  inquired  what  it  was,  and  musk  was  rapped  out. We  demurred,  for
no  odour  was  perceptible,  but  the  statement  was  reiterated. After  the
seance  we  gathered  up  the  dust,  which  looked  like  musk,  but  had  no
smell  ivhcUever. The  next  morning,  however,  the  odour  was  powerful
enough ;  and  the  powder  still  exists,  and  is  indubitably  very  good
powdered  musk. By  what  imaginable  process  can  that  phenomenon
have  been  accomplished  1

"  I  remember  another  occasion,  amongst  several,  Avhen,  after  a
seance,  I  was  walking  up  and  down  smoking  a  cigar.  The  odour  of  strong
perfume  was  distinctly  perceptible,  in  spite  of  the  tobacco.  On  the
table  lay  a  blotting  jjad  of  white  paper.  My  eye  fell  on  it,  and  I  asked,
on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  whether  some  scent  could  not  be  sprinkled
so  that  Ave  could  see  it  there.  The  request  was  at  once  and  repeatedly
complied  with.  The  paper  was  drenched,  and  the  odour  from  it  was
very  pi'onounced  twenty-four  hours  afterwards.  One  of  the  astonishing
points  connected  with  this  matter  is  the  quantity  of  liquid  that  is  pro-
duced. The  table  is  covered  with  innumerable  stains  ;  and  if  they  be
removed,  another  stance  will  renew  them.  The  spray  appears  to  fall
everywhere,  for  the  very  fire-irons  bear  traces  of  its  presence  ;  and  I
am  quite  sure  that  the  housemaid's  opinion  of  the  manifestation  would
not  be  complimentary  to  the  invisible  operators.

"  I  must  omit  much  that  might  be  said,  but  in  conclusion  I  append
an  account  of  one  remarkable  manifestation,  for  which  I  am  indebted
to  the  kindness  of  a  friend  Avho  was  present.  Our  hands  were  all
joined  in  a  cluster  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  the  quantity  of
liquid  must  have  exceeded  half  an  ounce  at  least.

Statement  by  Mii.  Percival.

"  In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  will  describe  as  briefly  as  possible
what  occurred  at  the  dark  seance  held  on  the  evening  of  March  IStli,  1874,
when  scent  was  produced  so  abundantly  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  S.  and
myself,  while  you  were  in  a  state  of  trance.  The  controlling  spirit  began  by
speaking  through  you  at  some  length,  and  we  were  told  to  expect  unusual
manifestations.  They  commenced  with  a  strongly-scented  breeze,  which
passed  softly  round  the  circle,  its  course  heing  marked  by  a  pale  light.  In
a  few  mmutes  it  suddenly  changed,  and  blew  upon  us  with  considerable


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


273


force,  as  if  a  pair  of  bellows  had  been  employed,  and  the  temperature  of  the
room  was  perceptibly  lowered.  After  this  liquid  scent  was  sprinkled  upon
us  several  times  :  it  appeared  to  come  from  the  top  of  the  room,  and  fell
upon  us  in  small  drops.  Finally  we  were  told  that  a  new  manifestation
would  be  attempted,  and  that  we  were  to  prepare  for  it  by  joining  hands  and
holding  the  palms  upwards.  In  this  position  we  waited  for  two  or  three
minutes,  and  then  I  felt  a  stream  of  liquid  scent  poured  out,  as  it  were,  from
the  spout  of  a  teapot,  which  fell  on  one  side  of  my  left  hand,  and  ran  down
upon  the  table.  The  same  was  done  for  Mrs.  S.  ;  and  to  judge  from  our
impressions  at  the  time,  and  from  the  stains  on  tlie  table,  a  very  considerable
quantity  must  have  been  produced.  I  may  remark,  in  conclusion,  that  there
was  no  scent  in  the  room  before  the  seance,  and  that  we  could  distinguish
several  different  perfumes  which  made  the  atmosphere  so  oppressive  that  we
were  glad  to  seek  a  purer  air  so  soon  as  the  seance  came  to  an  end.

"F.  W.  P."

*****  t!-

"  The  first  occasion  on  which  we  saw  the  large  luminous  appearances
with  which  we  were  for  a  time  so  familiar  was  on  June  7th,  1873.  By
that  time  we  had  become  very  familiar  with  the  floating  masses  of
luminous  vapour  which  I  have  before  noticed  ;  and  on  sevei'al  occasions
we  had  seen  these  masses  condensed,  so  to  say,  until  a  distinct  objective
light  was  formed.  On  this  evening,  however,  at  an  ordinary  seance,  I
felt  my  chair  withdrawn  from  the  table  to  the  distance  of  three  or
four  feet,  and  I  was  partially  entranced,  but  not  so  completely  as  to
prevent  me  from  recalling  what  happened.  A  number  of  cones  of  soft
light  similar  to  moonlight  appeared  in  succession,  until  a  dozen  or  raore
had  been  made.  They  presented  the  appearance  of  a  nucleus  of  soft
yellow  light,  .surrounded  by  a  soft  haze.  They  sailed  up  from  a  corner
of  the  room  and  gradually  died  out.  The  most  conspicuous  was  shaped
like  a  mitre  and  was  8  or  9  inches  in  height.  This  was  the  first  time
we  saw  lights  of  this  description,  and  we  determined  to  extemporise  a
cabinet  for  the  purpose  of  developing  them.  This  was  simply  done  by
throwing  open  the  door  between  two  rooms,  and  hanging  in  the  door-
way a  curtain  with  a  square  aperture  in  the  middle  of  it.  On  one  side
of  the  curtain  a  table  was  put  for  the  sitters  ;  on  the  other  side  I  was
placed  in  an  easy -chair,  and  was  soon  in  a  state  of  deep  trance,  from
which  I  never  woke  until  the  seance  was  concluded.  What  then  took
place  is  desciibed  in  the  records  of  friends  who  were  present.  Large
globes  of  light  such  as  I  have  described  above  sailed  out  of  the  aperture
and  went  into  the  room  where  the  sitters  were  placed.  They  are  described
as  of  the  same  soft,  pale  hue,  like  moonlight.  They  wei'e  sufficiently
bright  to  illumine  the  lintel  and  door  posts,  and  to  cast  a  strong  reflec-
tion into  the  room.  Within  the  gauzy  envelope  was  a  bright  point  of
concentrated  light,  and  the  size  varied  consideraljly.  The  cone  shape
predominated,  but  some  were  like  a  dumb-bell,  and  others  like  a  mass


274  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


of  luminous  vapour  revolving  round  and  falling  over  a  central  nucleus
of  soft  yelloAv  light.  They  seem  to  have  been  carried  in  a  materialised
hand,  a  finger  of  which  was  shown  at  request  by  placing  it  in  front  of
the  nucleus  of  light.  Round  each  was  soft  drapery,  the  outline  of
which  was  usually  perfectly  distinct.

' '  I  append  an  account  kindly  furnished  me  by  my  friend  Dr.  Thom-
son, of  4,  Worcester  Lawn,  Clifton  [now  dead] : —

"The  manifestations  began  with  a  luminous  haze  surrounding  a  small
point  of  bluish  light,  which  latter  gradually  increased  in  size,  apparently  at
the  expense  of  the  surrounding  hazy  envelope,  as  it  seemed  to  diminish  as
the  point  of  light  increased,  till  it  attained  the  size  of  one's  closed  fist.  At
this  size  it  remained  for  some  time,  until  one  of  the  sitters  expressed  dis-
appointment at  its  not  coming  further  into  the  room  in  which  we  were  seated.
The  mass  of  light  then  gradually  enlarged  till  it  became  in  bulk  equal  to  an
ordinary  sized  water-melon.  At  the  same  time  it  approached  us  to  ajiparently
within  5  feet  of  where  we  were  sitting.  At  this  time  the  jjerfumes  which
had  been  brought  during  the  earlier  part  of  the  evening  were  again  showered
down  upon  us.  The  appearance  of  the  light  reminded  me  strongly  of  what
I  liave  seen  when  an  electric  discharge  is  passed  through  an  exhausted  tube,
with  the  exception,  of  course,  of  the  latter  being  momentary,  whereas  in  the
present  case  the  light  continued  more  or  less  for  nearly  an  hour.  During  the
latter  part  of  the  seance,  the  light  emitted  from  this  source  was  sufficiently
intense  to  light  up  the  wliole  of  the  doorway  opposite  to  which  we  were
placed  ;  but  it  struck  me  that  the  intensity  of  the  light  was  feeble  as  com-
pared with  ordinary  light,  as  it  did  not  extend  beyond  a  few  feet  from  the
source."

"  I  have  reserved  for  separate  description  some  very  remarkable
phenomena  which  occurred  at  four  consecutive  seances  on  August  9th,
10th,  11th,  and  12th,  1873.  I  was  on  a  holiday  excursion  with  the
same  friends  who  have  witnessed  from  the  first  the  development  of  the
phenomena  that  I  have  described.  The  weather  was  lovely,  the  scenery
grand,  and,  mentally  and  physically,  we  were  in  a  harmonious  condition.
Nothing  heavier  than  the  Spectator  had  engaged  my  mind,  and  my  pen
had  composed  nothing  more  serious  than  a  gossiping  letter.  No  ina-
portunate  editor  clamoui'ed  for  '  copy,'  and  the  stifling  August  heat  of
London  was  exchanged  for  the  balmy  air  of  a  charming  lough  in  the
North  of  Ireland.  Our  days  were  spent  in  a  boat,  lazily  flogging  the
water  to  tempt  the  wary  trout  to  rise — exercise  enough  to  invigorate
without  tiring,  while  the  jaded  mind  took  rest,  and  the  body  was
refreshed  by  scenes  of  beauty.  It  is  under  such  circumstances  that
the  physique  is  in  most  perfect  order,  and  the  mysterious  force  which
is  used  for  these  manifestations  is  generated  most  rapidly,  while  the
harmonious  mental  state  disposes  to  complete  passivity.  I  do  not  envy
the  possessor  of  a  mind  so  ill-regulated  and  a  body  so  dyspeptic  as  to
fail  of  happiness  in  such  surroundings.  Accordingly,  as  might  be
expected,  our  invisible  friends  were  not  slow  to  avail  themselves  of  the


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Noses.  275


improved  conditions.  A  synopsis  of  what  actually  occurred  is  carefully
•compiled  from  notes  written  in  detail  at  the  time  [by  Dr.  Speer],  and
Tvhich  have  been  kindly  placed  at  my  disposal : —

Statemei^t  by  Dr.  Speer.

"  On  the  10th  of  August,  after  some  other  phenomena,  a  large  globe  of
light  rose  from  the  side  of  the  table  opposite  to  me,  and  sailed  up  to  the  level
of  our  faces,  and  then  vanished.  It  was  followed  by  several  more,  all  of
which  rose  up  from  the  side  opposite  to  me,  and  sometimes  to  the  right  and
sometimes  to  the  left  of  the  medium.  At  request  the  next  light  was  placed
slowly  in  the  centre  of  the  table.  It  was  apparently  as  large  as  a  shaddock,
and  was  surrounded  with  drapery.  At  this  time  the  medium  was  entranced,
and  the  controlling  spirit  informed  me  that  he  would  endeavour  to  place  the
light  in  the  medium's  hand.  Failing  in  this,  he  said  he  would  knock  on  the
table  in  front  of  me.  Almost  immediately  a  light  came  and  stood  on  the
table  close  to  me.  'You  see  ;  now  listen,  I  will  knock.'  Very  slowly  the
light  rose  up,  and  struck  three  distinct  blows  on  the  table.  '  Now  I  will  show
you  my  hand.'  A  large,  very  bright  light  then  came  up,  and  inside  of  it
appeared  the  materialised  hand  of  the  spirit.  He  moved  the  fingers  about
close  to  my  face.  The  appearance  was  as  distinct  as  can  be  conceived.  The
power  having  become  exhausted,  he  exhorted  me  to  wake  the  medium,  make
him  wash  his  face  and  hands  in  cold  water,  and  to  tell  him  nothing  tUl  that
had  been  done.  He  also  insisted  on  my  writing  a  close  account  of  what  had
been  done.

' '  On  the  following  evening  I  placed  the  paper  containing  the  account  on
the  table,  together  with  a  pencd,  and  asked  that  the  light  might  be  brought
down  upon  it.  This  was  done  several  times.  The  medium  having  become
entranced,  I  requested  the  controlHng  spirit  to  append  his  signature  to  the
document,  if  it  were  possible  to  do  so.  He  said  he  would  try.  He  then
brought  a  very  large  and  bright  light,  and  passed  it  up  and  down  over  the  face
of  the  entranced  medium,  so  that  I  could  see  it  distinctly.  He  told  me  that
the  folds  which  I  saw  round  the  light  were  drapery,  and  to  prove  it  he
brought  the  light  and  passed  the  drapery  over  the  back  of  my  hand  several
times.  It  was  perfectly  tangible.  I  asked  that  a  light  might  be  placed  close
to  my  face.  He  assented,  and  told  me  to  close  my  eyes  until  told  to  open
them.  I  did  so,  and  on  opening  them  I  saw  close  to  my  eyes  a  large  and  very
bright  light,  the  size  of  the  globe  of  a  moderator  lamp.  He  told  me  to  rub
my  hands  so  as  to  generate  more  power,  and  very  soon  another  large  light,
held  by  a  hand,  appeared  on  the  table.  This  time  the  hand  appeared  to  be
outside  of  the  drapery,  and  moved  the  fingers  about  freely,  and  receded  from
the  light,  as  though  the  lamp  were  held  in  anuther  hand.  After  other  lights
had  been  shown,  I  heard  the  pencil  moving,  and  repeating  his  admonition  of
the  previous  evening,  he  departed,  leaving  on  the  paper  a  specimen  of  direct
spirit  caligraphy.

"  I  have  omitted  to  say  that  the  way  of  renewing  the  light  when  it  grew
dim  was  by  making  passes  over  it  with  the  hand.  The  lights  were  of  the
kind  described  previously,  and  consisted  of  a  nucleus  which  was  said  to  be
brought  by  the  controlling  spirit,  surrounded  by  a  luminous  haze,  and  an
envelope  of  drapery. They  varied  in  size  and  luminosity,  and  seemed  to  be


276  Tlte  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


more  easily  and  fully  developed  when  I  rubbed  my  hands  together  or  on  my
coat.  At  one  time  a  portion  of  a  forearm  was  distinctly  visible,  and  the  hand
containing  the  light  was  pressed  very  distinctly  on  mine  as  it  lay  on  the  table.
I  may  add  that  all  the  cases  recorded  by  me  occurred  when  no  other  sitter
was  present  but  myself.  "S.T.S."

"  These  strange  phenomena  have  now  ceased  for  some  time  past.
The  drain  on  the  vital  strength  of  the  medium  was  too  great  to  be  con-
tinued. As  it  was,  the  experiments  made  were  attended  by  very  great
subsequent  prostration,  and  the  phase  passed  away,  as  the  levitations
described  in  Chapter  I.  ceased  after  a  time.  In  the  one  case  I  strongly
objected  to  the  manifestation ;  in  the  other  harm  ensued.  Both  have
therefore  ceased.

"  Since  the  commencement  of  the  present  year  we  have  had  another
kind  of  light  altogether,  which  is  still  shown  occasionally.  It  is
apparently  a  little  round  disc  of  light,  which  twinkles  like  a  star.  It  has
a  dark  side,  which  is  generally  turned  towards  me,  so  that  while  other
sitters  have  been  carrying  on  a  conversation,  the  answers  being  given
by  this  light,  I  have  not  been  able  to  see  it  at  all.  It  is  very  much
brighter  than  the  large  light,  and  more  like  a  star.  It  flashes  with
great  rapidity,  and  answers  questions  by  the  usual  code  of  signals.  The
light  usually  hovers  over  my  head,  sometimes  coming  into  the  circle,
but  more  frequently  floating  in  a  distant  corner  of  the  room.  It  is  not
apparently  solid,  nor  does  it  seem  to  be  surrounded  with  drapery.

"  On  a  few  occasions,  not  more  than  half  a  dozen,  we  have  observed
a  bright  scintillating  light,  which  apparently  rests  on  the  mantel-shelf.
It  is  about  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  and  looks  like  a  large  diamond  lit
up  with  strong  light.

"  I  have  reserved  for  the  last  a  description  of  the  most  remarkable
light,  of  quite  a  different  kind,  that  I  have  ever  heard  or  read  of.  It
appeared  in  greatest  intensity  on  the  eve  of  the  year  1873,  and  has
since  reappeai'ed  five  times.  On  each  occasion  it  diminished  in
brilliancy,  and  when  last  it  was  seen  had  lost  almost  all  its  striking
character.  It  has  not  been  seen  for  more  than  fifteen  months  now.  In
this,  as  in  much  that  I  notice  here,  I  rely  for  my  description  on  notes
carefully  taken  at  the  time,  and  which  now  lie  befoi'e  me.  When  the
light  was  first  seen  I  was  so  far  under  influence  as  to  render  my  powei's
of  observation  worthless,  and  before  it  had  attained  its  full  dimensions
and  brilliancy  I  was  deeply  entranced.  The  description  given  by  the
sitters  is  fortunately  very  minute.  The  light  was  first  observed  directly
behind  us.  At  that  time  it  was  a  tall  column,  about  half  an  inch  or
rather  more  in  width,  and  six  or  seven  feet  high.  The  light  was  of  a
bright  golden  hue,  and  did  not  illuminate  objects  in  its  neighbourhood.
For  a  minute  a  cross  developed  at  its  top,  and  rays  seemed  to  dart  from
it. Round  my  head  was  a  similar  sort  of  halo  to  that  which  clair-


The  Ex]periences  of  IF.  Stainton  Moses.  277


voyants  describe  round  tlie  heads  of  some  persons,  only  in  this  case  it
was  perceptible  by  natural  vision,  for  one  of  the  sitters  put  out  his
hand  to  ascertain  the  locality  of  the  rays  which  he  saw,  and  placed  his
fingers  directly  on  the  top  of  my  head.  At  this  time  I  was  not  so  deeply
entranced  as  to  be  unable  to  hear  what  was  said,  and,  at  request,  I
moved  my  body  from  side  to  side.  As  I  moved,  the  ray  moved  with
me,  and  the  removal  of  my  body  discovered  to  the  opposite  sitter  a
cluster  of  scintillating  light,  of  an  oblong  shape,  about  the  size  of  a
saucer,  at  the  foot  of  the  long  pencil  or  ray  before  described.  As  my
body  resumed  its  position  it  hid  the  lower  part  of  the  long  ray  of  light
from  view.  Soon,  however,  the  cross — as  it  had  then  become — com-
menced to  move,  and  gradually  travelled  from  my  Ijack  to  my  right
hand,  always  on  or  near  the  wall,  until  it  had  passed  over  an  arc  of  90\
My  friend,  who  had  been  watching  this  strange  phenomenon  with
absorbing  interest,  requested  to  be  permitted  to  examine  it  more  closely.
Leave  having  been  given,  he  rose  from  his  chair,  went  to  the  light,  put
his  face  close  to  it,  and  passed  his  hand  thi'ough  it.  He  detected  no
odour,  nor  did  the  light  disappear  as  he  touched  it.  No  wai'mth  came
from  it,  nor  did  it  light  up  the  room  perceptibly.  Both  the  long  ray
and  cluster  remained  visible  until  the  seance  was  concluded.

"  The  sound  which  has  since  developed  to  such  an  extent  was  ni'st
heard  by  us  on  March  23rd,  1873.  At  that  time  it  resembled  the
plucking  of  a  sti'ing  in  mid  air.  It  was  faint,  and  only  presented
itself  at  intervals.  We  called  it  the  Lyre  sound,  for  want  of  a  better
name,  and  could  make  nothing  out  about  it,  except  that  a  certain
imitation  of  it  could  be  made  by  slightly  touching  the  wires  of  a  piano
at  the  upper  notes.  Tt  could  have  been  more  perfectly  imitated  by
plucking  the  small  strings  of  a  harp,  had  one  been  at  hand.  I  succeeded
also  in  making  some  resemblance  to  it  by  drawing  my  finger  over  the
wires  of  a  musical  clock  which  hangs  on  the  wall  of  the  room  adjoining
that  in  which  we  usually  sit.  This  clock  is  distinctly  audible  to  us  in
the  seance-room,  and  soon  its  sound  was  counterfeited  to  jDerfection.
Although  I  could  not  exactly  make  out  how  it  was  done,  I  supposed
that  the  piano  or  clock  must  be  used  in  some  way  to  make  a  sound
which  seemed  to  be  in  mid-air.  This  theory  was  soon  upset,  for  the
sound  came  in  rooms  where  there  was  no  musical  instrument ;  even  in
my  own  bedroom,  where  sometimes  the  sound  has  been  so  loud  as  to  be
distinctly  audible  through  the  wall  in  an  adjoining  room.  Two  months
after  its  first  appearance,  it  had  become  so  loud  that  the  vibration  of
the  table  was  very  marked.  The  sound  would  traverse  the  room  and
seem  to  die  away  in  the  distance,  and  suddenly  burst  forth  into  great
power  over  the  table,  which  appeared  in  some  inexplicable  way  to  be
used  as  a  sounding-board.  The  wood  of  the  table  vibrated  under  our
hands  exactly  as  it  would  have  done  had  a  violoncello  been  twanged


278  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


while  resting  upon  it.  It  was  no  question  of  fancy  or  delusion.  The
sounds  were  at  times  deafening,  and  alternated  between  those  made  by
the  very  small  strings  of  a  harp  and  such  as  would  be  caused  by  the
violent  thrumming  of  a  violoncello  resting  on  the  top  of  a  drum.
Sometimes  in  our  midst,  sometimes  distant  and  soft,  sometimes  the
bass  and  treble  sounds  alternating,  the  sounds  were  the  most  inexplic-
able that  I  have  ever  heard.  When  they  once  became  established,  they
were  made  almost  continuously.  We  never  sat  without  them,  and  they
formed  almost  the  staple  phenomenon  of  the  seance.  With  them,  as
with  other  phenomena,  great  variety  was  caused  by  good  or  bad  con-
ditions. Just  as  illness  or  atmospheric  disturbance  made  the  perfumes
and  drapery  coarse  and  unrefined,  so  the  lyre  sound  became  harsh,
unmusical,  and  wooden.  It  seemed  to  be  far  more  dependent  then  on
material  accessories.  The  table  was  used  until  at  times  the  musical
twang  would  shade  into  a  sort  of  musical  knock,  and  finally  become
an  ordinary  dull  thud  upon  the  table.  Sometimes,  too,  we  heard  a
very  distinct  imitation,  purposely  done,  I  think,  of  a  loose  string.
When  things  were  not  all  right,  the  sound  would  assume  a  most
melancholy,  wailing  character,  which  was  indescribably  weird  and
saddening.  It  was  not  unlike  the  soughing  of  wind  through  trees  in  the
dead  of  night ;  a  ghost-like  dreary  sound  that  few  persons  would  sit
long  to  listen  to.  That  sound  was  always  accompanied  by  black
darkness  in  the  room,  and  we  were  always  glad  to  take  the  hint  and
close  the  sitting  as  soon  as  we  could.  We  invariably  found  afterwards
that  there  had  been  some  reason  for  this  sadness.

"  No  point,  indeed,  connected  with  these  strange  sounds  is  more
remarkable  than  the  intensity  of  feeling  conveyed  by  them.  They
contrive  to  render  all  the  varieties  of  emotion  which  are  conveyed  by
the  human  voice.  Auger  and  sadness,  content  and  mirth,  solemnity
and  eagerness,  are  conveyed  in  a  way  quite  inexplicable.  In  answering
our  questions  sometimes  an  eager  and  rapid  request  for  alphabet  will
be  struck  out,  the  notes  and  the  quickness  with  which  they  are  sounded
conveying  precisely  the  idea  of  eagerness  which  a  sharp  interruption
by  an  impatient  listener  would  give.  The  wailing  sounds  above
noticed  seem  at  times  almost  to  sob  and  shriek  as  if  in  a  burst  of  sad-
ness. Sometimes  to  a  question  put  silence  will  be  maintained  for  a
while,  and  then  little,  hesitating  sounds  will  be  made,  very  slowly  and
tremulously,  so  as  to  convey  perfectly  the  idea  of  uncertainty  and
doubt.  Then  again  the  reply  will  come  clear,  sonorous,  and  immediate
as  the  '  I  do '  of  a  witness  in  the  box  who  has  no  doubt  as  to  the
answer  he  should  give.

"  As  one  instance  amongst  many  to  illustrate  this  intelligence  in
sound,  I  record  the  following.  Following  our  usual  custom,  we  had
inquired  as  to  the  invisible  intelligence  which  governed  the  sound,  and


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


279


received  full  particulars  as  to  his  life  in  the  body.  These  were  so
minute  that  I  had  no  difficulty  in  verifying  them  from  a  Biographical
Dictionary.  After  we  had  become  thoroughly  used  to  the  sounds  and
to  the  alleged  maker  of  them  [Grocyn  :  see  later]  a  book  came  out
which  contained  some  incidental  particulars  of  his  life.  It  fell  into
the  hands  of  one  of  our  circle,  who  read  it,  got  up  the  facts,  and  took
opportunity  of  questioning  about  them.  For  a  time  all  was  right  ;  but
on  being  asked  whether  he  remembered  a  certain  name  which  was
long  and  difficult  to  pronounce,  a  negative  was  returned.  '  But  you
must,  I  think?'  'No.'  'Why,  he  was  your  tutor?'  'No.'  'You
do  not  remember,  l)ut  he  was.'  A  tremendous  irritable  negative  was
given.  '  The  book  says  so.'  '  No,'  in  violent,  angry  accents  ;  '  the
book  does  not  say  so  ;  and  it  is  imperfect  besides.'  Other  questions
were  put,  and  answers  returned  in  the  same  sharp,  irritable  tone,
sometimes  ilatly  coiitradicting,  sometimes  correcting,  assertions  made.
At  last,  calling  for  alphabet,  the  correct  names  were — what  shall  I
say  1 — roared  out ;  and  on  reference  to  the  book  it  was  found  that
they  were  correct.  The  names  were  long,  and  the  questioner  had
forgotten  and  mispronounced  them.  No  greater  evidence  of  intelligence
could  be  conceived  than  this.  The  tone  was  just  the  tone  of  an  excited
disputant,  or  of  a  man  angry  at  having  his  word  disputed  when  he
knew  he  was  right.  I  had  never  seen  the  book  from  which  the  queries
were  propounded.  Some  of  the  facts  given  were  not  contained  in  it
at  all ;  others  wliich  had  been  wrongly  stated  were  corrected  promptly
and  decisively  ;  and  in  no  case  was  a  slip  made.  I  wonder  where  the
Unconscious  Cerebration  came  from  then  ?  I  do  not  believe  any
person  could  have  been  present  on  that  occasion,  and  have  heard  the
answers  and  the  way  in  which  they  wei'e  given,  without  carrying
away  the  conviction  that  a  real  individuality,  with  real  feelings,
passions,  and  mental  attributes  had  been  present,  albeit  invisible  to
the  eye  of  sense.  And  if  he  had  talked  with  this  invisible  as  often  as
we  have  during  more  than  a  year  past,  he  would  have  had  no  difficulty
in  bearing  testimony  to  the  reality  of  disembodied  existence,  and  of  the
perpetuation  of  mental  individuality  and  idiosyncrasy.  I  should  have
no  more  difficulty  in  recognising  this  sound  again  than  I  should  in
recalling  the  features  and  voice  of  any  old  friend  from  whom  I  might
chance  to  be  separated.  The  individuality  is  not  more  real  in  one  case
than  in  the  other.

"  But  I  am  dealing  with  sounds  now.  Identity  will  come  in  its
turn,  and  I  shall  be  able  to  make  out  a  strong  case,  I  think.  For  the
present  I  return  to  the  immediate  question.

"The  sounds  used  always  to  commence  near  the  circle,  and,  so  to
say,  radiate  from  it  as  a  centre  into  different  parts  of  the  room.  Of
late  they  have  changed,  and  are  usually  audible  to  me  before  they


280  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


strike  the  ear  of  any  other  person.  How  far  this  may  be  atti'ibiitable
to  clairaudience,  a  faculty  lately  developed  in  me,  I  cannot  say  posi-
tively. Bat  at  any  rate,  they  seem  to  me  to  commence  by  a  distant
rumble,  not  unlike  the  roll  of  a  drum.  This  gradually  draws  nearer
until  it  is  audible  to  all,  and  the  old  sounds  are  in  our  midst.

"Nor  are  they  confined  to  the  seance-room,  though  they  never  occur
anywhere  else  with  anything  like  the  readiness  and  intensity  with
whicli  they  are  made  in  that  room,  into  which  no  other  but  our  own
circle  who  sit  regularly  is  ever  admitted.  There  they  are  finest  both
in  tone  and  power.  But  they  have  been  heard  with  great  frequency
in  other  places  where  we  have  chanced  to  be,  in  sti'ange  rooms  alto-
gether, in  different  parts  of  the  country  where  I  may  have  been  staying,
and  even  in  the  open  air,  under  very  curious  circumstances.  We  were
at  Southend  this  spring,  where  there  is  a  pier  more  than  a  mile  in
length.  My  friend  [Dr.  Speer]  and  I  had  taken  our  books  and  were
sitting  at  the  extreme  end,  looking  out  to  sea,  when  raps  came  very
distinctly  on  the  rail  in  front  of  us.  We  ascertained  that  the  sound
was  there  without  doubt,  and  proceeded  to  experiment  upon  the
distance  at  which  it  could  be  heard.  I  placed  my  hands  on  the  topmost
rail,  and  my  friend  walked  on,  putting  his  ear  to  the  wood  from  time  to
time.  The  raps  were  clear  and  metallic,  and  well  known  to  us  at  our
seance.  They  followed  us  all  along  the  pier,  and  were  audible  at  a
great  distance,  as  indeed  any  sound  is  if  made  on  a  long  Avooden  rail.
This  was  at  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  At  8  p.m.  we  went  on  to  the
pier  again  for  the  purpose  of  experimenting  in  a  dim  light.  However,
a  bright  full  moon  shone  overhead,  and  though  it  was  quiet  it  was  not
even  dusk.  The  clear  metallic  rap  was  plainly  audible  at  a  distance  of
fifty  yai'ds  from  me.  As  we  were  trying  whether  it  could  be  heard  at
a  greater  distance,  the  musical  sounds  rang  out  as  clear  and  resonant
as  in  a  closed  room.  They  were  distinctly  audible  to  both  of  us  when
we  were  seventy  yards  apart,  and  were  apparently  made  in  the  space
between  us.  At  any  rate  the  sound  was  not  near  either  of  us,  but
seemed  to  come  from  a  distance.  Had  the  night  been  dark  I  believe
the  sound  would  have  been  considerably  intensified.  As  it  was  it  rang
out  Avith  all  the  characteristics  which  it  possesses  in  a  closed  room,  and
that  at  a  distance  of  some  800  or  900  yards  from  land.

"Hitherto  I  have  mentioned  only  the  stringed  musical  sounds  which
first  appeared  and  were  gradually  developed  :  the  vai'ious  sounds,  as  it
wer-e,  of  a  harp,  from  the  tiny  strings  down  to  the  deepest  bass  notes.
But  there  are  other  sounds  which  professedly  emanate  from  the  same
source,  and  which  resemble  the  sound  of  a  tambourine  played  over  our
heads,  or,  at  times,  the  flapping  of  a  pair  of  large  wings.  The  tambourine
sound  hovers  over  the  circle,  and  sometimes  gets  away  to  a  distance,
changing  almost  instantaneously  into  the  twanging  of  a  string.  Of


The  Exioeriences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  281


late,  other  sounds,  like  those  made  by  a  small  zither,  have  presented
themselves.  They  are  very  minute,  rather  metallic  sounds,  and  are
seven  in  number,  graduated  at  regular  intervals.  I  have  never  heard
a  zither  played,  but  I  am  told  by  those  who  have  that  these  sounds
accurately  imitate  that  instrument.  They  are  quite  distinct  from  the
sounds  which  I  have  described  before.  Unfortunately,  I  have  no  tune
in  my  composition;  if  it  were  otherwise,  I  have  no  doubt  that  actual
melodies  would  be  played.

"  The  nearest  approach  to  a  distinct  melody  occurred  on  a  late
occasion.  "We  sat  on  two  consecutive  evenings  ;  once  alone,  and  once
with  a  friend  who  occasionally  joins  our  circle.  On  each  occasion  the
sounds  were  very  marked.  When  alone,  we  sit  in  a  smaller  room,  and
there  the  sounds  come  out  most  distinctly ;  the  sound  as  of  a  very
tense  string  plucked  by  a  finger  nail.  Three  strings  are  distinguishable,
and  very  musical  were  the  notes  produced  from  them.  On  the  next
evening  these  three  strings  were  again  presented,  and  in  addition  to
them,  another  set  of  seven,  much  less  tensely  drawn,  and  giving  forth
a  lower  scale  of  sounds.  I  write  without  technical  knowledge,  and  am
somewhat  at  a  loss  to  convey  my  meaning  ;  but  what  struck  me  was
that  these  two  sets  of  sound  were  graduated  in  pitch,  and  harmonised
relatively  to  each  other.  They  represented  two  instruments,  the  one
of  three,  the  other  of  seven  strings,  and  they  were  used  in  playing
thus  : — Certain  notes  were  sounded  upon  the  three  strings,  and  these
were  followed  by  a  run  made  as  if  by  running  a  finger-nail  rapidly
over  the  strings  of  the  other  instrument.  The  result  was  like  what
musical  cognoscenti  call  '  a  free  prelude ' ;  what  I  should  describe  as  a
series  of  notes,  highly  pitched,  clear,  and  liquid  in  their  melody,
followed  by  a  rapid  run  on  an  instrument  of  lower  pitch.  I  sj)eak  of
instruments,  but  it  is  necessary  to  state  that  there  was  in  the  room —
an  ordinary  dining-room — no  musical  instrument  of  any  kind  whatever.
I  am  indebted  to  the  friend  who  has  been  most  interested  in  observine:
the  phenomenon  from  its  first  appearance  for  the  subjoined  account,
which  supplements  technical  deficiencies  in  my  own  description : —

Statement  by  Dr.  Speer.

"  '  The  sound  which  I  am  about  to  describe,  which  was  heard  in  our
circle  for  the  first  time  on  March  2.3rd,  1873,  has  been  one  of  the  most
constant  and  persistent  of  all  the  manifestations  with  which  we
have  become  acquainted  since  commencing  our  investigation  into  the
phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  having,  during  the  space  of  fifteen  months,
almost  invariably  presented  itself  at  each  sitting.  By  referring  to  my
notes  I  find  it  described  as  'a  sound  like  that  of  a  stringed  instrument,
played,  or  rather  plucked,  in  mid-air,  while  there  was  no  stringed
instrument  in  the  room.'  Every  attempt  was  subsequently  made  to
ascertain  through  what  substance  the  sound  could  be  evolved.  Objects


282  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


of  every  description  were  struck  against  one  another  ■with  a  view  to
elicit  a  similar  sound,  l)ut  in  vain  ;  and  it  at  last  became  patent  that
the  sounds  were  formed  independently  of  any  matei'ial  substance.  In
process  of  time,  the  character  of  the  sound  became  more  and  more
individualised,  and  its  locality  more  diversified.  It  would  appear  at
one  time  as  though  emanating  from  a  distant  part  of  the  room,  and  of
feeble  intensity.  At  another  time,  the  first  intimation  of  its  presence —
I  speak  of  it,  as  a  phenomenon,  but,  as  was  subsequently  shown,
indicative  of  a  presence — would  be  the  striking  apparently  of  a  tense,
metallic,  or  catgut  string,  over  the  centre  of  the  table,  and  not  un-
frequently  upon  the  table  itself.  In  process  of  time,  the  manifestation
became  most  extraordinary.  It  was  almost  impossible  (to  an  outsider
it  would  have  been  absohdely  impossible)  not  to  believe  that  a  large
stringed  instrument,  e.g.,  a  violoncello,  a  guitar,  a  double  bass,  or  a,
harp,  was  struck  by  powerful  human  fingers.  At  times  the  sounds
attained  such  a  pitch  of  intensity  as  to  be  almost  alarming ;  as  though,
indeed,  a  double  bass  had  been  placed  cross- wise  over  the  top  of  a  large
regimental  drum  for  a  sounding-board,  and  then  played  after  the
manner  of  a  guitar — viz.,  pizzicato.  On  these  occasions  the  sitters
could  distinctly  feel  a  strong  vibration  transmitted  from  the  points  of
the  lingers  in  contact  with  the  table  ujs  to  the  shoulder-joint.

" '  Before  long  these  powerfully  resonant  metallic  sounds  were
supplemented  by  sounds  apparently  made  by  plucking  the  shortest
strings  of  a  harp,  and  the  two  sounds  would  alternate  with  considerable
regularity.  Certain  evidences  of  intelligence  having  been  apparent  in
the  manifestations,  we  ascertained  that  the  sounds  were  in  truth
evidences  of  the  presence  of  individuals  purporting  to  have  long
since  departed  from  earth-life.  The  intelligence  was  manifested  first
by  answers  to  questions  which  were  given  in  the  same  manner  as  the
raps  on  a  table,  one,  two,  three,  five,  &c.  The  peculiarity  of  the
answers  was  that  the  tone  of  the  sounds  corresponded  in  a  most
singular  and  convincing  manner  with  the  nature  of  the  response.  In
other  woixls,  the  passions  of  individuals,  as  exemplified  on  earth  by
tones  of  speech,  were  here  illustrated  by  the  peculiar  type  and  tone  of
the  musical  sound.  A  harp  was  said  to  have  been  a  favourite  com-
panion of  the  departed  when  in  the  flesh  ;  and  several  attempts  were
made  to  elicit  actual  melody  at  various  times,  but  the  medium  not  being
of  a  musical  turn  of  mind,  this  attempt  invariably  failed.  By  request,
however,  scales,  octaves,  and  thirds  have  been  correctly  played,  and  on
one  occasion  an  arpeggio  was  very  fairly  rendered,  and  repeated  several
times.  S.  T.  Speeb.'

"  I  confess  myself  entirely  unable  to  give  any  idea  of  the  way  in
which  these  remarkable  sounds  are  produced.  That  they  are  made  by
no  material  means  I  am  certain,  for  they  occur  in  places  where  no  such
means  are  available.  That  they  are  the  means  taken  by  an  Invisible
Intelligence  for  making  his  presence  manifest  is  equally  certain.  J ust
as  others  take  a  peculiar  form  of  rap,  or  a  special  handwriting,  he
takes  this  musical  sound  as  his  symbol.  How  he  makes  it,  I  am  as
ignorant  as  I  am  of  the  manner  in  which  raps  are  produced  on  a  table


MRS.  STANHOPE  SPEER.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  283


Avithout  contact.  To  tell  me  that  it  is  done  by  the  exercise  of  will-
power does  not  help  me  ;  and  that  is  all  the  explanation  I  can  get.
That  the  sound  is  objective  is  plain  from  the  fact  that  all  hear  it
alike;  and  if  additional  proof  be  wanted,  it  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the
table  vibrates  beneath  the  sound.  It  remains  one  of  the  inexplicable
mysteries  which  are  none  the  less  real  objective  facts  becaiise  they  cire
mysteries  ;  and  for  the  explanation  of  which  we  must  be  content  to
bide  our  time. The  fact  is  certain. Let  the  theory  wait."


[From  this  summarised  account  of  the  earlier  phenomena  I  pass
on  to  citations  from  the  almost  wholly  unpublished  notes  of  Mr.  Moses
and  of  Dr.  Speer,  and  from  the  published  notes  of  Mrs.  Speer  {Light,
1892-3).  Mr.  Moses'  first  note-book  of  physical  phenomena  (1  B),  as
already  said,  is  missing  ;  his  note-book  2  B  begins,  as  it  happens,  at
the  same  date  as  Dr.  Speer's  note-book  1,  viz.,  on  November  17th,  1872,
when  the  little  group  met  after  an  interval.

The  period,  April-November,  1872,  covered  by  the  missing  1  B  is
covered  also  by  Mrs.  Speer's  notes,  and  a  few  direct  extracts  from  1  B
seem  to  have  been  printed  by  Mr.  Moses  in  Light.  I  shall  quote  some
of  this  early  matter,  giving  throughout  Mr.  Moses'  notes  as  the  text,
and  Mrs.  Speer's  (signed  M.S.)  and  Dr.  Speer's  (signed  S.T.S.)  in
notes.  I  may  say  at  once  that  I  have  found  no  discrepancies  of  any
importance  between  the  three  series  of  records,  although  each  nari'ator
tends  to  dwell  on  a  different  class  of  phenomena.  Mrs.  Speer  attends
most  to  the  trance-utterances  (which  I  do  not  here  reproduce),  and
Dr.  Speer  to  the  movements  of  objects  without  contact.  Mr.  Moses'
own  account  is  generally  the  fullest  for  such  part  of  each  seance  as  he
was  in  a  normal  state  ;  and  where  slight  slips  in  dates,  &c.,  occur,  Mr.
Moses  seems  generally  the  most  exact.  In  several  cases  one  of  the
recorders  supplies  some  detail  needed  for  the  proper  understanding  of
the  incidents  which  other  recorders  have  given.  None  of  the  records
attain,  or  can  even  be  said  to  aim  at,  scientific  completeness  ;  hut  by
studying  them  in  connection,  and  noting  incidental  phrases,  one  can
form,  I  think,  a  fairly  accurate  notion  of  what  the  recorders  believe
to  have  occurred.

Mrs.  Speer's  early  notes  describe  the  gradual  way  in  which  the
phenomena  began  : —

MarcJi  ith,  1872. — I  was  taken  ill,  and  confined  to  my  room  for  three
weeks.  During  that  time  my  cousin  brought  into  my  room  for  Dr.  S.  to
read  (she  was  tired  of  lending  me  books  on  the  subject,  seeing  how  little  I
was  interested)  Dale  Owen's  last  published  work,  TJie  Debatable  Land.
I  accidentally  took  it  up,  and  began  to  read,  and  at  once  my  indifference
vanished,  and  I  read  and  re-read  till  I  felt  my  mind  and  curiosity  so  aroused

U


284  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


that  I  longed  to  get  well  and  find  out  with  the  help  of  others  whether  the
facts  contained  in  this,  to  me,  wonderful  book  were  true  or  false.

March  2(3th. — I  was  able  to  leave  my  room,  and  on  seeing  our  friend  Mr.
Stainton  Moses,  I  asked  him  to  read  the  book  and  endeavour  to  discover
whether  it  was  true  or  false.  I  had  not  been  able  to  arouse  my  husband's
curiosity,  as  he  was  at  that  time  almost  a  Materialist.  Mr.  S.  M.  had,  up
to  the  present  period,  felt  as  little  interest  in  Spiritualism  as  ourselves,  but
impressed  with  my  great  desire  for  knowledge  upon  the  subject,  he  read  the
book,  and  became  as  anxious  for  information  as  I  was.'

On  June  3rd  Mr.  S.  M.  and  self  sat  with  Mrs.  C.  and  Miss  A.  C.  We
then  had  raps  near  Mr.  S.  M.,  and  a  few  tilts  of  the  table  ;  more  than  we  had
had  before.  After  this  we  met  several  times,  Dr.  S.  and  Miss  E.  joining  our
jiarty,  but  nothing  ever  occurred  excejit  slight  rapping,  always  near  Mr.  S.  M.
I  was  getting  weary  of  such  constant  failures,  and  my  husband  then  proposed
having  the  medium,  Mr.  Williams,  to  sit  with  us.

After  this  seance  we  sat  two  or  three  times  with  Mrs.  C .  and  her  sisters,
hxit  very  little  was  elicited  beyond  numerous  small  raps,  always  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Mr.  S.  M.,  who  was  by  degrees  developing  into  a  medium,  and
who  with  Dr.  S.  had  attended  several  public  seances,  and  had  been  informed
at  those  seances  that  he  would  have  great  mediumistic  power.

After  sitting  at  home  with  various  j^eople  and  getting  very  little  result,
we  became  tired,  and  pi'oposed  one  evening  that  we  would  try  by  our-
selves— Mr.  S.  M.,  Dr.  S.,  and  self.  Accordingly  we  did  so  on  July  30fch,
1872,  in  the  same  room,  and  with  the  same  table  that  was  used  when  Mr.
Williams  sat  with  us.  For  the  first  time  the  raps  became  intelligent,  and
aiTSwered  a  few  questions.  We  sat  again  the  following  evening,  under
the  same  circumstances.  Raps  louder  and  more  frequent  ;  the  table
quivered  and  moved  several  steps  ;  raps  also  answered  questions. — M.S.

The  phenomena  improved  during  the  summer ;  and  indications  of
the  identity  of  the  commvinicating  intelligences  were  occasionally  given.
The  subject  of  spirit  identity  will,  however,  be  more  conveniently  dis-
cussed when  the  whole  series  of  proofs,  partly  given  by  physical
phenomena,  and  partly  by  automatic  writing,  shall  be  before  us.
During  this  summer,  too,  "  Iraperator,"  the  leading  guide  or  director  of
all  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena,  announces  his  advent,  although  not  yet
giving  any  more  personal  name.  I  give  Mr.  Moses'  account  of  the
last  sitting  held  before  the  break,  after  which  Book  2  B  and  Dr.
Speer's  notes  begin. — F.W.H.M.]

September  \^th. — We  darkened  the  seance-room,  leaving  the  gas
burning  brightly  in  the  adjoining  dining-room,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I
at  the  table.  On  the  floor  under  the  table  we  put  a  piece  of  ruled
paper  and  a  pencil.  A  corner  of  the  paper  I  tore  off  and  handed  it  to
Dr.  S.  to  identify  the  sheet  of  paper  if  necessary. Various  raps,  some

^  I  hail  previously  tried  in  vain  to  read  Lord  Adare's  record  of  private  seances
with  D.  D.  Home.  Though  less  than  a  month  before  I  read  The  Debatable  Land
I  could  not  get  through  it. It  had  absolutely  no  interest  for  me.  —  S.  M.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


285


objects  brought  in,  and  a  noise  rathei"  like  sawing  wood.  Wlien  light
was  called  for  Mrs.  S.  stooped  and  picked  up  the  paper.  The  upper
surface  was  blank. Her  endorsement  on  the  back  of  the  paper  after-


I ~  \


w


Facsimile  reduced  from  original.  The  paper  was  blue,  with  faint
blue  lines.  The  corner  at  the  top  right  hand  was  torn  off  for  identitica-
tion  of  the  paper.

wards  written  reads:  "  I  took  the  paper  from  under  the  table  with  the
writing  downwards,"  i.e.,  on  the  surface  touching  the  carpet.  Dr.  S.
and  I  wrote  and  signed  this  endorsement.  "The  above  corner  was
torn  off  by  nie  (S.  M.)  before  the  light  was  put  out,  and  was  given  to
Dr.  S.  I  (S.  M.)  afterwards  put  the  two  pieces  together."  They  fit
exactly,  and  are  secured  by  a  couple  of  halfpenny  stamps,  with  the
initials  of  Dr.  S.  and  myself  upon  them.

The  message  follows  the  ruled  lines  exactly. A  facsimile  is

u  2


286


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


appended,  omitting  only  the  initials  of  a  deceased  friend.  The  mono-
gram in  the  left-hand  corner  is  that  of  another  deceased  friend  of
mine.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  writing  is  clearly  and  laboriously
executed  on  the  ruled  lines.  In  no  case  are  the  lines  deserted.  I
fancy  the  message  is  written  backwards.  Imperator's  signature  is  of
his  usual  decided  type,  very  like  what  is  automatically  written  by  my
hand.  I  suspect  that  the  message  was  written  by  tv/o  hands.  Imperator
very  rarely  wrote  before  or  after.  The  knowledge  of  my  movements
was  exact. I  left  for  London  the  next  morning.

[We  now  come  to  Book  2  B,  with  the  parallel  notes  of  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Speer.]

SiC7iday,  November  17th,  1872. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I  resumed
our  seances.  The  raps  were  extremely  loud  a,nd  resonant.  I  have  never
heard  them  more  plainly.  No  attempt  at  conversation  was  made  except-
in  the  way  of  comment.  Several  distinct  kinds  of  rapping  were  heard,
also  creaking,  and  a  peculiar  kind  of  wheezing  scratching.  ^

Monday,  18th. — Seance  resumed.  An  attempt  to  sit  inside  the
curtains  was  not  successful.  Raps  and  knocks  very  resonant,  jixst  as
much  so  when  none  of  us  touched  the  table.  Clouds  of  light  visible
in  the  room  and  a  form  near  me.  The  wheezing  noise  was  present
again  and  raps  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  No  conversation.
Barometric  pressure  low.  I  very  tired  and  below  par ;  severe  cold  and
cough.^

Ttiesdaij,  19th. — Seance  resumed,  with  similar  results.  In  addition
the  table  tilted  violently,  and  moved  so  as  to  rap  on  the  easy  chair  in
which  Dr.  Speer  was  sitting.  I  saw  a  figure  standing  on  my  right
hand,  which  was  said  to  be  Mr.  Callister.  The  room  was  filled  also
with  clouds  of  luminous  vapour.'

^  November  17 tJt. — Seances  resumed  after  two  months'  interval.  Mrs.  S.,
Mr.  M.,  and  self.  —  1st  seance  (about  one  hour).  Raps  and  knocks  very  soon
obtained,  about  Mr.  M. ,  on  his  chair,  on  table,  on  cupboard  of  library,  and  in
cui)board.  Knocks  and  taps  louder  than  we  have  heard  them.  Table
moved  half  round  twice. Barometer,  29|. — S.T.S.

-November  18th. — Same  circle. — Same  result  as  to  taps,  some  of  which  on
the  table  were,  perhajDS,  even  louder.  No  movement  of  table.  Sat  inside
curtain  with  scarcely  any  results.  Mr.  M.  was  tired  and  exhausted.  Weather
wet  and  gloomy. Barometer,  29  2-10.  —  S.T.S.

November  19th. — Same  circle.— -Same  results  at  first,  but  not  speedily
developed.  Raps  in  cupboard.  Table  moved,  tilted  ;  remained  suspended
on  two  legs  at  a  great  angle,  and  rapped  on  my  chair  ^  ' '  Welcome  ;  we
rejoice. Wm.  Cr." Barometer,  29  2-10.

November  20th.  —  Same  party. — Sat  late — 10.45.  All  tried  development
by  slow  knocks  and  taps.  At  length  table  moved  round,  tilted,  and  waved
fis  before. No  message. Barometer,  29i. Seance  about  40  mins. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  287


Friday,  22nd. — Seance  resumed  as  before.  Knocks  very  resonant.
Tiltings  of  the  table  completely  to  the  floor  without  contact ;  this
repeated  three  times.  A  paper-knife  brought  from  the  drawing-room
and  thrown  on  to  the  table,  striking  me  on  the  head  in  transit.  On
going  to  jny  bedroom  I  found  a  small  cross  made  out  of  some
Guimauve  lozenges  which  I  have  for  my  cough.  The  remainder  of
the  packet  which  was  not  used  was  taken  away,  and  I  have  been
unable  to  discover  it  anywhere."  l

Wednesday,  November  21th. — Seance  with  Mr.  Williams  at
Douglas  House.  [Mr.  Williams  is  the  well-known  medium  (who  has
repeatedly  been  caught  cheating).  Douglas  House  was  Dr.  Speer's
house  in  South  Hampstead,  London.]

We  sat  (Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self)  for  two  hours  absolutely  without
result.  We  did  not  get  even  a  rap.  After  Mr.  Williams  had  gone  I
went  down  to  the  lower  room  to  smoke  a  cigar  before  going  to  bed.
As  Dr.  S.  and  I  were  pacing  up  and  down  the  room  a  whole  shower  of
Guimauve  lozenges  (the  remainder  of  the  packet  out  of  which  the
cross  had  been  made  on  Friday  last)  was  violently  thrown  on  to  my
head,  whence  they  spread  over  the  floor  round  about  where  we  were
standing.  There  were  thirteen  or  fourteen  of  them,  and  that  num-
ber, together  with  the  nine  used  in  making  the  cross,  would  just  about
make  up  the  two-ounce  packet  which  I  had.  I  had  looked  in  every
conceivable  place  for  these  lozenges  (which  were  missing  after  the
cross  was  made),  but  could  find  them  nowhere.

Di'.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I  then  sat  to  see  if  sve  could  elicit  any  com-
munications. They  came  at  once — knocks,  tilts,  and  messages.  Mrs.
S.  had  imagined  that  she  was  touched  during  the  seance  with  Williams.
I  thought  not  as  I  saw  nothing — no  spirit  in  the  room.  We  inquired
now,  and  were  told  that  no  touch  had  been  given,  and  no  spirit  had
been  able  to  manifest  at  all.^

'^November  22ncl. — Same  party. — Began  at  9.15  p.m.  Previous  to  sitting
Mr.  M.  and  self  sat  on  tlio  harmonium  stool  in  the  study.  Heard  loud  raps.
On  sitting,  raps  almost  immediately.  Table  moved  very  roughly,  then  tilted
at  various  angles,  and  kept  suspended,  no  one  being  in  contact.  Table  then
brought  so  close  to  floor  as  only  to  rest  on  my  middle  finger  placed  on  floor,
and  yet  balanced  in  that  position  so  delicately  as  to  give  but  the  slightest
feeling  of  pressure  on  the  finger.  The  same  thing  occurred  in  the  opposite
direction.  For  some  minutes  the  table  (no  one  touching  it)  oscillated  under
my  finger  at  angles  which  I  have  since  tried  and  found  it  impossible  to
maintain  without  tipping  over  at  once.  N.B. — Mr.  M.  and  Mrs.  S.  were  so
far  removed  as  to  he  entirely  out  of  contact  with  the  table.  Message  spelt
out  : "  We  have  done  all. Go  !  "— S.T.S.

-  November  2Qth  [27i/(]. — Seance.  Same  as  before,  bat  with  the  addition  of
Mr.  Williams. — Room  carefully  prepared,  cupboards  all  locked  and  pasted  up.


288


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


Tuesday,  December  3rd. — Seance  with  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  in  the  lower
(breakfast)  room.  A  bright  fire  burned,  and  partially  lit  up  the  room.
The  table  used  was  a  heavy  round  loo  table,  firm,  and  many  times
heavier  than  than  the  small  table  which  we  have  been  accustomed
to  use  in  the  library,  whei'e  we  usually  sit.  Manifestations  com-
menced almost  immediately.  Raps  loud  and  clear,  but  not  so  resonant
as  on  the  small  table,  creakings  on  my  chair  and  on  the  table.  Finally
the  table  rose,  tilted  violently  until  it  rested  on  Dr.  S.'s  finger  or  the
floor.  It  followed  my  hands  as  iron  follows  a  magnet,  and  was  drawn
backwards  on  one  occasion  when  it  rested  on  the  floor.  I  tried  and
found  that  very  considerable  muscular  effort  was  necessary  to  stir  it
at  all.  Yet  it  followed  the  passes  of  my  hand.  I  found  that  my  chair
was  many  times  moved,  and  at  length  it  rose  in  the  air  to  the  height  of
^  eighteen  inches  or  thereabouts,  as  near  as  I  could  judge.  It  then
dropped  to  the  floor,  and  I  continued  my  upward  journey  until  I  must
very  nearly  have  reached  the  ceiling.  My  voice  was  described  by  Dr.
and  Mrs.  S.  as  sounding  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ceiling.  Pre-
sently I  came  down,  and  a  light  was  struck.  My  chair  was  found  to
be  some  distance  from  the  table.  "When  the  light  was  put  out  again
my  chair  was  taken  from  under  me,  and  placed  after  a  time  on  the
table.  It  was  a  heavy  chair,  but  was  placed  quite  gently  on  the
table  ;  and  glided  towards  Mrs.  S.  The  light  of  the  fire  was  enough  for
us  to  see  it  dimly.  I  again  felt  that  I  was  moving,  and  I  walked  away
to  the  end  of  the  room  to  break  the  circle.  Another  table  near  me
then  began  to  move,  and  I  called  for  a  light,  objecting  to  any  more
knocking  about.

When  we  darkened  the  room  again  I  called  for  Imperator,  who  had
never  rapped  all  the  evening.  He  came  at  last,  but  only  rapped  a
few  times  very  faintly."^

Bells,  rings,  tubes,  paper,  pencil,  &c.,  placed  on  table.  Commenced  at
8  p.  m. ,  and  sat  40  minutes  without  any  result  whatever.  It  was  suggested
that  Mrs.  S.  should  join.  She  did  so  for  20  minutes,  without  any  result.
We  then  adjourned  for  tea,  and  on  returning  sat  for  another  hour,  but
without  obtaining  any  results,  although  every  change  in  the  formation  of  the
circle  was  tried.  We  then  broke  up,  and  Mr.  W.  soon  after  departed.  On
Mr.  M.  and  myself  going  downstairs  for  a  smoke,  in  about  10  minutes  a
shower  of  guimauve  lozenges  came  rattling  down  on  Mr.  M.'s  head,  and  were
scattered  all  over  the  floor.  They  had  been  missing  for  several  days  past.
Mr.  M.  suggested  a  sliort  seance  without  Williams.  We  again  sat  for
20  minutes,  and  almost  at  once  obtained  results— raps,  turning  of  table,
tilting  of  table. We  had  no  theory  to  offer  for  this  singular  failure.

November  28th. — Seance— same  trio. — Power  very  soon  manifest.  A  closed
box  placed  on  table,  raps  on  table  and  box  and  in  ditto — table  violently
moved  several  times,  and  struck  each  member  in  turn. Singular  sounds


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  289


Monday,  December  9th.  —  Seance  as  usual,  Douglas  House. —
Imperator  [name  given  by  the  leading  control]  came  almost  as  soon  as
we  sat  down.  His  knocks  were,  as  usual,  very  distant  at  first,  in-
creasing in  intensity  until  at  one  period  of  the  evening  the  table
shook  as  from  a  blow  of  a  powerful  fist.  Dicky  [name  given  by  a
frequent  control]  had  very  little  to  do.  He  tried  once  or  twice  to  get  in,
but  was  shut  up  at  once  by  a  thud  and  retired  creaking  in  an  injured
tone.  Imperator  professed  his  readiness  to  answer  questions,  and  I
proceeded  to  question  him  as  to  the  source  from  which  these  mani-
festations came.

Question.  Are  these  communications  from  spirits  1 — Answer.  Yes.

Q.  Spirits  of  the  departed  1 — A,  Yes.

Q.  Are  you  a  spirit  once  incarnated  ? — A.  Yes.

Q.  You  have  been  in  the  flesh  ?— A.  Yes.

Q.  Is  the  account  given  of  these  manifestations  by  spirits  true  1—
A.  I  don't  know.

Q.  Is  what  you  tell  us  true  1 — A.  Yes  (emphatically).

Q.  Then  are  these  manifestations  from  the  spirits  of  the  departed  1 —
A.  Yes.

Q.  There  is  no  mistake  about  that  1 — A.  No.

Q.  And  you  yourself  are  a  departed  spirit  1 — A.  Yes  (three  very
loud  knocks,  startling  in  their  intensity).

Q.  And  others  associated  with  you  are  spirits  of  the  departed  ? —
A.  Yes.

Q.  Any  who  are  not  ? — A.  No.

Q.  Do  you  know  the  little  French  child  who  professed  to  be  Dr.
Speer's  sister  1 — A.  No.

Q.  Were  you  there  when  she  came  1 — A.  No.
Q.  Did  Miss  Kirkland  come  ? — A.  Yes.
Q.  Was  it  Miss  K.  really  I—A.  Yes.

emanated  from  box.  Sawing  closely  imitated,  ditto  driving  in  of  nails.  Raps
of  Imperator  soon  heard,  and  became  exceedingly  strong,  almost  alarmingly
so  to  a  neophyte. Message  : ' '  Stop." Seance  then  broken.

Saturday,  November  30i/i.— Same  seance.  Raps,  tilts  as  usual  on  table,
on  a  box  placed  on  table,  and  on  a  suspended  box,  which  box  was  twirled
round  and  round  several  times  without  contact  of  any  kind.  Imperator
manifested  loudly,  as  usual,  but  suddenly  departed. — S.T.S.

^December  3rd. — Seance  downstairs  at  large  round  table.  Manifestations
slow,  some  complaining  of  same  ;  the  table  suddenly  tilted  up  with  consider-
able force,  and  oscillated  at  a  great  angle.  This  occurred  several  times.
Mr.  M.  was  moved  about,  and  floated  twice,  and  a  large  dining-room  chair
was  placed  on  the  table.  I,  sitting  in  a  large,  heavy  armchair,  was  for  the
first  time  distinctly  moved. — S.T.S. Sat  in  firelight. — M.S.


290  The  Experiences  of  TF.  Stainton  Moses.


Q.  Are  you  sure  ? — A.  Yes,  yes.

Q.  Did  you  write  that  message  the  other  night  1 — A.  No.

Q.  Were  you  there  when  it  was  written  1 — A.  N  o.

Q.  You  did  not  come  because  Dr.  Speer  offended  you  1 — A.  Yes.

(Dr.  S.  again  apologised,  and  the  apology  was  received  with  a  series
of  stately  raps,  suggestive  of  bows.)

Q.  Then  your  absence  let  in  an  evil  or  lying  spirit  ? — A.  Yes.
; Q.  Are  we  liable  to  that  ?— A.  Yes.

Q.  Then  you  do  leave  me  ? — A.  No.

Q.  Not  usually,  you  mean  1 — A.  Yes.

Q.  Then  we  must  be  guarded  and  careful  to  sit  with  solemnity,  and
follow  guidance  ? — A.  Yes.

Q.  You  are  good  ? — A.  Yes.

Q.  I  solemnly  chai^ge  and  adjure  you  in  the  name  of  God  that  you
tell  the  truth.  Are  you  a  good  spirit,  once  incarnated  in  the  flesh  ?
—A.  Yes.

(Three  of  the  loudest  knocks  I  ever  heard.  We  all  involuntarily
drew  in  our  breath,  and  a  feeling  of  awe  stole  over  us.)

Q.  It  is  true,  then,  that  departed  spirits  can  return.  Do  you  know
Mr.  C.  ?— A.  Yes.

Q.  Is  he  here  ?— A.  No.

Q.  Can  you  fetch  him  ? — A.  Yes. — Do  so.

The  room,  which  had  been  filled  (especially  round  me)  Avith  floating
clouds  of  light,  grew  suddenly  dark,  and  absolute  stillness  took  the
place  of  the  previous  loud  knockings.  It  would  have  been  a  strange
scene  for  an  eai'-witness.  The  table,  isolated,  with  no  human  hand
touching  it,  giving  forth  a  series  of  mysterious  thuds  of  varying
intensity,  some  of  which  might  have  been  made  by  a  muffled  sledge-
hammer, all  indicating  intelligence  ;  an  intelligence  that  showed  itself
by  deliberation,  or  eagerness,  or  stately  solemnity,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  communication.  Round  the  table  three  persons  sitting
with  a  hush  of  expectation,  and  faces  (if  they  could  have  been  seen)
of  awe-stricken  earnestness ;  a  question  put,  and  a  loud  response,
another,  and  a  series,  as  though  by  a  counsel  cross-examining  a  dumb
witness.  The  room  shrouded  in  total  darkness,  except  at  one  end,
where  shifting  masses  of  luminous  vapour  now  and  again  gathered
into  a  pillar  which  dimly  outlined  a  form,  and  again  dispersed  and
flitted  round  the  head  of  one  of  the  sitters.  No  scene  could  be
imagined  more  calculated  to  strike  a  novice  with  awe,  none  more
solemn  and  impressive  for  those  who  participated  in  it.  The  Witch
of  Eudor  was  not  more  surprised  when  her  unholy  incantation  evoked
ttie  shade  of  Samuel  than  I  was  when  Imperator  in  answer  to  my
solemn  adjuration  professed  himself  to  be  a  departed  spirit. I  had  for


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


291


some  time  leaned  to  the  opinion  that  the  spirits — if  spirits  they
were — were  not  departed  ones.  Dr.  S.  had  leaned  to  the  same  notion,
so  that  the  Unconscious  Cerebration  theory  fails  to  meet  this  case.'  It
must  be,  I  think,  what  it  pretends  to  be — a  message  of  truth  from  a
denizen  of  the  spheres,  who  has  passed  the  probation  of  life  and  has
been  permitted  to  return  to  the  world  in  which  he  once  lived,  and
whose  communications,  though  imperfect,  are  sincere.

After  being  absent  about  three  minutes,  Imperator  returned,  and
his  commanding  thuds  drew  our  attention.  They  were  at  once  followed
by  knocks  of  a  diiTerent  description  to  any  which  we  had  yet  heard.
We  inquired  whether  Mr.  C.  were  present  ?  Yes.  Q.  Are  you  the
spirit  of  my  old  friend  ? — A.  Yes. — Q.  Who  died  so-and-so,  and  so-and-
so.  ..  .  ? — A.  Yes.  Q.  Can  you  give  me  any  test? — A.  Yes.
The  table  then  knocked  TRINITY.  It  was  a  test  to  me.  My
friend  shortly  before  his  death  had  been  perplexed  about  tlieological
questions,  and  once  had  written  to  me  to  say  he  had  been  lying  awake
on  Trinity  Sunday  morning  trying  to  realise  the  Trinity  and  had  failed.
He  asked  me  for  an  explanation  of  the  doctrine,  and  I  had  written  to
him  on  the  subject.

The  knocks  ceased  and  Imperator  returned.  We  requested  that
Dicky  might  be  allowed  to  tilt  the  table,  and  it  was  at  once  done ;  but
Imperator  soon  stopped  him,  and  bid  us  good-night.  So  closed  a  most
impressive  seance  ;  in  which  the  opinion  of  the  intelligences  themselves
declared  unmistakably  for  the  Theory  of  Departed  Spirits.  Though  this
vv'ould  not  form  any  strong  argument  to  convince  one  who  had  made  up
his  mind  in  an  opposite  direction,  still  it  must  be  allowed  to  have  its
weight  Taken  in  connection  with  other  collateral  evidence  such  as  the
materialised  spirit  form,  the  strongly  marked  individuality  which  per-
vades communications  from  each  jJarticular  spirit,  the  totally  different
nature  of  the  knock  in  each  case,  and  the  fact  of  certain  tests  being-
given,  the  balance  of  evidence  must  be  allowed  to  be  strong.

For  instance,  I  see  a  materialised  form  which  bears  resemblance  to
a  deceased  friend  (Step  No.  1).  I  see  that  form  standing  by  during  the
progress  of  phenomena  (Step  No.  2).  A  knock  different  from  any
other  is  given  (Step  No.  3).  That  knock  gives  a  communication
which  purports  to  come  from  the  person  whose  form  I  see  near  me
(Step  No.  4).  Questioned,  that  communicating  intelligence  asserts  in
the  most  solemn  manner  that  it  is  what  it  pretends  to  be,  and  per-
sists in  that  statement  on  being  adjured  (Step  No.  5).  On  being
further  pressed  a  test  known  only  to  myself  is  given  to  prove  identity

^  Mr.  Moses  here  fails  to  realise  the  possibility  that  opinions  not  held  by  our
ordinary  selves  may  nevertheless  be  held  and  expressed  by  the  unconscious  or  sub-
liminal part  of  our  being. — F.W.H.M,


292  The  Experiences  of  W.  Sta'mton  Moses.


(Step  No.  6).  That  information  is  confirmed  by  other  communicating
intelligences,  who  knock  with  their  own  special  knock,  and  are
apparently  distinct  individualities  (Step  No.  7).

This  forms  a  strong  link  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the  theory
advanced  by  the  intelligences  themselves.  On  the  other  side  is  the
manifest  fact  that  communications  jDurporting  to  come  from  our
deceased  friends  are  not  always  trustworthy,  and  that  they  are
generally  mai'ked  by  evidences  of  intellectual  weaknesses.  It  may  be
that  the  falsehoods  are  traceable  to  lying  spirits  who  personate  spirits
of  good,  and  that  the  low  order  (intellectually  speaking)  of  the  com-
munications may  be  accounted  for  by  the  tortuous  channel  through
which  they  come  and  the  medium  through  which  they  have  been
filtered.  But  the  exjjlanation  is  not  perfectly  satisfactory.  And
there  is  the  additional  stumbling-block  that  it  is  jwima  facie  extremely
unlikely  that  the  spirits  of  the  noble,  tlie  learned,  and  the  pure
should  be  concerned  in  the  production  of  physical  and  intellectual
phenomena  which,  when  not  silly,  are  frequently  mischieA^ous,  and
when  distinctly  true  are  not  new,  and  being  new  are  not  true.  The
argument  that  God  permits  for  the  establishment  of  a  fading  faith
manifestations  such  as  these  would  satisfactorily  dispose  of  all  objec-
tions. A  similar  rough  and  ready  form  of  argument  would  explain
everything  that  is  obscure  and  reduce  all  investigation  as  to  the  cause
of  things  within  very  narrow  limits.  God  permits  it,  or  it  would  not
exist.  The  fact  that  it  exists  because  He  permits  it  is  no  more  an
explanation  than  would  be  the  converse,  that  He  permits  it  because  it
exists.  Speculations  as  to  the  motives  which  sway  the  Deity  are
utterly  fruitless,  and  presumptions  as  to  what  is  or  is  not  likely  are
worse  than  fruitless.  I  have  seen  enough  to  convince  me  that  evei-y-
thing  is  likely,  and  that  nothing  is  likely  ;  and  I  have  come  to  the
conclusion  that  one  fact  is  worth  one  thousand  theories.  No  theory
that  I  know  of  will  explain  everything,  simply  because  we  are  ex-
plaining a  terra  incognita  and  dealing  with  the  impalpable,  which  we
cannot  grasp,  and  the  unknown,  which  we  canixot  in  our  present  state
of  existence  expect  to  fathom.

The  theory  of  the  Spiritualists — the  theory  advanced  by  the
intelligences  themselves — is  that  which  seems  to  me  the  roundest
and  most  coherent.  But  "round"  theories  are  suspicious,  and  the
suspicions  in  this  case  are  aggravated  by  the  manifestly  untrue
character  of  many  of  the  communications  given  by  these  intelligences.
The  voice  from  beyond  the  grave  is  uncertain,  and  when  it  can  be
tested  frequently  delusive,  if  not  absolutely  and  mischievously  false.
So  I  fancy  that  a  wise  man  will  still  return  as  his  verdict,  "  Not
Proven."


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  293


[Mr.  Moses  came  in  a  few  months  more  to  believe  completely  in  the
actual  identity  of  the  communicating  intelligences.  But  this  passage
in  his  diary  tends  to  show  (what  on  other  testimony  also  I  believe  to
have  been  the  case)  that  he  was  by  no  means  anxious  to  believe  in,  or
to  defer  to,  the  claims  of  alleged  '-'spirit  guides."  His  previous  Anglican
convictions  were  very  strong ;  and  his  intellectual  habit  of  mind  in-
clined rather  to  the  side  of  stubbornness  than  of  pliancy. — F.W.H.M.]

Thursday,  December  \1th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  T. —
The  seance  was  short.  I  questioned  Imperator  as  to  a  vision  I  had  had  on
the  previous  night.  He  said  that  he  had  appeared  to  me.  He  was  some-
what different  in  appearance  to  what  had  been  described.  I  asked
whether  I  should  see  him  again.  He  knocked  out  :  "  Watch."  The  clouds
of  light,  which  had  gathered  as  usual  round  me,  lifted  and  went  to  my
right  hand.  They  condensed  gradually  into  a  pillar,  and  finally  into  a
form,  majestic,  stately  and  noble  in  mien.  The  body  was  draped  as  with
a  toga,  though  that  might  simply  have  been  the  spirit  drapery.  The  right
ai'm  was  extended  and  pointed  towards  me.  The  face  was  the  face  of  my
vision,  though  not  so  distinct.  I  asked  that  I  might  be  touched,  and
the  figure  slowly  stepped  towards  me,  but  did  not  touch  me.  Finally
it  faded  away  veiy  gradually  until  it  was  dissipated  in  luminous  mist.
Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  saw  misty  light,  but  nothing  more.  I  asked  who
it  was,  and  "  Myself  "  was  rapped  out  in  Impera tor's  knocks.

Monday,  December  15th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  Mr.
Aug.  Eves,  and  myself. — Imperator  never  appeared.  Dicky  brought
in  two  pieces  of  an  ivory  puzzle  from  the  drawing-room,  and  a  handful
of  sugar  from  the  dining-room.  The  introduction  of  a  new  member
utterly  quashed  all  intellectual  manifestations.  This  seems  to  me  most,
undesirable,  though  in  this  case  inevitable.

December  IQth. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  self  alone,  Douglas
House. — Mrs.  Speer  explained  to  Mr.  Eves  that  he  must  not  join  the
circle,  as  it  was  objected  to  by  the  spirits.  We  had  no  sooner  sat  down
than  distant  knocks  of  Imperator  came.^  They  increased  rapidly  in
intensity,  and  the  alphabet  was  called  for  at  once.  The  knocks  were
very  loud,  irritable  and  rapid.  Several  messages  were  given.  "  If"
you  alter  the  circle  I  will  withdraw  all  manifestations."  "  It  is
difficult  enough  without  your  making  it  hardei-."  "  Never  again,  under
any  circumstances."  On  Mrs.  Speer  explaining  that  she  did  not  know,,
the  irritable  rejoinder  came  with  knocks  of  vast  power  :  "  You  ought
to  have  known."  I  remonstrated  with  Imperator  on  his  violence,  and
he  knocked  more  quietly.  Having  more  than  once  reiterated,  "  Never

1  Five  knocks  form  a  conventional  request  to  have  the  alphabet  spelt  out,  that  a
knock  may  be  given  at  each  letter  of  the  intended  message.— F.W.H.M.


294i  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.

again,"  he  told  us  to  look  under  the  table,  and  we  found  a  piece  of
papei'  which  we  had  put  there  perfectly  clean,  now  covered  with  the
pencil  marks  of  which  the  accompanying  is  a  facsimile  : —


■Ha)  l  .

The  knocks  were  awful  in  their  intensity,  and  so  loud  as  to  be
plainly  heard  in  the  bi'eakfast-room  on  the  floor  below.  The  com-
municating intelligence  was  of  a  most  imperious  description,  little  dis-
posed to  brook  opposition,  and  showed  a  power  Avhich  gave  one  an
uncomfortable  notion  that  he  was  quite  able  to  break  our  heads  if  it  so
pleased  him.  Evidently  the  circle  must  not  be  added  to  without  dis-
tinct permission.  And  no  Avonder.  A  delicate  experiment  may  be
vitiated  by  the  most  trifling  alterations  in  conditions.  And  we  know
nothing  of  the  conditions  except  that  they  are  governed  by  laws  of
which  we  know  little,  which  the  spirits  require  before  they  can  carry
on  their  higher  work  of  intellectual  manifestation.  Interference  with-
draws the  higher,  and  sends  one  bacli  again  to  creaking  chairs  and
physical  marvels. Imperator  justly  resents  such  interference.

December  19th. — In  the  evening  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self  sat  in
the  study.  After  some  knocks  and  tiltings,  Imperator  entranced  me
for  the  first  time  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer.  Mrs.  Speer
proceeded  to  hold  a  long  conversation  with  him.  She  describes  the
voice  as  quite  unlike  my  own,  very  slow  and  measured,  calm  and  very
dignified.  He  said  that  he  had  influenced  Mrs.  S.  to  inquire  into
Spiritualism  ;  that  he  was  here  now ;  that  he  (Imperator)  had  diiSculty
in  communicating  through  me  on  account  of  my  ill-health  and  want  of
perfect  faith  in  the  manifestations,  or  rather,  in  their  origin.  Psychic
force,  he  said,  was  true  enough.  He  wished  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  to  sit
v.dtli  me  for  ten  minutes  after  he  had  left,  so  as  to  give  me  strength.

Sunday,  December  22nd,  1872. — Seance  at  Mr.  Walter  Crookes's,
24-,  Motcomlje-street,  Belgrave-square.  Present  :  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Walter  Crookes,  and  myself. — The  only  things  that  occurred
were  owing  to  my  mediumship  and  not  to  Mr.  Home's. He  was  ill,


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  295

and  his  mediumship  is  very  uncertain.  Raps  on  my  chair  and  in  the
table  occurred.  When  Mr.  Home  sang  and  played  they  kept  time.  The
table  also  moved  twice. This  was  all.

Mr.  D.  D.  Home  is  a  striking-looking  man. His  liead  is  a  good
one. He  shaves  his  face  with  the  exception  of  a  moustache,  and  his
hair  is  bushy  and  curly. He  gives  me  the  impression  of  an  honest,
good  person,  whose  intellect  is  not  of  a  high  order.  I  had  some  talk  with
him,  and  the  impression  that  I  have  formed  of  his  intellectual  ability  is
not  high. He  resolutely  refuses  to  l^elieve  in  anything  that  he  has  not
seen  for  himself. For  instance,  he  refuses  to  believe  in  the  passage  of
matter  through  matter,  and  when  pressed  concludes  the  argument  by
saying,  "  I  have  never  seen  it." He  has  seen  the  ring  test,  but,  oddly
enough,  does  not  see  how  it  bears  on  the  question.  He  accepts  the  theory
of  the  return  in  rare  instances  of  the  departed,  but  believes  with  me
that  most  of  the  manifestations  proceed  from  a  low  order  of  spirits  who
hover  near  the  earth  sphere. He  does  not  believe  in  Mrs.  Guppy's
passage  through  matter,  nor  in  her  honesty. He  thinks  that  rec/ular
manifestations  are  not  possible. Consequently  he  disbelieves  public
mediums generally. He  had  read  with  great  interest  the  Liver-
2?ool  Mercurij  letters  [Autumn, 1872], and  welcomed  me as  the
"  ablest  exponent  of  a  creed  which  was  very  dear  to  him." He  said
he  was  thankful  to  know  that  his  mantle  had  fallen  on  me,  and  uroed
me  to  prosecute  the  inquiry  and  defend  the  faith. Altogether  he  made
quite  an  Elijah  and  Elisha  business  of  my  reception.  "  He  plays  and
sings  very  nicely,  and  recites  well.  He  wore  several  handsome  diamonds
gifts  from  royal  and  distinguished  persons. He  is  a  thoroughly  good'
honest,  weak,  and  very  vain  man,  with  little  intellect,  and  no  ability
to  argue  or  defend  his  faith.

1873.— The  new  year  opens  with  a  record  of  a  very  remarkable
seance  held  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  myself,  in  the  study  at  Douo-ks
House,  on  New  Year's  Eve. A  number  of  strange  spirits  came,  each
with  Its  pecuhar  noise. We  noticed  the  great  number  of  strange
noises,  and  I  knew  by  impression  that  strange  spirits  were  present
Dr.  Speer  was  in  the  act  of  calling  upon  Dicky  to  bring  him  somethino-
when  a  pair  of  salad  tongs  came  down  from  the  ceiling  and  struck  him
on  the  head.  They  did  not  appear  to  have  been  thrown  with  any  force
and  seemed  to  come  from  a  different  direction  to  that  from  which  articles
are  usually  thrown. They  generally  come  directly  over  my  head  the
power  being  concentrated  there.  In  this  case  the  tongs  seemed  to  come
from  the  ceiling  nearly  above  Dr.  Speer's  head. Amongst  the  strano-e
noises  that  we  heard  was  one  very  peculiar  wailing  sound. I  succeeded
m  establishing  communication  and  found  that  the  Spirit  purported  to
be  my  old  friend  A.  W. I  begged  her  not  to  wail  so. I  fear  she  is  not
happy She  rapped  out,  "  Cross  for  you," Mrs.  S.  calling  the  alphabet.


296  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


Light  was  called  for,  and  before  Mrs.  Speer  was  placed  a  crucifix  of
blue  enamel  with  a  handsomely  chased  figure  of  the  Saviour.  It  was
unknown  to  all  of  us,  and  seemed  to  be  of  foreign  manufactux'e.

Wear  it"  was  spelled  out.  The  next  spirit  gave  the  initials  J.  N.  L. ;
she  said  that  affinity  had  brought  her  ;  we  did  not  know  her  ;  and  she
had  come  to  do  us  good.  She  managed  to  tilt  the  table,  so  as  to  rap
upon  the  woodwork  of  Dr.  Speer's  armchair.  The  knocks  were  very
clear  and  resonant,  but  gentle  and  firm  in  character.

After  this  I  was  entranced  by  Irapei'ator.  He  said  that  a  great
many  strange  spirits  liad  been  admitted  that  night  who  had  been  wait-
ing to  get  into  the  circle.  He  had  difficulty  in  speaking,  not  being
used  to  it  ;  had  left  the  earth  for  a  very  long  time,  and  had  come  back
to  control  me  in  obedience  to  a  direct  mission  entrusted  to  him.  A
question  addressed  to  Imperator  about  a  vei'y  remarkable  spirit-light
was  replied  to  by  him  to  the  effect  that  the  bright  halo  of  light
indicated  great  spiritual  power.

The  light  referred  to  was  a  very  remarkable  one.  I  regret  very
much  that  I  cannot  from  personal  observation  describe  the  appearance.
T  was  partially  entranced  when  it  appeared,  so  far  that  my  powers
of  observation  were  worthless,  and  before  it  Avas  fully  developed  I  was
in  a  very  deep  trance,  from  which  I  did  not  recover  until  the  appearance
had  vanished.  The  description  given  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  is  very
circumstantial.  Dr.  Speer  was  the  first  to  observe  the  light,  which  was
directly  behind  me  on  the  wall.  Dr.  S.  faced  me,  and  his  eye  was
attracted  by  a  line  of  light  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  width,  of  a  bright
golden  hue,  which  for  a  moment  developed  in  a  cross  and  then  took  the
form  of  a  long  line  of  golden  light  more  than  six  feet  in  height.  Round
my  head  was  a  halo  with  rays  of  light  darting  upwards,  exactly  as  de-
scribed by  clairvoyants  on  previous  occasions.  On  this  occasion  Dr.  S.
said  he  saw  light  :  was  there  any  objection  to  his  putting  out  his
hand  to  feel  whether  it  was  over  my  head  1  He  did  so,  and  his  hand
went  straight  to  my  head  at  once.  The  nimbus  of  light  was  formed
before  the  concentrated  pencil  appeared  on  the  wall.  As  I  moved  the
ray  moved  with  me.  Commencing  near  the  door,  between  door  and
fireplace,  on  the  floor  there  was  visible  a  large  cluster  of  light  about  the
size  of  a  saucer,  but  more  oblong.  It  v/as  moved  in  conjunction  with
the  other,  and  remained  for  half-an-hour  or  more.  (The  cluster  of  light
on  the  floor  was  always  in  view.  The  long  pencil  of  light  was  at  times
obscured  by  my  body  in  its  lower  extremity.)  The  light  on  the  wall  moved
round  from  my  back  to  the  looking-glass  o\ev  the  fire.  It  was  not
until  Dr.  S.  I'ose  from  his  chair  to  look  over  my  head  that  he  found  that
the  column  of  li£;ht  rested  on  the  floor.  His  view  of  it  had  been  inter-
cepted  by  my  body.  The  light  was  visible  for  moi'e  than  half-an-hour.
Imperator  on  being  questioned  said  that  the  pencil  of  light  was  himself ;


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


297


the  bright  cluster  of  light  was  his  personal  attendant;  and  othei-
lights  in  the  room  were  the  band.  Dr.  Speer  walked  up  to  the  light  on
the  wall,  put  his  face  within  a  few  inches  of  it  and  passed  his  hand  over
it.  The  cluster  of  light  on  the  floor  seemed  to  be  on  the  pedals  of  the
harmonium.  Both  lights  remained  clearly  in  view  until  the  gas  was
lighted  and  the  seance  terminated.  ^

Jcmtiary  \th  [1873].— In  the  afternoon,  whilst  Mrs.  Speer  and  I
were  sitting  in  the  dining-room,  the  gas  being  fully  lighted,  Dicky
moved  the  large  dining-table,  rocked  it,  and  told  us  that  he  had  lived
when  on  earth  in  Lincolnshire.  Whilst  the  musical  clock  was  playing,
a  heavy  tramp  passed  round  the  room  in  time  to  the  music.  2

January  1th. — Seance  at  4,  Worcester  Lawn  [Clifton].  Present:
Dr.  Thomson  and  his  son,  Mr.  Beattie,  and  Mr.  Butland  (the  medium
through  whom  the  Clifton  photographs  were  obtained).  [Mr.  Beattie
and  Dr.  Thomson  are  dead  ;  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  the
other  two  sitters.  —  F.W.H.M.]  The  table  was  very  fidgety,  was
moved  backwards  and  forwards,  tilted,  rocked,  and  finally  floated
to  a  height  of  about  two  feet  from  the  ground.  The  movement
was  very  slow  and  stately,  except  now  and  again,  when  it  was
violently  shaken.  The  room  was  shaken  throughout.  Imperator
entranced  me  and  spoke  to  Mr.  Beattie  at  great  length  about  the
photographs,  saying  that  they  were  not  photos  of spirits,  but  of

1  December  31sf,  1872.— A  very  successful  seance.  A  blue  enamel  cross
was  brought,  no  one  knew  whence,  placed  before  my  wife,  who  was  told  to
wear  it.  A  pair  of  salad  tongs  of  Sevres  inanufacture  brought  from  drawing-
room  through  two  closed  doors.  A  coknnn  of  light  about  seven  feet  high  was
seen  to  move  round  the  room,  and  about  two  feet  to  the  right  of  the  column
was  a  large  glowing  mass  of  light.  The  column  of  light  I  placed  my  hand
upon,  as  seen  on  the  wall.  High  barometer,  30  ;  dark.  During  the  time
Imperator  was  entrancing  the  medium,  and  conversing  with  us  through  him,
we  saw  a  large  bright  cross  of  light  behind  the  medium's  head,  rays
surrounding  it  ;  after  this  it  culminated  into  a  beautiful  line  of  light  of  great
brilliancy,  reaching  several  feet  high  and  moving  from  side  to  side.  Behind
this  column  of  light  on  the  floor  was  a  bright  cluster  of  lights  in  oblong
shape.  These  remained  for  more  than  half-an-hour,  and  upon  asking  Im-
perator  the  meaning  of  the  lights,  he  said  the  pillar  of  light  was  himself'';  the
bright  light  behind  him  his  attendant  ;  and  the  numerous  lights  seen  in  the
room  belonged  to  the  band.  The  light  around  the  medium's  head  showed
his  great  spiritual  power.  He  also  said  in  time  we  might  see  him  ;  might
do  so  now  were  our  spiritual  vision  clearer.  Imperator  then  closed  the  seance
and  the  medium  awoke  unconscious  of  all  that  had  been  done.— S.T.S.]

"  January  4fA.— First  appearance  of  Rector,  known  by  his  heavy  tread  all
round  the  room,  in  full  gas-light.  Seance  in  light.  Table  danced  a  jig,  with
our  fingers  nearly  touching  it,  perpendicularly. -S.T.S.  In  the  light  we
watched  the  table  tilt  and  dance  up  and  down  without  contact  of  hands.— M.S.


298  Tlie  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


pictures  made  by  the  spirits.  He  gave  a  final  inspirational  address
on  Progress,  which  is  described  as  being  extremely  iDeautiful.  Mr.
Butland  in  trance  came  round  to  me  and  went  thi'ough  an  extremely
elaborate  i:)0unding  and  mesmerising  of  my  chest  and  throat.  It  was
a  long  process.  He  then  (under  the  control  of  Dr.  Elliotson)  took  my
hand  and  joined  it  to  Mr.  Beattie's.  This  was  in  the  dark.  A  very  loud,
srufF  A^oice  then  said  :  "Let  the  instrument  sit  at  the  table  in  lisht,
and  we  will  endeavour  to  entrance  him  again."  Accoi'dingly  Mr.
Butland  sat  down,  and  we  lit  the  gas.  After  a  time  he  was  again
entranced.  The  process  of  passing  into  the  trance  was  very  jjainful  to
witness.  When  entranced  he  rose  and  came  round  to  me  and  stood
over  me.  The  face  was  upturned  and  the  lips  moved  in  prayer  :
"  Bless  him,"  "  Guide  him,"  "  Lead  him  in  the  right  way."  The  hands
were  outspread  as  in  benediction.  He  then  knelt  by  my  knee,  burst
into  tears,  coveiing  his  face  with  his  hands,  and  finally  fell  flat  on  the
floor,  and  went  through  a  semblance  of  dying.  The  hands  were  at
length  folded  on  the  breast,  and  the  medium  rose  and  impersonated
another  character.  This  is  a  peculiarity  of  his  mediumship.  This  time
it  was  Mr.  Beattie's  mother.  Then  two  friends  of  his  who  used  to  live
in  Clifton.  The  face  and  voice  changed  in  each  new  control.  One  of
the  latter,  an  old  Presbyterian  minister,  said  it  would  be  better  if  the
seance  Avere  opened  Avith  prayer.  Mr.  Beattie  requested  him  to  give  a
form.  He  turned  round  A-ery  reverently  and  boAved  to  me,  or  I'ather  to
Imperator  standing  behind  me,  and  said  :  "  The  Great  Spirit  will  giA'e
it."  After  a  time  the  control  j)assed  and  I  Avas  entranced  again.
During  this  time  I  spoke  the  following  prayer : —

"  Holy  Father,  God  Most  High,  be  present  with  us  and  hear  the
earnest  prayer  of  Thy  children,  crying  after  light.  We  are  weak,  but  Thou
art  Mighty  !  We  grope  in  darkness  after  Thee,  the  Infinite  Light.  0  God,
Thou  Who  art  the  Infinite  Light  !  O  God,  Thou  Who  art  all-pure,  all-holy,
guide  us,  Thine  erring  children,  into  purity  and  holiness  !  Suffer  us  not
to  be  led  a\vay  by  that  Avhich  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish,  but  in  Thine
Infinite  Mercy  lead  us  onward  and  upward  to  the  fountain  of  Eternal
Light.  O  Thou  good  God,  be  with  us  !  We  ask  no  more.  If  we  have  not
Thee  we  arc  indeed  bereft.  Amen."

The  Avhole  seance  Avas  a  most  sti'iking  one.  I  regret  again  that  I
cannot  record  Imperator's  trance-speakings,  Avhich  Mr.  Beattie  says
Avere  most  beautiful,  reminding  him  of  Home's  finest  trance-speakings.
He  noA'er  saw  such  a  seance,  he  says.

Dr.  T.  and  I  sat  alone.  The  manifestations  commenced  at  once.
Dicky  brought  a  small  ci'oquet  ball  from  the  next  room  and  a  handful
of  lozenges  from  my  bedroom.  Iinperator  entranced  me,  and  explained
that  Miss  M.  had  beeir  the  deterrent  influence,  not  because  of  her
unbelief,  but  from  her  tone  of  mind.  My  spirits  could  not  come  into
the room or breathe the  atmosphere  that  surrounded her.  Pie


MR.  CHARLTON  T.  8P^:ER.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


299


(Imperator)  had  sent  a  manifesting  spirit  to  fetch  the  articles  in  order
to  show  Dr.  T.  the  power.  He  also  gave  information  of  peculiarities
of  my  mediumship,  its  sensitiveness  and  high-class  nature ;  spoke
favourably  of  Mr.  Butland,  who  was,  he  said,  a  very  valuable  and  honest
medium.

January  9th. — -Dr.  Thomson,  Mr.  Beattie,  Mr.  Butland  and  I
tried  for  spirit  photographs  in  the  dark  without  success.

Jamiary  IQth. — Seance  at  Worcester  Lawn,  Clifton.  Present :  Dr.
Thomson,  Mr.  Beattie,  Miss  Jones,  and  a  French  artist,  a  friend  of  Mr.
Beattie  and  myself. — The  manifestations  commenced  immediately.  The
table  was  repeatedly  floated  in  the  air,  two  feet  or  more  from  the
ground,  the  raps  were  very  loud  indeed.  Dr.  Thomson  and  Miss  Jones
were  touched  very  distinctly,  my  chair  was  floated,  removed  from  me,
and  I  was  placed  in  an  armchair  in  a  corner  of  the  room.  Articles
were  brought  from  three  different  rooms  in  the  house — viz.,  some
Guimauve  lozenges  from  my  bedroom,  four  dominoes  from  a  box  in  the
dining-room,  and  a  heavy  clip  with  receipted  bills  from  Dr.  Thomson's
room.  I  had  never  been  in  that  room,  and  it  is  rare  that  articles  are
brought  from  a  room  in  which  no  psychic  power  has  been  left.

I  was  entranced  by  Imperator,  and  gave  a  long  address  on  the
temper  and  mind  requisite  for  receiving  communications  and  on
inspiration.  Lights  were  seen  during  the  trance.  All  agreed  that  the
manifestations  were  the  most  powerful  they  had  ever  witnessed.

January  Wth,  1873. — Seance  at  Worcester  Lawn.  Present:  Dr.
Thomson,  Mr.  Beattie,  Mi\  Butland,  and  self. — ^Manifestations  com-
menced at  once.  The  table  was  floated,  loud  raps  came,  my  chair
was  moved.  Two  things  were  brought  out  of  a  bag  in  my  room,  a
railway  key  and  a  foot-rule.  The  table  was  repeatedly  floated,  and
remained  suspended  and  waving  backwards  and  forwards  for  a  con-
siderable time.  Imperator  entranced  me,  and  gave  an  address  on
Investigation  and  Proselytising,  concluding  Avith  a  very  beautiful
prayer.

Mr.  Butland  was  then  entranced,  with  less  difficulty  than  usual,  and
rose  from  his  chair  with  eyes  firmly  closed  and  with  a  peculiar  gesture
which  Mr.  Beattie  recognised.  He  took  paper  and  signed  his  initials,
J.  E.,  indicating  that  the  spirit  of  Dr.  Elliotson  was  present.  He  is
the  controlling  spii'it  with  Mr.  Butland.

After  walking  about  for  some  time  the  face  and  mien  changed  and
the  medium  went  through  a  death-bed  scene.  The  face  wore  an
expression  of  pain,  and  the  medium  gasped  for  breath,  put  his  hands
over  his  head,  writhed  as  though  in  pain,  and  went  through  a  number
of  gestures  indicative  of  dying.  The  face  cleared,  the  expression
became  less  painful,  and  the  hands  were  put  out  as  though  on  the
heads  of  children. At  last  the  hands  were  folded  over  the  chest  and

X


300


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


the  medium  rose  and  came  to  Dr.  Thomson  and  stood  over  him
with  a  look  and  attitude  of  great  affection.  He  asked  if  it  were  his
wife,  who  died  in  August  last,  and  the  face  brightened  and  smiled  eager
assent.  Asked  if  she  were  often  with  the  children — four  little  ones —
the  face  assumed  an  expression  of  great  maternal  love  and  gazed
ujDwards  as  though  imploring  a  blessing.  It  was  a  singularly  beautiful
impersonation — Dr.  T.  told  me  that  the  death-bed  was  reproduced
almost  exactly,  and  that  he  had  no  doubt  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  his
wife  who  inspired  the  medium.

The  next  control  was  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  went  through  a  very
elaborate  magnetising  of  my  throat  and  chest.  Before  doing  so,  how-
ever, he  appealed  with  a  deep  obeisance  to  Imperator,  who  Avas  standing
behind  me,  and  asked  permission.  Having  received  it,  he  explained
that  I  was  under  the  control  of  a  very  high  spirit  without  whose  per-
mission he  dared  not  touch  me.  Having  completed  the  operation  he
turned  again,  bowed  low,  and  Imperator  seemed  to  come  forward.  I
felt  the  presence  of  Imperator's  touch.  The  spirit  controlling  Mr.
Butland  was  appealed  to  by  Mr.  Beattie  as  to  a  remedy  which  he  had
advised  for  me,  and  again  some  three  or  four  spirits  were  "  called  in.
consultation."  Dr.  E.  said  there  were  very  many  spirits  who  wished  to
manifest,  but  he  could  not  allow  them,  as  it  would  hurt  the  instrument.
Mr.  Beattie's  father  next  manifested.  He  had  been  present  before  and
had  communicated  through  the  table,  and  had  touched  Mr.  Beattie  in
a  way  peculiar  to  himself.  Amongst  other  things,  he  had  given  a
peculiar  Masonic  knock,  which  Dicky  caught  up  and  was  highly

delighted  with  ! | | | | | |  may  represent  it. After  this

control  ceased  the  medium's  face  changed  to  an  expression  of  great
sweetness.  He  came  over  and  stood  before  me,  and  looked  down  on
me  with  a  smile  of  great  affection.  He  then  sat  down  on  my  lap,  took
my  hand  and  clasped  it  in  both  of  his,  straining  it  to  him.  Finally  he
put  his  arm  round  my  neck  and  laid  his  head  sobbing  on  my  shoulder.
The  sobs  were  so  violent  as  to  shake  us  both,  and  indicated  delight
rather  than  pain.  The  medium  then  rose  and  gazed  with  a  rapt  ex-
pression upwards.  The  face  was  extremely  beautiful.  The  arms  were
extended  to  heaven,  and  the  lips  moved  in  prayer.  The  arms  were  now
and  again  drawn  down  on  my  head  as  though  calling  down  angel  minis-
ters, and  I  was  conscious  of  a  very  jDure  and  soothing  presence  and  in-
fluence. I  have  no  doubt  A.  W.  was  the  controlling  spirit.  I  asked
her  if  she  were  weeping  for  sorrow.  She  signed  very  earnestly  "  No."
I  asked  if  I  caused  her  pain,  and  she  eagerly  embraced  me  afresh.
Was  she  near  me  often?  "  Always  "  was  faintly  whispered.  Could  I
do  anything  for  her  1  Apparently,  no.  Was  she  happy  1  Yes.  She
turned  and  gazed  again  at  me  with  a  face  of  rapt,  almost  agonised  affec-
■tion,  and  left  the  medium,  who  was  again  controlled  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  301


I  inquired  about  the  spirit  who  had  just  been  present,  but  could  get  no
answer  except  that  she  would  cooamunicate  with  me  herself  hereafter.
She  expressed  great  delight  at  my  having  recognised  her.  Soon  after
this  the  control  ceased,  and  we  closed  a  very  remarkable  seance.

Ml".  Butland's  mediumship  is  of  a  very  remarkable  type.  The  face
is  a  good  one,  with  pleasant  features,  and  a  full  black  beard  and  mous-
tache. When  controlled  the  face  is  very  expressive,  and  admits  of
great  change  of  expression.  The  gestures  are  tine  and  the  attitudes
M'ould  be  a  fine  study  for  a  sculptor  in  some  cases.  Both  expression
and  gesture  change  very  rapidly,  and  a  stranger  has  no  difficulty  in
recognising  the  emotions  intended  to  be  conveyed.  At  times  the
pathos  is  very  great  and  most  strikingly  depicted.  Tears  flow  from
the  eyes,  and  the  whole  man  is  thrown  into  the  character  he  is  depict-
ing, for  each  representation  has  its  strongly-marked  individuality,  which
is  maintained  throughout.

Few  of  the  spirits  speak,  except  Dr.  Elliotson,  Mr.  Dickie,  and  Mr.
Charleton.

Wednesday,  January  15th,  1873. — Seance  at  Douglas  House. — The
room  was  lighted  with  a  red  light  sufficienjbly  strong  to  enable  us  to  see
perfectly  what  was  going  on.  We  could  observe  the  lifting  and
floating  of  the  table  to  the  height  of  two  feet  or  more.^

Tuesday,  January  2lst. — Seance  at  Douglas  House. — The  usual
phenomena  occurred.  The  table  was  floated  repeatedly,  and  raised
from  the  ground  two  feet  without  contact.  .  .  .  Dicky  stated  that
he  was  the  spirit  who  trod  so  heavily  in  time  to  music,  and  shook  the
room.  He  illustrated  his  remark  by  shaking  the  floor,  and  saying  that
that  was  his  peculiar  sound.  [It  appears  that  this  seance  was  held  in
half-light,  though  Mr.  Moses  does  not  mention  the  fact.]  -

January  2oth. — Seance  at  Douglas  House. — The  physical  phenomena
commenced  at  once,  and  on  one  occasion  the  table  was  floated  to  tlie
level  of  our  heads  ;  this  in  clear  light.  Dicky  was  requested  to  bring
something,  and  accordingly  he  fetched  part  of  an  ivory  puzzle  out  of  the
drawing-room, 'and  a  heavy  bronze  candlestick  out  of  the  dining-
room.  The  latter  struck  me  heavily  on  the  head,  and  hurt  me  con-
siderably.

January  15^7^. — Seance  in  red  light.  Great  movements  of  the  table.  It
was  repeatedly  lifted  up  to  the  level  of  our  faces,  even  without  touching
it.  Subdued  light,  quite  sufficient  to  see  the  table  and  our  hands.  The
table  was  moved  and  floated  several  times  ;  we  could  watch  in  light  its  every
movement. — S.T.S.

^  January  21si. — Seance.  Half  light,  enough  to  see  our  hands.  The  table
was  lifted  to  a  considerable  height  twelve  times. — S.T.S.  We  again  sat  in
light.— M.S.

^January  2oth. — Seance.  A  candlestick  brought  from  next  room  through

X  2


302


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


January  29fh. — Table  tilted,  moved,  and  floated  as  usual.  Dickj^
came  and  tilted  the  table  near  Dr.  Speer.  I  lectured  and  forgave  him,
and  he  danced  about  in  great  glee.  [This  sitting  is  plainly  the  one
referred  to  below  by  Dr.  Speei-,  who  mentions  that  there  was  some  light
in  the  room,  a  fact  which  seems  to  have  been  only  occasionally  noted-]^

Sunday,  February  2drd. — Seance  at  Douglas  House.  Present,  the
usual  circle,  with  Mr.  Harrison,  Editor  of  the  Sph-itualist. — In  order
to  avoid  the  usual  seance-room  [which  Imperator  desired  to  be  kept
exclu.sively  for  the  intimate  group]  we  sat  in  the  breakfast-room,  the
firelight  being  excluded  as  well  as  possible.  The  usual  raps  and  creaks,
which  had  been  plainly  audible  at  dinner,  commenced  at  once,  and
Dicky  was  particularly  lively.  We  were  then  requested  to  darken  the
room,  and  the  light  which  had  been  round  us  vanished,  and  the
sounds  ceased.  Presently  my  chair  began  to  move,  and  I  saw  light
coming  as  it  were  through  the  door.  At  once  my  chair  was  withdrawn
from  me,  and  placed  on  the  table  ;  from  which  position  it  toppled
over  to  the  floor  again,  whilst  I  was  shot  to  the  end  of  the  room  under
a  side  table,  and  three  articles  were  put  upon  the  table,  viz.,  a  carved
ivory  napkin-ring  from  under  a  glass  shade  in  the  drawing  room,  a
carte  de  visite  from  the  same  room,  and  a  chamois  horn  from  the
entrance  hall. We  all  felt  cold,  and  the  influence  was  very  strong.

We  made  a  break  now  for  tea,  and  when  we  returned  Dicky  again
fetched  a  compass  from  the  drawing-room. ^

Tuesday,  March  ith. — Seance  at  Douglas  House. — A  very  loud
knock  on  the  table  came  as  I  was  describing  Mrs.  Jencken's  knocks.
It  was  a  distinct  imitation  of  hers,  but  not  quite  so  loud.  Dr.  Speer
had  got  a  magnet,  which  he  put  on  the  table,  as  an  experiment.  I  do
not  know  how  far  that  influenced  the  noise,  which  was  very  loud.

We  had  joined  hands,  contrary  to  our  usual  habit,  and  when  a
light  was  struck  (on  the  heavy  blow  coming)  we  found  on  the  table  a
little  silver  tray  with  an  orange  and  rose  upon  it — the  orange  for  me,
I  was  coughing,  and  the  rose  for  Mrs.  Speer.  Knocks  sounded  all
over  the  room. [Note  that  Dr.  Speer  makes  the  orange  a  biscuit.]  3

closed  doors,  and  was  thrown  at  Mr.  M.,  hurting  liim  much.  The  table  was
repeatedly  lifted,  higher  than  ever. — S.T.S.  We  saw  a  form  surrounded
witli  light  standing  between  myself  and  the  medium. — M.S.

^  January  28tli  [2dth]. — Seance.  Still  gi'eater  levitation  of  the  table.  We
had  almost  to  stand  to  keep  our  hands  on  it  ;  one  leg  was  placed  on  the  arm
of  my  chair  five  times.  A  chamois  horn  was  quietly  brought  through  the
locked  doors,  and  thrown  on  floor  ;  hght  partial.— S.T.S.

-  Februanj  23rcZ.  — Seance  below  with  Mr.  Harrison,  Editor  of  the
Spiritualist.  Several  objects  brought  into  the  room  from  the  floor  above  ;  a
heavy  chair  placed  on  the  table. — S.T.S.

^  March  ith. — Seance.  Two  violent  blows  of  metallic  sound  struck  on  the


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


303


Monday,  JIarch  10th. — Seance  at  Douglas  House. — Curious  spirit
knock  came  like  a  sharp  tap  with  a  pebble.  I  had  heard  the  same
sound  before  in  my  bedroom.  It  was  very  metallic  and  clear.  Im-
perator  spoke  in  answer  to  questions  at  some  length.  [Here  the
bringing  in  of  two  objects  is  noted  by  Dr.  Speer  only.]  ^

Sxmday,  March  lath. — We  sat  (Dr.  S.  and  I)  below  stairs,  and  had
many  knocks.  The  room  shook,  and  the  knocks  occurred  just  the
same  when  our  hands  were  removed  and  our  feet  placed  on  the  table.
We  had  several  messages,  one  purporting  to  come  from  Dr.  Speer's
little  sister,  C.P.S.S.  Imperator  came.  He  spoke  with  difficulty,  and
said  that  many  spirits  were  round  us.  The  noise  on  the  table,  chair,
bookcase,  and  harmonium  stool  was  very  remarkable,  continuing  all
the  time  that  I  was  entranced.  Before  the  trance  passed,  a  very  hard
knock  was  given  on  the  table.'-

March  19</(,  1873. — Douglas  House. — Dr.  Speer  and  I  sat  alone  in
the  room  below.  The  spirit  above  described  [as  making  loud  metallic
raps]  came  and  knocked  very  violently.  Dr.  S.  had  in  his  hand  a
small  steel  hammer,  used  in  sounding  the  chest,  and  with  it  he  struck
violent  blows  on  the  table,  which  were  responded  to  by  still  louder
knocks  from  the  spirit.  The  knocks  were  of  the  same  intense  and
metallic  character  as  before.  The  force  exercised  must  have  been  very
great.

We  were  finally  told  to  go  upstairs  and  sit  in  the  seance-room.
Mrs.  Speer  joined  the  circle,  and  little  Pauline  came  and  rapped  in  the
cupboard  of  the  bookcase.  The  raps  wei'e  clear  and  the  same  as  we
have  heard  from  her  before.  She  gave  her  name.  Dr.  S.  asked  for  a
message.  She  said,  "  I  wrote,"  alluding  to  a  previous  evening  when
there  had  been  a  great  noise  in  the  cupboard.  Dr.  S.  looked  in  the
cupboard,  and  found  his  marked  piece  of  paper  covered  on  one  side
with  "  Dieu  vous  garde. — C.  P.  S.  Sperr  "  [sic).

[This  mis-spelling  is  noticeable  in  connection  with  the  question  how
far  the  mis-spelling  of  names,  when  given  by  raps  or  direct  writing,
affects  the  question  of  identity.  Here  we  have  a  control  which  returns
frequently,  and  shows  knowledge  of  the  brief  earth-life,  and  the  full
name  of  the  little  sister  of  Dr.  Speer's,  whom  it  claims  to  be. Yet  the

table  ;  a  silver  salver  with  a  Hower  and  biscuit  brought  in  from  adjoining
room,  doors  being  locked.

1  March  10th. — Seance  on  ground  floor.  Extraordinary  metallic  blows
again  dealt  on  table,  and  some  on  the  floor.  Two  objects  brought  in  from
above  and  dropped  on  the  floor. — S.T.S.

"March  IQth  [lotJi]. — C.  P.  S.  S.  came,  also  Prudens  Scientite.  Extra-
ordinary and  unaccountable  sounds  heard  in  a  closed  cupboard  to  my
right  hand.— S.T.S.  ...  -


304


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


familiar  name  is  thus  mis-spelt.  On  the  other  hand,  certain  names  of
infant  children  (as  will  be  seen  later,  Feb.  10th,  1874)  were  spelt  with
great  exactness.  So  again,  of  two  Greek  names  mis-spelt  in  direct
writing,  one  was  thoroughly  familiar  to  Mr.  Moses,  who  was  much
disgusted  at  the  blunder.  The  inference,  as  stated  by  the  controlling
intelligences  themselves,  seems  to  be  that  when  a  name  is  rapped  out
or  given  in  direct  writing  its  production  is  of  the  nature  of  a  physical
phenomenon,  Avhich  may  be  more  or  less  successfully  performed,  and  is
not  necessarily  jserformed  by  the  spirit  itself  whose  name  is  given.  The
mere  fact  that  a  name  is  given  by  direct  writing  is  thus  no  proof  of
identity  ;  and  neither  is  a  blunder  in  spelling  it  any  disproof. —
F.W.H.M.]!

Sunday,  March  23rd,  1873. — Dr.  S.  and  I  sat  in  the  lower  room.  We
had  the  usual  sounds,  especially  the  metallic  knock  very  loud.  A  new
spirit  manifested,  who  gave  the  name  of  the  Spirit  of  Art.  There  was
also  a  noise  in  mid-air,  apparently  between  Dr.  S.  and  myself,  as  of  the
twanging  of  a  stringed  instrument.  There  was  no  such  instrument  in
the  room,  and  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  account  for  it.  A  spirit  also
imitated  the  drumming  of  a  tune.  The  knocks  were  at  times  exceed-
ingly loud.^

Monday,  March  2ith,  1870. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I  sat  in  the
study.  We  had  the  usual  knocks,  and  Imperator  answered  questions.
I  had  magnetised  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  put  it  under  the  table.
Imperator,  speaking  through  me,  told  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  to  hold
my  hands  and  he  would  give  me  a  "pleasing  test."  Accordingly,
when  I  came  out  of  trance  I  found  my  hands  grasped.  This  con-
tinued until  a  light  was  called  for  by  four  raps,  when  we  found
the  paper  covered  by  minute  writing.  The  annexed  is  as  near  a
facsimile  as  I  can  make.  [A  message  of  about  ten  lines  of  general
advice  is  here  copied.  This  sitting  is  noticeable  from  an  evidential
point  of  view,  from  the  mutually  supplementary  accounts  of  Mr.  Moses
and  Dr.  Speer.  Di*.  Speer's  statement :  "  I  myself  kicked  the  pencil  away
fi'om  the  paper,"  apparently  means  "  in  order  to  make  sure  that,  hands
being  held,  no  writing  should  be  done  with  the  feet." — F.W.H.M.]  ^

^  March  IQtli. — Seance.  Tremendous  raps,  imitating  and  exceeding  those
made  by  myself  with  a  percussion  hammer.  These  sounds  occurred  both  in
my  study  and  breakfast-room.  C.P.S.S.  [the  infant  sister  of  Dr.  Speer,  from
whom  frequent  messages  were  alleged  to  come]  gave  a  message  from  the
cupboard— S.T.S.

-March  23yd. — Seance  on  ground  floor.  Great  blows  struck  on  table  ;
knocks  and  sounds  of  every  kind.  Gravel  thrown  through  closed  window  ;
some  stringed  instrument  was  heard  playing  in  mid-air.  There  was  none  in
the  room.— S.T.S.

^  MarcJi  2bth  [24th]. — Stance  in  study.  One  metallic  blow  struck  on  table,


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses,


305


Wednesday,  Ajiril  %id,  1873. — -The  anniversary  of  my  first  seance.
I  have  now  kept  an  accurate  record  of  events  for  a  yeai'.  ...  A
short  time  after  sitting,  Dicky  and  Rector  manifested  loudly,  and
J.  N.  L.  came.  She  said  [by  raps]  she  wished  to  introduce  her  brother,
who  gave  the  name  of  John  Lydgate  ;  said  he  was  a  monk  who  lived
about  1420,  at  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  at  a  Benedictine  monastery  ;  that
he  got  his  education  at  Oxford  and  travelled  abroad ;  that  he  kept  a
school  of  poetry,  and  published  the  History  of  Thebes  and  the  Siege  of
Troy. Affinity  had  brought  him  to  me.

This  information  has  since  been  verified  in  the  most  remarkable
manner  by  Mr.  Noyes,  who  writes  me  that  John  Lydgate  was  exactly
what  he  professes  to  be,  and  that  he  studied  at  Oxford,  Paris,  and
Padua. The  Siege  of  Troy  was  a  poetical  romance  of  28,000  lines.

We  have  not  befor-e  had  so  circumstantial  a  description.^

Ajwil  19<A,  1873. — Mr.  Deane,  organist  of  Trinity  Churcli,  East-
bourne, joined  our  circle.  "We  had  several  loud  knocks  on  the  table,
and  creaks  and  taps,  but  no  communication.  At  one  particularly
loud  crack  from  the  metallic  spirit  who  has  given  the  name  of  John
Dee,  Dr.  Speer  saw  in  the  half-light  a  shadowy  arm  making  impact  on
the  table.  It  appeared  to  come  from  my  elbow.  My  arms  at  the
time  were  folded  on  the  table. Mr.  Deane  confirmed  by  reference  all

and  one  on  the  harmonium.  The  best  and  minutest  spirit-writing  (direct)
yet  obtained,  and  signed  by  four  spirits,  viz.,  Imperator,  Rector,  Doctor,  and
Prudens.  N.B. — The  paper  was  carefully  examined  by  us  all  immediately
before  extinguishing  the  light,  and  I  myself  kicked  the  pencil  away  from  the
paper. The  writing  was  widermost. — S.T.S.

^  April  2nd. — Seance.  Mrs.  De  M. ,  Messrs.  N.  and  Percival  joined  the
circle.  J anet  Nares  Lydgate  gave  her  name  for  the  first  time,  and  brought
her  brother,  who  died  in  1490.  He  gave  minute  details  of  his  earth-life,  all
of  which  were  found  to  be  absolutely  correct  by  tlu'ee  of  the  sitters  during
the  following  days  and  after  examination  of  records.  Raps  were  heard  all
over  the  large  dining-table.  A  large  stone  was  brought  in  (through  loclced
doors)  from  my  study. Hands  held  the  whole  time. — S.T.kS.

A2)ril  2nd. — This  evening  Mrs.  De  Morgan,  Mr.  Percival,  and  Mr.  N.
joined  our  outer  circle.  Manifestations  soon  commenced.  Rector  shook
the  room,  and  walked  round  the  circle  with  a  heavy  step.  Very  many  sounds
and  raps  were  heard,  all  different.  VVe  remarked  the  spirits  had  promised
to  come,  and  seemed  very  numerous.  They  rapped  out,  "We  are."  J.N.L.
introduced  her  brother  to  the  circle  ;  he  told  us  he  had  lived  in  the  reign  of
Henry  V.,  had  passed  into  spirit  life  in  1420,  was  a  monk  at  Bury  St.
Edmunds,  was  of  the  Order  of  the  Benedictines,  kept  a  school,  and  had  been
attracted  to  the  medium  by  affinity  and  love  of  education.  He  had  studied
at  Oxford  and  abroad,  and  had  translated  The  Siege  of  Troy.  J.N.L.
then  informed  us  she  was  in  the  second  sphere,  had  passed  away  young.
Imperator  came  with  his  soft  thud  on  the  table,  telling  us  by  raps  to  join
hands. In  a  few  minutes,  through  the  table,  message  was  given,  "  We  have


306


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


the  particulars  given  to  us  by  Dr.  John  Dee  and  Dr.  James  Nares,
who  is  Charley's  guardian.  The  particulars  were  principally  written
through  my  hand  by  Doctor.  ^

A2yril  30th,  1873. — Seance  at  Miss  Douglas',  81,  South  Audley-
street.  Present :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  "VVm.  Crookes,  Serjeant  Cox,  Miss
Douglas,  W.S.M. Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  medium.


Mr.  Home.


Mr,  W.  Crookes.


We  sat  in  a  well-lighted  room — a  bright  fire,  a  shaded  reading-lamp,
and  two  candles,  which  latter  were  finally  extinguished,  the  light  from
other  sources  being  ample.  The  table  was  covered  with  a  cloth,  and
the  fireplace  Avas  at  Mr.  Crookes'  back.  The  room  was  crowded
with  furniture.  We  had  not  sat  very  long  before  the  table  became
uneasy.  Small  raps  were  heard,  which  gradually  increased  in  power,
though  they  never  reached  anything  like  the  intensity  of  those  to
which  I  am  accustomed.  By  the  time  that  the  raps  had  become  con-
brought  stone.  Wait."  Presently  the  medium  was  greatly  convulsed,  and
suddenly  a  large  stone  was  rolled  violently  across  the  table  and  fell  on
Mr.  Percival's  knee.  The  stone  had  been  brought  from  the  hall  through  a
locked  door,  every  hand  at  the  table  being  held  during  the  process.  Mr.
Percival  had  been  anxious  to  have  a  proof  of  "  matter  passing  through
matter,"  and  this  indeed  was  a  solid  one,  as  the  stone  was  very  large  and
heavy.— M.S.

'■^ April  19t.h. — Stance  at  Eastbourne,  with  Mr.  Deane.  Constant  raps.
One  great  metallic  blow. I  saw  the  hand  and  arm.

April  26tli. — Seance.  Return  of  band.  Great  power  exhibited.  The
table  thrown  down,  and  replaced  tliree  times  of  its  oimi  accord.  Great  raps
and  metallic  blows.  Sounds  as  of  a  heavy  tread  constantly  walking  about  the
room. Objects  shaken  by  it. Lyre  sound  again  heard.

A^iril  28th. — Stance  extraordinary.  I.  did  not  come  ;  P.  did.  Great
and  uncontrolled  power  exhibited.  Table  moved  in  all  directions — raised
higli  up  in  mid-air  several  times.  Great  difficulty  in  controlling  it.  John  Dee
came  with  immense  force — cause  as  yet  unknown.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  307


firmed  Mr.  Home  judged  that  he  might  experiment  with  the  accordion.
He  took  it  up  in  his  right  hand  and  held  it  under  the  table.  Soon  it
was  played,  and  questions  answered  by  notes  struck  upon  it.  Finally
it  played  "  Home,  sweet  Home "  very  sweetly.  At  one  time  Mr.
Home's  hand  was  withdrawn  from  under  the  table,  and  he  allowed  it
to  go  where  it  was  impelled,  still  holding  the  accordion.  It  drew
steadily  towards  the  reading-lamp,  and  in  full  light  we  saw  it  playing,
expanding  and  contracting  steadily.  Mr.  Home  held  it  by  the
bottom,  the  keys  being  downwards.  After  this  it  was  replaced  under
the  table,  still  in  Mr.  Home's  hand,  and  Serjeant  Cox  was  told  to  look
under  the  table.  There  he  saw  the  hand — a  full-sized  man's  apparently —
playing  the  accordion.  About  that  he  is  absolutely  certain.  It  was
light  enough  to  be  quite  visible.  "  Ye  banks  and  braes  of  Bonny
Doon  "  was  partly  played,  and  we  were  all  touched  by  hands.  One
was  a  little  baby  hand — small,  delicate,  and  very  soft.  It  patted  my
knee  very  freely,  and  anticipated  my  mental  questions.  Miss  Douglas'
bracelet  was  moved  on  her  arm  close  to  my  eyes.  Questions  were
answered  upon  it,  and  at  one  time  the  raps  upon  it  were  loud  enough
to  be  heard  all  over  the  room.  Hands  came  up  under  the  cloth  and
touched  us,  and  questions  wei'e  answered  on  the  accordion  both  by
raps  and  by  the  notes.

The  ly7'e  sound,  which  is  familiar  to  us,  was  heard  very  distinctly,
even  when  the  accordion  was  away  from  the  table.

By  degrees  Mr.  Home's  hands  and  arms  began  to  twitch  and  move
involuntarily.  I  should  say  that  he  has  been  partly  paralysed,  drags
one  of  his  legs,  moves  with  difficulty,  stoops,  and  can  endure  very  little
physical  exertion.  As  he  passed  into  the  trance  state  he  drew  power
from  the  circle  by  extending  his  arms  to  them  and  mesmerising  himself.
All  these  acts  were  involuntary.  He  gradually  passed  into  the  trance
state,  and  rose  from  the  table,  erect,  and  a  different  man  from  what  he
was.  He  walked  firmly,  dashed  out  his  arms  and  legs  with  great
power,  and  passed  round  to  Mr.  Crookes.  He  mesmerised  him,  and
appeared  to  draw  power  from  him.  He  then  went  to  the  fireplace,
removed  the  guard,  and  sat  down  on  the  hearthrug.  There  he  seemed
to  hold  a  conversation  by  signs  with  a  spirit.  He  repeatedly  bowed,
and  finally  set  to  work  to  mesmerise  his  head  again.  He  rufiled  his
bushy  hair  until  it  stood  out  like  a  mop,  and  then  deliberately  lay  down
and  put  his  head  in  the  bright  wood  fire.  The  hair  was  hi  the  blaze,
and  must,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  have  been  singed  off".  His
head  was  in  the  grate,  and  his  neck  on  a  level  with  the  top  bar.  This
was  repeated  several  times.  He  also  put  his  hand  into  the  fire,
smoothed  away  the  wood  and  coal,  and  picked  out  a  live  coal,  which  he
held  in  his  hand  for  a  few  seconds,  but  replaced  soon,  saying  the  power
was  not  sufficient. He  tried  to  give  a  hot  coal  to  Mr.  Crookes,  but


308  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


was  unable  to  do  it.  He  then  came  to  all  of  us  to  satisfy  us  that  there
was  no  smell  of  fire  on  his  hair.  There  was  absolutely  none.  "  The
smell  of  fire  had  not  passed  on  him."  In  the  trance  state  he  passed
about  the  room  amongst  the  furniture  without  touching  any.  He
moved  the  lamp  to  the  mantelpiece.  He  spoke  in  a  soft,  subdued  voice,
called  himself  "  Dan,"  and  said  he  had  a  work  to  do  in  London.
During  the  evening  we  never  heard  who  the  spirits  were,  but  I  was  told
that  friends  of  mine  were  present.

[Mr.  Crookes,  to  whom  I  (F.W.H.M.)  have  shown  this  account,
comments  as  follows  : —

March  9th,  1893.

I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  the  seance  here  described,  and  can  corro-
borate Mr.  Stainton  Moses'  account.  I  v^'as  not  well  placed  for  seeing  tlie
first  part  of  the  "  fire  test  "  here  recorded.  I  knew,  from  experience,  that
when  Home  was  in  a  trance  much  movement  or  conversation  on  the  part  of
the  others  present  was  likely  to  interfere  with  the  progress  of  phenomena.
My  back  was  to  the  fire,  and  I  did  not  at  first  turn  round  to  see  what  he
was  doing.  Being  told  what  was  taking  place,  I  looked  and  saw  Home  in
the  act  of  raising  his  head  from  the  fire.  Probably  this  was  the  last  occasion
of  the  "  several  times  "  it  was  repeated,  as  I  have  no  recollection  of  seeing
it  more  than  once.  On  my  expressing  great  disappointment  at  having  missed
this  test,  Mr.  Home  told  me  to  leave  ray  seat  and  come  with  him  to  the  fire.
He  asked  me  if  I  should  be  afraid  to  take  a  live  coal  [ember]  from  his  hand.
I  said.  No,  I  would  take  it  if  he  would  give  it  to  me.  He  then  put  his  hand
among  the  hot  coals  [embers],  and  deliberately  picked  out  the  brightest  bit
and  held  it  in  his  hand  for  a  few  seconds.  He  appeared  to  deliberate  for
a  time,  and  then  returned  it  to  the  grate,  saying  the  power  was  too  weak,
and  he  was  afraid  I  might  be  hurt.  During  this  time  I  v/as  kneeling  on  tlie
hearthrug,  and  am  unable  to  explain  liow  it  was  he  was  not  severely  burnt.
The  fire  was  of  wood.  Miss  Douglas  never  burning  coal  in  her  recejjtion-
rooms.  At  tlie  commencement  of  the  evening  a  log  of  wood  had  been  put
on,  and  this  had  been  smouldering  throughout  the  evening.  My  recollection
of  the  fire  is  tliat  it  was  not  a  particularly  bright  one.

I  dii  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of  the  ordinary  skin  of  the  hand  being
so  prepared  as  to  enable  hot  coals  to  be  handled  with  impunity.  Schoolboys'
books  and  mediasval  tales  describe  how  this  can  be  done  with  alum  or  certain
other  ingredients.  It  is  possible  that  the  skin  may  be  so  hardened  and
thickened  by  such  j)reparations  that  superficial  cliarring  might  take  place
without  the  pain  becoming  great,  but  the  surface  of  the  skin  would  certainly
sufi'er  severely.  After  Homo  had  recovered  from  the  trance  I  examined  his
hand  with  care  to  see  if  there  were  any  signs  of  burning  or  of  previous  pre-
paration. I  could  detect  no  trace  of  injury  to  the  skin,  which  was  soft  and
delicate  like  a  woman's.  Neither  were  there  signs  of  any  preparation  having
been  previously  applied.

I  have  often  seen  conjurers  and  others  handle  red-hot  coals  and  iron,  but
there  were  always  palpable  signs  of  burning.  A  negro  was  once  brought  to
my  laboratory,  who  professed  to  be  able  to  handle  red-hot  iron  witli  impunity.
I  was  asked  to  test  his  pretensions,  and  I  did  so  carefully. There  was  no


The  Experiences  of  IF,  Stainton  Moses.  309


doubt  he  could  touch  and  hold  for  a  brief  time  red-hot  iron  without  feeling-
much  pain,  and  supposing  his  feet  were  as  resisting  as  his  hands,  he  could
have  triumphantly  passed  the  "red-hot  ploughshare"  ordeal.  But  the
house  was  pervaded  for  hours  after  with  the  odour  of  roast  negro.

William  Ckookes.]

Wednesday,  May  7th,  1873. — Seance  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  at
Miss  Douglas',  81,  South  Audley-street.  Present  :  Mrs.  Home,  Ser-
jeant Cox,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  Crookes,  Miss  Douglas,  and  myself. — ■
We  had  been  told  at  the  last  seance  to  sit  in  the  dining-room.  Miss
Douglas  had  forgotten,  and  the  fire  was  newly  lit  and  the  room
unprepared.  We  sat  round  the  table  for  fifty  minutes  with  no  result.
During  all  that  time  I  felt  power  drawn  from  me,  and  was  partially
entranced. The  phenomena  commenced  with  faint  raps  on  the  table.


Window  with  light  behind  it.


Cbair  on  which
Mrs.  C.  sat.


Mrs.  C.  X


I


X  Dinner-waggon,


D.  H.

X—


\

Figure  X
Mr.  C.

Mrs.  C.  /  \  Serjt.  Cox.


Fireplace,
without  fire.


Window.

Mr.  Home  took  the  accordion  in  his  hand,  and  held  it  under  the  table.
During  this  time  raps  occuri'ed  near  me  and  on  my  chaii-.  The
accordion  played  a  strange,  weird  melody,  unlike  anything  earthly  I
ever  heard.  The  taljle  rocked  about  like  a  ship  at  sea — rocked,
groaned,  and  finally  separated  at  the  joint. Nothing,  however,  was


310  Tlis  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


made  of  this,  and  the  table  was  joined  again.  A  chair  just  behind  Mr.
Home  began  to  move,  and  was  considerably  moved  round.  We  could
all  see  it  move,  but  stealthily,  and  when  the  intent  gaze  was  not  fixed
on  it.  We  found  invariably  that  direct  gaze  would  paralyse  the  move-
ment at  once.  .  .  .  Suddenly  Mr.  Home  jsassed  into  trance,  and
spoke  in  his  natural  voice,  but  of  himself  in  the  third  person.  He
spoke  of  a  spirit  near  (Hamilton  Dundas),  who  had  been  lost  in  the
President. Miss  Douglas  knew  him.

Mr.  Home  now  rose  from  his  chair,  and  .  .  .  went  into  the
inner  dining-room,  taking  the  accordion  with  him,  and  placing  it  on
the  dinner-waggon.  [Carving-table. — E.  Crookes.]  The  firelight  was
lowered  ;  the  reading-lamp  was  put  out  of  the  room  ;  the  gas  behind
the  window  at  the  end  of  the  room  was  lowered,  and  we  sat  in  gloom ;
the  window  at  the  end  showing  out  in  bold  relief.  During  the  evening
Mr.  Home  stood  near  the  fireplace,  and  kept  us  informed  of  his
position.  "  Now  Dan  is  here  ;  now  Dan  is  touching  the,  &c.,  &c."  We
all  saw  a  hand  descend  from  the  top  of  the  curtain  and  play  the
accordion.  It  was  a  large  hand,  and  its  reflection  on  the  window
blind  was  strong.  After  this  a  head  showed  in  similar  way.  When
Mrs.  Crookes  was  told  to  go  into  the  room  and  occupy  the  chair
marked  in  the  plan,  a  form  was  materialised  as  far  as  the  middle.  It
fl.oated  near  the  folding  doors,  and  advanced  towards  Mrs.  Crookes,  who
screamed,  and  it  vanished.

[Mrs.  Crookes,  to  whom  I  (F.W.H.M.)  have  shown  this  account,
makes  the  following  comments  : —

March  9th,  1893.

This  is  an  accurate  account  as  far  as  it  goes  of  one  of  the  most  interest-
ing stances  I  ever  had  with  Mr.  Home,  and  I  have  on  several  occasions
recounted  the  incidents  to  my  friends.  When  Mr.  Home  took  me  by  the
hand  and  led  me  into  the  back  dining-room  he  placed  me  in  a  cliair  at  the  side
of  the  window  and  carving-table  (not  dinner- waggon),  and  facing  the  party
in  the  other  room.  The  window  had  ground  glass  in  it,  no  blind,  and  the
gas  behind  was  bi-iglit  enough  to  show  everything  in  the  room  distinctly.
Mr.  Home  then  left  me  and  stood  between  the  two  rooms.  The  accordion
was  immediately  taken  from  his  hand  by  a  cloudy  appearance,  which  soon
seemed  to  condense  into  a  distinct  human  form,  clothed  in  a  filmy  drapery,
standing  near  Mr.  Home  between  the  two  rooms.  The  accordion  began  to
play  (I  do  not  remember  whether  on  this  occasion  thei'e  was  any  recognised
melody),  and  the  figure  gradually  advanced  towards  me  till  it  almost  touched
me,  playing  continuously.  It  was  semi-transparent,  and  I  could  see  the
sitters  through  it  all  the  time.  Mr.  Home  remained  near  the  sliding  doors.
As  the  figure  approached  I  felt  an  intense  cold,  getting  stronger  as  it  got
nearer,  and  as  it  was  giving  me  the  accordion  I  could  not  help  screaming.
The  figure  immediately  seemed  to  sink  into  the  floor  to  the  waist,  leaving
only  the  head  and  shoulders  visible,  still  playing  the  accordion,  which
was  then  about  a  foot  oS  the  floor. Mr.  Home  and  my  husband  came  to  me


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


311


at  once,  and  I  have  no  clear  recollection  of  what  then  occurred,  except  that
the  accordion  did  not  cease  playing  immediately.

Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  was  rather  angry  at  my  want  of  nerve,  and  exclaimed  :
"  Mrs.  Crookes,  you  have  spoilt  the  finest  manifestation  we  have  ever  had."
I  have  always  regretted  that  my  want  of  presence  of  mind  brought  the
phenomena  to  so  abrupt  a  termination.  Ellen  Crookes.]

May  9<7i-.— -Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  in  study. — A  very
interesting  seance.  We  joined  hands,  and  in  that  position  had  loud
knocks  from  Philosophus,  but  no  movement  of  table.  Dicky  came  and.
brought  very  gently  an  ivory  piece  of  puzzle  from  the  drawing-room.
At  my  request  he  fetched  another.  After  this  I  felt  something
crawling  over  my  right  hand  (which  Mrs.  S.  held)  and  could  not  make
out  what  it  was.  Wlien  a  light  was  struck  we  found  it  to  be  a  marker
from  Mrs.  Speer's  bedroom.  It  had  crawled  over  my  hand,  and  was
placed  directly  in  front  of  her,  with  the  legend,  "  God  is  our  refuge  and
strength,"  right  before  her  eyes.  It  was  folded  and  arranged  very
neatly.  During  the  whole  time  we  grasped  hands.  A  piece  of
mignonette  in  my  button-hole  was  taken  out  and  passed  over  my  face
and  hair,  and  over  Mrs.  Speer's  face.  As  we  concluded  the  seance  a
pillar  of  light,  very  bright  and  diffused,  descended  on  the  centre  of  the
table  and  passed  round  the  circle,  vanishing  near  the  ceiling.  It  was
like  a  flash  of  light  at  first.'

Wednesday,  May  lith. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. —
The  usual  manifestations,  rapping,  tipping,  and  floating  of  table.  No-
spirit  lights,  but  the  lyre  sound,  as  we  have  named  it.  The  sound  had
never  occurred  except  in  the  lower  room  and  in  the  dining-room,  where
there  were  musical  instruments — a  piano  and  a  musical  clock — on
which  it  could  be  imitated,  and  I  had  formed  the  idea  that  it  was
necessary  to  have  such  means  of  forming  the  sound.  Here,  however,
it  came  very  much  more  distinctly  than  I  had  ever  heard  it  before,,
close  to  our  ears,  and  moving  about  apparently  in  mid-air.  It  seemed
like  the  plucking  of  a  string  or  strings.  There  was  no  attempt  at  a
tune,  but  the  sound  was  clear,  and  varied  in  tone  and  pitch.  It  was
repeated  several  times  over,  and  continued  more  or  less  for  20  minutes
or  more.  Two  articles  were  brought  from  Mrs.  Speer's  bedroom.  The
seance  did  not  last  more  than  three-quarters  of  an  hour.^

Sundcty  Evening,  May  18th,  1873. — Douglas  House.  Our  circle  and
Mr.  Harrison. . . . — Scent  was  brought,  not  as  before,  but  by  a.

^May  9tJi. — Seance.  Hands  all  held.  Two  ivory  puzzle  pieces  brought  from
drawing-room,  and  a  bookmarker  from  our  bedroom.  Flowers  taken  out  of
Mr.  M.'s  coat  and  brushed  over  my  wife's  face. Philosophus  came. — S.T.S.

^  May  14,th. — Seance.  Lyre  spirit  (Grocyn)  manifested  well,  and  close  to
us.  Two  objects  were  brought  do^imstaArs  from  a  box  in  our  bedroom  ;  doora
as  usual  locked.


S12  Tlte  Experiences  of  W,  Stainton  Moses.


cool  wind  laden  with  the  odour.  It  was  like  otto  of  roses,  very
powerfvil.  As  it  passed  round  the  circle  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I
saw  a  figure  carrying  it  apparently.  I  also  saw  a  figure  in  the  middle
of  the  table  when  the  lyre  sound  was  heard  there.  Rector  manifested
very  forcibly.^

1  il/ay  ISf/i.— Stance  with  Mr.  W.  Harrison  in  our  dining-room.  Rector
with  us  the  whole  evening,  displaying  great  power  and  shaking  the
whole  room.  Grocyn  came  again.  Cards  were  brought  into  the  room  from
the  drawing-room.  Cold  columns  of  air  laden  with  rose  scent  circulated
around  us.  At  3  30  in  the  morning  the  handles  of  our  bedroom  were
violently  shaken. — S.T.S.

[Mrs.  Speer  has  incidentally  given  me  a  curious  description  of  this
nocturnal  sound.  I  had  asked  her  whether  the  servants  at  Douglas  House  or
elsewhere  had  ever  commented  on  the  musical  and  other  noises.  Mrs.  Speer
replies  (October  26th,  1893)  :— "  In  the  Isle  of  Man  we  had  a  furnished
house,  and  took  our  own  servants.  At  Ventnor  we  had  a  flat  to  ourselves
and  sat  very  little  there.  At  Shanklin  we  had,  for  three  years,  a  house  of
our  own,  where  tlie  most  remarkable  seances  occurred.  It  was  here
that  Mentor  used  to  make  such  beautiful  scent  from  the  flowers,  scenting  the
house  and  perfuming  flowers  that  we  were  wearing.  While  speaking  of
scent,  I  may  tell  you  that  one  summer  we  shut  up  our  London  liouse  and  took
all  the  servants  to  Shanklin.  Wo  had  occasion  to  ask  someone  to  enter  the
house.  The  lady  wrote  saying  the  spirits  were  evidently  taking  care  of  it,
as  it  was  filled  with  beautiful  scent — no  one  in  it.  As  a  rule  our  servants
slept  at  the  top  of  our  house,  and  they  made  no  remarks  concerning  noises,
except  on  one  occasion,  when  Dr.  S.  and  Mr.  S.  M.  had  been  sitting  in  a
lower  room,  opening  into  the  garden,  and  near  the  servants'  apartments.
The  manifestations  had  been  very  strong,  and  after  the  gentlemen  left  the
room  the  servants  said  they  heard  so  much  pounding  in  the  room  that
they  felt  frightened  and  went  to  bed  as  quickly  as  possible.  We  were  told
afterwards  that  so  much  power  had  been  generated  that  the  spirits  had  to
make  the  noise  to  get  rid  of  it.  A  similar  circumstance  occurred  to  me
and  Dr.  S.  one  night.  Soon  after  we  had  retired  to  bed  the  handle  of
our  door  was  violently  shaken.  I  thought  a  burglar  had  arrived  ;  he,  who
did  not  hear  well,  said,  'Perhaps  it  was  nothing.'  A  moment  afterwards
the  door  leading  into  the  dressing-room  was  also  shaken  loudly.  On  looking
outside  there  was  no  one  to  be  seen.  We  were  afterwards  told  that  a  spirit
had  been  attracted  by  the  spiritual  light  over  the  house,  and  had  used  up
power  that  had  been  left  by  shaking  the  doors.  The  spirits  did  once  give
three  loud  raps  at  my  bedroom  door  to  call  me  down  to  a  seance,  Mr.  S.  M.
being  downstairs.  And  mental  questions  liave  been  answered  by  raps  on  tlie
wall,  while  I  was  in  one  room  and  Mr.  Moses  in  another."  This  last  remark
relates  to  another  question  ;  as  to  phenomena  occurring  to  Mrs.  Speer  in  a
room  apart  from  Mr.  Moses.— F.W.H.M.]

May  27th. — Seance  at  Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I. —
Lyre  sound,  scent  while  hands  were  held.  A  large  materialised  hand
was  passed  over  Mrs.  Speer's  up-turned  face,  as  she  was  waiting  for  the


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


313


sprinkling  of  the  scent,  which  seemed  to  come  down  from  the  ceiling.
It  was  a  large  hand,  and  startled  her  so  much  that  we  closed  the  seance.
I  afterwards  ascertained  that  the  hand  was  Mr.  C — r's.  He  had  come
to  say  farewell,  being  called  to  other  work,  and  had  touched  Mrs.  S.  in
mistake.

^  May  26th  [27f/i]. — Seance  very  good,  (irocyn  still  developing  ;  scent
(liquid)  thrown  over  us  all  from  above  ;  a  hand  touched  Maria.  The  table
lifted  its  leg.

June  7th. — Seance.  Grocyn  again  constantly  with  us,  playing  in  all
directions,  sometimes  close  to  us,  at  other  times  distant.  A  brass  butterfly
was  brought  in  from  drawing-room,  all  hands  being  held.  Frequent
appearance  of  spirit  lights. Rector  came.

June  9th. — Seance.  Grocyn  came  again  as  usual.  Verbena  scent  appeared,
first  in  aerial  form,  and  then  in  repeated  showers.

June  IQth. — Stance.  Miss  Burkett,  Miss  and  Mr.  Percival. — Grocyn,  as
usual.  Two  scents.  Long  address  from  Imperator  ;  during  which  table  lifted.

Ju)ie  20th. — Seance  very  good.  Grocyn's  manifestations  were  most
extraordinary.  A  candlestick  was  brought  from  the  dining-room,  and  shell
fell  straight  down  from  the  ceiling  behind  me  on  the  back  of  my  arm-
chair. The  table  rolled  about  in  every  direction.  Showers  of  liquid
verbena  scent,  and  another  nameless  scent,  fell  down  upon  us.  Sometimes
it  was  poured  on  one  of  my  hands  alone.  Columns  of  very  cold  scented  air
passed  round  the  room.  A  cross  was  brought  to  me  of  silver  enamel.
Direct  writing  under  table.  At  the  close  of  seance  John  Dee  gave  two
tremendous  blows  on  the  table.

June  21st. — Seance  very  satisfactory.  Grocyn  and  his  friend  the  Welsh
Harper  again  manifested  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner,  taking  in  the  whole
range  of  the  gamut  upon  their  invisible  instruments.  Three  crosses  were
brought  with  the  message  (by  raps):  "One  for  each."  Scent  was  again
repeatedly  showered  down.  Between  thirty  and  forty  spirit  lights  appeared,
many  of  them  as  large  as  large  oranges.  They  began  near  the  floor,  then
ascended,  and  at  last  by  request  came  within  our  circle,  so  that  we  might  have
touched  them. One  came  down  (by  request)  on  the  table,  and  gave

9 three  loud  raps,  as  though  it  had  been  done  with  the  bottom
of  a  lamp.  The  appearance  of  several  of  them  may  be  thus
represented.  The  band  which  I  saw  is  stated  by  the  others  to  have
been  in  reality  the  finger  of  a  hand  crossing  the  lamp,  wliich  was  like
bright  moonlight.  Many  of  the  lights  were  amorphous,  or  rather
formless.  They  succeeded  each  other  with  great  rapidity.
June  23rd. — Seance.  We  had  this  day  fitted  up  a  cabinet  by  opening  the
door  of  the  bath-room,  and  hanging  in  front  of  it  a  heavy  curtain  with
a  square  aperture.  Mr.  M.  sat  in  this  cabinet  upon  a  reclining  chair.  Large
hghts  soon  appeared,  and  did  so  about  fifty  times.  They  emerged  from  the
aperture,  and  came  into  the  room,  casting  reflections  upon  objects.  Some
were  so  large  and  bright  as  to  show  the  whole  of  the  lintels  and  doorposts.
They  came  very  close  to  the  table  upon  which  our  hands  were  placed,  and
on  which  table  there  came  most  unexpectedly  the  little  raps  of  C.P.S.S.,
with  her  French  message  :  "Z)ieu  vous  garde.'' — S.T.S.


314  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


Friday,  June  27th.  —  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  Mr.  H.,  and  self. — We
sat  first  in  tlie  dining-room.  Tlie  knocks  began  almost  directly.
The  musical  sound  of  Grocyn  and  the  scent  came,  and  a  stone
was  brought  from  my  house  in  Clifton-road,  a  distance  of  half-a-
mile.  Imperator  spoke  very  briefly,  and  told  ns  to  go  upstairs.  I  had
a  very  distressing  headache,  and  the  atmospheric  conditions  were  nob
good.  I  sat  in  the  cabinet,  and  the  other  three  on  the  sofa  outside.
Lights  soon  came,  whilst  I  was  in  deep  trance.  They  are  described
to  me  as  of  pale,  soft  light,  which  was  surrounded  apparently  with
drapery.  Mr.  H.  described  it  to  me  as  a  luminous  crystal  with
a  hand  holding  it.  Mentor,  on  being  asked  whether  it  were
his  hand,  assented,  and  showed  a  gigantic  finger  before  the  light.
There  were  abovit  thirty  lights,  and  some  of  them  were  very  large
They  flashed  by  with  a  comet-like  motion  at  times,  and  then  again
stood  at  the  opening,  gradually  fading  away.

They  generally  seemed  to  radiate  from  a  solid  centre  of  luminosity
and  to  be  shi'ouded  in  some  soft  drapery.  Others  were  apparently
solid,  like  luminous  ice.  After  the  lights  had  been  shown  Mentor  con-
trolled me  (first  time),  and  I  walked  out  through  the  opening  and  sat
down  at  the  table,  talking  in  a  brisk,  cheery  voice,  quite  unlike
Imperator's.  The  control  did  not  last  long,  and  I  woke  refreshed  and
with  my  headache  gone.^

Saturday,  June  l^tli. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — Musical  sounds,
scent,  knocks  and  tilts.  Mentor  controlled,  and  showed  his  light,  flashing

i.JiMie  27^A. — Seance.  Mr.  W.  Harrison,  Editor  of  the  Spiritualist,  joined
our  circle  in  tlie  dining-room.  Grocyn  again  manifested  well.  Scent  thrown
over  evei'yone,  loud  knocks,  stone  brought  into  the  room.  I  happened  to
put  my  hand  out  into  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  felt  another  hand.
N.B. — The  medium  and  his  chair  had  been  removed  from  the  table.
Imperator  came  and  requested  us  to  go  upstairs  and  try  for  lights  as  before,
Mr.  M.  sitting  in  the  cabinet.  They  came  almost  immediately,  of  various
shapes  and  sizes,  some  very  large.  They  came  into  the  room  and  illumined
the  doorposts  distinctly  ;  on  one  sometliing  like  a  large  finger  seemed  to  rest.


The  above  represent  the  outlines  of  these  lights.  They  were  all  of  a  pale
bluish-green,  or  rather  greenish-blue,  tint.  Many  of  them  had  a  perfectly
distinct  hard  outline  and  a  bright  nucleus.  Mr.  Harrison  says  that  such
lights  could  by  no  possibility  be  imitated  [Mr.  Harrison  was  an  electrician],
and  imagines  that  they  were  produced  by  hands  holding  crystals  with
drapery  falling  on  them.  At  the  close  Mentor  brought  the  medium  out  of
the  cabinet  and  gave  us  a  short  address. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


315


it  close  to  Dr.  and  Mi's.  Speer  as  they  sat  at  the  table.  It  was  bright
and  of  large  size. Rector  also  manifested.'

Sunday,  June  2^th. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — The  lyre-sound  of
Grocyn  was  the  most  pronounced  I  have  yet  heard.  He  answered
questions  freely  with  it  and  played  a  duet,  varying  it  to  represent
the  sound  made  by  bells.  He  told  me  that  there  were  seven
musical  spirits  concerned  in  manifesting,  but  we  could  only  dis-
tinguish three  distinct  sounds.  One  was  like  the  very  small  string
of  the  harp,  the  other  was  like  the  very  deepest  bass  of  the
■^doloncello,  rich,  full,  and  very  powerful.  It  sounded  freely  in
our  midst.  Scent  was  showered  on  us,  and  three  books  were  brought
from  one  of  the  cupboards  of  the  book-case  and  laid  on  the  table,  my
chair  having  been  previously  withdrawn  to  the  end  of  the  room.  They
were  all  books  belonging  to  Dr.  Speer  which  had  been  lately  in  use.
The  table  was  a  good  deal  tilted.  Many  raps  and  sounds  were  made,
and  especially  Mentor  knocked,  first  on  the  table,  which  was  quite  out
of  my  reach ;  and  then  immediately  on  the  harmonium.  I  could  see
him  passing  backwards  and  forwards.  Indeed,  the  room  was  full  of
diffused  light — I  never  saw  more — -in  the  form  of  foggy  luminous  mist.
Little  points  of  light  flashed  out  now  and  again,  but  no  distinct  spirit-
lights  were  made.  -

Monday,  Jvly  ls(,  1873. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — The  day  was  so
oppressive  and  hot  that  we  had  not  thought  of  sitting,  but  I  suggested
trying  what  could  be  done  under  very  unfavourable  circumstances.
Grocyn  soon  manifested,  with  very  loud  thrumming,  of  deeper  tone
than  we  ever  had  before.  It  was  as  if  some  power  were  thrumming
the  deep  string  of  the  double-bass.  With  this  were  intermingled  other
sounds  shadmg  to  the  high  note  which  we  associate  with  the  Welsh
harper.  The  sounds  were  persistent  and  very  loud.  The  deep  bass  thrilled
the  air  and  imparted  a  tremulous  motion  to  the  table.  Scent  came,
and  I  was  controlled  both  by  Mentor  and  Imperator,  who  said  that
they  had  wished  to  tiy  what  could  be  done  under  such  bad  conditions.

Seance  at  20,  Mornington-road.  Tuesday,  July  2nd. — Mr.  and  Mrs.
Wilham  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Walter  Crookes,  Miss  Douglas,  Serjeant
Cox,  and  myself. Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  medium. — Home  had  received  a

June  2Sth. — Seance  good.  Grocyn  came  repeatedly  in  a  most  smgular
manner.  The  sounds  were  as  if  a  violoncello  had  been  played  on  the  top  of
a  big  drum,  and  the  strings  plucked.  Three  other  musical  sounds  were
heard.  Loud  knocks  on  the  table  and  harmonium  alternately.  Scent  as
usual.— S.T.S.

June  ^Qth. — Short  seance  by  impression  (weather  very  bad).  Grocyn's-
sound  as  extraordinary  as  ever.  Scent  showered  down  several  times.  John
Dee  delivered  some  great  blows  on  the  table. M.S.I,  came. — S.T.S.

Y


316  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


bothering  letter  just  before  the  seance,  and  Ave  had  very  scant  results.
We  were  touched  nnder  the  table,  and  roses  in  the  middle  of  the  table
were  thrown  to  us.  I  was  touched  on  face,  and  knees,  and  hand.  Raps
in  the  neighbourhood  of  my  chair  and  on  the  table  near  me.

Saturday,  July  btli. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — Grocyn  very  loud.
The  sounds  produced  are  indescribable.  If  a  powerful  double-bass  were
thrummed  on  a  big  drum,  I  doubt  whether  it  could  make  such  a  sound.
They  were  almost  continuous.  The  Welsh  harper  came,  and  we  had  a
new  sound,  which  was  vastly  like  a  squeaking  whistle.  This  may  have
been  attributable  to  the  fact  that  the  power  was  ill-regulated  and
erratic.  Scent.  Imperator  controlled  very  briefly.  He  spoke  of  some
very  interesting  discussions  which  I  am  holding  with  him  [by  auto-
matic writing].^

Stmday  Evening,  July  Qth. — -Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — Grocyn's
sounds  were  clear,  bell-like,  and  refined.  Occasionally  he  made  a  sound
as  of  a  loose  or  broken  string,  very  curious  and  loud.  The  whistle
developed,  and  was  less  harsh  and  unpleasant.  No  scent,  but  Mentor
made  a  few  small  lights  whilst  I  was  awake.  Knocks  in  cupboard

Wednesday  Evening,  July  ^tli. — Dr.  8.  and  self,  in  study. — We  sat
alone,  Mrs.  Speer  being  out.  The  seance  was  very  remarkable.  Grocyn
commenced  as  soon  as  we  sat  down.  His  sounds  were  portentously
loud,  at  times  causing  the  table  to  vibrate  throughout.  In  the
air  was  the  sound  as  of  a  tambourine  and  a  harsh  shrill  whistle
almost  like  a  bird's  note.  Knocks  on  the  table  like  small  objects  falling
and  rolling  about.  Knocks  on  harmonium,  cupboard,  and  table
simultaneously.  Table  lifted,  harmonium  stool  moved  and  brought  out,
my  chair  rapidly  pulled  away  from  the  table.  Books  brought  from  the
harmonium,  one  pulled  out  from  the  book-case,  a  small  picture  brought
to  the  table.  All  placed  on  Dr.  Speer's  left  hand.  Scent  unlike  any-
thing we  had  before.  Message  :  "  We  show  our  power.  Good-night,"
given  in  Mentor's  knocks.

After  the  seance  Dr.  S.  and  I  walked  up  and  down  in  the  dining-
room,  I  smoking  a  cigar.  The  smell  of  scent  became  palpable  through  the
odour  of  the  tobacco. I  casually  said  :  "  Now,  if  they  would  put  it  on

^  July  bill. — Seance.  M.A.  unwell.  Power  erratic.  Grocyn  came  as
usual.  J.  Dee  delivered  some  alarming  blows — really  fearful.  Table  moved
about. A  sound  like  a  penny  whistle  heard  several  times.  —  S.T.S.

-  Juhj  6th. — Stance.  Conditions  good.  Grocyn  and  his  harper  friend
manifested  in  a  most  remarkable  manner.  A  tambourine  was  heard  in  mid-
air. The  whistle,  now  more  like  a  bird,  was  repeatedly  heard  all  around.
CP.  S.S.  came,  giving  her  peculiar  knock,  like  the  dropping  of  shot  on
the  table.  She  gave  (through  the  table),  when  inquired  of:  "I  knock  by
my  will."  Lights  seen  around  the  medium,  v.'lio  himself  saw  them,  not
being  entranced.  They  were  not  so  distinct  as  when  he  is  entranced. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


317


the  blotting  pad  we  could  see  it."  (A  pad  lay  on  the  table.)  Immediately-
wet  scent  fell  on  the  pad,  and  this  phenomenon  was  repeated  a  dozen
times,  I  should  think.  The  little  bird-whistle  also  followed  us  and
.sounded  repeatedly,  near  the  ceiling,  apparently.  The  sound  was  much
less  than  it  had  been  in  the  dark  room.  The  dining-room  was  well
lighted,  and  lowering  the  gas  did  not  seem  to  make  any  difference.^

Saturday,  July  \^th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,  Dr.
Thomson,  of  Clifton,  and  myself. — We  sat  in  the  dining-room,  and
obtained  the  usual  phenomena — scent,  the  musical  sounds,  raps,  tilts,  &c.
We  tried  bringing  the  small  table  out  from  the  study,  but  the  raps
came  on  the  large  dining-table  at  once  ;  and  we  were  told  to  move  to
it.  We  sat  for  the  lights  in  the  cabinet  upstairs,  and  some  large  ones
appeared,  of  a  similar  nature  to  those  which  I  have  described  before.
Mentor  and  Imperator  both  controlled,  and  spoke  to  Dr.  Thomson.  The
control  was  short.  Mentor  \  i.e.,  Mr.  Moses  controlled  by  Mentor]  came
out  from  the  cabinet  and  walked  into  the  circle  tipstairs.  Scent  came
upstairs  for  the  first  time.-

Sunday,  July  13th. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self,  in  study. — Grocyn's
sounds  very  loud.  Scent.  Lights  formed  behind  me,  and  Imperator
entranced  me.  Dr.  Speer  describes  the  lights  as  being  very  diffused,
and  similar  to  those  shown  from  the  cabinet,  but  not  so  brilliant.
Impei-ator  spoke  sadly  of  the  difficulty  of  controlling  me,  and  of  the
discussion  which  I  have  had  with  him  now  for  a  long  time.  I  have
argued  out  with  him  the  question  of  his  identity,  and  of  the  pretensions
he  makes,  as  well  as  of  the  general  outcome  of  Spiritualism. The  tone

^  Jxily  9//i . — Seance.  Mr.  M.  and  self  sat  alone  in  my  study.  All  the
usual  phenomena.  Grocyn,  the  bu-d,  scent,  &c.,  presented  themselves  in  a
very  short  time,  and  with  greater  intensity  than  ever,  the  violoncello  or
harp  sounds  actually  sending  powerful  thrills  up  our  hands  to  the  .shoulder,
and  even  through  the  body.  The  bird-whistle  came  with  great  power,  and
very  close.  The  scent  fell  like  rain.  The  harmonium  bend  was  moved  out
and  a  number  of  books  were  brought  from  it  one  after  another  and  placed  on
my  left  hand.  A  frame,  containing  one  of  C.'s  certificates,  was  also  placed
across  my  hand,  and  a  large  book — Vol.  2  of  Count  Beaulus — was  finally
placed  on  the  pile  already  formed  on  the  table.  Great  thumps  were  heard
almost  simultaneously  on  the  cupboard  door  and  at  the  farthest  end  of  the
harmonium.  On  returning  to  the  lighted  dining-room,  scent  (verbena)  was
several  times,  and  by  desire,  thrown  on  a  blotting  pad  !  !  ! — S.T.S.

July  12th. — Dr.  Thomson,  of  Bristol,  joined  our  seance.  Tlie  study
table  was  placed  in  the  dining-room,  but  the  phenomena  were  very  slight.
We  left  it  and  sat  round  the  large  dining-table.  Grocyn  came  as  usual.
Heliotrope  scent  was  thrown  over  each  in  turn  ;  and  a  large  number  of  sjjlendid
lights,  apparently  held  by  hands,  were  seen  in  the  cabinet.  I  myself  saw
an  arm  apparently  holding  one  of  these  lights. — S.T.S.

Y  2


318  The  Ex'penences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


was — as  described  to  me — slow,  solemn,  and  very  impressive.  A  few
lights  were  made  by  Mentor  for  me  to  see,  but  I  was  half -entranced,

Monday,  July  14</i.. — Dr.  and  Mi's.  S.,  Mr.  Percival,  and  self. — We
sat  first  in  the  dining-room.  The  seance  throughout  was  good.  There
was  a  deal  of  light  in  the  room,  diffused  ;  C.P.S.S.  was  plain  to  me,
and  rapped  on  the  table  with  the  peculiar  dropping  rap.  Raps
commenced  almost  as  soon  as  we  sat  down,  and  the  scent  came.  (We
had  three  kinds  during  the  evening.)  Grocyn's  sounds  were  louder
than  T  ever  heard  them  in  the  dining-room,  though  still  not  so  loud  as
they  are  in  the  study.  They  varied  from  the  deepest  bass  to  the
highest  treble.  The  whistle  came  again,  apparently  up  in  the  air  near
the  ceiling.  Imperator  came,  and  spoke  at  length  in  answer  to
Percival's  questions.  He  promised  to  endeavour  to  put  himself  in
communication  with  another  medium,  so  as  to  give  me  corroborative
evidence  as  far  as  possible:  He  replied  also  to  questions  about  the
spheres  and  other  points.  We  then  sat  for  lights  upstairs,  and  had  a
number.  I  was  in  the  deepest  trance.  Dr.  S.  describes  them  as  not
so  brilliant  as  usual,  but  clear,  and  with  a  bright  nucleus.  Some  were
shown  with  a  hand  holding  them,  the  hand  large,  and  the  fingers
pointing  upwards.  Mentor  controlled  afterwards,  and  walked  out  as
usual,  talking  easily,  but  in  a  totally  different  way  to  Imperator.  He
said  the  conditions  of  atmosphere  and  medium  had  been  unfavourable.
Scent  was  again  showered  through  the  aperture  of  the  cabinet.^

Jtihj  I5th. — Seance  in  the  study  at  Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.
Speer  and  myself. — Imperator,  in  consequence  of  my  persistent  dis-
belief in  his  pretensions,  had  retired,  and  had  threatened  to  withdraw
the  power.  Scent  came  in  showers  ;  but  no  other  manifestation  was
given  except  a  few  knocks.  The  scent  was  literally  rained  down  on
us.  It  was  a  very  beautiful  scent,  like  sandal-wood,  at  first.  Aftei'-
wards  there  came  a  scent  of  a  totally  different  kind.  The  room  was
so  permeated  with  the  odour  that  it  remained  till  the  next  day.  Scent
fell  before  we  began  to  sit,  and  at  intervals  during  the  day  we  had
perceived  it  about  my  head.^

1  Jiihj  nth. — Si^ance.  Mr.  Percival  joined  us.  Grocyn  as  usual,  with
violoncello,  hai-p,  and  tambourine  ;  sounds  of  a  most  distinctive  and  unmis-
takable character.  Mr.  P.  greatly  astonished.  The  whistle  heard.  C.P.S.S.
came.  Jasmine  scent  abundantly  showered  down  both  in  the  dining-room
and  bedroom.  Large  liglits  (held  by  large  hands)  seen  emerging  from  the
cabinet.  Medium  in  deep  trance  as  usual  during  lights.  Flowers  from
centrepiece  thrown  about  freely. — S.T.S.

^Sunday,  July  20;/i.— Seance  with  Mr.  M.,  Mr.  Harrison,  and  self.  Mrs.  S.
in  bed.  Grocyn  most  distinct  and  clear  ;  the  wliistle  also  heard  several  times.
Mr.  H.  said  he  thought  it  would  develop  into  a  voice.  Raps  heard  all  over
the  table,  especially  in  front  of  Mrs.  S.'s  vacant  chair. At  last  some  extra-


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  319


August  9th. — We  resumed  our  sitting,  and  G-rocyn  again  mani-
fested very  beautifully.  Mentor  showered  scent,  and  I  witnessed  the
formation  of  some  eight  or  nine  very  beautiful  spirit-lights.  They
formed  quite  close  to  me  and  near  my  left  hand,  about  a  foot  from  the
floor,  floating  upwards  till  they  reached  the  level  of  the  table  and
became  visible  to  Di\  Speer.  They  were  expressly  made  at  my  side,
instead  of,  as  usual,  at  my  back,  so  that  I  might  see  them.  They
seemed  to  develop  from  a  very  bright  speck,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,
until  they  attained  the  size  of  a  soda  water  tumbler,  and  showed  a  soft
luminosity  like  pale  moonlight.  They  seemed  to  be  covered  with
drapery  and  to  be  held  by  a  hand.  They  faded  slowly  out,  remaining
visible  about  thirty  or  forty  seconds,  or  perhaps  a  minute.  The  largest
would  be  about  eight  inches  long.


Imperator  came  for  a  short  control,  and  said  that  Mentor  had  made
the  lights  for  me  to  see.  They  dared  not  do  so  in  town  when  I  was  at
work,  and  it  was  not  safe  to  make  them  except  when  I  was  without
other  demands  on  me.  They  were  typical  of  the  light  the  spirits  shed,
and  had  a  spiritual  meaning,  as  all  spiritual  phenomena  had.  He

ordinary  knocks  were  heard  (as  I  believe)  on  another  small  table  and  on  a  chair
near  it.  When  asked  to  knock  on  the  table,  knocks  of  the  sharpest  kind
came  on  the  table  and  then  on  the  floor.  It  was  as  if  large  glass  marbles
had  been  thrown  on  the  table,  had  bounded  ofl'  on  the  floor,  and  then  rolled
away.  Till  a  light  was  struck  it  was  almost  impossible  not  to  believe  that
such  had  been  the  case.  Two  scents  came  ;  one  (by  request)  saturated  a
pocket-handkerchief  belonging  to  Mrs.  S. Adieux. No  lights.— S.T.S.


320


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Mo&es-.


spoke  very  gravely  and  mournfully  of  the  state  of  Mrs.  Colt,  who
lies  in  London  seriously  ill  with  typhoid  fever.  Several  com-
munications have  been  made  to  me  on  that  subject.  One  night
at  Enniskillen  I  was  kej)t  awake  all  night  by  loud  raps.  "  111 "
was  all  the  communication  I  could  get.  Afterwards,  at  dinner
on  the  next  day,  when  Dr.  S.  was  present,  raps  came  again.  "Ill"
was  spelled,  and  when  I  asked  who,  "  B.  C.  "  was  given,  the  initials  of
Mrs.  Colt's  name.  (On  many  occasions  I  have  felt  sympathetically  ill,
and  have  been  told  that  the  cause  was  the  same.)  Iniperator  spoke
A^ery  mournfully  and  said  that  she  was  grievously  ill.  They  did  all
they  could,  but  could  not  get  near  her.  He  said  that  seven  spirits
were  watching  Mrs.  Speer  at  Shanklin.

Augibst  10th. — -Dr.  S.  and  self  at  Garrison  [Ireland]. — The  manifes-
tations commenced  with  Grocyn's  lyre-sound,  which  was  very  clear  and
melodious.  Scent  came,  and  then  the  lights — some  sixteen  of  them,
one  after  another,  on  both  sides  of  me.  They  were  large  and  clear  and
formed  near  the  level  of  my  knee,  rising  gradually  above  the  table.
Afterwards  Mentor  entranced  me  and  spoke  for  more  than  half-an-
hour  to  Dr.  Speer.  He  describes  his  mode  of  speech  as  abrupt  and
the  tone  as  a  hoarse  whisper  ;  all  unnecessary  words  left  out.  He
explained  that  he  would  bring  a  light  on  the  table  and  knock  with  it.
This  he  did  several  times  in  succession,  finally  showing  his  hand  in
front  of  the  last.  Dr.  S.  describes  it  as  a  well-formed  hand.  One  of
the  attendant  sjiirits  being  noisy.  Dr.  S.  said  he  feared  the  noise  would
awaken  the  inmates  of  the  inn.  Mentor  said  he  would  send  him  away.
He  knocked  three  times  and  said,  "  He  is  gone."  He  did  not  appear
again.  This  spirit  resembles  Rector  very  much,  and  is  the  personal
attendant  of  Mentor,  as  Rector  is  of  Imperator.  He  shakes  the  floor
very  much  like  Rector.  During  this  and  the  previous  night  loud
knockings  were  heard  in  my  room,  and  Dr.  Speer  was  kept  awake  a
long  time,  three  or  four  hours,  by  them.  Mentor  wished  to  put  the
light  in  my  hand,  but  failed  in  the  attempt.  On  one  occasion  the
advent  of  scent  was  preluded  by  a  prolonged  whistle.^

^  Detailed  record  of  seances  held  at  Garrison,  Loch  Melvin,  N.W.  of  Ireland,
by  Mr.  M.  and  self.

August  10th. — Sat  clown  about  half -past  nine  p.m.,  room  well  darkened.
Raps  began  very  soon  on  different  parts  of  the  long  table  at  a  distance  from
us,  and  on  Mr.  M.'s  chair.  These  knocks  soon  assumed  the  dropping
character  in  the  most  marked  manner.  A  novice  would  have  been  positive  that
small  objects  had  been  thrown  on  the  table  (vide  seance  of  July  20th).  Knocks
heard  in  other  parts  of  the  room. Scent  (sandal-wood)  was  freely  scattered,

and  on  my  asking  for  more  we  heard  a  sound  like  a  prolonged  wh  ^sli,

and  then  a  quantity  was  actually  squirted  in  my  face. Suddenly  a  large


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


321


August  Wth. — Dr.  S.  and  I,  as  before. — Dr.  S.  had  written  an  account
of  the  last  seance  according  to  Mentor's  direction,  and  we  agreed  to  lay
it  on  the  table  and  to  ask  Mentor  to  sign  it  with  his  name.  The  mani-
festations commenced  by  rajjs,  succeeded  by  Grocyn's  musical  sound.
Then  came  the  lights  as  before,  a  dozen  or  more.  They  were  precisely
similar  to  what  I  have  before  described.  I  was  then  deeply  entranced,
and  depend  for  the  account  of  what  then  occurred  entirely  on  Dr.
Speer.  My  consciousness  is  utterly  lost.  Mentor  speaks  in  a  hoarse
whisper,  very  short  and  sententious.  Before  I  was  entranced  the
lights  were  placed  on  the  paper  which  we  wished  him  to  sign.  After
I  was  entranced  Mentor  brought  the  light  down  five  or  six  times  upon
the  paper.  He  then  said  that  he  would  illuminate  the  medium's  face.
He  did  so,  passing  the  light  over  it  backwards  and  forwai'ds.  The
eyes  were  closed,  and  the  face  quite  passive.  He  then  explained  the
process  of  making  the  lights — which  Dr.  Speer  does  not  remember —
said  that  the  light  was  surrounded  by  drapery,  and  to  prove  it  he
brushed  Dr.  Speer's  hand,  which  was  on  the  ta,ble,  backwards  and
forwards  with  fine  drapery  very  distinctly  materialised.  This  was
repeated  five  or  six  times,  attention  being  directed  to  the  character  of
the  light  and  the  fineness  of  the  drapery.  On  being  requested,  he
placed  the  light  close  to  Dr.  Speer's  face,  first  of  all  telling  him  to
lean  over  and  place  his  hands  on  the  table,  within  the  sphere  of
influence.  He  was  to  shut  his  eyes,  and  to  open  them  when  told.
When  he  did  so,  the  light  was  within  an  inch  of  his  face,  very  bright,

light,  fully  formed,  came  from  under  the  edge  of  the  table  opposite
to  me,  to  the  left  of  Mr.  M.  It  rose  above  the  edge  of  the  table
and  vanished  ;  it  was  followed  by  several  more.  We  asked  if
the  light  could  be  brought  and  placed  on  the  table  between  Mr.
M.  and  self.  The  next  light  came  up,  rose  above  the  table,  and
advanced  to  its  centre,  in  obedience  to  our  request.  Lights  now  rose  up  on
Mr.  M.'s  right  hand  ;  some  came  close  to  his  face.  In  all  about  fifteen  great
lights  showed  themselves,  varying  from  the  size  of  an  orange  to  that  of  a
shaddock.  Grocyn's  harp  was  now  heard  in  the  most  distinct  manner.  The
sounds  were  absolutely  identical  with  those  of  a  stringed  instrument,  without
a  trace  of  tlie  wooden  character.  Loud  raps  of  three  kinds  occurred  simul-
taneously, and  ere  long  Mr.  M.  was  entranced  and  Mentor  came  and
addressed  me  (through  him)  in  his  short,  sententious  manner.  I  thanked
jiim  in  our  joint  names  for  his  wonderfully  beautiful  manifestations,  at
which  he  seemed  much  gratified.  He  then  told  me  to  draw  back  from  the
table  and  he  would  try  and  place  the  light  in  the  medium's  hand.  We  con-
tinued talking,  when  a  large  light  rose  up  from  under  the  table  and  came  to
the  middle  of  it.  It  was  followed  by  another.  I  asked  if  these  were  actually
in  the  medium's  hand.  He  said  "No — he  could  nut  achieve  it.  But,"
said  he,  "  I  will  knock  with  the  light  in  front  of  you."  Almost  immediately
a  light  came  up  as  before,  and  advanced  close  to  me  upon  tlie  table. ' '  You


322


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


and  as  large  as  the  globe  of  a  moderator  lamp.  This  was  twice
repeated.  He  then  told  Dr.  Speer  to  rub  his  hands  together  and  on
his  coat,  and  then  to  place  them  on  the  table.  Soon  a  large  bright
light  came,  held  by  a  hand  which  was,  as  before,  within  the  drapery  ;
but  before  the  light  was  another  hand,  which  was  worked  about  before
the  light,  so  as  to  show  it  clearly.  Dr.  S.  was  again  told  to  rub  his
ha^nds  on  his  coat  and  to  place  them  on  the  table.  "When  he  had  done
so  Mentor  rapped  on  them  with  his  hand  holding  the  lamp.  He  then
said  that  he  was  summoned  away,  but  before  he  went  he  would
endeavour  to  affix  his  mark  to  the  paper  which  had  been  prepared.  He
did  so,  the  pencil  being  very  plainly  heard  moving  over  the  paper.  The
sign  is  facsimiled  below.


The  circle  and  interlaced  triangles  always  accompany  his  signature.'

see!  You  see  !"  quoth  Mentor.  "Yes,  1  see."  "Now  listen,  I  knock."
The  light  rose  slowly  about  three  inches  from  the  table  on  which  it  rested  and
struck  three  distinct  blows.  Mentor  repeated  this  six  or  seven  times.  He
then  said,  "  Now  I  show  you  my  hand."  A  large,  very  bright  light  then
came  up  as  before,  casting  a  great  reflection  on  the  oilcloth,  came  up  as
before  in  front  of  me  ;  inside  of  it  appeared  the  hand  of  Mentor,  as  distinct
as  it  can  well  be  conceived.  "  You  see  !  You  see  !  "  said  he.  "That  is  my
hand  ;  now  I  move  my  fingers,"  and  he  continued  to  move  his  fingers  about
freely,  just  in  front  of  my  face.  1  thanked  him  for  his  consideration,  and
he  said  he  would  show  greater  wonders  still.  I  sliould  say  that  before  the
last  light  appeared  he  had  told  me  to  draw  wp  and  replace  niy  hand.  He
talked  more  about  what  Ave  might  expect  if  the  favourable  circumstances  con-
tinued. He  cheeked  his  lieutenant,  who  was  stamping  about  the  room  in
too  demonstrative  a  manner  ;  gave  me  a  special  dose  of  scent ;  told  me  to  tran-
scribe accurately  all  I  had  seen  and  heard  ;  told  me  to  make  the  medium
wash  his  face  in  cold  water  before  I  related  anything  to  him,  and  be  sure
and  tell  him  everything.  He  laid  great  stress  on  this,  and  exhorted  me
strongly. Wished  me  good-night  and  departed. — S.T.S.

^  August  IWi. — Sat  again  at  a  quarter  to  ten.  Raps  began  almost  imme-
diately, and  of  the  same  character  as  on  the  preceding  evening.  I  liad  placed
the  written  record  of  the  previous  seance  (August  10th),  together  with  a
pencil,  in  front  of  me. Grocyn  again  came. His  sounds  were  perfect.  Soon


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  323


August  12th. — Dr.  Speer  and  self,  at  Garrison. — We  commenced  by
rubbing  our  hands,  and  raps  at  once  occurred.  Grocyn  cleai',  and  the
whistle,  but  not  loud.  Lights  clear  and  large.  Grocyn's  sound  led
Dr.  S.  to  say  it  was  like  King  David's  harp.  Grocyn  at  once  called
for  the  alphabet  and  said,  "  I  know  him."  Dr.  S.  said :  "  Extra-
ordinary !  "  "Not  at  all,"  said  Grocyn.  Imperator  entranced  me  and
said  that  the  raps  which  had  disturbed  Dr.  S.  had  been  caused  by  the
efforts  of  the  band  to  prevent  some  undeveloped  spirits  from  manifest-
ing. We  had  been  to  an  old  churchyard  where  there  were  some
curious  tombs,  and  some  spirits  had  attached  themselves  in  eagerness
to  manifest.  He  also  said  that  I  ought  not  to  go  to  sleep  in  the  day.
I  had  taken  a  nap  after  dinner.  He  explained  that  the  lights  were
made  from  a  germ  of  magnetism  which  was  brought.  This  germ  was
invisible  to  the  natural  eye,  and  continued  so  until  it  was  surrounded
by  an  envelope  of  something  which  was  taken  from  the  circle  and
medium. This  was  covered  with  spiral  drapery. Several  of  the  lights

a  large  hght  came  up  from  under  the  table,  and  came  upon  it.  Knowing
that  Mentor  was  present,  I  asked  him  to  bring  the  light  and  illumine  the
paper,  which  he  did  at  once,  and  repeated  the  operation  three  or  four  times.
Light  after  light  followed  as  before,  when  again  loud  raps  all  over  the  table,
and  Mr.  M.  became  entranced.  Mentor  now  spoke  through  him.  I  told
him  what  I  had  done,  asked  if  he  was  satisfied,  to  which  he  replied
"  Yes,"  and  he  would  now  show  me  more.  I  asked  for  his  sign-manual  of
approval  to  my  record,  upon  which  he  at  once  brought  a  large  light,  and
placed  it  on  it,  so  that  I  could  see  the  writing.  He  said  he  would  try  and
do  what  I  wished.  He  then  said  that  he  would  illumine  the  medium's  face.
He  brought  a  large  bright  light,  and  passed  it  in  front  of  his  face,  which  I
could  see.  He  then  explained  the  process  of  making  the  lights,  and  told  me
that  the  folds  I  saw  around  them  hanging  down  were  really  drapery,  which
he  would  prove  to  me.  He  then  brought  the  light  close  to  the  back  of  my
hand,  and  brushed  it  backwards  and  forwards  with  as  distinct  a  materialised
drapery  as  can  well  be  conceived.  This  feat  he  repeated  first  on  one  hand
and  then  on  the  other,  five  or  six  times,  at  the  same  time  directing  my
attention  to  the  character  of  the  light  and  the  tangitiility  of  the  drapery.  I
then  asked  if  he  could  place  a  light  close  to  my  face.  He  assented,
told  me  to  rub  my  hands  briskly,  lean  forward,  and  close  my  eyes  until
told  to open them. I  did so, and on opening  them  I  saw  within

apparently  an  inch  or  so of  my  face  a  large  and  very

bright  light  of  this  shape,  ""N. as  large,  indeed,  as  the  globe

of a moderator lamp.  This  was  also  repeated  with

equal  success. He  again  told  me  to  rub  my  hands  on

my  coat,  and  to  extend  them.  Soon  another  large  light  came  in  front  of  me,
held,  as  on  the  previous  evening,  by  a  hand.  On  this  occasion  the  hand  a,p-
peared  to  be  outside  the  hght,  as  it  moved  the  fingers  about  freely  ;  and  also
removed  itself  some  inches  from  the  light  towards  me  and  back  again  severa
times,  as  though  the  light  were  held  in  the  left  hand,  and  the  right  hand  placed
in  front  of  it  at  various  distances. He  again  told  me  to  rub  my  hands  and


324)  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


were  made  quite  close  to  me.  For  all  information  during  the  trance
state  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Speer.

[A  specimen  of  Mr.  Moses'  letters  to  Mrs.  Speer  may  here  be  given  to
show  the  way  in  which  he  mixes  up  accounts  of  the  phenomena  with  topics
of  private  emotion  : —

"  You  will  have  heard  of  our  little  seances  at  Garrison.  They  must  have
been  very  wonderful.  I  was,  as  usual,  deeply  entranced  during  the  most
interesting  parts.  But  I  saw  a  great  deal  that  was  very  wonderful  indeed,
and  we  got  information  about  the  mode  of  making  the  light  that  was  very
curious.  At  the  last  seance  Imperator  introduced  S.,  and  gave  us  a  message
from  him,  promising  that  more  would  come  in  time.  I  have  had  very  little
writing,  but  I  expect  I  shall  not  get  very  much  whilst  I  am  moving  about.
We  were  constantly  wishing  that  you  had  been  with  us  at  Garrison.  You
would  have  enjoyed  the  readiness  with  which  Mentor  manifested  and  the
eagerness  with  which  he  tried  to  show  how  he  did  everything.  He  brushed
Dr.  Speer 's  hands  with  the  drapery  in  which  his  light  was  shrouded,  and
even  rapped  on  his  hands  as  they  were  laid  on  the  table.  His  hand  was  as
fully  materialised  and  as  natural  as  mine.

"Indeed,  both  his  hands  must  have  been  materialised,  for  he  put  one
before  the  light  which  was  held  in  his  other  hand.  It  is  all  very  wonderful
and  very  convincing.  He  spoke  with  great  contempt  of  London  atmosphere,
and  of  me  as  a  medium  under  conditions  of  hard  work.  I  expect  that  great
results  would  spring  from  conditions  such  as  tliose  which  we  had  at  Garrison,
but  they  arc  not  attainable.

' '  Since  I  commenced  this  letter  I  have  had  a  very  long  communication
from  Doctor,  who  has  been  absent  for  some  time.  He  speaks  a  good  deal
of  our  friend,  says  she  is  '  grievously  sick,'  and  that  the  direction  of  her
mind  to  Spiritualism,  which  she  associates  with  me,  enables  communications
to  be  made  about  her  state.  Doctor  says  he  has  no  power  of  predicting  the
ultimate  result,  but  says  she  is  in  danger,  as  we  call  it,  of  being  entirely
separated  from  the  body,  to  which  only  the  strong  bond  which  binds  her
to  her  children  yet  unites  her.  He  then  says  somewhat  of  our  shortsighted-
ness about  what  we  call  death.  He  says,  in  eft'ect,  God  knows  what  we  can't
know,  and  does  all  for  the  best.  He  then  goes  on  to  point  out  at  very  great
length  the  necessity  of  my  praying  most  earnestly,  heartily,  and  unceasingly,

listen.  A  light  came  and  placed  itself  over  my  hand,  and  Mentor  said  he
would  knock  with  his  hand  on  my  hand,  which  he  did,  bringing  the  bottom
of  the  light  and  his  own  hand  most  distinctly  on  the  back  of  mine.  He  then
said  he  must  go  to  other  work,  but  would  try  and  write  his  signature.  I
then  heard  the  jjencil  writing,  the  sound  being  most  distinct.  He  repeated
his  admonition  of  the  preceding  evening,  and  departed,  leaving  a  specimen
of  direct  spirit  caligraphy.

In  the  above  account  I  have  omitted  to  mention  the  manner  in  which
Mentor  asked  me  to  notice  how  he  would  renew  the  light.  He  withdrew
his  hand  gradually,  and  the  light  became  fainter  and  fainter,  till  almost  im-
perceptible. He  then  drew  his  hand  in  close  proximity  to  the  light,  whicli
appeared  to  grow  brigliter  as  the  hand  came  in  contact  with  it.  I  may  add
that  a  small  portion  of  the  forearm  was  also  visible. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  325


not  of  any  more  specific  petition  than  that  the  angel  ministers  may  be  able
to  reach  her  to  soothe  her  pain  in  sickness,  or  in  case  of  death  to  receive  the
spirit  and  to  usher  it  into  its  new  sphere.  It  is  an  exceedingly  solemn
exhortation.  They  say  (Imperator  said  so,  too,  the  other  night)  that  they
can't  get  near  on  account  of  opposing  influences.  If  I  were  nearer  they
could,  and  my  prayers  might  help  more  than  I  can  imagine.  They  speak
most  solemnly.  I  commend  their  advice  to  you,  for  I  am  sure  that  such
petitions  as  you  would  put  up  would  be  at  least  as  efficacious  as  any  that  I
could  utter.  If  by  such  means  we  are  enabled  to  soothe  one  pain,  or  to
convey  to  the  sufferer's  mind  one  feeling  of  rest,  it  becomes  a  sacred  duty
to  use  all  endeavours.  And  none  can  tell  how 'the  slender  nerve  thiit
moves  the  muscles  of  Omnipotence  '  may  be  able  to  bring  down  the  sooth-
ing and  blessed  influences  of  the  holy  angels,  nor  how  far  that  influence
may  extend.  Only  that  our  prayers  are  so  selfish,  I  believe  they  would  do
far  more.  The  simpler  they  are  the  better  ;  the  more  comprehensive  the
more  powerful."  ]

September  Qth,  1873. — Seance  at  Shanklin,  Isle  of  Wight.  Dr.  and
Mrs.  S.,  and  self. — Scent — sandal-rv^ood — in  profusion.  Raps  of  various
kinds.  Grocyn.  Lights  made  by  Mentor.  Control  by  Imperator  and
Mentor.  This  being  the  first  time  that  the  circle  had  met  since  we
separated  in  July,  the  phenomena  did  not  occur  so  strongly  as  usual.
The  musical  sound  was  very  clear,  and  the  lights,  some  six  or  seven  in
number,  were  of  the  usual  type.  The  scent  was  very  plentiful,  and
was  showered  from  the  ceiling  as  usual.  Imperator  spoke  somewhat  of
our  lost  friend  (B.C.),  and  said  she  had  not  yet  awoke.

Simday,  SejJtember  7th. — Same  place  and  circle. — Raps  and  com-
munications from  A.  W.  and  C.P.S.S.  Scent.  Lights,  of  a  totally
different  description.  One,  which  remained  visible  for  fully  five
minutes,  was  appai'ently  a  solid  sphere  of  light  about  two  inches  in
diameter  and  six  in  length.  It  did  not  seem  to  be  covered  with
drapery,  and  shone  with  a  clear,  pale  light.  The  great  peculiarity  was.
the  length  of  time  it  remained  without  renewal.  Other  lights  have
faded  very  rapidly,  lasting  from  ten  seconds  up  to  perhaps  a  minute.
I  believe  I  have  considerably  understated  the  time  which  this  continued.
At  request  it  touched  us  all,  and  was  hard  and  cold.  Several  others
followed.  Three  objects  Avei-e  brought  into  the  room,  one  from  the
dining-room,  one  from  Mrs.  Speer's  bedroom,  and  one  from  another
I'oom  in  the  house.  A  spirit,  Harmony,"  came  and  i-apped  out  in
clear  little  taps:  "She  is  well;  still  asleep."  This  spirit  is  one  who
has  never  been  incarnated  on  this  earth.  Impei'ator  and  Mentor
controlled,  the  latter  brushing  Mrs.  Speer's  face  and  hands  with  drapery
very  strongly  materialised.  Grocyn's  sounds  very  clear.  We  put
down  a  piece  of  paper  under  the  table,  and  had  on  it  a  message  from
A.  W.  and  C.P.S.S. By  mistake  the  same  piece  was  put  down  again,


S26  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


and  on  it  was  a  message  from  Imperator :  "  Hail  !  Cease  not  to  pray.
The  peace  of  God  be  with  you. — I.S.D."i

Monday,  September  8(h. — Same  circle  and  place. —  Scent,  raps.
Message  from  Harmony  :  "  Still  asleep."  Lights  of  a  totally  different
description,  shrouded  with  drapery,  and  not  nearly  so  brilliant,  remaining
visible  only  a  short  time.  Grocyn's  sounds  were  very  good,  clear  and
less  wooden  than  of  old.  Mentor  controlled  very  Iniefly  and  requested
the  room  to  be  made  darker  for  the  future.  A  bright  moon  was
shining.  Paper  put  under  the  table,  as  before,  was  found  to  contain  a
message  from  Imperator.  There  was  no  pencil  with  the  paper,  but  two
lay  on  the  table  during  the  evening.^

Tuesday,  Sei)temher  9th. — Same  conditions. — Plentiful  scent  as
before.  Sixteen  little  peai'ls  were  put  on  the  table,  six  having  been
previously  given  during  the  day.  Mrs.  Speer  and  I  were  writing  at
the  same  table,  and  a  pearl  was  put  on  my  letter  as  I  was  writing.
After  that  I  saw  a  spirit  standing  by  Mrs.  Speer,  and  was  told  that  it
was  Mentor,  who  had  put  a  pearl  on  Mi's.  Speer's  desk.  After  that  four
others  came. They  seemed  to  drop  on  the  table,  just  as  I  have  seen

them  with  Mrs.  A  h.  [A  private  lady  known  to  Mr.  Moses  and  to

myself,  whose  experiences  have  never  been  published. — F.W.H.M.]
We  have  in  all  twenty-two  now.  They  are  small  seed  pearls,  each
pei'forated.  Mentor  showed  some  wonderful  lights.  One  was  so  large
and  brilliant  that  it  lit  up  all  our  faces.  It  was  like  a  draped  tent
with  bright  light  within  it.  The  drapery  brushed  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer's
hands.  Many  of  them  were  large,  weird  and  ghost-like.  Grocyn
manifested  beautifully,  and  said  on  his  harp  that  he  could  not  play  a
tune  through  me,  but  that  he  was  about  Charlie,  and  Mendelssohn
would  make  him  a  great  musician.  We  then  were  told  to  break,  and
•on  returning  to  the  room  before  it  was  darkened  my  little  box  with

the two  pearls  which  Mrs.  A  h's  spirits  gave  me  slid  gently

into  my  hand.  It  startled  me  very  much.  The  box  had  been  taken
away  and  to  my  great  grief  I  could  get  no  tidings  of  it.  Mrs.  A.
told  me  they  had  been  taken  to  smooth  communications  with  our
friend  Sunshine,  and  that  they  would  be  returned. Mentor  brought

'^September '7th. — A  splendid  seance. Grocyn  and  Mentor.  Lights

0 appeared.  One,  upon  request,  remained  visible  and  stationary  for  45
minutes. It  assumed  the  cylindrical  shape,  thus  : and  t~J-7
tilted  itself so as to  show  its cylindrical  character. j  1 1
Drajjery  was  thrown  over  our  hands  and  faces,  and  objects  were  J  1/
brought  into  the  room  through  closed  doors  (as  usual). — S.T.S.

" /Se/jie/nk'r  8t/i,  [9i/i].— Seance.  Direct  spirit  writing.  Obtained  a  small
pearl  case  of  Mr.  M.  's,  wliicli  had  been  lost  for  a  month.  Was  brought  back
in  half  light,  while  his  hand  was  on  the  table,  and  put  into  it.  It  contained
two  pearls. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


327


them  back.  This  is  one  of  the  most  startling  evidences  I  have  had.
Impei'ator  brought  us  news  of  Sunshine,  as  Harmony  could  not  come  ;
and  said  she  slept  still.  All  was  well  with  her.  He  delivered  a  very
long  and  solemn  charge,  followed  by  a  beautiful  prayer.  It  was  an
exceedingly  impressive  speech.  After  the  control  I  was  very  tired  and
exhausted.  The  seance  only  lasted  one  and  a  quarter  hours,  but  was
very  exhausting.^

Sejyfember  lOth,  1873. — Shanklin,  same  conditions. — Scent  very
abundant.  Grocyn  played  very  beautifully,  doing  exactly  what  we
asked,  even  to  playing  octaves  and  thirds  at  Dr.  Speer's  request.  Small
lights.  Imperator  controlled  for  a  short  time  and  said  that  the  condi-
tions were  not  good.^

September  Wth,  1873. — Same  place  and  circle. — Very  copious  scent,
very  sweet.  Verbena,  being  asked  for,  was  given.  Waves  of  cool  air,
laden  with  scent,  fanned  us.  Dr.  Speer  changed  his  place,  and  a
groaning  noise  in  the  table  was  made  until  he  went  back.  Then  we
were  told  that  the  places  of  the  circle  must  not  be  changed.  At  first
the  lights  were  a  failure  until  the  circle  rubbed  hands  violently ;  then
three  of  the  brightest  lights  we  have  had  came.  The  lights  were  large
and  draped  in  long  drapery,  and  the  light  was  brilliant  enough  to  show
a  forearm,  bare  to  the  elbow.  The  hand  was  quite  plain,  and  the  arm
swarthy  and  rather  thin,  delicately  shaped.  It  ap^^eared  three  times.
Mentor  afterwards  said  that  in  time  he  could  materialise  his  body  if  I
were  put  in  a  cabinet.  Mentor  spoke  briefly.  Imperator  did  not  come
at  all.  The  lights  in  shape  were  such  as  this,  but  with  the  drapery
sixteen  or  eighteen  inches  in  length. Mentor  wrote.^


^  Septemhcy  W}. — Seance.  Very  good.  Pearls  brought  in  daylight.  Direct
spirit  writing. — S.T.S.

2  September  10th. — Seance.  Conditions  not  good.  Lights  few  and  feeble.
The  nuclei  floated  about  without  gauzy  enveloiJe. — S.T.S.

^  September  nth . — Seance.  Pearls  brought.  An  attempt  made  to  raise
M.A.  Table  tilted.  Three  large  bright  lights,  with  a  quantity  of  falling
drapery.  To  each  an  arm,  bare  to  the  elbow,  was  appended.  Mentor  gave
direct  writing  under  the  table,  to  the  efiect  that  he  would  eventually  show
himself.  Grocyn  brought  Mendelssohn,  who  could  not  yet  communicate,  but
would  do  so  eventually. — S.T.S.


328


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Closes.


September  I2th,  1873. — Shanklin.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  and  self. — The
phenomena  commenced  on  our  rubbing  hands,  which  we  did  vigorously.
Immediately,  during  the  Invocation  with  which  we  began,  a  round  light
was  seen  close  to  me,  so  close  that  I  did  not  see  it.  Dr.  S.  saw  it  and
called  attention  to  it,  when  it  went  out  at  once.  The  lights  rapidly
developed  to  an  extraordinary  pitch.  They  flashed  about  backwards
and  forwards  with  great  rapidity,  darting  close  to  our  faces  and  brushing
them  with  drapery.  The  solid  cylinder  was  visible  for  full  five
minutes  and  was  very  brilliant.  The  drapery  seemed  to  change  colour
at  times,  and  to  become  black,  or  so  dark  as  to  conceal  part  of  the  light.
The  solid  cylinder  seemed  to  be  about  eight  inches  long  and  two  inches
in  diameter.  Mentor  controlled,  and  spoke  at  length.  He  brought  a
great  quantity  of  scent,  which  he  threw  about,  and  some  of  it
unfortunately  went  into  Mrs.  Speer's  eye,  causing  us  to  break  abruptly.
It  was  explained  that  the  scent  was  brought  to  improve  the  atmo-
spheric conditions.  It  must  have  l^een  very  plentifully  scattered,  for
everything  was  spotted  with  it,  and  was  evidently  very  pungent  and
strong.'

Sunday,  September  lith,  1873. — Same  circle  and  place. — Raps
from  Mentor,  who  showed  a  number  of  lights,  some  of  which  were
comparative  failures,  the  nucleus  only  being  visible.  This  nucleus
Mentor  has  explained  that  he  brings  with  him,  and  in  unfavourable
conditions  he  is  not  able  to  surround  it  with  the  luminosity  which
he  gets  from  the  circle.  The  power  gradually  improved  until
we  had  one  of  the  lai-gest  and  brightest  I  ever  saw.  The  light
illumined  the  walls,  and  the  drapery  must  have  been  two  feet  in  length.
Mentor  also  brushed  our  faces  and  hands  with  his  drapery.  I  had
good  opportunity  for  judging,  and  I  should  describe  what  I  felt  as  the
corner  of  a  very  line  muslin  robe,  but  finer  and  softer  than  any  manu-
factured in  this  country — more  like  the  finest  Indian  fabrics.  This  is
the  first  time  I  have  had  opportunity  of  examiiiing  the  drapery,  and
even  now  I  have  not  handled  it.

Grocyn's  sounds  were  more  beautiful  than  I  have  ever  heard  them,
I  think  ;  clear,  resonant,  and  bell-like.  The  Holy  Maid  of  Kent  showed
herself  to  me  in  company  with  Catharine. She  could  not  talk,  but

''■September  13th  [?  12fch].  — A  singular  seance.  Grocyn  absent,  for  the  first
time  for  many  weeks.  A  cylindrical  light  appeared  at  once,  remained
for  some  minutes,  came  again,  and  moved  about  in  every  direction
and  at  all  heights  with  great  rapidity. Other  lights  appeared,  of

curious  shapes.  Scent  thrown  in  great
quantities — so  much  was  thrown  at  Mrs.  S.'s
eye  as  to  produce  excruciating  agony  and  con-
gestion of  the  eye,  with  almost  blindness  for  24
hours. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


329


rapped  continuously  little  pencil-raps.  J ohn  Dee  gave  one  moderate
knock.  Mentor  controlled  for  a  while,  and  gave  us  beautiful  waves  of
scented  air,  but  no  liquid,  in  consequence  of  the  accident.  After  a
break  Imperator  controlled  for  a  little  time.  Sunshine  still  slept,  he
said,  and  would  sleep  for  some  time  to  come.  She  had  passed  through
two  spheres  of  suffering  during  her  illness,  but  would  return  and  go
through  them  in  the  conscious  state  of  spirit-existence.  When  we
l)roke  up  we  found  some  flowers  from  the  middle  of  the  table  had  been
-distributed  to  each,  and  a  little  heap  of  pearl  was  put  before  each.
One  hundred  and  thirty-nine  little  pearls  have  now  been  brought  to
us,  one  hundred  and  ten  in  the  last  two  days.  Grocyn  said  he  knew
Luther,  who  was  in  the  Second  Sphere.  Erasmus  was  seventeen  when
he  came  to  him  as  pupil.  1-

1  September  14t7i.— Seance.  Grocyn  most  distinct.  He  answered  (through
his  harp)  questions  about  Erasmus.  Mentor  fanned  us  repeatedly.  Three
splendid  lights  appeared ;  an  arm  was  seen  ;  drapery  repeatedly  thrown  over
us. Flowers  taken  out  of  a  vase  upon  the  table  and  thrown  at  us. — S.T.S.

[Mrs.  Speer's  account  is  as  follows  (Light,  August  20th,  1892)  : —

September  14th,  1873. — Circle  met  at  nine  o'clock,  Mr.  S.M.  having  been
impressed  to  sit  at  this  hour.  I  was  occupied  in  my  room  about  the  proposed
time  of  our  meeting,  when  several  loud  raps  came  on  the  door.  On  opening
it  no  one  was  there,  so  I  concluded  the  friends  wished  my  presence  in  the
seance-room.  I  at  once  joined  the  medium  and  Dr.  S.  On  sitting  down  I
saw  a  bright  figure  standing  behind  Mr.  S.M.  We  were  told  it  was  Mentor.
He  then  came  between  us,  bringing  cool  air  full  of  the  scent  of  roses,  which  he
wafted  over  our  hands  and  faces.  G.  manifested,  making  more  beautiful
sounds  than  usual ;  he  answered  our  questions  on  his  musical  instrument,
which  sounded  like  a  harp.  He  said  he  knew  Erasmus,  that  he  was  seventeen
years  of  age  when  he  came  under  his  instructions  ;  he  also  knew  Melancthon
and  Luther,  of  whom  he  did  not  express  much  approval.  Mentor  then
showed  us  lights,  not  equal  to  those  we  had  previously  had,  but  he  was  able
to  brush  our  hands  with  the  drapery  surrounding  them,  which  felt  very  fine
and  soft,  like  India  muslin.  Then  G.  gave  five  twangs  on  his  harp  for  the
alphabet,  spelling  out  the  word,  "Break."

On  returning  to  the  room  more  beautiful  scent  was  brought,  and  a  little
■sprinkled  on  our  hands.  Mentor  many  times  during  the  seance  fanned  me  with
the  scent-laden  air.  He  then  showed  us  two  or  three  very  large  lights.  One
must  have  measured  with  its  drapery  quite  two  feet  in  height  ;  he  brought
it  close  to  ury  face,  and  brushed  my  hands  many  times  with  the  drapery  ;  he
also  touched  my  hand,  and  his  hand  felt  as  human  as  ray  own.  Mentor
then  controlled  the  medium,  and  expressed  great  sorrow  for  having
accidentally  hurt  me  at  a  previous  stance.  The  lights  were  not  good,  as  Mr.
S.M.  was  ill,  and  the  atmosphere  was  not  right,  and  this  interfered  with
their  development.  The  medium  then  said  he  saw  a  fresh  spirit  standing  by
■Catharine.  She  advanced  to  the  table  and  rapped  clearly.  We  were  in-
formed it  was  the  "  Maid  of  Kent,"  who  had  been  allowed  to  come  to  the
circle  for  her  good. We  promised  to  pray  for  her. This  announcement  was


330


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


On  September  28th  Ave  sat  again.  In  the  afternoon  we  had  all
been  to  Kensal  Gj'een  Cemetery.  We  had  all  the  usual  phenomena,
and  in  addition  a  spirit  came  which  had  annexed  itself  to  me  in  the
afternoon,  and  rapped  A^ery  clearly,  asking  for  a.  prayer.  E,aps  all  over
the  room.  Grocyn  carried  his  sound  right  away  from  the  circle.  At
night  I  was  kept  awake  by  the  Kensal  Green  spirit,  who  knocked
most  violently.  A  board  near  me  was  considerably  moved  from  the
wall,  as  they  wished  to  put  it  on  the  table.

Monday,  September  29th. — Douglas  House. — A  very  irregular,  dis-
turbed seance.  I  was  very  far  from  well,  tired  and  worn  out  with  the
noise  and  worry  of  school.  Nothing  occurred  for  a  long  time,  and  we
made  a  short  break.  When  we  returned  very  little  still  occurred,  until
sharp  I'aps  came,  quite  outside  of  the  circle.  It  was  one  of  the  same
spirits  who  had  annoyed  nie  lately.  It  could  not  come  on  the  table
until  we  asked  it,  but  knocked  about  outside.  At  last  it  came  much
more  gently  on  the  table  and  asked  for  prayer.  A  very  curious  and
quite  new  sound  was  made  in  the  air,  between  Mrs.  S.  and  myself  ;  a
whirring  noise,  sighing  like  the  wind  among  the  trees.  I  have  since
heard  it  in  my  bedroom.  Grocyn  manifested,  but  feebly.  We  had
some  scent  also.  I  noticed  before  it  came  that  the  air  was  pervaded
by  a  damp,  unpleasant  odour.  The  whirring  noise  got  so  violent  near
to  my  right  ear  that  I  bi'oke  tip  the  sitting.  It  was  like  a  solid
substance  violently  whirled  round.  The  spirit  would  give  no  name
but  "S."

Sunday,  October  5th,  1873. — Douglas  House. Our  circle  and  Mr.

received  by  many  very  jubilant  raps.  Imperator  then  controlled  the-
medium,  and  after  saying,  "Good  evening,  friends,"  and  blessing  us,  spoke
for  a  few  minutes  with  difficulty.  He  said  it  would  not  be  well  to  keep  the
control,  as  the  conditions  wore  not  good  ;  regretted  the  accident  to  my  eyes,
and  said  Doctor  would  give  the  medium  some  rules  it  would  be  well  for  all
to  follow.  "We  groped,"  he  said,  "in  the  dark  even  as  they  did.  With
more  perfect  conditions  the  manifestations  would  surprise  us. "  Our  friend
(to  whom  reference  has  been  made)  was  still  resting.  She  had  passed  through
the  spheres  of  suffering  dui'ing  her  illness.  "I  had  wished  "  (he  continued)-
"  to  speak  to  you  on  the  subject  of  worship,  but  must  postpone  doing  so
until  a  more  convenient  season.  May  the  blessing  of  the  Supreme  be  with
you."  After  Imperator  left  the  medium.  Mentor  brought  more  scent,  and
jjresented  flowers  to  each  of  the  circle.  When  we  lighted  the  gas  we  found
a  small  heap  of  seed  pearls  in  front  of  each  of  the  sitters,  placed  by  the
flowers  Mentor  had  previously  given  to  us. — M.S.]

September  l&lt. — Seance.  Grocyn  as  usual.  He  played,  by  request,  on
his  invisible  tambourine,  answered  questions,  and  made  some  singular  wailing
sounds.  Mentor  made  lights,  which  extended  their  range  of  mobility  much
[further]  beyond  the  circle  than  ever  ;  even  up  on  to  the  ceiling.  J.  Dee
came  and  communicated.  Rapped  more  quietly  than  heretofore.  P.  came
with  very  j)eculiar  raps. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  331


Harrison. — We  had  the  usual  phenomena  very  strong.  Scent  in  waves
of  cool  air,  moist  scent.  Grocyn's  sound  very  clear.  Seneca's  dropping
sound.  Rector  and  Odorifer  together,  with  a  multitude  of  sounds  on
the  table.  Mentor  and  Imperator  controlled.  Some  small  lights  were
also  made.  When  we  went  up  into  the  cabinet  upstairs.  Mentor
made  some  very  clear  lights,  one  of  which  endured  over  four  minutes.
I  had  been  very  anxious  to  try  the  duration  of  the  light,  because
an  imitation  of  such  lights  is  made  by  phosphorised  oil ;  but  lights
so  made  are  of  very  brief  duration.  I  believe  that  a  favourable
trial  would  show  that  Mentor's  light  would  last  seven  or  eight
minutes.

October  14th,  1873. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — We
sat  in  the  study.  Nothing  occurred  for  some  time.  We  remai-ked  the
unusual  absence,  and  almost  while  we  were  speaking  a  little  Parian

,  statuette  was  put  upon  the  table.  It  was  brought  from  the  front  bed-
room, which  I  usually  occupy  when  staying  in  the  house.  It  was
followed  after  an  interval  by  a  silver  fruit-knife,  which  was  brought

- from  a  closed  work  box  of  Mrs.  Speer's  in  the  dining-room. We  were
then  left  in  peace,  and  wondered  where  Grocyn  was. A  spirit  came
tapping,  and  I  asked  that  Grocyn  might  be  fetched. It  was  rapped
out:  "We  are  doing  so." Mrs.  S.,  who  was  calling  the  alphabet,
stopped,  imagining,  as  we  all  did,  that  the  sentence  was  finished.  How-
ever, the  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  "  mething  else  "  spelt. We  could
not  conceive  what  was  meant  till  it  occurred  to  us  to  put  the  "so"  on  to
it,  and  we  found  the  sentence  to  be  : "  We  are  doing  something  else."
We  were  told  to  form  hands,*  and  something  fell  on  the  table,  which
turned  out  to  be  a  snuff-box  from  Dr.  Speer's  dressing-room.  He/ore
it  came  he  said  that  he  smelt  Tonqviin  bean, which  had  been  in
the  box. A  curious  snapping  noise  was  heard  in  the  air  ;  we  had
scent-laden  breeze,  and  then  Grocyn  came. Dr.  S.  had  procured,
unknown  to  me,  a  book  (Drummond's  Life  of  Erasmus),  from  which  he
selected  test  questions. Grocyn  had  before  told  us  that  he  had  become
acquainted  with  Erasmus  at  the  age  of seventeen. This,  we  had
thought,  meant  that  E.  became  G.'s  pupil  at  that  time. We  thought
that  this  contradicted  the  book,  and  Dr.  S.  quoted  the  book  against
Grocyn. G.  indignantly  twanged  out  "  Imperfect,"  and  proceeded  to
explain  that  he  made  E.'s  acquaintance  first  when  he  went  to  Padua,,
that  E.  came  to  England  in  1798  and  remained  one  and  a-half  years.
He  also  spelt  the  year  of  his  birth,  1767,  making  him  thirty-one  when,
he  came  to  England. Dr.  S.  said,  "  No,  thirty." Grocyn,  however,,
contradicted  very  sharply. The  twangs  had  a  curious  intensity,  just,
as  expressive  as  the  excited  tone  of  a  disputant. Asked  by  Dr.  S.
whether  he  knew  the  name  of  Chalcelydes,  he  promptly  said  "  No.'*

z


332


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


Dr.  S.  said  :  "  He  was  your  tutor."  "No."  "  But  he  was."  "No."
"  Do  you  know  Domitian  ? "  "No."  "  Polonius  ?"  "No."  Calling
for  the  alphabet  he  twanged  out  :  "  Demetrius  Chalcondyles,"  and
afterwards  "  Politian."

These  turned  out  to  be  the  correct  names.  We  referred  to  the  book
afterwards  and  found  that  Dr.  S.  had  mistaken  or  forgotten  the  names.
The  fact  of  Erasmus'  staying  one  and  a-half  years  we  none  of  us
knew,  and  that  Grocyn  studied  at  Paris  is  not  mentioned  in  the  book.  It
was  a  very  curious  piece  of  evidence  as  to  identity.  Some  of  the  facts
were  unknown  to  any  of  us.  Some,  e.g.,  names  and  dates,  were  wrongly
read  and  given,  and  were  corrected  promptly,  the  communicating  spirit
showing  just  the  same  impatience  as  a  man  would  who  was  examined
as  to  his  life  and  heard  false  statements  made.  The  twangs  were  of
great  intensity,  and  the  spirit  showed  a  complete  acquaintance  with
Grocyn's  life,  which  is  a  very  strong  argument  for  identity.  One
would  think  a  personator  would  not  have  got  so  indignant.  He  got
very  wroth  indeed.  It  was  altogether  curious  evidence  for  identity  as
against  unconscious  cerebration.  The  dropping  sound  of  Seneca  was
very  loud  indeed,  and  frequently  repeated  both  on  the  table  and
harmonium  stool.^

End  of  Citations  from  Mr.  Moses'  Notes. '  .

1  Stance  on  October  lith. — Mrs.  S. ,  Mr.  M.,  and  self. — For  some  time
nothing  occurred,  but  then  raps  were  heai'd  in  various  places — on  the  floor,  Mr.
M.'s  chair,  on  the  cupboard,  in  the  air.  Presently  a  small  marble  statuette
was  brought  from  the  spare  bedroom  upstairs,  through  the  locked  door,
and  thrown  on  the  table.  Ere  long  a  silver  clasped  fruit-knife  was  similarly
brought  from  a  workbox  in  the  dining-room.  Shortly  afterwards  I  per-
ceived an  aroma  as  of  a  Tonquin  bean,  and  (we  had  been  previously  told  to
join  hands)  a  snuff-box  which  I  had  placed  upon  the  chimney-piece  of  my
dressing-room  upstairs  was  thrown  on  the  table.  After  this  there  was  a
pause  ;  we  expressed  astonishment  at  not  hearing  Grocyn,  and  asked  if  he
could  be  fetched.  "  We  are  doing  so,"  was  the  reply  ;  but  we  jumped  pre-
maturely at  our  conclusion,  for  on  resuming  alphabet  we  were  much  puzzled
by  the  words  "  — mething  else,"  the  phrase  standing  thus,  "  We  are  doing
something  else."  This,  in  reality,  preceded  the  appearance  of  the  snuff-box,
and  doubtless  referred  to  it.  After  another  pause  Grocyn  came  most  dis-
tinctly. I  at  once  entered  into  conversation  with  him  respecting  Drum-
mond's  Life  of  Erasmus  and  the  mention  of  his  own  name,  &c.,  in  that
work.  I  asked  for  the  initial  of  the  country  he  (Grocyn)  had  studied  at,  and
it  was  given,  "Italy,  University  Padua."  I  asked  if  he  knew  the  names
of  Dionysius  Calcedonys,  and  of  Polonius  ;  answer  negative.  I  remon-
strated, having  written  those  names  down  the  day  before  from  Drummond's
work.  He  then  asked  for  alphabet,  and  gave  the  following  names,  which,  on


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


333


I  here  close  for  the  present  the  series  of  quotations  from  Mr,
Moses'  records.  We  have  traversed  just  a  year  from  the  date —
November,  1872 — when  the  continuous  series  of  these  records  begins.
And  the  reader  has  been  introduced  to  nearly  all  the  classes  of
phenomena,  which  continue  in  varying  intensity  for  some  six  or  seven
years  longer.  It  will  not  be  necessary  to  follow  them  to  the  end  in
equal  detail.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  next  instalment  of
evidence  we  must  deal  with  Mr.  Moses'  automatic  writings  as  well,
and  we  must  endeavour  to  give  some  such  general  view  as  may  throw
light  on  the  difficult  question  of  the  nature  and  identity  of  the
intelligences  at  work.  Can  we  asci-ibe  all  the  phenomena  to  some
operation  of  Mr.  Moses'  own  subliminal  self  ?  or  were  other  intelligences
engaged  ?  and,  if  so,  did  they  in  any  sense  correspond  to  the  pei'sons
under  whose  names  they  announced  themselves  ?

But  although  anything  like  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the
phenomena  must  thus  be  deferred  for  a  farther  paper,  some  clearness
may  meantime  be  gained  by  a  brief  preliminary  classification, — which
may  also  indicate  the  kind  of  difficulties  which  each  possible  explana-
tion of  the  records  will  have  to  meet.

I.  In  the  first  place,  as  already  implied,  it  is  manifest  that  all  the
phenomena  do  in  some  sort  cohere  together,  and  form  parts  of  a  single

referring  to  Drummond's  work,  were  found  to  be  perfectly  correct  :
Demetrius  Chalcondyles,  and  Politian.  He  said  he  had  studied  at  Paris  ;
that  Erasmus  remained  a  year  and  a-half  at  Oxford,  and  arrived_,there  at  the
age  of  thirty-eiglit.  All  this  was  found  (on  reference)  to  be  perfectly  correct,
although  no  one  had  any  knowledge  of  the  latter  facts,  and  the  medium  had
never  seen  the  work  of  Drummond.  The  singular  part  of  the  scene  con-
sisted in  the  extraordinary  evidence  of  personal  feeling  made  by  Grocyn
through  the  medium  of  his  harp.  The  sounds  were  typical  of  approval,
disapproval,  anger,  impatience,  and  on  one  occasion  a  powerful  string
sound  changed  instantly  into  a  parchment  sound.  After  a  pause  two
most  violent  blows  fell  on  the  table,  so  that  we  instinctively  extended  our
hands  to  seek  tlie  fallen  objects.  Nothing  was  to  be  felt.  Mrs.  S.  being
somewhat  startled,  we  suggested  moderation.  The'  sounds  were  transferred
to  the  harmonium,  rolling  from  that  upon  the  stool,  then  on  the  floor,  and
under  the  table  towards  my  chair.  This  occurred  upwards  of  fifteen  times,
and  would  have  led  anyone  not  accustomed  to  these  manifestations  to  expect
to  find  a  corresponding  number  of  hard  bodies  on  the  floor.  Needless  to  say,
nothing  was  found.

Grocyn's  information  forms,  I  conceive,  a  most  important  contribution
to  the  much  vexed  question  of  personal  identity. — S.T.S.

[Tliis  and  similar  biographies  will  be  the  subject]  of  discussion  later.
— F.W.H.M.]


334  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


and  prolonged  effort,  whose  constantly  avowed  aim  is  the  promulgation
of  important  truth.  The  authors  of  the  automatic  writing  assert  in
all  possible  ways  that  they  are  the  authors  of  the  physical  phenomena
as  well.  Each  series  presupposes  and  refers  to  the  other.  The  trance-
addresses  given  at  the  seances  are  continued  by  the  messages  written  in
privacy.  The  phenomena  of  the  seances  are  predicted  in  the  automatic
script,  and  similar  phenomena  sometimes  occur  to  Mr.  Moses  when
alone.  Nay,  the  actual  writing  itself  is  common  to  both  series.  The
"  controls  "  who  write  by  Mi-.  Moses'  hand  as  he  sits  alone  produce  in
the  seance-room  "  direct  writing," — inscribing  their  names  on  blank
paper  without  the  intervention  of  any  human  hand.  The  signatures  of
the  automatic  and  the  direct  script  are  practically  identical ; — the  only
difference  being  that  the  direct  script  looks  as  though  written  with
greater  effort.  Whatever  element,  then,  either  of  weakness  or  of
strength  is  to  be  found  in  any  part  of  Mr.  Moses'  evidence,  that
strength  or  weakness  affects  all  the  evidence  alike.

II.  The  relation  between  what  we  should  call  objective  and  what
we  should  call  subjective  phenomena  is  in  fact  much  more  complex
than  is  imj^lied  in  mere  community  of  origin.  This  matter  is  treated
of  in  the  automatic  script,  and  our  discussion  must  be  deferred  until
we  have  those  statements  before  us.  Meantime  it  is  well  to  point  out
that  the  phenomena  alleged  go  far  beyond  mere  "telekinesis," — that
power  of  moving  objects  at  a  small  distance  fi'om  the  body  which,  as
was  suggested  in  a  previous  paper,  may  conceivably  be  a  power
inexplicaljly  inherent  in  man  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as  the  power
to  move  his  own  limbs  is  inexplicably  inherent.  In  these  records  we
find  asserted  what  we  can  only  describe  as  a  transcendental  chemistry  ;
— a  power  of  producing  light  without  heat,  like  the  glow-worm  ;  a  power
of  overcoming  the  force  of  cohesion,  of  disaggregating  matter  and  re-
aggregating  it  in  the  same  or  different  forms  ; — and  even  a  power  of
simulating  in  this  re-aggregated  matter  that  initiative  and  self-adaptive-
ness  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  life.

III.  One  more  comment  on  the  phenomena  as  a  whole  will  not  be
superfluous.  To  the  ordinary  reader  these  marvels  will  inevitably
appear  arbitrary  and  incoherent.  He  will  think  that  one  might  as
well  have  copied  the  so-called  "  phenomena  "  straight  from  the  Arabian
Nights ;  have  asserted  that  Mr.  Moses  was  made  half  of  flesh  and
half  of  marble  ;  or  that  he  flew  on  a  wishing-carpet ;  or  that  the
genie  burst  out  of  the  bottle  in  a  pillar  of  smoke.  There  is,  however,
something  more  of  method  in  this  apparent  madness,  although  it  is
a  method  which  we  can  as  yet  only  observe  and  not  explain.

The  fact  is  that  the  phenomena  alleged  to  occur  at  seances  may  be
divided  roughly  into  three  classes  : —


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


335


1.  — The  first  and  by  far  the  largest  class  consists  of  tricks  whose

mechanism  is  perfectly  well  known, — as  well  known  as  the  way
in  which  the  ordinary  avowed  conjurer  produces  the  rabbit  from
the  hat.  These  tricks,  indeed,  are  generally  on  a  lower  level
than  those  of  the  conjurer  at  a  fair  ;  but  in  spite  of  repeated
exposures  they  serve,  when  dished  up  with  the  appropriate
"patter,"  to  deceive  the  great  mass  of  wonder-seekers  bent  on
the  supernatural.

2.  — The  second  class  consists  of  phenomena  somewhat  similar  to

those  of  the  first  class,  but  not  at  present  reproducible  by
ordinary  conjurers.  If  these  are  genuine,  then  we  may  call  the
first  class  imitations  of  them.  If  they  are  fraudulent,  they
indicate  that  here  and  there  a  so-called  "  medium  "  has  pro-
fessional secrets  of  his  own.

3.  — The  third  class  consists  of  a  few  rarely  attested  phenomena,

of  which  Home's  fire-test  is  an  example,  which  are  not  only  not
completely  imitated,  but  are  not  imitated  with  any  kind  of
plausibility,  by  even  the  most  accomplished  conjurers.  Here
we  have  to  assume  either  genuine  phenomena,  or  some  kind  of
hallucination  induced  in  the  observers  in  some  not  readily
imitable  way.

Now,  in  no  one  of  these  classes  is  the  range  of  alleged  phenomena
very  wide  ;  and  the  plienoinena  in  each  class  have  a  certain  analogy
to  the  rest.  Such  an  analogy  can  of  course  be  explained  in
two  ways.  Either  all  these  phenomena  are  conjuring  tricks,  of  which
some  are  better  and  some  are  worse  ;  or  some  of  the  phenomena  are
real,  and  the  rest  are  imitations,  which  aim  less  successfully  at  the
same  effects.  At  this  moment,  however,  I  am  not  discussing  the
question  of  fraud,  but  merely  showing  that  the  phenomena,  true  or
false,  are  constantly  and  independently  repeated,  and  have  not,
therefore,  the  arbitrariness  and  unexpectedness  which  characterise  the
marvels  of  the  Arabian  Nights.  The  simplest  way  of  showing  this
will  be  to  set  aside  all  performances  of  paid  mediums,  and  taking  only
such  non-venal  phenomena  as  have  been  printed  in  our  Proceedings
and  Journal  as  possessing  &  prima  facie  claim  to  confidence,  to  exhibit


336  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.

in  tabular  form  their  coincidences  with  the  phenomena  described  in
Mr.  Moses'  records  ^  : —


W.S.M.'s  princi-
pal phenomena.

Intelligent  raps.

Movement  of  objects
untouched.

Levitation.

Disapppearance  and  re-
appearance of  objects.

Passage  of  matter  through
matter.

Direct  writing.

Sounds  made  on  instruments
supernornially.

Direct  sounds.

Scents.

Lights.

Objects  materialised.

Hands  materialised
(touched  or  seen).

Barrett's  subjects

X

X

X

X

X

Bristowe  and

friends

X

X

Dariex's  subjects

X

X

Davis  children

X

X

X

X

X

X

Gasparin

X

"  Mr.  H. "(friend

of  Mr.  Crowe)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

D.  D.  Home  ...

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Mr. O.'s  friend

X

X

X

The  crosses  show  the  phenomena  alleged  to  have  been  obtained  in
each  case.  In  minor  cases  also  recorded  in  Proceedings  and  Journal
the  phenomena  have  been  much  the  same.

I  repeat  that  this  general  concordance  of  phenomena  does  not  in
itself  prove  anything  except  that  the  phenomena  are  not  alleged  at
random.  In  the  same  way  the  general  concordance  of  automatic
teachings  does  not  in  itself  prove  anything  except  that  the  subliminal
self  thinks  by  preference  in  certain  directions.  But  in  each  case,  in
that  of  the  "  physical  "  and  in  that  of  the  "  intellectual "  manifestations,
these  general  tendencies  are  likely,  in  some  direction  or  other,  to  point
the  way  towards  an  ultimate  explanation.

I  I  have  added  M.  de  Gasparin's  phenomena,  not  yet  printed  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  but  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Sidgvvick  in  her  article  on  "  Spirituahsm "  in
the  EncyclopfL'dia  Britannica ;  and  some  incidents  recorded  by  Professor  Barrett
in  the  Dublin  University  Magazine  for  December,  1877,  with  some  of  Home's
phenomena  not  specified  in  the  articles  on  him  in  S.P.R.  Journal.  The  other
phenomena  referred  to  will  be  found  as  follows  : — Bristowe,  Proe.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  383  :
Dariex,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  194:  Davis,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  173:  "Mr.  H.,"  Vol.  VII.,  p.  189:
D.  D.  Home,  Journal  Vol,  IV.,  pp.  141,  249 ;  Mr.  0,'s  friend,  Proc.,Yol.  IX.,  p.  121.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


337


And  now  for  a  few  words  on  the  origin  of  these  phenomena,  if
they  were  not  in  fact  the  supernormal  occurrences  which  they  pretend
to  be.

Collective  hallucination, — the  first  idea  which  will  present  itself  to
those  who  realise  the  strength  here  of  the  testimony  to  cliaracter,
— seems  excluded  by  the  number  of  permanent  traces  which  the
phenomena  left  behind  them.  If  objects  are  brought  during  the
seance  out  of  rooms  which  Mr.  Moses  had  never  avowedly  entered,  and
are  actually  found  and  remain  in  the  seance-room  afterwards,  there  has
been  more  than  a  hallucinatory  percept ; — a  transposition  of  matter,  by
normal  or  supernormal  means,  has  actually  been  effected.  Evidence  of
this  kind  abounds  in  the  records  in  question.

Shall  we  say,  then,  that  the  phenomena  never  occurred  at  all?
that  the  records  are  from  first  to  last  absolutely  false,  and  concocted  to
deceive  the  world,  with  no  basis  whatever  ?  This  view  might  have
been  upheld  had  the  circle  been  always  restricted  to  Mr.  Moses  and
the  Speer  family.  But  it  was  not  so  restricted.  Some  dozen  other
persons,  who  cannot  plausibly  be  held  to  be  all  in  the  fraud,  witnessed
the  phenomena.  It  is  true  that  some  of  these  witnesses  are  now  dead
or  inaccessible.  But  Serjeant  Cox  left  a  printed  statement ;  Dr.
Thomson,  of  Clifton,  proved  his  belief  by  continued  collaboration ;
Mr.  Percival,  Mrs.  Garratt,  Miss  Collins,  and  Mrs.  Honeywood  are  still
living,  and  cannot  with  any  plausibility  be  treated  as  accomplices.  Mr.
Percival's  evidence,  in  particular,  is  that  of  an  outside  and  occasional
member  of  the  group,  who  is  honourably  known  in  academic  and  official
life,  and  who  would  have  had  everything  to  lose  and  nothing  to  gain  by
complicity  in  such  a  fraud.  He  and  Serjeant  Cox  and  Mrs.  Honeywood
and  the  rest  may  of  course  have  been  dupes  ;  but  at  least  their  testimony
shows  that  something  sufficiently  like  Mrs.  SjDeer's  published  record  to
enable  them  to  subscribe  to  its  general  accuracy  did  actually  occur.  ^

Printed  testimony  from  Mr.  Percival  has  already  been  quoted,  and
will  be  quoted  again  in  a  further  paper.  He  was,  moreover,  a  principal
redactor  of  such  trance-uttei-ances  as  were  given  in  his  presence  ;  and
thus  Mrs.  Speer's  records  printed  in  Light  are  largely  due  to  him.  As
an  intimate  friend  he  was  kept  well  informed  of  the  progress  of  the
phenomena  throughout ;  and  it  was,  in  fact,  from  him  mainly  that
Edmund  Gurney  and  I  received  convincing  verbal  corroboration  of  Mr.
Moses'  statements  after  our  early  interviews  with  Mr.  Moses  himself.

^  Just  as  tliis  paper  passes  through  the  press  two  important  MS.  books  of  the  late
Miss  Birkett,  who  died  in  1881,  liave  been  found  and  sent  to  me.  They  contain  con-
temporary notes  of  various  seances  between  1874-1880  at  which  Miss  Bii-kett  was
present  (which  notes,  so  far  as  I  have  yet  studied  tliera,  appear  fully  corroborative
of  Mrs.  Speer's  accounts),  and  add  some  interesting  matter.  These  notes  will  be  con-
sidered in  the  next  paper.  Mrs.  Garratt  has  also  kindly  sent  me  contemporary  note
of  a  few  seances, — also  concordant,  to  be  mentioned  hereafter.


338


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stcdnton  Hoses.


The  testimony  of  an  occasional  member  of  the  circle  has  been  sent
to  me  as  follows  : —

Chadbury,  Evesham,  Worcestershire.

December  Gth,  1893.
I  was  witness  to  the  following  phenomena,  which  took  place  at  some  of
the  seances  held  at  the  house  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,  under  tlie  raediumship
of  Mr.  S.  Moses.  Some  of  the  raps  were  very  loud,  others  clear,  small  and
rapid.  The  musical  sounds  were  varied.  I  can  describe  one  as  soft  and  like
an  Eolian  harp  passing  through  the  air,  another  like  the  cliord  of  a  violon-
cello pulled  very  strongly  and  reverberating  through  the  large  dining-table.
A  small  stone  cross  was  brought  to  me,  delicious  scents  pervaded  the
atmosphere,  and  floating  lights  were  visible  in  many  parts  of  the  room.

Helen  C.  Collins.
Another  friend  of  Dr.  Speer's,  well  known  to  myself,  is  Dr.  Rooke,
a  practising  physician,  of  7,  Bays  Hill-villas,  Cheltenham. Dr.  Rooke
writes  to  Mrs.  Speer,  November  2.3rd,  1893  : —

"As  regards  communications  I  had  from  Dr.  Speer  in  re  Spiritualism,  I
had  a  good  many,  taken  altogether,  and  spread  over  the  whole  time  from  his
first  becoming  interested  in  the  subject.  I  well  recollect  that  he  and  Mr.
Moses  spent  a  Sunday  afternoon  at  my  house,  shortly  after  their  Isle  of  Man
experiences,  and  the  account  they  gave  me  of  the  disturbance  of  articles  in  one
of  their  bedrooms  and  the  symmetrical  way  in  which  heterogeneous  objects
had  been  arranged  on  the  bed,  the  room  having  been  previously  locked,  and
they  having  taken  precautions  against  tricks  on  the  part  of  any  servant,  and
I  tJiinh  also  articles  being  also  apparently  brought  tliro^igh  closed  doors.
Then  again,  after  several  letters  on  the  matter  I  had  from  Dr.  S.,  he  came
down  to  Cheltenham  and  stayed  some  d;iys  with  us  (you  were  not  with
him),  in  which  we  talked  the  whole  matter  over  repeatedly.  He  described
your  seances  at  your  own  house  and  the  various  physical  phenomena  which  you
have  lately  publislied  an  account  of.  I  well  recollect  his  laying  stress  on  the
ponderous  shaking  of  the  furniture  and  floor  of  the  room  w  hicli  one  of  your
spiritual  visitors  was  in  the  habit  of  producing.  He,  like  myself,  was  far
more  interested  m  abnormal  physical  phenomena  than  in  any  trance  mani-
festations or  spirit-teachings  through  the  mouth  of  any  medium."

Dr.  Rooke  encloses  a  letter  from  Dr.  Speer,  which  is  worth  quoting,
as  the  only  letter  which  I  have  seen  in  which  Dr.  Speer  describes  the
phenomena  to  a  friend  outside  the  special  group.  It  is  dated  13,
Alexandra-road  [Douglas  House],  N.W.,  July  13th,  1874.

"  We  have  had  two  new  spirits,  one,  'Kabyla,'an  old  Indian,  passed
thousands  of  years  ago  ;  he  has  brought  a  new  light,  and  materialised  some
beautiful  fine  spirit  drapery  (upon  his  first  attempt),  which  he  swept  over
our  hands.  We  had  last  night  an  admirable  specimen  of  zither  playing,
for  a  length  of  time.  The  performer  (we  don't  know  his  name  yet)  actually
performed  what  is  called  a  free  prelude;  that  is  to  say,  a  short  unbarred
composition.  The  whole  thing  was  most  marvellous,  for  there  is  no  zither
in  our  house,  and  it  is  an  instrument  that  cannot  be  mistaken.  Indeed,  on
his  departure,  Grocyn,  who  droj^ped  in  immediately  after  for  a  chat,  produced
his  own  sounds,  and  the  contrast  was  of  the  most  decided  character.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


339


"  The  other  evening  a  new  comer  slipped  in,  and  stank  us  out  of  the  room
"by  throwing  down  from  the  ceiling  a  large  quantity  of  Sp.  Pulegii.  Every-
thing that  it  touched  was  impregnated  for  24  hours.  The  dining-room  cloth
and  my  own  nether  habiliments  had  to  be  exposed  to  view  in  the  back
garden  ;  and  on  the  following  morning  our  dining-room  floor  and  passage  had
to  be  freely  fumigated  with  pastilles.  That  spirit  has  not  been  invited  to  join
us  again."

Dr.  Speer  was  by  no  means  given  (Mrs.  Speer  tells  me)  to  prosely-
tism  ;  and  having  met  with  some  sneers  when  he  alluded  to  these
phenomena  in  the  presence  of  scientific  friends  he  formed  the  habit  of
saying  little  about  them.  T  can,  however,  add  here  a  letter  from  an
intimate  friend  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,  to  whom  the  phenomena
were  commuxdcated  during  their  progress  :—

96,  Great  Portland-street,  London,  W.

Nove^nber  23rd,  1893.

My  Deae  Sir, — I  have  no  hesitation,  but  a  ready  willingness,  in  replying
to  your  request  in  the  letter  of  yesterday,  that  1  add  my  testimony  to  those
of  the  late  Stainton  Moses'  friends  who  are  in  a  position  to  offer  an  opinion
on  the  value  attaching  to  the  chief  witnesses  who  were  privileged  to  be
present  at  the  series  of  experimental  psychology  with  that  famous  sensitive,
viz.,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer.

I  had  the  honour  to  be  accounted  by  them  as  a  friend,  and  knew  them
both  in  their  home,  and  the  late  Dr.  Speer  as  a  club  friend  as  well.  We
often  talked  over  those  well-attested  experiments,  and  I  was  frequently
shown  the  place  and  nature  of  their  conduct  and  of  the  truly  "  staggering"
phenomena  which  were  continually  being  evolved.  The  smallest  details,
with  substantial  permanent  effects,  such  as  direct  wi'iting  and  production
of  objects  unknown  previously  to  the  persons  present,  were  entered  into  in
reply  to  my  sceptical  inquiries  and  suggestions  ;  and  Dr.  Speer,  with
whom  I  claimed  common  possession  of  "agnostic"  views,  yielded  me  the
opportunity  of  measuring  his  capacity  as  a  logical  thinker  free  from  pre-
conceived opinions  touching  the  matter  in  hand.  He  used  to  acknowledge
his  difficulty  in  accepting  the  "logic  of  facts,"  but  the  inevitable  working
of  an  open  mind  left  him  no  alternative.  The  effect  of  such  a  contact  of  our
minds  led  me  to  accept  his  testimony  as  unquestionable  and  possessing  the
value  of  absolute  and  verifiable  facts.

With  regard  to  Mrs.  Speer,  that  lady,  responding  to  my  desire  for
information  at  the  source,  helped  me  in  every  way  to  the  best  of  her  ability.
Her  method  was  to  put  before  me  the  facts,  to  show  me  some  of  the  records,
to  describe  the  conditions  under  which  the  seances  were  conducted,  to
exhibit  the  material  results,  and  with  the  patience  of  an  experimentalist  in
the  pursuit  of  scientific  investigation.

I  cannot  but  think  that  those  two  witnesses,  each  in  their  own  way,  and
supplementing  each  other,  were  imbued  with  the  desire  to  seek  out  the
treasures  of  knowledge  and  make  use  of  the  opportunities  so  fortunately
thrown  in  their  path.

Healthier  minds,  pursuing  their  special  object  with  greater  success  and
sounder  judgment,  I  never  met. — Yours  sincerely,

J.  Feed.  Collingwood.


340


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


Who,  then,  was  iinphcated  in  the  fraud,  if  fraud  there  were  ?  "Mr.
Moses  himself  must,  of  course,  have  been  primarily  concerned.  But
can  we  say  that  he  performed  the  tricks  in  an  unconscious  state?
Or,  whatever  his  own  state  may  have  been,  can  we  say  that  he
performed  the  tricks  alone  ?  or  with  accomplices  other  than  the  Speers  1
or  with  only  one  of  the  Speers  to  help  him  1  or  must  the  whole  Speer
family  be  involved  1

And  first  as  to  the  hypothesis  which  would  throw  the  blame  on  Mr.
Moses'  "  subliminal  self."  Mr.  Moses,  by  his  own  account,  fell  into
trances,  both  during  the  seances,  in  his  friends'  presence,  and  also
occasionally  when  alone  in  his  rooms,  as  his  automatic  writings  show.
And  besides  these  unmistakable  trances,  he  was  (as  he  himself  told
me)  once  at  least  for  some  days  in  a  state  of  exaltation,  which  did
not,  indeed,  prevent  him  from  going  through  his  routine  school-work
without  attracting  comment,  but  which  so  far  abstracted  him  from
ordinary  life  that  acts  then  performed  would  not  necessarily  have  been
remembered  afterwards.  This  was  in  direct  connection  with  long
religious  messages  which  were  then  being  written  through  his  hand,
and  which  deeply  moved  him.  And  on  one  other  occasion  at  least,
hereafter  to  be  mentioned,  he  became  entranced  for  a  few  seconds  in
the  course  of  ordinary  talk,  and  uttered  a  sentence  of  which  he  had
no  subsequent  memory.

These  facts  should  certainly  make  iis  receive  with  hesitation  such
accounts  as  Mr.  Moses  gives  of  physical  phenomena  occurring  when  he
was  alone.  Thus,  when  on  one  occasion  he  mentions  in  his  note-book
that  his  coat,  &c.,  had  been  disarranged  during  the  night,  we  may  well
suppose  that  he  himself  may  have  unconsciously  moved  them.  The
same  remark  would  apply  to  any  easily  producible  phenomenon  which
occurred  during  the  seances,  when  he  was  in  a  trance  in  the  dark.

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  told  (and  the  existence  of  copious  notes
of  his  trance-addresses  confirms  the  statement)  that  frequently  when
he  was  perceived  by  his  fellow-sitters  to  be  in  a  trance,  they  lit  a
candle  to  take  down  his  utterances — and  could  then,  of  course,  see
him  as  he  sat  at  the  table  with  them — while  raps,  apparently  in  various
parts  of  the  I'oom,  continued  as  usual.  On  other  occasions,  no  doubt,
he  was  entranced  while  musical  sounds  were  heai'd,  and  scent  fell,  and
globes  of  light  sailed  about  the  room.  But  these  tricks,  if  tricks  they
were,  wei'e  not  such  as  a  somnambulist  could  improvise,  and  then  wake
up  and  forget  them.  No  conjurer  is  so  gifted  as  to  find  gold  fish  and
tubes  of  water  under  his  trick-shirt  unless  he  has  previously  put  them
there.  Nor  would  bladders  of  phosphorised  oil  occur  spontaneously  in
Mr.  Moses'  pockets,  accompanied  with  a  strong  smell  of  otto  of  roses.
The  tricks,  in  fact,  would  have  had  to  be  carefully  and  continuously
prepared  and  maintained  ;  and  to  say  of  a  busy,  active  schoolmaster.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  3-il

most  of  whose  time  was  passed  in  his  class-room  ov  on  the  top  of  an
omnibus,  that  he  was  always  packing  himself  with  guitars,  jjhosphorus,
large  stones,  Chinese  chessmen,  and  small  objects  from  the  bedrooms  of
his  female  friends,  in  a  state  of  distraction,  comes  too  near  the  indig-
nant reclamations  of  the  wives  of  materialising  mediums,  who  maintain
that  false  beards  and  dirty  muslin  are  secreted  about  their  husbands'
persons  by  spirit-power.

No,  if  fraud  there  were,  Mr.  Moses  may  no  doubt  have  been  pre-
disposed to  such  fraud  by  some  peculiarity  of  temperament,  but  the
fraud  was  committed,  T  cannot  doubt,  with  the  knowledge  and
complicity  of  every  stratum  of  his  being.l

But,  in  the  next  place,  can  we  suppose  that  Mr.  Moses,  granting
him  the  use  of  all  his  faculties  and  full  preparation,  could  by  his  own
act  alone  have  imposed  upon  the  other  sitters  1

On  this  point,  unfortunately,  the  very  completeness  of  the
confidence  which  the  Speers  felt  in  their  friend's  probity  has  interfered
with  the  preservation  of  the  kind  of  record  which  we  desire.  The
whole  party  were  interested  in  watching  the  phenomena,  and  not  in
watching  each  other,  and  the  casual  way  in  which  even  so  important  an
evidential  point  as  the  existence  of  a  light  in  the  seance-room  is
alluded  to  shows  how  subordinate  the  conditions  of  the  phenomena
soon  came  to  be  in  comparison  with  the  phenomena  themselves.  Soon

1  Though  perhaps  somewhat  out  of  i^lace,  two  testimonials  to  Mr.  Moses  may  here
be  inserted,  which  have  been  printed  by  Mr.  Speer  in  his  memoir  above  referred  to.
The  first,  from  Maughold  Parishioners,  on  his  resigning  that  cure,  runs  as  follows  : —

"  '  Rev.  and  Dear  Sir, — We,  the  undersigned  parishioners  of  Maughold,  are  much
concerned  to  learn  that  it  is  your  intention  shortly  to  resign  the  position  which  you
have  for  some  years  past  so  usefully  and  honourably  occupied  amongst  us.  We  beg  to
assure  you  that  your  labours  have  been  greatly  appreciated  in  the  parish.  The  longer
we  have  known  you,  and  the  more  we  have  seen  of  your  work,  the  greater  has  our
regard  for  you  increased.  The  congregations  at  both  the  churches  under  your  charge
are  very  different  in  numbers  to  wliat  they  were  some  time  ago.  The  schools  have
been  better  looked  after  ;  the  aged  and  infirm  have  been  visited  and  comforted  ;  and
the  poor  have  been  cheered  and  heliDed  by  your  kindness  and  liberality.  By  your
courteous  demeanour,  by  your  friendly  intercourse,  and  by  your  attention  to  the  duties
of  the  parish  generally,  you  have  greatly  endeared  yourself  to  us  all ;  and  not  least  to
our  respected  and  venerable  Vicar,  whose  hands  we  are  well  satisfied  you  have  done
all  you  possibly  could  to  strengthen.  We  cannot  but  feel  that  your  loss  will  be  a  very
serious  one  to  the  parish,  and  we  should  be  glad  if  you  could  see  yovir  way  to  remain-
ing some  time  longer  with  us.  By  reconsidering  your  determination,  and  consenting
to  remain,  you  would  place  us  under  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude  and  obligation.'

"  Here  follow  the  signatures  of  the  Rector  and  Churchwardens,  also  of  fift3'-four
of  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  district." — Spirit  Teachings,  Memorial  Edition,
1894,  p.  vii.

Again,  on  page  ix.  we  find  notice  of  another  collective  expression  of  esteem.

"  On  resigning  his  post  through  ill-health,  the  Council  of  University  College
passed  a  resolution  conveying  to  Stainton  Moses  their  best  thanks  for  his  long  and
valuable  service  to  the  school,  and  a  special  letter  of  affectionate  regret  was  also  sent
lo  him,  signed  by  twenty-eight  of  his  colleagues."


342


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


came  to  be,  I  say,  for  Mi'S.  Speer  and  hei-  sou  unite  in  saying  that  in
the  earlier  days  Dr.  Speer  was  really  on  the  alert  as  to  "  test
conditions  "  ; — Mr.  Charlton  Speer  remembering,  for  instance,  that  his
father  had  the  legs  of  the  large  dining-table  unscrewed,  and  the  leaves
separated,  when  the  first  raps  were  heard,  in  order  to  satisfy  himself
that  no  tricks  had  been  played  with  that  respectable  piece  of  furniture.
But  we  have  here  largely  to  depend  upon  recollections,  such  as  those
contained  in  the  following  letters  : —

Ventnor.

November  29th,  1893.

I  wish  to  state  that  the  most  convincing  evidences  of  spirit-ijower  always
took  place  when  hands  were  held.

Other  manifestations  occurred  often  in  light,  such  as  raps,  raising  of
table,  scent,  musical  sounds,  and  showers  of  pearls.  Lights  also  appeared
all  over  the  room,  coming  and  going  by  request,  and  rapping  also  by  request
in  different  parts  of  the  room.

A  book  was  once  brought  in  light  out  of  one  room  and  put  into  Mr.
S.  M.'s  hands,  while  Dr.  Speer  was  sitting  at  his  side  in  another  room.

I  saw  a  knife  jump  out  of  the  butter  dish  and  fall  on  to  the  table  in  light.

On  one  occasion  the  medium  fell  on  to  the  floor  in  a  deep  trance,  while
Grocyn  was  making  most  startling  musical  sounds,  and  at  the  same  time
Catharine  was  rapping  loudly  to  attract  our  attention,  as  she  wished  to  give
a  message  to  tell  us  to  help  Mr.  S.  M.

Two  cameos  were  carved  in  light  while  we  were  dining,  and  message
given,  through  raps,  to  tell  us  where  to  find  them.  This  was  a  very  common
occurrence,  as  frequent  raps  and  messages  would  be  given  while  dining  in
light.

At  one  saance  as  many  as  seven  different  sounds  were  going  on  at  the
same  time  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  It  would  have  been  quite
impossible  for  any  one  person  to  have  made  them.

Maria  Speer.

Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

November  21th,  1893.
Referring  to  your  letter  of  November  17th,  in  which  you  ask  for  more
proof  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  could  not  personally  have
performed  the  manifestations  which  occurred  through  his  mediumship,  I  can
only  say  that  when  I  joined  the  circle  it  had  been  holding  its  investigations
for  several  years,  and  that  the  minds  of  the  original  sitters  had  been  quite
convinced  that  it  was  out  of  the  power  of  any  of  their  members  to  have
produced  the  phenomena  by  trickery  or  conjuring.  When  they  first  sat
everything  that  hajipened  was  subjected  to  a  rigid  scrutiny,  and  test  con-
ditions were  imposed  with  completely  satisfactory  results.  However,  during
the  time  that  I  sat  with  the  circle  I  may  draw  your  attention  to  the  follow-
ing points  : — •

(1)  That  we  sometimes  had  a  light  during  tlie  jjrogress  of  the  mani-
festations.

(2)  That  the  phenomena  were  not  confined  to  any  one  part  of  the  room,
but  took  place  indifferently  near  the  medium  and  some  distance


The  Experiences  of  TF.  Stainton  Moses.  343


removed  from  him  ;  also  that  sounds  were  heard  at  various  heights
extending  from  the  floor  to  the  ceiling,  and  the  lights,  as  often  as
not,  were  _/Z?-sf  seen  approaching  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  room
to  that  on  which  the  medium  sat.

(3)  That  the  phenomena  occurred  just  as  freely  in  one  room  as  in
another,  and  were  in  no\vise  affected  by  the  seance  being  held  in
other  houses,  and  other  places  many  miles  removed  from  London.
This  does  away  with  the  somewhat  humorous  theory  of  mechanical
contrivances.

(4)  That  when  the  medium  was  in  a  state  of  trance  we  always  lit  a  candle
in  order  to  take  notes  of  what  the  controlling  spirit  had  to  say.
During  the  control  the  medium's  hands  and  face  could  therefore  be
plainly  seen,  and  even  then  raps  could  be  heard  in  other  parts  of  the
room.

(5)  We  often  tried,  without  success,  to  imitate  the  various  raps,  thus
showing  that  the  sounds  produced  (by  the  outside  intelligences)  did
not  depend  for  the  quality  of  their  tone  upon  the  nature  of  the
substance  of  the  table,  or  whatever  other  object  was  apparently
used  in  their  manufacture.

Charlton  T.  Speee.

Mr.  Percival,  for  whose  return  from  abroad  I  have  waited,  before
printing  off  the  end  of  this  paper,  sends  me  the  following  letter  : —

Sproughton  Manor,  Ipswich.

December  2oth,  1893.
Mt  Dear  Myers, — I  was  an  intimate  friend  of  the  late  W.  Stainton
Moses  for  nearly  20  years,  and  I  regard  him  as  one  of  the  most  truthful  and
upright  men  I  have  ever  known.  I  attended  a  considerable  number  of
seances  at  Douglas  House,  and  I  am  convinced  that  it  was  physically
impossible  for  him  to  have  produced  such  a  manifestation  as  the  ' '  shaking
of  the  floor"  of  the  seance  room,  which  frequently  occurred.  I  also  believe
that  manifestations  such  as  raps  and  lights  were  often  produced  wliile  he  was
in  a  state  of  deep  trance.  With  regard  to  the  stances  described  in  your
paper,  at  which  I  myself  was  present,  I  can  fully  endorse  the  records  of  the
other  sitters  ;  I  took  notes  at  the  time,  which  I  still  possess,  and  they  have
been  used  by  Mrs.  Speer.  I  always  considered  W.  Stainton  Moses  to  be  a
man  of  unusual  ability,  and  I  believe  he  would  have  succeeded  in  almost  any
line  of  life  which  he  might  have  taken  up.  His  mind  was  perfectly  free
from  delusions  of  any  kind,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  and  in  all  the  affairs  of
daily  life  he  was  eminently  practical  and  conscientious. — Yours  very  sincerely,

F.  W.  Percival.

These  letters,  although  of  course  not  equal  in  evidential  value  to  the
contemporary  notes,  appear  to  me  to  be  concordant  with  those  notes,  in
which,  as  will  already  have  been  observed,  sittings  in  full  or  half-light
and  sittings  with  hands  held  are  occasionally  mentioned,  and  mentioned
in  an  incidental  fashion  which  suggests  that  there  has  been  no  special
effort  made  to  pick  out  the  most  evidential  occurrences.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


Further  than  this,  I  repeat,  we  cannot  now  go  ;  and  the  looseness
of  the  record  on  these  points  may  serve  to  enforce  the  lesson  that  all
records  of  supernormal  occurrences,  however  intimate  the  group  among
whom  they  occur  may  be,  should  be  kept  with  as  much  as  possible  of
the  precision  usual  in  ordinary  physical  experimentation.  There  is  no
saying  what  point  may  afterwards  be  raised,  what  doubt  expressed,
which  a  few  words  in  the  contemporaneous  record  would  have  cleared
up  altogether.

And  now,  assuming,  as  I  think  many  readers  will  do,  that  Mr.
Moses  could  not  have  performed  all  these  supposed  tricks  unaided,
can  we  suggest  any  accomplice  other  than  the  Speers  themselves  ?
Could  he,  for  instance,  have  suborned  their  servants  ?

But  the  phenomena  occurred  not  only  in  Dr.  Speer's  house,  or  in
houses  rented  by  him,  but  in  the  houses  of  other  friends  (Dr,  Thomson,
Mrs.  Honeywood,  Serjeant  Cox)  and  in  ordinary  sea-side  lodgings
(Southend,  Shanklin,  ifec),  and  especially  at  a  little  inn  at  Garrison,  an
Irish  village,  to  which  Dr.  Speer  and  Mr.  Moses  had  gone  for  some
fishing.  It  would  have  been  hard  to  transport  either  accomplices  or
apparatus  to  all  these  places  in  turn.

And  now  another  point  suggests  itself.  "What  was  the  attitude  of
the  younger  Speers,  the  son  and  daughter,  who  were  children  when  the
manifestations  began,  but  were  admitted  to  the  stances  about  1877,
when  the  phenomena  were  already  on  the  decline  ?  Can  we  suppose
that  Mr.  Moses  was  in  league  with  their  parents  to  deceive  them,  or
were  they  also  members  of  the  supposed  plot  ?  I  have  already  cited  a
brief  letter  in  which  Mr.  Charlton  Speer  gives  reasons  for  believing
that  he  was  not  deceived  by  Mr.  Moses.  I  subjoin  a  longer  account
from  him,  and  a  brief  note  from  Miss  Speer,  who  is  an  invalid.  It
will,  I  think,  be  felt  that  Mr.  Charlton  Speer  cannot  be  separated
from  his  parents  in  the  matter.  Honest  or  otherwise,  his  position  is
the  same  as  theirs.

My  Deak  Mr.  Myers, — You  have  asked  for  some  of  my  personal
recollecfcions  of  seances  with  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  at  which  I  was  present.  I
will  endeavour  to  place  before  you  a  few  experiences  which  may  be  of
interest  ;  and  though  very  much  that  I  remember  would  merely  be  a
repetition  of  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer's  Records  lately  published  in  Light,  yet
certain  things  did  strike  me  very  strongly  at  the  time,  as  being  valuable  tests
of  the  genuineness  of  the  manifestations  ;  and  these  perhaps  might  have  been
more  strongly  insisted  upon  in  the  Records,  had  they  been  prepared  for  the
perusal  of  a  sceptical,  or  at  any  rate  an  unconvinced,  public.  Tlie  habitual
readers  of  Light  having  presumably  advanced  somewhat  beyond  the
elementary,  but  all- important,  stage  of  mere  belief  in  the  reality  of  spirit
manifestations,  would  probably  not  set  so  much  store  upon  the  simple  details
of  tests,  uninteresting  in  themselves,  but  asked  for  and  given  as  conclusive
proofs  of  the  spiritual  origin  of  these  same  manifestations. It  is  some  of  these


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  345


occurrences,  taking  place  under  test  conditions,  that  I  propose  to  describe  to
you.  It  is  important  to  note  that  at  these  stances  no  less  tlian  ten  different
kinds  of  manifestations  took  place  with  more  or  less  frequency.  On  occasions
when  we  had  fewer  varieties  we  were  usually  told  tliat  the  conditions  were
not  good.  When  they  were  favourable  the  manifestations  were  more
numerous,  the  raps  more  distinct,  the  lights  brighter,  and  the  musical
sounds  clearer.  The  various  occurrences  may  be  briefly  enumerated  as
follows: —

1.  Great  variety  of  raps,  often  given  simultaneously,  and  ranging  in  force
from  the  tapping  of  a  finger-nail  to  the  tread  of  a  foot  sufficiently  heavy  to
shake  the  room.  Each  spirit  always  had  its  own  distinctive  rap,  many  of
them  so  peculiar  as  to  be  immediately  recognised  ;  and  these  sounds  often
took  place  in  sufficient  light  for  the  sitters  to  see  each  other's  features  and — I
suppose  more  important — hands.  Raps  also  were  frequently  heard  on  the
door,  sideboard,  and  walls,  all  removed  some  distance  from  the  table  at
which  we  sat.  These  raps  could  not  possibly  have  been  produced  by  any
human  agency  ;  of  that  I  satisfied  myself  in  every  conceivable  way.

2.  Raps  which  answered  questions  coherently  and  with  the  greatest
distinctness  ;  also  gave  messages,  sometimes  of  considerable  length,  through
the  medium  of  the  alphabet.  At  these  times  all  the  raps  ceased  except  the
one  identified  with  the  communicating  spirit,  and  jjerf  act  quiet  prevailed  until
the  message  was  delivered.  We  could  nearly  always  tell  at  once  with  which
spirit  we  were  talking,  owing  to  the  perfectly  distinct  individuality  of  each
different  rap.  Some  of  the  higher  spirits  never — in  my  time — manifested  by
raps  at  all,  but  announced  their  presence  by  a  note  of  music,  or  the  flash  of  a
light  ;  but  among  those  who  did  manifest  in  the  usual  way  it  would  be  difficult
to  forget  Rector's  heavy,  ponderous,  but  muffled  tread,  which  shook  the  whole
room  with  its  weight,  while  it  appeared  to  move  slowly  round  the  circle.

3.  Numerous  lights  were  generally  visible  to  all  the  sitters.  These  lights
were  of  two  different  kinds — objective  and  subjective  ;  the  former  were
usually  like  small  illuminated  globes,  which  shone  brightly  and  steadily,  often
moved  rapidly  about  the  room,  and  were  visible  to  (ill  the  sitters.  A  curious
fact  in  connection  with  these  lights  always  struck  me,  viz.,  that  looking  on  to
the  top  of  the  table  one  could  see  a  light  slowly  ascending  from  the  floor,
and  to  all  appearance  passing  out  through  the  top  of  the  table,  the  table  itself
apparently  not  affording  any  obstacle  to  one's  view  of  the  light.  It  is  a  little
difficult  to  explain  exactly  what  I  mean,  but  had  the  top  of  the  table  been
composed  of  plain  glass,  the  effect  of  the  ascending  light  as  it  appeared  to
one's  organs  of  vision  would  have  been  pretty  much  the  same  as  it  was,  seen
through  the  solid  mahogany.  Even  then,  to  make  the  parallel  complete,  it
would  be  necessary  to  have  a  hole  in  the  glass  top  of  the  table,  througli  which
the  light  could  emerge.  The  subjective  lights  were  described  as  being  large
masses  of  luminous  vapour,  floating  round  the  room  and  assuming  a  variety
of  shapes.  However,  Dr.  Speer  and  myself  being  of  entirely  unmediumistic
temperaments,  we  were  only  able  to  see  the  objective  lights,  but  Mr.  Stainton
Moses,  Mrs.  Speer,  and  other  occasional  sitters  frequently  saw  and  described
those  which  were  merely  subjective.  Anotlier  curious  j)oint  in  relation  to  the
objective  lights  was  that  however  brightly  they  might  shine  they  never
— unlike  an  ordinary  lamp — threw  any  radiance  around  them  or  illuminated


346


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


the  smallest  portion  of  the  surrounding  darkness — when  it  ivas  dark —  in  the
slightest  degree.

4.  8cents  of  various  descriptions  were  always  brought  to  the  circle  —the
most  common  being  musk,  verbena,  new-mown  hay,  and  one  unfamiliar  odour
which  we  were  told  was  called  spirit-scent.  Sometimes  breezes  heavy  with
perfume  swej^t  round  the  circle,  at  other  times  quantities  of  liquid  musk,  &c.,
would  be  poured  on  the  hands  of  the  sitters  and,  by  request,  on  our
handkerchiefs.  At  the  close  of  a  seance  scent  was  often  found  to  be  oozing
out  of  the  medium's  head,  and  the  more  it  was  wiped  away,  the  stronger
and  moi'e  plentiful  it  became.

5.  The  musical  sounds,  which  were  many  and  of  great  variety, formed  a  very
important  item  in  the  list  of  phenomena  which  occurred  in  our  presence.
Having  myself  had  a  thorough  musical  education,  I  was  able  to  estimate,  at
its  true  value,  the  importance  of  these  particular  manifestations,  and  was
naturally  well  able  to  judge  of  the possibility  or  impossibility  of  their
being  produced  by  natural  means,  or  tlirough  human  agency. These  sounds
may,  roughly  speaking,  be  divided  into  two  classes  :  those  which  obviously
proceeded  from  an  instrument— a  harmonium — in  the  room,  whilst  the  hands
of  all  the  sitters  were  joined  round  the  table  ;  and  those  which  were  pro-
duced in  a  room  witliout  an  instrument  of  any  kind  whatever  therein.
These  latter  were  of  course  the  most  wonderful. As  regards  the  musical
sounds  produced  in  the  room  in  which  there  was  no  instrument,  they  were
about  four  in  number. First,  thei-e  were  what  we  called  the  "  fairy  bells."
These  resembled  the  tones  produced  by  striking  musical  glasses  with  a  small
hammer. The  notes  thus  given  forth  were  clear,  crisp,  and  melodious.  No
definite  tune  was  ever  played,  but  the  sounds  were  always  harmonious,  and,
on  being  requested  by  me  or  any  other  member  of  the  circle,  the  "bells  "
would  always  run  up  or  down  a  scale,  in  perfect  tune. It  was  difficult  to
judge  where  the  sound  of  these  "fairy  bells"  came  from,  but  I  often
applied  my  ear  to  the  top  of  the  table,  and  the  music  seemed  to  be  somehow
in  the  wood — not  underneath  it ;  as  on  listening  under  the  table,  the  music
would  appear  to  be  above. Next  we  had  quite  a  different  sound — that  of  a
stringed  instrument  more  nearly  akin  to  a  violoncello  than  anything  else  I
have  ever  heard. It  was,  however,  more  powerful  and  sonorous,  and  might
perhaps  be  produced  by  placing  a  'cello  on  the  top  of  a  drum  or  anything
else  likely  to  increase  the  vibration. Tliis  instrument  was  only  heard  in
single  notes,  and  was  used  entirely  by  one  spirit,  who  employed  it  usually  for
answering  cj^uestiojis,  in  the  same  way  that  others  did  by  raps. The  third
sound  was  an  exact  imitation  of  an  ordinary hand-bell, which  would
be  rung  sharply  by  way  of  indicating  the  presence  of  the  particular  spirit
with  whom  it  was  associated. We  naturally  took  care  to  ascertain  that  there
was  no  bell  of  any  kind  in  the  room  ;  even  if  there  had  been,  it  would  have
been  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  have  rung  it  round  the  walls,  and  even  up
to  the  ceiling,  as  this  particular  sound  proceeded  indilferently  from  all  parts
of  the  room. Lastly,  we  had  a  sound  that  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  offer
an  adequate  description  of. The  best  idea  of  it  I  can  give  is  to  ask  you  to
imagine  the  soft  tone  of  a  clarionet  gradiially  increasing  in  intensity,  until
it  rivalled  tlie  sound  of  a  trumpet,  then  by  degrees  diminishing  to  the
original  subdued  note  of  the  clarionet, until  it  eventually  died  away


The  Experiences  of  If.  Stainton  Moses.  347


in  a  long-drawn-out  melancholy  wail.  This  sound  was  ascribed  to
*'Odorifer."

This  is  a  very  inefficient  description  of  this  really  extraordinary  sound,
but  as  I  have  in  the  whole  course  of  my  experience  never  heard  anything
else  at  all  like  it,  it  is  impossible  to  give  to  those  who  have  not  heard  it  a
more  accurate  idea  of  what  it  was  like.  Like  the  two  previous  sounds  I  have
described,  it  was  always  associated  with  one  spirit.

It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  in  no  case  did  the  controlling  agencies  pro-
duce more  than  single  notes,  or  at  best  isolated  jjassages.  This  they
accounted  for  as  owing  to  the  peculiarly  unmusical  organisation  of  the
medium.  At  any  rate,  the  production  of  these  sounds  was  wonderful  enough
in  itself,  as  over  and  over  again  I  thoroughly  satisfied  myself  that  there  were
no  materials  in  the  room  which  could  in  any  way  assist  in  making  any  kind  of
musical  tones,  and  the  clarionet  and  trumpet  sound  was  one  that  I  should
be  utterly  at  a  loss  to  imitate  in  any  way,  whatever  materials  might  be  at  my
disposal.  Before  I  joined  the  circle  several  other  musical  instruments  were
frequently  imitated,  and  all  were  heard  with  greater  variety,  both  of  manipula-
tion and  tone  ;  but  as  I  am  now  only  giving  you  a  brief  epitome  of  what
actually  happened  under  my  own  observation,  I  refrain  from  alluding  to
occurrences  which  took  place  when  I  was  not  present.

6.  Direct  writing  was  often  given,  sometimes  on  a  sheet  of  paper  placed
in  the  centre  of  the  table  and  equidistant  from  all  the  sitters  ;  at  other
times  one  of  us  would  place  our  hands  on  a  piece  of  paper  previously  dated
and  initialled,  and  usually  a  message  was  found  written  upon  it  at  the  con-
clusion of  the  seance.  We  always  placed  a  pencil  upon  the  paper,  but
sometimes  we  only  provided  a  small  piece  of  lead,  the  results  being  the  same
in  both  cases.  Usually  the  writing  took  the  form  of  answering  questions
which  we  had  asked,  but  sometimes  short  independent  communications  were
given,  also  messages  of  greeting.

7.  Movements  of  heavy  bodies  such  as  tables  and  chairs  were  by  no
means  infrequent.  Sometimes  the  table  would  be  tilted  up  at  a  considerable
angle.  At  other  times  the  chairs  of  one  or  more  of  the  sitters  would  be  pushed
more  or  less  forcibly  away  from  the  table,  until  they  touched  the  wall  be-
hind— or  the  table  would  move  away  from  the  sitters  on  one  side  and  be  pro-
pelled irresistibly  against  those  on  the  other,  compelling  them  to  move  their
chairs  in  order  to  avoid  the  advance  of  so  heavy  a  piece  of  furniture.  The
dining-table  in  question  at  which  we  usually  sat  was  an  extremely  weighty
one,  and  was  made  from  solid  Honduras  mahogany,  but  at  times  it  was
moved  with  much  greater  ease  than  tlie  combined  efforts  of  all  the  sitters
could  accomplish — and  these  combined  efforts  were  powerless  to  prevent  its
moving  in  a  certain  direction,  if  the  unseen  force  willed  it  to  do  so.  We
frequently  tested  the  strength  of  the  force  by  trying  to  check  the  onward
movements  of  the  table,  but  without  success.

8.  The  passage  of  matter  through  matter  was  sometimes  strikingly
demonstrated  by  the  bringing  from  other  rooms  of  various  articles  through
closed  and  bolted  doors.  Photographs,  picture-frames,  books,  and  other
objects  were  frequently  so  brought,  both  from  rooms  on  the  same  floor  and
from  those  above  as  well. How  they  came  through  the  closed  doors  I


348  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


cannot  say,  except  by  some  process  of  de-materialisation  ;  but  come  they
certainly  did,  apparently  none  the  worse  for  that  process,  whatever  it  might
have  been.

9.  The  direct  spirit  voice,  as  opposed  to  the  voice  of  a  spirit  speaking'
through  the  medium  while  in  a  state  of  trance,  we  very  seldom  heard,  and
never  with  any  clearness  or  distinctness.  But  occasionally  it  was  attempted,
and  by  listening  carefully  we  could  distinguish  one  or  two  broken  sentences
which  were  hissed  out  in  a  sort  of  husky  whisper.  These  sounds  generally-
seemed  to  be  in  the  air  above  us,  but  they  were  produced  with  evident
difficulty,  and  there  being  so  many  other  methods  of  communication,  the
direct  voice  but  seldom  was  essayed.

10.  The  inspirational  addresses  given  by  various  spirits  through  Mr.  S.  M.
when  in  an  entranced  condition  have  been  so  tlioroughly  dealt  with  by  Mrs.
Speer  in  her  "  Records,"  that  I  can  add  nothing  as  regards  the  matter
thus  expounded.  Touching  the  manner  of  these  addresses— one  or  more
of  which  we  had  at  almost  every  seance, — I  can  only  say  that  they  were
delivered  in  a  dignified,  temperate,  clear,  and  convincing  tone,  and  that
though  the  voice  proceeded  from  the  medium  it  was  always  immediately
apparent  that  the  personality  addressing  us  was  not  that  of  the  medium.
The  voice  was  different,  and  the  ideas  were  not  always  in  accordance  with
those  held  at  the  time  by  the  medium.  An  important  fact,  too,  was  that,
although  many  spirits  exercised  this  power  of  control,  the  voice  which  spoke
was  always  different — and  in  the  case  of  those  sjjirits  which  controlled
regularly,  we  got  to  know  perfectly  well  which  intelligence  was  communicating
by  the  tone  of  voice  and  the  method  of  enunciation.

So  far,  in  this  enumeration  of  the  various  phenomena,  I  have  been  speak-
ing generally  of  the  manifestations  whicli  usually  occurred  at  most  of  our
sittings  ;  but,  in  conclusion,  I  will  give  you  two  particular  instances,  one  of
direct  writing  and  one  of  identity,  both  of  which  I  think  are  interesting,
and  which  certainly  impressed  me  considerably.

On  one  occasion  we  were  told  to  cease  for  a  time,  and  resume  the  seance
later  on.  I  asked  the  communicating  intelligences  if  they  would,  during  the
interval,  give  me  a  sample  of  direct  writing  under  test  conditions.  An
affirmative  I'eply  having  been  given,  I  procured  a  piece  of  my  own  note-
paper  and,  unknown  to  the  other  members  of  the  circle,  I  dated  and  initialled
it,  and  put  a  private  mark  as  well  in  a  corner  of  the  sheet.  The  others
having  retired  from  the  dining-room  to  tlie  drawing-room,  I  placed  my  piece
of  paper  with  a  pencil  under  a  table  in  the  study,  and  having  thoroughly
searched  the  room,  I  barred  the  shutters,  bolted  and  locked  the  door,  and
put  the  key  in  my  pocket.  I  leant  against  the  door,  or  for  a  change  sat  on
the  doormat,  vmtil  I  re-entered  the  room  ; —  when  to  my  great  satisfaction  I
found  a  message  clearly  written  on  the  paper.  As  we  had  not  been  sitting  in
the  study,  and  as  I  can  positively  aver  that  no  one  entered  the  room  after  I
had  left  it  until  I  myself  unlocked  the  door,  I  have  always  considered  this
particular  instance  of  direct  spirit  writing  a  most  satisfactory  and  conclusive
test.

The  other  occurrence  that  I  consider  specially  worthy  of  mention  took
place  as  follows  : — We  were  sitting  one  night  as  usual,  and  I  had  in  front  of


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  SiO


me,  with  my  hand  resting  upon  it,  a  piece  of  note-paper  with  a  pencil  close
by.  Suddenly  the  medium — Mr.  Stainton  Moses, — who  was  sitting  exactly
opposite  me,  exclaimed,  ' '  There  is  a  very  bright  column  of  light  behind  you."
Soon  afterwards  he  said  that  the  column  of  light  had  developed  into  a  spirit-
form.  I  asked  him  if  the  face  v/as  familiar  to  him,  and  he  replied  in  the
negative,  at  the  same  time  describing  the  head  and  features.  When  the
seance  was  concluded  I  examined  my  sheet  of  paper  which  my  hand  had
never  left,  and  found  written  on  it  a  message  and  signature.  The  name  was
that  of  a  distinguished  musician  who  died  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
century.  I  purposely  refrain  from  specifying  him,  as  the  use  of  great  names
very  frequently  leads  to  results  quite  different  from  those  intended.  However,
now  comes  the  most  extraordinary  part  of  the  affair.  I  asked  Mr.  Stainton
Moses — without  of  course  showing  him  the  written  message — whetlier  he
thought  he  could  recognise  the  spirit  he  saw  behind  my  chair  if  he  saw  a
portrait  of  him.  He  said  he  thought  he  could,  sol  gave  him  several  albums
containing  likenesses  of  friends  dead  and  alive,  and  also  portraits  of  various
celebrities.  I  remained  in  another  part  of  the  room,  and  did  not  watch  him,
nor  even  knew  when  he  was  looking  at  the  right  album.  On  coming  to  the
photograph  of  the  composer  in  question,  he  at  once  said  without  hesitation,
"That  is  the  face  of  the  spirit  I  saw  behind  you."  Then  for  the  first  time
I  showed  him  the  message  and  signature.  I  regarded  the  whole  incident  as
a  very  fair  proof  of  spirit-identity,  and  I  think  that  most  people  would
consider  the  occurrence  one  of  interest.

I  feel  that  this  letter  has  gro-ira  to  an  unconscionable  length,  and  I  must
apologise  for  the  bald  manner  in  which  many  of  the  statements  made  therein
have  been  set  forth.  I  have  been  considerably  jjressed  for  time,  and  can  only
hope  that  the  manifold  crudities  of  language  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  be
compensated  for  by  the  fact  that  the  whole  is  an  impartial  and  unprejudiced
account  of  some  of  the  remarkable  phenomena  to  which  I  was  a  witness,
and  the  genuineness  of  which  I  am  ready  at  any  time  to  vouch  for.

(Signed)  Charlton  T.  Speer.

November  5th,  1893.

Ashley  Villa,  Ventnor.

October  30th,  1893.
I  wish  to  state  that  I  am  a  daughter  of  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer,  and  was
present  at  many  of  the  seances  recorded  in  Light  by  my  mother,  and,  further,
that  the  facts  therein  stated  are  in  my  recollection,  and  are  true,  and  that
the  phenomena  actually  took  place.

Constance  Rosalie  Speek.

I  must  now  leave  the  reader  to  judge  whether,  if  these  phenomena-
were  fraudulent,  the  Speer  family  can  be  acquitted  of  complicity  in  the
fraud.  If  we  were  dealing  with  a  number  of  known  cheats,  or  of  quite
unknown  persons,  we  should,  I  think,  certainly  pronounce  the  whole
group  equally  concerned.  And  here,  where  the  witnesses  ai'e  all  of
equally  good  repute,  I  do  not  myself  feel  able  to  draw  any  dividing  line
between  one  and  another  of  them.  ,  .


2  A  2


350  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stcdnton  Moses.

It  is  not,  indeed,  clear  in  what  way  the  Speer  family  could  have
benefited  by  such  a  course  of  deception.  With  regard  to  Mr.  Moses
himself,  there  was  undoubtedly  what  might  be  regarded  as  a  consider-
able, though  a  mixed,  gain.  There  were  some  annoyances  and  anxieties
which  his  note-books  show  him  to  have  felt  severely,  but  to  which  I
need  not  here  refer.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  the  slow  of  being
regarded  by  the  Spiiitualist  body  in  England  and  America  as  a  leader
gifted  with  supernormal  powers.

A  prospect  somewhat  of  this  type  has  often  been  enough  to  tempt
to  fraud.  Yet,  having  seen  something  of  the  way  in  which  such
impostors  deal  with  their  real  or  manufactured  evidence,  and  of  the
way  in  which  Mr.  Moses  dealt  with  his,  it  has  often  struck  me  that  his
mode  of  producing  it  was  very  unlike  theirs.  It  happens  that  I  have
had  repeated  discussions  with  Mr.  Moses  as  to  his  method  of  putting
his  phenomena  before  the  world,  which,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  was
too  scrappy  and  incidental  to  do  them  full  justice.  I  had  myself
seen  the  pile  of  note-books  ;  and  I  urged  him  to  print  them  at  once
in  as  full  a  form  as  possible.  He  delayed  and  demurred,  saying  that
they  were  too  private  for  publication.  I  then  urged  him  at  least  to
reprint  Spirit  Identity  in  an  exacter  form,  and  with  additional  corro-
borations. This  he  used  to  promise  to  do  ;  and  he  said  that  he  would
ask  me  to  help  in  some  such  task  when  the  time  came.  But  he  still
delayed ; — delayed  until  the  year  before  his  death.  Then  he  began
to  print  Mrs.  Speer's  notes  of  seances,  and  some  of  his  own,  in  Light;
and  he  prepared  a  tract  called  The  Identity  of  Spirit,  which  I  hope  to
print  in  a  further  article,  and  which  gives  the  gist  of  Sinrit  Identity
in  a  more  exact  form.  This  type-written  tract  is  marked  "  Only
pai'tially  revised."

Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  Mr.  Moses'  conduct  throughout  was  ex-
plicable on  the  view  of  him  taken  by  his  friends  ;  namely,  that  he  was
a  reserved,  sensitive,  somewhat  proud  man,  who  disliked  being  discussed
as  a  "medium,"  or  baring  his  inner  life  to  the  public,  and  who  wished
only  to  utter  just  so  much  of  his  own  experiences  as  might  give  him
the  authority  on  these  subjects  which  he  felt  that  he  had  a  right  to
claim.

If  these  note-books  had  not,  in  fact,  existed  ; — if  he  had  had  no
real  testimony  to  fall  back  upon  ; — reserve  would  of  course  have  been  a
cheat's  natural  resource.  But  since  the  books  do  exist,  and  are  full
of  what  purports  to  be  evidence,  how  is  it  that,  if  he  had  elabo-
rately got  up  all  that  evidence,  he  was  so  reluctant  to  bring  it  out  ?
Having  blacked  himself  all  over  so  thoroughly  for  his  part  of  Othello,
why  was  he  so  coy  about  removing  more  than  his  gloves  1

If,  then,  I  attempt  to  sketch  the  inner  history  of  these  trans-
actions on  the  hypothesis  of  fraud,  the  best  scheme  that  I  can  oiFer


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  351


for  the  use  of  the  perspicacious  critic  will  stand  somewhat  as
follows.

"  Beneath  the  semblance  of  probity," — let  him  say — "  the  mask  of
sanity,  Mr.  Moses  concealed  an  unscrupulous  love  of  leadership  and
notoriety,  a  morbid  passion  for  mystifying  mankind.  Unable  to  gratify
this  craving  in  the  humdrum  life  of  a  parish  clergyman,  he  found  in  the
craze  of  Spiritualism  a  congenial  field.  He  must  at  some  time, — possibly
in  his  retirement  on  Mount  Athos, — have  quietly  acquired  considerable
conjuring  skill.  He  was  able,  for  instance,  to  persuade  Serjeant
Cox  that  he  moved  a  large  dining-table  and  raised  it  partially  from
the  floor  in  full  daylight,  without  any  apparent  contact.  His  deal-
ings with  phosphorus  also  went  beyond  the  ordinary  chemical  reper-
tory ; — unless,  indeed,  we  credit  the  '  spirit-lights '  to  his  more
scientific  confederate.  For  he  seems  to  have  felt  fi'om  an  early  period
the  need  of  accomplices  to  assist  his  contrivances  and  spread  his
renown.  His  thoughts  naturally  turned  first  to  the  physician  who
had  just  brought  him  through  a  dangeimis  illness, — a  gentleman  of
trained  scientific  capacity,  but  whose  materialistic  views  had  probably
blunted  his  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  and  disposed  him  to  find
amusement  in  laughing  in  his  sleeve  at  mankind.  On  the  other
hand,  Mrs.  Speer's  serious  and  religious  temperament  was  useful  in
its  own  way,  for  she  would  readily  suggest  to  herself  some  high
moral  purpose  for  the  sake  of  which  a  lifetime  of  fraud  might
blamelessly  be  embraced.  Mr.  Charlton  Speer  again,  as  a  pure  artist,
would  care  little  about  bourgeois  truth  and  honour.  The  next  need
was  a  dupe  of  good  character  to  take  notes  and  to  admire.  The  choice
of  an  Oxford  graduate  secured  adequate  philosophy  and  grammar ;  while
a  position  in  the  Civil  Service  might  be  thought  likely  to  have  fostered
a  spirit  of  complaisant  credulity.  What  was  now  needed  was  wide
advertisement ;  and  the  means  chosen,  if  indirect,  were  none  the  less
subtle.  Books  out  of  print  are  often  the  most  sought  after  ;  nor
perhaps  could  a  savour  of  tempting  rarity  have  been  better  given  to
the  fictitious  experiences  than  by  consigning  their  truncated  record  to
a  moribund  magazine.  Thus  launched  on  the  world,  the  conspirators
divided  their  parts  as  their  special  gifts  suggested.  Mrs.  Speer's  line
was  of  course  the  womanly  and  the  religious.  She  corresponded  with
Mr.  Moses  on  serious  and  intimate  matters,  so  as  to  give  him  the
opportunity  in  his  replies  of  alluding  to  his  bogus  phenomena  as
though  they  formed  an  ever-present  element  in  his  inner  life.  For  this
correspondence, — of  which  only  fragments  have  as  yet  seen  the  light, — -
a  fraudulent  use  will  doubtless  be  some  day  found.  Mrs.  Speer  helped
also  in  Spirit  Teachings,  and  perhaps  contributed  that  semblance  of
high  moral  tone  which  serves  to  screen  the  essential  insidiousness  of
the  work  as  a  whole. The  task  of  the  scientific  husband  was  delimited


352  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


■with  an  astute  reserve.  The  stim  and  output  of  Dr.  Speer's  twenty
years  of  fraud  was  to  be  embedded  in  a  couple  of  penny  note-books,
which  he  was  slyly  to  keep  to  himself.  He  could  reckon  pretty
confidently,  indeed,  upon  their  being  ultimately  revealed  with
triumphant  pedantry  by  someone  Avhom  he  had  never  set  eyes  on,  at
an  indefinite  date  after  his  death.  Meantime,  with  the  characteristic
secretiveness  of  the  impostor,  Mr.  Moses  accumulated  in  his  locked
drawers  the  documents  on  which  his  pretensions  reposed.  The  present
thus  amply  enjoyed,  all  that  remained  was  to  plan  for  the  development
of  future  fame.  The  gang  had  naturally  maintained  intimate  friendships
with  persons  of  known  position  and  character.  It  Avas  a  stroke  of
consistency  to  bequeath  the  unpublished  manuscripts  to  gentlemen  of  this
type  ;  even  with  the  risk  that  such  execxitors  might  treat  the  records
in  a  spirit  of  masterly  inaction.  Some  nincompoop  with  nothing
better  to  do  was  sure  to  beg  for  permission  to  study  and  arrange  the
precious  stulF ;  and  some  up-to-date  Editor  of  the  New  Journalism  was
equally  certain  to  jump  at  the  copy  for  his  high-toned  print."

"  If  you  want  any  more,"  as  the  adage  runs,  "  you  may  sing  it
yourself."

But  the  private  confidence  which  prompts  a  tone  of  irony  when  the
probity  of  trusted  friends  is  thus  under  discussion,  will  not  be,  and
ought  not  to  be,  communicable  in  its  fulness  to  other  minds.  I  ask  no
immunity  for  Mr.  Moses  and  his  group  from  that  jealous  scrutiny  to
which  every  claim  to  supernormal  powers  should  of  right  be  subjected.
No  one  concei'ned  in  this  stoiy  will  resent  the  most  seai'ching  ques-
tions, the  most  extreme  hypotheses.  And,  indeed,  even  for  those  who
may  be  willing  to  accept  these  records  as  a  transcript  of  actual  fact,
the  period  of  question,  of  hypothesis,  has  yet  only  just  begun.  What
was  there  verily,  we  must  go  on  to  demand,  behind  this  bewildering
manifestation  1  What  power,  and  with  what  purpose,  was  working  in
what  unknown  way  ?  Verane  te  fades,  verus  mihi  nuntius  adfers  ?
There  must  yet  be  many  a  pondering  of  the  trustworthiness,  the
significance,  of  this  incursion  upon  the  private  counsels  and  sequestered
commonwealth  of  men.  And  when  all  is  done  there  will  remain  a
mystery  which  neither  our  belief  shall  comprehend  nor  our  incredulity
unravel .


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


353


It  is  expressly  stated  in  each  part  of  these  Proceedings  that  the
responsihility  for  both  facts  and  opinio7is  rests  solely  with  the  author  of
each  article.  Since,  however,  it  seems  possible  that  the  pmblication  of  so
great  a  mass  of  documents,  of  very  pronounced  character,  as  are  already
included,  or  are  to  be  included,  in  Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers'  papers  on  the
Experiences  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  may  be  misinterpreted  as  implying  a?i
adoption  on  the  2}art  of  the  Council  which  authorises  their  publication,
of  something  like  the  point  of  view  from  which  Mr.  Moses'  records  were
written,  a  few  tvords  of  exjdanatio^i  may  here  be  useful.

Two  main  p)oints  are  involved  in  these  Itecords  :  (1)  the  siq^ernormal
character  of  the  alleged  phenomena  ;  (2)  the  specific  interpretation  ivhich
Mr.  Moses  gives  to  them.  With  regard  to  the  first  point,  the  Council  are  of
opinion  that,  taking  into  consideration  the  character  of  the  records  of
tvhich  a  piart  is  here  pjublished,  the  conditions  under  ivhich  the  recorded
phenoir.ena  occxirred,  and  the  general  circumstances  of  Mr.  Moses'  life,
the  sup>position  that  the  phenomena  are  to  be  explained  by  deception  on
the  part  of  Mr.  Moses,  whether  in  a  normal  or  an  abnormal  state,  is  in
a  very  high  degree  improbable  ;  and  that  therefore  the  records  constitide  an
imp)07-tant  lya^'t  of  the  evidence  which  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Society  to
collect  and  to  put  before  the  world,  ivithout  necessarily  p)'''onouncing  a
decisive  conclusion  as  to  its  validity.  On  the  question  whether  the
imp)robability  of  deception  is  greater  or  less  than  the  imiwobability  that
the  events  actually  occurred  as  recorded  the  members  of  the  Council
individually  entertain  diverse  views,  and  they  do  not  feel  called  upon
to  express  any  opinion  collectively.

With  regard  to  the  second  p)oint,  the  Council  tvoxdd  remind  the
reader  that  ivhere,  as  in  these  records,  actual  observation  is  obviously,
and  indeed  avowedly,  mingled  with  imported  theory,  the  distinction
between  fact  and  inference  from  fact  must  be  kept  in  view  throughout.

Much  matter  of  importance  remains  to  be  printed;  and  a  final  judg-
ment can  hardly  be  formed  tmtil  the  tihole  case  shall  be  under  review.


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.  \  tt  o  odd
^  ^  '  >  Hon.  bees.  S.P.B.

Frank  Podmore,  J


354


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


INDIAN  MAGIC  AND  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  CONJURERS.
By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.

In  the  Norlh  American  Revieiv  for  January,  1893,  appeared  an
article  entitled  "High  Caste  Indian  Magic,"  over  the  name  of  the
well-known  professor  of  conjuring,  Mr.  Harry  Kellar.  In  this  article
Mr.  Kellar  gives  an  account  of  various  marvels  which  he  declares  that
he  personally  witnessed  in  India,  and  he  states  that  "  the  high  caste
fakirs,  or  magicians,  of  Northern  India  have  probably  discovered  natural
laws  of  which  we  in  the  West  are  ignorant.  That  they  succeed  in  over-
coming forces  of  nature  which  to  us  seem  insurmountable,  my  obser-
vation satisfies  me  beyond  doubt."  This  dictum  raises  an  interesting-
general  question  as  to  the  value  of  conjurers'  descriptions  of  perform-
ances of  the  kind  described, — besides  the  question  as  to  the  value  of
Mr.  Kellar's  testimony  in  particular.  I  propose  to  deal  briefly  with
these  two  questions.  The  previous  publications  on  this  subject  by  Mr.
Kellar  that  have  fallen  under  my  notice  are  three  short  articles  which
appeared  in  Leis^ire  Hours  for  March,  April,  and  May,  1892,  and  a
book  published  in  1886,  entitled  :  A  Magician's  Tour  Uji  and  Down
and  Round  About  the  Earth,  being  the  Life  and  Adveiitures  of  the
American  Nostradamus,  Harry  Kellar.  Edited  by  his  faithful
"  Familiar,"  "  Satan  Junior."  According  to  this  book,  which  I  shall
speak  of  as  Mr.  Kellar's,  his  first  visit  to  the  "far  East"  was  in  the
year  1877.  About  July  4th,  1876,  Mr.  Kellar  "decided  to  visit
Australia  and  the  far  East."  In  1876  and  1877  we  find  him  in
Australia,  Avhich  he  left  in  1877.  Singapore,  Johore,  Java,  Shanghai,
Hong  Kong,  Rangoon,  and  various  other  places  were  visited,  and  Mr.
Kellar  finally  opened  in  Calcutta  on  December  30th,  1877.  The
places  visited  in  order  are  given, — Calcutta,  Allahabad,  Lucknow,
Delhi.  Mr.  Kellar  is  also  said  to  have  visited  Agra,  Cawnpore,
Jeypore,  and  Benares,  and  "all  the  prominent  towns  of  the  Punjab."
He  opened  in  Bombay  on  February  14th,  1878,  and  from  Bombay
moved  northward  to  Bagdad. He  did  not  return  to  India  till  1882.

How  happens  it,  then,  that  Mr.  Kellar  describes  an  experience
which  he  had  at  Secunderabad  in  1878, — when  there  is  no  mention
whatever  in  his  book  of  any  visit  to  Secunderabad  1  And  Secun-
derabad was  a  very  long  way  oflf  from  any  of  the  places  mentioned  as
having  been  visited  by  Mr.  Kellar,  and  in  a  totally  diflFerent  direction.
A  visit  to  Secunderabad  would  have  required  several  days  at  least.
Not  only  so,  but  Mr.  Kellar  describes  a  scene  which  he  says  he


Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  355


witnessed  "at  the  palace  of  Sii*  Salar  Jung,  the  Nizam  of  Secun-
derabad."  Now,  there  is  no  Nizam  of  Secunderabad.  There  is  a
Nizam  of  Hyderabad,  and  Nawab  Sir  Salar  Jung  Bahadur  was
Minister  of  Hyderabad.  Secunderabad  is  a  city  in  the  Nizam's
dominions.  In  his  book  Mr.  Kellar  is  described  as  having  appeared
in  Calcutta  before  the  Nizam  of  Secunderabad  and  also  Sir  Salar  J ung,
Prime  Minister  of  the  Nizam.  It  is,  of  course,  not  surprising  that
Mr.  Kellar  should  make  a  mistake  about  the  titles  of  these
"  notables,"  unless  he  actually  visited  the  Nizam's  dominions.  The:
surprising  thing  is,  if  he  visited  Secunderabad  in  1878,  as  he  now
states,  and  witnessed  what  he  regarded  as  a  remarkable  incident
there,  that  no  mention  of  such  a  visit  should  appear  in  his  book.
And  such  a  visit  would  have  been  a  complete  deviation  from  the  line
of  his  route  as  described  in  his  book.  He  has  possibly  confused
Secunderabad  and  Hyderabad  with  Allahabad.

It  appears  clearly  from  Mr.  Kellar's  book  that  two  or  three  years
of  scattered,  hasty  travel  would  cover  his  experience  of  "  India  and  the
far  East." Yet  he  begins  his  article  by  the  following  passage  : —

"  Fifteen  years  spent  in  India  and  the  far  East  have  convinced  me  that  the
high  caste  fakirs,  or  magicians,  of  Northern  India  have  probably  discovered
natural  laws  of  which  we  in.  the  West  are  ignorant."

At  the  very  outset,  then,  Mr.  Kellar  claims  a  familiarity  with
"  India  and  the  far  East  "  which  he  does  not  possess.  But  this  is  by
no  means  the  most  serious  fault  that  we  have  to  find  with  Mr.  Kellar's
statements.  It  appears,  from  the  account  in  his  book,  that  it  was  not
till  1877  that  he  visited  India,  and  that  during  the  winter  of  1875-6
he  was  journeying  backwards  and  forwards  between  England  and
America,  and  giving  performances  in  the  latter  country.  How,  then,
at  this  time  could  he  be  also  in  Calcutta  ?  He  says  in  his  recent
article  : —

"  On  the  occasion  of  the  visit  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  Calcutta  during
the  winter  of  1875-6,  I  saw  a  marvel  of  levitation  jierformed  in  the  presence
of  the  Prince  and  of  some  fifty  thousand  spectators."

The  Prince  of  Wales  was  in  Calcutta  during  the  winter  of  1875-6,
but  if  Mr.  Kellar  declares  that  he  also  was  there  at  that  time,  as  he
does — well,  we  have  a  conjurer's  testimony  to  a  very  remarkable'
performance,  more  marvellous  than  the  feat  of  levitation  which  he
describes  himself  as  having  witnessed  at  the  Maidam.  The  reader  may,
however,  be  willing  to  pass  over  discrepancies  of  this  kind,  and  to
assume  that  although  Mr.  Kellar's  memory  of  dates  and  persons  is  not
very  good,  he  may  nevertheless  have  witnessed  some  such  scene  as  he
describes,  in  a  different  year,  and  when  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  not
present.  Let  us,  therefore,  take  another  incident  from  the  recent
article  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  how  much  confidence  we  can  place  in


356


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


Mr.  Kellar's  descriptions  of  a  conjuring  trick  which  he  fails  to
understand. He  says  :  —

"I  saw  a  performance  by  the  whirUng  fakirs  in  the  Chandee  Choke,  the
Cheapside  of  Calcutta.  There  were  a  score  of  Englishmen  in  the  party,
which  had  gathered  by  arrangement,  and  we  were  escorted  to  a  long  empty
room  in  the  Chandee  Choke,  which  was  apj^arently  an  unoccupied  store-room.
There  was  no  back  door,  and  the  only  two  windows  in  the  room — which
were  at  either  side  of  the  entrance — looked  on  the  street.  There  was  no  one
present  when  we  arrived,  and  we  examined  the  room  carefully,  testing  the
v^alls,  ceiling  and  floor  for  secret  doors,  traps,  wires,  &c.,  and  came  to  the
conclusion  that  in  those  respects,  at  least,  all  was  as  it  should  be.  We  then
drew  a  chalk  line  one-third  of  the  way  down  the  room  from  the  door,  beyond
which  we  were  to  remain  as  audience,  while  four  fakirs,  who  appeared  at
that  moment  from  the  street,  were  to  give  us  an  exhibition  of  their  magical
powers  in  the  other  two-thirds  of  the  apartment,  which  was  destitute  of
either  doors  or  windows,  and,  so  far  as  we  could  inform  ourselves,  absolutely
without  means  of  communication  with  the  adjoining  buildings  or  with  the
open  air.

"  The  old  fakir  took  a  chafing-dish  and  set  it  about  ten  feet  from  the  chalk
line  on  his  side,  casting  upon  its  glowing  coals  a  white  powder,  which  gave
out  a  strong  scent  of  tuberoses,  very  agreeable  to  the  senses.  A  fine  white
vapour  arose  from  the  burning  powder  and  filled  the  corners  of  the  ceiling,
draping  the  dull  panelling  with  a  flying  wreath  or  two,  but  still  permitting
a  clear  view  of  the  end  wall.  At  a  point  some  six  or  eight  feet  beyond  the
chafing-dish  the  old  man  and  his  three  assistants  began  dancing  slowly  ;  they
gave  utterance  to  no  sound,  but  whirled  faster  and  faster,  with  a  rhythmic
motion,  their  robes  flowing  out  on  either  side  and  blending  the  four  forms
into  a  composite  group,  of  which  the  tall  master  was  the  central  figure.
Suddenly,  to  our  great  astonishment,  we  became  aware  that  there  was  only
one  form  visible,  that  of  the  old  man.  The  swift  whirl  of  his  dance  was
gradually  relaxed,  and  in  a  minute  or  two  he  became  motionless,  salaamed,
advanced  in  front  of  the  chafing-dish,  bowed  again,  and  pointed  with  a
dignified  gesture  to  the  rear  of  the  apartment.  We  all  looked  eagerly  in  the
direction  of  his  gesture  ;  there  was  not  a  living  creature,  nor  indeed  an
object  of  any  kind,  visible  beyond  the  line  except  himself.  With  another
salaam  he  returned  to  his  original  position  in  the  rear  of  the  chafing-dish,
and  began  with  reverse  motion  the  dance  of  a  moment  before.  Holding  out
his  arms  on  eacli  side  of  him  as  if  the  better  to  balance  himself,  he  now  sang,
in  a  low,  monotonous  tone,  a  chant,  the  words  of  which  impressed  themselves
upon  my  memoi'y  and  sounded  like  this  : —

Al  YA  OR  EKTO  DO  !

"  In  some  inexplicable  way  the  monotonous  drone  of  this  chant,  which
fell  not  unmusically  from  his  lips,  seemed  to  join  with  the  vapours  which
curled  about  the  scene  to  bewitch  our  fancies,  or  at  all  events  to  produce  a
condition  of  dreamy  delight.  If  this  was  hypnotism,  so  be  it  ;  but
whether  or  not  the  existence  of  this  charmed  condition  can  be  ascribed  to
hypnotic  influences,  I  never  felt  my  senses  more  completely  at  my  command  ;
and  witli  my  eyes  fixed  intently  upon  his  whirling  figure  I  became  aware
that  he  seemed  to  be  throwing  ofi'  from  himself  portions  of  his  body  ;  one


Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  357


arm  here,  the  other  there,  a  leg  here,  and  so  on,  the  illusion  being  perfect,
if  illusion  it  was,  and  the  end  of  the  room  where  he  had  begun  to  dance
alone  becoming  gradually  filled  with  figures  like  his  own,  only  younger,  each
whirling  with  the  same  chant  in  the  same  direction.  Suddenly  the  dance
again  died  away,  the  chant  was  hushed,  and  when  we  looked  again  there  was
but  one  performer  visible,  the  old  fakir,  who  advanced  in  front  of  the
chafing-dish  and  asked  for  backslieesh.  He  received  it  liberally,  and  we  again
made  an  examination  of  the  room,  but  could  discover  no  explanation  of  the
disappearance  of  his  companions."

Now,  it  certainly  looks  as  if  Mr.  Kellar  was  trying  here  to  describe
an  incident  which  appears  as  follows  in  an  article  by  him  in  Leisure
Hours  for  March,  1892,  where  he  writes  : —

"At  Calcutta  I  attended  a  performance  of  three  fakirs,  which  was  given  m
a  large  room.  At  one  end,  where  they  had  drawn  a  dividing  line,  none  of
the  spectators  were  allowed.  Tlie  three  fakirs  began  dancing  and  whiskmg
around  like  dervishes,  with  a  di^izy  rapidity.  This  continued  for^  a  few
moments,  when  I  suddenly  discovered  that  there  were  four  dancers  instead
of  three.  Then  the  number  increased  still  further  until  there  were  a  dozen
men  dancing,  twisting  and  gyrating.  Then,  seemingly,  the  dancers  came
nearer  together,  until  they  appeared  to  be  all  massed  in  one  big  dancer,  who
finally  ceased  whirling  and  stood  there  alone.  As  I  have  just  explained,  the
spectators  were  not  allowed  to  examine  that  end  of  the  room  where  the
fakirs  performed  their  feat,  so  I  could  not  make  any  personal  inspection  of
the  walls.  It  did  not  seem  possible,  however,  from  where  I  sat,  that  there
could  have  been  any  reflection  from  the  sides  or  rear  ;  but  I  was  evidently
deceived  by  some  clever  optical  delusion."

A  comparison  of  these  accounts  will  probably  be  interesting  to  the
reader,  whether  he  concludes  that  they  refer  to  the  same  incident  or
not,  and  there  is  other  evidence  to  show  that  the  feats  witnessed  by  Mr.
Kellar  in  India  have  grown  lai'gely  in  his  imagination  with  the  lapse
of  time.  Compare  the  statements  in  his  recent  article  with  the
following  passage  from  Leisure  Hours,  March,  1892  : —

"  Some  of  the  purely  Oriental  wonders  were  unique  and  unaccountable—
notably  the  levitation  of  a  human  being  in  mid-air  without  any  visible  means
of  support,  and  apparently  defying  the  laws  of  gravity  ;  the  cutting  of  a
man  to  pieces  and  building  him  up  again  as  good  as  ever  ;  the  changing  of  a
rupee  held  in  the  hand  of  a  spectator  into  a  writhing,  lively  cobra  ;  wonder-
ful feats  of  hypnotism  or  simulation  of  death  ;  the  making  of  birds  and
animals  of  common  clay  and  subse(iuently  imbuing  them  with  life,  so  that  they
appeared  real ;  the  production  of  the  deadlycobra  from  most  impossible  places;
the  whirling  dervishes,  changing  from  one  to  many  and  then  back  to  one
again  ;  causing  iron  to  float  in  water,  and  a  ball  to  spin  around  the  head  without
any  apparent  attachment  to  the  body.  These  and  many  other  wonders  belong
exclusively  to  the  crafty  Hindu,  and  have  never  yet  been  explained  by
Europeans.  They  are  simply  tricks,  but  very  clever  and  ingenious,  and  the
secrets  are  carefully  guarded."

And  compare  this  again  with  his  statements  in  1886. On  turning


358


ilfr.  Richard  Hodgson.


to  the  book  from  which  I  have  already  quoted,  I  find  a  chapter  (XVI.)
entitled  "  The  Jugglers  of  India."  The  first  paragraph  reads  as
follows  : — •

' '  Naturally,  on  his  first  visit  to  India,  Kellar  was  curious  to  see  something
of  tlie  famous  jugglers,  of  whom  travellers  have  told  such  marvellous  tales.
He  went  out  of  his  way  to  meet  any  famous  performer  who  could  only  be
reached  in  that  manner,  and  the  result  was  that  between  the  time  he  landed
at  Calcutta  and  the  time  he  embarked  at  Bombay,  he  had  witnessed  about
everything  of  note  in  the  juggling  line  that  the  country  afforded.  The
opinion  he  formed,  after  seeing  all  they  could  show  him,  was  that,  apart
from  their  skill  as  snake  charmers,  in  the  basket  trick,  and  one  or  two  other
illusions,  the  ability  of  the  entire  fraternity  of  Indian  jugglers  is  beneath
contempt."

He  then  describes  the  jnango  trick,  a  stiahe  charming  trick,  the
basket  trick,  the  bo2vl  of  water'  trick,  the  coloured  sugars  trick,  and  the
dry  sand  trick.  The  last  sentence  of  the  chapter  reads  : — "  The  tricks
already  described  are  the  only  ones  Kellar  saw  in  India  which  are
worth  mentioning."

How  comes  it,  then,  that  if  this  was  Mr.  Kellar 's  opinion  in  1886,
he  should  give  descriptions  in  his  recent  article  of  incidents  which  he
states  he  witnessed  in  India  prior  to  that  time,  incidents  which  he  now
says  "baffled  my  deepest  scrutiny,  and  remained  the  inexplicable
subject  of  my  lasting  wonder  and  admiration"?  Surely  Mr.  Kellar
is  romancing  !  Against  the  Kellar  of  1893  we  may  quote  the  Kellar
of  1886  :—

"Many  of  the  wonders  attributed  to  Oriental  jugglers  have  never  existed
anywhere  outside  of  the  imaginations  of  those  who  tell  them.  The  writers
who  declare  that  they  have  seen  such  impossible  feats  performed  as
throwing  a  ball  of  twine  in  the  air  to  form  a  sort  of  Jack-and-the-bean-stalk,
up  wliicli  the  juggler  climbed  out  of  sight,  pulling  the  string  after  him,  and
that  the  pistol  shot  of  a  companion  brought  the  aerial  clindjer  to  the.
earth  in  fragments,  which,  when  brought  together,  became  a  living,
uninjured  man  again,  must  have  had  their  brains  steeped  in  hasheesh."

Let  us  now  turn  to  what  Mr.  Kellar  has  to  say  about  the  notorious
medium  Eglinton  : —

''My  first  experience  with  the  plienomenon  of  levitation  was  in  January,
1882,  during  the  course  of  an  engagement  I  was  filling  at  the  Chowringhee
Theatre  Royal  in  Calcutta.  Mr.  Eglinton,  a  professed  spiritual  medium,
was  giving  seances  in  Calcutta  at  the  time,  and  as  I  openly  avowed  my
ability  to  expose  the  frauds  of  all  so-called  mediums,  I  was  taken  to  one  of
them,  which  occurred  in  a  brilliantly  lighted  apartment.  I  will  not  describe
it  otherwise  than  to  say  that  it  so  puzzled  and  interested  me  that  I  gladly
accepted  tlie  invitation  an  evening  or  two  afterwards  to  be  present  with
several  others  at  a  dark  seance  given  by  Mr.  Eglinton.

' '  It  was  now  that  the  feat  of  levitation  was  apparently  performed,  in  the
presence  of  these  spectators. The  only  furniture  in  the  room  was  a  plain


Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  359


teakwood  table,  a  zither,  some  chairs,  two  musical  boxes,  and  a  scroll  of
paper.  A  circle  having  been  formed,  I  was  placed  on  Mr.  Eglinton's  left
and  seized  his  left  hand  firmly  in  my  right.  Immediately  on  the  extinction
of  the  lights,  I  felt  him  rise  slowly  in  the  air,  and  as  I  retained  firm  hold  of
his  hand,  I  was  pulled  to  my  feet,  and  subsequently  compelled  to  jump  on  a
chair  and  then  on  the  table,  in  order  to  retain  my  hold  of  him.  That  his
body  did  ascend  into  the  air  on  that  occasion  with  an  apparently  utter
disregard  of  the  law  of  gravity,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  The  musical  boxes,
playing  briskly,  then  ajjpeared  to  float  through  the  air  above  our  heads,
small  green  lights  appearing  and  disappearing  here  and  there  without
visible  cause,  and  the  zither  playing  near  the  ceiling  or  immediately  over
our  heads.  .  .  .  What  most  excited  my  wonder  was  the  fact,  for  I  may
speak  of  it  as  a  fact  without  qualifi.cation,  that  when  Mr.  Eglinton  rose  from
my  side,  and,  by  the  hold  he  had  on  my  right  hand,  pulled  me  up  after  him,
my  own  body  appeared  for  the  time  being  to  have  been  rendered  non-
susceptible  to  gravity."

How,  if  Mr.  Kellar  weighed  nothing,  he  should  have  been  compelled
to  jump,  it  is  somiewhat  difficult  to  understand.  A  more  detailed
account  of  these  incidents  is  given  in  Mr.  Kellar's  book,  pp.  167-173,
where  we  find  : — •

"He  sought  for  means  to  reproduce,  by  natural  means,  all  that  Mr.
Eglinton  had  done,  except  the  levitation.  He  succeeded  after  much  study
and  many  experiments.  Of  course  he  makes  no  claim  to  performing  the
tricks  by  the  same  means  that  Mr.  Eglinton  used.  It  may  be  that  he  uses
the  same  method,  and  it  may  be  otherwise.  He  simply  knows  that  he  pro-
duces the  same  results.  .  .  .  Regarding  the  levitation  feat,  my  master
has  never  been  able  to  reach  a  satisfactory  explanation.  What  puzzles  him
most  is  how  he  could  have  been  pulled  up  by  Mr.  Eglinton  without  feeling
his  own  weight  on  his  hand  and  arm.  He  seemed  to  lose  gravity.  Whether
the  occurrence  was  actual,  and  not  a  mere  mental  illusion,  he  is  not  prepared
to  say. It  assuredly  was  a  wonderful  and  unaccountable  performance."

The  reader  will  notice  that  the  alleged  levitation  occurred  in  the
darkness,  and  will  probably  infer  that  Eglinton  used  the  same  means
of  rising  as  Mr.  Kellar  afterwards  did,  viz.,  the  chair  and  the  table.
This  was  my  own  conclusion  concerning  the  alleged  levitation  of
Eglinton  at  a  dark  seance  given  in  a  room  of  a  friend  of  my  own  at  St.
John's  College,  Cambridge,  England,  in  the  year  1880.  Friends  of
mine  were  holding  Eglinton  at  the  time,  and  I  was  present  at  the
sitting  myself.  It  was  unanimously  agreed,  I  believe,  by  all  who  were
present,  that  there  was  no  evidence  whatever  to  show  that  Eglinton
rose  by  other  than  ordinary  means.  Eglinton,  moreover,  is  a  detected
trickster.  At  one  of  his  so-called  "  materialisation"  seances,  pieces  of
muslin  and  beard  were  cut  from  the  supposed  "  spirit,"  and  these
fitted  the  muslin  and  beard  afterwards  found  in  Eglinton's  port-
manteau. He  also  co-operated  with  Madame  Blavatsky  in  the
production  of  a  spurious  marvel,  was  detected  in  fraud  at  Munich,  and


360


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


was  discovered  surreptitiously  writing  at  one  of  his  so-called  "inde-
pendent slate-writing"  seances.  {Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research^  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  350-2.)  Mr.  Kellar's  first  experience  with
Eglinton  in  1882  was  in  "independent  slate- writing."  and  he  was
completely  deceived.  He  afterwards,  apparently,  changed  his  opinion
and  concluded  that  he  could  account  for  what  haj)pened  "  by  natural
means."  As  a  student  of  accounts  of  this  class  of  alleged  phenomena,
it  is  obvious  to  me,  from  Mr.  Kellar's  description  given  in  his  book,
that  he  was  ignorant  at  the  time  of  his  first  experience  with  Eglinton
of  some  of  the  common  methods  of  producing  alleged  "  independent
slate-writing  "  by  trickery.  Later  on  Mr.  Kellar  publicly  professed  to
be  able  to  "  duplicate  any  performance  given  by  mediums,  of  whatever
nature,  after  he  has  seen  it  done  three  times."  This  suggests  that  Mr.
Kellar's  real  opinion  about  Eglinton's  performances  is  that  they  were
all  tricks,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  Mr.  Kellar  has  withdrawn  the
challenge  thus  given  to  mediums.

I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  Mr.  Kellar's  article  is  written
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  romantic  story-teller  who  allows  his
imagination  full  play,  rather  than  from  that  of  a  careful  recorder  of
the  circumstances  of  a  trick- pei'formance,  and  some  of  his  fundamental
statements  as  to  times,  places,  and  his  own  conclusions  are  flatly
negatived  by  the  statements  in  his  previously  published  book.

We  may  now  ask  how  much  importance  is  to  be  attributed  to  a
conjurer's  testimony  concerning  marvellous  performances  of  the  kind
under  review.  It  is,  of  course,  not  to  be  doubted  that  a  conjurer,  or  a
person  familiar  with  the  devices  of  conjurers,  is  more  likely  to  discover
the  modus  oiJerandi  of  a  trick  than  the  ordinary  uninitiated
observer, — and  even  if  he  fails  to  discover  the  ti'ick,  he  may  by  virtue
of  his  knowledge  of  various  trick-devices,  Avrite  a  better  record  than
another  person  who  is  not  superior  to  him  in  other  respects.  It  does
not,  however,  follow  from  this  that  his  description  of  a  trick  which
has  baffled  him  will  be  specially  reliable.  The  conjurer  may  not  be  a
particularly  keen  observer  of  circumstances  not  already  familiar  to
him  as  belonging  to  the  conjuring  class  ;  his  memory  may  be  untrained
in  the  reproduction  of  circumstances  which  he  did  observe  at  the  time ;
and  he  may  be  entirely  unaccustomed  to  the  making  of  precise  records
of  such  a  series  of  events.  A  conjui'er  does  not  seem  to  have  any
special  capacity  qua  conjurer  in  these  directions.  And  a  tendency
which  besets  the  ordinary  observer  is  likely  to  operate  still  more
powerfully  with  an  expert  in  prestidigitation.  The  very  fact  of  his
having  been  deceived  will  in  many  cases  contribute  towards  the
marvellousness  of  his  record,  especially  if  he  is  over-confident  of  his
ability  to  detect  trickery.  For  a  similar  reason,  he  is  more  apt  to
suppose  that  the  phenomenon,  if  unintelligible  to  him,  was  inexplic-


Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  361


able  "  by  natural  means."  Mr.  Kellar  seems  to  have  taken  this
confiding  attitude  when  he  witnessed  Eglinton's  performances  in
1882.  I  was  much  struck  myself  when  in  India  by  the  complete
mystification  produced  in  some  Hindu  jugglers  by  several  tricks  of  a
European  gentleman  who  was  an  amateur  conjurer.  At  the  time  I
was  not  familiar  with  conjuring  methods,  but  reasoned  out  the  modus
operandi  in  these  particular  tricks  which  caused  the  amazement  of  the
native  experts  because  they  were  unfamiliar  with  that  class  of  perform-
ance. Not  only  do  I  see  no  sufficient  ground  for  supposing  a  jrriori  that
a  conjurer  will  make  specially  accurate  records  of  a  trick  which  he  has
failed  to  understand,  but  a  comparison  of  several  records  made  by
conjurers  of  "  independent  slate-wi'iting  performances  "  with  those  of
other  intelligent  non-conjuring  observers,  all  of  the  witnesses  being
alike  ignorant  of  the  modus  operandi,  affords  a  posteriori  proof  that
conjurers  are  not  specially  competent  recorders.  Mr.  Kellar's  desci'ip-
tion  of  his  slate-writing  sitting  with  Eglinton  is  an  instance.  Ic
may  be  laid  down  as  a  rule  almost  without  exception  that  the  account
of  a  trick  by  a  person  ignorant  of  the  method  used  in  its  production
will  involve  a  misdescription  of  its  fundamental  conditions.  And  this
misdescription  is  frequently  so  marked  that  no  clue  is  afforded  to
the  student  for  the  actual  explanation.  These  statements  apply  not  to
the  ordinary  observer  alone,  but  also  to  the  baffled  conjurer,  whose
testimony  is  vitiated  by  the  same  liability  to  mal-observation  and  lapse
of  memory  so  fruitful  in  the  reports  by  ordinary  observers  of  "  occult
phenomena.

If,  then,  a  conjurer  says  that  he  was  unable  to  discover  any  trick  in
an  alleged  "occult"  phenomenon,  his  statement  to  that  effect  is  entitled
to  more  value  than  that  of  a  person  unfamiliar  with  conjuring.  There
is  something  about  that  phenomenon  which  is  probably  exceptional.
It  may,  however,  be  a  form  of  trick  which  is  simply  unlike  any  of  those
already  familiar  to  the  conjurer.  Eglinton's  slate-writing  trick,  for
example,  deceived  Mr.  Kellar  in  1882.  It  would  not,  however,  I  believe,
deceive  him  now.  But  supposing  that  the  conjurer  fails  to  discover  a.
trick,  what  is  the  value  of  his  opinion  that  no  trick  was  jjossible  ?  This
depends  entirely  upon  the  individual  man,  and  not  upon  his  conjuring
knowledge.  "We  must  consider  his  general  capacity,  his  ability  to
observe  and  recollect  the  detailed  circumstances  of  the  performance,,
his  knowledge  of  the  sciences,  mental  as  well  as  physical,  his  tendency
to  believe  in  supernormal  phenomena  without  sufficient  evidence.*  If
he  is  too  confident  in  his  own  powers,  he  will  be  likely  to  assume  that.

*  I  have  asked  many  persons  for  an  explanation  of  one  of  Mr.  Davey's  tricks —
writing  between  slates  screwed  and  tied  together— and  only  one  person,  Professor  S.
P.  Langley,  solved  the  problem.  Among  those  who  failed  were  two  conjurers,  one  of
them  being  Mr.  Kellar.


362


Mr.  Richard  Hodgson.


the  performance  was  not  a  trick  merely  because  he  was  unable  to  dis-
cover the  trick.  Now,  with  all  due  respect  to  Mr.  Kellar's  power  as  a
conjurer — and  he  stands  high  in  some  branches  of  his  profession — I  do
not  regard  his  opinion  as  entitled  to  much  weight  beyond  those  special
matters  with  which  he  is  familiar.  And  I  think  that  my  statement
is  sufficiently  vindicated  by  Mr.  Kellar's  assurance  in  the  first  place
that  he  could  easily  expose  the  frauds  of  "  spiritistic  mediums,"  and
then  his  apparent  readiness  to  jump  at  the  conclusion  that  Eglinton's
performance  at  the  slate-writing  seance  "was  in  no  way  the  result
of  trickery  or  sleight-of-hand."  When  we  come  to  consider  the  narra-
tions which  Mr.  Kellar  now  gives  of  his  experiences,  putting  aside  the
discrepancies  of  dates,  &c.,  which  I  have  pointed  out — and  which
seem  to  indicate  ihat  Mr.  Kellar  is  entitled  to  less  confidence  as  a
narrator  than  is  the  ordinary  historian — it  is  plain  that  he  is  com-
pletely unaware  of  the  ravages  which  time  makes  in  one's  recollections.
What  should  we  think  of  an  astronomer  who  proposed,  several  years
after  the  event,  to  draw  from  memory  accurate  charts  of  the  sun's
flames  during  a  total  eclipse  ?  What  would  Mr.  Kellar  think  of  a
witness  to  his  own  performances  who,  being,  let  us  say,  unable  to
divine  Mr.  Kellar's  methods,  should  attempt  years  afterwards  to  narrate
wdiat  he  witnessed  ?  Some  of  Mr.  Kellar's  operations,  which  were
perhaps  actually  seen  at  the  time,  but  their  significance  not  undei'stood,
have  been  transposed  in  their  order  or  have  dropped  out  of  memory.
Possibly  other  events  have  taken  their  place  in  recollection — and  Mr.
Kellar  would  find  it  absolutely  impossible  to  reproduce  his  performance
under  the  conditions  as  these  are  erroneously  remembered  by  the
witness.  Most  persons  appear  to  think  that  their  memory  of  a  series
of  events,  if  clear  and  vivid,  is  necessarily  trustworthy.  They  regard
their  recollection  as  a  photograph,  the  lines  of  which  may  indeed
become  blurred,  and  fade  out,  but  do  not  change  their  distinctive  posi-
tions. This  view  of  recollection,  as  regards  the  events  which  we  are
considering,  is  totally  erroneous.  To  continue  our  analogy,  the
memory  photograph  may  change  in  many  of  its  really  most  important
elements,  and  yet  be  a  clear  and  vivid  photograph.  The  memory-
faculty  is  not  adequate  for  the  reproduction  of  the  details  of  the  events
in  question  as  they  occurred.  And  I  have  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Kellar's
descriptions  of  the  incidents  which  he  was  unable  to  explain  are  just  as
faulty  as  the  descriptions  of  his  own  perfonnances  would  be  if  given
years  afterwards  by  a  witness  who  was  unfamiliar  with  Mr.  Kellar's
methods.

I  may  add  here  a  few  words  about  my  own  conclusions  concerning
Hindu  jugglers,  Avithout  claiming  even  so  much  experience  in  India
as  was  actually  enjoyed  by  Mr.  Kellar.  All  that  I  saw  was  conjuring,
and  every  detail,  I  believe,  became  known  to  me,  either  by  purchase  or


Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  363

hy  discovery. I  did  not,  however,  see  some  of  the  performances  which
Mr.  Kellar  describes. Possibly  I  saw  only  what  he  designates  as  the
low  caste  fakirs,  and  not  any  of  the  high  caste  fakirs. I  venture  to
suggest  about  these  that  the  high  caste  fakirs,  if  such  exist,  may  bear
•somewhat  of  the  same  relation  to  the  low  caste  fakirs  as  the  high
■class  professionals  here,  such  as  Kellar  and  Hermann,  bear  to  the
performers  in  dime  museums. In  the  next  place  I  would  remind  the
reader  that  the  Hindu  race  has  differentiated  very  widely  in  many
respects  from  the  Western  branches  of  the  Aryan  stock, — and  it
would  not  be  an  extreme  hypothesis  to  suppose  that  certain  modes  of
■deception  have  been  developed  by  them  on  lines  which  are  unfamiliar
to  the  Western  races.  This  differentiation  is  shown  in  other  directions,
from  philosophical  speculations  down  to  trick  puzzles  in  cane  and  wire.
They  may,  indeed,  have  discovered  some  "  laws  "  of  which  we  in  the
West  are  at  present  ignorant. I  certainly  do  not  affirm  that  this
is  impos.sible,  though  in  the  course  of  my  investigations in  India
concerning  the  marvellous  phenomena  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  con-
nection with  Madame Blavatsky and  the Theosophical  Society  I
could  find  no  evidence  for  the  existence  of  anything  but  ordinary
trickery. The  performances  of  all  the  "jugglers"  whom  I  saw  were
^inquestionably  conjuring  tricks,  and  I  sought  in  vain  for  an  eye-
■witness,  European  or  native,  of  the  famous  rope  exploit  of  which  we
have  heard  so  much  in  travellers'  tales. About  three  years  ago  a  story
spread  that  this  supposed  trick  was  explicable  by  "hypnotism."  It
was  alleged  that  certain  travellers  had  proved  this  by  means  of  a
kodak. The  kodak  showed  no  such  scenes, — rope  taut  as  though  fixed
to  an  inevitable  point  in  the  air,  disappearing  boy,  man  following  with
a  knife, — bloody  limbs  and  trunk  and  head  falling, — reintegration  of
the  boy's  organism,  &c.  This  story  turned  out,  by  the  confession  of  its
author, to  be  a  "yarn,"  as  was  obvious  to  myself when  it  first
appeared, — not  only  from  the  indications  of  the  drawings  given  with
the  story,  but  because  the  famous  "  mango  "  or  tree-growing  trick  was
explained  in  the  same  way — viz.,  by  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  whereas  I
was  well  aware  that  the  latter  was  a  simple  conjuring  trick,  every
detail  of  which  was  known  to  me. Even  Colonel  Olcott,  faithful
follower  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  recipient  of  so  many  favours  from
the  (imaginary)  adepts  or  Mahatmas,  told  me,  after  several  years'
residence  in  India,  that  he  had  never  witnessed  the  rope-climbing
performance. It  was  he  who  made  the  statement  to  me,  on  what
authority  I  do  not  remember,  that  the  explanation  was  "  hypnotic
suggestion,"  and  he  related  in  connection  with  his  opinion  the  story  of
a  native  who  was  looking  on  at  this  performance  from  a  little  distance
off,  up  a  tree,  whence  he  had  a  good  view  but  could  not  distinguish
the  conjurer's  words. He  saw  the  conjurer  do  nothing  more  mysterious

2  B


364


31  r.  Richard  Hodgson.


than  to  cut  up  a  large  vegetable  of  the  pumpkin  order,  and  fit  the^
fragments  together,  whereas  the  spectators  close  at  hand  averred  that
they  had  witnessed  the  various  stages  of  the  "  rope-climbing "  trick.
So  runs  the  story.  Now,  it  is,  of  course,  perfectly  easy  to  induce  in  a,
hypnotic  subject  the  belief  that  he  is  witnessing  or  has  witnessed  a
performance  like  that  under  consideration,  but  I  do  not  know  of  any
experiments  that  in  the  least  degree  indicate  the  feasibility  of
hypnotising  a  whole  group  of  persons  without  their  knowledge.  It  is,
nevertheless,  possible  that  the  original  story  of  this  famous  ti-ick,
as  well  as  several  later  versions,  may  have  been  due  to  hyj^notie
suggestion.  Colonel  Henry  Yule,  in  his  notes  to  The  hook  of  Ser
Marco  Polo,  has  given  various  references  to  the  accounts  of  this
performance, —  by  Ibn  Batuta,  the  Moor,  in  the  fourteenth  century ;
by  Edward  Melton,  an  Anglo-Dutch  traveller,  in  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury ;  by  Francis  Valentyn  (whose  account  Colonel  Yule  apparently
thinks  is  borrowed  from  Melton's) ;  and  by  the  Emperor  J ahangueir;,
in  the  seventeentli  century.

After  describing  the  trick,  Ibn  Batuta  writes  : — •

"  All  this  astonislied  me  beyond  measure,  and  I  liad  nn  attack  of
palpitation  like  that  ■which  overcame  me  once  before  in  the  j^resence  of  the?
Sultan  of  India,  when  he  showed  me  something  of  the  same  kind.  They  gave
me  a  cordial,  however,  which  cui-ed  the  attack.  The  Kazi  Afkliaruddin  was
next  to  me,  and  quoth  he,  '  Wallah  !  'tis  my  opinion  there  has  been
neither  going  up  wox  coming  down,  neither  marring  nor  mending  ;  'tis  all
hocus  pocus  I  '  "

On  referring  to  this  previous  incident  mentioned  by  Ibn  Batuta,  T
find  that  it  was  a  case  of  apparent  levitation,  where  one  of  several
jugglers  rose  in  the  air  and  took  a  sitting  posture  in  the  air  above  the
head  of  the  witness.  Ibn  Batuta  states  that  he  was  alarmed,  and
finally  lost  consciousness,  that  he  was  restored  to  consciousness,  and
that  he  still  saw  the  juggler  in  the  air  above  him,  and  that  the  juggler
shortly  after  resumed  his  normal  position.  Tliese  two  accounts  by
Ibn  Batuta  certainly  seera  to  indicate  that  his  exjDerience  was  due  to
hypnotic  suggestion.  Experts  in  practical  hypnotism  are  well  aware
that  there  is  a  light  stage  of  the  hypnotic  trance  where  the  subject  is
susceptible  to  illusive  suggestions,  but  from  which  he  frequently  lapses
into  a  deeper  stage,  that  of  coma,  if  not  kept  active,  so  to  speak,  l^y
continual  inquiries  or  suggestions.  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  Ibn
Batuta's  loss  of  consciousness  in  his  first  experience  was  an  instance  of
this  tendency  to  lapse  into  the  deeper  state  of  hypnotic  trance.  The
remark  of  the  Kazi  Afkliaruddin  which  he  quotes  in  the  account  of  his
later  experience  appears  to  indicate  that  this  person,  at  all  events,  was
not  a  good  hypnotic  subject.  His  ofiicial  position  perhaps  warranted
liim  in  speaking  out  an  opinion  of  the  performance  which  might  indeed


Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers.  365


have  been  shared  by  many  others  who  dared  not  venture  to  criticise
the  conjurer.  My  readers  will  doubtless  remember  the  old  fairy  tale  of
the  Emperor  of  China's  magic  robes  and  the  little  child.  Afkharuddin
apparently  witnessed  nothing  at  all  extraordinary,  and  asserted  this  in
such  plain  and  impressive  language  that  Ibn  Batuta  recorded  the  fact.
I  do  not  claim  an  extensive  knowledge  of  accounts  of  this  rope  per-
formance, but  I  have  not  yet  met  with  any  authentic  records  by  joint
witnesses  of  its  occurrence,  and  possibly  the  tale  of  it  depends  upon  a
few  accounts  by  isolated  travellers  ^\  ho  were  more  or  less  susceptible
to  hypnotic  suggestion,  and  who  were  not  all  so  fortunate  as  Ibn
Batuta  in  finding  that  not  every  person  present  was  affected  as  he
was.

The  Emperor  Jahangueir  describes  a  series  of  remarkable  tricks,
performed  by  seven  Bengal  jugglers.  He  enumerates  twenty-eight  in
detail.  The  reader  will  rightly  infer  that  his  account  is  full  of  mis-
descriptions of  various  kinds.  These  will  probably  be  extraordinary
in  the  case  before  us,  since  the  Emperor  Jahangueir  must  be  regarded
as  liable  not  only  to  the  ordinary  forms  of  mal-observation  and  lapse
of  memory,  but  also  to  further  deficiencies  due  to  the  age  in  which  he
lived, — which  may  be  briefly  characterised  as  comiDaratively  ignorant
and  superstitious.  For  explanation  of  some  of  the  incidents  mis-
described  there  are  obvious  clues  for  persons  familiar  with  modern
conjuring  operations.  Other  incidents  may  be  explained  if  we  suppose
that  acquisitions  which  we  regard  as  recently  achieved  were  known  to
the  Bengalese  operators, — but  in  all  these  cases  we  must  amend  the
accounts  of  Jahangueir  by  supplying  additional  details.  Other
incidents  remain  apparently  inexplicable,  as  appears  to  me  (perhaps
not  to  others  who  may  know  more  than  myself  about  these  matters),  if
tve  regard  Jahangioeir's  descriptions  as  correct.  And  this  is  just  the
very  point  that  I  wish  to  emphasise  more  than  any  other.  His
descriptions  must  be  regai-ded  as  largely  erroneous.  Take  the  descrijj-
tions  by  uninitiated  witnesses — I  have  heard  them  frequently — of
Mr.  Kellar's  flower-growing  trick,  or  the  wine  and  water  trick,  or  the
Psycho.  They  are  absurdly  inaccurate  from  the  nature  of  the  case,
inasmuch  as  the  witnesses  failed  to  see  through  the  tricks.  In  the
same  category  I  place  Mr.  Kellar's  descriptions  of  the  Hindu  tricks
(those  which  he  actually  saw)  which  he  failed  to  understand.

I  conclude,  therefore,  that,  in  spite  of  the  strong  assertions  of  a
distinguished  conjurer,  we  have  before  us  no  real  evidence  to  the
manifestation  by  Indian  jugglers  or  fakirs  of  any  marvels  beyond  the
power  of  trickery  to  produce.  Such  a  conclusion,  if  correct,  is  of
importance  to  our  general  inquiries,  Avhich  can  only  make  progress  by
a  constant  sifting  of  all  kinds  of  testimony,  a  constant  delimitation
of  false  from  true  in  accordance  with  canons  which  ought  to  be  made

2  B  2


366


Mr.  RicJiard  Hodgson.


more  exact  and  effective  by  every  fresh  application.  And  I  add  one
word  of  moral, — a  caution,  namely,  against  accepting  too  readily  the
uncorroborated  dicta  of  eminent  men,  whatever  their  source,  and
whatever  their  tendency.  The  conjurer's  mere  assertion  that  certain
marvels  are  not  explicable  by  trickery  is  worth  just  as  much  as  the
savanfs  mere  assertion  that  they  must  be  so  explicable, — just  as  nauch,
£ind  no  more.

There  is  no  royal  road  to  sound  opinions  on  such  matters  generally  ;
there  is  nothing  for  it  save  to  examine  each  narrative  on  its  own  merits,
and  with  close  individual  care  ;  the  mind  meanwhile  prepared  for  either
fate, — whether  to  prick  some  bubble  of  pretension  into  empty  falsity,
or  to  discover  beneath  some  unpromising  envelope  a  germ  of  inex-
plicable truth.


Supplement  ]


Review.


367


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEW.


1.  TJie  Secret  Commonivealth  of  Elces,  Farms,  and  Fairies. A  Study  in  Folk-

Lore  and  Psychical  Research.  The  Text  by  Robert  Kirk,  M.A.,
Minister  of  Aberfoyle,  A.D.  1691.  The  Comment  by  Andrew  Lang,
M.A.,  A.D.  1893. London  :  David  Nntt.

2.  Comparative  Psycliical  Beseanh.  By  Andrew  Lang.  Contemporary  Review,

September,  1893.

Mr.  Robert  Kirk  was  "a  man  of  good  family,  a  student,  and,  as  his
book  shows,  an  innocent  and  learned  person."  He  wrote  of  Elves  and
Fairies,  with  full  belief  in  their  existence,  and  mijiute  knowledge  as  to  their
habits  and  qualities,  mental  and  bodily,  if  we  may  use  the  word  body  of  these
"vehicles  so  spungious,  thin,  and  defecat."  His  style  occasionally  reminds
us  of  Sir  Thomas  Browne.  Sir  Thomas  himself  might  have  said  of  the
shooters  of  the  fairy  arrow-heads  :  "  Tliey  are  not  as  infallible  Benjamites,
hitting  at  a  Hair's  breadth  ;  nor  are  they  wholly  unvanquishable,  at  least  in
Appearance."  The  book  ist>f  curious  interest,  and  we  are  grateful  to  Mr.
Lang  and  Mr.  Nutt  for  making  a  rare  work  accessible  in  so  pleasant  a  form
as  that  which  clothes  the  Bihliotlieqne  de  Carabas.

Mr.  Lang  prefixes  a  long  and  interesting  introduction,  in  which  he  dis-
cusses, with  the  wealth  of  illustration  which  he  has  at  his  command,  the
psychical  problems  suggested  by  the  book.  This  introduction,  and  also  his
article  on  Comparative  Psychical  liesearch,  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  work
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  Both  will  be  read  with  great  interest
by  members  of  the  Society  ;  and  some  discussion  of  the  moral  which  they
convey  may  not  be  out  of  place  in  the  Society's  Proceedings.

The  main  theme  of  the  two  essays  is  that  the  historical  branch  of
Psychical  Research  has  been  neglected.  Mr.  Lang  points  out  that  in  legends
and  popular  beliefs,  in  stories  of  witches,  fairies,  hauntings,  magic,  and  so
forth,  among  peoples  of  all  degrees  of  civilisation,  there  is  a  great  deal
which  finds  a  close  parallel  in  the  records  of  spiritualism,  hypnotism,
telepathy,  and  other  modern  forms  of  supernormal  phenomena.  He  argues
that,  the  results  being  similar,  the  causes  are  probably  similar  also.  There
may  be  a  "residuum  of  fact"  behind  the  phenomena  ;  or  there  may  be  only
certain  world-wide  tendencies  inherent  in  the  liuman  mind,  which  make  men
of  very  different  races  and  periods  believe  and  invent  similar  fictions — just  as
spiders  have  an  instinct  which  makes  them  spin  similar  webs.  In  any  case,
he  urges,  the  comparative  method  applied  to  Psychical  Research  should  help


Review.


[Supplement.


to  discover  the  residuum  of  fact  if  there  be  one  ;  and,  whether  fact  be
discovered  or  not,  it  should  serve  to  elucidate  a  most  remarkable  province  of
psychology.

This  branch  of  inquiry  has  not  been  so  comj^letcly  neglected  as  Mr.
Lang  supposes.  "As  far  as  the  writer  has  read  the  Society's  Froccediiujs,"
he  writes,  "it  'takes  no  keep,'  as  Malory  says,  of  these  affaii's  in  their
historical  aspect ;  — and  again — "  The  Psychical  Society,  as  far  as  the  writer
is  aware,  has  not  examined  officially  the  old  accounts  of  the  phenomena
which  it  investigates  at  present."  He  may  be  excused,  perhaps,  for  not  being
familiar  with  the  1,300  pages  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  ;  but  he  will  find  at
p.  172  of  the  first  volume  of  that  work  a  most  interesting  and  masterly  ex-
amination, by  Edmund  Gurney,  of  the  evidence  for  Witchcraft  and  Magic.
This  examination  is  founded,  the  author  says,  "on  a  careful  search  through
about  two  hundred  and  sixty  books  on  the  subject  (including,  I  think,  most
of  the  principal  ones  of  the  16th,  17th,  and  18th  centuries),  and  a  large  number
of  contemporary  records  of  trials."  The  conclusion  at  which  Gurney  arrives
is  that  ' '  there  is  a  total  absence  of  respectable  evidence,  and  an  almost
total  absence  of  any  first-hand  evidence  at  all,  for  those  phenomena  of
magic  and  witchcraft  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  the  results  of
diseased  imagination,  hysteria,  hypnotism,  and  occasionally,  perhaps,  of
telepathy."

The  results  of  this  careful  and  laborious  study  do  not  encourage  further
excursions  in  the  same  country.  There  is  ample  material  for  the  chapter  in
the  "History  of  Human  Error"  which  Mr.  Lang  desires.  It  will  be  a
voluminous  chapter  ;  while  the  "  residuum  of  fact"  may  probably  be  con-
tained in  very  few  paragraj^hs.  It  is  with  this  "  residuum  of  fact"  that
Psychical  Research  is  mainly  concerned,  at  any  rate  for  the  jjresent ;  and
it  is  clear  that  for  the  establishment  of  facts  we  must  rely  almost  entirely  on
contemjjorary  and  recent  evidence.

The  grounds  for  this  conclusion  are  two-fold.  In  the  first  place,  a  careful
scrutiny  and  sifting  of  evidence,  such  as  is  now  thought  necessary,  was  almost
unknown  among  the  older  recorders.  This  is  plain  to  anyone  who  reads  Mr.
Gurney's  note  on  Witchcraft,  and  might  be  illustrated  abundantly  from  the
Secret  Convinonwealtli.  ^  This  destroys  the  value  of  a  large  part  of  the  evidence.
In  the  second  place,  even  in  the  case  of  such  evidence  as  prima  facie  will
satisfy  the  high  standard  of  modern  requirements,  there  is  no  means  of
testing  it  in  the  manner  which  is  familiar  to  readers  of  the  Journal  and
Proceedings  of  the  Society.  In  accounts  of  occurrences  one,  two,  three,  or
more  centuries  ago  it  is  impossible  to  verify  dates,  to  establish  coincidences,
to  examine  witnesses,  and  to  obtain  corroborative  evidence.  Experience  of
contemporary  cases  shows  that,  [with out  such  examination  and  corroboration,
reports  of  extraordinary  occurrences,  even  when  at  first  hand,  are  of  im^
perfect  evidential  value.

I  am  inclined  to  think,  too,  that  Mr.  Lang  has  laid  rather  too  much  stress

'  For  example,  Kirk  states,  without  any  expression  of  doubt,  and  without  tliink-
ing  it  necessary  to  state  his  evidence,  that  "  Walter  Grahamt^  some  Time  living  in  the

Parocli  wherein  now  I  am  sliot  a  Hair  with  his  eyes,  having  praised

its  swftness  (such  was  the  Infection  of  ane  evill  Eye)."  He  adds  that  this  was  "  un-
usual!." ■


Suppleiaaiit.T]


Heview.


369


upon  the  coincidences  between  the  old  and  the  new,  the  civilised  and  the
uncivilised.  It  would  be  a  serious  task  to  catalogue  the  beliefs  which  do
not  find  a  parallel  in  modern  records  ;  but  they  far  outnumber  those  that
do.  To  give  one  examjile  only,  second  sight  may  have  its  parallel  in  telepathy,
but  the  "odd  solemnity"  by  which  the  "Priviledges  of  the  whole  Mistery"
■were  acquired  is  not  practised  or  believed  to  be  efficacious  by  the  moderns.
' '  He  must  run  a  Tedder  of  Hair  (which  bound  a  Corps  to  the  Bier)  in  a  Helix
about  his  Midle  from  End  to  End  ;  then  bow  his  Head  downwards,  as  did
JElijah,  1.  Kings  18.  42,  and  look  back  througli  his  Legs  untill  he  sie  a  Funerall
.advance  till  the  People  cross  two  Marches."  The  attitude  is  more  uncomfort-
.able  than  that  in  which  Peter  Ibbetson  "dreamed  true '';  and,  moreover,  not
without  risk — for  "if  the  Wind  change  Points  while  the  Hair  Tedder  is  ty'd
iabout  him,  he  is  in  Peril  of  his  Lyfe."  Darwin  used  to  say  that  no  exiDeri-
anent  is  too  absurd  to  try,  but  we  may  doubt  whether  Mr.  Lang  would
desire  his  historical  inquirer  to  make  practical  investigations  into  this  and
other  similar  neglected  brandies  of  art.

The  whole  mass  of  folk-lore,  myth,  magic,  and  all  the  beliefs  of  an  uncritical
age  are  compounded  of  many  elements.  Mr.  Lang's  conclusion  as  to  the  Fairy
belief  is  that  it  is  "a  complex  matter,  from  which  tradition,  with  its  memory
of  earth-dwellers,  is  not  wholly  absent,  while  more  is  due  to  a  survival  of  the
pre-Christian  Hades,  and  to  the  belief  in  local  spirits— the  Yuis  of
Melanesia,  the  Nereids  of  ancient  and  modern  Greece,  the  Lares  of  Rome,
the  fateful  Mcerse  and  Hathors — old  imaginings  of  a  world  not  yet  '  dis-
peopled of  its  dreams.'  "  Thus,  even  in  a  belief  which  appears  to  be  so  far
removed  from  reality  as  this,  Mr.  Lang  admits  that  there  may  be  some  element
of  fact.  A  similar  analysis  may  be  applied  to  other  kinds  of  belief.  The
primary  object  of  Psychical  Research  is  to  separate  the  element  of  fact,  and
for  this  purpose,  as  I  have  said,  only  contemporary  evidence  can  serve.

It  is  this  possible  element  of  fact  which  Mr.  Lang  apjjears  to  neglect
when  he  sums  up  his  results  by  saying — "our  only  conclusion  is  that  the
psychological  conditions  which  begat  the  ancient  narratives  produce  the  new
legends."  Why,  then,  if  the  psychological  conditions  are  unchanged,  are
there  many  old  legends  which  have  no  analogues  among  the  new  1  Mr.  Lang
gives  no  answer  to  the  c^uestion.  In  fact,  he  does  not  ask  it,  because  he  only
■collects  likenesses  and  not  differences,  and  therefore  the  ditferences  and
omissions  do  not  strike  him.  The  answer,  I  think,  is  that  the  legends  are
begotten  not  by  psychological  conditions  alone,  but  by  psychological  con-
ditions together  with  a  certain  substratum  of  fact.  The  psychological  con-
ditions have  changed,  as  civilisation  has  advanced,  in  the  direction  of  more
.stringent  criticism  of  evidence.  The  result  is  that  the  legends  with  the
least  substratum  of  fact  have  died  out,  while  those  which  have  a  greater
substratum  of  fact  still  survive  in  some  form.  This  consideration,  if  valid,
may  encourage  an  examination  of  modern  beliefs,  with  the  object  of  finding
the  underlying  facts  ;  but,  for  the  reasons  given  above,  such  an  examination
must  be  carried  on  by  scrutiny  of  contemporary  evidence,  and  by  experi-
ments. Comparison  with  the  old  stories  will  give  very  little  result.


H.  Babln'gton  Smith.


370


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


EDMUND GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1893.


Additions  since  the  list  in  ^'  Proceed infjs,"  Vol.  VIII.


ENGLISH.

Experimental  Psychology,  International  Congress  of.  Second

Session,  London,  1892  London,  1893

Hudson  (Thomson  Jay),  The  Law  of  Psychic  Phenomena.  A
Working  Hypothesis  for  the  Systematic  Study  of  Hyx^notism,
Spiritism,  Mental  Therapeutics,  &c  London,  1893

 (Another  copy).

 (Another  copy).

James  (Professor  William),  Text  Book  of  Psychology  London,  1892

TucKEY,  (C.  Lloyd,  M.D.),  The  Value  of  Hypnotism  in  Chronic

Alcoholism  London,  1892

RiBOT  (Th.),  The  Diseases  of  Pei'sonality.  Authorised  Translation,

Chicaijo,  1891

Vincent  (R.  Harry),  The  Elements  of  Hypnotism  :  Its  Pheno-
mena, Its  Dangers  and  Value  London,  1893'

FRENCH.

Binet  (Alfred),  Les  Alterations  de  la  Personnalite  Paris,  1892

Janet  (Prof.  Pierre),  Etat  Mentale  des  Hysteriques,  les  Stig-

mates  Mentaux. Preface  de  M.  le  Prof.  Charcot  Paris,  1893

  L'Automatisme  Psychologique  Paris,  1889

Nizet  (Henri),  L'Hypnotisme. Etude  Critique  Brussels,  N.D,

GERMAN.

Grossmann (Dr. J.), Die Erfolge der  Suggestionstherai^ie

(Hypnose)  bei  Intiuenza  Berlin,  1892

Hecker  (Dr.  Ewald),  Hypnose  unci  Suggestion  im  Dienste  der

Heilkunde  Wiesbaden,  1893

Kiesewetter  (Carl),  Franz  Anton  Mesmer's  Leben  und  Lehre.

Nebst  einer  Vorgeshichte  des  Mesmerisnius,  Hypnotismus,

und  Somnambulismus  Leipzig,  1893

Reichel  (Willy),  Der  Magnetismus  und  seine  Phiinomene,  jBe?h')i,  1892

Rells  (Edmund  W.),  Psychologische  Skizzen  Leipdg,  1893

Ringier  (Dr.  Georg),  Erfolge  des  therapeutischen  Hyjinotismus

in  der  Landpraxis. Mit  einem  Vorworte  von  Prof.  Dr.  Aug.

Forel  Miinchcn.,  1891

Zeitschrift fur Hypnotlsmus, Suggcstionstherapie,  Sugges-

tionslehre und verwandte psychologische  Forschungen.

Reditdrt  von  Dr.  J.  Grossmann  Berlin,  1892-3


A  full  Catalogue  of  the  books  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  vas  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Siipjdementar]/  Catalogues  ivere-
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  and  VIII.  Separate  copies  of  these
Catalogues  are  still  on  hand,  and  can  be  obtained  from  the  Secretary.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


371


LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  flSSOCIHTES.

(December,  1893.)
PRESIDENT.

The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.  Balfour^  M.P.,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
John  R.  Hollonu,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-.street,  Portman-square,  W.
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Crossdeep  Lodge,  Twickenham.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.

Hon.  Roden  Noel,  St.  Aubyns,  West  Brighton.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Cambridge.


COUNCIL

G.  AV.  Balfour,  M.P.

Thomas  Baekworth.

Professor  "W.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.

The  Eakl  of  Crawford  and

Balcaeres,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  Macalister,M.D.  ,F.  R.  S.
A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.


FOR  1893.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Frank  Podmore.

Professor  W.  RAMSAY.Ph.  D.  ,  F.  R.  S.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Babington  Smith.

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Frederic  W,  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Frank  Podmore,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

SECRETARY  FOR  FRANCE.
Leon  Marillier,  7,  Rue  Michelet,  Paris.

SECRETARY  FOR  THE  UNITED  STATES.
Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


S72


Lint  of  Members  and  Associates.


HONORARY  MEMBERS.

William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P.,  Ha  warden  Castle,  Chester.
Sir  Frederick  Leighton,  Bart.,  P.R.A.,  2,  Holland  Park-road,  W.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  P.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
'G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

■ ■ ■  CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  R;io  Janeiro.
Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  Kalmar,  Sweden.

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Josephine,  Boute  d'Antibes,  Cannes,

Alpes  Maritinies,  France.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

-Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  G,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartjiann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.
Professor  Dr.  Heinrich  Hertz,  The  University,  Bonn.
Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Bourg-la-Reine,  France.
Professor  Kovalevsky,  The  University,  Kharkof,  Prussia.
Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Hans  Natge,  Berlin-Tempelliof,  Berlin.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.
Dr.  F.  Freiiierr  Goeler von Ravensburg, 4,  Nettelbeckstrasse,
Berlin,  W.

Tii.  RiBOT,  Office  of  tlie  Revue  Fhilosoplbique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Riciiet,  15,  Rue  de  I'Universitci,  Paris.
Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr. Freiiierr  von  Sciirenck-Notzing, 29,  Herzog-Wilhelmstrasse,
Municli.

Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


373


MEMBERS,  HONORARY  ASSOCIATES,  AND  ASSOCIATES.

Names  of  Members  are  ■printed  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  irre fixed  by  an  Asterisk.  '

Names  of  Associates  are  printed  in  Small  Capitals.

Adair,  Mrs.,  Glenavoii,  Cookstown,  co.  Tyrone.  •  ;

Adams,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Ainslie,  Ainslie  Douglas,  15,  Lower  Grosvenoi'-place,  S.W.
Alcock,  Richard,  M.B.,  Burlington-crescent,  Goole.
Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester. • .  .-.  ':
Allen,  Frederic,  Sidmouth-i-oad,  Newcastle,  Staffordshire.  /  ••!■"'

Allen,  Henry  J.,  14,  Ailesbury-road,  Donnybrook,  co.  Dublin. .  :
Allen,  Miss  Mary  Gray,  14,  Queen's-square,  W.C.
Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  83,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.  ■
Amery,  W.  C,  13,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.
Anderson,  James  Arbutiinot,  46,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Anderson,  Miss  M.  25,  Lansdowne-crescent,  Kensington  Park,  W.
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.
Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Adbury  House,  Newbury.  .  ..  /;

Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.  ■  '  : •

Ashbourne,  The  Lady,  23,  Fitzwilliajn-street,  Dublin.
Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Atkinson,  Miss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy- gardens,  Tynemouth.
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.
Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.
Baines,  Miss  W.,  40,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.
Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  47,  Russell-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton^
gardens,  S.W.

Balfour,  G,  W.,  M.P.,  G7,  Addison-road,  London,  W., • - '  /  -
Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ball,  Thomas  Stanley,  Spring  Bank,  Fulwood,  near  Preston.
Banister,  Major  Fitzgerald  M.,  R.  A.,  Jun.  Army  and  Navy  Club,  W.
Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,
Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.
Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.  P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Barkworth,  Lieut.  John  R.,  R.E.,  R.A.  and  R.E.  Mess,  Malta.
Barmby,  Rev.  James,  B.D.,  Pittington  Vicarage,  Durham.
Barrett,  Ashley  William,  M.B.  (Lond.),  42,  Finsbury-square,  E.0,
Barrett,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Lincoln.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  02,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.


374


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  Glengariff,  co.  Cork.
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  60,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  Loudon  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  Christ's  College,  Brecon.
Bazley,  Sir  Thomas  S.,  Bart.,  J. P.,  JNI.A.,  Hatherop  Castle,  Pairford,
Gloucestershire.

Beatty,  Octavius,  Killevey,  Darleston-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey,

Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redcliffe-sq.,  S.W.

Bective,  The  Countess  of,  42,  Cadogan-square,  W.

Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterlield-gardens,  London,  W.

Bell,  Bainbridge  R..,  The  Rectory,  Cheltenham.

Bell,  Charles  W.,  J.P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.

Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.

Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E.

Benson,  R.  Hugh,  1,  Landscape-place,  Llandaff.

Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Princes-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.
Berkeley,  Captain  H.  Fitzhardinge,  R.N.,  Warwick  Lodge,  Rivers-
court,  Hammersmith,  W.
Bernard,  John,  Captain,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "  Nelson,"  Portsmouth.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucestei'-road,  London,  S.W.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bewley,  IMiss  Mary  M.,  Netherton  House,  Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Bibby,  Charles  Hesketh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bickford-Smitii,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,Endymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W.
Bicknell,  PtEV.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy,
Bicknell,  Norman  L.,  Foxgrove,  Beckenham,  Kent.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Junr.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.
Bigg-,  Miss  Louisa,  Lyndhurst,  Luton.
BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.  A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  ■
BiRRELL,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Down  View-road,  Worthing.
Blackburn,  Ernest  M.,  38,  Egerton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.
Blackwood,  Mrs.,  Norton  Court,  Sittingboume,  Kent.
Blakelock,  Rev. R.,  M.A.,  Horbury  Bridge  Vicarage,  Wakefield.
Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Boger,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Elvington,  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


375


Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  "VV.
BoLDERO,  Lieut.-General  G.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.
BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.
Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  c/o  A.  Scott  and  Co.,  Rangoon,  Burmali.
IBooRNE,  Herbert  H.,  55  and  56,  Chancery-lane,  London,  W.C.
BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Bayeux,  (Calvados),  France.
Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  INIiss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.
Bourget,  Paul,  7,  Ptue  de  Monsieur,  Paris.

Bouverie,  Edward  O.  P.,  M.  A.,  93,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
BoviLL,  Mrs.  Alfred,  9,  St.  Andrew's-place,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Highclere  Rectory,  Newbury.
Bovi'LBY,  Arthur  S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Bowness,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London, W.

Royd^  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  jST.B.

RoYD,  William  Henry,  Ballymacool,  Letterkenny.

Bramston,  Miss  A.  R.,  Witham-close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Suntrap,  Radcliffe-road,  Croydon.

Bramwell,  John  M.,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square, W.

Brandretii,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Weybridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.

Rrewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.

Briggs,  Mrs.,  Rawdon  Hall,  near  Leeds.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Soutlnvark,  S.E.

Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  12,  Hans-place,  London,  S.W.

Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A  ,  M.A.,  1,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.

Brown,  Mrs.,  21,  South-street,  Park-lane,  W.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  26,  Carisbrooke-road,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.

Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.

Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidstoii,  Alleyn-road,  West  Dulwich,  S.E.

Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Brownlow,  The  Countess,  Ashridge,  Berkhamsted.

Bkuhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Prussia.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill-square,  W.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.A.,  9,  Upper  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

IBuLMER,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York.  '

Bunnett,  a.,  J  UNR.,  35,  W^hitehorse-road,  Croydon.

BuNSHAW, N.  F.,  Medical Officer,  B.G.J.P.  Railway,  Ghadechi,

Kathiawar,  India.
Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London^  E.C.


376


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbui-y.

Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Icklesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harro^y-on-the-Hill.

Butcher,  Miss,  22,  CoIUngliam-place,  London,  S.W.

Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.

Butler,  G.  W.,  B.A.,F.G.S.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton,  Surrey.

Butt,  Lady,  8,  Petersham-terrace,  Gloucester-road,  S.W.

BuTTEMER,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.

Buxton,  Lady,  Shadwell  Court,  Thetford.

Caillard,  Vincent,  Constantinople.

Cairo,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  Soutli  Hampstead,  London.
Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  jM.A.,  45,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Sandon,  Wellington,  Salop.
Campbell,  James  A.,  Bai-breck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.
Carey,  Arthur,  B.Sc,  Browsich,  Gateacre,  near  Liverpool.
Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Greywell  Hall,  Winchfield.
*Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Caudee,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.G.
Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-square,  London,  S.W.
Cave-Browxe-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W.
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.
Champness,  Alfred,  Sedbei-gh,  Yorks.

Chandler,  Rev.  H.  0.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge.
Charleswortii,  Miss  A.  M.,  Maitland  House,  Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C.,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  Apollo-street,  Bombay.
CiiATTOCK,  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Childers,  Miss  F.  L,  46,  Gunter's-grove,  London,  S.W.
Clark,  W.  W.,  Denehurst,  Dorking.  ,  .

Clark,  Miss,  Suffield  Park,  Cromer.

Clarke,  John  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-sti-eet,  London,  W.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  RedhilL
Clavequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.
Clayton,  Charles  E,,  Hillcote,  Highcroft  Villas,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
CoATES,  Andrew,  Pitcullen  House,  Perth,  JST.B.

Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
CoGiiiLL,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Cosheen,  Castle  Townshend,  co.  Cork.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates,


m


Colchester,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  7,  Bennett-street,  St.  James's,  S.W.

Cole,  Alfred  C,  M.A.,  64,  Portland-place,  "VV.

Coleridge,  Miss  Ciiristabel  R..,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Coles,  D.  A.,  M.  D.,  Sydney  House,  Sutton  Court-road,  Chiswick,  W.

Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.

Collison,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  Newlands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.

Colt,  Frederick  E.,  9,  Old-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

CoLTHURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.

Colvile,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

CooNEY,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.A.,  73,  Botanic-avenue,  Belfast.

Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  15,  Racknitz-strasse,  Dresden,  A.

Cort  van  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  W.  A.,  Amsterdam,  Holland.

CouES,  Dr.  Elliott,  1,726,  IST-sfcreet,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C,  U.S.A.

CousENS,  Charles  H.,  Star  Chambers,  30,  Moorgate-st.,  London,  E.C.

Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valleyfield,  Penicuik,  N.B.

CowpER,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  38,  Rue  Jean  Goujon,  Paris.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S-,  2,  Caven-

disli-square,  London,  W.
Crawford,  F.  Marion, Yilla  Crawford,  Sant'Agnellodi  Sorrento,  Italy.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rio  Maior,  Portugal.

Crewdson,  Miss  Gwendolen,  St.  Regulus,  St.  Andrews,  Fife,  N.B.
Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  29,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.
Crossley,Mrs.C.  R.,  103,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  London, "VY.
Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  1-5,  Great  St.  Helens,  London,  E.C.
Crowther,  W.  Fearne,  Mayiield,  Sussex.
Cruise,  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Menion-square,  Dublin.

Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,  The  Chestnuts,  St.  Margaret's,  Twickenham.
Cunningham,  G.,D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge.
Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge.
*CuRTis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.  .  -

D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120,  Rue  de  Bac,  Paris.
Dakin,  Rev.  Edward,  Selsley,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire.
Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M. A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  Clifford  House,  Wellington,  Somerset.
Damania,  Surgeon-Major,  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.
Daniel,  A.  M.,  B.A.,  Temple  Chambers,  London,  E.C.
Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenham.
Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  WooUohra,  New  South  Wales.
Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.
Davis,  A. E.,  L.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.I.,  20,  Great  George-sq.,  Liverpool.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  23,  Manor-park,  Lee,  Kent.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  1,  Stanford-road,  Kensington,  W.


S78


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Dawkin,  W^illiam,  Gl,  Clifton-street,  Larkhall  lane,  S.W.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Oarlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Despard,  IMiss,  77,  Cliesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  KB.
DiCKixsoN,  GoLDSwoRTiiY  L.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dickinson,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Hyett,  29,  Pembroke-gardens,  Kensington.
DiCKSEE,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
iJiLL,  J.  P.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dixon,  Edward  T.,  12,  Barkston  Mansions,  South  Kensington,  S.W".
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Wickham  House,  East  Park  Parade,
Northampton.

DoBBiE,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
DoBiB, Stanley L.,SurgeonLt.-Col., Supt.Govt.  Lunatic Asylum,Madras.
Dodgson,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.
DouBLEDAY,  Mrs.  FRANCES  G.,  c/o Drexel, Harris and Co.,  37,

Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
DovETON,  F.  B.,  Eastcliffe,  Babbacombe,  South  Devon.
DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.L,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  Redcliffe-

square,  London,  S.W.
Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  12,  Tennison-road,  South  Norwood,  S.E.
Duff,  Charles  E.,  M.B.,  122,  High-street,  Deptford.
Dugdale,  Mrs.  Stratford,  Merevale  Hall,  Atherstone.
Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  (Retired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  3,  St.  Stephen's-

road,  Westbourne  Park,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Barum  House,  Queen-street,  Henley  on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster^street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.

Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Elder,  Mrs.,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  AV.

Elliot,  Mrs.  Minto,  7,  George-street,  Hanover-square,  W.

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.

Elliott,  Rev.W. A.,2,  Clarence-villas,Westbourne-gardens,  Trowbridge.

Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pout-street,  London,  S.W.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  4,  Warwick-square,  London,  S.W.

Elton,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brorapton,  London,  S.W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London.

Eno,  J.  C,  AVood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermacora,  Dr.,  G.B  ,  Padua,  Italy.

EsTERHASY,  CouNT  MiciiEL,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


379


Eustace,  John,  IST.,  ]\r.D.,  Highfield,  Drumcondra,  co.  Dublin.

Eustace,  Miss  Grace,  Castlemore,  Tullow,  co.  Carlow,  Ireland.

EvAXS,  IviRKHAM,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Eves,  Mrs.  Charles  T.,  Brook's  Lodge,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.

Ev/ing,  Lieut.-Colonel,  A.,  The  Lawn,  Taunton.

Eagan,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  56,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Ealcomek,  Professor  M.  T.,  Technical  Institute,  Teramo,  Italy.

Farxcombe,  George  Richard,  B.A.,  40,  Belgrave-street,  Birmingham.

Feilding,  The  Lady  Louisa,  23,  Princes-gate,  London,  S.AV.

Feildixg,  Hon.  Everard,  Newman  House,  Kennington-road,  S.E.

Felton,  Alfred,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Fielding,  Mrs.,  19,  Wilton- place,  London,  S.W.

Fielding,  Mrs.  T.  M.,  25,  Cardigan-road,  Richmond,  near  London.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  Junr.,  B.A.,  5,  Alfred-place  West,  Thurloe-sq.,  S.W.

*FiNzi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.

Fisher,  Rev.  J".  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.

FitzGerald,Desmond  G.,M.S.T.E.,46,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W.

Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  Rosy,  M.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of

Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redclitfe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Flynt,  William  Garnett,  7,  Walmer-road,  Birkdale  Park,  Southport.
Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  MandeviUe-place,  London,  W.
Forrester,  Mrs.,  Gavell  House,  Kilsyth,  JST.B.
Forster,  A.,  6,  Anglesea-terrace,  Gensing-gardens,  St.  Leonards.
Fort,  Charles  Leyland,  B.A.,  Alderbury  House,  Salisbury.
Foster,  Gerald  H.,  5,  Cleveland-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.
Fountain,  Alfred,  The  Elms,  Cornwall-road,  Uxbridge.
Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  4,  Grosvenor-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Eraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Bellary,  Madras  Presidency.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C. ,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.
Frickee,  John  C,  6,  Colville-terrace,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlow-i-oad,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.
*Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.
Furnivall,  Percy,  Belgrave  Hospital  for  Children,  London,  S.W.
Garbett,  Edward  H.,  Barcombe  House,  Hull.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Fawley  Vicarage,  Wantage.
Gardner,  Right  Hon.  H.,  M.P.,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  W.
Gardner,  The  Lady  Winifred,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-scjuare,  W.
Gardnee,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-square,  W.
Garnee,  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.
Garry,  Francis  N.,  M.A.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Reading.


380


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Garth,  Henry,  M.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  Morden,  near  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.D.,  Marton,  Basechurch,  Salop.
Gessmann,  Gustav,  Junr.,  Zwolfers  Gasthof,  Altmansdorf,  Vienna.
GiBOTTEAU,  AiME,  M.D.,  Villa  Bearnaise,  Biarritz.
GiLCRiEST,  W.  F.,  A.I.C.E.  (Ireland),  Sligo.  .  ^

Glardon,  Rev.  Augusts,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.
Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.
Godfrey,  Thomas  H.,  M.B.,  Van  Mildert  House,  Stockton-on-Tees.
Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/oCol.  C.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Stalf  Corps,  Poona,  India.
Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.
GooDiER,  Miss  B.  M.,  Fulsliaw  Bank,  Wilmslow,  Cheshire.
Goodman,  Louis  H.,  Bertram  House,  170,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Goodman,  Roger  N.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Brookfield,  Cambridge.
■*Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  2,  Westbourne  Park-road,  London,  W.
GoRDiGiANi,  Edward,  50,  Via  Degli  Alfani,  Florence.
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

GovER,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.

Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  "VV.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Meadowside,  Heald-place,  Rusholme,  Mancliestei'.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Ehn-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Grantham,  F.  W.,  100,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.

Gray,  Rev.  A.,  M.A.,  Malvern  House,  East  Liss,  Hants.

Gray,  Edward  W.,  Surgeon-Captain,  The  Citadel,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Green,  C.  T.,  M  R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.

Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.

Greener,  W.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.

Greig,  PkEV.  DxIVid,  M.A,,  Cottenham  Rectoiy,  Cambridge.

Grier,  Captain  George  R.,  Leonardstone  House,  Neyland,  "Wales.

Griffith,  Miss  E.  G,  37,  York-street,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essenden,  Hatfield,  Herts.

Grogan,  Miss,  18,  Ridgmount-gardens,  London,  W.C.

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.  '  '

■*Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  Piye  Croft,  Fulford-road,  Scarborough.

Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.W.

Gudgeon,  James,  Stowraai-ket.

Guest,  A.  H.,  L.R.C.P.E.,Westbourne,  Whalley-range,  Manchester.
Guinness,  Miss  Henrietta,

Gunton,  Rev.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.

Gunton,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.

Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas'  Parsonage,  Piinlico,  S.W.

GuRNEY,PvEV.F.,M.A.,St.  John's  Cottage,  BoveyTracey,  Newton  Abbot.

Gurney,  Henry  G.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  W.

Gurney,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


381


Hackett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Haggard,  John  G-,  H.B.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria.

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  2,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Kensington,  W.

Hall,  Charles  S.,  The  Borough  Chambers,  Bournemouth.

Hall,  George,  M.D.,  CM.  Edin.,  Wyndham  Lodge,  Milford,  Surrey.

Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  co.  Down,  Ireland.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Haegrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Grange,  Chorlton-cum-Hardy,  Manchester.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Ale.xandra-road,  Southport.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  J.  C,  Bruce  Herald  Office,  Union-st.,  Milton,  Otago,  N.Z.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Fawkham,  viA  Dartford.
Hartshorn,  Miss  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.C.
Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.
Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.
*Hayes,  Joseph  W.,  1,  George's-street,  Enniscorthy.
Hayward,  M.  Cecil,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.  -.
Heaton,  Charles,  M.R.C.S.,  Watford,  Herts.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  55,  Sutherland-avenue,  Maida-vale,  W.
Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W^.

Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll-villas,  Cheltenham.

Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.

Hewetson,  H.  Bendelack,  F.  L.S.,  M.  R.C.S.,  1 1 ,  Hanover-sq.,  Leeds.

HiBBS,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.

HiGGiN,  F.  C,  Killiney  Castle,  Killiney,  co.  Dublin.

HiLDYARD,  F.W., St. Nicholas  Club,8lA,QueenVictoria-st., London,  E.C.

Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Instowe,  Cheltenham.

Hill,  Henry,  The  Park,  Nottingham.  ;■  -

Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.
Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.  .
Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle.

HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  ]\Iiss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixham.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C.,  The  Vicarage,  Aylesford,  Kent.
Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  B.A.,  75,  Eaton-square,  S.W.
Holland,  J.  F.  R.,  M.D.,  Kulni  Hotel,  St.  Moritz,  Switzerland.
Holland  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.


382


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-sq.,  W.
HoLSTEiN,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Holt,  H.  Sherwin,  Wave  Cottage,  Chelmsford.
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hook,  Rev.  Cecil,  M.A.,  Hook  Memorial  Vicarage,  Leeds.
Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,"W.
Hooper,  Mrs.  Pitman,  11,  Bulstrode-street,  Manchester-square,  W.
HoPKiNsoN,PiiorESSOR  A.,  M.A.,B.C.L.,  The  Lodge,  32,Herne  Hill,  S.E.
Hopps,  John  Page,  Oak  Ti-ee  House,  South  Norwood  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Horne,  Alderson,  Ditton-place,  Balcombe,  Sussex.
Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penritli.
Howard,  Robert  Henry,  Bishop  Hatfield's  Hall,  Durham.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
HowoRTii,  Henry  H.,  M.P.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
HijBBE-ScnLEiDEN,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Steglitz,  near  Berlin.
Huddleston,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  P»,ose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterham
Valley,  Surrey.

Hughes,  Mrs.,  Gwynnondale,  Llanarthney,  E.S.C,  Carmarthenshire.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Humfrey,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Hunter,  Thomas,  Arnold  House,  Rugby.
HuTCiiixs,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town,
Hutchinson,  Frederick  W.  H.,  B.A.,  1,  Emmanuel-rd.,  Cambridge.
Hutchison,  Rev.  R.P.,  M.A.,  Martyr  Worthy  Rectory,  Winchester.
Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-sti-eet,  Brighton.
Inglis,  Rev.  D.,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.

Irving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon-Major,  Govt.  House,  Ganesh  Khind,  Bombay,
Isaachsen,  Rev.  Thorveld  E.,  44,  Boompjes,  Rotterdam.
Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare.
Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,  3f,  Carlisle-place,  Westminster,  S.W.
*Jajies,  Captain,  10,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.
Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.H.  H.,M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  Jl.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham.

Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn, Chester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Myn-yr-Afon,  Ptuabon.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyti  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.  '
*Jenkins,  E.  Vaugiian,  Energlyn,  38,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.
Jenkinson,  Mrs.  F.  R.  G.,  112,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.
Jennings,  Mrs.,  16,  Lower  Sloane-street,  S.W.

Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.  •  .


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


883


Johnson,  William  Ernest,  M.A.,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.
Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  16,  Gunterstoiie-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Crantner  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.
Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.
Joyce,  S.,  Junr.,  50,  The  Crescent,  Salford,  Manchester.
Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.
Keatinge,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Lodgelands,  Balcombe,  Sussex.
Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  co.  Meath.
Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  2,  Lloyd-place,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester.
Kenmare,  The  Countess  of,  Killarney  House,  Killarney.
Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.
Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.
*Keulemans,  J.  G.,  1-3,  York-terrace,  Brewery-road,  Southend.
Kingsbury,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.
Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.AV.
*KiRK,  Joseph,  2,  Ripon-villas,  Upper  Ripon-road,  Plumstead,  Kent.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.
Knox,  Nathaniel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Konstamm,  Edwin  M.,

Lach-Szvrma,Rev.  W.S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,  Barkingside  Yicarage,  Ilford.
Lafone,  Alfred  W^.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
Laing,  R.M.,  M.  a.,  B. Sc.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.
Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.
Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  117,  St.  George's-square,  S.W.
Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Leete,  Miss,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Leete,  Miss  L.,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Legge,  The  Lady  Frances,  Woodsome,  Hudderstield.
Leigh,  W,  Austen,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent.  Hyde  Park,  London, W.
Lewis,  C.  AY.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.
Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Leymarie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.
Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  AYales.
Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.
Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  General  Assembly  Library,  AVellington,  New  Zealand.
LiMOND,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.
Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  of,  The  Deanery,  Lincoln.


884


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.

Li^^DSAY,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  59,  Caversham-road,  London,  N.W.

Lloyd,  Francis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Butla.nd-gate,  London,  S.W.

Lloyd,  Otiio  Holland,  16,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool.

Lodge,  Robert,  Great  Gearie.s,  Ilford.

Loewe,  Hugo  L.,  3,  Southampton-street,  London,  "SV.C. .

LoNGSTAFF,  G.  B.,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Highlands,  Putney  Heath,  S.W.

Lord,  Mrs.  Robert,  ISTewstead,  Albert-road,  Bolton,  Lancashire.

LovELL,  Reginald  H.,  449,  Collins-street,  Melbourne.

Low,  Lady,  23,  De  Vere-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Lucas,  Mrs.  E.  A.,  Clareville,  co.  Galway.

Lyttelton,  Sybella  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  AY.

Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.

MacColi,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.

James's,  S.W.
*Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Heswall,  Cheshire.
Mackay,  George  D.,  Inveralmond,  Cramond,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair.  W.

Mackenzie,  J.  Kenneth  D.,  Broadvvay  Chambers, Westminster, S.W.
IMacNaugiiton,  IIev.  Samuel,  M.A.,  Rose  Bank,  Addison-road,  Preston.
Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.
Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-i-oad,  London,  S.W.
Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Malmesbury,  Susan  Countess  of,  25,  Sloane-gardens,  S.W.
Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough.
JMangin,  Marcet,  130,  Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  M.A.,  Woodford  Bridge,  Essex.
Mantell,  jNIiss  Bertha,  5,  South  Bank-terrace,  Surbiton.
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumber-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-avenue,  London,  ISI.W.  ■■
IMarshall,  FIenry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.
Marshall,  Thomas,  Leeds  Lil^rary,  Commercial-street,  Leeds.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Marson,  Gervase,  3,  Park-road,  Southport.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  A,  E.,  34,  Elvaston-place,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.
Martin,  Mrs.  E.  G,,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),  France.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Martin,  W.  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Assist.  Commissioner  (Lidian  Civil

Service),  Sialkot,  Puiijab,  India.
Mason,  Miss  M.  IL,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts. : ■■  ;


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


.385


Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Yictbria-street,  London,  S.W.
Masteeman,  Miss  Louisa,  Cawood  Lodge,  Haslemere.
MATiiE\vs,G.B.,B.A.,9,Menai  View-terrace,UpperBangor,NorthWales.
Matthews,  Frank  H.,  22,  Wentworth-street,  Bolton,  Lane.
Matthews,  H.  de  Couves,  The  Mount,  Monken  Hadley,  Barnet.
McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Ardenconnel-row,  near  Helensburgh,  N.B.
McHuGH,  P.  A.,  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKeelie,  Miss  Helen  Gr.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N.,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McNeile,  Mrs.,  Admiralty  House,  Lewes.

Melville,  Andrew  P.,  0,  West  Castle-road,  Mercliiston,  Edinburgh.

Merrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria.

Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barusley.

Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley -square,  V\.

Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

MiLMAN,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  17,  Southwell-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,K.O.I.E.,  Simla,  India.

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.

Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,V/alsingliam  House,  Piccadilly, W.

JMonteagle,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Trenchard,  Fojaies,  co.  Limerick.

Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

Moore,  Lt.-General  Montgomery,  Bellevue,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.

MoRDAN,  Miss  C.  E.,  15,  Queen-square,  W.C.

Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.  .

MoRisoN,  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh.  .■

MoRisoN,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.

Moul,  Mrs.,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

MouLE,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts.

MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Munro  &  Co.,  7,  Rue  Scribe,  Paris.
Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Shelley  House,  Chelsea,  S.W.
MoYNiHAN,  B.  G.  A.,  M.B.  (Loud.),  The  General  Infirmary,  Leeds.
MuNRO,  Henry  Acland,  B.A.,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.
MuNTHE,  Dr.,  Rome.

Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
Murray,  R.  M.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.P.(Edin.),  10,  Hope-st.,  Edinburgh.
Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile-park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  N.
Murray',  T.  Douglas,  33,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W.
Murray-Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.
Muse,  Mrs.  Eva  S.,  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  U.S.A.
Musk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.
Myers,  A.  T.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  2,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.


386


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Myers,  Mes.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Mylne,  Mrs.,  122,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Nathan,  S.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Eochester.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  The  Rectory,  Southwick,  Brighton.
Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.
Newj30LD,  Miss  A.,  4,  Artillery -buildings,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.
Newsom,  John,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
NiCHOLL,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.
NiCHOLLS,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth.
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  Tlie  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
Nicoll,  Augustus,  M.B.,  99,  Elm  Park -gardens,  S.  Kensington,  S.W.
NicoLSON,  Sib  A.,  K.C.I. E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Embassy,  Constantinople.
■^Nisbet,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.
Noakes,  D.  W.,  23,  Nelson-street,  Greenwich,  S.E.
Noel,  Hon.  PcOden,  St.  Auljyns,  West  Brighton.

Noel-Cox,  Herbert  L.  N.,  2,  Edinburgh  Mansions,  Victoria-st., S.W.

NoRRis,  William  Alfred,  Holmwood  Lodge,  Laton-road,  Hastings.

Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotham,  Kent.

Oakeley,  Miss  H.  D.,  97,  Warwick-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W.

Ogilvie,  G.  M.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Oman,  Mrs.,  St.  Philip's  Lodge,  Painswick-road,  Cheltenham.

Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.

O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,M.B.,  140,Elizabeth-st.,Sydney,NewSouth  Wales.

Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide.

Osborne,  James,  Ph.C,  Her.sham,  near  Walton-on-Thames.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguardo,  Florence.

Paice,  William,  M.A.,  1,  Portman  Mansions,  Baker-street,  W.

Palmer,  Lieut.  H.R.,  R.A.,  The  Grand  Depot  Barracks,  Woolwich.

Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  Melrose,  Porus  P.O.,  Jamaica,  W.I.

Paeker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A.

Parry,  Rev.  William  Edwards,  B.  A.,  1,  Bell-terrace,  Clewer,Windsor.-

Passingham,  Mrs.,  Lanina,  Llandyssil,  Cardiganshire.

Peake,  C.  W.,  B.A,,  c/o  Mr.  Wood,  High-street,  Newport,  Salop.

Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  Apollo-st.,  Bombay.

Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Islands.

Perry,  E.  C,  M.D.,  M.A.,  Superintendent's  Hou.se,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.

Pethybridge,  Walter,  29,  ]\[ethley-street,  Kennington  Cros.s,  S.E.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


387


PetroVO-SoIovOVO,  Michael,  9,  Mohovaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Phillips,  Rev.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Men.
Phillips,  Mrs.  March,  Edmonstone  House,  Cheltenham.
Phipps,  Miss,  Knebworth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts.
Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I. E.E.,  126,  Holmesdale-rd., South  Norwoocl,S.E,
Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.
Pitt-Taylor,  F.  S.,  The  Lawn,  Rock  Ferry,  Cheshire.
Plenderleith,  William,  60,  Stroud  Green-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.
Plummer,  J.  W.,  Cockermouth.

Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street,  London,  W.

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Glensouthwell,  Rathfarnham,  co.  Dublin.

Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Porter,  Mrs.,  Ivanhoe,  Alum  Chine-road,  Bournemouth.

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  op,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W.

Postgate,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Campden  Hill-square,  London,  W.

Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles.  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.

Powys,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Pribitkof,  v.,  23,  Troitzky  Pereoulok,  St.  Petersburg.

Prickett,  Miss  L.  M.,  Ross  Cottage,  Fortune  Gate-road,  Harlesden.

Prothero,  Mrs.,  63,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge.

Pryce,  R.  a.  Vaughan,  New  College,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Pullen,  Miss,  Milton  View,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.

Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Shotley  Bridge,  co.  Durham.

Pye,  William  A.,  25,  Mark-lane,  London,  E.C.

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela.  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Raalte,  Charles  van,  Aldenham  Abbey,  Watford.

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  52,  Grosvenor-street,  London,  W.

Raleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbroke-road,  London,  W.

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W.

Ramsay,  Lady,  The  Old  House,  Wimbledon,  S.W.

Raper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Raphael,  Mrs.  Walter,  7,  Bramham-gardens,  S.  Kensington,  S.W.

Raupert,  Rev.  H.  G.,  10,  Park-street,  Bath.

Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor.

Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  Thornclifle,  Cheltenham.


•388


List  of  Members  and  Associcdes.


Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  necar  Warrington.
Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  FarclifFe-place,  Bradford.
RiCHAEDSON,  Robert  E.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
RiDDiFORD,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Brookfield,  Hucclecote,  near  Gloucester.
Ridley,  Frank  C,  17,  Margaret-street,  London,  W.
Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Botanic  Gardens,  Singapore.
Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.
RiGG,  Thomas  S.  J. ,B. A., General  Post  Office,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
Ritchie,  Miss,  131,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W.
Roberts,  William  Johnson,  140,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.
Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  Brook  Dene,  1 4,  Strawberry  Hill-road,  Twickenham.
Robertson,  C.  Lockhart,  M.D.,  GunsGreen,The  Drive,  Wimbledon.
Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh.
Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.
■^Robertson,  Miss  N.,  1,  Oakley-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Robin,  Percy  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robinson,  Edward,  4,  Castelnau-gai-dens,  Barnes,  S.W.
Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
-Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Vicarage,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-on-
Thames.

-Rogers,  George  F.,  M.A.,  123,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Pai'k,  W.
Ross,  A.  Gait, 7,  Edinburgh- terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Rossi-Pagnoni,  Professor  G.F.,  4,  Via  Sabbatini,  Pesaro,  Italy.
Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.
Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.Pv.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  Errington,  Clapham  Park,  S.W.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Amberley  Cottage,  Maidenhead.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  University  Hall,  Gordon-square,  London,  W.C.
Rylands,  Thomas  G.,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Highfields,  Thelwall,  near
Warrington.

^Sajous,  Charles  E.,  M.D.,  28,  Rue  de  Madrid,  Paris.
Salmond,  Percy  N.,  Captain  3rd  Royal  Scots,  Eldermere,  Ilkley.
(Samaldas,  Lalubhai,  Chief  Revenue  Officer,  Bhavnager,  Bombay

Presidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath.
-Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  40,  Portland-place,  London,  W.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.  \
Saunders,  Thomas  Bailey,  M.A.,  13,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  S.W.
*Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.  .
ScHRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178^  Earls  Court-road,  S.W.  .


■  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


389


ScHREiBER,  Major,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  Caimizaro,  "Wimbledon,  S.W.
SciiWABE,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  3,  Upper  Belgrave-road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigli,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRiPPS,  T.  Cecil,  Adelphi  Chambers,  London,  AV.C.
*Scudamore,  Mrs.,  3,  Tollington-park,  Holloway,  London,  N.
Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmersley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N.
Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.
Selous,  Edmund,  Barton  Mills,  near  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.
Shaen,  Rev.  Richard,  M.A.,  West  Cottage,  Royston,  Herts.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sharpe,  James  W.,  M.A.,  Woodroffe,  Portarlington-road,  Bourne-
mouth.

Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atlierstone.

Sheppard,  W.  F.,  M.A.,  2,  Temple-gardens,  E.C.

Shove,  Miss  E.,  K.Q.C.P.L,M.B.,  25,  St.  Mark's-cres.,  Regent'sPk.,  N. W.

Shroff,  M.  M.,  R.  H.  Bhaya's  House,  Bora  Bazar-st.,  Fort  Bombay,  India.

*Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifford  Rectory,  Essex.

*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.  ,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.  C. ,  U.S.A.
SuuTTLEWORTH,  JoHN,  Kenmare  Bridge,  by  New  Galloway,  Kirkcud-
brightshire, N.B.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  1-4,  Cornwall-gardens,  S.W.
Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W.
Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Kniglitsbridge,  London,  W.
Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  M.A.,  LL.B.,Downpatrick,  co.  Down,  Ireland.
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Sladen,  Douglas,  B.  W.,

Sloman,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Birkenhead.

Sloman,  Samuel  George,  Junr.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.

Smart,  J.  Naish,  Sydney  House,  Burnham.  .  .

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  H.  B.,  M.A.,  32,  Royal  York-ter.,  Clifton,  Bristo

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Riverbank,  Putney,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  John  George,  Junr.,  Hill  House,  Surbiton.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  52,  Stanhope-gardens,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


390  List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Smith,  R.  Morris,  3,715,  Cliestnut-street,  W.  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.

Smith,  R.  Pearsall, 41,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R.  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.

Smith,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Wallace  A.,  .34,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,  W,

Snaith,  James  F.,  Ancaster  House,  48,  Granada-road,  Southsea,  Hants.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

SoloviofF,  Wsevolod,

Soltykoff,  Prince  Alexis,

Somerset,  Lady  Henry,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Somerset,  H.  Somers,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  2-5,  York -street,  Portman-square,  W.

Sperling,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Spinks,  Judge,  Vernon,  British  Columbia.

St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.

Stackhouse,  Mrs.  M.  F.,  Stackhouse,  Settle.

Stainforth,  Miss  Emily,  15,  Matheson-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Stanley,  Henry  M.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  S.W.
Stan  way.  Miss  Emily,  17,  Park-street,  Taunton.
Staple Y,  Alfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  House,  Wimbledon,  S.W.
Stearn,  H.T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Stephenson,  Sir  Augustus  K.,  K.C.B.,  Q.C.,  46,  Ennismore-gar-
dens,  S.W.

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  George,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta.

Stevenson,  R.  L.,  Vailinia  Plantation,  Upolu,  Samoan  Islands.

Stewart,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Larghan,  Coujsar  Angus,  N.B.

Stillman,  W.  J.,  3,  Challoner-street,  West  Kensington,  W.

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport.

Stout,  George  F.,  M.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Sturges,  Mrs.William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  London, W.

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.

■*Sugden,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

SuMMERSON,  Samuel  J.,  Haughton-le-Skerne,  Darlington.

Swan,  0.  A.,  10,  Dclamere-street,  London,  S.W.

Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent.

SwANWiCK,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Swire,  Henry,  Captain,  2,  Nightingale-place,  Woolwich.

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W.

Synge,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  1,  Daleham-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


391


Taxcred,  Mrs.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Tanner,  Ernest,  Hazlehurst,  Penarth.

Tanner,  Slingsby,  104b,  Mount-street,  P>erkeley -square,  W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.
Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taxis,  The  Princess,  Grosse  Mohrengasse,  Vienna.
Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Lismore,  Guildford.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  Portland  House,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road,

Blackheath,  S.E.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  Joseph  William,  F.LC.,F.C.S.,  Drumpellier,  Gloucester
Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  Woodstock,  Waverley  rd.,  Liverpool.
Thompson,  Rev.  Joseph  L.,  Mahaica,  E.G.  Demerara,  British  Guiana

South  America.

Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.
Thurstan,  Frederick,  W.,  M.A.,  La  Martiniere,  Lucknow,  India.  \
Todd,  Mrs.,  Maclean,  Clarence  River,  New  South  Wales.
Tooth,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  W^oodside,  Croydon.
TowNLEY,  Miss  F.  M.,  47,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Trahbrne,  Mrs.,  Coedriglan  Park,  Cardiff.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J. P.,  Ivenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaiis.
Tucke.y,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  33,  Green-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
TuKER,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Milton  Hall,  Cambridgeshire.
Tweedie,  David  M.,  Adelaide.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Underwood,  Rev.  Canon  C.  W.,  M.A.,  Histon  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.

Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.

Van  Rentergiiem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  2-51,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.

Venn,  J.,D.Sc.,  F.  R.S.,  Summerleigli,  Chine  Crescent-rd.,  Bournemouth.

Verrall,  Mrs  ,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.


392


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Yerrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.
YiAN-WiLLiAMS,  Rev.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place,  North  Shields.
Vicars,  G.  R.,  M.D.,  Branston,  Lincoln.

ViLLAMARiNA,  TiiE  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.
Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France.
Vincent,  R.  Harry,  Fernbank,  Leytonstone,  N.E.
ViviAx\,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

VoRES,  Arthur,  M.Pv.C.S.,  8,  Mansfield-street,  Cavendish-square,  W.  ■
Walker,  Mrs.  Stewart,  Shi-ewsbury  House,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
*Walwyn,  IMrs.,  9,  Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Warburton,  PiEV.  W.  T.,  M.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  IsT.B.

Warter,  M  rs.  Tatham,  Longden  Manor,  Pontesford,  Salop.

Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa,01d  Swinford,Stourbridge„

WATERHOUSE,C.H.,M.D.,56,KarlLudwig  Strasse,Ober-Dobling,  Vienna.

Watson,  Rev.  John,  M.A.,  18,  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.

Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C,  39,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.

Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W..

Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Wedi),  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Caml:)ridge.

Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W..
Wemyss,  Miss  A.,  Washwell  House,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  2,  Ridge  way-road,  Redhill.
Whately',  Mrs.  Henry, Campden  House-road,  Kensington,  W.
Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambi'idge.
WiiisiiAW,  Mrs.  Berhnard,  27,  Upper  Bedford-place,  W.C.
WiiiTAKER,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  107,  Florence-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.
Whitehead,  John,  Esplanade,  Guernsey.

WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Larkfield,  near  Maidstone.  •  .  ;

Wilde,  Mrs.  Oscar,  16,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.

WiLLAN,  Miss  Florence  M.,  50,  Weymouth-street,  Portland-place,  W..

WiLLARD,  Miss  Frances  E.,  The  Cottage,  Reigate.

WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.

Williams,  A.  C.  Redsiiawe,  9,  Upper  Beulah-hill,  Upper  Norwood, S.E..

Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G.,M.A.,Ketteringham,Wymondham,  Norfolk.

Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham,

Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.

W^ilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Dunridge,  West  Hill,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea..

Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  The  Woodlands,  Athlone.  .  '  ■' ■  •'

WindeyeRjThe  Hon.  W.  C.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Sydney,  Australia..


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


393^


WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.  Edward,  40,  Albion-street^,  Hyde  Park,  W.
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  42,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.
Wisden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadsvater,  near  Worthing.
WiTiiERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.C.
WiTTiG,  Gregor  C,  2,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.
WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  Moika  28,  St.  Petersburg.
Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.
W^OOdhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Woodruffe,  Miss  Adelaide,  c/o  National  Provincial  Bank  of  Eng-
land, 88,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.

Wright,  Mrs.  Almroth  E.,  Oakhurst,  Netley,  Hants.

Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London, W.-

W^'LD,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.

Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.

Yearsley,  p.  Macleod,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings-
bury-Neasden,  N.W.

Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.

Young,  Rev.  Charles -John,  F.R.A.S.,  Staflbrd-place,  Halifax.

Young,  Professor  William  H.,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant- Secretary,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelpbi^
London,  W.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  flSSOCIHTES  OF  THE  MERICM  BRMCH.

(December  31sT,  1893.)  ■  '  '


Names  of  Members  are  i^rinted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  inefixed  hy  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  are  2yrinted  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  when  another  Country  is  named.


Abbey,  Charlotte  L.,  ]\I.D.,  717,  Franklin-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Adams,  Robert  C,  45,  Metcalfe-street,  Montreal,  Canada.
Albert,  Mrs.  H.  M.  L.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.
Albree,  John,  Junr.,  56,  Bedford-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Alden,  F.  E.,  Vandergrift  Building,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Alexander,  Don,  513,  McCallie-avenue,  Chattanooga,  Tenn.
"^Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.

Allen,  Prof.  J., Univ. of  City  of  N. Y.,AVashington-sq.,]Srew  York,  N.Y.

Allen,  Rev.  M.  Theresa,  Liberal,  Mo.

Alling,  Joseph  T.,  72,  Oxford-street,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Almy,  Francis,  Buffixlo,  N.Y.

Ames,  Mrs.  Joseph  B.,  5,  Richter-teri-ace,  Brookline,  Mass.
Andrew,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Old  Colony  Hill,  Hingham,  Mass.
Annes,  a.  L.,  Wansan,  AVis.

Arnold,  J.  N.,  19,  College-street,  Providence,  R.L

AuEL,  Mrs.  C,  65,  Lefferts-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Austen,  Mrs.  George,  Morris  Plains,  New  Jersey.

Avery,  Miss  M.  H.,137,  Academy-st.,  Poughkeepsie,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ayer,  J.  C,  68,  We,st  91st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ayers,  George  D.,  Maiden,  Mass.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  2,729,  Prairie  avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Baker,  Dr.  Smith,  Winston-building,  Utica,  N.Y.

Baldwin,  Henry  C,  1729,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Ballou,  Mrs.  M.  D.  B.,  5,558,  Drexel-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Barnes,  W.  A.,  New  Madrid,  Mo.


«


Lid  of  Memhcrs  and  Associates.


39


Bare,  James  M.,  c/'o  Institute  of  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London

Central  Institute,  Exhibition-road,  London,  S.AV.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  Walnut-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.
Beale,  C.  W.,  Arden,  North  Carolina.

Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Bigelow,  Dr,  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Blackford,  A.,  322,  South  Main-street,  Findlay,  Ohio.
Blackmar,  Paul,  406,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Blake,  Francis,  Keowaydin,  Weston,  Auburndale,  P.O.,  Mass.
Blodgett,  C,  M.D.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.
Blodgett.  Mrs.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.
Boardman,  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Boon,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  Villa  de  la  Grazia,  Alassio,  Riviera  di  Ponenta,
Italy.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

BowDiTCH,  Professor  U.  P.,  Harvaid  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  179,  Commoiiwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Braggiotti,  Isidore,  208,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Breed,  Stephen  A.,  17,  St.  James'-a venue,  Boston,  Mass.

Briggs,  Dr.  E.  C,  125,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass,

Brimmer,  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brimmer,  Mrs.  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Dr.  F.  D.,  524,  Van  Buren  street,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Brooks,  Henry,  15,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Delass  S.,  309,  Main-street,  Peoria,  111.

Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Browne,  Mrs.  L.  Andrews,  131,  Sargent  street,  Newton,  Mass.

Brush,  Miss  Helen  C,  71,  West  47th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

BRY.^i.N,  W.,  c/o  Messrs.  Bottler  Bros.,  Main-street,  Houston,  Texas.

BuFFETT,  Dr.  E.  p.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

BuNDY,  Mrs.  Mary  E.,  582,  La  Salle-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

BuRGE,  jNIiss  Marie  L.,  132,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Carey,  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

CarnOChan,  Gouverneur  M.,  46,  Exchange-place,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carpenter,  Frank  B.,  Tiffany  Building,  337,  4th-avenue,  New  York.

Carpenter,  Franklin  P»-.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.


396


List  of  Members  ami  Associates.


Carpenter,  Mrs.  Franklin  E.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle  street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Casey,  Theodore  B.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Catlin,  Captain  R.,  1,428,  Euclid-place,  AVashington,  D.C.

Oaulkins,  Silas,  Soldiers'  Home,  San  Bernardino,  California.

Chapin,  F.  W.,  M.D.,  Hot  Springs,  Virginia.

Chapman,  Mrs.  J.  J.,  327,  "West  82nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Cheesman,  Dr.  W.  S,,  22,  AVilliam-street,  Auburn,  N.Y.

Cheney,  Dr.  Fred.  E.,  Hotel  Bristol,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  W.  T.,  220,  Broad-street,  Rome,  Georgia.

Chenoweth,  Mrs.  C.  Van  D.,  64,  East  86th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Chick,  Frank  W.,  Madrid,  Franklin  Co.,  Maine.

Clarke,  J.  E.,  Ph.D.,  214,  South  43rd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  603,  Buchtel-avenue,  Akron,  Ohio.

Cleaves,  N.  Porter,  29,  India-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  N.H.

Cobb,  Mrs.  Francis  D.,  Barnstaple,  Mass.

Cochran,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  care  of  Messrs.  Todd,  Donigan  Iron  Co.,

Louisville,  Ky.
Coffin,  Charles  A.,  109,  Nahant-street,  Lynn,  Mass.
Coffin,  C.  P.,  209,  Washington-street,  Room  3,  Boston,  Mass.
CoLSON,  W.  A.,  Cor.  Buckner-avenue  and  Bluff-street,  Peoria,  111.
CoMPTON,  Prof.  Elias,  "Wooster  University,  "Wooster,  Ohio.
Comstock,  C.  B.,  39,  Whitehall-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  K.,  220,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.
Cook,  George C,  1,734,  Cambridge-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
CooNLEY,  Mrs.  John  C,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.
Cooper,  James,  P.O.  Box  1,942,  Montreal,  Quebec,  Canada.
Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Corning,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  Oxford,  Maine.

CoESER,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  1,819,  Vine-place,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Cory,  C  B.,  8,  x\rlington-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cotton,  Mary  H.,  M.D.,  114,  West  123rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Cowles,  Dr.  E.,  INIcLean  Asylum,  Somerville,  Mass.

Crafts,  James  M.,  59,  IMarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Crafts,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Craig,  John  W.,  Box  291,  San  Bernardino,  Cal.

Crepin,  Ernest  E.,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Critchlow,  E.  B.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.

Crocker.  Mrs.  F.  E.,  P.  O.  Box  59,  Columbus  Junction,  Iowa.
Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Gardner-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Society  Natural  History,  Boston,  Mass.
Croswell.  James  G.,  17,  West  44th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates


397


HERS,  Dr.  T.  D.,  "Walnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.
V xiXGHAM,  S.  A.,  Altoona,  Florida.
Ci  ;ran,  Richard  L.,  219,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y.
Curtis,  W.  E.,  14,  West  20th-street,  IsTew  York,  N.Y.
' SHiNG,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Highland  Park,  111.

C  JTLER,  Miss  Anna  A.,  M.D.,  284,  Orange-street,  N"e^v  Haven,  Conn.
Da^ley,  Judge  Abram  H.,  16,  Court-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Darrow,  Clarence  S.,  3,559,  Vernon-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Davidson,  Thomas,  Prof.,  239,  West  105th-street,  Kew  York,  N.Y.
Davis,  Samuel  G.,  120,  Highland-street,  Eoxbury,  Mass.
Dawbarn,  Egbert  H.  M.,  jM.D.,  105,  W.  74th-st.,  New  York,  X.Y.
Delabarre,  Prof.  G.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin  F.,  112,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Room  22,  94,  Washington  street,  Chicago,  111.
Dike,  Miss  Florence  B.,  207,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
DiMMOCK,  George,  P.  O.  Box  15,  Canobie  Lake,  N.H.
DoANE,  IMrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Dodge,  J.  T.,  340,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.
Dole,  Nathan  H.,  "  Hedgecote,"  Glen-road,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Donald,  PtEV.  Dr.  E.  Winchester,  Trinity  Church,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-a-venue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Doty,  Asa  C,  Box  523,  Cuba,  N.Y.

Dow,  Alexander,  331,  West  Soth-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Drown,  T.  Pickering,  351,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Duncan,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Dunham,  Miss  E.  L.,  37,  East  36th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Dunham,  Dr.  W.  R.,  Stoneham,  Mass.
Dwight,  Mrs.  James,  Stockbi-idge,  Mass.

Edmunds,  Albert  J.,  c/o  Historical  Society  of  Penna,  1,300,  Locust-
street,  Philadelphia.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  c/o  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  161,  Main-street,  Keene,  N.H.
Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  330,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Errani,  Mrs.  Charlotte,  118,  East  26th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
EsTERLY,  Mrs.  G.  W.,  104,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Esty,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass,
Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Evans,  Frederick,  Junr.,  Keiuark  Daily  Advertiser,  'i>[e\v&rk,  N.J.
Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  23,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Everett,  Torrey,  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.
Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  J.,  Eliob,  Maine.


398


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Fayes,  Pkof.  Chas.,  LL.D.,  150,  East  45th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Felton,  Thomas  C,  Hotel  Ludlow,  Boston,  Mass.
Fergusox,  J.  H.,  Talmage,  JSTebraska.
Fields,  Mks.  James  T.,  148,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
FiLLEBROwN,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  264,  Boylston-street,  Bo.ston,  Mas.5.
FisKE,  Bev.  Eiciijiond,  D.D.,  251,  Lexington-st.,  East  Boston,  Mass.
FLunRER,  Bev.  Charles,  D.D.,  Grand  Bapids,  Michigan.
Forbes,  John  M.,  Milton,  Mass.

Forbes,  W.  H.,  181,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Ford,  Austin  E.,  Freeman's  Journal,  11,  Park-row,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ford,  Professor  Darius  R.,  D.D.,  Elmira  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Foster,  Mrs.  Wm.,  82,  Huntington-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Frothingham,  O.  B.,  118,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

FuUerton,  C.  W.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.

FuLLERTON,  Professor  G.  S.,  4,1  1G,  Spruce-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  470,  North  State-sti-eet,  Chicago,  111.

Gale,  Harlow  S.,  43,  Biilow-strasse,  Berlin.

Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Gardiner,  Professor  II.  N.,  23,  Craft's-avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Ma.ss.

Genuno,  Prof.  J.  Franklin,  Ph.D.,  Amherst,  Mass.

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.

Gill,  Wm.  Fearing,  3,  East  86th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Gilman,  Benjamin  I.,  Oread-street,  Woi-cester,  Mass.

Gleason,  Adele  a.,  M.D.,  The  (Sanitarium,  Elmira,  N.Y.

Goddard,  George  A.,  1,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Goddard,  Mrs.  Moses,  25,  Brown-street,  Pi'ovidence,  R.I.

GooDALE,  Henry  Sterling,  400,  AYest  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

GooDNOW,  H.  R.,  32,  Remsen-street,  Brooklyn,  New  York.

GooDRiDGE,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Goodwin,  W.  H.,  Junr.,  Sioux  City,  Iowa.

Gray',  Miss  Agnes  W.,  1,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Greeley,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Nashua,  Iowa.

Green,  Mrs.  Richmond,  Easthampton,  Mass.

Greene,  Miss,  Hotel  Brunswick,  New  York,  N.Y.

Gkidley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Rev.  R.  A.,  Columbus-avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.
Griffing,  Mrs.  0.  R.,  729,  Amsterdam-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Groot,  Mrs.  W.  de,  c/o  Mrs.  J.  de  F.  Windle,  South-st.,  Stamford,  Conn.
Grover,  Rev.  G.  W.,  22,  Temple-street,  Nashua,  New  Hampshire.
Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.
Hale,  George  S.,  10,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hall,  Hon.  G.  E.,  Consulat  Imperial  de  Turquie,  San  Francisco,  Cal,


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


399


ITall,  Professor  James,  New  York  State  Museum,  Albany,  N.Y.

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Tabor,  Fremont  Co.,  Iowa.

Hamblet,  Eugene,  P.  O.  Box  12,  Dracut,  Mass.

Hamilton,  C.  M.,  50,  Main-street,  Salamanca,  N.Y.

Hansen,  Otto  R.,  649,  Cass-stre«t,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,710,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Harris,  Rev.  J.A.,D.D.,  St.  Paul's  Rectory,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia.

Harris,  John  J.,  St.  Louis  Insane  Asylum,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,914,  23rd-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.O.

Hartzell,  T.  S.,  73,  Navarre-street,  Canton,  Ohio.

Harwood,  C.  H.,  M.D.,  208,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hawkins,  William  M.,  G,  Coit  Block,  West  Swan-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Haworth,  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.

Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hayward,  Alvinza,  224,  California-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Heard,  John,  Junr.,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  &  Co.,  London,  England.

Hedges,  Mrs.  Sidney  M.,  76,  Highland-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.

Heilner,  Rev.  S.  A.,  D.D.,  813,  South  3rd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.

Heyer,  George  W.,  619,  Main-street,  Houston,  Texas.

Heywood,  Charles,  Gardner,  Mass.

Hicks,  Ben.j.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen's  Co.,  N.Y.

Hiles,  Ogden,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.

Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  19,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Hoffman,  Professor  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.

Hogg,  Mrs.  John,  50,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Ma.ss.

Holbrook,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  N.Y.

HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holladay,  Prof.  Waller,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

PIoLMES,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  112,  West  118th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Rev.  S.  V.  V.^  1,262,  New  Hampshire  Ave.,  Washington,  D.C

Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holt,  L.  Emmett,  M.D.,  15,  East  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

HoMMEL,  P.  A.,  794,  2nd-avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.

Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hotchkiss,  Miss  Jeannie  E.,  M.A.,  Rathbun  House,  Elmira,  New  York.

HoYLE,  W.,  P.  O.  Box  407,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

Hubbard,  Robert  M.,  322,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.C.

Hudson,  Woodward,  Concord,  Mass.

Hull,  Miss  P.  C,  22,  John-street,  Providence,  R.I.

Hunt,  Chas.  R.,  M.D.,  262,  Union-street,  Bedford,  Mass.


400


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


Hurley,  A.  M.,  cornerof  First  and  Monmouth-sts.,IndepencTeiicejOregoii).

HusE,  Wm.,  Ponca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska.

HuTcnixsoN,  Dr.  Mahlox,  100,  State-street,  Cliicago,  111.

Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Jackson,  Mrs.  Flora  J.,  558,  Mihvaukee-street,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

James,  Mrs.  C.  E.  L.,  c/o  Bleeclier  Luce,  10th  and  Chestnut-streetSy

Fort  Smith,  Ark.
James,  Dr.  F.  H.,  2,627,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
January,  Mrs.  J.  Lixdell,  e/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  London..
Jayne,  H.  La  Barre,  505,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Jewett,  Miss  S.  O.,  South  Berwick,  Maine.

JoHXSOX",  Charles  E,.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.

JoHNSOX,  Professor  Roger  B.,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.

Johnson',  Thomas  M.,  Osceola,  St.  Clair  Co.,  Mo.

JoLiNE,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y..

Jones,  Geo.  H.,  561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Jones,  Miss  Theresa  E.,  South  Evanston,  111.

JosLYX,  John  H.,  208,  E.  Water-street,  Elmira,  N.Y.

Judah,  J.  M.,  545,  Shelby-street,  Memphis,  Tenn.

Kehew,  Mrs.  William  B.,  317,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass..

Kelly,  W.  C,  ShelbyviUe,  111.

Kemptox,  Charles  W.,  61,  Oro  Blanco,  Pima  Co.,  Arizona..

Kerlix,  Isaac  N.,  M.D.,  Elwyn,  Delaware  Co.,  Pa.

KiBBE,  A.  B.,  M.D.,  326,  Bailey-building,  Seattle,  Washington.

KiDD,  O.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

KiLNER,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  333,  West  78th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Commonweal th-ave.,  Boston,  Mass..

King,  J.  Stebbins,  M.D.,  Syndicate  Block,  Decatur,  111.

Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  30,  Institute-road,  Worcester,  Mass.

Kopta,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podmok  in  Podmok,  Post  Shiitten-

hofen,  Bohemia.
Krekel,  Mrs.  M.P.,  802,  East  llth-street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Kuhn,  Hamilton,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Kuhn,  Mrs.  Hartman,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Lamont,  Robert,  182,  Willoughby-avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Lang,  B.  J.,  8,  Brimmer-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Latham,  Miss  V.  A.,  B.Sc,  58,  East  University-ave.,  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.
Lathrop,  John,  10,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawrence,  Mrs.  Amory  A.,  59,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  142,  East  18th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


401


Lee,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  21,  Chauncey-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22iid-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Leonhardt,  J.  S.,  M.Sc,  M.D.,  1,427,  0-street,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.
Leubuscher,  a.  L,  76,  Nassau-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Lewis,  P.  M.,  M.D.,  Lecoaipton,  Kansas.
Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.
Librarian,  Cassadaga  Lake  Library  Association,  Lily  Dale,  N.Y.
Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.
Librarian,  Cutting's  Free  Library,  Lunenburgh,  Yermont.
Librarian,  Denver  Public  Library,  Denver,  Colo.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass.

Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Michigan  State  Libx'ary,  Lansing,  Mich.

Librarian,  University  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

Librarian,  Ohio  University,  Athens,  Ohio.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Rochester  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  New  York, N.Y.
Librarian,  San  Francisco  Free  Public  Library,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Librarian,  (Springfield)  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.
LiPPiTT,  General  Francis  J.,  9,  Blake-row,  U.S.  Naval  Academy,

Annapolis,  Indiana.
LiTTLEFiELD,  J.,c/o  S.  S. White  (t  Co.,  12th&  Chestnut-sts.,  Philadelphia.
LocKwooD,  Colonel  J.  S.,  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lodge,  Mrs.  John  E.,  31,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
LoMBARDi,  C,  1,314,  Rusk-avenue,  Houston,  Texas.
Long,  George  E.,  Jos.  Dixon  Crucible  Company,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Long,  Rev.  J.  D.,  Babylon,  Long  Island,  New  York.
LouNSBERRY,  C.  A.,  G'lobe  Office,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
LYiMAN,  Joseph  B.,  University-bldgs.,  Washington-sq.,  E.,  New  York.
Macdonald,  Dr.  R.  C,  34,  Parmenter-street,  Boston,  Mass.
MacDonough,  Thomas  B.,  West  End,  Long  Branch,  N.J.
Macleod,  Miss  Gertrude  E.,  1,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Mallery,  Mrs.  Garrick,  1,323,  N.-st.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
Manning,  F.  J.  H.,  2Sh,  North  Front-street,  Portland,  Oregon.
Marshall,  Rev.  A.  A.,  D.D.,  Crystal  Springs,  Georgia.
Marshall,  Henry  R.,  Macintyre  Bg.,  874,  Broadway,  New  York,N.Y.
Marvin,  Walter  T.,  17,  Lichtenhainer-strasse,  Jena,  Germany.
Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason,  Miss  Ida,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason,  H.  L.,  39,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.


402


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Mather,  Enoch,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  124,  Hamilton-cavenue,

Patterson,  N.J.
McArthur,  James,  3,848,  Lake-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
McClelland,  Major  G.  P.,  Davenport,  Iowa.

McCuNE,  Dr.  Olive  F.,  53,  Orange-street,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y.
McEwEN,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y.
McGee,  W.  J.,  U.S.  Geological  Survey,  Washington,  D.C.
McHexry,  Mrs.  J.  Howard,  Pikesville,  Ealto.  Co.,  Maryland.
McIlwraitii,  H.  p.,  Muskegon,  Mich.
McVicker,  J.  H.,  McYicker's  Theatre,  Chicago,  111.
Mendenhall,  Mrs.  E.  P.,  Duluth,  Minn.

Mendeniiall,  Nereus,  M.D.,  Guilford  College,  Guilford  Co.,  N.C.

Metcalp,  Mrs.  I.  H.,  81,  Angell-street,  Providence,  R.T.

Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Peterborough,  Madison  Co.,  N.Y.

Millet,  Josiaii  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

MiLLiKEN,  George,  3,614,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

MiNOT,  Professor  Charles  S.,  22,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Minturn,  Miss,  109,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mitchell,  James,  Stock  Exchange,  New  York,  N.Y.

Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  34,  East  29th-street,  Chicago,  111.

Moth,  M.  J.,  M.D.,  3438,  Indiana-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Myers,  W.  H.,  M.D.,  15,  West  Wayne-street,  Port  Wayne,  Ind.

Nagles,  Miss  Maria  K.,  1,214,  Walnut-street,  Phila.,  Pa.

Nevins,  Miss  Anna  K.  20,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Neweold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  4,116,  Spruce-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Newcomb,  C.  A.,  1,145,  Woodward-avenue,  Detroit,  Mich.

Newcomb,  Prof.  Simon,  Washington,  D.C.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heeer,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Ney,  G.  S.,  M.D.,  27,  Adams-avenue  East,  Detroit,  Michigan.
Nichols,  Miss  A.  B.,  92,  La  Salle-street,  Chicago,  111.
Nims,  F,  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.
Noele,  Louis  Spencer,  Leadville,  Colo.

NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary  A.,  206,  West  71st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

NoRRis,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Marion,  Marion  Co.,  Ohio.

Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119i,  Yoi-k-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Nye,  William  B  ,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Oldham,  F.  F.,  Blymyer  Building,  opp.  Post  Office,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.

Oliver,  George,  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Ormsby,  George  F.,  113,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-sti-eet,  Boston,  Mass.

Palmer,  Hon.  Thomas  W.,  1,040,  Woodward-ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.

Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Parke,  Miss  M.  P.,  117,  West  49th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


403


Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Parkman,  Miss  M.  R.,  Hotel  Huntington,  Huntington-ave., Boston,  Mass.

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.

Peabody,  John  E.,  183,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

pECKnAM,  Dr.  Grace,  25,  Madison-avemie,  New  York,  N.Y.

Pedigo,  Dr.  Lewis  G.,  Lock  Box  259,  Roanoke,  Yirguiia.

Pelleav,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massaehusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Pendleton,  Miss,  1,522,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Penfield,  Sophia,  M.D.,  Danbury,  Conn.

Perkins,  Mrs.  A.  T.,  112,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Perkins,  Mrs.  Charles  E.,  223,  Commonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

Perkins,  Mrs.  E.  H.,  5,  East  40tli-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Perkins,  Franklin  R.,  294,  Linwood-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Peerin,  Mrs.  E.  O.,  Stanton,  Florida.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Perry,  Thos.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-sti-eet,  Boston,  Mass.
Peters,  E.  T.,  Box  265,  Washington,  D.C.
Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  Forest  Hill-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Peterson,  Dr.  Frederick,  201,  West  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Plumb,  D.  S.,  24,  Boudinot-street,  Newark,  N.J.
Plummer,  J.  W,,  200,  Randolph-street,  Chicago,  111.
Preston,  Mrs.  William  G.,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston,  Mass.
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  71,  Marlborough-street,  Boston^  Mass.
Pumpelly,  Raphael,  Bainbridge,  Georgia.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  ]\Iass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  George,  50,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quirk,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  Payton  and  Co.,  765,  Calle

■  Moreno,  Boenos  Ayres,  South  America.
Raine,  R.  J.,  Carleton-place,  Ontario,  Canada.
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirklaud-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Randall,  Herbert,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan.
Ranney,  E.  H.,  Kalamazoo,  Michigan.
Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Ransom,  Paul  C,  1,298,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Raymond,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  Carey-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  34,  Gramei-cy-park,  New  York,  N.Y.


404.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Reece,  Mrs.  Lucy,  110,  Osborne-street,  La  Porte,  Ind.

*E,EES,  Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  Wayside,  Scarsdale,  New  York,  N.Y,

E.EMEE,  William  A.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Reynolds,  Edward,  M.D.,  130,  Marlborough- street,  Boston,  Mass.

Reynolds,  Rotii,  Lock  Box  32,  Gainesville,  Florida.

Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.

Richardson,  Mrs.  Abby  S.,  2-56,  West  lOOth-street,  New  York,  N.Y..

Richardson,  Charles,  G08,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Richardson,  M.  T.,  Ridgewood,  New  Jersey.

Richardson,  Dr.  W.  L.,  225,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
RiCKER,  James  W.,  City  Collector,  City  Hall,  Boston,  Mass.
Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  7,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
RoBBiNS,  Miss  H.  L.,  116,  West  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Rodman,  Miss  Emma,  174,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
RoLFE,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.
Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Yernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
RoTCH,  Miss  Joanna,  Milton,  Mass.

Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Rumsey,  Mrs.  B.  C,  cor.  Delaware-ave.  and  Tracey  st.,  Buffalo,  N.Y..
Russell,  David,  Houston,  Texas.
Salter,  W.  M.,  Silver  Lake,  N.H.

Sargent,  Mrs.  Winthrop,  207,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass,
Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Pembroke-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Savage,  Philip  H.,  28,  Holyoke  House,  Cambridge,  Slass.
Sawyer,  Hon.  Chas.  H.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.
Sawyer,  G.  C,  Utica  Academy,  Utica,  N.Y.
Saavyer,  PtOSWELL  D.,  58,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Schenck,  Miss  Ida  Z.,  114,  East  19th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
ScniEFFELiN,  Mrs.  AV.  H.,  242,  East  15th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Schiller,  Prof.  C,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.
SciiOFiELD,  Edwin,  1,825,  Ontario-street,  Tioga,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Scott,  Mrs.  L.,  The  Amidon,  83rd-street,  and  Boulevard,  New  York.
ScuDDER,  Samuel  H.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Scull,  Mrs.  H.,  The  Arizona,  42nd-st.  and  Greenwood-ave.,  Chicago,  IlL

Sears,  John  D.,  Upper  Sandusky,  Ohio.

Shaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  c/o  J.  Eastman  Chase,  Pocasset,  Mass.

Shaw,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Shaw,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Sued,  Z.,  832,  17th-street,  Denver,  Colorado.

Sheets,  John  C,  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill,  Ohio,

Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.

SniMMiN,  Miss  Blanche,  229,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

SiiiNN,  Miss  Hattie  A.,  Room  46,  115,  Monroe-street,  Chicago,  III.

*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


405'


Shultz,  Rev.  N.,  Box  583,  San  Antonio,  Texas.

SiNTENis,  E.  H.,  P.  O.  Box  115,  Abilene,  Texas.

Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Smith,  George  R.,  M.D.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.

Smith,  Horace  J.,  6,  East  Penn.,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y,

Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111.

Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Smith,  Winfield,  21,  Hathaway-block,  Mihvaukee,  Wis.

Stansell,  Mrs.  E.  T.,  75,  La  Casa,  Denver,  Colo.

Stebbins,  Walter  G.,  City  Hospital,  Boston,  Mass.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo..

Steffens,  J.  L.,  Credit  Lyonnais,  Paris,  France.

Stillmann,  Mrs.  W.  O.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.

Stilwell,  Mary  H.,  D.D.S.,  1,300,  Arch-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Stockton,  John  P.,  Junr.,  Highwood,  Bergen  Co.,  N.J.

Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  229,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Storer,  Albert,  40,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Strauss,  Albert,  124,  West  97th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  1,923,  Dodge-street,  Omaha,  Neb.

Strong,  Charles  A.,  M.D.,  5,516,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  336,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sutherland,  J.  G.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.

Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

Talbot,  Edward  A.,  2,  Elmo-street,  Dorchester,  Mass.

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  247,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Edward  Wyllys,  M.D.,  Mont  Clair,  N.J.

Taylor,  Fredk.,  174,  School-street,  Lowell,  Mass.

Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  305,  West  76th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  305,  West  76th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Tiiorndike,  S.  Lotiirop,  2,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Thorpe,  Joseph  G.,  Jxtnr.,  115,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Tickell,  I.  A.  Arscott,  The  Bayhead,  Narcoossee,  Florida.

Tighe,Jddge  J.G.,Germanioa  Bdg.,  375-379, Fulton- st.,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

TiLTON,  Howard  W.,  12,  Pearl-street,  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.

Totten,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street, Washington,  D.C.

Towner,  Judge  J.  W.,  Santa  Ana,  California.

Toy,  Professor  C.  H.,  7,  Lowell-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Turnbull,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Turner,  Miss  Mary  J.,  11,  Faxon-avenue,  _Quincy,  Mass.


406


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


TuTTON,  Mrs.  Sara,  2,318,  Jay -street,  Denver,  Colorado.

Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.

Tyler,  J.  C,  Magnolia-avenue,  cor.  Olive-street,  Knox.ville,  Tenn.

Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Van  Allen,  Wm.  H.,  St.  John's  School,  34,  Varick-st.,  New  York.N.Y.

Tan  Horn,  U.  L.,  104,  West  29th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Auburn,  Cahfornia.

Van  Norden,  Theodore  L.,  16,  West  48th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Noeden,  Warner  M.,  16,  West  48th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Slyke,  J.  M.,  23,  North  Pinckney-street,  Madison,  Wis.

Vaugiian,  Miss  Virginia,  226,  West  34th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

ViELE,  Herman  K.,  1,722,  Connecticut-avenue,  Washington,  D.C.

Wade,  Miss  Julia  Frances,  Box  268,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  4,403,  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mav^r,  Pa.
Waters,  Miss  Mabel,  360,  First-street,  Elmira,  New  York,  N.Y.
Watson,  Mrs.  F.  S.,  263,  Clarendon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Watson,  Dr.  William  H.,  720,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y.
Watts,  H.  M.,  "  The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Webb,  Mrs.,  34,  Chestnut-street,  Salem,  Mass.
Webster,  David  L.,  332,  Beacon- street,  Boston,  Mass.
Westbrook,  Dr.  R.  B.,  1,707,  Oxford-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Wheeler,  Mrs.  Stephen,  cor.  6tla  and  Ash-streets,  Fort  Smith,  Ark.
Wheeler,  William,  Concoi-d,  Mass.

Wherrell,  John,  M.D.,  228,  North  Mill-street,  Kansas  City,  Kansas.
Whipple,  L.  E.,  328,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
White,  Professor  C.  J.,  36,  Weld  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.
White,  Professor  Frances  E.  ,1,717,  Master-st.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
White,  Mrs.  Harriet  B.,  49,  East  73rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
White,  Henry  G.,  32,  Irving-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
White,  James  T.,  765,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
White,  J.  T.,  M.D.,  Room  206,  Pioneer-bdg.,  Seattle,  Washington,  D.C.
Whiteside,  Miss  H.,  c/o  A.  A.  Carey,  29,  Fairfield-st.,  Boston,  Mass.
Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
WniTON,  Rev.  James  M.,  Ph.D.,  18,  West  9th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
WiLKiNS,  Miss  F.  A.,  c/o  G.  A.  Dewey,  146,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Williams,  Professor  H.  H.,  University  of  N.C.,  Chapel  Hill,  N.C
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  C,  37,  East  50th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111.
Wilson,  Mrs.  John  C,  Framingham,  Mass.
Wilson,  Tom  L.,  Room  10,  Chopin  Block,  Buffiilo,  N.Y.


Lint  of  IJcmhers  and  Associates.


407


*WiLTSE,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Carl-street,  AV.  Roxbury,  Mass.

Winter,  Mrs.  W.,  17,  3rd-ave.,  New  Brighton,  Staten  Island,  New  York.

Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Woodman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Weight,  James  A.,  1,127,  Sherbrook-street,  Montreal,  Canada.

Wright,  Dr.  J.  P.,  36,  New  Montgomery-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Wyatt,  Melvyn  H.,  Sparkill,  Rockland  County,  N.Y.

Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Yates,  W.,  2,937,  Indiana-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

ZuG,  C,  P.O.  Box  1,053,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.


PROCEEDINGS OF  THE


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOLUME  IX.

1894.


A.

A.  ,  Miss,  Automatic  Experiences  of 73-92,  117

American  Brancli  of  the  Society  for  Psycliical  Kesearcli,  List  of  jMeinbers  394
Antesthesia,  Partial,  Prof.  W.  Ramsay's  Observations  on  Mental  Pheno-
mena under ...  236

Anonymously  contributed  Cases 112,  118,  168,  171,  174

Automatic  Writing,  Instances  of 21,  43-127,  185,  226,  255,  256,  334

Telepathic 44,48,52-70

Automatism,  Motor,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 26

B.

B.  ,  Mr.,  Evidence  in  the  case  of  Miss  A. 84

Badger,  Pev.  C,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ... ...  32

Bastian,  Prof.,  F.R.S.,  on  Hysterical  or  Functional  Paralysi-s 201

B^rillon,  Dr. ,  Hypnotic  PjXperiments  of ... 38

Bernadette,  the  Seeress  of  Lourdes,  Apparition  of  the  Virgin  to  ...  170-182
Besant's,  Mrs.,  Defence  of  the  Theosophists,  K  Hodgson's  lto[ily  to  ...  129
Blavatsky,  Madame,  Theosophix;al  Defence  of,  K.  Hodgson's  Reply  to  ...  129
Boissarie,  Dr.,  Evidence  as  to  the  "Miracles"  at  Lourde.s  176-181,  190,  195,  205
Bracaloni,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by  2.30


ii


Index  to  Vol.  IX.


Breuer,  Dr. J.,  and  Dr.  S.  Freud,  on  the  Psychical  Meclianlsm  of


Hysterical  Phenomena  ... 12-15

Brofferio,  Prof.  A.,  "  Per  lo  Spiritismo,"  Review  of  216

Brooke,  Lady,  Evidence  in  the  ease  of  Miss  A. 80

Browne,  Hugh  Junor,  Case  contributed  by ... ... 124,127

Buchanan,  Charles,  Case  recorded  by 191

Buckley,  Dr.  J.  M. ,  Case  recorded  by 170

Buttemer,  K.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by 61

C.

Charcot,  Prof.,  Case  recorded  by 201

Clarke,  Kev.  Father,  S.J. ,  on  the  "Miracles  "  at  Lourdes 161

Collingwood,  ■].  F. ,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  339

Collins,  Helen  S., ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  338

Crookes,  Mrs.,  Evidence  as  to  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home 310

„ W.,F.K,S.,„ „  „  „ 308

D.

Day Y,  .Sir  lluiiiphroy,  Case  recorded  by ...  242

Dordoyne,  Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in,  M.  Leon  Marillier  on 177

Dozous,  Dr.,  on  the  "  Miracles"  at  Lourdes 179,  180

E.

Eddy,  Mrs.  M.  B.  G,,  on  Mind-Healing 107

Eglinton,  W.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 358-361

Elliotsoii,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by  202

Ermaeora,  Dr.  G.  B. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... 68

Eve,  H.  ^y.,  Note  on  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses  251

F.

Faith-Cuke,  Mind-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes,  A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.,

and  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 160

Freud,  Dr.  S. ,  and  Dr.  J.  Breuer,  on tlie  I'syehical  Mechanism  of

Hysterical  Plienonicna 12-15

G.

GlACCHi,  Dr.  Oscar,  Cases  recorded  by  230

Gibert,  Dr. ,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of ... ... 196


Index  to  Vol.  IX.


iii


Gibotteau,  Dr.,  On  some  Experiments  in  Influencing  at  a  Distance
Green,  H.  T.,  Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing  of

Guicciardi,  Signora,  Case  recorded  by  ...

Giirney,  Edmund,  ^Memorial  Lilirary  Catalogue


H.

H.,  Prof.,  Case  contributed  by ...  67

Hadselle,  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by 33,  35

Hartmann,  Dr. ,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  134, 135,  138,  140,  142-145

Helot,  Dr.  C,  on  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes ... ...  199

Hempstead,  A.  E.,  Case  contributed  liy... ... ... ... ... ...  122

Hodgson,  R.,  LL.D.,  on  the  Defence  of  the  Tlieosophists ... ... ...  129

,,  ,, Reply  to  Mr.s.  Besant ...  129-150

,,  ,,  ,, A.  P.  Sinnett 150-159

,,  ,, Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurens ...  354

Home,  D.  D.,  Evidence  for  the  Medium.ship  of 197,  295,  306-311

Howard,  Lady  Mabel,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ...  44

Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  the  "Law  of  Psychic  Phenomena,"  Review  of  ...  230

Hypnotism 12-14,29-31,38,202,211,216

,, Action  at  a  Distance ...  29,  31,  216

,, Curative  Effects  of 202

,, Hysteria  and 12-14

,, Dr.  Moll's  Experiments  on  Rapport  in 211

Hysteria,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  the  Mechanism  of ... 3

I.

Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers,  R.  Hodgson  on  ... ...  345

J.

James,  Prof. ,  on  Trance  Utterances 42

Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  On  the  Psychology  of  Hysteria 16-24

Johnson,  Dr.  W.  G.,  Note  on  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Mcses 251

Judge,  W.  (^.,  E^lence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena ... ...  130-145


...28-31
61,  62
...  228
...  370


K^LLAR,  H.  W.,  on  "Indian  Magic,"  R,  Hodgson's  Criticism  of 354

,,  ,, ,,  "  Slate- Writing  "  Phenomena  witli  W.  Eglinton  358-361

Kirby,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... ... .. ... ...  48

Kirk,  Robert,  "  The  Secret  Commonwealth  of  Elves,  Fauns,  and  Fairies,"

with  an  Introduction  by  Andrew  Lang,  Review  of ... ... ...  367


iv


Index  to  Vol.  IX.


L.

Lang,  Andrew,  "  Coiiii)arative  Psychical  Research,"  by,  Keviewof  367
,, Kirk's  "Secret  Conimonwealtli,"  with  an  Introchiction

by,  Review  of ... 367

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  Reviews  by —

"  Per  lo  Spiritismo,"  by  Prof.  Brofferio 216

"  Psychologic  (ler  Suggestion,"  by  Dr.  8cliiiiiilkunz ... 214

"  Rapport  in  der  Hypnose,"  by  Dr.  A.  Moll 211

Levander,  F.  W.,  Note  on  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses 252

Lewis,  S. ,  Case  contributed  by 64

Library,  Edmund  Gurney  Memorial,  Catalogue 370

Long,  G.  S.,  Case  contrilmted  by 65

Lourdes,  The  Miracles  of,  A.  T.  Myers  M.D.,  and  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  on  ...  160
„ „ Alleged  Cures 181,  190,  192,  193,  195,  196,  198-205


M.

Magontikr,  Marie,  the  Seeres.s  of  Dordognc 178

Marillier,  M.  Leon,  on  tlie  Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne 177,  178

Meetings  of  the  Society,  Oi'dinary 1,  235

Membei's,  Associates,  and  Honorary  Meml)ers,  List  of 371

,, American  Branch,  List  of ... ... 394

Milan  Experiments  with  Eusapia  Palladino ... ... ... ... ...  218

Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes,  A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.,

and  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 160

„ Instances  of 168,  171,  174,  175,  182,  191

Works  on ,  160

Moll,  Dr.  A.,  "  Rapport  in  der  Hypnose,"  Review  of 211

Moses,  AV.  Stainton,  Experiences  of,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 245

„  „  ,, Personal  Record  of 259-264,  266-332

,,  ,, Physical  Phenomena  (Miscellaneous)  ...  259-333

,,  ,, Analysis  of  Evidence  ...  333-352

,, Direct  Writing  265,275,284-286,

294,  303,  304,  322,  324-327,  347,  348
,,  ,,  ,,  ,, Levitations 261-263,  288,  289,  299,  302

,,  ,  ,,  ,, Lights, Materialisations,  Mu.sic,

Scents,  &c.  269-283,  286,  290,  293,
296, 297, 299, 302, 304,  305,  311-333,

338,  339,  342,  343,  345,  346,  348,  349
,,  ,, Passage  of  Matter  through  Matter

267,  268,  287,  293,  297-299,  301-
306,  311,  313-315,  331,  332,  338,  347
,,  ,,  Sketch  (jf  Life  and  Character 245-252


Index  to  Vol.  IX.


V


Myers,  A.  T.,  M. D. , F. R. C. P.  (andF.W.H.  Myers),  on  Mind-Cure,  Faith-
Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes 160

Myers,  F.  AV.  H.  {and  A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.),  Mind-cure,  Faith-cure,  and

the  Miracles  of  Lourdes 160

,, Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Experiences  of 2-1:5

,, ,, Subliminal  Consciousness,  The 3

,, ,, „ Mechanism  of  Hysteria  3

, , , , , , Motor  Automatism ...  26

0.

0.,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by 118


P.

Palladino,  Eusapia,  Milan  Experiments  with 218

Percival,  F.  W. ,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  272,  343
Personality,  Problems  of— See  Subliminal  Consciousness.
Physical  Phenomena,  Alleged  Movements  of  Objects,  &c. ,  without  con-
tact, &c  217,  218-225,  252-352,  359-362

„  ,,  "Direct  Writing"  265,  275,  284-286,  294,  303,  304,

322,  324-327,  347,  348,  359-362

,,  ,,  Fire  Experiments  of  D.  D.  Home 307-.309

,,  ,, Levitations  and  Alterations  of  Medium's  Weight

220,  221,  222,  261-263,  288,  289,  299,  302
,, ■  Lights,  "Materialisation,"  Music,  Scents,  &c.  218,

222,  223,  269-283,  286,  290,  293,  296,  297,  299,  302,
304,  305,  31I-.333,  338,  339,  .342,  343,  345,'34(i,  348,  349
,,  ,,  Passage  of  Matter  through  Matter,  Alleged  267,

268,  287,  293,  297-299,  .301-306,  311,  313-315,

331,  332,  338,  347

Podmore, Frank, Review  of  the  Milan Experiments  with  Eusajna


Palladino 218

R.

R.,  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by 92,93,98,105

Radnor,  Lady,  Evidence  in  the  case  of  ^Nliss  A. 77

Ramsay,  Prof.,  Ph.D.,F.R.S.,  on  Partial  Amesthesia 236

Reed,  Carl  H.,  Case  recorded  by I70,  171


Reviews 211,  214,  216,  218,  225,  230,  367

Richet,  Prof.,  Report  of  Milan  Experiments  with  Eusapia  Palladino  ...  218
Rooke,  Dr.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses ...  .338


vi  . .  Index  to  Vol.  IX.

S.

SCHMIDKUNZ,  Dr.  P.  H.,  "  Psychologie  der  Suggestion,"  Keview  of ...  214

Schofield,  Dr.  A.  T  ,  on  the  Evidence  for  Faith- Healing 174

Self -Suggestion,  a  Possible  Case  of ... 182

Sinnett,  A.  P.,  The  Defence  of tlie  Theosophists,  Mr.  E.  Hodgson's

Eeply  to 129,  150

Smith,  H.  Babington,  IJeviews —

"  Comparative  P.sychical  Peseareli,  "  by  Andrew  Lang  ... 367

Kirk's  "Secret  Commonwealth,"  with  an  Introduction  by  Andrew

Lang  367

"  Spiritismo  e  Telepatia,"  by  Prof.  Tambuvini  ... ... 225

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediuniship  of  Mr.  Stainton

Moses 248,  342,  344

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Stanhope  T. ,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  Mr.
Stainton  Moses 247,  248,  253,  254,  264-266,  275,  276,  281,  282,

283,  284,  286-280,  207,  301-306,  310-324,  326-330,  332,  333,  342

Stead,  W.  T. ,  Cases  contributed  by ... ... ... 52-61

Steven.son,  li.  Louis,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ...  9

St.  Maclou,  Dr.  de,  on  the  Lourdes  Miracles ... ... ...  193

Subliminal  Consciousness,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 3

,,  ,,  Mechanism  of  Hysteria 3

,,  Motor  Automatism .. ... ... ... ...  26

,,  ,,  Motor  Messages 32,  3.S,  35,  37,  44,  48,  53  61,

62,  64,  65,  67,  68,  73,  93,  98,

105,  107,  113,  119,  122,  124,  127
,, ,, ,, ClassiKcation  of  Modes  of  39-43
Summers,  Miss,  Evidence  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Stead ...  52-57


T.

T. ,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by 171

Tamburini,  Prof.  Aug.,  Cases  recorded  by 228,  229

,, ,, ,, "  Spiritismo  e  Telepatia,"  Keriew  of 225

Teale,  J.  W.,  Case  recorded  by 206

Telepathy— See  Motor  Autom.vtlsm.

,, ,, Prof.  Tamburini  on 225

Theosophists,  The  Defence  of  the,  Mr.  P.  Hodgson's  Keply  to  Mrs.  Besant

and  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett 129

Thomson,  Dr.,  Evidence  as  to  tlie  Mediuniship  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses ...  274


U.

Underwood,  Mr.  and  Mr?.,  Case  contributed  by


107


Index  to  Vol.  IX.  vii
V. '  -

Vesci,  Lady  Je,  Case  contrilmted  by 37

W.

Wedgwood,  Hensleigli,  Cases  contributed  by 92-106

Wetterstrand,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  216

•  X.

X.,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by 182


Z.

Z.,  Hon.,  Case  contributed  by
