Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XI (1895)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1895 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XXVII-XXIX) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc11soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF THE  INCORPORATED


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  XI.
(CONTAINING PARTS XX  711— XXIX.)
1895


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  published
in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors.


I

London


KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.

1895.


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive
in  2015


littps://arcliive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc11


CONTENTS.


PAGE

General  Meetings .....  ....  1

Experiments in  Thought-transference. By Heney G. Rawson,  ^
Barrister-at-Law

Dipsomania  and  Hypnotism. By  Johk  Gordon  Dill,  M.  A. ,  M  .D.  ,  and

a  Case  by  C.  Theodoke  Geeen,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  (Lend.)  18

The  Experiences  of  VV.  Stainton  Moses.— II. By  Ebedeeic  W.  H.  ^
Myers

On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages. By  "  Miss  X."  114

Sttpplejient.

Reviews : — •

Recent  Books  on  Hypnotism.  By  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.  145
Mr.  F. Podmore's "Apparitions and  Thought-trans-
ference." By  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.  D. .  149
Mr.  W.  Leaf's  "Modern  Priestess  of  Isis  "  (translation
from  W.  S.  SolovyoflF),  and  Mr.  E.  Garrett's  "Isis
very  much  Unveiled." By  Fea^ik  Podiiore . .  155
Herr  Edmund  Parish's  "  Ueber  die  Trugwahrnehmung."

By  Miss  Alice  Johnson  162

"  Ri vista  di  St adi  Psichici."  By  Waiter  Leaf,  Litt.  D.  171
General  Meetings  173
Some  Experunents  on  the  Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Vbeeall  174

Analysis  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  Card  Experiments.  By  C.  P.  Sangee,  F.S.S.  193
The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc.  By  Andeew  Lang  .  .  .  .198
Resolute  Credulity.  By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers  .  .  .  .213
Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  By  Dr.  G.  B.  Erjiacoea  235
Some Psychical  Phenomena  bearing  upon  the  question  of  Spirit

Control. By  Charles  Hill-Tout  309

Supplement.

Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  1

I. By  Arthur  H.  Pierce  317

II. By  Frank  Podmore  325

General  Meeting  333

The  Subliminal  Self. By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

Chapter  VIII. The  Relation  of  Supernormal  Phenomena

to  Time  ; — Retrocognition .....  334

Chapter  IX. The  Relation  of  Supernormal  Phenomena

to  Time  ; — Precognition . . ....  408

Report  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee  for  1894—5 ....  594

Supplement.

Review  :—

Professor  Boirac's  "  L'Hypothese  du  Magnetisme  Animal."

By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.  D  599

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library . .  601

List  of  Members  and  Associates  602

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch . .  626


34095


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  67st  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  July  13th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Mr.  W.  Crookes

in  the  chair.  .  ^  i  -rx  »

Professor  Sidgwick  read  a  paper  on  "  Disinterested  Deception.
Mr  F.  W.  H.  Myees  addressed  the  meeting  on  the  subject  ot

<' Physical  Phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Stainton

Moses."

The  68th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
October  26th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Professor  Lodge  read  a  "  Report  on  Unusual  Physical
Phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence  of  an  Entranced  Person
(Eusapia  Paladino)."

The  69th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
December  7th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Dr.  Leaf  in  the  chair.

"Miss  X."  read  "A  Provisional  Account  of  an  Enquiry  into
Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands."  _  _

A  paper  by  Miss  N.  Robertson  on  "Experiments  in  Apparent
Clairvoyance,"  was  read  by  Mr.  Myers.


The  70th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
January  25th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Mr  F  W.  H.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "  The  Progression  from
Subliminal  Phenomena  to  Phenomena  claiming  to  be  obtained  under
Spirit  Control."

The  71st  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
March  1st.,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Mr.  Pearsall  Smith  in  the  chair.  _

Mrs  a  W.  Vereall  read  a  paper  on  "  Some  Experiments  in  the
Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge,"  which  will  be  published  in
a  future  number  of  the  Proceedings.

Mr.  H.  G.  Rawson  read  a  paper  on  "  Experiments  in  Thought-
Transfer  ence,"  printed  below.

A  paper  by  Me.  C  Hill-Tout,  on  "  Some  Psychical  Phenomena
bearing  on  the  question  of  Spirit  Control"  was  taken  as  read,  for
want  of  time.


B


2


Henry  G.  Maiuson.


EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.
By  Henry  G.  Rawson,  Barrister  at  Law.


The  experiments  which  I  am  about  to  describe  were  carried  out  by
myself  and  a  small  party  of  intimate  friends  of  my  own,  for  whose
bona  fides  I  can  vouch.  The  accounts  of  each  occasion  were  compiled
from  notes  taken  at  the  time,  and — with  the  exception  of  the  first  two
days'  experiments — written  out  fully  the  same  evening,  and  in  each
case  all  the  experiments  made  are  recorded.

I  may  mention  that  some  years  ago  I  forwarded  to  the  Society  the
record  of  some  experiments  of  mine  which  were  printed  in  the  Journal
S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  147  and  182,  and,  subsequently,  some  criticisms
from  my  personal  experiences  upon  a  theory  of  Mr.  Downing's,  which
were  printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  III.,  p.  192.

Since  that  date  I  have  had  few  opportunities  of  renewing  my
experiments.  The  fact  also  that  I  found  myself  almost  invariably  less
successful  in  eveiy  series  of  experiments  after  the  first  with  any  agent
rather  discouraged  me,  or  dulled  my  interest  in  persevering.  It  may,
however,  be  worth  mentioning  that  in  one  exceptional  case,  a  lady
with  whom  I  have  had  three  series  of  experiments  in  guessing  playing-
cards,  the  results,  allowing  myself  2  guesses  each  time,  have  been  7
right  out  of  12,  7  out  of  12  (a  second  time),  and  9  out  of  18.  Except
in  this  last  instance,  I  have  never  been  able  to  get  a  clear  concept
(mental  or  visual)  of  any  cai'd  at  all  after  the  12th.  Several  cai'ds
would  persist  in  recurring  together.  I  say  "mental  or  visual,"  because
in  my  experience  it  has  been  sometimes  one,  sometimes  the  other.
When  most  successful  I  have  distinctly  seemed  to  see  the  card.

N.B. — I  always  sliut  my  eyes  when  guessing.

I  may  mention  that  the  ladies  who  took  part  in  the  experiments
which  I  am  aljout  to  describe  were  quite  clear  that  the  interposition
of  a  solid  or  opaque  body  (such  as  a  screen)  between  them,  or  the
shutting  of  her  eyes  by  the  percipient,  increased  the  difficulty,  and
some  unsuccessful  experiments  I  remember  apparently  resulted  from
one  or  other  of  these  causes.  There  were,  however,  many  cases,  e.g.,
those  witnessed  by  "  Z.,"  where  in  spite  of  one  or  other  of  these
impediments  the  experiment  was  successful.


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.  3

I  have  been  anxious  to  prosecute  the  experiments  in  this  direction,
.but  opportunity  has  been  wanting.

li  as  some  maintain,  thought  moves  by  way  of  undulat.ons  (or
vibrations)  in  some  medium  more  subtle  than  ether  which  can
permeate  to  the  brain,  the  interposition  of  an  obstacle  may  naterfeie
with  those  undulations.  The  result  of  my  experiments  when  an
obstacle  has  been  interposed  shows  that  it  does  not  arrest  them
entirely,  and  at  the  same  time  proves,  to  my  satisfaction  at  any  iate,
that  the  success  of  the  experiments  cannot  be  attributed  to  collusion.

It  may  also  be  worth  mentioning  that  after  an  hour  or  less  of
experiments,  my  friends  frequently  complained  of  headache  and  for
Z  ZL:  partly,  our  seances  were  discontinued  after  the  series

now  recorded.  .  .  , ., ,

November-  2ith,  1894.-The  first  evening  was  occupied  with
experiments  in  the  transference  of  diagrams,  Mrs  L  and  Mrs  B.,
(who  are  sisters^  being  the  operators,  and  myself  the  only  other

T^^posTtions  on  that  occasion  were  throughout  as  follows  -.-Mrs
L  sat  on  a  low  chair  by  the  fire,  drawing  in  her  lap  ;  Mrs.  B^sat
some  distance  off  at  a  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  with  her  back
to  Mrs  L  •  and  I  stood  almost  between  them  with  my  back  to  the
fire  looking  occasionally  over  Mrs.  B.'s  shoulder.  To  the  best  of  my
recollection"  I  never  saw  Mrs.  L.'s  drawings  until  they  were  complete
and  handed  up  for  comparison.

From  the  sitters'  positions,  it  was  impossible  that  they  could  ook
over  one  another,  and  as  one  was  sitting  throughout  with  her  back  to.
the  other,  some  eight  feet  distant,  no  collusion  was  possible. In  one
case  only  that  of  the  fern-palms  (No.  6,  see  p.  5), was  any  hmg
saS  except  "  Oh  ! I  know  what  she  is  thinking  of,"  or  words  to
that  effect,' which  the  percipient  exclaimed  on  two  or  three  occasions
almost  immediately  the  agent  began  drawing,  and  at  once  commenced
her  own  sketch. All the diagrams drawn l^y both ageiit  and
percipient  are  reproduced  below,  those  of  the  agent  being  marked  O.,
and  those  of  the  percipient,  R. In  the  first  tiiree,  Mrs.  B  was  agent
and  in  the  last  three,  Mrs.  L. No.  2  (the  triangle)  was  the  only  one
suc^gested  by  me,  and  also  the  only  instance  in  which  there  was  a
failure In  this  case  alone  some  additions  were  made  subsequentiy
to  tiie percipient's  drawing  by  myself, showing  how a  kmc  of
triancvle  was  to  be  seen  in  the  figure  of  the  cat. At  that  time  I  had
not  thought  of  reproducing  the  record. The  agent  then  made  some
additions  to  her  sketch,  but  in  the  reproductions  which  accompany
this  paper,  both  diagrams  are  given  as  originally  drawn. The  other
diagrams  were  chosen  by  the  agent  in  every  case  without  communi-
catFon  with  any  one  and  were  drawn  in  the  positions  I  have  indicated.


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.


5


November  2%th,  1894.— Present,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  and  myself.
Experiments  with  playing-cards,  a  complete  pack  being  used.  At  first
the  card  was  selected  by  Mrs.  L.,  but  after  the  first  two  or  three
experiments  I  suggested  that  it  should  be  obtained  by  cutting  the
pack,  the  card  thus  coming  to  the  bottom  being  the  one  to  be  guessed.
This  in  the  first  place  makes  collusion  by  pre-arrangement  more
difficult,  and  also  renders  less  probable  a  complication  I  have  noticed
elsewhere,  arising,  I  presume,  from  the  apparent  difficulty  of  concen-
trating the  thoughts  on  one  card  when  the  agent  has  just  seen  and
rejected  others.  A  curious  phenomenon  resulted  from  this  on  two
occasions  (previously  recorded,  see  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  148)
viz.,  that  I  guessed  a  card  Avhich  the  agent  had  for  a  moment  intended
to  choose  and  then  changed  her  mind.  In  neither  case  did  the  card
she  actually  selected  present  itself  to  my  "  mind's  eye  "  at  all.

The  plan  we  adopted  on  the  present  occasion  was,  if  the  first
guess  was  wrong,  for  the  agent  to  say  "  No,"  or  "  Wrong."  I  found,
however,  that  the  tone  in  which  this  was  said  might  sometimes  convey
an  impression  that  the  guess  was  nearly  correct,  or  otherwise,  so  I
-usually  adopted  the  course  of  seeing  the  card  myself  and  giving  alone
the  answer  "No  "  ("Wrong  "),  or  "  Yes  "  ("Right  ").  It  will  be  noticed
that  in  the  lai^ge  majority  of  instances,  when  Mrs.  L.,  Mrs.  B.,  or
Mr.  L.  was  the  percipient,  the  first  guess  was  correct.


6


Henry  G.  Rawson.


As  an  almost  invariable  rule  when  either  Mrs.  B.  or  Mrs.  L.  was
the  percipient,  I  was  the  only  person  in  the  room  who  knew  the  right
card  except  the  agent,  the  reason  for  my  looking  at  it  being  that
which  I  have  stated.  In  the  few  cases  when  I  was  percipient,  I
believe  that  it  was  shown  to  both  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.

The  following  is  the complete  record  of  the  experiments  made.

(1)  Mrs.  L.  agent;  Mr.  Rawson  percipient.

Card  drawn.  Card  guessed.

9  of  Diamonds  9  of  Clubs

I  here  explained  to  them  that  I  allowed  two  "  guesses  "  usually,  if
not  correct  the  first  time.

3  of  Spades  Queen  of  Spades,  3  of  Spades
Ace  of  Diamonds  Knave  of  Diamonds,  7  of

Diamonds

(2)  Mrs.  L.  agent ;  Mr.  L.  percipient.

Card  draivn.  Card  guessed.

8  of  Diamonds  8  of  Diamonds
10  of  Spades 10  of  Spades

6  of  Hearts  6  of  Hearts

Queen  of  Clubs  Knave  of  Clubs,  4  of

Clubs

4  of  Diamonds  4  of  Diamonds
10  of  Spades 10  of  Spades

Mr. L.'s  plan  was  to  say  first  "you  are  thinking  of  a  "

(mentioning  a  suit)  ;  then  in  about  10  seconds  he  would  give  the
number.  I  was  told  by  him  and  Mrs.  L.  that  they  had  frequently
tried  the  experiment  before,  and  that  he  was  almost  invariably  right.
He  said,  however,  that  it  tired  him,  and  he  did  not  take  part  in  many
of  our  seances.

December  5th,  1894.— Present,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.,  Mrs.  B.,  Miss  B.
(a  sister  of  the  other  two  ladies),  and  myself.

Expei'iments  with  playing  cards  ;  conditions  the  same  as  on  previous
evening. All  experiments  are  recorded  below.

(1)  Mrs.  L.  agent ;  (she  also  showed  the  card  to  me  and  Miss  B.,
who  sat  beside  her),  Mr.  L.  percipient.

Card  draivn.  Card  guessed.

King  of  Spades  King  of  Spades

9  of  Hearts  (Mr.  L.  said  "  I know  the

suit,")  2  of  Hearts,  10  of
Diamonds

2  of  Clubs  Knave  of  Clubs,  7  of  Clubs

7  of  Diamonds  King of Diamonds, 8  of

Diamonds

4  of  Spades  King  of  Spades


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.  7

(2)  Mrs.  L.  agent,  Mrs.  B.  percipient.

Card  drawn.  Gard  guessed.

5  of  Hearts  '  of  Hearts

Ace  of  Hearts  Ace  of  Diamonds

3  of  Diamonds  3  of  Diamonds

5  of  Spades  5  of  Spades

2  of  Clubs  2  of  Clubs

Ace  of  Clubs  Ace  of  Clubs

xT^^j,  _Mrs  B.  declined  on  this  occasion  to  guess  a  second  time,
saying  that  she  always  guessed  at  once  if  at  all. In  the  second  ex-
periment, she  said,  "!t  is  either  Ace  of  Hearts  or  Ace  of  Diamonds.
Now  I  had  been  shown  the  card,  which  was  Ace of Hearts.  1
said "Wait  a  little  and  see  which  it  is." After  5  seconds  she  said
Ace  of  Diamonds." Right,"  said  Mrs.  L  ^^^'^^ ^^l^^^,
it  was  Ace  of  Hearts. "  Oh,"  she  said,  "  I  thought  it  -s  A-  of
Diamonds." The  next  four  were  right  at  the  first  guess. Mis.  B.  did
not  guess  the  suit  first,  like  Mr.  L.

(3)  Mrs.  L.  agent,  Mr.  Rawson  percipient.

Card  drawn.  Card  guessed

9  of  Diamonds  3  of  Diamonds,  7  of  Hearts

10  of  Diamonds  10  of  Diamonds

5  of  Clubs  4  of  Hearts,  4  of  Diamonds

9  of  Clubs  -King  of  Clubs,  Ace  of  Clubs

(4)  Mrs.  B.  agent,  choosing  and  holding  the  card,  Mrs.  L.  also
knowing  the  card  and  being  no  doubt  also  an  agent,  Mr.  Rawson
percipient.  ^^^^^^  ^^^^^^^^^  Card  guessed.

9  of  Spades  3  of  Spades

King  of  Diamonds  King  of  Diamonds

8  of  Spades  9  of  Hearts

3  of  Clubs  4  of  Clubs

Kin<.  of  Hearts  Queen  of  Hearts,  King  of  Hearts

4  of'biamonds  10  of  Diamonds

.5  of  Spades  2  of  Spades,  4  of  Spades

4  of  Hearts  6  of  Hearts,  5  of  Hearts

I  found  that  I  could  not  prevent  Mrs.  L.  or  Mrs.  B.  from  uncon^
sciously  giving  me  some  indication  after  the  first  guess,  by  tone  of
voTce  or  otherwise,  as  to  its  correctness,  so  I  made  no  second  guess  m

""mne"^^^^^  ^^''^
to  perform  certain  actions.  i  /-m^  q\  t

In  no  case  vvas  there  contact. With  one  exception  noted_  (^o.  3)1
was  the  only  person,  except  the  percipient,  who  did  not  remain  seated.


8


Henry  G.  Rmvson.


In  order  to  see  better  what  happened  I  occasionally  walked  from  place
to  place.  The  percipient  could  in  every  case,  except  No.  4,  see  every
one  in  the  room  (all  were  requested  to  concentrate  their  thoughts  on
the  thing  to  be  done),  but  no  indication  could  well  have  been  given  by
anyone  without  my  noticing  it,  as  I  could  see  where  the  percipient
looked.  I  never  noticed  the  slightest  attempt  to  give  any  indication
without  noting  it. Any  such  indication  is  recorded  below.

(No.  1.)  Mrs.  L.  was  sent  out  of  the  drawing-room.  I  suggested  and
Mrs.  B.  agreed,  and  we  then  informed  Miss  B.  and  Mr.  L.  of  our
decision,  that  Mrs.  L.  should  take  up  the  hearth-brush  and  sweep
the  hearth.  At  my  suggestion  Mrs.  B.  sat  beside  me  on  a  sofa  on  the
further  side  of  the  room  from  the  door  and  adjoining  the  tire-place
where  we  had  been  sitting  during  previous  experiments.  Mr.  L.  and
Miss  B.  sat  on  a  sofa  between  the  door  and  the  lire-place.  Mrs.  L.
was  then  called  into  the  room.  In  this  and  all  similar  cases  I
summoned  the  percipient,  and  found  her  in  the  dining-room  some
distance  away  and  quite  out  of  hearing.  After  walking  into  the
room  she  stood  still  for  half  a  minute,  then  said:  "I  know,"  and
walked  to  the  fire  and  took  up  the  brush.  Some  30  seconds  later
she  swept  the  hearth.

(No.  2.)  Miss  B.  went  out  and  the  other  three  of  us  agreed,  at  my
suggestion,  (Mr.  L.  not  knowing  what  was  arranged)  that  she  should
ring  the  bell  on  left  of  fire-place.  On  this  occasion  I  took  notes
and  did  not  attempt  to  will.  I  may  note  here  that  our  experiments
seemed  to  shew  that  neither  Mr.  L.  nor  I  could  transfer  our  thoughts,
to  any  of  the  ladies,  either  in  these  or  card  experiments,  and  that
Mrs.  B.  took  the  leading  part  in  "  willing."  She  had  no  idea  of  her
power  till  some  experiments  ten  days  previously,  which  I  did  not  record.
Miss  B.  did  as  willed  in  about  a  minute.

(No.  3.)  Mrs.  L.  out;  the  other  four  agreed  that  she  should  kneel
on  a  certain  chair  (which  was  first  moved  out  of  position  and  then
replaced  by  me  before  she  came  in,  lest  its  altered  position  should
attract  her  attention)  and  take  up  a  book  near  it  on  a  table.

After  coming  into  the  room,  and  standing  still  for  a  minute  or  less,
Mrs.  L.  said  :  "  You  want  me  to  go  down  on  my  knees,  but  I  won't."
As  she  continued  to  stand  still  for  2  or  3  minutes,  Mrs.  B.,  who  had
been  sitting  beside  me  on  the  sofa,  got  up  and  stood  beside,  but  not
touching  hei".  In  15  seconds  Mrs.  L.  moved  towards  the  right  chair,
sat  on  it,  and  took  up  the  right  book.  Mrs.  B.  said,  once  or  twice  :
"  You  viust  do  it,"  in  an  authoritative  voice.  I  have  noticed  the  same
tone  sometimes  from  Mrs.  L.  to  Mr.  L.  in  card-reading — as  if  she
considered  it  a  question  of  will,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  earnest  persuasion.

(No.  4.)  Mrs.  L.  was  sent  into  the  dining-room,  where  I  had
noticed  some  walnuts,  with  other  dessert  dishes,  on  a  what-not  (second


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.  9'

storey,  7iot  top).  I  suggested  she  should  be  willed  to  crack  one.  It
was  arranged  that  I  alone  should  follow  her  to  the  dining-room,  the
others  remaining  in  the  drawing-room,  tell  her  we  had  settled  some-
thing, and  watch  her.  The  only  words  that  passed  were  her  question  :
"  Are  you  willing  alBO?"  and  my  reply:  "  I  am  thinking  of  the  thmg.
In  less  than  30  seconds  she  said  :  "  Have  I  to  crack  a  nut  1 "  There
were  no  nuts  but  walnuts  there.

I  made  notes  of  these  experiments  at  the  time,  read  them  over,  and
all  those  present  initialled  them  as  correct.  The  above  account,  written
later  the  same  evening,  is  a  faithful  amplification  of  the  notes.

December  Uth,  1894. Present :  Mrs.  L.,  Mrs.  B.,  and  myself.

We  tried  first  experiments  with  drawings,  all  of  which  are  repro-
duced below.  The  annexed  plan  shows  the  relative  positions  of  the
sitters  : —

Sketch  of  Room.


Door


Fireplace


Mrs.  L.
X


Mrs.  B.  X


X  H.G.R.


Mrs.  L.  on  chair  facing  towards  piano,  writing  on  lap.  Mrs.  B.  sitting  at  table,
back  to  Mrs.  L.,  11  feet  distant. H.G.R.  facing  Mrs.  L.

The  originals  of  Nos.  1,  2  and  3  were  drawn  by  Mrs.  L. ;  in  some
cases  Mrs.  B.  had  finished  her  thought  copy  almost  as  soon  as  Mrs.  L.

The  originals  of  Nos.  4,  5  and  6  were  drawn  by  Mrs.  B.,  in  each
case  at  my  suggestion.

I  have  recorded  all  that  was  said.

(No.  1)  Shortly  after  Mrs.  L.  began  drawing  this  (a  nose)  Mrs.  B.
said,  "  I  can  think  of  nothing  ;  I  can  only  hold  my  nose."  At  that
time  I  did  not  know  what  Mrs.  L.  was  drawing.  In  some  10  seconds
Mrs.  B.  began  drawing,  and  was  finished  within  15  seconds  of  Mrs.  L.


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.


11


R.  6


(No  2)  This  was  more  "like  a  foot  at  first,  but  while  waiting  for
Mrs.  L.  to  begin  a  fresh  subject  Mrs.  B.  began  shading  the  boot—
Avithout  thinking— and  this  accentuates  the  dissimilarity.  This  and
the  case  mentioned  on  November  24th,  are  the  only  instances  m  which
the  drawing  was  touched  after  the  original  had  been  seen.

(No.  4)  Mrs.  L.  said  almost  at  once— after,  say,  10  seconds— "  Now
I  know  what  it  is  ;  I  am  sure  ;  I  can  see  it."

(No  5)  Mrs.  L.  began  drawing  within  10  to  15  seconds,  and  pre-
sently said,  "  I  am  drawing  something  I  can  see."  The  clock  was  in
front  of  her  on  the  mantelpiece.

(No  6)  Mrs.  L.  said  "  1  know  what  it  is."

Afterwards  Mrs.  B.  told  me  that she  thought of putting  a
label  on  the  champagne  bottle  she  drew  (No.  4).

We  then  had  some  "  willing  "  experiments.  In  each  case  1  suggested
what  should  be  done.  First  Mrs.  L.  went  out;  the  others  remained
seated  in  each  experiment.  We  settled  she  should  walk  to  a  bracket
o-lass  at  the  side  of  the  room,  look  into  it,  and  smooth  her  hair

After  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room  some  30  seconds  she
turned  left  half  face,  walked  to  the  glass,  pausing  once  or  twice  on  the
way,  looked  at  herself,  caught  sight  of  me  in  the  glasss  and  made  a
bow  to  me. Experiment  not  further  proceeded  with.

Next  Mrs.  B.  went  out.  We  decided  she  should  walk  to  the  end  of
the  room,  take  a  flower-pot  ofle  its  stand  and  put  it  on  the  floor.^

She  walked  straight  up  to  the  pot  and,  after  10  seconds,  said,  "  Do
you  want  me  to  draw  the  blind  up  ?"  I  said  "  No,  think  again."  In
about  30  seconds  she  said,  suiting  the  action  to  the  word,  "  Do  you
want  me  to  put  the  pot  on  the  floor  1 "

Next  Mrs.  B.  went  out.  We  decided  she  should  sit  down  at  the
piano  and  play.  She  came  straight  m,  sat  down  at  the  piano  and  said,  "  I
don't  know  anything  to  play."  (N.B.— She  plays  rather  well  by  memory.)
I  said  "Wait  a  httle." In  5  seconds  she  struck  three  or  four  discor-


12


Henry  G.  Rawson.


dant  notes  with  a  laugh.  It  would  have  been  interesting  to  will  her  to
play  something  particular.  A  final  experiment  to  make  her  do  some-
thing in  another  room  failed  altogether  ;  she  said  she  could  think  of
nothing.

The  following  are  some  experiments  with  cards  which  came  next.
(1)  Mrs.  L.  agent,  Mr.  L.  percipient.

Card  guessed.
9  of  Clubs,  5  of  Clubs
10  of  Clubs,  10  of  Spades


Car-d  draivn.
Queen  of  Clubs
King  of  Clubs


(2)  Mrs.  L.  agent,  Mrs.  B.  percipient.


Card  drawn.
5  of  Hearts
8  of  Spades
10  of  Clubs
Knave  of  Diamonds
5  of  SjDades


Card  guessed.

7  of  Hearts,  Ace  of  Diamonds

8  of  Spades

9  of  Clubs,  10  of  Clubs
Knave  of  Diamonds

7  of  Spades,  5  of  Spades


(3)  Mrs.  B.  agent,  Mrs.  L.  percipient.


Card  dratun.

2  of  Clubs
Queen  of  Hearts
5  of  Diamonds


Ace  of  Diamonds
Ace  of  Hearts
Ace  of  Clubs


King  of  Spades


Card  guessed.

2  of  Diamonds,  2  of  Clubs
Queen  of  Hearts

9  of  Diamonds,  "  4,  no,  5  of  Dia-
monds." (I  asked  Mrs.  L.  why
she  changed.  "  Because  I  saw
the  5th  pip  as  I  spoke.")

Ace  of  Diamonds

Ace  of  Hearts

Ace  of  Clubs.  (These  three  Mrs.
B.  selected  to  see  if  it  would
confuse  the  percipient.  For  all
the  others  the  pack  was  cut  as
usual,  and  the  bottom  card
taken.)

King  of  Diamonds,  King  of  Spades


December  13th,  1894. — I  arranged  to  try  some  experiments  thig
afternoon  with  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.,  in  the  presence  of  a  friend
of  mine,  a  clergyman,  whom  I  will  call  Z.,  aged  about  70.  I
was  not  surprised  that  in  the  presence  of  a  stranger  we  did  not  have
anything  like  the  success  of  previous  experiments,  but  to  my  great
satisfaction  my  friend,  who  was  an  entire  sceptic,  guessed  or  "  saw  "
three  cards  right  himself.


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.
"We  were  sitting  thus  :—


13


Door


Fireplace


Mrs.  L.

X


X  ]SIr.  R.
X  Mrs.  B.


X

Z.


]Mrs.  L.  was  guessing  ;  I  cut  the  cards  in  each  case  and  handed  them
to  Mrs,  B. The  first  guess  was  :

10  of  Hearts  (right)
the  second  :

5  of  Diamonds  (right) ;

when  Z.,  who  had  been  sitting  quiet,  exclaimed,  "  Positively,  I  thought
of  the  5  of  Diamonds  !  "  "We  then  asked  him  to  try.  He  shut  his  eyes
and  we  all  three  saw  the  agreed  card  and  "  willed."  He  made  two
single  guesses  :

Card  dratvn.  Card  guessed.

5  of  Diamonds  Queen  of  Diamonds.

7  of  Clubs  9  of  Spades.

The  second  being  wide  of  the  mark,  we  returned  to  Mrs.  L.  alone
guessing,  Mrs.  B.  holding  the  card ;  but  Z.  continued  with  closed  eyes
to  see  what  he  might  see.

Mrs.  L.  made  the  following  guesses  : —

Card  drawn.  Card  guessed.

(1 )  Queen  of  Hearts  King  of  Clubs,  King  of  Hearts.

(2)  7  of  Clubs  9  of  Clubs.

(3)  3  of  Spades  3  of  Diamonds,  3  of  Clubs.

(4)  5  of  Clubs  4  of  Clubs,  4  of  Diamonds.

(5)  7  of  Hearts  7  of  Hearts.

(6)  Knave  of  Clubs  King  of  Clubs.


14


Henry  0.  Rawson.


Meanwhile,  it  having  been  agreed  that  Z.  should  write  down
anything  he  saw,  for

(2)  He  wrote,  "  7  of  Hearts."

(3)  As  soon  as  Mrs.  L.  said  "  3  of  Clubs  "  (her  second  guess),  I
said  "  No,  3  of  Spades."  To  my  astonishment,  Z.  broke  out,  in  evident
excitement,  "  Oh,  why  did  you  tell  1  I'll  take  my  oath  I  saw  the  3  of
Spades  !  I  wish  I  had  had  time  to  write  it  down  !  "  I  should  say  it  is
extremely  improbable  that  my  friend  has  "  affirmed  with  an  oath  "  for
many  a  long  year.  I  know  him  intimately,  and  never  heard  him  iise
"  forcible  language  "  before!  All  the  more  did  it  impress  me.  He
had  not  got  over  the  experience,  and  was  still  wondering  what  it
meant  when  Ave  parted  at  midnight,  the  experiment  having  taken  place
about  6  p.m.

(4)  He  guessed  8  of  Spades.

(5)  ,,  Queen  of  Hearts.

(6)  ,,  9  of  Clubs,  Knave  of  Clubs

He  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  this  kind  of  experiment  before  I  told
him  of  it  the  previous  night,  and  started  for  our  re7bdez-vous  to-day  quite
a  sceptic.

We  had  three  experiments  first,  before  the  above,  Mrs.  L.  holding
the  card,  and  Mrs.  B.  guessing.

Card  drawn.  Card  guessed.

Ace  of  Hearts  Ace  of  Hearts

A  Spade  Mrs.  B.  said  "A  Spade  ;  I  can  see
(number  not  recorded)  no  more."

King  of  Spades  10  of  Clubs,  10  of  Diamonds.

Mrs.  B.  evidently  was  nervous  before  a  stranger.

We  then  tried  "  willing  "  certain  actions  to  be  performed.

Mrs.  L.  went  out.  We  decided  she  should  lightthe  further  one  of  two
candlesticks  on  the  piano.  She  walked  straight  to  the  candle,  and  after
pausing  2  minutes  or  so  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  took  it  up  and  said,
"  I  don't  at  all  know  what  to  do  with  it."  I  said,  "  You  must  think."
After  another  minute  she  said  "You  don't  want  me  to  light  if?"  The
room  was  brightly  lit  by  electricity.  This,  by-the-way,  was  the  second
experiment.

In  the  first,  she  was  to  put  the  cover  on  to  the  muffin  dish,  by  which
it  lay  on  a  tea  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room.

She  walked  straight  to  the  table,  after  a  longish  pause,  perhaps  4
minutes,  and  said,  "  Do  you  want  me  to  do  anything  to  the  cups  1 "  I
said  "  No."  She  then  walked  to  a  corner  of  the  room,  took  up  a
China  cup,  not  one  of  the  tea-set,  and  said,  "  Am  I  to  move  this  ?
I  feel  as  if  I  was  to  move  the  cups."  She  then  gave  up  the
experiment.


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.


15


(See


Lastly  we  did  som'^  cJrawmg,^rs.^  3j. 'first  doing  tK-e  originals,
reproductions  below.)

In  the  first,  (No.  1),  Mrs.  B.,  after  waiting  some  three  minutes,  said
"  I  can't  think  of  anything."  In  about  15  seconds  more  she  called  me
and  said,  "  Look  here," — pointing  to  a  gilt  four-leaved
shamrock  like  this,  which  formed  an  ornament  at  the
corner  of  a  picture  frame  in  front  of  her,  as  she  sat  at
a  table  with  her  back  to  Mrs.  L.,  who  was  drawing  on
a  book  in  her  lap,  the  whole  breadth  of  the  room,
some  18  feet,  behind  her — "Look  here,  Mr.  Hawson,
I  was  looking  vacantly  before  me  and  I  noticed  this.  It's  the  only
idea  I  have  and  I  will  draw  it."

When  I  looked  at  her  drawing,  I  was  astonished  to  see  that  she  had
only  drawn  two  leaves  of  the  shamrock,  and  those  the  two  which  exactly
resemble  the  interior  of  a  sand-glass,  which  I  found  Mrs.  L.  had  mean-
while completed.  In  this  case  no  one  present  knew  what  Mrs.  L.  was
drawing.  This  seems  to  me  a  more  suggestive  result  than  usual.
The  resemblance  might  have  been  coincidental  had  she  drawn  her
object  properly,  but  she  seems  to  have  been  most  unwittingly  moved  to
omit  two  leaves  and  the  stalk,  which  would  have  almost  entirely  robbed
her  sketch  of  its  most  singular  resemblance  to  Mrs.  L.'s  drawing.


O.  1


R.  1


O.  2


O.  3


Subject  No.  (2)  I  suggested  to  Mrs.  L.  Mrs.  B.  after  waiting  5
minutes  said  she  could  think  of  nothing  and  gave  up,  but  presently  she
said  "  I  thought  of  an  eye,"  but  for  some  unexplained  reason  (probably
nervousness  of  failure)  she  had  not  drawn  it.  She  had  then
seen  the  circle  with  centre  (0.  2)  which  Mrs.  L.  had  drawn.  The
eye ,  Mrs.  B.  thought  of  might  very  conceivably  have  resembled
the  "  circle  with  centre  "  which  I  had  suggested  to  Mrs.  L.  N.B. —
This  is  the  second  time  I  have  suggested  a  mathematical  figure  j — on


16  Henry  G.  Rawson.

the  previous  ;oc:casi6t  (seo 'firc^t' sertes-^  ?t' V/is  an  equilateral  triangle,
which  I  suggested  to  Mrs.  B., — and  no  result  happened  in  either  case.
These  form  the  only  two  failures  (if  this  be  one)  out  of  15  recorded
experiments;  The  fact  of  my  suggesting  the  subject  is  no  absolute
impediment,  as  may  be  seen  in  previous  experiments,  e.g.,  the  clock
and  champagne  bottle  on  December  12  th,  and  the  match-box  of  the
following  experiment.

In  this,  (No.  3),  Mrs.  B.  drew  the  original  at  my  suggestion.  My
suggestions  on  this  and  other  similar  occasions  were  made  in  a  whisper
pianissimo,  and  I  can  be  certain  Mrs.  L.  could  not  catch  what  I  said,
e.g.,  "  Draw  a  match-box."

Now,  the  strange  thing  is  that  when  her  sketch  was  finished,  Mrs.
L.,  who  is  absolutely  incapable  of  a  pretence,  said  "  I  don't  know  what
I  have  drawn  ;  it's  a  kind  of  square  inside  a  square."

I  think  all  will  agree  that  hers  is  the  more  characteristic  match-box
of  the  two  ;  one  with  the  luminous  strip,  to  the  life  !

This  is  a  return  to  our  experience  of  the  first  night,  November  24th,
viz.,  that  the  idea  was  consciously  or  unconsciously  reproduced  (on  this
occasion  unconsciously,  for  the  only  time)  and  not  the  particular  repre-
sentation, ^.g.,  on  the  first  night  the  rings  and  the  hands  were  quite
dissimilar.  But  on  December  12th  the  visual  and  not  the  mental  con-
cept seemed  sometimes  to  prevail,  e.g,  the  foot  which  suggested  a  boot ;
the  cylindrical  paper  basket  which  turned  into  a  barrel.  Per  contra,
however,  the  clocks  and  the  chairs  were  unlike.

I  read  this  accompanying  report  of  our  experiments  on  December
13th  to  Z.,  who  asked  me  to  add  that  on  the  occasion  of  the  drawing,
he  placed  a  chair  between  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.,  so  that  the  latter
could  not,  if  she  turned  round,  see  what  Mrs.  L.  was  drawing  in  her  lap.

The  following  statement  was  written  and  signed  by  Z.,  the  terras
being  left  entirely  to  himself  : —

December  lith,  1894.

"  I  wish  to  testify  that  to  the  best  of  my  memory  Mr.  Rawson  has
given  a  correct  account  of  the  circumstances  in  connexion  with  the
thought-readings  at  Mr.  L.'s  residence.  It  would  seem  to  be  almost
impossible,  moreover,  that  it  could  have  been  by  chance  that  I  correctly
told  the  right  card  on  three  occasions  out  of  about  eight.  But  I  must
say  that  I  have  an  uneasy  feeling  of  dislike  to  such  sort  of  experiments,
and  that  I  do  not  feel  disposed  to  enter  further  into  them  ;  but  would
leave  them  to  those  who  feel  no  such  scruples."

It  is  worth  remarking  that  the  fact  that  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.  are
alternately  agent  and  percipient  goes  counter  to  the  theory  of  *'  willing  "
(a  fortiori  of  hypnotism),  as  it  is  unlikely  that  the  weaker  will  could  in
turn  control  the  stronger.  Nor  can  I  even  accept  with  confidence  the
view  that  it  is  7iecessary  that  the  agent  should  concentrate  on  the


Experiments  in  Thought-transference.


17


thought  to  be  transferred,  or  should  desire  it  to  be  guessed ;  for,  as
ah'eady  mentioned,  I  have  on  two  occasions  guessed  a  card  which
the  agent  had  I'ejected  in  favour  of  another  while  selecting  one  to
concentrate  her  thoughts  u^Don.  This  may  be  chance ;  I  must  have
tried  to  guess  at  least  100  cards  on  different  occasions,  and  only  recall
two  instances  of  this.  For  this  reason,  however,  I  usually  ask  the
agent  not  to  select  a  card,  but  to  cut  one  to  the  bottom  of  the  pack,
so  as  to  reduce  the  chance  of  her  thinking  of  more  than  one  card.

My  view  in  all  these  experiments  is  that  they  are  reducible  to  pure
thought-transference,  though  I  vise  the  terms  "  guessing  "  and  "  willing  "
for  brevity,  and  though,  in  my  opinion,  concentration  of  thought  is
highly  desirable,  and  an  apparent  exercise  of  will  facilitates  success — as,
when  Mrs.  B.  has  sometimes  exclaimed  :  "You  must  guess  it"  :  "  You
must  know  what  it  is."  The  chief  good  of  such  expi'essions  would,  in
my  view,  be  to  prevent  the  percipient  from  letting  his  mind  wander,  or
from  thinking  of  other  things,  which  would  probably  be  fatal  to
success, — unless  for  a  sufficient  interval  he  kept  his  mind  a  tabula  7'asa
for  the  transferred  thought  to  impress  itself  vipon.

Doubtless  the  difficulty  of  getting  success  before  strangers  is  due
(as  I  have  found  myself  as  percipient)  to  the  constant  recurrence  in  the
percipient's  mind  of  an  anxious  dread  of  failure,  and  its  resultant  con-
sequences of  su.spicion  on  the  part  of  the  stranger  as  to  the  bona  fides
of  previous  results.

On  a  date  subsequent  to  the  above  experiments  I  tried  Mrs.  B..
thinking  of  a  word  which  I  suggested,  and  Mrs.  L.  guessing.

The  first  word  selected  was  "  candle."  After  two  or  three  minutes
Mrs.  L.  said,  "Is  it  electric  light  ? "  I  said,  "Think  again."  In  10
seconds  she  said  "  Is  it  a  candle  "

Next  I  suggested  "  theatre."  After  about  -30  seconds  she  said  "  Is;
it  a  play-house  ?  "  Strange  that  she  should  use  a  word  which  would
be  quite  unusual  in  the  mouth  of  either  herself,  her  sister,  or  me.  I
thought,  however,  that  was  near  enough.

The  experiment  was  then  interrupted.


c


18


Dr.  John  Gordon  Dill.


n.

DIPSOMANIA AND  HYPNOTISM.

By  John  Gordon  Dill,  M.A.,  M.D.,

Assistant  Physician  to  the  Sussex  County  Hospital.

Among  the  many  disorders  of  the  mind,  one  of  the  most  prevalent
in  this  country  is  that  form  of  moral  insanity  which  leads  to
dipsomania,  and  there  is  none  which  causes  such  widespread  miseiy,
or  which  leads  oftener  to  crime.  For  in  the  course  of  his  unfortunate
life,  the  drunkard  not  only  becomes  himself  a  physical  and  moral
wreck,  and  in  time  swells  the  immense  army  of  paupers  and  criminals,
but  he  is  a  perpetual  source  of  grief  and  disgrace  to  his  relations  and
friends,  and  his  children  inherit  from  him  in  a  marked  degree  an
intellectual,  a  moral,  or  a  nervous  instability,  which  may  hopelessly
cripple  them  from  their  earliest  years,  or  develop  later  into  some
neurotic  disease.  Now  it  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  upon  that
habitual  drunkenness  is  a  disease— a  moral,  as  opposed  to  an
intellectual  insanity, — and  that  no  matter  how  real  the  resolution  to
reform,  or  how  intense  the  pangs  of  remorse  for  the  past  may  be,  it  is
a  positive  fact  that  the  power  of  resistance  does  not  equal  the
impelling  force  of  the  temptation  and  craving  to  drink.  The  drunkard,
in  other  words,  is  not  his  own  master.

The  English  law,  unfortunately,  does  not  recognise  this,  and  the
penalty  for  drunkenness  serves  to  keep  many  a  miserable  being
in  existence,  by  the  periods  of  enforced  abstinence  between  his  orgies,
which  he  passes  in  prison.  Nor  has  any  system  of  treatment  been
discovered  which  can  be  relied  upon,  although  innumerable  specifics
have  been  introduced  from  time  to  time,  only  to  be  discredited  after
trial.  Certainly  the  power  of  resistance  does  increase  during  total
iibstinence,  and,  given  the  will  to  reform,  a  long  period  of  compulsory
abstinence  has  often  the  effect  of  getting  rid  of  the  craving  to
drink,  and  the  patient  is  cured  if  he  remain  a  total  abstainer ;  but
■even  thus,  one  glass  of  alcohol  may  be  enough  to  restore  the  disease,
and  cases  are  by  no  means  uncommon  in  which,  after  many  years  of
.apparent  cure,  the  patient  has  felt  confident  of  his  power  to  drink  in
moderation,  and  the  disease  has  returnech  In  so  terrible  and  often
hopeless  a  malady,  the  merest  straw  of  possible  salvation  is  naturally
grasped,  and  the  encouraging  results  which  hypnotism  had  given  in
the  hands  of  other  observers  led  me  to  give  it  a  trial.

Time  alone  can  prove  the  value  of  any  treatment,  even  if  it
is  apparently  successful  at  the  outset,  and  I  shall  therefore  only  record


Dipsomania  and  Hypnotism.


19


the  results  of  the  first  few  cases  which  came  under  my  observation
some  years  ago,  with  their  subsequent  history  as  far  as  I  have  been
able  to  trace  it.

Case  I. — Mrs.  J.  was  a  lady  between  40  and  50  years  of  age,  a
confii'med  drunkard,  who  had  been  deprived  of  the  care  of  her
children,  and  was  subjected  to  more  or  less  control.  There  was  no
apparent  wish  to  reform,  but  considerable  violence  and  impatience  of
restraint  when  the  desire  to  drink  was  strong.

I  first  saw  her  in  1886,  and  about  a  year  later  determined  to  try
the  effects  of  hypnotism.  She  was  not  very  susceptible,  and  the
unconscious  stage,  which  was  not  often  reached  during  a  course
extending  over  many  weeks,  was  not  deep,  but  she  became  very  much
quieter,  and  the  craving  for  drink  abated  for  a  time.  It  was  thought
wise,  however,  to  place  her  under  stricter  surveillance  in  the  country,
and  I  have  lost  sight  of  her.

I  may  here  mention  that  I  have  noticed  with  some  drunkards  that
the  ci'aving  for  drink  comes  on  with  great  intensity  at  more  or  less
regular  intervals,  with  periods  of  intermission,  during  which  they  may
have  little  or  no  temptation.  Moreover,  in  the  course  of  many  cases,
this  "  lucid  interval "  appears  in  time  to  shorten,  until  it  almost
disappears.

Case  II. — A.  W.  was  a  housemaid,  aged  about  32,  who  had  lost
her  chai'acter  and  her  virtue  by  her  drunken  habits.

I  first  saw  her  at  "  St.  Monica's  Home,"  to  which,  at  the  time,  I
was  Honorary  Physician.  She  was  very  readily  hypnotised,  and
after  three  or  four  suggestions  that  she  should  dislike  all  forms  of
alcohol  and  be  unable  to  take  it,  she  lost  all  desire  for  drink.

Eventually  a  situation  in  a  gentleman's  family  was  found  for  her,
which  she  has  retained  for  the  past  six  years,  and  she  is  a  most  valued
and  trusted  servant.

It  is  worth  notice,  that  when  she  was  suffering  from  influenza  and
had  been  ordered  port  wine  by  another  medical  man  who  was
attending  her,  she  resisted  strenuously,  and  deceived  her  mistress  by
pouring  it  away.

Case  III. — Miss  I.  was  a  well-connected  woman,  whose  relations
had  disowned  her,  and  who  had  found  a  temporary  asylum  in  the
Home  above  mentioned.

Although  she  really  wished  to  be  cured,  I  was  unable  to  produce
the  slightest  effect  upon  her,  nor  were  two  other  more  experienced
hypnotists  than  myself,  who  very  kindly  came  with  me  to  see  her,
more  successful.

A  curious  point  about  this  case  was  that  the  craving  for  drink
came  on  with  a  hallucination  that  she  could  smell  brandy,  and  then
nothing  could  stop  her  drinking.


20


Dr.  John  Gordon  Dill.


Case  IV. — Captain  A.,  an  officer  retired  from  the  army,  had  been
an  inebriate  for  at  least  nine  years.  Mr.  Hugh  \Yingfield,  who
happened  to  be  at  Brighton,  very  kindly  came  with  me  to  see  him,
and  at  his  first  visit  attempted  hypnotism,  and  managed  to  render
Captain  A.  powerless  to  get  up  from  his  chair.  He  then  arranged  to
see  him  again  the  next  moi'ning,  but  unfortunately  during  the  night
Captcvin  A.  developed  the  first  symptoms  of  an  attack  of  pneumonia,
which  became  complicated  by  delirium  tremens.  After  six  weeks  of
a  most  dangerous  illness  I  advised  him  to  go  to  Cambridge,  and  to  put
himself  under  Mr.  Wingfield,  who  had  most  kindly  offered  to  do  all  he
could  for  him,  but  apparently  he  had  become  quite  insusceptible  to
hypnotism.  He  had  been  a  total  abstainer  during  his  convalescence,
but  after  leaving  Cambridge  he  relapsed  into  his  former  habits,  and
I  have  since  heard  of  his  death.

Case  V. — Mrs.  P.,  a  lady  aged  about  55,  had  contracted  habits  of
intemperance  during  a  period  of  great  domestic  anxiety.  I  had  very
few  opportunities  of  hypnotism,  but  the  effect  appeared  to  be  good  at
the  time,  and  although  I  have  seen  very  little  of  her  during  the  past
few  years,  she  has  never,  to  my  knowledge,  caused  any  scandal  by  a
relapse,  though  it  is  quite  possible  that  she  may  drink  secretly.

Case  VI. — Captain  B.,  a  retired  officer  of  the  navy,  aged  42,  had
been  a  drunkard  for  years.  Although  a  wealthy  man,  he  was
accustomed  to  leave  home  when  he  began  to  drink  hard,  and  would
sometimes  return  covered  with  vermin,  and  without  having  changed
his  clothes  since  the  day  he  went  away.

He  expressed  no  wish  to  reform,  and  although  he  was  treated
under  my  direction  by  a  most  experienced  hypnotist,  he  was  not  very
deeply  affected,  nor  was  absolute  unconsciousness  ever  reached.  At
the  same  time  he  was  quieter  and  more  I'easonable  during  the  course  of
hypnotism,  but  after  a  few  weeks  he  grew  tired  of  it,  and  had  a
relapse  shortly  aftei'wards.

Case  VII. — Mrs.  A.,  aged  40,  was  the  widow  of  a  clergyman.
The  discovery  of  her  failing  had  been  made  during  the  life  of  her
husband,  and  for  a  time  all  forms  of  alcohol  were  kejit  from  her,  but
when  his  decease  took  place,  she  bribed  one  of  the  undertaker's  men
to  put  a  bottle  of  brandy  into  the  coffin  when  it  was  brought  into  the
house,  and  then  got  drunk  in  the  room  with  the  corpse.

I  first  saw  her  some  years  later,  when  she  had  been  rescued  from
the  lowest  depth  of  depravity  by  her  sister.  She  was  treated  by  the
hypnotist  mentioned  in  the  last  case,  and  was  easily  influenced,  but
although  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  that  any  alcoholic  liquor  would
make  lier  violently  sick  was  efi'ectual  for  about  three  days,  at  the  end
of  that  time  it  had  apparently  quite  passed  away,  nor  did  repeated  trials
lengthen  tlie  period  during  which  it  took  eflfect. This  could  not  be


Dipsomania  and  Hypnotism.


21


continued  indefinitely,  and  she  was  finally  sent  to  a  retreat  under  the
Act.  I  regret  to  say  that  I  have  had  no  information  about  her
during  the  past  few  years.

Case  VIII. — Mrs.  E.  was  an  excellent  cook,  but  she  had  lost
situation  after  situation  owing  to  her  drunken  habits.

When  I  first  heard  of  her,  some  former  friends,  who  believed  in  the
sincerity  of  her  remorse,  and  trusted  her 'promises  of  amendment,  having
found  a  place  for  her  with  a  lady  who  knew  her  history,  collected  a
small  sum  of  money,  jjart  of  which  they  expended  in  the  purchase  of
some  respectable  clothes,  which  they  gave  her,  with  the  balance  of  the
money,  some  three  or  four  days  before  the  time  when  she  was  to  enter
upon  lier  new  duties.  Needless  to  say  that  she  had  sold  the  clothes  and
spent  the  money  and  was  hopelessly  drunk  when  the  day  arrived.  I
found  her  in  a  state  of  great  destitution,  in  a  miserable  lodging  with  her
half-starved  child,  and  for  about  three  weeks  supplied  them  with  the
bare  necessaries  of  life,  while  I  hypnotised  her  diligently.  She  was
very  susceptible,  and  soon  found,  to  her  surprise,  that  she  was  unable  to
take  her  share  in  a  bottle  of  gin,  which  some  boon  companion  had
offered  her.  She  rapidly  regained  respectability  of  manner  and  appear-
ance, and  in  the  course  of  about  three  weeks  found  liei'self  a  situation
as  cook,  while  her  little  daughter  was  admitted  to  an  orphanage.
From  that  time  to  this — now  nearly  five  years — she  has  maintained  her
character  as  a  most  respectable  servant,  and  was  so  highly  valued  by  her
employers  that  they  kept  the  place  open  for  her  when  she  was  obliged
to  go  into  hospital  to  be  treated  for  a  varicose  ulcer  of  the  leg.

An  interesting  point  about  the  case  is  that  the  effect  of  the
suggestion  has  gradually  worn  oif,  and  she  is  now  able  to  take  a  glass
of  beer  at  dinner,  but  as  yet  she  has  suffered  from  no  temptation  to
drink  in  excess.

Although  it  would  be  rash  to  base  any  conclusions  upon  the  results
of  so  very  meagre  a  series  of  cases,  they  serve  perhaps  to  indicate  that
there  is  a  possibility  that  this  mode  of  treatment  may  be  successful,  or
that,  at  any  rate,  until  hypnotism  has  been  tried,  no  case  of  dipsomania
should  be  pronounced  hopeless.  Doubtless  in  moi-e  experienced  hands
better  results  might  have  been  obtained,  and,  had  we  any  certain  means
of  ensuring  a  susceptibility  to  hypnotism,  there  is  no  reason  that  it
should  not  be  much  more  uniformly  successful.  I  have  noticed  in  more
than  one  case  that  the  best  time  to  make  an  attempt  is  very  shortly
after  a  bout  of  drunkenness,  and  that  the  patient  is  less  easily  hypnotised
the  longer  he  is  kept  sober.  Possibly,  therefore,  it  may  be  discovered
that  some  drug  may  have  the  effect  of  increasing  susceptibility,  but  the
few  experiments  which  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  making  in  this
direction  have  hitherto  yielded  barren  results.  Such  experiments,  how-
ever, might  well  repay  the  trouble  they  entail,  for  could  we  but  discover


22


ifr.  G.  Theodore  Green.


a  certain  and  reliable  method  of  dealing  with  dipsomania,  it  would  be
difficult  to  exaggerate  its  beneficent  results,  not  only  in  the  present  by-
lightening  the  heavy  burden  of  human  misery,  but  in  the  future  by
promoting  the  health  and  happiness  of  unborn  generations.


[The  following  case,  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  C.  Theodore  Green,
M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  (London),  of  Birkenhead,  will  be  read  with
interest  in  connection  with  the  above. — Editor.]

The  Treatment  by  Suggestion,  with  Cure  in  Four  Sittings,  of  a
Man  Addicted  to  the  Abuse  of  Alcohol,  Bromides,  and  Choral.


On  October  6th,  1893,  a  man,  aged  32,  came  tome  complaining  that
for  two  months  past  he  had  been  unable  to  get  a  night's  rest  without
bromides  and  chloral  ;  and  also  that  he  had  an  irresistible  craving  for
whiskey  ;  and  that  his  brain  was  not  able  for  his  work, — that  of  cashier
in  a  very  large  wholesale  business.  His  account  of  himself  was  in-
coherent and  vague,  and  he  presented  the  restless  appearance  and
excited  manner  of  a  person  very  near  dementia.  He  was  of  fair  com-
plexion and  hair,  5  feet  10  inches  in  height,  in  good  physical  condition
of  body,  and  having  a  cerebral  development  decidedly  above  the
average.  I  gathered  from  his  conversation  that  in  1887  he  had  a
serious  bout  of  drinking,  from  which  he  recovered.

Some  few  months  ago  he  began  to  be  worried  about  his  work,  and
then  commenced  taking  a  single  glass  of  whiskey  or  beer  in  the  even-
ing. He  soon  found  that  one  glass  was  not  enough,  so  he  had  two  ;  in
this  manner  increasing  his  daily  dose  of  stimulant,  till  the  craving  for
it  was  present  all  the  time.  He  consulted  some  doctor,  who  told  him
to  "go  to  Llandudno  and  drink  lots  of  stout."  "Well,  he  went  to
Llandudno  and  drank  several  bottles  of  stout  daily.  But  as  he  was
nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grew  worse,  from  the  development  of
insomnia,  he  consulted  another  medical  man,  who  gave  him  a  prescrip-
tion for  "bromides  and  chloral."  Without  the  nightly  use  of  this
sedative  draught,  he  got  very  little  sleep,  and,  of  course,  his  brain
became  more  and  more  unfitted  for  the  accurate  work  required  of  him.

He  told  me  he  had  never  been  hypnotised  before.  As  he  expressed
disgust  for  his  unconquerable  craving,  and  a  belief  that  he  could  be  in-
fluenced by  hypnotism,  I  agreed  to  try  what  it  could  do  for  him.  I
insisted  that  this  form  of  treatment  would  give  him  back  his  normal
strength  of  will,  so  that  he  would  be  able  to  conquer  his  unnatural
cravings.  In  fact,  I  made  him  understand  that  it  was  not  /  who  was
curing  him,  but  that  I  was  merely  shewing  him  how  to  cure  himself  by
the  exercise  of  his  will. So,  throughout  the  four  sittings  that  I  gave


Case  of  Cure  by  Suggestion.


23


him,  I  suggested  that  his  will  was  growing  stronger,  and  that  all  his
functions  were  coming  more  and  more  under  his  own  control.  I  also
ridiculed  the  idea  that  the  person  hypnotised  need  give  up  or  lose  all
his  will  power  to  that  of  the  operator.

On  October  6th,  he  fell  into  a  hypnotic  slumber  in  seven  minutes  by
gazing  at  a  diamond.  I  then  made  suggestions  that  he  would  sleep
well,  and  not  awake  at  2  a.m.  as  usual,  that  alcohol  in  all  forms  would
taste  vile,  and  if  swallowed  \yould  be  vomited.  The  next  day  he
telephoned  saying  that  he  had  slept  right  on  to  breakfast  time — the
best  sleep  he  had  had  for  two  months  ;  and  that  he  had  had  a  glass  of
whiskey,  but  had  difficulty  in  keeping  it  down.

He  now  went  away  into  North  "Wales  with  some  friends,  and  I  did
not  see  him  for  a  fortnight.  Shortly  before  he  returned  he  wrote  me
a  long  and  very  rambling  letter,  that  made  me  fear  still  more  for  his
sanity.  He  said  that  he  slept  very  well  for  four  or  five  nights  after
being  hypnotised,  but  that  since  then  he  had  been  getting  worse  in
every  way. I  advised  his  speedy  return.

So,  on  October  22nd,  I  hypnotised  him  again.  This  time  the  sleep
■was  more  profound,  and  he  seemed  unable  to  answer  my  questions  till
I  suggested  that  he  could  do  so  quite  easily.  I  repeated  the  former
suggestions,  and  made  use  of  ordinary  mesmeric  "passes,"  which  I
regard  as  a  most  useful  form  of  suggestion.

On  October  .24th,  hypnosis  was  produced  by  my  gazing  into  his  eyes
for  two  minutes.  On  this  occasion  he  seemed  rather  less  excitable.  He
said  he  had  been  sleeping  well  except  for  a  bilious  attack  that  occurred
during  the  night  of  the  22nd.  He  also  said  that  he  had  taken  no  more
sedative  draughts,  and  that  he  had  very  little  desire  for  alcohol.

On  October  28th,  he  said  he  slept  quite  well  each  night,  and  had  no
desire  either  for  alcohol  or  sedatives,  and  that  his  brain  was  clear.  As
a  test  of  the  latter,  he  procured  one  of  his  cash  books  on  the  27tli,  and
worked  at  it  for  two  hours,  and  was  delighted  to  find  that  he  could
work  as  Avell  as  ever.  His  manner  is  totally  changed.  He  is  restful,
and  acts  and  speaks  as  a  man  should  when  in  perfect  possession  of  his
faculties.  I  now  hypnotised  him  for  the  last  time,  and  repeated  the
former  suggestions.

Also  I  found  I  could  inhibit  all  the  special  senses.  I  also  gave  him
a  crystal,  and  bade  him  see  a  picture  of  his  dining-room,  which  I  had
not  seen.  He  described  it,  and  the  persons  he  saw  moving  about  in  it.
But  I  was  unable  to  make  him  see  the  picture  of  a  room  he  had  never
seen,  but  of  which  I  was  thinking  intently  at  the  time.

Up  to  date  (March,  1894)  there  has  been  no  relapse.  Time  only
can  shew  whether  this  cure  be  permanent ;  but  I  think  I  am  safe  in
assuming  that  any  recurrence  of  the  above  symptoms  will  be  as  easily
abolished  by  hypnotism  as  they  were  before.


24>


The  ExiKviences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


III.

THE  EXPERIENCES  OP  W.  STAINTON  MOSES.— II.
By  Ekederic  W.  H.  Myers.

In  a  former  article  on  the  experiences  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,
which  appeared  in  Part  XXV.,  Vol.  IX.  of  these  Proceedings,  two
main  lines  were  pursued.  In  the  first  place  I  offered  a  general
summary  of  Mr.  Moses'  life  and  character,  and  of  the  nature  of  the
evidence  under  review,  with  a  discussion  as  to  the  trustworthiness  or
otherwise  of  the  printed  and  written  matter  which  we  have  to  treat.
In  the  second  place,  I  gave  extracts  fi-om  contemporary  records,  by
himself  and  others,  of  the  physical  phenomena  obtained  during  his
first  year  of  investigation,  1873-4  ;  including  incidentally  many  points
bearing  on  identity  of  the  communicating  intelligences.  Many  subjects
still  remain  for  discussion ;  and  it  will  be  convenient  to  indicate  at
once  the  order  in  which  they  will  here  be  taken.

A. — In  the  first  place  some  further  extracts  will  be  given  from  the
notes  of  the  remaining  seances  (1874-1880),  of  which  any  record
has  been  kept.  In  Mr.  Moses'  own  note-books  this  record,  though
becoming  irregular  as  he  got  tired  of  recording  so  often  very  similar
phenomena,  is  continued  till  August,  1875.  Mrs.  Speer's  notes
continue  at  intervals  until  1880,  and  there  are  occasional  notes  by  Dr.
Speer  during  these  later  years.  Two  other  occasional  members  of  the
circle.  Miss  Birkett  (now  deceased)  and  Mrs.  Garratt  (known  to  me),
also  took  some  notes,  which  Mrs.  Garratt  has  kindly  sent  to  me.  I  find
them  fully  concordant  with  the  other  series  ;  and  I  have  printed  some
of  Miss  Birkett's,  where  points  of  interest  are  introduced.  On  the
whole,  however,  I  have  given  but  brief  notices  of  these  later  seances.
Mr.  Charlton  Speer  had  already  summarized  their  main  features,  in
his  letter  quoted  in  my  former  paper  ;  and  no  doubt  can  now  be  felt
that  the  impression  of  what  occurred  at  these  meetings  was  sub-
stantially the  same  in  the  minds  of  all  the  persons  present.  Nor  sljall
I  return  to  the  question  as  to  the  genuinely  supernormal  character
of  the  phenomena,  which  has  been  sufficiently  discussed  in  my  former
paper.

That  they  were  not  produced  fraudulently  by  Dr.  Speer  or  other
sitters  I  regai'd  as  proved  both  by  moral  considerations  and  by  the  fact
that  thej  are  constantly  reported  as  occurring  when  Mr.  Moses  was


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  3Joses.


25


alone.  That  Mr.  Moses  should  have  himself  fraudulently  produced
them  I  regard  as  both  morally  and  physically  incredible.  That  he
should  have  prepared  and  produced  them  in  a  state  of  trance  I  regard
both  as  physically  incredible  and  also  as  entirely  inconsistent  with  the
tenor  both  of  his  own  reports  and  of  those  of  his  friends.  I  therefore
regard  the  reported  phenomena  as  having  actually  occurred  in  a
genuinely  supernormal  manner.

What  is  still  needed,  I  believe,  in  order  to  produce  a  like  conviction
in  scientific  minds  in  general,  is  not  so  much  any  further  argument  as
to  Mr.  Moses,  as  the  occurrence  of  like  incidents  afresh  in  the  presence
of  other  mediums.  Readers  of  the  S.P.R.  Journal  are  aware  that  a
group  of  observers  have  been  investigating  the  phenomena  which  occur
in  the  presence  of  Eusapia  Paladino — phenomena  which  appear  to
I'esemble  those  of  Mr.  Moses  in  many  points  ; — and  we  hope  before  long
to  publish  a  full  statement  of  Eusapia's  case  in  these  Proceedings.
Should  her  phenomena  find  acceptance,  the  independent  corroboration
thus  furnished  to  Mr.  Moses'  case  will  be  very  important.

B.  — Next  to  the  description  of  Mr.  Moses'  physical  phenomena
must  come  the  quite  equally  important  task  of  analysing  the  automatic
writing,  of  which,  as  already  stated,  24  books  remain.  The  contents
of  these  books  consist  partly  of  messages  tending  to  prove  the  identity
of  communicating  spirits  ;  partly  of  discussions  or  explanations  of  the
physical  phenomena ;  and  partly  of  religious  and  moral  disquisition.
After  describing,  in  Mr.  Moses'  own  words,  the  general  method  and
character  of  this  writing,  it  will  be  well  to  consider  those  passages
which  bear  upon  the  identity  of  the  communicating  intelligences.

C.  — These  may  be  fitly  introduced  by  a  paper  entitled  "The
Identity  of  Spirit,"  composed  by  Mr.  Moses  in  his  last  years,  but  not
published  by  him.  In  this  paper  about  thirty  spirits  are  specified,  and,
taking  these  first,  I  shall  add  to  Mr.  Moses'  own  account  such  further
corroborative  particulars  as  collation  of  other  passages  in  his  writings,
or  independent  enquiry,  may  have  supplied.

D.  — I  shall  next  deal  with  certain  other  communicating  spirits
whose  messages  appear  to  carry  evidence  of  identity  ;  representing
mainly  persons  lately  deceased,  and  desirous  of  communicating  for
private  reasons.

E.  — Having  thus  briefly  described  the  alleged  communicating
intelligences,  I  shall  hope  in  a  future  paper  to  arrange  and  summaiise
what  they  have  to  say  as  to  the  accompanying  phenomena.  This  task
is  not  easy  ;  since  these  so-called  explanations,  although,  as  I  hope  to
show,  really  consistent  and  conceivable,  are  given  in  a  scattered  and
unscientific  form ;  while  they  cannot,  of  course,  be  regarded  as  in
themselves authoritative. There is, however,  much  interesting


26


The  ExiJeriences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


matter  of  Mr.  Moses'  own,  touching  his  own  subjective  impressions
and  phenomena  occurring  to  him  in  solitude,  which  will  best  be  given
in  that  connection.

F. — There  will  still  remain  a  task  which,  in  Mr.  Moses'  own  eyes,
was  the  most  important  in  the  whole  field.  The  main  object  of  the
manifestations,  as  was  again  and  again  asserted  by  his  "  guides,"  was
a  moral  and  religious  one.  Certain  teaching  of  high  importance  was
to  be  given  ;  and  the  marvels  were  to  be  regarded  merely  as  a  method
of  ensuring  that  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  a  message  which
came  with  such  credentials.  Many  of  these  ethical  communications
have  been  printed  in  Spirit  Teachings,  and  I  do  not  propose  to
reproduce  them.  Others  may  perhaps  hereafter  be  printed  in  a
second  volume  of  Spirit  Teachings.  For  myself,  at  some  future  time  it
may  be  well  to  give  briefly  the  gist  or  spirit  of  these  communications,
comparing  them  with  such  deductions  as  may  fairly  be  made  from  the
principle  of  telepathy,  — our  main  guide,  at  present,  in  any  speculations
of  this  type.

I  now  take  up  the  series  of  Mr.  Moses'  notes  about  November  1873,
where  my  former  quotations  ceased.


Extracts  from  Mr.  Moses'  Note-Books.

December  5th. — Douglas  House.  Mr,  Percival,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,
and  myself. — A  wonderful  demonstration  of  knocks,  at  least  four
distinct  knocks  occurring  simultaneously,  and  keeping  on  for  some
minutes.  Little  Pauline  came  and  knocked  close  by  Dr.  Speer  ;  with
her  was  a  clear  drumming  on  the  table,  a  dull  sound  apparently
made  on  the  cloth  which  covered  the  table,  and  a  loud,  clear
knocking  on  the  lower  part  of  the  table.  At  the  same  time  a  con-
tinuous sound  was  being  made  on  the  floor  near  my  chair,  and  a
creaking  on  the  chair  itself.  These  sounds  continued  ceaselessly  for  a
considerable  time— I  should  say  nearly  half-an-hour,  at  any  rate  for
more  than  fifteen  minutes.  It  was  a  most  singular  noise  that  the
combined  knockings  made.  The  room  seemed  to  be  full  of  intelligences
manifesting  their  preseiice.  In  the  midst  of  it  came  Gi'ocyn  with  his
musical  sound  ;  the  same  as  ever,  but  feebler.  He  did  not  play  much.
Copious  scent  fell  from  the  ceiling,  accompanied  by  a  sort  of  whistle,
which  we  have  noticed  before  in  connexion  with  this  manifestation.
Imperator  controlled,  and  spoke  at  length  on  religious  questions.  In
answer  to  questions  from  Mi\  P.,  he  aflirmed  the  doctrine  of  re-incar-
nation, although  carefully  guarding  his  opinion.  He  answered  a
question  as  to  the  time  when  a  soul  took  possession  of  the  body  by


The  Exjyeriences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


27


saying  that  there  were  cases  in  which  the  soul  had  lived  before.  I  am
not  able  to  record  what  took  place  exactly,  but  the  docti'ine  was
aifirmed. I  wait  to  question  more  clearly  thi'ough  writing.

December  Qth. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self  alone. — Raps  and  slight
sound  of  Grocyn  gave  place  to  a  control  by  Imperator,  who  modified  a
good  deal  what  had  been  supposed  to  have  been  said  on  the  previous
evening.  He  explained  that  he  had  not  stated  the  re-incarnation
theory  save  as  another  chance  for  souls  who  had  sunk  so  low  as
practically  to  lose  identity.  They  were  incarnated  again,  and  so  had
means  of  progress.  He  stated  that  the  control  had  been  bad,  and
that  much  that  had  been  said  was  not  reliable.  The  conti'ol  gave
place  to  one  by  the  Bishop  [Wilberforce],  who  spoke  for  the  first  time
as  I'egards  his  identity.  His  voice  was  as  different  as  possible  from
Imperator's,  and  the  effect  was  very  startling.  The  control  lasted  far
beyond  the  breaking  up  of  the  seance.  I  was  clairvoyant,  and  saw  the
Bishop,  Catharine,  and  Grocyn.  At  Imperator's  request  Grocyn  made
some  of  the  most  beautiful  sounds  he  has  yet  made.  Catharine  also
knocked  near  Dr.  Speer.  I  complained  of  cold  and  of  a  sensation
of  darkness  after  seeing  so  much  light.  The  control  was  so  perfect
that  I  did  not  shake  it  off  altogether  until  I  had  slept,  which  I  did'
heavily  all  through  the  night.

December  I8th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self  alone
in  the  study. — Raps  commenced  almost  at  once,  a  strong  contrast
to  the  weary  waiting  at  Mr.  Crookes's.  The  power  was  evidently
strong.  We  had  had  raps  and  scent  whilst  sitting  at  dinner,  and  as
soon  as  we  sat  down  both  recommenced.  My  chair  was  drawn  back,
and  Grocyn  played  over  and  about  the  circle,  finally  coming  on  the
table.  His  sound  commenced  behind  me,  near  the  door,  and  at  Dr.  Speer's
request  he  went  off  into  the  air  and  made  the  tambourine  sound  over
the  table.  It  was  very  pronounced.  We  spoke  of  the  persistence
of  Grocyn's  manifestations,  and  Dr.  S.  contrasted  tliem  with  those  of
John  Dee,  who  had  not  manifested  for  months.  Instantly  a  loud  crash
came  on  the  table  and  John  Dee  manifested  freely.  It  seemed  as
though  he  were  waiting  till  the  direction  of  our  minds  to  him  enabled
him  to  manifest.  It  gave  one  an  idea  of  a  telegraph  wire  disconnected
for  a  time,  the  connexion  being  supplied  by  our  thoughts.  Seneca
was  asked  for,  and  replied  at  once  with  the  peculiar  dropping  sound,
with  harmonium  stool  and  table.  The  room  was  full  of  light,  and
Grocyn  wrote  in  his  own  writing  on  a  piece  of  marked  paper  put  under-
the  table.  It  was  just  like  his  writing  through  my  hand.  "  I  am
hei-e. — W.  Grocyn."

I  have  omitted  to  say  that  the  table  was  moved  and  put
straight. We  had  altered  its  position  at  starting. Gi'ocyn  seemed


28


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


to  be  the  presiding  spirit.  He  answered  questions  by  his  sounds
very  beautifully.^

December  3lst  (New  Year's  Eve). — Shanklin.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,
and  self. — The  house  was  fresh,  and  the  manifestations  were  irregular,
as  is  frequently  the  case.  The  old  house  next  door,  in  which  we  sat
when  I  v,-as  last  at  Shanklin,  had  got  seasoned.  This  was  new.  We
had  a  great  variety  of  raps.  A  spirit  who  used  to  come  with  a
whirring  sound  manifested  again,  but  with  a  grinding  sound,  somewhat
similar,  but  without  the  whirr.  He  said  (W.  H.  S.)  that  he  came  from
Kensal,  came  down  with  me.  He  wished  for  prayer.  John  Dee
manifested. Gi'ocyn  very  sweetly.^

January  \st,  1874. — Shanklin.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  and  self. — Stormy,
blowing  a  gale,  and  raining  in  the  evening.  Day  extremely  fine  and
bright.  Many  sounds.  W.  H.  S.'s  peculiar  sound  again.  Grocyn
slightly.  Catharine.  Dr.  S.  asked  her  to  go  near  him,  and  she  said  she
could  not.  Conditions  were  bad,  and  she  could  not  go  far  from  the
medium.  This  is  frequently  said.  A  curious  little  plucking  sound  in
mid-air,  near  Mrs.  Speer  apparently.  A  name  spelled  out,  "  Cecilia
Feilden,"  an  old  friend  of  Mrs.  Speer,  whose  grave  Dr.  S.  and
I  had  visited  at  Bonchurch  in  the  morning.  She  said  she  had
heard  of  Dr.  Eves's  death  from  Miss  Kirkland  [also  deceased].
She  remained  some  time  conversing,  during  which  I  kept  my  mind
fixed  hard  on  Virgil,  repeating  portions  of  it  and  disengaging  my  mind
from  what  was  going  on.  She  said  that  "  many  spirits  from  long
beyond  had  come  with  her."  She  rapped  out  finally,  "  I  must  depart.
Adieu,"  and  immediately  the  sounds  ceased.  On  taking  up  a  marked
.sheet  of  paper  which  we  had  put  down  it  was  found  to  be  wiitten  on,
"  C.  F.  passed  seventeen  years. — Rector."

This  is  the  third  time  that  going  to  a  graveyard  has  produced
similar  results.  W.  H.  S.  came  after  a  visit  to  Kensal  Green.  At
Garrison  the  din  in  my  bed-room  followed  a  visit  to  an  old  disused
burying-ground  ;  and  now  after  a  visit  to  Bonchurch  this  came.  The
spirit  was  in  earth-life  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Speer's.  She  had  seen  her  mother
and  two  sisters.  Asked  if  any  friend  was  lying  near  her  at  Bonchurch,
she  rapped  out,  "Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot'^  [no  mention  of  vex'ification,

^  December  mil. — Stance  in  my  study.  Circle  as  usual. — At  this  seance
the  peculiar  feature  consisted  in  the  sudden  and  entirely  unexpected  return
of  two  intelligences  merely  upon  the  casual  mention  of  their  names,  viz. ,
John  Dee  and  Seneca.  Direct  spirit  writing  was  also  obtained  from  Wm.
Grocyn.— S.T.S.

■  Shanklin,  December  31s^. — Mr.  M.  having  arrived  in  the  afternoon,  we  sat
again.  W.  H.  S.  appeared  ;  Grocyn  likewise.  The  table  was  tilted  over  to
within  four  inches  of  the  ground,  and  was  quietly  replaced.  Our  position  at
the  table  was  altered  completely. John  Dee  came  once,  alsoH  . — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


29


but  ]\rrs.  Speer  writes  to  me  in  1894,  "Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot,  a
relation  of  the  Feilden  family,  is  buried  near  to  Cecilia  Feilden's  grave."]
I  knew  nothing  of  C.  F.,  did  not  expect  her,  though  Dr.  S.  had  a  pre-
sentiment that  she  would  come  on  visit.  I  did  not  expect  her  at  all.
We  broke  and  resumed,  and  while  hands  were  held,  after  much  convul-
sion on  my  part,  H  's  and  Rector's  names  were  written  on  marked

paper  under  the  table.  Dr.  S.  had  asked  for  H  's  signature.  When

I  went  to  bed  the  noise  in  my  room  was  very  great.  It  seemed  as
though  two  persons  were  quarrelling  with  each  other  in  opposite
corners  of  the  room.  The  noise  was  very  great,  heavy  poundings
being  made  at  the  same  time  on  the  floor  and  walls,  and  the  bedclothes
plucked.  The  noise  continued  all  night  long ;  and  was  most  pro-
nounced in  the  dead  of  the  night  (1  to  4  a.m.).  I  have  frequently
noticed  the  power  then  seems  most  in  force.

We  had  cool  waves  of  scented  air  during  the  evening.  JManifes-
tations  did  not  occur  so  readily  as  usual,  nor  were  they  so  powerful.^

January  2nd. — Same  circle  and  place. — W.  H.  S.  came  again  with
a  slight  grinding  sound.  Great  rappings  all  over  the  room  on  the
table  and  floor,  a  deal  of  drumming,  and  then  a  spirit  came  who  gave
the  name  of  Henry  Spratley,  said  he  died  on  December  24th,  at  the  age
of  seventy-six,  at  Moor  Cottage,  Maidenhead,  had  been  selected  by
Imperator  to  prove  identity.  A  letter  has  been  sent  to  the  vicar  to
verify  the  fact.  [Facts  ultimately  verified  by  Mr.  Spratley's  son.
The  case  will  be  referred  to  later.  There  seems  a  doubt  as  to  the
exact  age,  as  Registrar's  list  gives  Heniy  Spratley,  builder,  aged  75,
died  at  Bridge-road,  Maidenhead,  Bray.  Cause  of  death  :  senile  decay:
pneumonia  one  month.  December  24th,  1873. — F.W. H.M.J  We  had
masses  of  scent  —  verbena,  sandalwood,  rose,  musk.  The  room
was filled  with  light. My old  friend Artindale came — rapped

Januarxj  Isi,  1874. — Seance.  Same  circle. — The  characteristic  wailing
sound  purporting  to  emanate  from  W.H.S.  was  soon  audible  and  com-
municated, but  feebly.  Cecilia  Feilden  came  for  the  first  time  (we  had  that
day  stood  over  her  grave  at  Bonchurch).  She  communicated  most  satis-
factorily in  every  way,  to  our  great  surprise,  as  this  rarely  is  the  case  upon
their  first  visit  to  a  mundane  circle.  On  breaking  up  for  a  few  minutes  we
found  upon  the  under  surface  of  a  piece  of  white  paper,  previously  iden-
tified, the  following  words  had  been  written —
C.F.

passed  away  seventeen  years.

t  Rector.

On  resuming  the  seance  Grocyn  appeared  and  manifested  as  usual.  A
most  peculiar  and  perfectly  novel  sound  was  heard. It  purported  to  come

from  H  ; and  while  all  hands  were  tightly grasped  his  name  was

written  on  paper  under  the  table  as  in  the  case  of  C.  F. — S.T.S.


30


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses,


out  his  name — and  said  he  had  only  just  awoke  five  days  ago.  He
has  been  dead  now  six  months.  He  gave  his  birth-place,  and  said
he  was  happy.  We  heard  him  rapping  on  the  table  in  the  morning  at
breakfast.  We  could  not  make  out  anything,  and  asked  him  to  return
at  night.  He  did  so,  with  the  same  knock.  Mentor  returned  for  a
minute,  controlled  me  without  effort,  and  said  that  he  had  been  allowed
to  come  back  for  a  while.  He  said  he  would  try  and  come  back  one
evening  and  show  lights  for  us.  He  afterwards  threw  some  musk  in
powder  on  the  table  near  Mrs.  Speer.  The  table,  a  large  loo  table,  was
tilted  until  it  rested  on  the  ground  near  Dr.  Speer.  He  asked  that  it
might  rest  on  his  finger,  and  it  did  so,  beating  quite  gently.  Yet  the
normal  v/eight  of  the  table  was  sufficient  to  have  hurt  him  badly.  I
was  far  away  from  the  table  and  could  not  touch  it.  Yet  it  was
replaced  in  its  original  position  quite  gently.  Mentor  again  controlled
for  a  moment,  and  said  that  they  had  written  for  my  friend  on  the
paper  under  the  table.  Two  pieces  had  been  marked  and  put  down,
one  near  me  and  the  other  close  to  Dr.  Speer,  separated  from  me  by  the
whole  width  of  the  table,  six  feet ;  on  that  was  written  "  T.  S.  A."
and  "  Rector."  Dr.  S.  had  requested  that  writing  might  be  done  near
him.  Grocyn  came  and  said  good-night  on  his  lyre,  and  the  seance
concluded.

January  Zrd,  1874. — Same  circle  and  place. — W.  H.  S.  came  with
his  grinding  sounds.  Grocyn  played  very  sweetly,  and  the  heavy
dropping  sound  said  to  be  made  by  Seneca  was  I'epeated  several  times.
We  enquired  who  made  the  little  rolling  or  dropping  sounds  on  the
table,  and  were  informed  that  two  spirits  whom  Rector  had  brought,

I  and  P  ,  made  them. I  referred  after  to  my  books  and

found  that  the  promise  had  been  given  on  May  10th,  1873.  Rector
manifested,  and  we  had  great  quantities  of  scent — verbena  especially.
The  odour  was  very  strong  indeed.  After  a  ten  minutes'  break,
Mentor  controlled  and  made  some  wonderful  lights,  or  rather  one
persistent  light,  which  remained  clear  and  visible  for  more  than  forty
minutes.  I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  record  accurately  the  time,  but
we  entered  the  room  shortly  after  10  p.m.,  and  the  seance  broke  up  at
11.30.  The  light  appeared,  say,  ten  minutes  after  we  sat  down,  and
lasted  till  about  the  same  time  before  we  broke  up.  I  therefore
allowed  a  wide  margin  when  I  said  it  lasted  without  going  out  for
forty  minutes.  It  commenced  in  the  corner  of  the  room  behind  me.
Dr.  S.  noticed  one  as  soon  as  we  sat  down,  which  faded  at  once.  Then
Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  saw  another,  which  also  faded  out.  The  control  (as
they  tell  me)  by  Mentor  was  at  once  established,  and  I  was  in  a  deep
trance  for  the  remainder  of  the  sitting.  A  light  at  once  appeared  near
my  left  hand,  on  or  just  over  the  table.  It  is  described  as  a  cylinder
of  luminous  substance,  hard,  and  giving  a  golden  light. It  would  be


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


SI


about  four  inches  by  three  inches,  and  apparently  circular  at  top  and
bottom.  It  was  draped  with  something  that  Dr.  Speer  felt,  and  said
was  coarse  and  rough.  From  the  time  it  appeared  it  never  once
faded  from  view.  It  grew  at  times  stronger,  and  was  faint  at  first,
gradually  acquiring  brilliancy  and  clearness.  It  moved  round  the
circle,  touched  all,  beat  on  the  table  just  as  J.  King's  does,  struck
the  chandelier  over  our  heads,  hit  the  ceiling,  and  sailed  slowly  into
the  far  corner  of  the  room,  some  yards  from  us.  Its  movements  were
slow  and  stately,  and  the  light  golden  and  very  steady.  No  waves
of  light,  apparently,  but  just  a  solid,  self-luminous  cake.  The  colour
was  not  that  of  phosphorescent  light,  but  yellower  and  more  golden.

Mentor  spoke  very  freely,  and  said  he  could  have  kept  it  alive  for
longer,  but  was  afraid  of  hurting  me.  The  light,  he  said,  was  fed  from
my  body.  The  next  morning  I  felt  very  cold,  tired,  and  weak,  with
pain  in  the  spine,  especially  at  the  lower  part,  and  over  the  solar
plexus.^

1  January  3rd. — Seance. — The  peculiar  grinding  sound  was  soon  heard.
Grocyn  then  manifested  ;  other  hitherto  unknown  sounds  were  also  heard.
The  sound  as  of  a  stone  dropping  on  the  table,  and  then  on  to  the  ground,
was  heard.  A  spirit  came  and  gave  his  name  as  Henry  Spratley,  Moor
Cottage,  Maidenhead.  He  said  that  he  had  been  sent  by  Imperator  to  give
proofs  of  his  identity,  and  he  gave  his  age  and  date  of  his  death.  No  one
in  the  circle  had  ever  been  to  Maidenhead,  or  had  ever  seen  or  heard  the
name  before.  So  on  the  following  morning  I  wrote  on  spec,  to  the  vicar  for
information  (owing  to  absence,  I  may  say,  his  answer  did  not  reach  us  for  a
month).  No  answer.  Mr.  M.  wrote  to  the  postmaster,  but  he  received  no
answer.  Mrs.  Speer  then  wrote  :  "  To  the  occupant  of  Moor  Cottage,"  and
was  at  once  answered  by  the  son,  Henry  Spratley,  who  corroborated  every
particular  given  by  the  spirit.  Another  deceased  (eight  months)  friend  of
one  of  the  circle  then  came  and  gave  much  information  hitherto  unknown  to
any  of  us,  and  all  of  which  was  subsequently  verified.  On  closing  the  stance
the  initials  of  the  deceased  friend,  T.  S.  A.,  and  Rector  were  found  written
upon  the  paper  always  placed  under  the  table.  At  this  seance,  and  at  the
preceding  one,  large  quantities  of  liquid  scent — verbena  and  musk— (the
latter  in  powder)  were  freely  showered  down  upon  us.  On  breaking  for  a
few  minutes  and  then  resuming  the  stance.  Mentor  came  and  exhibited  a
most  remarkable  light,  of  cylindrical  shape,  and  covered  with  drapery.  It
moved  about  freely  in  all  directions,  always  returning  and  resting  upon  the
edge  of  the  table,  and  then  advancing  to  its  centre.  It  then  would  sail  away
to  different  parts  of  the  room,  striking  the  gaseliers  in  its  ascent,  and  then
{by  request)  striking  the  ceiling  as  far  distant  from  the  circle  as  it  was
possible  to  do  so.  By  request  again  it  placed  itself,  surrounded  by  its
drapery,  in  my  outstretched  palm.  I  could  distinctly  pinch  the  drapery.  It
remained  visible  for  upwards  of  forty  minutes,  and  was  a  hitherto  unex-
ampled manifestation. — S.T.S.  [This  memorandum,  made  when  the  infor-
mation as  to  Mr.  Spratley  had  been  already  received,  seems  to  confuse
together  the  phenomena  of  January  2nd  and  3rd].


32


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses,


January  ith. — Seance  as  before. — Raps  at  once.  A  little  piece  of
wood  brought  from  Mrs.  Speer's  room,  into  which  I  had  never  been.
Scent  thrown  into  Dr.  Speer's  eye,  causing  pain  for  some  time.  Great
masses  of  floating  light  filled  the  room,  visible  to  Dr.  S.,  though  he
usually  does  not  see  the  light.  A  tap  came  under  Mrs.  Speer's  hands,,
and  the  name  "  George  Eves  "  was  rapped  out.  He  said  he  was  her
brother,  had  manifested  at  the  Holmeses',  and  thi'ough  me  at  Mrs.
Gregory's.  Another  sound  followed,  and  "Augustus  Eves  "  rapped  out
his  name,  affirmed  his  identity,  and  said  he  had  manifested  at  the
Holmeses',  He  said  Imperator  had  allowed  him  to  come.  Asked  wha
Imperator  was,  he  said,  "Prophet  of  the  coming  Truth" — an  expression
characteristic  of  him,  Mrs.  Speer  says.  Asked  further  for  the  name,
no  response  was  given.  Other  raps  then  came,  and  "  Emma "  was
rapped  out — Mrs.  Speer's  sister.  She  gave  her  assurance,  and  the  raps
then  changed  to  Mrs.  Speer's  father's.  "  God  protect  and  guard  you,
dear  Marie."  Then  Mrs.  S.'s  brother  came  back :  "We  have  been
allowed  to  return,  and  give  j^roof  to  convince.  Imperator  allowed
us."  Grocyn  struck  up  a  lively  note,  called  for  alphabet,  and  spelt  out
by  his  sounds,  "  Cease,  and  be  thankful.  Great  and  wise  spirits  have
made  effort  to  convince  you."  ^

All  the  evidence  now  is  on  the  identity  question.  We  had  not
thought  of  or  expected  Mrs.  Speer's  relatives.

January  5th  (following  evening). — Same  place  and  circle. — Raps.
Scent.  Table  tilted  as  before  described,  and  rested  on  the  floor,  and
beat  on  Dr.  Speer's  finger  quite  gently.  I  stood  up  and  put  my  arm
over  the  table  as  it  rested  on  the  flooi",  and  found  it  was  actually  fixed
in  that  position  as  shown.


The  table  must  weigh,  I  should  say,  upwards  of  a  hundredweight,
yet  it  rested  on  the  finger  quite  gently.  Once,  however,  I  had  asked
that  the  spirit  would  rap  on  the  floor,  and  a  smart  blow  was  given.

^Sunday,  January  Ath. — Seance.  Same  conditions. — Masses  of  floating
amorphous  light  were  almost  at  once  seen,  and  an  object  brought  through
the  locked  doors  from  our  bed-room  above.  Liquid  scent  again  freely  thrown
on  the  table.  Raps  were  then  heard,  and  Dr.  Eves,  Emma  Eves,  and
George  Eves  came  and  communicated  in  succession. — S.T.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  33


Dr.  S.  had  not  heard  me,  and  he  felt  the  weight  on  his  finger  rather
severely.  At  I'equest  the  table  was  very  gently  levitated  to  the
height  of  more  than  a  foot  from  the  floor.  It  settled  down  quite
calmly.

All  this  time  I  had  seen  a  veiled  figure  standing  by  Dr.  S.  Mrs.
S.  could  see  the  light,  but  could  not  distinguish  the  figure.  It  did  not
seem  to  move,  and  was  apparently  outside  the  circle,  near  the
window  curtains.  It  did  not  move.  Presently  distinctive  raps  came
on  the  table,  and  "  Charles  Louis  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  I  salute  you,"
was  rapped  out.  Dr.  S.  questioned  the  spirit  in  French,  and  answers
were  returned  correctly.  A  curious  instance  of  this  was  as  follows  :
Dr.  S.  intended  to  ask  the  name  of  Napoleon's  mother,  but  by  mistake
asked  for  the  wife's  name.  This  was  given,  a  response  not  to  the
mental  intent,  but  to  the  spoken  question.  After  some  other  unimpor-
tant questions,  I  asked  for  something  unknown  to  any  of  us,  and  the
date  of  his  birth,  April  20th,  1808,  was  given.  This  we  have  verified
and  found  correct.  Dr.  S.  asked  for  some  direct  writiiig  on  one  of  the
two  marked  papers,  and  assent  was  given,  "  J'ecrirai.  Taisez-vous."
Mentor  controlled,  and  said  that  it  was  really  the  spirit  of  Napoleon,
late  Emperor  of  the  French.  They  would  write  on  the  paper  near
Dr.  Speer's  foot,  that  being  nearest  to  where  the  figure  had  been
standing.  After  his  control  passed  I  was,  as  is  frequently  the  case,
clairvoyant,  and  described  the  face  of  the  Emperor,  his  waxed  imperial
and  moustache,  his  impassive  marble  face,  and  wound  up  by  saying  he
was  a  "regular  Mephistopheles."  The  form  was  just  in  the  same  place,
and  apparently  could  not  come  within  the  circle.  Mentor  was  at  my
right  hand,  and  rapped  clearly  at  request  with  his  double  knock.  All
this  time  our  hands  were  joined,  and  remained  so  until  the  seance
closed,  and  we  found  on  the  paper  close  by  Dr.  Speer's  foot  writing  of
which  I  append  a  facsimile.


This  is  a  good  case  of  evidence  from  four  sources  : —

1.  Clairvoyant  Vision.

2.  Raps  through  table.

3.  Confirmation  by  Mentor.

4.  Direct  Wi-iting.

I  have  omitted  to  say  that  the  spirit,  being  asked  why  he  came,


34


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


said  that  he  was  invited  by  Imperator,  a  characteristic  expression,  as
was  the  "  I  salute  you."  ^

January  17 th,  1874. — Douglas  House. — In  future  I  shall  only
record  noticeable  points.  The  usual  features  which  mark  every  sitting
will  not  be  recorded  at  length.  The  point  to-night  was  the  levitation
of  the  table.  It  darted  up  sevei-al  times  into  the  air  to  the  height  of
two  feet  or  more.  The  movement  was  sudden,  and  it  settled  down
again  quite  gently.  I  was  raised  in  my  chair  from  the  ground  twice.
The  chair  was  an  inch  or  two  only  from  the  ground.  A  chair  behind
me  was  lifted  and  placed  on  my  chair,  leaning  from  it  to  the  wall.

Simday,  Janiuiry  \8th,  1874. — A  long  communication  from  Im-
perator, detailing  changes  in  the  band  of  communicating  spirits.  In
the  evening  we  sat  at  Douglas  House.  A  large  piece  of  coral  was
placed  very  gently  on  the  table.  We  did  not  discover  it  until  Mrs.  S.
accidentally  touched  it.  It  is  the  largest  object  we  have  had  brought
in.  It  came  from  the  hall  outside.  Two  books  from  the  bookcase
near  were  put  on  the  table,  and  a  small  ivory  tablet  of  Dr.  Speer's
from  the  same  place,  but  near  to  him.  It  was  thrown  gently,  so  as  to
fall  near  Mrs.  Speer.  We  were  discussing  this  attempt  to  bring  objects
in  a  different  direction  during  a  break  in  the  sitting.  As  soon  as  the
gas  was  put  out,  a  book  from  a  closed  cupboard  at  the  corner  farthest
from  me,  and  immediately  behind  Dr.  Speer,  was  brought  out  and
struck  him  on  the  shoulder,  and  fell  near  Mrs.  S.  This  is  the  first
attempt  that  has  been  made  to  bring  an  object  from  behind  a  sitter
opposite  to  me.  Usually  the  power  seems  to  be  behind  me.  The  waves
of  scent  are  detected  by  both  sitters  before  I  smell  them.  The  objects
come  over  my  head  when  brought  into  the  room,  and  movements  of
articles  occur  behind  and  near  me.  Grocyn  plays  behind  and  near  me
usually,  though  at  times  he  goes  far  away.  But  in  this  case  the  book  ,
came  from  a  closed  cupboard  behind  Dr.  Speer,  struck  him  on  the

^January  5th. — Stance. — Raps  and  scent  almost  immediately.  A  figure  was
then  seen  by  one  of  the  circle  standing  aside  of  me.  The  heavy  table  moved
and  tilted.  Alphabet  was  called  for,  and  Charles  Louis  Napoleon  Bonaparte
was  rapped  out.  (No  one  in  the  circle  knew  that  his  name  was  Charles.)  I
asked  him  a  variety  of  questions,  of  which  we  were  ignorant,  with  a  view  to
test,  and  they  were  all  subsequently  ascertained  to  be  true.  I  asked  why  he
came.  "  Invited,"  he  said,  "  by  Imperator."  Mark  the  impei-ial  tone — not
"ordered,"  but  "invited."  After  replying  to  our  questions,  I  asked  if  he
could  write  for  us.  He  gave  "  J'ecrirai,"  and  then  rapped  out  "  Taisez-vous,"
i.e.,  silence.  The  ex-Eraperor  now  became  distinctly  visible  to  the  clair-
voyant member  of  the  circle,  and  presented  a  sad  and  dejected  expression  of
countenance.  At  the  close  of  the  seance  the  paper  under  the  table  had
been  written  upon,  and  the  C.  L.  N.  B.  stood  out  in  a  fine,  bold,  flowing
hand. — S.T.  S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


35


shoulder,  and  fell  near  Mrs.  Speer.  He  had  intended  to  ask  for  some-
thing to  be  brought  from  near  him,  as  he  had  formed  an  idea  that  the
force  was  connected  with  the  spine  of  the  medium.  His  wish  was
anticipated.  We  had  abundance  of  scent-laden  air,  the  coldest  I  ever
felt.  A  sensitive  thermometer  would  have  gone  down  several  degrees.
[See  on  February  7th.]  I  never  felt  such  cold  air.  The  Prophet
showed  his  little  light.  It  was  very  brilliant,  and  at  times  like  two
bi'ight  buttons  with  a  dark  space  between  them.  It  evidently  had
a  dark  back  to  it.  Most  generally  it  was  invisible  to  me,  though  I
was  not  entranced.  The  table  was  levitated  several  times,  as  on  the
previous  night. My  chair  was  di'awn  away  from  it.

Jcmitary  ^\st. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — I  had
been  very  unwell.  The  physical  movements  were  all  quiet.  The  only
important  thing  was  the  rapping  out  the  name  "  Alexander  Thelliffsen,"
an  old  parishioner  of  mine  at  Douglas,  whose  deathbed  I  had  attended.
He  gave  some  slight  particulars.  I  had  forgotten  his  name,  and  do  not
now  know  his  Christian  name.

January  24:th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  Mr.  Percival.
— We  sat  in  the  dining-room.  The  most  marked  manifestation  was  cold,
scent-laden  air,  which  we  had  in  great  quantities.  H.  Spratley  came
and  rapped  out,  "  It  is  true  that  I  said."  We  have  received  confinna-
tion  from  his  son.  Divers  raps,  and  then  Imperator  controlled  and
spoke  of  God  and  other  subjects.  He  also  answered  questions  as  to
materialisation.  The  Prophet  showed  his  little  light,  and  when  I
sneezed  Dr.  S.  saw  a  light  flash  up  suddenly  on  the  other  side  (right)  ;
it  was  a  simple  flash,  dying  out  at  once.  At  night,  when  I  put  out  the
light,  I  noticed  my  hands  luminous.  I  am  still  unwell. — The  evening
was  clear  and  fine,  and  the  barometer  high.

January  25th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — The
whole  seance  was  occupied  by  a  series  of  messages  from  Thomas  Wilson,
Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man,  who  has  lately  written  in  my  book.  He
gave  the  most  minute  details.  He  was  born  at  Burton,  in  Cheshire,
December  20th,  1663;  died  March  7th,  1755,  aged  91.  Mother's  name,
Sherlock,  born  at  Oxton,  in  Cheshire  ;  schoolmaster,  Mr.  Harper,  of
Chester  ;  ordained  by  Dr.  Morton,  Bishop  of  Kildare,  to  curacy  of  his
uncle.  Dr.  Sherlock.  He  was  made  Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man  in  1697,
and  married  Mary  Patten,  of  Warrington,  1698.  He  had  four
children  :  Rlary,  died  aged  thirteen  ;  Thomas,  aged  one  year  ;  Alice,
aged  two ;  and  Thomas,  who  survived  him.  All  this  was  rapped  out
in  answer  to  questions  without  a  particle  of  hesitation,  and  with  clear-
ness and  precision.  He  said  he  was  in  the  fourth  sphere,  went  to  the
Isle  of  Man  occasionally,  but  knew  nothing  of  the  present  Bishop.
Had  been  sent  by  Imperator,  knew  the  Prophet,  and  gave  his  name,
but  declined  to  give  the  name  of  the  third  "Vates"  until  Imperator

F  2


36


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


gave  it.  He  also  gave  Imperator's  name.  The  light  was  very  strong
in  the  room,  and  we  had  one  shower  of  scent.  This  is  the  most  curious
descriptive  account  we  have  had  througli  the  table,  though  many  such
have  been  written  out  in  my  book.  The  Bishop  said  that  the  writing
in  my  book  was  in  his  own  hand.  I  have  sent  for  a  letter  of  his,  if  one
can  be  had,  and  I  propose  to  verify  all  the  above  details,  if  possible.
[Note  added  later  :  The  handwi-iting  is  a  facsimile.  I  obtained  a
letter  from  the  Isle  of  Man.]

February  \st. — I  have  succeeded  in  verifying  all  the  above  particu-
lars. I  can  find  no  record  of  the  death  of  his  infant  children.

[I  have  verified  these  facts,  except  names  and  age  at  death  of  two
children,  from  Sto well's  Life  of  Wilson,  published  1819.  This  easily
accessible  work  contains  no  specimen  of  handwriting.  Mr  Moses
showed  me,  in  1886,  the  letter  in  Bishop  Wilson's  handwriting,  which
much  resembled  that  of  the  automatic  script.  It  is  noticeable
that,  in  this  case  and  Grocyn's,  details  as  to  historic  personages,  such
as  are  usually  written  automatically,  are  flashed  or  rapped  out  at
s(^ances.— F.W  H.  M.]

On  Simday  Morning  (January  25th,  1874)  I  had  another  of  the
curious  visions  which  I  have  experienced  twice  before.  I  was  sitting
at  my  table  in  Clifton-road — time,  1  p.m.  or  thereabouts.  I  had  break-
fasted late,  about  10.30,  and  had  been  writing  since  breakfast.  I  am
unable  to  say  how  long  the  vision  lasted,  nor  am  I  able  to  fix  exactly
the  time  of  its  commencement.  If  I  may  judge  by  the  amount  I  had
written,  it  could  not  be  long.  I  have  no  remembrance  of  ceasing  to
write.  The  first  thing  that  I  remember  was  standing  beside  my  body
and  looking  at  it.  I  did  not  feel  surprised,  but  only  curious  to  know
how  I  got  there.  The  spirit  body  seemed  to  be  disengaged  and  to  be
leading  an  independent  existence.  While  I  was  looking  I  was  con-
scious of  the  presence  of  the  Prophet,  who  stood  beside  me.  He  was
robed  in  sajaphire  blue,  and  on  his  head  v/as  a  coronet  with  a  very
bright  star  in  the  middle  over  the  brow.  The  face  was  what  I  have
seen  before — the  face  of  an  old  man  with  a  long  beard  and  moustache,
deep-set  eyes  and  large  massive  brow.  He  explained  to  me  that  I  was
out  of  the  body,  and  told  me  to  follow  him.  I  remember  well  the
oddity  of  my  sensation  when  I  discovered  that  the  wall  of  the  room
was  no  bar  to  me.  We  passed  on  our  way  without  obstacle  until  I
found  that  we  were  in  the  midst  of  a  very  beautiful  landscape.  How
we  got  there  I  do  not  know,  but  I  seemed  to  have  changed  almost
instantaneously  the  surroundings  of  earth  for  the  scenery  of  the
spheres.  A  special  efl'ort,  I  imagine,  of  my  guide  enabled  me  to  see
my  body,  and  after  that  I  resumed  spirit  vision  to  the  exclusion  of
bodily  vision.  The  scenery  through  which  I  jDassed  was  like  an  earthly
landscape,  but  the  air  was  more  translucent,  the  water  more  clear  and


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


37


sparkling,  the  trees  greener  and  more  luxuriant.  I  went  along  with-
out conversation,  and  noted  the  ease  with  which  my  will  carried  me
along  with  a  peculiar  gliding  motion.  At  the  end  of  my  journey  we
came  to  a  simple  cottage,  very  like  many  I  have  seen  here,  and  there
I  found  my  Grandmother  Stainton.  She  was  just  as  I  remembered  her,
only  clothed  in  a  long  pure  robe,  with  a  girdle  of  deep  red.  Her  hair
was  bound  with  a  simple  fillet,  and  her  whole  face  and  figure  were
idealised  and  glorified.  She  attempted  to  addi-ess  me,  but  my  guide
motioned  me  away  and  hurried  me  back.  From  this  point  my  memory
grows  fainter  and  fainter,  and  I  can  recall  no  more  until  I  found  myself
sitting  in  my  chair,  the  pen  on  the  table  by  my  side,  and  the  paper  on
which  I  had  been  writing  before  me.  The  ink  was  very  dry,  and  I  was
for  a  time  only  partly  conscious  of  what  I  had  seen.  It  all  came  back
by  degrees.  Now  at  night  it  is  conceivable  that  I  might  be  drowsy
or  sleepy,  though  I  know  I  was  not  on  the  occasion  of  the  previous
vision.  But  this  was  midday.  I  certainly  did  not  go  to  sleep.  I  had
had  breakfast  and  nothing  else  two  hours  ago,  and  the  vision  was
a  propos  of  nothing  that  was  in  my  thoughts.  It  is  stated  by  communi-
cating spirits  that  the  occurrence  was  real,  and  that  my  oblivion  of  the
latter  part  was  caused  by  the  necessity  of  hurrying  me  back,  as  the
conditions  were  not  good.^

January  2Gth. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  JMrs.  S. — A  great  variety
of  raps  of  different  kinds — one  quite  new,  a  sort  of  roll  like  a  drum  of
a  very  peculiar  kind.  Dr.  S.  tried  in  vain  to  imitate  it.  We  were
told  that  it  was  made  by  Theophilus.  Grocyn  came  and  played,  but  not
very  well.  The  Prophet  showed  his  light  at  request.  The  heavy,
dropping  sound  came,  too,  at  Dr.  Speer's  request.  The  little  dropping
sounds  on  the  table  were  plain.  A  peculiar  reflected  light  in  the
polished  mahogany  of  the  bookcase  came  two  or  three  times.  It  was
about  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  and  appeared  reflected — from  what  source
I  could  not  discover.  My  chair  was  drawn  away  from  the  table,  and
Imperator  delivered  a  long  address.

On  coming  out  of  the  trance,  I  saw  and  described  the  spirit  as  one
of  commanding  mien,  with  a  short  robe  girt  round  the  waist,  and  a
crown  with  a  cross  *^  in  the  centre,  just  as  the  Prophet  has  a  star.  In
his  hand  he  held  a  long  wand,  terminating  in  a  cross.  He  said  nothing,
and  gradually  faded  from  view.

January  29th,  1874. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S. — As  soon
as  we  sat  down  we  had  cool  air  and  scent.  Grocyn  played,  and  at
request  made  the  deep  violoncello  sound.  The  Prophet's  light  was  very
bright  indeed,  and  darted  about  all  over  the  room. Once  it  came  very

^  Other  visions  of  this  type  are  reserved  for  a  future  paper.


38


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


near  to  Mrs.  Speer's  face.  It  never  knocked  or  made  any  sound,  but
darted  about  and  was  very  bright.  The  heavy  dropping  sound  was
made  on  the  liarmonium  stool  at  Dr.  Speer's  request.  Little  Dicky
came  back  with  his  old  creak,  and  controlled  me  in  the  oddest,  squeaky
little  voice.  It  is  described  as  very  peculiar.  A.  W.  also  came  back
and  gave  her  name.  Jvist  as  before,  her  raps  were  tiny  and  delicate,
I  was  clairvoyant,  and  described  my  gi'andmother  again.  She  had  a
child  with  her.  I  also  described  the  Prophet  and  Theophilus,  and
several  spirits  who  were  apparently  at  the  ceiling  over  the  table,  and
wei'e  showering  down  scent.  As  the  se'ance  was  about  to  break  up,  I
saw  a  spirit  suddenly  come,  and  immediately  John  Dee's  crack  was
heard.  At  request  he  moderated  it,  and  made  it  on  the  harmonium,
stool  and  table.

Saturday,  February  7th,  1874. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,  Mr.  Percival,
Mr.  H.,  and  self. — Floating  masses  of  light.  Beautiful  scent,  like
honeysuckle.  It  was  like  the  air  in  a  country  lane.  Grocyn  played
very  loudly,  imitating  the  clock,  as  usual.  More  scent.  Air  very  cool,
so  cold,  in  short,  that  it  made  all  the  circle  shiver,  except  myself.  It
came,  as  usvial,  from  over  my  head  A  self-registering  thermometer
which  had  been  put  on  the  table  showed  a  deflection  of  6deg.  after  the
seance  was  over.  The  cold  was  intense  at  times.  The  Prophet's  little
light  came,  and  we  held  a  long  conversation  with  him,  the  answers
being  given  in  flashes.  It  was  a  very  pretty  manifestation,  the  light
being  turned  in  each  case  to  the  questioner.  A  curious  muffled  whisper
came  between  me  and  Mrs.  Speer,  and  Mr.  H.  thought  it  was  a  voice
trying  to  speak.  We  extemporised  a  tube,  and  some  muffled
whispering  sounds  were  made,  but  it  did  not  come  to  much.
The  tube  was  taken  up  and  thrown  down  by  Dr.  Speer.  A  loud  noise
on  the  table  by  Mr.  P.  was  made  by  the  fall  of  a  round  stone  which
had  been  brought  from  the  study  at  his  back.  He  had  just  remarked
that  he  had  never  witnessed  a  clear  case  of  the  passage  of  matter
through  matter.  A  heavy  ornament  (statuette)  from  the  mantelpiece
behind  me  was  placed  on  my  head,  and  then  very  quietly  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  table.  Continual  scented  air  was  blown  about.
Imperator  controlled,  and  spoke  for  an  hour  on  the  Nature  of  God.  I
do  not  record  what  he  said,  as  I  find  a  good  deal  of  it  repeated  in  my
book.

February  &th,  1874. — Same  circle  on  the  following  night. — Scent
again,  witli  very  cold  air,  which  made  all  shiver.  The  wind  again  came:
from  over  my  head.  An  ornament — a  china  flower  vase — was  brought
from  the  bedroom  occupied  by  Mr.  H. — the  same  in  which  I  usually
sleep.  The  manifestations  were  similar  to  those  of  the  preceding  night,
Mr.  P.  seemed  to  be  in  the  centre  of  clouds  of  light,  and  felt  the  influence
very  much. At  night  he  had  manifestations  in  his  room,  the  bed  being


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


39


violently  shaken. The  sounds  of  Grocyn  and  the  Prophet's  light  and
the  scent  were  very  successful.

Tuesday,  February  lOth,  1874. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — A
peculiar  triple  sound  on  the  table,  and  then  the  following  messages
were  rapped  out : — ■"  Bertie  Henry  D'Oly  Jones,  died  at  Umballa,
India,  December  31st,  1873,  aged  one  year  and  seven  months."  This  was
elicited  by  repeated  questions.  Alphabet  was  again  called,  and
"  D  apostrophe  Oly  "  was  spelt  out.  Again  :  "  Edward  George  Nigel
Jones,  died  January  3rd,  1874,  aged  two  years  and  nine  months.  After-
wards we  had  another  brother  join  us,  January  5th,  Cholmely — children
of  Nigel  Jones."  Other  questions  elicited  answers  that  Imperator  had
sent  them.  We  afterwards  searched  the  India^i  Mail,  but  could  dis-
cover no  trace.  At  length,  in  looking  over  the  Pall  Mall  Budget,  we
found  the  appended  notice,  which  only  gives  initials  : —

"  Jones. — Bertie  H.  D'O.,  aged  1,  Dec.  31st ;  Edward  G.  N.,  aged
2,  Jan.  3rd  ;  and  Archie  W.  C,  Jan.  5th,  children  of  Mr.  W.  C.  N.
Jones,  at  Umballa,  India."

[Announcement  verified,  and  see  note  D  later  as  to  Christian
names  in  full.  It  is  not,  of  course,  implied  that  the  children  them-
selves spelt  the  names  thus  carefully,  but  rather  Imperator,  or  their
mother,  also  lately  deceased.  Conversely  there  is  a  case  where  a  well-
known  name  is  spelt  incorrectly  in  direct  writing,  and  it  is  explained
that  the  famous  spirit  was  using  a  clumsy  intermediary.  "  Zachary
Gray"  spelt  his  name  "Grey"  in  all  actual  writings  of  his  that
I  have  seen— F.W.H.M.]

No  one  of  us  had  ever  heard  of  the  children  or  their  parents.

Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday,  February  Wth,  12th,  lith. — I
class  these  stances  together,  as  the  phenomena  were  somewhat  similar.  I
am  now  staying  at  Douglas  House,  and  we  sit  regularly.

The  week  has  been  marked  by  a  remarkable  development  of  Grocyn's
music.  He  has  made  beautiful  sounds  within  the  circle,  playing  chords
exquisitely,  arpeggio  chords  at  Dr.  S.'s  request,  intervals,  &c.  The
Welsh  harper  played  in  concert  with  him,  and  made  some  very  curious
high  notes.  But  the  most  remarkable  sound  was  that  of  a  very  deep
bass  string  played  quite  out  of  the  circle.  It  sounded  like  a  big  drum,
and  was  away  behind  me.  It  was  the  first  time  that  we  had  such
distinct  evidence  of  sound  made  away  from  the  table.  Mrs.  S.  remarked
of  the  sound  that  it  was  as  loud  as  J.  Dee's.  Immediately  there  came
a  crash  on  the  table  close  to  her  elbow,  which  startled  us  tremendously.
He  was  standing  near,  and  something — the  mention  of  his  name  and
directing  of  our  minds  to  him  (?) — enabled  him  to  manifest.  The
Prophet  showed  his  light  and  answered  questions  as  before.  Abundance
of  scent  and  cool  air  were  given. Yates  came  with  a  peculiar  knock,


40


The  Ex2')eriences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


not  unlike  Imperator's,  and  attempted  a  control,  Avhich  was  not  suc-
cessful. Imperator  controlled  and  spoke  briefly.  I  have  omitted  to  say
that  I  described  clairvoyantly  the  Prophet  and  the  Seer  together — the
latter  a  young  and  very  beautiful  spirit,  the  Prophet  dignified  and
aged.  Also  Grocyn  and  a  tall  spirit  by  Dr.  Speer  whom  I  did  not
know. There  was  a  deal  of  light  in  the  room.^

Sunday,  February  \^th,  1874. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — The
usual  manifestations — Grocyn,  scent,  movement  of  table.  The  dropping
sounds  were  extremely  clear,  clearer  than  ever,  and  they  went  on
during  the  control.  The  Prophet's  light  was  very  clear  and  bright.
Imperator  controlled,  and  spoke  again  of  God  and  of  His  Nature  ;  also
as  to  the  personal  existence  of  spirit  after  death.  I  had  imagined  it
to  be  impersonal  to  a  certain  extent.  The  control  was  interfered
with  by  Dr.  Speer  leaving  and  breaking  the  circle.  Afterwards  a  very
singular  piece  of  direct  writing  was  done  in  answer  to  Mrs.  Speer's

1  Mrs.  Speer's  account  of  two  of  the  sittings  thus  summarised  may  be
given  for  comparison  (Light,  November  26th,  1892) : —

Fehruaryl2th. — Circle  met  under  usual  conditions.  Scent  very  abundant.
G.  manifested,  producing  remarkable  musical  sounds  of  every  description,
playing  octaves,  intervals,  aud  chords  by  request.  G.'s  sounds  this
evening  were  so  deep,  resembling  a  drum,  that  we  remarked  they  were
almost  as  loud  as  the  sounds  Dr.  Dee  produced.  Instantly  he  came,  and
made  a  tremendous  rap  between  me  and  Mr.  S.  M.  H.'s  light  was  then
visible,  and  answered  questions  as  usual.

"  Fehruary  14f/i.. — We  again  met  in  our  seance-roorn,  which  was  soon
filled  with  spirit-light,  large  masses  floating  about  in  every  direction.  G .
quickly  manifested,  playing  sweetly.  We  heard  the  music,  very  soft,  outside
the  circle  ;  then  it  sounded  in  the  corners  of  the  room,  and  came  behind  the
medium,  floating  over  his  head.  The  sounds  were  more  beautiful  than
usual — pure  and  sweet,  and  harp-like,  the  table  not  acting  as  a  sounding-
board,  as  on  previous  occasions.  Octaves,  chords,  and  intervals  were  instantly
sounded  by  request,  as  on  the  jjrevious  evening.  The  spirit  known  to  us  as
the  Welsh  Harper  also  answered  questions  on  the  strings  of  his  spirit-harp.
A  fresh  musical  sound  came,  made  by  another  spirit.  Name  not  given.  We
heard  an  unknown  rap  on  the  table,  soft  and  mufiied,  something  like
Imperator's.  On  asking  who  it  was,  "  Vates"  was  given  through  the  alpha-
bet, also  "Break."  On  returning  to  the  room  many  sounds  were  made'
around  the  medium.  H.'s  light  flashed,  and  the  medium  tried  to  speak.
The  voice  was  quite  unlike  Imperator's.  The  spirit  tried  to  control  the
medium  three  diflerent  times,  but  failed.  Imperator  then  sijoke,  saying  the
voice  was  new.  Vates  was  trying  to  communicate,  and  as  he  wished  it  to
have  its  own  peculiar  identity  it  was  more  diflicult.  He  said  the  spirit  had
taken  the  name  of  "  Vates  "  as  they  did  not  wish  great  names  to  be  brought
before  the  public.  H.,  who  was  an  exalted  spirit,  would  help  in  giving
information." — M.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  41


request  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  for  the  signatures  of  some  of  the
spirits  for  her  book. I  append  a  facsimile  as  near  as  I  can  make  it.


February  IQth. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  Mr.  Percival,
Miss  B.,  and  self. — From  the  first  the  manifestations  seemed  to
suffer  from  the  introduction  of  a  new  element.  Grocyn's  sound  was
wooden  and  poor ;  there  were  frequent  pauses,  and  the  only  copious
manifestation  was  the  shower  of  scent  by  Miss  B.  It  has  been  so  on
the  two  previous  occasions  when  she  has  been  present.  There  is
evidently  something  in  her  influence  which  does  not  work  harmoni-
ously at  present.  Imperator  controlled  very  slightly,  and  when  the
light  was  struck  for  the  purpose  of  taking  notes  the  control  passed
away  at  once.  It  was  afterwards  resumed,  and  the  old  subject  of
God  was  explained,  and  some  questions  answei-ed. But  the  whole  was


February  I8th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — It
was  late  before  we  sat.  The  raps  were  very  various  and  Grocyn's
sounds  were  very  good.  He  had  a  peculiar  tambourine  sound,  which
was  very  curious  and  quite  independent  of  the  circle  or  table.  The
room  was  very  full  of  light,  and  the  points  of  light  were  different.
The  Prophet  did  not  show  his  little  bright  speck,  but  in  place  of  it  a
duller  point  of  light,  which  flashed  about  and  assumed  at  times  the
appearance  as  of  a  column  of  phosphorescent  smoke.  It  was  quite
different  from  what  we  had  before  seen.  Raps  on  the  table  and  on  my
chair,  and  quantities  of  scent  and  cold  air.  The  scent  of  violets  was
very  pronounced ;  also  of  verbena  and  another  pure  scent  not  unlike
eau-de-cologne.

^  Miss  Birkett  describes  this  sitting  as  follows  : —

"  Various  scents  were  wafted  round  the  room  to  each  sitter,  with  strong
currents  of  air,  after  which  liquid  verbena  was  poured  down  on  Dr.  S.  as  if
from  the  rose  of  a  watering-pot  in  a  continuous  stream,  some  showers  of
it  extending  to  M.  B.  [herself].  A  long  and  glow-worm-hke  light  tilted
about  for  some  time  near  Mr.  Moses."


difficult.i


42


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


February  19th. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  self. — No  phenomena
■worth  recording  were  shown.  Grocyn  played,  but  not  well.  Scent
was  abundant,  and  the  floating  masses  of  light  were  visible  to  all.
There  were  three  distinct  musical  sounds — or  four,  I  fancy  :  Grocyn's
old  sound,  the  Welsh  harper,  the  tambourine,  and  a  new  sound,
apparently  made  by  plucking  a  string.  The  sound  made  gave  one  the
idea  of  a  band  tuning.

February  20th,  1874. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I  dined  with  Mrs.
Gregory,  to  meet  the  Baron  du  Potet,  the  celebrated  magnetist  and
spiritualist.  Mr.  Percival  was  of  the  pai-ty.  During  dinner  I  was
conscious  of  a  strange  influence  in  the  room,  and  mentioned  the  fact.
The  Baron  had  previously  magnetised  me  very  strongly,  and  had
rendered  me  more  than  usually  clairvoyant.  He  also  recognised  a
spirit  in  the  room,  but  thought  it  was  the  spirit  of  a  living  person.
After  dinner,  when  we  got  upstairs,  I  felt  an  uncontrollable  inclination
to  write,  and  I  asked  the  Baron  to  lay  his  hand  upon  my  arm.  It
began  to  move  very  soon,  and  I  fell  into  a  deep  trance.  As  far
as  I  can  gather  from  the  witnesses,  the  hand  then  wrote  out,  "  I  killed
myself  to-day."  This  was  preceded  by  a  very  rude  drawing,  and  then
"Under  steam-roller.  Baker-street,  medium  passed,"  [i.e.  W.S.M.]  was
written.  At  the  same  time  I  spoke  in  the  trance  and  I'ose  and
apparently  motioned  something  away,  saying  "  Blood  "  several  times.
This  was  repeated,  and  the  spirit  asked  for  prayer.  Mrs.  G.  said  a
few  words  of  prayer,  and  I  came  out  of  the  trance  at  last,  feeling
very  unwell.  On  the  following  day  Dr.  Speer  and  I  walked  down  to
Baker-street  and  asked  the  policeman  on  duty  if  any  accident  had
occurred  there.  He  told  us  that  a  man  had  been  killed  by  the  steam-
roller at  9  a.m.,  and  that  he  himself  had  helped  to  carry  the  body  to
Marylebone  Workhouse.

I  felt  the  influence  at  night  very  much,  and  did  not  shake  it  off  for
forty-eight  hours. This  is  curious  evidence  of  spirit  action.^

Sunday,  February  22nd. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — The  control
was  interfered  with  by  the  events  of  the  previous  day.  Nothing  could
be  done  except  irregular  rappings  and  movements  of  my  chair.  At
last  we  were  told  to  join  hands,  and  two  remarkable  pieces  of  direct
writing  were  given,  one  in  hieroglyphics,  which  I  have  since  been  told
comes  from  an  Egyptian  spirit. I  was  deeply  entranced.

Friday,  Febrimry  21th. — Douglas  House. — Grocyn  and  raps  and
the  Prophet's  light.  An  argument  as  to  the  position  of  the  light
upset  conditions  and  stopped  manifestations.

Saturday,  February  2Qth. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  Mi".  Percival,  and  self,
in  dining-room. — The  physical  manifestations,  though  few,  were  very

1  See  below,  under  Section  B.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


43


good.  Scent  was  abundant.  Grocyn  played,  and  a  new  spii'it  came —
"  Rosamira,  wife  of  Benjamin  Lancaster,  ofMt.  Greville,  Kilburn — died
January  11th,  1874."  Imperator  answered  some  questions  as  to  the
spirit  who  had  killed  himself,  and  then  delivered  a  very  long  and
interesting  address  on  the  Religions  of  the  World.  He  pointed  out
the  good  in  each,  and  showed  how  it  received  its  sum  and  crown  in
Spiritualism.

[Daily  Telegraph,  January  15th,  1874:  "On  the  11th  inst.,  at
Torquay,  Rosamira,  the  beloved  wife  of  Benjamin  Lancaster,  Esq.,  of
Mount  Gi'eville,  Kilburn."  Where  not  otherwise  stated,  messages
coming  while  Mr.  Moses  was  not  entranced  were  given  by  raps.
— F.W.H.M.]

March  \st,  1874. — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — The  usual  phenomena.
In  the  midst  of  the  stance,  when  perfectly  clear  of  influence,  I  saw
Theophilus  and  the  Prophet.  They  were  as  clear  and  palpable  to  the
eye  as  human  beings  would  be  in  a  strong  light.  Placing  my  hand
over  my  eyes  made  no  difference,  but  turning  away  I  could  see  them
no  longer.  This  experiment  I  repeated  several  times.  I  also  saw  the
little  Catherine.  This  is  the  first  time  I  remember  being  so  clair-
voyant in  a  seance  without  being  previously  entranced.  "  Torquay  "
was  rapped  out ;  we  could  not  understand  why.  Since  then  Mr.  Per-
cival  has  discovered  that  the  spirit  who  communicated  before  had  died
at  Torquay. This  is  a  curious  instance  of  unlikely  communication.

March  2nd. — 21,  Green-street.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  Mr.  Percival,  and
self. — The  Baron  du  Potet  tried  his  mesmeric  power  on  Mi'S.  Speer,
Mr.  Percival,  and  myself.  He  sent  me  off  very  rapidly,  and  I  was
conscious  of  a  spirit  near  me,  but  he  woke  me  up  so  soon  that  nothing
happened.  Then  Mrs.  Speer  was  tried,  and  she  went  to  sleep,  but  her
sensations  at  first  were  not  very  pleasant — afterwards  they  became
very  much  more  so. Percival  never  went  off  actually.

March  16<7i. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — Raps
began  very  quickly,  and  Grocyn.  Sounds  very  good  ;  tambourine  veiy
loud.  Dr.  S.  suggested  joining  hands,  and  we  did  so.  The  table  at
once  began  to  move,  and  my  chair  was  withdrawn  until  we  were  forced
to  loose  hands.  I  was  put  close  to  the  door,  and  sat  full  six  feet  from
the  table.  In  that  position  raps  were  made  on  the  table  and  it  was
moved, — the  raps  were  loud  and  decisive  on  the  table.  My  chair  was
violently  shaken  and  moved,  and  1  raised  myself  so  as  to  remove  my
feet  from  the  floor,  crouching  upon  the  seat.  In  that  position  the
chair  was  moved  with  equal  facility,  and  lovid  rappings  were  made  on
the  wall,  door,  cupboards,  harmonium,  and  floor.  The  noise  was  very
great.  The  Prophet  showed  his  light  very  brightly,  and  it  flashed  about
like  forked  lightning. I  saw  the  reflection  in  the  looking-glass  very


44


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


distinctly.  We  had  plenty  of  very  beautiful  scent,  and  some  of  it
which  was  thrown  into  Mrs.  Speer's  eye  caused  no  pain.

March  I8th. — After  [Imperator]  left,  Chom  resumed  control,  and
said  he  wished  to  give  a  test.  We  all  joined  hands,  Mr.  Percival
standing  up  and  leaning  over  the  table,  so  as  to  reach  my  hands.  We
grasped  hands,  and  our  palms  were  upwards.  Whilst  in  that  position
a  flood  of  scent  (verbena)  was  poured  into  our  hands.  Mr.  Percival's
hand  was  filled  with  more  than  a  teaspoonful.  Mrs.  Speer  received  a
considerable  quantity,  and  my  hand  and  arm  were  thoroughly  wet.  The
table  was  drenched  with  scent  all  round.  The  door  was  locked,  and
the  room  empty.  A  more  complete  objective  test  cannot  be  conceived.
The  whole  quantity  of  scent  must  have  been  considerably  over  a
tablespoonful.  I  believe  this  estimate  is  very  considerably  under
the  mark.  An  attempt  at  direct  writing  failed,  the  power  having  been
used  for  the  scent.  ^

Wednesday,  March  2^th.—T>v.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — We  had
been  to  lunch  with  Mrs.  W.,  and  the  conditions  were  more  or  less
disturbed.  Nothing  of  importance  occurred,  except  the  advent  of  a
new  spirit,  who  made  a  peculiar  detonation  in  mid-air  about  the  level
of  my  head,  and  between  me  and  Mrs.  Speer.  It  was  a  quite  distinct
sound.  The  name  given  was  "  Lottie,  daughter  of  Sir  Everard  Buck-
worth," — passed  away  a  century  ago  in  Jermyn-street.  The  power
ceased  after  Everard,  and  we  broke  up.  In  the  dining-room  after-
wards raps  came  again,  and  the  surname  Buckworth  was  given.  The
following  morning  a  message  was  written  through  my  hand  to  the
effect  that  she  died  December  5th,  177.3,  at  the  house  of  one  Dr.  Baker,
a  fiiend,  in  Jermyn-street.  She  died  of  disease  of  the  heart  while
dancing. She  had  "looked  in,"  and  was  gone  again.

[This  death  is  recorded  in  the  Annual  Register.  It  will  be  again
mentioned  when  the  automatic  writings  are  discussed. — F.W.H.M.]

Ajn-il  lith,  1874. — Dr.  S.  and  I  alone. — We  resumed  after  an
interval,  during  which  the  Speers  had  been  to  Shanklin,  where  Mrs.  S.
still  remains,  and  I  to  Bedford.  We  sat  on  the  previous  evening,
without  much  result,  except  some  very  bright  lights  of  the  Prophet's.
To-night  lights  commenced  again,  but  of  a  quite  different  character  to
any  we  had  seen  before.  They  darted  about  like  a  comet,  coming  from
the  side  by  the  harmonium,  or  near  the  fireplace.  They  were  evanescent,

1  Mrs.  Speer's  account  (Light,  December  10th,  1892)  is  as  follows : —

' '  After  Imperator  had  ceased  sp)eaking  Chom  again  controlled,  sayhig  he
wished  to  give  us  a  test.  He  told  us  to  join  hands,  keeping  the  palms
upwards  and  open.  Wliile  in  this  position  a  delicious  scent  was  literally
poured  on  to  them."


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


45


and  apparently  of  diffuse  luminosity,  within  which  was  a  nucleus  of
light ;  not,  however,  visible  to  me.  We  had  some  ten  or  twelve  of  these,
some  more  brilliant  than  others,  some  visible  both  in  the  looking-glass
and  in  the  glass  of  the  book-case,  and  they  were  showing  a  trail  of  reflected
light  on  the  table,  when  suddenly  there  arose  from  below  me,  apparently
under  the  table,  or  near  the  floor,  right  under  my  nose,  a  cloud  of
luminous  smoke,  just  like  phosphorus.  It  fumed  up  in  great  clouds,
until  I  seemed  to  be  on  fire,  and  rushed  from  the  room  in  a  panic.  I
was  fairly  frightened,  and  could  not  tell  what  was  happening.  I  rushed
to  the  door  and  opened  it,  and  so  to  the  front  door.  My  hands  seemed
to  be  ablaze,  and  left  their  impress  on  the  door  and  handles.  It  blazed
for  awhile  after  I  had  touched  it,  but  soon  went  out,  and  no
smell  or  trace  remained.  I  have  seen  my  own  hands  covered  with  a
lambent  flame  ;  but  nothing  like  this  I  ever  saw.  There  seemed  to  be
no  end  of  the  smoke.  It  smelt  distinctly  phosphoric,  but  the  smell
evaporated  as  soon  as  I  got  out  of  the  room  into  the  air.  I  was  fairly
frightened,  and  was  reminded  of  what  I  had  read  about  a  manifesta-
tion given  to  Mr.  Peebles  similar  to  the  burning  bush.

I  have  omitted  to  say  that  the  lights  were  preceded  by  very  sharp
detonations  on  my  chair,  so  that  we  could  watch  for  their  coming  by
hearing  the  noise. They  shot  up  very  rapidly  from  the  floor.

April  I5th,  1874. — Dr.  S.,  Mr.  Percival,  and  I.  Peculiar  raps,  and
a  figure  at  the  end  of  the  table,  in  the  place  where  Mrs.  Speer  usually
sits.  I  was  conscious  of  it,  and  the  influence  was  not  good.  In  trance
I  spoke  to  it  and  held  a  long  conversation  with  it.  It  gave  the  name
of  John  O.  "  I  got  rid  of  my  body  on  the  8th  of  April."  He
died  at  Keswick.  I  remember  the  grey  look  of  the  spirit ;  I  wished
it  to  be  taken  away.  The  knocks  were  quite  new — very  loud  and
imperious.^

The  Times,  Standard,  and  Telegraj^h  have  been  searched  in  vain
for  a  notice  of  Mr.  Callister's  death.  At  Somerset  House  we  find
the  entry:  "John  B.  Callister,  gentleman,  aged  33,  died  of  cardiac
paralysis,  at  Turnside  Lodge,  above  Derwent,  April  9th,  1874."  There
is  here  a  day's  discrepancy  of  date,  but  patients  dying  of  cardiac

^Miss  Birkett  writes  : —

"  After  a  time  Mr.  M.  said  he  saw  a  spirit  at  the  end  of  the  table.  Its
appearance  seemed  to  annoy  him,  and  he  said  he  did  not  like  the  looks  of  it
and  wished  it  would  go  away.  Presently  loud  raps  were  heard  on  the  table
near  it,  and  the  following  sentence  was  given.  .  .  .  Mr.  M.  replied,
'Now  his  father  has  come  ;  I  see  him  standing  near  it.'  We  were  further
told  that  he  had  died  suddenly  at  Keswick  on  April  8th.  He  had  been
slightly  known  to  the  medium  some  few  years  before.  The  day  of  the  seance
was  that  of  his  funeral.  The  circumstances  [i.e.,  the  death  itself  as  well  as
the  rest]  were  previously  unknown  to  the  sitters."


46


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stctinton  Moses.


paralysis  not  infrequently  die  when  lying  down  in  bed,  and  are  found
dead  in  the  morning. — F.W.H.M.]

Imperator  controlled  and  gave  information  about  the  phosphoric
scene  of  the  other  night,  and  some  scent  was  made  on  the  spot  and
showered  on  us.  The  Prophet's  light  and  Grocyn's  sound  very  pure
and  good ;  two  kinds  of  scent ;  made  from  our  bodies,  it  was  said.

Imperator  said  that  the  phosphoric  smoke  of  the  other  night  was
caused  by  an  abortive  attempt  on  the  part  of  Chom  to  make  a  light.
There  were,  he  said,  ducts  leading  from  our  bodies  to  the  dark  space
beneath  the  table,  and  into  this  space  these  ducts  conveyed  the
sul)stance  extracted  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  light.  The  phosphoric
substance  was  enclosed  in  an  envelope  which  was  materialised.  It  was
the  collajise  of  this  envelope  that  caused  the  escape  of  the  phosphoric
smoke  and  the  smell.  This  substance  was  the  vital  principle,  and  was
drawn  from  the  spine  and  nerve  centi'es  principally,  and  from  all  the
sitters,  except  those  who  were  of  no  use  or  were  deterrent.

Ajwil  [18],  1874. — Seance  at  Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Sj^eer
and  I. — The  phenomena  comprised  the  usual  knockings,  tilts,  movements
of  my  chair  and  of  the  table.  Prophet's  light  and  two  of  Chom's.
W.  JB.  C.  appeared  again  and  touched  my  finger,  the  result  being  that
the  skin  was  broken  and  the  joint  swollen  up.  The  pain  gradually
ceased,  but  the  mark  still  remains  after  48  hours.  Chom  controlled,
and  in  answer  to  request,  wi'ote  with  a  green  pencil,  which  Dr.  S.  put
down  on  jjaper  marked  by  us  befoi'e  the  sitting.  This  shows  conclu-
sively that  the  pencil  put  down  was  used.  Quantities  of  scent.
Grocyn's  sounds  very  dull.  He  entranced  me,  and  I  am  told  that  they
were  then  better  than  any  he  had  ever  made.  Asked  why,  he  said,
"  Medium  entranced."  The  table  moved  freely  without  contact,  and
was  levitated  slightly.  It  was  moved  beyond  my  reach  and  then
brought  back  to  me.  The  raps  very  loud.  The  Pi'ophet's  light  was  very
bright.  I  saw  clairvoyantly  the  "  little  Catherine  "  and  J.  B.  C.  He
sat  on  the  harmonium  stool,  and  apparently  had  two  guardians  with
him.  The  different  noises  going  on  were  very  numerous  as  well  as  loud.
I  was  considerably  convulsed.

Wednesday,  Ap7-U  22iid,  1874. — A  disturbed  seance;  very  dark.  I
was  afterwards  told  that  tlae  efforts  of  the  band  were  devoted  to
keeping  away  a  number  of  undeveloped  spirits.  A  noise  was  made
like  opening  a  fan,  a  very  curious  noise  on  the  fireguard,  and  a  grating
sound  between  Mrs.  Speer  and  Mr.  Percival.  When  I  returned  home
I  was  conscious  of  the  presence  of  a  form,  and  the  name  of  Judge
Edmunds  was  spelt  out  three  or  four  times.  I  could  not  understand
it,  as  I  had  no  news  of  his  death.  However,  on  the  following  Sunday
I  received  at  Southend  a  copy  of  tlie  Medium,  in  which  his  death  on
April  5th  was  announced.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


47


April  26th,  1874. — Southend.  —Dr.  Speer  and  I  went  on  to  the
Pier,  which  is  Ij  miles  long,  and  sat  reading  at  the  end  of  it.  Whilst
so  sitting  I  heard  clear  metallic  raps  on  the  rail  in  front  of  us.  We
satisfied  ourselves  that  the  sounds  were  real  and  as  clear  as  on  the
table.  They  purported  to  come  from  Philosophus.  They  were  very
clear  and  continuous ;  they  followed  us  up  the  Pier  as  we  returned,
and  from  time  to  time  we  tested  them  by  putting  our  ears  down.  In
the  evening  (this  was  at  4  p.m.)  we  went  on  the  Pier  at  8  p.m.,  and
tried  the  experiment  again.  A  bright  moon  shone  overhead,  and  we
were  some  half  a  mile  from  land,  about  a  third  down  the  Pier.  First
we  tried  to  elicit  raps.  I  stood  beside  a  post  and  placed  as  much  of
my  body  in  contact  with  it  as  I  could.  Dr.  Speer  listened  for  raps.
They  were  distinctly  audible  at  20,  25,  30,  40,  and  50  yards.  I  could
hear  them  well  without  putting  my  ear  down.  After  50  yards  Dr.
Speer  failed  to  hear  them.  In  the  afternoon  I  thought  I  heard  a  faint
sound  of  Grocyn,  and  now  his  sounds  came  out  as  clear  and  resonant
as  in  a  closed  room.  They  were  distinctly  audible  to  both  of  us — and
we  were  70  yards  apart — and  were  apparently  made  in  the  space  between
us.  At  least,  the  sound  was  far  off  apparently  to  both  of  us.  Had  the
night  been  dark  I  believe  the  power  could  have  been  intensified.  It
struck  me  as  a  very  singular  fact  that  such  phenomena  should  occur  in
mid-ocean  (so  to  say)  and  in  good  light,  with  no  means  of  concentrating
the  power.

In  the  evening  we  had  a  seance — Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self — in  a
small  apartment  which  we  occupy  here  (8,  Cashiobury-terrace).  Almost
the  whole  of  one  side  of  the  room  is  window,  which  Mrs.  Speer
darkened  as  well  as  she  could.  The  table  was  an  ordinary  round  table,
five  feet  in  diameter.  Raps  came  almost  directly,  and  we  had  some  very
beautiful  scent,  which  was  like  sweet-briar.  Mrs.  S.  had  got  some
fresh  flowers  in  the  room,  with  sweet-briar  among  them  and  gorse.
The  Prophet  showed  his  light,  although  the  room  was  not  very  dark,
and  Mentor  came  and  showed  his  light  once.  He  controlled  then,  and
said  that  he  was  not  allowed  to  make  lights,  as  I  was  so  ill  (I  have  a
had  attack  of  bronchitis).  Grocyn  came  and  played,  and  a  new  musical
sound  was  made,  like  a  guitar,  in  the  wood  of  the  table.  Philosophus
rapped,  and  I  saw  Chom,  Mentor,  Rector,  and  others  clairvoyantly.
Rector  manifested  veiy  strongly.  ^

1  Mrs.  Spear's  account  of  this  sitting  (Light,  December  24th,  1892)  begins
as  follows  : —

''April  26th. — We  again  sat  at  Southend,  but  were  not  able  to  darken  the
room.  I  had  been  suffering  from  neuralgia  all  day,  and  had  been  alone.
Through  the  day  I  perceived,  every  now  and  then,  delicious  scent,  which
became  more  pronounced  towards  the  hour  of  our  meeting,  filling  the
passages,  Mr.  S.  M.'s  room,  and  the  one  I  was  sitting  in. So  strong  was  it


48


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


April  21th,  1874. — Southend. — Abundant  scent  all  through  the
day.  As  we  sat  at  the  table  during  the  day,  Dr.  S.  writing  a  business
letter,  we  had  a  long  conversation  with  Chom.  He  made  a  peculiar
knock,  sharp  and  like  a  detonation,  on  the  floor  under  the  carpet.  In.
the  evening  we  sat,  and  had  quantities  of  scent  of  three  kinds,  one  made
from  the  sweet-briar  in  the  room.  Chom  controlled,  and  described  the
making  of  scent  over  the  table  near  the  ceiling.  It  was  showered  down
on  us  over  and  over  again,  on  our  heads,  into  our  hands  by  request,
and  all  about  until  the  air  was  laden  with  it.  We  had  Grocyn  and
the  new  musical  spirit.  The  Prophet  showed  his  light.  Imperator
controlled  and  spoke  for  some  time  ;  after  which  lights  again  and
writing  by  Chom  and  Kabbila,  an  Indian  spirit.

Ajyril  29th,  1874. — Mrs.  Honey  wood's,  52,  Warwick-square,  W.
Mrs.  H.,  a  lady  friend,  and  myself. — We  had  the  usual  phenomena  of
scent,  musical  sounds,  raps,  and  lights  ;  the  latter  brilliant  and  clear,
flashing  about  very  brightly.  It  was  a  very  successful  stance,  con-
sidei'ed  as  in  a  stranger's  house,  with  complete  strangei'S.^

that  when  Dr.  S.  came  in  from  his  evening  walk  he  asked  who  had  been
burning  a  pastille.  During  the  stance  the  spirits  informed  us  that  they  had
been  scenting  the  house  all  day.  They  fanned  us  with  perfumed  air  as  soon
as  we  sat  down,  and  rained  wet  scent  over  us,  which  they  made  from  some
sweetbriar  we  had  in  the  room.  We  were  deluged  with  this  most  fragrant
perfume  ;  it  fell  all  over  my  face,  arms,  and  hands  ;  it  was  poured  over  each
member  of  the  circle,  and  into  our  hands  by  request.  G.  made  his  usual
musical  sounds.  While  he  was  manifesting  Chom  impressed  Mr.  S.  M.  to
speak.  He  said  he  saw  a  spirit  near  the  ceiling  making  the  scent,  and  we
should  soon  have  it  rained  over  us.  This  was  true,  as  immediately  it  came
down  in  showers  all  over  the  circle  and  table.  The  medium  then  said  G-.
would  play,  and  pointed  to  the  place  where  he  was  standing.  G.  then  gave
us  a  musical  scale,  and  played  different  intervals  by  request.  The  tone  was
pure  and  clear  ;  he  simulated  the  sound  of  pulling  a  tight  and  loose  string
of  a  harp,  also  a  tambourine." — M.S.

1  Mrs.  Honeywood  sends  me  an  independent, but  not  contemporary,
account  of  this  sitting  as  follows  : —

"April  28th,  1874. — Mr.  Stainton  Moses  dined  with  me  and  Miss  Beale,
and  afterwards  proposed  trying  what  we  could  get.  We  therefore  went
downstairs  to  my  boudoir,  where  Mr.  S.  M.  had  never  been.  We  put  out
the  candle,  and  held  hands.  Raps  soon  began,  and  a  cool  breeze,  then
quantities  of  scent  fell  on  our  hands,  heads,  and  the  table.  Lights  like  the
flame  of  a  candle  dai-ted  about  between  us,  over  Mr.  S.  M.'s  head,  and
about  the  room.  Mr.  S.  M.  passed  into  a  trance,  and  speaking  with  the
voice  of  an  old  man,  but  in  a  very  dignified  and  impressive  manner,  told  us
the  object  of  their  coming  was  to  teach  and  elevate  mankind.  Lights  again
appeared,  and  scent  wet  my  face  and  hands.  The  sound  of  a  guitar  string
was  twanged,  though  I  had  no  instrument  in  the  house,  or  scent  of  any  kind.
A  short  farewell  speech  concluded  the  stance." — Baebaka  Honeywood.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.  49


Thursday,  A2)ril  30th. — Dr.  S.  and  I,  alone. — A  chair  put  on  the
table. Manifestations  boisterous.

Saturday,  Ma,y  '2nd. — As  Mrs.  Speer  was  sitting  writing  at  her  desk
a  quantity  of  dry  musk  fell  on  it,  covering  paper  and  everything  near.
It  was  throughout  the  desk,  and  must  apparently  have  been  put  in  it
under  jjapers  as  well  as  outside.  [Mrs.  Speer  has  no  note  of  this
special  occasion,  but  says  that  musk  was  frequently  thus  deposited  on
and  in  her  desk].

Sunday,  May  3rd,  1874. — I  was  suffering  with  aggravated  bronchial
attack,  and  felt  very  much  below  par.  Raps  commenced  at  once,  and
throughout  the  evening  the  manifestations  were  veiy  strong.  Grocyn's
sound  was  very  good,  commencing,  apparently,  at  a  great  distance,  and
soundmg  something  like  the  muffled  roll  of  a  big  drum.  We  had  new
sounds,  too,  of  a  zither,  very  pretty,  five  in  all.  They  played  over  my
head  and  round  the  circle.  They  were  quite  independent  of  the  table.
They  were  clear,  very  highly  strung,  and  apparently  graduated,  giving
one  the  idea  of  an  instrument  of  five  strings.  "We  were  told  that  they
were  made  by  a  new  spirit.  Scent  was  very  abundant  indeed.  Chom
and  Mentor  controlled.  The  most  curious  part  of  the  seance  was  that
in  which  an  elaborate  attempt  was  made  to  relieve  my  bronchitis.
When  we  made  the  usual  break,  after  sitting  for  about  forty  minutes,
I  was  perfectly  conscious  of  two  materialised  hands  making  passes  over
my  head,  throat,  chest,  and  back.  After  a  time  I  began  to  throw  off
from  my  hands  the  vitiated  magnetism.  My  hands  were  thrown  about
so  violently  that  Dr.  S.  could  hardly  hold  them.  At  one  time  my  hands
were  so  fast  glued  to  the  table  that  Mrs.  S.  had  to  exert  all  her  power
to  get  them  off.  After  this  I  drew  power  from  both  sitters  by  making
passes  over  their  hands  and  arms.  After  all  was  done  I  certainly
felt  and  looked  much  better  than  I  had  been  for  a  long  time.  The
sensation  of  the  hands  was  perfectly  distinct  and  unmistakable.  As
the  seance  concluded,  I  became  clairaudient,  and  recited  a  long  passage
from  Judge  Edmunds,  who  stood  by  me.  He  had  previously  spoken  to
me  before  I  heard  of  his  death,  which  occurred  April  5th,  1874.

May  \'2th. — Douglas  House. — An  interesting  seance.  The  usual
phenomena,  the  musical  sounds  being  very  distinct.  The  special
point  was  that  a  quantity  of  powder  Avas  put  on  the  table.  I  saw  it
all  luminous,  and  Chom  said  it  was  musk.  There  was  no  perceptible
odour,  but  the  next  morning  it  was  strong.  This  is  the  only  time  I
have  ever  known  such  an  occurrence.  The  odour  was  A'ery  pronounced.
I  am  still  very  ill  with  bronchitis,  and  sittings  are  suspended.

May  30th. — Douglas  House.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I. — A  visitor
had  been  in  the  house,  and  we  had  had  no  sittings.  I  am  still  ill  with
bronchitis  and  below  par. Vast  quantities  of  scent  were  showered

G


50  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


down,  and  Grocyn  came.  The  peculiarity  of  the  seance  was  that  when
I  could  hear  the  sound  no  one  else  could,  and  vice  versd.  I  heard  by
clairaudience  and  not  by  natural  hearing,  being  very  deaf  with  my  cold.
On  request  I  was  enabled  to  hear  the  sound  with  my  natural  ear,  but
I  described  it  long  before  it  was  heard  by  the  others,  and  heard  it
frequently  when  they  did  not.  At  the  same  time  I  was  unconscious  of
sounds  apparently  made  on  the  table  under  my  nose.

I  spent  Whitsuntide  at  Broadlands,  where  I  met  Colonel  Di'ayson,
and  had  some  very  interesting  conversation  with  him.  The  editor  of
the  Fortnightly  [Mr  John  Morley]  was  there,  and  I  had  opportunity  of
seeing  the  proofs  of  Wallace's  article  on  Spiritualism.  The  second
part  is  better  than  the  first.

[Edmund  Gurney  and  I  also  met  Mr.  Moses  at  Broadlands,  (Loi'd
Mount-Temple's,)  at  this  date,  and  heard  from  him  an  account  of  his
phenomena  concordant  with  that  here  given.]

Thursday,  June  25/h,  1874.  —  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  Mrs.  F. —
Mrs.  F.  being  a  new  member,  there  was  nothing  new  done.  The  usual
manifestations,  lights,  music,  and  copious  scent.  I  wore  a  gardenia  in
my  buttonhole,  and  the  scent  of  it  was  diffused  throughout  the  room
most  powerfully.  We  had  other  scents,  until  the  atmosphere  was  so
loaded  that  we  were  glad  to  get  out  of  it.  The  flower  after  the  seance
was  stained  and  dead,  as  though  all  its  vitality  had  been  taken  out  of
it.  This  is  like  the  effect  we  have  noticed  at  Shanklin.  Imperator
controlled  and  spoke  clearly.

Friday,  July  ith,  1874. — P[ercival]  came  up  unexpectedly,  and  Mrs.
S.,  at  dinner,  told  me  about  sitting  again  with  Mrs.  F.  I  was  startled,
and  an  indescribable  feeling  of  fear  came  over  me.  When  we  sat  condi-
tions were  very  disturbed,  and  nothing  came,  except  at  first  some  very
faint  rose  scent.  After  sitting  a  long  time,  we  broke,  and  resumed.  Still
the  room  was  dark,  and  the  influence  unpleasant.  After  a  time  a  very
pungent  odour  of  peppermint  was  diffused  through  the  room.  It  was
very  unpleasant. ^  While  in  the  garden,  before  we  began  to  sit,  I  was
conscious  of  scent  all  round  me,  especially  on  my  hair.  When  I  rubbed
my  hair  my  hand  was  scented  strongly.  I  tried  the  experiment  many
times.  When  the  peppermint  came  I  was  conscious  of  its  presence  first
near  my  head,  and  it  seemed,  as  it  were,  to  be  evolved  out  of  the  hair.
I  have  before  noticed  the  same  thing,  but  not  so  markedly  as  on  this
occasion.

Monday,  Jtdy  Qth,  1874. — We  had  sat  (Dr.  S.  and  I)  on  Sunday,
with  no  results.  We  met  again  to-day,  and  had  a  good  seance.  Grocyn.
manifested,  and  we  had  beautiful  scent,  rose  and  some  other.  The


^  See  Dr.  Speer'.s  letter,  Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  3.S9.


The  Experxeiices  of  W.  Stavaton  Moses.


51


Prophet's  light  was  clear,  and  we  had  a  new  light,  ^^■ith  drapery,  very-
soft  and  silky,  round  it.  It  was  a  sort  of  hooded  light,  with  a  very
bright  nucleus  within  it.  It  seemed  to  be  permanent.  At  request  the
Light  came  near,  and  brushed  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer's  hands.  We  also
had  direct  writing  from  Chom.  While  it  was  going  on  we  heard
scraping  on  the  floor,  and  Dr.  Speer,  having  placed  the  paper  in  a  par-
ticular position,  with  the  pencil  on  the  top  of  it,  thinks  that  neither
paper  nor  pencil  had  been  moved  ;  yet  the  writing  was  on  the  side  next
the  cai'pet.  I  was  slightly  convulsed,  and  my  hands  were  moved  under
the  table  while  the  writing  was  going  on  beneath.

Juhj  I2th,  1874.— Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  Mr.  P.,  and  self.— The  weather
was  close  and  oppressive.  The  phenomena  were  very  good,  notwith-
standing. Scent,  Grocyn,  and  a  very  remarkable  manifestation  of  the
zither.  The  sound  was  the  nearest  approach  to  music  that  we  have  yet
had.  The  high  noises  were  imitated  exactly,  and  the  runs  were  executed
with  marvellous  precision.  Two  instruments  apparently  were  used,  or
rather  imitated,  one  with  thi-ee  high  strings,  and  another  with  seven
lower  ones.  The  little  sounds  of  the  smaller  instrument  were  brought
out  most  clearly,  and  then  were  followed  by  an  elaborate  run  on  the
other  instrument,  as  though  the  fuiger  were  drawn  rapidly  over  the
strings.  The  effect  was  most  curious.  After  I  had  observed  and
noted  this  for  a  long  time  I  was  entranced,  and  then  the  sounds  moved
round  the  circle.  Grocyn's  sounds  were  very  fine,  and  scent  very
beautiful.  After  the  seance  was  ovei',  the  phenomenon  of  its  being
evolved  from  my  head  was  very  marked.  As  T  rubbed  my  hair  the
smell  came  out  very  markedly  ;  it  was  the  same  as  had  been  given
during  the  seance.  This  phenomenon  has  now  occurred  a  dozen  times
very  markedly.  Imperator  controlled,  and  spoke  at  length  very  cheer-
fully.

Sunday,  July  26fh,  1874. — A  remarkable  seance  throughout.  I
was  entranced  almost  immediately  on  sitting  down,  and  the  trance
state  had  been  coming  on  for  some  hours  before.  So  thoroughly  was  it
established  that  I  have  no  remembrance  of  anything  until  I  found
myself  in  bed  the  next  morning.  I  relate  what  was  told  me.  Evei'y
phenomenon  was  intensified  ;  Grocyn's  sounds,  the  scent,  lights
(Prophet's  and  Kabbila's),  were  all  there.  Dr.  S.  had  put  in  front  of  him
a  wine-glass,  into  which  he  asked  the  scent  might  be  put.  In  answer
to  that  request  a  good  tablespoonful  was  poured.  This  he  preserved  in
a  bottle.  Kabbila's  lights  were  hooded,  and  quit-e  different  from  the
Prophet's.  Catharine  knocked  very  clearly,  and  gave  some  messages.
At  length  she  rapped  out :  "  Look  at  the  medium  and  after  :  "  Take
care  of  the  medium."  Mrs.  S.  naturally  thought  she  meant  after  the
seance.  She  persisted  in  rapping  in  an  eager,  excited  waj- ,  and  after
some  time  a  light  was  struck,  and  I  was  discovered  to  have  fallen  down

G  2


52


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


by  the  book-case,  doubled  up  in  a  most  awkward  position,  and  in  a
profound  trance.  My  face  was  bathed  for  some  time  before  any  sign
of  revival  showed,  and  then  I  could  not  stand,  but  slipped  down  in  a
helpless  way.  My  legs  could  not  support  my  body,  and  my  hands
could  not  hold  anything.  Dr.  S.  walked  home  with  me,  and  he  says
that  T  could  not  have  walked  at  all  alone.  I  have  no  recollection  of
anything,  nor  do  I  know  how  I  got  to  bed,  except  that  I  found  every-
thing quite  straight  in  the  morning.  We  had  an  engagement  with
Hudson  at  4  p.m.  that  day,  and  I  never  recovered  from  the  trance  until
after  that.  Unfortunately  there  was  a  misunderstanding,  and
Hudson  was  out,  otherwise  I  believe  we  should  have  had  a  good
result.  This  is  the  deepest  trance  into  which  I  have  ever  been  thrown.
To  all  intents  and  purposes  my  consciousness  was  entirely  suspended
from  8  p.m.  to  9  a.m.  the  next  day.

[Mrs.  Speer's  account  of  this  seance  (Light,  January  7th,  1893)  is
quite  concordant  ;  but  she  dates  it  July  27ih ;  which,  if  an  error,
is  the  only  slip  of  the  kind  which  I  have  observed  in  her  records.
I  assume  Mr.  Moses'  date  to  be  correct,  as  he  gives  the  day  of  the
week  as  well  as  of  the  month.]

Clifton. — I  spent  the  last  ten  days  of  August  with  Dr.  Thomson.
During  that  time  we  experimented  in  the  study  for  photographs,  and  got
results  exactly  similar  to  the  previous  Clifton  photos.  We  also  got  a
head — a  sort  of  double  of  mine.  We  sat  several  times  and  got  the
usual  phenomena — scent,  lights,  music,  direct  writings,  and  dry  musk.
Roses  were  scented  in  my  ljuttonhole,  a  different  scent  being  put  upon
them.  They  turned  brown  and  died.  Some  scent  put  into  a  glass
during  a  seance  evaporated  during  the  night  in  spite  of  being  carefully
covered  over.  Dr.  Thomson's  eldest  son  sat  Avith  us  on  the  last  night
of  my  stay.  He  saw  the  luminous  appearances  in  the  room  very  clearly,
and  described  them  exactly  as  they  seemed  to  me.  Two  very  clearly
defined  figures  were  near  Dr.  T.,  visible  to  both  of  us.  We  heard  a
noise  like  that  of  a  person  trying  to  speak.  At  last  one  came  close  to
me  and  said  "  Helen  " — that  was  the  name  of  Dr.  T.'s  wife.  The  other
spirit  was  his  mother,  who  appeared  on  the  plate  at  Hudson's  some  ,
time  ago.

August  ZXst. — Came  to  Shanklin.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I  sat  the
first  night,  and  got  the  usual  phenomena.  Dr.  S.  saw  a  luminous
column  at  my  right  hand,  and  Tmperator,  who  was  controlling,  told
him  it  was  the  Prophet.  The  light  known  as  his  flashed  up  at  once  in
the  midst  of  it. Kabbila  also  manifested  with  his  light.

iieptemher  \st. — Same  sitters. — We  had  the  three  or  four-stringed
lyre  of  Chom,  and  Said  and  his  seven-stringed  sound.  The  three-
stringed  was  less  like  a  string  than  any  sound  we  have  ever  heard.  It


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


53


was  very  remarkable.  A  new  spirit  manifested  by  tilts.  He  gave  his
name  Abraham  Florentine,  and  he  was  in  the  American  War  of  1812,
died  August  5th,  1874,  aged  8-3  years  1  month  17  days,  at  Brooklyn.
The  table  is  a  very  heavy  one,  and  it  requires  great  strength  to  tilt  it.
The  power  used  was  enormous,  and  gave  us  all  severe  headaches.  [This
message  was  verified  by  inquiring  at  the  office  of  the  Adjutant-General
of  the  State  of  New  York,  and  will  be  again  referred  to  when  we
discuss  the  various  evidences  of  identity  in  Mr.  Moses'  experiences. —
See  p.  82.— F.W.H.M.]

Beptemher  2iid,  1874. — Same  circle. — The  musical  manifestations
were  remarkable — six  different  sounds  were  made.  Grocyn,  Chom,
Welsh  harper.  Said,  a  noise  like  a  drum  made  by  Kabbila,  and  the
sound  of  a  seven-sti-inged  lyre.  Said's  sound  was  extraordinary  ;  a
high  treble  running  note  like  water  dropping  on  metal.  It  was  scarcely
like  a  string.  Kabbila  and  the  Prophet  showed  their  lights,  the
Prophet's  very  bright  and  triangular  in  shape.  Abraham  Florentine
made  the  same  peculiar  quivering  in  the  table.  He  caine  to  say  that
the  months  and  days  referred  to  his  age.^

1  Mrs.  Speer's  account  of  the  Abraham  Florentine  sittings  is  as  follows
{Light,  January  21st,  1893)  : —

September  \st. — This  evening  the  raps  came  soon  after  we  had  settled
ourselves,  and  much  spirit-light  was  visible,  especially  in  one  corner  of  the
room.  By  raps  we  were  told  that  a  strange  spirit  wished  to  communicate,
and  would  do  so  during  the  stance.  G.,  Chom,  and  Said  all  manifested  by
making  their  different  musical  sounds.  After  playing  for  some  time  G.
rapped  out,  "  We  have  done."  The  table  then  began  to  quiver  as  if  alive.
It  was  a  heavy,  solid,  old-fashioned  round  table,  difficult  to  move,  but  it
was  raised  several  times,  and  a  spirit  rapped  on  it  with  much  energy,  asking
for  the  alphabet,  and  when  it  was  called  gave  the  name  of  ' '  Abraham
Florentine."*  We  asked,  "  Where  did  you  live  ?  "  "Brooklyn."  And  then
followed,  "  I  fought  in  the  war  of  1812."  "When  did  you  pass  away  V
"I  passed  August  5th,  1874."  "At  what  age  ?  "  "Eighty-three  years,  one
month,  seventeen  days."  This  information  was  given  in  a  most  excited
maimer,  and  the  table  was  violently  shaken  when  we  did  not  quite  under-
stand the  answers.  Great  power  was  taken  from  each  of  the  circle,  and  we
were  so  upset  by  the  constant  violent  movements  of  the  table — producing,
each  time  it  was  moved,  a  kind  of  electric  shock  through  us — that  we  had
the  greatest  difficulty  in  taking  the  information  through  the  alphabet.  The
spirit  at  last  ceased,  and  our  friend  G.  came  to  the  rescue.  He  informed  us
that  the  spirit  had  been  chosen  by  Imperator  to  give  us  another  proof  of
identity,  and  that  he  had  been  a  Spiritualist  in  earth-life.  We  were  then
deluged  with  scent  and  told  to  cease.  Mr.  S.  M.  was  in  deep  trance  during
the  time  the  information  was  given.

September  2nd. — This  evening  the  scent  was  exquisite;  raps  came  quickly,

*  All  the  details  given  were  afterwards  completely  verified.  No  one  present  at
the  stance  knew  anything  about  Abraham  Florentine.


54  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


September  Srd  and  4cth. — Same  circle. — -Manifestations  similar  to
those  above,  but  intensified.  The  musical  sounds  have  reached  seven,
the  new  one  being  like  the  noise  made  by  striking  fine  porcelain,  but
with  a  very  decided  ring  in  it.  It  is  a  very  singular  sound,  and  is
made  with  great  intensity.  The  three-stringed  lyre  is  also  very
beautiful,  more  like  the  dropping  of  liquid  on  a  metallic  surface  than
anything  else. But  the  sounds  are  all  indescribable.

1.  Grocyn. — Since  the  seance,  when  he  made  such  violent  mani-
festations he  has  been  much  quieter.  The  sounds  are  very  pure,  and
exjsress  feeling  most  wonderfully.  They  are  most  like  a  thick  harp
string.

2.  Choni  makes  the  sound  of  an  old  Egyptian  harp  with  four  strings.
There  is  little  similarity  to  a  stringed  sound.

3.  Said  makes  a  noise  somewhat  similar  to  Chom's,  but  the  lyre
has  only  three  strings.  It  is  an  old  Egyptian  instrument,  and  the
sound  is  like  dropping  water  on  a  steel  plate,  a  sort  of  liquid  sound,
very  intense. I  am  told  it  is  very  like  the  sound  of  a  harmonium  reed.

4.  Roophal  makes  a  sound  of  a  seven-stringed  lyre,  very  pretty
rippling  sound,  but  the  strings  do  not  seem  to  me  to  be  an^anged  in
harmonial  progression.

5.  Kabhila  makes  a  sound  like  a  drum,  very  deep,  a  sort  of  pro-
longed roll.

6. makes  a  sound  like  the  ringing  of  fine  porcelain,  only

that  the  ring  is  very  much  more  pronounced.  This  is  a  very  intense
sound.

7.  The  Welsh  Harper  makes  a  sound  as  of  the  highest  strings  of  a
harp,  sharp  and  I'inging.

In  addition,  there  is  the  sound  of  a  tambourine  and  a  sort  of
flapping  sound  like  large  wings.  These  can  scarcely  be  called  musical
in  any  sense,  though  they  are  but  exaggerations  of  others  in  some  way.
The  modus  operandi  is  similar.

September  5th,  1874. — Mr.  Percival  joined  us.  The  musical  sounds
wei-e  repeated,  but  the  principal  part  of  the  seance  was  taken  up  with
communications  about  W.H.S.,  who  came  with  the  old  grinding
sound,  the  influence  in  the  room  being  very  unpleasant.  Grocyn  com-
municated about  him,  the  tones  used  being  very  striking. Dr.  S.

and  with  them  several  musical  sounds.  All  the  stringed  instruments  were
heard,  and  a  new  sound  like  a  drum.  This,  we  were  told,  was  a  manifesta-
tion of  Kabbila's.  He  and  [the  Prophet]  showed  their  lights.  Abraham
Florentine  came  again  ;  we  recognised  his  presence  at  once  by  the  violent
trembling  of  the  table.  We  rather  objected  to  his  rough  manifestations,  as
he  used  up  so  much  power.  G.  then  interfered  and  told  us  the  spirit  wished
to  say  the  one  month  and  seventeen  days  referred  to  his  age. — M.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


55


asked  for  the  name  to  be  given,  and  Grocyn  spelt  ont  "Woe."  He  said
it  was  his  spirit  name.  G.  did  not  know  his  earth  name.  Three  of
the  sitters,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  I,  knew  it  j^erfectly  well.  This  is  a
strong  piece  of  evidence  against  unconscious  cerebration.  The  know-
ledge was  there,  yet  G.  said  he  did  not  know.

Dr.  S.  asked  for  the  characteristic  of  the  spirit  to  be  put  in  one
word,  and  Greed  was  spelt  out.  Pi'obably  no  word  would  so  well
express  what  was  wanted.  G.  could  have  no  communication  with  him,
he  said.

September  7th. — Musical  sounds,  but  not  good.  After  a  break  some
remai'kable  lights  were  made  ;  the  Prophet's  very  brilliant  indeed.
Mentor  came  and  controlled,  and  showed  a  light  much  smaller  than  he
had  shown  before.  Kabbila  also  showed  his  light,  and  two  at  least
were  visilile  at  the  same  time.  The  lights  never  faded  during  the  half-
hour  in  which  they  were  visible.  Some  very  fine  drapery  hung  from
Mentor's  lamp,  which  he  brushed  over  the  hands  and  faces  of  the
sitters.  It  was  as  fine  as  gossamer,  and  was  lit  up  by  the  lamps.  At
request  M.  struck  the  table  with  his  lamp,  and  all  felt  his  hand,  which
was  as  real  as  a  human  hand.  He  also  said  that  Kabbila  had
materialised  partly.  The  lamp  struck  P.'s  head.  It  was  apparently
of  some  such  shape  as  this,  brightly  kiminous,  and  with  drapery  brightly
lit  up.  During  the  night  I  heard  the  grinding  sound  very  strongly,
and  Grocyn  sounded  very  sweetly.  He  said  "  W."  wanted  prayer,  and
came  to  get  good  and  to  progress. He  would  do  no  harm.i

MR.  MOSES'  SKETCH  OF  MENTOR's  LAMP  AND  DRAPERY.


1 A  seance,  during  the  whole  of  which  Mr.  Moses  was  entranced,  may
here  be  described  in  Mrs.  Speer's  words  {Light,  January  2Sth,  1893)  : —

September  lOth. — Mr.  Percival  having  left  Shanklin,  this  evening  the
circle  sat  alone.  The  room  soon  seemed  full  of  foggy  light,  and  Catharine
quickly  rapped.  G.  sounded  three  musical  notes  ;  through  the  alphabet  he
told  us  that,  though  tlie  atmosphere  was  bad,  we  were  to  sit  and  they  would
do  all  they  could  for  us.  Mr.  S.  M,  was  deeply  entranced,  and  continued  in
that  state  all  through  the  seance. The  stringed  instruments  were  played,


56  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Mosea.


September  19th. — Same  circle  and  place. — Whilst  walking  up  and
down  before  the  windows  in  the  garden  I  distinctly  heard  the  sound  of
the  faiiy  bells  in  the  air.  They  seemed  to  come  from  a  distance,  and
were  sweet  and  clear.  Both  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  heard  them  as  well  as
myself.  When  we  sat  down  they  began  again,  and  I  heard  them  very
clearly.  They  seemed  to  come  from  a  great  distance,  and  gradually
came  on  the  table.  I  then  became  entranced,  and  the  sounds  are
described  as  being  very  remarkable,  long  runs  being  made,  and  the
sounds  running  up  and  down,  so  that  the  wood  seemed  to  be  alive.
Catharine  knocked  very  loudly,  and  seemed  to  be  in  command.  The
three  and  four-sti-inged  instruments  were  played  while  I  was  awake  and
thoroughly  aljle  to  appreciate  what  was  going  on.  After  that  came
the  seven-stringed  instrument,  played,  as  we  were  informed,  by  a  third
Egyptian,  Roophal,  contemporary  with  Chom  and  Said.  The  sounds
were  very  distinct,  and  I  was  able  to  question  and  elicit  replies.  The
i^eply  was  made  by  striking  three  strings  once  or  twice,  as  occasion
required.  Abundant  scent  (jasmine)  was  showered  down.  Dr.  Speer
had  asked  for  some  before  we  sat — we  had  forgotten  to  ptit  a  glass  on
the  table.  There  must  have  been  an  ounce  or  more  of  it.  Grocyn's
sound  was  very  powerful  and  sweet.  I  have  not  before  had  so  good
an  opportunity  of  hearing  the  sounds.  They  are  incredible  to  anyone
who  has  not  been  led  up  gradually,  as  we  have  been.  The  purity  and
intensity  of  them  is  beyond  description. ^

and  the  sounds  evoked  were  delightful  and  startling  ;  chord  after  chord  was
played  with  great  strength  and  rapidity.  This  manifestation  lasted  for  some
time.  Dr.  S.  then  remarked  that  many  spirits  seemed  to  have  left  us,  and
mentioned  the  name  of  Dr.  Dee  In  a  few  moments  he  manifested,  striking
the  table  a  tremendous  blow  ;  both  the  medium  and  myself  were  greatly
upset.  Mr.  S.  M.  began  to  move  and  groan  as  if  in  pain.  The  shock  was
so  sudden  that  it  made  us  feel  cold,  and  the  conditions  became  inharmonious.
Suddenly  the  room  grew  very  bright,  and  I  felt  enveloped  in  a  cloud  of  light
and  exquisite  scent.  This  was  wafted  over  us.  Liquid  scent  was  also
showered  over  our  hands  and  heads.  This  delicious  perfume  brought
harmony,  and  we  heard  raps,  asking  for  the  alphabet.  The  message  given
was  "Benjamin  Franklin  is  present."  I  then  heard  a  sweet  tinkling  sound
like  a  clear  bell  close  to  my  ear;  it  moved  and  played  in  front  of  the  medium,
who  was  still  deeply  entranced,  and  afterwards  it  played  over  tlie  middle  of
the  table,  when  Dr.  S.  heard  it  for  the  first  time.  It  was  a  striking  mani-
festation, the  notes  were  so  clear,  sweet,  and  low — we  named  it  "fairy
hells."— M.S.

iMrs.  Speer's  account  of  this  sitting,  and  summary  of  sounds  made,  may
here  be  given  {Light,  January  28th,  1893) : —

September  19th. — Before  meeting  this  evening  we  heard  the  "  fairy  bells  "
playing  in  different  parts  of  the  garden,  where  we  were  walking  ;  at  times
they  sounded  far  off,  seemingly  playing  at  the  top  of  some  high  elm  trees,


The  Eoyper'iences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


57


September-  20th,  1874. — Same  place  and  circle. — Our  last  sitting-
had  a  totally  different  result  from  what  we  expected.  Imperator
usually  comes  to  bid  us  farewell.  On  this  occasion  I  was  almost
entirely  free  from  influence,  and  Mrs.  Speer  was  almost  entirely  en-
tranced. Dr.  Speer  also  experienced  the  same  tingling  in  his  hands.
During  the  sitting  I  saw  a  luminous  hand  moving  about  the  room,  and
under  it  a  I'ound  luminous  object.  This  I  saw  repeatedly,  and  each
time  some  little  round  object  fell,  either  on  the  table,  on  our  hands,  or

music  and  stars  minglhig  together,  then  they  would  approach  nearer  to  us,
eventually  following  us  into  the  seance-room,  which  opened  on  to  the  lawn.
After  we  were  seated  the  music  still  lingered  with  us,  playing  in  the  corners
of  the  room,  and  then  over  the  table  round  which  we  were  sitting.  They
played  scales  and  chords  by  request,  with  the  greatest  rapidity,  and  copied
notes  Dr.  S.  made  with  his  voice.  After  Mr.  S.  M.  was  entranced  the
music  became  louder  and  sounded  like  brilliant  playing  on  the  piano.  There
was  no  instrument  in  that  room.  The  sound  we  called  the  seven-stringed
instrument  became  coherent  for  the  first  time  this  evening,  and  answered
questions  through  the  alphabet  with  this  instrument  instead  of  rapping  on
the  table.  The  spirit  told  us  that  he  was  an  Egyptian,  his  name  was
Roophal,  he  had  been  a  priest  in  the  Temple  of  Osiris,  and  a  friend  of  Said
and  Chom.  The  scent  was  most  abundant,  and  was  thrown  all  over  the
table  and  circle.  It  had  been  brought  for  us  to  save,  but  as  we  had  for-
gotten to  place  a  glass  on  the  table,  they  threw  it  over  us  in  large  quanti-
ties. We  had  mentioned  before  commencing  the  seance  that  we  should
like  more  scent  to  add  to  what  had  already  been  obtained  and  bottled.

During  our  visit  to  Shanklin  so  many  different  musical  sounds  were
developed  that  I  propose  now  jjlacing  them  on  record.

G.,  who  had  manifested  so  long  in  the  circle,  and  whose  sounds  resemble
a  harp,  tambourine,  and  double  bass.

The  Welsh  Harper,  who  always  played  apparently  on  a  very  small  harp,
making  high  notes,  on  very  tight  strings.

Chom  and  Said  played  on  instruments  which  consist  of  three  or  four
strings.

Roophat  on  a  seven-stringed  instrument.  This  was  like  a  very  sweet
harp  playing  in  the  air.

We  had  also  Kabbila's  drum  sound,  and  the  one,  for  want  of  a  better
name,  we  called  the  plate  sound,  as  it  resembled  a  sound  that  could  be
made  on  a  china  plate  turned  upside  down  and  struck  with  a  small  hammer.

Fairy  bells.  Introduced  when  Benjamin  Franklin  first  manifested  in  our
circle.  We  had  always  associated  these  sounds  with  him  and  the  spirits
who  came  with  him.  It  was  an  exquisite  manifestation,  something  like  a
musical  box,  but  more  ethereal,  and  the  notes  sweeter.  We  used  to
hear  it  playing  about  us  very  often  at  this  time,  especially  when  out  in  the
garden  late  at  night.  It  was  our  habit  to  open  the  casement  window  and
step  on  to  the  lawn  after  our  seance  was  concluded,  and  I  often  heard  these
"  fairy  bells  "  playing  at  midnight  among  the  trees,  the  effect  being  very
beautiful  and  unearthly. — M.S.


58


The  Experiences  of  W .  Stainton  Moses.


on  our  heads.  These  were  afterwards  found  to  be  round  beads,  such
as  we  have  had  Ijefore.  After  the  seance  was  over  I  was  smoking,  the
gas  was  lighted,  and  we  were  walking  about,  with  the  window  wide
open  on  to  the  garden,  when  the  pearls  began  to  fall  again.  They
descended  in  a  shower  from  the  ceiling,  or  dropped  about  the  carpet,
until  there  were  some  thirty  of  them,  O  about  this  size.  In  one
case  a  shower  fell  on  my  head  and  scattered  all  over  the  room,  just  as
the  Guimauve  lozenges  had  done  on  a  previous  occasion.  The  light
was  full,  and  we  all  saw  the  thing  done  over  and  over  again.  At  night
some  musk  was  put  on  my  dressing-table.  I  had  seen  the  hand
apparently  holding  a  luminous  powder  magnetically  suspended  under
it,  at  the  distance  of  an  inch  apparently.  All  the  power  during  this
series  of  seances  has  apparently  been  devoted  to  the  musical  sounds,
and  to  attempts  to  influence  the  other  members  of  the  circle.  The
sounds  have  increased  both  in  intensity,  tone,  and  variety.  No  direct
writing  and  but  little  light.  The  room  markedly  full  of  luminous
vapour. Attempt  at  direct  voice  once.^

1  Mr.  Moses'  accounts  have  by  this  time  become  somewhat  irregular.  I
quote  Mrs.  Spear's  account  of  a  sitting  on  October  17tli,  1874  : —

October  17th. — This  evening,  as  soon  as  the  gas  was  extinguished,  tlie
room  appeared  full  of  spirit-light.  Mr.  S.  M.  saw  and  described  G.  His
musical  sounds  appeared  to  come  from  the  place  he  said  he  was  occupying.
Then  he  mentioned  Catharine,  and  she  immediately  tapjjed  on  the  corner  of
the  table,  where  he  saw  her  standing.  After  this  he  said  :  "Judge  Edmonds
is  here."  We  asked  if  he  could  write  for  us.  A  message  came  through  raps  :
"  We  cannot  write."  The  "fairy  bells"  played  round  the  circle.  Chom
then  spoke  through  Mr.  S.  M.,  saying  that  this  manifestation  was  made  by
Benjamin  Franklin.  Before  meeting  Mr.  S.  M.  had  taken  three  rings  from
his  hands  and  threaded  them  on  to  his  watch-chain  ;  his  watch  was  on  one
end  of  the  chain,  and  a  small  pocket  barometer  on  the  other  ;  both  of  these
articles  he  placed  in  side  pockets  of  his  waistcoat,  the  rings  hanging  midway
on  his  chain  in  full  sight  of  the  circle.  We  suddenly  saw  a  pillar  of  light
advance  from  a  corner  of  the  room,  stand  between  me  and  Dr.  S.,  then  pass
through  the  table  to  Mr.  S.  M.  In  a  moment  the  figure  flashed  back  again
between  us  and  threw  something  hard  down  upon  the  table.  We  passed  our
hands  over  the  table,  and  found  the  rings  had  been  removed  from  the
medium's  chain  without  his  knowledge.  Catharine  then  rapped  very  joy-
fully, asking  for  the  alphabet ;  the  message  given  through  it  was  "  Franklin
did  it.  Cease."  During  the  next  fortnight  we  held  several  short  st^ances,
with  the  usual  manifestations  of  scent,  musical  sounds,  raps,  and  light. — M.S.

Again,  on  November  16th,  Mrs.  Speer  records  an  interesting  seance.
{Ligld,  February  25th,  1893)  :—

November  16^/(,  187-1. — The  circle  met  as  usual.  Hapa  were  heard  on  the
table  before  I  had  closed  and  locked  the  door.  The  room  was  soon  filled
with  masses  of  spirit-light.  Mr.  S.  M.  had  been  spending  the  day  with
us,  as  he  was  not  well. Several  times  during  the  day  wet  scent  of  the  most


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


59


November  21s^,  1874. — ^Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — A  striking  seance.
Room  full  of  hazy  light.  Little  dropping  sounds  on  the  table,  whieh
turned  out  to  be  very  minute  beads.  Two  other  sizes  afterwards
brought — in  all  there  must  have  been  five  or  six  dozen.  Beautiful
sounds  of  the  fairy  bells.  I  saw  Grocyn  making  the  sounds ;  he
stood  pointing  at  the  table^  and  as  he  pointed  the  sound  was  made.
Behind  him  stood  Franklin.  As  the  power  failed,  F.  seemed  to  put
moi'e  into  him  by  passes.  He  gradually  faded,  and  the  sound  ceased.
Vast  quantities  of  scent  have  been  poured  down  lately,  and  the  very
singular  phenomenon  of  the  eifusion  of  scent  fi'om  the  cz^own  of  my  head
has  been  very  marked.  It  is  usually  verbena,  and  oozes  out  from  the
scalp.  I  have  been  suffering  from  neuralgia,  and  the  process  is  remedial,
I  believe. The  odour  is  extremely  strong.

[The  entries  after  this  point  lose  their  regular  sequence  of  dates.]
December  12th,  1874. — The  effusion  of  scent  has  continued  at  inter-
vals, being  most  marked  when  I  am  suffering  pain.  The  odour  is
verbena,  strong  enough  to  be  perceptible  throughout  the  house.  I
have  ascertained  from  Mrs.  Acworth  that  she  is  the  subject  of  the
same  phenomenon,  though  in  her  case  it  is  not  traceable  to  any  spot.
The  odour  is  rose,  and  diffuses  itself  when  she  is  tired  and  the  power
exhausted.  She  is  told  that  the  object  is  to  ward  off  undesirable
influences.

November  27th. — -After  a  seance  at  Douglas  House  I  went  to  bed
about  twelve,  and  soon  fell  asleep.  About  2.15  a.m.  I  woke  ujd  suddenly
with  a  start,  wide  awake,  and  with  an  indefinable  sensation  that
something  was  about  to  happen. I  lay  on  my  back  looking  up  at  the

fragrant  description  oozed  from  the  crown  of  his  head.  When  it  was  coming,
he  said, there  seemed  to  be  an  icy  cold  circle  round  the  part  of  his  head  which
became  wet  with  the  scent.  While  he  was  experiencing  this  sensation,  if  we
put  our  fingers  on  the  spot  they  were  wetted  with  the  most  fragrant  scent,
sometimes  verbena,  but  more  frequently  sandalwood.  A  cambric  handker-
chief placed  on  his  head  at  such  times  would  retain  the  scent  for  a  long
period.  We  were  told  it  was  a  remedial  process,  and  the  medium  felt  greatly
benefited  by  the  treatment.  Much  exquisite  sandalwood  scent  was  thrown
over  the  circle  and  table.  Kabbila  sounded  his  drum  and  G.  his  double-bass.
Dr.  S.  then  remarked  :  "  We  have  never  heard  any  wind  instrument  played."
A  minute  after  the  remark,  a  blast  as  from  a  trumpet  came  between  Mr.
S.  M.  and  myself.  It  was  of  the  most  startling  character,  and  the  note  was
repeated  several  times.  The  medium  felt  very  cold  and  uncomfortable
during  this  new  manifestation.  He  saw  the  spirit  who  had  made  it  standing
near  the  harmonium.  We  were  told  afterwards  that  it  was  made  by
Benjamin  Franklin,  the  most  powerful  of  the  physical  spirits,  and  he  hoped
he  would  do  much  for  us  in  the  future.  Dr.  S.  asked  if  they  could  make  the
harmonium  sound  ;  it  was  closed,  but  when  Mr.  S.  M.  blew,  several  notes
were  sounded. — M.S.


60


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


ceiling,  and  saw  above  me  a  luminous  hand,  such  as  I  had  seen  before
in  seances,  with  the  fingers  gathered  together  and  holding  in  attraction
under  them  what  looked  like  a  little  ball  of  fire  as  big  as  a  pea.  As  I
looked  the  fingers  were  unclasped,  the  hand  opened,  and  the  little  ball
of  fire  fell  on  my  beard.  So  impressed  was  I  with  the  reality  of  the
vision  that  I  jumped  out  of  bed  at  once  and  looked  for  what  had  struck
me.  I  got  a  light,  and  discovered  on  the  bed  a  small  opalescent  stone
about  the  size  of  a  large  pea.  It  was  of  a  brown  hue,  shot  with  pale
blue.  I  have  since  discovered  that  it  is  callejd  Sapphirium  ;  it  is  a
Brazilian  stone  largely  imitated  in  Paris.

On  Thursday,  December  10th,  we  had  a  sitting  at  Douglas  House.
Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  and  self. — We  burnt  some  gum  in  a  little  bronze
censer,  and  put  it  flaming  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  As  it  died  out  a
number  of  little  taps  began  round  it  and  near  Mrs.  Speer.  These
inci'eased,  each  little  detonation  being  accompanied  with  a  little  puff  of
smoke,  as  it  appeared  to  me.  After  this  had  lasted  some  time  we  were
told  to  get  light,  and  look  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  "VVe  did  so,  and
found  nothing.  Astonished  at  this,  for  we  have  always  found  hitherto
what  we  were  told  to  look  for,  we  put  out  the  light,  and  it  Avas  rapped
out,  "There  is  nothing."  We  could  not  understand,  and  thought  some
playful  spirit  was  making  fun  of  us.  "  J oin  hands  "  was  rapped  out,
and  instantly  I  became  very  violently  convulsed.  It  was  as  much  as
Dr.  Speer  could  do  to  hold  my  hands.  As  the  violent  convulsions
threatened  to  injure  my  hands  against  the  censer,  Mrs.  Speer  re-
moved it  to  the  corner  of  the  table  next  to  Dr.  Speer.  When  the
fit  passed  off  my  head  fell  on  the  table,  and  it  was  necessary  to  support
me  in  my  chair  to  prevent  me  from  falling.  I  gradually  regained  con-
sciousness, and  when  light  was  struck  two  little  stones  were  found  in
the  censer,  similar  to  the  one  in  my  possession.

We  have  lately  (December  3rd)  had  a  sitting,  with  Mr.  and  Miss
Percival  and  Miss  B.^  added  to  our  circle.  All  the  phenomena  very
strong,  and,  in  addition,  we  had  two  pieces  of  direct  writing  on  the
table,  one  a  signature,  the  facsimile  on  large  scale  of  Ben.  Franklin,
and  the  other  of  Kabbila  and  Rector.  I  saw  the  luminous  hand
writing  the  signature  of  Franklin.  When  complete  the  paper  was
taken  up  from  Mrs.  Speer's  hand,  near  which  it  lay,  and  carried  into
the  air,  falliirg  on  Miss  Percival's  hand.  The  other  was  similarly
carried  up,  and  fell  on  Dr.  Speer's  hand.  The  fairy  bells  have  also
developed  great  power.

Saturday,  January  \(Sth,  1875. — The  sapphire  which  was  brought
to  me  I  had  set  by  Leroy  and  Son  (Piegent-street)  in  a  ring,  with
respect  to  which  I  received  a  number  of  directions. When  it  arrived

1  There  is  a  concordant  account  in  Miss  Birkett's  notes.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  61


we  held  a  sitting,  as  we  were  told  that  they  wished  to  remove  from  it
the  influence  it  had  contracted  by  being  in  other  hands.  I  placed  the
ring  on  my  silk  handkerchief,  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  at  once
it  was  surrounded  by  a  luminous  vapour.  Knocks  of  all  kinds  were
going  on  all  over  the  table,  some  six  or  eight  clearly  distinguishable.
INIrs.  Speer  once  put  her  hand  near  the  ring,  and  when  she  withdrew  it
it  was  luminous.  The  Prophet  showed  his  little  light  all  over  it,  and
close  to  our  faces  and  hands,  at  the  very  end  of  our  fingers.  The
whole  scene  was  very  striking  and  curious.  I  was  warned  A'ery  strongly
not  to  allow  the  ring  to  go  into  other  hands. ^

1  Two  quotations  from  Mr.  Moses'  letters  to  Mrs.  Speer  (Light,  December
24th,  1892,  and  December  31st,  1892)  may  here  be  given  : —

Bedford,  April  2nd,  1875.

' '  I  have  nothing  particular  to  tell  you  in  the  spiritual  way.  I  had  a  very
interesting  communication  on  Easter  Sunday,  which  succeeded  a  by  no
means  interesting  early  morning  experience.  The  Moravians,  as  you  may
remember,  wake  up  the  dead  by  singmg  over  their  graves  at  the  uueartlily
hour  of  six  a.m.  on  Easter  Day.  Whether  the  'dead'  resent  this  treatment
or  not  I  do  not  know,  but  for  the  last  two  Easters  they  have  visited  me  with
their  complainings.  Last  Easter  they  annoyed  me  more  than  enough.  Tliis
Easter  I  was  conscious  of  their  presence  less  by  the  physical  than  the  spiritual
sense.  They  did  not  make  so  much  noise,  but  the  room  seemed  to  swarm
with  them.  It  is  a  mysterious  question,  that  of  the  attraction  of  spirits  to
earth  by  the  direction  of  our  spirits  to  them.  I  believe  that  therein  lies  one
of  the  keys  to  the  whole  question  of  spirit  intercourse.  My  communication
was  from  Theophilus,  on  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  Christian  festival."

Mrs.  Moses'  house  at  Bedford  is  near  a  Moravian  burying  ground.  From
the  same  place  Mr.  Moses  ^\'rites  again  : —

"August  Id,  1875. — There  have  been  some  very  subtle  and  beautiful
perfumes  here.  My  mother  can't  at  all  make  out  where  they  come  from.
Three  little  pearls  also  made  their  appearance  on  the  table  the  other  day.
I  have  also  had  a  little  ruby  and  sappliire  and  emerald  :  all  small — the  size
of  your  rubies.

"  Mentor  was  the  cunning  workman  who  fashioned  the  cameo.  He  is  not
content  with  his  work,  which  he  says  was  bad,  and  that  he  can  do  much
better.  He  actually  carved  it,  he  says.  And  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  it,
seeing  that  I  can  find  no  hmit  to  spirit-power.  If  they  are  allowed  to  work
in  their  own  way  they  can  do  almost  anything.  It  is  only  when  we  compel
them  to  work  in  hnes  prescribed  by  us  that  they  find  any  difliculty.

"  We  are  on  the  very  threshold  of  the  subject  :  even  those  who  know
most.  The  vast  mass  of  Spiritualists  have  no  sort  of  idea  of  the  matter,  and
I  doubt  whether  this  age  ever  will  have."

Another  sitting  may  be  described  from  Mrs.  Sjjeer's  record  (Light,  May
13th,  1893)  :—

February  -ith,  1875. — We  met  as  usual. Rector  manifested  strongly,
shaking  the  room  and  the  chairs  on  which  we  were  sitting. It  appeared  as


62  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


August  27th,  1875. — Dudley  Villa,  Shanklin. — During  the  interval
that  has  passed  since  my  last  record  the  manifestations  have  developed,
and  some  new  ones  have  been  added.  The  musical  sounds  have  been
added  to  by  a  long  single  note  like  that  made  by  a  tuning-fork.  The
scent  continues.  We  have  had  fewer  lights  than  usual.  Several  small
gems  (ruby,  sapphire,  emerald,  as  well  as  some  pearls,  a  moonstone,  and
others)  have  been  brought.  Some  time  since  a  cameo  was  cut  during  a
seance  at  Douglas  House.  It  was  rudely  done,  but  the  result  was  very
remarkable.  Last  night  the  experiment  was  repeated  under  very  satis-
factory circumstances.  As  soon  as  the  stance  commenced  I  passed  into
the  trance  state.  I  derived  my  information  from  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,
who  alone  were  present.  A  long  message  was  rapped  out  by  Catharine.
She  said  they  had  brought  a  shell,  and  were  going  to  cut  a  cameo ;
that  I  was  in  trance  "  for  the  night,"  and  that  I  was  to  be  left  alone  till
morning,  and  not  to  be  told  of  what  was  done.  A  light  was  struck,
and  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  saw  a  shell  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  I  was  in
deep  trance.  Grocyn  played,  and  the  fairy  bells.  There  Avas  abundant
scent  of  a  particularly  sweet  kind.  Then  Mentor  came  and  Imperator.
After  he  left  light  was  called  for,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  table  was  a
cameo  and  a  quantity  of  debris  of  shell.  Noises  had  been  heard  as  of
picking,  and  I  saw  a  hand.  The  shell  is  more  clearly  cut  than  the  first,
and  shows  a  head,  lavirel-crowned.  It  is  polished  inside,  and  shows
plain  marks  of  the  graving  tool. The  seance  lasted  about  an  hour.


End  of  Quotations  from  Note- Books.

Here  Mr.  Moses'  notebooks  of  physical  seances  end,  although
there  are  from  time  to  time  allusions  to  physical  phenomena  in  his
books  of  automatic  script.  Mrs.  Speer's  records  continue  until  May
2nd,  1880,  and  show  that  the  phenomena,  though  rarer,  continued'

if  a  very  heavy  man  stood  behind  our  chairs,  jumping  up  and  down  with
great  vigour.  Scent  came  very  abundantly,  and  G.  manifested  with  his
musical  sounds.  After  sitting  for  some  time  we  heard  a  most  melancholy
noise,  which  sounded  like  the  wailing  of  the  wind  passing  through  an  iron
grating.  It  grew  louder  and  was  a  most  weird  sound,  giving  the  impression  of
unrest,  wailing,  and  woe.  We  all  felt  awe-struck,  especially  when  we  were
informed  that  the  sound  was  produced  by  a  large  body  of  undev^eloped
spirits  who  were  trying  to  get  to  us  ;  but  our  band  of  spirits  would  not
allow  them  to  approach  near  the  circle.  We  had  never  heard  .so  awful  a
sound  as  this  before.  We  were  then  informed  by  a  spirit  controlling  that
Imperator  had  permitted  them  to  come,  hoping  that  the  spirit-atmosphere
round  the  circle  would  benefit  them,  and  he  had  trusted  they  were  more
progressed  than  they  appeared  to  be. — M.S.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  3Ioses.  63


much  the  same. A  letter  of  Mr.  Moses  to  Mrs.  Speer,  dated  April,
1876,  foreshadows  their  gradual  disappearance.

' '  I  send  you  a  packet  which  you  will  see  is  '  spiritual. '  It  contains  a
fragment  of  spirit-drapery  sweetened  by  some  spirit  musk.  Magus  is  the
operator,  and  I  believe  Mentor  with  him.  At  any  rate,  those  two  have  been
at  work.  I  think  that  the  musk  smells  more  powerfully  than  usual.  I  had
a  long  and  very  beautiful  communication  from  Imperator  yesterday  (Easter
Day)  which  I  am  minded  to  copy  out  and  print.  Easter  Day  seems  to  be
a  favourite  with  them.  I  have  had  a  message  on  that  day  every  year.  The
idea  is  the  passage  from  Death  to  Life  symbolised  by  the  Crucifixion  and
Resurrection,  and  typifying  the  death  of  Self  Denial  and  Self  Sacrifice  lead-
ing to  the  Regeneration  or  Resurrection  of  the  Spirit  from  dead  Matter  to
the  higher  life.  It  is  well  worked  out,  and  very  striking.  There  was  also  a
communication  written  out  about  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  spiritual  world.
You  nmst  read  what  Imperator  says.  He  does  not  speak  hopefully,  and
wishes  us  not  to  meet  yet,  though  he  evidently  contemplates  the  resuming
of  our  circle  hereafter.  But  by  that  time,  he  says,  my  physical  raediumship
will  either  be  absolutely  under  control,  so  as  to  be  no  longer  fraught  with
danger,  or  will  have  ceased.  The  latter  seems  to  be  implied,  though  he
seems  to  hint  that  material  evidence  will  always  be  forthcoming.  He  is  very
decisive  in  saying  what  he  does,  and  says  that  we  are  none  of  us  ever  left.
It  gives  me  a  very  strong  idea  of  pre-arranged  plans  and  of  wise  and  power-
ful protection.  He  evidently  looks  far  ahead  ;  his  plans  now  are  for  the  far
future,  and  the  mind  is  first  prepared. I  am  quite  conscious  of  that.

' '  I  shall  probably  hear  more  before  we  see  each  other.  I  heard  nothing
of  the  Moravians  this  year,  nor  was  I  conscious  of  any  '  presence,'  which
looks  like  a  withdrawal  from  the  objective.  But  Mentor's  drapery  and  musk
are  objective  enough."

'["The  letter  from  which  these  extracts  are  taken"  (adds  Mrs.  Speer)  "  still
retains  the  scent  of  the  musk  referred  to  at  the  commencement,  as
'  sweetening  the  spirit-drapery, '  although  it  was  written  nearly  seven-
teen years  ago.  The  drapery  is  lost,  but  the  strong  perfume  of  musk
remains  fresh  and  pungent."]

On  May  2nd,  1880,  occurred  the  last  sitting  which  Mrs.  Speer  haa-.
recorded. She  concludes  her  records  in  Light  (October  21st,  1893)
with  the  following  words  : —

"I  have  now  come  to  the  end  of  the  seances  at  which  any  notes  were
properly  taken.  Other  meetings  we  have  since  had  occasionally,  and  at
times  Imperator  spoke  through  Mr.  S.  M.  until  within  a  few  months  of  his
decease.  Raps  were  sometimes  heard  and  messages  given.  Musk  and  coral
were  also  brought  and  scattered  over  the  room  at  several  different  times.  Half
that  took  place  could  not  be  recorded,  and  often  the  addresses  were  imperfectly
taken  down.  It  is  also  impossible  to  give  any  idea  of  the  impression  pro-
duced upon  the  circle  by  the  beauty  and  refinement  of  some  of  the  manifes-
tations, or  by  the  power  and  dignity  of  Imperator's  influence  and  personality.
And  now  I  may  say,  in  concluding  what  has  been  to  me  a  most  pleasant
task,  that  if  a  perusal  of  these  personal  records  of  the  most  interestint^


64.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


experiences  I  have  ever  been  through  should  in  any  way  lead  inquirers  to
realise  how  far  more  elevating  a  study  the  higher  aspects  of  Spiritualism
present  than  the  investigation  of  the  mere  phenomena  with  which  the  subject
is  usually  associated,  in  this  case  I  shall  feel  that  the  preparation  and  publi-
cation of  these  '  Records '  will  have  borne  good  fruit,  and  that  my  work
will  have  not  been  undertaken  in  vain. — M.S."

Here  these  citations  from  reports  of  the  seances  may,  I  think^
fitly  close.  Mrs.  Speer's  fuller  accounts  are  accessible  in  Light ;  and  I
assume  that  Mr.  Moses'  own  record  of  seances  will  be  somewhere
accessible  to  future  students.  The  remaining  records  by  Dr.  Speer,
Miss  Birkett,!  and  Mrs.  Garratt,  which  I  have  left  unprinted,  are
fully  concordant,  and  will,  I  suppose,  be  similarly  preserved.  Such
papers  as  I  have  any  control  over  will  be  deposited  in  the  archives  of
the  S.P.E..  There  is  a  good  deal  of  correspondence,  &c.,  which  I  have
examined,  without  finding  any  discrepancy  worth  mentioning  in  any
of  the  accounts.  For  my  own  part,  I  see  no  way  in  which  these
records  could  have  come  into  existence,  with  the  support  of  the  four
living  witnesses  known  to  me,  except  on  the  hypothesis  of  their  sub-
stantial truth.

Section  B. — Examination  of  Automatic  Writings.

B. — The  next  division  of  our  work  must  be  an  examination  of
the  automatic  writings.  The  24  books  of  these  writings,  already
described,  although  mostly  of  small  size,  contain,  of  course,  far  more
matter  than  can  be  printed  here.  I  propose  to  deal  with  these  as
follows.  In  Sections  B,  C,  D,  I  shall  analyse  the  bulk  of  the  evidence
which  they  contain  bearing  on  the  question  of  spirit-identity.  In
Section  E,  I  hope  later  on  to  discuss  the  rationale  of  the  physical
manifestations,  and  to  quote  matter  from  these  notebooks  bearing
thereon ;  especially  the  recoixl  of  certain  phenomena  occurring  to
Mr.  Moses  when  alone,  with  which  the  automatic  messages  are  inter-
spersed. In  Section  F  I  hope  to  give  a  brief  resume  of  the  "  Spirit
Teachings,"  already  published  in  part  in  the  book  of  that  name,
and  of  which  further  specimens  may,  I  hope,  he  published  hereafter.

These  automatic  messages  were  almost  wholly  written  by  Mr.  Moses'
own  hand,  while  he  was  in  a  normal  w^aking  state.  The  exceptions  are
of  two  kinds.  (1)  There  is  one  long  passage,  which  must  some  time  be
further  discussed,  alleged  by  Mr.  Moses  to  have  been  written  by  himself
while  in  a  state  of  trance.  (2)  There  are,  here  and  there,  a  few  words
alleged  to  be  in  "  direct  writing"; — written,  that  is  to  say,  by  invisible
hands,  but  in  Mr.  Moses'  presence  ;  as  already  several  times  described
in  the  notes  of  seances.

1  Miss  Birkett's  notes  cease  June  7th,  1880.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


65


Putting  these  exceptional  instances  aside,  we  find  that  the
writings  generally  take  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  Mr.  Moses  proposing
a  question  in  his  ordinary  thick,  black  handwriting.  An  answer  is
then  generally,  though  not  always,  given  ;  written  also  by  Mr.  Moses,
and  with,  the  same  pen,  but  in  some  one  of  various  scripts  which
differ  more  or  less  widely  from  his  own.  The  evidential  value  of  these
handwritings  will  be  discussed  hereafter.  In  the  meantime  Mr.
Moses'  own  description  of  the  process,  as  given  in  the  preface  to
Spirit  Teachings,  may  be  studied  with  advantage.

' '  The  communications  which  form  the  bulk  of  this  volume  were  received
by  the  process  known  as  automatic  or  passive  writing.  This  is  to  be
distinguished  from  Psychography.  In  the  former  case  the  psychic  holds  the
pen  or  pencil,  or  places  his  hand  upon  the  planchette,  and  the  message  is
written  without  the  conscious  intervention  of  his  mind.  In  the  latter  case
the  wi'iting  is  direct,  or  is  obtained  without  the  use  of  the  hand  of  the
psychic,  and  sometimes  without  the  aid  of  pen  or  pencil.

"Automatic  writing  is  a  well-known  method  of  communication  with  the
invisible  world  of  what  we  loosely  caU  Spirit.  I  use  that  word  as  the
most  intelligible  to  my  readers,  though  I  am  well  aware  that  I  shall  be  told
that  I  ought  not  to  apply  any  such  term  to  many  of  the  unseen  beings  who
communicate  with  earth,  of  whom  we  hear  much  and  often  as  being  the
reUquice  of  humanity,  the  shells  of  what  were  once  men.  It  is  no  part  of  my
business  to  enter  into  this  ghost  question.  My  interlocutors  call  themselves
sjiirits,  perha^JS  because  I  so  call  them,  and  spirits  they  are  to  me  for  my
present  purposes.

"These  messages  began  to  be  written  through  my  hand  just  ten  years
since — March  30th,  1873 — about  a  year  after  my  first  introduction  to
Spiritualism.  I  had  had  many  communications  before,  and  this  method
was  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  convenience,  and  also  to  preserve  what  was
intended  to  be  a  connected  body  of  teaching.  The  laborious  method  of
rapping  out  messages  was  manifestly  unfitted  for  communications  such  as
those  which  I  here  print.  If  spoken  through  the  lips  of  the  medium  in
trance  they  were  partially  lost,  and  it  was  moreover  impossible  at  first  to
rely  upon  such  a  measure  of  mental  passivity  as  would  preserve  them  from
admixture  with  his  ideas.  I  procured  a  pocket  book  which  I  habitually
carried  about  with  me.  I  soon  found  that  writing  flowed  more  easily  when
I  used  a  book  that  was  permeated  with  the  psychic  aura  ;  just  as  raps  come
more  easily  on  a  table  that  has  been  frequently  used  for  the  jjurpose,  and  as
phenomena  occur  most  readily  in  the  medium's  own  room.

"  At  first  the  writing  was  very  small  and  irregular,  and  it  was  necessary
for  me  to  write  slowly  and  cautiously,  and  to  watch  the  liand,  following  the
lines  with  my  eye  ;  otherwise  the  message  soon  became  incoherent,  and  the
result  was  mere  scribble.  In  a  short  time,  however,  I  found  that  I  could
dispense  with  these  precautions.  The  writing,  while  becoming  more  and  more
minute,  became  at  the  same  time  very  regular  and  beautifully  formed.  As
a  specimen  of  caligraphy  some  of  the  pages  are  exceedingly  beautiful.  The
answers  to  my  questions  (written  at  the  top  of  the  page)  were  pai-agraphed
and  arranged  as  if  for  the  press,  and  the  name  of  God  was  always  written  in

H


66


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


capitals  and  slowly,  and,  as  it  seemed,  reverentially.  The  subject-matter
was  always  of  a  pure  and  elevated  character,  much  of  it  being  of  personal
application,  intended  for  my  own  guidance  and  direction.  I  may  say  that
throughout  tlie  whole  of  these  written  communications,  extending  in
unbroken  continuity  to  the  year  1880,  there  is  no  flippant  message,  no
attempt  at  jest,  no  vulgarity  or  incongruity,  no  false  or  misleading  state-
ment, so  far  as  I  know  or  could  discover  ;  nothing  incompatible  with  the
avowed  object,  again  and  again  repeated,  of  instruction,  enlightenment,  and
guidance  by  spirits  fitted  for  the  task.  Judged  as  I  should  wish  to  be
judged  myself,  they  were  what  they  pretended  to  be.  Their  words  were
words  of  sincerity,  and  of  sober,  serious  purpose.

"The  earliest  communications  were  all  written  in  the  minute  characters
that  I  have  described,  and  were  uniform  in  style  and  in  the  signature,
'Doctor,  the  Teacher,'  nor  have  his  messages  ever  varied  during  all  the
years  that  he  has  written.  Whenever  and  wherever  he  wrote,  his  hand-
writing was  unchanged,  showing,  indeed,  less  change  than  my  own  does
during  the  last  decade.  The  tricks  of  style  remained  the  same,  and  there
was  in  short  a  sustained  individuality  throughout  his  messages.  He  is  to
me  an  entity,  a  personality,  a  being  with  his  own  idiosyncrasies  and
characteristics  quite  as  clearly  defined  as  the  human  beings  with  whom  I
come  in  contact,  if,  indeed,  I  do  not  do  him  injustice  by  the  broad
comparison.

"After  a  time,  communications  came  from  other  sources,  and  these  were
distinguished  eacli  by  its  own  handwriting,  and  by  its  own  peculiarities  of
style  and  expression.  These,  once  assumed,  were  equally  invariable.  I
could  tell  at  once  who  was  writing  by  the  mere  characteristics  of  the
caligraphy.

"  By  degrees  I  found  that  many  spirits  who  were  unable  to  influence  my
hand  themselves  sought  the  aid  of  a  spirit  '  Rector,'  who  was  apparently
able  to  write  more  freely  and  with  less  strain  on  me  ;  for  writing  by  a  spirit
unaccustomed  to  the  work  was  often  incoherent,  and  always  resulted  in  a
serious  drain  upon  my  vital  powers.  They  did  not  know  how  easily  the
reserve  of  force  was  exhausted,  and  I  suffered  proportionately.

"Moreover,  the  writing  of  the  spirit  who  thus  became  a  sort  of
amanuensis  was  fluent  and  easy  to  decipher,  whereas  that  of  many  spirits
was  cramped,  archaic  in  form,  and  frequently  executed  with  difBculty  and
almost  illegible.  So  it  came  to  pass,  as  a  matter  of  ordinary  course,
'  Rector '  wrote,  but  when  a  spirit  came  for  the  first  time,  or  when  it  was
desired  to  emphasise  a  communication,  the  sjairit  responsible  for  the
message  wrote  for  himself.

"  It  must  not  be  assumed,  however,  that  all  messages  proceeded  from  one
solitary  inspiration.  In  the  case  of  the  majority  of  the  communications
printed  in  this  volume  this  is  so.  The  volume  is  a  record  during  which
'  Imperator '  was  alone  concerned  with  me,  though,  as  he  never  attempted
writing,  '  Rector  '  acted  as  his  amanuensis.  At  other  times,  and  esj^ecially
since  that  time,  communications  have  apparently  proceeded  from  a
company  of  associated  spirits,  who  have  used  their  amanuensis  for  the
purpose  of  their  message.  This  was  increasingly  the  case  during  the  last
five  years  that  I  received  these  communications.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


67


' '  The  circumstances  under  which  the  messages  were  written  were
infinitely  varied.  As  a  rule  it  was  necessary  that  I  should  be  isolated,  and
the  more  passive  my  mind  the  more  easy  the  communications.  But  I  have
received  messages  under  all  sorts  of  conditions.  At  first  they  came
with  difficulty,  but  soon  the  mechanical  method  ajjpeared  to  be  mastered,
and  page  after  page  was  covered  with  matter  of  which  the  specimens  contained
in  this  book  will  enable  the  public  to  judge.

"What  is  now  printed  has  been  subjected  to  revision  by  a  method  similar
to  that  by  which  it  was  first  written.  Originally  published  in  the  Spiritucdist
newspaper,  the  messages  have  been  revised  but  not  substantially  altered  by
those  who  first  wrote  them.  When  the  publication  in  the  Sjiiritualist  was
commenced,  I  had  no  sort  of  idea  of  doing  what  is  now  being  done.
Priends  desired  specimens  to  be  published,  and  the  selection  was  made
without  any  regard  to  continuity.  I  was  governed  only  by  a  desire  to  avoid
the  publication  of  what  was  of  personal  interest  only,  and  I,  perforce,
excluded  much  that  involved  allusion  to  those  still  living,  whom  I  had  no
right  to  drag  into  print.  I  disliked  printing  personal  matter  relating  to
myself ;  I  had,  obviously,  no  right  to  print  that  which  concerned  others.
Some  of  the  most  striking  and  impressive  communications  have  thus  been
excluded,  and  what  is  printed  must  be  regarded  as  a  mere  sample  of  what
cannot  see  the  light  now,  and  which  must  be  reserved  for  consideration  at  a
remote  period,  when  I  and  those  concerned  can  no  longer  be  aggrieved  by
its  publication.

"It  is  an  interesting  subject  for  speculation  whether  my  own  thoughts
entered  into  the  subject-matter  of  the  communications.  I  took  extraordi-
nary pains  to  prevent  any  such  admixture.  At  first  the  writing  was  slow,
and  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  follow  it  with  my  eye,  but  even  then  the
thoughts  were  not  my  thoughts.  Very  soon  the  messages  assumed  a
character  of  which  I  had  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  thought  was  opposed
to  my  own.  But  I  cultivated  the  power  of  occupying  my  mind  with  other
things  during  the  time  that  the  writing  was  going  on,  and  was  able  to  read
an  abstruse  book,  and  follow  out  a  line  of  close  reasoning  while  the  message
was  written  with  unbroken  regularity.  Messages  so  written  extended  over
many  pages,  and  in  their  course  there  is  no  correction,  no  fault  in  compo-
sition, and  often  a  sustained  vigour  and  beauty  of  style.

' '  I  am  not,  however,  concerned  to  contend  that  my  own  mind  was  not
utilised,  or  that  what  was  thus  written  did  not  dej^end  for  its  form  on  the
mental  qualifications  of  the  medium  through  whom  it  was  given.  So  far  as
I  know  it  is  always  the  case  that  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  medium  are
traceable  in  such  communications.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  it  should  be
otherwise.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  mass  of  ideas  conveyed  to  me  were
alien  to  my  own  opinions,  were,  in  the  main,  opposed  to  my  settled
convictions,  and,  moreover,  that  in  several  cases,  information  of  which  I
was  assuredly  ignorant,  clear,  precise,  and  definite  in  form,  susceptible  of
verification,  and  always  exact,  was  thus  conveyed  to  me.  As,  at  many  of  the
seances,  spirits  came  and  rapped  out  on  the  table  clear  and  precise  informa-
tion about  themselves,  which  we  afterwards  verified,  so,  on  repeated
occasions,  was  such  information  conveyed  to  me  by  this  method  of  automatic
writing.

H  2


68


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.


"I  argue  from  the  one  case  to  others.  In  one  I  can  positively  assert
and  prove  the  conveyance  of  information  new  to  me.  In  others  I  equally
believe  that  I  was  in  communication  with  an  external  intelligence  which
conveyed  to  me  thoughts  other  than  my  own.  Indeed,  the  subject-matter
of  many  of  the  communications  printed  in  this  volume  will,  by  its  own
inherent  quality,  probably  lead  to  the  same  conclusion.

' '  I  never  could  command  the  writing.  It  came  unsought  usually,  and
when  I  did  seek  it,  as  often  as  not  I  was  unable  to  obtain  it.  A  sudden
impulse,  coming  I  knew  not  how,  led  me  to  sit  down  and  prepare  to
wi"ite.  Where  the  messages  were  in  regular  course  I  was  accustomed  to
devote  the  first  hour  of  each  day  to  sitting  for  their  reception.  I  rose  early,
and  the  beginning  of  the  day  was  spent,  in  a  room  that  I  used  for  no  other
purpose,  in  what  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  religious  service.  These
writings  frequently  came  then,  but  I  could  by  no  means  reckon  upon  them.
Other  forms  of  spirit-manifestation  came  too  ;  I  was  rarely  without  some
unless  ill-health  intervened,  as  it  often  did  of  late  years,  until  the  messages
ceased.

' '  The  particular  comurunications  which  I  received  from  the  spirit  known
to  me  as  Imperator  mark  a  distinct  epoch  in  my  life.

' '  I  have  noted  in  the  course  of  my  remarks  the  intense  exaltation  of
spirit,  the  strenuous  conflict,  the  intervals  of  peace,  that  I  have  since
longed  for,  but  have  seldom  attained,  which  marked  their  transmission.  It
was  a  period  of  education  in  which  I  underwent  a  spiritual  development
that  was  in  its  outcome  a  very  regeneration.  I  cannot  hope,  I  do  not  try,
to  convey  to  others  what  I  then  experienced.  But  it  may  possibly  be  borne
in  upon  the  minds  of  some  who  are  not  ignorant  of  the  dispensation  of  the
spirit  in  their  own  inner  selves,  that  for  me  the  question  of  the  beneficent
action  of  external  spirit  on  my  own  self  was  then  finally  settled.  I  have
never  since,  even  in  the  vagaries  of  an  extremely  sceptical  mind,  and  amid
much  cause  for  questioning,  ever  seriously  entertained  a  doubt."

A  i^rolonged  study  of  tlie  M.S.  Ijooks  has  revealed  nothing  incon-
sistent witli  this  description.  I  have  myself,  of  course,  searched
them  carefully  for  any  sign  of  confusion  or  alteration,  hut  without
finding  any  ;  and  I  have  shown  parts  of  them  to  various  friends,
who  have  seen  no  points  of  suspicion.  I  am  permitted  by  the
executors  to  show  such  parts  as  contain  no  private  matter,  at  my
discretion,  to  students  interested  in  the  enquiry  ;  and  when  the  books
pass  from  my  guardianship,  they  will  no  doubt  be  preserved  for  future
reference.

I  think,  however,  that  no  one  who  admits  that  automatic  writing  is
possible  at  all,  is  likely  to  feel  much  doubt  that  we  have  here  a  genuine
and  typical  instance  of  automatic  script,  written  under  some  such
conditions  as  those  described  above.  It  seems  plain,  moreover,  that
the  various  entries  were  made  at  or  about  the  dates  to  which  they  are
ascribed.  They  contain  constant  references  to  the  seances  which  went
on  concurrently,  and  whose  dates  are  indeiDendently  known ;  and  in
the  later  books,  records  of  some  of  these  seances  are  interspersed  in


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


69


their  due  places  amongst  other  matter.  The  M.S.S.  contain  also  a
number  of  allusions  to  other  contemporaneous  facts,  many  of  which
are  independently  known  to  myself.

I  think,  moreover^  that  on  one  who  had  studied  these  entries  through-
out would  doubt  the  originally  pi'ivate  and  intimate  character  of  many
of  them.  The  tone  of  the  spirits  towards  Mr.  Moses  himself  is  habitually
courteous  and  respectful.  But  occasionally  they  have  some  criticism
which  pierces  to  the  quick,  and  which  goes  far  to  explain  to  me  Mr.
Moses'  unwillingness  to  have  the  books  fully  inspected  during  his
lifetime.  He  did,  no  doubt,  contemplate  their  being  at  least  read  by
friends  after  his  death  ;  and  there  are  indications  that  there  may  have
been  a  still  more  private  book,  now  doubtless  destroyed,  to  which
messages  of  an  intimate  character  were  sometimes  consigned.

The  questions  at  issue,  in  short,  as  to  these  messages,  refer  not  so
much  to  their  genuineness  as  to  their  mUhenticity,  in  the  proper  sense
of  those  words.  That  they  were  written  down  in  good  faith  by
Mr.  Moses  as  proceeding  from  the  personages  whose  names  are  signed
to  them,  there  can  be  little  doubt.  But  as  to  whether  they  did  really
proceed  from  those  personages  or  no  there  may  in  many  cases  be  very
great  doubt ; — a  doubt  which  I,  at  least,  shall  be  quite  unable  to
remove.  We  must  return  to  this  problem  later,  when  the  principal
cases  have  been  laid  before  the  reader  in  detail ;  at  present  I  will
merely  suggest  for  his  guidance  that  he  will  generally  find  the  evidence
for  identity  much  more  satisfactory  in  the  case  of  spirits  recently
departed,  and  more  or  less  on  the  medium's  own  level,  than  in  the  case
of  spirits  more  exalted  and  remote.

In  his  little  book  on  Sjnrii  Identity  (1879),  Mr.  Moses  had  collected
some  of  the  most  impressive  of  these  cases  of  identity,  and  added  some
interesting  matter  as  to  the  subjective  side  of  his  experiences.  The
book  was  never  widely  known ;  and  when  the  small  edition  was
exhausted  Mr.  Moses  postponed  the  re-publication,  on  the  ground  that
the  book  was  imperfect,  and  that  he  had  no  time  to  improve  it.  I
repeatedly  pressed  him  on  the  subject ;  and  when  last  we  spoke  of  it
(October  15th,  1886),  he  said  that  he  would  some  time  re-write  the  book,
and  would  consult  me  as  to  further  passages  of  M.S.  to  be  published.  The
book  was  never  re-written  ;  but  an  essay  called  "  The  Identity  of  Spirit,  '
found  among  Mr.  Moses'  papers,  and  apparently  intended  to  be  read  to
the  London  Spiritualist  Alliance,  in  some  degree  fulfils  his  expressed
intention.  I  communicated  this  paper  first  to  Light,  the  newspaper
of  which  Mr.  Moses  was  Editor  until  his  death  ;  but  1  feel  it  right  to
reprint  it  here  almost  in  extenso,  as  his  last  word  on  the  subject  of
these  identifications.  I  have  carefully  compared  it  with  the  M.S.S.  on
which  it  rests,  and  have  found  it  accurate.  I  have  also  discussed  it
with  Mrs.  Speer,  who  helped  Mr.  Moses  in  its  compilation  and  vouches


70  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


for  facts  of  verification,  &c.,  not  recorded  in  the  M.S.  I  add  a  few  notes
where  I  have  been  able  to  bring  some  independent  corroboration.

Section  C. — Mr.  Moses'  jMjyer  on  the  Identity  of  Spirit.

' '  The  evidence  which  has  been  given  to  me  is  best,  perhaps,  presented
in  this  way.

"  When  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  I
came  into  relations  with  a  sjjirit  who  called  himself  'Imperator.'  Those
who  are  familiar  with  my  book  Spirit  Teachings  will  remember  what
care  I  took  to  make  sure  that  I  was  not  being  befooled  by  any  spirit.  If
the  precautions  that  I  took  strike  anyone  as  insufficient,  I  should  much  like
to  know  what,  in  the  opinion  of  my  critic,  would  be  considered  sufficient..
For  in  the  affairs  of  daily  life  I  am  much  less  careful,  and  I  find  usually  that
people  do  not  go  about  to  deceive  me.  The  longer  I  live  the  more  I  am
disposed  to  believe  that  the  object  of  people  on  any  moral  plane,  as  a  rule,  is
not  to  take  in  other  people — exceptis  excijnendis,  as  will  occur  to  all.  And
so  with  this  belief  in  my  mind,  and  with  these  precautions  that  I  made  use-
of,  I  present  the  evidence  that  now  follows.

"It  was  in  August,  1872,  that  I  first  became  acquainted  with  evidence
of  Spirit  Identity.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I  were  then  sitting  regularly
almost  every  evening.  A  friend  of  Mrs.  S^jeer's,  of  whom  I  had  never
heard,  came  and  wrote  through  my  hand  her  name,  '  A.  P.  Kirkland.'
Dr.  Speer  said,  '  Is  that  our  old  friend  1 '  Then  I  wrote.  '  Yes.  I  came
to  tell  you  that  I  am  happy,  but  I  can't  impress  our  friend  to-night.'  The
handwriting  then  changed,  and  there  came  communications  from  Mr.
Callister  (a  friend  of  mine)  ;  and  from  my  cousin,  T.J.S.  ;  and  from  another
spirit,  which  I  do  not  think  it  of  importance  to  mention  here.

"  With  regard  to  these  communications,  they  were  distinct  in  style,  and
it  is  of  importance  to  notice  that  the  handwriting  of  Miss  Kirkland  was.
very  similar  to  her  own,  which  I  had  never  seen,  and  that  of  Mr.  Callister,
on  being  questioned  as  to  his  identity,  recalled  to  my  memory  a  fact  which
had  escaped  it,  and  referred  to  a  conversation,  the  last  I  had  had  with  him
on  earth.  This  I  do  not  adduce  as  evidence  of  identity,  nor  do  I  withdraw
it  as  such.

"This  was  on  August  21st,  1872,  and  on  September  4th  in  the  same  year
there  came  a  little  sister  of  Dr.  Sj^eer's,  particulars  respecting  which  case
are  printed  in  Spirit  Identity,  p.  59,  as  follows  : —

"  '  I  pass  to  a  case  in  which  a  spirit  -vvho  first  manifested  her  presence  on
SeiDtember  4th,  1872,  has  remained  in  ^^ermanent  communication  with  us
ever  since.  I  note  this  case  because  we  have  the  advantage  of  prolonged
intercourse  to  aid  us  in  forming  an  opinion  as  to  identity,  and  because  the
spirit  has  not  only  given  an  unequivocal  proof  of  her  characteristic
individuality,  but  has  evidenced  her  presence  in  various  ways.  This  is  a
remarkable  case,  too,  as  tending  to  prove  that  life  once  given  is  in-
destructible, and  that  the  spirit  which  has  once  animated  a  human  body,
however  brief  its  tenure,  lives  on  witli  unimpaired  identity.

"  'The  spirit  in  question  announced  herself  by  raps,  giving  a  message  in
French. She  said  she  was  a  sister  of  Dr.  Speer 's,  and  had  passed  away  at


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


71


Tours,  an  infant  of  seven  months  old.  I  had  never  heard  her  mentioned,
and  her  brother  had  forgotten  her  existence,  for  she  lived  and  died  before
his  birth.  Clairvoyants  had  always  described  a  child  as  being  in  my
company,  and  I  had  wondered  at  this,  seeing  tliat  I  had  no  trace  of  any  such
relation  or  friend.  Here  was  the  explanation.  From  the  time  of  her  first
appearance  slie  had  remained  attached  to  the  family,  and  her  clear,  joyous
little  rap,  perfectly  individual  in  its  nature,  is  never  failing  evidence  of  her
presence.  It  never  varies,  and  we  all  know  it  at  once  as  surely  as  we  should
know  the  tone  of  a  friend's  voice.  She  gave  particulars  of  herself,  and
also  her  four  names  in  full.  One  (Stanhope)  was  new  to  her  brother,  and
he  verified  it  only  by  reference  to  another  member  of  the  family,  (Mrs.
Denis).  Names,  and  dates,  and  facts  were  alike  unknown  to  me.  I  was
absolutely  ignorant  of  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  any  such  person.

'  'This  little  spirit  has  twice  manifested  her  presence  on  the  photographic
plate.  One  of  these  cases  was  attested  by  direct  writing,  and  both  will  be
found  clearly  detailed  in  the  course  of  my  researches,  in  the  chapter  on
Spirit  Photography,  published  in  Human  Nature,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  395.  (See
also  Spirit  Identity,  Appendix  IV.)

' '  So  here  we  have  a  presence  that  gives  by  raps  a  name  unknown  to
any  person  present  ;  that  name  afterwards  verified ;  that  apj^ears  on  a
photographic  plate  with  her  mother,  certain  distinctive  features  in  the
figure  of  the  mother  giving  further  evidence  of  the  identity  of  the  baby-
figure  ;  and  lastly,  an  attestation  from  those  whom  we  had  learned  to  trust
of  the  truth  of  it  all.  I  lay  stress  on  this  case.  Another  case  which  I
think  important  is  this.

' '  On  an  evening  in  the  month  of  January,  1874,  I  repeatedly  said  to

Mrs.  Speer,  '  Who  is  Emily  C  .  ? Her  name  keeps  sounding  in  my  ear.'

Mrs.  Speer  rei^lied  that  she  did  not  know  anyone  of  that  name.  '  Yes, '  I
said  very  emphatically,  '  there  is  someone  of  that  name  passed  over  to  the
world  of  spirit. '  She  could  give  me  no  information,  and  I  was  disturbed,
in  the  way  in  which  I  always  am  when  such  things  take  place.  Tliis  is  one
of  the  many  cases  occurring  about  this  time.  When  the  evening  paper
came  in  we  looked  (as  we  frequently  did)  at  the  obituary.  I  may  say  that
our  minds  were  set  on  this  subject  of  identitiy.  At  our  daily  sittings  fact  on
fact  was  given  to  prove  it  and  to  remove  any  doubts.  It  became  a  regular
thing  for  us  to  receive  a  message  giving  such  facts  as  an  obituary  notice
would  contain.  We  therefore  looked  for  them,  and  we  found  an  announce-
ment of  the  death  of  'Emily,  widow  of  the  late  Captain  C C  .'

On  a  subsequent  evening  in  the  following  year,  the  date  of  which  I  can
produce,  but  which  I  have  not  by  me  at  the  moment,  she  returned  again.
Dr.  Speer  and  I  had  gone  out  for  a  walk  in  the  afternoon — I  was  then
staying  with  him  at  Dudley  Villa,  Shanklin,  Isle  of Wight,— and  at  our

seance  in  the  evening  came  '  Emily C C  . ' I enquired  what

brought  her,  and  her  answer  was  rapped  out  on  the  table,  '  You  passed  my
grave.'  Here  I  should  explain  that  at  this  time  I  never  went  near  a  grave-
yard but  I  attracted  some  spirit,  identified  afterwards  as  one  whose  body
lay  there.  I  said,  '  No,  that  is  impossible  ;  we  have  been  near  no  grave-
yard,' and  Dr.  Speer  confirmed  my  impression.  The  communication,  how-
ever, was  persistent,  and  we  agreed  that  we  would  take  the  same  walk  the


72


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


next  day.  We  did  so,  and  at  a  certain  place  I  had  an  impulse  to  climb  up
and  look  over  a  wall,  which  quite  shut  out  from  the  view  of  the  ordinary
passer-by  what  was  behind  it. I  climbed  up  and  looked  over,  and  my  eye

fell  at  once  on  the  grave  of  'Emily  C C  .,' and  on  the  dates  and

particulars  given  to  us,  all  exactly  accurate.

' '  Another  instance  similar  in  kind — though  this  is  of  a  personal  friend  of
Mrs.  Speer's — is  the  case  of  Cecilia  Feilden.  (See  Spirit  Identity  p.  58).  We
were  then  at  Shanklin,  sitting  regularly  every  evening,  when  on  .January  1st,
1874,  there  came  a  fresh  sound,  a  little  ticking  sound  in  the  air,  close  to
Mrs.  Speer.  We  enquired  what  it  might  represent,  and  were  told  that
it  indicated  the  presence  of  Cecilia  Feilden,  who  had  died  17  years  ago.
We  asked  why  she  came,  and  were  told  that  she  had  been  attracted  to  her
old  friend,  Mrs.  Speer,  through  me,  and  in  consequence  of  Dr.  Speer's  and
my  presence  at  her  grave  at  Bonchurch  that  afternoon.  She  answered
many  questions,  and  finally  rapped  out,  'I  must  now  dajmrt.  Adieu.'
This  word  Miss  Feilden  always  used  at  the  end  of  her  letters.  Mrs.  Speer
tells  me  that  she  seldom  concluded  a  letter  otherwise.  I  had  never  known
her,  or  heard  of  her  until  Dr.  Speer  pointed  out  her  grave.  When  we  rose
from  the  table  we  found  that  a  piece  of  marked  paper,  which  we  had  put
down  under  the  table,  had  written  upon  it  the  words  '  passed  17  years. '

' '  Again,  there  is  the  case  of  Henry  Spratley.  We  were  then  the  same
circle,  sitting  in  the  same  way,  on  January  2nd,  1874,  and  I  can  aver  that
not  one  of  us  had  ever  heard  of  this  jjerson.  He  had  lately  departed
(December,  1873),  and  it  was  alleged  that  he  had  been  brought  by  the
controlling  spirit,  'Imperator,'  for  purposes  of  evidence,  and  in  pursuance  of
a  plan  intended  to  break  down  my  persistent  scepticism.  We  had  from  him
messages  of  the  usual  type,  saying  simply  who  he  was,  when  he  was  born,
and  when  he  died.  We  found  it  difficult,  I  remember,  to  verify  the  facts,
but  in  the  end  Mrs.  Speer  succeeded  in  doing  so  by  writing  (1)  to  the  Post
Office,  making  a  general  enquiry,  to  which  no  answer  came  ;  (2)  to  the  vicar
of  Maidenhead,  with  no  reply  (we  afterwards  discovered  that  he  was  on  his
holiday)  ;  (3)  to  the  '  present  occupant  of  Moor  Cottage,'  the  address  given
to  us  by  the  spirit ;  (4)  to  his  nearest  surviving  representative,  who  wrote
back  with  some  surprise  to  say  that  all  things  were  quite  true.  '  My  father
lived  here  till  he  died  on  December  24th.'

"Perhaps  I  may  here  mention  a  case  in  which  I  endeavoured  to  mislead
a  communicating  spirit,  but  without  any  success.  If  there  be  truth  in
the  allegations  of  the  too-clever  people  that  constitute  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  there  should  have  been  conveyed  from  my  brain  to  that
of  the  impersonal  entity  with  which  I  communicated  the  falsity  I  had
fabricated.  1  There  came  a  spirit  who  represented  herself  to  be  my  grand-
mother. I  remembered  her  well  as  a  child,  and  being  at  this  time  perfectly
free  from  any  abnormal  influence,  I  cross-questioned  my  alleged  relative
at  great  length.  The  answers  to  my  questions  were  given  by  raps,  different
from  any  we  had  heard  before,  and  during  the  greater  part  of  the  time
without  any  contact  with  the  table.

"  '  I  enquired  of  her  minute  facts  and  dates,  her  birthday,  the  day  of
her  death,  her  children's  names,  and  a  variety  of  details  such  as  occurred  to

1  I  do  not  accept,  but  need  not  refute,  this  criticism. — F.W.H.M.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


73


me.  I  then  asked  if  she  remembered  me  as  a  child.  She  did.  I  proceeded
to  detail  two  imaginary  incidents  such  as  might  occur  in  a  child's  life.  I  did
it  so  naturally  that  my  friends  were  completely  deceived.  It  never  occurred
to  them  that  I  was  making  up  a  story  as  a  test.  Not  so,  however,  my
'Intelligent  Operator  at  the  other  end  of  the  line.'  She  refused  altogether
to  assent  to  my  story.  She  stojjped  me  by  a  simple  remark  that  she  re-
membered nothing  of  the  sort.  Nor  could  I  by  any  means  get  her  to
waver,  or  to  admit  that  she  might  be  mistaken.  She  repeated  that  she
did  not  remember  anything  of  the  sort.  I  had  frequently  been  told  that
spirits  would  assent  to  anything  ;  and  my  jjious  fraud  had  as  much  for  its
object  to  test  the  allegation  generally  as  to  prove  identity  in  this  particular
case.  .  .  .  This  spirit,  at  any  rate,  refused  to  assent  to  what  I
suggested.  I  certainly  rose  from  the  table  convinced  that  I  had  been  talk-
ing to  a  person  that  desired  to  tell  the  truth,  and  that  was  extremely  careful
to  be  exact  in  statement.  I  verified  all  the  facts,  and  found  them  exactly
given. (See  S2Ji)'it  Identity,  p.  53.)  '

"I  remember  well  that  my  mother  was  much  surprised  at  what  she
thought  to  be  the  tenacity  of  my  memory  as  to  long  past  events.

"This  narrative  is  becoming  monotonous,  but  it  is  necessary  for  purposes
of  argument  to  bring  facts  to  bear  on  you  as  they  were  brought  to  bear  on
me,  if  only  for  the  same  purpose.  On  Januarj'  4th,  1874,  we  had  one  of  our
usual  meetings.  Bright  masses  of  light  stood  between  Mrs.  Speer  and  myself,
and  there  came  a  gentle  rapping  directly  under  my  hands.  She  asked  if  the
spirit  wished  to  communicate,  and  to  her  great  astonishment  the  name
'  George  Eves  '  was  rapped  out.  Greatly  affected,  Mrs.  Speer  said,  '  Are  you
my  brother  ? '  'Yes.'  'Have  you  ever  manifested  your  presence  before  T
(This  not  from  uncertainty  as  to  the  likeness,  but  because  we  wished  to
ascertain  in  this  way  whether  it  was  indeed  George  Eves  whom  we  had
seen  and  whom  his  sister  had  recognised.)  '  Yes,  I  have,  but  not  here  ;
partly  through  the  medium  you  visited'  (i.e..  Holmes).  'Then  that  was
your  face  that  I  saw  ? '  said  Mrs.  Speer.  '  Yes.'  Dr.  Speer  then  asked  if  he
had  a  sister  with  him.  No  reply,  but  a  much  deeper  rap  gave  through  the
alphabet  the  name  'Augustus.'  Mrs.  Speer,  who  was  always  very  im-
pressionable and  generally  knew  what  was  wanted,  said,  "  Are  you  my
father?'  'Yes.'  'And  you  manifested  also  at  Holmes',  did  you  not  1
'  Yes.'  After  some  further  conversation,  there  came  a  little  tapping  again
under  Mrs.  Speer's  hands.  It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  make  clear  the
evident  anxiety  felt  by  the  spirit  to  communicate.  The  quality  of  the  raps
represented  exactly  the  inflections  of  an  eager  human  voice.  VVe  called  the
alphabet,  and  '  Emma '  was  rapped  out.  Mrs.  Speer  had  a  mother  and
sister  of  that  name — she  enquired  which.  'Sister.'  '  And  have  you  seen
our  brother  William  ? '  '  No. '  Further  conversation  followed,  and  the  only
object  in  referring  to  it  is  to  point  out  that  it  is  too  silly  to  think  that  any
being  should  elaborately  impose  in  this  way  upon  people  whose  one  and
only  desire  was  to  arrive  at  the  truth.  Nor  could  any  of  those  present  who
felt  the  atmosphere,  and  saw  the  light  that  surrounded  us,  assent  to  the
doctrine  that  we  were  the  sport  of  devils.  I  never  sat  under  better  con-
ditions, nor  in  a  more  harmonious  state,  and  I  rely  on  such  sensations  quite
as  much  as  I  do  on  material  tests.


74  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


' '  Another  case  that  I  think  important  is  recorded  in  my  Spirit  Identity^
pp.  65 — 66,  as  follows  : —

"  '  One  more  case  of  extremely  minute  evidence  given  in  detail  through
the  means  of  raps,  and  corroborated  by  automatic  writing,  must  be  given
before  I  close.  About  the  same  time  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  the
whole  of  one  of  our  se'ances,  extending  nearly  to  two  hours,  was  taken  up
by  the  communication  of  a  series  of  facts,  names,  dates,  and  minute  par-
ticulars from  a  sjjirit  who  was  apparently  able  to  reply  to  the  most  searching
questions.  The  day  of  his  birth,  particulars  as  to  his  family  history,  and
details  of  his  early  life  were  given  at  my  request.  Then  came  a  perfect
autobiograjjhy,  so  far  as  salient  facts  were  concerned,  and  embracing  some
trivial  particulars,  which,  however,  fell  into  their  place  in  the  most  natural
way.  All  questions  were  answered  without  the  faintest  hesitation,  and
with  perfect  clearness  and  precision.  The  particulars  were  taken  down  at
the  time,  and  are  in  all  respects,  where  verification  is  possible,  exact  and
accurate.  Even  if  this  case  stood  alone  in  my  experience,  it  is  more  difBcult
for  me  to  imagine  that  what  was  so  laboriously  and  precisely  given  was  the
product  of  imposture,  the  fraud  of  a  deceiving  spirit,  or  the  vagary  of  an
errant  brain,  than  to  believe,  as  I  assuredly  do,  that  the  intelligent  ojjerator
was  the  man  himself,  with  memory  unimpaired  and  individuality  un-
destroyed  by  the  change  which  we  call  death.  Resting,  as  it  does,  on  the
same  basis  with  other  facts  that  I  have  detailed,  and  with  many  that  I  have
not,  it  presents  one  more  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  In  addition  to  the
long  series  of  facts  thus  communicated  by  means  of  raps,  there  stands  in  a
book  which  I  used  at  this  time  for  automatic  writing,  a  short  letter  written
automatically  by  me  in  a  peculiar  archaic  handwriting,  phrased  in  a  quaint
old-fashioned  spelling.  It  is  signed  with  the  name  of  the  spirit  in  question,
who  was  a  man  of  mark  in  the  days  of  his  life  upon  earth.  I  have  since
obtained  a  letter  in  his  handwriting,  an  old  yellow  document,  preserved  on
account  of  the  autograph.  The  handwriting  in  my  book  is  a  fair  imitation
of  this,  the  signature  is  exact,  and  the  piece  of  old-fashioned  spelling  occurs
exactly  as  it  does  in  my  book.  This,  it  was  said,  was  purposely  done  as  a
point  of  evidence.'

"  So  much  for  the  quotation.  What  follows  is  from  my  private  records.
This  same  Thomas  Wilson  came  to  our  circle  on  January  25th,  1874,  and
occupied  the  whole  of  the  evening  in  giving  the  most  minute  details  with
regard  to  himself  and  his  peo2:ile,  througli  tilts,  or  rather  levitations,  of  the
table.  I  got  tired  to  death,  but  still  he  went  on.  He  said  that  he  was  born
at  Burton,  in  Cheshire,  on  December  20th,  1663,  and  that  he  died  on  March
7th,  1755,  aged  91.  That  his  mother's  name  was  Sherlock,  and  that  she
was  born  at  Orton,  in  Cheshire.  That  his  schoolmaster  was  Mr.  Harper,  of
Chester.  That  he  was  ordained  by  Dr.  Morton,  Bishop  of  Kildare,  to  a
curacy  of  liis  uncle's.  Dr.  Slierlock,  in  1680.  That  on  January  29th  (St.
Peter's  Day),  he  was  made  Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man  ;  that  he  married  Mary
Patten,  of  Warrington,  in  1698,  and  had  four  children — Mary,  died  aged  13  ;
Thomas,  aged  one  year  ;  Alice,  aged  2  years,  and  another  son,  Thomas,  who
outlived  him.  He  told  us  that  '  Imjjerator  '  had  sent  him  to  the  circle.
His  rap  was  clear  and  distinct.  All  these  details  were  quite  unknown  to
the  circle,  but  were  verified  afterwards,  and  an  old  letter  sent  by  a  friend  to


The  Exi^eriences  of  TF.  Stainton  Moses.


75


me  verified  the  handwriting.  The  word  '  friend  '  in  it  is  spelt  with  the  e  before
the  i,  as  in  the  automatic  writing.  ...  I  ask,  if  he  were  not  the  man  he
pretended  to  be,  who  was  he  1  For  it  is  more  difficult  to  conceive  that  any
being  could  counterfeit  the  Intelligence  represented  than  to  believe  that  the
Intelligence  itself  was  present." — [Note  A.]

' '  Another  account  to  which  I  should  like  to  refer  is  that  of  Rosamira
Lancaster  : —

"  'On  February  28th,  1874,  and  following  evening,  a  spirit  came  by  raps,
and  gave  the  name  of  "Rosamira."  She  said  that  she  died  at  Torquay  on
January  10th,  1874,  and  that  she  had  lived  at  Kilburn.  She  stated  that  her
husband's  name  was  "Lancaster."  At  this  time  I  was  troubled  about  details,
and  so  I  asked  her  husband's  Christian  name,  and  I  got ' '  Ben,"  and  then  the
power  failed.  (The  obituary  showed  that  the  full  name  was  Benjamin.)
I  then  passed  under  the  control  of  "  Imperator,"  and  he  said  that  he  had
tried  as  far  as  he  could  to  bring  this  spirit  to  us.  Afterwards  the  truth  of
the  statements  was  verified  by  me,  and  they  w-ere  found  to  be  absolutely
exact  ;  and  it  is,  perhaps,  important  to  say  in  this  connexion  that  not  only
were  they  {i.e.,  the  facts)  literally  true,  but  that  nothing  was  said  that  was
not  true  ;  nor  was  there  any  surplusage  of  detail — only  plain,  definite,
positive  facts.'  " — [Note  B.]

' '  On  the  principle  of  driving  the  nail  home,  I  will  now  give  the  case  of
Henry  Le  Mesurier.  I  had  been  a  pupil  of  his  at  Bedford  School,  and  on
June  17th,  1874,  there  came  a  new  rap  on  the  table.  On  enquiry  the  name
of  '  Le  Mesurier'  was  given.  At  that  time  I  was  entranced,  and,  therefore,
incapable  of  asking  questions.  Mrs.  Speer  enquired  what  the  spirit
wanted.  '  I  have  proved,'  he  said,  'that  you  w^ere  right,  and  that  I  was
wrong.' — [Note  C]  On  what  ground  is  it  conceivable  that  a  spirit  should
come  back  and  tell  that  lie  ?

"  And  here  I  may  refer  to  an  account  that  has  already  appeared  in  print
in  Spirit  Identity,  pp.  61-63,  as  follows  : —

"On  February  10th,  1874,  we  were  attracted  by  a  new  and  peculiar
triple  tap  on  the  table,  and  received  a  long  and  most  circumstantial  account
of  the  death,  age  (even  to  the  month),  and  full  names  (in  two  cases  four,
and  in  the  other  three,  in  number)  of  three  little  ones,  children  of
one  father,  who  had  been  torn  from  him  at  one  feU  swoop  by  the  Angel
of  Death.  None  of  us  had  ever  heard  the  names,  which  were  peculiar.
They  had  passed  away  in  a  far  distant  country,  India  ;  and  when  the  message
was  given  us  there  was  no  apparent  point  of  connexion  with  us.  [See  above,
p.  39.]  The  statements,  how-ever,  were  afterwards  verified  in  a  singular
manner.  On  March  28th,  1874, 1  met,  for  the  first  time,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  A.
Watts,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Cowper  Temple,  M.P.  (afterwards  Lord  Mount-
Temple).  Our  conversation  was  concerned,  chiefly,  with  evidence  of  the
kind  that  I  am  now  summarising.  I  recounted  various  cases,  and  among
others,  the  case  of  these  three  children.  Mrs.  Watts  was  much  struck  with
the  recital,  which  corresponded  in  outline  to  a  very  distressing  history  which
she  had  just  heard.  On  the  Monday  previous  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Watts  had
dined  with  an  old  friend,  Mrs.  Leaf,  and  from  her  had  heard  a  distressing
story  of  bereavement  which  had  befallen  the  relative  of  one  of  Mrs.  Leaf's
acquaintances. A  gentleman  residing  in  India  had,  within  a  brief  s^jace  of


76  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


time,  lost  his  young  wife  and  three  children.  Mrs.  Leaf  entered  fully  into
the  melancholy  details,  but  did  not  mention  either  names  or  the  place  of  the
sad  occurrence.  In  reciting  the  incident  of  three  young  children  com-
municating with  me,  I  gave  the  names  and  the  place,  as  they  had  been
furnished  to  me  in  the  messages.  Mrs.  Watts  undertook  to  ascertain  from
Mrs.  Leaf  the  particulars  of  the  case  she  had  mentioned.  She  did  so  on  the
very  next  day,  and  the  names  were  the  same.  Through  the  kindness  of
Mrs.  Watts  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Leaf,  and  was  much  impressed
with  the  perfect  correspondence  of  every  detail  given  to  me  with  the  facts  as
they  occurred.

"It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that,  on  the  very  day  on  which  the
communication  was  made,  Mrs.  Watts,  who  possesses  a  very  beautiful  gift  of
automatic  drawing,  which  had  been  for  some  time  in  abeyance,  was  impelled
to  draw  three  cherub  heads,  which,  she  was  afterwards  spiritually  informed,
were  drawn  in  typical  allusion  to  this  sad  event.  Other  details,  symbolic  of
the  country  in  which  it  occurred,  and  of  the  attraction  of  the  mother's  spirit
to  her  three  little  ones,  were  added.  The  drawing  forms  a  very  striking
illustration  of  the  various  methods  employed  to  reach  various  types  of  mind.
Mrs.  Watts — at  that  time,  be  it  noted,  unknown  to  me — had  always  been
instructed  in  the  language  of  symbolism,  by  poetic  simile,  and  by  artistic
representation.  I,  on  the  contrary,  had  not  progressed  so  far.  I  was  on  a
material  plane,  seeking  for  truth  after  my  own  fashion,  and  craving  hard  for
logical  demonstration.  So  to  me  came  hard  facts,  clearly  given,  and  nothing
more.  To  her  came  the  symbolic  indication,  the  artistic  delineation,  the
poetry  of  the  incident.  The  source,  however,  was  one.  It  was  the  Spirit
manifesting  Truth  to  us  according  to  our  several  needs.

' '  I  regard  that  case  as  one  of  the  most  complete  and  remarkable  that  have
ever  fallen  within  my  knowledge.  For  not  only  was  the  information  given
to  me  absolutely  true,  complete,  and  definite — it  seems  to  me  that  we  cannot
attach  too  much  importance  to  definite  evidence — but  the  facts  conveyed  to
me  in  my  own  way — that  is  to  say,  in  a  very  positive  manner — were
conveyed  to  my  friend  in  the  way  that  reached  her  best,  ideally,  pictorially,
and  through  the  imagination.  Now,  I  should  like  to  say  that  anyone  who
postulates  a  deceptive  and  fraudulent  spirit  going  about  to  deceive  me — I
pray  you,  for  what  purpose  1 — has  to  account  for  the  fact  that  this  most
deceptive  spook  has  used  two  methods  of  deceiving  two  diff'erent  people.
To  me  he  must  have  told  circumstantial  lies  ;  for  my  friend  he  must  have
made  some  extremely  curious  drawings.  I  present  this  case  for  observation
because  I  think  that  if  I  were  a  being  who  wanted  to  deceive  you,  I  should
use  some  more  simple  and  less  complex  methods.  In  other  words,  I  should
appeal  more  directly  to  your  intelligence."— [Note  D.]

' '  Passing  by  much  that  I  shall  eventually  lay  before  the  public,  I  will
now  quote  the  case  given  in  Spirit  Identity,  p.  193  (Appendix  III.),  of  a
'  Man  Crushed  by  a  Steam-roller,'  as  contributed  by  an  eye-witness  of  the
seance  [F.  VV.  Percival]  to  the  Spiritualid  of  March  27th,  1874  [And
see  p.  42  above]  : —

"  'On  the  evening  of  Saturday,  February  21st,  a  few  friends  met  together
at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory,  21,  Green-street,  Grosvenor-
square,  W. The  fjarty  numbered  six  in  all,  and  included  the  Baron  Du


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


77


Potet,  and  the  gentleman  to  whose  mediumship  we  are  indebted  for  the
"  Spirit  Teachings  "  which  have  appeared  from  time  to  time  in  your  columns.
Tliere  was  no  intention  of  having  a  seance,  and  ordinary  topics  were  the
subject  of  conversation,  when  suddenly,  in  the  middle  of  dinner,  this
gentleman  surprised  us  by  saying  that  he  felt  a  spirit  standing  near  him
between  himself  and  the  Baron  (who  sat  on  his  right) ;  whether  good  or  bad
he  could  not  tell,  but  the  influence  was  by  no  means  pleasant.  The  spirit
was  also  perceived  by  the  Baron,  to  wliom  it  conveyed  the  impression  that  it
was  in  a  state  of  great  distress,  and  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  a  person  then
alive.  Nothing  more  was  said  at  the  time,  but  the  medium  continued  to
feel  a  disagreeable  influence  near  him,  and  spoke  of  it  to  me  when  dinner
was  over.  As  soon  as  we  reached  the  drawing-room  he  was  impelled  to  sit
down  and  write  ;  and  when  a  pencil  and  paper  had  been  brought,  his  hand
was  moved  backwards  and  forwards  with  great  rapidity,  and  an  object  was
roughly  drawn  on  the  paper  which  resembled  a  horse  fastened  to  a  kind  of
cart  or  truck.  Several  attempts  were  made  to  depict  it  more  clearly,  and
then  the  following  sentences  were  written  : — "  I  killed  myself — I  killed  my-
self to-day — Baker-street— medium  passed."  Here  the  writing  became
unintelligible,  as  the  medium  grew  more  and  more  agitated,  until  at  length
he  rose  from  his  seat  in  a  state  of  trance,  and  exclaimed  in  broken
sentences  :  "Yes,  yes.  Killed  myself  to-day,  under  a  steam-roller.  Yes,
yes.  Killed  myself — blood,  blood,  blood."  The  control  then  ceased,  but
the  medium  felt  the  same  unpleasant  influence  for  some  hours  afterwards,
and  could  not  entirely  shake  it  off'  for  some  days.  In  reference  to  the  com-
munication, I  may  state  that,  although  the  medium  had  passed  through
Baker-street  in  the  afternoon,  neither  he  nor  anyone  present  was  aware  that
a  man  had  committed  suicide  there  in  the  morning  by  throwing  himself
under  a  steam-roller.  A  brief  notice  of  the  occurrence  appeared  in  the  Pall
Mall  Gazette  in  the  evening  but  none  of  the  party  had  seen  that  paper.  It
is  worth  remarking  that  on  the  front  of  the  steam  roller  which  was  used  in
Baker-street  a  horse  is  represented  in  brass,  and  this,  perhaps,  may  serve  to
account  for  its  appearance  in  the  medium's  drawing,  where  we  should
certainly  not  expect  to  find  it.

' '  '  Allow  me,  in  conclusion,  to  point  out  a  few  of  the  inferences  that  may
fairly  be  drawn  from  the  facts  I  have  stated  by  those  willing  to  accept  them
as  true.  In  the  first  place,  they  would  seem  to  prove  that  no  amount  of
injury  done  to  the  body  at  the  time  of  death  incapacitates  the  spirit  for
immediate  action.  In  this  case  the  unfortunate  man  was  literally  crushed  to
pieces,  and  yet  a  few  hours  afterwards  his  spirit  could  communicate  in
writing  through  the  medium,  and  could  also  make  use  of  his  organs  of
speech.  In  the  next  place,  it  would  appear  that  a  spirit  just  released  from
the  body  carries  with  it  something  corporeal ;  otherwise,  it  is  difficult  to
account  for  the  Baron's  impression  that  the  spirit  he  perceived  was  that  of  a
person  who  was  then  living.  Again,  we  may  infer  that  siiiirits  immediately
after  death  are  able  to  recognise  a  medium  through  whom  they  can
communicate.  In  the  case  before  us  it  would  ajjpear  that  the  spirit  followed
the  medium  from  Baker-street,  and  waited  for  an  opportunity  of  making  his
presence  known.  And,  lastly,  I  would  add  the  remark  that  the  man  who
accepts  the  facts  I  have  stated,  and  seeks  for  a  solution  of  the  difficulties


78


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


that  surround  them,  will  look  in  vain  for  much  assistance  from  psychic  force
or  unconscious  cerebration.'  " — [Note  E.]

"  Again,  there  is  the  case  of  Charlotte  Buckworth,  printed  in  Spirit
Identity,  p.  112,  Appendix  III. (See  also  Spirit  Teachings,  p.  287)  : —

"  '  A  spirit  communicated  by  means  of  raps,  giving  particulars  as  to  her
life,  which  were  precise,  and  entirely  unknown  to  any  member  of  the  circle.
On  the  day  following  I  inquired  respecting  her,  and  an  account  was  given  to
the  effect  that  her  name,  Charlotte  Buckworth,  was  rightly  given  ;  that  she
had  no  special  connexion  with  me  or  with  my  friends,  but  spoke  as  one  who
was  present.  The  fact  that  I  had  been  on  the  previous  day  in  company  with
four  persons,  all  more  or  less  mediumistic,  had  prevented  regular  communica-
tions, and  had  introduced  a  disturbing  element.

"  '  It  was  said  that  Charlotte  Buckworth,  the  spirit  in  question,  had  been
suddenly  deprived  of  bodily  existence  in  1773,  at  a  party  of  pleasure,  at  a
friend's  house  in  Jermyn-street.  Further  enquiry  elicited  the  information
that  she  had  suffered  from  a  weak  heart,  and  had  dropped  down  dead  while
dancing.  My  friend,  who  was  writing,  could  not  say  whose  house,  but
subsequently  returned  to  give  me  the  information — Dr.  Baker's,  on
December  5th.  We  were  not  able  to  verify  this  information,  and  had  given
no  further  thought  to  the  matter.  Some  considerable  time  after,  however,
Dr.  Speer  had  a  friend  at  his  house,  who  was  very  fond  of  rummaging
among  old  books.  We  three  were  talking  one  evening  in  a  room  in  which
there  were  a  number  of  books  rarely  used,  arranged  in  shelves  from  floor  to
ceiling.

' ' '  Mr.  A.  (as  I  will  call  him)  mounted  a  chair  to  get  at  the  topmost  shelf,
which  was  filled  with  volumes  of  the  Anwud  Register.  He  took  one  down
amid  a  cloud  of  dust,  and  commented  on  the  publication  as  a  valuable
record  of  events.  Almost  anything,  he  said,  could  be  found  in  it.  As  he
said  this  the  idea  flashed  into  my  mind  at  once  most  vividly  that  there  was
the  place  to  look  for  a  record  of  Charlotte  Buckworth's  death.  The  event
would  probably  create  interest,  and  so  would  be  found  in  the  obituary  which
each  volume  contains.  The  impression  was  so  strong — it  seemed  as  though
a  voice  spoke  to  my  inner  sense — that  I  hunted  out  the  volume  for  1773,  and
there  I  found,  among  the  notable  deaths,  a  record  of  this  occurrence,  which
had  made  a  sensation  as  occurring  at  an  entertainment  at  a  fashionable
house,  and  with  awful  suddenness.  The  facts  were  exactly  given.  The
book  was  thickly  covered  with  dust,  and  had  evidently  not  been  distui'bed
since  it  had  been  consigned  to  the  shelf.  I  remembered  that  the  books  had
been  arranged  five  years  before  ;  there  they  had  lain  ever  since,  and  but  for
Mr.  A.'s  antiquarian  tastes  no  one  would  have  meddled  with  them.  The
verification  was,  I  believe,  as  distinctly  spiritual  in  its  suggestion  as  was  the
communication. '

"Perhaps  one  of  the  most  striking  cases  I  can  present  is  the  first
experience  that  occurred  to  me.  (See  S2}irit  Identity,  pp.  124 — 126,
Appendix  V.)  : —

"  I  inquired  where  I  could  see  for  myself  these  new  phenomena,
and  was  informed  that  Miss  Lottie  Fowler  [a  well-known  professional
medium.]  was  about  to  hold  a  seance  that  very  evening  (April  2nd,  1872),  at
15,  Southampton-row. I  went,  and  was  greatly  astonished  at  what  I  saw


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  79


and  heard.  I  need  not  take  up  time  by  detailing  the  occurrences  of  the
first  part  of  the  sitting  ;  most  Spiritualists  are  familiar  with  the  usual
routine  of  Miss  Fowler's  stances.  Much  hazy  nonsense  was  talked,  and
many  vague  statements  made,  which  seemed  to  me  to  be  of  no  use  what-
ever as  tests  of  spirit  identity.  I  was  rapidly  becoming  nauseated.  I
craved  for  something  more  clear,  something  on  which  I  could  rest  as  a
staple  piece  of  evidence.  I  enquired,  therefore,  whether  I  might  endeavour
to  obtain  some  such  proof  for  myself.  Leave  was  at  once  given  by  the
director  of  the  circle,  and  I  addressed  the  spirit  who  controlled  the  medium.

"' You  are  tiring  your  medium,  and  making  fun  of  us.  Go  and  send
someone  who  is  serious."

' '  The  medium  shivered  and  turned  away,  and  the  voice  came  as  thougli
troubled.

"  'You've  nothing  to  do  with  me. I  won't  go. Me  no  go.'

"  '  Yes,  you  will. You'll  go  and  send  some  one  else.'

"  After  more  colloquy  the  medium  shivered  again,  seemed  to  be  in  pain,
and  stood  rooted  to  the  spot,  crouching  as  if  in  dread.

"  After  a  time  the  voice  came  again,  but  utterly  changed  ;  the  voice,  this
time,  of  a  man,  very  calm  and  unimpassioned,  instead  of  the  child-voice
speaking  baby  jargon.

' '  '  You  want  me  ? '

"  '  Yes. What  is  your  name  ? '

"  '  I'd  rather  not  tell  you. You  can  ask  me  any  questions.'
"  '  No. Tell  me  what  you  see,  or  describe  any  one  whom  you  see  near
-me. I  will  answer  yes  or  no  ;  no  more. '

"  '  I  see  a  man,  very  old,  tall,  with  a  long  white  beard,  and  long  hair.'
"'Yes.'

"  'The  beard  is  very  white  indeed.'
'"No.  Goon.'

"' He  has  a  very  high,  broad  forehead,  and  his  eyes  are  drawn  down.
Why,  he's  blind  !  '
"  '  Yes.'

"'And  his  face  is  black  and  blue.  And  '  (here  the  medium  shuddered
violently) — '  oh  !  what's  that  in  his  mouth  ?  It's  like  slime— and  mud — and
oh  !  blood.'

"  '  Yes?'

"  '  And — it's  dark.  I  can't  see.'
"  '  Go  on. How  is  he  dressed  ? '

"  '  He  has  a  long  blue  coat.  No,  not  exactly  a  coat — something  long.  I
can't  see  his  feet.'

' '  '  Where  does  he  stand  1 '

"  '  Right  opposite  ;  close  by  you.'

"  '  Can  you  see  his  name  1 '

"'No. He  seems  in  trouble. I  think  it's  money. He  looks  so  horrible.
Let  me  go. Why  do  you  keep  me  here.'
"  '  Go,  then. Do  you  know  me  1 '
' '  '  No. ' (This  very  emphatically. )

' '  I  shall  not  attempt  to  describe  the  scene  during  the  time  that  this
conversation  was  held. I  have  quoted  from  a  full  and  careful  record  written


80  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


at  the  time,  and  the  whole  scene  is  photographed  indelibly  on  my  mind.
Every  one  seemed  petrified  and  astonished.  They  would  have  been  still
more  so  had  they  known  with  what  photographic  accuracy  a  scene  in  my
own  private  experience  was  being  re-enacted  before  my  eyes.  It  was,  I  am
sure,  as  unknown  as  I  was  myself.  It  was  a  scene  that  passed  in  a  very
distant  part  of  Great  Britain,  and  it  was  reproduced  with  a  realistic  power
that  bore  down  before  it,  as  with  torrent  force,  all  doubt  and  hesitation.  I
felt  that  the  man  was  there  before  me  ;  himself  reproducing  the  story  of  his
death  for  my  conviction.

' '  Here  we  have  the  case  of  a  man  who  went  to  a  stance  with  absolutely
no  expectations  in  his  mind  ;  he  did  not  know  what  to  expect ;  he  did  not
expect  anything  ;  and  he  got  what  in  any  police-court  would  be  considered
perfect  evidence  of  life  beyond  the  grave.

"  There  is  another  case,  a  veiy  remarkable  one,  which  came  through  my
own  automatic  writing  ;  and  in  case  people  should  assert  that  these  things
are  borne  in  upon  my  mind  by  the  persons  with  whom  I  may  be  associated,
I  may  remark  that  this  experience  came  when  I  was  alone.  It  is  prefaced
by  a  facsimile  signature.  The  lady,  Mrs.  Dalton,  stated  that  she  died  at
Peachley,  having  lived  at  Cheltenham  most  of  her  life.  In  answer  to  the
question  where  Peachley  was,  she  said  that  it  was  near  to  Bournemouth^
She  oddly  described  herself  as  the  wife  of  a  brother  of  Dr.  Speer's,  and
when  I  thought  that  this  would  not  do  she  exjjlained  that  it  was  a  '  brother
in  the  art  of  healing.'  She  gave  her  husband's  name  as  W.  Dalton — since
verified — and  said  that  she  died  on  February  2nd,  1872.  The  '  2  "  was  so
badly  made  that  I  enquired,  ''72  or '73?'  The  reply  was  '72,'  which  was
accurate.  We  were  also  told  that  this  was  one  of  the  cases  in  which  the
controlling  spirit  brought  persons  for  the  sake  of  giving  proof  of  identity.

"Again,  Mary  Hall  came  on  March  29th,  1874,  and  wrote  in  a  curious^
shaky  hand  automatically  :  '  I  have  been  with  you  and  have  watched  you. —
Maey  Hall.'  I  could  make  nothing  of  the  signature,  and,  therefore,  could
not  possibly  identify  the  individual  in  question.  '  Mary '  being  so  badly
written,  I  inquired  if  it  were  not  '  Alice.'  Then  the  signature  came  in
varied  form,  and  I  made  out  'Mary  Hall.'  I  said:  '  I  don't  know  you  ;
what  bi'ings  you  ? '  The  answer,  more  carefully  written,  began  :  '  I  am
permitted  to  manifest,'  and  then  the  power  being  so  weak,  no  more  was-
written  for  a  moment.  I  said,  being  occujjied  with  a  desire  for  identity  :
'  Where  did  you  live  and  die  V  'I  lived  near  you,  at  Oxford  Villa,
Alexandra- road.  I  passed  December  13th,  1872.'  I  said  :  '  I  am  afraid  I
can't  read  it '  (the  writing  being  such  that  it  was  now  extremely  hard  to
decipher  it).  On  this  the  writing  changed,  and  there  came  a  friend  who
visually  controls  when  any  one  finds  it  diflicult  to  do  so.  He  said  :  '  She
says  truly  ;  she  passed  near  here,  and  is  attracted  to  you  from  the  neigh-
bourhood to  the  circle.  She  passed  at  the  age  of  91,  and  has  been  resting
from  her  earthly  toils.'  Somewhat  surprised,  I  enquired:  'Has  she  been
sleeping  all  this  time  ? '  for  I  did  not  remember  that  in  the  spirit-world  there
is  no  time.  '  Yes,'  the  answer  came,  '  she  was  full  of  years  when  she  passed
away.  She  lived  most  of  her  earth-life  at  Yarnton,  near  Oxford.  She
has  rested  one  year  and  three  months  of  your  time  ;  she  rested  from
sufi'ering.'


The  Eoiperiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  81

' '  This  being  was  absolutely  and  wholly  unknown  to  me.  I  enquired,
and  found  that  Mrs.  Hall  had  lived  and  died,  at  the  age  stated,  at  the
address  given.

• '  I  find  it  hard  to  put  together  all  the  evidence  I  have  which  makes  me
believe  in  the  return  of  departed  human  beings  to  this  life.  If  they
continue  to  live,  I  should  exiject  them  to  continue  to  return — for  that  which
makes  the  reality  of  a  spirit  would  almost  certainly  bring  him  back  to  the
sphere  of  his  interests.  I  do  not  understand  a  spirit  going  to  the  planet
Mars,  where  he  has  no  ties,  but  I  do  understand  his  coming  back  here.

"  Out  of  a  profusion  of  cases  here  is  one  of  a  different  kind.  In  the  year
1880,  one  Thursday  afternoon  (date  unknown).  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I
had  dined  together,  and  the  party  included  a  lady  who  had  been  visiting  a
connexion  of  Dr.  Speer's  family  in  that  spring.  There  she  had  seen,  and
been  much  attracted  to,  a  lovely  little  girl  about  seven  months  old.  The  child
used  to  be  brought  in  after  dinner,  and  the  lady  in  question  grew  very  fond
of  her.  Between  the  time  of  leaving  her  friends  and  coming  to  London,  the
child  passed  away.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  none  of  these  points  had
had  ever  been  mentioned  to,  or  were  known  by,  myself.  On  the  occasion
to  which  I  refer,  this  lady  had  risen  from  her  seat  and  was  about  to  place
herself  in  another  chair,  when  I  suddenly  called  out,  '  Don't  sit  down  on  it,
don't  sit  down  on  it.  Little  Baby  Tiramins.'  None  of  us  knew  its  first  name,and
they  asked  me.  I  said,  '  Marian  ;  the  grandmother  has  brought  it.'  I  then
suddenly  came  out  of  the  trance  in  which  I  had  been,  and  in  my  own  natural
voice — so  different  to  the  voice  in  which  I  had  been  speaking — said,  '  Mrs.
Speer,  will  you  have  some  coffee  ? '  quite  ignorant  of  all  that  had  been
passed.  We  wrote,  and  then  found  out  a  fact  unknown  to  any  of  us — that
the  child's  name  was  Marian.  I  do  not  put  this  forth  as  a  complete  piece  of
evidence,  for  the  lady  may  have  heard  and  forgotten  the  name. — [Note  G.]

"Another  case.  There  had  come  at  one  of  our  stances  some  influence — I
so  call  it  for  want  of  a  better  name— which  had  made  us  all  horribly  cold.
On  December  21st,  1874,  I  inquired  about  the  seance  of  the  previous
evening,  and  was  told  that  the  coldness  was  caused  by  the  presence  of
certain  spirits  who  had  manifested  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Chief
('Imperator  ').  I  made  enquiry  with  regard  to  certain  statements  made  by
them,  saying,  '  Can  you  put  the  facts  down,  that  I  may  compare  them  with
what  they  said  ? '  (It  is  important  to  say  that  I  had  no  conscious  memory
of  anything  that  had  been  said  at  that  seance.)  After  my  question  there
was  a  very  long  pause,  then  : —

' '  '  The  mother  was  Euphemia  Matilda  Death,  and  she  passed  from  your
world  at  Aldershot  on  November  20th  at  the  age  of  22.  The  little  one  was
Edith  Ellen  Death  ;  she  was  only  fifteen  months  when  she  passed  away.
Her  father's  name  was  William  Death,  Veterinary  Surgeon  of  the  Military
Train. These  are  the  chief  facts,  we  know  no  more.'

"These  facts,  utterly  unknown  to  all  the  circle,  were  subsequently
verified.

"As  evidence  from  another  point  of  view,  I  may  mention  that  I  have  had
repeated  cases  of  signatui^es  which  are  veritable  fac-similes  of  those  used  by
the  persons  in  life  ;  such,  for  example,  are  the  signatures  of  Beethoven,
Mozart,  and  of  Swedenborg,  in  connexion  with  Judge  Edmonds. It  is

I


82  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


remarkable  tliat  his  signature,  or  rather  initials,  in  my  book  are  those  which
he  used,  and  that  Svvedenborg's  signature,  a  very  peculiar  one,  is  a
fae-simile  of  his  known  handwriting  ;  quite  unknown,  however,  to  me." —
[Note  H.]

' '  The  case  \vhich  has  been  considered,  on  the  authority  of  persons  who
think  they  are  best  able  to  judge,  as  the  best  evidence  ever  produced  for
spirit-identity  is  the  case  of  Abraham  Florentine  recorded  in  Spirit  Identity,
pp.  105-111,  Appendix  III.  : —

"  CASE  OF  ABRAHAM  FLORENTINE.
To  THE  Editor  of  the  Spiritucdist.

Sir, — In  the  Spiritualist  of  December  11th,  1874,  you  printed  a  letter
from  me,  a  letter  the  main  portion  of  which,  in  view  of  the  information
elicited  by  it,  I  will  ask  you  to  reproduce.

In  the  month  of  August  last  I  was  staying  with  Dr.  Speer  at  Shanklin,
Isle  of  Wight.  We  had  a  number  of  sittings,  and  at  one  of  them  a  spirit
communicated,  who  gave  his  name  as  Abraham  Florentine.  He  said  that  he
had  been  concerned  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  that  he  had  lately  entered
spirit-life  at  Brooklyn,  U.S.A.,  on  Augu.st  5th,  at  the  age  of  83
years,  1  month,  and  seventeen  days.  We  had  some  difficulty  at  first  in
making  out  whether  the  months  and  days  referred  to  the  age  or  to  the
length  of  his  illness  ;  but  he  returned  on  the  following  evening,  and  cleared
up  the  difficulty.  The  manner  in  which  the  communication  was  made  was
most  singular.  We  were  seated,  three  in  number,  round  a  heavy  loo  table,
which  two  persons  could  move  with  difficulty.  Instead  of  the  nips  to  which
we  are  accustomed,  the  table  commenced  to  tilt.  So  eager  was  the  com-
municating spirit  that  the  table  rose  some  seconds  before  the  required  letter
was  arrived  at.  In  order  to  mark  T  it  would  rise,  quivering  with  excite-
ment, in  a  manner  perfectly  indescribable,  about  K,  and  then  descend  at
T  with  a  thump  that  shook  the  floor.  This  was  repeated  until  the  whole
message  was  complete  ;  but  so  eager  was  the  spirit  and  so  impetuous  in  his
replies,  that  he  bewildered  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  completely  (I  was  in  deep
trance)  and  caused  the  process  to  be  prolonged  over  the  whole  sitting.  If  I
may  venture  a  guess,  I  should  say  that  Abraham  Florentine  was  a  good
soldier,  a  fighting  man  not  nice  to  meet,  and  that  he  retains  enough  of  his
old  impetuosity  to  rejoice  at  his  liberation  from  the  body,  which  (if  I  may
guess  again)  had  become  a  burden  to  him  through  a  painful  illness.

Will  the  American  papers  copy,  and  enable  me  to  verify  my  facts  and

M.A.  (OxoN).

' '  Mr.  Epes  Sargent,  to  whom  I  privately  communicated  the  facts  of  the
case,  was  kind  enough  to  insert  for  me  a  paragraph  in  the  Banner  of  Light
of  December  12th,  1874,  embodying  the  same  enquiry.  The  result  was  to
elicit  what  the  Banner  calls  '  one  of  the  most  singular  and  well-attested
evidences  of  the  return  of  spirit  which  it  has  been  our  good  fortune  to
chronicle  during  a  long  experience. '  The  matter  may  best  be  stated  in  the
words  used  by  the  writer  in  the  Banner  of  Light  of  February  13th,  1875.
It  will  be  observed  that  a  misconception  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  words,
'a  month  and  seventeen  days,'  occurs  at  first,  but  this  is  subsequently


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


83


cleared  up  ;  though,  according  to  the  widow's  account,  the  age  should  have
been  eighty-three  years,  one  month,  twenty-seven  days.  This,  however,
does  not  affect  the  case  of  identity.  The  original  enquiry  in  the  Banner
was  this,  and  the  result  is  quoted  direct  from  the  newspaper  : —

"  '  At  a  seance  in  England  lately,  a  spirit  communication  was  received  by
means  of  the  tilting  of  a  heavy  table.  The  whole  table  seemed  alive,  and
as  though  it  were  being  disintegrated  in  the  very  fibres  of  the  wood.  The
gist  of  the  communication  was  that  the  spirit  was  one  Abraham  Florentine,
who  died  at  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  August  oth,  1874.  He  said  he  was  in  the  war
of  1812,  and  then,  after  an  interval,  added,  "a  month  and  17  days."  Can
any  of  our  Brooklyn  friends  inform  us  whether  they  ever  heard  of  Abraham
Florentine  ? '

' '  '  No  sooner  had  that  issue  of  our  paper  found  its  way  to  the  public  than
we  received  by  due  course  of  mail  the  following  reply,  which  speaks  for
itself.  :—

"  To  THE  Editor  of  the  '  Banner  of  Light.'

"In  the  'Banner'  to-day  received  here  is  a  paragraph  concerning  a
spirit  wlio  manifested  through  the  medium  of  a  dining-table  at  some  place
in  England,  and  gave  the  name  Abraham  Florentine,  a  soldier  in  the  war  of
1812.  You  make  enquiry  whether  anyone  ever  heard  of  Abraham
Florentine.  I  cannot  specifically  answer  that  question  ;  but  having  been
engaged  some  14  years  since  in  auditing  the  claims  of  the  soldiers  of  1812
in  the  State  of  New  York,  I  am  yet  in  possession  of  the  records  of  all  such
who  made  claims  for  service  in  that  war.  In  those  records  appears  the
name  of  Abraham  Florentine,  of  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  and  a  full  record  of  his
service  can  be  obtained  in  the  office  of  the  Adjutant  General  of  the  State  of
New  York,  in  claim  No.  11,518,  war  of  1812.  I  think,  however,  that  he
claimed  for  a  longer  term  of  service  than  that  he  gave  in  England,  his
allowance  being  58  dol.

' '  Wilson  Millar,  Claim  Agent.
"Washington  D.C.,  December  13th,  1874.

"  '  Pursuant  to  the  advice  of  our  legal  correspondent,  we  addressed  a
letter  to  the  Adjutant-General,  S.N.Y. ,  asking  for  the  facts,  without,
however,  giving  any  reason  for  our  request,  and  received  the  following
courteous  reply  : —

"General  Head-quarters,  State  of  New  Yoi'k,

"  Adjutant-General's  Office,  Albany,  January  25th,  1875.
"Sirs, — In  reply  to  your  communication,  dated  January  22nd,  I  have
to  furnish  you  the  following  information  from  the  records  of  this  office  : —
Abraham  Florentine,  private  in  Captain  Nicole's  Company  1st  Regiment
New  York  Militia,  Colonel  Dodge,  volunteered  at  New  York  on  or  about
September  2nd,  1814  ;  served  three  months,  and  was  honourably  discharged.
He  received  Land  Warrant,  No.  63,395,  for  40  acres.  The  above  is  taken
from  the  soldier's  sworn  statement,  and  not  from  official  records. — Very
respectfully,

"Franklin  Townsend,
' '  Colby  and  Rich,  ' '  Adjutant-General.

"No.  9,  Montgomery-place,  Boston.


84


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


"  'Those  who  are  acquainted,  through  experience  as  investigators,  with
the  workings  of  the  Spiritualistic  circle  will  bear  in  mind  that  the  correct
giving  of  dates  is  ever  a  matter  of  difficulty  on  the  part  of  the  returning
intelligence,  and,  therefore,  the  slight  discrepancy  existing  between  the
length  of  service  given  by  the  spirit  Florentine  and  that  embodied  in
the  record  is  easily  explainable.  [This  is  a  misconception.  The  one  month,,
seventeen  days,  refers  to  age,  not  to  length  of  service. — W.S.M,]  But
the  main  facts  are  established.  Here  is  a  spirit  who  manifests  under  the
most  peculiar  circumstances,  and  in  the  most  forcible  manner,  to  a  circle  in
a  foreign  land,  whose  members  are  all  strangers  to  the  fact  that  such  a  being
as  himself  ever  trod  the  planet;  a  member  of  the  circle  asks  through  an
English  paper  that  proof  (if  any  exists  in  America)  may  be  given  him  as  to
the  verity  of  said  spirit's  assertions,  and  the  same  enquiry  reaches  us  by  a
private  letter;  we  then  call  upon  the  public  for  information  concerning  one
of  whom  we  have  never  before  heard.  AVe  receive  in  reply — from  a  legal
gentleman  in  Washington,  whose  acquaintance  we  have  never  had  the
pleasure  of  making — the  information  which  leads  us  to  address  the  Adjutant
General  of  the  State  of  New  York  (who  is  also  a  total  stranger  to  us),  and
are  assured  from  data  existing  at  his  office  that  such  a  soldier  did  serve
in  the  war  of  1812  as  claimed.  The  theory  of  collusion  is  untenable  here,
as  the  several  parties  who  have  given  in  the  testimony  are  strangers  to
each  other.  The  chain  of  evidence  is  comijlete.  Let  those  who  think  they
can  explain  this  occurrence  on  any  other  hypothesis  than  that  maintained
by  the  Spiritual  philosophy  make  tlie  attempt.  When  that  statement
appeared,  my  friend.  Dr.  Crowell,  was  kind  enough  to  take  steps  to  obtain
additional  verification  from  Floi-entine's  widow.  I  a^jpend  his  letter
published  in  the  "  Banner"  of  February  20th,  1875:—

' '  To  THK  Editor  of  the  '  Banner  of  Light.  '

"Sir, — Upon  reading  in  tlie  'Banner'  of  the  13th  inst.  the  article  headed
'Abraham  Florentine:  Verification  of  his  Message,'  I  examined  my  'Brook-
lyn Directory,'  and  there  found  the  name  of  Abraham  Florentine,  with  the
address  119,  Kosciusko-street.  Being  at  the  moment  disengaged,  and  in-
terested in  pursuing  the  subject,  I  at  once  sought  the  street  and  number
indicated,  and  my  application  at  the  door  was  met  by  an  elderly  lady,  of
whom  I  inquired  whether  Mr.  Abraham  Florentine  resided  there.  The
reply  was  :  '  He  did  reside  here,  but  is  dead  now.'  "

Q.  May  I  inquire  whether  you  are  Mrs.  Florentine,  his  widow  1

A.  I  am.

"Upon  my  here  remarking  that  I  would  be  pleased  to  obtain  some  in-
formation about  her  late  husband,  she  invited  me  to  a  seat  in  the  parlour,
and  our  conversation  was  then  resumed.

Q.  May  I  ask  when  he  died  ?

A.  Last  August.

Q.  At  what  time  in  the  month  ?

A.  On  the  5th.

Q.  What  was  his  age  at  time  of  decease  ?
A.  Eighty-three.

Q.  Had  he  passed  his  eighty-third  year  ?

A.  Yes;  his  eighty-third  birthday  was  on  the  previous  8th  of  June.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


85


Q.  Was  he  engaged  in  any  war  ?

A.  Yes;  in  the  war  of  1812.

Q.  Was  he  naturally  active  and  self-reliant,  or  the  reverse  1

A.  He  had  a  will  of  his  own,  and  was  rather  impetuous.

Q.  Was  his  last  illness  of  long  or  short  duration,  and  did  he  suffer  much  1

A.  He  was  confined  to  his  bed  for  a  year  or  more,  and  suffered  a  good  deal.

' '  I  have  here  given  the  qtiestions  and  answers  in  their  relative  order  and
in  their  exact  words  from  notes  taken  at  the  time.  During  a  slight  jjause
following  the  last  answer,  Mrs.  Florentine,  who  appeared  to  be  a  very
respectable  lady  of  about  sixty-five  years  of  age  and  of  American  birth,  in-
quired ray  object  in  asking  these  questions,  when  I  read  to  her  the  article  in
the  '  Banner, '  which  evidently  puzzled,  though  it  interested  her,  and  I  then
entered  into  a  full  explanation  of  its  purport,  greatly  to  her  surprise.  She
then  fully  endorsed  every  line  of  it,  and  I  left,  thanking  her  and  promising,
at  her  request,  to  send  her  a  copy  of  the  last  number  of  your  journal.

"It  will  be  observed  that  while  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Florentine  states
his  age  to  have  been  eighty-three  years,  one  month,  seventeen  days,  accord-
ing to  his  widow's  account  it  should  be  twenty-seven  days ;  but  this  dis-
crepancy is  hardly  worthj'  of  notice,  as  either  he  or  she  may  here  be  equally
mistaken.  As  the  case  stood  before  this  additional  confirmation  of  its  truth
was  obtained,  it  certainly  Avas  a  remarkable  verification  of  a  spirit  message;
but  as  now  presented  it  appears  to  me  the  evidence  is  conclusive.

"  I  would  add  that  I  have  some  acquaintance  with  '  M.A.  (Oxon  ), '  the
gentleman  in  London  who  applied  in  the  Spiritualist  for  information  of
Abraham  Florentine  ;  and  I  can  assure  your  readers  that  he  occupies  a  very
high  literary  position,  and  his  character  is  a  guarantee  against  collusion  and
deception,  and  I  take  pleasure  in  contributing  to  establish  the  identity  of
the  communicating  spirit.

"  Yours  truly,

"Eugene  Crowell,  M.D.

"Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  February  loth,  1875."

' '  To  me,  personally,  it  is  extremely  interesting  to  find  my  queries
verified  by  facts.  I  never  doubted  that  the  case  would  turn  out,  as  so  many
others  have  done,  to  be  true;  but  the  interesting  point  of  observation  to  me
was  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  deductions  I  drew  from  the  singular  way  in
which  the  communication  was  made.  The  vehemence  of  the  tilts  and
knocks,  the  (to  us)  entirely  novel  mode  of  communicating,  and  the  evident
earnestness  of  the  spirit,  and  its  eagerness  in  trying  to  'have  its  say,'
were  very  striking.  Doubtless,  what  will  strike  your  readers  more  is  the
singularly  conclusive  nature  of  the  evidence  respecting  the  actual  return  of
the  departed.  Most  undoubtedly  none  of  us  had  ever  heard  of  xlbraham
Florentine,  nor  had  any  of  us  friends  in  America  who  could  have  given  us
news  of  what  went  on  there,  nor,  if  we  had,  could  they  have  mentioned  to
us  a  fact  in  which  we  should  have  felt  no  interest.  As  a  plain  matter  of
truth,  I  repeat  that  both  name  and  facts  were  entirely  unknown  to  us.  And
this  is  one  among  many  instances  in  my  own  experience  which  I  hope
to  gather  up  and  record  in  its  place.

"M.A.  (Oxon.)

"  March  10th,  1875.


86


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


"  In  conclusion,  I  may  remark  that  this  case  has  received  the  valuable
imprimatur  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research." — [Note  J.]

' '  One  of  the  cases  which  are  on  quite  a  different  plane  of  evidence  I  may
record  thus  :  on  May  13th,  1876,  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  Mr.  H.  J.  Wood
and  I  went  to  try  for  a  spirit  pliotograph  at  Hudson's.  We  had  previously
tried  unsuccessfully,  eight  plates  having  been  exposed  in  vain.  On  this
occasion  five  failures  succeeded  one  another ;  then  came  a  plate  which
represented  me  sitting  alone,  and  showing  behind  me  a  tall  figure,  that  of  a
friend  whom  I  recognised  at  once.  He  had  taken  his  life  under  melancholy
circumstances  eight  months  before,  and  I  had  not  heard  of  him  since.  But
immediately  before  going  to  Hudson's  I  had  met  and  talked  with  his  sister^
who  was  passing  through  London.  Our  conversation  had  been  much  con-
cerned with  him.  During  the  experiment  I  had  heard  a  spirit- voice,  telling
me  that  it  was  successful,  and  also  the  name  of  the  spirit  whose  image  was-
to  appear  on  the  plate.  There  is  a  sequel  to  this  story.  The  stigmatic
mark  on  my  brow,  reproducing  the  cut  on  W.  B.  's  head  made  in  his  suicidal
act,  appeared  on  the  anniversary  of  his  death.  (This  I  do  not  detail  here. ) —
[For  this  case  see  Section  E.— F.W.H.M.]

' '  But  perhaps  one  of  the  most  remai'kable  cases  that  I  have  ever  had
is  that  of  the  BishojD  of  Winchester  ( Wilberforce,  previously  Bishop  of
Oxford),  who  first  of  all  came  to  me  when  I  was  alone,  and  afterwards
controlled  me  during  one  of  our  seances,  s^jeaking  in  a  voice  wholly  unlike
mine,  and  very  like  his  own.  He  wrote  through  my  hand,  and  signed  his
communication  with  the  fac-simile  of  his  own  signature.  Perhaps  that
is  an  elaborate  mystification  ?  If  it  be  so,  it  has  at  any  rate  the  merit  '
of  being  elaborate  !  And  I  know  nobody,  or  rather  no  sjiirit  in  or  out  of  a
body,  to  whom  it  would  be  worth  while  to  take  such  an  amount  of  trouble
with  such  very  unpromising  results.

"I  will  now  proceed  to  quote  the  case  in  fuller  detail.  On  July  21st,
1873,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  first  came  to  our  seances,  although  he  had
been  to  me  when  I  was  alone  on  the  previous  evening.  On  December  6th  he
came  again  and  controlled  me,  speaking  in  a  voice  which  was  very  like  his
and  unlike  mine.  In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  who  was  controlling,  the
reply  came,  '  Samuel  Wilberforce  ;  you  have  wished  for  evidence  of  the
departed.  I,  Samuel  Wilberforce,  died.  I  have  come  back.  I  live,  the
same  man,  the  same  spirit.  It  is  strange,  strange,  very  strange  to  come
back  again,  and  I  find  it  difficult  to  sjjeak.  Another  time  it  will  be  easier.'
The  spirit  then  described  his  jjassage  into  life  as  instantaneous,  without
pain  ;  a  sudden  waking  into  life.  He  said  that  with  all  his  shortcomings,
and  they  were  many,  he  could  still  look  back  on  his  earth-life  as  a  life
of  useful  work,  honestly  done.  He  gave  his  blessing  to  the  circle,  and
then  departed.

"  On  July  24th,  1873,  the  Bishop  wrote  through  my  hand  automatically.
He  was  introduced  by  '  Imperator,'  who  said  :  '  A  friend  is  with  you  who  is
able  to  communicate.  You  will  know  who  has  been  near  you.'  My  hand
then  wrote  .  ,  ^  g_  ^^^^^  .

God  guard  you,  dear  friend.
It  is  well
+  S.  O.'


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stcdnton  Moses.  87

' '  I  said  :  '  How  very  extraordinary  ! But  how  am  I  to  know  that  it

is  . It  is  all  so  extraordinary. How  did  the  same  pen  write  this  ?  It

certainly  is  the  very  fac-simile  of  his  writing.  Can  it  be  possible  that  he  is
here  now  ? Can  he  write  again  1 '

"  '  No,  friend,'  replied  '  Imperator,'  '  he  cannot  remain,  nor  can  he  write
again  now.  He  came  at  my  request  to  give  you  a  test.  We  wish  to  do
what  we  can.'

"  'But,'  I  said,  'this  is  no  test.  I  am  just  as  far  from  knowing  his
identity  as  I  am  yours.'

"  '  He  reminds  you  of  the  last  Sunday  you  spoke  with  him  in  Oxford  ;
how  he  preached  at  the  opening  of  the  new  oi-gan  for  the  praise  of  the
Supreme  at  the  Church  of  Carfax  in  the  morning ;  how  he  discoursed  before
the  University  in  the  afternoon ;  and  how  in  the  evening  he  gathered  his
work-people  round  him  at  Cuddesdon,  and  spoke  to  them  of  the  love  of
their  God. '

"  '  Yes,'  I  replied,  '  and  the  last  sermon  was  far  the  best.  Yes,  that  is
true. Can  you  tell  me  the  subjects  of  the  other  sermons  1 '  "

"'Yes,  friend,  the  sermon  before  the  University  of  Oxford  was  from
the  words  of  John  as  touching  the  abiding  Spirit.  ' '  He  dwelleth  with  you
and  shall  be  in  you."  xiv.  17.  In  the  morning  discourse  the  imperfect
views  which  the  orthodox  hold  of  heaven  were  developed  from  the  picture
of  John  the  Seer,  in  the  Apocalypse.  "They  rest  not  day  and  night,
saying.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy." Rev.  iv.  8.'

"  '  That  is  true  ;  but  I  do  not  remember  the  University  sermon.'

"  'Friend,  you  heard  it  not,  being  overcome  with  sleejj.  But  you  have
it  among  the  published  sermons  of  your  friend  ;  p.  157  ;  you  will  iind  it.'

"  'Yes,  that  is  indeed  true,  and  I  remember  it  well.  I  was  very  sleepy,
and  the  Bishop  joked  about  it  afterwards.'

"  Then  comes  a  further  communication.

"  '  A  friend  will  speak  with  you  through  us. '  [Then  in  a  handwriting
resembling  Bishop  Wilberforce's.]  '  S.  O. — Peace  be  with  you.  List  and
heed.'

"  '  Our  friend  has  not  yet  acquired  the  power  of  writing  with  ease.  He
has  not  been  able  to  return  to  earth  since  the  day  on  which  he  wrote  for
you.  He  came  then  at  my  request  and  by  my  aid.  Now  he  tells  you  of  his
experiences  in  our  spirit  land.  Though  the  manner  of  the  separation  between
the  spirit  and  body  was  rude  and  sudden,  still  tlie  sjjirit  woke  to  con-
sciousness far  sooner  than  is  usual.  The  spirit  of  our  friend  had  lived
even  in  earth-life  much  amid  the  realities  of  the  hereafter.  It  had  medi-
tated on  its  own  translation,  and  had  realised  the  change.  So  that  when  it
came  it  was  less  unexpected,  even  though  sudden.  He  was  wise  therein.
But  I  will  allow  him  to  speak  in  his  own  words '  : —

"  '  When  my  spirit  awoke  to  consciousness  of  the  eternal  life  and  its
surroundings,  I  found  myself  in  company  with  bright  and  blessed  angels,
the  ministers  to  me  of  the  abounding  mercy  of  my  God.  The  shock  that
severed  me  from  earth  had  been  so  sudden  that  at  first  I  was  not  conscious
that  I  was  in  the  world  of  spirits.  But  my  dear  father  made  himself  known
and  convinced  me  that  I  was  indeed  alive  and  amongst  the  ranks  of  the
shining  ones. With  him  was  my  dear  mother,  and  they  were  joined  after  by


88  The  Experiences  of  W,  Stainton  Moses.


the  pure  spirit  of  Keble,  and  philaathropic  souls  who  delight  to  gather
around  him  who  on  earth  was  a  chief  amongst  men  in  philanthropy  and
deeds  of  love.  By  them  I  was  conducted  to  the  home  where  my  guardians
rest.  From  them  I  learn  that  which  is  requisite  for  me,  and  am  taught
to  put  aside  much  that  I  once  thought  of  vital  moment.  Ah  !  how  easily
does  the  spirit  put  away  the  opinions  of  earth  to  which  it  so  fondly  clung  !
Tlirough  my  guardians  I  received  the  request  that  I  would  put  myself  into
communication  with  you.  It  was  conveyed  to  me  through  your  presiding
spirit,  who  now  writes  for  me.  [Not  quite  so.  Imperator  very  rarely
wrote,  and  never  at  this  time.]  I  complied  with  joy,  and  am  now
pleased  beyond  measure  that  I  can  touch  the  plane  where  so  many  dear
to  me  still  live  ;  though,  alas  1  alas  I  I  cannot  reach  them.  They  know  not,
and  will  not  learn  as  yet.  Since  I  left  the  earth  I  have  been  occupied
in  learning  my  work,  and  in  preparing  myself  for  the  life  of  progress  to
which  my  being  is  now  devoted.  Already  under  the  guidance  of  my
guardians  I  have  passed  through  the  first  sphere  where  are  gathered  those
who  are  bound  to  earth  by  the  affections,  or  are  unable  to  rise  as  yet.  There
I  saw  some  whom  I  had  known  in  the  body,  and  learned  from  them  and
from  others  much  that  I  needed  to  know.  My  work  will  be  of  a  similar
sort  till  I  reach  my  apjDointed  sjjhere.  I  have  come  to  give  you  this  brief
word  of  comfort  and  consolation. Be  of  good  cheer.'

' '  '  One  has  so  much  to  ask. Are  the  spheres  like  this  world  1 '

"  'In  every  way  similar.  It  is  only  the  change  of  condition  that  makes
the  difference.  Flowers  and  fruits  and  pleasant  landscapes  and  animals  and
birds  are  with  us  as  with  you.  Only  the  material  conditions  are  changed.
We  do  not  crave  for  food  as  you  ;  nor  do  we  kill  to  live.  Matter,  in  your
sense,  is  done  with,  and  we  have  no  need  of  sustenance  save  that  which  we
can  draw  in  with  the  air  we  breathe.  Nor  are  we  impeded  in  our  move-
ments by  matter  as  you  are.  We  move  freely  and  by  volition.  I  learn  by
degrees,  and  as  a  new-born  babe,  to  accustom  myself  to  the  new  conditions
of  my  being.'

' ' '  Are  things  real  to  you  1 '

"  '  Quite,  and  very  beautiful.'

"'You  must  not  detain  our  friend  now,' said  'Imperator,'  'and  you
yourself  have  done  more  than  you  ought  to  attempt.  God,  the  All  Wise,
the  All  Loving,  guard  you. I.  S.  D.'

"  And  now,  passing  by  more  cases  than  I  have  quoted,  and  not  dealing
with  the  evidence  as  an  advocate  might,  I  am  content  to  leave  it  for  the
jury. It  means  something — will  you  tell  me  what  it  does  mean  ?"

Note  A. — Bishop  Wilson.  I  have  verified  these  facts  from  Stowell's
"  Life  of  Bishop  Wilson,"  a  book  which  Mr.  Moses  might  perhaps  have
met  with  in  the  Isle  of  Man.  But  the  facts  are  scattered  about  and
could  hardly  have  been  picked  up  even  by  the  subliminal  memory
without  going  through  the  book.  The  names  of  the  two  children  who
died  in  infancy  (called  here  Thomas  and  Alice)  are  not  to  be  found
in  Stowell's  Life ;  but  I  do  not  know  how  they  could  be  verified.
This  is,  of  course,  a  drawback  to  messages  from  historical  personages.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Hoses.  89


It  is  difficult  to  find  facts  not  easily  accessible  beforehand,  and  yet
verifiable  afterwards  ;  and  the  objections  common  to  all  "  historical
controls"  inevitably  apply  to  this  one  also.

Note  B. —  Rosamir a  Lancaster.  "We  have  verified  this  death  from
an  announcement  in  the  Daily  Telegraph,  of  January  15th,  1874,  of
course  published  long  before  the  name  was  given  by  raps  at  the  seance.
It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  the  name  should  have  been  unwittingly
seen  by  Mr.  Moses,  and  here  reproduced  from  his  subliminal  memory.
If  the  case  stood  alone  it  would  be  reasonable  thus  to  explain  it.
Where,  however,  as  with  Mr.  Moses,  there  is  much  evidence  to  the
identity  of  returning  spirits,  which  no  subliminal  memory  would
explain,  I  think  that  that  hypothesis  need  hardly  be  invoked  even  in
cases  where  it  might  a  la  rigueur  seem  sufficient.  See  enti-y  for
Pebruary  28th,  1874,  in  Section  A.

Note  C. — Henry  Le  Mesurier.  Here,  again,  no  facts  were  given
which  were  previously  unknown  to  Mr.  Moses.  The  case,  however,  is
made  more  interesting  by  a  fact  not  mentioned  in  Mr.  Moses'
summary; — viz.,  that  this  spirit  had  ah'eady  made  his  presence  known
to  Mr.  Moses  through  automatic  writing  before  he  manifested  during
Mr.  Moses'  trance  in  his  seance-room.  I  give  an  extract  from  the  diary
describing  this.  The  sentence,  "I  have  proved  that  you  were  right
and  I  was  wrong,"  refers  to  conversations  with  regard  to  man's  sur-
vival of  death.

A.  "I  see  my  mistake  now,  I  hope  to  rest  soon.  I  knew  nothing  of  this
in  the  days  of  my  earth  life.  But  now  my  senses  are  quickened  I  shall  rest
aad  know  hereafter.  For  the  present  I  am  desirous  only  to  make  myself
known  to  you."

Q.  Who  are  you  1

A.  "Henry  Le  Mesurier. You  know  me."

Q.  Why  do  you  come  to  me  1 What  brings  you  1

A.  "I  am  impelled,  I  know  not  why.  Bless  me  and  pray,  so  I  shall  rest."
Q.  Surely  I  will. But  you  do  not  need  prayer  !

A.  "Yes,  yes,  yes. Pray,  pray,  pray. I  shall  sleep  now  if  you  will."
Q,  If  I  will  ? Surely  you  are  wrong.

A.  ' '  You  will  aid  me,  I  would  say. I  am  not  unhappy,  but  I  want  rest,
and  I  am  compelled  to  come  here  first. Pray,  pray,  pray."
Q.  Do  you  seriously  want  to  go  to  sleep  ?
A.  "  Oh,  yes.  Sleep."

Q.  But  I  don't  believe  you  are  Le  Mesurier.

A.  "You  are  faithless  and  unbelieving. We  never  allow  any  spirit  to
manifest  who  is  not  here. We  help  your  friend."
Q.  Do  you  guarantee  him  1

A.  "  We  help  him  to  make  himself  manifest.  You  may  trust  him  and  us. "
Q,  I  will  do  anything  I  can.


90  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


A.  "  He  will  speak  himself .  Pray,  and  he  will  rest  even  as  others.  Sleep,.
I  want  and  long  for  rest.  I  would  that  I  had  known  before  of  this  power  of
communication.  Oh,  the  multitudesthat  wait  I  But  I  must  cease.  I  am.
not  permitted  further. The  Lord  keejj  you."

Q.  Can  you  recall  any  incident  of  your  life  known  to  me  ?

A.  "I  once,  in  ungoverned  rage,  knocked  you  down  :  and  bitterly  re-
gretted my  fault."

Q.  I  remember. It  was  a  very  small  matter.

A.  "  Farewell,  my  time  is  short. God  guard  and  guide  you."

H.  Le  M.

Q.  What  possessed  Le.  M.  to  come  and  write  last  night  ?
A.  "  He  was  anxious  and  we  permitted  him. It  will  quiet  him,  and  he
will  rest  in  peace. He  requires  sleep."

Q.  Do  all  spirits  sleep  on  entering  the  next  world  1

A.  ' '  Not  all,  but  many  require  rest,  and  remain  in  peaceful  repose,  tended
by  angel  guards,  until  the  spirit  wakes  naturally  to  its  new  life.  This  is  so
with  your  friend  Sunshine.  She  is  peacefully  sleeping  and  renewing  her
life.  Her  time  of  rest  is  still  prolonged,  but  the  end  approaches  though  not
yet. We  shall  inform  you  when  she  wakes."

Note  D. — There  is  an  intei-esting  point  with  regard  to  the  Christian
names  of  these  Jones  children  ;  the  upshot  being  that  a  doubt  of  my
own  as  to  the  completeness  of  the  verification  made  of  these  names  at
the  time  has  led  to  a  pretty  clear  demonstration  that  the  names  could
not  have  been  obtained  by  any  ordinary  means.  Reference  to  Mr.
Moses'  account  will  show  that  Mrs.  Watts  (deceased  wife  of  Mr.  Alaric
A.  Watts,  Mr.  Moses'  executor)  asked  Mrs.  Leaf  (deceased  aunt  of  my
colleague,  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.)  as  to  these  Christian  names,  and
Mrs.  Leaf  seems  at  once  to  have  replied.^  "The  names  were  the  same,"
is  Mr.  Moses'  comment.  But  how  could  Mrs.  Leaf  know  1  She  was  not
likely  to  have  in  her  possession  a  baptismal  register,  or  other  full
statement  of  the  elaborate  Christian  names  of  these  three  young
children  of  "the  relative  of  an  acquaintance."  I  can  feel  little  doubt
that  what  Mrs.  Leaf  really  possessed  and  showed  to  Mrs.  Watts  was
an  entry  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  (seen  also  by  us)  of  the  death  of  the
children,  in  which  the  initials  of  the  Christian  names  were  given,
corresponding  to  those  of  the  names  rapped  out  at  the  seance,  to
which  entry  Mr.  Moses  refers  as  verification.  I  suspected,  there-
foi'e,  that  Mr.  Moses'  phrase  was  so  far  inaccurate  that  it  assumed
that  the  whole  names  were  the  same  because  the  initials  were
so.  Personal  reference  to  Mr.  Watts  and  Mrs.  Speer  showed  that
they  had  no  distinct  recollection  which  would  conflict  with  this  view.
I  therefore  desired  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  to  look  up  the  matter,  and  his  two
memoranda  subjoined  will  show  (1)  that  there  was  some  little  difficulty
in  getting  at  the  information  at  all ;  (2)  that  the  information  given  at
the  stance  was  probably  more  accurate  than  the  official  record.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Closes.


91


Jones  Children.

"In  May,  1893,  we  were  informed  at  Somerset  House  that  certificates  of
death  of  civilians  in  India  were  not  kept  there,  and  that  application  must  be
made  to  the  Deputy-Registrar  in  India.  Application  was  therefore  made  to
this  ofiicial,  and  after  a  delay  of  more  than  three  months,  during  which  time
we  wrote  a  reminder,  we  were  informed  that  fees  for  searches  in  the  registers
had  to  be  'paid  beforehand,'  and  a  scale  of  charges  was  sent.  The  sum  of
fifteen  shillings  and  postage  was  therefore  mailed,  and,  in  course  of  time,
another  communication  came  to  the  eflfect  that  the  registers  for  1873  and
1874  were  in  London,  and  could  be  inspected  at  the  India  Ofiice,  the  fees
being  returned.  Permission  was  at  once  obtained  to  inspect  the  registers  at
Whitehall  ;  and  by  the  middle  of  December  we  were  able,  for  the  sum  of
three  shillings,  to  obtain  the  desired  information."

Decemhey  20th,  1893.

"I  have  to-day  made  search  through  the  Burial  Certificates  at  the  India.
Ofiice,  Whitehall,  taking  the  following  notes  about  the  Jones  children.

"Bertie  Heni-y  D'Ogly  Jones,  died  at  Umballa,  aged  Ij  years,  on  the
31st  December,  1873.  Croup  and  acute  bronchitis.  Son  of  W.  C.  Nigel
Jones  (of  the  Government  Telegraph  Department)  and  Constance  Mary,  his.
wife.

"Edward  George  Nigel  Jones,  aged  2^  years,  died  at  the  same  place  on
January  3rd,  1874,  of  aldama  of  the  glottis  supervening  on  tonsilitis.

' '  Archie  William  Cholawndeley  Jones,  three  weeks  old,  died  at  the  same
place  on  January  5th,  1874. Spasm  of  tlie  glottis.

"  [Note  :  the  spelling  of  the  third  Christian  name  in  the  register  is  exactly
as  I  have  written  it.  The  ofiicial  in  charge  of  the  registers  agreed  that  it
was  clearly  written  so  ;  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  as  to  the  name  really
being  Gholmondeley.] "

Now  this  official  report  contains  two  certain  errors  and  one  probable
error.

(1)  Aldama  for  Oedema.

(2)  Cholawndeley  for  Gholmondeley.

(3)  D'Ogly  for  D'Oly.

(2)  As  to  this  name  there  was  (Mrs.  Speer  tells  me)  confusion  in  the
spelling  at  the  seance.  They  knew  that  they  had  not  got  it  all  right,
but  put  down  Cholmely.

For  the  benefit  of  foreign  readers  it  must  be  said  that  the  old
English  name  Gholmondeley  is  pronounced  Chumley.

It  seems  to  me  obvious  that  in  the  official  record  aiv  has  been
substituted  by  error  of  copyist,  who  did  not  know  the  name  Gholmon-
deley, for  071.  And  in  the  seance  it  seems  as  though  they  had  got  no
error  in  any  letter,  but  an  omission,  of  and  and  an  e.

(3)  As  between  D'Ogly  and  D'Oly  I  have  no  evidence ;  and  I
should  be  glad  either  of  a  direct  statement  as  to  the  child's  name,  or
of  such  indirect  evidence  as  may  result  from  a  proof  that  either  name


92  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


is  otherwise  known.  I  am  inclined  meantime  to  believe  that  D'Oly
is  correct.

Note  E. — Further  information  about  this  suicide  was  given  by
entry  February  23,  1874.  [It  is  remarkable  that  "Miss  X.",  then  a
child,  was  prevented  by  a  monition  (as  she  informs  me)  from  entering
the  street  where  the  traces  of  this  incident  were  still  visible.]

February  23rd,  1874.
Q.  I  very  much  wish  to  communicate  with  Imperator.
[A  long  pause.]

A .  "  Whatever  communication  you  hold  must  be  brief.  You  are  unfit  to
commune  now."

Q.  That  spirit  who  communicated  at  Mrs.  Gregory's.

A.  "  He  was  what  he  said.  It  surprises  us  much  that  he  should  have  been
able  to  attach  himself  to  you.  It  was  owing  to  your  being  near  the  place
where  he  met  his  bodily  death.  Do  not  direct  your  mind  strongly  to  the
subject  lest  he  vex  you."

Q.  What  does  he  want  ? Can  I  help  him  ?

A.  "  He  was  wretched  and  sought  help  in  ignorance.  Prayer  will  aid
him."

Q.  Well,  now,  how  comes  it  that  he  woke  at  once,  and  Sunshine  sleeps
still  ?

A.  ' '  He  has  not  yet  slept.  It  will  be  well  if  he  gets  repose  which  will
enable  him  to  progress  hereafter.  Should  he  not  do  so  he  will  remain
an  earth-bound  spirit  for  long. "

Q.  Then  rest  is  really  a  step  to  progress  ?

A.  "  It  is  so.  He  will  repose  if  prayer  avail.  Of  this  we  will  discourse
hereafter.  We  endeavoured  to  control  last  night  in  vain.  A  new  Egyptian
spirit  came  and  wrote  for  you  ;  but  it  is  unintelligible.  Cease,  the  power
goes.  Farewell."

"tI:S:D.

"  X  Theophilus."

February  2Uh,  1874.
Q.  I  have  much  to  ask. You  say  that  sleep  is  in  some  way  conducive  to
progress.

A.  "Yes,  it  would  be  so  in  the  case  of  such  a  sudden  sevei-ance  of  bodily
existence  as  that  now  in  your  mind.  It  is  to  be  desired  that  the  poor  soul
may  rest  and  not  haunt  the  sphere  of  vice  in  which  his  earth-life  was  spent.
Should  the  guardian  be  able  to  lull  the  soul  to  sleep  it  will  be  well.  Other-
wise it  will  but  haunt  the  scenes  of  its  former  vicious  habits.  ,It  is  better
that  you  do  not  direct  your  mind  to  that  spirit.  He  has  passed  beyond  your
sphere  now."

Q.  Is  the  spirit  unharmed  by  such  a  ghastly  mutilation  as  that  1

A.  "  The  mutilation  of  the  body  harms  not  the  spirit. The  spirit  body  is

not  to  be  harmed  by  injury  to  the  body  of  earth  otherwise  than  by  the  shock.

And  the  very  shock  might  stir  it  rudely  into  action,  and  excite  it  rather  than

lull  it  into  quiescence.


The  Experiences  of  TT.  Stainton  Moses.  93


' '  You  are  not  now  in  a  condition  which  enables  us  to  go  far  into  the
subject. You  have  far  from  recovered  your  spiritual  tone  as  yet."

Q.  Then  that  spirit  haunted  the  place  of  its  departure  ?

A.  "It  is  usually  so  that  a  spirit  which  has  so  rudely  been  severed  from
the  body  would  hover  near  even  for  a  long  time  after."

Q.  How  did  it  come  to  pitch  on  me  1

A.  "  You  passed  by,  and  being  in  a  highly  sensitive  condition  the
disturbed  spirit  would  naturally  be  attracted  to  your  si^here,  even  as  iron  is
attracted  to  a  powerful  magnet.  Moreover,  when  he  came  near  he  would  be
enabled  to  discern  you  by  the  aura  which  surrounds  you  and  which  is  visible  to
the  spirit  -eye.  Light  and  attraction  would  both  enable  him  to  recognise  a
cliannel  of  communication  which  he  longed  for.  You  have  been  told  before
that  an  aura  surrounds  all  material  objects,  and  that  aura  in  the  case  of  a
medium  is  recognisable  afar  off  by  spirit  eyes."

Q.  Can  you  tell  me  what  that  aura  is  ?

A.  "The  magnetic  aura  which  surrounds  your  body  and  enables  spirits
to  gain  access  to  you  and  to  use  the  atmosphere  for  manifesting.  It  is  more
highly  charged  with  the  force  which  we  use  and  so  is  known  to  us.  The
mediumistic  aura  to  spirit  gaze  is  of  golden  hue.  The  sympathetic  tint  is
crimson,  the  colour  of  the  affections— the  tint  of  the  learned  and  powerful
agent  for  the  development  of  truth  is  blue,  the  colour  of  the  intellect.  The
spirit  who  seeks  for  a  medium  is  attracted  by  the  mysterious  force,  to  you
mysterious,  yet  the  force  of  sympathy  which  is  all  powerful  with  us.

' '  Attraction  and  repulsion,  sympathy  and  antipathy,  are  known  in  a
degree  to  all,  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  most  sensitive.

"  This  is,  as  you  know,  the  cause  of  the  instantaneous  feelings  which  dart
into  the  mind  on  another  being  brought  into  the  reach  of  your  aura.  It
expands  or  contracts,  attracts  or  repels,  accordingly  as  it  is  in  harmony  or
discord  with  the  aura  brought  in  contact  with  it.  All  spirits  know  this,
though  all  do  not  profoundly  understand  it.  Some,  as  the  suicide  in
question,  would  act  by  intuition  and  sul^ject  to  magnetic  attraction.  Such
gravitate  to  a  sympathetic  as  iron  to  a  magnet.  Hence  it  is  that  the  highly
developed  are  more  open  to  attack  from  the  grosser  spirits."

Q.  Then  to  spirit  eye,  the  aura  declares  the  character  ?

A.  "To  the  more  developed  and  progressed  it  does  so,  and  hence  the
concealment  is  not  possible  in  our  spheres.  The  sjoirit  carries  its  character
impressed  on  the  very  atmosphere  it  breathes. This  is  a  law  of  our  being."

Q.  Very  beautiful,  bvit  very  awful  !

A.  "Nay,  friend,  not  so  :  but  a  great  safeguard,  seeing  that  we  know  we
are  open  to  the  gaze  and  the  knowledge  of  all.  It  is  well  that  it  should  be
so. We  pause."

Note  G. — Baby  Timmins.  Mrs.  Speer  has  described  to  me  this
incident,  which  is  remarkable  as  the  only  observed  case  where  Mr.
Moses  had  a  sudden  access  of  unconsciousness  during  ordinary  life,
although  he  himself  mentions  others.

Note  H. — Euphemia  Death.  The  se'ance  at  which  this  sj^irit
appeared  and  at  which  Mr.  Percival,  Miss  Percival  (now  Mi's.  Garratt),


94


The  Experiences  of  W.  Sfainton  Moses.


and  Miss  Birkett  were  present,  is  described  by  Mrs.  Garratt  in  a  letter
in  my  possession,  and  also,  concordantly  and  at  greater  length,  by
Miss  Birkett,  whose  account  I  have  subjoined.

December  21st,  1874.
"Exquisite  scents  of  several  kinds  repeatedly  brought  round  to  each
sitter.  The  fairy  bells  were  heard  clearly  and  beautifully ;  and  on  Dr.  Speer
asking  for  scales,  the  ascending  and  descending  scales  were  clearly  played,  also
arpeggio  chords.  The  medium  was  controlled  by  various  spirits,  who
declined  to  give  their  names ;  and  the  whole  of  the  manifestations  during  the
evening  were  interrupted  and  broken  up  by  the  attempts  to  commynicate  of
two  spirits  who  gave  the  name  of  Death,  but  were  unable  to  tell  the
pai'ticulars  they  wished,  until  helped  by  Grocyn,  who  acted  as  interpreter,
and  repeated  upon  his  lyre  the  facts  he  gained  from  them  with  difficulty.
The  spirits  said  they  had  passed  away  within  two  or  three  weeks  ;  that  they
were  mother  and  child  ;  the  mother's  name,  Euphemia  Matilda  Death,
aged  22,  the  child  Ellen,  aged  20  months  ;  that  the  death  was  sudden  and
under  painful  circumstances  ;  that  E.  M.  D.  was  the  wife  of  a  veterinary
surgeon  at  Aldershot ;  and  that  she  died  on  November  20th  ;  the  child,  it
was  thought,  on  the  4th  of  November.  The  medium  had  previously
described  the  spirits,  who  stood  close  to  him,  as  a  young  woman  and  young
child  ;  the  latter  standing,  but  supported  by  the  mother.  The  medium
seemed  to  suffer  from  their  presence,  and  complained  of  their  intense  cold.
Imperator  controlled  for  a  few  minutes,  saying  that  in  consequence  of  the
anxiety  to  speak  on  the  part  of  these  young  spirits  he  could  not  control  the
medium,  but  would  leave  him,  to  allow  them  to  make  their  communication.
That  they  came  for  help  to  get  rid  of  the  earth-itiHuence  which  still  clung  to
tliem  ;  and  that  this  process  caused  the  feeling  of  cold  to  the  medium  and
circle.  That  it  was  easy  to  understand  how  good  was  obtained  by  the  spirit
in  such  a  case,  because  of  the  sympathy  existing  between  all  living  creatures,
which  bound  all  creation  together.  Regarding  sudden  death,  Imperator  also
said  that  a  suddenly  painful  and  premainre  death  caused  much  injury  and
distress  to  the  spirit.  He  wished  it,  however,  to  be  understood  that  an
instantaneous  death,  when  the  spirit  is  ready  and  matured,  is  in  no  way  dis-
advantageous.

"Later  the  same  night  the  sjjirit  of  Euphemia  M.  Death  returned  to
Mr.  Moses  to  correct  some  slight  errors  in  her  statement.  The  child's  name
was  Edith  Ellen,  and  she  was  15  months  old.  She  died  in  great  pain  from
an  accident,  and  the  mother  died  suddenly.

"After  enquiry  and  search,  a  Woolwicli  paper  was  obtained,  which  con-
firmed the  foregoing  statement  in  every  particular,  and  added  that  the  child
Edith  Death  died  from  the  effect  of  a  fall  into  scalding  water."

Mr.  Moses  had  a  further  account  of  this  visit,  as  follows  :  —

December  2ud,  1874.
Q.  I  wish  to  ask  about  the  seance  last  night. It  was  a  very  singular  one
as  we  were  all  so  cold.

A.  "  The  coldness  was  by  the  jiresence  of  the  spirits  who  manifested.
It  was  done  without  the  Chief's  knowledge.  We  did  not  know  that  he  would
be  able  to  control,  and  the  spirits  were  anxious."


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


95


Q.  Wliy  did  they  come  ?

A.  "  They  were  desirous  and  it  was  so  planned.  They  are  not  in  any  way
connected  with  us  or  you."

Q.  Do  you  know  if  their  story  is  true  ?

A.  "It  was  rightly  given,  save  that  an  error  was  made  in  one  point
through  difficulty  of  controlling."

Q  They  followed  me  home  and  altered  that  point  and  added  somewhat.
Can  you  put  down  the  facts  so  that  I  may  compare  them  ?  I  have  no
remembrance  of  them  except  one  name.

A.  ' '  We  can  procure  them  if  you  wait.  But  we  do  not  know.  There  is
no  necessity."

[After  a  long  pause.]

"The  mother  was  Euphemia  Matilda  Death,  and  she  passed  from  your
world  at  Aldershot,  on  the  twentieth  day  of  November,  at  the  age  of  22.
The  little  one  was  Edith  Ellen  Death.  She  was  only  15  months  old  when
she  passed  away.  Her  father's  name  was  William  Death,  Veterinary  Surgeon
of  the  Military  Train.  These  are  the  chief  facts.  We  know  no  more.
The  Chief  considered  it  well  to  cease  the  control,  lest  you  should  be  annoyed
by  them.

"  t  R."

In  the  Registrar's  list  we  find  : —

"  Euphemia  Matilda  Death,  died  at  South  Camp,  Aldershot,  November
21st,  1874,  of  '  valve  disease  of  heart,'  age  22.  Edith  Ellen  Death,  infant  of
above,  died  at  the  same  place,  on  November  4th,  1874,  of  '  congestion  of  the
brain  6  days,'  age  1  year  3  months."

The  discrepancy  of  a  day  in  date  of  death  is  not  unusual  in  case  of
death  at  night ;  especially  from  heart  disease.

"  Congestion  of  brain  "  might  well  follow  upon  an  accident  such  as
was  here  described.

Principal  Spirits  claimed  as  communicating  with  Mr.  Moses.


C. — Spirits  mentioned  in  "  The  Identity  of  Spirit."


1

A.  P.  Kirkland

17

Ai-chie  William  Cholmondeley

2

J.  B.  Callister

Jones

3

T.  J.  Stainton

18

Suicide  under  steam-roller

4

Catharine  Pauline  Speer

19

Charlotte  Buckworth

5

EmUy  C.  C.

20

Beethoven

«

Cecilia  Feilden

21

Mrs.  Dalton

7

Henry  Spratley

22

Mary  Hall

8

Grandmother

23

Marian  Timmins  (baby)

9

George  Eves

24

Euphemia  Death

10

Augustus  Eves

25

Edith  Ellen  Death

11

Emma  Eves

26

Judge  Edmonds

12

Bishop  Wilson

27

Swedenborg

13

Rosamira  Lancaster

28

Abraham  Florentine

14

Henry  Le  Mesurier

29

W.  B.— (Suicide)

15

Bertie  Henry  D'Uly  Jones

30

Samuel  Wilbei'force

16

Edward  George  Nigel  Jones

96


Tlie  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  MoseS.


D. — Other  Evidential  Communications.


31  "Blanche  Abercromby "

32  Miss  Green

33  Fanny  Westoby

34  Louis  Napoleon


35  Mr.  Rowbotliam

36  President  Garfield

37  Dr.  Stanhope  Speer

38  Rector  (clairvoyance  ?)


Skctiox  D. — Othe?-  Evidential  Communications.

It  will  be  convenient  to  prefix  to  this  section  a  conspectus  of  the
principal  alleged  spirits  whose  communications  are  in  anj  wajr
evidential.  Some  thirty  of  these  have  been  already  mentioned  by
Mr.  Moses  in  the  tractate  just  quoted  ;  but  a  few  more  cases  remaiin
which  it  seems  desirable  to  print.

31. — The  first  case  which  I  shall  quote  under  this  section  is  hx
some  ways  the  most  remarkable  of  all,  from  the  series  of  chances  which'
have  been  needful  in  order  to  establish  its  veracity.  The  spirit  in
question  is  that  of  a  lady  known  to  me,  whom  Mr.  Moses  had  met,  I
believe,  once  only,  and  whom  I  shall  call  Blanche  Abercromby.  The
publication  of  the  true  name  was  forbidden  by  the  spirit  herself,  for  a
reason  which  was  at  once  obvious  to  me  when  I  read  the  case,  but
which  was  not,  so  far  as  I  can  tell,  fully  known  to  Mr.  Moses.  The
lady's  son,  whom  I  have  since  consulted,  supports  the  prohiljition  ;  and
I  have  consequently  changed  the  name  and  omitted  the  dates.

This  lady  died  on  a  Sunday  afternoon,  about  twenty  years  ago,  at
a  country  house  about  200  miles  from  London.  Her  death,  which  was
regarded  as  an  event  of  public  interest,  was  at  once  telegraphed  to
London,  and  appeared  in  Monday's  Times  ;  but,  of  course,  on  Sunday
evening  no  one  in  London,  save  the  Press  and  perhaps  the  immediate
family,  was  cognisant  of  the  fact.  It  will  be  seen  that  on  that  evening,
near  midnight,  a  communication,  purporting  to  come  from  her, was  made
to  Mr.  Moses  at  his  secluded  lodgings  in  the  north  of  London.  The
identity  was  some  days  later  corroborated  by  a  few  lines  purporting  to-
come  directly  from  her,  and  to  be  in  her  handwriting.  There  is  no  I'eason
to  suppose  that  Mr.  Moses  had  ever  seen  this  handwriting.  His  one
known  meeting  with  this  lady  and  her  husband  had  been  at  a  seance —
not,  of  course,  of  his  own — where  he  had  been  offended  by  the  strongly
expressed  disbelief  of  the  husband  in  the  possibility  of  any  such
phenomena.

On  receiving  these  messages  Mr.  Moses  seems  to  have  mentioned
them  to  no  one,  and  simply  gummed  down  the  pages  in  his  M.S.  book,,
marking  the  book  outside  "  Private  Matter."  The  book  when  placed
in  my  hands  was  still  thus  gummed  down,  although  Mrs.  Speer  was
cognisant  of  the  communication.  I  opened  the  pages  (as  instructed  by
the  executors),  and  was  surprised  to  find  a  brief  letter  which,  though


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


97


containing  no  definite  facts,  was  entirely  characteristic  of  the  Blanche
Abercromby  whom  I  had  known.  But  although  I  had  received  letters
from  her  in  life,  I  had  no  recollection  of  her  handwi-iting.  I  happened
to  know  a  son  of  hers  sufficiently  well  to  be  able  to  ask  his  aid — aid
which,  I  may  add,  he  would  have  been  most  unlikely  to  afford  to  a
stranger.  He  lent  me  a  letter  for  comparison.  The  strong  resem-
blance was  at  once  obvious,  but  the  A  of  the  surname  was  made  in
the  letter  in  a  way  quite  different  from  that  adopted  in  the  automatic
script.  The  son  then  allowed  me  to  study  a  long  series  of  letters,
reaching  down  till  almost  the  date  of  her  death.  From  these  it
appeared  that  during  the  last  year  of  her  life  she  had  taken  to  writing
the  A  (as  her  husband  had  always  done)  in  the  way  in  which  it  was
written  in  the  automatic  script.

The  resemblance  of  handwriting  appeared  both  to  the  son  and  to
myself  to  be  incontestable ;  but  as  we  desired  an  experienced  opinion  he
allowed  me  to  submit  the  note-book  and  two  letters  to  Dr.  Hodgson.
Readers  of  these  Proceedings  (Part  IX.,  Vol.  III.)  may  remember  that
Dr.  Hodgson  succeeded  in  tracing  the  authorship  of  the  "  Koot  Hoomi  "
letters  to  Madame.  Blavatsky  and  to  Damodar,  by  evidence  based  on  a
minute  analysis  of  handwriting.  As  regards  the  present  matter.  Dr.
Hodgson  reports  as  follows  : —

5,  Boylston  Place,

Boston,  September  Uth,  1893.

"I  have  compared  the  writing  numbered  123  in  the  note-book  of  Mr.
Stainton  Moses,  with  epistles  of  January  4th,  18 — ,  and  September  19th,
18 — ,  written  by  B.A.  The  note-book  writing  bears  many  minor  resem-
blances to  that  of  the  epistles,  and  there  are  also  several  minor  differences
in  the  formations  of  some  of  the  letters,  judging  at  least  from  the  two
epistles  submitted  to  me  ;  but  the  resemblances  are  more  characteristic  than
the  differences.  In  addition,  there  are  several  striking  peculiarities  common
to  the  epistles  and  the  note-book  writing,  which  appear  to  be  especially
emphasised  in  the  latter.  The  note-book  writing  suggests  that  its  author
was  attempting  to  reproduce  the  B.A.  writing  by  recalling  to  memory  its
chief  pecidiarities,  and  not  by  copying  from  specimens  of  the  B.A.  writing.
The  signature  especially  in  the  note-book  writing  is  characteristically  like
an  imitation  from  memory  of  B.A.'s  signature.  I  have  no  doubt  whatever
that  the  person  who  wrote  the  note-book  writing  intended  to  reproduce  the
writing  of  B.A."

Richard  Hodgson.

The  chances  necessary  to  secure  a  verification  of  this  case  were  more
complex  than  can  here  be  fully  explained.  This  lady,  who  was  quite
alien  to  these  researches,  had  been  dead  about  twenty  years  when  her
posthumous  letter  was  discovered  in  Mr.  Moses'  private  note  book  by
one  of  the  very  few  surviving  persons  who  had  both  known  her  well
enough  to  recognise  the  characteristic  quality  of  the  message,  and  wera

K


98


The  Exiyeriences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


also  sufficiently  interested  in  spirit  identity  to  get  the  handwritings
compared  and  the  case  recorded.

The  entries  in  the  M.S.  l)Ooks  will  now  be  quoted.  The  communica-
tions began  with  some  obscure  drawings,  apparently  representing  the
flight  of  a  bird.

A.  "  It  is  spirit  who  has  but  just  quitted  the  body.  Blanche  Abercromby
in  the  flesh. 1  have  brought  her. No  more.  M."
Q.  Do  you  mean  1

No  reply.  Sunday  night  about  midnight.  The  information  is  unknown
to  me.

Monday  morning.

Q.  I  wish  for  information  about  last  night.  Is  that  true  ?  Was  it
Mentor  ?

A.  ' '  Yes,  good  friend,  it  was  Mentor,  who  took  pity  on  a  spirit  that  was
desirous  to  reverse  former  eiTors.  She  desires  us  to  say  so.  She  was  ever
an  enquiring  spirit,  and  was  called  suddenly  from  your  earth.  She  will  rest
anon.  One  more  proof  has  been  now  given  of  continuity  of  existence.  Be
thankful  and  meditate  with  prayer.  Seek  not  more  now,  but  cease.  We  do
not  wish  you  to  ask  any  questions  now."

"t  I  :  S  :  D.
[A  week  later.]  ^  Rector.

Q.  Can  you  write  for  me  now  1
A.  "  Yes,  the  chief  is  here."

Q.  How  was  it  that  S[;)irit  [Blanche  Abei'cromby's]  came  to  me  1

A.  "The  mind  was  directed  to  the  subject,  and  being  active,  it  projected

itself  to  you. Moreover,  we  were  glad  to  be  able  to  afford  you  another

proof  of  our  desire  to  do  what  is  in  our  power  to  bring  home  to  you  evidence

of  the  truth  of  what  we  say."

Q.  Is  it  correct  to  say  that  the  direction  of  thought  causes  the  spirit  to  be

present  ?

A.  "In  some  cases  it  is  so.  Great  activity  of  spirit,  coupled  with  anxiety
to  discover  truth  an  to  seek  into  the  hidden  causes  of  things,  continue  to
make  it  possible  fm-  a  spirit  to  manifest.  Moreover,  direction  of  thought
gives  what  you  would  call  direction  or  locality  to  the  thought.  By  that  we
mean  that  the  instinctive  tendency  of  the  desire  or  thought  causes  a
possibility  of  objective  manifestation.  Then  by  the  help  of  those  who,  like
ourselves,  are  skilled  in  managing  the  elements,  manifestation  becomes
possible.  This  would  not  have  been  possible  in  this  case,  only  that  we  took
advantage  of  what  would  have  passed  unnoticed  in  order  to  work  out
another  proof  of  the  reality  of  our  mission.  It  is  necessary  that  there
should  be  a  combination  of  circumstances  before  such  a  manifestation  can  be
possible.  And  that  combination  is  rare.  Hence  the  infrequency  of  such
events,  and  the  difliculty  we  have  in  arranging  them  :  especially  when
anxiety  enters  into  the  matter,  as  in  the  case  of  a  friend  whose  presence  is
earnestly  desired.  It  might  well  be  that  so  ready  a  proof  as  this  might  not
occur  again."

Q.  Then  a  combination  of  favourable  circumstances  aided  you  VVill  the
.spirit  rest,  or  does  it  not  require  it  'i


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


99


A.  "  We  do  not  know  the  destiny  of  that  sfjirit.  It  will  pass  out  of  our
control.  Circumstances  enabled  us  to  use  its  presence  :  but  that  presence
will  not  be  maintained."

Q.  If  direction  of  thought  causes  motion,  I  should  have  thought  it  would
be  so  with  our  friends  and  that  they  would  therefore  be  more  likely  to
come.

A.  "It  is  not  that  alone.  Nor  is  it  so  with  all.  All  cannot  come  to  earth.
And  not  in  all  cases  does  volition  or  thought  cause  union  of  souls.  Many
other  adjuncts  are  necessary  before  such  can  be.  Material  obstacles  may
prevent,  and  the  guardians  may  oppose.  We  are  not  able  to  pursue  the
subject  now,  seeing  that  we  write  with  difficulty.  At  another  time  we  may
resume. Cease  for  the  present  and  do  not  seek  further."

"  t  I  :  S  :  D.  Rector."

Q.  On  reading  over  what  has  been  written,  I  am  struck  with  this.  You
said  once  that  conditions  had  been  interfered  with  by  the  projection  of
antagonistic  thought  from  a  distance.  And  now  it  seems  that  a  spirit
released  from  its  body  is  carried  whither  its  thoughts  turn.  It  seems  then
that  thought  is  motion  :  and  that  effect  can  be  produced  without  the  actual
presence,  as  we  understand  it,  of  a  spirit  in  the  room.  If  this  be  so,  it
seems  to  follow  that  manifestations  may  be  performed  objectively,or  at  least
directed,  without  the  actual  presence  of  the  spirit  who  purports  to  make
them. Is  this  so  ever  and  is  this  so  in  our  own  circle  ?

A.  "It  is  so  frequently  in  this  way.  Great  spirits  operate  through  inferior
agencies  without  themselves  being  present  as  you  understand  the  term.
This  is  very  frequent."

A  few  days  later,  Mr.  Moses  says  : —

Q.  The  spirit  B.  A.  began  by  drawing. Was  it  herself  ?

A.  "With  assistance.  She  could  not  write.  One  day  if  she  is  able  to
return  again,  she  will  be  more  able  to  express  her  thoughts."

Q.  I  remember  that  poor  man  who  was  killed  by  the  steam-roller  drew.

A.  "  Do  not  dwell  on  him  lest  you  be  vexed.  He  was  not  able  to  express
himself.  And  even  as  the  undeveloped  human  mind  betakes  itself  to
symbols  to  sa^jplement  defect  of  language  :  so  do  spirits  seek  to  illustrate
that  which  they  cannot  utter.  So  the  Holy  Maid  [of  Kent]  drew  when,
she  appeared.  She  has  now  progressed,  and  is  progressing,  having  cast
aside  the  weight  that  hindered  her."

Q.  I  am  glad. Will  she  come  back  1

A.  "It  may  be,  but  not  now."

[A  few  days  later.]

A.  "A  spirit  who  has  before  communicated  will  write  for  you  herself.
She  will  then  leave  you,  having  given  the  evidence  that  is  required."

"I  should  much  like  to  speak  more  with  you,  but  it  is  not  permitted.
You  have  sacred  truth. I  know  but  little  yet. I  have  much,  much  to  learn.

"  Blanche  Abekceomby.

"  It  is  like  my  writing  as  evidence  to  you."

In  the  next  case  the  identity  is  shown  by  vision  and  internal  voice.


100


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


32.  — Miss  Green  (Spirit  Identity,  pp.  90-91).

"The  first  of  my  cases  occurred  on  August  18th  insfc.  T  had  returned
from  a  three  days'  absence  to  the  house  of  friends  with  whom  I  was  staying.
When  I  left,  a  friend  of  the  lady  of  the  house  was  unwell.  During  my
absence  she  died  very  suddenly.  When  I  entered  the  room  I  saw  her
standing  beside  her  friend — the  lady  whom  I  was  visiting.  The  dis-
embodied phantom  was  as  clear  to  my  gaze  as  the  living  person  to  whom  I

was  talking. 'So  Miss is  dead,'  I  said,  forgetting  that  the  good  lady

could  not  see  the  ghostly  visitant.  '  Yes.'  '  And  buried,'  I  continued,  for
the  words  sounded  in  my  ear.  '  Yes  ;  but  how  did  you  know  1 '  Then  I
remembered,  and  turned  the  subject,  for  my  hostess  would  have  fainted  in
horror  had  she  known  how  near  to  her  her  friend  was.  Strange  !  a  few
hours  ago  and  she  would  sit  by  the  bedside  and  clasp  the  clammy  hand,  and
kiss  the  lips  on  which  death  already  had  set  the  seal  of  silence  :  yet  she
would  have  screamed  at  the  friend  whose  self  was  by  her,  minus  only  that
old  and  shabby  body  which  it  had  cast  off.  That  is  what  '  I  believe  in  the
resurrection  of  the  body  '  has  brought  us  to.  I  took  careful  note  of  the
dress,  mien,  and  face  of  the  ghost — I  had  never  seen  the  original  in  the
body — and,  as  occasion  served,  I  elicited  from  my  hostess  a  description,
which  greatly  tallied  with  my  vision,  except  in  one  point.  The  ghost  wore
a  brooch  of  peculiar  make,  wliich  I  could  get  no  description  of.  On  the
following  day,  however,  my  hostess  came  back  from  her  friend's  house  with
the  identical  ornament  in  her  hand.  Her  friend  had  left  it  to  her  as  a
memento."

The  "  hostess  "  here  was  Mi's.  Moses,  mother  of  W.  S.  M.  I  have
compared  this  account  with  the  contemporary  recoi'd,  and  Mr.  Moses
gave  me  a  concordant  verbal  account.

33.  — -Fanny  Westoby.  This  excellent  case  was  described  by  Mr.
Moses  to  Edmund  Gurney  and  myself,  while  it  was  still  fresh,  on  our
first  meetinfi;  with  him,  May  9th,  1874.

On  the  evening  of  April  8th,  1874,  while  at  Bedford  with  his  father
and  mother,  Mr.  Moses,  who  had  been  receiving  messages  about  ancient

religions  during  the  day,  began  to  ask  a  question,  "  I  should  1  ,"

when  a  meaningless  drawing  was  made  in  place  of  intended  words.

Q.  What  is  all  that  ? And  why  was  I  stopped  ?

A.  "A  spirit  wishes  to  communicate,  and  we  are  commanded  to  permit
her.  She  is  not  able  to  write  with  ease,  but  will  communicate  through  us.
Her  name  is  Fanny  Westoby. Do  you  know  the  name  ? "

Q.  I  do  not  remember.

A.  ' '  Your  mother  knows  her  well. She  is  a  cousin  of  hers. She  passed
from  your  earth  May  15th  last."
Q.  Was  she  married  ?

A.  "  Yes,  her  maiden  name  was  Kirkham."

Q.  Fanny  Kirkham.  Yes,  I  have  a  dim  remembrance.  She  used  to
live  at  Markby.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  101


A.  "She  says  that  she  was  born  in  Alford,  in  the  house  now  occupied
by  Sam  Stevenson.  She  then  lived  at  Markby,  and,  having  married,  at
Belchford.  She  passed  away  at  Horncastle,  at  63  years  of  age.  You  do  not
remember  her,  when,  in  the  year  1845,  you  went  to  see  her  at  Markby.
Her  mother,  Elizabeth  Kirkham,  was  then  just  released  from  a  lingering
illness,  and  your  mother  had  gone  to  condole  with  her  cousin.  You  were
taken  round  the  farm,  and  rode  on  a  goat  (she  is  anxious  on  this  point),  and
she  threw  you  in  sport  into  a  heap  of  wheat  which  was  being  threshed.  The
result  was  that  you  were  severely  bitten  by  the  harvest  bug.  She  is  very
anxious  that  you  should  recall  this  to  your  mother."

Q.  I  will. But  is  it  wise  ?

A.  "You  will  not  be  able  to  induce  her  to  search  into  this  matter,  but
you  may  satisfy  yourself  that  what  is  said  is  true."
Q.  Has  she  any  message  ?

A.  "  She  says,  '  I  lost  much  of  my  opportunity  for  progress  through  the
gratification  of  bodily  appetite  which  cast  me  back.  My  course  of  progress
is  yet  to  come.  I  find  my  present  life  not  very  diff"erent  from  yours.  I  am
nearly  the  same. I  wish  I  could  influence  Mary,  but  I  can't  get  near  her.'  "

Q.  Can  she  assure  me  that  she  is  F.  W.  1

A.  "  She  can  give  you  no  further  evidence.  Stay,  ask  your  father  about
Donnington  and  the  trap-door."

Q.  I  have  not  the  least  idea  what  she  means.  All  the  better.  I  will  ask.
Any  more  1 Is  she  happy  1

A.  "  She  is  as  happy  as  may  be  in  her  present  state."

Q.  How  did  she  find  me  out  ?

A.  "  She  came  by  chance,  hovering  near  her  friend  [i.e.,  Mrs.  Moses],  and
discovered  that  she  could  communicate. She  will  return  now."
Q.  Can  I  help  her  '(

A.  ' '  Yes,  pray. She  and  all  of  us  are  helped  when  you  devote  your
talents  willingly  to  aid  us."
Q.  What  do  you  mean  ?

A.  "In  advocating  and  advancing  our  mission  with  care  and  judgment.
Then  we  are  permeated  with  joy.  May  the  Supreme  bless  you."  [Book
VIII.,  pp.  78-83.]

"  X  Rector."

[I  have  enquired  of  my  mother  and  find  the  particulars  given  are  exactly
true.  She  wonders  how  I  remember  things  that  occurred  when  I  was  only
5  years  old  !  I  have  not  ventured  to  say  how  I  got  the  information,
believing  that  it  would  be  unwise  and  useless.  My  father  I  can  get  nothing
out  of  about  the  trajj-door. He  either  does  not  remember  or  will  not  say.]

[April  9th,  1874.  My  father  has  remembered  this  incident.  A  trap-door
led  on  to  the  roof  in  the  house  he  occupied  at  Donnington.  The  house  was
double  roofed,  and  a  good  view  could  be  had  from  it.  F.  K.  on  a  visit
wanted  to  go  there,  and  got  fixed  half-way  amid  great  laughter.

/N^  /\ Elevation  of  double  roof.]


[We  have  verified  Mrs.  Westoby's  death  in  the  Register  of  Deaths.
— F.W.H.M.].


102


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


34.  — For  Louis  Napoleon  see  Part  A,  January  5th,  1874.  I  have  a
concordant  contemporary  M.S.  account  from  Mrs.  Speer.

35.  — Mr.  Ptowbotham.  In  Sjnrii  Identity,  pp.  94-5,  Mr.  Moses
relates  how,  when  walking  with  a  friend  and  discussing  spiritualism,  he
took  refuge  from  rain  in  an  inn,  [the  "  Britannia,"  Belsize  Road,  as  he
informed  me].

' '  One  day  we  were  walking  together  and  rain  came  on.  To  avoid  a
wetting  we  took  refuge  in  a  billiard-room  near  at  hand,  and  whiled  away  the
rainy  hour  with  a  game,  discussing  all  the  while.  The  proprietor  was  the
only  other  person  in  the  room,  and  he  showed  some  interest  m  what  I  was
saying.  He  asked  some  questions,  and  seemed  rather  frightened  than
otherwise.  He  was  a  wine  merchant,  and  gave  me  his  card  as  I  left,  asking
for  custom.  From  time  to  time  I  did  purchase  some  goods  from  him,  and
on  perhaps  half  a  dozen  occasions  exchanged  some  words  with  him.  He
always  asked  me  about  Spiritualism.  The  last  time  I  saw  him  he  was  ill,
and  said  that  he  was  in  the  doctor's  hands,  but  was  mending  fast.  I  saw
no  more  of  him,  until  sitting  alone,  as  my  habit  is,  in  my  study  in  the
early  morning,  he  appeared  to  my  clairvoyant  eye.  I  was  writing  about
transcorporeal  action  of  spirit,  the  double,  and  such  phenomena,  and  I
wondered  much  at  this  apparition.  I  never  thought  for  a  moment  that  it
was  anything  but  a  double  of  the  living  man.  For  a  time  he  could  not
speak  ;  but  when  he  managed  to  make  me  hear,  he  saluted  me  as  he  would.

have  done  in  the  fiesh,  calling  me  Mr. ,  a  name  which  he  heard  my

friend  use  while  we  were  together  in  the  billiard-room.  It  was  a  name  used
by  him,  and  known,  I  am  sure,  to  no  one  else  except  two  or  three
acquaintances.  Yet  this  spirit  used  it  quite  naturally,  as  he  would  have
done  in  the  fiesh,  though  he  knew  my  real  name  well  enough.  I  gradually
inquired  what  brought  him,  and  learned  that  he  had  '  come  to  see  me.'  He
was  dead — had  died  some  two  months  ago  at  a  place  and  address  which  he
gave  me.  He  likewise  told  me  his  full  name,  the  disease  which  carried  him
off,  and  the  date  of  his  death.  All  these  facts  were  entirely  outside  of  my
knowledge.  He  died  at  a  watering-place  far  away.  His  full  name,  disease
(a  peculiar  one),  and  death,  were  utterly  unknown  to  me.  I  and  some
friends  verified  them  all,  and  found  them  literally  exact.  Yet  he  seemed  to
have  no  special  reason  for  coming,  unless  it  was  to  add  his  stone  to  the
cairn  of  evidence.  He  did  not  even  say  that  he  had  discovered  the  truth  of
my  faith,  and  had  come  to  confirm  it.  He  came,  and  he  went,  and,  like
many  another  who  has  done  the  same,  I  have  seen  him  no  more."

Mr.  Moses  told  me  that  this  Mr.  Rowbotham  died  at  Torquay,  of
diabetes. I  have  not  verified  this  decease,  as  the  year  is  not  given.

36.  — President  Garfiekl,  This  is  a  communication  made,  not  by  the
departed  spirit  itself,  but  by  friends.

30,  St.  Peter's,  Bedford.
September  20th,  1881,  10  a.m. — This  morning,  on  awaking  at  5.54  a.m.,
I  was  aware  of  a  spirit  who  desired  to  communicate. It  turned  out  to  be


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  103


Mentor,  with  him  B,  Franklin,  [Ejjes]  Sargent  and  others.  They  told  me
ill  effect  "  The  President  is  gone.  We  were  with  him  to  the  last.  He
•died  suddenly,  and  all  our  efforts  to  keep  him  were  unavailing.  We
laboured  hard,  for  his  life  was  of  incalculable  value  to  our  country.  He
would  have  done  more  to  rescue  ix,  from  shame  than  any  one  now  left."  I
asked  why  it  had  been  deemed  necessary  to  come  to  me  with  the  news.  It
was  replied  that  a  period  of  great  activity  in  the  spirit  world  was  now  being
renewed,  and  that  my  sympathies  with  him  and  with  his  work,  and  their
own  knowledge  of  me,  had  inclined  them  to  bring  the  news.  The  Daily
iVeiys  contained  no  tidings,  though  the  bulletins  were  bad.  It  seemed  on
the  contrary  that  the  news  of  the  previous  night  which  they  contained  was
a  little  more  favourable.  I  walked  down  to  the  station  feeling  convinced
that  the  news  would  come,  but  up  to  11.30  a.m.  could  not  hear  of  it.
About  12.. 37  I  again  went  and  found  that  a  rumour  had  reached  Bedford.
The  evening  papers — Globe  and  Echo — which  I  purchased  at  4.30  p.m.
gave  me  the  first  mundane  information  of  the  event.  It  is  now  stated  that
he  died  at  10.50  p.m.  on  the  19th  (yesterday).  That  in  English  time  is
3.50  a.m.  of  this  day,  20th,  or  two  hours  before  I  woke  and  got  the  mes.sage.

I  have  since  learned  that  the  death  was  sudden,  and  the  remarkable
fluctuations  are  not  inconsistent  with  efforts  such  as  described.

September  21st. — The  latest  reports  fix  10.35  not  10.50  p.m.  [or  3.35
a.  m.  English  time]  as  the  exact  time  of  death.  I  forgot  to  say  that  very
strong  disapprobation  was  expressed  of  the  administration  of  defibrinated
bullock's  blood  which  had  been  resorted  to  at  the  last.  This  seems  to  have
been  especially  repulsive,  as  crude  blood  is  apparently  universally  connected
with  the  lowest  and  most  undeveloped  form  of  spirit-life,  for  which  it  has  a
great  attraction.  A  vessel  of  fresh  blood  was  a  means  of  ensuring  the
presence  of  powerful  spirits  at  magical  incantations  and  seances.  In  the
seance  recorded  on  p.  70  this  was  insisted  on,  a  proj)os  of  the  slaughter  of  a
bullock  which  I  had  been  led  to  witness.  It  was  said  that  undeveloped
spirits  rejoiced  in  the  bloodshed,  and  found  their  great  attraction  wherever
it  was  to  be  found.

37.— Dr.  Speer.

Dr.  Speer  died  February  9th,  1889,  and  shortly  after  his  death  Mr.
Moses  received  from  him  a  remarkable  proof  of  identity,  of  which  he
"wrote  me  an  account  at  the  time.  I  much  regret  that  I  have  mislaid
that  letter;  but  Mrs.  Speer  has  kindly  written  for  me  [1894]  an,  of  course,
independent  account,  which  I  recognise  as  completely  accordant  with
that  which  Mr.  Moses  had  given  me.  On  receiving  Mr.  Moses'  account,
I  wrote  to  him  suggesting  that  the  pet  name  might  have  been  used  by
Dr.  Speer  in  speaking  to  his  wife  during  one  of  Mr.  Moses'  trances,  and
might  thus  have  been  subconsciously  heard  by  Mr.  Moses.  He  repudi-
ated— indeed  almost  resented — this  suggestion;  and  on  talking  to  Mrs.
.Speer,  since  Mr.  Moses'  death,  I  find  her  absolutely  sure  that  the  nursery
nickname — felt  by  herself  to  be  absurd  in  its  application  to  an  elderly
lady — had  never  been  used  except  in  complete  privacy.


104


The  Exi^eriences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


' '  The  first  time  my  husband  made  his  presence  felt  to  Mr.  Moses  was-
wlien  he  was  writing  about  him  for  Light  ;  he  mentions  it  in  the  account.
Several  other  times  he  told  me  he  had  seen  Dr.  S.  in  vision,  but  he  seemed
unable  to  speak,  and  if  he  did  Mr.  M.  forgot  what  he  said,  as  was  often  the
case  when  he  came  out  of  the  trance  state.  But  I  remember  one  incident
which  must  have  occurred  soon  after  our  loss,  but  I  have  not  the  date
of  it  here.  Mr.  S.  M.  came  one  Sunday  to  dine  with  us.  He  looked
strange  and  remarked  to  me,  '  I  have  seen  your  husband  again,  and  he  sent
you  a  message  which  I  do  not  understand.'  He  seemed  troubled,  and  I  saw
he  was  unable  to  take  any  dinner.  Suddenly  he  took  out  his  pocket-book
and  rapidly  wrote  something  in  one  of  the  sheets,  tore  it  out  and  lianded  it
to  me  saying,  '  Can  you  make  anything  out  of  this  ? ' I  saw  a  message

written  '  Tell  dearest  all's  well.' The  word  omitted  was  a  pet  name

he  often  called  me  when  alone.  I  think  no  one  had  ever  heard  it,  and  I  am.
quite  sure  Mr.  Moses  never  had.  The  name  is  too  absurd  to  print,  as  pet
names  C)ften  are.  I  took  the  paper  from  him  and  could  not  help  smiling  to
see  the  old  familiar  pet  name  again,  and  felt  at  once  the  message  must  have
come  from  my  husband,  and  said  to  Mr.  S.  M.,  *  Oh  yes,  that  is  the  pet  name
Stanhope  used  to  use  when  we  were  alone.  I  can  show  it  to  youin  many  letters. '

I  went  upstairs  and  brought  several  down,  all  commencing  '  My  dearest  .'

As  soon  as  I  had  shewn  him  the  letter  he  looked  greatly  relieved  and  was
able  to  enjoy  his  dinner.  I  think  he  must  have  feared  he  was  being
deceived.  We  looked  on  it  at  the  time  as  a  good  test,  as  I  know  he  had
never  heard  the  name.  My  daughter  perfectly  remembers  the  incident  and
says  this  account  is  correct."

I  have  now  quoted  the  best  cases  in  Mr.  Moses'  records  of
identification  of  a  spirit  recently  departed.  It  is  in  these  recent
cases  that  the  evidence  is  simplest  and  strongest ;  and  it  will  be
observed  that  they  closely  resemble  similar  proofs  of  identity  given  in
a  long  series  through  Mrs.  Piper,  and  recorded  in  more  sporadic  fashion
elsewhere.  The  communicating  spirit  seems  to  be  little  changed,
and  to  retain  its  characteristic  interest  in  survivors  and  in  the  things
of  earth.

There  are  also  an  alleged  group  of  remoter  spirits ;  but  it  is
obvious  that  the  evidence  to  identity  which  they  can  give  must
generally  be  less  direct  and  convincing.  By  the  very  conditions  of
the  communication  they  cannot  show  commanding  intellect,  or  teach
entirely  new  truths,  since  their  manifestations  are  ex  hypothesi  limited
by  the  capacity — not  by  the  previous  knowledge — but  by  the  previous
capacity — of  the  medium.  And  if  they  give  facts  not  consciously
known  to  the  medium — facts  however  elaborate — it  may  still  be
suggested  that  these  facts  have  been  suhliminally  acquired  by  the
medium  through  some  unconscious  passage  of  the  eye  over  a  printed
page,  or  else  that  they  are  clairvoyaidly  learnt,  without  the  ageircy  of
any  ljut  the  medium's  own  mind,  though  acting  in  a  supernormal
fashion.  .  •


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainion  Moses.  105


This  is  no  merely  fanciful  hypothesis ;  nor  is  it  a  hypothesis
derogatory  to  Mr.  Moses'  own  probity.  On  the  contrary,  as  will  be
presently  seen,  he  himself  prominently  puts  forth  the  circumstance
(Rector's  copying  from  a  closed  book)  which  tells  most  strongly  for
the  view  that  the  alleged  remote  identities  may  not  really  be  concerned
at  all.  Nay,  the  guides  themselves  expressly  state — a  'propos  of  some
brief  accounts  of  musicians  said  to  be  interested  in  Mr.  Charlton
Speer — that  spirits  can  refer  to  books,  e.f/.,  their  own  biographies,
and  refresh  their  memory  thei'eby.  This  admission  of  coui'se  leaves  us
with  nothing  more  than  the  word  of  Tmperator  to  prove  that,  say,
Robert  of  Gloucester,  or  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  (who  merely  give  facts
about  their  own  writings),  were  in  reality  present.  Such  guarantee —
sometimes  only  indirectly  implied — was  enough  for  Mr.  Moses  at  the
time  ;  especially  since  these  remoter  spirits  came  in  intermixture  with
nearer  spirits,  whose  identity  could  be  better  proved.  But  in  a  serious
talk  with  me  on  the  matter  in  1886  he  withdrew  much  of  this  certainty;
— saying  that  in  the  case  t)f  some  of  the  musical  spirits  especially
he  had  had  no  inward  sensation  of  a  spirit's  presence, — such  as  he  had
had,  for  instance,  in  the  cases  of  Miss  Green  and  Mr.  Rowbotham,  given
above.  He  repudiated,  however,  the  idea  of  subconscious  memory  on
his  part  of  words  actually  seen  by  himself ;  feeling  sure  that  some  of
the  facts  automatically  written  had  never  been  beneath  his  eyes.  This
may  very  well  be  the  case ;  as  he  had  not,  I  think,  more  than  a  mere
schoolmaster's  acquaintance  with  English  literature  and  history  ;  not,
indeed,  so  much  as  would  nowadays  be  expected  from  an  English  master
in  a  school  as  good  as  that  where  he  held  a  post.  I  judge  this  largely
from  the  "Notes  by  the  Way,"  which  he  contributed  to  Z^(/^^  for  many
years;  and  in  which  he  was  certainly  not  minimising  his  actual  store  of
knowledge.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  I  caniaot  tind  in  these  historical  com-
munications any  provable  fact  which  might  not  have  been  drawn  from
some  fairly  accessible  printed  source.  There  were  certain  stanzas  from
Lydgate,  written  by  the  alleged  Zachary  Gray,  [or  Gi'ey,]  which  Mr.
Percival  verified  in  the  British  Museum.  But  these  are  to  be  found  in
Wartomls  English  Poetry ;  from  which  they  reproduce  (as  Prof.  Skeat
has  kindly  pointed  out  to  me)  a  philological  error  of  Warton's  own.  It
will  be  seen  below  that  the  power  of  reading  closed  books  is  expressly
attributed  to  Zachary  Grey  ;  and  if  he  really  possessed  it  he  probably
exercised  it  here  ;  giving  thereby,  of  course,  no  particular  proof  that  he
was  Zachary  Grey  rather  than  any  other  spirit.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Holy  Maid  of  Kent  makes  a  statement  which,  although  directly
contradicted  by  Froude  in  his  History,  is  almost  certainly  true.  She
says  that  she  was  led  by  "  torture  "  to  make  her — as  she  claims  untrue
— confession  ;  and  although  Froude  says  that  she  was  not  tortured,  it
seems  plain  that  she  received  treatment  in  prison  which  led  her  in  a


106  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


few  days'  space  absolutely  to  change  her  tone,  and  give  in  to  her
accusers.  "  Torture"  is  not  a  legal  term  ;  but  without  any  published
contemporary  order  on  the  matter  there  might  have  been,  and  pro-
bably was,  a  very  sufficient  reality.  This  point  also,  making,  so  far
as  it  goes,  in  favour  of  the  identity,  passed  unobserved  at  the  time.

I  will  now  give  the  account  of  Rector — one  of  the  alleged  remoter
spirits — as  to  a  quotation  from  a  closed  and  unknown  book.

38. — Rector.  This  spirit  is  very  intimately  associated  with  Mr.
Moses,  and  habitually  writes  for  Imperator,  and  for  the  group  of
guides  generally.  His  handwriting  comes  more  and  more  to  resemble
that  of  Mr.  Moses  himself.  To  him,  moreover,  is  attributed  the  power
of  reading  in  books  unknown  to  Mr.  Moses,  and  of  writing  out  matter
there  found  through  Mr.  Moses'  hand.

The  Reading  of  Books  by  Spirits.
Q.  Can  you  read  1

A.  ' '  No,  friend,  I  cannot,  but  Zachary  Gray  can,  and  Rector. I  am
not  able  to  materialise  myself,  or  to  command  the  elements."
Q.  Are  either  of  those  spirits  here  ?

A.  "  I  will  bring  one  by  and  by. I  will  send . . . Rector  is  here."

Q.  I  am  told  you  can  read. Is  that  so  ? Can  you  read  a  book  1

A.  [Spirit  handwriting  changed.] "Yes,  friend,  with  difficulty."

Q.  Will  you  write  for  me  the  last  line  of  the  first  book  of  the  ^neid  ?

A.  "Wait.  Omnibus  errantem  terris  et  fiuctihis  cestas."

[This  was  right.]

Q.  Quite  so.  But  I  might  have  known  it.  Can  you  go  to  the  book-case,
take  the  last  book  but  one  on  the  second  shelf,  and  read  me  the  last
paragraph  of  the  ninety-fourth  page  ?  I  have  not  seen  it,  and  do  not  even
know  its  name.

A.  "I  will  curtly  prove  by  a  short  historical  nari'ative,  that  popery  is  a
novelty,  and  has  gradually  arisen  or  grown  up  since  the  primitive  and  pure
time  of  Christianity,  not  only  since  the  apostolic  age,  but  even  smce  the
lamentable  union  of  kirk  and  the  state  by  Constantine."

[The  book  on  examination  proved  to  be  a  queer  one  called  Boger's
'■^  Antipopopriestian,  au  attemjjt  to  liberate  and  purify  Christianity  from
Popery,  Politikirkality  and  Priestrule."  The  extract  given  above  was
accurate,  but  the  word  "  narrative  "  substituted  for  "account."]

Q.  How  came  I  to  pitch  upon  so  appropriate  a  sentence  ?

A.  "I  know  not,  my  friend.  It  was  by  coincidence.  The  word  was
changed  by  error. I  knew  it  when  it  was  done,  but  would  not  change."

Q.  How  do  you  read  ? You  wrote  more  slowly,  and  by  fits  and  starts.

A.  "  I  wrote  what  I  remembered,  and  then  I  went  for  more.  It  is  a
special  eifort  to  read,  and  useful  only  as  a  test.  Your  friend  was  right  last
night  ;  we  can  read,  but  only  when  conditions  are  very  good.  We  will  read
once  again,  and  write  and  then  impress  you  of  the  book  : — 'Pope  is  the  last
great  writer  of  that  school  of  poetry,  the  poetry  of  the  intellect,  or  rather
of  the  intellect  mingled  with  the  fancy.' That  is  truly  written. Go  and


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  107


take  the  eleventh  book  on  the  same  shelf.  [I  took  a  book  called  Poetry,
Momance  and  Rhetoric.^  It  will  open  at  the  page  for  you.  Take  it  and
read,  and  recognise  our  power,  and  the  permission  which  the  great  and
good  God  gives  us,  to  show  you  of  our  power  over  matter.  To  Him  be
glory.  Amen."

[The  book  opened  at  page  145,  and  there  was  the  quotation  perfectly
true.  I  had  not  seen  the  book  before  :  certainly  had  no  idea  of  its
contents.] [These  books  were  in  Dr.  Speer's  library. — F.W.H.M.]

It  is  plain  that  a  power  such  as  this  of  acquiring  and  reproducing
fresh  knowledge  interposes  much  difficulty  in  the  way  of  identifying  any
alleged  spirit  by  means  of  his  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  his  earth-life.

The  spirit  "  Imperator  "  claims  responsibility  for  the  whole  series
of  manifestations  and  should  therefore  be  mentioned  here,  although
there  is  no  proof  of  his  identity  with  the  historical  personage  whom
he  asserts  himself  to  be.  His  character,  however,  claimed  and  obtained
Mr.  Moses'  entire  confidence.  He  answers  for  the  identity  and
veracity  of  spirits  introduced  ;  he  explains  the  phenomena,  so  far  as
they  are  explained  ;  and  he  throughout  impresses  on  Mr.  Moses  his
own  teaching.

If  such  high  and  sweeping  claims  were  made  by  any  ordinary
writer,  we  should  expect  to  find  much  in  the  course  of  his  writings
which  would  prove  their  extravagance.  If  we  ask  oui'selves  how  to
disprove  Imperator's  claims  we  shall  find  no  very  definite  answer.  We
may  indeed  suggest  that  he  seems  to  have  reposed  more  confidence  in
the  spirits  styling  themselves  Magus  than  they  altogether  deserved.
And  of  course  we  shall  say,  with  varying  degrees  of  emphasis,  that  the
teaching  which  he  olfers  as  the  highest  boon,  and  which  Mr.  Moses
accepts  as  such,  is  by  no  means  so  novel  or  so  illuminating  as  is  some-
times implied.  But  this  is  only  to  say  that  Imperator  is  not  our
appointed  guide  ;  that  it  is  not  we  who  are  directly  reached  by  his
exhortation  or  argument.  His  utterances,  like  other  human  utterances,
fall  short  of  the  universality,  the  permanence,  which  their  author  would
fain  give  them.  But  in  regard  to  their  primary  end,  the  develop-
ment of  Mr.  Moses'  own  soul,  I  know  not  if  words  of  more  weight
could  have  been  spoken,  or  that  sturdy  and  downright  spirit  led
onwards  by  any  surer  way.

We  have  now  briefly  surveyed  the  principal  members  of  the
numerous  group  of  spirits  alleged  to  have  communicated  with  Mr.
Moses  in  various  ways.  The  facts  relating  to  them  have  been  of  a
complex  kind,  and  it  will  be  convenient  here  to  discuss  some  of  the
questions  which  they  suggest.

1.  In  the  first  place  let  us  review  the  group  of  communicating-
spirits  as  a  whole,  and  see  if  we  can  form  any  conclusion  as  to  the


108  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


reason  why  certain  spirits,  and  not  others,  desired  or  were  able  to
indicate  their  presence.

2.  Next  let  us  try  to  ascertain  what  degree  of  presence  or  influence
is  intended  to  be  implied  by  the  various  forms  of  impressional  or
physical  manifestation.

3.  And,  lastly,  let  us  consider  what  proofs  of  identity  should  be
asked  for,  or  might  conceivably  be  given,  or  have  actually  been  given
by  the  spirits  in  question.

1.  Taken  in  itself,  the  list  of  communicating  spirits  seems  to
consist  of  names  selected  almost  at  random.  From  various  explana-
tions given  by  Imperator,  we  see  that  this  list  may  be  divided  as
follows  : —

(a)  A  group  of  high  spirits,  aiming  at  the  advance  of  knowledge,
and  especially  of  religion,  who  have  been  able  to  discern  Mr.  Moses'
gifts,  and  have  to  some  extent  themselves  trained  him  for  the  purpose
required.  They  have  modified  his  early  life  :  for  instance,  by  prompt-
ing him  to  his  period  of  retirement  on  Mount  Athos,  and  by  keeping
him  from  wishing  to  marry.  Some  of  these  spirits,  however,  stand  in
very  distant  relation  to  Mr.  Moses,  and  their  indications  of  presence
or  collaboration  are  of  a  purely  arbitrary  kind.

There  are  a  group  of  spirits,  it  is  said,  belonging  to  various  ages
and  countries,  who  are  united  by  their  desire  to  inform  mankind
of  their  destiny  and  duties.  Each  member  of  this  group  desires
to  show  approval  when  an  attempt  is  made  at  such  communica-
tion. They  cannot  all  take  an  active  share,  but,  while  some  work
actively,  others  express  sympathy  by  choosing  either  a  signature,
or  some  special  physical  manifestation,  to  be  associated  with  their
names,  even  if  not  actually  produced  by  themselves.  This  form  of
communication  is  of  course  not  meant  to  be  in  itself  evidential ;  it
depends  on  the  confidence  reposed  in  the  "control"  in  charge  of  the
manifestations  ; — much  as  when  letters  of  encouragement  are  read
at  a  public  meeting,  their  genuineness  is  taken  on  trust  from  the
chairman.  Even  when  the  handwriting  produced,  (either  automatically
through  the  medium,  or  directly,  without  the  intervention  of  human
hands),  resembles  that  of  the  deceased  person,  this,  as  elsewhere  ex-
plained, does  not  in  itself  prove  identity.  Well-known  signatures
especially  may  be  copied  by  other  spirits.

As  soon,  however,  as  it  is  understood  that  such  messages  are  not
intended  to  be  evidential,  it  seems  not  unnatural  that  they  should
be  given  thus.  It  needs  no  derogation  from  the  dignity  of  even  the
highest  spirit  to  express  his  sanction  of  any  scheme  designed  to
convey  to  "  men  of  goodwill,"  in  fashion  however  humble  and  un-
assuming, some  message  of  their  eternal  fate.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  109


But  where  identity  is  absolutely  unprovable,  as  in  the  case  of  this
group  of  "men  of  old  time,"  it  would  be  futile  to  discuss  the  probabilities
on  either  side.  I  cannot  blame  Mr.  Moses  for  his  injunction  to  leave
these  spirits — eminent  but  not  Divine — under  the  mask  of  the  symbolic
titles  which  they  chose  to  assume.  His  reverence  for  Imperator  was
of  a  filial  type  which  led  him  to  desire  that  although  there  must  be
discussion  about  the  doctrines,  there  should  be  none  about  the  actual
personality  of  the  teacher  to  whom  he  felt  that  he  owed  all  that  was
best  in  his  own  inner  life.

(6.)  The  second  group  of  communicating  spirits  consists  of  relatives
and  friends  of  the  sensitive,  or  of  other  members  of  the  group.  This
would  seem  natural  on  any  hypothesis,  and  the  most  curious  question
is  not  as  to  who  is  included  in  the  list,  but  as  to  who  is  omitted.
There  is  no  power  of  summoning  any  spirit  at  will.  And  it  seems  that
some  spirits  cannot  return  ; — either  from  something  in  their  own  con-
stitution, or  because  they  are  restrained  by  over-ruling  guides  from
what  might  be  prejudicial  to  their  progress.  During  this  series  of
seances,  an  intimate  friend  of  all  the  sitters — mentioned  in  the  M.S.S.
as  "  Sunshine  " — passed  away  from  earth.  For  her  return,  or  for  some
message  from  her,  however  slight,  Mr.  Moses  and  his  friends  ask  with
a  persistency  which  should  surely  have  produced  for  them  her  sem-
blance, if  the  messages  had  been  but  the  shadow  of  their  desire.  Yet
she  never  manifests  her  presence  in  any  way  ;  and  the  message  of  the
guides  about  her  is  always  that  she  is  sleeping  ;  and  that  even  when
she  wakens  it  will  not  be  thought  fit  for  her  to  revisit  earth.

Somewhat  similarly,  Mr.  Moses'  own  father  manifests  only  once,
controlling  his  son's  hand  to  write  one  short  "  word  of  fatherly
greeting,"  and  no  more.

It  may  be  the  case  that  the  world  beyond  the  grave  is  a  world  of
moral  and  emotional  affinities,  freed  from  merely  casual  or  spatial
separations.  But  in  communicating  across  the  gulf  this  is  not  yet
thus ;  and,  as  on  earth  itself,  the  deai'est  may  be  inaccessible  to  us,
while  strangers  press  to  our  side.

(c.)  The  third  group  consists,  in  fact,  of  undesired  intruders; — -
spirits  mainly  of  low  type  and  recently  discarnated, — sometimes  by
their  own  violent  act.  These  intrusions  were  occasionally  of  value  as
evidence; — as  in  the  case  of  the  man  killed  by  a  steam-roller,  given
above.  But  the  guides  discourage  the  appearance  of  such  spirits,  even
warning  Mr.  Moses  to  avoid  tldnking  of  them,  lest  they  thereby  gain
strength  to  infest  him.  As  a  rule,  indeed,  they  effected  no  injury
beyond  a  day  or  two's  restlessness  or  fatigue.  On  one  occasion  only,
when  his  own  mind  was  greatly  troubled  by  a  gross  wrong  which  had
been  done  to  him,  and  which  he  found  it  very  hard  to  forgive,  he
seemed  to  feel  a  prolonged  and  injurious  presence  of  bad  spirits  taking


110


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


pleasure  in  his  angry  thoughts,  and  fanning  his  resentment.  But  it  is
of  importance  to  note  that  on  the  whole  the  occasional  inconveniences
of  his  sensitivity  to  spirit-influence  were  as  nothing  in  his  own  view
compared  with  its  benefits ;  the  sense  of  uplifting  and  strengthening
which  the  communion  of  higher  souls  often  brought  to  him,  and  even
their  every-day  help  (as  he  believed)  in  getting  through  his  heavy  work
without  breaking  down.

When  he  spoke  to  me  of  these  benefits  during  his  lifetime,  I
supposed  them  to  be  mei-ely  subjective  ;  but  I  confess  that  the  study  of
all  this  intimate  matter  has  brought  me  nearer  to  his  point  of  view  ;
presenting  me  with  a  picture  of  a  character  originally  somewhat  lack-
ing in  width  and  suavity,  but  essentially  honest,  resolute  and  manly,
and  controlled  and  discij)lined  into  progress  by  spirits  higher  and  wiser
than  himself.

(d.)  A  fourth  and  very  important  group  consists  of  spirits  willingly
admitted  by  the  guides,  as  contributing  proofs  of  identity  while
satisfying  their  own  desire  to  communicate.  Such  were  Abraham
Florentine  and  "  Blanche  Abercromby," — the  first  of  them  apparently
wishing  to  reach  his  wife  with  his  message; — the  second — with  a  touch
entirely  characteristic  of  that  spirit  as  known  to  myself  on  earth — -
impelled  by  the  mere  desire  to  confess  that  she  had  been  wrong  ; —
to  atone  instantly  and  unreservedly  for  the  injustice  of  her  previous
distrust.

It  is  in  cases  of  quite  recent  departure  (I  repeat),  like  the  two  here
mentioned,  that  the  evidence  for  identity  seems  to  me  strongest.  la
remoter  cases,  although  facts  unknown  to  the  automatist  may  be
produced,  the  hypothesis  of  personating  spirits,  never  absolutely  re-
futable, will  have  more  plausibility  than  it  has  with  the  sudden  eager
messages  as  from  those  who  have  just  touched  another  shore.

2.  And  this  brings  us  to  our  second  question  ; — as  to  what  degree
or  kind  of  presence  or  influence  is  intended  to  be  asserted,  or  can  by
us  be  accepted,  in  messages  taken  as  genuinely  in  some  way  emanating
from  their  alleged  authors.  In  such  an  enquiry  we  are  bound  to  begin
by  ridding  our  minds  as  far  as  we  can  of  the  conventional  notion  of  a
personality  consisting  of  one  centre  of  consciouness  only,  operating  in
one  place  alone.  Even  for  the  incarnated  spirit  such  a  conception  has
elsewhere  been  shown  to  be  in  various  ways  too  narrow.  Even  the
constraining  prison  of  the  body,  with  its  one  (though  partially  dupli-
cated) brain,  through  which  all  consciousness  must  find  expression,
cannot  prevent  the  co-existence  of  more  than  one  stratum  of  conscious-
ness, nor  the  temporary  transposition  of  what  seems  the  main  centre
of  consciousness  to  a  distance  from  the  body.  "When  the  centripetal
force  of  the  body,  so  to  call  it,  is'  withdrawn,  we  must  expect  a  still
greater  possibility  of  multiple  centres  of  consciousness,  of  dissociations


Tlte  Experiences  of  W.  Stavnton  Moses.


Ill


of  the  elements  of  personality.  I  have  elsewhere  compared  "  haunt-
ings  "  to  "  dreams  of  the  dead  ; "  to  some  vague  persistent  thoughts,
that  is  to  say,  which  may  exist  in  the  disembodied  spirit,  alongside  of
its  fuller  and  truer  existence,  and  may  objectify  themselves  to  terrestrial
perception  as  though  representing  the  entire  departed  soul.

Mr.  Moses'  experiences  throw  some  light  on  this  view.  In  the  first
place,  in  the  case  of  the  higher  spirits,  it  is  expressly  asserted  that  they
can  act  upon  him  from  a  distance,  and  can  attend  to  many  matters  at
the  same  time.  And,  in  the  second  place,  spirits  of  ordinary  type,  not
neccesarily  low  or  "earth-bound,"  are  represented  as  recognising  the
presence  of  friends,  and  especially  of  a  sensitive,  near  their  graves.
Grotesquely  enough,  this  was  a  source  of  real  annoyance  to  Mr.  Moses
every  Easter.  It  so  chanced  that  Mrs.  Moses'  house  at  Bedford,  to
which  her  attentive  son  paid  frequent  visits,  stands  near  a  Moravian
churchyard.  The  Moravians,  it  seems,  are  in  the  habit  of  singing  over
the  graves  of  their  dead  at  six  o'clock  every  Easter  morning,  and  Mr
Moses'  bedroom  used  to  be  filled  with  the  noise  of  spirits  agitated  by
the  ceremony!.  It  is  not  implied,  however,  that  all  these  spirits
were  present  in  such  a  manner  that  they  were  no  longer  conscious  and
active  elsewhere.

And  we  may  conceive  that  the  whole  concern  with  earth  of  a  spirit
long  departed  may  occupy  as  small  a  part  of  his  total  being  as  the
remaining  link  with  the  body  occupies  in  the  being  of  a  recently
departed  soul.  The  evidential  inference  from  all  this  will  be  that  we
cannot  use  written  communications  of  remote  spirits  as  evidence  of  any-
thing like  what  we  on  earth  should  term  actual  presence.

3.  These  preliminaiy  considerations  apply  to  all  the  messages,  of
whatever  nature  their  actual  content  may  be.  We  must  now  'oriefly
go  through  the  points  which  make  a  message  prirnd  facie  evidential,
which  indicate,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  actually  does  come  in  some  way
from  its  alleged  source.  This  question,  however,  has  been  so  often
discussed  in  these  Proceedings  that  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  main
stages  of  evidential  quality  in  messages  given  by  automatic  writing  or
by  trance-utterances  is  all  that  will  be  needed  here.

1.  Evidentially  lowest  comes  the  class  of  messages  which  is  by  far
the  most  common  ;  messages,  namely,  in  which,  although  some  special
identity  may  be  claimed,  all  the  facts  given  have  been  consciously

1  I  may  mention  here  that  Mr.  Moses  told  me  that  he  often  saw  spirits  standing
about  in  his  bedroom  while  he  undressed.  He  said  that  he  was  too  tired  to  talk  to
them,  and  that  if  not  looked  at  or  encouraged  they  disappeared.  It  may  be  remembered
that  Mr,  Rowbutham  (case  35)  manifested  in  this  way  to  Mr.  Moses  when  alone.  It
is  not  unlikely  that  there  would  have  been  more  recognitions  of  this  kind  had  Mr.
Moses  sought  them  with  more  zeal  ;  but  as  soon  he  had  become  convinced  as  to
identity,  his  own  interest  reverted  mainly  to  Imperator's  teachings.


112  The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.


known  to  the  automatist.  Here  we  may  well  suppose  that  his  own
personality  alone  is  concerned,  and  that  the  messages  have  a  subliminal,
but  not  an  external  source.

2.  Next  above  these  come  messages  containing  facts  likely  to  be
known  to  the  alleged  spirit,  and  not  consciously  known  to  the  automa-
tist ;  but  which  facts  may  nevertheless  have  sometime  been  noted  by
the  automatist,  even  unwittingly,  and  may  have  thus  obtained  lodge-
ment in  his  subliminal  memory.

3.  Next  come  facts  which  can  be  proved, — with  such  varying
degrees  of  certainty  as  such  negative  proof  allows, — never  to  have
been  in  any  way  known  to  the  automatist ;  but  which  nevertheless
are  easily  to  be  found  in  books ;  so  that  they  may  have  been  learnt
clairvoyantly  by  the  automatist  himself,  or  learnt  and  communicated
to  him  by  some  mind  other  than  that  of  the  alleged  spirit.

4.  Above  this  again  would  come  that  class  of  experimental  mes-
sages, or  posthumous  letters,  of  which  we  have  as  yet  only  one  good
(although  rather  remote)  example ;  where  the  departed  person  has
before  death  arranged  some  special  test, — some  fact  or  sentence  known
only  to  himself,  which  he  is  to  transmit  after  death,  if  possible,  as  a
token  of  his  return.  Every  serious  student  of  these  problems,  I  think,
should  do  this  ; — should  write  down,  for  instance,  some  sentence, — so
significant  to  himself  that  he  may  hope  to  remember  it  after  the  shock
of  death  ; — should  seal  the  letter  and  entrust  it  to  safe  keeping,  and
then  should  seek  in  the  next  world  any  method  open  to  him  of  com-
municating the  test  sentence  to  survivors.  ^

5.  Thus  much  for  the  various  kinds  of  verbal  messages,  which  can
be  kept  and  analysed  at  leisure.  We  must  now  turn  to  evidence  of  a
different  and  not  precisely  comparable  kind.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  not
these  inferences  from  written  matter  which  have  commonly  been  most
efficacious  in  compelling  the  sui'vivor's  belief  in  the  reality  of  the
friend's  return.  Whether  logically  or  no,  it  is  not  so  much  the  written
message  that  he  trusts,  but  some  phantom  of  face  and  voice  that  he
knew  so  well.  It  is  this  familiar  convincing  presence, — eiVro  8e  Bin-KiKov
avTco, — on  which  the  percipient  has  always  insisted,  since  Achilles
strove  in  vain  to  embrace  Patroclus'  shade.

How  far  such  a  phantasm  is  in  fact  a  proof  of  any  real  action  on  the
part  of  the  spirit  thus  recognised  is  a  problem  which  has  been  dealt
with  already  in  various  papers  on  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  The
upshot  of  our  evidence  to  my  mind  is  that  although  the  apparition
of  a  departed  person  cannot  jjer  se  rank  as  evidence  of  his  presence,

1  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I  now  hold  a  good  many  of  such  test-letters  ;  and  we  shall  of
course  be  glad  to  receive  others,  under  such  various  conditions  as  the  senders  may
impose.


The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses.  113


yet  this  is  not  a  shape  which  purely  hallucinatory  phantasms  seem  often
to  assume  ;  and  if  there  be  any  corroborative  evidence,  as,  for  instance,
writing  which  claims  to  come  from  the  same  person,  the  chance  that  he
is  really  operative  is  considerable.  In  Mr.  Moses'  case  almost  all  the
figures  which  he  saw  brought  with  them  some  corroboration  by  writing,
trance-utterance,  gesture-messages  (as  where  a  figure  makes  signs  of
assent  or  dissent),  or  raps.

6.  And  this  brings  us  to  a  class  of  cases  largely  represented  in  Mr.
Moses'  series,  where  writings  professing  to  come  from  a  certain  spirit
are  supported  by  physical  phenomena  of  which  that  spirit  claims  also
to  be  the  author.  Whether  such  a  line  of  proof  can  ever  be  made
logically  complete  or  no,  one  can  imagine  many  cases  where  it  would
be  practically  convincing  to  almost  all  minds.  Materialisations  of
hands,  or  direct  writing  in  the  script  of  the  departed,  have  much
of  actual  cogency  ;  and  these  methods,  with  others  like  them,  are,  as
we  have  seen,  employed  by  Mr.  Moses'  "controls"  in  their  eiforts  to
establish  their  own  identities.  Physical  phenomena  in  themselves,
indeed,  carry  no  proof  of  an  intelligence  outside  that  of  the  sensitive
himself.  Trance  utterance,  or  automatic  script,  also,  as  we  have  seen,
falls  short  in  itself  of  proving  the  action  of  an  external  mind.  When
Grocyn,  for  instance,  answers  questions  by  making  musical  sounds
(heard  by  all  present)  in  the  air,  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  the
sensitive's  own  di'eam  should  clothe  itself  in  Grocyn's  imagined  per-
sonality, and  should  then  exteriorise  itself  in  objective  phenomena,
corresponding  to  that  self-suggestion.  Where  all  is  so  obscure,  such
possibilities  should  be  duly  noted ;  but  the  hypothesis  seems  too  far-
fetched to  be  permanently  acceptable.

But  the  questions  now  opening  before  us  involve  too  much  of
discussion  and  of  theory  to  fall  suitably  within  this  series  of  items  of
definite  evidence.  In  these  two  papers  I  have  given,  I  think,  a
sufficiently  full  account  of  Mr.  Moses'  physical  phenomena,  explaining
my  reasons  for  believing  in  their  genuineness  ;  and  also  a  sufficiently
full  account  of  communications  professing  to  proceed, — and,  as  I
believe,  for  the  most  part  really  proceeding, — from  spirits  who  have
recently  quitted  this  earthly  life.  Much  more  matter  remains;  matter
which  seems  to  me  to  help  us  towai'ds  a  more  coherent  view  as  to
the  nature  of  relations  between  disembodied  spirits  and  spirits  still
inhabiting  this  tabernacle  of  flesh.  At  some  future  date,  should  my
readers  desire  it,  1  shall  hope  to  recount  some  more  of  Mr.  Moses'
phenomena,  and  to  discuss  the  directions  in  which,  taken  in  con-
nection with  other  phenomena  of  like  nature,  they  seem,  however
dimly  and  obscurely,  to  direct  our  onward  view.


114


Miss  X."


IV.

ON THE APPARENT SOURCES  OF
SUBLIMINAL  MESSAGES.

By  "Miss  X."


[For  the  benefit  of  any  readers  who  may  not  be  familiar  with
previous  volumes  of  our  Proceedings,  it  is  well  to  state  that  "  Miss  X.''
is  the  lady  who  contriljuted  a  paper  on  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-
Vision,  printed  in  Vol.  V.,  p.  486,  and  a  paper  entitled  A  Record  of
Telepathic  and  other  Experiences  in  Vol.  VI.,  p.  .358. — H.  Sidgwick.]

The  aim  of  the  following  pages  is  solely  that  of  presenting  a
familiar  subject  from  a  less  familiar  point  of  view.  Much  has  already
been  written  on  the  question  of  the  Sources  of  Messages  ;  many
theories  propounded  which  it  is  not  my  concern  either  to  establish
or  confute  ;  many  experiences  quoted,  to  wliich  it  is  not  in  my  power
to  add  much  that  is  new,  or  anything  that  is  startling.  I  simply
make  an  attempt  to  examine  a  few  simple  experiences  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  Subject,  rather  than  from  that,  more  familiar,  of  the
spectator  or  the  experimenter.

My  own  experiences,  from  which  I  propose  to  draw,  have  in  them
little  of  the  marvellous  ;  they  are  all  of  a  most  ordinary  nature;  they
claim  no  merit  but  that  of  being  carefully  observed  and  recorded.  For
that  very  reason — because  they  present  no  special  difficulties,  because
they  are  for  the  most  part,  as  compared  with  others  which  have  been
described  to  us,  mere  commonplace — they  are  perhaps  the  better
material  for  elementary  enquiry.

I  have  attempted  in  several  instances,  mainly  of  so  trivial  a  nature
as  not  to  absorb  one's  conscious  attention  at  the  moment  of  their
occurrence,  to  analyse  the  impression  which  they  created,  to  observe
the  nature  of  the  sensations  they  aroused,  and  to  measure  the  degree
and  kind  of  the  emotion  or  train  of  thought,  if  any,  by  which  they
were  accompanied.

That  this  analysis  is  far  from  satisfactory,  I  am  quite  as  conscious
as  the  severest  critic  could  wish  ;  this  is  the  case  for  many  reasons,
some  of  them  sufficiently  obvious.  The  analysis  of  sensation  is  pro-
verbially difficult  at  all  times,  and  the  analysis  of  sensation  in  some
degree  apart  from  one's  ordinary  experience,  apart  largely  from  that
of  others,  having  little  analogy  with  other  strata  of  one's  conscious-


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  115


ness,  little  help  from  antecedent  probability  and  ordinary  a  pi'iori
deduction,  has  in  it  perhaps  some  elements  of  especial  perplexity.

I  propose  to  deal  with  such  phenomena  as  are  purely  spontaneous,
for,  directly  the  question  of  experiment  is  introduced,  we  introduce
also  the  element  of  that  self-consciousness  which  I  venture  to  think
fatally  destructive  of  just  those  conditions  which  it  is  most  useful  to
observe.  And,  just  because  of  this,  just  because  the  phenomenon  is
in  greater  or  less  degree  a  shock,  it  is  very  obvious  that  we  have,  at
the  outset,  the  inevitable  condition  of  surprise  which,  in  some  sort,
disqualifies  the  subject  for  exact  observation.

We  might  compare  our  position  with  that  of  an  estate  holder  who,
with  the  help  of  a  Divining  Rod,  has  lately  discovered  a  fertile  spring
upon  his  property.  A  few  years  ago  we  were  prepared  to  admit  the
possible  existence  of  water  somewhere,  deep  down,  far  out  of  sight,
but  we  were  less  prepared  to  admit  that  there  were  possibilities  of  in
some  degree  commanding  a  supply  by  empirical  methods.  A  few  had
brought  to  us  specimens  of  the  precious  fluid.  Most  of  us  knew  people
who  had  some  sort  of  experience  for  which  they  could  not  account,
but  we  dismissed  the  phenomena  as  so  far  removed  from  ordinary
experience  as  to  seem  either  wholly  fortuitous,  or  mere  charlataniy.
The  word  "fortuitous  "  we  now  modify  into  "  spontaneous,"  recognis-
ing that  the  phenomena  are  governed  by  laws,  however  little  known
or  understood.  In  place  of  professional  charlatanry  we  have  now  the
results  of  organised  experiment.  The  Divining  Rod  has  been  found
to  respond  to  other  than  professional  manipulation,  and  systematised
enquiry  has  become  possible.  We  no  longer  dispute  the  existence  of  the
phenomena.  We  even  classify  the  methods  of  their  production  under
such  groupings  as  "automatism,"  "  telepathy,"  "hypnotic  suggestion,"
self-suggestion,  and  the  like.  But  our  classifications  sometimes  merely
name  while  powerless  to  explain  the  phenomena.  We  want  to  go  a
step  further  back,  to  formulate,  if  possible,  some  system  which  shall
help  us  to  refer  effect  to  cause.  And  when  we  remember  that  our
material,  our  unit  of  thought,  is  not  mere  inorganic  matter  or  a  gas,
a  group  of  animals  or  plants,  but  a  sentient,  thinking  human  being,
it  seems  as  if  our  enquiry  should  have  special  advantages  and  facili-
ties, in  that  we  are  not  dependent  solely  on  our  own  observation — that
the  subject  of  our  enquiry  can  intelligently  participate  in  the  experi-
ment, can  itself  observe,  analyse,  and  record.

When  considering  the  various  psychological  experiments  of  the
kind  now  so  familiar  to  us,  which  aim  at  classifying  and  explaining
the  impulses  and  emotions  of  the  jiatient,  one  is  sometimes  tempted  to
ask,  as  in  regard  to  other  forms  of  vivisection,  What  is  the  Subject's
point  of  view  1  This  is  the  standpoint  from  which  I  propose  to  indicate
not,  as  yet,  a  clue  to  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  Sources  of


116


"3Iiss  X.


Subliminal  Messages,  but,  rather,  a  few  of  the  difficulties  which  beset
us  in  the  attempt.

My  friends  have  often  said,  "  Surely  you  must  have  some  impres-
sion of  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon  while  it  is  passing,  whether  the
message  comes  from  without  or  from  within,  how  far  it  is  externalised,
■whether  your  vision — supposing  a  vision  to  be  in  question — is  an  exter-
nalisation  of  your  own  thought  or  mental  perception;  whether  it  is,
so  to  speak,  an  emanation  from  some  mind  still  in  the  flesh,  or  whether
it  is  some  definite  message  from  a  discarnate  mind  ?  "

Such  a  question,  it  might  seem,  should  be,  by  an  intelligent
observer,  easy  of  answer.

I  confess,  however,  to  feeling  gi'eat  sympathy  with  those  who  find
it  difficult  to  analyse  sensations  of  this  kind — possibly,  even,  some  im-
patience with  those  who  have  a  pigeon-hole  ready  prepared  and
docketed  for  the  reception  of  each  impression  as  it  arises.

I. — Let  me  illustrate  this  point  from  the  very  simplest  class  of
messages  with  which  I  am  personally  familiar,  those  in  which  a
message  is  received,  having  no  obvious  corresponding  sense  im-
pression.

One  morning,  July  20th,  1890,  I  had  spent  the  whole  morning,  for
I  was  recovering  from  recent  illness,  lying  on  a  long  chair  on  the
lawn.  I  could  not  move  without  help,  and  was  therefore  incapacitated
from  going  back  to  the  house  and  forgetting  that  I  had  done  so,  as
might  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  About  twelve  o'clock  a  friend
casually  calling,  came  through  the  drawing-room  window  into  the
garden  to  talk  to  me.  When  she  returned  to  the  house  about  half  an
hour  later,  a  book  which  she  had  left  in  the  hall  was  not  to  be  found,
and  after  a  prolonged  hunt  in  every  likely  place,  she,  with  another
friend,  came  back  to  the  garden  to  see  whether  she  could  have  left  it
near  me.  On  hearing  their  story  I  at  once  remarked,  "  The  book  lies
on  the  blue-room  bed."  The  statement  seemed  wildly  improbable,  as
the  room  in  question  was  not  in  use,  and  was  seldom  entered  even  by
the  servants.  There,  nevertheless,  on  the  bed,  the  book  was  found.
Some  workmen  had  come  into  the  house  during  the  morning,  bringing
a  number  of  pictures  and  books  belonging  to  a  friend,  to  be  taken  care
of  for  a  short  time,  and  these,  for  safety,  had  been  placed  in  the  dis-
used rootn,  the  book  lying  on  the  hall  table  having  been  accidentally
included  with  the  new  arrivals.

Now,  how  is  one  to  explain  a  circumstance  of  even  this  simple
kind  1  One  can  hardly  dismiss  it  as  mere  "  coincidence,"  for  this  is
but  a  specimen  of  a  type  of  incident  which  occurs  very  frequently.
It  would  be  somewhat  far-fetched  to  call  it  "  telepathic,"  as  the  book
was  unconsciously  removed,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that
the  workman  was  aware  of  having  included  it  among  those  he  was


On  the  A^yparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  117


carrying.  No  one  in  the  house  had  seen  its  removal.  The  impression
cannot  have  been,  in  any  literal  sense,  clairvoyant,  because  there
was  no  conscious  picture  in  my  mind.  I  formed  no  vision — of  a  kind
often  seen — of  the  whereabouts  of  the  volume.  I  had  no  reason  for
the  statement.  I  was  not  conscious  even  of  forming  a  guess.  I
can  only  describe  the  impulse  in  some  such  phrase  as  "It  came  into
my  head  to  say  " — this,  and  many  other  things  of  a  like  kind,  equally
true,  equally  improbable,  and  equally  unexpected.

I  would  group  this  with  another  case  with  which  it  has  some
features  in  common,  though  the  source  of  the  message  is  perhaps  more
■apparent.  A  very  intimate  friend  had  died,  and  we  found  a  sad
pleasure  in  reading  and  discussing  the  many  notices  of  his  life  and
work  which  appeared  in  newspapers  and  magazines.  One  afternoon
his  sister,  a  friend,  and  myself  were  speculating  as  to  the  probable
authorship  of  an  article  containing  details  of  a  kind  so  intimate  that
we  felt  sure  the  author  must  be  a  personal  friend.  Several  names  were
suggested  and  dismissed  ;  at  last  one  of  my  friends  remarked  :  "I  seem
to  have  a  hazy  notion  who  it  ought  to  be,  but  I  can't  get  hold  of  it."
At  that  moment  my  eye  fell  upon  the  paper  in  question,  and  across  it
I  read  in  the  handwriting  of  my  deceased  friend  (I  do  not  give  the
real  name)  Henry  Roberts — a  name  which,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  I
never  heard  before.  "  That  is  the  man  !  "  my  friend  exclaimed — when
•our  companion  interrupted,  "  What  Roberts  do  you  mean  1"  "  The
Oxford  man."  "But  I  don't  remember  one.  Where  does  he  live ?  "
•"I  don't  know.  I  don't  fancy  he  belongs  to  any  college."  At  this  point
■ — again  on  the  paper  before  me,  and  again  in  the  handwriting  of  my
friend — I  read  (I  do  not  give  the  real  name)  Montagu  Street.

It  so  happens  that  both  of  my  friends  are  much  more  familiar
with  Oxford  than  I  am,  and  the  street  I  have  called  "  Montagu  "  is  a
very  unimportant  one.

The  friend  who  had  recognised  the  name  of  the  man  was  not  able
to  say  whether  my  further  statement  was  correct,  but  the  other  lady
remarked,  "  There  is  a  Montagu  Street,  I  know  ;  but  the  only  man  I
can  remember  living  there  is  one  whose  name  I  forget — a  great  botan-
ismgman."  "That  is  Roberts,"  said  my  friend.  "  He  is  a  botanist,
•and  he  and  my  brother  were  great  friends,  and  so  the  statement  is  quite
likely  to  be  true."

Now  the  crowning  mystery  of  this  story  is  that  it  wasn't  true,  and
the  article  was  written  by  some  one  quite  different ;  so,  had  I  accepted
the  communication  as  coming  from  my  deceased  friend  (which
happily  I  did  not)  I  should  have  added  one  more  to  the  multitude  of
■cases  one  constantly  hears  of — of  lying  spirits  and  false  messages —
which  would  have  been  for  me  a  very  new  and  a  very  distressing  ex-
perience indeed-


118


"Miss  X.


I  find  no  difficvxlty  in  supposing  that  I  received  the  name,  Henry
Roberts,  from  the  mind  of  my  friend  who  was  trying  to  think  of  it^
instances  of  sub-conscious  knowledge  coming  to  the  surface  in  the
mind  of  a  second  person  more  readily  than  in  that  of  the  thinker,,
being  common  enough.  The  "  Montagu  Street"  question  is  a  little
more  difficult ;  but  we  may  perhaps  explain  it,  either  as  forgotten
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  friend  who  transmitted  the  name  Henry
Roberts,  or  as  a  forgotten  association  with  the  name  Henry  Roberts,,
on  the  part  of  our  other  friend,  who  knew  the  name  of  the  street,  and
not  that  of  the  man.

In  both  of  the  cases  quoted  two  of  the  fi-iends  present  were  those
who,  in  former  accounts  of  experiments  and  observations,  have  been
referred  to  as  D.  and  H.,  and  it  seems  likely  that  their  presence  was  in
some  sense  contributory  to  the  experience,  though,  in  the  case  of  the
lost  book,  their  ignorance  of  its  whereabouts  was,  to  their  great  incon-
venience, as  complete  as  my  own.

In  a  former  paper  I  gave  some  examples  of  common  percipience,  or
collective  thought-transference,  of  H.  and  myself,  and  speculated  as  to
whether  she  or  I  were  to  be  considered  the  Agent  in  such  experiences.
A  very  recent  example  would  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  suggest  that  the
message  was  transmitted  through  her,  though  the  experience  lends  itself
also  to  another  interpretation.

On  Saturday,  January  l"2th,  1895,  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  mornings
I  went  into  D.'s  room  and  found  her  writing  letters.  She  happened
almost  immediately  to  be  called  away,  and  left  saying — "  I  was  just
writing  to  H.  You  may  as  well  go  on  with  the  letter."  Accordingly,  I
took  up  the  pen,  when  "it  came  into  my  head  "  to  write,  as  under  other
circumstances  it  might  have  "  come  into  my  head  "  to  say,  that  I  feared
she  had  been  ill  or  troubled  lately,  and  I  hoped  that  nothing  was  wrong.
It  so  happens  that  I  don't  write  to  H  once  in  six  months,  and  I  was.
somewhat  struck  by  the  nature  of  this  revival  of  our  correspondence,
and  added  half  a  page  of  nonsense  and  chatter  to  take  the  edge  off.  I
am  constantly  in  the  society  of  her  family  and  friends,  I  had  had  a  letter
from  her  husband  at  Christmas  saying  that  H.  was  too  much  occupied
with  guests  to  write,  and  neither  D.  nor  I  had  any  reason  whatever  to-
suppose  that  anything  distressing  had  occurred.  Later,  on  the  same  day,
one  of  her  .sisters  called,  and  we  naturally  asked  for  the  latest  news  of
H.  We  were  met  with  the  assurance  "Oh  she's  all  right ;  very  busy,"^
and  I  dismissed  my  fears.  The  same  evening,  however,  D.  received  a,
letter  from  H.  written  early  that  morning  to  ask  "do  you  know  if  any-
thing is  wrong  with  K.  [a  younger  sister]  ?  I  kept  hearing  her  call  me  in
the  night  and  fear  that  she  is  ill," — the  enquiry  being  made  of  D.  rather
than  of  her  own  family  because  K.  is  somewhat  nervous.  During  a  long
illness  some  years  ago,  H.,  the  elder  sister,  had  acted  as  K.'s  nurse,  and


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  119


had  been  accustomed  to  be  frequently  aroused  during  the  night,  and
to  be  ready  at  all  hours  of  the  day  to  obey  the  call  of  the  invalid.
K.,  who  is  now  in  average  health,  had,  we  found,  in  point  of  fact  been
suffering  at  the  time  referred  to,  and  her  thoughts  had  naturally  turned
to  her  former  nurse.

The  following  is  H.'s  account  of  the  receipt  of  my  enquiry.

February  10th.

"  I  remember  well  the  letter  I  received  from  [D.]  dated  January  12fcli.
I  am  very  sorry  I  destroyed  it.  The  letter  in  question  was  begun  by  [D],
and  then  the  rest  of  the  first  page  was  written  by  you,  in  which  were  con-
tained these  words  in  your  handwriting,  '  [X]  is  staying  here  till  Monday.
She  is  quite  well,  thank  you,  but  what  is  wrong  with  you  1 '  This  letter  I
received  the  following  day,  Sunday,  January  13th.  On  Saturday,  12th.,
the  same  day  on  which  you  and  [D.]  wrote  yours,  I  wrote  to  [D.]  telling  her
how  I  had  been  disturbed  on  Friday  night  by  hearing  K.  call  out,  and
seeing  her  with  a  very  distressed  face."

The  following  is  from  the  letter  to  D.  to  which  H.  refers.

January  12th.

"  Last  night  I  could  not  sleep  much,  and  I  had  been  awake  a  long  while
when,  some  time  after  4  o'clock  I  think,  I  heard,  as  if  it  were  in  the  room,
K.'s  voice  ...  I  turned  and  saw  her,  looking  ghastly.  I  can't  get  her
face  out  of  my  mind;  1  hope  she  is  all  right."

Commenting  upon  the  incident  under  date  February  10th,  H.
writes  : —

"  I  was  much  worried  about  it  all  day,  and  mentioned  it  to  my  husband
and  to  Mrs.  R.,  and  they  both  remember  it."

There  was  nothing  in  my  writing  which  could  be  called  "automatic."
I  knew  perfectly  well  what  1  was  going  to  say,  and  was  equally  con-
scious of  the  unreasonableness  of  the  impulse.  At  the  same  time  though
not  under  any  compulsion  to  write,  I  felt,  as  in  many  such  cases,  that
the  impulse  to  write  was  stronger  than  the  impulse  to  refrain.  As  a
mere  questioii  of  distance,  K.,  who  lives  a  few  hundred  yards  away,  was
more  likely  to  affect  me  than  H.,  who  lives  a  hundred  miles  away  ;  and
yet,  unless  the  whole  thing  were  a  mere  coincidence,  K.'s  distress,  close
by,  was  the  exciting  cause  of  a  message  which  reached  me  from  a  dis-
tant county.  It  is  worth  while  to  mention  that,  though  I  have  received
many  impressions  from  H.,  they  have  all  been  veridical,  as  have  hers
from  me,  with  the  one  possible  exception  that  she  wrote  to  D.  a  few
weeks  ago  asking  whether  I  had  lost  a  stone  out  of  a  pearl  ring,  when,
in  point  of  fact,  I  had  shortly  before  lost  an  amethyst  out  of  another
ring  on  the  same  finger.  This  might  have  been  a  chance  coincidence,
though  it  seems  the  less  likely  for  the  fact  that,  so  far  as  I  know,  I  never


120


"Mss  X."


lost  a  stone  out  of  a  ring  before,  and  H.  never,  except  on  that  occasion
received  the  impression  of  my  having  lost  anything.

I  had  a  cm*ious  series  of  impressions  of  this  kind, — unexternalised —
last  September  under  I'ather  special  circumstances.

I  had  been  asked  by  the  owners  of  a  house,  reputed  to  be  haunted,
to  pay  them  a  visit,  in  the  hope  of  elucidating  the  mystery  of  the  alleged
ghost.  I  had  heard  the  details  of  the  case  from  a  neighbour  of  theirs,
and  beyond  the  invitation  had  had  no  correspondence  with  them,  and
knew  absolutely  nothing  about  them,  except  that  they  were  young-
married  people  with  some  little  children,  and  were  very  highly  respected.
I  had  a' ready  formed  the  conclusion  that  the  phenomena  were  mainly
subj  active,  and  that  it  was  a  case  for  Bell,  Book  and  Candle,  and  know-
ing that  the  alleged  ghost  had  been  the  occasion  of  real  distress,  I  felt
some  responsibity  for  my  visit,  which  I  thought  would  either  remove  or
emphasize  the  discomfort  of  my  host  and  hostess,  and  of  others  depen-
dent upon  them.  I  was  anxious,  as  far  as  possible,  to  earn  their  con-
fidence, to  secure  such  help  as  might  be  in  the  difficult  task  of  uproot-
ing, in  the  course  of  a  day  or  two's  visit  from  a  total  stranger,  an  idea
which  had  had  possession  of  their  minds  for  over  two  years.  It  is
almost  the  only  time  when  I  have  really  longed  for  the  power  of
controlling  phenomena,  so  as  to  be  able  to  "show  off"  at  will.

I  knew,  however,  that  wishing  would  not  help  matters,  and  that  I
must  await  events.

My  hostess  drove  me  up  from  the  station  and  courteously  expressed
her  sense  of  the  trouble  I  had  taken  in  coming  to  so  uncanny  a  house
and  among  entire  strangers.  "  We  all  tried  guesing  what  you  would  be
like,"  she  said,  "  but  it  matters  much  more  to  you  what  we  are  like."
There  was  my  chance,  "  Perhaps  I  know,"  I  said,  "  let  me  describe  your
husband;" — and  hardly  knowing  from  one  phrase  to  another  what  I  was
going  to  say.  I  sketched  a  personality  which  I  had  certainly  not  con-
sciously conceived,  and  which  had  certain  marked  pecularities,  — "  very
tall,  extremely  thin,  with  low  forehead  and  unusually  overhanging  brows
and  deep  set  eyes,  clean  shaven."  I  quote  from  memoranda  made  at
the  time.  My  hostess  listened  in  silent  surprise,  and  her  only  comment
was  "You  must  have  seen  him  !  "  Next  we  discussed  the  house.  "Have
you  had  it  ever  since  you  were  married?"  I  asked,  "No,"  she  said,
"  we  first  lived  at  another  place  a  few  miles  off.  We  came  here  two
years  ago."  "  And  in  the  meanwhile  you  went  to  New  Zealand  ?  "  I
was  impelled  to  remark.  This  too  proved  correct,  though  I  said  it  with
as  little  perception  of  its  meaning  as  if  I  were  pronouncing  words  in  an
unknown  language.

Later,  when  I  came  downstairs,  after  changing  my  dress,  I  was
introduced  to  my  host,  who  had,  I  found,  been  suitably  impressed
by  the  account  of  these  lucky  hits. Something  was  said  of  a  visitor


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  SiMiminal  Messages.  121


to  lunch  the  following  day.  "Is  her  name  Clara  Stimpson  ?"  I  was
again  prompted  to  enquire. This  too  proved  correct. ^

So  far  my  impulses  had  been  impulse  merely,  without  any  sense  im-
pressions. The  words  "  rose  to  my  lips,"  in  a  very  literal  sense.  But
when  a  gentleman  present  asked  me  how  "  Stimpson,"  not  a  common
name,  was  spelt,  I  had  a  momentary  visualisation.  The  name  is  familiar
to  me  only  as  that  of  a  certain  London  tradesman,  who  spells  it  Stim-
son.  One  of  his  carts  rose  before  my  mind's  eye  with  the  letter  p
inserted  in  the  name  above  the  s.  "  With  a  p,"I  said  confidently,  which
was  correct.

The  next  day  I  was  returning  alone  from  a  walk,  when  I  met  my
host  in  the  carriage  drive.  "Miss  Stimpson  is  here,"  he  said.  "She
knows  about  what  you  said  last  night,  and  we  want  to  see  whether
jou  can  pick  her  out  from  the  three  ladies  on  the  lawn."

I  am  too  slow-sighted  to  distinguish  easily  even  those  with  whose
personality  I  am  familiar,  and  I  felt  that  here  again  was  a  case  for
self-abandonment.  I  walked  up  with  perfect  confidence  to  one  of  the
three  (they  were  all  of  about  the  same  age  and  general  appearance)
and  said,  "  You  are  Miss  Stimpson,"  which  proved  correct.  This
however,  by  itself,  would  not  be  of  any  value,  as  I  had  only  two
chances  of  missing.

After  that  I  was  reduced  to  terror  lest  it  should  occur  to  my
new  friends  to  ask  awkward  questions  dangerous  to  my  new  found
reputation.  I  was  by  no  means  reassured  when  I  learnt  that  part  of
the  programme  arranged  for  me  Avas  that  I  should  "  tell  them  their
fortunes  !  "

This  I  declined,  but  offered  to  "  read  their  characters."  The
power  of  character-reading  is  of  course  simply  a  result  of  the  habit  of
observation,  and  in  four  of  the  cases  present  I  knew,  before  I  began,
that  I  should  find  the  task  easy  enough.  But  I  was  not  prepared  to
find  myself  sketching  scenes  in  their  past  lives,  and  I  listened  with  as
little  expectation  and  quite  as  impersonally,  as  if  the  voice  speaking
were  that  of  some  one  else.

It  would  not  be  fair  to  repeat  these  statements,  but  all  who  were
present  will  bear  me  out  in  saying  that  the  facts  were  all  perfectly
correct,  and  perfectly  definite  in  kind.

I  may  add,  incidentally,  that  I  succeeded  in  "  laying  the  ghost "  so
far  that,  though  the  previous  manifestations  had  been  very  frequent,
nothing  has  been  heard  of  him  since  the  date  of  my  visit  (August  29th
to  September  1st,  1894.)

I  have  long  felt  that  some  degree  of  exaltation  is  conducive  to
experiences  of  this  kind. This  of  course  may  be  of  all  degrees  and

1  Clara  Stimpson  is  the  real  name.


122


"Miss  X:"


varieties,  the  one  necessary  condition  being,  I  believe,  self-abandon-
ment, and  self-forgetf illness — whatever  the  motive.  In  the  present
instance  my  motive  was  a  very  strong  one,  and  I  never  remember
having  so  many  impressions  of  the  kind,  without  a  single  failure,  in
the  course  of  so  short  a  time,  for  all  occurred  within  24  hours  of  my
arrival,  after  which,  as  I  felt  that  the  necessary  preliminaries  were
achieved,  and  I  had  other  work  to  accomplish,  nothing  moi'e  of  the
kind  liappened.

I  have  sent  a  copy  of  the  passages  in  my  diary  referring  to  the
above  incidents  to  my  host  and  hostess,  with  the  following  note,  which
they  have  signed  : —

"  The  above  statements  are  perfectly  true,  and,  so  far  as  we  know.  Miss
X.  could  not  have  obtained  the  knowledge  she  displayed  of  our  private
concerns  by  any  recognised  method."

In  my  diary  I  hnd  another  recent  example  of  this  unformulated
impulse  to  express  what  has  never  been  consciously  a  thought.

In  this  instance  I  cannot  attribute  the  impulse  in  any  degree  to
special  interest  in  the  subject  concerned,  for  nothing  could  be  more
futile,  more  absolutely  without  importance  except  merely  as  a  psycho-
logical curiosity.

On  August  15th  last  I  was  staying  with  my  friend,  Mrs.  T.,  at  a
hotel  in  Scotland.  When  I  wanted  to  ring  for  the  maid  in  the  morn-
ing, I  found  that  my  bell-pull  was  broken,  and  there  was  nothing  for
it  but  to  go  to  the  door  of  ray  friend's  room,  and  ask  her  to  ring,  and
give  the  necessary  order.

Knowing  that  she  was  in  bed,  and  the  door  locked,  I  intended  to
call  out,  "  Will  you  ring  your  bell,  please,"  but  the  words  resolved  them-
selves into,  "Who  is  Frances  at  Eastbourne  V  "I  must  be  going  daft,"
I  thought,  and  when  my  friend  called  back,  "  What  ?  What  did  you
say  V  I  succeeded,  though  with  an  effort,  in  telling  her  of  my  needs.
It  was  not  till  we  were  creeping  up  the  Caledonian  Canal  some  few
hours  later  that  I  had  an  opportunity  of  telling  her  of  the  ridiculous
incident.  "  I  don't  know  any  Frances,  do  you  ?  "  I  added.  My  friend
laughed  heartily,  and  answered,  "Well,  no,  I  don't,  but  I  had  a  letter
yesterday  about  a  Frances,  who  is  going  to  Eastbourne,  in  whom  I  feel
some  second-hand  interest  What  sort  of  a  Frances  ? "  To  my  own
surprise  I  had  an  answer  ready.  "A  Frances,"  I  said;  "an  oldish  lady
in  a  cap."  "  Quite  true,"  said  ray  friend,  "  I  have  never  seen  the  lady,
but  she  must  be  quite  old  enough  to  wear  a  cap."  Mrs.  T.  confirms
her  share  of  this  incident  as  follows : —

"[On]  August  15th,  as  we  were  going  up  the  Caledonian  Canal  on  the
steamer.  Miss  X.  said  to  me  '  Who  is  Francos  at  Eastbourne  1 '  I  was  very
astonished,  as  I  do  not  know  the  Frances  in  question,  but  one  of  my
correspondents  a  few  days  previously  liad  told  me  of  her  visit  to  them  at


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  SuhLiminal  Messages.  123


Eastbourne.  When  I  asked  Miss  X.  for  details,  she  said,  '  I  know  the
Frances  is  a  woman,  because  of  the  way  the  name  is  spelt,  and  she  is  an
oldish  lady  with  a  cap.'  "

In  a  later  note  Mrs.  T.  adds  : —

"The  Frances  in  question  is  an  oldish  lady  and  probably  wears  a  cap."

This  sort  of  thing  is  almost  irritating.  It  is  quite  useless,  and
not  even  amusing.  If  there  is  only  a  certain  allowance  of  thought-
transference  or  clairvoyance  or  the  like,  why  cannot  it  be  more
usefully  expended  ?  In  my  own  case  I  am  not  even  able  to  deduce  any
conclusions.  I  have  expressed  all  I  am  conscious  of  concerning  it
"when  I  say — "  it  came  into  my  head."  I  believe,  too,  that  I  am
justified  in  adding — "  and  such  as  the  information  is,  I  always  feel
that  it  is  true."

II. — Another  group  of  subliminal  messages  is  that  which  externa-
lises itself  in  visual  form.  I  find  that  others,  less  accustomed  than
myself  to  the  receipt  of  messages  from  the  sub-conscious  stratum  of
one's  mind,  find  it  somewhat  diflicult  to  sympathise  in  my  feeling  that
this  class  is  less  startling,  more  natural,  so  to  speak,  than  the  group,
in  some  way  more  simple,  with  which  I  have  dealt,  so  far.  There  is
always,  to  me,  something  weird,  something  which  quickens  one's  pulses
and  excites  the  kind  of  physical  discomfort  known  as  "  feeling  a  cold
wind,"  familiar  to  frequenters  of  seances,  in  listening  to  unfamiliar
statements  proceeding  from  one's  own  lips,  in  not  knowing  what  you
may  be  led,  or  perhaps  driven,  to  say  next.

As  I  have  had  occasion  to  state  in  previous  articles,  I  habitually
think  in  terms  of  sight.  Though  often  congratulated  on  the  possession
of  unusual  powers  of  memory,  I  am  absolutely  unable  to  recall  any-
thing which  I  cannot  visualise.  Even  numbers  when  heard  only,  not
seen,  I  associate  with  musical  sounds,  and  these,  in  turn  with  combina-
tions of  colour.  Consequently  every  idea  or  recollection,  consciously
dwelt  upon,  is  visualised,  and  in  many  cases,  dramatised, — that  is,  my
pictures  have  life  and  movement.  For  this  reason,  a  scene  conjured
up  either  in  the  crystal  or,  as  the  professional  medium  would  say,  "in
the  sun-oundings  "  of  those  about  me,  has  in  it  none  of  the  disconcert-
ing elements  of  the  less  externalised  impression.  It  is  more  in  con-
formity with  my  habits — has  a  greater  share  in  my  consciousness  ;.
moreover  it  is,  except  in  the  rare  cases  of  "  collective  hallucination,"
my  own  property,  with  which  I  am  not  obliged  to  part,  except  by  ray
own  choice.

And  here  I  should  like  to  say,  in  the  interests  of  those  whom  such
of  us  as  "  collect  cases  "  are  perpetually  badgering  for  evidence,  that  I
believe  the  instinct  of  the  subject  of  such  experience  is  to  be  silent
about  it. I  was  disposed  till  lately  to  regard  as  a  personal  peculiarity


124


"Miss  Xr


the  sort  of  dumbness  which  strikes  one  at  the  moment  of  its  occur-
rence. I  can  go  away  and  write  it  down — I  can  talk  about  it  later  ;
I  can  even  while  it  is  present  make  trivial  remarks  on  other  topics,
and  "  keep  up  "  a  conversation,  but  it  is  obviously  easier  to  say  to  an
afternoon  visitor,  "Do  you  take  sugar'?"  or  " Won't  you  have  some
more  cake  ? "  than,  "  Don't  be  startled — but  your  deceased  husband —
or  an  unknown  lady — or  a  portion  of  the  countenance  of  some  human
being,  sex  indeterminate,"  as  the  case  may  be,  "  is  looking  over  your
left  shoulder."  My  visitor  might  not  like  it,  for  one  thing  ;  one  has  a
guilty  sensation  of  listening  at  key -holes,  for  another;  for  myself  I  have
■always  the  physical  discomfort  of  being  out  of  breath  (a  fact  which
may  suggest  more  explanations  than  one),  and  finally  one  feels  much
as  the  young  man  does  over  his  first  sonnet  (school-exercises  not  being
counted),  which  he  locks  up  in  his  desk  for  a  length  of  time  propor-
tionate to  the  depth  of  the  sentiments  which  gave  it  birth.

When,  during  my  late  visit  to  Scotland,  I  was  brought  in  contact
with  more  seers  in  six  weeks  than  in  the  whole  of  my  previous  life-
time, I  had  the  opportunity  of  noting  the  same  conspiracy  of  silence,
and  of  seeking  to  discover  its  cause.  Again  and  again  I  came  across
stories,  which,  if  true,  and  I  had  no  reason  to  doubt  them,  went  to
show  that,  over  and  over  again,  catastrophes  might  have  been  averted,
and  trouble,  greater  or  less,  arrested  in  its  course,  if  those  who  saw
visions  would  have  spoken  out  in  time.  I  quote  in  illustration  one
story  which  struck  us  with  some  indignation,  and  which  we  had  at  first
hand  from  the  principal  actor  and  the  principal  witness,  two  young
xnen  working  in  a  quarry  not  far  from  Oban.  One  of  the  two,  the
fifth  seer  in  a  direct  line  in  his  family,  had  a  brother  who  was  about  to
row  in  a  regatta  on  a  loch  some  miles  away.  It  was  arranged  that  the
quarrymen  were  to  join  him,  but  when  the  day  came  for  their  projected
holiday,  the  seer  declined  to  go,  or  to  allow  his  friend  to  go,  but  would
give  no  reason.  Later,  a  telegram  came  to  say  that  the  brother  was
drowned.  "  I  knew  it,"  said  the  seer  ;  "  I  knew  it  was  to  be  so."  We
asked  why  he  had  not  warned  his  brother  against  his  impending  fate.
He  seemed  to  think  the  very  notion  profane — an  interference  with  "the
will  o'  the  Lord."  We  asked  why  he  did  not  at  least  tell  of  his  vision,
and  allow  others  to  draw  their  own  inferences.  That,  he  said — and  we
heard  this  and  the  other  excuse  dozens  of  times — would  never  do  ;
if  you  did  that  "ye'd  hae  nae  mair,"  and  indeed  we  constantly  heard
of  "telling  of  the  first"  as  a  means  of  curing  oneself  of  being  a  seer
against  one's  will.

I  cannot  always  share  the  impatience  which  the  psychical
investigator  often  shows  towards  the  witness  who.  did  not  relate  his
dream  or  intuition  in  time  to  make  a  good,  well-evidenced  "  case  "  of
it. The  tendency  to  delay,  however  interpreted,  is  one  in  which  I  can


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Siiblimincd  Messages,  125


sympathise  and  I  often  record  an  intuition  with  a  secret  longing  to
anathematise  the  training  which  has  made  my  conscience  troublesome
on  such  points.

But  to  return  to  the  question  of  visualised  impressions,  or  intuitions,
or  transference  of  thought.

The  first,  example  I  shall  quote  is  one  in  support  of  which  I  can
bring  no  direct  evidence.  Had  it  occurred  lately  I  could  not,  in  the
nature  of  things,  tell  the  story  at  all.  Two  intimate  fi'iends  who  heard
it  a  few  days  after  its  occurrence,  can  testify  that  the  story  has  not
varied  in  the  interval,  but  that  is  all  in  the  nature  of  corroboration
I  can  offer.

We  all,  probably,  know  the  sensation  on  being  introduced  to  any
one  who  excites  our  interest  or  curiosity,  of  making  a  conscious  effort
to  grasp  the  stranger's  individuality — an  effort  quite  different  from  the
spontaneous  sympathy  established  with  a  friend.  In  my  own  case
this  effort  is  occasionally  assisted  in  a  somewhat  unusual  manner.  A
picture  will  form  itself  in  the  background  of  the  stranger,  which  sug-
gests a  clue  to  the  problem  he  presents — some  indication  of  a  dominant
factor  in  his  life  or  experience,  the  origin  of  which  I  find  it  difficult  to
ascertain. Thus  : — ■

I  was  visiting  for  the  first  time  at  the  house  of  a  friend  who  had
recently  married.  Her  husband  I  had  never  met,  but  all  that  I  had
ever  heard  led  me  to  expect  to  find  him  an  agreeable  gentleman  of  good
birth,  fortune,  and  position.  We  were  introduced,  and  I  soon
perceived  that  he  had,  at  least,  the  wish  to  please,  and  to  show  hospi-
tality to  all  the  guests  assembled.  However,  from  the  first  moment
that  1  had  opportunity  to  observe  him  carefully,  I  was  troubled  by  a
curious  and  perplexing  hallucination. No  matter  where  he  happened

to  be — at  the  dinner  table,  in  the  conservatory,  at  the  piano  for  me

the  real  background  disappeared  and  a  visionary  scene  succeeded.  I
saw  the  same  man  in  his  boyhood — he  was  in  reality  very  youthful  in
appearance— gazing  towards  me  with  an  expression  of  abject  terror,
his  head  bowed,  his  shoulders  lifted,  his  hands  raised  as  if  to  defend
himself  from  expected  blows.

I  discovered  afterwards  that  this  scene  was  one  which  had  really
taken  place  at  a  famous  public  school,  when,  in  consequence  of  a  dis-
graceful act  of  fraud,  he  was  ignominiously  expelled,  and  had  to  "  run
the  gauntlet  "  of  his  schoolfellows.

Now,  how  is  such  a  circumstance  to  be  explained  1  My  own  feelint^
is  that  the  picture  was  symbolic  ;  that  this  was,  if  one  may  so  speak"^
a  precipitated  specimen  of  the  man's  moral  atmosphere— "  a  taste  of
his  quality  "—and  my  impression  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the
distrust  the  incident  inspired  in  my  mind  has  been  amply  justified
by  subsequent  very  disastrous  events. Such  a  scene  as  this  seems


126


"Miss  X."


analogous  to  those  suggested  by  "  trace  " — the  picture  called  up  by  a
psychometric  impression  rather  than  one  directly  telepathic.  It  would
be  far-fetched  to  suppose  that  the  scene — which  had  occurred  at  least
ten  years  before,  and  was  probably  not  a  uniquely  disgraceful  incident
— was  literally  present  in  the  mind  of  its  chief  actor.

It  was  by  the  light  of  this  very  circumstance  that  I  interpreted,
perhaps  wrongly,  for  quite  a  different  interpretation  also  suggests
itself,  a  later  circumstance  which  occurred  little  more  tlian  a  year  ago.

In  Octobei",  1S93,  I  happened  one  day  to  call  on  a  friend  who  was
engaged,  I  was  told,  with  a  visitor  from  the  north.  Though  the  visitor
was  unknown  to  me,  I  recognised  his  name  as  that  of  a  con-espondent
of  whom  I  remembered  nothing  definite  except  that  he  had  spoken  of
himself  as  the  pupil  of  a  certain  professor,  whose  lectures  in  philosophy
and  logic  I  had  myself  attended.

By  some  accident  I  i-emained  standing  for  a  minute  or  two  before
he  was  introduced  to  me,  and  had  thus  an  opportunity  of  observing
him,  which  I  did  with  some  interest.  I  have  already  explained  more
than  once  that  I  am  so  strong  a  visualiser  that  my  impressions,  when
at  all  vivid,  constantly  assume  an  objective  form,  and  I  see  them  before
me  as  a  picture,  often  allegorical.  On  this  occasion  I  saw,  standing
near  Mr.  H.,  the  tall  figure  of  a  Hindoo  whose  dress  and  bearing  I
observed  carefully,  and  whose  appearance  I  took  to  be  a  symbolic  pre-
sentation of  the  thought  which  passed  through  my  mind,  "  You
don't  look  much  like  philosophy,  not  a  Kantian  or  Hegelian  anyway,
mystic  possibly — meditative  and  receptive — not  observant  or  critical.
Perhaps  you  have  played  with  theosophy."

When  I  moved  across  the  room  for  conversation,  the  figure  disap-
peared, but  some  time  later,  when  our  talk  liappened  to  turn  on  the
sources  of  messages,  I  mentioned  the  circumstance,  and  Mr.  H.  seemed
deeply  interested.

On  November  23rd  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  H.  reminding  me
of  the  incident,  and  asking  me  (saying  that  he  would,  later,  explain
his  reasons)  to  answer  the  following  questions  : —

1.  When  and  where  did  you  see  the  vision  ?

2.  T(.i  what  nationality  did  he  belong  ?

3.  How  was  he  dressed,  and  in  what  colour  ?

4.  Did  he  wear  anything  on  his  head  ?

5.  What  colour  was  his  hair  ?

6.  What  sort  of  features  ? Lips  thick  or  thin  ?

7 .  What  was  his  manner  towards  me  ?

I  answered  these  questions  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and  by  return
of  post  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  H.  relating  that  a  few  days  before
(November  20th)  he  had  had  an  interview  with  a  clairvoyant  footman


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  2Iessages.  127


who  had,  quite  spontaneously,  described  the  same  figure  which  I  had
myself  seen  five  weeks  earlier.  For  the  sake  of  comparing  details,  Mr.
H.'s  questions  to  me  were  framed  upon  the  description  given  by  the
medium.  My  answers  were  from  memory  only,  as  I  had  made  no  note
of  the  incident  at  the  time,  and  the  following,  from  Mr.  H.'s  diary,  does
not  give  details.  I  may,  however,  observe  that  he  believes  that  there
is  no  discrepancy  between  my  earlier  and  later  descriptions.

"The  note  I  have  of  your  interview  is  as  follows  (entered  November  18th,
1893)  :— On  October  10th  or  11th  I  [was  introduced  to  Miss  X.  who  told  me]
that  on  entering  the  room  where  we  were,  she  saw  a  vision  (as  it  were)  of  an
Indian  gentleman,  presumably  a  philosopher,  standing  behind  me  and  vanish-
ing immediately  after  I  rose  to  shake  hands  with  her.  This  vision  she  said
she  interpreted  to  mean  that  I  was  under  an  oriental  control  and  should
therefore  presumably  be  fond  of  psychology,  logic,  metaphysics,  and  sj^ecula-
tive  thought  generally.

' '  She  was  careful  to  explain  that  she  did  not  regard  the  vision  as  proof  of
the  real  existence  of  such  a  spirit,  but  merely  as  a  symbolical  embodiment  or
projection  from  her  own  mind  of  a  conception  which  she  had  formed  of  my
character.  She  then  looked,  she  told  me,  at  the  shape  of  my  thumb,  and
though  not  a  believer  in  palmistry,  and  believing  that  the  lines  on  the  hands
are  inherited  from  our  prehensile  ancestors,  she  thought  tliat  this  part  being
large  was  indicative  of  some  considerable  logical  argumentative  or  reasoning
power."

[This  is  not  quite  what  I  meant  to  convey.  I  considered  Mr.  H.'s
hand  very  interesting  from  the  curious  resemblance  of  a  somewhat
unusually  shaped  thumb  to  that  of  a  Parsee  acquaintance,  a  great
student  of  logic  and  of  classical  and  oriental  mysticism.  I  have  never
been  convinced  of  the  justice  of  the  pretensions  of  the  alleged
"  Science  "  of  palmistry,  but  I  often  glean  indications  fi-om  what  one
may  call  the  expression  of  the  hand,  and  have  sometimes  found  that  the
palm  may  act  as,  so  to  speak,  apoi»i<  de  repere  for  thought-transference
or  intuitional  impressions.]

I  now  append  Mr.  H.'s  report  on  his  comparison  of  evidence  : —


"Mm  X."

On  entering  the  room  I  saw  a  vision
of  a  man  standing  behind  you.

He  was  an  Indian  ;  a Hindoo,  or
perhaps  a  Parsee.


His  clothes  were  white,  apparently
cotton  or  thin  silk  with  a  coloured
bordering.


T/ie  Footman.

There's  a  man  standing  by  you
now.

He  is  a  furrener  (foreigner).  He
isn't  white  and  he  isn't  black,  but
he's  a  kind  of  dark  orange,  a  sort
of  Mulatto  colour.

He's  dressed  all  in  white  ;  he's  got
a  kind  of  brown  holland  suit  on.


128


"Miss  X."


"  Miss  X."

He  had  a  white  cotton  or  silk  turban
on  his  head,  with  a  red  edge.

His  hair  and  his  whiskers  were  very
dark.

His  lips  were  rather  thin  but  not  re-
markable.

He  stared  before  him  with  Hindoo
indifference,  but  seemed  to  regard
you  as  his  property.  He  stood
quite  close  to  you  with  his  hand  on
your  shoulder.  He  had  a  sort  of
guardian  spirit  air  ;  a  sort  of  in-
spirer  of  your  existence  air  ;  a
general  air  of  proprietorship  and  of
your  belonging  to  him.


The  Footman.

He's  got  a white turban  on  his
head.

He's  got  dark  hair  and  dark  whiskers;
very  dark.

His  lips  are  neither  thick  nor  thin,,
but  medium.

He  looks  at  you  very  lovingly.  He
knows  you  very  well,  and  looks  as
if  he  could  take  you  up  in  his
arms  and  hug  you.  He  stands
very  close  to  you,  so  he  must  be
very  intimate  with  you.


At  the  risk  of  apparent  I'epetition  I  think  it  well  to  add  Mr.  H.'s
notes,  taken  at  the  time  of  his  interview  with  the  footman,  as  in  these
cases  the  questions  are  often  almost  as  important  as  the  answers.

November  20th,  1893.
The  servant  without  any  c^uestioning  made  the  following  statements  : —
There's  a  man  standing  by  you  now.
He's  dressed  in  white,  a  kind  of  brown  hoUand  suit.
He's  got  a  white  turban  on  his  head.

He  isn't  black  and  he  isn't  white.  He's  a  kind  of  orange  or  Mulatto
colour — a  kind  of  dark  yellow.

He's  got  dark  whiskers  and  dark  hair.

His  lips  are  neither  thick  nor  thin,  but  medium.

He  looks  at  you  very  lovingly  ;  he  knows  you  very  well  and  .stands  very
close  to  you,  so  he  must  be  intimate  with  you.

I  said  :  "  Does  he  wish  to  say  anything  to  me  ?  "What  does  he  wish  me
todol"

He  said  :  ' '  He  wants  you  to  study  philosophy.  He  wishes  you  to  inves-
tigate spiritualism."

I  said  :  "  Does  he  wish  me  to  go  in  for  it  deeply  1 "'
Reply  :  "  He  says,  '  yes.'  "

I  said  :  "Does  he  wish  me  to  give  up  all  my  time  to  it  ?  "
Reply  :  "  He  says,  '  yes.'  "

I  said  :  ' '  Does  he  wish  me  to  give  up  my  profession  for  the  purpose  of
studying  philosophy  1 "

Reply  :  "  He  nods  his  head  and  says,  'yes'.  He  says,  also,  that  you  are
very  impressionable,  very  easily  impressed,  and  if  you  go  by  your  impres-
sions (?  intuitions)  you  won't  go  far  wrong."

The  letter  which  accompanies  this,  illustrates  the  difference  between
Mr.  H.'s  point  of  view  and  mine.


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Sithliminal  Messages.  129


"  See  if  this  does  not  alter  your  theory  of  the  vision.  How  could  two
diiferent  persons,  one  refined,  educated,  and  -well-connected  like  yourself,
the  other  a  poor  ignorant  working-man,  see  precisely  and  absolutely  the  same
.subjective  vision,  if  there  were  no  objective  reality  there  1  Isn't  the  '  simjjle
truth  '  hypothesis  after  all  infinitely  more  simple  and  scientific  and  credible
than  all  the  fine-spun  theories  which  seek  to  set  aside  the  theory  that  the
thing  which  we  see  first  is  that  which  it  purports  to  be  ?  I  have  no  intellectual
difliculty  in  taking  the  vision  as  a  piece  of  genuine  objective  jierception
made  by  means  of  a  sixth  sense  or  special  power  (latent  perhaps  in  all),
but  developed  only  in  a  few."

I  should  perhaps  state  that  I  have  sufficient  reasons,  into  which
however  I  need  not  enter  at  length,  for  believing  that  this  was  not,
as  might  appear,  a  case  of  that  inscrutable  omniscience  which  usually
pervades  the  kitchen.  I  am  as  certain  as  one  can  be  of  anything,  that
by  no  normal  means  could  this  man  have  heard  of  the  previous
incident.

I  reminded  Mr.  H.  of  the  probability  that  as  his  psychical  experi-
ments and  experiences  had  been  very  few  in  number,  it  was  likely  that
his  interview  with  me  might,  on  the  occasion  f  f  his  visit  to  a  medium,
be  somewhat  prominent  in  his  mind,  and  that  thought-transference
might  account  for  the  second  description  of  the  Hindoo.  I  have  no
means  of  deciding  between  the  two  interpretations.

III. — I  find  it  possible  to  distinguish  between  a  vision  of  a  living
friend  and  of  one  who  has  passed  away,  by  reason  of  the  greater  con-
creteness  of  the  phantasm  of  the  living — a  perception,  mental,  perhaps,
rather  than  sensuous  ;  but  on  very  careful  reflection,  recollection,  and
analogy,  I  can  find  no  certain  difference  in  kind  between  the  thought
image — the  visualisation  of  an  idea — and  the  so-ealled  "spirit";
suggesting  that  this,  too,  may  be  in  certain  cases  the  visualisation
of  an  idea — for  myself  a  pregnant  fact,  infinitely  suggestive.  My
own  inclination  is  invariably  to  exhaust  every  possible  normal,
even  every  possible  extension  of  natural  explanation,  before  appealing
to  what  we  call  the  supernormal,  and  I  ventured  to  urge  this  point
upon  my  correspondent.  He,  however,  assured  me  that  he  found
a  "straightforward  spirit"  a  much  more  thinkable  hypothesis  than
"  an  externalised  visualisation  of  a  symbolical  idea  subconsciously
conceived ";  and  though  I  may  have  my  opinion  on  the  case
in  point,  "I  have  no  reason  but  a  woman's  reason" — "I  think
it  so  because  I  think  it  so."  Such  things  rest,  unfortunately,  but
too  often,  on  impressions  too  subtle  for  analysis,  almost  too  subtle
for  statement.

A  curious  little  incident,  not  the  less  suggestive  and  perplexing  for
its  extreme  triviality,  occurred,  also  in  connection  with  Mrs.  T.,  while
in  Scotland  last  summer.

M


130


Miss  X."


We  were  breakfasting  alone,  very  early  and  somewhat  hurriedly,
on  the  morning  of  August  10th,  having  planned  to  take  the  coach  to
Glencoe,  when  I  suddenly  perceived  a  little  red  man  dangling  in  the
air,  a  foot  or  two  away  from  my  friend,  and  remarked  upon  the  fact.
She  looked  at  the  toast-rack  and  marmalade  in  front  of  her,  and  being
used  to  odd  statements  on  my  part,  asked  ""What  kind  of  a  red  man?"
As  he  continued  his  dangling  I  was  able  to  describe  him  in  detail.
He  was  entirely  red,  and  had  the  sort  of  outline  of  the  little  jointed
ivory  figures  one  buys  in  the  Soho  Baazar.  His  arms  were  crooked
abruptly  upwards  at  the  elbow,  and  he  ceased  a  little  above  the  knees.
Mrs.  T.  could  suggest  no  explanation,  and  we  went  our  way
leaving  him,  so  far  as  I  know,  still  dangling  from  an  invisible  string.
We  did  not  return  till  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  Mrs.  T.,  having
entered  the  house  first,  met  me  as  I  came  in  at  the  front  door,  saying
"There's  your  red  man!"  and  showed  me  a  letter  she  had  just
received  marked.  Immediate — To  be  forwarded,  and  sealed  in  red
wax  with  the  impress  of  precisely  the  figure  I  had  described.  The
letter  had  arrived  by  the  first  post,  shortly  after  our  departure,  and
was  of  consequence.

We  have  kept  the  seal,  which,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  I  had
never  before  seen,  and  Mrs.  T.  has  written  a  separate  account,  as
follows  : —

"One  morning  at  breakfast,  (August  13th),  during  our  Scotch  tour,
Miss  X.  said,  to  me,  '  I  have  a  hallucination  this  morning  of  a  little
red  man  dancing  about  on  the  table;  he  has  no  legs,  and  has  one  of  his  arms
crooked  up  in  a  funny  fashion  ;  he  has  something  to  do  with  you,  not  me,
as  he  keeps  dancing  about  in  front  of  you.'  I  could  not  account  for  the
little  red  man  in  any  way  ;  but  in  the  evening  I  found  among  my  letters
(which  had  arrived  after  we  had  gone  out  in  the  morning)  one  of  some
consequence,  with  a  red  seal,  an  impression  of  a  man  without  legs,  and
holding  a  flag  or  sword  in  one  hand."

No  cudgelling  of  my  brains  or  stirring  up  of  my  memory  avails
to  contribute  anything  further.  I  simply  saw  the  little  red  man,  he
suggested  no  association,  and  I  assigned  him  to  my  friend  merely
because  he  seemed  to  belong  to  her  "  surroundings."

Once  while  we  were  out  I  observed  a  girl  with  a  heraldic  device
in  her  hat,  sitting  next  to  the  coachman  in  his  red  jacket.  We
speculated  as  to  the  possibility  of  his  correspondence  with  my  vision.
But  I  felt  at  the  time  he  wouldn't  do.

I  should  like,  before  passing  on  to  another  point,  to  illustrate  what
I  have  said  as  to  the  sense  of  abstraction  which  accompanies  the  image
of  one  who  has  passed  away.

It  has  happened  to  me  many  times,  so  vivid  are  these  phenomena,
to  mistake  a  phantasm  for  a  living  person,  for  the  moment,  but  only


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  131

for  the  moment.  I  believe  that  this  is  merely  a  consequence  of  my
extreme  slow-sightedness  as,  when  the  time  sufficed,  the  mistake  has
always  been  corrected.  If  the  vision  has  only  sufficient  duration  I
become  conscious  of  its  independence  of  my  environment.  In  every
case  that  I  am  personally  able  to  recall,  the  living  phantasm  brings
with  it  some  hint  of  its  own  surroundings,  of  the  things  with  which
it  has  some  real  relation — the  dead  seem  to  be  abstracted  from  any
surroundings  whatever.

Now  for  my  illustration.  An  old  family  friend,  a  very  accom-
plished musician,  had  directed  my  musical  studies  from  my  earliest
childhood.  He  had  a  very  highly  strung,  artistic  temperament,  yet,
strange  to  say,  was  an  absolute  Materialist.  He  was  so  closely  associ-
ated with  my  favourite  study  and  my  desire  to  please  him  by  diligence
and  perseverance  was  so  intense,  that,  when  thoughts  of  music  occupied
my  mind,  it  was  not  remarkable  that  I  should  visualise  my  old  friend
at  his  piano  or  organ.  And  it  was  always  definitely  at  his  instrument.
If  I  fancied  him  at  mine,  a  more  careful  observation  would  show  that
the  piano  before  him  was  his  own  favourite  Broad  wood.  I  would  see
him,  too,  among  the  surroundings  of  the  seaside  home  to  which  he  had
lately  removed, which, though  I  have  never  seen  it,  seems  quite  familiar,
and  I  was  glad  to  find,  on  seeing  a  photograph  of  his  studio  only  the
other  day,  that  I  had  correctly  localised  the  old  familiar  furniture.

On  the  5th  May,  1893,  I  received  a  letter  from  his  wife,  in  which
she  said  that  both  were  arettinir  old  and  feeble,  but  nothino-  of  a  nature
more  alarming.  On  the  9  th,  one  of  my  frequent  pictures  of  my  old
friend  arose  before  me.  He  looked  just  as  usual,  with  this  difference,
the  image  bore  no  I'elation  to  anything  else;  it  was,  if  1  may  so  describe
it,  a  vignette  ;  there  was  no  piano  or  violin,  and  the  sense  of  abstrac-
tion, before  referred  to,  was  very  intense.  To  a  friend,  who  endorses  the
story,  I  remarked  sadly  that  I  knew  my  old  friend  was  dead.  I  also
entered  the  impression  in  my  diary.  The  next  day  brought  the  sad
news.  I  do  not  think  there  was  any  time  coincidence.  My  friend
had  died  at  dawn,  and  my  picture  was  formed  about  9.30  a.m.,  three
hours  later.  I  have  never  classified  this  as  "a  phantasm  of  the  dead;"
it  has  rather  seemed  to  me  as  if  some  sub-conscious  knowledge  of  the
fact,  however  obtained,  served  to  modify  a  familiar  act  of  visualisation,
or,  if  we  make  thought-transference  the  basis  of  any  theoi'y  of  explan-
ation, as  if  the  seer  were  incapable  of  receiving  an  impression  of  the
new  surroundings,  as  if  the  new  atmosphere  could  not  communicate
itself,  as  if,  let  us  say,  my  friend  had  become  abstracted  from  time  and
space  and  had  no  relation  with  the  things  which  we  call  "  real.  '

Strange  to  say,  I  have  lately  had  a  similar  monition  of  the
dangerous  illness  of  my  friend's  wife.  I  give  the  story  as  noted
by  D.

M  2


132


"Miss  X"


' '  On  January  29th,  X.  and  I  were  dressing  to  go  [out]  when  I  suddenly
noticed  that  her  eyes  were  fixed  on  the  window,  in  a  manner  I  know-
well  and  have  long  learned  to  associate  with  something  '  uncanny. '  T
waited  till  her  face  regained  its  normal  expression,  and  then  asked  what  she
had  seen  or  what  she  felt.  She  turned  to  the  clock,  and  said  in  a  dreamy
far-away  tone,  'A  quarter  past  H.  I  think  Mrs.  C.  is  dead  or  very  ill.'
The  next  morning  a  letter  telling  of  the  dangerous  illness  of  the  lady
in  question  reached  X.,  from  a  relative, — a  very  rare  correspondent."

[Signed  by  D.]

My  old  friend's  illness  was  very  sudden — the  result  of  a  stroke  of
paralysis,  but  I  cannot  discover  any  time  coincidence,  unless  it  may
be  that  of  the  writing  of  the  letter,  as  to  which  my  correspondent
can  only  say,  "  it  was  somewhere  about  the  middle  of  the  morning."

And  here  I  would  say  emphatically  that  there  are  two  classes  of
phantasms  (I  use  the  word  as  less  committal  than  "  spirits,"  for  I  do
not  feel  myself  in  a  position  to  speak  with  certainty)  two  classes  of
phantasms,  of  which  I  am  unable  to  speak  from  experience,  the
phantasm  that  is  so  concrete  as  to  utilise  furniture,  remove  tables  and
occupy  chairs,  and  the  phantasm  that  is  so  abstract  as  to  be  indepen-
dent of  space,  beyond  whose  person  one  may  trace  the  pattern  of  the
wall-paper.

1  offer  another  example  of  the  possible  explanation  by  thought-
transference  of  what  at  first  sight  might  seem  a  vision  of  the
departed.

Two  years  ago  I  was  visiting  in  a  country  village  in  which  I
had  spent  much  of  my  childhood.  The  constant  companion  of  those
earlier  days  was  my  friend  M.,  who  since  my  last  visit  had  married,
gone  abroad  and  had  died.  So  intensely  was  the  thought  of  M.  associated
with  all  my  old  haunts,  and  so  complete  had  been  during  life  our
power  of  thought-transference,  that  a  vision  of  my  old  friend  in  half  a
hundred  spots  would  hardly  have  surprised  me.  Nothing,  however,  of
the  sort  occurred,  until  one  day  I  was  walking  with  a  friend  past  a
row  of  houses  built  since  my  last  visit,  and  towards  which  I  felt  only
the  distaste  of  an  old  inhabitant  for  modern  improvements.  At  the  last
house  in  the  row  I  had  a  momentary  vision  of  my  friend  M.  As,  of
course,  the  sense  of  my  friend's  loss  was  very  prominent  in  my  con-
sciousness, I  could  not,  with  any  fairness,  analyse  the  impression,  for  it
is  obviously  a  case  in  which  one  would  have  to  discount  for  expecta-
tion. It  was,  perhaps,  the  very  last  place  in  which  such  a  vision  might
be  looked  for,  still  I  never  for  an  instant  mistook  the  figure  for  any
other,  brief  as  was  the  impression  of  its  presence.

A  remark  made  to  me  the  following  day  possibly  explains  the
phenomenon.  A  sister  of  my  deceased  friend  said  to  me,  "I  want  to  take
you  to  call  on  the  T.'s. They  live  in  the  end  house  in  that  row  of  new


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  133


■villas,"  naming  the  place  of  my  vision,  "  and  would  like  to  know  you.
They  are  too  old  to  call  upon  you,  but  M.  used  to  be  there  so  much  that
I  think  you  would  like  to  meet  them.  They  think  they  saw  you  pass
the  house  yesterday."

What  more  likely  than  that  the  thought  of  M.,  so  prominent  in
several  minds,  should  have  thus  taken  shape,  perhaps,  in  some  such
fashion  as  in  a  crystal  picture. But  I  cannot  tell.

I  have,  so  far,  tried  to  express  the  effect  upon  the  Subject  of  three
stages  of  supernormal  messages.

(1.)  The  impulse  to  deliver  a  statement  which  seems  to  owe  its
genesis  to  something  apart  from  one's  own  consciousness,  to  be  inde-
pendent of  reason  or  memory,  perhaps  analogous  to  the  messages  of
clairaudience  or  automatic  writing,  but  having  no  corresponding  sense
impression,  an  elementary  form  possibly  of  the  phenomenon  known  as
"  trance  utterance."

(2.)  The  externalisation  of  an  idea,  a  symbolic  presentation  of  an
impresssion  consciously  or  sub-consciously  made.

(3.)  A  definite  sense  hallucination,  presenting  some  fact  sub-con-
sciously acquired  by  thought-transference,  clairvoyance,  or  other
means.

These  have  all  so  much  in  common  that  to  distinguish  between
them  is  not  easy  and  may  be  considered  merely  fancifuL  But  some-
times, as  in  the  following  case,  a  mind  picture  seems  to  contain  all
three  elements  at  once,  and  the  analysis  becomes  more  complex  still.

During  the  month  of  August  1893,  we  chanced  to  be  staying  in  a
sea-side  village  on  the  north  coast  of  France.  The  hotel  was  so  full
that  we  had  to  sleep  in  a  little  chalet  at  a  short  distance  away.  My
own  room  was  next  to  that  of  an  English  lady  with  whom  I  had
a  slight  acquantance,  mainly  on  the  basis  that  we  were  fellow-members
of  the  S.P.R..  But  we  had  exchanged  but  few  visits,  and  I  had  no
acquaintance  with  any  of  her  friends.

On  August  11th,  about  7.20  o'clock,  1  looked  into  her  room  on
returning  from  my  afternoon  bathe,  to  ask  if  she  would  walk  with
me  up  to  the  hotel  for  dinner.  I  found  her  lying  on  her  bed,  with  her
back  to  the  window,  and  reading  the  newspaper.  In  place  of  the  wall
behind  her,  I  seemed  to  see  the  view  of  a  sea-side  watering-place — a
view  quite  different  from  that  really  visible  through  the  window.
With  this  for  a  background,  I  saw  a  scene  which  will  be  shortly
described.

I  was  naturally  somewhat  startled,  and  hai'dly  knew  in  what
words  I  accounted  for  my  visit  ;  but  I  left  my  friend  very  hastily
and  returned  to  my  own  room.  I  there  wrote  the  following
memorandum  in  the  few  moments  which  I  could  spare  before  going
up  to  our  meal  at  the  hotel.  ^


134


"Miss  X."


"  Friday,  August  lltli,  1893.

(A)  "  I  entered  Mrs.  T.'s  room  rather  hurriedly  this  afternoon  about  7.20'
to  tell  her  that  I  was  going  up  to  the  Hotel  terrace,  and  found  myself
momentarily  confronted  with  a  startling  scene.  She  was  resting  on  her  bed,,
and  the  very  limited  space  behind  her  seemed  to  have  expanded  so  that  I
looked  straight  onto  the  sea  without  the  intervention  of  wall  or  window.  It^
was  rather  a  sea  than  what  lies  before  us  iiere.  Against  this  background  a
man  was  moving  so  that  I  saw  his  profile  only.  He  was  above  average
height — not  young — grey,  with  a  moustache — clear  cut  face — very  upright.
As  he  came  near  Mrs.  T.  he  turned  so  as  to  face  me,  but  my  attention  was-
distracted  at  that  point  by  the  intervention  of  two  other  figures  who  seized
him  from  beliind  with  gestures  which  somehow  conveyed  to  me  annoyance-
if  not  actual  malice.  These  were  two  girls,  perhaps  between  18  and  25,  but
it  is  not  quite  safe  to  say.  I  saw  only  one  distinctly;  she  was  well  outlined.
— rather  'gentlemanly  '  in  her  get  up — had  a  '  tailor-made  '  air — I  rather
think  a  shirt,  but  if  so  it  had  a  stifl'  front  or  a  man's  tie,  and  was  not  loose
and  soft.  The  other  girl  impressed  me  as  the  stronger,  but  whether  mentally
or  physically  I  cannot  say.  The  man  was  well  groomed— dressed,  I  thinky
in  grey. I  did  not  see  the  girls' faces."

While  at  table,  I  told  my  friend  that  a  wish  she  had  chanced
to  express  that  something  of  psychical  interest  would  happen  during
her  visit  seemed  to  have  been  fulfilled,  but  without  describing  the
cii'cunistances,  which  we  agreed  she  had  better  have  in  writing.
We  further  agreed  that  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  some  further
development,  it  would  be  better  that  we  should  exchange  no  ideas,
or  information  upon  the  subject.  On  our  return  to  the  chalet,  I
presented  her  with  my  memorandum.  She  expressed  great  interest,,
but  did  not  tell  me  to  what  extent  the  vision  was  veridical,  beyond
the  remai'k  that  though  the  description  of  the  gentleman  was  almosti
exact,  .she  felt  tolerably  sure  that  he  had  not  a  suit  of  the  colour
I  described.

The  next  morning  I  was  alone  in  my  room,  turning  over  in  my
mind  the  details  of  my  vision,  when  suddenly  the  whole  scene  re-
appeared. For  the  first  moment,  T  was  inclined  to  feel  that  this  was-
only  a  visualised  memory,  occurring  as  it  might  have  done  in  a  picture
in  the  crystal.  But  I  soon  perceived  that  it  was  something  more,  as
the  story  received  new  additions,  which  I  at  once  described  in  wi'it-
ing,  of  which  the  following  is  a  copy  : —

(B)  "Saturday,  11.40.  Sometimes  if  I  wait  without  seeking  for  informa-
tion I  get  my  visions  repeated  with  additions — a  recrudescent  memory,  as
I  believe,  involving  some  facts  unnoticed  at  the  moment.  I  have  now
discovered  the  name  of  one  of  the  two  girls.  As  I  was  noting  down
yesterday's  events  in  my  diary  the  whole  scene  was  reproduced  in  a  flash
with  the  addition  that  the  man  on  being  held  back  shouted  '  Ainiee  !
Aimee  !  '  "  [The  real  name  being  one  which,  as  to  the  peculiarity  of  its
finals,  corresponds  with  this.]


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  135

Early  next  morning  I  slipped  this  memorandum  under  the  door  of
my  friend's  room,  calling  her  attention  to  it,  with  the  remai"k,  "  I  have
found  out  the  name  of  one  of  those  girls."  When  we  next  met,  my
friend  expressed  increased  interest  in  the  story,  but  again  offered  me
no  information.  During  the  day,  however,  she  put  into  my  hands  a
case  containing  photographs,  calling  my  attention  to  the  portrait  of  a
friend  of  whom  we  had  had  occasion  to  speak  a  few  days  before.  I  at
once  exclaimed,  pointing  to  another  portrait  near  it,  "Why,  that's
the  ghost ;  and  a  very  good  likeness,  too."  She  then  told  me  that  she
had  had  all  along  little  doubt  that  this  gentleman,  her  friend.  Admiral
Z.,  [whose  real  name  and  title  I  am  not  permitted  to  give, — a  man  of
distinction  in  one  of  the  Services]  was  the  original  of  my  picture ;
that  the  two  girls  in  question  were  his  daughters,  but  they  were
unknown  to  her,  and  that  she  could  not  at  all  explain  the  details  in
my  vision  which  had  seemed  to  express  some  enmity  towards  her  on
their  part.

I  now  add  Mrs.  T.'s  remarks  upon  the  incident.

"  Miss  X.  has  asked  me  to  give  an  account  of  a  curious  incident  in  which
I  was  the  agent.  I  was  lying  in  my  room  after  bathing,  reading  the  Daily
Telegraph,  and  my  thoughts  entirely  centred  on  the  article  which  I  was
perusing.  I  heard  a  knock  at  my  door,  and  on  my  saying  'Come  in,'
Miss  X.  entered  to  tell  me  that  she  was  going  up  to  the  terrace  of  the  hotel,
at  the  same  time  remarking  that  I  was  very  flushed,  which,  I  said,  I  attri-
buted to  the  bath.  During  dinner,  about  half  an  hour  afterwards,  she
said  'I  saw  something  extraordinary  in  your  room  just  now,'  and  on  my
expressing  astonishment  she  told  me  the  following  strange  story  which  I
cannot  do  better  than  give  in  her  own  words  as  she  kindly  wrote  it  out  for
me  that  evening.

[See  A.  ante.]

"I  was  much  impressed,  as  all  the  figures  were  so  distinctly  described
that  I  could,  without  hesitation,  recognise  every  one  of  them.  I  purposely
gave  Miss  X.  no  hint  which  could  in  any  way  guide  her  to  a  solution  of
the  meaning  of  this  curious  vision.

"The  next  morning  while  I  was  dressing  she  pushed  under  the  door  the
following,  at  the  same  time  saying  '  I  have  discovered  the  name  of  one  of
the  girls.'  /

[See  B.  ante.]

"Now  this  is  to  me  most  interesting,  as  my  second  name  was  Aimee,  and  I
have  never  in  my  life  been  called  by  that  name  except  by  the  man  in  the
vision  ;  and  on  my  asking  Miss  X.  wliy  she  wrote  the  name  with  ee  instead
of  the  more  usual  y,  she  replied  '  because  it  impressed  me  as  being  written
thus.'  I  never  sign  this  second  name  except  to  official  documents,  and  she
could  not  possibly  have  known  that  it  was  my  name, my  first  [which  is  here
given  as  Esther],  of  course  being  well  known  to  her."

[Mrs.  T.  does  not  even  use  her  second  initial.]


136


"Miss  X."


The  next  chapter  in  the  story  was  as  follows  : —

On  Monday  the  14tli  of  August,  we  were  at  a  hotel  in  Rouen,  and
at  table  d'hote  I  was  seated  next  to  my  English  friend,  Mrs.  T.  ;  and
in  conversation,  she  referred,  but  without  naming  him,  to  the  Admiral,
and  without  touching  upon  the  incident  which  had  introduced  him  to
me.  As  she  spoke,  T  happened  to  be  twisting  round  with  my  fingers  a
tall  goblet  of  Chablis,  into  which  I  was  idly  gazing.  As  I  looked,  there
formed  upon  the  surface  of  the  glass  the  following  words,  in  long,
narrow  letters  : —

"  Aimee  is  Esther  ;  the  one  who  speaks  is  Kate."

I  read  the  message  aloud  to  ray  friend,  who  at  once  exclaimed  ;

"  Now  you  know.  It  is  quite  true  that  I,  Esther,  am  Aiin^e.  The
name  proiDcrly  belougs  to  me,  but  it  is  one  which  I  never  use,  and  never
employ  in  my  signature,  and  never  hear  except  from  the  lips  of  this  one
particular  friend,  the  Admiral.  It  is  also  true  that  one  of  tlie  girls  is
called  Kate."

A  curious  detail  in  regard  to  this  point  is  that  the  name  which  I
have  given  as  "Kate"  is  also  my  own  name,  which  may  complicate  the
question  as  to  the  real  meaning  of  the  message.  I  am  inclined  to
think  that  it  relates  to  one  of  the  girls,  as  I  can  conceive  of  no  reason
for  informing  me  of  my  own  actions.

We  both  agreed  that  this  message  was  of  a  particularly  perplexing
kind,  as  I  had  all  along  supposed  that  the  cry,  "Aimee,  Aimee,"
referred  not  to  my  friend,  Esther,  but  to  the  Admiral's  daughter.

On  the  suggestion  that  I  might  perhaps  see  something  more,  I
again  gazed  into  my  goblet,  when  at  once  the  following  picture
appeared : —

[I  quote  the  account  written  the  same  evening  and  which  has  been
preserved  (with  A  and  B)  by  Mrs.  T.]

"  Monday  Evening,  Av.gmt  lith.

"  While  at  table  d'hote  engaged  in  conversation  with  Mrs.  T.  (not  having
any  obvious  bearing  on  what  followed)  I  chanced  to  look  into  my  goblet  of
Chablis  and  there  read  in  type  of  the  following  proportions  [Here  I  repro-
duced the  letters  as  exactly  as  I  could]  : —

"  '  Aimee  is  Esther  ;  the  one  who  speaks  is  Kate.'

"This  passed  away,  and  was  succeeded  by  a  picture  not  so  clear  as  before
and  which  I  cannot  recall  except  as  a  memory — that  is,  I  can  revive  the
impression,  but  not  visualise  the  scene — A  long  row  of  houses  of  the  sea-.side
lodging  house  type — in  front  a  road — beyond,  a  long  low  building — an
esplanade,  and  below  the  sea — at  the  door  of  the  building  stands  the  same
man  as  before — the  right  hand  in  his  pocket,  looking  straight  out  before  liim
— perhajys  it  is  not  a  door — I  saw  the  upright  lines  behind  him  — it  may  be
a  window — it  faces  the  sea."

My  friend  was  quite  unable  to  say  whether  this  vision  were  or
were  not  likely  to  be  true,  as  the  place  at  which  the  Admiral  was


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliriiinal  Messages.  137


staying  was  one  she  had  never  seen  ;  but  she  took  an  early  opportunity
of  sending  him  a  description  of  the  incident,  and  two  or  three  days
after,  she  read  me  his  reply.

I  add  some  further  notes  of  Mrs.  T.'s  on  the  story.

"  I  must  here  state  that  my  conversation  at  that  moment  was  witli
reference  to  the  man  in  the  vision,  although  unknown  to  Miss  X.,  and  my
thoughts  apparently  called  up  these  names  in  the  glass  as  if  to  teU  her  to
whom  I  was  alludmg.

"  On  writing  to  tell  my  friend  of  this  vision,  in  reply  he  says  '  the
description  Miss  X.  gives  of  the  house  does  not  correspond  with  the  house  I
am  hving  in,  but  does  to  a  great  extent  with  the  club  from  which  I  always
TTrite — it  is  on  the  sea  front  with  a  road  in  front — then  the  esplanade  and
sea — and  I  often  stand  at  the  door  or  bay  window  and  look  out  across  the
sea. '

"One  or  two  points  are  interesting  as  regards  the  first  vision.  I  said  to
Miss  X.  '  you  are  wrong  about  the  colour  of  the  clothes  the  man  was  wearing,
as  he  only  has  a  brown  suit  with  him.'  In  reply  to  my  query  to  him  on  the
subject,  he  writes  '  I  had  worn  a  grey  suit  that  morning,  and  a  brown  one
in  the  afternoon,  but  at  7.15  o'clock  I  must  have  been  dressed  for  dinner, —
the  girls  had  on  serge  dresses  with  silk  fronts,  not  shirts,  (as  they  were
going  out  for  a  sail  after  dinner)  ;  they  often  wear  in  the  day-time  stiff
shirts  with  ties.'  "

It  seems  to  me  that  this  story  contains,  as  to  the  source  of  the
messages,  varied  and  conilicting  elements.  The  figure  of  the  Admiral
might  perhaps  be  traced  to  thought-transference  from  my  companion;
but  as  the  figures  of  the  giiis — unknown  to  her — may  be  regarded  as
"  part  of  his  surroundings,"  whatever  that  phrase  may  mean,  it  would
seem  more  simple  to  consider  both  elements  in  my  vision  as  purely
clairvoyant.  In  either  case,  the  picture  may  be  regarded  as  belonging
to  Class  III.  But  supposing  it  to  be  clairvoyant — that  I  really  did
see  the  man  and  his  daughters — how  shall  we  account  for  the  irruption
of  that  part  of  it  which  was  not  literally  true,  though  to  me  quite  as
real  and  vivid  as  any  other — the  action  of  the  girls  in  withdrawing
their  father  from  my  friend's  influence  ?

This  can  only  be  taken  as  symbolic,  as  belonging  to  Class  II.,  the
visualisation  of  an  idea.  How  far  the  idea  was  of  my  own  conception
it  would  be  difficult  to  say.

Then  the  explanatory  message  seen  in  the  glass  of  Chablis — whose
mind  gave  birth  to  this  ?  Is  not  this,  although  more  externalised,  of
the  same  class  as  the  impulse  to  say  things  which  our  minds  have  not
consciously  conceived  ?

The  vision  of  the  Admiral  standing  at  his  club  window — which
was  literally  coincident — one  would  explain  without  hesitation  as
thought-transference,  except  for  the  fact  that  if  we  admit  clairvoy-
ance in  the  former  case,  one  does  not  see  why  it  should  be  excluded


138


"Miss  X.


in  the  other,  just  because  another  and  simpler  hypothesis  would  tit
the  circumstances  equally  well.

On  the  theory  that  one's  intuitions  and  premonitions  and  the  like
are  messages  from  one's  sub-conscious  self  to  the  self  of  one's  ordinary
consciousness,  it  is  instructive  to  note  that  one's  sub-consciousness
occasionally  appears  to  regard  things  from  a  somewhat  different  stand-
point from  that  of  the  ordinary  consciousness,  to  present  important
facts  in  an  aspect  which  makes  them  seem  to  us  unimportant,  to
externalise  only  some  trifling  accessory  in  an  interesting  picture,  and
to  misrepresent,  and  often  exaggerate  one's  emotions.  Why,  for
example,  should  it  not  be  as  easy  to  see  the  contents  of  an  important
letter  as  to  see  the  (equally  unknown)  device  upon  its  seal  1
Why,  if  it  were  needful  to  offer  warning  against  a  new  acquaint-
ance, should  the  veil  be  lifted  from  a  scene  of  his  boyhood,  dis-
graceful enough  it  is  true,  but  a  far  less  practically  useful  warning
than  a  glimpse  of  his  contemporary  mis-doings,  which  might
have  saved  those  belonging  to  him  from  much  subsequent  misery  ?
Why,  again,  should  we  be  subjected  to  what  I  may  describe  as  fictitious
emotion,  as  in  the  following  example  1

On  Tuesday  last,  January  22nd,  I  was,  as  is  my  custom,  occupied
with  my  books  before  rising.  I  had  been  reading  for  perhaps  an  hour
and  was  vaguely  conscious  that  there  wei'e  movements  about  the
house.  I  was  reading  "  Love's  Labour  Lost,"  and  had  paused  to
visualise  the  second  scene  between  Moth  and  Armado  in  the  full
absurdity  of  its  detail.  Suddenly,  just  as  one  scene  succeeds  anotlier
in  the  crystal,  the  picture  I  had  conjured  up  disappeared,  and  gave
place  to  that  of  the  village  street  of  my  northern  home.  But,  as  often
in  dreams,  the  scene  was  historically  inaccurate,  for  not  only  were
there  the  rough  stone  cottages  thatched  with  ling,  of  my  childhood's
days,  with  one  of  which  (in  my  picture,  especially  visible)  the  abode  of
an  old  servant,  I  was  very  familiar,  but  also  part  of  the  block  of
handsome  stone  buildings  by  which  they  have  been  lately  displaced,
and  in  which  a  very  intimate  friend  chances  to  have  his  offices.

Together  with  the  picture,  there  flashed  upon  me  a  sense  of  loss
and  distress,  which,  as  I  gazed,  took  possession  of  my  whole  being.
Tears  sprang  to  my  eyes,  and  I  felt  that  I  knew  that  something
sorrowful  had  occurred,  though  of  what  nature  I  could  not  recall.
The  impression  was  as  if  left  by  forgotten  knowledge,  not  a  forecast  of
the  futui'e,  the  sort  of  distress  with  which  one  awakes  from  a  forgotten
dream.  A  moment  later,  hearing  the  steps  of  the  maid,  and  the
clink  of  the  tea-cup  outside,  I  extinguished  the  lamp  to  give  me  time
to  recover  from  my  too  obvious  distress.  She  re-lighted  the  lamp
and  handed  me  with  my  tea  a  letter  which  I  at  once  perceived  was
from  a  sister  of  this  friend. I  opened  it  with  increasing  apprehension,


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Suhlhninal  Messages.  139


for,  as  I  had  heard  from  her  but  a  few  days  before,  I  felt  sure  she
must  have  some  special  reason  for  writing.  The  letter  was  to  tell
me  that  our  dear  old  servant,  who  formerly  lived  in  the  cottage  of  my
vision  and  whom  I  had  known  all  my  life,  had  died  suddenly,  and
that  my  friends  had  just  returned  from  the  funeral  service.

It  is  an  ungracious  task  to  measui'e  one's  regrets  and  affections,  but,
as  so  often  happens  in  the  case  of  being  "  prepared  "  for  a  shock,  the
previous  emotion  was  in  excess  of  that  which  the  news  itself  would
have  occasioned.

Certainly,  whatever  the  source  of  such  messages,  there  is  about  them
a  distinct  lack  of  the  sense  of  proportion  in  time,  space,  and  degree.
In  the  case  just  quoted,  the  superfluous  emotion  did  not  certainly
come  from  the  friend  who  communicated  the  news,  for  her  interest
in  the  old  servant  had  been  largely  for  my  sake.  So  far  as  I  can  telL
in  looking  back,  I  went  through  none  of  the  natural  consecutive  pro-
cesses of  reasoning  which  might  lead  from  a  vague  sense  of  something
wrong  in  a  certaiii  village  to  association  of  the  fear  with  those
dearest  to  me  in  the  neighbourhood,  dread  as  to  what  that  might
include,  and  terror  of  the  worst.  I  am  perfectly  clear  that  I  saw
both  dwellings  at  once, — the  sites  of  the  two  being  not  fifty  yarda
apart.

There  are  many  cases  of  this  kind  which  do  not  admit  of  being
recorded  before  the  coincidence  is  known,  and  which  must  therefore
rest  on  my  personal  veracity  and  be  judged  accordingly.  This  may  be
said  also  of  the  following  incident,  in  itself  trifling,  but  which  I  quote
as  a  further  illustration  of  the  queer  way  in  which  one  seizes  upon  an
accessory,  rather  than  the  more  important  item  iri  an  incident.  I  was
driving  home  in  the  afternoon  of  January  14th.  My  cab  was  checked
at  a  street  corner,  and  I  noticed  that  we  were  passing  an  oyster  shop.
Suddenly  I  knew  that  my  friend  E.  was  sending  some  oysters  to  an  old
gentleman  we  know  who  is  ill.  I  looked  at  the  time, — 4.20 — and
though  I  had  not  the  smallest  reason  to  suppose  E.  had  ever  thought
of  doing  such  a  thing  I  felt  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact.  I  fully  intended  to
note  it  down  on  my  return,  but  unluckily  forgot  all  about  it  till  next  day^
when  I  heard  D.,  my  invalid  friend's  daughter,  sending  a  message  of
thanks  for  some  oysters  sent  by  another  friend,  not  E.  E.,  however,
was  present  and  I  turned  to  her  and  said,  "You  ought  to  have  sent
those  oysters,  I  saw  you  doing  it  yesterday  afternoon  at  4.20."

"That  was  the  very  time  they  were  being  sent  off","  she  answered^
"  and  though  they  were  Mr.  J.'s  present,  I  ordered  and  sent  them  at
his  request."

Presumably  the  motive  force  in  any  act  is  the  initiation  of  that  act.
Mr.  J.  had  never  sent  my  friend  a  present  before  in  his  life,  and,  in-
deed, knew  him  very  slightly ;  such  impetus  as  the  act  might  I'eceive


140


''Miss  X."


from  its  novelty  and  his  initiation  otight,  one  would  naturally  suppose,
to  have  been  accompanied  by  the  idea  of  Mr.  J.,  and  yet  such  idea  failed
to  reach  me,  while  the  moi'e  familiar  and  commonplace  one  of  E.  did
its  worlr.

In  receiving  messages  of  this  kind,  I  always  feel  that  a  main  point
is  to  preserve  them  from  adoiixture  with  the  ordinary  stratum  of  con-
sciousness ;  otherwise  they  become,  in  point  of  psychological  interest,
as  dreams  at  the  moment  of  waking  to  deep-sleep  dreams.  As  soon  as
I  begin  to  reason  about  an  impression,  I  begin  to  distrust  it.  Con-
stantly, in  trying  to  receive  psychometric  impressions,  I  find  that
having  dismissed  my  first  impulse  as  too  improbable  I  am  reduced  to
mere  guessing  and  all  interest  is  lost.  So  I  think  it  a  good  rule  to  say
whatever  comes  into  my  head  on  such  occasions.  For  instance,  D.  has
noted  down  the  following  :  "  December  24th,  I  showed  [X]  Aunt  E 's
little  box  to-day,and  said  •  you  may  have  the  contents  of  this  if  you  can
see  them  through  the  lid.'  She  answered,  'Then  I  certainly  shan't
get  them,  for  what  I  see  is  not  likely  to  be  in  a  box  of  that  sort'  [a  card-
board two-inch  cube,  coloui'ed  to  look  like  oak].  '  What  do  you  see  ? '
'  Wedding  cake.'  In  point  of  fact  the  box  contained  a  miniature
plum-pudding  in  a  toy  basin."  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  whereas  my
first  (and  approximately  correct)  impression  seemed  to  my  reasoning
faculties  absurd,  the  second  article  I  visualised, — a  memory  of  recent
shopping,  an  inkstand  shaped  like  a  cricket  ball, — was  far  more  wide
of  the  mark.

I  do  not  apologise  for  the  triviality  of  the  experiences  quoted.
Were  they  of  a  more  startling  character  they  would  lend  themselves
less  easily  to  comment,  either  now  or  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence.
What  I  feel  to  be,  from  the  critical  stand-point,  far  more  important,  is
their  numerical  frequency,  and  the  relation  of  success  to  failure.

For  about  five  years  I  have  tried  to  keep  a  diary  of  such  things.
I  have  aimed  at  writing  down  premonitions  before  their  coincidence
.  was  known — noting  cases  of  thought-transference,  retro-cognition,
psychometry,  intuition  of  all  kinds.  I  am  conscious,  as  most  people
are  who  attempt  to  keep  diaries,  of  unlimited  omissions ;  but  so  far  as
the  entries  go,  I  think  they  have  been  kept  with  exactness,  and  I  may
point  out  that,  as  I  have  exercised  no  selection  as  to  entries,  as  I
have  omitted  cases  because  I  forgot  them,  or  because  the  book  was  not
at  hand,  or  the  occasion  not  convenient  for  writing,  not  because
they  were  not  good,  such  omissions  tell  against  me,  and  not  in  my
favour — which  I  note  with  satisfaction.

I  am  certainly  within  the  mark  in  saying  that  I  have  noted  less
than  one-third  of  the  total  of  experiences  of  this  kind.  I  ought  to
say,  too,  that  I  never  note  pictures  which  spring  from  fancy  and  recru-
descent  memory  which  I  recognise  as  such  at  the  time,  nor  pictures


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  141


which  I  hi.  the  crystal,  unless  they  develop  in  some  unexpected
direction.-  Such  things  are  obviously  not  worth  recording,  as  any  one
capable  of  visualisation  can  create  them  indefinitely  at  will.  They
are  like  half  the  novels  one  reads,  amusing  for  the  moment,  occasionally
suggestive,  but  mere  pastime  and  not  worth  remembering.

I  have  omitted,  too,  certain  cases  which,  for  various  reasons,  have
found  record  elsewhere, — as  for  instance,  when  any  friend  concerned  in
the  experience  has  asked  for  a  written  account  of  it  and  it  has  not
seemed  to  me  worth  while  to  repeat  the  memorandum.  Further,  1
ought  to  explain  that  an  entry  may  include  half  a  dozen  pictures  or
impressions,  provided  they  relate  to  the  same  subject  and  occur  on  the
same  or  a  not  distant  occasion.  For  example,  the  whole  story  of  Mrs.
T.  and  the  Admiral  is  recorded  under  one  heading,  and  comes  in  first
as  "  Number  31  "  and  then  as  "  .31,  continued,  see  above."

Perhaps  one  year's  records  may  be  taken  as  typical;  1894  has
given,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  a  good  average  ;  better,  I  think,  than

1893  ;  not  so  good  as  the  two  previous.

All  the  above  details  being  allowed  for,  I  classify  my  record  for

1894  as  follows  : —

(«)  19  cases  good.

(b)  5 ,,  bad.

(c)  27 ,,  imperfect.

(d)  7 „  unexplained.

(e)  5 ,,  incomplete.

(a)  The  classification  "  good  "  does  not  refer  to  the  quality  of  the
message  but  only  to  its  accuracy.  The  "  little  red  man,"  for  example,
is  very  trivial,  but  as  far  as  it  goes  it  is  correct ;  this,  and  "  Clara
Stimpson,"  and  "  Frances  at  Eastbourne,"  and  "  The  Admiral  "  series,
though  differing  in  quality,  1  should  classify  alike  as  "good,"  because
they  contain  no  element  of  doubt.

(b)  1  classify  as  bad  such  impressions  as  seem  to  have  no  founda-
tion in  fact,  as  for  instance,  when  I  picture  a  friend  as  in  trouble,  who,
in  point  of  fact,  is  in  average  spirits,  and  the  like.  I  am  inclined  to
believe  that  nearly  all  such  cases  are  due  to  the  irruption  into  an  im-
perfect, or  imperfectly  understood,  experience  of  the  ordinary
consciousness.  Of  course  in  certain  cases  there  is  another  obvious
explanation,  that  a  friend  may  have  transmitted  the  impression  of  a
passing  mood  or  sensation,  keen  enough  for  the  moment,  but  forgotten
in  looking  back,  when  questioned,  on  the  day's  general  complexion.
Two  cases  originally  classified  as  bad,  I  have  since  changed  to  "  imper-
fect "  on  discovering  that  I  had  been  intentionally  misled  by  the  person
to  whom  they  referred.  One  of  these  is,  I  believe,  were  the  evidence
complete,  really  a  ffood  case,  but  I  leave  it,  at  present,  as  im-perfect.


142


"Miss  X:


(c)  I  classify  as  imperfect  all  such  cases  as  are  only  partly  good, —
like  the  "  i^luni-pudding  "  story.  It  occasionally  happens  that  a  case
at  first  imper/ect  becomes  good  in  process  of  time.

(d)  The  class  unexplained  includes  such  stories  as  the  Hindoo  and
Mr.  H.,  which  is  neither  right  nor  wrong  but,  as  far  as  we  know,
meaningless.  I  was  at  first  disposed  to  classify  these  as  subjective,  but
I  am  inclined  now  to  think  that  inadequate,  perhaps  unfair.

(e)  The  cases  classified  as  inconiplete  are  those  as  to  which  the
evidence  is  too  imperfect  to  admit  of  any  conclusion  being  drawn,which
it  would  be  unjust  to  relegate  to  the  bad,  but  which,  for  lack  of  precise
information,  I  am  unable  to  classify  more  precisely.

I  will  not  further  multiply  examples  which  are  the  more  tedious
because  their  principal  point  lies  in  the  minuteness  of  their  differences.
I  have  jDerhaps  made  it  apparent  how  difficult  it  may  be  for  even  the
recipient  of  supernormal  messages  to  speak  with  any  certainty  as  to
their  source.  I  should  like  to  sum  up,  as  possibly  suggestive  of  com-
parison to  others  of  wider  and  more  startling  experience  than  my
own,  the  very  few  conclusions  which  I  have  been  able  to  deduce  from
my  own  observation  of  apparently  supernormal  messages,  which,  I  may
remark,  have  been  tolerably  frequent  during  my  whole  life,  and  which
I  have  now  observed  very  carefully  fur  about  seven  years.

(1.)  I  find  it  quite  impossible  to  mistake  the  intention  of  any  figure
which  has  ever  appeared  to  me  at  the  moment  of  death,  although  these
figures  have,  I  think,  in  all  cases,  presented  their  usual  appearance.

(2.)  I  think  also  that, when  the  glimpse  has  been  more  than  momen-
tary (and  again  I  would  emphasise  the  fact  of  my  slow-sigh tedness),  I
have  never,  even  in  the  case  of  strangers,  mistaken  a  vision  of  a
deceased  person  for  that  of  one  still  living.

In  both  cases  I  am  speaking  of  the  kind  of  vision  which  we  call
clairvoyant — which  it  is  difficult  to  trace  to  the  mind  of  any  one  living,
or  to  any  memory  or  observation  of  my  own.  In  both  there  is  a  strong
sense-impression  of  abstractedness  to  which  I  have  before  referred  ;  in
the  former  case  this,  naturally,  is  further  accentuated  by  the  emotion  or
shock  which  accompanies  it.

(3.)  But  things  become  more  complex  when  this  sense  of  abstracted-
ness is  carried — as  in  the  case  of  the  Hindoo — into  pictures  of  the  kind
which  seem  to  me  to  be  externalisations  of  an  idea.  If  the  idea,
whether  born  in  my  own  mind  or  communicated  from  that  of  another,
does  not  include  any  surrounding  circumstance,  the  figure  will  be  "a
vignette,"  having  no  relation  to  things  about  it,  standing  or  walking
possibly  in  the  air,  owning  none  of  the.  usual  conditions  of  time  and
space.


On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Subliminal  Messages.  143


(4.)  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mind  in  which  the  picture
originates  further  conceives  the  surroundings,  these  too  will  be
presented. Then  the  vision  will  fall  under  one  of  two  groups  ; —

(a. )  The  picture  may  be  thought  of  as  in  definite,  distant  surround-
ings, so  that  the  seer,  while  walking  in  a  London  street,  may  see  a
friend  seated  at  a  dinner  table  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning.  A  vision
of  this  sort  is  difScult  to  distinguish  from  "  clairvoyance,"  and  it  is
constantly  so  mis-called,  just,  as  any  subjective  hearing  of  voices  is  mis-
called "  clairaudience."  I  admit  the  frequent  difficulty  of  distinction.
Happily,  we  have  usually  the  obvious  ground  of  coincidence,  the  com-
parison of  time,  place,  and  contents  of  message.

{h. )  The  figure  may  be  thought  of  as  having  relation  to  my  surround-
ings, so  that  I  may  see  a  friend,  who  has  pictured  himself  as  calling  on
me,  in  the  act  of  lifting  the  latch  of  my  garden  gate.  This  is  an
instance  when  a  hallucinatory  figure  may  be  excusably  mistaken — as
frequently  happens — for  a  real  one.

In  all  subjective  analysis  and  observation  of  this  kind,  there  are
two  constantly  recurring  difficulties,  both  of  which  have  to  be
reckoned  with — the  element  of  surprise  and  the  element  of  expectation.
Each  is  in  its  way  a  serious  interruption — the  shock  which  partially
unnerves,  the  antecedent  knowledge  or  apprehension  which  over-
stimulates  the  activities,  so  that  discrimination  between  what  we  see
and  what  we  think  we  see  adds  another  feature  to  the  problem  of
exact  observation.

It  must  be  a  very  hardened  observer  indeed,  who  does  not  feel
some  degree  of  emotion,  whatever  its  kind,  however  familiar  its
occui'rence,  at  the  sudden  extension  of  one's  purview  ;  and  it  is,  in
many  cases,  only  afterwards  that  one  analyses  the  brief  impression.

This,  inevitable  as  it  is,  emphasises  the  importance  of  deducing  no
rule  from  a  single,  or  even  from  a  few  examples.  It  is  so  easy,  and
yet  so  fatal,  to  read  back  the  proof  of  any  theory  one  is  anxious
to  establish.

On  the  other  hand,  expectation  too  is  a  serious  pitfall,  far  more
serious,  I  believe,  than  we  are  ready  to  realise.  The  question  is
not  one  upon  which  time  will  permit  me  to  enlarge ;  but  I  believe
that  the  extreme  difficulty  which  has  beset  all  my  mechanical
experiments  in  crystal-gazing  is  to  be  found  equally,  though  less  obvi-
ously, in  every  analysis  of  sense-impression.  There  is  the  difficulty
of  sense,  of,  so  to  speak,  physical  expectation,  and  the  difficulty  of
mental  expectation,  this  last  being  both  conscious  and  sub-conscious.

In  the  above  illustrations,  T  have  tried  to  select  some  which
seemed  free  from  these  especial  complications,  the  importance  of  which
I  think  will  be  readily  conceded.


144


"Miss  X."


There  is  one  danger  of  which  I  say  nothing,  because,  in  truth,  I
know  nothing  of  it — the  alleged  danger  to  health  of  inind  or  body.
For  myself,  I  am  perfectly  healthy  ;  accustomed  to  an  active  life  spent,
in  great  part,  in  the  country;  riding,  walking,  or  gardening,  a  lover  of
animals,  flowers,  and  country  pleasures.  My  health,  like  that  of  most,
has  suffered  interruptions,  but  I  can  emphatically  say  that  my  psychical
experiences  are  clear  and  abundant  in  proportion  to  the  perfection  of
my  physical  health — that  weariness  or  exhaustion,  which  might  render
them  dangerous,  makes  them,  as  a  rule,  impossible.


Note by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.


As  no  names  are  mentioned  in  the  above  paper,  I  am  asked  tO'
state  that  "  Miss  X."  has  shown  me  all  the  signed  documents  referred
to  in  it.  The  proofs  of  the  part  of  the  paper  relating  to  incidents  in
which  they  were  concerned  have  been  submitted  by  us  to  Mr.  H.
and  the  lady  referred  to  on  jjp.  120-122,  who  have  approved  them.
Mrs.  T.  sent  her  accounts  as  quoted  on  pp.  122  and  130  direct  to  me,
and  "  D.'s  "  original  account  given  on  p.  132  is  also  in  my  possession.
The  ladies  spoken  of  as  "  D."  and  "  H."  have  appended  their
signatures  to  the  following  cases,  in  which  they  were  concerned,
in  testimony  that  the  circumstances,  so  far  as  they  knew  of  them,
were  correctly  stated  : — viz.,  H.  to  those  on  pp.  117,  118-119,  and  D.
to  those  on  pp.  116,  117,  118-119,  131,  139  (also  signed  by  "E.").

I  may  add  that  the  incidents  seemed  to  me  to  gain  in  impressive-
ness  when  I  discussed  them  with  "  Miss  X.",  partly  on  account  of
details  which  could  not  be  published,  but  which  added  to  the  force
of  the  coincidence.


Supplement.]


Reviews.


145


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEWS.
T.

^  Recent  Books  on  Hypnotism.

1.  Psycho-Therapie. Clinique  de  Psycho- The'rapie  Suggestive  cV Amsterdam.

By  Drs.  a.  W.  Van  Rentekghem  and  P.  Van  Eeden. Paris,  1894.

2.  Le  Somnamhulisme  Provoque  et  la  Fascination. By  Dr.  E.  Mesnet.

Paris,  1894.

3.  L'Hypnotisme  et  le  Grime. By  Dr.  Crocq,  (Fils). Brussels,  1894.

4.  Die  Bedeutimg  der  hypnotischen  Suggestion  als  Heilmitlel. Berlin,  1894.

5.  The  Use  of  Hypnotism  in  the  first  degree  as  a  means  of  modifying  or

eliminating  a  fixed  idea.  By  De.  Russell  Sturgis.  Reprinted  from
the  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  1894.

6.  Hie  Elements  of  Hypnotism  :  its  phenomena,,  its  dangers  and  value.  By

R.  Harry  Vincent. London,  1893.

7.  Ein  Beitrag  znr  psychischen  und  suggestiven  Behandlung  der  Neurasthenie.

Von  Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenk-Notzing. Berlin,  1894.

8.  Die  Psycho-therapie  (Hypnose)  ;  ihre  Handhabung  und  Bedeutung  fiir  den

praktischen  Arzt. Von  Dr.  med.  Tatzel. Berlin,  1894.

Members  liave  no  doubt  noticed  the  satisfactory  progress  which  is  being
made  by  the  Library,  and  how  especially  the  "  Edmund  Gurney  "  portion
of  it  is  being  continually  increased  by  tlie  addition  of  new  books  on
psychology  and  allied  subjects.  Works  on  hypnotism  form  the  largest
portion  of  the  recent  acquisitions,  and  the  bulk  of  these  are  written  by
physicians  and  deal  mainly  with  the  subject  as  a  method  of  treating
disease.  They  are  therefore  outside  the  scope  of  the  Society's  Proceedings
except  so  far  as  they  contain  matters  of  general  interest.

(1).  Among  tlie  most  recent  and  most  important  of  these  is  Psycho-
Therapie,  by  Drs.  van  Renterghem  and  van  Eeden,  of  Amsterdam.  These
physicians  have  used  hypnotism  extensively  in  their  clinique  since  1887,  and
their  book  is  an  exposition  of  their  experience.

In  their  interesting  introductory  chapter,  they  enter  into  an  explanation
of  psycho-therapeutics,  and  contrast  the  metliod  of  treating  diseased
states  by  suggestion  and  by  drugs.  In  the  former  case  they  claim,  as  do
Liebeault  and  Bernlieim,  that  we  go  at  once  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  and
by  stimulating  the  ideo-motor  centres  in  the  brain  attack  the  disease  from


146


Revieivs.


[Supplement.


its  starting-point  or  centre,  instead  of  from  the  periphery,  as  when  drugs
are  used.

The  end  aimed  at  by  all  treatment  is  to  influence  the  plasma  or
formative  material  of  the  body,  but  this  can  be  done  more  naturally  and
efficaciously,  they  think,  by  suggestion  than  by  drugs.  It  is  impossible,
they  admit,  to  increase  the  initial  vital  energy,  which  is  a  matter  of
inheritance,  but  the  existing  supply  of  vital  energy  may  be  stimulated  and
directed  into  proper  channels  by  appropriate  treatment.  Man  is  not  a
machine  wliich  merely  requires  supplying  with  a  certain  quantity  of  fuel  to
replace  waste  of  energy.  He  differs  from  a  machine  especially  in  that
he  possesses  a  fund  of  energy  upon  which  he  can  draw  for  the  wants  of  the
organism.  It  is  the  direction  and  management  of  this  fund  which  the
authors  consider  the  most  important  function  of  the  physician,  and  the
one  which  suggestion  enables  him  to  exercise  to  the  greart;est  advantage.

They  give  detailed  reports  of  a  number  of  their  cases,  and  a  tabulated
statement  of  the  malady  for  which  each  patient  was  treated,  his  degree  of
susceptibility  to  hypnotism,  and  the  result  attained.

The  number  of  persons  who  presented  themselves  for  treatment  was
1089,  and  of  these  58,  or  5'33  per  cent.,  proved  insusceyjtible  to  hypnotism,
and  120,  or  11 '61  per  cent.,  were  affected  to  the  extent  of  somnambulism,
characterised  by  amnesia,  or  loss  of  memory  on  waking  of  what  was  said
or  done  during  the  hypnotic  state.  The  remaining  82  per  cent,  were
influenced  in  varying  degrees,  from  slight  drowsiness  or  heaviness  to
profound  sleep,  which  just  fell  short  of  somnambulism.  The  authors
express  themselves  satisfied  with  the  curative  results  obtained,  and
emphatically  assert  that  in  no  case  have  untoward  results  followed  the
treatment.

The  book  is  so  clearly  and  candidly  written  that  its  effect  upon  the
reader  must  be  convincing.  Drs.  van  Rentei-ghem  and  van  Eeden  have
earned  especially  the  gratitude  of  the  medical  profession  by  this  exposition
of  five  years'  carefully  detailed  experience,  and  no  doubt  their  labours  will
be  recognised  and  rewarded.  In  fact,  indications  are  apparent  everywhere
that  medical  men  are  awaking  to  the  important  part  played  by  suggestion  in
all  methods  of  treatment.

(2).  Dr.  Mesnet's  book  is  written  from  a  medico-legal  standpoint.  He
has  closely  studied  the  phenomena  of  profound  hypnosis  in  neurotic  patients
in  the  wards  of  the  Hotel  Dieu  in  Paris,  of  which  he  is  Senior  Physician.
He  comes  to  the  same  conclusion  as  Bernheim  and  Liegeois,  of  Nancy,
that  these  highly  sensitive  subjects  can  be  absolutely  dominated  by  the
hypnotist,  and  could  be  subjected  to  ill-treatment,  made  to  sign  documents,
and  impelled  to  commit  crimes  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  He  cites  several
test  cases  in  support  of  his  views,  and  urges  consideration  of  the  matter  on
medical  men  and  jurists.

Dr.  Mesnet  has  made  a  special  study  of  that  phase  of  somnambulism
termed  fascination,  in  which  the  subject  is  hypnotised  by  gazing  into  the
eyes  of  the  hypnotist  or  at  a  bright  object.  In  this  state,  as  has  been
demonstrated  by  previous  investigators,  the  higher  brain  functions  seem
entirely  suspended,  and  the  subject  simply  follows  the  object  which  has
fascinated  him  without  consciousness  or  volition.


Supplement.]


Revieivs.


147


The  condition  sometimes  occurs  spontaneously,  as  in  a  case  reported  by
Dr.  Mesnet.  One  of  his  colleagues  was  called  to  attend  a  station-master
who  had  been  fatally  injured  by  a  locomotive.  The  poor  man  expressed
himself  completely  ignorant  of  how  he  got  on  the  line,  but  witnesses  proved
that  he  had  advanced  to  meet  an  in-coming  train,  and  had  appeared
determined  to  have  it  run  over  him.  Further  evidence  .showed  that  he  had
frequently  suifered  from  catalyptic  seizures  and  temporary  loss  of  conscious-
ness when  suddenly  confronted  with  a  flashing  surface.  Similar  cases  have
been  reported  by  other  physicians,  and  it  is  possible  that  some  deaths  which
look  like  suicide  may  be  due  to  attacks  of  spontaneous  fascination.

Dr.  Mesnet  relates  some  interesting  cases  of  spontaneous  somnambulism
which  he  was  able  to  convert  into  the  hypnotic  equivalent  by  making
suggestions  at  the  moment  the  patient  was  waking  to  a  normal  condition,
thus  demonstrating  the  practical  identity  of  the  two  states.

His  endeavours  to  hypnotise  his  most  sensitive  patients  from  a  distance
have  not  convinced  him  of  the  possibility  of  this  procedure,  and  he  has
had  none  but  negative  results  m  his  experiments  in  thought-transference
and  clairvoyance.

(3)  .  Dr.  Crocq,  of  Brussels,  also  discusses  hypnotism,  chiefly  in  its
medico-legal  aspects.  Though  he  agrees  with  Dr.  Mesnet  and  others  of
the  Nancy  School,  that  the  power  of  suggestion  in  profound  hj'pnosis  is  so
great  that  the  patient's  scruples  may  be  overcome  by  repeated  and  energetic
suggestions,  yet  he  thinks  criminals  will  find,  if  they  attempt  to  use
hypnotism  to  effect  their  ends,  that  they  will  be  betrayed  b^'  it,  for  the
memory  is  very  likely  to  be  revived  by  properly  applied  suggestions.  Dr.
Crocq  has  also  made  a  considerable  number  of  ex2)erinients  with  a  view  to
■obtaining  hypnosis  when  at  a  distance  from  the  subject,  but  he  has  not
been  successful,  and  we  are  justified  therefore  in  continuing  to  hold  that
this  is  only  possible,  if  at  all,  in  a  very  small  jjroportion  of  the  most
sensitive  subjects.

(4)  .  It  appears  that  the  practice  of  hypnotism  has  been  forbidden,  even
to  medical  men,  in  Russia  by  the  state  authorities.  Physicians  who  were
interested  in  the  medical  use  of  hypnotism,  and  who  looked  upon  this
interference  as  uncalled  for,  appealed  to  their  brethren  throughout  Europe
to  send  a  protest  to  the  Russian  Government,  with  a  view  to  getting  the
prohibition  removed.  We  do  not  know  whether  this  efiect  has  followed
the  petition,  but  the  situation  has  produced  a  very  interesting  volume,  and
■one  which  is  probably  unique  in  the  history  of  medical  literature.  It
contams  articles  written  by  thirty  well-known  physicians  in  German,
English,  French  and  Italian.  The  writers  were  asked  to  express  their  views
with  regard  to  the  utility  of  hypnotism,  its  dangers,  and  the  steps  they
would  recommend  for  its  regulation  ;  and  the  result  is  this  collection  of
essays.

(5)  .  Dr.  Russell  Sturgis,  a  well-known  physician  of  Boston,  has  published
a  pamphlet  on  the  use  of  hypnotism  in  the  first  degree  for  removing  fixed
ideas  and  conditions  of  ill-liealth  starting  from  nervous  or  moral  shock.  <
His  views,  which  are  illustrated  by  cases,  bear  out  the  experiences  of
Professor  Janet  and  other  physicians  wlio  are  endeavouring  to  demonstrate

N  2


148  Reviews.  [Supplement.


the  importance  of  the  psychical  factor  in  disease.  One  of  Dr.  Sturgis's
cases  is  that  of  a  lady  who  had  for  many  years  suffered  from  sleepless-
ness, neuralgia  and  general  loss  of  health.  It  was  some  time  before  she  told
Dr.  Sturgis  of  the  starting  point  of  her  illness,  which  dated  from  the
sudden  death  of  her  invalid  father,  to  whom  she  had  spoken  angrily  shortly
before  he  died.  She  had  become  impressed  with  the  idea  that  he  had  died!
without  forgiving  her,  and  this  so  preyed  upon  her  mind  that  her  health
gradually  broke  down.  Dr.  Sturgis  was  able  by  hypnotic  suggestion  to-
remove  the  morbid  idea,  and  the  patient  rapidly  recovered.

(6)  .  In  The  Elements  of  Hypnotism,  a  young  writer,  Mr.  R.  Harry  Vincent,
has  produced  a  useful  and  interesting  resume  of  the  subject,  illustrated  hy
many  original  experiments.  While  an  undergraduate  at  Oxford,  he
hypnotised  a  number  of  his  college  friends,  both  dons  and  undergraduates.
He  found,  as  did  Mr.  Hugh  Wingfield  at  Cambridge,  that  undergraduates-
are,  as  a  rule,  excellent  subjects.  As  these  young  men  may  be  said  to-
represent  the  pick  of  the  country,  this  fact  is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the
assertion  that  one  still  hears  at  times,  that  only  persons  of  a  low  order
of  intellect  are  liypnotisable.  Mr.  Vincent  gives  some  remarkable  instances
of  the  readiness  witli  which  sensory  hyperajsthesia  is  produced  by
suggestion  during  hypnosis.  For  example,  "  A  number  of  persons  each,
take  in  their  hands  some  small  object,  such  as  a  penknife  or  coin.  While  the
subject  is  still  out  of  the  room,  these  articles  are  placed  on  the  table  and  the
subject  is  brought  in.  He  takes  up  the  first  object,  smells  it,  and  then
smells  the  hands  of  the  various  persons  till  lie  comes  to  the  owner  of  the
object,  when  he  leaves  it  in  his  or  her  hand,  and  so  on  until  he  has  settled
the  ownership  of  all  the  articles  placed  on  the  table."  To  show  the  effect
ot  suggestion  in  heightening  the  power  of  memory,  Mr.  Vincent  quotes  the-
case  of  a  friend  of  his  who  was  in  for  an  examination  in  history,  and  was-
unable  to  remember  dates.  He  asked  Mr.  Vincent  to  hypnotise  him,  and
suggest  improved  memory.  The  experiment  proved  so  successful  that
the  candidate  passed  a  good  examination  and  found  himself  able  to-
remember  columns  of  dates  after  reading  them  over  a  few  times.  Mr.
Vincent  adds  that  the  effect  has  continued.  The  latter  part  of  the  volume
is  devoted  to  experiments  on  animals,  and  these  are  illustrated  from
photographs.  Mr.  Vincent  finds  he  is  able  to  hypnotise  many  small  animals,
such  as  birds,  frogs,  snakes  and  lizards,  by  monotonous  excitation  of  special
nerves.  Ho  has  one  pet  toad  which  becomes  almost  immediately  cataleptic
when  he  strokes  its  back,  and  continues  so  for  three  or  four  minutes.  Mr.
Vincent  is  perhaps  rather  too  ready  to  accept  Professor  Bernheim's  dictum
that  suggestion  explains  all  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism,  and  to  I'idicule
other  theories  ;  but  the  book  is  thoroughly  readable,  andean  be  recommended
to  the  lay  reader  who  desires  to  learn  something  of  hypnotism  and  of  the
modern  views  concerning  it.

(7)  .  Dr.  von  Schrenk-Notzing's  latest  contributions  are  almost  exclusively
of  inedical  interest ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  (8)  the  excellent  little
volume  Die  Fsycho-therapie ;  ihre  Handhabinig  iaul  Bedeidung,  by  a  new
writer.  Dr.  Tatzel  of  Essen,  who  has  studied  under  Dr.  Wetterstrand  of
Stockholm,  to  whom  he  dedicates  the  work.

Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey.


■Supplement.]


Revieivs.


149


II.

Appa/ritions  and  Thought-Transference :  an  examination  of  the  evidence  for
telepathy.  By  Frank  Podmore,  M.A.  With  numerous  illustrations.
London,  Walter  Scott,  Limited,  24,  Warwick-lane,  1894.  Charles  Scrib-
ner's  Sons,  743-5,  Broadway,  New  York.  (The  Gontempovary  Science
Series,  No.  xxvi. )

Mr.  Podmore  tells  us  in  his  preface  that  he  aims  "  at  presenting  in
Tjrief  compass  a  selection  of  the  evidence  upon  which  the  hypothesis  of
thought-transference,  or  telepathy,  is  based."  For  his  material  he  has
drawn  upon  the  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for
JPsychical  Research,  the  unpublished  records  of  the  same  Society,  and  many
•other  sources.  The  conclusions  to  which  he  aims  to  bring  his  readers  are,  he
tliinks,  in  substantial  agreement  with  those  of  the  representative  workers  of
the  Society,  "yet,"  he  says,  "  I  have  no  claim  to  represent  "  that  Society,
■"  nor  right  to  cloak  my  shortcomings  with  the  authority  of  others."

Mr.  Podmore's  book  will  receive  a  warm  welcome  at  the  hands  of  all
those  who  are  interested  in  this  line  of  work.  We  have  long  felt  the  need
of  just  such  a  book, — a  book  that  would  put  before  the  world  in  accessible
form  some  small  part  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  that  has  accumulated  in
the  last  few  years,  and  would  thus  serve  as  a  stimulus  to  further
observation  and  experimentation.  Probably  no  living  man  is  better  fitted
to  undertake  such  a  task  than  Mr.  Podmore,  and  the  book  will  meet  this
Tvant  most  admirably.  His  many  years  of  experience  in  dealing  with  such
problems,  his  thorough  acquaintance  with  what  has  been  done  in  the  field,
his  cautious  temper  and  his  uniform  candour  are  known  to  all  who  have
profited  by  his  work  in  the  past.  The  present  writer  feels  no  little
hesitation  in  venturing  to  criticise  the  policy  of  such  a  veteran  as  Mr.
Podmore.  No  one  can  say  to  what  extent  his  own  judgment  is  warped  by
tendencies  to  believe  inherited  from  his  cave-dwelling  ancestors,  and  I  am
aware  that  some  of  the  remarks  which  I  shall  make,  which  indeed  seem  to
me  to  be  based  upon  metaphysical  speculations  of  recent  origin,  may  be
inspired  by  latent  animistic  tendencies  long  since  formally  exiled  from  the
company  of  my  accredited  beliefs.  Yet,  even  with  such  a  dire  possibility
confronting  me,  I  shall  make  bold  to  write  the  impression  which  the  book
makes  upon  me.

Mr.  Podmore  is  cautious  to  the  verge  of  conservatism.  All  will  agree
that  any  accepted  theory  should  be  somewhat  strained  to  account  for  new
facts,  before  we  eitlier  confess  ignorance  or  resort  to  new  theories,  but
opinions  will  vary  as  to  the  exact  point  at  which  such  straining  ceases  to  be
a  virtue,  and,  by  impeding  the  freedom  of  speculation,  becomes  a  bar  to
further  progress.  In  the  first  lialf  of  his  book,  Mr.  Podmore  seeks,
and  very  successfully,  to  establish  a  theory  ;  in  the  second,  he  strains  it  to
account  for  phenomena  which,  I  think,  can  be  brought  vmder  it  only  by  a
series  of  more  or  less  violent  assumptions.  It  is  to  these  assumptions  that
I  wish  chiefly  to  attract  attention.

The  thesis  which  the  book  is  designed  to  establish  is  thus  stated  on  page
6: — "  Communication  is  possible  between  mind  and  mind  otherwise  than


150


Reviews.


[Supplement


through  the  known  channels  of  sense."  The  introductory  chapter  calls  the
attention  of  the  experimenter  to  such  common  sources  of  error  as  fi'aud,
hypersesthesia,  muscle-reading  and  thought-forms.  The  four  following
chapters,  "Experimental  Transference  of  Simple  Sensations  in  the  Normal
State,"  "  Experimental  Transference  of  Simple  Sensations  with  Hypnotised
Percipients,"  "  Experimental  Production  of  Movements  and  Other  Effects, "
"  Experimental  Production  of  Telepathic  Effects  at  a  Distance,"  give  a  review
of  the  mi3re  important  part  of  the  experimental  evidence.  It  is  not
possible  to  give  here  any  adequate  idea  of  the  strength  of  that  evidence.  It
appears  tliat  tastes,  smells,  pains,  visual  images,  motor  impulses  and
inhibitions  have  been  transferred  to  normal  and  hyjjnotised  patients,  at
varying  distances  and  under  conditions  which  preclude  any  supposition  of
the  intervention  of  normal  means.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  any  one
can  follow  Mr.  Podmore's  masterly  presentation  of  these  results  without
experiencing  some  degree  either  of  conviction  or  of  coiif usion.

In  these  first  five  chapters  Mr.  Podmore  consistently  aims  at  his  proposed
end.  But  with  the  sixth  chapter,  which  takes  up  the  evidence  for  thought-
transference  occurring  spontaneously,  we  enter  upon  a  quite  new  field.
Chapter  VI.  itself  contains  a  shrewd  estimate  of  the  absolute  value  of  the
spontaneous  evidence,  and  of  its  relative  value  as  compared  with  the
unpretentious  results  of  the  first  five  chapters.  Mr.  Podmore  unhesitatingly
rests  his  case  upon  the  experimental  evidence  alone.  "If,"  he  says  on  page
144,  "  all  the  [spontaneous]  cases  .  .  .  hitherto  recorded  could  be  shown
one  by  one  to  be  explicable  by  more  familiar  causes  .  .  .  the  grounds,
for  the  belief  in  telepathy  woidd  not  be  seriously  affected  ;  we  should
merely  have  to  modify  our  conception  of  its  nature,  and  restrict  its-
boundaries."  While  admitting  that  the  spontaneous  evidence,  far  more
than  the  experimental,  is  exposed  to  the  possibilities  of  error,  he  claims  that
these  incidents  "in  their  aggregate  are  not  such  as  can  be  plausibly
attributed  to  misrepresentation  or  coincidence,"  but  constitute  "an  im-
portant body  of  evidence."

To  this  important  body  of  evidence  we  are  introduced  in  the  nine
following  chapters,  the  captions  of  which  will  sufficiently  indicate  their
contents.  Chapter  VII.,  "  Transference  of  Ideas  and  Emotions."  Chapter
VIII.,  "  Coincident  Dreams."  Chapter  IX.,  "  On  Hallucination  in  General."
Chapter  X.,  "  Induced  Telepathic  Hallucinations."  Chapter  XL  ,"  Spon-
taneous Telepatliic  Hallucinations."  Chapter  XII.,  "Collective  Hallucina-
tions." Chajater  XIII.,  "Some  Less  Common  Types  of  Telepathic  Hallu-
cination." (In  this  chapter  we  have  reciprocal  cases;  misinterpreted  mes-
sages ;  heteroplastic  hallucinations  ;  haunted  houses  and  others  mentioned.)
Chapter  XIV.,  "On  Clairvoyance  in  Trance."  Chapter  XV.,  "  On  Clair-
voyance in  the  Normal  State."

Mr.  Podmore  admits  that  the  weight  of  tlie  evidence  contained  in  these
chapters  will  be  variously  estimated  by  various  persons.  But  he  does  not,  I
think,  make  equally  plain  the  fact  that  the  significance  of  this  evidence  is  afc
jjresent  far  from  clear.  He  has  hitherto  strictly  confined  himself  to  his  task.
He  has  given  us  the  evidence,f or  telepathy.  Now,  by  telepathy  Mr.  Podmore
means  soinething  more  definite  than  the  definition  above  quoted  would  lead
us  to  exjaect,  and  the  further  limitations  of  Ins  conception  speedily  come  to


Supplement.]


Reviews.


151


view  in  the  meaning  which  he  ascribes  to  the  perplexing  phenomena  with
which  he  is  now  called  upon  to  deal.

This  material  is  interpreted  by  many  in  favour  of  two  theories  which  are
at  present  in  the  deepest  disgrace  in  the  scientific  world, — the  doctrine  of  a
life  after  death,  and  its  twin,  the  belief  that  the  intelligence  does  occasion-
ally in  some  sense  leave  its  body  during  life,  and  visit  distant  scenes.  Mr.
Podmore's  object  in  adducing  this  evidence  is,  or  seems  to  be,  not  merely  to
prove  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  non-sensory  communication  between
mind  and  mind  while  in  the  body,  but  also  to  show  that,  admitting  such  a
non-sensory  communication  as  experimentally  established,  we  can  explain
these  spontaneous  phenomena  without  resorting  to  either  of  the  above
obnoxious  doctrines.

In  the  original  definition  there  is  nothing  to  exclude  either  of  these  theories.
It  is  conceivable  that  telepathic  communication  may  take  place  between  minds
in  the  body  and  minds  out  of  the  body,  if  the  latter  exist  at  all,  which  we
do  not  as  yet  know.  It  is  also  possible  to  frame  an  animistic  theory  which
will  fall  within  the  broad  domain  of  that  original  definition.  For  it  is  not
nominated  in  the  bond  that  the  minds  in  question  must,  to  affect  one  another
telepathically,  remain  in  the  place  in  which  their  respective  bodies  are,  and
there  is  nothing  inconceivable  in  the  notion  that  minds  may  in  some  sense
be  capable  of  translocation  while  their  bodies  remain  unmoved.  It  is  true
that  we  cannot  as  yet  define  in  what  sense,  except  negatively.  We  can  be
quite  sure  that  it  is  not  in  any  material  sense,  and  that  the  phantasm  does
indeed  belong,  as  Mr.  Podmore  shows  in  the  chapter  on  hallucination  in
general,  to  the  world  of  dream  rather  than  to  that  of  matter.  But  until  we
have  fixed  more  certainly  the  relations  of  the  dream-world  to  the
material,  it  is  as  well  not  to  be  too  dogmatic  in  our  assumptions.

It  will,  of  course,  not  be  possible  for  me  to  give,  within  the  limits  of  a
review,  a  complete  analysis  of  the  difliculties  which  confront  Mr.  Podmore
in  his  endeavour  to  account  for  these  phenomena  after  the  analogy  of  the
experimental  evidence. A  few  must  suffice.

The  experimental  evidence  suggests  what  may  be  called  an  inductive
conception  of  the  telepathic  process.  This  conception  Mr.  Podmore  has,  I
think,  in  mind  tliroughout,  and  in  the  last  chapter  he  has  attempted  to
work  it  out  in  detail.  We  have  usually  in  each  case  :  (1.)  A  known  human
consciousness,  which  we  may  proleptically  style  that  of  the  agent  ;  (2.)  A
mental  state,  x,  consciously  existing  in  it ;  (3. )  A  second  known
human  consciousness,  that  of  the  percipient ;  (4.)  A  second  state,  x^,
consciously  existing  in  it,  and  resembling  or  in  some  way  related  to  state  x  ;
(5.)  A  relation  of  sequence  or  coincidence  established  between  states  x
and  x^.

To  this  tyi^e  a  large  number  of  the  spontaneous  cases  conform  more  or
less  exactly,  and  may  be  justly  regarded  as  depending  upon  the  same  laws.
In  certain  respects  we  may  expect  variations.  The  agent  and  percipient  are
usually  known  to  one  another,  and  frequently  sustain  intimate  personal
relations  to  one  another.  Preoccupation  on  the  part  of  the  agent
with  the  thought  of  the  percipient,  especially  in  times  of  emotional
excitement,  and  a  deliberate  intention  on  his  part  to  affect  the  percipient
appear  to  be  conditions  favourable  to  the  transmission  of  the  telepathic


152


Reviews.


[Supplement.


impulse.  A  passive  state  on  the  part  of  the  percipient  seems  to  favour  the
reception  of  the  impression.  The  emergence  of  the  induced  state  in
consciousness  may  follow  or  even  precede  the  occurrence  of  the  supposed
inducing  state.  The  induced  state  x^,  may  diverge  more  or  less  widely  from
the  actual  form  of  the  inducing  state.  If  this  divergence  be  very  great,  the
message  may  be  regarded  as  misinterpreted.  If  not  very  great,  the  induced
state  may  be  termed  autoplastic, — that  is,  constructed  by  the  percipient  out
of  material  furnished  by  his  own  mind  upon  the  lines  suggested  by  the
telepathic  impulse.  When  re^  is  an  exact  copy  of  x,  the  state  is  said  to  be
heteroplastic. Such  are  the  leading  features  of  this  type.

The  difficulties  which  I  shall  mention  fall  under  two  chief  heads.

1.  Those  arising  from  a  lack  of  evidence  for  the  existence  of  the  state  a;.

2.  Those  arising  from  a  multijDlicity  of  simultaneously  "induced"
states.

When  there  is  nothing  more  than  a  lack  of  evidence  for  the  existence  of
X,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  assume  that  x  exists  in  some  consciousness
unknown  to  us.  Acquaintance  and  intimacy  seem  to  be,  as  I  have  said,
conditions  favourable  to  the  transmission  of  the  telepathic  impulse,  but  we
have  reason  to  think  that  they  are  not  essential  conditions,  and,  from  the
nature  of  the  case,  in  most  such  occurrences  the  agent's  share  in  the  matter
would  remain  unknown, — we  should  simply  have  an  unrecognised  hallucina-
tion, and  the  evidence  for  its  telepathic  origin  would  be  wholly  lacking.

But  frequently  the  circumstances  are  such  as  strongly  to  suggest  an
extra-human  origin  for  the  telepathic  impulse.  Often  the  information  thus
conveyed  is  known  to  have  been  in  possession  of  some  friend  or  relative  of
the  percipient  who  lias  recently  died,  and  the  information  is  sometimes  such
as  we  should  suppose  the  dead  would  wish  to  convey  to  the  living.  When  in
such  cases  we  not  only  know  that  the  information  was  in  the  possession  of  the
dead,  but  also  have  good  reason  for  thinking  that  it  is  not  in  the  possession
of  any  one  living,  or  not  in  the  possession  of  any  living  person  known  to
the  percipient,  the  presumption  that  the  impulse  originated  with  a  dead
person  becomes  very  strong.  Mr.  Podmore's  unwillingness  to  resort  to  this
hypothesis  is,  I  think,  not  justifiable.  However  repugnant  such  a  doctrine
may  be  to  our  sensibilities  as  scientists, — especially  since  it  has  been  con-
joined with  the  absurdities  of  "  Modern  Spiritualism," — it  is  our  duty  to
consider  it  fairly  as  one  of  the  conceivable  hypotheses.  It  certainly  is  not
yet  proved.  But  there  was  a  time  when  telepathy  between  living  minds
was  also  not  yet  proved,  and  it  is  not  likely  that  it  would  have  stood  as  near
proof  as  it  does  to-day  had  Professor  Sidgwick,  Mr.  Podmore,  Mr.  Gurney,
Mr.  Myers,  Mr.  Hodgson  and  others,  at  every  step  refused  to  consider  the
hypothesis  at  all.  Such  evidence,  as  Mr.  Podmore  himself  shows,  should
be  considered  in  the  aggregate.

An  analogous  difficulty  is  presented  in  the  phenomena  of  "clairvoyance."
If  such  phenomena  can  be  established  upon  human  evidence,  it  would
appear  probable  that  persons,  either  in  the  normal  state  or  entranced,  have
described  occurrences  remote  in  space  or  time  or  both.  The  percipient
seems  to  become  cognisant  of  these  things  much  as  if  he  had  been  actually
present  and  had  seen  them  with  his  eyes.  According  to  the  telepathic
theory,  as  formulated  by  Mr.  Podmore,  we  must  suppose  that  his  information


Supplement.]


Reviews.


153


is  drawn  from  the  consciousness  of  some  other  person,  who  did  become  so
cognisant  of  them.  But  it  often  seems  very  improbable  that  any  livmg
teing  has  at  any  time  had  an  experience  analagous  to  that  which  occurs  in
the  percipient's  consciousness.  Thus  when  Mr.  Cleave  in  trance  sees  his
friend  faint,  we  certainly  cannot  suppose  that  he  in  any  way  shared  her
experience  of  fainting.  He  saw  it  as  he  would  have  seen  it  had  he  actually
been  present.  In  one  most  interesting  series  of  apparently  clairvoyant
visions  of  which  I  knew, — the  patient  being  an  intimate  friend  of  mine,— the
visions  shifted  between  these  two  types,  and  in  some  cases  passed  through
both.  In  the  first  stage  the  patient  seemed  to  be  a  spectator  of  the  scene,
the  supposed  agent  appearing  only  as  one  object  among  many.  In  many
of  the  visions  of  this  type,  the  "agent"  was  not  in  any  way  thinking  of  or
interested  in  the  patient.  In  the  second  stage  the  patient  appeared  to
become  identified  with  the  visual  consciousness  and  discursive  thought  of  the
agent,  on  one  occasion  heard  a  remark  addressed  to  him,  but  never  shared
his  motor  sensation  or  Gemeingefiihl.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  the
visions  of  the  first  type  were  accompanied  by  no  disagreeable  symptoms  and
could  occasionally,  though  rarely,  be  produced  voluntarily.  The  visions  of
the  second  type  were  invariably  preceded  by  characteristic  and  severe  pain
in  the  head,  were  followed  by  great  prostration  and  were  never  produced
voluntarily.

It  is  not  improbable  that  these  are  distinct  but  related  types,  and  they
certainly  do  not  themselves  tend  to  suggest  a  thought  induction  of  any
kind.  The  first  is  what  is  commonly  called  clairvoyance, — the  second  seems
ito  suggest  a  partial  coalescence  of  the  consciousness  of  the  patient  with  that
of  the  supposed  agent.  I  quote  this  case,  however,  as  an  illustration  of
possible  conceptions  and  not  as  proof  for  the  existence  of  the  states  in
question.  The  evidence  which  I  have  goes  to  show  that  the  information
apparently  derived  from  these  visions  was  true,  but  the  evidence  is  not,  to
my  mind,  satisfactory.

In  all  cases  where  the  induced  state  a;'  contains  non-veridical  elements,
we  may  term  3^  partially  autoplastic.  But  when  the  "induced"  state
contains  elements  which,  although  veridical,  are  not  apparently  drawn  from
the  mind  of  the  agent,  but  are  such  as  could  have  been  got  by  some  third
person,  if  actually  present,  much  as  they  were  got  by  the  percipient,  how  are
vfe  then  to  interpret  them  by  the  inductive  theory  1

The  second  group  of  difficulties,  those  attending  the  explanation  of  the
collectively  perceived  j^hantasm,  often  contains  all  the  above,  as  well  as
those  peculiar  to  itself.  There  is  often  no  known  living  agent,  and  the
circumstances  sometimes  suggest  a  dead  agent.  Furthermore,  the  phantasm  is
iisually  described  alike  by  all  the  percipients,  but  I  know  of  little  evidence  for
the  imposition  of  a  complete  heteroplastic  hallucination,  under  circumstances
where  no  animistic  conceptions  are  admissible,  upon  several  percipients  not
known  to  be  especially  sensitive  to  telepathic  influences.  The  single
imambiguous  case  which  Mr.  Podmore  quotes  (No.  62),  is  so  remote  that  I
do  not  feel  willing  to  accept  it  as  conclusive.  Again,  there  seems  to  be  no
known  reason  why  the  phantasm  is  so  commonly  that  of  the  human  figure.

The  "local  hallucination  "  (haunted  houses)  presents,  in  addition  to  those
■of  the  above  types,  certain  difficulties  of  its  own. Why,  upon  the  telepathic


154


Reviews.


[Supplement,


theory,  should  hallucinations  be  attached  to  certain  places  ?  Mr.  Podmore
mentions  (page  314)  a  curious  notion  suggested  by  Mr.  Gurney, — that  any
person,  thinking  of  a  given  place  which  is  at  the  time  actually  experienced
in  sense-perception  by  some  other  person,  may  attain  thereby  to  such  a
community  of  consciousness  with  the  other  person  as  to  be  able,  under  some
unknown  circumstances,  to  import  into  the  consciousness  of  tlie  second
person,  in  the  guise  of  a  hallucination,  a  tliought  existing  in  his  own.
This  speculation  is  certainly  fascinating  to  the  idealist,  but  until  some
definite  evidence  can  be  adduced  in  its  favour,  it  is  not  entitled  to  rank  as
more  than  a  speculation.

In  view  of  these  difficulties,  it  seems  to  me  tliat  we  have  no  right  to  say
that  telepathy  is  sufficient  to  account  for  such  phenomena.  For  my  own  part,
I  know  of  no  theory  that  is  even  approximately  satisfactory.  It  is  not,  I
think,  necessary  to  accept  the  dilemma  which  Mr.  Podmore  offers  us  in  liis
chapter  on  hallucination  between  a  crude  materialistic  animism  and  such
an  inductive  conception  of  telej^athy  as  the  experimental  evidence  and  a  large
part  of  the  spontaneous  would  lead  us  to  form.  No  one  will  dispute  Mr.
Podmore's  statement  (page  272)  that  the  notion  of  an  objective  material
existence  for  the  phantasm  collectively  perceived  has  not  been  rendered
more  intelligible  "  by  the  invocation  of  fixed  ether,  intercalary  vortex
rings,  space  of  four  dimensions,"  etc.  ;  that  the  theory  "  betrays  its  own
origin  in  a  pre-scientific  age,  and  without  formal  destruction  by  argument
has  shared  in  the  euthanasia  which  has  overtaken  many  other  pious  opinions
found  inadequate  to  the  facts."  But  it  is  also  possible  to  urge  similar
objections  against  ascribing  "material"  existence  to  any  phenomena
collectively  perceived,  and  many  thinkers  of  repute  regai'd  the  much  lauded
conceptions  of  contemporary  science  as  intrinsically  little  better  than  the
barbarous  animism  of  our  forefathers.  All  alike  are  tlie  outcome  of  more
or  less  instinctive  efforts  to  formulate  the  manifold  of  experience  in
relatively  simple  concepts.  "Modern  science"  represents  a  much  more
advanced  stage  of  this  process,  and  the  symbols  it  has  devised  represent  the
facts  far  more  accurately  than  the  productions  of  the  pre-scientific  age
could  hope  to  do.  Yet  not  even  the  most  "  scientific  "  of  these  conceptions
can  withstand  a  metaphj'sical, — perhaps  better  a  meta-scientific,  analysis.  Our
power  of  analysis  is  greater  than  our  power  of  synthesis  ;  we  can  show  hovr
unsatisfactory  these  conceptions  are,  but  we  cannot  frame  better  to  take
their  place.  It  may  well  be  that  in  these  perplexing  and  unclassifiable
phenomena  we  are  gaining  data  whereby  future  generations  will  be  able  to
correct  and  reconstruct  the  conceptions  which  our  present  day  science
regards  as  fundamental,  and  in  view  of  that  possibility  we  should,  I  think,
be  cautious  in  trying  to  force  such  facts  into  any  semi-scientific  conceptions
that  we  can  now  frame.

In  his  concluding  chapter,  after  suggesting  that  telepathy  may  possibly
co-ojjerate  in  normal  life  with  the  recognised  means  of  conveying  thouglit,
and  endeavouring  to  explain  by  its  means  the  reported  action  of  the  metals
and  magnets  upon  tlie  body  and  the  alleged  physical  jjhenomena  of
Spiritualism,  Mr.  Podmore  states  the  two  theories  as  to  the  relation  of
telepathy  to  our  other  faculties.  He  seems  inclined  to  favour  the  theory
that  it  is  a  remnant  of  a  lost  faculty,  but  adds  that  if  we  admit  the  existence:


Supplement.]


Reviews.


155


of  such  supernormal  faculties  as  clairvoyance,  retrocognition  and  prevision,
"  it  would  be  luore  reasonable  to  regard  telepathy  as  a  member  of  the  group
of  such  supernormal  faculties,  operating  in  ways  wholly  apart  from  the
familiar  "sense  activities,  and  not  amenable,  like  these,  to  terrestrial
laws."

Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,
University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.


III.

(1.)  A  Modern  Priesteas  of  Ids  :  abridged  and  translated  on  behalf  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  fre)m  the  Russian  of  Vsevolod
Sergyeevich  Solovyoff,  by  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.

(2.)  Isis  verymuch  Unveiled:  being  the  story  of  the  great  Mahatma  Hoax,  by
Edmund  Garrett.

These  two  volumes  complete  tlie  story  told  in  the  Rejaort  of  the
Committee  on  Theosophic  Phenomena  {Proceedhiys,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.).
In  the  pages  of  the  Report  we  were  enabled  to  examine  the  finished
products  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  genius  ;  we  saw  the  manufactured
phenomena,  as  turned  out  for  the  American,  Indian,  and  European  markets  ;
we  made  the  acquaintance  of  some  leading  members  of  the  Theosophic
cult  in  their  final  stage,  a  pleasantly  ambiguous  blend  of  charlatanry  and
simplicity.  In  Mr.  Solovyoff 's  vivid  narrative,  as  englished  by  Dr.  Leaf,
we  are  privileged  to  look  on  at  the  process  of  manufacture,  to  watch  the
gradual  evolution  of  history  into  myth,  of  conjuring  tricks  into  occult,
phenomena,  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  colleagues  into  her  dupes  or  her  accom-
plices. Mr.  Garrett  tells  us  how  the  business  was  carried  on  by  less  com-
petent hands  after  the  death  of  the  head  of  the  firm,  and  the  disastrous,
consequence  of  glutting  the  market  with  astral  letters.

Mr.  Solovyoft'  is  a  Russian  of  good  social  position,  and  an  author  of
some  repute.  At  the  time  when  his  narrative  begins.  May,  1884,  he  was.
staying  in  Paris,  studying  mystic  and  occult  literature,  and  planning  to.
write  on  ' '  the  rare,  but  in  my  opinion,  real  manifestations  of  the
imperfectly  investigated  spiritual  powers  of  man."  Quite  opportunely,
when  thus  engaged,  he  came  across  a  recent  book  of  Madame  Blavatsky's,
and  a  copy  of  tlie  Matin  containing  a  notice  of  her  arrival  in  Paris.  Having
obtained  an  introduction  from  a  friend  at  St.  Petersburg,  Mr.  Solovyoff
called  a  few  days  later.  He  found  Madame  Blavatsky  lodged  in  a  small,
poorly  furnished  apartment,  in  a  long  mean  street,  and  was  at  first
repelled  by  "the  plain,  old,  earthy-coloured  face"  of  the  Prophetess  herself.
But  they  were  both  Russians,  and  in  a  strange  land  ;  Mr.  Solovyoff  received
a  frank  and  kindly  greeting,  and  in  a  few  minutes  found  himself  talking
as  to  an  old  friend.  The  intimacy  thus  suddenly  begun  seems  to  have
continued  on  much  the  same  footing  until  the  final  rupture.  Madame
Blavatsky  constantly  appealed  to  Solovyoff 's  friendship  whenever  he  could
render  her  any  service,  and  he  seems  never  to  have  disregarded  the  appeal.
Whatever  he  may  have  thought  at  different  periods  of  their  acquaintance  of


156


Revieivs.


[Supplement.


Madame  Blavatsky's  claims  to  supernormal  power,  Solovyoff  throughout
seems  to  have  looked  upon  her  as  a  woman  to  be  loved — or  at  worst  to
be  pitied.

Their  first  interview,  whilst  productive  of  much  high  spiritual  converse,
was  not  wholly  barren  of  "  phenomena."  Madame  Blavatsky  left  the  room
for  a  few  minutes — to  attend  to  some  domestic  duty,  as  she  explained —
and  shortly  after  her  return  the  silvery  peal  of  the  famous  astral  bells  was
heard  in  the  air.  A  few  days  later,  after  receiving  an  assurance  that  no
religious  dogma  was  involved,  and  that  the  study  of  Oriental  literature  was
the  chief  object  aimed  at,  Mr.  Solovyoff  was  initiated  in  due  form  into  the
Theosophical  Society,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Keightley,  and  the  pure-souled
chela,  Mohini  M.  Chatter jee.  Shortly  afterwards  he  made  the  acquaintance
of  Colonel  Olcott  and  the  celebrated  turban  given  to  him  in  New  York
by  an  astral  visitant  from  the  Himalayas.

A  few  days  later,  Mr.  Solovyoff  was  himself  privileged  to  witness  a
manifestation  of  a  remarkable  kind.  He  called  upon  Madame  Blavatsky
by  appointment  one  morning.  There  were  present  Madame  Blavatsky,
her  sister,  Madame  Jelihovsky,  and  others.  To  them  thus  assembled  there
came  a  ring  at  the  outer  door.  The  door  was  opened  by  the  serviceable
Babula,  Madame  Blavatsky's  Hindoo  servant,  who  was  seen  by  Solovyoff  to
take  a  letter  from  the  postman's  hand,  and  lay  it,  securely  sealed,  on  the
table.  The  letter  was  for  Miss  X. ,  an  elderly  lady  staying  in  the  house,  who
had  not  yet  left  her  room.  It  occurred  to  Madame  Blavatsky  that  the
letter,  thus  unexjiectedly  introduced,  afforded  an  excellent  opportunity  for
a  test.  She  placed  the  unojjened  letter  against  her  foreliead  and  slowly
wrote  down  the  contents  of  the  letter,  uttering  them  aloud  at  the
same  time,  amidst  expressions  of  scepticism  from  Madame  Jelihovsky.
Irritated  no  doubt  by  this  wanton  display  of  domestic  unbelief,  the
Prophetess  vouchsafed  further  proofs  of  her  power.  With  a  red  pencil
she  drew  on  the  paper  a  theosophical  symbol—  of  the  kind  with  which  readers
of  the  Westminster  Gazette  are  familiar  through  Mr.  Garrett's  narrative —
and  at  the  same  time  underlined  "obviously  with  a  great  effort  of  will"  a
word  in  her  copy  of  the  letter.  The  letter  was  then  handed  through  the
open  door  to  Miss  X.,  who  came  out  and  read  it  in  their  presence.  The
contents  of  the  letter  were  identical  wath  the  cojjy  made  by  Madame
Blavatsky,  and  the  theosophical  sign  and  underlined  word  occurred  in  their
proper  place  in  the  original.  That  this  "  plienomenon "  much  imjjressed
Solovyoff  at  the  time  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  he  not  only  signed  an  account
•of  it  drawn  up  on  the  spot,  but  that  he  subsequently  sent,  in  his  own  name,
a  letter  detailing  the  circumstances  to  the  Eebua.  The  latter  fact,  indeed,  is
not  mentioned  in  its  proper  place  in  the  narrative  ;  but  Solovyoff  admits,  in
the  description  of  the  incident,  that  he  did  not  at  the  time  realise  all  the
possibilities  of  fraud  in  the  case.

A  few  days  later,  in  obedience  to  a  summons  from  Madame  Blavatsky,
Solovyoff  came  away  from  a  theosophical  meeting  in  the  middle  of  a  lecture
by  Olcott,  and  was  rewarded  for  this  act  of  self-denial  by  witnessing,  in  the
same  domestic  circle,  the  birth,  under  the  maieutic  hands  of  Madame,  with
the  still  serviceable  Babula  as  assessor,  of  yet  another  "  phenomenon."  The
miracle  on  this  occasion,  liowever,  was  perhaps  a  trifle  crude  for  European


Supplement.]


Reviews.


157


tastes  ;  or  the  whole  performance  may  have  been  badly  staged.  At
any  rate  the  impression  produced  upon  Solovyoff  ajjpears  to  have  been
unfavourable  ;  the  incident  was  not  recorded  over  his  signature  in  the
newspapers  ;  and  Madame  Blavatsky  had  occasion  to  lament  his  hardness
of  heart.

In  August,  1884,  Solovyoff  was  privileged  to  have  another  experience,
this  time  of  a  less  dubious  kind.  He  went  to  see  Madame  Blavatsky  at
Elberfeld,  and  on  the  night  of  his  arrival  there,  under  peculiar  circumstances,
had  a  vision  of  Mahatma  M.  But  lest  this  dream  or  hallucination  should
fail  of  its  due  effect,  the  "Master  "  followed  it  up  by  inserting  the  following
day  a  confirmatory  note  in  Olcott's  coat  pocket,  ' '  between  a  button  and  a
toothpick. "1  As  Olcott  was,  however,  in  another  room  at  the  time  of  its
receipt,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Master  paid  less  than  his  usual  deference
to  Western  ideas  of  evidence.  At  any  rate  Solovyoff,  though  obviously
anxious  to  believe,  remained  unconvinced.

Then  came  the  publication  of  the  Coulomb  letters,  and  the  investigation
by  Mr.  Hodgson  and  the  S.P.R.  Committee  ;  there  wei-e  many  agitated
letters  and  much  travelling  to  and  fro  on  the  part  of  Madame  Blavatsky.
Finally,  in  August,  1885,  apparently — Mr.  Solovyoff  is  vague  about  times  and
seasons,  and  extremely  chary  of  dates — he  went  to  Wiirzburg  at  Madame's
invitation.  Her  only  companion  at  the  time  was  a  small  Hindoo,  one
Bavaji  (or  Babajee,  as  he  is  called  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  Report).  Madame
Blavatsky  appears  to  have  thought  that  the  time  had  now  come  for  a  final
effort  to  overcome  the  obstinate  scepticism  of  her  pupil.  He  called  upon
her  one  morning,  and  found  her  sitting  in  a  huge  arm-chair  : —

"At  the  opposite  end  of  the  table  stood  the  dwarfish  Bavaji  with  a
confused  look  in  his  dulled  eyes.  He  was  evidently  incapable  of  meeting
my  gaze,  and  the  fact  certainly  did  not  escape  me.  In  front  of  Bavaji  on
the  table  were  scattered  several  sheets  of  clean  paper.  Nothing  of  the  sort
had  occurred  before,  so  my  attention  was  the  more  aroused.  In  his  hand
was  a  great  thick  pencil. I  began  to  have  ideas.

"'Just  look  at  the  unfortunate  man,' said  Helena  Petrovna  suddenly,
turning  to  me,  '  he  does  not  look  himself  at  all,  he  drives  me  to  distraction.
He  imagines  that  here,  in  Europe,  he  can  carry  out  the  same  regime  as  in
India.  He  never  used  to  eat  anything  but  mdk  and  honey,  and  here  he  is
doing  the  same.  I  tell  him  that  if  he  goes  on  like  that  he  will  die,  but  he
wUl  not  listen. And  so  he  had  an  attack  last  night.'  "

Then  came  much  talk  in  Russian — a  tongue  Bavaji  did  not  understaiid
—on  the  S.P.R.,  and  on  Solovyoff's  want  of  faith.  Then  Solovyoff
continues,  "I  was  walking  about  the  room  at  the  time,  and  did  not  take
my  eyes  off  Bavaji.  I  saw  that  he  was  keeping  his  eyes  wide  open,  with
a  sort  of  contortion  of  his  whole  body,  while  his  hand,  armed  with  the
great  pencil,  was  carefully  tracing  some  letters  on  a  sheet  of  paper.

"  '  Look  !  What  is  the  matter  with  him  ? '  exclaimed  Madame  Blavatsky.

"'Nothing  particular,'  I  answered,  'he  is  writing  in  Russian.'  I  saw
her  whole  face  grow  purple. She  began  to  stir  in  her  chair,  with  an  obvious

1  An  account  of  the  incident,  %\Titten  by  Mr.  Solovyoff  shortly  after  its  occurrence,
will  be  found  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  393—5.


158


Revietvs.


[Supplement.


desire  to  get  up  and  take  the  paper  from  him.  But  with  her  swollen  and
almost  inflexible  limbs,  she  could  not  do  so  with  any  speed.  I  made  haste
to  seize  the  paper,  and  saw  on  it  a  beautifully  dra-ivn  Russian  phrase.

"Bavaji  was  to  have  written  in  the  Russian  language,  with  which  he
was  not  acquainted  :  '  Blessed  are  they  that  believe,  as  said  the  Great
Adept.'  He  had  learnt  his  task  well,  and  remembered  correctly  the  form
of  all  the  letters,  but  he  had  omitted  two  in  the  word  'believe.'  [The
effect  was  precisely  the  same  as  if  in  English  he  had  omitted  the  first  two
and  last  two  lettei's  of  the  word.]

"  '  Blessed  are  they  that  lie,'  I  read  aloud,  unable  to  control  the  laughter
which  shook  me.  '  That  is  the  best  thing  I  ever  saw.  Oh,  Bavaji  !
You  should  have  got  your  lesson  up  better  for  examination.'  "

Then  came  more  revelations.  Madame  Blavatsky  was  alone,  except  for
poor  Bavaji,  and  seems  to  have  felt  the  need  of  a  sympathetic  companion.
At  last  an  accident  precipitated  the  crisis.  Solovyoff  went  by  Madame's
instructions  to  get  a  photograph  from  a  drawer,  and  found  there  a  packet  of
the  Chinese  envelopes,  already  familiar  to  him,  in  which  letters  astrally
conveyed  from  Thibet  were  wont  to  appear.  Then  came  the  dramatic
moment.  Madame  Blavatsky  unbosomed  herself  completely.  "What  is
one  to  do,"  she  said,  "when  in  order  to  rule  men  it  is  necessary  to  deceive
them "  ;  when  they  will  not  accept  even  the  doctrine  of  Isis  Unveiled
without  the  belief  in  miracles  ;  when  their  very  stupidity  invites  trickery  ;
for  "almost  invariably  the  more  simple,  the  more  silly,  and  the  more  gross
the  phenomenon,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  succeed  1  "  There  is  much  more
about  the  imbecility  of  her  dupes,  and  of  the  world  in  general,  and  something
about  the  syndicate  of  scribes  who  wrote  the  celebrated  K<jot  Hoomi  letters ;
of  Olcott's  blundering  but  well-intentioned  assistance  in  "  phenomena,"  and
his  ac(iuittal  by  the  S.P.R.  of  anything  worse  than  stupidity — a  verdict
which  Madame  seems  to  have  regarded  as  a  personal  insult.  The  strange
interview  terminated  with  an  exhibition  of  the  "astral  bell,"  and  an  in-
vitation to  co-operate  in  the  manufacture  of  Koot  Hoomi  letters.

On  the  same  day  there  followed  a  second  interview,  in  which  Madame
Blavatsky  tried  by  various  means  to  obliterate  the  impression  which  she  had
made.  First,  she  alleged  that  it  was  a  black  magician,  and  not  she  herself,
who  had  spoken  through  her  mouth  ;  then,  that  the  "  Master  "  had  designed
to  try  the  faith  of  his  would-be  disciple.  Lastly,  she  used  alternately  threats
and  promises.  After  this  there  followed  more  interviews  with  Madame,  and
letters  from  her  :  and  finally,  an  extraordinaiy  document,  headed  ' '  My
Confession."  Tlie  receipt  of  this  last  appears  to  have  finally  decided  Mr.
Solovyofl^.  On  the  IGth  February,  1886,  he  despatched  to  Adyar  a  letter
resigning  his  membership  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  shortly  after-
wards laid  before  the  Theosophists  in  Paris  the  proofs  in  his  possession  of
Madame  Blavatsky's  fraud.

After  that  he  appears — whether  for  the  sake  of  a  former  friendship  or
through  fear  of  vengeance — to  have  kept  silent  until  after  the  death  of  Madame
Blavatsky,  and  the  appearance  in  a  Russian  journal  of  some  articles  on  her
by  Madame  .Jelihovsky.  It  was  to  correct  the  false  picture  drawn  in  these
articles  that  Mr.  Solovyoft'  published  in  1892  the  account  now  translated.
The  book  is  supplemented  by  two  appendices,  containing  Madame  Jelihov-


Supplement.]


Revieius.


159


•sky's  comments  on  Solovyoff's  book  and  SolovyofF's  reply.  Madame
Jelihovsky  quotes  many  of  Solovyoff's  letters,  written  during  the  period
of  which  his  book  treats,  which  unquestionably  tend  to  show  that  he
was  much  more  favourably  disposed  towards  a  belief  in  theosophic
"phenomena"  than  would  appear  from  the  narrative  written  some  years
rafter  the  events.  But  this,  if  admitted,  does  not  in  any  way  reflect  upon  his
«andour.  He  must  be  an  exceptional  man  who  can  reconstruct  witli  fidelity
his  earlier  mental  attitude  towards  a  problem,  at  a  time  when  after  events
have  placed  the  solution  in  his  grasp.  That  SolovyofF  was  disposed  to
l»elieve  in  Theosophy  if  he  could,  appears  from  his  narrative.  From  his
contemporary  letters  it  would  further  appear  that  he  did  actually  go  some
considerable  way  towards  belief. That  is  all.

As  regards  Mr.  Solovyoff's  credentials,  he  tells  an  interesting  story,  and
tells  it  well.  Perliaps  for  our  purposes  he  tells  it  sometimes  almost  too
well.  He  appears  not  as  a  rule  to  have  kept  a  diary  or  memoranda  of  the
events  he  relates  :  on  only  one  occasion  does  he  mention  having  taken
written  notes  of  an  interview,  and,  as  already  said,  he  is  vague  about
dates.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  if  he  had  to  rely  almost  exclusively  on
his  memory,  or  on  the  letters  which  he  received  from  Madame  Blavatsky,
"that  he  should  have  to  some  extent  misrepresented  his  own  mental  attitude
at  the  time.  Nor  are  we  required  to  suppose  that  the  conversations  i-eported
with  Thucydidean  aptness  have  all  the  authority  of  historical  documents,
^ut  such  considerations  do  not  seriously  affect  the  value  of  his  testimony.
The  two  most  important  pieces  of  evidence — the  interview  at  Wtirzburg,
and  the  Confession  written  some  months  later — are  sufficiently  attested,  the
one  by  notes  written,  as  Solovyoff  tells  us,  on  the  same  day,  the  other  by
the  actual  document  with  a  legally  certified  translation.  For  the  rest  Mr.
Solovyoff  tells  a  straightforward  tale,  and  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt
that  the  incidents  of  which  he  treats  are  in  their  main  outlines  accurately
described.

Scarcely  less  valuable  evidence  is  afforded  by  the  letters  which  Mr.  Solovyoff
has  appended  to  his  narrative,  written  from  America  by  Madame  Blavatsky
to  Mr.  Aksakoff. We  have  here  the  whole  early  history  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  told  in  her  own  inimitable  style  by  its  foundress. The  series  begin
in  October,  1874:,  with  a  letter  describing  the  spirit  materialisations  at  the
Eddy  brothers'  house,  and  the  writer's  meeting  there  with  Colonel  Olcott.
It  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  11  millions  of  Spiritualists  at  the  last  census
in  the  United  States,  ' '  which  have  already  grown  to  18  millions,  ahnost
50  per  cent."  (Madame  was  always  a  little  vague  in  her  arithmetic),  and  of
the  writer's  own  adhesion  to  the  faith — "I  have  now  been  a  Sjjiritualist  for
more  than  ten  years,  and  now  all  my  life  is  devoted  to  the  doctrine."  Then
came,  at  an  inopportune  moment,  the  Katie  King  exposure,  which  made
Spiritualism  less  popular  on  the  other  side  of  the Atlantic.  Madame
Blavatsky  began  by  denouncing  the  exposure  as  "neither  more  nor  less
than  a  plot  (now  almost  proved)  of  the  Protestant  Jesuitical  Society  called
the  Young  Men's Christian Association ! " (Ten  years  later,  the  same
Madame  Blavatsky,  in  a  new  role,  was  protesting  that  another  exposure,  in
which  she  was  more  directly  concerned,  was  due  to  a  conspiracy  on  the
part  of  certain  Christian  missionaries,  who  had — as  again  was  "almost


160


Reviews.


[Supplement.


proved  " — paid  40,000  rupees  to  suborn  false  witnesses).  Shortly  after  we-
read  of  a  secession  from  the  orthodox  American  Spiritualists,  and  the
establishment  of  a  new  organ,  the  Spiritual  Scientist.  Then  again  we  hear
much  of  the  Hermetic  philosophy  and  of  the  Kabbala  and  of  Paracelsus ;  of
the  fruits  of  Madame's  observations  in  past  journeyings  in  Egypt,  Assyria,
Siam,  Cambodia,  Mexico.  But  time  would  fail  to  trace  the  devious  paths
by  which  Spiritualism  grew  into  Theosophy,  ghosts  into  astral  bodies,
spiritual  phenomena  into  manifestations  of  the  occult  power  of  the  human
mind  ;  how  finally  Madame  from  a  medium  was  metamorphosed  into  a
chela,  John  King  with  his  saucer-shaped  cap  became  the  Mahatma  Morya
with  his  turban  ;  and  the  centre  of  the  spiritual  universe  shifted  from  the
seance  room  to  the  Thibetan  Himalayas.

In  these  pages  we  find  a  partial  revelation  of  the  whole  life  of  Madame
Blavatsky.  For  the  Confession  and  her  earlier  letters  to  Mr.  AksakofF
indicate  pretty  clearly  what  manner  of  woman  she  was  before  she  began  to
pose  as  a  great  Spiritual  Teacher.  From  the  same  letters  we  learn  by  what
steps  she  rose  to  her  position  at  the  head  of  a  movement  at  one  time  by  no
means  inconsiderable.  These  letters  and  SolovyofF's  narrative  help  us  also
to  a  clearer  understanding  of  a  personality  which  she  hei'self  might  have
described  as  a  reincarnation  of  Cagliostro  or  Alexander  of  Abonotichos.
That  she  was  no  vulgar  impostor  must  be  admitted.  But  how  much  her
activities  owed  to  the  common  greed  of  bread  and  butter,  and  how  much  to
such  subtler  instincts  as  the  love  of  power  and  the  artist's  pleasure  in  the
work  of  his  hands  it  is  liard  to  say.  One  feature,  already  patent  to  all  who
knew  her,  however  slightly,  is  brought  out  strongly  by  Solovyoif's  narrative.
She  had  at  all  times  of  her  life  the  most  singular  power  of  winning  the
interest,  and  even  the  regard,  of  those  who  came  in  contact  with  her  ;  even
of  some  who  mistrusted  and  half  despised  her.  Her  opinion  of  missionaries
in  general,  and  especially  of  missionaries  in  India,  was  well  known  and  freely
expressed  ;  yet  I  have  myself  seen  an  Indian  missionary  sitting  bound  to
her  side  by  the  mere  charm  of  her  conversation,  for  half  a  summer  afternoon.
Part  of  the  attraction  lay,  no  doubt,  in  the  fiery  energy  of  her  nature, —
an  energy  which  led  her  to  feel  or  feign  an  interest  in  the  most  diverse
subjects  ;  which  availed  to  keep  her  alive  wlien  half-a-dozen  mortal  diseases
were  warring  in  her  body  ;  which  enabled  her  to  emerge  triumphant  from
two  such  cataclysms  as  the  Katie  King  exposure  in  1874  and  the  jjublication
of  the  Coulomb  letters  and  Mr.  Hodgson's  report  ten  years  later.

But  something  was  due,  no  doubt,  to  her  simple  humanity  ;  to  the  large-
ness of  nature  which  held  men  like  SolovyofF  and  women  like  Mrs.  Besant
captive.  Certainly  she  was  built  on  a  grand  scale.  Her  very  impostures
were  stupendous  in  their  audacity.  What  other  man  or  woman  could  have
set  two  continents  talking  of  her  by  the  help  of  a  few  torn  cigarette  papers
and  a  buried  teacup  or  so  1  And  she  could  inspire  fear  as  well  as  friendship.
It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  very  obvious  reluctance  which  Mr.
Solovyoff  showed  to  offend  her — a  reluctance  which  led  to  his  keeping  silence
until  after  her  death  ;  and  there  is  evidence  in  his  narrative  that  he  had
reason  to  fear  her  vengeance.  I  am  acquainted  with  another  case,  in  which
Madame  Blavatsky,  when  as  yet  she  had  not  reached  the  zenith  of  her
power,  half  revealed  herself  to  a  gentleman  in  whom  she  apparently  hoped


Supplement.  ]


Reviews.


161


to  find  an  accomplice.  He,  too,  drew  back  from  the  profl'ered  alliance,  but
dread  of  her  vengeance  kept  his  lips  sealed  during  her  lifetime.

As  regards  Dr.  Leaf's  share  in  the  present  book,  his  name  is  a  guarantee
for  the  accuracy  of  the  translation.  Those  of  us  who  do  not  understand
Russian  can  see  for  ourselves  that  the  book  is  written  in  clear  picturesque
English.  But  not  the  least  laborious  part  of  Dr.  Leaf's  work,  it  may  be
supposed,  lay  in  tlie  editing  and  abridgment  of  Madame  .Jelihovsky's
voluminous  reply,  and  of  Mr.  SolovyofF's  further  comments,  for  which  labour
all  English  readers  owe  him  gratitude.

Space  will  not  permit  us  to  discuss  at  length  the  content?  of  Mr.
Garrett's  clever  and  entertaining  booklet.  But  the  nature  and  importance
of  his  work  can  perhaps  best  be  indicated  by  the  following  extracts.
Speaking  in  the  Hall  of  Science  (writes  Mr.  Garrett)  on  August  30th,  1891,
three  months  after  Madame  Blavatsky's  death,  Mrs.  Besant  said  ; —

"You  have  never  known  me  tell  a  lie  (No,  Never!  and  loud  cheers).  I  tell
you  that  since  Madame  Blavatsky  left  I  have  had  letters  in  the  same  hand-
writing as  the  letters  which  she  received  (sensation).  Unless  you  think
dead  persons  can  write,  surely  that  is  a  remarkable  fact.  You  are  surprised,
— I  do  not  ask  you  to  believe  me  ;  but  T  tell  you  it  is  so.  All  the  evidence  I
had  of  the  existence  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  teachers  and  of  their  so-called
abnormal  powers  came  through  her.  It  is  not  so  now.  Unless  every  sense
can  at  the  same  time  deceive  me,  unless  a  person  can  at  the  same  time  be
sane  and  insane,  I  have  exactly  the  same  certainty  for  the  trutli  of  the  state-
ments I  have  made,  as  I  know  that  you  are  here.  I  refuse  to  be  false  to
the  knowledge  of  my  intellect  and  the  perceptions  of  my  reasoning  faculties."

In  an  interview  published  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  of  September  1st,
1891,  Mrs.  Besant  further  explained  that  these  letters  came  from  a  Mahatma
of  whom  she  was  a  pupil,  and  that  they  did  not  come  through  the  post,  but
"  in  what  some  would  call  a  miraculous  fashion,"  in  a  word,  that  "  the  letters
I  receive  from  the  Mahatmas  are  precipitated."

It  was  afterwards  shown  conclusively  that  Mrs.  Besant  and  other
members  of  the  Society  had  indeed  received  many  such  letters,  but  that  they
were  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  .Judge,  ("  our  devoted  Judge,"  as  Madame
Blavatsky  fondly  called  him),  and  forwarded  to  their  destination  some-
times through  the  ordinary  course  of  post,  sometimes  by  sleight  of  hand.
The  proof  being  complete,  Mrs.  Besant  at  a  private  convention  of  the
Theosophical  Society  delivered  a  sjaeech,  of  which  the  following  is  an
extract : —

"I  do  not  charge,  and  have  not  charged,  Mr.  Judge  with  forgery  in  the
ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  but  with  giving  a  misleading  form  to  messages
received  psychically  from  the  Master  in  various  ways.  .  .  .  Personally,  I
hold  that  this  method  is  illegitimate.  .  .  .  I  believe  that  Mr.  Judge  wrote
with  his  own  hand,  consciously  or  automatically  I  do  not  know,  in  the  script
adopted  as  that  of  the  Master,  messages  which  he  received  from  the
Master  or  from  chelas  ;  and  I  know  that  in  my  own  case  I  believed  that  the
messages  he  gave  me  in  the  well-known  script  were  messages  directly
precipitated  or  directly  written  by  the  Master.  When  I  publicly  said  I  had
received,  after  H.  P.  Blavatsky's  death,  letters  in  the  writing  that  H.  P.

o


162


Reviews.


[Supplement.


Blavatsky  had  been  accused  of  forging,  I  referred  to  letters  given  to  me  by-
Mr.  Judge,  and  as  they  were  in  the  well-known  script,  I  never  dreamt  of
challenging  their  source.  I  know  now  that  they  were  not  written  or  ]jre-
cipitated  by  the  Master,  and  that  they  were  done  by  Mr.  Judge  ;  but  I  also
believe  that  the  gist  of  these  messages  was  psychically  received,  and  that
Mr.  Judge's  error  lay  in  giving  them  to  me  in  a  script  written  by  himself,
and  not  saying  so  .  .  .  Having  been  myself  mistaken,  I  in  turn  misled
the  ijublic."

Mrs.  Besant's  proclamation  in  1891  of  her  correspondence  with  the
Mahatmas  was  published  from  the  house-tops  ;  but  up  to  the  date  of  the
appearance  of  Mr.  Garrett's  articles  in  the  Wedminster  Gazette  this  oracular
utterance  in  a  hole  and  corner  convention  of  the  Faithful  was  the  only
attempt  made  by  her  to  retract  the  false  testimony  so  emphatically  given  to
the  world.  From  the  evidence  which  Mr.  Garrett  has  brought  forward,  we
are  all  enabled  to  share  Mrs.  Besant's  conviction  that  the  letters  were
"done  by  Mr.  Judge,"  and  to  form  our  own  opinion  as  to  the  probable
natui'e  of  his  inspiration.  Not  the  least  instructive  part  of  the  book,  it
should  be  added,  is  the  appendix  containing  a  selection  from  the  letters
written  by  Theosophists  on  the  exposure.

Frank  Podmore.


IV.

JJeber  die  Tr?i(jivahrnehmung,  {Hallucination  imd  Illusion')  mit  besonderer
BerUckaichtigung  der  internationalen  Enquete  Uher  Wachhallucinatioii
bei  Gesunden. Von  Edmund  Parish. A.  Abel,  Leipzig,  1894,  jjp.  246.

This  work  originated — the  author  informs  us  in  his  Preface — in  a  study
of  the  international  statistics  of  the  waking  hallucinations  of  persons  in  a
normal  condition,  and  grew  out  of  a  series  of  lectures  given  in  the  Munich
section  of  the  Gesellschaft  fiir  psychologisclie  Forschung.  Its  aim  is  to  review
the  whole  field  of  sensory  delusions, — one  important  class  of  which,  viz.,
those  occurring  under  normal  conditions,  has  generally  been  entirely  ignored
in  current  works  on  hallucinations, — and  to  show  their  relation  to  "correct"
or  "objective"  percejjtion.  The  author  has  made  an  exhaustive  study  of  the
German,  English,  French  and  American  literature  bearing  on  the  subject,
as  far  back  as  the  early  part  of  the  century,  and  the  multitude  of  references
he  gives  form  what  is  probably  by  far  the  naost  complete  bibliography  of  the
subject  in  existence.  He  also  describes  a  few  hypnotic  experiments  of  his
own,  devised  to  test  and  illustrate  certain  points.

As  his  work  came  out  while  the  last  part  of  the  English  Report  on
the  Census  of  Halhicinations  was  passing  through  the  jjress.  Professor
Sidgwick's  Committee  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  his  criticisms  on  their
results,  and  his  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  Census  are  based  on  the
provisional  Tables  published  at  the  International  Congress  of  Experimental
Psychology,  and  on  material  furnished  by  the  German  collection,  which  only
amounted  to  625  answers.

His  preliminary  general  account  of  sensory  delusions  is  excellent,
■embodying  the  results  of  all  the  most  important  recent  discussions,  and  he


Supplement.]


Reviews.


163


gives  a  convenient  and  well-arranged  summary  of  the  kinds  of  hallucinations
that  arise  under  certain  pathological  and  physiological  conditions.  The
differences  between  the  pathological  hallucinations  and  those  that  occur  to
persons  in  a  normal  waking  condition  appear  from  the  descriptions  to
be  very  marked.  The  former  are  incidents  in  a  systematic — a  more  or
less  coherent — course  of  delusion,  with  which  they  fit  in,  just  as  our
■ordinary  percepts  of  external  objects  fit  in  with  our  ordinary  course  af
thought.  They  are  therefore  not  often  recognised  to  be  delusive.  The
waking  hallucinations  of  normal  persons,  on  the  other  hand,  are  isolated
experiences  not  cohering  with  the  general  course  of  perception,  and  there-
fore recognised  to  be  hallucinatory.

The  hallucinations  produced  by  intoxication ,  various  forms  of  poisoning,
and  acute  illness  or  delirium,  are  also  as  a  rule  very  lengthened  and
complicated,  and  are  bound  up  with  delusive  ideas,  involving  the  whole
consciousness  of  the  patient.  Different  types  of  hallucinations  are  often
reported  as  the  effects  of  different  poisons,  but  the  specific  action  of  the
poison  is  only  one  factor  in  the  determination  of  the  type.  The  most
important  factors  are  the  circumstances  and  temjjerament  of  the  patient ;
such  drugs  as  haschish  and  opium  owe  their  renown  as  producers  of  certain
types  chiefly  to  their  being  the  principal  narcotics  used  by  Orientals.

The  hallucinations  accompanying  certain  physiological  conditions,  e.g.,
sleep  and  hypnosis,  occur  in  the  state  of  dream- consciousness.  In  post-
hypnotic hallucinations,  however,  the  full  waking  consciousness  is
sometimes — though  not  always — retained,  and  in  this  they  resemble  the
next  class  considered, — crystal  visions.  In  treatmg  these,  free  use  is
made  of  "Miss  X.'s"  experiences,  so  familiar  to  all  readers  of  these
Proceedings,  and  the  analogous  phenomenon  of  "  shell-hearing"  is  illustrated
by  an  interesting  case  quoted  from  Spitta  {Der  Schlaf  u.  die  Traumzustande
d.  menschl.  Seele,  p.  293),  who  succeeded  in  inducing  auditory  hallucinations
in  himself  by  listening  to  slight  strokes  made  by  a  muffled  clapper  on  a  bell.

After  considering  these  various  types  of  hallucinations,  Herr  Parish
enunciates  his  main  thesis, — that  the  one  element  common  to  aU  the  states
under  which  they  arise  is  a  dissociation  of  consciousness,  more  or  less
pronounced.  He  holds  that  in  the  pathological  state  the  intellectual
activity  is  obstructed,  the  higher  nerve  elements  that  carry  on  the  work
of  association  become  exhausted,  and  hallucinations  set  in.  The  process  by
which  this  is  supposed  to  take  place  is  explained  more  fully  as  follows  : —

In  abnormal  conditions  of  the  brain,  for  instance  in  anjemia,  and  also
during  sleep,  some  of  the  higher  nerve  centres  become  exhausted,  while
others  are  in  a  state  of  unusually  high  tension.  There  is  therefore
obstruction  in  the  nervous  paths  leading  to  the  former,  and  less  resistance
than  usual  in  those  leading  to  the  latter ;  hence  the  nervous  impulses  that
would  normally  affect  the  first  set,  become  diverted  towards  the  second,
and  produce  there  an  effect  which  is  a  hallucination.  During  this  jDrocess,
sensations  which  are  generally  sub-conscious  may  become  conscious,  and
may  thus  determine  the  form  of  the  hallucination  ;  the  influence  of  sub-
conscious ideas  being  often  seen,  for  instance,  in  crystal  visions.  The
blocking  of  paths  to  the  centres  which  would  normally  be  reached  is  a
process  of  "  dissociation," — the  opening  of  paths  in  other  directions  is  what


164


Reviews.


[Supplement


HeiT  Parish  calls  "enforced  association."  His  description  of  the  nervous
action  is,  of  course,  as  lie  says,  only  to  be  regarded  as  a  "  diagrammatic
representation  "  of  the  way  it  actually  takes  place.

Herr  Parish  maintains  that  both  hallucinatioJis  and  illusions  are
anomalous  reactions  of  the  brain  to  stimuli  in  the  way  just  described,  but
that  while  illusions  arise  from  dissociation — a  dropping  out  of  certain
processes  that  normally  occur,  and  a  consequent  failure  to  correct  the
sensations  received ;  — hallucinations  arise  fvom  forced  associaiion,  the  nervous
impulses  travelling  to  centres  that  would  not  normally  be  affected  by  them,
and  producing  changes  there.  He  holds  that  the  two  processes  seldom  or
never  actually  take  place  separately  ;  but  generally  one  or  the  other  pre-
dominates. The  origiTial  stimulus  may  be  external  or  may  start  in  the  brain
itself  ;  in  the  latter  case,  the  hallucination  is  an  illusory  perception  of  the
brain  change.  The  cases  given  in  illustration  of  these  points  are  all,,
however,  what  would  be  generally  called  illusions,  and  we  fail  to  see  why
Herr  Parish  is  not  satisiied  to  retain  the  ordinary  usage  of  the  words
"hallucination"  and  "illusion."  There  is  no  doubt  that  there  are  two
quite  distinct  kinds  of  phenomena, — illusions,  in  most  cases  clearly  traceable
to  external  perception,  which  can  often  be  reproduced  at  will,  for  their
original  percipient,  at  least,  and  sometimes  for  others  as  well  ;  and  halluci-
nations which,  as  a  rule,  cannfit  be  reproduced  at  all,  and  can  rarely  be
shared,  and  which,  therefore,  clearly  do  not  depend  on  any  perception  of
external  objects.  The  fact  that  it  is  sometimes  difficult  in  ^jractice  to  draw
the  line  between  the  two  types  cannot  do  away  with  the  distinction  between
them  ;  the  same  difficulty  occurs  in  all  attempts  at  classification,  and  it  is
not  only  more  convenient,  but  also  more  accurate,  to  keep  the  distinctions
between  types  in  view,  notwithstanding  the  existence  of  intermediate  forms.

The  physiological  section  of  the  essay  contains  also  a  full  sunnaary  of  the
long-standing  dispute  as  to  whether  hallucinations  are  originated  in  the
sensory  or  in  the  ideational  nerve  centres,  and  whether  the  nervous  changes
travel  centripetally  or  centrifugally.  Due  weight  is  given  to  the  many
arguments  that  have  been  brought  forward  on  both  sides,  and  the  conclusion
is  reached  that  both  views  are  equally  correct  (or  incorrect),  since  recent
investigations  tend  to  show  that  the  sensory  and  ideational  centres  occujjy
the  same  part  of  the  brain.

Later  on,  he  discusses  the  evidence  for  retinal  action  in  liallucinations,
which  is  drawn  from  tlieir  changes  in  colour  and  form  according  to  optical
laws,  and  shows  that  the  effects  are  probably  due  to  association  of  ideas  ;
similarly,  in  atropin  poisoning  and  in  fever  delirium,  both  real  objects
and  hallucinations  appear  distorted, — the  effects  observed  on  real  objects
being  apparently  transferred  by  association  of  ideas  to  the  hallucinations.

In  discussing  the  theory  of  points  de  repere,  he  thinks  that  we  should
regard  as  the  starting-point  fif  the  hallucination,  not  a  single  given  sensory
stimulus,  but  the  sum  of  all  the  sensory  stimuli  acting  at  the  moment.  We
can  then  explain  the  sensory  nature  nf  hallucinations  by  the  participation  of
the  sensory  nerves,  while  the  particular  form  they  take  is  determined  by  the
brain  changes.  There  seems  to  be  a  certain  confusion  of  ideas  in  this  view.
The  sensory  character  of  hallucinations  can  be  thus  explained  only  if  it  can
be  shown  that,  in  the  presence  of  sensory  stimuli,  all  ideas  tend  to  take


Supplement.]


Reviews.


165


a  sensory  form,  which  is  obviously  not  the  case.  The  phenomena  of
"  synsesthesise  " — when  the  stimulation  of  one  sense  leads  to  a  hallucinatory
impression  on  another  sense,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  "coloured  audition,"
— lend  some  sliglit  support  to  the  view  ;  but,  as  Herr  Parish  justly  remarks,
we  know  too  little  of  the  subject  to  be  able  to  explain  hallucinations  as
"  synsesthesise  "  ;  we  have  rather  to  regard  synsesthesise  as  hallucinations
whose  regular  appearance  j^oints  to  an  automatic  association,  acquired  very
early  in  life.

Many  other  points  of  general  interest  are  raised  which  we  have  not
space  here  to  discuss.  One  of  the  most  interesting  is  an  elaboration  of
Hoppe's  theory  that  many  auditory  hallucinations  originate  in  the
percipient's  unconscious  articulation  of  his  thoughts,  in  consequence  of  an
unusual  intensity  in  the  centrifugal  motor  innervation  which  is  supposed
to  accompany  all  verbal  thinking.  "Without  being  audible  to  others,
the  articulation  might  reach  such  a  pitch  as  to  give  rise  to  auditory
hallucinations  or  illusions.  This  view,  which  refers  chiefly  to  morbid  cases,^
is  supported  by  some  observations  on  insane  patients,  and  Herr  Parish
adduces  one  of  his  hypnotic  experiments,  in  which  the  suggestion  that  the
subject  should  articulate  all  his  thoughts  did  not— as  he  had  expected —
lead  to  audible  speech,  but  to  an  apparent  impression  on  the  part  of  the
subject  that  another  person  was  talking.  The  same  inaudible  articulation,
carried  a  step  further,  produces  enforced  speaking  aloud,  and  Herr  Parish
compares  the  various  degrees  of  the  process  to  analogous  stages  in  automatic
writing.

Passing  to  the  results  of  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  he  gives  a
tabular  summary  of  the  English,  French,  American  and  German  collections,
which  contain  between  them  27,329  answers,  of  which  3,271,  or  11'96  per
cent.,  are  affirmative,  9'75  per  cent,  of  the  men  and  14"57  per  cent,  of  the
women  answering  in  the  affirmative.  The  relative  frequency  of  hallucinations
in  the  two  sexes  is  thus  about  the  same  as  in  the  English  collection  taken
alone.  It  was  shown  by  Professor  Sid.g\vick's  Committee,  in  their  Report
on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  {Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.,  p.  153),  that
this  result  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  to  some  extent  by  women
remembering  their  hallucinations — at  all  events  those  recently  experienced
— better  than  men  do.

Next  comes  the  important  question  of  whether  the  statistical  results
represent  accurately  the  frequency  of  hallucinations.  In  comparing  the
various  Ad  interim  reports  published  by  the  English  Committee  with  their
final  Tables  presented  to  the  Congress,  Herr  Parish  observed  that  the
percentage  of  affirmative  answers  constantly  decreased  in  each  fresh  section.
"While  of  the  first  2,928  answers  collected,  12 '4  per  cent,  were  affirmative  ;
of  the  last  7,724,  only  8'1  per  cent.  wei"e  affirmative,  or,  omitting  the
foreign  element,  which  belongs  chiefly  to  the  last  section,  only  7  0  per  cent."-
On  this  ground,  he  concludes  that  the  total  percentage  of  9-4  in  the  English-
speaking  division  is  considerably  too  high,  and  that  it  can  only  be  rectified
by  further  "  intensive  "  enquiry  ;  a  further  "  extensive"  enquiry  by  which,

1  The  percentage  griven  by  Herr  Parish  is  somewhat  lower,  as  he  calculated  it  on
the  assumption  that  all  the  foreigners  belonged  to  the  last  section.


166


Revieius.


[Supplement.


so  to  speak,  the  cream  is  skimmed  (jff  a  larger  area,  will  only  further
exaggerate  the  error.  He  thinks,  in  other  words,  that  "  selection "  of
affirmative  answers  was  consciously  or  unconsciously  exercised  to  a  large
extent.

Various  arguments  are,  however,  brought  forward  in  the  Report  on  the
Census  57 — 60)  to  show  that  "selection"  has  not  had  much  influence
on  the  total  result,  and  we  may  add  here  that,  of  the  English  collectors,  37
collected  each  at  least  about  100  answers,  the  total  number  collected  by  the
37  amounting  to  about  6,500,  or  considerably  over  one-third  of  the  answers
from  English-speaking  persons.  It  seems  likely  that  these  collectors  at
least  must  have  almost  exhausted  their  circle  of  acquaintances,  and  cannot
have  merely  "skimmed  the  cream  "  from  them.  Some  of  the  rest  of  the
collection  was  made  by  their  friends,  whose  circles  of  acquaintance  would
have  overlapped  theirs,  so  that  certain  sets  of  people  must  have  been  j^retty
thoroughly  canvassed.

Then,  again,  as  regards  the  part  of  the  collection  in  which  the  percentage
is  highest,  viz.,  the  Brazilian  section  (23 '9  per  cent.)  its  size  is  evidence — •
■considering  that  it  was  entirely  the  work  of  one  man— that  not  much  selection
can  have  been  exercised,  apart  from  the  fact  that  Professor  Alexander  was
certainly  well  aware  of  the  proper  method  of  collecting  answers.  His  results,
therefore,  undoubtedly  tend  to  show  that  hallucinations  are  considerably
more  frequent  among  the  Brazilians  than  among  the  English.

From  those  considerations  it  appears  to  us  probable  that  the  results  of
the  whole  collection  are  in  reality  more  trustworthy  than  that  of  any  part  of
it  taken  alone.

It  is  also  noteworthy  that  in  the  German  collection,  although  it  only
amounts  to  a  total  of  625  answers,  the  2:)i'oportion  of  affirmative  answers
(5'95  per  cent,  from  men,  10'72  per  cent,  from  women,  8'16  per  cent,  from
both),  is  decidedly  lower  than  in  any  of  the  other  collections,' in  spite  of  the
apparent  inclusion  (see  Table  II.,  p.  229)  of  "yeses"  relating  to  hallucina-
tions of  non-vocal  sounds,  which  would  have  been  excluded  from  the
English  Tables.

As  to  the  different  frequency  in  diff'erent  nations,  Herr  Parish  remarks
that  the  existing  material  is  hardly  sufficient  to  form  a  judgment  on,  and  it
seems  to  be  partly  on  the  larger  proportion  of  "yeses"  reported  by  the
French  and  Americans,  as  shown  in  his  Table  I.  (p.  226),  that  he  founds  his
view  that  a  more  "  extensive  "  enquiry  is  misleading.

But  the  numbers,  as  they  stand,  cannot  be  compared  with  the  English
results.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  proportion  of  persons  originally
answering  "yes"  in  the  Engli.sh  and  in  the  American  collections  was  almost
exactly  the  same  ;  in  the  English,  10 "5  per  cent,  of  men,  16-1  per  cent,  of
women,  13-4  per  cent,  of  borh  ;  in  the  American,  10'97  per  cent,  of  men,
17'19  per  cent,  of  women,  13-5  per  cent,  of  both.  The  English  "yeses"
were  reduced  by  counting  as  "noes"  those  which  referred  to  experiences
clearly  not  within  the  scope  of  the  question  asked,  and  to  experiences  of  a
doubtful  kind,  which  the  Committee,  after  careful  consideration,  excluded
from  their  Tables. (See  Report  on  the  Census,  pp.  36-38.)

The  French  collection  also  contains  affirmative  answers  which  in  the
English  would  have  been  counted  as  negative,  for  instance,  some  relating  to


Supplement.]


Reviews.


167


hallucinations  of  non-vocal  sounds.  If  we  reduce  the  number  of  affirmative
answers  by  allowing  for  these  (on  the  basis  of  the  French  Tables  in  an  Ad
Interim  report  published  in  the  ProceedingsS.P.'R.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  264-7)  the
French  percentages  are  brought  very  near  to  those  of  the  Russian  section  of
the  English  collection,  and  it  sesms  probable  that  if  the  same  principles  of
counting  had  been  applied  throughout  to  the  French  cases  as  to  the  English,
the  number  of  affirmative  answers  would  have  been  still  further  reduced.
M.  Marillier  thought  the  percentage  too  high,  as  he  found  that  some  persons
who  collected  only  "  noes  "  did  not  send  in  their  lists.  (See  Report  of  the
International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychologij,  p.  65.)

Herr  Parish  remarks  that  a  comparatively  small  number  of  hallucinations
are  reported  to  occur  in  bed,  but  this,  he  supposes,  is  because  the  same
coadition — a  "dissociation  of  consciousness" — that  leads  to  hallucinations,
also  promotes  the  forgetting  of  them.  The  English  Committee  pointed  out,
however,  {Report,  p.  171)  that  the  numbers  reported  as  occurring  in  bed  are
very  large,  considering  what  a  small  part  of  our  lives  is  generally  spent  awake
in  bed.  And  if  this  be  so,  we  cannot  draw  from  them  the  conclusion  that  a
large  proportion  of  these  hallucinations  are  forgotten.

Herr  Parish's  explanation  of  hallucinations  as  due  to  a  "  dissociation  of
consciousness "  is  clearly  derived  from  a  study  of  the  pathological  cases,
though  it  is  possible  to  apply  it  also  to  dreams  and  hypnotic  hallucinations.
He  says,  indeed,  that  in  the  different  types  of  hallucinations  it  exists  in
many  different  degrees,  and  that  the  profounder  the  dissociation,  the  more
"  massive  "  is  the  character  of  the  hallucination,  and  the  more  also  is  all
memory  of  it  prevented.  We  can  find,  however,  as  a  rule,  no  evidence  of
any  such  "  dissociation  "  in  waking  hallucinations  of  the  kinds  included  in
the  Census,  with  the  exception  of  those  that  occurred  in  bed,  which  were
treated  separately  in  the  Report,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  proving  that
the  percipient  was  awake  in  all  cases.  The  cases  he  gives  to  illustrate  the
supposed  existence  of  the  dream-consciousness  occurred  after  long  exposure
to  cold  and  exhaustion,  and  are  practically  dreams,  not  waking  hallucinations
at  all.  Mere  fixation  of  the  eyes  may  occasionally  tend  to  bring  about  a
dreamy  condition,  but  the  English  collection  contained  very  few  cases  that
could  be  thus  explained,  and  it  would  be  a  more  serious  interference  with
intellectual  work  than  experience  justifies  us  in  assuming  if  reading  or
writing  for  any  length  of  time  were  constantly  liable  to  bring  on  the  dream-
consciousness,  which  he  suggests  was  the  exjolanation  of  the  two  cases  he
gives  on  p.  73.

AVhether  the  state  in  which  hallucinations  such  as  these  occur  should  be
called  one  of  dream-consciousness  or  not,  is,  after  all,  merely  a  question  of
verbal  definition  ;  but  Herr  Parish  deduces  the  conclusion  that  hallucina-
tions, like  dreams,  are  specially  liable  to  be  forgotten  and  therefore  that  the
reported  numbers  no  more  afford  a  true  measure  of  the  number  that  actually
occur  than  would  a  reported  number  of  dreams.  He  admits,  however,  that
in  sleep  there  is  a  much  deeper  dissociation  of  consciousness  than  in  waking
hallucinations,  and  maintains  that  forgetfulness  depends  on  this,  from  which
it  must  follow  that  dreams  are  forgotten  much  more  than  hallucinations.
And  since,  as  a  matter  of  common  knowledge,  dreams  are  reported  very
much  more  frequently  than  hallucinations,  it  follows  a  fortiori  that  halluci-


168


Revieius.


[Supplement.


nations  are  very  much  rarer  phenomena  than  dreams.  There  is  really  no
evidence  that  memoi-y  is  less  reliable  about  hallucinations  than  about  most
other  things.  The  P\,eport  on  the  Census  shows  (see  pp.  62 — 69)  that  the
majority  of  them  are  forgotten,  but  an  investigation  of  memory  with  regard
to  almost  any  other  class  of  events  would  probably  show  similar  results.

The  last  chapter  of  the  essay  is  concerned  with  the  question  of  telepathy,
which  Herr  Parish  declares  cannot  at  the  present  day  be  passed  over  in  any
general  discussion  of  hallucinations.  He  approaches  the  subject  evideiitly
with  an  open  mind,  but  it  seems  to  us  that  his  treatment  of  it  is  marked  by
a  want  of  discrimination  of  the  different  degrees  of  evidence  in  different
cases.  There  are  no  doubt  a  great  many  apparently  veridical  phenomena
— real  or  alleged — which,  by  straining  a  point  here  and  there,  can  be
explained  without  having  recourse  to  the  theory  of  telepathy,  and  a  study  of
them  is  useful  in  revealing  unsuspected  sources  of  error.  But  the  important
question  is  whether  the  residuum  of  well-evidenced  cases  can  be  thus
explained  away,  and  with  this  question  Herr  Parish  does  not  attempt  to
deal.  The  reports  of  the  German  collection,  which  he  seems  to  have  chiefly
studied,  and  a  number  of  which  are  published  at  the  end  of  his  essay,
certainly  add  little  or  nothing  to  the  evidence,  and  he  did  not  perhaps
sufficiently  realise  the  purely  provisional  nature  of  the  Tables  issued  by  the
English  Committee  at  the  Congress.

His  criticisms  have  been  in  the  main  forestalled  in  their  Eeport  on  the
Census,  but  it  may  be  worth  while  to  recapitulate  and  discuss  them  further
here.  First,  he  remarks  that  in  testing  whether  chance  will  account  for  the
number  of  coincidences  that  occur,  we  ought  to  consider  only  the  proportion
of  coincidental  to  non-coincidental  cases  recorded  during  the  most  recent
period,  namely,  the  five  years  preceding  the  enquiry,  since  veridical  or
coincidental  cases  are  shown  by  the  Tables  to  be  remembered  much  better
than  non-cfiincidental  ones.

The  calculations  of  the  English  Committee,  as  given  in  their  Report,
were  made  on  a  much  more  stringent  basis  than  this,  viz  ,  on  the  numbers
reported  as  occurring  during  the  most  recent  quarter  of  the  year  before  the
enquiry.  The  utmost  degree  of  forgetfulness  of  non-coincidental  cases
warranted  by  the  facts  (not  by  mere  theoretical  considerations)  was  assumed,
and  it  was  also  assumed  that  no  coincidental  cases  at  all  were  forgotten.
The  latter  is  undoubtedly  an  extreme  assumption.  The  Committee  met
with  some  evidence  in  the  Census  itself  of  such  forgetfulness  (though  not
indeed  of  the  precise  type  of  case — recognised  apparitions  seen  at  the  time
of  the  death  of  the  person  represented — on  which  their  calculations  were
based)  and  some  evidence  also  of  unwillingness  to  mention  veridical
experiences,  which,  if  at  all  usual,  must  have  unduly  reduced  the  number
reported.

It  is  also,  of  course,  probable  that  the  disproportionately  large  number
of  remote  coincidental  ajjparitions  reported  is  partly  due  to  some  of  them
being  wrongly  remembered  as  coincidental,  rather  than  to  any  abnormal
difference  of  memory  with  regard  to  the  two  kinds  of  cases.

Secondly,  Herr  Parish  considers  that  the  proportion  of  coincidental  to
non-coincidental  cases  reported  during  the  last  five  years  is  much  too  high,
because  it  is  begging  the  question — the  question  whether  there  are  two


Supplement.]


Reviews.


169


different  classes  of  hallucinations,  one,  subjectively,  and  the  other
telepathically  caused — to  compare  the  coincidental  cases  only  with  the
clearly  objectified  apparitions  of  recognised  living  persons.  He  holds  that
we  ought  first  to  prove  that  the  facts  cannot  be  explained  by  one  theory
covering  all  cases. His  reasoning  then  proceeds  as  follows  : —

Since  for  the  non-telepathic  explanation,  both  the  form  of  the  halluci-
nation and  the  greater  or  less  degree  of  its  externalisation  are  matters  of
indifference,  it  is  necessary  to  prove  that  the  veridical  cases  occur  in  a  larger
proportion  among  all  hallucinations  tlian  can  be  accounted  for  by  chance.
Now,  of  the  apparitions  of  recognised  living  persons  reported  to  occur
■during  the  last  five  years,  as  stated  in  the  English  Tables  presented  to  the
Congress,  5  per  cent,  were  coincidental.  Assuming  the  correctness  of  this
proportion,  then,  out  of  the  whole  number  of  such  apparitions  reported —
348 — there  should  be  17  coincidental  cases.  But  the  whole  number  of
hallucinations  reported — visual,  auditory  and  tactile,  recognised  and  un-
recognised,— was  1,871.  Therefore  the  true  proportion  of  veridical  cases  is
17  out  of  1,871,  or  only  '9  per  cent.'^  Finally,  since  he  considers  it  proved
that  only  a  very  small  jjroportion  of  the  hallucinations  that  occur  are
remembered,  and  consequently  reported  ;  since  further,  there  is  in  his  view
no  reason  to  regard  illusions  (in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word)  as
•essentially  different  from  hallucinations,  or  to  separate  dreams  from  waking
liallucinations,  the  veridical  cases  thus  dwindle  to  an  infinitely  small
proportion.

It  is  remarkable  that  Herr  Parish  can  have  gone  through  this  carefully
elaborated  piece  of  reasoning  without  discovering  that  the  assumption
on  which  the  whole  is  based  is  altogether  arbitrary  and  unwarrantable.
If  we  wish  to  find  the  true  proportion  of  veridical  cases  among  all  kinds  of
hallucinations — including  in  the  term  illusions  and  dreams — it  is  surely
■obvious  that  we  ought  to  take  all  kinds  of  veridical  cases,  including  veridical
illusions  and  dreams,  also  cases  coinciding  with  other  events  than  death,  as
well  as  premonitory  cases.  It  cannot  be  correct  to  apply  a  restriction  to
veridical  cases  which  is  not  also  applied  to  the  whole  group  of  cases  with
whicli  they  are  to  be  compared.

No  doubt  it  would  be  an  instructive — though  a  somewhat  lengthy —
process  to  discover  what  proportion  veridical  experiences  of  all  types  bear
to  all  experiences  of  the  same  type.  We  should  probably  find  the  pro-
portions different  in  different  types,  because  it  is  most  likely  that  telepathy
manifests  itself  more  easily  along  some  lines  than  along  others.  There
seems  reason  to  think,  for  instance,  that  it  has  a  special  tendency  to  produce
hallucinations.  The  particular  type  of  case  selected  in  the  Census —
apparitions  of  recognised  living  persons  —was  chosen  as  that  in  which  the
calculation  of  chance  coincidence  could,  for  obvious  reasons,  be  estimated
probably  more  accurately  than  in  any  other.

The  whole  argument  for  telepathy,  however,  of  course  turns  on  the
question  whether  the  reports  of  veridical  cases  are  Irustworthy.  A.ssuming
the  bona  fides  of  the  witnesses,  are  their  recollections  to  be  trusted  ?  Herr

1  Several  arithmetical  errors  vi^ere  made  in  this  calculation,  which  we  have
corrected  for  the  benefit  of  readers.


P


170


Reviews.


[Supplement.


Pax'isli  follows,  or  rather  goes  far  beyond  Professor  Royce,  in  maintaining
that  a  large  number  of  cases  can  be  referred  to  "pseudo-memories," — an
irresistible  conviction  that  some  event  which  did  not  really  occur  has
been  experienced,  a  hallucination  of  memory  as  vivid  and  convincing  and
of  necessity  more  difRcult  to  correct  than  a  sensory  hallucination.  The
theory  was  elaboi-ated  by  Professor  Royce  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
Society  for  Psychical  Research  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  366  et  seq),  but  was  put  forward
by  him  as  a  pure  hypothesis,  applicable  only  to  a  certain  number  of
cases,  chiefly  dreams  and  mental  impressions,  not  externalised  waking
hallucinations.  He  himself  admitted  that  there  were  many  apparently
veridical  cases  to  which  it  would  not  apply.  The  only  definite  evidence  in
favour  of  this  hypothesis  was  drawn  from  a  very  small  number  of  morbid
cases.  Illusions  of  memory,  i.e.,  inaccurate  recollections  of  real  events,  are,
of  course,  common  enough,  and  are  one  of  the  errors  that  have  always
to  be  guarded  against.  Herr  Parish  gives  an  instance  known  to  himself
of  a  lady  who  dreamt  that  a  certain  estate  was  sold  for  the  price  of
750,000  poodles.  Soon  after,  an  offer  was  made  to  buy  it  for  750,000
marks,  whereupon  not  only  the  lady  herself,  but  many  of  her  friends,  were
convinced  that  she  had  dreamt  of  marks  instead  of  jjoodles.  The  story  does
not  appear  to  rest  on  the  kind  of  evidence  that  we  should  require  from
one  which  was  supposed  to  illustrate  telepathy,  but  assuming  that  it  is
accurately  reported,  it  is  merely  an  illusion  of  memory  of  a  familiar  kind.
If  the  lady  had  had  no  dream  at  all  with  regard  to  selling  the  estate,  a
hallucination  of  memory  to  the  effect  that  she  had  dreamt  of  it  would
have  been  a  much  more  remarkable  error,  different  in  kind  rather  than
in  degree.

The  argument  against  chance  coincidence  is  thus  disposed  of  in  a  whole-
sale manner  by  premising  (1)  that  a  very  large  number  of  non-coincidental
hallucinations  occur,  whereas  only  very  few  of  them  are  remembered,  and
(2)  that  the  great  majority  of  coincidental  hallucinations  that  are  remembered
never  occurred  at  all,  but  are  to  be  put  down  to  hallucinations  of  memory.
The  analogy,  however,  of  hypnotic  cases,  on  which  Herr  Parish  in  general
lays  so  much  stress,  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  a  revival  of  apparent
memory  is  more  often  genuine  than  hallucinatory.  The  memory  of  what
has  happened  during  hypnosis  may  often  be  revived  by  a  few  words  bearing
but  very  remotely  on  the  subject.  (For  examples,  see  Moll's  Hypnotism,
English  Translation,  p.  125.)  So  far  as  dreams  go,  we  are  often  reminded  of
them  by  some  slight  incident,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  distrust  the  accuracy
of  such  recollections.

Herr  Parish  argues  further  that  the  method  of  calculation  of  chance
coincidence  is  fallacious,  because  the  probability  of  coincidence  is  different
in  each  case.  Supposing  that  the  percipient  is  nursing  her  mother  who  is  ill
with  pneumonia  and  75  years  old,  it  is  comparatively  probable  (a)  that
"  among  other  hallucinations  and  dreams  "  some  will  relate  to  the  mother,
and  also  (6)  that  the  mother  may  die  at  the  time  of  one  of  these  "  hallucina-
tions and  dreams."  These  are  obvious  considerations — except  the  assump-
tion of  the  frequency  of  hallucinations  under  such  circumstances.  But  it
was  shown  in  the  Report  on  the  Census  (see  pp.  1G7-171),  that  there  is  little
evidence  for  the  production  of  hallucinations  by  anxiety. Also  in  most  of


Supplement.]


Revieius.


171


the  cases  there  presented  as  affording  evidence  for  telepathy,  the  percipient
was  in  no  anxiety  at  all,  and  there  was  therefore  no  antecedent  probability
that  his  "  hallucinations  and  dreams  "  would  relate  to  the  dying  person.

With  regard  to  the  age  of  the  dying  person,  this,  of  course,  affects  the
probability  of  death  in  any  individual  case,  but  the  method  of  averages  is
misleading  only  if  the  average  of  all  the  individual  cases  considered  differs
from  the  standard  average.  Thus,  if  the  coincidental  apparitions  were  only  of
persons  dying  at  advanced  ages,  it  would  be  incorrect  to  use  as  a  factor  in
the  calculation  the  annual  death-rate  for  the  whole  population.  Now,  the
ages  of  the  decedents  in  the  coincidental  cases  included  in  the  English
collection  were  unfortunately  not  always  given,  but  the  circumstances
generally  enable  us  to  estimate  them  roughly.  Such  an  estimate  of  those  35
cases  which  were  published  in  the  Repor  t  on  the  Census  as  supported  by
more  or  less  good  evidence,  gives  the  following  results  :  —

Age  at  Death.  Number  of  Gases.

From  6  months  to  25  years.  9
From  25  to  56  years.  11

Over  55  years.  ,  15

Of  the  last  15  cases,  there  are  4  in  which  the  decedent  was  very  likely
under  55  years  old,  while  of  the  middle  11  cases,  there  are  two  in  which  he
may  have  been  under  25.

From  the  Tables  of  Expectation  of  Life  compiled  from  the  reports  of
the  Registrar  General,  we  find  that  out  of  100  persons  (taking  men  and
women  together),  32  die  under  25  years  of  age,  22  between  the  ages  of  25
and  55,  and  46  over  55  years.  Out  of  35  persons,  the  corresponding
numbers  would  be  11,  8,  and  16  respectively,  which  are  not  very  different
from  the  numbers  in  the  Census  cases  just  quoted.  It  follows  that  the
average  probability  of  death  in  these  cases  was  about  the  same  as  in  the
population  generally,  and  therefore  that  it  is  legitimate  to  use  the  annual
death-rate  as  a  factor  in  the  calculation.

If,  however,  Herr  Parish's  treatment  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  will
hardly  seem  adequate  to  those  who  take  a  more  favourable  view  of  it  than
he  does,  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  forms  merely  a  subordinate
part  of  his  book.  To  psychologists  and  to  those  interested  in  the
general  study  of  hallucinations,  his  wide  knowledge,  his  capacity  for
the  orderly  marshalling  of  facts,  and  his  careful  and  impartial  discussions
of  disputed  points,  will  make  his  work  of  great  value,  if  not  indispensable,
and  should  rank  him  among  recognised  authorities  on  the  subject.

Alice  Johnson.


V.

Rivista di Studi Psichici  ; Periodica Mensile. Edited by Dr.  G.  B.
Ermacora  (Padua),  and  Dr.  G.  Finzi  (Milan).

In  spite  of  the  prevailingly  positive  character  of  scientific  thought  in
Italy,  psychical  studies  have  in  the  last  few  years  gained  a  firm  footing
there,  partly,  no  doubt,  owing  to  the  modified  adherence  of  such  eminent
men  as  Lombroso  and  Schiaparelli,  but  still  more  to  the  active  work  of  the


172


Reviews.


[Supplement.


two  editors  of  the  new  periodical,  whose  names  will  be  familiar  to  all
students  of  the  Proceedings.  We  are  heartily  glad  to  see  that  the  subject
has  now  progressed  so  far  as  to  call  for  the  establishment  of  a  special  organ,
to  which  we  offer  a  most  cordial  welcome.

The  first  number,  issued  last  January,  opens  with  a  most  suggestive  and
interesting  address  by  the  editors,  "  Ai  nostri  lettori."  It  takes  as  its  text
"  Misoneism,"  the  resistance  of  the  human  mind  to  the  entrance  of  new
ideas,  as  shown,  of  course,  in  the  attitude  of  the  scientific  world  towards
psychical  studies.  A  new  idea,  the  editors  say,  means  a  modification  of
brain-substance  ;  but  all  living  beings  tend  to  resist  anything  that  causes
an  expenditure  of  energy,  and  therefore  anything  that  tends  to  modify
their  organs.  This  resistance  to  change,  among  other  effects,  produces  in
the  region  of  thought  a  secondary  form  of  "positivism."  Scientific
positivism  is  the  progressive  adaptation  of  the  intelligence  solely  and
entirely  to  the  facts  of  experience  ;  this  operates  to  the  good  of  the  species.
But  there  is  another  sort  of  positivism  which  may  be  called  that  of  the
individual  economy  ;  this  urges  the  individual  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  new
and  painful  adaptations  of  the  intellect  involving  expenditure  of  energy,
and  therefore  operates  hurtfully  to  progress.  A  man  conscious  that  he  is
a  factor  in  the  advance  of  humanity  will  always  be  subject  to  the  ojaposition
of  these  two  sorts  of  positivism,  and  is  tempted  to  confound  with  scientific
positivism  that  which  is  only  the  expression  of  his  own  individual  desire  to
avoid  painful  eff"ort.  The  psychical  enquirer  must  endeavour,  in  the  first
place,  to  accept  as  fact  nothing  but  fact,  but  at  the  same  time  he  must  not
shirk  the  painful  effort  to  adapt  his  mind,  by  gradual  steps,  from  ideas
already  familiar,  to  those  which  are  new,  and  that  with  the  least  possible
waste  of  intellectual  energy.

After  this  introduction,  which  is  closed  by  a  long  letter  of  good  wishes
from  Carl  du  Prel,  the  number  contains  one  rather  curious  case  of
apparition  at  the  time  of  death  or  shortly  afterwards — a  collective  hallucina-
tion of  two  sisters  living  near  Rovigo,  in  1874  ;  translations  of  two  other
cases  from  the  October  number  of  our  Journal  ;  the  first  part  of  a  popular
exposition  of  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  with  respect  to  telepathy,
by  Dr.  Ermacora  ;  a  translation  of  an  extraordinary  case  published  by  Dr.
Liebeault  in  the  January,  1894,  number  of  the  Uevue  de  VHypnotisme  ;  notes
on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  on  spirit-identity,  and  on  the  exposure  of
Mrs.  Williams  ;  and  finally  a  long  and  highly  complimentary  review  of  Mr.
Podmore's  Apparitions  and  Thought-traiisference,  again  by  Dr.  Ermacora.
He  has  some  good  criticisms  to  make  ;  and  ends  by  expressing  an  earnest
hope  that  the  work  may  soon  be  translated  into  Italian,  "  because  the
popularization  of  psychic  science  begins  with  telepathy,  because  there  is  in
our  language  no  book  which  adequately  treats  of  the  subject,  and  because
Podmore's  work  is  the  one  which  most  thoroughly  attains  this  end."

Walter  Leaf.


General  Meetings.


173


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GEJ^ERAL  MEETINGS.


The  72nd  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall,  on  Friday,  April  5th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Professor
SiDGWiCK  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  and  commented  on  various  cases  of
Premonition,  forming  part  of  a  paper  on  "  The  Relation  of  Subliminal
Phenomena  to  Time,"  which  will  be  published  in  a  future  number  of
the  Proceedings.


The  73rd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
May  17th,  at  8.30  p.m.  :  Mr.  R.  Pearsall  Smith  in  the  chair.

Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  paper  on  "The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc,"
printed  below,  was  read  by  Mrs.  Lang.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  a  further  part  of  his  paper  on  "  The
Relation  of  Subliminal  Phenomena  to  Time."


The  74th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
July  5th,  at  4  p.m.  ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  read  a  paper  on  "Human  Personality,
in  the  light  of,  and  in  its  relation  to.  Psychical  Research,"  which  it  is
hoped  to  pubHsh  in  a  future  number  of  the  Proceedings.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  the  paper  on  "Resolute  Credulity,"
printed  below.


Q


174


Mrs.  A.  W.  Vermll.


I.

SOME EXPERIMENTS ON THE  SUPERNORMAL
ACQUISITION OF  KNOWLEDGE.

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


For  the  last  five  years,  at  irregular  intervals  and  with  many
interruptions,  I  have  been  making  experiments  in  "  guessing  "  ordinary
playing  cards ;  I  have  varied  the  conditions,  with  a  view  to  testing
some  of  the  suggested  causes  of  success — hyperssthesia,  telepathy,
clairvoyance,  or  teltesthesia — and  I  will  now  describe  and  attempt  to
classify  the  results.  The  number  of  experiments  is  in  no  single  series
great  enough  to  justify  me  in  looking  upon  any  suggested  explanation
as  proved  ;  at  the  same  time,  the  evidence  seems  to  point  to  certain
conclusions,  and  perhaps  the  publication  of  my  attempts  may  induce
others  to  carry  on  similar  experiments,  which  may  result  in  more
assured  conclusions.

I  ought  to  say  that  I  have  recorded  carefully  at  the  time  each
experiment ;  occasionally,  on  beginning  a  new  sei'ies,  a  few  preliminary
trials  were  made  with  a  view  to  ascertaining  what  would  be  the  most
convenient  way  of  carrying  out  a  proposed  experiment,  but  as  soon  as
the  method  was  determined  on,  every  experiment  has  been  recorded.
Where  another  person— my  little  girl— was  concerned,  I  took  the
precaution  of  assigning  marks  for  success  to  each  of  us,  using  the
marks  as  a  means  of  testing  the  accuracy  of  the  record.  Thus  I  noted
the  cards  drawn  and  guesses  made,  she  reckoned  in  her  head  the  marks
obtained  by  each  of  us.  When  the  series  for  the  evening  was  finished,
she  would  say  what  marks  each  had  obtained  and  I  would  revise  my
notes.  We  never  found  any  discrepancy,  so  I  may  take  it  as  certain
that  my  records  are  substantially  correct.  The  rough  notes  were  taken
on  loose  sheets  of  paper,  copied  into  a  book,  and  compared  the  next
day  with  the  originals.  I  have  no  guarantee  to  offer  of  the  accuracy
of  the  notes  taken  when  I  was  alone  beyond  that  of  my  desire  to  avoid
error  and  my  knowledge  that  extreme  care  is  necessary  to  do  so.  In
every  case  the  guess  has  been  recorded  before  the  actual  card  was
looked  at.  In  cases  where  it  was  necessary  to  cancel  a  guess — perhaps
because  the  card  fell  over  on  its  face  or  might  otherwise  have  been
observed — the  fact  of  the  cancelling  has  been  recorded,  though  the
guess  has,  of  course,  not  been  reckoned.

The  experiments  have  almost  all  been  made  after  five  o'clock  in  the
evening,  some  before  dinner,  some  after — nearly  all,  therefore,  by


Swpernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.  175


artificial  light.  The  series  have  often  been  interrupted,  sometimes
unavoidably,  sometimes  voluntarily.  When  I  have  been  specially
busy,  or  have  felt  thoroughly  disinclined  for  guessing  cards,  I  have  not
continued  a  series.  But  if  one  experiment  has  been  made,  I  have
always  continued  on  that  occasion  till  the  regular  number  has  been
completed  ;  my  usual  number  at  a  sitting  has  been  5  or  10.

The  experiments  made  fall  into  five  classes,  divided  according  to
the  supposed  cause  of  success,  if  success  there  were.  They  were
arranged  to  test  the  following  possible  causes  of  successful  guessing  of
unperceived  cards  : —

A.  — -Delicate  and  cultivated  sense  of  touch — the  fingers  consciously
feeling  the  face  of  the  card.

B.  — Momentary  contact — one  finger  being  placed  for  an  instant  on
the  back  of  the  card.

C.  — Telepathy,  of  various  kinds,  direct  and  indirect.

D.  — Hypersesthesia.

E.  — Telsesthesia.

I  have  some  difficulty  in  giving  names  to  the  supposed  causes  in
these  last  two  classes,  D  and  E,  but  as  one  of  the  senses  (touch  or
sight)  has  always  been  employed,  though  the  information  has  not  been
consciously  obtained  through  it,  I  have  called  the  cause  provisionally
hypersesthesia,  where  the  card  has  been  known  to  no  intelligence
before  it  was  guessed,  and  telsesthesia,  where  the  knowledge
has  been  present  in  one  mind  and  conveyed  to  the  other,  not  directly
as  a  mental  image,  but  indirectly  and  apparently  through  the  tactile
sense  of  the  person  guessing.  I  will  explain  my  meaning  more  fully
when  I  come  to  these  classes.

It  will  be  seen  that  class  A  is  more  nearly  akin  to  class  D  than  to
any  other,  and  that  C  and  E  are  possibly  closely  connected.  But  as
the  whole  classification  is  provisional,  I  have  thought  it  better  to  deal
with  the  five  groups  in  something  like  chronological  sequence.

A. — Sense  of  Touch.

I  was  led  to  try  experiments  in  the  direction  of  ascertaining  how
far  it  was  possible  to  know  a  card  by  feeling  its  face,  after  some  other
trials  had  shown  me  how  much  easier  it  was  than  I  had  supposed  to
see  the  reflection  of  a  card.  I  had  dealt  cards  out  over  a  polished
wooden  surface,  by  lamplight,  and  had  seen  every  card  with  ease  ;  I
found  the  same  results  when  I  used  an  ordinary  leather-covered  writing
table,  and  by  a  careful  arrangement  of  lights,  was  able  to  see  enough
of  the  cards  reflected  on  a  well  ironed  white  linen  table-cloth  to  enable
me  to  distinguish  with  certainty  between  picture  and  non-picture  cards,
black  and  red,  and  so  on. I  could  not  distinguish  3  of  Hearts  from

Q  2


176


3frs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


3  of  Diamonds,  but  I  dare  say  I  should  soon  have  acquired  the  skill,
had  I  persevered.

I  then  went  on  to  see  if  I  could  distinguish  between  a  picture  and  a
plain  card  after  passing  over  the  surface  the  sides  of  my  thumbs.  I
found  it  quite  easy  to  do  so,  and  in  a  pack  that  I  had  used  a  few  times
I  was  able  to  pick  out  the  picture  cards  with  very  few  errors.  I  now
began  a  regular  series  with  a  view  to  learning  to  distinguish  each  card
by  touch.  I  drew  a  card,  felt  it  without  looking  at  it,  guessed  it,
recorded  the  guess,  put  the  card  aside,  and  drew  the  next.  After
evei'y  10  or  15  cards,  I  turned  up  the  cards  which  had  been  laid  aside
in  a  regular  sequence,  entered  the  results  in  the  book,  shuffled,  and
began  again.  I  did  not  put  each  card  back  and  then  shuffle,  as  I
found  it  very  important  to  perform  the  feeling  process  rapidly,  and  my
fingers — or  rather  thumbs — seemed  to  lose  their  sensitiveness  if  I
constantly  re-adjusted  the  cai-ds.  As,  however,  I  did  not  know
whether  my  guesses  were  correct  or  not,  I  do  not  think  the  probable
number  of  successes  was  materially  affected  by  this  method.  I  made
50  guesses  in  an  evening,  and  went  on  till  I  had  400  guesses  \\\  alL
For  the  results  see  Table,  Series  A  I.  p.  194.

Taking  the  separate  evenings,  the  completely  correct  guesses  were
distributed  as  follows  :  3,  2,  9,  6,  4,  2,  3,  5.

I  found  that  the  art  of  feeling  the  number  of  the  pips  was  one  that
could  be  learnt  :  in  that  of  perceiving  the  suit  I  made  no  conscious
progress. The  figures  on  the  separate  evenings  were  as  follows  ; —

Number of pips right  : 10,  8,  13,  14,  8,  8,  6,  16 =  83  ;  most

probable  total,  31.
Suit  right;  18,  17,  17,  16,  14,  13,  10,  16  =  121;  most  probable

total,  100.

Before  leaving  this  Seines  I.,  I  may  note  a  curious  instance  of
an  illusory  mental  impression  as  to  how  the  guess  was  made.  I
am  a  very  good  visualiser,  and  as  soon  as  I  think  of  a  card,  see  a  mental
picture  of  it.  On  the  3rd  night,  i.e.,  after  100  guesses,  I  found  that  I
was  mentally  reversing  these  processes,  and  had  it  not  been  for  my
experiences  of  the  two  preceding  evenings  should  have  said,  not  that  I
felt,  but  that  I  saiv  the  card.  From  this  time  to  the  end  of  the
experiments.  T  ceased  to  be  conscious  of  the  process  by  which  I  learnt
what  the  cards  were.

This  experience  has  not  been  without  interest  to  me  in  leading  me
to  mistrust  any  pei^sonal  impression,  however  distinct,  as  to  how  a
conclusion  has  been  reached. [See  Appendix  A.,  p.  190.]

Since  trying  these  experiments,  I  have  had  the  sensitiveness  of  the
skin  of  my  hands  tested,  with  a  view  to  ascertaining  whether  there  is
any  reason  to  suppose  that  I  have  greater  natural  facilities  than  most


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.  177


people  for  recognising  cards  by  feeling  their  surfaces.  It  was  found
that  the  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  hands,  as  tested  by  placing
small  weights  upon  it,  was  not  more  than  normal,  and  as  tested  by
Weber's  test,  it  was  not  more  than  normal  except  along  the  inner  edge
of  the  left  thumb,  where  the  sensitiveness  was  as  high  as  at  the  point
•of  the  index  finger,  which  is  unusual.

£. — Momenta?'^  Contact. Pure  Guessing.

Side  by  side  with  the  series  just  described  I  carried  on  some  experi-
ments with  a  view  to  testing  the  results  of  pure  guesswork.  I  took  the
top  card  of  the  pack  without  looking,  put  my  hands  on  it  and  guessed.
I  was  careful  not  to  move  my  fingers  over  the  card  nor  to  look  at  it.  I
kept  my  hands  on  it  merely  to  make  some  connection  ;  I  waited  for  no
impression,  but  guessed  as  quickly  as  I  could  get  my  mind  to  form  a
choice.  I  never  seemed  to  have  any  reason  for  guessing  one  card  more
than  another,  and  often  had  great  difficulty  in  making  a  reasonable
■guess.  Such  phrases  as  "  Queen  of  roses,"  "  6  of  shadows  "  came
constantly  to  my  lips. For  results  see  Table,  B  II,  p.  194.

C. — Telepathy.

The  experiments  in  telepatliy  that  I  am  considering  in  this  paper
have  all  been  made  with  my  little  girl,  now  aged  11-|-.  I  have  made
•experiments  with  her,  being  myself  either  agent  or  percipient,  from
the  time  she  was  four  or  five  years  old,  using  occasionally  other  objects
than  cards,  and  I  have  once  or  twice  received  spontaneous  impressions
which  I  am  inclined  to  believe  were  derived  telepathical]y  from  her.
The  record  of  an  earlier  series  of  experiments  with  cards  has  been
published  in  the  Joxirnal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  .33.  The  experiments  in
telepathy  now  to  be  mentioned  are  of  two  kinds,  direct  and  indirect ;
in  the  direct  experiments,  Series  III.,  she  (or  I)  would  draw  a  card  and
look  at  it,  and  I  (or  she)  would  guess.  The  guess  was  always  recorded
before  the  actual  card  was  mentioned.  In  the  indirect  experiments.
Series  IV.,  a  card  was  drawn  by  one  of  us  from  a  pack,  the  back  was
looked  at  by  both,  a  guess  made  by  each,  i-ecorded,  and  the  card  then
turned  over  and  the  face  looked  at  by  both.  As  to  our  success  in
guessing  these  cards  correctly  I  shall  speak  when  I  come  to  the  next
■class  of  experiments,  D.  I  have  counted  and  classified  in  Series  IV.
the  cases  in  which  our  guesses  (whether  right  or  wi'ong)  coincided,  and
it  is  this  series  which  I  mean  by  the  experiments  in  indirect  telepathy.

The  general  results  of  these  card  experiments  in  telepathy,  direct
and  indirect,  is  negative — that  is,  there  is  no  evidence  in  favour  of
telepathy.  For  the  actual  figures  see  Tables.  There  is  a  slight  excess
over  the  figures  given  by  probability  in  the  Series  IV.,  but  not  enough
to  warrant  the  drawing  of  any  conclusion  in  favour  of  telepathy.


178


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


Another  series,  III  b.,  in  which  H.  was  percipient,  should  be
mentioned.  To  vary  the  experiments  in  dii'ect  telepathy,  which  were
very  dreary  work  for  a  child,  we  started  a  series  in  which  instead  of
guessing  the  whole  card  at  once  the  percipient  guessed  in  three  stages,
receiving  the  answer  "Yes,"  or  "No,"  before  the  next  guess.  Thus,
"  Picture  Card".—"  No." "  Diamonds."— "Yes." "  Eight."— "No."

The  success  was  somewhat  greater  in  this  series  (which  is  included
in  C  Ilia  in  the  Table),  but  the  experiments  soon  proved  as  dull  as  the
others,  and  we  abandoned  them.

The  extreme  difficulty  in  keeping  up  any  interest  in  this  "very  dull
game"  may  accoiint  for  the  failure  of  the  experiments.  In  the  original
series,  some  years  ago,  the  child  was  quite  unfamiliar  with  cards,  and
much  interested  in  them.  On  the  occasions  I  am  now  discussing,  the
cards  themselves  were  no  longer  interesting  to  her,  and  she  was  keenly
anxious  to  be  successful  and  correspondingly  depressed  at  failure.

In  the  course  of  the  experiments  in  direct  telepathy,  we  had  some
interesting  experiences,  which  are  perhaps  worth  noting  for  the  benefit
of  future  investigators.  On  one  occasion,  when  I  had  drawn  a  card
and  was  holding  it  as  usual,  with  the  light  of  the  lamp  on  it,  H.  said
"  3  of  clubs  ;  I  saw  that  through  the  back,  against  the  light."  We
proceeded  to  investigate  and  found  that  in  some  circumstances  it  was
possible  to  see  the  pips  through,  although  it  was  not  easy  to  do  so
unless  we  put  the  card  actually  against  the  globe.  On  another  occasion
I  was  looking  at  8  of  hearts,  and  H.  guessed  7  of  hearts,  adding  ;
"  That  must  not  count,  for  I  heard  you  say  hearts."  On  further
inquiry,  she  said  that  she  heard  — t,  —  t,  — t,  — t,  and  then  'art,  'art
'art.  My  attention  had,  as  I  knew,  wandered  on  this  occasion,  and  it
is  possible  that  I  did  say  the  word  unconsciously.  I  had  a  cold,  and
my  breathing  was  moi'e  difficult  and  louder  than  usual.  We  never
had  another  similar  experience.  These  guesses  just  mentioned  do  not
appear  in  the  tallies.  I  mention  them  here  because  they  suggest  a
possible  explanation  where  the  number  of  successes  in  thought-transfer-
ence is  slightly  higher  than  probability  would  lead  us  to  expect — viz.,
the  including  of  a  few  cases  where  the  information  was  conveyed  by
the  ordinary  channels,  neither  agent  nor  percipient  observing  that  such
was  the  case.

As  bearing  on  the  question  of  telepathy  between  H.  and  myself,  I
add  two  notes,  one  on  a  case  of  apparent  spontaneous  telepathy,  the
other  on  experimental  telepathy  where  the  interest  of  both  agent  and
percipient  was  greater  than  in  the  case  of  the  experiments  with  cards.

Apparent  Spontaneous  Telepathy,  between  H.  and  myself.

On  January  22nd,  1891,  I  was  sitting  alone  in  a  perfectly  dark
room,  with  my  two  liands  on  a  small  wooden  table. At  this  time  I


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knotvledge.


179


was  in  the  habit  of  sitting  in  this  way  every  day  for  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  but  nothing  had  so  far  occurred  of  any  kind.  On  January  22nd
I  went  into  the  drawing-room  at  5.45,  and  left  when  the  clock  struck
six.  When  I  had  sat  for  about  10  minutes  I  saw  a  bright  spot  of
light,  which,  however,  disappeared  when  I  looked  fixedly  at  it ;  a
moment  after,  I  had  a  very  clear  vision  in  another  part  of  the  room  of
a  golden  key,  very  large  and  bright.  I  shut  my  eyes,  and  on  opening
them  again  saw  the  key.  This  persistence  of  a  vision  is  quite  unlike
my  experience  in  crystal-gazing.  The  handle  was  towards  my  right,
the  wards  to  my  left  ;  the  key  was  nearly  horizontal,  the  handle
slightly  higher,  as  it  would  be  if  the  key  were  lying  on  the  ground
with  the  wards  nearer  to  me  than  the  handle.  But  in  the  absence  of
any  object  to  compare  with  the  key,  I  could  not  say  whether  it  was
represented  as  lying  on  the  ground.

The  phenomena  I  was  looking  out  for  were  not  of  this  nature,  and
as  I  happened  to  be  interrupted  just  as  I  left  the  room,  I  unfortunately
made  no  note  at  the  time.  About  7  o'clock  H.,  aged  7|  years,  came
back  from  a  small  children's  party  in  a  great  state  of  excitement  about
a  magic  lantern,  which  she  much  regretted  that  I  had  not  seen.  The
story  represented  was  that  of  Bluebeard  and  the  "golden  key."  This
key,  she  said,  appeared  in  several  of  the  pictures,  one,  "  a  dreadful  one,
with  the  key  lying  in  the  blood."

On  hearing  this,  I  noted  my  own  vision  and  the  time,  5.55  p.m.,
with  a  sketch  of  the  key — and  H.'s  account,  as  above  given.  Two
days  later  I  was  able  to  see  the  slides,  and  fix  the  hour  of  the  perform-
ance. The  show  began,  the  hostess  told  me,  at  20  minutes  or  a  quarter
to  6,  and  lasted  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  more  sensational
slides  had  been  omitted,  and  there  was  no  picture  with  the  key  lying
in  the  blood.  The  key  appeared  3  times,  once  held  by  Bluebeard,  once
by  Fatima,  and  once  lying  on  the  ground,  in  the  same  position  as  I  had
seen  it,  but  reversed ;  i.e.,  with  the  handle  to  the  left.  In  no  picture
was  the  key  golden.

It  was  clear  then  that  my  vision  did  not  reproduce  anything  that
had  been  actually  seen  by  the  child,  although  it  seemed  to  have
occurred  at  tlie  time  when  she  was  seeing  the  pictures  and  wishing  that
I  could  do  so  also.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  child's  own
account  to  me  did  not  reproduce  exactly  what  she  had  seen.  It  was
not  till  some  years  later  that  I  discovered  by  accident  that  in  the  first
version  she  had  ever  read  of  Bluebeard,  a  French  one,  the  key  was
golden.  The  staining  of  the  key  with  the  blood  is,  of  course,  an
essential  element  in  the  story,  and  H.'s  account  of  the  show  suggests
that  the  central  incident  to  her  mind  was  the  golden  key  lying  in  the
blood.  If  then,  my  vision  were  due  to  something  more  than  chance,
H.  seems  to  have  conveyed  to  me  a  symbolic  representation  of  the


180


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


story  as  conceived  by  her  rather  than  a  reproduction  of  the  actual
picture  at  which  she  was  looking.

A2yparent Thought-transference  of  Clearly  Visualised  Scenes,  I  being

percipient.

In  the  autumn  of  1893  we  tried  to  transfer  visualised  scenes  ;  in
this  I  believe  myself  to  have  had  some  slight  success  as  percipient  with
other  people.  H.  and  I  sat  in  the  same  room,  at  some  distance,  back
to  back  ;  she  thought  of  a  scene  or  picture,  I  looked  at  the  ceiling,
described  what  I  saw,  and  drew  it.  There  was  not  complete  silence,
but  no  leading  questions  were  asked,  and  very  few  remarks  made.  I
took  down  at  the  time,  on  one  occasion,  every  word  that  was  said,  and
am  sure  that  no  sort  of  hint  is  given  by  H.,  other  than  the
inevitable  one  of  satisfaction  or  disappointment,  of  which  I  am
conscious,  though  it  is  not  expressed.  After  my  description  and
drawing  were  complete,  H.  made  rough  outlines  in  some  cases  where
her  description  was  not  definite  enough  to  please  her.  She  did  this
before  seeing  my  drawings.  We  have  made  in  all  7  attempts,  besides
2  where  I  had  no  impression  of  any  kind.  Out  of  these  7,  in  2  cases
H.'s  visualisation  was  not  clear  enough  to  enable  her  to  draw  anything,
and  in  these  two  cases  I  failed  completely.  In  one  case,  there  may
have  been  a  connection  between  my  impression  and  H.'s  mental
picture  ;  the  four  remaining  cases  I  will  describe  in  detail.

(a). My  description  was  as  follows  ; —

Darkish  centre,  perhaps  brown ;  light  or  white  side  pieces,  like  an
odd-shaped  chandelier  or  a  gigantic  white  butterfly.  Most  conspicuous
vivid  blue  background,  as  if  the  object  were  seen  against  a  bright  blue
sky. My  drawing  is  reproduced  on  the  Plate,  marked  P.l.

H.'s  picture,  in  her  own  words  : —

Ship  leaving  Port  Gavin,  very  tall,  brown,  centi-al  mast,  white
sails — the  wliole  showing  against  a  brilliant  blue  sea,  with  dark  brown
rocks  on  one  side. For  H.'s  drawing,  see  Plate,  fig.  A.l.

She  had  seen  this  on  the  Cornish  coast,  when  on  a  visit  without
me,  and  had  been  struck  with  the  beauty  of  colouring.  She  was
disappointed  at  my  not  seeing  the  rocks.

(6.) My  description  ;  —

Fat  insect — no,  child — child  with  its  back  to  me,  and  arms  and  legs
stretched  out ;  colour  reddish  brown  in  the  centre ;  shiny  bright  head,
very  solid  body. (See  Plate,  fig.  P.  2.)

H.'s  picture  : —

Baby  ,  in  a  passion,  standing  in  the  corner  with  his  face  to

the  wall.

The  child  in  question  had  very  shining,  bright  hair,  much  brighter,


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knoidedge.  181


as  H.  said,  than  his  frock,  which  was  white  (not  brown). He  stood
with  legs  and  arms  outstretched,
(c.) My  description  : —

Large  globe  on  the  top  of  a  pillar  —  base  indistinct — cannot
see  colour  of  globe  ;  it  is  light,  has  reflections,  is  dazzling  and  bright —
perhaps  an  electric  light  on  the  top  of  a  pillar. [See  Plate,  tig.  P.3.)

H.'s  picture  : —

Sun  setting  behind  point  of  hill,  so  that  a  little  notch  is  taken  out
of  the  disc  of  the  sun  by  the  point  of  the  hill.  The  whole  scene  is
distant,  lower  ranges  of  hills  leading  up  to  the  highest,  behind  this  is
the  setting  sun. Mist  over  the  lower  part. (See  Plate,  fig.  A.3.)

(d.) My  description,  verbatim. H.'s  comments  in  italics.

"Scene,  outdoors — colour,  green.  Yes.

"  Right  hand  definite,  left  hand  undefined,  e.g.,  on  right  hand,
mountain  or  hill,  line  of  trees,  house. Which  ?

"  Right  hand,  hill — green  hill,  clear  outline.  Something  at  bottom
of  hill,  behind  it  sea — or  before  it.  Purplish  flat  surface  fills  middle
of  picture.  Object  [at  foot  of  hill]  not  natural — geometrical  in  out-
line. How  large  ?

"Can't  see  size  ;  colour,  white  and  red.  No  horizontal  lines  ;  [lines]
vertical  and  aslant."

H.'s  picture  : —

Dieppe  as  seen  from  the  steamer  (6  months  before  ;  H.'s  first
impression  of  a  French  town).  Cliff  sharply  defined  on  right ;  on  left,
view  cut  oS'  by  the  steamer.  Red  and  white  houses  below  the  white
cliff  in  the  green  hill,  all  seen  across  a  dull  bluish  sea.

I  have  given  the  account  of  this  impression  in  detail  because  it
illustrates  the  difliculties  which  I  experience  in  what  I  may  call  inter-
pretation. The  objects  present  themselves  to  my  mind  as  groups  of
lines,  accompanied  by  an  impression  of  colour,  but  there  are  no  external
objects  for  comparison,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  get  any  notion  of  their
size — and  sometimes,  as  in  this  last  case,  they  appear  in  succession,  so
that  even  their  relative  proportions  are  not  easy  to  determine.  The
"object  at  the  foot  of  the  hill"  seemed  to  be  equally  likely  to  be  a  house
with  a  red  roof  and  white  front,  a  red  waggon  with  a  white  load,  or  a
child's  white  pinafore  against  a  red  dress.  The  only  certainties  were
that  the  main  colours  were  red  and  white,  and  the  general  trend  of  the
lines  vertical  and  aslant.  The  description  is,  I  think,  not  inaccurate
when  refeiTed  to  the  view  of  Dieppe  at  the  foot  of  the  cliffs.  Again
in  the  3rd  case,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  general  outlines  the  two  drawings
are  similar,  but  I  interpreted  my  impression  on  too  small  a  scale  when
I  suggested  a  globe  of  electric  light  carried  on  a  pillar  for  what  was
the  sun  momentarily  resting  upon  the  hill  top.


182


Mrs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


D. — Hypera'sthesia.
The  card  experiments  under  this  head  fall  into  two  main  divisions
— viz.  :  (1)  Those  already  spoken  of,  where  two  persons  guess  ;  (2)
Other  experiments  in  which  I  alone  looked  at  or  touched  the  pack
of  cards.

I  will  begin  with  the  first  division,  Series  V.  and  Va.^  I  have-
already  partly  described  the  method,  and  will  only  add  that  I  shuffled
and  H.  drew  the  card,  that  on  forming  a  guess  each  person  said
"Now,"  that  when  both  '-ISrow's"  had  been  said,  H.  spoke  her  guess,  I
mine.  I  recorded  both,  and  then  the  card  was  turned  up.  I  shuffled
after  each  guess,  and  we  guessed  10  at  a  sitting.  The  reason  that  H..
mentioned  her  guess  before  I  did  was  that  I  thought;  that,  as  she  was-
quite  a  child  at  the  time,  she  might  be  influenced  to  change  her  card
if  she  heard  mine  before  recording  her  impression.  I  may  have  been,
influenced  in  the  same  way,  but  at  least  I  was  aware  of  the  danger.-
The  first  series  was  in  February,  1890;  the  next  in  October,  1890,  with
a  fresh  pack  ;  the  two  short  series  were  in  January,  1891,  and  May,
1892.  Some  preliminary  experiments  with  an  old  and  defective  pack
were  successful,  and  we  then  began  the  regular  series.  For  results  see
Table,  p.  195.

It  will  be  seen  that,  taking  the  totals,  the  success  is  marked,  and
so  it  is  in  each  of  the  long  series.  The  cards  were  different  in  each  of
the  four  series.  In  the  first  series  we  used  a  pack  which  had  been
occasionally  used  for  piquet,  and  there  was  a  slight  difference  in  the
appearance  of  the  cards  that  had  been  more  often  used.  The  diftbrencCr
however,  was  so  slight  that  H.  did  not  notice  it  when  I  drew  her
attention  to  it,  and  I  was  myself  unable,  at  the  end  of  the  experiments,,
to  sort  the  piquet  cards  from  the  others.  tStill  it  is  possible  that  the
difference,  slight  as  it  was,  may  have  helped  me  to  guess  the  cards
rightly.  There  was  a  perceptible  progress  in  my  guessing  of  the
numbers  of  cards  :  6,  .5,  7,  13,  10  (total  41),  being  the  totals  correct
in  each  50,  while  the  total  of  sttits  correctly  guessed  by  me  was
precisely  in  accordance  with  probability— viz.,  62.

For  the  second  series,  in  October,  1890,  we  used  a  fresh  pack,  with
backs  dark  in  general  colouring  and  well  covered.  They  were  not
unused,  but  were  entirely  unfamiliar  to  me  and  quite  new  to  H.  I
was  not  so  successful  in  guessing  numbers  (22  instead  of  41),  while  I
was  nearly  as  good  in  guessing  cards  (9  for  10).  The  results  with
H.  were  not  quite  so  good  as  those  in  the  first  series  (number  rights
22  ;  card  right,  9  ;  instead  of  26  and  14  respectively).  The  third
series  was  unavoidably  interrupted  ;  the  only  interesting  point  about
it  was  the  striking  example  it  offered  of  what  I  have  observed  on  other

1  The  guesses  are  identical  with  those  in  Series  IV.,  described  above.


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.  18o

occasions,  namely,  the  tendency  to  be  distinctly  good  or  bad,  rather
than  indifferent,  in  this  special  form  of  guessing.  On  one  evening,  ont
of  10  guesses,  I  was  right  6  times  as  to  suit  and  3  times  as  to  number)
thus  scoring  half  my  total,  both  of  "number  right"  and  "suit  right,"
on  one  of  the  four  nights.  The  4th  series  promised  well,  but  was  also
unfortunately  interrupted.  The  cards  in  this  series  were  pale  in
colouring  and  had  not  been  used  by  either  of  us  before.

I  made  a  careful  examination  of  the  cards  correctly  guessed  in  the
first  and  last  sets  of  this  series  (V.)  with  a  view  to  determining  the
question  whether  the  large  number  of  successes — obviously  beyond
what  chance  would  produce — was  due  to  recognition,  conscious  or
unconscious,  of  cards  previously  drawn.  Such  an  explanation  will  not
account  for  everything  ;  in  the  first  10  attempts  in  the  4th  series,
for  instance,  I  guessed  2  cards  correctly,  2  of  diamonds  and  6  of
diamonds.  Of  these,  2  of  diamonds  was  drawn  again  nearly  a  month
later  and  rightly  guessed  by  H.,  while  6  of  diamonds  was  drawn
again  on  the  same  night  and  incorrectly  guessed  by  us  both.  In  the
first  set  of  250,  my  10  completely  correct  guesses  represented  8  cards,
and  H.'s  14  completely  correct  guesses  represented  5  cards,  but  in  all
cases  the  cards  correctly  guessed  were  turned  up  on  other  occasions
and  not  rightly  guessed.

I  now  come  to  the  second  division  of  this  Class  D — viz.  :  solitary
experiments  in  guessing  cards  without  excluding  the  senses  of  sight  or
touch,  but  without  applying  them  to  the  faces  of  the  cards.  The
whole  series  where  I  used  my  eyes  I  will  call  VI.,  but  I  will  treat
separately  of  the  five  sets  of  experiments.  The  series  in  which  I  used
only  the  sense  of  touch  I  call  VII.  In  July,  1892,  after  the  conclusion
of  the  double  series  just  desci'ibed,  I  began  a  set  of  experiments  alone.
I  shuffled  the  cards,  picked  up  the  top  one,  being  careful  not  to  touch
the  face,  looked  at  the  back  and  made  a  guess.  I  used  a  pack  of  cards
that  had  been  used,  I  think,  for  some  of  our  telepathic  experiments,
but  the  backs  of  which  I  had  not  examined.  With  these  I  made  100
trials  {see  VI.  1,  Table,  p.  195).

I  then  bought  a  new  pack,  thick,  well  glazed,  with  dark  well
covered  backs,  Avith  gilding  on  them.  I  chose  them  with  a  view  to
trying  success  under  what  I  believed  to  be  the  worst  possible
conditions,  as  I  have  a  fancy  that  it  is  easier  to  guess  when  the  backs
are  pale  in  colour  and  not  highly  glazed.  The  results  are  shown  in
VI.  2  ;  see  Table,  p.  195.

The  next  series  (VI.  3)  was  a  very  short  one  ;  the  pack  was
another  perfectly  new  one,  with  pale  but  well  covered  backs.

The  next  30  (VI.  4),  some  months  later,  were  tried  with  a  new
and  unused  pack,  and  the  last  20  (VI.  5)  with  a  pack  specially  opaque.

The  most  marked  results  were  Avith  the  familiar  pack,  but  I  ought


184


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


to  say  that  in  the  2nd  set  with  the  new  pack,  out  of  the  four  cards
correctly  guessed,  3  were  guessed  at  their  first  appearance,  the  4th  at
its  second  ;  but  this  one,  as  well  as  two  of  the  others,  was  drawn  again
and  incorrectly  guessed.  Comparing  these  results  with  those  obtained
in  the  double  experiments  of  the  same  kind,  I  am  convinced  that  the
whole  explanation  is  not  to  be  found,  as  I  once  thought,  in  the  identifi-
cation of  certain  cards  by  marks  on  their  backs,  though  this  may  occur
and  help  to  produce  the  success.

The  last  series  I  tried  (No.  YII)  was  one  where  I  used  touch  only  ;
this  ran  concurrently  with  set  2  of  series  VI.  I  shut  my  eyes,  during
shuffling  and  drawing,  and  placed  one  finger  of  the  left  hand  on  the
back  of  the  selected  card.  I  had  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  impres-
sions at  all,  even  after  waiting  some  time.  The  results  were  not  more
than  what  chance  might  give,  2  complete  successes  in  100  guesses.

Before  going  on  to  record  our  most  recent  experiences,  I  may
perhaps  here  mention  some  of  my  own  impressions  as  to  the  way  in
which  my  knowledge  was  obtained  in  the  more  successful  series,  though
I  place  very  little  confidence  in  the  trustworthiness  of  such  impressions.
I  will  also  here  mention  some  delusions  which  I  had,  and  some  cases
where  I  seem  to  have  misinterpreted  my  impressions.

Genex'ally,  when  looking  at  the  back  of  a  card,  I  see  a  sort  of  ridge
or  ridges  along  it  which  represent  the  face  to  me.  For  instance,  a  4  or
6  will  have  a  longitudinal  ridge  at  each  side,  a  2  or  3  one  central  ridge,
a  5  and  an  ace  run  down  to  a  hollow,  but  the  5  is  more  distinctly
raised  at  the  edges  than  the  ace  ;  7  and  8  seem  to  be  closely  alike,  all
over  little  ups  and  downs,  and  so,  again,  are  9  and  10,  while  the
picture  cai'ds  present  a  curious  uniformity  of  surface,  with  no  ridges
<it  all.  At  one  time  I  thought  certain  cards  were  more  inclined  than
others  to  spin  on  the  surface  on  which  I  placed  them,  but  on  making
experiments  I  could  not  find  that  this  was  the  case.  On  several
occasions  I  convinced  jnyself  that  impressions  as  to  marks  on  the
back  were  complete  delusions  ; — e.g.,  in  the  last  of  the  2nd  set  of  250
(Series  IV.  and  V.)  a  card  was  drawn  which  I  thought  looked  like  king
of  diamonds ;  we  had  drawn  king  of  diamonds  earlier  in  the  evening
and  on  its  back  I  had  noticed  five  little  marks  close  together.  I  saw
five  nearly  similar  marks  on  the  card  in  question,  and  (note  the  dream-
like quasi  reasoning  !)  guessed  queen  of  diamonds.  The  card  was  king
of  diamonds.  Of  coui'se  I  at  once  said  that  it  was  marked,  but  H.
declared  she  could  see  nothing.  I  undertook  to  pick  it  out  of  the
pack.  I  went  through  the  whole  pack,  and  laid  aside  two  cards  as
having  little  marks,  like  in  kind,  but  not  identical  with  those  on  the
king.  These  two  cards  proved  to  be  the  knave  and  the  2  of  diamonds,
but  I  had  failed  to  find  the  king,  and  on  close  examination  could  see  no
trace  of  any  kind  of  mark  on  it. Again,  when  alone,  I  was  sure  that


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.


185


a  card  was  "  very  like  "  the  last  one — king  of  clubs  (correctly  guessed)
— and  therefore  decided  to  guess  queen  of  clubs.  But  immediately
after  I  felt  sure  that  it  was  a  spade.  So  I  guessed  queen  of  spades.
The  card  was  a  king  of  spades — obviously  more  like  king  of  clubs  than
any  other.  Had  I  reasoned  correctly  from  my  impression,  I  should
have  guessed  correctly. As  it  was  I  failed.

On  another  occasion,  after  some  successful  guesses  alone,  I  showed
the  cards  to  my  husband  to  see  if  he  could  see  any  marks  or  ridges  on  the
backs.  I  gave  him  ace  of  diamonds  which  I  had  just  guessed  correctly,
but  he  could  see  nothing.  I  drew  another,  and  handed  it  to  him  ;  he
gave  it  back  (on  a  book)  saying  it  was  possible  that  there  was
something  down  the  middle.  I  looked  and  said,  "  JSTo  ;  now  the  10  is
an  odd  card  ;  I  have  never  guessed  a  10  right.  This  may  be  a  10 — yes,
it  is  a  10,  I  should  think  hearts."  It  was  10  of  spades.  This  guess  is,
of  course,  not  counted  in  the  series.

Once  again,  alone,  I  drew  a  card,  and  thought  it  was  an  ace  ; — then
my  attention  having  been  called  to  the  backs  by  a  small  tear  in  the
first  card  drawn  that  evening,  I  noticed  equal  signs  of  use  at  the  top
and  bottom  of  this  card,  and  concluded  that  it  was  a  reversible  card.
I  therefore  (notice  the  absurd  iiaference)  decided  that  it  was  not  an  ace.
I  made  no  guess,  and  cancelled  the  trial,  as  it  was  obviously  not
spontaneous  guessing.  The  card  was  ace  of  diamonds,  the  one
reversible  ace.

These  cases  seem  to  tell  against  the  theory  that  success  is  due  to
the  perception  of  actual  marks  on  the  backs  of  the  cards,  too  slight  to
be  easily  seen ;  for  the  signs  which  seemed  to  guide  me  had  probably
no  actual  existence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  appearance  of  something
on  the  back — ridges,  hollows,  <kc. — more  or  less  corresponding  with  the
face  of  the  caixl,  taken  together  with  the  fact  that  I  had  no  success  in
guessing  when  my  eyes  were  shut,  suggests  to  me  that  the  stamping  of
the  pictures  and  pips  on  the  cards  may  possibly  produce  indications  on
the  backs,  which  are  visible  i;nder  some  conditions  and  to  some  persons.

As  illustrating  the  possibility  of  hypersBsthesia,  see  in  Appendix  B,
the  account  of  some  experiments  with  diagrams  in  contact  with  the
percipient,  but  not  consciously  felt ;  but  as  they  were  known  to  the
agent,  telepathy  may  have  been  the  cause.

E. — Telcesthesia.

The  last  series  of  which  I  have  to  speak  were  undertaken  after  I
had  read  an  account  of  experiments  by  M.  Roux  in  the  Annates  des
Sciences  Psychiques,  July,  1893.  We  selected  the  1.3  cards  of  one
suit  out  of  two  packs,  and  the  agent  took  those  of  one  pack,  the  per-
cipient those  of  the  other.  The  agent  drew  a  card  from  her  pack  and
looked  at  it. The  percipient  with  eyes  shut  sat  at  some  distance  with


186


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


her  back  to  the  agent,  holding  her  own  pack,  with  the  backs  of  the
cards  towards  her,  in  her  left  hand.  The  percipient  transferred  her  13
cards  from  left  to  right  hand  slowly  until  she  had  a  wish  to  stop  at  any
particular  card.  This  card  was  reckoned  as  her  "guess."  In  the  first
series,  in  which  H.  acted  as  agent,  I  had  no  success.  I  seldom  felt  any
impulse,  and  often  went  through  the  whole  13  cards  and  began  again,
choosing  at  random  (I  always  kept  my  eyes  shut)  but  very  soon  I
recognised  the  cards  by  touch,  and  this  naturally  spoilt  the  experi-
ment. I  had  pi'obably  unconsciously  recognised  the  cards  by  touch
before  my  conscious  attention  was  drawn  to  the  fact.  On  looking
back  at  the  record  I  find  that  I  "  guessed  " — that  is,  stopped  at —
the  same  card  twice  in  one  evening  (5  trials  )  and  on  six  out  of
the  first  twelve  evenings,  namely,  on  the  1st,  4th,  6th,  10th,  11th,  12th.
On  the  13th  evening  I  stopped  at  the  10  for  my  second  guess,  again
for  my  third,  and  again  for  my  fourth.  I  was  conscious  on  this
occasion  of  recognising  it,  that  is,  I  was  conscious  of  a  certain
familiarity  in  the  card  which  made  me  wish  to  select  it.  On  the  next
night,  I  stopped  at  the  7  for  my  first  guess,  and  could  not  get  rid  of
it,  selecting  it  four  times  out  of  five.  After  we  had  finished  I  tried
to  select  the  7  by  deliberately  feeling  the  cards,  but  failed.  I  mention
these  facts  because  they  seem  to  me  to  confirm  the  earlier  experiments
as  to  the  facility  of  learning  to  recognise  a  card  by  touch.  At  the
same  time  they  seem  to  show  that  the  amount  of  skill  which  can  be
attained  in  such  matters  is  far  beyond  what  the  experimenter  is  able
consciously  to  exert.

For  the  purpose  of  the  particular  experiment  I  was  anxious  to  try,
this  delicacy  of  touch  was  most  inconvenient.  We  went  on,  however,
with  the  experiments  with  a  new  suit,  and  later  on  tried  26  cards
(two  suits)  at  a  time  instead  of  one.  For  results  see  Series  VIII.  and
Villa,  Table,  p.  196.  The  packs  were  altered  between  the  two  sets  of
each  series.

Taking  these  two  sets,  where  13  cards  were  used,  it  will  be  seen
that  H.'s  success  is  almost  double  the  most  probable  number — 21
instead  of  11'5.  From  the  beginning  she,  unlike  me,  was  aware  of  a
definite  impulse  to  stop  ;  her  difficulty  in  deciding  which  card  to  select
came  from  an  occasional  uncertainty  as  to  which  of  two  cards  was  the
"  card  intended."

Some  incidental  observations  may  be  interesting.  On  the  5th
evening  of  the  second  pack  (diamonds),  H.  had  stopped  three  times  at
the  10,  and  I  thought  that  she  might  be  beginning  to  recognise  the
cards  by  touch.  She  knew  nothing  of  my  experiments  in  that
direction.  On  the  next  evening,  at  the  2nd  trial,  she  said  :  "  I  have
guessed  what  this  is,"  meaning  that  she  had  a  mental  impression,  and
pn  stopping  at  a  card,  she  added,  before  seeing  it,  "  here  it  is,  it  is


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.


187


the  6,"  which  was  the  right  card.  I  note  this  as  possibly  explaining
the  process  that  results  in  success,  namely,  telepathy,  more  readily
felt  subconsciously  than  by  the  conscious  mind,  but  on  this  occasion
reaching  the  consciousness  as  well  as  apparently  enabling  the  percipient
to  stop  at  the  right  card.  I  do  not  know,  and  H.  was  not  able  to
say,  whether,  when  she  said  "  I  have  guessed,"  she  had  already
touched  the  right  cai'd.  Her  impression  was  that  she  "  saw  " — she
is  also  a  good  visualiser — the  card  before  she  felt  it,  but  in  the
light  of  my  own  experiences  in  feeling  cards,  (see  above,  p.  176)  I
attach  little  value  to  this  impression.

However,  on  this  evening,  when  our  sets  were  finished,  we  tried
some  experiments  to  see  whether  H.  could  select  a  given  card,
consciously  or  unconsciously.  I  shuffled  the  cards,  and  she  tried  to
find  the  required  cards  under  the  same  conditions  as  above.  The  two
sets  of  trials  were  as  follows  : —

A.  — I  named  a  card  and  asked  her  to  find  it  ;  the  cards  named
were,  6,  7^  6  ;  the  cards  drawn  were,  respectively,  7,  6,  8.

B.  — She  thought  of  a  card  (unknown  to  me)  and  tried  to  find  it.
The  cards  thought  of  were  king,  2,  queen ;  the  cards  drawn  were  6,  6,
king.

It  will  be  seen  that  on  no  occasion  did  she  succeed,  when
deliberately  trying  to  produce  the  required  card  ;  the  choice  of  one
card  (the  6),  three  out  of  the  six  times,  suggests  that  her  fingers  were
sensitive  enough  to  find  again  a  card  once  drawn.

But  I  have  still  to  mention  the  most  interesting  of  all  the
-observations  that  I  have  been  able  to  record.  On  the  1st  night  of  the
2nd  set  (diamonds),  when  H.  was  percipient,  I  was  aware  of  an
impression  beforehand  that  H.  was  going  to  guess  correctly  on  the  two
•occasions  when  she  did  so.  I  therefore  decided  to  record  beforehand
iiny  such  impression  that  I  might  have.  As  soon  as  H.  had  drawn  her
card,  I  was  in  the  habit  of  recording  my  card,  before  she  looked  at
hers,  and  I  now  arranged  to  put  a  mark  whenever  I  had  the  impression
that  she  was  right. The  result  was  as  follows  : —

Number  of  cards  guessed  correctly  by  H.,  9  ;  of  these  all  were
marked  by  me.

Number  of  guesses  marked  by  me,  11.  Of  these  9,  as  above,  were
Tight ;  one  was  wrong  (queen  for  king),  the  11th  was  half  right — i.e.,  I
felt  sure  that  H.  had  guessed,  made  my  mark,  felt  her  stop  at  what  I
was  sure  was  the  right  card,  and  wondered  why  she  did  not  speak.
Then  she  said  :  "  Well,  this  one,"  and  produced  the  4.  (My  card  was
the  3.)  On  my  saying  "No,"  she  said:  "  Oh,  then,  it  is  the  other,  I
was  not  sure,"  and  produced  the  preceding  3.

It  is  difficult  for  me  to  describe  what  is  the  nature  of  the  impression
I  receive,  which  leads  me  to  believe  that  the  percipient  has  been


188


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


successful.  All  who  have  tried  to  convey  an  idea  by  thought-
transference  must  be  familiar  with  the  sensation  that  after  a  special
effort  the  thought  has  been  actually  projected  into  space,  leaving  one
fatigued  and  conscious  of  a  loss.  But  in  this  case  that  I  am  trying
to  describe,  the  effort  made  seems  to  meet  with  a  response,  the  force
exerted,  instead  of  departing,  returns,  and  the  momentary  fatigue  is
followed  by  so  vivid  an  impression  of  recovery  of  power  that  it
amounts  to  a  pleasurable  physical  sensation.  Difficult  as  it  is  to
describe,  the  sensation  is  unmistakable,  and — what  is  moi'e  important
— seems  rarely  to  be  misleading.

Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  received  a  report  of  the  results  of
some  200  guesses  of  cai'ds  done  under  somewhat  similar  circumstances-
to  those  described  under  the  head  of  D.  The  conditions  were  better,
inasmuch  as  the  card  was  drawn  by  one  person,  who  did  not  look  at  it,,
and  guessed  by  another.  Not  only  is  there,  under  these  circumstances,,
the  guarantee  against  self-deception  afforded  by  the  presence  of
another  person,  but  the  tendency  to  recognise  a  card  by  touch  in
shuffling  is  overcome.

I  quote  from  the  account  I  have  received  : — •

"Mrs.  Y.  sat  at  one  end  of  an  ordinary  table,  and  Mr.  Y.  on  the
opposite  side.  A  screen  was  formed  by  a  piece  of  newspaper  fixed  up-
against  a  stand.  Behind  this  Mrs.  Y.  drew  a  card  from  a  pack  and,
without  looking  at  it,  placed  it  face  downwards  on  a  book  and  passed
the  card  and  book  to  Mr.  Y.  whose  fingers  never  touched  anything
but  the  back  of  the  card  sometimes.  A  shuffle  of  the  pack  followed
each  guess.  On  two  occasions  third  persons  were  present.^  Mr.  Y.
sees  or  does  not  see  an  image  on  the  back  of  the  card.  This  is-
sometimes  so  faint  that  nothing  can  be  made  of  it  ;  sometimes  it  is
shifting  and  variable  ;  sometimes  clear,  with  colour.  Sometimes  nO'
image  is  seen  at  all."

In  all  cases,  even  where  no  image  was  seen,  a  guess  was  made ;  it
is  probable  that  had  all  cases  where  no  image  appeared  been  rejected,
the  number  of  successful  guesses  would  have  borne  a  higher  ratio  to
the  most  probable  number  than  they  do  in  the  record  as  it  stands.
But  that  the  success  is  very  striking,  the  figures  (given  at  the  end  of
the  Table,  see  p.  196)  show.

Two  guesses  are  excluded  from  the  calculation  because  they  were
alteniative  ;  they  were  (a)  4  or  5  of  hearts,  the  actual  card  being  5  of
hearts,  (b)  2  or  3  of  diamonds,  the  actual  card  being  2  of  diamonds.

The  following  is  a  complete  record  of  three  more  recent  series  of
experiments — carried  out in  the  presence of other witnesses — in


1  The  corroboration  of  these  ijersons  has  been  obtained.


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knoivleclge.  189


which  Mr.  Y.  only  made  a  guess  in  the  cases  where  he  saw  a  distinct
image. The  mark  x  indicates  that  he  had  no  impression.
March  ^Ist,  1895.


Card  guessed.

X

.  X

King  of  Hearts
.  5  of  Diamonds

X
X

5  of  Hearts

X

5  of  Diamonds
King  of  Ckibs
This  list  was  recorded  and  witnessed
Essenden,  Hatfield,  Herts.

May  22nd,  1895.


Card  draivn.
Not  recorded
Not  recorded
5  of  Diamonds
5  of  Diamonds
Not  recorded
Not  recorded
King  of  Clubs
Not  recorded
7  of  Clubs
King  of  Clubs
by  Miss  A.  E.  Grignon,  of


Card  guessed.

Card  drawn.

X

Not  looked  at

X

3  of  Hearts

X

4  of  Hearts

X

2  of  Hearts

Knave  of  Hearts

Ace  of  Spades

X

8  of  Spades

X

6  of  Diamonds

X

4  of  Hearts

7  or  9  of  Spades

9  of  Spades

X

2  of  Spades

3  of  Clubs

3  of  Clubs

X

5  of  Diamonds

X

2  of  Spades

X

7  of  Clubs

X

2  of  Diamonds

9  or  8  of  Spades

9  of  Spades

X

4  of  Spades

4  of  Hearts

King  of  Clubs

X

3  of  Hearts

X

Ace  of  Diamonds.

X

Knave  of  Clubs

X

Ace  of  Clubs

2  or  3  of  Hearts

6  of  Hearts

6  of  Hearts

Knave  of  Clubs

King  of  Clubs

King  of  Clubs

The  above  list  is  signed  by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


R.


190


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


May  26</i-,  1895. — These  experiments  were  made  in  the  presence  of
Mr.  Y.'s  two  brothers,  one  of  whom  shuffled  and  handed  the  cards  to
him.


Card  guessed.

X

2  of  Hearts

X

3  of  Clubs

X
X
X

2  of  Hearts

X

X

4  or  5  of  Clubs


Card  drawn.
8  of  Hearts

2  of  Hearts
Knave  of  Clubs

3  of  Clubs
5  of  Hearts
10  of  Hearts

4  of  Diamonds
Knave  of  Hearts

5  of  Spades
8  of  Spades
5  of  Clubs


Mr.  Myers  writes  :-


May  30th,  1895.

"I  know  the  reasons  why  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Y.  wish  to  remain  anonymous,
and  regard  them  as  sufficient.  Mrs.  Y.  was  known  to  me  for  some  years
before  her  marriage  as  a  scrupulously  careful  informant.  Mr.  Y.  is  occupied
in  studies  which  both  demand  and  foster  accuracy  of  mind.  I  have  witnessed
other  phenomena  of  interest  in  Mr.  Y.'s  presence,  besides  tlie  card-experi-
ments here  cited.  Tn  the  series  signed  by  me,  I  gave  Mr.  Y.  the  cards
myself,  shuffling  the  full  pack  between  each  experiment,  and  sliding  off  the
top  card  under  my  hand,  face  downwards,  on  to  a  piece  of  cardboard,  in
such  a  manner  that  neither  he,  nor  I,  nor  Mrs.  Y.,  could  obtain  the  slightest
glimpse  of  its  face.  The  cards  were  thick,  with  a  pattern  on  the  back,  and
were  guessed  as  they  lay  face  downward  on  the  cardboard,  upon  a  small
table  between  Mr.  Y.  and  myself,  being  in  my  sight  all  the  time.  The
perception  seemed  to  come  gradually,  the  suit  being  generally  guessed  in  a
few  seconds,  if  at  all,  and  the  number  of  pips  in  a  few  seconds  to  half  a
minute  longer."

I  should  be  very  glad  to  receive  accounts  of  similar  experiments
from  any  other  informants  who  may  be  inclined  to  try  them.  Reports
to  be  addressed  to  me  at  5,  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.


APPENDIX  A.

Illustrating  Misinterpretation  op  Means  by  which  Information
IS  Conveyed  to  the  Mind.


The  observations  now  to  be  mentioned  seem  to  me  in  some  ways
analogous  to  the  imaginary  transference  of  the  source  of  information  ,
from  one  sense  to  another,  mentioned  on  p.  176,  inasmuch  as  in  each
case  there  is  a  sensation  erroneously  interpreted. But  instead  of  a


Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knoivledge.


191


perception  actually  derived  from  one  sense  appearing  to  be  derived
from  another,  as  with  the  cards,  in  these  cases  a  piece  of  information
not  consciously  possessed  at  the  moment  is  conveyed  to  the  conscious
intelligence  by  means  of  an  apparent  mechanical  difficulty,  which  on
examination  turns  out  not  to  exist.  The  information  thus  obtained  is
usually  negative  ;  that  is,  this  apparent  mechanical  difficulty  prevents
my  doing  something  unnecessary  or  undesirable,  which  I  should  know  to
be  such  if  I  thought  about  it,  but  which  from  thoughtlessness  I  am  on
the  point  of  doing. An  illustration  will  make  my  meaning  clearer.

Constantly,  when  using  my  typewriter,  it  has  happened  to  me  to
find  a  difficulty  in  pressing  a  key,  so  great  a  difficulty  as  to  oblige  me
to  look  to  see  what  is  wrong.  I  then  see  that  what  is  wrong  is  that
my  finger  was  on  the  wrong  key,  but  there  is,  in  fact,  no  difficulty
whatever  in  depressing  the  key  if  I  determine  to  do  so.  The  effect  of
this  apparent  mechanical  difficulty  is  to  draw  my  attention  in  time  to
the  mistake  I  am  on  the  point  of  making.

I  have  notes  of  two  similar  occurrences,  both  extremely  trivial,  but
illustrating  the  above  point.  One  day  last  September  I  was  putting
on  my  bonnet,  and  had  taken  the  pin,  which  goes  through  the  back,  to
secure  it.  The  pin  entirely  refused  to  pass  through  my  hair,  and  after
some  inefficient  thrusts,  I  took  it  out  to  look  at  the  point  to  see  what
was  Avrong.  I  then  saw  that  I  had  not  taken  the  usual  pin  ;  with
this  particular  bonnet  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  wearing  a  large-
headed  ornamental  pin,  whereas  the  pin  I  now  held  had  a  small  glass
head,  and  was  one  I  usually  wore  with  a  hat.  There  tvas  nothing
wrong  with  the  point,  and  noiv  that  I  knew  what  I  was  doing  I  had  no
sort  of  difficulty  in  j^ushing  it  through  iny  hair.  The  two  pins  are
quite  unlike  in  shape  and  weight;  what  probably  happened  was  that
my  hand  felt  something  unusual  in  the  head  of  the  pin,  but  instead  of
my  becoming  conscious  of  the  difference  in  sensation  of  the  head,  my
attention  was  attracted  by  the  apparent  bluntness  at  the  point.

The  second  experience  occurred  a  few  days  later.  I  wrote,  in  the
afternoon,  five  letters,  and  then  stretched  out  my  left  hand  to  the
stationery  case  to  take  the  necessary  envelopes.  I  wanted  five,  and  as
I  can  usually  take  a  small  number  without  error  expected  to  take  five.
But  I  did  not  get  enough  ;  I  found  that  I  only  had  three,  and  tried  to
take  a  couple  more.  But  one  of  these  two  slipped  through  my  fingers
and  I  only  held  one.  I  was  quite  vexed  at  my  maladroitness,  gave  up
a  further  attempt  for  the  present  and  proceeded  to  fold  my  letters,
put  them  into  envelopes,  and  address  them.  When  I  came  to  the  5th
letter,  I  remembered  that  I  had  an  envelope  ready  addressed  for  this
letter,  as  I  had  written  the  night  before,  but  torn  up  the  letter  after
receiving  a  letter  by  the  late  post,  which  decided  me  to  wait  for  fuller
information. I  had  kept  the  envelope,  and  it  was  actually  lying  on  my

R  2


192


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


table  while  I  was  trying  to  take  the  five  envelopes.  I  may  have  seen  it,
but  if  I  did,  it  was  unconsciously  ;  it  was  only  when  I  found  that  I
could  not  get  five  envelopes  that  I  discovered  that  I  did  not  require
more  than  four.


APPENDIX  B.

Recognition  of  Objects  by  Telepathy  or  Hyperesthesia.
Percipient,  Aged  7|  Years.


In  November,  1890,  I  tried  the  following  experiment  with  H.  I
drew  a  diagram,  which  I  placed  on  H.'s  forehead,  while  her  eyes  were
shut,  and  asked  her  to  describe  it.  To  make  the  performance  more
like  a  game,  I  went  on  to  ask  what  colour  it  was,  and  what  she  could
see  through  it.  We  tried  four  experiments,  three  on  the  afternoon
of  November  16th,  and  one  at  6.15  on  November  30th,  with  the
followins  results  : —


Object  drauni.


H.  drew  a  triangle  with  her  finger  in  the


air.


Right.


H.  described  and  drew  an  irregular  figure,
which  did  not  seem  to  satisfy  her,  then  said  it
A  triangle  with  apex was  like  an  oval  dish  .  Wrong.


cut  off.


Square.


H.  said :  "  It's  like  a  window  with  no
cross  bars,"  and  drew  a  four-sided  rectangular
Bight.


figure  in  the  air.


d.


H.  said  :  "  It's  a  diamond."  "What  else  1 "
said  I,  meaning  what  colour,  &c.  "  It's  got  a
line  across  it,  and  another  across  that.  The
colour  is  pale  blue."  Eight.


Square  divided  into  4
squares  by  a  vertical
and  a  horizontal  line.

When  I  gave  her  the  diagram,  she  turned  it  anglewise  and  said,
"  Oh  yes,  that's  right,  and  the  colour  was  not  far  wrong."  As  the
diagram  was  drawn  in  ink  on  white  paper,  I  did  not  understand,  and
asked  what  she  meant.  She  said,  "  Why  it's  all  blue,  bluish  white
inside,  and  even  the  ink  is  blue."  The  diagram  had  been  dried  with
blotting  paper  and  was  not  a  very  deep  black,  but  I  could  see  nothing
blue. Ten  minutes  afterwards  she  picked  up  the  paper  again  and


Analysis  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  Card  Experiments.  193

commented  on  the  fact  that  it  was  blue,  the  lines  dark  bright  blue,
and  the  inside  pale  blue.  I  burnt  the  diagram  and  discontinued  the
game  after  observing  this  persistence  of  a  self-suggested  hallucination.

"We  had  previously  tried  experiments  which  seemed  to  show  that
the  child  could  feel  the  diagram.  She  could  almost  always  tell  whether
the  right  or  wrong  side  of  a  playing  card  were  placed  on  her  fore-
head. I  was  quite  unable  to  distinguish  the  two  sides.  I  am  more
inclined  to  attribute  her  successes  (3  out  of  4)  to  hyperesthesia  than
to  telepathy.


ANALYSIS  OF  MRS.  VERRALL'S  CARD  EXPERIMENTS.
By  C.  P.  Sanger,  F.S.S.


If  we  make  m  guesses,  and  the  probability  ^  of  each  individual  guess
being  right  is  p,  it  is  clear  that  the  most  pi'obable  number  of  successes
is  mp ;  but  the  probability  of  being  successful  exactly  mp  times  is  less
than  |.  Suppose  that  p,-  is  the  probability  ^  that  the  number  of
successful  guesses  lies  between  mp  - r  and  +  »■,  then  the  "probable
error"  may  be  defined  as  that  value  of  r  which  makes  pr  =  i.  This
value  of  r  is  approximately  j  s/2TTmp  (1  -  p)  when  771  is  large.  In  the
Tables  given  below,  I  have  calculated  the  "  probable  error  "  from  this
formula.  It  is  also  found  that  Py  will  differ  from  1  by  a  very  small
quantity  if  we  take  r  to  equal  3\/2(l  -  p)7np,  so  that  any  number  of
successes  greater  than  mp  +  3  J2{1- p)7np  would  indicate  that  the
successes  had  not  all  been  obtained  by  mere  chance.  In  the  Tables
below  I  have  calculated  the  "  number  of  successes  required  to  prove
skill "  from  this  formula.

As  these  formulae  are  obtained  by  assuming  that  m  is  large  and  that
mp  and  m  (1  — p)  ai'e  not  small,  it  is  probable  that  they  would  not  give
trustworthy  results  if  applied  to  the  case  of  "whole  cards."  I  have
therefore  omitted  to  give  any  calculations  or  inferences  based  on  them.

The  figures  given  for  "  number  of  pips  "  are  probably  not  very
trustworthy  when  the  number  of  trials  is  less  than  200.  The  number
of  trials  is  certainly  insufficient  to  base  any  very  definite  conclusions

1  For  a  complete  discussion  of  the  problem  involved,  see  Professor  Edgeworth's
papers  on  "The  Calculus  of  Probabilities  applied  to  Psychical  Research"  in  the
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  190,  and  Vol.  IV.,  p.  189.

^  The  general  value  of  p,-  is  given  by


+


1


ichere  — ~  =  2  p  (1  —  p)  m.


194


G.  P.  Sanger,  F.S.S.


upon  whenever  the  "  number  of  successes  required  to  prove  skill  "  is
greater  than  twice  the  "  most  probable  number  of  successes."  I  have
added  the  inferences  that  I  think  may  fairly  be  drawn  from  Mrs.
Verrall's  results,  using  the  terms  "  skill, "probably  skill,"  "  possibly
skill  "  and  "chance";  in  doing  so  it  is  possible  that  I  err  in  favour
of  inferring  probable  or  possible  skill  too  readily.

[Nute. — In  the  following  Tables,  the  capital  letters  prefixed  to  the  series
refer  to  the  classification  adopted  on  p.  175.

The  numbers  of  successes  in  "suits"  and  "  number  of  pips  "  include  the
successes  in  "  whole  cards,"  as  well  as  those  in  "  suits  "or  "number  of  pips  "
respectively.

A  complete  pack  was  used  in  all  the  experiments  except  those  of  Section  E,
and  one  guess  only  was  made  in  each  trial.]


SUITS.

NO.  OF  PIPS.

WHOLE  CARDS.

A  I.  3{rs.  V.  fecHna  faces  of  Cards.

400  Trials.  Jan.'mh—Fcb.  lOth,  1890

Most  probable  number  of  successes  ...

100  ,

31

8

Probable  error

6

4

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

137

53

—

Actual  number  of  successes

121

83

34

Inference

probably  skill

.skill

—

B  II.  Mrs.  V.  touching  backs  of  cards.

350  Trials.  Jan.  18th— Feb.  11th,  1890

Most  probable  number  of  successes  . . .

87

27

7

Probable  error

6

4

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

122

48

Actual  number  of  successes

82

25

6

Inference

chance

chance

0  III.  3Irs.  V.  percipient ;  IT.  agent.

185 Trials.  Oct.  I8th,  imO—Ftb.  3rd,  1891.

Most  probable  number  of  successes  ...

46

14

4

Probable  error  ..

4

3

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

71

29?

Actual  number  of  successes

46

14

3

Inference  ...

chance

chance

C  Ilia.  H.  percipient  ;  Mrs.  V.  agent.

240  Trials.  Oct.  18th,  1890- Feb.Wth,  1892.

Most  probable  number  of  successes  ...

60

18

5

Probable  eiTor

4

3

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

89

36

Actual  number  of  successes

24

7

Inference  ... ,

possibly  skill

possibly  skill

1  The  word  "  skill "  is  used  to  mean  that  the  results  are  due  to  some  cause  other
than  chance.


Analysis  of  Mrs.  VerraU's  Card  Experiments.  195


Cir  TTC

INU.  Ur  IrlJrS.

C  IV.,  D  v.,  and  D  Va. 590  Trials.

J'eO.  i'itn,  lovK) — June  ibt/i,  ioyZ.

IVIost  probable  nurnber  of  successes  ...

40

11

Probable  error

7

4

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

192

72

—

C  IV. Mrs.  V,  and  H.  both  guessing

-

counted  CIS  ct  success*

Af*'hnji,l  TiniTinPT  at  ttnopp^^sp^

155

56

141

JLXAJlwX  Ky  LA \I/ •■■ *.«  «■*

nrnba.Vilv  ^kill

D  V.andD  Va. Mrs.  V.  ana  H.  both

guessing  same  card;  correctness  of

guess  counted  as  a  success.

U  V.  Mrs.  V.  percipient  ;  oyU  iriais.

in  2.50  trials. >'e6.,  1890

62

41

10

in  250  trials. Oct.,  1890

55

22

9

m  t:U  trials, ucin,  loyi

19

D

A

yj

in  ou  trials. May,  ley/

lis

y

A

4

Total  actual  number  of  successes

147

78

23

Inference

chance

skill

U  Va,  ii.  percipient  ;  o"J0  irials.

in  250  trials, i^ct.,  1890

71

26

14

in  250  trials Oct  1S90

51

22

9

in  40  trials. Jan.,  1891

6

2

1

in  50  trials Mav  1892

17

2

1

vMfX Ov\j Lx  Li  1X1  yj^L \Ji. O  LI  v.'L.'VroO^O ■  .  ■

145

52

9'%

Tnf  PfPTiPP

TiTri Via  ril  V  cilnll

\jL\JVJaiULj  olvllX

D  VI.  Mrs.  V.  looking  at  hacks  of  cards.

280  Trials.

July  ZorUf  ioyZ — Tto.  Zot/i^  1094.

Most  probable  number  of  successes  ...

70

oo

0

Probable  error

4

o
O

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

101

40


m  iUU  trials

35

o^;
A>

13

in  100  trials

28

14

4

in ^0  trials:

111 Ov Li  Idib ... ...  ...

19

1

in  30  trials

8

3

1

in  20  trials

5

1

0

l\j\j<Xl  oiKjuKXaiL  IlUlllUtri  Ui  i5U,Uv,co>3eo  ...

Oo

'TO

-l-Xiloi. ... ... ... ...  ...

T^T'/~\  r^o  r\  \  "T7  oln  I  1
piOUaUij  teJiilJ.

D  Vll.  Mrs.  V.  touching  backs  of  cards.

100  Trials.

Aug.  1st,  m>2—Feb.  17th,  1893.

lvTn*5ti  TtTririnrtiP  nnrnripr  of  qiipppqcpq

OK

Q
O

9

Probable  error

3

2

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove

skill

43

19?

Actual  number  of  successes

28

9

2

Inference

possibly  skill

chance

1  Of  tiiese  14,  6  were  correct  as  to  suit  only  ;  the  other  8  were  entirely  incorrect.


196  G.  P.  Sanger,  F.S.S.

E  VIII  Mrs.  V.  percipient;  H,  agent;  144  Trials.
E  Villa.  R.  percipient ;  Mrs.  V.  agent  ;  150  Trials.


[In  these,  only  one  suit  was  used  at  a  time,  instead  of  a  whole  pack,  and  the
number  of  pips  was  guessed.]


E  VIII.

144  TRIALS.

E  Villa

150  TRIALS.

Oct  mh~Nov.  26th,  1893.

Most  probable  number  of  successes

11

12

Probable  error

2

2

Number  of  successes  required  to  prove  skill . . .

24  ?

25  ?

in  09  trials  ...

2

in  75  trials  ...  9

Actual  number  of  successes

in  75  ,,

8

in  75 „ ...  12

Total  ...

10

Total  ...  21

Inference

chance

probably  skill

Mr.  Y.'s  Experiments.


SUITS.

NO.  OF  PIPS.

WHOLE  CARDS.

197  trials.  Jan.  2Uh—Mar.  llth,  1895.

Most  probable  number  of  successes  . . .

49

15

4

Probable  error  ...

4

3

Number  of successes required  to

prove  skill  ...

75

31

Actual  number  of  successes

102

43

34

Inference  ... ...  ...

skill

skill

[Fi'om  Mr.  Sanger's  calculations  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  experiments,
some  other  cause  than  chance  is  shown  to  have  been  operative  in  the
following  series  of  experiments  : —

A  I,  where  Mrs.  Verrall  was  feeling  the  faces  of  the  cards  ;

D  V,  when  she  was  looking  at  the  backs  of  the  cards,  H.  looking

at  them  and  guessing  at  the  same  time ;
and  D  VI,  when  she  was  looking  at  the  backs  of  the  cards  alone  ;
and  possibly  also  in  C  IV,  the  series  of  experiments  in  "indirect
telepathy."

H.  was  less  successful  than  Mrs.  Verrall,  there  being  no  series  in
which  "  skill  "  was  conclusively  proved  in  her  case. The  best  were  : —

C  IV,  the  experiments  in  "  indirect  telepathy  "  ;

D  Va,  in  wliich  she  was  looking  at  the  backs  of  the  cards,  Mrs.
Verrall  looking  at  the  same  time  ;

and  E  Villa,  the  experiments  in  "  telsesthesia."

It  is  noteworthy  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  decidedly  more  successful
in  guessing  the  number  of  pips  than  in  guessing  suits,  as  shown  in


Analysis  of  Mrs.  VerraU's  Card  Experiments.  197


Series  A  I,  C  IV,  T>  V,  and  D  VT, — that  is,  in  all  her  successful
series.  The  same  tendency  is  shown  in  H.'s  guesses,  see  Series  C  IV,
and  D  Va.

The  series  of  experiments  in  which  Mrs.  Verrall  failed  altogether
were  those  in  "  direct  telepathy  "  (C  III)  ;  those  in  "  telsesthesia  "
(E  VIII)  ;  and  those  in  which  she  merely  touched  the  back  of  the
card,  generally  with  one  finger  only,  and  waited  for  no  impression,
but  guessed  as  quickly  as  she  could  get  her  mind  to  form  a  choice
(B  II  and  D  VII).  These  two  last  series  should  hardly  be  counted  as
"  experiments  on  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  "  at  all,  as
they  were  intended  merely  to  show  the  results  obtained  by  "pure
guesswork." — Ed.]


198


Andrew  Lang.


IT.

THE  VOICES  OF  JEANNE  D'ARC.
By  Andrew  Lang.

In  spite  of  the  minute  French  research  into  the  history  of  Jeanne
d'Arc,  and  the  active  French  pursuit  of  studies  in  esoteric  psychology,
no  expei't  seems  to  have  applied  the  new  psychological  methods  to  the
old  problem  of  the  Maid.  The  remarks  of  Mr.  Myers,  in  his  essay  on
"  The  Demon  of  Socrates  "  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  Part  XIV.,  pp.  522—
549)  contain  almost  all  which  I  have  met  with  on  this  curious  topic,
from  the  pen  of  the  modern  psychologist.  Perhaps  one  may  be  per-
mitted a  few  comments  on  these  notes  of  Mr.  Myers.  He  would  not
lay  stress  on  his  obiter  dictum  that  the  Venerable  Jeanne  had  "no  con-
spicuous strength  of  intellect."  SimiJicitv,  as  all  witnesses  declared —
with  "  feminine  subtlety,"  according  to  Beaupere,  one  of  her  judges —
was  the  mark  of  the  Maid.  She  was  uninstructed.  She  could  not
read.  But  lier  n.-iti\  e  intellectual  strength  is  attested  by  the  lucidity
■of  her  political  ideas.  She  went  straight  to  the  point :  the  necessity
of  recovering  France,  of  expelling  the  English,  of  securing  French
loyalty  by  crowning  the  Dauphin.  Like  Bedford,  she  saw  that,  after
the  Coronation  at  Rheims,  Paris  must  "  fall  at  one  stroke,"  (I  quote
Bedford)  if  the  stroke  were  swiftly  dealt.  Paris  did  not  fall,  because
Jeanne's  counsel  was  neglected,  and  during  the  derisory  negotiations
with  Burgundy,  which  she  denounced,  Paris  was  garrisoned  by  fresh
English  troops.

In  the  same  way,  Jeanne's  replies  to  the  most  subtle  and  en-
snaring theological  questions  (replies  recorded  by  her  hostile  judges),
are  worthy  of  her  Master,  our  Lord,  and  are  irrefutable  proof  of
"  conspicuous  strength  of  intellect."  Her  improvised  skill,  not  only
in  tactics  and  strategics,  but  in  the  practical  art  of  the  artillerist,  is
attested  by  d'Alengon,  and  is  apparent  to  any  intelligent  reader  of
the  story  of  her  campaigns. ^  She  not  only  struck  sudden  and
severe  blows,  not  only  organised  surprises,  but  (as  Captain  Marin
proves  at  length)  understood  the  game  of  war  on  the  great  scale.
Meanwhile,  the  manners  of  this  peasant  girl  were  the  manners  of  a
grande  dame.  In  brief,  she  had  this  quality  of  genius,  that  no  situa-
tion, however  novel  and  strange,  found  her  unready  or  incompetent.

1  Captain  Marin's  Jeanne  cTArc,  StratSf/iste  ct  Tacticienne,  may  be  consulted.


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc.


199- '


To  me  it  seems  that  Shakspeare  himself  gives  less  extraordinary
proof  of  "  conspicuous  strength  of  intellect,"  for  we  never  see  Shaks-
peare put  to  trial  in  great  practical  aifairs.  On  the  bodily  vigour  of
the  Maid,  it  is  needless  to  dilate.  Severe  wounds  did  not  incapacitate
her  from  instant  action  ;  she  wore  arms  for  six  days  without  intermis-
sion i  ;  all  her  comrades  testified  to  her  extraordinary  endurance,  and
without  such  endurance,  her  week  of  victory,  crowned  by  the  battle  of
Patay,  would  have  been  impossible.

One  point  may  be  left  to  physiologists  and  physicians.

Twenty-five  years  after  her  death,  her  Maitre  d'  Hotel,  d'Aulon,-
declared  that  women  who  knew  her  well  had  averred  that  she  was
free  from  the  infirmities  of  her  sex.  JSTothing  to  this  effect  was  stated
by  ladies  in  whose  houses  she  had  lodged,  who  had  the  most  intimate
acquaintance  with  her,  who  had  bathed  with  her,  and  shared  her
couch.  Her  unusual,  if  not  unprecedented,  personal  modesty  is  described
by  her  comrades  in  arms,  and  may  explain  the  origin  of  the  rumour.
Intellectually  and  physically,  then,  the  Maid,  like  Soci-ates,  was  un-
deniably robust  and  vigorous.  Except  under  stress  of  fasting,  chains,
and  the  torture  of  a  prolonged  trial,  or  after  her  leap  h-om  the  top  of
the  donjon  of  Beaurevoir,  we  never  hear  of  ill-health  in  Jeanne  d'Arc.
All  this  differentiates  her  from  the  neuralgic,  neurotic,  or  epileptic
patients  of  the  Salpetriere,  and  from  mystics  like  the  contemporary
St.  Colette.  The  vague  and  question-begging  term  "  hysterical "  can
only  be  applied  to  Jeanne  if  we  argue,  "  All  visionaries  are  hysterical.
Jeanne  was  a  visionary. Thei'efore,  Jeanne  was  hysterical."

In  her  pi'ivate  character,  we  learn  from  every  side  that  she  was
naturally  gay  and  humorous.  Some  of  her  answers  to  her  judges  show
this  :  the  most  touching  proof  of  all  is  that  when  one  of  the  notai'ies
at  her  trial  made  a  mistake  in  a  date,  she  corrected  him,  laughed  when
her  accuracy  was  demonstrated,  and  playfully  threatened  "to  pull  his
ears  if  he  made  another  blunder."  Such  were  the  natural  gaiety  and
high  spirits  of  a  captive  who,  in  chains  and  fasting,  was  being  tried
for  her  life.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Maid,  while  the  best  and  most
industrious  girl  of  her  village,  had  early  attracted  the  ridicule  of  other
children  by  her  extreme  devotion.  She  kept  fast-days  strictly,  she
was  much  in  pi'ayer,  from  her  infancy  upwards.  To  prove  that  such
practices  may  beget  hallucinations,  we  have  (among  many  other  cases)
the  example  of  the  American  Puritan  scholai'.  Cotton  Mather.  Having
noticed  that,  after  prayer  and  fasting.  Cotton  Mather  saw  an  angel,
who  entertained  him  with  literary  conversation,  I  called  to  this  fact
the  attention  of  Pere  Ay  roles,  S.J.,  an  historian  of  the  Maid.  The
learned  father  asked  me  if  Mather's  prophecies  were  fulfilled,  as  a  rule.

1  Contemporary  Letter  of  Boulainvilliers.


200


Andreiv  Lang.


I  had  to  answer  "  No,"  whereon  Pere  Ayroles  drew  a  not  unnatural
distinction,  unfavourable  to  the  New  England  mystic.

The  period  when  Jeanne  supposed  herself  to  see  her  tirst  visions
M'as  physiologically  critical.  She  was  either  between  thirteen  and
fourteen,  or  between  twelve  and  thirteen.  M.  Simeon  Luce,  in  his
Jeanne  D'Arc  a  Domremy,  held  that  she  was  of  the  more  advanced
age,  and  his  date  (142.5)  fitted  in  with  some  public  events,  which,
in  his  opinion,  were  probably  the  occasions  of  the  experiences.
Pere  Ayroles  prefers  the  earlier  period  (1424)  when  the  aforesaid
public  events  had  not  yet  occurred.  After  examining  the  evidence  on
both  sides,  I  am  disposed  to  think,  or  rather  I  am  certain,  that  Pere
Ayroles  is  in  the  right.  In  either  case  Jeanne  was  at  a  critical  age,
when,  as  I  understand,  female  children  are  occasionally  subject  to
illusions.  Speaking  then  as  a  non-scientific  student,  a  mere  literary
man,  I  submit  that  on  the  side  of  ordinary  causes  for  the  visions  and
voices,  we  have  : —

1.  The  period  in  Jeanne's  life  when  they  began.

2.  Her  habits  of  fasting  and  prayer.

3.  A  rumour  of  her  abnormal  physiological  condition.

4.  Her  intense  patriotic  enthusiasm,  which  may,  for  all  that  we
know,  have  been  her  mood  before  St.  Michael  announced  to  her  the
mission.

On  the  other  side,  as  facts  more  or  less  inconsistent  with  hysteria
and  hysterical  illusions,  we  must  reckon  her  unprecedented  vigour  of
mind  and  body,  her  humour,  her  lack  of  the  customary  superstitions
(such  as  belief  in  fairies),  her  unstverving  helief  in  the  objectivity  of
what  she  saw  and  heard  and  the  contents  of  the  messages  which  she
believed  herself  to  have  received.  The  point  which  I  have  italicised
has  been  a  subject  of  dispute.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  Jeanne's
recantation,  made  in  sight  of  the  stake,  is  notoriously  a  very  dubious
document,  and  that  she  most  undeniably  withdrew  it,  preferring  death
and  obedience  to  her  voices  to  such  a  life  as  the  English  were  leading
her.  There  is  anothei'  informal  document  (written  a  week  after  her
death)  concerning  air  examination  held  on  the  day  of  her  martyrdom,  a
document  which  the  grejflers  refused  to  sign  and  which  is  unsigned
{Proces  I.  p.  477).  The  testimony  of  this  paper,  such  as  it  is,  assures
us  that  Jeanne  ceased  to  believe  that  her  voices  came  from  saints  and
angels.  They  had  promised  "release  with  great  victory;"  she  was  being
led  to  the  stake,  therefore  she  had  been  deceived.  But  even  now  she
maintained  that  the  voices  and  visions,  whencesoever  they  came,  were
objective.  "  Realiter  habuit  revelationes  et  apparitiones  spirituum."  In
the  letter  of  Henry  VI.  to  the  nobles,  prelates,  and  towns  of  France,
he  (or  rather  Bedford)  adopts  this  dubious  confession.  "Seeing  her  end
approach,  she  plainly  knew  and  confessed  that  the  spirits  which  often


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc.


201


appeared  to  her  were  evil  and  lying  spirits,  that  their  promise  to
deliver  her  was  false,  and  so  she  bore  witness  that  by  these  spirits  she
had  been  mocked  and  deceived."  (Proces  I.,  493.  Rouen,  June  28th.)
On  the  scaffold,  at  last,  she  understood  the  nature  of  her  victory  and
called  upon  her  familiar  saints.  Thus  Jeanne,  on  the  most  dubious
and  most  unfriendly  evidence,  never  conceived  that  her  "voices"  were
merely  subjective  and  hallucinatory.  Bad  spirits  or  good,  they  were
spirits  !  Taking  it  for  what  it  is  worth  (and,  though  it  is  informal,
M.  Quicherat  does  not  think  that  it  is  forged),  this  posthumous
testimony  adds  another  important  fact  to  our  knowledge.

Only  when  within  an  hour  of  the  inevitable  fire,  did  Jeanne
dream  that  her  voices  had  deceived  her.  Therefore,  previously,  they
had  not  deceived  her,  or  not  essentially.  The  intimations  thus
obtained  had  been  correct.  If  any  external  evidence  for  this  can  be
adduced,  the  visions  of  Jeanne  will  certainly  be  differentiated  from
those  of  Cotton  Mather,  for  example.

Let  us  then  examine  the  evidence  as  to  the  origin  and  nature  of
the  alleged  phenomena.  Mr.  Myers  regai-ds  Jeanne's  replies  to  her
accusers,  in  1431,  as  "  the  only  trustworthy  source."  Certainly,  if
the  Proces  has  been  garbled,  (as  is  pi'obably  the  case,  for  in  a  brief
official  recapitulation  facts  are  stated  which  are  not  in  the  full
Report),  it  was  not  garbled  in  a  sense  favourable  to  the  accused.  But
I  conceive  that  letters  and  other  evidence,  written  in  1429,  are  not  to
be  neglected,  while  criticism  may  discern  much  valuable  or  significant
matter  even  in  the  Proces  of  1452-56.

I  shall  begin  with  the  letter  of  the  Senechal  de  Berry,  Perceval
de  Boulainvilliers,  to  the  Duke  of  Milan,  [Proces  V.,  p.  115.)  The
date  is  June  21st,  1429,  six  weeks  after  the  relief  of  Orleans.  After
a  few  such  tales  as  that  the  cocks  crowed  when  J eanne  was  born,  and
that  her  flock  was  lucky,  he  dates  her  first  vision  peractis  aetatis  suae
duodecim  annis,  "  after  she  was  twelve."  Briefly,  the  tale  is  that,  in
a  rustic  race  for  flowers,  one  of  the  other  children  cried,  "Joanna,
video  te  volantem  juxta  terram,"  "Joan,  I  see  you  flying  near  the
ground."  This  is  the  one  solitary  hint  of  "levitation  "  (so  common  in
hagiology  and  witchcraft)  which  occurs  in  the  career  of  the  Maid.
This  kind  of  story  is  so  persistent  that  I  knew  it  must  have  been
told  in  connection  with  the  Irvingite  movement  in  Scotland.  And  it
was  !  There  is,  perhaps,  just  one  trace  that  flying  was  believed  to  be  an
accomplishment  of  Jeanne's.  "When  Frere  Richard  came  to  her  at
Troyes,  he  made,  she  says,  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  ^  She  answered,
"Approchez  hardiment,  je  ne  in' envouleray  jjasJ'  Now  the  con-
temporary St.  Colette  was  not  infrequently  "  levitated  !  "


^  Proces  T.,  100.


202


Andrew  Lang.


To  return  to  the  voices.  After  her  race,  Jeanne  was  quasi  rapta
et  a  sertsibus  alienata,  then  juxta  earn  affuit  juvenis  quidam,  who  bade
her  "  go  home,  for  her  mother  needed  her."

"Thinking  that  it  was  her  brother  or  a  neighbour  "  (apparently  she
only  heard  the  voice,  and  did  not  see  the  speaker),  she  hurried  home,
and  found  that  she  had  not  been  sent  for.  Next,  as  she  was  on  the
point  of  returning  to  her  friends,  "  a  very  bright  cloud  appeared  to  her,
and  out  of  the  cloud  came  a  voice,"  bidding  her  take  up  her  mission.
She  was  merely  puzzled,  but  the  experiences  were  often  renewed.  This
letter,  being  contemporary,  represents  cui'rent  belief,  based  either  on
Jeanne's  own  statements  before  the  clergy  at  Poictiers  (April,  1429),
or  on  the  gossip  of  Domremy.  It  should  be  observed  that  till  Jeanne
told  her  own  tale  at  Rouen  (1431)  we  have  not  one  word  about  Saints
or  Angels.  She  merely  spoke  of  "my  voices,"  "my  counsel,"  "my
Master."  If  she  was  more  explicit  at  Poictiers,  her  confessions  did
not  find  their  way  into  surviving  letters  and  journals,  not  even  into
the  journal  of  the  hostile  Bourgeois  de  Paris.  We  may  glance  at
examples.

The  Journal  du  Siege  dOrleans  is  in  parts  a  late  document,  in
parts  "evidently  copied  from  a  journal  kept  in  presence  of  the  actual
«vents."  (Quicherat.  In  Proces  IV.,  95.)  The  t/bwrna?,  in  February,
1429,  vaguely  says  that  "  about  this  time  "  our  Lord  used  to  appear  to
a  maid,  as  she  was  guai'ding  her  flock,  or  "cousant  et  filant."  A  St.
Victor  M.S.  has  courant  et  saillant,  which  curiously  agrees  with  Bou-
lainvilliers.  The  Journal,  after  telling  of  the  Battle  of  the  Herrings
(February  12th,  1429),  declares  that  Jeanne  "  knew  of  it  by  Grace
Divine,"  and  that  her  vue  a  distance  induced  Baudricourt  to  send  her
to  the  Dauphin.  (Proces  IV.,  125.)  This  was  attested  by  Baudricourt's
letters  (IV.,  125).  All  this  may  have  been  written  as  late  as  1468,
but  a  vague  reference  to  an  apparition  of  our  Lord  rather  suggests
contemporary  hearsay,  before  Jeanne  came  to  Orleans.  Jeanne  never
claimed  any  such  visions  of  our  Lord.  The  story  of  the  clairvoyance  as
to  the  Battle  of  the  Herrings  is  also  given  in  the  Chronique  de  la  Pucelle.
{Proces  IV.,  206.)  M.  Quicherat  thinks  that  the  passage  is  amplified
from  the  Journal  du  Siege.  On  the  other  hand,  M.  Vallet  de  Viriville
attributes  with  assurance  the  Chronique  de  la  Pucelle  to  Cousinot  de
Montreuil,  who  was  the  Dauphin's  secretary  at  Poictiers,  when  the  Maid
was  examined  there  in  April,  1429. ^  If  Cousinot  was  the  author,  he
certainly  did  not  write  his  chronicle  till  long  after  date.  However,  he
avers  that  the  story  of  clairvoyance  was  current  in  the  spring  of  1429.
The  dates  exactly  harmonise;  that  is  to  say,  between  the  day  of  the  battle,
February  12th,  and  the  setting  forth  of  the  Maid  from  Vaucouleurs,


1  Hisloire  de  Charles  VII.,  II.,  62.


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc.


203


there  is  just  time  for  the  bad  news  from  Rouvray  to  arrive,  confirming
her  statement,  and  for  a  day  or  two  of  preparation.

These  and  other  documents,  whether  contemporary  or  written
later  by  contemporaries,  contain  none  of  the  references  to  visions
of  St.  Margaret,  St.  Catherine,  and  St.  Michael,  which  we  find
in  Jeanne's  own  replies  at  Rouen.  For  this  omission  it  is  not
easy  to  account,  even  if  we  suppose  that,  except  when  giving  evidence
on  oath,  the  Maid  was  extremely  reticent.  That  she  was  reticent,  we
shall  prove  from  evidence  of  d'Aulon  and  Dunois.  Turning  to
the  Maid's  own  evidence  in  court,  we  must  remember  that  she  was  most
averse  to  speaking  at  all,  that  she  often  asked  leave  to  wait  for  advice
and  permission  from  her  voices  before  replying,  that  on  one  point  she
constantly  declared  that,  if  compelled  to  speak,  she  would  not  speak
the  truth.  This  point  was  the  King's  secret.  There  is  absolutely  con-
temporary evidence,  from  Alain  Chartier,  that,  before  she  was  accepted,
she  told  Charles  something  which  filled  him  with  surprise,  joy,  and
belief.  {Proces  V.,  131.  Letter  of  July,  1429.)  The  secret  was  con-
nected with  Charles's  doubts  of  his  own  legitimacy,  and  Jeanne  at  her
trial  was  driven  to  obscure  the  truth  in  a  mist  of  allegory,  as,  indeed,  she
confessed.  Mr.  Myers  does  not  seem  to  have  understood  this  point.
All  that  tale  of  an  angel  and  a  crown  was  mere  allegory.  Jeanne's
.extreme  reluctance  to  adopt  even  this  loyal  and  laudable  evasion  is  the
measure  of  her  truthfulness  in  general.  Still,  she  did  say  some  words
which,  as  they  stands  it  is  difficult  to  believe,  to  explain,  or  to  account  for.
From  any  other  prisoner,  so  unj  ustly  menaced  with  a  doom  so  dreadful,
from  Mary  Stuart,  for  example,  at  Fotheringay,  we  do  not  expect  the
whole  truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  The  Maid  is  a  witness  of
another  kind,  and  where  we  cannot  understand  her,  we  must  say,  like
herself,  passez  outre  /

When  she  was  "  about  thirteen,"  she  had  a  voice  from  God,  to  aid
her  in  governing  herself.  "And  the  first  time  she  was  in  great  fear.
And  it  came,  that  voice,  about  noon-day,  in  summer,  in  her  father's
garden  "  (where  other  girls  of  old  France  hear  the  birds  sing,  "  Marry,
maidens,  marry  !  ")  "and  Jeanne  had  not  fasted  on  the  day  before.  ^
She  heard  the  voice  from  the  right  side,  towards  the  church,  and
seldom  heard  it  without  seeing  a  bright  light.  The  light  was  not
in  front,  but  at  the  side  whence  the  voice  came.  If  she  were
in  a  wood "  (as  distinguished  from  the  noise  of  the  crowded  and
tumultuous  court)  "  she  could  well  hear  the  voices  coming  to  her."
Asked  what  sign  for  her  soul's  health  the  voice  gave,  she  said  it  bade
her  behave  well,  and  go  to  church,  and  used  to  tell  her  to  go  into
France  on  her  mission. (I  do  not  know  why  the  advice  about  going  to

1  The  reading  is  nec  not  et,  as  in  Quicherat  Proces  I.  52,  compare.  I.  216.

/

.

/


204


Andrew  Lang.


church  is  generally  said  to  have  been  given  first.)  Jeanne  kept  object-
ing that  she  was  a  poor  girl  who  could  not  ride,  or  lead  in  war.
She  resisted  the  voice  with  all  her  energy.  As  to  her  male  dress,
she  "varied."  Obviously  she  was  anxious  not  to  involve  her  first
warrior  friend,  J ean  de  Nouvellompont,  as  having  made  the  suggestion
that  she  should  dress  as  a  man.  Her  loyalty  to  all  of  her  party  perhaps
made  her  hint  that  her  voices  were  her  advisers  ;  this  is  obscure.  She
asserted  that  she  knew  the  Dauphin,  on  their  first  meeting,  by  aid  of
her  voices.  (1.56.)  She  declared  that  the  Dauphin  himself  "  multas
habuit  revelationes  et  apparitiones  pulchras."  In  its  literal  sense,
there  is  no  evidence  for  this,  but  rather  the  reverse.  She  may  mean,
"  revelations "  through  herself,  or  may  refer  to  some  circumstance-
unknown.  "Those  of  my  party  saw  and  knew  that  voice,"  she  said,
but  later  would  only  accept  them  as  witnesses  if  they  were  allowed
to  come  and  see  her.  (I.  57.)

This  is  the  most  puzzling  point  in  Jeanne's  confession.  She  had
no  motive  for  telling  an  untruth,  unless  she  hoped  that  these  remarks
would  establish  the  objectivity  of  her  visions.  Of  course,  one  of  her
strange  experiences  may  have  occurred  in  the  presence  of  Charles  and
his  court,  and  she  may  have  believed  that  they  shared  in  it.  The
point  is  one  which  French  writers  appear  to  avoid,  as  a  rule.

She  said  that  she  heard  the  voice  daily  in  prison,  "  and  stood  in  sore
need  of  it."  The  voice  bade  her  remain  at  St.  Denis  (after  the  repulse
from  Paris,  in  September,  1429),  but  she  was  not  allowed  to  remain.

On  the  next  day  (the  third  of  the  trial)  she  told  Beaupere  that  she
was  fasting  since  yesterday  afternoon.  Beaupere  conceived  that  her
experiences  were  mere  subjective  hallucinations,  caused  by  fasting,  by
the  sound  of  church-bells,  and  so  on.  As  to  the  noise  of  bells,
Coleridge  writes  that  their  music  fell  on  his  ears,  "Most  like  articulate
sounds  of  things  to  come."  Beaupere's  sober  common  sense  did  not
avail  to  help  the  Maid,  but  at  the  Rehabilitation  (1456)  he  still  main-
tained his  old  opinion.  "  Yesterday  she  had  heard  the  voices  in  the
morning,  at  vespers,  and  at  the  late  ringing  for  Ave  Maria,  and  she
heard  them  much  more  frequently  than  she  mentioned."  "  Yesterday
•she  had  been  asleep  when  the  voice  aroused  her.  She  sat  up  and  clasped
her  hands,  and  the  voice  bade  her  answer  boldly.  Other  words  she  half
heard  before  she  was  quite  awake,  but  failed  to  understand."  (I.  62.)
Mr.  Myers  says  that  this  rousing  from  sleep  by  such  a  voice  is  "a
phenomenon  often  observed  in  our  cases  of  veridical  hallucination."
But,  in  the  spirit  of  Beaupere,  I  may  ask  if  the  phenomenon  is
unfamiliar  to  the  insane,  who  are  often  haunted  by  airy  voices  1

She  denied  that  the  voices  ever  contradicted  themselves.  On  this
occasion,  as  not  having  received  leave  from  her  voices,  she  refused  to
say  anything  as  to  her  visions.


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  cVArc.


205


At  the  next  meeting  she  admitted  having  heard  the  voices  in  court,
but  in  court  she  could  not  distinguish  the  words,  owing  to  the
tumult.  She  had  now,  however,  leave  to  speak  more  fully.  The  voices
were  those  of  St.  Catherine  and  St.  Margaret.  Later  she  was
asked  if  St.  Margaret  "  spoke  English."  Apparently  the  querist
thought  that  the  English  Margaret,  wife  of  Malcolm  of  Scotland,  was
intended.  They  were  crowned  with  fair  crowns,  as  she  had  said  at
Poictiers  two  years  before.  She  now  appealed  to  the  i-ecord  of  her
examination  there,  but  it  was  not  in  court,  nor  was  it  used  in  the  trial
■of  Rehabilitation.  It  has  never  been  recovered.  A  witness  who  had
■examined  her  at  Poictiers  threw  no  light  (twenty  years  later)  on  the
saints  and  voices.  Seven  years  ago  (that  is,  when  she  was  twelve)  she
first  saw  the  saints.  On  the  attire  of  the  saints  she  had  not  leave
to  speak.  They  were  preceded  by  St.  Michael  "  with  the  angels  of
Heaven."  "  I  saw  them  as  clearly  as  I  see  you,  and  I  used  to  weep  when
they  departed,  and  would  fain  that  they  should  have  taken  me  with
them."

As  to  the  famous  sword  at  Fierbois,  she  averred  that  she  had  been
in  the  church  there,  on  her  way  to  Chinon,  that  the  voices  later  bade
her  use  a  sword  which  was  hidden  under  earth, — she  thinks  behind,  but
possibly  in  front  of  the  altar, — at  Fierbois.  A  man  unknown  to  her
was  sent  from  Tours  to  fetch  the  sword,  which  after  search  was  found,
and  she  wore  it.

Asked  whether  she  had  prophesied  her  wound  by  an  arrow  at
Orleans,  and  her  recovery,  she  said  "  yes."

This  prediction,  omitted,  as  to  its  exact  details,  by  Mr.  Myers,  is
singular  in  that  it  was  recorded  before  the  event.  The  I'ecord  was
copied  into  the  registre  of  Brabant,  from  a  letter  written  on  April  22nd,
1429,  by  a  Fleniish  diplomatist,  De  Rotselaer,  then  at  Lyons. ^  De
Rotselaer  had  the  prophecy  from  an  officer  of  the  court  of  the  Dauphin.
The  prediction  was  thus  noted  on  April  22nd,  the  event  occurred  on
May  7th.  On  the  fifth  day  of  the  trial  Jeanne  announced  that,  before
seven  years  were  gone,  the  English  would  lose  a  dearer  gage  than
Orleans ;  "  this  I  know  by  I'evelation,  and  am  wroth  that  it  is  to  be  so
long  deferred."  Mr.  Myers  observes  that  "  the  prediction  of  a  great
victory  over  the  English  within  seven  years  was  not  fulfilled  in  any
exact  way."  The  words  of  the  Maid  are  "  Angli  demittent  majus  vadium
quam  fecerunt  coram  Aurelianis,"  and,  as  prophecies  go,  their  loss  of
Paris  (1436)  corresponds  very  well  to  the  Maid's  announcement.  She
went  on,  indeed,  to  say  that  the  English  "  will  have  greater  loss  than  ever
they  had,  through  a  great  French  victory,"  but  tliis  reads  like  a  gloss
on  her  original  prediction. "  She  knew  it  as  well  as  that  we  were


7


'^Proces,  IV,,  425.


S


206


Andrew  Lang.


there."  {Proces  I.,  84).  "  You  shall  not  have  the  exact  year,  but  well
I  wish  it  might  be  before  the  St.  John  ;  "  however,  she  had  already
expressed  her  sorrow  that  this  was  not  to  be.  "  Perhaps  some  English
will  fall  before  Martinmas,"  a  vague  and  not  unsafe,  but  rather  annoy-
ing remai-k !  Asked,  on  March  1st,  whether  her  liberation  was
promised,  she  said^  "Ask  me  in  three  months,  and  I  will  tell  you."  In
three  months  exactly,  her  stainless  soul  was  free.

On  the  appearance,  garb,  and  so  on  of  her  saints,  she  declined  to
answer  questions.

She  had  once  disobeyed  her  voices,  when  they  forbade  her  to  leap
from  the  tower  of  Beaurevoir.  She  leaped,  but  they  forgave  her,  and
told  her  that  Compiegne  (where  she  was  captured  on  May  23rd,  1430)
would  be  relieved  "  before  Martinmas."  It  was  relieved  on  October
26th,  after  a  siege  of  five  months.  On  March  10th  an  effort  was  made  tO'
prove  that  her  voices  had  lied  to  her,  and  that  she  had  lied  about  her
voices.  The  enemy  ]naintained  that  on  May  23rd,  1430,  she  announced
a  promised  victory  to  the  people  of  Compiegne,  vowing  that  St.  Mar-
garet and  St.  Catherine  had  revealed  it  to  her.  Two  hostile  priests  of
Compiegne  were  at  Rouen,  and  may  have  carried  this  tale,  which  is  re-
ported by  two  Burgundian  chroniclers,  but  not  by  Monstrelet,  who  was
with  the  besieging  army.  I  have  examined  the  evidence  in  Macmillan's-
Magazine  for  May,  1894,  and,  to  myself,  it  seems  inadequate.  In  court
she  said  n^eust  autre  commandement  de  yssir.  She  was  not  asked
whether  she  had  pretended  to  have  received  such  an  order.  She  told
the  touching  story  of  how,  at  Melun,  on  April,  1430,  the  voices  had
warned  her  that  she  would  be  taken  prisoner  before  midsummer  ;  how
she  had  prayed  for  death,  or  for  tidings  as  to  the  day  and  hour.  But
no  tidings  were  given  to  her,  and  her  old  belief,  often  expressed,  that
she  "  should  last  but  one  year  or  little  more  "  was  confirmed.  The  Due
d'Alengon  had  heard  her  say  this  several  times ;  for  the  prophecy  at
Melun  we  have  only  her  own  word.

She  was  now  led  into  the  allegory  about  the  Angel  (herself)  and  the
Crown  (the  coronation  at  Rheims).  This  allegory  was  fatal,  but  does
not  bear  on  her  real  belief  about  her  experiences.  She  averred,  return-
ing to  genuine  confessions,  that  her  voices  often  came  spontaneously  ;
if  they  did  not,  she  summoned  them  by  a  simple  prayer  to  God.  She
had  seen  the  angelic  figures  moving,  invisible  save  to  her,  among  men.
The  voices  had  promised  her  the  release  of  Charles  d'Orleans,  but  time
had  failed  her.  This  was  as  near  a  confession  of  failure  as  she  ever
made,  till  the  day  of  her  burning  ;  if  she  really  made  one  then.  But  here,
as  always,  she  had  predicted  that  she  would  do  this  or  that  if  she  were
sans  empeschement.  She  had  no  revelation  bidding  her  attack  Paris
when  she  did,  and  after  the  day  at  Melun,  she  submitted  to  the  advice
pf  the  other  captains. By  the  way,  if  this  be  so,  not  she,  but  the

V...


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Are.


207


captains,  displayed  the  strategy  admired  by  Captain  Marin  in  the
Oise  campaign  of  1430.  As  to  her  release,  she  was  only  bidden  "to
bear  all  cheerfully ;  be  not  vexed  with  thy  martyrdom,  thence  shalt
thou  come  at  last  into  the  kingdom  of  Paradise."

To  us,  this  is  explicit  enough,  but  the  poor  child  explained  to  her
murderers  that  by  martire  she  understood  the  pains  of  prison  and  she
referred  it  to  her  Lord,  whether  there  were  more  to  bear.  In  this
passage  the  original  French  exists,  as  well  as  the  Latin  translation.
The  French  is  better.

"Ne  te  chaille  de  ton  martire,  tu  t'en  vendras  enfin  en  royaulme
de  Paradis."

"Non  cures  de  martyrio  tuo  :  tu  venies  finaliter  in  regnum  para-
disi."

The  word  hinc  is  omitted  in  the  bad  Latin.  Unluckily  we  have
only  a  fragment  of  the  original  French,  as  taken  down  in  court.

This  passage,  with  some  others,  may  perhaps  be  taken  as  indicating
that  the  contents  of  the  communications  received  by  Jeanne  were  not
always  intelligible  to  her.  Those  who  believe  in  a  kind  of  plurality  of
personalities  may  put  their  own  interpretation  on  this  fact.  But  as
far  as  I  have  read,  people  who,  like  "  Leonie,"  have  several  selves  are
people  in  all  ways  very  unlike  Jeanne  d'Arc.

That  her  saints  could  be,  and  were,  touched  physically  by  her,  she
admitted.  (1.  18-5.)  Here  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  she  had
touched  with  her  ring,  (as  the  custom  was),  a  relic  of  St.  Catherine,
at  Fierbois.  Such  relics,  brought  from  the  desert  of  Sinai,  lay  at
Fierbois,  and  we  know  that  women  loved  to  rub  their  rings  on  the
ring  of  Jeanne,  in  spite  of  her  laughing  remonstrances.  But  apart
from  this  conjecture,  she  regarded  her  saints  as  tangible  by  her.  She
had  embraced  both  St.  Margaret  and  St.  Catherine. (I.  186.)

For  the  rest,  Jeanne  recanted  her  so-called  recantation,  averring-
that  she  was  unaware  of  the  contents,  or  full  significance  of  the
document.  Her  voices  recalled  her  to  her  duty,  for  them  she  went  to
the  stake,  and,  as  I  have  shewn,  if  there  was  a  moment  of  wavering
on  the  day  of  her  doom,  her  belief  in  the  objective  reality  of  the
phenomena  remained  firm,  and  she  recovered  her  faith  in  the  agony
of  her  death.

Of  external  evidence  as  to  these  experiences,  the  best  is  probably
that  of  d'Aulon,  the  Maitre  d'Hotel  of  the  Maid,  and  her  companion
through  her  whole  career.  He  and  she  were  reposing  in  the  same
room  at  Orleans,  her  hostess  being  in  the  chamber  (May,  1429),
and  dAulon  had  just  fallen  asleep,  when  the  Maid  awoke  him  with  a
cry.  Her  voices  bade  her  go  against  the  English,  but  in  what
direction  she  knew  not.  In  fact,  the  French  leaders  had  begun,
without  her  knowledge,  an  attack  on  St.  Loup,  whither  she  galloped

s  2


208


Andreiv  Lang.


and  took  the  fort.  (III.  212.)  It  is,  of  course,  very  possible  that
the  din  of  onset,  which  presently  became  audible,  had  vaguely
reached  the  senses  of  the  Maid.  Her  page  confirms  d'Aulon's
testimony.

D' Anion  states  that  when  the  Maid  had  any  martial  adventure  in
prospect,  she  told  him  that  her  "  counsel "  had  given  her  this  or  that
advice.  He  questioned  her  as  to  the  nature  of  this  "  counsel."  She
said  "  she  had  three  councillors,  of  whom  one  was  always  with  her,  a
second  went  and  came  to  her,  and  the  third  was  he  with  whom  the
others  deliberated."  D'Aulon  "was  not  worthy  to  see  this  counsel."
From  the  moment  when  he  heard  this,  d'Aulon  asked  no  more  ques-
tions. Dunois  also  gave  some  evidence  as  to  the  "  counsel."  At
Loches,  when  Jeanne  was  urging  the  journey  to  Rheims,  Harcourt
asked  her,  before  the  King,  what  the  nature  (modus)  of  the  council
was  ;  how  it  communicated  with  her.  She  I'epHed  that  when  she  was
met  with  incredulity,  she  went  apart  and  prayed  to  God.  Then  she
heard  a  voice  say,  Fille  De,  va,  va,  va,  je  serai  a  ton  aide,  va  /  "  And
when  she  lieard  that  voice  she  was  right  glad,  and  would  fain  be  ever
in  that  state."  "As  she  spoke  thus,  ipsa  miro  niodo  exsultabat,  levando
sues  oc.ulos  ad  ccdum"  (III.,  12).  Finally,  that  Jeanne  maintained  her
belief  to  the  moment  of  her  death,  we  learn  from  the  priest,  Martin
Ladvenu,  who  was  with  her  to  the  last  (III.,  170).  There  is  no  sign
anywhere  that  at  the  moment  of  an  "  experience,"  the  Maid's  aspect
seemed  unusual,  or  uncanny,  or  abnormal,  in  the  eyes  of  tliose  who
were  in  her  company.

These  depositions  were  given  twenty  years  later,  (1452-56)  and,  of
course,  allowance  must  be  made  for  weakness  of  memory  and  desire  to
glorify  the  Maid.  But  there  is  really  nothing  of  a  suspicious  character
about  them.  In  fact  the  "  growth  of  legend  "  was  very  slight,  and  is
mainly  confined  to  the  events  of  the  martyrdom,  the  White  Dove,  tlie
Name  of  Christ  blazoned  in  flame,  and  so  forth.  It  should  also  have
been  mentioned  that  at  the  taking  of  St.  Pierre  de  Moustier  (Novem-
ber, 1429)  Jeanne,  when  deserted  by  her  forces,  declared  to  dAulon
that  she  was  "not  alone,  but  surrounded  by  fifty  thousand  of  her  own."
The  men  therefore  rallied  and  stormed  the  place.

This  is  the  sum  of  the  external  evidence  as  to  the  phenomena.  I
have  already  indicated  what  is  known  as  to  the  mental  and  physical
■characteristics  of  the  Maid.  Her  extreme  temperance  should  also
perhaps  be  remembered.  M.  Quicherat  writes  as  if  hysterical  patients
occasionally  fell  from  great  heights  '■'■sans  I'sion,"  as  Jeanne  leaped
from  the  donjon  of  Beaurevoir.  This  may  be  left  to  the  consideration
of  physicians.

As  to  the  contents  of  the  communications  to  Jeanne,  they  were
certainly sane,  judicious  and  heroic. M.  Quicherat,  (Aper^us  Ifou-


i


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  cVArc.


209


veaux,  p.  61)  distinguishes  three  classes  of  abnormally  conveyed
knowledge,  all  on  unimpeachable  evidence.

(1.)  Tliought-reading,  as  in  the  case  of  the  King's  secret  ;  she
repeated  to  him  the  words  of  a  prayer  which  he  had  made  mentally.

(2.)  Clairvoyance,  as  exhibited  in  the  affair  of  the  sword  of  Fierbois.

(3.)  Prescience,  as  in  the  prophecy  of  her  arrow-wound  at  Orleans.
According  to  her  confessor,  Pasquerel,  she  repeated  the  prophecy  and
indicated  the  spot  in  which  she  would  be  wounded  (under  the  right
shoulder)  on  the  night  of  May  6.  But  this  is  later  evidence  given  iii
the  Trial  of  Rehabilitation.

To  these  we  might  add  the  view,  from  Vaucouleurs,  a  hundred
leagues  away,  of  the  defeat  at  Rouvray;  the  prophecy  that  she  "would
last  but  a  year  or  little  more ; "  the  prophecy,  at  Melun,  of  her  capture ;
the  prophecy  of  the  relief  of  Compiegne;  and  the  strange  affair  of  the
hon  conduit  at  the  battle  of  Pathay.i  For  several  of  these  predictions
we  have  only  the  Maid's  word,  but,  to  be  plain,  Ave  can  scarcely  have
more  unimpeachable  testimony.

Here  the  compiler  leaves  his  task  :  the  inferences  may  be  drawn
by  experts.  The  old  theory  of  imposture,  the  Voltairean  theory  of  a
"poor  idiot,"  ai-e  untenable.  The  honesty  and  the  genius  of  Jeanne
are  no  longer  denied.  If  hysteria  be  named,  it  is  plain  that  we  must
argue  that,  because  hysteria  is  accompanied  by  visionary  symptoms,  all
visions  ai'e  proofs  of  hystei'ia.  Michelet  holds  by  hallucinations  which
were  unconsciously  externalised  by  the  mind  of  Jeanne.  That  mind
must  have  been  a  very  peculiar  intellect,  and  the  modus  is  precisely  the
difficulty.  But  "  Miss  X."  avers  that,  being  a  strong  visualise!',  she
often  sees  her  impressions  objectively  before  her,  "  as  a  picture."  I  do
not  gather  that  she  also  hears,  touches,  and  smells  them,  as  Jeanne  did.
Henri  Martin  believes  in  some  kind  of  manifestation  revealed  to  the
individual  mind  by  the  Absolute.  Many  Catholics,  as  yet  unauthorised,
I  conceive,  by  the  Church,  accept  the  theory  of  Jeanne  herself;  her
saints  were  true  saints  from  Paradise.  It  is  manifest  that  visions  of  a
bright  light  and  "auditions"  of  voices  are  common  enough  phenomena
in  madness,  and  in  the  experiences  of  very  uninspired  men  and  women,
collected  and  published  by  the  S.P.R.  From  the  sensations  of  these
people,  Jeanne's  phenomena  are  only  differentiated  by  their  number,
by  their  persistence  through  seven  years  of  an  almost  abnormally
healthy  life,  by  their  importance,  orderliness  and  veracity,  as  well  as
by  their  heroic  character.

Mr.  Myers  has  justly  compared  the  case  of  Jeanne  with  that  of
Socrates.  A  much  humbler  parallel,  curiously  close  in  one  respect,
may  be  cited  from  M.  Janet's  article,  Les  Actes  Inconscients  dans  le


'  IV.,  371,  372. Here  the  authority  is  Monstrelet,  a  Burgundian.


210


Andrew  Lang.


Somnamhulisme  {Revue  Philosojjhique,  March,  1888).  Mr.  Myers
analyses  and  comments  on  this  essay  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,
Part  XIII,,  p.  374.

The  case  is  that  of  Madame  B.,  a  peasant  woman  near  Cherbourg.
She  has  her  common  work-a-day  personality,  called,  for  convenience,
"  Leonie."  There  is  also  her  hypnotic  personality,  "  Leontine."  Now
Leontine  (that  is,  Madame  B.  in  a  somnambulistic  state,)  was  one  day
hysterical  and  troublesome.  Suddenly  she  exclaimed  in  terror  that  she
heard  a  voice  oh  the  left,  crying,  "Enough,  be  quiet,  you  are  a  nuisance."
She  hunted  in  vain  for  the  speaker,  who,  of  course,  was  inaudible  to
M.  Janet,  though  he  was  present.  The  sagacious  speaker,  so  to  say,  is
"  brought  out "  by  repeated  passes,  and  when  this  moral  and  sensible
phase  of  her  character  is  thus  evoked,  Madame  B.  is  "  Leonore."
Madame  B.  now  sometimes  assumes  an  expression  of  beatitude,
smiling  and  looking  upwards.  As  Dunois  said  of  Jeanne  when  she
was  recalling  her  visions,  "  miro  modo  exsultabat  levando  suos  oculos
ad  coelum."  This  ecstacy  Madame  B.  (as  Leonore)  dimly  remembers,
averring  that  "  she  has  been  dazzled  hy  a  light  on  the  left  side."  Here
apparently  we  have  the  best  aspect  of  poor  Madame  B.  revealing
itself  in  a  mixture  of  hysterics  and  hypnotism,  and  associating  itself
with  an  audible  sagacious  voice  and  a  dazzling  light  on  the  left,  both
hallucinatory.

The  coincidence  with  Jeanne's  earliest  experience  is  most  curious.

Audivit  vocem  a  dextero  lattre  ....  claritas  est  ab  eodtm
latere  in  quo  vox  auditur,  sed  ibi  communiler  est  magna  claritas.
Like  Madame  B.,  Jeanne  was  at  first  alarmed  by  these  sensations.

The  parallel,  so  far,  is  perfectly  complete.  But  in  Jeanne's  case,  I
have  found  no  hint  of  temporary  unconsciousness.  When  strung  up  to
the  most  intense  mental  eagerness  in  couft,  she  still  heard  her  voices,
though,  because  of  the  tumult  of  the  assembly,  she  heard  them  indis-
tinctly. Thus  her  experiences  are  not  associated  with  insanity,  partial
unconsciousness,  or  any  physical  disturbance  (as  in  some  tales  of  second
sight),  while  the  sagacity  of  the  communications  and  their  veracity
distinguish  them  from  the  hallucinations  of  mad  people  and  of  Cotton
Mather.  As  far  as  the  affair  of  Rouvray,  the  prophecy  of  the  instant
death  of  an  insolent  soldier  at  Chinon,  (evidence  of  Pasquerel,  her  con-
fessor), and  such  things  go,  we  have,  of  course,  many  alleged  parallels  in
the  predictions  of  Mr.  Peden  and  other  seers  of  the  Covenant.  But  Mr.
Peden's  political  predictions  are  still  unfulfilled,  whereas  concerning
the  "  dear  gage  "  which  the  English  should  lose  in  France  within  seven
years,  Jeanne  may  be  called  successful.

On  the  whole,  if  we  explain  Jeanne's  experiences  as  the  expressions
of  her  higher  self  (as  Leonore  is  Madame  B.'s  higher  self),  we  are  com-
pelled to  ask  what  is  the  nature  of  that  self  1 To  one  inquirer  it  seems


The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc.


211


like  "  something  far  more  deeply  interfused  "  than  any  mental  con-
comitant of  the  cerebral  organism.

The  evidence  for  knowledge  acquired  by  no  familiar  natural  channel
of  sense  sufficed  to  convince  M.  Quicherat,  whom  Pere  Ayroles  regards
as  a  fr-ee-thinker.  Nor  have  I  exhausted  all  the  alleged  instances,
from  a  dislike  to  drawing  on  the  evidence  given  in  1452-1456.

In  the  whole  story  I  am  struck  by  the  comparative  lack  of
miraculous  undergrowth  of  legend.  Moreover,  when  we  remember  our
current  theories  of  collective  hallucinations  propagated  by  enthusiasm,
or  feigned  by  enthusiasts,  when  we  remember  that  the  legend  of  the
contemporai-y  St.  Colette  is  a  tissue  of  such  tales  as  are  told  about
D.  D.  Home,  it  seems  odd  that  even  the  later  reports  concerning
Jeanne  are  so  temperate.  Nobody  pretends  to  have  heard  voices  in
her  company,  to  have  seen  lights  or  saints,  to  have  beheld  her  elevated
in  air,  or  even  to  have  seen  her  chair  snatched  away,  like  St.  Colette's,
by  invisible  hands !  When  I  say,  "  nobody,"  I  should  make  an
exception,  perhaps,  for  a  Monsieur  de  Cailly.  If  a  Grant  of  Arms,
now  existing  only  in  a  copy  made  about  1610  by  Charles  du  Lys,  is
authentic.  Monsieur  de  Cailly  shared  with  Jeanne  at  Orleans,  in  May,
1429,  a  vision  of  Angels.  The  Grant  of  Arms,  permitting  him  to  bear
thi'ee  Angels'  heads,  avers  that  Jeanne  herself,  in  June,  1429,  begged
for  him  this  favour.  The  copyist,  Charles  du  Lys,  married  a  Mademois-
^  elle  de  Cailly,  and  doubtless  copied  a  document  belonging  to  her
family.  Jeanne  healed  no  diseases,  and  refused  credit  for  the
momentary  recovery  of  a  new-born  child  at  Lagny,  in  April,  1430.
Thus  it  seems  that  "  contagious  enthusiasm  in  a  credulous  age,"  even
'  in  the  presence  of  one  who  was  herself  a  miracle,  does  not  always
generate  a  rich  undergrowth  of  legend.

I  began  by  saying  that^  I  could  find  no  work  on  Jeanne  d'Arc  by
a  psychological  expert.  The  remarks  of  Brierre  de  Boismont  are
singularly  inadequate.  The  sun  flashing  on  the  church  window  caused
the  first  experience,  and  so  forth.  How  much  does  the  sun  flash,
outside,  from  a  medieval  window  of  stained  glass  ?  A  few  attempts
at  a  pathological  explanation  rest  on  a  late  rumour  reported  at  third
hand.  I  have  not  consulted  the  Zoist,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  257.  The  Comte
de  Bourbon  Lignieres,  while  he  assails  the  theory  of  hallucinations,  is
hardly  to  be  regarded  as  himself  a  scientific  expert.  Finally,  I  have
been  unable  to  procure  an  essay  by  Captain  Marin,  in  which,
according  to  M.  Lanery  d'Arc,  he  regards  the  apparitions  to  Jeanne  as
objective,  and  of  the  same  spiritualistic  category  as  the  famous  Katie
King.

To  state  the  facts,  with  some  criticism  of  the  evidence,  has  been
my  sole  object,  nor  can  I  add  a  conjecture  to  the  many  unsatisfactory
hypotheses  about  this  mystery  of  the  Maid. Were  I  compelled  to


212


Andrew  Lang.


pronounce  an  opinion,  it  would  be  to  some  such  effect  as  this  :  -Follow-
ing Brien-e -de -Boismont  as  against  Lelutj  I  should  think  that  persons
entirely  sane  may  be  so  constituted  as  to  see  and  hear,  as  if  externally,
their  ideas  and  mental  impressions.

It  would  be  impossible  for  Jeanne,  as-i^-was-fot^SoeratesT-to  regard
these  experiences  as  other  than  objective  and  caused  by  external
influences.  Thus  I  should  have  no  hesitation  about  considering  her
experiences  mere  constitutional  externalisations  of  her  ideas.  But
the  evidence  showing  that  the  contents  of  the  messages  received  by
her  were  such  as  she  could  not  have  learned  in  any  normal  way  is  so
strong  that  I  am  compelled  to  believe  in  some  abnormal  extension  of
faculty,  coi'responding  to  her  native  and  unparalleled  genius.  |  To  a
certain  extent,  she  was  admitted  within  the  arcana  and  sanctuary  of
the  universe.

"  Gome  to  the  Salpetriere,"  said  a  man  of  science  to  an  xlbbe,
"  and  I  will  show  you  twenty  .Jeo.iraes  d'Ai-c  "  "  Ras  one  of  them
given  us  back  Alsace  and  Lorraine  ? "  said  the  Abbe.

There  i§  the  cru./  ■


Resolute  Credulity.


233


III.

RESOLUTE  CREDULITY.
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


The  work  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  its  own
sphere  resembles  in  some  important  points  that  of  the  Charity
Organisation  Society  in  the  sphere  of  almsgiving.  The  C.O.S.  has  had
to  deal  with  a  widespi-ead  and  worthy  although  often  an  ill-directed
and  even  ruinous  impulse — the  impulse  to  relieve  the  physical
wants  of  other  men.  In  its  endeavours  to  guide  that  impulse  into  the
best  channels  the  C.O.S.  encounters  two  contrasted,  or  rather  comj^le-
mentary,  forms  of  evil.  On  the  one  side  there  is  the  credulity,  the
indolence,  the  vanity  of  the  reckless  giver  ;  on  the  other  side  there  is
the  helplessness,  the  fraud,  the  vice  and  cruelty  which  the  ill-judged
boons  encourage  or  engender.  We  too,  on  our  part,  deal  with  a  wide-
spread and  noble  impulse  ; — although  an  impulse  whose  misdirection
has  made  the  saddest  side  of  human  history.  Our  motive  power  is
furnished  by  man's  innate  longing  to  penetrate  the  Realm  Unseen  ; —
that  world-old  desire  which  is  now  taking  on  itself  a  new  definiteness
and  intensity  as  science  is  accustoming  men's  minds  to  a  standard  of
more  assured  and  verifiable  certainty  than  contented  the  aspirations  of
earlier  men.

And  we  meet  in  this  inquiry  also  those  two  complementary  causes
of  error  which  make  earthly  charity  so  hard  to  dispense  aright.  On
the  one  side  we  too  often  find  credulity,  indolence,  vanity  ;  on  the
other  side  the  fraud  and  falsehood  which  that  credulity  generates
and  that  indolence  allows.  For  us  also,  as  for  the  C.O.S.,  it  is  needful
from  time  to  time  to  utter  a  word  of  warning  ;  to  define  anew  the
spirit  in  which  we  hold  that  high  truth  should  be  sought ;  to  point
out  some  blind  pathways  which  as  yet  have  led  only  to  deceit  and
disillusion.

Once  more  then  I  must  repeat,  (since  men  on  the  side  both  of
belief  and  of  negation  seem  slow  to  understand  it),  that  our  very
raison  (Xetre  as  a  Society  is  that  we  endeavour  to  be  scientific  and  not
partisan  ;  that  the  persons  of  widely  different  views  and  experiences
who  compose  our  group  unite  only  in  the  strong  desire  to  be  careful,
thorough,  dispassionate  ;  since  we  know  well  that  in  that  temper  only
shall  we  arrive  at  ti'uth.

'-'We  exist," — to  quote  a  letter  written  by  Edmund  Gurney  and
myself  to  the  S.P.R.  Journal  for  January  1887, — "we  exist  in  order  to


214


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


carry,  if  we  can,  the  methods  of  recognised  science  into  a  region  where  no
recognised  science  as  yet  has  forced  its  way.  And  we  appeal  with  equal
sincerity  to  each  of  the  groups  which  stand  aloof  from  us  on  either
side,  to  help  us  in  the  task  which  we  have  undertaken.  To  those  who
deem  us  creduloxis  we  say,  '  Criticise  our  methods,  and  we  will  do  our
best  to  improve  them.  Attack  our  evidence,  and  we  will  strengthen  or
abandon  it.'  And  to  those  who  think  us  over-sceptical  we  say  similarly,
'  Offer  us  more  and  better  evidence,  and  you  will  find  that  there  is
nothing  to  which  we  oppose  a  mere  a  j^riori  denial, — no  case  which  we
will  not  set  forth  with  candour  and  criticise  with  care.'"

Our  history  during  the  eight  years  since  these  words  were  written
has  not,  I  hope,  been  inconsistent  with  their  tenor.  We  have  set  forth
much  fresh  evidence  ;  and  among  it  much  evidence  to  phenomena  for
which,  when  we  began  our  labours,  there  was  little  testimony  which
seemed  to  stand  examination.  My  own  wi'itings,  especially,  are  likely
to  be  oftener  attacked  as  exhibiting  an  excessive,  than  an  insufhcient,
tendency  to  belief.  It  may  therefore  be  useful  if  I  here  enumerate
certain  theses  for  which  we  have  'not,  in  my  view,  received  evidence
enough  to  give  them  even  a  prima  facie  claim  to  be  regarded  as  true.
These  unproved  theses,  however,  are  not  all  on  the  same  footing.
Some  of  them  might  conceivably  be  established  to-morrow.  To  believe
in  others  of  them  indicates,  I  think,  that  resolute,  predetermined
credulity  against  which  it  is  the  purpose  of  this  paper  to  protest.  But
•of  all  alike  I  may  say  that  the  man  who  alludes  to  any  one  of  these
theses  as  true  is  bound,  in  my  view,  at  the  same  time  to  state  or  refer
to  the  definite  and  provable  facts  which  justify  his  conclusion.  In  all
cases  alike,  however,  he  will  probably  prefer  simply  to  say  that  the
•existing  evidence  is  too  voluminous  to  be  printed  on  that  particular
occasion.

Thesis  1. — There  is  such  a  thing  as  "Occult  Science"  or  Magic ;
and  supernormal  powers,  especially  in  the  East,  are  trans-
mitted by  tradition,  or  acquired  by  ascetic  practices,  so  that
the  possessors  of  such  powers  can  understand  and  control
them.

I  was  once  disposed  to  believe  in  the  truth  of  some  parts  at
least  of  this  thesis,  but  the  study  of  various  books  and  periodicals
written  to  defend  it  has  destroyed  that  tendency  to  belief. ^  Dr.
Hodgson's  paper  on  "Indian  Magic"  (S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,
p.  354)  was  not  calculated  to  reassure  me.  Since  that  paper  was
written, however, some articles  by  "  Heinrich Hensoldt,  Ph.D.,''

■  I  do  not  of  course  mean  to  assert  that  there  may  not  be  tricks  depending  on
suggestion,  or  even  on  telepathy,  which  may  be  handed  down  in  country  place.s  and
may  enter  into  "folk-lore," — a  very  different  matter  from  the  claim  discussed  above.


Resolute  Credulity.


215


have  appeared  in  the  Are7ia  (an  American  monthly  magazine  which
gives  some  space  to  these  topics),  which  articles,  if  true,  establish
all  the  occultism  that  could  be  desired.  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I  examined
these  papers,  and  concluded  that  they  were  entirely  unworthy  of
notice.  Mr.  Stead  printed  a  story  of  Dr.  Hensoldt's  in  Borderland ;
but  with  reserve,  as  "one  of  a  series  of  articles  which  were  undoubtedly
thrilling,  and  might  be  true."  It  is  fortunate  that  he  did  so,  as  this
led  to  an  interview  in  which  Dr.  Hensoldt  told  Mr.  Stead  "  that
in  the  main  he  was  quite  sure  that  his  facts  were  correct,  but
that  he  had  written  them  up  a  little."  ^  In  Borderland  for  April,
1895,  p.  168,  Mr.  Stead  prints,  along  with  this  statement  of  Dr.
Hensoldt's,  an  article  from  the  Ceylon  Observer  (date  not  given),  from
which,  if  no  answer  is  forthcoming,  it  certainly  appears  that  Dr.
Hensoldt's  story  was  a  tissue  of  deliberate  falsehoods.  As  Dr.
Hensoldt  has  been  lecturing  in  America,  and  "has  been  much  pleased
by  the  universal  interest  which  his  discourses  upon  Indian  occultism
have  roused  among  the  educated  classes  of  the  United  States,"  it  is  to
be  hoped  that  the  Arena  will  presently  educate  those  classes  a  little
further  in  his  direction.

Thesis  2. — Mahatmas  exist  in  Thibet ;  Mme.  Blavatsky's  occult  per-
formances and  those  of  her  friends  were  genuine, — and  (this
last  clause  is  now  optional)  have  been  continued  since  her
death  by  Mr.  Judge.

I  do  not  propose  to  say  anything  more  on  all  this.  History  tells  us
that  Moseilana  after  the  death  of  Mahomet  introduced  an  egg  into  a
bottle,  and  by  the  marvel  of  that  sight  shook  the  prestige  of  the
Prophet  and  balanced  for  some  months  the  destinies  of  Islam.

An  egg  in  a  bottle  !  One  might  exhibit  an  apple  in  a  dumpling  to
Mr.  Judge's  admirers,  and  ask  them  triumphantly  what  they  had  to
say  to  that.

Thesis  3. — The  heavenly  bodies  indicate  or  influence  in  an  occult
way  the  destinies  of  men.

I  do  not  know  on  what  evidence  this  belief  is  based.

Thesis  4. — The  lines  in  a  man's  hand  indicate  his  history,  character,
and  destiny.

I  have  seen  no  evidence  of  any  value  for  this  proposition.

Thesis  5.- — By  the  act  of  bathing  in  or  drinking  the  water  of
the  spring  at  Lourdes,  or  of  other  sacred  springs ;  or  by

'  We  are  quite  familiar  in  the  S.P.R.  with  the  genial  admission  of  "writing-  up  a
little." It  has  put  a  sudden  end  to  many  correspondences.


216


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


invocations  of  a  special  kind  ;  or  by  the  practice  of  a
"  Christian  Science,"  which  can  be  leai'nt  from  books  and
lectures,  therapeutic  results  are  attained  which  differ  in  kind
from  those  which  ordinary  suggestion  or  self-suggestion,
without  any  of  these  adjuncts,  occasionally  produces.

On  this  point  I  may  refer  to  a  paper  by  my  late  brother  and  myself
in.  Proceedings,  Vol.  IX,  p.  160,  and  to  a  discussion  of  the  Holywell  cures
by  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal  for  May,  1895.  Since
the  article  in  Proceedings  M.  Zola's  work  on  Lourdes  has  appeared,  and
has  been  recognised  on  both  sides  as  a  serious  study  of  the  problem.
His  descriptions  from  personal  observation  of  the  constatation  or
proof  of  the  cures — descriptions  whose  accuracy  has  not,  so  far  as
I  know,  been  seriously  questioned — are  absolutely  confirmatory  of  the
conclusions  drawn,  from  mere  study  of  the  literature  favourable  to
Lourdes,  by  my  brother  and  myself.^

I  will  add  that  I  am  personally  very  anxious  that  some  part  of  the
above  thesis  should  be  proved  true ; — that  is  to  say  that  some  method
should  be  found  by  which  the  processes  of  therapeutic  self-suggestion,
at  present  so  rai'ely  effective,  should  be  made  more  certain  and
more  profoundly  efficacious.  I  cannot  but  think  that  there  must
be  some  such  method ;  but  I  see  little  evidence  that  it  has  yet
been  found.

Thesis  6. — Some  public  showmen  now  use  in  their  exhibitions  some
form  of  supernormal  power.

I  should  be  very  willing  to  believe  this  thesis,  which  would  show
more  regularity  in  the  operation  of  telepathy  or  clairvoyance  than  we
have  ever  seen  attained  in  experiments.  But  I  see  no  proof  that
it  is  true  of  any  public  performer  at  the  present  time  ;  and  I  shall
presently  quote  two  cases  where  supernormal  powers  which  audiences
have  believed  to  exist  can  be  shown  to  be  in  no  wise  needed  to  explain
the  phenomena.  On  the  other  hand  I  remember  that  when  some  of
our  group  were  learning  and  buying  ti'icks  from  a  conjurei*,  some  twenty
years  ago,  she  told  us  that  it  was  not  worth  our  while  to  buy  her  code-
trick,  because  her  occasional  specially  good  hits  depended,  as  she  be-
lieved, on  thought-transference  from  the  man  who  went  round  looking
at  the  articles  which  she  guessed.  She  said  that  she  was  obliged  to
pay  this  man,  who  was  not  in  other  respects  useful,  because  she  found
that  she  could  not  get  the  same  clear  knowledge  of  objects  from  other
confederates  equally  trained  in  the  code. This  is  no  j^roof  of  super-

1  A  narrative  given  by  Dr.  Pierre  Delbet  (Revue  dc  Paris,  1895,  p.  C28)  suggests
considerable  doubt  as  to  the  good  faith  of  some  of  tlie  religious  bodies  who  announce
cures.


Resolute  Credulity.


217


normal  powers  ;  but.  it  is  nearer  proof  than  is  the  mere  fact  that  many
spectators  have  been  puzzled  by  many  codes.  ^

Thesis  7. —  Some  public  mediums  now  giving  seances  are  pro-
ducing genuine  phenomena  of  movements  at  a  distance  or  of
materialisation.

I  do  not  feel  by  any  means  certain  that  this  thesis  is  wholly  false.
Believing  as  I  do  that  genuine  phenomena  occur  both  through  Eusapia
Paladino  and  through  various  private  persons  known  to  me;  and
believing  also  that  genuine  phenomena  have  at  one  time  or  other
occurred  through  more  than  one  public  medium,  it  would  not  surprise  me
to  receive  proof  that  something  genuine  was  thus  occurring  now.  But
when  I  consider  the  great  difference  between  the  care  and  skill  which
have  been  devoted  to  the  investigation  of  Eusapia  (I  am  of  course  not
thinking  of  my  own  minute  share  in  that  long  inquiry)  and  the  kind  of
observation  on  which  other  contemporary  claims  are  mainly  based,  I
feel  bound  to  draw  the  line  as  I  have  done.

I  shall  presently  give  accounts  of  two  sittings  with  Mr.  Husk,  which
illustrate  the  modest  equipment  of  capacity  on  which  a  soi-disant  medium
can  live  and  prosper.  But  the  most  important  source  of  information
on  this  subject  is  a  pamphlet  compiled  by  Mr.  John  Curtis,  of  Boston,
with  a  preface  by  the  late  Colonel  Bundy,  of  Chicago,  editor  of  the
Religio-Philosophical  Journal.  Colonel  Bundy  firmly  believed  in  the
genuineness  of  some  of  these  phenomena,  and  the  newspaper  which  he
edited  was  distinctly  spiritualistic;  but  with  admirable  courage  and
disinterestedness  he  made  it  a  large  part  of  his  business  to  expose  the

1  The  reader  may  refer  to  Borderland  for  July,  1894,  p.  422,  for  ]Miss  X.'s
account  of  the  performance  of  Mr.  Jesse  Shepard,  the  "musical  medium,"— an
-account  concordant  ^vith  the  view  of  other  competent  musical  critics.  There'  is  no
reason  whatever  to  credit  Mr.  Shepard  ■s\'ith  any  powers  more  supernormal  than  a
high  falsetto  voice  and  a  judicious  use  of  the  left  elbow.

Mr.  Hamilton  Aide  has  favoured  me  with  the  following  graphic  description  of
one  of  Mr.  Shepard's  seances charge,  a  guinea  a  head  for  each  auditor  :—

"  Shepard  informed  me  that  he  was  an  uncultured  musician— a  statement  which
his  subsequent  performance  fully  verified ;  also,  that  he  was  inspired  at  will  by  the
spirits  of  Mozart,  Beethoven,  Mendelssohn,  etc.  This  was  a  greater  demand  on  my
credulity.  And  yet  I  beheve  there  are  many  who  have  swallowed  the  astounding
pretension  without  difficulty.  The  spirit  of  a  young  lady  in  the  schoolroom  was,
apparently,  the  one  who  descended  upon  S.'s  shoulders,  arms,  and  hands  (and
descended  heavily,  too)  on  this  occasion.  As  long  as  he  played  in  full
lamplight  his  performance  was  beneath  criticism.  AA'hen  the  room  was  reduced  to
total  darkness  and  he  played  what  he  termed  "  The  Passage  of  the  Israelites  over
the  Red  Sea,"  a  curious  and  clever  effect  to  imitate  the  trampling  of  horses  and
rumbling  of  chariots  was  produced  by— what  part  of  his  body  or  what  mechancial
contrivance  I  know  not,  but  clearly  the  thing  was  a  trick.  Of  his  vocal  powers
which  he  justly  considers  abnormal,  I  can  truly  say  that  anything  so  terrible  and
hideous  I  never  heard  issue  from  the  human  throat— varying  from  the  roar  of  a  bull
to  the  screech  of  a  mackaw.  One  felt  glad  there  were  not  more  vocal  spirits  let  loose
upon  the  world. "


218


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


fraudulent  materialisations  which  are  unfortunately  still  too  common  in
the  United  States.  The  pamphlet  referred  to  is  called  "  Some  account
of  the  Vampires  of  Onset,  past  and  present."  It  is  published  by  S.
Woodberry  and  Co.,  105,  Summer-street,  Boston,  Mass.,  price  ten  cents.
It  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  inquirer.  "  Onset  "  is  the  name  of
the  "  Camp  "  or  settlement  of  tents,  where  spiritualistic  gatherings
ai-e  held  in  the  summer,  and  where  these  persons  drive  their  trade.
Among  the  "  Vampires  "  exposed  in  this  collection  of  legal  documents,
sworn  statements,  and  other  contemporary  and  first-hand  evidence  are
Mrs.  Hannah  V.  Ross,  Mrs.  Amanda  M.  Cowan,  Mrs.  Carrie  M.  Sawyer,
"  Dr."  D.  J.  Stansbury,  and  Mrs.  M.  E.  Williams,  who  has  lately  been
exposed  in  Paris.^  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  wider  publicity  had  not
been  given  to  these  pages  by  spiritualistic  papers  ;  for  although  na
actual  catching  of  Mrs.  "Williams'  rag-doll  or  herself  is  recorded  in
this  pamphlet,  certain  other  facts  there  given  would  have  prevented
any  lady  from  permitting  her  presence.

It  is  in  the  continued  patronage  accorded  to  many  of  these  Vampires
and  Jezebels — in  their  rapid  transits  through  the  sliding  panel  and  the
divorce-court — that  I  find  the  strongest  instance  of  that  resolute,  that
immutable,  that  immoral  credulity  which  almost  makes  one  wish  to  see
some  of  the  dupes  in  the  dock  alongside  of  their  deceivers.  I  have  felt  a
similar  wish  when  I  have  seen  a  man  who  had  dined  toss  half-a-crown
to  a  maudlin  woman  in  the  rainy  street,  while  she  pinched  the  hired  baby
that  she  was  slowly  murdering  for  the  sake  of  those  very  half-crowns.^

I  proceed  now  to  some  of  the  concrete  cases  of  which  I  have  spoken

1  Dr.  Hodgson  writes  to  me  :  "Mr.  Curtis  has  in  his  possession  masses  of  material
taken  from  Mrs.  Hannah  V.  Ross,  Mrs.  H.  B.  Fay,  Mrs.  Bliss,  Mrs.  Hull,  Mrs.
Amanda  M.  Cowan,  Mrs.  Fairchild,  the  Berry  sisters,  and  Mrs.  Holmes,  at  the
times  when  these  persons  were  seen  posing  as  spirits."

Dr.  Hodgson  also  sends  me  much  matter,  published  and  unpublished,  re  the
detected  frauds  of  several  mediums,  especially  the  Bangs  sisters  and  one  Keeler  (not
the  conjurer  of  that  name).  We  hold  all  this  in  readiness  for  printing,  if  required  ;
but  after  reviewing  much  of  what  has  already  been  printed  on  both  sides  of  the
controversy,  I  think  that  the  evidence  for  widespread  fraud  throughout  all  this
group  is  already  so  strong  and  the  evidence  for  genuine  phenomena  anywhere  in  the
group  so  weak,  that  few  of  our  readers  can  need  further  caution.

'-  I  am  afraid  that  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  may  protest  against  this  passage  ;  and
I  desire  respectfully  here  to  anticipate  an  attack  from  him  to  which  I  shall  not  wish
otherwise  to  reply.  I  regard  Mr.  Wallace's  testimony  with  regard  to  the  character  of
public  mediums  as  precisely  on  a  par  with  the  testimony  of  Marcus  Aureliu»
Antoninus  with  regard  to  the  character  of  Faustina.  There  are  natures — and,  as  in
the  case  of  Marcus,  such  natures  may  belong  to  the  wisest  of  men — which  stand  so  far
removed  from  the  meaner  temptations  of  humanity  that  those  thus  gifted  at  birth  can
no  more  enter  into  the  true  mind  of  a  cheat  than  I  can  enter  into  the  true  mind  of  a
chimpanzee.  Only  may  such  spirits  judge  us  also  at  the  end  !  However  far  they  may
be  above  us,  we  shall  have  nought  to  fear, —

Because  the  unstained,  the  clear,  the  crystalline

Have  ever  in  them  something  of  benign.


Resolute  Credulity.


219


above.  Roughly  speaking,  we  have  to  meet  three  main  modes  of
producing  illusion.  There  is  the  skilful  use  of  natural  forces  ;  there  is
the  employment  of  confederates  ;  and,  last  not  least,  there  is  simple
"suggestion" — some  would  call  it  sheer  effrontery — supported  by
darkness  and  by  appropriate  "  patter."

I  quote  fii'st  Professor  Lodge's  account  of  Mrs.  Abbott's  exhibition  : —

On  The  Mechajjical  Performance  of  Mrs.  Abbott,  Recently
Advertised  as  "  The  Georgia  Magnet."

My  attention  has  been  called  to  an  article  by  Dr.  Henri  Goudard  in  the
Jan. -Feb.,  1895,  number  of  the  Annales  des  Scietices  Psycldrpies,  wherein  that
gentleman  relates  his  experience  with  Miss  or  Mrs.  Abbott  in  Paris,  finds
himself  unable  to  agree  with  the  short  summary  quoted  correctly  as  embody-
ing my  opinion  by  Professor  Richet,  and  asks  me  to  state  at  greater  length
why  I  recognise  nothing  abnormal  in  the  performance.

I  wUl  answer  his  courteously  worded  request  briefly,  but  I  hope  definitely.

The  extracts  given  by  Dr.  Goudard  from  the  "  Figaro  "  are  not  scientific
or  precise  in  their  terms.  I  pass  at  once  to  the  experience  of  Dr.  Goudard
himself,  as  described  by  him  in  the  paper  referred  to.

I. — A  man  holds  a  chair  firmly  against  his  chest  and  is  then  pushed  about
by  the  operator,  ivho  appears  to  exert  very  little  force  on  the  chair.

The  experiment  is  easily  repeated  by  anybody,  and  the  subject  of  it  is
usually  surprised  at  the  apparent  strength  of  the  person  operating.  The  right
hand  of  the  operator  need  exert  no  force  at  all,  and  it  is  to  this  hand  that
attention  is  directed  ;  force  is  exerted  by  the  left  hand  near  the  chest  of  the
patient,  and  in  an  unexpected  direction,  first  pushing  and  then  pulling,  or
vice  versa.  It  is  tlie  unexpected  and  sudden  variation  of  the  force  which
throws  the  patient  ofi"  his  balance,  especially  if  he  has  strongly  braced  him-
self to  meet  and  oppose  a  force  in  the  wrong  direction.

I  do  not  remember  having  seen  Experiment  II. ,  so  I  pass  on  to  the  next,
which  is  an  important  one.

III. — The  operator  stands  on  one  foot  holding  a  billiard-cue  while  a  tall
strong  man  is  then  asked  to  pus] i  her  backwards  by  steady  pressure  on  the  cue,
and  fails.

To  succeed  with  this  experiment  the  operator  must  be  short  and  strong  in
the  arms.  When  a  tall  person  is  pushing  against  a  short  person  he  is  push-
ing largely  downwards,  and  by  standing  on  a  heel  the  body  of  the  short
person  can  become  a  strut  almost  in  the  direction  of  the  force.  If  she  can
then  maintain  her  arms  rigid  there  is  no  chance  of  pushing  her  backwards.
Untimely  and  unexpected  pushes  are  not  permitted,  and  if  the  cue  is  lowered
so  that  the  pushing  becomes  more  horizontal,  she  abandons  it  for  a  time  and
rests  or  changes  the  person  ;  the  rules  of  the  game  have  to  be  adhered  to  if
the  experiment  is  to  succeed.  With  the  cue  held  well  up,  a  short  strong
woman  can  repeat  the  experiment,  as  I  have  verified.  When  four  or  five
men  push  on  the  same  cue  they  get  in  each  other's  way — the  cue  bends  so
that  the  end  men  refrain  from  exerting  much  force,  and  the  thing  degenerates
largely  into  a  farce.


220


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


With  one  or  two  men  the  experiment  is  certainly  surprising,  but  it  is
simply  and  purely  mechanical.  A  man  pushing  somewhat  downwards  can
exert  singularly  little  propulsive  force.  The  magnitude  of  it  depends  on  the
position  of  his  centre  of  gravity  and  the  amount  by  which  a  vertical  through
it  outlies  his  toes.  He  stands  on  one  leg  and  instinctively  throvi's  the  -weight
of  his  other  leg  forward  to  get  as  much  moment  as  he  can,  but  the  fact  that
the  j^osition  of  this  free  leg  makes  a  material  difference  shows  how  slight  is
the  force  really  exerted.  On  the  other  hand  a  person  standing  on  a  heel  and
pushing  upward  and  forwards  is  in  a  position  to  sustain  a  very  considerable
load.

The  conditions  are  entirely  reversed  when  the  force  exerted  is  a  pull
instead  of  a  push.  A  tall  heavy  man  has  then  a  great  advantage.  Tug  of
war  in  a  standing  position  depends  upon  weight  and  height ;  and  if  Mrs.
Abbott  had  been  able  to  engage  sviccessfuUy  in  a  tug  of  war  with  me,  it
would  have  been  a  direct  proof  of  something  abnormal.  I  spent  altogether
some  hours  fruitlessly  in  trying  to  persuade  her  and  her  exhibitors  to  permit
me  to  try  in  private  any  form  of  pnlUnrj  experiment.  But  tlie  most
frivolous  pretexts  were  brought  forward,  such  as  the  presence  of  a  carpet
on  the  floor,  etc.,  and  the  test  was  resolutely  declined.

IV. — Slie  holds  a  billiard  cue  in  a  slanting,  nearly  vertical  position,  aiid  asks
some  one  to  force  its  point  to  the  ground  by  sliding  it  along  her  open  palms.

This  experiment  can  be  repeated  by  any  one  with  strong  enough  arms.
It  was  not  so  invariably  successful  with  Mrs.  Abbott,  and  is  not  one  of  her
best  tricks.  If  the  operator  can  get  an  energetic  person  to  push  vigorously,
the  friction  of  the  open  palms  is  sufficient  to  prevent  the  cue  from  sliding,
(again  rather  surprising,  but  easily  verifiable),  but  if  a  languid  person,
without  pushing  against  tlie  operator,  simply  exerts  force  in  the  direction
of  the  cue's  length,  it  slides  down  with  perfect  ease.  A  practised  exhibitor
is,  however,  prepared  for  this,  and  is  able  to  evade  the  attempt,  or  to  dis-
count it  in  some  way.

I  remember  the  stethoscopic  feat  numbered  V.,  but  I  was  not  impressed
by  it.  Perhaps  I  too  ignorantly  accredit  the  human  body  with  the  power
of  purposely  generating  slight  sounds  when  they  are  listened  for
attentively.

VI. — She  presents  her  elbows  to  a  person  standing  behind  her,  and  requests
to  be  lifted  by  them. Sometimes  she  can  thus  be  lifted,  sometimes  she  cannot.

This  experiment  is  certainly  singular.  It  appears  that  this  mode  of
raising  a  person  is  not  far  from  the  margin  of  what  is  possible  without
overbalancing  oneself.  One  has  to  stand  rather  vertically,  and  one  has
very  little  moment  adapted  to  support  a  weight  placed  in  one's  hands  held
out  horizontally.  If  the  operator  holds  her  elbows  well  back  the  lifting
can  be  done,  but  if  she  draws  them  forward  even  slightly,  the  lifting  cannot
be  done.  I  conjecture  that  a  man  with  extra  long  feet,  and  stiffly  soled  flat
boots,  and  short  fore-arms,  would  have  an  advantage  in  this  mode  of
lifting,  and  might  be  able  to  succeed  in  lifting  the  person  in  spite  of  the
awkward  positi'm  of  her  elbows.  The  lifting  can  always  be  done  if  the
elbows  are  forcibly  drawn  back  first ;  but  this  brings  the  dress  and  body
into  contact,  and  that  is  not  considered  fair.


Resolute  Credulity.


221


It  was  not  pretended  that  there  was  any  real  increase  in  weight  such  as
a  balance  could  show,  and  in  fact  a  rough  balance  test,  improvised  by  Professor
Fitzgerald,  tended  to  disprove  any  such  increase.  It  is  therefore  quite
different  from  the  levitations  testified  to  by  Mr.  Crookes.  The  effect
only  pretends  to  be  subjective,  i.e.,  one  to  be  tested  by  a  human  being.
A  human  being  so  arranged  as  a  balance  is  a  deceptive  one,  and  his  margin
of  lifting  is  very  narrow,  owing  to  the  small  basis  afforded  by  his  feet.  A
lever  or  bracket  projecting  from  a  pillar  standing  in  a  pair  of  human  boots
would  have  very  little  lifting  power,  especially  if  the  weight  were  applied
somewhat  far  out  towards  the  free  end.

VII. — She  stands  loith  her  hands  lightly  against  a  ivall  and  then  asks  to  be
pushed  up  to  the  wall  by  pressure  on  her  back.

This  is  a  modification  of  No.  III.  The  pushing  force  of  a  man  on  a  short
person  is  less  than  he  expects,  and  the  purchase  given  her  by  pressui'e  on  the
wall  is  precisely  in  the  right  direction  and  is  sufficient  to  balance  all  the  force
necessary.  The  palms  of  her  hands  may  indeed  be  tested  and  found  not  to
touch  the  wall,  but  some  part  of  her  finger-tips  always  touches,  and  theso
finger-nails  will  be  seen  to  go  white,  indicating  pressure.  The  experiment
is  easy  enough  for  any  one  to  do.

I  did  not  see  experiment  VIII.,  but  conjecture  that  it  depends  on  the
known  fact  that  a  child  willing  to  be  lifted  and  holding  itself  properly  can
easily  be  raised,  whereas  a  child  unwilling  and  limp  is  comparatively  difficult
to  sustain.  The  reason,  doubtless,  depends  on  the  mode  of  holding  ;  a  mode
which  may  be  sufficient  in  the  one  case  can  be  made  quite  inadequate  in  the
other.

IX.  — The  apparent  difficulty  of  being  lifted  is  tra7ismitted  to  another
person.

When  I  saw  this  experiment  it  was  performed  thus  : —
A  loutish  boy  was  called  in,  and  his  hands  held  with  fore-arms  horizontally
by  Mrs.  Abbott.  Any  one  was  then  asked  to  raise  him  by  the  elbows,
standmg  behind  him  in  the  orthodox  way.  My  opinion  is,  that  when  she
wished  him  "  light  "  she  pushed  his  elbows  a  trifle  back,  and  when  she
wished  him  "heavy"  she  drew  them  a  little  forward.  That  so  small  a
motion  of  the  elbows  makes  all  the  difference  constitutes  the  beauty  of  the
trick.  Ill  one  case  the  weight  is  below,  in  the  other  it  is  above  the  load
possible  with  the  given  condition  of  leverage.  That  is  how  I  saw  the  perform-
ance, but  if  I  had  seen  it  as  Dr.  Goudard  apparently  has  seen  it,  tried  with  a
child  of  five  years  old,  I  should,  I  suppose,  have  been  much  more  impressed.
I  cannot,  of  course,  say  what  other  circumstances  might  have  modified
the  view  one  would  naturally  have  been  compelled  to  take  if  the  facts  were
precisely  as  now  described  by  him.

X.  — A  bUlia^-d  cue  s^andiw^  vertically  on  the  ground  is  to  be  pressed  down
by  the  hands  of  a  number  of  persons  placed  on  the  top  of  it,  while  a  man  who
has  clambered  itp  and  perched,  himself  there  is  seated  upon  these  hands  ;  the
operator  then  easily  raises  the  cue,  iirasping  it  anywhere  with  one  hand.

This  is  a  sort  of  psychological  experiment.  If  the  reader  pictures  him-
self as  one  of  those  with  hau  ls  on  top  of  and  pressing  down  the  cue,  he  will

T


222


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


realise  that  the  consequences  of  a  break  in  the  cue  appeal  forcibly  to  his
imagination,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  without  knowing  it  he  will  be
assisting  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  seated  person,  rather  than  doing  what
he  supposes  every  one  else  to  be  doing,  viz. ,  vigorously  pressing  down.  Under
these  conditions  it  is  perhaj^s  only  surprising  that  the  cue  does  not  rise  even
without  the  gentle  upward  force  exerted  by  the  operator.

XI.— Five  or  six  persons  are  sitting  and  sjyrawling  on  a  chair,  which  the
operator  then  momentarily  raises  or  jerks  for  an  instant  from  the  floor.

This  experiment  is  performed  with  a  special  chair  with  a  narrow  and
uncomfortable  seat.  The  man  to  be  seated  is  selected  of  a  suitable  height
for  his  feet  to  be  well  on  the  floor,  and,  by  the  time  the  other  men  have
sprawled  on  his  lap,  most  of  their  weight  is  really  sustained  by  his  legs  and
feet,  especially  if  the  operator  standing  behind  the  chair  begins  to  tilt  it  up.
The  experiment  is  rather  a  farcical  one,  as  the  raising  is  only  momentary  and
it  results  in  a  sprawl  on  the  floor  for  the  bodies  insecurely  propped,  rather
than  supported,  by  the  chair.

It  is,  I  know,  asserted  that  very  little  force  is  exerted  by  the  operator's
hands  ;  it  is  also  asserted  that  none  is  exerted  by  her  knees.  But  in  my
experience  the  tests  for  these  two  things  are  not  made  together,  and  the
tilting  or  jerking  up  can  be  done  either  way,  with  the  help  of  the  fore-arms.
With  a  suitable  chair  it  is  an  experiment  which  any  one  can  try,  and  he  may
be  surprised  to  find  how  readily  the  necessary  force  can  be  exerted.  If  Mrs.
Abbott  does  not  do  it  by  muscular  exertion,  wliy  does  she  stand  in  precisely
that  position  which  would  be  chosen  by  a  person  who  had  only  muscular
exertion  to  rely  on  1

I  have  now  dealt,  I  hope  sufficiently,  with  all  the  more  important
statements  of  Dr.  Goudard.  I  only  answer  for  what  I  myself  saw,  but  I
was  not  satisfied  by  one  visit,  nor  did  I  come  to  a  final  conclusion  till  I  had
tried  exjjeriments  with  other  j^ersons  of  suitable  size.  It  will  be  observed
that  I  conclude  that  the  feats  are  ingeniously  chosen  to  suit  a  short  jjerson,
and  that  Mrs.  AVjbott,  tliough  small  and  in  appearance  frail,  is  probably
very  muscular,  at  any  rate  in  the  arms.  Perhaps  Dr.  Goudard  noticed  that
her  fore-arms  exhibited  more  muscle  than  is  common  in  her  sex.

I  did  not  offer  any  public  statement'  at  the  time  she  was  exhibiting  in
England,  beyond  the  bare  fact  that  in  my  opinion  there  was  nothing  occult  in
the  matter,  because  I  had  no  wish  to  injure  the  exhibition,  which  was  a
fairly  good  and  entertaining  exhibition  of  well  chosen  feats  of  strength  and
skill.  Nothing  shown  to  me  demanded  the  exercise  of  actual  "fraud";  nor
was  there  any  prominent  subterfuge  or  pretence,  beyond  the  name
"Magnet,"  which  to  the  populace  may  signify  anything  or  nothing.  At  any
rate,  the  public  who  paid  to  see  Mrs.  Abbott's  performance  obtained  full
value  for  their  money,  and  investigators  were  treated  with  a  very  fair  amount
of  frankness  even  by  her  exhibitors  ;  and  that  she  should  decline  to  attempt
feats  impossible  to  do  Ijy  normal  physics  was  after  all  perfectly  legitimate  as
a  matter  of  business,  which  indeed  the  whole  show  was.

Oliver  J.  Lodge.

March,  1895.

1  The  account  given  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  168,  was  not  a  publication.


Resolute  Credulity.


223


I  have  also  three  other  first-hand,  independent,  and  concordant
accounts  of  Mrs.  Abbott's  muscular  and  other  tricks — (1)  from  James
H.  Hyslop,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Ethics  in  Columbia  College,  New
York  City  ;  (2)  from  the  Rev.  Solon  Laner,  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson
(account  first  printed  in  Religio- Philosophical  Journal) ;  (3)  from  Dr.
Hodgson  himself.

Professor  Hyslop's  long  and  careful  analysis  is  based  upon  notes
taken  the  day  after  the  performance.  He  succeeded  in  himself
repeating  almost  all  Mrs.  Abbott's  tricks,  his  agreement  with  Dr.
Lodge  as  to  their  modus  operandi  being  very  close.  He  takes,  how-
ever, a  more  serious  view  of  the  amount  of  actual  and  conscious
falsehood  in  Mrs.  Abbott's  statements,  and  demurs,  for  instance,  to
accepting  the  same  child  as  this  lady's  daughter  one  day  and  as  a
disinterested  stranger  from  among  the  audience  the  next.

Mr.  Laner  describes  certain  phenomena  which  Mrs.  Abbott  seems
to  have  abstained  from  attempting  in  Professor  Lodge's  presence  : —

One  of  her  cleverest  performances  was  the  weighing  trick,  which
deceived  the  audience  and  all  the  committee,  including  the  man  who  did  the
weighing  (a  prestidigitator),  I  alone  claiming  it  to  be  a  trick,  and  showing
the  method  of  its  performance  after  the  exhibition  was  over.  The  trick  was
as  follows  : — First,  Mrs.  Abbott  called  for  me  to  stand  on  the  platform  of  an
ordinary  pair  of  scales  to  be  weighed.  She  instructed  me  to  stand  on  the
iron  portion  of  the  platform,  which  was  about  five  inches  wide,  running
around  the  platform.  I  stood  with  one  foot  on  each  side  of  the  platform,
my  weiglit  being  nearly  in  tlie  middle  of  the  platform,  measuring  length-
wise. In  this  position  the  weight  registered  was  my  normal  weight,  about
140  pounds.  Then  I  stepped  off  the  scales,  and  Mrs.  Abbott  stepped  on.
But  she  took  a  position  differing  from  mine,  as  I  observed.  Her  feet  were
placed  on  the  extreme  rear  of  the  platform,  across  the  rear  corners,  her  heels
being  just  on  the  rim  of  the  platfoi-m.  I  asked  her  to  place  one  foot  forward,
but  she  objected  that  she  must  stand  on  the  iron  portion.  I  remarked  that
the  iron  extended  all  the  way  around  the  scales,  but  she  still  persisted  in  her
Ijosition.  Standing  thus,  she  easily  caused  her  weiglit  to  fluctuate,  by
tijjping  up  the  front  of  the  platform  slightly,  and  then  lowering  it  again,
and  the  man  who  was  weighing  her  was  not  able  to  move  the  weight  fast
enough  to  record  the  fluctuations.

It  should  be  said  before  describing  the  second  stage  of  this  performance
that  all  members  of  the  committee,  save  myself,  were  by  her  request  seated
at  the  rear  of  the  stage,  where  they  could  not  observe  closely  her  position
on  the  scales.  I  had  been  standing  near  her,  and  when  she  began  this
performance,  sat  down  opposite  the  scales,  where  I  had  a  favourable  view.
The  man  at  the  scales  was  too  busy  with  the  weights  to  observe  carefully.
The  audience  could  not  see  the  details  on  account  of  distance.

The  second  stage  of  the  weighing  trick  was  as  follows  : — A  small  box  was
handed  round  among  the  committee,  and  pronounced  unsuspicious.  It  was
then  placed  behind  the  scales,  and  I  noticed  that  it  was  just  the  height  of
the  platform,  which  it  touched  at  the  rear  end. This  box  was  ostensibly  for


224


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


a  man  to  stand  upon,  in  order  that  he  might  bear  down  on  Mrs.  Abbott's
shoulders,  as  she  stood  upon  the  platform  of  the  scales.  When  this  man
bore  down  upon  her  shoulders  the  scales  registered  many  pounds  less  than
her  normal  weight,  (which  she  stated  to  be  98  pounds,  but  which,  I  should
say,  was  nearly  120  pounds).  The  explanation  of  this  trick  was  very  easy  to
me  when  I  saw  that  her  feet  were  so  placed  that  her  heels  rested  on  the  box
behind  her,  which  thus  relieved  the  scales  of  much  of  the  weight  of  herself
and  of  the  man  who  was  vigorously  pushing  down  on  her  shoulders.

The  third  stage  was  as  follows  : — A  board  smaller  than  the  top  of  the
platform  of  the  scales  was  placed  on  the  platform,  ostensibly  for  insulating
persons.  Then  Mrs.  Abbott  invited  the  man  who  had  previously  pushed
down  on  her  shoulders  to  now  partially  lift  her  from  the  scales,  and  while
he  was  doing  this  her  weight  was  reported  to  be  several  pounds  more  than
normal.  This  trick  was  performed  by  pushing  the  board  with  her  foot  so
that  it  rested  partly  on  the  box,  before  the  man  who  was  to  lift  her  had
stepped  upon  the  box.  In  the  excitement  he  did  not  notice  the  board,  and
thus  he  and  Mrs.  Abbott  were  both  standing  on  this  board,  one  end  of
which  rested  upon  the  scales,  throwing  the  greater  part  of  their  combined
weight  upon  the  platform.  Although  the  man  lifted  her  from  the  platform,
he  still  stood  on  the  board,  and  thus  did  not  lift  her  weight  from  the  scales,
but  rather  added  part  of  his  own  weight.  The  scales  registered  150  pounds,
if  I  remember  rightly.  This  was  the  last  performance  on  the  programme,
and  without  waiting  for  any  report  from  the  committee,  the  audience  rushed
out,  exclaiming  upon  the  marvellous  things  they  had  witnessed.  The  other
members  of  the  committee  crowded  around  Mrs.  Abbott  expressing  their
profound  astonishment  at  her  gifts.  My  own  congratulations  were  upon  the
clever  exhibition  she  had  given,  and  were  received  with  suspicion.  The
man  who  did  the  weighing  was,  he  said,  a  prestidigitator,  but  failed  to
learn  the  modus  operandi  of  any  of  her  tricks,  but  confessed  himself  satisfied
Avhen  I  did  the  scales  trick,  and  allowed  him  to  do  the  weighing  as  before.

Other  tricks  would  be  difficult  to  describe  in  detail,  but  may  be  briefly
mentioned.  She  produced  a  snapping  noise  on  a  tumbler,  by  holding  it
with  a  handkerchief,  slipping  her  thumb  or  finger  along  on  the  glass,
produciiig  thus  a  noise  like  the  crackling  of  electricity.  I  did  the  same
afterward.  A  physician  was  called  on  the  stage  to  take  her  temperature
with  a  clinical  thermometer.  He  reported  it  to  be  three  degrees  below  the
normal  point,  indicating  an  abnormal  condition,  which  in  a  patient  would
be  considered  very  dangerous.  I  did  the  same  thing  the  next  day  with  a
physician's  thermometer,  by  slyly  inhaling  through  the  lips,  and  exhaling
through  the  nostrils,  thus  keeping  a  current  of  cold  air  playing  on  the  tube
of  the  thermometer,  and  putting  the  temperature  at  five  degrees  below  the
normal,  yet  I  still  live.

Dr.  Hodgson  himself  saw  Mrs.  Abbott  in  Boston  in  1889,  when
she  must,  he  thinks,  have  been  less  expert  than  now.  He  pushed  her
against  the  wall,  and  forced  the  vertical  cue  to  the  ground,  then
refused  to  endeavour  to  lift  her  unless  allowed  to  stand  on  a  chair.
This  was  imprudently  permitted,  and  he  then  lifted  her  from  the
ground  with  ease. At  that  date  the  exhibition,  he  thinks,  was  more


Resolute  Credulity.


225


definitely  spiritualistic,  and  therefore^  under  the  circumstances,  more
definitely  fraudulent,  than  it  has  been  since  she  achieved  a  wider
repute.

The  next  case  which  I  shall  quote  depends  on  the  use  of  confederates.
The  stern  moralist  might  object  to  some  of  the  private  deceptions
which  seem  to  have  been  necessary  to  secure  the  public  effect.

Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  from  whom  the  account  comes,  is  already  known
to  readers  of  these  Proceedings  as  an  acute  observer.

Brighton,  December,  1894.

[After  describing  the  great  recent  success  at  Brighton  of  Mrs.  Baldwin's
"  Somnomancy,"  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  continues  ; — ]

The  performance  generally  began  with  a  cabinet  seance,  in  which  some-
times the  "  Professor  "  and  sometimes  his  wife  acted  as  "medium."  This
kind  of  exhibition  is  now  too  common  to  ai'ouse  much  interest,  so,  although
this  part  of  the  show  was  patiently  endured,  it  excited  no  enthusiasm.  At
its  termination  Professor  Baldwin  sent  several  assistants  amongst  the
audience  to  distribute  slips  of  paper  and  pencils,  also  small  squares  of  mill-
board to  serve  as  desks.  Some  forty  or  fifty  of  these  conveniences  would  be
distributed  in  different  parts  of  the  hall,  the  recipients  being  told  that  they
might  write  any  question  upon  the  paper,  fold  it  up  and  stow  it  in  their
pockets — the  pencils  and  mill-boards  being  then  collected  by  the  assistants
and  deposited  on  the  .stage  in  full  view  of  the  audience.  The  mill-boards
were  ostensibly  offered  to  prevent  the  inconvenience  of  writing  upon  the
knee;  the  "Professor"  frankly  referred  to  the  theory  of  preparation  and
ridiculed  it,  stating  that  if  any  preferred  to  discard  the  mill-board  they  were
at  liberty  to  do  so — indeed  they  might  use  their  own  paper  and  pencils,  and
might  in  fact  write  their  questions  at  home  and  come  to  the  hall  with  them
safely  concealed  in  their  pockets.  The  great  thing  was  to  keep  the  question
vividly  in  mind,  and  it  had  been  found  by  experience  that  to  write  it  down
there  and  then  was  a  help  towards  this  end.  He  further  said  that  he  could
only  control  Mrs.  Baldwin's  "  visions  "  to  a  very  limited  extent  himself  ;  and
only  an  uncertain  proportion  of  those  who  had  written  questions  would  be
likely  to  receive  answers.

After  this  business  some  serpentine  dancing,  some  character  songs,  and  a
nigger  were  inflicted  upon  the  audience,  and  then  Mrs.  Baldwin  was  led  on
with  her  eyes  bandaged  and  seated  in  the  centre  of  the  stage.

Her  method  of  procedure  now  was  somewhat  as  follows: — "  There  is  a
Kate  Jones  somewhere — in  the  gallery,  I  think — somewhere  on  the  left —
she  wants  to  know  what  became  of  the  stone  from  her  fancy  ring — she  won't
get  it  back — it  fell  in  the  cinders  when  she  was  over  the  grate — I  can't
trace  it  further  to-night."  As  soon  as  the  name  of  Kate  Jones  was  announced
that  personage  was  instructed  to  hold  up  her  paper,  an  assistant  would  go
and  take  it  from  her,  bring  it  to  the  Professor  who  had  taken  his  stand  at
the  foot  of  the  steps  leading  up  to  the  stage,  and  he  would  unfold  it  and
read  out  the  question  immediately  Mrs.  Baldwin's  answer  was  given.  The
question  in  this  instance  was  probably,  ' '  Where  shall  I  find  the  stone  miss-
ing from  my  ring  ?  Kate  -Jones."  The  questions  were  all  of  this  type  more  or


226


Frederic  W .  H  Myers.


less,  and  Mrs.  Baldwin's  answers  were  generally  a  mixture  of  skilful  general-
ities and  bold  dramatic  detail,  but  never  contained  matter  which  could  be
either  denied  or  confirmed  on  the  spot.  The  real  cleverness  of  the  business
however  lay  in  the  extra  ''visions,''  so  to  speak,  which  often  clustered  round
the  bare  question.  For  instance,  Mrs.  Baldwin  would  say,  "There's  a  lady
sitting  here — somewhere  just  beneath  me — whose  mind  is  fixed  upon  some-
thing like — like — oh  !  a  cat.  Why,  yes— that  cat's  been  lost — it's  lost  now,
too  !  "  The  assistant  meanwhile  apj^roached  the  lady  (who  was  beamingly
holding  her  paper  up),  spoke  a  few  words  to  her,  took  her  folded  paper,
carried  it  to  the  Professor,  who  opened  and  read  it,  saying,  "  Yes,  Mrs.  Bald-
win is  certainly  on  the  right  track — now  we'll  just  see  if  we  can't  catch
this  cat."  Then  turning  to  Mrs.  Baldwin,  "How  long  has  it  been  lost?
Can  you  tell  us  ?  "  Mrs.  Baldwin  would  make  an  effort  and  finally  say,  "It
has  been  away  from  home  some  years — one — two  —  why,  it  must  be  nearly  four
years."  "Is  that  so,  madam?"  the  Professor  would  enquire.  "Quite
true,"  from  the  delighted  lady.  Then  the  Professor  would  read  aloud  from
her  paper,  "  What  became  of  my  favourite  Persian,  cat?  "  and  he  would  draw
attention  to  the  fact  that  no  hint  was  given  in  it  as  to  the  date  of  the
animal's  disappearance.  He  would  then  proceed,  "  Mrs.  Baldwin  seems  to
be  right  on  this  cat's  trail — we'll  chase  it  home  any  way."  Then,  turning  to
her,  "Can  you  tell  us  what  that  pussy's  name  was  now?"  Here  he  would
hasten  on  the  stage,  go  behind  her  and  make  some  violent  passes  towards  the
back  of  her  head,  the  pianist  meanwhile  striking  a  loud  and  sustained
chord.  Mrs.  Baldwin  would  start,  stj-ain,  and  declare  with  a  gasping  effort
that  the  cat's  name  was  "Dick."  The  lady  having  been  called  upon  to
confirm  this,  Mrs.  Baldwin  would  add  some  details  to  the  effect  that  two
men  (described)  had  been  instrumental  in  getting  the  cat  away,  they  sold  it  for
a  good  bit — it  seemed  next  in  a  dealer's  shop — and  seemed  now  to  be  in  a
good  home — in  the  country — seemed  well  cared  for.  This  case  was  one
which  actually  came  under  my  own  notice.  I  watched  every  phase  of  it,
and  it  affords  a  type  of  and  a  key  to  the  whole  performance.  The  date  of
the  cat's  disappearance  and  its  name  were  both  communicated  to  the  assis-
tant in  answer  to  his  enquiries  when  he  collected  the  lady's  paper,  and  he  in
turn  communicated  them  to  Baldwin  in  a  passing  whisper,  whereupon  Bald-
win arounted  the  stage  and  whisjjered  the  word  "Dick"  to  Mrs.  Baldwin
under  cover  of  the  piano,  but  still  quite  loud  enough  for  my  companions
and  me  to  hear.  Sometimes  the  Professor  would  communicate  with  Mrs.  B.
by  means  of  a  code,  but  I  never  saw  this  used  except  when  dates  were  to  be
communicated,  when  it  seemed  to  be  invariably  used.

I  saw  the  exhibition  three  times  from  a  position  in  the  stalls  close  to
Baldwin.  Again  and  again  I  saw  assistants  bring  him  the  folded  papers  and
at  the  same  time  rapidly  mutter  some  information  extracted  from  the
enquirer  ;  and  I  got  to  know  two  or  three  of  the  words  used  in  the  number
code  between  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Baldwin.

In  the  case  of  some  questions  such  as,  "  When  shall  I  be  married  ?  "  "Shall
I  pass  my  examination  ?"  and  so  on,  the  answer  was  easy  enough  to  frame
without  the  intermediate  assistance  of  the  "Professor."  Mrs.  Baldwin's
replies  often  admitted  of  no  proof — nor  could  they  be  disproved  ;  but  they
excited  wonder  all  the  same,  for  the  simple  reason  that  an  appropriate


Resolute  Credulity.


227


answer  to  an  unseen  question  was  a  marvel  in  itself.  The  ground-work  of
the  whole  thing  was  the  well-known  pad  trick.

Amongst  the  numerous  mill-boards  distributed  to  the  audience  were  a
good  many  innocent-looking  thin  pads,  and  these  probably  contained  a
sheet  of  carbon  paper  concealed,  so  that  anything  written  would  leave  an
impression  beneath.  These  pads  were  distributed  judiciously  by  the  assis-
tants, who  stood  by  ready  to  take  them  again  at  once,  after  use.  I  never
received  one  of  these,  nor  did  any  of  my  friends.  I  never  received  answers  to
any  of  my  questions  written  upon  the  plain  mill-boards,  nor  did  any  of  my
friends.  On  the  other  hand,  when  one  of  the  audience  within  my  range  of
observation  received  something  to  write  upon  which  was  obviously  not  a  mill-
board like  mine,  that  person  received  an  answer  to  his  question.  The  assis-
tants no  doubt  kept  these  prepared  pads  separate  from  the  others,  and  when
the  mill-boards  were  subsequently  placed  by  the  footlights  for  everybody
to  see,  the  special  ones  would  find  their  way  behind  the  scenes,  so  that  Mrs.
Baldwin  might  inspect  them  and  commit  to  memory  suitable  answers.

I  know  a  conjurer  who  is  doing  a  "  Somnomancy  "  entertainment  (in
imitation  of  the  Baldwins)  with  great  success  by  means  of  this  pad  trick  ;
but  the  thing  which  makes  the  Baldwin  exhibition  so  specially  remarkable
is  the  skilful  way  in  which  they  generally  manage  to  give  more  information
than  the  written  question  conveys,  and  this,  as  I  have  explained,  is  managed
by  boldly  pumping  the  writer  on  the  quiet,  and  then  retailing  for  the  edifica-
tion and  mystification  of  the  entire  audience  the  information  thus  gained.

Not  the  least  remarkable  feature  about  the  business  is  the  fact  that  in
nearly  every  case  of  such  pumping,  the  person  pumped  is  as  much  surprised
as  the  rest  of  the  audience  when  Mrs.  Baldwin  states  the  facts.  This  is,
no  doubt,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  assistant  is  not  looked  upon  as  part  of
the  trick.  It  did  not  seem  to  occur  to  people  that  if  they  told  the
assistant,  who  politely  came  to  receive  their  folded  paper,  that  the  lost  watch
was  marked  with  the  initials  "J.W. "  he  could  tell  the  "Professor,"  and
the  "Professor"  could  tell  Mrs.  Baldwin.  A  friend  of  mine,  a  reporter,
who  got  hold  of  several  of  the  people  who  had  received  most  astonishing
answers,  was  much  struck  at  finding  that  they  had  not  only  given  to  the
assistant  all  the  information  additional  to  that  contained  in  the  written
question,  but  that  until  closely  questioned  they  had  quite  forgotten  having
done  so,  through  attaching  no  importance  to  it  at  the  time.

It  was  often  asserted  in  controversy  that  Mrs.  Baldwin  frequently
answered  questions  which  had  been  privately  written  at  home  and  which
were  never  produced  from  the  writer's  pocket  until  the  answer  was
announced  at  the  public  entertainment.  Now  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Baldwin  made  a
large  circle  of  acquaintances  in  the  town,  and  in  fact  held  little  impromptu
receptions  daily.  I  think  that  some  of  these  "  questions  written  at  home  "  were
probably  the  outcome  of  these  receptions,  where  preliminary  confidences,
promptings,  and  pumpings  doubtless  occurred.  Only  on  three  occasions  did
I  see  answers  given  to  questions  which  had  been  written  on  private  paper
before  the  entertainment.  One  was  in  the  case  of  a  lady,  who  had  written
her  question  on  her  own  note-paper  at  home,  and  she  received  an  answer
— appropriate  enough,  but  not  open  to  verification  for  some  years  to  come.
This  lady  had  certainly  attended  Mrs.  Baldwin's  tea-parties,  and  like  her


228


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


husband  (a  press  man),  was  one  of  her  warmest  admirers.  It  is  quite  pro-
bable that  Mrs.  Baldwin  knew  enough  of  this  lady's  interests  to  guess
at  the  nature  of  the  question  ;  in  fact,  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  the
question  had  been  privately  propounded,  and  that  Mrs.  Baldwin  had  said  :
' '  You  had  better  write  it  in  the  usual  way,  as  I  can  answer  better  when  in
the  trance  this  evening."  The  second  case  was  that  of  a  boy  who  wanted
to  know  whether  he  would  become  a  chemist,  his  question  being  written
on  an  old  telegraph  form.  This  may  have  been  introduced  by  the  mother
in  Mrs.  Baldwin's  presence  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  last  case  ;  or
the  boy  may  have  taken  one  of  the  assistants  into  his  confidence — for  there
were  hundreds  of  people  who  took  Mrs.  Baldwin  quite  seriously  and  made
every  effort  to  get  her  advice  upon  subjects  which  they  had  close  at  heart.
The  third  case  was  that  of  a  well-known  Brighton  clubman,  who,  sitting  in
the  front  row  obtained  an  answer  to  a  question  which  he  had  pencilled
on  his  cuff.  There  could  certainly  be  no  confederacy  here,  but  I  do  not
think  it  was  by  any  means  impossible  for  Baldwin  himself  or  some  of
the  assistants  to  get  a  sight  of  this  question  during  the  excitement  and
wild  confusion  which  always  prevailed  throughout  this  portion  of  the  enter-
tainment. He  was  probably  seen  writing  it.  There  were  always  plenty  of
people  at  each  entertainment  carrying  questions  which  had  been  previously
written,  who  received  no  replies  ;  I  know,  myself,  of  a  good  many  such
cases  amongst  my  own  friends.

The  whole  business  was  most  cleverly  and  successfully  carried  out
here ;  but  careful  observers  agreed  that  there  was  no  good  proof  of
occult  or  psychic  power,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  proofs  of  conjui-ing
and  trickery  were  abundant.  GAS

I  give  next  an  account  of  my  own  of  a  recent  sitting  with  Mr.  Husk.
The  record,  taken  from  notes  jotted  down  shortly  after  the  sitting,  has
been  approved  by  "Mrs.  C,"  who,  as  the  holder  of  Mr.  Husk's  other
hand,  was  alone  able  to  judge  of  its  accuracy.  It  was  also  shown  in
draft  to  two  leading  members  of  the  group,  who  found  nothing  to  con-
tradict ;  although  one  of  them,  I  fancy,  retains  some  kind  of  belief  in
some  of  Mr.  Husk's  phenomena.  I  should  add  that  all  the  members  of
this  group,  who  had  been  sitting  for  a  long  time  with  Mr.  Husk,  were
persons  of  position  and  intelligence ;  and  that  "  Mr.  A."  particularly  is
an  acute  man  of  the  world,  and  is  himself  the  dread  of  impostors  in  a
quite  diflferent  line  of  research  which  he  has  made  especially  his  own.

I  was  recently  told  by  a  friend — whom  I  will  call  Mr.  A. — that  he  had
had  certain  experiences  with  Mr.  Husk, — notably  the  playing  of  fairy  bells
in  the  air, — which  he  was  at  a  loss  to  explain.  I  reminded  my  friend  of  the
exposure  narrated  in  Light  for  February  14th,  1891 ,  under  the  heading  ' '  A
triple  exposure  of  cheating  mediums,  Williams,  Husk,  Rita  ;  "  where  the
sudden  flash  of  an  electric  pin  disclosed  Husk  leaning  over  the  table  and
showing  his  own  face  as  that  of  a  spirit,  illuminated  by  a  card  covered  with
luminous  paint.  I  reminded  him  also  of  an  incident  recounted  in  S.P.R.
Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  460,  where  a  committee,  including  Mr.  Crookes,
examined  an  iron  ring  which  encircled  Husk's  arm,  and  was  believed  by  his


Resolute  Credulity.


229


admirers  to  be  too  small  to  have  been  placed  in  that  position  by  ordinary
means.  The  committee  found  that  it  was  just  not  too  small  ; — and  offered  to
take  it  off  again  by  ordinary  means  ; — guaranteeing  the  wearer  against  any
pain  in  the  process  by  a  few  whiffs  of  chloroform.  The  offer  was  declined,
but  the  ring  did  not  much  longer  figure  as  a  standing  miracle.

My  friend  replied  that  he  held  no  brief  for  Husk's  character,  and  that  a
medium  might  be  both  fraudulent  and  genuine  ;  and  since  I  agreed  to  this,
and  had  a  real  curiosity  as  to  the  powers  which  enabled  Husk  to  maintain  a
clientele  in  spite  of  the  "  record  "  above  referred  to,  I  consented  to  meet  him
at  the  lodgings  of  Mr.  B.  in  Eaton  Terrace,  S.W.,  only  stipulating  that
his  hands  were  to  be  held  by  myself  and  Mrs.  C,  a  lady  whose  powers  of
observation  I  had  reason  to  trust.  This  was  agreed  to,  and  a  group  of  seven
persons  awaited  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Husk  in  Mr.  B.'s  sitting-room.  We  were
to  sit  at  a  round  table,  and  Mr.  B.  pointed  out  that  if  one  sat  just  opposite
a  leg,  one  could  step  on  to  the  table  without  shaking  it.  From  any  other
point  one  would  tilt  up  the  table  in  a  dangerous  way.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Husk  arrived,  and  Mr.  Husk,  left  to  choose  his  seat,  sat
down  just  opposite  the  leg  of  the  table.  "  Fairy  bells  "  and  various  small
objects  were  then  placed  on  the  table,  which  they  nearly  covered,  so  that
they  lay  a  few  inches  from  each  sitter's  hands.  The  room  was  then  very
completely  darkened,  and  Husk  offered  his  little  fingers  to  Mrs.  C.  and
myself,  in  which  to  crook  our  own, — that  method  of  hand-holding  being
enjoined  as  least  irksome.  We  linked  hands  aU  round  in  the  same  fashion.
Of  course  the  only  security  which  we  thus  gained  was  that  Husk  would  not
actually  walk  away  from  us.  His  large  hands  were  practically  at  liberty  ;
and  as  he  moved  our  hands  freely  about,  as  though  with  convulsive  tremors,
our  hold  was  not  only  no  real  check,  but  might  even,  as  will  be  seen  later,
become  a  positive  advantage  to  him.  He  kept  his  arms  well  out  from  his
sides,  and  his  body  and  legs  at  such  a  distance  from  us  that  without
deliberate  effort,  of  a  kind  unlikely  to  be  made  by  his  ordinary  sitters,  no
contact  was  possible.

The  first  "phenomenon''  was  a  general  shaking  of  the  room,  which
ceased  and  began  again  at  request,  so  as  to  show  that  it  was  not  due  to  any
external  cause.  The  value  of  such  a  phenomenon  depends,  of  course,  on
the  ease  with  which  any  particular  room  can  be  shaken,  and  we  found  by
subsequent  experiment  that  it  is  perfectly  easy  to  shake  Mr.  B.'s  room
(which  is  in  a  very  iU-built  house),  by  vigorous  contractions  of  the  muscles
of  the  thighs  upon  the  chair.  Of  course,  one  can  hardly  keep  one's  hands
quite  still  meanwhile,  but  Husk's  hands  jerked  about  in  such  a  way  as  to
conceal  any  tremor  which  might  have  been  caused  by  muscular  pushes  on  the
seat  of  his  chair.

Spirit- voices  then  came; — that  is  to  say,  Husk  leant  first  in  one  direction
and  then  in  another,  and  uttered  quasi -pleasantries  for  which  I  am  glad  not
to  be  obliged  to  hold  any  disembodied  intelligence  responsible.  On  one
occasion,  for  instance,  I  leant  forward  rather  markedly  over  my  hands  on  tha
table,  and  Husk,  who  is  a  tall  man  and  can  move  noiselessly,  leant  over  and
behind  me,  and  made  some  remark  in  a  squeaky  voice  over  my  further
shoulder.  It  was  so  absolutely  obvious  how  this  was  done  that  when  "  Uncle,"
or  whatever  the  supposed  spirit's  name  was,  said,  (from  Husk's  normal


230


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


position,  which  he  briskly  regained,)  "  There  !  I  jumped  over  your  shoulder
that  time  !  "  it  was  hard  to  realise  that  a  claim  was  made  that  the  voice
had  been  separate  fi'om  the  medium's  body.  Some  of  the  party,  I  learnt,
had  taken  a  ventriloquist  to  decide  whether  these  voices  were  due  to
ventriloquilism  or  to  spirits.  He  pronounced  that  neither  hypothesis  was
required.  For  the  most  part  Husk  leant  well  back  behind  Mrs.  C.  to
utter  these  voices,  assuming,  (although,  as  it  happened,  erroneously,)  that
the  lady  was  the  less  formidable  of  his  two  neighbours.  He  gave  another
indication  of  this  presently  when  more  serious  business  began.  Husk  now
moved  his  hands  more  violently,  raised  ours  from  the  table,  and  swung  them
about  in  the  air.  Mrs.  C,  who  held  his  right  hand,  extended  her  fingers  to
discover  what  it  was  that  he  wished  to  touch.  She  found  her  hand  brought
into  contact  with  the  back  of  his  chair,  so  that  his  linked  hand  might  have
hitched  it  into  a  position  convenient  for  his  next  move.  I  managed  to  sidle  a
little  nearer  to  him  on  my  side,  and  distinctly  felt  the  movement  of  his  thigh
and  knee,  as  he  stepped  on  to  his  chair  and  then  on  to  the  table,  with  a  corres-
ponding strain  on  my  little  finger,  which  he  now  held  high  in  air,  and  used  to
steady  himself  in  stepping  upwards.  This  was  so  manifest  that  I  immediately
said  "Mr.  Husk  has  stepped  on  to  the  table,"  to  which  Mrs.  Husk  replied,
"  He  has  not  stei)]Ded  on  to  the  table  ;  " — being,  I  suppose,  aware  in  some
occult  manner  that  he  had  been  raised  in  some  occult  way.  I  then  felt  about
for  Husk's  chair,  but  that  also  had  been  lifted  on  to  the  table,  probably  by
his  placing  one  foot  through  its  back  and  hitching  it  up  after  him,  when  he
had  placed  one  foot  firmly  on  the  table.  We  tried  this  afterwards,  and  Mr.
B.  found  that  with  a  little  practice  it  was  not  difficult,  given  the  two  hands
on  each  side  by  which  to  steady  oneself  in  the  process.  The  table  was
low,  and  the  chairs  light.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  he  drew  up  the
chair  with  his  right  hand,  keeping  it  immediately  beneath  him,  and  away
from  Mrs.  C.^

After  a  minute  or  two  we  were  told  to  light  up,  and  saw  Husk,  still
holding  our  little  fingers,  sitting  on  the  back  of  his  chair,  with  his  feet  on
its  seat,  in  the  middle  of  the  table, — a  performance  which  was  rendered  quite
easy  by  the  continued  support  of  our  hands.

He  then  descended,  and  the  room  was  re-darkened.  An  attempt  was
made  by  the  spirits  to  get  Mrs.  Husk  to  sit  next  to  the  medium,  but  this  we
declined,  and  Mrs.  C.  and  I  changed  places,  (Mrs.  C.  now  taking  Husk's
left  hand  with  her  right),  so  as  to  use  fresh  little-fingers,  as  the  strain  which
Husk  had  imposed  on  those  members  had  made  them  almost  insensible  ; — a
result,  by  the  way,  which  may  have  its  value  at  times.  We  sat  for  a  few
minutes,  and  the  small  objects  on  the  table  in  front  of  Mr.  Husk  began  to
move  about.  But  almost  at  once  the  squeaky  voice  was  heard,  saying  to
Mrs.  C,  "You're  breaking  the  conditions  !"  "No,"  replied  Mrs.  C.  with
truth,  ' '  I  still  hold  my  neighbour's  finger,  as  I  was  told,  to  maintain  the
chain."  What  Mrs.  C.  had  in  fact  done  was  to  bring  her  neighbour's  hand
<ind  her  own  left  hand  well  on  to  the  table,  and  near  the  objects,  so  that
when  Husk  put  out  his  left-hand  fingers  to  move  the  objects,  he  came  in
contact  with Mrs. C.'s  left  hand  as  well. There  were  no  more  move-

1  For  a  somewhat  similar  feat  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Eghnton,  see  Proceedings,
Vol.  IX.,  p.  359.


Resolute  Credulity.


231


ments,  except  the  movement  of  thirty-five  shillings  into  Mr.  Husk's  pocket
before  he  and  his  wife  went  away.  I  cannot  but  think  that  there  is  still  a
very  fair  opening  for  beginners  in  this  trade.

The  playing  of  the  faii-y  bells  did  not  occur, — but  it  seems  only  to  occur
when  Mrs.  Husk,  or  some  similarly  devoted  person,  sits  next  to  Husk.  Two
hands  being  then  free,  Husk  can  easily  stand  on  his  chair  and  play  (say)
with  his  right  hand  the  instrument  held  up  by  Sirs.  Husk  with  her  left,
varying  this  by  himself  holding  up  the  instrument  and  knocking  it  against
the  ceiling  ;  a  phenomenon  observed,  as  I  understand,  only  in  low  rooms.  As
the  whereabouts  of  the  instrument  is  recognised  by  a  piece  of  luminous
cardboard  gummed  on  to  it,  it  would,  of  course,  be  easy  to  enlarge  its
apparent  range  of  flight  by  brandishing  a  similar  piece  of  luminous  card-
board at  the  end  of  a  \vire.  But  I  must  not  demoralise  Mr.  Husk  by
suggesting  tricks  of  this  kind.  His  actual  powers  are  amply  sufficient  for  all
that  his  sitters  call  upon  hmi  to  perform. — F.W.H.M.

Mrs.  Sidgwick,  to  whom  I  showed  this  account,  produced  for  me
another  record  (undated)  of  a  sitting  with  Husk,  by  the  late  Mr.  S.
J.  Davey  ;  interesting  to  me  as  showing  in  actual  operation  the  little
artifice  with  luminous  paper  and  musical  box  above  suggested.  Our
readers  will  remember  that  Mr.  Davey's  own  skill  in  reproducing  and
sui-passing  various  "  spiritualistic  phenomena  "  by  adroit  conjuring  led
many  spiritualists  to  believe  for  a  long  time,  in  spite  of  Mr.  Davey's
disclaimers,  that  he  was  a  powerful  medium  himself. See  Proceedings


A  few  months  ago  my  friend  Munro  and  myself  went  to  a  seance  given
by  Messrs.  Husk  and  Williams  at  15,  Southampton  Row,  for  the  benefit  of
;i  certain  Mr.  Eobson.

The  room  where  the  sitting  was  held  being  somewhat  small,  it  was
decided  the  chaii-s  should  be  placed  as  per  diagram  herewith.


S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII,  p.


253.


jSIantel-shelf


r


^  Williams


Window


(  (


Table


d


(O


o
o


Window


L.


^  A


Husk


Piano


Hands  were  supposed  to  be  held  all  round.


232


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


On  taking  our  seats  Munro  selected  that  marked  A,  whilst  I  sat  next  to
him  at  B.

The  lights  being  turned  out  the  spirits  rapped  out  that  they  objected
to  Munro  sitting  at  A,  consequently  he  had  to  move  over  to  C  and  I  slipped
into  his  former  seat  at  A.

Whilst  the  others  were  loudly  singing  "  Shall  we  gather  at  the  river,"  I
put  my  head  down  close  to  the  table,  and  in  doing  so  I  heard  Husk  say
something  in  an  undertone  across  the  table  to  Williams.

Immediately  after  this  the  raps  proceeded  from  the  neighbourhood  of
Williams  and  reflected  upon  my  adverse  magnetism,  and  as  the  gentleman
next  to  me  at  G  remarked  that  he  felt  very  sick,  I  thought  it  prudent  to
change  my  quarters  and  therefore  went  over  to  H.

I  then  found  I  had  made  a  good  exchange,  for  I  noticed  coming  through
the  door  at  L,  a  faint  streak  of  light,  and  this  I  should  never  have  seen  had
I  retained  my  seat  at  B.

The  usual  mountebank  tricks  were  then  played,  such  as  the  medium's
speaking  through  the  paper  trumpets,  etc.

Aided  by  the  streak  of  light  I  distinctly  observed  a  form,  which  I  have
little  doubt  was  Husk,  stalking  about  the  room.  Every  time  he  crossed  the
streak  he  was  plainly  visible,  and  every  now  and  then  he  patted  the  sitters'
heads  with  the  paper  tube  he  carried  in  his  hands.  (N.B. — There  was  no
suggestion  of  a  spirit  moving  about  the  room.)

Mr.  Burns  sat  at  F  and  it  seems  incredible  he  could  not  have  seen  this
as  well  as  myself,  for  the  figure  was  sometimes  only  a  foot  or  two  distant.

A  large  musical  box  commenced  to  play  and  was  supposed  to  float  over
the  heads  of  the  sitters.  I  discovered  that  the  floating  light  supposed  to  be
the  musical  box  was  simply  a  small  piece  of  luminous  substance  and  that  the
musical  box  was  on  the  table  most  of  the  time.  I  should  say  that  un-
doubtedly either  Mr.  Husk  or  Mr.  Williams  employed  the  well  known
fishing-rod  apparatus  to  float  the  luminous  substance  about  the  room.  I  saw
what  appeared  to  be  a  black  cloud  over  the  table  in  the  neigh boui-hood  of
the  musical  box,  and  it  is  possible  that  this  was  the  stuff  used  to  vary  the
sounds  by  muffling  the  box.  I  also  think  that  on  one  or  two  occasions  the
musical  box  was  really  lifted  off  the  table,  a  feat  easily  to  be  accomplished
by  any  one  with  the  free  use  of  their  two  hands.

Various  "phenomena  "  took  place,  but  none  worthy  of  record.  In  fact,
most  of  tlie  tricks  were  so  badly  worked  that  they  were  unworthy  of  the
name  of  conjuring.

S.  J.  Davey.

A  good  many  unpublished  M.S.S.  of  this  type  are  by  this  time  in
the  possession  of  the  S.P.R.;  and  there  are  (for  instance)  further
papers  with  regard  to  Messrs.  Husk  and  Rita,  which  can  be  produced
should  those  gentlemen  desire  it.

For  my  part,  although  I  had  set  aside  some  further  detections  to
quote,  I  am  now  weary  of  this  uncongenial  task.  And  I  trust  that  in
London  at  any  rate  there  is  not  now  nearly  so  much  of  this  kind  of
thing  going  on  as  there  was  when  the  efforts  of  theS.P.R.  began.  Most
of  the  Hai'pies  have  fled  from  Phineus'  banquet-hall  ; have  estab-


Resolute  Credidity.


233


lished  elsewhere  their  dark  rooms  and  their  seance- tables — mensasque
metu  liquere  priores.

One  final  word, — addressed  both  to  those  who  look  askance  on  our
labours,  and  to  those  who  fain  would  assist  them.  The  case  of  our
psychological  work,  as  compared  with  psychological  work  I'ecognised  as
orthodox,  stands,  if  I  mistake  not,  somewhat  thus.  Psychology  is  at  last
becoming  an  experimental  science  ; — is  even  aspiring  to  become  the
<;hief  of  sciences.  At  present,  however,  two  groups  work,  with  little
connection,  at  the  two  ends  of  Experimental  Psychology.  First  come
the  many  new  Professors  and  Lecturers  in  Germany,  France,  America,
and  elsewhere  who  are  making  accurate  experiments  on  everything  in
man  which  they  can  manage  to  get  at  ; — the  nervous  system  in  general,
vision,  audition,  orientation,  tactile  sensibility,  reaction-times,  fatigue,
-attention,  memory,  mental  imagery, — with  a  host  of  cognate  inquiries.
Much  of  this  is  delicate  quantitative  work,  and  is  performed  with
instruments  of  precision.  The  drawback  is  that  such  methods  and  such
.apparatus  are  better  adapted  to  give  accuracy  to  facts  already  roughly
known  than  to  carry  the  inquirer  much  farther  into  the  depths  of  our
being.  It  is  work  preparatory  to  discovery,  rather  than  discovery
itself.

At  the  other  end  of  the  range  a  group  still  small,  although  it
spreads  yearly  somewhat  wider  in  each  civilised  land,  is  attacking
psychological  problems  of  the  highest  importance,  but  which  admit  as
jet  of  only  approximate  and  tentative  methods  of  inquiry.  This  is
woi^k  of  discovery  indeed  ;  but  it  is  rough  pioneer's  work — preparatory
also  in  its  own  way  to  the  ultimate  science  to  which  we  all  aspire.  And
for  a  new  and  complex  task  like  this  you  must  needs  prepare  in  both
these  ways.  If  men  want  to  make  a  map  of  India  they  may  begin  by
accurate  measurements  of  a  small  tract  of  populous  plain  ; — but  at  the
same  time  by  attempting  a  first  and  half-conjectural  survey  of  the  un-
sealed Himalayas.  If  you  choose  the  former  task  as  your  own  you  can
progress  without  mistakes  ;  if  the  second,  you  needs  must  make  many
mistakes,  since  no  man  who  dares  not  be  often  baffled  can  reach  the
secret  of  the  snows.

It  is  our  duty  then  to  remember  that  we  are  no  isolated  hunters,
Taut  the  scouts  and  avant-couriers  of  the  scientific  host.  Our  work,  to
be  of  permanent  value,  must  lie  in  the  preparation  of  data  for
organised  science.  However  bizarre  our  facts  may  be,  we  must  treat
them  with  as  distinct  a  sense  of  responsibility  to  the  ultimate  judgment
of  the  learned  world  as  though  they  were  merely  fresh  facts  of  an  old
type  ;  as  though,  for  instance,  we  were  computing  from  scanty  observa-
tions the  path  of  a  new  comet.

I  disclaim  altogether  that  spirit  of  exclusiveness  which  has  some-
times— almost  grotesquely  as  it  seems  to  me — been  alleged  against  the


234


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


group  with  which  I  work.  I  believe  that  in  no  way  has  our  standard
been  held  too  high ;  and  though  we  may  thus  have  missed  many
adherents,  I  believe  that  we  have  not  lost  one  collaborator  whose  work
would  have  been  of  serious  value.  We  need,  of  course,  informants  and
helpers  in  every  country  and  in  every  position  in  life.  "We  welcome
and  respect  every  informant,  be  he  Spiritualist  or  Agnostic,  or  an  un-
lettered rustic  or  a  child  of  ten,  who  comes  to  us  in  that  straightforward
temper  which  is  as  natural  to  child  as  to  savant,  because  it  is  the  temper
not  of  Science  only,  but  of  Conscience  herself.  On  the  other  hand  the
hinderers  of  our  cause — the  "  back-friends,"  as  the  old  English  term
would  exactly  name  them — are  merely  such  men  as  sciences  of  older
status  than  ours  have  long  been  able  to  rule  out  of  court.  Our  foes
are  the  crank  and  the  charlatan  ;  the  intellectual  parasite  who  exists
at  second-hand  ;  the  fanatic  who  ignores  damning  evidence  and  takes
fraud  for  marvel ;  the  self-seeker  who  would  reserve  from  the  common
fund  of  truth  a  peculiu^n  or  perquisite  of  his  own.

But  I  would  not  speak  as  though  men  like  these  were  growing  in
number.  On  the  contrary,  it  says  much  that  we  should  even  have
begun  to  dream  of  expelling  them  from  a  region  so  long  the  chosen
sanctuary  of  outlaws  from  the  scientific  camp.  And  the  dominant
feeling,  I  venture  to  say,  of  all  those  who  have  taken  an  active  part  in
this  movement  is  one  of  surprise  and  gratitude  at  the  amount  of
generous  and  competent  help  which  we  have  received  from  men  and
women  previously  unknown  to  us  ; — at  the  rapid  extension  of  those
habits  of  thought  and  action  which  our  reseai'ch  requires.  For  my  own
part,  such  share  as  I  have  taken  in  the  work  would  have  been  manifestly
impossible  without  the  help  literally  of  hundreds  of  careful,  intelligent,
disinterested  correspondents.  Such  contributions,  indeed,  have  formed
so  integral  a  part  of  all  that  I  have  published  that  I  have  rarely  been
able  to  speak  of  the  contributors  as  I  would,  lest  I  should  seem  to
bespeak  favour  for  myself  also.  Personal  matters,  however,  are  of
little  moment  in  a  quest  like  ours.  Mes  enim  huniani  generis  agittir,
non  nostra  ;  and  it  is  not  for  the  sake  of  one  group,  or  of  one  age,  that
we  may  desire  that  the  helpers  of  our  work  shall  be  many,  and  the
hinderers  few.


A


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  235


IV.

TELEPATHIC  DREAMS  EXPERIMENTALLY  INDUCED.
By  Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.

[Dr.  Ermacora,  of  Padua,  is  already  known  to  readers  of  these
Proceedings  by  an  experiment  numbered  M.  41  and  printed  in  the
Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  68.  Since  the  publication  of  that  case  Dr.
Ermacora,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Finzi  of  Milan,  has  become  the
Editor  of  the  Rivista  di  Studi  Psichici. — Ed.]

INTRODUCTION.

During  part  of  the  months  of  September  and  October,  1892,  I  had
left  Padua  and  was  at  Milan,  in  order  to  be  present  at  some  experi-
ments which  were  being  made  there  with  the  aid  of  the  well-known
medium,  Eusapia  Paladino.  I  was  obliged  in  consequence  to  interrupt
the  psychical  experiments  which  I  had  for  some  time  been  making  in
Padua  with  Sig"*  Maria  Manzini,  who  possesses  automatic  powers  of
various  kinds,  both  motor  and  sensory,  with  occasional  indications  of
supernormal  faculty,  shown  especially  in  her  susceptibility  to  telepathy
and,  more  doubtfully,  in  her  apparent  power  of  foreseeing  the  future
and  of  producing  physical  phenomena.  Her  motor  automatism  takes
the  form  of  writing  in  the  waking  state  ;  and  the  form  of  speech
and  mimicry  with  changes  of  personality  in  special  conditions  of
somnambulism  ;  her  sensory  automatism  consists  in  auditory  hallucina-
tions of  articulate  and  occasionally  of  musical  sounds,  and  visual
hallucinations,  fully  developed  only  during  somnambulism.  All  these
phenomena,  whether  motor  or  sensory,  are  not  the  result  of  suggestion,
in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  word,  but  are  connected  with  the
assumption  of  the  existence  of  certain  mediumistic  personalities,  which
assert,  without  however  ha^-ing  been  able  as  yet  to  adduce  sufficiently
convincing  proofs  of  it,  that  they  are  the  disembodied  spirits  of  humart
beings.

Shortly  after  my  departure  for  Milan,  there  came  to  live  with
gig-na  Maria  her  little  cousin  Angelina  Cavazzoni,  of  Venice.  Angelina
was  born  on  July  16th,  1888.  Thus,  during  the  experiments  here
recounted,  and  in  which  this  child  played  so  important  a  part,  her  age
varied  from  4  years  and  3  months  to  4  years  and  10  months.

Although  the  experiments  which  I  shall  describe  have  not  yet
reached  the  point  I  could  have  wished  to  attain  before  publishing


236


Dr.  J.  B.  Ermacora.


them,  still  I  think  them  worthy  of  note,  both  because  I  have  not  yet
seen  a  systematic  series  of  researches  in  this  direction  published,  and
because  I  believe  that  some  of  the  results  already  obtained  are  of
sufficient  importance  to  arrest  the  attention  of  modern  psychical
researchers,  and  to  encourage  them  to  further  investigations  in  this
direction.

Origin  of  the  Experiments.

While  I  was  at  Milan,  I  received  from  Sig"^  Maria  a  letter  dated
September  23rd,  of  which  I  give  a  part.  I  ought  first,  however,  to
mention  that  the  name  Elvira  refers  to  a  mediumistic  personality
which  habitually  manifests  itself  through  the  automatism  of  Sig"'^  Maria.
It  has  the  characteristics  of  a  child,  and  professes  the  greatest  aflfection
for  Sig"^  Maria. Here  is  a  part  of  the  letter  : —

. Yesterday  Angelina  arrived  and  slept  with  me. Last  night  I

was  sleepless  and  crying  The  child  was,  I  am  sure,  wide  awake,

and  all  at  once  I  saw  her  put  out  her  hands  as  if  to  catch  something.  I  said  to
her,  "  Be  quiet  and  go  to  sleep."  Then  she  said,  "Do  you  not  see.  Aunt,"
(Angelina  calls  Sig"'i  Maria  aunt,  although  really  she  is  her  cousin,  but  not  of
the  same  generation)  " that  beautiful  child?"  I  looked  at  the  pictures  in
the  room,i  for  at  that  particular  moment  I  was  not  thinking  of  spirits.  And
she  added,  "  Are  you  deaf  ;  don't  you  hear  her  speaking?  And  she  says  to
me  that  you  should  not  weep,  but  that  you  should  sleep."  Then  I  bethought
myself  of  the  little  Elvira,  and  I  asked  Angelina,  "  How  is  she  dressed?"
She  replied,  ' '  She  has  a  beautiful  blue  pinafore,  Aunt  ;  make  one  like  it  for
me  to-morrow."  Then  nothing  more  passed.  But  this  morning,  the  first
thing  for  which  she  asked  me,  before  I  had  spoken  to  her,  was  the  pinafore
like  that  of  the  little  girl.  It  may  be  nothing,  but  to-day  I  shall  try  to  make
her  write  (automatically),^  and  shall  watch  whether  she  hears  herself
spoken  to.

This  incident  was  quite  sufficient  to  lead  one  to  suppose  a  probable
susceptibility  in  Angelina  to  telepathic  perception,  for  the  blue
garment  and  the  eagerness  to  comfort  Sig"^.  Maria  in  her  sad  moments
were  precisely  the  characteristics  of  the  mediumistic  personality  Elvira,
whom  Sig"'^  Maria  saw  in  dreams  and  in  somnambulism,  and  with
whom  she  communicated  in  automatic  writing.  Moreover,  Angelina,
who  had  only  arrived  that  day,  had  no  knowledge  of  the  experiments
of  Sig"''^  Maria,  nor  did  she  ever  hear  of  them  later  on.  Sig"^  Maria  is
not  in  the  habit  of  speaking  of  them  to  others,  and  has  never  men-
tioned them  even  to  her  mother,  her  sole  companion,  with  whom  she
lives  in  perfect  harmony.

1  Signorina  Maria  explained  to  me  afterwards,  that  at  first  she  thought  that
Angelina  alluded  to  one  of  the  pictures  of  women  in  the  room.  The  light  was
burning.

-  Angelina  showed  no  particular  aptitude  either  for  automatic  writing  or  for
hallucinatory  audition.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  237


The  following  extract  is  from  another  letter  of  Sig"^  Mai'ia's,  dated
September  26tli  : —

On  Saturday  night  (Sept.  24th)  I  dreamt  that  Elvira  brought  Adriano
to  me  as  usual.  Angelina  says  she  saw  her  in  the  night,  but  she  cannot
explain  herself  as  well  as  the  first  time  ;  she  says  that  she  also  sees  her
own  mother,  and  she  asks  incessantly  for  an  apron  like  that  of  the
child,  1  so  much  so  that  I  was  obliged  to  make  her  one  with  some  stuff  I
had;  but  she  does  not  care  for  it,  because,  she  says,  it  is  not  "  like  the
other."

It  will  be  understood  that  Adriano  is  a  personality  of  the  same  kind
as  Elvira.  He  showed  at  this  period  a  childish  character,  and  Elvira
calls  him  her  brother.

The  visual  hallucination  of  her  own  mother  was  not  new  to  Angelina,
for  a  similar  thing  had  happened  to  her  at  the  end  of  July  of  the  same
year,  1892,  when,  shortly  after  the  death  of  her  mother,  she  had  come
to  spend  some  days  at  Padua  with  Sig"^  Maria.  But  in  this  case  it  is
uncertain  whether  it  was  a  hallucination  or  simply  a  dream,  for
Angelina  only  spoke  of  it  in  the  morning.

In  a  letter  dated  September  28th,  Sig"^  Maria  wrote  to  me  as
follows  : —

The  little  Elvira  comes  seldom.  Angelina  said  yesterday  morning  that
she  had  seen  her  (in  a  dream),  and  she  drives  me  mad  because  she  wants  to
go  with  the  child  ;  she  says  she  cannot  go  because  she  has  not  got  a  pinafore
like  hers.

In  another  letter  dated  October  2nd,  Sig"^  Maria  tells  me  that  on
September  24th,  when  she  was  receiving  communications  from  Elvira
by  means  of  automatic  writing,  she  asked  her,  "  Was  it  really  you  who
showed  yourself  to  Angelina?"  To  which  Elvira  replied,  "Yes,  it  was
I,  because  I  like  the  child."

Although  frequently  communications  of  this  kind  are  rather  irrele-
vant and  characterised  by  the  incoherence  of  ordinary  dreams,  yet  in
this  instance,  the  personality  Elvira  having  already  shown  a  certain
coherence,  and,  moreover,  some  signs  of  supei'normal  activity,'-  I  felt
justified  in  hoping  that  on  my  return  to  Padua  I  should  perhaps  be
able  to  evoke,  with  the  co-operation  of  the  child  and  of  Elvira,  pheno-
mena of  the  nature  already  described,  but  more  distinct,  and  under
more  conclusive  conditions.

1  Angelina  never  knew  even  afterwards  that  this  child  seen  by  her  in  sleep,  or  in
hypnagogic  hallucinations,  was  already  known  to  us,  and  bore  the  name  of  Elvira,
and  she  always  alluded  to  her  as  the  "  6?«c  child.'"  This  proves  that  Angelina  had
not  been  in  the  least  degree  influenced  by  anything  she  had  heard.

^  I  speak  purposely  in  vague  terms,  and  shall  continue  to  do  so,  so  as  to  leave
unprejudiced  the  question, — in  my  opinion  yet  unsolved, — whether  Elvira  and  the  other
analogous  personalities  which  manifest  themselves  by  means  of  Signorina  Maria  are
creations  of  her  subliminal  consciousness,  or  possess  independent  individualities.

U


238


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


Part  I.  ,  -

Preliminary  Experiments.

On  October  18th,  1892,  I  returned  to  Padua,  and  on  the  same
evening  I  recommenced  experimentinc;  with  Sig™  Maria  with  auto-
matic writing.

The  personality  Elvira  manifested  itself  and  at  once  asked  after
Angelina,  and,  without  being  questioned,  told  us  that  with  her  help
and  that  of  Adriano  she  hoped  to  be  aljle  to  show  us  something  fine
soon.  She  said,  however,  that  we  must  not  ask  her  for  explanations
now,  because  "  Adriano,  who  will  be  the  principal  author  of  all,
does  not  wish  to  give  us  other  explanations,"  and  she  "  fears  to
spoil  everything  by  disobeying  him."  Afterwards,  however — so  far,
at  least,  as  I  could  judge — the  personality  Adriano  did  not  seem
to  be  concerned  in  any  interesting  fact  connected  with  the  little
Angelina.

But  before  proceeding  further,  I  wish  to  justify  what  might  be
condemned  by  some  as  an  error  in  the  system  of  exposition  which  I
have  adopted.

The  idea  still  exists  amongst  many  people  that  in  psychical  phe-
nomena there  are  only  two  things  worthy  of  note — (1)  the  definite  result
of  the  phenomenon  expressed  in  terms  which  do  not  involve  ideas  as  to
the  nature  of  the  process,  and  (2)  the  subject  considered  from  a  physio-
logical or  pathological  point  of  view.  This  mode  of  procedure
resembles  that  of  a  person  who,  wishing  to  study  a  clock,  considers
only  the  movement  of  the  hands  and  the  outside  case,  leaving  out  the
mechanism  on  which  that  movement  depends.  Now,  the  motor
mechanism  of  every  psychical  phenomenon  is  naturally  the  personality
which  produces  it,  and  therefore  this  should  be  studied  with  the
greatest  care, — as  well  as  the  subject, — not  only  in  the  case  (supposing
it  to  be  possible)  when  the  acting  personality  is  extraneous  to  the
svxbject,  but  also  when  it  is  merely  a  psychical  isomer  of  the  normal
personality  of  the  subject  himself;  for  in  both  cases, — as  we  are  treating
of  conscious  and  volitional  acts, — if  we  neglect  to  study  the  personality
which  knowingly  and  willingly  acts,  we  neglect  the  study  of  the  true
mechanism  of  the  phenomenon.

Many  experimenters,  while  maintaining  a  correspondence  with
these  acting  personalities,  feel  some  repugnance  to  mentioning  their
relations  to  them,  or  do  not  do  so  frankly,  except  when  they  are  of  the
officially  recognised  type  of  somnambulic  personalities.  This  seems  to
me  an  unwarrantable  suppression  of  facts  ;  accordingly,  I  feel  bound
to  follow  quite  an  opposite  method,  although  it  may  be  distasteful  to
some  readers.


f


I


at
to
A

cc

h£

n'
ol
t'

lo.
re
or
me'

HI'

■w


r


t


r


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  239


Naturally  I  shall  condense  the  communications  somewhat,  modify-
ing them  where  the  style  or  personal  considerations  may  make  it
necessary,  without  of  course  altering  the  sense  so  far  as  the  present
argument  is  concerned.

To  return  to  the  experiments.

Experiment  1.— On  the  evening  of  October  19th,  I  put  myself  as
nsual  in  communication  with  Elvira.  Signa  Maria  and  I  were  alone
with  Angelina,  who  appeared  to  be  sleeping  profoundly.  As  I  was
thinking  more  of  the  vague  promise  of  experiments  with  Angelina
which  Elvira  had  made  the  evening  before  than  of  my  own  plans,  I
first  asked  Elvira  whether  she  would  be  able  to  try  something  with  the
child  this  evening,  and  whether  we  ought  to  wake  her.  She  replied  (in
automatic  writing)  that  Adriano  was  again  absent  and  therefore  she
could  do  nothing,  and  that  when  she  was  coming  with  him,  she  would
warn  us.  But,  as  I  have  already  remarked,  nothing  interesting  ever
occurred  to  Angelina  with  the  apparent  assistance  of  Adriano.

Then  I  asked  Elvira  if  she  could  appear  to  Angelina,  as  she  said
she  had  done  on  the  night  of  September  22nd  to  23rd. She  replied  :—

"  Certainly  I  can,  but  the  child  must  be  sleeping,  and  if  I  can  I
will  appear  to  her  in  a  dream.  You  must  ask  her  afterwards  what  she
has  seen,  and  so  discover  whether  I  have  succeeded."

Question.  "  But  why  do  you  doubt  your  power  to  make  her  see  you
in  a  dream,  if  you  have  already  been  able  to  show  yourself  to  her  when
awake  ? "

Ansiver.  "  Yes,  that  is  a  reasonable  question ;  but  you  must  know
that  on  that  evening,  seeing  Maria  very  unhappy,  I  made  a  great  effort,
which  can  only  be  made  for  a  person  extraordinarily  dear,  and  so  I
succeeded.  However,  I  will  try  this  evening  in  a  dream ;  moreover  the
child  will  see  me,  when  she  is  awake,  when  I  come  with  Adriano."

Q.  "  How  must  we  try  ?  Will  you  show  yourself  to  Angelina  after
Maria  has  been  sent  to  sleep,  or  before  ? "

A.  "I  warn  you  first  that  this  is  not  a  proper  evening  to  send  Maria,
to  sleep.  I  will  appear  to  Angelina  in  the  form  of  a  child  with  a  beauti-
ful doll  in  my  arms,  and  if  I  can  I  will  come  in  another  colour  "  (i.e.,
not  dressed  in  her  favourite  blue).

Q.  "  Then  we  are  to  experiment  at  once  1 "

A.  "  Yes  ;  I  wish  to  try  at  once,  but  mind  you  ask  the  child  what
she  has  seen. I  may  very  likely  be  dressed  in  pink,  and  if  I  succeed  T
shall^  be  content. I  warn  you  that  I  shall  not  communicate  again  this
vening,  and  so  I  wish  you  good  evening,  but  remember  that  if  I  fail  it
my  fault,  not  being  accustomed  to  do  this. If  Adriano  were
--e  he  would  certainly  succeed,"

u  2


240


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


Naturally  these  communications  were  read  in  silence,  and  no  word
was  spoken  about  the  doll  and  the  pink  dress,  lest  Angelina  should  be
influenced,  although  asleep.  Not  knowing  when  the  supposed  action
of  Elvira  would  end,  I  thought  it  better  to  wait  till  the  child  had  been
questioned  the  next  morning.

The  evening  of  the  following  day  (October  20th)  Sig"^  Maria  told
me  that  by  means  of  persistent,  but  not  suggestive,  questions  she  had
been  able  to  elicit  from  Angelina  that  she  had  dreamt  of  Elvira  with
a  doll  in  her  arms,  but  she  was  dressed  in  blue  and  not  in  pink  as  had
been  settled.  In  order  to  make  sure  that  the  child  was  not  making  a
mistake  as  to  the  name  of  the  colour,  Sig"^  Maria  showed  her  various
patterns  of  coloured  stuffs  from  which  to  choose  the  colour  she  meant,
and  she  chose  the  blue.

So  the  dream  was  not  in  complete  accordance  with  the  programme,
and,  what  is  more  important,  the  conditions  under  which  it  occurred
were  not  conclusive  ;  because  the  child  slept  with  Sig"^  Maria,  and  it
is  possible  that  the  latter  while  asleep  may  have  suggested  the  dream
to  Angelina  verbally.

In  the  next  communication  from  Elvira  (by  automatic  writing,
October  21st),  she  justified  the  partial  failure  in  her  own  way,  saying
that  "  she  had  not  had  time  to  make  another  colour  "  [i.e.,  different
from  the  usual  one).  She  did  not  seem  disposed  to  repeat  the  experi-
ment that  evening.

On  October  22nd  Elvira  (in  automatic  writing)  told  us  that  not
even  the  next  night  would  it  be  possible  to  act.  Nevertheless,  next
day,  Sig"*  Maria  told  me  that  in  the  morning  the  child  had  told  her
spontaneously  that  she  had  again  dreamt  of  Elvira  with  the  doll  in
her  arras,  but  that  this  time  she  had  on  a  pink  dress.  Thus  the  dream
proposed  on  October  19th  was  completely  realised  on  the  night  of  the
21st-22nd  ;  but  this  seems  not  in  harmony  with  the  hypothesis  that
the  dreams  were  really  called  forth  by  the  personality  Elvira,  since  she
had  said  she  could  not  act.  Asked  for  an  explanation,  she  gave  it  (in
^automatic  writing)  in  the  following  terms  : —

"Yesterday  evening  Angelina  took  her  doll  to  bed,  and  therefore
dreamt  that  she  saw  me,  but  I  assure  you  it  was  not  the  case,  but  all
-the  effect  of  fancy.  I  have  already  told  you  many  times  when  we
really  originated  the  dreams,  and  I  am  sincere  and  tell  you  the  truth
■when  they  are  the  effect  of  fancy.  So  I  think  there  is  no  need  for  so
many  doubts,  because  I  am  the  first  to  warn  you  what  dreams  are  true
^nd  what  imaginary."

Although  the  communication  may  only  have  been  an  excuse
invented  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  still  I  must  note  that  on  the
-evening  of  October  21st,  when  I  asked  Elvira  why  in  the  preceding
dream  she  had  not  appeared  to  Angelina  in  the  pink  dress,  Angelina


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  241


■vvas  present,!  a,nd  it  is  likely  that  on  the  night  of  the  22ncl,  at  the
moment  of  falling  asleep,  the  idea  of  the  doll  at  hand  may  have  been
associated  with  the  idea  of  Elvira  dressed  in  pink  and  with  a  doll  in
her  arms,  and  may  have  produced  the  dream.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  the  course  of  the  experiments  the  explana-
tions given  by  Elvira  proved  trustworthy,  at  least  as  far  as  they
concerned  things  accessible  to  her  intelligence  and  verifiable  by  ours.

Seeing  some  probability  of  success,  I  wished  at  onee  to  try  the
experiments  under  better  conditions,  determining  to  exercise  stricter
control  by  degrees  as  success  followed  on  the  less  rigorous.  So  all  I
did  at  first  was  to  have  Angelina  put  to  sleep  alone  in  a  little  room
close  to  that  in  which  Sig""-  Maria  and  her  mother  slept.  The  two
rooms  communicate  by  the  landing  of  the  staircase  on  which  their
doors  open.

Experiment  2. — October  24:th.  Evening. — I  found  Sig"^  Maria  in
bed  with  a  bad  headache,  an  ailment  to  which  she  has  been  subject
from  infancy.  T  put  her  into  the  somnambulic  state  to  cure  it  by
suggestion.  I  took  this  opportunity  to  evoke  a  communication  from
Elvira,  who  manifested  to  Sig"'"^  Maria  through  a  sensory  hallucination.^

She  proposed  to  cause  Angelina  to  dream  of  lier  dressed  in  pink,
with  a  white  pai'asol  in  one  hand,  and  a  fan,  also  white,  in  the  other,
and  with  bare  feet,  according  to  her  custom.

After  waking  Sig"^  Maria  (whose  somnambulism  is  always  followed
by  amnesia),  I  forgot  to  warn  her  that  Angelina  would  pi'obably  have
some  dream  in  the  night,  and  that  she  must  question  her  in  the
morning.  Leaving  Sig"^  Maria's  room,  I  found  her  mother  issuing  from
the  next  room,  where  she  had  just  put  Angelina  to  bed  ;  the  child  had
already  been  asleep  for  some  time  on  the  ground-floor,  so  that  she
could  not  have  heard  Sig"^  Maria's  voice  when  she  related  to  me  the
dream  planned  by  Elvira.

October  2oth. — In  the  evening,  when  I  went  to  Sig"^  Maria's  house,
she  told  me  that  Angelina  kept  saying  to  her  all  day  that  she  wanted  a

1  This  does  not  contradict  what  I  said  at  first  about  the  child's  ignorance  of  the
nature  of  these  experinjents,  for  at  an  age  when  a  child  does  not  know  what  writing
is,  it  is  unlikely  to  know  what  automatic  writing  is,  and  the  little  one  could  not
suspect  the  presence  of  any  personality  other  than  our  normal  selves  from  my
behaviour.

-  Neither  during  Signorina  Maria's  somnambulism  nor  in  other  conditions  does
my  suggestion  alone  suffice  to  evoke  the  personality  Elvira.  I  do  not  exclude
the  possibility  of  producing  in  the  trance  a  hallucination  of  the  presence  of  Elvira,
just  as  I  could  produce  the  hallucinatory  presence  of  a  real  person  ;  but  probably  in
this  case  the  Elvira  so  suggested  would  not  be  coherent  with  the  other.  I  deduce
this  from  the  fact  that  Elvira  often  flatly  denies  strong  convictions  of  Signorina.
Maria's  with  regard  to  her ;  hence  I  infer  that  she  would  equally  repudiate  the  false
Elvira  suggested  by  me.


242


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


white  parasol  and  a  white  fan.  Sig"*  Maria  did  not  guess  the  origin  of
the  child's  wish.  The  latter  had  not  told  her  of  the  dream,  nor  did
gigna  Maria,  who  was  not  aware  of  the  exjjeriment,  think  of  question-
ing her.  She  assured  me  that  after  my  departure  on  the  evening  before
she  did  not  move  from  her  own  bed,  nor  in  any  way  communicate  with
the  child  during  the  night.  Sig^  Annetta,  who  slept  with  her
daughter,  confirmed  this.

These  conditions,  however,  were  far  from  being  conclusive,  both
because  Angelina's  desire  for  a  white  parasol  and  a  white  fan  was  not
sufficient  to  prove  that  the  dream  predicted  by  Elvira  took  place,  and
because  the  possibility  of  verbal  suggestion  during  the  night  on  the
part  of  Sig"*  Maria,  to  whom  Elvira  might  have  returned  in  the  trance
state,  was  not  excluded.  I  say  Elvira  might  have  returned,  because
not  only  does  Elvira  in  motor  manifestation^  leave  no  traces  in
the  somnambulic  memory  (much  less  in  the  normal  memory)  of
gigna  Maria  ;  but,  as  I  discovered  later,  the  period  of  somnambulism
during  which  Elvira  manifests  sensorially^  to  Sig"'"^  Maria,  although  it
differs  in  no  other  point  from  her  ordinary  somnambulism,  is  followed
by  amnesia  directly  Elvira's  sensorial  manifestation  ceases,  although
the  somnambulic  state  remains  apparently  unaltered.^  Consequently
the  spontaneous  appearance  of  the  normal  somnambulism  does  not
suffice  to  recall  the  ideas  expressed  by  Elvira  while  manifesting  sen-
sorially  in  a  previous  somnambulistic  state  of  Sig"^  Maria.  Therefore
if  the  somnambulism  and  the  personality  of  Elvira  happen  to  present
themselves  when  Sig"^  Maria's  mother  is  asleep,  the  former  might
possibly  go  to  the  child's  room  and  act  on  her  by  verbal  suggestion.
Although  duinng  several  years  of  hypnotic  experiment  I  have  only
observed  two  or  three  cases  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  in  Sig"^'
Maria,  it  will  be  better  to  keep  its  possible  occurrence  in  mind,
because  we  continued  our  experiments  in  this  way  for  some  time  before
introducing  stricter  conditions.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  need  to
exaggerate  this  danger,  or  to  make  the  gratuitous  hypothesis  that  it
would  be  easy  to  produce  a  series  of  exact  and  complicated  dreams,  like
those  I  shall  relate,  by  mere  verbal  suggestion,  in  a  person  who  had  never
been  hypnotised.  In  any  case,  when  precautions  were  taken  later  on,
the  dreams  occurred  in  spite  of  them.

Experiinent  3. — On  the  same  evening  {October  25ih),  wishing  to
advance  a  step,  I  asked  Elvira  if  it  would  be  possible  to  make
Angelina  dream  according  to  a  programme  pre-arranged. She  replied

1  That  is,  when  Signorina  Maria  speaks  as  Elvira.— Eu.

2  That  is,  through  a  sensory  hallucination. — Ed.

3  Sometimes  the  moment  of  the  internal  change  is  marked  by  a  slight  sigh  or  a
yawn.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  243


(by  automatic  writing)  that  it  could  be  done,  or  that  at  least  she  hoped
so.  I  then  proposed  that  Angelina  should  dream  of  Elvira  with  a  light
in  one  hand  and  a  cross  in  the  other.

Ansioer.  "The  light  if  you  like,  but  not  the  cross  :  choose  some-
thing else."

I  proposed  Sig°^  Maria's  portrait  instead  of  the  cross.  Elvira
accepted  the  idea  of  a  portrait,  but  preferred  that  of  Angelina's  mother,
recently  dead.  Kind  feeling  on  Elvira's  part,  no  doubt,  prompted  this
suggestion  as  it  had  prompted  the  rejection  of  the  cross.  For  when
asked  if  she  had  rejected  it  on  account  of  a  religious  scruple,  she
replied,  "  Not  at  all ;  only  it  would  have  made  too  strong  an  impression
on  the  child."

October  26th. — Sig"^  Maria  told  me  that  she  had  not  seen  Angelina
again  the  evening  before,  after  I  had  proposed  the  dream  and  departed.
The  child  was  then  in  her  room  and  asleep,  and  Sig"^  Maria  went  at
once  to  bed  in  her  mother's  room.

Directly  Angelina  awoke  in  the  moi'ning,  she  came  to  Big^a-  Maria's
bed,  and  the  latter,  after  waiting  to  see  if  the  child  would  relate  a
dream,  followed  my  instructions,  and  tried  to  draw  her  attention  to  a
light.  No  effect.  She  then  talked  to  her  of  a  box  Angelina  knows,
which  has  the  picture  of  a  little  girl  on  its  lid.  Upon  which  Angelina
said  she  had  seen  the  blue  child  in  a  dream,  and  added  that  this  time
she  had  no  parasol  or  fan,  but  a  light  in  one  hand,  and  a  portrait
(unrecognised)  in  the  other,  and  was  dressed  in  white.  The  non-
recognition  of  the  portrait  is  interesting,  for  it  begins  to  make  us  see
that  the  perception  probably  takes  place  by  means  of  sensorial  images,
and  not  by  any  process  of  direct  ideation  independent  of  these  images.
It  is  a  point  of  great  importance  in  the  present  experiments,  because  it
is  the  first  indication  that  the  child  is  directly  impressed  by  the  images
of  the  things  represented  in  the  dream,  and  not  by  verbal  suggestion.

October  11th. — Sig"''^  Maria  told  me  that  last  night  Angelina  h^
dreamed  of  Elvira  with  a  book  and  a  candlestick  in  her  hands.  As  no
dream  had  been  arranged  the  evening  before,  this  counts  as  a  failure.
It  is  instructive,  however,  as  showing,  as  did  that  of  October  22nd-23rd,
the  child's  tendency  to  spontaneous  reproduction  of  dreams  on  the
same  theme.  I  had  no  time  to  ask  Elvira,  as  I  did  on  the  23rd,  if
this  dream  had  been  induced  by  her.

Experiment  4. — I  wished  to  assure  myself  of  the  success  of  this  simple
type  of  dreams,  and  proposed  that  this  night  Elvira  should  appear  in  a
dream  with  a  violin  in  one  hand  and  a  bottle  in  the  other.  When
asked  if  she  would  find  this  easy,  she  replied  (by  automatic  writing),
^' Yes,  it  is  very  easy  for  me,  but  you  must  ask  the  child  directly  she
wakes,  or  she  may  forget  and  make  a  mistake."


244


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


Asked  if  she  required  time  for  her  action,  or  if  she  produced  the
dreams  instantaneously,  she  answered  : —

"  Oh,  no,  indeed  ;  I  must  have  at  least  ten  minutes."

Elvira  appears  to  appreciate  time  with  sufficient  exactness. ^

October  2Sth.  Evening. — Complete  failure.  The  child  had  been
indisposed,  and  had  slept  in  Sig"''^  Maria's  bed.  She  had  not  dreamed.
I  asked  Elvira  the  reason  of  this.  She  replied,  through  motor  som-
nambulism, that  it  had  been  impossible  to  act,  on  account  of  the  child's
disturbed  sleep.  Sig"*  Maria  had  been  obliged  to  wake  her  often,  thus
interrupting  Elvira's  action.  Sig""-  Maria  confirmed  this  when  she
woke.

JSxperiment  5. — During  the  trance,  and  while  Elvira  was  present,
I  asked  her  to  make  Angelina  dream  as  follows  :  she  was  to  be  at
Venice  in  a  two-oared  gondola  with  Sig"''^  Maria  and  me,  and  go  to  the
Lido.  Elvira  justly  observed  that  the  child  on  waking  would  not  be
able  to  explain  the  object  of  our  excursion,  and  that,  therefore,  to  make
sure  of  the  place  she  must  be  made  to  see  the  horses,  the  baths,  and
the  sea  with  its  waves,  Elvira  making  the  sound  "  vuuh  "  to  imitate
the  noise  of  the  waves.

When  Elvira  was  gone,  I  did  not  mention  the  proposed  dream  to
gigiia  Maria  either  in  her  trance  or  in  her  noriiial  state  after  waking,
in  order  that  she  might  remain  ignorant  of  it  in  both  conditions.  It
is  needless  to  say  that  Angelina  on  the  ground  floor  had  heard  nothing.
When  I  left,  some  time  after  Sig"''''  Maria  had  woke,  I  saw  Angelina
already  in  bed  and  asleep.

October  29th. — I  found  Sig"''^  Maria  in  bed  and  indisposed  this
evening.  She  told  me  she  had  gone  to  bed  directly  after  I  left,  with-
out seeing  the  child  ;  said  that  Angelina  had  risen  at  seven  a.m.,  and
come  to  her  room  about  eight,  but  when  questioned  had  said  she  had
not  dreamed.  When  Sig"'^  Maria  got  up,  about  9.30,  the  child  asked
for  a  story,  and  on  being  told  that  Sig"''^  Maria  did  not  know  any,
said,  "  Then  I  will  tell  you  one,  only  I  have  forgotten — that  little
girl  has  told  me  so  many  pretty  ones  !  "  Sig"''^  Maria  asked,  "  What
little  girl  1 "  "  The  one  I  know,  the  one  who  always  comes.  She  was
dressed  in  blue,  and  we  were  in  a  boat  with  two  oars,  and  we  went  to
the  Gardens.  There  were  lots  of  horses,  and  the  sea  said  '  vuuh  ! ' "
(imitating  the  sound  which  Elvira  had  produced  motorially  the  evening
before).  "  We  played  on  the  grass,  and  she  ran  more  than  I  did  ;  she
told  me  so  many  stories,  but  I  have  forgotten  them."  She  made  no
mention  of  other  persons  being  in  the  boat,  and,  as  only  Elvira  and  not
Maria  knew  the  programme,  she,  of  course,  could  not  question  the
child  on  the  point.

1 1  have  experimented  on  this  subject  with  other  secondary  personalities.


Telepaihic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  245


The  following  night,  as  I  had  proposed  no  dream,  Angelina's  mind
was  free,  and  she  told  the  last  di-eam  again  on  the  next  day,  adding
that  in  those  gardens  (the  Lido)  there  was  also  a  tramway,  and  that
the  blue  child  had  made  her  ride,  and  had  then  told  her  stories  to
prevent  her  being  frightened.  ^

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  word  "  vuuh "  by  which  Elvira
imitated  the  roar  of  the  sea  before  the  dream,  and  Angelina  after  it,
is  commonly,  and  one  may  say  almost  inevitably,  used  by  any  one  who
■washes  to  imitate  this  sound.

[In  this  case,  as  in  others],  the  dreams  do  not  always  follow  the
programme  with  exactitude.  The  points  of  identity  are,  however,
such  as  to  begin  to  produce  a  conviction  that  they  cannot  be  mere
chance  coincidences.  It  must  be  remembered  that  at  first  Elvira  did
not  understand  the  aim  of  these  experiments,  and,  as  she  herself  after-
wards told  me,  she  omitted  some  things  as  of  no  importance,  and  added
others  to  make  the  dream  jyrettier.  When  this  was  clear  to  me,  I  asked
Elvira  to  aim  first  of  all  at  precision,  upon  which  the  successes  sensibly
improved.  This  again  demonstrates  the  necessity  of  considering  the
active  pei'sonality,  as  otherwise  its  idiosynci-asies  may  be  taken  for
general  laws.

October  30th. — Sig"^  Maria  was  again  ill  in  bed.  She  told  me  that
to-day  Angelina  had  asked  her  to  make  a  frock  and  buy  a  pair  of
shoes  for  the  blue  child,  who  must  be  cold  in  her  blue  chemise  and
with  bare  feet.  I  mention  this  to  show  that  the  chUd's  dreams  were
vivid  enough  for  her  to  confound  them  with  reality.

Dreams  of  Various  Objects.

Exjjeriment  6. — October  'ilst,  1892. — Elvira  manifested  in  the
trance  motorially,  and  promised  to  make  another  dream  experiment  that
night.  Seeing  that  I  could  not  think  of  a  subject,  she  proposed  as
follows.  She  would  take  the  child  to  Venice  and  show  her  the  regatta
from  the  Rialto  ;  red  will  win.

I  wished  again  to  study  the  manner  in  which  imitative  sounds  are
perceived  [see  dream  of  October  28th-29th),  so  I  told  Elvira  that  I
■«dshed  the  child  to  hear  the  fru-fru  which  the  prows  of  the  boats
make  in  cutting  the  watei',  and  I  asked  her  to  make  the  sound  so  that
I  might  know  what  characteristic  it  acquired  when  reproduced  by
gigna  Maria  in  the  character  of  Elvira.  She  emitted  the  prolonged
sound  ff,  ff,  which  is  really  a  better  imitation  of  the  real  sound.

To  my  question  whether  she  needed  a  longer  time  to  act  to  produce
a  dream  apparently  long,  she  replied,  "  One  or  two  minutes  longer.  We
can  produce  dreams  which  seem  to  you  to  last  for  hours  in  a  short  time."

^  As  Venetian  children  are  not  used  to  horses,  they  are  generally  afraid  of  them.


246


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


I  left  Sig"'""-  Maria  ignorant  of  all  that  had  happened  dviring  her
trance.

November  \st. — I  wished  to  hear  this  dream  directly  from  Angelina,
who  was  usually  sleeping  or  dozing  in  the  evening,  so  I  called  on
gio-na  Maria  during  the  day.  As  she  knew  nothing,  she  had  not
questioned  Angelina,  who  had  said  nothing  spontaneously.  But  as  she
was  shy,  instead  of  telling  me  anything  she  began  to  cry.  I  therefore
left  her,  asking  Sig"'''  Maria,  who  was  still  in  ignorance,  to  question  her
patiently.  When  I  went  back  in  the  evening,  Sig"''^  Maria  told  me  all
she  had  been  able  to  extract  from  the  child.  She  had  thought  last
night  that  she  was  at  Venice  on  the  Riva  del  Vino,  close  to  the
Hialto,  in  the  company  of  the  usual  blue  child.  The  small  steamboats
for  passenger  service  had  stopped  running,  and  the  boats  were  not
about  as  usual.  Instead  there  were  so)ne  boats  which  went  very  fast,
rowed  by  men  dressed  in  different  colours.  The  water  dividing  befoi'e
their  prows  made  the  sound  gro,  gro.  The  boat  in  front  carried  two
men  dressed  in  red.  Elvira  and  Angelina  fanned  themselves  with  a
large  fan.

This  time  the  child  made  use  of  an  imitative  sound  vinlike  Elvira's;
gigiia  Maria  said  she  could  not  reproduce  it,  as  Angelina  accompanied
it  by  a  breathing,  which,  however,  did  not  make  it  the  more  resemble^/f.
We  have  also  in  this  case  a  slight  variation,  for  the  point  of  view  was  the
Riva  del  Vino  and  not  the  Rialto ;  and  the  fan  was  an  addition.  But
tliese  particulars  are  chiefly  of  use  to  weaken  the  hypothesis  that  the
dream  was  produced  by  a  verbal  suggestion  from  the  personality  of
Elvira.

This  evening  Elvira  refused  to  make  Angelina  dream, ^  saying  that
she  would  be  occupied  elsewhere.-

1  It  may  be  worth  noting  that  on  this  night  Angelina  had  a  dream  which  was
possibly  of  telepathic  origin,  but  which  took  place  without  any  voluntary  action  on
the  part  of  Signorina  Maria  and  apparently  without  the  agency  cf  the  Elvira
personality.  The  following  are  Dr.  Ermacora's  notes  of  the  incident : — '"November
'2nd,  1892. — Maria  te[\s,  me  that  last  night  (November  1—2)  Angelina — who  should
not  have  been  influenced  by  Elvira— dreamt  that  she  was  in  a  room  where  there  was
a  table  in  the  middle,  a  piano,  a  buffet  having  no  cujiboard  with  glass  doors  above
it,  and  a  sofa.  Several  persons  were  there,  including  Signorina  Maria  and  Dr.
Ermacora."  He  states  that  this  description  exactly  fits  a  room  to  which  he  used  to
go  with  Signorina  Maria  and  other  persons  to  carry  on  experiments,  except  that
there  was  a  small  harmonium  instead  of  a  piano  in  it.  There  was  reason  to  think
that  Angelina  had  never  heard  of  this  place.  Dr.  Ermacora  observes  that  if  the
dream  was  telepathic,  it  was  the  only  case  of  the  kind  that  occurred  during  the  course
of  these  experiments  spontaneously  and  without  the  action  of  Elvira. — Ed.

-  Even  those  who  do  not  admit  the  possibility  of  the  independence  of  a  secondary
or  mediumistic  intelligence  must  take  count  of  this  form  of  expression,  although  they
often  a  priori  consider  it  meaningless.  We  must  remember  that  nothing  is  meaning-
less, and  to  say  a  thing  has  no  meaning  simply  implies  that  as  yet  it  has  none  for  us.
In  this  case,  the  phrase  "Elvira  occupied  elsewhere"  may  be  supposed  to  mean  the
activity  personifying  itself  as  Elvira  operating  telepathically  elsewhere.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  247


Experiment  7. — November  2nd. — I  asked  Elvira  if  she  would
induce  a  dream  this  night.  She  answered  (automatic  script),  "  We
have  always  succeeded  till  now  ;  we  will  try  again  this  evening."

I  had  arranged  the  dream  beforehand.  I  proposed  that  Elvira,
dressed  in  red  and  with  a  large  straw  hat  on,  should  accompany
Angelina  to  the  Piazza  San  Marco  at  Venice,  and  should  find  it
turned  into  a  garden  with  grass  and  many  flowers.  The  campanile
should  have  vanished,  and  there  should  be  a  very  large  tree  in  its
place.  Many  children,  dressed  in  white,  should  be  running  and
playing  with  young  goats.  A  peasant  on  the  great  tree  should  saw
off  a  branch,  and  Angelina  should  hear  the  saw  make  the  sound  zin-zin.

It  will  be  seen  that  this  experiment  was  again  arranged  in  order
to  discover  if  the  child  had  a  direct  perception  of  images  in  the
dreams,  or  if  they  were  replaced  by  woixls.  The  programme  was  too
complicated.  But  Professor  William  J ames,  of  Cambridge  University,
U.S.,  had  honoured  me  by  his  presence,  and  I  was  so  imprudent  as  to
venture  among  difficulties  not  yet  overcome,  with  the  hope  of  showing
him  a  more  interesting  result,  forgetting  that  any  small  disturbance,
such  as  the  introduction  of  a  stranger,  has  a  tendency  to  diminish,  or
even  entirely  prevent,  success.

When  I  asked  Elvira  if  she  hoped  to  succeed,  in  spite  of  the
unusual  complexity  of  the  dream,  she  answered  (by  automatic
writing),  "  It  is  rather  long.  It  is  possible  for  me,  but  I  don't  know
if  the  child  will  remember  all  that. However,  we  will  try."

Question.  "  Could  you  not  induce  dreams  with  persons  better  able
to  remember  and  relate  them  I "

Answer.  "  But,  you  see,  it  answers  so  well  with  her  that  if  you  will
have  patience  you  will  succeed.  I  am  not  certain,  but  still  I  think
that  the  one  at  Venice  (Angelina's  sister)  would  answer  the  purpose
as  well."

It  is  quite  natural  that  I  should  be  dissatisfied  at  havins;  for  a
subject  a  child  of  an  age  which  prevented  her  lending  intelligent
assistance,  and  who  was  shy  with  me,  which  prevented  my  studying
her  closely.  Therefore  I  tried  occasionally  to  propose  a  different
percipient  to  Elvira  ;  but  my  efforts  were  vain,  and  it  is  easy  to
suppose  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  person  who  was  a  good
percipient  in  rapiyort  with  Elvira,  and  who  could  besides  be  made  use
of  as  a  subject  of  study.  Then  we  must  consider  that  the  child's
innocence  offered  me  opportunities  of  making  interesting  observations
which  might  have  been  impossible  with  an  adult.

November  3rd. — When  I  called  on  Sig"'"^  Maria  in  the  morning  the
child  had  not  yet  told  her  anything,  and  she  had  not  thought  of
questioning  her.  This  showed  Sig"«'  Maria's  want  of  interest,  which
was  rather  an  advantage  than  not,  as  it  prevented  her  curiosity  or


248


Dr.  0.  B.  Ermacora.


untimely  zeal  from  disturbing  the  results.  And  though  she  had  no
initiative,  she  was  careful  and  punctual  in  executing  my  instruc-
tions. She  and  I  questioned  the  child  together,  but  her  replies  were
vague  and  often  contradictory.  She  seemed  only  to  remember  that
she  had  been  in  the  company  of  Elvira,  who  was  dressed  in  red,  in  a
place  surrounded  by  a  wall  where  there  was  grass,  and  many  little
girls  dressed  in  various  colours,  who  were  playing  with  toys.  She  did
not  appear  to  have  i*ecognised  the  Piazza  S.  Marco ;  on  the  contrary,
she  said  the  wall  was  smooth  and  that  there  were  no  shops ;  she  had
not  even  had  the  impression  that  the  scene  was  in  Venice.  This  can-
not be  called  more  than  a  partial  success  ;  but  it  is  worth  observing
that  if  the  dream  had  been  produced  by  verbal  suggestion,  the  words
Piazza  San  Ma,rco  must  have  been  used,  and  would  have  aroused  tlie
corresponding  idea  clearly  in  the  child.

The  partial  failure  was,  as  I  understood  later,  no  doubt  partly
caused  by  our  having  made  Angelina  relate  her  dream  in  my  presence,
which  disturbed  her  ;  she  appeared  so  uncertain,  contradictory,  and
suggestible  that  I  soon  learned  to  place  most  faith  in  the  second-hand
accounts  of  Sig"^  Maria  or  her  mother.

Experiment  8.  —  Novemher  ith.  —  Elvira  manifested  motorially
during  Sig"'^  Maria's  trance,  after  having  manifested  sensorially  as  usual.
When  questioned  as  to  the  preceding  incomplete  success,  she  replied
that  she  had  evoked  the  pre-arranged  dream  exactly,  but  that  the  child
had  not  remembered  it.  I  proposed  the  following  dream  for  the  next
nio'ht  : —

Elvira  would  come  to  Angelina,  accompanied  by  the  latter's  dead
mother,  who  would  bring  her  a  pretty  blue  hood.  Elvira  asked  that
the  dream  should  be  modified,  not  wishing  to  cause  too  great  an
impression  on  the  child  through  her  mother's  presence,  and  proposed
to  substitute  a  great-aunt,  who  was  just  then  at  Milan.  She  thought
the  dream  simple  and  easy  to  induce,  and  again  recommended  that  the
child  should  be  questioned  directly  she  woke.

Novemher  5<A.— Signor  Carlo  Vanzetti  and  Dr.  E.  T.  (who  are
interested  in  psychical  phenomena)  and  myself,  called  on  Sig"^  Maria
about  2.30  p.m.  I  had  forgotten  to  repeat  Elvira's  advice  to  Sig"''^
Maria  the  preceding  evening,  and  the  latter  had  not  questioned  the
child.  So  we  interrogated  her  ourselves.  Fortunately  she  was  in  an
expansive  humour,  and  told  us  that  the  blue  child  had  come  to  see  her
with  the  great-aunt  from  Milan,  who  had  a  blue  hood,  but  she  could
not  explain  if  it  was  on  her  head  or  in  her  hand,  and  contradicted
herself.  There  were  many  ribbons  on  the  hood,  as  well  as  the  plaits  of
Angelina's  hair,  which  had  been  cut  off.  She  did  not  know  if  her  aunt
meant  it  for  a  pi'esent  to  her. She  added  that  the  blue  child  was


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  249


■not  really  dressed  in  blue,  but  in  white.  I  only  mention  this  unim-
portant point,  which  was  outside  the  programme,  to  remark  afresh
liow  much  the  effect  of  these  dreams  on  the  child  resembles  that  of
real  waking  events  ;  thus  Maria  told  us  that  to-day  Angelina  had
wanted  to  wear  her  white  frock,  to  be  like  Elvira.

We  put  ourselves  in  rapport  with  Elvira,  and  asked  her  why  the  aunt
had  not  given  the  hood  to  Angelina  as  pre-arranged.  Elvira  replied
(by  automatic  writing),  "  No ;  her  aunt  put  it  down  and  I  took  it  up  to
show  it  to  her  (Angelina)."  This  may  be  true,  and  the  child  may  have
forgotten  it.  It  was  a  mistake  on  my  part  not  to  ask  for  an  explana-
tion about  the  locks  of  hair,  which  were  not  in  the  programme ;  all
the  more  that  they  had  some  connection  with  the  aunt.  Sig"'^  Maria  told
us  that  this  aunt  had  been  much  vexed  when  Angelina's  hair  was  cut
off  after  her  mother's  death,  because  there  was  no  one  to  arrange  it.

Experiment  9. — The  child  was  sent  away,  and  Signer  Vanzetti
proposed  the  following  dream  to  Elvira.  She  should  appear  in
<3ompany  with  Sig"'^  Maria's  mother,  who  should  present  Angelina
with  a  large  cake,  which  she  should  open.  A  little  bird  should  come
out  and  fly  away,  laughing.

November  Qth. — I  went  to  see  Sig"''"'  Maria  about  2.30  p.m.,  and
found  Signor  Vanzetti  already  there.  We  had  arranged  that  he  should
call  to  see  if  the  attempt  were  a  success  or  not.  The  child  was  present
and  had  already  told  her  dream  as  follows  : — The  blue  child  had  come
to  her  with  Sig"*  Maria's  mother  ^  who  brought  her  a  cake. From  a

hole  in  the  cake  came  out  (Angelina  failed  to  find  the  word).

Vanzetti.  "A  mouse  1"  Angelina.  "No."  F.  "Acat?"  ^.  "No."
V.  "  Then  it  must  have  been  a  dog."  A.  "  Yes."  V.  "  Was  it  like  a
lien?" A.  "No;  like  a  pigeon,  but  smaller."

This  dialogue  shows  that  the  child  probably  saw  a  small  bird,  but
it  also  shows  how  easy  it  is  to  lead  her  astray  by  suggestive  or  even
non-suggestive  questions  made  by  persons  who  do  not  possess  her  full
confidence.

We  sent  her  away  and  placed  ourselves  in  communication  with
Elvira,  who  manifested  through  automatic  writing,  and  then  in  the
trance  sensorially,  and  at  last  motorially,

1  I  cannot  say  with  certainty  that  the  success  was  complete,  as  regards  the  presence
of  Signora  Annetta  in  the  dream,  for  Dr.  E.T.,  whom  I  met  in  the  course  of  the  day,  said
he  did  not  remember  the  introduction  of  Signorina  M. 's  mother  into  the  programme.
I  am  obliged  to  report  this  circumstance,  but  I  find  the  point  recorded  in  my  notes  of
the  5th,  or  at  most  of  the  6th  November  ;  and  besides  the  arbitrary  introduction  of
another  person  into  the  dream  would  have  caused  me  to  question  Elvira  about  it,  or
at  least  I  should  have  made  notes  after  the  success ;  and  I  find  I  did  neither  the  one
nor  the  other.  A.s  Signor  C.  Vanzetti  had  left  at  once,  I  could  not  trust  entirely  to
Ms  memory. The  point  besides  is  of  little  importance.


250


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


Exjoeriment  10. — Signer  Vanzetti  proposed  the  following  dream; —
While  the  child  was  awai'e  of  being  in  her  own  bed,  Elvira  should  come
and  kiss  her  forehead,  then  put  her  hands  underneath  her  body  and
carry  her  to  her  father  in  Venice.  Then  she  should  bring  her  back  to
her  own  bed.

November  7th. — Doctor  E.  T.  and  I  visited  Sig"^  Maria,  who  was
ignorant  of  the  dream,  which  had  been  planned  while  she  was  in  the
trance.  However  she  had  followed  her  instructions  and  questioned  the
child  in  the  morning  ;  but  the  latter  would  tell  nothing,  and  had  said
she  was  bored  by  always  dreaming  of  Elvira.  She  was  sufficiently-
docile  to  relate  her  dream  to  us,  notwithstanding.  She  said  that  last
night  the  blue  child  came  to  her  and  kissed  her  on  the  chin.  She  took
her  to  Venice  in  a  carriage  drawn  hy  a  horse,  went  with  her  to  her
father,  who  kissed  her  on  her  /orehectd,  and  then  Jl.ew  home  with  her
through  the  air.

As  we  see,  the  variations  from  the  programme  are  not  great.  The
following  day  {November  8th)  I  asked  Elvira,  "  Did  you  make  the
slight  changes  in  the  dream  of  the  6th-7th,  or  did  she  forget  ?  "  She
replied  (by  automatic  writing), .  "  No ;  you  know  it  is  I  who  make
these  little  changes.  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  harm,  but  if  so  tell
me,  and  I  will  not  do  it  any  more."  I  naturally  recommended  exact-
ness, and  the  results  seemed  to  me  to  improve.

November  8th. — No  dream  had  been  pre-arranged,  and  Angelina^
had  a  spontaneous  one,  which  is  not  odd.  But  it  is  curious  that,
though  she  was  used  to  pleasant  dreams,  this  night  she  dreamt  of  a
man  with  horns,  in  whom  she  believed  she  recognised  the  devil ;  and
she  remarked  that  she  would  rather  see  the  blue  child  again  than
dream  such  things.  So  that  this  dream  would  seem  to  have  been  a
reaction,  either  spontaneous  or  imposed  from  outside,  against  the
protests  she  had  made  against  the  too  persistent  dreams  about.
Elvira.

Experime7it  11. — While  Elvira  manifested  in  automatic  wi'iting,  I
proposed  a  dream  which  it  is  useless  to  I'elate,  because  it  was  a.
complete  failure,  in  spite  of  Elvira's  acceptance  of  it.

Experiment  12. — November  9ih. — I  proposed  the  following  dream
for  the  next  night : — Angelina,  with  Sig"^  Maria,  would  be  at  the
window  of  her  own  room,  and  would  look  towards  the  river.  A
lamb  would  be  grazing  on  the  bank.  A  boat  loaded  with  apples  would
pass,  conducted  by  one  boatman.  He  would  stop  close  to  the  iron
bridge,  and  get  out  to  drink  at  the  inn.  While  the  boat  was
unguarded  the  lamb  would  jump  in  and  begin  to  eat  the  apples,  which,
would  make  Angelina  laugh  very  much.


Telepathie  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.


251


I  will  explain  my  aim  with  regard  to  the  detail  of  the  inn.  [It
exemplifies  a  method  of  control  which]  has  the  advantage  of  passing
entirely  unperceived  by  the  personalities  to  which  it  is  applied,  or  at
least  by  their  supraliminal  selves.  This  consists  in  introducing  into
the  programme  of  the  dream  some  idea  which,  when  perceived
sensorially  and  objectively,  would  produce  a  different  effect  on  the
subject  than  if  it  had  been  exjjressed  verbally  ;  or  in  introducing
sensorial  images,  which,  with  regard  to  the  percipient,  should  not
be  in  perfect  correspondence  with  his  verbal  images.  It  is  evident
that  if  the  dream  were  originated  by  verbal  suggestion,  the
percipient,  in  most  cases,  will  mention  even  the  circumstances  which  he
has  not  seen,  or  will  describe  his  experience  in  proper  terms  ;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  if  the  scene  were  perceived  by  means  of  direct
images  of  the  things,  we  must  expect  that  he  will  be  ignorant  of  every
accessory  circumstance  mentioned  in  the  programme,  but  not  present
in  the  scene ;  he  will  form  mistaken  jvidgments  about  the  things
perceived,  and  will  give  them  inappropriate  names.  The  dream  of  the
Pia  zza  S.  Marco  transformed  into  a  garden  is  a  good  example  of  this.
(JVovember  2nd-3rd,  1892).  Thus,  in  the  present  case,  if  Sig''^^  Maria,
suggests  the  dream  verbally  to  Angelina,  it  is  improbable  that  she  will
omit  the  particular  about  the  inn,  and  it  is  besides  probable  that  the
child,  knowing  the  reason  for  the  boatman's  absence,  will  have  some
sensorial  image  of  it,  and  will  mention  it  in  her  account.  Whereas  if
she  perceives  the  scene  directly,  she  will  see  the  boatman  go  away,  but
will  not  be  able  to  say  why  or  where — the  inn  not  being  visible  from
the  window  at  which  she  will  be.

Angelina  was  in  bed  and  asleep,  with  the  door  shut,  while  I
explained  this  programme  to  Elvira.  "When  I  left  I  asked  Sig'»'
Annettai  to  take  care  that  her  daughter  and  the  child  should  not  meet
during  the  night,  and  as  she  and  Angelina  generally  wake  before  Sig"^
Maria,  I  asked  her  to  get  the  child  to  relate  her  dream  before
Sig-na  Maria  awoke,  or  at  least  before  they  met.

This  intervention  of  Sig^  Annetta  was  of  great  advantage,  although
it  did  not  do  away  with  the  inconvenience  of  my  getting  the  story  at
second-hand.  It  allowed  of  the  child  being  questioned  by  a  person
who  was  not  only  ignorant  of  what  dreams  were  expected,  but  who
also  did  not  know  what  interest  Angelina's  dreams  could  have  for  me,
and  who  did  not  trouble  herself  about  it.  She  could  not,  therefore,
alter  them  by  involuntary  suggestion. I  may  add  that  she  fulfilled  my

1  It  is  well  to  keep  in  mind  that  during  the  communications  with  Elvira,  only
Signorina  Maria  and  I  were  present,  except  in  the  few  cases  always  mentioned,  when  I
went  with  some  person  not  of  Signorina  Maria's  family.  Signora  Annetta  was  unaware
of  the  existence  of  the  Elvira  personality,  and  of  that  of  others  resembling  her,  and
Angelina  knows  Elvira  only  through  her  dreams.


252


Di'.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


charge  with  so  much  patience  that  the  child  ended  by  being  unwilling
to  tell  her  dreams  to  anybody  else.

November  lOth. — About  4  p.m.  I  called  to  discover  the  results.  I
saw  Sig=^  Annetta  first,  and  she  was  convinced  that  no  communica-
tion had  been  possible  between  the  child  and  Sig"''^  Maria  till  the
morning.  Angelina  told  her  the  dream  before  Sig"'^  Maria  was  awake.
It  is  useless  to  repeat  it,  as  it  corresponds  almost  exactly  to  the  pro-
gramme. I  say  almost,  because  there  ai^e  two  points  of  difference
which  are  precisely  what  render  the  result  most  interesting.  One  is
that  Angelina  called  the  animal  which  ate  the  apples  a  "  light-coloured
dog,"  instead  of  a  "lamb."  Now  the  child,  being  a  Venetian,  had  not
seen  any  lambs,  and  when  she  saw  one,  she  naturally  baptised  it  in  her
own  fashion.  The  other  point  of  dilference  is  that  she  did  not  say
where  the  boatman  had  gone,  and,  when  questioned  on  the  point  on
my  arrival,  she  could  not  explain  it,  though  she  remembered  the  dream
perfectly.  According  to  what  was  said  above,  these  two  particulars
favour  the  hypothesis  that  the  child  sees  the  scene,  instead  of  simply
hearing  it  described.

Experiment  13. — The  usual  communication  with  Elvira  having
been  established,  she  declared  herself  ready  for  a  fresh  experiment  the
following  night.

I  read  the  programme  I  had  written  down  a  few  moments  before: —
Angelina  is  in  the  Piazza  dei  Signori  (Pcidua)  with  Sig'^  Annetta.  It
snows,  and  the  Piazza  is  white.  Angelina  is  amused  at  the  sight,  but
stops  suddenly  to  look  with  astonishment  at  a  spot  in  front  of  the
Caffe  Mio,  where  the  snow  is  black  instead  of  white,  because  just  before
A^igelina's  arrival  a  man  had  jyassed  ivith  a  sack  of  coal  dust ;  the  sack
had  hurst  and  the  coal  dust  was  spilt  on  the  snow.  I  underline  the
last  words  in  order  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  they  relate  to  a  cii'cum-
stance  extraneous  to  the  dream,  and  are  designed  to  put  the  form  of
perception  to  the  proof.  While  I  was  reading  the  programme  in  the
usual  room  on  the  first  floor,  the  child  was  playing  outside  the  street
door  with  other  little  girls,  and  could  have  heard  nothing.

November  Wth.  Evening.  —  Sig*'^  Annetta  assured  me  that  neither
last  evening  after  I  left  nor  during  the  night  had  her  daughter  and
the  child  had  any  communication  relating  to  the  dream ;  they  had
never  been  out  of  her  sight.  The  evening  before  they  had  all  gone
together  to  call  on  another  son  of  Sig=^  Annetta's,  who  is  married
and  does  not  live  with  them.  There  Angelina  fell  asleep,  and  was
carried  home,  and  put  to  bed  in  her  own  room  by  Sig''^  Annetta
without  having  awoke.  Sig"-'-  Maria  and  her  mother  slept  together  as
usual.  The  child  told  her  dream  to  Sig  Annetta  in  the  morning
before  Sig"^  Maria  was  awake. The  account  was  as  follows : —


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  253


Angelina  had  been  in  the  Piazza  dei  Signori  with  Sig'^  Annetta.
There  was  much  hail  on  the  ground,  and  outside  the  Caffe  Tuo  (as
the  child  was  accustomed  to  call  it)  the  ground  was  black  like  coal.

Sigiia  Maria  in  her  turn  told  me  that  she  had  gone  out  later  with  the
child,  who,  passing  through  the  Piazza  before-mentioned,  related  the
story  over  again,  repeating  that  the  ground  had  been  white  with  hail,
gigna  Maria  asked  her  if  the  white  stuff  might  not  have  been  snow,  to
which  the  child  replied,  "No  !  what  is  snow?  It  was  hail;  the  ground
was  white,  but  near  the  Caffe  Tuo  it  was  black  instead — all  coal ;
and  I  ran  on  the  white.  It  was  such  fun."  She  wanted  to  accompany
Signa  Maria  to  the  side  of  the  Piazza,  where  she  had  seen  the  coal ;  and
to  explain  better,  showed  her  the  black  colour  which  formed  the  back-
ground of  the  glass  windows,  and  said  that  at  that  part  of  the  ground  it
was  blacker  even  than  that.  I  at  first  thought  it  odd  that  the  child
should  call  the  white  stuff  on  the  ground  hail.  But  later  Sig"'^  Maria
discovered  that  the  child  had  never  seen  snow.  This  ambiguity  about
a  name  could  not  have  happened  under  better  conditions  for  excluding
the  hypothesis  of  verbal  suggestion,  because,  as  Sig"''^  Maria  could  not
know  that  the  child  called  snow  hail,  she  would  naturally  have  used  the
term  snow,  which  would  not  have  been  understood  by  Angelina,  and
therefore  would  not  have  produced  the  image  of  the  whiteness  on  the
ground.

Experiment  14. — i^ovember  12th.  Evening. — I  went  to  see  Sig"^.
Maria,  with  the  programme  of  the  next  dream  ready  written.  During
the  communication  with  Elvira  (by  automatic  writing)  I  read  this
programme  to  Maria,  word  for  word :  ' '  Angelina  is  with  me  in  the
church  of  S.  Marco  at  Venice.  Elvira,  dressed  in  pink  and  with  a
white  handkerchief  round  her  head,  comes  to  meet  us,  and  all  three  so
to  the  Riva  degli  Schiavoni,  and  go  into  a  tent,  where  we  are  shown  a
fine  tiger."

As  I  saw  that  the  results,  if  telepathically  produced,  were
becoming  more  and  more  important,  I  desired  to  increase  the  rigour  of
the  conditions.  I  therefore  asked  Sig^  Annetta  to  lock  the  child's
room  directly  she  was  asleep,  to  hide  the  key,  to  unlock  the  room  in
the  morning,  and  to  induce  Angelina  to  relate  the  dream  before  any
communication  with  Sig"^  Maria  was  possible.

November  IWi.  Evening. — Sig^-  Annetta  told  me  that  Angelina
was  already  asleep  when  I  left  last  evening;  She  found  her  daughter
in  bed,  and  followed  her,  tying  the  key  round  her  neck.  She  herself
woke  with  the  key  still  tied  round  her  neck,  and  when  the  child  called
she  ran  to  open  the  dooi-.  Angelina  at  once,  while  Sig°  Maria  still
slept,  told  the  following  dream  : — She  was  with  me  at  Venice  in  the
church  of  S.  Marco. A  little  girl  entered  dressed  in  pink,  with  a

X


254


Br.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


■white  handkerchief  on  her  head.  We  all  went  together  to  a  little
house,  where  there  was  an  animal  like  a  cat,  but  larger,  and  not  really
a  cat.

Here,  again,  the  visual,  and  not  the  verbal,  image  of  a  tiger  was
probably  perceived.  "We  have  besides  the  circumstance  that  Elvira
was  seen,  because  Angelina  mentioned  the  pre-arranged  details  of  the
pink  dress  and  white  handkerchief,  but  she  was  not  recognised.  [These
points,  again,  tell  against  the  hypothesis  that]  the  dream  was  induced
by  verbal  suggestion.

Experiment  1-5. — While  Elvii^a  was  manifesting  sensorially  she,  in
reply  to  my  questions,  caused  Maria  in  the  trance,  to  tell  me  she  could
make  the  child  see  in  dreams  even  things  unknown  to  Sig"^  Maria,  but
known  to  herself  and  to  me.

I  wished  to  try  the  experiment  at  once,  and  proposed  that  she
should  make  Angelina  see  the  interior  of  a  house  I  had  examined  a
short  time  ago,  and  which  was  entirely  unknown  to  Sig''^"-  Maria,  being
in  a  village  some  kilometres  from  Padua,  where  she  had  never  been.
Elvira  had  said  on  a  previous  occasion  that  she  knew  this  house  ;  thus
her  proposed  conditions  were  realised.  Our  programme  was  that
Angelina  should  find  herself  in  this  house  with  her  little  sister.
Signor  C,  who  lived  there,  would  give  them  sweetmeats,  and  would
either  show  them  over  the  house  or  I'ound  the  neighbourhood  of  it.

November  lith.  3  p.m. — Sig*  Annetta  was  alone  in  the  house.
She  told  me  that  from  the  moment  I  left  on  the  previous  evening  she
had  taken  the  same  precautions  as  on  the  night  before,  including  the
locking  up  of  Angelina.  Directly  the  child  awoke  she  related  the
following  dream  : — -

Enrichetta  (her  little  sister)  had  taken  her  to  a  garden  where  there
was  much  grass,  and  in  the  midst  a  large  house.  They  played,  and  an
old  gentleman  gave  them  two  boxes  of  sweetmeats  and  took  them  in  to
see  the  house,  which  was  large,  and  neither  pi-etty  nor  ugly.

Although  all  this  is  correct,  I  cannot  consider  the  dream  a  success,
so  far  as  the  representation  of  a  place  unknown  to  Sig"'^  Maria  is
concerned,  because  the  description  is  too  indefinite.

Experiment  16. — November  15th. — I  was  at  Sig"^  Maria's  house  at
2  p.m.  Elvira  said  she  hoped  to  show  the  child  jjlaces  unknown  both
to  Sig"*  Maria  and  me,  but  known  to  herself.  As  T  could  not  invent
a  dream  of  this  kind  on  the  spot  (up  to  the  present  time  I  have  not
seen  one  such  realised),  I  proposed  the  following  which  I  had  pi-epared
in  writing  for  the  day  before  :—

"  Angelina  will  still  be  in  the  country  house  of  the  preceding
dream,  and  will  be  eating  boiled  potatoes  with  Professor  B. Then  1


Telepatliic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.


255


shall  come  and  bring  her  some  Indian  figs.  (As  Elvira  said  she  did  not
know  what  Indian  figs  were,  I  substituted  common  figs.)  Afterwards
I  shall  take  her  and  Professor  B.  to  see  the  neighbourhood ;  I  shall  tell
Angelina  to  be  vei-y  fond  of  me,  and  to  let  herself  be  sent  to  sleep
by  me."

This  programme  had  among  other  aims  :  (1)  To  refresh  the  vision
of  the  surroundings  of  the  house,  which  should  furnish  characteristic
points  for  recognition,  if  the  representation  should  prove  exact ;  (2)
to  see  if  a  sufficiently  exact  visual  perception  of  a  person  wholly
unknown  to  Angelina,  but  known  to  Sig"^  Maria  (as  is  Professor  B.),
is  possible  ;  and  (3)  having  used  visual  images  exclusively  until  now,  to
see  if  auditory  images  would  be  perceived  equally  well,  and  if  verbal
images  could  be  used  for  making  suggestions  ;  as,  if  that  were  the  case,
they  could  be  utilised  to  forward  our  present  researches.

The  most  simple  method  of  proving  the  telepathic  origin  of  these
dreams  would  naturally  be  to  ask  Elvira  to  induce  a  certain  dream  in
the  child  on  the  spot ;  then,  when  Elvira  had  given  us  notice  that  her
own  action  was  completed,  to  wake  the  little  one  and  make  her  recount
the  dream.  But  in  this  way  we  should  have  encountered  two
difficulties.  The  first  is,  that  Elvira  says  she  can  only  act  when  the
child  is  in  deep  and  tranquil  sleep,  which  does  not  easily  happen  in  the
evening ;  the  second  is  that  to  wake  her  would  put  her  out  of  temper^
so  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  get  any  coherent  account  from  her.
Being  thus  doubtful  of  results,  I  put  off  this  experiment  till  the  time
when  I  should  have  succeeded  in  putting  her  into  the  somnambulic
state,  when  I  could  control  her  sleep  and  her  temper.  This  is  why  I
wished  Elvira's  suggestion  to  come  to  my  aid.  However,  up  to  the
present  time  my  efforts  have  been  unsuccessful,  and  I  have  been
satisfied  with  the  proofs  Avhich  I  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  later,  so
that  I  dropped  this  method  for  the  time  being,  always  intending  to  try
it  again  when  circumstances  were  pi'opitious.

November  \%th,  ^  p.m. — I  found  only  Sig"^  Maria  and  the  child  at
home.  Angelina  told  me  as  follows  : — She  had  dreamed  of  being  in
a  large  house  in  the  country,  but  could  not  explain  if  it  was  the  same
she  had  seen  in  the  preceding  di-eam.  She  was  with  a  handsome,  tall,,
and  rather  stout  gentleman,  with  beautiful  long  moustaches.  Then  I
arrived  and  brought  her  some  figs  which  she  found  sweet.  I  told  her
to  be  good,  and  to  let  me  put  her  to  sleep.  Questioned  about  the
neighbourhood  of  the  house,  she  could  say  nothing  to  prove  that  she
had  seen  it  as  it  really  is.  Besides  which,  she  did  not  remember
eating  with  the  gentleman  before  I  came.

I  took  out  of  my  pocket  17  photographs  which  T  had  prepared.
That  of  Professor  B.  was  among  them.  The  others  also  were  portraits
of  men  of  middle-age,  and  offered  a  certain  resemblance  to  him  ;  such  a


256


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


resemblance  as  would  make  it  difficult  for  an  adult,  and  impossible  for
a  child,  to  distinguish  that  of  Professor  B.  from  the  others,  after  a
mere  verbal  description.

I  promised  the  child  some  sweetmeat  if  she  could  find  her  dream
gentleman  among  the  17  portraits.  Meantime  I  watched  Sig"^  Maria,
to  see  if  she  influenced  Angelina  by  any  unconscious  sign.  The  latter
seemed  very  tired,  or  perhaps  confused  by  the  novelty  of  the  thing,
and  could  not  decide.  I  stopped  her  when  I  found  she  was  looking
about,  instead  of  at  the  photographs.

Meanwhile  Sig^  Annetta  had  returned  and  I  instructed  her  to
induce  the  child  to  search  for  the  portrait  when  her  daughter  was  not
present,  lest  the  latter  should  unconsciously  influence  her.  Sig^  Annetta
herself  could  not  influence  the  results,  for  she  does  not  know  Professor
B.,  and  is  also  ignorant  that  the  gentleman  Angelina  saw  in  her  dream
is  so  named.

When  I  returned  in  the  evening,  Sig-'''  Annetta  assured  me  that
her  daughter  had  not  seen  the  photographs  since  I  left,  and  that  the
child  had  made  her  choice  while  Sig"^  Maria  was  out  of  the  house.
She  then  showed  me  two  photographs  that  the  child  had  selected,
adding  that  she  had  preferred  one  of  the  two.  Now,  the  portrait
preferred  as  most  resembling  the  gentleman  in  the  dream  i.s  precisely
that  of  Professor  B.,  and  the  other  is  sufficiently  like  to  be  taken  for
his  portrait,  even  by  an  adult  who  had  only  glanced  at  the  original.
The  resemblance  fails  in  one  point.  Pi'ofessor  B.'s  moustaches  are  very
long,  and  those  in  the  second  photograph  are  rather  short.

I  should  add  that  the  choice  was  made  among  27  portraits^  instead
of  1 7  ;  I  added  1 0  more  when  I  left.

Experiment  17. — I  read  the  programme  I  had  prepared  for  the
coming  night  to  Elvira  this  same  evening.

Angelina  is  at  Desenzano  ujion  the  lake  of  Garda  with  Elvira  and
me.  I  am  dressed  in  white  linen  and  have  a  straw  hat.  Elvira  has  a
red  dress  and  a  wreath  of  blue  flowers.  We  look  for  a  boat  to  take
us  to  Sirmione,  but  cannot  find  one.  Then  we  go  the  whole  way  on
foot.  When  we  reach  Sirmione,  Elvira  and  I  recommend  Angelina  to
remember  the  dreams  well  and  to  relate  them  with  exactness.

This  programme  had  a  special  aim.  Some  time  ago  Elvira  had  said
she  knew  the  lake  of  Garda  and  its  neighbourhood.  I  also  know  them  a
little,  while  Sig"^  Maria  and  Angelina  have  never  been  there.  There-
fore, I  wished  the  dream  to  give  Elvira  a  new  opportunity  to  show  the

1  Dr.  Ermacora  has  sent  me  all  the  photographs  in  question  for  comparison.  I
concur  in  what  he  says  as  to  the  difficulty  of  recognising  any  one  out  of  them  by  verbal
description. — Ed.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  257


child  in  a  dream  something  known  to  us,  and  unknown  to  Sig"^  Maria
and  the  percipient.

November  11  th. — About  4  p.m.  I  called  on  Sig"^  Maria.  I  was
told  that  Angelina  had  not  had  any  dream,  and  that  she  had  been
rather  restless  during  the  night.  ^

Experiment  18. — Elvira  communicated  in  automatic  writing.  I
asked  her  if  she  could  try  the  same  dream  again  the  next  night,  and  if
she  would  like  me  to  repeat  it.  She  replied,  "Yes,  if  I  can  make  her
dream,  I  will. You  need  not  repeat  it ;  I  know  it  quite  well."

A  result  which  I  had  aimed  at  from  the  beginning,  because  it  would
have  offered  me  a  most  simple  and  certain  proof  of  the  telepathic  origin
of  these  dreams,  was  their  realisation  at  a  distance  which  would  have
made  any  communication  between  Maria  and  Angelina  impossible.
This  wish  had  remained  unfulfilled.  Such  experiments  were  [for  various
reasons]  not  easy,  and  I  accordingly  deferred  trying  the  plan  till  I  had
exhausted  the  easier  methods  of  control.

Just  then  Angelina's  father  desired  to  see  her  and  keep  her  at
home  for  a  few  days.  Sig"'^  Maria  was  to  take  her,  and  as  Angelina's
father  had  not  room  for  her  also,  she  would  be  obliged  to  pass  the  night
at  a  distance  from  the  child.  This  was  a  propitious  circumstance,  and
I  decided  to  go  to  Venice  on  the  same  day  as  Sig""'  Maria,  November
18th.

November  18th.  —  I  went  to  Venice  and  met  Sig"'"^  Maria  about  noon.
She  had  arrived  an  hour  sooner  than  I.  She  told  me  that  her  mother
had  unlocked  Angelina's  room  that  morning  and  found  her  already
awake.  Sig"*  Maria  entered  the  room  while  Angelina  was  telling  the
dream  to  Sig'^  Annetta,  and  thus  it  was  she  who  related  it  to  me.

Angelina  had  dreamt  she  was  in  the  country  with  me  and  the
blue  child.  I  was  dressed  in  white,  and  my  hands  were  very  much
larger  than  was  natural.  Elvira  had  blue  flowers  on  her  head.  We
all  went  to  look  for  a  boat,  but  not  being  able  to  find  one,  I  went  on
foot,  while  Angelina  and  the  blue  child  were  ti'ansported  through
space.  Angelina,  when  she  awoke,  thought  she  was  still  in  the  air.
In  reply  to  Sig"^  Maria's  questions  she  replied  that  there  wei'e  many
houses  and  banks  like  those  in  the  Gardens,  but  larger.-  She  did  not
remember  the  colour  of  Elvira's  dress,  nor  what  hat  I  wore,  but  when
closely  questioned  said  that  the  dress  was  red  ;  she  would  not  admit
that  my  hat  was  of  straw,  but  said  it  was  of  soft  brown  felt,  like  my

1  As  Angelina's  little  room  was  next  to  that  occupied  by  Signorina  Maria  and  her
mother,  they  could  easily  hear  if  she  woke,  because  she  became  alarmed  at  finding
herself  alone,  and  called  to  them.

-  Angelina  has  never  been  in  a  hilly  country,  so  she  could  only  express  the  idea  of
mountains  by  amplifying  that  of  the  banks  or  hills  of  the  public  garden  at  Venice.


258


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


usual  one.  She  did  not  remember  that  Elvira  and  I  had  said  anything
to  her.  She  added  that  there  was  a  great  deal  of  water,  but  that  it
seemed  less  than  in  the  lagoon  at  Venice.

The  dream  was  therefore  successful  in  its  general  outlines,  but
there  was  no  point  in  it  which  did  not  probably  pre-exist  in  the  mind
of  Sig"'"^  Maria.

Exj)eriment  19. — -In  the  evening  I  called  on  Sig"^  Maria  and  tried
to  communicate  with  Elvira.  But  instead  of  Elvira,  Adriano  mani-
fested in  automatic  writing.  Does  the  non-appearance  of  Elvira,  con-
sidered from  the  point  of  view  that  these  personalities  are  mere
dramatisations  of  more  complex  subliminal  phenomena,^  signify  a
refusal  to  attempt  the  experiment  ^  This  is  the  interpretation  which
suddenly  occurred  to  me  as  the  most  natural  one,  but  Adriano
explained  that  he  was  .sent  by  Elvira,  who  was  much  vexed  at  not
being  able  to  come. In  the  end  I  told  Adriano  the  programme.

November  Y'dth. — Towards  midday  Sig"*  Maria  and  I  went  to  the
home  of  Angelina,  who  could  barely  remember  that  she  had  dreamt
of  the  blue  child  and  nothing  more.  The  failure  is  complete,  because
Elvira  did  not  figure  in  the  programme  I  had  communicated  to  Adriano
overnight.  Later,  in  another  place,  I  questioned  Elvira  about  the
cause  of  the  failure.  She  replied  in  automatic  writing,  and  attributed
it  to  the  too  light  and  agitated  sleep  of  the  child.

Experiment  20. — I  proposed-  to  Elvira  to  try  again,  and  gave  her
another  programme  for  the  following  night.  Naturally  I  took  care
that  Sig"'^  Maria  and  Angelina  should  meet  no  more  that  evening.

November  20th. — I  went  in  the  morning  with  Sig"'*'  Maria  to  see
the  child,  who  told  us  she  had  had  two  dreams,  neither  of  which  had
the  least  connection  with  my  programme.

I  had  here  another  opportunity  of  remarking  how  easy  it  was,  by
means  of  suggestive  questions,  to  make  Angelina  relate  any  story  I
wished.  However,  to-day  she  was  particularly  pre-occupied  with  the
return  to  Padua — not  because  she  regretted  it,  but  because  she  feared
her  cousin  would  go  without  her.  This  pre-occupation,  which  drove
the  dream  from  her  mind,  no  doubt  augmented  her  suggestibility,  or
rather  her  inclination  to  give  heedless  answers  in  order  to  put  an  end
to  a  subject  that  did  not  interest  her. This  susceptibility,  however,

1  This  hypothesis  does  not  afiFect  the  utihty  of  the  stvidy  of  these  personalities,  upon
wliich  I  have  insisted  from  the  first.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  clear  that  if  they  are
nothing  more  than  the  translation  into  supraliminal  terms  of  subliminal  operations
inaccessible  to  our  intelligence,  they  would  constitute  the  real  keys  which  yield
access  to  the  study  of  the  transcendental  man.  To  neglect  studying  them  would  be
like  the  neglect  of  the  study  of  hieroglyphics  by  a  person  who  wished  to  penetrate  the
mysteries  of  ancient  Egypt.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  259


by  no  means  weakens  the  telepathic  interpretation  of  the  successful
cases.  In  the  various  cases  concei'ning  which  I  myself  interrogated
her,  I  certainly  could  not  mistake  my  suggestions  for  her  dreams.
When  Sign*  Maria  qiiestioned  the  child,  I  could  trust  to  her  good
sense  and  to  her  exactness  in  following  my  indications,  which  was
also  evidenced  by  the  care  she  showed  in  bringing  forward  the
points  of  discrepancy.  But  in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  and
those  the  most  interesting,  the  child  related  the  dream  to  Sig^
Annetta,  who  knew  absolutely  nothing  of  the  programme  fixed.

On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  (jSTovember  20th)  we  had  all
returned  to  Padua.  By  no  means  discouraged  at  the  negative  result
of  this  little  telepathic  expedition,  I  called  on  Sig"^  Maria  again  in  the
evening.  Elvira  manifested  in  automatic  writing,  [and — after  explain
ing  that  the  child's  susceptibility  to  her  influence  had  been  disturbed
by  the  presence  of  strangers — said  finally,]  "  I  warn  you  there  will  be
no  dream  to-night,  because  the  child  is  too  excited  with  her  journey  ;
another  night  perhaps  ;  to-night  I  can  promise  nothing."

Novemher  21  si. — [No  dream  proposed.]

Experiment  21. — Novemher  23rd. — I  proposed  the  following  dream
for  the  next  night : — Angelina  was  to  be  among  the  hills  with  a  peasant
of  the  mountains,  who  had  a  basket  on  her  back.  They  were  to  climb
a  rough  path,  and  Angelina  would  be  tired.  Then  the  peasant  would
put  her  in  the  basket  and  carry  her.  This  peasant  was  to  be  Angelina's
grandmother,  who  was  then  at  Milan.  I  chose  a  mountainous  scene
on  purpose,  because  the  child  had  never  seen  one,  and  thus  we  should
be  able  to  discover  traces  of  verbal  suggestion  or  of  direct  perception.

It  was  still  day  when  I  left,  so  the  experiment  was  not  protected
by  the  usual  blockade.^

November  2ith,  4  p.m. — Sig"^  Maria  told  me  that  the  dream  had
taken  place  with  precision.  Angelina  had  told  her  that  her  grand-
mother at  Milan  looked  ugly  dressed  up  like  that  with  a  handkerchief
on  her  head.  The  basket  in  which  she  had  been  carried  was  like  those
used  at  Venice  for  carrying  coals.

It  is  evident  that  Angelina  perceived  the  scene  with  more  details
than  were  mentioned  in  my  programme,  as  she  saw  her  grandmother's
headkerchief  as  it  is  worn  by  our  mountaineers.  It  is  not  rare  to  see,
both  at  Venice  and  Padua,  mountaineers  with  basket  and  kerchief.
However,  as  we  have  seen,  the  waking  Angelina  associates  the  basket
with  the  coal  vendors  of  Venice,  instead  of  with  women  with  kerchiefs
on  their  heads. -

1 1  mean  by  this  word  any  precaiition  taken  to  prevent  normal  communication
between  the  subjects.

-  My  notes  taken  at  the  time  do  not  make  it  clear  that  the  child  saw  the  mountain
scenery.  But  I  believe  I  remember  that  she  spoke  of  a  fatiguing  path  and  many  stones.


260


Dr.  G.  B,  Ermacora.


Experiment  22. — The  dream  I  proposed  for  the  next  night  need  not
be  stated,  as  it  did  not  take  place,  possibly  for  the  following  reasons.

gigiia  Maria's  father,  who  was  old  and  ill,  was  at  this  time  in
Venice.  On  the  evening  of  this  day,  November  24th,  she  received
notice  that  he  was  very  ill,  and  she  and  her  mother  decided  to  go  to
Venice  next  day.  During  the  night  Sig"^  Maria  dreamt  that  she
saw  her  father,  as  thin  as  a  skeleton,  as  she  had  never  seen  him  in  life,
rise  slowly  from  his  bed  into  the  air.  She  woke  suddenly  with  the  im-
pression that  he  was  dead  and  found  (she  does  not  remember  how)  that
it  was  a  little  past  4  in  the  morning.  The  child  also  woke  just  then,
and  said  that  now  it  would  be  useless  to  go  to  Venice,  for  that  her
grandfather  was  already  dead.

When  they  arrived  at  Venice  they  heard,  in  fact,  that  he  had  died
shortly  after  4  a.m.  Sig"^  Maria's  grief  prevented  my  attempting  to
procure  other  information  about  the  case.  However,  a  short  time  after
she  told  rae  that  she  had  heard  from  those  about  him  that  he  had
become  exceptionally  thin,  as  the  dream  had  shown  him.

For  other  reasons  the  dream  experiments  were  interrupted  for  some
days.  In  the  meantime,  on  the  nights  of  November  28th,  29th,  and
30th,  the  child,  who  slept  alone  in  her  little  room,  awoke  frightened
about  4.15  or  4.30,  saying  that  she  felt  the  bed  shake,  and  heard
scratching  on  the  floor  mat.  It  is  curious  that  this  should  have
happened  at  the  particular  hour  of  Maria's  dream.

During  this  period  I  busied  myself,  without  success,  in  preparing
the  ground  for  the  production  of  dreams  under  my  direct  control.  I
tried  to  habituate  the  child  to  the  hypnotic  sleep,  but  I  only  succeeded
once,  and  the  one  success  was  followed  by  several  failures ;  her  want  of
attention  makes  her  at  present  a  bad  hypnotic  subject.  [I  also  failed
to  persuade  Elvira  to  help  me  in  inducing  sleep  in  the  child.]

Ex'periment  23. — December  \Sth. — Evening.  I  proposed  the  follow-
ing dream  to  Elvira,  who  manifested  in  automatic  writing : — Angelina
was  to  be  in  a  box  at  the  theatre  with  Sig"^  Maria  and  Signer  G.  M.
(who  is  known  to  Sig"'i'  Maria  and  also  to  the  Elvira  personality,
but  is  entirely  unknown  to  the  child).  The  spectacle  was  to  be  an
equestrian  circus,  and  Angelina  was  to  be  particularly  pleased  with  a
little  white  ass  (somarello).

This  dream  had  two  aims.  As  Angelina  had  never  been  in  a  box
at  the  theatre,  this  might  give  occasion  for  some  discrepancy  between
the  visual  images  perceived  and  the  terms  which  she  might  use  in
her  account  ;  thus  the  hypothesis  of  verbal  suggestion  would  be  put
to  the  proof.  Further,  I  wished  to  repeat  the  experiment  of  the
recognition  of  the  portrait  of  an  unknown  person  seen  for  the  first
time  in  a  dream.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  261


Before  I  left,  and  before  Sig"^  Maria  had  seen  the  child,  the  latter
was  locked  into  her  I'oom,  and  I  asked  Sig^  Annetta  to  hide  the  key
instead  of  tying  it  round  her  neck,  so  that  Elvira,  if  she  should
possibly  manifest  motorially  during  the  night,  should  be  unable  to  get
possession  of  it  and  proceed  to  make  verbal  suggestions.  (I  have  said
that  Sig^  Annetta  and  her  daughter  slept  in  the  same  bed.)

December  19</t. — 4  p.m.  Sig"^  Maria  was  in  bed  with  a  headache.
Sig^  Annetta  (as  usual  ignorant  of  the  programme)  told  me  the  dream
which  Angelina  had  related  to  her  that  morning  •  it  had  nothing  in
common  with  the  programme.

Experiment  24. — As  I  did  not  think  it  probable  that  the  sus-
pected verbal  suggestion  (which  I  judge  to  be  impossible  without
the  trance)  could  take  place  in  spite  of  Sig^  Annetta's  vigilance
during  the  day,  I  charged  the  latter  to  renew  the  nightly  blockade
and  hide  the  key,  in  the  hope  that  the  dream  would  occur  on  the
succeeding  night.

No  communication  with  Elvira  to-day.

December  20th,  4  p.m. — Sig"*  Maria  was  better,  and  I  found  her  up.
This  night  the  dream  had  taken  place,  and  the  child  had  related  it  in
the  morning  to  Sig*  Annetta,  whom  she  had  seen  before  anybody  else,
and  then  to  Sig"^'  Maria  and  the  latter's  brother.

She  had  thought  she  was  in  the  theatre,  in  a  tiny  room  which  had
no  windows  towards  the  street,  but  which  had  them  towards  the
inside  of  the  theatre.  Sig"^  Maria  was  there  too,  and  also  a  very  tall
gentleman  with  a  fair  moustache.  There  were  only  a  few  people  in
the  middle  of  the  theatre,  but  running  horses  instead.  There  was
besides  an  animal,  a  little  donkey,  white  and  small,  which  she  liked  so
much  that  she  wished  to  have  it  at  home.

I  caused  the  child  to  tell  me  the  story  over  again,  and  again
I  proved  how  easy  it  was  to  make  her  alter  her  story  by  suggestion.
Naturally  this  detracts  nothing  from  the  value  of  the  first  spontaneous-
account  made  to  people  who  knew  nothing  of  the  programme.

It  must  be  noticed  that  in  this  dream  the  verbal  image  box  was
entirely  excluded,  while  Angelina  translated  the  A'isual  image  into
words  with  childlike  ingenuousness,  which  favours  the  hypothesis  of
direct  perception.  The  child  did  not  recognise  the  portrait  of  Signor
G.  M.,  which  I  gave  to  her  among  twenty  others,  and  which  she  had
first  looked  for  in  the  presence  of  Sig'*'  Annetta  and  her  daughter-in-
law,  and  then  before  me  and  Sig"'^  Maria ;  on  the  contrary,  on  the
latter  occasion  she  put  it  aside  without  hesitation.

From  time  to  time  as  the  child  told  her  story  she  turned  towards
Signa  Maria  for  approbation,  as  if  she  were  convinced  that  Sig"''^  Maria


262


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


had  been  present  at  the  scene  ;  and  this  shows  how  easily  she  confounds
her  dreams  with  reality,  i

I  trust  that  the  successive  nocturnal  blockades,  although  separated
by  the  intervening  day,  need  not  be  put  down  as  inefficacious,  since
•gigna  Maria  was  in  bed  all  day,  and  Sig*  Annetta  assured  me  that  the
child  only  once  entered  her  room  for  a  few  moments.  Sig"'''  Maria
assured  me  also  that  on  account  of  the  intense  pain  she  suffered,  she
•only  exchanged  a  few  words  with  the  child,  and  that  no  allusion  was
made  to  the  dream.

Experiment  25. — proposed  the  following  dream  to  Elvii-a  for  the
next  night: — Angelina  is  in  a  boat  on  the  neighbouring  canal  with
,giga  Annetta  and  me.  I  am  not  rowing,  but  the  boat  is  drawn  by  a
pair  of  swans,  and  I  am  seated  at  the  prow  guiding  them  with  reins.
The  other  two  are  seated  behind  me.  We  go  up  the  canal  as  far  as
the  astronomical  observatory.

When  I  went  away,  I  left  the  twenty  portraits,  including  that  of
Signor  G.  M.,  with  Sig^  Annetta,  to  see  if  the  child  would  recognise
him  when  she  was  left  in  quiet.  Sig^  Annetta  watched  her  all  the
evening,  then  locked  her  into  her  room  and  hid  the  key.

December  2\st,  4  p.m. — The  first  thing  I  heard  when  I  entered  the
house  was  that  Angelina  had  recognised  the  portrait  of  Signor  G.  M.
Sig^  Annetta  assured  me  she  had  found  it  when  alone  with  her  (she
herself  does  not  know  Signor  G.  M.,  and  did  not  know  which  portrait
was  to  be  looked  for).  Angelina  justified  her  first  failure  by  explain-
ing that  that  gentleman  at  the  theatre  was  smiling,  and  that  in  the
portrait  he  was  very  serious. ^

Angelina  told  me  that  she  had  dreamed  last  night  that  there  was
a  boat  in  the  neighbouring  canal  and  that  I  was  in  it.  She  could  give
me  no  other  jDarticulars,  not  even  if  she  had  also  been  in  the  boat ;  but
when  I  re-visited  Sig"^  Maria  in  the  evening  she,  upon  being  questioned,
assured  me  that  when  Angelina  told  her  dream  in  the  morning,  she
had  said  spontaneously  that  she  was  in  the  boat  with  me.

This  success  is  evidently  very  incomplete,  but  it  cannot  be  regarded
as  a  chance  coincidence  if  we  consider  it  as  a  whole.

Ex2)eriment  26. — I  asked  Elvira  if  she  was  aware  of  people,  places,
actions,  or  other  things  unknown  to  Sig"''^  Maria,  out  of  which  I  could

m

1  I  believe  myself  in  a  position  to  reject  as  an  absurdity  the  hypothesis  that  the
child's  story  is  a  comedy  taught  her  by  Signorina  Maria,  and  that  consequently  she
turns  ingenuously  to  the  latter  for  suggestions  ;  and  it  is  besides  disproved  by  the
later  successes  under  stricter  conditions.

-  This  photograph  also  has  been  sent  to  me  by  Dr.  Ermacora. — Ed.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  263

make  dreams  for  Angelina.  She  replied,  "  Yes  ;  I  will  even  tell  you
the  dream  for  to-night,  but  I  will  only  tell  you  this  evening."

I  accepted  the  proposal,  stipulating  that  I  might  add  something
myself,  to  make  sure  that  the  nocturnal  blockade  should  not  be  fi'us-
trated  by  a  previous  communication  with  Angelina.

In  the  evening  I  asked  Elvira  for  her  programme,  and  she  replied
in  automatic  writing  : — "  I  think  it  would  be  fine  to  make  Angelina
dream  that  she  was  on  the  Lake  of  Garda  with  me,  but  then  I  will
make  her  see  things  which  no  traveller  sees,  but  which  exist  notwith-
standing, I  assure  you.  Now  tell  me  what  you  want  to  add  to  it."  I
accepted  Elvira's  programme,  requesting  as  addition  only  that  the
water  of  the  lake  should  be  as  white  as  milk.  Elvii'a  replied,  "  I  must
make  her  see  everything  under  water,  but  I  can  easily  make  it  the
colour  you  want."

When  I  left  I  saw  Angelina  already  asleep  on  the  ground  floor.  I
made  the  usual  recommendations  to  Sig'^  Annetta,  though  I  knew  thei'e
was  no  need.

December  2'2nd,  4.30  p.m.— Angelina  told  me  she  had  dreamt  as
follows  ; — She  was  with  the  blue  child,  who  was  dressed  like  a  boy,  in
trousers,  with  a  large  hat  on  her  head.  They  went  to  a  very  large
canal,  without  bridges,  and  with  trees  on  its  banks.  At  first  they
walked  on  the  water  without  bathing  themselves  in  it,  and  then  they
went  under  it.  There  Angelina  saw  many  broken  houses,  of  which  she
could  distinguish  the  doors  and  windows  ;  there  was  also  a  church,
broken  too,  but  not  so  much  as  the  houses.  She  also  heard  bells  ring,
but  without  seeing  either  bells  or  bell-tower.  Then  they  both  came
out  quite  dry,  and  the  blue  child  kissed  her,  and  said,  "  I  am  going  to
Paradise,  and  you  must  take  care  to  remember  the  dream."  The  water
was  the  colour  of  water  and  anise.

gigna  Maria  and  Sig^  Annetta  assured  me  that  the  dream  had  been
told  the  same  way  in  the  morning,  and  first,  as  usual,  to  Sig'''  Annetta,
when  lier  daughter  was  not  present.  The  night  before,  Angelina  had
been  put  to  bed  directly  I  left  by  Sig''^  Annetta,  who  allowed  no  com-
munication with  her  daughter,  and  locked  the  door  and  hid  the  key.

A  dream  like  this  did  not,  of  course,  represent  things  unknown  to
gigiia  Maria  and  known  to  others,  because  the  existence  of  ruins  under
the  Lake  of  Garda  is  not  demonstrated  nor  demonstrable.  There  is  a
legend  to  that  effect,  but  Sig"^.  Maria  may  have  once  known  and
forgotten  it.  When  she  was  asked  if  she  had  read  anything  about  the
Lake  of  Gai-da,  she  replied  in  the  negative,  and  told  me  that  her  scanty
reading  consisted  chiefly  of  translations  from  French  novels,  in  which
the  Champs  Elysees,  etc.,  and  not  the  Lake  of  Garda,  played  a  part.
But  such  a  declaration  is,  of  course,  insufficient  to  prove  tliat  she
might  not  in  some  way  have  heard  the  legend,  and  this  is  rendered


264


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


more  probable  by  a  discovery  I  made  later,  that  when,  in  the  case
of  Maria,  a  conscious  idea  has  been  telepathically  transferred,  it
acquires  in  consequence  a  tendency  to  pass  out  of  the  field  of  conscious
memory.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  Angelina  showed  from  her  description  that
she  had  really  seen  a  lake,  but  she  called  it  a  very  large  canal  with
trees  on  its  banks  ;  simply  because  the  idea  of  a  canal  was  familiar  to
her.  Besides,  the  water  was  seen  of  a  milky  white  colour,  but  this
perception  was  not  associated  with  the  colour  of  milk,  but  with  the
colour  of  aniseed  and  water.  This  is  another  fact  unfavourable  to  the
idea  of  verbal  suggestion.

Experiment  '21 . — When  Elvira  manifested  in  automatic  writing,  she
first  asked  me  ; — "  Are  you  pleased  with  the  child's  dream  1  Tell  me
the  truth."  I  replied  : — "The  dream  was  amusing  to  her,  but  of  very
little  use  to  me,  because  it  was  about  things  which  I  cannot  possibly
verify."

Ansiver.  "  Leave  me  to  show  her  something  that  Maria  cannot
possibly  have  seen.  I  see  that  the  child  understands  me  and  remembers
quite  well  what  I  say  to  her.  I  will  tell  her  in  her  dream  the  name  of
the  city,  and  the  name  of  the  exact  point  she  has  seen."

I  thought  it  best  to  accept  the  proposal,  though  it  was  not  what  I
was  aiming  at,  but  I  asked  Elvira  to  show  Angelina  a  little  cart,
with  a  small  barrel  in  it,  drawn  by  a  large  dog.  Elvira  accepted  the
addition.

Experiment  28. — December  23rd. —  4  p.m.  Angelina  had  had  no
dream  the  preceding  night,  or  at  least  when  she  woke  she  did  not
remember  it.  I  was  told  that  she  had  been  restless,  probably  from
worms,  and  this  would  account  for  the  failure.

Elvira  said  instead  that  the  dream  had  not  taken  place  because  she
had  been  unable  to  come,  arid  promised  to  act  the  next  night.

December  24:th. — 4  p.m.  Sig"'"^  Maria  told  me  that  Angelina  had
related  the  following  dream  that  morning  ; — -

She  was  with  the  blue  child  in  a  place  full  of  stones  ;  there  were
very  large  horses  with  long  thin  necks,  and  some  had  one  hump,  and
some  two.  The  men  wore  white  cloaks.  The  road  was  all  up  and
down  hill.  She  saw  a  great  stone  with  many  holes,  and  a  little  cart
drawn  by  a  large  dog,  with  a  barrel  full  of  wine  which  was  trickling
out.  The  blue  child  had  told  her  at  the  end  of  the  dream  that  this
place  was  Cario  {i.e.,  Cairo).  I  called  the  child  and  made  her  give  an
account,  which  coincided  almost  perfectly  with  that  of  Sig"''^  Maria.
She  only  left  out  some  small  details  which  she  afterwards  added  in


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  265


reply  to  my  non-suggestive  questions.  She  added  that  the  men  were
not  all  in  white  cloaks, — some  had  jackets  ;  they  had  also  white  hats
{turbans  ? )

Sig*'  Annetta,  who,  as  usual,  had  heard  the  child's  story  directly
she  woke,  confirmed  all  this.

In  this  case  also  the  ideas  might  have  been  easily  drawn  from  the
mind  of  Sig°a  Maria,  who  might  have  acquired  them  from  illustrated
books,  pictures,  or  more  likely  panoramas,  and  the  control,  of  course,
was  not  perfectly  rigorous.  Angelina  described  the  camels  as  large
horses  with  long  thin  necks  and  one  or  two  humps.  Such  a  description
renders  it  probable  that  she  really  saw  them  without  knowing  what
they  were.  I  could  not  understand  what  the  child  meant  to  describe
in  talking  of  the  large  stone  with  holes.  ^

Experiment  29. — In  the  evening  I  visited  Sig"=i  Maria  again,  and,
putting  myself  into  communication  with  Elvira,  I  proposed  a  dream  of
^lerial  ascension  for  the  same  night ;  but  first,  of  course,  I  asked  her  if
•she  knew  anything  about  it.  Elvira  replied  (automatic  script),  "  Yes,
we  can  try  that  too;  I  am  not  used  to  it,  but  I  know  a  little,  however."

I  then  explained  my  dream  :  Angelina  should  be  with  me  and  with
the  servant  who  lived  at  her  own  home  in  Venice,  in  the  enclosure  of
the  Prato  della  Valle  (in  Padua).  We  should  all  get  into  the  car  of  a
balloon  and  ascend  from  the  middle  of  the  enclosure,  descendino-  at
Venice,  on  the  Rialto  bridge. The  balloon  was  to  be  green.

Decemher  25th.  Evening. — Sig*  Annetta  told  me  that,  when  I  left
the  evening  before,  Angelina  was  already  asleep,  and  that  her  daughter
had  gone  to  bed  directly  after  without  seeing  the  child.  Sig<'^  Annetta
had  put  the  latter  to  bed  without  waking  her,  had  locked  her  into  her
room  and  hidden  the  key.  In  the  morning  the  child  told  her  dream
before  seeing  Sig"'i  Maria. Her  story  was  as  follows  : —

She  seemed  to  be  with  me  and  the  servant  fi'om  Venice  in  the  Frato
della  Valle,  where  there  was  a  great  ball,  the  colour  of  salad,  furnished
with  many  ropes.  We  all  went  up  into  the  air  and  descended  at
Venice  upon  the  Rialto  bridge.

Afterwards  Sig"a  Maria  told  me  that  in  the  morning,  as  soon  as  she
saw  the  child,  the  latter  had  told  her  the  same  story,  with  the  difference
that  she  had  said  "  the  colour  of  grass  "  instead  of  the  colour  of  salad  ;
and  she  had  added  that  we  had  climbed  in  by  the  cords.

It  should  be  remarked  again  that  the  expressions  "  colour  of  grass,
colour  of  salad,"  bear  witness  for  the  direct  impression  of  colour
rather  than  for  verbal  impi'ession ;  but  I  need  not  insist  upon  this

1  About  nine  months  later  I  asked  Elvira  for  an  explanation  of  this.  She  replied
that  Angelina  had  meant  to  describe  certain  Egyptian  houses.


266


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


further  in  cases  of  complete  success  with  the  blockade,  especially  as  it
will  be  seen  that  ray  methods  became  more  and  more  sti'ingent.

Experiment  30. — I  then  proposed  to  Elvira  to  carry  out  a  dream  she
had  proposed  on  December  20th — viz.,  to  make  Angelina  dream  that
she  was  at  sea  and  sea-sick  in  a  storm,  and  that  she  heard  the  orders
of  the  captain.  She  accepted  the  unexpected  proposition.  The  aim  of
this  dream  was,  as  I  have  said,  to  discover  if  it  were  possible  to  induce
in  the  child  emotions  and  sensations  hitherto  entirely  unknown  to  her.
I  asked  Elvira,  "  Do  you  know  enough  of  nautical  matters,  or  must  I
help  you  ?  "

Ansiver.  "  No,  don't  tell  me  anything;  I  know  a  little."

To  obtain  a  proof  that  the  dream  was  a  result  of  impressions,
received  that  night,  and  in  no  way  prepared  beforehand,  I  asked  Elvira
to  add  a  red  flag,  with  a  green  cross  in  the  middle,  to  the  boat.

December  l^th. — Signor  C.  Vanzetti  and  I  called  on  Sig"*''  Maria,
about  3  p.m.  Sig"^  Maria  was  present,  but  not  Angelina,  when
Sig-a  Annetta  assured  us  that  she  had  applied  the  blockade  rigorously
the  preceding  night,  so  that  Sig"'^  Maria  could  not  possibly  have
communicated  with  Angelina,  whose  door  had  been  locked  and  the  key
hidden.  About  4  a.m.  Angelina  had  called  for  Sig^-  Annetta,  who
went  to  see  what  she  wanted.  When  the  child  saw  her  she  said,
"  Grandmother,  so  bad  ! "  ;  complained  of  having  been  sick,  and
pointed  to  signs  of  the  sickness  on  the  floor,  but  Sig'^  Annetta  could
see  nothing.  Then  the  child  said  she  had  dreamt  of  being  in  a  very
laro-e  boat,  with  flags  above,  one  of  which  had  a  sa?ac/-coloured  cros.s,
and  that  a  man  with  a  great  beard  had  said,  "  Cut  the  ropes,  cut
the  sails."

gigna  Maria,  who,  as  usual,  only  heard  the  child's  story  later  on,
added  the  following  particulars  : — Angelina  had  told  her  that  the  flag
with  the  saZ«(^-coloured  cross  was  red ;  that  the  men  had  black  trousers
and  were  in  their  shirt-sleeves  ;  that  they  were  all  upon  a  very  large
tramway.  It  should  be  noted  that  at  Venice  the  small  steamboats
which  carry  passengers  from  one  point  of  the  city  to  another  are  called
tramways,  and  thus  Angelina,  when  speaking  of  great  tramways,  meant
steamboats.

The  absent  child  was  now  called,  and  repeated  the  account  herself.
She  said  she  had  been  in  a  steamboat  with  many  men,  none  of  whom
she  knew.  One  of  them  had  a  long  beard.  There  was  a  red  flag  with
a  salad-coloured  croivn.  When  asked  what  she  meant  by  croivn,  she
traced  a  cross  with  her  finger.  The  confusion  of  names  results  from
the  fact  that  devotional  crowns  generally  carry  a  cross  hanging  from
the  end.  Angelina  went  on  to  relate  that  there  was  much  water,
which  even  came  inside ;  and  it  thundered  and  lightened  besides.  The


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  267


man  with  the  beard  said,  "  Be^id  the  sails  !  cut  the  ro-pes  /"  She  said
her  legs  trembled,  that  she  could  not  stand,  and  then  was  sick.

We  asked  her  if  the  steamboat  was  like  those  which  go  from  Padua
to  Venice  (i.e.,  the  trains)  or  like  those  on  the  Lagoon.  She  answered
that  it  was  like  those  on  the  Lagoon.  Sig^  Annetta  asked  her  if  the
ropes  she  had  talked  about  in  the  morning  were  stretched  (horizontally)
or  upright.  "  LTpright,"  replied  the  child.  Sig^  Annetta  told  us  that
the  child  habitually  woke  early,  but  never  at  4  a.m.,  which  at  this
season  is  the  middle  of  the  night.

Setting  aside  the  unseamanlike  orders  of  the  captain,  which  can  be
explained  by  Elvira's  ignorance  of  things  nautical,  this  dream  is
interesting  from  the  fact  that  a  new  sensation  is  implicated  in  it, — a-
visceral  sensation.  The  child  said  she  felt  so  ill ;  she  must  even  have
felt  really  sea-sick,  as  she  believed  she  had  vomited  ;  and  this  was  all
the  more  remai-kable  as  she  had  never  been  to  sea,  and  does  not  come
of  a  seafaring  family.  She  was  therefore  ignorant  of  the  pathological
results  of  the  oscillation  of  the  body,  and  therefore  the  mere  idea
of  going  to  sea  in  bad  weather  was  insufficient  to  set  in  action  a
pre-existing  mechanism  of  associations  based  on  memory  only,  and
producing  the  sensation  of  sea-sickness.


Part  II.
Study  of  Visual  Images.

I  now  proposed  another  method  of  control  in  order  to  test  the
hypothesis  of  verbal  suggestion.  This  was  to  show  Sig"''^  Maria  ivhile
Elvira  was  present  a  previously  unseen  drawing,  representing  nothing
that  she  could  describe  in  words,  and  then  ask  Elvira  to  make  Angelina
see  it  in  a  dream.  Afterwards  I  would  show  Angelina  the  real  drawing,,
mixed  with  others  of  the  same  type  [which  Sig"-'^  Maria  had  not  seen]^
to  see  if  she  would  recognise  it  after  having  dreamt  of  it.

On  December  25th  I  asked  Elvira,  "  If  I  showed  you  the  design  of
some  architectural  ornament  chosen  at  hazard  amongst  many,  could
you  .show  it  to  Angelina  in  a  dream,  so  that  after  she  awoke  she  would
be  able  to  recognise  it  amongst  many  others  1 "  Elvira  replied  (by
automatic  writing),  "  Oh,  yes,  indeed,  it  will  please  me  very  much  to
do  it."  Q.  "Even  if  I  used  drawings  unknown  to  you  and  Angelina
and  Maria,  such  as  machines,  etc.  ? "  A.  "  Yes,  yes ;  whatever  you
please."

December  2Qth.  Evening. — I  took  with  me  Fig.  V.  of  the  first
number  of  Professor  Romolo  Trevisani's  Corso  d'Omato,  meaning  to
begin  with  something  easy. I  left  the  five  other  pictures  which  the


268


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


number  contains  at  home.  As  the  picture  is  not  mounted  for  safely
carrj'ing  in  the  pocket,  I  enclosed  it  between  two  very  stiff  pieces  of
paper,  so  that  it  should  not  crease  or  tear,  and  thus  be  distinguishable
from  the  others,  which  are  quite  new.

However,  this  evening  I  could  make  no  experiments,  because
Adriano  manifested  instead  of  Elvira,  and  said,  in  automatic  writing,
that  he  could  not  yet  replace  Elvira  in  such  experiments.

December  11th.  Evening. — The  experiment  with  the  drawing  had
to  be  put  off  for  the  same  reason  as  yesterday.

Experiment  31. — December  28th.  Evening. — Elvira  manifested,
and  said  she  was  ready  for  the  experiment.  She  said,  however,  that
she  was  much  afraid  she  could  not  see  the  drawing  without  making
use  of  Sig^s-  Maria's  eyes.  Therefore,  to  prevent  the  latter  from
looking  at  the  drawing  either  more  or  less  than  was  necessary,  I
arranged  with  Elvira  that  she  should  make  a  sign  with  Sig"-^  Maria's
hand  when  she  had  seen  enough,  upon  which  I  would  cover  the
picture  again.

I  then  drew  from  my  pocket  the  picture,  which  neither  Sig"^
Maria  nor  any  one  else  in  the  house  had  seen,  and  put  it  before  her.  In
about  half  a  minute  her  hand  moved,  and  I  covered  the  picture  and
pocketed  it  quickly  so  that  no  one  else  should  see  it.  Elvira  wrote  at
once,  "  That  is  enough  for  me."

When  I  was  leaving,  1  went  to  the  room  on  the  ground  floor  where
Angelina  had  only  just  awoke  from  her  usual  nap  on  the  sofa.  She
was  very  tiresome,  as  she  usually  is  when  sleepy.  I  thought  she  was
not  at  all  in  a  state  to  receive  any  information  from  Sig"''^  Maria  about
the  drawing  the  latter  had  seen.

As  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  if  our  normal  personalities  are
able  to  induce  telepathic  dreams  in  Angelina,  as  Elvira  does,  I  had
tried  at  my  house  on  several  nights  to  suggest  some  dream  to  her,  but
had  had  no  results.  Supposing  that  Sig"''*'  Maria  was  in  better  con-
ditions for  such  action,  I  begged  her,  on  leaving,  to  will  strongly  and
frequently  during  the  night,  while  Angelina  was  presumably  asleep,
that  she  should  dream  she  had  a  hen  in  her  arms.  And  to  induce
Sigiia  Maria  to  do  her  best,  I  told  her  that  what  Elvira  did  she  should
be  able  to  do,  which  aroused  her  emulation.

December  29th.  7.15  a.m. — •Sig"'''  Annetta,  whom  I  saw  first,  told
me  that  yesterday  evening,  with  the  usual  precautions,  she  had  locked
the  child  into  her  room  and  hid  the  key,  but  that  shortly  before  my
arrival  she  had  heard  calls,  and  knowing  that  Angelina  was  not  well,
she  had  opened  the  door,  and  not  having  time  to  stop  with  her,  had
been  obliged  to  carry  her  to  her  own  bed,  where  her  daughter  still  was.
On  going  up  I  found  Sig"^  Maria  still  in  bed  and  awake,  and  Angelina


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  269


asleep  again ;  however  she  soon  awoke.  Sig"^  Maria  assured  me  that
during  the  short  time  Angelina  had  been  there,  she  had  not  spoken  to
her  about  the  drawing  or  anything.

Siga  Annetta  then  took  the  child  downstairs.  I  gave  her  the
pictures,  asking  her  to  show  them  to  AngeKna  and  ask  her  if  she  had
dreamt  of  anything  she  saw  among  them.  Of  the  six  pictures,  three
represented  simple  or  composite  leaves,  and  the  other  three  are  large
roses.  Angelina  selected  Fig.  V.,  saying  she  was  sure  she  had  dreamt
of  that  and  not  of  the  others.

I  had,  however,  forgotten  to  hide  the  inscription,  "Fig.  V.,"in  the
corner  when  I  showed  the  picture  to  Sig^a  Maria  the  evening  before,
and  although  Angelina  does  not  know  her  alphabet  or  numbers,  this
might  have  offered  a  i^nt  de  repere  sufficiently  describable  by  words  or


drawing.


After  the  child  had  found  the  picture,  I  went  upstairs  to  Sign^^
Maria's  room  carrying  the  pamphlet,  and— avoiding  any  indication-
asked  her  to  find  the  picture  she  had  seen  last  evening.  To  my  surprise
she  rejected  Fig.  Y.,  and  hesitated  between  the  other  two  roses.  I
should  add  that  directly  after  I  had  shown  the  rose  to  Sig"a  Maria  the
evening  before,  she  could  not  tell  me  how  many  leaves  it  had.

This  fact,  which  was  repeated  constantly  during  the  experiments,
is  probably  of  great  importance  in  psychology,  and  particularly  in
telepathy. Indeed,  as  may  be  already  seen  from  this  first  example,  it
was  not  that  Sig"a  Maria  had  forgotten  the  figure  ;  on  the  contrary,
she  recognised  it,  but  sub-consciously,  other^N-ise  she  could  not  have
rejected  it  at  once:  and  besides,  she  always  justifies  such  an  action  (as
will  be  seen  later)  by  the  most  unlikely  reasons,  exactly  as  happens
with  a  subject  acting  under  a  hypnotic  suggestion  intended  to  alter
his  judgment. Consequently  the  telepathic  transference  of  a  sensory
image  to  another  percipient  is  to  Sig"a  Maria  practically  the  same
thing  as  the  suggestion  that  she  shall  not  he  able  to  recognise  the
image,  and  thus  is  the  same  thing  as  the  disappearance  of  the  image
from  her  supraliminal  consciousness. Naturally  we  must  guard  against
concluding  general  psychological  laws  from  the  psychical  idiosyncrasies
of  particular  subjects  ;  but  in  any  case  the  fact  remains  that  such
illusions  of  memory  present  themselves  in  some subjects. And  if
it  finally  becomes  recognised  that  in  all  telepathic  agents  there  exists
an  inclination  more  or  less  strong  to  present  such  phenomena,  this
would  make  a  new  point  of  view  from  which  to  explain  the  frequent
unconsciousness  of  the  agent  in  spontaneous  telepathy.

As  to  Signa^  Maria's  attempt  consciously  to  suggest  a  dream,  she
told  me  she  had  tried  to  do  what  I  told  her,  both  overnight  and  in  the
morning  when  Angelina  feU  asleep  in  her  bed.  But  the  latter  said  she
had  had  no  other  dream,  and  when  a  possible  dream  about  a  hen  was


270


Br.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


mentioned  to  her,  she  did  not  admit  the  suggestion,  but  positively-
denied  having  had  such  a  dream.

After  dinner,  when  Signor  C.  Vanzetti  was  present,  Elvira  began
to  write  automatically,  asking  at  once,  "  Are  you  pleased  with  me  1 "
I  expressed  my  satisfaction  at  the  success,  but  asked  her  if  much  time
and  pains  had  been  needed  to  induce  the  visual  image  in  the  little  girl.
She  replied,  "  No,  on  the  contrary^  it  was  very  easy,  only  I  thought  the
child  had  not  looked  at  it  enough,  and  instead  it  was  the  grown-up  one
(Maria)  who  should  have  been  ashamed  ;  for  I  was  here  this  morning,
and  I  was  much  amused  to  see  that  she  chose  any  but  the  right  (i.e.,  any
picture  but  the  right),  and  she  was  so  sure  and  so  obstinate  ! "

Experiment  32. — -December  ?>\st.  Evening. — Elvira  manifested
through  automatic  writing,  and  I  proposed  a  new  experiment  for  that
night.  I  had  brought  J.  Cai'pentier's  Illustrated  Catalogue  of  Electrical
Apparatus,  Ed.  July,  1887,  Paris,  and  had  decided  to  transfer  to
Angelina  Fig.  11, — a  Weber's  galvanometer,  To  avoid  possible  verbal
indications  from  the  number  of  the  figure,  or  its  place,  or  the  number
of  the  page,  I  placed  the  book  (unseen  by  Sig°*  Maria)  on  the  sideboard,
open  at  the  right  page,  covering  up  the  page  with  four  perfectly  opaque
quires  of  white  paper,  so  as  to  show  the  figure  in  the  smallest  possible
square.  I  then  covered  the  figure  with  another  piece  of  paper.  When
Elvira  said  she  was  ready  to  look,  I  brought  Sig"*  Maria  close,  and
directed  her  glance  to  the  covered  figure.  I  uncovered  it  quickly,  and
looked  at  the  time.  After  52  seconds  Sig"^  Maria  said  that  Elvira  had
moved  her  hand  to  show  she  had  finished.  I  covered  up  the  figure
again  at  once,  and  Sig"''^  Maria  returned  to  the  table.  The  communica-
tion with  Elvira  was  hardly  finished,  when  I  put  the  pamphlet  in  my
pocket,  so  that  Sig"'^  Maria  did  not  see  it  again.  I  determined  in  future
to  follow  the  same  method,  also  hiding  the  initials  of  the  artist  if  they
«xist,  and  to  avoid  as  much  as  possible  pictures  with  letters  ai'ound
them,  especially  when  the  letters  could  easily  be  utilised  for  verbal
indications.  In  the  present  case  I  chose  Fig.  11,  because  it  has  several
points  in  common  with  some  others  among  the  34  in  the  catalogue,  such
as  the  lower  part  consisting  of  a  disc  on  three  feet,  a  vertical  rod  in
the  middle,  etc.,  and  because  it  would  be  very  difficult  (for  anyone  not
familiar  with  such  instruments)  to  distinguish  it  by  means  of  a  verbal
description  from  Fig.  10,  which  is  also  a  Weber's  galvanometer.^

1  All  the  pamphlets  containing  diagrams  used  in  this  and  the  following  experi-
ments have  been  sent  tc  us  by  Dr.  Ermacora.  From  a  study  of  these,  it  seems  to  us
clear  that  it  would  be  extremely  difficult— if  not  impossible— for  an  unscientific
person  with  no  knowledge  of  drawing,  who  had  only  seen  one  of  the  diagrams  in  each
case,  either  to  describe  it  to  another  person  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  him  to  pick
it  out  of  the  set,  or  to  reproduce  it  from  memory  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  enable
him  to  recognise  it. — Ed.


Telepathic  Breams  Experimentally  Induced.  271


Elvira,  in  automatic  writing,  approved  of  this  evening's  methods,
and  without  making  absolute  promises  of  success,  undertook  to  try.

I  determined  that  if  these  experiments  in  the  transference  of
pictures  should  succeed,  I  would  try  either  the  rotation  of  the  picture
in  its  own  plane,  or  specular  inversion,  in  order  to  render  verbal  trans-
ference more  difficult.  I  therefore  asked  Elvira  if  she  could  show  the
child  the  pictui-e,  not  as  she  herself  saw  it,  but  turned  through  some
angle,  or  upside  down  in  its  own  plane,  or  symmetrically  inverted.
Of  course  I  explained  these  terms  in  detail.  She  replied,  "  I  think  it
will  be  very  easy  ;  we  will  try."

January  \st,  1893.  7  a.m. — I  found  Sig"^,  Maria  and  Angelina
already  risen,  as  the  former's  sister-in-law  was  ill.  I  asked  Angelina  if
she  had  dreamt  of  anything  ;  she  said  she  had  dreamt  of  playing  with
a  paper  with  a  picture  on  it.  I  showed  her  Carpentier's  catalogue,  but
she  could  not  find  the  picture  she  had  dreamt  of,  nor  could  she  describe
the  figure  of  her  dream. She  only  said  it  was  like  a  horizontal  pole.

Elvira  did  not  manifest  this  evening.

January  2nd.  Evening. — I  asked  Elvira  the  reason  of  yesterday's
non-success,  and  she  replied,  in  automatic  writing,  "  It  was  not  the
child's  fault.  Because  T  tried  to  make  her  see  the  picture  from  another
side,  as  you  told  me,  she  did  not  see  it  well.  It  is  my  fault  for  doing
it  too  soon."  This  explanation  is  in  agreement  with  Angelina's
impression,  if  we  suppose  that  this  "  other  side  "  of  the  picture  meant
a  rotation  through  90  deg.  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  because  in
that  position  the  glass  tube  which  encloses  the  suspension  thread
becomes  a  horizontal  pole.  In  that  case  Angelina,  holding  the  picture-  '
straight,  would  not  recognise  it.

Experiment  33. — This  evening  I  took  the  catalogue  of  J.  Duboscq's
spectroscopes  (Ed.  1876),  and  chose  figure  4  beforehand.  (See  Plate
I.,  Fig.  I )  It  represents  an  Amici's  spectroscope  on  a  column  with
three  feet,  which  looks  like  a  table  with  a  central  pillar.  But  two
other  figures  out  of  the  eight  in  the  catalogue  have  this  three -footed
column,  and  this  would  make  verbal  description  of  iS'o.  4  insufficient.

Elvira  was  ready  and  pleased  to  experiment.  The  precautions
described  above  were  repeated,  and  Sig"^  Maria  looked  at  the  picture
for  30  seconds.  I  need  not  say  that  nobody  in  the  house  had  ever  seen
the  catalogue,  and  that  I  had  shown  it  to  no  one  beforehand.  I  must
here  remark  that  this  was  always  the  case,  and  that  I  used  a  fresh
book  each  time.

This  evening  the  conditions  were  more  strict.  The  child  was  put  to
bed  and  the  door  locked.  I  sealed  a  piece  of  paper  over  the  keyhole
with  four  seals.  Of  course  I  left  the  key  with  Sig'^  Annetta  in  case  of
necessity.


272


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


January  Srd.  6.30  a.m. — Sig'^  Annetta  was  up,  and  said  she  had
been  obliged  to  open  the  door,  as  Angelina  wanted  something,  but  that
she  was  asleep  again.  Sig"*  Maria  was  still  in  bed  in  the  other  room,
and  her  mother  assured  me  she  had  had  no  communication  with  the
child.  Angelina  woke  and  called  Sig^  Annetta  to  dress  her.  I  gave  Sig^
Annetta  the  Duboscq's  catalogue  to  show  to  Angelina,  and  remained
in  Sig"^'  Maria's  room.  Sig^  Annetta  then  came  to  say  that  Angelina
had  dreamt  of  playing  with  a  paper  on  which  was  a  picture,  and  that
on  looking  at  the  catalogue  she  recognised  the  picture,  which  she  said
was  like  a  table.  As  there  are  two  spectroscopes  of  Kirchoff  and
Bunsen  in  the  book  which  are  much  more  like  tables,  T  told
Sig^  Annetta  to  warn  Angelina  to  be  sure  which  she  had  seen,  or  she
would  not  have  her  usual  reward, — a  sweetmeat.  Sig^  Annetta
returned,  and  showed  me  Fig.  4,  saying  the  child  was  sure  that  was  it.
Thus  the  success  was  complete.  I  gave  the  book  to  Sig"^  Maria  to
identify  the.figure  she  had  seen  yesterday,  but  she  rejected  Fig.  4  and
chose  Fig.  3,  a  spectroscope  of  Kirchoff  and  Bunsen,  very  unlike  the
other.  "When  asked  her  reason,  she  said  that  she  had  not  chosen
Fig.  4  because  the  one  she  had  seen  had  not  that  long  piece  (the  body
of  the  spectroscope  in  Fig.  4),  and  that  there  were  no  little  separate
pictures  (sections  of  the  prisms).  Thus,  Maria  forgets  precisely
those  chai'acteristics  which  are  the  most  striking  in  the  figui'e  seen  the
evening  before.

Two  days  after,  Sig"''^  Maria  told  me  she  had  asked  Angelina  to
relate  her  dream,  and  that  the  child  had  said  .she  would  not  talk  about
it  any  more ;  that  she  had  given  the  picture  she  had  played  with  back
to  Uncle  Giovanni  (as  she  calls  me),  and  tliat  it  was  all  done  with.
This  shows  how  vivid  Angelina's  dreams  must  be,  since  she  confounds
them  with  objective  events.

Elvira  did  not  manifest  in  the  evening.  I  charged  Sig"'^  Maria  to
make  Angelina  dream  of  a  vine  loaded  with  ripe  black  grapes,  and  of
eating  them.

January  4:th.  Evening. — Sig'^^-  Maria  told  me  she  had  tried  hard
and  often  during  the  night  to  suggest  the  proposed  dream  to
Angelina,  but  that  when  she  was  asked  about  it,  she  replied  that  she
had  dreamt  of  playing  with  other  children  outside  the  door,  and  when
asked  if  she  had  eaten  any  fruit  in  her  dream,  she  said,  no.

Ex])eriment  34. — That  evening  I  had  taken  with  me  No.  19  of  the
Revue  Generale  des  Sciences,  October  15th,  1892,  and  had  chosen  for
experiment  Fig.  16,  p.  668.  (See  Plate  I.,  Fig.  II.)  This  was  a  rather
daring  choice,  because  out  of  the  18  figures  in  the  book,  9  were  of  the
same  type  and  none  were  easily  describable  in  words.  The  9  pictures
are  reproductions  of  photographs  by  C.  V.  Boys,  representing  projectiles


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  273


in  motion.  All  have  a  grey  background,  a  more  or  less  formless  black
spot  (the  projectile),  curves  representing  the  waves  of  displacement  of
the  air,  and  irregular  lines  representing  the  electric  conductors  used  to
produce  the  illuminating  spark.  Two  others,  besides  the  selected
figure,  have  a  thick  vertical  line  x'epresenting  the  surface  of  a  plate  of
glass  traversed  by  the  projectile,  and  in  the  other  five,  as  in  the  chosen
picture,  the  outline  of  the  projectile  is  partly  hidden  in  a  sort  of  fog.
Fig.  16,  which  I  selected,  has  no  very  special  characteristics  ;  it  is
however  the  smallest.

As  it  was  probable  that  Angelina's  room  would  be  opened  again  the
following  night,  I  proposed  that  a  neighbour  should  sleep  with  her  to
attend  to  her,  if  Elvira  approved.  The  two  would  naturally  be  locked
up  together.  When  the  picture  had  been  placed  as  usual  and  com-
munication with  Elvira  established,  I  asked  her  if  she  was  disposed  for
a  new  experiment. She  replied,  "Yes;  but  no  promises"  (of  success).

Dr.  E.  "  Would  it  disturb  you  if  Nannella  slept  with  Angelina  to
avoid  the  opening  of  the  door  ? "
Elv.  "  Is  she  big  or  little  ? "

Dr.  E.  "She  is  14.  She  is  downstairs.  Perhaps  you  can  go  and
look  at  her  and  see  if  her  presence  will  suit  you."

Elv.  (after  a  pause)  "  Well,  do  it,  but  on  one  condition  ;  that  she
does  not  disturb  the  child.  We  can.  try,  but  I  cannot  understand
everything  by  just  looking  at  her."

gig-na  Maria  then  looked  at  the  picture  for  18  seconds,  with  the
usual  precautions.  The  time  seemed  short,  and  I  asked  Elvira,
"  Did  you  see  well  ? "  She  replied  (by  automatic  writing),  "  Yes,  very
well."

I  put  the  book  in  my  pocket,  and,  allowing  no  communication
between  Sig"^  Maria  and  Angelina,  proceeded  to  blockade  the  latter
and  Nannella.  When  they  were  in  bed  and  c[uiet,  Sig^  Annetta
locked  the  door,  and  I  examined  it  and  sealed  paper  over  the  lock  as
before.  I  had  written  a  sentence  on  the  paper,  and  of  course  carried
away  my  seal.

January  5th.  6.45  a.m. — Found  Sig'''^  Annetta  up,  all  the  others  in
bed.  Sig^  Annetta  said  she  had  heard  the  child,  but  had  not  opened
the  door.  I  went  up  and  carefully  examined  the  form  and  position  of
the  seals,  which  I  recognised  as  those  I  had  made.  I  told  Sig'^  Annetta
to  open,  while  I  went  to  wait  in  her  daughter's  room,  who  was  awake.
I  waited  till  the  neighbour  had  gone,  as  I  wished  her  to  knew  nothing
of  the  experiments.  Then  I  bade  Sig^  Annetta  ask  the  child  simply
what  she  had  dreamt.  She  said,  "  Of  playing  with  pieces  of  papei\"
Sig^  Annetta  then  took  the  Hevue  to  her,  and  I  waited.  I  heard  that
Angelina  was  cross  and  noisy,  and  had  small  hope.  Soon  after,
Hig^  Annetta  came  back  with  the  book  open  at  page  668,  and  showed


274


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


me  a  figure  which  Angelina  said  she  had  dreamt  of.  It  was  Fig.  16,
and  AngeUna  had  said  that  was  the  one,  because  it  had  a  little  snake
in  it  (the  cvirved  conductor).

The  word  snake  has  a  close  verbal  association  with  this  figure,  but
any  one  who  discovers  in  this  a  sign  of  verbal  suggestion  should
notice,  first,  that  nine  of  the  figures  in  the  book  have  one  or  more
curved  lines,  and  secondly  that  Fig.  16  is  not  the  one  that  most  recalls
a  smike ;  Fig.  14  does  so  much  more.  The  real  point  of  difference
between  Fig.  16  and  the  others,  i.e.,  its  smallness,  would  have  served
gigiia  Maria  much  better  for  verbal  suggestion.  And  besides,  how  could
vei'bal  suggestion  have  taken  place  ?  Sig"''^  Maria  would  have  been
obliged  to  shout  a  description  of  the  figure  outside  Angelina's  closed
door.  Now  no  hypnotist  will  believe  that  a  child  of  four  years,  in
natural  sleep,  could  be  made  to  distinguish  Fig.  1 6  from  the  others  by
such  means.  Or  can  any  one  believe  that  such  an  exact  idea  could
be  conveyed  to  a  child  awakened  in  the  night,  when  she  would
naturally  be  sleepy  and  cross  1  And  then,  why  should  her  companion
and  Sig^  Annetta  in  the  next  room  have  heard  nothing  1  It  may  be
said  that  Sig"''-  Maria  reproduced  the  drawing,  unconsciously  or  not,
and  passed  it  beneath  the  door.  But  Sig"''>'  Maria  cannot  draw,
automatically  or  otherwise.  How  could  a  child,  ignorant  that  she
was  being  experimented  upon,  have  eluded  her  companion,  got  a  light,
and  studied  the  drawing  given  her  by  such  means  ?  I  believe  all  this
not  only  impossible  for  Sig"'"*^  Maria  in  somnambulism,  but  also  if  she
had  consciously  and  artfully  used  her  senses.  I  will  not  raise  the  idle
question  of  the  good  faith  of  the  persons  concerned,  for  which  I  can
answer,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  conditions  stated  put  fraud  out  of
the  question.  Naturally,  I  do  not  base  conclusions  on  one  success  ;
my  experiments  were  carried  further,  as  will  be  seen.

From  Big"-''  Maria's  position  she  could  not  see  what  picture  her
mother  had  pointed  out  to  me.  I  gave  her  the  closed  book,  that  she
might  find  the  j^icture  she  had  seen  last  evening.  After  some  hesita-
tion, she  thought  she  recognised  Fig.  15,  but  was  not  sure,  because
they  were  all  so  much  alike  and  she  only  remembered  the  dusky
colour.  As  Fig.  15  was  10.3""™  by  135™™,  while  Fig.  16  was  only
58mm  ijy  91mm_  J  asked  her  if  last  night's  picture  was  not  smaller.
She  said  she  thought  it  was,  but  that  she  might  not  have  seen  all  of
it  ;  part  might  have  been  hidden.

Rotation  op  Figures.

Experiment  35. — January  5th.  3  p.m. — I  took  a  number  of  the
Eemie  Generals  des  Sciences,  dated  March  30th,  1892  (No.  6),  to  Sig"*
Maria.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  275


I  placed  Fig.  11,  p.  206,  in  the  usual  way  for  Sig"<'^  Maria,  but,
without  her  knowledge,  turned  it  upside  down.  It  represented  a  section
of  a  jjump  for  spraying  antiseptic  liquids,  and  would  be  meaningless  to
any  one  unacquainted  with  machines  {see  Plate  T.,  Fig.  III).  The
number  contains  26  figures,  most  of  them  veiy  unlike  Fig.  11.
There  are  only  three  others  representing  sections  of  disinfecting
apparatus,  which,  however,  do  not  resemble  Fig.  11.

When  communication  with  Elvira  was  established  (automatic
writing),  she  said,  "Tell  me  only  what  you  want  for  to-night,  because
I  cannot  stop  so  long  as  I  did  yesterday."

I  showed  her  the  picture  as  usual  for  17  seconds,  and  then  tlie  con-
versation continued.

Dr.  E.  "  I  should  like  you  to  show  Angelina  the  picture  turned
half-way  round  in  its  own  plane  ;  that  is,  upside  down  "

Elv.  "  I  will  not  promise,  but  will  try."

Dr.  E.  "  Did  ISTannella's  presence  interfere  with  the  success  1 "
Elv.  "For  my  part,  she  does  not  disturb  me  at  all."
January  6th.  7.30  a.m. — As  the  picture  had  been  looked  at  in
the  afternoon,  I  had  been  unable  to  lock  up  Angelina  at  night.  Sig"*
Maria  and  her  mother  had  risen  when  I  arrived.  The  child  had  left
her  own  room  a  little  before,  and  was  in  Sig"^  Maria's  bed.  I
remained  in  the  latter's  room  while  Sig^  Annetta  carried  off  the  child
to  dress  her.  Before  leaving  the  room  she  said  she  had  dreamt  of
playing  with  pajjers.  I  asked  her  if  there  were  pictures  on  them,  and
she  said,  yes.  Angelina  was  carried  to  her  own  bed,  and  I  sent  her
the  book.  Soon  after,  Sig''^  Annetta  came  back  to  say  that  Angelina
was  puzzled  and  had  put  the  book  into  disorder  (it  had  come  unsewn).
In  a  short  time  she  returned,  and  giving  me  the  book  upside  down,
pointed  to  Fig.  11,  and  said  that  Angelina  had  recognised  it  decidedly
and  at  once,  exclaiming,  "  That's  it."  Yesterday  I  had  shown  the
pictui'e  to  Elvira  reversed,  but  had  asked  her  to  show  it  to  Angelina
upside  down  in  relation  to  the  position  in  which  Elvira  had  seen  it —
that  is  to  say,  right  side  up.  Now,  as  Angelina  had  been  obliged  to
put  the  book  into  confusion  to  find  the  picture,  and  Sig'^  Annetta  had
given  it  to  me  upside  down,  it  seemed  that  a  vision  of  the  figure
up.side  down  had  been  produced.  I  kept  Sig"^  Maria  as  usual  in  igno-
rance of  the  figure  Angelina  had  indicated,  and  gave  her  the  closed
book  that  she  might  search  for  herself.  After  a  short  examination  of
the  book  right  side  up,  she  chose  the  right  half  of  Fig.  5,  which  half
is  the  very  picture  least  unlike  the  one  she  had  seen  the  day  before.  I
told  her  she  was  wrong,  and  that  she  must  turn  the  book  upside  down.
But  she  persisted  in  choosing  the  same  half  of  Fig.  5,  I  did  not  con-
tinue to  tell  her  she  was  wrong,  and  decided  not  to  do  so  in  future,  for
fear  of  interferinsc  with  results.


27G


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


About  4  p.m.  I  went  back  to  Sig-'-^  Maria,  and  put  myself  into
communication  with  Elvira.

Elv.  "  Tell  me  if  you  are  content."

Dr.  E.  "  Yes,  I  am  pleased,  although  last  night  the  conditions  were
not  strict  enough.  Have  you  any  observation  to  make  about  the
experiment  ?  "  (Alluding  to  the  failure,  as  I  supposed,  in  turning  the
picture.)

Elv.  "  I  made  her  see  it  right  side  up,  as  you  told  me  she  ought  to
see  it  turned."

Dr.  E.  "  Explain  how  you  knew  that  the  picture  you  saw  yesterday
evening  was  upside  down."

Elv.  "  Who  is  talking  of  yesterday  evening  1  I  knew  it  this
morning  when  I  was  present  while  the  child  was  searching."

Dr.  E.  "  But  since  you  saw  Angelina  examining  the  book,  you  must
have  seen  that  it  was  upside  down,  so  that  the  turning  did  not  take
place  in  the  dream."

Elv.  "  But  what  are  you  driving  at  1  The  child  looked  for  it  this
morning  with  the  book  right  side  up  ;  I  know  that.  When  Angelina
gave  the  book  to  her  grandmother,  it  was  by  its  pi'oper  side."

Now,  from  Elvira's  coherent  explanation,  it  will  be  seen  that  she
maintains  that  the  figure  she  saw  yesterday  was  shown  right  side
up  in  the  dream,  and  that,  in  spite  of  appearances  to  the  contrary,
Angelina  found  it  with  the  volume  right  side  up.  Sig^  Annetta  was
absent,  so  I  could  not  ask  her  on  which  side  Angelina  had  recognised
the  figure  ;  but  I  called  the  latter  from  the  ground  floor,  where  she
could  not  have  overheard  the  preceding  dialogue,  and  asked  her  to  find
the  picture  she  had  seen  in  her  dream  again,  putting  the  book  right
side  up  before  her.  Of  course  I  took  care  that  Sig"=^  Maria  should  not
be  able  to  influence  her  involuntarily.  T  turned  over  the  pages,  and
before  reaching  the  right  one,  she  showed  me  with  her  finger  that  the
picture  was  at  the  top  and  to  the  left  [which  is  correct].  When  she
reached  p.  206,  she  pointed  out  Fig.  11  at  once  without  hesitation.
Not  content  with  this,  I  turned  the  book  upside  down,  and  asked  her
if  by  chance  she  had  seen  it  in  this  position,  but  in  spite  of  the
suggestive  question,  she  gave  a  decided  No.  As  the  figure  is  in  a
corner,  it  is  inadmissible  that  Angelina  sliould  have  been  mistaken
after  her  prompt  and  spontaneous  declaration.

Next  morning  I  took  back  the  book  and  asked  Sig''^  Annetta  to
show  me  again,  if  she  remembered,  the  pictui'e  Angelina  had  chosen
the  previous  morning.  I  held  the  book  right  side  up,  and  turned  the
pages  ;  at  p.  206  she  showed  me  Fig.  11.  I  also  asked  her  if  the  child
had  not  selected  the  picture  with  the  book  upside  down,  but  she  said,
No. Thus  it  is  plain  that  Elvira  was  right.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  277

Experiment  36.  —  On  January  Qth  I  showed  Elvira,  for  a  fresh
"dream,  Fig.  3,  p.  269,  of  the  Revue  Generate  des  Sciences  for  April
30th,  1892  (Xo.  8).  It  has  14  pictures,  but  4  only  are  of  the  same
type  as  Fig.  3,  which  represents  Carpentier's  declinometer.  The  other
3  which  are  like  it  represent  magnetic  instruments,  all  with  tripods,
which  would  suggest  tables  to  non-scientific  persons,  and  Fig.  1  has
also  a  vertical  tube  like  Fig.  3.^  The  usual  precautions  were  taken,
and  Elvira  looked  at  the  figure  upside  down  for  35  seconds.  Unfor-
tunately, this  figure  was  lettered,  which  may  have  shown  Sig"'^  Maria
that  it  was  upside  down.

January  7th.  7.30  a.m. — Angelina  told  Sig^  Annetta  that  she
had  no  dream.

Experiment  37.  Evening. — I  asked  Elvira  if  she  had  anything
to  say.  She  replied  (automatic  writing),  "Yes;  excuse  me  for  having
failed  last  night  ;  it  was  not  the  difliculty,  but  because  I  could  not
come.  If  you  like,  we  will  have  the  same  figui-e  again ;  if  not,
change  it."

I  agreed  to  Elvira's  proposal,  wishing  to  see  if  she  would  remember
the  pictui'e  after  24  hours.  I  asked  her  again  to  turn  it  upside
down.

In  order  to  prevent  future  confusion  in  counting  successes  and
failures,  I  asked  Elvira  to  tell  me  in  automatic  writing,  when  I  came
to  vei'ify  I'esults,  if  she  had  tried  to  act  or  not ; — of  course  before  any  one
questioned  the  child.  For  evidently  if,  before  I  broke  the  blockade,
Elvii'a  wrote,  "  To-night  I  could  not  act,"  this  might  be  counted,  not  as
a  failure,  but  as  an  experiment  not  carried  out.  Elvii'a  accepted  my
proposal.

January  8th.  7.4-5  a.m. — Yesterday  Angelina's  sister  and  a  servant
had  arrived  from  Venice,  and  Angelina's  room  had  been  given  to
them,  so  that  she  had  slept  with  Sig"^  Maria  and  her  mother.  I
found  the  two  girls  in  bed,  but  awake.  Sig"^  Maria  told  me  that
Angelina  had  already  said  she  had  dreamt,  but  that  she  would  only
tell  her  dream  to  her  grandmother,  Sig^  Annetta  carried  her  out  of
the  room,  and  after  an  interval  returned  and  told  me  that  the  child
had  dreamt  of  the  usual  papers.  She  took  the  closed  number  of  the
Revue  des  Sciences  to  the  child,  and  I  told  her  to  make  Angelina  look
at  the  pictures  from  all  sides,  and  to  bring  back  the  book  exactly  in
the  position  the  child  pointed  out.  After  a  few  moments,  she  brought
back  the  book  open  at  p.  269,  and  showed  me  Fig.  3  right  side  up.
Consequently Angelina  must  have  dreamt  of  the  figure  seen  by

^  Perhaps  the  most  conspicuous  feature  in  this  diagram  is  that  the  tube  is  opened
to  show  the  internal  mechanism,  so  that  it  might  be  described  as  a  round  cupboard
wth  an  open  door. No  other  figures  in  the  book  have  this  feature, — Ed.


278  Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.

Elvira  the  evening  before  last,  and  have  dreamt  of  it  right  side  up,,
which  was  intended. ^

Exjjerijnent  38. — In  the  evening,  I  had  chosen  and  prepared  in
the  usual  way  Fig.  11,  p.  40,  of  the  Lumiere  Electrique  for
January  13th,  1883,  representing  a  vertical  section  of  a  turbine,
without  letters  or  figures.  The  number  contained  twenty-six  figures
or  groups  of  figures.  Two  of  them  represent  landscapes,  and  must  not
be  counted.  The  others  are  chiefly  sections  of  scientific  instruments,
very  unlike  No.  1 1  for  any  one  who  can  compare  them,  while  Figs.  7,
13,  and  17,  which  also  represent  vertical  sections  of  turbines,  are
sufllciently  like  No.  11  to  prevent  Sig"'^  Maria  from  describing  the
latter  to  Angelina  in  terms  which  would  enable  the  child  to  distin-
guish it  from  them.  And  her  powers  of  drawing,  either  in  a  conscious
or  an  automatic  state,  are  too  low  to  allow  of  her  making  a  sketch  of
it  from  memory.  Elvira  looked  at  the  picture  for  28  seconds,  and
was  requested  to  turn  it.  She  replied,  "  I  undei'stand,  and  I  hope
there  will  be  no  difiiculty."

January  9th.  7.45  a.m. — Sig"^  Maria  slept  with  Angelina  and  the
servant  this  night.  They  were  in  bed  when  I  arrived.  Sig"'^  Maria
and  the  servant  assured  me  that  they  had  not  talked  about  dreams
since  waking.  Angelina  was  carried  off  as  usual,  and  Elvira  wrote^
"  I  have  not  tried,  because  the  child  was  too  excited.  I  will  try
to-night  without  fail."

Angelina's  father  had  arrived  the  evening  before  and  wished  to
take  her  back  with  him,  which  had  greatly  vexed  her,  on  account  of
her  love  for  Sig"'"^  Maria,  and  though  he  had  yielded  to  me  and  agreed
to  leave  her,  she  was  still  alarmed.

I  went  downstairs,  and  Angelina  told  me  at  once  that  she  had  had
no  dream  ;  she  had  previously  told  Sig^  Annetta  the  same  thing.

In  the  evening  Sig"'^  Maria  was  not  well,  and  we  had  no  com-
munication with  Elvira.

January  lOth.  7.45  a.m. — Sig"'''  Maria  and  Angelina  were  still  in
bed,  where  they  had  slept  together.  Angelina  told  me  she  had  a
dream  to  relate,  but  would  only  tell  it  to  her  grandmother.  She
was  carried  off,  and  Elvira  wrote,  "  I  have  not  been  able  to  do
anything."

Sig^^  Annetta  came  back  to  say  that  Angelina  had  dreamt  of
playing  with  her  sister  Enrichetta.  This  dream  was  natural  after  the
sister's  visit,  but  the  case  shows  that  Elvira's  predictions  of  success  or
non-success  were  dependable.

1  It  may  be  noted  that  Angelina  found  the  figure  the  first  time  she  looked  for  it  ;
but  see  note  on  p.  277- — Ed.


Telepathic  Breams  Experimentally  Induced.  279


Experiment  39. — In  the  evening,  I  showed  Elvira  the  same  picture
again.  This  time  it  was  turned  90  deg.  in  the  opposite  direction  to
the  hands  of  a  clock,  consequently  on  its  side,  instead  of  in  the  position
of  the  day  before  yesterday.  This  transforms  it  into  quite  another
figure  for  Sig"''^  Maria.  The  observation  lasted  17  seconds,  and  I  then
charged  Elvira  to  turn  it  90  deg.  more  in  the  opposite  direction  to  the
clock  hands.  This  rotation  of  the  sensorial  image,  added  to  the
rotation  already  really  made,  should  have  made  Angelina  dream  of  it
upside  down.

Jainiary  Wth.  6.4-5  a.m.- — I  found  only  Sig^  Annetia  risen.  Her
daughter  and  the  child  were  awake,  but  in  their  respective  rooms,
gigiia  Maria  said  she  had  not  yet  spoken  to  Angelina.  Later  on  in  the
evening,  Sig'^  Annetta  told  me  she  had  locked  Angelina  alone  into  her
room  immediately  after  I  had  gone,  and  that  she  had  only  opened  the
door  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  my  coming.  In  the  meantime
Angelina  had  not  left  her  bed,  nor  spoken  of  dreams.  While  Sig"^
Maria  was  still  in  bed,  we  communicated  with  Elvira,  who  wrote
automatically,  "  I  have  tried,  and  hope  I  have  succeeded."

I  gave  the  book  to  Sig*  Annetta,  warning  her  that  Angelina  might
not  find  the  picture  with  the  book  right  side  up,  but  might  be  obliged
to  turn  it.  I  gave  no  indication  as  to  the  direction  or  degree  of  the
rotation.  She  soon  returned  and  showed  me  the  figure  in  the  position
in  which  the  chikl  had  recognised  it.  It  was  Fig.  11,  p.  40,  but
upside  down,  not  as  had  been  pre-arranged,  but  from  Elvira's  point  of
view  of  yesterday.  Sig''^  Annetta  assured  me  that  the  child  had
recognised  it  thus,  and  again  in  the  evening  she  added  that  Angelina
had  turned  the  book  .spontaneously,  Sig^  Annetta  having  said  nothing
about  my  instructions.  Sig"*^  Maria  was  unable  from  her  place  to  see
the  picture  pointed  out  by  her  mother  or  the  position  of  the  book,  and  I
gave  it  to  her  closed,  warning  her  to  look  at  the  pictures  from  all  sides.
She  said  at  once  that  she  recognised  Fig.  7,  p.  309,  as  the  picture  she
had  seen.  She  was  holding  it  turned  90  deg.  in  the  conti'ary  direction
to  the  hands  of  the  clock.  This  was  the  position  of  yesterday,  and
Fig.  7  is  the  most  like  Fig.  11  in  this  position  ;  therefore  this  first
judgment  follows  the  law  I  have  pointed  out  of  the  substitution  of
another  idea  with  the  least  possible  error.

I  asked  Angelina  if  she  had  recognised  the  picture  by  any  par-
ticular sign,  or  by  its  whole.  As  far  as  I  could  judge,  she  had  recog-
nised the  whole.

On  the  following  evening  (January  12th)  I  asked  Elvira,  "How
do  you  know  if  you  have  made  Angelina  dream  or  not  ? "  She
replied,  "  I  know  from  the  child's  more  or  less  quiet  sleep.  If  she
moves  a  little  afterwards,  the  result  is  doubtful ;  if  she  is  quiet,  I
am  sure."


280  Dr.  Q.  B.  Ermacora.  "

For  various  reasons,  no  more  experiments  of  this  kind  were  made
until  March  1st.  I  tried  meanwhile  to  utilise  the  time  in  new  experi-
ments in  transferring  telepathic  dreams  by  Sig''^-  Maria's  voluntary
efforts. But  after  repeated  trials  I  was  forced  to  acquiesce  in  failure.

The  total  number  of  such  expei'iments,  including  those  of  December
28th  and  29th,  1892,  and  of  January  3rd  and  4th,  1893,  is  14.  Of
these,  10  were  suggested  while  the  agent  and  supposed  percipient  were
in  the  same  bed.  On  one  other  occasion  the  agent  went  close  to  the
percipient's  bed  ;  it  is  not  stated  in  my  notes  if  she  did  so  on  the  three
remaining  occasions.  All  the  dreams  which  she  tried  to  suggest  wei'e
of  ideas  familiar  to  tlie  child.  As  there  was  only  one  very  doubtful
and  partial  success  (a  vision  of  Signor  Vanzetti)  among  14  attempts,
it  appears  that, — admitting  the  possibility  that  Sig^^-  Maria's  normal
personality  might  produce  telepathic  dreams  in  Angelina, — we  may
yet  regard  this  personality  as  absolutely  unfit  for  such  an  office  (at
least  during  this  period)  in  comparison  with  Elvira.  Moreover,  the
fact  that  on  one  occasion  (February  llth-12th)  Sig"^'  Maria  enforced
her  mental  suggestion  by  humming  the  music  to  the  child, — without
succeeding  any  more  than  in  the  other  cases, — shows  that  the  latter
does  not  possess  the  great  sensorial  suggestibility  which  would  have
been  necessary  if  Elvira  had  produced  the  dream  by  such  means.  This
is,  thei'efore,  another  argument  in  favour  of  the  telepathic  explanation.

It  may  be  objected  that  Sig"*  Maria's  conviction  that  only  Elvira
could  succeed  may  have  been  the  cause  of  her  failures.  But  the
contrary  was  the  case,  as  I  had  explained  to  Sig"'^  Maria  that
the  thing  could  be  done,  and  that  she  ought  not  to  show  herself
inferior  to  Elvira.  I  do  not  know  hosv  these  assertions  were  received
by  Sig"^  Maria's  subliminal  consciousness,  and  it  is  idle  to  discuss
the  point,  but  the  personality  of  Maria  accepted  them  as  reasonable,
and  acted  with  zeal  and  the  hope  of  success.  Otherwise  she  would  not
have  risen — as  she  once  did — half-dressed  in  the  cold  to  enforce  her
suggestions.

BxjKriment  iO.— March  1st.  4  p.m. — I  chose  Fig.  3  of  the
Mectricien  (October  29th,  1892)  for  this  night's  dream.  It  is
without  letters,  and  represents  a  complicated  machine  used  in  the
manufacture  of  submarine  cables.  There  are  six  figures  in  the
number,  without  reckoning  advertisements  on  coloured  paper.  Two
of  these  are  absolutely  unlike  Fig.  3  ;  three  others  represent  machines
of  the  same  kind  as  it.  The  distinguishing  characteristics  of  Fig.  3
foi"  an  ignorant  person  would  be  its  numerous  toothed  and  untoothed
wheels,  also  some  discs  with  pegs  perpendicular  to  their  planes  ;  [but
these  features  are  also  found  in  all  the  other  three  similar  figures.]
My  choice  of  the  two  positions  of  the  figure,  at  the  time  of  observation


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  281


and  in  the  dream,  was  made  by  lot.  I  distinguish  four  positions
corresponding  to  the  four  sides  of  the  volume.  No.  1  Ls  the  proper
position  for  reading,  ISTo.  2  with  the  book  on  its  right  side,  No.  3  upside-
down,  and  No.  4  with  its  left  side  to  the  observer.  I  threw  the  dice,
and  position  No.  "2  turned  up.  The  picture  was  arranged  in  the  usual
way.  During  the  communication  with  Elvira,  Sig"''^  Maria  looked  at
the  figure  for  25  seconds.  Position  1  was  chosen  by  lot  for  the  dream.
This  would  bring  the  book  right  side  up,  but  not  the  figure,  which
was  placed  lengthwise  down  the  page.

March  'Ind.  9  a.m. — Sig"*  Maria  said  she  had  not  yet  asked  the
child  about  the  dream.  Before  questioning  her  we  communicated
with  Elvira,  who  wrote,  "  I  have  tried,  and  hope  I  have  succeeded  ;
but  if  not,  do  not  be  too  tired  to  try  again."

Angelina,  interrogated  in  another  room  by  S^g^  Annetta,  said  she
had  dreamt  of  holding  a  book  with  a  picture.  I  sent  the  number  of
the  Electricien  to  her,  telling  her  to  look  at  the  pictures  from  all  sides.
Sig'''  Annetta  returned  with  the  book  open  at  p.  290,  Fig.  3,  and  said
that  the  child  had  recognised  the  little  i^ot.  When  Angelina  was
made  to  seek  again  in  my  presence,  she  again  chose  Fig.  3,  in
Position  1,  and  said  she  had  really  seen  it  so.  Sig'"^  Annetta  also
assured  me  the  child  had  found  it  thus,  and  only  thus  do  the  part^
she  called  a  little  pot  resemble  one.  Therefore  my  programme  had
been  carried  out.

This  time  Sig"*  Maria  was  placed  so  that  it  was  just  possible  she
might  have  seen  the  picture  her  mother  pointed  out.  However,  she
believed  she  recognised  Fig.  2  in  Position  1  [the  one  most  like  Fig.  3].

As  Angelina  had  said  she  knew  the  picture  again  from  the  little  jmt
(an  insignificant  detail)  T  showed  the^JO<  to  Sig""'  Maria,  asking  her  if
she  had  seen  it  in  yesterday's  picture.  She  said  she  did  not  remember
it  at  all.  This  case  leads  me  to  suspect  that  I  may  be  right  in  suppos-
ing that  the  points  most  impressed  upon  the  percipient  are  exactly
those  which  most  easily  disappear  from  the  consciousness  of  the  agent,
or  perhaps  never  enter  it.

No  control  or  blockade  had  been  possible  in  this  last  experiment.
Angelina  had  slept  in  her  own  room,  but  at  4  a.m.  had  waked  and
called,  so  that  Sig*  Annetta  and  Sig^*  Maria  had  taken  her  into  their
bed.i  .  .

Experiment  41. — 4  p.m.  (about). — This  time  I  had  chosen  the  picture
of  a  microscopic  preparation,  looking  like  a  mere  scrawl  (Fig.  10,  p.  634,
of  the  Revue  Generate  des  Sciences,  for  September  30th,  1892).  There
are  twelve  pictures  in  the  number,  all  of  microscopic  preparations,

1  The  figure  used  in  this  experiment  is  so  extremely  complicated  that  it  is
especially  difficult  to  believe  that  any  verbal  description  of  it  could  have  sufficed  for
recognition, — Ed.


282


Dr  G.  B.  Ermacora.


and  all  more  or  less  like  irregular  blotches. Fig.  2  is  much  like  10,
both  having  marble-like  markings  on  a  spotted  ground.

I  chose  Position  2  by  lot.  The  j^icture  was  placed  as  usual,  a-nd
the  engraver's  nanae  (appearing  on  the  margin  of  Figs.  2  and  8  also)
was  carefully  hidden.  Elvira  looked  at  it  for  30  seconds.  I  then,  by
means  of  the  dice,  selected  position  1  for  the  dream.

March  ?>rd.  8.30  a.m. — Everybody  was  up.  I  had  not  been  able
to  lock  up  Angelina,  and  she  had  left  her  bed  in  the  night  to  go  to
gigiia  Maria's.  The  latter  had  not  yet  asked  the  child  about  her
dream.  Elvira  wrote,  "  I  have  tried,  and  hope  I  have  succeeded."
Sig'"^  Annetta  then  questioned  the  child,  who  said  she  had  dreamt  of
a  book  with  a  picture,  but  not  like  the  last.  The  book  was  taken
to  her  on  the  ground-floor,  and  when  Sig''^  Annetta  called  me  I  found
her  with  it  before  her  in  position  2.  She  pointed  out  Fig.  10.  I
asked  her  if  she  had  seen  it  in  this  position.  She  said  first  "No,"  and
then  "  Yes."  It  is  natural  to  think,  however,  that  she  had  seen  tlie
figure  in  the  position  in  which  she  held  it,  and  that  therefore  t!ie
rotation  of  90  deg.  had  been  effected.  I  asked  her  how  she  recognised
the  figure,  but  she  was  already  confused  by  my  previous  question,  and
pointed  to  its  extreme  left,  where  there  was  nothing  particular.

I  carried  the  book  to  Sig"^,  Maria,  who  had  remained  upstairs.
After  examination  she  rejected  the  most  unlike  figures.  Then  holding
the  book  in  Position  2,  as  it  had  been  during  the  observation,  she
hesitated  between  Figs.  2  and  10  ;  but  finally  chose  Fig.  2.

March  ith. — I  went  to  Sig"^  Maria's  house,  but  forgot  to  take  a
book.  As  I  know  that  the  child  has  a  tolerably  good  ear  for  music,  I
suggested  to  Elvira  to  make  Angelina  dream  of  a  musical  phrase.  She
replied,  "  We  must  first  have  done  with  the  figure  dreams,  or  the  child
will  be  confused  and  I  shall  have  more  difficulty  in  returning  to  them."

This  advice,  not  to  mix  impressions  of  diverse  kinds,  should  be
noted  by  students  of  experimental  telepathy.

Experiment  42. — March  5th.  Evening. — I  selected  Fig.  19,  p.  411,
of  the  Lumiere  Electrique  for  June  14th,  1884,  for  this  night's  dream.  It
has  minute  letters  and  numbers,  but  so  have  many  of  the  others  in  the
book.  Fig.  19  is  a  diagram  of  an  electric  light  station,  and  includes
besides  the  dynamo  a  number  of  accessory  pieces  of  apparatus.  It  is
on  a  small  scale,  which  makes  it  still  more  complicated  and  confused.
Of  the  37  pictures  in  the  book,  19  are  of  the  same  type, —  diagrams
drawn  in  black  lines  on  a  white  ground,  without  shading,  and  having
minute  details  marked  by  letters  and  figures.

I  put  the  picture  into  position  4,  taking  care  to  hide  its  upper
portion,  which  represents  a  circuit,  witli  lamps  depending  from  it,  and
looks  like  a  ladder,  so  that  it  could  be  easily  described.


Telepathic  Breams  Experimentally  Induced.  283


The  observation  lasted  65  seconds.  I  asked  Elvira  to  make
Angelina  see  it  in  Position  1.

Before  leaving,  and  without  Sig"^  Maria's  having  been  able  to  com-
municate with  the  child  (she  went  downstairs  for  an  instant  to  fetch
■something,  but  Angelina  was  asleep),  I  locked  her  into  the  little  room,
sealing  a  piece  of  paper  by  one  end  to  the  door  near  the  handle,  and  by
the  other  to  the  doorpost.  The  piece  of  paper  was  half  of  a  larger
piece,  on  which  I  had  written.  It  was  cut  across  the  words.  This
■was  to  prevent  the  paper  being  changed,  and  I  took  the  other  half
home.  I  had  left  my  seal  at  home,  and  used  one  belonging  to  Sig"^
Maria,  which,  of  course,  I  took  away  with  me.  I  took  notes  of  the
position,  form,  and  colour  of  the  drops  of  sealing-wax.  Naturally,  if
iihere  had  been  any  suspicion  of  fraud,  these  precautions  would  have
been  illusory,  because  Sig"'"^  Maria  could  have  described  the  figure
through  door  or  window,  or  have  passed  a  picture  out  through  chinks
or  window.  But  as  in  this  case  there  could  be  no  fear  of  fraud,
but  only  of  possible  somnambulic  action,  this  locking  up  was  of
great  importance,  since  it  made  such  action  impracticable.  In  fact,  if
gigna  Mai'ia  had  tried  to  describe  the  figure  under  the  conditions
mentioned,  the  only  effect  would  have  been  to  alarm  her  mother,  and  to
make  her  inform  me  that  her  daughter  had  gone  mad.

When  I  left  that  evening,  Angelina  was  still  asleep  on  the  sofa,
giga  Annetta  and  another  person  present  told  me  that  she  had  been
•asleep  when  Sig"^  Maria  had  come  down  for  a  moment,  and  that  the
latter  had  said  nothing  about  dreams.

March  <6th.  8  a.m. — From  the  street  I  saw  Sig^a-  Maria  waiting  to
b)e  liberated,  and  Angelina  was  at  the  door.  Sig^-  Annetta  said  that
they  had  not  exchanged  a  word.  I  found  the  seals^  in  every  minutest
detail  identical  with  those  made  the  evening  before ;  the  paper  was  a
little  stretched.  But  I  remembered  having  dried  the  writing  at  a
petroleum  lamp.  This  must  have  shrunk  the  paper,  and  the  dampness
of  the  night  had  restored  its  original  length.  The  two  halves  corres-
ponded.

After  letting  Sig"=^  Maria  out,  I  asked  Elvira  if  she  had  acted,  and
if  she  hoped  for  success.  She  wrote,  "  I  have  tried,  and  hope  I  have
succeeded."  Then  Sig^  Annetta  went  as  usual  to  question  Angelina
on  the  ground  floor,  and  returned  saying  the  child  had  had  the  usual
dream  about  a  piece  of  paper  with  a  picture  on  it.  I  sent  her  the
book  to  search,  and  she  soon  sent  word  she  had  found  the  picture.  T
found  her  with  the  book  in  Position  1,  and  she  showed  me  Fier.  19,2

1  Every  evening  after  fixing  the  seals,  I  ^vrite  a  very  minute  description  of  them,
to  assist  my  recolleotiun.

-  The  figure  is  an  extremely  complicated  one.  — Ed,


284


Dr.  0.  B.  Ermacora.


so  that  she  had  seen  the  right  figure  turned  as  proposed.  Then  I  toolc
the  book  to  Sig"^  Maria.  She  hesitated  between  Fig.  20  and  Fig.  2-3.
As  usual,  the  figures  mistakenly  recognised  are  those  which  most
nearly  resemble  the  right  one.

Experiment  4-3. — T  took  the  number  of  La  Liuniere  Electrique  for-
April  4th,  1885,  with  uie  when  I  went  back  in  the  evening.  The
figure  I  had  chosen  was  No.  13,  p.  16.  The  book  contains  45
figures,  of  which  12  are  of  the  same  type  and  about  the  same  size  as-
No  13  ;  they  are  diagrams  of  electrical  apparatus  in  black  lines  on  a.
white  ground.  Eight  of  them,  including  Fig.  13,  are  very  much  alike.
They  are  diagrams  of  an  Edison  dynamo  with  circuits  and  accessory
apparatus.  Figs.  12,  13,  and  14  only  differ  from  one  another  by  very
small  details.  Fig.  13  is  lettered,  but  so  are  12  and  14,  in  analogous
parts.

"With  the  dice  I  chose  Position  4  for  the  figure.  When  Elvira  had
communicated,  Sig"^  Maria  looked  at  it  for  40  seconds  with  one  eye  only.
Position  2  was  selected  by  means  of  the  dice  for  the  dream,  so  I  asked
Elvira  to  turn  the  picture  upside  down.  I  told  her  to  make  Angelina-
see  it  well,  as  it  was  to  be  distinguished  from  others  much  like  it.

Before  going  to  bed,  Sig"^  Maria  went  downstairs  twice  to  fetch
something,  but  I  accompanied  her  on  both  occasions  to  see  that  she  had
no  communication  with  the  others.  The  child  was  asleep,  and  Sig'i'^
Maria  uttered  no  word  and  made  no  gesture  relative  to  the  experi-
ments. I  then  sealed  her  up  in  her  room  as  I  had  done  on  the  previous
evening.

March,  1th.  7.40  a.m. — Angelina  was  up  and  at  the  front  door.
Sig^  Annetta  said  she  had  waked  half  an  hour  ago,  that  Sig'^^  Maria
had  not  yet  risen,  and  that  no  communication  between  them  had  been
possible.  I  went  up  and  examined  the  seals,  which  were  intact ;  the
pieces  of  paper  corresponded  exactly.  Sig"^  Maria  was  still  asleep.  I
woke  her,  and  she  said  her  head  had  ached  during  the  night,  and  did
so  still.

I  gave  her  the  writing-book  and  pencil,  and  Elvira  wrote  directly,
"  I  have  tried  and  have  good  hope,  but  excuse  me  if  there  is  no
success."

Sig^  Annetta  now  came  to  say  that  the  child  had  dreamt  of  play-
ing with  many  papers.  The  book  was  taken  to  her  by  Sig-'^  Annetta
as  usual,  and  I  stayed  upstairs.  Soon  after,  Sig^  Annetta  called  me
and  showed  me  Fig.  13  (see  Plate  IT.  Fig.  IV.),  which  Angelina  had
chosen.  But  the  rotation  had  not  been  effected ;  the  picture  was  in
Position  1  instead  of  2,  and  the  child  said  she  had  seen  it  so.

gig-na  Maria  then  looked  at  the  book  in  Po.sition  4.,  as  Elvira  had
seen  it  the  previous  evening,  and  standing  behind  her  I  saw  that  when


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.


285


she  came  to  p.  16,  she  looked  fixedly  at  Figs.  13  and  14  ;  she  passed
them  over  in  the  hope  of  perhaps  finding  something  better,  but  went
back  and  chose  Fig,  14  (see  Plate  IT.,  Fig.  V.)  When  asked  why  she
preferred  14  to  13,  she  said  she  recognised  Fig.  14  by  two  small  rods
(the  two  limbs  of  the  field  magnets  of  the  dynamo).  Besides,  Fig.  13
was  excluded  on  account  of  the  lines  being  diagonal,  and  because  the
upper  arc  (in  Position  4)  had  swellings  (the  spirals  representing  the
I'esistance  diagrammatically),  which  she  had  not  seen  yesterday.  Again,,
the  figure  seemed  taller  (regarding  it  in  Position  4).  However,  she
confessed  that  during  yesterday's  observation,  she  had  not  remarked
the  arcs  at  the  top  of  Fig.  14  (Position  4).  She  did  not  remember
having  seen  letters  or  numbers.

Specular  Inversion  of  Figures.

Experiment  44. — March  8th.  6  p.m. — It  seemed  to  me  that  success-
with  simple  rotation  of  the  figures  was  sufficiently  established,  and
that  I  might  now  try  specular  inversion.  I  thought  of  using  some
figure  symmetrical  on  either  side  of  its  axis,  making  Sig"*  Maria  look
at  one  half  only,  while  the  other  half  should  be  shown  in  the  dream
and  recognised  by  the  child.  I  therefore  took  with  me  Vol.  II.  of
Professor  Romolo  Trevisani's  Corso  d'Ornato,  which  contains  five
ornamental  designs  very  nearly  symmetrical.  These  I  had  cut  into
symmetrical  halves,  making  ten  pieces,  and  the  left  half  of  Fig.  IX  was
chosen  for  observation.  I  showed  the  figure  to  Sig"^  Maria  with  the
inscription  Fig.  IX.  directly  before  her  in  the  left-hand  upper  corner
of  the  paper.  I  did  this  expressly  to  see  if  the  inscription  would  be
used  as  a  point  de  repere.  Sig"^  Maria  looked  at  the  picture  for  40-
seconds,  and  I  asked  Elvira  to  execute  a  specular  inversion  of  it.

March  9th..  8.30  a.m. — I  first  asked  Elvira  if  she  had  acted.  She
replied  (automatic  writing),  "  Yes,  I  have  tried,  and  hope  I  have
succeeded."  [Angelina,  however,  could  not  find  the  right  picture,
though  the  one  she  chose  resembled  it  more  than  any  of  the  others,
and  had  Fig.  XI.  engraved  in  the  corner  instead  of  Fig.  IX.]

It  is  to  be  noted  that  if  the  specular  image  of  the  observed
picture  was  seen  in  the  dream,  the  Fig.  IX.  must  also  have  been
inverted  ;  and  if  it  attracted  the  child's  attention,  she  must  necessarily
have  rejected  the  other  half  of  Fig.  IX.  because  this  sign  was  missing
from  it,  and  have  preferred  the  half  bearing  the  inscription  Fig.  XI.
because  it  was  the  most  like  the  dream  picture  [of  all  those  that  bore
numbers].

Experiment  45.  March  \Qth. — I  had  chosen  Fig.  2,  p.  387,  of  the
Lumiere  Electrique,  for  September  6th,  1884,  for  this  day's  experiment,

z


286


Br.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


[representing  an  elaborate  apparatus  for  electric  lighting.]  Its  two
halves  were  almost  symmetrical  on  each  side  of  a  central  vertical  axis,
and  I  intended  to  show  one  half  to  Sig"^  Maria,  covering  the  other
with  the  usual  folds  of  paper,  to  see  if,  after  Elvira  had  inverted  the
figure,  the  child  would  recognise  the  other  half  as  her  dream  picture.
[The  result  of  this  experiment  was  doubtful  :  the  figure  selected  was
not  the  right  one,  but  was  more  like  it  than  any  other  figure  in  the
book.]

Experiment  46.  March  Wth. — About  4  p  m.,  I  went  back  to
Signa  Maria  with  the  picture  for  the  next  experiment.  I  had  planned
to  make  Elvira  see  the  picture  inverted  in  a  mirror,  and  that  she
should  invert  it  again  in  the  dream,  so  that  the  child  might  see  it  in
its  original  position.  A  screen  was  to  be  used,  to  prevent  Sig"^  Maria
first  seeing  the  picture  directly,  and  she  was  to  look  at  it  with  one  eye
through  a  hole  in  the  screen.  She  was  already  accustomed  to  use  one
'eye  only  in  these  experiments  (see  ante,  p.  284),  and  the  change  had
caused  no  new  difficulty.

The  picture  I  had  selected  was  a  group  formed  of  Figs.  30  and  31,
p.  221,  of  the  Lumiere  Electrique,  for  August  9th,  1884  (see  Plate  II.,
Fig.  VI.)  The  number  contains  39  figures,  or  groups  of  figures  forming
a  whole.  The  figure  chosen  was  a  section  of  a  gas-burner  for  soldering
electric  lamps  ;  there  were  a  few  small  letters  on  it,  and  the  words  air
-and  gaz,  which  I  only  perceived  later.  The  figure  would  be  unintel-
ligible to  unscientific  persons,  and  had  nothing  striking  about  it  but
the  detached  part  (Fig.  31),  which  was  like  the  claw  of  a  cray-fish.
But  this  shajae,  detached  or  otherwise,  was  to  be  found  in  5  other
iigures.

Position  2  was  selected  by  means  of  dice,  and  the  edges  of  the
■diagram  were  covered  with  sheets  of  paper  as  usual.  I  then  arranged
the  vertical  screen  with  its  opening,  and  the  inclined  mirror  intended
vto  reflect  and  invert  the  horizontal  figure.

When  Sig"''-  Maria  had  put  her  eye  to  the  hole,  I  uncovered  the
picture,  and  then  covered  it  again  at  the  usual  signal.  The  observa-
tion lasted  25  seconds.  The  figure  was  so  disposed  that  nothing  could
be  seen  through  the  hole  in  the  screen  but  its  inverted  reflection.
Elvira  now  wrote,  "  Have  you  anything  to  say  ?  I  am  quite  satisfied."
I  asked  her  to  invert  the  figure,  and  she  answered,  "  Very  well,  I  will
try."

March  I2th.  8  a.m. — As  usual  Sig"'"^  Maria  had  said  nothing  about
the  dream,  nor  had  Angelina.  "VVe  asked  Elvira  if  she  had  tried  and
succeeded.  She  said,  "  Yes,  I  have  tried  as  usual,  and  hope  I  have
succeeded ;  but  if  I  have  not  quite  done  so,  excuse  me."  Sig-"^  Annetta
then  questioned  the  child,  who  said  she  had  dreamt  of  a  picture  with


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  287


a  round  thing  and  a  long  tldng.  Sig=^  Annetta  took  her  the  book,  and
returned  in  a  few  minutes  with  it  open  at  p.  221,  Figs.  30  and  31,  the
right  ones,  but  in  Position  1— that  is,  right  side  up.  I  went  down  to
question  Angelina,  and  she  said  she  had  seen  it  so.

It  will  be  seen  that,  besides  the  specular  inversion,  the  figure  had
been  turned  90  degrees  on  its  own  axis.

I  caused  Sig°a-  Maria,  when  searching  for  her  yesterday's  picture,  to
look  at  the  book  as  reflected  in  the  mirror,  and  in  Position  2.  She  chose
Fig.  29,1  excluding  the  small  Fig.  28  close  to  it.  When  asked  why
Figs.  30  and  31  (the  right  ones)  would  not  do,  she  replied  that  they  were
not  like,  because  of  the  long  thing,  and  the  separate  part  (Fig.  31).

Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  two  points  which  enabled  the  percipient
to  recognise  the  pictures  were  exactly  those  which  faded  first  from  the
empirical  consciousness  of  the  person  who  transmitted  them.

Experiment  47.  — [Evening.] — As  I  had  seen  that  Sig"^  Maria
did  not  see  the  picture  easily  when  the  mirror  was  used,  I  aban-
doned the  plan  for  the  time,  and  used  pairs  of  symmetrical  figures
made  on  the  spot.  Tliis  was  easily  done  by  dropping  ink  on  a  piece
of  paper,  doubling  the  paper,  and  rubbing  it  over,  so  as  to  obtain
complicated  and  outlined  marks.  I  used  an  ink  made  of  an
aniline  colour  dissolved  in  a  mixture  of  water  and  glycerine.  When
the  paper  was  cut  in  two  along  the  ci'ease,  one  half  was  a  specular
image  of  the  other.  One  half  was  then  used  for  the  observa-
tion, and  afterwards,  mixed  with  the  others,  was  to  be  recognised,
— or  rather  not  recognised, — by  Sig*^^  Maria,  while  the  second  half,
also  mixed  up  with  the  others,  was  to  be  recognised  by  the  child.  Such
tigures  would  naturally  be  difficult  to  describe  in  words,  or  to  copy,
unless  the  copyist  could  draw.  I  took  five  pieces  of  paper,  twice
as  long  as  they  were  broad,  making,  when  folded  and  torn  in  two,  ten
square  pieces  ;  I  then  shuffled  them  carefully,  and  taking  them  as
they  came,  numbered  them  from  1  to  10,  so  that  no  one  could  divine
from  the  numbers  which  figure  was  the  half  of  which  other.  I  kept
them  in  their  case,  and  chose  Fig.  9  by  means  of  the  dice.  I  got
Position  4  (always  regarding  the  side  where  the  ordinal  numbers  were
written  as  the  top)  and  put  it  before  Sig"'"^  Maria,  who  looked  at  it  for
50  seconds.  It  was  then  quickly  replaced  in  my  pocket  with  the
others.  I  asked  Elvira  to  execute  its  specular  inversion,  and  myself
remained  ignorant  of  the  number  and  position  of  the  figure  which
would  correspond  to  it  after  the  operation.

gigna  Maria  went  down  to  say  good-night  to  her  mother  while
Angelina  was  sleeping. I  then  sealed  her  into  her  room  as  before,

1  Fig.  29  closely  resembles  part  of  Tig.  30.— Ed.

z  3


288


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


taking  the  additional  precaution  of  noting  on  paper  the  exact  size  of
the  seals,  and  even  of  the  drops  of  sealing-wax,  as  well  as  of  the
inevitable  creases  in  the  paper.

March  l'3th.  7.30  a.m. — I  found  Angelina  and  Sig''^  Annetta
already  up,  but  the  former  had  only  been  awake  since  7,  and  had  but
just  risen.  I  went  upstairs,  and,  unseen  by  any  one,  examined  the
seals,  which  I  found  intact.  I  tore  the  paper  and  entered,  finding
gig-na  Maria  still  asleep.  Meanwhile  Sig^-  Annetta  questioned  the
child,  who  had  dreamt  of  a  picture  on  a  paper.  I  then  sent  the  ten
pictures  to  the  child,  the  pairs  being  thoroughly  mixed,  telling  her  she
must  look  at  them  from  all  sides.

Elvii-a  wrote,  "  I  have  tried,  but  am  afraid  I  did  not  quite  succeed
in  inverting  the  figure."

giga  Annetta  soon  called  me  down,  and  Angelina  showed  me  Fig.  6
in  Position  3.  Now,  the  inversion  of  the  figure  as  I  had  directed
would  really  have  given  Fig.  6,  but  in  Position  1  instead  of  3.

When  Angelina  was  asked  how  she  recognised  the  figure,  and  if
she  had  seen  it  all  in  her  dream,  she  replied  that  she  had  seen  it  all,
but  that  she  had  particularly  noticed  the  ^ji^eon,  which  was  a  small
detached  spot,  like  a  flying  bird.  Now  the  pigeon  is  very  much  more
apparent  in  Angelina's  Fig.  6  than  in  its  corresponding  half  which
gigiia  Maria  had  looked  at  the  day  before,  because  the  ink  had  not
stuck  so  well  on  the  latter,  and  this  left  it  doubtful  whether  the  child
might  not  have  picked  out  6  instead  of  9,  not  because  the  inversiort
had  really  taken  place,  but  because  the  pigeon  on  Fig.  6  chiefly
attracted  her  attention.  ^

After  fresh  shuffling,  the  pictures  were  taken  to  Sig"'^  Maria,  who>
chose  Fig.  7,  Position  4,  which  was  the  one  most  like  the  Fig.  9,
which  she  had  really  seen.  She  rejected  Figs.  6  and  9  because  of
the  separate  spots,  which  ivere  just  the  pigeons  on  which  Angelina
founded  her  recognition.

Experiment  48. — March  Idth.  Evening. — During  the  present
sitting,  the  child  was  asleep  in  the  room  with  me  and  Sig"^  Maria.  I
had  prepared  aiiother  set  of  10  figures  for  to-night's  experiment  in
symmetrical  pairs  in  the  way  already  described,  and  chose  No.  4
by  lot.

[This  experiment  was  a  failure  ;  Angelina  chose  the  wrong  picture
next  day.  Sig"'^  Maria  hesitated  between  Figs.  4  and  10,  and  finally
chose  10,]

^  It  must  also  be  observed  that  the  number  9,  written  on  the  diagram,  closely
resembles  a  C  upside  down,  which  might  have  made  recognition  through  verbal
description  jDassible  in  this  case.— Ed.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  289


Experiment  49. — March  ISth.  4.30  p.m. — For  this  night's  experi-
ment I  had  prepared  10  more  figures  in  symmetrical  pairs  like  the
others.  They  were  numbered  at  random,  and  this  time  the  number
was  lightly  traced  in  pencil  on  their  backs.  I  found  this  change
nec^sary,  because  when  I  had  gone  downstairs  the  morning  before  to
discover  Angelina's  choice,  I  had  found  that  she,  impelled  by  a  very
inopportune  desire  for  symmetry,  had  arranged  the  pictures  in  oi'der
before  her,  so  as  to  bring  the  number  in  each  iiito  its  right  hand  upper
corner,  and  this  would  not  only  embarrass  the  search  for  the  true
position  in  case  of  success,  but  also  interfere  with  the  I'ecognition ;
indeed  this  may  well  have  been  the  cause  of  the  last  failure.

Fig.  10,  Position  2  (with  regard  to  the  number  on  the  back)  was
chosen  by  hazard.  The  observation  lasted  45  seconds.  I  asked  Elvira
to  invert  the  figure,  making  the  top  the  bottom.  To  which  she  replied,
"  All  right,  I  understand  perfectly.  I  have  seen  better  this  time,  and
hope  to  succeed."

March  l^th.  7.36  a.m. — Angelina  had  only  just  got  up.  Sig"*
Maria  was  still  in  bed  ;  she  said  she  had  not  talked  of  the  dream  to
any  one.  Elvira  communicated,  said  she  had  tried,  and  hoped,  as
usual.  Angelina  told  Sig^  Annetta  that  she  had  di-eamt  of  a  paper
with  a  blot  upon  it.  I  took  the  ten  figures  downstairs  to  her  and
left  her  \\ath  Sig^  Annetta.  Five  minutes  after  (I  have  since  kept
account  of  -the  time  the  child  spends  in  searching),  Sig^^  Annetta
called  me.  I  found  that  Angelina  had  chosen  Fig.  10,  Position  4  {see
Plate  III.,  Fig.  VIL);  the  one  observed  [by  Signs'  Maria],  but  turned
180  deg.  instead  of  being  specularly  inverted  as  had  been  arranged.
The  figure  representing  this  inversion  was  Fig.  5  in  Position  1,  and
Siga  Annetta  told  me  that  Angelina  had  looked  at  and  rejected  it.
The  latter  said  she  recognised  the  figure  by  its  whole  appearance ;  she
seemed  disgusted  and  weary.

Signa  Maria  chose  Fig.  2,  Position  3  {see  Plate  III.,  Fig.  VIII.),
which  is  the  most  like  10,  except  5,  its  corresponding  pair.

Experiment  50. — March  I9th.  Evening. — Elvira  advised  me  not
to  give  the  figure  which  had  been  observed  to  Angelina  among  the
others,  but  merely  its  corresponding  half,  till  the  child  had  had  some
exercise.  This  method  renders  the  success  of  the  inversion  rather
illusory,  but  it  appeared  worth  while  to  adopt  it  provisionally.

After  the  observation  of  the  picture,  Sig°^  Maria  wa.s  shut  into  her
room  with  the  same  precautions  as  before.

March  '20th.  7.55  a.m. — Sig^  Annetta,  whom  I  saw  first,  told  me
her  daughter  had  been  indisposed  in  the  night,  and  that  therefore  the
door  had  been  opened.  Angelina  had  also  been  restless  and  coughing.
Before  the  child  was  questioned,  Elvira  communicated  as  follows  : —


290


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


"It  is  not  my  fault  at  all.  I  came  three  times  in  the  night,  and  could
never  succeed.  The  first  time  the  child  was  furious,  and  I  tried  to
quiet  her.  When  I  came  again  she  was  awake  with  a  cough,  and
Maria  was  obliged  to  give  her  some  medicine.  The  third  time  Maria
was  ill,  and  I  tried  to  help  her,  and  so  I  let  the  dream  go ;  but  it'was
not  my  fault."

Experiment  51. — March  21st.  4  p.m. — Elvira  wrote  that  she  had
no  engagements  for  the  coming  night,  and  asked  to  be  shown  the  new
picture.  T  had  divided  the  pictures  into  two  groups,  in  order  to  be
able  to  follow  the  advice  Elvira  had  given  me  the  day  before  yester-
day. The  five  original  figures,  so  to  speak,  from  which  the  one  to  be
observed  was  to  be  selected,  were  in  one  group,  and  the  corresponding
five  inverted  ones  in  the  other.  The  latter  were  to  be  given  to
Angelina  to  select  from  after  the  dreaiii,  and  were  not  to  be  seen  by
Maria ;  the  original  five  were  to  be  shown  to  Maria  for  recognition,  or
rather  for  non-recognition.

In  view  of  the  fact,  so  carefully  studied  by  Binet.i  that  distraction
of  the  attention  of  the  normal  personality  increases  the  perceptive
powers  of  the  sub-conscious  personality  [and  considering  that],  even  if
the  diversion  of  the  medium's  attention  during  observation  should  not
improve  the  results,  it  would  be  a  new  obstacle  for  the  partisans  of  the
fraud  theory  to  overcome,  I  determined  to  adopt  the  plan,

I  chose  one  of  the  original  figures  and  its  position  (2)  by  lot.  (The
numbers  in  this  case  and  for  the  future  are  on  the  back  of  the  drawing).
I  talked  to  Sig"''-  Maria  during  the  40  seconds'  observation.  Directly
after,  she  said  she  did  not  know  what  she  had  been  looking  at.  I
forgot  to  tell  Elvira  to  invert  the  picture.

March  22nd.  4  p.m. — I  was  not  able  to  go  in  the  morning,  and
had  little  hope  that  the  child  would  remember  the  picture,  even  if  she
had  dreamt  of  it.

gigiia  Maria  told  me  that  the  child  had  been  vexed  at  my  non-
appearance in  the  morning,  because  she  had  dreamt  of  the  picture  so
plainly,  and  now  would  not  be  rewarded  as  usual  by  a  sweetmeat.
She  was  fetched  from  school,  and  Sig^^  Annetta  gave  her  the  five
inverted  pictures,  while  I  gave  the  five  originals  to  Sig"^  Maria.

Angelina  was  alone  ;  Sig"''^  Maria  and  I  together  in  the  next  room.
The  latter  said  it  was  no  use  looking,  for  she  remembered  nothing.
However,  she  selected  a  figure,  which  was  not  only  the  wrong  one,  but
also  bore  the  least  resemblance  to  the  right.

'  Binet.  Les  alterations  de  la  personnaliK,  International  Scientific  Library,
Paris,  1892.


Telepathic  Breams  Experimentally  Induced.  291


After  a  short  time,  Sig^  Annetta  called  me,  and  Angelina  showed
me  Fig.  2,  Position  3,  -which  is  the  inverted  impression  of  the  picture
that  had  been  observed,  but  turned  through  90  degrees.

Experiment  52. — I  went  back  in  the  evening  with  a  new  series  of
pictures.  Till  now  I  had  separated  the  symmetrical  pairs  of  pictures
with  a  paper-knife.  This  time,  after  doubling  them  together,  I  cut  off
a  narrow  strip,  including  the  crease,  with  a  ruler  and  pocket-knife,
thus  making  it  impossible  to  discover  on  which  side  the  crease — i.e.,
the  axis  of  sjmmetry — had  been.  I  took  fare  to  allow  for  the  loss  of
the  narrow  strip,  and  to  leave  the  halves  exactly  square.  I  did  this
on  the  three  following  occasions  also.

This  time  Angelina  was  in  bed  and  asleep  in  the  room  where
gigna  jyjaria  and  I  communicated  with  Elvii'a  and  the  observation  took
place  ;  but  from  her  position  she  could  not  have  seen  the  figure  even  if
she  had  been  awake.

No.  5  of  the  primary  figures  was  chosen  by  lot.  The  observation
lasted  35  seconds,  and  I  diverted  Sig^^  Maria's  attention  by  talking
and  by  singing  a  favourite  air  of  hers.  When  it  was  over  I  again
noticed  that  the  picture  was  No.  5,  Position  1.

I  asked  Ehira  if  she  had  seen  enough,  and  if  she  would  turn  the
figure  upside-down.  I  also  asked  her  to  explain  why  the  last  picture
had  been  rotated  90  deg.  She  replied,  "  I  have  seen  quite  well  ;  and
you  told  me  nothing  about  last  night's  picture,  so  I  turned  it  in  that
way."

Signa  Maria  went  to  her  room  without  ha^-ing  uttered  a  word  with
regard  to  the  experiments,  and  I  sealed  her  in  with  all  the  pre^-iously
described  precautions.

March  23rd.  8  a.m. — Sig°a  Maria  was  still  in  her  room,  and
Angelina  had  only  just  risen,  having  waked  at  7.30.  I  went  up  to
Signa  Maria's  room,  and  found  all  intact.  Elvira  wrote  as  usual,  "  I
have  tried,"  etc.

While  I  was  upstairs  I  heard  Sig'""--  Annetta  questioning  Angelina
about  her  dreams,  and  the  latter  replied  that  she  had  dreamt  of
blotted  paper.  I  then  carried  down  the  five  inverted  pictures  to  the.
child,  and  returning  gave  the  five  original  ones  to  Sig"^  Maria.  Sig"a>
Maria  first  said  she  remembered  none  of  them,  but  on  further  examina-
tion chose  Fig.  2,  Position  2  (see  Plate  III.  Fig.  X),  which  was  not  the
one  observed,  but  pei-haps  the  most  like  it.  I  must  remark  that  this
time  I  had  taken  pains  to  make  the  figures  much  alike  in  type  and
size.  Signa  Maria's  reason  for  rejecting  Fig.  5  was  that  it  had  a  dark
round  spot  on  a  clearer  background,  low  down  towards  the  left  (with
regard  to  its  position  when  observed),  and  that  as  a  whole  it  wa.s  too
much  rounded.


292


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


In  10  minutes  Sig''>'  Annetta  called  me  down.  Angelina  showed
me  Fig.  1,  Position  1  (see  Plate  III.,  Fig.  IX),  which  corresponded
exactly  to  the  observed  figure  and  was  inverted  as  pre-arranged.

Experiment  5.3. — About  4  p.m.,  I  returned  to  the  house.  Elvira
having  consented  to  another  trial.  Fig.  2,  Position  4,  were  chosen  by  lot
from  a  new  batch  of  five  original  figures.  The  revolution  was  to  be
from  right  to  left  this  time,  and  Elvira  did  not  promise  success,  as  it
was  the  first  time  she  had  turned  a  picture  in  this  direction.

[On  account  of  the  time  of  day,  no  blockade  was  possible,  but
Angelina  was  watched  by  Sig^  Annetta.  This  experiment  failed,
though  Elvira  wrote  that  she  "  had  tried."]

Experiment  54. — March  25th,  4  p.m. — Angelina  had  for  several
days  had  a  slight  ailment  in  her  eyes,  enough  to  cause  painful
inflammation.  I  asked  Elvira  if  we  should  defer  the  experiment,  as
deep  sleep  was  necessary,  but  she  replied  that,  in  her  opinion,  we
should  try  all  the  same.  So  the  observation  was  made  while  I
conversed  with  Sig"^  Maria.

March  2Qth.  7.43  a.m. — Sig^  Annetta  told  me  that  Angelina  had
been  crying  in  the  night  from  the  pain  in  her  eyes.  Sig"^  Maria  was
still  in  bed.  On  communicating  with  Elvira,  she  wrote,  "  I  fear  a  com-
plete failure,  not  through  my  fault,  but  on  account  of  the  child.  Ask
her,  however,  but  I  promise  nothing  good."  She  added,  "  It  would  be
well  to  rest  two  or  three  days,  till  she  is  better."

When  the  child  was  questioned,  she  said  she  had  not  dreamt  of
anything.

As  circumstances  continued  unfavourable,  I  was  unable  to  go  on
with  this  series  of  dream  pictures.  From  the  little  I  have  been  able
to  do,  it  results  that  dreams  of  figures  without  alteration,  and  also
rotated  in  their  own  plane,  may  be  said  to  have  succeeded ;  while
specular  inversion  has  given  inconclusive  results.

Eesumption  of  Scenic  DreAxMs.

On  April  1st,  when  Angelina  was  better,  Elvira  announced  (by
automatic  writing)  that  in  three  or  four  days  we  should  be  able  to
recommence  the  dreams.

Experiment  55.  A2yril  5fh. — I  asked  her  if  she  believed  we  could
again  try  the  transference  of  images  from  Angelina  to  Sig"'^  Maria
in  the  waking  state,  which  had  been  interrupted.  She  replied  that
on  the  contrary  we  had  better  return  to  the  dreams,  adding  that  it
would  be  necessary  to  begin  over  again,  i.e.,  with  the  dreams  of


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.


293


animated  scenes.  I  therefore  proposed  a  scene  for  the  next  night
which  Elvira  accepted  with  pleasure,  because,  said  she,  "It  amuses  the
child."  But  when  1  went  next  day,  at  2.. 30  p.m.,  to  see  Sig"''^  Maria,
she  told  me  she  had  forgotten  to  question  the  child  who  was  now  at
school.  Elvira  said  she  had  tried  in  vain  in  the  night,  because  a
stranger  had  slept  with  Angelina, — a  circumstance  unknown  to  me,
and  which  Sig^^-  Maria  had  not  meant  to  tell  me.  A  neighbour  had
been  prevented  from  sleeping  in  her  own  house.

JExjoeriment  56.  April  Qth. — I  proposed  that  Elvira  should  make
Angelina  dream  that  she  and  Sig"^  Maria  were  on  the  Campanile  of
S..  Marco  at  Venice,  and  that  she  should  notice  that  the  pigeons  usually
flying  round  were  green.  (This  at  least  is  what  is  written  in  my
Journal.)

Elvira  answered,  "  Very  well,  but  there  must  be  no  strangers  ;
then  I  promise  to  succeed."

Erom  Experiment  56  [to  the  end  of  the  present  series],  Angelina
slept  with  Sig^  Annetta,  and  Sig"^  Maria  slept  alone  in  another  room.
Angelina  related  the  dreams  to  Sig^  Annetta  directly  after  waking,
and  before  communicating  with  Sig"*  Maria.  Sig^  Annetta  has  since
told  me  that,  unless  some  one  was  ill,  she  always  locked  herself  in
with  Angelina.

April  1th.  Evening. — Sig"<^  Maria  said  that  Angelina  had  dreamt
of  being  on  a  high  Campanile  with  her ;  she  did  not  mention  that  of
S.  Marco.  She  saw  beautiful  large  birds  (she  did  not  say  pigeons),
with  feathers  of  lovely  blue.

On  my  remarking  that  the  blue  colour  was  a  mistake,  because  I
had  arranged  that  the  birds  should  be  green,  Sig"'^  Maria  said  I  was
wrong,  and  that  she  remembered  I  had  said  blue.  Elvira  wrote
that  Sig"*  Maria  was  right.  As  I  could  not  remember  very  clearly,
and  as  I  know  that  Elvira's  memory  is  far  better  than  mine,  I
yielded.

In  the  present  dream  there  are  two  points  which  tend  to  show  that
it  was  not  produced  by  verbal  suggestion.  The  lirst  is  the  non-recog-
nition of  the  Campanile  of  S.  Marco,  a  thing  compatible  with  the  real
vision  of  the  scene,  on  the  part  of  a  child  who  had  seen  it  only  from
below  ;  all  the  more  that  in  her  dream  she  was  not  looking  at  the
panorama  below  (in  which  case  she  might  easily  have  recognised
Venice),  but  at  the  coloured  pigeons.  The  second  point  is  that  she
did  not  grasp  the  idea  of  pigeons,  but  perceived  rather  a  strangely
transformed  image  of  them,  which  she  did  not  recognise  as  pigeons.

Exjjeriment  57. — I  proposed  the  following  dream  for  the  next
night  : — Angelina  goes  to  a  cellar  with  Sig^  Annetta,  who  draws  some


294


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


wine,  and  going  away  forgets  to  turn  the  tap.  Angelina  remains  in
the  cellar  while  the  wine  runs  out,  and  amuses  herself  with  paddling;
in  it.

Elvira  added,  "  If  you  like,  I  will  prolong  the  dream,  and  addl
something." To  which  I  consented.

April  8th.  2.15  p.m. — Sig"*  Maria  told  me  that  Angelina  had
dreamt  of  going  with  Sig''''  Annetta  down  some  steps  into  a  dark
place  (she  did  not  say  cellar),  where  she  saw  the  keg  that  stood  in  the
yard.  Sig''^  Annetta  drew  some  wine,  and  did  not  close  the  tap
properly.  A  quantity  of  wine  ran  out  over  the  ground,  and  Angelina,
said  she  had  bathed  her  hands  and  feet  in  it,  but  saw  she  had  spotted
her  blue  frock,  and  became  frightened  lest  Sig"*  Maria  should  scold
her.  In  fact,  she  dreamt  that  the  latter  not  only  scolded,  but
whipped  her.  This  dream,  which  Sig^  Annetta  also  recounted  without
the  least  diiference,  was,  therefore,  carried  out  with  precision,  with  the
little  tragi-comic  introduction  of  the  whipping,  which  was  the  addition
Elvira  had  promised.  But  it  must  not  be  said  that  Elvira  had
departed  from  her  rule  of  never  producing  impressions  injurious  to  the
child,  because,  if  one  reflects,  this  was  a  little  educative  lesson.
Eerillon  could  not  have  given  a  better,  considering  the  age  of  the
subject.

This  dream  bears  no  trace  of  verbal  suggestion,  but  it  does  bear
traces  of  a  direct  sensorial  perception  of  the  scene.  There  being  no
underground  cellars  in  Venice,  and  none  in  Sig"^  Maria's  house  at
Padua,  nor  in  any  other  house  known  to  Angelina,  the  latter  has  no
idea  of  them,  though  she  may  have  of  cellars  above  ground.  Now  I
had  simply  said  cellar,  and  Angelina  would  naturally  have  pictured
what  she  knew.  Instead,  we  find  in  the  dream  an  image  of  new
surroundings,  for  which  she  had  not  even  a  name.  Angelina's  assertion
that  the  keg  was  the  one  in  the  yard  is  evidently  the  result  of  an
association  of  ideas.

Elvira  asked  me  if  I  objected  to  additions  to  the  dreams.  I  said,
no,  provided  she  omitted  nothing.

Experiment  58. — I  wished  to  examine  the  effect  on  Angelina  of
dreams  involving  the  use  of  powers  she  did  not  yet  possess,  so  I
proposed  that  Elvira  should  make  her  dream  she  could  read,  and  that
she  actually  read  in  a  book  a  little  story  which  I  invented  on  the  spot.

I  asked  Elvira  if  this  were  possible ;  she  replied  that  she  could
promise  nothing,  but  would  try.

Apiril  %th.  Evening. — Sig"'^  Maria  told  me  that  Angelina  (who
continued  to  sleep  with  Sig'^  Annetta)  had  on  waking  told  the  latter
that  she  could  read,  and  that  she  had  read  something  in  a  book,  but
could  not  remember  what. She  was  so  convinced  that  she  could  read.


Tele'pcdhic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  295


that  directly  she  had  risen  she  took  a  paper,  and  imitating  a  person
reading,  repeated  disconnected  phrases.  And  later  on,  seeing  me  at  a
distance  in  a  public  place,  she  insisted  on  being  brought  to  me  to  give
me  the  important  news.

Sig'i  Annetta  confirmed  the  dream  (she  had  not  been  present  at  the
scene  out  of  doors),  and  told  me  that  at  tirst  she  had  believed  it  was  a
little  trick  of  Angelina's  to  get  a  book  bought  for  her  to  play  with  ;  but
that  she  had  not  asked  for  one.

Elvira  wrote,  "  You  must  excuse  me  if  it  was  not  all  done  ;  it  was
the  tirst  time. I  hope  to  succeed  in  the  future."

Perhaps  the  strength  of  Angelina's  new  impression  interfered  with
her  perception  of  the  imaginary  contents  of  the  book.

Experiment  59. — I  asked  Elvira  if  she  would  repeat  this  experi-
ment. She  said,  "  Yes,  I  shall  be  pleased  to  exercise  myself,  and  then
if  I  cannot  satisfy  you  with  the  writing,  I  can  with  the  dreams.  Tell
me  the  dream,  that  I  may  go."

Sig*  Annetta  gave  me  some  book,  and  turning  over  the  leaves  at
hazard,  I  found  the  odd  word  Guglielmeide  written  in  large  characters.
I  showed  it  to  Sig"^'  Maria,  and  asked  Elvira  to  make  the  child  read  it
in  a  dream  so  that  she  should  remember  and  recognise  it  in  the  book.

The  child  was  all  this  time  in  bed  and  asleep,  and  I  carried  the-
book  away  with  me.

Ajjril  IQth.  3  p.m. — ^ig^  Annetta  told  me  that  Angelina  had  again
dreamt  of  being  able  to  read,  and  of  reading  a  word  in  large  letters
in  a  book.  Sig"''^  Maria  knew  nothing  about  it,  as  she  had  not  ques-
tioned the  child.

I  sent  to  fetch  Angelina  from  school,  and  showed  her  the  book
open  at  the  page  where  the  word  Guglielmeide  was  written,  and  told
her  to  look  for  the  word  she  had  seen  in  her  dream.  As  I  saw  she
was  too  timid  to  pay  attention,  I  sent  her  away  with  Sig*^  Annetta
and  the  book.  They  soon  returned,  and  Angelina  showed  me  the
word  Guglielmeide,  but  could  not  pronounce  it.  Consequently  she
had  not  received  an  auditory  impression  of  the  word,  and  the  dream
belongs  to  the  purely  visual  category.  There  is  no  other  word  in
large  letters  on  the  page  I  showed  to  the  child,  and  consequently  there
is  no  proof  that  she  did  not  recognise  it  by  its  size  rather  than  by  its
separate  letters.

From  these  experiments,  which  unfortunately  were  not  followed
up,  I  drew  a  hope,  which  will  certainly  be  realised  later  on  by  others,
of  the  possibility  of  teaching  reading  by  means  of  telepathy.

Experiment  60. — Ajyril  \lth.  3  p.m. — Wishing  to  try  again  to
cause  a  dream  of  something  unknown  to  Sig"!^  Maria,  but  known  to


296


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


me,  I  proposed  to  Elvira,  while  she  was  manifesting  herself  by  means
of  a  sensory  hallucination  to  Sig"=^  Maria  in  her  trance  state,  to  show
the  child  in  a  dream  the  gasworks  at  Rovigo,  which,  as  they  were
being  re-arranged,  offered  special  details  entirely  unknown  to  Sig"^
Maria,  but  well  known  to  me,  as  I  was  taking  part  in  the  work.

April  I2th.  3.30  p.m. — Angelina  had  gone  to  school  before  seeing
Signa  Maria,  who  had  risen  later,  and  therefore  did  not  know  the
result  of  the  dream.

Sig^  Annetta  told  me  that  the  child  had  dreamt  of  being  in  the
country,  in  a  house  without  a  roof,  where  there  was  much  smoke,  and
dirty  black  men  hurrying  about.  Angelina  attributed  the  burning  in
her  eyes  to  this  (she  was  still  suffering  from  pustules  in  them).  She
was  sent  for,  but  I  could  obtain  no  more  details,  even  by  leaving  her
alone  with  Sig^'  Annetta.

This  result,  although  satisfactory  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
telepathic  perception  in  dreams  of  ideas  drawn  from  the  mind  of  Sig"'^
Maria,  does  not  demonstrate  the  perception  of  ideas  extraneous  to  it,
because,  though  the  dream  was  of  gasworks,  they  had  no  characteristic
belonging  to  those  at  Rovigo,  unknown  to  Sig"*  Maria.

Exjieriment  61. — April  \?>th.  2.30  p.m. — Elvira  wrote  that  she
would  make  Angelina  dream  during  the  next  night.  While  I  was
searching  for  a  subject,  Elvira  sent  Sig"*  Maria  to  sleep,  and  during
the  trance  I  proposed  the  following  di'eam  :  Angelina  is  on  the  roof
playing  with  a  cat ;  several  white  mice  appear,  and  the  cat  pursues
them.  Elvira  replied  that  the  mice  would  do,  but  not  the  cat,  as  she
had  a  great  objection  to  these  animals.  I  then  proposed  to  substitute
a  dog.

April  \ith,  about  6  p.m. — Sig"*  Maria  said  that  Angelina  had  told
a  dream  to  Sig^  Annetta,  but  that  she  did  not  believe  it  had  any  con-
nection with  our  experiments,  because  I  had  not  proposed  a  dream  the
day  before.  In  fact,  as  Sig"'^  Maria  was  in  a  trance  while  I  proposed
the  dream,  she  could  know  nothing  about  it  in  the  waking  state.  She
could  only  tell  me  a  little  of  what  Angelina  had  related.  Sig''^  Annetta
then  related  the  dream  ;  it  was  absolutely  identical  with  the  pro-
gramme.

Experiment  62. — "When  I  returned  later,  Sig"^  Maria  was  already
in  bed  in  the  little  room.  Angelina  also  was  in  bed  and  asleep  in  the
next  room.  Elvira  manifested  herself  by  a  sensory  hallucination  in
the  trance.  I  proposed  the  following  dream  :  Angelina  was  to  see
three  women  with  sewing-machines  enter  the  house  about  mid-day,
each  carrying  a  sewing-machine,  which  they  were  to  offer  to
gigna  Maria  for  sale. Sig"^  Maria,  finding  them  rusty  and  out  of


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  297


order,  refuses  them,  and  the  three  women  go  away  angry  to  the  iron
bridge  (visible  from  the  house)  and  throw  the  machines  into  the
water,  grumbling.

As  I  could  not  seal  up  Sig"*  Maria's  door,  I  begged  Sig^  Annetta.
to  watch  that  no  communication  took  place  between  her  and  Angelina.
She  replied  that  she  was  always  on  the  watch,  and  that  usually
Angelina  related  her  dream  directly  she  opened  her  eyes.

April  \5th.  4  p.m.  (about). — Sig™  Maria  did  not  know  that
Angelina  had  dreamt  at  all,  and  having  been  in  a  trance  when  the
dream  was  proj^osed,  was  also  unaware  that  any  dream  had  been  pro-
posed at  all.

Sig^  Annetta  told  me  that  the  child  had  related  a  dream  about
three  women  coming  to  sell  sewing-machines  ;  she  had  dreamt  that
Signa  Maria  refused  to  buy,  not  for  the  reasons  above  stated,  but
because  she  said  she  had  no  money.  The  rest  of  the  dream  followed
the  programme  exactly.  Angelina  had  afterwards  insisted  that  when
the  water  was  low,  the  three  machines  must  be  fished  up ;  a  new
example  of  the  way  she  objectifies  these  dreams.  The  alteration  in
the  reason  given  for  not  buying  the  machines  is  a  natural  one  to  occur
to  the  child,  who  is  used  to  having  her  own  childish  demands  put
off  with  this  excuse.  Elvira  agreed  that  this  was  the  reason  of  the
alteration.  This  is  the  only  time  in  the  coui'se  of  the  experiments
in  which  it  is  clearly  indicated  that  the  alteration  was  produced  by
the  percipient,

Exjyeriment  63. — When  Elvira  manifested  in  the  trance^  I  proposed
the  following  dream  for  the  next  night  . —  Angelina  was  to  be  a  man,,
and  to  ply  the  trade  of  a  boatman  at  Venice.  Four  English  people,
two  gentlemen  and  two  ladies,  were  to  come  up,  with  red  guide-books.
They  would  explain  by  gesture  that  they  wanted  to  go  to  the  Lido,
and  Angelina  would  accompany  them.  Elvira  added,  laughing  (we
are  speaking,  of  course,  of  tlie  hallucinatory  Elvira,  seen  only  by
Signa  Maria),  that  the  people  would  wear  veils,  as  they  usually  do.

April  \Qth.  Evening. — Sig"'^  Maria  was  ill  in  bed  with  a  head-
ache. Her  mother,  to  whom  I  spoke  fii'st,  told  me  that  Angelina  had
dreamt  of  being  a  boatman.  She  said  she  had  rowed  to  the  Lido
with  three  gentlemen  in  gloves  and  veils,  who  were  carrying  red
books.  When  they  got  to  the  Lido,  one  of  them  fell  into  the  water.
Sig^  Annetta  then  asked,  "  Did  these  gentlemen  come  from  England
(Inghilterra)  ? "  Angelina,  not  understanding  the  question,  replied,
"No;  they  were  not  on  land  (in  terra),  they  were  on  the  water."
gig-a  Annetta  said  that  the  child  accompanied  her  story  by  mimicking-
the  gestures  made  in  rowing,  showing  how  vivid  had  been  the  motor
image.


■298


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermaeora.


Experiment  64. — I  wished  to  place  Angelina  in  a  dream  state  still
more  unlike  her  real  one,  so  I  proposed  to  Elvira  to  make  her  dream
that  she  was  grown  up  and  was  being  married.  I  left  Elvira  to
develop  this  theme.

April  nth.  Evening. — Sig^  Annetta  said  that  that  morning
Angelina  had  told  her  that  she  had  dreamt  she  was  as  tall  as
gigiia  Maria,  and  that  she  was  at  home  in  the  parlour  at  Venice.
Many  people  were  present,  and  she  had  a  white  veil  over  her  head,
and  was  leaning  on  the  arm  of  a  gentleman,  who  put  a  ring  on  her
finger.  Sig^  Annetta,  who,  as  usual,  knew  nothing  of  the  proposed
dream,  said,  "  Then  you  were  dreaming  of  your  own  v/edding."  To
which  Angelina  ingenuously  replied,  "  If  it  was  my  own  wedding,
when  shall  I  find  my  sweetheart  ?  "

gigna  Maria,  who  had  also  been  ignorant  of  the  proposed  dream
.and  had  not  been  present  when  the  child  related  it,  could  not  on  this
account  either  confirm  or  correct  her  mother's  statement.

It  cannot  be  said  that  this  dream  was  a  resuscitation  of  habitual
waking  ideas,  for  Angelina  in  her  short  life  had  never  seen  a  wedding.

Experiment  65. — When  Elvira  manifested  during  Sig™  Maria's
trance,  I  proposed  that  she  should  try  to  show  Angelina  some  place
known  to  herself  (Elvira),  but  unknown  to  us  all ;  so  that  if  Angelina
could  afterwards  describe  it,  we  could  identify  it  when  Elvira  told  us
where  it  was. She  accepted,  and  expressed  some  hope  of  success.

April  18th.  4.1-5  p.m. — Sig*  Annetta  told  me  that  the  child  had
teen  restless  and  probably  feverish  during  the  night.  She  had
questioned  her,  and  the  child  had  said  irritably  that  she  had  nothing
to  tell.

Experiment  66. — I  proposed  yesterday's  programme  over  again.

Ajrril  Idth.  Evening. — Sig'"^  Annetta,  while  lier  daughter  was
absent,  told  me  that  Angelina  had  dreamed  of  being  in  a  Piazza,  that
is,  in  a  Campo  (at  Venice  the  Piazze  ai-e  called  Campi),  which  was
crossed  by  a  pathway,  on  each  side  of  which  the  ground  was  paved.
In  a  corner  of  the  Campo  there  was  a  church  with  rough  walls  and  close
to  this  the  theatre.

gigna  Maria,  whom  I  afterwards  questioned,  said  she  had  not  heard
-about  the  dream.

Elvira  (in  automatic  writing)  asked  me  if  I  was  satisfied  with  the
dream.  As  I  did  not  in  the  least  recognise  the  spot  Angelina  had
dreamt  of,  I  asked  Elvira  where  it  was,  and  she  replied  :

"  I  am  ready  to  tell  you  as  much  as  I  can.  The  place  .is  Adria ;
the  Piazza,  the  Piazza  Garibaldi ;  the  theatre  is  the  Orpheus."


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  299


Dr.  E.  "That  is  good,  but  the  important  thing  for  me  would  be
to  know  if  Maria  may  not  have  known  the  place  by  description  or
otherwise."

Elv.  "  Well,  I  am  very  sure  that  it  is  not  the  sort  of  place  they
would  make  a  picture  of,  so  I  am  quite  certain  Maria  has  not  seen
it. Please  tell  me  to-night's  dream,  for  I  have  no  time  to  stop."

As  I  have  only  been  to  Adria  once  as  an  infant,  I  could  not  recognise
the  description,  but  I  found  a  friend  who  knows  the  little  town  well,  and
he  told  me  that  the  description  corresponded  exactly  with  the  reality.

I  cannot  share  the  opinion  of  Elvira  that  Sig"^  Maria  could  not
have  known  the  place,  because  prints  and  photographs  of  it  may  exist,
or  she  may,  perhaps  subconsciously,  have  heard  it  described.  Yet  this
is  not  probable,  for  Sig"^  Mai'ia  reads  very  little,  and  lives  an  extremely
retired  life.  She  herself  is  naturally  certain  that  she  knew  nothing  of
Adria  ;  but  that  proves  nothing,  because  the  knowledge  may  have
existed  outside  the  field  of  consciousness.

Experimetd  67.— I  asked  Elvira  to  repeat  the  experiment  of  making
Angelina  dream  of  a  place  of  which  neither  she  nor  Sig"^  Maria  knew
tinything,  and,  if  possible,  of  one  which  the  latter  could  not  even
indirectly  have  heard  of.  [This  subject  was  proposed  immediately
before  Sig"^-  Maria  went  to  bed.]

April  20th.  3  p.m. — Sig"*  Maria  was  ill,  and  her  mother  told  me
"that  Angelina  was  also  indisposed  and  restless  during  the  night,  and
that  she  did  not  relate  any  dream  in  the  morning.

Experiment  68. — Elvira  manifested  in  the  trance,  and  said  that  the
child's  state  had  prevented  her  acting.  The  proposed  dream  was  put
off  till  the  coming  night.

AjJril  2lst.  Evening. — Angelina  had  told  Sig^  Annetta  in  the
morning  that  she  had  dreamt  of  being  in  the  same  place  as  before,
but  on  the  other  side,  where  there  was  a  beautiful  palace  with  steps
adorned  with  flowers.  Inside  there  were  gentlemen  dressed  in  black,
who  gave  her  sweetmeats.  As  before,  I  was  completely  unable  to
identify  the  place.

Elvira  wrote  :— "  I  transported  her  to  Adria.  What  I  showed  her
was  the  hotel  of  the  Stella  d'Oro.  But  I  warn  you  that  I  showed  her
the  inside,  not  the  outside,  of  the  place,  and  if  you  enquire,  ask  what
the  staircase  of  the  hotel  is  like,  and  the  name  of  the  manager.  I  will
tell  it  you  if  you  like.  His  name  is  Panciera,  but  the  people  at  Adria
call  him  Panciotti."

Dr.  E.  "  You  have  chosen  ill ;  Maria  may  easily  have  heard  a
public  place  like  that  described  without  knowing  or  remembering  that
she  had,"


300


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


Next  day  I  enquii'ed,  and  found  that  the  hotel  of  the  Stella  d'Om
really  existed,  and  had  been  managed  by  a  man  named  Panciera,  nick-
named Panciatti  (not  Panciotti),  but  that  it  had  been  closed  for  some
time.  Besides,  the  hotel  was  not  really  in  the  Piazza,  but  in  a  street
which  strikes  off  it  on  the  side  mentioned  in  the  dream,  i.e.,  opposite
the  church  and  the  theatre.

I  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  learning  anything  about  the  staircase
with  flowers  ;  but  Angelina  may  have  dreamt  of  the  potted  shrubs
so  often  seen  on  the  staircases  of  hotels.

Ex2)eriment  69.  —  April  21nd.  4.1 -5  p.m.  —  Sig*  Annetta  told  me
that  Angelina  had  been  restless  in  the  night,  and  in  the  morning  had
said  she  had  dreamt  of  a  place  like  the  Prato  delle  Valle  (a  piazza  in
Padua),  without  being  able  to  give  more  details.

After  Elvira  had,  in  automatic  writing,  exhorted  me  to  patience  as
a  means  of  success,  she  added,  "  I  came  to  make  the  dream  last  night
as  usual,  although  you  gave  me  no  directions  yesterday."

Exjjerimenf.  70. — A2)ril  2Zrd.  Evening. — Sig*  Annetta,  in  the-
presence  of  her  daughter,  told  me  that  last  night  Angelina  had
dreamt  of  being  in  a  large  room  with  many  people.  There  was  no
furniture  but  chairs  and  benches.  Sig*  Annetta  asked  her  if  it  was
like  a  theatre,  and  she  said  that  the  seats  were  like.  Angelina,
insisted  that  she  knew  where  the  place  was,  and  Sig"*  Maria  said  that
when  they  were  out  that  day  Angelina  persisted  in  wishing  to  take
her  to  the  place  she  had  dreamed  of,  and  that  when  they  were  passing
through  the  Piazza  dei  Signori  she  pointed  to  the  entrance  of  the  Via
Maggiore,  saying  that  that  was  the  way  to  the  place.

We  communicated  with  Elvira  and  told  her  all  this  ;  and  I  asked
her  what  place  she  had  shown  the  child.  She  replied,  "Yes,  the  child
is  right ;  I  showed  her  all  that.  But  I  will  tell  you  nothing  to-night^
nor  make  a  new  dream,  but  will  deepen  the  impression  so  that
Angelina  may  explain  herself  better,  and  to-morrow,  at  two  o'clock^
you  will  know  something  more.  But  another  time  after  such  a  dream,,
you  must  take  her  at  once  where  she  wants  to  go,  even  a  long  way,  or
into  the  country."

From  what  Sig"^  Maria  had  said,  I  had  concluded  that  the  hall  or
theatre  belonged  to  the  Circolo  Filarmonico,  which  is  in  the  Via.
Maggiore. I  said  nothing,  and  I  was  proved  to  be  wrong.

Exi)eriment  71. — April  24:th.  4  p.m. — Angelina  had  had  the  same
dream,  and  said  in  my  presence  that  she  could  find  her  way  to  the
place.  I  asked  Sig*  Annetta  to  go  out  with  her  and  accompany  her
wherever  she  pleased.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  301


After  they  had  gone,  I  put  myself  in  rapport  with  Elvira,  and
asked  her  to  explain  the  difficulty  about  the  exact  place  of  the  hotel
of  the  Stella  d'Oro,  and  whether  the  child  had  meant  that  the  stair-
case was  painted  with  flowers,  or  adorned  with  pots  of  flowers.

Elvira  replied,  "  No,  the  poor  child  was  right,  but  could  not  explain
herself.  The  hotel  is  not  in  the  Piazza,  but  in  a  street  opposite  the
theatre.  The  staircases  are  not  painted  nor  adorned  with  flowers,
but  the  steps  are  of  open  work ;  that  was  what  she  could  not
explain."

Dr.  E.  "  Then  they  are  of  iron,  because  marble  is  not  treated  so."
Elv.  "  But  it  is  the  front  of  the  steps  which  is  of  open  work,  not
the  part  where  you  put  your  foot."
Dr.  E.  "  Are  they  iron  1 "

Elv.  "  Certainly  not,  and  not  marble  either.  I  think  it  is  a  kind
of  composition,  unless  they  may  be  iron  after  all,  but  coloured  very
light."  1

When  Elvira's  communication  was  ended,  T  asked  Sig''^  Annetta  to
come  up  and  tell  me  about  her  walk.  She  said  that  Angelina  had
at  once  begun  to  hurry,  and  to  look  for  something.  Big=^  Annetta,  on
account  of  a  pain  in  one  leg,  could  not  keep  up  with  her,  so  that
Angelina  was  always  in  fi'ont,  and  as  excited  as  a  dog  searching
for  his  home.  She  often  looked  up  at  the  walls  of  the  houses.
Sig^  Annetta,  who  is  not  a  native  of  Padua,  could  not  tell  me
the  names  of  certain  small  streets  thr-ough  which  they  passed,  but
she  made  me  understand  the  way  they  had  taken  perfectly.  At  the
end  of  the  Via  S.  Agnese,  Angelina  remarked  certain  windows  adorned
with  flowers,  and  said  that  that  was  the  house  whose  inside  she  had  seen.
Siga  Annetta  took  the  number  of  the  house,  1,458,  and  not  perceiving
the  inscription  over  the  bell,  went  into  a  neighbouring  shop  to  ask.
She  was  told  that  it  was  the  oflice  of  the  Societa  Filarmonica.  (This,
as  will  be  seen,  is  a  little  mistake  of  Sig^-  Annetta's).  When
Sig''''  Annetta  asked  the  child  how  she  had  found  the  house,  she  said
she  had  gone  the  way  she  went  in  her  dream,  but  that  then  it  was
night,  for  the  lamps  were  lighted.  She  said  also  that  they  were
playing  in  the  house,  but  not  singing.  I  went  at  once  over  all  the
ground  and  found  No.  1,458,  which  had  an  inscription  over  the  bell
Philodramatic  Club  of  Padua.  Tt  is  not  a  Philharmonic  Society,  as
Sig^  Annetta  had  mistakenly  said.  This  I'ecognition  of  a  house,  the
internal  arrangements  of  which  ai-e  evidently  those  seen  by  Angelina,

1  I  found  out  about  this  later.  The  steps  have  no  peculiarity,  but  the  balustrade
is  of  marble  or  cement,  with  ornaments.  On  the  other  hand,  Elvira  gave  me  much
information  later  about  the  outer  and  inner  appearance  of  the  hotel,  its  proprietor,
etc. ,  and  I  found  it  for  the  greater  part  correct.

2  A


302


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


and  where  they  play,  but  do  not  sing,i  is  interesting  from  a  double
point  of  view.  Firstly,  because  none  of  us  were  consciously  aware  of
the  existence  of  a  Philodraruatic  Society  in  that  place  ;  and,  secondly,
because,  as  may  be  seen  by  looking  at  a  plan  of  Padua,  the  road  taken,
was  very  tortuous,  and  this  shows  that  the  child  was  not  guided  by  the
idea  of  the  definite  position  of  the  place  to  be  found,  but  that  she  was
directed  by  successive  recognitions  along  the  road.

This  is  also  proved  by  two  other  facts.  The  first  is  that,  as
Sig*  Annetta  said,  Angelina  went  on  looking  here  and  there,  as  if  to
recognise  a  path  already  gone  over.  The  second  is,  that  when  Angelina
found  herself  the  day  before  in  the  Piazza  dei  Signori  she  ai3peared
to  have  known  the  comparatively  direct  way  to  the  Philodramatic
Club  (which,  as  I  have  said,  made  me  believe  that  the  dream  house  was
the  Philharmonic  Club),  and  to-day,  on  the  contrary,  she  did  not  know
the  easy  way,  but  took  a  very  long  and  tortuous  road,  partly  through
small  streets,  through  which  she  has  probably  never  passed.

In  the  evening  I  went  back  to  Sig"^'  Maria  to  try  for  more  accurate
information  as  to  any  possible  knowledge  existing  in  the  family  about
the  Philodramatic  Club  ;  or  in  Angelina  about  the  streets  she  had
passed  through.  Sig"^  Maria  said  she  was  completely  ignorant  of  the
existence  of  the  Club,  adding  that  if  she  had  ever  passed  through  the
Via  S.  Agnese,  she  must  have  done  so  very  seldom.  Her  mother  was
certain  of  never  having  been  through  it,  and  both  of  them  were  sure
thev  had  never  taken  Angelina  to  a  place  which  was  to  them  so  far
out  of  the  way.  Angelina  was  never  allowed  to  leave  their  house  with
other  persons.  I  must  add  that  Sig"-'^  Maria  lives  a  very  retired  life,
that  she  hardly  ever  leaves  the  house  except  for  domestic  affairs.

Sig^  Annetta's  topographical  memory  is  exceptionally  weak.  After
seven  years  in  Padua  she  only  knows  the  principal  streets.

[Various  circumstances  prevented  my  trying  further  experiments
for  some  time.  But  at  last]  it  appeared  that  the  dreams  were  to
begin  again  on  October  2nd.  Instead  of  which,  another  personality
manifested  on  that  day,  whom  I  will  call  B.,  and  who  up  to  the  present
time  had  only  helped  with  a  series  of  experiments  on  the  estimation
of  intervals  of  time.  She  told  me  that  she  was  now  in  a  position  to
undertake  experiments  of  more  importance,  and  asked  my  permission
to  make  an  experiment  the  following  night  in  place  of  the  dream
promised  by  Elvira.  Not  wishing  to  refuse,  but  rather  desirous  to
know  if  she  could  do  better  than  Elvira,  I  agreed  ;  and  the  following
day  brought  a  result  so  interesting  that  I  thought  it  wise  to  put  off
the  telepathic  dreams  for  the  present  and  to  continue  the  study  of  the

1 1  found  that  there  was  a  hall,  which  had  been  used  just  at  the  time  for  some
private  representations.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.


303


strange  and  varied  manifestations  pi'oduced  by  B.,  and  often  by
Adriano,  in  Sig"^  Maria's  house  at  night.  But  this  study,  which  aims
at  discovering  whether  these  manifestations  occur  in  a  supernormal
way,  or  are  expHcable  by  a  simple  alteration  in  the  personality  of
gigna  Maria,  must  be  related  in  another  place.

Conclusion.

Taking  all  the  facts  here  recorded  into  consideration,  I  think  it
best  for  the  present  to  lay  no  claim  to  the  discovery  of  a  new
phenomenon,  but  to  ascribe  the  results  attained  to  an  agency  now
known  and  undisputed — viz.,  telepathy — and  I  shall  proceed  to  con-
sider them  from  this  point  of  view.

Duplication  of  the  Agent. — In  the  course  of  the  experiments  here
described,  the  interesting  fact  is  revealed  that  two  personalities  take
part  in  the  action  ; —first,  the  telepathic  agent,  who  produces  the  tele-
pathic transference  of  the  picture,  and,  secondly,  Sig"^  Maria,  so  far
as  sensorial,  whose  senses  supply  to  the  telepathic  agent  the  pictui'e  to
be  transferred.  In  the  dreams  of  figures,  the  sensorial  agent  receives
the  sensorial  image, — which  has  to  be  transferred  to  the  telepathic
agent, — shortly  before  transferring  it.  In  the  case  of  the  scenic  dreams,
the  telepathic  agent  chooses  from  amongst  the  images  already  existing
in  the  recent  or  remote  memoiy  of  the  sensorial  agent  the  one  which
is  best  fitted  for  the  operation  he  has  to  perform.  As  we  have  seen,
none  of  the  present  experiments  demonstiate  tliat  the  telepathic  agent
has  transferred  images  which  he  himself  has  directly  perceived  without
the  intervention  of  the  sensorial  agent's  normal  senses.  The  experi-
ments also  showed  the  incapacity  of  the  normal  personality  of  Sig"'''
Maria  for  fulfilling  the  office  of  telepathic  agent; — i.e.,  she  is  unable  by
her  own  will  to  transfer  images  to  the  percipient  telepathically.

I  do  not  pretend  to  have  discovered  anything  new,  when  I  make  a
distinction  between  the  two  personalities  which  unite  for  telepathic
action  ;  it  is  well  known,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  fact  is  considered
fundamental  not  only  by  modern  spiritualists,  but  ])y  occultists  in  all
times  and  places,  who,  however,  press  its  interpretation  further.  But
I  think  it  useful  to  insist  on  this  poiiit  for  the  sake  of  those  who  study
only  the  telepathic  branch  of  psychical  science ;  because  the  recogni-
tion of  the  existence  of  a  special  personality,  producing  the  telepathic
action,  affords  some  explanation  of  much  that  seems  capricious  in  the
results  of  experimental  telepathy,  and  wai-ns  the  experimenter  not  to
neglect  any  means  of  putting  himself  into  rapport  with  the  telepathic
agent.  If  I  had  not  been  previously  in  rapport  with  the  personality
called  Elvira,  and  had  not  asked  her  aid,  it  is  probable  that  I  should
never  have  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  a  single  telepathic  dream.


304  Dr.  G.  B.  Ermaeora.

Or  if  I  had  undertaken  a  series  of  experiments,  putting  her  out  of  the
question,  the  proportion  of  successes  might  have  been  very  small.

I  maintain,  then,  that  the  existence  of  a  telepathic  agent, — whose
personality  is  not  only  distinct  from  the  normal  one  of  the  sensorial
agent,  but  also  differs  from  it  in  psychical  faculty, — must  be  regarded  as
the  key  to  everything  in  this  branch  of  experimental  telepathy,  if  the
results  are  capable  of  any  interpi'etation  at  all.

In  order  not  to  be  misunderstood,  I  may  point  out  that  recognition
of  the  existence  of  the  telepathic  agent  as  a  separate  personality,  does
not  involve  any  hypothesis  as  to  its  nature  ;  it  may  be  a  psychical
product  of  the  sensorial  agent,  or  it  may  possess  an  independent  exist-
ence. Taking  the  word  jjersonality  in  the  sense  which  modern
psychologists  give  to  it — that  is,  a  succession  of  states  of  consciousness,
discontinuous,  perhaps,  but  held  together  by  memory  and  the  conscious-
ness of  the  Ego — then  Elvira  is  certainly  a  personality.

Influence  of  the  States  of  the  Sensorial  Agent,  of  the  Percipient,  and  of
the  Telepathic  Agent,  upon  the  Residls.

[For  the  success  of  the  experiments,  it  appeared]  that  a  profound
and  tranquil  sleep  [on  the  part  of  the  percipient]  was,  if  not  a  necessary,
at  least  a  most  favourable  condition,  and  that  disturbance  of  body  or
mind  had  a  contrary  effect.  I  find  that  out  of  17  cases  in  which  the
percipient  was  ill  or  agitated,  only  5  were  successes,  i.e.,  29  per  cent.  ;
while  there  are  49  among  the  other  53  (No.  55  excluded,  for  reasons
already  stated),  i.e.,  92  per  cent.

As  for  the  sensorial  agent,  she  was  as  a  rule  asleep  at  the  time  of
action,  and  consequently  in  the  most  favourable  condition  for  telepathic
action.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  if,  and  how  often,  the  influence
was  exercised  when  Sig"''^  Maria  was  by  chance  awake,  and  with  what
results. But  on  this  point  I  have  no  data.

In  6  cases  (Experiments  4,  23,  43,  50,  53,  67)  Sig"^^'  Maria's  rest
was  distui'bed  by  physical  causes,  and  in  1  case  (Experiment  22)  by
moral  causes ;  and  among  these  cases  there  was  only  one  success  (No,
43).  But  in  5  of  them  (ISTos.  4,  22,  50,  53,  67)  the  percipient  was  also
disturbed  in  the  night,  so  that  these  failures  may  be  attributed  to
her.  Tliere  remain  2  cases  (Nos.  23  and  43)  in  which  the  sensorial
agent  was  disturbed  and  the  percipient  was  in  her  normal  state,  and  of
these  two  cases.  No.  43,  though  registered  as  an  incomplete  success,  is
remarkable  as  having  been  a  dream  of  a  very  difficult  figure,  executed
when  the  blockade  was  complete;  the  only  mistake  concerned  the
rotation.  But  as  the  data  are  few  and  inexact,  we  cannot  draw  any
conclusions  worthy  of  note  as  to  the  influence  of  the  state  of  the
sensorial  agent  upon  the  results.


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  305


It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  consider  the  state  of  the  sensorial  agent
while  the  programme  was  being  communicated  to  the  telepathic  agent.
Of  the  16  experiments  in  which  the  programme  was  proposed  to  Elvira
while  Sig"a  Maria  was  in  the  trance,  only  one  was  a  failure,  and  even
this  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  severe  indisposition  of  the  percipient
during  the  night.  Besides,  of  the  4  experiments  with  dreams  of
figures,  when  Sig"^  Maria's  attention  was  distracted  during  the  observa-
tion, there  were  2  failures  in  2  cases  when  Angelina  was  indis-
posed, while  the  other  2  were  successes,  one  of  which  was  remarkable
for  the  vividness  of  the  dream,  which  was  remembered  many  hours
after  waking,  although  the  object  dreamt  of  was  a  formless  spot.

We  may  infer  fi-om  this  that  telepathic  action  takes  place  more
easily  when  the  image  to  be  transferred  remains  outside  the  conscious-
ness of  the  agent ;  or  it  may  be  that  the  telepathic  agent  can  execute
the  transference  of  the  image  all  the  better  for  its  slight  adherence  to
the  personality  of  the  sensorial  agent.  This  is  not  only  possible,  but  is
rendered  probable  by  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  transferred  image
has  a  tendency  to  escape  from  the  normal  memory  of  the  sensorial
agent  later  on.

Amnesia  of  the  Sensorial  Agent  for  Images  Telepathically  Transferred.

The  first  experiences  of  this  amnesia  showed  that  it  was  not  a
simple  amnesia  ;  because  if  it  had  been  complete,  Sig"'^  Maria  would
have  been  incapable  of  recognising  even  any  approximation  to  the
figure, — she  would  have  chosen  one  at  hazard,  happening  to  choose  the
right  one  as  often  as  chance  permitted ;  and  if  the  amnesia  were
incomplete,  then  her  choice  would  have  been  restricted  to  a  few
figures  resembling  the  one  observed,  and  therefore  she  would  have
failed  in  her  search  less  frequently,  according  to  the  law  of  chance  ;
whereas  what  really  happened  was  that  she  always  chose  one  of  the
similar  figures,  but  never  the  right  one.

We  have  to  do,  then,  with  two  memories  belonging  to  two  strata
of  consciousness — the  normal  memory,  which  recalls  the  observed
figure  only  approximately  and  directs  the  sensorial  agent's  attention
to  those  which  resemble  it,  and  a  second  memory,  belonging  to  a
deeper  stratum  of  consciousness,  which  preserves  some  clear  mark
of  recognition,  but,  with  a  view  to  non-recognition,  exercises  an
inhibitory  action  on  the  first.  The  inhibition  does  not  relate  to  the
sensorial  image,  but  to  a  judgment  with  respect  to  the  time  of
perception  of  the  image,  making  it  appear  to  be  then  seen  for  the  first
time.

In  many  cases  of  scenic  dreams,  the  recollection  of  the  programme
endured  sufliciently  well  for  Sig"'^  Maria  to  observe  differences  between


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


the  dream  and  the  programme  afterwards.  But  T  cannot  tell  whether
in  these  cases  the  normal  memory  may  not  have  suffered  some  restric-
tion. In  another  series  of  experiments  lately  commenced,  I  have
noticed  a  want  of  attention  on  the  part  of  Sig"^  Maria's  normal
personality,  for,  though  she  was  awake,  she  was  apparently  under  the
influence  of  a  suggestion  to  pay  no  attention  while  I  repeated  the  pro-
gramme. Taking  the  facts  together,  it  seems  that  a  state  of  inatten-
tion, as  well  as  the  somnambulic  state,  is  favourable  to  telepathic
action,  and  we  can  discover  a  connection  between  them  and  the
amnesia  already  described.

We  are  able  to  suggest  reasons  why  the  amnesia  is  constant  and
complete  in  the  dreams  of  figures,  while  in  the  case  of  the  scenic
dreams  it  only  occurred  in  a  partial  way.

The  pictures  being  quite  new  to  Sig"^  Maria,  and  being  expressly
chosen  as  not  lending  themselves  to  an  association  of  ideas,  their
sensorial  images  did  not  find  in  the  normal  consciousness  any  co-ordi-
nation, nor  consequently  any  point  of  connection  with  pre-existing
images ;  therefore  when  ti-ansferred  to  another  stratum  of  consciousness
they  naturally  left  no  trace  in  the  normal  one.  On  the  other  hand,
the  old  images  utilized  in  the  scenic  dreams,  being  connected  by
innumerable  strong  links  to  the  whole  complex  of  the  normal  conscious-
ness, were  necessarily  more  easy  to  reproduce  in  another  stratum  than
if  they  had  been  transferred  as  they  stood  ;  and  if  thus  transferred,
they  must  necessarily  have  re\'ived  immediately  in  the  normal
consciousness  through  the  connecting  links  of  association.

What  the  nature  of  the  telepathic  agent  may  be  it  is  as  yet  impossible
to  divine,  but  we  shall  have  made  a  step  forward  to  this  discovery
when  we  can  reckon  up,  not  only  the  results  of  my  few  experiments,
but  of  the  innumerable  ones  of  the  spiritists,  for  the  telepathic
agents  are  the  same  as  the  personalities  which  the  spiritists  call  spirits,
and  which  I  have  called  mediumistic  personalities.  But  if  we  cannot
say  what  they  are,  we  can  at  least  say  what  they  are  not.

Those  who  have  no  knowledge  of  mediumistic  phenomena  have  long
been  satisfied — and  continue  to  satisfy  themselves — with  a  confusion
of  ideas  which  will  probably  become  famous  in  the  history  of  scientific
erroi's.  They  have  declared  that  the  mediumistic  personality  is  the
same  as  that  provoked  by  suggestion  in  somnambulism.  My  own
view  is  that  the  hypnotic  personalities  have  no  real  existence,  and  are
neither  new  nor  interesting.  In  the  hypnotic  state,  the  subject,  being
better  able  to  concentrate  his  attention,  becomes  a  better  actor, — that
is  all  ;  but  a  few  glasses  of  wine  would  produce  the  same  effect.  If
he  believes  himself  to  be  the  person  he  represents,  that  is  no  more
.than  it  is  said  many  actors  can  do.  Consequently  there  is  in  this  no
•true  change  of  personality,  but  only  what  Richet  calls  an  ohjectivica-


Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced.  307


fion  of  ty^ns.  It  is  a  state  of  spontaneous  dream  of  such  intensity  as
to  become  motor  as  well  as  sensory.

The  spontaneous  changes  of  personality,  accompanied  by  alterations
of  the  mental  faculties,  of  sensibility,  and  often  of  the  pathological
condition,  of  which  we  have  abundant  examples,  are  more  worthy  of
the  name,  and  must  not  be  confounded  with  that  just  mentioned  ;
because  here  the  cause  is  deeper  and  the  consequences  more  stable.
But  even  in  these  cases  the  new  personalities  have  the  general  charac-
teristics of  the  normal  personality,  without  any  fresh  element,  and  thus
may  be  more  justly  regarded  as  mere  alterations  of  the  normal,  or  as
resulting  from  its  disintegration,  as  Pierre  Janet  says.

I  am  aware  that  many  modern  spiritualists,  unfamiliar  Avith
psychology,  confound  these  intelligences  with  those  of  another  kind,
which  they  regard  as  belonging  to  discarnated  spirits.  But  the
mediumistic  personalities  of  which  I  now  speak  possess — besides  a
personality  of  the  normal  human  type — a  series  of  faculties  which  the
latter  does  not  possess,  and  are  able  to  produce  such  manifestations
as  are  not  only  impossible  to  the  normal  human  personality,  but
are  so  inconceiveable  to  the  latter  as  to  be  regarded  a  priori  as
impossible.

Consequently,  to  confound  the  two  is  a  palpable  error.  The
mediumistic  personalities  cannot  be  a  product  of  disintegration,
because  they  contain  a  mass  of  new  elements,  and  it  would  be  nearer
the  truth  to  consider  them  products  of  integration,  as  Mr.  Myers  says  ;
or  as  manifestations  in  the  sensory  field  of  an  entire  order  of  psychical
activities  usually  excluded  from  it.  Professor  Boirac^  proposes  the
name  of  iMvapsychical  phenomena  for  these  supernormal  psychical  facts,
but  the  term  hyj^rpsychical  is,  perhaps,  more  appropriate.

When  we  reflect  on  the  identity  of  the  telepathic  agents  and  the
mediumistic  personalities,  and  the  absolute  difference  between  their
faculties  and  modes  of  action  and  those  of  the  normal  personality,  a
partial  conciliation  between  the  opposing  theories  of  spiritism  and
telepathy  seems  possible.  The  spiritists  believe  that  telepathy  is
produced  by  discarnated  spirits,  or  by  living  spirits  which  can
temporarily  separate  themselves  from  their  bodies.  The  non-
spiritists  who  recognise  telepathy,  believe  in  some  action  between
brain  and  brain,  and  that  certain  arguments  on  which  the  spiritists
base  their  belief  ai^e  false  interpretations  of  phenomena  produced
merely  by  telepathy  between  the  living.-

The  idea  of  secondary  or  mediumistic  personalities  acting  as
telepathic  agents  has  the  advantage  of  offering  common  ground  to
the  two  opposing  theories. Not  only  spiritists,  but  also  telepathists,


1  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiqiies,  1893,  p.  341.


308


Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora.


should  recognise  that  the  true  telepathic  agent,  in  cases  of  this  kind,  is
not  to  be  found  in  what  is  commonly  called  the  human  intelligence,
but  that  it  forms  part  of  an  absolutely  dilferent  kind  of  intelligence.
If  this  point  is  well  considered,  a  great  part  of  the  divergence  between
the  two  theories  is  eliminated.

The  fact  that  on  most  occasions  in  spontaneous  telepathy  the  figure
of  the  person  supposed  to  send  the  message  is  seen,  does  not  at  all
indicate  that  such  person  is  the  agent.  This  view  is  borne  out  by  the
experiments  described  above.  In  fact,  the  representation  of  either
the  sensorial  or  the  telepathic  agent  in  the  dreams  was  seen  to  be  a
circumstance  entirely  extraneous  to  the  production  of  the  dreams  ;  or,
in  other  words,  as  the  presence  of  the  image  of  the  sensorial  agent
in  no  way  indicated  that  it  was  the  real  agent,  so  also  the  absence  of
that  of  the  telepathic  agent  would  not  in  the  least  signify  that  it  was
not  the  real  agent.

Summing  up  all  the  previous  considerations,  it  seems  to  me  that  a
beginning  of  an  explanation  of  telepathy,  based  solely  on  experience,
may  be  given  by  admitting  the  existence  of  telepathic  agents,  of  a
nature  unknown  to  us,  but  certainly  different  from  the  personalities
treated  of  in  ordinary  psychology.  These  agents,  in  consequence  of  a
voluntary  or  involuntary  excitation  coming  from  the  sensorial  agent,
transmit  to  a  distance,  by  processes  known  to  themselves,  the  ideas
they  were  charged  to  convey,  or  which  of  their  own  initiative  they
judge  it  opportune  to  convey.

But  experience  teaches  us  .something  more,  and  that  is  that  the
telepathic  agent  can  induce  the  ti'ansference  of  ideas  as  well  by  the
will  of  the  sensorial  agent,  when  the  percipient  is  unwarned, — for
instance,  in  the  Verity  case, — as  by  the  will  of  the  percipient,  when  the
personality  of  the  sensorial  agent  remains  entirely  unconcerned  with
the  phenomenon, — as  in  the  Stead  case.  Elvira  shows  that  she  can
not  only  act  in  the  first  way,  as  in  the  cases  here  described,  but  also
in  the  second.  She  did  this  in  a  series  of  experiments  in  telepathy
where  Sig"^  Maria  was  percipient  by  means  of  automatic  writing,  while
Angelina  acted  as  sensorial  agent,  being  awake,  but  unconscious  of
what  was  happening.  This  series,  though  much  less  interesting,  may
perhaps  be  described  elsewhere.

[The  above  paper  is  translated  and  somewhat  abridged  from  the
original  Italian.  For  the  more  complete  account,  including  further
theoi'etical  discussions,  readers  are  referred  to  Dr.  Ermacora's  Italian
article,  which  will  shortly  be  published  in  the  Rivista  di  Studi
Fsichici. — Ed.]


Pfa.te  I


Plate  n


Fig.  IF  Exp.  43  IigV


Plate  in


Ftg3ZE


Exp  49


FtaM


Psychical  Phenomena  Bearing  upon  Spirit  Control.  309


V.

SOME  PSYCHICAL  PHENOMENA  BEARING  UPON  THE
QUESTION  OF  SPIRIT  CONTROL.

By  Charles  Hill  Tout,
Princijyal  of  BucMand  College, Vancouver,  B.C.

A  wave  of  interest  in  psychical  matters  passing  over  our  locality
about  three  years  ago,  due  in  part  to  the  transit  across  our  horizon  of
a  psychic  star  of  some  magnitude  from  the  neighbouring  Western
States,  enabled  me  to  bring  about  the  formation  of  a  small  body  of
inquirers  for  the  purpose  of  first-hand  investigation  into  spiritistic
phenomena.  A  half-dozen  of  us  arranged  to  meet  twice  a  week.  It
would  be  tedious  to  give  in  detail  the  results  of  our  "  sittings  it  will
be  sufficient  to  say  that  our  experience  was  of  a  veiy  mild  type.
Sitting  in  the  dark  as  a  rule,  subjective  lights  in  the  form  of  luminous
vapour  were  occasionally  seen  by  myself  and  one  other  member.  I
was  at  first  inclined  to  attribute  these  to  our  imagination,  but  as  they
seem  to  be  a  matter  of  common  experience  in  spiritistic  circles,  I  sup-
pose they  may  be  regai'ded  as  having  some  sort  of  reality  of  their  own,
and  may  perhaps  be  taken  as  evidencing  incipient  powers  of  clairvoy-
ance in  the  seers.

The  lady  members  of  our  circle,  particularly  a  mother  and  her
daughter,  were  taken  almost  from  the  first  sitting  with  spasmodic
twitchings  and  movements  in  the  fingers  and  arms.  Sometimes  these
movements  were  very  violent,  causing  them  to  slap  and  thump  the
table  with  such  force  as  to  seriously  bruise  their  fingers  and  hands.
Often  we  were  obliged  to  withdraw  their  hands  by  main  force  from  the
table, — the  ladies  being  unable  of  themselves  to  do  so, — or  to  place
something  between  their  hands  and  the  table  to  soften  the  effects  of
the  blows.

With  the  exception  of  these  two  ladies,  none  of  the  other  sitters
were  much  affected  on  these  occasions,  though  at  times  an  almost
irresistible  impulse  came  upon  myself  to  imitate  their  actions ;  but
though  I  occasionally  allowed  the  impulse,  at  the  suggestion  of
the  other  sitters,  to  have  full  play,  it  never  with  me  took  the
bit  between  its  teeth  and  got  beyond  my  control.  I  could  always
stop  at  once  any  movements  in  my  limbs,  or  change  the  attitude  of
my  mind,  by  an  eflFort  of  will. Almost  from  the  first  an  overpowering


■310


Charles  Hill  Tout.


drowsiness  would  come  upon  some  of  us,  especially  upon  myself  and
Miss  G.,  the  young  lady  who  beat  the  table  so  violently.  My  head
would  become  as  heavy  as  lead,  and  I  sometimes  had  the  greatest
difficulty  in  sitting  in  my  chair.  At  times  this  stupor  would  get  the
better  of  me,  and  my  head  would  drop  to  the  table,  seemingly  drawn
down  to  it  by  some  force  in  the  table  itself.  After  an  interval  of  a
moment  or  two,  I  could  sit  up  again.  My  spiritistic  friends  assured
me  on  these  occasions  that  if  I  would  give  myself  up  to  the  influence
upon  me  I  should  pass  into  the  trance  state,  and  I  think  it  possible
that  I  might  have  done  so  if  I  could  have  sufficiently  subdued  my  very
wakeful  critical  faculty.  But  this  I  at  this  period  found  a  great
difficulty  in  doing,  and  it  was  not  till  much  later  that  I  was  able  to
watch  the  effect  of  this  influence  upon  myself  and  learn  something  of
its  mode  of  action.

And  now,  in  referring  to  my  own  experiences,  if  my  remarks  appear
to  be  egotistic  and  centre  rather  much  iu  myself,  this,  I  beg  to  say,
is  due  rather  to  the  nature  of  my  tojDic  than  to  any  desire  on  my  part
that  it  should  be  so.  Being  ever  wishful  to  test  the  theory  of  spirit
intervention  and  control,  I  dropped  in  one  evening  upon  some  friends,
professed  "  spiritualists  "  of  many  years'  standing,  and  after  a  little
conversation  we  sat,  myself,  my  friend  and  his  wife,  for  manifestations.
After  about  half  an  hour  I  felt  a  strange  sensation  stealing  over  me.
I  seemed  to  be  undergoing  a  change  of  personality.  I  seemed  to  have,
as  it  \s'ere,  stepped  aside,  and  some  other  intelligence  was  now  controll-
iug  my  organism.  I  was  merely  a  passive  spectator  interested  in  what
was  being  done.  My  second  self  seemed  to  be  a  mother  overflowing
with  feelings  of  maternal  love  and  solicitude  for  some  one.  The  very
features  of  my  face  seemed  to  be  changing,  and  I  was  distinctly  con-
scious of  assuming  the  look  of  a  fond  and  devoted  mother  looking
down  upon  her  child.  I  even  inwardly  smiled  as  I  thought  how  ridi-
culous I  must  be  looking,  but  I  made  no  effort  to  resist  the  impulse.
I  now  felt  I  wanted  to  caress  and  console  somebody,  and  the  impulse
was  strong  upon  me  to  take  my  friend  in  my  arms  and  soothe  and
•cheer  him.  I  resisted  the  impulse  for  some  time,  but  finally  yielded  to
it.  In  doing  so,  I  had  a  distinct  feeling  of  relationship  to  my  friend.
After  a  little  while  I  became  myself  again.  My  friend  was  confident
that  I  had  been  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  his  dead  mother,  as  he  had
had  a  distinct  impression  of  her  presence  at  the  time,  which  very
probably  accounts  for  the  feeling  of  relationship  I  experienced,  as  well
as  for  my  impersonation  of  the  maternal  character.  I  shall  show
presently  how  vei'y  susceptible  I  became,  under  like  conditions,  to  all
kinds  of  suggestion;  and  if  this  fact  be  taken  into  consideration  here,
I  tliink  it  will  adequately  account  for  what  took  place  without  resort-
ing to  my  friend's  hypothesis.


Psychical  Phenomena  Bearing  upon  Spirit  Control.  311


However,  I  am  bound  to  state  as  against  this  view  that  I  after-
wards learnt  that  lie  was  in  trouble  and  worry  over  his  business,  and
was  in  need  of  cheering  and  encouragement ;  and  that,  moreover,  a  few
months  later,  a  terrible  calamity  overtook  him  in  the  loss  of  two  of
his  children  by  drowning.  The  effect  of  this  experience  upon  myself
w^s  very  curious  too.  For  the  rest  of  that  evening  and  most  of  the
next  day  I  experienced  a  most  delightful  sense  of  rest  and  content-
ment, and  a  feeling  of  relief  from  the  strain  and  worry  of  life,  as  if
somebody  else  had  taken  the  burden  off  my  shoulders  on  to  his  own.

The  night  following  this,  I  accepted  an  invitation  to  be  present  at
a  sitting  held  at  the  home  of  another  believer  in  spiritism.  This
gentleman's  wife  is  mediumistic  to  a  mild  degree  She  sat
apart  by  herself,  and  the  husband  and  I  sat  at  a  small  table.
Presently,  after  a  little  singing  which  closed  with  the  hymn
"  Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee,"  she  asked  me  if  any  relative  of  mine  had
died  from  lung  trouble,  as  she  was  suddenly  experiencing  a  great
difficulty  and  pain  in  breathing.  She  was  sure,  she  said,  that  this
unusual  impression  was  due  to  my  presence  among  them.  At  first  I
could  remember  no  one  belonging  to  me  who  had  died  or  suffered
from  lung  trouble ;  though,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  my  father  had
actually  died  from  bronchitis  and  pleurisy  some  twenty  years  before.
My  memory  had  gone  back  rather  to  my  mother  who  had  died  since,
but  from  quite  another  cause.  I  mentioned  the  cause  of  my  mother's
death  and  asked  her  if  she  thought  it  referred  to  that.  But  no,  it
was  not  that ;  "it  was  somebody  who  had  passed  away  with  lung
trouble."  I  now  suddenly  remembered  my  father's  death  and  its
■cause,  and  acknowledged  to  her  that  my  father  had  died  from  lung
trouble.  At  this  she,  or  rather  (as  she  expressed  it),  the  influence
which  she  called  my  father,  manifested  satisfaction  ;  fi'om  which  she
inferred  that  he  was  pleased  to  be  recognised.  I  remembered  too,
now,  and  noted  as  a  curious  coincidence,  which  may  or  may  not  mean
anything,  that  the  hymn  we  had  been  singing  when  the  impi'ession
came  upon  her,  viz.,  "Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee,'  had  been  a  great
favourite  with  him.  I  mention  this  fact  because  at  every  subse-
quent meeting,  the  singing  of  this  hymn  always  produced  in  her  when
we  were  both  present  together  the  same  sensations  ;  and  because  of
the  suggestive  influence  it  had  later  upon  myself.

My  friends,  of  course,  claimed  that  this  occurrence  was  irrefragable
evidence  of  spirit  manifestation  ;  but  though  there  was  some  appeai-
ance  of  ground  for  their  claim,  I  was  still  unable  to  regard  what  had
occuri'ed  as  in  any  sense  a  satisfactory  proof  of  spirit  communion,  or  of
the  persistence  of  my  father's  personality,  and  still  less  can  I  do  so  to-
day. I  may  add  that  I  learnt  through  the  medium  that  I  was  an  object
of  special  care  to  my  father,  who  was  always  actively  overlooking  my


312


Charles  Hill  Tout.


welfare  and  interests,  and  I  received  answers  more  or  less  satisfactory
to  a  number  of  questions  I  put  with  regard  to  future  movements  on
my  part.  But  as  the  medium  could  only  answer  in  the  form  of  "  yes  "
and  "no,"  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  the  table,  I  could  not
regard  this  as  very  important  or  conclusive.

A  little  time  after  this,  at  meetings  where  I  met  a  greater  number
of  sitters,  I  began  to  manifest  a  phase  of  mediumship  myself,  or  so  the
sitters  regarded  it.  I  should  also  say  that  every  medium  I  had  so  far
met  had  always  informed  me  that  T  possessed  mediumistic  powers.
On  one  occasion  a  public  medium  of  the  Mrs.  Piper  type  singled  me
out  from  a  mixed  audience  as  a  person  of  peculiarly  mediumistic
temperament,  stating  that  she  saw  me  surrounded  by  a  luminous
haze,  which  she  interpreted  as  marking  in  me  a  particular  phase  of
mediumship.  What  this  phase  was  1  have  now  forgotton.  I  merely
mention  the  fact  for  what  it  is  worth,  and  as  possibly  explaining,  in
part,  the  events  which  happened  later.

At  one  of  these  larger  sittings,  after  the  table  had  rapped  out
answers  to  a  series  of  questions  put  to  it,  confirming  in  part,  and
contradicting  in  other  instances,  what  we  had  been  told  on  previous
occasions,  the  movement  in  the  table  began  to  subside,  and  the
influence  began  to  centre  in  me.  I  may  say  here  that  this  has  been
my  unvarying  experience  throughout  the  whole  course  of  my  observa-
tions, that  while  the  table  is  rapping  out  answers  no  one  sitting  at  it
is  affected  or  influenced  ;  although  those  of  impressionable  tempera-
ment are  liable  at  any  moment,  when  the  interest  in  the  questions
and  answers  flags,  to  find  the  power  centering  in  themselves.
On  this  particular  occasion  I  was  affected  to  an  unusual  degree,
experiencing  violent  twitchings  in  my  limbs,  and  sensations  of
painful  chilliness  that  made  my  teeth  chatter  again.  I  sat,  as  I
always  did  now,  passively  waiting  for  what  might  transpire.  All
sorts  of  impulses  seemed  to  be  moving  me,  and  I  noticed  how
susceptible  I  was  becoming  to  the  slightest,  even  half-realised
suggestion  offered  by  the  course  of  my  own  thoughts,  or  by  the  chance
remarks  made  by  the  other  sitters.  I  presently  felt  myself  being
drawn,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  towards  the  floor  on  the  left  side  of  my
chair.  I  yielded  to  the  influence  and  fell  prostrate  out  of  my  chair  on
to  the  floor  with  considerable  force  ;  and  though  the  others  thought  I
must  have  hurt  myself,  I  certainly  felt  no  inconvenience  from  the  fall.
I  lay  groaning  for  a  little  while  and  then  got  up  and  sat  in  my  chair
again.

Some  one  now  suggested  that  we  should  sing,  and  this  being  done,
I  immediately  became  affected  by  the  music,  which  moved  me  in  a
very  extraordinary  manner.  I  fancied  myself  realising  the  whole
scene  clearly  ; — in  a  great  cathedral  I  seemed  to  be  the  presiding  priest


Psychical  Phenomena  Bearing  'iipon  Spirit  Control.  313


at  the  close  of  a  great  function  pronouncing  the  benediction.  I
appeared  to  be  looking  down  from  a  great  height  upon  the  congrega-
tion and,  lifting  my  hands,  I  went  through  the  form  of  blessing  them.
It  will  be  observed  in  all  these  phases  or  states  that  I  seemed  to  be
two  individuals, — one  my  ordinary,  critical,  observant  self,  closely
watching  what  took  place  in  and  around  me,  the  other  the  character
that  seemed  to  be  personating  itself  through  me.  Presently,  with  a
change  in  the  music,  the  scene  changed  and  I  now  became  an  operatic
singer.  I  sing  tenor  a  little,  but  am  not,  strictly  speaking,  a  musical
person.  But  now  I  seemed  to  have  a  perfect  control  and  mastery
over  my  voice,  and  I  sang  with  impassioned  tones  several  notes  above
my  normal  compass  pleading  and  gesticulating  to  some  invisible  but
felt  female  presence  in  the  air  above  me.  I  have  no  recollection  of
the  words  I  uttered,  1  was  carried  away  and  intoxicated  with  the
passion  I  felt.  I  stretched  my  arms  aloft,  invoking  the  presence
I  felt,  but  could  not  realise,  above  me.  There  were  moments
during  this  phase  when  I  lost  consciousness  of  myself  and  surround-
ings.

The  singing  of  the  others  ceasing,  the  scene  again  abruptly
-changed.  I  say  abruptly,  for  this  exactly  expresses  the  suddenness  o.
the  change.  In  going  over  the  events  of  this  evening  the  next  day
1  was  struck  with  this,  and  being  familiar  with  the  abrupt  changes  some-
time produced  in  the  hypnotic  by  the  varying  suggestions  of  his  operator,
accounted  for  my  own  sudden  change  of  character  in  the  same  way.
And  I  do  not  doubt  that,  of  the  dozen  or  more  personalities  I
characterised  that  night,  every  one  was  due  to  a  suggestion  of  my  own
mind,  or  to  something  in  my  immediate  environment.

But  to  proceed.  After  what  I  have  described  took  place,  some  one
suggested  more  music,  as  the  influence  seemed  to  work  upon  me  better
under  music,  and  the  hymn  "  Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee  "  was  started.
Before  the  first  verse  was  finished,  I  began  to  experience  strange  sen-
sations. I  stood  up  and  began  to  sway  to  and  fro,  and  soon  lost  all
sense  of  my  surroundings.  I  seemed  to  be  far  away  in  space.  The
feelings  of  distance  and  remoteness  from  all  other  beings  were  very
marked,  and  a  sense  of  coldness  and  loneliness  oppressed  me  terribly.
I  seemed  to  be  moving,  or  rather  to  be  drawn  downward,  and  presently
felt  that  I  had  reached  this  earth  again ;  but  all  was  strange  and
fearful  and  lonely,  and  I  seemed  to  be  disappointed  that  I  could  not
attain  the  object  of  this  long  and  lonely  journey.  I  felt  I  was  looking
for  some  one,  but  did  not  seem  to  have  a  clear  notion  of  whom  it  was,  and
as  the  hopelessness  of  my  search  and  the  fruitlessness  of  my  long  journey
forced  itself  upon  me,  I  cried  out  in  my  wretchedness  and  misery.  I
felt  I  could  neither  find  what  I  wanted  nor  get  back  from  whence  I
had  come. My  grief  was  very  terrible,  and  I  should  have  fallen  to  the


314


CJiarles  Hill  Tout.


ground  but  that  the  other  sitters  had  gathered  round  me,  and  some
of  them  held  ray  hands.

Just  at  this  moment,  the  lady  who  had  experienced  the  oppression
on  her  lungs  at  the  first  singing  of  this  hymn,  made  the  remark,
which  I  remember  to  have  overheard,  "It's  his  father  controlling  him,"
and  I  then  seemed  to  realise  who  I  was  and  whom  I  was  seeking.  I
began  to  be  distressed  in  my  lungs  and  should  again  have  fallen,  if
they  had  not  held  me  by  the  hands  and  let  me  back  gently  upon  the
floor.  As  my  head  sunk  back  upon  the  carpet,  I  experienced  dreadful
distress  in  my  lungs  and  could  not  breathe.  I  made  signs  to  them  to-
put  something  under  my  head.  They  immediately  put  the  sofa
cushions  under  me,  but  this  was  not  sufficient, — I  was  not  raised
high  enougli  yet  to  breath  easily,  and  they  then  added  a  pillow.  I
have  the  most  distinct  recollection  of  the  sigh  of  relief  I  now  gave  as-
I  sank  back  like  a  sick,  weak  person  upon  the  cool  pillow.

I  was  in  a  measure  still  conscious  of  my  actions,  though  not  of  my
surroundings,  and  I  have  a  clear  memory  of  seeing  myself  in  the
character  of  my  dying  father  lying  in  the  bed  and  the  room  in  which
he  died.  It  was  a  most  curious  sensation.  I  saw  his  shrunken  hands
and  face,  and  lived  again  through  his  dying  moments  ;  only  now  I
was  hoi\\  myself, — in  some  indistinct  sort  of  way, — and  my  father^
with  his  feelings  and  appearance.

Presently  the  sense  of  loneliness  came  over  me  again.  I  seemed
to  be  all  alone,  and  wanted  and  cried  out  for  my  son,  that  is  for
myself.  I  continued  in  great  distress,  though  the  others  assured  me
that  my  son  was  there  present.  I  suppose  the  suggestion  took  effect,
as  I  presently  seemed  to  be  holding  and  fondling  myself  as  the  son  I
came  to  speak  with.  I  seemed  to  be  at  the  same  time  both  my
father  and  myself,  his  son.  "We  communed  together  and  comforted
each  other,  and  all  the  little  misunderstandings  of  the  old  days  were
made  clear )  and  I  made  him  understand  that  as  a  man  and  a  fatlier
myself,  I  was  now  better  able  to  appreciate  his  attitude  towards  me
in  the  past.  As  a  boy,  I  had  always  regarded  him  as  very  harsh  and
had  no  warm  feelings  for  him,  and  it  seemed  as  if  the  knowledge  on
his  part  of  this  fact  had  made  him  restless  and  unhappy  ever  since
his  death,  and  had,  through  the  singing  of  this  favourite  hymn  of
his,  brought  him  back  to  this  sphere  again.  After  this  I  presently
came  to  myself  and  got  up  again,  and  in  a  little  while  readily
assumed  or  impersonated  several  other  characters  before  the  meeting
broke  up.

With  regard  to  this  strange  impersonation  of  my  father  in  his.
dying  moments,  I  think  the  suggestion  made  through  the  remark  I
overheard,  that  it  was  my  father  controlling  me,— coupled  with  the
prior  suggestion  conveyed  through  the  singing  of  the  hymn  which


Psychical  Phenomena  Bearing  iqion  Spirit  Control.  315

had  now  become  associated  in  my  mind  with  my  father's  personality, —
sufficiently  and  convincingly  accounts  for  all  that  took  place,  without
calling  in  the  actual  presence  of  my  father's  spirit  self.  The  peculiar
manner  in  which  the  details  of  the  scene  worked  themselves  out  I  can
fully  account  for  in  my  own  mind.  The  peculiar  feelings  of  loneliness,
the  chilly  vastness,  the  tracklessness  of  the  surrounding  space,  and  the
fact  that  I  could  not  find  the  object  of  my  search,  together  with  the
sense  of  the  hopelessness,  the  uselessness  of  my  efforts, — all  sprang
from  a  story  I  had  heard  read  aloud  many  years  ago,  and  which  took
a  great  hold  upon  my  imagination.  It  was  a  ghost  story  from  the
ghost's  point  of  view,  and  told  of  the  return  of  a  restless  spirit  to  the
earth  and  to  the  scenes  of  its  former  existence ;  the  strangeness  and
intense  disappointment  it  felt  at  not  being  able  to  make  itself  known
to  the  loved  ones  of  its  past  life,  &c.,  &c.

The  other  details  relating  to  the  imaginary  conversation  are  also
what  would  be  likely  to  take  place  if  such  a  thing  as  my  father's
return  in  spirit  wei-e  possible,  and  therefore  what  would  most  likely
take  place  if  I  could  be  made  to  believe  he  were  present  with  me.
For  often  of  late  years,  when  I  have  felt  that  my  children  misunder-
stood the  motives  which  prompted  certain  conduct  on  my  part  towards
them,  my  thoughts  have  involuntarily  gone  back  to  my  own  youth  and
training,  and  I  have  frequently  longed  that  my  father  might  be  alive,
that  I  might  make  him  feel  that  I  understood  and  appreciated  him
better  now  and  w.oulcl  gladly  seek  his  advice  and  counsel  in  the
training  of  my  own  children.  And  in  the  same  way  I  might,  if  it
were  needful,  adequately  account  for  all  the  salient  features  of  the
other  impersonations.

While  seeking  in  no  way — in  thus  accounting  for  these  experiences
of  mine  by  the  natural  workings  of  my  own  subconscious  self — to
deny  that  we  may  under  certain  conditions  and  circumstances  be
influenced  by  intelligences  outside  ourselves,  I  cannot  admit  that  my
own  experience,  at  any  rate,  is  to  be  accounted  for  in  this  manner.
I  know  myself — and  ray  susceptibility,  even  under  normal  conditions^
to  suggestion  in  all  sorts  of  forms,  not  necessarily  verbal, — so  well
that  no  alternative  remains  to  me  but  to  believe  that  what  I  did  was
due  simply  to  every-day  suggestion  in  one  form  and  another.  Building
and  peopling  chateaux  en  Espagne  was  a  favourite  occupation  of  mine
in  my  earlier  days,  and  this  long-practised  faculty  is  doubtless  a
potent  factor  in  all  my  characterisations,  and  probably  also  in  those  of
many  another  full-fledged  "  medium."  At  any  rate  I  hope  I  have
made  it  clear  that  before  we  can  admit  that  phenomena  such  as  I  have
described  are  due  to  the  influence  or  presence  of  disembodied  spirits,
that  is,  discarnate  men— as  is  commonly  done, — the  personal  equation
that  here  manifests  itself  so  strongly  under  the  dramatising  faculty


316


Charles  Hill  Tout.


which  we  all  possess  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  is  commonly  sup-
posed, and  which  is  very  active  in  strongly  imaginative  temperaments
such  as  mine,  must  be  eliminated.  And  when  this  is  intelligently  and
rigorously  done,  I  venture  to  think  that  a  very  large  proportion  of
cases  now  attributed  to  spirit  control  will  be  adequately  explained
without  resorting  to  any  such  occult  agency.

In  conclusion,  let  me  say  that  I  have  not  written  this  hurried  and
fragmentary  account  of  my  experiences  to  establish  any  theory  of  my
own,  or  to  run  a  tilt  against  over  credulous  spiritists.  My  purpose  has
been  simply  to  point  out  how  liable  we  are  in  these  as  in  other
matters  to  be  the  victims  of  self-deception ;  and  how  guardedly  and
critically  we  should  receive  all  evidence  of  this  kind.  So  strongly  do
I  feel  in  this  matter  myself  that  I  would  pei'sonally  refuse  to  accept
phenomena  of  a  vastly  more  startling  nature  than  any  that  have  come
under  my  observation  or  that  I  have  experienced  as,  in  any  sense,  evi-
dence of  spirit  control,  unless  the  whole  character  and  antecedents  of
the  medium  were  thoroughly  known  and  were  such  as  to  render  an
explanation  of  the  kind  I  have  given  wholly  inadmissible  and  out  of
place.  And  as  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  mediumship  ex  hypothesi
that  it  be  impressionable  and  therefore  readily  open  to  suggestion,  I  do
not  see  that  we  can  ever  hope  to  obtain  evidence  not  open  to  these
objections  and,  therefore,  evidence  that  we  can  accept  and  rely  upon.


Supplement.]  Siibliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration?-  317


SUBLIMINAL  SELF  OR  UNCONSCIOUS  CEREBRATION?


Having  had  occasion  recently  to  examine  some  of  the  literature  connected
"with  the  subject  of  "multiple  consciousness,"  the  writer  discovered  that,  as  the
reading  advanced,  his  opinions  were  undergoing  a  complete  transformation.
Starting  with  the  prepossession  that  "double  consciousness"  was  a  well
attested  fact,  and  that  a  "secondary  consciousness  "was  a  necessary  assump-
tion for  the  satisfactory  explanation  of  many  curious  facts  of  a  morbid
psychological  nature,  there  came  gradually  the  inclination  to  adopt  a  more
physiological  and,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  a  more  consistent  view.  At  a  time
when  such  books  as  those  of  Janet  ^  and  Binet,^  and  such  articles  as  those
of  Myers^  are  giving  widespread  currency  to  the  notions  of  "secondary'*
and  "subliminal"  consciousnesses,  it  may  uot  be  amiss  to  approach  the  subject
from  a  somewhat  antagonistic  standpoint,  and  to  offer  a  mild  protest  against
the  too  hasty  adoption  of  such  momentous  doctrines.  There  are  many  facts
that  seem  to  militate  very  strongly  against  all  those  theories  that  have  for
their  fundamental  claim  the  existence  of  a  subliminal,  split-oiF,  parasitic,
secondary  consciousness.  Three  reasons  for  rejecting  these  theories  may
perhaps  be  worthy  of  consideration.

I.  The  assumption  of  a  secondary  consciousness  is  unnecessary.  This
hypothesis  has  arisen  in  great  part  from  a  study  of  the  curious  phenomena  of
hysteria,  and  is  founded  upon  the  belief  that  outside  of  the  normal,  primary
consciousness  there  exist  separate  sensations,  separate  images,  and  separate
memories,  for  which  it  is  considered  necessary  to  posit  another  consciousness.
The  belief  in  these  sensations,  images,  and  memories  is  grounded  principally
in  the  notion  of  pseudo-anaesthesias,  and  in  the  notion  that  complex  move-
ments cannot  be  produced  without  accompanying  motor  iniages.  In  hysteria
anaesthesias  and  complex  movements  are  found,  which  are  not  under  the
jurisdiction  of  the  primary  consciousness.  Consequently  the  hysteric  has  a
secondary  bit  of  consciousness  which  contains  these  rejected  sensations  and
motor  images. Such  in  its  simplest  form  is  the  argument  of  the  French

1  Pierre  Janet. — L'Automatisme  Psychologique.  Also  Etat  Mental  des  ITvsteriques,
Vols.  I.  and  II.,  1892-3.

-  A.  Binet. — Les  Alterations  de  la  Personnalite.

^r.  W.  H.  Myers. — Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  February,  July, and  December,  1892.


I.


318


Arthtir  H.  Pierce.


[Supplement.


writers.  Standing  alone  it  may  mean  one  of  two  things.  It  may  mean  that
conscious  motor  images  are  necessary  for  the  production  of  movements  and
that  complex  acts  req-uire  a  guiding  consciousness, — that  is,  it  may  mean  that
consciousness  stands  in  causal  relation  to  motor  processes  ;  or  it  may  simply
mean  that  these  odd  phenomena  of  hysteria  are  such  as  would  naturally  be
accompanied  hy  consciousness,  the  latter  being  called  secondary  in  these  cases
because  it  does  not  belong  to  the  normal  consciousness  of  the  subject.  In  a
word,  the  argument  in  favour  of  a  secondary  consciousness  may  rest  upon  a
belief  in  the  causal  efficacy  of  consciousness,  or  it  may  rest  upon  mere
analogy.  Without  discussing  the  particular  point  of  view,  however,  that
individual  writers  take,  and  without  entering  into  any  consideration  of
particular  theories  such  as  that  of  psycho-physical  parallelism,  believers  in
which  are  perhajDs  less  apt  to  speak  of  consciousness  as  necessarily  present  in
the  initiating  and  guiding  of  movements,  — leaving  all  this  aside,  one  can  at
least  say  that  all  writers  upon  the  subject  of  secondary  consciousness  seem
utterly  to  forget  the  well  known  experiments  upon  frogs  and  pigeons  that
have  been  repeated  time  and  time  again  in  physiological  laboratories.  These
animals,  when  deprived  of  their  hemispheres,  will  swim  or  fly,  as  the  case
may  be,  will  avoid  obstacles,  regain  their  normal  position  if  placed  upon
their  backs,  eat  if  food  be  put  into  their  mouths,  in  short  will  perform  all  or
nearly  all  their  normal  acts  if  only  the  appropriate  stimuli  be  applied.  Here
•we  have  acts  of  considerable  complexity  with  nothing  but  the  lower  nervous
centres  to  control  them.  But  there  is  one  all-important  condition  for  these
acts  of  frogs  and  pigeons.  The  appropriate  stimidi  must  be  applied,  for  no
act  is  spontaneous.  The  movements  of  the  hysteric  which  are  ascribed  to  the
secondary  consciousness  are  of  this  type  exactly.  All  the  movements  of
adaptation  to  a  pair  of  scissors  or  to  a  dynamometer  placed  in  the  hand,  and
all  the  movements  in  automatic  writing  are  simply  responses  to  appropriate
stimuli,  responses  that  are  no  more  complex  for  man  than  are  swimming  and
flying  for  frogs  and  pigeons.  So  that  even  if  a  consciousness  be  really
efficient  in  directing  movements,  it  is  superfluous  to  invoke  it  for  such
phenomena  as  hysteria  presents.

II. — The  second  consideration  for  abandoning  the  theory  is  that,  if
■consistently  held,  it  must  be  pushed  to  a  point  of  absurdity.  In  his  ' '  Das
Doppel-Ich,"i  Dessoir  makes  the  following  statement,  "In  the  course  of
ordinary  life  certain  actions  occur  which  presuppose  for  their  origination  all
the  faculties  of  the  human  spirit,  but  which,  nevertheless,  work  themselves
out  without  the  knowledge  of  the  agent.  These  actions  we  term  automatic.
Among  them  are  certain  automatic  movements,  as  the  act  of  dressing
oneself,  or  of  retracing  a  well  known  path  ;  and  some  other  automatic
performances,  such  as  counting  one's  steps,  or  adding  up  columns  of  figures.
These  latter  acts  plainly  indicate  the  existence  of  a  separate  train  of
memory  employed  upon  them.  And,  moreover,  although  they  take  place
without  the  agent's  knowledge,  they  cannot  take  place  without  his  conscious-
ness; they  cannot  be  truly  unconscions  acts.  They  must  in  some  fashion
belong  to  a  sM&-consciousness  which,  in  relation  to  the  far  more  potent  ui^per
consciousness,  may  best  be  understood  if  we  consider  it  as  a  secondary


1  Max  Dessoir  —Das  Doppcl-Ich. Leipzig,  1890.


Supplement.]  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  ?  319


■consciousness.  And  if  we  regard  consciousness  and  memory  as  the  essential
•constituents  of  an  Ego,  we  may  boldly  say  that  every  man  conceals  within
Jiimself  the  germs  of  a  second  personality.

All  my  automatic  acts  then,  are,  when  the  whole  story  is  told,  acts  that
Ijelong  to  a  subordinate  consciousness.  I  am,  then,  constantly  attended  by
a  personality.  No.  2,  who  watches  over  me  and  attends  to  many  of  my
personal  matters  like  a  faithful  valet.  After  a  short  season  of  preliminary
instruction,  he  learns  to  oversee  the  operations  sometimes  wrongly  called
mechanical,  such  as  walking,  dressing,  avoiding  objects  in  my  way,  swallow-
ing, coughing,  etc.  It  is  he  who  thrusts  my  hands  into  my  pockets,
and  causes  me  to  blush  when  I  become  embarrassed.  His  is  the  blame  for
any  sudden  fit  of  uncontrollable  awkwardness,  and  to  him  may  often  be
ascribed  the  responsibility  for  "the  things  that  were  better  left  unsaid."  It
is  he  that  revels  in  my  dreams,  that  raves  in  my  fevers,  and  sometimes
becomes  inconveniently  communicative  and  shamelessly  reveals  secrets  that
liave  been  whispered  to  him  by  individual  No.  1.  All  the  acts  of  my  body
that  are  not  consciously  governed  by  my  personal  consciousness  are  under
the  supervision  of  No.  2.  In  short,  if  this  theory  of  a  secondary  conscious-
ness be  made  to  do  its  full  duty,  the  doctrine  that  habits  are  due  to  well-
worn  nervous  paths  must  be  abandoned,  and  all  the  phenomena  now
commonly  ascribed  to  habit  must  be  classed  under  the  head  of  relegations
io  a  secondarij  consciousness.  Such  a  conclusion  is  not  merely  unnecessary,
it  is  mythical  and  fantastic  to  a  point  of  absurdity.

Once  more,  consider  for  a  moment  the  implication  of  Myers'  theory  of  a
■"subliminal"  consciousness.  Those  who  are  familiar  with  his  articles  will
remember  his  simile  of  the  spectrum,  the  ultra-red  portion  representing  the
consciousness  that  attends  the  physiological  functions,  and  the  ultra-violet
end  representing  that  consciousness  from  which  come  the  inspirations  of
genius.^  Here  we  have  the  secondary  consciousness  divided  into  two  parts.
What  is  to  hinder  the  sub-division  of  each  of  these  parts  1  If  we  go  the  full
length  of  the  theory,  must  we  not  jDosit  a  consciousness  for  every  physical
process  ?  Must  not  the  digestive  organs,  the  heart,  the  lungs,  the
mechanism  of  locomotion  have  each  its  own  special  overseer  ?  And  if  once
we  begin  this  process  of  sub-division,  where  are  we  to  stop'?  "Few,"
Dessoir  says,  "have  entered  the  lists  in  defence  of  the  multiplicity  of  the
Ego."  Were  we  to  keep  going  down,  positing  more  and  more  layers  of
consciousness,  "  we  should  arrive  at  a  kind  of  onion-structure  of  tlie  Soul !"
To  be  sure  we  should,  but  double  consciousness  cannot  stop  with  its  own
assumption.  Consistency  demands  that  the  Subliminal  Self  be  divided  into
numerous  other  tiny  Selves,  whose  sum,  together  with  the  little  primary  Self,
makes  up  the  entire  individual.  I  myself,  then,  am  but  a  homunculus
among  homunculi,  and  why  the  particular  homunculus  that  I  call  myself
should  be  such  as  he  is,  and  not  one  of  the  subliminal  fellows,  that  remains
a  total  and  inscrutable  mystery.  Without  saying  it  in  so  many  words,
Myers  practically  admits  all  this.  But  this  is  worse  psychologizing  than  an
unconditional  return  to  the  old  doctrine  of  Faculties.

1  See  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  207.

2  Myers— Proceed infifs,  S.P.E.,  VII..  XX.,  p.  328.

2  B  2


320


Arthur  H.  Pierce.


[Supplement,


III. — A  third  reason  for  rejecting  the  theory  under  discussion  is  that
we  have  not  a  particle  of  direct  testimony  for  the  existence  of  a  split-otf
consciousness.  You  will  retort  that  we  have  no  direct  evidence  for  the
existence  of  any  consciousness  not  our  own,  and  I  should  at  once  assent,
because  all  of  our  reasoning  in  regard  to  another's  consciousness  is  by
analogy  solely.  But  there  is  one  point  that  needs  to  be  noted.  Assent  to
the  theory  of  secondary  consciousness  has  been  unquestionably  facilitated  by
the  notion  that  we  are  all  in  possession  of  a  dream-consciousness  that  is
separate  from  our  waking  consciousness.  And  we  draw  this  conclusion  not
so  much  from  the  observation  of  the  dreams  and  petty  somnambulisms  of
others,  as  from  the  often  observed  fact  that  the  imaged  events  of  one  dream
will  recur  in  another  dream,  tliough  they  be  forgotten  during  waking
naoments.  This  thought  seems  to  establish  conclusively  the  proof  of  a
distinct  dream-consciousness.  But  a  moment's  careful  thought  will  im-
mediately disclose  the  incontestible  fact,  that  the  recurrence  in  dreams  of
identical  pictures  peculiar  to  the  dreams  could  never  have  been  established  and
would  probably  never  have  been  conceived,  had  not  the  fact  of  recurrence
been  present  in  the  primary  consciousness  of  the  individual.  And  of  the  fact
of  recurrence  there  could  never  liave  been  the  faintest  inkling,  had  it  not  been
that  the  events  which  recurred  were  known  to  consciousness  No.  1.  The
dream-consciousness  is  only  the  normal  consciousness  working  under  peculiar
conditions.  Many  dreams,  I  feel  confident,  are  never  attended  by  any
consciousness  whatsoever.  They  are  then,  strictly  speaking,  not  dreams  at
all,  although  to  an  observer  all  tlie  outward  manifestations  of  a  dream  are
present.  But  a  consciousness  cannot  be  inferred.  It  must  be  testified  to
by  the  individual  himself.  And  so  far  as  I  know,  no  secondary  consciousness
has  ever  left  in  any  automatically  written  record  any  claim  to  self-conscious^
ness,  or  any  indefeasible  testimony  in  support  of  its  own  recognised
existence.  The  whole  conception  is  pure  assumption.  For  no  primary
consciousness  can  ever  bear  witness  to  the  existence  of  a  secondary,
dissociated  fragment  of  consciousness.  If  it  ever  attempt  to  give  such
testimony,  it  thereby  proves  that  the  fragment  is  a  portion  of  itself  and
therefore  no  fragment  at  all.

Nor  have  those  statements  any  value  that  are  made  by  jaersons  who
affirm  that  they  are  composed  of  two  distinct  selves,  one  of  which  does-
things  that  the  other  condemns.  What  such  persons  are  talking  about  is-
simply  the  one  primary  self  under  two  different  and  somewhat  contradictory
aspects.  Any  testimony  from  oneself  that  one  is  double  is  the  very  best
possible  proof  that  one  is  not  double.  In  like  manner  those  who  claim  that
they  are  possessed  or  are  under  some  foreign  control,  either  refer  to  various
contradictory  phases  of  their  one  self,  or  show  that  some  of  their  acts  that
are  usually  voluntary  occur  without  the  presence  in  consciou.sness  of  the
appropriate  accompanying  motor  images.  There  is  no  direct  evidence  for  a
secondary  consciousness,  and  indirect  evidence  in  such  a  case  as  this  should,
it  seems  to  nie,  be  looked  upon  with  suspicion.  We  have  no  right  to  assert
that  a  given  set  of  muscular  movements  is  accompanied  by  a  consciousness,
merely  because  it  is  of  a  kind  that  with  us  is  so  accompanied.  Reasoning  by
analogy  may  sometimes  overstep  its  bounds.

Accordingly,  I  am compelled to  reject  the  theory  of  a  secondary


suppiement]  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  ?  321

consciousness  for  the  three  reasons  given, — because  the  supijosition  is
unnecessary  to  explain  the  facts  ;  because  it  must  be  pushed  to  a  point  of
absurdity  if  consistently  held  ;  and  because  there  is  not  the  slightest  direct
evidence  for  the  existence  of  the  kind  of  consciousness  in  question.  All  the
facts  usually  taken  in  support  of  a  double  consciousness  theory  appear
explicable  in  terms  of  brain  alone.  Tlie  brain-explanation  may  seem  un-
satisfactory to  many,  but  at  least  it  is  the  less  mythical  explanation,  and
surely  it  is  fully  as  simple,  in  that  it  confines  the  difficulty  wholly  to  the
physical  side.  Let  me  state  as  well  as  I  can  the  physical  exjjlanation  for  the
various  cases  of  ordinary  alternating,  or  changing  personality,  as  well  as  for
those  cases  in  which  two  or  more  separate  consciousnesses  are  supposed  to
exist  simultaneously. We  will  consider  the  latter  first.

In  all  the  abnormalities  of  hysteria,  for  which  Janet  and  the  rest  see  fit
to  assume  a  second  consciousness,  the  state  of  the  matter  seems  to  me  to  be
simply  this,  —  certain  cerebral  cells  and  cortical  paths  have  in  some  way
become  clogged,  with  the  result  that  the  nervous  tensions,  and  the  force  and
rapidity  of  discharge  consequent  upon  these  tensions,  have  been  reduced  to  a
point  far  below  the  normal.  These  cortical  processes  are  unable  to  reach
that  degree  of  excitation  that  is  requisite  for  consciousness.  Every  one
admits  that  an  excitation  below  a  certain  limit  fails  to  be  attended  by
consciousness,  though  the  reason  for  such  a  fact  is  still  lacking.  The  normal
consciousness  therefore  becomes  contracted,  as  Janet  so  often  says.  The
rest  of  the  consciousness  has  simply  evaporated.  If  I  may  be  permitted  to  use
such  a  grotesque  figure,  consciousness  may  be  compared  to  a  mass  of  steam
floating  over  a  brain  whose  cortex  is  in  a  high  state  of  nervous  tension  and
activity.  Let  certain  portions  of  the  cortical  area  "cool  down"  and  the
steam  disappears  from  over  those  areas.  Now  this  is  exactly  what  happens
in  hysteria.  Certain  brain-areas  become  so  clogged  that  the  requisite
amount  of  "heat"  cannot  be  maintained,  and  lo  I  the  vapoury  consciousness
vanishes.  Could  these  chilled  areas  once  be  "  warmed  "  again,  conscious-
ness would  return.  And  we  find  plenty  of  evidence  that  this  often  happens.
The  hysterical  ansethesias  vastly  diminish  in  states  of  intoxication,  whether
from  alcohol,  chloroform,  or  morphine  ;^  they  often  disappear  wholly  during
an  attack,  which  surely  is  a  nervous  commotion  sufficient  to  arouse  any
dormant  brain-tract  ;  electricity  diminishes  them  ;  and  if  the  attention  of
the  patient  be  called  to  the  anesthetic  part  by  directing  her  to  look
at  a  coloured  wafer  placed  upon  it,  pinching  of  the  part  will  be  felt  for  some
time  afterwards, — and  what  is  "calling  the  attention  to  the  part "  but  a
method  for  rendering  more  intense  the  nervous  process  in  the  tactile  regions
of  the  cortex.  The  aboulias,  as  well  as  the  antethesias,  disappear  in  ether  or
alcohol  intoxication.'  Patients  find  it  much  more  easy  to  voluntarily  per-
form old  and  habitual  acts  than  those  newly-acquired ;  which  is  only  another
way  of  saying  that  well-worn  cortical  paths  can  be  raised  to  the  conscious-
ness-point of  excitation  much  more  readily  than  i^aths  that  still  ofler
resistance  by  reason  of  their  newness.  If  the  cortex  could  be  kept  con-
,stantly  at  a  red  heat,  consciousness  would  be  as  extensive  as  in  any  normal

1  Janet.— Etat  Mental,  etc..  Vol.  I.,  p.  20.

2  Janet.— ioc.  cit.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  144.


322


Arthur  H.  Pierce.


[Supplement.


individual.  But  disease  has  occasioned  too  much  resistance  for  that.  Several
considerations  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  clogging  and  consequent  imper-
viousness  of  paths.  In  the  so-called  stage  of  intellectual  aboulia  the  patient
has  a  feeling  of  unfainiliarity  with  everything  ;  all  things  appear  as  if  in  a
dream ;  the  subject  is  not  wholly  sure  whether  a  book  is  a  book,  is  not  abso-
lutely certain  that  a  brother  is  really  recognised  as  a  brother,  etc.  i  That  is,  the
nervous  process  is  so  weak  that  the  usual  paths  of  association  are  not  opened,
and  the  experience  has  none  of  that  feeling  of  "warmth  and  intimacy"  that
in  normal  life  constitutes  the  fact  of  recognition.  Again,  a  subject  who  would
normally  require  twenty  minutes  for  the  execution  of  such  a  simple  act  as
taking  a  hat  from  a  table  and  hanging  it  upon  a  peg,  will  perform  the  act
immediately  under  the  influence  of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  At  a  given
rap  upon  the  table  she  takes  the  hat  and  hangs  it  up.  The  hypnotic
suggestion  has  opened  the  necessary  paths,  and  the  act  can  be  performed
quickly.  But,  furtlier,  if  she  be  interrupted  in  the  midst  of  the  act  and
asked  what  she  is  doing,  she  replies -"  I  ?  I  am  doing  nothing." — "  But  you
have  just  taken  the  hat." — "No,  it  is  not  I."  The  subject  thinks  that  it  is
not  she  who  does  the  act,  because  the  usual  normal  complex  of  associated
paths  that  corresponds  to  what  we  term  the  reasons  for  an  act  is  wanting.
The  very  elements  that  comjjose  the  feeling  of  self- origination  are  lacking,
for  if  one  knows  no  reasons  for  an  act,  how  can  one  think  that  the  act  is
one's  own  ?  Paths  are  everywhere  blocked.  Only  a  few  can  be  open  simul-
taneously. The  greater  part  of  consciousness  is  consequently  suppressed.

Once  more,  the  hysterical  amnesias  are  no  more  wonderful  tlian  the
similar  experiences  that  we  ourselves  have  when  we  are  about  to  fall  into  the
unconsciousness  of  sleep.  Not  long  ago,  as  I  was  on  the  point  of  falling
asleep,  a  train  of  thought,  apparently  of  some  significance,  ran  through  my
mind  and  imniediately  vanished,  leaving  no  trace  beyond  the  faint  recollec-
tion that  something  had  been  there.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  psychological
interest  of  the  matter,  the  fact  even  of  the  vanished  thoughts  might  never
have  been  noticed.  The  whole  life  of  the  hysteric  is  made  up  of  exiieriences
of  this  kind.  Impressions,  of  whatever  sort  they  may  be,  leave  such  faint
traces  behind  them  that  the  paths  of  association  lie  unopened  or  dormant,
until  forced  open  by  some  unusually  violent  nervous  commotion  like  the
attack.  Then  the  amnesias  vanish,  and  for  a  moment  the  field  of  conscious-
ness enlarges.

Thus  the  amount  of  consciousness  that  a  hysteric  possesses  is  constantly
varying,  fluctuating  at  the  times  of  an  attack  from  almost  nothing  to  the
normal  amount.  The  fluctuations  of  the  anajsthesias,  amnesias,  and  jjowers
of  voluntary  movement ;  the  j^eculiar  phenomena  of  the  paralyses,  the  con-
tractures and  the  attacks;  in  a  word  all  the  "bizarreries"  that  are  the
commonplaces  of  the  hysteric's  life  can  be  understood  and  accounted  for  on
no  other  hypothesis  than  the  one  that  makes  them  cerebral  and  not  mental
phenomena.  To  the  poor  hysteric  herself,  to  be  sure,  they  must  appear
under  the  form  of  continual  fluctuations  in  the  field  of  consciousness,  from  a
state  of  normal  life  to  that  state  in  which  the  residual  consciousness
is  extremely  minute. But  to  the  observer  and  describer  they  must  ever


1  Janet.— ioc.  cit.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  141.


Supplement.]  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration?  S23


appear  as  phenomena  of  brain  and  nervous  system, — phenomena  due  to  one
of  the  most  subtle  of  nervous  diseases.

But,  one  objects,  does  not  the  anesthetic  hand  of  the  hysteric  have  a
memory  of  its  own  ?  Does  it  not  repeat  acts  that  it  is  first  made  to  perform  1
Does  it  not  show  by  its  automatic  writing  that  the  events  of  weeks  ago  are
remembered  ?  And  does  not  this  memory,  then,  show  the  existence  of  a  con-
sciousness of  which  it  is  a  f)art  ?  I  would  reply  that  in  the  true  sense  of  the
word  there  is  no  memory  here  at  all.  There  is  nothing  but  tlie  recurrence  of
former  discharges,  a  second  edition  of  previous  acts.  There  is  no  more
memory  present  than  in  the  well-seasoned,  time-mellowed  violin,  which
responds  to  the  bow  by  vibrating  in  the  same  old  waves  and  nodes  that
hundreds  of  previous  bowings  have  firmly  established.  If  this  can  be  called
memory,  tlien  the  pranks  of  the  hysteric's  anjesthetic  hand  may  also  be  so
called.  And  if  counting  and  adding  are  to  be  made  proofs  of  a  consciousness,
I  can  only  say  that  machines  will  add  with  marvellous  accuracy,  and  that
work-horses  have  been  known  to  start  for  home  when  a  definite  number  of
loads  have  been  carried.

These  changes  in  the  consciousness  and  the  personality  of  the  hysterics
can  be  best  understood  by  keeping  in  mind  the  thesis  so  ably  maintained  by
Ribot  in  his  Diseases  of  Personality.  According  to  him,  what  we  mean  by
personality,  psychologically  speaking,  is  but  a  complex  of  memories  and
bodily  seii,sations.  If  now  these  bodily  sensations  be  changed  or  diminished,
there  is  lost  the  very  thing  upon  which  the  consciousness  of  personal  identity
rests.  Now  the  hysteric  has  lost  many  of  her  bodily  sensations.  What
happens  over  a  good  part  of  the  body  is  often  not  re^jorted  to  consciousness
at  all.  But  let  all  the  bodily  sensations  be  restored,  as  in  the  deep  somnam-
bulism, and  the  patient  is  her  true  self  again.  The  trouble  lies  probably  in
tlie  kinsesthetic  regions  of  the  cortex.  ^  This  conception  of  trouble  in  the
kinsesthetic  areas,  of  such  a  kind  that  the  consciousness-point  of  excitation
cannot  usually  be  reached,  helps  also  to  clear  up  the  phenomena  which  are
classed  under  the  head  of  co-operations  of  the  two  consciousne-sses.^  ^-y-t
the  hand  is  pricked  three  times  and  the  subject  sees  or  thinks  of  the  number
three.  That  is,  the  paths  of  association  to  the  visual  or  other  sensory
centres  are  open,  and  these  centres,  in  consequence  of  their  excitation,  are
accompanied  by  consciousness.  All  the  facts  of  "  co-operation"  can  be  thus
explained.

When  the  two  consciousnesses  conflict,  a,s  in  the  "  parasitic  cases,  the
state  of  the  matter  is,  probably,  that  certain  groups  of  cells  have  in  some
way  become  dissociated  in  part,  so  that  they  cannot  properly  discharge.  Their
constant  struggle  to  discharge  constitutes  the  annoyance,  the  harassing
"irruptions  of  the  secondary  consciousness."  Some  violent  emotion  opens  up
paths,  allows  the  discharge  to  take  place,  and  sets  everything  right  again.
This  seems  to  me  a  more  simple  explanation  than  to  say,  as  the  writers
referred  to  in  the  foot-note  do  say,  that  two  consciousnesses  become  recon-

^  See  H.  C.  Bastian's  Hysterical  or  Functional  Paralysis.
'■^Binet. — -Lac.  cit.,  p.  173.

3  See  article  by  Breuer  and  Frend  in  Neurologisches  Centralllatt,  Ja,nua,Ty,  1893,
Also  Janet,  Loc.  cit..  Vol.  II  ,  pp.  65  and  242.


824


Arthur  H.  Pierce.


[Supplement.


ciled.  How  weeping  and  cursing  can  reconcile  two  consciousnesses,  I  fail
to  see  ;  but  that  they  could  be  effective  in  opening  up  clogged  paths  I  can
easily  understand.

,  What  has  been  said  in  regard  to  hysteria  may  be  said  equally  well  in
regard  to  dreams,  automatic  writing,  niediumistic  possession,  &c.,  &c.  Old
and  familiar  paths  are  discharging  in  a  subdued  wayj-^nd  the  acts  are  reflex
and  unconscious.  In  fact  all  those  phenomena  that  are  commonly  supposed
to  furnish  evidence  in  favour  of  a  secondary  consciousness,  really  present  the
most  convincing  illustrations  of  the  fact  that  acts  of  the  most  complex  kind
can  go  on  without  the  aid  of  an  accompanying  consciousness.  With  respect
to  hysteria,  it  may  indeed  be  true  that  it  can  be  most  conveniently  diagnosed
as  a  mental  disorder,  for  the  facts  in  consciousness  are  here  more  accessible
than  the  regions  of  the  cortex.  But  to  cZia3n0.se  hysteria  as  a  mental  disease,
and  to  consider  it  a  mental  trouble  which  produces  physical  disorders,  are
two  widely  different  things.

In  some  such  way  as  this,  the  weakness  of  the  theories  that  postulate  two
co-existing  consciousnesses  may  be  shown.  What  now  can  be  said  of  those
familiar  cases  of  alternating  personality  for  which  Mary  Reynolds '  and
Ansel  Bourne^  may  be  taken  as  types  ?  It  is  true  that  we  have  here  two
separate  personalities,  but  one  is  not  secondary  to  the  other  except  in  point
of  time.  When  either  one  exists,  it  is  for  the  time  primary  consciousness,
the  whole  personality.  Each  has  its  own  period  of  complete  sway,  and
meanwhile  the  other  has  ceased  to  be.  By  some  strange  process  there  have
arisen  two  sundered  sets  of  associations,  each  of  which  represents  a  self.  But
it  is  not  under  the  form  of  associations  hi  consciousness  that  these  two  sets
have  become  sundered.  The  separation  is  a  brain-fact  entirely, — a  brain-
fact  that  finds  its  counterpart  in  the  fluctuating  changes  of  consciousness.
Exactly  what  this  brain-fact  is  I  am  of  course  unable  to  state  ;  but  the
general  explanation  seems  to  lie  in  the  notion  of  cortical  cloggings,  partial  or
entire,  cloggings  of  such  a  kind  that  currents  may  still  pass,  though  with
enfeebled  power,  as  electric  currents  pass  with  greater  difficulty  through  a
smaller  wire  ;  or  cloggings  that  may  wholly  bar  the  passage  of  all  ordinary
currents  and  may  thus  switch  them  off  in  new  directions.  Of  one  thing,
however,  there  seems  to  be  some  evidence,  namely,  that  although  some  new
portions  of  the  cerebral  structure  must  be  used  for  the  new  sets  of  associa-
tions, each  of  the  alternating  personalties  does  not  correspond  to  absolutely
distinct  brain-areas.  Mary  Reynolds,  after  falling  into  her  second  state,  was
obliged  to  re-learn  the  arts  of  reading  and  writing,  but  "she  made  such
rapid  progress  in  both  that  in  a  few  weelcs  she  had  readily  relearned  to  read
and  write,"  and,  the  account  adds,  "  when  we  consider  the  length  of  time
required  to  teach  a  child  these  arts,  her  almost  intuitive  readiness  appears
wonderful."  The  simple  and  prosaic  truth  is  that  certain  identical  brain-
paths  were  employed  in  the  second  as  in  the  first  state.  In  the  beginning  of
the  second  state  they  were  doubtless  obstructed  or  disconnected,  but  the  new
efforts  at  learning  cleared  them  out,  or  established  the  proper  connections,  and
thereafter  they  functioned  correctly. Ribot  states  that  no  cases  are  known

1  Transactions  of  the  College  of  Physicians  of  Philadelphia,  April  4,  1888,
abstracted  in  Prof.  James'  Psychology,Yo\.  I.,  p.  381.
-  Prof.  James'  Psychology,  Vol.  I.,  p,  391,


Supplement.]  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration?  325


to  him  where  the  second  personality  has  not  inherited  at  least  some  small
share  of  the  effects  of  its  predecessor  ;  and  from  what  has  just  been  said  the
reason  is  clear.  Ansel  Bourne's  second  self, — the  Brown  personality, — ^was,
according  to  Professor  James,  "nothing  but  a  rather  shrunken,  dejected  and
amnesic  extract  of  Mr.  Bourne  himself."

In  the  cases  of  progressive,  or  developing  personalities,  like  those  of  Dr.
Azam's  Felida  X.  and  Janet's  Lucie  and  L^onie,  the  successive  personalities,
•each  larger  than  and  including  the  others,  seem  to  be  clue  to  the  successive
removal,  through  the  influence  of  disease  or  hypnotism,  of  certain  inhibi-
tions. The  complex  network  of  interlacing  brain-paths  is  divided  oS  some-
how into  more  or  less  perfect  systems.  One  system  of  paths  remains  open
constantly  and  represents  the  normal  personality.  At  times  a  second  system
is  opened  up  and^put  into  connection  with  the  first,  and  this  combination  of
the  two  sets  of  paths  corresponds  to  the  second  personality.  Similarly
with  the  third  personality,  when  that  exists.  Thus  Lucie  I.  was  anjesthetic
all  over,  nearly  deaf  and  partially  blind.  In  Lucie  II.  the  ansesthesias  were
■diminished,  some  inhibitions  had  been  removed  and  some  new  paths  opened;
while  Lucie  III.  had  all  the  inhibitions  removed  and  was  without  a  trace  of
anaesthesia.  To  say  that  certain  new  sets  of  paths  have  been  opened  up
.■seems  vastly  more  simple  and  intelligible,  vague  as  it  may  be,  than  to  say
that  various  strata  of  consciousness  have  been  brought  from  a  state  of  dis-
sociation into  one  of  harmonious  union.

Let  no  one  suppose  from  the  above  that  the  writer  is  endeavouring  to
reduce  personality  to  cerebral  explosions,  or  trying  to  debase  consciousness
by  making  use  of  brain-hypotheses.  An  attempt  has  been  made  merely  to
suggest  an  explanation  of  the  facts  that  shall  be  consistent  with  itself  ;  and
to  this  end  the  description  of  the  phenomena  has  been  couched  in  physical
terms,  with  no  pretence  whatever  to  ultimate  points  of  view  where  "  deeper
realities "  must  gain  recognition.  For  all  the  phenomena  usually  classed
under  such  heads  as  "double"  and  "secondary"  consciousness,  two  terms
may  be  proposed, — first  Alternating  Personalities,  a  term  that  is  already  for
the  most  part  correctly  employed  ;  and  second,  Fluctnating  Consciousness,
a  term  that  will  cover  all  cases  of  developing  personality,  as  well  as  all  cases
that  are  supposed  to  be  manifestations  of  a  subliminal  consciousness.
"Multiple  consciousness,"  "secondary  consciousness,"  and  the  like,  are  terms
that  should  be  abandoned.  "  Two  souls  within  one  breast"  is,  indeed,  a
beautiful  rhetorical  figure,  indispensable  for  poetry  and  religion.  And  so
were  Kepler's  angels  a  beautiful  conception  for  the  power  that  drives  the
planets. But  in  science  the  metaphor  must  be  dropped.

Akthur  H.  Pierce.


11.

It  is  no  doubt  useful  sometimes  to  forsake  the  mountain  tops  whereon
the  Subliminal  Self  sits  enthroned,  and  to  rest  for  a  space  on  the  solid
earth.  For  there  are  mists  in  those  high  regions,  and  the  traveller  who  has
looked  for  a  wide  prospect  over  the  kingdoms  of  the  mind  has  sometimes
found  his  only  reward  in  the  strenuous  joys  of  the  ascent.  Personally,  I
am  grateful to Mr.  Pierce  for having  recalled  us  for  a  time  to  the


326


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplemenfc.-


purely  physiological  aspects  of  the  problem — aspects  which  our  ignorance,  on.
the  one  hand,  of  the  cerebral  changes  accompanying  donsciousness,  and  on.
the  other,  the  allurements  of  tlie  psychological  questions  involved,  are-
constantly  tempting  us  to  ignore. Mr.  Pierce  has  done  good  service  by^
attempting  to  define  the  nature  of  tlie  physical  changes  which  correspond  to
the  mental  phenomena  of  fluctuating  and  alternate  consciousness.  His.
physiological  explanation  of  the  modifications  in  sensibility  presented  by
hystero-ansesthetic  subjects  like  Pierre  Janet's  Louise  and  Rose,  is,  if  not
novel,  luminous  and  forcible. Probably  his  account  of  the  matter  is  about
as  near  as  we  can  at  present  come  to  a  correct  view  of  the  physical  side  of  the
phenomena. The  metaphor  of  consciousness  as  the  steam  floating  over  the
w(.>rkings  of  the  brain  engine,  with  stimuli  such  as  alcohol  or  hypnotism  to
warm  up  tlie  cooled-dovvn  area  and  thus  increase  the  steaming  surface,
is  picturesque  and  helpful. And  in  all  the  latter  part  of  his  paper,  when  he
deals  with  the  phenomena  of "Alternating  Personalities,"  to  each  of
which  he  allows  an  independent  consciousness,  it  is  difiicult  to  find  cause  for
serious  disagreement. To  all  this  M.  Pierre  Janet  and  the  other  French
observers  referred  to,  if  I  have  rightly  understood  them,  and  probably  Mr.
Myers  also,  would  find  themselves  able  to  assent.

But  why  does  Mr.  Pierce  quarrel  with  the  attribution  of  consciousness  ia
these  abnormal  states?  Consciousness  is  not  a  brain  fact.  And  yet
Mr.  Pierce  tliroughout  writes  as  if  the  physiological  were  an  alternative  to  the
p.sychological  explanation.  Take  your  choice,  he  says  in  effect,  but  you  can't
have  both.  Thus,  he  assures  us  that  the  singular  manifestations  observecS
in  .Janet's  hystero-anassthetics,  are  "cerebral,  not  mental  phenomena."  He
warns  us  that  "  if  the  theory  of  a  secondary  consciousness  be  made  to  do  its  ■
full  duty,  the  doctrine  that  habits  are  due  to  well-worn  nerve  paths  must  be  '
abandoned,  and  all  the  phenomena  now  commonly  ascribed  to  habit  must  be
classed  under  the  head  of  rdegat ions  to  a  secondary  conscionmess."  And
finally,  he  lays  it  down  that  all  the  facts  usually  taken  in  "support  of  a.
d(juble  consciousness  theory  appear  explicable  in  terms  of  brain  alone,"  and
that  tills  is  "the  less  mythical  explanation."  Now  to  the  plain  man— the
man  who  is  not  bound  by  his  allegiance  to  some  philosophical  system
to  swear  away  any  of  the  facts— statements  like  these  appear  to  involve  a
radical  misconception  of  tlie  questions  at  issue.

To  the  plain  man  there  is  not  one  series  of  phenomena  susceptible  either
of  a  physical  or  of  a  metapliysical  explanation.  There  are  two  series  of
phenomena.  The  plain  man  calls  tliese  series  respectively  physical  and
mental.  The  mental  phenomena  are  states  of  consciousness,  the  physical
are  brain  changes— Mr.  Pierce's  "  clogged  cells, "  "well-worn  nerve  paths,"
"  inhibited  tracts,"  and  so  on.  If  we  wish  to  go  a  little  deeper,  it  may  be
pointed  out  that  the  existence  of  both  series  rests  upon  inference.  We  are
deahng  with  brain-changes  which  we  never  saw,  nor  are  ever  likely  to  see  -
and  witli  .states  of  some  x)ther  person's  consciousness,  when  all  that  we
really  know  is  states  of  our  own.  But  the  inferences  are  made  amd
accepted  by  everyone  as  postulates  necessary  for  carrying  on  tlie  business  of
life.  Perhaps  it  may  be  that  the  two  sets  of  phenomena  are  diverse  aspects  of
the  same  essential  fact.  But  for  practical  purposes  we  have  to  take  them  as
find  tliem,  as  two  separate  and  mutually  exclusive  series. For  purposes


we


Supplement.]  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  ?  327

of  scientific  treatment  we  may,  if  we  choose,  discuss  the  problem  from
either  the  cerebral  or  the  mental  side,  or  from  both  simultaneously.  We
may  talk  indifferently  of  "enlargement  of  consciousness,"  or  "re-
vivification of  dormant  cerebral  tracts,"  of  "the  intrusion  of  a  secondary
memory, "  or  ' '  the  spasmodic  functioning  of  a  dissociated  sub-cortical
centre."  Probably  in  our  present  ignorance  of  cerebral  physiology  the
psychological  method  is  likely  to  be  the  more  fruitful,  and  it  appears,  with
deference  to  Mr.  Pierce,  to  be  the  simpler.  But  no  doubt  it  is  well  to  have
both.

Thus  much  is  conceded  by  logic  and  connnon  sense.  But  what
logic  and  common  sense  do  not  concede  is  that  we  should  treat  mental
and  cerebral  [^phenomena  as  members  of  that  same  series.  The  cerebral
fact  has  its  cerebral  antecedent  and  its  cerebral  consequent.  Not  merely  the
observed  facts,  but  the  conditions  of  our  thinking  compel  us  to  assume  that  the
physical  chain,  at  any  rate,  is  complete  in  itself,  and  unbroken  by  the-
intrusion  of  any  fact  of  a  different  order  :  though  we  cannot  always  trace  a-
like  continuity  in  the  mental  series.  When,  therefore,  Mr.  Pierce  talks  of"
abandoning  well-worn  nerve  channels  in  favour  of  secondary  consciousness  ;•
when  he  asks  us  to  accept  the  "brain  explanation  "  as  less  mythical  ;  when
he  writes  of  a  mental  disorder  as  a  thinkable  explanation  of  cerebral  disease,
he  is  ignoring  the  rules  of  the  game.  A  mental  disorder  cannot  cause  a
physical  change  :  "well-worn  nerve  channels"  are  merely  the  hypothetical
brain-equivalents  (has  Mr.  Pierce  ever  seen  a  well-worn  nerve  channel,  and
would  he  recognise  it  if  he  did  ?  )  for  the  workings  of  what  Mr.  Myers
calls  the  Subliminal  Consciousness.  The  brain  explanation  is  more  "  satis-
factory" as  an  explanation  of  the  physical  facts,  just  as  the  Subliminal
Consciousness  is  more  satisfactory  ■  as  a  means  of  describing  the  mental
phenomena.  Both  are  alike  "  mythical  "  if  by  that  is  meant  hypothetical.
In  fact,  we  are  dealing  throughout  with  hypotheses,  conventional  signs  of  we
know  not  what  underlying  realities.  The  two  sets  of  signs  are  parallel  ;  but
it  is  a  fatal  blunder  to  interpolate  a  term  from  one  series  into  the  other.  The
art  of  painting  and  the  art  of  writing  furnish  us  with  two  series  of  conven-
tional signs  by  means  of  which  a  fact  in  nature--  say  a  landscape — may
be  represented.  Mr.  Pierce  is  in  the  position  of  an  artist  who  through  the
poverty  of  his  technical  resources  .should  in  depicting  a  landscape  leave  the
sky  unpainted,  filling  in  the  blank  with  a  written  description  of  the  blue
vault  dappled  with  white  clouds,  and  should  then  proceed  to  complain  that
the  black  ink  would  not  harmonise  with  the  colour-scheme  of  his  picture.

What  right  has  Mr.  Pierce,  on  physical  grounds,  to  object  to  consciousness
as  an  explanation  of  the  psychological  phenomena  observed  1  Once  more,
consciousness  is  not  a  brain  fact.  When — to  take  his  arguments  seriatim  —
Mr.  Pierce  asserts  that  the  assumption  of  a  secondary  consciousness  is  un-
necessary, the  question  arises,  unnecessary  for  what  ?  It  is  not  necessary —
it  would  be  ridiculous —  as  an  explanation  of  physical  facts.  But  no  one,  as
far  as  I  am  aware,  has  put  it  forward  in  that  connection.  Whether  or  not  a
secondary  consciousness  may  be  inferred  from  certain  phenomena,  physical
and  mental,  is  a  question  with  which  jjsychologists  are  primarily  concerned,
and  which  cannot  be  solved  or  greatly  advanced  towards  solution  by  reference
to  reflex  action  and  brainless  frogs.


328


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


So  again,  in  his  second  argument.  To  suppose  that  consciousness  accom-
panies automatic  action  may  or  may  not  be  absurd.  It  is  a  question,  I
apprehend,  to  be  determined  by  observation.  But  Mr.  Pierce  has  not  shown
that  it  has  any  bearing  upon  the  ascription  of  habitual  action  to  well-worn
Tierve  paths.

His  final  argument,  that  there  is  no  direct  testimony  to  the  existence  of  a
split-off  consciousness,  not  only  betrays  the  same  misconception,  but  appears
to  be  based  on  a  superficial  and  extremely  restricted  survey  of  the  facts.
In  the  latter  part  of  his  paper,  in  order  to  meet  the  cases  of  Ansel  Bourne,
Mary  Reynolds,  and  Felida  X.,  Mr.  Pierce  admits  the  existence  of  "  alter-
nating personalities,"  and  "fluctuating  consciousness,"  and  thus  practically
•concedes  much  of  the  matter  in  dispute.  But  in  his  first  discussion  of  the  sub-
ject he  conceiitrates  his  attention  almost  exclusively  on  the  small  group  of
hystero- anaesthetics  described  by  Pierre  Janet  and  others.  Practically  the
whole  of  his  arguments  and  illustrations  are  drawn  from  these  subjects.
"  The  belief,"  he  says,  "in  these  sensations,  images,  and  memories  [outside
the  normal  cousciousness],  is  grounded  principally  in  the  notion  of  pseudo-
antesthesias,  and  in  the  notion  that  complex  movements  cannot  be  produced
without  accompanying  motor  images."  Even  to  dreams  and  somnambulism
lie  refers  only  to  express  his  conviction  that  "many  dreams  are  never
attended  by  any  consciousness  whatever."  Surely  we  need  Mr.  Pierce's
definition  of  consciousness  before  we  can  discuss  a  statement  of  this  kind.

But  however  narrowly  Mr.  Pierce  would  be  disposed  to  limit  the  applica-
tion of  "consciousness,"  I  cannot  but  think  that  if  he  had  at  the  outset  of
his  enquiries  taken  into  consideration  not  merely  such  pathological  cases  as
those  of  Felida  X.  and  Ansel  Bourne,  but  the  more  frequent  and  normal
phenomena  of  the  hypnotic  trance,  he  would  liave  modified  this  statement  of
his  views.  The  hypnotised  subject  presents,  or  may  present,— as  many  of
us  have  seen  for  ourselves, — all  the  phenomena  which  we  associate  with  con-
sciousness, not  merely  in  our  own  case,  but  in  the  case  of  the  same  person
when  in  his  normal  state.  He  talks,  acts,  reasons  ;  exliibits  emotion,  judg-
ment, volition.  As  has  been  said,  the  hypnotic  state  frequently  differs  from
the  normal  in  no  cither  respect  than  that  it  is  different.  If  Madame  B.  is  not
conscious  in  the  state  in  which  she  has  christened  herself  Leontine,  by  what
signs  are  we  to  infer  consciousness  in  others  at  all  ?  And  the  consciousness  of
the  hyjjnotic  is  certainly  not  identical  with  the  consciousness  of  the  waking
state.  With  rare  exceptions  it  is  more  extensive  ;  it  includes  the  waking
consciousness  as  a  larger  includes  a  smaller  concentric  circle,  itself  not
included  by  it.  Indeed,  so  much  Mr.  Pierce  i^ractically  admits,  by  proposiirg
tiie  term  "fluctuating  consciousness"  for  conditions  like  those  presented  by
Felida  X.  and  Madame  B.

Comparing  the  admissions  at  the  end  of  the  article  with  the  argument  at
the  beginning,  I  am  led  to  the  conclusion  that  what  Mr.  Pierce  really  aimed
at  refuting  was,  not  the  contention  that  consciousness  accompanies  certain
abnormal  .states  and  certain  "automatic"  actions,  but  the  doctrine  that
these  states  and  actions  indicate  that  there  are  two  independent  centres
of  activity  functioning  simultaneously  in  the  same  organism — in  a  word,  the
doctrine  of  dual  or  rival  control.  If  I  am  right  in  my  understanding  of  his
argument,  it  might  be  paraj)hrased  somewhat  as  follows  : — Consciousness  is


Supplement.]  SMimincd  Self  ov  Unconscioiis  Cerebration?  329

an  accompaniment,  under  certain  conditions,  of  the  functioning  of  the  brain
as  a  whole.-  It  is  a  unity  which  reflects  the  synthesis,  or  rather  synergy,  of  the
several  cerebral  centres.  To  recognise  a  secondary  consciousness  would  be  to
admit  the  possibility  of  a  second  synthesis  of  brain  centres.  Such  dual  con-
trol in  an  organism  would  be  opposed  to  all  physiological  analogy.  There-
fore there  is  no  secondary  consciousness.

As  to  whether  that  contention  is  sound  physiologically,  I  am  not  competent
to  offer  an  opinio.ir.  But,  arguing  solely  from  the  psychological  data  at
present  available,  I  am  led,  provisionally,  to  the  same  conclusion.  I  can  find
no  evidence  that  would  lead  me  to  believe  that  there  are  two  independent
organised  systems  of  consciousness  operatmg  simultaneously  in  any  of  the
cases  so  far  brought  forward.  The  ordinary  case  of  the  hypnotic  subject — with
which  in  this  connection  we  may  group  such  morbid  cases  as  those  of  Felida
X.  and  Janet's  hystero-ansesthetic  patients— certainly  seem  to  call  for  no
such  explanation.  These  are  all  instances  of  what  Mr.  Pierce  calls.
"Fluctuating  Consciousness."  In  other  words,  the  two  consciousnesses
may  be  represented  by  concentric  circles,  of  which  the  normal  is  always  the
smaller.  There  is  here  no  conflict  or  co-operation  of  independent  centres  of
consciousness:  the  "secondary"  consciousness  differs  from  the  primary
merely  in  containing  more  elements.  This  difference,  as  formulated  by
Mr.  Pierce  in  physiological  terms,  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  removal  of  certain
inhibitions  existing  in  the  normal  state,  or  to  the  stimulation  to  "conscious-
ness-point of  excitation  "  of  certain  cerebral  tracts  normally  dormant.  In
psychological  language,  a  secondary  consciousness  includes  a  wider  range  of
motor  or  sensory  images,  of  ideas  and  emotions.  But  it  is  essentially  one
consciousness,  its  centre  the  same,  its  periphery  enlarged.  And  there  is,  I
imagine,  little  evidence  that  the  "  Secondary  "  consciousness  deserves  even
the  name  of  an  enlarged  consciousness  in  its  earlier  stages — except  in  those
rare  cases  where  the  field  of  waking  consciousness  has  been  abnormally
restricted  by  disease.  In  the  ordinary  hypnotic  subject  it  appears  to  take
some  time  for  the  consciousness  to  become  developed.  In  the  process  of
such  development,  no  doubt,  it  assumes  iirto  itself  new  elements,  both
subjective  and  objective — facts  of  internal  sensation  and  lapsed  memories,
as  well  as  novel  experiences  from  without.  By  such  means,  as  in  Madame
B.'s  case,  the  trance-consciousness  may  be  educated  and  developed,  so
as  not  merely  to  present  a  widely  difierent  content,  but  to  assume  a  different
character  from  the  primary  state  of  the  same  individual.  But  this  is  purely
an  artificial  product.  It  is  one  consciousness  which  has  worked  up  into
organic  relation  with  itself  the  fresh  material  presented  to  it.  We  only  know
"Leontine"  in  her  mature  state.  But  it  is  not  likely  that  she  came  mtothe
world  fuU-grown.

The  mstances  in  which  the  secondary  consciousness  intrudes  into  the
domain  of  ordinary  life  may  seem  irreconcilable  with  this  view  of  the
matter.  When  the  hidden  "  Adrienne "  answers  intelligent  questions
whilst  "Louise"  is  talking  to  the  company  at  large;  when  the  hypnotic
subject,  in  the  midst  of  a  conversation  in  the  normal  state,  gets  up  to  poke
the  fire  in  obedience  to  a  mandate  given  10  minutes  before  in  the  hypnotic
trance  ;  or  writes  out  the  solution  of  an  arithmetical  problem  whilst
reading  the  newsjjaper  aloud — do  not  these  various acts  indicate  two


380


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


simultaneously  functioning  centres  of  consciousness?  Mr.  Pierce  has
recognised  the  difficulty,  and  attempts  to  meet  it  by  suggesting  that  the
acts  performed  by  the  secondary  consciousness,  as  the  planchette- writing,  and
poking  of  the  fire,  and  whispered  conversation,  are  automatic  and  per-
formed without  consciousness.  But  the  facts  are  against  this  explanation,
at  least,  in  some  cases.  Mr.  Gurney,  for  instance,  has  shewn  (see  his  article
on  "Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-hypnotic  States,"  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,
Vol.  IV.,  pp.  268-323),  that  the  actions  attributed  to  the  Secondary  Self  are
frequently  so  difficult  and  complicated  as  necessarily  to  imply  the  exercise
of  the  fullest  intelligence  of  which  the  subject  is  capable.  Moreover,  the
re-hyjonotised  subject  remembers  the  performance  of  the  enjoined  act,  and
-can  explain  any  peculiarities  in  its  performance,  and  correct  mistakes  made.
It  would  surely  be  extravagant  to  refuse  to  admit  that  such  acts  are
deliberately  and  consciously  performed.  But  the  facts  appear  sometimes  to
be  not  inconsistent  with  the  converse  supposition, — that  it  is  the  actions
-atti-ibutable  to  the  pi'imary  self  which  are  performed  without  conscious
guidance,  as  the  response  of  some  lower  cerebral  centre,  through  well-worn
nerve  channels,  to  familiar  stimuli.  The  attention  of  observers  and
experimenters  has  been  directed  almost  exclusively  to  the  acts  attributed  to
the  secondary  consciousness,  and  the  attempt  to  prove  that  such  acts
indicate  intelligence  and  volition,  and  the  workings  of  the  primary  conscious-
ness have  been  comparatively  neglected.  We  are  given  no  detail  in  many
■cases  of  the  waking  occupations  of  Mr.  Gurney's  subjects.  Perhaps  the
.actions  of  their  waking  selves  were  the  purely  reflex  response  to  the  spoken
or  printed  words.  Indeed,  in  some  curious  experiments,  directed  to
■obtaining  "evidence  of  an  absolutely  complete  and  mutually  exclusive
segregration  of  two  simultaneous  states  or  streams  of  consciousness  in  the
same  individual,"  (Loc.  cit.  pp.  318  et  seq.)  Mr.  Gurney  succeeded  only
in  demonstrating  that  when  the  performance  assigned  to  the  primary  self
was  of  a  nature  to  demand  the  full  exercise  of  intelligence,  the  secondary
■consciousness  was  unable  to  discharge  its  allotted  task.  The  subject,  for
instance,  read,  "  Through  the  Looking  Glass  "  aloud  "with  spirit  and  enjoy-
ment," but  failed  simultaneously  to  multiply  697  by  8  through  planchette  ;  in
other  words,  Mr.  Gurney  failed  to  obtain  the  evidence  which  he  desired.  And,
indeed,  it  is  obvious,  as  Mr.  Gurney  points  out,  that  it  would  in  any  circum-
stance be  extremely  diflicult  to  obtain  clear  proof  of  such  a  pr(_)position  as  the
simultaneous  functioning  of  two  independent  centres  of  consciousness.  We
know  from  the  fact  of  the  subsequent  memory,  and  from  other  tests,  such
as  the  suscej^tibility  at  the  time  to  hallucination,  that  tlie  subject  in  obeying
a  post-hypnotic  command  frequently  relapses  into  the  hypnotic  or  secondary
state.  Apparent  instances,  therefore,  of  the  simultaneous  performance  of
intelligent  acts  by  two  separate  centres  of  consciousness,  may  be  explained —
since  it  is  practically  impossible  to  prove  that  the  acts  were  really
simultaneous — as  examples  of  the  rapid  alternation  or  fluctuation  of  the
field  of  consciousness.

But,  in  fact,  all  tliese  difiiculties  disapjDear,  or  at  least  assume  less
formidable  proportions,  if  we  accept  the  conclusion  to  which  analogy  and  the
facts  of  observation  alike  point  us,  to  wit,  that  we  have  been  too  hasty  in
defining  the  limits  of  consciousness. We  are  dealing,  as  has  been  said,  with


•Supplement.]  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  '?  331


two  parallel  series  of  phenomena,  brain  changes  and  states  of  consciousness.
It  has  for  some  time  been  recognised  that  the  physical  chain  is  complete
and  continuous.  Yet  we  seem  willing  to  believe  in  the  mental  chain  as
fragmentary.  We  talk  of  the  stream  of  consciousness  :  we  suffer  ourselves
to  resolve  it  into  a  series  of  detached  pools.  Unless  we  are  prepared  to
admit  that  consciousness  is  simply  a  bye-product  of  cerebral  activity,  it  is
difficult  to  account  for  its  existence  at  all,  except  on  the  supposition  that  it  is
continuous.  If  consciousness  really  disappears  periodically — in  sleep,  for
instance,  or  coma — how  can  it  ever  arise  again  de  novo,  if  we  repudiate  the
explanation  of  it  .as  a  secretion  of  the  brain-cells  ?  But  if  we  admit  what
facts  of  observation  also  seem  to  indicate,  the  absolute  continuity  of  con-
sciousness :  if  we  abolish  the  old  distinction  between  conscious  and  uncon-
scious, and  substitute,  to  borrow  a  phrase  of  Mr.  Lang's,  conscious  cmd  not-so
conscious,  we  shall  find  the  phenomena  intelligible.  We  have  been,  perhaps,
at  fault  in  our  interrogation  of  consciousness.  A  more  patient  and  searcliing
scrutiny  would  have  brought  to  light  much  that  has  hitherto  escaped  our
notice.  The  strong  light  is  focussed,  it  is  true,  only  on  the  objects  of
immediate  interest :  but  outside  the  brilliant  circle  which  illumines  our  every-
day life  may  be  discerned  dim  images,  growing  ever  fainter  and  fainter,  but
still  recognisable.  Amongst  such  dim  shapes,  seen  momentarily  and  then
forgotten,  are  the  dreams  which  we  faintly  recall  on  our  first  waking,
fragments  of  half-heard  conversations,  the  actions  which  we  class  as  habitual
or  automatic.  We  may  recognise,  as  fully  as  Mr.  Pierce  does,  that  these
actions  are  prepared,  and  these  images  recorded,  automatically — that  is,  by
lower  members  of  the  cerebral  hierarchy,  acting  without  direct  reference  to
or  express  mandate  from  the  central  government ;  but  nevertheless  in  strict
subordination  to  their  sovereign  as  responsible  ministers  of  a  constitutional
monarchy.  To  admit  thus  much,  and  yet  to  recognise  that  these  actions  are
accompanied  by  some  degree  of  consciousness,  is  not  to  countenance  anarchy
or  even  to  connive  at  dual  control.

In  brief,  to  vary  the  metaphor,  since  it  is  only  by  metaphors  that  we
can  reason  at  all  in  such  matters,  it  would  seem  that  the  hypnotic  ti'ance
and  other  forms  of  the  secondary  consciousness  simply  open  the  door  and
admit  the  light  to  our  psychological  lumber-room.  The  pressure  upon  the
area  of  our  working  consciousness  is  great,  and  its  capacity  limited.  As  a
result  whole  classes  of  ideas  and  sensations  get  crowded  out.  In  the  long
ascent  from  the  amoeba  we  may  suppose  that  group  after  group  of  simj^le  sensa-
tions fell  back  into  the  unconscious  or  the  "not  so  conscious,"  as  their  place
was  required  by  the  more  complex  images  called  into  existence  by  the  chang-
ing environment.  Even  in  the  lifetime  of  the  individual  the  thoughts  and
memories  of  childhood  and  youth  are  gradually  thrust  into  that  twilight  by
the  urgent  afiairs  of  our  maturer  life.  Year  by  year  sensations  once  vivid
grow  fainter  and  finally  pass  unregarded.  New  forms  of  activity  are  practised
with  anxious  care,  and  repeated  until  use  has  made  them  familiar,  and  ulti-
mately cease  to  require  an  express  mandate  from  the  sovereign  power  for  their
performance.  It  is  then  of  this  psychological  lumber-room  that  the  crystal  and
the  hypnotist's  command  throw  open  the  door.  It  by  no  means  follows  from
the  fact  that  the  furniture  thus  revealed  has  been  gradually  rejected  by  the
growing  consciousness,  that  it  is  of  little  value. The  lumber-rooins  of  our


332


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


grandfathers  and  grandmothers  would  often  have  been  found,  one  imagines,  tO'
contain  Queen  Anne  sideboards,  Sheraton  tables,  Chippendale  chairs,  and  many
other  things  of  higher  use  and  greater  beauty  than  the  veneered  monstrosi-
ties with  which  their  possessors  had  filled  the  places  left  vacant.  So  in  the
lumber-room  of  memory  we  may  find  much  that  we  would  gladly  see  furbishedl
up  and  brought  into  the  daylight  again — forgotten  scenes,  neglected  ideals,,
faith  grown  dusty  from  disuse.  Sometimes  we  may  find  there  a  "  Wild
Duck  Attic  " — the  hidden  romance  of  a  life-time.  It  is  likely  enough  that
the  hap-hazard  process  of  selection  which  the  contents  of  our  consciousness-
have  undergone  causes  the  loss  of  much  that  we  would  not  willingly  let  pass^
away.  When  the  nature  of  the  process  and  the  results  which  attend  it  are
more  clearly  recognised,  we  may  find  it  possible  to  recover  something  of  this,
so-called  lumber  from  oblivion,  and  thus  enlarge  and  enrich  our  woi'k-a-day
selves.  But  as  yet  we  seem  to  have  found  in  the  subliminal  consciousness  nO'
certain  indication  of  any  knowledge  or  faculties  which  have  not  at  some  tim&
played  a  part  in  the  primary  field.  We  come  across  memories  of  childhood,
and  many  old  forgotten  things  ;  we  come  across  traces  of  long  lost  but  once
serviceable  faculties— telepathy,  sense  of  time,  of  direction,  of  weight ;  w&
acquire  partial  control  over  bodily  functions — digestion,  circulation,  and  the'
like — which  civilised  man  has  learned  to  acquiesce  in  as  beyond  his  guidance.
But  in  all  this  we  only  resume  possession  of  our  own.  And  I  submit  that
we  have  as  yet  no  sufficient  evidence  of  anything  beyond  that.  The
subliminal  consciousness  presents  to  us — if  we  can  read  it  right— an  epitome
of  our  own  past.  It  gives  us  hope  and  help  for  the  future,  not,  on  a  sober-
interpretation  of  the  facts,  by  holding  out  the  promise  of  transcendental
faculties,  but  by  showing  us  what  we  have  once  had,  and  have  not  yet
wholly  lost.

Fkank  Podmore.


General  Meeting.


333


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETING.


The  75th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall,  on  Friday,  October  11th,  at  8.30  p.m.;  Professor
SiDGWiCK  in  the  chair.

Statements  were  made  by  the  Chairman,  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  Mr.
Myers  as  to  the  results  of  a  series  of  experiments  made  at  Cambridge
with  an  Italian  "  medium,"  Eusapia  Paladino.  The  investigators
were  unanimously  of  opinion  that  systematic  trickery  had  been  used
throughout  the  whole  series  of  experiments  at  Cambridge,  and  that
there  was  no  adequate  reason  for  supposing  that  any  other  cause  was
required  to  explain  the  phenomena  that  had  there  occurred.

Dr.  Hodgson  read  part  of  a  paper  on  "  Recent  Phenomena  of
Trance  observed  through  Mrs.  Piper,"  which  it  is  hoped  to  publish
in  full  in  the  next  number  of  the  Proceedings.


334


F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers.


I.

THE SUBLIMINAL  SELF.
By  E.  W.  H.  Myers.


Chapter  VIII.
The  Relation  op  Supernormal  Phenomena  to  Time  ; —
Retrocognition.


In  a  series  of  chapters  dealing  with  the  existence  and  faculties  of  a
Subliminal  Self, — a  part  of  our  mind  or  faculty  which  lies  below  the
threshold  of  our  ordinary  consciousness, — I  have  called  attention  to
many  facts  which  indicate  that  we  are  in  reality  beings  of  wider  scope
and  deeper  powers  than  we  habitually  suppose.  Reviewing  almost
every  known  group  of  supernormal  phenomena  in  turn,  I  have  tried  to
show  that  this  submerged  faculty  has  much  to  do  with  the  perception
or  production  of  them  all.

There  remain,  however,  two  considerable  groups  of  phenomena
which  in  this  connexion  I  have  hardly  yet  touched.  One  of  these
groups  consists  of  physical  phenomena,  such  as  have  been  described  in
these  Proceedings  especially  in  connection  with  the  late  Mr.  Stainton
Moses.  Their  relation  to  man's  subliminal  faculty  must  be  reserved  for
future  discussion.  There  remains  that  varied  group  of  incidents  which
raise  the  question  of  the  relation  to  Thne  borne  by  these  hidden
powers  which  in  other  ways  have  shown  themselves  so  far-reaching  and
flexible.  I  have  indeed  already  touched  the  margin  of  this  subject  in
a  chapter  on  "  Hypermnesic  Dreams"  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII).  And
a  more  direct  attack  on  the  problem  has  been  made  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
who  published  about  six  years  ago  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.)  a  paper  "On
the  Evidence  for  Premonitions."

That  paper  contained  a  collection  of  the  best  cases  of  apparent
premonition  which  we  had  received  up  to  that  time,  during  six  years
of  enquiry  ;  with  a  discussion  of  those  soui'ces  of  error,  such  as  illusion
of  memory  and  accidental  coincidence,  which  need  to  be  fully  con-
sidered before  we  can  even  pi'ovisionally  believe  that  anything  so
apparently  inexplicable  as  a  real  prefigurement  of  the  future  has  in
reality  occurred.  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  cases  (some  thirty  in  number)  were
in  her  judgment  (with  which  I  agreed)  inadequate  to  establish  so
strange  a  conclusion. "We  cannot,  I  think,"  she  says,  p.  353,  "demand


The  S'lMiniinal  Self.


335


that  the  possibility  of  supernormal  prevision  should  be  accepted  even
as  a  working  hypothesis  by  the  scientific  world,  as  I  myself  consider
that  telepathy  ought  to  be  accepted.  Still,  there  is  enough  evidence  to
make  us  think  about  it ;  and  one  advantage  of  having  a  society  like
ours  is  to  bring  home  to  people  the  importance  of  observing  and  record-
ing at  once  facts  bearing  on  such  subjects,  and  to  supply  a  centre  where
such  records  can  be  kept."

Mrs.  Sidgwick's  discussion  has  been  effective  in  the  direction
desired  ;  and  at  least  double  the  amount  of  evidence  of  this  type
which  our  society  had  amassed  during  the  six  years  which  preceded
that  paper  has  been  sent  to  us,  or  printed  elsewhere,  during  the
seven  years  which  have  followed  it.  On  this  ground  alone  the  time
has  plainly  come  for  another  stock-taking  ; — which  in  consequence
of  other  engagements  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  it  devolves  upon  me  to
attempt.^

The  evidence,  I  say,  has  grown  in  the  way  which  was  to  be  expected
if  precognition  were — and  hardly  unless  it  were — a  true  fact  in
nature.  And  at  the  same  time  the  whole  question  has  gradually
assumed  a  new  aspect.  In  the  earlier  years  of  our  research  the
evidence  for  precognition  was  entirely  divorced  from  experiments  ;
was  derived  from  sources  almost  wholly  separate  from  our  sources  of
evidence  to  other  supernormal  phenomena ;  and  even  had  it  bulked
large  enough  for  acceptance  on  its  own  merits,  would  in  its  nature
and  scope  have  found  no  manifest  link  with  other  results  of  our
enquiry.

In  each  of  these  three  respects  there  has  been  an  improvement  in
the  situation.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  now  a  beginning — it  is  not
yet  more — of  actual  experiment  in  this  direction,  from  which  experi-
ment seemed  wholly  excluded.  In  place  of  the  spontaneous,  confused,
imperfectly  remembered  dreams  which  still  form  the  main  bulk  of
our  evidence  for  precognition,  we  are  now  sometimes  able  to  substitute
those  voluntary,  externalised,  and  easily  recordable  visions  which
constitute  the  "  crystal  pictures  "  to  which  attention  has  begun  to
be  directed,  and  which  include  a  small  percentage  of  precognitive
scenes.

As  I  have  often  urged,  the  first  discovery  of  an  actual  method  of
experiment — however  difiicult  and  uncertain — in  such  an  enquiry  as
this  brings  it  at  once  out  of  a  region  where  we  can  never  count  on
advance  into  a  region  where,  if  sufficient  diligence  be  used,  progress
must  in  time  follow.

1 1  shall  assume  that  the  reader  is  familiar  not  only  with  the  cases,  but  with  the
evidential  criticisms  in  the  article  referred  to.  I  am  treating  the  subject  in  a
somewhat  different  manner  ;  but  those  criticisms  of  course  continue  to  apply  equally
to  the  cases  which  I  shall  quote.

2  c  2


336


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


In  the  second  place,  the  lapse  of  years  has  now  allowed  us  to
observe  with  some  continuity  the  experiences  of  a  good  many
informants ;  and  in  most  cases  we  have  found  that  where  there  is
frequent  telepathy  or  clairvoyance,  there  is  pretty  sure  also  to  be  some
anomaly  in  the  time-relations  of  the  phenomena  which  no  simple
formula  (such  as  a  supposed  latency  of  telepathic  impressions)  will
serve  to  explain.  Our  living  sources,  that  is  to  say,  of  telepathic  and
of  precognitive  evidence  are  now  in  many  cases  the  same.

And  thirdly,  as  we  get  some  further  glimpse  into  the  laws  which
underlie  our  vaiied  phenomena,  we  see  more  clearly  that  retrocognition
and  precognition —  supernormal  knowledge  of  Past  and  Future — cannot
safely  be  set  aside  as  isolated  problems  ; — as  fortresses  which  we  may
leave  behind  us  unattacked  as  we  advance  over  our  newly  conquered
realm.  On  the  contrary,  our  work  tends  to  become  more  and  more
emphatically  an  exploration  of  facxdty ; — not  merely  a  collection  of
evidence  to  particular  occurrences,  but  a  following  out  of  every  clue
which  may  lead  to  knowledge  of  what  is  actually  going  on  beneath  the
threshold  while  certain  resulting  phenomena  are  showing  themselves
above  it.  We  must  search  for  the  ncitural  groups  into  which  our  cases
fall ;  contenting  ourselves  no  longer  with  the  first  obvious  lines  of
classification.

On  no  side,  then,  may  we  leave  supernormal  phenomena  unattacked.
We  must  not  take  for  granted  their  relation  to  any  great  category  of
human  thought.  Their  relation  to  time  is  as  unknown  to  us  a  p)riori
as  is  their  relation  to  space  or  to  physical  causation.  Their  relation  to
space,  indeed,  was  necessarily  our  first  subject  of  enquiry.  Our  first
task  was  to  prove  that  space  is  bridged  by  some  iovm  of  mental  trans-
mission which  no  known  laws  will  explain.  Into  this  enquiry  time
only  entered  in  so  far  as  it  was  needful  to  prove  temporal  coincidence,
in  order  to  prove  causal  connexion,  between  the  event  in  one  place  and
its  spiritual  repercussion  in  another.

And  could  our  enquiry  have  been  arrested  here  there  would  be  a
comparative  simplicity  even  in  our  novel  conclusions.  In  a  universe
where  instantaneous  gravitation  operates  unexplained, — where  a  world
of  ether  coexists  with  a  world  of  matter, — men's  minds  must  needs  have
a  certain  openness  to  other  mysterious  transmissions ;  must  be  ready  to
conceive  other  invisible  environments  or  co-existences,  and  in  a  sense
to  sit  loose  to  the  conception  of  Space,  regai'ded  as  an  obstacle  to
communication  or  cognition.  A  similar  emancipation  from  the
limitations  of  Time  is  more  difficult.  We  can,  of  course,  imagine
increased  powers  of  remembering  the  Past,  of  inferring  the  Future.
Bub  we  can  hardly  conceive  the  Past  revived,  save  in  some  mind  which
has  directly  observed  it.  And  to  imagine  the  Future  as  known,  except
by  inference  and  contingently,  to  any  mind  whatever  is  to  induce  at


The  Subliminal  Self.


337


once  that  iron  collision  between  Free  Will,  and  "Fixed  Fate,  Fore-
knowledge absolute,"  from  which  no  sparks  of  light  have  ever  yet  been
struck.  Still  more  unwelcome  is  the  further  view  that  the  so-called
Future  actually  already  exists  ;  and  that  apparent  time-progression  is
a  subjective  human  sensation,  and  not  inherent  in  the  universe  as  that
exists  in  an  Infinite  Mind.

Nor  shall  we  in  fact  find  it  necessary  to  insist  upon  any  very
revolutionary  line  of  explanation.  There  is  one  analogy  which  will
meet  most  of  our  evidence  (although  not  all),  and  to  which  we  shall
repeatedly  recur  as  our  simplest  guide.  As  is  the  memory  and  the
foresight  of  a  child  to  that  of  a  man,  even  such,  I  shall  suggest,  is  the
memory  and  the  foresight  of  the  man's  supraliminal  self  as  compared
to  the  retrocognition  and  the  precognition  exercised  by  an  intelligence
unrestrained  by  sensory  limits  ; — whether  that  intelligence  belong  to
the  man's  own  subliminal  self,  or  to  some  unembodied  spirit.  I  main-
tain that  in  this  thesis  there  is  nothing  incredible  ; — nay,  that  it  is  the
necessary  corollary  of  belief  in  the  existence  anywhere  of  any  extension
of  the  powers  which  we  habitually  exercise.

If  there  is  a  transcendental  world  at  all  there  is  a  transcendental
view  of  Past  and  Future  fuller  and  farther-reaching  than  the  empirical;
and  in  that  view  we  may  ourselves  to  some  extent  participate,  either
directly,  as  being  ourselves  denizens  all  along  of  the  transcendental
world,  or  indirectly,  as  receiving  intimations  from  spirits  from  whom
the  shadow  in  which  our  own  spirits  are  "  half  lost "  has  melted
away.

This  I  believe  to  be  the  central  reflection  to  which  the  study  of
supernormal  knowledge  of  Past  and  Future  at  present  points  us  ;  and
I  shall  be  well  satisfied  if  the  evidence  which  I  shall  adduce  should
persuade  the  reader  that  in  some  undefined  fashion  we  share  at
moments  in  this  transcendental  purview.  As  to  the  precise  manner  in
which  we  share  it,  the  difliculties  are  just  those  which  meet  us  when,  in
any  other  group  of  our  phenomena,  we  try  to  distinguish  between  the
activity  of  the  automatist's  own  spirit,  and  of  other  spirits,  embodied
or  unembodied,  and  perhaps  also  of  a  World-Soul  or  of  Intelligences
above  anthropomorphic  personification.  But  this  uncertainty  will  be  a
secondaiy  matter  ;  since  our  first  business  in  this  little-explored  region
will  be  simply  to  collect  trustworthy  experiments,  well-evidenced
narratives,  and  to  cement  them  together  with  only  just  so  much  of
theoretic  mortar  as  may  enable  them  to  be  surveyed  without  needless
confusion.

Such  will  be  my  course  in  the  two  chapters  which  follow,  in  which
I  shall  in  the  first  place  briefly  describe  the  general  character  of  our
evidence  for  retrocognition  and  precognition ;  shall  then  cite  the
narratives ;  and  shall  finally  give  a  diagrammatic  and  provisional


338


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


view  of  what  I  conceive  to  be  their  relations  to  each  other,  and  to
other  supernormal  facts.

The  general  characteristic,  then,  of  these  occurrences  is  to  show  us
fragments  of  knowledge  coming  to  us  in  obscure  and  often  symbolical
ways,  and  extending  over  a  wider  tract  of  time  than  any  faculty
known  to  us  can  be  stretched  to  cover.  On  the  one  side  there  is
retrocoynition,  or  knowledge  of  the  past,  extending  back  beyond  the
reach  of  our  ordinary  memory  ;  on  the  other  side  there  is  precognition,
or  knowledge  of  the  future,  extending  onwards  beyond  the  scope  of
our  ordinary  inference.

In  each  direction,  indeed,  there  are  certain  landmarks  ;  the  regres-
sion and  the  progression  alike  seem  to  develop  gradually,  and  to  follow
lines  which  we  can  learn  to  recognise.  In  the  direction  of  the  Past  we
begin  with  hypermnesia;  our  first  step  lies  in  the  conception  that  what
has  once  been  presented  to  our  sensory  field,  although  never  gathered
into  what  we  deem  our  conscious  perception,  may  nevertheless  have
been  perceived  and  retained  by  the  subliminal  self.  It  is  partly
through  dream  and  partly  by  automatic  artifices  that  this  fact  is
realised ;  and  those  same  dreams,  those  same  artifices  of  script  or  vision,
presently  carry  us  a  step  further,  and  reveal  a  knowledge  which  must
have  come  from  the  memories  of  other  living  persons,  or  (as  I  hold)
of  departed  spirits.  Then  in  another  direction  a  less  direct  source  of
knowledge  opens  out ;  living  oi'ganisms,  our  own  or  others',  disclose
(in  ways  unknown  to  biology)  the  history  implicate  in  their  structure  ;
objects  which  have  been  in  contact  with  organisms  preserve  their
trace  ;  and  it  sometimes  seems  as  though  even  inorganic  nature  could
still  be  made,  so  to  say,  luminescent  with  the  age-long  story  of  its
past.  Or  it  may  even  be  that  some  retrocognitive  picture  is  presented
which  we  may  discover  to  be  veracious,  but  with  which  we  can  discern
no  spiritual  or  material  link  ;  as  though  a  page  of  the  cosmic  record
had  been  opened  to  us  at  random,  and  had  closed  again  without  sign
or  clue.

And  next  let  us  look  forward  into  the  Future  ; — across  that  im-
palpable, almost  imaginary  line  of  the  Present  Moment,  which  for  us  is
the  greatest  reality  of  all.  Naturally  enough,  the  first  time-confusion
which  we  find  is  a  confusion  aflfecting  that  present  moment  itself  ;
namely,  that  sensation  of  already  remembering  what  is  happening  or  is
just  about  to  happen  to  which  some  authors  have  applied  the  too  wide
term  paramnesia,  but  for  which  promnesia  seems  a  more  exact  and
distinctive  name.  Next  we  have  the  wide  range  of  suggestive  phe-
nomena, where  the  subliminal  self  possesses  knowledge  of  the  future
unshai'ed  by  the  supraliminal ;  since  the  subliminal  self  has  in  fact
wound  up  the  organism  to  sti'ike  a  given  note  at  a  given  hour.
Self-suggestion  in  turn  merges  into  organic  prevision ; where  the


The  Subliminal  Self.


339


subliminal  self  foresees  what  will  happen — not  in  consequence  of  any
determining  effort  of  its  own,  but  by  virtue  of  its  deeper  knowledge
of  the  organism  and  of  the  changes  which  that  organism  must  by
physiological  laws  undergo.  This  organic  2}'>'evision  may  lead  us  far;
but  as  it  grows  more  distant  and  complex,  involving  more  and  more
of  a  man's  future  environment,  as  well  as  of  his  future  organic  histo7-y,
it  merges  into  a  form  of  precognition  which  cannot  depend  on  insight
into  material  bodies  alone.

We  now  proceed,  that  is  to  say,  along  a  line  which  is  an
extension  of  ordinary  intellectual  inference.  First  comes  hyperces-
thetic  inference ; — that  enlarged  span  of  anticipation  which  acuter
sensory  impressions  permit ;  as  a  sensitive  patient  will  be  able  to
predict  her  doctor's  visit  when  his  step  is  merely  heard  in  the
street,  although  others  cannot  recognise  that  step  until  it  is  close
to  the  bedroom  door.  Then  comes  an  obscure  point  where  this
hypersesthesia  seems  to  pass  into  telsesthesia  ; — where  sensory  per-
ception seems  to  cease,  and  supersensory,  telepathic,  or  clairvoyant
perception  to  begin.

Thus  to  take  the  common  instance  of  auditory  hypersesthesia
alluded  to  above.  Lady  Eardley,  (a  witness  already  cited),  tells  me, —
and  her  husband,  Commander  de  "Idousada,  confirms  to  me  her
recollection, — that  for  some  weeks,  when  she  was  in  very  weak  health,
and  also  much  distressed  by  a  business  matter,  she  distinguished  from
her  London  bedroom  the  special  sound  which  a  heavy  letter  made  in
falling  into  the  letter  box.^  I  have  listened  from  the  same  room,  and
cannot  myself  hear  any  sound  of  letters  falling  in.  But  Lady
Eardley  also  knew,  she  says,  that  these  heavy  letters,  or  certain  among
t\\exa.,weve,  laivyers'  letters;  and  thinks  that  she  did  not  discern  this
by  hearing  alone.  No  notes  wei'e  taken  at  the  time,  (some  years
ago),  and  the  account,  thei-efore,  is  not  evidential ;  but  it  illusti'ates
the  confused  percipience  which  marks  the  line  between  hypersesthesia
and  telsesthesia,  when  impressions  are  referred  to  a  sensory  channel
through  which  they  may  possibly  have  not  really  arrived.  Some
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  experiments  {Proceedings  Vol.  XI.,  p.  184  ifec),
illustrate  the  same  form  of  confusion.

Well  then,  when  we  have  definitely  passed  from  the  sensory  to  the
transcendental  mode  of  perception,  it  is  probable  that  our  power  of
inference  as  to  the  futvire  will  be  greatly  enlarged.  We  cannot,
indeed,  guess  how  far  this  enlargement  will  extend.  There  is  nothing
absolutely  to  forbid  us  to  regai'd  all  precognitions  as  the  result  of
this  wider  outlook  of  the  subliminal  self.

1  Indications  of  a  similar  hyperaesthesia  were  observed  by  Dr.  Hodgson  with
Miss  Mollie  Fancher  ; — a  sensitive  well-known  in  America.


340


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Nor  shall  I  attempt  to  draw  the  line  at  which  this  telsesthetic  in-
ference ceases.  If  I  do  still  look  further  for  other  sources  of  precogni-
tion, this  is  partly  because  in  some  cases  I  think  that  there  is  actual
evidence  that  the  precognition  comes  from  a  disembodied  intelligence;
and  partly  also  on  the  wider  ground  that  I  distrust  all  explanations
which  give  to  man,  embodied  or  disembodied,  any  monopoly  of  the
transcendental  world.  The  simplicity  of  our  instinctive  anthropo-
morphism is  not  the  simplicity  of  truth it  is  no  more  so,  when  we
are  thus  dealing  with  intelligences  which  may  be  far  above  our  ken,
than  when  the  savage  ascribes  to  a  man-like  demon  the  movements
and  influences  of  gross  inanimate  things.

But  lirst,  as  I  have  said,  I  ascribe  some  precognitions  to  the
reasoned  foresight  of  disembodied  spirits,  just  as  I  ascribe  some  retro-
cognitions  to  their  surviving  memory.  I  have  tried  in  an  earlier  paper
to  show  ground  for  believing  that  some  spirits  have  a  continued
knowledge  of  some  earthly  affairs  ;  and  if  they  have  such  knowledge,
and  can  show  us  that  they  have  it,  they  may  presumably  reveal  to  us
also  their  not  infallible  inferences  from  what  they  know.

Thus  far  I  have  been  indicating  roads  along  which  I  fancy  that
believers  in  any  kind  of  transcendental  faculty  will  some  day  be  forced
to  travel.  What  follows  is  a  speculation,  or  suspicion,  which  no
records  or  experiments  of  ours  can  prove,  but  which  seems  to  me  to
loom  behind  them  all.  I  suspect,  then,  that  it  is  not  by  wider  purview,
wiser  inference  alone,  that  finite  minds,  in  the  body  or  out  of  it,  have
attained  to  knowledge  of  what  yet  must  be.  I  imagine  that  the
Continuity  of  the  Universe  is  complete  ;  and  that  therefore  the
hierarchy  of  intelligences  between  our  minds  and  the  World-Soul  is
infinite  ;  and  that  somewhere  in  that  ascent  a  point  is  reached
where  our  conception  of  time  loses  its  accustomed  meaning.  To
Plato's  "  Spectator  of  all  Time  and  of  all  Existence  "  there  may  be
no  barrier  between  Then  and  Now.  The  idea,  of  course,  is  familiar
enough  to  philosophical  speculation.  The  novelty  is  that  this,  with
many  other  ideas  which  have  hitherto  floated  gaseously  inter  apices
philosophic^,  like  helium  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  sun,  may  now
conceivaljly  be  tested  in  earthly  laboratories  and  used  as  a  working
explanation  for  undeniable  facts.  For  the  moment  I  say  no  more  ;  the
reader  will  judge  with  the  cases  before  him  whether  amid  contingent
prefigurements  we  find  something  of  inevitable  ;  or  among  individual-
ised inferences  some  trace  of  a  Cosmic  Mind.

We  shall  have  to  set  forth  evidence  illustrative  of  each  of  these
main  lines  of  speculation  in  turn.  But  before  we  embark  definitely
on  either  our  backward  or  our  forward  survey,  we  are  met  by  a  familiar
psychological  puzzle,  of  no  great  evidential  significance,  but  yet  afford-


Tlie  Subliminal  Self.


341


ing  a  useful  introduction  to  further  problems.  I  allude  to  the  sensation,
much  discussed  in  France  of  late,  of  the  deja  vu ;  the  feeling  which
many  men  have  experienced,  "  I  have  lived  through  all  this  before,  and
I  know  what  will  hajDpen  this  next  minute.

Ordinary  explanations  of  promnesia  (as  I  shall  call  this  sensation)
follow  two  main  types.

1.  The  reminiscence  is  a  true  one,  depending  (n)  on  a  past  waking-
experience,  or  (6)  on  a  past  dream  which  some  similarity  in  circum-
stances recalls  to  memory.

2.  The  reminiscence  is  illusory,  depending  (a)  on  a  kind  of  malady
of  perception  or  attention  affecting  the  wliole  personality,  or  (6)  on
some  sort  of  splitting  of  the  personality,  as,  for  instance,  on  asynchron-
ism  of  cerebral  hemispheres,  etc,

1  (a).  It  is  probable  that  most  of  my  readei'S  share  the  belief
which  was  my  own  so  long  as  I  argued  from  my  personal  promnesic
sensations  in  boyhood ;  namely,  that  a  confused  recollection  of
actual  past  events  gave  rise  to  the  feeling  that  I  knew  what  was
going  to  happen.  This  view  was  supported  by  the  triviality  of  the
occasions  when  I  had  the  feeling,  as  in  the  course  of  some  familiar
game  or  talk.  Until  one  learns  how  small  a  fraction  of  human
sensation  or  emotion  one's  own  capacity  comprehends,  one  is  apt  to
think  that  the  strongest  records  of  what  others  feel  are  mere
exaggerated  descriptions  of  something  one  has  felt  oneself.  And
often,  after  all,  this  is  true  ;  and  probably  a  large  proportion  of
promnesic  experiences  have  this  simple  source.

1  (5).  It is obviously possible  also that a suddenly  evoked
—  reminiscence  of  a  past  dream  may  give  rise  to  the  feeling  of  "  deja  vu"

— of  having  witnessed  the  actual  scene  at  some  indefinite  time  before.
If  such  coincidence  with  a  previous  dream  were  a  merely  casual  one,
this  heading  would  be  a  mere  variety  of  1  {a).  The  really  important
question — to  which  we  must  presently  return — is  whether  the  con-
nexion may  be  other  than  casual,  whether  the  dreamer  may  in  some
supernormal  way  have  visited  the  scene,  or  anticipated  the  experience,
which  he  was  destined  afterwards  to  behold  or  to  undergo.

2  (a).  The  hypothesis  of  some  kind  of  interruption  or  indecision  in
the  acts  of  perception  and  attention,  giving  rise  to  a  confused  location

^  It  seems  to  me  undesirable  to  give  to  this  phenomenon  the  name  paramnesia,
as  has  been  commonly  done  of  late.  The  word  paramnesia  should  mean  simply
"  erroneous  or  morbid  memory," — as  paresthesia  and  parageusia  (for  instance)  mean
erroneous  or  morbid  sensation  or  taste.  It  is  inconvenient  to  try  to  narrow  a  word  of
this  general  type  to  connote  oiie  small  group  of  phenomena ;  not  to  say  that  it  is
begging  the  question  to  assume  that  those  phenomena  are  in  any  way  morbid.  The
paradoxical  term  "  promnesia," — memory  beforehand—  seems  to  me  tn  express  unmis-
takably the  paradoxical  sensation  under  review, — and  to  express  nothing  more.


342


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


in  time  of  the  object  perceived,  has  been  worked  out  in  various-
ways,  all  of  which  seem  purely  hypothetical. ^  Such  confusions  may
exist,  but  they  can  in  any  case  explain  only  the  slighter  and  moment-
ary forms  of  promnesia,  not  those  cases  where  the  sensation  of  memory
becomes  definite  enough  to  attract  to  it  the  percipient's  full  and
deliberate  attention.

2  (6).  The  old  idea  of  a  lack  of  precise  concordance  between  the
perceptions  of  the  two  cerebral  hemispheres  seems  to  be  scouted  on
the  Continent,  but  is  still  occasionally  revived  in  England.  (See  Brain,
Winter  number,  1895.)  I  cannot  myself  see  how  a  functional
asynchronism  of  this  sort  can  be  proved  except  by  indications  of  a
definitely  right-handed  or  left-handed  character — such  as  mirror-
writing — none  of  which  have,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  as  yet  noted  in
direct  connection  with  promnesia.  It  would  not,  indeed,  surprise  me
if  they  wei'e  so  observed,  since  I  have  in  an  earlier  paper,  (Proceedings,
Vol.  III.,  p.  1),  collected  some  indications  that  the  subliminal  self
sometimes  manifests  itself  preferentially  through  the  right  or  less-used
hemisphere ;  and  since  I  am  also  disposed  to  think,  (as  I  must  now
explain),  that  one  among  many  causes  of  promnesia  may  lie  in  a
double  perception  of  the  present  moment  by  the  subliminal  and  the
supraliminal  self.  ■  ■

This  view,  although  it  must  inevitably  remain  a  conjecture  like  the
rest,  rests  at  any  rate  upon  a  plausible  deduction  from  what  I  regard  as
the  facts  of  subliminal  hyperesthesia,  hypermnesia,  teltesthesia.  If  the
subliminal  self  notes  and  remembers  more  than  the  supi'aliminal,
its  process  of  perception  must  be  in  some  way  different  and  superior,
even  when  concerned  with  objects  within  the  ordinary  sensory  field.
And  this  difference  in  mode  of  perception  may  sometimes  involve  a
duplication  or  confusion  of  the  sense  of  time.

To  understand  this  let  us  endeavour  to  realise  the  apparently
simple,  but  really  complex  notion  of  the  actual  present  moment.

The  true  Present  is  an  evanescent,  an  infinitesimal  thing.  It  is
the  imaginary  meeting-point  between  two  eternities ;  and  the  more
finely  we  divide  Time  the  less  is  left  which  is  not  Past  or  Future.  But
for  us  men  the  "specious  present," as  it  has  been  well  called,  is  a  solid
"  duration-block,"  consisting  of  a  small  fragment  of  Time  Past  ^jZi6S  a
still  smaller  fragment  of  indistinguishably  vivid  anticipation  of  Time
Future  ; — the  length  and  context  of  the  duration-block  being  con-
ditioned for  each  of  us  by  our  several  organisms.

Let  me  consider  in  what  ways  this  "specious  present"  of  mine  is
obviously  defective.

'  See  various  papers  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  1894,  or  summarised  in  the
Atmee  Psycholo(jique  for  1895.


The  Siihliminal  Self.


343


In  the  first  place  I  observe  that  my  perception  of  the  actual
moment  is  always  retarded,  and  is  irregulai-ly  retarded  ;  so  that  it
is  both  in  arrear  as  a  whole  and  also  blurred  by  the  trails  or
prolongations  of  special  perceptions  which  are  still  more  in  arrear
than  the  rest.

In  the  second  place  I  observe  that  the  span  of  my  present, — my
protensive  span,  to  adopt  a  word  of  Hamilton's, — is  after  all  so  short,  in
spite  of  its  tardiness  and  its  blurring  trails,  that  the  actual  external
or  organic  event  of  the  instant  is  only  dimly  intelligible  to  me,  and
needs  to  be  perpetually  explained  by  memory  and  anticipation.  Let
us  consider  these  complaints  in  order.

1.  The  retardation  of  our  perception  of  the  content  of  the  actual
moment  by  the  necessary  journey  of  our  impressions  fi'om  end-organ
to  sensorium  is  matter  of  common  knowledge,  and  even  of  practical
inconvenience,  where,  as  in  astronomy,  exact  measurements  of  time
are  needed  and  "  personal  equations  "  have  to  be  allowed  for.

2.  Our  perception  is  irregularly  retarded,  not  only  by  the  variable
media  of  our  environment,  which  split  up  one  instantaneous  event  into
past,  present,  and  future  (as  when  I  recollect  the  lightning  and  antici-
pate the  thunder),  but  also  by  the  nature  of  our  nervous  system,  which
continues  the  heterogeneous  changeable  character  of  the  environment,
and  makes  perception  slower  at  some  moments  than  at  others,  and  at
some  peripheral  points  than  at  others, — so  that  a  tap  on  the  leg  appears
later  in  time  than  a  simultaneous  flash  in  the  eyes.

3.  Our  perception  is  blurred  by  the  reverberation  of  our  sense-
organs,  which,  having  been  stirred  into  one  special  thrill,  cannot
instantly  arrest  it  and  start  on  another.

4.  Our  protensive  span  suffices  us  under  familiar  conditions,  but  is
inadequate  in  sudden  crises.  The  presence  of  mind  which  then  becomes
so  important  means,  in  fact,  a  resolute  maintenance  of  the  protensive
span  of  the  specious  present,  so  that  the  immediate  past  may  be  firmly
realised  and  the  immediate  future  foreseen ;  in  place  of  the  mere
bewildered  instantaneous  consciousness  of  shock  to  which  the  present
is  then  apt  to  shrink. ^

Let  us  consider  in  a  simple  example  the  effect  of  all  these  weak-
nesses together  upon  our  perception  of  a  given  scene,  as  compared
with  what  that  perception  might  be,  were  it  direct  and  unhindered  by
organic  disabilities.  A  horse  leaps  a  fence,  and  goes  through  attitudes
ABODE,  with  sounds  corresponding  to  each  moment  of  movement
through  the  air.  Now  most  of  the  details  of  this  moving  scene, — the
separate  hairs  of  the  horse,  the  minor  noises, — lie  beyond  my  sensation
altogether.  What  I  do  perceive  is  a  general  effect,  irregularly  retarded.

1  On  all  this  see  Prof.  James'  Principles  of  Psychology,  Vol.  I.,  chaps.  XV.,  XVI.


344


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


When  the  horse  is  at  E  I  hccar  him  at  A  and  see  him  mainly  at  C ;  but
a  trail  of  vision  persisting  from  A  and  B  gives  me,  in  fact,  a  confused
dissolving  view  of  ABC,  modified  by  a  dim  but  irresistible  foresight
of  D.  Meantime  (let  us  say)  an  instantaneous  camera  photographs
the  horse  in  each  attitude,  and  thus  decomposes  my  dissolving  view
into  a  series  of  definite  successive  pictures.

Now  suppose,  for  argument's  sake,  that  while  my  supraliminal  self
is  looking  through  my  eyes,  my  subliminal  self  is  looking  through
the  camera  ;  and  that  when  the  horse  is  at  E  the  self  which  views
the  first  prospect  becomes  partially  aware  of  the  self  which  views  the
second;  somewhat  as  happens  in  "competition  of  visual  fields,"  when
one  looks  through  a  stereoscope  which  offers  a  differeiit  scene  to  right
and  left  eyes.  What  will  the  result  be  ?  When  the  horse  is  actually
at  E  I  shall,  as  before,  see  him  at  C ;  but  I  shall  have  also  an  impres-
sion that  I  have  seen  him  at  C  already, — and  that  I  know,  moreover,
that  he  will  pass  through  D  and  E, — up  to  the  point  at  which  the  sub-
liminal self  has  already  registered  the  pictures.

Now  this  exactly  corresponds  to  the  promnesic  sensation,  which,
along  with  the  impression  that  the  present  moment  has  been  traversed
already,  contains  the  impression  that  the  immediate  futui'e  has  been
lived  through  also,  and  is  already  known.  At  any  given  moment,  of
course,  the  subliminal  perception  would  be  only  a  fraction  of  a  second
in  advance  of  the  supraliminal  ;  but  the  coalescence  of  consciousnesses
might  last  for  some  time,  much  as  it  does  in  the  case  of  automatic
writing  or  other  automatisms.  This  explanation  would  not  apply  to
cases  where  the  subject  believes  himself  to  have  a  knowledge  of  facts
not  instantly  impending  ;  such  a  knowledge  of  a  place,  for  instance,  as
enables  him  to  guide  others  about  it,  or  such  a  knowledge  of  words  yet
unuttered  as  enables  him  to  forestall  them  by  speech  or  act.  Cases  of
that  kind,  though  sometimes  classed  with  promnesia,  really  present  a
different  problem,  and  will  be  considered  further  on.

In  the  meantime  I  can  perhaps  best  explain  what  has  been  said
aboveby  a  few  extracts  from  a  paper  by  M.  Lalande  (HevuePhilosopJdque,
Novembei',  1893),  in  which  that  psychologist,  who  seems  to  have  been
at  more  pains  than  any  one  else  as  yet  to  collect  lirst-hand  statements
as  to  promnesia,  comes  to  a  conclusion  essentially  the  same  as  that  to
which  the  facts  which  we  in  England  have  collected  seem  to  me  to
point.

Dealing  then  with  this  phenomenon,  M.  Lalande,  while  of  course
recognising  that  the  ordinary  explanations  will  cover  many  cases,  con-
siders nevertheless  that  we  often  have  here  a  supernormal  fact,  accom-
panied by  subjective  symptoms  such  as  trifling  errors  of  memory  do  not
produce.  The  feeling  is  said  to  be  sometimes  accompanied  by  a  dis-
tressing emotion  which  may  become  actual  terror. Among  the  phrases


The  Subliminal  Self.


345


used  are  "a  disquietude,"  "an  oppression  on  the  chest,"  "a  kind  of
vertigo."  Other  subjects  remark  that  the  feeling  is  like  that  of
nightmare,  and  gives  the  impression  of  a  world  other  than  that  in
which  we  live.  The  subjects  of  promnesia,  however,  do  not  seem  to  be
specially  morbid  or  nervous  persons  ;  the  main  fact  noticeable  about
them  being  that  they  have  often  also  experiences  of  veritable  telepathy
or  precognition.  I  translate,  with  slight  abridgement,  M.  Lalande's
principal  reflections, (loc.  cit.  p.  495.)

"  It  is  possible  in  the  first  place  that  paramnesia  may  be  produced  by
that  singular  and  almost  indefinite  acceleration  which  thought  occasionally
assumes.  The  striking  examples  quoted  by  M.  Taine  place  beyond  doubt
the  capacity  of  the  human  spirit  to  represent  to  itself  in  a  few  seconds  series
of  conscious  states  whose  ordinary  subjective  duration  would  occupy  several
hours.  On  the  other  hand  we  must  remember  that  we  are  never  conscious  of
all  the  perceptions  which  we  experience  at  a  given  moment.  Compare  these
two  facts.  You  are  presented  with  a  new  landscape,  and  you  receive  thence
a  mass  of  images  which  your  intelligence  does  not  at  once  comprehend,  but
which  enter  therein  none  the  less,  like  an  instantaneous  photograph.  Sup-
pose then  a  distraction  of  the  tenth  of  a  second,  during  which  your  thoughts
fly  elsewhere,  and  rapidly  summarise  a  subjective  period  say  of  ten  or  fifteen
minutes  ; — what  will  happen  when  you  return  from  the  distraction  1  Tou
will  behold  and  recognise  the  scene  which  your  thought  quitted  for  a
moment,  but  you  will  not  refer  the  first  act  of  perception  to  its  right  place
in  time  ; — in  the  first  place  on  account  of  the  partially  unconscious  character
of  the  original  perception  ;  but  especially  on  account  of  the  apparent  length
of  the  moment  of  distraction.  The  second  perception  might  thus  easily
assume  that  form  of  spatial  prevision  which  it  wore  with  M.  Sch.  (who  feels
that  certain  things  ought  to  be  in  certain  places  in  a  room  really  seen  for  the
first  time,  and  on  looking  attentively  finds  that  these  things  are  there. )

"  But  something  more  is  needed  to  explain  prevision  in  time,  which
appears  to  be  real  according  to  the  evidence  quoted  above.  It  seems  that
between  simple  cases  of  paramnesia  and  sensations  called  telepathic,  there
exists  a  series  of  intermediate  cases,  which  connect  the  two  by  insensible
transitions.  Numerous  facts  accumulated  during  several  years  by  hypnotists,
doctors,  and  psychologists,  give  some  appearance  of  probability  to  the  existence
of  a  veiy  powerful  hypersesthesia,  which  is  almost  always  unconscious,  and
which  permits  objects  to  be  seen  at  a  distance,  or  under  quite  unusual
conditions.  This  second  sight  may  be  simply  an  excitation  of  the  senses
already  known,  or  it  may  arise,  as  has  often  been  suggested,  from  a  different
sensorium,  rudimentary  as  yet,  which  might  assist  sight  by  extending  it,  as
sight  assists  the  sense  of  touch.  It  is  unnecessary  for  the  present  question
to  decide  between  these  two  hypotheses  ;  either  would  do  equally  well.
I  shall  then  call  this  abnormal  and  unconscious  perception  "telepathy"
without  entering  on  the  C[uestion  of  its  cause.

"  But  if  it  is  admitted  that  by  accident  a  more  or  less  intense  excitement
of  the  mind  brings  it  into  play,  the  result  ought  really  to  be,  to  make  us  see
the  same  object  twice,  in  a  time  which  will  often  be  very  limited.  Thus  on
seeing  a  blow  coming  one  believes  one  feels  it  beforehand. Let  us  take  an


346


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


example  to  make  the  idea  clear  :  I  am  walking  with  a  friend  ;  he  is  thinking
a  sentence  which  he  is  about  to  utter.  A  telepathic  sensation  is  produced  and
I  jjerceive  clearly  the  inward  speech  in  which  he  has  thought  his  sentence.
But  this  perception  to  which  I  am  unaccustomed  remains  unnoticed  if  the
sentence  is  not  really  pronounced.  If  on  the  contrary  he  pronounces  it
immediately,  the  auditive  sensation  will  immediately  awake  in  the  hidden
depths  of  my  mind  the  same  perception  that  I  had  a  minute  ago  ;  I  shall
think  I  recognise  it,  or  rather  I  shall  really  recognise  it.  The  only  mistake
will  be  in  projecting  my  remembrance  into  a  more  or  less  far-off  past  in  order
to  explain  to  myself  its  confused  character,  which  belongs  only  to  its  origin.

' '  But  it  is  very  evident  that  this  special  sensation  would  be  likely  to
become  equally  apparent  under  the  influence  of  other  causes,  such  as  dream,
passion,  hypnotism,  and  perhaps  many  other  physiological  agents,  which
have  not  yet  been  remarked.  The  transitions  between  the  two  phenomena
would  thus  be  quite  natural.  Quite  natural  also  would  be  the  comparison
made  by  observers  between  paramnesic  prevision  and  a  straying  memory
just  "  on  the  tip  of  one's  tongue."  There  would  be  the  same  passage  from
unconsciousness  to  perfect  consciousness.  This  fact  also  would  be  explained,
that  very  often  persons,  who  experience  the  most  distinct  cases  of  paramnesia,
state  that  they  frequently  have  veridical  presentiments  also.  This  is  the  case

with  M.M.  L  ,  Bo  T, ,  amongst  observers  whom  we  have  quoted.

The  frequency  of  jjaramnesia  with  children  again  renders  the  existence  of
this  special  sensation  probable.  With  them  as  with  savages  the  senses
are  more  subtle  and  impressionable  than  with  developed  men.  Life
blunts  our  sensibility  little  by  little,  and  above  all,  crystallises  it  in  a  set
form.  The  organs  of  children  on  the  contrary,  more  supple  and  more  easily
modifiable,  respond  to  slight  actions  (movements)  to  which  our  intellectual
hardening  has  rendered  us  insensible."

The  following  case  illusti'ates  the  kind  of  incident  (familiar  enough
in  these  Proceedings)  which  M.  Lalande  finds  not  uncommon  in  the
experience  of  his  promnesics.

"  I  was  at  onetime  (says  his  informant)  the  pupil  of  Father  B.,  a  Jesuit,
with  whom  I  continued  to  correspond.  After  a  silence  of  eighteen  months,
I  felt  one  day  some  remorse,  and  I  wrote  him  a  letter  to  the  Jesuit  College  at
Dole,  where  he  was  Professor.  Shortly  afterwards  I  was  suddenly  awakened
in  the  middle  of  the  night  by  a  hand  placed  on  my  arm  ;  and  I  heard
the  voice  of  Father  B.  saying  to  me,  '  My  dear  friend,  I  am  no  longer  at
Dole  ;  I  am  professor  of  mathematics  at  the  College  of  Saint  Michel,  at
Saint-Etienne.'  I  lit  my  candle  and  looked  about  me  ;  I  saw  no  one,  and
nothing  unusual  ;  I  went  to  sleep  again,  supposing  that  it  had  been  a  dream.
Next  morning  I  received  a  letter  from  Father  B.,  beginning  with  the  very
phrase  which  I  had  heard  in  the  night.  I  was  absolutely  ignorant  that  he
had  changed  his  residence,  or  that  there  was  a  Jesuit  college  at  Saint-
Etienne. The  letter  gave  me  quite  a  shock.''

This  is  not  strictly  a  premonition,  as  the  letter  was  already  written
and  passing  through  the  post  {Proceedings,  "Vol.  V.,  p.  289);  and  its
occurrence  to  a  man  habitually  subject  to  promnesia  seems  to  point  to


The  Subliminal  Self.


347


telepathy  as  the  explanation  of  both  phenomena. Thus,  when  this

same  M.  J repeated  to  a  friend  (Lalande,  p.  488)  initial  phrases

yet  unuttered  of  speeches  in  Ferdinand  le  Noceur  which  he  had  never
heard  or  read,  he  may  have  derived  these  phrases  telepathically  from
the  minds  of  the  actors  awaiting  their  cues  to  strike  in.  Somewhat
similarly,  when  a  question  is  being  passed  down  a  class  a  boy  pre-
viously ignorant  of  the  answer  sometimes  catches  it  (it  is  said)  from  the
eager  (though  silent)  knowledge  of  the  boy  standing  just  below  him.
Such  little  incidents  are  hardly  capable  of  proof,  but  yet  are  worth
observation.

There  are  not,  however,  many  of  the  more  advanced  promnesic
cases  which  telepathy  would  explain.  Generally  there  is  no  other
mind  apparently  involved,  and  it  simply  seems  as  though  the
promnesic  either  enjoyed  at  the  moment  a  wider  than  ordinary
percipience,  or  had  already  visited  in  some  supernormal  way  the
scene  which  he  feels  that  he  remembers.  Now  these  are  actually  two
possibilities  of  which  we  have  well-attested  examples.  A  telsesthetic
extension  of  knowledge  at  the  moment  lies  at  the  base  of  what  we
are  accustomed  to  call  monitions ;  and  dreams  premonitory  of  future
scenes  or  incidents  form  a  great  part  of  our  evidence  to  precognition.
And  it  can  make  no  theoretical  difference  whether  the  objects  of
extended  knowledge  of  either  of  these  kinds  are  in  themselves
momentous  or  trivial.  It  may  be  of  great  value  to  me  to  receive  a
■warning,  through  some  supernormal  faculty,  that  I  am  on  the  point  of
walking  into  a  dock  in  the  dark  ; — very  valueless  to  apprehend
similarly  that  I  shall  come  upon  a  church  with  a  copper  spire  after
the  next  turn  in  the  road ;  but  both  impressions  alike  must  fall  for
the  psychologist  into  the  same  category.

These  small  oscillations  about  the  specious  present,  in  short,  when-
ever they  mean  more  than  mere  mistake  and  confusion,  are  strictly
analogous  to  the  ampler  oscillations  with  which  we  are  in  these
chapters  mainly  concerned.

And  passing  on  now  to  retrospects  and  prospects  of  wider  scope,
let  us  begin  with  the  backwai-d  swing  of  the  pendulum,  and  consider
to  what  extent  our  knowledge  of  the  Past  will  sometimes  open  itself
beyond  the  familiar  bounds.  Brief  discussion  may  serve,  for  many
points  of  detail  have  been  already  dealt  with  elsewhere.

Let  us,  then,  begin  our  study  of  supernormal  retrocognition  by  first
inquiring  in  what  ways  we  ordinarily  and  normally  acquire  our
knowledge  of  the  Past.  We  acquire  such  knowledge  partly  from
direct  personal  memory,  and  partly  from  retrospective  infei'ence
based  on  what  we  see  or  hear.  "We  might,  indeed,  define  memory  as
an  acquisition  of  fresh  potential  changes  of  consciousness  concomitant
with  changes  in  our  oi-ganism,  which  imply  certain  past  events  as


348


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


their  cause.  But  this  definition,  which  sounds  natural  enough  when
applied  to  diffused  or  organic  memories,  such  as  the  cricketer's
memory  of  the  feel  of  the  bat,  would  seem  pedantic  if  applied  to
the  minute  cerebral  changes  which  accompany  the  learning  of  a
new  fact.  In  such  a  case  we  ignore  in  common  speech  the  real
organic  change  which  the  learning  of  any  fact  implies  in  us,  and  we
merely  refer  to  the  specialised  sensory  channel  through  which  the
information  comes  to  us — as  hearing,  reading,  and  so  forth.  In.  a
vague  but  quite  intelligible  way,  we  thus  mark  off  organic  memory
from  definite  sensory  or  intellectual  memories.

In  our  inquiry  into  retrocognition  it  will  be  well  to  keep  roughly
to  some  division  of  this  sort,  and  to  begin  by  inquiring  into  the
extensions  which  seem  to  be  given  to  organic  memory.

We  know,  of  course,  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  our
evocahle  memory — that  which  we  can  summon  up  and  use  at  will — and
that  much  ampler  memory  which  we  must  suppose  to  exist,  in  some
potential  form  at  least,  imprinted  upon  our  organism.  The  faint  and
crude  recollections  of  sensations  and  movements,  which  are  all  that  we
can  call  into  ordinary  consciousness,  would  be  far  from  enabling  us  to
recognise  sensations,  or  to  repeat  movements,  as  we  actually  do  recognise
and  repeat  them.  The  study  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  moreover,  has
shown  us  how  these  potential  or  latent  memories  may  be  grasped  and
used.  The  increased  poxoer  over  the  organism  which  the  subject
under  suggestion  shows  necessarily  implies  an  increased  memory
of  the  organism's  past ;  the  hyperboulia,  as  I  have  termed  it,  is
hypermnesia  as  well.  That  wider  will-power,  indeed,  is  probably  no
more  aware  of  the  exact  mechanism  which  it  employs  in  its  control  of
secretions,  &c.,  than  I  am  of  the  exact  mechanism  by  which  I  raise  my
hand  to  my  head.  And,  similarly,  the  hypnotic  memory  is  probably
itself  very  shallow  as  compared  to  what  a  complete  summation  of  all
the  lapsed  memories  of  the  organism  might  be.  But  already  we  find  it
descending  deeply  to  gland  and  blood-vessel,  implicated  as  these  are  in
stigmatisation  and  similar  phenomena,  and  we  can  draw  no  clear  line
below  which  all  organic  consciousness  must  cease,  and  memory  must
become  no  more  than  a  metaphor.

We  cannot  draw  such  a  line,  I  say,  either  on  the  basis  of  smallness
of  magnitude  or  of  remoteness  in  time.  We  cannot  assert  that  organic
memory  may  not  inhere  in  a  single  cell  or  neuron,  or  even  in  a  single
living  molecule.  Neither  can  we  assert  that  organic  memory  cannot  be
prolonged  backwai'ds  before  birth.  Birth,  indeed,  is  but  an  incident
in  each  organism's  history ;  that  oi'ganism  has  an  embryonic  life
before  birth, — and  a  pre-embryonic  life  in  countless  lines  of  ancestry.
Although  we  no  longer  say  with  the  "  traducianist "  schoolmen  that
Adam's  body  included  not  only  his  own  soul  but  the  souls  of  all  his


The  Subliminal  Self.


349


descendants,  we  still  trace  to  ancestors  more  remote  than  Adam
characteristics  which  even  now  influence  our  psychical  life.

It  is  a  moot  point  how  far  the  life-experiences  of  each  organism
modify  by  what  we  regard  as  purely  physiological  transmission  the
characteristics  of  its  descendants.  The  rude  suggestion  (so  to  term  it)
of  the  amputated  limb,  or  other  injiiry,  is  commonly  not  accepted  by
the  offspring ;  the  embryo  develops  unaffected  by  the  shock  which  the
parent  has  undergone  pre^^iously  to  the  act  of  union.  But  if  that
shock  fall  upon  the  mother  during  the  embryo's  life,  and  if  it  chance  —
(in  post-natal  suggestions  also  there  seems  much  of  what  we  must
needs  call  chance  in  this) — if  it  chance  to  reach  the  mother's  subliminal
self  in  effective  fashion,  it  may  then  transfer  itself  to  the  embryo,  and
imprint  upon  the  child  the  organic  memory  of  the  mother's  emotion  of
admiration,  disgust,  or  fear.  i^STo  one  doubts  this  form  of  heredity
when  it  is  exhibited  on  a  striking  scale, — as  with  children  born  during
the  alarms  of  a  siege,  or  of  the  Reign  of  Terror  in  France.  And  I
believe  that  there  is  evidence  enough  (although  T  cannot  quote  it  here)
to  show  that  isolated  and  momentary  suggestions — as  the  sight  of  a
crushed  ankle  or  missing  finger — may  produce  a  definite  localised
effect  on  the  embryo  in  much  the  same  way  as  a  hypnotic  suggestion
may  produce  a  localised  congestion  or  secretion.^

If,  then,  we  thus  find  imprinted  on  the  child's  organism  such  a  con-
spicuous, specialised  memory  of  pei'haps  an  almost  instantaneous
emotion  of  the  mother's,  we  must  surely  suspect  that  his  organism  may
contain  also  some  inborn  memories  less  conspicuous  and  more  purely
cerebral  than  such  a  gross  phenomenon  as  a  mark  on  the  face  or  a
deformed  finger.  And  by  this  new  route  we  shall  come  round  again  to
something  like  the  innate  ideas  of  certain  philosophical  systems.  ISTor
can  we  absolutely  limit  such  influence  to  the  actual  parent  organism
alone.  For  aught  we  know,  the  "germ-plasm" — whatsoever  may  be
the  continuous  link  of  all  generations — -may  be  capable  of  reacting  to
psychical  suggestions  as  sensitively  as  the  embryo.  The  shaping  forces
which  have  made  our  bodies  and  our  minds  what  they  are  may  always
have  been  partly  psychical  forces, — from  the  first  living  slime-speck  to
the  complex  intelligences  of  to-day.

This  view  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  suggestion  which  I  have  made
elsewhere,  that  the  human  spirit's  supernormal  powers  of  telepathy  and
telsesthesia  are  survivals  from  the  powers  which  that  spirit  once  exer-
cised in  a  transcendental  world.  It  may  well  be  that  the  spirit  already
modified  by  cosmic  experiences  dating  back  to  infinity  may  inform  the

1  To  what  extent  the  nature  of  the  connexion  between  the  maternal  and  the
embryonic  organism  may  modify  the  mechanism  of  suggestion  this  is  not  the  place
to  inquire.

2  D


350


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


body  already  modified  by  terrene  experiences  dating  back  to  the  first
appearance  of  life  on  our  planet.  Both  the  old  traducianist  and  the
old  transmigrationist  view  would  thus  possess  a  share  of  truth ;  and  the
actual  man  would  be  the  resultant  not  only  of  intermingling  heredities
on  father's  and  mother's  side,  but  of  intermingling  heredities,  one  of
planetary  and  one  of  cosmic  scope.

I,  at  any  rate,  follow  those  who  can  see  no  fundamental  dividing-line
between  the  most  purely  intellectual  act  of  memory, — say  the  recollec-
tion of  a  mathematical  formula, — and  the  habit  or  predetermination
■which  has  made  each  new  cell  in  a  man's  body  take  on  the  peculiarities
of  its  predecessor, — back  till  the  time  when  the  segments  of  the
fertilised  ovum  took  on  the  peculiarities  of  their  progenitors.  The
introduction  of  consciousness  into  this  series  is,  I  conceive,  a  quite
gradual  process  ;  our  own  human  consciousness  being  merely  a  casual
intermediate  point  between  such  dim  unnamed  self-awareness  as  may
pervade  at  least  all  sentient  things,  and  that  far  in  tenser  consciousness
which  mortal  man  forefeels  only  in  some  moment  of  ecstacy.

The  physiological  changes  which  follow  upon  self-suggestion
depend,  in  my  view,  upon  a  revival  of  memories  which  have  long
lapsed  from  supraliminal  consciousness  ;  upon  a  recurrence  to  jjrimitive
powers,  exercised  in  days  when  all  that  the  organisni  had  to  attend  to
consisted  in  processes  of  absorption,  secretion,  and  so  forth.  And
somewhat  similarly  I  hold  that  much  which  we  now  term  hyperresthesia
may  rather  consist  of  some  rudimentary  sense  of  unfamiliar  type
derived  from  a  joi'imitive  pincesthesia,  or  diffused  undifferentiated
sensibility,  from  which  our  special  senses,  and  the  special  senses  of
other  animals,  have  developed  under  the  pressure  of  special  needs.
As  to  telepathy  and  telffisthesia,  the  case  is  different.  I  do  not  say
that  these  powers  may  not  have  existed  in  our  lowly  ancestors,  or  may
not  now  exist  among  the  infei'ior  animals,  but  I  cannot  regard  them  as
faculties  dependent  (as  the  senses  are  dependent)  upon  the  vitalisation
of  matter.  Rather  I  hold  them  as  a  part  of  our  inheritance  upon
the  other — the  cosmic — side  of  our  descent.  They  belong  to  the
transcendental  world  and  to  our  transmigrationist  pedigree ;  and
have  been,  I  take  it,  not  fostered  but  concealed  by  this  planetary
alliance  between  spirit  and  matter.

For  the  present,  however,  our  inquiry  concerns  the  traducianist
aspect  of  heredity  alone.  We  have  to  consider,  that  is  to  say,
whether  any  of  the  phenomena  of  retrocognition  which  lie  before  us
are  explicable  as  extensions  of  organic  memory  ; — as  evocations  into
daylight  consciousness  of  imprints  made  in  this  life,  or  in  ancestral
lives,  upon  our  physical  being.  So  much  of  intellectual  predisposition
is  hereditary  that  it  would  be  rash  to  fix  d  priori  any  point  where  a
memory  was  too  definite  to  be  capable  of  transmission. It  is  a


Tlie  Suhliviinal  Self.


351


question  of  evidence ;  but  I  may  say  at  once  that  for  an  ancestral
memory  as  definite  as  would  here  be  needed  there  seems  to  me  to  be
at  present  no  adequate  evidence,  and  that  the  hypothesis  is  worth
mentioning  mainly  because  any  other  explanation  of  some  of  these
facts  or  pictures  from  a  remote  past,  with  which  we  sliall  presently
have  to  deal,  seems  at  first  to  be  still  more  incredible.

While,  therefore,  I  do  not  at  present  see  evidence  that  memories
either  of  words  or  of  scenes  can  be  inherited,  I  think  we  ought  to  be
on  the  watch  for  cases  like  the  following,  where  the  writer,  the  Rev.
"VV.  S.  Lach-Szyrma,  believes  that  there  was  an  innate  cerebral  picture,
due  to  parental  suggestion  : —

P.  252.  Hereditary  Memory.

To  the  Editor  of  the  "Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research."

Sir, — There  is  one  obscure  subject  on  which  I  should.  ]ike  to  see  an
inquiry  by  the  Society  for  Psj'cliical  Research.  I  mean  hereditary  memory.
I  know  it  is  usually  accepted,  even  by  sceptical  physiologists,  that  we
inherit  instincts  and  habits  from  our  ancestors.  The  case  of  a  hereditary
passion  for  hunting  in  certain  English  families  is  adduced.  Also  certain
acts,  e.tf.,  in  women  a  peculiar  mode  of  threading  a  needle  (as  in  one  branch
of  my  own  family)  is  hereditary.  The  Stuarts  and  Bourbons  both  had  a
manifest  and  remarkable  heredity  of  thought  (which  might  result  partly
from  instinct,  partly  from  education).  But  may  not  this  power  of  inheri-
tance extend  still  further,  even  to  the  recollection  of  certain  places  by
descendants,  and  may  not  this  account  for  some  cases  at  least  of  that  well-
known  mental  phenomenon  of  persons  feeling  suddenly  that  they  perfectly
recollect  places  and  scenes  where  a  moment's  reflection  shows  that  they
have  never  been  in  their  lives  1  I  may  explain  what  I  mean  by  my  own
experience.

In  early  childhood  I  was  much  given  to  day  dreams,  as  many  only
children  of  active  imaginations  are.  Two  scenes  have  haunted  me  many
hundred  times,  I  am  sure,  though  as  I  attained  manhood  they  faded  and
were  only  recollected  as  childhood's  dreams.  I  will  describe  each  of  them.
They  were  two  of  my  dominant  scenes  to  the  inner  visual  organs  in  child-
hood.

1.  A  large  village  lying  northward,  with  heaving  plain  and  woodlands
in  the  back.  In  front  there  is  a  little  stream  crossed  by  a  small  bridge.  It
is  looked  at  from  a  hill.  There  is  one  church  in  that  village,  and  a  road
going  north,  and  a  park  to  the  east.  I  have  thought  of  that  village  a
hundred  times  and  peopled  it  with  imaginary  people  and  quaint  adventures,
as  children  will.

Now  when  I  was  an  undergraduate  in  Oxford,  my  mother  suggested  my
going  to  visit  Adderbury,  which  had  been  connected  with  our  family  since
1800,  and  where  she  had  spent  some  of  her  childhood,  staying  with  her
uncle  who  dwelt  there.  She  intended  going  herself  there,  but  was  pre-
vented. Still  she  told  me  to  go  there  and  see  the  old  place,  full  of  her
childhood's  memories. I  did  so  one  winter's  day. I  came  to  a  low  hill,  and


352


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


there  before  me  was  almost  exactly  the  scene  of  my  childhood's  dreams — ■
the  large  village,  the  little  stream,  tlie  park,  the  woodlands,  and  the  church.
Now  my  mother  had  never  described  to  me  Adderbury.  It  is  curious  I
should  have  thought  of  it,  for,  spending  my  childhood  in  Devon,  I  had
conceived  a  typical  Oxfordshire  village,  totally  unlike  any  place  I  had  seen
in  childhood.

2.  Another  scene  was  more  curious  and  more  persistent.  It  was  a  large
village  near  the  sea,  facing  eastwards.  The  hill  is  very  steep — so  steep  that
you  must  descend  part  of  the  way  by  steps.  The  houses  are  in  terraces  one
over  the  other.  Above  there  is  a  woodland.  I  always  thought  I  dwelt
there,  and  had  a  house  on  the  north  side.  Hundreds  of  day  dreams  had  I
of  that  village  and  its  steps  and  terraces,  and  blue  sea,  but  my  home  was
always  on  the  north  side  and  a  little  inland.  Till  last  July,  I  never  in  all
my  journeys  had  seen  any  place  like  that  scene  of  my  day  dreams.  I  was
then  asked  to  visit  Clovelly  in  North  Devon,  where  my  maternal  ancestors
(my  great  grandmother  was  a  Cary)  had  long  lived.  To  my  astonishment,
there  were  the  teri'aces,  the  steep  hill,  the  steps  down  to  the  sea  facing  east-
ward, and  to  the  north,  Caiy  Court,  where  for  ages  our  people  had  lived.  I
saw  in  the  church  seven  of  the  Cary  tombs.  Clovelly  is  described  in  West-
vxvnl  Ho,  which  I  only  read  some  years  ago  for  the  first  time,  and  the
resemblance  never  struck  n\e.

Are  there  not  many  other  instances  of  this  ancestral  memory  ?

W.  S.  Lach-Szyrma.

Newlyn  St.  Peter,  Penzance,  Fehruanj,  1890.

Thought-transference  in  childhood  from  the  percipient's  mother  or
other  relatives  might  probably  suffice  to  explain  a  case  of  this  kind.
And  we  shall  find  cases  where  a  scene  similarly  viewed  in  advance  can
never  have  been  looked  upon  by  any  ancestor  of  the  jJercipient's.

Leaving  now  the  question  of  an  ancestral  memory,  let  us  speak  of
the  organic  memory  of  impressions  received  by  each  man  during  his
own  past  life.  In  my  chapter  on  Hypermnesic  Dreams,  Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  362,  I  set  forth  evidence  tending  to  show  the  possibility
that  all  definite  sensory  experiences  of  this  present  life  may  be  pre-
served in  a  subliminal  memory.  I  would  now  suggest  in  addition  that
there  may  be  a  conservation  of  the  psychical  aspect  of  the  past  organic
sensation  itself,  as  well  as  of  the  resultant  condition  from  which  that
past  sensation  may  be  inferred. In  the  case  of  a  there  will  thus

be  the  instant  pain,  then  its  brief  resonance  through  the  organism,
then  its  permanent  picture,  so  to  call  it,  which  can  still  be  revived  as
painful,  and  lastly  the  symbolized  memory,  no  longer  actively  painful,
which  we  use  when  we  wish  to  recall  the  fact  of  the  pain.  I  speak
first  of  a  pain,  since  that  is  a  comparatively  definite  thing,  approaching
near  to  the  sensations  due  to  specialised  end-organs,  of  which  also  we
shall  soon  see  that  similar  records  remain.  But  I  would  extend  this
suggestion  to  all  states  of  organic  sensibility,  including,  for  instance,


The  Subliminal  Self.


353


the  possible  revival  in  adult  life  of  the  freshness  of  youth,  or
the  possible  renewal  of  the  sensation  of  hungry  emptiness  after  a
copious  meal.

The  following  cases  illusti^ate  what  has  been  said,  both  as  to  the
continuous  perception  exercised  by  the  subliminal  self, — none  the  less
when  the  supraliminal  self  has  been  held  in  abeyance  by  chloroform, —
and  also  as  to  the  possibility  of  a  revival — preferably  in  a  half-dreaming
state,  as  with  illusions  hy2magoc/iques.

The  cases  were  contributed  by  a  surgeon,  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.

P.  251.

The  Subliminal  Consciousness  at  Work  during  the  Influence  of  an

Anesthetic.

(1)  On  November  3rd,  1893,  a  middle-aged  woman  was  operated  on  for  a
bony  tumour  of  the  upper  jaAv.  She  was  of  course  under  an  anresthetic.
When  she  awoke,  after  completion  of  the  operation,  she  said  she  had  no
recollection  whatever  of  what  had  occurred.  When  I  called  on  her,  on
November  7th,  she  said  she  had  had  severe  neuralgia  during  the  night  in  the
situation  of  the  operation.  During  the  continuance  of  this  pain,  and  while
half  awake  and  half  asleep,  she  thought  she  could  follow  each  step  of  the
operation  of  November  3rd.  She  described  the  cutting  and  slipping  of  the
steel  chisel,  the  blows  of  the  mallet,  and  scraping  back  of  the  gum — in  fact,
it  seemed  to  her  that  she  underwent  the  whole  operation  agam.

(2)  A  lady  to  whom  I  told  the  above  said  she  once  took  "gas  "  for  a  tooth
extraction.  This  was  quite  successful,  for  she  "felt  nothing."  But  on  an
occasion  subsequent  to  this  she  had  a  return  of  toothache — some  time  in  the
night.  She  declared  that  she  could  then  feel  all  the  symptoms  of  becoming
unconscious  while  inhaling  the  gas  ;  then  came  the  digging  of  the  forceps  to
get  a  grip  on  the  tooth,  the  wrench,  and  awful  pain— every  detail  was  "  felt  "
now,  although  her  waking  consciousness  had  been  quite  unaware  of  any  pain
during  the  actual  extraction.

(3)  I  have  many  times  noted  that  people  while  anajsthetised,  who  do  not
feel  pain  in  the  ordinary  sense,  and  who  on  coming  to  themselves  declare  that
they  did  feel  no  pain  during  the  operation,  have  struggled,  groaned,  spoken,
or  given  some  other  evidence  that  some  stratum  of  their  consciousness  was
awake  during  the  anajsthesia,  and  was  being  impressed  by  the  pain  of  the
operation.

The  above  appears  to  show  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  does  take
note  of  what  is  going  on,  while  the  work-a-day  self  is  oblivious  to  all  external
stimvili  when  under  the  influence  of  an  anfesthetic  ;  and  that  the  memory  of
this  subliminal  self  may  be  brought  to  the  surface  by  some  appropriate
stimulus,  such  as  the  neuralgia,  which,  we  may  note,  occurred  between  sleep-
ing and  wakmg — that  is,  at  a  time  when  the  subliminal  is  more  active  than
the  supraliminal  stratum  of  our  conscious  ijersonality.

Analogous  to  the  foregoing  is  the  fact  similar  in  hypnotism,  where  it  is
often  possible  to  recall  a  memory  in  the  subject  after  awakening  of  what  has
been  done  and  said  during  his  hypnosis.


354


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Note  to  Case  I.  — Tlie  patient  did  not  see  the  operator's  instruments  at  all,
nor  was  she  told  after  the  operation  how  it  was  done,  but  merely  that  the
tumour  had  been  cut  away  entirely  and  successfully.  No  one  was  present  at
the  operation  except  the  patient,  operator,  and  myself.  The  operation  was
described  by  the  patient  as  accurately  as  a  non-medical  person  was  likely  to
do.  It  may  be  thought  tliat  she  was  enabled  to  describe  the  operation  by  her
vivid  imagination  ;  but  under  the  circumstances  I  should  regard  this  ' '  vivid
imagination ''  as  only  another  name  for  her  subliminal  memory.

With  regard  to  Case  II. ,  as  I  was  not  present  during  the  extraction  of  the
teeth,  I  know  none  of  the  details.

In  each  of  tliese  two  cases  I  was  of  course  careful  not  to  suggest  to  the
patient  the  details  of  the  operation — such  as  "  Did  you  feel  this  or  that  ?"  I
merely  asked  them  twice  over  to  tell  me  what  they  felt.  Both  the  patients
were  thoroughly  under  the  influence  of  the  anassthetic  —  chloroform  in  the
first  case,  and  nitrous  oxide  gas  in  the  second.

C.  Theodore  Green,
M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  London.

Somewhat  analogous  to  this  revival  in  half-sleep  of  memories  which
antesthetics  had  till  then  obscured,  is  the  occasional  revival  during
drowning — or,  in  Charles  Darwin's  case,  during  a  fall  from  a  wall  —
of  a  series  of  life-memories  both  swifter  and  fuller  than  conscious
effort  could  have  supplied.  Such  cases  can  hai'dly  be  recorded  in
detail  by  the  percipient  himself,  but  they  are  numerous  enough  to  make
it  pretty  certain  that  the  phenomenon  is  more  than  a  mere  subjective
illusion.  In  a  case  which  I  have  heard  from  a  friend,  nearly  drowned
in  boyhood,  the  marked  feature  was  the  delighffulness  of  the  panorama,
— a  review  of  childish  games,  &c. — rising  in  the  effortless  fashion  of
that  subliminal  uprush  which  we  term  a  flash  of  genius.  I  suspect
that  similar  resurgences  of  lapsed  memory  occur  both  in  health  and
in  disease  more  fi"equently  than  has  yet  been  observed.  Almost  any
mental  tempest  may  bring  remote  impressions  to  light, — as  storms  will
wash  up  cannon-balls  on  a  long-since  bombarded  shore.  "  I  knew  one
man,"  says  Dr.  Clouston  {Mental  Diseases,  p.  147),  "who,  as  he  was
passing  into  mania,  could  repeat  a  whole  play  of  Shakespeai'e  or  a  book
of  Milton,  which  when  well  he  could  not  do."^

Somewhat  akin  to  this  is  the  following  case  of  revival  during  health,
— and  during  the  deep  sleep  in  which  changes  of  j)ersonality  are
generally  effected, — of  a  special  vividness  of  youthful  memories.  The

1  With  quite  healthy  persons  .sudden  and  insistent  memories  sometimes  occur,
with  details  fuller  than  could  have  been  voluntarily  called  u^^.  Thus  a  young  officer
recounts  the  following  experience,  undergone  while  he  was  reading  in  bed,  awake
and  with  calm  mind: — "Everything  that  had  happened  since  I  first  went  to  sea
flashed  before  me  like  a  dissolving  view ;  places,  events,  faces,  names,  everything.
This  lasted  for  over  an  hour,  and  then  the  picture  faded  away,  and  nothing  but  a
blurred  impression  remained.  The  effect  it  had  on  me  made  me  feel  uncomfortable
for  a  couple  of  days  afterwards."


The  Suhliminal  Self.


355


accompanying  telepathic  phenomenon, — the  discharge,  if  we  may  so
term  it,  of  telergic  energy, — perhaps  testifies  to  the  profound  character
of  the  shock ;  as  when  similar  phenomena  occur  at  a  moment  of  ex-
ternal crisis,  or  at  the  change  of  death.

L.  984. Ae  Pn  Auditory.

From  Mrs.  Manning,  who  writes  to  Professor  James  as  follows  : —

105,  Winter  Street,  Portland,  Maine,  October  28th  [1894].

Dear  Sir, — At  the  request  of  Colonel  Woodhull,  I  send  you  the  following
statement,  which  I  hope  may  be  of  use  to  you.

When  I  was  a  child  at  my  home  in  Rochester,  N.Y.,  my  elder  sister  had
almost  entire  care  of  me.  At  night,  after  putting  me  in  bed,  she  would  sit
beside  me  for  a  few  moments  until  I  fell  asleep.  Frequently  I  would  wake
up,  and  finding  myself  alone  and  in  the  dark,  of  which  I  was  much  afraid,  I
would  call  out  to  her  ;  she  would  come  and  soothe  me  to  sleep  again.  In
1875,  I  was  living  at  Fort  Hartsuff,  Nebraska,  a  military  post,  the  station  of
my  husband.  Our  nearest  railway  station  was  Grand  Island,  on  the  Union
Pacific  Railroad,  75  miles  away.  My  sister  then  lived  at  Omaha,  about  300
miles  east  of  Grand  Island.  Our  mail  reached  us  by  buckboard  from  Grand
Island  every  Wednesday  and  Saturday.  One  night  in  November,  I  awoke
from  a  dreamless  sleep,  wide  awake,  and  yet  to  my  own  consciousness  the
little  child  of  years  ago,  in  my  own  room  in  the  old  home  ;  the  sister  had
gone,  and  I  was  alone  in  the  darkness.  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and  called  with  all
my  voice,  "Jessie  !  Jessie  !" — my  sister's  name.  This  aroused  my  husband,
who  spoke  to  me.  I  seemed  to  come  gradually  to  realisation  of  my
surroundings,  and  with  difficulty  adjusted  myself  to  the  present.  In  that
moment  I  seemed  to  live  again  in  the  cliildhood  days  and  home.  I  cannot
express  too  strongly  the  feeling  of  actuality  I  had.  For  days  after  this  the
strange  impression  was  with  me,  and  I  could  recall  many  little  incidents  and
scenes  of  child-life  that  I  had  entirely  forgotten.

I  wrote  to  my  sister  the  next  day,  and  told  her  of  the  strange  experience
of  the  night  before.  In  a  few  days  I  received  a  letter  from  her,  the  date  the
same  as  mine,  and  having  passed  mine  on  the  way,  in  which  she  said  that
such  a  strange  thing  had  happened  the  night  before — that  she  had  been
awakened  by  my  voice  calling  her  name  twice  ;  that  the  impression  was  so
strong  that  her  husband  went  to  the  door  to  see  if  it  could  possibly  be  I.  No
one  else  had  called  her  ;  she  had  not  been  dreaming  of  me.  She  distinctly
recognised  my  voice.

Mary  M.  Clarkson  Manning.

Captain  Manning  writes  : —

Portland,  Me.,  October  2Wi,  1894.
I  distinctly  recall  the  circumstances  as  related  above  by  my  wife.

W.  C.  Manning
(Captain  23rd  Infantiy,  U.S.  Army).

Mrs.  Manning's  sister  and  brother-in-law  give  their  testimony  as  follows : —

Detroit,  Mich.,  November  1st,  1894.
The  statement  made  by  my  sister  is  as  I  remember  the  experience.


356


F.  W.  H.  Myers,


That  it  made  a  deep  impression  upon  us  both  is  evidenced  by  each  writing
of  it  to  the  otlier  on  the  day  following  its  occurrence.  The  impression  made
was  so  forcible,  it  has  never  been  forgotten.

Jessie  Clarkson  Thrall.

Detroit,  Mich. ,  November  1st,  1894.

The  within  statement  of  a  curious  coincidence  might  have  been  forgotten
by  me  duiing  the  past  twenty  years,  had  the  facts  not  been  recalled  to  my
memory  from  time  to  time  as  they  have  by  the  principal  actors  in  it.  I  have
always  regarded  it  as  a  strange  coincidence,  but  nothmg  more.

I  heard  no  call,  but  went  to  the  door  to  satisfy  my  wife  tliat  her  sister

was  not  in  the  hall.  „  „

George  Thrall.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgsoii's  enquiries,  Mrs.  Mamiing  informed  him  that
the  original  letters  referred  to  had  been  destroyed  long  ago,  and  that  neither
she  herself  nor  her  sister  had  ever  had  any  similar  experience.

Still  more  noticeable  is  another  group  of  cases  where  the  recent
impressions  are  in  various  ways  suppressed  in  favour  of  the  old.  V/e
are  familiar,  in  the  first  place,  with  what  is  termed  ecmnesia, — the  gap
sometimes  left  in  memory  after  a  blow  on  the  head,  or  even  after  a
sudden  emotional  shock, — which  gap  may  or  may  not  include  a  period  of
time  before  the  shock  as  well  as  after  it,  and  may  or  may  not  be  ulti-
mately filled  up  by  a  slow  or  hidden  influx  of  recollection.  The  super-
position of  memories,  so  to  term  it,  may  in  such  cases  be  veiy  curious.
Suppose  that  T  have  an  ecmnesic  gap  from  Monday  to  Thursday  ;  I
shall  tack  on  the  events  of  Thursday  to  the  events  of  Monday,  and
shall  regard  them  as  continuous  ; — taking  up  the  brain-cells,  so  to  say,
at  the  point  where  Monday  left  them.  But  all  the  time  a  true  memory
of  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  will  have  formed  itself  and  will  be  waiting
to  appear  ;  so  that  perhaps  on  Saturday  I  shall  discover  that  my  brain
on  Thursday  was  by  no  means,  as  I  had  imagined,  still  in  its  Monday
condition.  Yet  I  have  been  working  on  Thursday  and  Friday  upon
the  basis  of  the  old  Monday  brain- condition  which,  in  an  ordinary
view,  would  be  held  to  have  been  irrevocably  altered  by  Tuesday's
events,  and  thus  to  have  passed  away  for  ever.

The  various  forms  and  stages  of  double  personality,  so  often  men-
tioned in  these  Froceeduigs,  exhibit  a  similar  phenomenon.  Louis
Vive,  for  example  {Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  j).  29,  &c.),  could,  by  certain
empirical  processes,  be  made  a  boy  again  at  will,  i^everting  to  the
memory  and  character  belonging  to  the  age  at  which  any  given
distribution  of  his  defective  nervous  energy  had  last  prevailed  in  his
organism.  Or,  again,  in  a  case  observed  by  Dr.  Pitres,  of  Bordeaux,
{Revue  de  V Hyjynotisme,  January,  1891,  p.  201),  the  recovery  of
youthful  sensation  and  nervous  integrity  was  the  afiair  of  a  moment.
"  When  the  patient  is  carried  back  by  her  delirium  [or  by  suggestion]  to


The  Subbliminal  Self.


357


the  time  wheu  she  was  six  or  seven  years  old,  not  only  does  she  express
herself  and  amuse  herself  like  a  child,  but  her  hemiantesthesia  has
disappeared,  and  her  hysterogenous  zones,  very  active  in  her  ordinary
life,  have  lost  their  excitability."

I  will  add  another  example  which  may  tend  to  show  that  these
renewals  of  former  states  of  organic  sensation  affect  the  whole  system
in  a  way  that  no  voluntary  effort  of  mind  can  rival.  Hardly  anything
affects  our  normal  casnojsthesia  or  general  organic  sensations  more  deeply
than  the  alternation  of  hunger  and  repletion.  Yet  the  elder  Despine,
a  most  careful  observer,  reports  as  follows  as  regards  the  changes
effected  by  light  hypnotic  trance  in  his  well-known  patient  "  Estelle."
"The  aliments,"  he  says  {Mklecine  Pratique,  p.  47)  "taken  in
abundance  during  the  trance  [when  she  was  able  to  eat  freely]  did  not
seem  to  have  satisfied  her  in  the  smallest  degree  on  her  return  to  the
waking  state,  and  vice  versa.  In  fact,  whenever  Estelle  passed  from
one  of  these  conditions  to  the  other,  she  never  failed  to  experience  in
her  new  form  of  existence  the  physical  appetites  and  needs  appropriate
to  the  new  state.  How  did  her  digestive  organs  arrange  themselves  to
effect  this  singular  phenomenon  1  Where  did  all  the  food  go  which  had
assuaged  the  devouring  hunger  of  the  state  of  trance  ? — and  how  could
all  those  cold  drinks  of  beer,  coffee,  snow  and  ice,  milk  of  almonds,
raspberry  vinegar,  and  so  forth,  leave  room  a  few  moments  afterwards
for  the  thin  broths  of  herbs,  &c.,  and  the  ve<j'etables  which  in  her  nor-
mal  state  had  long  formed  her  only  nourishment ;  and  all  this  when
the  food  taken  in  the  trance  could  not  possibly  have  been  so  far
digested  as  to  allow  any  appetite  to  be  felt  1 "

Allied,  I  think,  to  this  power  of  subliminally  arresting  and  recalling
organic  sensations  which  for  the  waking  self  are  lost  beyond  discovery,
is  a  phenomenon  for  which  there  is  some  evidence  in  the  records  of
early  mesmerism.  I  mean  the  power  possessed  by  some  entranced
patients  of  a  self-diagnosis  profounder  (as  some  physicians  then  said)
than  medical  skill  could  have  attained.  Such  self-diagnosis  of  the
patient  is  still  sought  and  obtained  with  success  by  Janet  and  others
in  the  special  case  of  hysteria ;  where  the  hysteric,  under  skilful
hypnotic  treatment,  can  recall  and  reveal  the  long- forgotten  incident
which  started  her  malady.  I  believe  that  a  similar  subliminal  history
of  their  disease  might  be  educed  with  advantage  from  some  hypnotised
patients  of  other  types.  ^

There  is  a  further  degree,  yet  more  important,  to  which  this  organic
retrocognition  may,  I  believe,  be  carried.  Readers  of  Professor  Richet's
article  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  18  foil.,  will  remember  that  a  long

'  A  curious  case  of  subliminal  medical  guidance  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  200.


358


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


inquiry, — more  careful,  probably,  than  any  inquiry  on  this  subject  had
ever  previously  been, — convinced  that  physiologist  of  the  occasional
reality  of  a  claim  which  no  doubt  has  been  often  fraudulently  made  ; —
the  claim,  namely,  of  a  clairvoyant  insight  into  the  organic  condition
of  an  absent  person.  Here,  of  course,  we  come  to  a  definitely  super-
normal power  ;  and  it  is  a  power  which  claims  to  involve  both
backward  and  forward  knowledge  such  as  actual  medical  examination
of  the  patient  could  not  attain.  On  this  point  I  add  one  further  case
of  Pi'ofessor  Richet's.

Paris,  le  8  Mars,  1889.

J'ai  un  tres  beau  cas  cle  lucidite,  que  je  vais  vous  raconter  avec  detail.

Vous  ne  savez  peut-etre  pas  que  men  beau-pere,  Mr.  F.  A. ,  a  ^t^  malade
assez  gravement  a  partir  du  mois  d'aout,  1887.  (C'est  lui  dont  j'ai  eu
roccasion  de  parler  dans  les  Proceet/nif/s  S.P.R.,  1888,  p.  126,  Exp.  XL.)
II  a  ite  de  plus  en  j)lus  malade  jusqu'au  mois  de  janvier,  1888.  A  ce
moment  (janvier  et  fevrier,  1888)  j'interroge  a  plusieurs  reprises  Alice
[a  person  whom  Mr.  Richet  hyjinotised]  sur  la  saiite  de  Mr.  F.  A.  J'avoue
que  je  croyais  Mr.  F.  A.  absolument  perdu,  et  un  jour  entre  aiitres  en
fevrier,  1888,  j'ai  interrog^  Alice  ;  elle  ni'a  dit,  "Ne  vous  inquietez  pas."
Pour  ma  part  je  croyais  que  Mr.  A.  ne  vivrait  plus  que  huit  jours.

De  fait,  contrairement  a  ce  que  je  pensais  et  ce  que  pensaient  tous  les
medecins,  il  a  k  peu  prfes  gueri.  [Certain  symptoms,  however,  described
by  Mr.  Richet,  remained,  which  necessitated  the  constant  attention  of  a
surgical  nurse.]  Quoiqvi'il  soit  age  (76  ans),  qu'il  s'amaigrisse  beavicoup,  et
que  ses  forces  ne  s'ameliorent  pas,  k  partir  du  mois  de  fevrier,  1888  (vers  le
9  fevrier  environ)  il  a  ete  sans  euipirer. . .  .

A  diverses  reprises  (peut-etre  trois  ou  quatre  fois)  j'ai  demand^  a  Alice
de  me  parler  de  lui.  Elle  ni'a  dit,  "  Ne  vous  inquietez  pas;  je  vous  en
parlerai."

II  y  a  deux  jours,  le  Jeudi,  7  mars,  a  une  heure  de  I'apres-midi,  des  que
j'ai  endormi  Alice,  elle  me  dit  (ce  sont  ses  paroles  textuelles  que  je  copie
d'apres  la  stenograj^hie  que  j'ai  prise) :  "  J'avais  hate  de  vous  voir  ;  je  voulais
vous  voir  hier  pour  vous  jDarler  de  M.  A.  Ou  il  est  plus  souffi-ant  ou  il  va
avoir  une  crise  ;  de  la  fievre,  de  I'alteration,  de  la  fatigue.  Quel  mauvais
moment  !  Le  mal  s'aggrave  ;  il  est  tres  abattu.  II  ne  faut  rien  attendre
pour  cette  crise-la. "  (Cela  signifie  que  la  crise  ne  se  terminera  pas  par  la
mort. )  "II  ne  pourra  pas  bouger  ni  faire  un  mouvement.  La  douleur  est
surtout  dans  les  reins,  a  gauche,  et  tres  forte.  Ce  ne  sera  pas  la  demiere
crise.  II  la  supportera  encore.  Elle  aura  lieu  avant  peu,  dans  deux  ou  trois
joui's.  Elle  sera  plus  forte  que  toutes  celles  qu'il  a  eu  depuis  un  an.  Le
moment  approche.  II  soufFrira  moins  a  la  fin.  II  mourra  au  moment  ou
vous  ne  vous  y  attendrez  pas  ;  ce  n'est  pas  dans  une  crise  qu'il  mourra.  II
ne  pourra  pas  jn-endre  d'aliments,  on  lui  mouille  les  levres.  ...  II
avait  peur  de  mourir  ;  maintenant  c'est  bien  change,  et  il  est  plus  in-
different."!

1  Ces  details  sur  les  aliments,  la  .secheresse  des  Ifevres,  et  Tindifference  progressive
k  la  mort,  sont  absolument  vrais.


The  Subliminal  Self.


359


Voila  ce  que  m'a  dit  Alice  a  une  heure  le  Jeudi.  Ce  meme  J eudi  soir,  en
rentrant  chez  moi,  je  trouve  ma  femme  fort  inquiete,  et  elle  me  raconte  que

dans  la  nuit  du  mercredi  au  jeudi,  vers  une  heure  du  matin  [here  Mr.

Richet  relates  in  detail  how  for  the  first  time  for  13  months  the  attendant
had  been  unable  to  assist  Mr.  A.,  who  had  been  in  great  agony  for  three
hours,  until  at  length  a  surgeon  was  sent  for,  with  whose  aid  the  sufferings
of  the  patient  were  instantly  relieved.]  II  est  Evident,  et  meme  absolument
sur,  qu'  Alice  n'a  pu  savoir  cela  ;  nioi-meme  je  I'ignorais  absolument  a  une
heure.

II  y  a  done  la  un  fait  de  lucidite  tres  remarquable,  que  je  vous  signale
d'une  manifere  tout-k-fait  speciale.  Remarquez  combien  cela  coincide  avec
(1)  I'observation  relative  a  la  maladie  de  mon  beau-pere  que  je  vous  ai
racont^e  ;  (2)  I'Observation  XIV.,  p.  164,  que  j'ai  publiee  dans  les  Proceed-
ings S.P.R.,  1888.

II  faut  noter  coinme  essentiel  que  depuis  un  an  et  un  mois  jamais  Mr.  A.
n'a  eu  une  crise  aussi  forte  et  avec  autant  d'angoisse  que  dans  la  nuit  de
mercredi  h  jeudi.  (Signed) Ch.  Richet.

Let  us  now  turn  from  these  diffused  organic  sensations  and
memories  to  those  more  definite  sensations  and  memories  which  are
received  by  the  end-organs  and  stamped  upoji  the  brain.  For  simpli-
city's sake  I  shall  generally  take  the  sense  of  sight  as  representative  of
all  the  senses.

And  here  at  once  I  may  distinguish  three  difierent  stages  of  visual
memory,  often  apprehended  with  some  confusion.  ^  First  comes  that
peripheral  or  entoptic  memory  which  consists  in  the  short-lived  per-
sistence of  a  retinal  impression  as  a  true  after  image,  which  passes
through  certain  physiological  stages  and  then  disappears,  so  far  as  we
know,  altogether.  This  may  be  compared  with  the  actual  primary
pain  itself,  which  presently  dies  away.  Next  to  this  comes  another
form  of  "  brute  "  or  unintelligent  memory,  which  is  often  confounded
with  the  first,  but  which  is  in  fact  quite  distinct  from  the  ordinary
retinal  after-image,  and  far  more  permanent.  This  is,  if  I  may
so  term  it,  a  cerebral  after-image ;  a  persisting  possibility  of  the
resurgence  of  a  complex  scene  just  as  it  presented  itself  in  the  visual
field,  and  perhaps  with  details  now  discernible  which  were  not
wittingly  noted  at  the  time.  This  kind  of  photographic  or  phono-
graphic after-image  need  not  involve  any  intellectual  selective  action.
It  forms  a  treasure-house  from  which  illusions  hypnagogiques ,  crystal-
visions,  and  other  sensory  automatisms  seem  often  to  be  drawn '-^ ;  nor
do  we  know  any  necessary  limit  to  this  revival.  The  following  cases
from  Professor  Hyslop  may  serve  as  examples  of  these  cerebral
after-images.

^On  this  subject  see  Proceedings,  Vol,  X.,  pp.  134:448  (viz.,  the  chapter  on  the
Physiology  of  Salliicinations.)

-  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  449-455.


3G0


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


P.  171.  Columbia  College,  New  York,

Mmj  mh,  1893.

My  Deaii  Hodgson, — I  enclose  an  interesting  experience  of  one  of  my
students,  who  asks  that  his  name  shall  not  be  used.  I  should  say  regarding
it  that  he  told  me  the  incident  a  day  or  two  after  it  occurred,  and  remarked,
what  he  has  not  included  in  his  present  account  ;  namely,  that  the  colours
stood  out  clear  in  the  after-images,  if  the  impressions  or  apparitions  may  be
called  that.  The  case  thus  bears  a  close  relation  to  positive  after  images,
though  experienced  at  an  unusual  interval  after  the  original  impression.

J.  H.  Hyslop.

May  18th,  1893.

Dr.  Hyslop, — Dear  Sir, — You  asked  me  to  write  out  my  "  experience  "
on  St.  Patrick's  day  some  time  ago,  and  it  was  my  forgetfulness  and  pro-
crastination which  prevented  me  from  doing  so.  Here  it  is.  On  last  St.
Patrick's  day,  March  17th,  1893,  I  left  college  early  in  the  afternoon,
cutting  my  laboratory  work  in  chemistry.  I  went  through  to  Fifth  Avenue,
as  I  had  an  errand  to  do  over  on  Sixth.  When  I  struck  Fifth  I  saw  part  of
the  parade  of  the  loyal  sons  of  St.  Patrick,  with  their  green  sashes,  banners
with  harjis  surmounted  by  fools'  caps,  and  all  the  other  paraphernalia.  I
think  I  then  walked  up  a  couple  of  blocks  and  walked  through  to  Sixth  to
do  my  errand.  I  am  certain  of  doing  the  errand,  but  do  not  quite  recollect
what  streets  I  went  through.  When  I  had  finished  my  errand,  I  walked
directly  to  my  house,  17,  East  55th  Street,  and  when  I  crossed  the  Avenue,
Fifth,  (on  my  way  home),  the  parade  had  passed,  so  between  the  time  when
I  last  saw  them  and  the  time  when  I  entered  my  house,  I  should  say  that  a
full  quarter  of  an  hour  elapsed.  Meanwhile,  the  parade  had  quite
passed  out  of  my  consciousness.  But  as  I  was  going  up  my  front  stairs,
which  are  quite  dark,  I  got  a  distinct  picture  of  the  paraders,  green  sashes,
banners  and  all, — seemingly  projected  on  the  dark  wall  paper  with  which
the  hall  is  covered.  The  picture  was  so  vivid  for  an  instant  that  it  seemed
as  if  I  could  see  the  features  of  the  paraders'  faces.

This  is  as  detailed  an  account  as  I  can  give  of  the  circumstance,  and  there
is  one  particular  in  which  my  memory  plays  me  false  in  a  singular  way.  I
could  not  state  which  way  the  ^jaraders  were  going,  although  I  think  it  was
uptown.

Columbia  College,  New  York,  May  Idth,  1893.
My  Dear  Hodgson, — I  may  add  to  this  a  frequent  exjDerience
of  my  own  when  a  boy.  I  was  in  the  habit  of  attending  the  country
fairs  with  my  parents.  There  were  exhibitions  of  stock,  farm  pro-
duce and  machinery,  etc.  I  suppose  I  was  about  10  or  12  years  of
age.  The  music  given  on  such  occasions  was  by  an  ordinary  brass  or
cornet  band,  which  always  had  a  strong  attraction  for  me,  and  I
listened  to  it  in  preference  to  doing  anything  else,  though  I  have  no  doubt
now  that  it  was  of  a  bad  quality  and  poor  in  selection.  But  nevertheless  it
had  a  fascination  for  Ine.  I  always  observed  that  for  hours  after  I  could
hear  the  bands  playing  their  music.  My  home  was  seven  miles  distant,  and
on  the  way  thither  in  returning,  and  after  ray  return,  I  could  hear  the
sounds  of  the  music. It  was  not  an  ordinary  case  of  imagination  and


The  Subliminal  Self.


361


memory,  but  more  like  real  sound,  though  I  distinctly  remember  being
under  no  illusion  as  to  its  purely  subjective  nature.  I  recognised  that  it
was  not  a  real  sound,  and  so  the  experience  had  not  that  feature  of  a
hallucination  which  causes  it  to  be  mistaken  for  a  reality.  I  knew  that  it
was  not  real,  and  that  it  was  merely  internal.  It  was  not  so  distinct  as  an
objective  sound,  but  was  like  the  continuance  of  a  sensation  after  the
stimulus  is  gone,  less  vivid  than  before.  But  it  was  a  sound  of  a  kind  that
I  could  not  get  rid  of,  and  was  no  doubt  an  extraordinary  case  of  after-image
in  hearing.  ILysj^ot.

But  meantime  a  process  has  begun  as  to  which  physiology  can  tell
us  nothing,  and  of  which  psychology  describes,  under  the  name  of
Attention,  a  small  part  alone.  A  selection  is  made  among  the  countless
details  with  which  the  brain  has  been  stored ;  a  synthetized  and
abbreviated  memor'y  reduces  the  unmanageable  complexity  to  orderly
usefulness.  Unconsciously  we  chew  the  cud  of  recollection  ;  and  when
any  picture  is  again  summoned  up  to  the  surface  it  is  found  to  have
assumed  a  more  or  less  symbolic  form,  appropriate  to  the  furniture  of
each  man's  mind.  It  is  this  symbolized  or  organised  memory  on  which
we  practically  live  ;  and  every  day  a  fresh  portion  of  these  digested
memories  becomes,  so  to  say,  absorbed  into  our  system ;  influencing  our
character,  or  habit  of  I'eaction  to  psychical  stimuli,  but  no  longer  dis-
tinguishable from  our  central  consciousness  any  more  than  food  when
digested  into  chyle  is  any  longer  distinguishable  from  the  eater.  At
which  stages  in  this  mnemonic  process,  then,  do  we  find  evidence  of
supernormal  action,  as  of  hypermnesia,  or  of  telepathic  perception  of
the  content  of  other  minds  1

"With  the  mere  retinal  memory,  in  the  first  place,  we  are  here  little
concerned.  Some  ingenious  experiments  on  its  prolongation  have  l^een
quoted  elsewhere.^  But,  however  prolonged,  it  will  still  be  character-
istic; a  mere  retinal  after-image  is  not  likely  to  be  mistaken  for  a  super-
normal image.

With  cerebral  after-images  the  case  is  quite  different.  It  is  plain
that  if  these  persist  for  some  days  or  months  in  latency  and  then
suddenly  reappear,  say  in  a  crystal- vision,  the  "  scryer  "  may  well  have
foi'gotten  that  he  ever  witnessed  the  scene,  and  may  take  the  mere
brute  memory  for  a  revelation  of  facts  unknown.

It  must  be  remembered,  moreover,  that  these  resurgent  pictures  are
not  always  exact  reproductions  of  the  primary  impression.  On  the
contraiy,  they  have  often  undergone  some  subliminal  modification, —
intelligent  but  not  reasonable, — a  dream-like  change,  for  which  no  mind
except  our  own  need  be  held  responsible.  Just  as,  for  instance,  the
faces  which  some  people  see  in  the  dark  generally  present  some  slightly


1  Proccedinrjs,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  4.50.


362


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


novel  combination  of  features  in  themselves  familiar,  so  also  do  crystal-
visions  often  contain  some  merely  fantastic  element.  The  seer  must
therefore  be  on  his  guard  against  supposing  that  if,  for  instance,  he  sees
a  familiar  scene  with  new  details,  those  details  must  needs  represent
any  fact  whatever.

These,  then,  are  forms  of  retrocognition  which  it  is  needful  here  to
distinguish  and  specify,  but  which  may  henceforth  be  left  aside  from
our  inquiry.  What  we  wish  to  study  is  the  retrocognition  which  depends
on  the  exercise  of  supernornial  powers, — on  telepathy  or  on  teliBsthesia ;
— on  the  perception  by  us  of  knowledge  contained  in  other  minds,
embodied  or  disembodied,  and  possibly  on  the  absorption  by  us  of
knowledge  afloat,  so  to  say,  in  the  Universe  ; — which  may  be  grasped  by
our  spirit's  outreaching,  or  which  may  fall  on  us  like  dew.

I  will  begin  with  a  group  of  cases  which  seem  to  illustrate  both
telpesthetic  and  telepathic  facult)^,  and  which  may  serve  as  a  watershed
from  which  we  may  descend  on  either  side  in  turn.  They  are  cases,
moreover,  which  approach  somewhat  closely  from  the  intellectual  side
those  cases  of  organic  retrocognition  which  we  have  already  discussed.
Fov  the  idea  that  it  may  be  possible  to  review  or  retrocognise  a  man's
grosser  corporeal  conditions  by  merely  contemplating  the  man  or  some
object  pertaining  to  him  naturally  suggests  the  question  whether,  if
the  past  state  of  his  lungs  or  stomach  be  thus  discernible,  the  past
state  of  his  consciousness  may  not  be  so  too.  Thoughts  and  emotions
have  left  traces  on  his  nervous  system ;  nay,  on  his  spirit ;  in  some
sense  they  still  exist ;  are  these  decipherable  by  any  seer's  in  ward
eye  1  This  question  opens  the  way  to  a  crowd  of  answers  which
fall  short  of  actual  evidence.  Sudden  unreasoning  sympathies
and  antipathies  may  be  striking  enough  to  those  who  feel  them  :
but  it  is  impossible  with  such  vague  phenomena  to  be  sure  of
marking  the  misses  as  well  as  the  hits.

Here  is  a  case  which  suggests  some  slight  retrocognitive  power
under  hypnotism.

P.  243.

From  Dr.  Van  Eeden,  of  Amsterdam,  Corresponding  Member  of  the
S.P.K.

The  following,  says  Dr.  Van  Eeden,  is  a  very  strange  case  of  telepathic
influence,  to  the  exact  truth  of  which  I  can  however  testify  : —

On  January  11th,  1892,  I  treated  Miss  M.  for  hysteric  aphonia.
I  sent  her  to  sleep  in  luy  own  study.  As  she  showed  signs  of  simulation,
and  seemed  to  need  an  energetic  treatment,  I  tlireatened  to  throw  a  glass  of
cold  water  in  her  face,  if  she  did  not  speak  immediately  in  a  clear  voice.
I  was  obliged  to  fulfil  the  threat  with  the  expected  result.  She  awoke  and
spoke  in  a  clear  loud  voice.  Tliis  was  the  first  time  in  five  years'  practice
that  I  took  this  measure,  and  I  told  nobody  of  it.


The  Subliminal  Self.


363


On  January  13th,  I  treated  Miss  F.  in  the  same  chair  in  my  study.
I  had  treated  this  lady  several  times  before  in  the  same  place,  and  she  always
went  into  a  quiet  sleep.  But  this  time  she  told  me  after  the  treatment  that
her  sleep  had  been  very  much  disturbed.  For  she  had  heard  me  saying  in  a
threatening  voice  :  "I  shall  awake  you  by  throwing  a  glass  of  cold  water  in
your  face. "  And  as  she  is  very  afraid  of  cold  water,  she  was  in  constant  fear
and  uneasiness.  Now  I  had  said  nothing  of  the  sort,  had  not  left  her,  and
iiad  not  spoken  to  anybod.y  of  the  occurrence  with  Miss  M.  two  days  before.

Miss  F.  often  hears  voices  in  her  sleep,  but  seldom  so  clearly  as  this  time.

F.  v.  E.

The  above  statement  is  the  literal  translation,  (made  in  1892  for  the
S.P.R.)  of  the  note  I  took  down  immediately  after  the  occurrence  of  the
incident  related.

T  add  the  version  of  Miss  F. ,  written  now  (1895)  while  she  is  staying  in
my  house,  I  having  asked  for  her  corroboration.  I  seem  to  have  been
mistaken  in  the  notion  that  she  had  heard  me  threatening  her.  This  mistake
is  the  result  of  my  impression  of  her  fright,  which  struck  me  principally.
According  to  her  version,  I  was  [in  her  hallucination]  speaking  to  somebody
else,  and  on  this  point  she  is  positive.  As  for  me,  I  am  absolutely  sure  I  did
not  say  anything  of  the  kind,  during  her  sleep,  nor  did  I  mention  the  fact
to  anyone.

August  13th,  1895.  F.  v.  E.

The  corroboration  of  Miss  F.  runs  as  follows  : —

Often,  during  my  sleep,  I  hear  at  a  distance  different  voices  speaking,  —
though  not  to  myself.

On  the  above-mentioned  date  I  heard  distinctly  the  voice  of  Dr.  van
Eeden  saying:  "And  so  I  threw  a  cup  of  water  into  her  face."  As  I
liave  a  particular  dislike  to  being  frightened,  I  thought  at  that  moment  how
very  angry  I  should  be  if  he  sliould  beliave  so  badly  towards  me  !

Bussum,  August  13th,  1895.  A.  F.

[Miss  F.  gave  me  orally  (at  Utrecht,  September  19,  1895)  an  interesting
account  of  her  somewhat  unusual  experience  under  hypnotism.  There
is  no  trance,  and  no  break  in  memory,  but  a  unique  rush  of  illusions
hypnagogiques,  among  which  the  impression  above  related  was  specially
distinct.— F.W.H.M.]

There  are,  however,  a  few  cases  of  a  much  stronger  kind,
where  a  definite  fact  in  a  man's  life  has  manifested  itself  phantasmally
to  a  sensitive's  gaze.  Thus  Miss  X.  recounts  (Proceedings,  Vol.
XI.,  p.  125)  the  vision  of  a  striking  picture  of  long-past  disgrace,
in  the  close  vicinity  of  an  acquaintance  whom  she  had  no  reason  to
connect  with  any  such  scene.  Similarly  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  of  Sweet
Springs,  Missouri,  puhlished  in  the  Medical  Brief  for  May,  1891,  a  long
account  of  retrocognitive  perceptions  of  a  similar  kind.  As  has  been
the  case  with  many  of  our  informants,  it  was  not  until  lately  that
Dr.  Parsons  recognised  that  such  experiences  could  have  a  scientific


364.


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


interest ;  and  most  of  his  cases  are  remote  and  now  incapable  of
corroboration.  I  select  for  quotation  a  case  which  is  well  confirmed,
and  where  the  oddness  of  the  emergent  symbol  seems  to  preclude
mere  chance  coincidence.

P.  172.

D.  J.  Parsons,  M.D.,  Sweet  Springs,  Mo.,  writes  as  follows  in  The
Medical  Brief,  April,  1891  :—

Twenty  years  after  my  first  experience  I  learned  that  I  could  see  things
mentally,  I  will  call  it,  just  as  others  had  seen  them  many  years  before  and
hundreds  of  miles  distant.  To  illustrate  :  While  in  company  with  Dr.
Trotter,  of  Lexington,  Mo. ,  I  could  see  before  and  near  to  him  a  delicate
hand  on  which  was  a  dark  red  kid  glove.  The  hand  was  all  the  time  in
motion.  I  called  his  attention  to  it  and  he  was  much  surprised.  I  told  him
the  hand  had  a  history,  and  if  he  had  no  objections  I  would  be  pleased  to
know  it.  He  said,  ' '  I  was  travelling  in  Canada,  on  the  cars,  and  one  day
we  ran  up  to  a  train  that  had  been  wrecked  a  little  while  before.  I  went  to
the  wreck  and  about  the  first  thing  I  saw  was  a  young  lady  lying  upon  the-
ground  dead  ;  one  hand  was  naked  and  the  other  was  covered  with  a  dark  red
kid  glove."  Instantly  upon  his  uttering  the  words,  the  dark  red  kid  glove-
and  the  hand  vanished.

Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  from  Sweet  Springs,  Mo.,

June  2oth,  1891.

Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — In  regard  to  Dr.  Trotter's  case  I  would
state,  in  addition  to  what  I  have  written,  that  the  Doctor  came  into  the  drug
store  where  he  found  me  alone  on  one  Sunday  morning,  and  we  talked  for
about  an  hour,  the  gloved  hand  all  the  time  present  and  in  motion.  The
dinner  bell  was  rung,  he  going  to  dinner  and  I  going  home.  I  returned
about  half -past  one  and  immediately  he  called  in.  Saw  the  hand  all  the  time-
soon  as  he  entered,  as  before.  I  then'  called  his  attention  to  it  as  stated..
My  experience  has  taught  me  to  believe  that  the  hand  would  have  returned
with  the  Doctor  perhaps  hundreds  of  times,  or  until  he  explained  to  me  the
cause  of  its  presence.  Soon  as  he  uttered  the  words  dark  glove,  it  vanished  ;;
would  never  appear  again  under  any  circumstances.

Dr.  Trotter  writes  from  Lexington,  Mo.  :—  j^^-^^  ^^fj^^  1891

R.  Hodgson,  Esq., — Dear  Sir, — The  circumstance  to  which  you  refer,
connected  with  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  of  Sweet  Springs,  Mo.,  is  indeed  veiy
remarkable —the  gloved  hand.  The  following  is  about  the  way  it  occurred.
About  the  year  1852,  I  was  travelling  on  the  (then)  Great  Western  R.R.,
Canada,  when  one  of  the  worst  R.R.  accidents  occurred  in  the  annals  of  R>
Roading,  known  as  the  Baptist's  Creek  accident.  Over  70  were  killed
outright,  and  about  100  wounded.  I  saw  tliem  all  and  there  were  many
horrible  and  striking  sights,  all  of  which  passed  out  of  my  mind,  excepting-
(ine  :  it  was  the  corpse  of  what  had  been  a  very  handsome  young  lady,  who-
had  had  a  beautiful  hand  ;  her  right  hand  was  lying  across  her  chest  with  a
fine  neat  glove,  her  left  was  bare.  The  gloved  hand  made  a  strong  im-
pression on  me  which  has  remained  to  this  day,  about  40  years. I  have  no


The  Subliminal  Self.


365


recollection  of  ever  mentioning  it  to  any  one  till  some  10  or  12  years  ago  to  Dr.
Parsons.  We  had  been  intimate  friends  for  years,  and  had  talked  a  great
deal  on  various  subjects,  Spiritualism  among  the  rest.  One  day  he  said  to
me,  "Doctor,  there  is  something  connected  with  a  glove  which  has  made  a
strong  impression  upon  your  mind."  These  are  about  his  exact  words.  It
astounded  me,  and  I  hadn't  to  think  a  second  to  tell  him  there  was,  and  I
told  him  the  circumstances,  and  that  the  sight  of  the  gloved  hand  clung  to
me,  and  I  will  say  does  so  yet.  It  has  been  a  great  wonder  to  me  how  Dr.
Parsons  referred  to  it.  He  certainly  never  got  the  idea  from  any  physical
source. -Very  respectfully,  ^  Trotter.

P.S. — You  are  at  liberty  to  use  this  as  you  think  proper. — R.T.

These  two  cases,  of  the  boy  "  running  the  gauntlet,"  and  of  the
red  glove,  illustrate  better  than  any  others  in  my  possession  the
suggested  adherence  of  phantasmal  scenes  to  a  living  person, — or,  say
their  inherence  in  that  person, — with  no  suggestion  of  spirit  agency.^
It  is  plain,  on  the  other  hand,  that  where  instead  of  a  glove,  or  a
picture  of  A  himself  in  the  past,  it  is  the  phantom  of  a  deceased
person  which  is  thus  seen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  living  one,  we  can
no  longer  feel  confident  that  it  is  the  living  man's  memory  only
which  is  at  work.  But  there  is  no  need,  I  say,  to  suppose  that  the
red  glove  implied  the  presence  of  the  spirit  of  its  quondam  owner.
We  may  regard  it  as  a  psychical  image  accompanying  the  man  in
whose  memory  it  was  lodged,  although  as  imperceptible  to  ordinary
observers  as  the  special  scent  by  which  a  bloodhound  would  have
tracked  his  footsteps  along  a  crowded  street.  Nor  need  we,  on  such
an  analogy,  suppose  that  such  trace  can  be  left  only  by  the  presence
of  the  living  man  himself.  His  cap  or  glove  will  give  trace  enough
for  the  hound  to  follow  his  movements, — to  reconstruct  his  life  from
the  hound's  point  of  view;  and  similarly  there  may  be  signs  in  the
man's  body  or  envii'onment  which  may  afford  a  transcendental  trace,
from  which  his  history  may  be  reconstructed  by  a  gaze  which  is  not  of
the  eye  alone.  ^

This  influence  of  material  objects  in  facilitating  retrocognitive
telsesthesia  has  been  already  more  than  once  discussed  in  connection

1  Por  a  discussion  by  Miss  X,  of  alternative  explanations  of  such  pictures,  see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XT.,  p.  114  foil.  And  compare  a  case  quoted  by  Mr.  Podmore,
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  286.

2  It  is  worth  noting  that  this  is  precisely  what  ^schylus  suggests  when  he  makes
the  phantom  of  Clytemnestra  appeal  to  the  sleeping  Eumenides  to  recognise,  by  the
internal  visions  of  their  profound  sleeji,  the  long-past  source  of  the  wounds  which  she
shows  in  her  breast.  [Eum.  98).

'Opare  irKriyai  rdcrde  KapStas  o6ev
EuSovcra  yap  4>pr)v  Ofipacriv  \ap.TTpvveTaL-
'Ev  rjpepa  Se  p-olp'  (iTrpucrKOTros  fipoTwv.

2  E


366


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


with  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  and  will  call  for  further  discussion  when  those
trance-phenomena  shall  be  again  dealt  with.  For  the  present  I  will
merely  refer  to  two  cases,  both  of  them  from  informants  with  whose
names  the  readers  of  these  Proceedings  are  already  familiar.  The
first,  the  tracing  of  the  history  of  a  ring,  will  be  found  in  a  paper
signed  J.  M.  Soames,  in  the  Contem2}orary  Review  (1891),  whose
author — his  real  name  is  Major  Schreiber — is  known  to  me.  The
case  is  remote  and  now  hardly  capable  of  corroboration,  but  it  seems
to  have  been  carefully  observed  and  described.  (See  Ft-oceedings,
Vol.  VIIT.,  p.  526.)

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  Dobbie,  a  correspondent  known  to
many  of  us,  and  of  whose  conscientious  care  we  feel  assured.  It  is
quoted  by  Mrs.  Sidgvvick  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIT.,  p.  65.

In  these  and  similar  cases  the  inanimate  object  is  regarded  as
leading  to  a  knowledge  of  part  of  the  history  of  persons  connected
with  it.  But  it  is  sometimes  asserted  that  the  inanimate  object
reveals  its  oion  history, — suggesting  scenes  in  which,  perhaps,  no
human  being  has  taken  part.  This  further  claim,  I  think,  is  simply  a
matter  of  evidence,  and  it  is  as  yet  quite  insufficiently  sui^ported.
One  might  regard  it  as  consistent  with  a  view  of  the  universe  as  a
completely  conservative  system,  that  record  should  somehow  persist,
even  of  scenes  which  have  never  been  reflected  in  human  minds.
Human  minds  probably  constitute  but  an  infinitesimal  fi-action  of  the
mind  in  the  Universe.  But  as  to  whether  a  record  formed  apart
from  human  minds  can  be  reached  by  human  minds  or  no  ; — that,  I
repeat,  may  be  discussed  with  more  profit  when  better  evidence  than
now  exists  for  so  extreme  an  assumption  shall  have  been  produced

But  now,  continuing  our  survey  of  modes  of  retrocognition  which
do  not  directly  depend  upon  tele^Dathy,  we  come  to  two  groups  of
phenomena  which,  as  far  back  as  the  publication  of  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  seemed  hardly  to  fall  under  the  heading  of  Transmission  from
Mind  to  Mind,  which  that  book  was  primarily  intended  to  prove.
Edmund  Gurney  has  there  said  much  as  to  "  telepathic  clairvoyance,"
and  something  also  (Vol.  II.,  p.  365,  sqq.)  as  to  "  a  curious  little
group  of  cases  in  which  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  assign  the
impi'ession  to  the  '  agency  '  of  any  particular  person,  and  which  recall
the  Greek  notion  of  "^r^^r) — the  rumour  which  spreads  from  some
unknown  source,  and  far  outstrips  all  known  means  of  transport."
In  crude  language,  there  are  cases  where  a  living  man's  spirit  seems  to
wander  about  and  pick  up  knowledge  for  itself,  and  cases  where  it
seems  to  sit  at  home  while  knowledge  flows  in  upon  it  from  no  trace-

1  The  works  on  this  subject  by  Buchanan  and  Denton  lack  precision  and
corroboration  from  the  evidential  point  of  view.


The  Subliminal  Self.


367


able  source.  The  dividing  lines  of  hypothetical  classes  of  this  sort  are
of  course  obscure ;  but  I  may  say  that  the  cases  given  in  Mrs.
Sidgwick's  paper  on  Clairvoyance  (^Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  30),
belong  mainly  to  the  former  of  these  two  groups, — sometimes  called
Travelling  Clairvoyance  ; — of  which,  again,  we  shall  in  this  paper  hear
more  when  we  come  to  discuss  precognition.  For  the  moment  I  turn
to  the  second  class  ; — the  passive  reception  of  impressions  which  no
assignable  mind,  incarnate  or  discarnate,  can  plausibly  be  supposed  to
have  ti'ansmitted.  Convenience  demands  a  name  for  this  class ;  and
new  woi-ds  of  fresh  derivation  and  definite  meaning  do  assuredly  save
more  trouble  in  the  end  than  they  give  at  the  beginning.  The  early
Christians  used  the  term  Koa-fxoTTaOr^s  for  a  man  readily  affected  by
impressions  from  the  surrounding  world.  I  therefore  propose  to  term
these  experiences  cosmopatldc ; — -impressions  which  come  to  men  from
the  transcendental  environment  ;  boime  like  seed  on  the  wind,  rather
than  wittingly  directed  towards  him  by  the  voluntary  or  involuntary
sympathy  of  any  assignable  intelligence.  In  this  class  I  should  place
the  several  instances  quoted  by  Mr.  Gurney  (loc.  cit.)  where  a  sudden
and  true  impression  of  the  death  of  some  distinguished  personage
comes  to  a  percipient  with  no  special  interest  in  the  event. ^  Various
crystal  visions  already  published  seem  to  fall  under  this  category,  and
several  narratives  quoted  in  this  paper  may  be  so  interpreted.  But
often  a  link  of  some  kind  can  be  found  ;  and  we  may  well  suppose
that  such  links  may  be  differently  perceived,  and  may  link  human
spirits  in  unguessed  ways,  in  the  subliminal  world.

L.  976.  A^iPs

Received  thrcaigh  the  American  Branch.
The  following  case  was  received  by  Professor  James  from  Mr  R.  T.  Van
Deusen,  of  600,  Addison  Avenue,  Albany.

Mr.  Van  Deusen  writes  : —  r  oa*7 i  one?

I  am  a  collector,  and  of  late  a  dealer,  in  old  china.  My  home  and
business  are  in  Albany,  N.Y.,  where  I  issue  a  small  sheet,  called  the  China

1  One  of  the  most  curious  of  these  cases  to  my  thinking  is  that  given  in  the  note
to  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p,  SG7,  where  Mr.  C.  Mayne  Young,  a  man  of
some  note  in  his  day,  was  troubled  for  some  hours  of  the  night  with  the  inward
insistance — almost  amounting  to  an  auditory  hallucination — of  four  apparently  mean-
ingless syllables,"  Dowd,"  "  Swell,"  "  Pull,"  "  Court,"  and  only  afterwards  discovered
that  Mr.  Dowdeswell,  of  Pull  Court,  a  stranger  to  him,  was  at  that  time  on  his  death-
bed. I  happen  to  know  the  ladies — daughters  of  Mr.  Horace  Smith,  the  once  well-
known  author  of  "Rejected  Addresses," — to  whom  Mr.  Young  communicated  this
dream  before  the  coincidence  was  known.  They  fully  remember  the  circumstances,
and  their  evidence  is  made  the  more  valuable  by  the  fact  that  not  only  did  they  then
regard  Mr.  Young's  nan-ative  of  his  experience  as  pointless  ; — but  even  now  that  the
coincidence  is  known — and  by  them  inexplicable— they  take  no  interest  in  the  matter.
See,  also,  a  ease  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal  for  October,  1892  ;— "  Earl  Howe  of  Gopsal."

2  E  2


368


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Collector.  Some  14  months  since,  I  found  an  article  in  Scrihner's  Magazine
bearing  on  the  subject,  and  written  by  Mrs.  A.,  of  Brooklyn,  an  entire
stranger  to  me.  I  wrote  Mrs.  A.  at  the  time,  and  may  have  received  three
to  five  letters  from  her,  all  of  which  are  biief  and  pertaining  strictly  to  our
common  interest.  Once,  when  in  New  York  city,  I  called  upon  Mrs.  A.  at
her  Brooklyn  home,  meeting  only  her,  and  of  course  learning  nothing  of  her
family.  At  this  call  Mrs.  A.  exjjressed  a  desire  to  possess  a  certain  specimen,
which  I  found  later  on  ;  and,  having  a  trip  to  town  in  view,  decided  to  again
call  and  tell  her  of  it.  Arrived  at  the  house,  I  was  told  by  a  maid  that  Mrs.
A.  's  son  was  very  ill,  and  that  she  saw  no  one.  In  response  to  an  inquiry,  I
was  told  that  they  then  regarded  him  as  improving.  I  thus  left  the  house
with  the  impression  that  he  was  on  the  road  to  recovery.  During  the  next
two  or  three  weeks  I  frequently  considered  the  advisability  of  writing,  but
hesitated  for  some  time,  fearing  to  intrude  so  trifling  a  matter  at  a  time  of
anxiety  and  care.  I,  however,  received  a  comf)limentary  copy  of  her  book
China  Collecting  in  America,  at  this  time,  and  acknowledged  the  same  in  a
note,  expressing  hope  of  recovery,  &c.  Very  shortly  after  this,  I  awoke  one
morning  at  an  earlier  hour  than  usual  (why  I  knew  not),  and  fell  into  a  doze,
from  which  I  was  wakened  at  about  seven  by  the  announcement,  in  a  low
voice,  close  to  my  right  ear,  '^Willie  A.  died  this  morning  at  two  o'clock."
I  never  for  a  moment  doubted  that  my  wife,  who  sleeps  in  an  adjoining
room,  had  been  in  and  told  me.  It  is  her  custom  to  wake  me  very  gently,
and  I  believed  I  heard  her  voice.  I  "gathered"  myself  rather  slowly,
wondering  how  Mrs.  Van  Deusen  could  have  received  the  information.  The
acquaintance  between  Mrs.  A.  and  myself  was  of  the  sort  described,  and
there  was  no  reason  why  any  notification  of  this  death  should  be  sent  us.  I
went  out  into  the  hall,  met  my  wife,  and  asked  the  question,  only  to  receive
from  her  the  startled  reply,  "Who  is  dead?"  when  mutual  explanations  and
astonishment  ensued.  I  was  so  imjjressed  with  the  precise  and  emphatic
character  of  the  aiinouncement  that  I  nientioned  it  to  two  or  three  friends,
and  sought  to  find  out  if  it  was  true.  I  was  only  able  to  learn  that  the  lad
died  that  night.  On  my  next  meeting  with  Mrs.  A.  this  fall,  I  asked  if  the
name  of  her  son  was  Willie,  and  on  hearing  that  it  was  not,  I  then  explained
my  reason  for  asking,  when  Mrs.  A.  told  me  that  her  son  did  die  at  tiuo
o'clock  that  morning.  Mrs.  A.  then  vokniteered  the  information  that  she  had
heard  a  similar  case  in  connection  with  the  death  of  her  son.

I  fancy  that  I  was  too  heavy  with  sleep  to  catch  the  first  word  of  the
sentence— note  its  order.  This  is  the  only  instance  of  tlie  sort  that  ever
happened  to  me.

It  happened  tliat  friends  came  to  us  the  day  that  I  received  the  notifica-
tion of  Mrs.  A.'s  son's  death,  and  I  mentioned  the  fact  to  them.  I  was
sick  most  of  that  day — a  peculiar  nervous  dyspepsia  and  accompanying
disturbance.  I  knew  this  was  not  due  to  the  knowledge  of  this  boy's  death.
Tliere  was  no  reason  why  I  should  feel  his  death.  I  think  I  was  not  much
impressed  with  the  occurrence  until  it  became  the  subject  of  talk.

Do  you  sup2Dose  that  tlie  disturbance  of  my  nervous  centres  was  in  any
way  connected  with  the  incident,  and  if  so,  how?  I  am  33  years  old,  and  am
fairly  strong.

Robert  Thompson  Van  Deusen.


The  Subliminal  Self.


369


In  a  latei'  communication,  Mr.  Van  Deusen  said  that  he  was  unable  to
give  the  exact  date  of  his  experience,  having  made  no  note  of  it.  After
ascertaining  that  it  was  on  the  same  morning  tliat  the  boy  died,  he  ceased  to
feel  any  active  interest  in  it.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  request  for  corroboration,  Mrs.  Van  Deusen
wrote  : —

The  Addison,  Middlebury,  Vt.,  March  ^Ist,  1893.

Dear  Sir, — Your  letter  to  Mr.  Van  Deusen  requesting  a  statement  from
me  was  duly  received.

I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  my  husband's  asking  me  that  morning
whether  I  had  told  him  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  A.  's  son,  and  his  surprise  at
my  reply  that  I  had  not  been  in  the  room,  and  knew  nothing  of  it.  Indeed,
I  did  not  even  know  she  had  a  son,  so  slight  was  the  acquaintance.  I  only
know  of  Mrs.  A.  as  one  of  Mr.  Van  Deusen's  customers.  My  husband
seemed  much  impressed  with  the  occurrence,  and  we  talked  more  or  less  of
it  at  the  time.  It  gradually  passed  out  of  our  minds  until  two  or  three
months  later,  when  during  a  call  on  Mrs.  A.  he  mentioned  the  circumstances
and  learned  the  correctness  of  the  intelligence.  So  much  time  has  since
passed,  that  it  is  impossible  to  recall  names  of  those  to  whom  it  was  told.
Mrs.  William  O.  Stillman  remembers  the  occurrence,  and  I  presume  our
maid,  who  was  mucli  in  the  dining-room  in  attendance  on  the  table,  might
remember  it,  but  she  has  left  me,  and  I  have  not  her  address.

Mr.  Van  Deusen  wrote  to  Mrs.  A.  for  permission  to  give  her  address,  as
you  requested,  but  has  received  no  reply.  Alys  B  Deusen

Dr.  Hodgson  wrote  to  Mrs.  Stillman,  asking  for  her  recollections  of  the
occurrence,  and  received  the  following  reply  : —

287,  State  Street,  Albany,  Fehruary  27th,  1893.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — This  morning  I  received  your  note  about  Mr.  Van
Deusen's  experience,  and  regret  I  made  no  note  at  the  time.  He  told  me
the  day  after  he  received  the  impression  that  a  voice  said  to  him  the  night

before  :  "  Little  Willie  A.  died  at  o'clock." He  told  me  the  hour,  but

I  have  forgotten  it.  Shortly  afterwards  he  said  to  me  that  he  heard  from
Mrs.  A.  that  the  hour  at  which  her  little  boy  died  was  the  hour  he  had
heard,  and  I  was  quite  struck  by  the  coincidence. — Very  truly  yours,

Frances  Stillman.

It  must  be  noted  here,  I  repeat,  that  there  had  in  fact  been  some
slight  link  between  the  dying  boy's  mother  and  the  percipient ;  and
that,  for  aught  we  know,  this  connexion  may  have  been  more  operative
below  than  above  the  conscious  threshold.

And  similarly  in  cases  where  a  man  lias  a  vision  of  some  incident
at  a  distance  ; — say  of  some  accident  in  which  he  is  not  directly
concerned  ; — one  can  still  say  that  the  event  was  one  which  it  would
have  interested  him  to  see,  which  might  have  attracted  his  telmsthetic
attention^  so  to  term  it,  in  sleep.

Both  this  and  the  following  case  resemble  the  dream  {Phantasms
of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  368)  in  which  a  gentleman  at  Leicester


370


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


discerned  an  accident  then  occurring  in  the  Thames  Tunnel.  Mr.
Wack's  narrative  recalls  also  Mrs.  Storie's  experience,  {Phantasms
of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  370),  excej^t  that  the  person  whose  fate  was
represented  in  the  dream  was  in  this  case  entirely  unknown  to  the
dreamer. Mr.  W.  H.  Wack  is  an  attorney.

P.  224.  Court  House,  St.  Paul,  Minn.

February  10th,  1892.

I  believe  I  have  had  a  remarkable  experience.  About  midnight  on  the
29th  day  of  December,  headsore  and  fatigued,  I  left  my  study  where  I  had
been  poring  over  uninspiring  law  text,  and,  climbing  to  my  chamber  door,
fell  into  bed  for  the  night.

Nothing  unusual  had  transpired  in  my  affairs  that  day,  and  yet,  when  I
gave  myself  to  rest,  my  brain  buzzed  on  with  a  myriad  fancies.  I  lay  an
hour,  awake,  and  blinking  like  an  over-fed  owl.  The  weird  intonation  of  an
old  kitchen  clock  fell  upon  my  ears  but  faintly,  as  it  dongedthe  hour  of  two.
The  sound  of  the  clock  chime  had  hardly  died  when  I  became  conscious  of
my  position  in  a  passenger  coach  on  the  St.  Paul,  Minneapolis  and  Omaha
railroad.  I  was  journeying  to  Duluth,  Minnesota,  from  St.  Paul,  in  which
latter  place  I  had  gone  to  sleep.  I  was  aware  that  I  had  been  on  the  train
about  four  hours  and  that  I  was  somewhere  near  the  town  of  Shell  Lake,
Wis.,  distant  from  St.  Paul  about  eighty  miles.  I  had  often  been  over  the
road,  and  as  T  peered  through  the  coach  window,  I  recognised,  in  the  moonlit
scene,  features  of  country  and  habitation  I  had  seen  before.  We  were
plunging  on,  almost  heedlessly  as  it  seemed,  when  I  fancied  I  heard  and
was  startled  from  my  reverie  by  a  piercing  shriek,  which  was  protracted
into  a  piteous  moaning  and  gasping,  as  if  some  human  creature  were  sufl'ering
some  hideous  torture.

Then  I  felt  the  train  grind  heavily  to  an  awkward  stop.  There  was  a
sudden  commotion  fore  and  aft.  Train  men  with  lanterns  hurried  through
my  car  and  joined  employes  near  the  engine.  I  could  see  the  lights  flash
hero  and  there,  beside  and  beneath  the  cars  ;  brakemen  moved  along  the
wheels  in  groups,  the  pipe  voice  of  the  conductor  and  the  awe-stricken  cry
of  the  black  porter  infused  a  livening  sense  to  a  scene  which  I  did  not
readily  understand.  Instinctively  I  concluded  that  an  accident  had  happened,
or  perhaps  that  a  break  to  the  train  had  occasioned  this  sudden  uprising  of
train  men.  A  minute  later  I  was  out  upon  the  road  bed.  Tlie  brusque  and
busy  search  and  the  disturbed  manner  of  the  attendants  did  not  invite
elaborate  inquiry  from  a  curious  passenger,  so  I  was  content  to  be  told,  in
very  ugly  snaj^pish  English,  that  if  I  had  eyes  I  might  see  for  myself  that
"some  one  got  killed,  I  reckon,"  Everybody  moved  and  acted  in  a  spirit  of
stealth,  and  each,  it  appeared,  expected  a  horrible  "  find."  The  trucks  were
being  examined  from  the  rear  of  the  train  forward.  Blood  splotches  were
discovered  on  nearly  all  the  bearings  under  the  entire  train.  When  the  gans;
reached  one  of  the  forward  cars,  all  lights  were  cast  upon  a  truck  which  was
literally  scrambled  with  what  appeared  to  be  brains — human  brains,
evidently,  for  among  the  clots  were  small  tufts  of  human  hair.  This  truck,
particularly,  must  have  ground  over  the  bulk  of  a  human  body.  Every


The  Sicblimincd  Self.


371


fixture  between  the  wheels  was  smeared  with  the  crimson  ooze  of  some
crushed  victim.  But  where  was  the  body,  or  at  least  its  members  ?  The
trucks  were  covered  only  with  a  pulp  of  mangled  remnants.  The  search  for
what  appeared  of  the  killed  was  extended  500  yards  back  of  the  train  and  all
about  the  right-of-way  with  no  more  satisfactory  result  than  to  occasionally
find  a  blood-stained  tie.

All  hands  boarded  the  train  ;  many  declaring  that  it  was  an  unusual
mishap  on  a  railroad  which  left  such  uncertain  trace  of  its  victim.  Again
I  felt  the  train  thundering  on  through  the  burnt  pine  wastes  of  northern
Minnesota.  As  I  reclined  there  in  my  berth,  I  reflected  upon  the  experience
of  the  night,  and  often  befuddled  my  sleepy  head  in  an  effort  to  understand
how  a  train,  pushing  along  at  the  rate  of  thirty  miles  an  hour,  could  so
grind  and  triturate  a  vital  bulk,  staining  only  trucks  behind  the  engine,
unless  the  killed  at  the  fatal  time  were  upon  the  truck  or  huddled  closely  by
it.  I  concluded,  therefore,  that  the  being  destroyed  under  the  train  had
been  concealed  near  the  bespattered  fixtures  of  the  car.  I  had  read  of
death  to  tramps  stealing  rides  by  hiding  themselves  under  or  between  cars,
and  finally  I  dismissed  meditation — assured  that  another  uixfortunate
itinerant  had  been  crushed  out  of  existence.  Horrible  !  I  shuddered  and
awoke— relieved  to  coinprehend  it  all  a  dream.

Now  the  fact  that  the  foregoing  is  an  accurate  statement  of  a  dream
experienced  by  me  is  not  a  matter  for  marvel.  Taken  alone,  there  is  nothing
remarkable  in  the  time  at  which  this  vision  blackened  my  sleep.  The  spell
was  upon  me  between  two  and  three  o'clock  in  the  morning — of  that  I  am
certain.  I  am  positive  of  the  time,  because,  when  I  awoke,  I  heard  the
clock  distinctly,  as  it  struck  three.

On  the  morrow,  I, — who  usually  forget  an  ordinary  dream  long  before
breakfast— recounted  to  the  family  the  details  of  the  night's  distraction.
From  my  hearers  there  followed  only  the  ordinary  comments  of  how  ghastly
and  how  shocking  the  story  was  as  told  and  how  strange  the  nature  of  the
accident — thut  iw  parts  of  the  body  had  been,  found.  The  latter  circumstance
v.'as,  to  me  also,  quite  an  unusual  feature  of  railroad  casualty.

The  evening  following  the  night  of  the  dream  (December  30th),  at  5
o'clock,  I  returned  to  my  home,  stepped  into  my  study,  and,  as  I  am  in  the
habit  of  doing,  I  glanced  at  a  page  of  the  St.  Faul  Dispatch,  a  daily  evening
newspaper.  It  had  been  casually  folded  by  a  previous  reader,  so  that  m
picking  it  up  flatly,  the  article  which  first  fixed  my  attention  read  :

"Fate  of  a  TKAiiP. Horrible  Death  Experiexced  by  an  Unkno-svn
Man  on  the  Omaha  Road.

"  Duluth,  December  30. — Every  truck  on  the  incoming  Omaha  train  from
St.  Paul  this  morning  was  splashed  with  blood.  Trainmen  did  not  know
there  had  been  an  accident  till  they  arrived  here,  but  think  some  unfortunate
man  must  have  been  stealing  a  ride  between  St.  Paul  and  this  city.  Train-
men on  a  later  train  state  that  a  man's  leg  was  found  by  them  at  Spooner,
and  that  for  two  miles  this  side  the  tracks  were  scattered  with  pieces  of  flesh
and  bone. There  is  no  possible  means  of  identification."

Here  was  an  evident  verification  of  all  that  transpired  in  my  mind  between
two  and  three  o'clock  on  the  previous  night. I  reflected,  and  the  more  I


372


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


pondered  the  faster  I  became  convinced  that  I  had  been  in  some  mysterious
form,  spirit  or  element,  witness  of  the  tragedy  reported  in  the  columns  of
the  press— that  my  vision  was  perfect  as  to  general  details,  and  the
impression  complete  and  exact  to  time,  place,  and  circumstance.  The  next
morning  I  scanned  the  pages  of  the  Pioneer  Press  of  December  31st,  and
read  the  following  paragraph  :  —

"  Unknown  man  killed.  Shell  Lake,  Wis.  Special  telegram,
December  30th. — Fragments  of  the  body  of  an  unknown  man  were  picked
up  on  the  railroad  track  to-day.  Portions  of  the  same  body  were  also  found
on  over  100  miles  of  the  railroad.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been  killed  by
the  night  train,  but  just  where  is  not  known."

With  this  came  the  conviction  to  me  that,  living  and  asleep,  100  miles
from  the  place  of  the  killing,  I  had  been  subjected  to  the  i^hantom-sight  of
an  actual  occurrence  on  the  Omaha  railroad,  as  vivid  and  in  truth  as  I  have
stated  it  above.

I  have  not  written  this  account  because  Mark  Twain  and  other  authors
have  published  in  current  magazines  their  experiences  in  what  is  termed
Mental  Telepathy  or  Mental  Telegraphy.  On  the  contrary,  having  read
a  number  of  those  articles,  I  have  hesitated  to  utter,  as  authentic,  what  I
now  believe  to  be  a  material  and  striking  evidence  of  the  extent,  the  caprice,
and  the  possibilities  of  this  occult  ]jhenomenon.  Harry  W  Wack

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  enquiries,  Mr.  Wack  wrote  : —

St.  Paul,  February  mh,  1892.

My  Dear  Sir, — Replying  to  your  valued  favour  of  the  15th  inst.,  I  will
say  that  you  are  right  in  understanding  that  my  account  of  the  dream  sub-
mitted to  your  Society  is  a  true  narrative.

I  reaffirm  every  word  of  it,  and  give  you  my  solemn  assurance  that,  as  I
have  stated,  I  informed  my  family  and  friends  of  the  dream  and  its  details,
before  I  had  the  first  suspicion  that  the  public  press  ever  had  contained  or
ever  would  contain  a  report  of  such  an  actual  occurrence.

If  desirable  I  will  make  affidavit  as  to  the  truth  of  the  substance  of  the
narrative  in  your  hands.

I  enclose  a  few  corroborative  letters,  the  signatures  to  which  I  procured
yesterday,  February  19th. If  these  serve  you,  well  and  good.

Harry  W.  Wack.

The  following  were  the  corroborative  letters  enclosed  : —

(1)  St.  Paul,  Fchruary  20th,  1892.

Gentlemen, — Referring  to  an  account  of  a  dream  submitted  to  you  by
Mr.  Harry  Wack  of  this  city  which  I  have  read,  I  beg  leave  to  add  the  follow-
ing facts  corroborative  of  the  narrative.

After  careful  consideration  of  the  article,  I  find  that  the  story  of  the
dream  on  December  29th-30th  is  in  substance  identical  with  that  which
was  related  by  Mr.  Wack  at  breakfast  on  the  morning  of  December  30th,
1891.  On  that  occasion  Mr.  Wack  stated  that  he  had  been  agitated  the  pre-
vious night  by  a  dream  of  unusual  features,  and  then,  at  the  request  of  those
present,  he  recited  what  now  appears  in  his  article,  which  I  have  just  perused
for  the  first  time. On  the  evening  of  December  30th,  1891,  when  Mr.  Wack


The  Subihninal  Self.


373


discovered  the  newspaper  item,  he  again  mentioned  the  dream  and  called  ray
attention  to  the  newspaper  item,  and  several  of  the  family  discussed  the
matter.  On  the  morning  of  December  31st,  another  newspaper  clipping
bearing  on  the  same  matter  was  debated  by  the  family.

Aside  from  the  unusual  features  and  hideousness  of  the  dream,  there  was
nothing  to  startle  us,  until  the  newspaper  accounts  developed  the  affair  in  a
mysterious  sense.  The  first  version  of  the  dream  was  given  in  the  moriiing
of  December  30th.  The  first  newspaper  dispatch  appeared  and  was  dis-
covered in  the  evening  of  the  same  day.  This  I  know  of  my  own  know-
ledge, being  present  on  each  occasion.

Mes.  Margaret  B.  Macdonald.

(2)  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  February  20tk,  1892.
Gestlemex, — I  have  read  the  letter  of  Mrs.  Macdonald,  with  whom  I

visited  on  December  29th,  30th,  31st,  and  days  following,  and  with  your  per-
mission I  will  say  that  I  also  was  present  at  breakfast  when  Mr.  Wack
mentioned  the  dream,  and  at  dinner  (6  p.m.)  when  Mr.  Wack  called  our
attention  to  the  newspaper  item,  which  he  then  declared  was  a  positive
verification  of  the  dream  he  experienced  the  night  before.  I  have  read  the
account  of  the  dream,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  precisely  as  I  understood  it  from
Mr.  Wack's  account  given  on  the  mornmg  of  December  30th,  1891.

Rose  B.  Hamilton.

(3)  St.  Paul,  February  20th,  1892.
Gentlemen, — Having  read  the  foregoing  letters  of  Mrs.  Macdonald  and

IMiss  Rose  B.  Hamilton,  and  being  familiar  with  the  facts  and  incidents
therein  set  forth,  I  would  add  my  endorsement  to  them  as  being  in  strict
accord  with  the  truth.

Mr.  Wack  stated  his  dream  as  he  has  written  of  it  in  the  article  which  I
understand  he  has  submitted  to  you,  on  the  morning  of  December  30th,  1891.
He  came  upon  and  drew  our  attention  to  the  newspaper  articles  in  the
evening  of  December  30th,  and  on  the  morning  of  December  31st,  1891.  It
was  these  newspaper  dispatches  which  made  the  dream  interesting,  and  there-
after  it  was  freely  discussed.  ^  McDonald.

Mr.  H.  "W.  Smith,  an  Associate  ]\Iember  of  the  American  Branch,  writes
to  Dr.  Hodgson  in  connection  with  the  case  : —

Office  of  Smith  and  Austrian,  Commission  Merchants,

290,  E.,  6th  Street,  Produce  Exchange,

St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Ajrril  ]4^/i,  1892.
My  Dear  Sir, — It  has  been  impossible  for  me  to  accept  Mr.  Wack's
invitation  to  meet  at  his  house  the  witnesses  he  cited  in  his  communication
to  you.  I  have  already  written  you  of  my  preliminarj'  interview  with  Mr.
Wack,  and  it  confirms  in  my  own  mind  the  high  opinion  which  I  previously
held  of  him  through  our  acquaintanceship,  extending  over  a  series  of  years.
There  is  no  reasonable  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  statement  he  makes  is
substantially  correct,  at  least  as  respects  any  and  all  allegations  of  fact.
Of  course  the  application  of  these  facts  to  an  unknown  force  is  a  matter  upon
which  I  cannot  speak.

Herbert  W.  Smith.


374


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  fact  that  Mr.  Wack  had  often  travelled  over  this  road  may
possibly  have  turned  in  this  direction  the  telsesthetic  perception  of  his
sleeping  hours.

The  following  case  bears  an  absurd  resemblance  to  the  tragedy  just
recounted.

M.Cl.  12.

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

Mr.  Watts,  who  told  me  the  incident  immediately  before  writing  it  down
at  my  request,  is  quite  unable  to  tind  any  explanation  of  the  matter.  He  is
quite  clear  that  he  had  no  opportunity  to  tell  anyone  beforehand,  that  the
image  of  the  broken  statue  had  actually  cume  into  his  mind  at  the  moment
when  he  was  brushing  his  hair,  and  the  violent  shock  which  he  seems  to
have  felt  when  he  saw  his  dream  realised  is  strong  evidence  that  he  is  not
mistaken  on  this  point.

From  Mr.  J.  Hunter  Watts,  of  39,  Seething  Lane,  E.G.,

July  16th,  1889.

I  will  endeavour  to  commit  to  paper  the  little  episode  which  I  related  to
you  verbally.  About  six  years  ago  I  was  with  my  brother  George  in  Paris,
where  he  bought  for  some  eight  or  ten  francs  a  Plaster  of  Paris  "  Venus  de
Milo  " — a  ghastly  copy  of  the  original.  I  protested  against  the  purchase  as
I  had  to  share  the  bother  of  bringing  the  thing  home,  and  as  it  was  some
four  or  five  feet  high  our  fellow  travellers  imagined  we  had  with  us  a  corpse
rolled  up  in  ])aper.  Arrived  home  I  would  not  consent  to  the  house  being
disfigured  with  the  thing,  so  as  a  compromise  my  brother  planted  it  on  the
summit  of  a  fern  rockery  in  the  corner  of  the  garden,  where  it  stood  for
many  months,  and  I  had  forgotten  its  existence  save  when  it  was  directly  in
sight.  Out  of  sight  it  was  out  of  mind.  One  autumn  morning,  just  after  I
had  risen  from  bed,  I  was  combing  my  ambrosial  locks  before  the  looking-
glass,  and  I  caught  myself  reflecting  that  after  all  it  was  a  pity  the  thing  had
blown  down  and  broken,  for  it  did  not  look  so  bad  at  a  distance  surrounded
by  the  ferns.  "Strange  too,"  I  thought  to  myself,  "  that  the  head  should
be  so  neatly  decapitated,  though  the  fall  made  no  other  fracture."  Then  I
pulled  myself  up  mentally,  for  all  at  once  it  came  to  my  mind  that  I  had
been  dreaming,  and  I  smiled  to  myself  that  such  a  trumpery  thing  should  be
the  subject  of  my  dreams.  The  whole  matter  would  have  been  forgotten,
would  have  gone  to  the  limbo  of  things  unrcmembered,  but  on  going  down-
stairs to  breakfast  and  finding  the  table  not  yet  furnished,  I  went  for  a  stroll
into  the  garden.  It  was  wet  underfoot  and  a  strong  wind  was  blowing.
When  I  came  to  the  fernery  I  gave  a  start  and  for  a  moment  I  stood  tout
ihahi,  for  there  was  the  poor  Venus  de  Milo,  the  body  unbroken,  lying  across
the  ferns,  and  the  head,  neatly  decapitated,  in  the  middle  of  the  walk,
exactly  as  I  had  seen  it  in  my  dream.  For  the  moment  T  was  convinced  that
I  had  been  walking  in  my  sleep  and  had  visited  the  garden,  but  that  I
found  could  not  be  the  case,  as  it  had  rained  all  night  and  my  garments
would  have  been  wet  through,  and  my  feet,  if  unshod,  muddy,  or  their
covering,  if  they  had  any,  defiled,  which  was  not  the  case.  Neither  am  I
given  to  walking  in  my  sleep. I  have  never  done  so. I  walked  back  to  the


The  Subliminal  Self.


375


house  feeling,  to  use  a  vulgar  phrase,  "knocked  all  silly."  Can  it  he,  I
asked  myself,  and  I  have  asked  myself  the  same  question  a  score  of  times
since,  that  while  my  body  material  slumbered  in  bed,  some  immaterial  part
of  my  being  wandered  in  the  garden  1  If  so,  that  immaterial  part  of  me  had
a  remarkable  disregard  for  wind  and  rain.

The  episode  is  a  trifling  one,  but  it  has  often  given  me  pause  and  it
remains  to  me  inexplicable.  As  you  know  I  am  a  Bank  Holiday  sort  of
young  man,  not  given  to  day-dreams.  j jj^^^^^  Watts.

In  answer  to  the  inquiry  whether  the  statue  could  have  been  seen  from
his  bedroom  window,  or  from  any  other  window  in  the  house,  Mr.  Hunter
Watts  says  : — "  No,  impossible  ;  only  by  stretching  the  head  out  of  window
another  side  of  house — from  rooms  occupied  by  ladies."

A  lady  to  whom  Mr.  Watts  related  the  dream  corroborates  as  follows  : — ■
45,  Hungerford  Road,  Camden  Road,  N.,  Augitst  9th.

All  I  can  at  all  remember  about  the  Venus  is  that  Mr.  Watts  told  us  one
morning  that  a  strange  thing  had  happened,  he  having  dreamt  that  the
statue  had  been  decapitated,  and  on  going  into  the  garden  he  found  it  was
so,  and  that  the  head  of  the  Venus  had  been  cut  clean  off,  and  had  rolled  on
to  the  path  from  the  figure,  which  liad  been  placed  in  the  rockery  among
the  ferns.  He  was  very  much  astonished,  as  the  dream  was  vivid,  and  he
saw  the  headless  statue  as  he  had  seen  it  in  his  dream.  We  could  never
explain  how  it  hapjDened,  the  head  being,  as  it  were,  cut  off.

M.  Adams.

Again  this  quasi-instinctive  knowledge,  realised  on  awaking  from
sleep,  of  the  mutilation  of  a  secluded  statue  may  be  compared  witii
cases  where  a  seer  becomes  aware  of  the  position  of  a  dead  body, —
sometimes  of  no  special  interest  to  himself.

P.  226.

The  following  case  was  borrowed  originally  from  tlie  P^dujio-Plnlosophical
Journal  and  quoted  in  Light,  February  7th,  1891.

A  prominent  Chicago  journalist  states  that  his  wife  asked  him  one
morning  while  still  engaged  in  dressing,  and  before  either  of  them  had  left
their  sleeping  room,  if  he  knew  any  one  named  Edsale  or  Esdale.  A  negative
reply  was  given,  and  then  a  "Why  do  you  ask  1  "  She  replied  :  "  During  the
night  I  dreamed  that  I  was  on  the  lake  shore,  and  found  a  coifin  there  with
the  name  of  Edsale  or  Esdale  on  it,  and  I  am  confident  that  some  one  of  that
name  has  recently  been  drowned  there."  On  opening  the  morning  paper,
tlie  first  item  that  attracted  his  attention  was  tlie  report  of  the  mysterious
disapjjearance  from  his  home  in  Hyde  Park  of  a  young  man  named  Esdale.
A  few  days  afterwards  the  body  of  a  young  man  was  found  on  the  lake  shore.

This  case,  with  further  matter,  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  an
informant,  to  whom  Dr.  Hodgson  replied  as  follows  : —

Boston,  Mass.,  October  22nd,  1888.
The  first  two  substantial  paragraphs  appear  to  be  a  statement  quoted
from  the  Chicago  Times. You  do  not  say  whether  you  have  any  personal


376


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


knowledge  of  the  gentleman  in  question  ;  whether  he  personally  confirms
the  account  ;  whether  you  have  the  statement  of  his  wife,  over  her
signature,  confirming  the  details  so  far  as  she  was  concerned  ;  what  the
date  of  the  experience  was,  and  what  the  date  of  the  first  written  account
of  it  was  ;  whether  any  memorandum  of  the  circumstance  was  made  on
the  day  itself  ;  whether  you  have  the  independent  confirmation  of  the
finding  of  the  body  of  Esdaile  ;  whether  it  was  possible  that  some  account
of  the  young  man's  disaj^pearance  may  have  appeared  in  an  evening  paper  of
the  day  before,  rendering  it  possible  for  [your  informant's]  wife  to  have  read
the  account,  or  seen  some  heading  referring  to  it,  and  afterwards  forgotten
it ;  and  I  venture  to  suggest  that  if  you  have  not  worked  ujj  the  case  in  this
way,  it  should  be  so  worked  up.

I  am  desirous,  of  course,  that  whoever  is  engaged  in  collecting  such  cases
should  present  as  much  corroboration  as  possible  for  each.

RiCHAKD  Hodgson.

On  this  the  then  Editor  of  the  Relujio-Ph'dosopMcal  Journal,  the  late
Colonel  Buudy,  remarks  :  —

I  have  known  the  gentleman  and  his  wife  mentioned  in  case  No.  10,  by
reputation,  for  some  fifteen  years,  and  personally  for  six  years.  I  obtained
from  each  of  them  a  report  of  the  case  when  first  published,  October  14th,
1885,  and  each  said  that  the  statement  was  true  as  published  in  the  Chicago
Times  of  that  date.  I  saw  both  of  them  September  23rd,  [1888],  just  prior
to  publishing  the  report,  and  read  it  to  them  ;  each  declared  it  to  be  a  true
report  of  the  occurrence.  After  receipt  of  Mr.  Hodgson's  letter  I  called  to
see  what  further  information  they  could  furnish  in  regard  to  the  other  points
mentioned  therein.  After  reading  the  letter,  the  gentleman,  who  is  Mr.
Franc  B.  Wilkie,  the  well-known  editorial  writer,  and  "Poliuto"  of  the
Chicago  Times,  at  once  volunteered  the  following  statement  : —

Chicago,  October  2Qth,  1888.

In  October,  1885,  I  was  one  of  the  editorial  writers  on  the  Chicago
Times,  and  wrote  the  item  referred  to.  I  am  the  individual  mentioned
therein.  The  date  of  the  occurrence  was  about  a  week  prior  to  the  date  of
the  report  in  the  Times.  I  did  not  make  any  written  memorandum  on  the
day  it  occurred  ;  as  the  coincidence  was  so  strong  and  distinctly  marked,  it
made  such  an  indelible  impression  o\\  my  mind,  I  did  not  forget  any  of  the
details  during  the  time  prior  to  writing  the  item.  The  name  was  one
unknown  to  me  previous  to  seeing  it  in  the  Chicago  Daily  News  the  morning
referred  to.  I  had  not  seen  any  reference  to  the  disappearance  before  that
morning.  My  wife  said  at  the  time,  and  still  says,  that  she  had  never  seen
the  name,  or  heard  in  any  way  of  the  disappearance.  I  was,  of  course,
on  the  look-out  for  any  report  of  the  return  of  the  young  man,  or  of  the
finding  of  his  body,  and  saw  the  account  of  the  finding  of  the  body  in  the
Chicago  papers  a  few  days  after  the  ajjpearance  of  the  first  item  in  regard  to
his  disappearance  ;  and  then  wrote  the  item  for  the  Times  of  October  14tli.  I
had  at  the  time  carefully  examined  the  case  in  all  its  bearings,  and  although
I  may  not  agree  with  the  various  explanations  or  theories  that  might  be
ofi'ered  in  regard  to  it,  I  gave  it  as  a  curious  coincidence  and  one  that  I
knew  to  be  true.

Franc  B.  Wilkie.


The  Subliminal  Self.


377


To  which  Mrs.  Wilkie  adds  the  following  : —

Having  read  the  foregoing  statement,  I  wish  to  certify  to  its  truth.  Tlie
dream  was  the  cause  of  considerable  comment  for  the  few  days  following,  as
to  the  various  features  of  the  case,  and  whether  the  dream  would  be  verified.
My  previous  presentiments  had  been  with  reference  to  intimate  friends,
which  made  this  one  appear  the  more  marked,  and  caused  Mr.  Wilkie  to
examine  the  matter  more  carefully  in  all  its  details.

The  residence  of  the  young  man  was  eight  miles  from  our  home.  I  am  not
aware  that  we  have  ever  known  any  of  the  young  man's  friends,  or  anyone
who  knew  him  ;  and  am  certain  that  had  the  fact  of  his  disappearance  been
mentioned  in  my  hearing  prior  to  the  morning  after  the  dream,  I  should
have  remembered  the  name,  for  I  distinctly  remembered  that  it  seemed
peculiar  to  me,  when  I  saw  it  in  apparently  large  silver  letters  on  the  coffin.

Mrs.  Franc  B.  Wilkie.

The  Chicago  Daily  Neivs  of  the  morning  of  Wednesday,  October  7th,
1885,  was  an  eight  column  paper,  and  at  the  top  of  the  seventh  column
appeared  the  following  ; —

W.  E.  Esdaile,  in  the  employ  of  Robert  Warren  and  Co. ,  commission
merchants  in  the  Royal  Insurance-building,  and  residing  at  4,523,  Woodlawn-
avenue,  Kenwood,  has  been  missing  since  last  Friday  morning.  Mr.
Esdaile  is  a  Canadian,  unmarried,  and  twenty-seven  years  of  age.  His
family  resides  at  Montreal.  He  has  been  resting  from  business  during  the
last  week,  and  has  spent  much  of  his  time  strolling  along  the  lake  shore.
As  his  accounts  are  all  right,  and  there  is  no  assignable  reason  for  his  dis-
appearance, his  friends  fear  that  he  has  committed  suicide.  Overwork,  it  is
thought,  and  an  injury  to  his  skull,  received  some  years  ago,  may  possibly
have  brought  on  insanity. The  police  are  searching  for  him.

The  records  in  the  Coroner's  office  for  Cook  County,  111.,  show  that
inquest  No.  941  was  held  on  October  10th,  1885,  on  the  body  of  Wm.  E.
Esdaile,  drowned  October  2nd,  in  Lake  Michigan,  whether  by  accident  or
otherwise  the  jury  were  unable  to  determine.

Mr.  Robert  Warren,  of  the  above-named  firm  of  Robert  Warren  and  Co.,
says  that  he  landed  in  New  York  on  his  return  from  a  trip  to  England,  on
Monday,  October  5th,  1885,  and  reached  Chicago, Wednesday,  p.m.,  October
7th  ;  that  he  did  not  hear  of  the  disappearance  of  Mr.  Esdaile  until  he
reached  home,  and  knows  of  no  public  announcement  of  the  disappearance
prior  to  that  in  the  News  of  October  7th  ;  that,  had  there  been  any,  he
would  very  likely  have  heard  of  it  between  New  York  and  Chicago,  as  he  was
on  the  look-out  for  news  from  Chicago.

Mr.  Ward,  who  had  charge  of  Mr.  Warren's  business  during  his  absence,
says  that  he  was  informed  of  Mr.  Esdaile's  disappearance  on  Friday  evening,
October  2nd.  On  Saturday,  a.m.,  he  examined  the  papers,  etc.,  found  in
the  young  man's  room  ;  found  no  evidence  of  suicidal  intent,  but  indications
that  he  was  not  in  his  right  mind,  and  concluding  that  he  might  have
wandered  oiF,  a  detective  was  employed  to  search  for  him.  The  matter  was
kept  very  quiet,  so  as  to  prevent  publication  of  sensational  rejjorts  that
would  alarm  his  friends,  and  also  render  it  unpleasant  for  the  young  man
should  he  be  found. Mr.  Ward  is  not  aware  that  any  announcement  of  the


378


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


matter  was  made  in  any  papers,  before  the  item  in  the  Neivs  of  October  7th.
They  were  following  on  the  track  of  a  young  man,  whose  description  corres-
ponded somewhat  with .  that  of  Mr.  Esdaile,  who  had  been  seen  at  the
waterworks  of  Hyde  Park  (and  Kenwood),  and  then  had  travelled  around  the
end  of  Lake  Michigan  into  Indiana,  and  were  expecting  to  tind  him  very
soon,  when  on  Saturday  morning,  October  10th,  notice  was  received  that  the
body  of  Esdaile  had  been  found  on  the  lake  shore  near  his  home.

In  referring  to  the  matter, the  Chicago  Tribune  of  Saturday,  October  10th,
1885,  says  :  "It  will  be  seen  that  the  detectives  are  on  a  warm  trail  and  will
probably  overtake  the  young  man,  who  is  believed  to  be  insanely  wandering
about  without  aim  or  purpose."  [There  was  thus  no  general  belief  that  he
had  been  dro\i-ned.'\

A  Chicago  rejjorter,  who  resides  at  Kenwood,  and  was  acquainted  ivith
Esdaile,  says  that  he  first  heard  of  the  disappearance  through  the  school
children,  who  said  that  the  teacher  had  told  them  that  Mr.  Esdaile  was  miss-
ing, and  requested  them  to  tell  their  parents,  and  ask  if  any  one  had  seen
him.  The  reporter,  knowing  Mr.  Ward,  called  on  him  to  obtain  the  j^arti-
culars  for  publication,  but  Mr.  Ward  objected,  saying  that  Mr.  Warren  had
been  away  for  some  time  ;  that  Mr.  Esdaile  had  been  practically  in  charge
of  the  affairs  of  the  firm  ;  that  Mr.  Warren  had  just  landed  in  New  York,
and  a  public  announcement  of  the  matter  in  the  papers  would  cause  him
unnecessary  alarm.  The  reporter  says  that  the  item  in  the  papers,  Wednes-
day, October  7th,  was  the  first  public  announcement  of  the  matter.

The  next  case  is  somewhat  similar  ;  but  the  precise  time-relation
between  incident  and  vision  is  not  clear.  It  is  evidentially  a  weak
point  that  the  vision  was  not  mentioned  before  the  incident  was
known.

M.Cl.  90.

Tlie  following  account  was  written  in  the  early  part  of  1892.  The  writer
is  a  retired  professional  man.

Wednesday,  November  18th  [1891],  I  was  lying  on  a  sofa  about  2  p.m.
in  half  doze,  when  my  thoughts  reverted  to  Southsea,  where  I  had  spent
about  a  fortnight  in  June  last.  A  mental  picture,  realistic  enough  almost  for
a  dream,  of  the  animation  and  stir  of  the  pier  and  steamboats  interested  me,
when  all  at  once  my  mind  became  absorbed  with  the  conception  of  a
barge-like  vessel  with  diving  apparatus  engaged  in  some  submarine  work.  The
impression  of  something  being  wrong,  with  a  hurried  agitated  effort  to  raise
a  diver  from  the  water,  impressed  me.  There  seemed  to  be  a  difficulty  in
working  the  winding-up  machine,  and  in  my  dream,  or  semi-dream,  I  was
excited  with  the  fear  that  they  would  fail  to  get  the  diver  up  alive  through
the  apparent  hitch.  At  last  in  my  reverie,  they  succeeded  in  raising  him,
and  then,  as  if  I  were  in  the  barge,  I  seemed  to  see  the  helmet  removed,  and
the  diver  was  dead.  I  thought  no  more  of  the  matter  except  as  a  rather
peculiar  instance  of  a  half-awake  dream.  But  the  next  day  when  reading  the
Daily  Netos,  I  was  startled  on  coming  across  a  paragraph  stating  in  effect
that  "yesterday  morning"  (the  day  of  my  mental  impression,  dream,  or  call
it  what  you  will),  whilst  a  diving  party  were  engaged  in  doing  soinething  to


The  Subliminal  Self.


379


some  chain  moorings  in  Portsmouth  Harbour,  the  diver  got  probably  in  some
way  entangled,  and  signalled  to  be  taken  up.  The  effort  was  at  once  made  to
do  so,  but  considerable  delay  was  occasioned  by  the  supposed  obstacle,  and
when  at  last  he  was  brought  to  the  surface  he  was  quite  dead,  black  in  the
face,  and  blood  oozing  from  his  mouth  and  nostrils.  Struck  with  the  at  least
Terrjarkable  coincidence,  I  read  the  paragraph  to  my  wife  and  a  lady  who  was
present,  as  answering  so  precisely  in  every  particular  to  my  mental  impression
of  the  previous  day,  which  could  not  have  been  more  than  three  or  four  hours
^it  the  earliest  from  the  time  the  accident  actually  occurred.

The  lady  through  whom  the  case  was  received  writes  : —

3Iay  WtJi,  1892.

I  called  upon  Mr. ,  and  he  said  that  he  had  not  mentioned  his  dream

(or  vision)  to  any  one  until  some  hours  afterwards,  when  the  newspaper

came  in. A  Miss  ,  an  elderly  lady  who  was  present  when  I  called,  said

that  she  was  also  there  when  the  newspaper  came  in,  and  remembered  his
exclamation  of  surprise  and  his  saying,  "  Why,  this  is  the  very  thing  I
dreamed  of  yesterday,"  or  some  words  of  that  sort.

The  following  is  the  account  of  the  incident  given  in  the  Daily  Neu\s  of
Thursday,  Nov.  19th,  1891  :—

Death  of  a  Diver  on  Duty. — Yesterday  morning  a  party  of  men  were
engaged  in  repairing  the  moorings  of  the  Corporation  Buoy  in  Portsmouth
Harbour,  which  had  been  damaged  during  the  recent  gale.  A  diver  named
Luke  went  down,  but  he  had  been  below  only  four  or  five  minutes,  when  he
gave  the  customary  signal  for  being  hauled  up,  having  apparently  become
entangled.  Some  difficulty  was  experienced  in  getting  him  above  water,  but
this  having  been  accomplished  and  the  helmet  removed,  he  was  found  to  be
black  in  the  face  and  bleeding  from  the  nose.  As  soon  as  possible  he  was
conveyed  to  the  Harbour  Railway  Station,  where  he  was  found  to  be  dead.

It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  a  specially  gifted  seer  is  able  to
discover  missing  corpses  by  some  effort  of  clairvoyance,^  or  perhaps,  as
claimed  in  the  first  of  the  following  cases,  by  intimation  from  some
spirit  interested  in  the  deceased.

P.  257.  Through  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage.

Dear  Mr.  Savage,  —My  mother  has  written  out  for  you,  at  my  request,
the  particulars  of  the  drowning  of  the  Mason  boys.  She  has  told  the  story
in  her  own  way.  She  has  suggested  copying  it,  but  at  her  age,  seventy-
five,  I  think  it  is  too  much  of  a  task  for  her.  All  the  parties  she  refers  to,
excepting  Mrs.  Brigham,  who  was  the  one  she  wished  to  take  her  place  in
going  to  Boston,  are  now  living,  and  on  my  return  from  Washington  I  will
go  to  N.  and  get  the  evidence  of  the  mother,  brother,  and  Mr.  Clark.

I  do  not  remember  the  particulars  as  does  my  mother.  A  sister  of  the
boys  was  a  schoolmate  of  mine.  I  knew  at  the  time  that  the  boys  were
missing. I  knew  from  the  sister  the  particulars  of  the  case  as  it  went  on.

^  See  a  case  communicated  by  Dr.  Wiltse,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  77.


380


F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers.


I  went  to  the  lake  on  the  Monday  morning  my  mother  speaks  about,  to
see  the  cannon  fired.  It  was— the  firing  of  a  cannon — an  unusual  event  to
us  children.  The  town  was  so  small  we  knew  everything  that  was  occurr-
ing. I  was  at  the  lake  when  the  grappling  irons  were  used  in  the  afternoon,
and  remember  to  have  heard  the  men  say  it  was  no  use  to  drag  the  lake
further,  as  the  boys  certainly  were  not  in  it,  notwithstanding  the  mother
felt  so  decided  that  they  were  there.  I  was  in  the  crowd  that  met  my
mother  at  the  station,  and  heard  what  she  said,  and  went  with  the  rest  to
the  lake,  and  stood  and  listened  to  the  laughs  and  jokes  of  those  about  me
at  what  was  going  on.

It  is  just  as  she  said.  A  silence  that  was  terrible  fell  over  us  all,  as,  in
less  than  five  minutes,  both  boys  were  lying  dead  on  the  shore  before  us
all. — Very  truly  yours,

Eleanor  F.  Crosby.

March  23rfZ,  1891.

In  March,  1864,  I  was  living  in  N.,  about  17  miles  from  Boston.  I  had
a  neighbour  who  had,  among  other  children,  two  sons,  the  eldest  about  15,
the  younger  brother  11.  Tlieir  names  were  Willie  and  Joshua  Mason.
The  older  brother,  Willie,  was  employed  in  the  store  of  Weeks  and  Potter,
druggists,  on  Washington-street,  Boston.  This  Willie  Mason  had  come  to
N.  on  Friday  at  two  o'clock,  to  spend  Sunday  with  his  mother,  Mrs.  Josej^h
Critcherson.  (The  boys'  father  was  dead,  and  the  mother  had  married
again.)  The  mother  had  gone  to  Boston  the  same  day  Willie  Mason  had
come  out  to  make  the  visit.  It  had  been  her  intention  to  come  out  on  the
same  train  with  her  son,  but  he  had  come  out  earlier  than  he  had  expected.
He  reached  N.  about  two  o'clock,  and  went  immediately  to  his  home.  He
said  to  his  younger  brother,  not  finding  his  mother  at  home  and  not  meeting
her  at  the  station,  "  Let  us  go  to  meet  mother."

These  are  the  last  words  he  is  known  by  anyone  living  to  have  spoken,
and  this  was  his  intention  as  he  left  the  house  in  company  with  his  brother
to  the  depot.  Mrs.  Critcherson  did  not  come  on  this  train  from  Boston,
but  on  the  one  following  ;  her  boys  did  not  meet  her,  neither  did  she  find
them  at  home  when  she  reached  there.  This  was  late  Friday  afternoon.
They  did  not  return  that  night,  but  all  day  Saturday,  as  nothing  was  heard
from  them,  she  became  almost  frantic  with  grief.  She  said  her  boys  would
never  keep  away  from  her  and  give  all  this  trouble  if  they  were  where
they  could  come  to  her.  Her  husband,  the  stepfather  to  the  boys,  was  in
the  army,  and  was  then  in  Washington.  On  Saturday,  friends  of  the  family
sent  to  Boston  to  see  if  they  had  gone  there.  They  interviewed  the  train
conductors  to  learn  if  any  such  boys  had  been  seen  going  in  any  direction.
All  the  mother  knew  of  the  boys  was  what  the  sister  of  the  boys  had  told
her  on  her  return,  that  Willie  had  left  the  liouse  saying  he  was  going  to
meet  his  mother.

Mrs.  Critcherson,  so  far  as  I  know,  was  not  acquainted  in  any  way  with
Spiritualism,  and  she  afterwards  became  a  member  of  the  orthodox  church
in  N.  She  had  all  the  time,  while  gentlemen  were  visiting  camps  and
telegraphing  in  difi"erent  directions,  a  very  strong  impression  that  her  boys
were  in  the  lake,  and  did  not  come  to  her  because  they  could  not.  No  one
in  town  believed  this  to  be  possible. In the  first  place,  they  were  not


The  S'lMiminal  Self.


381


seen  by  any  one  on  the  lake.  Then,  in  March,  there  was  nothing  to  attract
boys  to  the  lake.  But,  to  quiet  the  anxiety  of  the  mother,  some  of  the
gentlemen  of  the  to^ni  had  agreed  to  take  cannons  to  the  lake,  and  fire  them
from  a  point  near  the  boat-house  on  Monday  morning,  as  it  was  kno^vn  that
bodies  having  been  long  in  the  water  could  be  raised  by  this  procedure.
For,  granting  that  the  mother's  impressions  were  correct,  which  no  one  else
believed,  the  boys  had  been  from  Friday  afternoon  till  Monday  morn  in  the
water.  A  Mr.  Andrew  Clark,  who  had  a  livery  stable  inN.,  agreed  to  go
to  Boston  Monday  morning  to  get  grappling  irons  to  drag  the  lake  more
thoroughly.  I  had  not  been  to  see 'Mrs.  Critcherson  till  I  went  about  nine
o'clock  on  Monday  morning.  I  knew  she  had  many  in  and  out  continually,
and,  believing  the  boys  would  come  back  before  long,  I  was  not  uneasy  about
them.  I  suppose  why  I  believed  they  would  return  was  because  I  could  not
think  of  them  as  going  to  the  lake  at  this  season  of  the  year  ;  and  then  I  had
not  seen  her,  to  be  influenced  by  her  feelings,  and  shared  the  general
feeling  of  the  town  that,  while  the  boys  were  known  to  every  one  to  be
unusually  fine  boys,  still  this  must  be  a  frolic  which  would  have  an  ending
soon.

As  I  said  before,  I  went  to  Mrs.  Critcherson's  about  nine  o'clock  on
Monday  morning  to  offer  her  my  services,  because  I  had  by  this  time  begun
to  feel  uneasy  myself,  while  I  still  believed  they  were  alive  somewhere.  I
found  Mrs.  Critcherson  very  much  unnerved,  and  saying,'  "Only  one  thing
remained  to  be  done,  and  that  was  for  some  one  to  go  to  Boston  and
consult  a  clairvoyant,"  and  turning  to  me,  she  said,  "  Mrs.  D.,  you  are  the
one  I  want  to  go."  I  had  never  visited  a  clairvoyant  or  consulted  one,  and
did  not  know  where  to  go  or  how  to  turn.  I  said  to  her,  "  I  am  not  the  person
to  go,"  and  turning  to  another  friend  I  said,  "Now  she  is  just  the  person  to
go."  I  had  oflfered  my  services,  but  I  did  not  wish  to  go  on  such  an  errand
and  an  undertaking  I  was  not  familiar  with.  She  turned  to  me  again,  and
said,  "I  wish  you  to  go  for  me."  I  said  that  I  would  go  home  and  get
ready  at  once,  to  go  on  the  11  o'clock  train.  I  must  say  here,  T  had  no
faith  that  anything  would  come  from  this  visit  to  Boston.  By  the  time  1
reached  the  station,  at  11  o'clock,  it  was  pretty  generally  known  in  N.
that  I  was  going  to  Boston  to  consult,  as  a  last  resource,  with  a  clairvoyant,
as  they  had  already  fired  the  cannons  with  no  result,  and  were  sure  now  that
the  boys  were  by  no  possibility  in  the  lake.  On  the  same  train  going  in,  was
this  Andrew  Clark  going  after  the  grappling  irons.  He  said  to  some  of  the
townspeople  at  the  station  that  he  would  return  as  soon  as  possible.  He
did  arrive  in  N.  on  the  two  o'clock  train,  and  went  with  a  large  number  of
persons  to  the  lake,  but  after  using  the  irons  for  some  time,  they  all  gave
up  and  went  to  the  town  again,  saying,  "It  is  of  no  use  ;  the  boys  we
cannot  find."  The  mother  still  felt  sure  they  were  in  the  lake,  until  they
were  found  Monday  eve.

I  arrived  in  Boston  at  12  o'clock.  I  went,  as  I  had  been  told  to  do,  to
the  Banner  of  Light  office,  and  asked  there,  as  a  stranger,  if  they  could
direct  me  to  some  reliable  clairvoyant.  They  directed  me  to  some  one  on
or  near  Court-street.  I  found  the  woman  engaged.  The  gentleman  who
answered  the  bell-pull  directed  me  to  a  clairvoyant  on  Dix-place.  When
I  arrived  at  Dix-place  I  foujid  this  woman  also  engaged,  but  she  directed  mq

2  F


382


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


to  a  Mrs.  York,  on  Washington-street,  near  Common-street.  It  was  about
three  o'clock.  A  sitter  was  leaving  as  I  rang  the  bell.  Mrs.  York  opened
the  door  herself.  When  I  told  her  my  errand,  she  told  me  she  could  not  see
me  till  the  next  day,  but  on  my  saying  the  next  day  would  be  too  late,  she
told  me  to  walk  into  her  parlour,  and  she  would  go  out  and  take  a  walk
and  on  her  return  would  see  me.  These  were  the  only  words  she  addressed
to  me,  and  I  am  sure  she  knew  nothing  of  me  whatever,  where  I  came  from,
or  what  my  errand  was  about.  I  spoke  no  words  with  her  further  than
those  I  have  already  stated,  neither  had  I  ever  heard  of  Mrs.  York  before,
and  she  knew  no  one  in  N.  She  was  gone  about  15  minutes,  when  she  came
into  the  room,  and  going  to  the  fireplace  at  once,  and  with  her  back  to  me,
and  without  my  speaking  one  word,  she  said,  "They  went  East  before  they
went  West."  (The  railroad  station  is  east  from  the  house  in  which  their  mother
lived,  and  the  lake  west.)  She  then  said,  "  They  saw  the  fire,  and  so  went
to  the  water."  (It  was  afterwards  found  out  that  on  this  day,  Friday
afternoon,  some  men  were  burning  brush  near  the  lake  ;  that  was  what
attracted  them  up  there.)  She  then  went  on  to  describe  the  boat-house,
with  a  hole  in  the  side  of  the  boat-house.  She  then  said,  "  They  went  in
through  this  hole  in  the  side."  She  described  the  boat,  which  she  said  was
a  "  narrow  boat,  painted  black,''  and  said,  "  Oh  dear,  it  was  never  intended
that  but  one  person  should  get  into  it  at  a  time."  She  told  of  their  pulling
out  a  little  way,  the  younger  brother  falling  into  the  water  first,  and  the
older  brother  trying  to  save  him,  and  also  said,  "The  place  where  they  are
is  muddy,  and  they  could  not  come  to  the  surface."  "  Why,"  said  she,  "it
is  not  the  main  lake  they  are  in,  but  the  shallow  point  which  connects  the
main  lake,  and  they  are  so  near  the  shore,  and  if  it  was  not  this  time  of  the
year  (March)  you  could  almost  walk  in  and  pick  them  up."  She  told  of
the  citizens'  interest  in  trying  to  find  them,  and  said,  "They  will  not  find
them  ;  they  go  too  far  from  the  shore  ;  they  are  on  the  left  of  the  boat-
house,  a  few  feet  from  the  land."  Then  I  said,  "If  they  are  in  the  water,
they  will  be  found  before  I  can  reach  home.''  She  said,  "No,  they  will  not
be  found  before  you  get  there  ;  you  will  have  to  go  and  tell  them  where  they
are,  and  then  they  will  be  found  witliin  iive  minutes  after  you  reach  the
lake."  She  made  me  promise  to  go  with  them  to  the  lake.  She  said,  "  They
are  very  near  together  ;  after  finding  one  you  will  quickly  find  the  other."
It  was  not  more  than  ten  minutes  before  the  boys  were  found  and  on  the
way  to  their  mother's  house,  after  I  told  them.  I  reached  Natick  at  five
o'clock.  There  was  a  crowd  at  the  station.  When  I  got  out  on  to  the
platform,  some  gentleman  said  to  nie,  "Mrs.  D.,  what  did  the  clairvoyant
tell  you  "  I  answered,  "Haven't  you  found  them  yet?"  They  said  no,
and  then  I  told  them  what  Mrs.  York  had  said,  and  went  with  them  to  the
lake.  In  looking  into  the  boat-house  it  was  found  that  the  long  narrow  boat
owned  by  Mr.  Benning  Ball,  and  painted,  as  she  had  said,  all  in  blade,  was
missing  :  this  boat,  as  she  had  said,  "  was  to  hold  only  one  man,  and  was  unsafe
occupied  by  two  persons."  (I  did  not  know  at  the  time  of  my  sitting  with
Mrs.  York  that  Mr.  Benning  Hall  was  the  owner  of  such  a  boat,  or  that  the
boat-house  was  used  to  shelter  a  boat  of  this  description.  I  had  never  seen
such  a  boat  owned  by  any  one  ;  so  this  part  slie  did  not  reach  from  my  mind.)
And  this  boat  was  found  in  a  cove  some  distance  from  the  boat-house,  a  few


The  Siihliminal  Self.


383


days  after.  Neither  did  I  know  of  the  "hole"  in  the  boat-house  until  I
reached  the  lake  on  this  afternoon.  Finding  that  what  she  said  of  the  boat
and  the  hole  in  the  boat-house  was  true,  I  began  to  think  the  rest  might  be
true  also  ;  but  no  one  hi  the  crowd,  so  far  as  I  know,  did  place  any
confidence  in  her  statement.  I  stood  on  the  shore  and  two  boats  put  off
with  men  holding  grappling  irons.  I  was  able  to  tell  them  how  to  direct
their  course.  Three  or  four  strokes  of  the  oars  and  the  elder  brother  of  the
boys  who  were  missing,  and  who  was  holding  one  of  the  grappling  irons,
exclaimed,  "I  have  hold  of  something."  The  men  stopped  rowing,  and  he
raised  the  body  of  the  largest  boy  above  the  water.  In  taking  the  body
into  the  boat,  the  boat  moved  a  few  lengths.  They  were  told  to  go  to  the
same  place  where  the  eldest  had  been  found,  and  almost  immediately  brought
up  the  other  body.  It  was  not  ten  minutes  after  reaching  the  lake  that  the
boys  were  found,  and  were  being  taken  to  their  home.  As  Mrs.  York  had
said,  they  were  in  a  muddy  place  ;  their  clothing  testified  to  the  fact.

The  disappearance  of  the  boys  in  the  manner  I  have  described  is  known
by  fifty  persons  now  living  in  Natick.  I  cannot  say  how  much  larger  the
number  is.

She  had  while  in  this  trance,  by  using  books  on  the  table,  showed  me  the
boat-house  and  the  shore  so  well,  that  any  one  from  the  description  could
have  gone  directly  to  the  water  and  found  them.

I  asked  her  how  she  came  by  this  information.  She  answered,  "The
boys'  father  told  me."  How  did  she  know  the  boys'  father  had  been  dead
several  years  ?  Elizabeth  Evebett  Davis.

Boston,  May  Utlt,  1891,  2.38  p.m.

I  met  Mrs.  Davis  within  the  last  hour,  on  the  street.  Her  daughter,
Mrs.  Crosby,  was  driving  her  to  the  station.  She  is  going  to  see  her  sister
in  Natick.

She  told  me  that  the  medium,  Mrs.  York,  told  her  that  it  was  Mr.
Mason's  spirit — the  father  of  the  two  boys — who  told  her  where  the  bodies
of  the  boys  could  be  found  in  the  lake.  j  g^y^^^

Natick,  May  5th,  1891.

I  am  the  sister  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  E.  Davis,  and  lived  in  Natick  at  the
time  of  the  disappearance  of  the  Mason  boys.  I  remember  the  fact  that  my
sister  went  to  Boston  to  consult  a  clairvoyant  by  request.  The  name  of  tlie
clairvoyant  was  Mrs.  York.  Mrs.  York  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  my  sister,
she  never  having  heard  of  her  before  she  left  Natick  for  Boston.  .  I  heard
her  relate  all  the  particulars  at  the  time,  which  are  found  in  her  statement.
I  have  heard  her  relate  it  many  times  since  without  any  variations.  I
remember  that  when  my  sister  went  to  consult  the  clairvoyant  she  had  no
confidence  that  she  would  receive  any  information  that  would  be  of  use  in
finding  the  boys,  or  that  after  Mrs.  York's  directions  they  would  jarove  true.
She  even  hesitated  to  relate  what  Mrs.  York  had  told,  but,  being  met  by  a
large  delegation  at  the  station,  she  felt  that  she  must,  it  being  demanded
what  she  had  been  told,  Mrs.  York  having  made  her  promise  that  she  would
do  so,  and  charged  her  to  be  sure  and  be  explicit. I  know  my  sister  did  not


384


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


believe  they  were  in  the  pond.  She  thought,  like  most  others,  that  they  had
gone  out  of  town,  perhaps  visiting  encampments.  The  medium  used  books
to  indicate  and  illustrate  by  existing  objects  unknown  to  Mrs.  Davis,  the
terminus  of  the  two  directions,  and  said,  "  Where  these  lines  cross,  there  you
will  find  the  boys. "  Everything  had  been  done  that  could  be  to  find  them
when  the  train  arrived  at  Natick  at  five  o'clock.  Mrs.  York  charged  her  to
return  as  soon  as  possible,  as  the  boys  would  not  be  found  until  she  (Mrs.
Davis)  had  given  the  directions.  At  the  Natick  railroad  station  she  told  her
story,  but  the  men  insisted  that  she  should  go  with  them  to  the  lake,  which
she  did  directly.  They  followed  Mrs.  Davis's  directions  and  in  a  few
moments  she  said,  "There  is  the  place."  One  of  the  boys  was  immediately
pulled  to  the  surface,  and  in  a  few  moments  the  other.  Mrs.  York  stated  to
Mrs.  Davis  how  the  drowning  happened,  to  the  effect  that  the  youiager  fell
out  of  the  boat  first  and  that  the  older  boy  in  trying  to  help  him  was  also
drowned.  There  were  many  there  who  witnessed  the  recovery  of  the  bodies,
and  'twas  a  very  impressive  moment,  and  is  considered  one  of  the  most,  and
perhaps  the  most  remarkable  occurrence  ever  happening  in  Natick.

This  is  a  bare  statement  of  facts  which  can  be  attested  by  many  persons.

Cathekine  S.  Rice.

Witnesses  to  signature  : —  t  in

®  Isaac  Everett.

Marietta  Rice.

I  am  the  mother  of  William  E.  and  J oshua  P.  Mason,  who  were  drowned
in  Lake  Cochituate,  Natick,  Massachusetts,  on  Friday  afternoon,  March
25th,  1864,  aged  sixteen  and  thirteen.

March  25th  I  was  out  of  town  till  evening.  During  my  absence  my  son
William  arrived  from  Portland,  Maine,  where  he  had  been  temporarily
employed  by  H.  H.  Hay,  wholesale  druggist,  during  the  rebuilding  of  the
store  of  his  former  employers,  which  had  been  destroyed  by  fire.  This
firm's  name  was  Weeks  and  Potter,  Washington-street,  Boston,  and  he  had
just  been  recalled  to  them  and  was  to  begin  work  with  them  again  in  their
new  store  the  following  Monday.

On  reaching  his  home,  he  found  me  absent  and  left  home  with  the
intention  of  meeting  me  at  the  depot  at  five  o'clock,  accompanied  by  his
brother  Joshua.

I  came  two  hours  later  and  I  was  met  by  a  little  friend  of  theirs  who  told
me  that  Willie  had  got  home.  On  my  reaching  home  I  enquired  where
he  was,  and  was  told  that  he  and  Joshua  had  gone  out  to  meet  me  on  the  five
o'clock  train,  since  which  time  they  had  not  seen  either  of  them.  From  the
moment  when  they  said  they  had  not  seen  them,  I  wondered  where  they  were,
but  consoled  myself  with  the  thought  that  they  might  be  calling  on  some  of
their  associates  who  were  perhaps  pleasantly  entertaining  them,  which  caused
their  delay.  When  bed-time  came  and  they  did  not  return,  I  became  very
anxious,  and  had  a  sleepless  night.

At  this  time  my  husband,  their  step-father,  was  in  the  army  and
consequently  could  not  help  me.  The  next  morning  an  elder  son  began
with  me  to  make  enquiries.  We  rode  to  every  point  where  we  hoped
information  concerning  them  might  be  given.  To  our  sorrow  no  information
relating  to  their  whereabouts  could  be  obtained.


The  Subliminal  Self.


385


Saturday,  at  about  five  o'clock,  we  returned  and  reported  to  our
neighbours,  who  had  become  very  much  interested  on  account  of  their
disappearance,  that  we  could  learn  nothing  from  them.  They  offered  their
services,  and  at  my  suggestion  immediately  instituted  a  search,  going  to
different  towns,  each  individual  acting  on  his  own  ideas  as  to  where  they
might  be  found,  as  I  could  give  no  suggestions.  Every  one  returned  failing
to  have  obtained  any  information.

They  then  came  to  me  to  ask  what  further  I  would  wish  them  to  do.  My
reply  was  that  were  my  husband  at  home,  I  could  say  just  what  I  would  have
done,  and  I  said  that  would  be  to  have  the  lake  searched  for  them,  for  I  felt
they  were  where  they  could  not  reach  me,  and  must  be  in  the  pond,  or  they
certainly  would  be  at  home.  No  one  believed  they  could  by  any  means  be
in  the  pond,  but  this  was  my  own  strong  impression.  To  gratify  me  they
commenced  their  search  in  the  pond  immediately  on  Sunday  evening.
During  this  evening  a  boat  was  discovered  floating  on  the  opposite  shore.
My  brother  came  to  me  at  about  midnight  on  Sunday  and  said,  "I  am
afraid  your  apprehensions  are  correct,  for  we  have  fomid  a  boat  afloat."
They  suspended  further  operations  till  morning  because  of  the  darkness.
On  Monday  morning  early  the  engine  bells  and  church  bells  were  rung  to
call  the  citizens  together  to  organise  so  as  to  systematically  search  the  pond.
Nearly  all  business  was  suspended.  They  fired  a  cannon  and  used
grappling  irons  and  spent  all  the  morning  in  the  effort  to  find  my  boys.
They  came,  some  friends,  every  half-hour,  to  report  to  me  the  result  of  their
search,  and  to  relieve  my  anxiety  all  they  could.

Mrs.  Davis  called  at  about  ten  o'clock  and  wished  to  know  if  she  could
aid  me  in  any  way.  I  proposed  that  she  should  go  to  Boston  to  consult  with
a  clairvoyant,  for  I  felt  this  was  my  last  resort,  though  at  the  time  I  knew
nothing  of  clairvoyance  and  had  no  belief  in  it,  but  I  wanted  to  try  every-
thing. I  knew  personally  of  no  clairvoyant  and  left  it  all  with  Mrs.  Davis,
the  result  of  which  visit  she  has  already  given,  and  I  corroborate  it.  I  do
not  think  that  Mrs.  Davis  had  any  faith  that  anything  would  come  from  her
going  to  Boston,  but  she  went  only  to  gratify  me.  I  did  not  say  to  her
anything  about  a  boat  having  been  seen  afloat  the  night  before.

All  search  for  my  boys  was  given  up  at  about  three  o'clock.  Every  one
felt  sure  by  this  time  that  they  could  not  be  in  the  water,  and  despaired  of
finding  them  and  waited  to  see  what  directions  Mrs.  Davis  would  bring  from
Boston,  if  any.

She  reached  Natick  at  five  o'clock.  Mrs.  York,  the  clairvoyant,  said  that
my  boys  were  in  the  pond,  and  she  gave  Mrs.  Davis  directions  how  to  find
them  and  told  when  and  where  they  would  be  found.  They  went
immediately  to  the  pond.  It  was  supposed  by  the  townspeople  that  they
had  dragged  all  the  ground  she  described.

Mrs.  Davis  arrived  in  Natick  at  five  o'clock,  and  at  twenty  minutes  of
six  my  boys  were  brought  into  my  house.

Mary  A.  Critcherson.

Witness : —  ■  '  -r,

CAKOLmE  Bkigham.


Note. — Caroline  Brigham  was  post-mistress  of  Natick  for  several  years,
and  was  appointed  to  the  position  by  Henry  Wilson,  or  through  his  influence.


386


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I  have  had  read  to  me  my  mother's  statement  concerning  the  drowning  of
niy  brothers,  William  and  Joshua  Mason,  and  I  corroborate  it  with  this
exception.  I  think  my  mother  is  mistaken  concerning  the  finding  of  the
boat.  To  the  best  of  my  memory  the  boat  she  speaks  of  was  seen  for  the
first  time  on  Monday  forenoon  after  the  citizens  had  organized,  and  not  on
Sunday  night.

Sunday  I  was  not  at  home.  I  drove  to  Readville  and  visited  the  camps
there.  I  also  visited  the  Charlestown  navy  yard.  From  Saturday  morning
till  Sunday  night  I  was  driving  all  the  time  in  different  directions,  and  other
parties  were  going  in  further  directions.  My  mother  had  all  this  time,  after
they  failed  to  reach  home  late  Friday  night,  a  very  strong  impression  that
the  boys  were  in  the  lake,  and  no  one  was  able  to  change  that  feeling.  We
did  not  make  any  attempt  to  search  the  lake  till  everything  else  had  failed  ;
it  was  a  difiicult  thing  to  do  any  efficient  work  there  without  the  assistance
of  the  townspeople,  and  no  one  could  be  made  to  feel  they  were  by  any
possibility  in  the  water.  It  was  in  war  times  and  the  townspeople  thought
they  had  gone  away  to  enlist  as  cai^tains'  boys  or  drummer  boys,  but  my
mother  scouted  the  idea  and  would  not  listen  to  it  for  one  minute.

On  Monday  morning  the  bells  were  rung,  and  the  people  congregated  at
the  engine  house  and  there  tliey  organized.  My  mother  located  where  she
felt  sure  the  boys  were,  to  the  meadow  part  of  the  lake.  We  went  in
detachments,  surrounding  the  shore  of  that  part  of  the  lake.  It  was  at  this
time  in  the  middle  of  the  forenoon  that  this  boat  already  named  was  found,
upside  down,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  lake  to  where  the  boat-house  was.
It  couldn't  by  any  possibility  have  been  seen  at  the  boat-house  I  had
before  this  been  up  to  the  lake  and  walked,  not  all  round  the  lake,  but
enough  to  satisfy  me  that  there  was  no  boat  to  be  seen.  They  fired  a  cannon
several  times  and  moved  the  cannon  to  difi'erent  points.  We  then  went  in
boats  with  grappling  iroas  such  as  we  could  procure.  We  worked  till  about
three  o'clock.  We  went  several  times  to  within  a  few  feet  of  where  they
were  afterwards  found.  It  was  known  that  Mrs.  Davis  had  gone  to  Boston
to  consult  with  a  clairvoyant.  I  had  looked  to  find  some  hat  or  something
else  to  show  that  my  brothers  were  drowned.

I  began  on  Sunday  to  feel  with  my  mother  that  they  were  in  the  pond,  as
I  could  get  no  trace  of  them  anywhere,  though  up  to  their  being  found  I
could  get  no  clue  to  lead  me  to  suppose  so.  My  mother  had  no  reason  to
think  they  were  in  the  pond,  further  than  the  fact  that  she  knew  her  boys  so
well,  especially  William,  who  was  the  oldest,  and  knew  they  were  such  boys
they  would  never  have  kept  away  from  her  if  they  could  have  come  to  her.
I  knew  they  could  not  have  gone  into  the  water  to  swim  at  that  season  of
the  year,  and  another  reason  why  I  was  led  to  think  my  brothers  had  not
gone  to  the  water  was  because  I  knew  they  were  afraid  of  the  water.

I  went  to  the  station  to  meet  Mrs.  Davis  because  we  had  become  dis-
couraged. Tliere  was  also  a  very  large  crowd  there  to  meet  her.  She  told
me  what  Mrs.  York  had  said,  and  gave  me  directions  how  to  proceed,  the
course  to  pursue  with  the  boat.  She  went  to  the  lake.  I  got  into  the  boat.
I  remember  that  a  Mr.  Langdon  Spooner  was  with  me  in  this  boat.  Mrs.
York  said  we  must  go  a  little  north  of  west  and  not  go  so  far  from  the
shore. The  water  was  so  shallow  where  they  were  drowned,  that  I  made  the


The  Subliminal  Self.


remark  immediately  after  that  if  he,  my  brother  William,  had  stood  up
straight  he  would  not  have  been  drowned,  his  head  would  have  been  above
water.  We  followed  Mrs.  York's  course  nearer  to  the  shore.  I  held  the
grappling-iron  and  in  this  direct  course  Mrs.  York  had  indicated  I  grappled
into  the  coat  collar  of  my  eldest  brother  a  very  short  distance  from
shore.  We  brought  the  body  to  the  land,  and  I  did  not  go  out  again,
but  remained  by  the  side  of  the  body  already  found.  Mr.  Langdon
Spooner,  with  a  grappling  iron  at  the  end  of  a  long  pole,  found  the  body
of  my  brother  Joshua  almost  immediately  after,  as  Mrs.  York  said  it
would  be  found.

I  think  it  is  well  to  state  in  this  connexion,  so  that  no  confusion  may
arise  in  the  mind  of  any  one  reading  this,  that  my  mother  has  been  married
three  times.  Her  first  husband,  who  was  my  father,  was  Albe  0.  Hanscome.
I  have  two  sisters,  both  of  whom  are  living.  Her  second  husband,  the  father
of  the  two  boys  who  were  drowned  (and  they  were  the  only  children  by  this
marriage),  was  Wm.  P.  Mason.  Her  third  and  present  husband  is  Joseph
Critcherson.

Charles  P.  Hanscome.

Witnesses  to  signature  : —

Eva  C.  Clement.
Natick,  May  5th,  1891.  Eleanor  F.  Crosby.

Natick,  Mass.,  May  27th,  1891.

I  am  the  stepfather  of  William  and  Joshua  Mason.  In  confirmation  of  the
clairvoyance  of  Mrs.  York  I  would  say,  about  one  year  and  a  half  after  the
finding  of  my  sons  in  a  manner  she  described,  Mrs.  York  came  to  my  house
unexpectedly.  This  was  her  first  visit  to  the  town  of  Natick,  Mass.  She
said  she  had  come  to  Natick  wishing  to  visit  the  lake  where  the  boys  were
drowned.  I  accompanied  her.  When  we  had  arrived  within  a  short  distance
of  the  lake,  she  requested  me  to  fall  back,  saying  she  would  show  me  the
place  where  the  bodies  were  found.  I  fell  back.  She  went  to  the  shore
of  the  lake,  going  into  what  seemed  to  be  a  trance  ;  she  picked  up  a  stone
and,  with  her  back  to  the  water,  threw  her  arm  over  her  head  and  the  stone
landed  where  they  told  me  the  bodies  were  found,  her  eyes  being  closed  at
the  time.

This  is  to  me  a  mystery.  t  ^

•'  Joseph  Critcherson.


Witnesses


Mary  A.  Critcherson,
Arthur  Waters.


In  March,  1864,  I  had  a  livery  stable  in  Natick  in  company  with  Mr.
Tyler  Brooks.  Mr.  Critcherson  and  his  family  were  acquaintances  of  mine.
Mr.  Charles  Sherman,  Mr.  Brooks  and  myself,  after  the  boys  were  found  to
be  missing  on  Friday  night,  were  more  active  than  any  one  else  in  town,
outside  the  family,  in  trying  to  discover  the  boys'  whereabouts.  Mr.
Sherman  and  Mr.  Brooks  are  now  both  dead.  Although  it  happened  so
many  years  ago,  I  had  so  much  to  do  with  it  I  remember  the  particulars  of
our  proceedings  perfectly.


388


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


When  we  began  our  work,  none  of  us  had  the  slightest  idea  as  to  where
the  boys  were.  I  took  one  of  my  teams  on  both  Saturday  and  Sunday  and
drove  everywhere,  where  any  one  said  it  was  possible  they  might  be  found.
In  these  two  days  I  drove  miles.  My  partner,  Mr.  Brooks,  and  also  Mr.
Sherman  did  the  same,  but  we  none  of  us  could  get  a  clue  to  them.

On  Monday  morning  I  drove  to  Saxon ville  and  got  the  cannon  which  was
used  for  firing  at  the  lake.  After  using  this  cannon  I  went  to  Boston  on  the
eleven  o'clock  train  for  irons  to  drag  with  ;  before  this  we  had  used  some  on
the  lake  Monday  morning  that  we  had  manufactured  ourselves.  I  remember
that  Mrs.  Davis  was  on  this  same  train,  and  that  she  was  going  to  Boston  to
consult  with  a  clairvoyant.  We  both  talked  the  matter  over.  Neither  Mrs.
Davis  nor  myself  had  any  faith  she  would  get  any  news  of  the  boys  in  this
way.  I  came  out  on  the  two  o'clock  train  and  went  at  once  to  the  lake  and
we  used  the  irons,  but  with  no  result.  We  all  got  tired  out  and  gave  up  and
went  to  the  depot  to  hear  what  Mrs.  Davis  would  say.  I  remember  what  she
told  as  being  said  by  the  clairvoyant.  Mrs.  Davis  went  to  the  lake,  and  the
boys  were  found  just  where  she  said  they  would  be  found,  as  well  as  in  the
manner  she  had  described,  and  as  reported  to  us  by  Mrs.  Davis.

One  of  my  teams  was  at  the  lake,  a  wagon  like  an  express  wagon,  and
their  bodies  were  taken  to  their  home  in  it.  I  don't  explain  how  this  was
done,  the  finding  the  boys.  I  only  state  the  facts.  We  were  about  twenty
minutes  at  the  lake.

Andrew  I.  Clark.

Witnesses  : —

Mrs.  Charlotte  A.  Clark.
Marietta  Rice.

We  have  lived  in  Natick  for  forty-eight  years.

We  have  never  had  any  special  acquaintance  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Critcherson  and  family,  though  we  have  always  known  of  them.  We  have
known  Mrs.  Davis  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  Catherine  Everett  Rice,  and  their
families  for  thirty-five  years  or  more.

We  were  living  in  Natick  at  the  time  of  the  disappearance  of  the  boys
and  remember  all  that  occurred  at  the  time.  No  one  knew  where  the  boys
were,  and  every  effort  to  trace  them  had  failed  till  after  Mrs.  Davis's  return
from  Boston  on  Monday  afternoon,  when  the  boys  were  found  where  and  as
she  said  they  would  be  found,  through  the  mediumship  of  a  Mrs.  York  of
Boston.

1,  G.  A  Colbath,  was  at  the  lake  on  Monday  morning  when  the  cannon
was  fired.  No  one  would  have  ever  gone  to  the  lake  to  look  for  the  boys
again,  had  not  Mrs.  Davis  returned  from  Boston,  and  told  what  the
clairvoyant  said.  Some  thought  they  might  have  gone  to  the  lake,  and
others  (this  was  the  general  belief)  thought  they  had  run  away  to  enlist.

I,  G.  A.  Colbath,  was  on  my  way  to  the  post-office  at  night  when  an
acquaintance  met  me  and  said,  ' '  The  boys  are  found,  and  a  medium  has  told
where  they  were."  The  reason  why  it  was  not  believed  that  they  could  be
in  the  lake  was  because,  on  the  shore,  nothing  belonging  to  them  could  be
found.  It  is  sure  that  the  clairvoyant  not  only  told  where  they  were,  but
located  the  exact  spot.


The  Subliminal  Self.


389


It  is  our  belief  that  the  boys  were  found  through  the  mediumship  of
Mrs.  York.  We  neither  of  us  believe  in  Spiritualism. We  are  Universalists.

G.  Albert  Colbath.
Hannah  M.  Colbath.

Witnesses  to  these  signatures  : —

Chas.  H.  Taylor.
Dora  Hair.

Note. — Mr.  G.  Albert  Colbath  is  a  brother  of  Vice-President  Henry
Wilson,  who  died  in  Washington,  November  22nd,  1875.  Hon.  Henry
Wilson  changed  his  name  from  Jeremiah  Jones  Colbath  to  that  of  Henry
Wilson  by  an  Act  of  the  New  Hampshire  Legislature,  in  1833.  Mrs  Colbath
was  cousin  to  Mrs.  Wilson.

E.  F.  Crosby.

We  were  living  in  N.  at  the  time  of  the  disappearance  of  the  Mason
boys.  We  knew  all  the  particulars  of  the  case,  although  we  had  no  part
in  it,  and  were  not  at  the  lake  when  the  boys  were  found.  We  remember
that  there  was  great  excitement  in  town  Saturday  morning,  when  it  became
widely  known  that  the  boys  were  missing,  they  having  disappeared  on
Friday,  the  day  before.  We  remember  that  every  effort  was  m.ade  to  find
them,  and  that,  as  a  last  resort,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Davis  went  to  Boston  to
consult  a  clairvoyant.  We  also  remember  that  the  boj^s  were  found  almost
immediately  after  Mrs.  Davis's  return  from  Boston  on  Monday  afternoon,
the  men  working  as  she  directed,  she  having  received  her  directions  from
the  medium,  Mrs.  York.

Mrs.  Davis  is  a  personal  friend  of  ours,  we  having  known  her  for  more
than  thirty  years,  and  we  have  no  hesitancy  in  saying  that  we  believe
that  the  medium,  Mrs.  York,  whom  she  consulted,  was  tlie  instrument
through  which  the  boys  were  found.

(Signed) Seth  W.  Tibbetts.

Matilda  B.  Tibbetts.

Witnesses  : —

Richard  Foley.
Nellie  D.  Foley.

Natick,  Mass.,  Maij  11th,  1891.

I  add  a  somewhat  similar  case;  where,  however,  the  percipient  had
a  strong  interest  in  the  deceased  ;  so  that  we  may  suppose  it  possible
that  influence  was  exerted  by  the  mind  of  the  dead  child.

P.  178.

This  case,  which  originally  appeared  in  the  newspapers  in  connection
with  the  report  of  an  inquest  at  Birmingham,  was  investigated  by  Mr.
Martyn  Smith,  of  Abberton  Hall,  Pershore,  a  Member  of  the  S.P.R.
He  writes  : — •

April  26th,  1895.

I  was  in  court  and  heard  all  the  evidence,  which  was  on  oath,  and  to  my
mind  seems  to  jjoint  directly  to  a  case  of  thought-transference.


390


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[The  following  is  the  newspaper  account  of  the  inquest,  sent  by  Mr.
Martyn  Smith.]

Another  inquest  had  reference  to  the  death  of  Rose  Foster  (13),  32  Court,
14  house,  Camden-street,  whose  body  was  found  in  the  canal  at  Spring  Hill,
the  19th  inst.  [i.e.  April  19th,  1895.]  The  mother  stated  that  her  daughter
"Was  very  nervous  and  frightened,  especially  at  thunder  and  lightning.  A
little  while  ago  she  was  told  that  she  was  suffering  from  an  affectiun  of  the
kidneys,  which  would  put  her  life  in  danger  unless  she  was  very  careful.  She
had  been  living  with  her  aunt,  but  on  Good  Friday  she  came  home  of  her
own  free  will.  On  Wednesday  she  left  the  house  suddenly,  and  was  not  seen
alive  by  witness  again.  Several  witnesses  were  called,  who  spoke  to  seeing
deceased  sheltering  from  the  thunderstorm  under  the  bridge,  and  Thomas
Tarpler  said  he  was  in  a  boat  on  the  canal  near  the  bridge  when  the  storm
was  at  its  height,  and  he  heard  a  scream  and  a  splash,  but  he  did  not  see
any  one.  Elizabeth  Turtoir  stated  that  on  Wednesday  she  was  going  with
the  deceased  over  Spring  Hill  Bridge,  when  witness  remarked  to  her,  "  Oh,
that  water  !"  Witness  said  this  because  about  twelve  months  ago  she  fell
into  the  water  there.  Deceased  said,  "I  feel  as  if  I  could  jump  over  there,"
{meaning  the  bridge).  Witness  upon  tliis  said  to  deceased,  "  Oh,  you  soon
want  to  part  with  your  life.  I  have  not  seen  enough  enjoyment  yet."
Foster  answered,  "  You  don't  know  what  trouble  I  have  had  to  go  through."
Mrs.  Jeffrey,  of  the  Geoi'ge  Inn,  Grove-lane,  Smethwick,  aunt  of  the
deceased,  said  the  girl  had  lived  with  her  for  some  weeks.  She  was  sulky,
and  witness  told  her  she  would  have  to  go  back  home  if  she  did  not  behave
herself.  Thereupon  the  girl  left  of  her  own  accord.  On  Thursday  the
girl's  brother  came  to  tell  her  she  was  missing.  That  night  witness  dreamt
that  she  was  walking  along  the  towing-path  of  the  canal  to  her  sister's
house,  and  that  while  stirring  the  water  with  her  umbrella  she  saw  the
face  of  her  niece.  Next  morning  she  went  to  the  scene,  and  found  the
police  dragging  underneath  the  bridge.  She  asked  them  to  drag  at  the
spot  where  in  her  dream  she  saw  the  face.  They  did  so,  and  at  once  found
the  body. It  was  some  distance  from  the  bridge.

Mr.  Martyn  Smith  also  sends  us  the  following  notes  of  his  interviews  with
Mrs.  Jefferies,  and  with  the  Police  Inspector  who  superintended  the  dragging
of  the  canal  :  —

MoAj  Uth,  1895.

Mrs.  Jefferies,  of  the  George  Inn,  Grove  Lane,  Smethwick,  says  it  was
the  Wednesday  after  Good  Friday  that  her  niece  (Foster)  was  missing.  On
the  following  day  her  (Mrs.  Jefferies')  nephew,  brother  of  the  niece,  called
on  his  aunt,  saying  that  he  did  not  think  she  was  alive,  as  some  girls  had
told  him  his  sister  had  said  she  would  not  speak  to  them  again — meaning  she
would  not  see  them — and  he  suspected  she  was  drowned.  The  aunt  said,
"  Oh,  I  should  not  take  any  notice  of  that,  she'll  turn  up,"  or  something  to
that  effect.  Mrs.  J.,  however,  continued  to  think  about  it  (as  her  niece  used
to  live  with  her),  and  the  same  night,  Thursday,  had  a  dream.  She  thought
she  was  walking  along  the  side  of  the  canal  at  Spring  Hill  with  an  umbrella,
which  she  let  touch  to  ripple  the  water  ;  when  at  a  certain  spot  she  saw  the
face  of  her  niece  appear  above  the  surface  twice,  and  the  second  time  she
caught  it  by  the  hair,  lifted  her  out  and  clasped  her  to  her  breast  and  kissed


The  Subliminal  Self.


391


her.  She  woke  up  after  the  dream  much  terrified.  She  told  it  to  her  servant
and  may  have  told  it  to  others.

The  next  morning  (Fridaj')  she  heard  that  the  police  were  dragging  the
canal  and  went — she  had  not  been  near  the  spot  for  5  or  6  years  before — and
spoke  to  the  sergeant,  told  him  of  her  dream,  and  asked  if  he  would  try  the
drag  at  the  place  she  had  seen  the  face  in  her  dream.  They  did  so.  The  face
of  the  girl  appeared  above  the  water  just  as  she  had  seen  it  (in  sleep) ;  it  sank
again,  and  the  second  time  the  face  appeared  in  the  same  position,  and  the
brother  leaped  into  the  water  and  clasped  the  body  to  his  breast  and  kissed
the  face  as  the  aunt  had  dreamt  she  herself  had  done.

Mrs.  JefFeries  says  that  previous  to  anything  unusual  happening  to  her  or
her  connexions  she  has  some  "  warning  "  by  dreams.  She  is  sister  to  the
mother  of  the  drowned  girl.  She  did  not  knovv  before  her  dream  that  the
canal  would  be  dragged,  nor  had  she  received  any  intimation  about  it.

Birmingham,  Maij  7th,  1895.

Acting-Inspector  Whittingham  was  told  off  in  charge  of  two  minor  oflicers
to  drag  the  canal  near  to  the  spot  where  the  girl  had  been  last  seen.  While
there  he  was  accosted  by  the  auntj  who  stood  by  the  canal  side  and  appeared
to  take  great  interest  in  what  was  going  on,  and  she  asked  him  whether  she
might  tell  him  a  dream  that  she  had  had  the  previous  night.  Thereupon  she
explained  that  in  her  dream  she  had  a  clear  view  of  the  dying  girl,  but  some
distance  from  the  spot  where  they  were  then  dragging — about  55  to  60  yards.
The  inspector  suggested  that  the  men  should  go  to  the  otlier  spot,  and
recommenced  the  dragging,  and  they  came  across  the  body  at  the  point
indicated,  the  fourth  or  fifth  time  of  putting  in  the  drag.

Martyn  Smith.

These  experiences,  however, — call  them  what  you  will,  travelling
clairvoyance  or  cosmopathic  impressibility, — are  not  evoked  by  deaths
alone.  The  case  of  the  Venus  of  Milo  has  already  suggested  that  there
may  be  something  like  short  excursions  in  which  some  fact  near  in  place
or  in  interest  is  learnt.  Sometimes  these  impressions  take  the  form
of  dreams,  in  which  case  there  is  generally  some  admixture  of  fantastic
detail.  Sometimes  a  new  belief  or  mental  picture  seems  to  survive
from  sleep  ;  sometimes  the  fact  is  given  through  automatic  writing,  or
through  crystal-vision.

In  all  cases  the  possibility  of  hypercesthesia  has  to  be  considered ;
but,  postponing  for  the  moment  that  discussion,  I  will  here  compare
six  cases,  (one  of  them  previously  published)  which  will  give  an  idea
of  this  apparent  diffusion  of  knowledge  without  any  very  obvious
telepathic  channel.  In  all  of  these,  however,  a  somewhat  indirect
telepathy  may  be  plausibly  conjectured.

The  cases  concern  a  stolen  linch-pin  and  a  stolen  horse,  and  a  lost
dog,  book,  watch,  and  ship.  In  the  case  of  the  stolen  linch-jnn  the
dreamer  seems  to  have  received  an  obscure  notion  of  a  mischievous
trick  which  had  been  played  on  a  neighbour,  before  or  during  the
dream.


392


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


P.  131.

From  Commander  F.  M.  Norman,  R.  N. ,  J.  P.  of  Berwick.

Cheviot  House,  Berwick-on-Tweed,  February  19th,  1890.

On  February  17th,  1890,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  driving,  or  being  driven,
along  the  road  near  my  house  in  an  open  cart  with  one  horse.  A  man  whom
I  saw  passing  called  out  loudly,  ' '  Look  out,  look  out,  take  care  ! "  On
looking  over  the  side  of  the  cart,  I  saw  the  wheel  had  come  oS,  apparently
owing  to  the  loss  of  the  linch-pin,  and  was  rolling  away  by  itself  towards
the  bank. The  cart  did  not  overturn,  and  I  then  awoke  and  got  up.

After  breakfast  I  opened  my  gate  for  the  purpose  of  going  to  tomi.  The
first  person  whom  I  saw  was  a  farmer,  well  known  to  me,  by  name  Anderson.
He  immediately  complained  to  me  that  as  soon  as  he  went  out  of  his  house
that  morning  he  observed  one  of  the  linch-pins  of  his  cart  lying  on  the
ground,  the  cart  itself  having  been  driven  off  by  his  son,  who  was  evidently
ignorant  of  his  danger.  Anderson  had  run  after  the  cart,  and  had  succeeded
in  restoring  the  linch-pin  to  its  place  without  any  accident  having  happened,
though  the  cart  had  travelled  more  than  a  mile.

I  may  add  that  he  said  that  it  had  been  done,  he  felt  sure,  on  purpose,
by  a  man  who  owed  him  a  grudge.

F.  M.  NORMAI^.

In  a  subsequent  letter  our  informant  adds  : —

March  6th,  1890.

After  I  dreamed,  I  woke.  I  woke  just  as  I  saw  the  wheel  rolling  away.
Then  I  went  to  sleep  again,  and  woke  at  the  usual  time  for  getting  up.  I
am  not  able  to  fix  the  hour  of  the  dream.

I  cannot  give  or  suggest  any  connecting  link  at  all.  I  had  not  spoken  to
the  farmer  for  many  days  before,  and  nothing  beyond  "Good  morning  "  for
weeks,  and  certainly  I  had  not  been  reading  or  talking  about  anything  that
would  lead  up  to  the  dream.

It  is  notable  that  the  cart  of  my  dream  in  which  I  was  standing  up  was  a
one-horse  farm  cart.  In  such  a  cart  I  had  never  set  foot  since  I  came  to
this  place  13  years  ago.

I  spoke  to  no  one  about  my  dream  till  I  met  the  farmer,  who  was  the  first
person  whom  I  met,  just  outside  my  gate,  and  he  at  once  accosted  me  with,
"Captain,  did  you  ever  lose  your  helm  at  sea?"  Not  seeing  exactly  his
drift,  I  asked  him  why,  or  what  he  meant,  and  then  he  told  me  where  he
had  been,  and  what  for.

The  farmer  was  not  a  man  who  would  be  likely  to  come  to  me  for  help
or  advice.  His  son  was  in  my  Bible-class  for  years,  and  I  used  to  call
now  and  then  to  see  the  parents,  but  that  is  all.  Not  the  son  in  the  cart.
At  the  same  time,  also,  the  farmer  would,  no  doubt,  often  think  of  me,  and
so  would  his  family,  as  I  take  a  prominent  part  in  public  affairs  here.

My  dreams  are  few  and  far  between,  and  are  nearly  always  about  the  sea
and  early  recollections.

If  I  eat  anything  that  causes  "nightmare"  it  takes  the  form  of
"  dodging  "  shells  in  the  trenches  before  Sevastopol,  where  1  served.

I  don't  dream  of  Berwick,  its  people,  or  surroundings,  more  than  once  ui
three  years.

Captain  Norman  writes  again  on  March  10th,  1890  : —


The  Subliminal  Self.


393


Herewith  I  have  pleasure  in  sending  you  "statements  "  by  the  Anderson
family.  You  will  observe  that  Margaret's  dream  arrests  attention  in  two
particulars.  (1)  That  she  dreamed  about  me  on  the  night  before  the  cart
was  taken  out.  (2)  That  she  dreamed  about  the  child  of  the  man  whom  her
father  suspected.  I  may  say  that  when  I  met  her  father  outside  my  gate,  he
mentioned  Z.  as  the  suspected  person  ;  but  in  my  account  to  you,  I  believe
I  purposely  suppressed  the  name.

Anderson  declares  that  I  have  not  been  mentioned  inside  his  house  for  a
long  time  before  the  occurrence.

F.  M.  NOKMAN.

[Margaret  Anderson's  dream  omitted  as  not  clearly  coincidental.]

Statement  by  Mr.  Anderson,  Farmer,  High  Greens,  Berwick-on-Tweed  : —
Between  nine  and  ten  on  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  February  18th,  1890,
I  went  out  into  my  yard,  and  I  at  once  observed  a  linch-pin  lying  in  a  corner
close  to  the  place  where  my  cart  usually  stands.  It  immediately  struck  me
that  some  one  who  owed  me  a  grudge  had  taken  the  pin  out  of  the  axle
before  my  cart  had  been  driven  off  to  my  meadow  by  my  son.  I  lost  no
time  in  pursuing  the  cart,  which  I  caught  up  just  beyond  Captain  Norman's
gate.  Fortunately,  no  accident  had  happened,  and  my  son  was  not  aware
that  anything  was  wrong.  I  gave  him  the  pin  and  he  replaced  it.  Directly
afterwards  Captain  Norman  came  out  of  his  gate,  and  on  my  telling  him  the
nature  of  my  errand  he  said  that  he  had  dreamed  during  the  past  night  that
he  was  drivmg  in  a  cart  along  the  road,  and  one  wheel  rolled  oflf  for  want
of  a  linch-pin.

Michael  Anderson.

Statement  by  Peter,  son  of  the  above  : —

About  9.30  a.m.  on  Tuesday,  February  18th,  1890,  I  harnessed  my
father's  horse  to  the  farm  cart,  and  drove  past  Captain  Norman's  house  in
the  direction  of  our  meadows.  Just  after  I  had  passed -Captain  Norman's
gate  I  heard  some  one  shouting  after  me.  On  looking  round  I  saw  my
father,  who  ran  up  and  produced  our  linch-pin,  which  he  said  some  one  had
taken  out  before  I  started,  but  I  had  noticed  nothing  wrong,  and  the  wheel
was  in  its  place. I  replaced  the  pin  and  proceeded.

Peter  Anderson.

Witness  to  the  above  two  signatures  : — .  Margaret  Anderson.

Since  Commander  Norman  was  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  well
known  in  the  neighbourhood,  it  is  perhaps  just  possible  that  the
thoughts  of  the  offender  may  have  "  flown  to  "  the  magistrate  who
would  be  likely  to  punish  his  malice,  if  detected.

The  case  of  the  stolen  horse  (L.  841,  printed  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
YIII.,  p.  399)  resembles  the  linch-pin  case,  but  the  dream  is  much
more  vivid  and  urgent.  The  emotion  and  perspiration  during  sleep
suggest  that  the  dreamer  seemed  to  himself  to  be  actually  witnessing
the  theft  with  a  sense  of  ineffectual  rage  and  distress.

The  case  of  the  lost  dog  involves  the  apparent  discernment  of  a
fairly  continuous  scene. Telepathy  from  the  maid-servant  alone  could


394


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


scarcely  account  for  the  whole  vision  ;  but  we  may,  pei'haps,  conjecture
that  the  mind  of  the  finder  of  the  dog  was  also  in  some  way  involved.

L.  9G9.

The  following  account  was  received,  in  1893,  from  Miss  C.  H.  Grange,
34,  Old  Broad-street,  E.G.

"  I  was  stay hrg  with  friends  in  one  of  the  Eastern  Counties.  Shortly
after  I  had  come,  my  friend,  Mrs.  B.,  wrote  to  her  sister  in  the  North,
asking  her  to  send  off  by  train  the  colley  dog  which  was  only  waiting  at
the  old  home  until  his  mistress  was  ready  to  receive  him.  We  were  all
anxious  to  welcome  'Barrie,'  who  was  an  old  friend,  and  accordingly  were
exceedingly  pleased  when  a  letter  arrived,  saying  that  he  had  been  duly
despatched  by  express  train.  This  letter  arrived  on  a  Monday  morning,
and  the  writer  added,  'The  station-master  here  tells  me  that  "Barrie"

should  reach  on  Monday  morning,  or  possibly  even  on  Sunday,  if

not  delayed  in  London.'

"One  o'clock  came,  and  with  it  the  sad  intelligence  that  as  yet  nothing
had  been  heard  of  our  colley.  At  intervals  during  that  afternoon  and
evening  one  or  other  of  us  might  have  been  seen  on  the  platform,  inter-
viewing porters  as  to  tlie  probable  cause  of  the  delay  experienced  by
'  Barrie  '  on  his  journey.

" Tuesday's  letter  bag  contained  a  letter  saying,  'To-day  I  have  had  a
telegram  from  the  station-master  at  York,  saying  that  on  Saturday  afternoon
"  Barrie  "  slipiDed  his  collar  and  disappeared.'

"  The  days  passed  by,  and  we  never  failed  to  include  the  station  in  our
daily  walk,  always  with  the  same  question  on  our  lips  '  Any  news  of
Mrs.  B's  dog  ? '  but  a  favourable  reply  never  came.

"  [On  Friday  of  the  same  week]  we  arranged  to  visit  Cambridge,  and  to
spend  several  hours  in  that  most  interesting  town.  On  the  return  journey,
being  very  tired,  most  complete  was  the  silence  which  fell  upon  us.  As
far  as  I  can  remember,  no  one  had  mentioned  '  Barrie's  '  name  since  the
usual  inquiry  had  been  made  in  the  morning,  and  indeed,  as  a  week  had
now  elapsed  since  his  loss,  we  were  beginning  [to  give  up  the  hope  of
recovering  him].

"  Like  all  the  rest,  I  was  in  a  semi-sleeping  condition.  I  do  not  say  asleep,
for  then  what  follows  would  be  a  dream,  and  certainly  it  was  scarcely  that —
no,  merely  in  a  tired  condition  of  mind  and  body,  I  felt  that  peculiar  sensa-
tion which  I  am  sure  has  been  felt  by  many,  that  is,  that  though  sufficiently
awake  to  know  what  is  going  on  around,  still  your  real  mind  seems  to  be  far
away  and  almost  separate  from  your  surroundings.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I
was  walking  down  a  road,  and  before  me  I  could  see  quite  plainly  the  colley
dog  of  which  we  had  spoken  and  thought  so  much,  being  led  by  a  man  who
held  him  with  a  rope.  I  followed  him  with  interest  until  he  was  taken  up  to
a  door  which  I  saw  opened,  and  the  flood  of  light  from  within  showed  me
the  well-known  figure  of  Mrs.  B.'s  maid-servant.  It  all  appeared  to  me
so  vivid  that  I  suddenly  started  up  and  said  to  Mrs.  B.,  '  Edith,  "  Barrie  "
is  found  ! '  Every  one  was  taken  aback  by  the  suddenness  of  this  state-
ment, and  Mrs.  B.  laughingly  said,  '  Nonsense  !  how  can  you  possibly
know,  and  why  raise  false  hopes  in  my  mind  ? ' I  then,  quite  awake  and


The  Suhliminal  Self.


395


looking  most  intently  at  her,  replied,  '  Yes,  he  is  found,  and  wlien  we  arrive

at  Station  the  first  thing  to  happen  will  be  that  a  porter  will  come  up

and  say,  "  Mrs.  B.,  your  dog  is  found."  '  Then  I  went  on  describing  the
scene  of  which  I  had  just  imagined  myself  to  be  a  witness,  saying,  '  Ah,
there  I  see  him  going  down  the  road.  Now  the  maid  is  opening  the
door.'  Here  there  was  a  universal  laugh,  and  at  last  I  joined  in  it,  whereat
all  visions  vanished. Still  I  maintained  my  oi^inion  that  the  colley  was

safe  in  ,  and  when  Dr.  B.  remarked  that  if  all  happened  as  I  had  said,

I  should  have  a  pair  of  gloves,  I  agreed,  and  promised  him  a  pair  if
'  Barrie  '  should  prove  still  to  be  missing.

"In  about  forty  minutes  after  this  the  train  drew  up  at  ,  and

Dr.  B.  opened  the  door  and  stepped  out.  Just  as  he  was  giving  his  hand
to  Edith,  a  porter  came  up  to  her  and  said,  'Mrs.  B.,  your  dog  is
found.'  She  e.xclaimed,  '  Where  is  he  ?'  The  man  replied  by  whistling  to
a  fellow  porter,  who  brought  the  dog  from  the  other  end  of  the  platform,
and  '  Barrie  '  was  soon  overwhelming  his  mistress  with  rather  boisterous
caresses.  On  our  way  home,  Dr.  B.  remarked  that  I  was  only  entitled
to  one  glove,  as  the  scene  I  had  so  graphically  described  of  the  dog  being  led
down  the  road,  was  a  myth.  But  on  our  arrival  at  the  house,  our  first  greet-
ing from  the  maid  was,  '  Oh,  it  really  is  your  dog,  Mrs.  B.  ?  I  would  not
take  him  in  when  the  porter  brought  him  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  ago.'

"  I  was  paid  the  bet.  -n-  >i

^  "C.  H.  Grange.

Miss  Grange  tells  us  that  the  incident  occurred  in  April,  1884,  and  that
the  above  account  was  written  some  weeks  later,  on  her  return  home  from
visiting  Mrs.  B.

Dr.  and  Mrs.  B.  added  to  the  account  a  corroborative  note,  signed  by
both  of  them,  to  the  following  effect : —

"Without  accepting  any  psychical  theory  whatever  as  bearing  upon  the
subject,  we  can  state  that  the  above-mentioned  facts  have  been  to  the  best
of  our  recollection  quite  correctly  recorded."

This  note  was  written  in  May,  1893.

A  letter  from  Mrs.  B.  to  Miss  Grange,  enclosing  it,  says  : — "  I  remember
about  it,  and  what  I  forget  Dr.  B.  says  he  remembers,  and  vice  versa,  so  we
can  with  a  clear  conscience  sign  it  for  you. "

The  case  of  the  lost  book  continues  and  corroborates  a  previous
series  of  similar  experiences  on  the  part  of  the  same  informant  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  chapter  on  Motor  Automatism).

P.  201. Statement  by  Lady  Vane  : —

Hutton  in  the  Forest,  April  8fh,  1894.

About  a  month  ago  I  lost  a  book,  a  manuscript  one,  relating  to  this
house.  I  thought  I  had  left  it  in  my  writing-table  in  my  sitting-room,  and
intended  to  add  a  note  about  some  alterations  just  completed — but  next  day
the  book  had  vanished.  I  looked  through  every  drawer  and  cupboard  in  my
room  and  then  asked  Sir  Henry  to  do  the  same,  which  he  did  twice.  I  also
made  the  head  housemaid  turn  everything  out  of  them  and  helped  her  to  do
so — so  that  four  thorough  searches  were  made  ;  but  in  vain. We  also  looked


396


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


in  the  gallery  and  library  (the  only  other  rooms  to  which  the  book  had  been
taken)  and  could  not  find  it.  On  March  28th  I  asked  Lady  Mabel  Howard
to  write  about  it.  She  wrote,  "It  is  in  the  locked  cupboard  in  the  book-
case— hidden  behind  the  books."

I  said,  ' '  Then  it  must  be  in  the  library,  because  the  bookcases  are
locked,"  and  Lady  Mabel  wrote,  "  Not  in  the  library."  I  said,  "  Then  it
must  be  in  the  ante-room  in  the  cupboard,"  and  asked  if  J  should  find  it.
Lady  Mabel  wrote,  "No,  send  Sir  Henry."  I  asked,  "  Will  he  find  if?"
and  she  wrote,  "  Of  course."

Still  thinking  it  could  only  be  the  ante- room  or  the  library — on  account
of  the  locked  cupboard  and  bookcase,  I  asked,  "  Which  end  of  the  room  ?  "

Lady  Mabel  wrote,  "  The  tapestry  end."  I  asked,  "Is  it  on  the  window
side  of  the  room  or  on  the  other?  "  and  she  wrote,  "The  other."  A  friend
staying  in  the  house  looked  in  the  bookcases  in  the  library  at  the  tapestry
end,  and  in  the  cupboard  in  the  ante-room  (I  had  met  with  an  accident
and  could  not  go  myself)  and  could  not  find  the  book,  so  we  gave  it  up.

On  April  5th  Sir  Henry  was  in  my  sitting-room  and  suddenly  said,  "I
have  an  idea  !  Lady  Mabel  meant  this  room.  There  is  the  bookcase  and  the
locked  cupboard  in  it — and  the  wall  outside  the  door  is  covered  with  tapes-
try." I  said,  "You  liave  looked  in  that  cujjboard  twice,  and  so  have  I  and
the  housemaid,  and  the  book  is  not  there — but  look  again  if  you  like."  Sir
Henry  unlocked  the  door  of  the  cupboard  and  took  out  all  the  books  (there
were  not  more  than  half-a-dozen)  and  put  them  on  the  floor.  The  last  he
put  back  into  the  cupboard  was  a  scrap-book  for  newspaper  cuttings,  and  as
it  was  rather  dark  at  6.30  p.m.  he  could  not  see  the  name  on  the  back  and
therefore  opened  it  to  see  what  it  was,  and  the  lost  manuscript  book  fell  out.

Having  searched  this  very  small  cupboard  four  times  previously,  either  of
us  would  have  been  ready  to  swear  that  this  book  was  not  in  it.

(Signed) Maegaket  Vane.

Henry  Vane.

Writing  to  Mr.  Myers  about  this  case  on  April  10th,  from  Greystoke
Castle,  Penrith,  Lady  Mabel  Howard  says  : —

The  day  I  got  your  letter  I  got  a  special  letter  sent  over  from  Hutton
to  say  my  pencil  had  found  a  valuable  book  that  Lady  Vane  had  lost.  We
therefore  walked  over  there  on  Sunday  and  I  asked  her  to  write  it  out.
It  is  so  very  curious,  quite  the  best  thing  I  think  the  pencil  ever  has  done —
as  it  said,  "  in  the  cupboard  in  the  bookcase,"  and  they  couldn't  think
where  it  meant — a  cupboard  in  a  bookcase  —and  this  little  cupboard  is  a
cupboard  in  the  middle  let  into  glass  bookcases  on  either  side.  I  had  no
idea  of  the  cupboards  or  tapestries  there,  and  the  pencil  wrote  all  this  in  the
sandwich  paper  at  luncheon  on  the  Point-to-Point  race  course."

So  curious,  too,  the  pencil  said,  "Send  Sir  Henry,"  twice.  It  was  the
merest  chance  finding  it,  as  it  fell  out  of  this  scrapbook,  and  was  hidden
behind  the  other  books.

In  another  letter,  dated  April  14th,  Lady  Mabel  Howard  writes  : —

I  saw  Lady  Vane  on  February  24th  when  the  book  had  not  been  lost.
I  did  not  see  her  again  till  Easter  Monday.  The  moment  I  got  upstairs  she
exclaimed,  "  I  want  you  to  find  a  book  for  me  that  is  lost." No  pencil  nor


The  Subliminal  Self.


397


paper  was  forthcoming,  so  she  said,  "Never  mind,  write  when  you  get
home,"  but  I  forgot,  and  it  was  two  days  after  at  the  Point-to-Point  race
that  she  asked  me  again,  and  we  wrote  it  in  the  paper  the  sandwiches  had
heen  in.

I  was  abroad  all  this  March  and  it  was  then  that  there  were  repairs  being
done  in  the  house,  and  Lady  Vane  took  the  book  down  from  where  she  kept
it  (I  don't  know  where)  and  having  entered  the  repairs  into  it,  put  it  down,
and  from  that  moment  it  was  never  seen  again.  I  must  have  been  at  Florence
when  the  book  was  lost.

Mabel  Howard,

Are  we  to  describe  this  as  a  knowledge  of  past,  of  present,  or  of
future  ?  Or  may  we  say  that  a  teLiesthetic  perception  of  this  kind  is  not
strictly  conditioned  by  time,  but  includes  some  retrogressive  knowledge
as  to  how  things  reached  their  present  condition,  and  also  some
pregressive  inference  as  to  their  coming  development  1  The  element  of
forecast  in  the  present  case, — -the  indication  that  it  would  be  Sir
Henry  Vane  who  would  find  the  book, — is  in  itself  very  slight ;  but  it
cannot  be  ignored  when  we  compare  other  messages  of  Lady  Mabel
Howard's.  See,  for  instance,  the  messages  to  Mr.  Huth,  Vol.  IX.,
p.  46,  where  the  element  of  precognition  was  strongly  marked.  In
this  present  case,  the  whereabouts  of  the  book  can  hardly  have  been
supraliminally  known  to  any  human  being ;  since  the  workman  or
servant  whose  hands  may  have  slipped  it  into  the  larger  book  was
probably  unaware  of  what  it  was,  or  even  of  his  own  unthinking
action  itself.  If,  however,  it  were  Sir  Henry  or  Lady  Vane  who
unthinkingly  placed  the  small  book  in  the  larger  one — and  this  does
not  seem  quite  impossible — Lady  Mabel's  knowdedge  might  have  been
drawn  telepathically  from  their  subliminal  memory.

In  the  case  of  the  lost  watch,  to  be  next  quoted,  it  might  similarly  be
suggested  that  the  loser's  subliminal  self  had  seen  the  watch  fall,  and
afterwards  communicated  that  knowledge  telepathically  to  his  sleeping
friend.  The  analogy  of  other  cases,  however,  would  seem  rather  to
point  to  an  excursion  or  extension  of  the  dreamer's  perception,  so  as  to
include  the  field  where  the  watch  was  found.

P.  176.  J.  L.  Squires.

Prof.  James, — Dear  Sir, — I  am  informed  that  you  are  at  the  head  of
the  Boston  Branch  of  the  English  Society  of  Psychical  Research,  and  beg  to
call  your  attention  to  a  singular  incident  which  took  place  near  here  some
time  ago,  and  which  has  never  been  chronicled. It  is,  in  brief,  as  follows  : —

A  young  man  of  this  place,  J.  L.  Squires  by  name,  was  at  work  on  the
farm  of  T.  L.  Johnson,  with  another  young  man,  Wesley  Davis,  who  was  one
day  far  from  the  buildings  mending  fence  around  a  large  pasture.  Squires  was
not  with  him,  nor  had  he  ever  been  far  into  the  pasture.  At  some  time  dur-
ing the  day  Davis  lost  his  watch  and  chain  from  the  vest  pocket,  and  although

2  G


398


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


he  searched  diligently,  could  not  find  it,  as  he  had  no  idea  as  to  the  probable
locality  of  the  watch.  Although  only  a  silver  watch,  Davis  worked  for  a
living  and  could  liardly  afford  its  loss.

In  his  sympathy  for  his  friend,  Squires  could  not  keep  his  mind  ofi"  the
watch,  and  after  two  or  three  days  thinking  of  it,  went  to  bed  one  night  still
thinking  of  it.  During  the  night  he  had  a  dream,  or  vision,  as  we  may  call
it,  and  saw  the  watch  lying  on  the  ground  with  the  chain  coiled  in  a  peculiar
position  :  rocks,  trees  and  all  the  surroundings  were  perfectly  plain  to  him.
Telling  his  story  at  the  breakfast  table,  he  was,  of  course,  well  laughed  at,
but  being  so  convinced  that  he  could  go  straight  to  the  watch,  he  saddled  a
horse  and  found  it  exactly  as  he  expected  to.

All  the  parties  concerned  are  wholly  honest  and  reliable.  I  will  have  a
detailed  statement  sworn  to  if  you  would  like  it.

John  E.  Gale,  Guilford,  Vermont.

In  the  month  of  March,  1887,  I,  Jesse  L.  Squires,  of  Guilford,  in  the
county  of  Windliam,  and  State  of  Vermont,  being  then  in  the  twenty-third
year  of  my  age,  began  working  for  T.  L.  Johnson,  a  farmer  living  in  the
town  aforesaid.

In  the  month  of  Sefitember  following — the  exact  day  of  the  month  I  do
not  remeiTuber — I  was  about  one  mile  from  the  farm  buildings  with  a  young
man  named  Wesley  Davis,  with  whom  I  had  for  several  years  been  acquainted,
and  who  had  been  working  with  me  at  said  Johnson's  for  several  months,  look-
ing after  some  cattle  that  had  strayed  from  a  jDasture.  The  cattle,  eighteen  or
twenty  head,  were  found  in  a  large  mow  lot,  and  seeing  us,  started  to  run
away  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  in  which  we  wished  to  drive  them.  In
order  to  head  off  the  cattle  and  turn  them  back,  Davis  ran  one  way  and  I
the  other,  and  while  running  Davis  lost  his  watch  and  chain  from  his  vest
pocket,  but  did  not  discover  his  loss  until  eight  or  nine  o'clock  that  night,
when  it  was,  of  course,  too  late  to  search  for  it.  Believing  that  he  must  have
lost  the  watch  while  engaged  in  getting  the  cattle  back  into  the  pasture,
Davis  and  myself  returned  to  the  place  the  next  morning  and  looked  for  the
watch  all  the  forenoon.  Not  having  any  idea  of  the  probable  locality  in
which  the  watch  was  lost,  and  not  being  at  all  certain  that  it  was  lost  while
after  the  cattle,  we  did  not  succeed  in  finding  it,  although  we  searched  for  it
until  twelve  o'clock.  The  watch  was  one  that  Davis  had  had  for  some  time,
and  he  was  much  attached  to  it,  and  felt  very  badly  about  his  loss.  He
worked  hard  for  his  living,  and  could  not  afford  to  lose  the  watch,  for  which
he  had  paid  twenty-five  dollars.  I  felt  sorry  for  him,  and  thought  about  the
watch  continually  all  tlie  afternoon  after  we  returned  from  looking  for  it,  and
was  still  thinking  of  it  when  I  went  to  sleep  that  night.

During  my  sleep,  at  what  hour  I  could  not  tell,  I  saw  the  watch  as  it  lay
upon  the  ground  in  the  mow  lot,  over  a  mile  away.  It  was  in  the  tall  grass,
at  least  ten  inches  high.  The  face  of  the  watch  was  turned  up,  and  the
small  steel  chain  which  was  attached  to  it,  lay  in  a  curve  like  a  half  circle.
About  three  feet  from  the  watch  was  a  large  spot  where  the  grass  had  been
crushed  and  matted  by  a  creature  lying  down  ;  about  ten  rods  to  the  north
was  a  brush  fence  ;  about  ten  or  twelve  feet  to  the  eastward  of  the  watch
was  a  granite  cobble  stone  one  or  two  feet  in  diameter,  which  lay  about  half


The  Subliminal  Self.


399


out  of  the  ground.  When  I  awoke  the  next  morning,  which  was  Sundaj-,  I
felt  as  certain  that  I  could  go  straight  to  the  watch  as  if  I  had  really  seen  it,
and  told  Davis  so,  and  tried  to  have  him  go  out  and  get  it.  He  had  no  faith
in  my  "vision,"  "  dream,"  or  whatever  it  may  be  called,  and  would  not  go.
In  spite  of  the  jests  and  laughter  of  the  entire  family,  I  saddled  a  horse  and
went  directly  to  the  watch,  which  I  found  with  all  its  surroundings  exactly
as  I  had  seen  it.  I  was  not  nearer  than  forty  rods  to  Davis  when  the  watch
was  lost,  as  I  ascertained  after  it  was  found.

The  watch  had  run  do'sra  and  stopped,  the  hands  pointing  to  9.40  o'clock,
which  I  also  noted  in  my  dream.

J.  L.  Squires.

Guilford,  Vermont,  March  Uh,  1892.
I  hereby  certify  that  I  have  known  the  above  J.  L.  Squires  for  over
twenty  years,  and  that  I  know  him  to  be  strictly  temj)erate,  honest,  and
truthful.  He  has  always  been  in  the  best  of  health.  He  tells  me  that  he
has  recently  had  an  experience  similar  to  the  above,  which  I  will  send  you,
if  you  wish.

If  the  above  is  ever  put  in  type,  please  tell  me  where  I  can  get  a  copy.

JoHis'  E.  Gale,  Justice  of  the  Peace.

The  narrative,  which  next  follows,  of  the  lost  ship, — the  finding  of
the  Carnatic, — originally  published  in  Harper  s  Magazine,  without
Capt.  Sargent's  corroboration,  has  been  greatly  increased  in  evidential
value  by  that  added  testimony.  Here,  again,  there  seems  a  confusion
or  coalescence  of  times,  and  a  telepathy  verging  upon  telsesthesia.  If
the  central  psychical  fact  was  the  appeal  of  Morton  for  help,  yet  the
series  of  scenes  cogaised  seems  to  have  involved  the  ship's  striking
upon  a  rock  some  hours  before,  and  a  representation  of  the  landscape
of  the  disaster.

P.  175.  Lowell,  Mass.-;

October  ISth,  1890.

Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston.

Dear  Sir, — Replying  to  your  favour  of  the  17th,  I  send  you  a  copy  of
Sar^xr's  Magazine  for  AngVLUt,  1880,  with  the  article  marked  in  "Editor's
Drawer."  The  episode  there  related  is  probably  the  basis  of  the  erroneous
report  which  has  drifted  so  strangely  to  you.  The  matter  as  written  in
Harper  is  not  embellished  nor  exaggerated  in  the  least.  I  can  vouch  for  the
absolute  truth  of  the  narrative.

George  A.  Hanscom.

From  Harpei-'s  Magazine,  August,  1880.
The  following  statement  of  singular  facts,  recalled  by  a  recent  article  in
this  magazme,  is  contributed  by  Mr.  George  A.  Hanscom,  of  Lowell,
Massachusetts.

The  reading  of  the  "Puzzle  for  Metaphysicians  "  in  the  June  number  of
your  monthly,  recalls  to  the  writer  the  most  remarkable  occm'rence  of  like

2  G  2


400


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


nature  which  a  nautical  experience  of  twenty  years  afforded.  This  is
another  of  those  experiences  which  go  to  prove  the  occasional  thinness  of
the  curtain  which  limits  the  natural  vision  of  mortals.

In  1869  I  was  in  Suez,  in  command  of  the  British  steamship  Nesera,
belonging  to  the  Bombay  and  Bengal  Steamship  Company — a  company
owning  a  line  of  steamers  born  of  the  necessities  of  the  manufacturing
world,  when  the  supply  of  American  cotton  was  so  largely  cut  off  by  the
War  of  the  Rebellion.  The  line  was  under  the  management  of  William.  F.
Stearns,  now  deceased,  son  of  the  late  Professor  Stearns,  of  Amherst
College,  a  man  who,  going  to  India  penniless,  developed  qualities  which
enabled  him  to  rise  on  the  flood  tide  of  prosperity  to  a  colossal  fortune  and
high  social  jjosition,  but,  as  it  proved,  only  to  see  his  riches  float  out  on  the
receding  tide,  and  leave  his  family  but  poorly  provided  for  at  his  untimely
death.

The  Netera  was  lying  in  Suez-roads,  the  canal  being  not  yet  open,  await-
ing passengers,  etc.,  before  sailing  on  her  return  voyage  to  Bombay.  The
Peninsular  and  Oriental  Company's  steamship  Carnatic  was  also  about
ready  to  sail  for  the  same  port,  and  only  waiting  mails  and  passengers.  It
happened  that  the  passengers  for  the  two  steamers  came  across  the  Isthmus
together,  and  that  two  old  friends  and  school-mates  met,  the  one  to  join  the
Neajra,  the  other  the  Carnatic.  A  day  was  spent  by  the  friends,  who  un-
expectedly met  on  the  Egyptian  desert,  in  recounting  their  experience  since
they  last  parted,  and  naturally  enough  there  was  a  good  deal  of  badinage
between  them  as  to  the  comparative  merits  of  the  two  steamers,  and  as  to
which  should  first  land  on  the  "  coral  strand,"  ujDon  which  these  "griflins  "
were  to  be  initiated  into  their  duties  in  the  "Civil  Service,"  to  which  they
had  been  newly  appointed.

The  Carnatic  was  the  first  to  be  ready,  and  sailed  from  Suez  in  the  morn-
ing ;  the  Nesera  left  early  in  the  evening,  some  ten  or  twelve  hours  after  the
mail  steamer.  The  night  was  fine,  and  at  breakfast  time  we  had  passed
Shaduan  Island,  were  out  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  and  into  the  Red  Sea  proper.
Breakfast  was  served  on  deck,  under  double  awnings  of  heavy  canvas.  The
young  gentleman  who  had  left  his  friend  the  day  before  seemed  somewhat
depressed  in  spirits,  and  duinng  breakfast  said  rather  anxiously,  "  Captain,  at
what  time  did  we  stop  last  night  ?  "

"  Stop  !  we  have  not  stopped  since  leaving,"  was  the  reply.

"  Not  even  to  take  soundings  1  "

"No,  the  engines  have  not  been  eased  since  leaving  port."

The  young  man  seemed  much  surprised,  and  finally  said  that  he  had  a
most  vivid  and  remarkable  dream  during  the  night,  and  this  he  proceeded  to
relate  in  substance  as  follows  :  —

"  In  my  dream  it  appeared  to  me  that  the  steamer  was  stopped  during  the
night,  and  that  I  went  on  deck  to  ascertain  the  cause.  I  saw  a  boat  pulling
off  from  an  island  to  intercept  us,  and  a  lantern  was  waved  to  arrest  our
attention.  As  the  boat  came  nearer  I  saw  my  friend  Morton  standing  in  the
stern.  As  he  came  up  the  gangway  ladder  I  said,  '  For  God's  sake,  Morton,
what  brings  you  here  1 '  I  never  saw  him  plainer,  nor  heard  his  voice  more
distinctly  than  when  he  said,  '  The  Carnatic  has  struck  a  rock  and  gone
down  ;  the  passengers  and  crew  are  on  an  island  close  by,  all  safe,  and  we


The  Subliminal  Self.


401


■want  your  ship  to  take  them  on  board.'  I  dreamed  that  our  ship  stoi^ped
until  other  boats  came  off  with  the  remainder  of  the  people,  and  we  then
proceeded."

The  narration  of  the  dream  made  a  profound  impression  upon  the
passengers,  but  the  captain,  as  in  duty  bound,  laughed  it  off.  The  young
man  proved  a  jolly  sort  of  fellow,  but  was  called  "the  dreamer  "  during  the
rest  of  the  voyage.

On  arrival  at  Aden  live  days  later,  before  our  anchor  was  down,  we  were
hailed  by  a  boat  which  had  been  despatched  from  the  Peninsular  and
Oriental  ofDce,  and  asked  if  we  had  any  news  of  the  Carnatic,  that  ship  being
a  day  overdue.  We  had  no  news  to  give  ;  but  our  "dreamer"  quietly
remarked  to  me,  "You  may  find  that  there  is  more  to  my  dream  than  you
suppose."

A  few  hours  completed  our  coaling,  and  we  were  off  again  for  Bombay.
On  arrival  at  that  port  we  heard  the  news  of  the  loss  of  the  Carnatic,  and  the
circumstances  were  just  as  narrated  to  us  two  weeks  before.  The  ship
struck  on  a  rock  near  Shaduan  Island  some  twelve  hours  after  leaving  Suez.
The  passengers  and  crew  were  landed  on  the  island  ;  the  steamer  subse-
quently slid  off  tlie  rock  and  went  down  in  deep  water.  During  the  night  a
steamer's  light  were  seen  by  the  shipwrecked  crew,  and  a  boat  was  sent  out
to  intercept  her.  Our  "  dreamer's  "  friend,  Morton,  went  in  the  first  boat ;
the  remainder  of  the  people  were  subsequently  taken  on  board,  and  the  rescu-
ing steamer,  not  the  Netera,  rescued  the  party.  The  "dreamer"  told  the
story  as  well  as  it  could  be  told  to-day.

It  seems  probable  that  our  "  dreamer's  "  vision  was  shown  him  at  the  very
moment  the  ship-wrecked  people  were  embarking  upon  the  steamer  which
came  to  their  aid,  and  that  the  Nesera  was  not  ten  miles  from  the  scene  at
the  time.

It  may  be.  stated  in  conclusion,  to  show  the  perfection  to  which  the  postal
system  of  the  world  has  arrived,  that  the  only  letter  addressed  to  the  writer
which  ever  failed  to  reached  him  in  aU  his  twenty  years'  wanderings,  went
down  in  the  Carnatic.

Lowell,  Mass.,  May  2nd,  1893.

R.  Hodgson,  LL.D., — Dear  Sir, — Replying  to  your  favour  of  the  28th
ult.,  I  think  I  wrote  you  long  ago  that  I  cannot  now  tell  the  whereabouts  of
Morton.  It  was  more  than  twenty  years — nearly  twenty-five  years  ago,  and
I  have  long  ago  largely  lost  touch  with  both  England  and  British  India.  If,
however,  the  matter  should  be  published,  with  an  intimation  that  you  would
like  to  hear  from  him,  he  will  come  to  the  front  —  certainly  so  if  published  in
the  English  and  Indian  branches  of  the  Society, — if  he  is  still  alive.  "The
power  of  the  press  "  is  far-reaching.  I  can,  however,  give  you  one  important
witness  in  the  person  of  Captain  R.  W.  Sargent,  708,  Pine-street,  Phila-
delphia. Sargent  was  chief  officer  of  the  "  Nesera  "  and  knew  all  the  circum-
stances at  first  hand.  He,  Sargent,  now  occupies  an  important  position  in
the  Cramp  Steamshipbuilding  Company,  having  recently  left  the  sea  after
many  years  in  the  American  Steamship  Line,  by  whom  he  was  deputed  last
year  for  a  trip  on  the  Russian  Relief  Service.  I  cannot  think  of  any  other
whose  present  address  I  can  give. Possibly  he  can.


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  matter  published  in  Harijer  was,  however,  written  without  embellish-
ment when  the  case  was  fresh  in  mind,  and  may  be  relied  upon.

Geo.  a.  Hanscom.

1358,  Hanover-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,

November  10th,  1893.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D., — Dear  Sir, — Captain  George  Hanscom
wrote  me  about  the  matter,  and  a  year  ago,  February  last,  I  talked  the
"  Carnatic  "  incident  over  with  him  at  his  home  in  Lowell,  Mass.  He  read
the  article  from  Harper  s  for  August,  1880,  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  in  my
memory  he  had  stated  the  case  as  it  was.  As  well  as  I  can  remember,  the
statement  is  absolutely  true,  but  he  has  not  gone  into  the  details  as  much
as  he  might  have  done,  had  he  taken  a  more  active  interest  in  psychology.

I  was  second  officer  with  him  at  the  time,  and  thrown  more  in  contact
with  the  young  man.  As  I  got  older  I  became  very  much  interested  in  these
subjects  and  probably  have  told  the  story  hundreds  of  times  to  saloon
passengers  in  steamships  I  have  commanded,  as  it  is  to  me  one  of  the  clearest
cases  on  record  of  something  leaving  a  man  and  coming  back  to  him.

I  cannot  agree  with  Captain  Hanscom  as  to  the  young  man  saying  it  was
a  "dream."  He  insisted  he  it  all,  he  resented  it  being  considered  a
"dream."

I  do  not  remember  the  names  of  either  of  the  young  men,  and  have  not
heard  of  either  of  them  since.

The  young  men  were  going  out  to  enter  the  telegraph  service,  and  the
party  divided,  as  a  part  of  them  wished  a  day  longer  in  Egypt.  The  young
man  on  the  Neasra,  as  well  as  we  could  find  out,  never  saw  the  Carnatic.  Yet
he  described  her  to  us  quite  as  well  as  if  he  had  been  on  board.

He  had  never  been  down  the  Gulf  of  Suez  ;  probably  Captain  Hanscom
forgot  this.  In  my  presence  he  asked  him  to  describe  the  jilace  where  the
ship  struck  and  where  the  passengers  were,  with  the  general  look  of  the  land,
which  he  did.  When  we  were  alone.  Captain  Hanscom,  who  was  very  mucli
impressed  with  the  story,  said  to  me,  "  Mr.  Sargent,  where  did  the  ship
strike,  what  place  did  the  people  land,  and  what  was  the  high  land  he  saw-
in  the  distance?"  I  replied,  "The  ship  struck  near  Usshreifi  Reef,  the
boat  landed  on  the  Island  of  Jubal,  and  the  land  on  the  right  hand  was
Shaduan,  and  on  the  left  Ros  Mohamed."  He  answered,  "That  is  what
I  make  it."

After  twenty-four  years  this  case,  in  its  main  points,  is  fresh  in  my
memory. I  wish  I  could  help  you  to  trace  the  young  men,  but  I  cannot.

To  me  this  one  case  has  proved  that  some  men  have  a  dual  personality.
I,  of  course,  have  heard  of  others,  but  I  was  shipmates  with  this  one,
and  it  has  settled  the  fact  for  me  that  there  is  something  in  man  superior  to
matter.

R.  W.  Sargent.

I  will  close  this  group  of  retrocognitive  cases  with  a  possible,
but  obscure,  telepathic  basis  by  a  curious  incident  where  the
retrocognised fact,  although  in  one  sense  exti'emely  accurate,  was


The  Subliminal  Self.


so  presented  as  to  be  wholly  misleading ;  and  iu  a  way  in  which
no  assignable  intelligence  (unless  it  were  a  forgetful  dream  of  the
deceased  debtor's  or  of  the  satisfied  creditor's)  would  have  been
likely  to  have  presented  it.

P.  170.  Law  Offices  of  H.  and  P.,

New  Orleans,  January  8th,  1894.

My  Dear  Sir, — In  May,  1889,  I  had  purchased  the  residence  property
where  I  now  live,  and  of  course  had  looked  into  the  title,  as  to  conveyances
and  liens. This  work  was  concluded,  when  one  night  I  dreamed  this  dream.

I  was  walking  tlirough  the  business  part  of  the  city,  and  met  our  sheriff,
who  said,  "I  am  going  to  sell  that  house  and  lot,  corner  of  2nd  and  Chestnut-
streets,  for  the  claim  of R.  M v.  J.  C  ,  for  446.50dols. " I  was

annoyed,  of  course,  thinking  that  there  might  have  been  some  mistake  in
the  search  for  judgment  liens  — and  then  I  woke  up.

J.  C  had  been  a  former  owner. On  my  way  down  to  my  office  next

morning  I  stopped  to  see  his  son,  W.  C  , — his  successor  in  business, —

and  as  a  kind  of  joke,  told  him  my  dream.  As  I  told  him  his  face  lengthened
visibly,  and  without  saying  anything,  he  went  to  his  ledger  and  after  looking
at  it  said,  "You  made  a  slight  mistake  in  figures— it  was  444,50dols." — and.
then,  with  a  sort  of  awe,  continued,  ' '  But  with  the  interest,  figured  here  in

pencil,  it  was just  446.50dols." I should  add  that  J.  C had  been

embarrassed  before  his  death,  but  had  settled  up  his  debts,  so  I  had  no
trouble.  Now,  had  the  claim  been  sued  on,  the  sheriff  and  lien  part  of  my
dream  had  no  truth,  but  the  debt  and  amount  were  precise. I  knew  R.

M  very  well,  but  never  associated  him  in  any  way  with  J.  C  ,  nor

had  the  slightest  reason,  that  I  can  recall,  to  suspect  that  C  had  ever

had  any  dealings  with  M  ,  C being  "in  cotton"  and  M  "in

sugar."

W.  W.  Howe.

Professor  William  James,

Cambridge,  Mass.

No.  54,  Union-street,  New  Orleans,

March  Uth,  1894.

Professor  William  James, — Dear  Sir, — Your  favour  of  the  10th  inst.
is  at  hand,  and  in  reply  :— The  occurrence  referred  to  was  certainly  quite
startling  and  it  was  about  as  follows  : —

The  heirs  of  my  father,  deceased,  had  sold  a  property  here  to  Judge  W.

W.  H  ,  and  some  time  after  the  sale  had  been  passed  and  completed  and

purchase  price  paid,  J udge  H  called  at  our  office  one  morning  and  said

that  he  had  had  a  dream  (probably  the  night  before)  which  had  annoyed  him
a  little,  although  he  was  not  disposed  to  attach  any  importance  to  it,  but
simply  to  satisfy  a  not-understood  desire  to  do  so,  he  had  come  around  to
mention  it  to  me,  and  it  was  this  : —

That  his  dream  was,  that,  notwithstanding  his  careful  research  of  the
title  of  the  property  and  that  all  encumbrances  found  had  been  removed,
there  had  been  presented  to  him  for  payment  a  judgment  obtained  by  Mr.


404


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


K.  M  for  an  amount  which  he  specified  in  dollars  and  cents.  I  remarked

to  him  that  it  was  very  remarkable  indeed  that  that  amount  would  vary  very

little  from  what  a  liability  would  have  been  to  Mr.  M had  it  not  been

paid ,  and  had  drawn  interest  to  that  date.  I  referred  to  data  and  computed
the  interest  and  was,  as  said  before,  quite  startled  to  find  that  there  was  no
difference  between  the  figures  mentioned  by  him  and  what  I  found  the

liability  to  Mr.  M  would  have  been,  had  it  not  been  paid  off. I  regret

very  much  that  I  did  not  make  memorandum  of  this  amount  and  the  date,  so
that  it  might  have  been  given  you  explicitly  and  definitely,  but  did  not,  and
■without  knowing  the  date,  I  cannot  give  even  approximately  the  amount
mentioned.

I  told  the  Judge,  however,  that  there  was  an  inaccuracy  in  the  dream,

and  that  was  that  Mr.  M  's  claim  had  never  gone  to  judgment,  nor  had

there  been  any  legal  contention  or  contest  about  it  ;  but  that  it  was  a
liability  that  had  been  settled  in  the  regular  course  of  business  at  the  i:)roper
time.

Wm.  H.  Chaffe.

I  must  here  leave  for  the  present  the  study  of  knowledge  of
things  past  or  present  received  by  telsesthesia  or  by  obscure  telepathy,
— supernormal  knowledge  whose  origin  is  not  clearly  traceable  to
any  definite  external  intelligence  ; — and  must  pass  on  to  the  much
commoner  type  of  messages,  vi^here  knowledge  of  past  or  present  (we
are  not  yet  dealing  with  things  future)  is  claimed  to  proceed  from  some
more  or  less  definite  disembodied  intelligence.  The  cases  which  we
have  already  studied  form  an  extension  of  the  scope  of  a  man's  own
personal  memory  or  observation  ;  those  on  which  we  now  enter  form
an  extension  of  the  scope  of  the  things  which  he  hears  and  reads, — and
from  which  he  combines  by  selection  and  inference  his  main  knowledge
of  the  Past.

My  reader  already  knows  how  confused  and  contradictory  these
soi-disant  spirit  messages  generally  are.  For  the  most  part,  as  I  have
often  urged,  they  may  well  be  no  more  than  externalised  dreams,
whose  source  is  wholly  within  the  automatist's  own  intelligence.

This  view  I  must  now  supplement  by  an  endeavour  to  show  that
even  if  we  suppose  these  messages  to  come  from  outside  ourselves  (as  I
hold  that  some  of  them  cei'tainly  do),  we  need  still  feel  no  surprise  at
their  generally  unsatisfactory  character.  Even  on  that  hypothesis
they  are,  I  think,  very  much  what  the  analogies  of  earthly  life  would
lead  us  to  expect.

Suppose  that  the  Avhole  mass  of  statements,  or  signs  of  assent  or
denial,  which  are  presented  to  any  man  during  a  day  of  common  life
were  simply  written  out  continuously,  with  no  indication  of  their
source  beyond  what  their  content  supplies,  we  should  then  have  a
jumble  much  like  that  which  automatic  messages  present.  Let  us  try
to  compare  the  two  scenes  ;  somewhat  widening  our  ordinary  categories


The  Subliminal  Self.


405


so  as  to  allow  for  the  unknown  conditions  of  the  world  from  whence
these  messages  are  alleged  to  come.

In  the  course  of  a  day,  then,  I  hear  various  direct  statements  from
living  persons,  who  speak  as  they  believe  at  the  moment,  and  whom  I
can  question  on  what  they  say.  I  also  read  many  written  statements,
whose  writers  I  cannot  question  ;  these  statements  representing  what
their  writers  believed  at  a  given  moment  in  the  past.  The  first  of
these  classes  I  may  call  direct  statements  ;  the  second,  exuvial.  They
are  exuvial  inasmuch  as  they  represent  a  past  state  of  the  generating
intelligence,  as  a  snake's  skin  or  a  lobster's  shell  represents  a  past
conformation  of  the  animal's  organism.  The  need  of  this  general  term
to  comprehend  all  statements  detached  from  their  authors, — no  longer
supported  by  a  life  behind  them  which  can  hear  and  answer  questions, —
•will  presently  appear.  And,  thirdly,  I  both  hear  and  read  many
statements  which  neither  now  represent,  nor  ever  represented,  any
independent  belief  or  truth.  Such  statements  I  may  call  j:)«msii!ic,
since  they  are  merely  based  upon  some  other  mind's  belief,  or  upon  my
own  belief  which  they  reflect  to  me,  perhaps  with  no  wish  to  deceive.
Thus  a  child  assents  to  any  story  which  I  tell  him, — his  object  being  not
to  controvert  but  to  understand  ; — a  dog  shows  sympathy  with  any
emotion  which  I  choose  to  express  ; — its  impulse  being  merely  to  attain
companionship  with  a  mind  above  its  own.  Nay,  my  own  dreams  also
are  parasitic  upon  my  waking  day.  They  represent  the  best  which
some  fragment  of  my  mind  can  effect ; — a  petty  whirlwind  that  lifts
the  chaff  from  the  floor  of  my  mental  granary.

Now  my  point  is  that  whereas  when  we  believe  ourselves  to  be
dealing  with  an  unseen  world  we  desire,  and  instinctively  expect,  that
all  messages  which  come  to  iis  shall  be  direct,  the  probability  never-
theless is  that  they  will  mainly  be  exuvial  or  jmrasitic.

If  even  the  material  world  is  so  full  as  we  find  it  of  the  exuviae  of
past  thoughts  and  emotions, — although  such  thoughts  must  be  written
on  paper,  or  spoken  into  phonographs,  if  the  vibrations  of  brain  or
larynx  are  not  to  wander  irrecoverably  away  ;  much  more  may  a
supersensory,  a  telepathic  world  accumulate  the  mental  exuvise  which
may  form,  so  to  say,  the  environment  in  which  its  new  life  proceeds.
What  is  likely  to  be  there  imaged  and  treasured,  if  not  the  Past  of
Souls  1  Some  such  images  may  be  fleeting  as  shadows,  some  persistent
as  the  imagined  vortices  of  ether,  or  some  may  last  a  little  longer  than
others,  as  in  a  room  filled  with  smokers  some  smoke-rings  float  for  a
few  moments  still  discernible  in  the  heavy  air.

What  if  the  haunting  ghost  be  such  a  smoke-ring  among  the
disintegrated  images  of  other  occupants  of  the  house  1  What  if  some
isolated  passionate  statement,  like  that  professing  to  come  from  the
Leicester  murderess,  {Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  99),  should  represent


406


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  impress  o£  some  intense  memory, — a  record  which  still  in  some
sense  coheres  independently,  and  meets  the  sensitive's  receptive  power,
much  as  a  particle  of  organic  debris  iloats  within  the  tentacles  of  a
sea-anemone'?

This,  then,  may  come,  and  nothing  beyond  it ;  one  message  may
be  given  with  ease  and  force  ;  after  which  there  will  be  only  silence,
or  a  confused  parasitic  rehandling  of  the  facts  already  given.

And  this  brings  me  to  my  second  category  of  subordinate  and
untrustworthy  communications, — those  which  in  the  actual  world  I
have  called  jmrasitic.

The  causes  which  lead  to  such  communications  on  earth  seem  likely
to  be  even  more  prevalent  in  a  ti'anscendental  world.  On  this  earth
the  mere  differences  of  bodily  organisation  which  deprive  the  lower
animals  of  the  power  of  speech  prevent  our  direct  contact  with
minds  much  below  our  own.  In  a  world,  on  the  other  hand,  where
thought  is  directly  communicated,  it  may  well  be  that  minds  somewhat
on  the  level  of  the  dog  or  the  monkey  may  come  into  a  closer  relation
than  here  with  the  mind  of  man.  And  since  the  actual  language  in  which
automatic  messages  are  conveyed  is  almost  always  derived  from  our
own  brains,  there  seems  no  security  against  our  confusing  messages
inspired  by  these  lower  intelligences  with  messages  veritably  coming
from  our  departed  friends.  Such  messages  may  show  the  wish  to
please  of  the  friendly  dog,  or  the  wish  to  tease  of  the  mischievous
monkey.  Possibly  they  may  be  mere  attempts  to  understand,  to  get
into  communication  with  our  human  minds.  Whatever  the  temper
which  inspires  them,  they  will  be  mere  reflections  or  distortions  of
what  we  already  know.  Or  again,  just  as  I  have  elsewhere  virged  with
regard  to  apparitions,  so  may  these  written  messages  also  I'epresent  the
dreams  of  the  dead.  They  may,  that  is  to  say,  be  as  partial  and
parasitic  a  product  of  a  discarnate  mind  as  our  dreams  are  of  minds
still  incarnate.  We  have  no  I'ight  to  assume  that  we  are  meeting  the
full  ray  of  the  unseen  intelligence, —  an  intelligence  which  may  be  even
more  liable  to  dispersion  than  is  our  own,  and  in  traversing  some
obscure  medium  to  reach  us  may  leave  much  of  its  light  behind.
There  is  yet  one  more  supposition  which  some  of  the  feebler  mani-
festations suggest.  There  may  be  an  intelligence  which  is  impermanent
and  almost  impersonal,  which  is  in  some  way  generated  from  the  mere
comflux  of  several  incarnate  minds  bent  in  the  same  direction,  or
possibly  is  even  parasitic  upon  a  single  human  intelligence,  like  the
dream  which  falls  as  a  transient  entity  upon  the  sleeping  mind  of  a
Homeric  hero.

I  have  dwelt  at  length  on  all  the  possible  sources  of  error  in
retrocognitive  messages,  because  it  seems  to  me  important  both  to
recognise  their  existence  to  the  full,  and  also  to  perceive  that  they  do


The  Suhliminal  Self.


not  explain  all  the  messages  alleged  to  come  from  the  dead.  I  regard
the  memories  of  depai'ted  spirits — the  facts  which  they  impart  to  us
from  their  own  store — as  constituting  a  real  and  most  important
source  of  retrocognition.  In  the  often-quoted  case,  for  instance,  of
Mr.  Stainton  Moses  and  Abraham  Florentine,  I  hold  that  the
surviving  spirit  of  Abraham  Florentine  did  really  communicate  with
Mr.  Moses,  and  that  in  this  direction  lie  chances  of  knowledge  which
we  can  hardly  exaggerate.  Mauy  of  the  recent  messages  given
through  Mrs.  Piper,  I  may  add,  have  seemed  to  belong  to  this  type.

But  on  all  these  messages  from  departed  spirits  I  have  written  so
much  already  that  there  is  no  need  for  recapitulation  here.  I  will  add
one  suggestion  alone,  to  which  much  that  has  been  recorded  in  this
paper  seems  obscurely  to  point.  Even  when  we  are  dealing  with  true
retrocognitions  involving  scenes  or  histories  in  which  men  long-
departed  have  played  their  part,  we  must  not  assume  that  such
knowledge  must  needs  have  come  to  us  through  the  agency  of  some
definite  and  assignable  discarnate  mind.  We  cannot  indeed  prove  that
they  have  not  so  come.  AVe  cannot  demonstrate  that  any  given  scene
may  not  have  been  presented  by  some  spirit  to  whom  that  scene  was
once  familiar.  But  for  aught  we  know,  the  scene  may  come  to  us
without  any  such  intervention.  Its  permanence  in  the  Universe
cannot  depend  upon  its  relation  to  any  finite  mind.  If  one  image
persists,  then  all  images  ;  for  the  Omnipresent  Mind  includes  them  all.
Zmo-i  tw  deal.  Nothing  for  that  Intelligence  is  "  drowned  in  the  deeps
of  an  infinite  Past."


408


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Chapter  IX.

The  Relation  of  Supernormal  Phenomena  to  Time. — Precognition.

2(a.  'ESo/cet  ri's  juot  yvvr]  TrpoaiKdovara  KoXfj  kcil  fietSyJy,  XevKci  Ifidria  e;^oucra,
Kok^aai  fxe  Kcii  eiTTCii',  'fl  SwKpares,  "H/xart  Kev  TpiTaTco  ^dirjv  epljStoXov  lkolo.
— TlXaraivos  Kplrcov.

It  is  now  time  to  make  our  long-delayed  transition, — I  Avill  not  say
from  things  past  to  things  future, — but  from  things  whose  interest  for
us  lies  within  our  backward  gaze  to  things  whose  interest  for  us  lies
within  our  forward  gaze  and  as  yet  unrealised  expectation.  This
transition  is  both  gradual  and  complicated  ;  and,  just  as  many  retro-
cognitions  already  quoted  have  had  some  element  of  the  future  in  them,
so  also  among  the  precognitions  with  which  we  must  now  deal,  there
will  be  many  where  what  looks  like  knowledge  of  the  future  can  be
analysed  into  an  enlarged  knowledge  of  what  actually  exists.

There  are,  indeed,  certain  phenomena  —  "monitions"  as  we  term
them  in  these  Proceedings — Avhich  in  common  parlance  are  often  spoken
of  as  ji:)remonitions,  and  used  as  a  type  of  knowledge  of  the  future,  where
it  is  nevertheless  plain  that  all  that  is  needed  is  a  somewhat  extended
perception  of  near  facts.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  for  this  reason  excluded
"Monitions"  from  her  paper  on  "Premonitions";  but  they  must
needs  find  their  place  in  the  present  more  generalised  discussion  of  the
Relation  to  Time  of  Supernormal  Phenomena.

These  monitions, — of  which  we  have  already  printed  a  good  many
instances, — range  from  incidents  so  trivial  and  momentary  that  it
would  seem  absurd  to  ascribe  them  to  anything  more  dignified  than  a
barely  subliminal  stratum  of  the  percipient's  own  consciousness,  up  to
important  warnings  which  claim  the  authority  of  some  departed  but
still  watchful  friend.

At  the  lower  end  of  this  series  come  the  obscure  intimations  which
restrain  us  from  action  on  grounds  which  perhaps  are  only  just
forgotten  and  still  by  effort  recoverable.  The  chess  player,  returning
after  various  trains  of  calculation  to  the  temptation  of  a  specious  move,
will  dimly  feel  a  sense  of  restraint ; — "  I  must  not  do  that,  though  I
cannot  recollect  why."  Mrs.  Verrall  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XL,  p.  190)
has  noted  instances  where  this  subliminal  warning  presents  itself  as  a
'physiccd  hesitation  ; — the  hand  refusing  to  execute  an  order  which  is
really  unreasonable  ; — and  which  is  felt  to  be  such  so  soon  as  some
trivial  recent  fact  is  remembered.

One  step  further,  and  we  have  an  actual  externalised  hallucination
of  touch  checking  the  inconsiderate  action. A  lady  throwing  a  handful


The  Subliminal  Self.


409


of  envelopes  into  the  fire  feels,  in  one  of  our  cases,  a  hand  laid  upon
her  arm, — pauses  in  surprise, — and  discovers  that  she  is  throwing
away  with  the  envelopes  a  roll  of  banknotes  which  in  a  moment  of
distraction  she  has  placed  among  them.  We  cannot  surely  assume  an
external  agent  here,  without  assuming  also  that  it  was  some  guardian
angel  which  checked  Mrs.  Verrall,  in  her  closely  similar  experience,
from  taking  five  envelopes  from  her  stationery  case  when  only  four
"were  required.

Let  us  take  one  step  further,  and  we  come  to  monitions  based  upon
&  fact  apparently  not  forgotten  merely,  but  never  known  ;  a  fact  lying
demonstrably  beyond  the  noi'mal  sensory  cognisance  of  the  percipient.

A  fact  beyond  his  normal  sensoiy  cognisance,  I  say  ;  but  obviously
before  we  assume  that  he  has  perceived  that  fact  in  a  transcendental
■or  telsesthetic  fashion,  we  must  make  the  fullest  allowance  for  hyperses-
thesia, — for  an  extension  of  the  bodily  senses  which  may  include  this
strange  knowledge  within  its  range.  Nay  more;  our  search  for  possible
liypersesthesia  is  bound  to  be  much  wider  than  any  search  which  the
physiologist  is  likely  thus  far  to  have  found  worth  his  pains.  His  intei'est
has  lain  in  definite  measurable  extensions  of  the  higher  senses,  rather
than  in  obscure  and  novel  sensations  which  led  to  no  clear  end.  It  is
for  these  last,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  is  our  special  duty  to  search.
We  have  obscure  and  novel  facts  to  explain,  and  before  we  confidently
assign  them  to  psychical  and  transcendental  causes,  we  must  try  and
think  of  everything  which  the  human  body  might  conceivably  discern
or  discover.

I  say  "  the  body  "  rather  than  "  the  senses  ";  for  we  must  go  back
in  our  inquiry  (though  of  course  without  expectation  of  immediate
success)  to  an  ancestral  condition  far  anterior  to  any  senses  which  we
now  know.  We  must  go  back  to  the  first  germ  of  life,  and  in  place  of
merely  crediting  it  with  "  irritability,"  which  is  all  the  power  of  re-
action which  it  can  actually  show  us,  we  must  credit  it  with  all  the
potentialities  which  the  history  of  its  descendants  teaches  us  to  infer
as  already  latent  \i\  it.  We  know  into  how  wide  a  gamut  of  feeling
the  germ's  vague  internal  sensation,  its  vague  external  sensation,  have
•dilfused  and  specialised  themselves  in  man.  We  dimly  conjecture  into
what  other  rays  the  spectrum  of  that  dim  primal  gleam  of  conscious-
ness has  been  fanned  out  in  animals  other  than  man.  And  we  may
feel  assured  also, — though  it  be  hard  to  realise  the  fact, — that  all  the
known  or  guessed  sensations  of  men  and  animals  are  but  a  small
selection  from  the  range  of  sensations  potentially  educible  from  the
vague  2}ci.na;sthesia, — so  to  term  it, — of  the  primal  germ.  Average
experience  within  average  limits  ; — that  is  all  that  our  known  senses
cover.  If  the  stimulus  be  too  weak,  we  are  liable  to  mistake  the  sense
through  which  it  comes  to  us  ;  if  it  be  too  strong,  we  are  liable  to  feel


410


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


a  mere  distress  or  bewilderment,  not  referred  to  any  definite  sense.
It  is  surely  conceivable,  then,  that  all  our  known  sensibilities  may
form  merely  a  kind  of  bull's-eye ; — the  place  where  outer  and  inner
influences  oftenest  touch  our  central  sensorium  ; — while  round  this
bull's-eye  all  kinds  of  unclassified  obscure  sensations  probably  scatter.

It  follows  that  when  we  have  to  explain  very  strange  perceptions;
we  must  be  on  the  look  out,  not  only  for  the  hypertesthesia  of  known,
senses,  but  also  for  that  more  generalised  form  of  hyperesthesia  which
may  involve  senses  (peripheral  or  central)  as  yet  incipient  and  unrecog-
nised, although  still  depending  on  the  material  world, — a  wider  selection
from  the  potential  pansesthesia  of  the  primal  germ.  There  may — there
must — be  evolution  still  going  on  in  us  in  relation  to  our  material  as
well  as  to  our  transcendental  environment,  and  Ave  must  not  claim
phenomena  for  the  latter  without  taking  account  of  the  former  as  well.

Once  more  ;  we  must  remember  that  the  assumed  new  sensitivities,
physical  and  transcendental,  may  be  linked  together  in  ways  quite
unknown  to  us.  The  synsesthesii©  which  are  only  now  beginning  to  be-
no  ted  between  the  ordinai'y  senses  ; — of  which  "  coloured  audition,"  or
sound-seeing,  is  the  accepted  type ; — may  be  carried  yet  further,  and
may  connect  in  unlooked-for  ways  man's  responses  to  his  physical  and
to  his  transcendental  environments.  There  will  be  nothing  to  surprise
us  if  the  same  percipient  should  receive  a  number  of  subliminal
intimations,  of  which  some  are  to  be  referred  to  hypersesthesia  and  some
to  telsesthesia,  or  to  telepathy  from  the  living  or  from  the  dead.i

I  have  said  that  hypersesthesia  may  be  peripheral  or  central ;  —  that
is  to  say,  that  it  may  consist  in  the  heightened  perception  of  sensations
coming  from  outside  our  organism,  or  from  within  the  brain.  I  will
begin  with  some  cases  of  apparent  telajsthesia,  or  of  apparent  prevision,
which  may  possibly,  though  by  no  means  certainly,  be  referable  to  an
extension  of  the  external  senses.

My  first  case  shall  be  taken  from  the  experience  of  the  late  Rev.
P.  H.  Newnham,  known  to  readers  of  these  Proceedings  as  a  most
careful  informant,  and  as  agent  in  a  long  series  of  experiments  which,  in
my  view,  conclusively  proved  telepathy  with  his  wife,  Mrs.  Newnham,.
who  still  survives.  He  had  throughout  life  many  monitions,  premonitory
dreams,  &c. ; — but  most  of  these  unfortunately  passed  unrecorded  at
the  time ;  and  I  mention  them  only  to  indicate  that  it  would  be  difficult
to  explain  by  hypersesthesia  all  his  experiences. In  the  case  which

1  One  is  so  often  asked  how  mediums  are  to  be  distinguished,— or,  rather,  one  is
so  often  told  that  so-and-so  "looks  like  a  medium,"— that  it  is  just  worth  saying  that
I  at  least  can  trace  as  yet  no  other  quality  whatever  which  seems  to  be  habitually
found  along  with  transcendental  sensitivity  ;— unless  it  be  (and  even  this  is  hardly
more  than  a  guess)  a  special  tendency  to  be  influenced  by  the  electrical  condition  of
the  atmosphere.


The  Subliminal  Self.


411


follows  it  is  possible  that  although  he  had  never  seen  Chaonia  he  might
have  had  a  general  notion  of  its  aspect  when  flying,  and  might
subconsciously  have  seen  it  settle  on  the  oak.

P.  109.  From  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham.

I  have  on  many  occasions,  throughout  the  last  35  years  at  least,  experi^
enced  the  sensation  of  a  soundless  voice  speaking  words  distinctly  into  my
ear  from  outside  of  me.  Whenever  this  has  been  the  case,  the  information
or  advice  given  has  invariably  proved  correct.

I  distinguish  this  phenomenon  clearly  from  the  ordinary  forms  of  ' '  pret
sentiment."  This  voice  is  distinctly  something  a6  extra.  In  presentiments,
if  certain  words  seem  to  come,  they  come  from  within,  and  are  (so  to  speak)
spoken  voicelessly  by  myself,  just  as  in  verbal  reading  to  yourself.

I  never  pay  any  attention  to  these  so-called  "presentiments."  I  have
had  plenty  of  them,  and  find  them  more  often  false  than  true.

But,  when  this  voice  comes,  it  never  fails.

In  July  1858  (I  believe,  but  it  may  have  been  June,  1857),  I  was
visiting  friends  at  Tuiibridge  Wells,  and  went  out  one  evening,  entomolo-
gising.  As  I  crossed  a  stile  into  a  field,  on  my  way  to  a  neighbouring  wood,
the  voice  distinctly  said  in  my  right  ear,  "  You'll  find  '  Chaonia  '  on  that  oak."
(This  was  a  very  scarce  moth,  which  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  which  most
assuredly  I  had  never  consciously  thought  of  seeing.)  There  were  several
oaks  in  the  field,  but  I  intuitively  walked  up  to  one,  straight  to  the  off  side
of  it,  and  there  was  the  moth  indicated.

With  this  last  case  two  others  should  be  compared,  where  the
hypothesis  of  a  subconscious  hyperfesthetic  discernment  of  the  bifid
fern  or  the  four-leaved  clover  by  ordinary  eyesight  is  possibly
applicable.

P.  241.

From  the  "  Ammles  des  Sciences  Psychiques,"  Mai-Juiii,  1895.

By  M.  Adrien  Guebhard,  Professeur  A.gv6g6  a  la  Faculty  de  Mddecine.

On  the  30th  May,  1893,  I  was  on  a  geological  excursion  in  the  environs
of  Nice.  After  a  very  uneasy  night,  passed  in  the  village  of  Contes,  I  set
out  in  a  rather  bad  humour  in  the  direction  of  Escarene  by  an  old  road,
where  my  disgust  was  heightened  by  seeing  on  my  right  a  long  mound  of
absolutely  no  interest,  either  palfeontological  or  stratigraphical.  In  vain  I
tried  to  console  myself  by  seeking  in  the  crevices  of  the  moist,  drijjping
stone,  or  under  the  tufts  of  green  maidenhair,  some  rare  snail-shell  for  a
collection  belonging  to  my  friends.  I  had  already  resigned  myself  to  the
uninteresting  walk  of  the  ordinary  tourist,  when  suddenly  a  flash  of
recollection  arrested  my  wandering  attention  — a  memory  dating  from  my  old
passion  of  long  ago  for  botany,  revived  for  a  short  time  in  1889  by  the  publi-
cation of  a  work  on  the  abnormal  partitions  of  ferns,  but  certainly  long  since
abandoned.  Promptly,  and  with  all  the  intensity  of  an  old  longing  never
satisfied,  I  conceived  a  great  ambition  for  an  object  which,  having  been


412


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


vainly  sought,  had  ahnost  passed  into  a  myth,  namely,  the  Asplenium
Ti-ichomanes,  or  Common  Maiden-hair  Spleenwort  abnormally  bifurcated,
which  I  had  often  seen  mentioned  in  a  book,  but  which  I  had  never  once,
during  thirty  years,  been  able  to  discover,  in  spite  of  the  great  abundance  of
the  normal  species.

Hardly  was  this  mental  picture  evoked,  before  my  eyes,  as  if  drawn  by
the  real  image,  were  arrested  by  one  amongst  all  the  green  tufts  which
surrounded  me,  and  amongst  all  the  fronds  which  composed  it,  by  one  alone,
which,  two  yards  off,  had  the  exact  appearance  of  a  bifui'cation.

Purely  appearance,  I  said  to  myself,  drawing  near.  Simply  the  juxta-
position of  two  neighbouring  fronds,  which  I  have  so  often  mistaken  for  it.

Sceptical  even  while  gathering  it,  I  could  not  believe  my  eyes.  But  the
evidence  was  undeniable,  and  when,  much  astonished  but  highly  delighted,  I
had  plucked  the  fern,  I  said  to  myself  half-aloud,  as  though  uttering  a
challenge,  "  Well,  I  only  want  now  to  find  the  Cet — "  I  bad  not  finished  my
sentence  when  my  gaze,  leaving  the  high  vp'all  on  the  right  where  it  was  still
mechanically  searching,  fell  below  the  footpath  on  the  left,  at  the  foot  of  the
buttress,  on  a  poor  sickly  plant  of  Ceterach  Officinarum  (Common  Scale-Fern
or  Scaly  Spleenwort)  crowded  into  the  midst  of  the  Asplenium  (Spleenworts)
as  if  dejected  at  finding  itself  in  this  damp  shady  corner  instead  of  a  crevice
in  a  dry  and  sunny  wall,  which  is  the  usual  abode  of  this  species.

And  this  plant,  which  ordinarily  I  should  never  have  dreamed  of  seeking
in  such  a  spot,  this  fern  of  quite  simple  venation,  edges  very  slightly  divided,
and  under  surfaces  all  scaly,  in  fact  with  an  appearance  so  opposed  to  the  idea
of  partition  that  (never  having  come  across  a  specimen  either  in  my  youthful
researches,  in  the  splendid  collections  of  the  Museum,  or  in  any  herbal  or
rare  book)  I  had  concluded  it  to  be  non-existent — an  impossible  anomaly —
it  was,  I  say,  a  frond  of  this  fern  that  appeared  before  me  to-day  at  my
bidding,  as  in  Perrault's  stories,  as  clearly  bipartite  as  the  Asplenium  close
by  had  been.

Being  at  once  led  on,  and  covetously  pushing  my  reasoning  straight  to  the
principal  conclusion  of  my  old  observations  on  the  somewhat  epidemic  and
at  the  same  time  local  character  of  these  freaks  of  nature,  I  argued  :  "  If  I
have  found  one,  and  even  two  bifurcated  fronds,  certainly  the  third  is  not
far  to  seek."  And  in  less  time  than  it  had  taken  to  announce  this  decision,
without  any  hesitation,  amongst  all  the  attractive  groups  of  fern,  I  dis-
tinguished immediately  one  frond  of  maiden-hair  shewing  two  clearly-marked
points.

I  should  never  have  made  up  my  mind  to  put  this  incident  in  writing,  at
the  risk  of  occasioning  the  reader's  sceptical  smile,  if  the  recurrence  of  the
same  adventure  twice  in  the  course  of  this  same  year  had  not  confirmed  the
reality  and  demonstrated  the  importance  of  the  psychological  problem.

On  the  8th  August,  1893,  at  Lausanne  (Switzerland)  I  had  just  accom-
panied some  friends  returning  to  the  country,  whose  gay  conversation  was
anything  rather  than  botanical,  and  the  last  good-byes  were  hardly  said,
when  all  at  once,  as  I  walked  along  the  path  we  had  taken  a  minute  or  two
earlier,  there  shot  into  my  head ,  without  rhyme  or  reason,  the  idea  of  a
divided  maiden-hair,  and  immediately  I  put  my  hand  on  a  frond,  then  further
on  on  a  second,  and  again  on  another,  always  making  my  choice  at  once


The  Subliminal  Self.


413


without  groping  in  the  long  green  mantle  of  the  great  wall.  Afterwards  I
in  vain  retraced  my  steps  to  explore  conscientiously,  with  attention,  and  at
length,  the  fifty  yards  of  pathway  ;  there  was  nothing  more,  or  I  could  see
no  more.

Ten  days  later  I  was  visiting  near  Chamb^ry  with  a  gay  and  numerous
party  the  celebrated  country  -house  Charmettes,  still  alive  with  memories  of
Jean  Jacques  Rousseau.  As  I  crossed  the  threshold,  the  thanks  of  the  care-
taker still  in  my  ears,  and  before  my  eyes  the  pictures  of  the  Confessions,  I
instinctively  felt  my  gaze  drawn  towards  the  little  wall  of  the  terrace,  where,
at  the  first  glance  amongst  several  stunted  tufts,  which  were  afterwards  to
furnish  me  with  several  similar  specimens,  I  discovered  an  extremely  curious
plant  of  maidenhair,  such  as  I  did  not  yet  possess,  with  fronds  not  merely
bifurcated,  but  really  ramified.

Was  it  this  time  a  reminiscence  of  "  Lettres  sur  la  botanique  "  which  had
given  the  suggestion  ?  Was  it  not,  as  well  as  the  time  before,  simply  an  echo
at  a  relatively  shorter  distance  of  the  exciting  experience  in  the  month  of
May  ?  I  do  not  think  so,  for  with  regard  to  the  latter  nothing  of  the  sort
could  be  argued,  and  it  seems,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  precisely  the
absence  of  all  appreciable  cause,  the  apparently  complete  spontaneity  of  the
first  vision,  to  which  was  due  the  intensity  of  the  second— a  real  second  sight
which  leads  infallibly  straight  to  the  mark.  That  mark  is  evidently  pre-
existent,  of  a  real  kind,  and  perhaps — one  might  defend  this  view  ! — is
itself  by  its  simple  presence,  and  by  a  sort  of  self-discharge  at  a  distance,
the  unsuspected  and  unperceived  cause  of  the  sudden  internal  revival
of  a  similar  image,  stored-up  long  ago  ; — the  spontaneous  exteriorisation
of  which,  and  the  placing  of  it  in  coincidence  with  the  corresponding  object,
would  constitute  precisely  the  fact  of  the  discovery — that  is  to  say  simply  the
proof  of  the  existence — of  that  object.  Whatever  may  be  the  cause,  it  seems
certain  that  only  the  abruptness,  the  suddenness  of  the  cerebral  awakening
is  capable  of  giving  momentarily  to  the  sensorial  faculties  that  acuteness  in
some  sort  prophetic,  which  automatically  attracts  the  material  object  of  the
mental  evocation,  not  out  of  nothing,  as  a  superstitious  mind  might  believe,
but  simply  out  of  the  relative  obscurity  in  which  it  would  have  remained
under  other  circumstances.

No  normal  tension  of  the  mind,  no  eflbrt  of  will,  no  abilities  exercised  at
their  best  could  attain  to  the  results  of  these  rapid  moments  of  temporary
hyper-stimulation.  Never,  except  on  the  three  occasions  I  have  recorded,
have  I  been  able  to  find  the  abnormal  Asjdeniimi,  still  less  the  abnormal
Ceterach,  although  every  year,  sooner  or  later,  thousands  of  specimens  have
passed  before  my  eyes,  amongst  which  I  have  often  tried  on  solitary  walks
in  the  most  varied  localities,  with  all  the  concentration  of  attention  of  which
I  am  capable,  and  the  fullest  use  of  a  faculty  of  discovery  developed  by  old
naturalistic  habit,  to  discover  the  rare  object,  the  eternal  ambition  of  the
collector. I  often  found  other  things,  but  never  that.

Is  it  not  the  same,  to  make  a  comparison,  as  that  which  happens  in  a
dream,  when  in  preference  to  the  subjects  of  long  voluntary  meditations
trivial  daily  incidents  always  crop  up,  which,  hardly  noticed  at  the  moment,
and  apparently  no  sooner  occurring  than  forgotten,  have  none  the  less  by  the
unexpectedness,  the  lightning-like  effect  of  their  track  across  the  daily

•2  H


414


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


monotony,  made  a  more  vivid  if  not  a  deeper  impression  on  the  brain  than
all  the  subjects  of  ordinary  preoccupation  or  voluntary  reflection.

The  cerebral  problem  is  certainly  curious,  and  deserves,  based  as  it  here
is  on  a  group  of  precise  facts,  to  be  clearly  stated  at  this  time,  when  the
science  of  psychology,  no  longer  admitting  the  supernatural,  fears  not  to
encroach  at  times  on  the  domain  of  the  marvellous,  in  order  that  it  may
restrict  more  and  more  that  of  the  incomprehensible.

AdRIEN  GrUEBHARD.

With  regard  to  my  above  communication,  in  which  you  have  been  kindly
interested,  you  put  the  following  questions  to  me  : —

(1)  Is  it  not  possible  that  this  discovery  of  abnormal  ferns  may  have  been
an  effect  of  unconscious  sight  ?

(2)  As  to  the  fact  of  finding  three  of  them  in  a  small  space,  is  it  possible
that  this  monstrosity  may  be  determined  by  certain  local  causes  in  such  a
manner  that  in  a  very  limited  area  many  may  occur,  whilst  for  several
hundreds  of  yards  not  one  may  be  met  with  1

As  to  the  second  point,  I  can  reply  at  once  "  Yes,"  for  such  was  exactly
the  conclusion  I  came  to  on  my  first  study  of  this  subject,  confirmed  by  my
last  find  at  Contes-les-Pins.

These  abnormal  growths  are  almost  always  in  little  groups,  forming  well-
defined  islands  as  it  were  in  the  midst  of  normal  plants,  proving  the  external,
local  and  non-individual  character  of  the  original  causal  lesion,  which  might
be  due,  as  I  think,  to  some  micro-organism,  either  vegetable  or  animal,  a
parasite  fungoid  or  gnawing  insect.

But  it  is  not  at  all  the  repetition  of  the  discovery  (which  was  logical  and
foreseen),  which  afiected  me  so  strongly  as  to  make  me  forget  for  a  minute
the  palpable  and  material  object  ;  but  rather  the  incredibly  rapid  succes-
sion, I  mi'jht  almost  say  the  instantaneous  co-incidence,  of  the  apparition
of  each  mental  image  and  its  objective  realisation.

When  one  gives  oneself  up  to  any  search  whatever,  even  with  the
great  amount  of  practice  and  the  good  sight  which  I  have,  there  is  always  a
time  of  visual  groping  like  the  tactile  fumbling  of  the  hand  which  seeks  a
needle  in  a  bottle  of  hay.

The  time  lost  in  hunting  about  is  longer  in  proportion,  as  the  object
sought  is  less  common  and  less  distinct  from  the  mass  of  its  surroundings.
And  what  more  like  a  frond  of  double  fern  than  two  fronds,  one  lying
across  the  other  ?

In  vain  ordinarily  I  might  have  exercised  my  keen  sight  on  the
first  part  of  the  wall,  as  I  did  on  the  after  part,  as  I  have  done  hundreds  of
times  for  years  ;  it  is  very  probable  I  should  have  found  nothing — since  it
is  also  very  probable  that  there  was  nothing.

How  did  it  happen  that  it  was  just  where  there  was  something  that  my
attention  was  aroused  1  How,  too,  did  my  eye  go  so  quickly  and  directly  to
the  point,  passing  from  right  to  left,  from  high  to  low  at  once,  with  such
certainty  ?

Is  it  by  a  sort  of  attraction,  which  the  real  object  has  for  the  mental
image,  previously  itself  evoked  from  its  latent  state  by  the  near  neighbour-
hood of  the  reality  which  it  expresses  ?


The  Subliminal  Self.


415


Here  is  a  question  which  I  had  already  put  in  the  course  of  my  first
study  of  the  subject,  and  which  you  repeat  more  definitely,  in  your  first
question  concerning  unconscious  sight.  ^  q


Compare  with  this  the  following  recent  incident  which  occurred  to
Dr.  Hodgson  shortly  after  he  had  been  reading  the  above  account.

P.  256.  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

September  14i/i,  1895.

Yesterday  morning  (September  13th,  1895),  just  after  breakfast,  I  was
strolling  alone  along  one  of  the  garden  paths  of  Leckhampton  House,
repeating  aloud  to  myself  the  verses  of  a  poem.  I  became  temporarily
oblivious  to  my  garden  surroundings,  and  regained  my  consciousness  of
them  suddenly  to  find  myself  brought  to  a  stand,  in  a  stooping  position,
gazing  intently  at  a  five-leaved  clover.  On  careful  examination  I  found
about  a  dozen  specimens  of  five-leaved  clover  as  well  as  several  specimens  of
four-leaved  clover,  all  of  which  probably  came  from  the  same  root.  Several
years  ago  I  was  interested  in  getting  extra-leaved  clovers,  but  I  have  not  for
years  made  any  active  search  for  them,  though  occasionally  my  conscious
attention,  as  I  walked  along,  has  been  given  to  appearances  of  four-leaved
clover  which  proved  on  examination  to  be  deceptive.  The  peculiarity  of
yesterday's  "find"  was  that  I  discovered  myself,  with  a  sort  of  shock,
standing  still  and  stooping  down,  and  afterwards  realised  that  a  five-leaved
clover  was  directly  under  my  eyes.  I  plucked  some  of  the  specimens,  and
showed  them  at  once  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Myers,  and  explained  how  I  had
happened  to  find  them.  Clover  plants  were  thickly  clustered  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, but  I  failed  on  looking  to  find  any  other  specimens.  Tiae  incident
naturally  suggests  the  arresting  of  my  subliminal  attention.

R.  Hodgson.

Turning  to  the  sense  of  hearing,  we  have  several  cases  where  an
intimation  which  the  percipient  regarded  as  supernormal  may  have
depended  on  subconscious  interpretation  of  a  slight  sound.  For
instance ; —  two  friends  walking  together  along  a  street  in  a  storm
just  evade  by  sudden  movements  a  falling  mass  of  masonry.  Each
thinks  that  he  has  received  some  monition  of  the  fall  ; — •  each  assertinac
that  he  heard  no  noise  whatever  to  warn  him.  Here  is  an  instance
where  subliminal  perception  may  have  been  slightly  quicker  and
more  delicate  than  supraliminal ; — and  may  have  warned  them  just
in  time.

In  the  next  case^  there  may  have  been  some  subliminal  hyperses-
thesia  of  hearing  which  dimly  warned  Mr.  Wyman  of  the  approach  of
the  extra  train.


^  For  a  somewhat  similar  case,  possibly  due  to  hypersesthesia  of  hearing,  see
American  Journal  of  Pspcholoyy,  Vol.  III.,  p.  435  (September,  1890).


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


P.  166.

Mr.  Wm.  H.  Wyman  writes  to  the  Editor  of  the  Arena  from

Dunkirk,  N.Y.,  June  26th,  1891.

Some  years  ago  my  brother  was  employed  and  had  charge  as  conductor
and  engineer  of  a  working  train  on  the  Lake  Shore  and  Micliigan  Soutliern
Railway,  running  between  Buffalo  and  Erie,  which  passes  through  this  city
(Dunkirk,  N.Y.).  I  often  went  with  him  to  the  Grave  Bank,  where  he  had
his  headquarters,  and  returned  on  his  train  with  him.  On  one  occasion  I
was  with  him,  and  after  the  train  of  cars  was  loaded,  we  went  together  to
the  telegraph  office  to  see  if  there  were  any  orders  and  to  find  out  if  the  trains
were  on  time,  as  he  had  to  keep  out  of  the  way  of  all  regular  trains.  After
looking  over  the  train  reports  and  finding  them  all  on  time,  we  started  for
Buffalo.  As  we  approached  near  Westfield  Station,  running  about  12  miles
per  hour,  and  when  within  about  one  mile  of  a  long  curve  in  the  line,  ray
brother  all  of  a  sudden  shut  off  the  steam,  and  quickly  stepping  over  to  the
fireman's  side  of  the  engine,  he  looked  out  of  the  cab  window,  and  then  to
the  rear  of  his  train  to  see  if  there  was  anything  the  matter  with  either.  Not
discovering  anything  wrong,  he  stopped  and  put  on  steam,  but  almost  imme-
diately again  shut  it  off  and  gave  the  signal  for  breaks  and  stopped.  After
inspecting  the  engine  and  train  and  finding  nothing  wrong,  he  seemed  very
much  excited,  and  for  a  short  time  he  acted  as  if  he  did  not  know  where  he
was  or  what  to  do.  I  asked  what  was  the  matter.  He  replied  that  he  did
not  know,  when,  after  looking  at  his  watch  and  orders,  he  said  that  he  felt
that  there  was  some  trouble  on  the  line  of  the  road.  I  suggested  that  he  had
better  run  his  train  to  the  station  and  find  out.  He  then  ordered  his  flagman
with  his  flag  to  go  ahead  around  the  curve,  which  was  just  ahead  of  us,  and
he  would  follow  with  the  train.  The  flagman  started  and  had  just  time  to
flag  an  extra  express  train,  with  the  General  Superintendent  and  others  on
board,  coming  full  40  [forty]  miles  per  hour.  The  Superintendent  enquired
what  he  was  doing  there,  and  if  he  did  not  receive  orders  to  keep  out  of  the
way  of  the  extra.  My  brother  told  him  that  he  had  not  received  orders  and
did  not  know  of  any  extra  train  coming  ;  that  we  had  both  examined  the
train  reports  before  leaving  the  station.  The  train  then  backed  to  the  station
where  it  was  found  that  no  orders  had  been  given.  The  train  dispatcher  was
at  once  discharged  from  the  road,  and  from  that  time  to  this  both  my  brother
and  myself  are  unable  to  account  for  his  stopping  the  train  as  he  did.  I
consider  it  quite  a  mystery,  and  cannot  give  or  find  any  intelligent  reason
for  it. Can  you  suggest  any  1

The  above  is  true  and  correct  in  every  particular.

In  subsequent  letters  to  Dr.  Hodgson  Mr.  Wyman  writes  : —
My  brother  died  some  three  years  ago.
The  incident  occurred  about  the  year  1873.

I  was  not  connected  with  the  road  or  train  at  the  time  ;  I  was  employed
on  the  New  York,  Lake  Erie,  and  Western  R.  R.,  at  Dunkirk.  The  flag-
man is  now,  or  was  a  short  time  ago,  living  in  Denver,  Colorado  ;  his  state-
ment can  be  obtained  if  desirable.

The  Superintendent  died  in  Germany  about  two  years  ago.


The  Subliminal  Self.


417


In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Wyman  adds  : — I  traced  Mr.  James  Conway,
[the  flagman],  to  Colorado,  and  learned  from  his  son  that  he  died  March  16th,
1888. [Letter  sent  herewith.]

Mrs.  D.  Wyman,  widow  of  the  percipient,  writes  :  —

Jersey  City,  September  Wth,  1893.

Mr.  Hodgson, — Sie, — I  received  your  letter  asking  me  for  statements  in
regard  to  Mr.  Wyman's  experience.  I  don't  think  I  could  tell  any  of  the
circumstances,  I  only  recollect  hearing  him  say  he  was  singularly  and  deeply
impressed  that  something  was  wrong,  and  he  obeyed  the  impulse  and  stopped
the  train  just  in  season  of  time  to  prevent  an  accident,  and  it  left  a  deep
impression  on  his  mind  ever  after,  as  he  often  spoke  of  it  and  wondered  why
and  what  it  was. — Yours  respectfully,

L.  A.  Wysian.

Taking  next  the  sense  of  smell,  we  have  elsewhere  printed  several
cases  where  monitions  taking  various  forms  have  summoned  the  per-
cipients to  an  incipient  conflagration  of  which  they  felt  sure  that  no
ordinary  sensation  could  have  warned  them.  There  may  often,
however,  as  in  the  next  case,  be  some  doubt  whether  some  slight  odour
may  not  have  given  a  subliminal  hint.

P.  162.  Oro  Blanco,  Arizona,

March  1th,  1894.

Db.  Hodgson,— Dear  Sir, — I  give  you  herewith  account  of  an
occurrence  about  two  years  ago.  ...  At  the  time  I  was  at  a  mine
called  Rosales,  about  twenty  miles  east  of  Carlo,  Sonora,  Mexico.  I  had
with  me  my  assistant,  and  two  other  Americans.  A  Mexican  family
occupied  the  building  where  we  made  our  headquarters.  The  corral,  or
enclosure  for  the  horses  of  the  party,  was  about  50  yards  from  the  house,
and  was  fenced  with  posts  and  brushwood,  with  one  entrance.  There  were
no  other  houses  within  200  yards.

We  had  been  quite  busy  examining  ore  samples  in  the  house,  and  finally,
late  in  the  afternoon,  to  get  a  breath  of  fresh  air  and  rest  a  little,  I  went  to
the  outside  door  and  leaned  up  against  the  door  frame  lazily,  thinking  of
nothing  in  particular.  The  rest  of  our  party  were  inside,  busy  with  assay
samples. None  of  the  Mexicans  were  in  sight.

A  voice,  more  to  my  inner  hearing  than  outward,  but  to  me  perfectly
audible,  said,  "Go  to  the  corral!"  Now,  if  there  is  anything  I  am  not
likely  to  do  on  a  trip,  it  is  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  care  of  the
horses  or  corral.

I  looked  toward  the  corral,  saw  nothing  out  of  the  way,  and  answered
the  voice,  perhaps  not  audibly,  "What  should  I  go  to  the  corral  fori"
and  kept  my  position.  In  a  few  seconds  it  came  again,  "  Go  to  the  corral ! '
quite  peremptorily.  I  went.  I  stepped  quickly  inside  the  corral  (first  time
I  had  been  there).  The  ground  was  covered  with  several  inches  of  dry  grass
and  hay,  old  fodder,  etc.,  which,  near  one  side,  was  on  fire.  I  gave  the
alarm,  and  by  quick  work  we  saved  the  corral  and  horses.


418  F.  Vi.  H.  Myers.

Before  I  got  inside  the  corral,  I  had  neither  seen  nor  smelt  smoke,  and
had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  anything  wrong.  None  of  our  party  or  of  the
Mexicans  knew  anything  of  what  was  going  on  till  I  gave  the  alarm.

C.  W.  Kempton. [Associate  S.P.R.]

(In  answer  to  an  enquiry  dated  March  16th,  1894,  Mr.  Kempton
wrote  : )

The  date  was  p.m.  of  May  5th,  1892.  I  was  using  my  professional
notebook  that  day,  and  made  no  record  of  this  occurrence  in  it.

C.  W.  Kempton.

I  was  Mr.  Kempton's  assistant  on  the  trip  to  Resales  Mine  in  May,  1892,
and  remember  his  finding  the  fire  in  the  corral.  I  do  not  remember  if  he
said  anything  to  me  about  a  voice  warning  him,  at  the  time.  1  have  a  faint
idea  that  he  did  so.

Edward  E.  Noon.

Oro  Blanco,  April  2nd,  1894.

With  this  case,  however,  it  is  only  fair  to  compare  the  following,
where  the  sense  of  smell  can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  have  played  a
part,  although  subliminal  hearing  may  have  operated  in  the  first  of  the
two  cases.

P.  134.  Monition.

From  a  lady  known  to  F.  W.  H.  M.,  received  June  3rd,  1890.

In  the  summer  of  1888,  I  was  living  in  the  little  mming  camp  of  R  ,

in  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Our  house,  a  frame  building,  was  some  little
distance  from  any  other,  at  the  top  of  a  steep  hill ;  the  only  disadvantage  of
this  being  the  additional  difficulty  of  getting  water,  which  was  an  expensive

commodity  in  R  as  the  adjacent  mines  had  drained  most  of  the  wells,

and  we  had  either  to  carry  it  a  long  way,  or  buy  it  in  barrels  at  50  cents,
each.

The  house  contained  six  rooms,  all  opening  one  out  of  another,  my  own
room,  with  a  dressing  closet  beyond,  where  my  child  slept,  being  at  one
extremity,  and  the  front  porch,  which  overlooked  the  valley,  at  the  other.

One  evening,  after  my  little  girl  was  asleep,  I  lit  a  tiny  night-lamp,
always  left  burning  on  a  bracket  m  her  room  ;  and,  leaving  all  doors  and
windows  open,  on  account  of  the  intense  heat,  went  to  sit  in  the  front  porch.
I  may  have  sat  there  half  an  hour,  when  my  attention  was  caught  by  a  great
blazmg  light  in  the  direction  of  the  furthest  houses.  It  appeared  evident
that  one  at  least  had  taken  fire,  and  the  difficulty  of  getting  water,  and  the
hope  that  no  children  were  in  danger,  flashed  through  my  mind.  While
watching  the  rapidly  growing  glare,  I  heard  a  faint  crackling  sound  in  my
own  house.  It  would  not  have  disturbed  me  at  any  other  time,  as  I  only
supposed  that  some  smouldermg  piece  of  cedar  in  the  kitchen  stove  had
blazed  up.  But,  with  the  present  thought  of  fire  in  my  mind  I  went  into
the  kitchen  to  look,  and,  glancing  through  the  oj)en  doors  as  I  passed  saw  a
volume  of  flame  and  smoke  jjouring  from  the  child's  room  into  mine.  Thank
God,  it  was  still  possible  to  rush  through  and  save  her,  and  I  carried  her


The  Subliminal  Self.


419


back  in  a  blanket  to  prevent  the  scorch,  for  the  room  was  only  burning  at
■one  end  ;  the  side  where  the  bed  stood,  though  fearfully  hot  and  suffocating,
was  not  yet  on  fire,  and,  thanks  to  the  timely  warning,  the  water  left  iii  the
barrels  proved  just  enough  to  extinguish  the  flames  before  very  much  was
destroyed,  though  they  were  making  headway  terribly  fast  on  the  dry  lumber.
After  all  was  quiet  I  went  back  to  the  porch  to  look  at  that  other  burning
house,  feeling  so  thankful  that  my  child  was  safe,  and  wondering  anxiously
if  others  were  also. But  all  was  dark,  and  when  I  came  to  make  inquiry

next  day,  nothing  was  known  in  R  of  any  such  fire. And  had  it  not

been  for  my  strange  vision  of  it,  which  must  have  lasted  fully  10  minutes,  I
feel  sure  that  my  little  girl  would  have  been  burned  to  death.

On  the  night  of  May  21st,  1890,  I  was  staying  at  F  ,  in  England.  I

always  burned  a  nightlight  in  the  bedroom  I  shared  with  my  little  girl.  It
stood  in  a  saucer  of  water  upon  a  wooden  corner  bracket,  and  I  had  never
had  any  accident  with  it. At  about  a  quarter  to  two  I  was  waked  suddenly,

and  very  much  startled  by  hearing  myself  called  not  only  the  impression

but  the  actual  sound  of  the  voice  ringing  in  my  ears  as  I  jumped  up  in  bed.
The  name  called  was  an  abbreviation  of  my  own,  not  used  by  anyone  in
England.  When  I  found  that  all  was  quiet  in  the  house,  I  lay  down  think-
ing how  strange  it  was  that  this  particular  form  of  my  name,  which  I  had
not  heard  for  many  months,  .should  have  been  used.  Half  a  mmute  later,
not  only  the  paper  case,  but  the  grease,  of  which  at  that  hour  my  nightlight
was  full,  caught  fire,  making  a  blaze  which  threatened  the  bracket,  and
might  have  set  fire  to  the  wall  also,  but  that,  thanks  to  having  been  waked,
I  was  able  to  jump  out  of  bed,  and  extinguish  it  directly.

Here,  again,  is  an  averted  railway  accident,  where  smell  may
possibly  have  played  some  part.

P.  213.

The  following  letter  was  received  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  confirmation  of  an
account  in  a  newspaper,  concordant  with  Mr.  Stewart's  account  given  later.

Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  Company,

August  \4dh,  1893,  Garrett,  Ind,

Yours  of  August  10th  received.  Must  say,  the  story  as  printed  in  many
of  the  newspapers  of  our  country,  regarding  the  train  being  saved  by  a  pre-
monition, or  warning,  given  me,  was  true  as  printed.  The  fireman  I  then
had,  since  became  an  engineer,  and  was  killed  in  an  accident  on  a  railroad  in
Iowa  two  years  since.  The  conductor  who  was  with  me  at  the  time  you  refer
to  is  running  passenger  train  on  the  Mackinaw  road.  I  do  not  know  his
address,  but  his  father,  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  and  his  brother.  Dr.  Charles
Stewart,  are  residents  of  this  city.  A  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Joseph  Stewart,
care  of  Dr.  Charles  Stewart,  Garrett,  Ind. ,  would  reach  my  conductor.

Yes,  sir,  I  have  had  an  ex^jerience  of  similar  nature  since  the  occurrence
you  refer  to.  Had  a  warning  from  tlie  same  source,  and  by  obeying  it  I
saved  what  otherv/ise,  without  obeying  the  warning,  must  have  been  a  most
dreadful  accident ,  and  must  have  resulted  in  the  entire  destruction  of  my
train,  with  the  lives  of  many,  if  not  all  the  persons  on  board. I  am  not  a


420


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Spiritualist,  do  not  believe  in  so-called  Spiritualism,  but  do  believe  that  the
living  are  often  visited,  often  warned  of  danger,  and  often  comforted  in  times
of  affliction  by  the  spirits  of  departed  loved  ones.  I  do  not  know  how  far
away  the  spirit  world  is  from  tliis,  but  I  know  that  the  spirits  of  departed
loved  ones  are  often  very  near  to  me.

It  may  be  in  the  near  future  I  may  relate  to  you  the  later  ex])eriences  I
have  had  in  similar  things,  living  witnesses  to  which  still  live  in  this  city.
In  regard  to  the  privacy  of  my  name,  I  care  not,  as  I  am  not  ashamed  of  it
being  seen  any  place  that  I  put  it.  ^ ^  Moses.

Battle  Creek,  Mich.,  August  2Qth,  1893.

Richard  Hodoson,  Esq., — Dear  Sir, — Your  request  received,  and  will,
as  far  as  memory  serves,  give  a  correct  statement  as  to  the  incident  referred  to.

Train  No.  2  of  the  B.  and  U.  RR.,  due  in  Chicago  at  6.20  a.m.,  Sunday,  in
the  month  of  August,  1883  (have  forgotten  exact  date),  was  on  time,  running
at  about  35  miles  an  hour.  On  api^roaching  Salt  Creek  Trestle  Work,  about
40  miles  east  of  Chicago,  the  engineer,  Mr.  C.  W.  Moses,  felt  that  something
that  he  could  not  define  compelled  him  to  stop  before  attempting  to  cross
over.  He  applied  the  air  and  came  to  a  full  stop  at  the  appi'oach.  I  occu-
pied front  seat  in  smoker,  it  being  the  second  car  from  engine.  The  time
was  about  4.30  a.m.

I  immediately  went  forward  and  joined  the  engineer,  where  we  found  30
feet  of  the  woodwork  burned,  the  rails  being  held  to  place  by  charred
stringers.  We  went  across,  by  climbing  down  and  up  the  bank  on  the  other
side,  and  woke  up  the  watchman  who  was  employed  to  look  after  the  bridge,
who,  on  seeing  us  and  the  condition  of  things  in  general,  took  to  his  heels
and  is  running  still,  as  far  as  I  know.

I  would  say  that  in  more  than  a  score  of  years  engaged  in  railroad  work,
that  was  the  most  narrow  escape  I  ever  experienced  ;  for  undoubtedly,  with
a  fall  of  thirty  feet  and  the  length  of  over  a  hundred,  we  would  not  only  have
been  disabled,  but  burned.

Now,  you  especially  ask  as  to  what  imijelled  Mr.  Moses  in  his  action.
He  only  stated  to  me  at  the  time  that  something  especially  pressing  on  him
told  him  he  should  stop,  and  he  acted  on  the  impulse.  There  had  been  fires
all  along  tlie  side  of  track  at  other  points,  but  he  paid  no  attention  to  them.

In  conclusion,  I  see  some  nevvspaper  man  got  hold  of  the  incident  as  late
as  last  June,  and  attempted  to  make  Mr.  Moses  say  that  the  spirit  of  a  sainted
mother  took  hold  of  him.  Well,  Mr.  Moses  is  an  upright  and  truthful,  old,
reliable  engineer,  and  owing  t<.)  his  great  advance  in  years  at  this  late  date
may  have  intimated  as  much,  but  nothing  was  said  about  the  old  lady  at  the
time  ;  that  I  vouch  for.

Believing  this  a  sufficient  reply,  will  close.  Should  you  wish  anything
more  specific,  I  am  at  your  service. — Respectfully,

I.  J.  Stewart,  Conductor  C.  J.  and  M.  R.  R.

[Formerly  of  the  B.  and  O.  R.  R.]

In  the  following  case  again  some  subliminal  sense  of  smell  may  be
conjectured.


The  Subliminal  Self.


421


P.  219.

Fifteen  or  sixteen  years  have  elapsed  since  I  had  the  following  clair-
voyant experience,  but  at  the  time  I  was  much  struck  by  it,  and  described
it  minutely  to  several  of  my  friends,  so  that  I  feel  sure  I  can  remember
the  facts  accurately.  The  circumstances  were  most  prosaic,  and  I,  a
matter-of-fact  individual,  with  little  interest  and  less  faith  in  psychical
phenomena.  I  was  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  at  home  for  my  winter
holiday,  but  taking  no  interest  in  household  matters,  and  I  question,
whether  on  that  particular  evening  I  knew  that  it  had  been  the  washing-
day.

I  had  gone  upstairs  to  look  for  a  missing  knitting  needle,  and  was.
returning  to  the  parlour  wondering  whether  I  had  dropped  it  there,  when
suddenly  I  was  arrested  by  a  strange  feeling,  and  saw  before  me  a  vision  of
flames,  and  felt  irresistibly  impelled  to  go  through  a  door  at  the  end  of  the
passage  and  down  some  steps  into  the  kitchen.  There  all  was  quiet,  and  I
came  partially  out  of  the  trance-like  state,  and  found  myself  thinking
"Why  am  I  here?  I'll  go  upstairs."  But  again  I  saw  the  fire,  and  felt  I
must  go  into  the  adjoining  laundry.  On  opening  the  door,  I  was  in  no  way
surprised  to  see  just  such  a  scene  as  had  during  the  preceding  moments  been
distinctly  before  my  mental  vision.  A  jointed  gas  bracket  had  just  fallen
on  to  a  heap  of  dry  sheets  and  towels,  which  were  blazing  almost  to  the
ceiling.  With  a  little  difficulty  I  extinguished  the  flames,  and  went  to  tell
the  rest  of  the  household  what  had  occurred.  I  remember  I  had  a  strange
feeling  in  my  head,  as  if  I  had  just  awaked  out  of  an  unnatural  state.

No  other  person  was  near  at  the  time,  the  washerwoman  having  gone
home,  and  the  servants  being  upstairs.  Nor  could  I  even  unconsciously
have  smelled  burning,  as  two  doors  were  closed  between,  and  the  gas-pipe
had  evidently  fallen  only  a  few  moments  before  I  entered,  or  the  flames
would  have  spread  further.  The  laundry  was  situated  just  under  a  wooden
staircase  in  the  middle  of  a  very  dry  house,  so  if  the  fire  had  been
undiscovered  for  even  a  few  minutes,  the  consequences  must  have  been
disastrous  to  the  house.

Several  members  of  the  family  remember  the  occurrence,  and  I  have
still  an  old  servant  of  the  family  who  distinctly  remembers  it.  I  have
never  had  any  recurrence  of  such  a  phenomenon,  and  was  at  the  time  much
surprised  that  I  should  have  been  the  subject  of  an  experience  so  strange
and  so  real.

M.  H.  Geay.

March  31st  1893  Drive,  PoUockshields,  Glasgow.

The  gentleman  who  sends  this  case  writes  that  he  has  received  orally
the  confirmatory  testimony  of  Jessie,  the  old  servant,  and  encloses  the
corroboratory  statement  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  White,  stepmother  of  the  per-
cipient.

Mrs.  Elizabeth  White  does  not  remember  that  she  was  told  at  the  time,
of  the  fire  part  of  the  vision. She  ^^■rites  : —

My  daughter,  at  home  from  school,  not  naturally  domesticated,  seldom
went  near  the  kitchen — which  was  shut  off  from  the  hall  by  a  swing-door.
On  the  night  above  mentioned,  she  came  into  the  parlour  looking  so  pale


422


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


and  agitated — being  naturally  nervous — that  I  at  once  asked  what  was  the
matter,  and  when  she  could  speak,  she  said,  "  Mamma,  it  is  a  wonder  the
house  was  not  on  fire,"  and  then  told  of  having  the  strong  impression  that
she  must  go  down  to  the  laundry,  that  there  was  fire.  She  had  to  go
through  two  closed  doors  to  get  there,  and  was  not  aware  that  no  one  was
in  the  laundry  at  the  time.  Her  promptitude  in  stamping  out  the  fire  of
the  burning  sheets  no  doubt  saved  the  house,  and  accounted  for  her  pallid
look  on  returning  to  the  parlour. This  occurred  about  fifteen  years  ago.

Elizabeth  White.
Norwood,  Thirm.

In  the  next  case  some  warning  may  have  been  received  from  the
closer  smell  of  slimy  water  ; — or  perhaps  from  a  vague  dilFerence  in  the
look  of  the  darkness,  or  even  in  the  resistance  of  the  air.

P.  177.  5,144,  Madison  Avenue,  Hyde  Park,

Chicago,  Odoher  mh,  1892.

Dr.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  send  you  an  account  of  an  incident  in
wliich,  I  think,  my  life  was  saved  by  my  obedience  to  an  imjjulse  arising
from  nothing  within  my  conscious  knowledge  or  perception.

Some  years  ago,  I  landed  in  Stillwater,  Minn.,  from  a  steamboat  on
which  I  had  come  down  the  St.  Croix  river.  The  boat  was  a  small,  local
affair,  and  no  conveyances  came  to  meet  it.  I  was,  I  believe,  the  only
passenger  on  board  when  we  reached  Stillwater,  and  there  I  was  left  to
make  my  way  alone  to  the  hotel.  We  landed  at  about  9  p.m.  of  a  starless
night,  and  in  the  shadow  of  a  warehouse  which  cut  ofi"  the  lights  of  the  town  ;
the  hour,  the  clouded  sky,  and  the  shadow  of  the  warehouse,  uniting  to
make  the  dock  extremely  dark.

I  had  been  in  Stillwater  once  before,  and  had  a  general  idea  of  the
topography  of  the  town,  although  some  years  had  passed  since  my  previous
visit,  and  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  had  never  passed  over  this  particular
locality.

As  I  left  the  boat  I  saw  the  lights  of  the  bridge  at  some  distance  on  my
left,  and  knowing  the  bridge  to  be  at  the  foot  of  the  principal  street,  on
which  stood  the  hotel  where  I  intended  to  put  up,  I  naturally  commenced  to
walk  along  the  dock  in  that  direction.  I  had  gone  but  a  very  short  distance,
when  I  suddenly  felt  so  strong  an  impulse  to  turn  and  go  the  other  way  that
I  instantly  obeyed .  I  saw  nothing,  heard  nothing  ;  I  did  not  even  have  an
impression  of  danger,  though  I  did  have  a  feeling  that  it  must  be  in  some
way  better  to  turn.

I  distinctly  remember  that  my  reason  protested,  and  berated  me  for  a
fool  in  taking  a  roundabout  way  to  my  destination  when  the  straight  way  lay
before  me,  with  the  added  prospect  of  losing  myself  in  the  railway  yards,
with  perhaps  a  ten-foot  fence  to  climb.  I  laughed  aloud,  and  articulated,  or
at  least,  mentally  formed  the  words,  "  You  fool  !  What  are  you  doing  this
for  ? "  However,  my  impulse  proved  stronger  than  my  reason.  I  persisted
in  "going  round  Robin  Hood's  barn,"  reached  my  hotel,  and  there  the
matter  passed  from  my  mind.


The  Sithliininal  Self.


423


The  next  day  I  casually  came  to  the  same  place,  and  discovered  that  I
had  turned  within  a  few  feet  of  a  spot  where  the  dock  was  cut  away  into  an
incline  for  hauling  freight  up  into  the  warehouse.  This  incline  was  so  steep
that  a  person  could  have  kept  his  footing  on  it  only  by  great  care.  If  I  had
unexpectedly  stepped  down  on  to  it  in  the  darkness,  I  should  certainly  have
lost  my  footing,  and  should  have  slipped  into  the  river  ;  and  as  I  am  but  a
feeble  swimmer  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  and  was  encum-
bered with  a  fall  overcoat  and  a  rather  heavy  satchel,  I  should  just  as
certainly  have  been  drowned.

The  value  of  the  incident  lies  in  the  fact  for  which  you  must  take  my
word,  that  I  am  not  an  impulsive  and  changeable  jDerson,  but  rather  logical
and  persistent.  My  action  was  entirely  contrary  to  my  nature,  and  the
unavailing  protest  of  my  reason  against  what  appeared  to  me  an  inconsequent
and  absurd  proceeding  convinces  me  either  that  I  was  influenced  by  some
intelligence  entirely  without,  or  that  my  "  Subliminal  Self  "  perceived  and
acted  upon  what  my  "  Su2:)raliminal  Self  "  could  not  see.

I  have  never  had  any  other  supernormal  experiences.

Marshall  Wait.

Tactile  seyisihility,  again,  must  be  carefully  allowed  for.  The  sense
of  varying  resistance  in  the  air,  to  which  I  just  now  alluded,  may  reach
in  some  seeing  persons,  as  well  as  in  the  blind,  a  high  degree  of  acute-
ness.  It  is  perhaps  possible  that  even  the  interposition  of  a  chair  in  a
narrow  passage  might  thus  make  itself  felt.  But  Mr.  W.  (a  good
witness  and  well  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson)  has  had  other  experiences
where  supernormal  influences  seemed  plainly  inrlicated.  (Vol.  VIII.,
p.  242.)

P.  159.  State  of  New  York,  December  28th,  1893.

Dr.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — In  compliance  with  your  request  to  write
out  an  account  of  my  chair  experience,  which  I  described  to  you  when  here,
I  submit  the  following  : —

My  oiiice  consists  of  three  rooms,  and  the  library  in  the  back  one  is
reached  by  passing  through  the  full  length  of  the  other  two.  The  middle
room  is  rather  narrow,  and  well  filled  on  both  sides  with  furniture,  leaving  a
rather  narrow  passage  through  the  room  lengthwise,  particularly  at  a  point
about  the  middle  of  the  room,  where  the  passage  is  only  three  feet  wide.
This  passage  was  very  naturally  kept  free  from  obstructions,  but  on  the
occasion  of  which  I  am  about  to  speak,  some  one,  probably  the  janitor  when
he  came  in  to  see  to  the  fires  soon  after  the  office  was  closed  for  the  day,  had
placed  a  chair  in  this  narrow  passage,  so  that  any  one  who  should  attempt  to
pass  through  the  room  would  be  certain  to  fall  over  it,  if  dark.  I  think  it
was  about  the  last  days  of  December,  1892.  I  recollect  the  days  were  very
short.  I  had  left  the  office  for  the  day  with  the  passage  free.  I  visit  the  office
occasionally  evenings,  but  not  ofteii.  On  this  occasion  during  the  evening,
when  it  was  very  dark,  I  visited  the  office  alone.  I  unlocked  the  outside
door,  walked  through  the  first  room,  stopping  at  the  door  that  leads  to  the
second  or  middle  room,  to  get  a  match  from  the  safe  hanging  on  the  door


424


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


casing  with  which  to  light  a  lamp  in  the  library,  where  I  wished  to  get  some-
thing. I  was  in  a  very  great  liiirry,  and  walked  very  rapidly  ;  after  taking
the  match  from  the  safe,  I  started  at  a  very  rapid  pace  to  go  through  this
narrow  passage  and  into  the  library.  It  was  very  dark,  none  of  the  objects
in  the  room  were  visible,  but  as  I  was  very  familiar  with  the  place,  I  did  not
hesitate.  T  had  proceeded  six  or  eight  feet  in  this  rapid  manner,  when
suddenly  I  saw  a  bright,  yellow  light  lighting  up  very  plainly  the  back  of  the
chair  which  was  in  the  passage.  The  light  was  confined  to  the  chair,  and  at
the  same  time  I  stopped  short.  The  stopping  was  quite  involuntary  on  my
part.  The  light  lasted  for  but  a  second,  but  it  had  shown  me  the  chair
distinctly,  especially  the  carving  on  the  back  of  the  chair.

Immediately  it  occurred  to  me  to  discover  the  origin  of  the  light,  if
possible,  so,  before  proceeding  to  get  a  light  or  to  leave  the  room,  I  approached
the  chair  again  in  a  similar  manner,  but  no  light  appeared,  and  I  experienced
no  check.  I  also  looked  very  carefully  for  the  origin  of  the  light,  but  could
discover  none.  There  was  no  light  anywhere  near,  and  even  had  there  been,
I  am  at  a  loss  to  see  how  it  could  have  shone  into  the  centre  of  this  room,
and  the  difliculty  is  still  further  increased  by  the  fact  that  it  shone  only  in
one  place,  and  even  there  the  light  was  of  a  somewhat  different  colour  and
appearance  from  ordinaiy  artificial  light.

After  satisfying  myself  that  there  was  no  light  anywhere  that  could  have
produced  it,  I  went  into  the  library  and  got  alamjj  and  made  an  examination.
The  chair  was  in  the  passage  in  tlie  most  dangerous  part  ;  otherwise  the
room  was  in  its  usual  condition.  I  should  also  state  that  at  one  end  of  this
room  there  was  a  coal  stove,  with  a  tire  in  it  of  hard  coal.  It  was  burning
very  low,  and  was  ashed  over.  I  examined  it  before  I  got  a  lamp,  and  I  am
confident  that  no  light  of  any  kind  proceeded  from  it.

As  to  my  sudden  stop.  The  stop  and  the  light  were  simultaneous.  I
hardly  think  the  light  unaided  caused  me  to  stop  ;  it  undoubtedly  prevented
me  from  starting  after  I  had  stopped.  I  fully  believe  I  should  have  sustained
a  heavy  fall,  but  for  the  light  and  the  stop.

P.S.  —  When  I  mention  that  the  colour  of  the  light  appeared  different,  I
mean  that  it  did  not  look  as  a  light  reflected  from  or  shining  from  a  distance
on  to  a  spot  would — it  was  more  like  loohing  directly  at  alight.

Here  is  a  monition  for  which  it  is  not  easy  to  suggest  any
hyperjiestlietic  origin.

P.  258  (A  B  10.)

Boston  Transcript,  Avgvsb  17th,  1894.
To  the  Editor  of  the  Tfauici-yjf ;— Tlie  following  incident  may  interest
some  of  the  readers  of  the  Transcript.  A  few  weeks  ago  I  had  occasion  to
require  the  services  of  a  dentist,  and  when  I  went  to  his  ofiice  at  the  time
appointed  I  found  him  in  a  very  excited  state  of  mind,  caused,  he  told  me,
liy  a  very  strange  occurrence.  The  office  is  a  pleasant  room  facing  the
Common  on  Tremont-street,  and  in  one  corner,  the  farthest  from  the  windows,
the  dentist  had  a  small  work-bench,  partitioned  off  from  the  rest  of  the  room,
and  there  he  had  his  cojjper  vessel  which  he  used  when  vulcanising  the  rubber


The  SiMiminal  Self.


425


for  the  setting  of  false  teeth.  He  had  been  working  at  a  set  of  teeth,  and
was  bending  over  the  bench  on  which  was  the  copper  containing  the  rubber,
when  he  heard  a  voice  calling  in  a  quick  and  imperative  manner  these  words  :
"Run  to  the  window,  quick  !  "  "  Run  to  the  window,  quick  !  "  twice  repeated.
Without  thinking  from  whom  the  voice  could  have  come,  he  at  once  ran  to
the  window  and  looked  out  to  the  street  below,  when  suddenly  he  heard  a
tremendous  report  in  his  workroom,  and  looking  round  he  saw  the  copper
vessel  had  exploded,  and  had  been  blown  up  through  the  plastering  of  the
room.  He  went  into  the  workshop  and  found  things  in  a  most  confused
condition,  the  bench  of  two  inches  thickness  was  broken  downwards  by  the
concussion,  and  everything  in  the  room  showed  marks  of  the  violence  of  the
explosion.  The  neighbouring  tenants  came  rushing  into  the  room  to  ascer-
tain the  cause  of  the  loud  report,  and  they  were  surprised  at  the  dentist's
account  of  the  transaction.  As  he  was  alone  in  the  room  at  the  time  of  the
accident,  he  is  mystified  at  the  warning  that  he  received  so  opportunely.

The  copper  vessel  had  a  safety  valve  whicli  was  supposed  to  open
automatically  at  a  certain  degree  of  pressure,  but  it  appeared  on  investiga-
tion after  the  explosion  that  it  had  become  useless  by  reason  of  foulness,
therefore  it  did  not  work.  These  are  the  simple  facts  in  the  case,  as  told  me
by  the  young  man,  but  I  cannot  verify  them  except  by  stating  that  the
appearance  of  the  room  and  the  workshop  substantiated  his  account.  The
copper  vulcaniser  weighed  about  ten  pounds  and  was  imbedded  in  the  ceiling,
for  there  was  a  pressure  of  about  eighty  pounds  to  the  square  inch  at
the  time  of  the  explosion.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  dentist  was  saved
from  being  wounded,  or  pei'haps  killed,  by  the  friendly  warning,  and  it  is
certainly  a  very  interesting  incident.

C.  H.AiZEN  Brown.

Box  1813,  Boston,  August  Wth,  1894.

Boston,  Mass.,  Nooember  15th,  1894.
Mr.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir,  -Mr.  C.  Hazen  Brown  informs  me  that  he
received  a  letter  from  you,  relative  to  the  warning  that  was  given  before  the
explosion  at  my  oflice,  requesting  the  name  of  the  dentist — or  card.  Please
find  card,  and

I  remain,  yours  respectfully,

O.  F.  Smith,  D.M.D.

150,  Tremont-street,  Room  6.

Boston,  Mass. ,  December  1st,  1894
Mr.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — Your  communication  of  November  15th
was  received. I  have  been  so  engaged  that  I  have  not  had  opportunity  to
attend  to  that  matter.

I  should  be  pleased  to  have  you  call  at  my  oflice  on  the  5th  of  the  present
month,  at  9.30  o'clock  a.m.,  and  will  explain  to  you  the  use  of  the  vulcaniser
and  talk  with  you  in  regard  to  the  explosion. — Yours  respectfully,

O.  F.  Smith,  D.M.D.

I  called  on  December  5th  and  saw  Dr.  Smith,  a  coloured  gentleman.
Intelligent  witness.  His  only  experience.  Did  not  recognise  tlie  voice.
The  marks  of  the  exijlosion  were  still  in  the  room.  He  confirmed  the
account  of  Mr.  Brown  (known  to  me). — R.H.


426


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


From  these  cases  of  possible  hyperesthesia  of  the  external  senses
we  may  make  our  transition  to  a  phenomenon  of  what  may  be  termed
central  hyperiEsthesia,  a  heightening  of  inner  sensations  to  a  point
where  the  future  history  of  the  organism  can  be  guessed  or  divined  with
unusual  distinctness.  This  is  virtually  but  another  aspect  of  the
knowledge  of  intimate  processes  which  self-suggestion  has  so  often
shown.  If  the  subliminal  self  can  induce  or  arrest  changes  in  the
organism,  it  may  well  be  able  also  to  foresee  such  changes  when  they
are  approaching  through  natural  causes.  In  whatever  direction  we
have  seen  suggestion  operate,  in  that  direction  may  we  expect  to  see
organic  prediction  operate  also.  Thus,  for  instance,  suggestion  has
produced  fainting,  and  also  bleeding  at  the  nose.  We  need  not,  then,
be  surprised  if  we  find,  as  already  printed.  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,
p.  339,  a  warning  of  a  fainting-fit  conveyed  to  Lady  Eardley,  or,  as
in  the  following  case  (unfortunately  of  remote  date),  a  warning  of
dangerous  nose-bleeding.

P.  133. Monition.  Auditory.

Communicated  by  Mr.  D.  Fraser  Harris,  B.Sc,  Lend.,  who  is  acquainted
with  the  percipient,  Mrs.  Edwards. Mr.  Fraser  Harris  says

Mrs.  Edwards  is  a  widow  lady,  and  an  American,  but  of  English
extraction  ;  she  describes  herself  as  being  not  imaginative,  not  credulous,
not  eccentric,  not  hysterical,  and  is  not  of  a  neurotic  constitution.

This  occurred  in  the  year  1845.  Mrs.  E.  was  in  good  health,  and  had,  at
this  time,  had  none  of  the  before-mentioned  fevers,  which  came  on  between
the  ages  of  30  and  50.

Mrs.  E.  had  slept  well,  and  was  in  the  act  of  getting  up,  when,  ajiparently,
the  quiet  was  broken  in  upon  by  an  almouncement  being  made  as  though
some  one  had  come  in  at  the  bedroom  door  and  said,  in  a  loud  voice,  these
words  :  "To-day,  at  six  o'clock,  you  will  die."  There  was  nothing  more,  but
these  words  seemed  to  resound  throughout  the  room.

Mrs.  E.  resolved  to  tell  no  one  of  the  announcement,  and  also  not  to
brood  over  it,  if  possible,  at  all.  To  accomj^lish  tliis  she  went,  in  the  course
of  the  afternoon,  to  the  house  of  a  married  sister  of  hers,  where  there  would
be  sure  to  be  something  more  or  less  stirring  going  on.

This  had  the  effect  of  distracting  her  attention  from  the  certainly  very
distressing  prophecy,  and  Mrs.  E.  had  the  benefit  of  her  sister's  society  till
six  o'clock  Ijegan  to  be  struck  by  the  clock.  As  it  commenced  sounding
Mrs.  E.  said  to  herself,  ' '  There  now,  it's  six  o'clock  already,  and  nothing  has
happened  : "  but  the  statement  was  premature,  for  before  the  chime  ceased
blood  was  gushmg  out  of  both  nostrils  in  a  copious  stream.  The  alarm
was  raised,  and  the  whole  h(3usehold  flocked  round  and  applied  the  usual
remedies  of  cold  keys,  &c.,  but  quite  without  success.  This  profuse  and
alarming  haemorrhage  did  not  cease  till  bucketfuls  of  cold  water  were
poured  on  the  head  and  down  the  spine.  When  the  doctor  arrived  he
said  a  very  large  quantity  of  blood  had  been  lost,  and  life  only  just  saved
and  no  more.


The  Subliminal  Self.


427


As  might  be  well  expected,  Mrs.  E.  was  very  weak  for  days  after  this
occurrence.  Though  this  was  the  first  iii  point  of  time  of  the  more  important
hallucinations  of  ]\Irs.  E.'s  life,  it  is,  in  certain  respects,  quite  the  most
extraordinary  by  reason  of  the  striking  sequel  to  and  almost  complete  fulfi  -
ment  of  the  prophecy.  D.  F.  H.

Mrs.  Edwards  adds  : —

I  certify  that  this  report  is  correct.  Isabella  S.  Edwards.  '

Mrs.  Edwards'  sister,  IVIrs.  Coleman,  at  whose  house  the  haemorrhage
occurred,  ^vrites  corroborating  her  sister's  account.  It  is  important  to  note
that  the  premonition,  though  not  mentioned  to  any  one,  was  in  a  sense  acted
upon  by  the  percipient.

It  may  be  objected  that  in  these  cases  there  was  more  than  a  mere
foreknowledge,  — there  was  a  communication  of  the  warning  as  though
bv  an  external  voice.  But  these  externalised  voices  have  been  obseiTed
in  cases  of  self-suggestion  also, — as  in  the  often-quoted  case  of  "Leonie."
The  following  narrative,  from  the  article  by  Dr.  Parsons  already  quoted,
adds  an  interesting  variety,  where  the  influence  of  opium  seems  not
only  to  have  developed  a  monitory  hallucination,  but  to  have  added
force  to  the  self-suggestion  involved.

P.  250.  From  Tlie  Medical  Brief. May,  1891.

Sixteen  years  ago,  I  was  a  little  sick  ;  took  half  a  grain  of  opium,  and  lay
down  upon  the  bed.  Soon  as  I  began  to  feel  the  tranquiUsrng  effect  of  the
opium,  I  saw  three  men  approaching  me  ;  the  one  in  front  said  :  ' '  Tou  smoke
too  much  tobacco."  I  replied:  "I  know  I  do."  He  then  said:  ""WTiy
don't  you  quit  it  ? "  I  answered  by  saying  :  "  I  have  been  thuiking  about  it,
but  I  am  afraid  I  can't."  He  extended  his  right  arm,  and,  placing  his  fore-
finger very  near  my  face,  gave  it  a  few  very  significant  shakes,  said,  in  a  very
impressive  and  emphatic  mamier  :  ' '  You  will  never  want  to  use  tobacco  any
more  as  long  as  you  Hve."  He  continued,  by  saying  :  "Tou  swear  sometimes. "
I  answered  :  "Yes."  He  said  :  "  Will  you  promise  to  quit?"  I  intended
to  say  yes,  but  just  as  I  was  about  to  utter  the  word  yes,  instantly  a  change
came  over  me,  and  I  felt  like  I  had  been  held  under  some  unkno^mi  influence,
wliich  was  suddenly  withdra^vn  or  exhausted.  I  had  been  a  constant
smoker  for  more  than  twenty  years.

Since  the  occurrence  of  the  above  incident,  I  have  not  touched  tobacco  ;
have  felt  ever  since  like  it  would  poison  me,  and  I  now  feel  like  one  draw  at
the  pipe  would  kill  me  uistantly. My  desire  for  tobacco  was  suddenly  and
eflectuaUy  torn  out  by  the  roots,  but  perhaps  I  shall  never  know  j  ust  how
was  done.  D.  J.  Paeso>"s,  M.  D.

Sweet  Springs,  Mo.

Even  when  the  crisis  pi'edicted  is  death  itself,  we  may  still  in  some
cases  suppose  that  the  subliminal  self  has  but  drawn  an  inference
from  its  perception  of  a  disease  likely  to  be  soon  fatal. Thus  in  the


428


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


following  case  heart-disease  may  have  been  far  advanced,  unknown
to  Mr.  Pratt's  waking  self.

. P.  156.

The  following  paragraph  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  from  some  unknown
newspaper : —

Sees  Himself  Dead  in  a  Dream.
'Thomas  Pratt  Dies  at  Valparaiso  After  Having  a  Remarkahle  Vision.

Valparaiso,  Ind.,  January  13th,  [1894].
Special  Telegram.

Thomas  Pratt,  an  old  resident  of  this  city,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  this
morning.  He  was  born  in  182.3  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  was  a  veteran  of
the  civil  war.

Pratt's  store  on  College  Hill  has  long  been  the  meeting  place  of  a  half-
dozen  friends  and  old-time  comrades  of  the  proprietor.  Last  night  when  his
friends  came  in,  Mr.  Pratt  told  a  dream  he  had  had  the  night  previous.  He
had  dreamed  that  he  was  dead,  yet  he  possessed  the  peculiar  power  of  one  in
a  trance — to  see  all  that  went  on  about  him  though  he  was  unable  to  move  or
speak.  He  had  noted  the  preparations  for  his  burial,  and  he  even  named  the
half-dozen  friends  who  served  as  pallbearers.  He  also  told  of  the  funeral
services  being  held  in  the  Memorial  Hall,  and  of  his  ride  to  the  cemetery,
and  the  lowering  of  his  coffin  into  the  grave.  And  when  the  first  dirt  was
thrown  upon  the  box  he  awoke  from  the  trance  and  called  to  his  comrades,
and  they  drew  him  from  the  grave.  The  pallbearers  of  the  dream  will  be
the  pallbearers  at  his  burial,  Monday,  which  will  be  from  the  new  Memorial
Hall.

January  15th,  [1894].
Dr.  Hodgson  applied  to  the  postmaster  at  Valparaiso  and  received  the
following  reply  : —

Valparaiso,  Ind.,  January  26th,  1894.
Mr.  Pratt  told  his  dream  the  day  after  it  occurred  and  the  day  before  he
died,  to  .John  C.  Flint,  George  Herrington,  W.  S.  Flint,  and  Albert  Amos
and  others. They  would  give  you  truthful  statements  in  regard  to  it.

Mark  L.  Dickover,  Assistant  Postmaster.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Dickover  says  that  a  doctor,  arriving  shortly
after  Mr.  Pratt's  death,  ascribed  it  to  heart-disease.

Further  inquiries  elicited  the  two  letters  which  follow  : —

Valparaiso,  Ind.,  February  iih,  1894.

Richard  Hodgson,— My  Dear  Sir, — Your  communication  of  the  29th
ult. ,  asking  information  of  the  dream  which  Thomas  Pratt  had  concerning
his  death,  has  been  received.

On  the  night  previous  to  the  night  on  which  he  died,  he  said  he  dreamed
that  he  died  at  twelve  o'clock.

During  the  dream  he  selected  the  pallbearers,  and  seemed  to  be  con-
scious of  all  proceedings  of  his  funeral,  until  dirt  was  thrown  on  the  coffin,
which  suddenly  aroused  him.

William  S.  Flint.


The  Subliminal  Self.


429


Valparaiso,  Ind.,  February  2nd,  1894.

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  the  29th  received.  As  regards  Mr.  Thomas  Pratt's
dream  of  January  11th  :  Mr.  Pratt  was  a  merchant  here.  I  went  in  the
store  in  the  morning  of  the  12th  January.  He  related  to  me  the  circum-
stance of  his  dream.  He  said  that  he  died  last  night.  I  said,  "Well,
you  are  alive  yet."  Then  he  told  me  about  his  dream.  He  said  that  he
dreamt  that  he  died  and  chose  his  pallbearers,  and  was  taken  to  the
grave,  and  then  lowered  down.  When  they  began  to  put  the  dirt  on
the  coffin  he  woke  up.  When  I  went  down  the  next  morning  he  was
dead.  He  died  3  a.m.,  on  the  13th  of  January.  The  same  pallbearers
officiated  him  to  the  grave.

I  was  the  first  one  that  he  related  his  dream  to.  He  laughed  at  it  the
same  day  that  he  died,  and  said  that  he  was  good  for  forty  years  longer.
When  he  died  he  was  71  years  old.

George  Herrington.

Compare  the  case  of  Chi'istopher  Brooks,  quoted  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  291.  The  doctor  there  could  find  nothing
amiss ;  yet  must  we  not  suppose  that  some  heart-disease  already
existed  when  the  premonition  came  ?  At  any  rate  the  death
of  a  healthy  and  contented  young  man,  at  a  predetermined  day
and  hour,  merely  on  account  of  an  impression  received  in  a  dream, —
this  would  be  a  result  going  far  beyond  any  efficacy  with  which  mere
unsupported  suggestion  has  hitherto  been  credited.

Compare  the  following  case,  where  a  child,  while  apparently  quite
well,  feels  the  impression  of  approaching  death,  and  ascribes  it  to  his
dead  brother's  call.

P.  222. (A.B.  12.)

The  following  case  was  printed  in  the  Eeligio-Philosophical  Journal,
May  5th,  1894.  Mr.  B.  B.  Kingsbury,  who  contributed  the  case,  states  that
the  informant  is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Chm-ch,  and  her  husband
has  confirmed  her  as  to  the  statements  of  voices  heard  by  tlie  little  boy  calling
him.  Mr.  Ivingsbury  adds  that  both  are  worthy  of  the  highest  credit.  The
father  is  somewhat  of  a  "sensitive"  and  the  mother  has  had  two  or  three
clairvoyant  experiences  herself.

The  statement  just  as  it  was  given  by  the  mother  runs  as  follows  : —
"Is  there  a  life  beyond  the  grave  1  Had  I  ever  doubted  that  there  is  a
life  beyond  (which  I  never  for  a  moment  did),  my  doubt  would  have  been
removed  by  what  I  call  a  vision.  In  1883  I  was  the  mother  of  two  strong
healthy  boys.  The  eldest  was  a  bright  boy  of  two  years  and  seven  months.
The  other,  a  darling  baby  boy  of  eight  months.  August  6th,  1883,  my  baby
died.  Ray,  my  little  son,  was  then  in  perfect  health.  Every  day  after
baby's  death  (and  I  may  safely  say  every  hour  in  the  day)  he  would  say  to
me,  '  Mamma,  baby  calls  Ray. '  He  would  often  leave  his  play  and  come
running  to  me  saying,  '  Mamma,  baby  calls  Ray  all  the  time. '  Every  night
he  would  waken  me  out  of  my  sleep  and  say,  '  Mamma,  baby  calls  Ray  all

2  I


430


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  time.  He  wants  Ray  to  come  where  he  is  ;  you  must  not  cry  when  Ray
goes,  Mamma,  you  must  not  cry,  for  baby  wants  Ray.'  One  day  I  was
sweeping  the  sitting-room  floor,  and  he  came  running  as  fast  as  he  could
run,  through  the  dining-room  where  stood  the  table  with  baby's  high  chair
(which  Ray  novs^  used)  at  the  side.  I  never  saw  him  so  excited,  and  he
grabbed  my  dress  and  pulled  me  to  the  dining-room  door,  jerked  it  open
saying,  '  Oh,  Mamma,  Mamma,  come  quick  ;  baby  is  sitting  in  his  high
chair. '  As  soon  as  he  opened  the  door  and  looked  at  the  chair  he  said,  '  Oh,
Mamma,  why  didn't  you  hurry  ;  now  he's  gone  ;  he  laughed  at  Ray  when  he
passed  the  chair  ;  Oh,  he  laughed  at  Ray  so  nice.  Ray  is  going  with  baby,
but  you  must  not  cry,  Mamma. '  Ray  soon  became  very  sick.  Nursing  and
medicine  were  of  no  avail.  He  died  October  13th,  1883,  two  months  and
seven  days  after  baby's  death.  He  was  a  child  of  high  intelligence  and
matured  far  beyond  his  years.  Whether  it  is  possible  for  the  dead  to
return,  and  whether  my  baby  came  back  and  was  seen  by  his  little  brother
or  not,  we  leave  for  others  to  judge."

Defiance,  Ohio,  December  13th,  1894.
Mr.  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

Kind  Sir, — Your  letter  of  November  27th  received  and  noted.  In  reply
will  say  that  Mr.  Kingsbury's  account  in  the  Uelujio-Philosophkal  Journal
for  May  5th  last  of  my  little  boy's  clairvoyance  shortly  before  his  death,  is
correct  in  every  detail.  When  the  child  ran  to  me  telling  me  the  baby  was
sitting  in  his  chair  at  the  table,  there  was  no  one  in  the  house  but  the
servant  girl,  little  Ray  and  myself.  I  told  the  girl  nothing  about  it  and  she
did  not  hear  the  child  ;  but  as  soon  as  my  husband  came  to  dinner  I  told
him.  After  that  we  talked  freely  of  the  matter  to  several  of  our  friends.  Little
Ray  knew  nothing  of  death,  we  had  never  spoken  of  it  to  him  in  any  way  ;
the  last  time  I  took  him  to  the  baby's  grave  shortly  before  he  was  taken
sick  we  were  sitting  by  the  grave  and  I  thought,  "  Oh  !  if  I  could  only  take
baby  up  and  look  at  it  for  just  one  minute,  I  would  feel  so  glad."  Instantly
Ray  said  to  me,  "  Manima,  let  us  take  baby  up  and  look  at  it  just  one  minute;
then  we  will  feel  better."  Just  as  we  were  leaving  the  grave  he  smoothed
it  with  his  little  hand  and  said,  "  Ray  is  going  to  lie  down  and  sleep  right
here  beside  little  brother,  but  you  must  not  cry,  mamma."  He  is  now  lying
just  where  he  said  he  would.

P.S. — I  wish  to  say  that  I  have  never  known  much  of  what  is  called
modern  Spiritualism,  but  was  born  and  reared  a  Presbyterian  and  still
belong  to  that  church  of  which  I  am  an  active  member.  -p  -g

February  27th,  1895.
Mr.  R.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — In  regard  to  B.  B.  Kingsbury's  state-
ment in  the  Beligio-Philosophical  Journal  of  May  5th,  1894,  I  can  truly  say
that  my  wife  related  it  to  me  the  day  it  occurred  when  I  came  to  dinner.
I  frequently  heard  our  little  boy  tell  his  mamma  that  the  baby  called  him
all  the  time. — Yours  respectfully,  W  H  H


Defiance,  Ohio,  February  27th,  1895.
R.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  can  truly  say  that  Mrs.  and  Mr.  H.  often


The  Subliminal  Self.


431


spoke  to  me  of  Ray  seeing  the  baby  in  the  chair  before  he  took  sick.  They
told  me  the  next  day  after  it  happened.

Mrs.  J.  H.  Shulters,
116,  Summit  Street,  Defiance,  Ohio.

The  hallucinations  and  spontaneous  impressions  of  children,
though  generally  of  poor  quality  as  evidence,  would  well  repay  care-
ful collection.  Just  as  with  "  number-forms,"  "  sound-hearing,"  and
the  like,  children  probably  experience  more  vividly  and  frequently  the
various  forms  of  sensory  automatism  which  concern  our  present
researches.

Beside  these  cases  we  may  place  a  few  others  where  the  date  of
death  has  been  foretold,  or  self-suggested,  without  any  such  strong  or
depressing  emotion  as  seemed  obviously  likely  to  affect  the  event.

P.  146. Prediction  of  death  fulfilled.

The  following  is  a  case  of  a  prediction  of  death,  of  which  information
was  sent  to  us  before  it  was  known  that  the  death  had  occurred,  and  which
was  fulfilled  within  a  day  of  the  time  foretold.

The  Rev.  Aug.  Glardon,  M.A.,  writes  to  Professor  Sidgwick  :  —

Tour-de-Pilz,

September  Uth,  1893.
One  of  my  aunts,  Miss  J.  V.,  living  at  Vallorbe,  in  the  Jura,  and  very  ill
since  April,  predicted  six  weeks  ago  that  she  would  leave  her  friends  to-
morrow, Friday,  15th  September. If  the  event  confirms  her  prediction  I
shall  let  you  know. I  only  thought  to-day  of  advising  you. — Yours  truly,

Aug.  Glardon.

The  postmarks  are — Tour-de-Pilz,  14/ix/93  ;  Cambridge,  Sep.  16,  93.
Professor  Sidgwick  received  two  days  later  another  post-card,  with  post-
marks— Tour-de-Pilz,  15/ix/93  ;  Cambridge,  Sep.  18,  93,  as  follows  :  —

Tour-de-Pilz,  Vaud.

September  Uth,  1893.  8  p.m.
Dear  Sir, — I  receive  this  moment,  five  hours  after  sending  you  my  first
post-card,  a  letter  from  Vallorbe  to  inform  me  that  my  aunt.  Miss  Julie  V.,
died  this  morning  at  five  o'clock — "just  at  the  end  of  the  six  weeks,"  says
my  informant.  From  what  I  had  been  told,  I  thought  the  "six  weeks"
Miss  V.  had  spoken  of  were  to  end  to-morrow.  Whether  I  am  right  or
wrong,  it  remains  a  proved  fact  that  my  aunt  announced  the  time  of  her
death  six  weeks  beforehand,  to  a  day.  Aug.  Glardon.

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  the  cause  of  Miss  V.'s  death,  Mr.  Glardon
writes : —

Tour-de-Pilz.

September  29th,  1893.
Dear  Sir,— In  answer  to  your  note  of  Saturday  last,  I  shall  state  that
my  aunt.  Miss  Julie  V.,  was  aged  78. She  died  of  a  disease  of  the  liver,  on
the  14th  of  the  present  month,  after  an  illness  of  five  months.


432


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Six  weeks  before  her  death  she  was  taken  from  her  house  to  the  house  of
her  brother.  It  was  on  the  4th  of  August,  and  it  was  a  few  days  after  that,
bemg  already  half  delirious,  she  said  to  her  brother  ;  "  I  have  come  to  you
for  six  weeks."

During  the  last  month  of  her  life  she  was  almost  constantly  half  un-
conscious, and  never  referred  to  what  she  had  said.

When  I  went  to  see  her,  two  days  before  her  death,  she  did  not  recognise

me  fully. It  was  then  that  her  brother  and  sister-in-law  told  me  that  they

expected  her  to  pass  away  on  the  15th,  explaining  why. In  fact,  she  died

the  day  before  that. She  was  a  woman  of  calm  nerves  and  lymphatic

temperament. — Yours  truly,  .  ^

^  Aug.  Glardojn.

I  may  place  here  an  odd  case  where  the  knowledge  of  impending
death  can  hardly  come  from  the  decedent.

P.  137.

The  following  appeared  in  the  Religio-PldlosophicalJow-nal  for  November
1st,  1890  :—

STATEMENT  OF  DR.  SUDDICK.

For  some  time  past  we  have  been  holding  spiritual  stances,  or  circles,
regularly  every  Tuesday  and  Friday  evening  at  our  home  in  Cuba,  Mo.,  and
have  gotten  and  are  getting  many  messages,  truthful  and  otherwise,  although
the  untruthful  ones  are  few  comparatively  and  are  generally  so  from  known
causes,  such  as  misunderstanding  of  question  asked,  inharmony  in  circle,
&c.,  &c.  Most  remarkable  was  a  "Prophecy  and  its  Fulfilment,"  a  hurried
statement  of  which  appeared  in  the  Better  Way  of  October  18th.  Two
friends  had  called  in,  namely,  Charles  H.  Cottnam,  bookkeeioer  for  the  firm
of  Newman  and  Jones,  general  merchants,  and  James  E.  Hollow,  jun.,  of
the  firm  of  Hollow  and  Son,  dealers  in  stoves,  hardware,  and  furniture,  both
doing  business  at  this  place.  Then,  my  wife  and  I  sat  around  a  small  walnut
centre  table,  placing  om-  hands  on  its  top  surface  in  the  usual  manner,  and  in
about  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  the  table  began  to  move,  indicating  the  presence
of  our  spirit  friends,  or  some  intelligence  with  the  power  to  move  it,  and
answer  questions  intelligently,  as  we  found  by  asking.  The  lamp  was  sitting
on  a  piano  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  turned  down  so  as  to  make  a  subdued
or  mellow  light,  but  not  so  low  but  that  we  could  see  what  time  it  was  by  our
watches  as  we  sat  at  the  table,  or  jot  down  the  communications  as  they  were
spelled  out.

Mr.  Cottnam  had  a  friend,  Mr.  Chris.  Varis,  a  prominent  hotel  keeper  of
St.  James,  Phelps  County,  Mo.,  and  a  former  resident  of  this  place.  His
disease  was  a  chronic  affection  of  the  throat.  Mr.  C.  had  called  on  him  a  few
days  previous  and  found  him  very  weak  and  sinking  fast.  He  could  take  no
solid  food,  and  all  the  nourishment  he  got  was  by  painful  swallowing  a  little
eggnog  or  milk.  His  attendant  physician,  Dr.  Headlee,  of  St.  James,  told
Mr.  Cottnam  that  he  thought  Mr.  Varis  could  live  but  a  few  days  at  most,
and  from  his  appearance  Mr.  Cottnam  was  of  the  same  opinion.  After  many
other  questions  were  asked  and  answered,  the  table  answering  by  tipping  two
of  its  feet  two  or  three  inches  off  the  floor,  and  then  striking  it  again,  once


The  Subliminal  Self.


433


for  no,  twice  for  don't  know,  and  three  times  for  yes.  Mr.  C.  asked,  ' '  Do
you  know  my  friend  Chris.  Varis,  of  St.  James,  Mo.  ?"  "Yes."  "Is  he
any  better  than  when  I  was  with  him  last?"  "No."  "Is  he  worse?"
"Yes."  "Will  I  have  time  to  get  to  him  before  he  passes  out  if  I  take  the
next  train?"  "Yes."  "Will  he  live  over  to-morrow?"  "Yes."  "Do
you  know  when  he  will  pass  out?"  "Yes."  Then  the  table  rocked  back
and  forth  slowly,  the  feet  striking  the  floor  forty  times,  making  forty  distinct
raps,  much  to  the  surprise  of  all  present,  as  we  were  expecting  him  to  pass
out  much  sooner.  We  counted,  and  found  that  the  time  indicated  would  be
October  8th  ;  so  to  make  sure  we  were  right  we  asked,  ' '  Will  he  pass  out  on
OctoberSth?"  "Yes."  "  In  the  forenoon  ?  "  "Yes."  "  Will  a  telegram
be  sent  to  me  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  to  that  efiect  ? "  "Yes."

A  night  or  two  after  the  above  described  stance  Mr.  Cottnam  sat  at
another  house  with  different  sitters,  and  received  the  following  confirmation
of  the  above.  He  says  :  ' '  We  had  been  sitting  only  a  few  minutes  when  the
table  began  to  move.  I  asked,  'Is  the  spirit  demonstrating  a  friend  of  mine?'
'Yes.'  (Indicated  by  three  distinct  tips  of  the  table.)  '  Will  you  spell  your
name  ? '  '  Yes. '  The  alphabet  was  called  in  the  usual  way,  and  the  letters
signalled  by  tips  spelled  Ben  Walker.  'Are  you  my  friend,  Ben  Walker,  of
St.  Louis  ? '  '  Yes. '  '  I  was  not  aware  of  your  demise  ;  when  did  you  pass
out  ? '  Three  distinct  tips.  '  Does  that  mean  that  it  has  been  three  days
since  you  passed  out  ? '  'Yes.'  '  Is  your  body  buried  ? '  'No.'  'Will  it  be,
buried  to-morrow  ? '  '  Yes.'  '  Do  you  know  my  friend  Chris.  Varis  ? '  'Yes.'
'  Will  he  pass  out  on  October  8th  ? ' '  Yes. ' 'Are  you  sure  of  this  ? ' '  Yes. ' ' '

Mr.  Cottnam  was  not  aware  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Walker,  and  rather
doubted  the  truth  of  the  message  about  him.  The  Globe  Democrat  of  the
next  day,  however,  confirmed  the  truth  of  his  death  and  stated  that  the
interment  was  deferred  until  his  son  arrived  from  a  distant  city.

The  prediction  about  Mr.  Varis  became  an  open  secret,  and  was  talked  of
freely  through  the  town  from  the  morning  of  August  30th  until  October  8th,
when  a  telegram  came  over  the  wires  informing  Mr.  C.  that  Mr.  Varis  died
that  morning  at  six  o'clock.

I  append  a  letter  from  Dr.  Headlee,  the  physician  who  attended  Mr.
Varis,  which  corroborates  the  account  just  given.  I  also  send  the  signatures
of  twelve  of  our  best  citizens  in  further  confirmation,  and  the  signatures  of
the  sitters.  Many  more  names  could  be  obtained,  but  I  judge  the  following
to  be  sufiicient.

Cuba,  Mo.  ^-  M-D-

Dear  Doctoe,, — About  a  week  previous  to  the  death  of  Mr.  Chris.  Varis
I  was  in  Cuba,  and  a  friend  was  inquiring  about  him.  I  told  him  that  on  the
evening  before  I  did  not  think  he  would  survive  the  night,  but  on  that
morning  he  had  rallied  a  little,  that  the  chances  all  were  that  he  would  not
last  twenty-four  hours.  He  then  told  me  that  he  (Mr.  V. )  would  live  until
the  eighth  day  of  October,  and  that  he  would  die  on  that  day  ;  this  he  did,
dying  at  6  a.m.

Mr.  Varis  was  sick  about  seven  or  eight  months  and  for  the  last  three  was
expected  to  die  at  any  time.  — Respectfully  yours,

S.  H.  Headlee,

St.  James,  Mo.,  Odoher  18th,  1890.


434


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Cuba,  Mo.,  Odoher  15th,  1890.

To  AIL  WHOM  IT  MAY  CONCERN  :— This  is  to  certify  that  we,  the  under-
signed citizens  of  Cuba,  Mo.,  did,  prior  to  the  death  of  Mr.  Chris.  Varis,  of
St.  James,  Mo.,  wliich  occurred  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  of  October,  1890,
hear  a  propliecy  to  the  eifect  that  he  would  die  on  the  mornmg  of  that  day.

We  heard  that  his  death  was  foretokl  at  a  stance,  at  tlie  house  of  Dr.  S.
T.  Suddick,  iia  tlie  town  of  Cuba,  Mo. ,  on  the  night  of  August  the  29th,  or
forty  days  prior  to  tliat  event.

S.  T.  Suddick,  M.D.

I  received  message  for  Cottnam  October  8th,  from  St.  James.

Chas.  C.  Kent.
Telegrapli  Operator  at  Cuba.

Jas.  E.  Hollow,  jun.,  one  of  the  circle  of  August  29th.
LoNGSTREET  SiMPSON,  Clerk  in  Store.
T.  P.  Brickey,  Propiietoi-,  Cuba  Hotel.

E.  A.  Evans,  Real  Estate  Agent.

F.  R.  Hardesty,  Druggist.
W.  T.  Hunter,  Blacksmith.

C.  H.  Cottnam,  one  of  the  circle  of  August  29th.
Dr.  V.  L.  Shelp,  Dentist.
Dr.  J.  H.  Martyn,  Physician  and  Surgeon.
Geo.  Askins,  Hotel  Clerk.

Mrs.  Louise  Farley  Suddick,  one  of  the  circle  of  August  29th.
J.  A.  Rost,  Shoemaker.
J.  A.  Caims,  Clerk  in  Store.
B.  F.  Johnson,  Notary  Public.

The  letter  from  which  the  following  is  an  extract,  and  of  which  the
original  was  sent  to  Mr.  Hodgson  by  Dr.  Suddick,  fixes  the  date  of  the
stance.

Cuba,  Mo.,  August  29th,  1890.

D.  E.  Perryman,

Bonne  Terre,  Mo.

Dear  Friend, —

30th.  We  had  a  nice  little  circle  last  night,  in  our  iiarlour,  and  good
phenomena,  so  far  as  table-tipping  goes.  Myself,  wife,  and  two  neighbours,
composed  the  circle.  There  were  about  a  hundred  questions  asked,  and  all
were  answered  correctly,  so  far  as  we  know.

One  gentleman  was  requested  to  go  to  a  sick  friend,  and  was  told  the
number  of  days  he  would  live,  &c.,  &c.

S.  T.  Suddick.

(This  extract  appeared  in  tlie  Beligio- Philosophical  Journal.)  Dr.
Suddick  says  that  the  letter  was  returned  to  him  at  his  own  request,  and
writes  : — ■

You  will  find  that  the  first  seven  or  eight  lines  were  written  August  29th
and  the  remainder  of  the  letter  on  the  30th,  or  j)art  before  and  part  after  the
sitting.

Mrs.  Suddick  sends  the  following  account  of  the  sittmg  : —


Tlie  Subliminal  Self.


435


Cuba,  Mo.,  November  Wi,  1890.

Replying  to  your  favour  of  the  5th  inst.,  requesting  niy  confirmation  of
the  "  prophecy  "  of  which  my  husband  wrote,  I  can  say  that  I  was  one  of  the
sitters  ;  the  seance  having  taken  place  at  our  house.  There  were  two  other
sitters  besides  my  husband  (Dr.  Suddick)  and  self,  namely,  J.  E.  Hollow,
jun.,  and  C.  H.  Cottnam.  The  message  was  given  in  answer  to  questions
put  by  Rlr.  Cottnam  concerning  his  friend  Mr.  Varis.  He  did  not  call  the
name  of  the  latter  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,  but  only  spoke  of  him  as  ' '  my
friend,"  and  I,  for  one,  did  not  know  at  the  time  to  whom  he  referred.  (I
think  perhaps  the  other  sitters  did. )  1  heard  casually  the  next  day  through  a
neighbour  lady  that  Mr.  Varis,  of  St.  James,  was  expected  to  die  at  any
time,  and  associating  the  two  incidents,  I  concluded  that  he  was  the  sick
friend  of  whose  demise  Mr.  C.  had  been  questioning  the  "  spirits, "  and  on
enquiring  found  that  I  had  surmised  correctly.

At  the  sitting,  Mr.  Cottnam  asked  a  number  of  questions  about  his  sick
friend,  among  which  were,  "  Will  he  be  alive  when  I  arrive  there  ?  "  "Will
he  die  to-morrow  1"  "Will  he  die  the  day  after  ? "  &c.  After  receiving
negative  answers  to  the  last  two — and  perhaps  the  question  whether  he
would  live  a  week  was  asked, — I  do  not  distinctly  remember — he  requested
the  controlling  power  to  rap  once  for  every  day  that  his  friend  would  yet
live,  and  the  table  rapped  forty  times  :  each  of  the  sitters  counted  the  raps
as  they  were  given  distinctly  by  the  table  rising  one  side  off  tlae  tioor  and
striking  dowTi  again.  On  counting  the  forty  days  from  that  date  we  found
that  the  time  of  his  death  as  prophesied  would  fall  on  the  8th  of  October.
(The  date  of  the  prophecy  was  August  29th.)  Mr.  C.  asked  if  the  8th  of
October  was  the  day  on  which  he  would  die,  and  the  table  rapped  three
times,  the  conventional  signal  for  "Tes."  He  then  asked  if  the  demise
would  take  place  in  daytime  or  at  night  ;  in  the  forenoon  or  afternoon,  etc. ,
and  received  answers  that  it  would  be  m  the  daytime,  and  in  the  forenoon.

At  several  other  seances,  held  at  the  home  of  Mr.  Brick  ey  and  other
places,  these  questions  were  again  asked,  and  the  answers  repeated  that  Mr.
Varis  would  die  on  the  morning  of  October  8th,  as  at  the  first  sitting.  Of
these  dates  I  am  perfectly  confident.

It  may,  and  it  may  not,  be  superfluous  to  add,  that,  unlike  my  husband,
I  am  not  a  confirmed  believer  in  the  sf)iritual  origin  of  those  phenomena
which  we  have  from  time  to  time  witnessed,  such  as  movements  of  the
table  by  some  unknown  power  ;  intelligent  answers  to  questions  ;  messages
given  through  the  alphabet,  etc.,  but  have  been  undecided  whether  to
attribute  them  to  telepathy,  thought-transference,  or  some  other  unknown
mental  or  magnetic  quality  residing  in  the  sitters  themselves,  or  whether,
as  so  many  believe,  it  is  really  through  the  direct  agency  of  the  disembodied.

Wishing  your  Society  much  success  in  its  rational  and  most  scientific  way
of  dealing  with  these  occult  problems, — I  am,  very  truly,

Louise  F.  Suddick.

Mr.  Hodgson  has  also  received  letters  from  Mr.  I.  P.  Brickey,  Mr.  E.
A.  Evans,  and  Mr.  J.  A.  Rost,  confirming  the  authenticity  of  their  testi-
mony quoted  above.  Mr.  Brickey  states  that  it  was  at  his  house  that  the
seance  at  which  the  prophecy  was  confirmed  was  held.


436


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Mr.  Evans  writes  : —

Cuba,  Mo.,  November  8th,  1890.
Touching  the  matter  cited  in  yours  of  the  4th  inst.,  I  desire  to  say  that
my  signature  subscribed  to  the  published  statement  of  Dr.  Suddick,  relative
to  the  prophesied  death  of  Chris.  Varis,  of  St.  James,  Mo.,  is  authentic.
Further,  in  this  connection  I  desire  to  say  that  I  never  attended  a  seance,  as
it  is  called,  I  believe,  in  my  life,  have  no  experience  in  that  line,  and  have
no  personal  knowledge  upon  which  to  base  belief  nor  unbelief  of  Spiritual-
ism. But  I  was  told  by  parties  that  met  at  Dr.  Suddick's  residence,  some
weeks  before  the  demise  of  Chris.  Varis,  that  by  raps  with,  or  on  a  table,  I
do  not  know  which,  they  were  told  that  Varis  would  die  in  40  days,  or
October  8th,  and  he  did  die  on  the  date  as  given.

EuGEXE  A.  Evans.

There  remained  an  important  question  to  determine  :  whether  Mr.  Varis
had  known  of  the  prophecy,  making  it  possible  that  it  had  brought  about  its
own  fulfilment.  The  following  letter  and  statement  give  the  result  of  Dr.
Suddick's  inquiries  on  this  jaoint  : —

Cuba,  Mo.,  December  23rd,  1890.

I  received  your  recent  letter  several  days  ago,  but  thought  it  would
perhaps  be  more  satisfactory  to  you  and  your  Society  for  me  to  go  and  see
Mrs.  Varis,  widow  of  Mr.  Chris.  Varis,  myself.  So  yesterday  (Sunday)  I
boarded  the  noon  train,  and  on  arriving  found  Mrs.  Varis  and  lier  two
daughters,  young  ladies,  very  intelligent  and  clever  people.  On  introducing
the  subject,  just  a  shade  of  vexation  passed  over  Mrs.  V.'s  face,  and  she
made  haste  to  say,  ' '  We  are  not  Spiritualists,  and  knew  nothing  of  the
prophecy  until  we  saw  it  in  the  Cratvford  Mirror,  at  least  two  weeks  after
Mr.  Varis'  death.  I  was  very  much  vexed,  as  we  believe  nothing  in  such
foolishness. . . .  "

I  explained  that  the  parties  who  had  signed  their  names  to  the  paper  had
not  intended  it  to  ajjpear  hi  the  local  press.  Mrs.  V.  said  she  had  felt  very
badly  about  having  her  husband's  name  bandied  about  in  that  way  in  a
newspaper,  but  when  Mr.  Cottnam  explained  the  matter,  and  Dr.  Headlee
said  he  knew  of  tlie  prophecy,  and  that  the  morning  of  the  8th  of  October
had  been  specified  as  the  time  in  which  he  should  die,  a  week  or  more
before  his  death  occurred,  she  felt  that  there  must  be  some  truth  in  it,  as  she
could  not  doubt  Dr.  Headlee.

"Mrs.  Varis,  did  your  husband  know  anything  about  the  prophecy
before  his  death  ?  "

"No,  indeed,"  she  said,  "none  of  us  knew  anything  about  it  until  two
weeks  after  his  death."

' '  Might  not  Dr.  Headlee  have  said  something  to  him  about  it  during  one
of  his  visits,  without  your  knowing  it?"

"Oh,  dear  no,"  she  said,  "I  was  always  present  at  these  visits,  and  know
no  such  talk  occurred  at  any  of  them.  No,  I  am  positive  Dr.  Headlee  never
mentioned  it,  and  that  Mr.  V.  never  knew  it."

I  then  -ivrote  up  the  little  memorandum  enclosed,  and  she  signed  it,  or
rather  her  daughter  did,  at  her  request,  in  my  presence.

I  then  went  out  and  found  Dr.  Headlee,  and  he  said  in  answer  to  my
questions  : —


The  Suhlim-inal  Self.


437


' '  No,  I  know  positively  that  Mr.  V.  knew  nothing  of  the  prophecy  ;  no
one  in  St.  James  knew  anything  of  it  but  myself,  and  I  did  not  want  him

to  find  it  out."  g_ ^  SUDDICK.

To  ALL  WHOM  IT  MAY  CONCERN  :  —This  is  to  certify  that  I  am  positive

that  my  husband  knew  nothing  whatever  of  the  propliecy  of  his  death,  made

at  a  Spiritual  circle  held  at  the  home  of  Dr.  S.  T.  Suddick,  in  Cuba,  Mo.,  on

August  29th  last. We  did  not  hear  of  it  for  about  two  weeks  after  his

death. We  are  not  Spiritualists.  /r.- i\ nir *  -it-

^  (Signed) Mrs.  A.  Varis.

We  may  add  that  Spiritualistic  stances  (without  professional  mediums)
are  very  frequently  held  in  Cuba,  Mo.,  which  is,  we  understand,  a  town,  of
some  550  inhabitants  ;  and  that  other  prophecies  have  been  made  which
have  come  true,  as  the  following  letter  written  by  Dr.  Suddick  to  Colonel
Bundy,  editor  of  the  Iteligio-Philosop]iical  Journal  (and  received  from
Colonel  Bundy  by  Mr.  Hodgson  on  October  28th,  1890),  wdl  show.  They
are,  however,  decidedly  less  striking  than  the  instance  we  have  given,  and  it
would  be  diflicult  to  estimate  their  evidential  value  without  a  precise  state-
ment of  the  number  of  prophecies  that  have  not  come  true.

"We  had  a  sitting,"  says  Dr.  Suddick,  "about  a  month  ago,  spirits
statmg  that  '  a  woman  would  die  in  Cuba  on  October  20th, '  but  they  would
not  spell  the  name. Miss  Anna  Long  died  here  that  day.

"Parson  Stillwell,  a  very  old  gentlemen,  was  quite  feeble,  and  a  few
nights  ago  at  a  circle  some  one  asked  how  long  he  would  live.  The  spirits
spelt  out, '  He  will  die  to-night. ' In  the  morning  he  was  dead.

"  The  spirits  kept  parties  in  Cuba  posted  in  the  wheat  market,  noting  all
the  changes  from  to  three  or  four  days  ahead,  all  this  fall.  Thousands  have
been  made  here."

In  the  next  case  the  death  seems  to  have  been  due  to  natural
causes,  which  could  not,  one  would  think,  have  been  foreseen  from
however  intimate  a  view  of  the  subject's  organism  at  the  time  when
the  presentiment  first  appeared.

P.  148.  433,  Harrison  Street,  Topeka,  Kansas,

September  1st,  1893.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  have  a  painful  duty  to  perform  in
acquaintmg  you  Avith  the  sickness  and  deatli  of  my  mother,  Mrs.  Enoch
Chase.  My  mother  was  taken  sick  on  Saturday  morning,  July  29th,  with
bilious  fever.  The  fever,  after  a  run  of  ten  days,  ceased  and  she  seemed  to
be  improving  rapidly.  She  continued  improving,  so  much  so  that  on  Wed-
nesday and  Thursday,  the  16th  and  17th,  she  sat  up  a  little,  but  on  Friday
morning  we  noticed  she  seemed  weak.  A  little  later  she  had  a  sinking  spell
from  which  she  gradually  passed  into  unconsciousness.  After  a  great  effort
we  revived  her,  but  from  that  time  on  she  gave  up  entirely  and  failed  rapidly
until  Sunday  evening  at  seven  o'clock,  when  she  passed  away.  Please  notice
the  Friday,  Saturday  and  Sunday  mentioned  in  her  premonition,  which
correspond  with  the  last  three  days  of  her  sickness,  after  the  relapse  took
place.


438


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


We  found,  the  sealed  envelope  after  her  death  in  her  box  of  private  papers.
She  has  told  us  ever  since  ray  father's  death,  which  occurred  April  24th,  1888,
that  she  would  only  survive  him  iive  years.  We  did  not  pay  tlie  attention
to  this  that  we  now  wish  we  had.

Mrs.  S.  J.  Crawford.

[A  sealed  envelope,  with  inscription  and  contents  as  given  below,
was  found  among  Mrs.  E.  Chase's  private  papers  after  her
death.]

Inscription  on  Envelope.
To  be  opened  after  my  death,  if  it  takes  place  in  or  near  5  years  after  the
death  of  my  husband,  viz.,  April,  1888.  Mother

Enclosure  in  Envelope.

Topeka,  Becemher  28th.,  1891.

It  has  come  to  my  mind  this  morning  that  perhaps  I  had  better  leave  this
premonition  in  this  shape.

Ever  since  the  death  of  my  husband,  on  the  24th  of  April,  1888,  I  have
felt  that  five  (5)  years  is,  or  will  be,  the  limit  to  me  of  life.  There  has  been
no  sudden  expression  in  that  way,  but  the  knowledge  has  seemed  to  follow
me  like  the  knowledge  of  any  other  fact,  —  say  this  is  Friday,  and  I  am
thinking  of  doing  something  in  a  day  or  two,  I  would  just  think,  to-morrow
will  be  Saturday  and  the  next  will  be  Sunday,  then  I  can't  do  it.  The
thought  always  follows  me,  just  quietly  and  naturally  :  Five  years.  Now,
if  I  should  live  six  years,  I  will  destroy  this,  but  if  my  premonition  comes
true,  I  wish  this  sent  to  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,
Mass.,  with  particulars.

Send  to  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Mrs.  E.  Chase.

Re  Mrs.  Chase.

Baxter  Springs,  Mmj  10th,  1894.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — You  ask  me  my  mother's  age  at
the  time  she  made  her  prediction.  She  was  about  sixty-nine  and  a  half  years
old  when  she  wrote  it  out.  She  was  born  on  June  22nd,  1822,  wrote  out
her  prediction  December  28th,  1891,  and  died  August  20th,  1893.  I  think
the  fact  came  to  her  the  very  day  of  my  father's  death,  April  24th,  1888.

My  mother's  friend,  Mrs.  Silas  Rain,  of  Topeka,  told  me  that  my  mother
said  as  much  to  her  the  niglit  after  my  father's  death.  Mother  talked  to  me
many  times  about  it,  but  not  so  soon  as  she  did  to  Mrs.  Rain.  Some  weeks
must  have  passed  before  she  mentioned  it  to  me.  I  cannot  remember  when
I  first  heard  her  talk  about  it.

IsABELLE  M.  Crawford.

(Mrs.  S.  J.  Crawford,

433,  Harrison  Street,  Topeka,  Kan. )

Here  is  another  case,  where  there  may  have  been  some  subliminal
perception  of  danger  to  the  child's  health.  The  coincidence  involved
is  imperfect.


Tlie  Subliminal  Self.


439


P.  157.

From  a  gentleman  in  Boston,  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  who  desires  that
his  name  may  not  be  published.

In  the  year  1872  I  lived  in  the  city  of  Pittsburgh,  Pa.  I  had  then  four
children,  two  boys  and  two  girls.  The  boys  slept  in  one  room,  the  girls  in
another,  and  on  the  same  floor  was  my  own  chamber.  One  night  I  had  a
dream  that  I  shall  never  forget,  and  it  is  as  vivid  to  my  mind  to-day  as  at
the  time  of  its  occurrence.

I  dreamed  of  being  in  a  large,  square  room  on  the  ground  floor.  Outside
the  window  was  a  hearse,  and  in  it  a  coffin  containing  the  body  of  my
younger  son.  Just  as  I  turned  away  from  the  window  I  saw  a  man  with  the
body  of  my  younger  daughter  in  his  arms,  with  her  head  hanging  off  his
shoulder,  with  her  eyes  wide  open,  staring  at  me.  I  said  to  the  man,
"Don't  take  her,  she  ain't  dead."  He  replied,  "Yes,  she  is  dead  ;  that's
the  way  they  look  when  they  die  that  death."

I  awoke  with  a  cold  perspiration,  arose,  and  with  a  light  I  visited  the
rooms  where  my  little  ones  slept.  I  examined  their  pulse,  put  my  hand  on
their  heads,  and  found  them  to  be  apparently,  in  perfect  health,  and  sleeping
the  sweet  sleep  of  childhood.  I  returned  to  my  chamber  and  sat  on  the  edge
of  my  bed,  thinking  of  my  dream,  when  my  wife  awoke.  I  told  her  of  my
di'eam.  It  impressed  me  so  that  it  was  over  an  hour  before  I  again  went  to
sleep.

The  next  morning  my  boy,  whom  I  saw  in  the  hearse,  awoke  in  a  high
fever  and  did  not  leave  his  bed  for  nearly  six  weeks.  All  through  his  sick-
ness the  dream  was  a  great  source  of  anxiety  to  myself  and  my  wife.  Good
medical  attention  and  careful  nursing  at  last  restored  him  to  health.  All  my
children  are  men  and  women  grown,  and  from  that  day  I  have  had  no  serious
sickness  in  my  family.

Such  a  dream  !  What  was  its  significance  1  Merely  a  coincidence  1  Or,
■was  it  a  warning  to  give  the  case  all  the  care  possible  to  save  the  child's  life.

South  Boston,  July  25th,  1892.
RiCHAED  Hodgson,  Esq., — Dear  Sir, — I  cannot  recall  any  other  dream
of  a  similar  nature,  nor  can  I,  as  a  rule,  upon  awakening,  recall  the  details
of  a  dream  that  I  had  during  the  night,  although  I  can  recall  the  fact  that
I  made  up  my  mind,  at  the  time  of  the  dream,  that  I  would  recall  it.
Dreams  do  not  often  come  to  me,  and  this  is  the  only  one  that  to  me  had
any  significance.

There  was  not  much  illness  in  P.  at  this  time,  and  in  fact,  it  was  unusually
healthy.  There  was  no  child's  death,  at  or  near  the  time,  that  I  had  any
personal  knowledge  of. I  enclose  a  note  from  my  wife,  as  desired.

Mrs.  C.  confirms  as  follows  :  —

South  Boston,  July  20th,  1892.
R.  Hodgson,— Dear  Sir, — The  facts  in  relation  to  the  dream  that  my
husband  had  during  his  residence  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  are  just  as  stated  by
him.  We  talked  them  over  at  the  time,  and  I  shall  always  remember  his
waking  up  and  going  into  the  sleeping  rooms  of  our  children,  and  his  telling
me  of  his  dream  before  he  again  went  to  sleep.


440


F.  W.  II.  Myers.


In  order  to  form  an  opinion  on  such  cases  as  these,  we  shall  have
to  compare  other  narratives,  where  deaths  have  been  predicted  by
jaersons  other  than  the  decedents  themselves.  But  before  approaching
that  tojaic,  we  must  pause  on  a  small  group  of  cases  which,  if  the
theory  here  advanced  to  explain  them  should  contain  any  truth,  form
an  interesting  link  in  our  argument.

We  have  been  reviewing  evidence  which  tends  to  show  that  a
man's  subliminal  self  may  sometimes  perceive  his  own  approaching
death,  and  may  transmit  this  knowledge  to  the  empirical  self,
sometimes  by  aid  of  a  hallucination.  Now  we  know  that  the
subliminal  self  may  sometimes  communicate  to  other  persons  know-
ledge which  it  cannot  or  does  not  communicate  to  its  own  empirical
self.  This  is  familar  enough  in  hypnotic  experiments,  or  in  spon-
taneous automatic  script,  which  script  may  be  (for  instance)  written  in
a  position  turned  away  from  the  automatist,  and  may  remain  unknown
to  him,  although  its  content  must  have  come  from,  or  passed  through,
his  own  deeper  being.  We  know  also  that  an  agent  has  sometimes
succeeded  in  transmitting  a  phantasmal  image  of  himself  to  a
percipient  at  a  distance,  without  knowing  whether  he  has,  in  fact,  been
successful  or  no.

It  is  natural,  therefore,  to  ask  whether  there  is  anything  to  show
that  the  subliminal  self  ever  reveals  the  approach  of  death,  not  to  its
own  empirical  self,  but  to  other  persons ; — showing,  perhaps,  by  a
phantasmal  image,  the  source  from  which  the  information  comes.

To  this  question  we  have  some  ground  for  returning  an  affirmative
answer; — although  of  course  the  greater  the  interval  between  appari-
tion and  death,  the  greater  also  is  the  plausil^ility  of  an  explanation  of
the  coincidence  as  due  to  chance  alone.  There  are  various  cases  where
the.  phantom  of  a  person  destined  soon  to  die  has  been  seen  by  a
percipient  at  a  distance ;  nor  does  it  seem  that  such  an  apparition
depends  upon  the  decedent's  own  supraliminal  effort.  On  the  contrary,
it  often  appears  while  he  is  asleep  or  in  a  comatose  condition.  Such
cases  are  familiar  to  readers  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  where  they
are  classed  among  other  apparitions  "  at  a  time  of  death  or  crisis," —
the  crisis  being,  of  course,  the  agent's  —  perhaps  only  subliminal-
perception  that  death  is  imminent.  It  is  not  always  clear  by  how
many  hours  they  precede  death  ; — in  one  case,  for  example,  (Journal,
December,  1885,  and  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  307),  the  appai'ition
coincides  with  the  onset  of  a  rapidly  fatal  attack  of  diphtheria.

From  that  case  to  the  following  there  is  no  very  great  step.

P.  CI. 636.  Cornwall  Terrace,  N.W.,  November  20tli,  1889.

Towards  the  end  of  March,  1878,  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  while  believing
myself  to  be  awake,  I  thought  the  door  at  the  head  of  my  bed  was  opened


The  Subliminal  Self.


441


and  a  white  figure  passed  along  the  side  of  the  bed  to  the  foot,  where  it  faced
about  and  showed  me  it  was  covered  laead  and  all  in  a  shroud.  Then  with
its  hands  it  suddenly  parted  the  shroud  over  the  face,  revealing  between  its
two  hands  the  face  of  my  sister,  who  was  ill  in  another  room.  I  exclaimed
her  name,  whereupon  the  figure  vanished  instantly.  Next  day  (and  certainly
on  account  of  the  shock  given  me  by  the  above  experience),  I  called  in  Sir
W.  Jenner,  who  said  my  sister  had  not  many  days  to  live.  [She  died,  in
fact,  very  soon  afterwards.]

I  was  in  good  health,  without  any  grief  or  anxiety.  My  sister  was  being
attended  by  our  family  doctor,  who  did  not  suspect  anything  serious,  there-
fore I  had  had  no  anxiety  at  all  on  her  account,  nor  had  she  herself.

I  have  never,  either  before  or  after  this,  had  such  an  experience.

(Signed) G.  J.  Romanes.

The  impression  made  by  this  incident  upon  the  late  Dr.  Romanes,
r.R.S.,  was,  as  he  more  than  once  told  me,  very  deep  ;  nor  was  there,
lie  thought,  any  such  anxiety  in  his  mind  at  the  time  with  regard  to  his
sister  as  could  have  predisposed  him  to  this  unique  hallucination.
There  were,  I  may  add,  other  unpublished  circumstances  which
confirmed  him  in  his  view  of  the  matter.

The  following  case  seems  pretty  closely  parallel.

L.  861. All  pn Borderland.  Visual.

From  Mr.  J.  H.  Kennedy,  through  Professor  Barrett.

Repeated  appearances  of  an  apparition,  as  in  this  experience,  seem  to  be
very  unusual.

[Dublin],  July  20th,  1889.
On  the  night  of  the  10th,  or  rather  morning  of  11th  February,  1884,
while  sleeping  on  a  bed  formed  by  chairs  in  my  dining-room,  my  wife  having
been  confined  the  night  previous,  I  was  startled  by  a  most  remarkable
vision.

My  cousin.  Miss  Amy  Flint,  passed  by  the  side  of  my  bed  several  times
from  the  foot,  disappearing  at  the  head,  and  carrying  in  her  hand,  with  her
arm  stretched  out,  a  virgin's  lamp.  After  she  had  passed  several  times  I
started  up  in  bed,  the  thought  having  struck  me  that  my  wife  had  either
passed  away  or  had  become  seriously  ill.  I  sat  up  in  the  bed  in  a  state  of
fear  and  anxiety,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  fearing  if  I  went  up  to  the
bedroom  I  might  startle  my  wife  and  perhaps  cause  her  death,  and  reasoning
to  myself  that  if  anything  was  wrong  the  nurse  would  certainly  let  me  know.
During  all  this  time  the  figure  continued  to  pass  and  repass  with  a  solenm,
steady  tread.  Having  watched  and  listened  for  some  time,  my  cousin  ceased
to  pass.  I  lay  down,  fell  asleep,  and  thought  no  more  of  it,  excepting  to  go
up  and  inquire  about  my  wife  and  child  early  that  morning.  They  were  both
doing  well,  so  I  dismissed  the  thing  from  my  mind,  till  about  10  o'clock,  when
my  cousin's  brother  called  to  say  his  sister  had  passed  away  just  at  the  time
of  my  vision.  In  consequence  of  this  extraordinary  occurrence  I  had  the
infant  called  after  her,  Amy.  ...


442


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I  may  say  my  cousin  had  been  for  a  long  time  in  consumption,  but  the  day
previous  appeared  much  better,  went  out  by  herself  in  good  spirits  and  visited

J.  H.  Kennedy.

Mr.  Kennedy  does  not  seem  to  have  mentioned  his  vision  to  anyone  before
he  heard  of  his  cousin's  death,  and  his  aunt,  to  whom  he  mentioned  it  some
weeks  afterwards,  is  dead.

He  writes  later  to  correct  the  date  given  in  his  first  account,  saying  that
his  daughter  Amy  was  born  on  January  2nd,  1883,  and  that  his  cousin  died  a
few  days  later,  on  January  7th,  and  we  have  verified  these  two  dates
independently  by  reference  to  the  Register  of  Births  and  Deaths.  The  fact
of  his  daughter  being  named  after  his  cousin  in  consequence  of  the  occurrence,
as  mentioned  in  his  first  letter,  affords  some  independent  evidence  of  the
correspondence  in  the  dates  of  the  apparition  and  the  death.  Note,  however,
the  disposition  to  exaggerate  coincidences  which  this  mistake  illustrates.

Mr.  Kennedy  states  that  he  has  experienced  no  other  hallucinations,  but
he  recently  had  a  dream  of  a  distressing  kind,  which  made  a  good  deal  of
impression  on  him,  and  which  there  is  some  reason  to  think  was  telepathic.
In  an  interview  with  Professor  Barrett  he  also  related  an  experience  which
occurred  to  his  mother.  This  was  a  veridical  vision  or  dream  of  the
sudden  death  of  a  friend,  and  is  of  interest  as  being  an  instance  tending  to
show  a  hereditary  faculty  of  "  second-sight."

The  following  case,  again,  is  of  the  same  type.  The  informant  is
known  to  me ;  her  father  was  a  very  distinguished  public  man.

P.  307.

From  the  Hon.  Mrs.  M  ,  A.  Adjutant  General's  House,  Royal  Barracks,

Dublin.  1884.

My  sister  was  in  the  habit  of  getting  up  at  5  a.m.  and  of  going  to  my
father's  room  (who  was  not  well  at  the  time)  to  give  him  tea,  and  then
reading  to  him  until  about  7.  I  asked  her  one  day  if  she  would  call  me
sometimes,  that  I  should  like  to  get  up  at  5.  She  refused,  saying  she
thought  " I  did  quite  enough  in  the  day  and  had  better  be  in  bed."  The
next  morning,  however,  Thursday,  to  my  surprise  I  awoke  and  saw  her
standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  looking  very  bright  indeed,  and  I  fancied  in  a
white  dressing-gown.  The  curtains  were  drawn  over  the  windows  and  the
light  seemed  somehow  only  to  strike  her  figure.  She  said,  ' '  Remember  I
have  called  you,  it  is  5  o'clock,  and  now  I  am  going  away  ;  I  am  going  away,
remember. "  I  fell  asleep  and  did  not  wake  until  eight.  At  breakfast  I  said
to  my  sister,  "So  you  did  come  and  call  me  after  all!"  She  looked
astonished  and  said,  "No,  I  did  not."  I  said,  "Do  you  mean  that  you  did
not  come  at  5  o'clock  and  say  '  Remember  I  have  called  you,  and  now  I
am  going  away  '?  "  "  No,"  she  said,  "I  never  came  near  your  room."  She,
however,  questioned  me  in  rather  an  agitated  way,  and  to  my  surprise  said,
"I  don't  like  those  sort  of  dreams."  I  never  heard  her  say  anything  of  the
sort  before,  and  was  rather  surprised  at  her  thinking  twice  about  it.

The  next  day,  Friday,  having  been  in  perfect  health  and  spirits  up  to  that
morning,  she  was  taken  ill  whilst  sitting  by  my  father's  side,  at  about  6


The  Subliminal  Self.


443


o'clock,  and  she  died  at  5  o'clock  the  day  week,  Thursday,  of  my  dream  or
vision  ;  and  a  curious  coincidence  was  that  she  had  on  a  white  muslin
dressing-gown  in  which  she  had  sat  up  during  part  of  the  night.  I  do  not
recollect  that  during  the  fluctuation  of  this  short  illness,  from  which  at  first
no  danger  was  apprehended,  this  strange  incident  occurred  to  my  memory,
but  as  the  clock  struck  5  on  that  sad  morning  I  remembered.
There  is  another  dream  connected  with  that  sad  short  illness.
-  My  father,  the  second  night  before  my  sister  was  taken  ill,  dreamed  that
he  asked  her  to  go  on  with  the  "Life  of  Charles  James  Fox,"  the  second
volume  of  which  was  not  then  in  the  house.  He  dreamed  that  she  said,  "Oh
there  is  no  more  for  me  to  read,  that  is  the  end,"  and  she  held  up  the  volume
she  had  read  to  him,  open  at  the  last  page,  across  the  half  of  which  he  saw
printed  in  very  large  black,  thick  letters,  filling  the  page  quite  across,

THE  END.

He  said  it  gave  him  a  sort  of  shock  which  awoke  him,  and  he  still  felt  a
painful  shock,  he  could  not  say  why,  when  he  awoke  and  remembered  it.
And  yet  he  was  haK  amused  at  feeling  it  a  shock  or  remembering  it  at  all.

He,  however,  did  not  mention  it  that  day,  because  he,  being  ill,  thought
my  mother  might  not  like  it.  The  day  my  sister  died  he  told  us.  The
strange  thing  was  that  it  was  the  same  night,  or  rather  morning,  and  about
the  same  time  that  I  thought  I  saw  her  :  for  soon  after  he  awoke  he  saw  her
come  in  with  his  tea,  but  did  not,  I  believe,  tell  her  the  dream.

It  was  strange  that  she  finished  that  book,  and  that  it  was  the  last  time
she  ever  read  to  him,  and  that  that  night  ivas  the  end  of  one  phase  of  family
life  in  many  ways.  My  father  never  recovered  her  death,  and  everything
changed  soon  after.

My  father  was  the  late  Field-Marshal  ,  and,  as  anyone  will  know,  not

a  man  likely  to  think  of  dreams  in  general,  and  up  to  the  day  of  his  death
was  in  intellect  and  faculties  like  a  man  of  30.  [Field-Marshal  Lord  S.  died
in  1863.]

From  this  case,  again,  there  is  but  one  step  to  the  next, — which
involves  prevision  of  a  death  more  sudden  and  unexpected.  This  case,
which  comes  from  a  lady  who  does  not  wish  her  name  to  be  printed,  is
remote  in  date  ;  but  the  danger  of  illusion  of  memory  is  perhaps  less
in  a  witness  before  the  fact  other  than  the  percipient  than  it  would
have  been  in  a  remote  case  testified  to  by  the  percipient  himself.  One
is  hardly  likely  to  imagine,  without  foundation,  that  one  has  been  told
by  two  persons  of  a  special  incident  affecting  both  of  them,  before  it
occurred.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hearing  one's  name  called  is  a
common  form"  of  subjective  illusion.

P.  637.

The  late  Colonel  M.,  of  the  Militia,  resided  at  S.  I  was  companion  to
his  wife  for  many  years,  travelled  with  them  into  various  countries  on  the
Continent,  and  altogether  was  with  her  more  than  30  years.  At  the  time
when  I  went  to  them  Mr.  M.  's  elder  brother,  Thomas,  was  a  captain  in  the
Militia  where  Mr.  M.  was  an  oflicer,  and  the  regiment  remamed  at  B.  for


444


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


12  months.  B.  is  six  miles  from  S.  and  Mr.  M.  used  to  come  home  every
evening.  One  cold  evening  in  the  month  of  March,  in  the  year  1855,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  M.  sat  reading  for  a  wliile  over  a  fire  in  the  bedroom  befoi'e  going  to
bed.  At  11  o'clock  they  were  startled  by  hearing  the  brother  call  aloud
"Will"  on  the  stairhead,  the  iwme  by  which  he  was  accustomed  to  call
Mr.  M.  Both  heard  the  voice,  and  Mr.  M.  rushed  to  the  stairhead
exclaiming,  "Whatever  brings  you  here?"  he  having  left  him  at  B.  and
supposing  him  to  be  there.  There  was  no  one  to  be  seen.  When  I  went  to
them  in  the  morning  they  told  me  immediately  of  what  had  occurred.  They
had  been  very  much  disturbed  by  it  through  the  night.  During  the  day
Mr.  M.  rejoined  his  regiment  at  B.  as  usual.  His  brother  Thomas  was
there  still  and  apparently  well.  But  in  the  evening  about  six  o'clock,  when
the  exercises  of  the  day  were  over,  he  was  standing  in  the  street  with  him
when  he  suddenly  dropped  down  dead.  From  frequent  references  to  the
subject  in  after  years  I  know  that  Colonel  and  Mrs.  M.  were  firmly  convinced
that  the  voice  they  heard  was  a  reality,  and  that  it  was  an  intimation  of  the
impending  death  of  Captain  Thomas.  The  fact  that  they  told  me  of  it  in  the
morning,  when  the  captain  was  still  well  and  likely  to  live,  shows  that  it
could  not  be  an  imaginary  thing  on  their  jjart,  the  result  of  apprehension
respecting  him.  Colonel  M.  and  his  wife  were  among  the  most  excellent
people  I  ever  knew,  and  I  remained  at  the  Hall  till  the  grave  had  closed
first  over  him  and  then,  nearly  15  years  afterwards,  over  her.

October  2lst,  1889.  E.  W.

The  next  case  presents  an  element  of  reciprocity,  which  of  course
adds  to  its  evidential  value.

P  256.

Mrs.  Tabour  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  ; —

2718,  Chicago-avenue,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

May  8th,  1895.

I  have  recently  learned  of  a  case  of  remarkable  appearance  before  death,
or  rather  a  short  time  previous  to  death.  A  man  ill  with  consumption
appeared  to  a  lady  (a  friend  of  mine  and  also  a  friend  of  his)  in  a  perfectly
natural  manner,  properly  clothed,  although  he  was  ill  in  bed  at  the  time,  and
was  found  upon  investigation  to  have  been  asleep  at  the  time  of  the
appearance.  Now,  the  reason  why  they  were  able  to  establish  the  above
fact  so  accurately  was  that  the  man  related  to  his  wife,  directly  upon  awaking,
that  he  had  dreamed  of  this  lady  in  the  most  vivid  manner,  and  described
her  appearance,  and  the  position  of  the  furniture  in  her  rooms.  The  two
families  were  about  one  day's  journey  apart,  by  rail.  The  man  died  about  a
fortnight  later.  These  people  are  willing  to  give  dates  and  names,  and  if  you
will  have  your  secretary  prepai'e  a  list  of  such  questions  as  you  may  want
answered,  and  forward  to  me,  I  will  get  all  infonnation  possible.  I  think  it
may  be  well  to  see  to  the  matter  while  I  am  here.  — Very  sincerely  yours,

JosiE  L.  Fowler  Tabour.

Mrs.  Tabour  adds  :  —

Mrs.  Shagren  is  a  woman  of  strong  clairvoyant  powers.  All  the  parties
are  of  Swedish  birth,  and  of  unusual  intelligence. At  the  time  of  this


The  Subliminal  Self.


445


appearance,  Mrs.  Shagren  was  about  thirty-one.  Occurred  over  ten  years
ago. No  appearance  at  time  of  death.

Statement  of  Mrs.  SHAaREN  Regarding  Appearance  of
Mr.  Hendrickson.

This  happened  one  day  after  I  had  finished  my  morning's  work,  housework.
It  was  about  ten  o'clock.  I  stood  before  the  mirror  doing  my  hair,  when  I
suddenly  saw  him  [Mr.  Hendrickson],  coming  from  behind,  as  if  apjaroaching  on
tip-toe.  His  hands  were  outstretched,  and  I  had  an  impression  that  he  would
place  them  on  my  shoulders  ;  I  could  even  hear  his  last  step,  like  the  squeak  of
a  boot,  as  he  put  his  foot  down.  I  turned  in  surprise,  and  faced  him,
consequently  seeing  him  out  of  the  glass  and  in  the  glass.  As  I  turned  I
exclaimed,  "  Is  that  you  1 "  At  least  I  felt  that  I  said  that,  but  as  I  spoke
he  vanished.  He  was  perfectly  natural  in  appearance,  and  fully  dressed,
just  as  1  had  always  seen  him.

In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  which  I  know  was  April  24th,  1884,  as
I  was  passing  from  the  room  in  which  I  had  seen  him  in  the  morning , going
through  a  small  hall-way,  1  heard  steps  from  behind.  Turned  and  saw  him
again,  dressed  as  in  the  morning,  and  again  as  I  turned  toward  him  he
vanished.

The  impression  of  seeing  him  was  not  so  strong  as  in  the  morning.

The  next  day,  a  young  lady  friend  of  mine,  and  also  a  friend  of  Mr.
Hendrickson's  family  came  to  visit  me,  and  knowing  of  her  friendship  with
Mr.  Hendrickson  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  anything  of  the  family,  or  where
they  were  living,  as  I  had  heard  nothing  from  them  for  about  four  years,  I
having  been  south  during  that  time,  and  they  in  the  meantime  having  left  the
city.

I  asked  if  she  knew  if  Mr.  Hendrickson  was  still  living,  as  I  knew  he  had
consumption.  She  replied  that  he  was  living  the  last  time  she  had  heard  from
them. And  then  I  said  "  I  saw  him  yesterday  morning."

My  friend  was  not  surprised,  and  regarded  the  appearance  as  a  warning  of
death.  To  my  statement  she  said,  ' '  I  would  not  be  surprised,  as  I  received
a  letter  from  his  wife  saying  he  had  a  hemorrhage  of  the  lungs.  ^  Let  us
write,"  she  continued,  "and  find  out  if.  he  is  living  or  dead."  Then  we  wrote
we  both  felt  uneasy  and  1  told  of  seeing  him.  In  a  few  days  we  received  a
reply  saying  that  he  was  not  dead,  but  the  doctors  had  said  he  could  not  live,
and  then  [Mrs.  H.]  related  his  experience  of  seeing  me  in  a  dream,  while  asleep
on  the  morning  he  had  appeared  to  me.  Although  he  had  never  been  in
the  house  he  described  my  room,  and  said  to  his  wife,  when  speaking  of  his
dream,  "she  looked  stouter  than  she  used  to,"  which  was  true,  as  I  had
grown  much  stouter  in  the  four  years  since  they  had  seen  me.

Mrs.  Hendrickson  and  myself  were  friends  from  childhood.  I  had  only
known  Mr.  Hendrickson  since  his  marriage.  We  were  just  good  friends.
Mr.  Hendrickson  once  told  his  wife  that  I  had  appeared  to  him.  That  was
long  before  my  experience  of  seeing  him.

1  Hemorrhage  of  the  lungs  has  been  associated  with  psychical  manifestations
oftener  than  from  the  relative  frequency  of  that  mode  of  death  would  seem  ante-
cedently probable.

2  K


446


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Mrs.  Hendrickson  has  re-inaiTied,  and  is  now  Mrs.  Erickson  of  Beresford,
South  Dakota.  (Signed)  []\Ii-s.]  C.  M.  Shagren.

708,  South  6  Street.

Beresford,  S.D.,  May  27th,  1895.
Mrs.  C.  M.  Shagren, — Dear  Friend, — I  received  your  welcome  letter  a
few  days  ago  and  will  now  answer  it.  It  was  in  the  morning  of  April  24th,
1884,  when  Mr.  Hendrickson  awoke  and  said  he  had  been  dreaming  of  you.
I  said  "I'll  mark  this  down  and  see  if  it  means  something."  He  slept  longer
that  morning  than  he  used  to  do,  and  in  five  days  we  had  a  letter  from  you
and  you  said  you  had  seen  him  in  your  room  that  morning  and  you  thought
something  would  happen  to  him  before  long.  He  was  dressed  in  his  night
clothes  at  the  time.  On  the  20th  of  May  he  died.  I  wrote  to  Dora,  but  I  do
not  remember  what  I  did  write  or  when  it  was.  It  was  before  he  died,
anyway.  I  had  not  heard  from  you  since  you  went  to  Tennessee  until  this
time. I  believe  you  said  in  your  letter  that  you  got  my  address  from

^^^^ Mrs.  F.  Erickson.

Bei-esford,  S.  Dak.
Box  156.

From  private  letter  written  by  Miss  Dora  Edenofi",  of  Chicago,  June  14th,
1895,  to  Mrs.  Shagren.

I  have  been  trying  to  think,  but  cannot  remember  what  you  said  about
Mr.  Hendrickson.  It  does  seem  that  you  did  tell  me  that  you  had  seen  him
in  your  room,  but  I  cannot  remember  any  more. — Your  friend,  Dora

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  question  how  Mrs.  Shagren  remembered  that
the  date  was  April  24th,  1884,  Mrs.  Tabour  adds  :—

There  are  many  reasons  why  Mrs.  Shagren  remembered  that  date.  Fii'st
because  of  the  young  lady,  who  came  from  another  city,  and  was  on  her  way
to  Europe,  and  other  facts  which  I  might  tell  you  if  necessary.  I  looked
into  it  pretty  carefully  as  I  am  rather  a  doubter  myself. . .  .

In  the  case  next  quoted  the  phantasm  indicates  not  death  precisely,
but  an  impending  condition  of  decay.

P.  251.

[The  following  statement  comes  from  a  lady  known  to  me,  who  has  also
described  the  incident  to  me  orally.  Owing  to  the  painful  nature  of  the
incident,  the  writer  does  not  wish  to  ask  her  mother  for  the  narrative  which
she  sent  to  her  at  the  time.  It  is  of  course  possible  that  she  may  have
sub-consciously  noted  indications  of  impending  decay.]

In  the  autumn  of  1892  I  was  in  Paris,  staying  with  a  near  relative  of
mine,  of  whom  I  am  very  fond,  and  who  was  a  most  distinguislied  and  clever
man  in  his  jjrofession,  that  of  a  lawyer.

He  had  not  been  quite  himself  for  some  weeks  and  had  comjjlained  in  his
letters  to  me  (I  was  in  England  at  the  time)  of  feeling  nervous  and  unfit  for
work,  in  fact  run  down.  As  his  letters  made  me  feel  uneasy,  I  wrote  and
ofli'ered  a  visit,  saying  a  change  to  Paris  would  be  beneficial  to  me,  and  took
up  my  abode  in  his  pretty  apparttment,  near  the  Boulevard  Haussmami.


The  Subliminal  Self.


447


My  relative  is  a  bachelor,  and  has  one  servant,  a  valet,  who  does  not
sleep  in  the  appartement,  but,  according  to  Paris  custom,  has  a  room  on
the  5'6™e  ;  therefore  we  two  were  alone  in  the  house  at  night.  My  room  was
at  one  end  of  a  passage,  and  his  at  the  other,  several  rooms  intervening.

A  few  days  after  my  arrival,  I  received  a  budget  of  important  papers  to
read,  and  a  request  to  translate  into  English  an  article  out  of  a  French
medical  paper.  Not  having  had  time  to  do  this  all  day,  I  postponed  the
translation  till  after  my  relative  had  gone  to  bed,  as  he  generally  retired
early.  As  it  was  a  chilly  night,  I  thought  I  would  take  the  lamp  into  my  room,
and  work  out  the  translation  after  I  was  in  bed.  I  read  several  letters  first,
and  then  started  on  my  task,  aided  by  a  dictionary,  as  the  French  technical
terms  staggered  me  rather,  now  and  then.  This  is  to  show  you  my  mind
was  fully  occupied,  and  that  not  only  was  I  wide  awake  but  that  I  was  not
in  any  way  brooding  on  my  relative's  nervous  state,  nor  indeed  was  I  thinking
of  him.  As  I  was  writmg  most  energetically,  I  saw,  as  one  can  see  without
raismg  one's  eyes,  one  of  the  doors  of  my  room  slowly  opeir,  and,  as  I
imagined  it  could  only  be  my  relative,  who  was  restless,  and  was  coming  in
to  have  a  chat,  I  said,  without  even  troubling  to  look  up  "  Come  in,  I'm  not
asleep."  Receiving  no  answer,  I  looked  up,  and  saw  a  most  awful  sight.  (I
must  tell  you  my  relative  was  a  singularly  handsome  man,  very  tall,  and  an
intelligent,  bright  face. )

I  saw,  staggering  into  the  room,  a  likeness  of  him,  but  in  the  last  stage  of
imbecility.  He  had  shrunk  down  to  half  his  lieight,  his  legs  seemed  semi-
paralysed,  and  unable  to  support  his  tottering  emaciated  form.  His  face  was
drawn,  all  character  and  expression  had  left  it,  the  lower  jaw  drooped,  and
the  eyes  had  no  intelligence  or  recognition  in  them,  nothing  but  a  vacant,
hideous  stare  !  This  thing, — for  I  can  call  it  nothing  else — staggered  across
my  room,  looking  round  at  me  now  and  then,  then  made  for  the  opposite
door,  where  it  groped  about  aimlessly  for  the  handle,  and  finally  succeeded
in  opening  it,  tumbled  itself  into  the  next  room,  and  disappeared.  I  sat  up
in  bed  frozen  with  horror,  and  gazed  at  this  till  it  vanished,  then  jumped  out
of  bed,  and  ran  along  the  passage  into  my  relative's  room.  He  was  sound
asleep  in  bed,  and  there  was  no  sign  anywhere  of  the  ghastly  semblance  of
himself  that  I  had  seen.  I  could  not  get  to  sleep,  and  this  awful  sight
haunted  me  for  weeks.  I  naturally  spoke  of  it  to  no  one  in  Paris,  but  wrote
an  account  of  it,  much  as  I  am  doing  now,  to  my  mother,  in  England.  Some
weeks  later  my  relative,  feeling  his  nerves  no  better,  consulted  an  eminent
physician,  and  a  specialist  for  nervous  complaints.  The  doctor  did  not  alarm
him,  but  told  me  privately  he  much  feared  that  creeping  paralysis  and
softening  of  the  brain  would  set  in.

His  diagnosis  was  only  too  correct ;  at  the  present  moment  my  poor
relative  is  in  a  private  hospital  ;  he  went  steadily  from  bad  to  worse,  all  the
dreadful  symptoms  of  his  disease  increased  visibly  and  rapidly,  and  now
(autumn  of  1895)  he  is  very  nearly  like  the  ghastly  vision  I  saw  of  him  in
1892,  and  which,  may  be,  was  sent  in  some  measure  to  prepare  us  for  the
great  sorrow  in  store  for  us  all.

My  relative  was,  at  the  time  of  this  incident,  about  43  years  of  age,  and
as  handsome,  intelligent,  and  charming  a  man  as  one  could  wish  to  see — tlie
very  last  person  for  whom  one  could  foresee  such  a  fearful  end.

2  K  2


448


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I  give  no  names,  or  address,  as  he  is  still  alive,  and  it  would  be  unpleasant
for  our  family. Apart  from  that,  the  details  are  absolutely  exact.

Here  is  another  case  of  somewhat  similar  type,  but  where  the
approaching  end  was  even  harder  to  foresee.  The  narrative  was  given
to  Mr.  Gurney.

P.  253.  From  Mrs.  Chaproniere.

2,  Hotham-villas,  Putney.

April  lUh,  1888.

I  was  in  my  bedroom  being  undressed  by  my  maid,  Mrs.  Gregory,  who
had  been  with  me  for  41  years,  and  she  was  unfastening  my  bracelet  when  I
saw,  just  behind  her  about  two  feet  off,  her  exact  resemblance.  She  was
then  in  perfect  health.  I  said  to  her,  "  Wliy  Mrs.  Gregory,  I  see  your
fetch."  She  smiled  and  said,  "Really,  ma'am,"  but  was  not  in  the  least
alarmed.  On  the  following  Sunday,  she  was  only  poorly.  I  went  for  a  doctor
at  once,  who  said  she  was  a  little  out  of  sorts.  On  Wednesday  evening  she
suddenly  died.  It  was  about  the  same  time  that  her  double  had  appeared  to
me  just  a  week  before. This  was  about  15  years  ago.

Sophie  Chaproniere.

I  have  seen  Mrs.  Chaproniere,  and  questioned  her  about  the  case.  She
told  me  that  she  had  never  had  a  hallucination  of  vision  on  aiiy  other  occa-
sion. The  "double"  was  as  distinct  as  the  real  person,  and  an  exact
reijroduction.  The  death  was  very  sudden.  Mrs.  Gregory  had  been  slightly
unwell  for  a  couple  of  days  before  it  took  place,  but  was  able  to  enjoy  her
food,  and  no  anxiety  was  felt  on  her  account.  A  daughter  of  Mrs  Chap-
roniere states  that  she  clearly  remembers  that  her  mother  mentioned  the
apparition  at  once,  before  the  death. — E.  G.

April  2Uh,  1888.

But  perhaps  the  most  interesting  case  in  this  group  is  the  following
which  I  give  translated  from  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  J uly-
August,  1891.

Here  it  seems  certain  that  three  persons  of  education  and  probity,
assembled  together  in  no  excitement  of  mind,  did  all  of  them  see  a
phantasmal  figure,  vaguely  resembling  a  living  person,  ill  in  bed  at
the  time,  perform  a  certain  movement, — simple,  indeed,  but  with  no
obvious  meaning.  One  of  these  persons  afterwards  saw  the  invalid
walk  to  the  door  in  the  same  way,  at  a  moment  which  had  in  his  eyes
especial  solemnity,  as  bringing  the  definite  announcement  of  her
approaching  death.

P.  210.  Case  of  the  Rue  Jacob.

]\/[Ue Isnard's  account.
One  evening  in  January,  1878,  I  had  an  hallucination. My  mother  was
then  living,  and  my  brother,  my  sister,  and  myself  lived  with  her.  My
father  had  been  dead  a  year  and  a  half.


The  Subliminal  Self.


449


We  were  very  anxious  about  my  mother,  who  was  seriously  ill,  and  had
kept  her  bed  for  four  months.  This  evening  she  had  told  us  that  she  was
better,  and  we  felt  relieved  and  more  hopeful.

It  was  about  8  o'clock,  we  were  all  with  her  trying  to  amuse  her,  and
talking  of  her  recovery,  when  she  looked  at  us  with  a  smile  and  said,  ' '  I
want  you  all  to  dine  together  this  evening;  it  is  a  long  time  since  you  did  so,
and  all  on  my  account.  (One  of  us  always  remained  with  her.)  I  shall
see  you  from  here,  and  it  will  be  like  being  with  you."  We  did  as  she
wished.

The  dining  room  communicated  with  my  mother's  room  by  folding  glass
doors  ;  these  were  surrounded  by  curtains.  The  dining  room  was  large,  and
longer  than  it  was  broad;  it  was  a  cold,  dull  room,  on  account  of  its  low  ceiling,
its  painted  walls  and  high,  dark  panels.  The  only  window  looked  upon  a
dark  court.  Three  other  doors  opened  out  of  it,  one  into  an  antechamber,
another,  nearly  opposite,  opened  into  a  narrow  passage  leading  to  the  front
rooms,  the  third  ojjened  into  a  sort  of  dressing  closet.  Entering  the  dining-
room  from  the  ante-chamber,  the  window  was  close  to  the  door  on  the
right ;  the  door  of  my  mother's  room  was  divided  from  the  window  by  a
panel.  In  the  evening  the  room  brightened  up  a  little,  but  it  was  always
dim  in  the  corners.

We  were  just  sitting  down  when  the  bell  rang.  It  was  a  friend  who  had
come  to  enquire  after  our  mother,  and  she  asked  him  to  dinner.  At  table  I
had  the  bedroom  door  on  my  right,  and  the  door  of  the  corridor  was  exactly
opposite.  M.  Menon  and  my  brother  were  at  my  left ;  my  sister,  whose
seat  was  at  my  right,  had  gone  to  the  the  kitchen  to  prepare  my  mother's
drink.

We  talked  of  indifferent  matters  ;  my  mother  joined  in  the  conversation,
and  I  could  see  her  face,  lighted  by  a  little  lamp  at  her  side.  She  seemed
calm.

After  a  time  she  grew  tired  and  asked  us  to  shut  her  door.  I  only
pushed  it  to,  and  we  continued  talking,  but  less  loudly.  I  can  affirm  that
we  were  all  calm  and  unconcerned.

It  was  9  o'clock,  the  night  was  quiet,  the  table  was  the  only  lighted  spot
in  the  room,  a  faint  light  could  be  seen  in  my  mother's  room  through  the
unground  glass  doors.

All  at  once  the  wind  seemed  to  rise  and  howl  plaintively  at  the  end  of
the  corridor.  The  corridor  door,  which  is  closed  by  a  French  handle,  {bee  de
cane),  opened  violently,  the  two  glass  leaves  came  together  with  a  crash.  I
looked  up,  astonished  at  the  sudden  gust  amidst  the  calm.  Then  something
strange  and  inexplicable  happened.  A  shadow,  like  the  shadow  of  a
woman,  stood  at  the  entrance  of  my  mother's  room  ;  it  drew  away  from  the
curtains  and  glided  slowly  towards  the  corridor.  I  saw  it  vaguely  at  first,
but  more  clearly  when  its  profile  was  thrown  up  by  the  wall.  When  it
arrived  at  the  angle  formed  by  the  wall  at  that  place,  it  left  the  wall,
advanced  into  the  room,  and  again  turned  towards  the  corridor.  At  that
moment  it  stood  out  clearly  on  the  white  background  of  the  open  door,  it
looked  to  me  perfect  and  distinct.  It  was  the  shadow  of  a  woman,  more
compact  than  transparent,  and  yet — if  I  may  so  express  myself — it  was
diaphanous  as  some  clouds  are.


450


F.  W.  U.  Myers.


It  was  little,  slightly  bent,  its  head  was  bent,  and  its  arms  crossed  over
its  breast  ;  a  sort  of  resignation  and  reserve  was  expressed  in  its  attitude.
The  head  and  shoulders  were  covered  by  a  sort  of  ashy  grey  veil,  the  face
was  quite  hidden,  it  might  have  been  a  nun.  It  entered  the  corridor  and
disappeared  into  the  darkness.  A  gust  of  wind,  less  violent  than  the  first,
closed  the  door  after  it  ;  my  mother's  door  had  also  closed  noiselessly.  The
phenomenon  lasted  some  seconds.  I  had  thought  of  my  mother  directly,
not  that  there  was  any  particular  resemblance,  but  I  had  felt  some
mysterious  connection  between  her  and  the  ajjparition.  I  cannot  analyse
what  I  felt.  It  was  not  fear,  it  was  astonishment  mixed  with  a  kind  of
superstitious  alarm.  I  felt  an  immense  sadness,  my  heart  contracted,  and
I  had  a  jjainful  presentiment.  I  thought  "  My  mother  will  die."  I  looked
at  my  brother  anxiously,  his  face  told  me  that  he  too  had  seen.  M.  Menon
seemed  ill  at  ease.  I  rose  to  go  to  my  mother,  and  hesitated,  fearing  to
find  her  worse.  Turning  to  M.  Menon,  I  said,  "I  once  knew  a  Russian
family,  in  which  it  had  become  almost  a  matter  of  belief  that  when  a  shadow
left  the  room  of  a  sick  person,  he  would  die  that  same  day,  or  very  shortly."
"Do  not  let  yourself  be  distressed,"  he  replied,  "it  was  only  a  play  of
shadows,  caused  by  a  gust  of  wind  most  probably."  I  was  not  convinced,
but  went  into  my  niotlier's  room.  The  light  had  gone  out,  which  struck
me.  I  relit  it  and  found  her  dozing.  I  was  obliged  to  wake  her  and  ask  her
how  she  was.  She  looked  at  me  as  if  she  had  been  dreaming,  'and
answered,  "I  am  not  so  well,  I  am  in  some  pain.  Let  me  sit  up.
I  am  oppressed.  .  .  ."  I  re-arranged  her  position,  but  being  unable  to
control  myself  any  longer,  I  asked,  "  Mamma,  did  you  hear  anything  just
now  1"  "  No,  why  ?  "  "  Don't  you  know  ?  We  saw  a  shadow  come  out  of
your  room."  She  looked  at  me  with  vague  interrogation.  I  could  not  keep
from  crying,  and  without  thinking  that  my  tears  might  trouble  her,  I  asked,
"You  are  going  to  get  well,  to  stay  with  us,  to  live  a  long  time,  are  you
not  ?  "  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "yes,  poor  child.  You  are  a  baby  to  cry  about  a
shadow. It  all  means  nothing. Tell  Valerie  to  bring  my  tisane."

I  went  back  to  the  dining  room,  and  found  that  my  brother  had  told
Valerie  (my  sister).  She  was  surprised,  but  not  as  much  impressed  as  I
was.

My  brother  and  M.  Menon  took  leave  of  my  mother  and  went  out,  the
former  not  returning  till  late.  That  night  my  mother  grew  worse,  and
continued  to  do  so.

We  did  not  again  speak  about  the  ajiparition,  and  in  a  few  days  I  ceased  to
think  of  it.

My  mother  died  on  January  25th  of  the  same  year,  between  9  and  10  in
the  evening.  One  day  when  my  brother  and  I  were  talking  of  her,  "That
shadow,"  I  said,  "was  not  altogether  wrong,  and  my  presentiment  did  not
deceive  me."  "  No,"  my  brother  replied,  "  the  more  I  think  of  it  the  less
I  under.stand  it — yet  we  really  did  see  something."

I  have  never  had  any  other  hallucination.

2.  Account  of  Dr.  Isnard.

In  1878,  I  lived  with  my  mother  and  sisters  at  the  Rue  Jacob.  My
mother  had  been  in  bed  seriously  ill  for  four  months,  when  one  evening.


The  Subliminal  Self.


451


M.  Menon  dining  with  us,  she  expressed  a  wish  to  be  present  at  the  meal,
by  having  the  door  left  open.

Our  apartments  consisted  of  five  rooms,  three  looking  out  on  the  Rue
Jacob,  two  (the  dining  room  and  my  mother's  room)  on  an  inner  yard.  The
event  occurred  in  these  two.  There  were  three  doors  in  the  dining  room —
that  of  the  antechamber,  my  mother's  (a  glass  folding  door),  and  the  third,
which  was  closed  by  a  hec  de  cane,  led  by  a  passage  into  the  front  rooms.

The  night  was  quiet,  it  was  about  9  or  9.30.  We  were  calm,  and  almost
reassured  by  the  improvement  in  my  mother's  health.

Our  conversation  at  last  seemed  to  fatigue  the  invalid,  and  she  asked  us
to  close  the  door. We  set  it  to,  and  went  on  talking.

Suddenly  the  door  of  the  corridor  opened  wide,  the  leaves  of  my
mother's  door  clashed  and  then  oj^ened,  and  the  wind  rose.  I  thought  it  odd
there  should  be  a  gust  of  wind,  when  all  the  windows  were  shut.  I  looked
about,  and  saw  between  the  curtains  which  surrounded  my  mother's  door,
the  shadow  of  a  woman,  small,  bent,  with  head  bent  forward,  and  arms
crossed  on  the  bosom.  A  dusty  grey  veil  seemed  to  cover  it,  so  that  it
looked  like  a  nun.  It  came  softly  into  the  room,  gliding  over  the  floor,  in
the  same  attitude  ;  the  face  was  invisible.  It  passed  close  to  me,  out  of  the
door,  and  disappeared  in  the  darkness  of  the  passage.  A  second  gust  of
wind  closed  the  doors. The  whole  thing  lasted  six  or  seven  seconds.

I  did  not  feel  fear,  but  we  were  all  three  embarrassed.  We  had  seen  the
same  thing,  and  did  not  dare  to  admit  it  to  one  another.  My  sister  was
particularly  affected.

"It  was  nothing,  mademoiselle,"  said  M.  Menon,  "it  was  a  play  of
shadows.  Do  not  be  disturbed."  My  sister  said  she  had  known  a  Russian
family  who  believed  that  wlien  a  shadow  went  out  of  an  invalid's  room,  he
would  die  that  day,  or  certainly  before  long.  She  then  went  to  my  mother.
My  youngest  sister,  who  had  been  absent,  returned,  and  seemed  greatly
siu-prised  at  what  we  told  her.

My  friend  and  I  went  out  together.  When  I  returned  I  found  my
mother  much  worse.

What  astonishes  me  to  this  day  is  that  though  our  minds  were  full  of  the
apparition,  we  avoided  any  mention  of  it.

Next  week,  I  was  alone  with  my  mother.  She  had  been  sitting  in  the
dining-room  for  some  minutes.  My  sisters  were  out.  It  was  5  o'clock,  the
time  when  Dr.  D.  generally  came.  I  had  never  been  alone  with  him.  Being
a  medical  student,  I  suspected  that  my  mother's  state  was  serious,  and  I  had
not  courage  to  receive  the  sentence  of  death.  So  that  when  he  came,  I
declined  to  go  to  the  door.  My  mother  rose,  and  at  that  moment  I  was
struck  by  her  attitude.  It  was  that  of  the  shadow  we  had  seen.  She
advanced  slowly  towards  the  door,  little  and  bent.  Her  head  and  shoulders
were  covered  by  a  shawl  and  her  face  was  invisible  ;  her  arms  were  crossed
over  her  chest.

My  mother  died  on  the  25th  of  .January,  at  9.30.

I  give  you  the  facts  as  they  are,  without  attempting  to  explain  them.

Dr.  Isnakd.

15,  Boulevard  Arago,


452


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


3.  Account  of  M.  Menon-Covnuet.

At  the  beginning  of  January,  1878,  I  went  to  see  my  friend.  Dr.  Isnard,
of  No.  28,  Rue  Jacob,  and  to  enquire  after  his  mother  who  had  been  for
some  time  dangerously  ill.  I  was  asked  to  dinner,  and  M^l^s  Isnard,  their
brother,  and  I  dined  in  a  room  next  to  that  of  the  invalid.  Towards  the
end  of  the  meal  the  youngest  sister  went  to  the  kitchen.  The  door  of  M™e
Isnard's  room  was  put  to,  but  not  closed.  It  was  near  the  right  corner  of
the  dining-room  and  was  close  to  another  door  which  communicated  with  the
drawing-room  by  means  of  a  passage.  These  doors  were  at  right  angles  with
one  another  ;  both  were  pushed  to,  but  not  hasped  ;  at  least  the  glass  door
into  Mine  Isnard's  room  was  not.  M.  Isnard  and  I  could  both  see  these  doors,
one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on  the  left,  and  Mile  Isnard  faced  the  angle
formed  by  the  two  doors.  We  all  distinctly  saw  a  shadow  glide  from  the
invalid's  door  to  the  door  communicating  with  the  coi'ridor,  following  the
angle.  This  shadow  looked  like  a  woman  with  a  very  long  veil,  like  a  nun  ;
its  head  was  bent.  It  seemed  to  me  to  grow  less  and  less  distinct,  and  on
reaching  the  door  leading  to  the  drawing-room,  it  disappeared.  It  seemed
to  disappear  through  the  floor.  At  this  moment  the  two  doors,  which  had
opened  suddenly  and  simultaneously  before  the  shadow  passed,  returned
quickly  and  simultaneously  to  their  original  positions,  striking  loudly  against
their  doorposts.  The  passing  of  the  figure  and  the  closing  of  the  doors  took
about  6  or  7  seconds.

Each  of  us  at  first  believed  that  he  or  she  alone  had  been  hallucinated,
but  we  were  of  course  obliged  to  abandon  this  hypothesis.  When  the
younger  M^l^  Isnard  came  back  she  was  told  what  had  occurred,  and  could
not  believe  it.  She  had  not  left  the  kitchen  in  the  meantime.  I  went  and
looked  out  of  the  only  window  of  the  dining-room  to  see  if  there  were  any
possibility  of  a  shadow  having  been  cast  through  it,  but  there  was  no  lighted
window  on  the  same  floor  as  ours,  in  the  buildings  opposite  our  apartment.
We  were  on  the  third  floor,  looking  out  on  the  yard  ;  there  were  several
windows  below  slightly  lighted,  and  there  was  a  gas  lamp  in  the  yard,  but
this  was  7  or  8  yards  below,  exactly  under  our  window.  Neither  was  it
possible  that  a  shadow  should  have  been  thrown  through  either  of  the  dining-
room  doors.  It  appeared  impossible  to  us  that  any  effect  of  light  could  have
produced  what  we  had  seen,  and  we  gave  up  our  attempts  at  a  satisfactory
explanation.

Mnie  Isnard  died  some  days  after,  and  it  is  only  since  her  death  that  we
have  sometimes  talked  of  the  mysterious  apparition.

G.  Menon-Cornuet.

22,  Rue  de  Constantinople,
Paris,  November  Ibth,  1890.

4.  Attestation  of  M.  Josset.

I,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  Dr.  Isnard,  one  of  my  intimate  friends,
related  to  me  ten  years  ago  the  curious  case  of  the  passing  of  a  shadow  in
his  rooms,  simultaneously  observed  by  three  persons.  He  told  me  that  the
shadow  exactly  resembled  his  mother,  who  was  then  dangerously  ill,  and


The  Subliminal  Self.


453


died  a  few  days  after.  We  have  often  spoken  of  this  fact,  which  we  believed
to  be  absolutely  unique  ;  and  Dr.  Isnard's  story  has  never  varied.

L.  JOSSET,

6,  Boulevard  Arago,  Paris.  Chemist  of  the  First  Class.

5.  Wit7iess  of  ilf V.  Isnard.

I  remember  perfectly  that  when  I  came  back  to  the  dining-room,  my
brother  told  me  what  all  three  had  seen.  I  have  just  read  their  accounts,
and  can  certify  that  the  facts  related  there  are  exactly  as  they  were  told  me
directly  after  the  event.  y  jsj^^jj^p

Observations  feom  De.  Daeiex,  Editok  of  Annates  Psychiqiies.

We  have  before  us  the  extract  from  the  certificate  of  death  of  M™e  Isnard,
draw  up  on  the  26th  January,  1878  ;  we  extract  the  following  passage  :
' '  Marie-Josephine  de  Boussois,  Rentiere,  died  at  her  domicile,  28,  Rue
Jacob,  yesterday  (that  is  on  the  25th  January,  1878)  at  11  o'clock  at  night,
. widow  of  Jean-Augustin  Isnard  .

Therefore  Madame  Isnard  died  on  January  25th,  1878,  as  we  have  always
been  told.

Although  the  witnessess  of  this  strange  phenomenon  are  our  intimate
friends  ;  though  we  cannot  possibly  doubt  their  sincerity,  and  though  we
know  that  they  related  the  story  to  their  friends,  ten  years  ago,  when  they
knew  nothing  of  psychical  phenomena,  we  have  visited  the  rooms  where  it
happened,  in  order  to  see  if  some  natural  explanation  were  not  possible.

After  a  minute  examination  of  the  house  and  the  rooms,  we  have  been
obliged  to  acknowledge  that  no  natural  shadow  could  have  been  accidentally
projected  on  the  spot  where  the  appearance  was  observed,  and  that  none  of
the  witnesses  could  have  been  mistaken  on  the  point.

This  hypothesis  is  also  corroborated  by  the  strange  resemblance  between
the  shadow  and  the  invalid,  who  had  the  same  figure,  the  same  dress,  and
the  same  attitude  ;  and  this  argues  in  favour  of  the  psychical  character  of
the  phenomenon.

None  of  the  witnesses  is  subject  to  hallucinations  or  has  had  another  in
his  life.

The  younger  daughter  of  M^e  Isnard,  who  was  in  the  kitchen  at  the
time,  and  whose  shadow  could  have  not  been  projected  into  the  dining-room,
was  16  centimetres  taller  than  her  mother  ;  she  had  besides  no  veil  on  her
head,  and  her  shadow,  even  admitting  that  it  could  have  been  seen  there,
could  not  in  any  way  have  resembled  the  one  seen.

Besides,  this  particular  shadow  was  not  so  dark  as  projected  shadows  are;
Dr.  Isnard  compares  it  to  spider's  web.

M.  Menon  and  MUe  Isnard  saw  it  in  profile  on  the  doors  and  walls,  as  if
it  had  been  thrown  there  ;  Dr.  Isnard  saw  it  in  space,  clearly  detached,  and
objective  ;  to  him,  it  hid  what  was  behind  it,  as  an  object  more  or  less
transparent  might  do.  When  the  position  of  the  places,  the  path  taken  by
the  shadow,  and  the  respective  positions  of  the  witnesses  are  studied,  it  is
easy  to  perceive  that  it  must,  or  at  least  may  have  been  sOj  even  if  the  form
was  really  objective  :  M.  Isnard  was  placed  rather  near  the  glass  door  and


454


F.  T7.  H.  Myers.


perpendicularly  to  it ;  the  shadow,  coming  out  of  the  glass  door  to  reach  the
angle  and  the  corridor  door,  must  have  at  first  come  straight  towards  him,
so  that  it  was  easy  for  him  to  see  it  in  space ;  for  at  the  point  it  started  from
and  for  about  a  yard  of  its  path,  he  could  not  have  seen  it  projected  into  the
dining-room  ;  he  would  have  seen  it  projected  on  the  wall  of  the  bedroom,
about  six  yards  ofi'.

On  the  other  hand,  Mll<^  Isnard  and  M.  Menon,  jolaced  farther  from  the
angle  and  from  the  door,  could  not  see  the  shadow  coming  towards  them,  and
when  they  looked  at  the  figure,  their  gaze,  instead  of  meeting  the  empty
space  in  the  bedroom,  would  have  fallen  on  the  opening  of  the  glass  door,  on
the  angle  of  the  two  walls,  and  on  the  door  of  the  corridor,  at  that  moment
wide  open.

Thus,  (and  we  insist  on  this  point)  the  different"way  in  which  the  shadow
was  seen  by  the  witnesses  seems  to  depend  on  their  positions  in  regard  to
the  path  of  the  figure,  and  this  difference  favours  the  theory  of  its  objectivity.
However,  we  should  not  dare  to  conclude  that  the  apparition  was  really
objective  and  that  the  three  percipients  really  saw  the  phantasm  or  double
of  the  invalid. But  we  draw  attention  to  the  following  six  points  : —

1.  A  strange  and  unforeseen  phenomenon  was  spontaneously  and  simul-
taiieously  observed  in  the  same  manner  by  the  three  persons  present,  whose
attention  was  first  drawn  to  it  by  a  gust  of  wind.

2.  Mils  Isnard  found  her  mother  asleep  directly  after.

3.  The  shadow  resembled  the  invalid  and  walked  like  her.

4.  The  invalid  felt  worse  at  once,  grew  steadily  worse,  and  died  a  few
days  after.

5.  No  real  shadow  could  have  taken  the  path  of  the  shadow  which  was
seen.

6.  The  gust  of  wind  occurred  in  a  time  of  complete  calm,  when  the
windows  were  shut.

Again,  the  witnesses  observed  no  movement  of  the  air,  as  they  would
with  a  real  gust  of  wind.

Some  movement  of  the  air  might  however  have  passed  unobserved  on
account  of  the  disturbed  state  of  the  witnesses.  Dariex

Apart  from  the  collectivity  of  the  percipience,  another  new  point,
it  will  be  observed,  is  here  involved.  If  this  phantom  was  really  a
message  from  the  decedent's  spirit  implying  that  death  was  near,  the
circumstances  suggest  that  that  spirit  must  also  have  been  able  to
discern  a  scene  in  the  i-emaining  earth-life  which  ordinary  inference
could  not  have  foretold.  We  pass  in  fact,  at  this  point,  from  organic
prevision  to  a  prevision  of  future  incidents  of  life,  of  which  there  will
be  much  to  say  later  on.

But  before  directly  facing  this  main  problem,  it  will  be  well  to  lead
up  to  it  by  another  indirect  route — namely,  through  certain  apparent
acts  of  prevision  which  seem  to  be  at  least  partly  explicable  by
telepathy. In  the  cases — as  yet  few — whei*e  there  has  been  anything


The  Subliminal  Self,


455


like  a  series  of  telepathic  messages,  some  element  of  apparent  pre-
diction has  generally  been  included  ;  although  probably  often
resolvable  into  a  mere  conversion  of  the  agent's  expectation  and
inference  into  what  looks  to  the  percipient  like  an  actual  reality.
The  following  telepathic  diary — which  we  have  not  been  able  to
persuade  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.  to  renew — illustrates  this  slight  want
of  contemporaneity.

P.  169.  From  the  Pacific  Theosophist,  San  Francisco,

Aicgusf,  1893.

The  following  experiments  were  conducted  by  a  well-known  physician  of
this  City  and  his  wife.  Both  were  somewhat  interested  in  the  subject  and,
upon  the  latter  leaving  for  a  visit  in  the  country,  it  was  arranged  that  at  a
certain  time  of  each  day  ten  minutes  should  be  devoted  to  an  attempt  to
communicate  telepathically,  each  alternating  as  transmitter  and  receiver.

The  notes,  carefully  written  down  while  separated  nearly  a  hundred  miles,
speak  for  themselves.  They  also  make  it  apparent  that  the  physician  accom-
plished something  more  than  mere  telepathy.  In  receiving  supposed  mes-
sages, he  several  times  got  accurate  information  of  things  which  the  wife  had
no  idea  she  was  imparting  and  in  one  or  two  instances  actually  foresaw
occurrences  which  could  not  possibly  have  been  known  to  his  transmitter.
This  shows  how  intimately  our  psychic  senses  blend  one  with  the  other,  and
how  hard  it  is  for  an  untrained  person  to  distinguish  just  what  psychic
faculty  is  active.  The  phenomena  recorded  are  commonplace  in  their  char-
acter ;  the  interest  lies  in  their  truthfulness  and  the  scientific  accuracy  of
their  observation. The  results  are  as  follows  : —

May  12*/!,.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.  May  12Wi. —Received.

Arrived  safely. Pleasant  trip.  B. Had  a  good  trip. B.  slept  well.

feels  fairly  well. We  have  a  nice House squarely built and plain  ;

place  in  an  old-fashioned  house.  j^o^'ch  surrounded  by  trees  ;  not  front-

ing the  road  ;  rooms  very  sunny.
[All  accurate.  What  follows  was
seen  clairvoyantly,  apparently.  —
Ed.]  Landlady  wears  sun-bonnet  with
jacket  of  same.  Little  boy  three  years
old.  [Boy  expected,  but  did  not  arrive
until  next  day.  The  description  ac-
curate.] Fire  in  north  east.  [Fire
occurred  next  night.]

May  13i/i.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.  May  13i/i.— Received.

Theresa  B.  and  her  mother  were  I  think  Theresa  B.  was  there  or  is

here yesterday. Also Clara and  coming. Something,  I  can't  make

Emma.  Business  somewhat  dull,  out,  about  business.  T  think  it  is  bad.
W.'s  house  burned  yesterday.

May  Uth.  May  im.

Nothing  sent.  Forgot  to  keep  the  appointed  time.


456


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


May  15i/i.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.
E.  and  R.  went  to  park. Mrs.  A.
is  angry. S.  paid  his  bill.

May  16i/i.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.
Paid  a  visit  to  K.'s. B.  feels  quite
well.

May  17i/i.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.
Nothing  sent  ;  business  prevented.

May  18i7i.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.
B.  does  not  feel  well  at  all.  Went
for  medicine.


May  19i/i..— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.

Case  of  D.  will  come  off  in  the
courts  29th.  Business  still  quiet.
Played  whist.

May  20i/i.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.

My  clothes  and  shoes  are  all  torn.
I  have  poison  oak  on  my  arms.  Hope
it  will  not  be  bad.


May  2lst.
Appointment  forgotten.

May  22nrf.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  IS.

Visited  springs.  Very  warm  all
day. I  have  a  sick  headache.


May  23rd.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.
Up  all  night.  Very  tired.  Nothing
new.


May  15th. — Received.
Could  get  nothing  definite  ;  think
you  collected  some  money.

May  16i/i..— Received.
You  took  a  long  walk. I  see  a.
young  man  with  a  revolver  in  his
hand. [A  young  man  shot  a  dog  in
the  garden  that  day.]

May  17th.~  Received.

Could  get  nothing  at  all.  Think
you  were  out.

May  18th. — Received.

See  a  lot  of  wine  casks  and  demi-
johns. Something  about  curtains.
[Mrs.  S.  visited  a  large  wine  cellar  oni
the  17th.  The  curtains  in  her  room
annoyed  her  very  much.  But  nothing
about  either  was  consciously  sent.]

May  19th. — Received.
Think  you  had  rain.  You  seem
dissatisfied.  You  are  telling  me  some-
thing about  D.,  I  am  sui'e.  [It  did
rain,  but  the  fact  was  not  consciously
sent.]

May  20</)..— Received.
You  went  out  riding.  I  see  you
holding  a  shoe  in  your  hand.  You
have  poison  oak  on  your  right  arm.
B.  is  better.  You  want  me  to  mail
you  the  Bulletin  and  Chronicle.  [Mrs.
S.  did  ride  out  to  some  sulphur
springs.  Poison  oak  was  on  right
arm  only.  B.  gained  three  pounds.
She  was  hoping  for  the  Bulletin  sup-
plement only.]

May  21st.
Not  at  home  ;  did  not  sit  to  receive.

May  22nd. — Received.

It  must  be  warm  ;  I  see  you  fann-
ing yourself,  you  were  riding  ;  on  a
donkey,  1  think.  [She  rode  in  a  car-
riage but  saw  a  donkey  on  her  trip
which  amused  her  very  much.]

May  23rd. — Received.  ,
You  are looking  very  cross  and
tired.


The  Sublioninal  Self.


457


May  24i7i.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.  Ma]/  24^/i..— Received.

Sent  nothing.  I  see  a  bin;  churcli-like  building —

brick.  [Mrs.  S.  went  the  evening
previous  to  a  church  entertainment.
The  descrij)tion  correct.  Not  sent
consciously].

Maij  2oth. — Transmitter,  Dr.  S.  May  2oth. — Received.

I  have  a  bad  sore  throat.  I  am  You  have  unpleasant  weather.  You
going  to  Drs.  F.  and  S.  (dentists)  to  are  trying  to  tell  me  something  about
give  ether. It  is  a  windy  day.  Dr.  F.  and  his  partner,  Dr.  S  ,  but  I

can't  make  it  out.

Mrs.  S.  was  somewhat  doubtful  about  the  success  or  even  possibility  of
such  experiments  succeeding,  and  was  fairly  startled  upon  comparing
memoranda  on  her  return  home.  B.  is  a  sister  of  Mrs.  S.,  for  whose
benefit  the  trip  was  taken.  The  doctor  had  never  been  in  that  part  of  the
country,  and  so  could  not  have  seen  the  house  and  church  he  so  accurately
described.  The  experiments  throw  much  light  on  psychic  faculties  other  than
mere  telepathy.

J.  S.,  M.D.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.

San  Francisco,  November  29th,  1893.

R.  Hodgson,  Esq  , — Dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  yours  of  November  15th,
my  statemeiit  is  that  my  experiment  with  my  wife  in  telepathy  resulted  pre-
cisely as  you  find  it  given  in  the  Pacific  Theosophist.  [In  a  later  letter  Dr.
S.  states  that  he  is  not  himself  a  Theosophist.]

I  came  to  try  the  experiment  this  way :  I  read  in  the  daily  papers  of  a
certain  drummer  who,  when  absent  from  his  home,  made  it  a  practice  to  sit
at  ten  o'clock  p.m.,  for  about  half  an  hour,  his  wife  the  same,  and  mentally
■communicate  the  news  of  the  day  to  each  other,  as  exchanging  letters  was
inconvenient,  he  being  compelled  to  change  his  location  every  day.

As  my  wife  was  to  go  away  from  San  Francisco  last  summer  with  a  sick
sister  of  hers,  we  decided  to  try  the  experiment,  with  the  result  given  in  the
Pacific  Theoso2)hist.  My  wife  has  grown  up  in  an  atmosphere  of  scepticism,
consequently  she  did  not  give  the  subject  as  much  attention  as  I  did,
otherwise  we  might  have  had  better  results.  Now,  of  course,  her  personal
experience  convinced  her  of  something.

No  third  person  was  aware  of  our  doing,  excepting  what  I  state  here  :  I
met  Dr.  J.  Anderson  in  consultation  about  a  patient,  when  I  told  him  I
believed  in  the  possibilities  of  telepathy,  and  that  I  was  making  experiments
just  then  with  my  wife.  He  asked  me  to  show  him  the  result,  good  or
bad,  which  I  did.  Dr.  Anderson  never  met  my  wife,  neither  did  he
know  where  she  went  to.  She  was  in  St.  Helena,  Sonoma  County,  about
■63  miles  from  the  city.

We  agreed  to  sit  twenty  minutes  at  ten  o'clock  p.m.  In  sending  news,  I
fixed  my  mind  strongly  on  the  messages,  in  receiving  I  made  my  mind  as
near  blank  as  I  could,  excluding  all  thought.  Everything  I  received  came  to
me  as  a  mental  picture.  Sometimes  I  would  see  things  only  pai-tly,  like  half
of  a  face.  When  I  saw  her  arm,  with  the  poison  oak,  it  came  very  clearly.
I  almost  thought  I  could  speak  to  her,  but  I  never  heard  anything  like  noise.


458  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

The  only  other  experiments  I  tried  were  several  years  ago  in  mind-reading.
One  party  would  fix  liis  mind  on  a  certain  card,  and  I  would  tell  him  which
one  it  was.  I  succeeded  once  out  of  every  three  attempts.  Some  days  I  could
tell  correctly  four  or  five  times  in  succession,  other  times  I  failed  altogether.

I  tried  the  experiments  for  my  own  personal  satisfaction,  having  no  desire
to  attract  notice  whatever.  1  may  also  add  that  I  found  that  a  quiet  mind
and  rested  condition  of  the  sj'stem  is  necessary  for  success.

I  don't  wish  my  name  to  be  published,  but  if  anybody  should  enquire  of
you  privately,  the  same  as  you  did  of  Dr.  Anderson,  I  have  no  objection  to
you  giving  them  my  name  and  address.

Wishing  you  success  in  your  labours,  I  remain,  yours,  j  g

I  corroborate  the  above  statement  in  every  detail.  Mrs E  S

Mr.  W.  E.  Coleman,  well-known  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  writes  to  him  as  follows  :
Chief  Q.M.  Ofhce,  San  Francisco,  California,

December  21sf,  1893.
Upon  enquiry  I  find  that  Dr.  .J.  S.  is  a  reputable  physician  of  character
and  standing. All  speak  well  of  him,  and  he  is  considered  a  man  of  veracity.
I  can  find  nothing  against  him  as  man  or  as  doctor.  q^j^^^j^j^

I  add  a  few  cases  of  scenes  apparently  prefigured,  where  the  pre-
figurement  may  simply  have  been  a  telepathic  transference  of  an
anticipation  existing  in  another  mind.

Here  is  a  trivial  premonition,  which  may  have  had  its  rise  in  an.
existing  intentioyi  on  the  caller's  part  to  offer  to  show  the  slides,
telepathically  transferred  to  Dr.  Smith.  It  is  an  evidential  weakness
that  Dr.  Smith  had  not  told  the  dream  before  the  offer  was  made.


P.  187.

From  Dr.  Henry  Smith,  Associate  S.P.R.,  toE.  T.  Bennett,  (enclosing  "B. ")

Cravensea,  Cockington,  Torquay,

Aiyril  13th,  1894.

Dear  Sir, — Many  strange  facts  occur  which  with  our  present  knowledge
are  unaccountable. I  will  give  you  one.

On  Friday  night,  6th  inst. ,  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream.  I  dreamt  I  called
on  a  gentleman  on  business  matters.  He  asked  me  to  look  at  a  number  of
transparent  photographic  slides.  I  sat  down  and  much  enjoyed  the  views.
They  were  remarkably  fine  and  so  impressed  themselves  on  my  memory  that,,
during  the  day,  I  could  distinctly  see  the  streets  and  buildings.

On  Saturday  evening,  7th  inst. ,  Mr.  Winget,  my  printer,  called  on  me.  In
the  course  of  conversation  he  said  :  "I  see  you  are  interested  in  Egyptian
buildings — I  have  lately  purcliased  a  very  fine  collection  of  transparent
photographic  slides.  I  have  four  sets — Egypt,  Palestine,  The  Rhine,  and
Paris — also  a  very  fine  stereoscopic  cabinet.  I  should  have  great  pleasure  in
shewing  them  to  you,  if  you  will  kindly  come  up  to  my  house."

I  listened  with  surprise  to  what  he  said,  and  when  he  was  gone  I
remarked  to  my  children,  ' '  Did  you  hear  what  Mr.  Winget  said  ?  I  was  too


The  Siihliminal  Self.


459


much  astonished  to  make  any  remark  to  him  on  the  subject."  I  then  told
them  my  dream.

On  Sunday  evening  following,  I  went  to  Mr.  Winget's  house,  and  there
to  my  astonishment  stood  the  very  box  and  its  surroundings  I  had  seen  in
my  dream.  I  sat  down  and  looked  over  twenty  or  more  slides,  then  got  up
and  said,  "  I  will  look  at  no  more  !  "  for  there  I  saw  the  identical  views  I
had  seen  in  my  dream.

What  theory  will  account  for  this  fact  1  This  was  not  dreaming  of  some-
thing that  had  taken  place,  but  most  vividly  of  something  that  was  to  take
place.-Yours  truly,  ^^^^^

"B."  (enclosure).  Cravensea,  Torquay,

April  mh,  1894.

I  was  in  the  room  with  my  sisters  when  Mr.  Winget  invited  tny  father
to  go  to  his  house  to  look  at  some  transparent  slides,  illustrating  Paris,
Egypt,  etc.

Immediately  Mr.  Winget  left,  my  father  exclaimed,  "I  was  so  astonished
at  what  Mr.  Winget  said,  that  I  could  not  answer  him  !  He  has  most
graphically  described  my  dream — this  is  most  extraordinary  ! — I  will  accept
the  invitation."

My  father  went,  and  found  everything  exactly  as  he  had  seen  in  the
dream — the  chair,  window,  and  other  surrounding  objects — as  well  as  the
cabinet  and  slides.

I  may  add  that  we  had  noticed  how  remarkably  quiet  my  father  became
when  Mr.  Winget  mentioned  the  slides.

Ada  Smith.
Annie  Smith.
Ph(ebe  Maud  Smith.

Observe  that  if  Dr.  Smith  had  less  distinctly  observed  that  his
thovight  of  the  slides  preceded  the  offer  to  show  them,  that  offer  might
have  given  the  characteristic  feeling  of  promnesia, — as  of  the  repetition
of  something  previously  rehearsed.  It  has  already  been  suggested  that
the  promnesic  sensation  may  sometimes  thus  be  at  bottom  a  form  of
telepathy.

Here  is  another  case,  where  the  warning  of  danger  may  have  been
a  telepathic  impact  from  the  mind  of  the  assassin,  as  he  heard  the
approach  of  his  intended  victim.

P.  173.

Four  years  ago,  I  made  arrangements  with  my  nephew,  John  W.
Parsons,  to  go  to  my  office  after  supper  to  investigate  a  case.  We  walked  along
together,  both  fully  determined  to  go  up  into  the  office,  but  just  as  I  stepped
upon  the  door  sill  of  the  drug  store,  in  which  my  office  was  situated,  some
invisible  influence  stopped  me  instantly.  I  was  much  surjarised,  felt  like  I
was  almost  dazed,  the  influence  was  so  strong,  almost  like  a  blow,  I  felt  like
I  could  not  make  another  step.  I  said  to  my  nephew,  ' '  John,  I  do  not  feel
like  going  into  the  office  now,  you  go  and  read  Flint  and  Aitkin  on  the
subject." He  went,  lighted  the  lainp,  took  off  liis  hat,  and  just  as  he  was


460


F.  IF.  H.  Myers.


reaching  for  a  book  the  report  of  a  large  pistol  was  heard.  The  ball  entered
the  window  near  where  he  was  standing,  passed  near  to  and  over  his  head,
struck  the  wall  and  fell  to  the  floor.  Had  I  been  standing  where  he  was,  I
would  have  been  killed,  as  I  am  much  taller  than  lie.  Tlie  pistol  was  fired
by  a  man  who  had  an  old  grudge  against  me,  and  had  secreted  himself  in  a
vacant  house  near  by  to  assassinate  me.

This  impression  was  unlike  any  that  I  ever  had  before.  All  my  former
impressions  were  slow  in  their  development,  grew  stronger  and  stronger,
until  the  maximum  was  reached.  I  did  not  feel  that  I  was  in  any  danger,
and  could  not  understand  what  the  strong  impression  meant.  The  fellow
was  drunk,  had  been  drinking  for  two  weeks.  If  my  system  had  been  in  a
different  condition — I  had  just  eaten  supper — I  think  I  would  have  received
along  with  the  impression  some  knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  danger,
and  would  have  prevented  my  nephew  from  going  into  the  office.

I  am  fully  satisfied  that  the  invisible  and  unknown  intelligence  did  the
best  that  could  have  been  done,  under  the  circumstances,  to  save  us  from

D.  J.  Parsons,  M.D.,  Sweet  Springs,  Mo.

(The  above  account  was  received  in  a  letter  from  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,
dated  December  15th,  1891.)

Statement  of  Dr.  J.  W.  Parsons.

About  four  years  ago  my  uncle.  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  and  I  were  going  to
supper,  when  a  man  halted  us  and  expressed  a  desire  for  medical  advice.
My  uncle  requested  him  to  call  the  next  morning,  and  as  we  walked  along  he
said  the  case  was  a  bad  one  and  that  we  would  come  back  after  supper  and
go  to  the  office  and  examine  the  authorities  on  the  subject.  After  supper
we  returned,  walked  along  together  on  our  way  to  the  office,  but  just  as  we
reached  the  door  of  the  drug  store  he  very  unexpectedly,  to  me,  stopped
suddenly,  which  caused  me  to  stop  too  ;  we  stood  there  together  a  few
seconds,  and  he  remarked  to  me  that  he  did  not  feel  like  going  into  the  office
then,  or  words  to  that  effect,  and  told  me  to  go  and  examine  Flint  and
Aitkin  I  went,  lit  the  lamp,  and  just  as  I  was  getting  a  book,  a  pistol  was
fired  into  the  office,  the  ball  passing  close  to  my  head,  struck  the  East  wall,
then  the  Nortli,  and  fell  to  the  floor.
This  5th  day  of  July,  1891.

John  W.  Parsons,  [Ladonia,  Texas.]

I  have  spoken  of  these  last  cases  as  explicable  by  telepathy,  or
supernormal  perception  of  the  contents  of  a  distant  mhid ; — and  of
some  previous  cases  as  explicable  by  telissthesia,  or  supernormal
perception  of  matter  at  a  distance,  without  any  assignable  influence  of
another  mind.  Of  course,  however,  we  cannot  broadly  distinguish
from  each  other  obscure  faculties  such  as  these.  For  aught  we  know,
there  may  be  a  higher  point  of  view  from  which  these  two  types  of
connaissance  superieure  may  be  fused  in  one.  We  need  not,  then,  be
surprised  if  we  find  cases  where  the  two  faculties,  if  we  can  so  term
them,  meet, — as  where  some  disposition  of  material  objects  seems  to
facilitate  a  transference  of  thought.


Tlie  Subliminal  Self.


461


-  "We  have  had  some  curious  instances  of  this  kind,  where  the
actual  touch  of  some  object  which  had  belonged  to  a  deceased  person
seemed,  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  to  facilitate  communication  from
that  person.

And,  somewhat  similarly,  keeping  to  matters  within  our  present
scope,  we  have  already  published  several  cases  where  a  letter  in  course
of  passage  through  the  post  seems  to  have  been  cognised  by  its  intended
recipient  before  delivery.  Sometimes  a  knowledge  of  the  letter's
content  is  thus  transmitted ;  sometimes  the  outside  only  is  prefigured,
perhaps  with  postmarks  which  the  writer  himself  has  not  seen.  It
looks  as  though  the  current  of  the  writer's  thought  had  directed  his
intended  reader's  supernormal  perception  to  some  sight  of  the  actual
material  letter  then  on  its  way  to  him. I  quote  two  cases  of  this  type.

M.Cl.  92.  Visual.

Mrs.  Vemi  wiites  : —

3,  St.  Peter's  Terrace,  Cambridge,  January  9th,  1895.

January  8th,  I  came  down  to  breakfast ;  A.  was  sitting  at  the  table,
Dr.  Vemi  was  not  in  the  room.  Something  engaged  my  attention  at  the  end
of  the  room,  and  standmg  with  my  back  to  the  table  I  said  ;  ' '  Are  there  any
letters  for  me,  A.  ?" (The  letters  are  usually  on  or  by  my  plate.)

A.  "Yes,  one  ;  there  is  one."

[Mrs.  Veim.]  "  See  who  it's  from  ;  do  you  know  1 "

A.  "It  has  the  Deal  postmark;  it  is  from  Frances  (Venn) — for  you
or  me."

Turning  round  I  saw  no  letter,  and  said  :  "I  see  no  letter,  A,  What  are
you  talking  about  ? Have  you  hidden  it  ?  "

fA.  "  Unless  my  ej'es  deceive  me,  there  is  a  letter,  as  I  said."

Going  up  to  the  table  to  look,  I  found  none,  and  said  :  ' '  There  is  none.
Tou  shouldn't  invent  things  ;  you  shouldn't  say  tilings  just  as  if  they  were
true,  when  they're  not !  " (No  doubt  a  valuable  observation.)

A.  ' '  Well,  I  didn't.  There  was  one,  or,  at  any  rate,  my  eyes  seemed  to
see  one  just  as  I  told  you,  with  the  Deal  postmark  and  Frances'  writing  ;
but  I  don't  know  if  it  was  to  you  or  me.  I  couldn't  read  the  writing  from
here. I  know  there's  none  now." Subject  dropped  purposely.

This  was  at  9  o'clock.  Returnmg  at  10  o'clock  into  the  hall,  the  second
post  havmg  just  come,  the  servant  had  just  put  one  letter  on  the  hall  table  ;
it  was  to  A.  from  Frances  and  bore  the  Deal  postmark,  as  A.  had  said.
She  had  been  at  Frant,  and  we  did  not  know  she  had  returned  home,  and
were  not  expecting  to  hear  from  her.  Another  cousin  wrote  generally.
There  was  nothing  of  any  note  in  the  letter.  It  was  given  to  A.  at  the  end
of  his  lessons  with  the  remark — "  Here  is  the  letter,  you  see,  after  all."

"Yes,"  he  said,  indifferently,  not  a  bit  interested,  his  mind  full  of  some-
thing else,  "I  often  do  see  things  like  that,  you  know  I  do."

A.  was  with  his  tutor  when  the  second  post  came,  and  the  letter  was
taken  in  by  the  servant,  and  laid  on  the  hall  table  before  me — there  was  no


462


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


possibility  of  his  having  hid  it  ;  and  he  wouldn't  have  cared  to  do  it  in  any
case. We  never  take  any  notice  to  him  of  his  saying  anything  of  the  sort.

S.  C.  Venn.

P.S. — I  am  sorry  I  didn't  keep  the  letter  to  send  you,  but  let  some  one
bum  it.  A.  left  it  lying  about  ;  but  I  took  it  into  the  drawing-room  and
shewed  it  to  Dr.  Venn  and  told  him  the  story,  before  giving  it  to  A.

Dr.  Jolm  Venn,  F.R.  S.,  adds  : —

This  was  so.

J.  Venn.

Mrs.  Venn  writes  later  : —

January  21st.

His  cousins  live  at  Walmer,  but  the  post-mark  is  Deal.

Archie  would  think  of  Walmer,  not  of  Deal,  as  their  home  ;  but  he
might  have  seen  jjrevious  letters  during  the  last  three  or  four  months  with
Deal  post-mark  on  them,  though  he  had  received  none  from  them  addressed
to  liimself  from  there.  He  would  have  had  the  opportunity  of  noticing  it
on  letters  to  liis  father  or  to  me.

S.  C.  Venn.

Mrs.  Venn  adds  the  following  account  of  an  incident  which  took  place  a,
few  years  ago — a  case  of  apjDarent  thought-transference  between  herself  and
her  son,  occurring  in  a  dream.

January  15th,  1895.
I  think  the  oddest  exjoerience  I  ever  had  with  him  was  one  night  at
Bournemouth,  when  he  still  slept  in  my  room.  I  dreamed  a  dream  and
woke  with  it,  and  he  immediately  (asleep  still)  in  his  sleep  began  to  talk
about  it,  proving  that  he  was  dreaming  the  same  thing.  It  was  a  very  queer
dream,  and  involved  the  question  of  how  many  inches  (of  a  row  of  candles)
should  be  cut  off  each  candle.  He  gravely  begged  me  to  ' '  cut  off  six  inches,
do,  mamma  "  ;  when  I  was  feeling  four  would  be  enough.  It  was  a  fete  in
our  dream,  and  we  were  ligliting  up  some  room.  No  real  thing  had
happened  to  suggest  it  to  us,  but  we  both  dreamt  it  together  apparently.

Compare  the  following  case  from  a  percipient  known  to  Dr.
Hodgson.

P.  163.  2024,  Lexington  Avenue,  New  York,

February  11th,  1893.

About  two  weeks  ago,  I  think  on  the  night  of  the  3rd  inst.,  I  dreamed
that  I  was  going  to  a  place  called  Pontegardo .  I  remembered  the  name  dis-
tinctly on  awaking,  but  it  seemed  so  "outlandish"  and  queer,  I  did  not
think  that  it  could  be  a  real  name.  I  asked  my  mother  if  she  knew  of  a  place
with  such  a  name.  She  said  that  she  did  not.  Three  or  four  days  after  that
I  received  a  letter  from  my  husband,  who  is  in  Florida,  saying  that  he  would
probably  go  to  Pwntagardo.  This  letter  was  written  either  the  day  preced-
ing my  dream,  or  the  day  after.

Phebe  L.  Gkiffing  [Associate  S.P.R.]

As  related  above,  my  daughter-in-law  asked  me,  the  morning  after  her
dream,  if  I  knew  of  a  place  called  Pontegardo.  I  did  not  know  of  such  a
place  until  my  son's  letter  was  received,  saying  that  he  thought  of  going
there.  Jane  R.  Griffing.


The  Subliminal  Self.


463


2024,  Lexington  Avenue,  New  York,

February  21st,  1893.
Deae  Mr.  Hodgson, —  ....  My  daughter-in-law  has  the  letter
referring  to  Puntagardo,  but  as  it  is  principally  about  personal  affairs,  she
does  not  like  to  send  it.  Charley  writes  of  a  business  project  which,  if  he
carries  it  out,  will  make  Phebe's  dream  premonitory,  as  they  will  go  there
to  live.  If  this  should  be  the  result,  it  will  be  one  of  the  clearest  of  pre-
monitions, as  when  she  received  the  letter,  nothing  of  the  kind  had  been
contemplated.  There  was  only  an  intention  on  Charley's  part  to  remain  in
Jacksonville,  or  go  to  Tallahassee  to  take  charge  of  a  newspaper  office.
These  two  plans  were  in  Phebe's  mind,  and  she  had  no  idea  of  any  other  plan.

Jane  R.  Griffing.

And  here  we  find  a  point  of  transition  to  a  new  group  of  cases,  in
which  foreknowledge  of  similar  type  comes  from  a  definite  mind,  of
which,  however,  we  cannot  clearly  determine  whether  it  is  the
percipient's  own  mind  or  a  mind  external  to  her,  and  unembodied.

My  first  example  comes  from  Mr.  W.,  the  friend  of  Dr.  Hodgson's,
from  whom  a  case  has  above  been  cited.

P.  150.  October  26th,  1894.

Dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — As  you  are  well  aware,  I  have  been  for  a  number
of  years  an  automatic  writer,  so-called.  Tlie  following  is  an  account  of  an
experience  I  had  last  April.

In  the  afternoon,  I  was  riding  eastward  towards  Schenectady,  N.Y.,  on
the  N.Y.C.  and  H.R.  road.  I  intended  to  get  off  at  Schenectady,  and  take
a  train  from  there  to  Troy,  and  at  Troy  to  get  a  train  on  the  Fitchbui'gh  and
Hoosac  Tunnel  Road.  I  asked  the  conductor  whether  I  would  be  able  to
make  good  connections  at  Schenectady,  also  at  Troy.  He  informed  me  that
I  would  at  Schenectady,  but  at  Troy  I  would  not,  for  the  reason  that  I  would
not  arrive  in  Troy  until  five  minutes  after  the  departure  of  the  train  on  the
F.  and  H.  T.  He  told  me  that  I  would  not  arrive  in  Troy  until  5.5,  and
my  train  departed  at  just  five  o'clock,  and  that  it  was  the  last  one  for  the
week.  This  was  Saturday.  I  asked  him  if  he  could  suggest  any  way  for
me  to  get  the  train  or  reach  my  desired  place  of  destination,  but  he  said  he
could  not.  It  seemed  certain  that  I  must  lay  off  in  Troy  over  Sunday.
The  conductor  passed  on,  and  I  meditated,  but  to  no  purpose.  After  some
time  I  took  a  pencil  and  paper,  and  thought,  but  did  not  write,  "Well,  I
think  I  shall  not  get  through  to-night,  I  am  very  sorry." Instantly  the

pencil  wrote,  "You  will  reach to-night,"  naming  the  place  I  was

bound  for.  I  replied,  by  thought,  "Why,  it's  impossible,  how  can  I  ? — the
train  out  of  Troy  leaves  five  minutes  before  my  train  arrives." The  answer

was,  "Yes,  but  you  will  get  to  to-night,"  again  naming  my  place  of

destination. Again  I  thought,  ' '  Pray  tell  me  how  I  am  to  do  so. "  The

answer  was,  "  Oh,  never  mind  how,  I  tell  you  you  will  arrive  in  all

right  to-night."  I  urged  the  impossibility  of  the  matter,  but  that  was
stoutly  denied.  I  pleaded  for  an  explanation,  but  it  was  written  that  I  needed
none,  and  that  none  would  be  given  me. I  asked  for  instruction  and  it  was


464


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"written  that  they  had  none  to  give.  I  insisted  on  the  fact  that  I  could  not
get  the  train,  but  this  was  not  conceded.

On  arriving  at  Schenectady  I  found  my  train  for  Troy,  and  as  I  boarded
it,  I  aslied  the  trainman  if  we  would  arrive  in  Troy  in  time  for  me  to  get  a
train  on  the  Fitchburgh  and  Hoosac  Tunnel  Road.  He  replied  "  No  "  very
promptly,  and  added,  "  it  leaves  five  minutes  before  we  arrive."  I  took  my
seat.  When  the  conductor  came  along  I  tried  hard  to  ajjpear  innocent,  and
asked  him  if  I  would  get  to  Troy  in  time  to  get  a  train  out  on  the  Fitchburg
and  Hoosac  Tunnel  Road. I  said  I  hoped  to,  for  I  was  very  anxious  to

arrive  at  that  night. His  reply  was,  ' '  We  do  not  arrive  in  Troy  until

five  minutes  after  five,  and  the  train  on  that  road  pulls  out  at  just  five  and
it's  the  last  train."  He  passed  on  picking  up  tickets  and  I  settled  back  into
my  seat.  It  seemed  as  if  the  last  chance  was  gone,  and  I  could  not  help
but  wonder  what  would  be  written,  so  1  observed  mentally,  ' '  Well,  you  see
your  prediction  is  wrong,  do  you  not  'I  "  And  then  came  to  me  what  seemed
to  be  the  height  of  foolishness,  "  Why,  you  will  get  there  all  right,  just  as
I  told  you."  No  explanation  being  vouchsafed,  I  fell  to  ]3lanning  what
I  would  do  in  the  city  of  Troy  over  Sunday,  for  I  had  no  hope  of
getting  out.

After  a  while  the  conductor  came  back  and  took  a  seat  just  behind  me,
and  leaning  over  towards  me  he  said,  ' '  So  you  would  very  much  like  to  get
that  train,  would  you?"  "Yes,  sir,"  I  said.  "Well,"  continued  he,
"there  is  just  one  way  that  is  possible  for  you  to  do  it,  if  you  are  a  good
runner  and  willing  to  take  chances."  Of  course  I  asked  how.  Said  he,  "I
don't  advise  anyone  to  do  it,  but  it  is  possible  to  jump  off  this  train,  for  we
stop  before  we  reach  the  Troy  Depot,  and  run  and  jump  on  to  that  train  while
it  is  going  out."  And  he  took  a  pencil  and  drew  the  railroads  and  the
depot  (a  Union  one)  about  like  this  : —


Troy
Depot.


The  Subliminal  Self.


465


And  then  he  went  on  to  explain  :  "  We  are  not  alloioed  to  run  into  the
depot  until  the  train  for  Saratoga  and  the  one  on  the  Fitchburgh  and  H.T.R.
have  both  pulled,  out,  which  they  both  do  at  just  five  o'clock.  We  should
arrive  at  our  stopping  place  X  at  about  five.  You  could  get  oS'  there  and
run  across  the  Saratoga  track  and  over  to  Z  and  jump  on  to  that  train.
There  is  a  street  from  a  point  near  X  to  Z."

At  X,  as  our  train  stopped,  I  jumped  from  it  and  ran  to  point  Z  and
caught  my  train  which  was  passing  at  that  point.

When  seated  in  the  car  I  gave  the  pencil  one  more  chance  and  it  was
written  :  "I  see  you  are  on  board  all  right ;  don't  you  think  I  knew  what  I
was  telling  you  1 "

I  had  no  further  trouble  in  reaching  the  desired  place  that  night.

I  will  say  that  I  was  not  aware  of  any  of  the  material  facts  prior  to  their
appearing  as  I  have  stated  them.  I  had  not  consulted  any  time-table  or
otherwise  learned  as  to  the  times  on  which  these  trains  were  to  arrive  or
depart :  and  I  knew  nothing  of  the  train  stopping  outside  the  Troy  Depot  or  of
the  possibility  of  getting  from  it  and  running  up  the  street  and  catching  the
train  I  wished  to  take.  I  never  had  the  slightest  idea  of  such  a  thing  until
the  conductor  laid  the  plan  before  me  just  as  I  have  stated  it.  I  was
travelling  alone. I  did  not  know  the  conductor  or  anybody  that  I  saw.

I  had  no  occasion  to  look  up  or  inform  myself  as  to  trains  at  Troy  for
the  reason  that  I  expected  to  travel  on  the  West  Shore  Road  instead  of  the
N.Y.C.  and  H.R.R.  ;  but  I  missed  the  train  on  the  West  Shore  Road  and  so
took  the  N.T.C.  and  H.R.R.  as  the  best  thing  possible  under  the  circum-
stances. On  the  West  Shore  Road  my  journey  would  not  have  been  through
Schenectady  and  Troy  but  would  have  been  to  Rotterdam  Junction  on  the
West  Shore  Road  and  there  I  would  have  connected  with  a  train  on  the
Fitchburgh  and  Hoosac  Tunnel  Road,  all  very  nicely.

I  think  this  experience  is  quite  unique.  Perhaps  some  one  can  explain  it.

W.

N.Y. November  Sth,  1894.
In  accordance  with  your  suggestion,  I  send  you  herewith  a  further
statement  that  you  may  subjoin. I  think  it  covers  your  enquiry.

C  .  W  .

About  two  years  prior  to  that  I  had  travelled  from  Schenectady  to  Troy,
and  out  of  Troy  on  F.  and  H.  T.  R.  ;  but  at  that  time  the  train  did  not
stop  outside  of  Troy  Depot.  I  had  travelled  in  years  previous,  that  is,  from  5
to  20  years  ago,  several  times  on  trains  between  Schenectady  and  Troy,
but  none  of  them  ever  stopped  outside  of  Troy  Depot. I  had  not  been  in

 since  the  trip  of  two  years  before. Prior  to  that  I  had  been  m  that

place  perhaps  once  in  two  years,  for  a  day.

It  might  be  well  to  add  that  no  friend  of  mine  at  or  elsewhere

knew  any  of  these  facts,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief.  After

arriving  at  I  told  my  friends,  but  none  of  them  had  known  of  the

matters.  I  feel  confident  that  no  friend  or  acquaintance  of  mine  knew  I
was  to  travel  from  Schenectady  to  Troy,  and  that  none  of  them  had  made
or  heard  of  a  connection  in  that  way.  From  talks  with  them  I  know  they
did  not.


466


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Among  our  best  attested  cases  of  foreknowledge  of  a  letter's  arrival
was  one  communicated  by  Dr.  Ermacora,  of  Padua,  and  printed
Yol.  IX.,  p.  68.

As  the  readers  of  Dr.  Ermacora's  article  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XI.,
are  aware,  that  very  careful  observer  has  not  yet  been  able  to
decide  whether  the  "  mediumistic  personality  "  which  calls  itself
Elvira  is  a  separate  entity,  or  merely  a  modification  of  the  medium's
own  mind.  There  is,  in  fact,  much  the  same  perplexity  as  in
another  case  which  has  been  long  and  carefully  observed, — the
problem,  namely,  as  to  the  identity  of  the  so-called  Phinuit  with
Mrs.  Piper.

Whatever  Elvira  may  be,  she  possesses  certain  supernormal  powers
which  for  us  are  perhaps  the  more  instructive  in  that  their  scope  is
somewhat  narrowly  limited.  Among  these  powers  Elvira  claims
2)recognition  ; — admittedly  on  what  may  be  termed  a  puny  scale,  and
dealing  with  trivial  matters,  but  nevertheless  involving  some  real  know-
ledge of  the  coming  course  of  events,  and  of  the  part  which  human
actions,  apparently  free,  will  play  therein.  The  question  now  before  us
is  whether  Elvira's  apparent  foreknowledge  may  not  be  explained  as
inference  from  a  slightly  wider  knowledge  of  the  present,  combined
with  a  power  of  suggestion  exercised  not  only  upon  Maria  Manzini
herself,  (which  on  any  hypothesis  is  obviously  probable),  but  even  upon
strangers.!  Dr.  Ermacora,  as  will  be  seen,  has  kept  these  points  in
mind  ;  and  his  conclusion  is  that  Elvira  has  shown  some  foreknowledge
of  events,  paltry  indeed  in  themselves,  but  yet  such  as  suggestion  can
hardly  be  pressed  to  cover.  (See  the  incident  of  sale  of  pawn-tickets,
and  others,  in  Rivista  di  Sttidi  Psichici,  1895).  The  question  will
then  be, — and  these  trivial  incidents  may  help  us  quite  as  well  as
more  important  ones  towards  its  solution, — whether  that  supernormal
knowledge  of  actually  existing  thoughts  and  things  with  which  Elvira
must  at  any  rate  be  credited  {Proceedings,  Vol.  IX,  p.  68)  may  be
enough  to  suggest  by  mere  forward-looking  inference, — itself  perhaps
supernormally  acute, — the  events  foretold  in  the  two  following  and
some  similar  cases.  The  case  first  given  would  be  easily  explained
if  there  were  collusion  between  Maria  Manzini,  and  Linda  Bigoni.
Dr.  Emacora,  however,  is  satisfied  of  the  probity  of  Maria  Manzini
who,  as  previously  stated,  has  been  well  known  to  him  for  some
years.

1  As  this  paragraph  passes  through  the  press,  I  hear  from  Dr.  Emacora  that  Elvira
has  made  a  prediction  involving  a  mistake  to  be  made  by  Maria  in  cutting  out  some
garments,  and  has  then  withdrawn  it,  as  not  wishing  that  Maria  should  thus  waste
the  stuff,  and  resolving  to  influence  her  not  to  make  the  mistake.  Elvira  herself,
therefore,  admits  that  she  can  influence  the  so-called  predictions  by  suggestions  of
her  own.


The  Subliminal  Self.


467


P.  211.

Premonition  of  an  Incident  at  the  Caff^  Nazionale  at  Padua.
Percipient,  Maria  Manzini.

On  the  7th  of  April,  1894,  at  9.30  p.m.,  Signa  Maria  Manzini  was  in  the
sonniambulistic  state.  The  personality  called  Adriano  manifested  sensorially
(hallucinations).  He  asked  me  to  suggest  to  M.  to  pay  attention  to  the
dream  she  would  have  during  the  night,  and  to  record  it  at  once  in  the
proper  book,  as  it  would  be  premonitory.

I  went  to  see  Signa  Maria  the  next  day,  and  found  the  following  note  in
the  register  of  dreams.

"Night  of  April  7-8,  1894.  I  dreamed  that  I  was  in  the  street,  and
that,  being  very  warm,  I  went  into  a  Caffd  to  rest.  It  seemed  to  be  the  Caff^
at  the  bridge  of  San  Lorenzo.  I  took  some  trifle,  but  when  I  wanted  to  pay
for  it  (I  found),  to  my  great  surprise,  that  I  had  forgotten  my  purse  and  had
not  a  farthing.  I  was  confused  and  so  frightened  and  ashamed  at  not  being
able  to  pay  that  I  woke.

"Padua,  April  8th,  8  a.m. Maria  Manzini."

I  questioned  Signa  Maria,  to  get  more  details,  but  it  was  not  much  use.
I  immediately  wrote  the  following  note  at  the  foot  of  hers.  "  M.  says  the
Caffe  was  the  one  now  called  the  Caffe  Nazionale.  The  occurrence  took
place  about  9.30  or  10  a.m.  ;  she  does  not  remember  the  date.  It  was  fine
and  warm  weather.  She  did  not  see  any  one  else  in  the  Caffe,  and  does  not
remember  how  she  was  dressed,  nor  what  she  drank."

April  8th,  10.50  p.m.

On  the  evening  of  April  9th,  Signa  Maria  told  me  she  had  passed  a  restless
night  and  had  slept  little,  aird  that  she  had  heard  a  voice  which  told  her  to
pay  attention  to  the  continuation  of  the  dream  on  the  following  night.  I
found  this  hallucination  also  properly  recorded  in  the  register  by  Signa  Maria.

On  April  10th,  instead  of  the  record  of  the  continued  dream,  I  found  the
following  note  : —

"Night  of  April  9-10,  1894.  This  night  the  voice  again  whispered
the  words  I  had  heard  the  night  before,  although  I  had  gone  to  bed  with  the
intention  of  saying  what  Dr.  E.  had  told  me  to  say.

' '  I  may  have  said  it  between  sleeping  and  waking  ;  I  remember  distinctly
that  the  same  voice  replied  '  I  understand. '

"Padua,  10t?i,  1894,  8  a.m. M.  Manzini."

[I  must  explain  that  Signs'  Maria  had  not  recognised  the  voice  the  first
time.  I  thought  it  was  Adriano  who  had  hallucinated  her,  but  did  not  say
so.  Now,  as  Adriano  had  fixed  the  night  of  the  10th  for  one  of  the  experi-
ments with  telepathic  dreams,  and  as  I  wished  to  put  it  ofl'  till  the  11th,  and
as  none  of  the  mediumistic  personalities  had  in  the  meantime  given  me  an
opportunity  to  propose  the  delay,  I  had  thought  of  profiting  by  Adriano's
nocturnal  manifestation,  if  it  were  repeated  ;  and  had  charged  Signa-  Maria
to  make  the  proposal  if  she  heard  the  voice  again.  This  second  time  Signa
M.  recognised  Adriano's  voice  ;  i.e.,  the  voice  he  assumes  in  her  dreams.]

On  the  evening  of  the  11th  Signa  M.  told  me  she  had  had  the  promised
continuation  of  the  dream. She  had  noted  as  follows,  directly  on  rising  : —


468


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"Night  of  April  10-11,  1894.  I  dreamed  I  was  in  the  Caffe  Nazionale,
at  the  bridge  of  San  Lorenzo,  and  that  T  was  confused  and  did  not  know  what
to  say  to  the  waiter,  because  I  had  not  a  farthing.  At  that  moment  I  looked
into  the  street  and  saw  an  acquaintance,  Linda  Bigoni,  passing.  I  called,
her,  and  as  she  had  money  she  got  me  out  of  the  difficulty.

"Padua,  April  llth,  1894,  8a.m. M.  Manzini."

I  omit  the  last  half  of  the  preceding  note,  as  it  concerns  another  dream.

We  still  had  not  been  told  on  what  day,  nor  with  certainty  on  what  hour,
the  double  dream  would  be  realised.  On  April  14th  I  went  with  Professor
Faifofer  and  Signor  Faido,  to  see  Sig^^''  Maria,  and  Elvira  manifested.  I
asked  her  if  she  could  possibly  furnish  the  dates.  She  said  she  did  not  know
them,  but  that  she  would  go  and  find  out  if  we  could  wait  a  few  moments.
This  she  did,  and  returned  to  say  that  the  dream  would  be  realised  on  May
30th  following,  between  10  and  11  a.m.

As  Sig"^  Maria  was  seriously  indisposed  at  this  time,  the  manifestations
of  the  different  secondary  personalities  were  very  rare  and  irregular,  and
consequently  I  had  no  opportunity  to  consult  them  about  the  present  pre-
diction. But  on  the  evening  of  May  28t]i,  Elvira  manifested  and  said  she
would  return  the  next  night  to  give  me  further  particulars  about  the  dream.
She  said  it  would  be  realised  on  the  31st  instant.  I  remarked  at  once  that
the  30th  had  been  predicted,  but  she  insisted  on  its  being  the  31st  :  that  she
had  announced  it  for  that  day,  and  she  called  to  witness  the  two  men  who
had  been  present  at  her  communication  of  April  14th.

Next  evening  she  manifested  as  she  had  promised,  but  she  had  little  more
to  add.  She  repeated  the  prediction  in  the  following  terms.  She  did  not
dictate,  but  I  copy  the  note  I  took  the  same  evening,  textually  (consequently
two  days  before  the  fulfilment).  My  note  is  founded  ujjon  notes  taken  on
the  spot,  and  is  therefore  almost  equivalent  to  notes  written  from  dictation.
May  2^th,  5  p.m.

"  Elvira  re-aflirms  that  the  realization  will  take  jjlace  on  the  31st.  In
spite  of  my  notes,  which  indicate  the  30th,  she  is  sure  she  said  the  31st
before  the  two  mm  who  were  present  (Prof.  Faifofer  and  Signor  Faido),  and
says  that  their  testimony  may  be  appealed  to.^  To  my  repeated  question,
she  replied  that  the  time  would  be  10  a.m.

"  I  asked  her  to  tell  me  everything  she  knows.  She  says  that  at  that  hour
M.  will  pass  the  spot,  will  be  hot  and  tired,  and  will  enter  the  CaflFe  and
order  a  glass."

"Q.  Of  what  1

"A.  I  don't  know  ;  I  can  tell  you  to-morrow  night.

"  M.  will  also  eat  a  cake,  and  will  then  look  in  vain  for  her  purse.  She
will  be  annoyed  and  confused,  and  will  think  of  offering  the  waiter  one  of
her  earrings.  She  will  look  out  to  see  if  any  acquaintance  passes.  It  will
be  arranged  that  the  person  she  dreamed  of  shall  pass,  and  M.  will  call
her  in. She  also  will  pay  for  a  glass,  and  they  will  both  laugh  violently."

The  above  is  taken  from  pencil  notes  written  while  Elvira  was  communi-
cating.

May  29th,  6.25  p.m.

1 1  questioned  these  two  gentlemen,  but  they  could  not  remember.


The  Subliminal  Self,


469


Tlie  following  evening  (May  30th),  Elvira  manifested  in  somnambulism
and  told  me  she  had  been  informed  that  M.  would  take  a  glass  of  Marsala,
but  that  she  was  not  certain,  as  M.  might  change  her  mind  at  the  last
moment.

On  the  morning  of  the  31st,  I  arranged  to  witness  the  realization,
unknown  to  Signa-  Maria  and  her  friend,  for  fear  of  interfering  with  the
course  of  events.  Since  April  11th,  when  Sig°''>'  M.  wrote  down  and  repeated  to
me  the  second  part  of  the  dream,  I  had  never  mentioned  the  subject ;  later
on,  it  had  evidently  vanished  from  her  supraliminal  consciousness,  and  she  was
unaware  of  Elvira's  successive  communications,  as  they  had  taken  place  in
somnambulism.

To  avoid  recognition  I  wore  a  coat  of  a  colour  unlike  any  I  habitually
wear,  and  a  hat  of  a  very  common  shape,  which  I  had  not  used  for  several
years.  About  9.30  a.m.  I  went  towards  the  CafFe  Nazionale.  But  as  the
name  of  the  caffe  had  never  been  stated,  and  as  we  had  only  guessed  it
from  topographical  indications,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  there  might
be  some  mistake  about  the  place,  and  that  the  scene  of  action  might
possibly  be  the  Caffi^  dell'  Arena,  which  was  close  by.  I  walked  up  and
down  in  front  o£  the  Caffe  Nazionale  for  some  time,  hoping  to  meet  some
friend  who  would  watch  the  CafFe  dell'  Arena,  but  in  vain.  But  when  I
saw  that  there  were  several  persons  in  the  latter,  I  thought  that  Sig^a
Maria  would  on  that  account  be  unwilling  to  enter  it,  and  I  decided  to  go  to
the  Caffe  Nazionale.  I  seated  myself  at  a  table  in  a  rather  dark  place,  far
from  the  door.

The  two  tables  which  stood  on  each  side  of  the  door,  near  to  the  windows,
were  occupied  ;  one  of  them  by  several  persons  who  were  talking  animatedly.
This  was  an  unfavourable  circumstance,  as  it  might  prevent  Sig"^  Maria
from  entering,  or,  if  she  entered,  she  would  be  obliged  to  sit  far  from  the
windows,  and  so  would  not  see  lier  friend  passing.  I  therefore  concluded
that  if  the  dream  were  to  be  realized,  these  persons  would  sooir  go.  As  a
fact  the  tables  were  both  empty  a  few  minutes  before  ten,  and  only  two  or
tln-ee  people  remained,  farther  back  in  the  room.

Here  is  the  account  of  what  now  occurred.  It  is  based  upon  notes  taken
at  the  time,  and  on  a  more  detailed  account  written  a  few  hours  later.

At  10  precisely  Sig"''''  M.  passed  in  front  of  the  Caffe  walking  rather  fast.
She  was  going  towards  the  Catfe  dell'  Arena,  near  the  bi'idge  of  San  Lorenzo.
She  passed  the  door  of  the  CafFe  Nazionale,  but  just  as  I  was  losing  sight
of  her,  she  turned  suddenly,  as  if  she  had  come  to  a  resolution,  and,
entering  the  CafFe  seated  herself  at  one  of  the  empty  tables  near  the
window.  I  raised  a  newspaper  which  I  had  kept  unfolded  for  the  purpose,
and  hid  myself  behind  it,  pretending  to  read,  though  I  was  really  watching
her  movements  over  the  top  of  it.

She  ordered  a  glass  of  Cyprus  ;  a  cake  was  also  brought  to  her,  but  I  did
not  see  if  she  ate  it,  not  being  able  to  watch  her  continuously.  She  sometimes
glanced  in  my  direction  and  obliged  me  to  hide  my  forehead  and  eyes  behind
the  journal.  Soon  after  she  began  to  feel  behind  her,  and  showed  signs  of
confusion,  blushing  very  much.  She  often  looked  out  of  the  window
impatiently,  and  then  turned  to  look  at  the  room,  but  she  did  not  appear  to
recognise  me  ;  I  took  care  to  let  my  hat  be  seen. It  was,  as  I  said,  of  a


470


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


very  common  shape,  but  quite  unlike  those  I  usually  wore.  She  felt  her
earrings  repeatedly,  ljut  I  could  not  see  whether  she  removed  them.  The
waiter  brought  her  some  illustrated  papers  which  she  opened  and  looked  at
carelessly,  glancing  now  into  the  street  and  again  into  the  room.

If  the  dream  were  to  be  exactly  fulfilled,  the  friend  must  pass  while
Signa  M.  was  looking  out.  At  10.17  Sig"a  Linda  Bigoni  passed  (who  was  the
friend  dreamed  of).

She  walked  fast  in  the  direction  of  the  bridge  of  San  Lorenzo,  towards
the  Gaffe  dell'  Arena.  At  that  moment  Sig°''>'  M.  saw  and  called  her  ;  but
she  refused  to  come  in  and  went  on.  Sig"^'  M.  then  rose  quickly,  went  to
the  door  and  called  her  more  loudly.  Sig"^  Linda,  whom  I  had  lost  sight  of
for  a  moment,  came  back.  They  exchanged  some  words  near  the  door,  but  I
only  heard  distinctly  these  words  of  Sig"'''  Linda's,  ' '  and  if  I  had  not
passed  ?  "  They  re-entered  the  CafFe  directly.  Sig"a  Maria  offered  a  glass
to  her  friend  and  they  then  talked  and  laughed  together,  but  quietly  (not
noisily  as  Elvira  had  said).

At  10.25  Sig"'^  M.  went  out,  ajDparently  because  she  saw  some  one  to  whom
she  wished  to  speak. At  10.26  she  came  in  again.

Soon  after,  seeing  that  SigM  Linda  had  emptied  her  glass,  and  fearing
they  might  leave  before  I  had  time  to  question  them,  I  gave  up  waiting  to
see  if  they  would  laugh  loudly  as  Elvira  had  jjredicted,  and  went  to  sit  close
to  them.

They  seemed  greatly  surprised  to  see  me,  and  gave  me  a  short  account  of
what  I  knew  already.  Sig"a  Maria  said  she  should  never  have  supposed
that  the  person  reading  the  newspaper  was  I,  and  that  she  had  felt  impatient
for  me  and  the  other  two  or  three  people  present  to  go,  so  that  she  might
be  less  ashamed  to  tell  the  waiter  that  she  had  no  money  and  to  leave  some
article  as  a  pledge.

She  said  she  had  thought  of  leaving  an  earring,  only  that  it  would  look  odd
to  go  away  with  one  ;  not  remembering  in  her  confusioji  that  she  cotiJd  put
the  other  in  her  pocket. She  tried  to  take  off  a  ring,  but  it  was  too  tight.

She  seemed  very  much  annoyed  at  not  having  recognised  me,  as  slie
might  have  appealed  to  me,  and  thus  have  spared  herself  some  emotion  and
a  consequent  headache.

She  told  me  she  had  gone  out  that  morning  to  visit  two  customers,  one
of  whom  lived  in  this  neighbourhood  (Via  Noci),  but  that  in  any  case  she
would  have  come  this  way  to-day  on  account  of  other  business.  She  had
not  found  her  clients  at  home,  and  could  have  returned  a  shorter  way  with-
out passing  the  Gaffe  Nazionale,  but  she  wanted  to  see  the  oleographs  in  the
window  of  the  lithographer,  Prosperini,  so  she  turned,  and  first  passed  the
Gaffe  deir  Arena  and  then  the  Gaffe  Nazionale.  She  was  tired  and  warm,  and
when  passing  the  Gaffe  dell'  Arena  had  thought  of  going  in,  but  there  were
too  many  people.  When  she  was  passing  the  Caff^  Nazionale,  the  idea
suddenly  occurred  to  her  again  and  she  entei'ed.  When  I  questioned
Signa  Linda,  she  told  me  she  was  not  in  the  habit  of  passing  through  this
street.  She  had  by  chance  passed  there  also  the  day  before,  about  ten,  but
that  was  the  first  time  for  a  long  period.  Her  reason  for  coming  to-day  was
that  she  had  a  dress  to  make  for  a  lady  who  lived  in  this  direction,  but
farther  on. She  had  chosen  the  morning  for  her  visit  by  pure  chance,  having


The  Subliminal  Self.


471


at  first  decided  to  go  in  the  evening.  But  this  morning  about  nine  she  dis-
covered that  the  trimming  of  the  dress  was  wanting.  She  thought  she
would  go  out  to  buy  it,  and  then  resolved  to  visit  her  customer  about  it  first.
She  even  showed  me  the  pattern  of  the  trimming  she  was  carrying  to  her
client.

She  told  me  she  hardly  ever  carried  money  and  that  it  was  by  pure
chance  again  that  she  happened  to  have  a  lire  with  her,  and  so  was  able  to
render  the  little  service  to  Sig"'"^  Maria.  Yesterday  when  she  passed  she  had
not  even  a  centime.

Signa  Maria  added  that  she  had  had  some  hope  of  seeing  her  doctor  or  her
friend  P.  pass,  because  they  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  that  she  had
never  thought  of  Linda.  When  the  waiter  had  brought  her  the  papers  she
was  much  disturbed,  and  a  sudden  and  permanent  headache  came  on.  She
said  she  had  never  gone  into  a  shop  without  money  before,  and  that  she
would  never  enter  that  Caflfe  again.

As  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  learned  from  the  conversation  of  the
two,  and  as  no  harm  could  now  be  done  by  telling  them,  I  now  informed
them  that  I  had  known  all  about  the  incident  before.  Sig^a-  Maria,  who  was
used  to  such  things,  and  was  still  feeling  annoyance,  was  very  little  surprised  ;
but  it  was  very  different  with  Sig^a  Linda,  who  could  not  understand  how  I
knew  she  would  pass  this  place  at  this  time.  I  jjointed  out  to  them,  how-
ever, that  the  realisation  was  perhaps  not  quite  complete  ;  for  Signa  Maria
ought  to  have  eaten  the  cake,  and  I  had  not  observed  whether  she  had  done
so. But  both  of  them  assured  me  that  she  had.

[I  have  not  related  this  conversation  in  derail  for  the  sake  of  making  my
story  more  amusing,  but  for  the  sake  of  stating  all  the  facts  known  to  me,
which  may  be  useful  when  the  case  comes  to  be  discussed,  and  may  throw
some  light  upon  the  states  of  consciousness  of  the  two  persons,  immediately
after  the  event.]  The  same  day,  at  about  3.30  p.m. ,  I  went  to  see  Signa  Maria,
whom  I  found  in  bed  with  the  headache  which  had  come  on  at  the  Caflfe.  I
stopped  it  by  suggestion  and  hypnotisation.  The  Elvira  personality  profited
by  this  hypnosis  to  manifest  and  ask  if  all  had  happened  as  she  had  pre-
dicted. She  has  a  childish  character,  and  often  causes  misunderstandings
between  us  and  the  other  mediumistic  personalities  ;  she  showed  much  satis-
faction, and  said  "Now  you  see  how  exactly  I  am  able  to  tell  you  things."
gigna  Maria  was  still  slightly  surprised  at  the  occurrence,  but  said  I  must  be
mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  event  had  been  pre-announced  in  some  dream
of  hers  ;  because  she  said  she  did  not  remember  anything  about  it,  though
she  remembered  the  other  dreams  quite  well.

Although  this  amnesia  can  be  easily  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  dream
had  happened  two  months  before,  it  draws  our  attention  to  the  probable
existence  of  a  particular  psychological  problem,  related  to  the  recollection  of
premonitory  communications.  In  fact,  in  the  experiments  with  telepathic
dreams,  in  which  Sign^^  Maria  acted  as  agent,  we  discover  a  striking  tendency
to  amnesia  (for  the  supraliminal  consciousness  of  Sig"^  Maria)  of  the  tele-
pathically  transferred  images.  Therefore  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  try
to  discover  if  anomalies  of  memory  may  not  also  be  present  in  cases  of  pre-
monition, although  these  phenomena  diflfer,  in  so  far  that  in  them  the  subject
apparently  acts  as  percipient  instead  of  agent  ;  in  reality  they  may  be  per-


472


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


fectly  analogous  in  cases  like  the  present,  where  the  premonition  (taking  the
word  in  its  strictest  sense)  may  be  only  apparent,  and  the  realisation  may  be
due  to  telepathic  action  on  the  part  of  the  subject.  Thus  an  accurate  study
of  anomalies  of  memory  may  perhaps  some  day  furnish  us  with  data  for  dis-
tinguishing premonitions  realised  by  the  subject's  supernormal  activity  from
those  (if  such  there  be)  which  are  realised  independently  of  the  subject.

I  remark  in  jjassing  that  in  the  case  of  the  arrival  of  an  unknown  travel-
ler, when  it  was  more  likely  that  Sig"^  Maria  was  percipient,  instead  of  tele-
pathic agent,  she  perfectly  remembered  the  premonition  directly  upon  its
realisation.  In  the  other  cases,  where  the  premonition  occurred  in  somnam-
bulism, followed,  as  a  rule,  by  amnesia,  all  necessary  data  are  wanting.

Taking  into  consideration  the  separate  ^particulars  of  the  premonition
after  its  completion  by  the  last  information  given  by  Elvira  ;  dividing  them
into  two  groups  as  they  were  or  were  not  realisable  or  capable  of  being  known
beforehand  by  the  normal  personality  of  Sig"a  Maria  ;  and  at  the  same  time
separating  such  as  were  realised  from  such  as  were  not,  we  can  epitomise
them  in  the  following  table.  The  particulars  which  were  partly  realised,  or
partly  non-realised,  are  enclosed  between  parenthesis.

Not  realised.

(Order of glass  of

Marsala.)
(Extreme  merriment).


Presence in Caff^  of
other  persons  not  seen
in  dream.

money .

It  is  clear  that  those  particulars  which  were  realised,  and  which  are
placed  in  the  upper  group,  do  not  add  to  the  evidence  for  the  jiremonition  ;
it  is  proved  only  by  those  in  the  second  group.  However  the  table  shows
that  the  particulars  of  the  upper,  invalid  group  had  no  more  tendency  to
complete  realization  than  those  in  the  lower.

Indeed,  if  the  content  of  the  premonition  had  been  more  closely  connected
with  Sig"a  Maria's  normal  activity  than  with  that  of  extraneous  persons,  she
ought  to  have  preferred  Mai'sala  to  Cyjjrus,  and  slie  would  have  laughed  with
her  friend  much  more  openly  than  she  really  did,  But  when  later  I  asked
Sigiia  Maria  if  she  had  hesitated  between  Cyprus  and  something  else,  she


Particulars  which  Sig"^
Maria  might  have  real-
ised, or  have  been
already  acquainted  with
in  a  normal  manner.


Realised.

/The  forgetting  of  the
f  purse.

Impression  of  heat.
Going  into  the  Gaffe.
Ordering  glass,  etc.
Confusion;  idea  of  leav-
ing earring,  liope  that
an  acquaintance  might
pass.
(Merriment).
Aspect  of  waiter.


Particulars  which  Sig"*
M.  could  neither  have
foreknown  nor  realised
in  a  normal  way.


Passing  of  friend,  and
coincidence  that  at  that
moment  M.  was  look-
ing out  of  window.
Accidental  c  i  r  c  u  m  -
stance  that  friend  had


The  Subliminal  Self.


473


said  no,  because  she  generally  took  Cyprus  ;  she  added  (what  I  knew  before)
that  she  did  not  much  like  Marsala.

As  I  before  remarked,  even  the  present  case  does  not  help  to  demonstrate
the  precognition  of  things  altogether  independent  of  the  subject;  the  latter's
subliminal  activity  would  explain  all.  It  may  have  set  in  action  not  only
the  subject  herself,  but  by  means  of  telepathy,  her  friend  also.  The  follow-
ing circumstances  would  seem  to  support  this  hypothesis.

1.  The  first  act  of  the  realisation,  the  forgetting  of  the  purse,  occurred  in
a  state  of  abstraction,  and  a  state  of  abstraction  is  one  of  the  natural  fields  in
which  the  subliminal  activity  displays  itself.

2.  It  was  Sig"5i  Maria's  desire  to  see  the  oleographs  in  Prosperini's
window  which  led  her  to  take  the  way  past  the  Caff^  Nazionale,  and,  as  she
told  me,  this  wish  came  into  her  mind  suddenly.  She  also  declared  that  she
liad  never  felt  the  wish  before,  although  she  was  often  in  the  neighbourhood
and  frequently  passed  Prosj^erini's  shop.  This  is  analogous  to  a  subliminal
impulse.

3.  The  heat  which  Sig"^.  Maria  felt,  and  which  induced  the  wish  to  enter
the  CafF4  dell'  Arena  (she  told  me  afterwards  that  she  was  covered  with  per-
spiration), although  explicable  by  her  rapid  walk,  was  perhaps  exaggerated
when  it  is  remembered  that  the  day  in  question  was  not  very  warm.'^  This
permits  us  to  suspect  that  her  impression  of  heat  and  perspii'ation  may  have
resulted  in  part  from  a  self-suggestion.

4.  The  act  of  entering  the  Gaffe  Nazionale  after  having  renounced  the
idea  of  entering  the  Caffe  dell'  Arena  was  performed  without  premeditation,
because  in  the  first  place  Sig^a  Maria  explained  that  after  she  had  passed
the  Gaffe  dell'  Arena  she  did  not  remember  that  there  was  another  Gaffe  a
little  farther  on  ;  she  had  forgotten  its  existence  ;  and  also  because,  as  I
myself  remarked,  she  seemed,  when  entering  the  place,  to  be  yielding  to  a
sudden  impulse,  which  recalls  so-called  automatic  actions  determined  by
subliminal  stimuli.

5.  Sig^^  Linda  was  not  induced  to  leave  her  house  and  walk  past  the  Gaffe
by  any  reason  clearly  independent  of  presumable  telepathic  action,  but
rather  by  an  impulse  which  sprang  up  with  the  apparent  spontaneity  which
often  accompanies  telepathic  impulses.

But  on  the  other  hand  we  have  two  circumstances  which  appear  to  con-
tradict the  hypothesis  that  the  realisation  was  determined  telepathicallj'  by
the  subject.

1.  Although  the  passing  of  Sig"^  Linda  may  be  attributed  to  telepathic
action,  it  is  very  difiicult  not  to  see  a  determining  cause  in  the  circum-
stances which  preceded  her  action  (i.e.,  the  commission  to  make  a  dress
for  a  lady  in  the  neighbourhood),  or,  at  the  least,  an  almost  necessary
auxiliary,  to  the  telepathic  action  ;  and  it  is  still  more  difiicult  to  suppose
that  these  very  circumstances  should  have  been  the  outcome  of  a  sub-
consciously elaborated  plan  carried  out  by  telepathic  action  on  the  part  of
Signa  Maria.

^  On  the  31st  May,  1894,  the  Astronomical  Observatory  of  Padua  registered  a  tern
perature  of  18'6deg.  (Celsius)  at  9  a.m.  ;  and  21'0deg.  at  3  p.m.


474}


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


2.  As  I  remai'ked  before,  the  particulars  of  the  premonition  directly
realisable  by  Signa-  Maria  did  not  show  any  tendency  to  be  fulfilled  with
greater  precision  than  those  which  depended  on  the  action  of  a  person  un-
concerned in  the  matter.

Observe  that  May  30th  and  31st,  the  two  days  between  which
Elvira  hesitated,  were  both  of  them  days  on  which  Signs'  Linda  actually
passed  the  cafe  in  question.

P.  212.

Premonitory  dream  of  the  visit  of  a  commercial  traveller  who  asked  for  a
subscription  to  a  novel. Percipient,  Maria  Manzini.

Signorina  Maria  Manzini  at  my  request,  kept  an  account  of  the  dreams
which  occurred  in  her  ordinary  sleej).  Some  were  remembered  spon-
taneously in  the  morning  and  some  in  her  next  somnambulic  state.  In  the
latter  case  I  suggested  to  her  that  she  should  remember  and  record  them
after  waking.

I  think  the  following  case  was  remembered  in  somnambulism,  but  this  is
of  no  consequence,  because  Sig"*  Maria,  following  my  advice,  recorded  not
only  the  date  of  dreams,  but  also  the  date  and  the  hour  when  she  wrote
them  down.  In  any  case  the  present  dream  was  recorded  before  its  fulfil-
ment.

This  is  what  I  find  in  the  record  of  Sig"*  Maria's  dreams  : —
"Night  of  March  26th -27th,  1894."

"  I  dreamt  that  the  door  bell  rang  on  the  S.  Pietro  side  of  the  house. ^  I
went  to  open  and  found  a  tall  man  about  forty  years  old,  with  greyish
trousers  and  a  darker  overcoat.  He  was  very  polite,  and  asked  if  I  would
subscribe  to  the  issue  of  a  novel,  saying  that  afterwards  I  should  have  a
pair  of  earrings  as  a  prize.  I  said  no,  because  I  thought  it  was  an  impos-
ture."

March  27th,  1894,  11  p.m.

I  did  not  read  the  account  of  this  dream  till  after  its  realization,  but  am
perfectly  certain  that  Sig"'''-  Maria  told  it  to  me  directly,  and  I  also  dis-
tinctly recollect  that  when  Sig"^  Maria  related  the  realization  a  few  days
later,  she  said  I  ought  to  remember  her  preceding  dream  ;  and  I  remember
also  that  I  not  only  recalled  it,  but  that  I  looked  at  once  at  the  record  to  see
if  it  had  been  written  down  according  to  rule.  I  found  that  it  was  correct
and  that  it  agreed  with  the  viva  voce  story.  Besides  though  Sig"a  Maria  may
not  always  be  diligent  in  recording  dreams  she  hardly  remembers,  she  is
very  careful  to  put  the  exact  date,  and  is  therefore  quite  certain  that  the
dream  occurred  either  in  the  night  of  March  26th-27tli,  or  at  most  (suppos-
ing the  case  to  have  been  complicated  by  a  paramnesia  which  displaced
the  dream  in  time)  on  March  27th,  at  9  p.m.  ;  about  which  time,  as  can  be
seen  from  my  journal  of  the  somnambulic  experiments,  Sig"^  Maria  was  in
somnambulism  in  my  presence.  ■  •

1  Signa  Maria's  house  has  two  doors,  one  in  the  Via  S.  Pietro,  and  the  other
turned  towards  the  river  Bacohiglione.  ,  ■


The  Subliminal  Self.


473


On  the  evening  of  March  31st,  i.e.  four  days  after  the  droam,  Signa  M.
told  me  that  on  that  day  about  3  p.m.  the  visit  of  which  she  had  dreamed  had
taken  place.  Everything  coincided  ;  the  entrance  of  the  person  by  the  door
towards  S.  Pietro,  his  age,  his  insinuating  manners,  the  colour  of  his
trousers  and  overcoat,  and  the  object  of  his  visit.

I  called  her  mother,  and  asked  her  to  describe  the  visit  with  all  possible
details  ;  meanwhile  I  took  the  following  notes  :  ' '  The  person  came  twice  ;
the  first  time  about  11  a.m.,  when  Maria  was  out.  Signora  A.nnetta  (her
mother)  was  alone  in  the  house.  The  visitor  had  very  pleasant  manners,
and  was  about  thirty-five  years  old  (Signa  Maria  thought  forty).  He  had
a  box  covered  with  black  cloth  with  him,  such  as  is  used  by  commercial
travellers.  He  said  he  came  to  show  them  a  novelty.  In  order  to  get  rid
of  him,  Signora  Annetta  said  that  Sig7iorina  Maria  was  not  at  home  ;  he
replied  that  he  would  return,  and  Signora  Annetta  told  him  to  come  at  2  p.m.
At  2  p.m.  he  returned  and  rang  at  the  door  on  the  S.  Pietro  side.  Signora
Annetta  opened  to  him,  and  says  that  when  he  entered  the  room  Maria
seemed  much  astonished  (Maria  said  at  once  that  she  was  astonished  at
recognising  him).  He  proposed  that  they  should  subscribe  to  the  issue  of
a  novel  ;  there  were  to  be  prizes  when  the  issue  was  finished  ;  two  pictures,
or  a  small  organ,  or  a  pair  of  earrings.  In  his  box  were  the  organ  and  an
alarum,  as  samples,  and  he  had  with  him,  but  not  in  the  box,  samples  of
the  earrings,  of  the  frames,  and  two  oleographs  between  pasteboards.

Luigia  Monti  and  Linda  Bigoni  were  also  present.  Maria  refused  the
offers.  When  they  and  the  man  were  gone,  Maria  remarked  with  surprise
that  she  had  already  dreamt  of  the  scene  with  all  its  details,  i.e.,  as  far  as
the  man  was  concerned.  Signora  Annetta  added  that  from  girlhood  she
also  had  frequently  dreamed  of  coming  events.

March  31st  1894,  9.30  p.m.  (written  in  the  presence  of  Annetta  and
Maria).  It  was  necessary  to  prove  two  things,  before  the  case  could  be
supposed  to  be  evidential.  First,  that  the  visit  was  real,  and  not  an  odd
hallucination  of  the  senses  or  memory,  and  secondly,  that  the  man  had  not
made  the  tour  of  Padua,  offering  his  merchandise,  many  days  before  the
dream  ;  in  which  case  Sig^^  Maria  might  have  become  aware  of  it  in  some
way  or  other,  and  thus  have  originated  the  dream  herself.

In  order  to  clear  up  the  first  point,  I  went  on  the  following  day  (April  1st,
about  6.30)  to  see  Sig"a  Linda  Bigoni  and  asked  her  to  tell  me  all  about  the
visit  at  which  she  had  been  present.  She  replied  that  she  had  gone  to  see
Maria  the  day  before,  about  2.30,  while  the  man  was  there,  and  she  con-
firmed all  the  details  about  the  object  of  his  visit,  his  remarks,  the  things
he  had  with  him,  his  politeness,  his  age,  and  the  colour  of  his  clothes.
He  had  made  the  same  proposition  to  her  as  to  Maria.  As  she  had  arrived
after  him,  she  could  not  say  by  which  door  lie  had  entered  ;  but  she  said
he  had  left  before  her,  and  had  gone  out  by  the  kitchen  door,  towards
the  river.  On  being  questioned,  she  replied  that  she  had  not  seen  Sigia
Maria  since  the  visit.  Before  leaving  her,  I  requested  her,  if  the  man
should  come  to  her  house,  or  if  she  should  meet  him  in  the  street,  to  ask
him  on  what  day  he  had  come  to  Padua  ;  which  she  promised  to  do.

The  same  evening  I  went  back  to  Sig^^  Maria  and  before  telling  her  of
my  talk  with  Signorina  Linda,  I  questioned  her  and  her  mother  again.


476


F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers.


Signoiina  Maria  said  she  did  not  remember  by  which  door  the  man  had
gone  out,  or  rather,  she  had  paid  no  attention,  but  her  mother  said  she  was
certain  that  he  had  gone  out  by  the  kitchen  door,  because  he  had  seen  some
one  enter  tliac  way,  and  on  leaving  had  said  tliat  as  there  was  a  door  there
also  he  would  go  out  by  it.  The  mother  did  not  know  however  whether  he
or  Signorina  Linda  B.  had  left  fii'st,  but  Signorina  Maria  was  sure  he  had
gone  away  first,  because  afterwards  she  had  continued  her  conversation  with
Signorina  Linda  about  their  own  afiairs,  and  this  conversation,  begun  before
he  left,  had  prevented  her  noticing  by  which  door  he  quitted  the  house.

Both  then  said  they  remembered  Signorina  Linda  B.'s  coming  at  about
2.30  while  the  man  was  there,  and  that  he  had  come  before  2  and  stayed
nearly  an  hour.

Thus  all  the  testimony  is  in  accordance,  and  no  doubt  remains  that  the
event  with  all  its  details  really  liappened.

On  the  evening  of  April  18th,  Sig"^  Maria  told  me  that  her  friend,
Sigiia  Linda  B.,  had  something  to  tell  me,  but  in  order  to  keep  her  promise
she  would  tell  it  only  to  me.  Signorina  Maria  said  that  Linda  B.  was  coming
to  see  her  on  the  morrow,  when  I  could  meet  her.

The  following  day  (April  19th)  I  went  to  see  yi'ig^^  Maria  at  the  time
fixed,  and  found  Linda  B.  at  the  house.  The  latter  told  me  she  had  met  the
man  in  the  street  ;  that  he  had  recognised  her  and  had  renewed  his  offer.
She  took  advantage  of  this  to  ask  him  when  he  had  arrived  in  Padua,  and
he  said  he  had  come  on  March  29th,  and  tliat  he  had  not  visited  Padua
before  for  several  years.

This  proves  that  the  dream  occurred  two  days  before  the  arrival  of  the
person  implicated,  and  that  consequently  it  could  not  have  resulted  from  a
mere  sensorial  impression  of  Signorina  Maria's.

Of  such  a  type  as  this ;—  gradually  evolved,  slightly  inexact,  and
altogether  trivial, — are  all  the  predictions  given  through  Jllvira.  I
do  not  think,  however,  that  their  triviality  affords  in  itself  any  clear
indication  as  to  their  origin.  They  are  the  attempts  of  an  intelligence
which,  whether  embodied  or  unembodied,  is  not  much  above  a  child's
level,  to  prove  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance, — namely,  the  possibility
of  foreseeing  future  events.  In  comparison  with  the  value  of  the  result
thus  aimed  at,  the  actual  incidents  by  which  it  may  be  attained  matter
little.  It  is  of  greater  interest  to  have  a  pedlar's  visit  foretold,  if  only
that  visit  could  not  have  been  foreseen  by  any  ordinary  intelligence,
than  to  have,  say,  a  death  foretold,  if  we  suspect  that  that  more  impres-
sive prophecy  may  have  helped  to  work  its  own  fulfilment.

Since  Dr.  Ermacora's  cases  were  in  our  hands  he  has  published  in
the  Eivista  di  Studi  Psichici  for  July,  1895,  a  curiously  parallel  series
of  trifling  telepathic  incidents,  mixed  with  premonition,  obtained
through  automatic  writing  by  Signer  M.  Bonatti,  a  painter  known  to
him.  This  case,  of  which  I  here  print  a  partial  translation,  tends,  as
far  as  it  goes,  to  show  that  the  secondary  personality  in  those  other
cases  is  probably  identical  with  Maria  Manzini  herself.


The  Subliminal  Self.


477


P.  245.

Telepathic  Perceptions  hy  means  of  Automatic  Writing.

By  M.  Bonatti.
Translated  from  the  Bivista  di  Studi  Psichici,  July,  1895.

I  began  to  write  automatically  with  the  hand  of  a  medium  resting  on  mine,
but  soon  I  was  able  to  write  alone.  The  conmiunications  were  at  first  of  a
spirituaUstic  character,  and  the  writing  was  a  fair  imitation  of  that  of  the
defunct  who  appeared  to  be  present,  and  whom  I  had  known  in  life.
However,  I  was  acquamted  with  their  writing.  I  was  generally  advised  to
work  and  study  much  ;  my  counsellor  was  interested  in  my  moral  life,  and
was  a  more  attentive  friend  than  any  I  have  found  in  flesh  and  blood.  Soon
after  I  was  obsessed  by  a  lying  and  frivolous,  but  not  wicked,  personality,
who  displayed  a  great  passion  for  art.  This  personality  was  only  useful  to  me
on  that  point,  giving  me  advice,  and,  by  means  of  automatic  drawing,  greatly
developing  my  memory  of  drawing  and  powers  of  conception.  I  did  not
write  for  several  months,  in  order  to  free  myself  of  this  obsession.  Mean-
while I  enlarged  my  knowledge  of  psychical  matters  ;  and  when  I  began  to
write  again  I  succeeded  in  convincmg  the  communicating  personality  that  it
might  be  an  emanation  from  my  own  subconscious  self.  After  this  it  called
itself  my  Secondo.

I  examined  this  Secondo  to  see  if  it  possessed  any  supernormal  powers,
and  discovered  some.  It  continued  to  give  me  useful  advice,  and  strengthened
my  love  of  art.

When  I  write  automatically  I  do  not  know  what  the  communication  will
be  ;  sometimes  I  guess  after  a  few  words,  but  I  often  guess  ^vrongly,  and
write  something  altogether  unlike  my  guess.

I  enjoy  perfectly  good  health,  and  am  able  to  endure  constant  outdoor
exercise  without  fatigue.  A  s  far  as  I  know,  I  am  psychically  normal.  I  retain
all  my  normal  faculties  when  writing  automatically.

[Signor  Bonatti  begins  by  giving  an  account  of  telepathic  communications
transmitted  to  him  by  sleeping  and  dreaming  persons  at  a  greater  or  less
distance,  and  revealed  in  automatic  writing.  We  then  come  to  monitions  of
actual  or  impending  events.]

The  following  is  copied  from  my  journal.

October  lUh,  1892,  7.30  p.m.

I  write  "Go  to  Pedrocehi's,  because  M.  O.  is  there."

I  wanted  to  see  my  friend  M.  O.,  whom  I  find  in  the  evening  at  the  Cafi"^
Pedrocchi,  except  on  certain  fixed  evenings  when  he  cannot  come.  This  was
one  of  these  evenings.  I  went  and  found  my  friend,  who  had  been
unexpectedly  liberated  from  his  engagement.

October  21st,  7.30  p.m.

I  write,  "  M.  O.  is  now  mentioning  your  name  to  Sig^a  R. "  Two  hours
after  I  meet  M.  0.,  who  says  he  spoke  of  me  to  Sigia  R.  about  7.30,  apropos
of  a  letter  which  he  had  received  that  evening,  and  which  contamed  a
reference  to  me.  I  had  not  seen  him  all  the  day,  knew  nothing  of  the  letter,
nor  that  he  was  with  Sigiia  R.  when  I  was  writing.

2  M


478


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


-^owember  2nc7,  4  p.m.  •
I  write,  "Ermacora  has  arrived  by  the  tramway."  I  knew  that  Dr.
Ermacora  had  left  Padua  this  morning  and  that  he  would  return  during  the
day,  but  I  did  not  know  where  he  was  going,  nor  when  the  trains  came  in.
This  evening  Dr.  Ermacora  told  me  that  he  came  from  the  station  by
tramway,  and  that  he  got  off  it  about  4  p.  m.  in  the  Piazza  Garibaldi.  I  had
not  left  my  study  for  many  hours,  and  no  one  who  could  have  seen  Dr.
Ermacora  arrive  had  been  to  see  me.  I  cannot  hear  the  tramway  nor  see
the  Piazza  Garibaldi  from  my  study,  and  there  are  no  windows  on  the  street,
through  which  I  could  have  heard  anything.

February  20th,  1893.  . '  '

I  write,  "  X.  has  received  the  money  from  C.  I."

I  wrote  this  communication,  which  much  interested  me,  two  days  after
had  received  the  money.  I  had  had  no  information,  and  no  conversation  with
X. ,  with  whom  I  had  disagreed,  and  who  had  reasons  for  keeping  silence,  as
he  wished  to  retain  the  part  of  the  money  which  should  have  come  to  me.  I
had  been  long  awaiting  the  payment  of  this  debt,  but  I  could  not  even
approximately  guess  that  C.  I.  would  pay  it  just  then.

February  26th,  1  p.m.

I  write,  "I  am  poisoning  myself.  Think  of  me."  The  writing  begins
with  a  name  I  cannot  decipher,  but  which  I  guess.

March  19th. — To-day  a  friend  of  the  person  whose  name  I  guessed  told  me
spontaneously  that  that  person  had  attempted  to  poison  herself  several  days
ago.  On  the  26th,  when  I  had  the  communication,  she  was  at  Bologna,  and
made  the  attempt  later  at  Rovigo.  I  do  not  know  if  it  was  the  first  attempt,
nor,  if  it  was  so,  whether  she  had  decided  to  do  it  when  I  wrote.  T  had  no
reason  to  suppose  that  A.  G.  would  wish  to  take  her  own  life.  Unfortunately
I  have  had  no  more  communications  from  her  which  might  have  given  me
more  details.

March  13th.— 1  write,  "Shall  come  to  you  before  Saturday  to  pay  you.
M.  and  S."

[March  22nd,  I  learned  to-day  that  M.  and  S.  could  have  paid  me  before
the  term  fixed  by  the  communication,  as  they  had  received  the  money,  part
of  which  was  owing  to  me,  before  that  date.  I  had  had  no  reason  to  suppose
they  could  have  been  in  a  position  to  pay  me  before  ;— could  not  even  have
guessed  it.]

March  17th.— I  write,  "  Run  to  the  Club.  Go."  I  have  not  been  to  the
Club  for  more  than  a  month,  and  intended  to  go  to  bed  at  once.  My  friend,
A.  L.,  who  rarely  goes  to  the  Club,  had  this  evening  assisted  at  a  conference
on  Guido  Bonatti.  Association  of  ideas  made  him  think  of  me,  and  he  went
to  the  Club  believing  he  would  find  me  there.  I  obeyed  the  telepathic  order,
and  thus  discovered  what  had  caused  it.

March  20t/i.— The  automatic  writiirg  confirmed  the  communication  of  the
13th  inst.  [As  I  have  written  above,  I  only  discovered  the  truth  on  the  22nd
inst.]

March  25th.— The  automatic  writing  tells  me  about  the  money  of  which  I
■wrote  on  the  13th  and  20th  insts. I  understand  that  I  shall  be  paid  on


The  Suhliminal  Self.


479


Tuesday.  I  wrote  to  R. ,  one  of  the  persons  concerned,  on  the  27th,  hoping
to  be  paid  through  his  intervention.  He  replied  the  same  day,  ' '  I  am  still
unwell,  and  to-morrow  [Tuesday]  T  must  go  out  of  town."  [So  that  he  could
not  pay  before  Wednesday.]

Instead  of  this,  he  did  not  go  out  of  tovm  on  Tuesday,  but  came  on  that
day  to  pay  me,  as  the  communication  had  foretold.

March  28th,  10  a.m. — I  write,  "You  will  receive  a  visit  shortly."  Twenty
minutes  later  I  had  a  visitor.  At  that  time  of  day  I  receive  nobody  uninvited,
and  this  visit  was  quite  unexpected.

March  28th,  Tuesday. — -To-day  I  wrote  that  a  person  would  come  on
Saturday,  bringing  money  from  X.

April  1st,  Saturday.  — This  evening  the  automatic  writing  told  me  that  R.
•liad  been  looking  for  me  at  4.30,  to  give  me  "  Carte  valori,  40  Lire."

Several  days  later  I  learned  that  R.  was  really  looking  for  me  on  Saturday
at  4.30,  to  give  me  money.  He  had  only  20  lire  with  him,  but  had  hoped  at
first  to  give  me  40.  I  think  I  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  R.  would  pay  me
40  lire,  neither  more  nor  less.

April  7th,  5.45  p.m. — I  wrote,  "Girls  will  come  to  the  studio  to-day.
They  will  visit  you."

6. 15  13. m. — A  gii'l  has  just  come,  as  I  was  going  out.  She  had  decided
just  before  to  come  and  ask  me  for  some  information.  Contrary  to  my  habit
I  had  remained  longer  in  my  studio.  Generally  nobody  comes  after  five,  as  I
leave  at  that  hour.

Mcty  8th. Morning. — A  communication  partly  illegible. "You  will

receive . . . Ang  Go  to-day,  which  will  tell  you  about  M.,

because  she  has  been  talking  to  him. "

Ang  Go  is  at  Venice. Many  days  ago  I  had  charged  her  to  say

certain  things  to  M.  if  she  met  him. He  lives  at  Venice. On  this  evening

(the  8th)  I  received  a  card  from  Ang  Go  ,  relating  her  conversation  with

M.  whom  she  had  met  by  chance.  After  the  "You  will  receive  to-day "  in
the  automatic  writing,  there  are  several  attempts  at  a  word.  Now  I  know  all
about  it,  I  can  see  that  the  word  is  meant  for  "postcard."

MayWth. — Several  unimportant  things.  "We  shall  meet  to-morrow.  I
shall  come  to  you  at  (not  clear  whether  9.30  or  11)  and  will  stop  till  one."
Communication  begins  with  the  name  of  G  N  .

May  17th. — Before  I  wrote  yesterday,  G  N  had  told  me  she  could

not  come  to  me  to-day.  However,  she  came  at  11,  and  at  once  told  me  she
could  only  stay  till  one. She  generally  stops  till  2.30  or  3.

February  5th,  1894.  Venice — (I  lived  at  Padua  while  receiving  the
previous  communications).  The  automatic  writing  informs  me  that  my
mother  at  Padua  has  had  something  the  matter  with  her  hand.  [About
twenty  days  later  I  verified  this. No  one  had  told  me  of  it.  ]

Febrna?-y  5th.  Venice.  —  "You  will  have  a  letter  to-morrow."  Having
just  written  the  above  information  about  my  mother,  I  understand  that  the
letter  will  be  from  her.

On  the  18th  inst.  I  again  wi-ote  that  my  mother  was  suffering  from  her
hand. I  had  not  yet  verified  the  communication  of  the  5th. After  writing,

2  M  2


480


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


my  hand  automatically  turned  over  the  leaves  of  my  writing  book  till  the
above  communication  about  the  letter  came  under  my  eyes.  I  had  paid  no
attention  to  it  at  the  time,  and  now  looked  over  my  mother's  letters.  I  found
one  with  the  po.stal  stamp,  "Padua,  5th  February,  1894,  5  p.m. — Venice,
5th  February,  1894,  7  p.m."  I  certainly  received  it  on  the  morning  of  the
6th,  as  I  never  get  letters  in  the  evening.

Unfortunately  I  have  not  kept  all  the  original  writings  before  January,
1893,  I  have  jjreserved  only  those  which  were  verified.  This  is  due  to  my
then  inexjjerience,  for  I  thought  it  useless  to  preserve  unverifiable  com-
munications. I  remember  that  till  January,  1893,  false  communications  were
rare,  and  the  unverifiable  ones  were  numerous.

From  the  beginning  of  1893  till  February  5th,  1894,  against  twenty-seven
communications  verified,  I  have  recorded  eight  false  ones,  eighteen  which  I
could  not  verify,  five  which  were  wholly  or  partly  correct,  but  where  I  am
not  certain  that  the  information  may  not  have  reached  me  in  some  normal  but
unnoticed  manner,  and  two  which  were  correct  but  not  exact.

I  reckon  that  from  October,  1892,  till  January,  1893,  there  may  have  been
five  false  announcements.  Thus  there  may  have  been  altogether  thirteen
false  communications.

I  conclude  from  my  personal  experiences  that  the  principal  cause  of
failure  is  the  intervention  of  the  normal  consciousness,  which  occurs  most
easily  when  the  writing  is  slow  and  illegible,  or  when  the  communication  is
desired.  I  do  not  remember  ever  having  received  a  truthful  message  when  I
wished  for  it.  The  true  telepathic  cases  were  always  spoiitaneous,  and
improved  by  the  exercise  of  the  faculty.  A  true  message  was  nearly  always
followed  by  other  true  ones  ;  then  came  a  false  one,  which  caused  discourage-
ment, and  initiated  an  annoying  series  of  falsehoods,  till  another  success
restored  confidence.

I  have  observed  that  confidence  is  the  best  condition  for  obtaining
psychical  phenomena.

Signor  Bonatti  is  a  friend  of  Dr.  Ermacora,  who  has  been  sometimes
present  when  he  was  writing  automatically  ;  on  one  or  two  occasions  when
the  writing  was  of  telepathic  origin.  Signor  Bonatti  cannot  obtain  much
confirmation,  partly  on  account  of  the  lapse  of  time,  and  partly  because  the
supposed  agents  are  jjersons  whom  he  has  lost  sight  of.  In  the  case  of
November  2nd,  Dr.  Ermacora  well  remembers  that  on  the  same  evening^
Signor  Bonatti  asked  him  if  he  had  really  arrived  at  the  hour  mentioned,
and  that  he  had  done  so.  Signor  Bonatti  did  not  at  first  recognise  the
impoi-tance  of  controlling  his  experiences,  and  was  perhaps  afraid  of  exciting
the  derision  of  the  persons  concerned.  He  has  however  kept  and  sent  the  two
letters  concerning  the  cases  of  March  25th  and  May  8th,  1893,  which  are
partly  translated  below.  The  second,  though  dated  May  7th,  was  really
posted  at  Venice  on  the  8th,  as  the  post-mark  proves. First  letter  : — •

Deab  Angelo, — X.  wrote  me  yesterday  that  you  have  received  my  part
for  the  woi'k  for  the  Salon.  I  hope  you  are  better.  I  only  heard  yesterday
that  you  were  ill. Pardon  my  troubling  you. — Yours  affectionately,

M.  [Bonatti.]

1  This  phrase  is  thus  corrected  by  Dr.  Ermacora,  after  reference  to  his  notes,  from
the  Italian  account.


The  Subliminal  Self.


481


March  27th  (?),  1893.
Second  letter. Reply  : —

Dear  M.  [Bonatti], — I  am  still  unwell,  but  must  go  out  of  tovm  to-
morrow. Manzoni  came  just  now,  and  gave  me  90  lire  for  you  ;  that  is  the
last  which  the  Ignoranti  destined  for  me.  I  cannot  go  to  M. 's  before
Wednesday,  and  will  come  to  your  study  on  Wednesday  afternoon  and  hand
you  the  90  lire.  Aisgelo.

(This  reply  was  written  in  pencil  on  the  back  of  the  first  letter).

Third  letter  :—

Venice,  Maij  7th,  1893.

I  found  M.  and  told  him  what  you  charged  me  to  say.  He  told  me  he  had
written  to  you  before  leaving,  and  that  he  would  wi-ite  again  and  send  you  his
portrait.— Yours,  A^GELmx.

(Post-mark  Venice,  May  8th).

In  the  cases  thus  far  quoted  there  has  been  some  ground  for
supposing  that  the  prediction  came  either  from  the  percipient's  own
mind,  or  from  some  other  incarnate  mind,  or  from  a  mind  which,  even
if  unembodied,  is  scarcely  distinguishable  from  the  percipient's  own.  I
proceed  to  a  few  cases  where  the  warning  seems  attributable  to  some
recognised  discarnate  spirit.

And  here  I  would  begin  by  referring  the  reader  to  the  cases
published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  170,  under  the  title  of
"  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge  on  the  part  of
Phantasms  of  the  Dead."

If  the  departed  do  indeed  in  some,  perhaps  relatively  rare,  cases
preserve  a  certain  power  of  following  the  earthly  career  of  those  dear  to
them  (and  we  have  little  evidence  of  a  knowledge  on  their  part  wider
than  this),  then  it  is  probable  that  they  will  foresee  both  some  events
which  we  on  earth  can  foresee,  and  some  which  we  cannot.  In  the
paper  just  referred  to,  cases  G  213,  214,  215,  216,  219,  and  221  (a
collective  case)  suggest  a  departed  friend  foretelling  an  approaching
death, — usually  a  death  already  recognised  as  imminent  by  observers  on
earth.

In  another  case  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  349),  where  warnings
were  given  as  to  the  dangers  run  by  a  secret  conspirator,  no  precognition,
properly  speaking,  was  needed,  but  only  a  knowledge  of  the  young
man's  actual  rashness.  So,  again,  in  the  following  narrative,  a
knowledge,  on  the  part  of  a  deceased  person,  of  the  concealed  inten-
tions of  the  Bank  Managers  would  be  enough  to  prompt  the  warning.

P.  331.

[This  case  is  virtually  made  first  hand  by  Dr.  Hastings'  letter.]
The  following  story  was  told  me  by  Miss  Graham  herself,  also  told  by
her  to  Professor  Barrett,  who  met  her  at  our  house. She  was  an  American


482


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


M.D.,  a  woman  between  30  and  40  years  of  age,  in  full  vigour  of  practical
life,  whose  perfect  healthfulness  of  mind  and  body  impressed  all  who  met
her.  No  one  could  have  been  less  of  a  visionary.  Descended  from  a  line  of
medical  ancestors,  she  was  a  marked  instance  of  hereditary  tendency.  As
soon  as  she  learned  to  write  her  name  she  added  M.D.  to  it,  and  in  her
childish  play  was  always  either  doctor  or  nurse  to  her  playmates.  Her
father  was  unable  to  give  her  a  medical  education,  and  possibly  unwilling
also,  but  she  took  this  matter  into  her  own  hands.  Beginning  as  a  teacher
in  a  school,  she  went  on  as  nurse  in  an  insane  asylum,  and  then  to  make
money  faster,  learnt  book-keeping,  and  went  as  clerk  in  a  merchant's  office,
where  she  worked  steadily  for  eight  years,  until  she  had  saved  enough
for  her  college  career,  through  which  she  passed  with  extraordinary
success.

She  had  put  these  precious  savings  into  a  bank  in  Boston  started  on
philanthropic  principles,  to  give  good  interest  to  women.  There  was  no
suspicion  about  the  bank,  guaranteed  as  it  was  by  well-known  names.  But
one  morning  Miss  Graham  woke  hearing  a  voice  say,  "Miss  Graham,  take
your  money  out  of  the  Bank."  Going  to  sleep  again,  she  woke  in  the  morn-
ing inclined  to  treat  it  as  a  dream.  She  quite  believed  in  these  voices,  from
frequent  experience,  but  came  within  a  recent  legal  definition  of  sanity,  by  not
obeying  th  ir  suggestions  unless  otherwise  commending  themselves  to  her
Judgment.  Accordingly,  instead  of  going  to  the  bank,  she  fulfilled  an  engage-
ment in  another  part  of  the  town  with  her  dressmaker.  Here  she  was  obliged
to  wait,  finding  herself  in  the  same  room  with  another  lady  who  seemed  deter-
mined to  talk  to  her.  Rather  impatient  at  being  delayed.  Miss  Graham
was  not  socially  inclined,  till  the  stranger  suddenly  asked,  "Do  you
know  anything  of  Howe's  Bank  1 "  When  she  rejDlied  with  interest,
"Only  that  I  have  an  account  there."  Her  interest  deepened  as  the  lady
proceeded  to  give  details  about  the  unsafe  situation  of  the  bank,  with  which
her  husband  was  connected,  winding  up  with  saying,  "I  felt  compelled,
almost  against  my  will,  to  tell  you  all  this,  and  must  beg  you  to  say  nothing
about  it  for  a  few  weeks."

Miss  Graham  decided  that  she  would  lose  no  time  in  making  herself  safe,
and  only  just  succeeded  in  going  home  for  her  bank-book,  and  drawing  out
her  deposit,  before  the  hour  for  closing.  The  bank  stopped  on  the  follotvmg
day.

The  labours  of  10  years  would  have  gone  for  nothing  without  this  timely
warning.

Twice  during  her  woriv  at  a  London  hospital.  Miss  Graham  heard  the
voice.  One  night  she  had  gone  to  her  lodgings  utterly  wearied  out,  and  just
as  she  laid  her  head  on  the  pillow,  she  heard  the  voice  "Mary  Graham,
such  and  such  a  case  (describing  it  accurately)  has  just  entered  the  hospital."
Miss  Graham  had  gone  straight  from  the  hospital  to  her  lodgings, and  had  left
no  such  a  case,  one  so  rare  that  she  had  never  met  with  it  in  any  previous
experience.  She  was,  moreover,  so  worn  out  that  she  went  to  sleep.  Tnan
hour  or  so  afterwards,  she  was  awakened  by  the  voice  repeating  the  informa-
tion. Being  somewhat  rested,  she  rose,  and  on  arriving  at  the  hosj^ital
found  the  case  at  the  most  critical  stage.  It  had  come  in  shortly  after  slie
left  the  hospital.


The  Subliminal  Self.


483


On  another  occasion  she  was  unable  to  obey  the  voice,  and  on  reaching
the  hospital,  found  she  had  just  missed  another  case  of  extreme  interest.

These  cases  seem  worth  recording,  and  I  give  them  as  they  were  related
to  us  by  Miss  Graham  herself.

September  3rd,  1883.  Annie  E.  Ridley.

Boston,  December  13th,  1883.

Regarding  the  Howe  Bank.  First  let  me  say  that  Mrs.  Julia  Ward
Howe  was  never  in  any  way  connected  with  that  Institution.  The  Mrs.
Howe  who  was,  is  now  in  jail,  and  I  have  the  sympathy  for  her  to  believe  that
she  did  not  mean  to  cheat  any  one,  but  her  brain  and  mathematics  were  not
sufficient  to  show  her  that  there  must  be  an  end  of  her  operations,  and  that
some  one  must  suffer  in  that  end.  With  others  I  got  into  the  affair.  I  was
one  of  the  late  comers,  so  that  I  had  received  no  interest.  All  rliad  put  in  I
consequently  lost.  I  went  with  Dr.  Graham  when  she  drew  her  money,  and
might  have  taken  mine,  but  did  not.  She  believed  she  had  had  a  warning  from
her  mother.  Nothing  of  the  kind  had  ever  come  to  me.  It  is  hard  for  me
to  believe  evil  intentions  on  the  part  of  any  one  with  whom  I  have  dealings,
so  I  trusted  the  managers,  and  lost.

The  voice  which  Dr.  Graham  heard  saying,  "For  a  little  while  only,"
was  not  during  her  sickness,  but  just  after  she  had  got  settled  in  her  room.
A  few  weeks  before  her  death.

C.  E.  Hastings.

Dr.  Caroline  E.  Hastings  is  the  j)rofessor  of  anatomy  (to  a  mixed  class)
at  a  medical  college  in  Boston,  so  much  esteemed  that  she  was  asked  if  her
bust  might  be  placed  in  the  college.  She  chose  instead  to  have  a  library  for
the  students'  reference,  which  was  done.

Her  confirmation  of  Dr.  Mary  Graham's  story  is  complete.  It  was  Dr.
Graham's  sister  wlio  told  me  that  Dr.  Hastings  was  with  her  when  she  went
to  the  bank,  and  also  about  the  last  voice.

A.  E.  Ridley.

In  the  narrative  next  to  be  quoted,  also,  a  knowledge  of  the  expelled
lodger's  actual  intentions  would  suffice  to  show  the  need  of  warning.
This  incident  is  noticeable  from  the  fact  that  the  phantom  was  seen  by
two  persons.  It  is  taken  from  a  long  psychical  record  written  for
Dr.  Hodgson  by  a  lady  who  has  had  many  similar  experiences,  all  of
which  she  regards  as  veridical,  although  most  of  them  cannot  now  be
shown  to  have  been  more  than  subjective.  This  is  not  the  only  case
where  a  psychical  history  of  mainly  subjective  aspect  has  received  at
some  points  the  support  of  a  second  witness  for  experiences  resembling
those  which  the  same  percipient  claims  to  have  undergone  in  solitude.

P.  215.  Mrs.  Norah  Gridley.

306,  Rookery  Building,  Chicago,

August  mh,  1890.
The  following  statement  corrected  by  my  mother  is  true in  every
particular.

Queena  O.  V.  Gridley.


484  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

[Revised  from  notes  made  by  me  in  April,  1890. — R.H.]

In  the  month  of  September,  1889,  my  young  daughter  and  I  were
occupying  a  room  in  a  house  on  the  west  side.  I  had  no  intention  of  leaving
the  house  then — didn't  know  when  I  should  go.

Near  12  p.m.,  midnight,  I  woke  suddenly  ;  my  daughter  at  the  same
moment  made  an  exclamation.  I  gave  a  shriek  almost  apjjalling.  My
daughter  said,  "  Mother,  what's  the  matter  ?  "  and  further  said,  "Mother,
some  one  is  standing  at  my  head."  I  replied,  "Oh  no,  go  to  sleep  if
you  can."

But  I  did  see  something, — I  saw  the  figure  of  a  young  man  clothed  in
white  and  so  transjjarent  that  I  could  see  the  articles  of  furniture  through
the  garment^,  and  a  voice  said  distinctly,  "Mother,  go  away  from  here,"
and  for  some  time  after,  if  I  found  myself  dozing,  the  same  voice  would  say,
"Mother,  don't  go  to  sleep."  At  that  momenta  bright  light  illuminated
the  rooms.  I  saw  both  doors,  one  in  to  the  hall,  and  the  other  to  the
back  room,  standing  wide  open.  I  knew  they  had  been  locked  the  previous
evening.  I  arose  and  lit  the  gas, — I  then  found  both  doors  closed  and
locked.

I  was  so  frightened,  and  the  jjulsation  of  my  heart  so  distinct,  I  know  it
could  have  been  heard  some  distance  away, — I  did  not  sleep.  I  arose  earlier
than  usual  jn  the  morning,  related  event  of  the  night  to  my  landlady,  who
sneered  at  it  and  said,  "  Don't  be  foolish,  you're  crazy."

Before  I  had  finished  the  recital,  my  daughter  awoke,  and  said,  ' '  Mother,
do  you  know  what  happened  in  the  night  ?  "  "I  guess  nothing  hajapened,
what  was  it?"  (The  landlady  was  still  listening).  Her  reply  was,  "You
did  know,  mother,  for  your  heart  beat  so  violently  that  it  sounded  like  a
hammer  and  shook  the  bed."

Then  I  said,  "  Why  didn't  you  speak  to  me  about  that  ?  "

Her  reply  was,  "  I  thought  that  you  thought  if  I  knew  that  you  were
afraid,  we'd  both  go  to  pieces."

I  then  said,  "  What  did  you  see  1  "

' '  I  saw  my  brother  at  my  head  dressed  in  white.  His  clothes  were
glistening  like  satin,  though  they  were  transparent,  and  I  could  see  right
through  them." (The  figure  was  translucent  to  me  also).

"  Did  he  say  anything  ?  "

"You  must  go  away  from  here,  mother."

I  turned  to  my  landlady  and  asked  her  what  she  had  to  say  after  this
corroborative  statement.

"  I  think  you're  both  idiots  !  "
(My  daughter  was  16  years  of  age.)

Next  day  I  was  out  working,  reporting  for  a  paper,  and  going  along  the
South  side  I  saw  a  furnished  room  to  rent.  I  enquired  price  and  said  I
would  come  next  day  to  take  possession.  I  told  my  daughter  on  returning
to  get  ready,  pack  up,  etc.

My  daughter  said  I  was  crazy.

TIae  day  after  we  left  and  took  possession  of  new  room.

About  ten  days  later  I  called  to  get  some  things  left  at  my  jirevious
lodgings.  The  landlady  said,  "  You  don't  know  what  an  awful  thing
happened  the  night  after  you  went  away, — a  man  raised  the  window  and


The  SvMiminal  Self.


485


entered  your  room.  A  woman  occupying  the  aforesaid  room  said,  'What  do
you  want  here  1  Get  out  ! '  The  man  left,  saying,  '  I  don't  want  anything
of  you.'"

The  woman  described  the  man  as  "  short,  thickset,  very  dark."

During  my  stay  in  that  house,  a  man  answering  this  description  had
failed  to  pay  his  room-rent.  He  and  the  landlady  had  had  much  trouble
and  hard  talk.  She  couldn't  get  him  out.  The  landlady  asked  my  advice.
I  advised  her  how  to  take  legal  proceedings.  She  did,  and  the  man  left,
saying  as  he  departed,  ' '  You  were  never  smart  enough  to  get  me  out  of  my
room  ;  it  was  that  black  devil  downstairs  !  "

The  woman  who  occupied  the  room  after  I  left  was  a  domestic.  The
landlady  was  IMrs.  Brown,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.

With  this  case  I  will  close  my  series  of  those  precognitions  which  I
regard  as  in  various  ways  explicable  without  postulating  any  direct
knowledge  of  the  future.  The  group  to  which  we  have  now  to  address
ourselves  presents  our  central  problem  in  a  dii'ecter  form.

I  do  not,  indeed,  assume  that  we  have  come  here  to  any  real  break
or  discontinuity  in  the  nature  of  premonitions  themselves.  If  the
premonitions  already  recorded  have  been  due  to  some  kind  of  inference
from  a  knowledge  of  existing  facts  wider  than  our  own,  it  is  possible
enough  that  some  or  all  of  the  premonitions  yet  to  be  mentioned  have
also  been  due  to  inference  of  some  supernormal  kind.  The  break  which
I  find  here  is  a  purely  subjective  one.  It  is  simply  that  I  can  no  longer
suggest  any  plausible  explanation  of  my  cases  which  does  not  involve
some  perception  of  the  future  more  direct  than  any  which  our  ordinary
minds  enjoy.  I  see  no  way  in  which  intelligence  of  a  common  human
type,  working  upon  however  full  a  knowledge  of  present  facts,  could
arrive  at  some  at  least  of  the  predictions  to  be  now  quoted.  It  does
not,  at  any  rate,  seem  worth  while  to  strain  that  explanation  further.
It  may  still  hold  good,  but  I  prefer  to  throw  my  remaining  evidential
cases  into  convenient  groups,  and  to  leave  the  reader  to  explain  each
group  as  he  will.

First,  then,  I  will  take  a  series  of  cases  which  recall  and  extend
the  cases  of  promnesia  given  in  my  last  chapter.  In  ordinary
promnesia,  as  before  explained,  there  is  no  proof  that  the  incident
■which  seems  to  have  been  already  experienced  has  been  so  in  fact ;
since  it  is  only  by  the  fresh  experience  that  the  supposed  memory  of
the  former  one  is  revived,  nor  does  the  incident  last  long  enough  to
allow  of  any  test  of  the  reality  of  the  previous  knowledge  of  it.  It
is  plain  that  there  might  be  two  stages  evidentially  beyond  this  point.

In  the  first  place,  the  promnesic  incident  may  be  sufficiently
complex  to  allow  of  some  test  during  its  progress  ;  and  in  the  second
place,  the  dream,  or  whatever  it  is,  in  which  the  future  incident  is
foreseen  may  have  been  at once  remembered,  without  waiting  for


486


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  arrival  of  the  incident  to  awaken  the  memoiy,  and  may  have  been
related  to  other  persons  beforehand.

Of  this  second  and  more  advanced  stage  we  have  many  examples  ;
cases,  namely,  where  a  person  undergoing  some  definite  incident
states  that  that  incident  had  previously  in  some  way  been  presented
to  him,  and  sometimes  that  he  had  mentioned  this  presentiment  to
others,  or  had  recorded  it  in  some  way  before  the  event.

Now  as  regards  cases  of  this  type,  especially  whei;p  the  pre-
cognition is  alleged  to  have  been  conveyed  in  a  dream,  the  following
words  of  Edmund  G-urney's  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  298)
deserve  careful  attention.

"The  first  objection  to  dreams,"  he  says,  "as  evidence  for  transferred
impressions  of  distant  conditions  or  events,  is  this,  that  dreams  being  often
somewhat  dim  and  shapeless  things,  subsequent  knowledge  of  the  conditions
or  events  may  easily  have  the  effect  of  giving  body  and  definiteness  to  the
recollection  of  a  dream.  When  the  actual  facts  are  learnt,  a  faint  amount
of  resemblance  may  often  suggest  a  past  dream,  and  set  the  mind  on  the
track  of  trying  accurately  to  recall  it.  This  very  act  involves  a  search  for
details,  for  something  tangible  and  distinct  ;  and  the  real  features  and
definite  incidents  which  are  now  present  in  the  mind,  in  close  association
with  some  general  scene  or  fact  which  actually  figured  in  the  dream,  will  be
apt  to  be  unconsciously  read  back  into  the  dream—  they  make  part  of  the
original,  of  which  the  mind  conceives  the  dream  to  have  been  a  picture  ;  and
the  picture,  when  evoked  in  memory,  will  only  too  probably  include  details
drawn  from  the  original.  After  we  have  once  realised  the  matter  in  its  full
distinctness,  it  becomes  almost  impossible  to  recall  with  due  wtdistinctness
the  distant  and  shadowy  suggestion  of  it.  Dreams  in  this  way  resemble
objects  seen  in  the  dusk  ;  which  begin  by  puzzling  the  eye,  but  which,  when
once  we  know  or  think  we  know  what  they  are,  seem  quite  unmistakable
and  even  full  of  familiar  detail.  For  our  purposes,  therefore,  it  is  of  prime
importance  that  the  dreams  shall  be  told  in  detail  to  some  one  on  whose
memory  we  can  rely  ;  or,  better  still,  written  down,  or  in  some  way  acted  on,
at  the  time,  and  before  the  confirmation  arrives."  ^

Bearing  in  mind  this  caution,  (which  refers  also,  by  the  way,  to
several  cases  already  quoted),  and  omitting  almost  all  cases  where

^  In  a  paper  in  Mind,  for  April,  1888,  further  developed  in  a  "Report  on
Phantasms  and  Presentiments,"  (ProceccZwii/s  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  March,  1889),  Professor  Royce,  of  Harvard,  presses  the  caution  which
Edmund  Gurney's  words  inculcate  into  a  further  hypothesis  (American  Proceedings,
p.  3G6).  "This  hypothesis  is,"  he  says,  "  that  in  certain  people,  under  certain  exciting
circumstances,  there  occur  what  I  shall  henceforth  call  Pseudo-Presentiments,  i.e.,  more
or  less  instantaneous  and  irresistible  hallucinations  of  memory,  which  make  it  seem  to
one  that  something  which  now  excites  or  astonishes  him  has  been  pre-figured  in  a
recent  dream,  or  in  the  form  of  some  other  warning,  although  this  seeming  is  wholly
unfounded,  and  although  the  supposed  jarophecy  really  succeeds  its  own  fulfilment."
In  support  of  this  thesis,  Professor  Royce  quotes  two  records  of  insane  cases  from
Kraepelin,  and  in  a  supplement  a  case  from  Orschansky,  (a  fourth  case,  p.  566-7,


The  Siobliminal  Self.


487


the  premonitory  dream  was  not  meutioned  or  acted  upon  beforehand,
we  may  proceed  with  a  group  of  cases,  relatively  the  most  numerous  of
all,  in  which  no  explanation  based  on  ordinary  foresight  will  satisfy  the
facts,  while  yet  there  is  seldom  any  indication  of  the  agency  of  any
spirit  beyond  the  percipient's  own.  The  general  scheme  is  as  fol-
lows : — The  percipient,  usually  in  dream,  but  sometimes  by  voice
or  crystal-vision,  is  shown  a  scene  or  is  made  aware  of  a  fact  in  the
future — generally  in  the  near  future — which  scene  afterwards  is
witnessed  or  which  fact  comes  true.  The  scene  is  generally  one  from
his  own  coming  life,  and  is  often  trivial  in  character.

The  following  case  was  sent  to  me  by  Mrs.  Atlay,  wife  of  the  late
Bishop  of  Hereford.

P.  179.

Mrs.  Atlay  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

March,  1893.

My  dream  was  as  follows  : —

I  dreamt  that  the  Bishop  being  from  home,  we  were  unable  to  have
family  prayers  as  usual  in  the  chapel,  but  that  I  read  them  in  the  large
hall  of  the  Palace,  out  of  which,  on  one  side,  a  door  opens  into  the  dining
room.  In  my  dream,  prayers  being  ended,  I  left  the  hall,  opened  the
dining  room  door,  and  there  saw,  to  my  horror,  standing  between  the
table  and  the  side-board,  an  enormous  pig.  The  dream  was  very  vivid,  and
amused  me  much.  The  Bishop  being  from  home,  when  dressed  I  went  down
into  the  hall  to  read  prayers.  The  servants  had  not  come  in,  so  I  told  my
governess  and  children,  who  were  already  there,  about  my  dream,  which
amused  them  as  much  as  it  had  done  me.  The  servants  came  in  and  I  read
prayers,  after  which  the  party  dispersed.  I  opened  the  dining  room  door,
where,  to  my  amazement,  stood  the  pig  in  the  very  spot  in  which  I  had
seen  him  in  my  dream.  With  regard  to  your  question  as  to  whether  I
could  have  heard  the  pig  in  my  sleep,  he  was  then  safely  in  his  sty,  and  my
room  is  quite  on  the  other  side  of  the  house,  a  large  hall  dividing  our
side  from  the  servants'  side  of  the  house,  behind  which,  in  a  yard,  was  the
pig-sty.  It  got  into  the  dining  room  in  consequence  of  the  gardener  being
engaged  in  cleaning  out  the  sty  while  the  servants  were  at  prayers  ;  they

hardly  needs  reference),  where  paranoiacs  have  beUeved  that  all  important  events  had
been  predicted  to  them  beforehand.  But  as  Dr.  Hodgson  points  out,  (American
Proceedings,  p.  543),  these  cases  are  not  really  parallel  to  the  phenomena  which
concern  us.  They  are,  in  fact,  a  form  of  the  common  insane  delusion  of  grandeur.  A
further  reply  by  Edmund  Gurney  will  be  found  in  Mind  for  July,  1888.  It  may
suffice  here  to  add  that  longer  experience  has  continued  to  inspire  distrust  of  these
short  cuts,  or  improvised  generalisations,  as  to  habits  of  memory.  Memory  may
sometimes  play  such  tricks  as  Professor  Royce  supposes,  and  may  play  all  kinds  of
other  tricks  as  well,  and  may,  again,  be  sometimes  far  more  accurate  than  we  are
disposed  to  expect.  We  mtist  in  each  instance  be  freshly  on  the  look  out  for  memory's
possible  errors,  but  the  notion  of  a  special  track  of  error  in  the  direction  suggested
by  Professor  Royce  has  not  as  yet  been  supported  by  adequate  evidence.


488


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


having  left  every  door  open,  the  pig  met  with  no  obstacle  on  liis  voyage
of  discovery.  Fanny  P.  Atlay.

I  lieard  Mrs.  Atlay  tell  the  dream  when  she  came  into  the  hall  before
prayers. [Precise  date  not  remembered — a  few  years  ago.]

Emily  NiMHo.  (Governess.)

In  reply  to  my  inquiry  whether  the  pig  might  not  have  escaped
before  the  dream,  and  have  given  some  indication  of  proximity  to  Mrs.
Atlay's  bedroom  window,  that  lady  informed  me  that  he  only  got  loose
while  she  was  reading  prayers  ; — -the  gardeners  who  had  been  cleaning
his  sty  having  left  it  imperfectly  secured.  The  sty  was  at  a  considei'-
able  distance  from  the  palace.  The  date  of  the  incident  was  a  few
years  before  the  record,  but  cannot  now  be  precisely  ascertained.

The  next  case  which  I  shall  quote  is,  I  think,  almost  unique  in  our
collection  in  this  respect, — that  the  premonition  seems  to  work  its  own
fulfilment,  by  suggesting  the  one  course  of  action  which,  as  it  happened,
would  bring  about  the  dreaded  experience.  It  is,  of  course,  possible
that  the  coincidence  may  have  been  accidental.  Mrs.  C.  says  that  she
is  rather  a  frequent  dreamer,  although  few  of  her  dreams  make  so
strong  an  impression  as  the  one  which  I  quote,  and  another  with
similar  coincidence,  which  I  omit  for  want  of  space.

P.  204.

Mrs.  C.  writes  in  a  letter  dated  February  29th,  1888,  from  Holland-road,
Kensington  : —

I  have  an  intense  horror  of  monkeys — I  seldom  look  at  one  if  I  can  help
it — they  are  objects  of  such  antipathy  to  me  ;  and  I  dreamed  that  I  was
persistently  followed  by  one  such  as  I  had  never  seen  before,  but  which
terrified  me  extremely,  and  from  which  I  could  not  escape.

Thiixking  I  should  be  better  able  to  throw  olF  the  impression  of  my
dream  if  I  told  it,  I  mentioned  it  to  my  family,  and  my  husband
recommended  a  short  walk.  In  consequence,  and  qxiite  contrary  to  my
custom,  I  arranged  to  take  my  children  for  a  short  walk,  without  their  nurse
accompanying  me,  and  as  their  favourite  walk  was  up  Nightingale-lane,
(Holland-lane),  past  another  lane  enclosed  by  the  high  walls  of  Argyll
Lodge,  the  residence  of  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  I  agreed  to  take  them  there,
and  when  we  arrived  at  Argyll  Lodge,  what  was  my  horror  to  see  on  the
roof  of  the  coach-house  the  very  monkey  of  my  dreams  !  In  my  surprise
and  terror,  I  clasped  my  hands  and  exclaimed,  much  to  the  amazement  of  a
coachman  waiting  outside,  "  My  dream  ! My  dream  !  "

This  I  sujjpose  attracted  the  attention  of  the  monkey  and  he  began  to
come  after  us,  he  on  the  top  of  the  wall,  we  beneath,  every  minute  I
expecting  he  would  jump  upon  me,  and  having  precisely  the  same  terror  I
experienced  in  my  dream.  One  of  my  children  being  very  young  we  could
not  go  fast,  which  added  to  my  distress,  but  we  succeeded  in  escaping  it,
and  on  my  return  home  I  sent  a  servant  to  enquire  if  a  monkey  had  been


The  Subliminal  Self.


489


seen  there,  for  my  state  of  nervousness  was  extreme.  She  was  informed
that  that  morning  a  rare  and  very  valuable  monkey  belonging  to  the
Duchess  had  got  loose,  and  so  the  incident  was  explained.  But  my
dreaming  of  it  previously  remains  unexplained. [Signed  by  Mrs  C  ]

In  a  subsequent  letter  dated  March  2nd,  1888,  Mrs.  C.  writes  : —

The  "  monkey  dream  "  was  told  to  at  least  six  persons  before  I  went  for
my  walk,  and  my  children  still  remember  my  terror  and  the  ' '  peculiar
monkey  "  which  followed  us.

Mrs.  C.  also  states  that  the  dream  occurred  in  1867,  and  sends  letters
of  corroboration  from  her  husband  and  her  nurse,  which  are  given  below.

F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Esq., — Dear  Sir, — I  have  seen  my  wife's  corres-
pondence with  you,  and  I  fuUy  confirm  the  facts  as  she  has  stated  them.
Tours  very  faithfully,  [Signed  by  Mr.  C]

Statement  written  by  Mrs.  C.'s  nurse.

Holland-road,  March  3rd,  1888.
Caroline  M.,  Mrs.  C.'s  nurse,  remembers  two  dreams  [i.e.,  this  and  another
sent  to  us,  but  not  printed  here]  which  her  mistress  told  her  when  she  went
to  her  room  in  the  morning. She  remembers  both  dreams  coming  true.

The  Marquis  of  Lorne  informs  me  that  a  monkey  was  in  fact  kept
in  the  stables  of  Argyll  Lodge  at  and  after  the  date  here  somewhat
vaguely  indicated.

Here  is  a  case  where  the  percipient  is  well  known  to  me.

P.  224.  Statement  by  Colonel  K.  Goghill.

April,  1894.

A  curious  case  occurred  to  me  last  month,  though  it  may  be  but  a
coincidence  not  worth  recounting  On  28th  March  I  received  a  letter  from
a  lady,  with  whom  I  had  not  been  in  correspondence  for  about  a  year,  stating
that  on  the  26th  she  had  either  a  vision  or  a  dream  (I  forget  the  expression)
that  she  saw  me  in  a  very  dangerous  position  under  a  horse,  from  which
many  people  were  trying  to  relieve  me.  By  return  of  post  I  wrote  that  I
thought  it  a  dream  which  was  proved  by  contraries,  as  nothing  of  the  sort
had  occurred.  That  afternoon  I  received  notice  of  a  last  "  off  day  "  with  our
pack  of  hounds,  and  the  next  morning  on  my  way  to  covert  I  posted  my
letter.  At  the  finish  of  a  long  run  in  the  afternoon,  my  horse,  pulling
double  down  a  steep  hill,  was  unable  to  collect  himself  for  a  big  bank  at  the
bottom  of  the  hill,  breasted  it,  and  fell  head  over  heels  into  a  deep  and
broad  drop  ditch  on  the  far  side  with  me  underneath  him.  His  head  and
shoulders  were  at  the  bottom  and  legs  remained  up  on  the  landing  side  of
the  ditch.  Many  of  the  field  dismounted,  and  after  some  minutes  pulled
the  horse  away,  and  got  me  from  under,  more  or  less  stunned,  but  little  the
worse,  except  a  few  face  cuts,  the  loss  of  a  tooth,  and  a  crushed  stirrup,  and
the  horse  with  a  few  head  cuts.  The  horse  was  about  my  best  hunter,  and
never  before  guilty  of  such  a  thing,  though,  of  course,  it  may  have  been  but  a
hunting-field  coincidence.  Kendai  Coghill.

Ajyril,  1894.


490


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  letter  in  which  the  lady  in  question  (the  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir-Carleton)
relates  her  dream  is  unfortunately  lost,  but  Sir  Joseph  Coghill  writes  : —

Glen  Barrabane,  Castle  Townsend,  May  3rd,  1894.
On  the  29th  March  last,  my  brother,  Colonel  Coghill,  C.B.,  showed  me
a  portion  of  a  letter  just  received  from  a  lady  who  wrote  describing  a  dream
or  vision  in  which  she  had  seen  him  meet  with  a  serious  accident  from  a
horse,  and  she  noticed  a  crowd  of  persons  assisting  him  away.

J.  L.  Coghill.

Colonel  Coghill  writes  by  return  of  post,  after  the  receipt  of  the  letter
relating  the  dream,  but  before  the  accident,  as  follows  : —

Cosheen,  Castle  Townsend,  Co.  Cork,  Wednesday,  March  28th.
My  dear  Mrs.  Cakleton, — Need  I  say  how  delighted  I  was  to  see
your  handwriting  this  morning,  and  how  happy  I  am  to  say  that  your  dream
has  so  far  proved  the  rule  of  going  by  "  contraries,"  for  I  never  in  my  life  was
going  stronger  than  I  am  at  present.

Writing  agam  on  the  31st  March,  the  day  after  the  accident,  Colonel
Coghill  says  : —

"My  dear  Mrs.  Carleton, — You  win,  hands  down.  There  are  two
grounds  on  which  we,  your  friends,  have  to  thank  ourselves  that  you  belong
to  the  last  half  of  this  century — first  that  we  can  enjoy  your  existence  and
friendship,  and  secondly  that  had  you  lived  earlier  you  might  have  been
burnt  as  a  witch,  for  by  your  dream  you  foretold  a  grief  to  me,  though  in
prospective.  Yesterday  I  enjoyed  the  imperial  crowner  which  you  saw  in  your
dream,  the  hardest  fall  I  have  had  for  very  many  years.  It  was  the  last  day  of
our  hunt,  and  I  wanted  to  give  a  finishing  touch  to  the  education  of  my
young  horse.  I  began  the  day  badly  by  being  on  the  wrong  side  of  the
wood  when  they  broke  away,  and  while  riding  hard  to  overtake  them  I  topped
a  bank  and  found  a  chasm  too  big,  so  we  dropped  a  crumpler,  but  I  got  off  with
a  broken  spur  and  bent  stirrup.  After  I  had  overtaken  my  field,  I  was  pelting
down  a  hill  faster  than  I  wanted,  and  met  a  stiff  bank  at  the  bottom  with  a
broad  ditch  and  a  drop  on  the  landing  side.  The  young  savage  couldn't
collect  himself  in  time  and  struck  the  bank  above  his  knees.  Tableau — six
legs  in  the  air  ;  2nd  view — a  man  in  the  ditch  with  horse  on  top  of  his  (the
man's)  head.  Here  your  dream  fails,  for  instead  of  an  unsympathetic  crowd
helping  him,  I  was  released  by  half-a-dozen  friends,  including  the  master,
and  about  as  many  ladies  ;  3rd  tableau — all  their  loose  horses  pursuing  the
hounds  riderless.

"  My  first  thought  when  down  was  your  dream,  and  before  my  head  was
out  of  the  mud,  I  said  :  '  At  any  rate,  as  I  am  to  be  led  away  by  some  one
the  neck  must  be  all  right ' — and  so  it  was,  and  I  got  off  very  cheaply.  Con-
sidering that  the  horse  was  on  my  head  I  can't  understand  how  the  only
thing  that  gave  way  was  my  extreme  back  tooth,  which  got  smashed  and  its
next  neighbour  chipped — a  few  scratches  on  nose  and  forehead  sums  up  the
total  grief,  and  cheap  at  the  price.  Now  will  you  oblige  me,  if  I  am  worth
a  sleeping,  or  waking  dream  in  future,  to  make  a  pleasanter  one  of  it — for
this  morning  I  feel  as  if  a  crowbar  had  replaced  my  jointy  neck,  and  every
joint  is  bound  in  iron  cramps  of  shoulders,  arms,  and  legs. A  few  hot  baths


The  Subliminal  Self.


491


and  a  little  massage  will  put  all  that  right,  and  as  it  was  the  last  day  of  the
season,  I  lose  nothing  by  it.  T  should  not  have  written  all  this,  but  I
thought  that  in  connection  with  your  dream  you  might  feel  an  interest  in
its  fulfilment."

The  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir-Carleton,  who  experienced  this  dream,  writes  from
Oreywell  Hill,  Winchfield,  as  follows  : —

From  my  childhood  I  have  had  premonitions  of  illnesses  ;  sometimes  the
illness  proves  trivial  and  sometimes  fatal.  I  have  no  distinct  impressions,
but  coming  events  seem  to  cast  shadows  before  them,  which  as  a  child  I  used
to  term  "fore-feeling,"  and  I  have  not  yet  found  any  better  word.  I  have
heard  my  Scotch  mother,  long  deceased,  relate  premonitory  dreams  of  her
own,  so  there  is  probably  some  hereditary  sensitiveness  to  impressions.

After  a  few  hours  or  days  the  gloomy  fore-feeling  seems  to  lighten  in
some  cases,  as  though  a  threatening  "  disagreeable  "  had  been  somehow
averted.  But  I  can  conscientiously  affirm  that  no  great  sorrow,  however
sudden,  has  come  upon  me  unpreceded  by  a  premonition  of  approaching
trouble  connected  with  the  individual  cdxmt  to  suffer  or  die.

I  have  also  repeatedlj'  fore-felt  the  loss  of  pets  neither  sick  nor  old.

Here  again  is  a  case  where  a  somewhat  complex  scene,  involving
the  action  of  several  persons,  is  dreamt  and  narrated  beforehand.

P.  195.

Mr.  Haggard  of  the  British  Consulate,  Trieste,  Austria,  gives  the
following  account  of  a  premonitory  dream  and  its  fulfilment : —

September  2lst,  1893.

A  few  months  ago  T  had  an  extraordinarily  vivid  dream,  and  waking  up
repeated  it  to  my  wife  at  once.  All  I  dreamt  actually  occurred  about  six
weeks  afterwards,  the  details  of  my  dream  falling  out  exactly  as  dreamt.

There  seems  to  have  been  no  purpose  whatsoever  in  the  dream  ;  and  one
cannot  help  thinking,  what  was  the  good  of  it.

I  dreamt  that  I  was  asked  to  dinner  by  the  German  Consul  General,  and
accepting,  was  ushered  into  a  large  room  with  troj)hies  of  East  African  arms
on  shields  against  the  walls.  (N.  B. — I  have  myself  been  a  great  deal  in
East  Africa.)

After  dinner  I  went  to  inspect  the  arms,  and  amongst  them  saw  a
beautifully  gold-mounted  sword  which  I  pointed  out  to  the  French  Vice-
Consul — who  at  that  moment  joined  me — as  having  probably  been  a  present
from  the  Sultan  of  Zanzibar  to  my  host  the  German  Consul  General.

At  that  moment  the  Russian  Consul  came  up  too.  He  pointed  out  how
small  was  the  hilt  of  the  sword  and  how  impossible  in  consequence  it  would
be  for  a  European  to  use  the  weapon,  and  whilst  talking  he  waved  his  arm
in  an  excited  manner  over  his  head  as  if  he  was  wielding  the  sword,  and  to
illustrate  what  he  was  saying.

At  that  moment  I  woke  up  and  marvelled  so  at  the  vividness  of  the
dream  that  I  woke  my  wife  up  too  and  told  it  to  her.

About  six  weeks  afterwards  my  wife  and  myself  were  asked  to  dine  with
the  German  Consul  General  ;  but  the  dream  had  long  been  forgotten  by
us  both.


492


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


We  were  shown  into  a  large  withdrawing  room  which  I  had  never  been
in  before,  but  which  somehow  seemed  familiar  to  me.  Against  the  walls
were  some  beautiful  trophies  of  East  African  arms,  amongst  which  was  a
gold-hilted  sword,  a  gift  to  my  host  from  the  Sultan  of  Zanzibar.

To  make  a  long  story  short,  everything  happened  exactly  as  I  had  dreamt
— but  I  never  remembered  the  dream  until  the  Russian  Consul  began  to
wave  his  arm  over  his  head,  when  it  came  back  to  me  like  a  iiash.

Without  saying  a  word  to  the  Russian  Consul  and  French  Vice-Consul
(whom  I  left  standing  before  the  trophy)  I  walked  quickly  across  to  my  wife,
who  was  standing  at  the  entrance  of  a  boudoir  opening  out  of  the  withdraw-
ing room,  and  said  to  her; — ^"  Do  you  remember  my  dream  about  the
Zanzibar  arms  1 "  She  remembered  everything  perfectly,  and  was  a  witness
to  its  realization.  On  the  spot  we  informed  all  the  persons  concerned  of  the
dream,  which  naturally  much  interested  them.

Mrs.  Haggard's  corroboration  of  her  husband's  dream  and  its  fulfilment
runs  as  follows  : —

I  remember  being  awoke  one  night  by  ray  husband  to  hear  a  curiously
vivid  dream  he  had  just  had.  It  is  now  some  months  ago,  and  possibly
some  of  the  more  minute  details  of  his  relation  may  have  escaped  my
memory,  but  what  I  remember  of  his  dream  is  the  following.  He  dreamed
that  we  were  dining  with  the  German  Consul  General,  whose  drawing-
room,  a  remarkably  handsome  apartment,  was  ornamented  with  trophies
of  arms  from  the  East  Coast  of  Africa.  Having  been  in  those  regions
himself,  he  felt  some  interest  in  them,  and  went  nearer  to  examine  them
more  closely.  While  he  was  doing  so,  the  Russian  Consul  came  up,  and
in  his  usual  rather  excitable  fashion  began  flourishing  his  arm,  as  he
dilated  upon  the  extraordinary  smallness  of  the  native  hand  for  which
the  hilt  of  a  certain  sword  must  have  been  designed.  That  is  what  I
recollect  of  the  dream.  Its  fulfilment  took  place  a  few  weeks  later,  when
the  circumstance  of  the  dream  had  almost  passed  from  our  thoughts.

We  dined  one  evening  with  the  German  Consul  General,  the  Russian
Consul  being  also  present,  among  others.  After  dinner  my  husband  went  to
examine  one  of  the  trophies  of  East  African  arms,  with  which  the  room — as
in  his  dream, — was  hung.  While  he  was  doing  so,  the  Russian  Consul  went
up  to  speak  to  him  upon  the  subject,  and  the  dramatic  flourish  of  his  arm,
with  which  he  emphasised  his  conversation,  at  once  recalled  the  dream,
in  which  it  had  taken  place,  so  vividly  to  my  husband's  mind,  that  he
immediately  crossed  the  room  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I  did  not  remember  it
also,  which  of  course  I  did,  though,  as  I  was  talking  to  some  one  else  at  the
time,  and  only  knew  the  room  previ(jusly  by  my  husband's  description  of  his
dream,  the  coincidence  might  not  have  occurred  to  me  had  he  not  called  my
attention  to  it.  Directly  he  did  so,  however,  by  asking  me  if  I  did  not
remember  his  dream,  I  recollected  quite  well  all  the  details  I  have  previously
mentioned.  ^.gnes  M.  Haggakd.

Trieste,  October  20th,  1893.

Below  are  given  a  letter  from  Mr.  Kolemine,  Russian  Consul,  and  a  state-
ment from  Herr  Michabelles,  German  Consul  General  at  Trieste,  both  of


The  Subliminal  Self.


493


whom  were  witnesses  of  the  fulfihnent  of  Mr.  Haggard's  dream,  and  of  the
great  impression  which  it  made  upon  him  at  the  time.

Monsieur  Haggard,  mon  collegue  d'Angleterre,  en  a  eu  un  tres  remar-

quable  au  point  de  vue  psychologique.  M^e  Z  aussi  et  d'autres  personnes

encore.  Veuillez  accepter  tout  ce  que  Monsieur  Haggard  vous  a  ^crit  comme
etant  parfaitement  la  v^rit^  et  I'asserter  de  mon  nom  si  vous  le  jugez
necessaire.

Agr^ez,  cher  Monsieur,  I'assurance  de  ma  consid(^ration  tres  distingu^e.

A. DE  KOLEMINB.

Whilst  I  was  German  Ci^nsul  General  at  Trieste,  I  had  one  evening  in
February  or  March  of  this  year,  the  pleasure  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Haggard's
company  at  dinner  ;  among  others  the  Russian  Consul  was  present.  It  was
the  tirst  time  that  Mr.  Haggard  came  into  my  private  house  ;  before  we  had
always  met  in  my  office.  After  dinner  I  was  busy  in  entertaining  my  party,
when  suddenly  Mr.  Haggard  joined  me  and  told  me  that  a  few  weeks  before
he  had  seen,  in  a  very  vivid  dream,  my  drawing-room  with  the  tropliies  of
East  African  arms  on  shields  against  the  walls,  and  Mr.  Kolemine,  the
Russian  Consul,  standing  before  one  trophy  had  explained  something  to
him  in  his  usual  excited  manner,  waving  his  arms  over  his  head  in  order  to
illustrate  what  he  said.  All  this  had  happened  just  at  the  moment  with  all
particulars  seen  in  the  dream.  I  was  extremely  astonished  at  the  strange
occurrence  and  observed  that  the  realisation  of  his  dream  had  produced  a
strong  effect  on  Mr.  Haggard's  mind.

J.  MiCHABELLES,

Counsellor  of  legation  in  the  Foreign  Office.
Berlin,  November  10th,  1893.

In  the  next  case  the  gradual  accomplishment  of  the  dream  seems
to  have  been  watched  with  interest  by  more  than  one  person.

P.  206.

The  Rev.  B.  DuUey,  of  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.,
sends  the  following  statement,  which  was  written  in  October,  1893,  and  is
certified  to  be  correct  by  the  percipient,  Annette  Jones.

Annette,  wife  of  Walter  Jones,  tobacconist,  of  Old  Gravel  Lane,  St.
George's,  East  London,  early  in  September  of  this  year  (1893)  had  her  little
boy,  Peter,  ill.  One  night  she  dreamt  that  she  saw  a  cart  drive  up,  stop
near  where  she  was,  and  the  driver  move  a  black  cloth  and  discover  three
coffins,  two  white  and  (me  blue.  One  white  coffin  was  bigger  than  the  other,
and  the  blue  was  the  biggest  of  the  three.  The  man  took  out  the  bigger
white  coffin  and  left  it,  driving  off  with  the  two  others.  In  the  morning
Mrs.  Jones  told  her  dream  to  her  husband,  and  afterwards  to  another  woman,
specially  telling  her  husband  that  one  of  the  coffins  was  blue.  On  the  10th
of  September,  Mrs.  Devonshire,  who,  and  whose  husband  were  particular
friends  of  the  Jones's,  was  confined  with  a  fine  boy,  whom  they  named  Eric.

At  first  he  seemed  quite  healthy,  but  a  weakness  of  the  lungs  developed
itself  and  he  died  on  Friday,  the  29th  of  September. Little  Peter  Jones  died

2  N


494


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  following  Monday,  the  2nd  of  October,  being  then  16  months  old.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Jones,  knowing  that  Eric  was  to  be  buried  on  the  Wednesday,  for
the  sake  of  both  friendship  and.  economy,  hurried  their  little  boy's  burial  for
that  day,  so  that  both  funerals  should  take  place  at  the  same  time.  On  the
morning  of  the  Wednesday,  the  parish  priest  informed  Mr.  and  Mr.  Jones
that  another  child's  body  would  be  brought  into  church  along  with  theirs,
the  son  of  a  Mrs.  Jupp,  whom  they  did  not  know.

Mrs.  Jones  then  remarked  to  her  husband,  "If  the  coffin  is  blue,  then
my  dream  will  come  true.  For  the  two  other  coffins  were  white."  And  so
it  hajjpened.  Mrs.  Jones  anxiously  watched  at  the  funeral  for  little  Jupp's
coffin,  and  when  she  saw  it  was  blue,  she  clutched  her  sister,  who  walked  by
her  side,  and  said  "  that's  my  dream."  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  relative
sizes  of  the  coffins  also  corresponded,  little  Eric's  being  the  smallest  for  a  child
of  a  few  daj's,  little  Jupp's  the  largest  for  one  about  6  years,  and  blue,  and
Peter's,  of  coui'se,  less  than  his  but  bigger  than  Eric's.

I  have  read  the  above  and  find  it  a  true  and  correct  account  of  my  dream
and  the  circumstances  relating  to  it.

Annette  Jones.

I  remember  distinctly  my  wife  telling  me  of  her  dream,  and  especially  as
to  the  colour  of  the  coffins,  2  white  and  1  blue,  and  watched  the  circumstances
which  occurred  afterwards  with  something  like  awe.

Walter  H.  Jones.

The  Rev.  B.  Dulley  states  in  a  letter  dated  January  6th,  1894  : —
Mr.  Jones  is  a  particularly  common-sense  practical  man  with  abilities
in  that  respect  above  the  average. So  far  from  welcoming  the  preternatural
event  noted,  he  is  rather  vexed  and  worried  by  it.  Both  he  and  his  wife  are
conscientious  people,  and  certainly  believe  what  they  say.

B.  Dulley,  Clerk  in  Holy  Orders.

In  some  other  cases  the  premonitory  dream,  although  it  may  have
made  a  vivid  impression,  and  perhaps  have  even  been  narrated  to  others,
is  then  apparently  clean  forgotten  until  the  moment  of  its  fulfilment.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  justly  urged  (of  a  similar  case)  that  this  looks
rather  as  though  we  were  dealing  with  a  pseudo-memory,  created  by
the  very  circumstance  which  seems  merely  to  revive  it.  There  may,
however,  be  another  explanation.  We  know  that  when  a  suggestion  is
given  to  a  good  subject  in  the  hypnotic  trance  to  the  effect  that  he  will
(say)  open  the  window  half  an-hour  after  awaking,  he  passes  that  half-
hour  in  unconsciousness  of  the  order, — which  order  nevertheless  he  fulfils
at  the  right  minute.  Well,  while  he  is  thus  fulfilling  it,  or  just  before
he  fulfils  it,  he  lapses  into  a  state  more  akin  to  the  hypnotic  state  in
which  he  received  the  order  than  to  the  waking  state  in  which  he  has
since  remained.  The  memory  of  what  he  has  to  do  comes  to  him  only
just  in  time,  and  derives  its  efficacy  from  a  partial  i-ecrudescence  of  the
condition  in  which  he  was  when  he  accepted  the  order.  Even  thus,
perhaps,  we  might  by  analogy  consider  the  condition  of  the  dreamer  of


The  Suhliniinal  Self.


495


a  precognitive  dream  as  a  secondary  state,  the  recollection  of  which  has
a  tendency  to  fade  fi-om  the  waking  mind,  but  which  is  partially
revived  when  the  prefigured  incident,  —  which  belongs  in  a  sense  to  the
secondary  state, — suddenly  presents  itself  in  the  waking  day.

Bearing  this  in  mind,  the  following  prevision  of  a  rattle-snake  may
be  compared  with  the  prevision  of  a  woodcock  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick
quotes.  Observe  that  in  this  case,  although  Dr.  Kinsolving  did  not
actually  recount  his  dream  before  the  event,  he  remembers  having
thought  of  doing  so,  but  refrained  from  a  natural  scruple.

P.  149.

Dr.  Kinsolving  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  of  the  Epiphany,
Philadelphia,  writes  as  follows  to  Dr.  Hodgson  : —

2016,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,

October  Uth,  1891.

My  Dear  Sir,— The  dream  was  this.  I  seemed  to  be  in  woods  back  of
the  hotel  at  Capon  Springs,  W.  Va.,  when  I  came  across  a  rattle-snake,
which  when  killed  had  two  black-looking  rattles  and  a  peculiar  projection  of
bone  from  the  tail,  while  the  skin  was  unusually  light  in  colour.  The
impression  of  the  snake  was  very  distinct  and  vivid  before  my  mind's  eye
when  I  awoke  in  the  morning,  but  I  did  not  mention  the  dream  to  any  one,
though  I  was  in  the  act  of  telling  my  wife  while  dressing,  but  refrained  from
so  doing  because  I  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  long  walks  in  the  mountains,
and  I  did  not  wish  to  make  her  nervous  by  the  suggestion  of  snakes.

After  breakfast,  I  started  with  my  brother  along  the  back  of  the  great
north  mountain,  and  when  about  twelve  miles  from  the  hotel  we  decided  to
go  down  out  of  the  mountain  into  the  road  and  return  home.  As  we  started
down  the  side  of  the  mountain  I  suddenly  became  vividly  conscious  of  my
dream,  to  such  an  extent  as  to  startle  me,  and  to  put  me  on  the  alert.  I
was  walking  rapidly,  and  had  gone  about  thirty  steps,  when  I  came  on  a
snake  coiled  and  ready  to  strike.  My  foot  was  in  the  air  and  had  I  finished
my  step  I  would  have  trodden  upon  the  snake.  I  threw  myself  to  one  side  and
fell  heavily  on  the  ground.  I  recovered  myself  at  once  and  killed  the  snake
with  the  assistance  of  my  brother,  and  found  it  to  be  the  same  snake  in
every  particular  with  the  one  I  had  had  in  my  mind's  eye.  The  same  size,
colour,  and  peculiar  mal-formation  of  the  tail.

It  is  my  belief  that  my  dream  prevented  me  from  treading  on  the  snake,
but  I  have  no  theory  on  the  subject,  and  get  considerably  mixed  and
muddled  when  I  try  to  think  on  the  line  of  such  abnormal  experiences.

Gr.  H.  Kinsolving.

Christ  Church,  Clinton  and  Harrison  Sts.,

323,  Clinton-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Ji^rii  mh,  1892.

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson, — My  Dear  Sir, — My  brother,  the  Rev.  Geo.
H.  Kinsolving,  of  Philadelphia,  has  enclosed  me  your  request  for  my


496


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


recollection  of  his  premonitory  dream  last  summer  at  Capon  Springs.
Constant  occupation  during  the  season  just  ended  is  my  apology  for  a
somewhat  tardy  compliance  with  that  request.  The  circumstances  as  I
I'emember  them  were  these  : —

We  started,  he  and  I  together,  off  from  the  Springs  Hotel  just  after
breakfast  to  go  over  the  mountain  to  Rock  Enon  Springs.  Our  first  stop  was
on  the  crest  of  the  North  Mountain  and  near  it  we  had  some  conversation
with  two  boys  who  were  out  huckleberrying.  I  asked  them  about  their
experience  with  rattle-snakes,  and  they  replied  that  they  had  killed  several
during  the  season.  Later,  my  brother  and  I  were  clambering  up  a  steep,
rough,  bushy  cliff  and  as  he  was  in  front  I  said,  "  You  had  better  look  out
for  rattle-snakes.  This  is  a  very  snaky  sort  of  place."  At  neither  of  these
references  to  the  subject  of  the  snakes  did  my  brother  seem  to  be  reminded
of  or  make  any  allusion  to  his  dream  of  the  night  before  of  which  he  had  not
then  told  me.

After  walking  some  way  beyond  this  we  missed  our  trail  and  found  our-
selves descending  the  mountain.  Suddenly  my  brother,  who  was  at  my  side
and  a  little  in  front,  throw  his  body  back  and  said,  ' '  My  !  I  like  to  have  stepped
on  that  fellow  !  "  I  think  I  caught  him  by  the  shoulder  as,  with  one  foot
raised  just  over  the  reptile  which  was  coiled  under  some  bushes  and  a  bit  of
brushwood,  he  reeled  backward.  Then  as  we  closed  in  upon  the  snake  and
delivered  our  first  stones,  my  brother  catching  sight  of  his  tail  said,  "  That
is  strange  !  I  will  tell  you  something  remarkable  about  that  snake  in  a
moment."  Then  when  we  had  killed  the  snake,  before  I  had  noticed  any-
thing remarkable  about  it — when  to  me  it  was  like  Jim  Smiley 's  frog,  "just
like  any  other  frog  " — my  brother  pointed  to  the  fact  that  it  had  but  one
I'attle  on  its  tail,  and  proceeded  to  tell  me  his  dream.  He  said  that  the  night
before  he  dreamed  that  he  came  up  in  the  front  of  the  Springs  Hotel  as  a
party  of  boys  were  in  the  act  of  killing  a  snake.  Bending  over  the  reptile  he
said,  "  Why,  boys,  that  snake  has  a  diseased  tail."  And  on  examination  it
appeared  a  very  singular,  defective  tail.  At  the  time  of  his  narrow  escape
from  being  bitten  (for  the  reptile  had  thrown  back  his  head  to  strike  when
discovered),  he  said  the  dream  had  suddenly  come  into  his  mind.  I  noticed
a  pause  and  losing  the  ishread  of  the  argument  in  which  we  were  engaged,  and
this  made  me  look  towards  him  at  the  moment.  He  answered  there  on  the
spot  to  my  question  wliy  he  had  not  told  me  the  strange  dream  when  I
mentioned  snakes  as  we  clambered  up  the  peak  or  when  we  were  speaking
with  the  boys,  that  he  had  not  thought  of  the  dream  during  our  walk  until  a
moment  before  this  snake  was  met  and  that  at  that  moment  tlie  dream  had
come  into  his  mind  with  such  vividness  as  to  make  him  look  where  he  was
walking  with  some  care.

The  snake  was  large  enough  to  have  had  half-a-dozen  or  more  rattles.  It
had  a  single  rattle — not  a  button — and  looked  as  though  disease  or  crushing
or  some  unusual  accident  had  deprived  it  of  the  rest.

These  are  the  facts,  as  I  remember  them,  very  hastily  narrated.  The
experience  was  altogether  unique  for  me  at  least.  I  will  send  you  this
direct  without  having  spoken  to  [my  brother]  of  the  experience  since  leaving
the  Springs  in  the  month  of  August  last.

Arthve  B.  Kinsolving.


The  Subliminal  Self.


497


The  following  case,  from  a  lady  known  to  ine,  is  interesting  in
this  connexion ;  since  a  dream  is  at  first  remembered  so  impressively
as  to  affect  action,  is  then  apparently  forgotten,  and  finally  revives
in  memory  just  in  time  to  enable  the  dreamer  to  avert  its  complete
fulfilment.

P.  185.

On  the  second  occasion  my  warning  in  dream  did  probably  prevent  a
rather  serious  accident.  We  were  living  in  about  188 — ,  in  Hertford-street,
Mayfair.  One  day  1  determined  that  on  the  morrow  I  would  drive  to  Wool-
wich in  our  brougham,  taking  my  little  child  and  nurse,  to  spend  the  day
with  a  relation.  During  the  night  I  had  a  painfully  clear  dream  in  vision  of
the  brougham  turning  up  one  of  the  streets  north  of  Piccadilly  ;  and  then  of
myself  standing  on  the  payment  and  holding  my  child,  our  old  coachman  fall-
ing on  his  head  on  the  road, — his  hat  smashed  in.  This  so  much  discomposed
me  that  when  in  the  morning  I  sent  for  the  coachman  to  give  him  his  orders,
I  almost  hoped  that  some  obstacle  to  the  drive  might  arise,  so  that  I  might
have  an  excuse  for  going  by  train.  The  coachman  was  an  old  and  valued
servant.  I  asked  him  if  ho  would  have  the  carriage  ready  to  drive  to  Wool-
wich at  ten.  He  was  not  given  to  making  difficulties  ;  but  he  hesitated,
■and  when  I  suggested  eleven  instead,  he  said  that  he  would  prefer  that  hour.
He  gave  no  reason  for  his  hesitation  and  said  that  the  horse  was  quite  well.
I  told  him  almost  eagerly  that  I  could  quite  well  go  by  train  ;  but  he  said
that  all  was  right.

We  went  to  Woolwich  and  spent  the  day.  All  went  well  until  we  reached
Piccadilly  on  the  return  journey.  Then  I  saw  that  other  coachmen  wei-e
looking  at  us  ;  and  looking  through  the  glass  front  of  the  brougham  I  saw
that  the  coachman  was  leaning  back  in  his  seat,  as  though  the  horse  were
pulling  violently,  of  which,  ln)wever,  I  felt  no  sign.  We  turned  up  Down-
street.  He  retained  his  attitude.  My  dream  flashed  back  upon  me.  I
called  to  him  to  stop,  jumped  out,  caught  hold  of  my  child,  and  called  to  a
policeman  to  catch  the  coachman.  Just  as  he  did  so  the  coachman  swayed
and  fell  off  the  box.  If  I  had  been  in  the  least  less  prompt,  he  would  have
fallen  just  as  I  saw  him  in  my  dream.  I  found  afterwards  that  the  poor  man
had  been  sufiering  from  a  serious  attack  of  diarrhoea  on  the  previous  day,  and
had  gradually  fainted  from  exhaustion  during  the  drive  home.  He  was
absolutely  sober  ;  and  his  only  mistake  had  been  in  thinking  that  he  was
strong  enough  to  undertake  the  long  drive.  In  this  case  my  premonitory
dream  differed  from  the  reality  in  two  points.  In  my  dream  we  approached
Down- street  from  the  west ;  in  reality  we  came  from  the  east.  In  my
dream  the  coachman  actually  fell  on  his  head  ;  the  crushing  of  his  hat
on  the  road  being  the  most  vivid  point  of  the  dream.  In  reality  this
was  just  averted  by  the  prompt  action  which  my  anxious  memory  of  the
dream  inspired.

Signed  [Lady  Z.]

The  aversion  of  the  fulfilment,  by  reasonable  precaution,  is  here  an
important  feature. Another  dream  of  the  same  lady's  presents  us  with


498


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


a  fatal  fulfilment  occurring  in  spite  of  the  dreamer's  aroused  anxiety.
But  in  that  case  no  precautions  were  taken — nor  indeed  could  they
have  been  easily  taken, — to  avert  the  calamity.

P.  184.

I  am  not  usually  a  great  dreamer  ;  but  on  two  occasions,  and  two  occasions
only  in  my  life,  I  have  acted  on  dreams  or  impressions,  and  in  each  case  there
seems  to  have  been  some  meaning  in  the  impression  which  I  received.

In  or  about  the  year  1866,  Lord  Z.  and  I  were  inhabiting  a  house  in
Charles -street,  Mayfair.  We  had  built  out  a  bedroom  into  the  small  court
behind.  This  bedroom  was  separated  only  by  a  narrow  passage  or  strip  of
court  fi'om  our  neighbour,  Mrs.  L.'s  kitchen,  which  was  built  out  into  th&
court  in  the  same  fashion,  and  was  of  one  story  only.

In  the  middle  of  a  very  cold  night  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by  a  heavy
fall  into  this  passage  outside  our  bedroom  wall,  as  if  some  heavy  body  had
fallen  into  it  from  the  roof  of  Mrs.  L.'s  kitchen.  I  listened,  much  alarmed,
and  heard  groans  from  the  passage.  I  thought  that  some  burglar  had  slipped
from  the  kitchen  roof  down  on  to  the  jiavement  and  was  lying  there  injured.
I  begged  Lord  Z.  to  get  up  and  look  ;  but  he  could  hear  nothing,  and  told
me  that  I  had  been  dreaming.  I  went  to  sleep  again  at  length  ;  but  was
again  awakened  by  a  similar  thud  in  the  jjassage.  I  now  begged  Lord  Z.  so
earnestly  to  look  that  he  got  up  and  partially  dressed  and  opened  a  door  on
the  ground  floor  which  led  into  this  passage.  The  moon  was  shining  brightly,
and  there  was  no  trace  whatever  of  anything  unusual.  Much  perplexed  I
again  went  to  sleep.  After  I  had  left  the  bedroom  in  the  morning,  a  servant
came  to  ask  me  whether  he  might  get  ready  a  bedroom  to  receive  a  workman
who  had  come  to  work  on  the  roof  of  Mrs.  L.'s  kitchen,  and  had  fallen  into
the  passage  from  the  kitchen-roof  just  as  I  had  thought  that  I  heard  a  man
fall  some  few  hours  previously.  .  •

The  premonition,  if  sucli  it  was,  was  here  of  no  special  use.  It  seemed
as  though  I  had  received  an  intimation  of  a  coming  fact  which  only  con-
cerned me  by  its  mere  physical  nearness.

Signed  [Lady  Z.]

[Lord  Z.  is  no  longer  living.]

A  case  very  similar  to  this  reaches  us  from  America.  Dr.  Hodgson
knows  Mrs.  P.  and  Dr.  Lukens,  and  has  examined  Dr.  Lukens's  notes
throughout.

214.  Metuchen,  N.J. ,  March  12th,  [1892].

Prof.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — About  the  time  this  reaches  you,  you  will
receive  a  "  Fulfilled  Prediction,"  written  by  me  and  signed  by  four  others.
The  fifth  witness  is  ill  in  Brooklyn,  but  I  can  procure  her  attestation  should
you  desire  it.  I  am  the  sixth — the  seventh  is  in  "  The  Great  Beyond."  All
these  heard  the  prediction  repeatedly.

I  lay  stress  on  this  incident  because  of  my  impression  of  the  accident
several  weeks  before  it  took  place,  and  because  in  no  way  that  I  can  see
could  it  liave  been  photographed  upon  the  ether  before  it  took  place.  Unless,


The  Suhliminal  Self.


499


indeed,  our  innermost,  the  spiritual  essence,  being  at  one  with  the  Universal
Spirit,  foresees  the  future  as  part  of  the  Eternal  whole.

Some  curious  facts  I  did  not  incorporate  in  the  statement,  because  they
could  not  be  vouched  for  by  the  witnesses.  For  instance,  Mr.  Collins,  to
whom  the  fatal  accident  happened,  was  asked  by  Mr.  Van  Horn  (the  hus-
band of  the  last  signer  to  the  document  which  slie  will  forward  to  you)  to  re-
move the  snow  from  the  roof  as  described.  The  roof  was  a  small  conserva-
tory extending  from  the  main  dwelling.  This  he  did  as  requested.  Then  he
began  to  clear  the  ice  from  the  gutter  at  his  own  monition,  though  remon-
strated with  and  strictly  charged  to  be  careful  lest  he  should  fall,  by  Mr.  Van
Horn,  his  employer.  You  will  see  the  pertinence  of  this  fact  by  comjjaring
this  statement  with  that  which  is,  or  will  be,  forwarded  to  you  by  Mrs.  Van
,Horn.

H.  M.  P.

A  Fulfilled  Prediction.

Tn  the  winter  of  1886  and  1887,  I  was  living  at  West  29th  Street,  New
York  City.  In  company  with  six  friends  I  used  to  sit  one  hour  each  week,
not  for  "  spiritual  manifestations  "  but  for  the  purpose  of  harmonising  our-
selves and  for  the  cultivation  of  sensibility  to  psychic  impressions.

During  these  meetings  several  strong  presentiments  of  future  occurrences
came  to  nie  (Mrs.  H.  M.  P.),  which  were  subsequently  verified.

One  of  the  more  marked  was  the  following  : —

T  distinctly  felt  that  a  serious  accident  would  shortly  happen  to  some  per-
son in  or  about  the  back  portion  of  the  residence.  There  would  be  a  fearful
fall  of  some  elderly  man.

Now  in  the  house  were  two  elderly  men,  but  I  foresaw  that  the  accident
would  happen  to  neither  of  these.

Again  and  again  as  we  sat  within  our  quiet  room,  did  the  impression  of
this  terrible  fall  come  to  me,  as  those  present  clearly  remember.  At  such
times  the  horror  was  strong  and  persistent.  In  consequence  we  even  talked
of  having  a  lamp  constantly  burning  on  the  hall  of  the  basement  staircase
lest  one  might  make  a  misstep  there.  But  I  could  not  locate  the  place  where
the  fall  would  happen.

In  the  late  winter  of  1887  there  occurred  a  heavy  rain  followed  by  a  sud-
den freeze.  In  consequence  the  rain-gutter  of  the  rear  roof  became  clogged
with  ice  which  it  seemed  desirable  should  bo  cleared  away.

In  order  to  do  this  a  man,  between  sixty  and  seventy  years  of  age,  Thomas
Collins  by  name — the  foreman  of  a  number  of  men  employed  by  the  husband
of  one  of  us — volunteered  to  remove  the  ice.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  none
of  our  number  knew  anything  of  what  he  was  about  to  do.

Accordingly  Mr.  Collins,  a  man  of  large  experience,  caution,  and  intelli-
gence, with  hatchet  in  hand  mounted  a  ladder  placed  against  the  eaves  of
the  roof.  The  ladder  slipped  as  he  reached  the  top,  and  he,  with  it,  fell  to
the  stone  paving  of  the  area.  Mr.  Collins  struck  upon  his  head  causing
fracture  of  the  skull.  He  was  removed  to  the  hospital,  where  he  died  in  a
few  hours  without  having  recovered  consciousness.

The  first  impression  or  foreshadowing  of  this  accident  was  between  two
and  tliree  months  before  its  occurrence.

H.  M.  P.,  Metuchen,  N.J.


500


F.  W.  B.  Myers.


The  undersigned,  who  heard  this  prediction,  testify  to  the  statement  as
recorded  above.

(Signed) Henrietta  M.  Marvin,  Morrisania,  N.Y.

Harriet  W.  Farnsworth.  140,  W.  16th  St.,  N.Y.
Sarah  J.  Ostranda,  181,  Sixth  Avenue  [New  York].
Sarah  W.  Van  Horn,  Fairfield,  Conn,  (at  the  time
mentioned  106,  West  29th  St.,  New  York).

[I  add  a  few  other  brief  cases  from  the  experience  of  Mrs.  H.  M.  P.]

On  the  evening  of  January  2nd,  1892,  Mrs.  H.  M.  P.  made  the  following
prediction.  "I  see  Dr.  Anna  Lukens  receive  a  letter  announcing  a  death.
You  (to  Dr.  A.  L.)  will  soon  hear  of  the  death  of  some  one  connected  with
you — not  very  closely  ;  but  the  news  will  be  something  of  a  shock  and  a
great  surprise,  but  it  is  not  a  death  that  will  touch  you  closely."

The  following  persons  were  present  (at  1,068,  Lexington  Avenue,  New
York  City)  when  the  prediction  was  made.

Dr.  Anna  Lukens.
H.  M.  P.
M.  L.  Jackson.
W.  E.  Ward.

[Received  February  23rd,  1892.— R.  H.]

Extract  from  letter  to  Dr.  Anna  Lukens  fi'om  her  niece  : —

Philadelphia,  Januarij  14i/i,  1892.

My  Dear  Aunt  Annie, — .  .  .  .  Wasn't  that  very  sad  about  Hannah
Jones  ?  Suppose  thee  knew  she  died  on  January  2nd  of  jDneumonia,  and  was
buried  Wednesday,  the  6th.  They  were  living  on  13th  Street,  kl.  Locust
Street,  for  the  winter.  It  must  be  very  hard  for  John  and  the
children

W.  E.  L.

Through  Dr.  Anna  Lukens,  member  S.P.R.

Sunday,  May  Id,  1892. 3.30  p.m.

Mrs.  H.  M.  P.  in  semi-trance.  Her  control,  X.,  tells  Mr.  W.  E.
Ward  that  one  of  his  horses  (off  horse)  (a  new  span  recently  purchased)  is
unsafe  and  that  an  accident  will  occur  which  may  be  very  serious  unless
great  care  is  observed.  X.  (control)  says  "  horse  will  shy  badly — I  think
going  down  hill,  both  horses  inclined  to  be  tricky — will  try  to  run  away  on
this  occasion  ;  better  get  rid  of  them."  After  a  few  minutes'  pause  X.  says
"  Bx'ave,  there  is  a  dangerous  place  in  your  big  factory,  upper  part — some-:
thing  broken — will  fall  soon,  and  if  it  does  will  kill  many  people.  Can't
see  just  what  it  is — but  you  better  look  after  it  at  once."

Both  predictions  verified  the  following  Tliursday  (May  5th),  within  a
few  hours  of  each  other.  The  off  horse  shied  badly,  threw  the  carriage
off  on  the  side  of  the  road,  nearly  upsetting  it,  and  then  both  horses
tried  to  run  away.  Owing  to  tlie  good  management  of  the  coachman,  no
injury  was  sustained.  A  few  hours  after  this  accident,  a  split  beam,
forming  part  of  one  of  the  lieavy  trusses  supporting  the  roof,  was  discovered


The  Siibliminal  Self.


501


in  exact  locality  as  described  by  the  medium.  If  it  had  fallen,  which  it
must  soon  have  done,  there  would  have  been  serious  loss  of  life.

(Signed) H.  M.  P.

W.  E.  Ward.
Anna  Lukens.

[Received  May  19th,  1892.— R.  H.]

And  now  I  quote  a  case  where  the  dream  was  told  beforehand,
but  to  a  person  now  dead.  Even  had  it  not  thus  been  told,  I  see  no
reason  to  suppose  that  the  mere  sight  of  a  quite  commonplace
scene  could  generate  a  pseudo-memory  with  so  uniquely  disturbing  an
influence  in  a  man  otherwise  sane  and  in  the  midst  of  work.

P.  154.  Algonquin  Club,  Boston.

December  27th,  1893.

RiCHABD  HoDGSOn,  LL.D., — Deae  Sir, — I  enclose  to  you  herewith  a
very  curious  story  told  me  by  my  friend,  Mr.  W.  H.  M.  [name  and
address  given],  Boston.  I  am  afraid  that  strong  corroborative  evidence
cannot  now  be  secured  from  persons  to  whom  Mr.  M.  may  have  told  his
"  dream  "  before  he  went  to  Reading.  He  thinks  that  he  mentioned  having
had  a  very  vivid  dream  to  his  fiancee,  now  his  wife,  and  that  his  mother,
now  dead,  knew  of  the  dream  at  the  time.  He  did  not  talk  very  freely
about  the  affair,  because  he  did  not  care  to  expose  himself  to  the  ridicule  of
his  friends.

I  know  him  very  well.  He  is  a  brusque,  practical,  every-day  young
man,  of  large  business  experience,  and  apparently  very  far  removed  by
nature  and  environment  from  susceptibility  to  hallucination.  I  believe  in
his  truthfulness  and  honesty  in  this  matter  most  implicitly.

It  may  be  well  to  say  that  I  have  not  attempted  to  secure  evidence  of
the  correctness  of  topographical  details  from  Reading  ;  also,  that  at  the
time  of  his  dream,  Mr.  M.  had  in  his  possession  no  letter  from  that  city,
nor  any  friends  nor  business  relations  in  or  with  the  place,  and  his  trip  to
Reading  in  the  following  autumn  was  purely  the  result  of  sudden  exigency.
He  went  to  Philadelphia,  I  believe,  to  meet  a  friend,  found  he  had  gone  to
Reading,  and  followed  him  thither.

Charles  Heywood.

Mr.  W.  H.  M.  awoke  one  morning,  probably  in  August,  1884,  and
proceeded,  as  was  his  habit,  to  plunge  his  head  into  cold  water.  At  this,
the  recollection  flashed  across  his  mind  of  a  dream  he  had  had  during  the
night.  He  had  seemed  to  be  in  a  strange  city,  in  a  square  at  the  inter-
section of  several  streets.  Between  two  of  the  streets  was  a  building  with
this  sign  upon  it,  "John  Leyden  (or  Layton),  Hay  and  Grain,  Coal  and
Wood."  The  vision  made  such  an  impression  upon  him  that  he  remembered
it  during  the  summer.  In  the  following  October  he  visited  Reading,  Pa.,
for  the  first  time  in  his  life.  Arriving  after  dark  and  being  unfamiliar  with
the  city,  he  enquired  the  way  to  the  nearest  respectable  hotel,  and  there  put
up  for  the  night. In  the  morning  he  opened  his  window  and  looked  out  upon


.502


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  square  seen  in  his  dream,  corresponding  in  every  detail,  even  to  the  bale
of  hay  and  the  bags  of  grain  at  the  door  of  the  store.

The  above  statement  is  as  nearly  correct  as  I  can  now  recall  it.

W.  H.  M.

February  12th,  1894.

Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D., — Dear  Sir, — I  have  your  letter  of  the  8th,
and  in  reply  would  say  that  my  friend  Heywood's  account  of  my  "  dream  "
is  as  I  recall  it  now.  I  am  a  civil  engineer,  and  at  the  time  of  the  occurr-
ence I  was  Principal  Assistant  Engineer  of  the  Boston  and  Providence  R.R,
My  seventeen  years  of  business  life  have  been  actively  spent  in  the  practice
of  my  profession  and  in  general  contracting,  and  until  this  thing  happened
I  had  always  regarded  anything  of  like  nature  as  a  delusion  or  a  trick.
Under  these  circumstances,  I  think  you  will  understand  why  I  didn't
mention  the  matter  to  my  friends.  I  told  my  mother  something  of  it
before  I  went  away, — in  fact,  a  day  or  so  after  the  dream, — but  as  she  died
October  26th,  1893,  that  avenue  of  investigation  is  closed.  My  (at  that
time)  fiancee  lived  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  and  on  visiting  her  soon  after  my
trip  to  Reading,  Pa.,  I  told  her  of  the  matter.  She  is  now  my  wife,  and
recalls  the  affair,  but  I  am  afraid  this  is  not  good  evidence,  nor  have  I  any
other.  The  man  I  went  to  see  died  about  1885  or  1886,  though  I  learned
this  only  three  years  ago.

I  am  sorry  not  to  be  able  to  furnish  corroborative  evidence  of  this
matter,  as  I  would  like  to  have  it  explained.  I  had  never  been  in  Reading
till  that  time,  nor  have  I  been  there  since.

The  matter  bothered  me  so  much  at  the  time  that  it  almost  demoralized
me.  I  couldn't  get  it  out  of  my  mind.  There  is  one  more  thing  which  I
would  like  an  explanation  of.  It  used  to  bother  me,  but  I  am  quite  used  to
it  now.  Since  I  was  a  young  boy,  I  have  been  frequently  surprised  to  find
myself  saying  in  conversation  combinations  of  words  which  I  recognize  as
having  dreamt  of,  or  unconsciously  thought  of.  I  mean  phrases  which  I
have  never  thought  of  in  connection  with  the  subject  with  which  I  after-
wards use  them.  This  used  to  so  affect  me  that  1  would  hesitate — almost
stop  talking — and  then  involuntarily  finish  the  remark  with  the  remainder
of  the  words,  which  would  frequently  be  in  unusual  combination,  but
properly  used.

When  I  realised  the  occurrence,  it  seemed  for  an  instant  as  though
I  had  lost  control  of  my  mind.  This  happens  to  me  still  once  in  a
while,  but  it  doesn't  unnerve  me  as  it  used  to  do.  Do  I  make  myself
understood  ?

I  do  not  think  I  am  fanciful  or  imaginative,  but  I  have  given  these
things  much  unjjroductive  thought,  and  I  am  anxious  to  have  them
explained,  which  is  the  reason  I  told  Hey  wood  of  the  first  matter.

I  should  prefer  that  my  name  be  withheld  from  publication.  My  wife
can  tell  of  her  limited  knowledge  of  the  first  matter,  and  I  enclose  her
statement.

W.  H.  M.

[Name,  address,  and  commercial  position  given.]


The  Subliminal  Self.


503


February  12th,  1894.
The  statement,  as  told  by  Mr.  Heywood,  of  Mr.  M.'s  dream,  is  sub-
stantially as  he  told  it  to  me  before  our  marriage.

F.  R.  M. (Address  given.)

The  prefit^ured  scenes  which  I  have  thus  far  quoted,  whether  in
themselves  trivial  or  otherwise,  have  mainly  been  drawn  from  the
impending  actual  personal  experience  of  the  seer  himself.  But  in  the
case  (for  instance)  of  the  fall  from  the  kitchen  roof,  it  is  noticeable
that  Lady  Z.  did  not  herself  actually  hear  the  fall,  although  she
would  have  heard  it  had  she  still  remained  in  her  bedroom,  whei'e  she
heard  the  premonitory  sound.  Something  then  was  prefigured  which
lay  just  outside  her  own  life-history.

We  have  some  other  cases  of  like  type,  as,  for  instance,  the  follow-
ing crystal  vision  seen  by  Miss  X.,  in  direct  response  (a  very  rare
circumstance)  to  a  request  for  information  on  a  specific  point.  Other
premonitions  of  Miss  X.'s  have  already  appeared  in  these  Proceedings

P.  183.

Extract  from  "  Borderland  "  on  "  The  Art  of  Crystal-gazing."  October,
1893.

A  week  or  two  ago  I  was  visiting  friends  in  the  country,  and  was  about
tu  leave  their  house  on  a  certain  morning.  ' '  .1  wonder  what  you  will  do  after
I'm  gone,"  I  was  saying.

For  answer,  one  of  them  pulled  towards  me  a  piece  of  bright  mahogany
furniture  brilliantly  polished,  and  said,  "  Here  is  a  crystal — look."

"  This  is  the  pic-nic  you  said  you  were  all  going  to  at  Pin  Mill,  I  suppose,"
I  said  pleasantly,  as  a  picture  appeared.  "What  and  where  is  Pin  Mill?
There  is  no  sign  of  a  mill — it  is  just  a  grassy  bank  with  some  thorn-bushes
beyond.  Why  do  you  and  K.  get  up  and  go  away  ?  G.  and  S,  stay  together
and  Gr.  looks  as  if  her  back  hurt  her. The  nurse  is  there  too  with  the  boy."

"  I  don't  know  in  the  least  what  Pin  Mill  is,  but  any  way,  the  nurse  and
child  won't  be  there,"  said  my  friend.

A  day  or  two  later  she  wrote,  "  You  were  almost  right  about  Pin  Mill —
there  is  no  mill  in  sight.  We  sat  on  a  bank,  K.  had  cramp  and  I  had  to  take
her  for  a  walk,  G.  and  S.  were  left  together.  G.  had  sprained  her  back  and
was  in  some  pain,  and  the  nurse  and  boy  were  there.  The  were  no  thorn-
trees,  but  there  were  elder  and  blackberry-bushes  grown  up  high,  which  at  a
little  distance  looked  like  thorns." [I  have  seen  this  letter. — F.W.H.M.]

Similarly  trivial  in  the  foreshown  details  is  the  following  case  from
the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques.

P.  207.  The  Rivan.\zzaro  Case.

Letter  to  M.  Charles  Picket.

April  17th,  1891.

My  Dear  Colleague,  —You  ask  me  to  send  you  my  case  of  telepathy.  It
is  a  story  of  my  youth,  and  consequently  an  old  story  ;  I  formerly  told  it  to
M.  Sabatier,  of  Montpellier. Here  it  is,  if  it  interests  you  :  —


50i


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


During  the  summer  of  1867,  I  was  officially  the  assistant,  but  in  reality
the  friend,  in  spite  of  difference  in  age,  of  M.  F.,  a  former  officer  in  the  navy,
who  had  gone  into  business.  We  were  trying  to  set  on  foot  again  the
exploitation  of  an  old  sulphur  mine  at  Rivanazzaro,  near  Voghera,  in  Pied-
mont, which  had  been  long  abandoned  on  account  of  a  falling  in.

We  occupied  the  same  rooms,  and  our  relations  were  those  of  father  and
son,  or  of  elder  and  younger  brother.

I  have  often  gone  over,  in  memory,  the  story  I  am  about  to  tell  you  ;  I
have  studied  it  with  my  scientific  habits,  without  finding  the  least  explana-
tion. Nevertheless,  before  owning  my  absolute  inability  to  arrange  the  facts
in  any  method  at  all  in  accordance  with  those  to  which  my  profession
habituates  me,— measures,  figures,  experiments, — I  have  searched  for  all
the  accessory  circumstances  which  might  have  influenced  the  phenomenon.
Though  I  have  not  been  able  to  come  to  a  conclusion,  more  competent
persons  may  do  so.

I  knew  that  Madame  F.,  who  lived  at  Toulon,  and  with  whom  I  was
slightly  acquainted,  would  soon  be  confined.  I  cannot  say  I  was  indifferent
about  this  fact,  for  it  concerned  M.  F.  ;  but  it  certainly  caused  me  no  pro-
found emotion  ;  it  was  a  second  child,  all  was  going  well,  and  M.  F.  was  not
anxious.  I  myself  was  well  and  calm.  It  is  true  that  a  few  days  before,  in
Burgundy,  my  mother  had  fallen  out  of  a  carriage  ;  but  the  fall  had  no  bad
consequences,  and  the  letter  which  informed  me  of  it  also  told  me  there  was
no  harm  done.

M.  F.  and  I  slept  in  adjoining  rooms,  and  as  it  was  hot  we  left  the  door
between  them  open.  One  morning  I  sprang  suddenly  out  of  bed,  crossed
my  room,  entered  that  of  M.  F.,  and  awakened  him  by  crying  out,  "you
have  just  got  a  little  girl  ;  the  telegram  says.  .  .  ."  Upon  this  I  began
to  read  the  telegram.  M.  F.  sat  up  and  listened  ;  but  all  at  once  I  under-
stood that  I  had  been  asleep,  and  that  consequently  my  telegram  was  only  a
dream,  not  to  be  believed  ;  and  then,  at  the  saure  time,  this  telegram  which
was  somehow  in  my  hand  and  of  which  I  had  read  about  three  lines  aloud,
word  for  word,  seemed  to  withdraw  from  my  eyes  as  if  some  one  were  carrying
it  off  open  ;  the  words  disajjpeared,  though  their  image  still  remained  ;  those
which  I  had  pronounced  remained  in  my  memory,  while  the  rest  of  the  tele-
gram was  only  a  form.

I  stammered  something  ;  M.  F.  got  up  and  led  me  into  the  dining-room,
and  made  me  write  down  the  words  I  had  pronounced  ;  when  I  came  to  the
lines  which,  though  they  had  disappeared  from  my  memory,  still  remained
pictured  in  my  eye,  I  replaced  them  by  dots,  making  a  sort  of  drawing  of
them.  Remark  that  the  telegram  was  not  written  in  common  terms  ;  there
were  about  six  lines  of  it,  and  I  had  read  more  than  two  of  them.  Then,
becoming  aware  of  our  rather  incorrect  costume,  M.  F.  and  I  began  to  laugh,
and  went  back  to  our  beds.

Two  or  three  days  after  I  left  for  Toree  ;  I  tried  in  vain  to  remember  the
rest  of  the  telegram  ;  I  went  on  to  Turin,  and  eight  or  ten  days  after  my
dream  I  received  the  following  telegram  from  M.  F.,  "  Come  directly,  you
were  right."

I  returned  to  Rivanazzaro  and  M.  F.  showed  me  a  telegram  which  he  had
received  the  evening  before  ;  I  recognised  it  as  the  one  I  had  seen  in  my


The  Suhliminal  Self.


505


dream  ;  the  beginning  was  exactly  what  I  had  written,  and  the  end,  which
was  exactly  like  my  drawing,  enabled  me  to  read  again  the  words  which  I
saw  again.  Please  remark  that  the  confinement  had  taken  place  the  even-
ing before,  and  therefore  the  fact  was  not  that  I,  being  in  Italy,  had  seen  a,
telegram  which  already  existed  in  France — this  I  might  with  some  difficulty
have  understood — but  that  I  had  seen  it  ten  days  before  it  existed  or
could  have  existed  ;  since  the  event  it  announced  had  not  yet  taken  place.
I  have  turned  this  phenomenon  over  in  my  memory  and  reasoned  about  it
many  times,  trying  to  explain  it,  to  connect  it  with  something,  with  a  pre-
vious conversation,  with  some  mental  tension,  with  an  analogy,  a  wish, — and
all  in  vain.  M.  F.  is  dead,  and  the  paper  I  wrote  has  disappeared.  If  I
were  called  before  a  court  of  justice  about  it,  I  could  not  furnish  the  shadow
of  a  material  proof,  and  again  the  two  personalities  which  exist  in  me,  the
animal  and  the  savant,  have  disputed  on  this  subject  so  often  that  sometimes
I  doubt  it  myself.  However,  the  animal,  obstinate  as  an  animal  usually  is,
repeats  incessantly  that  I  have  seen,  and  I  have  read,  and  it  is  useless  for  me
to  tell  myself  that  if  any  one  else  told  me  such  a  story  I  should  not  believe
it. I  am  obliged  to  admit  that  it  happened.

J.  TeOULET.

Professor  at  the  Faculty  des  Sciences  at  Nancy.

M.  Thoulet  has  lately  confirmed  all  the  details  contained  in  his  letter.
He  has  no  longer  any  written  trace  of  this  old  story,  but  the  recollection  of
it  is  perfectly  clear.  He  assured  me  that  he  had  seen  and  read  the  telegram
like  a  real  object.

The  delicate  point  of  this  sti-iking  experience  so  carefully  (if  a  little
tardily)  reported,  would  be  to  know  exactly  what  degree  of  resemblance
existed  between  the  real  telegram  and  the  visionary  telegram  which  M.  Thoulet
had  read  ten  days  before.  But  even  if  the  identity  was  not  as  great  as  M.
Thoulet  now  thinks,  the  analogy  must  yet  have  been  striking,  and  the  origin
of  this  astonishing  hallucination  and  clairvoyant  premonition  is  most  extra-
ordinary.

Ch.  R.

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  expectant  mother  had  amused
herself  by  composing  telegrams  to  be  used  in  case  of  the  birth  of  a  boy
or  of  a  girl,  so  that  telepathy  may  have  been  at  work  here.

In  the  case  next  quoted  the  prefigured  scene  lies  still  further  from
the  percipient's  own  experience ;  belonging  to  the  private  life  of  a  man
known  to  her  only  by  sight,  and  in  whom  she  took  no  interest.

P.  198.

From  Mr.  Alfred  Cooper,  of  9,  Henrietta  Street,  Cavendish  Square,  W.

This  account  was  orally  confirmed  by  him  to  Mr.  E.  Gutney,  June  Gth,
1888.  It  is  written  by  Mr.  Cooper,  but  attested  also  by  the  Duchess  of
Hamilton.

A  fortnight  before  the  death  of  the  late  Earl  of  L — ,  in  1882,  I  called
upon  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  in  Hill  Street,  to  see  him  professionally.  After


506


F.  W.  U.  Myers.


I  had  finished  seeing  him  we  went  into  the  drawing-room,  where  the  Duchess
was  and  the  Duke  said  to  me,  "  Oh,  Cooper  ;  how  is  the  Earl  ?  "

The  Duchess  said,  "What  Earl?"  and  on  my  answering  "  Lord  L — ,"
she  replied  "  That  is  very  odd.  I  have  had  a  most  extraordinary  vision.  T
went  to  bed,  but  after  being  in  bed  a  short  time,  I  was  not  exactly  asleep,
but  thought  I  saw  a  scene  as  if  from  a  play  before  me.  The  actors  in  it  were
Lord  L — ,  in  a  chair,  as  if  in  a  fit,  witli  a  man  standing  over  him  with  a  red
beard.  He  was  by  the  side  of  a  bath,  over  which  bath  a  red  lamp  was  dis-
tinctly shown. "

I  then  said,  "I  am  attending  Loi'd  L —  at  present  ;  there  is  very  little
the  matter  with  him  ;  he  is  not  going  to  die  ;  he  will  be  all  right  very
soon."

Well,  he  got  better  for  a  week  and  was  nearly  well,  but  at  the  end  of  six
or  seven  days  after  this  I  was  called  to  see  him  suddenly.  He  had  inflam-
mation of  both  lungs.

I  called  in  Sir  William  Jenner,  but  in  six  days  he  was  a  dead  man.  There
were  two  male  nurses  attending  on  him  ;  one  had  been  taken  ill.  But  when
I  saw  the  other  the  dream  of  the  Duchess  was  exactly  represented.  He  was
standing  near  a  bath  over  the  Earl  and,  strange  to  say,  his  beard  was  red.
There  was  the  bath  with  the  red  lamp  over  it.  It  is  rather  rare  to
find  a  bath  with  a  red  lamp  over  it,  and  this  brought  the  stoiy  to  my
mind.

The  vision  seen  by  the  Duchess  was  told  two  weeks  before  the  death  of
Lord  L — . It  is  a  most  remarkable  thing.

This  account,  written  in  1888,  has  been  revised  by  the  [late]  Duke  of
Manchester,  father  of  the  Duchess  of  Hamilton,  who  heard  the  vision  from
his  daughter  on  the  morning  after  she  had  seen  it.

Signed  Mary  Hamilton.

Alfred  Cooper.

Her  Grace  had  been  reading  and  had  just  blown  out  the  candle.
Her  Grace  has  had  many  dreams  which  have  come  true  years  after.

Alfred  Cooper.

[The  Duchess  only  knew  Lord  L —  by  sight,  and  had  not  heard  that
he  was  ill.  She  knew  she  was  not  asleep,  for  she  opened  her  eyes  to  get
rid  of  the  vision  and,  shutting  them,  saw  the  same  thing  again.]

An  independent  and  concordaiit  account  has  been  given  to  me
orally  by  a  gentleman  to  whom  the  Duchess  related  the  dream  on
the  morning  after  its  occurrence.

In  the  two  cases  which  follow,  we  find  a  specially  interesting  form
of  gradual  emergence.  The  percipient  is  for  some  time  rendered
anxious,  as  though  by  a  dim  precognition  of  an  accident  which  no  one
could  ordinarily  foresee,  and  then  when  the  moment  of  crisis  actually
arrives  a  telepathic  shock  transmits  the  scene — in  one  case  to  the
percipient  already  affected,  in  the  other  case  (though  incorrectly)  to
his  wife — along  with  an  increment  of  his  own  dim  distress.


The  Subliminal  Self.


507


P.  164.  T.  F.  Leech,  M.D.

Indiana  State  Medical  Society.

Office  of  the  Vice-President,
Crawfordsville,  Ind.,  August  14//i,  1893.

Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D., — Dear  Sir, — I  will  say  that  I  suffer  from
chronic  rheumatism,  and  at  times  become  a  little  nervous,  caused  by
pain,  loss  of  sleep,  and  worry  about  business,  &c.,  &c.  While  in  that  con-
dition I  had  the  experiences  to  which  you  refer.  My  two  sons,  EUerslie  and
Charlie,  had  been  interested  in  establishing  Sons  of  Virginia  camps  through-
out the  country  [in  June,  1892],  and  would  occasionally  ask  to  drive  my
horse  and  buggy  on  their  nightly  visit  to  different  villages.  I  thought  nor
cared  anything  for  it,  until  one  evening  at  the  supper  table  EUerslie  said,
"  Papa,  I  want  to  go  to  Mace  to-night."  Mace  is  six  miles  east,  and  there
is  a  good  gravel  road  leading  to  it.  When  he  spoke,  it  flashed  through  me
that  on  the  way  home  something  would  happen  to  him .  I  thought  of  foot-
pads, sudden  illness,  and  the  like.  However,  without  making  known  my
fears,  I  asked  who  was  going  with  him.  He  answered,  "No  one."  I  told
him  to  take  Charlie  along.  He  said  Charlie  had  an  examination  the  next
day  at  College,  and  couldn't  go.  I  told  him  to  get  Bart  Griffith,  a  brother
S.  of  V.  He  went  to  see  G.,  and  on  returning,  told  me  G.  couldn't  go,  he
had  an  examination  also.  I  told  him  he  ought  to  get  some  one.  He  said
he  couldn't.  I  tried  to  throw  off  my  fears  and  started  to  my  office.  On
the  way  I  saw  a  young  man,  Arthur  Wellington,  and  asked  him  to  go  with
my  son.  He  said  he  would.  I  took  him  to  EUerslie  and  said,  "  Arthur  will
go  with  you."  He  answered,  "All  right, "and  I  dismissed  the  whole  thing,
fears  and  all,  from  my  mind — at  least,  I  thought  I  had.

I  was  busy  at  the  office  until  nine  o'clock,  when  I  went  home.  My  wife
had  retired.  I  got  in  bed,  read  a  while,  turned  out  the  light  and  went  to
sleep,  having  forgotten  that  my  son  was  away  with  the  horse  and  buggy.
About  eleven  o'clock  I  awoke  with  a  start  and  sat  up  in  bed.  I  had  seen,
before  waking,  EUerslie  driving  along,  alone  in  the  buggy,  the  horse  trotting
slowly,  one  mile  out  of  Crawfordsville.  I  saw  the  exact  spot  and  recognised
it,  so  I  could  have  gone  to  it.  In  addition,  I  saw  the  lightning  come  down
and  strike  in  the  middle  of  the  road  about  50  feet  in  front  of  the  horse.  My
first  impulse  was  to  go  up  there. I  remembered  then  that  EUerslie  had  gone

to  Mace,  and,  as  I  supposed,  taken  Arthur  W with  him. I  tried  hard

to  reason  myself  out  of  the  alarm  into  which  I  had  been  thrown.  I  first
thought  I  would  hitch  up  and  drive  up  to  the  scene  of  the  lightning  stroke
and  see  if  E.  was  hurt  ;  then  I  remembered  that  I  hadn't  any  horse.  I
thought,  "  They  both  certainly  are  not  hurt,  or  at  least,  the  horse  will  come
home,  &c.,"  but  my  fears  had  too  deep  a  hold  on  me.  I  awoke  my  wife  and
asked  her  if  Arthur  went  with  EUerslie.  She  said,  no  ;  there  was  no  place
for  him  to  stay  during  the  meeting  of  the  camp,  and  he  concluded  not  to  go.
In  the  midst  of  my  worry  EUerslie  came  in,  and  I  dismissed  the  whole  thing
and  went  to  sleep  without  telling  any  one.

At  the  breakfast-table  EUerslie  said,  "t  saw  something  last  night  that
scared  me."  On  being  asked  what  it  was,  he  said,  "  While  I  was  coming
home,  I  saw  the  lightning  come  down  the  road  right  in  front  of  me,  and  all
spill  over  the  ground. It  looked  like  it  had  been  poured  out  of  something


608


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


and  spilled  all  around  on  the  ground.  It  scared  me."  "Did  it  scare  the
horse  ?  "  some  one  asked.  "  He  stopped,  and  T  gave  him  a  cut  and  told  him
to  get  up.  It  was  the  j^rettiest  sight  I  ever  saw,  it  beat  any  fireworks."  I
asked  him  if  he  was  alone  and  was  he  driving  in  a  trot.  He  said  he  was.  At
noon  of  that  day  I  asked  him  where  he  was  when  the  lightning  struck.  He
told  me,  and  it  was  the  place  I  saw  in  my  sleep.  I  then  told  my  family  of
my  experience.  It  was  strange  that  I  should  have  taken  alarm  at  the  mention
of  his  going,  and  also  felt  that  he  would  be  on  his  way  home,  when  he  would
be  exposed  to  danger ;  that  I  should  have  forgotten  entirely  that  he  was
away — I  generally  can't  go  to  sleep  if  any  of  the  family  is  out  ;  tliat  I  should
see  him  in  the  buggy  alone,  the  horse  trotting,  the  exact  location  in  the  road,
the  lightning  come  down  just  where  and  how  he  described  it  ;  and  when  he
told  about  it,  I  felt  that  I  had  been  there  and  saw  it.  It  was  all  new  to  me,
and  while  I  may  have  had  fears  of  impending  danger  sometimes  in  my  life,
I  don't  remember  such  a  remarkable  succession  of  coincidences  happening
in  my  experience.

One  day,  shortly  after  the  above  described  incident,  soon  after  dinner,  I
was  seated  in  my  front  room  watching  a  game  of  Halma,  played  by  the  chil-
dren and  some  company  that  was  visiting  us,  when  I  had  a  feeling  that  there
was  a  building  on  fire  near  by.

I  felt  so  certain  of  it,  that  I  could  hardly  restrain  myself  from  going  out
to  see  if  it  was  the  barn.  Then  it  occurred  to  me  that  it  might  be  the
house.  I  thought  the  people  on  the  street  would  see  it  and  cry  "fire"
if  it  was.  I  didn't  want  any  one  to  know  I  had  such  a  feeling,  and  was
holding  myself  still,  when  the  fire  bell  rang,  and  I  said  to  myself,  "there  it
is."  To  get  out  doors  without  any  ado,  I  said,  we  inust  see  the  horses  run.
On  opening  the  door  Miss  Bess  Smith,  sitting  in  a  buggy,  said,  "Look  at
the  school-house,  it  is  all  on  fire  in  the  cupola  !  "  My  own  house  and
other  houses  were  between  me  and  the  fire  when  I  received  the  impres-
sion, making  it  impossible  for  me  to  see  the  school-house.  Was  it  a  co-
incidence ?  It  was  the  Central  school  building,  three  stories  high,  and
burned  down,  entailing  a  great  loss  in  money  as  well  as  great  inconvenience
to  the  schools.

T.  F.  Leech,  M.D.
E.  W.  Leech.
Mary  E.  Leech.

Crawfordsville,  Ind.,  April  3rd,  1894.
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D., — Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  the  30th  prox.  received.
The  date  you  enquire  for  was  June,  1892.  Our  dear  boy  Ellerslie  has  gone-
to  his  long  home.  He  graduated  from  Wabash  College,  June  20th,  1893,
and  spent  the  summer  and  fall  of  that  year  at  the  World's  Fair.  Came  home
and  commenced  the  study  of  medicine.

One  of  the  last  things  he  did,  and  the  very  last  time  he  signed  his  name
was  in  bed  and  when  he  signed  the  paper  you  sent  some  time  in  February
last.  T.  F.  Leech.

The  next  case  is  still  more  remarkable,  (as  above  implied),  from  its-
element  of  collectivity.


The  Subliminal  Self.


509


p.  161.  Forney,  Tex.,  February  1st,  1894:.

Prof.  William  James, — Dear  Sir, — Replying  to  your  request,  I  find  it
hard  for  me  to  present  to  you  the  "premonition  "  as  it  impressed  me.

In  the  first  place  I  will  state  that  I  am,  or  have  been,  in  perfect  health.
1  am  not  in  the  least  superstitious  and  am  not  subject  to  hallucinations,  and
have  never  taken  but  little  interest  in  the  investigation  of  such  phenomena.
Three  years  ago  last  December  my  son,  then  eighteen  years  of  age,  left
home  to  accept  a  position  in  a  drug  house  in  an  adjoining  county.  I  was
perfectly  willing  for  him  to  go,  and  never  felt  a  moment's  uneasiness  about
him.  Last  summer  I  took  an  extended  trip  east  and  was  gone  some  time.
During  my  absence  I  never  once  felt  the  least  apprehension  about  my  son  or
any  member  of  my  family.  I  am  naturally  of  a  buoyant  disposition.  Some
time  last  fall,  in  a  vague  and  indescribable  way,  I  became  dissatisfied  about
my  son.  I  can't  say  I  was  uneasy — only  dissatisfied — though  I  cannot  tell
why.  I  wrote  him  several  letters, — more  than  I  had  written  him  the  entire
three  years  of  his  absence.  Early  in  November  he  came  home  on  a  visit,
and  after  he  left,  I  seemed  to  get  more  troubled  and  dissatisfied  about  him  ;
it  was  not  uneasiness  or  apprehension  as  to  any  danger,  simply  I  was  dis-
satisfied and  troubled  about  him.  I  cannot  explain  my  feelings.  As  near
as  I  can  remember,  I  felt  just  as  I  did  after  my  father's  death,  when  I  was
quite  a  small  boy.  It  seemed  that  the  light  had  suddenly  gone  out  of  my
life  and  there  was  nothing  left  for  me  to  live  for.  A  weight  like  a  mill-stone
seemed  crushing  out  my  life.  I  remarked  often  to  my  friends  that  living
seemed  to  have  lost  its  attraction  for  me.  As  December  wore  along  this  feel-
ing became  intensified,  and  in,  some  way  my  son  seemed  to  be  the  centre  of
it  all.  Often  I  would  awake  in  the  night  thinking  about  him,  and  so
impressed  with  the  emptiness  and  hollowness  of  life  that  I  could  not  sleep.
On  the  morning  of  the  19th  of  December  I  awoke  some  time  before  day.  It
seemed  that  I  had  reached  a  crisis.  I  got  up  and  kindled  a  fire  without  dis-
turbing any  member  of  my  family.  In  all  my  life  I  do  not  remember  ever
doing  such  a  thing  before.  I  sat  down  by  the  fire  to  think.  I  cannot
explain  the  awful  weight  that  oppressed  me.  I  did  not  know  what  it  was,
nor  what  was  the  matter  with  me,  yet  in  no  way  did  I  anticipate  trouble  or
danger  to  my  son.  About  7  a.m.  my  wife  awoke,  and  sitting  in  the  bed,
told  me  a  dream  that  was  sti'angely  impressing  her,  — in  fact  it  caused  her  to
awake.

"I  thought,"  she  said,  "that  you  were  in  a  strange  place  and  among
people  I  had  never  seen  before.  It  was  a  large  family  of  people,  with  several
small  children  who  were  going  to  school  and  a  grown-up  daughter.  I  came  to
the  place  in  a  wagon,  but  you  were  there  already.  I  thought  you  were  very
intimate  with  the  family.  The  large  girl  sat  in  your  lap  and  put  her  arms
round  your  neck  and  kissed  you  repeatedly.  While  I  was  wondering  where
you  had  met  these  people  to  become  so  intimate  with  them,  you  suddenly
dropped  over  and  died. And  I  awoke."

I  replied  to  her  that  I  felt  wretched  enough  to  wish  the  dream  a  reality  ;
that  I  was  so  troubled  about  Walter  that  life  had  become  a  burden.  After
breakfast  I  got  my  writing  material,  and  called  my  daughter  and  told  her  to
write  Walter  a  letter  at  once  and  tell  him  to  come  home.  To  be  sure  and
get  her  letter  off  by  the  first  mail  train. I  then  rode  out  to  one  of  my  farms

2  0


4


510


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


for  recreation.  About  12  m.  I  received  a  despatch  to  tlae  effect  that  my  son
was  badly  hurt  and  was  unconscious.  I  boarded  a  freight  train  and  hurried
at  once  to  the  scene,  with  the  understanding  that  my  wife  and  daughter  come
later  on  the  passenger.  Now,  right  here  comes  in  a  remarkable  feature  in
that  strange  matter.  Through  some  misunderstanding  they  failed  to  catch
the  train  and  had  to  get  private  conveyance  and  come  directly  across  the
country.  By  their  changing  horses  at  each  little  town,  they  were  enabled  to
reach  my  son  by  11  o'clock  at  night.  The  accident  had  happened  near  the
residence  of  a  most  excellent  farmer,  whose  daughter  my  son  had  been  long
visiting.  To  the  house  of  this  gentleman  he  was  taken,  as  it  was  not  only
near  by,  but  was  the  house  of  his  best  friends.  He  had  a  large  family  of
children  who  were  all  deeply  attached  to  my  son.  Of  a  truth,  I  could  not
say  that  we  suffered  more  than  did  those  people  because  of  my  son's  death.
When  my  wife  entered  the  room  where  our  boy  lay  unconscious,  this  girl  I
speak  of  was  standing  at  the  head  of  his  bed  weeping.  She  gave  a  glance
around,  and  then  whispered  in  my  ear,  "This  is  my  dream  !  This  is  the
room  I  saw  you  in — these  are  the  people  I  dreamed  of."  Even  her  trip  there
in  a  wagon  was  a  verification  of  her  dream,  and  the  family  were  just  such
people  as  she  described  to  me — "  very  plain,  but  most  excellent  country
people."  The  very  nature  of  the  country  through  which  she  travelled  was
in  perfect  fulfilment  of  her  dream,  as  was  also  the  scenery  surrounding  the
house.

In  conclusion  I  will  say  that  the  heaviness  of  feeling  that  so  oppressed
me  has  all  disappeared.  I  have  never  felt  that  peculiar,  that  indescribable
weight  that  was  crushing  out  my  very  life,  since  Sunday  morning,  the  17th
of  December.  Of  course,  I  feel  sad  because  of  my  loss,  but  it  is  altogether
a  different  feeling.  ji  jyj^y

Mrs.  Ivey  adds  the  following  corroboration  : —

February  Uth,  1894.

Peof.  James, — It  was  after  daylight  on  the  morning  of  17th  December,
1893,  that  I  had  the  dream.  I  thought  that  I  was  at  a  strange  place.  I  had
gone  there  in  a  wagon.  I  had  no  recollection  of  my  husband  going  with  me,
but  he  was  there  and  seemed  to  be  a  particular  friend  of  the  family.  It  was
a  large  family,  and  I  was  very  much  struck  with  their  manner  and  dress  and
general  appearance.  I  observed  the  house  closely  and  the  scantiness  of  its
furniture  and  the  slip-shod  way  it  seemed  to  be  kept.  The  children  were
getting  lessons,  and  would  go  to  my  husband  for  assistance.  The  largest  one
of  the  children,  a  girl  about  budding  into  womanhood,  sat  on  my  husband's
lap  and  was  very  affectionate.  I  was  not  the  least  jealous  of  this  girl,  only  I
wondered  how  in  the  world  came  my  husband  so  intimate  with  those  people
whom  I  had  never  seen  or  even  heard  of  before.  They  did  not  seem  to  pay
any  attention  to  me,  but  to  devote  themselves  entirely  to  my  husband,  who
seemed  to  be  the  centre  of  attraction.  Suddenly  my  husband  di-opped  over
and  died, — and  then  I  seemed  to  be  at  home,  and  awoke,

About  12  m.  the  same  day,  we  got  a  telegram  from  CojDeville,  Tex.,  that
our  son  was  fatally  injured,  and  to  come  at  once.  My  husband  went  immedi-
ately on  a  freight  train.  Through  some  misunderstanding  I  had  to  go  in  a
private  conveyance  across  the  country.  As  soon  as  I  entered  the  house  I
thought  of  my  dream,  for  it  was  all  just  as  I  had  dreamt,  even  the  house


The  Subliminal  Self.


611


and  its  surroundings.  The  peculiar  dress  and  manner  of  the  people,  their
scantiness  of  furniture  and  negligent  housekeeping,  even  to  the  children
getting  their  lessons,  and  the  larger  girl  who  wept  over  our  son  like  her
heart  would  break — all  were  just  as  I  had  dreamed  that  very  morning  No
one  could  have  told  that  the  dead  boy  was  not  their  son  instead  of  ours.
We  learned  that  he  was  indeed  an  intimate  and  most  particular  friend  of  the
family  ;  that  he  spent  more  of  his  time  there  than  anywhere  else,  that  all
the  children  looked  on  him  as  a  brother,  and  that  the  larger  girl  loved  him
more  than  a  brother.  With  the  single  exception  of  putting  my  husband  in
place  of  my  son,  the  dream  was  a  real  and  vivid  anticipation  of  the  actual.

A.  L.  Ivey.

[Even  this  great  inaccuracy — the  substitution  of  the  husband  for
the  son — does  not,  I  think,  destroy  the  impression  of  a  true  relation
between  the  actual  and  the  visionary  scene.]

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Ivey  gives  some  further  particulars  : —

Forney,  Texas,  April  20th,  1895.

Me.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — Replying  to  yours  of  the  12th
inst.  I  will  say  : —

1st.  My  son  was  hurt  about  11.30  a.m.  Sunday,  December  17th,  1893.

2nd.  I  woke  about  3  a.m.  the  same  morning,  but  not  being  able  to  go
back  to  sleep  from  some  undefinable  cause,  I  got  up  about  4  o'clock  and
kindled  a  fire  and  remained  up.

3rd.  He  was  returning  from  church  with  two  other  young  men  in  a  buggy
when  the  horses  took  fright  and,  running  away,  came  in  contact  with  a  tree
which,  striking  my  son,  produced  the  fatal  injuries  from  which  he  died.

4th.  The  blow  produced  concussion  of  the  brain,  from  whicli  he  was
unconscious  the  greater  part  of  the  time.  He  died  about  1  a.m.,  Tuesday
19th.

After  more  than  a  year  I  know  of  nothing  1  can  add  to  the  letter  I  wrote
Prof.  James.  I  believe  it  contained  as  near  the  truth  as  it  was  possible  for
me  to  write.  As  near  as  I  can  remember,  for  six  weeks  or  more  before  the
accident  I  was  to  a  great  extent  two  different  distinct  persons.  During  the
day,  I  was  my  normal  self — satisfied — interested  in  my  business  and  going
along  as  usual.  But  at  night  I  was  altogether  another  person.  I  would
generally  take  a  short  nap  and  then  awake  with  the  most  awful  feeling  of
weight  and  depression  that  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of.  I  could  seldom  sleep
all  night,  (though  I  am  usually  a  sound  sleeper),  I  would  lie  and  toss  vainly
trying  to  sleep — feeling  all  the  time  that  there  was  nothing  more  to  live  for
— that  all  that  was  worth  living  for  had  gone  out  of  my  life — that  I  had  lived
too  long — and  that  my  life  was  nothing  henceforth  but  a  burden.  When  I
would  awake  after  a  short  nap,  1  felt  like  I  imagine  a  person  must  feel  who
was  to  have  been  hanged  that  day  and  realised  the  dreadful  fact  immediately
after  awakening.  This  expresses  it  better  than  anything  I  can  think  of.  I
once  called  the  attention  of  a  friend  to  my  singular  condition — it  was
something  unusual  in  my  life — I  couldn't  understand  it — I  remarked  to  him
that  I  was  so  low-s[)irited  as  soon  as  I  went  to  bed  that  I  could  not  rest,  and
that  I  could  see  no  sense  in,  it  as  my  business  was  in  good  condition,  I

2  0  2


512


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


thought  possibly  that  I  was  going  to  be  sick,  as  I  was  only  troubled  at  night
and  was  as  cheerful  and  full  of  life  during  the  day  as  I  usually  am.  I  don't
know,  for  some  time,  that  this  state  of  mind  was  in  any  way  associated  with
my  son,  but  gradually  he  became  the  centre,  as  it  were,  around  which  the
awfulness  seemed  to  crystallise.  On  Sunday  morning,  December  17th,  I
awoke  about  3  o'clock  and  the  feeling  was  so  heavy  that  I  could  not  stand  it
and  got  up  and  made  me  a  fire.  As  soon  as  breakfast  was  over  I  got  pen  and
paper  and  ordered  my  daughter  to  write  to  Walter  to  come  hmne  at  once.

I  remember  well  walking  the  floor  after  breakfast  ;  and,  turning  to  a  friend
who  was  at  my  house,  I  remarked  to  him,  "  J^o,  I  am  troubled  to  death  about
Walter— I  see  ahead  of  him — and  there  is  ruin."  I  then  called  my  daughter
and,  getting  material  and  placing  it  on  the  table  before  her,  ordered  her  to
write  to  Walter  then  to  come  home  at  once.

Understand  though,  I  never  dreamed  of  any  accident  happening  to  him
that  day — I  never  thought  of  his  getting  hurt,  or  I  would  have  telegraphed
to  him.  I  was  simply  troubled  to  death  about  him  and  couldn't  tell  why.  It
never  once  crossed  my  mind  that  he  was  in  any  danger  at  all.  I  had  no
premonition  of  any  evil  happening  to  him.  I  was  simply  troubled  to  death
and  he  seemed  to  be  the  centre  of  it.  I  am  a  farmer.  Buckle  says  that
farmers  and  sailors  are  the  most  superstitious  of  people.  Possibly  this  may
be  true,  buc  I  don't  think  I  am  the  least  so.  I  never  had  anything  in  the
way  of  a  premonition  in  my  life  before,  though  I  once  had  a  remarkable
experience  in  connection  with  my  first  child  who  died  at  nine  years  of  age  ;
still  it  was  in  no  sense  a  premonition.  In  the  whole  range  of  human  experi-
ence I  know  of  no  class  of  phenomena  so  inexplicable  as  premonitions.
Even  if  Spiritualism  be  true,  I  cannot  see  how  spirit  intercourse  can  explain  it.

T.  F.  IVEY.

This  case  seems  to  tell  against  the  view  that  the  father's  trans-
cendental foresight  discerned  the  accident  long  beforehand.  It
suggests  rather  that  some  intelligence  to  which  the  impending  accident
was  long  previously  known  may  have  endeavoured  to  inform  the  father,
but  only  when  the  accident  was  just  about  to  occur  was  able  to
impress  the  father  still  more  strongly,  and  also  to  inform  the  mother
of  the  event,  though  with  much  symbolic  confusion.

Can  we  suppose  that  the  boy's  own  spirit  was  thus  aware  before-
hand of  his  own  impending  death,  and  was  able  to  transmit  the
knowledge  to  the  father,  although  not  to  the  boy's  own  supraliminal
consciousness, — with  the  desire,  perhaps,  that  the  father  should  avert
the  accident  by  summoning  the  boy  home  1  Far-fetched  though  this
sounds,  we  have  a  few  cases  of  so-called  "  banshees  "  where  the  fact
that  all  the  family  except  the  dying  man  himself  are  roused  by  the
alarming  sounds,  looks  as  though  those  premonitory  sounds  were  some-
how caused  by  the  spirit  which  is  about  to  quit  the  flesh  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  v.,  p.  307).  But  the  evidence  for  "banshees"  and  "  doubles "
is  too  scanty  to  justify  insistence  on  this  view,  and  we  shall  presently
find  that  the  agency  of  disembodied  spirits  is  more  often  suggested.


The  Suhliminal  Self.


513


T  must  first,  however,  quote  a  few  more  cases  where  the  origin  of
tlie  precognitive  vision  remains  quite  obscure.  I  will  begin  with  a
trivial  incident,  where  possibly  a  full  telepathic  knowledge  of  the  minds
of  others  might  have  led  to  an  expectation  of  the  meeting  which
actually  occurred.  This  resembles  an  extreme  instance  of  the  "  home-
coming "  cases,  where  a  man  returning  to  his  house  is  seen  before  he
actually  arrives.

P.  CI.  129.

From  Captain  Parker,  through  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer.

Hythe  Vicarage,  Southampton,  April  16ih,  1889.

Deak  Me.  Fryer, — On  referrmg  to  the  only  notes  I  have,  I  find  I  cannot
fix  the  exact  date  of  the  occurrence  of  which  you  want  particulars.  It  was,
however,  durmg  the  latter  half  of  June,  1886,  as  I  find  it  was  then  that  the
man  arrived  whose  coming  I  dreamt  about.

I  was  then  in  charge  of  a  Division  of  Coastguard,  and  it  was  a  part  of  my
duties  to  visit  the  various  coastguard  stations  within  the  limits  of  that
division  of  the  coast.  The  dream,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember  it,  was  as
foUows  :  that  I  was  visituig  an  outlying  station  where  there  were  several
coasting  vessels  moored,  their  heads  out  seaward,  and  sterns  secured  to  the
shore  with  hawsers.  Two  navy  bluejackets  landed  from  one  of  the  craft,
quite  to  my  surprise,  and  on  asking  where  they  were  from,  one  of  them  said
he  had  been  sent  from  Wick  for  duty  at  Sandhaven  (a  village  m  my  division).

The  details  of  the  dream  were  so  vividly  impressed  on  my  mind  on
waking,  which  is  quite  unusual  with  me,  that  I  told  my  housekeeper  about
it  at  or  about  breakfast  time  — as  far  as  I  know  the  only  time  I  ever  told  her
any  dream  at  aU.—  and  for  the  time  thought  no  more  of  it,  but  soon  after,  I
think  the  same  day,  when  the  post  came  I  received  an  official  letter  appoint-
ing a  man  from  Wick  for  duty  at  Sandhaven.

I  was  so  astonished  at  this  coincidence  that  I  at  once  said  to  my  house-
keeper :

"Tou  remember  the  dream  I  told  you  about  a  man  coming  from  Wick  for
Sandhaven. Here  is  his  official  appointment."

A  further  curious  coincidence  in  connection  with  the  above  is  that  in  the
ordinary  course  of  events  this  man  would  have  proceeded  from  Wick  to
Aberdeen  by  steamer,  and  from  thence  north  by  rail,  and  in  fact  that  was
how  he  was  ordered  to  go  ;  but  on  this  occasion,  which  sometimes  happened,
the  steamer  stopped  off  Fraserburgh  and  landed  the  man  there  without  my
knowledge  at  the  time,  until  I  found  a  strange  bluejacket  at  my  quarters,
and  on  askmg  who  it  was  and  where  he  had  come  from,  he  told  me  he  had
landed  from  the  steamer  from  Wick,  and  was  sent  for  duty  at  Sandhaven.
At  that  moment  aU  the  details  of  the  dream  again  came  to  my  mind,  and  the
fact  of  the  man  landing  on  the  coast  instead  of  coming  by  rail  was  also  in
accordance  with  the  details  of  the  dream.  It  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to
remark  that  nothing  occurred  beforehand  that  would  lead  me  to  expect  a  man
being  sent  from  Wick,  or  I  should  not  have  thought  that  the  dream  was
curious  or  worth  a  moment's  thought.


514  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

I  have  no  doubt  my  housekeeper  remembers  something  of  this  occurrence,
as  she  has  a  better  memory  than  I  have  for  most  things.  I  have  not  written
to  her  on  the  subject,  as  I  thought  you  might  prefer  to  have  her  evidence
without  any  reminder  from  me  to  her  about  it.  Y F H  Paeker

The  following  is  from  Captain  Parker's  housekeejjer.  If  her  recollection
is  exact,  there  was  more  coincidence  in  the  man's  aspect  than  Captain  Parker
has  described.

Fraserburgh,  April  mh,  1889.
In  answer  to  your  inquiry  about  Captain  Parker's  dream,  I  remember  him
telling  me  about  it.  He  said  that  in  his  dream  he  left  the  house,  and  soon
after  met  the  coastguard  man,  and  asked  him  if  he  was  the  man  that  was
come  to  Sandhaven  station  from  Wick,  and  he  said,  "I  am."  Mr.  Parker
said,  when  telling  me  about  it  next  morning,  "How  I  wish  to  see  that  man."
He  saw  him  soon,  to  his  astonishment,  the  exact  image  and  likeness  as  in  his

Elizabeth  Macdonald.


Here  is  a  "  home-coming "  case,  interesting  as  being  collective,
although,  as  in  many  out-of-door  cases,  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken
identity  seems  a  possible  one.

P.  167.  Coon  Rapids,

April  2m,  1892.

Mr.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir,  —One  Sunday  in  the  latter  part  of  March,  my
son  went  down  street  to  practice  a  cornet  solo  with  a  lady  pianist.  After  he
had  been  gone  a  short  time,  I  got  up  from  my  seat  and  went  to  the  window,
and  looked  in  the  direction  he  had  gone.  I  was  not  thinking  of  his  coming  for
some  time,  yet  I  saw  him  as  plainly  as  I  ever  did,  coming  at  a  little  distance.
I  said  to  the  family,  "Here  comes  the  Professor."  My  daughter-in-law
leaned  back  in  her  chair  to  look  out  of  the  window.  She  said,  "Yes,  there
he  comes."  We  looked  at  him  a  few  seconds,  and  turned  from  the  window.
What  seems  queer  is  we  failed  to  notice  his  not  coming  in,  or  to  say  anything
about  it.  I  don't  remember  thinking  of  him  again  until  he  really  came  some
time  afterwards.  As  usual  I  thought  very  little  about  it  until  next  day.  I
then  enquired  of  him,  and  he  assured  me  he  went  directly  where  he  started
to  go,  and  remained  there  an  hour  and  a  half,  when  he  came  directly  home.
I  told  him  I  saw  his  ghost.  He  laughed,  as  they  always  do.  The  third  day
afterwards  I  chanced  to  look  out  and  saw  him  (not  his  ghost)  coming  in  the
very  same  place.  This  was  a  very  windy  day.  Now,  here  is  something
strange  about  it,  if  I  can  explain  it  as  it  appeared.

The  Sunday  that  I  saw  his  ghost  was  a  calm  day,  but  he  appeared  as
though  the  wind  was  blowing  his  clothes  all  to  one  side,  and  his  head  was
drawn  down  inside  his  coat  collar,  as  if  to  protect  it  from  the  wind.  [He]
had  the  appearance  of  being  out  in  a  strong  wind,  just  as  he  really  was  the
third  day  after.  He  seemed  to  be  walking  fast,  and  yet  did  not  advance  a
step.  After  thinking  it  over  for  days,  I  bethought  me  to  ask  my  daughter-
in-law  how  he  appeared  to  her.  She  described  him  exactly  as  I  saw  him,
and  the  same  strong  wind  and  bending  his  head.

M.  E.  Vradenburg.


The  Subliminal  Self.


515


Mb.  Hodgson, — I  saw  the  apparition  my  mother-in-law  has  told  you  of
just  as  she  describes  it.

Delia  Vradenburg.

Received  March  l^th,  1894  :—

My  brother  went  out  to  practise  on  the  cornet  with  a  pianist,  as  mother
has  stated,  and  when  he  had  been  gone  a  short  time,  mother  went  to  the
window  and  says,  "Here  comes  the  Professor  !  "  My  wife  also  looked  out
and  saw  him,  as  she  testiiied  in  mother's  statement.  We  all  talked  about  his
returning  so  soon,  but  did  not  notice  his  failing  to  come  in  then.  But  when
he  returned,  he  declared  he  was  not  out  at  that  time,  but  had  come  directly
home  after  practice.  Remember  my  wife  and  mother  seeing  him  on  the
tliird  day  after,  really  coming  in  the  same  place,  and  appearing  as  they  saw
him  first,  the  wind  blowing  his  clothes  the  same  way.

E.  H.  Vradenburg.

The  next  case  is  a  remote  one,  but  it  involves  incidents  not  likely
to  have  been  forgotten.  Unfortunately,  no  corroboration  is  now
obtainable.

P.  145.  Dream.

The  percipient,  Miss  K.  M.  Cleary,  writes  : —

Albert -road,  Carrickfergus,  Co.  Antrim.

February  15f/i.,  1892.

I  will  first  state  that  I  am  a  very  healthy  woman,  and  have  been  so  all
my  life.  I  am  not  in  the  least  nervous.  My  occupation  is  that  of  head
teacher  in  one  of  the  Board's  Model  Schools.

[After  giving  an  account  of  an  occasion  when  she  saw  an  apparition  of  one
of  her  assistants,  who  was  absent  at  the  time,  and  another  occasion  when
she  saw  the  apparition  of  an  unknown  person,  Miss  Cleary  says  : — ]

When  I  was  about  fifteen  and  at  a  convent  boarding  school,  I  dreamt,
without  any  cause  that  could  inspire  it,  that  my  father  was  ill,  of  details
connected  with  it,  of  his  death,  of  results  which  followed.  When  the  bell
rang  for  getting  up,  and  the  nun  came  round  to  wake  us,  I,  who  had  been
roused  from  my  painful  chain  of  visions,  was  sitting  in  my  nightdress  on  the
side  of  the  bed,  and  so  faint-looking  that  the  lady  insisted  I  should  return  to
bed.  But  this  1  would  not  do.  I  was  too  terrified,  and  yet  so  glad  it  was
"  only  a  dream."  This  was  Friday.  On  Sunday  morning  came  the  bad
news  :  "Kate, — Father  is  very  ill  ;  pray  for  him."  And  so  commenced  the
chain  of  sad  realities  pictured  so  graphically  to  me.

In  answer  to  our  inquiries.  Miss  Cleary  wrote  further  :  —

February  2Qth,  1892.

In  reference  to  the  dream  previous  to  my  father's  death,  you  ask  me  if  I
can  give  further  details,  dates,  and  corroboration,  and  "  did  it  happen  at  the
beginning  of  his  illness,  or  before,  or  after  if?  "

Well,  I  think  the  only  important  detail  I  did  not  mention,  or,  at  least,
lay  stress  on,  is  that  it  was  the  sound  of  the  bell  for  rising  which  broke  the
chain  of  pictures  that  were  being  presented  to  me — that  I  was  sent  for  to  go


51G


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


home  (we  lived  in  Roscrea,  Co.  Tipp.,  where  the  convent  is)  ;  that  T  did  go
home  ;  that  I  turned  to  go  to  the  bedroom  that  had  always  been  occupied  by
him  ;  that  mother,  close  behind  me,  motioned  me  to  an  opposite  room,  which
had  never  been  used  as  a  bedroom ;  that  I  went  in,  saw  the  bed  in  a  certain
position,  head  towards  this  wall,  foot  tliat ;  that  Dr.  R.  was  towards  the  foot
of  the  bed,  holding  in  his  hand  a  white  china  tea-cup,  with  lilac  flower
pattern,  one  of  a  set  we  had  ;  that  on  the  window  was  a  very  peculiar  new
style  of  lace  curtain,  the  pattern  of  which  I  had  never  seen  anywhere.  I
dreamt  he  died,  and  of  the  grief  and  terrible  trouble  ;  and  about  this  part
there  was,  as  it  were,  a  cloud,  and  one  distinct  figure  loomed  from  it — that  of
an  uncle,  father's  brother.  Dr.  James  Cleary,  of  Dublin,  (27,  N.  Earl-street),
deceased  since.  I  saw,  or  felt,  that  James  took  my  only  brother  back  with
him  to  Dublin.

Every  detail  of  the  dream  was  verified.  Now,  with  me,  this  dream  is
unique  in,  if  I  may  express  myself  so,  its  span.

The  loud,  rapid  tones  of  the  hand-bell  rung  in  the  dormitory  roused  me,
and  mechanically  1  sprang  from  bed,  scarcely  awake  ;  in  a  daze  or  stu^Dor  I
was  sitting  on  the  side  of  it.  The  nun  whose  duty  it  was  to  go  from  bed  to
bed  to  make  sure  we  had  all  arisen,  found  me  as  I  described,  noted  my
appearance,  shook  me  a  little,  told  me  I  seemed  very  ill,  and  should  lie  down
again.  This  aroused  me  quite.  I  would  not  have  gone  back  to  that  bed
just  then  for  worlds.  1  told  her  I  was  not  ill,  that  I  had  been  dreaming,  and
dreamt  that  my  father  was  dead;  but  she  "would  not  listen  to  such
nonsense,  superstition,  and  folly,  &c."  (She  is  dead,  and  there  is  no  one
who  can  corroborate.)  I  may  have  mentioned  it  to  a  companion  ;  I  did  not
attempt  to  do  so  again  to  any  of  the  nuns.

At  the  time  1  had  this  dream  I  had  every  reason  to  believe  that  my  father
was  in  perfect  health  ;  and  he  rvas  in  perfect  health.  He  was  medical  doctor
to  the  house.  I  had  seen  him  a  few  days  before  from  a  window,  walking  in
the  grounds  with  the  Mother  or  Superioress.  He  looked  then,  as  he  always
did,  the  embodiment  of  health  and  good  humour.  In  comparing  dates  and
events  afterwards  with  my  mother,  who,  unhappily,  is  no  more,  I  found  that
the  dream  occurred  on  the  eve  of  his  first  day's  indisposition.  He  was
attending  a  fever  patient  some  miles  from  the  town,  got  a  severe  wetting,
which  predisposed  him  to  the  infection,  which  he  caught.  He  was  but  5
days  ill.  He  died  on  the  19th  July,  1853.  I  am  now  52,  therefore  I  was  not
so  much  as  15  when  he  died.  His  death  changed  the  wliole  course  of  my
life,  or  rather,  shunted  me  quite  on  other  lines.

On  Wednesday  morning  1  had  the  dream.  On  the  same  Wednesday  he
got  the  wetting.  Wednesday  night  he  felt  nervous  and  unwell,  and  had  a
hot  foot-bath  before  going  to  bed.  Thursday,  I  presume  he  did  not  go  out.
I'm  sure  he  lay  for  the  first  time  on  Friday.  Friday  evening  I  first  had  any
intimation  of  his  illness.  Then,  my  aunt,  his  sister,  who  was  a  nun  there
and  one  of  my  class  mistresses,  told  me  that  mother  had  sent  word  of  it,
with  a  request  that  the  nuns  would  pray  for  him,  but  she  added  :  "  There  is
no  cause  for  alarm." 1  recollect  nothing  particular  about  Saturday.

On  Sunday  morning  I  was  called  away  from  the  breakfast  table  and  told
I  was  to  dress  for  going  home,  to  see  my  father,  who  had  become  worse.  I
went  and  found  as  I  had  seen  in  my  dream.


The  Sitbliviinal  Self.


517


Mother  told  me  afterwards  that  she  was  greatly  shocked  by  my  standmg
as  I  did  at  the  threshold  of  the  door,  and  that  T  seemed  not  to  be  able  to
keep  my  eyes  from  the  windows.  The  room  and  everything  in  the  room  was
as  I  had  seen  them  in  my  dream.

I  know  that  father  had  been  thinking  of  me  particularly  during  the  early
part  of  the  week  in  which  he  took  ill,  as  I  had  had  an  earache.  He  sent  me
a  drug  for  it,  which  cured  it  at  once,  but  he  was  not  aware  of  the  success  of
his  remedy.  He  asked  me  then,  during  this  interval  of  consciousness  while
I  made  ray  short  visit,  how  was  the  pain  in  the  ear  ?  I  said  :  "  Your  little
bottle  cured  it."  (I  had  the  same  little  bottle  for  many  years.)  He  then
kissed  me  and  put  his  hand  on  my  head  and  blessed  me.  The  doctor  then
almost  pulled  me  away,  and  told  mother  to  take  me  from  the  room.

I  remember  well  how  unnaturally  calm  I  was,  and  this  calm,  or  apparent
insensibility,  remained  throughout  his  short  illness,  and  when  I  heard  of  his
death.  Mother  used  often  to  remark  how  strange  it  all  was,  and  how
extraordinary  that  I,  who  was  the  only  child  absent  when  he  became  ill,
should  be  the  only  one  who  received  his  sad  farewell,  and,  as  she  said,  "It
was  fitting  too,  for  I  was  his  favourite  child."  ]yj  Cleiry

It  will  be  observed  that  the  day  of  the  week  on  which  the  dream  occurred,
is  given  differently  in  the  two  accounts.  Whether  Dr.  Cleary's  illness  had
actually  begun  or  not  at  the  time,  it  appears  that  the  dream  took  place
during  a  period  when  at  least  there  was  no  reason  for  special  anxiety  about
him,  even  on  the  part  of  his  family  at  home,  and  when  Miss  Cleary  herself
liad  no  reason  for  anxiety  at  all.

The  case  which  I  next  quote,  sent  to  us  by  Lord  Wenlock,  was
omitted  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  the  ground  that  an  accident  of  this  kind
to  a  railway  official  is  not  rare  enough  to  raise  the  incident  clearly
above  chance  coincidence.  While  partly  agreeing,  I  think,  neverthe-
less that  the  case,  as  now  further  corroborated,  is  one  on  which  the
reader  should  have  the  opportunity  of  forming  his  own  opinion.

P.  368.

From  Thomas  Carbert,  Porter  at  Escrick  Station,  through  Lord  Wenlock,

Escrick  Park,  York.

At  the  end  of  February  or  beginning  of  March,  1883,  I  dreamt  I  saw
Mr.  Thompson,  the  station-master,  lying  with  his  legs  cut  off,  close  to  a  heap
of  coals  against  a  small  cabin  at  the  back  of  the  station.  I  dreamt  that  the
accident  happened  to  him  by  what  we  call  the  "  pick-up  "  goods  train,  and
that  it  occurred  in  the  month  of  May.

I  told  my  dream  to  Mr.  Thompson  the  next  morning,  and,  though  he
laughed  over  it,  it  seemed  to  make  him  uneasy.

On  the  18th  of  May,  1883,  Mr.  Thompson  was  run  over  by  the  "  pick-
up "  goods  train,  and  both  his  legs  were  cut  off.

The  accident  ha23pened  at  the  back  of  the  cabin  just  whei'e  I  dreamt  I
had  seen  him  lying.

I  have  taken  this  down  from  the  lips  of  the  above-named  Thomas
Carbert. — Wenlock,  February  14Wi,  1884.


518


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Further  enquiry  lias  much  improved  the  evidence  in  this  case.  Thomas
Carbert,  who  has  now  been  moved  to  llillington,  writes  under  date  October
7th,  1895  :—

' '  I  did  dream  it,  and  told  Mr.  Thompson  of  it,  and  he  told  Mr.  Hartas
Foxton  of  it  the  same  morning.  Mr.  Thompson  said  it  was  three  months  to
May  yet.  As  to  what  made  me  say  it  would  happen  in  May,  something
seemed  to  say  it  would  be  in  May  in  my  dream."

Mr.  Foxton  also  writes  as  follows  from  The  Grange,  Escrick,  October
12th,  1895  :—

Dear  Sir,  —  The  incident  you  mention  is  vividly  impressed  upon  my
memory.  One  morning  upon  my  arrival  at  Escrick  station  to  catch  the
8  train,  Thompson  and  Carbert  were  together  in  the  booking-office,  and  after
the  customary  greeting  Thompson  said  to  me,  "  Master  (he  always  called  me
'Master'),  what  do  you  think  Carbert  here  has  been  telling  mel  He  had  a
dream  last  night,  and  that  I  have  only  so  long  to  live  "  (mentioning  the  time,
either  two  months  or  three).  I  replied,  "  Why,  if  you  have  only  that  time  to
live  you  must  make  the  very  best  use  of  it  ;  at  the  same  time,  if  you  know
your  days  are  numbered,  you  may  still  have  longer  to  live  than  some  of  us."
This,  of  course,  I  said  half  in  jest,  and  the  train  coming  in  the  incident
ended.  But  1  noticed  particularly  that  Carbert  seemed  quite  downhearted
and  distressed  when  Thompson  was  relating  the  dream  to  me,  and  I  must
say  it  made  some  indefinable  impression  upon  me,  so  much  so  that  when  I
heard  of  the  accident  to  Thompson,  the  dream  and  its  ending  flashed
vividly  back  to  me.

You  are  at  liberty  to  make  use  of  this  letter  in  any  way  you  choose,  either
publicly  or  privately.  Hartas  Foxton.

For  a  reason  similar  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's, — namely,  the  frequency
of  accidents  in  a  miner's  life, — I  have  omitted  several  premonitions
of  such  events  ; — premonitions  pointing  mainly  to  individual  deaths,
but  sometimes  taking  the  form  of  some  strange  sight  or  sound, — an
ar'idus  fragor  in  the  heart  of  the  earth, — which  is  held  to  intimate
wide-spread  disaster  to  the  mine  itself.  A  layman  cannot  judge  as  to
how  far  the  very  conditions  which  make  the  danger  may  also  cause  the
unusual  sound.  The  following  case,  however,  does  not  seem  open  to
these  general  objections,  since  the  danger  was  one  voluntarily  incurred
by  a  man  above  ground.

P.  124.  The  Pit  Explosion  at  Tredegar.

From  The  South  Wales  Daily  Neivs,

November  11th,  1884.

A  curious  circumstance  was  narrated,  and  its  accuracy  vouched  for,  on
Monday,  at  Tredegar,  in  connection  with  the  death  of  the  man  Pugh.  He,
it  will  be  remembered,  persisted,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  the  police,
in  pressing  forwards  to  the  mouth  of  the  pit,  offering  to  give  his  assistance,
which,  as  he  was  under  the  influence  of  liquor,  was  refused. He,  however.


The  Subliminal  Self.


519


"went  too  close  to  the  edge,  fell  down  the  shaft,  and  was  dashed  to  atoms.
He,  it  seems,  was  on  intimate  terms  with  a  brewer  at  the  Cambrian  Inn,
named  Phillip  Williams.  Phillip  Williams  had  a  dream  on  Saturday  night
that  he  saw  Piigh  approach  a  coal  pit,  into  which  he  fell  and  was  killed.
Pugh  was  drinking  at  the  Cambrian  on  Saturday,  and  then  Williams  told
him  his  dream.  When  the  explosion  was  known  at  Tredegar  he  again  saw
Pugh,  and  warned  him  not  to  go  near  the  pit,  but  Pugh  started  off  direct  to
the  scene  of  the  calamity. His  death  took  -place  shortly  afterwards.

From  Mr.  Phillip  Williams  to  Mr.  C.  Downing.

Cambrian  Inn,  Tredegar,  December  29th,  1884.

The  unfortunate  man  Phillip  Pugh,  who  met  his  sad  end  by  falling  down
Pochins  Pit,  I  knew  very  well  for  years.  And  on  Friday  night,  prior  to  the
explosion,  which  occurred  between  9  and  10  o'clock  on  Saturday  night  [the
time  is  correct,  F.  P.],  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  Pugh  going  towards  the  pit,  and
falling  down,  and  I  was  struggling  with  him  to  prevent  him  falling  down,
but  could  not  prevent  him  ;  I  was  in  great  trouble,  and  when  I  awoke  I  was
in  a  bath  of  perspiration.  On  the  following  evening  between  six  and  seven
o'clock,  I  met  Pugh  and  told  these  words.

"I  have  been  in  awful  trouble  about  you  last  night.  I  dreamt  that  I  saw
you  going  towards  the  pit  and  falling  down  and  I  was  doing  all  in  my  jjower
to  prevent  you,  but  could  not.  I  hope  to  God  nothing  will  happen  to  you  ;
be  careful,  it  may  be  a  warning,  as  you  are  working  in  a  very  dangerous  place. "
The  answer  he  gave  me  :  "  Oh,  Williams,"  with  a  smile,  "there's  nothing
going  to  happen  to  me  ;  don't  I  look  well  ?  "  and  directly  he  heard  of  the
explosion  he  ran  down  towards  the  pit,  which  is  three  and  a-half  miles  from
Tredegar,  and  when  he  came  to  the  pit's  mouth  he  wanted  to  give  his  assist-
ance and  was  pushed  back  several  times  by  the  authorities,  but  would  still
come  forward,  and  said  that  he  would  be  the  first  man  that  would  go  down
the  pit  ;  and  it  so  happened.  I  may  tell  you  that  he  worked  in  the  pit  and
was  a  very  plucky  young  man.  I  told  it  to  several  people  before  it  happened
and  have  got  two  names  and  addresses  below,  which  I  can  vouch  for  their
respectability.  p^^^^^^  Williams.

Joseph  Evans,  miner,  79,  High  Street,  Tredegar.
Emily  Phillips,  proprietress  of  Cambrian  Inn.

From  Mrs.  Phillips.

Cambrian  Inn,  January  Mh,  1885.
In  answer  to  your  letter  concerning  my  name  appearing  in  a  letter  sent
by  Mr.  Phillip  Williams  respecting  his  dream,  I  beg  to  say  that  what  he  has
written  to  you  is  quite  correct,  lie  having  told  me  and  others  in  the  morning

before  the  explosion  took  place.  t-,

^  ^  Emily  Phillips.

From  Joseph  Evans.
79,  High  Street,  Tredegar,  January  Src^,  1885.
I  heard  PhilliiJ  Williams  telling  Pugh  of  his  dream,  and  what  has  been
written  is  quite  correct.  ^^^^^^


520


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Mr.  PhilliiD  Williams  writes  further  as  follows  : —

Cambrian  Inn,  Tredegar,  January  l%th,  1885.

I  may  tell  you  that  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  dreaming,  but  have  dreamt
on  several  occasions,  but  it  never  troubled  my  mind,  and  could  scarcely  make
anything  out  of  them  in  the  morning  when  I  awoke.  I  dreamt  a  dream  about
30  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  boy  in  school,  and  in  that  case  I  was  instrumental
in  saving  a  young  man's  life. [Account  given  ;  but  incident  too  remote.]

Another  kind  of  accident  is  prefigured  in  the  following  case.  It
will  be  observed  that  Mr.  Coburn  (known  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  a  good
witness)  remembers  to  have  told  two  persons  of  the  dream  before  the
event.

P.  165.  Upper  Melbourne,  Quebec,

December  lUh,  1891.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Sir, — Yours  of  December  11th  received,  and  I
beg  to  hand  you  the  premonition  referred  to  in  my  former  letter.  I  have
made  it  as  short  and  concise  as  possible.  Newlands  Coburn.

A  Peculiar  Dream  or  Premonition.

In  the  year  1875,  I  think,  one  night  I  dreamed  that  my  wife  had  gone  to
a  friend's,  who  lived  just  across  the  river  St.  Francis  (which  here  is  about
750  feet  wide)  at  11  o'clock  a.m.,  and  was  going  to  stay  for  dinner.  But  on
getting  there,  she  having  walked  down  the  river  and  across  the  public  bridge,
and  up  again  to  her  friend's,  she  found  the  house  open,  but  nobody  at  home.
So  she  went  down  to  the  river  bank,  and  called  to  me  from  the  other  side  to
swim  across  to  her  and  bring  some  refreshment  in  a  tin  can,  which  I
immediately  undertook  to  do  ;  but  just  as  I  was  nearing  a  gravel  bar  in  the
middle  of  the  river,  but  while  just  on  the  deepest  jjlace,  the  can,  which  was
in  my  left  hand,  would  continually  keep  drawing  me  under,  and  I  would  keep
swallowing  some  water.  So  I  was  obliged  to  strike  back  for  the  home  shore,
which  I  reached  in  safety,  amid  great  anxiety  of  my  wife,  who  was  watching
me  from  the  shore.  The  dream  was  so  vivid  that  it  woke  me,  and  my
stomach  was  sore  from  the  supposed  swallowing  and  belching  out  again  of
the  water.

I  turned  over  and  went  to  sleep,  but  in  the  morning  I  still  felt  the  effect
of  the  dream  on  the  muscles  of  the  stumach,  and  /  told  my  tvife  then  and
there  of  it,  and  how  my  stomach  felt.  And  after  breakfast  I  went  to
business,  and  was  just  telling  a  customer  whom  I  was  serving  of  the  peculiar
dream,  when  a  neighbour  rushed  into  the  store  and  said  he  was  afraid  that
there  was  trouble  down  at  the  river,  as  a  boy  on  the  other  side  (just  where
my  wife  was  in  the  dream),  was  running  up  and  down,  yelling  and
gesticulating,  and  another  naked  one  on  this  side  was  crying  and  calling
for  help.

It  was  jxist  11  a.m.  I  started  at  once  for  the  river,  throwing  off  my  coat
and  vest  as  I  ran,  secured  a  boat  and  a  young  man  to  help  me  run  it  out,
and  after  the  boy  pointed  out  where  a  companion  had  sunk  for  the  last  time,
a  few  minutes  before,  I  dived  down  in  12  to  15  feet  of  water  just  off  the


The  Subliminal  Self.


521


gravel  bar,  and  grasped  the  arm  of  the  drowned  young  man  with  my  left
hand,  and  brought  him  to  the  surface,  only  to  find  that  my  companion  had
allowed  the  boat  I  had  dived  off  to  drift  quite  a  distance  from  me.  I  then
had  the  same  struggle  to  get  the  body  and  myself  to  another  boat  that  had
just  put  out  from  shore  that  I  had  in  my  dream,  swallowing  and  then
belching  out  a  lot  of  water  ;  and  nothing  but  the  encouraging  shouts  from
those  on  shore,  who  had  hastily  gathered  (my  wife  among  them)  nerved  me
to  the  struggle.  I  then  m  reality  suffered  the  same  pain  which  I  felt  in  my
dream,  and  the  spot  where  the  young  man  was  drowned  was  just  where  the
"  can  "  troubled  me  in  my  dream,  and  where  I  turned.

N.  COBURN.

Upper  Melbourne,  Quebec,  September  Hh,  1893.
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D., — Dear  Sir,  — . . . My  wife,  to  whom  I
related  my  dream  before  the  drowning  took  place,  died  a  few  months  after

1  wrote  you.

You  will  pardon  me,  if  I  give  you  my  explanation  of  the  dream  and
drowning.  I  should  have  said  that  the  young  man  had  just  come  to  visit
friends  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  and  you  will  notice  my  rough
diagram  herewith,  that  the  R.R.  station  of  the  G.T.R.  is  below  where  I
live,  and  the  young  man  arrived  about  1.30  a.m.  (say  midnight)  and  was
obliged  to  walk  back  up  the  river  on  the  opposite  side  from  where  I  lived,
and  I  feel  sure  that  the  time  of  my  dream  was  when  he  was  passing  up  (say

2  a.m.)  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  He  went  to  bed  at  his  friend's  and
did  not  get  up  until  late,  and  immediately  went  to  the  river  with  some  other
young  men  for  a  bath  and  swim.  Newlands  Coburn.


The  next  case  is  my  sole  example  of  that  premonitory  vision  of
coffins  which  has  often  formed  an  important  element  in  popular
superstition.

P.  193. Through  Mrs.  Baker  (wife  of  Lieut.  Col.  F.  Baker  Pasha,  Y.C.).

June  22nd,  1891.

A  rather  strange  thing  appeared  in  our  family  some  years  since,  in
1887.  One  day  my  sister  left  the  room  in  which  she  and  I  had  been  sitting
and  went  into  the  drawing  room.  I  immediately  heard  her  call  out,  and  on
going  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  found  her  very  much  frightened,  at  having,
as  she  said,  seen  a  coffin  in  front  of  the  piano.  Three  weeks  afterwards
another  sister  of  ours  died,  and  previous  to  the  funeral  the  cofiin  was  brought
down  and  placed  before  the  piano,  in  exactly  the  spot  on  which  it  had  been
seen  by  the  sister  who  had  the  prevision  of  it.  H  C  M  H

"The  BuflFs."

[The  subject  is  painful  to  Miss  H.,  and  slie  has  not  sent  her  own
account.]

My  next  case  shall  be  one  which  concerns  not  death  but  birth  ; — -
an  elaborate  prefigurement  of  the  circumstances  of  an  accouchement ;
including  the  observation, (independently  confirming  a  suggestion


522


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


advanced  above),  that  when  the  moment  of  crisis  came,  the  percipient, —
passing  again,  as  I  conceive,  to  some  slight  extent  into  a  "  secondary  "
state, — was  conscious  of  an  unexpected  ease  and  capacity  in  the  per-
formance of  the  duties  which  the  dream  had  indicated  as  about  to  fall
to  her.

P.  186.  The  Post-Dispatch,  513,  Olive  Street,  St.  Louis,

February  2Uh,  1891.

Mk.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  called  on  Mrs.  Sara  Weiss,  of  3,710a,
Olive  Street,  yesterday  afternoon.  She  was  suffering  with  laryngitis  and
catarrh,  and  was  unable  to  speak  except  in  a  whisper,  and  said  that  her
delay  in  writing  out  an  account  of  her  dream  was  due  to  her  sickness.  She
told  me  of  the  dream,  as  also  of  several  other  seemingly  remarkable  experi-
ences, and  promised  me  that  she  would  write  an  account  of  them  as  soon  as
she  improved  a  little.  I  am  to  call  on  her  again  for  the  report  in  a  week  or
ten  days,  and  if  I  find  that  the  report  is  not  yet  written,  I  shall  write  it  my-
self and  give  it  to  her  to  sign.  She  appears  to  me  to  be  sincere,  and  if  her
story  can  be  corroborated  by  several  other  persons,  as  she  says  it  can  be,
the  case  will,  I  think,  be  a  very  good  one  for  your  collection  of  ''occult
wonders."

Mrs.  W.  dreamed  on  Friday  night,  January  21st,  1883,  that  her  daughter,
Mrs.  ChaunceyH.C.jhad  been  confined  and  that  she  had  acted  as  accoucheuse,
the  doctor  whom  they  expected  not  having  arrived.  After  the  birth  of  the
child,  a  doctor  arrived,  but  not  their  regular  family  doctor.  He  was  a  young
country-looking  fellow  with  black  eyes  and  hair,  and  wearing  grey  pants,
black  vest  and  coat,  and  a  blue  satin  necktie  with  a  peculiar  coral  figure  in
it.  This  was  the  dream  in  outline,  and  she  told  it  with  many  details  at
breakfast  next  morning  to  her  daughter  and  son-in-law.  Four  days  after,
Tuesday,  January  25th,  the  cliild  was  born  just  as  she  had  dreamed  it  had
been,  even  to  all  particulars,  and  after  it  was  all  over,  her  son-in-law  brought
in  a  yovmg  doctor  exactly  resembling  the  man  she  had  seen  in  her  dream,
face,  dress,  and  everything.  But  at  first  she  didn't  think  of  the  dream,  and
really  tliought  she  had  seen  him  in  real  life  before.  She  claims  that  she
never  once  thought  of  the  dream  until  the  child  had  been  born  and  the  doctor
had  been  there  some  time.  None  of  the  family  had  ever  seen  tliis  doctor
until  that  day,  and  Mr.  C.  had  tried  to  get  five  other  doctors  before  he  called
at  this  doctor's  office.  When  Mr.  C.  went  down  town  Saturday  morning,
January  22nd,  he  told  his  friend,  H.  B.,  about  it,  and  the  latter  told  his
wife  and  W.  B. ,  and  a  Miss  Slaughter  called  on  Mrs.  Weiss  that  afternoon
and  they  all  talked  about  it.  All  of  these  people  are  still  living  except  Miss
Slaughter.  The  B.'s  live  in  New  York  City,  and  the  C.'s  in  Chicago.  Mr.
B.  is  manager  and  vice-president  of  the  United  States  Express  Company,
with  headquarters  at  Chicago.  In  January,  1881,  he  w^as  private  secretary
to  Albert  Fink,  president  of  the  Railroad  Freight  Pool,  and  lives  in  N.Y.
City.  Mrs.  Weiss  was  living  then,  as  now,  in  St.  Louis,  but  was  visiting  her
daughter  in  N.Y.  Mrs.  Weiss  tells  me  that  Mr.  B.  objects  to  the  use  of  his
name  in  connection  with  the  matter,  as  it  would  be  embarrassing  to  him  in
his  business,  but  I  think  he  might  be  prevailed  upon  to  answer  a  few  ques-
tions, if  assured  tliat  his  name  would  not  be  published. His  wife  will  let  her


The  Subliminal  Self.


523


name  be  used  if  the  committee  want  it,  Mrs.  Weiss  says.  The  B.'s  have  not
been  heard  from  yet.  Mrs.  W.  told  me  Mr.  B.'s  business,  but  I  don't  recall
it  just  -now.  Mrs.  W.  talks  like,  and  has  every  appearance  of  being  a  well-
bred  lady,  and  used  good  language  in  her  conversation.  I  was  favourably
impressed.

W.  A.  Kelsoe,  1,331,  South  13th  Street.

1,331,  South  13th  Street,  St.  Louis,  March  mh,  1891.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — Mrs.  Sara  Weiss  handed  me  a
written  statement  of  that  dream  a  few  days  ago  with  her  name  and  address
attached,  and  I  have  had  a  type-written  copy  of  it  made  for  j'ou,  which  I  here-
with send  you.  I  am  at  liberty  to  send  you  the  original  or  a  copy,  and  send
the  [latter]  because  it  is  more  easily  read.  I  see  that  Mrs.  W.  omitted  to
give  the  date  of  the  dream,  and  I  have  supplied  the  omission  from  memory,
though  I  am  not  positive  whether  the  month  was  January  or  February.  Mrs.
W.  asks  that  the  names  of  the  G. 's  and  B.'s  be  not  used  in  any  publication
until  their  consent  has  been  obtained,  so  please  use  only  initial  letters.  She
makes  no  objection  to  that.  She  is  also  anxious  for  you  to  obtain  their  state-
ments regarding  her  dream,  but  hardly  knows  the  best  way  to  go  about  it.
I  suggested  to  her  that  perhaps  if  you  sent  Mr.  C.  and  Mr.  B.  a  copy  of
some  report  of  the  P.E,.  Society  you  could  get  them  interested  in  the  subject
in  that  way  and  then  secure  their  statements  afterwards,  and  she  thought
that  might  be  done.  It  may  be  that  Mr.  B.  would  offer  no  objection  at  the
outset.

Mrs.  W.  omitted  to  say  in  her  report  that  the  nurse  was  now  living  here
in  St.  Louis,  and  could  not  corroborate  the  dream.  She  remembers  hearing
Mrs.  W.  and  her  daughter  speak  of  the  dream  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  the
child,  or  rather  when  the  young  doctor  was  there  immediately  afterwards,
and  of  hearing  them  say  that  the  affair  came  off  just  as  Mrs.  W.  had  dreamed
it  would,  but  she  doesn't  remember  having  heard  any  of  the  famUy  speak  of
the  dream  prior  to  the  child's  birth.  T  will  try  and  see  this  nurse  and  get  her
statement,  as  I  think  it  will  be  of  some  value,  particularly  if  you  fail  to
obtain  any  corroborative  statements  from  the  B.'s  or  C.'s.  Her  name  is
Mary  something,  but  I  don't  know  her  address.

Account  of  Mrs.  Sara  Weiss.

The  dream  I  have  promised  to  relate  is  remarkable,  inasmuch  as  it  ante-
dated the  fulfilment  of  it  nearly  four  days.

In  October,  of  1881,  I  left  my  home  in  St.  Louis,  going  to  New  York
City,  to  be  with  my  daughter,  Mrs.  C.  H.  C,  during  her  expected  accouche-
ment. Dr.  Ranney,  an  old  well-known  M.D.,  was  the  family  physician.  His
office,  as  well  as  that  of  Mr.  C,  was  far  down  town,  while  the  family  resided
on  cor.  124th  Street,  and  Lexington  Avenue.  It  was  arranged  with  Dr.
Ranney  that  he  should  come  at  once  when  called.  The  nurse  was  engaged,
and  everything  put  in  order,  so  that  there  might  be  no  delay  or  confusion.

I  think  that  on  Saturday,  the  22nd  of  the  month  of  January  following,  a
heavy  storm  of  snow  and  sleet  prevailed  over  the  region  of  N.Y.  so  that  tele-
graph lines  were  weighted  down  with  sleet  and  broken  to  such  an  extent  in
N.Y.  City  that  for  a  time  there  was  a  break  in  the  service.


524.


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


On  Friday  night  I  dreamed  that  my  davighter's  labour  came  on,  that,
owing  to  some  cause  not  clearly  defined,  we  failed  to  get  word  to  Mr.  C,
who  was  to  bring  the  doctor  ;  that  we  sent  for  tlie  nurse,  who  came  ;  that  as
the  hours  passed,  and  neither  Mr.  C.  or  the  doctor  came,  we  both  grew
frightened  ;  that  at  last  I  heard  Mr.  C.  on  the  stairs  and  cried  to  him,  "  Oh,
Chan,  for  heaven's  sake  get  a  doctor,  Ada  may  be  confined  at  any  moment  ;  "
that  he  rushed  away,  and  I  returned  to  the  bedside  of  my  daughter,  who  was
in  agony  of  mind  and  body  ;  that  suddenly  I  seemed  to  know  what  to  do,
that  I  delivered  her,  attended  to  her  and  the  child,  and  that  shortly  after-
wards Mr,  C.  came,  bringing  a  tall  young  doctor,  having  brown  eyes,  dark
hair,  ruddy,  brunette  complexion,  and  dressed  in  black  coat,  grey  trousers
and  grey  vest,  and  wearing  a  bright  blue  cravat  picked  out  with  coral  .sprigs.
The  cravat  attracted  my  attention  particularly.  The  young  doctor  pro-
nounced Mrs.  C.  properly  attended  to  and  left.  Then,  after  awhile.  Dr.
Ranney  came,  saying  that  he  had  been  away  and  could  not  get  back,  but  that
everything  relating  to  Mrs.  C.  was  all  right.

In  the  morning  at  breakfast,  I  related  my  dream  to  Mr.  C.  and  my
daughter,  but  none  of  us  attached  any  importance  to  it.  But  as  the  days
passed,  the  dream  forced  itself  upon  me  so  persistently  that  on  Monday  I  said
to  Mr.  C.  :  "I  wish  you  could  arrange  some  way  for  us  to  get  word  to  you
quickly,  for  with  the  telegraph  lines  down,  what  can  we  do  in  case  Ada  should
be  taken  sick  and  you  away  ?  "  Mr.  C.  smiled  and  said  :  "I  guess  you  are
worried  over  that  dream,  but  to  satisfy  you,  I  will  write  a  telegram,  and  leave
it  with  instructions  at  the  district  office.  If  the  lines  are  not  in  order,  they
will  send  a  boy  to  me."

I  have  forgotten  to  say  that  Mr.  C.  on  Saturday  told  a  friend,  Mr.  H.  B.,
of  my  dream,  that  in  the  evening  Mr.  B.  called,  and  jestingly  spoke  of  the
dream  ;  that  on  the  afternoon  of  Saturday  Mrs.  B.  and  a  Miss  Evans  called
and  my  daughter  related  the  dream  to  them.  On  Tuesday  between  9  and  10
o'clock  my  daughter  was  taken  with  labour.  Immediately  that  we  knew  her
condition,  I  sent  the  maid  with  the  telegram  to  the  district  office,  and  for
the  nurse,  who  arrived  a  half  hour  or  so  before  the  child  was  born.  As  time
passed  and  it  became  apparent  that  the  services  of  an  accoucheur  might  be
needed  at  any  moment,  both  my  daughter  and  I  were  greatly  frightened,  for
I  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  how  to  proceed,  as  in  my  dream,  so  I  ran  to
the  window  to  see  if  Mr.  C.  and  the  doctor  might  be  in  sight,  then  back  to
my  daughter.  At  last  I  heard  Mr.  C.  on  the  stairs,  and  cried  to  him  to
bring  some  doctor  quickly,  as  Ada  was  on  the  point  of  being  confined.  Mr.
C.  rushed  off  and  I  returned  to  my  daughter.  She  looked  at  me  in  terror,
and  said,  "  Oh  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  Then  came  what  I  shall  be  glad  to  have
explained.  In  a  moment  all  sense  of  claim  left  me,  and  all  sense  of  sympathy
beyond  what  a  very  cool  and  experienced  doctor  might  feel.  I  heard  myself
saying  in  a  peremptory  fashion,  "  Ada,  don't  be  afraid,  I  know  just  what  to
do,  all  will  go  well."  She  looked  at  me  in  a  surprised  way  and  replied  :  "If
you  are  not  afraid,  I  won't  be."  The  nurse  was  panic-stricken,  and  ran  from
the  room.  I  went  after  her  and  in  a  manner  foreign  to  me,  directed  her  how
to  assist  me — I  do  not  deem  it  proper  or  necessary  to  go  into  details.  Suffice
it  to  say  that  I  succeeded  perfectly,  although  there  were  complications  which
might  have  resulted  seriously. Mr.  C.  went  to  seven  doctors'  offices  before


The  Subliminal  Self.


525


he  found  one,  when  at  last  he  came,  bringing  a  young  doctor.  The  nurse
was  dressing  the  baby.  Jly  daughter  was  resting  quietly  and  I  sat  in  a
corner  of  the  room,  feeling  a  dazed  sensation  and  wondering  if  I  were  going
to  faint.  In  a  few  minutes  I  recovered  myself  and  walked  to  my  daughter's
bedside,  where  the  young  M.D.  was  making  an  examination  to  see  if  all  was
right.  When  he  turned  around,  Mr.  C.  introduced  us  (T  think  his  name  was
White).  I  was  surprised  to  find  that  the  gentleman  had  a  very  familiar  look,
and  I  said,  "  Why,  doctor,  we  have  met  before,  but  I  do  not  recall  where."
He  smiled  and  asked,  "  Do  you  reside  in  N.Y.  ?  "  "  No,  I  live  in  St.  Louis  ;
have  you  ever  been  there  ?  "  "  Yes,  about  two  months  ago  I  passed  through
St.  Louis."  "And  I,"  I  said,  "have  been  in  New  York  for  over  three
months,  and  yet  I  know  I  have  met  you  before,  but  I  do  not  recall  where."
At  this  moment  my  daughter  plucked  at  my  dress  and  whispered,  "  Look  at
the  doctor's  cravat."  Li  a  moment  I  knew  he  was  the  man  whom  I  saw  in
my  dream,  and  then  realised  that  all  the  occurrences  of  the  past  six  hours
were  a  complete  fulfilment  of  the  dream,  which  only  needed  Dr.  Ranney's
visit  to  finish  it.  The  doctor's  dress  was  exactly  as  I  had  seen  it  in  the  dream.
Dr.  Ranney  came  in  about  two  hours.  He  had  been  called  to  Brooklyn,  and
the  ice  was  running  so  heavily  that  the  boat  was  delayed.  He  was  very
much  surprised  to  learn  that  I  had  acted  as  accoucheur,  and  still  more  so  as
some  complication  in  the  case  called  for  the  services  of  an  experienced  per-
son. When  he  came  the  next  day  he  questioned  me  closely,  and  I  felt  that
he  doubted  my  statement.  I  had  had  no  previous  experience,  and  at  my
daughter's  request,  I  told  him  of  my  dream  and  that  what  I  considered  one
of  the  strangest  features  of  the  matter  was  that,  on  my  honour,  the  dream
had  not  once  occurred  to  me  from  the  beginning  of  my  daughter's  labour
until  she  called  my  attention  to  the  doctor's  cravat.

Dr.  Ranney  desired  me  to  write  an  account  of  the  whole  matter,  and  I
promised  to  do  so,  but  delayed  it,  and  never  did  it.  I  have  endeavoured  to
have  my  statement  of  the  matter  corroborated,  but  find  that  Dr.  Ranney  is
dead.  Miss  Evans  is  also  dead.  My  son-in-law,  for  reasons  which  he  deems
sufficient,  does  not  wish  his,  or  ray  daughter's  name  used.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.
I  know  but  slightly,  and  do  not  like  to  make  the  request  of  them,  which  they
might  not  like  to  refuse,  and  then  they  may  have  forgotten  the  matter.

I  am  much  too  earnest  a  seeker  for  a  solution  of  the  question  at  the
beginning  of  my  statement  to  allow  myself  to  exaggerate  or  mistake.  I  have
condensed  as  much  as  possible  my  .statement.  The  full  particulars  would  be
too  lengthy.  If  my  information  was  not  from  some  foreseeing  intelligence,
where  did  it  come  from  ?

Sara  Weiss,

March,  1891.  3,710,  Olive  Street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Studio  of  A.  M.  Blanchard,  418  1-2,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Aiyril  1st,  1891.

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. — Dear  Sir, — I  may  add  that  Mrs.  A.  M.
Weiss,  who  recently  sent  you  a  report,  is  my  intimate  friend.  I  have  read
her  M.S.S  detailing  the  very  peculiar  experience  in.  N.Y.  ten  years  ago,  and
it  coincides  exactly  with  my  recollection  of  the  account  she  gave  of  it  a
few  days  after  the  event. No  one  but  Mrs.  W.  knows  that  I  was  informed


526


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


of  it,  and,  for  obvious  reasons,  I  cannot  go  on  formal  record,  should  my
testimony,  which,  of  course,  is  only  second-hand,  be  considered  of  any
value.  I  was  probably  the  only  person,  except  those  mentioned  in  Mrs.
W.'s  statement,  who  was  informed  of  the  exjjerience  at  the  time.

I  am  aware  that  my  statement  is  merely  corrobatory,  and  of  no  positive
value  as  evidence  ;  but  the  whole  alfair  was  so  far  removed  from  the  ordinary
run  of  psychic  experiences,  that  it  may  be  of  some  interest  to  you.

A.  M.  Blanchard.

Mr.  A.  M.  Blanchard  further  writes  : —

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. — Dear  Sir,— I  mailed  you  yesterday  a  letter
requesting  information,  and  also  containing  a  statement  in  support  of  Mrs.
Weiss's  report  of  her  peculiar  experience  in  N.Y.  in  1881.  This  morning  I
met  Mrs.  VV.,  and  she  voluntarily  suggested  that  I  make  the  statement
•which  I  had  already  forwarded,  and  gave  permission  that  it  go  on  record  if
so  desired.  I  was  in  St.  Louis  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  and  she  wrote
an  account,  somewhat  less  detailed  than  the  one  furnished  you,  but  as  far
as  my  memory  serves — and  it  naturally  made  a  strong  impression — agreeing
with  it  in  every  particular.  The  letter  is  not  now  in  existence.  Mary,  the
maid,  was  not  told  the  dream,  but  was  in  the  room  immediately  after  the
birth  of  the  cliild,  and  remembers  the  remark  made  to  Mrs.  Weiss  by  Mrs.
C,  reminding  her  of  the  appearance  of  the  young  doctor  in  the  dream.

A.  M.  Bl.AJSCHARU.

Mr.  Blanchard  again  writes  : —

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  have  read  the  x-eport  forwarded
to  you  by  Mrs.  Weiss,  of  the  dream  and  its  fulfilment,  on  the  occasion  of  the
birth  of  her  grandchild  in  New  York,  in  January,  1881,  and  it  coincides  in
all  its  details  with  my  recollection  of  the  account  written  to  me  by  her  a  few
days  after  the  event.

.1  regret  that  the  letter  is  not  now  in  existence,  but  it  made  so  strong  an
impression  on  my  mind  that  I  cannot  be  mistaken. ^  jyj-  Blanchard

I  have  read  my  mother's  written  statement  of  the  dream  which  she  had
previous  to  the  birth  of  my  little  boy,  and  in  so  far  as  I  remember,  it  is
quite  correct.  ]y[j^s_  q  jj_

St.  Louis,  [July]  31st,  1894.
Mr.  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  had  hoped  when  last  I  wrote  you  that  I
might  very  soon  be  able  to  go  to  Chicago,  when  I  could  talk  with  Mr.  C,  in
relation  to  his  recollection  of  the  dream.  I  was  very  ill  for  some  weeks,
and  at  last  went  to  Chicago,  hoping  that  a  change  might  benefit  me,  but  the
result  was  quite  to  the  contrary.  I  talked  with  Mr.  C,  but  he  has  been  so
immersed  in  business  during  the  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  time
when  the  dream  occurred,  that  he  declares  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  it,
or  of  any  matters  outside  of  his  business,  and  knowing  him  as  I  do,  I  do
not  doubt  the  assertion.  My  daughter  and  I  have  so  often  recurred  to  the
birth  of  the  little  boy,  and  incidents  connected  with  that  event,  that  she
remembers  the  dream  distinctly,  and  I  send  her  attestation  of  the  fact.

Sara  Weiss.
2,916,  Pine-st,  St.  Louis,  Mo.


The  Subliminal  Self.


527


St.  Louis,  Mo.

I  went  from  St.  Louis  to  New  York  in  1881,  as  nurse  maid  to  Mrs.  C.'s
little  girl.  I  lived  with  Mrs.  C.  when  the  little  boy  was  born.  I  was  a
little  over  fourteen  years  old  when  the  baby  was  born.  I  do  not  think  I  was
told  of  Mrs.  Weiss's  dream,  but  after  the  baby  was  born  I  was  told  to  bi'ing
the  little  girl  into  the  room.  A  strange  doctor  was  just  leaving.  Mrs.  C.
said  to  Mr.  C,  "  Did  you  notice  the  doctor's  neck -tie  1 "  Mr.  C.  said  "  No."
Then  Mrs.  C.  said,  "  Why,  I  know  him  by  mamma's  description  as  the
doctor  she  saw  in  her  dream."  I  heard  a  good  deal  of  talk  about  the  dream,
but  I  was  so  young  I  did  not  pay  enough  attention  to  what  was  said  to
remember  much  about  it.

Marie  Luensteoth.

My  next  case  also  is  concerned  with  a  birth  ;  but  it  suggests  certain
possibilities  which  are  still  more  perplexing.

The  writer  of  the  following  account  is  a  lady  recommended  to  nie
by  Dr.  Liebeault  of  Nancy  as  in  all  ways  an  excellent  informant ; — a
lady  who  has  now  for  many  years  taken  a  leading  part  in  an  important
French  philanthropic  enterprise,  and  whose  mind  is  not  given  to
exaggeration  or  morbid  sentiment.  I  am  obliged  thus  to  describe  my
correspondent  because,  for  reasons  which  seem  to  me  adequate,  I
cannot  give  her  name,  or  go  fully  into  the  points  in  her  letters  to  me
which  have  led  me  to  regard  her  as  a  scrupulously  careful  witness.
From  among  many  psychical  experiences,  mainly  conforming  to  our
usual  types,  which  she  has  recorded  in  a  pamphlet  in  my  possession,  I
select  the  incident  which  follows.

P.  178.  [Translation  from  pamphlet  printed  1894.]

In  November,  1877,  I  was  expecting  my  third  child.  On  the  night
before  its  birth  I  had  a  terrible  dream.

I  had  the  feeling  that  my  room  was  filled  by  all  kinds  of  mysterious  and
sorrowful  influences,  and  a  small  being,  separating  itself  from  these
confused  surroundings  at  the  other  end  of  my  room,  said  to  me,  "  I  come
to  you  that  you  may  love  me."

This  being,  of  the  size  of  a  child  two  or  three  years  old,  was  human
only  in  its  face,  from  which  shone  two  large  dark  eyes  ;  I  remarked  also  the
expression  of  the  mouth,  which  indicated  suffering  ;  as  to  the  rest  of  the
body,  it  was  so  painful  to  look  upon,  so  different  from  the  rounded  forms
and  fresh  rosiness  of  childhood,  that  I  woke  in  anguish,  my  heart  beating
violently.

In  the  morning  I  told  my  mother  of  this  dream.  She  regarded  it  as  a
nightmare  caused  by  my  condition  at  the  time  ;  and  we  welcomed  without
apprehension  the  arrival  of  my  third  little  daughter,  a  fine  child  of  dark
complexion,  well  formed,  and  showing  every  sign  of  strong  health.

When  a  few  weeks  had  passed,  I  observed  that  this  child's  physiognomy,
especially  when  it  was  on  the  point  of  crying,  bore  a  strong  likeness  to  the
child  of  my  dream.  It  had  also  the  same  large  dark  eyes  ;  but  very  gentle
in  expression,  and  filled,  as  it  grew  older,  with  a  deep  but  indefinable


528


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


sadness.  I  communicated  my  apprehensions  to  my  sister.  [A  letter  from
this  lady,  hei'self  concerned  with  philanthropic  and  literary  work,  lies
before  me,  dated  April  13th,  1894.  She  says,  "I  affirm  the  perfect
exactitude  of  this  narrative.  My  sister  told  me  her  dream,  I  was  witness
of  her  apprehensions  during  the  brief  existence  of  her  third  little  daughter,
and  she  said  to  me  textually  the  words  mentioned  in  her  narrative,  at  the
end  of  the  child's  life. "]  We  observed  the  child's  develof)ment  with  the
anxious  attention  that  every  mother  will  understand.

She  was  very  easy  to  rear,  without  faults  of  temper,  and  incredibly
precocious  in  all  ways — in  her  senses,  memory,  intelligence,  and  affectionate
sensibility.

I  brought  her  up  thus  to  the  age  of  two  years  and  a  half.  Then  she
was  taken  from  me  by  a  terrible  malady,  granular  kidney,  (la  granulie),
following  upon  measles,  and  finally  causing  meningitis,  after  causing
extreme  irritation  for  weeks.  The  poor  child  was  seriously  ill  for  three
months  and  a  half.  During  the  last  week  of  her  painful  existence  she  was
reduced  to  a  state  of  extreme  emaciation,  and  showing  her  sadly  to  my
sister,  I  said  to  her  with  absolute  truth,  "  Alas  !  There  is  the  child  of  my
dream,  exactly  as  she  appeared  to  me  the  night  before  she  was  born  ! "

It  will  be  observed  here  that  the  premonition  represented  neither
a  child  with  normal  resemblance  to  its  parents,  nor  a  child  suffering
from  any  disease  which  heredity  or  maternal  suggestion  could  have
caused,  but  a  child  in  a  condition  into  which  it  actually  fell  some  two
years  later,  as  the  result  of  zymotic  disease.

These  last  cases  offer  no  indication  of  any  message  from  without.
Rather  they  suggest  the  kind  of  flashing  recognition  which  a  man
might  experience  who  had  seen  his  own  life  beforehand,  and  now
retraversed  it  like  a  hypnotic  subject  carrying  out  a  "deferred
suffffestion."  I  will  next  give  a  few  cases  where  a  man's  future  life
seems  to  be  shown  to  him  as  though  from  some  external  source  of
knowledge.

In  the  following  case  of  Dr.  Liebeault's, — a  case  which  it  is  hard  to
regard  as  more  than  a  series  of  strange  coincidences, — it  will  be
observed  that  Dr.  Liebeault  is  not  himself  responsible  for  more  than
the  fact  that  the  young  man  believed  that  he  was  to  die  in  a  certain
year.  This  is  just  the  kind  of  case  where  the  death  might  have  been
ascribed  to  terror ;  but  in  fact  the  subject's  terrors  here  are  calmed,
and  he  then  dies  of  a  disease  which  terror  could  not  have  induced.

p.  190.  From  Dr.  Liebeault's  note-book.

M.  S.  de  Ch.  came  to  consult  me  to-day  at  4  p.m.  (January  7th,  1886)  for
a  slight  nervous  ailment.  M.  de  Ch.  is  much  preoccupied  by  a  lawsuit,  and
by  the  incident  which  I  proceed  to  recount.

On  the  26th  December,  1879,  while  walking  in  Paris,  he  saw  "  M™e.
Lenormand,  Necromancer,"  written  on  a  door. Urged  by  thoughtless


The  Subliminal  Self.


529


curiosity  he  entered  the  house,  and  was  shown  into  a  rather  dark  room.
M™s.  Lenormand  came  to  him,  and  placed  him  at  a  table.  She  went  out  and
returned,  and  then  looking  at  the  palm  of  one  of  his  hands  said,  "You  will
lose  your  father  in  a  year  from  this  very  day.  You  will  soon  be  a  soldier  ;
(he  was  19  years  old)  but  not  for  long.  You  will  marry  young,  have  two
children,  and  die  at  26."  M.  de  Ch.  confided  this  astoujiding  prophecy  to
some  of  his  friends,  but  did  not  take  it  seriou.sly.  However,  as  his  father
died  after  a  short  illness  on  December  27th,  1880,  precisely  a  year  from  the
interview,  he  became  less  incredulous.  And  when  he  became  a  soldier,  for
seven  months  only,  married,  had  two  children,  and  was  approaching  his
twenty-sixth  birthday,  he  became  thoroughly  alarmed  and  thought  he  had
only  a  few  days  to  live.  This  was  why  he  came  to  consult  me,  hoping  I  might
enable  him  to  avoid  his  fate.  For,  as  the  first  four  events  had  taken  place,
he  thought  that  the  last  would.  On  this  and  the  following  days  I  tried  to
send  M.  de  Ch.  into  profound  sleep  in  order  to  dissipate  the  impression  that
he  would  die  on  the  4th  February,  his  birthday.  M™e.  Lenormand  had  not
named  a  date,  but  he  was  so  agitated  that  I  could  not  induce  even  the
slightest  sleep.

However,  as  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  get  rid  of  his  conviction,  lest
it  should  fulfil  itself  by  self-suggestion,  I  changed  my  tactics  and  proposed
that  he  should  consult  one  of  my  somnarnbulists,  an  old  man  of  70  or  so,
nick-named  "the  prophet,"  because  he  had  exactly  foretold  his  own  cure  of
articular  rheumatism  of  4  years'  standing,  and  the  cure  of  his  daughter,  the
cure  in  the  latter  case  resulting  from  his  suggestion.  M.  de  Ch.  accepted
my  proposal  eagerly.  When  put  into  rajyport  with  the  somnambulist  his
first  question  was,  "  When  shall  I  die  ?  "  The  sleeper,  suspecting  the  state
of  the  case,  replied  after  a  pause,  "You  will  die  .  .  .  you  will  die  in  41
years."  The  efiect  was  marvellous  ;  tlie  young  man  recovered  his  spirits,
and  when  the  4th  February  passed  he  thought  himself  safe.  [Some  of  tliose
who  had  heard  of  the  prophecy  concluded  in  consequence  that  there  had  been
nothing  in  it.]

I  had  forgotten  all  this,  when  at  the  beginning  of  October  I  received
an  invitation  to  the  funeral  of  my  unfortunate  patient,  who  had  died  on
September  30th,  1886,  in  his  27th  year,  as  M™e.  Lenormand  had  foretold.
To  prevent  the  supposition  that  the  whole  afiair  was  an  illusion  on  my  part,
I  keep  this  letter  of  invitation,  as  well  as  the  record  made  at  the  time  of  M.
de  Ch.'s  visit  to  me.  I  have  since  learnt  that  the  unfortunate  man  had  been
under  treatment  for  biliary  calcuti  and  died  of  peritonitis  caused  by  an
internal  rupture.  .  LiiSbeault.

Here,  perhaps,  as  fitly  as  elsewhere  I  may  introduce  four  old  cases
which  should  not  be  ignored  ;  — cases  the  worse  for  their  age,  of  course,
inasmuch  as  we  cannot  question  our  informants  further  ;  yet  narratives
which  have  not  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  nor  bear  any  trace  of
frivolous  or  superstitious  origin.  They  are  grave  and  mainly  first-hand
statements,  and  while  they  are  themselves  strengthened  by  our  more
recent  narratives  they  do  also  in  their  turn  lend  to  those  new  instances
some  real  support.


530


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


P.  181.

Translation  of  an  extract  from  the  Meinoires  du  Due  de  St.  Simon.
(A.  Sautelet  et  Cie,  Librairies  Ecliteurs,  Paris,  1829).  Vol.  V.,  p.  120,
et  seq.  (A.D.  1706).  [The  Due  de  Saint  Simon  is  believed  to  have
kept  a  journal  with  the  object  of  thence  compiling  his  Memoires  and
here,  as  in  many  other  places,  the  account  suggests  that  notes  were
taken  at  the  time,  although,  of  course,  this  cannot  now  be  positively
asserted.]

Here  is  something  which  he  [the  Duke  of  Orleans]  told  me  in  a  corner  of
the  salon  at  Marly,  where  we  were  having  a  tete-d-tete  one  day,  when  he  had
just  arrived  from  Paris,  and  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out  for  Italy  ;  some-
thing so  marvellous,  confirmed  as  it  was  by  events  which  could  not  then  have
been  foreseen,  that  I  cannot  omit  it.  He  was  interested  in  all  arts  and
sciences,  and  with  great  powers  of  mind,  had  had  all  his  life  the  weakness
(so  common  at  the  court  of  Henry  II 's  children),  which  Catherine  de
Medicis  had  introduced  from  Italy  amongst  other  habits  and  customs.  He
had  sought,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  to  see  the  devil,  without  success,  according
to  what  he  has  often  told  me,  and  to  see  marvellous  things,  and  read  the
future.  Mademoiselle  de  Sery  had  at  her  house  a  little  girl  of  eight  or  nine,
who  had  been  born  there  and  had  never  left  it,  and  who  possessed  the
innocence  and  simplicity  of  her  age  and  upbringing.  Amongst  other  dealers
in  hidden  mysteries,  of  whom  the  Duke  of  Orleans  had  seen  so  many  in  his
life,  there  was  one  to  be  met  with  at  his  mistress's  house,  who  boasted  that
he  could  cause  anything  one  wanted  to  know  to  be  seen  in  a  glass  of  water.
Some  one  young  and  innocent  was  needed  to  look  into  it,  and  this  little  girl
was  just  suitable.  They  amused  themselves  by  wishing  to  know  what  was
happening  in  far-away  places,  and  the  little  girl  looked  and  told  what  she
saw  accordingly.  The  fellow  said  something  in  a  low  voice  over  the  glass  of
water  and  immediately  it  was  looked  into  successfully.

The  frauds  to  which  the  Duke  of  Orleans  had  so  often  been  exposed
induced  him  to  put  a  test  which  might  be  convincing.  He  told  one  of  his
men  in  a  whisper  to  go  immediately  to  Madame  de  Nancre's,  a  little  distance
off,  to  ascertain  exactly  who  was  there,  what  was  doing,  the  position  and
furnishings  of  the  room,  and  everything  that  was  going  on  there,  and  to
come  back  and  tell  him  in  a  whisper,  without  losing  a  moment  or  speaking  to
any  one.  The  order  was  obeyed  in  a  trice  without  any  one  having  noticed
what  it  was,  and  the  little  girl  was  in  the  room  all  the  while.  When  the
Duke  of  Orleans  had  been  instructed  by  his  messenger,  he  told  the  little  girl
to  see  in  the  glass  who  was  at  Madame  de  Nancre's,  and  what  was  going  on
there.  Immediately  she  told  them  word  for  word  all  that  the  Duke  of
Orleans'  messenger  had  seen.  The  description  of  the  faces,  figures,  and
clothes  of  the  people  who  were  there,  their  position  in  the  room,  the  people
who  were  playing  at  two  different  tables,  those  who  were  looking  on,  or  talk-
ing, seated  or  standing,  the  placing  of  the  furniture,  in  fact  everything.
Immediately  the  Duke  of  Orleans  sent  Nancre  there,  who  reported  that
everything  was  as  the  little  girl  had  said,  and  as  the  valet  who  had  first  been
there  had  told  the  Duke  in  a  whisper.

He  did  not  speak  to  me  much  on  these  subjects,  because  I  took  the  liberty
of  shaming  him  about  them. I  now  took  the  liberty  of  rating  him  soundly


The  Subliminal  Self.


531


about  his  account  of  this  incident  and  of  telling  hira  what  I  thought  might
deter  him  from  giving  credence  to  these  delusions  and  from  amusing  himself
with  them,  at  a  time  moreover,  when  his  mind  should  have  been  occupied
with  so  many  great  subjects.  "  That  is  not  all,"  he  said  to  me,  "  and  I  have
only  told  you  that  to  prepare  you  for  the  remainder,"  and  he  immediately
went  on  to  relate  how,  encouraged  by  the  accuracy  of  what  the  little  girl  had
seen  in  Madame  de  Nancre's  apartment,  he  had  wished  to  see  something
more  important,  and  what  would  happen  on  the  king's  death  ;  but  without
seeking  the  date,  which  could  not  be  seen  in  the  glass.  He  put  the  question
then  to  the  little  girl,  who  had  never  heard  Versailles  spoken  of  or  seen  any
one  belonging  to  the  court,  except  himself.  She  looked  and  explained  to
them  at  length  what  she  saw.  She  described  accurately  the  king's  room  at
Versailles  and  the  furnishings  which  were  actually  found  there  at  his  death.
She  depicted  him  precisely  in  his  bed,  and  standing  near  the  bed  or  in  the
room,  a  little  child  with  the  order  held  by  Madame  de  Ventadour,  at  the
sight  of  whom  she  exclaimed,  because  she  had  seen  her  at  Mademoiselle  de
Sery's  house.  She  made  them  recognise  Madame  de  Maintenon,  the  strik-
ing figure  of  Fagon,  the  Duchess  of  Orleans,  the  Princess  de  Conti  ;  she
exclaimed  at  the  Duke  of  Orleans  ;  in  short  she  revealed  to  them  whomsoever
she  saw  there,  princes,  lords,  servants,  or  valets.  When  she  had  finished,
the  Duke  of  Orleans,  surprised  that  she  had  not  mentioned  Monseigneur
[the  Dauphin],  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Burgundy,  nor  the  Duke  of  Berry,
asked  her  if  she  did  not  see  such-and-such  figures.  She  persisted  in  answer-
ing "  No,"  and  repeated  those  she  did  see.  The  Duke  of  Orleans  could  not
understand  this,  and  expressed  great  astonishment  at  it  to  me,  and  sought  in.
vain  the  reason  for  it.  The  event  explained  it.  It  was  then  1706.  All  four
were  at  that  time  in  full  life  and  health,  and  all  four  died  before  the  king.  It
was  the  same  with  the  Prince,  the  Duke,  and  the  Prince  de  Conti,  whom  she
did  not  see,  whilst  she  saw  the  children  of  the  two  latter,  M.  du  Maine,  his
children,  and  the  Count  of  Toulouse.  But  until  the  event  it  remained  a
mystery.  His  curiosity  satisfied  on  this  point,  the  Duke  of  Orleans  wished
to  know  what  would  become  of  himself.  That  however  waa  not  to  be  seen  in
the  glass.  The  fellow  who  was  there  offered  to  show  it  to  him  as  if  painted
on  the  wall  of  the  room,  if  he  was  not  afraid  of  seeing  himself  there  ;  and
after  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  rodomantade  before  them  all,  the  figure  of  the
Duke  of  Orleans,  clothed  as  he  then  was,  and  life-size,  appeared  suddenly  on
the  wall  like  a  painting,  with  a  closed  crown  on  its  head.  It  was  not  that  of
France,  Spain,  or  England,  neither  was  it  an  imperial  crown.  The  Duke  of
Orleans  who  gazed  fixedly  at  it  could  not  guess  what  it  was  ;  he  had  never
seen  such  a  one.  It  had  only  four  circles,  and  nothing  on  the  top.  This
crown  covered  his  head.

From  the  previous  mystery  and  from  this  latter  one,  I  took  the  opportu-
nity of  showing  him  again  the  folly  of  this  kind  of  thing,  fitting  delusions  of
the  devil,  permitted  by  God  for  the  punishment  of  a  curiosity,  which  He
forbids,  resulting  in  nothingness  and  darkness,  instead  of  the  light  and
instruction  sought.

He  was  at  that  time  certainly  very  far  from  being  regent  of  the
kingdom,  or  from  thinking  of  it.  That  was  perhaps  what  this  curious
crown  announced  to  him. All  this  happened  in  Paris  at  his  mistress's


532


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


house,  in  the  presence  of  their  most  intimate  circle,  the  day  before  he
told  me  of  it ;  and  I  thought  it  so  extraordinary,  that  I  have  given  it
a  place  here,  not  to  express  ray  approval  of  it,  but  to  make  it  known.

"St  Simon's  account,"  a  correspondent  writes  to  me,  "is  the  more
interesting  because  he  is  not  by  any  means  a  superstitious  man.  See
his  account  of  Boulainvillier's  predictions  of  deaths, --some  of  which
were  right  (apparently)  but  some  wrong.  St.  Simon  speaks  of  '  la
faussete,  la  vanite,  et  le  neant  de  cette  pretend ue  science  qui  seduit
tant  de  gens  d'esprit'  (Edition  Oheruel  et  Regnier,  Yol.  XI,  ch.  7,  p.
153 1715  A.  D.)  "

The  next  case  was  also  a  matter  of  serious  and  immediate  record.

P.  461. From  the  Rev-  T.  G.  Crippen,  Kirton,  near  Boston.

Since  writing  the  foregoing  paragraph  (i.e.,  P.  460)  I  have  found  a
memorandum  in  mj'  father's  handwriting,  dated  January,  1869,  in  which  he
had  set  down  particulars  of  several  dreams  or  presentiments.  I  will  give
one  of  them  verbatim  ;  the  incidents  nmst  have  occurred  in  the  early  part
of  1847.

"  ....  I  had  a  dream,  and  set  it  down,  telling  the  landlady
and  her  daughter  the  page  in  my  memorandum-book.  They  wanted  to  see
it,  but  I  said  'No,  but  they  might  mark  the  page, '  which  they  did.  Next
morning  I  was  sitting  at  the  same  table.  .  .  .  The  postman  gave  his
double  knock,  and  I  said  'Here  comes  my  dream.'  Sure  enough  it  was  ;  for
there  was  a  letter  from  the  Board  with  my  promotion,  which  I  did  not  look  for
for  another  year  at  least.  Now  the  dream  was  that  I  saw  a  letter,  read  it,
went  to  London  ;  close  by  a  church  that  you  could  go  round  two  sides  of,
I  saw  a  gateway  ;  I  entered,  saw  a  black-looking  building  with  folding  doors
and  a  side  door.  (Rough  sketch  in  the  margin,  unintelligible.)  I  entered
and  turned  up  a  flight  of  steps  on  my  right  hand,  met  a  very  little  man  and
he  said  '  Welcome,  stranger  ;  you  are  Mr.  Criijpen.'  .  .  .  That  was  my
dream  at  Thorpe-le-Soken.  The  church  was  St.  Giles  in  London  ;  I  never
asked  any  one,  but  went  straight  round  [sic],  saw  the  entrance  and  all  in
my  dream. The  supervisor  was  a  very  little  man. . .  ."

By  way  of  explanation,  I  may  add  tliat  the  place  described  as  having  been
seen  beforehand  was  a  soapery  near  St.  Giles,  of  which  my  father  had
charge  as  "  Assistant ''  for  a  few  months  in  1847.  I  was  too  young  to  be
able  to  give  any  corroboration  to  this  narrative  from  my  own  knowledge  ;
but  I  know  that  some  incidents  connected  with  his  removal  from  Thorpe-le-
Soken  to  London  at  that  time  made  a  deep  impression  on  my  father's
mind  ;  he  regarded  it  as  a  special  occasion  for  gratitude  to  God,  and  several
times  spoke  of  it  as  such.  Thos.  Geo.  Crippen.

It  will  be  obsei'ved  that  Mr.  Crippen  quotes  from  a  memorandum-
book  of  his  father's,  which  is  itself  a  digest  of  notes  taken  at  t?he
time.  As  regards  the  premonitory  vision  of  Wansford,  which  follows,
it  is  of  course  possible  that  the  Excise authorities  had  already


The  Subliminal  Self.


533


contemplated  moving  Mr.  Crippen  to  Wansford,  and  had  thought
of  that  scene  in  connection  with  him,  so  that  it  might  have  been
telepathically  transferred.

P.  460.

From  the  Rev.  Thomas  George  Crippen  (Independent  Minister),  Kirton,
near  Boston.

July  8th,  1884.

In  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  1852,  my  father  was  Excise  officer  at
Mildenhall,  Suffolk,  and  was  expecting  shortly  to  be  removed  to  another
station.  One  morning  at  breakfast  he  said,  "  1  have  had  a  curious  dream  ;
I  saw  a  malt-house  standing  beside  some  water  ;  there  were  trees,  and  a
crane  ;  I  have  never  been  in  such  a  place,  but  if  I  were  an  artist  I  could
sketch  the  scene  exactly."  A  few  months  later  the  expected  order  for
removal  came  to  hand,  and  my  father,  accompanied  by  my  mother  and
myself,  went  to  the  ^jlace  indicated  to  make  needful  arrangements.  The
place  was  Dalham,  a  few  miles  distant ;  and  I  distinctly  remember  that  as
we  rode  by  a  malt-house  beside  a  pool,  at  Dalham,  my  mother  said,  "Is
that  like  your  dream?"  The  reply  was  "No,  there  were  boats  on  that
water."  I  may  remark  that  I  was  then  a  few  weeks  under  11  years  old.
We  did  not  remove  to  Dalham,  the  order  being  countermanded  ;  but  in  the
early  spring  of  1854  — nearly  two  years  after  the  dream- -my  father  was
ordered  to  Wansford,  in  the  East  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  We  had  certainly
never  been  within  40  miles  of  the  place.  We  arrived  at  Driffield  on  a
Saturday  night,  and  put  up  at  the  "Bell"  ;  and  on  the  following  morning
my  father  and  I  took  a  walk  around.  In  the  course  of  our  walk  we  passed
a  malt-house  and  mill,  standing  beside  a  large  sheet  of  water,  at  Naflerton.
I  said,  "Is  that  like- your  dream  ?  "  The  reply  was  "  Something  like,  and  yet
not  like  it."  We  walked  on  to  Wansford — about  two  miles  further — when
suddenly  my  father  said  "  My  dream,  Tom,  there  it  is  !  There  is  the  malt-
house,  and  the  trees,  and  the  crane,  and  the  water  exactly  as  I  saw  it."  The
plac':!  was  Baiuton's  mill — since  known  as  Nornabell's — about  two  miles
from  Di'itfield.  As  I  have  a  distinct  remembrance  of  the  dream  being  the
subject  of  conversatiim  before  the  visit  to  Dalham,  of  the  conversation  at
Dalham,  and  of  my  father's  words  both  at  Nafferton  and  Wansford,  I  think
this  may  be  fairly  put  on  record  as  an  instance  of  presentiment  inexplicable
by  any  known  natural  law.

The  memorandum  contains  further  details,  but  I  prefer  to  leave  the
narrative  as  it  stands,  because  so  far  it  is  within  the  sphere  of  my  own
distinct  remembrance.

Thos.  Geo.  Geippen.

Tlie  next  case  is  again  noteworthy,  as  coming  from  a  quarter  where
the  slightest  conscious  embellishment  of  truth  would  have  been  reckoned
as  a  sin.  "  Fletcher  of  Madeley  "  was  one  of  the  chiefest  of  English
saints  ;  and  the  premonition  which  follows  is  bound  up  with  earthly  lives
than  which  few  could  have  approached  closer  to  the  life  unseen,  or  have
lain  more  manifestly  under  the  oversight  and  intendancy  of  heaven.


53i


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


P.  58.

From  the  life  of  Mrs.  Mary  Fletcher,  of  Madeley. By  the  Rev.  H.
Moore,  D.D. Vol.  I.,  pp.  241-243.

On  Mr.  Fletcher's  death  at  his  parish  of  Madeley,  his  widow  expected  to
have  to  give  up  their  house.  In  October,  1785,  she  makes  the  following
entry  in  her  journal :  "I  received  a  message  from  Mr.  Kenerson,  letting  me
know  I  should  never  be  turned  out  of  the  house.  It  brought  before  my
mind  a  dream  I  had  some  years  before  I  was  married.  I  dreamed  a  man
came  to  offer  me  some  tithes.  I  replied,  '  Friend,  I  have  nothing  to  do
with  tithes,  I  have  no  concern  in  any  living.'  But  soon  after  I  said  to  one
of  my  family,  Hannah,  'I  am  going  away,  I  have  a  call  from  the  Lord, — I
must  go.'  But  again  I  thought  I  knew  not  where,  not  even  into  what
country.  However,  the  way  of  duty  is  the  way  of  safety.  I  will  set  out,  and
God  will  lead  me.  Immediately  I  left  Cross  Hall,i  and  after  walking  a  few
paces  I  thought  I  was  carried,  in  a  moment,  I  knew  not  how,  and  set  down
in  a  churchyard,  and  some  one  said  to  me,  '  You  are  to  enter  into  this
church.'  I  went  in,  and  walking  up  the  aisle,  I  heard  a  kind  of  groan,  and
said,  'That  is  the  sound  of  death.'  When  I  came  out  of  the  church  I
entered  into  a  house  which  was  just  by  it.  As  I  was  on  the  steps  it  was  said
inwardly  to  me,  'This  is  the  habitation  which  God  hath  chosen  for  you.'
But  I  answered,  '  Oh,  no  !  I  cannot  live  here.  It  is  the  order  of  God  for
me  to  live  in  Yorkshire.'  I  went  into  some  rooms,  and  found  in  one  I
passed  through,  a  man  and  woman.  In  the  next  was  a  young  woman,  with
a  child  on  her  lap.  She  appeared  dying  of  a  consumption,  and  in  great  con-
flicts. We  soon  entered  into  conversation  ....  After  a  time,  she  told
me  I  must  come  here,  and  here  abide.  I  replied,  '  Oh,  no  !  I  live  at  Cross
Hall,  in  Yorkshire,  and  have  a  great  family  and  many  calls  there.'  But  she
said,  'It  is  the  will  of  God  to  bring  you  here — there  is  work  for  you  to  do.'
She  added,  '  Do  not  be  frightened,  God  will  make  you  a  comfortable
habitation.'  I  said,  'Have  you  the  Gospel  here?'  She  replied,  'Yes.'
'And  who,'  said  I,  'is  the  minister  that  brought  it  among  you?'  She
replied,  '  He  is  not  here  now. '  '  Then  who, '  said  I,  '  is  your  present
minister  1 '  She  showed  me  a  name  of  three  syllables — but  I  .  .  .  .
could  only  remember  the  two  last — '  nerson.'  I  felt  myself  in  great  anguish
and  sorrow  of  mind,  (though  I  could  not  assign  any  cause),  and  said,  '  I
must  go  away,  I  cannot  stay  here.  I  do  not  know  that  man  and  woman.  I
cannot  live  with  them.'  She  replied,  'That  man  and  woman  will  go  away
when  you  come. But  there  is  work  for  you  to  do,  you  must  abide  here.'

I  went  downstairs  ....  seeing  a  coach  ready  to  be  hired,
I  beckoned  to  it — the  man  opened  the  door  ;  as  I  was  stepping  in  he  said,
'  Where  will  you  be  carried  ? '  I  strove  to  say  Cross  Hall,  Yorkshire,  but  I
could  not. Then  I  strove  to  name  various  habitations  I  had  formerly  lived  in,

but  I  could  remember  the  name  of  none  At  last  I  stepped

back,  and  pointing  to  the  house  I  came  out  of,  I  said,  '  That  is  my  home.
God  hath  taken  the  remembrance  of  every  other  out  of  my  heart.'

I  knew  nothing  of  the  situation  of  anything  in  Madeley  when  I  liad
this  dream — but  when,  some  years  afterwards,  I  told  my  dear  Mr.  Fletcher,

1  Cross  Hall,  Yorkshire,  was  at  this  time  her  home.


The  Subliminal  Sdf.


535


he  said,  '  There  was  a  man  and  woman  who  lived  with  me  at  that  time,  and
a  young  woman  named  A.  C,  who  was  very  useful  in  the  work,  to  which  she
proved  a  nursing  mother.  She  died  of  a  consumption,  in  which  she  had
many  conflicts.'  I  said,  'Was  there  a  minister  here  whose  name  ended  in
'  neyson '  1 '  He  replied,  '  No.'  But  now  I  understand  it  all.  Had  I  before
remembered  the  whole  name,  I  should  at  once  have  known  this  dream  would
be  fulfilled  at  my  dear  husband's  death,  as  Mr.  Kenerson  was  the  patron  and
his  son  now  became  our  vicar."

And  now  a  case  which  we  may  interpret  in  vaiious  ways,  but
which  yet  points  to  spiritual  presences  which  to  this  man's  sober
apprehension  seemed  real  and  near.  I  quote  only  so  much  of  the
narrative,  not  now  evidential,  as  may  serve  to  show  its  pai'allelism  with
more  modern  experience.

P.  11.

From  a  letter  which  apjDeared  in  the  Gentleman' s  Magazine  (Vol.  XXXV.
1765,  pp.  599,  600)  headed  :  "  The  Existence  of  Invisible  Furewarners  of
Events  Asserted."  This  letter  bears  the  signature  of  J.  Cook,  M.D.,  and  is
dated  Leigh,  September  18th,  1765.

The  writer,  after  vouching  "  by  the  living  of  God  "for  the  truth  of  his
narrative,  says  : —

"  Ever  since  I  was  three  and  twenty  years  of  age,  I  have  had  an  invisible
being  or  beings  attend  me  at  times  both  at  home  and  abroad,  that  have  by
some  gentle  token  or  other,  given  me  warning  and  notice  that  I  should
shortly  certainly  lose  a  particular  friend,  or  a  patient.  They  began  and  con-
tinued from  our  marriage  till  the  decease  of  my  first  wife,  in  May,  1728,  and
of  her  mfant  daughter,  who  lived  with  me  but  seven  months,  and  but  six
weeks  after  her  mother,  when  they  were  very  frequent  and  troublesome
about  my  house,  as  was  well-known,  and  noticed  by  many  of  our  friends  and
neighbours.  After  that  they  came  seldom,  but  so  gentle,  civil,  and  familiar,
that  I  chose  rather  to  have  them  about  my  house  than  not,  and  would  not,
if  I  was  to  sell  it,  part  with  the  same  without  some  extraordinary  considera-
tion upon  that  very  account  ;  and  I  really  hope  they  will  never  leave  me
as  long  as  I  live  ;  though  my  spouse  wishes  otherwise,  to  whom  they  are
not  so  agreeable. . .  .

' '  Sometimes  we  have  had  their  hints  frequent  and  close  together  ;  at
other  times  but  seldom,  and  at  a  great  distance  of  time.  But  this  I  have
observed,  that  rarely  any  patient,  or  friend  that  I  respected,  or  that  valued
me,  departs  hence,  but  I  have  some  kind  of  sensible  notice,  or  warning  of  it ;
but  yet  so  discreet  and  mild,  as  never  to  flutter,  or  frighten  me.  This  notice,
which  is  either  by  seeing,  feeling,  or  hearing,  is  not  fixed  to  any  certain
distance  of  time  previous  to  their  deaths,  but  I  have  had  it  a  week,  a  month,
and  more,  before  their  decease,  and  once  only  three  days,  when  I  actually
heard  the  spiritual  agent  form  an  articulate  voice,  and  utter  these  words,  as
I  was  abed,  with  a  most  pathetic  emiDhasis,  '  I  am  gone  ; '  which  was
fulfilled  the  Monday  morning  following,  by  the  sudden  death  of  my  cousin's
daughter,  who  was  upon  a  visit  at  my  house,  and  was  well  two  days  before. "


536


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Towards  the  end  of  his  lettei-  he  adds  tliat  the  voice  came  "  just  as  I  had
put  out  my  candle,  and  was  laid  down  in  my  bed,"  etc.

' '  My  spouse  was  fast  asleep  by  me,  so  missed  being  witness  of  that
notice  ;  though  she  often  is,  and  some  of  my  sons  too,  and  many
others."  .

"  At  first,  in  1728,  I  kept  a  book  of  account,  where  I  entered  every
notice  or  warning,  with  the  particular  circumstances  attending,  and  the
event  that  succeeded  such  notices,  but  they  were  so  frequent  and  numerous
that  I  grew  quite  weary  in  writing  them  down,  so  left  off  that  method,
resolving  to  take  them  for  the  future  just  as  they  came.  The  very  last  hint
I  had  was  on  Saturday  night,  the  6th  of  July  1765,  in  my  chamber,  about
eleven  o'clock,  as  I  was  walking  to  my  bed,  being  from  home  attending  a
patient  I  was  that  morning  sent  for  to,  and  which  I  lost  on  the  20th  day  of
the  same  month.  For  the  first  five  days  I  saw  no  danger  ;  yet  I  doubted  the
event  ;  but  when  I  have  more  than  one  patient  dangerously  ill  at  a  time,
the  issue  only  determines  the  case,  and  though  I  lay  no  stress  upon  such
notices,  so  as  to  affect  my  practice,  yet  I  fear  the  worst,  and  though  the  use
of  means  is  then  to  no  purpose,  yet  it  renders  me  the  more  diligent  for
conscience'  sake."

It  is  interesting  to  set  beside  these  old  cases  some  modern
examples,  where  like  intimations  are  still  given  through  the  same
channels  as  before.

The  case  next  to  be  given  has  the  rare  peculiarity  of  involving
a  definite  date, — the  day  of  the  month,  a  few  months  ahead, — on
which  the  pi'emonition  was  to  fulfil  itself.^  The  matter  involved  was
a  private  one,  and  I  am  able  to  give  the  case  only  in  outline.

(P.  223.)  In  December,  1889,  I  received  from  Miss  X.  a  sealed
envelope  containing  a  date.  Miss  X.  stated  that  a  premonition  in
auditory  form — a  voice  often  heard  before  at  crises,  and  which
she  had  always  trusted — had  deferred  to  the  date  therein-mentioned
the  decision  of  a  matter  as  to  which  she  had  been  in  great
anxiety,  and  which  she  had  been  daily  expecting  to  be  obliged
to  decide.  It  did  not  then  appear  to  her  likely  that  the  decision
should  be  so  long  deferred  ;  nor  was  it  essential  that  an  actual
meeting  should  take  place  ;  but  she  resolved  to  do  nothing
either  to  help  or  hinder  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction.  The  date  in
question  found  her,  in  fact,  at  a  distance  from  London  (where  the
question  would  have  to  be  settled),  and  likely  to  remain  in  the
country.  An  unexpected  summons  from  an  invalid  relative  brought
her  back  to  London,— the  cause  of  the  summons  being  the  sudden
illness  of  a  maid.  Miss  X.  arrived  in  London,  and  an  accidental
visitor  at  the  relative's  house  invited  her  impromptu  to  an  enter-
tainment  at which she  met  the  friend  upon  whom the  matter


'  See  Mr.  Edisbury's  case,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  318.


The  Subliminal  Self.


537


depended — although  that  friend  was  previously  a  stranger  to  her
hosts  of  the  evening.

Miss  X.  then  wrote  to  tell  me  of  this  fact,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  I,
opening  the  sealed  letter  together,  found  that  the  date  given  therein
corresponded  to  that  on  which  the  predicted  meeting  and  decision  had
now  actually  taken  place.

In  the  next  case  a  date  is  also  obscurely  given.

P.  643. Dream. Cf. Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Case  (79).

From  the  Rev.  E.  D.  Banister,  Whitechapel  Vicarage,  Preston,
Xiancashire.

[November  Uth,  1885.]
My  father,  whilst  a  schoolboy  (probably  from  1808-1815),  had  a  dream
relating  to  his  future,  which  I  and  my  sister  have  often  heard  him  relate.
In  the  dream  he  saw  a  tablet  in  the  parish  church  of  his  native  place,  on
"which  was  inscribed  his  name  in  full,  the  date  of  his  birth,  and  the  day  and
month,  but  not  the  year,  of  his  death.  But  there  seemed  to  him  to  be
something  uncertain  about  the  month  in  the  date  of  his  death.  The  date
as  inscribed  on  the  tablet  was  Jun.  9.  But  as  June  is  seldom,  if  ever,
abbreviated  as  Jun.,  he  was  somewhat  inclined  to  think  that  it  might  be
Jan.  9.

Many  years  elapsed  after  the  dream,  and  nothing  occurred  to  recall  the
circumstance  until  on  June  9th,  1835,  my  eldest  brother  died  at  the  age  of
two  years  and  ten  months.  My  father  at  the  time  was  very  deeply  affected
by  the  loss  of  the  child.  The  date  of  the  child's  death  called  to  his  mind
the  date  on  the  tablet,  and  thouah  in  his  dream  he  distinctly  saw  his  own
name,  he  ever  afterwards  favoured  the  idea  that  the  date  he  had  seen  was
Jun.  9.

On  January  9th,  1883,  my  father  died.
Mr.  Banister's  sister  confirms  as  follows  : —

I  have  seen  my  brother's  letter  respecting  the  dream  of  which  I  have
Tieard  my  father  speak,  and  can  only  say  that  the  facts  are  as  my  brother
has  stated.  Agnes  Banistee.

To  what  extent  departed  human  spirits  may  be  concerned  in
messages  like  these  is  a  problem  which  only  a  much  wider  collection  of
evidence  can  enable  us  to  solve.  I  have  already  alluded  to  certain  cases
which  seem  to  show  us  a  departed  friend  foretelling  some  death  which
may  or  may  not  have  been  already  recognised  as  imminent  by  observers
on  earth.  It  is  suggested  thus  that  the  disembodied  spirit  can  better
discern  the  invalid's  condition,  and  remains  at  hand  to  receive  him
when  the  transition  comes.

In  several  families  there  is  a  tradition  that  some  special  sign
precedes  or  accompanies  the  transition  of  the  head  of  the  house,  or  of


538


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


certain  of  its  members.  In  the  case  of  one  of  these  families,  I  have
received  evidence  to  the  persistence  of  a  given  type  of  "  warning  ^
during  a  period  of  three  centuries.

P.  232.

Extract  from  Dr.  Robert  Plot's  "Natural  History  of  Oxfordshire."  Edited
1677. (Original  Book  at  Conyingham,  Knaresborough. Pages  204  and  205).

I.  "  I  must  add  also  a  Relation,  as  strange  as  it  is  true,  of  the  Family  of
one  Captain  Wood,  late  of  Bampton,  Oxfordshire,  now  of  Brise  Norton,  Captain
in  the  late  Wars  for  the  King.  Some  whereof  before  their  death  have  had
warning  given  them  by  a  certain  knocking,  either  at  the  door  without  or  on
a  table  or  shelves  within  ;  the  number  of  stroahs  and  distance  between  them,
and  the  place  where,  for  the  most  part  respecting  the  circumstances  of  the
persons  to  dye,  or  their  deaths  themselves,  as  will  easily  be  collected
from  the  following  relation.  The  first  knocking  that  was  heard,  or  at
least  observed,  was  about  a  year  after  the  Restoration  of  the  King,  in  the
afternoon,  or  a  little  before  night,  at  or  upon  the  door  it  being  then  given,
as  it  was  apprehended  by  Mrs.  Elenor  Wood,  mother  to  Captain  Basil  Wood,
who  only  heard  it,  none  being  about  the  house  but  herself  ;  at  which  she
was  very  much  disturbed,  thinking  it  boded  some  ill  to  her  or  hers,  and
within  fourteen  nights  after,  she  had  news  of  the  death  of  her  son-in-law,
Mr.  George  Smith,  who  dyed  in  London.

II.  "  About  three  years  after  that,  there  were  three  great  knocks  given
very  audibly  to  all  that  were  chen  in  the  house,  viz.,  to  the  aforesaid
Mrs.  Elenor  Wood,  Mr.  Basil  Wood,  and  his  wife,  Mrs.  Hester,  and  some
servants  ;  which  knocks  were  so  remarkable  that  one  of  the  maids  came
from  the  well,  which  was  about  twenty  yards  from  the  place,  to  see  what
was  the  matter  ;  and  Mrs.  Elenor  Wood,  and  another  maid  that  was  within
the  house,  saw  three  great  pans  of  lard  shake  and  totter  so  upon  a  shelf  in
the  milk  house  that  they  were  like  to  fall  down.  Upon  this  violent
knocking,  Mr.  Basil  Wood  and  his  wife,  being  then  in  the  hall,  came  pre-
sently into  the  milk  house  to  their  mother,  where  finding  her  somewhat
disturbed,  and  enquiring  the  reason,  she  replied,  '  God  Almighty  only  knew
the  matter  ;'  she  could  tell  nothing,  but  she  heard  the  knocking  ;  which  being
within  doors,  Mr.  Basil  Wood  concluded  was  for  some  of  the  family  at  home,
that  upon  the  door  being  for  a  friend  abroad ;  which  accordingly  fell  out,
i/iree  of  the  family,  according  to  the  number  of  the  knocks,  dying  within
little  more  than  half  a  year  after,  viz.,  Mrs.  Hester  Wood,  wife  to  Mr.  Basil
Wood,  a  child  of  Mr.  Wood's  sister,  and  Mrs.  Elenor  Wood,  his  mother.

III.  "About  August,  1674,  Mr.  Basil  Wood,  junior,  son  of  the  Mr.  Basil
Wood  aforesaid,  living  at  Exeter,  in  Devonshire,  heard  the  same  kind  of
knocking,  at  which  being  disturbed,  he  wrote  word  of  it  to  his  father  here  at
Bampton,  in  Oxfordshire  ;  viz.,  'That  one  Sunday  he  and  his  wife  and  her
sister  and  his  brother  did  distinctly  hear  upon  a  Table  in  their  chamber,  as
they  stood  by  it,  two  several  knocks  struck  as  it  were  with  a  cudgel,  one  of
them  before  and  the  other  after  morning  prayer,  a  little  before  dinner  ; '
which  letter  was  shown  to  Mr.  Wood,  senior,  (as  the  other  knockings  before
the  deaths  of  any  that  dyed  were  beforehand  told)  to  several  neighbouring


The  Subliminal  Self.


539


gentlemen  ;  after  which  within  about  fourteen  days,i  Mrs.  Hester  Wood,  a
second  wife  of  Mr.  Basil  Wood,  senior,  and  about  a  quarter  of  a  year  after,
her  father,  Mr.  Richard  Lisset,  dyed  both  at  Bampton  ;  since  which  time
they  have  heard  nothing  more  as  yet."

IV.  The  following  is  a  copy  made  by  Miss  Ethel  Woodd  of  an  entry  made
by  her  father,  Mr.  Charles  H.  L.  Woodd,  in  the  margin  of  his  cojay  of  Plot's
"Natural  History  of  Oxfordshire  "  : —

' '  The  said  warning  was  heard  at  the  death  of  Mr.  George  Woodd,  of
Richmond,  Surrey.  A  knocking  was  heard  by  Mrs.  Woodd  the  night  he  died.
He  said,  'Oh,  it  is  the  Woodds'  warning,  I  shall  die  before  morning.'  He

^i*^^  "^o-  "C.  H.  L.  Wood.

"  A.  D.  March,  1784."

[Mr.  George  Basil  Woodd,  father  of  Mr.  Basil  George  Woodd,  died
March  11th,  1784.]

V.  Basil  George  Woodd  died  at  Hillfield,  Hampstead,  August  28th,
1872,  aged  91  years.

Hannah  Wardman,  an  old  servant,  living  in  Mr.  Basil  George  Woodd's
house.  The  Old  Parsonage,  Harrogate,  Yorkshire,  heard  three  distinct
knocks  outside  on  the  front  door  the  night  he  died  at  Hampstead.  She  got
up  and  went  down  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  ojjened  the  door  and  looked
round — not  a  creature  to  be  seen  over  aU.  the  stray  [i.e.,  the  wide  grass
common  at  Harrogate  on  which  the  old  parsonage  looked  out.]  The  knocks
occurred  again  and  she  came  down  a  second  time  in  vain  (remembered  by
Eleanor  .J.  Mitton  and  Fanny  L.  Woodd).  She  also  heard  dogs  coming  into
the  yard  and  howling  all  night.

At  Hillfield,  Mr.  Gleave,  the  butler,  heard  knocks  at  the  pantry  window
(this  is  remembered  by  E.  H.  W.  only).  It  is  thought  that  an  old  servant,
who  lived  at  Hillfield  at  the  time,  may  be  able  to  corroborate  it,  and  she  has
been  communicated  with.

["  E.  H.  W."  is  Mrs.  Basil  Kilvington  Woodd,  who  has  kindly  helped  in
the  collection  of  these  facts.]

Lower  Lodge,  Waterperry,  Wheatley,  Oxon. ,

June  22nd,  1895.

HoND.  Madam, — In  reply  to  your  request  about  the  knockings  heard  by
Gleave  on  the  eve  of  Mr.  Woodd's  death,  at  Hillfield,  August  28th,  1872,
I  quite  well  remember  Gleave  coming  out  of  the  pantry  and  saying
"Some  one  has  been  knocking  at  the  pantry  window."  Nothing  could  be
seen  ;  we  supposed  it  must  have  been  a  bird.  Gleave  said,  "  It  is  a  strange
thing  for  a  bird  to  come  there."  The  dog  howled  pitiously.  Chase,  one
of  the  men  in  the  garden,  remarked,  "  The  old  master  will  soon  be  gone  and
the  dog  knows  it."

I  remember  Mr.  C.  H.  L.  W.  once  speaking  of  the  knocks  being  heard  in
the  Woodd  family  at  the  death  of  the  oldest  member.

1  Mr.  Basil  Wood  was  married  three  times,  first  to  Esther  Meade,  secondly  to
Hester  Lisset.


540


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I  heard  Hannah  Wardnian  herself  speak  of  the  three  knocks  at  the  Old
Parsonage  ;  the  neighbours  in  the  morning  remarking  to  her  how  late  she
had  visitors.  As  they  were  speaking,  a  messenger  brought  the  sad  tidings
of  Mr.  Woodd's  death.  It  was  the  exact  time  of  the  knockins;  at  the  Parsonage
door.  I  did  not  hear  any  knocking  ;  I  had  been  with  the  ladies  and  Mr.
Woodd  in  their  great  trouble  in  a  strange  house.  It  quite  prepared  me  for
the  sad  tidings  Jane  Simpson  had  to  tell  me.  This  is  all  I  can  tell  you, —
Yours  respectfully,  ^a^a^  Tyloe.

[Hannah  Wardman  died  a  few  years  ago.]

Mr.  C.  H.  L.  Woodd  made  the  following  note  on  the  margin  of  his  copy
of  Plot  :—

"August  28th,  1872,  my  father,  Basil  George  Woodd,  of  Hillfield,
Hamjjstead,  died  at  11.12  p.m.,  at  Hillfield.  An  old  servant  who  took  care
of  his  house  at  Harrogate  was  aroused  at  11  or  12  by  a  violent  knocking  at
the  front  door.  She  looked  out,  could  see  nobody  ;  this  occurred  thrice.  Her
neighbours  asked  her  next  day,  '  What  was  the  knocking  ? '  She  heard  next
day  of  the  death  of  Mr.  B.  G.  Woodd  at  that  hour.  She  had  never  heard  of
the  legendary  superstition.  <  <  q ^  Woodd

"Roslyn,  Hampstead.

September  6th,  1872."

VI.  Charles  H.  L.  Woodd  died  December  15th,  1893,  between  8  and  9  a.m.

Atigust  21st,  1895.

On  Thursday  evening,  December  14th,  1893,  after  church  I  was
sitting  before  my  fire — I  knew  my  father  was  ill,  and  had  a  presentiment
that  he  was  dangerously  ill,  though  if  I  had  known  this  I  should  have
remained  at  Hampstead,  where  I  had  been  that  day.  As  I  sat,  I  distinctly
heard  three  knocks,  perhaps  more,  like  the  sound  of  some  one  emptying  a
tobacco  pipe  upon  the  bars  of  my  fire-grate.

Thinking  it  may  be  a  warning,  I  did  not  go  to  bed  for  an  hour,  thinking  I
might  be  sent  for.  At  1  a.m.  the  butler,  Arthur  Reading,  came,  and  I  was
awakened  from  sleep  by  ringing  of  the  front  door  bell  and  knocking.  He
told  me  the  doctor  had  sent  for  me,  as  my  father  was  very  ill ;  and  he  would  be
back  in  twenty  minutes  whilst  I  dressed,  to  take  me  to  Hampstead.  He  went
to  Westminster  for  medical  appliances.  In  half  an  hour  he  had  not  returned,
and  I  said  to  my  housekeeper,  Elizabeth  Park,  "I  must  go.  I  feel  sure  my
father  is  dying,  because  I  heard  the  Woodd  knocks  as  I  sat  in  my  chair  before
going  to  bed."

A  hansom  cab  passed  and  I  ordered  the  man  to  drive  as  fast  as  he  could
to  Roslyn  (Hampstead).  On  my  arrival  my  first  question  was,  "Is  he
still  alive  1 "  for  I  believed  he  must  have  passed  away  at  the  time  of  the
knocking. He  died  at  8.45  next  morning."

(Signed) Trevor  Basil  Woodd.

(Assistant  Curate,  S.  Peter's,  Eaton-square,  London).

Mrs.  Park  verifies  this  statement.
Mrs.  Dumbell  writes  as  follows  :  —

I,  Winifred  Dumbell  (n^e  Woodd),  certify  that  my  brother  related  to  me
this  circumstance  at  breakfast  next  morning.


The  Subliminal  Self.


541


There  was  no  reason  for  my  leaving  Rosyln  on  Thursday  afternoon,  and  I
should  not  have  done  so  had  I  thought  my  father  was  in  extremis.

St.  Crinian,  7,  Walpole-gardens,  Strawberry  Hill,

December  13th,  1895.

I  am  requested  by  Mrs.  Basil  Kilvington  Woodd  to  write  down  the
following  facts  relating  to  the  death  warning  in  our  family.

On  December  14th,  1893  (Thursday  morning)  hearing  my  father,  Mr.
Charles  Woodd,  was  not  well,  I  left  Epsom,  where  I  was  staying,  for
Hampstead,  and  found  my  father  in  bed  and  very  weak,  but  I  was  in  no  way
anxious  about  him,  as  I  did  not  suppose  him  to  be  seriously  ill.  At  11  o'clock
at  night,  being  tired  and  finding  I  could  not  assist  my  mother  or  the  nurse,  I
lay  down  in  an  adjoining  room  leaving  the  door  wide  open  and  I  fell  asleep.  In
a  short  time  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by  a  loud  rapping  as  if  at  the  door.  I
jumped  up  and  ran  into  the  passage  thinking  my  mother  had  called  me.  I
listened  at  the  door  of  my  father's  room,  but  no  one  was  moving.  I  lay  down
again  and  instantly  fell  asleep,  when  exactly  the  same  thing  occurred.  I  did
not  actually  sleep  again,  and  camrot  say  whether  any  sound  made  me  get  up
the  third  time,  but  I  went  in  search  of  the  doctor  and  gathered  that  he  was
anxious  about  my  father,  who  was  getting  much  weaker.  We  were  all  aroused,
and  about  8  o'clock  a.m.  my  father  died.

Winifred  Dumbell,  nee  Woodd.

I  did  not  connect  this  rapping  with  the  Woodd  warning,  as  all  was  so  rapid
and  unexpected,  but  on  mentioning  it  at  breakfast  the  next  morning  to  my
brother,  the  Rev.  Trevor  Basil  Woodd,  he  told  me  he  also  heard  a  similar
warning  in  his  rooms  in  Vauxhall  Bridge-road  about  the  same  time.

VII.  Basil  Thomas  Woodd  died  June  4th,  1895,  10.30  p.m.  His  two
daughters  send  me  the  following  statement : —

On  June  3rd,  at  10.30  p.m.,  Fanny,  his  daughter,  staying  with  Mrs.
Stoney,  83,  Wharton-road,  West  Kensington,  heard  knocks,  apparently
from  next  door,  as  of  nails  being  hammered  in  and  pictures  hung,  which
seemed  so  unlikely  at  that  hour  of  night  that  the  next  morning  she  men-
tioned it  to  Mrs.  Stoney,  whose  bedroom  was  just  below  hers,  asking  if  she
had  heard  it  or  could  account  for  it.  At  the  same  hour  Kate,  his  youngest
daughter,  who  was  with  him  at  his  brother  Robert's  house,  Woodlands,
Hampstead,  having  retired  for  the  night,  heard  bangs  or  thumps  against  the
windows  below,  which  made  her  suspect  burglars.  The  next  day,  the  4th,
Fanny  left  Mrs.  Stoney  to  go  to  Woodlands,  and  Kate  was  to  leave  on  the
5th.  Mr.  Woodd  was  in  his  usual  health,  and  was  with  the  family  at  dinner,
chatting  and  telling  Yorkshire  stories,  but  had  no  apjjietite  and  ate  nothing,
and  at  10  was  seized  with  the  apopletic  attack  from  wliich  he  never  rallied,
and  breathed  his  last  at  10.30  p.m.  Fanny  L  Woodd

Kate  I.  Woodd.

83,  Wliarton-road,  West  Kensington,  Jxdy  1st.
Miss  Fanny  Woodd  was  staying  in  my  house,  and  I  distinctly  remember
her  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  .June  asking  me  if  I  had  been  disturbed  by
the  great  knocking  on  the  wall  of  the  adjoining  house  the  previous  night.
She  supposed  the  people  must  have  been  putting  up  pictm-es,  and  we  agreed

2  Q


542


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


that  it  was  inconsiderate  of  them  to  do  it  at  that  hour,  10.30.  Soniething^
interrupted  us,  or  I  should  have  remarked  on  the  strangeness  of  my  not  haying
heard,  as  my  room  is  just  under  Miss  Woodd's,  and  the  noise  heard  by  one
could  not  have  failed  to  disturb  the  other.  A  servant  who  sleeps  on  the-
same  floor  also  did  not  hear  the  knocking,  but  was  bringing  in  breakfast
when  Miss  Woodd  spoke  of  it  to  me,  and  remembers  her  doing  so  and  signs,
tl^is  too.  ^  j_  Stoney.

M.  RiSDALE.

81,  Wharton-road,  West  Kensing-ton,  July  Id.
There  has  been  no  putting  up  of  pictures  or  knocking  of  any  kind  in  this-
house  for  quite  two  years. We  are  also  early  risers,  and  are  always  in  bed
and  asleep  by  10  p.m.  (Signed)  Harriet  Taylor.

Roslyn,  Hampstead,  N.W.,  August  5th,  1895.

Dear  Sir,  — I  send  you  the  following  account,  which  I  should  like  you  to-
see,  in  reference  to  the  "  Woodd  knockings. "

A  few  days  before  hearing  of  the  death  of  my  uncle,  Mr.  Basil  Thomas.
Woodd,  which  took  place  at  Woodlands,  Hampstead,  I  distinctly  heard  a
sound  as  of  some  one  knocking  two  or  three  times  at  the  front  door  ;  it  was.
about  10. 30  p.  m. ,  and  I  was  in  bed,  but  thinking  it  might  be  a  beggar  I  got
up  and  looked  out  of  the  window;  no  one  was  there,  and  all  was  quiet  after,,
and  I  thought  nothing  more  of  the  circumstance  until  I  heard  of  my  uncle's
death  a  few  days  after.  I  may  add  I  am  not  superstitious,  nor  was  I
expecting  that  my  uncle  was  in  danger.  I  and  my  sister  were  staying  at  the
time  at  Oughtershaw,  Skipton-in- Craven. — Believe  me,  yours  truly,

Gertrude  J.  Woodd.

Roslyn,  Hampstead,  N.W.,  August  5th,  1895.
Dear  Sir, — My  cousin.  Miss  Woodd,  of  Cony ingham  Hall,  Knaresborough,
asked  me  to  send  you  my  own  experiences  of  what  I  believe  to  be  the  "Woodd
knockings."  I  am  not  superstitious  in  these  ways,  but  one  night  about  10
p.  m.  I  heard  in  my  bedroom  a  sound  as  of  some  one  hammering  nails  into  a
wall.  My  sister  slept  next  door  and  remembers  that  the  next  morning  I
asked  her  if  she  had  been  putting  up  something  on  her  wall,  after  retiring  for
the  night.  She  said  she  had  not,  and  I  thought  little  more  about  it.  There
was  no  one  else  about  in  that  part  of  the  house.  This  took  place,  as  far  as  I
can  remember,  several  days  before  I  heard  of  the  death  of  my  uncle,  Mr.
Basil  Woodd,  which  took  place  at  the  residence  of  my  uncle,  Mr.  Robert
Woodd,  of  Hamjjstead,  on  Tuesday,  June  4th.  We  did  not  hear  of  the  event
until  the  following  Thursday,  June  6th.  — Yours  truly,

Ethel  G.  Woodd.

Can  it  be  possible  that  when  communication  of  this  sort  has  been
found  feasible  by  some  group  on  the  other  side  there  is  a  continuity  of
effort  to  sustain  it  1  or  that  each  decedent  in  succession  finds  in  the
previous  history  a  suggestion  to  attempt  a  similar  message  himself  ?  or
that  there  is  in  the  family  a  hereditary  aptitude  for  the  same  type  of
percipience  1


The  Siihlimincd  Self.


543


In  various  ways,  indeed,  our  evidence  suggests  that  approaching
death  may  bring  about  a  rap2orochement  between  incarnate  and  dis-
carnate  souls  of  which  such  evidential  incidents  as  we  can  get  hold  of
give  but  a  partial  glimpse.  For  instance,  if  the  dying  can  appear  to
the  living,  may  they  not  appear  also  to  the  dead  1  May  there  not,  that
is  to  say,  be  some  precursory  manifestation  of  the  departing  spirit  to
friends  in  the  unseen  woi'ldj  as  well  as  a  farewell  manifestation  to
friends  in  this  ?  The  following  case,  although  carrying  no  proof  of
being  more  than  subjective,  illustrates  what  is  here  suggested.

P.  635. 74,  Durham-road,  Manor  Park,  Little  Ilford,  Essex.

April  nth,  1888.

My  brother's  wife  died  on  March  4th,  1885.  From  that  time  he  was  in
failing  health.  Early  in  February,  1887,  he  grew  rapidly  worse,  and  was
ordered  to  Bournemouth.  About  midnight  one  Saturday  night  (I  think  it  was
the  23rd  of  February)  [February  23rd,  1887,  was  a  Wednesday;  and,  therefore,
Mrs.  Jameson  says  in  a  later  letter,  her  vision  must  have  occurred  on  the
26th],  while  he  was  at  Bournemouth,  I  was  lying  awake  in  bed,  the  gas
being  full  on,  when  I  fancied  that  I  saw  a  grave  with  a  small  white  stone
lying,  and  one  in  an  upright  position.  These  stones  suddenly  changed  to  a
leaden  hue,  and  upon  the  flat  stone  I  saw  a  basket  of  exquisite  flowers,  all
white,  and  such  as  I  have  not  beheld  before  or  since.  On  the  top  of  all  the
flowers  was  a  very  large  tiger  lily.  Immediately  following  this  I  felt  a
presence  jiear  me,  but  could  see  nothing,  and  it  flashed,  into  my  mind  that
my  brother  had  died  at  Bournemouth.  Shortly  after  I  saw  him  in  my
bedroom  with  a  lady,  whose  arm  was  linked  in  his.  Her  face  I  did  not
see,  as  they  were  a  little  in  advance  of  me.  I  saw  his,  and  recognised  his
form.  He  was  on  the  side  nearest  to  me.  The  lady  was  draped  as  a
well-dressed  bride,  and  veiled.  Her  dress  was  white  and  glistening.
He  was  in  ordinary  clothing,  and  they  were  both  very  happy.  I  also
heard  distinctly  the  low  murmur  of  voices,  and  heard,  too,  her  glad
laugh.  (This  increased  my  belief  that  he  had  died,  and  that  this  lady  was  his
wife.)  They  were  in  mid-air,  and  were  quite  unconscious  of  my  presence,
and  seemed  to  glide  rather  than  walk.  After  advancing  a  little  they  stood  still,
my  brother  seeming  reluctant  to  go  on.  After  lingering  a  moment  the  lady
vanished,  leaving  my  brother  as  one  deep  in  thought,  but  still  hesitating  ;
she  reapjjeared  for  an  instant,  and,  as  it  seemed,  enticed  him  to  follow  her.
But  he  still  seemed  unwilling  to  go  with  her,  and  she  vanished  finally,  and
after  a  few  more  moments  lingering,  my  brother  followed  in  the  same  direc-
tion that  the  lady  had  vanished.  He  returned  to  London  about  a  fortnight
after  this  vision,  and  died  on  the  23rd  of  March,  1887,  very  suddenly,  and  the
memory  of  this  wonderful  experience  will,  I  feel,  be  always  sacred  to  me.  The
surpri.sing  part  to  me  is,  that  throughout  the  whole  of  this  I  was  possessed
with  a  feeling  of  calmness  and  utter  absence  of  fear. Miriam  Jameson

Mr.  Jameson  writes  :-  ^p,.,.;  7^;^^  ;^g88_

My  own  share  in  the  proceedings  narrated  was  as  follows.  T  was,  on  the
night  referred  to,  sitting  at  work  in  my  study — not  far  from  our  bedroom —

2  Q  2


544


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


when  my  wife  called  me,  and  said  that  she  felt  sure  her  brother  was  in  the
bedroom.  I  said,  "  You  are  nervous.  I  will  come  to  bed."  I  had  scarcely-
done  so  when  she  sat  up,  and  began  to  describe  to  me  what  is  stated  in  her
narrative  as  to  seeing  her  brother,  &c.  I  saw  nothing.  My  wife  was  com-
posed, but  her  face  was  very  animated  and  her  eyes  glistened.  She  looked
and  spoke  just  as  a  good  actress  would,  in  describing  scene  and  action  not
visible  to  her  audience.

Our  little  son,  then  about  18  months  old,  had  been  taken  into  our  bed  —
being  wakeful.  He  was  wideawake,  and  was  prattling  and  trying  to  caress
his  mother,  while  she  told  me  what  she  was  seeing.  His  interruptions
seemed  to  hinder  my  wife  from  hearing  what  her  brother  said,  for  she
hushed  the  little  one  repeatedly.

The  orphan  child,  about  two  years  old,  of  my  brother-in-law,  who  had
been  with  us  from  the  time  of  her  mother's  death,  was  sleeping  in  an
adjoining  room.

I  may  add  that,  although  I  am  acquainted  with  several  well-known
Spiritualists,  I  have  never  (nor  has  my  wife)  taken  much  interest  in
Spiritualistic  phenomena.  I  mention  this  to  show  that  prepossession
would  not  account  for  my  wife's  remarkable  experience.

My  own  mind  is  still  in  suspense  on  the  point  whether  that  experience
was  not  purely  subjective,  although  I  cannot  but  admit  that  I  have  been
deeply  impressed  by  the  fact  of  the  intense  objective  reality  of  that
experience  to  my  wife.  William  Jameson.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Jameson  informs  us  : —

1.  That  she  never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  sight,  hearing,  or  any
other  sense.

2.  There  was  no  point  of  coincidence  with  fact  in  the  two  tombstones,
the  tiger  lily,  &c.

3.  She  thinks  the  interval  of  time  between  the  vision  of  tombstones  and
the  vision  of  figures  was  about  five  or  ten  minutes.  "  The  white  stones
changed  soon  and  suddenly,  the  leaden  hue  lasted  longer,  then  came  the
flowers.  Then  Ifdt  the  unseen  presence,  and  on  turning  round  or  over  to
my  little  son,  who  began  to  chatter,  these  figures  appeared  together,  as  I  have
told  you,  and  I  sat  up  in  bed  and  watched  them  steadfastly  until  they
vanished  close  to  the  outer  wall  of  the  house."

4.  The  walls,  the  gas  full  on,  and  all  in  her  bedroom,  were  visible  to  her,
but  she/eW  that  her  brother  and  the  lady  had  an  environment  of  their  own.
She  remembers  most  distinctly  her  brother's  curly  hair.

5.  She  does  not  think  that  she  had  been  more  than  usually  anxious  about
her  brother.  She  had  been  speaking  of  him,  and  had  written  to  him  that  day.

6.  She  never  mentioned  the  vision  to  her  brother,  and  does  not  know
anything  about  him  on  the  night  in  question ,  except  that  she  heard  on  the
Monday  that  he  had  seemed  a  little  better  on  Saturday  night.

The  vision  affected  her  vei-y  much.

And  now  for  three  narratives,  or  rather  groups  of  narratives,
where  unseen  j^rotection  or  guidance  seems  to  be  suggested.  I  leave
the  first  in  the  original  French,  in  the  hope  that  its  publication  may


The  Subliminal  Self.


545


bring  other  narratives  of  the  same  kind,  from  countries  where  com-
pulsory military  service  is  in  vogue.

P.  147.

The  following  interesting  cases  of  presentiment  were  sent  to  us  by  Pro-
fessor G.  Hulin,  of  the  University  of  Ghent,  who  wrote  to  Professor
Sidgwick  on  April  13th,  1894  :—

Ghent,  Place  de  I'Eveche,  3.
Dear  Sir, — At  the  congress  of  Psychology  held  at  Paris  in  1889,  I  had
the  honour  of  making  your  acquaintance,  and  had  a  conversation  with  your-
self and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  about  second  sight  and  similar  subjects.  At  that
time,  I  had  never  within  my  immediate  experience  come  across  any  certain
and  well-established  fact  of  the  sort.  Since  then  I  had  the  occasion  of
observing  a  case  of  presentiment  which  struck  me  because  it  is  certified  by
trustworthy  witnesses,  and  if  a  mere  coincidence,  it  is  certainly  a  most
extraordinary  one.  So,  although  I  own  I  am  still  rather  sceptical  about
that  class  of  phenomena,  I  send  you  herewith  a  narrative  of  the  facts,
thinking  the  case  may  interest  you.  i  take  the  liberty  of  writing  it  in
French,  as  I  want  to  be  sure  of  the  correctness  of  my  statements.

Georges  Hulin.

Vers  le  commencement  de  I'hiver  1890-91,  un  jeune  homme  du  nom  de
Charles-Louis  Casset,  du  village  de  Loo-ten-Hulle  (Flandre  Orientale)  ou.  ma
famille  a  sa  residence  d'ete,  annon^a,  pres  de  deux  mois  a  I'avance,  qu'il
amfenerait  au  tirage  au  sort  pour  la  milice,  le  num^ro  90  (on  salt  que  le
recrutement  de  I'armee  Beige  se  fait  par  voie  de  conscription).  Plusieurs
personnes  entendirent  cette  prediction,  faite  sur  un  ton  de  parfaite  assurance,
et  qu'il  renouvela  devant  le  commissaire  d'arrondissement  pr^sidant  au
tirage  au  sort. A  la  stupefaction  generale,  ce  numero  sortit  en  effet.

Le  bruit  en  etant  parvenu  a  nos  oreUles,  je  voulus  m'assurer  de
I'authenticit^  du  fait,  et  interrogeai  plusieurs  personnes,  entre  autres  la  mere
du  jeune  homme.  Tous  m'affirmerent  avoir  entendu  la  prediction.  Je
m'adressai  alors  au  commissaire  d'arrondissement,  M.  van  Dooren,  qui
me  donna  I'attestation  ecrite  que  voici :

.  .  .  "  Cette  annee-ci,  le  milicien  Casset,  Ch^  L^,  de  Loo-ten-
Hulle,  me  deinande,  avant  de  tirer,  si  le  no  90  se  trouvait  encore  dans
I'urne  ;  sur  ma  reponse  affirmative  il  e'ecria  :  '  C'est  celui-la  qu'il  me  faut ! '
Appeie  a  tirer,  U  amena  en  efi'et  le  numero  90.

"  Le  Commissaire  d'Arrondissement,
(Signe) "Jules  van  Dooren."

En  presence  de  ce  t^moignage  officiel  le  doute  n'etait  plus  permis.  Tres  in-
trigue', je  tachai  de  savoir  comment  le  jeune  homme  avait  eu  ce  pressentiment.

Au  printemps,  quand  mes  parents  furent  retournes  a  Loo-ten-Hulle,  je  le
fis  venir  a  la  maison,  et  I'interrogeai.  Jusque-la  il  n'avait  voulu  repondre
a  personne  ;  sans  doute  je  lui  inspirai  plus  de  confiance,  car,  aprfes  quelques
hesitations,  il  me  fit  le  recit  suivant.

Comme  la  plupart  des  fils  de  petits  cultivateurs,  il  avait  grand  peur  du
service  militaire,  qui  devait  priver  sa  famille  de  son  travail.  Plusieurs  mois
d'avance  il  eta  it  done  pr^occup^  et  anxieux,  et  pensait  constarament  au  jour
fatal  du  tirage  au  sort.


546


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Environ  deux  mois  avant  celui-ci,  une  nuit  qu'il  venait  de  se  couclier  il
vib  dans  un  coin  de  sa  chambre  une  forme  indistincte,  mais  grande  et
elev^e,  de  sorte  que  de  son  lit  il  devait  lever  les  yeux  pour  la  voir.  La  seule
chose  qu'il  pouvait  clairement  percevoir,  c'^tait  la  chiffre  90  en  grands  carac-
teres,  "  espac^s  d'environ  un  poing."

II  se  souleva,  ferma  les  yeux  et  les  rouvrit  pour  bien  s'assurer  qu'il  ne
revait  point.  L'apparition  ^tait  toujours  la,  aussi  indeniable  qu'au  premier
moment. Saisi  de  frayeur,  il  se  mit  a  prier,  et  ainsi,  peu  h.  peu,  s'endormit.

Des  le  premier  moment  il  avait  eu  I'intuition  que  ce  nombre  90  ^tait
celui  qu'il  tirerait  et  que  c'etait  un  bon  numero.

A  partir  de  cette  nuit,  il  eut  I'esprit  tout-a-fait  tranquille  et  dit  k  tous
ceux  qui  s'^tonnaient  de  ce  calme  qu'il  savait  qu'il  aurait  le  numero  90.  On
crut  d'abord  a  une  plaisanterie,  mais  il  affirmait  cela  avec  tant  de  conviction
que  bientot  il  excita  la  curiosity.

Comme  je  lui  demandais  s'il  avait  dans  sa  vie  eu  d'autres  visions,  il  me
dit  que  non,  mais  que,  apres  la  premiere  apparition,  il  eut  souvent  la  meme
vision,  meme  le  jour,  pendant  son  travail.  II  ajoutait  judicieusement  quece
n'etaienb  plus  sans  doute  de  vraies  apparitions,  mais  seulement  I'effet  de
son  imagination  vivement  frappee.

Cependant  il  croit  avoir  reellement  revu  l'apparition  myst^rieuse  dans  la
chambre  oii  se  faisait  le  tirage  au  sort,  avant  de  plonger  la  main  dans  le
tambour.  II  difc  au  president  qu'il  etait  inutile  qu'il  tirat,  que  son  numero
^tait  90.  Le  president  lui  repondit  de  ne  pas  plaisanter  et  de  prendre  un
billet. En  tendant  celui-ci  au  president  il  repeta  que  c'etait  90.

Ce  r^cit  me  fut  fait  avec  un  grand  air  de  sinc^rit^  et  de  scrupuleuse
exactitude,  Le  jeune  homme,  qui  semble  doux  et  intelligent,  parlait  k.  voix
basse  avec  une  Amotion  visible,  et  me  demanda  de  ne  rien  dire  aux  autres
habitants  du  village. II  croit  ^videmment  h  une  intervention  surnaturelle.

Je  m'adressai  encore  au  commissaire  d'arrondissement  pour  lui
demander  s'il  se  rappelait  d'autres  cas  ou  des  miliciens  avaient  pr^dit  le
numero  qu'ils  tireraient.  A  cette  ^poque  (1891)  il  ne  s'en  rappelait  qu'un
seul,  qu'il  voulut  bien  me  certifier  par  ecrit  en  meme  temps  que  celui
rapporte  plus  haute  :

"  en  1886,  au  tirage  au  sort,  a  Eeclo  le  milicien  Masco
(Ferdinand),  de  cette  ville,  m'a  declare,  avant  le  tirage,  qu'il  am^neraifc  le
no  112,  ce  qui  fut  vrai."

Depuis,  il  m'a  signale  trois  autres  cas  :  I'hiver  dernier  ou  le  pr^c^dent  (sa
lettre  n'est  malhcureusement  pas  datee,  et  mes  souvenirs  ne  sont  pas  precis
sur  ce  point),  il  m'(5crivait  ce  qui  suit :

"  Un  fait  bizarre  et  digne  d'etre  racont^  s'est  produit  mercredi  dernier
au  tirage  au  sort  pour  la  milice  a  Maldeghem.  Un  inscrit  du  nom  de
Pamvels  (Edouard),  de  la  commune  d'Adeghem,  en  s'approchant  de  I'urne
declara  hautement  au  commissaire  d'arrondissement  qui  pr^sidait  la  seance,
qu'il  am^nerait  le  no  216,  et  ce  fut  en  eifet  ce  numero  qu'il  tira  et  qui  fut
proclame.  II  y  avait  encore  au  moins  150  numeros  dans  le  tambour.  Le
plus  bas  numero  etait  46  et  le  plus  elev^  223."

Enfin,  cet  hiver  meme,  il  m'a  envoye  avec  sa  carte  de  visite  un  journal
contenant  I'entrefilet  ci-joint,  concernant  deux  nouveaux  cas  constates  par
lui-m§me.


The  Subliminal  Self.


547


The  newspaper  cutting  enclosed  is  as  follows  : —  Fevrier  1894

TrRAGE  AU  Sort. — Deux  faits  bizarres  se  sont  produits  au  tirage  au  sorb
qui  eut  lieu  a  Eecloo  samedi  dernier.

Le  milicien  Camille  Pyfferoen,  s'approchant  de  I'unie,  declara  a  M.  le
commissaire  d'arrondissement,  qui  presidait  les  operations,  qu'il  avait  reve,
la  nuit  passee,  qu'il  amenait  le  numero  111,  et  qu'U  etait  convaincu  que  le
sort  I'aurait  favorise  de  ce  bon  numero.

L'iuteresse  ameiia,  en  effet,  le  no  111.  M.  le  commissaire  lui  ayant
■demande  si  ce  qu'il  avait  declare  etait  bien  reel,  le  milicien  appela  son  pere
€n  confirmation  de  ses  dires.

Un  second  milicien,  Louis  Crisj^yn,  annouqa  qu'il  amenerait  le  no  116  ;
mais  sur  I'ubservation  que  celui-ci  etait  deja  tire,  il  declara  qu'il  prendrait
alors  le  numero  precedent,  et  il  tira,  en  effet,  le  n°  115.

These  cases  of  conscription-numbers  foretold  seem  to  me  much
more  impressive  than  the  somewhat  similar  dreams  of  races  of  which
we  have  printed  several  specimens  ;  since  the  event  is  absolutely
incalculable,  the  numerical  chance  against  success  is  much  greater,
and  the  testimony  of  the  pi'esiding  olficer  on  so  serious  an
occasion  carries  weight.  The  nearest  parallel  which  I  can  find  to  these
incidents  is  the  guiding  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses'  hand  to  open  a  book  at
a  particular  page  (Proceedings,  Vol.-  XI.,  p.  106).  It  seems  perhaps
less  incredible  that  some  suggestion  at  the  moment  should  have
guided  the  fortunate  percipient  to  the  lucky  number— which  his  less
fortunate  comrades  must  also  have  been  guided  to  leave  ready  for
him — than  that  the  exact  disposition  of  the  numbers  in  the  urn  should
have  been  foreseen  months  beforehand  by  any  finite  intelligence.  Of
course,  however,  we  cannot  tell  how  many  conscripts  may  have  dreamt
— and  announced — that  they  will  draw  a  particular  number,  and  have
failed  to  draw  it.

The  second  case  in  this  series  is  in  many  ways  noteworthy.  I
place  it  here  because  it  looks  as  though  suggestion  had  been  exercised
upon  the  railway  pointer  to  prevent  him  from  asking  for  the  ticket,
much  as  upon  the  conscripts  to  cause  them  to  draw  the  desired  number.
There  is  also  premonition  as  legards  various  incidents  of  the  journey.

P.  220.

The  narrative  which  follows  is  of  an  unusual  and  complex  type.  Its  main
purport  is  concerned  with  a  continued  knowledge  of  terrene  affairs  evinced
by  a  departed  spirit.  But  this,  the  kernel  of  the  case,  must  be  kept  entirely
secret,  for  reasons  affecting  survivors  ;  which  reasons,  so  far  as  I  can  judge
from  a  very  partial  knowledge  of  them,  are  entirely  sufficient.  Fur  the  same
reasons  the  true  names  (all  of  which  are  known  to  me)  have  had  to  be
altered  throughout  and  various  details  omitted.  Thus  deprived  of  its
central  significance  the  narrative  presents  the  following  type.

Mrs.  Claughton  (here  so-called)  visits  a  house  rejjuted  haunted.  She
there  twice  sees  a  phantasm,  which  she  is  able  to  describe  ;  the  description


548


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


suiting  a  deceased  lady  unknown  to  her,  who  had  lived  in  that  house.  There
is  external  evidence  to  the  fact  that  she  twice  saw  this  phantom  and  was
greatly  impressed.  The  phantom  appeared  to  speak  at  some  length  ;  and
made  many  statements  of  facts  unknown  to  Mrs.  Claughton.  Some  of  these
were  such  as  could  be  at  once  verified  ;  and  they  were  found  correct.  Others
related  to  an  expedition  which  Mrs.  Claughton  was  enjoined  to  make  to  a
village,  here  called  Meresby,  of  which  she  had  not  previously  heard.  Certain
persons  whom  she  would  hnd  there  were  described  by  name  and  with
other  details.  Certain  incidents  of  her  future  journey  thither  were  also
described  ;  thus  bringing  this  case  within  our  deiinition  of  premonitions  j
although  it  may  be  urged  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  predictions  was
accomplished  by  suggestioias  given  to  certain  persons  by  the  disembodied
intelligence  ;  so  that  no  true  precognition  was  needed.  Mrs.  Claughton
went  to  Meresby  and  found  all  as  foretold.  She  there  received  (as  had  also
been  foretold)  additional  communications  ;  and  she  then  obeyed  certain
orders  as  to  the  communication  of  facts  to  survivors.  That  she  made  the
journey,  and  certain  subsequent  visits,  is  proved  by  external  evidence.  As
to  the  messages  to  survivors,  nothing  is  known  beyond  Mrs.  Claughton's
own  statement  that  they  effected  the  intended  results.

This  whole  story  is  no  doubt  very  different  from  the  usual  tenor  of  our
narratives,  and  much  more  resembles  some  of  the  figments  of  romance.  On
the  other  hand  the  evidence  for  the  external  facts  of  the  narrative  is
absolutely  conclusive.  There  is  (as  will  be  seen)  no  doubt  whatever  that
Mrs.  Claughton  did  make  the  journey  to  Meresby,  giving  as  her  reason
some  message  conveyed  to  her  on  an  occasion  when  she  undoubtedly  was
found  fainting  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  There  is  no  doubt  that  at
Meresby  she  obtained  admission  to  the  church  at  a  similar  hour  of  the
night ;  nor  that  after  so  visiting  the  church  she  paid  certain  other  visits  to
persons  previously  strangers  to  her.

Nor  has  any  explanation  due  either  to  self-interest  or  to  insanity  been
suggested,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  by  any  of  the  persons  concerned.  The
whole  expedition  was  a  source  merely  of  trouble  and  embarrassment  to  Mrs.
Claughton,  who  left  a  sick  child  to  attend  to  the  alleged  injunction,  under
circumstances  of  much  inconvenience,  and  with  no  possible  advantage  to
herself.

An  explanation  from  insanity  or  hysterical  desire  of  notoriety  is  equally
untenable.  Mrs.  Claughton  is  a  widow  lady,  moving  in  good  society,  with
children  growing  up,  and  known  to  many  persons  as  a  cheerful,  capable,
active  woman,  who  has  seen  much  of  the  world,  and  has  plenty  of  business
of  her  own  to  attend  to  ; — and  who  is  by  no  means  given  to  dwelling  on
things  morbid  or  mysterious.  She  has,  indeed,  had  some  previous  ex-
periences of  apparitions,  which  all  appear  to  have  been  veridical,  but  she  has
paid  but  little  attention  to  them,  and  has  never  sought  to  encourage  such
visitations  in  any  way.

This  present  adventure  she  kept  as  quiet  as  she  could  ;  but  other  people
had  heard  vaguely  of  it,  and  she  was  annoyed  by  distorted  versions  ;  so  that
she  ultimately  consented  to  give  to  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  and  through  him
to  our  Society,  her  own  account  of  such  incidents  as  she  did  not,  for  the
sake  of  survivors,  feel  bound  to  conceal.


The  Siobliminal  Self.


549


The  written  evidence  now  existing  niay  be  divided  into  three  parts.

I.— Mrs.  Claughton's  own  diary,  written  mainly  in  pencil,  before,  during,
and  after  the  Meresby  journey.  This  diary  bears  the  marks  of  hasty  writing
and  IS  dated  from  day  to  day  and  in  parts  from  hour  to  hour,  during  the
events  which  interest  us.  This  diary  contains  the  secret  matter,  and  has
not  been  entrusted  by  Mrs.  Claughton  to  any  one  ;  but  Lord  Bute  and
I  have  been  allowed  to  read  portions  of  it,  and  to  observe  the  dates  of  the
important  entries  therein.

Along  with  this  diary  must  be  classed  a  document  which  I  am  allowed  to
reproduce  almost  in  Mo;  viz.,  a  sheet  of  memoranda  made  by  Mrs.
Claughton  before  her  Meresby  visit,  as  to  what  was  to  happen  to  her  there,
and  what  she  was  to  do.  I  became  possessed  of  this  document  in  the
following  manner.

Mrs  Claughton  had  stated  that  she  was  told  beforehand  [by  the  phantom]
that  her  ticket  (the  outward  half  of  a  return-ticket)  would  not  be  asked
for  on  her  arrival  at  Meresby  ;  and  that  in  fact  it  was  not  asked  for.
That  it  was  not  asked  for  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Claughton
sent  it  to  the  Dr.  Ferrier  of  the  story,  who  testifies  to  having  poss"essed
it,  and  to  having  seen  a  letter  from  the  Railway  Company  stating  that  no
other  ticket  had  been  issued  from  London  for  Meresby  by  the  train  in
question.  But  Mrs.  Claughton  had  not  mentioned  the  prediction  as  to  the
ticket  to  Dr.  Ferrier  before  her  journey.  I  therefore  asked  her  orally
whether  she  had  made  any  memorandum  of  her  own  as  to  the  ticket  before
that  journey.  At  my  request  she  at  once  brought  her  packet  of  private
papers  connected  with  the  case  ;  searched  amongst  them  in  my  presence,
and  found  a  paper  of  memoranda  as  to  what  she  was  to  do  and  to  expect  on
the  journey,  written  before  starting.  Cutting  off  a  part  of  that  paper  which
dealt  with  the  secret  matters,  she  gave  me  the  rest  and  I  reproduce  it
below.  The  porter's  omission  to  take  the  ticket  is  therefore  predicted  in
writing  before  the  event,  along  with  many  other  particulars  as  to  the
Meresby  visit.

II-— The  second  main  piece  of  evidence  is  an  account,  written  by  Mr.
Andrew  Lang,  the  well-known  author,  and  sent  by  him  to  the  S.P.R.,
embodying  the  written  and  oral  statements  of  Dr.  Ferrier  (and  of  another
friend)  communicated  verbally  while  Mrs.  Claughton  was  actually  on  her
journey,  and  in  writing  before  the  incidents  and  result  of  that  journey  were
known.  Mr.  Lang's  account  thus  reproduces  Mrs.  Claughton's  preliminary
statement  to  Dr.  Ferrier,  in  which  some  trifling  errors  have  been  since
corrected  in  notes  by  Mrs.  Claughton.  As  to  this  statement,  and  the  ticket
incident  especially,  Dr.  Ferrier  writes  to  me,  June  10,  1895:  "I  do  not
possess  the  ticket,  but  Mrs.  Claughton  sent  it  to  me,  and  I  gave  it  up,  in
order  that  enquiries  might  be  made  about  it,  as  I  thought  she  had  perhaps
taken  two  tickets,  and  that  this  was  the  unused  one.  I  saw,  but  do  not
possess  the  letter  from  the  Railway  Company  stating  that  the  ticket  in
question  was  the  only  one  issued  by  that  train  from  London  to  Meresby,  and
that  they  were  not  able  to  account  for  it  not  having  been  given  up.  I
possess  the  letter  from,  the  Curate  of  Meresby  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Johnson,
which  confirmed  in  a  general  way  the  account  given  by  Mrs.  Claughton  of
her  doings  there."


550


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Of  the  account  given  to  Mr.  Lang,  Dr.  Ferrier  says:  "  It  was  revised,
though  not  signed  by  me.  I  would  rather  trust  to  its  accuracy  than  to  my
present  recollection  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case.''

III. — The  third  main  document  is  the  account  dictated  by  Mrs.  Claughton
to  Lord  Bute,  May  17th,  1895,  giving  for  the  first  time  an  authentic  history
of  the  journey  to  Moresby.  This  account  is  supported  by  corroborative
letters  from  persons  concei-ned.  It  will  be  well  to  begin  with  this  account
as  the  substantive  statement,  and  to  add  other  papers  as  corroboration.

Statement  made  by  Mrs.  Claughton  to  the  Marquis  of  Bute.

Mrs.  Claughton  is  constitutionally  second-sighted,  as  are  many  members
of  her  family,  and  has  had  frequent  psychical  experiences,  but  has  never
tried  to  excite  the  faculty  by  artificial  means,  such  as  crystal  gazing
or  sitting  for  raps.  She  has  sat  as  a  joke  with  her  hands  on  tables
which  moved,  but  she  cannot  tell  whether  the  movement  was  connected
with  her.

She  was  staying  in  1893  with  her  two  children  at  6,  Blake-street,  a  house
belonging  to  Mrs.  Appleby,  daughter  of  the  late  Mrs.  Blackburn  (who  died
after  three  days' residence,  December  22nd,  1878,  of  a  wasting  illness,  which
had  lasted  three  years),  but  let  to  Mr.  Buckley.  They  had  so  done  at  least
■five  or  six  times  before,  during  about  seven  years.  Had  heard  the  house
was  haunted,  and  may  have  heard  the  ghost  was  Mrs.  Blackburn's.  Had
been  told  water  was  found  spilt  on  the  floors  inexplicably.  They  arrived  on
October  4th.  About  1.15  a.m.,  Monday,  October  9th,  Mrs.  Claughton  was
in  bed  with  one  of  her  children,  the  other  sleeping  in  the  room.  Mrs.
Claughton  had  offered  to  be  of  any  use  she  could  to  Miss  Buckley,  who
had  arrived  from  London  unwell  on  the  Saturday.  She  had  been  asleep,
and  was  awakened  by  the  footsteps  of  a  person  coming  downstairs,  whom
she  supposed  to  be  a  servant  coming  to  call  her  to  Miss  Buckley.  The
steps  stopped  at  the  door.  The  sounds  were  repeated  twice  more  at  the
interval  of  a  few  moments.  Mrs.  Claughton  rose,  lit  the  candle,  and  opened
the  door.  There  was  no  one  there.  She  noticed  the  clock  outside  was  at
1.20.  She  shut  the  door,  got  into  bed,  read,  and  leaving  the  candle  burning,
went  to  sleep.  Woke  up,  finding  the  candle  spluttering  out.  Heard  a  sound
like  a  sigh.  Saw  a  woman  standing  by  the  bed.  She  had  a  soft  white  shawl
round  the  shoulders,  held  by  the  right  hand  towards  the  left  shoulder,
bending  slightly  forwards.  Mrs.  Claughton  thinks  the  hair  was  lightish
brown,  and  the  shawl  partly  over  the  head,  but  does  not  remember  distinctly,
and  has  no  impression  of  the  rest  of  the  dress  :  it  was  not  grave-clothes.
She  said,  "Follow  me."  Mrs.  Claughton  rose,  took  the  candle,  and
followed  her  out  of  the  room,  across  the  passage,  and  into  the  drawing-
room.  She  has  no  recollection  as  to  the  opening  of  the  doors.  The  house-
maid next  day  declared  that  the  drawing-room  door  had  been  locked  by  her.
On  entering  the  drawing-room,  Mrs.  Claughton,  finding  the  candle  on  the
point  of  extinction,  replaced  it  with  a  pink  one  from  the  chefFonier  near  the
door.  The  figure  went  nearly  to  the  end  of  the  room,  turned  three-quarters
round,  said  "to-morrow,"  and  disappeared.  Mrs.  Claughton  returned  to
the  bedroom,  where  she  found  the  elder  child  (not  the  one  in  the  bed)
sitting  up. It  asked,  "  Who  is  the  lady  in  white  ?  " Mrs.  Claughton  thinks


The  Subliminal  Self.


551


she  answered  the  child,  "  It's  only  me— mother  ;  go  to  sleep,"  or  the  like
words,  and  hushed  her  to  sleep  in  her  arms.  The  baby  remained  fast  asleep.
She  lit  the  gas  and  remained  awake  for  some  two  hours,  then  put  out  the
lights  and  went  to  sleep.  Had  no  fear  while  seeing  the  figure,  but  was  upset
after  seeing  it.  Would  not  be  prepared  to  swear  that  she  might  not  have
walked  in  her  sleep.  Pink  candle,  partly  burnt,  in  her  room  in  morning.
Does  not  know  if  she  took  it  burnt  or  new.

In  the  morning  she  spoke  to  Mr.  Buckley,  on  wh'ise  advice  she  went  to
ask  Dr.  Ferrier  as  to  the  figure  about  3  p.m.  He  and  his  wife  said  the
description  was  like  that  of  Mrs.  Blackburn,  whom  Mrs.  Claughton  already
suspected  it  to  be.  Thinks  Dr.  Ferrier  told  her  that  Miss  Blackburn  (Mrs.
Appleby)  had  seen  her  mother  in  the  same  house.  Mrs.  Claughton  cannot
recognise  the  photograph  of  Mrs.  Blackburn  shewn  to  her  by  Mr.  Y.  (who
got  it  from  Mrs.  M.)  She  says  the  figure  seemed  smaller,  and  the  features
much  more  pinched  and  attenuated,  like  those  of  a  person  in  the  last  stage
of  consumption,  which  was  also  the  general  appearance.  By  his  advice,  Mr.
Buckley  put  an  electric  bell  under  Mrs.  Claughton's  pillow,  communicating
with  Miss  Buckley's  room,  as  Mrs.  Claughton  determined  to  sit  up  that
night  and  watch.

That  night  Mrs.  Claughton  sat  up  dressed,  with  the  gas  burning.  About
12  she  partly  undressed,  put  on  dressing-gov/n  and  lay  down  outside  bed,
gas  still  burning,  and  fell  asleep  reading.  Woke  up  and  found  the  same
woman  as  before,  but  the  expression  even  more  agitated.  She  bent  over
Mrs.  Claughton  and  said:  "I  have  come.  Listen  !"  She  then  made  a
certain  statement  and  asked  Mrs.  Claugliton  to  do  certain  things.  Mrs.
Claughton  said:  "Am  I  dreaming,  or  is  it  true?"  Tlie  figure  said  some-
thing like  :  "  If  you  doubt  me,  you  will  find  that  the  date  of  my  marriage
was  +  +  +  "  (this  is  the  date  of  the  marriage,  which  took  place  in  India,
of  Mrs.  Blackburn  to  Mr.  Blackburn,  who  is  alive  and  married  again.  Mrs.
Claughton  first  learned  the  corroboration  of  the  date  from  Dr.  Ferrier  on
the  following  Thursday).  After  this  Mrs.  Claughton  saw  a  man  standing  on
Mrs.  B.'s  left  hand — tall,  dark,  well-made,  healthy,  sixty  years  old,  or  more,
ordinary  man's  day  clothes,  kind,  good  expression.  A  conversation  ensued
between  the  three,  in  course  of  which  the  man  stated  himself  to  be  George
Howard,  buried  in  Meresby  Churchyard  (Mrs.  Claughton  had  never  heard
of  Meresby  or  of  George  Howard),  and  gave  the  dates  of  his  marriage  +  +  +
and  death  +  +  +  [Entries  of  these  dates  seen  by  me  in  Mrs.  Claughton's
pocket-book,  as  torn  out  and  lent  to  me.  —  F.  W.  H.  M.]  He  desired
Mrs.  Claughton  to  go  to  Meresby  and  verify  these  dates  in  the  registers,
and,  if  found  correct,  to  go  to  the  church  at  the  ensuing  1.15  a.m.
and  wait  at  the  grave  therein  (S.W.  corner  of  S.  aisle)  of  Richard
Hart,  died  4-  +  +,  fetat  + .  She  was  to  verify  this  reference  also
in  the  registers.  He  said  her  railway-ticket  would  not  be  taken,  and  she
was  to  send  it  along  with  a  white  rose  from  his  grave  to  Dr.  Ferrier.
Forbade  her  having  any  previous  communication  with  the  place,  or  going  in
her  own  name.  Said  Joseph  Wright,  a  dark  man,  to  whom  she  should
describe  him,  would  help  her.  That  she  would  lodge  with  a  woman  who
would  tell  her  that  she  had  a  child  (drowned)  buried  in  the  same  churchyard.
VVhen  Mrs.  Claughton  had  done  all  this,  she  should  hear  the  rest  of  the


552


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


history.  Towards  the  end  of  the  conversation,  Mrs.  Claughton  saw  a  third
phantom,  of  a  man  whose  name  she  is  not  free  to  give,  in  great  trouble,
standing,  with  hands  on  face  (which  he  afterwards  lowered,  showing  face),
behind  Mrs.  Blackburn's  right.  The  three  disappeared.  Mrs.  Claughton
rose  and  went  to  the  door  to  look  out  at  the  clock,  but  was  seized  with  faint-
ness,  returned  and  rang  the  electric  bell.  Mr.  Buckley  found  her  on  the
ground.  She  was  able  to  ask  the  time,  which  was  about  1.20.  Then
fainted,  and  the  Buckleys  undressed  her  and  put  her  to  bed.

That  morning,  Tuesday,  Mrs.  Claughton  sent  for  Dr.  Ferrier,  who
corroborated  certain  matters  so  far  as  she  asked  him,  and  ascertained  for  her
the  date  of  Mrs.  Blackburn's  marriage  (she  received  his  note  of  the  date  on
Thursday).  She  went  to  the  Post  Office,  and  found  that  "  Meresby "
existed.  Returned,  and  ascertained  that  it  is  in  Suffolk,  and  so  wrote  that
evening  to  Dr.  Ferrier,  and  went  to  London  with  her  daughters  that
(Thursday)  evening.

Friday  night,  Mrs.  Claughton  dreamt  that  slie  arrived  at  5  after  dusk,
that  a  fair  was  going  on,  and  that  she  had  to  go  to  place  after  place  to  get
lodgings.  Also,  she  and  her  eldest  daughter  dreamt  that  she  would  fail  if
she  did  not  go  alone.  Went  to  station  for  12  noon  train  on  Saturday.  Went
to  refreshment  room  for  luncheon,  telling  porter  to  call  her  in  time.  He
went  by  mistake  to  waiting  room,  and  she  missed  train  and  had  to  wait  (going
to  the  British  Museum,  where  she  wrote  her  name  in  Jewel  Room)  until
3.5,  as  stated.  [Hours  of  trains  slightly  altered. — F.  W.  H.  M.]  House
where  she  finally  found  lodgings  that  of  Joseph  Wright,  who  turned
out  to  be  the  Parish  Clerk.  She  sent  for  the  curate  by  porter,  to  ask
as  to  consulting  registers,  but  as  he  was  dining  out  he  did  not  come
till  after  she  had  gone  to  bed.  Sunday  morning,  Mrs.  Wright  spoke
to  her  about  her  drowned  child  buried  in  the  churchyard.  Went  to  fore-
noon service,  and  immediately  afterwards  went  into  vestry  and  verified  the
registers  ;  described  George  Howard  to  Joseph  Wright,  who  had  known  him
and  recognised  description  ;  then  was  taken  by  Joseph  Wright  to  the  graves
of  Richard  Hart  and  George  Howard.  On  the  latter  there  is  no  stone,  but
three  mounds  surrounded  by  a  railing  overgrown  with  white  roses.  She
gathered  rose  for  Dr.  Ferrier,  as  had  been  directed.  Walk  and  talk  with
curate,  who  was  not  sympathetic.  After  luncheon  went  with  Mrs.  Wright
and  walked  round  Howard's  house  (country  house  in  park).  Attended
evening  service,  and  afterwards,  while  watching  the  lights  put  out  and  the
church  furniture  covered  up,  wondered  if  she  would  have  nerve  to  go  on.
Back  to  supper  ;  afterwards  slept  and  had  dream  of  a  terrorizing  character,
whereof  has  full  written  description.  Dark  night,  hardly  any  moon,  a  few
stars.  To  church  with  Joseph  Wright  at  1  a.m.,  with  whom  searched
interior  and  found  it  empty.  At  1.20  was  locked  in  alone,  having  no  light ;
had  been  told  to  take  Bible,  but  had  only  Church-service,  which  she  had  left
in  vestry  in  the  morning.  Waited  near  grave  of  Richard  Hart.  Felt  no
fear.  Received  communication,  but  does  not  feel  free  to  give  any  detail.
No  light.  History  begun  at  Blake  Street  then  completed.  Was  directed  to
take  another  white  rose  from  George  Howard's  grave,  and  give  it  personally
to  his  daughter  (unmarried — living  at  Hart  Hall),  and  to  remark  her  likeness
to  him. About  1.45  Joseph  Wright  knocked  and  let  Mrs.  Claughton  out.


The  Subliminal  Self.


553


Went  to  George  Howard's  grave  and  gathered  rose  for  Miss  Howard,  as  had
been  directed.  Home  and  bed,  and  slept  well  for  the  first  time  since  first
seeing  Mrs.  Blackburn.

Next  day  went  and  sketched  church  and  identified  grave  of  Mrs.  Rowe,
on  whose  grave,  she  had  been  told  in  church,  she  would  find  a  message  for
herself. The  words  engraved  are  +  +  +

Then  called  on  Miss  Howard  and  recognised  strong  likeness  to  her  father —
carried  out  all  things  desired  by  the  dead  to  the  full,  as  had  been  requested.
Has  had  no  communication  from  any  of  them  since.  Nothing  since  has
appeared  in  Blake  Street.  The  wishes  expressed  to  her  were  not  illogical
or  unreasonable,  as  the  ratiocination  of  dreams  often  appears,  but  perfectly
rational,  reasonable,  and  of  natural  importance.

Signed  by  Mrs.  Claughton,  May  17th,  1895.

Copy  of  Memoranda  for  journey  made  by  Mrs.  Claughton.

Go  to  Meresby.  Railway  ticket  not  asked  for.  Porter  to  have  one  of
'K.'s  names  [i.e.,  to  have  as  a  surname  the  Christian  name  of  one  of
Mrs.  Claughton's  daughters, — which  turned  out  to  be  the  case. — F.W.H.M.]

Ask  for  marriage  register  of  George  Howard.  Find  out  last  day  the
name  Mrs.  T.

Find  grave  in  churchyard  with  white  roses.

Send  white  rose  to  Dr.  Ferrier.

Ask  on  arrival  at  Meresby  for  Mr.  Francis.  [The  gentleman  so  designated
"was  concerned  in  the  private  matters  ;  was  found  as  predicted. — F.W.H.M.1

Dark  man  Wright — big  fresh-coloured  healthy  fellow — will  help  me  in
what  I  have  to  do.

Find  grave  of  Richard  Hart  in  church.

Verify  home  of  Mr.  Howard.

Verify  village— village  fair  going  on.  [There  was  a  fair  going  on  in
Meresby,  as  predicted.  —F.W.H.M.]

Church  standing  far  away  by  itself. [Found  true. — F.W.  H.M.]

Stay  in  house  of  woman  whose  boy  is  buried  in  same  churchyard  as  Mr.
Howard. [Found  when  in  house  that  boy  was  so  buried. — F.  W.H.M]

Watch  in  church  by  Mr.  Hart's  grave.  Dark  man — Wright — to  take  me
there.

Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  statement.

1,  Marloes-road,  Kensington,  W,

October  17  th,  1893.
[The  sentences  in  square  brackets  are  added  by  Mrs.  Claughton,  slightly
correcting  Mr.  Lang's  account.]

I  send  the  following  narrative,  not  for  its  value  as  evidence,  but  because
it  enables  us  to  take  a  ghost  half  volley,  as  it  were,  the  adventure  being,  to
my  knowledge,  at  this  moment  incomplete.  The  proceedings  of  the  ghost,  it
will  be  remarked,  are  vieux  jeu,,  and  such  as  we  seldom  meet  in  modern
science.  The  tale  was  told  to  me  orally,  last  night  (October  16th)  by  a
gentleman  whom  I  shall  call  Dr.  Ferrier.  He  is  connected,  as  trustee,  with
the  haunted  house. To-day  he  brought  me  his  narrative  written  out  partly


554


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


by  himself,  partly  by  Mrs.  Ferrier,  and  he  added  some  facts  viva  voce.  Here
begins  his  M.S.  with  all  names  altered. A.  L.

Statement  by  Dr.  Ferrier.

Mrs.  Elizabeth  Blaokburn  died  at  5  a.m.,  on  December  22nd,  1878,  in  6,
Blake-street,  into  which  she  had  moved  only  a  few  days  previously.  Her
disease  was  chronic  diarrhcea  of  long  standing.  Her  children  stayed  on  in
the  house  till  the  eldest  girl  married  Mr.  Appleby  in  1880.  The  eldest  son
informed  me  that  they  frequently  heard  strange  noises  in  the  house  during
the  night.  The  house  was  empty  for  a  time,  then  tenanted  for  five  years,
during  which  no  noises  are  reported.  The  house  again  was  empty  till  Lady
Day,  1888,  when  the  present  occupier,  Mr.  Buckley,  entered.  His  mother
and  two  sisters,  on  their  entry,  were  much  alarmed  by  sounds  as  if  of  heavy
steps  on  the  stair-case,  which  is  of  stone.  This  lasted  for  three  years,  bub
was  never  heard  by  Mr.  Buckley.  A  few  months  after  the  family  entered
water  burst  out  in  the  front  area,  from  the  breaking  of  a  water  main.i
About  two  years  after  the  affair  of  the  main.  Miss  Buckley  was  in  the  attic,
kneeling  by  a  trunk,  when  she  felt  some  water  "  switched  "  at  her.  She
thought  it  was  a  practical  joke  of  her  brother's,  but  he  was  not  in  the  room.
A  small  pool  of  water  was  on  the  floor  where  she  stood,  and  the  wall  beyond
was  sprinkled.  Soon  after,  as  Mr.  Buckley  went  upstairs  in  the  dark,  carry-
ing an  ink  bottle  and  some  pens,  he  found  his  hand  wet.  He  thought  it
must  be  ink,  but  on  getting  to  the  light  found  it  was  clean  water  ;  there  was
a  little  pool  of  water  on  the  stair  where  this  occurred,  but  no  sign  of  damp
on  the  ceiling  above.

For  almost  two  years  since  this  occurred  no  noises  have  been  heard.

In  October,  1893,  a  Mrs.  Claughton  came  to  stay  in  the  house.  She  had
frequently  been  a  visitor,  and,  on  one  occasion,  when  nursing  Mrs.  Buckley
(mere),  had  heard  footsteps  coming  and  going  on  the  stairs.  In  this  last  visit
(October,  1893)  she  began  to  hear  footsteps  and  the  dragging  of  a  heavy
weight  on  the  stairs  about  1  a.m.  [October  8th.  No  footsteps  or  anything
peculiar  was  heard  till  the  Sunday  night.  Mrs.  Claughton  went  to  stay  in
the  house  the  previous  Tuesday.]  She  was  awakened  by  a  chill  wind  blowing
across  her  face,  though  window  and  door  were  shut,  and  it  was  a  calm  still
night.  On  the  night  of  October  8th  and  9th,  after  hearing  the  noises  and
feeling  the  wind,  she  opened  her  eyes,  and  saw  leaning  over  her  the  figure  of
a  wonian,  who  was  looking  at  her  intently  and  very  sadly.^  The  woman  said
in  a  distinct  voice,  "  follow  me,"  whereon  Mrs.  Claughton  rose  and  followed
her  into  the  next  room,  the  drawing-room. ^  She  took  her  bed-room  candle
which  was  flickering  in  the  socket,  and,  in  the  drawing-room,  paused  to
replace  it  by  a  pink  candle  from  a  table.  She  then  saw  that  the  figure
had  reached  the  further  end  of  the  drawing-room  ;  the  figure  turned  her

1  Water  is  only  carried  up  to  the  first  floor. There  is  an  unused  system  of  hot  air
pipes. The  sounds  lasted  after  the  main  was  mended. [Note  by  A.  L.]

2  Mrs  Claughton  describes  the  appearance  as  very  emaciated,  sad  and  kmdly  of
expression,  the  head  swathed  in  a  ramchudder  shawl. [Note  by  A.  L.]

3  Mrs.  C.  s  account  of  this  is  that  the  figure  passed  through  the  locked  door.  How
she  entered  herself  she  does  not  recollect. [Note  by  A.  L.]


The  Subliminal  Self.


555


head,  said,  in  a  distinct  voice,  "  to-morrow,"  and  vanished.  Mrs.  Claughton
returned  to  her  room,  and  heard  no  more  that  night. ^

The  woman  came  to  her  bedside  on  the  following  night,  and,  after  making
her  take  most  solemn  oaths  of  secrecy,  [made  her  a  certain  communication,
and  asked  her  to  do  certain  things.]  Mrs.  C.  was  to  go  to  a  place  of  which
she  had  never  heard,  to  a  house  and  a  man  whom  the  figure  described.  This
man  would  help  her  in  what  .she  had  to  do,  including  a  nocturnal  visit  to  a
church  where  she  would  receive  some  information.

The  Buckleys  were  wakened  by  the  alarum  wildly  pealed,  and  found  Mrs.
Claughton  in  a  swoon  on  her  bed.  [Mrs.  Claughton  said  she  had  been  asked
to  go  to  a  place,  the  name  of  which  she  had  never  before  heard.]  Dr.  Ferrier
recommended  her  to  consult  a  postal  guide  for  the  name  of  the  place  which
she  did  not  communicate  to  him.  She  did,  however,  ask  Mr.  Buckley  if  he
had  ever  heard  of  such  a  place  as  Meresby  (not  the  real  name),  and  it  is  as
obscure  as  a  village  can  be,  and  within  four  to  five  hours  of  London.

Mrs.  Claughton  left  the  town  where  these  events  occurred  on  October
nth  for  London,  meaning  to  visit  Meresby  as  soon  as  possible.  Here  my
information  ceases,  except  that  her  governess  in  town  (after  her  arrival
there),  was  disturbed  all  night  by  moans,  laments,  and  sounds  as  of  an
electric  machine  out  of  order  (October  loth).  Mrs.  C.  had  asked  Dr.  Ferrier
for  the  [date]  of  Mrs.  Blackburn's  marriage.  He  sent  her  a  note  from  Mrs.
Appleby,  giving  place  and  date.

Mrs.  Claughton  at  once  showed  Mr.  Buckley  and  Dr.  Ferrier  that  date
noted  in  her  diary.

In  a  later  letter,  dated  October  26th,  1893,  Mr.  Lang  writes  :—
There  is  now  no  doubt  that  Mrs.  Claughton  did  all  she  says.  She  went,
on  October  14th,  to  a  very  remote  small  place.  The  parish  clerk  there  and
the  curate  (the  rector  being  off  duty  from  age),  corroborate  things  in  written
statements. 2  She  says  she  reached  the  place  I  call  "Meresby"  in  the
evening,  went  to  the  clerk  named  by  ghost,  and  asked  for  parish  registers.
She  saw  these  on  Sunday  (October  loth)  after  Matins.  There  she  found
entries  (she  says)  corresponding  with  those  given  by  ghosts.  The  curate,  of
course,  can  only  say  she  searched  for  those  names,  which  I  need  not  give.
She  expressed  satisfaction.  She  passed  some  time  in  the  church  at  1—2
a.m.  (after  midnight),  the  clerk  remaining  outside.  She  then  emerges,  all
happened  as  she  expected.  She  asked  the  clerk  to  take  her  to  the  grave  of
[George  Howard,]  one  of  the  parties  in  the  register ;  he  died  in  the  same  year
as  ghost  (iMrs.  Blackburn).  [It  was  the  grave  where  she  went  after  church  in
the  morning.  It  was  too  dark  for  her  to  find  her  way  without  the  clerk's
guidance.]  There  she  plucked  a  white  rose  and  went  back  to  bed.
So  far  clerk  and  curate.

[Mrs.  Claughton  has  said  to  no  one  what  happened  in  the  church.]  Here
comes  a  curious  thing.  Originally  she  said  (Dr.  Ferrier  remembers  it)  that
she  saw  more  than  one  phantasm,  [three  persons]  on  the  second  night,  October

1  On  the  following  morning  she  consulted  Dr.  Ferrier.  He  advised  her  to  change
her  room,  which  she  disdained  as  cowardlj-.  He  suggested  fixing  up  an  electric  alarm
in  her  room,  which  was  done. [Note  by  A.  L.  ]

2  I  have  seen  curate's  and  clerk's  reports. [Note  by  A.  L.  ]


556


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


9th,  when  she  rang  the  alarum.  One  of  these  was  owner  of  the  said  grave.
That  ghost  bade  her  go  and  see  his  daughter,  [and  that  in  her  face  she,  Mrs.
Claughton,  would  see  the  likeness  to  her  father.]  Mrs.  Blackburn  only  sent
vague  messages  of  forgiveness,  and  it  was  she  who  insisted  on  the  fl(5wer-
plucking.  On  Monday,  October  16th,  Mrs.  Claughton  called  on  daughter  of
owner  of  grave  (at  Meresby),  and  gave  the  ghost's  message.  She  lives  some
way  outside  of  the  little  village.  Mrs.  Claughton  describes  this  lady's  father
[to  her,  and  the  lady  said  the  description  was  that  of  her  fatlier.]  The  clerk
corroborates  fact  of  visit  to  the  daughter.  Mrs.  Claughton  returned  to  town
on  the  following  day.  [She  travelled  up  in  the  same  carriage  as  a  lady  and
gentleman  and  a  child,  who  she  afterwards  found  had  been  staying  at  the
Rectory.  The  child  was  cold,  and  Mrs.  Claughton  lent  her  a  jacket,  and
then  entered  into  conversation,  they  saying  they  had  been  staying  at  Meresby
Rectory.]  Mrs.  Claughton  has  no  natural  knowledge  of  the  place  or
parties.  [Mrs.  Claughton  feels  relief  that  she  has  been  able  to  carry  out
satisfactorily  what  she  had  undertaken,]  and  is  apparently  convinced  she  saw
phantasms  [either  in  a  dream  or  reality].  ^

By  the  way,  spectres  throwing  water  occur  in  some  of  your  society's
reports  {Proceedings  XIX.  189),  and  in  old  books.  This  occurred  not  to
Mrs.  Claughton  but  to  her  friends,  before  her  adventure.

The  clerk  of  the  parish  of  "  Meresby "  states  that  Mrs.  Claughton
correctly  described  one  of  their  local  ghosts  as  he  was  when  alive,  though
nobody  knows  how  she  even  knew  of  his  existence.  Neither  this  latter
ghost  nor  Mrs.  Blackburn  seems  to  have  been  known  to  Mrs.  Claughton.
[Mrs.  Claughton  was  in  England  in  1878,  in  the  same  place,  as  far  as  she  can
remember,  as  where  Mrs.  Blackburn  died,  only  she  did  not  know  her.]

Copies  from  tombstones  in  Meresby  Glmrchyard.

(1)  To  teach  self-sacrifice  and  simple  faith  this  stone  recalls  the  sweet
memory  of  Constance,  the  dearly-loved  wife  of  Thomas  Carden ;  born
May  2nd,  1851  ;  died,  17th  January,  1891.

"And  flights  of  angels  sing  thee  to  thy  rest."

(2)  Richard  Hart,  Esq.,  15th  May,  1745,  aged  67  years.

(.3)  Marriage.  George  Howard,  merchant,  November  7th,  1839,  Hatcham;
died  August  7th,  1878,  aged  72.

Statement  by  the  Clerk  of  Meresby,  written  out  October  22nd,  1893.

I  am  clerk  of  the  Parish  of  Meresby.  On  Saturday  evening,  October  14th,
a  lady  who  gave  the  name  of  Claughton,  after  going  to  several  places  for
lodgings,  came  to  my  house,  accompanied  by  porter  with  luggage.  I  accom-
modated the  lady  with  lodgings.  She  told  me  that  she  wanted  to  look  at  the
church  registers,  and  did  I  think  the  curate  would  come  and  speak  to  her  at
my  house.  I  told  her  I  thought  he  would,  as  she  would  like  to  see  them  on
Sunday.  The  lady  then  sent  note  by  porter  to  curate,  who  was  just  going
out  to  dinner  so  did  not  come  till  about  half-past  eleven,  when  lady  had
retired  to  bed.  He  asked  me  to  apologise  to  her  for  not  coming  before,  but
would  be  happy  for  her  to  see  registers  on  Sunday  morning  after  service.

The  lady  came  to  morning  service,  and  afterwards  came  to  vestry  and
asked  for  registers  of  Richard  Hart  and  George  Howard,  also  giving  descrip-


The  Subliminal  Self.


557


tion  of  George  Howard,  which  was  quite  correct,  and  dates  of  registers  also
corresponded  with  those  in  the  lady's  journal.  I  then  showed  her  the  tomb-
stone of  Richard  Hart,  and  also  the  grave  of  G-eorge  Howard.  Curate
refusing  to  assist  lady  any  further,  the  lady  asked  ine  whether  I  would
accompany  her  to  the  church  at  twenty  minutes  past  one  Monday  morning.
I  told  her  I  could  not  give  a  decided  answer  just  then,  but  would  do  so  after
evening  service.  Spoke  to  curate  upon  the  matter  after  service.  He  told  me
that  he  should  not  have  any  more  to  do  with  it,  but  that  I  could  do  as  I
liked.  I  then  told  the  lady  I  would  do  as  requested.  At  a  quarter  to  one
o'clock  I  called  her.  We  then  proceeded  to  the  church,  and  after  looking
all  around  the  interior,  I  left  the  lady  in  the  church  at  twenty  past  one
o'clock  in  total  darkness,  locking  the  door  on  the  outside.  At  twenty  minutes
to  two  o'clock,  by  the  lady's  request,  I  gave  three  slight  taps  on  the  door,
unlocked  it,  when  the  lady  came  out.  We  then  went  to  grave  of  George
Howard,  where  the  lady  plucked  some  roses.  We  then  returned,  reaching
home  at  about  two  o'clock.

(Signed) Jo.seph  Wright,
Meresby,  October  22iid.  Parish  Clerk.

Letter  from  the  Clerk  of  Meresby.

Meresby,  October  22nd,  1893.
Dear  Madam, — I  have  sent  my  statement,  which  I  have  made  out  to  the
best  of  my  abilities.  I  saw  the  curate  last  evening.  He  showed  me  a  letter
that  came  from  a  man  by  the  name  of  Johnson,  of  Barton,  asking  for  par-
ticulars about  you^,  and  also  whether  I  took  you  to  the  church  on  Saturday
night  or  Sunday  morning,  he  put  it,  but,  unfortunately,  this  letter  was  sent
to  the  vicarage,  and,  of  course,  the  vicar  was  not  supposed  to  know  anything
about  it.  The  curate  seemed  to  be  rather  annoyed  about  it  going  there,  as
it  was  decided  to  keep  it  a  secret.  Hojjing  that  you  arrived  home  quite  safe,
— I  remain  yours  obediently,  Joseph  Wright,

Parish  Clerk.

Letter  from  Mr.  Buckleij  to  Mrs.  Cla^ightou.

Dear  Mrs.  Claughton, — There  was  a  ghost  before  you  came  to  stay  in
the  house.  We  took  the  house  in  ignorance  of  its  reputation,  and  were  only
told  of  it  when  we  ourselves  wanted  to  account  for  certain  noises — walking
up  and  down  stairs  at  night,  etc.,  etc.

The  water  throwing  business  was  as  follows  : — •

My  sister  L.  went  up  into  the  garrets  or  attics  about  9  o'clock  one
evening,  with  a  candle  in  her  hand,  to  get  something  from  an  old  chest.
Water  was  thrown  obliquely  across  the  room,  nearly  extinguishing  the
candle,  wetting  her  hand,  and  leaving  an  oblique  .splash  on  the  wall.  There
was  a  pool  of  water  on  the  floor  as  well.

My  sister  was  alarmed  at  this,  as  she  knew  no  one  was  in  the  room  or  on
that  story  with  her.  I  was  called  to  investigate  it,  and  found  everybody  in
the  house  ready  to  establish  clearly  that  they  were  none  of  them  above  the
drawing-room  at  that  moment,  except  my  brother  who  came  first  to  my
sister  when  she  called  out.

1  A  gentleman  whom  Dr.  Ferrier  had  asked  to  inquire  as  to  Mrs.  Claughton's
proceedings,  so  as  to  check  her  own  account. — F.  W.  H.  M.


558


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


My  own  experience  is  as  follows  : —

I  weiit  upstairs  one  evening  about  9  o'clock,  and  on  the  bedroom  landing
water  was  thrown  at  me  wetting  my  hand  and  falling  on  the  floor,  which
was  covered  by  oil-cloth,  or  linoleum.

I  ran  into  each  room  and  found  nobody — upstairs  into  the  attic — and
found  nobody — and  then  went  down  and  accounted  for  everybody  in  the
sitting-rooms  and  basement.  There  were  no  wet  marks  on  ceilings  in  either
case. — Yours  sincerely,

July,  1895.  W.  Buckley.

Statement  by  Mrs.  Clmighton's  governess.

I  was  sitting  at  needlework  in  the  schoolroom  last  night  (Friday,
October  13th,)  at  about  11  o'clock.  Mrs.  Claughton  was  in  her  room,  the
door  shut,  the  servants  all  in  bed.  I  heard  some  one  crying  or  rather
sobbing,  very  low  but  very  distinctly,  as  if  their  heart  would  break.  I
immediately  thought  of  Hilda  and  went  half  way  downstairs  when  I  found
her  door  wide  open  and  all  perfectly  still.  I  returned  to  my  work,  the
sobbing  continued,  like  a  woman's  or  a  girl's  voice.  I  thought  it  strange
that  one  could  hear  so  distinctly  through  the  walls,  but  determined  it  must
be  from  next  door  and  thought  no  more  about  it.

I  was  awakened  from  my  first  sleep  by  loud  moans  which  seemed  to  fill
the  room  and  come  from  every  part.  As  soon  as  I  was  awake  they  ceased.
Oddly  enough,  I  did  not  feel  a  bit  frightened,  but  made  up  my  mind  that  it
was  a  sudden  gust  of  wind.  I  sat  right  up  in  bed  and  listened.  All  was
perfectly  still,  till  I  heard  a  very  odd  sound  overhead  like  some  electric
battery  gone  wrong  and  broken.  I  thought  of  thieves,  then  remembered
that  the  telegraph  wires  are  fixed  to  this  house,  but  thought  it  odd  I  should
hear  tliem,  having  the  nurseries  over  my  room.  I  hesitated  whether
I  should  go  round  the  house  and  see  if  all  were  well,  but  determined  to
go  to  sleep  again,  as  the  sound  was  certainly  not  that  of  housebreakers.
I  also  thought  of  a  supernatural  cause  and  could  find  none.  I  was
wide  awake  and  sitting  up  in  bed  when  I  heard  this  strange  sound,  and
not  being  able  to  account  for  it  satisfactorily,  lay  back  and  went  to
sleep  again.  All  was  so  perfectly  still  in  the  street  and  everywhere  I
should  imagine  it  must  have  been  between  the  hours  of  one  and  two.
I  slept  soundly  and  was  awakened  at  least  three  times  more  always  with
these  fearful  moans,  which  filled  the  room,  always  feeling  wide  awake
and  each  time  attributing  it  to  the  wind,  although  when  one  awoke  the
sounds  ceased  and  there  was  not  a  breath  of  wind  to  be  heard.  Towards
morning  I  distinctly  heard  a  very,  very  heavy  footstep  overhead  and
a  heavy  thud  as  of  somebody  moving  something  very  cumbersome  and
heavy.  I  thought  of  Richardson  and  wondered  if  she  had  returned
without  any  one  knowing.  As  I  knew  the  nurseries  to  be  locked  and  the
keys  (as  I  then  thought)  in  her  keeping,  I  sat  up  again  and  listened.  All
was  perfectly  still.  I  knew  I  had  not  been  dreaming,  and  yet  could  not
account  for  the  noise,  all  being  so  perfectly  still.

I  slept  again  and  heard  the  servants  going  down,  some  hours  later,  and
thought  no  more  about  my  dreams  until  I  saw  Miss  Claughton  after  break-
fast. Mrs.  Claughton  had  talked  of  Spiritualism  during  breakfast,  yet


The  Subliminal  Self.


559


this  did  not  bring  my  night's  experience  to  my  memory.  It  only  all  came
back  link  by  link  when  I  saw  Miss  Claughton  and  told  her.

Saturday,  October  Uth,  1893.  (Signed) Makie  Giraud.

The  third  series  of  narratives  suggesting  an  unseen  pi'otection  or
guidance  comes  from  a  witness  of  whose  veracity  and  memory  Mr.
G.  A.  Smith,  who  interviewed  him  for  Mr.  Gurney  in  Florida  as  long
ago  as  November,  1886,  formed  a  very  high  opinion  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  Y.,  p.  325).  Mr.  Smith's  account,  and  some  other  recommenda-
tions received  of  Mr.  Skilton,  led  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  print  some  of  his
ex^Deriences.  (loc.  cit.)  Some  subsequent  correspondence  has  confirmed
the  impression,  and  although  the  following  incidents  are  remote  and
uncorroborated,  I  think  that  they  should  be  printed  here.

Writing  from  Daytona,  Florida,  October  20,  1895,  Mr.  Skilton
tells  me  that  the  statements  sent  to  Professor  James  were  "  written
down  along  as  they  occurred."

P.  158.

Mr.  Skilton,  writing  from  Jacksonville,  Florida,  November  10th,  1890,
sends  to  Professor  James  the  following  additional  incidents  "  noted  down
in  my  memorandum."

1.  In  giving  this  incident  of  my  life  in  which  I  was  guided  by  some  very
mysterious  influence  beyond  my  control,  I  feel  as  though  my  life  and
acts  had  been  of  some  good  and  benefit  to  my  fellow  man.  Being  sick  with
the  mumps  for  some  time  and  severe,  I  was  confined  to  my  room  about
three  weeks,  but  one  morning  feeling  able  to  go  to  the  R.R.  Depot,  I  started
out  ;  ray  folks  telling  me  I  must  not  go  away,  as  it  was  raining  and  bad
weather.  However,  I  went  on  to  the  depot  and  the  first  train  that  came
in  was  a  construction  train  out  picking  up  iron  and  ties  along  the  road,  and
I  very  strangely  went  off  dead-head  on  the  train  for  a  distance  of  twenty
miles  where  they  went  on  the  side  track  to  let  the  express  pass  them,  as
they  were  nearly  due,  and  a  very  fast  train  of  about  seven  cars,  and
did  not  make  this  a  stopping  place.  As  this  working-train  had  backed
in  so  as  to  clear  the  main  track,  and  the  switch  set  for  the  main  track,  the
conductor  told  the  forward  breakman  to  go  up  to  ojjen  the  switch,  meaning
after  the  express  had  passed ;  he  then  went  with  the  engineer  to  the
carboose  car  for  some  purpose,  but  the  brakeman  went  direct  to  the  switch
and  changed  it  to  the  side  track,  which  of  course  the  conductor  nor  engineer
knew  nothing  about.  Just  about  this  time  I  heard  the  express  coming,  and
saw  the  switch  wrong,  and  the  brakeman  standing  at  it.  I  tried  every  way
in  my  power  to  get  him  to  change  it,  but  could  not.  I  then  started  and  ran
to  change  it  myself,  but  just  before  I  got  to  it,  I  fell  down  by  some  means,
but  got  up  again  and  changed  the  switch  just  as  the  engine  of  the  express
was  coming  on  to  the  rails,  and  saved  the  terrible  collision.

The  engineer  on  the  express  stopped  his  train,  after  rumiing  by  some
distance,  and,  backing  up,  called  on  the  conductor  and  engineer  to  know
what  that  meant,  but  they,  not  having  seen  it,  were  in  a  puzzle  to  know


560


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


what  was  going  on  ;  but  after  being  told  what  had  happened,  the  question
came  up,  who  changed  the  switch  and  saved  the  train  1  I  told  them  I  did.
They  then  wanted  to  know  what  I  was  doing  on  that  train.  I  told  them
I  was  a  dead-head  on  it  ;  but  for  what  purpose  I  did  not  know,  as  I  ought
not  to  have  come  away  from  home  that  day,  as  I  had  been  quite  sick  ;  but
I  thought  it  was  all  right  as  I  had  done  a  good  thing.  The  engineer  on  the
express  says,  "Yes,  you  have  saved  my  life  and  many  others,"  and  then
turning  to  conductor  and  engineer  on  the  working  train  said,  "  You  had
better  keep  a  dead-head  on  your  train  all  the  time."

Now  for  an  explanation  of  what  that  brakeman  thought  he  was  doing
would  puzzle  tlie  oldest  heads  that  know  anything  about  railroad  manage-
ment !

I  went  home  on  that  working  train  that  night,  and  felt  justified,  though
I  had  gone  away  without  any  purpose  ;  and  many  times  since,  in  meeting
this  engineer  of  the  exjDress,  he  would  say,  "  you  ai'e  the  man  that  saved
my  life."

This  happened  before  I  had  learned  the  art  of  railroading,  but  as  for  any
remuneration  or  favour,  I  never  received  as  much  as  a  "  thank  you  "  from  the
R.  R.  Co.  for  what  I  did.

2.  I  do  not  call  this  a  premonition  ;  you  can  style  it  what  you  think
projDer.

As  an  introduction  to  it,  I  would  say  that  I  have  been  engaged  a  great
part  of  my  life  as  a  locomotive  engineer,  and  this  happened  while  engaged  in
that  business.  I  was  engaged  with  two  other  men  one  day  about  two
o'clock  p.m.  in  taking  out  some  evergreen  trees  from  a  box  car  to  take  home
and  set  out  ;  they  were  large  and  heavy  ;  I  had  to  run  the  car  up  on  the
switch  rails  to  get  them  out  ;  but  as  there  was  no  train  due  till  forty  minutes
I  would  have  plenty  of  time  to  get  them  out,  and  push  the  car  back  out  of
the  way.  There  had  been  a  great  deal  of  other  freight  put  in  the  car  after
mine  was,  so  it  was  necessary  to  take  out  some  of  it  before  I  could  get  at
mine.  I  opened  the  car  door,  and  a  barrel  of  eggs  fell  out  on  the  ground,
and  just  at  that  instance  I  saw  a  medium-sized  jjerson  standing  at  my  right
hand  clothed  in  white  with  a  bright  countenance,  beaming  with  intelligence.
I  knew  what  he  wanted  in  an  instant,  although  he  put  his  hand  on  my
shoulder  and  said,  "  Come  with  me."  We  moved  upward,  and  a  little  to  the
south-east  with  the  speed  of  lightning,  as  it  were  ;  I  could  see  the  hills,
trees,  buildings  and  roads  as  we  went  up  side  by  side  till  they  vanished  out
of  our  sight.  As  we  passed  on,  this  glorious  being  that  was  with  me  told
me  he  was  going  to  show  me  that  bright  heavenly  world.  We  soon  came
to  a  world  of  light  and  beauty,  many  thousand  times  larger  than  this  earth,
with  at  least  four  times  as  much  light.  The  beauties  of  this  i^lace  were
beyond  any  human  being  to  describe.  I  was  seated  by  the  tree  of  life  on
a  square  bunch  of  what  appeared  to  be  a  green  velvet  moss,  about  eighteen
inches  high  ;  there  I  saw  many  thousands  spirits  clothed  in  white,  and
singing  the  heavenly  songs,  and  1  could  think  of  but  one  verse  that  I  had
ever  heard  that  would  do  justice  to  this  heavenly  music,  and  that  is  this,
"  Hark  what  sweet  music,  what  a  song  Sounds  from  the  bright,  celestial
throng  !  "  for  it  was  the  sweetest  song  I  have  ever  heard.  I  here  told  my
attendant  that  it  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  been  perfectly  at  rest  in  my


The  Subliminal  Self.


561


life.  They  did  not  converse  by  sound,  but  each  knew  tlie  other  s  thoughts  at
tlie  instant,  and  conversation  was  carried  on  in  that  way,  and  also  witli  me.

After  viewing  the  wonderful  beauties  of  the  jjlace  for  some  time  and  the
thousands  of  sfiirits,  robed  in  spotless  white,  passing  through  the  air,  for
they  did  not  confine  themselves  to  the  surface,  but  went  every  direction  as
they  pleased,  I  wanted  to  see  my  dear  mother,  two  .sisters,  and  a  child  of
mine  that  had  died  some  time  before  this.  The  request  was  granted  at  once,
but  I  was  not  allowed  to  converse  with  them.  They  were  standing  in  a  row
in  front  of  me,  and  I  looked  at  them  and  coolly  estimated  the  distance  we
were  apart  at  thirty  feet,  and  wondered  how  these  things  could  be.  They
seemed  very  much  pleased  to  see  me,  and  I  shall  never  forget  how  they  wel-
comed me  when  I  first  saw  them,  although  no  conversation  passed.  About
this  time  my  attendant  told  me  we  must  go  back  ;  I  wished  to  stay,  but  he  told
me  my  time  had  not  come  yet,  but  would  in  due  tinre,  and  that  I  should
wait  with  patience.  At  this  we  started  back,  and  were  soon  out  of  sight
of  that  heavenly  land.  When  we  came  in  sight  of  this  world,  I  saw  every-
thing as  it  looked  from  a  great  height,  such  as  trees,  buildings,  hills,  roads,
and  streams,  as  natural  as  could  be,  till  we  came  to  the  car  that  I  had
opened  the  door,  and  I  found  myself  there  in  the  body,  and  he  vanished
out  of  my  .sight.  I  spoke  then  (just  as  I  oj)ened  my  watch  and  found  it
had  been  just  twenty-six  minutes  that  I  had  been  engaged  with  that
mysterious  one),  and  said  I  thought  I  had  left  this  world  for  good.  One  of
the  men  said,  "  There  is  something  the  matter  with  you  ever  since  you  ojoened
the  car  door  ;  we  have  not  been  able  to  get  a  word  out  of  you,"  and  that  I
had  done  all  the  work  of  taking  out  everything  and  putting  it  back  into  the
car,  and  one  item  was  eight  barrels  of  fiour  I  had  taken  ofi'  the  ground  alone
and  put  them  back  in  the  car,  three  feet  and  a  half  high,  witli  all  the  ease  of
a  giant.  I  told  them  where  I  had  been  and  what  I  had  seen,  but  they  had
seen  no  one.

This  I  count  the  brightest  day  of  my  life,  and  what  I  saw  is  worth  a  life-
time of  hardship  and  toil.  Being  in  good  health,  and  in  my  right  mind  in
mid-day,  while  busy  about  my  work,  and  my  mind  not  more  than  ordinarily
engaged  on  the  great  subject  of  eternal  life,  I  consider  this  a  most  extra-
ordinary incident.  I  was  told  by  this  mysterious  person  that  if  we  are
counted  worthy  at  death,  we  shall  be  accompanied  to  that  bright  world  by
one  of  those  glorious  beings,  and  this  is  my  firm  belief.

A  Dream.

3.  Being  engaged  running  a  locomotive  with  a  local  freight  train  for  some
time,  and  there  were  several  working  or  construction  trains  on  the  same
road,  and  one  in  particular  that  was  very  difficult  to  run  and  not  get  in  the
way  of  other  working  trains,  which  ofi"ence  would  suspend  the  conductor
and  engineer,  or  one  of  them  at  least  ;  and  what  made  it  stUl  more  com-
plicated was  that  they  had  to  run  over  several  miles  of  another  road  where
there  were  many  more  trains  to  look  after,  as  both  roads  ran  over  the
same  track.  After  trying  three  or  four  conductors  and  engineers  and  all  got
discharged  or  suspended  for  thirty  or  sixty  days,  the  road  master  came  to
me  to  take  the  engine  I  was  running,  and  go  and  try  it  without  a  conductor,
and  have  charge  of  a  large  number  of  men  as  gang  boss,  working  the  men,
keeping  their  time  mileage  of  the  cars  loaded  and  light,  conducting  the


562


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


train,  running  the  engine,  and  receiving  all  telegraph  orders,  making  a
report  each  day  of  all  I  had  done,  and  all  that  transpired — being  stationed
out  on  the  road  at  a  small  town.

After  running  it  about  two  weeks,  I  dreamed  one  night  that  there  was
a  collision  at  that  station  of  the  fast  express  with  the  through  freight  train,
and  that  the  engines  were  terribly  broken  up  and  passenger  coaches,  with
many  killed  and  many  more  badly  hurt.  When  I  awoke,  it  was  very  vivid
in  ray  mind,  worried  me  throughout  the  day,  but  nothing  happened  ;  but
the  next  morning  when  I  was  ready  to  go,  the  through  freight  train  was
late,  and  came  down,  passing  the  station  seven  minutes  on  the  express  time
(one  of  the  most  reckless  things  they  could  have  done,  as  it  was  in  a  cut,
and  on  a  sharp  curve  where  the  express  always  came  through  at  full  speed).
My  engine  was  standing  over  on  the  second  side  track  with  its  train.  Just
then  I  heard  the  express  whistle  for  the  station,  — I  saw  my  dream  in  an
instant,  with  all  its  horror,  but,  not  supposing  there  was  any  chance  to  save
them,  I  took  a  red  flag  and  ran  out  on  the  track  and  stopped  the  freight  by
my  signals,  as  1  ran  down  the  track  towards  the  express,  as  it  was  in  the
curve.  As  soon  as  the  engineer  saw  the  flag,  he  did  all  in  his  power  to  stop.
The  two  engines  came  within  about  teji  feet  of  each  other,  as  they  stopped.

Now  without  any  one  to  have  flagged  them,  there  is  no  telling  what
the  result  would  have  been,  as  there  were  nine  coaches,  with  all  that  could
stand  up  inside  and  out  on  the  platforms,  and  no  one  else  that  could  have
flagged  the  trains,  as  they  were  not  there  to  do  it  if  I  had  not  done  it.  The
dream  had  aroused  my  mind  so  thoroughly  that  I  was  on  the  look  out  for
anything  of  the  kind  to  happen  ;  otherwise  I  should  not  have  paid  any
attention  to  them,  as  I  was  not  in  the  habit  of  meddling  with  other  trains
when  mine  was  out  of  the  way.  This  was  looked  at  by  those  interested
there  at  that  time  as  a  matter  of  chance,  or  luck,  as  some  would  have  it — just
happened  to  be  so,  but  if  they  [had]  known  what  I  did  about  it  and  had  their
mind  taxed  as  heavily  as  I  did  the  day  before,  they  would  have  thought
difierent  ;  for  I  practically  knew  of  it  more  than  twenty-four  hours  before  it
came,  and  had  it  in  my  power  to  save  it,  and  did  it  with  joy.

I  attribute  this  to  the  power  of  an  unseen  agent  that  worked  upon  my
mind  so  efi^ectually  as  to  entirely  avoid  the  terrible  accident  that  might  have
sent  many  to  their  long  home.

How  I  Saved  a  Dreadful  Collision.
4.  I  was  once  engaged  as  engineer  on  a  fast  express,  and  it  became
necessary  to  change  the  time  card  on  the  R.  R.,  as  they  put  on  another
express  train  whicli  was  to  meet  the  train  I  ran  at  the  point  I  took  it,  and  in
changing  the  time  they  changed  some  of  the  most  important  rules  in  running
the  road,  and  not  making  them  quite  as  explicit  as  they  should.  When  the
first  day  came  for  us  to  meet  there,  the  new  train  did  not  come.  After  wait-
ing the  usual  time  for  the  variation  for  watches,  the  conductor  gave  the  signal
to  go,  but  I  shook  my  head.  He  stepped  into  the  office  and  reported  me  to
the  superintendent  (who  was  there)  immediately,  saying  he  would  not  have
an  engineer  that  would  not  go  when  he  told  him  to.  The  superintendent
came  out  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  I  said  he  had  no  right  to  go
according  to  the  time-card,  but  he  called  me  into  the  office  with  several
other  men,  who  all  said  I  was  wrong.  The  superintendent  said  he  had  made


The  Suhliviinal  Self.


563


the  time-card  and  knew  his  business.  But  after  parleying  fifteen  minutes,
and  getting  myself  in  a  position  to  be  discharged  promptly,  and  all  parties
being  in  a  bad  humour,  I  asked  the  sujierintendent  to  read  over  the  rules  that
related  to  meeting  station,  which  he  promptly  said  he  would  do,  and  show
me  where  I  stood.  He  picked  up  a  new  time-card  and  began  reading  the
rules,  but  not  coming  to  the  one  he  wanted  to,  he  was  some  time  in  getting
to  it,  and  just  using  up  the  time,  as  I  wanted  him  to,  and  before  he  got
quite  to  the  rule  he  wanted  to  show  me,  I  heard  the  familiar  whistle  of
the  fast  train  up  the  grade  about  a  mile.  I  tapped  him  on  the  shoulder
with  my  hand  and  said,  "  That  settles  it."  I  ran  out  and  just  succeeded  in
backing  my  train  down  the  grade  out  of  the  way.  I  then  went  to  the
superintendent  and  asked  him  what  he  thought  about  the  time-card.  He
said,  "  You  have  saved  us  one  of  the  greatest  collisions  that  was  ever  had  on
a  R.  R."  He  says,  "I  can't  see  how  you  could  see  anything  in  the  time-card
that  would  hold  you  so  against  such  odds  and  men  of  experience,  as  to
utterly  refuse  to  go  out."  I  told  him  the  time-card  was  not  very  plain,  and
would  not  have  kept  me  from  obeying  orders.  "My  will  was  to  do  just
what  you  wanted,  but  there  was  a  very  strong  impression  on  my  mind  that
there  was  wrong  in  starting,  which  grew  intense  as  the  conductor  gave  the
signal  ;  it  appeared  to  reach  a  point  just  at  that  time  that  it  would  have  been
impossible  to  have  got  me  to  go."  Although  I  was  cool  and  quiet  in  the
midst  of  derision,  I  had  faith  to  believe  that  my  impression,  come  from
what  source  it  would,  was  able  to  carry  me  through,  and  I  determined  to
follow  it  at  all  hazards,  and  it  brought  me  out  in  triumph.

The  superintendent  then  said,  "  For  this  act,  I  will  never  find  fault  with
you  hereafter," — and  he  never  did.  The  conductor  that  evening  said,  "You
are  worthy  of  a  pension,  I  will  never  dispute  you  on  the  rights  of  trains
again."

Now  this  kind  of  a  glorious  informant,  or  a  sure  knowing  of  things  not
yet  happened,  has  been  with  me  all  of  my  railroad  life,  and  has  never
failed  me  in  any  instance,  but  has  saved  my  life  many  times.

5.  I  was  once  firing  a  locomotive  that  was  hauling  iron  over  another  road  to
lay  its  track  of.  It  was  a  fine  new  passenger  engine,  with  large  driving  wheels
for  making  fast  time,  just  from  the  builder's  shop,  and  I  thought  I  had  been
very  lucky  to  get  so  good  a  situation  as  to  be  fireman  on  so  good  a  locomotive.

Two  nights  before  leaving  with  the  train,  I  dreamed  that  the  engine  and
train  ran  through  the  shallow  cut,  and  came  out  on  the  top  of  a  stone  bridge
very  high,  ran  across  the  bridge  and  turned  over  down  the  bank  some
seventy  feet  into  the  river.  I  was  stopping  with  a  very  intelligent  Christian
family,  and  I  told  my  dream  to  the  lady  of  the  house.  She  appeared  to  be
very  deeply  interested  in  it,  and  told  me  I  was  going  to  get  killed.  I  told
her  I  had  an  assurance  in  my  dream  that  I  would  not  get  hurt,  that  I
had  great  faith  in.  She  tried  'cb  persuade  me  not  to  go  out  at  all  with
the  train,  but  I  did  not  heed  her  warning,  and  when  the  time  came
to  go  out  with  the  train,  I  went.  When  we  had  got  about  fourteen  miles
out,  and  were  running  pretty  fast  down  grade  through  a  shallow  cut,
I  all  at  once  saw  a  large  number  of  men  on  the  track  which  the  engineer
could  not  see,  as  he  was  near-sighted,  but  I  told  him  to  stop  as  soon  as
possible,  but  we  soon  got  so  near  as  to  see  that  the  men  had  taken  up


564


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  track  and  rolled  out  the  large  timbers  that  lay  from  the  stone  bridge
off  on  the  high  embankment,  making  a  kind  of  ditch  over  two  feet  deep  and
fifty  feet  long.  But,  as  it  happened,  they  had  got  but  one  of  the  timbers
out  on  one  side  which  made  it  still  worse  for  turning  over  the  engine.
The  engineer  set  about  stopping  the  train  with  all  his  might,  but  to  no
purpose,  as  the  track  was  wet,  and  he  soon  jumped  off  and  left  the  engine.
I  thought  it  could  be  stopped  and  saved,  and  I  stayed  on  and  reversed  the
engine,  and  put  on  all  the  steam  and  whistle  brakes.  By  this  time  I  was  on
the  bridge,  and  no  chance  to  get  off.  I  failed  to  stop  the  engine,  and  it  ran
into  the  place  dug  out,  just  off  the  end  of  the  bridge,  and  turned  over  on
the  heavy  wall  laid  up  to  keep  the  embankment  from  washing  away.  As  it
was  a  long  way  down,  it  had  to  make  two  complete  turns  to  reach  the
bottom.  The  first  time  it  went  over,  it  blew  off  the  top  of  the  boiler,  with
a  tremendous  explosion.  As  the  wall  was  as  steep  as  a  Gothic  roof,  I  had
more  than  I  could  do  to  keep  my  feet  in  going  down  through  with  the  engine,
tender,  and  wood  jack  screws,  pinch  bars,  and  tools,  all  after  me,  and
almost  on  me.  The  bottom  of  the  river  was  a  solid  rock  with  six  inches  of
water  on  it. I  got  through  with  but  one  small  scratch.

I  went  up  and  measured  the  bridge,  and  found  it  two  hundred  feet  long,
with  five  arches  in  it,  made  of  cut  stone,  and  fifty-four  feet  perpendicular,
and  seventy  feet  on  the  slope,  where  the  engine  rolled  down.

As  soon  as  I  got  up  out  of  the  river,  I  looked  back,  and  saw  my  dream,
just  as  it  looked  to  me  when  I  was  dreaming.

Not  being  familiar  with  the  road,  I  could  not  locate  any  such  a  place,
but  when  I  came  to  try  the  realities  of  it,  I  saw  the  place  just  as  I  dreamed
it,  and  every  part  of  this  dream  came  true,  just  as  I  saw  it.

I  went  back  to  my  boarding  place  the  same  evening,  and  told  the  land-
lady that  the  locomotive  had  turned  over  into  the  river,  and  was  nearly
destroyed,  but  that  I  was  all  right.

This  was  my  first  dream  of  this  kind,  which  was  afterwards  repeated  four
times  more  in  different  places  and  circumstances,  and  came  out  just  the  same;
so  that  I  had  a  knowledge  of  two  days  ahead  of  just  what  was  going  to
happen  each  time,  by  some  mysterious  agency  or  guardian  spirit.  It  is  my
candid  belief  that  this  guardian  continued  with  me  day  and  night  as  long  as
I  ran  a  locomotive,  always  directing  me  in  the  right,  where  it  would  have
been  possible  for  me  to  have  done  wrong;  and  where  others  did  wrong  and  I
would  suffer  by  it,  I  escaped  in  every  instance.  In  this  case,  if  the  flagman
had  put  out  his  flag  before  taking  up  the  track,  all  would  have  been  well.

6.  I  give  this  narrative  of  my  life  from  an  actual  occurrence,  to  show  that
there  is  in  many  cases  an  unseen  agency  governing  the  mind,  actions,
and  labours  of  some,  to  their  own  great  advantage,  and  safety  of  others.

I  was  running  an  engine  on  a  fast  night  train  ;  I  had  been  running  the
same  train  about  five  years  ;  at  one  point  on  the  road  there  was  an  outer
switch  that  we  passed  after  whistling  for  the  station  at  full  speed.  I  don't
remember  in  all  that  time  of  slowing  up  the  train  in  the  least,  for  it,  this
siding,  was  used  for  broken  cars  and  stock  cars  out  of  season  for  using  them,
and  usually  had  from  fifteen  to  thirty  cars  on  it ;  at  the  time  I  relate,  it  had
twenty-six  cars  on  it.  We  usually  passed  it  at  a  speed  of  fifty  miles  an  hour,
and  sometimes  more  than  that,  although  we  always  stopped  at  the  station,


The  Subliminal  Self.


565


which  was  a  half  mile  further  on.  I  never  felt  any  fear  as  to  its  safety,  but
one  night,  leaving  home,  the  thought  came  to  my  mind  that  that  switch  was
wrong,  but  I  tried  to  put  it  off  and  not  think  of  it,  but  it  disturbed  me
considerable.

When  the  train  came  for  me  to  take,  it  was  fifty  minutes  late,  and  no
time  to  lose  for  anything  along  the  road.  I  started,  willing  to  make  up  all
the  time  I  could  over  my  part  of  the  route.  But  this  switch  bore  heavily  on
my  mind  as  being  wrong,  and  the  nearer  I  got  to  it,  the  stronger  the
impression,  till  at  last  I  made  up  my  mind  that  it  would  not  break  up  the
R.  R.  Co.  to  stop  and  see.  I  whistled  for  the  station  and  put  on  the  breaks,
and  stopped  the  train  and  as  the  head  light- gave  a  good  light  for  some  yards
ahead,  I  could  distinctly  see  the  switch  wi'ong  ;  I  got  off  and  went  ahead  to
change  it  and  found  it  locked.  Just  then  the  conductor  had  got  off  the  train,
and  wanted  to  know  what  I  had  stopped  there  for  ;  I  told  him  T  thought  I
would  shut  up  that  switch  before  I  ran  over  it.  He  says,  ' '  How  did  you
know  it  was  wrong  ?  "  I  said  I  did  not  know  it,  but  have  had  it  on  my  mind
all  night  so  far  that  it  was  wrong,  and  thought  I  would  stop  and  see,  to
satisfy  my  curiosity.  He  said,  "  You  have  done  a  good  thing — saved  your
life  and  all  the  rest  of  us,  besides  the  engine  and  train."

Now  this  circumstance  has  given  me  great  satisfaction  to  look  back  to
and  see  how  wonderfully  my  mind  was  wrought  upon  by  some  unseen
agency  that  would  not  let  me  shake  off  the  impression,  but  kept  enforcing
it  more  and  more.  From  this  may  we  not  make  wp  our  minds  that  we  are
many  times  saved  from  a  dreadful  fate  or  accident  ?  Such  has  been  my
■experience  many,  very  many  times.

7.  In  September,  1859,  being  an  engineer  running  a  fast  train  on  a  through
western  road,  and  being  at  tlie  west  end  of  my  route  on  Saturday  night,
September  3rd,  where  I  arrived  about  twelve  at  night ;  on  retiring  I  had  a
very  interesting  dream,  and  as  I  had  had  two  before  of  the  same  kind  at
different  places  which  came  true  to  the  letter,  it  made  this  all  the  more
interesting  to  me.  I  dreamed  that  1  was  running  tliis  fast  train  going  west,
and  that  it  was  nearly  an  hour  late,  and  I  was  trying  to  make  up  all  the
time  I  could,  and  just  as  I  was  about  half  way  between  two  stations,
which  were  eight  miles  apart  and  on  tlie  smoothest  track  on  the  whole  road,
the  engine  ran  off  on  the  north  side  of  the  track,  and  turned  over  in  the
night,  and  when  it  stopjjed  I  was  sitting  on  one  of  the  driving  wheels  with
my  feet  down  between  the  spokes,  and  in  the  darkness  a  person  of  medium
stature,  dressed  in  white,  came  down  from  heaven,  a  little  from  a  south-east
direction,  not  straight  down,  with  a  span  of  white  horses  and  a  black
carriage,  and  took  me  off  the  driving  wheel  of  the  locomotive  as  it  lay
on  its  side,  and  put  me  in  the  carriage,  and  went  up  a  little  south-
easternly  from  straight  up  ;  this  was  the  end  of  the  dream  ;  but  I  awakened
and  it  worked  my  mind  very  much,  so  that  I  slept  but  little  more  that
night,  and  during  the  Sabbath  my  mind  was  wonderfully  worked  upon  to
know  what  this  meant ;  for  I  had  faith  to  believe  it  would  come  to  pass.

I  told  no  one,  but  it  worried  me  very  much.  On  Monday  morning,
September  5th,  I  took  the  fast  express  back  to  the  other  end  of  my  route
where  I  lived,  and  where  I  arrived  about  1  p.m.  At  9.40  my  time  came
to  go  west  again  at  night. The  train  was  fifty-four  minutes  late. As  usual


566


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  conductor  said,  "Make  up  all  you  can,"  which  was  e(iuivalent  to
saying,  "  run  as  fast  as  you  dare  ride. "  I  left  with  all  speed,  and  had  not
told  my  wife  or  family  of  my  dream.  When  about  forty  miles  out,  and
making  about  as  fast  time  as  I  ever  ran,  which  was  some  more  than  a
mile  a  minute,  and  just  at  the  place  of  running  off  in  my  dream,  the  engine
struck  a  horse  which  went  under  and  threw  off  the  forward  trucks,  which
very  soon  resulted  in  turning  over  the  engine  in  the  very  place  I  had
dreamed.  Its  speed  was  so  great,  and  on  level  ground,  that  it  slid  over
fifty  feet  after  it  lay  on  its  side.  It  being  one  of  the  darkest  nights  1  ever
saw,  about  11  p.m.,  it  was  impossible"  to  do'ifiiything.  However,  I  reversed
the  engine  the  moment  it  left  the  track,  but  did  not  shut  off  steam.  It
turned  over,  and  when  it  fetched  up  and  stopped,  I  found  myself  sitting  on
the  driving  wheel,  with  my  feet  down  through  between  the  spokes,  with  my
under  jaw  broken,  and  three  ribs  on  my  left  side,  and  quite  a  deep  gash
cut  on  both  sides  of  my  face,  with  the  throttle  lever  broken  off  eighteen
inches  long,  and  in  my  hand,  which  I  had  not  let  go  of  all  the  time.  But  the
person  dressed  in  white  with  a  shining  countenance  beaming  with  intelli-
gence, I  did  not  see,  nor  the  white  horses  and  black  carriage.

It  was  telegraphed  to  my  wife  that  I  was  killed,  but  she  would  not
believe  it.

I  got  home  the  next  day  at  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  fully  believing
there  was  something  in  some  dreams.

Now  it  seems  more  of  a  mystery  to  me  that  this  dream  should  come  true
to  the  letter  till  it  came  down  to  the  very  point  wliere  I  should  see  the  man
in  white,  with  carriage  and  horses,  and  have  that  part  left  out,  than  it  does
to  have  the  other  part  come  as  dreamed.

My  mind  was  so  much  disturbed  by  my  dream  at  one  time  Monday,
that  I  made  up  my  mind  not  to  go  out  that  night,  but  let  some  one  else  try
it  ;  but  I  liad  no  sooner  got  my  mind  made  up  than  it  was  changed  by  some
unseen  agency,  and  an  assurance  given  that  I  had  not  the  least  doubt  in
that  I  should  not  be  killed  or  very  badly  hurt.  The  all  absorbing  thought
came  to  my  mind  that  all  I  needed  was  faith  unwavering,  and  it  came  to  my
mind  in  great  strength.  I  used  to  at  all  times,  when  starting  out  with  my
engine,  commit  my  life  and  all  into  the  hands  of  Him  who  doeth  all  things
well,  nothing  doubting,  and  He  never  failed  me  in  the  greatest  hour  of  need
and  accident  many  times.

8.  Being  once  placed  in  such  a  position  that  I  would  have  been  cut  in
two  by  a  passing  train,  I  will  relate  how  wonderfully  I  was  saved.  It
was  in  this  way :  I  was  running  an  express  train  as  engineer,  and  it  was
customary  to  do  a  considerable  switching  of  freight  cars  at  each  end  of  the
route.  As  I  was  at  the  west  end  of  my  run,  and  had  been  switching  cars
till  the  express  was  nearly  due,  and  the  local  freight  was  just  coming  in
then  from  the  way  the  exjjress  was  due,  I  had  a  few  moments  of  time,
and  was  packing  one  of  the  pumps  on  the  locomotive.  I  was  not  quite  done
when  I  ran  down  the  track  a  little  to  tell  the  conductor,  who  was  on  the
passenger  coach  of  the  freight  train,  that  I  wanted  to  get  by  him  when  he
backed  in  on  the  cross-over  track,  as  it  was  called,  and  he  said  he  would  let
me  by  with  my  engine.  I  then  asked  him  what  passenger  car  he  had  on
behind  which  was  just  next  to  the  one  I  stood  on. He  said  it  was  a  six


The  Subliminal  Self.


567


foot  gauge  car  on  our  tracks  of  four  foot  ten  inch  gauge.  I  was  going  to  get
oif  his  car,  just  where  I  was  packing  the  pump,  and  tinish  it  as  soon  as
possible,  and  run  up  and  get  by  his  train,  as  my  train  was  about  due  tlien.
As  I  rode  along  up  to  my  engine  and  was  about  ready  to  step  off  at  the  very
place  I  wanted  to,  I  looked  up  and  saw  about  thirty  feet  high  a  very
singular  looking  person  clothed  in  white,  with  a  wonderful  bright  countenance
beaming  with  intelligence  passing  along  in  the  air,  just  so  that  if  I  got  off
the  car  where  I  intended  to  I  could  not  see  it.  I  became  wonderfully
interested,  and  rode  on  about  forty  feet  farther,  and  it  went  out  of  my
sight  in  an  instant.  I  got  oif  the  train  just  then  which  was  moving  along
some  faster  than  a  man  could  walk,  but  as  soon  as  I  struck  the  ground,
I  saw  the  situation  in  an  instant.  The  broad  gauge  car  was  passing  my
engine  then  (which  had  an  outside  frame)  with  a  clearance  of  only  one  and
a  half  inches,  which  would  have  rolled  me  in  and  cut  me  in  two  without  the
least  chance  to  have  got  away,  as  I  did  not  see  the  danger  till  it  was  past — ■
if  I  had  not  seen  this  person  passing  along  up  in  the  air.  It  was  wonderful
with  what  force  this  was  pointed  out  to  my  mind  as  soon  as  I  got  on  the
ground,  and  if  I  was  ever  thankful  for  anything  in  my  life,  I  was  much
more  for  this,  knowing  my  life  had  been  saved  by  some  mysterious  agent  in
such  a  wonderful  interesting  way.

T  told  one  of  my  railroad  friends  about  it,  and  he  said  it  was  imagination.
I  told  him  it  was  a  glorious  imagination  that  would  save  a  man's  life  that
way,  but  that  I  thought  I  would  be  dishonest  with  myself  and  more  so  with
my  deliverer  to  attribute  it  to  imagination.

I  made  a  memorandum  of  it,  and  said  no  more  about  it,  feeling  it  was
wrong  to  trifle  with  such  glorious  preservation  of  life  by  the  Providence  of
God.

This  has  occurred  four  times  with  me,  saving  my  life  in  my  railroad
life,  but  at  no  other  time  was  there  any  one  visible,  but  their  influence
was  powerful.  Let  the  reader  judge  for  himself  the  source  of  this,  after
giving  me  credit  of  telling  the  simple  truth  just  as  it  happened  with  me.

It  has  always  been  a  satisfaction  to  me  to  think  of  this  escape,  and  how
nicely  it  turned  out.

My  railroading  was  all  done  in  Ohio  and  Indiana.

Subliminal  inference  may  have  operated  in  some  of  these  cases  ; —
as,  for  instance,  when  Mr.  Skilton  knew  that  a  six-foot  gauge  car  was
on  the  narrower  track.

Not  the  least  remarkable  of  tliese  incidents  is  the  condition  of
ecstacy  into  which  Mr.  Skilton  describes  himself  as  falling  during
vigorous  manual  exercise.  He  writes  to  me  that  he  has  never  had
any  trance  save  this  ; — which  he  regards  as  "  worth  a  lifetime  of
hardship  and  toil."

As  I  have  elsewhere  said,  I  incline  to  believe  that  ecstasy  is  the
highest  condition  into  which  a  spirit  still  incarnate  can  pass.  The
so-called  ecstasy  of  hysteria  I  regard  as  merely  an  instance  of  the
imperfect  simulations  of  various  psychical  states  which  the  disinte-
grated personality  of  the  hysteric  readily  affords. True  ecstasy  I


568


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


regard  as  a  condition  where  the  centre  of  consciousness  changes  from
the  suprahminal  to  the  subliminal  self,  and  realises  the  transcendental
environment  in  place  of  the  material.  The  reminiscence  of  such  a
momentary  enlightenment  I  regard  as  inevitably  confused  and  coloured
by  pre-existing  supraliminal  notions.  I  no  more  accept  Mr.  Skilton's
picture  of  the  unseen  world  as  exact  than  I  accept  Swedenborg's  ;
but  I  incline  to  believe  that  both  alike  were  in  truth  exalted
into  an  "  interior  condition "  where  their  perception  of  the  Cosmos,
though  less  distinct  and  intelligible,  was  wider  and  profounder  than
our  own.

In  my  next  case  it  seems  impossible  even  to  suggest  any  finite  mind
as  the  source  of  intelligence.

P.  144.  Dream.

Received  through  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Cope,  from  Miss  I.  Young.  The
account  was  written  in  the  early  part  of  1892.

British  Institute,  26,  Rue  de  Vienne,  Brussels.

In  the  morning  of  Friday,  March  29th,  1889,  after  being  awakened  at  my
usual  hour  for  rising,  I  went  to  sleep  again,  and  dreamt  the  following  :—  I

was  staying  with  a  friend,  Mrs.  0  ,  and  it  was  by  the  sea-side;  the  house

overlooked  the  sea,  the  waves  nearly  washing  agamst  the  garden  wall.  It
was  a  bright  clear  day  and  I  was  standing  close  to  the  wall,  v/atching  in  the
distance  two  vessels  on  the  sea,  one  having  left  the  place  I  was  at,  and  the
other  advancing  from  the  opposite  shore.  To  my  surprise  1  saw  that  neither
vessel,  as  they  neared  each  other,  seemed  to  make  room  for  the  other,  and
then  to  my  horror  one  dashed  into  the  other,  cutting  her  in  half.  I  saw  the
boiler  burst  of  the  injured  vessel,  throw  up  fragments  and  thick  black  smoke;
I  saw  the  passengers  hurled  into  the  water  making  frantic  attempts  to  save
themselves.  I  especially  noticed  hats  and  other  things  floating  on  the  water,
and  then  suddenly  two  bodies  were  washed  up  at  my  feet,  and  I  awoke  and
found  it  was  nearly  8.30  a.m.  The  dream  made  a  vivid  impression  on  me,
and  I  could  not  shake  off  the  feeling  of  horror  I  had  experienced  all  through
it.  That  same  afternoon  news  came  from  Ostend  of  a  terrible  catastrophe
in  the  Channel,  the  two  vessels.  Princesses  Henriette  and  Josephine,
crossing  t)ia  Ostend  and  Dover,  had  come  into  collision  that  same  morning
at  lOa.m.,1  the  one  had  cut  the  other  in  half  just  as  I  had  seen  it  in  my
dream  ;  indeed,  the  circumstances  were  the  same.  I  knew  no  one  on  board,
but  the  lady  with  whom,  in  my  dream,  I  was  staying,  had  three  relatives  on
board  ;  one  was  drowned  and  the  other  two  saved. Isabella  Young.

The  friend  with  whom  Miss  Young  was  staying  at  the  time,  Mrs.  C.  E.
Jenkins,  writes  : —

I  certify  that  the  above-mentioned  dream  was  related  to  me  about  an
hour  after  she  had  dreamt  it,  by  Miss  Young.  ^ q._  jEi,fKiNS.


iKeally  later  in  the  day,  as  steamers  cross  about  midday. — C.  H.  Cope.


The  Subliminal  Self.


569


In  answer  to  a  further  question,  Mrs.  Jenkins  writes  : —

British  Institute,  25,  Eue  de  Vienne,  Brussels,

May  3rcl,  1892.

Dear  Sir, — -In  answer  to  your  card  to  Mr.  Cope,  forwarded  to  me  this
morning,  I  beg  to  confirm  that  Miss  I.  G.  Young  related  her  dream  to  me
about  the  collision  before  we  had  heard  anything  of  it,  and  that  the  news
came  that  afternoon.  Meliora  G.  Jenkins.

(Hon.  Lady  Superintendent,

British  Institute,  Brussels.)

We  give  below  some  account  of  the  events,  as  related  in  the  Times.

From  the  Times,  March  30th,  1889  (Saturday)  :—
"A  Channel  Packet  Missing.

"  Up  to  12  o'clock  last  night  the  mail  and  passenger  steamer  which  left
Ostend  for  Dover  at  10  o'clock  yesterday  morning,  had  not  arrived.  The
vessel  (the  Comtesse  de  Flandre)  was  due  at  Dover  at  2.30.  There  was  a,
slight  fog  close  in  shore,  but  the  Calais  boat,  which  arrived  last  evening,
reported  that  it  was  tolerably  clear  out  in  the  Channel.  Great  anxiety  wag
felt  at  Dover  last  night  as  to  the  steamer's  safety,  and  signal  guns  were  fired
at  given  intervals."

In  the  second  edition  of  the  Times,  same  date  as  above,  the  following
appears  : —

' '  Foundering  of  an  Ostend  Mail  Steamer  {from  Lloyd's).

"Lloyd's  agent  at  Ostend  telegraphs,  under  date  to-day,  7.30  a.m.,  that
the  mail  boats  the  Princess  Henriette,  from  Dover,  and  the  Comtesse  de
Flandre,  from  Ostend,  were  in  collision  yesterday.  The  Comtesse  de
Flandre  sank,  and  11  of  the  crew,  including  captain  and  mate,  and  three
passengers,  were  drowned. Mails  lost.

"The  Comtesse  de  Flandre  was  a  steamer  of  500  tons  gross,  and  left
Ostend  yesterday  morning  with  mails  and  passengers  for  England."

In  the  Times,  Monday,  April  1st,  1889,  a  fuller  account  appears,  with
names  of  victims,  narratives  of  survivors,  &c.  Mr.  Algernon  Osborn,  one
of  the  saved,  gives  the  time  of  the  collision  as  half-past  one.  The  Times
account  is  as  follows  : —

Loss  of  a  Mail  Steamer.
"A  collision  of  a  terrible  character  occurred  in  the  English  Channel  on
Friday  afternoon  between  two  of  the  regular  steamers  plying  between  Dover
and  Ostend.  As  was  announced  in  the  Times  on  Saturday  morning,  great
anxiety  was  felt  at  Dover  on  Friday  night  when  the  packet,  the  Comtesse  de
Flandre,  failed  to  arrive  at  her  appointed  time.  The  packet  started  from
Ostend  at  a  quarter  past  10  on  Friday  morning  for  Dover,  with  20  passengers
and  7  bags  of  mails.  At  mid-day  the  Princess  Henriette,  a  larger  and  faster
boat  than  the  Comtesse  de  Flandre,  left  Dover  for  Ostend  with  15  passengers
on  board.  The  weather  was  thick  at  the  time,  but  not  so  dense  as  to  render
navigation  very  difhcult  had  all  possible  precautions  been  taken.  At  about  a
quarter  to  2  in  the  afternoon,  the  officers  of  the  Comtesse  de  Flandre  saw  the
Princess  Henriette  looming  through  the  mist,  and  before  any  effort  could  be
made  to  avert  the  impending  disaster,  the  Princess  Henriette  crashed  into


570


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  Comtesse  de  Flandre's  port  sponson,  cutting  clean  through  the  paddle-
box  into  the  engine-room.  The  fore  jjart  of  the  vessel  broke  right  away  and
sank,  the  boilers  exploding  directly  after  the  collision.  The  whole  affair  was
so  terribly  sudden  that  passengers  and  crew  alike  were  struggling  in  the

water  before  they  had  realised  fully  what  had  occurred  "

The  account  proceeds  to  describe  the  steps  taken  by  the  Princess
Henriette  to  save  life  by  lowering  boats.  Four  passengers,  the  captain,  the
mate,  five  stokers,  three  engineers,  and  one  sailor,  comprise  the  list  of
missing.

In  the  next  case  the  time-relation  of  the  vision  to  the  actual  facts
is  not  quite  clear  ;  but  there  is  distinct  premonition  as  to  the  meeting
with  the  shipwrecked  crew.

L.  943.

The  following  dream,  which  evidently  made  a  great  impression  on  the
dreamer,  shows  a  sufficient  amount  of  correspondence  with  actual  fact  both
in  the  time  at  which  it  occurred  and  in  detail  (black  man,  schooner  in  distress)
to  suggest  that  it  was  in  some  way  caused  by  these  facts — and  it  adds  interest
to  it  that  it  led  to  the  rescue  of  the  distressed  men.  It  is  not  quite  clear  how
much  of  Captain  Scott's  narrative  was  taken  from  contemporary  notes,  and
probably  no  further  evidence  could  be  obtained  as  to  this  now.

Document  I. — From  Bishop  Hale.

The  colony  of  Western  Australia  (called  at  the  time  the  Swan  River
Settlement)  was  founded  in  1829.  Captain  Scott  must  have  gone  there  very
shortly  after  that  period.

In  the  year  1848,  I  being  then  Archdeacon  of  Adelaide,  went  to  Western
Australia  in  attendance  upon  the  Bishop  of  Adelaide.  Cajjtain  Scott  showed
great  readiness  to  assist  the  BishojJ,  and  both  he  and  I  received  from  him
many  acts  of  kindness.

He,  one  day,  told  me  about  his  dreams  and  the  circumstances  comiected
therewith.  He  told  it  all  with  such  animation  and  such  varying  expressions
of  face  that  he  gave  one  the  idea  that  the  things  he  spoke  of  were  passing
vividly  before  his  mind's  eye  as  he  described  them.

1  was,  of  course,  greatly  struck  by  the  narrative  and  said  I  should  like
very  much  indeed  to  have  it  in  writing.  He  said  at  once  that  I  should  have
it ;  he  would  have  the  copy  of  his  log,  which  he  had  by  him,  transcribed  for
me. I  received  the  M.  S.  a  few  days  afterwards.

His  last  illness  was  a  long  and  wearisome  one,  and  the  old  man  was
pleased  when  any  friend  would  look  in  and  sit  with  him  for  a  time.  I  was
then  Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  and  I  was  aware  that  the  clergyman  of  his  parish
(Fremantle),  Mr.  Bostock,  was  in  the  habit  of  sometimes  taking  his  seat  by
the  old  man's  bedside,  in  addition  to  the  performance  of  the  usual  devotional
services.

I  never  had  upon  my  own  mind  the  slightest  doubt  about  the  truth  of  the
narrative,  but  I  was  quite  aware  that  some  persons  to  whom  I  might  chance
to  show  it  might  feel  doubtful  about  it,  and  it  occurred  to  me  that  Mr.


The  Subliminal  Self.


571


Bostock's  friendly  visits  to  tlie  old  man  afforded  an  excellent  ojiportunity  for
getting  some  declaration  such  as  that  which  he  did  obtain.

March  9i/i,  1892.  Mathbw  B.  Hale  (Bishop).

Document  II. — Captain  Scott's  Account.

''June  lOth,  1825.

' '  On  the  night  of  the  7th  of  June  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  a  schooner,  and
apparently  water-logged,  with  several  men  in  her  and  a  black  man  among
them.  On  the  eighth  I  dreamed  the  same  and  got  up  and  started  the  mate  up
aloft.  I  stayed  on  deck  until  daylight.  On  the  9tli  the  same  dream  occurred.
Got  up  and  altered  the  ship's  course,  having  passed  between  Guadeloupe  and
Antigua,  the  day  previous,  and  at  8  p.m.  heavy  squalls  with  heavy  tlnuider
and  lightning  ;  shortened  sail.  Daylight  made  all  sail,  fine  pleasant  weather.
On  the  10th,  at  8  o'clock,  altered  the  ship's  course  from  W.S.  W.  to  S.  W.  two
points  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  true  position  of  the  Bird  Islands,
or  to  see  if  these  really  existed  (as  on  my  chart  it  was  marked  doubtful).
1  was  at  this  time  very  vuieasy  in  my  mind,  supposing  that  something  was
going  to  happen  to  my  ship.  I  had  related  my  dream  to  my  mate  and
passengers,  Don  Joseph  Sevarra,  John  Poingestre  and  Wm.  Richenburg,
Esqrs.,  merchants  at  Carthagena,  who  wrote  the  circumstances  to  the
Humane  Society  and  to  their  house  in  London.

"On  the  morning  of  the  10th,  at  9.3  a.m.,  we  were  all  at  breakfast,  the
officer  on  deck  called  down  the  skylight  and  said  that  a  squall  was  coming.  I
immediately  repaired  on  deck  to  take  in  the  small  sails.  On  looking  astern
the  ship  where  the  squall  was  coming  from,  we  saw  a  boat  with  a  large  flag
flying  on  an  oar,  and  a  man  standing  up  in  the  bow  holding  it.  I  immediately
liove  the  ship  to  and  took  in  all  studding  and  small  sails.  My  men  that  were
aloft  furling  royals  said  that  they  could  see  a  number  of  men  and  that  they
thought  it  was  a  pirate.  One  of  the  men  stated  that  was  just  the  way  that
he  was  taken  the  year  previous  in  the  same  seas.  My  passengers  and  officers
then  requested  me  to  keep  the  ship  away,  which  I  did,  they  stating  that  if
they  should  turn  out  to  be  pirates,  I  should  not  recover  my  insurance  for  my
shii).  I  then  kept  her  away  under  her  reef'd  sails  and  Avent  down  to
breakfast.  After  my  entering  my  cabin,  I  felt  very  uneasy  and  returned  to
the  state  room.  Immediately  my  dream  came  forcibly  in  my  mind.  I  then
put  two  pistols  and  my  cutlass  by  my  side  and  went  on  deck,  called  all  hands
on  deck,  and  again  hove  the  ship  to  and  desired  Mr.  Poingestre  to  take  the
wheel  and  steer  the  ship.  I  then  ordered  the  first  officer  to  lower  his  boat
down  and  go  and  see  what  the  boat  was.  I  then  ordered  the  guns  to  be
loaded,  made  sail,  and  made  a  tack  towards  the  boats.  On  my  coming  up
with  them,  found  that  my  mate  had  taken  the  captain  and  his  men  out  of  the
boat  and  taken  them  into  his.  Captain  Jellard's  boat  having  a  great  quantity
of  water  in,  very  nearly  up  to  the  thwarts,  also  a  large  shark,  and  had  her
in  tow.

"After  getting  Captain  Jellard  on  board,  and  liis  men,  who  were  in  a
very  weak  state,  not  able  to  speak  with  the  exception  of  the  black  man  ;  from
him  I  got  all  the  particulars,  as  follows  :  it  appeared  that  they  belonged  to
the  schoonev  James  Hambleton,  of  Grenada,  from  America,  bound  to  Grenada,
and  being  short  of  water,  having  a  very  long  passage  through  light  winds,
were  going  on  shore  for  water  on  the  Island  of  Saints,  it  then  being  calm.


572


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


After  leaving  their  ship  a  light  hreeze  sprang  up  and  the  schooner  kept  her
ground,  but  the  boat  pulling  in  a  different  direction  and  the  current  running
so  strong  that  the  boat's  crew  became  quite  exhausted.  That  at  daylight
they  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  the  schooner  inshore  of  them  as  far  as
they  could  see  from  the  boat,  the  boat  still  drifting  further  from  land  and
ship  until  they  lost  sight  of  her  altogether.  The  following  day  they  had  a
very  dreadful  time  of  it  ;  it  blew  a  heavy  gale,  with  thunder  and  lightning  ;
they  had  to  make  fast  the  oars,  mast  and  sail  to  the  painter  of  the  boat,  and
let  the  boat  drift  to  break  off  the  sea  that  was  running.  During  all  this  time
they  had  no  water  or  anything  to  eat.  The  following  day  was  nearly  calm,
very  light  winds  and  a  hot  scorching  sun  ;  being  in  the  latitude  of  16°  21',
longitude  63°  14',  their  suflferings  were  very  great  all  day.  Both  captain  and
men  tore  their  clothes  off  their  backs  and  poured  water  on  themselves  to
keep  them  cool.  On  the  morning  that  I  discovered  them  the  black  man
appealed  to  his  God,  saying,  '  If  God  hear  black  man  as  well  as  white  man,
pray  send  me  fish  or  shark  for  massa  to  eat,  no  let  him  die. '  The  all-merciful
Father  heard  his  prayers  and  sent  him  a  large  shark,  which  was  lying  in  the
boat  on  her  being  brought  alongside,  of  which  they  had  drunk  the  blood  and
eaten  part  of  the  flesh.  I  immediately  knocked  in  the  head  of  a  water
puncheon  and  made  them  a  warm  bath  and  put  them  severally  into  it  for  tlie
purpose  of  cooling  them  and  getting  some  parts  of  their  shirts  off  their  skin
which  were  sticking  to  their  backs,  theu"  skin  being  all  blistered  with  the  sun
and  salt  water.  I  gave  them  a  little  tea  to  moisten  their  mouths  every  few
minutes,  until  some  of  them  prayed  for  food  and  asked  for  some  biscuit,  and
gave  them  rice  water  and  barley  water  occasionally.  After  a  good  sleep^
Captain  Jellard  sent  for  me  below  and  wished  to  speak  to  me.  On  searching
his  pockets  to  see  if  the  lalack  man  had  told  the  truth  about  his  ship,  I  found
his  register  and  manifest  of  his  cargo.  This  satisfied  me  all  was  correct,  and
that  they  were  not  pirates.  During  our  conversation  I  found  that  I  had
been  in  company  with  Captain  Jellard  in  St.  John's,  Newfoundland,  in  the
year  1814,  he  then  commanding  a  fine  schooner  called  the  Catch  Me  UHio  Can,
belonging  to  Spuryar  and  Co.,  of  Cool.

' '  In  a  few  days  they  all  came  round.  I  gave  them  up  to  the  British
Consul  at  Carthagena  and  requested  him  to  lose  no  time  to  send  them  on,  as
we  feared  that  something  would  be  brought  against  the  mate  of  the  schooner,
Captain  Jellard  having  all  his  papers  with  him.  On  my  arrival  in  England,
I  found  that  Captain  Jellard  only  arrived  there  three  days  previous  to  the
execution  of  his  mate  and  remaining  three  men,  they  having  been  tried  for
murdering  their  captain  and  the  other  three  men.  Had  not  the  Consul  sent
them  over  in  the  packet  to  Jamaica  and  requested  the  admiral  to  send  them
up  to  Grenada  with  all  dispatch,  these  four  poor  souls  would  have  lost  their
lives  innocently.  [Signed] "Daniel  Scott,

"  Commanding  the  Brig  Ocean  from  [illegible]  bound  to  Carthagena.

"I,  George  James  Bostock,  Chaplin  of  Freemantle,  W.  Australia,  dO'
hereby  certify  that  I  attended  Darnel  Scott  in  his  last  illness,  February,  1865,
wherein  he  repeated  the  substance  of  the  above  as  most  solemnly  true,  and
ascribed  the  whole  event  to  the  direct  guidance  of  an  over-ruling  Providence.

[Signed] ' '  George  J.  Bostock,

"9/5/1865."


The  Suhliviinal  Self.


573


We  have  endeavoured  to  trace  the  log-book  referred  to  m  Bisliop  Hale's
letter,  bvit  \vithout  success.  Inquiries  have  been  made  through  Lloyd's
Shipping  Agency  and  the  Board  of  Trade,  but  no  log  dated  as  far  back
as  1825  can  be  produced — it  was  not  till  1854  that  trading  vessels  were
compelled  to  render  official  log-books.

My  next  narrative  is  from  Dr.  Wiltse,  personally  known  to
Dr.  Hodgson  and  myself  as  a  careful  and  conscientious  witness.

P.  151.

A  case  of  probable  primary  independent  clairvoyance,  by  Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse,
Skiddy,  Kansas.

If  sucli  a  phase  of  clairvoyance  can  be  found  as,  independent  of
conscious  or  unconscious  suggestion,  attains  to  a  knowledge  of  the  unknown,
and  this  without  the  aid  of  a  second  person  as  the  operator,  who  induces  or
produces  the  hypnotic  condition,  I  term  this  primary  independent  clairvoy-
ance, but  if  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  the  unknown,  the  aid  of  a  second
person  is  required  as  hypnotiser,  then  it  would  be  secondary  independent
clairvoyance.

With  this  explanation  of  my  terms,  I  respectfully  submit  my  nomen-
clature to  the  judgment  of  your  learned  society,  and  proceed  to  recite  for
the  benefit  of  the  society  the  following  case  of  my  own  experience,  the  truth
of  the  main  facts  in  which  can,  I  think,  be  substantiated  by  the  gentleman  to
whom  the  scenes  were  described  in  detail  at  the  moment  of  their  appearance
and  who,  I  think,  is  still  living.  Much  circumstantial  evidence,  strongly
corroborative  in  its  nature,  may  also  be  obtained,  I  think,  by  addressing
any  of  the  parties  herein  named,  although  I  do  not  recollect  ever  talking
with  them  upon  the  subject,  except  the  last  named  :  —

Mr.  Maniphee  Haun,  Kismet,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.
Mr.  W.  T.  Howard,  Kismet.
Mr.  Jas.  Bales,  Wartburg.
Mr.  W.  Todd,  Wartburg.

The  last  named  is  the  gentleman  to  whom  I  described  the  scenes  as  they
were  presented  to  me  ;  while  the  first  named  is  the  gentleman  who  was
present  when  the  tragedy  happened,  and  would  of  course  be  likely  to
recollect  a  large  share  of  the  minutise  of  the  affair.  Tlie  testimony  therefore  of
the  two  gentlemen  is  indispensable  and  should  be  obtained  at  once,  but  I
prefer  that  the  society  shall  obtain  this  evidence  independently  of  me,  as
thus  avoiding  any  possible  appearance  of  tinkering  by  me,  although  I  shall
be  very  willing  to  render  any  assistance  in  the  matter  that  I  may  be  able.

A  Vision  by  Means  of  Pictures.

This  incident  occurred  in  Morgan  Co.,  Tennessee,  I  think  in  the  spring
of  1878.  Mrs.  Wiltse  and  myself  had  spent  the  day  with  her  mother  and
step-father,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Todd.  I  had  passed  most  of  the  day  with  Mr.
Todd  in  the  field  where  he  was  planting  corn.  We  retired  early  and  Mrs.
Wiltse  almost  immediately  fell  asleep.

Mr.  Todd  and  myself  being  wakeful,  lay  and  talked.  There  was  but
one  room,  in  which  there  was  an  open  fireplace  containing  fire  mostly  buried

2  s


574


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


up  with  ashes,  a  large  pine  knot  having  been  laid  on  top  of  these  embers,  and
so  nearly  buried  in  ashes  as  to  give  about  a  one  candle  power  of  light.

The  following  diagram  will  give  a  correct  idea  of  the  arrangement  of
the  room,  beds,  etc  : —


Door


Door


E.


Firei^lace


X.  Represents  the  heads  of  the  beds.

B.  The  bed  occupied  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Todd.

W.  The  bed  occupied  by  myself  and  Mrs.  Wiltse,  and

E.  The  open  fireplace. There  were  several  feet  of  space  between  the  two  beds.


While  we  were  talking,  I  saw  a  picture  slide  on  to  the  wall  at  my  feet,
at  such  a  height  as  to  rest  easily  in  the  line  of  my  vision.  I  called  to  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Todd  to  cease  talking  and  told  them  what  I  saw.  The  picture  was
some  feet  in  size  each  way  and  remained  before  me  long  enough  for  me  to
describe  [it]  in  detail  to  them.  It  was  a  landscape,  the  main  features  in  which
were  a  river  with  a  large  creek  emptying  into  it  very  nearly  at  right
angles.  When  I  had  given  a  full  description,  the  picture  disappeared  with
a  quick  movement  like  that  with  which  it  had  appeared,  but  in  tlie  opposite
direction  from  which  it  came.  Mr.  Todd  said  ' '  You  have  described
Emerald  River  and  Rock  Creek  where  it  empties  into  it," — which  I  thought
correct,  as  I  was  familiar  with  the  two  streams.

While  we  were  talking,  another  picture  slid  on  to  the  wall  in  the  same
manner  as  the  first  one.  It  was  the  same  picture  as  the  first  with  the
addition  of  several  open  fields  and  wooded  lands  along  the  banks.  In  one
of  the  fields  was  a  log  house  with  its  surroundings  wlaich  I  did  not  recognise.
The  picture  remained  stationary  until  I  had  described  it  thoroughly,  when
it  disappeared  similarly  to  the  first.

Both  Todd  and  his  wife  said  I  had  described  the  "  Cass  Davis  house  "
which  was  about  a  mile  distant,  across  the  river.  At  this  another  picture
slid  on  to  the  wall,  the  very  counterpart  of  the  second  one,  except  that  a  good
portion  of  the  landscape  was  left  out,  but  the  house  was  there,  the  door  of
which  was  closed,  and  as  I  announced  its  appearance,  I  heard  the  muffled
report  of  a  gun  on  the  inside  of  the  house,  and  immediately  afterwards,
the  door  flew  open  and  a  man  rushed  out  seemingly  in  a  great  fright.

At  this  point  Todd  said,  "See  here.  Doc,  are  you  seeing  these  things,  or
just  playing  off  a  drive  on  usi" I  assured  him  that  I  actually  saw,


The  Subliminal  Self.


575


or  seemed  to  see,  the  things  I  described,  although  they  did  not  seem
possessed  of  solidity,  but  were  more  as  if  one  should  breathe  over  a  looking-
glass,  then  stand  at  some  distance  from  it  and  observe  his  image  ;  it  would
look  shadowy  and  dim.

In  the  meantime  the  door  of  the  house  in  the  picture  had  been  left  open
so  that  I  could  see  into  the  house,  where  I  saw  a  man  staggering  toward
the  door  with  blood  running  from  his  mouth.  He  reached  the  door,  where
he  supported  himself  by  leaning  against  the  door-facing,  and  steadied  himself
off  the  door-step  on  to  the  ground.  In  so  doing,  he  left  the  print  of  his
hand  in  blood  upon  the  door-facing.

At  this  point  the  picture  again  disappeared  and  was  immediately  re-
placed by  another  much  the  same  as  the  other,  but  in  it  the  dead  body
of  the  man  was  lying  on  the  ground  some  few  feet  from  the  door,  while
from  the  field  advanced  several  people,  with  hoes  and  mattocks  in  their  hands,
who  gathered  round  the  body  in  apparent  excitement  and  consternation,
when  the  picture  vanished  and  I  saw  nothing  more.

I  asked  Todd  if  he  was  sure  of  the  house  ;  he  assured  me  that  it  bore
the  exact  description  I  had  given.  I  asked  if  there  was  any  rumour,  or  ever
had  been  to  his  knowledge,  of  a  tragedy  having  occurred  there.  "  Not  that
he  had  ever  heard  of."  I  believe  I  said  that  "something  of  the  kind  has
occurred  there  or  else  will.  If  it  is  jjast  we  may  never  know  it ;  if  it  is  to
come,  we  may  see."

When  the  corn  which  Todd  had  jDlanted  that  day  was  ready  for  hoeing,  I
was  with  him  again  in  the  field  a  portion  of  a  day,  and  together  we  left  the
field  and  started  to  go  to  Wartburg,  the  county  seat  about  two  miles  distant.
On  the  way  we  met  Cass  Davis,  a  quadroon,  who  asked  us  if  we  had  heard  of
Henderson  Whittaker  killing  himself.  We  had  not,  and  he  told  us  tliat
during  the  (forenoon  I  think)  Whittaker  went  into  the  house,  where  Mr.
Haun  was  sitting  alone  and  asked  Haun  to  loan  him  his  rifle  to  go  hunting.
Haun  pointed  to  the  corner  where  the  rifle  stood,  saying,  "I  don't  know
whether  it  is  loaded  or  not. "  Whittaker  put  his  mouth  over  the  muzzle  to  blow
into  the  gun,  pushing  back  tlie  hammer  with  his  foot.  The  foot  slijjped  ofFand
the  gun  was  discharged  into  his  mouth.  Haun  ran  out  into  the  field  for  help.
The  hands  came  up  and  I  think  found  the  young  man  dead  in  the  yard.  I
have  also  been  told  that  the  hand  print  of  blood  was  left  upon  the  door-
facing,  but  these  lesser  points  can  be  learned  best  from  jaarties  who  lived  in
the  neighbourhood  at  the  time.  The  main  points  are  absolutely  certain.  The
tragedy  occurred  in  the  house  I  had  described,  and  was  of  substantially
the  nature  I  had  described  from  tlie  picture-writing  on  the  wall.

[Answers  to  Questions  sent  to  Mr.  William  Todd,  Januaiy  loth,  1891.]
{Re  Dr.  Wiltse's  Vision.)

Q.  1.  Did  Dr.  Wiltse  describe  to  you  picture  appearances  which  he
said  he  was  seeing  at  the  time  ?
A.  1.  "Yes."

Q.  2.  Did  he  describe  particulars  of  what  he  was  seeing,  such  as  the  print
of  a  bloody  hand  upon  the  door-facing  of  the  Cass  Davis  house  ;  the  sound
of  a  gun  inside  ;  one  man  running  out  in  apparent  fright  and  the  other
staggering  out  of  the  doorway  and  dying  upon  the  ground  near  the  door  ?


576


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


A.  2.  "  He  did  describe  the  place  and  asked  me  if  I  knew  of  such  a
place  ;  I  told  him  that  it  was  the  Cass  Davis  house."

Q.  3.  Do  you  recollect  if  he  told  you  he  believed  something  of  such
nature  had  happened  in  the  Cass  Davis  house,  or  else  would  in  the  future  1

A.  3.  "  He  told  me  that  something  had  happened  at  that  place,  or
would  in  the  future."

Q.  4.  Did  the  future  events  in  that  house,  in  the  matter  of  the  death  of
H.  "Whittaker,  lead  you  to  conclude  that  Dr.  Wiltse  really  saw  that  night
what  he  told  you  he  was  seeing  1

A.  4.  "It  did  as  to  H.  Whittaker,  and  I  do  believe  he  saw  what  he
said  he  saw."  y^^u.  Todd,  January  26th,  1891.

Mr.  M.  Haun  writes  as  follows  to  Dr.  Hodgson  : —

Kismet,  Tenn.,  March  2nd,  1891.

Your  request  received,  and  will  say  in  reply,  1st,  that  I  remember  Dr.
A.  S.  Wiltse  having  told  me  of  his  "prophetic  vision,"  but  whether  it  was
before  or  after  the  fultilment  I  can't  say.  However,  the  facts  were  about  as
follows  :  The  young  man  shot  himself  in  the  mouth  while  attempting  to  blow
in  the  gun  ;  ball  passed  out  through  the  back  of  his  neck  just  in  the  edge
of  his  hair,  rupturing  some  large  vein  or  artery.  He  fell  instantly  and  was
unable  to  utter  a  word  intelligibly.  He  raised  himself  up  on  his  hands  with
his  head  drooping  over,  and  from  his  mouth  the  blood  ran  profusely,  making
a  large  pool  of  blood  upon  the  floor.  I  ran  about  forty  rods  from  the  house
to  call  the  nearest  help,  and  on  returning  found  the  young  man  lying  full
length,  iiat  on  his  face,  dead,  his  hat  lying  on  the  doorstej)  ;  the  print  of  his
hand  made  on  door-casing  ;  it  seemed  that  he  had  crawled  out  upon  his
hands  and  knees.

Now  the  hand-print  on  the  door  ;  the  blood-stained  hat  on  the  doorsteps  ;
the  kind  of  house  and  its  location  ;  the  season  of  the  year  when  the  accident
occurred,  correspond  with  the  Dr.'s  vision,  if  I  remember  correctly.

The  tragedy  occurred,  I  think,  in  the  month  of  July,  not  far  from  the
18th. As  to  when  the  Dr.  had  this  vision  or  dream  I  don't  remember.

No.  I  don't  remember  thinking  of  his  vision  at  the  time,  for,  as  before
stated,  I  don't  remember  having  heard  it  before,  although  I  might  have
heard  it.  Maniphee  Haun.

Mr.  J.  Bales  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :  —

Wartburg,  Tenn.,  March  Uth,  1891.

In  reply  to  yours  of  2/27,  will  say  that  I  remember  hearing  Dr.  Wiltse
talk  of  the  occurrence  you  mentioned  in  regard  to  the  tragedy  which
happened  at  the  Cass  Davis  Place.  He  told  me  of  it  before  it  happened,  and
when  it  did  occur  he  came  and  asked  me  if  I  remembered  what  he  had  told  me
about  it  before.  As  to  the  dates,  I  can't  remember  exactly,  but  it  must  have
been  twelve  or  fourteen  years  ago.  There  was  no  newspaper  published  here
at  that  time,  and  there  was  never  any  publication  of  it,  so  far  as  I  am  aware.

I  do  not  remember  the  appearance  of  a  bloody  hand  on  the  door  or
anywhere  else,  but  there  was  blood  on  the  house  in  different  places.

Would  have  answered  you  sooner,  but  I  wanted  to  remember  correctly
before  writing. Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse  considered  a  truthful  and  honest  man  here.

James  Bales.


The  Subliminal  Self.


577


Mr.  Howard  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  : —

Kismet,  Tenn.,  March  23)<i,  189[1].

Tour  enquiry  of  recent  date  just  received,  and  will  say  in  reply  that  Dr.
Wiltse  told  his  vision  to  Mr.  William  Todd  and  his  wife,  my  stepfather  and
my  mother,  a  short  time  before  the  occurrence.  I  was  informed  by  Mr.  Todd
that  the  details  ia  the  case  were  exactly  similar  to  the  Dr.'s  vision.  My
mother  stated  the  same  fact  in  my  hearing,  but  she  is  now  dead.  I  under-
stand from  different  parties  that  the  blood  print,  &c.,  were  exactly  as  seen  in
the  vision.  Dr.  Wiltse  was  stopping  at  our  house  (Mr.  Todd's)  at  the  time,
and,  after  relating  his  vision,  my  stepfather  recognised  the  place  described
as  the  "Cass  Davis  House,"  where  the  tragedy  afterwards  occurred.  I
would  refer  you  to  Mr.  William  Todd  for  further  particulars,  as  he  probably
remembers  the  date  ;  I  do  not.  -y^ iji  jJqward

I  shall  conclude  this  group  with  a  case  where  there  is  again  a
suggestion  of  personal  guardianship  and  care.  But  the  facts  prefigured
do  not  fall  within  the  life-history  of  the  decedent ;  so  that  if  we
suppose  that  it  was  his  spirit  which  foresaw  and  informed  his  niece  of
the  future,  we  must  suppose  also  that  he  foresaw  what  would  happen
to  his  body  after  his  death.  The  percipient,  whom  I  have  called  Lady
Q.,  has  given  me  orally  a  slightly  fuller  account.  An  unauthorised
version  of  the  main  points  here  to  be  detailed  was  compiled  shortly
after  the  event.

P.  189.

I  have  been  asked  to  give  an  account  of  an  experience  which  was  certainly
the  most  remarkable  in  my  life  : — a  dream  whicli  came  to  me  three  times
at  long  intervals,  and  which  was  at  last  fulfilled.

My  father  died  when  I  was  a  child  ;  my  mother  married  again,  and  I  went
to  live  with  an  uncle,  who  became  like  a  father  to  me.  In  the  spring  of  1882
I  dreamt  that  my  sister  and  I  were  sitting  in  my  uncle's  drawing-room.  In
my  dream  it  was  a  brilliant  spring  day,  and  from  the  window  we  saw  quan-
tities of  flowers  in  the  garden,  many  more  than  were  in  fact  to  be  seen  from
that  window.  But  over  the  garden  there  lay  a  thin  covering  of  snow.  I  knew
in  my  dream  that  my  uncle  had  been  found  dead  by  the  side  of  a  certain
bridle-path  about  three  miles  from  the  house—  a  field-road  where  I  had  often
ridden  with  him,  and  along  which  he  often  rode  when  going  to  fish  in  a
neighbouring  lake.  I  knew  that  his  horse  was  standing  by  him,  and  that  he
was  wearing  a  dark  homespun  suit  of  cloth  made  from  the  wool  of  a  herd
of  black  sheep  which  he  kept.  I  knew  that  his  body  was  being  brought
home  in  a  waggon  with  two  horses,  with  hay  in  the  bottom,  and  that  we
were  waiting  for  his  body  to  arrive.  Then  in  my  dream  the  waggon  came  to
the  door  ;  and  two  men  well  known  to  me — one  a  gardener,  the  other  the
kennel  huntsman — helped  to  carry  the  body  up  the  stairs,  which  were  rather
narrow.  My  uncle  was  a  very  tall  and  heavy  man,  and  in  my  dream  I  saw  the
men  carrying  him  with  difficulty,  and  his  left  hand  hanging  down  and  striking
against  the  banisters  as  the  men  mounted  the  stairs.  This  detail  gave  me  in
my  dream  an  unreasonable  horror.  I  could  not  help  painfully  thinking.  Oh,
why  did  they  not  prevent  his  hand  from  being  bruised  in  this  way  ?


578


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


In  the  sadness  and  horror  of  this  sight  I  awoke,  and  I  slept  no  more  that
night.  I  had  determined  not  to  tell  my  uncle  of  the  dream  ;  but  in  the
morning  I  looked  so  changed  and  ill  tliat  I  could  not  escape  his  affectionate
questioning  ;  and  at  last  1  told  him  of  my  vision  of  him  lying  dead  in  that
field-road.  I  had  no  anxiety  about  his  health.  He  was  a  robust  man  of
sixty-six,  accustomed  to  hunt  his  own  jjack  of  hounds  and  to  take  much
exercise.  He  listened  to  me  very  kindly,  and  although  he  was  not  himself
at  all  alarmed  by  my  dream,  he  offered  me  to  do  anything  I  liked  which
might  calm  my  mind.  I  begged  him  to  promise  me  never  to  go  alone  by
that  particular  road.  He  promised  me  that  he  would  always  make  an  excuse
to  have  a  groom  or  some  one  with  him  ;  I  remember  my  comjjunction  at  the
thought  of  giving  him  this  trouble — and  yet  I  could  not  help  asking  for
his  promise.

The  impression  of  the  dream  grew  gradually  fainter,  but  it  did  not  leave
me  ;  and  I  remember  that  when  a  little  boy  came  to  stay  with  us  some  time
after,  and  boy-like  drew  his  stick  along  the  banisters  as  he  went  upstairs,
the  sound  brought  back  the  horror  of  my  dream.  Two  years  passed  by,
and  the  thought  of  the  dream  was  becoming  less  frequent,  when  I  dreamt  it
again  with  all  its  details  the  same  as  before,  and  again  with  the  same  pro-
foundly disturbing  effect.  I  told  my  uncle,  and  said  to  him  that  I  felt  sure
tliat  he  had  been  neglecting  his  promise,  and  riding  by  that  field-road  alone.
He  admitted  that  he  had  occasionally  done  so,  "although,"  he  said,  "I
think  I  have  been  very  good  on  the  whole."  He  renewed  the  promise  ;  and
again  the  impression  grew  weaker  as  four  years  passed  by,  during  which  I
married  and  left  his  home.  In  the  May  of  1888  I  was  iir  London,  expect'
ing  my  baby.  On  the  night  before  I  was  taken  ill,  I  dreamt  the  same  dream
again,  but  with  this  variation.  Instead  of  dreaming  that  I  was  at  my  uncle's
home  with  my  sister,  I  knew  in  my  dream  that  I  was  lying  in  bed  in  our
London  house.  But  from  that  bedroom,  just  as  from  the  drawing-room  in
the  former  dreams,  I  seemed  to  see  my  uncle  lying  dead  in  the  same  well-
known  place.  And  I  seemed  also  to  perceive  the  same  scene  of  the  bringing
home  of  the  body.  Then  came  a  new  point.  As  I  lay  in  bed,  a  gentleman
dressed  in  black,  but  whose  face  I  could  not  see,  seemed  to  stand  by  me  and
tell  me  that  my  uncle  was  dead.  I  woke  in  great  distress.  But  as  I  was  ill  from
then  for  two  days,  as  soon  as  the  child  was  born  I  ceased  to  dwell  on  the
dream — only  I  felt  an  overpowering  desire  to  write  at  once  to  my  uncle  my-
self and  to  tell  him  tliat  I  was  getting  better.  I  was  not  allowed  to  do  this  ;
but  afterwards  I  managed  to  write  a  few  lines  in  pencil  unknown  to  any
one  but  the  nurse. This  note  reached  my  uncle  two  days  before  his  death.

As  I  grew  better,  I  began  to  wonder  greatly  at  not  hearing  from  my  uncle,
who  generally  wrote  to  me  every  day.  Then  my  dream  came  back  to  me,
and  I  was  certain  that  he  was  ill  or  dead — but  my  husband,  nurse,  and  maid
(all  I  saw)  seemed  cheerful  as  usual.  Then  one  morning  my  husband  said
my  step-father  wished  to  see  me,  and  I  at  once  guessed  his  errand.  He
entered  the  room  dressed  in  black  and  stood  by  my  bedside.  At  once  I
recognised  that  this  was  the  figure  which  I  had  seen  in  my  dream.  I  said,
"  The  Colonel  is  dead — I  know  all  about  it — I  have  dreamt  it  often."  And
as  he  was  unable  to  speak  from  emotion,  I  told  him  all  aliout  it,  place,  time
of  day  (morning),  and  the  clothes  my  uncle  wore.


The  Subliminal  Self.


579


Then  I  thought  of  that  scene  on  the  staircase,  which  had  always  remained
in  my  mind.  I  asked  if  there  were  any  bruises  on  the  hands.  "  No  bruises,"
said  my  step-father,  "  either  on  hands  or  face."  He  thouglit  that  I  fancied
that  my  uncle  had  fallen  from  his  horse.  Soon  afterwards  my  sister — the
sister  who  had  been  in  my  dream — came  to  see  me,  and  brought  me  a  ring
which  my  uncle  had  always  worn  on  his  left  hand.  T  was  very  thankful  for
this  memento  of  him  ;  and  I  told  my  sister  how  I  had  feared  that  the  ring
would  have  been  forgotten.  "I  only  came  just  in  time,"  she  said  ;  "they
were  just  going  to  close  the  coiiin."  "  Was  there  any  bruise  on  the  left
hand  ?  "  I  asked.  At  first  she  said  that  there  was  not  ;  but  then  she  said  she
thought  there  was  a  bluish  discoloration  across  the  back  of  the  first  joints  of
the  fingers.  She  did  not  know  how  it  had  been  caused.  When  I  was  well
enough  to  travel,  I  went  to  my  old  home  ;  there  I  saw  my  old  nurse,  who  had
been  in  the  house  when  my  uncle  died.  Her  account,  added  to  my  step-
father's, enabled  me  to  realise  the  events  of  that  day.  My  uncle  had  received
my  pencil  note  on  the  Sunday  morning,  and  had  been  gTeatly  pleased,
feeling  that  the  wished-for  heir  was  born,  and  that  I,  whom  he  loved  as  a
daughter,  was  through  my  trouble.  He  had  a  few  friends  to  lunch  with  him,
including  my  step-father,  and  said  that  he  had  seen  all  that  he  wished  to  see
in  life,  and  could  now  die  happy  at  any  moment.  His  guests  left  him  in  [the]
greatest  spirits,  and  two  days  afterwards  he  died,  and  his  body  had  been
brought  back  as  I  describe,  and  he  had  been  found  half  sitting  and  half
lying  in  that  very  field-road,  where  I  had  three  times  seen  him.  He  was
dressed  in  the  same  homespun  suit  in  wliich  I  had  seen  him  in  my  dream.
The  cause  of  his  death  had  been  heart-disease,  of  whose  existence  neither  I
nor,  I  belie've,  any  of  those  near  or  dear  to  him  had  been  aware.  He  had
evidently  felt  faint,  and  slipped  from  his  horse.  The  same  two  men  whom  I
had  seen  in  my  dream  as  helping  to  carry  the  body  had  in  fact  done  so,  and
my  nurse  admitted  that  the  left  hand  knocked  against  the  banisters.  She
seemed  afraid  lest  I  should  blame  the  men  who  carried  the  body,  and  did
not  like  to  speak  of  the  incident.  I  do  not  think  that  she  had  seen  the
incident  herself  ;  and  I  did  not  like  to  speak  to  the  men  about  it.  It  was
enough  for  me  that  it  was  on  the  back  of  the  left  hand,  as  I  had  see  it  in  my
dream  and  as  from  the  arrangement  of  the  staircase  it  must  have  been,  had  it
been  caused  in  the  way  that  I  saw.  I  will  add  one  fact  which,  although  it
was  purely  a  matter  of  my  own  feeling,  made  perhaps  as  much  im.pression
upon  me  as  anything  in  this  history.  I  do  not  think  that  any  daughter
could  love  a  father  better  than  I  loved  my  uncle  ;  and,  as  will  have  been
seen,  the  prospect  of  his  death  was  always  a  deeply-lying  fear.  But  as  soon
as  I  knew  that  all  had  happened  as  my  dream  foretold,  I  somehow  felt  that
all  was  ■well ;  and  the  death  left  me  with  a  sensation  of  complete  acquiescence
and  peace.  It  may  have  been  noticed  that  there  were  two  unreal  or  fan-
tastic points  in  my  original  dream  : — viz.,  the  multitude  of  flowers  in  the
garden,  and  the  thin  covering  of  snoiv.  I  think  that  I  can  throw  some
light  on  these  points  by  narrating  the  only  two  other  impressive  dreams
which  I  have  ever  had.  The  first  of  these  two  di-eams  I  mentioned  to
others,  and  acted  upon  it.  The  second  I  neither  mentioned  nor  acted  upon  ;
so  that  it  has  no  value  as  evidence,  and  is  really  given  as  helping  to  explain
the  symbolism  of  snow.


580


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I  had  heard  from  several  relations  (although  I  cannot  quote  definite
cases),  that  they  had  found  that  dreams  of  flowers  and  of  snow  were  followed
by  deaths  in  our  family.  This  may  have  suggested  that  form  of  symbolism
to  my  mind  ; — or  the  same  cause,  whatever  it  was,  which  acted  with  them
may  have  acted  with  me.  In  any  case,  what  happened  was  as  follows.  In
1887  I  heard  from  my  step-father  that  my  mother,  who  had  long  been  an
invalid,  was  seriously  worse  ;  and  he  asked  me  when  T  could  go  to  see  her.
My  mind  was  therefore  occuj^ied  with  her  illness  ;  but  the  tone  of  his  letter
was  not  immediately  alarming  ; — so  that  we  saw  no  reason  for  my  not  attend-
ing some  races  in  the  neighbourhood,  for  which  we  had  friends  staying.  But  one
night  I  dreamt  a  dream — which,  though  very  impressive,  was  somewhat  con-
fused— about  my  mother  seated  in  a  carriage  full  of  floivers.  I  remembered
the  symbolism  ;  and  I  felt  assured  that  my  mother  was  dead  or  dying.  I
mentioned  the  dream  to  my  husband  and  prepared  for  an  immediate  summons,
which  came  directly  afterwards.  Having  all  preparations  already  made,  I
left  immediately  and  arrived  in  time  to  see  my  mother  die.  This  dream  and
that  of  my  uncle  are  the  only  dreams  on  which  1  ever  acted  in  any  way.  The
second  dream  to  which  I  have  alluded  was  as  follows  : — In  18 —  I  saw  a
gentleman  whom  I  knew  lying  dead  in  a  red  coat  on  an  open  field  with  snow
on  the  ground.  Beside  liim  knelt  his  mother, — who  was  alive  and  well  at  the
time  of  the  dream.  I  tried  to  ajJproach  and  speak  to  her  ;  but  she  said,
"  Don't  touch  me,  I  have  come  for  him."  I  understood  that  she  had  died
before  him.  Two  years  later  this  lady  did  in  fact  die,  and  in  two  years  more
her  son  was  killed,  just  as  I  saw  him  lying,  in  a  scarlet  coat.  There  was,  of
course,  no  snow  on  the  ground,  as  it  was  in  late  spring  ;  so  I  fancy  that  the
snow  may  have  been  symbolical  both  here  and  in  my  dream  about  my  uncle.
I  may  add  that  I  am  not  of  an  imaginative  temjjerament ;  and  tliat  these  are
the  only  incidents  in  my  life  which  seem  to  lie  outside  ordinary  explanations.
My  husband  and  step-father  add  their  confirmation  of  the  incidents  which
concern  them.

The  above  account  is  true  and  accurate  in  every  particular.

December  22nd,  1892.  [Signatures  of  Lord  and  Lady  Q.]

[Lord  Q.'s  signature  attests  (besides  his  general  concurrence  with  the
account)  his  presence  at  the  interview  with  Lady  Q.'s  step-father,  as
described.  ]

The  account  is  correct  so  far  as  what  hapj^ened  when  I  went  to  London

to  inform  Lady  Q  of  her  uncle's  death,  which  is  all  that  is  within  my

own  personal  knowledge.

January  Wth,  1893.  [Signature  of  Lady  Q.'s  step-father.]

We  have  few  well-attested  cases  where  any  event  subsequent  to
his  own  death  has  been  intimated  to  any  percipient.  Here  is  one  with
fair  attestation.

P.  153.

Louise  Chandler  MovUon  in  the  Arena,  1892.

In  the  Cosmo2Xjlitan  Magazine  for  November,  an  article  of  my  own  was
published,  entitled  "Five  Friends — The  Story  of  an  Extinct  Household."


The  Subliminal  Self.


581


It  was  a  sketch  of  the  last  sad  years  of  Dr.  Westland  Marston  and  his  chil-
dren ;  and  it  contained  the  account  of  a  very  singular  spiritualistic  prophecy
as  to  the  succession  of  deaths  by  which  this  household  became  extinct — a
prophecy  often  repeated  to  me  while  all  the  persons  mentioned  in  it  were
still  alive  and  well.  This  remarkable  instance  of  what  seems  like  spirit
foreknowledge  made  a  wide  impression,  if  I  am  to  judge  by  the  numerous
letters  I  received  on  the  subject  from  all  parts  of  the  United  States  and  from
England.  Among  these  letters  was  one  in  itself  so  astonishing  that  I  wrote
to  its  author  for  permission  to  publish  it. Here  is  the  letter  : —

64,  John  Street,  Providence,  December  5th,  1891.
Mrs.  Louise  Chandler  MonMon.
Dear  Madam, — I  have  just  read  your  article  "Five  Friends,"  and  the
singular  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  regarding  the  death  of  the  Marstons  re-
calls a  similar  prophecy  in  my  own  experience,  and  its  fulfilment,  which  may
interest  you.

I  was  the  medical  adviser  of  the  family  of  Hiram  Maxfield,  a  hotel  keeper
and  caterer,  widely  known  throughout  New  England.  They  were  a  very
healthy  family,  seldom  ill,  any  of  them,  except  with  some  minor  ailment.
One  day  I  was  called  to  see  Mrs.  Maxfield  at  their  home,  a  few  miles  down
the  bay.  While  waiting  for  the  return  boat,  the  eldest  daughter,  a  young
lady  of  about  20,  came  out  upon  the  porch,  where  I  was  standing,  and  said
that  she  wanted  to  tell  me  something,  but  it  appeared  so  foolish  to  her  that
she  wanted  me  to  say  nothing  about  it  to  the  family.  She  said  that  she  had
heard  a  voice  say,  distinctly  ;  "You  will  die  first,  then  Harry,  then  father."
She  was  alone  at  the  time,  and  thought  that  some  one  must  have  spoken  to
her  from  an  adjoining  room.  She  went  to  the  door,  looked  in,  saw  no  one,
and  soon  heard  the  words  repeated  with  the  addition,  "  And  Dr.  Anthony
will  be  present  in  each  case."

All  three  of  the  persons  mentioned  in  this  prophecy  were  then  appar-
ently in  perfect  health.  About  two  years  after — the  young  lady  having
married  in  the  meantime — I  was  called  in  to  see  her.  She  had  been  stricken
with  apoplexy,  and  died  in  a  few  minutes  after  my  arrival.  The  son,  Harry,
about  this  time  developed  symptoms  of  consumption  ;  and  with  him  the  end
came  in  about  six  months.  He  had  been  away  in  another  climate,  under
the  care  of  a  physician,  but  as  he  was  failing  rapidly,  was  brought  home.  I
was  sent  for  and  arrived  just  before  he  breathed  his  last.

About  a  year  after  this,  the  father  of  the  family  contracted  a  cold  on  a
fishing  trip  to  New  Hampshire,  which  resulted  in  his  death  soon  after  his
return.  I  was  sent  for,  as  usual,  and  only  failed  to  be  present  at  the  moment
of  his  death  because  I  stepped  out  for  an  instant  to  send  a  telephone  mes-
sage, and  he  had  breathed  his  last  just  before  my  return.  Thus  was  the  pro-
phecy fulfilled.  I  must  add  that  neither  the  family  nor  myself  had  any
belief  in  spiritualism.— Respectfully  yours, ^y.  E.  Anthony,  M.D.

In  the  case  of  the  Marstons  the  prophecy,  purporting  to  come  from  the
spirit  of  Mrs.  Marston,  and  to  be  addressed  to  the  eldest  daughter  of  the
household,  was  :  "  You  will  die  first,  then  Nelly,  then  Philip,  and  last  of  all
your  father  ;  "  and  it  was  literally  fulfilled,  as  was  the  one  related  by  Dr.
Anthony  concerning  the  Maxfields.


582


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Asked  as  regards  the  date  of  this  incident,  Dr.  Anthony  writes  : — •

64,  John  Street,  Providence,  May  6th,  1892.

Richard  Hodgson,  Esq., — Deak  Sir, — I  have  found  the  account  books
of  which  I  wrote,  and  the  only  visit  which  I  find  was  made  to  Mrs.  M.
previous  to  the  daughter's  death,  was  April  22nd,  1877.  So  I  can  fix  upon
that  date  definitely,  as  the  date  of  the  prophecy.  Her  daughter  died
November  9th,  1879.  Harry  died  June  29th,  1881,  and  Mr.  Maxfield  died
July  2nd,  1884.  After  the  death  of  the  daughter,  either  the  same  day,  or
soon  after,  I  told  the  prophecy  to  the  lady  who  is  now  my  wife.

W.  E.  Anthony,  M.D.

May  6th,  1893.

Richard  Hodgson, — Dear  Sir, — I  have  a  distinct  recollection  that  the
Doctor  told  me  of  the  singular  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  the  death  of  the
lady  mentioned,  soon  after  it  occurred.  I  think  it  was  on  the  evening  of  the
same  day,  that  she  died.  If  the  date  of  the  death  was  Sunday,  then  I  am
quite  certain  as  to  time,  as  I  seldom  saw  him  on  other  evenings.

Marie  L.  Anthony.

[The  date  of  the  death,  November  9th,  1879,  was  in  fact  a  Sunday.]

In  the  next  case  also  the  speaker  points  to  events  in  which  he  will
no  longer  share.

P.  216. Soldier's  jjrophecy.

[This  case  was  received  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Ropes,  of  Boston,
well  known  as  an  authority  on  the  American  Civil  War.  ]

John  R.  Davis.

Cincinnati,  Ohio,  August  26th,  1893.

My  Dear  Mr.  Ropes, — Enclosed  the  story  of  the  soldier's  prophecy.  I
sent  copy  to  Captain  Ball,  to  know  if  it  corresponds  with  his  recollection.
As  I  remember  Davis,  he  was  barely  able  to  read  and  write.  From  the
regimental  descriptive  book  which  I  have,  I  take  the  following  : —

"  John  R.  Davis  enlisted  October  9th,  '61.  Age,  44  ;  occupation,  labourer;
born  in  South  Wales.  Height,  five  feet,  seven.  Blue  eyes,  iron  gray  hair."

The  story  may  be  of  no  value,  but  it  is  the  only  really  unaccountable  thing
of  which  I  have  personal  knowledge. — Yours  very  truly, q  p^-wEs.

In  August,  1863,  I  was  major  of  the  53rd  Ohio  Regiment,  and  in  the
absence  of  the  other  field  oflicers,  was  in  command.  The  regiment  was  then
in  the  Third  Brigade,  Fourth  Division,  15th  Army  Corps.  It  was  encamped
at  Messenger's  Fort  on  Black  river,  about  sixteen  miles  east  of  Vicksburg,
Miss.  One  morning  I  went  to  see  the  Division  Commander,  General  Hugh
Ewing,  on  some  business.  As  I  started  away,  he  told  me  that  he  had  just
received  notice  from  General  Sherman,  then  Corps  Commander,  to  take  the
division  to  Natchez.  I  asked  if  there  was  reason  why  I  should  not  speak  of
it.  He  said  there  was  not,  and  that  the  order  would  probably  reach  me  that
evening.

As  I  rode  into  our  camp,  I  noticed  in  the  police  detail  an  old  man  named
J  ohn  R.  Davis,  a  private  soldier  in  company  E. He  appeared  to  be  unwell,


The  Suhliminal  Self.


683


and  I  told  the  sergeant  to  relieve  him  from  duty.  Thinking  to  please  him
with  advance  news,  I  asked  Davis  to  sit  down  in  front  of  my  tent,  and  said  to
him,  "  Well,  Davis,  we  are  going  to  Natchez."  "  Who  is  going  to  Natchez  ?  "
he  replied.  "  The  regiment  is  going, — the  whole  division  is  going,"  said  I.
"  No,"  answered  Davis,  "The  division  is  not  going  to  Natchez;  the  regi-
ment is  not  going."  "  How  do  you  know  so  much  ?  When  did  you  take  com-
mand of  the  army  1"  I  said,  perhaps  a  little  impatiently.  I  do  not  wish  to  be
disrespectful,"  he  replied,  "  but  we  are  not  going  to  Natchez.  I  can  see  the
troops  marching  off  the  transports  at  Memphis,  and  I  cannot  see  any  more."
Then,  after  a  pause,  he  added,  ' '  These  things  come  to  me  in  dreams,  and
they  always  come  true."  "  How  do  you  know  they  are  our  troops  ? "  "I  can
see  you  on  the  deck  pointing."  "Where  are  you?"  "lam  not  there.'
"Are  you  going  to  get  a  furlough  ?  " "  No,  I  am  going  to  die."

No  amount  of  questioning  could  get  anything  more  from  him.  In  the
afternoon  1  went  to  brigade  headquarters.  Lieut.  E.  H.  Ball,  then  A. A.  A. G.,
was  an  officer  in  the  company  Davis  belonged  to.  I  told  him  the  story,  and
asked  him  to  detail  Davis  for  some  light  duty  at  brigade  headquarters.
Lieut.  Ball  secured  the  detail  at  once,  and  Davis  went  there  the  following
day.  The  order  to  go  to  Natchez  was  countermanded  before  it  reached  the
regiments.  Davis  died  September  5th,  immediately  after  the  battle  of
Chickamauga.  The  Corps  15th  was  ordered  to  Chattanooga,  via  Vicksburgand
Memphis.  I  was  still  commanding  the  regiment,  and  was  the  last  of  the  corps
to  leave  Vicksburg,  but  by  good  fortune  was  the  first  of  the  division  to  reach
Memphis.  Landing  at  the  city  wharf,  I  started  to  go  off  the  boat  at  the  head
of  the  regiment.  The  captain  of  the  boat  asked  me  to  come  up  to  the  cabin
for  some  purpose.  As  I  came  to  the  head  of  the  stairway,  I  saw  the  Lieutenant
Colonel  of  the  regiment,  who  had  been  for  some  time  at  home,  on  the  wharf.
I  went  to  the  guards,  and  leaning  over  the  rail,  i3ointed  to  him  and  called  to
the  adjutant  to  report  the  regiment  to  him.  There  was  (and  it  at  once
occurred  to  me)  the  literal  fulfilment  of  Davis'  prophecy.  The  Division  did
not  go  to  Natchez,  Davis  was  dead,  the  troops  were  marching  off  the  trans-
ports at  Memphis,  I  was  on  deck  and  pointing.  E.  C.  Dawes.

Cincinnati,  Ohio,  September  25th,  1893.

Dear  Mr.  Ropes, — Yours,  with  copy  of  letter  from  the  Society  of
Psychical  Research,  at  hand.  Captain  Ball  was  in  my  office  to-day.  I
handed  him  the  letter.  He  remembers  Davis  as  a  man  of  little  education,
but  intelligent,  quick,  and  nervous  in  his  movements  ;  and  he  reminded  me
of  a  notable  event  in  his  career,  when  Davis  got  very  drunk  in  Memphis,
and  defied  the  guard  with  an  empty  pistol.  He  was  fond  of  liquor,  though
seldom  under  its  influence.

In  August,  1863,  the  impression  in  the  army  of  the  Tennessee  was  that
unless  the  rebels  took  the  offensive,  which  we  deemed  very  improbable,  we
should  remain  in  camp  until  September  or  October,  and  then  go  to  Selma  or
Mobile.  As  I  find  time,  I  will  look  through  my  letters  home  that  summer
(most  of  which  I  have),  and  see  what  I  then  sent,  which  will  give  a  clue  to
the  current  opinion.  I  do  not  think  I  wrote  home  about  Davis.  My  people
knew  only  three  or  four  persons  in  our  regiment.  I  went  to  it  a  stranger,
and  in  my  letters  I  seldom  speak  of  any  one. — Yours  truly,

E.  C.  Dawes.


584


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Cincinnati,  Ohio,  October  3th,  1893.
John  Ropes,  Esq., — Dear  Mb.  Ropes, —After  the  surrender  of  Vicks-
burg,  and  the  return  to  Black  river  of  the  forces  that  under  General  Sherman
had  driven  Johnston  east  of  Pearl  river,  an  unusually  large  number  of  fur-
loughs were  granted  to  officers  and  men  of  the  army  of  the  Tennessee.  This
was  accepted  as  an  indication  that  no  movement  would  be  made  by  the  army
during  the  month  of  August,  at  least.  The  current  opinion  was  that  in  Sep-
tember or  October,  General  Banks  would  be  sent  to  capture  Mobile,  and  that
the  army  of  the  Tennessee  would  co-operate  by  moving  directly  east  through
Meridian  to  Selma.  The  moral  of  the  army  was  never  better.  Officers  and  men
had  implicit  confidence  in  their  ability  to  defeat  any  Confederate  army  that
could  then  be  brought  to  take  the  field  against  them.  The  only  suggestion  of  a
movement  north,  I  remember,  was  that  some  troops  might  be  sent  to  capture
the  large  amount  of  railroad  equipment  known  to  have  been  concentrated
at  Grenada,  Miss.,  and  to  remain  near  Grenada  while  the  rolling  stock  was
taken  to  Memphis.  In  fact,  this  was  attempted  by  a  small  force  of  cavalry,
who  destroyed,  instead  of  saving  it.  E.  C.  Dawes.

50,  State  Street,  Boston,  October  ISth,  1893.

Richard  Hodgson,  Esq., — Dear  Sir, — I  enclose  you  a  letter  from  Col.
E.  C.  Dawes,  dated  the  14th  inst.,  and  also  one  from  Captain  E.  H.  Ball,
dated  the  12th  inst.

Captain  Ball,  you  remember,  commanded  the  company  in  which  Davis,
the  private  soldier  who  prophesied  that  the  regiment  was  going  to  Memphis,
was.  J.  C.  Ropes.

48,  Laclede  Building,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  October  Uth,  1893.
Dear  Mr.  Ropes, — Before  leaving  home  Tuesday,  I  wrote  Captain  Ball
as  suggested  in  yours  of  5th.  I  reminded  him  of  something  that  will
serve  to  refresh  his  memory.  Ball  was  very  anxious  to  get  a  furlough  in
August,  '63,  to  go  to  his  old  home  in  Haverhill,  Mass.  His  first  application
was  refused.  After  Davis  was  detailed  at  Brigade  headquarters.  Ball
annoyed  the  old  man  a  good  deal  by  trying  to  get  him  to  foretell  whether  a
second  application  would  be  successful.  Davis  would  always  reply  that  he
did  not  know  anything  about  it,  that  these  things  came  to  him  in  dreams,
and  always  came  true.  I  hope  to  find  a  letter  from  Captain  Ball  at  home
to-morrow.  E.  C.  Dawes.

Portsmouth,  Ohio,  October  12th,  1893.
John  C.  Ropes,  Esq., — My  Dear  Sir, — In  answer  to  yours  of  the  5th,  I
have  to  say  that  I  remember  very^well  tliat,  some  time  in  August,  1863,  Major
E.  C.  Dawes,  then  commanding  53rd  Oliio  Regiment,  came  to  headquarters,
Third  Bi'igade,  Fourth  Division,  15th  Army  Corps,  of  which  I  was  temporarily
A.A.A.G.,  and  told  me  of  a  curious  prophecy  made  by  John  R.  Davis,  an
old  man  for  a  soldier, — and  a  member  of  my  company.  Davis  predicted
that  troops  would  go  on  transports  to  Memijhis,  and  that  he  would  die  before
they  went.  Major  Dawes  asked  me  to  give  Davis  an  easy  place  at  brigade
headquarters,  saying  that  he  was  sick  and  perliaps  a  little  off  his  base.  I  had
him  detailed,  and  tried  to  get  him  to  prophesy  for  me  without  success.  He
said  he  could  not  prophesy,  that  things  came  to  him  in  dreams  and  they
always  came  true,  and  he  did  not  know  anything  about  them.


The  Subliminal  Self._


585


I  went  home  on  leave  in  SeiDtember,  and  did  not  return  to  the  regiment
■until  just  before  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge.

Davis  did  die  and  the  troops  did  go  to  Memphis  on  transports. — Tours
truly,  E.  H.  Ball.

It  will  be  observed  that  this  soldier's  prediction  comes  nearer  than
any  case  with  which  we  have  yet  dealt  to  the  ancient  conception  of
prophecy,: — a  revelation  not  petty  nor  personal,  but  of  great  issues,  and
:for  some  lofty  end.  Such  prophecies  are  apt  to  be  difficult  to  prove  as
such, — to  distinguish  from  the  sage's  foresight  as  to  the  trend  and
stream  of  things.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  these  grave
communications  claim  a  divine  inspiration,  this  is  hardly  to  be
distinguished  from  the  subliminal  messages  of  which  we  have  so  often
spoken.  It  is  among  two  religious  bodies  widely  divergent  in  dogmatic
teaching  that  such  celestial  promptings  have  seemed  to  have  most  of
cogency, — in  the  Catholic  Church  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  among  the
earliest  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  It  is  much  to  be  desired
that  the  scattered  indications  of  monition  and  premonition  which
records  of  this  type  contain  should  be  collected  by  some  critical  though
sympathetic  hand.  The  early  Friends  especially  presented  a  character
which  cannot  be  alien  to  the  best  humanity  of  any  age.  Their  com-
bination of  sober  common-sense  with  inward  openness  to  illumination,
— the  steady  expectancy  of  their  calm  untroubled  souls, — this  is  the
"temper  which  our  inquiry  needs,  and  which  other  men  may  surely  attain
in  the  future  as  fully  as  these  men  in  the  past.

I  have  now  given  specimens  of  all  the  classes  of  evidence  known  to
me  which  bear  on  the  relation  of  supernormal  phenomena  to  time,  and
"have  endeavoured  to  throw  such  light  as  was  possible  on  each  in  turn.
The  result  is  to  me  at  least  in  one  way  of  much  interest.  For  these
phenomena  of  retrocognition  and  precognition,  covering  a  wide  range,
and  regarded  now  in  a  new  light,  are  found  to  have  a  close  connection
with  my  whole  group  of  previously  accepted  generalisations, — to  lend
•confirmation  to  them,  and  to  receive  confirmation  from  them  in  turn.

I  may  be  able  to  make  all  this  clearer — I  hope  that  I  shall  not
seem  to  make  it  more  dogmatic — by  a  diagrammatic  scheme  which
will  at  least  offer  to  criticism  definite  points  of  attack.  But  if,  instead
of  a  plane  surface  and  a  few  black  lines,  I  could  exhibit  a  transparent
globe,  varying  in  density,  colour,  and  luminosity,  we  should  still  have
an  absurdly  inadequate  symbol  of  that  ?i-dimensional  infinitude  of
living  faculty  some  few  of  whose  properties  we  dimly  discern.  Nay,
scant  as  it  is,  the  diagram  is  itself  misleading.  The  opposite  direction
of  its  lines  implies  no  ultimate  divergence ;  all  alike  must  be  assumed
to  meet  at  infinity.


586


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


3  .
O  Q

m  z

1-^


3  GC
O  U

ft
Q  <

OS


The  Subliminal  Self.


587


A  short  description  will  indicate  what  I  have  tried  to  express  by
this  diagram.

1.  The  dark  and  the  dotted  circle  represent  sections  of  concentric
spheres ;  of  which  the  upper  hemispheres  represent  the  Future,
and  the  lower  the  Past.  The  vertical  diameter  divides  material
phenomena  on  the  left  from  mental  on  the  right.  The  thick  line
AB  represents  what  I  have  elsewhere  called  "  the  spectrum  of
ordinary  consciousness  " ;  extending  from  the  red  end  at  A,  where  our
voluntary  control  over  the  body  and  our  ordinary  perceptions  of  its
processes  cease,  to  the  violet  end  at  B,  where  the  range  of  our  higher
senses  and  of  our  intellect  finds  its  term.

2.  The  small  thick  circle  of  which  AB  is  a  diameter  represents  that
area  of  time  past  and  future  which  is  within  the  grasp  of  the  empirical
or  supraliminal  self, — by  recollection  of  the  past  or  reasoned  inference
as  to  the  future.  This  is  a  kind  of  "  circle  of  perpetual  apparition";
a  small  circle  of  the  cosmic  sphere,  within  which  (save  in  sleep,  &c.)
the  stars  never  set.

3.  The  dotted  circle  indicates  the  realm  of  the  subliminal  Self ;
emerging  into  separate  consciousness  from  the  "World-Soul  in  which  it
is  immersed,  much  as  the  dark  circle  rises  into  separate  consciousness
out  of  the  dotted  circle  of  the  larger  Self.

The  metaphor  of  a  threshold  of  emergence,  however,  which  the  words
supraliminal  and  subliminal  imply,  is  not  expressed  by  the  position  of
lines  as  higher  or  lower  in  the  plane  of  my  diagram.  Rather  the  small
circle,  the  supraliminal  area,  must  be  conceived  as  subjectively  central
to  the  larger  circle,  or  area  of  subliminal  perception  and  control.

4.  The  line  A'B'  represents  the  spectrum  of  man's  subliminal  con-
sciousness at  any  given  moment.  It  runs  along  the  upper  side  of  the
thick  line  AB,  because  in  this  diagram  Future  is  above  and  Past  is
below  ;  and  the  subliminal  consciousness,  even  if  assumed  to  be  acting
through  the  mediacy  of  the  senses,  must  needs  be  always  slightly  ahead
of  the  empii'ical  or  organic ;  since  an  appreciable  time  is  consumed  in
the  act  of  sensation  itself,  and  in  the  passage  from  sensation  to
perception.  The  consequences  of  this  fact  were  indicated  when  the
phenomena  of  promnesia,  or  apparent  memory  of  the  present  moment,
were  above  discussed.

5.  Conformably  with  what  has  been  said  above,  and  following  the
thick  line  in  the  direction  of  A,  the  line  AA'  will  represent  the  exten-
sion of  subliminal  control  over  the  organism,  beyond  the  limit  of  em-
pirical or  voluntary  control.  This  extended  power  of  modifying  the
organism,  which  we  may  term  hyperhoulia,  has  already  met  us  in
various  phenomena  of  hypnotism  or  of  hysteria ; — for  instance,  in  the
re-establishment  of  suppressed  secretions.


588


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


6.  Carried  on  to  a  still  further  point,  under  the  guidance  of
disembodied  intelligences,  the  line  A' A"  will  indicate  that  extension
of  will-power  beyond  the  periphery  which  I  i-egard  as  the  basis  of
such  supernormal  power  over  matter  as  I  believe  to  have  been
manifested  through  the  agency  of  some  few  persons.  Produced  to
infinity  this  line  may  be  supposed  to  indicate  the  mysterious  connexion
of  Mind  and  Matter, — the  magnum  corpus  with  which  the  World-
Soul  is  mingled  in  some  identity  beyond  our  ken.

7.  Following  now  the  thick  line  AB  in  the  direction  of  B,  the
line  BB'  will  represent  the  extension  of  subliminal  perception,  first
hypertesthetic,  using  the  sense-organs  with  increasing  delicacy ;  then
teltesthetic,  or  depending  no  longer  on  sense-organs,  but  on  that
transcendental  receptivity  of  which  telepathy  is  the  commonest  type.

8.  Passing  on  beyond  the  indefinite  limitary  circle  of  the  sub-
liminal self,  we  may  take  the  line  B'B"  as  symbolizing  the  commerce
of  man's  spirit  with  the  world  of  unembodied  mind,  as  in  prayer  or
ecstacy.  Produced  to  infinity,  the  line  may  indicate  the  Cosmos  in
its  intellectual  aspect, — the  Mens  which  mingles  with  the  magnum
corpus  of  the  material  world.

9.  And  now  for  the  relations  to  Time  of  the  faculties  thus
indicated.  The  top  of  this  diagram  represents  the  Future,  the  bottom
the  Past.  The  oblique  ordinates  which  start  from  M — the  focus  of
man's  consciousness  —  represent  the  pathways  along  which  I  think
that  we  have  actual  evidence  of  man's  access  to  past  and  future  things.
The  rectangular  ordinates,  representing  direct  intuition  of  Past  and
Future,  by  our  own  or  higher  minds,  belong  to  that  speculative
conception  of  a  World-Soul  involving  both  Future  and  Past  of  which
I  have  already  spoken.

10.  Let  us  next  follow  the  oblique  ordinate  which  starts  from  M,
and  passes  through  C  and  C'  to  C".  This  line  represents  the  physical
or  organic  aspect  of  memory.  From  M  to  C  we  have  supraliminal
oi'ganic  memory  ; — such  physical  memories,  that  is  to  say,  as  can  be
summoned  up  at  will.  From  C  to  C  we  have  subliminal  organic
memories,  including  the  whole  range  from  hypnotism  to  heredity.
For  heredity  itself  is  in  some  sort  a  transmitted  memory,  and  a  record
of  all  ancestors  is  implicit  in  the  germ.  Following  the  line  from
C  to  C ",  beyond  the  limits  of  the  profounder  organic  personality,  we
meet  the  question  whether  any  similar  trace,  or  persistent  record  of
past  experiences,  can  inhere  also  and  be  discernible  in  inorganic
things.

The  luminescent  pebble  glows  with  the  treasui'ed  light  of  long-set
suns.  And  if  this  delicate  and  fugitive  energy  of  light  be  thus
persistent,  who  shall imit  the  influences  which  may  have  stored


The  Subliminal  Self.


589


themselves  within  the  labyrinth  of  vibrations  which  constitute  the
pebble  ? — influences  evocable,  perhaps,  and  recognisable  when  the
summons  and  the  perception  come.

It  is  conceivable,  then,  that  the  line  C'C",  pi'olonged  to  infinity,
might  give  us  a  complete  history  of  every  infinitely  smallest  particle  in
the  universe,  from  infinitely  remote  time.

11.  And  next  let  us  follow  the  ordinate  MDD'D" — the  line  which
represents  intellectual,  as  distinguished  from  organic,  memory ;  the
synthetized  and  symbolical  recollection  which  is  what  we  consciously
retain  of  the  Past.  From  M  to  D  the  line  thus  represents  the
memory  which  we  habitually  employ  ;  from  D  to  T>'  it  represents  the
hypermnesic,  or  fuller,  but  still  synthetized  and  personal  memory  of
our  past  experiences  which  we  have  found  the  subliminal  self  to  possess.
Passing  out  at  D'  from  the  sphere  of  the  Self,  we  come  to  memories
possessed  by  other  spirits,  from  which  memories  it  may  be  possible  that
knowledge  passes  to  incarnate  men.  Each  spirit's  memory,  like  each
human  memory,  will  presumably  be  unified  by  a  personal  synthesis.
It  will  be  a  subjective  or  impressionist  record  of  a  special  segment  of
the  past.

12.  And  now  between  these  two  types  of  memory — the  memory
implicate  in  Matter,  living  or  dead,  and  the  memory  implicate  in  Mind,
embodied  or  disembodied, — I  draw  a  rectangular  ordinate  MEE'E"  to
represent  direct  retrocognition,  by  our  own  or  by  higher  minds  ; —
such  persistence  of  the  Past  as  an  object  of  thought  as  may  inhere
neither  in  material  traces  nor  in  reminiscence  of  personal  experience.
What  has  been  still  may  be ;  and  not  merely  as  trace  recognisable
in  matter  or  as  former  impression  revivable  in  mind.  There  may
be  a  self-existent  and  imprescriptible  Cosmorama  ;  a  conservation
at  once  of  all  thought  and  of  all  phenomena;  the  World-Soul  as
the  Past.

13.  And  now  passing  on  to  those  ordinates  which  symbolise  the
future,  let  us  begin  with  the  oblique  ordinate  MFF'F",  whose  position
on  the  scheme  shows  it  to  indicate  orgmiic  precognition.  The  ordinary  or
supraliminal  segment  of  this  line,  MF,  is  represented  by  a  physician's,
or  rather  by  the  patient's  own  instinctive  prognosis.  Passing  on  into
the  wider  circuit  of  subliminal  faculty,  the  line  FF'  indicates  suggestion,
self-suggestion, — organic  clairvoyance, — the  profounder  prognosis  which
corresponds  to  hyperboulia  ;  since  increased  power  over  the  organism
implies  increased  knowledge,  and  increased  knowledge  implies  increased
foresight.  All  are  now  familiar  with  the  process  of  setting  (so  to  say)
the  organic  clock  to  strike  at  a  given  hour.  But  not  all  psychologists
have  realised  all  that  is  implied  in  the  supi'aliminal  unconsciousness  of
the  suggested  subject ;  who  bears  within  him  the  germ  of  a  complex


590


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


thought  or  action  which  to  him  will  seem  spontaneous  and  free  ;  yet
which  will  fulfil  itself  for  him  as  irresistibly  as  the  pang  of  hunger  or
the  languor  of  sleep.

Beyond  the  circuit  of  the  Self,  the  line  F'F"  denotes  spirit-
prognosis,  spirit  suggestion ;  the  foretelling  of  predetermined  organic
changes,  including  bodily  death  ;  and  the  recommendation  of  remedies
which  may  modify  or  postpone  such  changes.  There  is  some  evidence
(as  yet,  unfortunately,  mainly  of  a  private  kind)  that  such  advice  can
be  given  as  from  unseen  intelligences, — which  are  not,  however,  able
to  foresee  (any  more  than  an  earthly  physician  can  foresee)  the
possible  events  from  outside,  or  changes  in  the  environment,  which
may  make  the  prescriptions  of  no  avail.

14.  And  now  let  us  pass  on  from  organic  prevision  to  that  great
group  of  cases  which  I  will  provisionally  class  under  the  heading  of
telcesthetic  inference,  but  which  depend  no  doubt  on  causes  far  more
varied  and  complex  than  we  can  at  present  fathom.

We  have  already  seen  that  hypertesthesia  involves  hypermnesia  ;
that  is,  when  more  is  perceived  more  will  be  remembered.  In  the  same
manner  hyperesthesia  involves  what  we  might  call  hyper-promethia ;
that  is,  when  more  is  perceived,  more  will  be  foreseen.  The  line  MG-
representing  ordinary  foresight,  the  line  GG'  represents  the  foresight  of
the  subliminal  self  ;  based,  as  I  have  said,  on  hypersesthesia,  and  also
on  the  telepathy  and  telcesthesia  into  which  this  hyperfesthesia  inscrut-
ably passes.  Nor  have  we  any  theoretical  limit  to  what  the  incarziate
soul  may  thus  foresee.  In  many  of  our  cases  there  is  absolutely  no  clue
to  the  source  of  precognition ;  and  we  may  ascribe  all  these,  if  we  will,
to  the  subliminal  self  without  extraneous  aid.

Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  cases  where  the  agency  of
unembodied  spirits  is  asserted,  and  with  evidence  that  cannot  be
ignored.  The  line  G'G"  represents  the  foresight  of  unembodied
intelligences  ;  nor  can  we  guess  how  high  may  be  the  communicating
intelligence,  how  far-reaching  its  prefigurement  of  what  for  us  has
yet  to  be.

15.  We  are  led  thus  to  our  last,  our  boldest  conjecture.  The  line
from  M  to  H"  represents  the  possibility  of  a  knowledge  which  comes
to  man  from  no  individuated,  or  at  least  from  no  human  source ;
which  is  no  longer  inference  but  the  reflection  of  Reality  itself ;
of  the  World-Soul  as  the  Future  ;  of  a  pre-existent  Cosmorama  of
infinite  fates.

It  is  to  this  last  line  of  reflection  that  the  few  concluding  paragraphs
must  be  devoted.  And  first  a  few  words  as  to  the  relation  of  our
evidence  to  the  problem  of  Free  Will.  Here  I  have  a  suggestion  to
make  which  even  in  this  time-worn  controversy  is,  I  think,  absolutely


The  Subliminal  Self.


591


novel.  It  is  that  we  have  now  a  possibility  of  making  the  question
"  between  liberty  and  determination  a  matter  of  actual  experiment.

Let  us  put  that  old  question  in  this  specific  form — "Is  there
evidence  that  any  power,  can  show  me  a  picture  involving  my  own
(so-called)  voluntary  actions  in  the  future,  which  picture  I  cannot
by  any  effort  in  the  smallest  degree  hinder  from  becoming  actual
fact  1 "

For  mere  ordinary  prevision  this  would  of  course  be  impossible.
But  we  have  here  certain  foreshado wings  which  depend  on  no  ordinary
prevision,  and  which  are  more  wholly  outside  ourselves  than  any  in-
formation of  equally  definite  character  which  we  can  otherwise  receive.
The  scenes  or  statements  thus  given  in  complete  detail  seem  sometimes
to  be  fulfilled  with  equal  completeness.  But  rmist  they,  or  must  any
of  them,  inevitably  be  thus  fulfilled  1  Here  it  is  that  a  possibility  of
experiment  comes  in.  The  experiment  indeed  cannot  be  conclusive
either  way.  But  suppose  that — as  in  some  folk-lore  story — we  were  to
make  vigorous  effort  to  avert  some  incident,  and  were  yet  to  find  that
incident  fulfil  itself,  perhaps  by  dint  of  that  very  effort,  exactly  after
the  dreaded  fashion, — should  we  not  then  have  some  reason  to  infer
that  earth-life  was  not  really  modifiable  by  anything  which  we  feel  as
free-will  1

Assuming  such  a  result  of  our  experiment,  analogy  would  at  once
suggest  a  further  possibility.  For  our  life  on  earth  would  then  be  seen
to  resemble  the  experience  of  the  hypnotised  subject,  fulfilling  un-
wittingly in  waking  hours  the  suggestions  previously  made  to  him  in
the  ti'ance.  We  should  ask  whether  in  our  own  history  some  epoch
may  have  existed  in  which  a  self-suggestion  may  have  been  given
which  could  similarly  dominate  our  earthly  career.  Our  complex
organism,  the  result  of  a  long  previous  history,  is  felt  to  restrict  our
so-called  voluntary  action  within  narrow  limits  ;  and  if  we  possess  also
a  soul  independent  of  the  body,  it  is  surely  likely  that  the  soul's
previous  history  also — for  some  previous  history  any  entity  so  highly
specialised  as  a  man's  soul  must  have  had — may  exercise  a  determining
influence,  even  more  profound  than  the  organism's  influence,  upon  the
thoughts  and  actions  of  this  incarnation.  There  may,  in  short,  be  a
kind  of  alternating  personality,  expressing  itself  first  in  an  incorporeal
and  then  in  a  corporeal  state,  in  such  a  way  that  the  incorporeal  state
is  the  deeper  and  the  more  permanent,  and  that  suggestions  thence
derived  influence  corporeal  life,  although  the  empirical  consciousness
which  governs  that  life  may  never  know  it.

This  idea,  of  course,  is  not  new  to  religion  or  to  philosophy,  in
East  or  West,  and  it  has  long  since  been  suggested  that  our  earthly
existence  may  be  the  inevitable  sequel  of  our  past  eternity ;  a  pre-
destined pilgrimage  on  which  our  true  soul  looks  with  calm  content  j

2  T


592


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


since  not  one  of  earth's  phantom  sorrows  can  find  her  unwilling  or
strike  her  unaware.  The  soul  foi'etaught,  the  body  forewrought, —
these  will  move  onwards  as  they  must  and  may  ;  but  meanwhile  the
problem  of  Liberty  and  Necessity  will  no  longer  be  one  for  earthly  ex-
perience to  discuss ;  it  will  be  lifted  into  a  pre-natal  region,  among  the
secrets  of  the  transcendental  world.

All  this  must  be  conceived  as  possible  ;  yet  I  do  not  think  that  our
evidence  thus  far  collected  does  in  fact  make  for  this  view  of  pre-
determined earthly  fates.  Rather  we  have  seen  that  in  many  cases
monitions  have  averted  incidents  which  would  doubtless  have  occurred
had  the  percipient  i-eceived  no  warning.  And  where  dangers  have
been  foreshewn  and  yet  not  averted,  this  seems  often  to  have  been
because  no  adequate  effort  was  made  to  avert  them.  The  problem
which  our  narratives  more  urgently  suggest  is  how  to  reconcile  so  much
foreknowledge  with  so  much  freedom.  I  have  thought  sometimes  that
this  problem  of  free  human  wills  amid  the  predictable  operations  of
unchanging  law  may  resemble  the  problem  of  molecular  motion  amid
molar  calm.  Clear  and  stable  is  for  us  the  diamond  ;  the  dewdrop  is
clear  and  still ;  yet  within  their  tranquil  clarity  a  myriad  molecules
jostle  in  narrow  orbits  or  speed  on  an  uncomputed  way.  So  to  "  the
spectator  of  all  Time  and  of  all  Existence"  may  the  Cosmos  be  "as  one
entire  and  perfect  chrysolite ; "  and  yet  man's  petty  hopes  and
passions  may  make  endless  turmoil  among  its  minutest  elements  and  in
its  infinitesimal  grains.  Those  movements  too  must  be  ruled  by
unknown  law ;  yet  on  a  wide  view  they  will  average  out,  and  will
admit  of  predictions  fulfilled  immutably,  and  overriding  the  small  Wills
of  men.

Once  more,  and  from  a  different  standpoint.  Few  men  have
pondered  long  on  these  problems  of  Past  and  Future  without  wonder-
ing whether  Past  or  Future  be  in  very  truth  more  than  a  name —
whether  we  may  not  be  apprehending  as  a  stream  of  sequence  that
which  is  an  ocean  of  co-existence,  and  slicing  our  subjective  years  and
centuries  from  timeless  and  absolute  things.  The  precognition  dealt
with  in  this  chapter,  indeed,  hardly  overpasses  the  life  of  the  individual
percipient.  Let  us  keep  to  that  small  span,  and  let  us  imagine  that  a
whole  earth-life  is  in  reality  an  absolutely  instantaneous  although  an
infinitely  complex  phenomenon.  Let  us  suppose  that  my  transcend-
ental self  discerns  with  equal  directness  and  immediacy  every  element
of  this  phenomenon  ;  but  that  my  empirical  self  receives  each  element
mediately  and  through  media  involving  different  rates  of  retardation  ;
just  as  I  receive  the  lightning  more  quickly  than  the  thunder.  May
not  then  seventy  years  intervene  between  my  perceptions  of  birth  and
death  as  easily  as  seven  seconds  between  my  perceptions  of  the  flash
and  peal  ? And  may  not  some  inter-communication  of  consciousness


The  Subliminal  Self.


593


enable  the  wider  self  to  call  to  the  narrower,  the  more  centi-al  to  the
more  external,  "  At  such  an  hour  this  shock  will  reach  you  !  Listen
for  the  nearing  roar  !  "

And  thinking  thus  of  the  Universe  as  no  mere  congeries  of
individual  experiences,  but  as  a  plenum  of  infinite  knowledge  of  which
all  souls  form  part,  we  come  to  count  less  and  less  upon  having  to
deal  exclusively  with  intelligences  individualised  like  our  own.  Our
limitations  of  personality  may  less  and  less  apply  to  spirits  drawing
more  directly  upon  the  essential  reality  of  things.  The  definite
intelligences  which  have  crystallised,  so  to  say,  out  of  the  psychical
vapour  may  even  for  us  become  again  partly  sublimated,  may  again
be  diffused  for  a  moment  amid  such  knowledge  as  our  organisations
cannot  receive  except  in  ecstasy  and  bewilderment,  or  retain  except  in
vanishing  symbol  and  obscure  and  earthly  sign.

If  then  all  these  phenomena  form  part  of  one  great  effort  by  which
man's  soul  is  striving  to  know  his  spiritual  eavironment,  and  his
spiritual  environment  is  striving  to  become  known,  how  little  can  it
matter  what  the  special  incident  foretold  or  foreshadowed  may  be  !
"What  signifies  it  whether  this  or  that  earthly  peril  be  averted,  or
earthly  benefit  secured, — whether  through  this  or  that  petty  channel
shall  flow  some  stream  of  mortal  things  1  The  prime  need  of  man
is  to  know  more  fully,  that  he  may  obey  more  unhesitatingly,  the
laws  of  the  world  unseen.  And  how  can  this  great  end  be  attained
save  by  the  unfoldment  from  within,  in  whatsoever  fashion  it  may  be
possible,  of  man's  transcendental  faculty ; — by  his  recognition  of
himself  as  a  cosmic  being  and  not  a  planetary,  as  not  a  body  but  a
soul  1  Surely  even  that  special  premonition  which  is  sometimes  spoken
of  as  a  thing  of  terror, — the  warning  or  the  promise  of  earthly  death, —
should  to  the  wise  man  sound  as  a  friendly  summons,  and  as  a  welcome
home.  Let  him  remember  the  Vision  which  came  to  Socrates  in  the
prison-house ; — then,  and  then  only,  showing  in  an  angel's  similitude
the  Providence  which  till  that  hour  had  been  but  as  an  impersonal  and
invisible  Voice  ; — -but  now  the  "  fair  and  white-robed  woman  ",  while
friends  offered  escape  from  death,  had  already  spoken  of  better  hope
than  this,  and  had  given  to  Achilles'  words  a  more  sacred  meaning, —
"  On  the  third  day  hence  thou  comest  to  Phthia's  fertile  shoi'e."


594 Report  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee  for  1894--5.


II.

KEPORT  OF  THE  HYPNOTIC  COMMITTEE  FOR  1894-5.

The  Committee  comprises  the  following  members  : — T.  Barkworth,
J.P.  ;  A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.,  Chairman  ;  J.  M.  Bramwell,  M.B.  ;
St.  George  Lane-Fox ;  W.  Leaf,  Litt.D.  ;  G.  F.  Rogers,  M.D.  ;
F.  Podmore,  M.A.  ;  G.  A.  Smith;  C.  L.  Tuckey,  M.D.  ;  A.  Wallace,
M.D.  ;  and  E.  Westlake,  Secretary.

From  October  11th,  1894,  to  June  20th,  1895,  34  meetings  were
held ;  30  at  the  Society's  rooms,  3  at  Finsbury-square,  and  1  at
Hampstead. An  average  of  four  members  attended  at  each  meeting.

Thirty-six  youths,  all  of  whom  stated  that  they  had  not  been
previously  hypnotised,  came  in  reply  to  advertisements  inserted  in  the
daily  papers.  Ten  of  these  went  away  without  having  been  tried.  Of
the  remaining  26,  18  were  hypnotised,  and  8  were  unaffected,  giving  a
total  of  70  per  cent,  hypnotisable.  Five  were  decidedly  affected  on
the  first  attempt,  and  others  may  have  been ;  in  a  few  cases  the
hypnosis  may  have  been  slight.  No  strict  tests  were  applied  as  to  the
degree  of  hypnosis.  The  time  was  mainly  occupied  in  testing  for
thought-transference,  with  results  which  could  be  judged  of  on  their
own  merits,  independently  of  any  question  as  to  the  genuineness  or
depth  of  the  hypnosis.

It  was  observed  that  most  if  not  all  the  subjects  were  primarily
en  rajjjjort  with  all  those  present,  but  this  condition  was  easily
modified  subsequently  by  suggestion.

Experiments'  in  thoiight-transference  toith  a  hypnotised  sivhject.

Sixty-one  experiments,  with  7  operators  and  14  subjects,  were  made
in  guessing  playing-cards,  the  total  of  cards  guessed  being  1,173.  In
each  experiment,  a  number  of  cards,  varying  from  4  to  52,  or  20  on
the  average,  were  guessed  under  practically  uniform  conditions.

Of  these  experiments,  39  were  made  with  one  or  more  members  of
the  Committee  as  agents  (one  at  least  being  en  rapjjoi-t  with  the
subject),  and  one  subject  as  percipient  at  a  time.  Usually  one  member
only  acted  as  operator  and  agent.  Occasionally  other  members,  who
might  or  might  not  be  in  rapjjort,  would  also  look  at  the  cards.  When
a  subject  had  been  once  hypnotised,  he  was  sometimes  woke  and
re-hypnotised  by  the  next  person  about  to  act  as  agent;  at  other  times
the  subject  was  simply  put  in  rapport  with  the  next  agent.  A  total
of  817  cards  were  tried,  out  of  which  the  subjects  told  correctly  214


Report  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee  for  1894^-5.  595


suits,  79  pips,  and  19  whole  cards.  ^  The  most  probable  number  of
successes  by  chance  would  be  204,  63,  and  16  respectively;  the
numbers  required  to  prove  some  cause  other  than  chance  being  257,
95,  and  32  respectively. ^

In  four  of  these  experiments,  the  agents  were  in  contact  with  the
percipients  while  they  were  guessing  47  cards.  The  percipients  were
correct  in  7  suits,  4  pips,  and  3  whole  cards — a  higher  result  than
in  the  guessing  without  contact.  The  number  of  cards  tried  is,  how-
ever, too  small  to  draw  any  conclusion  from,  and  as  it  was  desired  to
avoid  possible  sources  of  error  in  the  experiments,  they  were  not
carried  further  in  this  direction.

In  some  experiments  the  card  guessed  coincided  more  often  with
the  preceding  card  (the  one  last  looked  at  by  the  agent)  than  with  the
one  he  was  looking  at  at  the  time.  Thinking  that  this  might  perhaps
point  to  the  greater  efficacy  of  sub-conscious  suggestion,  we  have
analysed  the  experiments  throughout  from  this  point  of  view,  and  a
summary  of  the  results  is  given  in  a  foot-note  to  each  group.  The
number  of  successes  of  this  kind — that  is,  of  coincidence  of  the  guess
with  the  card  last  looked  at  by  the  agent — is,  except  in  the  last  group,
always  beloiv  the  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance ;
whereas  the  number  of  real  successes — that  is,  coincidence  of  the  guess
with  the  card  looked  at  by  the  agent  at  the  time — is  always  above  the
most  probable  number.^

Experiments  in  thought-transference  with  tivo  hypnotised  subjects.

The  remaining  22  experiments  were  made  with  two  subjects  ;  the
operator  and  one  subject  acting  as  agent,  and  the  other  subject  as
percipient.

1  The  number  of  successes  in  "suits"  and  in  "pips"  include  the  successes  in
"whole  cards,"  as  well  as  those  in  "suits"  or  "pips"  respectively.  This  is  done
for  convenience  of  comparison  with  the  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance
in  each  case.

-  These  are  calculated  from  the  formula  given  by  Mr.  Sanger  in  his  analysis  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  card  experiments  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXVIII.,  p.  193.  As
he  shows  in  his  explanation  of  the  method  of  calculation,  the  number  of  trials  is
insufficient  to  base  any  definite  conclusions  on  whenever  the  number  of  successes
required  to  prove  some  cause  other  than  chance  is  greater  than  twice  the  most
probable  number  of  successes.  It  will  be  found  that  in  the  case  of  whole  cards,  any
series  of  less  than  800  trials  would  be  insufficient.  Tlie  number  of  successes  in  whole
cards  necessary  to  prove  some  cause  other  than  chance  is  therefore  only  given  in  the
two  series  of  817  and  069.

3  In  the  group  of  experiments  already  referred  to — in  which  the  cards  were
guessed  by  one  percipient  at  a  time — out  of  a  total  of  778  preceding  cra-ds,  193  suits
coincided,  52  pips,  and  12  whole  cards.  The  most  probable  number  of  successes  by
chance  would  be  194,  60,  and  15  respectively.  The  successes  were  therefore  in  each
case  hclow  the  most  probable  number.  This,  as  far  as  it  goes,  tends  to  show  that
unconscious  suggestion  was  inoperative,  and  to  emphasise  the  results  got  in  guessing
the  cards  looked  at  at  the  time.


59G Report  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee  for  189Ji.-5.

Twelve  of  these  experiments  were  made  without  contact  either
between  the  subjects  themselves  or  between  them  and  the  operator.
The  subjects,  having  been  hypnotised  by  some  member  of  the  Com-
mittee, were  seated  in  chairs  about  a  foot  apart  and  turned  either  back
to  back  or  at  an  angle  sufficient  not  to  see  one  another.  A  card  was
then  drawn  from  a  pack  by  the  operator,  or  by  another  member  of
the  Committee,  and  placed  upright  on  the  sideboard  under  the  south
bookcase  in  the  library  at  a  height  of  about  three  feet  from  the  floor.
A  large  black  book  was  usually  placed  behind  the  card  to  form  a  dark
background.  The  card  was  then  looked  at  intently  by  the  operator
and  by  one  of  the  hypnotised  subjects — the  two  acting  as  agents.  At
the  same  time  the  second  subject,  who  was  acting  as  percipient,  and
who  was  turned  the  other  way  with  eyes  closed,  was  told  that  a  card
was  being  looked  at.  In  about  a  quarter  of  a  minute  the  percipient
either  named  a  card  of  his  own  accord,  or  did  so  on  being  asked  by  the
operator.

These  twelve  experiments  comprised  a  total  of  152  cards,  out  of
which  the  pei'cipient  told  correctly  45  suits,  8  pips,  and  2  whole  cards.
The  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance  would  be  38,  12,
and  3  respectively  ;  the  numbers  required  to  prove  some  cause  other
than  chance  being  61  in  suits  and  26  in  pips.

Summarizing  the  two  foregoing  groups  in  which  there  was  no
contact,  we  have  a  total  of  51  experiments  with  969  cards,  out  of
which  the  percipients  told  correctly  259  suits,  87  pips,  and  21  whole
cards. 1  The  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance  would  be
242,  75,  and  19  respectively  ;  the  numbers  required  to  prove  some
cause  other  than  chance  being  299,  110,  and  37  respectively.

Ten  similar  experiments  were  also  made  in  which  the  subjects  were
in  contact  with  one  anotlier  and  with  the  operator,  usually  with  joined
hands,  the  other  arrangements  being  as  before  described.  The  usual
form  of  contact  was  as  follows  : — The  subject-percipient's  left  hand
was  placed  on  the  operator-agent's  knee ;  the  subject-agent  placed  his
right  hand  on  the  subject-percipient's  hand,  and  the  operator-agent
placed  his  hand  on  the  top  of  both.  Sometimes  the  operator  held  the
subject's  joined  hands  in  both  of  his.  In  the  first  experiments  the
subject-agent's  right  hand  was  simply  placed  on  the  subject-percipient's
left  arm.

These  experiments  include  a  total  of  204  cards,  out  of  which  the
percipient  told  correctly  56  suits,  84  pips,  and  16  whole  cards.  The
most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance  would  be  51,  16,  and  4

1  Out  of  a  total  of  910  preceding  cards,  222  suits  were  told  correctly,  Gl  pips,  and
If)  whole  cards.  The  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance  would  be  230,  71,
and  18  respectively. The  successes  were  thus  in  all  cases  helow  chance.


Report  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee  for  189^-5.  597

respectively ;  the  number  I'equired  to  prove  some  cause  other  than
chance  being  77  in  suits  and  32  in  pips.^

No  code  or  ordinary  process  of  communication  was  detected  on  any
occasion.  In  view,  however,  of  [a)  the  excess  in  pips  being  about
4  times  that  in  suits,  {h)  the  immediate  falHng  off  of  the  results
^whenever  contact  was  broken,  and  (c)  the  proved  hypersesthesia  of
the  subject  on  several  occasions,  it  seems  probable  that  indications
may  have  been  given  (perhaps  unconsciously  on  one  or  both  sides)
■of  a  normal  nature,  such  as  movements  or  muscular  pressures  so  slight
as  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the  experimenters.

The  experience,  therefore,  of  the  Committee  with  reference  to
thought-transference  between  the  operator  and  subject,  or  between  the
hypnotised  subjects,  is  as  yet  negative.  Although  the  results  in  several
of  the  series  exceeded  the  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance,
the  excess  was  not  very  great,  and  the  successes  in  every  case  fell  short
of  the  numbers  required  to  prove  some  cause  other  than  chance,  with
the  single  exception  of  the  pips  in  the  series  of  204  trials  just  men-
tioned, where  contact  was  used.

There  may,  however,  be  some  significance  in  the  fact  that  the
coincidence  of  the  guesses  with  the  "preceding  cards  "  was  invariably
— when  no  contact  was  used — helow  the  most  probable  number  of
coincidences  by  chance.  This  seems  at  least  to  strengthen  the  proba-
bility that  the  actual  successes  obtained  were  not  all  due  to  chance.

Experiments  with  Miss  Maud  Lancaster.

During  the  month  of  June,  Miss  Maud  Lancaster,  a  professional
thought-reader  and  discoverer  of  hidden  articles  and  stolen  property,
attended  on  three  occasions.  The  experiments  took  usually  the
following  form  : —

A  situation  simple  in  character  and  dramatic  in  action,  such  as  a
murder  or  a  theft,  was  rehearsed  in  Miss  Lancaster's  absence  by  the
Committee.  She  then  entered  the  room,  was  blindfolded,  and  was  told
the  general  nature  of  the  scene.  Then  stretching  out  her  hands  as
though  feeling  in  the  air,  and  touching  the  sitters  shghtly,  she
identified  the  actors  and  the  parts  taken  by  them.

The  experiments  were  also  varied  thus : — A  member  of  the
Committee  in  the  sight  of  his  colleagues  and  in  Miss  Lancaster's
absence,  touched  a  certain  point  in  the  room  for  a  few  seconds,  which
Miss  Lancaster,  on  being  blindfolded,  and  again  introduced,  speedily

1  Out  of  194  preceding  cards,  60  suits  were  told  correctly,  21  pips,  and  4  whole
cards.  The  most  probable  number  of  successes  by  chance  would  be  49,  15,  and  4
respectively  ;  the  numbers  required  to  prove  some  cause  other  than  chance  being
74  in  suits  and  31  in  pips.


598 Report  of  the  Hypnotic  Committee  for  1894.-5.

identified.  She  was  not  in  contact  with  any  one  who  knew  what  the
spot  was  during  any  part  of  the  time  that  she  was  searching  for  it.

The  Committee  were  impressed  throughout  these  experiments  by
the  possibility  that  Miss  Lancaster  may  have  been  able  to  tell  from
the  movements  of  the  sitters  whether  they  approved  of  her  doings.
Success  was  attained  by  her  only  after  she  had  made  a  variety  of
tentative  muscular  movements,  and  had  felt  the  sitters — when
required  to  identify  them.  To  some  of  them,  at  any  rate,  it  seemed
that  when  they  were  concentrating  their  thoughts  upon  the  action
sought  for,  they  might  by  some  sound,  by  their  breathing,  or  by  their
movements  when  touched,  have  given  her  indications,  although  their
untrained  senses  failed  to  notice  it.

This  conclusion  seems  warranted  by  the  fact  that  when  Miss
Lancaster  was  restricted  from  making  muscular  movements  on  her
own  account,  as  when  she  was  set  to  name  a  card  known  only  to  one
or  more  members  of  the  Committee,  she  invariably  failed.

Moreover,  when  she  attempted  to  find  a  hidden  coin,  the  situation
of  which  was  known  to  one  only  of  the  Committee,  she  succeeded
only  in  one  out  of  six  trials.

This  agrees  with  her  own  statement  that  she  succeeds  best  with
her  experiments  in  the  presence  of  large  audiences.

Before  admitting  that  thought-transference  is  operative  in  her
experiments,  further  investigation  is  required.


Supplement.


Review.


599


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEW.


L'Hypothese  du  Magnetisme  Animal. By  E.  Boirag  {Nouvelle  .Revue,
'  October,  1895).

In  the  October  number  of  the  Nouvelh  Revue,  M.  Boirac  has  published
some  interesting  and  important  observations  on  effects  produced  by  himself
as  hypnotic  agent  without  contact  with  his  subject.  They  are  confined  to
phenomena  of  apparent  attraction  produced  by  movements  of  his  hands  on
the  limbs  of  the  patient.  The  following  abridged  account  may  serve  as  a
type.  The  subject  in  this  case  is  a  boy  of  15,  from  the  Pyrenees,  who  was  in
M.  Boirac's  service  for  six  months.

"One  Sunday  afternoon  in  January,  1893,  coming  in  at  3  o'clock,  I  found
that  Jean  had  gone  to  lie  down.  I  found  him  asleep  on  his  back  on  his  bed.
Standing  by  the  door,  at  a  distance  of  three  metres,  I  stretched  out  my  hand
towards  and  on  a  level  with  his  feet.  After  a  minute  or  two,  perhaps  less,  I
raised  my  hand,  and,  to  my  amazement,  saw  his  legs  rise  from  the  bed  and
follow  the  upward  movement  of  my  hand.  This  was  repeated  three  times
with  absolute  regularity.  I  called  Mme.  B. ,  and  in  her  presence  repeated
the  experimeiit  two  or  three  times.  Mme.  B.  suggested  to  me  to  try  the
eifect  of  simple  thought.  I  fixed  my  eyes  on  his  feet,  and  slowly  raised  them.
The  feet  followed  the  movements  of  my  eyes,  rising,  stopping,  and  falling
with  them.  Mme.  B.  took  my  left  hand  and  with  her  other  did  as  I  had
done.  She  succeeded,  like  myself  ;  but  as  soon  as  she  ceased  to  touch  me,
she  produced  no  effects."

With  another  subject,  Gustave  P.,  similar  results  were  obtained,  namely,
attraction  of  his  limbs  by  movements  of  the  right  hand,  under  circumstances
which,  in  M.  Boirac's  opinion,  were  sufficient  to  exclude  the  hypothesis  of
hyperfesthesia  as  well  as  of  normal  vision  and  verbal  suggestion.  But  in  this
case,  when  the  left  hand  was  used,  instead  of  attraction  or  repulsion,  the
subject  said  that  he  felt  a  violent  pricking  in  the  limb  pointed  at  ;  when  both
hands  were  used  together,  he  complained  of  a  "muddle  "  (gdchis)  of  the  two
sensations.  With  the  aid  of  a  friend,  M.  Boirac  tried  the  effect  of  a  copper
wire,  of  which  he  held  one  bare  end,  while  the  other,  wrapped  round  a
wooden  ruler,  was  presented  by  his  colleague  to  the  subject's  body.  The
effect  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  hand  itself,  while  M.  Boirac  remained  in
the  room  and  could  see  what  was  going  on  ;  but  when  he  tried  from  the  next
room,  with  the  door  closed  between,  the  characteristic  symptoms  seem  to
have  given  place  to  a  general  feeling  of  malaise  and  heaviness  in  the  head.
On  repeating  with  the  earlier  subject,  Jean,  the  experiments  thus  suggested,
it  was  found  that  there  was  no  difference  in  the  action  of  the  right  and  left
hands  ;  both  alike  produced  attraction.


600


Revieiv.


[Supplement.


M.  Boirac  is  to  be  congratulated  on  his  good  fortune  in  having  hit  upon
subjects  showing  this  high  degree  of  sensitiveness.  We  wish  we  could,  from
experience,  confirm  his  conviction  that  ' '  any  one  who  tries  experiments  in
similar  conditions  "  will  be  able  to  verify  them.  We  can  assure  him  that  it
is  not  from  want  of  patience  in  searching  for  suitable  subjects  that  the
Hypnotic  Committee  of  the  Society  have  failed  in  witnessing  even  remotely
similar  results.

When  we  come  to  the  interpretation  of  these  exjoeriments,  we  are  sorry  to
find  ourselves  at  issue  with  M.  Boirac.  He  regards  them  as  pointing  to
"Animal  Magnetism"  as  distinct  from  suggestion.  If  he  means  to  exclude
from  suggestion  what  we  in  Eiighmd  call  "Thought-transference"  and
Continental  observers  "  Mental  Suggestion,"  he  is  probably  right  ;  though  I
am  not  entirely  satisfied  that  the  conditions  of  the  experiments,  which  are
very  imiDerfectly  recorded,  are  such  as  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  "mind
reading"  by  hyperiesthesia.  Still,  assuming  that  this  possibility  lias  been
successfully  excluded,  I  do  not  see  that  M.  Boirac  is  justified,  much  less
compelled,  to  have  recourse  to  the  term  "Animal  Magnetism."  That  lias  been
discarded  on  the  ground  that  it  suggests  all  sorts  of  false,  or  at  least  highly
improbable,  analogies  ;  and  it  seems  clear  that  M.  Boirac  has  allowed  himself
to  be  misled  in  this  very  way.  It  is  true  that  he  does  not  clearly  say  what  he
means  by  "Animal  Magnetism,"  but  such  phrases  as  "le  rayonnement
magndtique  ou  nerveux  "  raise  a  very  strong  suspicion  that  he  looks  upon  the
dynamic  agency  concerned  as  a  physical  force,  with  spatial  relations  and
actually  analogous  to  the  physical  magnetism  with  which  we  are  acquainted.
We  know  far  too  little  to  say  that  it  is  not  so  ;  but  I  am  not  aware  of  any
experiments  which  tend  to  prove  it,  and  M.  Boirac's  seem  to  me  to  go  certainly
against  it.  The  mere  fact  that  he  obtained  phenomena  of  "  attraction  "  is
surely  the  most  superficial  of  analogies,  when  we  think  of  the  imitativeness
which  is  one  of  the  commonest  features  of  deep  hypnotic  trance.  In  one  case,
M.  Boirac  got  a  sort  of  polarity  betiveen  his  hands,  but  his  attempt  to  verify
this  on  another  subject  proved  that  it  was  not  a  property  of  any  force
emanating  from  himself,  but  a  result  of  some  subconscious  interpretation  in
the  mind  of  the  subject.  The  experiments  with  the  copper  wire,  if  they
prove  anything,  show  that  the  force  cannot  be  conducted  from  one  room  to
another  like  electricity.  And  finally,  I  venture  to  suggest  that  if  M.  Boirac
wishes  to  get  the  ear  of  men  of  science,  it  can  only  be  done  by  the  pub-
lication of  exact  observations,  such  as  the  classical  experiments  of  Gurney.
M.  Boirac  may  have  kept  an  equally  exact  record  ;  if  so,  it  should  certainly
be  published.  But  the  present  article  shews  no  trace  of  the  careful  control
experiments  which  might  have  been  suggested  in  abundance  by  perusal  of  the
work  of  the  S.P.R.  in  England,  or  of  Moll  in  Germany;  and  while  these  are
absent,  one  cannot  feel  that  any  substantial  advance  is  likely  to  come  from
popular  publication.

Walter  Leaf.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


601


EDMUND  GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1895.


Additions  since  the  list  in Proceedings,"  Vol.  X.


PoDMORE  (Frank,  M.A.),  Apparitions  and  Thought-transference  :

An  Examination  of  the  Evidence  for  Telepathy.  London,  1894
 {Another  Copy.)


Janet (Prof. Pierre), L'Automatisme Psychologique  (2nd

Edition)  Pa,ris,  1894

Psychologique,  L'Ann^e,  Publi(^e  par  M.M.  H.  Beaunis  et  A.

Binet,  Premiere  Annee,  1894 Paris,  1895


ScHRENCK-NoTziNG  (Dr.  Frciherr  von).  Die  Bedeutung  nar-
cotischer  Mittel  fiir  den  Hypnotismus.  Reprint  from  the
"  Schriften  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  psychologische  Forschung  "
—Heft  1 Leipzig,  1891

 Ueber  Suggestion  und  Suggestive  Zustande Mmiich,  1893

 Ein  Beitrag  zur  psychischen  und  suggestiven  Behandlung  der

Neurasthenie Berlin,  1894

 Der  Hypotismus  im  Miinchener  Krankenhause  LciiKig,  1894

 Gutachten.  [Aus  die  Bedeutung  der  Hypnotischen  Sug-
gestion als  Heihnittel. Berlin.^ 1894

 Suggestion, Suggestivetherapie, Psychische  Behandlung.

[Aus der Real-Encyclopiidie der Gesammter  Heilkunde.
Vol.  m. Berlin.] 1893

 (Another  Essay  under  the  same  title  from  Vol.  IV.  of  the

same  Encyclopedia) 1894

Stoll  (Dr.  Otto),  Suggestion  und  Hypnotismus  in  der  Volker

Psychologic  '.  Leipzig,  1894


A  fidl  Catalogue  of  the  hooks  in  the  Edmund  Gv,rney  Library  was  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Supplementary  Catalogues  2oere
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,  and  X.  Separate
copies  of  these  Catalogues  are  still  on  hand,  and  can  be  obtained  from  the
Secretary.


602


Officers  and  Goioncil  for  1896.


PRESIDENTS.

(Prior  to  Incorporation.)

Professor  H.  Sidgwick ------  1882-1884.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S. - - -  1885-1887.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick ------  1888-1892.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S. -  1893.

Professor  William  James,  Plarvard,  U.S.A.  - -  1894-1895.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1896.


PRESIDENT.

"William  Crookes,  F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.


The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,
M.P.,  F.R.S.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.E.

The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.

Richard  H.  Hutton.

Professor  William  James,  Har-
vard, U.S.A.


Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithson-
ian Institution, Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of

RiPON.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.


COUNCIL.


The  Rt.  Hon.  ^^.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.

Thomas  Barkworth.

A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.

J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.

The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal-

CARRES,  K.T,  F.R.S.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Mr.  Registrar  Hood.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  Macalister,M.D.,F.  R.S.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


Frank  Podmore.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C.  LocKHART  Robertson,  M.D,

George  F.  Rogers,  M.D.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Babington  Smith.

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Sir  AUGU.STUS  K.  Stephenson,

K.C.B.,  Q.C.
Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
J.  Venn,  D.  Sc.,  F.R.S.
Abraham  Wallace,  M.D.


•  HON.  TREASURER.

H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Frank  Podmore,  32,  Well  Walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

SECRETARY  FOR  THE UNITED  STATES.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.


ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelplii,  London,  W.C.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


603


SCHEDULE  OF  MEMBERS  AND  flSSOClATES.

(August  7th,  1895. The  date  of  the  Registration  of  the  Society.)


PRESIDENT.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuar^t,  Rothe,say,  Isle  of  Bute.
John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Crossdeep  Lodge,  Twickenham.
Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon,
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Cambridge.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.
William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  Hawarden  Castle,  Chester.
Sir  Frederick  Leighton,  Bart.,  P.R.A.,  2,  Holland  Park-road,  W.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.
Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Josephine,  Boute  d'Antibes,  Cannes,

Alpes  Maritimes,  France.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.


604  Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Professor  Pierre  Janet,  22,  Rue  de  Bellechasse,  Paris.

Dr.  a.  a.  LiiEBEAULT,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  J.  Li^geois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.

Th.  Ribot,  Ofi&ce  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  I'Universitt^,  Paris.

Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2,  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.
Dr.  Otto  G.  Wetterstrand,  Stockholm.

MEMBERS,  HONORARY  ASSOCIATES,  AND  ASSOCIATES.

Names  of  Members  are  j^rinted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  hy  an  Asterisk.
Names  of  Associates  are  printed  in  Small  Capitals.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

AiNSLiE,  AiNSLiE  DouGLAS,  15,  Lower  Grosvenor-place,  S.W.

Alcock,  Richard,  M.B.,  Burlington-crescent,  Goole.

Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.

Allen,  Frederic,  Sidmouth-road,  Newcastle,  Staffordshire.

Allen,  Henry  J.,  14,  Ailesbury-road,  Donnybrook,  co.  Dublin.

Allen,  Miss  Mary  Gray,  14,  Queen's-square,  W.C.

Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  83,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W,

Amery,  W.  C,  34a,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.

Anderson,  James  Arbuthnot,  46,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Anderson,  Miss  M.  25,  Lansdowne-crescent,  Kensington  Park,  W.

Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.

Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.

Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.

Atkinson,  Miss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy-gardens,  Tynemouth.

Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.

Bacon,  Rev.  John  Mackenzie,  M.  A.,  Coldash,  Newbury.

Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Bailey,  Mrs.,  H.  H.,  50,  Clarendon-road,  Holland  Park,  W.

Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.

Bain,  James  L.,  M  A.,  Birnam,  St.  John's,  Sevenoaks,  Kent.

Baines,  Miss  W.,  Tighnamara,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute,  N.B.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  47,  Russell-road,  West  Kensington,  W,

Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,M.P.,F.R.S.,  4,Carlton-gdns.,S.W.

Balfour,The  Right  Hon.  G.W.,M. P.,  67,  Addison-road,  London, W.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


605


Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.
Barclay,  Rev.  CiiAS.W.,  M.  A.,TheVicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.  P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  co.  Dublin.
Barlow,  Colonel  W.  R.,  56,  Penywern-road,  London,  S.W.-
Barjiby,  Rev.  James,  B.D.,  Pittington  Vicarage,  Durham.
Barrett,  Ashley  William,  M.B.  (Lond.),  42,  Finsbury-square,  E.C.
Barrett,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Lincoln.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  GlengarifF,  co.  Cork.
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  34,  Oxford-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.  ,  ■
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.  -  ■  •

Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  The  College,  Eastbourne.
Beatty,  Octavius,  Killevey,  Darleston-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.
Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  RedclifFe-sq.,  S.  W.
Bective,  The  Countess  of,  Barnacre  Lodge,  Garstang.
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterfield-gardens,  London,  W.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bell,  Major  Wm.  Morrison,  Thor,  Birchington,  Thanet,  Kent.
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall -Mall,  S.W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  M.A.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.
Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E.
Benson,  R.  Hugh,  1,  Landscape-place,  LlandalF.

Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.  .  ■
Bernard,  John,  Captain,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "  Nelson,"  Portsmouth.
Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.  D.,60,Welbeck-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bibby,  Charles  Hesketh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bickford-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,  Endymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W.
BiCKNELL,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Jdnr.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardeiis,  S.W.
BiELBY,  Horace  C.  V.,  67,  Lord-street,  Liverpool,  W.

2  u


606


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  Lyndhurst,  Luton.

BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

BiRRELL,  Mrs.,  Lansdowne-road,  Worthing.

Blackburn,  Ernest  M.,  38,  Egerton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.

Blackwood,  Mrs.,  Norton  Court,  Sittingbourne,  Kent.

Biakelock,  Rev.  R.,  M.A.,  Horbury  Bridge  Vicarage,  Wakefield.

Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.

BoGER,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Elvington,  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.

Bois,  Henry  Gordon,  c/o  J.  M.  Robertson  and  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.

Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  W.

BoLDERO,  Lieut.-General  Gr.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.

BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.

Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  Bharwar,  India.

Boorne,  Herbert  H.,  55  and  56,  Chancery  lane,  London,  W.O.

BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Bayeux  (Calvados),  France.

Boswell-Stone,  Miss  E.  L  ,  Dayrells,  47,  Wickham-road,  Beckenham.

Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.

Boulnois,  H.  Percy,  M.Inst.C.E.,  7,  Devonshire-road,  Liverpool.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Highclere  Rectory,  Newbury.

BowELL,  Ernest  W,  W.,  Sissinghurst  Vicarage,  Staplehurst,  Kent.

Bowness,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London, W.

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Bramston,  Miss  A.  R.,  Witham-close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Suntrap,  RadclifFe-road,  Croydon.

Bramwell,  John  M.,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square, W.

Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholrae,  Weybridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.

Briggs,  Mrs.,  Rawdon  Hall,  near  Leeds.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E.

Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.

Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A.,  M.A.,  1,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  26,  Carisbrooke-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.

Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidston,  Alleyn-road,  West  Dulwich,  S.E.

Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryant,  Captain  G.  E.,  R.A.,  c/o  J.  M.  Edwards,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J  P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill-square,  W.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.A.,  9,  Upper  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates,


607


Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
BuLMER,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York.
BuNNETT,  A.,  JuNR.,  10,  Station-road,  South  Norwood,  S.E.
BuNSHAW,  ISr.F.,  Med.  Oif.,  B.G.  J.P.  Rail  way,  Ghadechi,  Kathiawar,  India.
Burghclere,  The  Rt.  Hon.,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
BuRGHCLERE,  The  Lady,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.C.
Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill.
Butcher,  Miss,  Nurse's  Home,  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  E.C.
Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
Butler,  G.  W.  ,  B.A.,  F.G.S.,  >Sandham,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
Butt,  Lady,  17,  Viale  P^s=>-  Margherita,  Florence,  Italy.
Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.
Caillard,  Vincent,  Constantinople.

Caillard,  Miss,  Wingfield  House,  near  Trowbridge,  Wiltshire.
Cairo,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London.
Caithness,  The  Countess  of,  Duchesse  de  Pomar,  124,

Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  45,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Sandon,  Wellington,  Salop.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  N.B.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  B.A.,  22,  Mai-ket  Hill,  Cambridge.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.
Carey,  Arthur,  B.Sc,  Browsich,  Gateacre,  near  Liverpool.
Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Greywell  Hall,  Winchfield.
*Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Carter,  Mrs.  L.  Brudenell,  Ridgeway,  Langley-avenue,  Surbiton.
Cathels,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  N.B.
Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-square,  London,  S.W.
Cave-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W.
Oazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.
Champness,  Alfred,  Sedbergh,  Yorks.

Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  Apollo-street,  Bombay.
Ohattock,  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  46,  Gunter's-grove,  London,  S.W.
Clark,  W.  W.,  Denehurst,  Dorking.
Clark,  Miss,  Suffield  Park,  Cromer.

Clarke,  John  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-street,  London,  W.

2  u  2


608


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates,


Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C  S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill,
Clayton,  Charles  E,,  Hillcote,  Highcroft  Villas,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Cleveland,  The  Duchess  of,  18,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  S.W.
Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Fawley  Lodge,  Lansdown-road,  Cheltenham.
Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
CoATES,  Andrew,  Pitcullen  House,  Perth,  N.B.

Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
CoGHiLL,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Cosheen,  Castle  Townshend,  co.  Cork.
Colchester,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M. A.,  7,  Bennett-street,  St.  James's,  S.W.
Colegranb,  Mrs.  E  ,  Bracebridge,  Norwood,  S.E. .  •
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
Colling  WOOD,  Miss  A.  M.,  5,  Addison-mansions,  West  Kensington,  W.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
CoLLisoN,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  17b,  Great  Cumberland-place,  London,  W.
CoLTiiURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CoLViLE,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.
CooNEY,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.A.,  28,  Donegall-passage,  Belfast.
Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  Brooklyn,  Croydon-road,  Caterham.
Cotterell,  James,  140,  Earlsfield-road,  Wandsworth  Common,  S.W.
CoRT  VAN  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  W.  A.,  Amsterdam,  Holland.
Cousens,  Charles  H.,  Star  Chambers,  30,  Moorgate-st.,  London,  E.C.
Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valleyfield,  Penicuik,  N.B.

■Cowper,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  Grosvenor  Hotel,  London,  S.W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Caven-
dish-square, London,  W.  -  -  .
Crawford,  F.  Marion,  Villa  Crawford,  Sant' Agnello  di  Sorrento,  Italy.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Crawley,  Mrs.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  S.W.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rio  Maior,  Portugal. ' .  .
Crewdson,  Miss  Gwendolen,  The  Barons,  Reigate.
Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  29,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.
Crossley,  Professor  Hastings,  Casa  Grazia,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  10,  Jeffry's-square,  St.  Mary  Axe,  London,  E.C.
Crowther,  W.  Fearne,  Mayfield,  Sussex.
Cruise,  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  W.,  Dublin.
Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,  The  Chestnuts,  St.  Margaret's,  Twickenham.
Cunningham,  G.,D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge.
*CuRTis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.
D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120,  Rue  de  Bac,  Paris.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.  A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  116,  King  Henry's-rd.,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


609


Damania,  Surgeon-Major,  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.
Danvers,  Mrs.,  4,  Cranley  Mansion,  Gloucester-road,  S.W.
Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenham.  '
Darlet,  Lady,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.
Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.
Davies,  Benjamin,  20,  Lomond-road^  Fairfield,  Liverpool.
Davis,  A. E.,  F.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.O.P.L,  20,  Great  George-sq.,  Liverpool.
Davis,  Joseph  T.,  Holly  Bush,  Snaresbrook,  Essex.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  2.3,  Manor-park,  Lee,  Kent.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  1,  Stanford-road,  Kensington,  "W.
Dawkin,  William,  61,  Clifton-street,  Lark  hall-lane,  S.W.
Day,  Barclay  L.,  Redcot,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

De  Brath,  Stanley,  Hawthornden,  Lawrie  Park-rd.,  Sydenham,  S.E.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Dem,  John,  Walsingham,  Cbislehurst.

*Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.
DiCKSEE,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dixon,  Edward  T.,  4,  Cranmer-road,  Cambridge.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  East  Park  Parade,  Northampton.
Dobbie,  a.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Dodgson,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.
Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  24,  Norham-road,  Oxford.

Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  George  W.,  473,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.

DovETON,  F.  B.,  Eastcliife,  Babbacombe,  South  Devon.

DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.I.,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  RedclifFe-

square,  London,  S.W.
Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Mena  Honor,  near  Cairo,  Egypt.
Duke,  Thomas,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  33,  Bilton-road,  Rugby.
DuLLEY,  Rev.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
Duncan,  Mrs.  A.M.A.,  Victoria  Club,  30a,  Sackville-st.,  London,  W.
DuTT,  R.  C,  CLE.,  Burdwan,  Bengal,  India.

Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  (Retired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  64,  Pembridge

Villas,  Notting  Hill  Gate,  London,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Barum  House,  Queen-street,  Henley-on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  .5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.  ^  -

Egerton,  Miss  IMary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.

Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elder,  Mrs.,  38,  Hyde  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Gilbert,  10,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.


610


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Elliot,  Mrs.  Minto,  7,  George-street,  Hanover-square,  W.

Klliot,  Miss,  Sandecotes,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K. C.S.I. ,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.

Elliott,  Rev.  W.  A.,  54,  Ivirkgate,  Shipley,  Yorkshire.

Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.

Ellis,  Mrs.  Robert,  4,  Rylett-road,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  4,  Warwick-square,  London,  S.W.

Elton,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brompton,  London,  S.W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London.

Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermacora,  Dr.  G.  B.,  Padua,  Italy.

EsTERHASY  CouNT  MiCHEL,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.

Eustace,  Miss  Grace,  Castleinore,  Tullow,  co.  Carlow,  Ireland.

EvANS,  KiRKHAM,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Eves,  Mrs.  Charles  T.,  Brook's  Lodge,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.

Fagan,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  56,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.O.

Falcomer^  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnik,  Alessandria.

Farncombe,  George  Richard,  B.A.,  40,  Belgrave-street,  Birmingham.

Farrer,  The  Lady,  Abinger  Hall,  Dorking.

Feilding,  The  Lady  Louisa,  23,  Princes-gate,  London,  S.W.

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5,  John-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Fielding,  Mrs.,  19,  Wilton-place,  London,  S.W.

Fielding,  Mrs.  T.  M.,  5,  Ailsa-park,  Twickenham.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  Junr.,  Post  Office,  Johannesburg,  South  Africa.

*FiNZi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.

Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.

FitzGerald,Desmond  G.,  M.S.T.E.,94,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton, S.W.

Fletcher,  Mrs.  K.  R.,  The  Orchard,  Buckland,  near  Betchworth, Surrey.

Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redcliffe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

Flynt,  William  Garnett,  7,  Walmer-road,  Birkdale  Park,  Southport.

Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  Mandeville-place,  London,  W.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Gavell  House,  Kilsyth,  N.B.

Fort,  Charles  Leyland,  B.A.,  Alderbury  House,  Salisbury.

Foster,  Gerald  H.,  5,  Cleveland-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.

Fountain,  Alfred,  The  Elms,  Cornwall-road,  Uxbridge.

Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  Traveller's  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.

Eraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Bellary,  Madras  Presidency.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C  ,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.

Freemann,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Anne's  Rectory,  28,  Soho-square,  W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlow-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


611


Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.
*Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.
FuRNiVALL,  Percy,  34,  Adelaide-road,  London,  N.W.
Galloway,  The  Countess  of,  17,  Upper  Grosvenor-street,  W.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Fawley  Vicarage,  Wantage.
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-square,  W.
Garner,  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.
Garrard,  Mrs.,  8,  Kensington-court,  London,  W.
Garth,  Henry,  M.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  4,  Harrington-street,  Calcutta.
Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.  D.,  Marten,  Basechurch,  Salop.
Gell,H.W.,M.A.,M.D.  (Oxon),M.R.C.S.,36,Hyde  Park  Sq.,London,W.
Ghin,  Professor  Francesco,  S.  Barnaba,  Venice.

Ghose,  N.  N.,  the  Indian  Nation  Office,  43,  Bancharam  Unkoor's-lane,
Calcutta.

GiBOTTEAU,  AlxMB,  M.D.,  Villa  Bearnaise,  Biarritz.

Gibson,  Miss  M.  E.,  20,  George-square,  Edinburgh.

GiTTERMANN,  RuDOLPH  C,  Odessa,  Russia.

Glardon,  Rev.  Auguste,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.

Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  C.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.

GooDiER,  Miss  B.  M.,  Edinscate,  Disley,  Cheshire.

Goodman,  Louis  H.,  Bertram  House,  170,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
*Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  Holy  Trinity  Vicarage,  Paddington,  W.
GoRDiGiANi,  Edward,  50,  Via  Degli  Alfani,  Florence.
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

GovER,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5,  New-squai-e,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Govett,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  Gibraltar.
Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Gr-vham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Meadowside,  Heald-place,  Rusholme,  Manchester.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Gray,  Edward  W. ,  Surgeon-Captain,  c /oMessrs.  Holt,  1 7 ,  Whitehall,  S.W.

Green,  C.  T.,  MR.C.S.,  L.R.C  P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.

Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.

Greener,  W.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rectorj',  Cambridge.

Grier,  Captain  George  R.,  Leonardstone  House,  Neyland,  Wales.

Griffith,  Miss  E.  C,  37,  York-street,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.

Griffiths,  Joseph,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.,  4,  Kings' -parade,  Cambridge.

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essenden,  Hatfield,  Herts.

Grogan,  Miss,  18,  Ridgmount-gardens,  London,  W.C.

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.

*Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  5,  22,  Crosby-i-oad,  Birkdale,  Southport.


612


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Geubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Shallow,  Ongar,  Essex.
Gudgeon,  James,  Stow  market.

Guest,  A.  H.,  L.R.C.P.E.jWestbourne,  "Whalley-range,  Manchester.
GuNN,  Mrs.,  36,  George-lane,  Lewisham,  S.E.

GuNTON,  Rev.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.

GuNTON,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.

Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas'  Parsonage,  Pinilico,  S.W.

Gurney,Rev.F.,M.  A.,St.  John's  Cottage,  Bo  veyTracey,  Newton  Abbot.

Gurney,  Henry  G.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  W.

Gurney,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.

Hackett,  James  F  ,  B.A  ,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia

Haggard,  John  G.,  H.B.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria.

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  3,  Pitt-street,  Campden  Hill,  W.

Hall,  Charles  S.,  The  Borough  Chambers,  Bournemouth.

Hall,  George,  M.D.,  CM.  Edin.,  Wyndham  Lodge,  Milford,  Surrey.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9,  Prior's-terrace,  Tynemouth.

Hall,  Mrs.,  3,  St.  Alban's-road,  Kensington,  London,  "W.

Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  Rowan,  8,  Connaught-street,  London,  W.

Hannah,  Robert,  82,  Addison-road,  Kensington,  W.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Harding,  G.  Palmer,  Trouville,  France.

Hargrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Grange,  Chorlton-cum-Hardy,  Manchester.
Hargeeaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southport
Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.
Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Longfield,  Kent.
Hartshorn,  Miss  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.G.
Haslam,  Prof.,  M.A.,  St.  Barbe,  Riccarton,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.
Haweis,  Miss,  127,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Hay'es,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.
*Hayes,  Joseph  W.,  1,  George's-street,  Enniscorthy.
Hayward,  Miss  Grace  G.,  25,  St.  George's  Road,  Kilburn,  N.W.
Hajrward,  M.  Cecil,  Caius  College,  Cambridge. • .  •
Heape,  Fhed.  W.,  Toorak,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Heard,  Richard,  37,  York-place,  Portman-square,  London,  W.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  55,  Sutherland-avenue,  Maida-vale,  W.
Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Hennikbr-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll  villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert.  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


613


Hewetson,  H.  Bendelack,  F.L.S.,  M.R.C.S.,  11,  Hanover-sq.,
Leeds.

HiBBS,  Reginald  E..,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.

Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.

HiLDYARD,  F.W.,  St.  Nicholas  Club,  81a,  Queen  Victoria-st.,  London,  E.G.

Hill,  Clement  Hugh,  63,  Church-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Instowe,  Malvern-road,  Cheltenham.  ..

Hill,  Henry,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.

Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.

Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle.

HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixham.
^Og'g')  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C.,  2,  Busby-place,  Camden-road,  N.W.
Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  M.P.,  B.A.,  58,  Conduit-street,  W.
Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodsje,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
HoUond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  Wonham,  Dampton,  Devon.
Holstein,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hood,  Mrs.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,  W.
Hooper,  Mrs.  Pitman,  8,  Endsleigh-street,  Tavistock-square,  W.C.
HoPKiNSON,  Professor  Alfred,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Lodge,  32,  Heme

Hill,  London,  S.E.
Hopps,  John  Page,  Oak  Tree  House,  South  Norwood  Hill,  London,  S.E.
HoRNE,  Alderson,  Ditton-place,  Balcombe,  Sussex.
Hotham,  Miss  C.  E.,  56,  Belgrave-road,  London,  S.W.  .  .  ,  -

Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penrith.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
HuBBE-ScHLEiDEN,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Steglitz,  near  Berlin.
HuDDLESTON,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hudson,  Norman  W.,  B.A.,  Pebble  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterham

Valley,  Surrey.

Hughes,  Mrs.,  Gwynnondale,  Llanarthney,  R.S.O.,  Carmarthenshire.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  The  Pines, Worcester  Pk.,Surrey.
Humfrey,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Humphreys,  Arthur  Lee,  187,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Hunter,  Thomas,  Arnold  House,  Rugby.
HuTCHiNS,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town.
Hutchinson,  F. W.  H.,  M.  A.,  Brooklands  House,  Avenue,  Cambridge.
Hutchison,  Rev.  R.P.,  M.A.,  Martyr  Worthy  Rectory,  Winchester,


614


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton.
Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.
Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Innes,  Lady,  Winslow,  Darling  Point,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.

Irving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon- Major,  Govt.  House,  Ganesh  Khind,  Bombay.

IsAACHSEN,  Pev.  Thorveld  E.,  44,  Boompjes,  Rotterdam.

Jackson,  Rev.  F.,  The  Vicarage,  Newton-upon-Rawcliffe,  Pickering.

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,S.  Hilda's  School,  Clifton-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

James,  Ernest  C.  F.,  Wellington  Club,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  S.W.

Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.H.  H.,M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St. John's  Wood,  KW.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A  ,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherhara.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnhara,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Overton,  Lansdowne-road,  Bournemouth.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyfi  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.

*Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  38,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.

Jenkinson,  Mrs.  F.  R.  G.,  112,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.

Jennings,  Mrs.,  16,  Lower  Sloane-street,  S.W.

Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wim pole-street,  London,  W.

Johnes,  Mrs.,  Dolaucothy,  Llanwrda  R.S.O.,  South  Wales.

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  LlandafF  House,  Cambridge.

Johnson,  Rev.  Wayland,  LL.D.,  Camden,  Delaware,  U.S.A.

Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  22,  Earl's  Court-square,  S.W.

Jones,  Captain  Henry  Michael,  V.C.,  H.B.M.  Legation,  Lima,  Peru.

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Professor  P.,  64,  Via  S^^-  Lucia,  Naples.

JoNES,T.R.,M.R.C.S.Lond.,L.R.C.P.L,L.MJ.,26,Lorne-rd., Birkenhead.
Joyce,  Samuel,  Ashridge,  Park-road,  Alexander  Park,  Manchester.
Kane,  J,  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale, London,  W.

Kearne,  Percy,  37,  Avonmore-gardens,  West  Kensington,  W.
Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  co.  Meath.
Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  26,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester.
Kenmare,  The  Countess  of,  Killarney  House,  Killarney.
Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.
Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.
*Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  York-terrace,  Brewery-road,  Southend.
Kingsbury,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.
Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W.
*Kirk,  Joseph,  9,  Vicarage-park,  Plumstead,  Kent.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


615


Knox,  Nathaniel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Knutsford,  The  Lady,  75,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.
KoTHEN,  Baron  Axel  von,  27,  Mikealsgatan,  Helsingfors,  Finland.
Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.W.  S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford.
Lafone,  A.  W.,  M.P.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
Laing,  R.M.,M.A.,B.Sc.,Boys'High  School,  Christchurch,]Srew  Zealand.
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.
Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.  B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.
Laurie,  Prof.  H.,  LL.D.,  President  of  the  Victorian  Society  for

Psychical  Research,  Melbourne.
Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  117,  St.  George's-square,  S.W.
Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  9,  St.  Paul's  Churchyard,  London,  E.G.
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W^.

Lee,  Rev.  W.  T.,  4,  Edith -terrace.  Mount  Gold  road,  Plymouth.

Lees,  Lieut.  W.  E.,  Royal  Engineers,  R.A.  and  R.E.  Mess,  Malta.

Leete,  Miss,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Legge,  The  Lady  Frances,  AVoodsome,  Huddersfield.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.  A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Lewes,  Lieut-Colonel  G.A.,  19,  R.M.C.  Terrace,  Camberley,  Surrey.

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Leymarie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  General  Assembly  Library,  Wellington,  New  Zealand.

Limond,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Linden,  Miss  Olga,  3,  Versailles  Road,  Anerley,  S.E.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.

Lindsay,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  41,  Via  del  Babinno,  Rome.

Lloyd,  Major  Francis,  22,  Cadogan-square,  London,  S.W.

Lloyd,  Otho  Holland,  Hotel  du  Pare,  Glion  sur  Montreux,  Switzerland

Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool

Lodge,  Robert,  Loxford  Grove  Park,  Wanstead.

LoEWE,  Hugo  L.,  .3,  Southampton-sti'eet,  London,  W.C.

Lord,  Mrs.  Robert,  Newstead,  Albert-road,  Bolton,  Lancashire.

LovELL,  Reginald  H.,  449,  Collins-street,  Melbourne.

Lucas,  Mrs.  E.  A.,  ClareviUe,  co.  Galway.

Lyall,  Miss  Frances  E.,  1,  Priory -parade,  Cheltenham.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  The  Vicarage,  Eccles,  Manchester.

Lyttelton,  Sybella  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.

Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.


616


Schedule  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.

James's,  S.W.
*Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Heswall,  Cheshire.
Mackay,  George  D.,  Inveralmond,  Cramond,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair.  W.

Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.
Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W.
Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough.
Mangin,  Marcet,  130,  Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  M.A.,  Grange  House,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  5,  South  Bank-terrace,  Surbiton.
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumber-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.

Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.

Marshall,  Thomas,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial-street,  Leeds.

Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  34,  Elvaston-place,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.

Martin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Martinez,  Mrs.,  13b,  Hyde  Park-mansions,  London,  W.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Chief  Court,  Lahore,  India.

Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.

Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

M athe  vvs,  G. B. ,  B.  A. ,  9 ,  Menai  Vie w -terrace^Upper  Bangor, North  Wales.

Matthews,  Frank  H.,  22,  Wentworth-street,  Bolton,  Lancashire.

Maud,  Miss  Constance,  Sanderstead  Rectory,  near  Croydon.

Maxwell,  Joseph,  36,  Rue  Petiniaud  Beaupeyrat,  Limoges,  France.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Ardenconnel-row,  near  Helensburgh,  N.B.

McHugh,  p.  a.,  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gai-dens,  London,  S.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N.,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McNeily,  a.  J.  W.,  Q.C.,  Supreme  Court,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Melville,  Andrew  P.,  5,  West  Castle-road,  Merchiston,  Edinburgh.
Merrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria.
Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley.
Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Mills,  Thomas  E.,  Cabra  Parade,  Dublin.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.  617


l^itchiner,  J.  H.,  Acacias,  Barham  Road,  South  Croydon.
MoLESWORTH,  SiR  GuiLFORD  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.
Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.
Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,Walsingham  House,  Piccadilly, W.
MoNTEAGLE,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Trenchard,  Foynes,  co.  Limerick.
Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.
MooRAj,  Fazal  G.,  Cooper's-hill,  Staines.

MooRE,  Lieut.-General  Montgomery,  Bellevue,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.
MoRDAN,  Miss  C.  E.,  15,  Queen-square,  W.C.
Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.
MoRisoN,  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh.
MoRisoN,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  JST.W.P.,  India.
Moul,  Mrs.,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Yictoria-street,  S.W.
MouLTON,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  c/o  Credit  Lyonnais,  19,  Boulevard  des  Italiennes,
Paris.

Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Babbacombe  Cliff,  Torquay.
Moynihan,  B.  G.A.,  M.B.  (Lend.),  The  General  Infirmary,  Leeds.

MuNRO,  Henry  AcLAND,  B. A.,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E. -

MuNTHE,  Dr.,  26,  Piazza  di  Spagna,  Rome.

JMuRRAY,  Donald,  M. A.,  Sydney  Mo7-ning  Herald  OfSiCe,  Sydney,N.S.W.
Murray,  Professor  Geo.  G.  Aim^;,B. A., The  University,  Glasgow,  N.B.
Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
.Murray,  R.  M.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.O.P.(Edin.),  10,  Hope-st.,  Edinburgh.
Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile-park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  N.
Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Clewer  Lodge,  Windsor.  .  ;

Murray- Ay nsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.
Muse,  Mrs.  Eva  S.,  Santa  Pe,  New  Mexico,  U.S.A.  ■  <;

Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House.  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  Mrs.  P.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Mylne,  Mrs.,  83,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W. •  i-
N'athan,  S.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Neate,  Percy  John,  P.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  268,  High-street,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  St.  Michael's  Vicarage,  Bromley,  Poplar,  E.
Nelson,  Mrs.  R.  A.,  Redbourne,  East  Molesey  Park,  Surrey.
Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.
Newbery,  J.,  3,  Bedford-place,  Brighton.

Newbold,  Miss  A.,  4,  Artillery-buildings,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.

Newsom,  John,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  East  Hampton,  Suffolk  Co.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Nicholl,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.

Nicholls,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tyneinouth.


618  Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
NicoLSON,  Sir  A.,  K.C.T.E.,  C.M.G., British Legation,  Tangier,

Morocco,  Africa.
*]S]'iSBET,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.

Noel-Cox,  Herbert  L.  N.,  2,  Edinburgh  Mansions,  Yictoria-st., S.W,

NoRRis,  William  Alfred,  Holmwood  Lodge,  Laton-road,  Hastings.

NoRTHCOTE,  Hon.  Hugh  Oliver,  The  Hyde,  Luton.

Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotham,  Kent.

Oakeley,  Miss  H.  D.,  97,  Warwick-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W.

Gates,  F.  Edward,  St.  Edmunds,  Ware.

*Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  23,  R,ue  Vladimir,  Warsaw.

Ogilvie,  G.  M.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Oman,  Mrs.,  St.  Philip's  Lodge,  Pains  wick-road,  Cheltenham.

Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.

O'Neill,  Gregory  L. ,  M. B. ,  2 9 1 ,  Elizabeth-st. ,  Sy d ney,Ne w  South  Wales.

Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

OzANNE,  Major  Charles  H.,  8,  Victoria-road,  Old  Charlton,  S.E.

Pace,  Miss  E.  M.,  M.B.  (London),  7,  Elmbank-street,  Glasgow.

Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlow,

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguardo,  Florence.

Palmer,  Miss,  3,  Carlisle-place,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  Melrose,  Porus  P.O.,  Jamaica,  W.I.

Park,  Miss  Margaret  L.  M.,  23,  Mecklenburgh-square,  W.C.

Parkes,  R.  J.,  2,  Church-street,  Southport,  Lancashire.

Passingham,  Mrs.,  Fermoyle,  Castle  Gregory,  Co.  Kerry.

Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  ApoUo-st.,  Bombay.

Percival,  Mrs.,  2,  Southwick  Place,  London,  W.

Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  TenerifFe,  Canary  Islands.

Perry,  E.  C,  M.D.,  M.A.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.

Pethybridge,  Walter,  3b,  Clarendon-road,  Clapham  Rise,  S.W.

Petrovo-Solovovo,  Michael.  38,  Serghievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

Phillimore,  R.  C,  8G,  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.

Phillips,  Rev.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Mon.

Phillipps,  Mrs.  March,  Edmonstone  House,  Cheltenham.

Phipps,  Miss,  Knebworth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts.

Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I.E.E.,  5,  Carew-road,  Thornton  Heath.

Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.

Plenderleith,  William,  126,  Stroud  Green-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.

Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Wey mouth-street,  London,  W.

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Rye  Vale,  Leixlip,  co.  Kildare.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


619


PoNTiFEX,  Miss,  72,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.  W.

Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Portal,  Miss  V.,  8,  Beaufort-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Porter,  Mrs.,  Highbury  Grange,  Portai-lington-road,  Bournemouth^  W.

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-squai-e,  London,  W.C.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W.

PosTGATE,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Campden  Hill-square,  London,  W.

Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.

PowLES,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.

PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Pribitkof,  v.,  67,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.

Prickett,  Miss  L.  M.,  Ross  Cottage,  Fortune  Gate-road,  Harlesden.

Prothero,  Mrs.,  2,  Eton-terrace,  Edinburgh.

PuLLEN,  Miss,  Milton  View,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.

PuMPHRET,  Mrs.,  Shotley  Bridge,  co.  Durham.

PuRDiE,  Mrs.,  27,  Palace-court,  London,  W.

Pye,  William  A.,  25,  Mark-lane,  London,  E.C.

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  52,  Grosvenor-street,  London,  W.

Raleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbroke-road,  London,  W.

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W.

Ramsay,  Lady,  64,  Cadogan-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Rarer,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Rathbone,  Mrs.,  Green  Bank,  Liverpool.

Raupert,  Rev.  J.  G.  F.,  30,  Belsize-square,  London,  N.W.

Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  73,  Jermyn-street,  London,  S.W.

Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor.

Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  Thorncliife,  Cheltenham.

Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.

Richardson,  Arthur,  Ph.D.,  22,  Meridian-place,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  Farclilfe-place,  Bradford.

Richardson,  Miss  J.,  72,  Hamilton-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Richardson,  Robert  E.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Riddiford,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Chalfont,  Burnwood,  near  Gloucester.

Ridley,  Frank  C,  17,  Margaret-street,  London,  W.

Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  17,  Margaret-street,  London,  W.

Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.

RiGG,  Thomas  S.  J. ,B.  A., General  Post  Office,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.

Robb,  Mrs.,  46,  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.

Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W 39  Addison-gardens,  Kensington,  W.


620


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Robertson,  C.  Lockhart,  M.D.,  Guns  Green, The  Drive,  Wimbledon.
Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh.
Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  5,  Adelaide-square,  Windsor.
Robertson-Macdonald, Mrs. ,  35, Tregunter-rd. , South  Kensington,  S.  W.
Robin,  Percy  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robinson,  Lady,  73,  Chester-square,  London,  S.W.
Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
*RoGERS,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-on-Thames.
Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  London  Hospital,  Whitechapel-road,  E.
Rogers,  R.  S.,  M.C.,  Finders-street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Ross,  A.  Gait, 7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place.  London,  W.
Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S  E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs.,  Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  Errington,  Clapham  Park,  S.W.
Rusiiton,  C.  H.,  7,  Queen  Elizabeth's-walk,  Stoke  Newington,  N.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Amberley  Cottage,  Maidenhead.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  Mrs.  Henshaw,  23,  Beulah  hill,  Norwood,  S.E.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  University  Hall,  Gordon-square,  London,  W.C.
Rylands,  Thomas  G.,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Highfields,  Thelwall,  near
Warrington.

Sajous,  Charles  E.,  M.D.,  28,  Rue  de  Madrid,  Paris.

Salmond,  Percy  N..  Captain  3rd  Royal  Scots,  Eldermere,  Ilkley.

Samaldas,  Lalubhai,  Chief  Revenue  Officer, Bhavnager,  Bombay

Presidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectoiy,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  40,  Portland-place,  London,  W.
Sanger,  Charles  Percy,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.
ScHRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Schreiber,  Major,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W..
Schuster,  Miss,  Cannizaro,  Wimbledon,  S.W.
Sciiwabe,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Rhodes,  Middleton,  Lancashire.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRipPS,  T.  Cecil,  4,  Drapers'-gardens,  London,  E.C.
*Scudamore,  Mrs.,  3,  ToUington-park,  Holloway,  London,  N.
Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmersley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N.
Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.
Selous,  Edmund,  Wamil  Hall,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


621


Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  "W.
Sharpe,  J.  W^.,  M.A.,  Woodroflfe,  Portarlington-road,  Bournemouth.
Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.

Sheridan,  Mrs.  Dudley,  Russell  House,  4,  West  Kensington-gardens,  W.
^Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifiord  Rectory,  Essex.

Shove,  Miss  E.,K.Q.C.P.I.,M.B.,25,St. Mark's-cres.,Regent'sPk.,]Sr.W.
*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.  ,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,D.  C. ,  U.  S.  A.
Shuttleworth,  John,  Kenmare  Bridge,  by  New  Galloway,  Kirkcud-
brightshire, N.B.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
SiDGWiCK,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W.
Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Downpatrick,  co.  Down,  Ireland.
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Sloman,  Samuel  George,  Junr.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.
Smith,  Mrs.  Apsley,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.
Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.
Smith,  Rev.  Canon  H.  B.,  M.A.,  Grange  over  Sands,  Lancashire.
Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Government  House,  Calcutta.
Smith,  John  George,  29,  Cadogan-terrace,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  W.
Smith,  Martyn,  Abberton  Hall,  Pershore.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  R.  Morris,  3,715,  Chestnut-street,  W.  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-i-oad,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R.  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.

Smith,  Wallace  A.,  34,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,W.

Smith,  Mrs.,  Barnes  Hall,  Sheffield.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Solovioff,  Wsevolod,  34.  Nikolaievskaia  St.  Petersburgh.

Somerset,  The  Lady  Henry,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Somerset,  H.  Somers,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Fairholme,  Ventnor,  Isle  of  Wight.

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  2-5,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W.

Sperling,  Arthur,  J.  P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Spinks,  Judge,  Vernon,  British  Columbia.

2  X


622


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.
Stainforth,  Miss  Emily,  15,  Matheson-road,  West  Kensington,  "W.
Stanley,  H enry  M .,  D .  C  L.  ,  L L.  D. ,  M .  P. ,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  S.  W.
Stanway,  Miss  Emily,  17,  Park-street,  Taunton.
Stapley,  Richard,  3.3,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.
Stapley,  Mrs.,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.
Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  House,  Wimbledon,  S.W.
Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Stephenson,SirAugustusK.,K.C.B.,Q.C.,46,Ennismore-gdns,S.W.
Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.
Stevenson,  Andrew,  M.A.,  16,  Warrender  Park  Crescent,  Edinburgh.
Stevenson,  George,  Pamswick  Lodge,  Shurdington,  Cheltenham.
Stewart,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Largham,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Miss  Susan,  89,  Philbeach-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stirling,  J.  M.  Moeries,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.
Stout,  George  P.,  M.A,,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Sturges,  Mrs.  William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.
Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.
*SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.
SuMMERSON,  Samuel  J.,  Haughton-le-Skerne,  Darlington.
Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere-street,  London,  S.W.
Swanwick,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.
Sweeting,  Richard,  D.H.,  B.A.,  D.P.H.,  6,  Hereford  Mansions,  Here-
ford-road, Bayswater,  W.
Swire,  Major  Henry,  2,  Nightingale-place,  Woolwich.
Swire,  Commander  Herbert,  R.N.,  H.M.  Coastguard,  Berwick.
Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W.
Synge,  Rev.  P.,  M.A.,  1,  Daleham-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tancred,  Mrs.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Tanner,  Ernest,  Hazlehurst,  Penarth.

Tanner,  Slingsby,  104b,  Mount-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.
Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taxis,  The  Princess,  Grosse  Mohrengasse,  Vienna.
Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Minsterworth,  Old  Bath-road,
Cheltenham.

Tebb,  a.  E.,  M.D.,  9,  Langland-place,  Finchley-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


623


Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Thatcher,  Miss,  36,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,  W.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  Joseph  William,  F.I.C.,F.C.S.,  Drumpellier,  Gloucester.
Thompsox,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  Woo  dstock,  Waverley-rd.,  Liverpool.
Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thurburn,  Mrs.,  Kirkfell,  Highland-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Thurstan,  F.W.,  M.A.,  Hertford  Lodge,  Albert-bridge,  Battersea,  S.W.
Tooth,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  "Woodside,  Croydon.
Traherne,  Mrs.,  Coedriglan  Park,  Cardiff.
Trexch,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  "Warrex,  M.A.^  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris.

Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  33,  Green-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.

TuKER,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  IST-W,

TuRXiLL,  Hexry,  Heathside,  Crayford,  Kent.

Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Milton  Hall,  Cambridgeshire.

TwEEDiE,  David  M.,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.  ■  "

Tyrer,  Mrs.  "W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Underwood,  Rev.  Caxox  C.  W.,  M.A.,  Histon  Vicarage,  Cambridge.
Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.
Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.

Vandeleur,  Major  General  J.  O.,  C.B.,  26,  Coventry-st.,  London, "W.

Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  251,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.

Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Oambi-idge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.

ViiN-WiLLiAMS,  Rev.  H.,  3,  Wateidoo-place,  North  Shields. -  -  ■  =

Vicars,  G.  R.,  M.D.,  Branston,  Lincoln.

Vickers,  Mrs.,  26,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.

ViLLAMARiNA,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France.

Vincent,  R.  Harry,  Fernbank,  Leytonstone,  N.E.

VoRES,  Arthur,  M.R.C.S.,  8,  Mansfield-street,  Cavendish-square,  W.

Walford,  Col.  Neville  L.,  R.A.,  1,  Ashbum-place,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Mrs.  Emma,  42,  Kingsnorth-gardens,  Folkestone.

Walker,  Mrs.  Stewart,  Shrewsbury  House,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Wall,  Miss  M.  M.,  Pioneer  Club,  22,  Bruton-street,Berkeley-square,W.

Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39,  Harley-street,  London,  W.

Wallop,  Rev.  Edward,  Missionary  Coll.,  Burgh  le  Marsh,  R.S.O.,  Line.

W  ARBURTON,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.

Ward,  Wilfrid,  Molescroft,  Eastbourne,

2x2


624  Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.


Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Dovvnpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lowei'  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Buglit,  Inverness,  N.B.

Warter,  Mrs.  Tatham,  Longden  Manor,  Pontesford,  Salop.

Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa,01d  Svvinford, Stourbridge.

Waterhouse, 0. H. ,M.  D. ,  5 6,  Karl Lud wig  Strasse, Ober-Dobling,  Vienna.

Watson,  Rev.  John,  M.A.,  18,  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.

W.\TS0N,  Mrs.  W.  C,  39,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.

Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W.

Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Wedd,  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W.
Wells,  Miss  Grenville,  5,  Argyll-road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Wemyss,  Miss  A.,  Wash  well  House,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Westcott,  William  Wynn,M.B.,D.P.H., 396,  Camden-road,  London,  N.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Westlake^  Mrs.  Ernest,  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  N.W.
Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Bernhard,  173,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Maldtano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  5,  St.  Andrew's  road,  Enfield,  N.
Whitehead,  John,  Esplanade,  Guernsey.
Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  Mostyn  House,  Cambridge.
Whiting,  J.  Makkby,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone.
Wilberforce,  Rev.  Canon  Basil,  M.A.,  20,  Dean's  Yard,  London.
Wilde,  Mrs.,  Hotel  du  Pare,  Glion  sur  Montreux,  Switzerland.
WiLLAN,  Miss  Florence  M.,  Hanley  Castle,  near  Worcester.
Willard,  Miss  Frances  E.,  The  Cottage,  Reigate.
Willett,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywavds  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  0.  Redshawe,  9,  Upper  Beulah-hill,  Upper  Norwood, S.E.
Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G.,M.  A.,Ketteringham,Wymondham,  Norfolk.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  Miss,  7,  Cromwell-terrace,  Scarborough.

Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Dunridge,  West  Hill,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.
Wilson,  Charles  M.,  Edinburgh  Hotel,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.
Winchester,  H.,  M.B.,C.M.,  Oak  Bank,  Fort  Augustus,  Inverness,  N.B.
Windeyer,  The  Hon.  W.  C.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Sydney,  Australia.
WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.  Edward,  40,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  W.
Wingpield,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.
Wisden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.


Schedule  of  Members  and  Associates.  625


"WiTHERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  8,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  S-W.

Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.C.

WlTTiG,  Gregor  C,  2,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.

WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  Moita  28,  St.  Petersburg.

Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.

WooDD,  Mrs.  Basil,  Leckby,  Hollington  Park,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.

W^OOdhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Wright,  Mrs.  Almroth  E.,  Ingleside,  Netley,  Hants.

Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.

Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.

Yearsley,  p.  Macleod,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings-

bury-Neasden,  N.W.
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.
Young,  Prof.  W.  H.,  883,  East  Main-street,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.


(Elections — August  to  November^  1895.)  .  .  -

Blyth,  W.  M.,  20,  Highbury -terrace,  London,  N.

Bolton,  Miss  A.  J.,  B.A.  (N.Z.),  Hillside,  Bourton-road,  Buckingham.

Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  West  Kirby,  near  Birkenhead.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37,  Commercial-road  East,  London,  E.

Chichele-Plowden, Trevor, C.S.I., The Residency,  Hyderabad,

Deccan,  India.
Oeackanthorpe,  Mrs.,  65,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Crooks,  Miss,  Kensington,  South  Australia.  •  '

Dodge,  Miss  Mary  M.  H.,  39,  Brompton-square,  London,  S.W.
Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  11,  Half -Moon-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Emanuel,Victor  R.,  67,  Queensborough-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London, W.
Field,  E.  M.,  M.A.,  Cotswold,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N.  "
Hall,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton.  .  , .  ;

Hyslop,  Dr.,  Bethlem  Hospital,  London,  S.E.  ■

Kluht,  Miss  H.  M.  156,  Westbourne-grove,  London,  W.
Levy,  Mrs.,  16,  Campden  House-road,  Kensington,  London,  W. ■  .1
LouGHNANE,  J OHN,  Clonkeen,  Aughrim,  Ballinasloe,  Ireland.
McCoNNEL,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Manor  House,  Ryburgh,  Norfolk.
Robbins,  Rev.  John,  D.D.,  St.  George's  Vicarage,  Campden-hill,W.
Sullivan,  W.  R.  Washington,  Purleybury,  Purley,  Surrey.
Way,  William  R.,  Hillside,  Upminster,  Essex.

Wheeler,  Major-General  F.,  Rtd.,  8,  Oxford-terrace,  London,  W.
Williams,  J.  Leon,  D.D.S.,  L.D.S.,  30,  George-street,  Hanover-sq.,W.
Young,  Mrs.  W.  R.,  Liscoom,  Ballymena,  co.  Antrim.  .■


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,
London,  W.C.


626  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  MD  flSSOCIHTES  OF  THE  HMERICM  BRUNCH.

(November,  1st,  1895.)  .


Names  of  Members  are  2}rinted  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  "prefixed  by  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  are  jy^inted  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  when  another  Country  is  named.


Abbott,  Henry  W.,  11,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Albery,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.

Albree,  John,  Junr.,  56,  Bedford-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.

Alden,  F.  E.,  Vandergrift  Building,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.

Alden,  Henry  M.,  Metuchen,  New  Jersey.

Alexander,  Don,  454,  Oak-street,  Chattanooga,  Tenn.

Alexander,  W.  L.,  Canton,  Ohio.

*Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.

Ames,  Professor  Daniel  T.,  202,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Anderson,  Professor  A.  W.,  Macalester  College,  St.  Paul,  Minn.

Annes,  a.  L.,  Wawsaw,  Wis.

ARGijELLES,  Don  Pedro,  Collector  of  Customs,  N.  Laredo,  Mexico.

Atwood,  Dr.  Wilson,  17,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Auel,  Mrs.  C,  65,  Letferts-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Austen,  Mrs.  George,  Morris  Plains,  New  Jersey.

Avery,  Miss  M.  H.,  137,  Academy-st.,  Poughkeepsie,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ayer,  J.  C,  68,  West  91st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ayer,  Miss  Louise  R.,  25,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  100,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  111.

Baker,  Cyrus  O.,  41,  Franklin-street,  Newark,  N.J.

Baker,  Dr.  Smith,  Winston-building,  Utica,  N.Y.

Baldwin,  Mrs.  Albert,  Esplanade-avenue,  cor.  Derbigny-street,  New

Orleans,  Lousiana.
Baldwin,  Elbert  F.,  13,  Astor-place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Baldwin,  Dr.  H.  C,  c/o  Dr.  Brigham,  19,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Barnes,  W.  A.,  New  Madrid,  Mo.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


627


Barrows,  C.  M.,  58,  University-road,  Brookline,  Mass.

Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.

Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  KY.

Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda  W.,  4,722,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Bigelow,  Dr.  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Blackford,  A.,  322,  South  Main-street,  Findlay,  Ohio.

Blanchard,  Rev.  Henry,  D.D.,  Portland,  Maine.

Blodgett,  C,  M.D.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Blodgett,  Mrs.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

BoARDMAN,  Hon.  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Boon,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  Molino  di  Sopra,  Alassio,  Riviera  di  Ponenta,  Italy.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

BowDiTCH,  Professor  H.  P.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  179,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Brewster.  Mrs.  William,  c/o  Brewster  and  Co.,  Broadway  and

47-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Briggs,  Dr.  E.  C,  12.5,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Brimmer,  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Brimmer,  Mrs.  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.
Brooks,  Henry,  115,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Brown,  Edmond  C,  132,  Nassau-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Brown,  Elisha  R.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.
Brown,  Rev.  Howard  N.,  353,  Walnut-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Browne,  Mrs.  L.  Andrews,  131,  Sargent-street,  Newton,  Mass.
Bryan,  W.,  1,015,  Capitol-avenue,  Main-street,  Houston,  Texas.
Buffett,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.
Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bulley,  R.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

BuNDY,  Mrs.  John  C,  624,  Sheridan-square,  Evanston,  111.
Burdett,  Charles  A.,  Woburn,  Mass.

BuRGE,  Miss  Marie  L.,  132,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Burke,  Ex.-Gov.  A.  H.,  Duluth,  Minn.

Butler,  C  W.,  M.D.,  35,  FuUerton-av.,  South,  Montclair,  N.J.
Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  31,  East  69th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cabot,  Caroline  A.,  M.D.,  168,  W.-48th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Carey,  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  46,  Exchange-place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Carpenter  Franklin  R.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.
Carpenter,  Mrs.  Franklin  R.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.


628


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Carpenter,  W.  O.,  517,  Adams-street,  Chicago,  111.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle -street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Casey,  Theodore  B.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Catlin,  Captain  R.,  1,428,  Euclid-place,  Washington,  D.C.

Oaulkins,  Silas,  Soldiers'  Home,  Los  Angeles  County,  California.

Chapin,  F.  W.,  M.D.,  Hot  Springs,  Virginia.

Chapman,  Mrs.  J.  J.,  327,  West  82nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Chase,  Harvey  S.,  12,  West  31st-street,  ISTew  York,  N.Y.

Cheney,  Dr.  Fred.  E.,  Hotel  Bristol,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  W.  T.,  220,  Broad-street,  Rome,  Georgia.

Chick,  Frank  W.,  Madrid,  Franklin  Co.,  Maine.

Clapp,  Mrs.  Emma  A.,  5,431,  Cottage  Grove-avenue,  Chicago,  TIL

Clarke,  J.  E.,  Ph.D.,  214,  South  43rd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  603,  Buchtel-avenue,  Akron,  Ohio.

Cleaves,  N.  Porter,  29,  India-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Clendennin,  Dr.  Paul,  Fort  Warren,  Boston,  Mass.

Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  N.H.

Cobb,  Mrs.  Francis  D.,  Barnstaple,  Mass.

CocKERiLL,  Mrs.  R.  D.,  Weir  City  Zinc  Co.,  Weir  City,  Kansas.
OoDMAN,  J.,  Porcellian  Club,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Coffin,  C.  P.,  39,  Court-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Coleman,  Miss  Anne  C,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania.
■^Coleman, William Emmette,  Chief Quartermaster's  Office,  San
Fx'ancisco,  Cal.

CoMPTON,  Prof.  Elias,  Wooster  University,  Wooster,  Ohio.
Conner,  Mrs.  Eliza  A.,  American  Press  Association,  45  &  47,  Park-
place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  K.,  220,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.
Cook,  R.  Harvey,  M.D.,  Oxford  Retreat,  Oxford,  Ohio.
CoONLEY,  Mrs.  John  C,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.
Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Corning,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  York  Harbour,  Maine.
Coryell,  V.  M.,  310,  Sixth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cotton,  Mary  H.,  M.D.,  Portsmouth,  Ohio.
Crafts,  James  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Crafts,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Crepin,  Ernest  E.,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Crocker,  Mrs.  P.  E.,  P.  O.  Box  59,  Columbus  Junction,  Iowa
Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Gardner-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Society  Natural  History,  Boston,  Mass.
Crothers,  Dr.  T.  D.,  Walnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.
CuRRAN,  Richard  L.,  54,  Oneida-street,  Utica,  N.Y.
Currie,  Rev.  C.  George,  D.D.,  1014,  St.  Paul's-street,  Baltimore,  McL


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


629


Curtis,  W.  E.,  1740,  M-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
Gushing,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Highland  Park,  111.
Dailey,  Judge  Abram  H.,  16,  Court-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Dawbarn,  Robert  H  M.,  M.D..  105,  W.  74th-st,  New  York,  KY.
Delabarre,  Prof.  G.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Dewey,  D.  B.,  Evanston,  111.

Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont-street,  Brookline,  Mass.

Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Room  22,  94,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  111.

Dike,  Miss  Florence  B.,  207,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

DiMMOCK,  George,  P.  O.  Box  15,  Canobie  Lake,  N.H.

Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  21,  Prospect-street,  East  Orange,  N.J.

Dodge,  J.  T.,  346,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.

Donald,  Rey.  Dr.  E.  Winchester,  Trinity  Church,  Boston,  Mass.

Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Dorr,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Dow,  Alexander,  1,  West  83rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Drown,  T.  Pickering,  351,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Dunham,  Miss  E.  L.,  37,  East  36th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

DuTTON,  Horace,  Auburndale,  Mass.

DwiGHT,  Mrs.  James,  Stockbridge,  Mass.  ■  •  ■

Dyer,  Walter  H.,  Knights ville,  Maine.

Earl,  John  Charles,  15,  Terrace-place,  Yonkers,  New  York,  N.Y.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  c/o  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  161,  Main-street,  Keene,  N.H.
Eldridge,  E.  H.,  The  Temple  Coll.,  Broad  &  Berks-sts., Philadelphia, Pa.
Eliot,  John  F.,  48,  Goi-don-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Mass.  : -  ■

Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  330,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Esterly,  Mrs.  G.  W.,  100,  South  13th-street,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Esty,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amhei'st,  Mass.
Etheridge,  Miss  Fanny  S.,  1,634,  Michigan-boulevard,  Chicago,  111.
Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass. ■'  •
Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  23,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  J.,  Eliot,  Maine.
Felton,  Thomas  C,  Hotel  Ludlow,  Boston,  Mass.
Ferguson,  J.  H.,  Talmage,  Nebraska.
Fields,  Mrs.  James  T.,  148,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
FiLLEBROWN,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  157,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Finney,  Miss  Ida  M.,  Lambertville,  New  Jersey.
'  FiNNiGAN,  John,  61,  Beckman-street,  New  York,  N.Y. -  :
FiSKE,  Rev.  Richmond,  D.D.,  251,  Lexington-sc.,  East  Boston,  Mass.
Fluhrer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  95,  Main-street,  Albion,  N.Y.
Forbes,  John  M.,  Milton,  Mass.

Forbes,  W.  H.,  181,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.  - ' —  ■  :  -


630


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Frothingham,  O.  B.,  118,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Fullerton,  C.  W,,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.

FuLLERTON,  PROFESSOR  G.  S.,  4,116,  Spruce-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  470,  Nortli  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Gale,  Harlow  S.,  Univ.  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.

Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Craft's  Avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Gardiner,  J.  Hays,  Harvard,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  M'ass.

Gay,  Walter,  Rue  Ampere,  Paris.

Gehring,  Albert,  626,  Pearl-street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Genung,  Prof.  J.  Franklin,  Ph.D.,  Amherst,  Mass.

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.

Gleason,  Adele  a.,  M.D.,  The  Sanitarium,  Elmira,  JST.Y.

Goddard^  George  A.,  1,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.

GoFF,  P.  0.,  11,  Brakenahl-block,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

GooDALE,  Henry  Sterling,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

GooDNOW,  H.  R.,  95,  Riverside,  Drive,  New  York.

Goodridge,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Gorton,  Dr.  D.  A.,  137,  Clinton-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Greeley,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Nashua,  Iowa.

Greene,  Bertram,  50,  Rue  de  Bassano,  Paris,  France,

Greene,  Miss,  Hotel  Brunswick,  New  York,  N.Y.

Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Rev.  R.  A.,  Columbus-avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Griffing,  Mrs.  C.  R.,  722,  Amsterdam-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.  ■

Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.

Hall,  Professor  James,  Room  35,  State  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.

Hall,  James  P.,  6,  Poplar-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.  .,

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Tabor,  Fremont  Co.,  Iowa.

Hamilton,  C.  M.,  50,  Main-street,  Salamanca,  N.Y.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,710,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Harris,  Rev.  J.  A.,D.D.,St.Paurs  Rectory,  Chestnut  Hill, Philadelphia.

Harris,  AVilliam  T.,  LLD.,  914,  23rd-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.

Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  57,  Bentley-avenue,  Jersey  City,  N.Y.

Hartzell,  F.  S.,  96,  North  Walnut-street,  Canton,  Ohio.

Hawk,  Walter  S.,  Doniphan,  Nebraska.

Hawley,  C.  E.,  821,  Asylum-avenue,  Hartford,  Conn.

Haworth,  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.

Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hayward,  Alvinza,  532,  Market-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Heard,  Mrs.  John,  439,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


631


Heilner,  Rev.  S.  A.,  D.D.,  1,410,  Christiau-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Hemenway,  Augustus,  ReadviUe,  Mass.

Heywood,  Charles,  Gardner,  Mass.

Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen's  Co.,  N.Y,

HiGBEE,  Col.  George  H.,  Kittery  Point,  Maine.

Hill,  Mrs,  A.  S.,  19,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

HiRRiTT,  Rev.  Frederick  W.,  Ottumwa,  Iowa.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Hodgson,  Dr. Thomas,  Astolet,Chapman-st.,iSrorth  Melbourne,  Australia.

Hoffman,  Professor  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.

HoLBROOK,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  KY.

HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holladay,  Prof.  Waller,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  28,  West  120th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Rev.  S. V.V.,Westminster  Church, Deleware-ave., Buffalo,N.Y.

Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holt,  L.  Emmett,  M.D.,  15,  East  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Hommel,  p.  a.,  794,  2nd-avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.

Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hotchkiss,  Dr.  Elizabeth,  M.A.,  The  Rathbun,  Elmira,  New  York.

Hoyle,  W.,  El  Toro,  Orange  County,  Cal.

Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.C.

Hull,  Miss  P.  C,  22,  John-street,  Providence,  R.I.

Hunt,  Chas.  R.,  M.D.,  262,  Union-street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.

Hurley,  A.M.,  corner  of  First  and  Monmouth-sts.,Independence,Oregon.

Huse,  Wm.,  Ponca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska.

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Mahlon,  100,  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Jackson,  Mrs.  Flora  J.,  558,  Milwaukee-street,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Jackson,  Mrs.,  16,  Rue  des  Bassins,  Paris,  France.

James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

January,  Mrs.  J.  Lindell,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  London.

Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Jewett,  Miss  S.  O.,  South  Berwick,  Maine.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-sti-eet,  Worcester,  Mass.
Johnson,  Professor  Roger  B.,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.
Joline,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  George  H.,  561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  Miss  Therese  E.,  Box  566,  Los  Angelos,  Cal.
Kehew,  Mrs.  William  B.,  317,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Kelly,  W.  F.,  918,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Kibbe,  a.  B.,  M.D.,  326,  Bailey-building,  Seattle,  Washington.
KiDD,  G.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.


632


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


KiLNER,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  333,  West  78th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Kimball,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Rockford,  111.

Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  30,  Institute-road,  Worcester,  Mass.
KoPTA,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podmok  in  Podraok,  Post  Shiitten-
hofen,  Bohemia.

K  UHN,  Hamilton,  c/o  Messrs.  Hottinguer  and  Co.,  Paris,  France.
Lamont,  Robert,  68,  St.  James's-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Lane,  Charles  D.,  Angels  Camp,  Calaveras  County,  California.
Lane,  Mrs.  Charles  D.,  Angels  Camp,  Calaveras  County,  California.
Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Latham,  Dr.  V.  A  ,  B.Sc,  N.  W.  Univ.,  Woman's  Med.  Coll.,  S.  Lincoln-
street,  Chicago,  111.
Lawrence,  A.  A.,  59,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawrence,  A.  E.,  Junr.,  53,  Devonshire-st,  Room  15,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  142,  East  18th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  New  York,  N.Y.
Lee,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  Shrewsbury,  Mass.
Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22nd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.
Librarian,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mavvr,  Pennsylvania.
Librarian,  Cassadaga  Lake  Library  Association,  Lily  Dale,  N.Y.
Librarian  of  Cazenovia  Public  Library,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.
Librarian,  Denver  Public  Libi'ary,  Denver,  Colo.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.
Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass.
Librarian,  Lowell  City  Library,  Lowell,  Mass.
Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.
Librarian,  Metropolitan  Club  Library,  Washington,  D.C.
Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lancing,  Mich.
Librarian,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Rochester  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester, New  York,N.Y,
Librarian,  (Springfield)  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.
Lippitt,  General  Francis  J.,  2,025,  G.-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
Littlefield,  J.,  c/o  S.  S.White  &  Co.,  12th&Chestnut-sts,,  Philadelphia.
Lockwood,  Colonel  J.  S.  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Lombardi,  C,  1,314,  Rusk-avenue,  Houston,  Texas.
Long,  George  E.,  Jos.  Dixon  Crucible  Company,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Lounsberry,  C.  a.,  c/o  The  Argus,  Fargo,  North  Dakota.
Love,  Charles  A.,  M.D.,  Malvern,  Iowa.

Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
MacDonough,  Thomas  B.,  25,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


633


Magoun,  Walter  Russell,  47,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.  '

Main,  W.  F.,  cor.  College  and  Dubuque-streets,  Iowa  City,  Iowa.

Mallery,  Mrs.  Garrick,  1,323,  N.-st.,  KW.,  Washington,  D.C.

Martin,  Miss  Emma  H,,  Worcester,  Mass.

Marvin,  Walter  T.,  2,099,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

JMason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  Miss  Ida,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  H.  L.,  39,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York,  IST.Y.

Maurs,  Phillips,  620,  F.-street,  Washington,  D.C.

McClellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Galena,  111.

McClelland,  Ma.tor  G.  P.,  Davenport,  Iowa.

McDonald,  Prof.  C.  C,  Kimball  House,  Davenport,  Iowa.

McEwEN,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y.

McGee,  W.  J.,  Bureau  of  Amer.  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Institution,

Washington,  D.C.
McHenry,  Miss  J.  Howard,  Pikesville,  Balto.  Co.,  Maryland.
McIntosh,  Herbert,  533,  Massachusetts-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
McLaury,  Dr.  Wm.  M.,  244,  West  42-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
McVicker,  J.  H.,  McVicker's  Theatre,  Chicago,  111.
Mendenhall,  Mrs  E.  R.,  1,804,  Green-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Peterborough,  Madison  Co.,  N.Y.
Millet,  Josiah  B.,  1-50,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Milliken,  George,  3,614,  Walnut  street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Miner,  Noyes  B.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.

Minot,  Professor  Charles  S.,  22,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

MiNTURN,  Miss,  109,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mitchell,  James,  Stock  Exchange,  New  York,  N.Y.

Morgan,  Lieut.  Geo.  H.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  34,  East  29th-street,  Chicago,  111.

MuRLiN,  Rev.  L.  H.,  President  Baker  University,  Baldwin,  Kansas.

Muhphy,  Hon.  Franklyn,  1,027,  Broad-street,  Newark,  N.J.

Myers,  W.  H.,  M.D.,  15,  West  Wayne-street,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.

Myrick,  Rev.  Henry  L.,  Sing  Sing,  New  Yoi-k.

Newbold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Penna,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Newcomb,  Prof.  Simon,  Washington,  D.C.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  East  Hampton,  Suffolk  Co.,  N.Y.

NiLEs,  Harry  D.,  M.D.,  217,  East  Brigham-street,  Salt  Lake  City, Utah.

Nims,  F.  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary  A.,  206,  West  71st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Norris,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Mai-ion,  Marion  Co.,  Ohio.

Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119|^,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Nye,  William  B.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Olcott,  Miss  Edith,  4,  East  53rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


634


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Oldham,  F.  F.,  Blymyer  Building,  opp.  Post  Office,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Oliver,  George  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.
Oppenheimer,  L.  M.,  Austin,  Texas.
Orrick,  N.  C,  Canton,  Mississippi.

Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Osborne,  A.  E.,  M.D.,  Eldridge,  P.O.,  Sonoma  Co.,  Cal.

Osgood,  Arthur  H.,  M.D.,  12,  Highland-avenue,  Somerville,  Mass.

Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Bulfalo,  N.Y.

Parke,  Miss  M.  P.,  117,  West  49th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-sti-eet,  Boston,  Mass.

Parks,  George  P.,  Bedford,  Indiana.

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.

Peabody,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  47,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Pearson,  Miss  E.  H.,  219,  Savin  Hill-avenue,  Dorchester,  Mass.

Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.

Pellew,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Pendleton,  Miss,  1,522,  Eocust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Perkins,  Mrs.  Charles  E.,  223,  Commonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

Perkins,  Franklin  R.,  294,  Linwood-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Perrin,  Mrs.  E.  O.,  Stanton,  Florida.  -

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34th -street.  New  York,  N.Y.

Perry,  Tiios.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Peters,  E.  T.,  Box  265,  Washington,  D.C.

Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  Forest  Hill-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Pettit,  Miss  Edith,  2205,  Trinity-place,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Plumb,  D.  S.,  24,  Boudinot-street,  Newark,  N.J.

Potter,  E.  C,  4,800,  Ellis-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Potter,  Mrs.  O.  W.,  130,  Lake  Shore  Drive,  Chicago,  111.

Pratt,  Mrs.  Henry  S.,  Haverford,  Pa.

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  458,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  George,  50,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quirk,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  Payton  and  Co.,  Balcaree  371,

Buenos  Ayres,  South  America.
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Ransom,  Frank  H.,  Coal  and  Iron  Exchange,  Bulfalo,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


635


Raymond,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  Carey-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  174,  West  87th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
*E,EES,  Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  864,  Carnegie  Studios,  New  York,  N.Y,
Reid,  Miss  Estelle,  38,  East  30-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Reynolds,  Edward,  M.D.,  130,  Marlborough  street,  Boston,  Mass.
Reynolds,  Roth,  3,  Bank  of  Commerce,  Louisville,  Ky.
RiALE,  Rev.  F.  N  ,  Ph.D.,  Des  Moines,  Iowa,
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  "Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.
Richardson,  Mrs.  Abby  S.,  256,  West  lOOth-street,  New  York,  N.Y,
Richardson,  M.  T.,  Ridge  wood.  New  Jersey.

Richardson,  Dr.  W.  L.,  225,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  37,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Robinson,  C.  W.,  108,  Travis-street,  Houston,  Texas.

Roeder,  Rev.  A.,  Vineland,  N.J.

RoLFE,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.

Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

RoTAN,  Edward,  Waco,  Texas.

Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Rumsey,  Mrs.  B.  C,  cor.  Delaware-ave.  and  Tracey-st.,  BulFalo,  N.Y,

Russell,  Arthur  J.,  Office  of  The  Journal,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Salter,  W.  M.,  1,415,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Sargent,  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Stockton,  San  Joaquin  County,  California.

Sargent,  Mrs.  Winthrop,  207,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass,

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Pembroke-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sawyer,  Hon.  Chas.  H.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.

Sawyer,  G.  C,  Utica  Academy,  Utica,  N.Y.

Schenck,  Miss  Ida  Z.,  114,  East  19th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

ScHiEFFELiN,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  242,  East  15th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Schiller,  Prof.  C,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.

Sercombe,  p.  H.,  58,  Sentinel-building,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Shaw,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Shaw,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Shedd,  Z.,  Room  3,  Masonic  Temple,  Denver,  Colorado.

Sheets,  John  C,  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill,  Ohio.

Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.

Shimmin,  Miss  Blanche,  229,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.

Sintenis,  E.  H.,  p.  O.  Box  115,  Abilene,  Texas.

Smalley,  Ora  O.,  Jaybird,  Ohio.

Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Smith,  J.  Heber,  M.D.,  279,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111.
Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.


636


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Smith,  Winfield,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.

SouLE,  George  H.  S.,  40,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stanton,  J.  E.,  M.D.,  D.INI.D.,  414,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Sterling^  Mrs.  E.  C,  22,  Westmoreland-place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stillmann,  Mrs.  W.  O.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.

Stilwell,  Mary  H.,  D.D.S.,  1,300,  Arch-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Stockton,  John  P.,  Junr.,  Highwood,  Bergen  Co.,  N.J.

Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  229,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  KY.

Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Chestnut  street,  Boston,  Mass.

Strauss,  Albert,  124,  West  97th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  703,  Euclid-avenue,  Desmoines,  Iowa.

Strong,  Charles  A.,  M.D.,  University  of  Chicago,  Chicago,  111.

Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stuyvesant,  Mrs.  J.  Reade,  85,  West  Grand-street,  Elizabeth^  N.J.

Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  336,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sutherland,  J.  G.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.

Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  128,  W.  59-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  44,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Fredk.,  121,  School-street,  Lowell,  Mass.

Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  San  Ysido  Ranch,  San  Bai'bara,  Cal.

Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  San  Ysido  Ranch,  San  Barbara,  Cal.

Thompson,  Frank  J.,  Fargo,  North  Dakota.

Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Tkorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  19,  Pern ber ton-square^  Boston,  Mass.

Thorpe,  Joseph  G.,  Junr.,  115,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Tiffany,  W.  G.,  54,  Rue  de  Bassano,  Paris,  France.

Tighe,  Judge  J.  G.,  Germanica  Bdg.,  375-379,  Fulton-st.,  Brooklyn,  N  Y.

Totten,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street, Washington,  D.C.

Touzalin,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  P.O.  Box  113,  Colorado  Springs,  Colorado.

Towner,  Judge  J.  W.,  Santa  Ana,  California.

Toy,  Professor  C.  H.,  7,  Lowell-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Turnbull,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Turner,  Miss  Mary  J.,  11,  Faxon-avenue,  Quincy,  Mass.

Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.

Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Underhill,  Miss  P.  A.,  55,  West  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Underwood,  B.  F.,  92,  La  Salle-street,  Chicago,  111.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Auburn,  California.

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  350,  East  Chicago-avenue,  Chicago,  III.

Ward,  Dr.  J.  N.,  Auburn,  California.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


637


Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.
Washburn,  Oscar  F.,  West  Acton,  Mass.

Watkins,  John  Elfreth,  Junr.,  1,626,  S.-st.,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.
Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Watts,  H.  M.,  "  The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Webb,  Mrs.,  34,  Chestnut-street,  Salem,  Mass.
Webster,  David  L.,  332,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Weld,  Miss  Edith,  South  and  Centre-streets,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Wheeler,  Mrs.  Stephen,  504,  Sixth-avenue,  Fort  Smith,  Ark.
Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.

Wherrel,  John,  M.D.,  228,  North  Mill-street,  Kansas  City,  Kansas.
Whipple,  L.  E.,  328,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
White,  James  T.,  765,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Whiteside,  Miss  H.,  c/o  A.  A.  Carey,  29,  Fairfield-st.,  Boston,  Mass.
Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Whiton,  Rev.  James.  M.,  Ph.D.,  79,  Worth-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Whittaker,  Thomas,  71,  East  66th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  C,  37,  East  50th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H  ,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111.
Wilson,  Mrs.  John  L.,  P.O.  Box  19,  Framingham,  Mass.
Wilson,  Tom  L.,  Room  10,  Chopin  Block,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
*WiLTSE,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Lancing,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.
Wing",  Isaac  H.,  Bayfield,  Wisconsin.

W^olcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Woodbridge,  Professor  F.  J.  E.,  Univ.  of  Minn.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Woodman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Wright,  Dr.  J.P.,  500,  North  Commercial-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Wyatt,  Melvyn  H.,  Sparkill,  Rockland  County,  N.Y.
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisberg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
ZUG,  C,  P.O.  Box  1,053,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of
any  cliange  of  address  to  Dr.  Kichard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,
Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE  INCORPORATED


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOLUME  XI.

1895.


A.'


Abbott,  Mrs.,  "  The  Georgia  Magnet,"  Performances  of  ... 219,  223,  224

Adams,  M. ,  Case  contriljuted  by 375

Aide,  Hamilton,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  Jesse  Shepard 217

American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  List  of  Members  626

Anonymously  contributed  Cases 346,  378,418,  439,  446,  527

Anthony,  W.  E. ,  M.D. ,  Case  contributed  by  581

Apparitions  and  Thouglit-Transference,  by  Frank  Pod  more — Review  of...  149

Associates,  Members  and — List  of 603

Atlay,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  487

Automatic  Writing,  Cases  of 64-69,  463,  477


B.

B.,  Madame,  Case  of 210,  325,  328,  329

Baker,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 521

Baldwin,  Mrs.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 225

Banister,  Rev.  E.  D. ,  Case  contributed  by 537

Blavatsky,  Madame— E.  Garrett  and  W.  S.  Solovyoff  on  the  Alleged

Occult  Powers  of ... ...  155

Boirac,  Prof.  E. — "L'Hypothese  du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  Review  of ...  599

Bonatti,  M.,  Case  recorded  by 477

Brown,  C.  Hazen,  Ca'e  contributed  by 424


ii


Index  to  Volume  XI.


C,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by

 439

C,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by

488

Carbert,  T.,  Case  contributed  by  ...

  517

Cavazzoni,  Angelina,  Telepathic  Experiments  with  ...

 235

Chaff e,  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by

 403

Chaproniere,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by...

  448

Clairvoyance,  Cases  of  Apparent  ... ... ... ...  133-137,

421,  423,  507

,, Experiments  in

  174

Claughton,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  ...

  547

Cleavy,  Miss  K.  M. ,  Case  contributed  by

  517

Clouston,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by

 354

Coburn,  Newlands,  Case  contributed  by

 520

Coghill,  Col.  K.,  Case  contributed  by

489,  490

Cook,  J.,  M.D,  (Geidlemau's  Magazine) ,  Case  recorded  by...

 535

Cooper,  Alfred,  Case  contributed  by  ...

 505

Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ..

 568

Crawford,  Mrs.  S.  J.,  Case  contributed  by

 437

Credulity,  Resolute,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on

...  213

Crippen,  Rev.  T.  G.,  Cases  recorded  by  ...  ...

532,  533

Critcherson,  Mrs,,  Case  contributed  by  ...

..  .  384-387

Crocq,  Dr.,  "  L'Hypnotisme  et  le  Crime",  by — Review  of  ...

  147

Crosby,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by

  379

D'Akc,  Jeanne,  The  Voices  of,  by  Andrew  Lang

Dariex,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by

Davey,  S.  J.,  Account  of  a  Sitting  with  Mr.  Husk
Davis,  Mrs.  Everett,  Case  contributed  by

Dawes,  E.  C,  Case  contributed  by

Despine,  Dr. ,  on  some  Hypnotic  Phenomena  ...

Dill,  J.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.  D. ,  Dipsomania  and  Hypnotism

Dijjsomania  and  Hypnotism —

Dr.  J.  G.  Dili,  on

,,  ,, C.  T.  Green,  on

Dulley,  Rev.  B  ,  Case  contributed  by  ..


E.


Eardley,  Lady,  Case  contributed  by  339

Ermacora,  Dr.  G.  B. ,  Cases  contributed  by 466,  467,  474

,,  ,,  Rivista  di  Studi  Psichici,"  Review  of ... ...  171

,,  ,, Telepathic  Dreams  experimentally  induced ...  235


...  198

...  453

...  231
380-389

...  .582

...  357

...  18

...  18

...  22

...  493


Index  to  Volume  XL


in


F.


FiNZi,  Dr.,  "  Rivisti  di  Studi  Psichici,"  Review  of 171

Fletcher,  Mrs.  Mary,  of  Madeley,  Case  recorded  by ..  534

Foxton,  Hartas,  Case  contributed  by 518

Fryer,  liev.  A.  T.,  Case  contributed  by 513


Gale,  J.  E.,  Case  contributed  by „. 397

Garrett,  E.,  "  Isis  Very  Much  Unveiled"  by.  Review  of ...  155

"  Georgia  Magnet  "  (Mrs.  Abbott),  Performances  of 219,  223,  224

Glardon,  Rev.  Aug. ,  Case  contributed  by ... 431

Goudard,  Dr.  H.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Abbott 219

Grange,  Miss  C.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 394

Gray,  M.  H.,  Case  contributed  by ... 421

Green,  C.  Theodore,  Hypnotism  and  Dipsomania 22

,, ,, Subliminal  Consciousness  and  Auoestlieticj ... ...  353

Gridley,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 483

Griffing,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... 462

Guebhard,  M.  Adrien,  Case  recorded  by .. ... ... ... ...  411

Gurney,  Edmund,  Memorial  Library  Catalogue 601


H.


H.,  Mrs.  F.,  Case  contributed  by ... 429-430

Hale,  Bishop,  Case  contributed  by 570

Haggard,  J.  B. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  491

Hamilton,  Duchess  of,  Case  contributed  by ..  505-506

Hamilton,  Miss  R.  B.,  Case  contributed  by 373

Hanscom,  G.  A.,  Case  contributed  by  .399

Harris,  D.  Eraser,  Case  contributed  by ...  426

Hastings,  Dr.  Caroline,  Case  contributed  by  ... ...  483

Herrington,  G.,  Case  contributed  by 429

Hey  wood,  Ch.,  Case  contributed  by ... .. ...  501

Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Psychical  Phenomena  bearing  upon  the  question  of

Spirit  Control ...  309

Hodgson,  Dr.  R,,  Case  contributed  by  415

,,  ,, Experiments  with  Mrs.  Abbott 223,  224

Howard,  Lady  ]\Iabel,  Case  contributed  by 396

Howe,  W.  "W. ,  Case  contributed  by 403

Hulin,  Prof.  G.,  Case  contributed  by ... 545

Husk,  Mr.,  Alleged  Mediuniship  of 217,  228,  231

Hypnotic  Committee,  Report  of  594

Hypnotism,  Curative 18,  22,  147,  148

„ Experiments  in  Thought-Transference 594-597


iv


Index  to  Volume  XI.


Hypnotism,  Miscellaneous  Phenomena  of 18-23,  145-148,  162-171,  235,

321-325,  328-330,  356-358,  362,  466,  467,  529,  594,  599


Recent  Books  on 145,162,599

Hyslop,  Prof.,  Case  contributed  by 360

Experiments  with  Mrs.  Abbott 223,  224

ISNARD,  M.,  and  Mademoiselle,  Case  contributed  by 448,  450

Ivey,  T.,  Case  contributed  by 509,  511

J.  .  ' ■  ■

Jameson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 543

Jeanne  d' Arc,  The  Voices  of,  by  Andrew  Laug 198

Johnson,  Miss  Alice— Review  of  "  Ueber  die  Trugwahrnehmung,"  by

Herr  Parish 162

K.

Kelsoe,  W.  a..  Case  contributed  by 522

Kempton,  C.  W. ,  Case  contributed  by 417

Kennedy,  J.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 441

Kingsbury,  B.  B.,  Case  contributed  by  .. 429

Kinsolving,  Dr.  G.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  495

L ACH-SzYRM A,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Case  contributed  by .. ...  351

Lalande,  M.,  Case  recorded  by 346

,, Phenomena  of  "  Paramnesia " ... 345

Lancaster,  Miss  Maud,  Experiments  with ..  597

Laner,  Rev.  Solon,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Abbott 223

Lang,  Andrew,  Case  Contributed  by 553

,, The  Voices  of  Jeanne  D'Arc 198

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  Review  of  Prof. Boirac's "  L'Hypothcse  du

Magnetisrae  Animal  " 599

,, ,, Review  of  "  Rivista  di  Studi  Psichici  " 171

Translation of  W.  S. SolovyofTs "  Modern

Priestess  of  Isis,"  Review  of... 155

Leech,  T.  F.,  M.D.,  Case  contributed  by 507

Liebeault,  Dr.,  Case  contributed  by ... 527,  528

Lodge,  Prof.  Oliver,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Abbott 219

Lourdes,  On  the  Cures  at 215,  216

Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  Case  contributed  by 500


Index  to  Volume  XI.


V


M.


M.,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 442

M.,  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  502

MacDouald,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 372,  373

Manning,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 355

Manzini,  Signa  Maria,  Dr.  Ermacora's  Experiments  with ... 235,  466,  467

Members  and  Associates  of  the  I.  S.  P.  11. ,  List  of . .  603

,,  ,, American  Branch,  List  of  ... .. ... ...  626

Meetings  of  the  Society 1,  173,  333

Menon-Cornuet,  M.,  Case  contributed  by ... 452

Mesnet,  Dr.,  "  Le  Somnanibulisme  Provoque,"  Review  of 145,  147

Moore,  Rev.  H. ,  Case  recorded  by 534

Moses,  C.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 419

Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Experiences  of,  F.  W.  H.  Myei&on 24

Analysis  of  Phenomena 24-26,107-113

,,  ,,  Automatic  Writings 64-107

,,  ,,  Physical  Phenomena  (Miscellaneous) 24-94

,,  ,,  "Spirit  Identity,"  Cases  point'ngto 31,  35,  36,  39,

42-49,  53,  70-107

,,  ,,  ,,  Table  of  cases 95,96

Moulton,  Mrs.  L.  Chandler,  Case  recorded  by  ... 580

Myers,  F.  W.  H.  -  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses 24

,,  ,,  Resolute  Credulity 213

Subliminal  Self,  The 334

,,  ,,  ,,  Precognition ...  408

,,  ,,  ,,  Retrocognition ... ... .  . ...  334

,,  ,,  ,,  Time,  Diagram  and  Scheme  of  Human

Faculty  in  Relation  to.« ...  586-591

Newbold,  W.  Roniaine— Review  of  "Apparitions  and  Thought-Trans-

ference,"  by  F.  Podmore ... ..  149

Newnham,  Rev.  P.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 411

Norman,  Commander  F.  M.,  R.N.,  Case  con tributtfd  by ..  393

O.

Officers  and  Council  of  the  I.S.P.R.,  1895  and  1896  . ... 602,  603

P.

P.,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Case  contributed  by ... 498

Paladino,  Eusapia,  Experiments  with 333

Parish,  Edmund- "  Ueber  die  Trugwahrnehmung,'' Review  of ... .  162

Parker,  Captain,  Case  contributed  by 513


VI


Index  to  Volume  XI.


Parsons,  D.  J.,  M.D.,  Cases  contributed  by 364,427,459

Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism —Miscellaneous  ...24-64,  217,  228,  231
Pierce,  A.  H.,  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  ? ... 317,  325

Pitres,  Dr. ,  on  Variations  of  Personality ... 356

Plot,  Di.  Robt.,  Case  recordeJ  by 538

Podmore,  Frank,  "Apparitions  and  Thought-Transference  "  by — Review  of  149
,,  Review  of  E.  Garrett's  "  Isis  very  much  Unveiled" ...  155

„  ,, W.  S.  Solovyoffs  "A  Modern  Priestess  of  Isis  "  155

,,  Subliminal  Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  ? 325

Prait,  Thos. ,  Case  contributed  by 428

Premonitions,  Cases  of ... 411-585


Q.

Q.,  Lady,  Case  coutriljuted  by 577


R.

Rawson,  H.  G.,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference 2

Resolute  Credulity,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers 213

Reviews 145,  149,  155,  162,  599

Richet,  M.  Ch.,  Case  contributed  by .. 358

Ridley,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by ... ... 481

Rivista  di  Studi  Psichici,  Review  of,  by  Walter  Leaf ...  171

Romanes,  Dr.  G.  J.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  440

Ropes,  J.  C. ,  Case  contributed  by 582


■s..


S.,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ... 455

Sanger,  C.  P.,  Analysis  of  Mrs.  VerraU's  "  Card''  Experiments 193

Sargent,  R.  W.,  Case  contributed  by ...  402

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Case  contributed  by ... 379

Scott,  Capt.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  571

Shagren,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  444-445

Sliepard,  Jesse,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  ... ...  217

Skilton,  Mr, ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... 559

Smith,  G.  A.,  on  Mrs.  Baldwin's  Exhibition  225

,, Dr.  Henry,  Case  contributed  by... ... ... ...  458

,, Martyn,  Case  contributed  by .. ... ... ... 389

Solovyoff,  W.  S.,  "A  Modern  Priestess  of  Isis,"  by — Review  of 155

Squires,  J.  L.,  Case  contributed  by 397-398

Spirit  Control,  Some  Psychical  Phenomena  Bearing  on  the  Question  of —  *

By  C.  Hill-Tout  309

Spirit  Identity,  Mr.  W.  S.  Moses'  "  Expeiiences  "—Cases  pointing  to

31,  35,  36,  39,  42-45,  49,  63,  70-107
...  "  Abraham  Florentine'' Case 53,82


Index  to  Volume  XI.


vn


Spii-it  Idenity,  Table  of  Cases 95,  96

Stewart,  I.  J. ,  Case  contributed  by 420

Stillman,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 369

St.  Simon,  Due  de.  Case  recorded  in  liis  "  Memoires  "  (1706) 530

Sturgis,  Dr.  Kussell,  "  Use  of  Hypnotism,"  Review  of 145,  147

Subliminal  Messages,  On  the  Apparent  Sources  of,  by  "  Miss  X  " ...  114

Subliminal  Self,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 334

,,  ,,  ,,  Precognition ...  408

,,  ,,  ,,  Retrocogoition 3.34

,,  or  Unconscious  Cerebration  ? —A.  H.  Pierce  on ... ...  317

,,  ,,  ,,  F.  Podmore  on 325

Suddick,  S.  T.,  M.D.,  Case  contributed  by 432


Tabour,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  444

Telepathic  Dreams  Experimentally  Induced,  by  Dr.  G.  B.  Ermacora ...  235

Telepathy  and  Subliminal  Messages,  "  Miss  X."  on 114-140

Theosophy,  Claims  of — Recent  Books  on ... ... ... ... ...  155

Thought-Transference,  Apparitions  and — by  F.  Podmore,  Review  of ...  149

„  ,,  Experimental 2,  235,  455,  466

„  ,,  ,,  Actions  Induced 7-9,14

„  ,,  ,,  Ideas  and  Mental  Pictures  3,15,180,181,455

,,  ,, ■ ■ „  Pictures  and  Diagrams  3,  5,  9, 15,  180-181

Playing  Cards  5-7,  12-14,  17,  177

,,.  ,,  ,,  Reproductions  (Plates)  3-5,10,11,15,180

„  ,,  Hypnotic,  Dreams  Induced ... 235,  267,  292,  466,  407

,,  ,,  ,, Playing-Card  Expeiiments 594

,,  ,,  ,, Reproductions  (Plates) 308

,,  ,,  Spontaneous ..,  117-140,  178,179,  236,237,474

Thoulet,  Prof.,  Case  contributed  by 503

Trotter,  Dr.  R.,  Case  contributed  by 364

Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D. — Recent  Books  on  Hypnotism,  Keviews  of ...  145


V.

Van  Deusen,  R.  T.,  Case  contributed  by 367

Van  Eeden,  Dr.,  "  Psycho-Therapie " — Review  of .. ...  145

Van  Renterghem,  Dr.,  "  Psycho-Therapie  " — Review  of 145

Vane,  Lady,  Case  contributed  by  395

Venn,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  461

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Experiments  on  Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge  ...  174
,, ,, C.  P.  Sanger's  Analysis  of  "  Card  "  Experiments  of ...  193

,, ,, Telepathic  Experiences 177-181

Vincent,  R.  H.,  "  Elements  of  Hypnotism  "  by— Review  of ... 145,  148

Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc,  The,  by  Andrew  Lang 198

Vradenburg,  M.  E.,  Case  contributed  by ■•■ ...  514


viii


Index  to  Volume  XI.


W.  E.,  Case  contributed  by

  443

W.,  Mr. ,  Cases  contributed  by  ...

423,  4d3

Wack,  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by

...  o/U

Wait,  Marshall,  Case  contributed  by

A  fin

...  422

... ... ...  ot^

Weiss,  Mrs.,  Case  contriubted  by

  522-523

Wilkie,  F.,  Case  contributed  by

  375-377

Williams,  Phillip,  Case  contributed  by

  518

Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S.,  Case  contributed  by

  573

Woodd,  Mrs.  Basil  K.,  and  others  —Case  (Family  Warning'

contributed  by

538-542

Wyman,  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by

  416

X.

X.,  Miss,  On  the  Apparent  Sources  of  Sibliminal  Messages ... ,  114


Y.

Y.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Clairvoyant  Experiments  of 188-190

Young,  C.  Mayne,  Case  recorded  by 367

Young,  Miss  I. ,  Case  contributed  by .. 568


Z.


Z.,  Lady,  Cases  contributed  by
